EE —— ——— —  _——_— Rs SOO—— — — OOO — 


ANNOTATIONS. 


UPON _— 


O | BIBL 


SACRED TEXT 


VARIOUS. READINGS 


ANNEX'D; 
Together with the 


Parallel Scriptures; 


The more Difficule TERMS in each V ER SE are Explained. 
Seeming CONTRADICTIONS Reconciled. 
QUESTIONS and DOUBTS Redolved. 

And the WHOLE TEX T Opened. 


V. OL. FE 


By the Late Kivobad and Learned Divine | B. 


Mr. MATTHEW POOLE 


a tm——_ 


The FOUR TH EDITION, With Large Contents before each Chapter ; Truely Corre@ed and Amen- 
ded: Together with the Harmony of che Evangeliſts, by Mr. Sam. Clark, never done with Pool's Annorta- 
tions before. And what further ſhall be choughr convenient, will be Inſert in | the Title Page of the Second 
Volume. 


NEHEM. VIIE Verſe 8. 
They read in the Book in the I aw of God diſftini#ly, and gave the Senſe, and cauſed them to underitand the reading. 


ACTS VII... Verſe 3o, 3t. 
NEE Onderſtandeſt on what thou readeſi? 


How can 1, except Some man ſhall guide me ? 


E DI N B U/K@ EH, 


—_ — -— ww oo —— - 


WHEREIN THE +. 


/ - 


s 7 TI PT I 
' : 


Printed by the Heirs and Succeſſors of Andrew Anderſon, Printer to the King's moſt Excellene Majeſty, 1 7 0 ©. 


— -—— - — 


-_ 
— 


+ Uſe 22 nm l —— +2 - 4lgeb. 1b} nec uh.” \ 
. 4 


is 
- . 

= I us : . \ 

a 2 * 
F, . i = "I — 
3 — . - a ——_ — - - - - _ 
"oy . 

Wy 4 

"F ; is . 
0 ws 

U 


PRE Þ 


W HE RE IN 


The Authors of the enſuing Annotations (* Supplemental io My. Poole) preſent tothe Reader an Hiſtorical Account f 
" Tranſlition of the Scriptures ito our Englith-Tongue, the mighty Workings of Divine Providence concurive to 5t 4 
the ſeveral Notes or Annotations which have beers publiſhed, end a particular Account of the Reverend Mr. Poole's, 
Thezr preſent Ondertaking, with the Reaſons of it. I 


HE ſame Reaſon which teacheth us to conclude that there is a Firſt Being, and muſt be a F;ri? Canſvand M,; 
( whom we call God ) That 7t is he who hathmade uy and not we our ſclues, and that we ave his People ard t 
ſheep of his paFure, will alſo oblige us To enter into his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praif 
and to be thankfull unto him, by fulfilling his Will 5 which we cannot do without ſome Revelation of it 1 

vs. God therefore having ceaſed roſpeak to Men face to face, as te. Abrahams, and Moſes, &c. ( which he never ordins 

ly did but toſome particular Fayorites ) we are by Reaſon inforced to conclude,that there are ſome Books in the World it 
which this Revelation is to be found. ) The Clarchof God * the Mother of us all ) hath conſtantly held forth the Boo 
of the O14 and New Teitaments, ( which we have in our B:Lles ) for this Sacred Revelation, which hath juſtly oblige 
all her Children to look upon them, as hug out to them for that uſe, upon that Noble Pilar the Church. Looking ing 
them upon the Churches notice ( as the Child does upon the Mother's telling it, That is the Sun ) every rea{onable Ma 
finds them of fo vercrable Antiquity, and difcerneth in them ſuch Stamps of Divinity, in the Majefty of their Sty/e, the Pu 

rity of the Matter, the Sublimeneſs and Spiri ality of the Propoſrtions contained in them, the Self- denial of the Pen men. t 

, Heavenlineſs of thp Scope and Endot thoſe Sacred Writings, the Harmony of the Parts, the Seal of Miracles, and princt 

pally in the zzighty Power andFEfficacy of them upon the Souls and Conſciences of Mulritudes,both for Conviion and for $; 

port, and Conſ-lation 3 that he eaſily concludes, This 2s the voice of God, and not of Man; and looks back upon his Mo 
ther che Church ' as a Child upon his Nurſe ) thanking her tor ſh: wing him ſnch a Treaſure, and ſaying as the Samaritan 
to their Countrey-woma!, John 4. 42. Now we believe t' eſe Books are the Word of God, not becauſe of thy ſaying ſo, by 
becauſe we have looked into them our ſelves, and find them of a different S1y/e, Nature and Matter, and to have a diffe 
rent Scope, End, Power and Efficacy upon the Souls of Men, from whatany other Writings in the World have. Thousg! 
the rruth is, that until a Man comes to be fully per{waled of the Truth of them from the ſame Spirit that dictated them 
every Soul will be as apt to waver 1n his Faith, concerning their being the Word of God, as hein Tully, who orly believe 
ed the Immortality of the S-ul trom the reading of Flato's Book, which (1f I remember right) the Rozx2n Orator expreſs 

ſth in Words to thisSenlie ; I have read over Plato': Book again and again; but I know not how it comes to ps, jo lorg a 

1am reading, I acre withit but 10 ſooner is the. Book out of my Hands, but De immortalitate anime d:birare ce1i, ibe 

oin ro doubt whether rhe Soul be immortal yea or no. Bur h »wever, in one Degree or other everv Chriſtian makes tha 
the Principle of his Religion, That the Holy S:rirtpres of the Old and New Teſtament are the Word f God. Some believe 
it more ftly and incertainly; ſomemore fixedly and firmly; and accordingly the Faith of Perions, as to them, is more 

or I* (s Operative. f, 
This Revelation of the Divine Will was made perfect gradually ( as it pleaſed Godin ſucceeding times to reveal what was 

his Secret Wil] before, but /i! from Ages. Soas: it Chronvlogers compute right ) there were more than 1500 Year 

paſſed b-rwixtthe \\ riting ofthe firſt Book of Ge-e/#s by Moſes, and the Revlation (C which was the lift) by Jotn; and 

Divines generally judge that he Sealedupthe Book, by thoſe words, Revelations 22. 18, 19. So thar, as to things to bebeliewk 

ed or done, we are to expect no further Revelation. | ", 
\V hen the Migh'y God, eventl.e Lord, had thys ſpoken, and God had thus ſfhined out of Sion the perfeFion of Beauty, it 

was but reaſon ble hat his People ſhould come iO the &»oxledge of what he had ſaid, that they might anſwer the end o 

the Rew-lation both by Believing and Obeying. | | | | .I 
The Old Tefament being written in the Hebrew Tongue, when great Multitudesof the Hebrews or Jews. by their Cap= 

tivitv in Babylon, had much forgotren, or corrupted their own Larguage.it was thought reaſonable there ſhould be 5 Cxl= 

daick Paraphraſe 5 and the Wiidom of Divine Providence provided a vep nagint Verſion, as for rhe benefit of others, {0 

poſſibly oi the Jews them(clves, the moſt of whom. before Chrilt's time were more Grecians than Hebricians; and it is ges 

nerally thought that all the Books of the New 7 eftament were writen in the Grcc/a7 Languoge. ; 


When it pleaſed God that the Goſpel ſhould be preached to a Nations, and the ſound of it go to the ends of : be Earth, he 
ſo ordered it allo, that ſoon after true Relrg10, came into any place, fume were ſtirred up ro Tranſlate thole. Holy -Book ; 
into the Language of thar Cramtrey 5 and be iofar aſſiſted them, that though in many leſſer things they failed through 
want ot a Knowledge oft! e juſt propriety of ſome Words in Hebrew or Greek, or theuſe of Particles in thoſe Langnages,? 
yer they tailed not in any thing whereby the R: ader might be led intoany pernicious Error touching his Salvation. And; 
we ſhall obſerve the Penmen of the New Teſtamert,giving {uch a deference tothe commonly received Verſion in theirtimes 
that although the Seprnagint Verſ7on which we have, appears to us more diſſonant from the Hebrew than any other ; yet 
moſt of the 2yotations of the O14 Teftament winch we have in the New, . are apparently from thet Verſion 3, whick 
texcheth us,that it is not every privat Miniſters work to makea new Verfion of the Scripture, but he ought to acquielce int 
the Verſcou which God bath provided for the Church wherein helives, and not ordinarly, or upon light grounds to} 
enter into a diſſent to it ; and it in any thing he ſes ir neceſſary to do it, yet not to do it ( as to a patticular Text ) with= 
out great modeſty, and a Preface of Reverence. ._ .. © 

This Tranſlation of the Scriptures into a Language underſtood by all people in that Conntrey into which the Church 
came, was lookt upon ſo reaſonable and neceflary, as it ws oppoſed by none, till the Papiſts had patched up a Religio 
for the upholding of which, it was neceffary tor them to maintain, That Ignorance was the Mother of Devotion : . after: 
which it was very difficult in any places where ch-ſe Sprr:tual 7 yrants had a dominion, to get the Scriptures tranſÞred ins; 
to the Language of that Countrey. Not to inſtance in other places, we ſhall give ſome ſhorr acccunt of Emelaud, Out 
Records te!] us of a Tranſlation of fone part of th-m into the Saxon Language ( which was then a great part ,of ours J 
within 700 years after Chriſt : and of the Tranſlation of the whole, into the ſame Larguage by Beda within 40 years afs 
. ter. Beda was himſelf a Papiſt. but the Myſtery of iniquity grew up gradually to its hight. ; Soon after, Bibles which 
the People could underſtand, were very ſcarce Commodities in E-gl/ard, and thus ir continued for 6co years. H ic4liff, whe 
lived in the time of Richard the 2d. and died in 1384. being the firſt we knew of afterward, who tranſlated the Scriptures 
into a Language underſtood by any who were not skilled - lome or other of the three learned Languages.” Thar - greg 


= 


2 i 


- T 
——_ _ 
LS . 
< -« LF 
ps a< 
Ia. Y 
"_ 
PRE IE.” 
**- 
* 4 
+ 


CE 
# 0 
ou 
DE EA 
By 
, 


a5 « 
by a po aw. wn . 
Is Sod IS 


bs 
pu 2 


nan eaſily underſtood, that without the Scriptures in their own Language the people muſt take all for the 31! of God, 
| hat their Prjei7s cold them was ſo, andthat the Popiſh Priefts were generally perſons of Ignorance, and Impudence enough 
o entitle God to any oftheir own Blaſphemies andSuperiFitions. But within thirty years after the death of Wickliff, viz, 
Anno 1414, the Council, ( or Conventicle rather) of Conitance, Decreed all Wick{ifs Books to the Fire; and though ſome 
were ſpared, yet the battel wes ſo hard, that there were very few that eſcaped. This was our ſtate till the year 527 (in 
al] which years the poor people of the Land of our Nativity, were without a teaching Bible(as tothe common people ; and 
indeed without a teaching Prieſt ; yea and for ſome time after this, as we ſhall hear. ! | 
\/ In the Year 1527, God put it into the heart of Mr. 7;»dall to Tranſlate the New Teifament into Engliſh ; as allo the 
Five Books of Moſez. ( He being then an Exile in Germany for his Religion. ) But he loſt all his Papers by a Shipwrack, in 
$115 paſſage to Hambnrgh, and had his work to begin again : which yet that taithful,and moſt unwearied Servant of God did 
accompliſh, adding ſome Prefaces to the ſeveral Books, and ſome Notes to the particular Chapters and Verſes.- The pub- 
liſhing of which much netled rhe Popiſh Biſhops in Exglard, and all means were then uſed to ſuppreſs it. Amongſt others 
the then Biſbep of Londen adviſed with one Packington a Merchant in that City, concerning the moſt accommodate mean _ 
that defign. The Merchant could think of none fo probable,as with a Sum of Money to by up the whole Impreſtion.The 
Biſhop approving it, furniſhed him with a round /uze to that purpoſe; which the Merchant ( veing morea Friend to Mr. 
1T7:dall than the Biſhop knew ) ſent to Mr. Tizda/ and had the Impreſſion ſent him, ( ſome few Copies being (as we muſt 
imagine ) firſt ſold off. ) (Scrlteri Annalis in anno 1532.) With hisMoney Mr. Tindal ſupported himſelf in his exile,and was 
alſo enabled to go on with his Tranſ]:tion of the other part of the B:ble,and to prepare a perfe(t Engl;ſb Bible: In the mean 


time a paſtage hapned ſo pleaſant.that I ſhall think it worth thewhile hereto relate it; Sir Thomas Moore being Lord C hancelor, 


and having ſeveral Perſons accuſed tor Hereſte,and ready for Execution,offered to compound with George Conſtantize, one 
'of them for his Life, upon the eaſte terms of his diſcovery to him who they were in Loxdox that maintained Tidal] bes 
4 yond Sea. Afﬀeer that the poor man had got as good a ſecurity for his Life, as the Honour, and Truth of the Chancellor 
could give him,hetold him, 1+ was the Biſhop of London maintained himby ſending him aſumof Money,to buy up the Im- 
'preſhion of his Teffamerts. The Chancellor ſmiled, faying, That he believed he ſaid true. Thus was this poor Confeſſors 


Lite ſaved. Bit to return to our Story. In the year 153g. Mr. 1indall was martyred at ”illefort in Flanders, For Tranſ- 


ating into the Fyg/;/h the New Teſtament and part of the Old,” iaith Sir Richard Baker.Chr. p. 282. )Buthis greatAdver- 
ſary, Sir Thomas Moore, was the year before gore to his own place, buing executed for Treaſon. Mr. Tirdall and Mr. Cover- 
dale, C as Mr. Fox telleth us) before Mr. 73zdals death, had Tranilated the whole Bible. But it camenotont till after his 

' Death, under the Name of Thomas Matthews, C with the Addition of the Appocrypha, Tranſlated by John Rogers. ) The 
Lord Cromnel, with Archbiſhop Cranmer, preſented it to the King, and obtained an Order from His Majeſty for leave for 
any of his Subjedsro read itz butthis was not without the great regret of the Biſhops. 

About thirteen years after this"1540 (or not ſo much the Lord Cromwel obtained Letters from K. Henry VIIT.for a Sube 
'#Qof his ro Reprint at Paris the Bible in Exglifh;, the King allo wrote a Letter to Bo-zer( at that time his Embaſſador in 
\ Frarcce)to further it. Graftoz and Whitchurch undertook the Work, upon what ſeeming encouragment from Boer may 
| be read in Mr. Fox's 24. Vol. of his Mariyrolrgy, Pref. 1641.pag. 515, 516. Eut how it came to paſs I cannot tell.( tho' 
| Bomncrs Treachery wasſaſpeted in the caſe) wien it was upen the point finithed,the Copies were ſeized, and order'd to be 

- burnt,and the work had wholly ceaſed, but for the covetouſneſs of the Officer, who ſold four great dry fats filled with 
\ them to an Hiberdaſher to lay Caps in. By this means having recovered ſome Copies, they came to Loydorw, and there 


; made a new Impreſton. 
But after this my Lord Crommel! being put to death, the Bz/hops and Popifo party made fo great complaint to the K ing 


 C whole watmrh for the Reformation much abated in the Jatier partot his Lite that the Sale of the Engliſh Bible was again 
Prohibited, and the Prizter.imprifoned 3 and althoug the Bzſhops promiſed the K ing they would make a more corre 


Tranſlation, yet it was never done during that Aizgs Reign, 


* Butin the Year of our Lord 1577. 'w | 
ſhed a new Trantlation ; bur till thar time, the B7blzs uied in Churches were 7 zdalls and Covordales, being allowed by 


- the publick Authority of K. Edw.6. 1549,1550, 1551, 1552. Andto this day, the Pſalzzs 1n our Service-Eook are according 
' to T:zdallsand Corerdales Bibles 3 which ſhould make us wary in our Cezſures of that Tranſlation, tho' welee reiſon in 
-- many things to diſſent from it Only we having a more corrett Tranſlation Eftabliched by Authority, why C for the a- 
voiding the offence of the leſs knowing people ' we have not made ule of that.but retained 2 Tranſ/ation not undertaken by 
_ any publick Anthority, and confeſſed to be more imperfect, 1s what I cannot,nor count my lelfobliged to account for. Poſ- 
ſibly God for the honour of his Mar/yr hath ſo ordered it. 
| After this, King J«mes coming to the Crow7,being a Prince of great, Learning and Judgment, and obſerving the diffrent 
uſage of ſome words in his age, trom the uſage of them in K. Hey. 8. or in Q. Elizabeth's time, and allo the ſeveral miſtakes 
Cthk>y of a minntenature | in thoſe more ancient Verſions, was pleaſed to employ diverſe learned men in making a New 
\ Tranſlation,which is that which attiis day is generally uſed. With what Renerence to former Tranſlators, what 1:bour and 
\ eare & pains they accompliſhed their work,theReader may fee at large in their Preface prefixed to thoſe Copies that are Print- 
ed in Folio, and in their Epiſtle to K. James in our Biblerof a lefler form 5 of which Tranſlation { tho'it may net be with- 
out its more minute Errors) yerlI think it may be ſaid, that it is hardly exceeded by that of any other Church. 
By this Hiſtory (Reader ) thou mayeſt underftand the mighty workings of Divine Previdence,and wonderfn) goodneſs of 
God to this Nation in theplenty we have of Bibles,and that ofa very corre Tranſlation, ( tho' poſſibly not in every litcle 
thing perfe&t. ) Mr. Fox ( if we remember right) tells us a Story of two Maids in Lincelnſhire, that in Q. Mariestime 
parted with a conſiderable part of their eſtate for a few leaves of the Bitle. How good 15 God to vs,that we for a few ſhil- 
lings can have the whole Revelation of the Divine WWII? Upon which account, we ofter it to the con{ideration ofany think. 
ing Eel: Man or Womran.what heor ſhe will anſwer for his or her ignorancein the Holy Scriptures,or for the ignorance of 
his or her Children if( having ſo much means as we have,to learn to Read )any ſhall negleCt the Teaching of their Children 


toread it.or Learning themſelves, incaſe their Parents have negleCted them : or being able to Read, ſhillneglett the prac. _ 


5ce of it,in exerciſing himſe]tin the Law of the Lord day and night,and living up to theRule of it.The Erg/ih Bible is come 
o us at the price of the Blood of one Martyr, and the unwearied Labour of a multitude.of Holy and Learned Men ſuc- 
ding one another for more than Six7y ears, betare we had the Tranſlation ſo perfett as now it is, in all hands, 


Poor Chriſtians in Popiſh Conniries either have not this Pof of Spiritual Food, or muſt cry out, - Death 3s in the Pox: 
rs ia their Preface obſerve, that of late the Church of Rowe would ſeem. to bear ſomething of 


A Our Ezeliſh PTra»ſlato | | > 
4 a Motherly Aﬀettionto her Children, and allow 'them the Scriptures in the Mother-1ongre : But it is indecd a vift nor 
\ worthy of it Names. They mult firſt get a Licerſe in Writing before they uſe them and to get that, they mult approve 
| them- 


oy 
” 
Ce 
: | 


' cee 


hich was the 19th. or 2cth. of the Reign of ®Preen Elizaleth, ſome Biſbops publi- + 


OT > OI ers TE 


ae 


4 Pry On? 7 8 '' V - ME ” 7 - >” Lg W*, b - R : x ai "t [4.5 Ln, "x2 « "*- + $4. OY * - +23, A 
{ - 2 » . C . , , , 
| ; F 3 P | 1 
' . 
a . » 


themſe]ves to their © onf7ſors, to be ſuch as are, if not trozen in the Dregs, yet.ſowred with the leaven of their Superſti- | 
tion. Yet this ſeemed coo much to Clement the Ezghth, who therefore fruſtrated the Grant of Pas the Fourth. They will : 
allow none to be read but the Doway Bibles, and the Remiſh Teſtaments, ( the Corruptions of which have been ſufficient- | 
| fy manifeſted by many Learned Men) nor will they truſt their People with theſe, without the Licenſe of their own Bis | 
. ſhops and: Inquiſitors. This is the liverty they boaſt of giving to any of their Religion to Read the Scriptures in Ezel:/h, 
What it is worth, let any Man judge. | 
 Inthe mean time, thoſe who are not affected with the Mercy of God to us in this particular, muſt declare themſelves nei- 
ther to have any-yall value for God, in the mighty workings of his Providence to bring this about, nor yet for the Blood * 
of Holy Mr. Tindail, who died in his Teſtimony tothis Truth, That zo People ought to be deprived of jo great a Good, © 
nor for the Labours and Pains of thole many Servants of God,, who travelled in this great Work, and thought no La- 
bourin it too much, nor indeed for their own Souls, to the Salvation of which, if the Holy Scripture in our own Lane 
guage doth not highly contribute, we muſt lay the blame upon our ſelves 

But although we have the B:ble-in a Language we underſtand, yet we may ſee reaſon to cry out as Bernard does with 
reference to the Sovg of Solomon Here is anexcellent Nut, but who ſtall crack it > Heavenly Bread, but who ſhall break 
> For thothe Papiſts and ſuch as have ill will to, the good of Souls make too great an /mprovement of the difficul- 
ties in Hoy Writ, in making them an Argument againſt the Peoples having themin a Language which they canunderſtand, 
'! ( for Avgyſtine ſaid true when he ſaid, there are Fords in them wherein Lambs may wade, as well as Depths in which E- 

lephants may ſwim ) and whatothers obſerve, is as true, That things neceſſary to be believed, or done in order to Salvation, 
ly plain and obvious in Holy Writ : yet it is as true, that there 1s much of Holy Writ, ' of which the generality cf P-ople 
muſt ſay as the Eunuch, How can 1 underſtand except ſome man ſhould guide me? Ats 8.31. not to mention the ſeeming ( on= 
3radi;ons that arc betwixt the Holy Penmen of' thoſe Sacred Books ) and indeed itis hard to ſay, what Eook of Scrips 
ture 15 ſo plain that every oxe who runneth can read it with nuderitanding > luch a valt difference there is betwixt the Ca-" | 
pacities ofthole who yet haye the ſame honeſt hearts. ) This hath made Wile and Learned Men not only ſee a need ot lar- 
ger Commentaries, but alſoof ſhorter Netes, Annotations, and Paraphraſes, &c. Nor tis this a Jate diſcovery. Ir is ups 
ward of three hundred years ſince Lyzra wrote his ſhort Notes upon the whole Bible. What YVatabulus and Eraſmus ( tha! 
all of them Papri?s) have done ſince, is ſufficiently known 3 to lay nothing of many others of that Religion. Amongſt 
rhe Reformed Churches, there hath been a Learned P;/cator in Germany, Junius and 1rcarellins elſewhere, who did tie 
ſame things : Eutall thele wrote their Notes in Latir, not in the p<cnliar Language of any Countr-y, The ai Cienret 
Notes we have in Emelifh were thoſe ordinarly known by the Name of the Geneve Notes, after two years labour finii'«« 
1560. by thoſe good men who tiying from Queen Maries Perlecution, took Sanctuary there. A Wotk lo acceprabl» 1G. 
Proteſtants in the beginning of our Reformation, that their Bible with thoſe Notes annexed was ( as is obierved bv the 
Authors of ourlate Ergl:ſh Annotations) Printed above Thirty tires over by Queen El7zabeth's Printers and their Hey 
and Syceefſors. There wanted not one indeed, who Fifty years after boldly refleted on that excellent Work in the rc 
Publick Pulpit of our Univerſity of Oxford ; but how grateful his Refledtions were to the Umzerſty ar thit time, m7 
beread in the Preface to the Engliſh Annotations : He- was in the ſame Pulpit checkt and confuted by the Do&er 7 
Chair, and ſuipended by the Governours ofthe Univerſity. The Labours of Eraſzms in his Paraphraſe on the New Te: 7 
ment were {o acceptable, that by pbl;ck Order they were to be in every Church expoſed to publick View, and Uſe” ar.«: 
(if we miſtake not ) ought to be ſo ftilt. After theſe, . were publiſhed Diodates Notes written in 1talzan, ſince tranſ]:ted. 
7nto Emelifh. About the year 1640. ſome Deliberations were taken for the Compoſing and Printing other E:g/;/h Note. 
( the old Geneve Notes notſo well fitting our new and more correct Tranſlation of the Bible ) Theſe were at fir't intended 
"to belo ſhort, that they might be printed together with our Bible in Filis or 2arto.. But thole Divines who were ir 
oaged in it found, this would not anſwer their end 3 17 being not polbible by fo ſhort Notes, to give People any toler:+i- 
light into the w hole Text ; yet they ſo concrafted rheif Works, that it was all diſpatched in one Volume «5 Which tho” 
it were ar firſt greedily bought up, yer we cannot ſay it gavelſo general a ſarisfattion C by reaſon of the ſhortneſs of it , 
as v1:s deſired and expected. So as upon the Second Eqition, it Came forth quite a new thing, making twojuſt Volumes: 
This was ſo acceptable to the World, thar within /zxteer: Tears it was ready for a 1hird Edition, with ſome turther En- 
{ Iargements. Before which alſo were publiſhed the Dutch Anrzotations tranſlated into. our Language, 

So that at this day ( beſides the ſhorter Geneve Notes) we have three ſorts of Annotations in our own Language 5 
Thoſe of famous Diodate; the Duichk Annotations, and thoſe of our own Divines. ( originally fo wrote. ) After which 
4} New Avunotations may ſeem ſuperfluous. It ſeems therefore reaſonable that we ſhould give onrReagers ſome ſhort account 
'T of our undertaking. Wedare ſay nothing could be further from the Thought of our Rezercnd Brother ( now at reſt 
with God ) who firſt began this Work, than to reflect any diſhonour upon thoſe eminent Perſons who laboured before 
in Works of this nature. nor is it any thing further from our thoughts. ( They all of them did famouſly in their Gene- 
| ration. ) And it it ſhould appear to any of our Readers, that any of us have {cen further into any particular Texts than 
| _*F thoſedid who went before us, yet we hope all our Readers will underſtand there 1s little Honour due to us upon that 

Z account, becauſe we had all their Shoulders to ſtand upen. 


$ The Pains which our Reverend Brother, ( 5 waxzgiris,) rook 1n his Synopſes Criticornm, 1s ſuch, as not only will make his 

* . Name live in the Churches of Chriſt, bur alſo eminently fitred him for giving the Senſe of the whole Scripture in Anno- * 
 Þ# 3ations ofthis Nature, which he undertook and carried on by his own Hand to the Fifty eighth of Iſaiah; deſigning that | 
: S Two Volumes ſhould comprehend the Whole, and that the firft ſhould determine with his Notes upon the Sorg of Solo | 


210n. What occaſioned his firſt Thoughts and Und: rtaking, himlſelt tells us 1n his Paper of Propoſals publiſhed with re- t 
ference to that Work, in theſe words. * Aut altho there are many excellent Comments upon divers parts of the crip- 
< ture, and ſome intire Comments or large Annotations upon the whole in the Engliſh Tenguez yet becauſe of the too. » 


I 7 < much brevity of ſome, and the unequal Compoſure of others, as being done by divers Hands, and the Prolixiry of - 
| Þ# <« choſe that have been written upon particular Books. ithath been often and earnelily wiſhed that there w: re ſome ſhort 
. þ# *© and full Comment, wherein all thoſe Paſſages which need the help of an Interpreter, might be ſufficiently cleared, ec. 
; 3 As the firſt Edition of our E-g/;/þ Annorations, after which followed the Tranſlation of thoſe of the Learned Dj;edate in- 


to our Language, and then thoſe of the Low Countrey Divines of Holland, C tho allof them deſervedly valuable ) ſeemed 
mnrch too ſhort to ſatisfie the Thirſt of many Pious Souls after the fuller knowledge of the Scriptures, ſo the larger Edi- 
tion of our Engliſh Annotations, ſeems capable of ſome Amendments by which they might be made more ſerviceable to | 
thoſe that uſe them, eſpecially in theſe particulars. _ | RY ? - © +2 

1. The whole Text is not Printed in them. > as thoſe who will uſe them muſt make uſe of a Pzble allo, for the under- } 
S Kanding of them. Our Reverend Brother (with whom _ we concur) ightly judged, that it wonld be of more —_ 
| | BY | re cage - 


fry 
b- 


. Wt hab... 


: 
' 


l 


ON LOR m_ Wed 5 Yoo wo 


=Y _ [ © ; a* as L Ts 4% 2 ( : = -< —_ b > $ ” » XX 
ew 0 | & if P HF ER 4 py Fx Y 4 


tzve to have the entire Text in the Reader's Eye, while heis ſeeking rhe Senſe of any particular place, and while he reads a 
Chapter, to have a Commentary/under his E ye in which he might find the Senſe of any part of it, and ſatisfie himſelf ag 
co any difficulty occurring 1n It, : 

2. As ſome ( very eminently. Learned Men _) had been too large in thoſe Avnotations( ſaying almoſt all that hath been 
ſaid by any upon the Texts they handled \fſo cthers had been as much roo ſhort, and that eſpecially in the New Teflament 
( which ſeems to Chriſtians to need the fulleſt Explication ) and others, from their variety of Learning, had mixed ſeveral 
Quotations of the Fathers, and Critical, and Phzlelogical Notions, poſlibly not ſo proper for the end for which {uch Arzo- | 
tations are deligned, which is to give the unlearned Chriſtians the true Sente of the Holy Scriptures 3 That thoſe who can, 
might read and underſtand the Will of God. , | 

That our Reader may not miſtake our deſign or undertaking, we deſire that he ſhould know.that we donot pretend ( as 
ſome have vainly fancied ) te tranſlate Mr. Poele's Synop/7s Criticornw (that would have asked ſix Voluzzes inftead of two) 
and when it had been done would have ſignified very little, unleis for thoſe who ( being learned Men ) needed no ſuch 
Tranſlation ; poſlibly in 2 whole Leaf ofthar Book fix Lines would not ſerveour purpoſe. Nor have we had any Ambiti- 
on,cither roſay ſomething that none had ſaid betoreus ( we have obſerved that thoſe who have had ſuch an Itch, have for 
the moſt part happned to ſay, what thole who came after them would not ſublcribe ) nor yet to ſay all that we knew wag 
ſaid before us, ( that had been to have confounded our Readers only with a variety of Senſes ) we have,only hinted the 
Senſes which in our Judgment have ſeemed faireſt, and leaſt conſtrained, and ſhortly ſhewed the Conſonancy of them to 
other Scriptures. We have avoided all Polemical Di/cenrſes as no way proper to our deſign, and very rarely hinted thoſe 


Praftical Concluſions which have aroſe from the Text when opened, ( the moſt wehave done of that nature is in our DiC | } 


courſes upon the Paralles) Te | 
Our Reverend Brother ( deſigning but Two Volumes, and the firſt tro end with the Song of Solomon, tho' ſince it hath been 


determined to concludeit with the Prophet Iſaiah, that all which he lived tofiniſh might be comprehended in one Volume) 
had an hard Task tocontra& his Diſceurſes ſo,as to bring them within thac compaſs,and thereby was neceſſitated not togive 
the intire Senſe of each Verſe in his Notes, but only of thoſe Words or Terms in the Verſe which he conceived to ftand in 
need of Explication, referring by Letters in the Text to the parts of the Commentary. This was not neceſſary in ſuch parts 
of theScripture where the entireSenſe of the whole Text is given.Nor indeed as to ſome parts is it poſſible, ſuch we mean 
as are opened harmonically) ;z of which nature ate the Three firſt Evangeliſts. Ir is confeſſed by. all, that the Evangelifts 
makeup but one entire Hiſtory, tho' ſome of them have ſome rhings which cheothers have not, and they ſeldom agree in 
the Phraſes and Circumſtances of any one piece of Hiſtory. This made it reaſonable, that with the [zterpretation of one 
Evangeliſt ſhould be joyned what the others had, with reterence to.the ſame piece of Hiſtory, Which Method hath been ac- 
cordingly purſued (being the ſame in which the moſt Jadicious Mr. alvin ard others have gone before us; )| nor indeed 
could any other courſe have been tak?n without a needleſs writing the ſame chings over again, fo as that in our Notes u- 
pon Mark, we bave only enlarged in the Explicatien of what he hath, which we did not meet with before in Matthews 

and in theExplication of Lyke we have cnly opened what he hath, which was not in Matthewor Mark Where they all | 


\ three concurrd, or but two of them concurr'd in any Story, we have opened what they all or beth ſay, in our Notes ups 


on thefirſt of them; and when we have come to it again in one or both the erher, we have only referred to our former 
Notes. Jobs { having little which the other Evangeliſts have ) we have conſidered by himſelf moſtly, yet ſometimes 
caking in ſomething from him. where we tound it Completory of any thing related by the other Evangeliſts. 

Tz magnss voluiſſe ſat eſt. We cannot ſay that we have letr noroom tor others tocome afrer us, and add to or correct 
what we have ſaid. But this we can fay in truth, that we have not willingly baulked any obvious Difficulty.and have de- 
fened a juſt Satisfaction to all our Readers:and if any Knot remain yet untied,we have told our Readers what hath been 
moſt probably ſaid for their ſatisfaQtion in the untying of 1t. 

If it had pleaſed God to have lent a little longer Life to our Revererd Brother, the Work bad very probable been done 
to greater advantage, and more general ſatisfatiun. We are bur entered upon his Harveſt, and have wanted his Sickle ; 
we cannot pretend to any double Portion of. rs Spirit. His Mamnile dropi from him before he was Tranſlated ( we mean 


' his S»»opſes. ) We have taken that up; out of that great Work of his we have taken ſo much as we judged proper for his 


delign in this Work, and made ule of a great number of other Authors, ſome of which he left our, - or very little confi- 


dered in his Syop/7s, upon delign to make a further uſe of them in this Engliſh Work,as thinking their labours more proper 


| for this. than his other Work. 


Our deſign, goed Reader, was not to tell thee how the Fathers interpreted Texts, ( Aquinas, Juſtinianus, and others, 
have done that Work) nor yet to tell thee any Grammatical Nicities, or what Learned Men have critically noted upon 
Terms or Phraſes, (that isdone in the Synopſes Criticornm ) Nor yet to tell thee what Concluſions of Truth may be raiſed ; 
from the Verſes ( that hath been done profitably upon many Books of Scripture by Mr. DickJon, Hutchinſon, Ferguſon, | 
Guild, Durhazz, and ſome others) much leſs to handle the Controverſies that have riſen from any portion of Scripture. Our { 
Work hath been only togive thee the plain Senſeof the Scripture, and to reconcile ſeeming ContradiCtions where they {| 
occurrd, and as far as we were able to oper Scripture by Scripture, which 1s its own beſt Interpreter, comparing things | 
Spiritual veith Spiritual, That thy Faith might not fland in the wiſdom of men, but in the Wiſdom and Power of God. 
IF we have reached chis end, it isall weaimed at; if thou getteſt any good by what we have done, Remember thy Sacri» | 

free is dueat another Altar, even his who mriniſtreth ſced to the Jower, who both watereth the furrows of the field, and bleſ- | 


ſeth the ſpringing of the Corn; let him have the Praiſe, and we only thy Prayers, that we may live an uſeful Life, and dy 


an happy Death, and attain to the Rejurrefion of the Dead, in which we ſhall all ſee and underſtand more perfeRly than 
we yet do. 


Annotations 


A tn. of —— _” 


5 ID W yy” we - 


wo 


RB 


id @ w fd 


gn———_—_— 


b = 
kr . W- 


ww zT.TaN 


% > > I_— 
Pu *2 by p = - 


he _—_— w 


NT 


Þ« © 


\ Mr. POOL'S Englih SYNOPSIS 


ht < WHOSE ao ow >, S ” 


OF | 


nnotations upon the Holy Bible 


Colleted out of the Latin Synopſes Criticorum, and divers other Learned Inter 
ted to the uie of Vulgar Capacities. 


preters ; and Accommode- 


GENESIS. 


® Pfal. 33: 
G. 


TON, 25. 


XJG. 5, 
146. 6, 


FI.I5. 


. Ta. 44-24 
Jer.10.14* was thus. 


Zech 12. 
I. 
Atﬀs 14. 


I5. 
T7. 24. 


FI 


"Heb. 11.3- 


The ARGUMEN T. 


His Bosk 3s called Geneſis; i» e» Generation, or Birth, giving an accompl of paſſages during 2300 years,” ond 
upwards, Viz, From the Creation of all things, tothe death of Joſeph. Tn which Hiftory Moſes by divine in- 
ſpiration, treats of the Creation of the World, with alltheparts, anduſes init, and of it, but chiefly of Man, who 
alene 20as made after Ged's Image ; where be lays down Ged's Conceſſions, and Frobibitions to him : and Man's Tranſ- 
greſfſion, together with the woful effefts, and the remedy of them inthe promiſe of a Savieur; the Original, Progreſs, 
and Preſervation of the true Church ſpringing from Abcl, and carried on by Seth, Enech, &c. and the ground and. 
riſe of Apoſtacy begun in Cain, and carried on by his Pojterity, ſeparating themſelves from the Holy Seed, till by their 
monftruous Provocations they had brought an untverſ2l Deluge to deſtruy all Mankind from off the Earth, excepting only 
| Noah, and his Family ; eut of which, as ibeChurch did again ſpring forth, ſo another curſed Race carrying on the 
former enmity to @ greater height, mot only fell into Idolatry, after it had continued a conſiderable time in Sem's Race, 
but breaking out into all Outrages, and Tyranicall Oppreſſions, it was almoſt extinct among theſe numerous Nations that 
Noah's Peſterity ſprang out into, But God callug Abraham into the Land of Promiſe,2vbo as an Idolater in Chaldea, 
and giving him Temporal and Spiritual Promiſes, and eſpecially that of the Meſſiah coming out of his Loins, and aſ- 
ſuring it by a ſpecial Covenant ſealed by Circumciſion,che Church began now to take root, and to be imbodied in Jacob's 
Family under the name of Ifrael ; and bere Ged undertook the pretection of bis People and Worſhip, byxbe viſible pre« 
ſence of Chrift her Head, that Angel of the Covenant, going continually 2vith them, comferting and defending them, 


zill they came into Egypt, where the Church continued until Joſeph's 


CHAP, I 


The whole viſible Creation aſſerted in general, v. x. Shemed in particular 


the condition of the rude matter of it, v. 2. The formation of the ſwveral ! 


Creatures on the ſeveral days. (1 ) Light produced by the powerful word 
of Goa, v. 3. approved and ſeparated from the darkneſs, v. 4 ramed, 
and the fir day declared, v. 5. (2) The Firmameit formed, its Uſe, 
Name and Time, v.6, 7, 8. (3) L 
Earth ; Sea md dry Land named and npproved, v. 9g, 10. The Earth 
brings forth Graſs, Herbs and Trees ; approved, and 1ime declared, v. 
11,12, 13. ( 4 ) The Firmoment furniſhed with Sun, Moon and” Stars; 
their uſes aſſigned, their Names, wich Apprebation, and time of doing 
declared, V 14,195, 16, i7, 18, 19. (5) Waters and Air furnijh= 
ed, approved, bleſſed, and time of it declared, v. 20, 21, 22,13. (6) 
The Earth furniſhed with living Creatures ſerſitive, and approved, v. 24, 
25. Rational Men in bot) Sexes created upon Conſultation, according to 
God's Image, with Dominion over the other Crearures ; and dl:ſed, v.26, 
27, 28. Food appointed far Man, V. 29. bor Beoſts, v. 309. The whole 
approved on the ſixih day. 


N * the beginning 4 Godcreated b the Heaven 
and the Earth c. 


a To wit, Of Time and Things, in the firſt place, before 
things were diſtinguiſhed and perfected in manaer hereafter 
expreſſed. Or,the tenſe is this, The beginning of the World 
And this Phraſe further informeth us; "I tkitthe World 

and all things in it, had a beginning, and wete ::rr from eternity, 
as ſome Philoſophers dreamed. b Made ourof nothing. c Either 
i. The Heaven and Earth as now they are with their Inhabitants. 
So this Verſe 1s a Summary or Brief of what 1s pai ticularly decla- 
red in the ref of this Chapter Or, - 2: The ſubſtance and com- 
mon matter of Heaven and Earth, Which ſeems more probably by 
comparing this Verſe with the next, where the Earth here mentt- 
cned is declared to be without form, and the Heavens withour lighr; 
as alſo with Gen. 2. 1: Where the Heavens and the Exrth, here only 
ſaid ro be created, areſaid to be fnijbedor perfefed, Yet I conceive 
the third Heaven to be included under the Title of the Heaven, and 
and to have been created and perfeCQed the firſt day, together with 
its blefſed Inhabitants the Holy Angels, as may be colleged from 
Job 33.6, 7. But the Scripture being written for men, and not for 
Angels, the Holy Ghoſt thought it ſuiticient to coniprehend them 
and their dwel'ing-place under that general term. of the Heavens, 
and proceedeth to give a more particular account. of the viſible. 
Heavens and Earth, which were created for the uſe of Man. In 
the Hebrew it 13, The Heavens and the Exrth. For there are three Hea- 
vens mentioned in Scripture, The Aerea! ; the place of Birds, 
Clouds and Mcteors,Mat.26, 64. Rev. 19. 17. & 20. 9. . The Starty ; 
the Region of the Sun,the Moon and Stars,Ger. 22. 17. The higheſt 
or fhird Heaven; 2 Cor. 12. 2. The dwelling of the bleſſed Angels. 
2 And the Earth e was without formand yoid f, and 
darkneſs 2yas upon the face g ofthe deep : and the Spies 


rit of God b moyed upon the tace of the Waters *. 


The Waters ſeparated from the - 


| 


| o were the firlt day p. 


p_— 


Death ; where this Bock Ends, 
7 


A 


e The ſame confuſed maſs or heap is here called both E2rth,from 
its mott ſolid and ſubſtantial part ; and the ep, from its vaſt Bulk 
and Depth ; and Waters, from ics outward face and covering. Sec 
Pjal. 104. 6. 2 Pet. 3.5. f(i,e.)' Without order and beauty, and 
without furniture and ufe. g The ſurface or uppermoſt part of it, 
upon which the light afterward ſhone. Thus not the Earth only, but 
alſo the Heaven above it was without light, as is manifeſt from the 
following verſes. h Not the Wind,which was nor yet created, as is 
manifeſt, becauſe the Air, the niatrer or ſubje&of ir, was not yet 
produced : But the Third Perſon of the glorious Trinity, called 
the Holy Ghoſt, to whom the work of Creation is attributed, Joh. 
26. 13. as It 1s aſcribed rc the ſecond Perſon, the Son, Joh. 1. 3. Col. 
I. 16, 17. Heb. 1.3. and to the Firſt Perſon, the Father, every where. 
* ( 7.e.) Upon the Waters, to cheriſh, quicken,and diſpoſe them to the 
produttion of the things afrer-mentioned. Ir is a Metaphor from 
Birds hovering and fluttering over,and ſitring upon their Eggs and 
young Ones, ro cheriſh, warm, and quicken them. 


3 And Godſaid ;, * Let there be Light: and there 
was Light &. | 

7 ( 7.e.) Commanded, not by ſuch a word or ſpeech, as we uſe, 
whichagreethnot with the ſpiritual nature of God ; . bur either by 
an Att of his powerful will, called the word of his- power, Heb. 1. 3. 
Or, by his ſubſtantial Word, his Sozz, by whom he made the Worlds, 
Hebe 1. 2. Pſal. 33.6. who is called, The Word, partly, if not princi- 
pally, for this reaſon, 7oh.1. 1, 2,3, 10+ k Which was ſome bright 
and lucid Body, peradventure like the fiery Cloud in the Wilder- 
neſs, giving a ſmall and imperfe& Light, ſucceſſively moving over 
the ſeveral parts of the Earth ; and afterwards condenſed.encreaſed, 
perfeQted, and gatuered together in the Sun. ; 


4AndGod ſaw / the Light, that ic 4s good » and 
God divided f the Light from the Darkneſs o 

I (i.e. ) Obſerved with approbation. » (7. e. ) Pleaſant and ami- 
able,agreeable to God's purpoſe and Man's uſe. » Made a diftin&i- 
on or ſeparation between them in place, time and uſe, thit the one 
ſhould ſucceed and ſhur out the other, and fo by their viciflitudes 
make the day and the night. 


5 And Godcalicd the Light day, and the Darkneſs 
he called Night : + and the Evening and the J1orning 


oIr isacknowledged by all, that the Evoring and the 5oraning are 
nor here ro be underitoood according to our common uſ:ge,bur are 
put by a Syecdoche exch of rhem for one whole part of the natural 
day,But becauſe ir may be doubred which part each ofchem tignihes, 
ſome underſtand by £-cing,the foregoing day ; and by the Morning, 
the foregoing night, and to the natural day begins with the morn» 
ing or. the light, as it did with the ancient Chal/deans, Others by 
Evening underſtand the firſt night or darkneſs which was upon the 
face of the Earth, wer. 2. which probably continued for the 1pace; 


þ of about twelve hours,the beginning whereof might fitly. be called 


EVning, 


7 Heb.BS 
tween the 
lioht, end 
between rh 
darkneſs, 


+ Heb.and 
the even > 
ing was, | 
and the © 
morning +, 
was, &Ce 


o . vx J . 
+ Y 
Ll 


ap. I | | 
| I Evemng, 2n1 by Morning the ſucceeding light or day, which may 
rezionab!y be ſuppoſed to continue the other rwelve hours,or there- 
aboucs. And this ſeems the truer Opinion, 1. Becauſe the dark- 
n= »as before the light, as the Evening is put before the Mormrg,v. 
e.and 8.and aferwa.ds. 2.Becauſe this beſt agrees both with the vul- 
* Sir; and with the Scripture uſe of the terms of Evening and Morning. 
3. Becauſe the Jews who had the beſt opportunity of knowing the 
mind of God in this matter by Moſes and other ſucceeding Prophers, 
begun both their common and ſacred days with the Evening, As 13 
confetſed, and may be gathered from Levit. 23. 32. p Did conſti- 
tute or make up the firſt Day; Day being taken largely for the na- 
tural Day ; conſiting of 24 hours: Theſe were the parts of the firſt 
Pay ; ind the like is to be underſtood of the ſucceeding days. 
Moreover, God who could have made all things at once, wasplea- 
ſed todivide his work into ſix days, partly to giveus occaſion more 
diſtin&ly and ſeriouſly to conſider God's works ; and principally 
to lay the foundation for the weekly Sabbath, as is clearly intimat- 
_ ed, Gen: 2, 2, 3: and Exod. 20.9, 10, IT. 
"ig TO. = J And God ſaid, * Let there be Fa firmament 9 
' Jer.ro.r2, in the midit of the Waters r, and let it divide the Wa- 


© & 51: 15. ters from the Waters, 

{ 7 Heb.cx- 4 Or, An Extenſon, or a Space or place extended, or ftretched aut and 
'# Laos. ſpread abroad like a Tent, or Curtain. » (7.e. ) Between the 
Waters, tho' not exattly in the middle place ; as Tyrus is ſaid to/ir, 


Mw @ATNR 


* 6 ka 


| 
þ or be ſcituated in the malt of the Seas, Ezek. 28. 2. Though it was 
8 but : little ſpace within the Sea. Bur of theſe things ſee more in 
7 the next Verſe. ; | Y. 

. 7 And God made the firmament 5s, and divided the 
k Waters, which vere under the firmament, from the Wa- 


þ ters which were above the firmament ?, andit was ſo «. 

'T s The Firmament here is, Either. 1. The Starry Heaven ; ſo'cal- 

E | led, not from” its folidiry, butfrom its fixed, durable, and in a ſort 

& 1ncorruptible and unchangeable nature. Or, 2. The Air; called 

| here, The expazffon, or extenjion ; becauſe it 1s extended far and 

wide, even from the Earth to the third Heaven ; called alſo, The 

Frrmament, becauſe it is fixed in its proper place, from whence it 

cannot be moved, unleſs by force. # The waters under the firmament 

are Seas, Rivers, Lakes, Fountains, end other waters in the bowels 

* of the Earth. The waters above the Firmament, or above the Heavens,as 

s they are called Pjo!. 143. 4. are cither, 1. A Collection or Sea of 

Waters placed by God aboveall the viſible Heavens, and there re- 

ſerved for ends known to himſelf. "Or rather, 2. The Waters in 

the Clouds; forthe Clouds are called Waters, Pſal. 18.11. and 194. 

2. and are faid to be in Heaven, 2 Sam.'21+ 10. Matth. 24. 30. and 

the produttion thereof is mentioned as an eminent work of God's 

Creation, Jo» 35.5. and 36: 29. Pſal.147.8. Prov. 8.28. which there- 

fore it is not credible,tharMoſes in his Hiſtory of the Creation would 

omit, which he doth, if they be not here meant; and theſe are 

| Tightly ſaid to be above the Frmament, 7. e. the Air, becauſe they 

are above a confid-rable part of it. » As God commanded and or- 

| dered it, ſo it was done and ſettled. | 

, S And God called the Firmament Heaven : and the 
| Evening and the Morning were the ſecond day. 

| *Jobi26. 9 4 And God ſaid, * Let the waters under the Heaven 


T9, 


an D223 E323. 5. 

ro And God called the dry-lavd Earth, and the ga- 
| thering tcecther of 'the Waters he called Seasz: and 
| Gor law that 3: vas g00d 4. 

2 Nor $ca, but Seas ; becauſe ofthe differing quantity and nature 
beth of ſeveral! Seas, and of the Rivers, and other leffer Colle&ions 
o© Warers, all which-the Hebrews call Seas, a The ſeparation-of the 
W.ters was begun on the ſecond day,' v. 6, ©&c. but nor perfteCted 

. G's - a . oh 
ti] th's Third day : Therefo:e God's approbation of that work is 
not ment.oned there, but here only. 


3Heb, rey. 11 And God ſaid, Let theearth bring forth þ F 
: acr Graſs, grals c, tie nerÞ yielding Seed 4, and the fruit tree 
& Gr. Erb, yieiding fruit after his kind e, whoſe Seed 3s f in it {ſeif 
& g, upon the carth : and irwas fo, 
b The ſen is, For the preſent Ict it afford matter,out of which 
T will make Graſs, ( as Man's Rib afforded matter, - out of which 
God made Woman } :. and for the future ler it receive vertue or 
power of producing it out of rhat Matter which I have made, and 
{vited to that end. c That which groweth of it {elf without Seed, 
or manuring, and is the food of Beaſts. & For the propagation of 
thei; ſeveral kinds, to wit, mature and perfe& Herbs, which alone 
yield Seed. So afterwards God made Man, not in the tate of child- 
3» hood, bur of grown and perfect Age. ez. e. According to the ſe- 
* vera] kinds of Frtits. f Now is by my conftitution,and {hal be for 
BY the future. & z. e. In ſome part of ir ſelf, either in the Root, or 
Branch, or Leaf, or.Bud, or Fruit. The ſenſe is, Which is ſuffi- 
cient of it ſelf for the propagation of its kind,withoutany conjun&i- 
on of Male and Female. | 
12 And the earth brought forth graſs, and herb 
yielding Seed after his kind ; and the tree yielding fruit, 
whoſe feed was in it ſeif}, after his kind : and God ſaw 
that it 98s good hþ. | 
þ This clauſe is ſo often added, to ſhew that a!l the Diſorders, 
evil and hurtful qualities that now are in the Creatures, are not to 
be imputed to God, who madeal! of them goed ; but ro Man's fan, 
which hath corrupted their nature, and perverted their uſes 


Wo <——— — i —— JD... Is 


_e 


-* 


2: 
»» 
. 


: 13 And the eveningand the morning were the third 
- | , 


I9. 


irmament of the Heaven, to divide F the day +4 from 
Pal. x36: 


che night: andletthem befor ſigns /, audfor ſeaſons », 


and for days », and years. + Heb. be- 
; To wit more glorious Lights - than. that created the firſt Day, tween che 

which probably was now condenſed and reduced into theſeLights; Day gnd 

which are higher for place,/more illuſtrious for Light, and more between the 

powerful for influence than that was. Note here, "i hat Herbs and Nzhy, 

Trees were created before the Sun, whoſe influence now is necefſa- 

ry for their produCttion, to ſhew that God doth not depend upon 

the means, or upon the help of the Creatures in his Operations. k 

z, e. The artificial day conchighs from Sun-riſing to Sun-ſetting. 7 

For the deſignation and diſtin&ion of times, as months, week;,c. 

as alſo for the ſignification of the quality ofrhe Weather or Seaſon 

by the manner of their riſing and ſetting, Marth. 16. 2. By their- 

Eclipſes, Conjun&tions, &c. And for the diſcovery of ſupernatural 

and miraculous effe&s ; of which ſee Jof. 10s 13. 1ſz. 38.8. Luke 21. 

25, 26. Aﬀs 2.19,20.m By their Motions and Influences to produce 

and diſtinguiſh the four Seaſons of the year, mentioned, 'Ger: $. 22. 

And to ſhew a+ well the fit Times and Seaſons for Sowing, Plant- 

ing, Reaping,Navigation, &c. as for the Obſervation of ſet and ſo- 

lemqg Feaſts, or other times for the ordering of Eccleſiaſtical or Ci- 

vil Aﬀairs. » By their diurnal and ſwifr motion to make the,days, 

and by their nearer approaches to us, or further diſtances from us, 

to make the Days or Nights either longer, or ſhorter, or equal. 

He ſpeaks here of natural days confiſting of 24 hours. o By their 

annual and flower motion to make years. 

I5 And let them be for lights in the firmament of the 
Heaven, to give'light upon the Earth: and it was ſo. 

16 And God made 7 two great Lights *, the greater T Heb. zh; 
Light p Þ to rulethe day 9, ard the lefſer Light to rule oo BY 
the night : He made the * Stars alſo. Heb. for 

* Or, Enlightners, as the word properly ſignifies. p- The Sun; the ruls of 
which is really and conſiderably greater than the Moon, or any of the aday,&c 
the Stars, or the whole Earth. And the Moon, called here 2he.leſir * Job g 
Light 1s greater than any of the Stars, nor really, bur in appearance 7. al 
andin clearneſs and light, in reſpe&of which it is called grear in 
this place, and both are much greater in efficacy and uſe, than any 
of the Stars. 4 Either, 1. To influence the Earth and its Fruits - 
with heat or moiſture, and to govern mensattions and affairs, which 
commonly are tranſa&ed by day : For the word Day is ſometimes 
put Metonimically for the events of the Day, as Prov. 27. 1, 1 Car; 
3-13. Or, 2. To regulate and manage the day, by its riſe to begin 
it, by irs gradual progreſs to carry it on, even to the mid-day, and 
by its declination and ſetting, to impair and end it. Which ſeems 
moſt probable, becauſe the Moon 1s in like manner ſaid zo rule the 
night, which is meant of the time, andnot of the Aftions or Eyents 
of the Night. _ : | 

17 And God ſet them in the firmamient of the Hea- 
ven: to givelighe upon the earth: 

- 18 And to * ruleover the day, and over the night, * Jer. z x; 
and to divide the night from the darkneſs : and God 35- 
ſaw that it 4s good 7. F 

r This Clauſe was omitted in the firſt day's Work, but is added 
here, becauſe the Light was then bur glimmering and imperfe&, 
which now was made more clear and compleat. - 

19 And the Eveningand the Morning were the fourth 
day. 

20 T And God ſaid, Let the waters bring forth a- 
bundantly + che moving Creature 5 that hath lite, and + T Heb.7he 


fowl hat may fly 7 above the Earth, in the open fir- F v-966. 3 
mament of Heaven. | Creates, 6 


5 Or, Creezing thing. A word which belongs to all thoſe living 1;4;g ſoul. 
Creatures, » ho move with their Bellies cloſe to the Eliment they + Heb.Lec 
movcin : Hence it 1 uſed both of Birds which fly in the Air,Lev. che Fowlfy. 
11. 20, and of things creeping upon the Earth, as v. 24. of this 4 Heb. Face 
Chapter, and of Fifhes thatſwim in the Sea, as here. : The Particle of the Fir- 
that or which 1s oft wanting, and to be underſtood in the Hebrew ;zament 0 
Language, as Gen. 39. 4. J0b 41. 1. 1/a. 6.6. according to this [Tran- jeaven. 
flation the Fowl have their matter from the Water as well as the 
Fiſhes ; which ſeem moſt probable, as from this, ſoalſo from the 
following Verſes, in which they are both mentioned together as 
made of the ſame materials,and as works of the ſame day, and both 
are bleſſed together, and both are diſtinguiſhed and ſeparated from 
the produQion of the Earth,which were the works of the ſixth day, 

v. 24, &c. And whereas it 1s ſaid; Gen. 2. 19. Out of the ground the 


| Lord God formed every beaſt of the field,and every fowl of the Air ; Tt may 


be anſwered, That the word Ground or Earth may be there under- 
ſtood more largely, as itis confeſfedly in ſome other places of 
Scripture, for the lower part of the World conſiſting of Earth and 
Water. For it is moſt reaſonable to expound that ſhort and general 
paſſage from the foregoing Chapter, wherein the original both of 
Beaſts and Fowls are largely and diſtintly deſcribed. Moreover, 
the Fowl ſeem to have been made of both theſe Elements, wiz. of 
ſoft and moiſt Earth, poſſibly taken f:om the bottom of the Water, 
in which caſe they were brought fofth by the Water, as is ſaid 
here, and formed out of the ground, as there. As Eve is ſaid to 
be made of Adam's Bone and Rib, Ger. 2:21. and ofhis Fleſh, wv. ! 
23. Which ſhews that with the Rib, Fleſh was taken from Adam, 
tho itbe not ſaid ſo, v. 21. So here, the Fowl were made both of 
Water and Earth, as their Temper and Conſtitution ſhews, tho 


— 


+ but one of them be here expreſſed. But theſe words are by ſome 


Tranſlated thus, And let the Fow! fly. But according to that Tran* ' 
ſlation, the mention of the Fowl, both here and in the following 
Verſe, ſeems to be very improper and forced. For it is prepoſte- 
rous and contrary to the method conſtantly uſed in this whole 


Chaprer, . 


ap, TL. 


14 4 4nd God faid, Let there be lights * ; in the *Deur. ,;, _ 


Po 3 0 Og en OAT av"; , 
— hf Gt IE et I Es 


RIEL hr 6 


Gl 
br 

4s 
6 
c 


=, 

. 2 
p- 
HS 
NV 


Do 
Chapter , to ſpeak of the motion of any living Creature; and the 
place thereof, before its original and produttion be mentioned. 
Beſides either the original of the Fowls is deſcribed here, or it is 
wholly omitred in-this Chapter, which is nor. credible. | 
21 Ar:d God Created « great * Whales x, and eve- 
"Heb :;. Ty | living Creature that * moveth, which the Waters 
wing Soul, brought forth abiindantly after their kind, and every 
* Or,Swim Winged Fowl after his kind y, and God ſaw that r 


meth. WAS g00d. Rs ; 

u 2, e. Produced out of moſt unfit matter, as if a man ſhould 
out of a ſtone make Bread, which requires as great 'a power as 
that which is properly called Creation. * Thoſe vaſt Sea-Moniters 
known by that Name, thoughelſewhere this word be applyed to 
great Dragons of the Earth. y In ſuch manner as is declared in 
the firſt Note upon Verſe 20. ; : 

* Chap.z- 22 And God blelled chem =, ſaying, * Be fruitful, 
i-.&9. 1- and muliply, and fill the Waters in the Seas a, and 


let Fowl multiply inthe Earth 6. . 

z Gave them power of procreation, and fruirfulneſs, which is 
"of juſtly a as a great bleſſing, Pſal.128. 3,4. # And conſe- 
quently in the Rivers, which come fromthe Sea, and return in- 
to it, 6 Where they ſhall commonly have their Habiration, though 
they had their orginal from the Waters ; of which ſee on v. 20. 


23 Andthe Evening and the Morning were the 


fifth day. | FE 
+ Heb.” 24 © And God ſaid, Let the Earth bring forth + the 
4, and creep- 


ving SOl3: [fying Creature © after his kind, Cattle 
ing thinge, and the Beaſt f of the Earth after his 


kind: Andit was (o. | 

c 1.e. Thoſe living Creatures hereafter mentioned, whoſe ori- 

ginal is fromthe Earth, and whoſe habitation isin it. d z. e.Thoſe 

tame Beaſts, which are moſt familiar with, and uſeful to men for 
Food, Clothing,or-other ſervice. e To wit, of the Earth, ofa dit- 

fering kind from thoſe creeping things of the Water, wv. 20. f 7. 

e. The wild Beaſt, as the Hebrew word conmonly ſignifies, and 
as appears further, becauſe they are diſtinguiſhed from the tame 

Beaſts, here called Cattle. | | 
25 And God made the Beaſt of the Earth after his 
kind, and Cattle after their kind, and every thing that 
creepeth upon the. Earth after his kind: And God 

ſaw that it vas good. 

- Chap.z. _ 26 J And God faid g, * Let us make man 4 inour 
1. & 9. 6. Image, after our: likeneſs 5: and * let them k 
«: Cor. 11. have dominion over the Filh of the Sea, and over the 
Ling x Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle /, and over all 
*4: 1-03" the Earth , and over every creeping thing that 


TO. 
*Pſal. 8.6. creepeth upon the-Earth. | 
g Having prepared all things neceſſary for mans uſe and com- 
fort. Þ The plurals », and our,afford an evident proof ofa plurali- 
ty of perions in the Godhead. Ir is plain from many other Texts 
as well as fromthe Nature & Reaſon of the thing,that God alone 
is mans Creator; the Angels rejoyced-at the work of Creation, 
bur only God wrought it, Job 38. 4,5,6,7. And it is noleſs plain 
from this Text, and from divers other places, that man had more 
Creators than one Perſon. See Job 35. 10. John 1. 2, 3. &c. Heb.t. 
3. And as other Texts aſſure us that there is but one God, fo this 
ſthews that there are more perſonsin the Godhead : Nor can that 
ſeeming contradi&ion of one and -more being in the Godhead be 
otherwiſe reconciled, than by acknowledging a plurality of Per- 
ſons in the Unity, of Eſſence: Ir is pretended that God here ſpeaks 
after the manner of Princes in the plural number,who uſe to ſay, 
We Will and Require,or, It isour Pleaſure. But this is only the Inven- / 
tion and pradtice of latter times, and no way agreeable to the ſim- 
plicity cither of the firſt ages of theWorld,or of the Hebrew Stile 
The Kings of J/-ael uſed to ſpeak of themſelves in the ſingular 
. number, 2 Sam. 3.28. 1 Chron: 21. 17.and 29. 14. 2 Chron. 2.6. And 
ſo did the Eaſtern Monarchs too, yea, even in their Decrees and 
Orders,which now run in the plural number,as Ezra 6:8. 1 (Darius) 
make a Decree Ezra 7. 21. 1, even 1 Artaxerxes the King,ado make a De- 
cree. Nor do:I remember one example in Scripture to the contra- 
ry. It is therefore a raſh and preſumpruous attempt, without any 
wariait,to thruſt the uſages of modern Stile into the ſacred Scrip- 
ture Beſides, the Lord doth generally ſpeak of himſelf in the fin- 


*Pſal: 104. 


12 


ber is uſed for the ſignification of this Myſtery. Moreover, this 
device is utte:ly overthrown by comparing this Text with Ge: 
3. 22. The Lord God ſaid, Behold,cke man is become as one of us, 'There- 
fore there are more perſons than one in the God-head. How ma- 
ny they are,other Texts plainly inform us,as we ſhall ſe intheir 
proper places. And whereas he ſaith not now as he did before, 
Let the Earth or Waters bring forth, but Let us make ; this change of 
the phraſe and manner'of expreſſion ſhews, that man was, as the 
laſt,ſo the moſt perfe&,and rhe chief of the ways & works of God 
in this lower World. i Image and likeneſs are two words noting 
the ſame thing,even exatt likeneſs. For both of them are uſed of 
Adam, Gen: 5. 3. He bezat a Son in his own likeneſs, after his Image;and 
F they are ſeparatly and indifferently uſed in the ſame ſenſe, man 
p- being ſaid to be made #n the likenee of God, Gen. 5. 1. and in the I- 
mage of God, Gen. 9. 6, Queſt. Wherein doth the Image of God in 
Man conſiſt ? nſw. r. It is in the whole Man, both in the ble(ſ- 
ſedneſs of his Eſtate, and in his Dominion over the reſt of the 
Creatures. 2. It ſhines forth even.in the Boly; in the Majeſty of 
mans Countenance, and hight of his Stature,which is ſer towards 
Heaven.when other Creatures by their down looks ſhew the low. 
iſs and meanneſs oftheir Nature, as even Heathens have obſer. 
ved. 3. Ir principally conſiſts and moſt eminently appears in | 
mans Soul. 1.In its Nature and Subſtance, as it is, like God, Spi- ; 
r:tual, Inviſible, Immortal, &. 3. In its Powers and Faculties, | 


gular number, ſome few places excepted, wherein the plural num. 


£4 P's 


3. In the ſingular endowments Wherewith God hath adorned it,as 
Knowledge, Righteouſneſs, and true Holineſs, in which St. Paul chiefly 


. placeth this Image, Eph: 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. k The Male and Female. 


both comprehended in the word,Man, as isexprefled v.27.together 
with their Poſterity. 7 By which he underſtands either, - 1. Both 
tame and wild Beaſts,the ſame word being uſed here in a differin 
ſenſe from what it hath v 25. as is frequent in Scripture. Or, 2. 
Tame Beaſts,which are particuiarly mentioned, becauſe they 'are 
more under mans Dominion than the wild Beaſts,and more fitted 
for mans Uſeand Benefit, though the other be not excluded, bur 
comprehended under the former, as the more famous kind, as is 
uſual in Scriptures and other Authors. 2 Over all other Crea- 
turesand ProduCtions of the Earth, and over the Earth ir ſelf, t6 
manage it as they ſee fitfortheir own comfort and advantage. 

27 So God Created maninhisown Image, inthe 
Image of God Created he him, * Male and Female , 
Created hethem ». _ 

7 Not both together, as ſome of the Jews have Fabled, but ſuc- 
ceſſively, the Woman after and out of the Man, as is moreparti- 
cularly related, Gen: 2: 21, &c» which is here meationed by anti- 
Cipation. Albeit the Woman alſo ſeems to have been made upon 
the ſixth day, as is here related, and as the following bleſſing 
ſhewerh, which is common to both of them, though the particu- 
lar Hiſtory of it is broughtin afterwards, Chap: 2. by way of re- 
capitulation,or repetition. 

28 And God bleffed them o, and God ſaid unto 
them, * Befruicful and multiply, and repleniſh the + 
Earth p,and ſubdue ie,and have Dominion over the Fiſh 
of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over 


every living thing that + moveth upon the Earth. + Heb: 
0 Having bleſſed them with excellent Natures; ind heavenly 4 f 
Gifts and Graces, he further bleſs eth them with aſpeci#land rem- wks os 
poral bleſſing expreſſed in the following Words. p With Inhabi- 
rants to be begotten by you. Queſt. Whether this be a Command 
obliging all men to Marriage and Procreation? So the Hebrew 
Do&tors think. It may be thus reſolved. 1.It is a Command ob- 
liging all men fo farasnct to ſuffer the extin&ion of mankind : 
Thus it did abſolutely bind Azam and Eve,as alſo Noah, and his 
Sons and their Wives after the Flood. 2. Ir dcth not oblige e- 
very particular perſen to' marry, as appears both from the exam- 
ple cf the Lord Jeſts, who lived and died in an unmarried State, 
and from his commendation of thoſe who made themſelves Eu- 
nuchs for the Kingdom of Ged, Marth. 19. 12. And f:cm St.Pauls 
appiobation of Virginity, . 1 Cor. 7. 1, 8, 26,27, 32. Oc. 3. It is 
here rather a promiſe of benedi&ion, than a command, as appears 
both from wv. 22. where the ſame words 2re applied to the brute 
Beaſts, who are not ſubje& to a command ; and becaule if this 
were a command, it would equally oblige every man to exe: ciſe 
dominion oyer Fiſhes and Fowls, &c. which is -abſurd. Tr is 
therefore a Permiſſion rather than a Command, though it be ex- 
preſſed in the form of a Command, as other permiſſions frequent- 
ly are, as Gen. 2. 16. Deut, 14. 4. | 
29 4 And God faid, Behold, I have given you 
every Herb | bearing ſeed, which & upon the face 
of all the Earth, and every Tree in the which 3s the 
fruit ofa Tree yielding ſeed, *co you it (ball be for 
meat 9. | 
9 It is neither affirmed nor denied that Fleſh alſo wasgranted to 
the firſt men for food, and therefore we may ſafely be ignorant 
of it. It is ſufficient for us, that it was expreſly allowed, Gen. g. 3. 
30 And toevery Beaſt of the Earth, and ro every 
Fowl of the + Air, and to every thing that creepeth 
upon the Earth, wherein there ;s + Life, I have given 
every green Herb for Meat : and it was ſo. 


IS. 
Matth. rgz 
Mar. 10.6, 


Chap.g. 1* 


t Heb: 
Seeding 
Seed. 
*Chap. 9.3 


+Heb.Hea- 


31 And God ſaw every thing that he had made: Heb. Ta 
And behold it vas very good. And the Evening and ving Soul. 
the Morning were the ſixth day. 


CHAP. II. 


The Sabbath inflituted and bleſſed, 2,7. A rehearſal of the Creation; and 
( 18. ) of Vegetables, 4,'5. The Earth watered, 6. (2.) of Man, 7. His 
Habitation, 8, 9g. Trees for his delight and food : as alſs the tree of 
Life and Knowledge, 9. Its pleaſant Situation and Riches, to----1g. 
Mans Employment, 15. Every treee given him but that of Knowledge, 
16.This demed on pain of death, 17. A purpoſe to create the Woman, and 
the Reaſon thereof, 18. Beaſts 3nd Fouls named by Adam, 19. 20. The 
Woman made of Adam's Rib preſented to him, 21, 22. And owned by 
him,23. Marriage Ordained, 24. Their flate whilſt innocent, 25. | 


Hus the Heavens and the Earth were finiſhed;and 
* all the Hoſt of them &@ _ Tet” 

a All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth are ca'led their Hoſts, 
for their multitude, variety, order, power, and ſubje&ion to the 
Lord of Hoſts. Particularly the Hoſt of Heaven in Scripture (which 
is its own beſt Interpreter ) ſignifies both the Stars, as Der. 4, 
19. and 17. 3. Js. 34- 4- and the Angels,as 1 Kings 22.9. 2 Chron. 
18,18. Luke 2. 13. Who from theſe words appear to have been 
Created within the compaſs of the firſt ſix days,which alſo is prc- 
bable from*Co!. x. 16, 17.But it is no wonder the Scripruie taith 
ſo little concerning Angels, becauſe it was watten for the uſe of 
men, nor of Angeis; and God would hereby takeus off. om cu- 
rious and impertinent Speculations, -ahd* reach us to imploy our. 
thoughts-abour neceſſary and uſefulthings. LEGS 0: 

.2 * Andon the feventh day. God ended þ his work + g,,q .g* 
which he had made: andherefted c on theſeventhday 11.31. : 
from all his work which he had made. ww Devr.s. 

b Or rather had ended or finiſhed, for ſo the Hebrew word m:y Fe 14 Heb. +. 


*Plal-4.6. - 


bo 


Reaſon or Underſtanding, and freedom in itschoice and aQtions. | x endred,as all the Learned know, 7 ſo it muſthe rendred;e)'e it 4+ 


4 


A Cond nn ee —_—_ — — 


* _ 


— - 


WW 


4 Chap. I 


FFTeb.Crea- 
zedto make. 


oſh: 22. 


J 
26+ Heb. 


_— 


_ 0d a miſt 
Thich weiit 
pfrom,&C. 


T Heb. duff 
oftyceroumd 


Tx Cor, 

15. 47: 
1 Cor. 

I5. 45. 


"IM 


[: | a 
doth not agree with the former Chapter, which expreſly faith, 
that all theſe works were done within fix days. c Not for his own 
need and refreſhment, for he i never weary, 1/ai. 49. 28. but for 
our example and inſtrufion, that we might keep that day as a 
day of Religious reſt. 4 

p And God Blefled the ſeventh day 4, and ſancti- 
fied it e: becauſe that in it he had reſted from all his 


Work +, which God * Created and made F. 

a By conferting ſpecial Honours and Priviledges upon 1t above 
all other days, thar it ſhould be a day of folemn 1eft and rejoycing 
and celebration of (od and his Works,an4 a day of Gods beſtowing 
fins2lar, and the bet blefſings upon his Servants and Worſhippers; 
e Separared it from common utc and worldly employments, and 
contecrated it ro the Worſhip of Gol, that it ſhould be accounted an 
Holy day, and ſpent in Holy works and Solemn excercics of Reli- 
gion. Some conceive thit the Sabbath was nor aQtually bleifed and 
ſanRificd at and from rhis time, bur only in the days of Moſ-5,which 
they pretend to be here related by way of Anticipation. But thi: 
opinion hath no four:dation in the Text or Context, but rather 1: 
confuted from them : for as toon as rhe ſacred Penman had faid 
that God had ended his work aud reſted, &c. he adds immediatly in 
words of the ſame renſe,that God bl:fſed rbeſcventh day,aud jonthified it. 
And if =. achagang this place with Exod.29.we ſhal find that Moſc: 
there ſpeaks of Go@'s bleiting an: ſanEifying of theSabbarh,nor as 
an ation then firit done,bur as thar which God had done former- 
ly upon the Creation of theWorld,to the en- thar men might ce- 
Iebrate rhe praites of God for that glorious work, which as it was 
agreeable ro the fare of innocency, fo was it no leis proper an 
neceſſary a duty for the firſt ages of the World after the fall,chan 
it was for the days of Moſes, and for the ſucceeding Generations 
* Becauſe he would have rhe memory of that glorious work of Cre- 


* ation,fFrom which hc then reſted, preſerved through all Generations. 


+ Either 1.Created in making, i.e. made by way of Creation. Or ra- 
ther, 2. Created our of nothing,and afterwards our of that Created 
natter made or formed diversthings,as the Beaſts our of the Earth, 
the Fiſhes our of the Water. He ujeth theſe two words poſſibly to 
ſhew that God's Witdon, Power & goodneſs, was manifelt nor on” 
Iy in ther a hich he brought out of meer nothing, but allo in 
thoſe rhings which he wrought out of matter altogether unfit for 
ſo griar Works. | : : 

4 @ ihele Fore the Generations g of the Heavens, 
and of the Earth. when they were Created, in the day 
þ ther the LOR D God made the Earth and the 
Heavens 

f 5. «. Theſe things mentionedin the 1 chap. 8. 7. e- A true and 
fall relation of their Generations, 7. e, . Of their Original, or Be- 
ginnings. þ Nor ſtrictly fo called, but largely taken tor the time, 
as It is V. 17. Ruth 4. 5. Tithe 19. 42. 2 Cor. 6.2. 

5 Andevery Plant of the Field, before it was in 
the Earth 5, and every Herb of the Field beforeir grew 
k: for the LORD Ged had not cauſed it to rain upon 
the Earth,and therewas not a Manto till the ground 7 

7 7. e. When as yet there wereno Plants,norfo much as Seeds of 
them there. & To wit, out of the Earth, as afterwares they did 
by Gods appointment. { The two great means of the growth of 
Plants and Herbs, wiz. Rain from Heaven, and the labour of 
man, were: both lacking, to ſhew that they were now broughr 
torch by Go.is Almighty Power and Word. 

6 * Bur there went up # a mitt o fromthe Farth, 
and watered the whole face of the ground p. 

- io wir, from time ro time by Gods appointment. o Or,7*zporr, 
orSCloud, which going up into the Air; was turned into Rain, and 
f-1! down again to the: Earth from whence 1t arole. p Whereby thu 
Larth was fofned and ciſpoled bothrto the nouriſhment cf thoſk 
Plants or Trees that were Created, and to the production of nes 
Plants in a natural and ordinary way., Bur theſe words may bc 
otherwiſe underſtood, the Copularive, and, hererendred bur, being 
put for the DisjunC&ive,or, as it 1s Exod. 2 LL, 17.5066.22.and 8. 3. 
and in other places. Or, the Negative particle, ot, may be under- 
food our of the foregoing clauſe, as 1t1s uſual in the Hebrew 
Language, as Pſa/. 1.5. and g. 17. and 44. 19. and 59. 8. and 1/2. 28. 
27, 28. And fo rheſe words may be joyned with the foregoing, 
and borh Tranſlated in this manner, Zhere was no Rain, mr a Ma: 
ro ti?) the gromd, or, ( or, wgr, for both come to one thing ) fo much 
as a mit which went up from the Errth, and watcred ( as afterwards 
was uſual and natural ) the whole face of the ground. 

- And the LORD God formed Man Þ of the * duſt 
of the ground, and breathed into his noſtrils q the 
breath of Life -: and * Man s became a living Soul . 

q And by that door into the Head and whole man. This is an 
empharical phraſe, ſufhciently 1mplying that rhe Soul of min wa: 
of a quite different Nature and higher ExtraCttion and Origina! 
than the Souls of Beaſts, which rogether with their Bodies are ſaid 
to be brought forth by the Earth,Gen.s. 24. 7 Heb. Of Lives:either 
to ſhew the continuance of this Breath or Soul borh in this Lite, 
and in the Life to come; or to note the various degreesor kinds of 
Life, which this one breath worketh in us, the Life of Plants, in 
growth and nouriſhment; the Life of Beaſts, in tenſe and moti- 
on;and the Life ofa Man, in Reaſon and Underſtanding. « Who 
before this was but a dull lump of Clay, or a comely Statue. # 7. 
e. Aliving Man : The So! being ofr put for the whole Man, as 
Gen. 12. 5, 13. and46. 15, 18. 1 Pet: 3. 20, Oc. 

$8 Andrthe LORD God planted « a Garden x Eaſt- 
ward y in Edenz2,: And there he put the Man whom 


he had formed 2. 

« Or, hadplanted, viz. on the third day,when he made the Plants 
and Treesto grow our of the ground. x A place of the choiceft 
Plants and#Fruits, moſt beautiful and pleaſant. y From the place 
where Moſes writ, and the Iſraelitesafterwards dwelt. z Eden here is 
the name of a place, not that Eden near Damaſcus in Syria, of which 


P -*6% 


| 


Ss. 
ſee Amos 1. 5. but another Edm in Meſopotamia or Chaldea,of which | 
ſee Gen. 4. 16 2 Kings 19. 12. 1/a. 37. 12+ Exek. 27, 23, There are 
many and tedious diſputes about the place of this Paradiſe * of 
which he that liſteth may ſee my Latin Synopſis. It may ſuffice to 
know that which is evident, that it was in or near to Meſopotamia,in 
the confluence of Euphrates and Tigris. a To wit, inanother place. 


9 And outof the Ground made the LORD God 
to grow every Tree that is-pleaſant tothe ſight, and 
good for Food, the Treeof Life b allo inthe midft 


of the Garden *, and the Tree of Knowledge of Good 
and Evil c. | 

b Socalled either ſymbolically,and facramentally,becauſe ir was 
a ſign and ſeal of that Life which man had received from God,and 
of his continual enjoyment of it upon condirion of his ob<dience: 
Or, effe&tively, becauſe God hath planred in it a {ſingular vertue 
tor the ſuppo:r of Nature, prolongation of Life, and the preven- 
tion of all Diſeaſes, Infirmitjes and Decays through age. * Or, 
v1thir the Garden,as Tyrus is ſaid to be inthe midſt of the Seas, Exzek. 28. 
2. Though, it was but juſt within it.c So called with reſpe&;,cither 
1. To God, who thereby would prove and make kaown mans. 
00d or Evil,his Obedience and Happineſs, or his Rebellion and 
Mitery Or rather, 2. To Man, who by the uſe of it would know 
co his coſt, hov- great & good things he did enjoy and mighthave 
kept by his Obudience, and how evil and bitter the fruirs of his 
Oifobedience were to himſelf and all his poſterity. Soit ſeems to * 
be an 1ronica] denomination, 9. d. You thirſted after more know- 
edge, which alſo the Devil promiſed you, and you have got what 
you defired ; more knowledge, even dear bought Experience. 

io Anda River 4 wentout of Ede: e to waterthe 
Garden, and from thence þ it was parted, and became 
into four Heads f. | 

a Or, Rivers,by a common Enallage. e The Countrey in which 
Paradite was ; where thoſe Rivers either aroſe from one ſpring 
or met rogecther in one Channel]. + (7, e. ) From the Garden. fe 
ws divided into four principal Rivers. Concerning which there 
arc now many diſputes. But it is no wonder if the riſe and ſcitu- 
ation of theſe Rivers be not now certainly known, becauſe of the 
great changes, which in fo Jong time| might happen in this, as 
well as in other Rivers, partly by Earth-quakes, and principally 
by the general Deluge. And yet Euphrates and Tigris, the chief of 
theſe Rivers, whereof the other two are branches, are diſcovered 
by ſome learned men, to have one and the ſame original orſpring, 
and thar in a moſt pleaſant part of Armenia, where they conceive 
Paradiſe was. See my Latin Synopſis. 

1: The name of the hirit zs Pi/wn g ; that is it which 
compaileth 4 the whole Land of Hevilah i, where 
there is Gold. 

z An eminent branch of the River 7jz-is,probably that called by 
others Paſi-tigris,or Piſo-tigrrs, þ 7. e. With many windings & turn- 
ings paſſed thorough ; as this word is uſed, 5oſ. 15. 3. Mat: 23. I5. 
; Either that which 1s in thoſe parts of 4rabia which is rownrlts 
Meſoporamia, fo called from Havilah the iſſue of Cham, Gen: 10. 7. 
Or that which is nigh Perſia, and in the borders of haia, ſo called 
from another Havila/z of the poſterity of Serv, Gen: 10. 29. Totei- 
ther of thefe following the deſcription agrees well. 

12 And the Guid of that Land z *good &: there is *2 Chron, 
Bde!lium /, and the Onyx-ſtone ws, IS $6 

k 7. e. Better than ordinary. / Which ſignifies either a precious 
goumie, of which ſee Numb: 11. 70.0r| Gems and Pearls. Once for 
all obſerve, that many of the Hebrew words or names of Stones 
Trecs,Birds,and Beaſts,are even to the Hebrew Do@orsand others 
borh ancient and modern Interpreters, of uncertain fignification 
and that withour any conſiderable inconvenience tous who are 
free from the obligations which the Jews were formerly under of 
procuring ſuch ſtones, and abſtaining in their Diet from ſuch 
Beaſts and Birds as then were ſuthcienrly known ro them; and 
if any were doubtful, they had one fafe courſe, to abſtain from 
them. 2 A kind of precious ſtone, of which ſee Exod: 25. 7. and 
0 20. 

:3 And thename of the ſecond River is Gihon y: 


The ſame zs it that compalleth the whole Land of + Es + cub. 
hi Pia 0. 
» Not that River in the Land of 7/2! ſo called, 1 Kings x. 33. 
2 Chron« 32. 39. But another of the ſ\ime name, which in He- 
brew ſignifies, the branci of a greater River : Here it is a branch 
either of Euphrates, 2s moſt think, or of Tigris,as ſome late Writers 
conceive. o Not that Countrey in Africa above Ezypr, commonly 
ſo called ; bureither Arabia, which in Scripture is frequently 
called Cujb or Eth:opia. Of which ſee the Notes upon 2 Kings 19.9. 
70b 28. 19. Exek. 29. 10. and 30.8, 9g. Heb. ;. 7. or rather a Coun- 
rrey adjoyning to india, and Perſia, with which Cuſh is joyned 
Ezck. 38.5. See alſo 1/2. 11.11. and Exek., 27, 10+ And about which 
place the Ethiopians are ſeated by Herod, 1. 7. Homer, Heſiod, and os 
thers. Of which ſee my Latin Synopſis. 
14 And the name of the third River is Hiddekel p 
Thar zs ix which goeth*toward the Eaſt of Aſſrie.And * Or, £2/- 
the fourth River ;zs Euphrates. ward to 
p (#.e. ) Tygris, oran eminent branch of it. See Dan. 10. 4. Ayia. 
' 15 And the LORD God took F the man, and put + Or, 
him 9 into the Garden of Ede, to * dreſs it r, and to Adam. 
keep it s.* Or, WE, 
q (i.e ) Commanded and enclined him to go. r.(r e.) To So np : 
prune, dreſs, and order the Trees and Herbs of it. 5s From the 3* ©3* 
annoyance of Beaits,which being unreaſonable Creatures, and al- 
lowed the uſe of Herbs, mighreafily ſpoil the beauty of it. 


16 And the LORD Ged commanded the Man ?, + Heb. 
ſaying, Of every Tree of the Garden | thou mayeſt Eating hou 
freely cat #, , " eat, 
5 An 


£ 
y 
o 
s 
bo 
7% 
4 
\ 
- =>) 
: 
Y 
, 
\ 
_ : 
by 
4 
7 
236 
_ 
£5 


Fey 


Chap. 11: 
t And the Woman too ( as appears both from the permiſſion for 
eating Herbs and + ruits given to her,together with her Husband, 
Gen. 1. 28, 29 and from Gen.z. 1, 2, 3.and from Eves punitkment } 
and rhar either immediarly, or by 44am whom God enjoyned to 
F inform her thereof. « Without offence to me, or hurt to thy ſelf. 
23 The words in Hebrew have the form ofa command, but are on- 
ly a permitfion or indulgence, as I Cor. 19. 25, s 5 
17, But of the Tree of the Knowledge of good and 
k evil, thou ſhalr nor ear of it; For in the day that 


thou catelt thereof, + thou ſhalt ſurely dye x. 


2 
> IH — 
© 22a 


1 H cat x With athrecfold dearh. r. Spiritual by the guilt and power of 
; rr ſin:atthat inſtant thou ſhalt be dead in trefpaſles and fins,Eph. 2.1 
F Jn 2. Tcmporal,or the death of the Body,which thalthen begin in thee, 
by decays, infirmities, terrors, dangers, and other harbingers of 
death. 3. Ecernal, which ſhall immediat!ly ſucceed the ether. 
18 And the LORD God laid y, & is not good 2 
| thar the man ſhould be alone : L will make him an 
+ Heb. as help T meet for himeg. 
| Before bim, » Or, Had ſaid,to wit,upon the ſixth day,on which the Woman 
F or a: is was made, Ger.1. 27, 28. 2 Not convenient either for my purpole 
® ere com- oftheincreaſe of mankind,or for mans perſonal comfort,or tor the 


propagation of his kind. # A moſt emphatical phraſe, ſignifying 
thus much, on correſpondent to him, ſuitable both to his nature and 
neceſlity,one altogether like to him in ſhape and conſtitution,diſpoſi- 
tion and affection ; a ſecond ſelf; or one 70 be at hand and near to 
him, to ſtand continually before him, familiarly to converſe with 
him, to be always ready to ſuccor,ſerve,and comfort him ; or,one 
whoſe eye, reſpect, and care, as well as deſire, ( Gen. 3.16.)ſhould 
be to him, whoſe buſineſs it fhall be to pleaſe and heip him. 

19 And out of the ground the LORD God form- 
ed everie Beaſt of the Field, and every Fowl of the 
Air, and brought them b unto * Adam c, to fee d what 
he would call them : And whatſoever Adam called e 
ery + living Creature, thas 4s the name thereof e. 

b Either by Winds,or Angels,or by their own fecret inſtin&,by 
which Storks, and Cranes,and 5wallows change their places with 
the ſcaſon.c Partly to own their Subjection ro him ; partly that man 
being recreated with their proipe&t,might adore and praiſe the Ma- 
ker of them,and withal be {enitble of his want of a meet compani- 
0n,ind ſo the better prepared to receive Gods mercy therein ; and 
partly for the reaſon here following. 4 Or,make 4 dſcivery, not to 
God, who knew it already, but tro all furure Generations, who 
woul:! hereby underſtand the ceep wildom and knowledge of their 
firſt Parent. e To wit, in the prinutive or Hebrew Language. 
And this was done for the manifeſtation both of mans Dominion 
over the Creatures, and of the largeneſs of his underſtanding ; ir 
being an a& of authority to give names, and an effe& of vaſt 
knowledge to give convenient names to all the Creatures, which 


parabl 2 ro 
him, 11.4.0. 


I 2. 


ws Or, th - 
Man. 


+ Heb. li- 


Ving Soul. 


© 


O ” m 
ſuppoleth an exact acquaintance with their Natures, 


20 And Adam f gave Names to all Cattel, and to the 
Fowl of the Air,and to every Beaſt of the Field: but for 
Adam there was not found an help meet for him f. 

. f4. 4. But though, in giving them names, he conſidered their 
ſeveral natures and perfe&Qions, it was evident to himſclfas well 
as to the Lord, that none of them was an help meer for him. 
21 And the LORD God cauſed a deep fleep tofall 
upon Adam g, and he ſlept : and he took one of his 
Ribs þ, and cloſed up the Fleſh z in ſtead thereof &. 


Z That he,who was without ſin,mightr fee] no pain in the taking 
away of his Rib. Ani4 in this ſleep ſome think Adam was in an ex- 
tae, wherein he ſaw what was aone,together with the reaſon and 
myitery of it. þ Together with the Fleſh upon it, v. 23. Or, one 
of his ſides, for the hebrew word fignifieth a Side as well as a Rib, 
which may be taken Synecdochicaily,for a part of one of his ſides, 
viz.a Riband rhe Fleſh upon it:Or,for one part out of each of his 
ſides ; as if the two Ribs clothed with Fleth were taken out of the 
man,becauſe he ſaith, verſe 23. This is Bone of my Bones, not,of my Bone. 
The Woran was taken out of this part, not our of the higher or 
lower parts,to ſhew thar ſhe is neither to be her husbands Miſtreſ-. 
to uſurp authority over him, 1 7.2. 12.Nor yet to be his Slave, 
to be abuſed,deſpiſed,or trampled under his feet; but to be kindly 
treated,and uſed like a companion, with moderation, reſpeCt, ans 
affettion. Queſt. How could a Rib be taken from Adam, but it 
muſt be either ſuperfluous in 4dam,while it was in him, or defe- 
Give afterwards,both which refle& upon the Creator? nſw. r. It 
was no ſuperfluity,but a .conveniency,if Adam had at firſt one Rib 
extraordinary pur into him for this purpoſe. 2.If 4dam loſt aRib 
upon ſo gloriousan occaſion, it was buta ſcaror badge. of honour, 
and no diſparagement either to him, or ro his Creator. 3. Either 
God created him a new Rib, or hardned the Fleſh to the Nature 
and Uſe ofa Rib, and ſo there was no defe& in him. : Together 
with another Bone orRib. & (7. e.) Of that Rib and Fleſh which 
he took away fromthim, which was eafie for God to do. 

22 And the Rib, which the LORD God hadtaken 
from Man, { made he a Woman, and broughe her / 
unto the Man m7. 

{ From ſome place at a little diſtance, whether he firft carryed 
her,that for the de-ency of the a&ion he might bring her thence. 
-m A Bride to a Bridegroom to be married to him: the grear God 
as being pleaſed to a& the part of a Father to give his Daughter and 
2 workmanſhip to him, thereby both teaching Parents their duty 
= of providing Marriages for their Children, and Children their 
W duty of expe&ing their Parents conſent in Marriage. 

4 23 And Adam ſaid nu, This is nowo Bone of my 
| Danes, and Fleſh of my Fleſh p: She ſhall Þe called 


Woman, becauſe ſhe was * taken out of man. 
2 Qu.How knew he this? &:ſw, Either r.By his own obſervation: 
For though it be ſaid that he was aſleep till the Rib was taken out 


+ Heb.cal- 
led, 


m5 RO: Ps Py — PS Mt SC ts : 
. RR 9 gre; Wo "| —_ " S- . 
IP T nn Rd. ES 


THeb.buil- 
fed. 


” + T0 
23. 3: 


" -1i#. 
2 4 of 


G E NE 


4 —% 


v.- 
, 
Fs 


Chap. HE oh 
and reſtored, yet he might awake as ſoon as ever that was done, 
the reaſon of his ſleep ceafing,and ſo might ſee the making of the 
Woman. Or, 2. By the Revelation of God, who put theſe. words 
into Adams mouth, to whom therefore theſe words of Adm are 
aſcribed, Matth. 19. 5. o Or, For this time the Woman is made of 
my Bones, &c. bur for the time ro come the 'Wornan as well as 
the Man thall be produced another way, to wit,' by Generation. 
p Made of my Kib and Fleſh, 7. e.God hath provided me a mect 
help and Wife, not out of the brute Creatures,but nearer hand, a 
part of my own Kody, and of the ſame narure with my ſelf, 
24 * Therefore q hall a man leave his Father” and * Matth. 
nis Mother r, and ſhall cleave unto, his Wife 5: And 19.5-Mar. 
chey-t ſhall « be one Fleſh x, EI: 
q Theſe are the Words of Moſes by divineinſtin&,or his inference eg A 
from Adam's words. r In regard of Habitartion and Society, bux © P2537: 
not'as.to a natural duty and affeCtion. s In Conjugal relation and 
higheſt atfettion,ev:n above what th-y owe totheir Parents. e Or, 
they two, as it is in the Samaritan, Syriack, and 4rabick Tranſlations, 
and Matthew 19.5. u ( 3. e. ) Shall be eſteemed by themſelves and 
others to be as entirely, and inieparably united, and thall have as 
intimate and univerſal communion, as if they ' were » (7. e. ) 
ione Perſon, one Soul, one Body. And this firit inſtitution ſhews 
'che ſinfulneſs of Divorces, and Polygamy, however God might 
upon 2 particular-reafon for a time diſpenſe with his own infti- 
rution, or remit the punifhment due to the violaters of ir. 
25 Andtiey were both naked, the Man' and his 
Wife ; and weie not aſhamed y. 
3 To wir, of their nakedneſs, as having no guilr, nor cauſe of 
{name ; no filthy or evil inclinations in their Bodies, no ſinful 
Concupiſcence, or impure motions in their Souls, but ſpotleſs 
innocency and perfeCtion, which muſt needs exclude ſhame. 


GCHAP. HL 

The Serpent*s ſubtilty, and enſnaring Queft ion, 1 The Woman's Anſwer, 2. 
Fhe Serpent denies the certainty of the threatuing, 4. Suggeſts a Benefit 
by Eating, 5. The Woman looks on the Fruit, takes, eats, gives to the 
Man, who alſo eats of it, 6, The conſequence of their ſin, 5, 8: Adam's 
S:1mmons, 9. Appearance, 10. Examination, 11. Excule,12. The Woman 
examined, excuſes, yet confeſſes the fatt, 13. Sentence upon the Serpent 
the inflrument, 14. Upon the Devil the chief agent with the firſt Goſpel 
Promiſe, 15. Upon the Woman, 16. Upon the Mm, 17 -+»——- 1g. 
Adam names his Wife, 20. God clothes them, 21. Tizey are thrown out 
of Paradiſe, 22. totill the Ground, 23. Their retura impoſfibley 24. 


A] Ow the Serpent 2 was more ſubtile than any 

Beaſt of the Fie!d 6, which the LO RD God ; 
had made : and he ſaid c unte the Woman 4d, + Yea, #Heb.t:; "2 
e hath Ged ſaid f, Ye ſhall not eat of every g Tree becauſe, | 
of the Garden ? | &e. 


a Or, rather, this or that Serpent : For here is an emphatical 
article, of which more by and by. b The Serpents eminent ſubrilry 
is noted both in facred Scripture, Gen.q9.17. Plal. 58. 5. Mat.10.16. 
2 Cor, 11. 3. and by Heathen Authors, whereof theſe inſtancesare 
given ; that when it is affaulted, it ſecures itshead ; That it Rops its 
ear at the Charmer's voice; and the like. If it be yet ſaid, tharſome 
Beaſts are more ſubtile,and therefore this is not true;it may be re- 
plied. r. It is no wonder if the Serpent for its inſtrumentality in 
mans fin hath loſt the greateſt part otits originakſubrilty, even as 
mans fin was puniſhed with a great decay both of the natural en- 
dowments of his Mind, Wiſdom,and Knowledge,& of the beauty, 
and glory of his Body, the inftrument of his tin. But this Text 
may,and ſeems to be underſtood not of the whole Kind of Serpents, 
bur of thisindividual,or particular Serpent;for it is in the Hebrew 
Hannachaſh, that Serpent, or this Serpent, to ſignifie that this was not 
only an ordinary Serpent, but was a&ted and aſſiſted by the Devil, 
who is therefore called that old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9.And this ſeems 
moſt probable,partly from the following difcourte, which is added 
as a proof of that which is here ſaid concerning the Serpents ſub- . 
rilty;and that ſurely wasnort the diſcourſe ofa Beaſt,but ofa Devil; 
and partly from 2 Cor.11.3. which hatha manifeft reference to this 
place,where the Apoſtle affirmeth thar the Serpent beguiled Eve through 
his ſubtilty;not ſurely through that ſubrilty which is common to all 
Serpents, but through that ſubtilty which was peculiar to this,as it 
was poſleſſed and ated by the Devil. There ſeems indeed to bean 
allufon here to the natural ſubrilty of all Serpents ; and the ſenſe 
of the ſacred Penman may ſeem to be this, as if he ſaid, The Ser- 
pentindeed in its ſelf is a ſubrtile Creature, and thought ro be more 
ſabrile than any Beaſt of the Field ; but howſoever rhis be in 0- 
ther Serpents, It 1s certain that this Serpent was more ſubrile 
than any Beaſt of the Field,as will appear by the following words. 
If it be ſaid,the particle 7h7s,or that,is relative to ſomething going 
before, whereas there is not a word about it in the foregoing 
words ; it may be replicd, - That relative particles are often pur 
without any antecedents, and the antecedents are left to be ga- 
thered not only out of the foregoing, but ſometimes alio out of 
the following paſſages, as is apparent from Exod.14. 23. Numb. 7. 
19. and 24.17. Pſal. 87. 1. and 105. 19. and 1714. 2. Prov. 7.8. and 
14. 26. So here, that Serpent, that of which I am now to” ſpeak, 
whoſe diſcourſe with the Woman here followeth. c Que#. How 
the Serpent could ſpeak, and what the Woman conceived of his 
ſpeech,and why ſhe was not affrighted,bur continued the diſcourſe 
with it? There betwo fatisfaftory anſwers may be given to theſe 
queſtions.1.The Woman knew that there were Spirirs,and did free- 
ly and frequently converſe with Spirits or Angels, whoalſo did p- 
pear in ſome viſible ſhape to her,which ſeems very credible;becayic 
in the following Ages not only the Angels, but even the bletled 
| God himſelf did. in that manner conyerſe with men. And as they 
afrerwards uſed to appear in the ſhape of mien,why mighrnot one 
of them now appear to her,and converſe with her 1n the ſhape of a : 
beautiful Serpent? And why might ſhe not freely and ſecurely dif- | 
courſe with this which ſhe ny 5 to be one of thoſe: good Angels, 
3 bl 


| 


© NOREEN « & Ac 5c 
__ _ h She & her Husband Y It 
-hoſe care and tuition both She & her Husband were commut-, 
hy S to borl ſuppoſe the fall of the Angels was yet unknown to her ;\ 
| and ſhe thought this robe a good Spirit,otherwiſe ſhe would have 
| declined all converſation withan Apoſtate Spirit.2.A late ingenious 
and learned Writer repreſents the matter thus, in which there is 
— nothing abſurd or incredible: TheSerpent makes his addreſs to the 
Woman with .a ſhort ſpeech,and ſalutes her as the Empreſs of the 
World,e>c.She is not affrighted, becauſe there was as yer no caufe 
of fear,no ſin,and therefore no danger,but wonders and enquires 
what thismeant,and whether he was not-a brute Creature,& how ' 
| he came to have ſpeech, and underſtanding? The Serpent replies, 
; | + that he was no better than a brurte,8& did indeed want both theſe 
&ifts,bur by eating ofa certain fruit in thisGarden he got þoth.She 
asked what Fruit and Tree that was?Which when he ſhewed her, 
[ ſhe replied, This,no doubt,is an excellent fruit,and likely to make 
| the eater of it wiſe;but God hath forbiddenus this Fruit: 'To which 
j |- $4 the Serpent replies,as it here follows inthe Texr. It is true, this 
] 
| 


: 


4 a. 
—————— FLY 


diſcourſe is not in the Text;bur it is confeſſed by Jewiſh, & other 
Expolitors,that theſe words,Yea,hath God jaid,&c.are a ſhort and ab- 
- rupt ſentence,and that they were but the cloſe of a foregoing diſ- 
courſe;which might well enough be either this now mentioned,or 
1 ' ſome other of a like nature. And that expreſſion which follows v. 
| 6.1/hen che Woman ſaw, i. e. underſtood,that it was a Tree tobe deſired 
þ ro make one wiſe,may ſeem to imply,both thar the Serpent told her, 
F and thar ſhe believed, that the ſpeech and underſtanding of the 
6 Serpent was the effett of the eating of that Fruit;and therefore that 
| | if it raiſed him from a brute Beaſt to the degree of a reaſonable 
Creature, it wouldelevate her from the humane ro a kind ofdivine 
(1 [nature or condition. 4\Who had upon ſome occaſion retired from 
- her Husband for a ſeaſon ; an advantage which the crafty Serpent 
quickly eſpieth, and greedily embracerh,and affauſteth her when 
ſhe wanteth the help of her Husband. e Or,Why,or, 1s it ſo, or, in- 
deed, or of a truth. f Tt is ſcarce credible that God,who is ſo boun- 
Ct | tiful,and the ſovereign Good,and ſo abhorring from all parſimony, 
a1 - and envy, ſhould forbid you the enjoyment of any part of thoſe 
Z provitions which he hath made for your uſe and comfort. g Or, 
ef any ; for the word is ambiguous, which therefore the cunning 
adverſary uſcrh to hide the ſnare which he was laying for her. 
2 And the Woman ſaidunto the Serpent, We: may 
eat of the Fruit of the Trees of the Garden : 
> But of the Fruit of the Tree, which zs in the midſt 
of the Garden, God hath ſaid, Ye ſhall not eat of it, 
neither ſhall ye touch ith, leſt ye die 5. | 
© þ To wit,in orderto the eating of it:Or,the touch might be ſim- 
ply forbidden,or the might reaſonably underſtand ir to be forbidden 
1n and by the prohivition of eating,becauſe it was an occaſion of fin, 
and therefore ro be avoided.For it 1s not probable thar the Woman 
being not yet corrupted, thould knowingly add to God's Word,or 
maliciouſly infinuat the harſhneſs of the Precept. # Others, !:/} 
peradventure ye dye,as if fnedoubred of the truth of the threatning: 
; W hich ſeems not probable,the Woman yer continuing in the ſtate 
| of innocency,and :uch doubting being evidently iinful ; and the 
bt | Hebrew paiticle Pen,doth not alwaysimply a doubt,as appears from 
ſal. 2. 12. Iſa. 27. 3. and 36. 18. compared with 2 Kngs 18. 3. 


EC 4 * And the Serpent ſaid unto the Woman, Yeſhai] 
' 11. 3- | not ſurely dye &, 1 

1 Tim. 2. & Ir is not ſo certain as you imagine, that you ſhall dye. God 

bk. did ſay ſo indeed for your terrour, and to kcep you in awe; or, 


he had ſome myſtical meaning in thoſe words; but do nor en- 
terrain ſuch hard and unworthy thoughts of that God who is in- 
finitely kind and gracious, that he will for ſuch a trifle, as the 
eating of a little Fruit, undo you and all your Poſterity, and ſo 
ſuddenly deſtroy the.moſt excellent work of his own hands. 

5 For Goddoth know /, thatin the day ye ' eat 
thereof, then your eyes ſhallbe opened mand ye ſhall 
: | be as Gods », knowing Good and Evil 0. 
| | | | If vou would have the whole truth of the matter, and God's 
deſign in that Prohibition, it is only this. = He knoweth-that 
you thall be ſo far from dying, that ye thall certainly be entred 
into a new ang more noble kind of Life ; and the eyes of your 
minds, which are now ſhut as to the knowledge of a World of 


| | ſtinttly. » Or, as God, like unto God himſelf in the largeneſs of 
; your knowledge. o As the very name that God hath pur upon 
| the T'ree may teach you. But this is a priviledge, of which,fer 
divers cauſes beſt known to himſelf, ſome of which your own 
1 reaſon will eaſily gueſs at, he would not have you partake of 
TS 6 And when the Woman ſaw p that the Tree was 
| good for Food.and that it was Fpleaſanr to the Eyes*, 


Army ? and a Tree to be defired tomake ene Wiſe q; ſhe took 
5 Tim. of the Fruit thereof, * and did eat, and gave alſo un- 
to her Husband r with her s, andhe did eat z, 

p By curious and accurate obfervation,and gazing upon 1t,or per- 
ceiving it by the Serpents diſcourſe,as was obſerved on wer. 3. To 
wit,in an eminent degree;for otherwiſe ſo were all the reſt.qWhich 
| ſhe might know by the Serpents information. See the Notes on 
mh wer. 1. + Who by this time was returned to her. «(i e ) Who 
| | now was with her;or,that he might eat with her and take his part 
*FY of that Fruir. t By her perſwaſion and inſtigation. See 1 7/m 2.14. 

| 7 And the Eyesof them both « were opened x, 

and they knew * that they were naked, and they ſew- 
| tOr,things ed y Fig-leaves z together, and made themſelves + 4 
| | f0 gird a= prons 4a- 1 i= | 
PF bout, * Of their Minds and Conſciences,which hitherto had been cloſed 
and blinded by the arrs of the Devil. x As the Devil had promiſed 
them, though in a far differing,and fadder ſenſe. * They knew it 
before,when it was their glory, ut now they knew it with grief 
and ſhame,from a ſenſe both of their guilt for the fin newly paſt, 


and of that ſinful Concupiſcence which they gpw found working in 


2. 14. 


things, ſhall then be opened, and ſee things more fully and di-' 


n= 


them. y Or, tyed, twiſted, or faſined. » The lefſer branches or 
twigs, upon-which were alſo the leaves of a Fig-tree, which per- 
adventure was then near them, and which becauſe of its broad 
leaves was molt fit for that uſe. a To cover their nakednefs, 

8 And they heard the voice bof the LORD God c 
walking in the garden in the cool + of the day 4: + ch. 
and Adam and his wife hid themſelves from the pre- we 
ſence of the LORD God e; amongſt the trees of the 
garden. 

b Mentioned wer. g. or rather the found, as the word woice is of- 

ten taken in Scripture, as Pſal. gz. 3. Rev. 16. 3. and 19. 6. c Ei- 
ther God the Father, or rather God the Son, appearing in the 
thape of a man, as afterwards he frequently did, ro give a fore- 
taſte of his Incarnation. 4 Abour Evening, the time when men 
uſe to walk abroad to recreate themſelves,when there was a cool 
and refreſhing Wind, whereby allo the voice of the Lord was 
more ſpeedily and effeQtually convey'd to Adam and his wite. 
e Eeing ſenſible of God's approach, and filled with Shame and 
Conſcience of their own Guilt and dread of Judgment, in ſtead 
of flying to God for Mercy, they fooliſhly attempted to run a- 
way from him, whom it was impoſlible to avoid. 

9 And the LORD God called f unto Adam, and 
ſaid unto him, Where art thou g ? 

# With a loud voice. g Thou whom I have fo highly obliged, 
Whither and wherefore doeſt thou run away from me thy Friend 
and Father, whoſe preſence was lately ſo ſweet and acceptable to 
thee 7 In what Place, or rather in what Condition art thou ? 
What is the cauſe of this ſudden and wonderful Change ? This 
he asks, not that he was ignorant of it, but to make way for the 
following Sentence, and to ſet a pattern for all Judges,that they 
ſhould examine the Offender, and enquire into the Offence be- 
fore they proceed to Puniſhment. 

io And he ſaid, 1 heard thy voice in the garden : 
and I] was afraid, becauſe 1 was naked 6 ; aid I hid 
my ſeif ;. | 

h He confeſſeth his nakedneſs, which was evident, but ſaith no- 
thing of his ſin; which,it poſſible, he would have hid. See Job 31. 
33. And 15grieved for the ivameful effe&ts of his fin,but nor yer fin- 
cerely penutent for his tin.;Our of reverence tot hy gloriousMajeſty 

11 And he ſaid, Whorto:d thee that thou waſt na- 
ked *? Haſt thou eaten of the tree, whereof 1 com- 
manded thee k, that thou ſhoujdeſt not eat? | 

* Or, that thy nakedneſs, which lately was thy glory, wis 
now become m:tter of {thame. k Concerning which 1 gave thee 
fo ſevere a charge upon pain of death. 

i2 And the man faid, The woman / whom thou 
gaveſt zo be with me 7, ſhe gave me of the tree, and 
1 did eat ».. 


{ I have eaten,not by my own choice and inclination, but by the 
perſwaſion of this: woman. »: As a meet help,a fairhfu] friend and 
' conſtant companion, ſuppoling that it was not good for me to be a= 
lone, which theevent ſnews would have been much better for me. 
Fhus Adam excuſeth himiclf,& chargeth God fooliſhly with his fin. 
» Qut of complacency to her,notfrom any evil deſign againſt thee. 
13 And the LORL God faid unto the woman, 
What zs this that thou haſt done 0? And the woman 


laid, The Serpent p beguiled meq, and I didear 7. 

o How hainousa crime haſt thou commirted ? What a World 
of miſchief haſt thou, by this one a&, brought upon thy ſelf and 
all thy poſterity ? Or, Why haſt thou done this? What cauſes 
or motives couldſt thou have for ſo wicked an a&ion ? What 
need hadſt thou of meddling with this forbidden fruit, when I 
had given thee ſo large and liberal an allowance ? p A Creature 
which thou haſt made, and that afliſted by an higher Power, by 
an evil Angel, for ſuch I now perceive by ſad experience there 
are. q A weak and fooliſh Woman,whoſe ſeduCtion calls for thy 
Pity, not thine Anger. r Being ſurpriſed, and over-perſwaded 
againſt my own Judgment and Reſolution. 

14 And the LORD God ſaid unto the Serpent s, 
Becauſe thou haſt done this, thou art « curſed above 
all cattel, and above every beaſt of the field x : upon 
thy belly ſhalt thou go *, and duſt ſhalt thou ear y all 
the days of chy life. *Ifa. 65. 

s Or rather th7s,cr that Serpent, which as was ſaid before on wv. 1. 25. 
was no ordinary Serpent,burt aSerpent ated and aſſiſted by the De- 
vil;and therefore this ſentence or curſe 1s pronounced againſt both 
of them; 1.Againſt the Serpent it ſelf, which though an unreaſona= 
ble Creature,and therefore not ſubjett to a Law,and conſequently 
not capable of guilt or fin, Rom.4 15. yet,being the Inſtrument of 
the Devils malice,is rightly puniſhed, as other Beaſts being abuſed 
by man's fin did ſuffer. together with him,Exod.32.20.,Levit.20.15, 
16.not for their crime,bur partly for the puniſhmenr,and partly for 
the benefit of man, who is their Lord and Owner, Pſal 8. 6. for 
whoſe ſake ſeing they were made, it is nor ſtrange ifthey be pu- 
niſhed for his uſe, that in their puniſhment man might have a de- 
monſtration of God's anger againſt fin,and a motive to Repentance. 
See 0nce6,7. 2.Againſt the Devil, who is hereprincipally intended, 
though as he lay hid in the body of the Serpent which he poſſefled 
and uſed;ſo his curſe is here mentioned under the cover of the Ser- 
pent's curſe, and under the diſguiſe of ſuch terms as properly and 
literally agree to the Serpent,bur are alſo myſtically to be under- 
ſtood concerning the Devil ; with whom the Lord entertaineth no 
conference, as he did with Adam and Eve, whoſe ſin was leſs than 
his,and whom God meant to bring to repentance; but immediatly 
denounceth the curſe againſt him,as one that ſinned againſt mve 
greater Knowledge,and from far worſe Principles, not from miitake 
or miſinformation, but from choice and rebellion, from hatred of 
God,and from meerenvy,and implacable malice againſt __ _ 

Fae IVC 


. 


: WV - £ Fs we he 4, 
: WEAT. . I 40. *7 Was « + {a 4 . 4 : 4 © « oi KM 
: _ 4 — * ET 
. Cha I: : ; ; 
- - * $ 


It. 
ceived the Woman, and ternpted her to thus fin. = Or tial be from 
henceforth, both really and 1n the opinion of all mankind : Or, Be 
hou. '* Asin other reſpeCts, ſo particularly .n that which. here fol- 
lows. +Ifthe Serpent did ſo before the fall ; what then was natu- 
ral. is now become painful and ſhameful to it,asnakednels and ſome 
| other things were to man. But it ſeems more probable, that this 
= Serpent betore the Fall either had Feet, or rather did go with its 

* Breaſt ere&, as the Baſilisk ar this day doth ; God peradventure ſo 
ordering it asa Teſtimony that ſome other Serpents did once go ſo. 
And ſo the ſenſe of the curie being applied to this particular Serpent, , 
and to its kind,may be this; whereas thou hadſt a priviledge above 
other kinds of Serpents, whereby thou didſt go with eretted Breaſt, 
and didſt feed upon the fruits of Trees and other Plants; now thou 
ſhalt be brought down to the ſame mean and vile cſtare with them, 
upon thy Belly, ( or rather Breaſt,as the word alſo ſignifies ) ſhalt thou go, 
&c. as they do. y Duſt is the food, as of Earth-worms,Scorpions,and 
ſome other Creatures; ſo alſo of ſome Serpents, as appears both 
from 1/a. 65. laſt. Mic. 7. 17. and from the Teſtimony of N:icander, 
E Tyeriac. verſe 372. and Philo an Arabick Writer. Or, the duſt is the 
| Serpent's ſawce rather than his meat,whilſt creeping and groveling 

upon the Earth, and taking his food from thence, he mult neceſſa- 
rily take in duit and filth rogether with it. Theſe two clauſes being 
applicd to the Devil, ſignific his fall from his noble State and Place 
tro Earth and Hell ; the baſeneſs of his Nature and ofhis Food, his 
delight being in the vileſt of men and things, it being now his 
Mcit and Drink to diſhonour God, and deſtroy Mankind,and pro- 
mote the eſteem and love of earthly things. 
15 And I will put enmity z berween thee and the 
*Mat:3:7: woman a, and between thy * ſeedb, and her # ſeed 
and13:38: c 2 it ſhall * bruiſe thy head e, and thou ſhalt bruiſe 
and23:33- his heel f. ! 
John 5: z Though now ye be ſworn Friends,Jeagued together againlt me: 
44- 3 Arid the man too, but the woman alone is mentioned, for the 
AMXS 13: Devils greater confuſion. 1. The woman, whom \as the weaker 
ns Veſſel. thou didit ſeduce, ſhall be the great occaſion. of thy over- 
1ſohn3.8- ,1.../ +. Becauſe the Son of God who conquered thisgreat Dragon 
+ PC 132- , 1.014 Serpent, Rev. 12. 9+ Who came to deſtroy the works of the Devil, 

Ft. 1 John 3. 8. wasmade of = woman, Gal, 4. 4. without the help of man, 
If: 7: 14* 7. 7. 14. Laker. 34, 35. © Litcrally, this Serpent, and for his ſake, 
Mic: 5: 3* the whole ſeed or race of Serpents, which of all Creatures are moſt 
*Rom:10* 1,,.thſome and terrible to mankind, and eſpecially to women: My- 
Q0- ſtically that evil Spirit which ſeduced her, and with him the whole 
Heb: 2:14- ſociety of Devils ( who are generally hated and dreaded by all men, 
1johns:5- even by thoſe that ſerve and obey them, but much more by good 
Rev: 12*. en, ) and all wicked men; who,with regard to this Text,are cal- 
7, ITe led Devils, and the Children,or ſecd of the Dcwvil, John 6. 70. and 8. 44. 

As 13. 10. 1 Jolm 3. 8. c Her of-ſpring ; firſt and principally, the 
Lord Chriſt, who with reſpe& to this 'Text and Promiſe js called, 
by way of cminency, th- ſeed, Gol. 3. 16, rg. whoſe alone work it 
is to break the Serpent's head; 7. e. to deſtroy the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. 
Compare John 12. 31. Rom. 16. 20. Secondly, and by way of par- 
ricipation, all che members of Chritt, all Believers and holy Men, 
who are called the Children of Chriſt, H:b. 2. 13. and of the Heaven- 
ly Jeruſalem, Gal. 4. 26. All the Members whereof are the feed of 
this Woman ; and all theſe are the implacable Eyonjig of the Dev1]; 
whom alſo by Chriſt's merit and ſtrength they do overcome. e The 
principal inſtrument both ofthe Serpent's fury and miſchief,and of 
his detence,and the principal ſeat of the Serpent's life, which there- 
fore men chicfly ſtrike at ; and which being upon | the ground, a 
man may conveniently tread upon, and cruſh it to pieces. In the 
Devil this notes his Power and Authority over men ; the ſtrength 
whereof conſiſts in Death, which Chritt, the bleſſed ſeed of the 
Woman, overthroweth by taking away the ing of death,which is ſim, 
1 Cor: 15: 55, 56: and deſtroying him that had the power of death,that 1s 
the Devil, Heb: 2: 14:f The part which is moſt within the Serpeat's 
reach, and wherewith it was bruiſed, and thereby provoked to fix 
his venomous Teeth there : But a part remote from the Head and 
Heart, and therefore irs wounds, though painful, are not deadly, 
'nor dangerous, if they be obſerved in time. IF it be applied to the 
ſeed of the Woman, Chriſt, his heel may note either his humanity, 
| whereby he trode upon the Earth, which indeed the Devil by God's 
permiſſion, and the hands of wicked men, did bruiſe and kill : Or 
his Saints and Members upon the Earth, whom the Devil doth in 
diverſe manners bruiſe, and vex and affli&t, while he cannot reach 
their head Chriſt in Heaven, nor thoſe of his Members who are or 
ſhall be advanced thither. 
16 Uzto the woman he ſaid, I will greatly 2 mui- 
tiply thy ſorrow, and thy conception +: in ſorrow 35 
thou ſhalt bring forth & children / : and' thy deſire 
+ Or, ſub. 77 ſhall be + to thy husband, and he ſhall rule * over 


Jef ro thy thee ». 


Heusband, 9g Or, certainly, as the repetition of the ſame word implies. h In 
* 1 Cor. diverſe Pains and Infirmiries peculiar to thy Sex, ( 2. e.) Thou ſhalt 
14. 343 have many, and thoſe oft-times falſe and fruitleſs conceptions,and 
abortive Births; and whereas thou mighteſt commonly have had 
many Children at onz Conception, as ſome few Women yet have; 


now thou ſhalt ordinarily undergo all the troubles and pains of Con- 
ception, Breeding and Birth, for every Child which thou haft. Or, 
thy Sorrows and thy Conception,by a figure called Hendiaduo, are put for 
thy ſorrows in Conception, or rather in Child-bearing,which the Hebrew 
word here uſed ſignifies, Gen: 16: 4: ud: 13: 3. 1. Ariſtetle in his 
Hiſtor: Animal: 7: 9: obſerves, that Women bring forth young with 
more pain than any other Creatures. & Or, bear, for the word notes 
all the pains and troubles which Women have, both in the time of 
Child-bearing,and in the a& ofbringing forth. / Heb. Sons;and Daugh- 
ters too,both being comprehended in that word, as Exod. 22.24.Pſal, 
128. 6. m Thy detires ſhall be referred, or ſubmitted to thy Huſ- 
bands will and pleaſure to grant or deny them,. as he ſees fir. Which 
ſenſe is confirmed from Gen- 4.7. where the fame phraſe is uſed in 
the ſame ſenſe. - And this puniſhment wasboth very proper for her 
rhat committed ſo great an errour, as the eating of the forbidden 


07S hw * 


Husband's advice or conſent, as in all reaſon ſhe ſhould have done 
in ſo weighty and douttful a matter : and very grievous to her,be- 
cauſe Womens Afrections uſe tobe vehement, and its irkſ.me to 
them to have them reſtrained or denied. » Seing, for wont of thy 
Husband's Rule and Condu&, thou waſt ſeduced by the Serpent, 
and didit abuije that Power I gave Thee together with thy Husband 
to draw himto fin ; thou ſhalt now te brought down to a lower 
degree, for he ſhall rule thee; not with that ſweet and gentle hand 
which he fo: merly uſed, as a Guide and Counſellor only, but by 
an higher and harder hand, asa Lord and Governour, to whem T 
have now given a greater Power and Authority over thee, than he 
had before, ( which through thy Pride and Corruption will be far - 
more uneatie unto thee, than his former Empire was ) and who will 
uſurp a further Power than I have given him, and will by my per- 
miſiion for thy Puniſhment rule thee many times with Rigour 1y- 
ranny and Crueity, which thou wilt groan, under, but ſhalt ae be 
able to deliver thy 1clf from it, Sce 1 Cor. 14. 34. 1 Tim 2, x1, 12 .. 

1 Pet, 3. 6. WE. 
17 And unto Adam he ſaid, Beeauſe thou haſt 
hearkned unto the voice of thy wife s, and haſt eaten 

of the tree of which I commanded thee, faying, Thou 

ihalt not eat of it, . * Curſed is the ground p for thy * If. 
lake 9, in forrow » ſhalt thou eat of it all the days of 5: © 
thy life, ""— 


0 (7. e. ) Obeyed the word and counſel, contrary 'to my expreſs 
command. p Which ſhall now yield both fewer and worle fiuits, 
and thoſe too with more trouble of mens Minds,and labour of their 
Bodies. q (7. e. ) Becauſe of thy ſin ; or, tothy uſe ; or, as far as 
concerns thee. r Or, with toi!, or, grief. 


13 Thorns alſo and Thiltles a, ſhall it + bring forth 
b to thee c: and thou ſhalt * eat the herb of the 
field d. 


a And other unuſeful and hurtful Plante, Synecdochically con- 
tained under theſe. 6 Of its own accord. c Not to thy benefit, but to 
thy grief and puniſhment. / Inſtead of thoſe generous and delici- 
ous fruits of Paradiſe, which becauſe thou did tt deſpiſe, thou ſhalt 
no more taſte of. See ver. 1. 29. 

19 Intheſweat of thy face f ſhalt thou eat bread g 
till thou return uato the ground : for out of it waſt thou 
taken ; for duſt thou art ;, and unto duſt ſhalc thou res 


turn &. 

F (7. e. ) Of thy Body : He-mentions the Free,becauſe there the 
ſweat appears firſt and moſt. Or, with labour of Body or Brain, 
Eccleſ. 1: 13: and vexation of mind. g (z.e. ) Get thy food and live- 
lihood :* Bread being put for all nouriſhment, as Gen. 18: 5: and 28: 
20, 7 As to the conititution and original of thy Body. See Gen: 18: 
27: Job 1: 21: Pſal: 103: 14. k Though upon thy obedience F would 
have preſerved thy Body no lets than thy Soul from all Mortality; 
yet now having finned, thou, ſhalt return unto duſt in thy Body, 
whilſt the immortal Spirit thall return unto God who gave it,Eccleſ: 13; 
7. Thus thy end ſhall te as baſe as rhy beginning. 

20 And Adam called his wives name + Eve mw, be- + Heb. 
cauſe the was the mother of all living ». Chavalt 

m Which fignifies either Living, or, the giver, or preſerver of Lif?. 

» Though for ker tin juſtly ſentenced to a preſent death, yer by 

God's infinite Mercy,and ty, Fertue of the promiſed Seed,was both 
continued in Life her ſelf, Ad was made the Morher of oll living Men 

and Women, that ſkould be after her upon the Earth ; who though . 
in and with their Mother they were condemned to a ſpeedy Death, 

yet ſhall be brought forth into the ſtate and land of the Living,and 

into the hopes ofa blefled and eternal Life by the Redeerner, who 
Mother or Progenitor ſhe was. 

21 Unto Adam allo, and to his -wife did the 
LORD God p make coats of skins 9, and clothed” 
them 7. 

p Either by his own Word, or by the miniſtry of Angels. q Of 
Beaſts ſlain either for ſacrifice to God, or for the uſe of Man,their 
Lord and owner. » Wuhich he did, partly to defend them from ex- 
ceſtive heats and colds, or other injuries of the Air, to which they 
were now expoſed ; partly to mind them of their fin which made 
their nakedneſs, which before was Innocent and Honourable, now 
to be an occaſion of Sin and Shame, and therefore to need covering: 
And partly to ſhew his care even of fallen Man, and to eggourage 
his hopes of God's mercy throvgh rhe bleſſed Seed, and thereby to 
invite him to Repentance. - 


22 And the LORD God ſaid 5, Bchold, che man is 


become 7 as one of us «, toknow goodand evil x: and 
now leſt he pur forth his hand y, and take alſo @ of ths 


tree of life, and ear andlive for ever &: WH 
s Either within himfelf, or to the other perſons of the Godhead. 
t (i:e:) Adam and Eve both are become ſuch according ro the De- 
vil's promiſe, and their own expeCation. This is an holy Irony, 
or Sarcaſm, like thoſe, r Kirgs 18. 27, Ecclef. 15. 9g. q. d. Behold,O 
all ye Angels, and all the future generations of Men, how rhe firſt 
man hath over-reached and conquered us,and got the Divinity which 
he affe&ed; And how happy he hath made himſelf by his Rebel- 
lion ! Bur this bitter ſcorn God uttereth nor to inſult over man's 
miſery, bur to convince him of his ſin, folly, danger and calamity, 
and to oblige him both to adiligent ſeeking after, and a greedy em- 
bracing the remedy ofthe promif.d Seed which God offtercd hin, 
and to a greater watchfulneſs over himſelf, and refpett to all God's 
commands for. the time tocome. «i.e. As one of the divine. Per- 
ſons, of infinite Wiſdom and Capacity. Here 1s an evident proof 
of a plurality of Perſons in the Godhead, compare Gen. 1. 25. and 
IT. 7. If it beſgid, God ſpeaks this of himſelf. and. the Angels ; 
beſides that as yer not one word hath been ſpoken concerning the 
Angels, it isan abſurd and unreaſonable conceitthat the great God 
ſhould level himſelf with the Angels, and give them 2 kind of equa» 


20, 


ft Heb. 
cauſe to 
Eud. 
*Pfal. 104 


I4. 


Frut was, in compliance with her own deſire, without asking hex 
, 


liry with himfeIfas this expreſſion infimas. x To know all thingy, 
, Bg © borh 


l fump 


SO —_ wy 2c, 


——— — —_ ww 


—— 


- 
= - 
E DJ ty , [ 
; - » yl ama TY - 
Or, of tre The Your, 


32 San is. being ofrey pit for a year, as Levit: 25: 29: 1. Sam: 1:3; and 27: 7. 


| > 
2G, Or, 3. Mo: 


I i vr £0A7sS, 


y . | i & _ 2 
7 o 

both good and evil. y The ſpeech 1s defe&ive, and to be ſupple 
thus, or ſome ſuch way ; but :0w CarC muſt be taken, of man muſt 
be baniſhed hence, left he,&c. - (7.0. ) As he did take of the tree of 
Knowledse. b (i.e.) And thereby prophane that Sacrament of 
erernal Lifz,and fondly perſwade' himſelf that he fhall live tor ever. 
This is zndther ScoF or Icony,whereby God upbraideth man's pre- 
tion, and thoſe vain hopes wherewith he did ſtill feed himſelf. 
22 Cherefore d the LORD God fent him forth e from 
the garden of Eden, to till f the ground, from whence 
he was token g. pM 

@ For prevention thereof, e Or, expelled him with ſhame and vi- 
olence, and fo as never to reſtore him thither : For it 1s the ſame. 
word which is uſed concernins divorced Wives. f To wit, with 
roil and ſwear, as was threatned, verſ. 17. g The ground without 
Paridife : For he was mide without Paradiſe, and then put into 
it, as was noted betorc. | | 

24 So he drove outthe mans and heplaced at the 
+ Heb.7/. Eaſt of the garden þ of Eden, Cherubims z, and Þ a 
fame of « flaming ſword &, which curned every Way /, to keep 
ſword. the way of the tree of life m7 | 


bh Where the entrance into it was,the other ſides of it being 1n- 


#84 « P+ 


his acceptafice of Sacrifices, as Levir: 9: 24: Judg: 6: 21: 1 Kings 18: 
38: 1 Chron: 21: 26: 2Chron: 7: 1. m Unto Abel's perſon, who was 
- cw good Man ; aud then to his Sacrifice, which was offered 
with Faith in God's Mercy, and in the promiſed Mediator, Kb. 
II: 4. 

5 But unto Cain and to his offering he had not re- 


__ and Cain was very wroth #,andhis conntenance 
ell o. 


z Partly with God, who had caſt ſo publick a diſgrace upon him. 
and given the preference to his younger Brother ; and partly with 
Abel, becauſe he had reccived more Honour from God, and there- 
fore was likely to have more reſpe& and priviledge from his Parents 
than him/eif, o Whereas before it was lifred up and chearful, now 
it tell down through ſenſe of guilt, diſappointment of his hope, 
ſhame and gricft, and envy at his Brother. | 

6 Andthe LORD faid unto Cain p, Why art thou 
wroth ? And ** why is thy countenance fallen q ? 

þ That he might bring him to repentance, and the knowledge * Job 2y. 
of his Sin. 4 The cauſe of this deje&edneſs is not from me, but 24+ 
from thy ſelf. | 


7 It thou doeſt well 7, ſhalc thou not + be accept- 


cloſed or ſecured by God to preſerve it from the entrance and annoy- 
ance of wild Beaſts : Or,before rhe garden, 7. e. Near to the Garden ; 


before 2nv man could come at the Garden any way. z ( z. e. ) An- ; 


- gels ; fo calied from their exquitire Knowledge, and therefore fitly 

here uſ d for the puniſhment of man who finned by affetting di- 
& In the Cherubims hands, as it was upon otacr 
And this 


CY » 
3 « 
*- * 
O 


Nizwmb., 22. 23. Jol. 5. 13. 1 Chron. 21. 16, 27. 


was Cither a material Sword, bright, and being b:andiſhed, ſhining | 
and glittering like a flame of fire ; or flaming fire, inthe ſhape of a ' 
Sword. Or, fenmins Swordr, becauſe there were divers Che:ubims, ! 


and cach of them had a Sword. The fmgular number for the plural : 
7 : 0 . Y ws b ty | RY 

Or. 2 two-ecged Sword. 1 Nas brandiſhed and nimbly » hirled about 

by the Cherubims ; which poſture was fitreſt for the preſent lervice. 


m The way that Teads to Paradiſe, and fo to the tree of Lite ; that 
man might be deterred and kept from coming thither. 


C HA P. If. 


The birth of Cain ani al, and theiremployment, x, 2. Cain's offering, 3. 
Abel's ſacrifice, and Goa's acceptance, 4. Cain's rejefied , his dijconrent, 
5. God expoſtulats it wit! ſhim, 6, 7. He murthers Al, 8. God makes 
enquiry after Avel, g. Ti? oy of /»;s blood, to. God 5 curſe upon Coin, 
TI, 12. His complaint, 13, 14. God Mtgats at, 15. Irs execution, IG, 
Cair's poſterity, 17, 18. Lamcii's two wives,” 19. They bear unro him 
ſons who dwell in tents, 29. invent muſical inſtruments, 21. Have Skill 
7 braſs ond iron, 22. His boaſting, 23, 24. The birth of Seth, 25. His 
ſon ; the revival of religion, -26. 


wn. = 


A ND Adim knew « Eve his wife, and the concei- 
ved and bare Cain 6b, and aid, I have gotten a 
man c from the LORD &. 

# This modeſt expreſſion is uſed both in Scriptureand ether Au- 
thors, to fgnifie the conjugal AQ, or canal knowledge. SO Gert 
19. 8: and 24. 16 Nz#:6.731. 17. Matth, I. 25. Lite 1. 34. 6 Whole 
name ſignifies a 2/3on. c A male Child, as Gen. 7. 2: which was 


7:9iF weicome. d Or, ty or with the Lord, (7.c. ) by vertue of tus 


" far ; ELEEE a EIT "x ns Foy PIE & pe #47; +1» I nv 1 
i111 B1Ei1:;10 , & £3: = MS 111.4 ;P<eCial *4YVOUT. Gr, a2 Nin; $F-C 1.0} a, 
pg x. _ 5 g 4 * «7 nel a4 > S j. '$ d » @;) Or thc M0112, ho inc 
s. « » TAC \ Grads D ODC! -j fiegMizlC, of '  þ4 109 1314 b . iy &* Ciſhs . oil PI = 
6:4 TILS WAS 12 DIO a:tcd Coed. 
4. 


4tn bace his brotker + Abel e: and Abel 
DA E keener of ikeer. bur Chin was a tiiler of th 
WIS @& JT ECCBET OLI3RCED, DUT Wall Was a CTLuer OLTNC 


” --o 
: I OO " _— 
£  £AHBU 15S ec. 
of 


ch. 75 #178 _ 6 . > : . 
} / EA E $46 no wInly, a vain, mortal, miferable Man, whereas ſhe 
"077: c20u9 bz more Tim an ordinary Man : Or this name 
T 23CD, ES TOOES FIT : 1 oY os Ks 2a1{erab] d Lite and untimel nA1 
"op op Tali). | of LH 4 \ D R Sl GEL H 1115 31311! * VU ta wy $4 "= > y -” i 
ferry. tata Dor, { VWhich was eftcemed a more honourabie calling 
ri ther o; 2 Shepherd, ond therefore either choten by the clder 
= . ' >. 4: 
. Þrocicr, or alot ro him by Ibis Vatner., 
4 Y Wo -» hs als hy &. tag 5-4 * - 4, $% i 
1 2 Aud Fin * procels oftimi & it came tO paſs, that 
+ i = £0 < F44's — » o - ; "4g * "; : W: FE yg . £ —S 
1 > e4 of AlN DILL: Þ CL TIE ITULT GL Ts ground all ofteiing 
, = >. vj x "_ = f « vy "% 
ez, + UNMOTRE LUNALD. 


g Lither'r. In general at the return of rhe ſet time then appoint- 
2nd uſd for the ſolemn: fervice-of God. Ur, 2: Art the end of 


eds? Andifthou doeſt not well, fin lieth at the door 


; 7: and Þ unto thee ſbe/l be his deſire, and thou ſhalt + Or,havs 
rule over him «. the excel. 


_ 7 Or, for the future ſhalt do well, ( 7: e:) repent of thy Sin,amend lency. 
tiiy Lite, offer thy Offerings with a willing and cheerful Mind, | 
and honeſt Heart, in Faith and Love, as Abe! did. s Or pardoned ject unto 
received into favour. Or, exalted, and either preſerved in, or re- *hce. 
ſtored unto thoſe rights of the firſt-born, which thou art conſcious 
, to thy {elf that thou haſt forfeited ? Or, elevated, in thy looks,7: c: 
would not, or ſhould nor,thy Countenance have been upright and 
pleaſant, which now 1s ſad and dejefted? * Sin is here taken,either 
1. Properly ; ſo the ſenſe is, Sin will be growing upon thee ; one 
Sin will brizg in another, and that malice and purpoſe of revenge 
againſt thy Brother, which now lies hid in the ſecrer Chamber of 
thy Mind and Heart,lies at the Door ready to break forth into the 
view of the World in open Murder. Or, 2. For the punithment 
of Sin, as it 1s taken Ger. 19.15. Levit: 5: 1: and 20: 20: Numb:18:1: 
2 Kings 7: 9: Zech. 14: 19. So the ſenſe is, if thou wilt- go on in 
Sin, and executethy wicked purpoſe, which I perceivelies working 
in thy Heart, be ſure thy ſin will find thee out, as it is ſaid Numb:3 2:23. 
Thou ſhalt not longenjoy the fruits of thy Wickedneſs, but a dread- 
ful Judgment ſhall tread upon the heels of thy Sin, and lie like a 
furious Maſtive Dog at the very door of thy houſe, to ſeize upon 
thee atthy firſt coming in or going out. For that perſon or thing 
which 1s very near to us, or at hand, is ſaid to be at the doors 
Matth: 24: 33: James 5: 9. nt Thoſe two clauſes may relate eithcr 
1. To Sin, which may be here ſpoken of as a perſon, as it is Rom. 
7. 8,9, 11, Oc. So the place may be rendred and expounded thus, 
The deſire of ſin 7s to thee, ( 7: e: ) to afſaulr, ſeduce, conquer and de- 
ſtroy thee : As it is ſaid, Luke 22: 31. Satan hath deſired to have 
you, that he may ſift zou, &c. Or thus, its deſire, objettively, nor 
ſubjeaively taken, (7: e: ) thy defire, intention, or reſolution of 
Sinning ; thatevil motion of thy heart againſt thy Brother, ſha/ be 
2g2inf (as the Hebrew particle c/ oft ſignifies ) thee, (i: e:) how- 
ſocver at preſent it pleaſeth thee, yetir is really not only againſt him, 
bur againit hy ſelf,and will certainly turn to thy own ruine : But 
( for ſo the particle and is commonly taken ) If thou be wiſe, give 
no place to it, but reſiſt it, do thou rule ( for the future Tenſe is oft 
pur imperatively, as in the Ten Commandments, and it frequent- 
ly ſignihes not what a Man can or ſhall do, bur his duty or what 
he ought to do, as is evident from Gen: 20: 9: Mal: 1: 6: Luke3:14. ) 
over zt, i.e. Conquer and ſubdue it, which is thy duty : Or, thou 
ſhalt rule over it, (7. e. ) by my grace aſtifting thy endeavours, thou 
ſhalr b>-enablcd to fubdue thy evil Concupiſcences and Paſſions, 
and ſo over-rule, prevent, or remove thoſe Punithments, which o- 
therwiſe Sin will infallibly bring upon thee. Or, 2. To Abel, and 
ſo the ſenſe is, 2nd (as for thy Brother 46c!, to whoſe Faith and 
Picty I have given this publick and honourable Teſtimony, which 
thy naughty itcart makes an occaſion of envy and malice, and in- 
tention of Murther, that thou may{tnot by a miſtake be led to the 
perpetration of ſohorrid a Crime ; know, that this favour of mine 
concerns only his fpiritual Priviledge,and the happineſs of the Life 
ro come, which thou deſpiſeſt ; bur it makes no change in civil 
" Rights, nor doth it transfer the Dominion from thee, whoſe it is 
by Birth, unto him; nor doth he ſo underſtand it; for notwith- 
ſtanding this ) to thee ſhall he hzs defire ſubject, ( 7: e: ) he ſhall and 


: . . 1 <5: vs 
hen the c might benow, as there was afrerward among 
the jews, more tviemn Wo. {hip and Sacnfices : The word days, 


-> probabiy at the end of the days of the weck, or uLon 


” 7 . 4 L « = aur = C- i | = Ps . ' 
Neh. 13. the fevenrh and la% day,of the weck, Saturday,wiich then was rhe 


5. $:bbzrh day, which befo:e this time was blefied and fantiificd,Gen: 
44.24.22. 2: 3. þ Eitacr to the, place appointed for the-ſfolemn Worſhip of 


*x.2.23. God : Qr, ro his Father, who at thar time was both king, anu Pro- 
- pher, and Pricſt. Or trought, 7: e: offe: ed. EE | ; 
4 Ard Abel, he ailo brought of rhe firſtlings 5 of his 
+ {ock,and of the Far chereof &:; and che LORD had * 
reſvect | unto Abel zz and to his oflering. 

7 Either 1, The firlt-born, which God reſerved to himſelf both 
at this t:me, and afterwards by an expreſs Law, Evod: 13: 2: Numb: 
2: 13. Or, 2. The choiceFand moſt eminent of the Flock: For 
the belt of any kind are oft called firſt-born, as Job 18:13: 7er:31:19: 
Beb: 12: 23: k L.ither 1. Properly, the fat being properly now re- 
quired by Go1, as afterwards was exprefled, Ex: 29: 13, 22: L204: 
5: 3: Or, 2. The bcft of them, as the word fat 15 often uſed, as 
Gen: 45: 18: an41 49: 20: Numb: 18: 12: Nebem: 8: 10: Pſal: 147: 14. 
1 Or, hobed to him with a grecious eye, kindly acc-pred ana owned 
hiza and his Sacrifice, and teſtified this, Hyb: 11: 4: ro Can and all 
there preſent, citaer by expreſs word,o: by ſome viſible ſign ; pro- 
bably y conſuming his Sacrifice ty fire from Heaven,as the Fathers 


| EE 
Heb.ſbecp 


heo.11. 


will nevertheleſs yield to thce as his Superiour, and thou according to 
thy own Hearts deſire, ſha!t rule ever him. Tf it be ſaid,: the name of 
Abel is not here mentioned, it may be anfivered, that this is ſuffi 
ciently included in the Pronouns is and him, and it is not unuſua] 
to put thoſe relative Pronouns alone, the antecedent being nor ex- 
preſſed, but to be gathered either from the foregoing or following 
Words ; of which ſee my Notes on Gen. 3. 1. 
$ And Cain + talked with Abel his - brother »: 

and it came to pals, when they were in the field 7, | Heb. 
that Cain roſe up-againft Abel his brother, and * ſlew /{*% zo, 
Um 2: _ ; y FM 23 

x Either 1. Familiarly and friendly, as he uſed to do, thereby to + - 1 Johns 
make him ſecure and careleſs: Or by way ofexpoſtulation and con- : Hh - 
tention. y Into which Abel was led, either by his own employment, Jude - ' 
or by Cain's perſwaſion; this being a fir place for che execution of 
his wicked purpoſe. z Poſſibly with Stone or Club, or with ſome 
Iron Tool belonging to Husbandry. 
9 And the LORD ſaid unto Cain, Where 5s 4bel 
a thy brother b? And he ſaid, I know not « 4m I my k 


brothers keeper c ? S 

a Not that God was ignorant where he was, bot partly todcon- 
vince him of his Sin, and te lead him to Repentance, and partly to 
inſtru Judges to enquire into Cauſes, and hear the accuſed ſpeak 

Tor - 


cacrally raink; wacrevy aiſo God did afterwards irequently lignify | 


. 
- 


T Or, ſubs 


* Chap. IV, 


a> ” aw - dn. = 


_ 


i ED 


OP 3 ORE 


% 
"4 


i S Wo, H - 4 


- 


s F 


= for. themſelves before.they paſs Sentence. b Whom .Narure and 
near Relation obliged thee ta love and preſerve. « Why doſt thou 
enquire of me concerning him who is of age to look ro himſelt ? 
Is he ſuch a ſtripling rhat he needs a Guardian? Or didft thou &- 
ver make me his Guardian ? | 


io And he ſaid, Wh 


LEE 


at haſt thou done d ? the VOICE 


+ Heb. Of thy brothers t Blood e * crieth unto me from the 
bloods. ground F. : : 

* Rev. 6. a I hear thy Words, but what ſay thy Aftions ? What an hide- 
104 ous Crime haſt thou committed? In vain doſt thou endeavour to 


hide it or deny it. #. In the Hebrew it is Bloods, either to aggra- 
vare the Crime ; or, to ſhew the plenty of the Blood ſpiJr; or, to 
charge him with the Murder of all thoſe that might naturally have 
come out of Abc's loins; which was a far greater Crime in the 


nonage of the World, when the Wor! d greatly wanted People. f 
Upon which it was ſpilt by thy bloody Hands. . 
it And now art thou curſed -g from the Earth b 


which hath-opened her mouth to receive thy Brothers 
Blood fiom thy hand z. | 

z- As the Earth was curſed for thy Father's ſake, ſo now art thou 
curſed in thy own Perſon. þ Or, In regard of the Earth, which ſhall 
grudge thee both, its Fruits,.and a certun dwelling-place. 7 Which 
had more humanity to thy Brother than thou hadſt ; forit kindly 
received and covered thar Blood which which thou didſt crueily 
and unnaturally ſhed upon it. 

12 When thou tiileſt the ground & it ſhall not hence: 
forth yield unto thee her ſtrength 7. 4 fugitive anda 
vagabond » ſha}tthou be in the earth, ..- 0G 

k Or, That ground, which doth or ſhall fall to thy ſhare ; which 
beſides the firſt and general Curſe inflied upon the whole Earth, 
ſhall have this peculiar Curſeadded ro it, | 
Fruit, in ſuch proportion, -as it hath hitherto done. » Banithe 
from thy own Land and Kindied, and Fathers Houſe, and from the 
whole Society of the Faithful, and wandering hither and thither. 
Others : ender the words mourning and trembling; or, trembling and 
wandering. Theſe two wor.'s note both the unquierneſs and hor- 
ror of his Mind and Conſcience, and the unſettledneſs of his Ha- 
bitation and Condition, and as ſome add, the trembling ofthis Bo- 


dy. | 
© +Or, mime 13 And Cain ſaid unto the LORD, + My punilh- 
E niquiry ir ments is greater than I] can bear. 
greater n Hebe.mmy Sin; But Sin ſeems here to be put for puniſhment, as 
thai tat before verſe 7..and Gen: 19: 15. Levit. 5. 1. Pſal; 69. 27, Prov. 12.21. 
jt may be Fcr Cain was not ſo ſenſible of his Sin, as of the ill effects of it, as 
forgiven. himſelf ſhews verſe 14: 1 | 
14 Behoid o thou haſt driveh me out p this day from 
the face of the earth 9g : and from thyF«te'r ſhall I be 
hid, and I ſhail be a fugitive and a' vagabond inthe 


_ 
"1% . 


1 & BY 
» 


] (1.e. ) Its Vertue, vor ftructer of every artificer tn braſs, and iren&: andthe 


PEI." 


£5. 2 


- > 
GL 
þ. 
- 


Either By the incieaſe of his own 
ther degenerat Sons of Adam to him, w 


and Irid begat 
Mehujael, and Mehujael begat Methuſael, and Methu 4 
{aclbegart Lamech _ | uber 

19 4 AndLamech 4 rookunto him two wivese : the TR 
name of the one as ACah, and the name of the other 
Zallah. F- 
d The wicked branch of that curſed Root of Czin. e Againſt God's 
firſt inſtitution, Gen. 2..24. Mal. 2. 15, and without God's leave. 

20 And Adak bare Jubai: he was the father of ſuch as 
dwell in Tents f. and of ſuch as have catiel g. 

f He taught Shepherds to dwell in Tents, and toremove them 
from place to place, for conveniency ef Paſture. The firſt Au- 
thors or Inventers of any thing, are commonly called its Fathers. 
g Heb. And of Cartel, i.e. The Iaventer of the Art of keeftyg and 
managing cartel. | ; 

21 And his brothers name 5»as. Jubal: he was the 
father of-all ſuch as handle the Harp and Organ þ. 

h Or, The lovely Inſirument;But.what kind of Inftrument this was; 
even the Jewsdo not underſtand; '- The meaning is, he was the In- | 
vente: of Muſick and muſical Inftruments. * f Heb, 


2 And Zillah ſhe aifo bare Tubal-Cain 3, an + in- Wrerrer- 


%. 


ſiſter of Tubal-Cain was Naamah 1. 


7} Whom ( a5 the learned conceive, - and the agreement of the 
name and funftion makes prebable ) the Hearhens worſhipped by 
the name of Yulcan, the god of Smith: ; and his Siſter Naamah, by 
the name of Fenus. k Who firſt taught Men how to make Arms 
and other Tuftrumears of Iren. © / So called from her Beaury;which 
her Naine ſignzfies. *Or 7 
T 5 e . . ſr 

2 And Limech ſaid unto his Wives, Adah and Zillah ou: [tay 
m, Hear my voice, ye wires of Lamech, hearken un- « man in 
ro my ſyecch : for * I have ſlain a man to my wound- 7 wound 
ing,and Þf a young man. * to my hurt #. _— p 

m Who,obſerving his fiercneſs and cruelty, feared that the Ven- : bald. 
geance of God or Men would fall upon him,and upon them for his «, ; my 
ſake, n (7.e.) Beitfo that I have flaina Man, and that a young pe. / 
Man, Why do you concern your ſelves in it? It is romy own wound= © 
ing and hurt, not to yours ; I muſt ſuffer for it, not you. Some take 
this to be a ſorrowful Confeſſion of his Blo-dy Crime, g. d. I have 


earth, and it ſhall come to pals, that every one that fin-. 
deth me, thall ſlay me 5s. | | 


o Conſider how ſeverely thou uſeſt me. p Wirh publick infamy, 
as the word ſignifies. q Qr, his -Emrth, my native Land. (ze. ) Fa- 
vour and ProteQion: 5s AsThe-publick Enemy of Mankind, and as 
one :ievored by thee to deſtruttion. Queſt. Whom did Cain fear, 
when it appears not that there were any but his Father and Mother? 

' Anlw. So 1gno- ant People conceive;bur ir isa fond conceit to think, 
that there wereno more Men than areexp:eſſed in this Book,where 
God never intended to give aCatilogue of all Wen,but only of the 
Church, or thoſe « ho had ſome relati n to, -rconcern with it.Nay, 
that rhere were ve: y many thouſand: of Meri, now in beings very 
credible upon theſe rational grounds and ſuppoſitions. 1. That 
Adam and Eve did according to God's prec-pt and bleſſing, Gen: 1. 
26 procreat Children preſently after the fall, and God's gracious 
reconcil'ment to them; and conſequently their Children did fo, 
when they came to competent age 2.That thoſe firſt Men and Wo- 
men were endowed, by God with extrao-dinary Fruitfulneſs, and 
might have rwo, three, four or mr: re at a time, (as divers perſons 
long after had ) which was then expedient for the repleniſhing of 
the ® o:1d;and the like may be judged of their Children during the 
Wo 14's infancy. That this Murder was commitrred bur a litrle 
before the hundred and thirty year of Adaw .age,which appears by 

comparing Gen 4 25. and 5. 3. Before which rime, How vaſt and 
numerous an off-ſpring might haye come from Atam, none can be 
ignorant, that can, and ſhall ma 


ke a ratnal computation, 

i5 And the LORD faid yo him, Therefore t who» 
ſoever ſlayeth Cain, vengtance fhall be taken on_ him 
ſeven-fold x. And the LORD feta mark upon Cain x, 
leſt any finding him ſhould kill him. 

t Or, Aſſuredly, as the word ſighifies, Jer: 2. 22. and 5. 2. Zech. 
11. 17. Thar thou mayeſt ſee how I hate Murde-, and how im- 
partially I ſha] puniſh all-Murtherers ; and that thou mayeſt be un- 
happily free from this fear, that thon mayelt live for an example 
to Mankind, for a terrour to thy ſelf and othe:s. « (7. e. ) Abun- 


dantly ; he ſhall be plagued with many and grievous Puniſhments, 
as the phraſe is uſed, Levit. 26. 28. Pſal. 12.7. and 79. 12. and in 


© n; \ oi , 
» g % VE I 
% © IE SC». 
a" 4 a 
; 7 - 


Body, or a gha{tlineſs of his 'Countenance, or what other viſible to- 
ken of the divine Diſpleaſure, God hath not revealed, nor doth it 
concern us to know. | 

16 4 And Cain went out from the preſence of the 
LORD y, and dwelt in the land of Nod z, on the eaft 
of Eden. * 4.4 


y (.e. ) Was baniſhed from the place of God's,fprcial Preſence 
and Habiration, from the Society of his Fath&f, -and -the only: 
Church which God had upon Earth. & In the Land:which was af- 
terwards called Ned, from Cair's unſettled Condition, becauſe he 
continued wandring hither and thither in it. 


17 And Cain knew ' his wife «, and ſhe conceived 


bet 


Heb. 
hanch: Name of the city, after thename of his ſon, Enoch c. 


many other places. x What this was, whether a trembling of his | 


and bare + Enoch, and he built a city, andcalled the. 


s Of which phraſe ſee onchop. 4 r. 6. Partly to divert his trou- 


murdered a Man, to my wounding, &c. (7.e. ) to my utter ruin, 
-or to the wounding and grief of my Hearr and Conſcience. But 
this ſeems nor to agree either ith the quality of Cains Family, or 
with the temper of Lamech's Perſo',, o: with the ſcope of the Holy 
Ghoit in this place; which is to deſcribe not the Ve:tues, bur the 
Crimes of that wicked Race. According to the marginal Franſla- 
tion, the ſenſe may be this, Fear nor for me ; for if any Man, tho' 
in his youth and i{trength, ſhou'd affaulr me. and give me the firſt 
ound, he ſhould pay dearly for it; and though 1 were rounded 
and veakned, the -emainders ofmy ftrengch would be ſuificienr ro 
give him his dearhs Wound. The words alſo may be orher=:iſc 
rend-ed; the Farticle c5/ being taken interrogatively, as it is, iſ. 
29. 6. and- 36. 19, and elſewhe:e, Have 1 /Tain # Man to my wound 
ing, and i oy, or. | a young Manto my hurt? (i.e. ) That thereby EF 
ſhould deſerve ſuch a mortal Wound or Hurt to be infli ted upon 
me by way of Retaliation ? , You have therefere no caulc of fear, cis 
ther for my ſake, orfor your own. | 


24 if Cain ſhall be avenged o ſcven- fold, truly La- 
mech ſeventy and ſeven-fold p. 


o If the flaughter of Cain ſhall be puniſhed in him that ſhall kill 
him, . whoſoeyer he be. p(z.e.,) My death ſhall be much more 
certainly and ſeverely revenged by God up-n any Man that ſhall 
murde: me. Theſ words may be either 1. A profane ſcoff. q. d. 
Since Cain, my Father and Pattern in Murther, was fo far from be- 
ing punithed by the Hand of God, that he had a ſpecial Prote&ion 
from him,that no Man ſhould darerc touch him ; If whoſe murther 
is not ſo hain us as his was) ſha! not fire worſe than he, and rhete- 
fo e have no -eaſt.n to fear either Gord »r Men. Or 2. An argu- 
ment or ground *f his Security, 9.4. Iam not cnly ſecured by my 
own Puiſſan-e, but by God's Providerice ; which ce:tainly will be 
more watchful over me, who have not commirted any ſuch horrid 
Crime; than overh-A\ that killed his own inn<cent P. other. 

:5 T And Adam knew bis Wife again, and ſhe bars 
-aſon, andcalled his name ÞF Seth q : for God, /aid ſhe r, # j1ch, 


[ 
hath appointed me arother Seed s 1nftead of Abel *, Sherh, 
whom Cain ſlew. 


q She gave the n»me, but not without Adam's conſent. Gen. 5.3. 
-» By divine Inſpirafior. 5s Nore that the woid Seed is uſed of ons 
ſingle Perſcn here, and Gez: 21. 13.and 38.8. Which confirms the 
Apoſtle's argumenr. Gal. 3.16, 7: To ſucceed his Father Adam, as 
Abel ſhould have done in the Prieſthood, and adminiſtration and 
care of holy Things in the Church of Ged. | ; 
26 And toSeth, to him aifo chere was borna Son ; and 
he called his name Þ Enos # : then began taen * to ca!l + Heb. x: 
upon the name ofthe LORD x _. | moſh; 
Which properly ſignifies a myſerable Man, to note the great *Or,cs call 
wickedneſs and wretchednets of that Generation ; which the He- them- | 
brew Writers generally obſerve. x To p*ay unto God, to Wor- ſelves by 
ip God in a more publick and ſolemn manner :, Prajing bein te name of 
bere pur for the whole Worſhip of God, as Gen: 12.8. and 26, #he Lord, 
25, and in manly other places. According to the marginal Verſion; . 
the ſenſe is this; then when, the World was univerſally corrupr, 
and bad forſaken God and his _— good Men grew my a- 
: 11s . 


| 


q 


P) 


o 


l 
: 


: 


: 
: 
: 
. 


} * [Chron: 
J-1 1. 


| 
: 
1 
j 


| 
i | 
i. : 


. 
«4 


E/3E 4 


** = 0 ——_ 


* 1Chron 
1.1, Oc. 


en 4 
» _ . P 
IS = 


hap. V. | 


liznt and Zealous for God, and did more publickly and avowedly 
own God,and began to diſtinguiſh and ſeparate themſelvesfrom the 
ungodly World ; and to. call themſelves, and one another by the 
naine of Gud, ( 7. e- ) rhe Sons, SCLVants, or Worſhippers of God, as 
they are expretly called ; and that, as it ſeems, upon this occaſion, 
Gen. 6. 2. And in this ſenſethis phraſe iselſewhere taken, as 1/a. 43. 
”. and 44. 5. and 65. 1. Somerender the place thus, Then bezan Men 
to proſeme the name, ( i.e. ) the Worſhip of the Lord, by Idolatry or 
Superſtirion. Bur this ſcems neither to agree with the Hebrew 
phraſe, nor coſuirt with this place, where he ſpeaks of the Poſte- 
rity of 5th; who were the holy Sced, and the only Church of God 


then in the World. - 
CHAP, Þv. 


The manner of man's creation repeated; 1, 2. Tine Genealogy, Age, and 
death of the fathers from Alam to Noah, in theline of Seth. Seth begotten 
of Aaam after his Image, 3. The piety and tran/{ation of Enoch, 24. La- 
mech's propheſy of his Son Noah, 2g. Sons born to Noah, 32. 


His isthe * book 2 of the generations of Adamb : 
in the day that God created man c, inthe like 


neſs of God made he him 7. 

2 ( 5. e. ) TheLitt or Catalogue, as this word is taken Nehem. 7. 
5. Matth. 1. 1. as it is alſo putfor any ſhort Wiiting, as for a bull 0: 
Divorce, as Dewt 24. 1,2. b( 7.e, ) His poſterity DEgorten by him; 
the word being paſſively uſed. But he doth nct here give a com- 
pleat Liſt of all Adam's Children, bur only of his godly Seed, which 
preſerved true Religion and the Worſhip of God from Aram to 


" the Flood, andf,om whoſe Joins Chriit came, Luke 3. c This 1s 


hee repeated ro n=te the different way of the produttion of Adam, 


and of his poſterity ; his was by, Creation from God, theirs by Ge- 


I, 26. 
them e, and bleſſed 


ncration from their Parents. 4 See Gen: 

2 Male and Female creat:d he 
them /;, and c:lled their Name 
when they werecreated.' 

e Sec Gen. 1..26. Matth. 19. 4. Mark 10.6. f With power topro- 
pagate their kind, and with other Bleflings. See Ger: 1. 28. g Which 
naine is given both to every Man, as Gen: 9g. 6. ſal. 49. 20. and to 
the firſt Man, asGen: 2. 23. and to the whole kind, both the Man 
and the Woman, who are called by one name, to ſhew their inti- 
mate Union and Communion in all things. 


2 And Adam lived an hundred andthirty years þ, and 
begat a ſon in his own likeneſs, after his image z, anc 


catied his name Seth. 

þ Aﬀeer he was created, in which time he begat other Sons and 
Daughters, as appears from what was ſaid before. - ; Either 1. In 
regard of the natural frame of his Body and Soul: Bur this was {© 
cvident of it ſelf, that the mention of ir had been frivolous. No. 
is there any reaſon why that ſhould be ſaid of Seth, rather than of 
Cain, or Abel, Or, 2. In tegard of his Corruption, q. 4. a weak, 
ſinful, mortal Man, like himſelf : For Adam's Image 1s here plain- 
ly oppoſed to the likeneſs of God, wherein Adam is faid to be created, 
werſet. And this is firly ſaid of Szrh to ſignifie, that although he 
was a worthy and good Man, and, Adamexcepted, the moſt eminent 
Perſon of tie whole Church of God; yer he, no leſs than wicked 
Cain, was b-gorten and born in Sin ; and that all the difference 
which was between him.and conſequently between other good Men, 
and the wicked Progeny of Cain, was not from the nature which 
they received from A4am, bur f. om the grace infuſed into them 
by God. | 

4 * And the days of 44am, after he had begorten 
Seth, were eight hundred years: and he begat tons and 


dauzhters k, 
bk \W hoſe names and numbers are here paſſed over in ſilence, as 
not belonging to the Genealogy of Chriſt, nor to the following Hi- 


- And all the days that Adam lived, were nine hun- 
dred and thirty years /, and he died. 


1 Thelons lives of Men, in ancient times here nored, are alſo 
mentioned by Fieathen Authors : And it was wiſely ſo ordered by 
God, both for the more plentiful encreaſe of Mankind in the firit 
Age of the World, and for the more effequal Propagation of true 
Religion, and other uſeful] Knowledge to the World. And many 

atural Reaſons might be given why their Iives were then longer 
than afrerwards. 


'6 And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and be- 


_ gat Enos. 


7 And Seth lived after he begat Enos, eight hundred 
and ſeven years, and begat ſons and daughters. 

8 And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and 
twelve years, and he died. 


+ Heb. Ke- * 9 And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Þ Cai- 


10 And Enos lived after he begat Cainan, eight 
hundred and fifreen years, and begat ſons and daugh- 


11 And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and 
five years, and hedied. : 
12 And Cainan lived ſeventy years, and begat + 


Mahalaleel: | 
13 And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalalee], 


eight hundred and fourty years, and begar ſons and 


daughters. ; 
14 And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred 


and ten years, and he died. 
15 And Mahalaleel lived ſixty and five years,and begat 
} Jared, | 


0 
; (4 
| 
|! if 
| 2| 
T8 { 
7 100 
ZE 2 
\ 
iy 
| (1 nan. Nan. 
= [8 4 
Lt) i 
+ 1% 
} TETS» 
| 
: 
+ Gr. Ma- 
BF leleel. 
| 6 
= 1, 
$: 4 
Fi. + Heh, Jon 
Y i red, 


is Zad Mahalaleel 


/ 
C 


we. v 4 


Adam g, in the day: 


hundred and thirty years, and begat ſons and daugh- 
cers. 

17 And all the days of Mahalaleel,were eighthundred 
ninety and five years, and he died» 

18 And Jared livedan hundred ſixty and two years, 
and he begat Enoch. 

19 And Jaredlived after he begat Enoch, eight hun- 
dred years, and begat ſons and davghters. 

20 And all the days of Jared were nine hypdred ſixty 
and twoyears,- and he died, 

21 AndEnoch lived ſixty and five years, 
+ Methuſelah -. 


7 whoſe name is thought by ſome learned men to contain a Pro- 
pheſy of the Fluod, which was to come a thouſand Years after; for 
ir ſignufies, He gies,ond the Dart or Arrow of Gods vengeance comes. 
Or, he dies, and the ſending forth of the Waters comes. 


and begat 


22 And Enoch * walked with God », afterhe begat 
Methuſelah, three hundred years, and begat ſons and 
daughters 0. 

2 ( i.e. ) He lived as one whoſe Eye was continually upon God; 
whoſe care and conſtant courſe and buſineſs it was to pleaſe God, 
and to imitate him, and to maintain acquaintance and communion 
with him ; as one devoted to God”, ſervice, and wholly governed 
by his will. * He walked not with the Men of that wicked age, cr 
as they walked, bur being a Prophet and Preacher, as may be ga- 
thered from 7ude, ver. 14, I5. with great Zealand Ccurage he pro- 
teſted and preached againſt their evil Praftiſes, and boldly owned 


3 Mic. 6.8. o Hence it 1s undeniably evident that the tate and uſe 
of Matrimony doth very well agree with the ſevereſt courſe of Ho- 
lineſs, and with the office of a Prophet or Preacher. 


23 And all the days of Enoch were three hundred 
1Xty and five years. | 

24 And * Enoch walked with God: and he vas not 
p, for God took him 9. 


? (7.e. ) He appearednot any longer upon Earth, or amongſt 
mortal Men. The ſame phraſe js in Gen. 42436. Jer. 31. rs. 94 Our 


ly Habitati:n. See Luke 23. 43. And he took either his Soul, of 
which al-ne this phraſe isuſed, Ezek. 24. 16. Or rather both Scul 
and Body, as he rook Elras, 2 Kings 2.11. becauſe he fo took him 
that he aid wor ſee dearh, Heb. rn. 5. 


25 And Methuſclah lived an hundred eighty and ſe- 
ven years, and begat F Lamech. 

26 And Methuſclah lived after he begat Lamech ſe- 
ven hundred eighty andtwo years, and begat ſons and 
daughrers. | 

27 And all the days of Methuſelah, were nine hun- 
red ſixtv andnine years r, and he died s. 

'7 The longeſt time that any Man lived. Bur it is obſervable 
that neither his, nor any of the Patriarch's Lives reached to a thou- 
ſand Years, which number hath ſome ſhadow of peife&tion. 5s Bur 
a little before the Flood came, being taken away from the evil to 
COMme. 


years, and begata ſon, 


t Not that wicked Lamech mentioned chap. 4. for he was of the 
Family of Cain, but this was deſcended from Seth, 


29 And hecalled his name + Noah «, ſaying x, This 
ſame ſhall comfort us concerning our work, and tvil of 
our hands y, becauſe of the ground which the LORD 
hath curſed. - 


u Which ſignifiesreff. x By the Spirit of Propheſy. y (7. z” 
Concerning the hard labour and manifold troubles to v hich we 
are ſentenced, Chap. 3. 19. And this he Cid either r. By the inven=« 
tion of Inſtruments of Husbandry, whereby Tillage was made 
mo:e ealy. Or, 2. By removing in ſome part the Curſe inflited 
upon the Earth, and reconciling God unto Mankind. Poſſibly he 
might ſuppoſe that this was the Mzſias, or promiſed Seed, and the 
Saviour of the uadone World : Asit was frequent with the an- 
cient Fathers, through theirearneſt deſire of the Meſias, to expeC&t 
him long before he came, and to miſtake other perſons for him. 
Or, 3- By preſerving a remnant of Mankin4 from that Deluge 
which he by the Spirit foreſaw would come, and re-peopling the 
emptied Earth with a new Generation of Men, and by reſtoring 
and improving the Art of Husbandry, See Genefs 9g. 20. 


20 And Lamech lived after he begat Noah, five hun- 
dred ninety and five years, and begat ſons & daughters. 

21 And alffſhe daysof Lamech were ſeven hundred 
ſeventy angffeven years, and he dicd- 

32 AndNoah was five hundred years old : and Noah 
begat z Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 

2 (7.e.) He began to beget ; God in mercy denying him Chil- 
dren till that time, that he might not beger them to the deſtroyer, 
that he might haveno more than ſhould be ſaved in the Ark : Or, 
having before that time begotten others who were now dead, and 
having the approaching Flood in his view, he began again to be- 
geta Seminary for the World. Oftheſe three Sons here following, 
the eldeſt ſeems to be Fapher, Gen, 10.21. The ſecond was Sem, as 
appears becauſe he was but an Hundred years old two years after the 
Flood, Gen, 11. 11. The youngeſt Ham, Gen. g. 24. But Sem is firſt 
named in order of dignity, as being the Progenitor of the Church, 
and of Jeſus Chriſt : and becauſe he and his Progany is the princi« 


lived after hs begat Jared, 6ght 


-pal ſubjc& of this whole Hiſtory. 
CHAP. 


God anu his ways in the midſt of them. Compare Gen. 6.6. Jer.1 2. 


T Gr. Mas 
thuſala. 


«+ 


hap. 24, 


40. Ptal. 


16. 8. and 
116.9, 


*'Heb.1r, 
bo 


of this ſinful and miſerable World unto himſelf, and to his heaven- 


28 And Lamech 7 lived an hundred eighty and ewo | 


+ Gr. Noe, 


4s 7-44; 


£04 


EE, "JI 
by y RES og 4 - a EI 


ONE ITN 


I þ 


Lea 


| Noe. 


26 Chap. 


X* 


- i EINE 2 oe W254 
Wo Es EI EY 
BEST” - A 


x 


by 
A 
, 


+ O1, of 
Man . 


: 
CG H A P. V I. 
Unlawful matches of the ſons of God with the daughters of men, 1. 2» 

Grieve the ſpirit of God, who threatens their deſiruFion, 3. Giants and 

mighty men born ; a general degeneracy" of mankind, 4, 5+ God repents 

that he had made man, and reſolves to deitroy that World, 6, 7. 

is excepted,” and finds favour with God,8. His Charatter, 9. The Earty 

corrupe and filled with violence, 11, 12. God declares t0 Noah his pur- 

poſe to deftroy it, 13. Diretis him to make an. ark, 14---16. Mentions 4 

deluge, 17. His covenant with Noaj: to preſerve a Seed, 18-=-21, '-Noals 

obedience, 22. | 

A N D it came topaſs when men @ began to multi- 

ply 5 onthe face of the Earth, - and daughters 
were born unto them c. 

a ( i: e. ) Wicked men, the poſterity of Cain,as appears from the 
following verſe; who are here called men, and the ſous of men,by way 
of contempr, and of diitinction ; meer men, ſuch as had only the 
natures, and qualities of corrupt men, withour the image of God. 
L To wit, more than ordinarily ; or more than the ſons of God,be- 
cauſe thy praftiſed Polygamy after the example of their Predeceſ- 
ſor, the ungodly Lamech, Gen. 4. 19+ c So doubtleſs were ſons allo ; 
bur their daughters are here mentioned, as one principal occaſion 
of the lin noted in the next verſe, and of the following deluge. 

2 Thar the {ons of God 4d faw e the daugiters Fi of 
men f, that they were fair g, and they took þ them 
Wives i of all which they chote &. 

4 Either 1. Perſons of greateſt eminency for place and power,for 
{ſuch are called Gods, and children of the moſt High, Pſal. 82. 6. Where 
alſo they are oppoled to Mn, verſe 7. 7. e. to meaner Men. And the 
moſt eminent things in their kinds are attributed ro God, as Cedars 
of God, Hill of God, &c. Bur it is not pro able, that the Princes and 
Noyles ſhould genorally take Wives orWomen of the meaner rank, 
nor would the Marriage» of ſuch perſons be ſimply condemned, or 
at leaſt it would not' e mentioned as a crying ſin,and a great cauſe 
of the deluge. Or :ather 2. The hildren of Seth, and Enos, the 
profeſſors of the t.ue Religion. For 1. Such, and on'y tuch,in the 
common ule of Scripture, are called the Sons and Chiliren of God, as 


Deut: 14. 1. and 32. 19. 1{a. r. 2. and 45. 11. Hoſ: 11. 1. Luke 17. 27,- 


&c. 2. This Title manifeſtly relates to Gen: 4. 26. where the ſame 
Perſons are 1aid to be call-d by the name of the Lord, i.e. to be the Sons 
and Servant- of od. 3.They are oppoſed to the Daughters of Men, 
the word Mex + eing here taken in an 11] ſenſe, or ſuch as hid no- 
thing in them bur the nature of Men, which 1s corrupt and abo- 
minab!z, and were not Sons of God; but Foreigners and Strangers 
to him and Apoſtates from h'm. 4. Theſe unequal matches with 
Perſons of a fille Religion,are every wnere condemned in Scripture 
as {infu' and pernicious, as Gen: 26: 35. Exod, 34. 16. 1 Kings 11. 
2, 3. Exrn 9g. 12, Nehem. 17, 23, &'c Mal. 2. x1. + Cor: 7. 39. 2Cor: 
6 14 and therefore are fifly ſpoken of here,as one of the fins which 
broug';c t. © flood upon the ungodly World. e ( z.e. ) Gazed up- 
on and o: ſerved curiouſly and luſtfully, as the ſequel ſhe+ erh.FOf 
that vngod!y and accurſed race of Ca/n. g ( 7. e. ) Beautiful, and 
ſer off their beauty with all the allurements of Ornaments & Car- 
TIAge ; 
God did, or durfſt rake, 1 Pet. 3. 3. and therefo e were moreentic- 
ing and vrevalent with fleſhly-mindes Men. + Either 1. By force 
and violence, a« the wore ſometimes Ggnities Or rather 2. By con- 
ſent; for the Sons of God were ſo few, in compariſon of the wick- 
ed World, that they durTnor take aw: y t1cir Yavghters by force; 


Noah | 


"GENESIS. 


CD ———_ 


| himfelf r wards them, like one thar is t uly peritent aud grieved, 
, deſt:oying the work of his own Hands. c Or, at his very 09:1, 7. e, 


which alſo proves that they did not take them for Har!ct;,vur for / 


Wives. #7 Poiibly more than one fo «ach of them, after the ex- 


ample of thoſe wicked Families 1nto which they were matched. & | 


(i.e. ) Loved and liked, 15 the word chooſing is taken, Pjal. 25. 12. | 


and 119. 173. 1ſs. 1. 29: and 42. 1. compared with Matth. 12. 


28. | 


This is noted as the firſt errour,that they did promiſc»ouſly chooſe ! 
Wives, without any regard to their Sobriety and Religion,minding ' 


only the pleaſing of their o:+n Fancies and Luits, not the plea'ing 
and ſerving of their 1 ord and Maker, nor te obraining of a godly 
Seed, Which was God's end in the inftirurio:1 of Marriage, Mal:2.15. 
and therefore ihould have been theirs too. 


3 And the LORD foid /, My ſpirit ithall not al- | 


ways ſtrive with man, for that 2 aif» » 15 il8th 6, 

yet þ his days q ſhail be an bundred and tweniy 
years 7» 

[ Fither r. To the men of that age by the mouth of Noah. Or, 

m Or, Con- 


2. Within himſelf; ( fee P/al. 4. 1. ) he determiacd. 
Or,*x ee i Or againſt men, as it hath hirherro done, by in- 
war 


| d ſyggeſtions in the Minds and © onfciences of 
wicked Men, re Movths and Miniſtry of hat ſmall remnant 
of holy Men, arf@ pa. ticularly of Noah, + ho pioreited againſt, and 
contended with the World, of the ungod!y,a::d by their z-oct1nes, 
Admnonitions, Threatnings and Examples, cndcavo| red to tring 
them to Repentance, 1 P-t: 3.19. ord:ſpute with, or| concerning, Or 
becauſe of Men, i: e£ Whether I ihould deſtroy or fave him, as God 
diſpures with, or about Ephraim, Hoſ: 11.8. » (7. e.) Even the 
Seed of Seth, orthe Sons of Godalſo; no les tirin the ofi-ſpring 
of Cain : The Pronoun being here put for the foregoing Noun, 
and the ſingular Number put for the plura!, he, /.e. they, to wit, 
the Sons of God. B-th which Figures are frequent in rhe ufe of 
Scripture. Or. he, i: e. Man, all Mankind, the Sons of {od nor 
excepted. o Not only fleſply in part, or in ſome actions, bur alto- 
gether, in regard of Soul as well as Body, minding norhing bur 
makinz proviſion for the Fl:jb,to fulfil its Luſts, Rom. 13. 14. Not having 
the Spirit, Jude verſe 19. not heeding its good Motions, bur ſuppreſ- 


mo 


ſing and reſiſting them. Feſb. not only in the condirion of their 


Nature, but in the baſeneſs and corruption of their Hearts & Lives; 


. aSthe word Fleſh is commonly uſed when it is oppoſed to the Spire, 
> Though he , 


as John 3.6. Rom. 7. 18. and 8: 5,9. Gal. 5. 17. 
deſerve a ſpeedy deſtruction. 9( 7. e. ) "The time allowed him for 
Repenrance, and. the prevention of his Ruine,r During which time 
Noah was preaching, and to afſurethem of the Truth of his Do- 
ctrine, preparing the Ark. See 1 _ 20. 2 Peter 2. 5. Queſs. 
How did God perform this Promiſe, when there were but an hun- 
dred years betweenthis time and the Flood, by comparing Gen: 5. 
32. with Gen: 7. 11? Anſw. 1, The encreafing wickedneſs of Man- 
kind might juſtly haſten theirRuine, and forteir the benchit of ths 


' that Noah was fo fi guilty ofthe comm«n co. :uprion of humane 


| preſerve him f:om the common deſtruction. 


HeW DEA 5 c | Jed Anthropopathia, whereby 2lfo Eyes, Ears, Hands, Note, £c are 
herein, uſing greater liberty thay the Sons and Daughters of 


Chap. 
Indulgence. 2. This Promiſe, though mentiored 1fter that, Ger: = 
5. 32. yet ſcems to have been made twenty years befo:e it; for that 
verſe 1s added there out of its proper piace, only ro compleat the . 
Genealoty ; and therefore, fr. r this Narration, 1t is repcar.d hue 
tn its duc order, verſe 10.. And tuch Uyiieron Prozerons are fiequents 
ly noted ta Scripture. 

4 There were giants 5 in theearth in thoſe days : 

+ & I | 
and ailoafter thar 8, when the fons of God came in «4 
unto the daughters of men, and they bare ch:1/-n ro 
them, the ſame became mighty men, which ere of 0d ' 
* 

x, men of + renown. ” + Heb. 

s Men ſocilled, partly from their high ſtature, but p-jncipally © 
for their great ſtrength and force, whereby they oppreiied anu ry- * 
rannized over others : bor rhisis mentioned as another $in, nd 
caule of the Flood ; and therefore they ſeem robe here noted. not 
for the height of their ſtature, whichis no crime, bur for their vio» 
lence, which alſo 15 expreiied :encath,. verſe 11, 13 &# Alter that 
time there aroſe a newGeneration or Succeſſion of rat fort or Mon. 
# Were united and incorporated with them. A modef ex;:reition 
of the Conjugal ſtate and a, as Ger. 16. 2. and 35. 3. Juice i5 2.5 
Which were proper to the firſt ages of the World; for the ſuccted- 
ing Generations were generally leſs in ſtature and ſtength of 40- 
dy, and therefore nor ſo famous for perſonal Exploits. Or this 
words may be thus joyned with the following, Which were of od, 
(7/.e.) among the Men of that firſt and wicked world, Men of 12= 
own, (i.e.) famous in their Generations; when indeed they thould 
have been in{amous for the atuſe of their ſtature and ſtrength to 
tyranny and cruelty. | 

5 And God ſaw that the wickedneſs cf man was : 


great 1n the earth, and that Þ every imagination of | Or, te 

F . : F - W1i7vie ?M 
the thoughts of his * heart y was only evil + continu- giuation. 
aily a. 

» To which the Scriprme commonly aſcribes all Men's 
wickednels, as Pjal: 41.6. Prov: 4. 23. an! 6. 14, 18. Jer, 
Ma#ih: 15: 19. Rom: 3. 10, OA Fhereb leading us from 
Sin to the original Corruption of Natu'e, as the cauſe and fource Maginatte , 
of them. @(z. e. ) That Man was perperunlly eirher deing or con- 9, #7 alſo 
triving wickzdnefs ; thatnot ory h:s actions were vile,” but his :%e purpoſes 
Priaciples allo ; his very Soul, yea the nobleſt part cf ir, which and delires. 


The Heovrew 
anal ord [ime 


17 9. fieth not , 
abts of only the ts 


might ſeem moſt free from rhe contagion; his Mind and IT houghts * Chap. 8. 
WeTE COLrupt and abominalle, and ſo there wasno hopes of amend- 2 r. Marth, 


menr. 


25. 3.3 
s And it repented the LORD & that he had made t Heb., + 
Man on the earth, very dnp. 


and it grieved him at his 

heart c. | 
b Properly God cannot repent, Numbers 23: 19: 1 Samuel de..20; 
29: becauſe he is unchangeatle in his Nature and Counicls, Mt; 
3:6. Jam: 1,17 And pe.tedtly wife, and conſtantly happy, nd 
therefore nor lyable ro any Grief cr Diſappointment _ Ber this is 
ſpoken of God after the manner of Man, by a commoa Figu-e cal- 


« # + $1 © o k . 
aſcribed ro God ; and it iignifics an alienation of God's ifeart and 


Aﬀections from Men for their wickedne's, whe e: y Gol cries 


<3 id 


exceedingly 

7 And the LORD ſaid, I will deſtroy man, whom _ 
T have created, from the fice of the Earth : + bork t PS. 
man and beaſt 4, and the creeping thing, and the 77 
fowls of the air; for ir repenteth me chat 1 have made © 
them, ſn 


d For as the Beaſts were made f.r Man's uſe and ſervice, they 
are deſtroyed for Man's puniſhment, and to diſcover the Nat: gni- 
ty of Sin; and .od's deep abhorrengy thereuf, by deirroying thoſe 
innocent Creatures chat had been made inftrumenral ro it. 

s Burt Noah tourd grace e in tie eyes of oy 

e( i.e.) Obtained Mercy ani Favour ; which is noted to ſhew 


LORD. 


Nature, th:t he needed God's frrace and Mercy 2 pardon and 
9 The are the generations of Noah f: * Noah was * Eick-14 
a juſt man, and + perfect b inhis gencrations 4, and 14, 29 , 
Noah watike © with God &-  _,  Per.4- 
f Either 1. Properly the poſterity of Noah, as the word is com F O:, uſe 
monly uſed ; and as it is exp!ained verſe 10. So the reſt of this veric Figs 
comes in by way of Parentheſi:, which is fiequenr Or, 2 The 
events or 9ccuriences which befell Neahand his? amily,as the word 
is taken, Gen: 27, 2, Prov. 27.1. þ Theſe wor. s are to be taken, 
either 1. joyntly, q. 4. he was Riz4t.ous, not only in appearanc?, Or 
1n part, /but perf Fly, 1n all reſpcts, towards God and Men; tin- 
cerely and t:uly, Or, 2. Diſtin.cly, 9.4. he was for his ſtare 
and condition juſt befo:ie frod, which was by Faith. Heb 11. 7. by 
wich every. jrtt man lives, Rom. IT. 17. and perfetf, 7. e- upright and 
unblam<able in the courſe of his Life among rhe men of his Age, 
as it follows. 7 This is ſpoken either 2. Diminurively ; he was 10 
comparatively to the men rhar then lived, who were very bad; 
though otherwiſe even Noah had many infirmities, ſo that he a!o 
had not been ſaved but for God's Grace and Mercy, v. 8. O-, 2. By 
way of amplification and commendation; he was good in bad times, 
in ſpighr of all evil Countels or Examples. He faith Generarions in 
the plural number, to ſhew thar as he lived in two Generations, 
one before the Flood, and another afrer it, ſo he continued uncor- 
rupted in both of them. & See on Ger: 5. 22. 


:o And Noah begazt three fons, Shem, Ham, 
Japheth 7. | Z 

1 See the Note on Gen: 5. 32. OS 2” ; 

11 The earth #» alſo was corrupt before God », and 
the Earth o was filled with violence p, EIN 

m Which is here put for irs Inhabitants, as r Kings 10. 24. Fek. 
14:13. #% Or, Before the ye of God, 9.4, in del pight and — | 
- 


and 


ne run nt — nan en een ens 
TO ©,a 5.4 LI 


—O ERR. oh Rod 50 woe won 


» ww 7 
3%. WY 


we 4a. 1.2K IRI. 0 
; Q 


'11 the Duties of Righteouſneſs. 


'8$;5 come # before me x ; 


* Or, from 


the cath. 


5 ' BP Y 


of God, ant of his Preſence and Juſtice. Compare Gen: 10. 9. and 
13.13. 9.4. They ſinned openly and impudently without ſhame, 
boldly and reſolutely without any fear of God. » Here put for the 
place, or the inhabited parts of it. So the ſame word is twice uſed 
in a differing ſenſe in one and the ſame verſe. See the-like Marth. 
$8.22. p Or, lnju/tice, Fraud, Rapine, Oppreſſon : For all theſe this 
word ſignifies. Some conceive that theſe two Branches note the 
vniver(al corruption of Mankind, in reference to all their Duties. 
1. Towards God and his Worſhip, which they corrupred by horri- 
ble Superſtition, and by Idolatry, which 1s called Corruption, Exod. 
32»7. Deut. 32. ©. Jud. 2. 19. 2 Chron, 27. 28. 2. Towards Men» 


12 And God looked upon the earth, and behoid, 
it was COrrupt : for all fleth q had corrupted his way 7 
upon the earth. | 
q ( i.e. ) All Men, as the word Fleſh is taken, Pſal. 78. 39. 1/ai. 40. 
5. and oft elſewhere. r Either 1. God's way, his precepts concer- 
ning Religion and Righteouſneſs. Or, 2. Their own way, or mun- 
ncr of hving. 
13 And Gol ſaid unto Noah, The end s of all fleſh 
for the earth is filled with 
violence chrough them z: and behold, I will deſtroy 


them * with the earth 4. 

s (7 e.) Therime of ruine, as this word is uſed, Exek. 7. 2, 3,6: 
Amos 8: 2: #& (7:6: ) Men,as ver: 12: though the Beaits allo vere 
involved in the fame deſtruction. # (z.c.) Is approaching and at 
the very door,and ſhall as certainly come as if it were actual'y come. 
x (i:e ) In my purpoſe and decree: Howſoever vain men flatrer 
themſelves » ith hopes of longer impunity. & (7:e: ) By thei 
means ; fo thatthe Earth even groans under them. # ( ;:e: ) With 
the Fruits and Beauty, though not the Subſtance of the Earth. Or, 
From the Earth, as ver. 79, The Hebrew eh being oft put for mn or 
meeth, as Gn: 44. 4: Det. 34: 1. and ' 1 Kings8: 43. compared with 
2 Chron. 6: 33. ; % 

14 Make thee anark bof gopher-woed c : f rooms 
ſhalt thoumake in the ark, and jhalr pitch it within and 
without with pitch e. 


RW 


. - Is 3 
agrees with the Ark, which in the Hebrew is of the feminine Gen- 
der, not with the Window, which is maſculine. 2. From the nature 
of the thing,the Ark requiring a roof,and that ſloping,that the Rain 
might ſlide off from it, and not ſink into ir; for which end the roof 
in the middle was to be higher than the Ark by a Cubit. And as 

the other parts of the Ark were made with exquilite contrivance, 

ſo doubtleſs this was not defeQtive therein. k Whereof the higheſt 

ſtory for Men and Birds ; the ſecond for Provition for the brure' 
Creatures ; the loweſt for the Beaſts, under which was the ſink of 
the Ark, which moſt probably was made floping at the bottom,as 

all Ships and Boats are, where Serpents and ſuch-iike Creatures 

might be put, with their proper Proviſions. | 

i7 And behold 1, even 1 /, do bring m a flood of 
waters upon the earth, to deſtroy all fleth », wherein 

is the breath of Life, from under Heaven : and every 

thing that is in the earth o ſhall dye. 

{Which is thus emphatically repeated,to fignific that this flood did 

not proceed from natural cauſes, but from the immediar hand and 

judgment of God. m (z.e.) Will afſurcdly and ſpeedily bring. 

1 ( 7.e. ) All Men,Birds and Beaſts. o This limitation is added to 
ſhew that the Fiſhes are not included in the threatned deſtruQtion, 
either becauſe they did n-t live in the ſame Element wherein Mcn 

lived and finned ; or becauſe they were not ſo inſtrumental in Mens 

1ns, as the Beaits might be ; or becauſe Man had a greater com- 
mand over the Beaſts than over the Fiſhes, and greater ſervice and 
benefit from them ; and therefore the deſtruction of the former was 
a greater and more proper puniſhment to Man than the latter. 

13 But with thee will I eſtabliſh my Covenant p: and 
chou ſhalt come into the ark; thou; and thy ſons, and 
thy wife, and thy ſons wives with thee, x 

p Either 1. My promiſe to preſerve thee and thine, both till the 
Flood and in it. notwithſtanding all the {coffs and threars of the 
wicked World againſt thee all the time of chy Preaching & Build- 
ing of the Ark. The wo:d Covenant being here underſtood,nort of 
a mutual compatt or agreement, but cf a ſingle and gracious promiſe, 
as 1t 1s alſo uſed, Nnmb.18.19:and 25. 12.and in other places. Which 
promiſe though only here mentioned, was doubtleſs made before, 
as may eaſily be gathered both fiom theſe. words, and ſome forego- 


ap, VII. 


U TE”) - 
” 
> EASEEIECICS * " 
ES ON SY Y 


'< _ 


. & 
$ 
F 
i 


h A little Ship made in the form of an A1k or Cheſt, but. proba- 
bly ſloping at rhe bottom for conveniency of Navigation, as It was 
fo- another reaſon ſloping at the trop. c This word is but onceuled 
in Scriptu:e, and therefore it is diverily rendred by the Leained; 
by ſome Pine, by many Cedar, but by others Cyprejs, a Tree very 
p oper and uſual for Ships, and of a firm and durable Subſtance, 
and much abounding 1n thoſe parts ; all which appears from anci- 
ent Authors e Or rather, with ſome kind of Bitumen, of the ſame 
nature and uſe with pitch, to cement the parts of the Ark together, 
and to preſerve it from the Injuries of the Sun, and Water, and 
Worms ; but more odoriferous to correct the unpleaſant ſcent of 
ſome of the Creatures. 

15 And this zs the faſhion which thou ſhalt make it of 
fz the length of the ark ſhell be three hundred cubits, 
the breadth of it ffry cubits,and the height of it thirty 
cubits g 

f Or, This is the meaſure,. or the manner according to which thou 
fbalt make it. g Ajuſt and regular proportion, the length being 11x 
times more than the breadth, and ren rimes more than the height. 
Ther: is noneed to underſtand this of Geometrical cubirs, which 
are ſaid to have contained nine ordinary cubirs; nor of ſacred cubits, 
which were an hind> breadth longer than the ordinary, Exck. 43.13. 
Nor tro ſuppoſe the ftacure of men at th t time ro have been gene- 
raliy larger, and coniequently their cubir much Jongec. For the 
ordinary cuvic confiſting of a co:mmon foot and an half, is ſufficient 
for the containing of alt Kinds of living Creatures and their 
Pr: vitions, which was to be pur into the Ark, as hath been ar large 
demonſt: ated by Icarned Men. N-r is there any conſiderable dit- 
ficulry in the point, but what is made by the ignorance of Inh- 
del:,and aggravated by their malice againſt the holy Scriptures. E- 
ſpecially if theſe rhings be conſidered ; 1. Thar the differ ing kind 
Of Beaſts and Bids, which unlearned Men fancy to be innumerable, 

are obſerved by the lea-ned, who have particula:ly ſearched inro 
them, and written of them,to be litrcle a-ove three hundred, where- 
of rhe far greir ſt part are bur ſmall; and many. of theſe whichnow 
are thought ro differ in kind, in their firſt original were but of one 
ſort, though now they be ſo greatly alrered in their Shape & Qua- 
lities; which mighr cafily ariſe-from the diverſity -f their Climate 
and Focd,and other Circumſtances, and from the p: omiſcuous Con- 
jun&ions of thoſe lawleſs Creatures. 2. That the brute C.catures, 
when they were encloſed in the Ark,where they were idle, & con- 
ſtantly. under a kind of hocrour and amazement, would be contenr- 
ed with far leſs Provitions and thoſe of another ſort than they were 
accutomed to, an1ſuch as mighr lye in leſs room, as Hay, and the 
fruits ofthe Earth. God a'fo,who altered their natures,and made the 
favage Creatures mild and gentle, might by the ſame powerful Pro- 
vidence moderar their Apperites, or if he pleaſed have encreaſed 
their Provition » hilt they did ear it, as afterwards Chriſt did by the 
Loaves. So vain and idle are the Cavils of wanton Wits,concerning 


ing paſſages, 'and from the need which Noah had of ſuch a ſupport 
and ericouragement, during all the time of his Miniſtry Or 2. My 
Covenant concerning the ſending of the promiſed Seed, and the 
Redemption of Mankind by the Meſſias, who ſhall come out of rhy 
Loins, and therefore thou ſhalt be preſerved. 
19 And ofevery living thing of all fleſh two q of e- 
very ſort ſhalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive 
with thee: they ſhall be male and female« 
q (i.e. ) Either 1. By Couples,or Male and Female : But this is 
mentioned as a diſtin&t thing in the cloſe of the verſe. Or rather 
2. Two at leaſt of every ſort, even of the unclean ; bur of the clean 
more, as 1s noted ch. 7. 2. 

20 Of fowls after their kind r, and of cattel after 
their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after 


his kind: two of every ſer: ſhall come unto thee s, to Fe 
keep them alive. : 
r(7:e; ) According to their ſeveral kinds. s Of their own ac- 
cord, by my impulſe, or by the condu@ of Angels, as Gen: 2. 19. 
21 And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten 
t, and thou ſhalt gather iz rothee, andit ſhall be for 
food forthee, and for them. 
ft Of which ſee Ger: 1. 29, 30. 
22 * Thus did Nech ;- according to allthat God com- , ,,.,,,. 
manded him, ſo did hes. _— 
« Both forthe matterand the manner of it ; although the work of - 
buj!ding the Ark was laborious, coſtly, tedious, dangerous, and 
ſcemingly fooliſh & ridiculous; eſpecially when all things conginu- 
ed in the ſame poſture & ſafety for ſo many ſcores of years together: 
Whereby Noah, without doubt, was all that while the Scng of the 
Drunkards, and the Sport of the Wits of that Age. So that it is 
not ſtrange that this is mentioned as an heroick A& of Faith in 
Noah, Heb. 11. 7, whereby he ſurmounted all theſe difficulties. 


CHAP, VII. 

God commands Noah to enter into the Ark ; thereaſon of it, x, Dire@s 
him as to the manner and time, '2---=4, Noah's obedience in all things, 5: 
His age, 6. His entrance with his family, &c,  intotheark, 7===9. The 
any in which the flood began, 10, 11, Its continuance, 12. Noah:and his 
Family, Sc. inthe ark, 13---16. The flood encitaſes and deſtroys all living 
ſubſtance, 17-==24. 


ND, the LOR © faid a unto Noah, Come 6 « Moo 
thu and all thy houſe c into the ark 3 for * thee 38. Luke 
have 7ſcen righteous 4 before me e in this generati- 17: 26. 


the incapaciry of the A:k for thefood of ſo many Beaſts. 3. Thar 
ſuppoſing the ravenous Creatures did feed upon Fleſh, here is alſo 
ſpace enough and ro ſpare,fora ſufficient number of Sheep, for their 
food for a whole yerr.as upon-compuration will eaſily appear; there 
being not twoth-uſind Sheep neceſſary for them. and the Ark con- 
taining n » !eſ5 than four hundred and fifty thouſand ſolid cubirs in 
;c. Bur of this matter more may be ſeen in my Latin Synopſis. | 


16 A window h ſhalt thou make to the ark, andin a. 
cubit ſhalt thou finiſh it above 7, and the door of the ark 


ſbalt thou ſer in the ſide thereof : ith lower, ſecond 
and third & fories ſhalt thou make it, 


on fe 2Pet. 2. 5» 

a When the Ark was finiſhed and furniſhed,and the time of God's Cap. 6.9. & 
patience expired, ' Gen: 6. 3. b(7.e.) Prepare to enter. c (7.e.}) + 
Thy Family : which conſiſted only of eight perſons, 1 Per. 3. 20. 38 


To wit, Noah and his three Sons, and their four Wives, Gen. 6. 18. # 
Whereby it appears that each had but one Wife, and conſequently 
it 1s more than probable that Polygamy, as it began in the poſteri- 
ty of wicked Cain, Gen: 4. 19. ſo it was confined to them, and 
had not as yet got footing amongſt the Sons of God. For if ever 
polygamy had beenallowable, it mult have been now, for the re= 
p<opling of the periſhing World. 4 Withthe Righteouſneſs of Faith, 
as It 15explained, Heb. 11.7, evidenced by all the fruits of Righ- 
teouſneſs and true Holineſs. e Not only before Men, and ſeem- 


ingly, bur really, and to my all-ſceing Eye. f Of which expreſſi- 


Ke 
"2a 
on, ſee Notes on Ger. 6. 9. $ 


h Or, a 277 : Or-Lizhts, or Windows The fingularnumber being 
put for the plu:al, «hich is molt frequent: Or it might be one great 
Lighr or Lanthorn,by which lighr might be derived & diſtributed 
into ſeveral rooms. 7 (.7.e,.) Either 1. The Window, which was 
to be a cubir ſquare. Or rather 2. The Ark ; as appears 1. From 


2 Of every clean beaſt g thou ſhalt take to thee by + 1+. /> 
ſevens h, the male and his female ; and of beaſts that ve +>. | 
are not clean, by two, the | maleand his female. F FED. 2he 

g Obj: The diſtin&ion of clean and unclean Beaſts was not be- Man ard 
forethe Law. Arnſw, Some legal things were preſcribed and uſed ** ''#- 


the Gender of the iicbrew affix, which is feminine, and therefore | 


| before 


b. ſox 
Jen. 
b. the 
ard 
ip. 


"# 


n I Ps TI £4 % BY; IE ” o 
POETS £5248 _ y $3 Don " 
MYA LS 2 C WIC, = 4 A 
& 


4 65:9. 


% 


7 + Heb:blor 


+ Heb: ſor 


2 FfOr, onthe 
"= ſeventh 
. aay. 


| *Or,Flo2d- #4 broken up x, 


. CE E666 x. kr! Oh : > | ib S I 
Vy . Pans; - a J % [ £ - 4 x1 
= . . 


beforc the Law, as abſtinence from the cating of Blood, Gen. 9. 4, 
and among orher things, Sacrifices, as learned men have ſuificicnt- 
iy proved; and conſequently the diſtinCtion. of Beaſts to be facrifi- 
ce:, was then, in ſome meatare, underitood, which afterwards was 
expretied,Lovir. 1, &c. Nor is this a good Argument, This was not 
written before ; therefore 1T was not commanded and praclited be- 
fore,eſpecially concerning a tune when no comman.ys of God were 
writren, but only delivered by tradition. þ Either 1. Seven tingle, 
as moſt think. Or 1ather 2. Seven couples, as may be gathered, 
:- From the duplication of the word in Hebrew. It it be 1aid jeven 
ſwen, lignities only ſeven of every kind, then it would have teen 
ſaid concerning the unclean Beaits, iwo two, (7. e. ) rwo of each 
ſort : Whereas now there 1s an apparent differcnce there It 1s faid 
only oy two, but here, by ſevens, or ſeven ſeven, which difference of 
the phraſe ſuggeſts a difference in the things, 2. By the following 
words.Themale and his female,which being invificrently applied to the 
clean and unclean, plainly thews that none of them cnrred into the 
Ark ſingle, and therefore there Was NO odd ſeventh among them, 
but all went in by couples, which was molt convenient 1 all for the 
propagation of their kind, and in the clean for other uſes allo; as 
for Sacrifices to God, if not for the ſuſtenration of Men in the Ark, 
ani after they came out of it. Which gives us the reaſon why God 
wou'ld have more of theclean than ofthe unclean pur intothe Ark, 
becauſe they vere more ſerviceable both to (od and Men. 


2 Of towls 3 alſo of the air by fevens &,the male and 


'T Ia. 13: the female, to keep * ſeed / alive upon the face. of all 


the earth, = 
i ( 5: e: ) Of clean Fowls; which he leaves to be underſtood out 
of the foregoing verſe. k And of the unclean by two ; as before of 
the Beaſts*TT 7#: e: ) The ſue, or breed of them. : : 
4 For yet ſeven days #9, and I wiilcauſc it to rain 
upon the earth forty days and forty nights: and every 
living ſubſtance = thac | have made, will I F deftroy 


from off the face of the earth. 

mm Or, After ſeven days, the Hebrew Lamed being put for after, as 
it is Exod. 16: 1. Pſal. 19: 3. Jer. 41. 4 Or, within jeven days, which 
time God allowed to the World as a turther jpace of Repentance, 
whereof, therefore it is probable, Noah gave th:m norice ; and it 
is not unlikely that many of them who ſlighred the chreatning, 
when it was at 120 years diſtance,now hearing a ſecond threatning, 
and conlidering the nearnels of their danger,might ve more affected 
and brought totrue Repentance : Who though deitroyed in their 
Bodies by rhe }lood for their former and Jong impenitency, which 
God would not-ſo far pardon, yet might be ſaved in their Spirits. 
See 1 Pet. 4. 6. And as.ſome preſcrved@&n the Ark were damned, 
ſo others drown-d in the deluge might be eternally ſaved. n= All 
that hath in it the breath of Lite, as was faid ch. 6. 7. 


© And Noah did according uuto ail that the LORD 


commanded him o. ; 

o Which was ſaid chap. 6. 22.. and 1s here repeated, becauſe this 
was an eminent inſtance of his Faith ans Obedience. 

6 And Noah was Þ tix hundred years old, when the 
flood of waters was upon the earth. 

> And Noah wens in, and his ſons andhis wife, and 
his ſons wives .with him into the ark, becauſe of p the 
waters of the ilood. | | 

p Or, For fear of : For fear is aſcribed to,and commended in Noah, 
Heb. 11. 7. Or, From the face of. | 

8 Of clean beaits, and of beaſts that are not clean, 
and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon 
the earth. i 

9 There went in q two and two r unto Noah into 
the ark, the mule and the female,as God had command- 
ed Noah | 

q iy the ſecret impullſe of their great Creator ard Governour. 
Sce Gen. 2. 19. and 6. 20. r Of which ice above verſe 29. 

$0 And it came to pals Þ after teven days, that the 
waters ofthe flood were upon the earth. 

1: In the ſix hundredth year of Noahs life s, in 
the ſecond monrh #, the ſevenceenth day of the month, 
the ſame day were all the fountains of che great deep 
and the *. windows of heaven were 
opened y. 

s Either compleat : Or rather current or begun ; otherwiſe he 
hed lived three. hundred fifty one years after the Þlood, not three 
hundred fifty only, as it 1s written, Ger: 9./9/. t Either 1. Of that 
year of Noah's life. Or 2. Of the year. Now as the year among 
the Bebrews was two-fold ; the one ſacred, for the celebration of 
Feaſts, beginning in March, of which ſee Exod. 12.2. The other 
civil, for the berter ordering of Men's political or civil Aﬀurs, 
which began in September. Accordingly this ſecond month is thought 
by ſome, to be part of April, and part of May, the molt pleatanr 
part of the year, when the Flood was leait expc&ted or feared : By 
ethers part of Otober, and part of November, a little after Noah had 
gathered the fruits of the Earth, and laid them up in the Ark. So 
the Flood came in with the Winter, and was by degrees dried up 
by the heat of the following Summer : And this Opinion ſeems 
the more probable, becauſe the moſt ancient and firſt beginning of 
the year was in September ; and the other beginning of the year in 
March, was but a later Inſtitution among the Jews with reſpect to 


their Feaſts and ſacred Aﬀairsonly, which are nor ar all concerned . 
here. « (7: e: ) Of the Sea, called the deep, 50b 38: 16, 30: and -41:% 


31: Pſal: 106: 9: and alſo of that great Abyfſs,or Sea of Warers, which 
15 contained in the Bowels of the earth. For that there are vaſt 
quantities of Waters there, is implied both here and in other Scri- 
ptures, 4 P/al: 33: 7: 2 Pet: 3:5: and is affiimed' by Plaro in his 
Phearus, and by Seneca in his Natural Queſtions, 3, 19. and is evi- 
dent from Springs and Rivers which have their riſe from thence,and 
ſome of them have no other place into which they iſſue themſelves, 
as appears from the Caſpian Sea, into which divers Rivers do empty 
theraſelves,and eipecially thar great River Yolgs, inſuch abundance, 


Anrti-Scripturiits in this. « The Fountvins ore ſaid to be brekenup 


Citap. VIL 
that it would certainly drown all thoſe parts of the Farth, if there 
were not a, vent for them under ground ; for other venr above 


bl 
ground out-of that great Lake or Sea rhey have-none. Ort of ti is 
dcep therefore, and cur of the Sca together, it was very caſe for 
God to bring fuch > quantity of Wirere, as might overwhelm the 
Larrh, without any production of new Wartcrs, which yer he with 
one word could have created. So vain arc the cavils of Atheittical - 


here, as Pal. 74. 15. by a Metonymy, becaufe the Earth and 0+ 

ther ChftruEtions were broken up, and fo a paiſige opened for the 

Fountains ; as Þread is faid to be 6&::/0d, Iſa: 23: 28: and Meal to be 

ground, 1[o: 47: 2: Becauſe the Corn, of which the Meal and Eread 
were made,was bruiſed and ground. y Which ſceme underfiand 
of the Waters, which from Gu: 1: 5: they tuppole v ae pi:ced by 
God above the viſible Heavens, and reſerved and kepr, as it weres 
in Priſon, for this very purpote; and now the Priten-Coers were 

opcned, and they Jet loole and ſent Cown for the :DettiuGion of 
the Wor!d: Bur others more fitlyunderſiand it of the clouds,v hich 

are called rhe windows of Heaven, Mal: 3: 10. So 2 Kings 7 3 dl 

Pſa: 78: 23: Iſa: 24: 18. Which then grew thicker and bigger wit! 

Warers ; nor is there any. inconvenience in it, if we ſay that God 

crcated a great. quantity of Waters for this end, which afterwards 

he annihilated, 

12 And the rain was upon the earth forty days and 
forty nights z. 

2 God by this gradual proceeding both awakened to repentance, 
and gave them ſpace for it. : 

13 Inthe * ſelf fame day @ entred Noah, and Shem, , Job and 
and Ham, and Japheth, the! ſons of Noah, and Noahs .;_ TY 
wife, and the three wives of his ſons with them, inta 
the ark. | 


a On whichthe Flood began by that terrible ſhower- Heb. i 
the Body, or Eſſence, or Strength of the Day, as Gen 17. 26. Levit. 23. 
14. Joſ. 10. 27. q.4. Not inthe dark or twilight, like one aſhamed 
of his ACtion, or afraid of rhe People, but when it was clear Day, 
or about Noon-tide, in the publick view of the. World. 

14. They, and every beaſt after his kind, and all the 
cattel after their kind, and every creeping thing that 
creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl - + 
after his kind, every-bird b of every #'ſort c: + Heb. 

6 The firſt word ſignifies the greater, the ſecond the leſs ſort FS. 
of B.rds, as appears from Gen, 15. 9; 10. Levi. 14. 4. Pja! 04.17. 

c Heb. Of every kind ot Wing, whether Feathered, as it. is in moſt 
Birds, or Skinn, and Griily, as in Bats. NESTED 

15 Ardthey wet:tin d uito Noah into the ark, two 
and ewo of all fleſh whe: ein 5s the breath of lif= e. 

d Sce on ver.g.e ( i:e; ) All living Creatures forementioned.14, 

iG And they that went in, went in maie and femaie* 


of all fleſh, as God had commanded him : and ths 
LORD ſhut him in f. * 
f Or, ſur the door after kim, or upon him, or for him, i.e. his 
good and ſafety, againit the fury either of the Waters, or of the 
People. This God didin ſome extraordinary manner. ; 
17 And the flood g was forty days upon the earth 2 
and the waters encreaſed z, and bare up the ark, and 
it Was lift up abore the earth, 
g Or, hat F/ood of Waters, which was poured down in that ſhow4 
2r mentioned, verſe r2, otherwilc the Flood was one hundred and 
tifry days upon the Earti:, verſe 24. 7 By the accefiion of more 
Waters from above and bcneath. ; 
18 Ard the waters prevailed, ard were encreaſed 
greatly upon theeartl;&; and the ark went upon the 
tice of the waters -* - 
k Ovarithrov ing Men, and Houſes, :nd Trees, where poſſibly 
they did, or thought ro ſecu:e themiclves. 
19 And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the 
eaith, and all the high hills that were under the whole 
heaven were COVered 2, a 1 
m Piofane Wits pretend this to be impoſlible, becauſe of the val. ' 
heighr of divers Mountains. But 1. This cannot be thought im= 
poilible by any Man that beheveth a God ; ro whom it was as eaſy 
to bring forth a ſufficiency of Warter, for this end, as to ſpeak "a 
word. Andif weacknowvletdgea Miracle of the Divine Power and 
Providence here, it is no more than even Heathens have confeiled 
in other caſes. 2. Pecadyenture this i lood might not be ſimply 
univerſal over the whole Earth, bur only over all the. habitable 
World where cither Men or Ecaſts lived ; which was as much as - 
either the Meritorious cauſe of the Flood, Men's iris, by the end 
of it, the deſtruttion of all Men and Beaſts, required. And 7he or 
that whole Heaven, may be underſtood of that which was over all the 
habitable parts of 1t. And whereas our modern Heathens,thit miſe 
call rhem(clves Chriſtians, hugh atrhe Hiſtory of this Flood up- 
on this and the like occations, as if it were an 1dleRomance; they 
may pleaſe to note, that their Predecefſors, the ancient arid wiſer 
Hearhens, have divers of them acknowledged the Truth of if, though 
they alſo mixed tt with rheir Fables, which was. neither ftrange,: - 
nor unuſual for them to do. LaFantius appeals to the Hethens of 
his age concerning it. 'Nay there is not only mentioned of 'the 
lood in general, tur alſo of the Dove ſent our of the Ark; in Plu- 
tarch, and Beroſus, and 4bydenus., And the memory of this generaF 
Flood is preſerved to this day among the poor ignorant 7di/zn;,whor 
asked the Chriſtians who invaded their: Land; - whether they ever 
heard of ſuch a thing, and whether another Flood was tb be expe- 
Qed ? And the Chineſe Writers relate, that bur one Perſon, . whomx 
they call Puoncuvs, with his Family, wers faved in the Flood,and ll 
the reſt periſhed. - _ _. nn ng 
20 Fifteen cubits upwards did the waters . preyail # 


and the mountains were covered. .... ooo 
. » Which was ſufficient for the DeſtruQtion cf the higheſt Meg, 
or other Creatures, though placed upon-the higheſt Mountains, ..., 


21 And all fleſh died chat moved o upon the earch; 


_ bdth 


<3.” p_ 
- & 
« =_ ” 2.25 tx 
= CEO RIOT IVC - 


_. " <MGL- ©; Sides 
ot 1 
—— — 


- o "REP" 
->—& _ 
x 110 rity ee rayrne— < ny, 
2 —S<DCoRhS —* 


— 


” 


CD GE GE Bo BEGS no nt ye 


CME REA es >... 


Top. VII. = 
both of fowl, and of catte?, and of beaſt, and of every | 
creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every 
man. : 

' 0(5.e.) Lived; for Motionis a ſign of Life. : 
22 All in whoſe noſtrils was Þ the breath of life p, of 


all that yas in the dry land, died 9. 
p Of which phraſe ſee the Note on Gen. 2. 7. 9 Whether Men or 


T Heh the 
4 H, ” lad 
030.39 Of 


af Lake Beits. oc. all that breathed theſame Air with Man, all that lived 

—_— x. ſt the ſame Element, which Man by his fins had infefted; where- 
C "Ex | by the Filkes are excepted, as hving in another Element. ; 

23 Andevery living ſubſtance was deſtroyed, which 

was upon the face of the ground, both man and catte], 

and thecreeping things, and the fowl of the heaven, 

WE We and they were deſtroyed from the earth r:and * Noah 


'** only remained live, and rhey that were with him 1n 
the ark. | : 

» This is ſo often repeated, that it may be more deeply ingrafted 
into the dull Minds and hard Hearts of Men, ro reach Men that 
they ought again and again to conſider this dreadful inſtance- of 
God's juſtice againft in, and incorrigible tinners. 

24 Aud the waters prevailed 5 upon the earth an 
hundred and fifty days 7, 


5 (5.e. ) Either grew higher and higher, or rather continued to 
prevail, and did not decreaſe. # In all, whereof one part was the 
tourty days mentioned, wer. 17. as appears from chap. 8. 4. 


: CHAP. | VIII. 

The waters abgte, Jo-==- 3. The ark reſts on mount Ararat, 4. The day 
on which the tops of the mountains were ſeen, noted, 5- Noah opens the 
" window of the ark, 6. Sends forth araven, 7@ Afrer that a aove, 8. 
Which returned, 9. He ſ-nas the dove out a ſecond tim, 10. Which re- 
rurnes with an olive leaf, 11. He ſends her out again, and ſhe returns 
net, 12, Tie earth dry, 13, 14. God commands Noah and his family to 
come out, 15--=--17. Which they do, 18,19. Noah builas analtar, and 
ſacrifices, 20. God accepts it, and promiſes nat to drown the world again, 

21. But to continue the ſeaſons of the year, 22. wie 
N D God remembred Noah a, and every Þ living 
ting b, and all the cattel that was with him 1n 
the ark : and God made a wind c to pals over the 


earth, and the waters aſlwaged. | 
a (i. e.) He ſhewed by his aftions that he minded and cared for 
him ; or pitied and ſuccoured him. Godis faid to remember his 
People when after ſome delays or ſuſpenſions of his favour, he re- 
turns and ſhews kindneſs to them, as Gen: 19: 29: and 3o 22: Exod: 
32: 13: Job 14: 13: Pal: 132: 1. bAs God puniſhed the Beaſts for 
Man's fin, ſo no+ he favours themfor Man's fake. cA drying or 
buining Wind, !ike that of Exod. 14. 21.which had a natural power 
to dry up the Waters; but that was heightned by the atliſtance of 
an higher and miraculous operation of God. : 
2 The fountains alſo ef the deep, and the windows 


of heaven were ſtopped, and the rain from heaven was 


reſtrained. 
t Heb." 3 And the waters returned from off the earth + con- 
going end tinually : and afterche end of che hundred and fifty days 


TWP the waters were abated. 
4 And the ark reſted inthe feventh month 4,on the 
' fſeventeenthday of the month, upon the mountains of 
Ararat e. 


d From the beginning, not of the Flood, bur of the Year, as ap- 
pears by comparing chap. 7. 11. and chap. 8. 13, 14. (7.e.) U- 
pon one of the Mountains of Ararat ; by a frequent Enallage of 
the Number, as 7ud. 12. 7. Matth. 21. 5. And by Ararat 1s here 
commonly and rightly underſtood Armenia, as appearsboth by com- 
paring /a. 37. 38: Jer. 51. 27 and by the Teſtimony of ancient 
Writers, produced by Joſephus and others to this purpoſe ; and by 
the great height of t:oſe Mountains,and by its nearneſs ro the place 
where the firſt Mcn lived ; this g:eat Veſſel nor being fitted for fail- 
ing to remote plices, bur only for the receit and preſervation of 
Meff and other Creatures in 1t. 
fileb.were 5 And the waters F decreaſed continually un- 
zn geing til the tenth month : in the tenth wnth, on the 


and decrea- 6 oy day of the month, were the tops of the mountains 


hes ſeen. | 
6 And it came to paſs at the end of forty days, that 
Noah opened the window of the ark which he had 


made. 
es» Y} Andhe ſent forth a ravenf, which went forth 
oor toand fro g, untill the waters were dried up from off 


and returie the earth þ. 

ing. f A fit Meſſenger for that purpoſe, becauſe it ſmells dead Carca- 
| ſes ata great diſtance, and flies far, and then returneth to its for- 
mer Habiration with ſomething in its Bill. g He>. Going and return- 
img. (5. e.) went forth hither and thither, now forward,then back- 


ward, ſometimes going from the Ark, and ſometimes returning to | 


the Ark,though nevercntring into it again. þ Not as if the returned 
afterwards ; but the phraſe implies, that the never returned. And 
ſo the word uni! 1: often uſed, as 2 Sam. 6. laft. Michal had no Child 
until the day of her death, i. e- never had a Child. See alſo Pſal. 110. 
1. Matth. 1. 25. 

$8 Alſo he ſent forth a dove ; from him to ſee if 
the waters were abated from off the face of the 


ground. hs 

7 Which flies lower and !onger than the Raven, and is more ſo- 
ciable and fimiliar with Man, and more conſtant to its accuſtomed 
dwelling, and more loving and faithful to its Mate, and therefore 
more likely to return with ſome diſcovery. 


9 Bur the doye found ao reſt for the ſols of her foot 


oh 


| 


k, and fhe returned unto him into the ark * for the wa- 
ters ere onthe face of the whole earth. Then he pur 

forth his hand, and took her 7, and + pulled her in un- +Heb.cou. 
to him into the ark. ſed her to 

k Becauſe the tops of the Hills which then appeared, were either ©: 
muddy, and'dirty ; or unobſerved by the Dove, as not ſoaring fo 
high : Whence the Doves are emphatically called rhe Doves of the 
Valleys, Ezek. 7. 16. 1 Her former acquaintance with Noah, and her 
preſent neceſſity making her more traQable. © 

lo And he frayed yet other ſeven days, andagain ke 
ſent forth the dove out of the ark. ; 

I: And the dove came in to him in the eyening , 
and lo, in hermouth asan olive-leaf » pluckt oft: So 
Noah knew that the: waters were abated from 'off the 
earth. 

2 As the manner of Doves is, partly for a better accommodation 
both for food and lodging, than yer he could meer with abroad ; 
and partly from his love to his Mate. » Queft. Whence was this leaf, 
when Trees had bcen ſo generally overthrown and rooted up by 
the deluge ? 4w. 1. Many Trees might be preſerved by an ad- 
vantogeous ſcituation, between the Rocks or Hills which broke the 
force of the Waters. 2. Ir is probable that God, by his powerful 
Providence, preſerved the Plants and Trees for future ages; and 
therefore thcre is no mention of any of their Roots or Sees preſer= 
ved in the Ark. 3. The Olive-rree eſpecially will not only ſtand, 
bur live and flouriſh under the Waters, as Pliny l: r5:c: 25: and 16: 

20: and Theophraſtus 4: 8: obſerve. Add, that the word here rendred 
leaf, ſignifies alſo a tender branch. 

12 And he ſtayed yet other ſeven days, and ſent 
forth the dove, which returned notagain unto him any 
NiOre 8. 

o Finding convenient food and reſting place upon the Earth, and 
preferring her freedom before her Mate. Poſſibly ſhe might loſe 
rhe ſight of the Ark, and forget or maſtake the way to ir. 

13 And itcame to pals in the fix hundredth and one 
year, 1n the firlt month, rhe firff day of the monthp, the 
waters were dried up from oft the earth : and Noah re- 
moved the covering of the ark, and looked, and behold, 
the face of the ground was dry. 

þ The words month and day are oft-times, for brevity ſake, omit- 
red by the Hebrews, as Leing eaſily underſtood: Thus the firſt of the 
F:af, Matths 26. 17. 1sthe firſt day of the Feaft, Mark 14. 12. 

14 And in the ſecond month, on the ſeven and 
ewentieth day of the month was the earth dried 9. 

q Nor only from water, as it was ver. 13. but from mud and dirt 
alſo. So the Flood coprinucd ton days more than a year, by com« 
paring this with, ghap/7. 11. | 

15 Ard God ſpake unto Noah, faying, 

16 Go forth of thearkr, thou, and thy wife, and 
ſons, and thy ſons wives with thee. 

r AS Noah expected the command of God for his going into the 
Ark, chap.7. 1, 2. ſofor his coming forth of it. 

17 Bring forth with thee every living thing that 
is with thee, of all fleſh, both of fowl, and of car 
tel, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon 
the earth, thatzthey may breed abundantly in the 
earth, and * 'be fruitful and multiply upon the 
earth Js | 

5 Queſt. How could theſe Creatures which came out of the Ark - 
in ſia, get thence to America, or to the IHlands remote from the 
Continent? Aſw. 1- As for America, it 1s thought by divers learn- 
ed Men, thar it 1s either joyned to this Continent,or ſeparated from 
it only by a Narrow Sea, which divers living Creatures could eafi« 
ly ſwim over. 2 Many living Creatures are, and always were 
tranſported by Men in their Veſſels, either for their ſupply, or 
profit, or diverſion, or other end+, and thence might eaſily be pro- 
pagared there. 3. The ſame God who made all theſe Creatures, 
and cauled them ro come firſt to Adam, and afterwards to Noah, 
could afterwards both encline and impower them tro go whither 
he pleaſed, without the advice of theſe vain Men,who will believe 
nothing of God which themſelves either do not fee, or cannot 
do 


f 


18 And Noah went forth, and his ſons, and his wife, 
and his ſons wives with him. 
19 Every beaſt,every creeping thing, and every fowl, 


and whatſocver creepeth upon the earth after their + +4 Heb fa. 1 


kinds, we: t forth out of the ark. milies. 


20 And Noah built an altar unto the Lord 7, and took 
of every clean beaſt, and of everyclean fowl, and offer- 
ed burnt-offerings on the altar «. 

£ The firſt Altar we read of, but riot the firſt which was built : 

For the Sacrifices which were offered before, Gen. 4. 3, 4. pre- 
ſuppoſe an Altar. "Therefore it is no ſufficient evidence, that ſuch 
things were not done, becauſe they are not ſaid to be done in Scri- 
pture : Which wili be anuſeful conſideration for the underſtanding 
of many paſſages in Scripture hereafter. * » The firſt thing Noah 
doth, 15 to pay his debt of Juſtice and Gratitude to that God which 
had ſo miraculouſly preſerved him, and reſtored him to his an- 
cient and proper Habitation. God expe&s to be ſerved in the firſt 
place. What Beaſts were clean and what unclean, ' ſee chap. 7. 2. 
Levit. 11, 2, &c. 

21 And the Lord ſmelled F a ſweet favour x, and + Web. 5 
theLord ſaid in his hearty, I will not again curſe the [,,ur of 
ground z any more for mans ſake, for the * imagina- ref | 
rion of mans heart js evil a from his youth +: Neither * ®:p. 6/ 
will I again {miteb any more cvery thing living as I have {,.., 
done, IS. I} 

«( 3.e.) 


Gro == (þ Yu 64 fel « 


& £4 1 ” 


Chap. IN: _ A 
x (7. e. ) Graciouſly accepted the Perſon, and Faith and Praiſe: 
offering of Noah,and was as well pleaſed therewith,as Men uſe to be 

with a {ſweet ſmell. y( 7: e: } Determined within himſelf, and ex- 

prefſed fo much to Noah. "The Hebrew Prepoſition el, ſometimes 

lignifics in, as Gen. 6: 6: 1 Sam: 27: 1; Others, ſaid | to his Heart, 

i:e: ſpake to the Heart of Noah, who is mentioned werſ: 20: Tv 

ſpeak to the Heart, in Scripture uſe, ſignifies to comfort. = ( i: e: ) 
The whole Earth with this kind of Curſe, with another deluge. , 
Otherwiſe God doth not hereby tye his Hands, that he may not 

either deſtroy a particular Land by a deluge,which hath been done 

ſince, or deſtroy the World by Fire when he ſees fit, as he hath 

declared he will do. a The reaſon contained in theſe words is this; 

Since all Mens Hearts are naturally corrupt, and from that filthy 

Spring wicked, Attions will be continually flowing forth into- the 

World ; and conſequently, if I ſhould b&evere to puniſh Men ac- 

cording to their Sins, I ſhould donothing but ſend one deluge af- 

cer another; Or theſe words may be joyned with the former, and 

the ſenſe may be this; I will not again deſtroy the Earth with a 

deluge for Man's ſake, or for Man's Sin, or becauſe of the imagination, 

&c. ( 7: e: ) becauſe'his Heart is corrupt,and his Attions are agree- 

able to ig, which was the cauſe of the. laſt deluge. Or | the Particle 

chi, may be rendred, although, as itis frequently taken, as Exod: $5: 

IT: and 13: 17: and 34: 9: YJoſ: 19: 13: Pſal: 25: 11; and 41: 5: 

and ſo the ſenſe.is plain, IT willnot again deſtroy the Earth, al- 

theugh the imagination, &c. i.e. Although I have juſt cauſe to do ſo. 

T.Or, From: his very childhood and infancy, as the Chaldee and Greek In- 

terpreters tranſlate it. 54. e, Kill or deſtroy, as the word /miting 

| Is. taken, Exod: 21: 18: Numb: 14+ 12: and 35: 16. Dewt: 28: 22,27: 
AMIS 4: Ye. . 1 | 
+ Heb. a 22 | While the earth remaineth c; ſeed-time, and 
get all the tiarveſt, and cold, and heat, and ſummer, and winter, 


days of the and day and night d ſhall not ceaſe. 

Earth. c viz, In this eſtate : For though it ſeems probable that the ſub- 
Nance of the Earth will abiue for cver, \after the diſſolution of the 
World by tne ; yet that will be in another manner,an« for other 
purpoſes. -::4 rhen there will be no need of Seed-t1me, or Harveſt 
&c. 4 Wh ch diſtin&ion in a manner ceaſed in the Ark, the Hea- 
vens being covered, and all its lights eclipſed by ſuch thick an« 
black Clouds, as never were before nor ſince. 


"CW A* IK 

God renews his blefing, 1: And confirms our dominion over the creatures, 2: 
Grants fleſh for food, but with the blood forbids it, 3, 4. The prnalty of 
murther, 5, 6. Goa repeats his bleſſmg,. 7. His covenant with Noah, and 
all his creatures, 8 --= -—- 11: Confirms it by the rain-bow as his to- 
ken, 12 -----=- 17: Noah's three ſons, 18, 19: His employment, 20. 
He is drunk and uncovered, 21: Ham ſinfully reveals it, 22. His other 
zwo jons, going backwards, covered him, 23: Noah knows it, 24 Cur- 
ſes Canaan, 25: Bleſſes Shem firft, 26: And then Japhet, 27; His age 
and death, 28, 29. 


A N D God bleſſed « Noah, and his ſons, and ſaid 
unto"tnem, * Be fruicful, and multiply, and re- 


240 
4 6 
We 
7 * Cha 
; XL 
RIS - - ; 
4. 
« 2 


'2 5-4 Pieniſh the earth. 
g 17. ” a (i.e. ) Renewed the old bleſſing and grant made chap. 1. 28. 


which might ſeem to be forfeit-d and made void by Man's Sin,and 
by God's judgm-Ent conſequent upon it. 

2 Aud tie fear of-you, and the dread of you ſhall 
be upon every beaſt of the carth, and upon every fow| 
of the air, upon all tnat moveth wpor the earth, and 
upon all the nies of the fea Þ; inco your hand are 


they delivered *. 

+ Before they Joved and reverenced you as Lords and Friends, 
now they thall d:cad you as Enemies and Tyrants. * bor youruſe 
and ſervice. I reſtore you in part to that Dominion over them, 
which you for your Sins have forfeited, 

; 2 Every moving cling þ that iiveth c, ſhall be meat 
3F for you 4, even as the * green herb have I given you 
? Chap. 1. all things Þ. 
29. . b Which is wholeſome and fit for food, and clean : An exce- 
ption to be gathe: cd both from the nature of the thing, and from 
th: diſtin&ion of clean and unclean Beaſts mentioned before and 
afterwards. c This is a1ded to excjude the uſe ofthoſe Creatures, 
which either died of themſelves, or were killed Ly wild Beaſts, 
which is here forvidden implicitely, and afterwards expreſly. 
See Exod. 22: 31: Levit: 22: 8: d,It is not a command that 
we muſt, but a permiſſion that we may eat of them. A grant 
offibly given before the Flood, but now expreſſed, either becauſe 
the former allowance might ſeem to be forfeited, or auſe as 
Men now grew more infirm and needed better nouriſhment, ſo 
the Earth was grown more feeble by the Flood, and its traits 
ielded leſs and worſe nouriſhment. f Underſtand this with the 
Fnication above-mentioned. The green Herbs were given before, 
chap: 1: 29. 
* But fleſh with the Þ life thereof e, which is the 
blood thereof f, ſhall you not ear g. 

e ( i: e: ) Whilſt it lives, or taken from the Creature before it 
be quite dead : Which was an ancient practice, and an effe&t 
either of luxury or cruelty. f (7. e. ) Which life or ſoul hath 
its ſeat in, and its{ypport from the Blood, and the Spirits cons 
tained init. It is certain Blood is the thing which is here princi- 
pally minded and forbidden, and ſo the words may be thus tran- 

ated and underſtood But Fleſh (7: e: ) the Fleſh of living Crea- 
tures hereby allowed you with the Life thereof, that is to ſay, with 
the Blood thereof, wherein its Life conſiſts. Or, But Rlefb whilft it 
bath in it its Life or Soul, or, which is all one, its Blood. g God 
thought fit to forbid this, partly that by this reſpe& ſhewn to the 
Blood of Beaſts, it mighr appear how 1acred a thing the Blood of 
Man was, and how much Go abhorred the Sin of Murther ; and 
principally becauſe the Blood was reſerved and conſecrated to God, 
and was the means of atonement for Van ; ( which, reafon God 
himſelf gives,, Levic. 17. 11,12...) and did in a ſpecial manner re- 
preſent the Blood of Chriſt, which was to be ſhed for the redem- 
Ption of Mankind, 


ap I, 


[IT 


ED 28 = CEIE "Ver 


b fa | 


3® * Lev. 17 
= 14. 
2 Don, I2. 
23. 
Ads 15, 
20. 
T Heb. 
Soul. 


* : 


% "0 


Fs And ſurely your blood of your + lives 4 will I re- + Heb; © 
quire 5: at the hand ofevery. beaſt will I require it 4, ** 
and. at the hand of man ; at the hand of every mans 


F 


brother 1 will 1 require the + life of man. + Heb, 
* Or, For, as the Particle is oft taken : This being the reaſon _ - 


of the foregoing prohibition. -þ Or, of your Souls 
perſons; the word Soul being oft put for perſon, ( 
which is for your Lives, ( i: e: ) which by the Spirits it generates is 

the great preſerver and inſtrument of your Lives, and of all your 

vital Attions, and the great Bond which tics your Souls and © Bo- 

dies together, The ſenile of the place is ; If I an thus careful for 

the Blood of Beaſts, be aſſured I will be much more ſolicitous for 

the Blood of Men, when it ſhall be ſhed by unjuſt and violent 

hands. 7 will make inquiſition for the Author of ſuch blood- 

ſhed, as Idid after Cain, and conſequently puniſh him : For 

this phraſe of requiring implies Puniſhment. * See Gen: 45: 22: Deut: 

18:19: compared with /#s 3: 23: Pſal: g: 13: If Magiſtrats He 

gleCt this Duty, I my ſelf will avenge it by my own Hand. &k 

Not for the Puniſhment of the Bealt, which being under ng 

Law, is not capable of Sin, nor Puniſhment ; but for caution to 

Men, for whoſe uſe ſeing they were made, it is no abuſe of them 

if they be deſtroyed for Man's benefir. Compare Exod: 21: 28: Le- 

vi; 20: I5: I This is added, either 1. as an aggravation - of the 

Crime, becauſe the Man ſlain was. the Brother of the Murtherer - 

all Men being made of one Blood, Aﬀs 17: 26, And having one Fa. 

ther, even God, Mal: 2: 10: and Adam too. Upon which account 

all Men are frequently called one another's brethren, as is mani- 

feſt from Gen: 26: 31: and 29: 4. Levit: 19: 17: and 25: £4: 
and 26: 37: and from many other places 'of Scripture. Or, 2, 

As an aſſurance of the Puniſhment of the Murtherer, without any 
exception of the neareſt Relation ; which, though ir makes the Sin 
greater, yer many times isa ſecurity againſt Puniſhment, the Mur- 
therer eaſily finding Favour and Pardon from his Parents and dear 
Friends, _Butr the former ſenſe ſeems the better. 
14 * Wholo ſheddeth + mans b:ood by man » ſhall 
his blood be ſhed *: for in the image of God made he * Maitti; 
NAN 0. 26. 52. , 
m Wilfully and unwarrantably. For there is a do Y ._ Revel.135 
on to this Law, 1. Of caſual "Flr arc exp eſled _ DE , 
Deut: 19; 4. 2 Ofdeath inflictes by the Hand of the Magiftrat 
for Crimes ceſerving it, mentioned in the following words, and 
elſewhere » (7: e:) By the Hand of Man, namely the Magiſtrar 
Rom: 13: 4. Who 1s hereby impowered and 1equired upon pain 
of my tigheſt diſpleaſure ro intii this Puniſhment. See Exod. 
21: I2: Levit; 24: 17: Matth: 26: 57: Or, For that Man. 5: e: 
For that Man's ſake, whoſe Blood he hath ſhed, which cries for 
Veng=ance. 0 So that Murther is not only an offence againſt Man, 
bur alſo an injury to God, and acontempt of that image of God, 
which all Men are obliged to reverence and maintain, and eſpe- 
cially Magiſtrats, who being my Vicegerents and Servants, are 
therefore under a particular obligation to puniſh thoſe who: d: face 
and deſtroy it. : : 
7 And you, beye fruitful, and multiply p, bring 
forth abundantly in the earth, and mulciply therein. 
p (7.e. ) As for you, I do not revent of that former Bleſſing F 
gave to your Parents, Ger. 1. 28. but do hereby reftiew it to y or 
and to your Seed after you. 
8 4 And God {pake unto Noah, and to his ſons with 
him, ſaying, 
9 AndI, behold, I eftabiiſh my covenant 
you, and with yourſ.ed # after you ; 
* g*( i: e: } My promiſe : For the Betfts included in this Cove- 
nant, verſe 10. are not capable ofa Covenant properly ſo calleds 
And the word Covenant is oft uſed for afimple Promiſe ; as we ſhall 
ſee hereafter. » (7 e. ) Your Poſterity, as that word is frequently 
taken, as Gen. 12.7. Exod. 28. 43, &c. 
10 Ard with everyÞ living creature that is with 

of the fowl, of the cattel, and of every beaſt of 
earth with-you, from all that go,out of the. ark, to e- 


very beaſt of the earth *. | | 

* To wit, which ſhall hereafter be in the Earth. So they are 
diſtinguiſhed from thoſe which were now with thtm. 

11 And *1 will eftablith my covenant with you, +, 
neither ſhall all fleſh be cur off any more by the waters 
of a flood, neither ſhall there any more be a flood s to 


deſtroy the earth» | | 
5s \ 7.e. ) An univerſal deluge : For particular inundations there 
have been, whereby Towns and Countries have been overwhelmed 
with all their Inh:birants. 

12 And God iid, This ;s the token of the cove- 
nant t which I make betwcen me, and you, andeve- 
ry living creature that #5 wich you, for perpetual gene- 
rations : 

t This, (i: e: ) The bow mentioned in the next verſe ; I appoint 
to you for aſenlible ſign and evidence to affure you, that I thall 
perform this Covenant or Promiſe. F 

13 1do ſet F my bow # in the cloud x, and it ſhall 
be for a token of a covenant berween me and the earth. 

+ Heb. 1 havegiven, ( 4. e. ) I will from time to time give and 
place. « God calleth it his Bow, partly becauſe it was his work- 


7: e; Of your 
Or, your Blood, 


q with 


ou, F Heb.1s 
the 31g Sul, 


545; 


manſhip, and chiefly becanſe it was his pledge and the ſeal of bis 
Promiſe: x A- proper ſeat forit : That they might now fetch an 
Argument of Faith from thence, whencebefore they had matter 


of juit fear; and that which naturally was, and is a ſign of Rain; 
might by this new Appointment of God, be turned into an Af- 
furapce, that there thould be no ſach overflowing Rain as now hag - 


been. | ; | 
| ” * And it ſhall come to paſs, when I bring a cloud 
over the earth 7, chat the bow ſhalt bs ſeen in che 


. # * 


A 
4 


cloud ; SEES 
C54 — 7 Nog. - 


| | | #Heb ove- 


4 7y living 
mM; Soul 14 4 
| feſh. 
' 
| 
11 I; | 
I" 
ug, | 
1.08 
C 
[bl | 
7 | 
| 1 + H-b. 
9508 Chenaan. 


=, 


= 


ER 


4 uw LS 
- 


UE Ho ro e_e__ —_——— 


+ Ta Toy Af 
we ry ——_ __— PaY ” 
== 
4s bo * pp —- I Oe 
yy wo ren ooo TIT woo oo - - - 
4 
PO 


«7 "T y, 
#"ut 

5 0 i he <a Ir : 

"_ 

: A4_Y - 
> . ga need 
——_— » CRE 

9 


—_—_ 
« 


” Noralways, bur very frequently, which is ſufficient for this 


oy 


purpoſe. 


15 And I will remem 
tween me, and you, an 
;; fleſh ; and the waters 
deſtroy allfleſh. 

16 And the how ſhal 


fleſh that 7s upon the earth. 


z (i.e. ) This Covenant ma 
of Men and Beaſts. : 
God after the manner of Men, who being forgetful, nec 
their Memory. 


This and the like ſpeeches are oft 


ber my covenant» which 5s be- 
d every Þ livingcreature ofall 
ſhall no more become « flood to 


| be in the cloud ; and I will 
look upon it, that I may remember the everlaſting co- 
venantz berween God and every living creature of all 


de with all ſucceeding Generations 
aſcribed to 


d helps for 


yon_—_— 


ing Ham committed the Crime, Why is the Curſe inflifted upon 
his Son Canaan ? Anſw. 1. When Canaan is mentioned, Ham 1s not 
exempted from the Curſe, bur rather more deeply plunged into it, 
whilit he is pronounced accurſed,not only in his Perſon ( which is 
manifeſtly ſuppoſed by his commiſſion of that Sin for which the 
Curſe was intlied ) but alſo inhis Poſterity, which doubtleſs was 
a great aggravation ofhis Grief : As on the contrary Joſeph is ſaid 
ro be blefled, when his Children are bleſſed, Gen: 48: x5, 16. 2. It 
ſeems therefore very probable from theſe Words, and the Hebrew 
Doors, and others affirm it, that Canaan did partake with his Fa- 
ther in theSin, yea, that he was the firſt diſcoverer of his Father's 
Shame. 3. Canaan 18 particularly mentioned by the ſpirit of Pro- 
pheſy, in regard of the future extirpation of th:t People ; and this 
is here remembred for the encouragement of the J/raelites, who 
were now in their expedition againſt them. 4. This may be an 
Ellipſis, or defe& of the word Father ; for ſuch relative words are 
oft-times omitted and underſtood in Scripture, as Matth: 4: 21: 
James of Zebedee, for the ſon of Zebedee. John 19: 25: Mary of Cleo= 


* covenant 4, which I have eſtabliſhed berween me and 


Noah was. They ſay he was bora ofthe Sea, becauſe Noah came out 


17 And God ſaid unto Noah, This is thetoken of the 


all fleſb that is upon the earth. 

a The ſame thing is ſo oft repeated for the ſtrengthning of the 
Faith of all men, and eſpecially of Noahand his Sons, whom the 
remembrance of thar dreadful deluge, which they had experience 
of, had made exceeding prone to fears of the like for time to 
Come. 


18 © {nd the ſons of Noah that went forth of the 
ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japhethz and Ham 
is the Father of F Canaan 6. 


b Which is here mentioned to make way for the following re- 
lation. 


19 Theſe are the three ſons of Noah: and of them 
; was the whole carth overſpread c, 

c A Truth which the old Heathens were not ignorant of,though 
chey changed the Names, and mixed their Fables with it ; for they 
tell us that Sarurn and his three Sons. divided the Worid among 
themſelves. And it is apparent, That their Saturn was no other than 
our No2h, becauſe they tell us he was the common Parent aad Prince 
of all Mankind, alſo an Husbandman and Vine-drefler, all which 


of the Waters: "That he devourcd all his Children except three, 
becauſe Noah condemned and foretold the deſtruftion of all the relt of 
the World. 

20 And Noah began ts be an husbandman 4, and he 
planted a vineyard. 

a ( i:e: ) Was an Husbandman, as he had been before» The 

| Verb, 70 begin, doth oft abound ; and is applied to him that conti- 
nueth, or repeaterh an Attion begun before. Thus Chriſt is faid 
ro begin to caſt our, Mark 11. 15 and to begin to ſpeak, Luke 12. 1. 
For which in the parallel places he is ſaid only to ca# our, Matth. 
21. 12. and zoſpeak, Matth. 16. 6. 

21 And he drank of the wine, and was drunken e, 
and he was uncovered f within his tent. 

e Either through ignorance and inexperience of the nature and 
ſtrength of that Liquior,or through the infirmiry of the fleſh, which 
was tempred by its great, and, to him, new pleaſantnefs, and by 
the refrethment he tound in it, under the weary labours of his Bo- 
dy, ard rhe ſad thoughts of his Mind, for the deſolate condition of 
the World. f Eithe: to rebeve himſelfagainft the hear of the Cli- 
mate and +eaſon, or from his Negligence and Careleſneſs ; which 
might eaſily happen, becauſe Men's Garments, at that time, were 
loo!e, as they were in te following ages, when Breeches were not 
in common uſe, and therefore were peculiarly preſcribed ro the 
Prieſts, Exod. 28. 42. Exe. 44. 18, 19. 

22 And Ham the father of Canaan 4b ſaw the 
nakedneſs + of his father and told his two brethren 
wichourt *, 

g Whoſ grownage was a great aggravation of this Sin. h This 
is here added as a reaſon of Canaaz's Curſe, werſe 25. + (7: e:) The 
ſecret parts, oft ſo called, as Levit: 18: and elſewhere. * (7: e: ) 
Who were then without the Houſeor Room where their Fatherlay 
in thar poſture, whom he invited ro that proſpe&. 


23 And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and 
laid zz upon both their ſhoulders, and went backward 
and covered the nakedneſs of their father ; and their 


faces were backward, and chey ſaw not their fathers na. 
kedneſs. 
24 And Noah awoke from his wine +, and knew ; 
what his younger fon & had done unto him. 
t (7.e. ) From his Drunkenneſs, or from his Sleep, the effte& 
of it. 7 Either by the information of his Sons; or by divine Infpi- 
ration... & Or, his little Son, either Ham mentioned, werſe 22: or 
Canaan mentioned 1n the next verſe ; by comparing of which places 
it may be gathered, that Canaan firſt ſaw it, and told his Father 
Ham of it, and he ro!d it to his Brethren. The latter ſeems here 
principally intended, 1. Pecauſe the Curſe following is appropri- 
ated ro him. 2. Beciuſe of rhe ritle of younger or litcle Son, which 
ſeems nor ro be fo properly added if Ham was meant ; both becauſe 
1t doth not appear t1ar he was the youngeſt, for whereſoever theſe 
three Brethren a:e mentioned, he isalways pur in the middle 
place, and becauſc rthar addirion ſeems to be unneceſſary and im- 
pertinent ro the preſent buſineſs, which if Canaan be intended, is 
proper and pertinent, by way of diſtin&tion, to ſhew that he 
ſpake of his Grandſon, or his Sons Son. 4bje#. He calleth him his 
Sou. Anſw. Grandchildren are frequently called, their Grandfa- 
thers Sons 1n Scripture, as Geneſis 29: 5: 2 Samuel 19: 24: 1 Chron: 


: I7. 
25 And he ſaid 1, Curſed w be Canaan » ; a ſervant 
of ſervants o ſhall he be unro his brethren. 


{ Nor from the paſſion of Revenge, but by divine Inſpiration, 


, abhor- 
red by Men, miulſcrable in his Perſon and Polteriry.” 7 Queſt _ 


and the ſpirit of Propheſy. m ( i: e:) Hateful to God 


pas, for the wife of Cleopas 
Father of Sychem, as our Engliſh Tranſlation rightly ſupplies it from 
Gen: 33: 19: Thus Goliah 1s put for Goliah's Brother, 
by comparing 2 Sam: 21: 19: with 1 Chron: 20. 5: 
an may be pur for the Father of Canaan, 


Aﬀts 7: 16: Emmir of Sychem, for the 


as is evident 
So here Cana- 
as the Arabick Tranſlation 
hath ir, that is, Ham, as the Seventy here render it. And though 
Ham had more Sons, yet he may be here deſcribed by his relation 
to Canaan, becauſe in him the Curſe was more fixed and dreadful, 
reaching to his utter extirpation, whilſt the reſt of Ham's Poſterity 
in after ages were bleſſed with the ſaving knowledge of the Goſpel. 
o ( i:e: ) The yileſt and worſt of Servants ; as Yanity of Vanities, is 
the greateſ> Vanity, Eccleſ. 1. 2. and great Wickedneſs, Hoſ: 10: 15: 
15 in the Hebrew Wickeaneſs of Wickeaneſs, and King of Kings IS put for 
the chief of Kings. 

20 And he ſaid, Bleſſed be the Lord God of Shem p; 


and Canaan ſhall be + his Servant, 


higheſt degree, becauſe the Lore hath here declared himſelf ro be 

Shem's God. Now for God to be ſaid to be any Man's God, is e- 

very where mentioned as-the height of Bleſſednefs. See Gen: 17: 
7: Pſal: 144: 15: Jer: 31: 33: Match: 22: 32. Burt the phraſe is here 
juitly varied. The Curſe is fixed upon Ham, becauls Man alone 1s 
. the Authorof his own Sin, an the Cauſe 'of his Ruine : But be- 
cauſe (od is the Author and tountain of all the Good that Man 
either doth or receiveth, therefore the Blefling is emphatically 
given to God, who only doth the Work, and of right is ro receive 
all the Glory, yet ſo as it redounds to Shem allo. And Shem 1s 
here peculiarly mentioned, nor Japherh, both for the comfort of 
the 1ſraelites, whoſe Progenitor he was, and becauſe this Bleſſing 
was firſt ſcated and long continued in Shemr's , Politerity alone, 574= 
»keth's Poſterity being tor along time excluded from it: and be- 
cauſe the Lord Chriſt, whois often called the Lord and God in Scri- 
pture, did take Hleſh from Shem; and ſo the Incarnation of Chriſt 
may be here foretold ; and Shem highly honoured and bletled in 
this, that he ſhould Le the Father of Chriſt according to the Fleſh, 
Rom: 9: 5. 
Speech, which is frequent in the Hebrew Tongue ; and it may ſig- 
nify that Shem ſhould be ſo eminently bleſſed, that men beholding 
ir, tt}ould be wrapt vp into Admization, and break forth into the 
Praiſes of that God who gaveſuch gifts unto men, and did ſo great 
things for Sh-m. Anſ, 3 The words may be otherwiſe rendred,ci- 
ther thus, blI:ſſcd, Oo Lora God, let Shem be, 7: 6: do thou Bleſs him. So 
iris only the conſtru& from Elbe, for the abſolute Elohim, which is 
not unuſua] in Scripture : Or thus, Bleſſed of the Lord God be Shem, 
or ſhall Shem be. So here 1s only adete& of the Hebrew Particle 
min, Which is oft wanting. 


his ſervant s. 


ro him, becauſe he had a very numerous Poſterity ; and by them 
he poſſeſſed the Jargeſt part of the World, even all Europe, a great 
parr of 4a, and as it is probable 4merica alſo. Or,God ſhall perſwade 
3aph:th, to do what follows, to dwell in Shem's Tents, where God 
dwelieth ; and fo to be re-unitcd to his Brother Shem both in Aﬀes- 
tion and in Religion, in both which the Gentiles, the g:eareſt 
part of whom were 7apherh's Poſteriry, were for a long time at an 
irreconcileable diſtance from the Jews, x ( z. e. ) Shall be of the 
ſame Church with She, 7. e. of the Church, which is called in 
Scripture the Tents or Tabernacles of Judah, or of Jacob, or in gene 
ral of the Saints, Zech. 12. 7. Mal. 2. 12. Revel. 20. 9, and here 
of Shem, in whoſe Poſteriry the Church was firſt and longeſt ſet- 
tled. And ro dwell with another, notes friendly Aſſociation and 
Communion with him, as when God is ſaid to dwell with Men: 
And when the Wolf is ſaid to dwell with the Lamb, Iſa. 11. 6. Poſſi- 
bly this may nore Japherh's Succeſſion into Shem's Tents, or co- 
ming into their place and ſtead, or the calling of the Genriles to- 
gether with the reje&ion of the Jews; as the Reubenites are fad to 
dwell in the Tabernacl.s of the Hagarens, whom they ſubdued and expel 
led, 1 Chron. 5. 10. s This was eminently accompliſhed : for though 
Shem and Japheth, in their Poſterity, did ſucce ely conquer and 
rule one over the other, yet none of Ham's Poſterity did ever bear 
rule over Japheth ; but Ham, though for a time he bore ſway in his 
Son Nimrod ; yet that Dominion ſoon expired, and the Aſtyrians 
Chaldeans,Grecians, and Romans, ruled the World for*a ſucceſſion of 


many Ages ; and Haw's People were conſtantly their Servants and 
Subjetts. 


28 And Noah lived after the food three hundred and 
fifry years 7. 


# Whichreacheth to the fifty eighth Year of 4braham's age, as 
the Jews note And ſo we havea manifeſt Account of the Propa- 
gation of Religion, from the beginning of the World to this Day. 
Noah received it from his Parents, who had the account of it from 
their firſt F ather Adam's own Mouth, and tranſmitted it to Abra= 
ham ; and igs deſcent; from him to the Jews, and by the Jews to 


others 


Anſw. 2. This may be a ſhort and abrupt manner of _ 


Y 


+ Heb.Seia 
> Bueſft. What isthis to Shem ? For it is not Shem, but God who 77 #0 
is here bleſſed. Anſw 1. Shem allo is here bleſſed, and that in the 72- 


27 God ſhall * enlarge Japhech 9, and he ſhall * or, pre 
dwe!l in the tents of Shem r, and Canaan ſhail be + ſwade. b 
T Heb. ſer« : ; 
q Or, Enlarge to Japheth, underſtand here his place, as Gen: 26: 299 fo | 
22: | Pſal: 4: 1: or his border : Which was very literally made good them, 


- "7; Fg rs 
A. \ x Py jr 
:.. "5 i Pp, ' . 
Ho » » 
4 


T "4 
\ 


5s ſufficiently known. Within this time alſo Noah ſaw the 
agref Bobel's Tower, the horrid Wickedneſs and Idolatry of 
his Children, and the bloody Wars which even then aroſe between 
ſome of them. , 
29 And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and 


ifty years «, and he died. 

, ne? bn i5.an omiſſion of that ſolemn clauſe uſed in all the pre- 
ceding Generations, And he begat Sons and Daughters ; which implies 
that Neak had no more than theſe rhree Sons, which alſo appears 
from the 19th. verſe of this chapter. 


CHAP. X. : : 
,"s pyſterity, 1. Sons of Japhet, 2-====5, Of Ham, 2-14. 4100S 
m_ perth, the firſt Sa and tyrant ; he reigns in Babel, Ofc. 10. 
Aſber builas Nineveh, Q&nc. 11. Sons of Canaan, 15. Their border, 19. 
Of Shem, 21-----3I. | | 
, T- His FrRaSs, though it may ſeem to ſome unprofitable, 
conſiſting almoſt wholly of Genealogies, yet hath indee 
great and manifold uſes. 1. To ſhew the true Original of the ſeve- 
ral Nations ; about which all other Authors write idely, urge 
and falſly, and thereby to manifeſt the Providence of God in n e 
Government of the World and Church, and the Truth and Aurho- 
rity of the Holy Scriptures. 2. To diſcover and diſtinguiſh —_ 
all other Nations, that People or Nation in which God's Churc! 
was to be, and from which Chriſt was to come. 3. That Noah s$ 
Propheſy concerning his three Sons might be better underſtood, 
and the accompliſhment of it made evident. 4. To explain divers 
prophetical Predi&ions and other paſſages of Scripture, as will ap- 
pear in the ſequel. For the better underſtanding of Tryon 5 
compare with it 1 Chron: 1. from verſe 4. to 24. And conli ” 
theſe three things. 1- In the ſearch of theſe Genealogies,we mu 
avoid both Careleſneſs for the reaſons now mentioned, and exceſ- 
five Curioſity about every particular Pe:ſon here named, and the 
People ſprung from him ; which is neither neceſſary, nor profi- 
table, no: indecd poſſible now to find out, by reaſon of the great 
changes of names through length of time, loſs of ancient Records, 
differences of Languages, extin&tion of Families, conqueſt and 
ditru&tion of Nations, and other Cauſes. It may f tice that di- 
vers of them, and thoſe the moſt eminent, are evident and dif- 
cernable ar this day, as will appear in the progreſs, by which we 
may and ought to preſume the Truth of the reft, whoſe Names 


Chap. 
the Father of the Macedonians, and Italians too, as may be gathered 
from hence, becauſe. both their Countries are called by the Name 
of Chittim ; Macedonia, 1 Mac: 1: 1.and 8, 5. and Italy, Numb: 24: 24. 
Dan: 11:30. See alfo 1/a: 23. 1. Jer: 2: 10, - Beſides that” there are 
- other Eyidences in prophane Writers that the 1a/ians came from the 
Grec:ans, p Called allo Rhodanim, 1 Chron: 1: G6. See Riphath in the 
former verſe. His Poſterity is uncertain. Moſt probably he was 
ſeared near his Brethren in ſome part of Grecce. And the Greeks { 


' to have worſhipped him under the Name of Jupi:2y Dodoneus,whole 
famous Oracle was in the City Dodona. | 

5 By theſe were the iiles q of the gentiles divided 7 
in their lands ; every one after his cougue s, after their 
families z, in their nations. 

q Not Iftes properly fo called : For why ſhould they, having their 
choice, forſake the Continent for Iflands,and thereby cut oft them= 
ſelves from their Brethren ? And where h:d they Ships to trantporr 
tiem ? But the word J/es here and elſewhere fignifies all thoſe 
Countries that had the Sea between them and 5udca, as ir doth 
Iſa: 11, 10, Its and 40: 15. Jer: 2.10. and 25: 22. Exh: 27. 
3- Zepha. 2: 17. And J/ss are here put for the Inhabitants, as the 
word Earth and Land are commonly uſed. r This diviſion of the + 
World among them being a work of great weight, was doubt eſs 
managed wirh great Care and Confultation,and the advice of their 
Heads and Governours, and above all by the wiſe and ſpecial P:o- 
vidence of God, which at this time did particularly determine the 
bounds of their ſeveral Habitations, as it is Recorded, 4#s 17: 26. 
s (4.e.) According to their ſeveral languages, into which they 
were divided at Babel. By which it appears that this diviſion, 
though mentioned before, was not executed till after the confu- 
ſion of Languages at Babel. t Here obſerve the Wiſe and Gracious 
Providence of God mixed with this judgment, that God diſtributed 
the Languages according to the diffeience of Families and Nations, 
that each ſeveral Nation, and all the Families, or Brarches of that 
Nation ſhould have one and the ſame Language ; whereby both 
Union and Love were preſerved among themſelves, and the ſeve- 
ral Nations were diſtinguiſhed one from another ; which-was very 
fit and neceſſary for many Reaſons : As that the Church of God, 


which was confined ro the Hebrew Nation, might neither be 
| mixed with, nor infef&ed by the Idolatrous Nations ; and that 't 


; might be evident to the Wor!d, that the Meſſias was boin of the 
; Seed of Abraham according to God's promiſe, &c. 


are loſt in the publick Confuſions of the World in former Ages, of 
whom I ſhall therefore be ſilent, and only ſpeak of the p.incip»1 
Perſons, and that briefly. 2. The ſame people which were origi- 


nally ſeared in one place, did oft rimes ſhift rheir places, or at leaſt | 


ſenr © th Colonies ; and that ſometimes inio places far diſtant 
from their Brethren, as appears from the ancient and famous Ex- 
pedition; mentioned in Sacred and Prophane Story. So you muſt 
nor wonder if you meet with the ſame People in divers Countries. 
3. InGeneral,the World «as divided into three Parts, whereof the 
more: Erſtern parts were allotted to Shem and his ITue, the more 
Sourhern paits to Ham,and the more Northern parts of it to Japheth. 


OW theſe are the generations of the ſons of Noah; 
Shem, Ham, and Japheth : and unto them were 
{ons born after the flood- 

2 * The ſons of Japheth @ : Gomer and Magog c, 
and Madai «d, and Javan e, and Tubalf, and Meihech 
g, and Tiras þ, 

2 Whoſe Portion was at firſt Aſa the leſs, and afterwards by de- 
grees all Ezrop:, and the Northern parts of Aſia. This is he ſo 
much celebrared among the Greeks, by the name of 7apetrs. 
Whoſe Poſterity are reckoned among the Northern People, Ezek. 
38: 6. and were ſeated ia tie Northern parts of the lefſer 4/2, and 
afterwards about Thracia ; and from him were called Gomar:, and by 
an eaſy change Cimbri, or Cimmerii, c The Father of the Sythians, 
as may be gathered from Ezek: 38: 2, 3, 15. and 39: 3, 6. 4 


Whoſe poſterity, whereſoever they were firſt placed, in Macedonza, | 


or elſe here, afterw:rd were fixed in Media, and were called Medes, 
and in the Hebrew by the Name of their Father Mz4a7, as appears 
from 2 Kings 17: 6, Jja: 13: 17. Jer: 13: 17. and 25. 25-| Dan: <. 28. 
and 6:8. e Of whom came the Grecians, who are called by them- 
{eives 1aones or Tones, and in the Heb: ew Jerzanim, and their Coun- 
trey Greece, Javan. See Iſa: 66: 19. . Exck: 27. 13, 19. Dan: 8: 21. 
and 10. 21. f Of whom came the 77, ancient'y called Thobel:, 
a People of ſia, near the Euxine Sea See Ezek: 27 13, and 3:: 6. 
and 38: 2, 3. g The Father of Moſchi, i, e. the Muſcovites, or 
rather as others thiak, the Capadeciaus, who were ancient!y called 
Meſchini, and Mojchi, and-rheir chigf City Maraca þ The Father of 
the Thracians; amongſt » hom is a River and Haven called Athyras,and 
who worſhipped their God Mars, under the Name of Thuras. ; 

3 And che ſons of Gomer ; Aihkenaz i, aud Ri- 
phath &, and Togarmah /. 

; Whoſe Seed poſſeſſed Pontus and Bithynia, and the Neighbour- 
 ingparts, from » hom they took the Names of th: Lake and Haven 
called Aſcanius, and the Sea called Axenus, or Euxinus, k Called 
Diphath, i Chron: 1: 6. The Let ers Daleth and Reſh being oft in- 
terchanged, as we ſhall ſee in other inſtances. His Poſterity dwel- 
led in or near Pontus and Bithynia, where Mela and Pliny and Solmus, 
Place the Riphar, or Riphaces, and the Paphlagonians, who were an- 
cient'y called Piphatei. 1 Whoſe Poſterity are joyned with Gomer's. 
See Ezek. 25: 14: and 28. 6. and were, as. ſome think, the Phrygians 
and Galatians, and of them rhe Gauls and Germans ; or, as others, 
the Armenians, and of them the Turks. 

4 And the ſons of Javan ; Eliſha #2, and Tarſbiſh 
Kirtim o, and Dodanim p. 

» The Father of the Grecians properly ſo called, who have pre- 

ſerved his Name and remembrance in the Citi:s, Els, and Eliſſus, 

in a traCt of ground called E!las, and in the Elizian Fields. And 

Hom theſe came the 'Zolians, a People of the leſſer Ais, where 


7, 


many of the Grecian Colonies were ſeared. » The Father of the | 


Cilicians, from whom their chief City Tarſur, in Hebrew Tarſbiſh, 
took its Name. See Fzek: 27: 12: Jon. 1: 13. Atﬀts 22:3. and 
From whom the whole Mediterranian Sea is called Tarſh;ſþ, becauſe 
the Cilicians were in a great degree Maſters of that Sea.o Or, Chirrim, 


- a 

any PM | m 4 HOWE 

TEIPT IE TFD MOT LIE RR wy *. FRI a at Fon” of 

F- Uh” uy Caidd; CPR. F=&c- . »* IgE "paws: . - Sd, 

* Fright 56, Og "vp . 5h EE 26S, EE J OT Ns "For at IX "Fl I C - 
Ky b "2. Ft _ - 


- near to India. 


' among whom is the River Put, and the Moors.. 


6.4 * And the ſons of Ham « ; Cuſh x, and Miz- 


'raim y, and Phut z. and Canaan .s. 


#u Whoſe Poſterity were diſpoſed into the parts South from 
Babel, both in Aſia and Africa. See 1 Chron, 4: 40. Pſal; 10+: 27. 
x The Father both of the Ethiopians and the 4:abians : Who, as 
it ſeems, ſent forth a Colony from themſelves more Eaſtward, even 
See Gen: 2: 13. 2 Kings 19: 9: Job 28- 19. Jer: 13. 
23: and 46: 9. y The Father of the Egyptians, who are gene-ally 
kno4n in Scripture by thit Name. z Of whom ſprung the Libyans, 
See Fer: 46: 9. 
Exek: 27: 10: and 3o: 5, Novum 3:9. a The curſed Parent of 
that accurſed Race of the Canaamtes, well known in Scripture, Gen: 


i 10. 25: | 


7 And the ſons of Cuſh ; Sheba b, and Havilah c; 
Sabtah d, and Raamah e; and S.btecha f : and the 
{ons of Raamah ; Sheba g, and Dedan h. 

b, Or, Seba, or Saba, whoic Seed were the Sabeans in Arabia the 
Deſart. See Pſal: 72: :0. Ja. 43: 3. and, as ſome think, the 


'« Abyſſmes in Africa. c The Father of the Inhabitants of -che Land of 
" | , Havilah, mentioned Gen: 2: 11. 
two remoteſt bounds of Arabia, Gen: 23: 18: 


a Land in the moſt E ſtern pzrt 
of Arabia, this Lcing oppoſed to Sar, a Deſart near Zeypr, as the 
x Sam. 15: 7. d The 
Father of thoſe People who were ſeat. d in the lowei part of 4 a- 
bia - he happy, near the Perſian Guif, who alſo ſent forth a Colony 
into Perſia, For in thoſe parts we meet with the Sabateni in Joſe= 
phus, the Stabei, and Meſabarhi in Prolomy and Pliny. e From w hom 
deſcended another people dwelling in the ſame 4rabi3. . See 
Ezek, 27: 22. f The Father of another People. :djoyning ro 
them. g The Father either of thit People which inhibited A:hi- 
opia, who were known by that Name. See 1 Kings 10: 1, 4. 
Ezek. 27. 22. Matth: 12: 42. Aﬀs 8::27, Or rather of another 
Pcople in 4ra6ia : So the ſeveral Sons of Ch are conveniently ſeat= 
ed one near another. And thoſe Er/iopians in £4frica might be 
a Colony either of theſe, or rather of the Poſterity of the for« 
mer Seha h Of whoſe Poſterity, fee Ezekiel 27: r5. and 38. 13. 

8 And Cuſh begat Nimrod ; : he began to. be a 
mighty one in the Earth. | 

; Whom he placeth laſt of all his Sons, becauſe 
more of him. 


9 He was a mighty hunter &, before the LORD 7 ; 
wherefore it is ſaid 9, Even as Nimrod the mighty 
hunter before the LORD. 


& Firſt of Beaſts, and by that occaſion of Meri. For when Meri 
were few, and lived diſperſedly, and wild Beaſts abounded, and 
moſt ofall inthoſe parts, by Hunting and Deſtroying of thoſe Beaſts, 
he got much Reputation and Favour with Men, who thereby were 
ſecured in their Dwellings. In confidence hereof, and having this 
| occafion ta gather great companies of the youngeſt and ſtrongeſt 

Men together to himſelf, by their help he eſtabliſhed a Tyranny 
and Abſolute Power over Men, Enſnaring, Hunting after; and 
| Deſtroying like Beaſts, all thoſe Men, who oppoſed his Dominion. _ 
Tyrants and. Perſecutors- are oft in Sciiprures called Fowlers and 
| Hunters, as Pſal: 91: x, Jer: 16: 16. Lament: 3: 52: and 4: 18. 
 } An aggravation of his Crime, that ir was done in God's preſence, 

impudently and in contempt both of God, who had (o lately ma- 
{ nifeſted his deteſtation of this Sin by the deſtru&ion of the World, * 

amonglt other Sins, for this very Sin of Violence, Gen: 6: 13. and 
| of his great Grandfather Noah then Living and Preaching, . who 

probably did admoniſh him of the wickedneſs and danger of this 
praftice. Thus he ſhewed thar he neither feared God nor reveren= 
ced Man, if they withſtood him in his Uſurpation of Dominion. 
m It became a Proverb, when any Man was haughty, and crit#] ahd 
ryrannical, and that joyned with impudence and obfticiacy; That 


he was to ſay 


D 


he was another Nimrod, | - 
1s Aid 


TY Chron: 


CC EK 5 mn Mhap. 
'+Gr. Ba- ro And the beginning of his kingdom » was | Ba- | * he f On the South and South-eaſt. g On the 
2. hel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh p, the land | Norti-ealt. _ 

of Shinar 4. 20 Theſe are the ſons of Ham, after their families, 


» (7. e.) Either his Chief and Royal City, or the place where ; after their tongues, in their countries, and in their | 
his Dominion began, and from whence it was extended to other | Nations. 


| R ary $ =_— i _ 
| parts. o Which being nor built till the confuſion of Languages, 21 Unto Shem alſo the father of all the children of 


'F chap; 11: 4. theweth that this, though here mentioned upon occa- k ; 
j | ſion of the Genealogy, was not executed till afrerward ; It being Eber b, che T brother of Japheth z the elder &, even to Las ay 
be: very uſual ia Scripture to neglet the order of time in' Hiſtorical | him were children born. png &c 

o » 


| | Relations. Þ Called Calno, Iſa. To: 9. and Canne, Ezek. 27: 23. h E* e.) OF the Hebrews, the only Church 'and People of 
L | - and as it is here, Cahreth, Amos 6: 2: Where it is mentioned | God when Moſes wrote, who are called Eber, Num: 24: 24. as here, 
amongſt the eminent Cities. 9 (7. e. ) In Meſopotamia. This clauſe | The children of Heber. And he is here called the farher of them 
belongs to all the Cities here named ; and is added for diſtintion peculiarly, though he had other Children, becauſe he was their 
ſake, becauſe there 15 a Babylon in the Land of Egypt,and there might Father not only by natural Generation, bur allo In reſpe&t of the 
be other Cities of the ſame Name with the reſt in other Coun- | Promiſe of God, which was conveyed to- them through | Shem's 
Tries, | Hands, and of that Faith and Holineſs, wherein he was their Pre- 
Y Or, he 11 Out of that land * went forth Asſhur '£ and | deceſſor and eminent Pattern : Even as Ham, though he had other 
wet 0! hyjlt Nineveh s. and * the city Rehoboch eg, and Sons, 1s eſpecially called the Father of Canaan, Gen: 4: 22. Becauſe 
;nt0 F('}- Calah o his Father's Curie reſted upon him, werſe 25. ObjefF. Eber had oF 
770. 1 100 RG '# Be many other Children here Recorded, and therefore in tht Sefiſe "Ig 
* Or, the _ 7A Man ſo called, either 1. Aſbur the Son of Shem, who for- | $5... not The Father of all the Children of Eber. Auſw. Though | 


frreets of Took the Land; either being forced by, or weary of Nimrod's TY- | Ebe- had other Children, yet none are called in Scripture The Chil 
the City, Tanny and Impiety, and erected another. Kingdom. Bur it 1s not | ,;.,,, of Eber, or which is all one, the Hebrews, but Abraham's Poſte= F 
” probable cither that Moſes would here relate an exploit of a Man rity : Even as though 4braham had divers other Children, yet the F- 
whoſe Birth is not mentioned till verſe 22. or that one ſingle Son | [,.5.1,.- ie in many places peculiarly called the Children of Abra= g 
of Sm would be here diforder'y placed among the Sons of Ham. | j,,, Anq the ungodly Jews, when they degenerat from God 
Or, 2. Another Asſbur of Hams race, Put it feems moſt likely and Godlineſs, God takes away their Name,” and denieth them to 4 
that A:;ſhur is the Name of a Place or Countrey, even of Aſhria, | Le Jews, Rom: 2: 28. and calls them Sodomites, 1/a: 1: 10. And R 
which in the Hebrew is called A4sbur ; and that the words ſhould therefore no wonder, if Joktan and his Poſterity having, as it is 
be thus rendered ; he, i. e. Nimrod wenr forth. out of his own Land probable, forſaken their Father's God; and -turned Idolaters, be 
to Ajhur to war againſt it, and add it to his Empire : For to go | here diſfor-ged 28 Boatards, and blotted our of the honourable Ca- 
forth 18 commonly atcribed to thoſe that go to war, or to Þ:trie, talogue of The Chilaren of Heber. See Rom: 9: 8. #1 Japheth alone 
as Judg. 2: IF and 11; 3. 2 Sam: I1: 3. Pjal: 69: 12. and the is here mentioned as his Brother, and not Ham, -becauſe he was 
Particle to 1s here underſtood, as It 18, 2 $97; 6: 10. and 10. 2. | Jefervedly ſhut our from Shem's Bleſſing pronounced by Noah, and 
compared with rn C2707. T3: 13: and 19: - FR A tamous and Was accurſed of God, whereas: Japheth WAS partaker with Shem, 
vaſt City ner the River Tigr:s, bur fo ruined by rime, that the | both in the Piety exc:ciſed towards their Father, and the Bleſſing 
Learned are not agreed al out the place wheie it was f{cituace. £ Of thereupon pronounced : The word Brother being often applied to 
which ſee Gen. 36: 37. 1 Chron. 1: 48. q Pe: ſons alike.in Condition, Diſpoſition, or Manners. See Gen: 49.5. 
. 12 Ard Reſen between Nineveh and Calah : the | + Though t'-e words in Hebrew may ſeem ambiguous, yet other 
ſame « is a great City» Texts makes it probable that Japherh was the Elder. tor Noah 


began to veger Chridren in his five hundredth Year, Gen: 5. 32. And 
4 171. and indeed was ſo, being Sixty Miles in compaſs Thus | SÞ-»7. was but a hundred Years old two years after the Flood, Ger: 
it is a traje&0n, and the relative is referred to the remotter Noun, | 11: 19. Therefore he was not the Eldeſt. And Ham is concluded 
If 4 | as ſometimes is done, though this ſeems to be a little forced. | Not to be the Eldeſt from Gen: 9. 24. Of which ſee the Notes there ; 
hi | | Or, 2 Reſen; ſo the meaning 1s, though this City be much infe- if ſo, Japheth muſt be the Eldeſt. And Shem is generally named 


z Fither 1. Nineveh, 'which is called 2 great city, Jonah 3: 3: and 


&; riour to Nineveh, yet this allo, if compared with moſt others, is a firft, not becauſe he was the Farſt-born, but becauſe he had the 
Fi great City. | Priviledges of the Firft-born, aad was chief in Dignity and Autha« 
* * Jor-zs 12 And Mizraim begat * Ludim x, and Anamim, | #ity in the.Church of God. | | 
C1 Jer: 46. p 5 3 D | : - : 
i <3s and Lebabim, and Naphtuhim, 22 The * children of Shem ; Elam 7, and Aſhur ws, * x Chro: 
il x Of this and the following Names here, and verſe 14. obſerve | and + Arphaxad », and Lud o, and Aram p. 1.27. - 
| two things, 1: They are not the names of Perſons, but of People Of whom came the Elamites or Perſians, See Gen, 14: 9. If. at 6 ol OS 
or Nations ; .and the word Father is here underſtood Ludim, tor |. 22. 21. Jer. 49. 34. Dan. 8. 2. Aﬀr 2. 9. m The Father of the 1** ſpad. © Wit 
the Father of the People called Lydim, and fo the reſt. 2. That | Aſjrians, See werſe 11. n Of whom the Chaldeans, as many con- Þ 


They are the ſeveral Nations dwelling in 4frica, ſpringing from the | ceive ; or, as others, the Inhabirants of that part of 4ſria, from 


”* 
— 
F 
5 
2» 


Ezyptians, which, as they multiplied, went further and further | him called Arphaxitis, wu Kich Prolomy corruptly calls Arrapachitis., 

Weſtward and Southward from Egypr. ; o The }ather of the Lydans, a well-known People in ſz the leſs. 438 
i4 And Pathruiim y, and <Caſluhim ( out of whom | » Of whom the $1rians, known by the Name of Aramites both in K 

came Philiſtim & ) and C2phtorim. | Sacred and other Authors. Compare with this Ger. 22: 21. 4 
3 The Inhabitants of Parhros, of which ſee Iſa: 11: 11. Jer: 44 22 And the children of Aram 5 Uz, and Hul, and { 

T, 15. Ezek: 29: 14 #» The meaning is, they came out of his Gether, and Maſh. 4 


Loins, or were his Off-ſp1ring, which might be true 3 rhough af- ; | x 
terwards we find them ſcared amongſt the Off-ſpring of of 14an, 24 And Arphaxad begat | * Salah ; and Salah begat ON 
having driven out the former Inhabitants, as was ulual in thoſe Eber, ' 
1h | ancient times. Obje#. The Philiſtmes are elſewhere ſaid ro come 25 * And unto Eber were born two ſons : and +Heb:She« 
L, we from Caphtorim. See Jer: 47: 4. Anſw. Therefore ſome make a the name of one was Peleg, for in his days 4 was che bs 4 


| trajection here, which i5not nuſual ; and read the words thus and OS X *Chan-r 1. 
8 Coltuhim, aud Caphtorim, out of whom came Philiſlim, Bur this ſeems earth divided r, and his brothers name yas Joktan. . N P11 


4 jo > » . 4 . \* M4 4 . ! m_ . a 
forced, nor is it neceſſary : For the place may be thus read with: | _ 9 Either 1. In the time of his Birth, whence he was ſo called. | 1 Chro: 
out any Parentheiis : And Ca/iuhim, our of whom came the Philiſtim Or, 2. Afterwards 1n the time of Life :* So his Father gave him 1: 19 "_ 
and CaMbtorim which two latter were Brethren, both the Son of rhis Name by the Spirit of Propheſie, fore-ſeeing this great Event, 7* '-* 


C2a/1:him y and ſo might ar firſt dwell together, whence their Names and the time of it. This being no unuſual thing in Scripture z 
are promiſcuorfly uſed one for another ; and the Caphror:ms are | 85 WE ſhall hereafter ſee, to give Prophetical Names to Children. 
1 


ſaid to owe? in Azz3h, or Gaza, the known feat of the Plil:ftines, \nd thus there 1s a longer and more convenient ſpace left for the 


Dewt: 2: 23. Aﬀrerwards they might be divided firſt in their Dwel- Peopling of the World, and Ripening of things for the general 
lings, then in their AﬀeCtions, a»d War one againſt another, and 1{perſfon aad Habiration of the Earth. r Firſt in Language, and 


the Caphtorim:, ſeem to have ſubdued and enſlaved the Phil ſtines, chen in Habitations. 


and pn OR into their Countrey, whom therefore God js faid 26 And Joktan begat Almodad s, and Sheleph and 
tn bring and deliver from Caphtor, Amos 9: 7. and the Caphrorims either Hazarmaveth. and Jerah | , 
3 5 


then or afterward might be detroyed and extirpated by the hand | { l 
| of God or Men, whence the Pliliſlines, in after times, are called | . s From him and the r eſt of Joktan , Sons here mentioned, come 
| The remnant of the Countrey of Caplitor, Jer: 27: 4. either 1. The Various Nations of India, as'moſt think. Or rather 
| | | "6 þ; : 2 2. The ſeveral People that live in the innermoſt parts of Arabia, 
3 Heb.7:z:- I al And Canzen begat T Sidon þ his firſt-born A, who proſeſs themſelves the Poſterity of Jothran, and have a city near 
| C01. and Heth þ Mecca, called Jettom. And the Homerites, one ſort of them, are de= 
a The Farher of the People, and builder of the City of Sion, duced from him by divers Writers, 
_ 11: 8: and 19: 28: 6 Of whom came the Hirtirer, Joſ. 1: 4.1 27 And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, 
and 9: 1, Oc. Ba : 28 And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba z 
16 And the Jzbuſitz *, and the Amorite, and the t A different Perſon from him werſe 7. and the Father of another br 
Girgaſite, 258 £O En ARM Y . People, having only the ſame Name with him. bg 
* Of th the other People followin ee Jol: 18: 22, 28. : ; * 
1; tmp fib-2;.4 5 : __ 29 And Ophir «, and Havilah-x, and Jobab : all 


2 Chron: 17: 4. Iſa: 49: 12. Ezek: 27: 8, 11. Amos G: 2, 14, Oc. 


hes +> G 
pn v _ 

. [RILEY -— 
RR —_—— MR 40. - 


Lþ 17. And the . Hivite, and the Arkice, and the | theſe _ ne was of Jokt1n. * | 2 
[ti Sinite, : Either t og 9 of wn: wo”: mo 2 we and 10. *, K.. 
38 : | - and 22. 49. r the other 1n Arava, of which fee Job: 22: 24. an IA 
T7.Ke - 18: And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the [yg 6 Seealfo 2ſal 45. 10. 1/s: 13. 12. x A diltin& Perſon —_ ; 
Wh: Hemathite ; and afterward were the familics of the | him, werſe 7. F 
" Canaznires ſpread abroad c. 30 And their dwelling was from Meſha as thou goeft J 

"By c Diſperied ia the ſeveral quarters of the Land, who, before they unto Sephar y, a mount of the eaſt 

't 5 . 


rew ſo numerous, dwelt together in the ſame place. , 4 
S : P 7 Theſe places: were either 1. In dia, where there are places - = 


19 And the border of the Canaanites was from | called by Prolomy and Pliny, Meſz, and Saparum and Sabara. Or 7 
f Heb:4t- Sidon d, as thou comeſt to Gerar, unto + Gaza e ; as rather 2. In Arabia, where there was a noted Port called Muſa ; 


4, ata Es 


zah. and near it, and Eaſtward from it, a People called &:pharite, and 
Sk thou goeſt unto Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah, |. Royal City called Saphar ; from kita this Sons and Jon 
wil and Zeboim f, even unto Laſha - ; ve : : ns a, 
"oy J, E "a 2. | Mountain doth here receive its Name. If it be ſaid, Arabia is not 
_ 4 (z.e.) The City and Counticy of Siden, on the North-weſt. | Eaſt but Sourh from Jules, it may be anſwered, x, That Arabis, 
hw | 4 | | a$ 


E 


rates Hr het Ew < 4 


"+" 
<<» > w*eag 
—_— — Dees 
os © 3 wry 


Clay. XT. GEMN 
«$17 is Eaſt in reſpet of Ezypt, where the Jews long dwelt, an1 
part of it is ſo to 5:22 alfo ; ſo it is nor feidom in Scripture rec- 
koned as a part of the Eaſt Countrey, as appears from Gen: 25. 6, 
18. Judg: 6. 3. 1 Kings 4: 30. Job 1: 3. Iſa: ' 11: 14. Jer: 49: 
28, And Tixitzs deſcribing Judea, ſairh, It is bounded on the Enſi 
by Arabia, 2. That this Mountain 1s {aid to be Eaſterly, nor 
ſimply, but in reſpe& of the City Ma, on the Eaſt whereof Pro- 

tomy placeth this Mountain, though he call it by another Name 
Cilimnx ; add to this, that Moſes ſpeaks of theſe places as known to 
the Jews, and therefore not ſo far diſtant from them as J1za/a, a 
place wholly unknown to them, and wherewith, as yer, they had 
no Communication. If it be further obje&ed, That if theſe People 
had been ſo near and well known to the Jews, we ſhould have had 
more mention of them in Scripture. I Anſwer, There is mention 
of ſome of them ; and for others, it is no wonder if by the fol- 
lowingWars among Nations,and mixtures and confuſtons of People, 
ſome of them were exrirpated, and others loſt their Names,though 
not thcir Beings, as oft hapned. | 

21 "Theſe ze the ſons of Shem, after their families, 
afcer their tongues, in their lands, after their nations, 

22 Theſe ore the families of the ſons of Noah, qfter 
their generations, in their nations, and by theſe were 


the Nations divided in the carth after the flood, 


CH AF. A 


One langunge in the earth, x. They journey from the eaſt, ſettle na 
plain in the land of Shinar, 2. Make bricks which they burn and uſe with 
lime, 3. Build a city and tower that they might not be ſcattered, 4. 
God ſees it. 5. Duſapprovves their deſign, 6. Defeats it, and ſccatters 
them by confounding their language, 7, 8. For which reaſon the place 
called Babcl, g. The poſterity of Shem to Abram, 10---=26. Avram takes 
Sarai to wife, 29. She is barren, 3o. He removes from Ur to Haran, 


the 


. 
Bro0= 


&C. 


31. Where his father des, 32. 
tHeb:Lip. N ÞD the whole carth a was of one F language, 
+ Heb: and of one | ſpeech b. 
Woras, 1 Chron: 16. 


a Earth is oft put for its inhabirants, as Gen. 6: 21, 
23. Pſal: 33: 8 b Which even Heathen Writers acknowledge ; 
and that probably was the Hebrew "Tongue. 

2 And it came to pals, as they + journeyed from the 
eaſt c, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar 
* and they dwelt there. 

+ (7. e. ) Nimrod and the reſt of his Confederats of Ham's Po- 
ſterity. c No: from Armenia, where the, Ark reſted, which was 
North from Babel, and is called Nerth in Scripture, as Jer. 25: 9, 
26, 2c. But from Aſjria, into which they had before come from 
the mountains of Ararat for more convenient Habitation, It 
may be rendered fo the Eaſt : Bur that manner of Tranſlation 
is neither uſual, nor neceſſary here. * Where Babel was, Gene- 


F2b ſis 10: 10. 

* +Heb: » 3 And Þ they faid one to another, Go to, Tet us 

'> manſaidto make brick d, and | burn them throughly. And they 
- hisneigh- had brick for ſtone, aud ſlime e had they for morter. |} 

rw d For in that low and fat Soil they had no Quarries of Stones. ' 

b- T Heb: The Heathen Writers agree that Babylons Walls were made of Brick. : 
5 burn them , A kind of Clay called Birumen, which, as P!/zy teftiierh, 1s Liquid | 
| 702 bur nd Glutinous, and fit to be uſed in Brick-buildings, as Strabo,Dzon, 


Bing. and others note. And that Babylon was built wich this, as 15 here |; 
ſaid, ve have the joint and expreſs Teſtimony of Beroſus, Cteſzas, | 
Dion, Curtius, and many others. by 

4 And they ſaid, Go to, let us build us a City and a | 
tower, whoſe top may reach unto heaven f, and let us * 
make us a name g, leit ws be ſcattered abroad upon the 


face of the whoie earth +. | Dy 

f (#. e. ) A very high Tower. An uſual Fyperbole both in | 
Scripture, as Deut: 1: 28: and 9: x. and in other Authors. This 
Tower and it's vaſt height is noted by Hero49:u5, Diodorus, and 
others. z (7. e. ) A great Name, as the phralc is elſewhere uſed. 
Comparc alio 2 Sam: 7: 9. with 1 Chron: 17: 8 See alto 1/a: 63. 
12, 14. Dan: 9.15 They take no care for God's Name, and 
the defence and propoga:ion of the true Religion, as duty bound 
them, bur meerly our of Pride and Vain glory l:bour to erect an 
everlaſting Monument of their Wit, and Wealth,and Magnifice.1ce 
to all Poſre:iry. & Their deſign was not to lecure themſelves 
againſt > Flood, which they well knew Brick-'uiidings were no 
fence again(t ; nor would they then - have built this Tower 1n a 
Plain, bur upon ſome high Mountain ; bur rather to prevent a 
toral and irrecoverable diſperſion. The; iought therefore to bind 
themſelves rogether in oge glorious Empire, and to make this glo- 
rious Ciry the capital Seat of it, and the place of Refuge and R<ſorr 
upon any con'{iderable Occaſion. | : 

5 And the LORD came down # to ſee the city, and 
the rower & which the children of men / built. 

; Nor by local deſcent, for he is every where ; but by the mani- 
feſtation of his Preſence and the effe&ts of his Power 1n that place. 
k (:i-e.) To know the truth of the Fa&, thereby ſetting a Patern 
for Judges to examine Cauſes before they paſ3. Sentence ; other- 
wiſe God ſaw this in Heaven ; bur in theſe Expreſſions he conde- 
ſcends to the capacity of Men. / So called emphatically, 1, For 
diſtin&ion of chem from the Sons of God, or the Race of Shem, 
who were not guilty of the Sin, and therefore did nor partake in 
the Curſe, the confuſion of their Language, but retained their an- 
cient Tongue uncorrupted for a good while. 2. To note their 
raſhneſs and folly, who being but weak and filly Men, duiſt op- 
poſe themſelves to the infinitely Wife and Powerful God, who 
did (as they might eaſily gather both from his Words and Works) 
intend 'to diſperſe and ſeparate them, that ſo by degrees they 
might poſſeſs the whole Earth, which God had made for that 
Purpoſe. 

6 And the LORD ſaid +, Behold, the people is one, 
and they have all one language ; and this they begin ' 
to do, and now nothing will be reſtrained from them, 


Which they have imagined to do. 


b:She« 4 
ap:I11, 2 
9. xv] &- 


2 


! dred and thirtie 


: dred years, and begar ſons and daughters, 


name of Abrams wife was Sarai ; and the name of Na- 
R0rs Wife, 


a 

% 
- 
\ 
JW 


ES1S Chap. Rh 


7 Go toy /:t us 2 g9 down, and there confound their 
language », that they may nor + underſtand one ano- + Heb; 
| thers ſpeech 0, hear. 

m (i. e. ) The bleſſed Trinity. Sec Gen: r. 26: n» By making 
them forget their former Language. and by puting into their 
Minds ſeveral Languages, not a diſtin& Language into cach Perſon, 
but into each Family, or rather into each Nation. o And thereby 
be difenabled from that muthal Commerce, which was altogether 
n<cefiary for the carrying on of that Work. 

8 Sothe LORD cattered them abroad from thence 
upon the face of all the earth p: and they lefc off ro 
build the City. 

Thus they brought upon themſelves the very thing they fear- 
ed,and that more ſpecdily and more miſchievoully to themſelves : 

For' now they were not only divided in place, but in Lan- 
guage too, and ſo were unfitted for thoſe Confederacies and Cor- 
reſpondencies which they mainly deſigned, and for the mutnal 
Comfort and Help of one another, which otherwiſe they might in 
good meaſure have enjoyed. : : | 

9 Therefore is the name of it called * Babel, be- * That is, 
cauſe the LORD did there confound the language of confuſion, 
all the earth : and from thence did the LORD ſcatter 
chem abroad upon. the face of all the earth. LE 

10 © * Thele are the generations of Shem q: Shem * Chap: 
was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two 1032. . 
years after the flood. | x Chron; 


7 Not all of them, as appears both from the next verſe,and from ** 77: 
the former chapter ; but of thoſe who were the Seminary of the 
Church, and the Progenitors of Chriſt. 


11 And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five 
hundred years r; and begat ſons and daughters. 

r So that he lived almoſt all the time of Abraham ; which was 
a ſingular Bleſſing both to himſelf, who hereby ſaw his Children 
of the renth Generation ; and to the Church of God, which by 
= —_ enjoyed ths Counſel and Condu& of fo great a Pa« 

i2 And Arphaxad lived five and thirtie years, and 
begat Salah. 

13 And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah, four 
hundred and three *years, and begat ſons and daugh- 
14 And Salah lived thirtie years, and begat Eber. 

I5 And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hun- 
dred and three years, and begat ſons and daughters, 

16 * And Eber lived four and thirtie years and be- 
gat * Peleg. 

I- And Eber lived after he begat Peleg, four hun- 


*; Chron: 
T1: 19. 
* Called. 
Luk:3:15, 
years s, and begat fons and daughters. Phalec; 
s So that he was the longeſt liv'd ofall the Patriarchs which were 
orn afcer the Flood. 
18 And Peleg lived thirtie years, and begat Reu- 
19 And Peleg lived after he begat Reu, two hundred 
and nine years, and begat ſons and daughters. 
20 And Reu lived ewo and thirtie ycars, and begat 
M SCrug. 
21 AndReu lived after he begat Serug, two hundred 
and ſeven years, and begat fons and daughters. 
22 And Serug lived tiurtie years, and begat Nahor. 
| 223 And Serug lived after he begat Nahor, two hun- 


b 


* Luke 4. 
35- Va» | 
ruch, 


24 And Nahor 7 lived nine and twentie years, and | 
begar * Terah- * Luke 3. 
; The firſt Patriarch who fe11 to Tdolatry. 34.Thara, 


25 And Nahor live after he begat Terah, an hun- 
dred and nineteen years, and begat ſons and daughe 
TCIS. 

26 And Terah lived ſeventie 
Abram x, 'Nahor, and Harav. . 2.i1Chre} 

 ( i.e.) Began to beget, as Ger: 5: 32. «x Who is firſt named 1: 26. 
in order of Dignity, ( for which cauſe She is put before Ham and, 
Japheth, and Moſes before Aaron ) not in order of time, which 
ſeems to be this ; Haro? probably was the eldeſt, becauſe Nzhor mar- 
ried his Daughter ; Nz{or the fecond ; and Abram certainly was 
the youngeſt, becauſe Terah, Airan's Father lived rwo hundred and 
five years, verſe 32. and 4bram after his Father's Death,  A#s 7: 4. 
went out of Harau, when he was ſeventy five years old, Gen. : 2, 

4, 5. therefore he was not begotten in Tera's ſeventieth Year, 
when Terah began to beget his Sons. +s here is faid, but in his one 
hundred and thiztieth Year,and fo. there remains ſeventy five Years 
preciſely to Abrhns departure. And Sarai, Haraz's Daughter was. 
bur ren Years younger than Abram, Gen: 17: 17. and therefore Hz- 
ran was Abrams elder Brother. 


27 4 Now theſe are the generations of Terah : Te- 
rah begat Abram, Nahar, and Haran : and Haran 
begat Lot. rs 

28 And Haran died before his father Terah 7 in 


the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Caldees, _ 
9 (4. e. ) In the preſence and during the life of his father. | 
29 And Abram and Nahor took them wives : the 


WE _ 
; - _ 
years, and * degat « * Joſh:242, 


#þ 


a. 


Milcah, the daughter of Haran z, the father 
of Miicah, and the father of Iſcah 4. | 


: iO 


Mi a wo ba $4 27 
» Such Marriages of Uncles and Neices being permitted then, 


+ In way of Holy Scorn and Deriſion; Compare Gen: 3: 22; 


Exad: 6; 20, ( as in the beginning of the World, the Marriages of, 
D 2 Brethrea 


: | F 


[| 


| 
| 
| 


«| 


LI 


i - ad Didi ct ee At rt ot 
"El Led 


IE . 
Lhe? 


PI 


a9 I, 


VO nb" o A ORG < COA AR COB. Eds AAA arts fe OY ts. 1 


{ 
' 


| 
| 2: 
| 

| 
| 


= 
Fy 


«4, :* te lb. 


— 0-4 G02 Ye) FRE: oF adi OBE. + oo A WO RET 0 3 IVF Ar As, 
5 - on) 
. ; A 


—_ 


} 
i 
Fl 
z 
d] ” 
: 
| 
S- 
{ 
+. 
| 
| 
4 
. 
: 


« 


V7 ” 


: 


Lord 


p. XII. 


Brethren and Siſters were ) though afterwards, the Church being 
very much enlarged, they were ſeverely forbidden, Levit: 18: 12, 
14: - Who is either Sarai, as the Jews and many others think, or 
rather another Perſon. For 1. Why ſhou'd Moſes expreſs Sarai thus 
darkly and doubrfully ? Had he meant her, he would have added 
afier Iſcho, this is Sarai, according to his manner in like cafes, Ger: 
14: 2, 7. and 35. 6, 2. He elſewhere calleth her, 7he Davghter, not 
of his Brother, as he ſhould have done, had ſhe been 1/cha, bur of his 


- Father by another Mother. 


Neh: 9:7: 
FAQs 7.4. 


30 But Sarai was Barren ; ſhe þz4 no child b. . 

b See Gen. 16: x, 2. and 18.. 11, 12. 

21 And Terah rook Abram his ſon c, and Lot the 
ſon of Haran, his fons ſon, and Sarai his daughter 
in law, his ſon Abrams wife ; and they went forth 
with them + from * Ur of the Caldees, to go into the 
land of Canaan ; and they came unto Haran 4, and 


dwelt e there, 

c See Joſ: 24. 2. Nehem: 9. 7. 1 Chron. 1: 26. Being informed 
by his Son of the command of God, he did not deſpiſe it, becauſe 
it came to him by the hands of his inferiour, bur chearfully obey- 
eth it ; and therefore he is ſo honourably mentioned as the Head 
and Governour of the Aﬀtion. + (7.e.) Terah and Abram went 
with Lot and Sarai, as their Heads and Guides. d Called Charran, 
Hs 7: 4+ and by the Romans Carre, a place in Meſopotamia ſtrict- 
ly fo calied, in the way to Canaan, and near to it, well known 
by Craſſus his defeat there, See Gen: 24: 10. and 28: 10. and 29. 4. 
e Or, reſted or abode, being detained there for a ſeaſon ; peradven- 
ture by Trrah's diſeaſe, which begun there, for the next verſe tells 
us of his death. ; | 

32 And the days of Terah were two hundred and 


five years: and Terah died in Haran. | 
C H,A P. XII 


God calls Abram from his own countrey and kindred to Canann, 1. Promiſes 
ro make of him a great and flouriſhing Nation ; and to bleſs in Chriſt his 
ſeed, 2, 3. Abram obeys, 4---6+ God appears to him, and promiſes to 
give Canaan to his ſeed ; he/builds an altar, 7. He removes to Bethel, 
and there builds an altar, $, 9. There being a famine he goes down t0 
Feypt, 10. He adviſes Sarai to equivocat, 11---13. She 1s taken into 
Pharaoh's houſe, 15. Pharaoh kind to Abram for her jake, 16. God 
plagues him becauſe of Sarai, 17. He calls Abram and expoſtulates with 
him, 18, 19. Sends him ſafely away, 20. , 


1/4 Heb:aud FRT OW the * LORD had faid « unto Abram, Get 


N thee ous of thy countrey,* and from thy kindred, 


;&c. 2nd from thy fathers houſe b, unto a land that I will 


&s 7:3 
h:3 1:3 


ſhew th:e c. 

a To wit, in Ur of the Chaldees, by comparing Gen: 11: 31. with 
ARES 7: 3, 4+ or, did ſay, again, 7. e. renewed the command in Ha- 
ran, whileſt Abram might poſlibly linger there, as afterwards Lot 
did in Sodom,longer than he thould. Bur the former interpretation 1s 
more probable, becauſe Moſes ſpeaks here of that command of God 
which came to Abram before he was gone from his kindred and fa- 
ther's houſe, and therefore before he came to Haran. And this com- 
mand was given to Abram either immediatly, or by Sem, then the 
Governout of God's Church. 6 From the family of Machor, which 
was now become TIdolatrous, Gen: 31: 3o. Joſ: 24: 2. and conſe- 


quently, their Society was dangerous and pernicious ; and there» 


|! + Heb: 


| #hake thee will bleſs thee d, and make thy name great, and thou 
{ agreat Na-. 


#2700. 


© . 


:18. 


"RN to me. 


283 > 


fore God mercifully ſnatcheth him asa brand out of the Fire. c Which 
as yet he nameth nor, for the greater tryal and exerciſe of 4brom's 
faith and patience, compare a: 41: 2. Heb: 11.8. 

2 And I will | make of thee a great nation, and I 


ſhalt be a blefling e: | 

d With all my bleſſings, Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal. See. 
Devt: 7: 13: and 28: 2, &c. and Eph. 1: 3:e( 7. e.) Botha par- 
tern and inftrument of Bleſlednefſs ro others; to thy Poſterity who 
ſhall te bleſſed forthy ſake; to thy Servants and Friends who ſhall 
be bleſſed by thy inſtrufttion and help ; and to all the World, as it 
follows. | 


2 And I will bleſs them that bleſs thee, and cu:ſe 


*Chap:18 him that curſeth thee f': * in thee g ſhall all familics 
| x8:and * þ of the earth be bleſſed 5. 


f Thoſe that are Friends or Enemies to thee, ſhall be the ſame 
A marvellous condeſcenfſion and priviledge. g (7.e.) In 
thy Seed, as it is explained Ger. 22: 18. and 26. 4. and 28. 24. 
( z. e. ) in and through Chrift, Af#s 3: 25. Gal. 3: 9, 16, 28, 29. 


or for thee, as the Chaldee hath it, 3. e. for thy ſake ; or,by hee, 7. e. 


by thy means ; or with thee, by comparing this with Gal: 3: 8,9. 7. e. 
in the ſame way and manner in which thou art bleſſed, that is, by 
a fruitful Faith, Compare Rom: 4: 11, 12, 16. h(5.e-) All 
Nations; which is to be limited to the Believers of all Nations, 
by the whole current of the Sc:iprures. 7 All that ſhall be bleſſed, 


' ſhall be bleſſed bþy this means, aad no other way. 


4 So Abrim departed & as the LORD had ſpoken 
unto him, and Lot went with him : and Abram as 
ſeventy and five years old when he departed out of 
Haran, | 

& Firſt from Ur, and after his father's death from Haran. 

5 And Ajbram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his 
brothers ſon, and all their ſubſtance that they had ga- 
thered, and the ſouls / that they had gotten »: inHaran; 
and they went forth to go into. the land of Canaan: 
and into the land of, Canazn they came. 

I ( 7. e. ) The perſons, as the word Souls is oft uſed, as Gen: 14. 
21. and 17. 4. Exod: 12: 15. Levit: 2: 1. Num: 23: 10. Dent: 
24:" 7: Mark 3: 4. &c. m Heb: made, ( i: e: ) either 1. begotten ; 
for though Abram had yer no children, Lot had, and both their 
Serrants had Children by their Fellow-ſervants born in their Houſe, 
which might well be numbred among Abram's and Lot's perſons, 
becauſe they had, an abſolute Dominion over them, Or, 2, 


, 
u 


GENESIS. 


cauſe her Beaury was not diminiſhed by Childbearing. 


| 
<—_ 


frruRed, ( 7. e. ) turned from Tdolatry, and taught in the truc Reli- 
gion, as the Chaldee expounds it: For ſuch were moſt p.oper for 
Abram to take along with him out of his Father's Houle in this Ex- 
pedition» Or, 3. Gorten, ( i.e.) procured either by conqueſt or 
purchaſe, or any other lawful and uſual way. 

6 4 And Abram paſſed through the land unto the 
place of Sichem », unto the plain of Moreh. And 


the Canaanite o was then ii the land p. : 

1 Heb. Sechem, a place afterwards ſo called in the Mounrains of 
Ephraim, Joſ: 21: 21. Judg. 8. 31. and here ſo called by anticipa- 
tion. o Properly ſo called ; that curſed, cruel, impious, and ido- 
latrous Nation. See Zech. 14: 21. This is'added as an aggrava- 
tion of Abram's Faith-and Obedience, that he durſt and did profeſs 
che true Religion in the midſt of ſuch a People 3 which could not 
be without great danger both of his Eſtate and Life p As a ſettled 
Inhabitant to continue there for a long time ; whereas now 1n 
Moſes his time, he was forthwith ro be expelled out of it. 

7 And the LORD appeared unto Abram q, and 
ſaid, * Unto thy ſe<d will I give this land » : and 
there built he an * altar s unto © LORD, who ap- 


peared unto him. 
9 To encourage and comfort him againſt his wicked neighbours. 
See Gen: 13: 15: and 15: 18: and 17. 8. and 24: 7. Deut: 34: 4. 5 A 
place for Sacrifice, and other parts of Divine Worſhip, ere&ed by 
him both to keep his Family in the true Religion, and to ſeparate 
himſelf and them from that idolatrous ne;zghbourhood. | 
8 And he removed from thence uno a mountain on 
che eaſt of Beth-el 7, and pitched his rent, having Beth- 
el on the weſt #, and Hai x on the eaſt : and there he 
built an altar unto the LORD,and called upon the name 
of the LORD. 


t A known place,/ which afterwards was called Beth-el, but now 
Luz, Gen: 28: 19: An uſual prolepſis, or anticipation, as before, 
verſe 6, u Or, On the Sea; which is all one, becauſe the Sea was 
on the Weſt part of the Land. See Ger: 13 14. and 22: 14. Nm. 
3: 23: Deut: 3: 27« x Or, 4, as it is called Joſ: 7. 2. Jer: 49. 3. 1/a. 
Io: 28. 

9 And Abram journeyed y, + going on ſtill towards 
the fouch z. 

y Removing from place to place, ſtill hoping to meet with bet- 
ter Neigbours, and to fiee himſelf from that perpetual Vexation 
which he had in beholding their Wickedneſs. z ( 7. e. J The Sou- 
thern part of the Land of Canaan towards Egypr. | 

to 4 And there was a famine in the land a: hd 
Abram went down into Egypt to ſojourn there : ty 
the famine was grievous 1n the land. 

a Or, In that land of Canaan, a Land eminently fruitfu!, Dev: 
8: 7, 8. This was paitly to puniſh that Peoples Sins, Pſal: 107. 34. 
partly to try Abrams Faith. 

11 And it came to paſs, when he was come near 
ro enter into Egypt, that he ſaid unto Sarai his wife, 
Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to 


look upon 6. 

b Queſt. How could ſhe be ſo fair,when ſhe wasabove ſixty Years 
old ? nſw. She was ſo both comparatively to the Egyptians, and 
ſimply in her ſelf, and that mighr be from divers cauſes ; 1. From 
the :greater vigour of Nature 1a that Age of the World. 2. Be- 
3 From 
Cods ſingular Providence, ordering it thus for 4bram's tryal, and 
for the manifeſtation of his ſpecial Providence, watching over him 
and his. 

12 Therefore it ſhall come to paſs, when the Egypti= 
ans 7 (hall ſee thee, that they ſhall ſay,7 his is his wife: 
and they will kill me, but they will fave thee alive. 

+ Who were a very luſtful People ; which made Abram more 
Cautious. 


13 Say, T pray thee, thou art my ſiſter c: that it 
may be well with me for thy fake ; and my ſoul ſhall 
live becauſe of thee, 

c So ſhe was either, x. More generally, as his Niece ; for Ne- 
phews and Nieces are in Scripture called Brethren and Siſters, as 
Gen: 13:8, x1. Or rather, 2+ Properly, ( 7. e.) by the iather's 
ſide, Gen: 20: 12. So this exprefiion was true, but ambiguous, 


and. intended to deceive the Egyptians, and therefore unwarran- 


table. And here Abram, the Father of the Faithful, elſewhere 
celebrated for the ſtrength of his Faith, betrays his Infirmity and 
diſtruſt of God's Providence and Promiſe, and this Fa& was not 
withour great danger both to himſelf and Sara. 


14 4 And it came to paſs, that when Abram was 
come into Egypt, the Egyptians - beheld the woman, 
that ſhe was vety fair. 

15 The Princes d alſo of Pharaoh e ſaw her, and 
commended her before Pharaoh : and the woman was 
taken f into Pharaohs houſe g. + 

d (7. e.) The officers and Courtiers , whoſe great deſign was 
to gain their Princes Favour by gratifyzng his Luſts. e A name 
common to all the Kings of Ezypr now, and for many Ages after. 
f (7. e. ) Taken and brought, one word for two. So the word 
take 1s uſed, Gen: 15: 6, 10, Exod: 18: 2. and 27: 20, Of £ Not to 
his Bed, but the Houſe of his Women, where they were purified 
and prepared for the King's Preſence and Society, as E#: 2: 8, 9. 
that in due time ſhe might be his Concubine or Wife. Thus even 
the Ceremonies of Courts, ſerve the Providence of God, and give 
opportunity for working her deliverance. 


16 And he entreated Abram well for her fake s 
and he had * ſheep, and oxen, and he-aſles, and men- 


ſervants, and maid-ſervants, and ſhe-aſſes, and camels. 
fon, * To 


+ 
$0 


Cha Ds X[l. | 


Heb: in 
ing and 
Journeyings 


"0 


12. 


THe 
bret] 


: See. 


Ti: 1 
Exoi 
2:13 


: AQ: 


Chap. XIIL. 


* Chap: 
T0; 16: 


* Chap. 


I2. 7. 


been impertinent to mention it in this place. 


17 And the LOR D * plagued Pharaoh h and his | for our imitation. þ Or ; or, between, &c. aus for or, as E:x0a: 21: 17: 


houſe ; with great plagues, becauſe of Sarai Abrams 
wife k. | | 

þ Moſt probably with ſome notable Diſtemper of his Body, which 
did both chaſtiſe him. for, and hinder him in the execution of his 
Luft. 7 (i.e. ) His: Servants ; who being tome one War, fome 
another, partners ofh1s Sin, ars juſily made partners 1n his Plagues. 
And if any were innocent inthis matter, they were obnox10us to God 
far other Sins. Belides, as they were puniſhed upon the occaſion of 
PB irno's Sin, ſo Phazavh was punithed 1n their Puniſhmenrs k (i.e ) 
For the a& of Violence towards her: -For the word -oken, Perſ. 15. 
implies, that it was by conſtraint, and not with 4rom's and with 
her conſent; which it is not probable that either of chem would 
give in thar caſe. 2, For an intention of uncleanneſs. For God 
who is the ſearcherand judge of Mens Hearts, may juſtly, 2nd dorh 
ofcen puniſh Men for their evil purpoſes. Compare Gen. 20 3, 4. | 

18 And Pharaoh called Abram, and faid, Wha zs 
this 1hat thou haſt done unto me ? Why didft thou not 


tell me that ſhe was thy wife / ? 122} ed. 

1 How great an injury haſt thou done to me in concealing this 
from me thar ſhe was thy Wife? How knew Pharaoh this? Anſw. 1. 
He gueſſed it from the quality of his Plague; which alſo awakened 
his Conſcience. . 2. Upon a ſerious enquiry into the Cauſe of this 
Plague, he underſtood it either by Divine Inſtin&, as Gen- 20. 3. or 
by Sara:'s Cont:flion, whom doubtleſs he ſeverely examined about 


GENESIS. | Chap. Alif. 


. ** » 6 of y 3 7 F- 1” herch Ls 
* To wit, by Pharaol's gift over and above his own. Elſe it had | g The elder, and wifer, and worthter perſon relinqu'fh 


. . . . » - . l 1 
| own right ro his inferiour for peace ſake, leaving us a noble exampie 


and Pſal: 8: 5: compared with Matth: 15: 14: Heb: 2: 6: for there \ 
was nv ſtrife between Abram and Lot; thongh he feared it might ? 
paſs from the feet ro the head. 7 ( i: e..) Both by nature near 
Kinſmen, as the word Brother is ofc uſed ; and in the Faith and 
Religion too ; amongſt whem Contenrions are very Indecent and 
Scandalous. 


9 Is not the whole. land before thee & ? Separate thy 
ſelf, I pray thee, from me * if rh.u it take 1 the lefc 
hand, then I will go to the righr: orif thou depart to the 
right hand, then 1 will go to the lefr. 

k ( 7. e.) Open to thy view, and free ro chuſe which part thou 
Pleafſeſt, as thou c2uſt agree with the Owners : I give thee full power 
ro chute before me. See a like phraſe, Gen: 20: 15: and 34: 1, 21: 
and 47:6. 1 This andthe foliowing Supplement are eafiiy gathered 
both from the words of this and the 11 Yerſe, and from rhe nature 
of the thing. And the Hebrew Language being a conciſe or ſhort 
Language, ſuch Supplements are frequently neceſſary, and very 


uſual. Compare 2 Chron: 10: 12: with 1 Kings 12: 11: 2 Sam: 23: 8: 
with 1 Chron: 11: 11: 


10 And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain 
of Jordan », that it was well watered every where, 


before the LORD deſtroyed Sodom and Gomorrah 


it. And ſhe, being awakened ' by this warning, durſt no longer | 


conceal her ſe!f, and thought ſhe might ſecurely make her telf ; 


known. ; fl : 

19 Why ſaideſt thou, ſhe is my fiſter ? ſo I might 
have taken her to me to wite m: now therefore behold 
thy. wife, take ber, and go thy way. @_ Ez 

» Though he had another before; Polygamy being then commonly 
prattiſed. : ; 

29 And Pharaoh commanded þ;s men concerning 
him - : and they ſent him away, and his wife, and all 
that he had. 


» (i.e. ) Gave them a charge concerning him for his ſafe condu&t 
whither he pleaſed. 


C HA P. AHL 


Abram retuſns from Egypt to Canaan with Lot, 1« He comes to Bethel ; 
calls en the Lord, 3, 4. Afram and Lot being bath very rich are obliged 
to part. Int goes to Sodom, 5---=-=- -='2 The men of S\d'm »xceeding 
wicked, 13. God renews his Promiſe ## Abram concerning Cmaan, and a 


O—— —— 


[7 
s 


numereus iſſue, 14---17. Abram removes t0 Mamre, and there builds an . 


altar, 18. 


N D, Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his 
wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him into 
the ſouth 2. | 

s (i.e,) Into the Southern part of Canaan. from whence he came, 
Gen: 12; 9: and which in Scriprureis called {imply the South, Feſ- 10: 14: 
and 1: 16 Otherwiſe he went carher into the Norrh : But the 
Scrip* ure, being written for the Jews, doth frequzntly accommodate 
the Names of the quarters of rh: World to them. 

2 And Abram as very rich in cattel, in filver, and 
in gold. | 

2 Andhe went on his journey b from the ſouth, even 
to Beth-el, unto the place where his tent had been ac 
the beginning, betweer. Beth-el and Hai, 

b Or rather, according to Þis journeys which he took as he came, 
going in the ſame Road, and reſting in the fame piace, of which he 
had experience. | 

4 Unto the * place of the altar c which he had made 
there at the firit : and there Abram called on the name 
of the-LORD 4. | 

c (7.e.) Where the Altar was ; for the Altar it ſelf was either 
fallen down, as being provably built of Earth, as afrerwards, Exod, 
20: 24: oroverthrown by rhe wicked Canaamtes. d4(7.e. ) Worſhipped 
Got by Prayer, and Preaching to his Family, Gen: 18: 19; and 
oiiering Sacrificess See Gen: 4: 26: and 12:8. | 

5 1 And Lot alſo which went with Abram, had 
flocks, and herds, and tents. ; 

6 And the land was not able to bear them, that they 
might dwell together : for their ſubltance was great, fo 
that they couid not dwell together. | 

7 And there was a ſtrife between the herds-men of 
Abrams cattel, and the herds-men of Lots cattel : and 
the Canaanite e and the Perizzite dwelt then ih the 
land f. | | 

e(7 e. ) The Canaanites, a5 Gen: 12:6: the ſingular number for 
the Jon as Pſal: 18: 45: and 105: 33, 40. f (7. e )' Were the 
Lords and Owners of it, and cheref'xre 4bram and Lot could nor take 
what Paſtures they pleaſed, but ſuch as the others lefr them, which 
was not ſufficient for their conveniency. It may alſo be added as a 
reaſon of Abram's following motion, becanſe thar Tdolatrous People 


ere preſent, apd diligently obſerved all their Contentions and 
\ other Mifczrriages ; and would, doubtleis, take occaſion thence to 
| diſparag= the rue Religion. And it muſt be remembred, that theſe 


are the words not of Abram, bur of Moſes ; who, knowing that rhe 


Canaanites were then ſpeediiy to be'turned our of tix Land, 1atimares 
THeb. men t 


brethren. 


2:13:* 


, were poſle({t, an 
Sce chap. the Land. 


bat_ the/ caſe was otherwile in Abram's days, when the Canaanites 


| 


! Or, even untill thou comeſt, 1. e, till a man come to Zoar, i. e. all 


d were likely to continue the Poſleflors and Lords of 


8 And Abram ſaid unto Lot g, Let there be no ſtrife, 


I pray thee, between me and thee, and þ between my” Inf. 1. TRI -Wor mede rolthers apo contin wrt 
AR: 7:26: herds-men and thy herds-men, . for we be 7 brethren 5. | 


even as the Garden of the LORD », like the land of 
Egypt o, as thou comelt unto Zoar p. | 

m A grear Plain fo called, becaule there rhe pleaſant River Tordax 
divided it ſelf into divers little Streams or Rivulets, which having 
no viſible out-ler into the Sea, by degrees, and in ſeveral places 
inſinuated themſelves into the Exth, which made it very fruitful 
and excellent for Lor's purpoſe. Butthis lovely Plain was afrerwards 
transformed by Divine Vengeance into a filrly Lake or dead Sea, 
Gen: 19:. n( 4.e,) Eirher 1. Like that famous Garden of Eden which 
God himſelf planted, Gzy: 2; 10, The like compariſon we meet 
with, Iſai. 51: 3: Ezeky 28: 13: and' 31: 8: Os, 2. Lik: ſome 
excellenr Garden : For &xcllent things are thus expreſſcd, as the hoſt 
of God, 1 Chron: 12: 22: 7. e. a great hoſt : Cedart ef God, Pſal. 80: 10: 
o A Land of eminent fertility by the influence of that great River 
Nilus ; anc:ently celebrated as the Granary of other Countries. See 
Ezek: 31. p (i.e. ) To Bela, Gen: 14: 2: afterwards called Zoar, 
G-n: 19: 22: and here ſo cailed by a Prolepſis. ' But theſe words are 
not to he joyned with the words immediately going before, as if 
Egypt was commended for its fertiliry in thay part of it, from 
whici men go ro.Zoar, but with the more remore words, and the 
ſenle is, as the words of the Text are rrarſplaced and rendred by 
ſome, that The plain of Jordan was ( before the Lord deſtroyed it. ard 
its Cities Sedom and Gomorrah ). watered every where, even to Zuar 1 


the way Whici1 leads from the place where Abram then was, to 
Zoar, And ſuch tranſpoſitions are not unuſual, as we fall ſee here. 
after, 


1: Then Lot choſe him all the plain of Jordan ; and 
Lot journeyed eaſt q: and they ſeparated theme! 


Ves, ; 
the + one from the other. boanp = 
 |4 Heb. From the Eaft, or, Eaftwai'd, as the Hebrew particle min, FES brother; 
1s i>metimes uſed, See Ger: 2: 8; 2 Sam: 2: 2: compared with 

1 Chron: 13. G6. 


{2 Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan, and Lot 
dwelt in the cities of the plain, and pitched his rent 
toward Sodom. | 

13 But the men of Sodom were * wicked, and ſinners * pe: 
before the LORD » exceedingly. | 16: 49: 

r Eminent, noted and impudent Sinners. See Gen: 18: 20' Exek: 
I6: 49: which is here added, as a fecrer Reproef to Lot, who was 
either careleſs in his enquiry into the diſpoſirions and manners of 
thoſe among whom he intended to fix his abode ; which for many 
Reaſons he thould have ſearched cut : Or he was willing to expole 
bimſc!f to all. the hizards which he might incur by their Neighbours 
hood and familiarity, for the ſweetneſs and fertility of the Soil. Ari 
errour which 1s frequently committed by Men in the choice of their 
Habirarions, and which oft coſts them dear, as it did Zot in the f6. 
lowing Story. 7 


i2 5 And the LORD ſaid unto Abram, after that Lot 
was ſeparated from him s, Lift up now thine eyes, and 
look. from the place where thou art, north-ward, aid 
{ourh-ward, and eaſt-ward, and weſt-ward. | 
s To comfort him now when he was alon?, and in a worſe Soil 
than Zo: had choſen, 


15 For all the land which thou ſeeſt z, ® to thee « * honey 


will I give ic, and to thy ſeed for ever x 77 Deas 
e Ovject, Abram could iee bur a little part of the Land. Aiſw. n, BY 4: 5 
He might now poſſibly be upon a Mountain, from wherice he ?* 


might have & latge proipe3t every way. .2- He gavehim all that ks 
ſaw, but not only that, but allo the reſt. of rhe Lanc, and theres 
foie he bids him walk through and view the whole Lond, Pre 17: 
% Yieſt. How was tae Land given to Ab7zm, when it is expreſiy 
ſaid, He, 1. e. God gave him mone Inheritance in it, no, not ſo mucy 
as to ſet his ſoot on, Atts 7: 5s: Aujw. 1. God gave Abram the right. 
to it, though not the aQual p:{f:MNon of ir, until the time chat 
God appointed ; as God gave the right of the Kingdom tv Davis, 
bur nor the Poſſeſſion till Sau!'s Death. 2. God explains himfelt, 
; To thee and 0 thy ſeed, 1.2. to thee, that is, to thy Seed, and that 
for thy lake ; the particle ava being pur oft for rhar is, as” 
1 Chron: 21' 12: compared with 2 Sam: 24: 13. Epi: 1: 3: and' in 
many other places, as we ſhall ſee. » Quzeft, How [ for cv ] 
when afrer iome. hundreds of Years they were turned out of it ? 


Obedience, which is oft exprefied in other plices, as Levit. 18: 
: D ; 26: Dew? 


2 


{Chap. XIV. 


{i 26: Deut: 4: 25, 26: {ſai: 48: 18, 19: 2 
| for ever, doth nor always fignify Erermry, but a long continuance, 
| as is evident from Gen: 37: 13: and 48: 4: Exod: 21: 6: Pſal: 132: 14- 
and many ether places of Scripture ; and in particular, when 1t 15 
| applied to the Jewith Rires and Priviledges it commonly ſignifies 
no more, than during the ſtanding of that Common-wealth, or 
until the coming of rhe Meſſias ; and foit may here be underſtood. 

16 AndI will 'make thy ſeed as the duſt of the carth : 
ſo that if a man can number the duſt of the earth, ber 
ſhall thy ſeed alſo be numbred. ; 

17 Ariſe, walk through the land, in the length of it, 
and in the breadth of ir: for I will give it unto thee. 

18 Then Abram removed bis tent, and came and 
dwelt in the+ plain of Mamre y which is in* Hebron z, 
ard buiir there an altar unto the LORD. 

y An Amorite of great note, from whom rhe Ciry Hebron was called 
Mamre, Gen: 23.19. a Friend and Confederate of Abram, Gen: 14: 13: 
by whom it is thought he was brought to the knowledge and worthip 
of the true God. z Or, near Hebron ; for ſo the Hebrew Beth is ſome- 


times taken. 
CHAP. XIV. 


Scweral kings wage war againſt the king of Sodom, &c. Lot is taken pri- 
ſoner, 1-=--=-12, Abram reſcues him, 15-------16. The king of Sodom 
coxeratulates him his wiftory, 17. Melchizedek king of Salem bleſſes him ; 
to him Abram gives Tithes, 18 —— 20, The king of Sodom offers to 
give Abram the goods taken in viftory, 21, Which Abram refuſes to accept 
22===-=24. 


N D it came to paſs in the days of Amraphel king 
of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellaſar, Chedorlaomer 
king of Elam, and Tidal king of * Nations: 

a i.e. Of a People which came to him our of ſeveral Nations, 
( being allured pcſſibly by his Fame, or by Promiſes and Priviledges 

granted to them ) and put themſelves under his Government. Or 
Goiim is the name of a certain place or Countrey, ſo called from rhe 

- confluence of divers People or Nations thither, as Thrus is called re 
Mart of Nations, Iſai: 23: 3: upon the ſame account. 

2 That theſe made war with Bera king b of Sodom, 
and with Birſha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of 
Admah,. and Shemeber, king of Zeboiim, and the king 
of Bela which is * Zoar. 

b Once for all, obſerve that the name of Kings is here and elſewhere 
given by Moſes to the chief Governours of Cities or little Provinces. 
Compare Joſ: 12: 9: Oc. 

3 All theſe were joined together in the vale of Siddim, 
which 3s Þ the falt ſea. 


: + Which now is, though when this Battel was fought it was not 
O- | 


2. The word Olam, rendred 


rela 
_—— —— _ 


- o—F4 adbbvc * wut of 
* 


78 xe th 


$4 #4 Eire db 4 eres trigger wt 


=_ phone 


8} Ff Heb. 
$; p/ains. Or, 
RF oken helts. 
_ * Chap. 
35.27. 


 ® Joſh. 


12: 33- 


4 Twelve years they ſerved Chedorlaomer c, and i» 
the thirteenth year they rebelled. 

c Who was their Lord, either 1. By Inheritance, as the ifſte of 
Elam, S$:mi's Son, Gen: 10: 22. Or, 2. By Conqueſt, having ſubdued 
thoſe People in a former War, which Joſephus ſpeaks of. 

5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer. 
and the kings that were with him d, and ſmore tie 
Rephaims e in Aſhtaroth-Karnaimf, and the Zuzims ir 

} Or, the Ham, and the Emims g in + Shaveh-kiriathaim 5. 
plain of Ki- d (i.e. )) Confederate with him for the recov:ry of his Righ: 
riathaim. expeCting the ſame aſſiſtance from him upon the like occation. ec A 
ficrc2 and warlike People of Canaan. See Gen: 15: 20: Or the Giants. 
, as this word 1s taken, Deur: 2; 11. f A place in Baſen called Aſhteroth 
Deut: 1: 4: Joſ: 9: 10: and 13: 31. Ir is furnamed Carnaim, q. d 
Two horned, Iiks a half Moon, either from the firuation and form ©: 
the place, or from rhe Goddeſs Dianz, or the Moon, which utuzlls 
wa painted with two horns, whom they worſhipped. g A Peop!e 
in Canaan of G:ant-like ſtature, Deut: 2: 10, 11. h Kiriathaim i; © 
noted City in Gilead, and Sha uvcth may be either the ancient name «i 
that Ciry, or the preſent name of the Countrey adjoyning and 
belonging to 1t. 

6 And the Horites 7 in the mount Seir, unto + Elparay 
k, which is by the wilderneſs, | 

; The ancient Inhabirants of Sezr, of whom ſee Gen: 36: 20: and 
Deut: 2; 12. k El ſignifies a Plain, and Paranis the name of a knowr 
ry and Mountain. See Num: 13: 3: Deut: 35: 2: 

C, 


+ + Or, che 
| plain of 


Paran, 


2 Sam: 25; 1: 


And they returned and came to-En-milhpar. 
which is Kadeſh /, and ſmote all the countrey of the 
Amalekjtes 97, and alſo the Amorites, that dwelr 
Haz2zon-tamare | 

I (4, e. ) Which after that time was called Kadeſch, of which ſec 
Numb: 20: 1, 14, ©c. m (i.e, ) Which afterwards was poſſeſſed 


by the Amalekires, Gen. 36. 12. A known Figure called Pro- 
lephis. : 


8 And there went out the King of Sodom, and the 
King of Gomorrah, and the King of Admah, and the 
King of Zeboiim, and the King of Bela ( the ſame 3; 


Zoar ) and they joyned battel with them in the yale of 
Siddim _; 

9 With Chedorlaomer the King of Elam, and with 
Tidal King of nations, and Amraphel King of Skinar, 
| and Arioth King of Ellafar : four Kings with five. 

+ Heb. 10 And the vale of Siddim f wes fullof ſlime-pits »; and 
| tits pits, thekings of Sodom and Gomorrah » fled, and fell p there: 
and they that remained, fled ro the mountain- 
 _ » And rherefore choſen by thoſe five Kings for the place of Batte], 

that their. Adverſaries being ignorant of rhe place might unawares 
fail into choſe Pirs, which rhey by their knowledge of it thought to 


 elcape. 0 (7.8) Theis Acics 3 @ tgurative Speech frequent in 


Ty 


GENESIS, 


Scripture, and other Authors ; for their perſons eſcaped, ſee Verſ. 17. { 
p Either 1. Fell into the Pits which they deligned for others. Or | 
rather 2. Were ſlain; as this word is oft uſed, as Jo: 8: 24, 25- - 
Judges 8: 10: and 12: 6. and here too; for thoſe that fell are here 

oppoſed to thoſe that remained. 


11 And they took all the goods of Sodom, and Go» 
morrah, and all their viuals, and went their way. 
12 And they took Lot q Abrams brothers{on ( who 


dwelt in Sodom ) and his goods, and departed. ® 

74 Who now ſuffered for his Co-habitation with bad Neigh- 
bours. 

12 And there came one that had eſcaped, and told 
Abram the Hebrew r ; for he dwelt in the plain of 
Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eſhcol ; and brother of 
Aner : and theſe were confederate with Abram s, 

7 So called, eirher 3, From his great and good Predeceſſor 
Eber, Gen: 10: 24: and 11+ 14. in and by whom the Primitive 
Language and true Religion were preſerved ; and therefore, though 
Abram had five other Progenitors between Eber and him, which 
were perſons of leſs nate, he is rightly denominated from Eber, the 
Hebrew, becauſe he was the firſt that revived the Memory and the 
Work of Eber, that kept up the ſame Language, and eminently 
propagated the ſame true Religion. Or 2. As others think, from 
his paſſing over the River Eyphrates, from beyond which he came into 
Canaan. 5 i.e, Had entred into a League for their mutual Defence 
againſt Common Enemies. Whence we learn that it is not ſimply, 
and univerſally unlawful to make a League with perſons of a falſe 
Religion. 

14 And when Abram heard that his brother was S 
taken captive, he* armed his * trained 7 ſervants, born / _ led 
in his own houſe, .three hundred and eighteen, and 7: 
purſued hem unto Dan» inftrufed. 

t (7. e.) Whom he had Diſciplined and Inſtru&ed both in 
Religion and in the Military Art too, both which were neceſlary to 
make them good Souldiers, that they might both fight with Skill 
and Courage, and alſo rely upon God, and engage his Aſſiſtance z 
which was now eſpecially neceſſary, when ſo ſmall a party were to 
2ngage againft ſo numerous an Army. « This 1s commonly 
thought to be a Town then called Leſbhem, Joſe 19. 47. or Laiſb, 

Trealges 18. 57. and afterwards Dan, See Judges 18. 7, 29. ſoit is an 
antzcipation. Bur it may be doubted whether this was a City ; or 
ifit were, whether jt were another Town called by the ſame name, 
which was frequent in thoſe parts. And ſcme think this is not a 
Town, but the very Fountain of Dan, whence Jordan had its 
name. , 

5 And he divided himſclfx againſt them, he and his 
ſervants by night, and ſmote them, and purſued them 
unto Hoba, which 5s on the left hand of Damaſcus. 

x (7. e. ) His Forces jnto ſeveral Parties, that coming upon 
chem from ſeveral Quarters he might ſtrike them with greater 
-errour, whilſt they thought his Army far more numerous than it 
WAS» | 

16 And he brought back all the goods y, and alſo 
brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the 
women alſo, and the people. 


y Which the victorious Kings had taken from the Princes and 
People mentioned before in this Chapter. 


17 \ And the king of Sodom went out to meet him 
{ after his return from the ſlaughter of Chedorlaomer, 
and of the kings that vere with him ) at the valley of | 
>dhaveh, which is the * kings dale 2+ * 2 Same 
Z So called either upon this occaſion of the meeting of divers 18- 18. 
tings here ; or becauſe King Mclchizedek either had his Habitation, 


r was much delighted with it, and converſant in it. See 2 Sam. 18. 
is. 


18 And + Melchizedek 2 king of Salem b brought +Heb,q.r. | 


orth bread. and wine c: and he 4s the prieſt d of the 
moſt high God e. | 


a Queſt, Who was this? Anſw. x. Sem, as the Jews and many 
hers think, who probably was alive at this time, and, no doubr, 
great Prince, Bur neither is it prodable that Sem ſhould be a 

Ling among the curſed Race of Ham ; nor will this agree with the 

\ poſtle's deſcription of Melchizedek, Heb. 7. 3. Without Father and 

other, &c, Whereas Sem's Parents, and the beginning and end of 

is days are as expreſly mentioned by Moſes as any other. 2. A 

Jana-nitiſh King by the Divine Providence made both a King over 

Men, and Prieſt unto the true God, brought in here in this unuſual 

aanner, without any menti9n of his Parents Birth or Death; for | 
this end, that he might be an illuſtrious Type of Chriſt. Of this ga 
natter ſee more upon Heb. 7. 3. b(7.e.) Of Jeruſalem, called elſe- 
where Jevus, and Salem, Pſal. 76. 2, c Not for Sacrifice to God ; for 
rhen he had brought forth Beaſts to be flair, which were the uſual 
and beſt Sacrifices : But partly to ſhew the reſpe& which he bore to 
Abram, and principally to refreſh his weary and hungry Army, 
according to the manner of thoſe times. See Dey. 23. 3,4.and 25. 18. 
Fnages 8. 5,6, 15. 1 Sam. 17. 17. d Thus in ſucceeding Ages the 
ſame perſons were often both Kiggs and Priefts. as the learned note 
out of Virgil, and other Authors. And this clauſe is here added, as 
the Cauſe and Reaſon, nor for his bringing forth, or offering Bread 
and Wine, as ſome wou'd have ir, ( for that is aſcribed-to him as 2 | 
King, as an a@ of Royal Munificence ) but of the following Benedi- 
Ction and Decimatien. e For in thoſe times God had his remnant 
ſcattered here and there even in the worſt Places and Nations. 


19 * And he bleſſed him, and aid, Bleſſed be F | 
—_ of the moſt high God, poſleſſour of heaven and ' 
earth. ; 

* Or, Therefore ( as the particle is oft taken, (7. e. ) becauſe he 
was a Prieſt of God ) he F i.e. Melchizedek ) bleſſed him ( Abram ) 
which was one a of the Prieſtly-Office. See on Heb. 7.6, 7. f So 
it 1s 2 Prayer for kin, that God would confirm and increaſe the 


* 


{ns 


RE hy 


m 4a Yay mnuuv 5 «+ 


ES ONTO 


bleſſing £ 


WE nt ale 7 rt 4 


7.1, : 


_—— 


Mr os rn wo 


Jap. 


*Heb:7:4: 


F Heb. 
ſoul;s. 


*Pſal* 3:3: 
and <c: 12: 
and 84: 
x1: and 
91: 4: 

+ Or, thy 


* *.weward 


ſhaT be 
Very great. 
* Pal: 
a6; 5: 


7 WV. 
bleſſing which he had given him. Or, Bleſed is; ſo ir is an 
acknowledginent of God's bleſſing conferred upon Abram borh 
formerly, and in this late and great Vittory. 


ſo it is a'predition concerning his furcure and furthers blefſ:dneſs, 
whereof this was only an earneſt. : x 

20 And bietted be the moſt high God, which hath 
delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave 
him * tithes g of all þ. | | 

7 Not Me!chizedek gave to Abram, as ſome Jews fooliſhly under- 
Rand ir ; for Abram ſwears that he would not keep, nor take any of 


VES IS 


, 
, 


| 


Or, Bleſſ:d ſhall be ; | of a Piacc to called. 


are frequent in Scripture, as Nam: 24: 22: Zech: 14: 18: Nehemt 5: 2: 
Habak: 2: 3: Eph: 2: 


BE 6 


3 And Abram ſaid, Bchold, to me thou haſt given no 
ſeed; and lo, one born in mine houſe his mine heir z. 


I: g This may be the name either of a Man, or 


hþ Of ſuch ſee Gen: 14 14: and Eccleſ: 2: 5. And theſe are oppoſed 


to them that are born ofa Man's body, Job 19: 17, Prov: 3 '. 2. Jer. 2.14. 


' 3} Either 1. By nearneſs of re/ation, being as i,me conceive, deſcended 


the recovered Goods of the Kingsof Srdom, or his Brethren, werſe 23- | 


Bur Abram cave to Melchizedek, as appears both from Heb: 4: 7: and 
from the nature of the thing ; for the Tithes confeſledly belong to 
the Prieſt, ſuch as Melchizedek, ani not Abram, is here deſcribed ro 
be. hþ Not of all the recovered Goods, but of all the Spoils taken 
from the Enemies. _ ; | 

21 And the king of Sodom ſaid unto Abram, Give 
me the + perſons, and take the goods to thy ſelf. 

22 And Abram faidto the king of Sodom, I have lifc 
up my hand ; untothe LOR D,: the moſt High God, 
the polleſſour of Heaven and Earth, | 

3 (i.e, ) Swore ; for this was the ancizut manner of ſwearing. 
See Exod: 6:8: Num: 14: 30: Deut: 32: 40: Eeek: 20: 5,06. 

23 That I will not take & from a threed even to a 
ſhoe-lachet*, and that I will not take any thing that #s 


thine, leſt thou ſhouldft ſay, I have made Abram rich. 

k Heb. If 1 ſhall take. Underſtand, God do ſo and jo tv me, which 1s 
expreſſed 1 Sam: 14: 44: A defe&ive manner of {wearing uſed 
amongſt rhe Hebrews,cither to maintain the reverence of Oaths,jand 
the dread of Perjury, ſeing they were afraid ſo much as to mention 
the Curſe which they meant ; or to ſhew that chey were willing to 
ſubmit to any puniſhment, which God ſhou'd infliftupoan them 
without excep"i:n, if they vio'ared their Oaths. * (z.e.) An 
thing though never ſo ſmall cr mean H(7 e. ) Leſt rhon ſhovuldit 
claim a ſhare wi h lod in the Honour due to him, ro whole bleſſing 
alone I dv, nd I will owe my riches. Or, leſt thou ſhouldſt ſay, 
Abram is enriched with my Spoils; and however he pretended 
Kindn-fs and C'a-ity, yet indeed it was his Covetoulſnels that put 
him upon this Work. | : | 

24 Save only that which the young men have caten, 
andthe porcon of the men which went with me , Aner, 
Ethcol, and Marne ; let them take their portion, 


joyned with him in the Bute], as 1t 15 conceived they did, or only 
abode by the Stuff, 1 Sam: 30: 24: and therefore thouzh he mighr, 
and did give away his own right, he could nor- give away other 
mens, 


CHAP. XV. 


: y F pd 2 | 
4 comfortable promiſe to Abram, x. His prayer for an heir, 2, 3. The. 
Abram's fa:th ; 6. He deſires ; 


promiſe of an anſwer to 115 prayer, '4, 5. 


a ſign, 7, $8. God gives him one, 9. He obſerves it, no, 1t. God 


appears to him when in a deep /1:ep, 12. A predit#ion of evil to befil his | 


poſterity, 13. Their deliverance, 14===-=-- 
Canaan renewed, 17J----=21. 


i6, Tie covenant concerning 


Frer theſe things the word of the LORD came 
unto Abram in a virion a, faying, Fear nor, 
Abram 6b: I am thy * jhieid ard 7 thy excceding * great 
reward. c. | 
a God anciently revealed himſel® ro M:n two ways, Firker r. 
When the man was afl-ep, in a dre:m; OC 2, Ina Vition, Num: 12:6: 
w..2en he was awake ; andihis errher 1. When he was «t.pcanto an 
Extaſie, wherein h1s tenſes are 1dI-,but his ming is a&'veanu cievared 
ro the contemplation and underftanding of what God reveals. See 
Num: 12: 6,7,8. and 24: 4: {ſa: 1: 1: 4#s 10: 10, 11. Or, 2. Nhen 
the thing was manifeſted by -n exrernal c-pr-lentation. So here, God 


ſeems to have appeared to Aram in the thaps of 3 Man, as he did 


Gen: 18: as may be gathered;trom werſ: 5: 16. 6 Neith-r the return of 
thoſe. Enemies whom thou haſt ſmut -n and proveked, nor rhe envy 
of thy Neighbours for this glorious Vittory, nor tor rhy own dei o- 
Jatc condition. 6 Seing thou didſt tru?! ro ary prereftion, I will be 
2 ſhield or a proreCtor to, thee ; and ſcizg rhou vidit to honourably, 
and for -my ſake rej.& cther rewards, taken by thy elf, and offered 
by the King of Sodom, thou ſhalr be no loſer by it ; I will abundantly 
rY=<comp=-"ce all thy piety to me, ans ch riry to thy affli&cu kinſman 
maahy liberal:ty towards others : I-w:!] bleſs thee w:th all forrs 
Sings. 25s well as defend thee frum ail evil; | wi.ica two 
a Min con pleatly happy. 
bam ſaid LOKL: God, what will thou give 
me, lt * leo d cihiidicf e, ard the ſteward of 
tay houf#F% this Ericzer of Lamaſcus g ? 
ft Wha: pleaiure can I t:kz jn any oth:r gif +, 16 long as thou doſt 
withold from me that great and promiicd gift of thar blefſ=d and 
bleſſing Seed, in the giving of whom, thy, honour and the World's 
happineſs 15ſo highly co::cerned, Chap: 12:3, 4Firtier x. Ipaf: the 
time of my life, going on and growing 1:. years, and haſtn:ng re-my 
long home. Or 2. I die, 7.e. am abour to die, cr likely rode; Going 
Is oft-times pur. for dying, as 1 Chron: 17: 11: compared with 2 Sam: 7:1 2: 
Job 10: 21. ard 14+ 20: Matth: 26: 24. e Whar good will the Worla 
do me, jf I have no Heir to poſſeſs it ? if God lote the Glory of his 
ruth in making good his p:cmile, and I lofe the comfort of my 
Iong-hoped for Ci1ild, and that ſuch a Child, the effe& of a Divine 
Fromiſe, one our of whole Loins he muſt c:me, in whom all Nati- 
ONs tha!! be bleſſed? f Heb. The Sn of the care, or Government, or 
Management of my Houſe, « e. he who nanageth the Aﬀairs of my 
Hcute. An utua! Hcbraiim, as captives are cxlJed children of captivity, 
Ezra 4: 1: and afflitt: d Per 01s, children of afflittion, Prov: 31: 5: Orhers 
frad the Verlc ti us, And the fleward of my houſe, this El:ezer of Damaſcus, 
underſtand, ſþa/! be my Heir ; which words may caſiiy be ſupplied 
our of the foliowing Verite. And 1uch ſupplements of a word, or 
Thort ſeatence out of a member or veris cighgr foregoing or foliowing, 


from Aare the eldeſt S-n of Sem. Or 2. For a recompence of his 
fidelity, compate Prov. 17. 2. Or 3. Becauſe he only had the 
exatt knowledge and 'abſolute power of all his Maſter's eſtate, 


Gen, 24. 10. and therefore could eaſily keep all after his Maſter's 


_ All which reafons concurring, might give occaſion for this 
peech. 


4 And behold, the word of the LORD eame unto 
him, faying, This ſhall nor be thine heir : bur he that 
thall come forth out of thine own bowels & thall be 
thine heir. 


k (7.4. )) Our of thy own Body, ſee Gen. 35.11. 2 Sam. 7. 12. 
2 Chron. 6 9. 


5 And he brought him forth abroad, and ſaid, Look 
now towards heaven, and ce!l the ſtars /, if thou be able 


to number them 2: and he faid unto him, * So (ball 
thy ſeed be. 


I Queftf. Seing the Sun was not yet going down, v. 12. how could 
he ſee the Stars? Anſw. 1. He might ſee them by repreſentation 
in 2 Viſion, or by a Divine Power ſtrengthning his Eyes to behold 
them. 2. It was not neceſſary he ſhould then a&ually fee them, 
He bids him make trial when he pleaſed, if he con!d number the 
Stars which were now preſent to his mind; and wou'd ſhort'y be 
preſent and viſible to his bodily Eye. m Which thou art nor ab'e 
to do ;; f r tho Aſtronomers have preſumed to give us the number 
of thoie Stars which are diſtin&]y. viſible to the Eye, wherein yet 
they vary one from anocher, yet there are other Stars innumerable, 


a wy confuledly to the Eye, and evidently by rhe help of 
raſles. | 


18 


Chap. *% Fa 


*; Chron! 
27: 27? 
Rom: 4 © 


. 6 Andhe* believed in the LORD»; and he counted * rom: 


* jt to him for righteouſneſs\s, | 


2 (i.e, ) He was fully perſwaded that God was able to 


Child, and efpecial'y concerning che Meſſias, who ſhould come out 


| of his Loins by rhat Child, and rhat both himſelf and all the People 
1m For as Abram had a right to Spoils, fo had they, whecker they | 


ſhould be Juſtified and Blefſed in and through him. -* Or, reckoned 
or imputed, as this word 1s tranſlaced, Rom: 4:-10, 22: -0 (2.6. ) 
For a righreous and wortrt.y Aion, as Pſal: 106: 31: and further, 
in reſpe& of tnis aCtion and grace of Fauh, whereby he relied upon 
Gol for the promiſed Seed, and upon the promiſed Sed roo, he 
pronounced him a juſt and righrequs: Perſon notwithſtanding his 
tailings, which even this Hiſtory acquainrs us with; and gracio:fly 
accep:ed him as ſuch. Which ſence is eaſily gathered from St. 
Paut's Expligation and Accommodation of this paſſage, Rom: 4: 99 
18, 22) = 

7 And he taid unto him, I -» the LORD that 
brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee 
this land to inherit it- 

8 And he faid, Lord GO 
p that I ſhali inherit ir ? 

p Hea;ki a ſign, nor out of diſtruſt of God's promiſe, for he was 
ffrong in Faith, Rom: 4: 20: bur for further affurance and conarmation 
of it. And ſuch an asking of a fign was not an unufual praftice with 
good Mcn, as Jueger.6: 37: 2 Kings 20: 8. nor arethey reproved for 
it; but on the contrary, 4az was commanded to ask a ſign, and 
reproved for notasking it, 1|s14/ 7. 


D, whereby ſhall I know 


% 


9 And he faid unto kim, Take me Þ an heifer of 
three years 01d, qanda ſhe-goar of three years old, and 
a ram of three years old, and a turtte dove, | a 
young Þigeon r. x Hh 

f Take and offer at my command, and for my ſervice. q At 
which time 1f is perfeCt in ſtature and ſtrength, ard therefore firteſt 
far Goa's Service. r This and the other Creacures here following, 


and S«cr:fices, are the ſame which afterwards were preſcribed in the 
Levirica}) Law. 


1Þ Ard he s teok unto him all theſe, and'divided 
them in the midſt t, and Jaid each piece one againft 
another 4; but the birds divided he nor x. 

s (.e. ) Abram, who by divine inſtin& and precept did all this 
which tere follows. # Into two equal Parts, This was dene for 
two Reaſons. 1. To repreſent the torn and diſtrafted condition 
11 Which his Seed was ro lie for a Seaſon. 2. To ratifie God's Co- 
venant with Aram and his Seed; forthis was a rite uſed in making 
Covenants, as appears both trom Scripture, Jer; 34: 18: and other, 
Authors. « Partly to excourage hope, that God w«u'd ia bis time 
put thoſe Parts rogerhey, and unite thoſe dry Bones ( to which the 
Iſraelite: Were Conpared, Ezek: 37: ) ard clothe ' them with Fieth - 
and partly, that the Perjons entring inte Covenant; might paſs be= 
rween thole parts, and ſo teſtify rheir Union; and Conjun&ion in 
one and the ſame Sacrifice, x Enher becauſe there were two Birds, 
and the one was laid againſt the other, which anſwered to rhe divi= 
ſion of the Jarger Crearures; or becauſe they belor:ged not ro the 
Ceremony of the Covenart, but were for the Uſe of Szcrifice, where- 
1 they were to be offered whole, as afterwards was "preſcribed, 
Levit: 17 15,17: = ; 

11: And when the fowls came down upon the car- 
caſles y, Abram drove them away z, 

y To devour them : whereby is ſignitied, eirher x. The diſtur« ' 
bance and diſtrattion which good Men are expoſed to itt the Service 
of God from evil Spirits and Men : or rather 4, The great peril 
of Abram's Poſtetiry, who were not only rorn in pieces like theſs 
Sacrihces, but even the remainder of them were likely to be ge- 
voured, by the Egyptians, whofe King is con:-pired to an Eagle, the 


.chiefofthe Bizes of prey, Exel: 17: & By the blaſt ofhis Mouth, as 
ES | D | 


+ the 


4: 35 2 
fulfill, Gal: 3:6; 


and wou'd certainly fulfi}l the promi'e made ro him concerning a Jam: 2:23: 


-H* 5. 'Ys | 
the Hebrew word ſignifies ; repreſenting Abram's Conqueſt over all 
his Enemies by Faith a and Prayer, whereby he engaged Ged to be the 
Preferver and Deliverer of his People. | 
12 And when the ſun-was going down, a deep _ 
fell-upon Abram #4; and lo, an horror of great darknels 
fell upon him 6. 


s Partly natural from his Jabour in killing and ſacrificing thoſe 
Creatures; and partly ſent upon him from God, to make way for the 
following Repreſentation. 6 (7. e. ) He ſeemed to be covered with 
a dreadful darkneſs, which was, either r. A Token'of God's ſpecial 
Preſence ; compare 1 Kings 8: 12. Or, 2. A fignification of the 
diſtreſſed and doleful condition of Abram's Seed ; for darkneſs in Scrip- 
rure is frequently mentioned as an emblem or ſign of great Miſery, 
as Pal: $8: 6: and 107:14, Oc. © = 

13 And he ſaid unto Abram, Know of a ſurety 
that thy Seed ſhall be a ſtranger in a land rhat is not, 
theirs c, and ſhall ſerve them, and + they ſhall aftlict 


them four hundred years 4, 

c (i.e. ) In Canaan and Egypt ; for though Canaan was theirs by 
promiſe, to be fulfilled in after rimes, yet it was not theirs by atual 
Doxation and Poſſeſſion, but they were Strangers in it, Gen: 17: 8: 
Pſal: 105: 11, 12. d Exa&ly 405 years, buta ſmall ſum is commonly 
negleed in a great number; both in ſacred and prophane Writers« 
There were 439 years between the firſt promiſe, or berween the 
renewing and confirming of the promiſe by the gift of 1aac, and 
Iſroels going out of Egypr, or God's giving of the Law, Exod; 12: 40: 
Gal: 3: 19: bur part of this crime Abraham with his Son Iſaac lived in 
much honour and comfort ; bur after 1/aac grew up, the Afﬀiction 
here mentioned began with 1ſazc in Canaan, and continued to ham 
and his Poſterity in Zgypt, till this time was expired. . 

14 And alfo that nation whom they ball ſerve e, will 

| I the f: and afterward * ſhall they come out with 
* Exod: great ſubſtance g. - P09 
np 2; 3G: e (i.e. ) pr, the principal ſeat of their ſervitude, and the 
lal: 105. inftrument of their ſoreſt Bondage. F( 7. e..) Puniſh, as that word iS 
T- uſed, Pſal: 51:6: Obad: wv: 21: and elſewhere. g The accompliſhment 
: whereof, ſee Exod: 3: 22: and I: 2: and 12: 35, 37. | & 
þ 1n peace 5 


FAQs 7:6: 


- Exod: 


211; 


15 And thou ſhalt go to thy fathers 
thou ſhalt be buried in a good old age. : 
h (i.e. ) Either 1. Into Heaven, where thy godly Peqyenieots 
are gone. Or 2. Into the ftate of the dead, where all chy Fathers 
are gone before thee : This may ſeem more probable, ar leaft in this 
- Place, partly, becauſe this or the like Phraſe is indifferently uſed 
concerning good and bad Men. See Gen: 25: 8: Pſal: 49: 19: partly 
becauſe this Phraſe is ſo expounded, 4s 13: 36 He, i.e. David, was 
laid v0 bis Fathers, and ( for, that is ) ſaw corruption ; partly, becauie 
ſome of Abraham's Fathers, and particularly Nahor, his Grandfatber, 
who lived ang died an Idolater, cannot with any warrant from 
Scripture be preſumed to be gone to rhe. place of bleſſedneſs in tneir 
Sovls. * Free from thoſe Afﬀfliftions which ſhall come upon thy 
Poſterity after thy deceaſe. 
16 Bur in the fourth Generation s they ſhall come 


hither again : for the iniquity of the Amorites & 15 not 
yet full 


# In the end of the 400 years mentioned, Yerſe 13+ a Generation, 
being at thattime reckoned at one hundred years, or thereabouts.”Or, 
in the fourth Generation, numbred from their going into Egypt, or 

_ from their leaving Canaan ; which may poſlibly be implieJ by theſe 
words, they ſballcome hither. $o Caleb was the fourth from Judah, and 
Moſe; the fourth from Levi, and ſo doubtleſs many others. k (7. e. ) 
Of the People inhabiting Canaan. And the Amorites, one of thoſe 
People, Yrſe 21. are here pur for all rhe reſt, as Gen: 48: 22: 1 Kings 
21: 26: 2 Krngs 21: 2: Amos 2: 10: either becauſe they were the 
greateſt and ſtouteſt of all, Amos 2: 9: or becaufe Abram dwelt among 
that People, Gen: 13: 18: and 14: 13. 7 All M-ns fins are kepr b 
God as in a Book of remembrance, not oneof them is loſt; and as God 
exatly obſerves the number and meaſure of Mens fins, ſo he determines 

within himſelf, how far, and how long he will bear with finful Men 
or Nations, and what ſhall be the period of his Patience ; and when 
that comes,> their Meaſure;is full, and their DeſtruQion 1afallibly 
comes. See Fer: 51:13: Matth: 23: 32: 1 Theſſ: 2: 16. 


| 17 Andit came to paſs, that when the ſun went down, 
> Heb. « 2nd it was dark, behold a ſmoaking Furnace, and a +F 
emp of fire. burning Lamp m» that paſſed between thoſe pieces. 

E m By which ſymbol God deſigned to repreſent, either x. The 
| future State of Abram's Seed * the ſmogking Furnace ſignifying Iſrael's 
Miſery ' in the Iron Furnace of Egypt, as it is called, Jer. 11. 4. and 
the burning Lamp noting their Deliverance, or Light ſhining out of 
Darkneſs. Or, 2. His own Preſence ; for God is called a conſuming 
Fire, Heb: 12: laſt: and both Smoak and Fire are elſewhere mentioned 
as the ſigns and means of God's Appearance. See Exod. 3: 2. and 19. 9, 
16, 18. and 20. 18. And this ſenſe ſeems to be favoured by the follow- 
ing words, it being the cuſtom of Perſons entring into covenant, to 
paſs between ſuch pieces, as hath been ſaid ; and becauſe God hath 
A no on which could viſibly do ſo, therefore he doth it inthis Type 

Sy Or JNagoWw. 

3 on a 18 Inthat ſame day the LORD Þ * made a covenant 
F with Abram, ſaying, * Unto thy Seed have I given » 
Chap.12. this land, from the River of Egypt e unto the great 
- and 13- River, vhe River Euphrates p : 
co » (5.6. ) Decreed and promiſed in due time to give, which makes 
4 jr as (ureas if it wereaQually given tothem. Or, 7 will give ; words 
ixod- 23. Of the paſtrime being oft pur for the future, eſpecially in Prophecies. 
uM. , Not Nilus, which elſewhere is ſo called, bur a leſs River, as is 
+ 3- Sſofficiently implied, becauſe this is oppoſed to the great River here 
eur: 1:77 following; buta River called Sihor, which divides Ezypt from Canaan. 
*24* See Num. 34. 5+ Joſbua 13.3. 1Chron. 13. 5. p The accompliſhment 
3+ & hereof, ſee 2 Sam. 8. 3-1 Kings 4. 21. and g. 21. 

+ 19 The Kenite q, and the Kenizzites r, and the 

Chron. et 5 
- 26: Kadmomitres s, \ - 

Jeh:9: 8: 9 Suppoled the ſame with rhe Midiaxites, by comparing Exod. 4. 1. 
[a:27: 12, With Judges Is 16. Sce allo. Num, 24.21. 1 Sam. 15. 6, r Thought to 


nd'11 


- ——_ a GENESIS. 


Chap. XVI. 


be the 7dumeans, who ſprung from Kenaz of Eſar's Race. But this ſeems 
not to agree with Deut. 2+ 5. where God expreſly ſaith to the J/raelites 
concerning the Idum eans, 7 will give you none of their lands, &c. $ 
( 5. e. ) The Eaſtern People, as the word ſignifies, elſewhere called 
the Hivites, Jeſ. 9. 1. who lived near the Mount Hermon, of. 11. 3. 
which was in the Eaſt part of Canaan, See P/al. 89. 12. 

20 And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the 
Rephaims, . 

21 And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the 
Girgaſhites, and the Jebuſites. 


F 


CHAP, XVI. 


Sarah is barren, 1. She gives Hagar, her ſervant, to Abram to be his wife, 
2, 3- Hagar conceives and deſpiſes her miſtreſs, 4. Sarai complains of it, 
5. Abram leaves her to Sarai's diſpoſal, who deals hardly with her : Hagar 
runs from her, 6. The angel of the Lord meets her, commands her to return 
and ſubmit, 7 w==g, Promiſing her a numerous Seed, 10. Names the 
child, 11. Foretells his diſpoſition, 12. God's looking on her in ber 


Aftiftion, comforts her, 13, 14. Her ſon born and named, 15. Abrams 
age. 


OW Sarai Abrams wife bare him no children : 
and ſhe had an handmaid an Egyptian, whoſe 
name as * Hagar. 

2 And Sarai faid unto Abram, Behold now, the 
LORD hath reſtrained me from bearing : I pray thee 
gO in unto my maid ; it may be that I may + obtain + Heb. bs 
children by her a: and Abram hearkned to the voice of builded 
Sarai b, by her. 


2 She reckons the Children of her Bond-woman, ( as Hagar was 
Gal. 4. 22: ) would be accounted her Children. See Gen. 30. 3. Exod. 
21.4. 2S9.21.8. Eſth.2. 7. bSuppoſing that God would accompliſh 
his Promiſe cf a Seed to come out of his Loins: by this way ; and 
knowing that Sarai was not yet mentioned in the promile, as the 
Perſon by whom he ſhould have that Secd ; and notcontuiring with 
God, which he ſhould have done. 
3 And Sarai Abrams wife took Hagar her maid the $ 
Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land 


of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be 


* Gal. 4. 
24+ 


his wife c. 


c (7.e. )) His Concubine, or ſecondary Wife. Polygamy, though it 
was forbidden by God's firſt Inſtiturion, Ger. 2. 24 compared with 
Mazth. 19. 5. and brought into the World by wicked Lamech, yet it 
was ſomerimes praQtiſed by the Patriarchs, either by God's permiſſion, 
who could rightly diſpence with his own Laws when and where he 
picaſed: or by their miſtake abour the lawfulneſs of it. As for ths 
prelent caſe, 1t is moſt evident this Ation was not the effe& of an 
inordinate Luſt, but of an earneſt defire of having Children, and 
eſpecially of obtaining the blefled and promiſed Seed. p 

4 4 And he wentin unto Hagar, -and ſhe conteived : 
and when ſhe ſaw that ſhe had conceived, her miſtreſs 
was deſpiſed in her eyes 4. 

4 For barrennels in ir ſelf was a reproach, and eſpecially to Sarf, 
who ſeemed to be a Perſon rejefted by God, as one whom he would 
not honour with being the Mother of that Seed ; and Hagar being 
ſuddenly made Sarar's Partner in the priviledge of Abram's Bed, and 
ſuperior to her 1a reſpett of thar great bleſſing of Child-bearing, ir is 
rio wonder if ſhe grew infolent upon it, eſpecially being advance@ 
ſo highly from ſo low a condition. | 

5 And Sarai {aid unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee 
e: {have given my maid into thy boſom ;'and when ſhe 
ſaw that ihe had conceived, I was deſpiſed in her eyes ; 
the LORD judge between me and thee f. 

e (i.e. ) The injury done to me by Hagar, who thus wickedly 
requites my kindneſs to her, be upon thee ; 7: e. is to be imputed to 
thee ; thou art the cauſe of it, becauſe thou doſt not maintain my 
Repuration, and repreſs her Arrogancy. f (5. e.) give forth a righte= 
ous Sentence between us, and deal with each of us according to our 
guilt or innocency u: this matter. Compare 1 Sam: 24: 13, 16. 


6 But Abram ſaid unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid 5s 

in thine hand g ; doto her Þ asit pleaſeth thee b. And + p<. 

when Sarai f dealt hardly with her 3, (he fled from her ha: which 

face k. # good in 
g (4.e. ) Subje& to thy Power and Authority, as the phraſe is #* 9% _ 

taken, Gen: 24: 10: and 39: 4, 6, 8: Num: 31: 49. For though ſhe be T Heb. af 

my Concubine,yer ſhe is thy inferiour ; and therefors if ſhe exalt her fitted her, 

fe!f above her meaſure, I give thee Power to exerciſe thy Authority 

over her. But whecher this was not one of Abram's Infirmities te 

give up his ſecond Wife into the hands of the firſt, may well be 

queſtioned. h Uſe whatſoever power God hath given thee over her : 

For we muſt not think that Aram gave her Power of Life and Deatle 

over her, eſpecially now when ſhe was with Child. Therefore here, 

as often elſewhere, the general words muſt be limited from the 

nature of the thing, and from ether Texts of Scripture, which forbid 

Cruelty even to our Servants. # Either by impoſing Labours upon 

her above her Strength, or by grievous Stripes which ſhe could not 

bear. k Contrary to God's command, Eedlef T0: 4: and to the Laws 

of Juſtice, becauſe both her Perſon and rhe Fruit of her Body were 

not her own, but Abrams right in Poſſeſſion. 


7 9 And the Angel of the LORD 7 found her by a 


fountain of water in the wilderneſs, by the fountain in 
the way to Shur »-: 


7 The Son of God, who off appeared in Man's Shape before he 
took man's Nature, who is called an Angel or Meſenger, becauſe he was 
the angel of rhe coumant, Ma!: 3: 1: and was ſent upon divers meſſages 
to Mea in theYf1d Teſtament, andat laſt was to be ſent in the Fleſh 
as _ great SO or Meſſenger of Peace and mn wg — we 
9m A Place near £gypr, Gen; 25; 18; 421 Sam; 1 - 7s el er Native 
Countrey, Exod; 15: 224 bs brIDE 

| 8 And 


ata AC PAI E 


MY AILS. 


-* WEPREPPItTT7 


+Th 
Ged | 
hear. 


* Ch 
253 ] 


+ H 
Elro: 
art i 
that 
me, 


EDT IEOISSN 


Wi A = * WAP In ig ry 


06s Ns . 1 


| I 
Chap. XVI. | . 
2 And ke faid, Hagar, Sarai's maid », whence cameſt 
hon 2 And whither wilt thou goo ?: And ſhe faid, 1 

face of my miftrefs Sarats 
he admoniſheth her, that tho ſhe was Avram's 
Wif. 'vetſhe was $ar9:'s Maid, to whom ſhe owed Subjeftion and | 
Service, from which ſhe could not lawfully withdcaw her ſelf. o 
Confider with thy ſelf what thowart doing ; _whar a ſad exchanges 
chon art making. Thou forſakeſt not only an excellent Maſter and 
Husband, bur alſo me and my worſhip, which thou wilt not find in 
inv ocher Family, and ſo caſteſt thy ſelf our of the true Church, and | 
2rt cunaing headlong into a place ofall Idolatry and Imptety, to thy | 
utter undoing ; and this meerly through Pride and Impatience. 

9 And the Angel of the LORD laid unto her, Return 
co thy miſtreſs, and ſubmir thyſelf under her hands. | 

10 And the Angel of the LORD ſaid unto her, Lwill 


multiply thy ſced exceedingly, that it ſhall not be. 
numbred for multitude. : | 
i: And the Angel of the LORD faid unto her, 
Behold, thou «rt with child, and ſhalt bear a fon, and 
(balt call Lis name + Iſhmacl z becauſs the LORD hath 


4 
iy 
Fi £ 
} 5 


ws - 
'g2 from tne 


7: By wiich Title 


+ That is, arr 
Grd jbal heard thy affliction *. 48 
hear * Hath heard thy Cry in thy Affliction. : 

12 And he will be a wiid man p 3 his hand will be 
vet againſt every man, and every mans hand againft him: 
F - " * and he ſhall dwell in the preſence of all his bre- 


thren r. | ; | 
p Heb. A wild aſs-man, 3.e. 43 Man like a wild Aſs, fierce and un- 


n{erled in his Habication ; ar as that Creature is, Job 39: 
pgs e Rag gs Hoſ: 8: 9g: living in Defarts and Mountains, Warlike 
ans Violent, ex:rciſing himſelf continually in hunting Beaſts, and 
oppreſſifig M-n. See Gen: 21: 20: 4 He will provoke and injure all 
that cenverte with him, and thereby wiil multiply his Enemies ; 
which is to be underſtood nor only of im, bar alſo of his Poſterity. 
7 In the Borders of the other Sons and Kindred of Abram and 1/aac, 
who though they ſhall be vexec and annoyed with his Neighbour- 
hood, yer ſhall norbe able to make him quit kis Habirtation, Sce 
Gen: 25: $8. 

12 And ſhe called the name of che LORD that ſpake 
+ Heb. unto her, F Thou God ſeeſt me 5: for the ſaid, Have 


E!roi, thou Þ aiſo here looked after him that ſeeth mer 2 
art a Gol , Thou haft been pi.aſ:d to rake notice and care of me, and gra- 
that ſeeſt ciouſly ro manifelt ray ſeif unto me. 7 (7 e. ) Aﬀeer that God whoſe 
me, eye is upon me for 20g ? Yo the chices her ſe'f for her negle&t of 
God, an. ofhis Providence, and thar notonly in her Maſte's Houle, 
bur even here in che Wilderneſs, where her deſolate and miſerable 
Condition ſhould have made her look after, and ca]l upon God for 
help. Or rather, cheſe are words of admiration, 9. d. Have T a/ſo here, 
7, e. in this deivlare Wilderneſs, looked after him that ſeech me, 1. e. 
ſe-n the face of my gracious God ! "That Gud ſhould appear ro me 
in my Maſte:'s Hou'e, where he uſed re maniteſt himſelt, was nor 
Nrange ; but that I ſhould have ſuch a favour here, thar God ſhould 
not only look upon me, but admit me ro ook upon him, and viſibly 
6 appear to me after I had run away from him, and from my godly 
Miſter, this was rore then T could hope or exp-:&t ! Others thus, 
Have I here ſeen after him that ſees me, i.e. after tne Viſion of him thar 
batt: appeared tome! 7. e. Do I vet ſee and live, afrerT have feen 
God! She wonders at it, becauſe it was then the common Opinion, 
That an appeara:ice of God toany Perſon + a5 a fore-runner ot Dearh. 
See Gen: 32: 30: Exod: 33: 20: Jug: 6: 22:and 13: 22. And ſreing is 
here pur for liv ng, one fu-tion of Life for Lite it ſelf, as Exod: 24: 
11: Eccleſ: 11; -, 8 Bur the word ſeeing, put by ir ſelf, as here it is, 
15neither in thoſe places, nor elſewhere, uſed for living. | And had 
that been her meaning, ſhe would have exprefled ir plainly, 2s they 
do 1n the places alledged; and nor. have uſed fo dark and dubious a 
Mer2phor, »or would have ſaid, ajter him that ſees me, bur rather, 
after I have ſ-en him. | 
i4 Wherefore the well was called * F Beer-lahairoi # ; 


* Chap: 
25: :23 behold, #7 js between Cadelh and Bered, 
} Taat 18, » This rame may have reſpe&, either 1. To God, The well of him 


re well of that liveth, (7. e, of rhe true 4nd iVing God ) ana ſeth me, 7 Ee. rakerh 

Pm 123 Ca: ot me. Or, 2. To Hagar, The well of her that liv«th, (| ive.) who 

#iverh and rho ſhe gave up her ſelt tor yeay and Joit, yer 1:0 15 likely to live, 

J-&@Þ Me, bork in her Perſon, and in her Poſteriry, and jecth, or did ſee, namely, 
God preient with her. 


is 4 And Hagar bare Abram a ſon + : and Abram 


called his ſors name, which Hagar bare, Iſhmael. 
t To wit, after her return and ſubmiſſivn to her Miſtreſs, which 
15 evident from the following Hiſtory. 
16 And Abram was fourſcore and fix years old, when 


Hagar bare Ilthmael co Abram. 
CHAP. XVEE 


God renews his covenant with Abram, . 1---=-= 4. His name in token hereof 
changed, 5. © Kings ſhall be born of him, 6. Te covenant eſtabliſhed with 
his ſeed, 7. The promiſe of Canaan-to him and his ſeed repeated, 8. 
Circumciſion inſtituted. 9, 10. The part to be circumciſed, 1x7. The Time 
and Perſent, 125-13. The putiiſhinent on neglectors 'f it, 14.  Savrat's 
name changed, 15. A ſon by her promiſed, 16. Abrahams ſurprize, 17. 
Hz prayer for Iſhmael, 18. The promiſe of a ſun by Sarah confirmed, his 
name, :9 Abrahams prayer fer Iſhmael ayſwered, 20. But th* covenant 
eſtabliſhed in Iſaac, 21. Abraham is circumciſed ; as is alſo. Iſhmael, and. 
all bis Het!ſe, 23 —— 27. 

Qu, AN D when Abram was ninety years o!d and nine, 
+2, E#» the LORD appeared ro Abram, and ſaid unto 
hogs him, I am the + Almighty GOD #, * walk before me 6, 

2 25 and be thou T perfect Cc. . | 
far, a Who can do ai; thar i have promiſed, or ſhall promiſe to thee, 
-34t, or and whatſoever pleaſerth me ; and therefore do thuu firmly believe 


5 


2 among you ſhall be circumoiſed. 


. and People comes. 


1D 1 9, Pe "CPE ® Pap. 


Judge, and Rewagder, being careful. to plexrſe and obey me in all 
things, and depending upon me for thy well doing and well-being. 
See the ſame phraſe, Gen: 48: 15: 1 Kings 8: 25: Pſal: 116: 9: c(1.e. } 
Sincere, univerial, and conftant in thy belief of my promiſes, and 
obedience ro my commands. See Ger: 6: 9. | 
2 AndI will make my covenant between me and 

thee d, and will multiply thee exceedingly. 

4 T am comets renew, eſtabliſh, and enlarge chat Covenant which 
I formerly made with thee. | 


3 And Abram fell on his facee: and God talked with 
him, ſaying, 

e Partly in ſeif-abaſement, and an humble ſenſe ofh's own unde- 
ſervedneſs of ſuch favours; and partly in Reverence and Worſhip 
to God, and a thankfu] acknowledgment of his marvellous kindaels. 
Compare Levit: g: 24+ Exek: 45: 3. 


4 As for me, behold, my covenant zs with thee, and 


thou ſhalt he a father of + many. nations f, 

f Both literally, or after the Fleſh, ofthe 1ſroelites, 1/maelites, Edomites, 
&c. and ſpiritually, of all Believers of all Nations, ro whom Abram 
hath in ſome ſort the place of a Father, Rom: 4: 12, 179. Noronly 
as he was the great Example and Teacher of that Faith by which they 
are all ſaved ( as the InſtruQers of others are called their Fathers, borh 
in Scripture, as Gen: 4: 20, 21: and in profane Authors } bur as he 
was made by God the head of the Covenant, by, or through whom 
the Covenant-right was conveyed to all his natural Seed, and after= 
wards to the ſpiritual Seed, all Gentile-Believers. 


5 Neither ſhall thy name any more be called Abram 
but thy name (hall be Abraham g, * for a faher of * Roms 
many Nations have I made thee. 4: 17s 

g ( 7. e. ) The Father of a Multitude, Ham in the Hebrew being put 
for Hamon, which ſignifies a Multitude, by a figure called 4pocope, 
which is uſual 19 proper Names. 

6 And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and F I 11x, x 
will make * nations of thee, and kings ſhall come out wit mate + 
of thee h. | | thee natia 

h Sc did the Kings of Iſrael and Judah, of Edem, of the Saracens, 9 , 
and the Meſſias, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords. * Chap: 


; . x 35: 11: 
7 And I will eſtabliſh covenant between me and the 
thee, and thy ſeed after thee, in their Generations, for 
ail everlaſting covenant ; to be a God unto thee z, and 
to'thy ſeed after. thee. 
Z (2. e.) Whatſoever I am or have, all that ſhall be thine, and 
ſhajl} be emp!oyed for thy. Proteftion, Conſolation, and Salvation. 
This Phzaſe contains init the confluence of all blefſiags, Temporal, 
Spirirual, and Ecernal. See Levit; 26; 12: Pſal. 33: 12. and 144: 15: 
Fer: 312 33. | | 
> And * I will giveunto thee, and to thy ſeed Þ after * Chap? 
thee, the land f wherein thou arta ſtranger, allthe land + Heb of 
of Canaan, for an everlaſting poſlefion & ; and 1 will hy ſejeetind 
be their God. | | ings, 3 
T Uaro thee, not in thy own Perſon, bur in thy Seed. See Gen: 13: 
15,17. k Uponcondition of their Obedienceto God, as is oft expreſſed: 
W herein ſeing they ſonotoriouſly failed, itis no wonder if they peſt 
zt but alittle while, as the Propher complains; Iſa: 63: 18; 
9 {\ And God faid unto Abraham, Thou ſhalt keep 
my covenant therefore, thou/l, and thy ſeed after thee, 
in their generations. | 
I The agreement is mutual : My part was expreſſed before ; now 
follows thy part, and the conditioato which my promile and bleſſing 
IS annexed. | 
10 Thisis my covenant » which ye ſhall keep between 
me and you, and thy ſeed afrer thee ; Every *man-child 


f Heb. 
multitude 
of nations. 


m Circumciſion is here called the Covenant by an uſual Metonymy, 
becauſe ic is the Condirion; Sign, and Seal of the Covenant; » the 
pledge of God's Promiſe and Man's Duty, And upon. the ſame 
grounds the Cup, 7. e the Wine, is called he New Teſtament in Chriſt's 
Blood, Luke 22: 20, Or, which is all one, Chriſt's Blood in the New. 
Teftamens, Matti: 26: 28. 1 It 1s evident that Women as well as Men 
were comprehended in this Covenant, from Gen: 34: 14; Exod: 12: 3, 4: 
Joel 2: 15, 16: Yer Circumciſion 1s given enly tothe Males, partly 
becaule it could nor, at leaſt not conveniently be adminiſtred to. 
Females ; partly, becauſe Man 1s the principal Cauſe of the propa- 
gation of Children, and conſequently of the propagation of that 
(Original Corruption which cleaves to them ; party, to ſigaifie thar 
all Perſons begotten by Man ſhould be pollured by Sin, rhough not 
all conceived by a Woman, . as Chriſt was : And partly, becauſe Man 
is the Head of rhe Woman, and of the Family, upon whom all their 
concerns are devolved, and from whom the diſtiaction of Families 


Wa 


11 And ye ſhall circumciſe the fleſh of your fore-$skin | 
0, and it ſhall be a * token of the covenant p betwixc *AQs 7.84 
me and you |  Roma9#! 

o (7.e. ) By anvſual Hypallage, the fore-skin of your fleſh : And the 113 » * * 
word Fleſb.is here pur for tne geniral Parr, as it is Levzt. 15: 2, I9: a 
Ezek: 16: +6: and 23: 20: and elſewhere. This parr God ſingled one 
for this Ordinance, becauſe it is and was a grear Inftrumear both in 
the commiſſion of attual Sins, and in the propagation of original Sin ; 
and rherefore it was very proper to apply to it the Sea) of God's 
gracious Covenant for the Remiſſion of Sins Paſt, and theExrirpation 
of Sin tor the furure. p(z.e.) A lign, evidence, and aſſurance, 
both of the bleſſiag promiſed by that God who appointed this Ordi- . .. © 
nance, and of Man obligation ro the duties required, which is + Heb 
ſignified by his acceprance of, and ſubmiſſion to this Ordinance. And , ſon of, + 
here we have the Nature and Definition of a Sacrament, viz. that it eight dayt, 
15 a figure or token of Gad's Covenant,  . Bfeviie 


12 AndFhe that is eight days old 7,*ſhall be circumcis 7 LY : 


/"cres @Ul my words. 6 As becomes ous ia the preſence of thy Lord, and þ 


{&d among you, every + A in your generations W; 7 iis, 


n a —_— , 6x 27 _ RE - £2. 5% WL - my ; - \ 


F . £Z e . 


he that is born in the houſe, or bought with money of 
any ſtranger s, which 7s not of thy ſeed. 


'q Not before that time, becauſe of the Childs Weakneſs and 
Imperfe&ion, and Impurity too, Exod: 22: 30: Levit: 12: 3: for which 


Exod: 22: 30. r Succeſlively, until the M:ſias come who ſhall circum- 
ciſe your hearts, and change this Ordinance for another. 5 Theſe 
were of two ſorts : 1. Children, who being entirely his poſſcſſion, 
and having not underſtanding to diſcern, nor will to chuſeor refuſe, 
were to be circumciſed. 2. Grown Perſons, who were not to be 
ompelled to be circumciſed, but if they refuſed .it, were not to be 
Apron to dwell in his Family, left they ſhould infe& orkers, but 
were to be ſold to Scrangers, as the Hebrew DoQors teach. Bur as for 
Abraham's Servants here, they were thoroughly inſtrufed in Religron, 
Gen: 18: 19: and doubtleſs did willingly embrace it, and ſubmit to 
Chis Sacrament. _ 6 4 : 
' 23 He that is born in thy houſe, and he that 15 
bought with thy money, muſt needs be circumciſed : 
and my covenant ſhall be in your fleſh for an everlaſting 


coycnant 7. 
£ So it was, and is properly inregardof the thing ſignified to all 
true Believers ; and for the ſign, it 1s ſo called, becauſe it was to 
endure through all Generations till the coming of the Meſſias : The 
word Olam here and elſewhere rendred everla#ing, or for ever, being 
"oft uſed toexpreſsnot only ſimple eternity, but any long continuance 
for many ages, yea ſomerimes for a Man's life. See Exod; 21: 6: 
Deut: 15: 17: 1 Kings 9: 3+ : 
ot 14 Andthe uncircumciſed man-child, * whoſe fleſh of 
bis fore-skin is not circumciſed «, that ſoul ſhall be cut 


off from his people x: he hath broken my covenant y. 
 * Orrather, And as for the uncircumciſed man-child, So the nominarive 
"8 is put abſolutely, as 1s frequent in the Hebrew Tongue. « Or, Wi? 
"x | ſhall not circumc Fd the fleſb of his fere-ckin ; For the Hebrew Verb may 
E - be rendred aQively, which ſeems beſt here ; becauſe the puniſhmenc 
ſeems mere juſtly to belong to the Parent, who was guilty, of this 
negle&; than to the Child, who was not capable of this Precepr, 
and therefore not guilty of the violation of it, And this may further 
appear from Exod: 4: 24, 25: where God ſeeks to kill, not the Child, 
but the Father, Moſe:, for this Sin. And zhe fieſh of the Child's fore-skin 
is rightly called he fleſb of his, i. e. The Parent's fore-ckin, becauſe the 
Child is part and the poſſeſſion of his Pareat. So that this threat- 
ning concerns only grown perſons, and of them only ſuch as ſhall 
wilfully and unneceſſarily negle& this duty ; for otherwiſe it was 
negleted by the J/raelites for forty years together in the Wilderneſs, 
If. 5: 7: without any token of God's diſpleaſure for it. x This phraſe 
denotes either 1. An excluſion from Fellowſhip with God's People, 
and from all the Promiſes, Priviledges and Bleflings belonging to 
them, either in this Life, or that to come. Or rather 2. An untimely 
and violent Death, as may be gathered from Exod: 31: 14: to be 
S5nflited by the Magiſtrat, to' whom God comaurred rhe execution 
! of this, as well as other Laws; and in caſe ofhis negle& and defaulc, 
1% orthe ſecrecy of the fat, by the extraordinary hand of God, who 
ſometimes aſcribes this a& to himſelf, as Zevir: 17: 10; and 20: 6. 
»y That ſacred bond which ryed him and me together, and by his 
negle& and contempt of the condition required on his part, he hath 
forfeited the bleſſing promiſed on my part. 
And God ſaid unto Abraham, 


$ —_ As for Sarai thy 
| wife, thou ſbalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah z 
t - ſhall her name be. | $4 © 

F z Sarai ſignifies my Lady, or wy Princeſs, which confines her 


Dominion to one Family ; but Sarah ſignifies either a Lady or Princeſs, 
ſimply and abſolutely without reſtriftion, or the Princeſs of a multi- 

- tude, the Hebrew Letter he being taken our of Hamon, and added to 
her name, as it was to Abram's name. 


'Y 16 And I will bleſs her, and pive thee a ſon alſo of 
| + Heb. be her : yea, I will bleſs her, and {ae ſhall be « m#rber of 


_— * nations ; kings of people ſhall be of her. 


43 


and ſaid in his heart, Shall « ebi/4 be born unto him 
that is an hundred years old ? and ſhall Sarah thar is 
ninety years old bear ? . | = 
a Through admiration and holy rejoycing at ſo great a Bleſſing, 
not through unbelief, as Sarah did Gen: 18: 12, 13. asappears from 
Rom: 4: 19, 29. Andthough the outward a@ was the ſame in both, 
yer God diſcerned their differing diipoſirions and intentions there- 


10, 
138 :And Abraham ſaid unto God, O that Iſhmae] 
'might live before thee 6? : 
b Grant, O Lord, that the giving ofone Son may not be joyned 
with the taking away of another ; that be! may faithfully ſerve 
thee, and may bave a ſhare in thy favour, and gracious Covenant. 
For this ſeems to be the meaning of this phraſe of living before God, 
or in God's preſence, by comparing a parallel phraſe, of walking before 
God, Verſe 1. and elſewhere, and an oppoſite phraſe, Fom thy face ſhall 
T be hid, Gen. 4. 14. : 
19 And God faid, * Sarah thy wife ſhall bear thee 
a ſon indeed ; and thou ſhalt call his name Ifaacc, and 
1 will eftabliſh my covenant with him for an everlaſting 
covenant, and with his ſeed after him. 
5 c Which ſignifies lauzhter, nor from Sarah's laughter, which es 
= yet had not happened, but from 4bram's patt laughter, Yerſe 17. and 
- future joy in h15 Son. 
20 Ard as for Iſhmael, T have heard thee |: behold, 
T have bleſſed him, and will make him fruitful, and will 
multiply him exceedingly : * eweive princes ſhall he 
beger, and I will make him a grear nation. 
+ To wit, in part, or ſo far as is here expreſſed ; and probably, | 
as to the chief Bleſſing of the Covenant, to wir, the forgiveneſs of 
his Sins, and eternal Life, as the Hebrew DoQtors and ſome othars 


MA” 


 *Chap:18: 
"x0: and 
” 1: 2; 


* Chap: 
257 363 


reaſon alſo Beaſts were not to be offered to God before the eighth day, : 


17 Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed a, | 


; '$: . Chap. XVIIL. 
2T But my covenant will I eſtabliſh with Iſaac 4, 

whom Sarah ſhall bear unto thee at this ſet time, in the 

next Year. 

4 The Covenant of the promiſed Seed to come ont of his Loins, 
and of Life and Salvation to accrue to himſelf, and to his Puſteriry 
by vertue of that Seed : In compariſon whereof God ſpeaks ſ]'ghtly 
of all the temporal Bleſſings conferred upon 1bmael, thoygh in 
themſelves they were great and glorious. By which ic may {vſſici- 
ently appear that Abraham's Faith, whereby he is ſaid to be jnt: hed, 
Rom: 4: had a farther reach in it than to bis own immediate Child, 
—_ 5 _ Meſſias, whoſe day therefore Abraham is ſaid to have ſeen, 

ohn 8: 56. 

22 And he left off talking with him, and God went 
up e from Abraham. 

e To Heaven in 2 viſible manner, -as it ſeems he converſed 
with him in ſome viſible ſhape. Compare Geneſis 35: 13: Judges 13; 
20: 

23 EC And Abraham took Iſhmael his ſon, and all 
that were born in his houſs,and all that were bought with 


his money, every male among the men of Abrahams 
houſe, and circumciſed the fleſh of their fore-skin f in 
the ſelf-ſame day g, as God had ſaid unto him. 

f Partly by his own hand, and partly by the help of others, whom 
he by Divine Inſtin& called to, and direfted in that work. gln 
which God appeared to him and gave the command. So he made 
haſte and delayed nor to execure God's command. And his Servants 
alſo yielded a ready and cheerful Obedicnce to this ſevere and painful 
Precept, being moved thereunto by Abraham's Example and ſovereign 
Authority,by God's powerful Preſence ſome way or other manifeſted 
to them, and by the proſpe& and hope of God's Bleſſing ta accom= 
pany and follow his own Ordinance. * 

24 And Abraham as ninety years old and nine, when 
he was circumciſed in the fleſh of his fore-skin. 

25 And Iſhmael his ſon was thirteen years old, when 
he was circumciſed in the fleſh of his fore-skin, 


26 In the ſelf-ſame day was Abraham circumciſed, 
and Iſhmael his ſon. 


27 And all the men of his houſe, born in the houſe, 


and bought with money of the ſtranger, were circum- 
ciſed with him. : 


CHAP, XVIII, 


OWE 0 

The Loyd appears to Abraham, 1. He ſees three men, 2. Invites them, 
accept it, 4, 5. He prepares for them a calf, &c. they eat, 6 ———g 
The promiſe of a ſon by Sarah renewed ; the time appointed, g. Sarah, 
being old, laughs, 1), 12. God reproves hey, 13. And confirms the 
promiſe, 14. Her denial, and God's reply, 15. The mengs towards Sodom 
16. God reſolves to ſhew Abraham his purpoſe to deſtroy Sodom, 17. The 
reaſon of it, 18. God's teſtimony of him, 19. God reveals his purpoſe ro 
him, 20 -—22. Abraham's interceſſion for Sodom, oft repeated, and God's 
condeſcention, 25 ==3 2. 


A ND the LORD appeared unto him in the plains 

of Mamre : and he fat in the tent-door s in the 
heat of the day 6b. 

a Waiting for Strangers which might paſs that way ; for whom no 
publick places being provided in thoſe times and places, verruous 
perſons uſed to enrertain .them in their Houſes. See Heb: 13: 2. 
b The time when Travellers, eſpecially in thoſe hot Countries, uſed 
to divert and refreſh themſelves. 

2 * And he lift up his eyes and looked, and lo, three * Neb: 
men c ſtood by him : and when he ſaw them, he ran to 13: 2 
meet them from the tent-door, and bowed himſelf 

toward the ground 4, 
| c As they ſeemed to be, though indeed they were Angels in Mens 
' ſhape. 4 A reſpe& uſually paid te perſons of quality, ſuck as theſe 
ſeeined to be, 

3 And ſaid, My LORD e, if now I have found 
favour in thy ſight, paſs not away, I pray thee, from 
thy ſervant. 

e He direQeth his Speech to one, who, by the Majeſty of his 
Countenance, and the Reſpe& which the other twa ſhewed him 
ſcemed to be the chiefofthem, ? 

4 Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and waſh 
your feet f, and reft your ſelves under the tree. 

7 A prattiſe uſual in thoſe parts, Gen: 19: 2: and 24:34: and 43: 247 
Jolm 13: 4, 5: 1Tim: 5: 10: becauſe they uſed to travel either bare. 
footed, oronly with Sandals to cover and ſecure the bottom of their 


Feer., 
5 AndI will fetch a morſel of bread, and + comfort 
ye your hearts ; after that ye ſhall paſs on : for therefore 
F are ye come to your ſervantg, And they ſaid, So #Heb. fa 
do as thou haft ſaid. tHebs, 
g Nor thar he faith, or thought that this was their deſign, but an I* --ve 
effe&t of Divine Providence. The meaning is, Therefore hath God 22/4. 


directed you this way, thatI might have an occaſion of performing 
my Duty to you. which I chearfully embrace. 


6 And Abraham haſtened into the tent unto Sarah, 


5 —_ 


3. They 


| and faid, + Make ready quickly three meaſures þ of fine 4 Hb; 


meal: knead zt, and make cakes upon the hearth 5. 

þ Containing each the third part of an Ephah. See Exod: 16: 36: 
; Upen the Coals, or inthe warm Cinders, or -in an Oven. He h- 
doubtleſs other Bread ready, but he would have gew Bread for them, 
which he thought moſt grateful. | 
7 And Abraham ranunto the herd, and fetcht a calf 
render and good, and gave it untg a young man ; and 
he haſted co dreſs it, 


Gaſes; 


colle@ from Gen: 25: 17: and from other conſiderations. | 


8 Al 


PEAR. 


CONE 


9% 


; 
| 
| 
* 


A A Ee OOO ION 
-” 


Chap. XVII. | 
3 And he took butter and milk,and the calf * which 
he had dreifed, and fer zz before them ; and he ſtood 


by them & under the tree, and they did eat /, 

* To wit, the Choiceft parts of the Calf. k To wait upon them, 
as the word ftianding 15 uſed, Nehem. I2: 44. Jer: 52: 12. | Either 
ſeemingly, as the SCrIPrure oft ſpeaks of things according to ap- 
pcarance-; or reitly, rhey receive the meat into the Bodies which 
they aſſumed, whete it was conſumed by a Divine Power. 


5 4 And they ſaid unto him »z, Where is Sarah thy 


wife 2 And he ſaid, Behold, in the tent ». 

-n (i. e.) One of them, in the name of all, ſaid ; which he 
did rot for his own ſatisfattion, for he who knew her name, knew 
alſo where ſhe was, bur to give occaſion for the following diſcourſe. 
2 In her Tent; for Men and Women had then their feveral Tents 


or Apartments. : | 
io And he ſaid, I will certainly return unto thee 


+ Heb: ro 0 according to the time of life p ; and lo, * Sarah 
be living thy wife ſhall have a ſon. And Sarah heard z: in che 


_— tent door which as behind him 4. | 
Re rFs 0 Not in a viſible ſhape, but with my powerful and effeQtual 
"2 —_ Preſence to fulfil my promiſe. p This time may reſpe&, either 
RY. 72 1. Abraham and Sarah ; in the time of life, 1. e. when you ſhall be 
buth alive and in health. Bur if it belonged to them, it might 
ſeem better ro underſtand it thus ; In the time when God ſhall 
reſtore life, ( 5. e. )/ vigour and a&ivity to you ; for till then both 
Abraham's Body, and Sarah's Womb are exp.cily ſaid to be dead, 
Rom: 4:19. to which deadneſs this life may be oppolite ; and the 
time of reſto'ing this lolt po ver of Generation may well be cal- 
led # time of life, .it being a kind of life from the dead, and an 
impowering of him for a vital ation from which he was before 
diſenabled, and for the conveying of life to a Child, and perpe- 
tuating his own life in him. Or 2. To the Child, according to the 
time of life, i. e. in the time which is uſual for the Conception, 
Quickaing, and Brnging forth of a living Child. Which inter- 
pretation receiveth ſome countenance fiom 2 Kirgs 4. 16. where 
we have the ſame phraſe. Or 3. To the year, according to the time, 
or this time of life, or living time, i. e. when this time or ſeaſon of 
the year ſhall revive, 7. e. return or be reſtored : As Cities and 
Buildings are ſaid to be revived, when they are repaired or revuilr, 
as 1 Chron: 11: 8. Nehem. 4. 2. And tivis ſeaſon might more pro- 
erly be ſaid to revive, and be called rhe time of life, becauſe It may 
be gathered from the heat, verſe r. and their refreſhing themſclve. 
under the ſhadow of a Tree, that it was th2 Spring-time, when 
Herbs and Plants and Trees, which ſeem to be dead in the Winter, 
recover and thew forth their life and vigour : And fo the ſenſe 
may be this, according to this time which is a time of life, or reviving, 
wherein as the Beaury and Fruits of the Earth will be renewed and 
revives, ſo thou and Sarah ſhall be revived or receive, as it were, 
a new life in the Son that ſhall be born to you. This ſenſe ſeem; 
more probable than either of the former; becauſe Ne ſpeaks of a 
certain ſer or appointed time, verſe 14 Rom: 9 9. Gem. 21 2. and 
that time was abour a year after this, as may avpear by comparing 
Gen: 17: 24. and Gen: :1: 5 (7. e.) Ar the back of the Ange} 
that ſpoke with him. Which is here added ro thew that he knew 
her L2ughter, not by the ſight of his Eyes, but by his all-ſeeing 

Knowledge. 

11 Now * Abraham and Sarah were old, and wel! 


*Chap: 17. 
: and it ceaſed to be with Sarah after 


17. Kom: ſtricken in age : 


4:19 the manner of women 7. ; 
HeD:11. », As to thoſe monthly Efluvinms peculiar to her Sex, which are 
1, 12. neceſſary to conception, compare Gen: 31: 35. 


12 Therefore Sarah iaughed « within her ſelf z, ſay- 
*Luke::. Ing, * Aﬀter Lam waxen old, ball I have pleaſure, « 


18. my * Ford beirg od alſo? | 
iPet:3:6: 5 Not from joy and admiration, but from aiNruſt and contempr, 


. 


rided it, though none bur her ſelf,as {he thoughr,knew it. » Nor ſo 


much in the conceprion, as in the education and fruition ofa Ch1'd. , 


12 Ard the LORD ſaid unto Abraham. Wherefore 


did Sarah laugh. ſaying, Shall I of a ſwiery bear a child, ' 


which am old ? | 
*TJer:32: 14 *Is anything too hard for the LORD «2.7 ar the 
17. Zech: time 'appointed will I return unto thee, according to 
8:6, Luke the time of life, and Sarah ſhall have a ſon. 


I: 37. * Heb. Hid from God ? So the ſenſe is, though the laughed only 
+ Chap: 5 her Heart, it is not unkaown to me : Or rather 00 wonderful for 
T7:2I. Godto effe& ? Which beſt ſuits with the following words. 


i5 Then Sarah denied y, ſaying. 1 iaughed not : for 
ſhe was afraid And he ſaid, Nay, but thou didft laugs. 


4 From the ſenſe of Guilt, and rhe diſcovery of her Shame, a:d 


the expetion of a fharp Rebuke both from this Perſon, and from | 


her Husband. | 
16 1 Aad the men roſe up from thence, and look- 
+. John. £4 towards todom : and Abraham wenr with them * co 
bring them 03 the way z. 
_ » A civility. ual then and afterwards: 
F 21; 5. Rom: 15: 24.1 Cor: 16. 1T, | 
Amos 3: 17 And the LORD ſaid, * Shall I hide from Abcra- 
7- hamethatthing wiichT do ; | 
3 q. d, T will not, Canor hide it ; it is againſt the Laws of 
Friendſhip to conceal my Secrets from him. The Interrogation 
here is in effe& a Negatio:. as elſewhere: Compare 2 Sam: 7. 5. 
with 1 Chron: 17: 4.and Matthy. 16.with Luke 6:43. See alſo mes 3.7. 
18 Deng that Abrahan bail {ureiy DECOME a great 
and mighty nation, and alehe nations of che earth ſhall 
*Chap:12 be * bleJed in him b, 


See As 20: 38: and 


: and 22. 
78.A&3.1 deny him the leſs ? Compare the rgument, Rom: 8; 22. God's 
25. Gal.z. ways are not like Men's » ays. Forty favou.s ro Men are argu- 
ments why-they ſhould do no more ; ut co God rhey are motives 
for che addiag of new ones. 


GENESIS © _—_ my 


as if ir were incredible. #t Heb. In her heart, 3. e. ſhe ſecretly de- | 


| 1aP» >, 
19 For I know him c, that he will command d his 

children and his houſho!d after him e, and they (hall 

| keep the way of the LORD, to do juſtice and juds- * 
ment g ; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham 


76 
4 
- 


DS 3 

; that which he hath ſpoken of him 5. | 

c I know him to be ſuch an one as1 am now deſcribing ; or 
I know this concerning him which now follows. Others, I love 
him, and therefore cannot conceal this from him. | Words of 
Knowledge being oft pur for Love, as Jer: 1: 5. and 24: 5: Ho: 
13: 5, Ames. 3: 2+» d Or, Inſtru#, as the word is uſed, Leviticus 
14: 5. Deut: 20: 18: and 27. 3, It will not be in vain that I tell 
him this, and give him occaſion to pray and to raſte my Goodneſs 
m anfwering Prayers, becauſe he will not ſmother thele things in 
his own Breaſt, but manifeſt them to otters, and teach them how 
goo God 1s, who ſo readily complies with the Defires and Prayers 
of Men, and -how terrible he is to incorrigible Sinners, and how 
evi] and bitter a thing it is to {in againſt God. And ſo I ſhall ger 
the end I aim at in all my Works, which is, that they may be 
known for rhe good of others ; that they may learn by fuch Ex. 
ample. e Who will live when he is dead. He will fo diligently 
imprint theſe things in their Minds, that they ſha!l never forget 
them. f ( 5. e. ) Obſerve and walk in the way of Gods Precepts : 
7. 4. He thall nor loſe his Deſign or Labour ; tor what he teacherh 
they ſhall learn and Praftiſe. See Pſal: 51: 15, &c._ g (5. e.) To 
do all things thar are good, and right, and juſt, both to God and 
Men. Compare Pſal:1 19. f>1. þ (3, e. ) That Abraham and his Poſte- 
rity, keeping the Condition: of the Covenant required on their parr, 
God may without any blemiſh to his honour or Juſtice give all thoſe | 
good things which he hath promiſed to them. | | 

20 And the LORD ſaid, Becauſe * the cry i of So- * Chap.z/ 
dom and Gomorrah & is great, and becauſs their ſin is 19. and | 
very grievous ; Sb 

Z Sins are faid to cry when they are groſs, and manifeſt, and im- Jam: 5.4. * 
pudent, and ſuch as highly provoke God ro Anger. k He names C 
oly rheſe two, as being the moſt eminenr in State, and exemplary 
in Wickedneſs ; but under them he includes the reft, as appears 
by the Story. | ; f 

21 * L will go down now, and ſee / whether they * Chap, | 
have T done altogether m2 accordir.g to the cry of ir, 11. s. | 
which is come unto me z and if nor. I wiil know. T Hed. 

/ (7. e.) Enquire into the truth of the thing. God here ſpeaks made a 
afrer the manner of Men, and for the Example and In{truftion of 2: 
Judges to ſearch into Cauſcs ere rhey paſs Sentence. m | Heb: Whee 
*her they harye made a conſuinmation or accompl:ſhment, i. e. whether 
they have filled up the meaſure of their Sins. Compare Gen: 15: 16, 
Marth: 23: 32. James 1+ 15. 

22. And the men » turned their faces from thence, 
and went toward Sodom : bur Abraham ſtood yer be- 


fore the LORD o. _ 

n (i:e.) Two of them - for the third ſtayed with Abraham, as it 
nere follows. o The third of theſe perſons, whom now he percei- 
ved to be the Lord himſelf, who had aſſumed an humane ſhape. 

23 1 And Abraham drew ncar p, avd iaid, Wilt 


thou alſo deſtroy the righteous with the wicked ? 
p. (7.e. ) Apptoached unto God ro enquire of him, and to pray 
:n*o him ; for ſo the phraſe of @rawing near to God is uſed, 1 Sam: 
I4: 36. Pſal: 73. 28. IJa: 29; 13: Heb: 10: 22. « : 
24 * Peradventure there be fifty righteous within * Jer. 5: $37 
the city q: wilt chou alſo deſtroy, and not ſpare the 


place for rhe fifty righteous that are therein ? 7 

q ( #. e.) In the cities concerned. as appears by verſe 20. and 19, 
25. The fingulac number for the plural, as is frequent, | as Gen: 3., 
2. 1 Chron; 10: 1: compired with 1 Sam: 31: 1. and oft elſewhere, 
Or the City Sodom alone is men.ioned, but the reſt are compre- 
hended under it, either becauſe of it's eminency, or becauſe they 
were ſubje&t or tubordinar to it, as may ſeem probable |from the 
Hiſtory, Gen: 14. | | 

'25 Thar be far from thee to do after this manner, to 
ſlay the righreous with the wicked : and that the righ- 
reous ſhajl be as. the wicked, that be far from thee: 
* ſhail nor the judge” of all the earth r do right 5? * Job 8.4: _ 
- 7 Now he clearly perceiveth that this perſon. was no lefs than and 34:17 
the Creator, Governour and Judge of the World, even the ſecond Rom ith | 
perſon in the Bleſfed Trinity, ro whom that Title and Work is 
aſcribed, as John 5: 22, 27« Afts 10. 42. and 17: 31. s He 
{peaks nor rhis, as 1f it were __ unjuſt for God to inyolve the - 
Righteous 1" the ſame temporal Deſtruction with the Wicked ; for 
hz knew very well and by his own experience, that there was not 
a juſt man 1on earth that d:d good and famed not, Ecclef, 7: 20. and 
therefore no fuch juſt man who dit nor for his own Sin deſerve 
that Death and Deft:-uftion, which is the proper wages of. ir, Rom: 6.: 
laſt. Bur he ſpeaks not here of ſtrick and rigorous Juſtice, but of 
that moderat and equitable way which God 1s pleaſed to uſe with 
the Sons of Men, and of rhar r:1ght to temporal Deliverances which 
by vertue of God's gracious Covenant and Promiſe, did accrue to 
pious and vertuous Perſons, eſpecially in the times of the old Teſta- 
ment, when temporal Promiſes were more expreſly and particu- 
larly made ro good Men.. 


26 And the LORD ſaid, If I find in Sodom fifcy 
righteous within the city, then I will ſpare all the place 


for their ſakes. __ | | 

275 And Abraham anſwered and ſaid, Behold, now 
T have taken upon-me to ſpeak unto the LORD, which 
am but duſt and aſhes:. | | 


t In regard of the compoſition of my Body,which was taken out 


b { 9. 4. ) Seing T have don | hf im. an 
(9 ) yy S oxef} Things For Bi, Ie Rk : 195 Eccl: 12: 7. 1 Cor: 15: 47, 48. 


of the Duſt, and ſhall return into it again. See Ger: 3: 19: Job 4; 


28 Petadventure there ſball lack five of che fifty righ= 


| teous, Wilt thou deſtroy all the city ſor lack of five «? 
| E 2 Arg 


* 922m % 
_ clas _ % VAL . 
GS 2% 
. I 
| ha 
| Pp 
o 
- 


| 2. 
* Chap: 


| 24.28. 


XX. 


. adventure there ſhall be forty found there. 


{ * Heb:13: 


And he ſaid, IFT fied there forty and five, I will not 
deſtroy t. : | ; 

« Heb. For five, or becauſe of five, to wit, which are lacking or 
wanting. The ſame Supplement we have alſo, Pſalm reg. 24. 


Lam: 4: 9. | : : : 8 
.29 And he ſpake unto him yet again, and faid, Per- 
And he 


ſaid, T will nor do zt for forties ſake. 
3o And he ſaid »»te him, O, let not rhe LORD be 


' angry, and I will ſpeak : Peradventure there ſhall thirty 


be found there. And he ſaid, 1 will not do it, if I 
find thirty there. 

' 21 And he faid, Behold now, T have taken upon me 
to ſpeak unto the LORD : Peradvencure there ſhall be 
twenty found there, And he ſaid, I will not deſtroy 
it for twenties ſake, 


22 Andhe ſaid, * O, let not the LORD be angry, 


' and I will ſpeak yer but this once « 3 Peradventure ten 


ſhall be found there, * And he ſaid, I will not deſtroy 


;r for tens ſake. 

* Abraham in modeſty could proceed no further, and being a 
good Man himſelf, he had a charitable Opinion of others, and 
thought there certainly were ſo many good Men in all thoſe Cities, 
efpecially,including Lot and his Family. No doubt Abraham re- 
membred Lt in his Prayers; but that large and generous Soul could 


not content himſelf with Let's preſervation, bur aims at the ſaving 


of the whole Ciries, which when he ſaw was doubrful aud unlikely, 
he prayed for his deliverance out of that common Deſtruttion, as 
may be gathered from Gen: 19: 29. 


33 And the LORD went his way, afſſoon as he had 
lefr communing-with Abraham : and Abraham recurned 


unto his place. | . 
CHAP. XIX. 

Two angels come to Sodom, 1. Lot invites them in ; they at firſt r:fuſe, 2. 
They enter ; he entertains them and they eat, 3. The men of Sodom ae- 
mands to know them, 4, 5. Lot aiſſwades them, 6, 7. Offers his aaugh- 
ters ; urges reaſon, 8. They are obſtinat ; threaten, and preſs to break 
the door, 9g. The angels pull Lot in, and ſhout to the door, 10. Aud 
ſmite the men with blindneſs, 11. ' Adviſe Lot to depart with his kin- 
dared, 12. The reaſon, 13: Lot ſpeaks to his ſons. in law ; they deride 
him, 14. The angels lay hold on Lot, his wife, and two daughters, and 
carry them out, 16. Command them not to look back, 179. Lot requeſts 
ro fay in Zoar ; it is granted ; with a command to haſten, becauſe till 
they are gone the Lord can do nothing, 18-=-23. God rains brimſtone 
Bna fire upon Sodom, 24, 25* Lots wife looking back, becomes a pillar of 
ſalt, 26. Abraham looks towards Sodom, 27, 28. God kind to Lot for 
Abrahams lake, 29. Lot and his two daughters remove to the mountain, 
30. Lyt's daughters contrive for an iſſue; 31, 32. They make their fa- 
ther drunk, lie with him, 33--—3$. and are with child, 36, Moab and 
Ben-ammi, the two ſons born thereby, 46, 37. | 

= D ehere came a two angels 6 to Sodom at even 

c ; and Lot fat in the gate of Sodom 4d: and Lor 


_ ſeing them, roſe up ro meet them 3 and lie bowed him- 


ſelf with his face coward the ground ; 

a Even thoſe two which departed from Abraham, Chap: 18, 22. 
and now were come to Le, the third yer ſtaying and communing 
with Abraham. b So they truly were, though they be called Men, 
Chap: 18. c Of the ſame day on which they departed from 4bra- 
ham. d Where he fat either to obſerve the Adminiſtration or Cor- 
ruption of Juſtice there ; for the ſeats of Judicature were in the 


* Gares : Or rather to wait for Strangers, to whom he might exerciſe 


Kindneſs and Hoſpitality. 
2 And he ſaid, Behold now my lords, * turn in, I 


pray you, into your ſervants houſe, and tarry all night, 
and * walb your feet, and ye ſhall riſe up early, and 


[ - 0M 29 on your ways F. And they ſaid, * Nay, but we 


will abide in the ſtreet all night e. 

+ And ſo this will beno hinderance to your Occaſions. e This 
w2s no untruth, but really intended by them in the preſent ſtare 
of things, and upon ſuppoſition that Zo: ſhould preſs them no 
further ; but they alſo intended, .f Lot was earneſt with them, to 
comply with them. The firſt denyal was but decent, and an a& of 
Civility,and in them it wasa deſign to diſcover Let's Piety and Ho- 
ſpitality, and to manifeſt rhe great difference between him and the 
barbarous Sedomites, and the reaſon and juſtice of Lor's Deliverance, 
and their Deſtru&ion. 

2 And he preſſed upon them greatly 3 and they turn- 
ed in unto him, and entered into his houfe : and he 
made them a feaſt, and did bake unleavened bread f, 


and they did eat. . 

f Becauſe that was ſooner prepared, that ſo they might ear it, 
and after that go to Bed in due time- : 

4 © Bur before they lay down f, the men of the ci- 
ty,even the men of Sodom,compailed the houſe round, 


both old and young all the people from every quarter g.. 

+ To ſleep, of which this word is uſed, Ger: 28: 13: Lev: 14:17. 
ad 26:6. g Some to exerciie Villany, and ſome to pleaſe them- 
ſelves with the Contemplation of it, and ſome out of curioſity, &c. 
This is added to ſhew hoy univerſally corrupt they were, and that 
there were not ten righteous men there. 

5 And they calied unto Lot,and ſaid unto him, Where 
ere the men which came in to thee this night ? bring 
them out unto us, that we may know them -þ. 

þ Either know whio they are : Or rather abuſe them, as Lot's an- 
ſwer explains it, and ſo that word is uſed, Gen: 4: 1. Numb: 31: 17: 
Jadg: 19: 22. And for the Sin here committed, ſee Lv: 18: 22. and 
20: 13: Rom: 1- 26, 27. 1 Cor: 6 9. Jude werſe 5. They openly and 


 Unpudeatly profeſs their wicked Intention, for which they are | 


GENESIS. 


branded, Iſa: 4: 9: and this intention of theirs is the more proba. 


ble, becauſe of the great beauty which it is likely was in thoſe bo« 
_ - wa the Angels aſſumed, whereby their Luft Was MOTe in- 
amed. 
6 And Lot went out at the door unto them, and ſhut 
the door after him, 
2 And ſaid, I pray you, brethren 3, do not ſo wick- 
edly. 

z So they were by Community of Nature and Habitation. See 
Gen: 9: 5: and 297 4: and Lev: 19: 17- and fo he calls them, if poſſi- 
bly he might ſweeten and reſtrain them. 

8 * Behold now, I have two daughters which have 
not * known man & ; let me, I pray you, bring them 


out unto. you, and do ye to them as 75 good in your * 
eyes /: only unto theſe men do nothing ; for therefore "wi, 


7 came they under the ſhadow of my roof m. 

& To wit, Carnally. See Gen: 24: 16: Num: 31: v8: Judg: 11: 39: 
{ Whatſoever your purpoſe or pleaſure is. See the ſame Phraſe, 
Gen: 20: I5. and 41: 37: Numb: 24: 1, &c. A moſt imprudent and 
ſinful Motion, whereby he yielded to one fin to prevent another, 
contrary to Romans 3: 8: and expo'ed his Daughters chaſtity which 
he was obliged to preſerve, and which indeed he had no power to 
expoſe, eſpecially ſeing they were betrothed to other men, wv: 14: 
Bur it is ſomeextenuarion of hisSin thar it proceeded from his great 
Charity and Kindneſs to Strangers, and that he was at this time 
under a great perturbation and diſcon poſure of mind. + That 
they might be preſerved from ſuch outrages. 
of the thing, though not of thoſe Perſons. See the Note on Ger: 
18: 5. 4. e. ) Under the proteQion of my Houſe. Shadow is of 
put for protein or defence, as Judges 9: 15: Pſalm 36: 7. Jer:48:45. 

9 And they ſaid, Stand back ». And they ſaid again, 
This one fcliew came in to ſojourn s, and he will needs 
be a judge p : now will we deal wor wich thee than 
with them. And they preſſed ſore upon the man, ever 


Lor, and came near to break the doors 

» Or, Go further off, i. e. out of our way ? ſtand not between us 
and the door, or come hither : That ſo they might ſeize him, and 
proceed in the duiigned wickedneſs. o q. 4d. One man, and he too 
bur a Stranger, preſumeth to oppoſe the whole Society of the Na- 


tive Citizens. p Heb. In judging he will judge. This buſy-body, if 


not reſtrained in time, will take Authority to himſelf to cenſure, 
reprove, and condemn us from time to time. 
10 Buc the mer pur forth their hand, and pulled Lot 


into the houſe to them, and ſhut te the door. 


11 And they ſmote the men * that were at the door "See AR 


FSeeTudg. 


”= 


{? 


This was the deſign ' 


Chap. XIX. 


of che houſe with, blindneſs q, both ſmall and great : 1;:.1. 


{o that they wearied themſelves to find the door. 
9 Heb. With Blindneſs, 7. e. with a blindneſs both of Body and 


Mind. It was nor a total blindneſs, as if they quite loſt the uſe of 


their Eyes, for they faw the Houſe, tho nor the Door, but it was a 
great dimneſs and confuſion of their Sight, and a diſturbance in 
their common Senſe, by which they were made unable to diſtin» 


gutth between differing Perſons or Places ; as it was alſo with the 
Syrians, 2 Kings 6: 18: as it 1s in ſome meaſure with ſome drunkards, 
who, tho their Eyes be open, c#nnot diſtinguiſh berween things 
thar differ. And this was very eaſy for Angels to do by a ſmall 
alteration either in their Sight, or in the Air, whereby either the 
Door might appear to them like the ſolid Wall, or the 1everal parts 
of the Wall like ſo many Doors. . 

12 4 And the mca ſaid unto Lot, Haſt thou here any 
beſides 2 ſon in law, and thy ſons, and thy daughters, 
and whatſoever thou haft in the city, bring them out of 
this place; BE | 

13 For, we will deſtroy this place : becauſe the * cry 
of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD, 
and the LORD hath ſent us to deſtroy it. | 

14 And Lot went out, and ſpake unto his ſons: in 


| law, which married 7 his daughters, and ſaid, Up, ex 


ye out of this-place,for the LORD will deſtroy this cicy: 
but he ſeemed as one that mocked unto his ſons in law. 
7 Heb: Took, or were taking, or about to take, to wit, either to 


Eſpouſe, or ro Marry. Compare Gen: 6: 2. and 24: 3: and 28. 6. 
Deut: 7: 3. Anciently Pe.fons were firit eſpouſed, and after ſome 


time, the Marriage was conſummated. 

15 45 And when the morning aroſe, then the angels 
haſtned Lot, ſaying, Ariſe, take thy wife, and thy 
ewo daughters which Þ are here £, leſt thou be conſum- 
ed in the * iniquity of the city. 


*Chap:183 


20. 


T Heb: are 
s Heb. Which are found, 7, e. Which are preſent with thee,as this found. 


r, pu* 


is uſed, 1 Chron: 29: 17. 2 Chron: «5: 11. and 39: 41: and 31: 1. * 
word is . 9: 17 3 3 keg 


Whence ſome gather that he had two other Daugh-ers married to 
two Sodomitiſh Men, who by their Husbands perſwiſton and exam< 
ple,ſtaid,and periſhed in thoſe Flames. Burt this isaot neceſſary:For 
this Phraſe may be applied to the Daughters br way of diſtinftion 
from their Spouſes 0: Husbands. 9. d. Tarry 10 longer in expeQa- 
tion of thy Sons-in-law, who are abſent, an# mult be given up for 
loſt, bur take thy Daughters which are four! and preſent with thes, 
and go thy way. 

16. And while he lingred z, tie men laid hold upon 
his hand, and upon the hand © his wife, and upon the 
hand of his two daughters ; tle LORD being merciful 
unto him ; and they brouglt him forth, and fcc him 


without the city. _ ; : 
; Either through loathneſs t part with all his Eſtate, or to loſe 
his Sons-in-law : Or, through-ſtoniſhment and diſtr:&1on of Mind, 


which made him both liſtleſ and impotent. 


17 And it came tr pab, when they hd brooghe 
ng og then: 


LES 
- ' J 
by 


fH 
fort 


In 


IDs NE Nl tn the. 
4 


Chap. 


+ Hob, 
thy face. 


f Heb. gone 
forth. 


*Deut:29: 
23:Iſa:13: 
19:ſer:50: 
40 Ez: 16: 
49: Hot: 
T1: 8: 
Amos 4:- 
11: Luke 
17: 29; 

2 Per: 2:6: 
Jude 7: 

Y See Jud: 
62 20: 

2 Chron: ” 
7:1: Ezek: 


TI: 24:3 


 * Luke 
47+ 32s 


thee 6 OY this thing aiſo, that I will not overs 
O 


XIX. h S 
them forth abroad, that he « faid, Eſcape for thy life x; 
look not behind thee y, neither ſtay thou inall the plain: 


eſcape tothe mountain, leſt thou be conſumed. 

u Either one of the Angels : Or the third Perſon, the Lord him- 
ſ&)f, who having parted from Alraham, after ſome time came to 49, 
as appears buth by the change of the number, for before this he 
ſpeaks of them. in the plural namber, but from hence inthe ſingular 
number, as Yerſe.19: 21, 22: and by the variation of the Phraſe, for 
the other two tpezk with ſubmiſſion, and as ſervants, Verſe 13+ The 
Lord hath ſent us, &s. but this ſpeaks with more authority, as 15 
evident from Yerſe 21: 22. x(5.e,) As thouloveſt thy life. See 
Deut: 4: 15: Joſe 233 11: Jer: 17:21, Or, eſcape with thy Life, for the 
Hebrew particle a// is ſometimes taken for with, as Exoa: 39-333 
Levit: 2: 2: and 14: 3i: Dent: 22: 6. So the S-nſe is, ſtand not 
lingring in hopes to fave thy goods, them thou ſhalt loſe as a 
puniſhment ofthy Sin and Folly 1n chuſing to dwell with ſo wicked 
a People, and be thankful that thou haſt thy life given thee for @ prey, 
as it is expreſſed, Jer: 38: 2., y Like one that grieves either for the 
Joſs of thy pleaſant H«biration, or vaſt Eſtate, or for thoſe curled 
Miſcreants ju{tly devoted to this Deſtru&tion. And this command 
tho given to Loz alone, yet was direfted alſo to his Companions, to 
whom doubtleſs he imparted it, as is evident both from all the other 
commands, which equally concern all, and from the following event. 


See Matth: 24: 18: Luke 9. 62. - 
18 And Lor faid unto them *, Oh, not ſo, my 


— _____— 


» o GOO ————_— n a W775?» 


by others after him. wo 

27 T-And Abraham gat up early in the morning, to 
the place where he * ftood before the LORD: 

28 And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah; 
and toward all the land of the plain, and bebeid, and 
lo, the ſmoak of the countrey went up as the ſmoak of 
a furnace. : | 

29 4 And it came to paſs when God deſtroyed the 
Cities of the plain, that God remembred Abraham », 
and ſent Lot out of the midſt of the overthrow, when 
he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt. 

-m Either 1. The promiſe made to Abraham, Gen: 12. 3- Or, 2. 
The Prayer made by #braham, Gen. 18. who doubtleſs in his Prayers 
for Sodom would nor forget Lot, rhough his Prayer for him be not 
there mentioned. And hereby it is infinuated, that Zos though 
he was a rightzeeus M:n, and ſhould be ſaved eternally, yet 
deſerved ro periſh temporally wich thoſe wicked People, to 
whom heaſſociated himſelf meerly for worldly advantages,and ſhould 
have done ſo, if Araham had not hindred it by his Prayers. 


39 © And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in 
the mountain, and his two daughters with him ; for he 
feared to dwell in Zoar »: and he dwelt in a cave, he 


LORD. | 


* /.e. Unto one of them, as is manifeſt from the following | 


words. [2 
19 Behold, now, thy ſervant hath found grace in | 


, 


thy ſight, and thou haft magnihed thy mercy, which | 
thou in erp unto me in ſaving my life : and I ! 
cannot eſtape to the mountain z, leſt ſome evil take | 
me, and I die. YM 

2 B:caule of the infirmity of my Age, and the fainting of my * 
Sp rits. Thus he ſheweth an unworthy and unreaſonable diftruſt of 
God's Power and Goodneſs which he had now experienced and 
acknowledged ERS 

2 Behold, now, this city zs near to flee unto, and. 
it 35 alittle one a: O let me eſcape thither, ( zs it not 
a littie one? ) and my ſoul thall jive. | 

a Therefore as its Inhabirants, ſo its Sins are fewer, and it will ' 
nor be an eminent Examp!e of thy Vengeance, as the other p!aces 
will be. | ; 

24 And he ſaid unto him, See, I have accepted Þ+' 


= 


throw this city, for the which thou haſt ſpoken. 

b Heb. 1have lift up thy countenance, ( 3.e. ) granted thy requeſt. 
The manner of the Exprefſion poſſivly may be raken from rh: cus | 
ſtom of the Eaſtern pa:'s; where Petitioners uſed not to fall upon 
therr Knees as we do, but to proſtrare themſelves wich their face to , 
the Ground ; ani the Perſon ro whom they auddreſſ2d themſelves, in 
token of his favourable acceptance of their Petitions, commanded 
them to be lifred up. 

22. Haſte chee, eſcape thither ; for T cannot do any 
thing till thou be come thither c: therefore the name of 
the city was called Zoar. 

c Becauſe of God's Decree and Promiſe to ſave thee from the 
gen?ral Deſtruttion. 

23 ET The ſun was þ riſen upon the earth d when 


Lot entered into Zoar. | 
d This Phraſe may nore, either the time of the day when this 
was done; or rather the narure and quality of the day, thatthe Sun 
appe-rred and ſhone forth that Morning in great Luſtre and Glory : 
/hich is well norcd as a very conſiderable circumſtance of the Hi- ; 
ſtory, and a great aggravation of the Ruin, which came when they | 
leaſt <xpetted ir. F 
24 Then * the * LORD rained upon Sodom and 


upon Gomorrah e brimſftone and fire f from the 
LORD g out of Heaven. | | 


e And rhe neighbouring Ciries, Aimah and Zcboaim, as appears * 
from Dent: 29. 23: F-r: 49: 18: Hſ: 11:8. f Brimftone is added co the 


— —__—@A_— 


CS — 


' Fire, either to conv-y and carry down the Fire which ia it ſelf is 


light and apt ro aſcend ; orro increaſe it, 1/a: 30: 33: or to repreſent 
the noylomnels of their Luſts. g ( 7.e. ) Fiom himſelf: The Noun 
pur for the Pronoun, as Gen: 1: 29: 2 Chron: 7: 2. But here it is 
empiatically ſo expreſſed, Either x. To ſignify tha® it proceeded | 
not from Natural Cauſes, but from the immediate Han4 of God. ' 
Or, .2, To note the Pluraliry of Perſons in the God-head, God 
the Son, who now appeared upon the Earth rained from God 
his Father in Heaven, both concurring in this A&, as,indeed all 
outwara Attions are common to all the Perſons of the Trinity. 
25 Aad he overthrew thoſe cities, andall the plain+, 
and all tte inhabitants of the cities, and that which 
grew uponthe ground. F-4 

h To wir, where theſe Cities and their Territories lay, . called zhe | 
Plain of Jordan, Gy: 13: lo. all which thea became, and to this day 
continues to be a ijthy Lake, called the Dead-Sea, bscauſe no Filh 

hves 1n.1t. 

26 «4 But his vife looked back i from behind him &, 
and the + became \ * pillar of ſalt /. 

l Through curiolity, w unvelief, or defire of what ſhe lefr, or 
from all taele Cauſes. k ( e.) From behind her Husband, whom ſhe 
followed. Wh'ch circumtynce ſeems ro be mentioned as the reaſon 
ofrhisPreſumprion, becauſcſhe could do it wirhout her Husband's 
Obſervation or Reproof, ro W,ch ſhe had a greater regard than to 
the all-ſeeing Eyz of God. T' ,, Her Body, by a very common 
Synecdethe.. 1 Either metaphortyj]y, ;.e a p-cpetual durable Pillar 
as an everhſtiny Covenant 15 calle. 4 Covenant of Salt, Numb: 18: 19: 
or properly, tor there is a kind of -rajick Silt, which reliſts the 
Rain, and is hard enough for Build1.,. as Pliny, Solinus, and others 
witneſs, And that Saic was here meg with Bruntcone, may be; 
garhered from D:4: 29. 23. Addto Clis, that Jojephrus Antiq. 1, 12.1 


and his two daughters. © 
z Leſt he ſhould either ſuffer from them, or with them ; perceivin 
now. that though it was little City, yet there was more wickedneſs 
14 1t than he imagined. 
31 4 And the firſt-born ſaid unto the younger, Our 
father js old, and there js not a man in the earth o to 


come in unto us after the manner of all the earth p. 

0 Either 1. In the whole Earth : For rhey thought tne ſame deluge 
of Fire which deſtroyed rhe four Cities had by this time extended 
it ſelf to Zoar, and al! other p'aces, knowing that the whole World 
did liein Wickedneſs, and having poſſibly heard from their Father, 
that the Worid as it was once deſtroyed by Water, fo it ſhould 
afterwards be conſumed by Fire, which they might think was now 
executed, and that God had ſecured Abraham from it by taking bing 
to himſelf. Or, 2. that Land, as ths word may be rendred. And 
her meaning might nct be this, that there was no Man at all, but 
not a Man with whom they mighr or durſt Marry + For though they 
knew they left many Men in Zoar, \y«<t the ſad experience of the 
dreadful Ruin wherein their Brethrep=n-law were involved, made 
them abher the thoughts of any Conjunthion with them. p( z.e.) OF 
all the Inhabirants of the Earth. Compare Gen: 18: 11: | 


32 Come, let us make our father drink wine q, and 
we will lie with him, that we may preſerve ſeed of our 


father 7. =. . OD 
9 Which they carried with them amongſt other neceſſary provi- 


ſions either from Sedowr or Zoar r Which :hough an inceſtuous and 


abominable Aion, yet they thought was made lawful by rhe ſup= 
poſed neccſlity, as in the beginning of the World the: Marriage of 


Bret.iren and Siſtzrs was lawful, becauſe neceſſary ; and when it | 


cealed to be neceſſary, becauſe of the increaſe of Mankind, it became 
inceſtuous. 

' 33 'And they made their father drink wine 5 that 
night :. and the ficſt-born went in, and lay with hes 
farher, and he perceived not when ſhe lay down, nor 
when (he aroſe z. DEE. 

s Towir, in Exceſs, ſoas to deprive him of the uſe of his Rea» 
ſon and Grace, which was likely to fruſtrate their Projed&t : This 
was a great Sin, nor only in them, but al'o in Let himtelf, not to 
beexcuſed by ignorance of the virtue of Wine, which being knowrh 
to both th? Daughrers, certainly their Father cou'd nor be 1gnorane 
of it. Tous hs who kept his Integrity in the midſt of all che 
Temprations of Sedom, fallsinto a grievous Sin in a place where 
he mighr ſeem mo? remote from all Temptations : God permitring 
this, to teach all f.]'owing Ages, how weak even the beſt Men are, 
when they ar? left ro themſe'v2s, and whar abſolute need they have 
of Divine Afſitence, * Wherein there is nothing ſtrange, it being 
uſual wich Drunken Men to do mahy things in that condition, 
which when they come to themſelves, they perfe&tly forger. And 
ſo might Lot, when under the pawer of Wine, forget that his Wife 
was rra_ into a pillar of Salt, and might miſtake his Daughter fos 
his Wife. | Es Ls 

34 And it came to paſs on the morrow, that the 
firſt-born ſaid unto the younger, Behold, I lay yeſter= 
night with my father : letus make him drink wine this 
night alſo ; and gochou in, and lie with him; that we 


| may preſerve ſeed of our father; 


235 And they madetheir father drink wine that night 
alſo ; and the younger aroſe, and lay with him ; and he 
perceived not when the lay down, nor when ihe aroſe. 

36 Thus were boch the daughters of Let with child 
+ by their father. oo te GE Rs 

+ Waich they might poſſivly imagine to be an evidence of 
Divine Approbation of their Fatt ; whereas, indeed, it was a deſign 
of God to mak? a laſting Monument of rheir Sin and Shame. _ 

37. And the firſt-born bare a {on, and cailed his name 
Moab « : the ſame js the father of the Moabites x unto 
this day. BENE 2 

.u (7.e.) Of my Father, begotten upon ime by my Father. Sa 
ſhe had learned from her Neighbours to declare her ſin as Sodom, 
Iaiah 3. 9g. x A miſchievous and infamous Pcople, branded, as 
rheir Brethren alſo the Ammonites were; with Characters of God's 
Diſpleaſure, 7 Leto Ft | 

38 And the younger, ſhe alſo bare a ſon; andcalled 
his name Ben-ammt y; the ſame #5 che father of the 
children of Ammon unto this day, . 4, _ _ * 

E 3 J (1,6) 


affirms that this Pillar remained in his time. And the likeis witneſſed 4 


* Chap, 


- 2 6 -, v.0Y 8 


* 5 (3.e. ) The $91 of my People, or Kindred, not of the curſed Race. 
of the Sodomites, where 1 was to bemarried. This is ſomething more 
modeſt than the-other in the nzme ſhe gives, but both impudently 
glorying in their Sin and Shame, of which they ſhould have bitterly 


repented. | 
CHAP. XX. 
aham ſojourns in Gerar,” 1. Denies Sarah to be his wife 5 Abimelech ſends 
. and takes her, 2. God warns Abimelech in a dream, 3. He expoſtulates 
with God ; who anſwers gnd commands him to reſtors Sarah, 4—7*+ 
Abimele:h warns his ſervants, 8. Rebukes Abraham, 10. Who excuſes 
and defends what he had ſaid, 11---—-13. Abimelech kind to Abraham ; 
reftores his wife, 14, 15- Rebukes Sarah, 16. Abraham prays for 
Abimelech ; God removes his judgments, 17, 18. 


ND Abraham journeyed from thence towards 
the ſouth countrey b, and dwelt between Cadeſh 


and Shur, and ſojourneyed in Gerar. 

a From the plain of Mamre, Chap: 18: 1: where he had long dwelt; 
and whence he removed, either becauſe of irs nearneſs to that filthy 
Lake, which now was in the place of that late fruirful plain; or for 
other reaſons and conveniences needleſs to be here enquired or 

| derermined. b Yet more towards the Southern part of Canaan. 
2 And Abraham faid of Sarah his wife, * She is my 
ſiſter c : and Abimelech king of Gerar ſent, and took 


Sarah d. 6 . 

c Left they ſhould ſlay him for his beautiful Wifes ſake, as himſelf 
tells us, Yerſe 11. For though Sarah was ninety years old, yer ſhe 
retained her Beauty in good meaſure, partly becauſe ſhe had nor 
been broken by bearing and nurſing of Children, partly becauſe in 
that age of the World Men and Women as they lived longer, ſo 
they did nor ſo ſoon begin to decay, as now they do ; and partly, 
becauſe of God's ſpecial Blefling upon her. 4 Nor withour violence, 
for it is not to be thought that either Abraham or Sarah would conſent 
| eo it, 7 
A 2 But God* came to Abimelech in a dream eby night, 
1 Pſal: and faid to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man *, for 
395" '©. the woman which thou haſt taken f: for ſhe is f a mans 
| F Heb. wife. 
| married e God then uſed to manifeſt his Mind in Dreams, not only to 
zo an Hyi- his People, but even to Heathens for their ſakes, or in things where- 
} band. in they were concerned. * Thou deſerveſt a preſent and untimely 
= Death ; and if thou proceedeſt in thy intended Wickedneſs, it ſhall 
be inflicted upon thee. f Both for thy injuſtice in taking her away 
by force, and For thy intentions to abuſe her, though nor yet exe- 
cuted. ; 

| 4 But Abimelech had not come near her g: and he 


faid, LORD, wilt thou ſlay alſo a righteous 5 nation z ? 
g (#. e. ) Had not yer lien with her. A modeſt Expreſſion, like 
.thar of knowing a woman, Gen: 4: 1 or going in to her, Gen: 6: 4: or 
rouching her, Prov: 6: 29. 1 Cor: 7: 1: by which we are taught to uſe 
Modeſty in our Speeches, and nor, with the rude Cynicks, to expreſs 


| * Chap: 


this. 
-  -& Withour any adulterons deſign in my Heart, or outward ations 
- tendingro it, being wholly ignorant of what thou now informeſt 


me. 2 
--6 And God ſaid unto him in a dream, Yea I know 
that thou didfſt his in the integrity of thy hear 1; for I 
| alſo withheld thee »: from ſinning » * againſt me ]: 
] therefore ſuffered I thee nor to teuch her. 
* Chap: _ Z(5. e.) That thou didft not this knowingly and maliciouſly, but 
d:'9: imprudently and inconfiderarly, which is indeed an extenuation of 
i1&E6:2: thy Sin, rhongh nor a total excuſe. Compare 1 Kings 9: 4: 1 Chron: 
al: + 29:1. mPartly by my reſtraining Grace, and partly TP} powerful 
$1; 45 Providence, and the Plague mentioned, Yerſe 17. » Which plainly 
Yn ſhews that izaviance is notalways an excule for Sin. See Luke 12: 48. 
| o This Sin, though dire&ly committed againſt Abraham and Sarah 
only,'is fad to be agaipſt God, as other ſuch Sins are, Gen: 39: 9: 
Pal: 5 1: 4:\ becauſe 1t was againſt God's command wrirten in Men's 
Minds, though nor yer publiſhed by expreſs Word or Writing ; and 
- againſt Gog's Honour ; and thar here in a particular manner, becauſe 
it would have rendred Tſaac's Original, and thereby God's Promiſe, 
doubtful. ph b 
_ 7 Now therefore reſtore the man his wife ; for he js 


- a prophet p, and he ſhall pray for thee *, and thou ſhalc 
| live : andif thou reſtore her nor, know thou that thou. 
ſhalt farely die, thou, and all thar are thine 9. 


p A perſon very dear to me, and familiarly acquainted with me, 
and therefore the injuries done to him, I take as done re my felt. 
See Pſalm: 105: 15, * Whichis one part of a Propher's Work, 
Fer: 14: 11: and 15. 1. q Which was not unjuſt, becaule they all had 
Sins of their own, for which they deſerved Death whenſeever God 
thoughr fir ro inflift it ; and Ged might take this occaſion to do it, 
that in puniſhing rhem he mighr alſo puniſh the King, whoſe SubjeQts 
they were. | : : 

\ 8 Therefore Abimelech roſe early in the morning, 
and called ali his fervancs r, and told all theſe things in 
their ears: and: che men were ſore afraid. ; 

r His Counſellors and principal Officers, as that word is uſed, 
2 Kings 1: 2: and 10:13, | 


_ 


D—_ — - ——_— _— 


(Z # kJ - 


, my kingdom a great fin ? Þ thou haſt done deeds unto 


'$ A Chap. d.0.G 


'9 Then Abimelech called Abraham; and ſaid unto 
him, What haſt thou done unto us «5? and what have [ 
offended thee, that * thou haſt brought on me and on * Chap: 
26: 105; 
me that ought not to be done. 

s How great @ danger haft thou expoſed us to ? - * Even the 
Heathens, who thought Fornication 'harmleſs, judge Adultery to 
be a very great and heinous Crime. See Gen: 38: 24: Levit: 20: 10: 
Deut: 22: 22: Ezek: 16: 38: and 23: 45, 47. Or, A great puniſhment, 
as rhis word is oft uſed ; which ſeems better to anſwer to his offending 
Abraham now mentioned. 
x» And Abimelech ſaid unto Abraham, What ſaweſt 
thou, that thou haſt done this thing * ? 

Whart levity or miſcarriagedidfſt thou diſcern in us which moved 
thee to deal thus with us ? 
1: And Abraham ſaid, Becauſe I thought, Surely 
the fear of God « js not in this place ; and they will 
ſlay me for my wifes ſake. 


 #% (5.e.) True Piety, or the Knowledge of the true God, which 
1s the only effectual reſtraint from the groſleſt wickednels. 

I2 And yet indeed ſhe is my liſteur x ; ſhe 5s the 
daughter y of my father, but not the daughter of my 
mother z : and jhe became my wife «. | 

x My near Kinſwoman ; even as Lot upon the ſame account is 
called 4braham's Brother, Gen: 13:8. y(35.e ) The Grand-daughter : 
For Grand-children are commonly called the Sons and Daughters of 
their Grand-parents, as Gen: 31: 28. Exod: 2: 18. And beſides, her 
Father Haran dying before her Grand-father, ſhe was left more 
1mmediatly under his Care and Education, and therefore was more 
peculiarly reputed Terah's Daughter, and Abraham's Siſter. See Gen: 
II: 29, z Becauſe Haran was Abraham's Brother only by the Father's 
ſide ; for Terah had Haron by another Wife. a How could 4braham 
marry one ſo near cf kin to him ? Ayſw. There were larger allow- 
ances for Marriages in thoſe rimes, as it was convenient there ſhould 
be ; neither had God as yer given thofe prohibitions, Levit. 18. 
Beſides, among all Nations, the Mother's fide was more regarded 
than che Father's in all prohibitions of Marriage. 

13 And it came to paſs, when God cauſed me to 
wander b from my fathers houſe, that I ſaid unto her, 
This is thy kindneſs which thou ſhalt ſhew unto me ; 
At every place whicher we ſhall come, *ſay of me, He 
is my brother. 

b This wore he uſeth, becauſe + God did not dire& him to any 
certain place, but ſent him out he knew not whither, Heb: 11: 8, 
And being rotravel and ſojourn amongſt perſons of divers tempers 
and manners, and all Pagans, he thought this equivocal enion 
convenient for his ſecurity. | | 

14 And Abimelech took ſheep and oxen, and men- 
ſervants, and women-ſervants, and gave them unto 
Abraham, and reſtored him Sarah his wife. 

is And Abimelech ſaid, Behold, my land is before 


thee c, dwell + where it pleaſeth thee. { Heb: 2s 
c (5. e. ) Free for thy view and choice, as Gen. 13. 9. 1s good int 
16 And unto Sarah he ſaid, Behold, I have given thy 7hine «es. 

brother d a thouſand pieces of filver e: behold, he #s to 

thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with theeg, 


and with all other þ : thus ſhe was reproved 3. 

d A ſharp rebuke and irony, q. 4. He whom thou didſt miſcal 
thy Brother. e To wit, Shekels, which is commonly underſtood 
when a ſum of Silver or Gold is indefinitely mentioned, as Num: 7: 
13, 85: 2 Sam: 18: 12: 2 Kings 6: 25+ f(3.e.) AProeteQtionto thee 
from the wanton eyes and attemprs of others, whilſt they know 
thee to be the Wife of another Man,and he ſuch an one whom they 
reverence and fear; and therefore thou didſt take a very wrong courſe 
to diſown him, whereby thou didit expoſe thy ſelf to great danger. 
Or, This #5 to thee, &c. i.e. ThisT give to thee to buy thee a Vail 
wherewith' thou may ſt cover thy Face, as it is fir and uſual for 
married perſons to do. Compare Gen: 24; 65: 1 Cor. 11:3, 6, 7, 10. 
£ Unto all rhat here live with thee, or near thee. i And with all 
Men whomſoever ; or admeniſhed to be more circumſpe& for the 
furure; or, and be thow admonijhed: Fox they may be the words 
of Abimelech. | 

17 © So Abraham prayed unto God : and God healed 
Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid-ſervants ; and 
they bare children. 

18 Far the LORD had faſt cloſed up all the wombs E 
of the houfe of Abimelech, becauſe of Sarah Abrahams 


wife. | 

k This phraſe elſewhere notes Barrenneſs, as r Sam: 1: 5, 6: 
and ſo many underſtand it here. Againſt which ſome J-arned Men 
obje& that that could not ſo ſoon be diſcovered, for all nis happened 
between the Conception and Birth of 1ſaac. Wiich objeCQtion 
may ſeem not valid, becauſe the evidences of Wonens being with 
Child go ſo long before the Birth of che Child, an« thoſe evidences 
not appearing in any of their Women, who bef«e that rime were 
generally Fruitful and ChiJd-bearing, they mght diſcern God's 
Hand in it, eſpecially upon God's admonitio: fo their King. But 
becauſe this Hiſtery leems to have been q-Ne In a far leſs ſpaces 
of time, it not being probable either, thar 0d would ſuffer Sarsh 
to be Jong with Abimelech ere he warned 21m, or that he being 
warned, and ſo ſeverely threatned, ancattually puniſhed, would 
delay the execution of God's command Or that upon his Obedience 
to God, the Mercy and Deliverance promiſed would be delayed 
by God. ; that ſeems more prob#le which others think, that 
this was an indiſpoſition, or plag© or ſore in the ſecr-t Parts, 
by which they were hindred fr Co-habitation, ' aud mutual 
Converſe, and conſequently ſom hopes of Conception and 
Child-bearing ; upon the remo'l whereof, 1t is ſaid, that #hey bare 
Children, where, as oft-times 1N Scripture, the Taſbimd conſum. 
mating A& is put. for all rh preveding Aﬀs, 9. #. and they were 


reſtored 


| __ 


4 
T 

x 
: 


| 


"TN 
x9. : 
18; 


* A( 
Gal: 
Heb 


IT. 


« Ch 
19. 
by, 
I ns 
*Ch 
I 7. 


*Y 


: G E . Lnar | 
| m Becauſe of his tender affe&ion to him, and God's promile . 
concerning him. See Gen. 17: 18, 20. He, who cheartully pars 
tcd with 1/auc, was hardly brought to part with 1þh-nael, kecauie the 
former was done by God's command, which he was obliged to 
obey ; the latter by the paſſion of an enraged Woman, wherewith 


= | _ 8 

Chap. XXlI. 4 
reſtored to the Conjugal uſe, and Conception, and, in due time, 
to Cinid-bearing. 


C H A P. AXE 


S%e corcerues and bears a Son, 1, 2. He is named Iſaac, 


7 a 1; its Sarah - 
4 4; Circumciſed the eighth day, 4. Sarah's joy and thanks, 6,.7 > OE 
ham makes a feaſt at the weaning of I/nac, 8. Iſhmael mACks 3 Sara 

fees it, 9. She complains to Abraham, and defires to have him caſt out, 
io. Afraham is grieved, 11. God commanas 18 the reaſon, 12. Pro- 
miſes a bleſmg to Iſhmael for his ſake, 13. Abraham ſends Hagar and 
her ſvn away ; they wander in the wilderneſs, are like to periſh for want of 
water, 14----16. God calls to her, 17. Repeats his prom!Je to Ijbmael, 18. 
Opens her eyes ; ſhe ſees # well, 19. They dwell there, and Iſhmael is an 
archer, 20. Marries an Egyptian, 21. Abimelech convinced that God 
was with Abraham, deſires a covenant, 22, 23. Abraham conſents, 24. 
Abimelecl's ſervants having taken a well from him, Abraham roproves 
him for it, 5. He pleads ignorance, 26. Both of them make 4 COVUe= 
nant, 271---=-32, Abraham plants a grove, and calls on the Lord the 


everlaſting God, 33, 34- 


he thought not fit to comply ; and probably he had Yenied her 
defire, if God had not interpoſed in it. » He doth not ſay becauſe 
of his wife ; from whence may be gathered, either that Hagar was 
not properly his Wife, or that this was another of Abraham's 11- 
firmities, that he had nor that affeQion for her which he ſhould 
have had. Whereby we may alſo ſee the excellency of God's in- 
{titutions, who appoinred but one Woman for one Man, that each 
might have the intire intere{t in the others affeQions ; and the dan- 
ger of Mens inventions, which brought Polygamy intothe World, 
whereby a Man's affeQtions are divided into {everal, and fometimes 
contrary ſtreams. | 

12 7 And God fajd unto Abraham, Let ir not. be 
grievous in thy fight, becauſe of the lad, and becauſe 


of thy Bond-woman o ; in all that Sarah hath ſaid unto 


chee, hearken unto her voice ; for in * Iſaac hall thy * Ron: g; 


AND the LORD viſited Sarah #, as he had ſaid, and 


*Chap:17 the LORD did unto Sarah * as he had ſpoken. | {ted p be called q. — 7b 
x9. and a ( 5. e. ) Performed his gracious Promiſe of giving herSt:ength 0. Thus Abraham had better Authority for his Divorce from = Is 
18: 19: to conceive and bear a Child. God's Viſitation of a pe:ſon in Scrip- | #2597 then he had for his Marriage with her, chap: 16: 2. p To '®* 


FRA" ” 


*Ats7:8 2 For Sarah * conceived and bare Abrahama ſon in If, : 
Ds. ; . . q! | 13'And allo of the fon of the bond-woman, will I 
He +22ug yo wi b 3 at the ſer time of which God had ſpo make a * nation, becauſe he is thy feed. *Chap:17 
*Y b Or, For bir old age, i. e. for the comfort of his old age. 14 And Abraham roſe up early in the mor ning r, 29: 
3 And Abraham cailed the name of his fon that was and took bread 5, and a bottle of water, and gave it 
* Chap:17 born unco him, whom Sarah bare to him, * Iſaac. unto Hagar ( putting ir on her (boulder ) and che. 


19. 
*Chap:17. 


ture uſe, is the manifeſtation and execution of his Purpoſe or Word 
towards that Perſon, and that either for evil, and ſo it is an infli&- 
ing of evils threatned, as the word wiſiting is uſed, Exoa: 20: 5. P/al. 
59: 5. or for good, and ſo'it is uſed for the aftual giving of Mer- 
Cics promiſed, as here and Gen: 50: 24. Exod: 4: 31. Ruth 1: 6. 


4 And Abraham circumciſed his Son Ifaac, being 
eight days old, * as God had commanded him. 


| of the Meſſias. 


wit, the Promifed Seed,the Heir of thy Eſtate, Covenant and Pro- 
miſes, the Progenitor of my Church and People, and particularly 

q ( i. e. ) Reputed and valued both by me and 
other Men. The words may be thus rendered, by Iſaac flat thy ſeed 
be ; for to be called is oft-rimes pur for to be, as 7/3. 1: 26. and 47:1, 5. 
Matth: 5.9, 19 | 


child, and ſent her away :: and the departed, and 
wandred in the wilderneſs of Beer-ſheba «. 


1” ; | r He who before doubted and lingred to do it when Sarah's Paſ= 
*Chap:17% $5 And * Abraham was an hundred years old, when ton ſuggeſted it, when once he actideflands it to be God's Will, 
T7. his ſor Iſaac was born unto him. he makes haſte to execute it, An excellent Example of Prudence 
6 © Arid Sarah ſaid, God hath made me to laugh c. oy Piety. s By reny may by here i inn pe neceſlaries, as 
6 that all that hear will laugh with me &. Mall'2: 7, 52: Me $2. jand 14: 15} conparen: wth ANTS. 
ſe c ( 7. e.) Before my own Ai ual Heart made me to laugh, | © 147 hy , Reefs nets it likely thac fo rich and liberal a Per- 
now God makes me laugh, not through diffi ence and irreverenc.;, | 2 43 ano 6. F.6d. end away ſuch wo and dear Relations 
he - ” | with ſo mean Accommodations ? 4&ſw. i. This might be done by 
as before, chap: 18: 12. but through exceſs of holy joy. d Or. ; ale © qf Coden Al a 20 
At me, ſome through Sympathy rejoycing with me and for me ; Þ ane” 1 as a oO 0: 4 mg J —_ Fn S669 
Jaughter being oft put for joy, as Iſa: 54: I. Gal. 4: 27, &c. others bor Hong v8 Ry bf _— wu Y —_ ya94: Pl __y 
through ſcorn and derilion, as at a thing which well may ſeem 861g rac ngarngypmcer -- wag. SES all Be ER _ Joan: 204 
incredible to them, becauſe it did ſo to me. See Gen: 17: 17. and | 39 3 No » 4g _w rey Fan places: And God might ors 
18: 02, 03, 15; ; =nhakpar og in raphang ru her eps pron 
7 And ſhe ſaid, who would have 1191 e Unto Abra- per of the Bond-woman and her Son ; and to prepare them 
ham, that Sarah ſhould have given Childrea f {\uck 8 ? | for the receiving of God's Help and Mercy ; and pa:tly, that hg 
for I have born him a Son in his old age. might more eminently ſhew his care and kindneſs t» Abraham, in 
A. ( 7. - ) Eau 008 > omen Ry Sa ſo improbable a pony for _ and _— ON LY ; 
thing ? Or, who bur a Go1 could have foreſeen and foretold it; | 2<10Nngee to him. 2. it cannor-be reaonabiy aouoted, ma 4- 
f She ſ2ith Ch:ldren, though ſhe had but one Child, either by an || 92? gave her theſe Proviſions only for the preſent, and intended - 
uſua]-Enallage of the Plural Number for the Singulac, whereby th. Þ © ſend furrher and berter afrer ward to a place appointed by him, 
word $05 or Daughtere is uſed when there was but one, as Gen: 36. | vhich alfo he did. But ſhe miſled her way, . as well ſhe migh, 
25- and 46. 23. Num: 26 8. or preſaging, that having received | © the Wilderneſs, and thereby c:me iato theſe Straits deſigned by 
from God a new Strengrh, ſhe might ha'e more Children. & B :od for the fignihcartion of greater Myſteries, as may be gathered 
which expreſſion ſhe ſheweth all Morhers what their dutie is, viz || 70M Gal: 4. # A place near Gerar, fo called here by a Prolepſis, 
to give their Children ſ»ck, when they are ible to do ir; and thac | P0© V7 31. h | 
neither greatneſs of quality, nor mulritude of buſineſs, nor othe; \5 And the water was ſpent in the bottle, and ſh 
difficulties and INconveniences, will be a ſutficient excuſe to thote | aft the chiid x under one of the ſhrubs. | 
that neglett ir. : x Not as if ſhe carried him in her Arms, or upon her Shoulders; 
8 And the child grew and was weaned h ; and || or he was now about eighteen years old ; bur being weak and faint, 
Abraham made a great feaſt the ſame day thar Iſaac was | +24 no doubt much dejetted in Spiritupon the proſpedt of his deſo- 
weaned. | are and diſtreſſed Condition, ſhe was torced to ſupport and lead 
"> , h It doth not appear how old Iſaac was, becauſe the time fo: fp oy oy _ Ag now, depepmg of Ang hls, Tar BYE ns 
| the weaning of Childrens very various, according to the differing TOs = = > ruo, 1 fact ft bio? 
” tempers agd neceſſities of Children, or inclination of arents ; and 8 nd Ne went, and lat her down over -againit 22, 
intho;e times when Mens lives were longer than now they are; pi 0- | * good way off, as it were a bow-ſhot : for ſhe ſaid, Let 
'Portionably the time was longer ere Ch 1drea were weaned, me not ſee the death of the child. And ſhe fat over 
9 5 And oarah ſaw the ſon of Hagar the Egyptian, gainft him, and lift up her voice and wept y- | 
whicn ſhe had born unto Abraham. mockin &4: y Who wept ? Either Hagar,for the Verb is ofthe Feminine Gen-« 
z Signifying either by words or geſtures his contempt of 7ſaac, Jer ; or the lad, as the we:ds following ſeem'to intumat. And for 
and his Ow of all that magnificence the1 ſhewed towards his rhe bay _— _ m_ ” ran pr py = InP wr ce 
younger Brother : And this carriage proce-ding from a moſt en- 7 AVE F FUR ——— — 
vious and malicious Diſpoſition, SC being 2 ſufficicat indication angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and ſaid 
= —_— miſchief —_— to o_ if y_ he thould now eopor: | unto. her, What ailech thee, Hagar ? fear not ; for 
nity 1t 15 NO WONdET 1T 15 Called p21epurion, Gat: 4; 29. although | (od hath heard the voice of the lad where he js a. 
_ ey word may be rendered bearing him, as it is uſed 2 Sam. « He hated ——_—_ ”_ my from Ln, out 
. extorted from him is prefling Calamity. # Tho he be in a va 
"Gbkg --77 Wherefore ſhe ſaid unto Abraham &, * Caſt | 14 acvolate Wilderneſs, Loh ay Boe is vec him, and I will take 
30. out this Bond-woman 4, and her ſon : for the ſon of | care of hin:. 


this bond-woman ſhall not be heir with my ſon, ever 
with Ifaac. 

-k Being enraged by this fat, and perceiving it was but a be- 
ginning and earneſt of greater evil deſigned by him againtt her 
beloved Jaar ; being allo guided by the wiſe © ounſei and Provi- 
dence of God, as appears from werſe 12. *} Though the fatt was 
done by Iſhmael, yet Sarah plainly faw thar this and other like car- 
rages were from his Mother's inſtig.rion and encouragement, who 
being of an 1mperious and petulant diipoiition. as appca:s from Gen: 
IG: 4, 9. in all p: 0>:biliry comforred her ſelf, 1nd animated her 
Son, by thar right he had to his Father: inheritance as he was his 

r{t-born, as may be garhercd oth from the cui:om of Women in 
ſuch caſes, and from the 1a+ words of this - erſe. Be:ides, if the 


Mother had been. continued, ſhe would ealily have pievailed with 
Abraham to fetca the Child Lack again. 


Ir And the thing was very grieyous in Abrahams 


| fghe zz, becauſe of his Son x. 


is 


18 Ariſe, lifr up the lad, and hold him in thine 
hand 6b: for I will make him a great nation. 


for T will bleſs ham, and thy care thall not be 1n vain. 


19 And God opened her eyes c, and ſhe faw a well 
of water : and ſhe went, and filled the botcle with wa= 
ter, and gave the lad drink. | 

£ Not that her Eyes were ſhut or blind before, but ſhe faw not 


her Eyes were full of Tears, -and her Mind diſtrafted and heedleſs 
through exceſſive Grief and Fear ; or becauſe God with-held her 
Eyes that ſhe might not ſee it withour his information. Compare 
Num: 23: 31. Luk: 24: 16, 

20 And God was with the lad, and he grew, and 
' dwelt in. the wilderneſs, ard became an Archer 4. 


d (5, e. ) A skilful Hunter of Beaſts, and Warrier with Mentoo, 
E 4 acco:ding 


b (5. e.) Sapport or ſuſtain thy languiſhing Child with thy hands 


the Well before ; either becauſe it was at ſome diſtance, or becauſe + 


n 4 2 Pp ; OEe ET EDS : 
vip pig * p 554 ot, Tab . 
"IT wo » ng. * 
'Y. TR 
Ld 


 , zccording to the PrediQtion, Gen: 16: 12. For the Bow was a prin- 
_ cipal Inſtrument in War,as well as in Hunting, Gen: 4852. and 49: 

23, 24. And theſe two Profeſſions oft went together. See Gen: 10:9. 

21 And he dwelt in the wilderneſs of Paran e: 


Egypt 2. . = .| 
2 In the Borders of that Wilderneſs, by comparing Ger: 14: 6. 
for the innermoſt parts of it were uninhabirable by Men or Beaſts, 
as Ancient Writers note. f By which we ſee both the Obligation 
that lyes upon Parents, and the right that is inveſted in them, to 
diſpole of their Children in Marriage in convenient time.Compare 
Gin: 24. 4. and 28; 2. Judges 14: 2. g Rather than out of Canaar, 
concerning whoſe accurſed State and furure Deſtruction ſhe had 
been informed in Abraham's Houſe. | ; 
22 And it- came to paſs at that time, that Abime- 
lech þ and Phicol the chief captain of his hoſt ſpake 
.. unto Abraham, ſaying, God is with thee in all that thou 
doſt ;. 
þ He of whom, ſee Gen: 20: 2. i Weplainly ſee that God bleſ- 
ſeth and proſpereth thee in all thy undertakings. | 
+ Heb. F 23 Now therefore ſwear unto me here by God, T that 


#hou ſbal thou wilr nor deal falſly with me &, nor with my fon, 
| _ "nor with my ſons ſon : but according to the kindneſs 
| thatT have done unto thee, thou ſhalt do unto me, and 


." tothe land wherein thou haſt ſojourned. 
 & That thou wilt not do me any hurt or injury : Heb. That thou 
wilt not lie witome, i. e. As thou haſt formerly profeſſed Kindneſs and 
Friendſhip to me, give me thy Oathro aſſure me that thou wilt be 

true and conſtant to thy own Profeſſions. 

'24 And Abraham faid, I will ſwear /. 

I Queſt. How could Abraham lawfully ſwear this, when Canaan 
| was given by God to him and his Seed for ever ? 4»/. Neither 4bra- 
1 ham nor his Seed had any preſent and attual right to the Poſſefſion 
3 of the Land, bur only the promilſe of a right in it, and Poſſeſſion of 
; it after ſome hundreds of years, and therefore he gave away none 
of his right by this Oath. For this Oath did only oblige Abraham, 
and not his Poſterity ; and 4bimelech extended that Obligation no 
further than to his Son's Son» : 

: 25 And Abraham reproved Abimelech mz, becauſe 
AQ of a well of water » which Abimelech's ſervants had 
* violently taken away. | 

-» That the foundation of true Friendſhip might be firmly laid, 
and the Peace inviolably obſerved, he removes an impediment to 
it, an occaſion of Quarrel and juſt Exception on Abraham's part. 

-» Which in thoſe hot and dry countries was of great eſteem and 
neceſſity. Compare Gen: 26: 19, 20, 21. Judges 1: 1F. Beſides a Well 
may be put for Wels, as the Greeks render it, and as may ſcem pro- 
bable by comparing this with Gen: 26. 15, 18. It being an ordinary 
thing to uſe the Singular ' Number for the Plural, as hath been 
- hewed. © See Gen. 3. 2: and 4: 20. 
26 And Abimelech ſaid, I wot not who hath done 

this thing : neither didft thou tell me, neither yet heard 

I of ir, but to day 0: | | 
o By which he wiſely and truly ſuggeſts, that Abraham ſhould 
not have ſmothered the Grudge in his mind fo long time, but ſhould 
inſtantly have reproved him for it, and endeavoured a ſpeedy re- 

dreſs, which hereby he intimars that he was ready to give. 

27 And Abraham took ſheep, and oxen, and gave 
them unto Abimelech pz and beth of them made a 


covenant. | ; | 

p Partly as an acknowledgment to him for his formerFavour and * 

+ - Friendſhip ; partly as an afſurance of his fincere Friendſhip, both 

preſent and for the future, of his acquieſcenice in his anſwer about 

the Well ; and partly for Sacrifice, and for the uſual Rite in making 

- _ Covenants, which was; that the Perſons covenanting might pats 
through the parts of the ſlain Beaſts. See Gen: 15: 18. 

28 And Abraham ſer'ſeven ew-lambs of the flock by . 


themſelves. _ | 
29 And Abimelech ſaid unto Abraham, What mean 


and his mother took him a wife f out of the land of } 


1 and all his Friends and Allies, and what a 


v | cs | Chap. XXII } 


24 And Abraham ſojourned in the Philiſtines land 


many days. 


CH AP. XXIL 


God tempts Abraham, 1. to ſacrifice Iſaac, 2. He readily goes about it, 
z-===-6. Iſaac's queſtion, 7, Abraham's anſwer, 8. They come to the 
place ; he binds. Iſaac ; lays him on the altar ; takes the knife, 9, 10. 
The Lord jees his integrity, and forbids him, 11, 12. A ram caught, 
and offered in the Read of TJaac, 13. The name. of the place, Jehova- 
jireth, 14. The Lord calls a ſecond time, 15. Swears by bimfelf ; 
confirms his promiſe ro Abraham and his ſeed, 16-----=18. Abraham 
rerurns to Beer-ſh:ba, 19» The Poſterity of his Brother Nahor, 20-==-24, 


ham. And he ſaid, | Behold, here am c. 

a After the accompliſhment of God's promiſes made to Abraham, 
and eſpecially of that promiſe concerning the bleſſed Seed ; when 
now he ſeemed. to be in a moſt proſperous and ſecure Condition, he 
meets with a ſevere exerciſe from God.. b The word JTempt 15 am» 
biguous, and ſignifies either 1. To intice to Sin, in which ſenſe 
Devils and wicked Men are ſaid to tempt others,but God zemprs no 
man, Jam: 1. 13. Or 2. To prove or try, and in this ſenſe God is 
ſaid to tempr Men. See Deuz: 8. 2. and 13: 3. Judges 2: 22. Thus 
God tempted Abraham, ( i.e ) hetiyed the lincerity and ſtrengtir 
of his Faith, the wniveriality and conſtancy of his Obedience, and 
this for God's great Honour, and Abraham's great Glory and Com= 
fort, and for the Churches benefit in all following Ages. c An 
expreſſion ſignifying a Man's attentive hearing what is 1aid to him, 
and his readineſs to execute. it, as v: 7. 11. and Gen: 27. 1. and 
1 $4: 3: 4, 6. | 

2 And he ſaid, Take now thy ſon, thine only ſor 
Haac,wjiom thou loveſt 4, and getthee into the land of 
Moriah e ; and 6ffer him there for a burnt-offering upon 


one of the mountains f which I will tell thee of g. 

d Not a word here but might pierce an heart of ſtone, mucly 
more 1o tender a Father as Abraham was. Take now, without de= 
murring or delay ; I allow thee no time for conſideration : thy, own 
prope: 0, not a Beaft, not an Enemy, not a Stranger, tho that 
had been very difficult to one ſo kind to all Strangers ; not a dear 
Servant, not a Friend or Familiar : thine only Son, not by Bi:th, 
for ſo he had another, 1hmael ; but this was his only Son by Sarah, 
his firſt and legitimate Wife ; who only had the right of Succeſſion 
borh ro his Inheritance, and to his Covenant and Promiles ; and 
this only was now left to him, for 1bmael was abandoned and gone 
from him : and this muſt be ſuch a Son as Iſaac, once matter of 
Laughter and great Joy, now cauſe of unexpreſſible Sorrow ; thy 
Renoni ; a Son of the Promiſe, of ſo great Hopes, and ſuch preg« 
nant Vertue and Picty,as this Story ſhews ; whom thou loveſt ; pecus 
liarly and Superlatively, even as thy own Soul : and get thee into the 
Land of Mvriah ; a place at a great diſtance, and to u hich thou ſhalt 


while fixed upon that bloody A&, which other Mens minds can 
ſcarce once think of withour horror ; and ſo thou mayeſt offer him 
in aſort ten thouſand times over before thou giveſt the fatal blow 5 
and offer him there with thine own hands, and cruelly take away 
the Life which thou haſc in ſome ſort given him : For a burnt-offer= 
img, wherein by the Law of the burnt-offering then known to 4bra-= 
ham, afterwards, publiſhed to all 7rael, his Throat was to be cur, 
his Body difleQted into Quarters, his Bowels taken our,as if he had 
been ſome notorious Traytor, and vile Malefa&or and Miſcreant, 
and afterwards he was to be burnt to Aſhes, thar if poſſible there 
might be nothing left of him ; And this muſt be done por: one of 
the Mountains, which T ſhall tell thee of, not ſecretly in a Corner, as 
if it were a work of Darkneſs, and thou wert aſh:med or afraid to 
own 1t ; but in a publick and open Place, in. the view of Heaven, 
Earth, God, Angels, and Men. Which horrid and ſtupendious 
Att it may be eaſily conje&tu ed what Reproach and Blaſphemy it 
would have occaſioned againſt rhe Name and Worſhip of God and. 


from his own ſelf-accuſing Mind, from the' clamours of his Wife, 
dangerous and miſe 


theſe ſeven ew-lambs, which thou haſt ſet by them- 
ſelves ? A 
20 And he ſaid, For theſe ſeven ew-lambs ſhalt thou 
take of my hand, that they may be a witneſs unto me, 
, that -have digged this well 9. | 
q That this care of Abraham's was not ſuperfluous may appear / 
=> from Gen: 26: .15. | 
{4 That is « 32: Wherefore he called that place + Beer-ſheba r, 
the well of becauſe there they ſware both of them. 
the Oath. r Which name'was communicated unto a City adjoyning : Of 
which ſee.Gen: 26: 23. Joſ: 15: 28. 2 Sam. 17. 11.and 24: 2. 

22 Thus they made a covenant at Beer-iÞeba : then 
 Abimelech roſe up, and Phicol the chief captain of his 
hoſt, and they returned into the land of the Philiſtines s. 

s (i.e. ) Into their part of that Land, to wit, Gerar, which was 
not far from this place. Ir is an uſual Synecdoche, whereby the 
whole Land is pur for a part of it : Otherwiſe they were at this 
tinic in that Land, ; 

33 And Abraham planted a + grove 7 in Beer-ſheba, 
and called there on the name of the LORD «, the 
everiaſting God. | 

# Not ſo much for ſhade, which yet was pleaſarfpgnd neceffary 
in theſe hor Regions, as for Religious Uſe, that he might retire thi- 
ther from-the noiſe of Worldly Buſineſs, and freely converſe with 
his Maker. © Which praftice of his was afterwards abuſed to Super- 

ſtiction and Idolatry,for which reaſon Groves were commanded to 
.be cur down, See Devt; 12: 2. and 16: 27 « Thankfully acknow- 
ledging God's great Goodneſs in giving him the Favour and Fricnd- 


-* Or, Tree. 


ons. That Faith that could ſurmount thefe and many more dif- 
ficulties, and could readily and chearfully reſt upon God in the 
diſcharge of ſuch a Duty, no wonder it 1s ſo honoured by God, 
and celebrated by all Men, yea, even by the Heathens, who have 
tranſlared this Hiſtory into their Fables. e Which ſignifies the 
Viſion of God, the Place where God would be ſeen and manifeſted. 
And ſo it is here called by way of Anticipation, becauſe it was ſo 


chievous Example this would have been 4 and man Generati- 


there for Jſaac's Deliverance ; though it may alſo have a further 
reſpe& unto Chriſt, becauſe in that place God was manifeſted in the 
Fleſh, f For there were divers Mountains there, as is evident from 
Pſalm 125. 2, and particularly there were two eminert Hills. or 
rather tops or parts of the fame Mountain, $07, where David's Palace 
was ; and Moriah, where the Temple was builr, and whence the 
adjoyning Countrey afterwards received it's name. g By ſome 
viſible Sign, or ſecret Admonition which I ſhall give thee. 


2 And Abraham roſe up carly in the morning 5, 
and fadled his afs 3, and took two of his young men 


with him, and Ifaac his ſon; and clave the wood for 


the burnt offering,and roſe up,and went unto the place 
of which God had told him, © 

b That he might execute God's Command without doubt or delay. 
; For greater Expedition, not waiting for his Servant to do it. 


4 Then on the third day + Abraham life up his eyes, 
and ſaw the place afar off, | 

+ Probably on the beginning of the third day. It is true, Me- 
riah was not three days Journey from Beer-ſbeba. But it muſt be 
conſidered that the. Aſs, upon which he rid, is a dull and flow 
Creature, and that Abraham went no faſter than the reſt of his 
Cowpany, who for ought appears, were on foot ; and that tlie 


hip of ſo great and worthy a Prince and Neighbour, 


7, 


Provitons 


go bur leiſurely, werſe 4. that thou mayeſt have thy mind all that ' 


the true Religion, and what Shame and; Torment to Abraham, _ 


called afterwards, verſe 14. in regard of God's eminent Appearance þ. 


ND it came to paſs after theſe things a, that * God *Heb: ir. 


did tempt b Abraham, and ſaid unto him, Abra- 17. 
+ Heb: 6e« 


hold me, 


&» 


XA WIS TIEEL 


EE LE > a En 


A—_— 


CE AR hae hed + CS 


| ESA jo <® 


6 


Pooyiions which they carryed along with them, both for their 
97:2 32d the Aﬀes ſubtiltance, and for ſacrifice, muſt needs retard 
TLiCin, 4 ; 

© And Abjaham ſaid unto his young men, Abide ye 
here with the aſs&, and I and the lad will go yonder 


and worſhip, and come again to you 6 | 

& Left they ſhould hinder him in the execution of his deſign. / 
For he knew that God both could. and would for his promiie ſake, 
either preſerve {ſac from being facrificed, or afterward raiſe him 
from the dead, as it is intimated, Heb. 11. 19. 

6s And Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offe- 
ring, and laid it upon 1/eac his Son mz and he took the 
fire in his hand, and a knife ; and chey went both of 
them together. 

»2 Who tho called a Lad, verſe 5. wasnow a Grown-man, at leaſt 
five and twenty years old, and therefore well able to bear that bur- 
den.and in this A& he was an eminent Type of Chriſt, who carried 
that Wood upon which he was crucified. : 

7 Ar liaac ſpake unto Abraham his father, and ſaid, 

+ Heb. be- My fathers : andhe faid, F Here om I, my {on 0. And 


bold me, 


r 


p_ 


Is 


om 


lamb for a burnt- oftering? = 

» A Compellation which might both wound 4braham's Heart, 
and admoniſh him how unbecoming to a Father that Attion was 
which he as going about. o Which Expreſſion ſhewed that he 
had not put off Father'y affe&ion to him, and that his intention did 
not ariſe from any unnatural and barbarous Diſpoſition, nor from 
any de-ay of Love to him, burfrom an higher Cauſe, even the de- 
clared Wi!l of God. | |. | 

$ And A4briham ſaid, My ſon, God will provide 
himſelfa lamb p for a burnt-eftering : fo they went both 


of them togerher. | 
p Either eicerally, tho I know not how ; for his Wiſdom and 

Powe: are infinite : Or 2. Myitically. as Chrift, whole 1 ype If aac 

was, is calle a Lamb. Thus Abraham prudently reveals the matter 

to him by degrees, not all at once. ; 

9 4d ti1cy Came to the place which God had told 

him of, and 4b: aham builr an altartheieq, and laid the 
* James2. wood in order, and bound Ifaac his ſonr, aud * laid 
| wel him on the altar upon the wood. 
; 4 Made of Earth flightly put together, as God afterward: pre- 
ſcribed, Eved. 20, 24. r Partly becauſe Burnt-offectags were to be 
bound to the Altar; of which ſee on Pjalm 118. 27. Paitly to re- 
preſenr Chriſt, who was bound to the Croſs. And rat [aac might 
be rh av re exa&t Type of Chriſt, he was b und by his owa Con- 
ſent, otherwiſe his Age and Strength ſeem ſuthcicar to have made 
an effequal refiitance, Ir is therefore highly reaſonable ro think 
that -braham having in the whole Journey prepa: ed 1/aac for ſuch a 
Work by general but pe-rinent Diſcouries, did upon the Mount 
paxricularly inſt uft him c ncerning the pl:in and - peremprory 
Command of God ; the ab'olure neceflity of complying ith it; 
the glorious reward of his Obedience,and the diſma! con{equences 


Bo rd lb 


ET OE OTE 


— 


of his Diſavedience ; the Power and Faithfulneſs of God cithe t5: 


p event the fatal Blow, or to reſto-e his Life loſt with infinite 1d- 
vantage. Upon theſe, and ſuch like reaſons, doubrle(; he readily 
1a'd himſelf down at his Father's feet, and yielded up himſelf to 
the Divine Will. 

10 And Abraham ftretched forth his hand, and took 
the knife to ſlay his 10n. 

11 And the angel of the LORD s calledunto him out 
of heaven, and ſaid, Abraham, Abrahams, And he 
{aid. B-hol4, here am L 

s (1. e, ) Chriſt the Angel of the Covenant, as appears from v.12. 
16. 't Herepzars his Name to prevent Abraham, whom he knew 
to be moſt expeditiousin God's lervice, and juſt ready ro, give the 
deadly Blow. 

12 And he ſaid, Lay not thine hand upon the Lad, 
neicher do thou any thing unto him: for now 1 kaow 
« that thou feareft God, ſcing thou haſt not withheld 
thy ſon, tine oniy {«1 from me x: 

u God knew the ſincerity and reſolve” neſs of 4brabam's Faith and 
Obedience before and withour this evidence, and from Ererniry 
frreſaw this Fatt, and al its Ci: cumftances; and rherefore you muit 
not think that Gd had now made any new difcove:y : But this is 
{p ken here, as in many other places, :of God after the manner of 
Men, who is then ſaid roknow a thing, when it is notorious and 
evident ro 1 Man's felf and others,by ſome :em.rkable Effe&. Thus 
Daw: / pray -d rat hs. 7 would ſearch and know his Heare, and his 
Thoughts, Plaln I39. 23: Tho he had before profeſſed that G d undery- 
ftood his Thoughts afar off, verſe 2. This therefore is the ſenſe. Now 7 
know, i.e. Now I have what I deſigned and defred; now TI hav- 
made thee an4 other's to know. As the Spirir f Godand fCh iſt 
is ſaid tocry, Abba, Fath:r, Gal. 4.6. when it make+ us to cry ſo, 
Rom. 8.15. x For my Service and Sacrifice ; Or for me, i.e. for m 
ſake, 7. e. rhou hat preferred mine Authority and Ho:our before 
the L fe cfthy dear-Son. By which words it appears that God him- 
{elf ſpeaks theſe words. 

*3 And Abraham lifted up his eyes. and looked, and 
behold, behind him + a ram y caught in a thicket by 
his horns: and Abraham wentand took. the ram, and 


oftered him up for a burnt-offering, in the ſtead oi his 
on 


T Which way he looked, either becauſe the Voice came that 
way 3 9: becau't he hard the Noiſe made by the motion of the 
Ram in the Thicker, y Which had gon- aſtray from the reſt of the 
Flock, and whole errors were dire&ed hither by God's wile and 
P 'werful Providence, and being young, tho ho ned, it mighr b 
Called either Lamb, as wwyſe 7, or Ron, as it is here. The e need 
no curious enqu'ry how he could off-r up thar to God vhich was 
not his own, both becauſe it was ov 2 © a n-ublick Place, and wn 


W_—_— 


19 Sp 


" EE Od 44 AH et 


he ſaid, Behold the fireand the wood: but where is the | 


GENES1S. 


| halt not withheld thy ſon, thine only ſon : 


infos "Ez bas. 4 
Chap. 
all probability utterly loſt to his Owner, and becauſe he had no 
doubt a Warrant and Inſpiraticn for it frcm the great Loid and 
Supreme Owner of all things. * 
14 And Abraham cailed the name of that place F 
Jehovah-jirth z : as it is ſaid to this day s, In the mount 
b of the Lord ic ſhall be ſeen c. RE | 
2 The ſame Hebrew Letters differently pointed, make the ſenſe 
either ative, the, Lord will ſee, 1.e. provide or take care of theſe 
that commit themlſclyes and their affairs to him; or paſſive, the Lord 
well be jecr, i.e, will appear and ſhew himſelf in the behalf of all 
thuſe that love him ' » Wherein Moſes wrote this Book ; this is ftull 
uſed as a Proverb. 6(45.e.) In greateſt Extremities and Diſtreſles, 
as we ſay, at the Pits brink. , c Or, the Lord ſhall bee ſeen or manifeſted. 
And although theſe words are uſed by way of remembrance of 
this great Deliverance, and by way of accommodation to ſuch like 
eminent preſervations from great dangers; yet they may have afur- 
ther reſpe&, and may ſignifie, That this was but an earneſt of furs 
ther and greater Bleſſings to be expe&cd in this place, where the 
Temple was builr,and the Lo-d Chriſt was manifeſted in the Fleſh. 
Is Y Andthe angel of the LORD called unto Ab- 
raham out of heaven the ſecond time. | 


16 And faid, * By my ſelfhaveT ſworn 4, ſaith th 
L ORD, for becauſe thou haſt done this thing e, and 


F. 


That is 
the Lord 
will ſee 
þr ovide, | 


*Pfal 19g 
9.Luke x 
 173-Hebs 
« So the Lord ſwears by his name, Jer: 44. 26. By his ſoul, in the 6.13. 
Hebrew Text, Jer: 51. 14. By his holineſs, Amos 4.2. which is the 
ſame with by himſelf, here. Hence alſo it appears that the Angel 
who ſpeaks here is Chriſt and God, becaule this is God's p'eroga= 
tive to ſwear by himſelf, as appears from Heh. 6. 13, oth 
Avraham by this A& did properly merit, or purchaſe the following 
promiſes, as plainly appears, becauſe! the ſame things for ſubitance 
had been freely promiſed ro Abraham long before this time and 
action, Gen. 12, 2. and 13. 16., only. what before was promiſed is 
now confirmed by an Oath, as a Teſtimony of that ſingular reſpe& 
which God had.to Abraham, and to this he:oical inſtance of Faith 
and Obedience, | 4g: IE 8 þ | 
_ 17 LThatin bleſlingT will bleſs thee, and in mulciply- 
ing I will muitiply thy ſeed as-the ſtars of the heaven, _ ;. ; © 
and as the ſand which js upon the ſea + ſhore ;and thy + T1cD.0p 
{ced ſhall potle(s thegate f of his encmies; REN: 1 
f (7: e: ) The City, by an uſual Synecdoche, as Deur: *2. 15. ahd 
18. 6. all the Cities, and conſequently the Countrey adjacent ; gate 
'or gates. The ſen'< is, they ſhall ſubdue their enemies. For the 
gates of Cities » ere the places both of Juriſdiction o* Judicature, 
Dent. 21. 19. and 22. 15. Amos 5.2, 15, Zech: 8. 16, and of Fortifica- 
tion and chiei ſt engrh in War, Judg. 5. 8 Pſal 147.:13. 1a: 22. 
7. Extk; 21. 22, And this promiſe was fulfilled both lirera'ly in 1+ 
raels conqueſt of Canaan, in David, ' Solomon, &c. and ſpiritually in 
Chriſt, Pſal. 110. x, 2, 3. | Is 4 
15 * And inthy ſeed ſhall all the nations of the earth +c4,2 14 
be bleſſed : becauſe thou haſt obeyed my voice. 3.and 8 
19 So Abraham returned unto his young men, and 18. Ads 
they roſe up, and went together to Beer-ſheba, and Ab- 4 Gab 
;aham dwelt at Beer-thebas _ 


\ 20 4 And it came to paſs aftertheſethings, that it . 
was told Abraham, ſaying, Behoid * Milcah the hath *Chap.i# 
alſo born chi!d:ien urto thy brother Nahor g; 29. þ 

£ This Nacrration and' Genealogy i« added fer Rebekab's ſake, and "WM 
ro mak2 way for the following Relation. 

2: Huz his firit-born, and Buz & his brother, and '_ 
Kemuelthe Father of 4ram 5. | 

h From whom deſcended, as ſome conceive, Elihu the Buzite, 
Job 32. 2. # Socalled, poflib!y becauſe he dwelt amongſt the $y- 
rians, as Jacob, for the fame reaſon, was called a Syrian, Deut: 26: 5. 
Bur there was another more ancient Aram ; from whom the Sirians 


deſcended, Gen. 10. 22. | | 
22 And Cheſed, and Hazo, and Pildaſh , and Jid-*- 
| 


laph, and Bethuel. | 1. 
23 And Bethuei begat * Rebekah &: theſe eight Mil- © © © 7 
cah did bear to N:ihor 4brahams brother. * Calle? 
k Afterwards {ſaac's Wife. chap. 24. 2M. Be. 
24 And his concubine 1, whoſename was Reumah, {7 Rev? 


ſhe bare allo Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahafh, and _— 
Maachah ms. 


- 1 Which was an inferior kind of Wife, taken according to the 
common practiſe of thoſe rimes, ſubje& to the Aurhority of the 
principal Wife, and whoſe children had no tight of Inheritance, 
but were endowea with Gifts. See Ger. 21. 14. and 25.6, m A 
name common both co Man,- as 2 Sam. 10.6. and Woman, as 1 


Kings 15.13+ 
CHAP; XKXIITL BE 
Sarah's age and death; Abraham niourns, 1, 2. He ſpeaks to the ſons 
of Heth for a burying-place, 3, 4 They offer him the choice of thei 
Jepulchres, 5, 6. Abraham deſires to purchaſe a field of Ephron, 8, g.. 
Ephron would give it him, 10--===-=15, Abraham purchaſes it, and 
weighs the ſilver, 16. The fi.ld made jureto Abraham for a poſſeſſion be= 
fore witneſſes, 17----20. 

Nd Sarah was an hundred and ſeven and twenty ' 
£4 years old, theſe were the years of the life of Sas 
rah #. 
a This is the peculiar Honour of Sarah the Mother of the Faithful, 

1 Pet. 3.6 to have the years of her life numbred in Scripture. 
2 And varah dicd in Kirjath-arba b ; the fame is He- 
bron c in the land of Canaan : And Abraham came tg 


mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her 4 RF 

þ Or, The City of 4Arba, fo called probably from a Cant of. 
great Man called 4rba, who lived and ruled in thoſe parts. .See 
Fajhua 14. 15. and 15. 13. c It is objeRed againſt this Scrip= 


Rom. 


” 


| 


— 


care, that this City Was Ngt 8 Hebroz gill Jelbys's time, Jof. roy 


15. but thisis a miſtake, Jc/þza doth not ſay ſo, but enly that the" 
naine of Hebron before, ( or in.old time ) as this very Particle 1s ren- 
dred, Deut: 2: 20; and elſewhere. So the Senſe is, The moſt 
ancient name of it was Kiriath-4rba. Nor doth Joſhua there give 
any account, or reaſon of this change of the name at that rime, or 
upon that occaſion, as the ſacred Writers uſe to do in ſuch caſes, 
but rather ſuppoſeth that Hebron was the name of it before he came 
thither; and __ long before that time, he doth not expreſs. f Into 
Sarah's. Tent. See Gen: 18: 6, 9: d According to the laudable 
Cuſtom of all ages and Nations, to manifeſt their ſenſe of God's 
_ upenthem, and of their own loſs. See Gen: 50: 3: Deut: 34. 
8, &c, | | T 

2 And Abraham ſtood up from before his dead e, 
and fpake unto the ſons of Heth, faying, 

e To ſhew his moderation in ſorrow, and to take care for her 
burial, accordingto his duty. ; 

4 I am afitranger, and a {ojourner with yougive me 
a poſſeſſion of a burying-place f with you g, that I may 
bury my dead outof my fight. 

f The priviledge of Burial hath been always ſought, and 
prized by all Nations, .whom Nature and Humanity, teacheth ro 
preſerve the Bodies of Men, which have been the Temples of rea- 

. Jonable and immortal Souls, from contempt and violation ; ſo e- 
ſpecially by Chriſtians, as a Teſtimony and Pledge of their furure 
Reſurre&tion. See Numb. 33: 4: Deut 21. 23. Job 5. 26. For which 
cauſe Abraham defires a diſtin&- burying-place ſeparated from the 
Pagan Frople g In Canoan.. There he,' and after him other 
Patriarchs, . earneſtly deſired to be buried, upon this account, that 
it might confirm their own and their Child:ens Faith in God's 


GENESIS 


 >— nou eo , 


of 


| Chap. XXIV; 
15 My LORD, hearken unto me : the land 5s 

worth four hundred * ſhekels of filver y ; What js that *Fxod 30. 
betwixt me and thee 2? bury therefore thy dead. is. Ezek, 

y He ſpeaks of the common Shekel,which many value at fifteen 45+ 12* 

Pence of Engliſh Money ; but others, more probably,at two Shil- 

lings and fix Pence, rightly, as I conceive, ſuppoſing that this was 

of the ſame weight and value with the Shekel of the Sanfuary, which 

was ſo called, not as if that were double to the former, but only 

becauſe all Shekels were to be examined by thatStandard which was 


kept in the Sanftuary. * Both Friends, and rich Men ; it is not 
worth any words or trouble between us. 


I6 And Abraham hearked unto Ephron, and Abra- 
ham weighed 2 to Ephron, the ſilver which he had 
named 1n the audience of the ſons of Heth, four hundred 
ſhekels of ſilver, currant meney with the merchant 6. 

a For in thoſe times Silver was paid by weight, Gen. 43. 21. Jer. 


32+ 10. b( i:e. ) Right for quality as well as weight, in the judg- 


ment of Merchants, whoſe frequent dealing in it makes them more 
able to Judge of it. 


17 9 And* thefield of Ephron which as in Mach- *Chap.as. 
pelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the 9. and 5c. 
cave which as therein, and all the trees - that yore 13 


in the field, that vere in all the borders round about, 
were made ſure 


18 Unto Abraham for a poſſeflion in the preſence of 


fire of his eyes, Exzck.' 24. 16. is now, being dead, become their 
torment. 
5. And thechildrenof Heth anſwered Abraham, ſay- 
- ing unto him, © : 
.. 6 Hear. us,my LORD 3 ; thou art | a mighty prince 
& amongſt us; in the choice of our ſepulchres bury thy 
dead: fone of us ſhall with-hold from thee his ſepul- 
4 chre, but that thou mayeft bury thy dead. 
b - ; Here is a Conjun&ion of the Plural and Singular Number, 
" becauſe though bur one perſon ſpake, yet he ſpake in the name of 
the whole Communiry. & Heb. 4 prince of God, Great and ex- 
-cellent perſons, or things are oftexpreſſed by adding the name of 
+ God. See Gen. '13. 10. Or, by Prince of God, they underſtand a 
Prince favoured and -beloved of God. 1 For each Family had a di- 
- Nin& Sepulchre, 


7 And Abraham ſtood up; and bowed himſelf » to the 
people of the land », even to thechildren of Heth o. 

m ( 3: e: ) Shewed a civil reſpe& to them in teſtimony of his 
thankfulneſs. - Religion allows and requires civility, and thoſe 
geſtures which expreſs it. » To the Governours of the People 
<6 who managed all publick affairs in the Peoples name,and ſtead, and 
4 & for their good. o So called from Herh the Son of Canaan, Gen. 19. 
f ; I5. 

$8 And he communed with them, ſaying, if it be 
your mind p that I ſhould bury my dead out of my 
ſight, hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the fon 
of Zohar : 

'' p Heb. 1fit bewith, i. e. agreeable to your ſoul, that is,your will 
| or good pleaſure ; for ſo the Soul is ſometimes taken, as Deur: 23: 24: 
t; +tOr double Plat. 27; 12. and 41:2. : 
Wie. 9 That he may give methe cave off Machpelah q.which 
+ Heb. ful hehath, which is inthe end of his held : for} as much 
money money as it is worthy he ſhall give it me, for a polletii- 
on of a burying-place amongſt you. | 
q Which ſeems to be the proper name of the place, werſe 17, 19. 
ſo called from its duplicity, becauſe the Cave was double, either 
one for Men, and another for Women ; or the one ſerved only for 
an entrance into the other, which was the burying-place. » Heb, 
For full money, i; Chron: 21: 22, 24. #: e: for Money of full weight 
© - anſwerabletoits worth. . 


 {} Heb.- 
i prence © 


% 


ET CONES ONT IE? 
- HS 
«OE 2 rn eo Or : 


And Ephron the Hittite anſwered Abraham in the + au- 
Whob.corr dience of the children of Heth, ever cf ail that went in 
; at the gates of his city t, ſaying, 

s Heb: Didſ#, to wit,at that time,asone of the Chief, or Rulers 
of the People; for ſo the word ſiting is oft uſed, as we ſhal ſee here- 
after. #* Either where he was born, or at leaſt where he lived. 

11 Nay, my Lord, hear me : the field give I thee, 
andtheeave that zs therein, I give it thee; in the pre- 
ſence of the ſons of my people give lit thee : bury 
thy dead. | | . 

12 And Abraham bowed down himſclf before the 
people of the land, 


12 And he ſpake unto Ephron in the audience of the 


thee hear me: 7 will give thee money for the field x;take 
;r of me, andI will bury my dead there. 


% Ir is a ſhort Speech, and ſomething muſt be ſupplied ; either 
if thou wilt give or reſign it tome; or, if thou be the Man of 
whom I ſpeak : For though Abraham knew his name, he might 

_ not know him by face, nor thathe was then preſent. »x He pru- 
dently choſe rather to buy ir, than to receive it as a gift, partly 
becauſe ir would be the ſurer to him and his, verſe 17, 20: and 


partly becauſe he would not have roo great obligations to his Pagan 
eighbours. 


I4 And Ephrcog anſwered Abraham, fayipg unto him, 


Promiſe, and animate their Children in due time to take poſleſ- | 
ſion of the Land. See Gen. 25. 9. and 47- 29, 30. and go. 13, | 
25. Exod, 13: 19:. Heb: 11: 22. h So ſhe that before was the de. 


10 And Ephrondwelt 5amonegſt the children of Heth. | 


people ofthe land, faying, Bur if chou wil give ir «,Ipray | 


the children of Heth, before all that went in at the 
gate of his city, | 

19 And after this Abraham buried Sarah his wife in 
the cave of the field of Machpelah, before. Mamre: the 
famess Hebron in the land of Canaan. 


| 20 And the field and the cave that is therein were 


' made ſure unto Abraham for a polleſſion of a burying- 
Place, by the ſons of Heths 


CHAP. XXIV, 

Abraham's ate and proſperity, 1. He makes his eldeſt ſervant ſwear not 
ro rake a wife for his ſon Iſaac of the Canaanites, bus of his own kindred, 
2 * 4 The ſervant enquires into the ature and conditions of the 
oath, 5. Abraham expreſſes his faith in the promiſe, 7. Explains rhe 
oath, 8: The ſervant ſwears, 10. He goes to the city of Nahoy, 11. Prays 
for ſucceſs, 12. And direfion, 13, 14. An immediate and particular av 
ſwer, 15 20: He wonders atthe providence, 21: Makes a preſent 
z0 Rebekah, 22. Enquires of what family ſhe was, 23. Her anſwer, 

24, 25: . He bleſſeth the Lord, 26, 27. Rebekah acquainrs her friends with 
it, 28. They provide for him, Oc. and invitehim in, 31, :2, He goes 
in; but refuſes to eat till he had told his errand, 33. He acquaints them 
with his buſmeſs, and Gods providence towards him, 34 — 49. They 
conſent to his propoſal, 5o, 51: He praiſes God, 52. Makes preſents to them 
all, 53. Deſires to return to hus maſter, 54 56. Rebekah being con= 


depart ; and meet JJaac meditating in rhe field, 61 —= 65. Who mar= 
ries her, G7. | 


; ND Abraham was old 4,and + well ſtricken in age 5 I 
and the LOR D had biciſed Abraham in all THeb:2-4 


chin gs. into days. 
a Bcing one hundred and fourty years old, by comparing Gen:21, 
5. with Gen: 25: 20, 
2 And Abraham ſaid unto his eldeit ſervant of his 
houſe 6, that ruled over ali that he had, * Pur, I pray 
chee, thy hand under my thigh c : *Chap.47; 


b Viz. Eliezer, Gen: 15. 2, © A ceremony uſed in Swearing, as 292 
now, ſo anciently in the Eaſtern parts, as Gen. 47: 29. either as a te= 
' ſtimony of Subjection,and promuitſc of faithful Service; for this Rite 
| was uſed only byInferiours towardsSuperiours;or,as ſome think, with 
 reſpett to the blefled Seed,Chriſt, who was to come out of Abraham's 
Thigh, as the phraſe is Gen; 46; 26: becauſe thisRite was uſed on= 
ly to Behevers. 

3 AndIwill make thee ſwear by the L OR D, the 
God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that * thou 


ſhalt not take a wife unro my ſon 4 of the daughters of *Chap.24 


the Canaanites eamongſt whom I dwell. 3: w_ _ 
d (7.e.) Not perſwade nor engage my Son to take ; for Iſaac, n Male 


though fourty ycars old, 
his Father in this Aﬀair, 
wiſe and faithful Servant, 
had ſuch long and large experience. e For he knew that they were 
not only groſs Idolaters and heinous Sinners, for ſo many others 
were;but that they werea People under God's peculiar Curſe, Gen. 
9. 25. and devoted to extirpation and utter deitru&ion, which was 
to be inflicted upon them by Abraham's Poſterity : And therefore 
to marry his Son to ſuch perſons had been an high degree of Self- 
murder, whereby the holy and blefled Seed had been in danger of 
great inf:&ion from them, and utter ruine with them. And 4 
braham's pra&tice was afterwards juſtified by God, who hath oft ſhew= 
ed hisdiilike of ſuch unequal matches of his People with thoſe In. 
fidels and Idolaters, by ſevere prohibitions and ſharp cenſures. See 
Exod: 34: 16. Deut, 7. 3. Joſ: 23. 12. Ejd. yg. 1, 2, 3. Nehem, 13. 273, 
25. 2 Cor: 6:14, 15. 

4 But thou ſhalt gounto my countreyf, and to my 
kindred g, and take a wife tinto my ſon Iſaac, 

f (i.e. ) Meſopotemia, werſe 16. which being largely taken for 
the Countrey between thoſe two famous Rivers Euphrates and Tigrs, 
from which ſcituation it hath that name; ſo Chaldez, whence 
Abraham came, Gen. 11. 31. and 12. 1. was apart of it. g The 
Family of Nahor, concerning the increaſe whereof he had received 
' information. chap. 22. 20, &'c. which he juſtly preferred before 
the Canaantes, partly becauſe though they were Idolaters, as ap= 
pearsfrom Gen. 31. 19, 30, 32, 35. and Jof, 24. 2..yet they did wor- 
'hip the true God rogether with Idols, as may be gathered from 
werſe 3:. 59. ofthis Chapter, and from other places; and theres 


was not only willing to be governed b EX0 
but alſo to hearken to the counſel of this 34: 16: 


' fere there was more hopes of the Converſion of one ofthat Fami- 


Iy; 


#8 AS yy 2 
<a 


tent to go with lim, they conſent, and bleſs her, $7 ——- 60. - They of 


of whom both his Father and himſelf Deut:7:I 
4 


Cha 


Ss 


Ra 
ww bl 
w RS 


P 


z 


Chap. KXIV. 


+ Or,and. 


*Chap.27. 
53> 


tHeb.that 
Women 
which 
draw Wa- 
T=r 20 


fo ith. 


*Verſ.43. 

*Chap.29: 
9:Exod.2. 
18. 


*Chap. 11. 


29. 


GEN 


ty; and partly becanſe c 
whe:e Abraham and his Poſterity did and ſhould live, and therefore 
of that flock would be more caſfily diiintangled from her Su- 


ONeg > 

perftition and Taofacry, cauſe the was removed from the influ- 
ences of the evil counſcisand examples of herneareſt Relations,and 
partly becauſe they were of the Race of ble{led Shim, and not of 


curſed Canaan. 

5 And the ſoryant aid unto him, Peradventure the 
woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land 
b: muſt I necds bring thy ſon again into the land from 
whence thoucamelt 2? Ws 

h Note here the prudenceand piety of this good man,who, before 
he would take an-Oath,doth diligently enquire into the nature and 
conditions of it, and expreſly mentioneth that exception, which 
might ſeem ro be of courſe ſuppoſed in it. 

& And Abraham faid unto him, Beware thou, that 
thou bring not my fon thither again 7. | 

; Ta caſe ſhe will not come hither, do not thou eng2ge that he 
ſha! go thither. Why ſo ? x. Becauſe there was more danger of 
infe&ion from his Wife and her Kindred, becauſe of their friendly, 
and familiar, and conſtant converſe with him, than from the Ca- 
naauites, who were ſtrangers to him, and lived ſeparately from 
him, and had bur little converſation with him. 2. Becauſe the 
command of God to Abraham to come out of Chaldea, and into 
Canaan, did extend to his Poſterity alſo, whom God would oblige 
to dwell there as long as they could, ' that they might liven con- 
ſtant Faith and expe&ation of the performance of od s promiſe in 
giving his land unto them. Qu2f#. How cou d he bring {aac thi- 
ther again, where he never was ? Anſw. 1. !ſaac might be ſaid ro 
be there before vi:tually, or in the Loins ofhis Father, as Lev: 1s 
faid to pay Tithes to Melchiſedeck by Avraham 1n whoſe Loins he 
was. 2. This azain may be referred to the Servant, that when he 
returned again he would not carry {/2ac along with them. 3. He 
might reaſonably ſuppoſe thar 1ſaac muſt go once thithers to fetch 
his Wife; ( for her coming ſo ſuddenly to him was an unexpe&ed 
thing ; ) but he wonld not have him promile, that when he had 
done ſo ence, he ſhould go thither again to live there with her. 

> 4 The LORD God of heaven * which took me 
from my fathers houſe, and from the land of my kin- 


died, and which ſpake unto me, and that {ware unto 


- me, ſaying, * Unto thy ſeed will I give this land, he 
* thall ſend his angel before thee Þ, and thou ſhalt take a 


wife unto my ſon from thence Kk. 

+ To dire+ and ſucceed thee in this enterprize. Compare 
Exod. 14. 19. and 23. 20. k T doubt not of the ſucceſs. He might ' 
fay ſo, either by rational ccnjeEture, both from the nature. of rhe 
thing, and from the conſtant courſe of God's Providence, blefling 
him in all his concerns ; or by particular aſfuranceand inſpiration 
from God | ks 

8 And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, 
then thou ſhalt be clear from this my oath 7: only bring 
not my ſon thither again. 

I From the obligation of this Oath, and from the penalties ofthe 
violation of it. 
9 Andrhe ſervant put his hand under the thigh of 
Abraham his maſter, and ſware to him concerniag that 
matter. 

xo T And the ſervant took ten camelsof the camels of 
hiSmaſter,and departed,( Þ for all the goods of his ma- 
ſter ere in his hand #2 ) and hearoſe,and went to Me. 
ſopotamia.unto the * city of Nahor F. 

m (1.e.) Tn his power to- take, without pa-ticular orders, what 
he thought fit and neceſſary either for his own uſe, or for the pre- 


motion of the preſent buſineſs. + Which was Haran,by comparing 
Gen: 28: 10: and 29: 4. 


11 And he made hiscamels to kneel down without 
the City by a well of water, at the time of the evening, 
even the time Þ that women go cutto driw water. 

12 Andheſaid, O Lord God of mi maiter Abraham, 
I prav thee, ſend me good ſpeed this day,and ſhew kind- 
neſs » unro my maſter Abraham 


_ % Or, Mercy. He makes no mention of himſelf, nor of the me- 
rits of his Maſter,but he aſcribes even temporal Bleſſings,and much 
more eternal Salvation, meerly to Gzod's Mercy. 


13 Behold, * I ſtand here by the well of water, and 
* the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw 
water : 

14 And let it come to paſs « that the damſel to 
whom 7 thallſay, Let down thy pitcher, 7 pray thee 
that 7 may drink ; and ſhe ſhallſay, D:ink, a d wil. 
give thy camels drink alſo: Je the ſame be ſhe that' 
thou halt appeinted p for thy ſervant .I{aac ; and there- 
by ſhall 1 know that thou haſt ſhewed kindneſs unto 
my maſter. 


_ © That this was not a raſh and vain Fancy, but a ſpecial ExpeCa- 
tion and Confidence wroughr in him by God's Spirit, appears both 
by the eminent Prudence and {zodlinef, of this Fe: ſon, an! by the 
exact correſpondency of the event with his Prayer, and by . pa- 
rallel Examples,as Jzdg.'6:36: 1 Sam ©: 7: and 14.8. p Heb. Evidently 
pointed out;or, exactly ſearched out, as a perſon meer fir him. 


 I5 & Andit came to pals before he had done ſpeak- 
ing, that behold Rebekah came out, who was born to: 
Bethuel lon of * Miicah che wife of Nahor Abrahams 
brother, with her picth2r upon her {houlder q. 


_ y 1 - s 
q According ro tne manner of the ti-{t and pureſt Ages of the 
World,wherein Humiliry and iiligence nor, as in this degene- 


Fation of the World, Pomp and Iicncf, were trac Ornaments of 


they lived at a greatdiſtance from the place 


Us 
ESI16S 
that Sex and Age. See Ger, 18: 6. and 29, 9g. 19. 20. Exed. 2. 16. 
Prov. 31: 27. 

16 And the damſel as + very fair-to look upon, a 
virgin,* neither had any man known her r:and tbe went 
down to the well and filled her pitcher,and came up. 


_# ('7.e. ) She was a Virgin not only in Title and Shew, but in 
Truth, for no man had known her, z. e- corrupted her. 


17 And the ſervant ran to meet;--r,and ſaid, Let me, 
( Tpray thee ) drink a lictle water of thy pitcher, 

18 And lhe ſaid, Driak,my Lord s * and ſhe haſte: 
and let down her pircher upon her hand, and ave him 
drink. | 4 

s For hisr2tinucſhewed him to be a perſon of more than 0:9i- 
nary quality. oh 

19 And when ſhehad done giving him drink. ſhe 
faid, I will draw watey for thy camels alſo, until they 
have donedrinking, 
trough, and ran again unto the well to'draw water, and 
drew for all his camels, : 

21 Andthe man wondring at her ?, held his peace,to 
wit thathe might know whether the LORD had made 
his journey proſperous, ornot. 


# ( i.e, ) Arthe wonderful-Pfovidence of God 
Anſwer of his Prayer. : 09, and the eminent 


22 Andit came to pals as the camels had done drink- 
ing,thac the man took « a golden + ear-ring x of half a 


ſhekels weight of gold; 


u (7; e: ) Gave to her, as that word of taking, or receiving is oft 
uſed, as Gen: 12. 19: Exod: 18:12: and 29: 25: Pſal: 68: 18: com ared 
with Eph: 4: 8: x So the word ſignifies, Gen: 35: 4: Exod: mh: i 
Or, j-wels for zhe forehead, which hung down fiom the forchead w 


thenoſe, or between the eyes. ' So the word is uſed, we-ſc 47: Ezek: 
16: 12. : : 


23 Andſaidy, Whoſe daughter ar: thou ? tell me. 7 
pray thee : Is chereroom in thy fathers houſe for us to 
lodge in ? 
y Or,frr hehatſaid;for it is probable he enquired who ſhe was bez 
fore he gave her thole preſents. 
e4 Andihe ſaid unto him,] az the daughter of Bethu- 
el the ſon of Milcah z, whichſhe bare unto Nahor. 


z So ſhe ſignifies that ſhe was Nahor's Daughte by hi p 
cubine, but by his lawful and principal Wike OT Og 


25 She ſaid moreover unto him, We have both ftraw 
and porn wan; Fr room tolodge in. 

26 Andthe man boweddown his head. and ips 
ped the LORD a. ? Ty 


x Giving thanks to God for his marvellous aſſiſtance hitherto,and 
begging the continuance of his preſence and blefling. 


27 And he faid, Bieifed be the LORD God ofmy 
matter Abraham, who hath nor left deſtitute my mas 
fter of his mercy and his truchb; I beirg in the way, 
the LORD led me to the houſe of my maſters bre- 


thren c. 


b (5: e: ) Who hath hewed his mercy in promiſing all mantier 6f 
Bleſſings, and hi; zrath in performing his Promiſes at this day. Or; 
it is a figure called Hendyadss, for true mercy, q: d: he hath for only 
been kind to him in ſhew, and 1n words,but in real and conſiderable 
effe&s. c.( #: e: ) Near Kintmen, as that word is commonly uſed, as 
verſe 48: and Gen: 13: 8. Mark 3: 31, 32. 

28 And the damſel ran, and told :hemw of her mo« 
thers h-uſe dtheſe things» 

4 Not, of her Father's houſe ; either becauſe her Father was now 
dead, and Bethuz2l,who is hereafter mentioned, was not Laban's Fa- 
ther, but his Brother ſo called; or becauſe the Women had diltin& 
apartment+ in the Houſes, and Jhe went firſt thither according to 
her cuitom. 2 


29 4 And Rebekah had a brother, and his name 
was Laban : and Labanran out unto the man, unto 
the well. 

3o Andit cameto paſs, when he ſaw the ear-ring 


the words of Rebekah his ſiſter, ſaying, Thus ſpake 
che man unto ms; that he came unto the man, and 
behold he ſtood by the camels atthe well. | 
31 And he ſaid, Come in, thou bleſſed of the 
LORD e, wherefore ſtandefſt thou without? for I have 
prepared the houſe, and room for the came's. 
e (.i, e. ) Whom God hath fo eminenrly favoured and bleſſed. 
22 YAnd the man caine into the houſe, and he un- 
2irded his camels, and gave ſtraw and provender for 
the camels, and water to waſh his feer, and the mens 
feer char were with him F. 
f Of which cultom, ſee Gen: 18: 4- 
23 And there was {et meat before him, to eat? but 


| he ſaid, I will noc ear, uncil I have told mine errand, 


And he ſaid, ſpeak on. 
24 And he faid, I am Abrahams ſeryant. | 
35 Andthe LORD hath bleiled my maiter greatly; 
and he is become great: and he hach given him flocks, 
and herds, and lilver, and goid, and men-ſervanrs, 
2nd maid-ſervants, and camels, and ailes, 
| K 2 


20 And ſhe haſted, and emptied her pitcher into the* 


ſhekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands, of ren } Orjend 
or the 
forehead, 


and bracelets upon his iiſters hands, and when he heard. 


26 And 


Chap. KN iv; 


THch good. 
of COUNT Ee 
BANE 

* Nun:b, 


32:17. 


*Verl. 13. 


| + Heb.tbe 


| way of 
| truth, 


| + Heb. 
Veſſels. ©. 


Chap. XXIV. 
| t 36 And Sarah my maſters wife bare a ſon to my ma- 


that he will give. Things are off ſaid to be done,in Scripture Jlan- 


ſter when ſhe wasold : and * unto him hath he given 


all that he hath g. 
z (7. e. ) Hath purpoſed and promiſed, and doth by me engage 


guage, when they will certainly and ſhortly be done. 
27 And my maſter made; me ſwear, {aying, Thou 


Canaanites in whoſe land I dwell : | 

28 But thou ſhalt go unto my fathers houſe, and to 
my kindred, and take a wife unto my ſon, 

39 And I ſaid unto my maiter, Peradventure the wo- 


man will not follow me. 
49 And he {aid unto me, The LORD * before whom 


GENESIS. 


54 And they did eat and drink, he and the men that 
were with him, and tarried all night: and they roſe 


my maſter, 
55 And her brother and her mother ſaid, Let th 
damfel abide withus j a few days,at the leaſtten s ; ws 


ſhaltnot take a wife to my ſon of the daughters of the | thatſhe ſhall go, 


s Others thus, a Year, or at the leaſt tex Months, the word 

: , , z Ce D 

mg por for pan we a ie itis very 1mprobable Ss hy 
uld demand or expett ſuch a thing from this M 

ſaw bent ſo much upon Exeodicing,” CE TOR ny 


56 Andhe faidunto them, Hinder me not, ſei 
LORD hath proſpered my way: ſcad me away = 
may g0 to my maſter, ; 

57 4nd they ſaid, We will call the damſel,and inquire 


I walk þ, will ſend his angel with thee,and proſper thy 
way; and thou ſhalt take a wife for my ſon of my kin- 
dred, and of my fathers houſe. 

þ In Obedience to all his Commands, and in hearty truſt in his 
Promiſes and gracious Providence towards me and mine. 

41 Then jhalt thou be clear from hs my oath ;,when 
thou comeſt to my kindred ; and if they give nor thee 
ene, thou ſhalt be clear from my oath. _ 

; Heb. From my curſe, denounced againſt thee if thou ſhouldſt 
violate thine Oath. The words Oat and Curſe are oft-times indif- 
ferently uſed, becauſe rhey commonly go together, and ſometimes 
they are both expreſſed, as Numb. 5. 21. : 

42 And I came this day unto the well, and {aid, O 
LORD God of my maſter Abraham,if now thou do pro- 
{per my way which Igo & : | ; 

k (5.2. ) Thedeſign or courſe in which T am ingaged; as the 
word way is frequently uſed. ; 

43 * Behold, I itand by the well of water,and it ſhall 
come-to paſs, that when the virgin cometh forth to 
draw water;and Ifay to her, Give me,I pray thee,a little 


water of thy pitcher to drink ; 


at her mouthe. 

+ (7.e.”) Underſtand her mind by her words,not ſo much con- 
cerning the Marriage it ſclf, in which ſhe reſigned up her ſelf to 
the diſpoſal of her Parents and Friends, and to which ſhe had gi- 
ven animplicit Conſent by her acceptance of thoſe Preſents which 
were made to her for that end ; as concerning the haſtineſs of her 
Departure. 


58 And they called Rebekah,and ſaid unto her,Wilt thou 
go with this man ? and (he ſaid,7 will go, 

59 And theyſent away Rebckah their ſiſter, and her 
_ *, ys Abrahams ſervant, and his men. ; 

u Deborah, by comparing Chap. 35:8: ily, t 
Mother and the N arks Fs Aro RE Boks corrupt Cn, the 
ous Family there was no ſuch Principleor Pra&tice. See Gen,» x - ; 

60 And they bleſſed Rebekah,and ſaid unto her, Thou 
rt ourfiſter x,bethou tbe mother of thouſands of millions 
and let thy * ſeed polleſs the gate of thoſe which hate 
them. 

x ( 7. e. ) Qur near Kinſwo 1ſt: 1 
nate our AﬀeCGtions from hw On poce - on 


Siſter,and as far as we can,beready t 
thren to thee. ady to perform all the duties of Bre« 


4 And the ſay to me, Both drink thou, and I will 
alſo draw for thy camels: Jer the ſame bethe woman 
00g the LORD hath appointed out for my maſters 

on. 
45 And before Thaddone ſpeaking in my heart, be- 
hold, Rebekah came forth with her piccher on her ſhoul- 
der;and ſhe went down unto thewell, and drew water: 
and I faid unto her,Let me drink, I pray thee. 

46 And ſhe madehaſte,and let down her pitcher from 
her ſhoulder, and ſaid, Drink, and I will give thy ca- 


mels drink alſo; ſo I drank,and ſhe made the camels 


drink alſo. 


47 And I asked her /,and ſaid, | Whoſe daughter arr * 


thou? and the ſaid, The daughter of Bethuel,Nahors ſon, 


whom Milcah bare unto him;and 1 pur the ear-ring u- 


pon her face,and the bracelets upon her hands: 
{ Firſt he asks who ſhe was,then he gives the gifts to her:Which 


is the right order, and is here obſerved in the repetition ; which 


was inverted in the firſt relation, werſe. 22, 23. 


43 And Iboweddovvnmy head, and vvorſbipped the 
LORD,and bleſſed the LORD God of my maſter Abra- 
ham,vvhich had led me in Þ the right vvay,to takemy 


"maſters brethersdaughter unto his ſon, 


49 Andnow if ys will deal kindly and truly » with 
my maſter, tell me : and if not;tell me; that Imay turn 


to the right hand, orto the left = 
m If you will thew true Kindneſs and real Friendſhip to him,in 
giving your Daughter to his Son. » ( 7. e. ) That I may look out 
a Wite for him elſewhere. It is a proverbial expreſſion, Numb. 20. 
17. and 22. 26. Det. 2. 27. : 
5oThen Laban and Bethuel » anſwered and ſaid, The 
thing proceedeth from the LORD p : we cannot ſpeak 


unto thee bad or good q. 
o Laban us put firſt,cither becauſe this Bethuel was not his Father, 


the chief manager of this buſineſs, ro whom his Father ſeems to have 
committed the care of his Family, being himſelf unfit for itthrough 
Age or Infirmity. p From God's Counſel and Special Providence. 
Hereby it appears they had the Knowledge and worſhip of the true 
God among them,tho they added Idols to him. 9 We cannot with- 
out oppoſing God, ſpeak or a& any thing which may hinder thy 
defign,or thwart thy deſire. Compare Gen:31: 24,29. 2 Sam. 13.22, 


51 Behold, Rebekah isbefore thee F, take ber, and 
0, and let her be thy maſters ſons wife, as the LORD 


hath ſpoken- 
+ (5.e. ) In thy powerand diſpoſal ; as this Phrafe 1s taken, Ger, 


20: 15. and elſewhere. 


52 And itcame to paſs,that when Abrahams ſervant 
heard their words, he worlbipped the LORD, bowing 


himfelf to the earth- 
53 4nd the ſervant brought forth F jewels of filver, 


8 and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave 7hem to Re- 


bekah : he gave alſo to her brorcher and to her mother 


precious things r. 
y The precious Fruits of the land from which he came, See 
Deut. 33. 13. &c. or in general,other rare and excellent things. In 


thoſe days Men gave Portions for theur Wives, as now they haye 


Portions with them, . | 


. but his younger Brother, as Foſephus thinks ; or becauſe Laban was | 


6x And Rebekah aroſe,and her damſels, aud they rod 
upon the cainels,and followed the man: and the - Sac 
took Rebekah,and went his way. 

62 And Iſaac came from the way of the 


hai-roi, for he dweltin the ſouth countrey y. 
3 In the Southern Parts of Canaan,as Gen. 
ther it ſeems, Abraham returned after Sarah's Death. 
63 And Ifaac went outto + meditate & in the field 7 


Rn the camels were coming. 
& To converſe with God, and with himſelf by »; ; 
table Thoughts and Ejaculations, and fervent + #. rogpaty an [17 ak 
things,ſo particularly for God's Blefling upon this great Aﬀair,and 
ſo his Praycrs are eminently anſwered. a He chuſeth a "ROAR 
place,whecein he might more freely attend upen God without grid 
Interruption or Diſtrattion. 6 That as he had begun the day wich 
God, ſo hemight cloſe it with him, and commit himſelf *to his 
Proteftion. Compare Pſalm 55. 17. 

64 And Rebekah lift up her eyes, and when ſhe ſaw 
Iſaac, ſhe lighted off the camel c. 

c As a teſtimony of her reſpe& to him whom by the $ 
underſtood to be her Lord and Husband. Compare "of IS: yen 
25; 2Z. 
65 For ſhe had ſaid unto the ſervant, What man 3s 
this that walketh inthe field to meet us?. And the ſer- 
vant had ſaid, It is my maſter; therefore ſhe took a yai! 
and covered her ſelf d. T 

d In token of Modeſty, Reverence,and Subje&ion. See Gen. 20 
IG. 1 Cor: 11: 10, ; AE 
p 65 And the ſervant told 1{aac all things that he had 

One. 

67 And Taac brought her into his mother Sarahs 
tente, and rook Rebekah, and ſhe became his wife ; 
and he loved her : and {aac was comforted after his mo» 


thers death f, 

e Partly to give her poſſeſſion of it,and partly to conſummate the 
Marriage. Women then had their Tents apart trom Men. See Gor: 
18: i0: and 24:67: and 31: 33: f Aſorrowful ſenſe whereof he yet 
had retained, tho ſhe died thiee years before this time. 

CHAP, XXY. 

Abrahams ſons by Keturah, 1--=4. Iſaac inherits his Fathers eſtate, 5. 
Proviſion for the othet ſons, 6. Abrahams age, 7. Death, 8. Burial #4 
10. God bleſſeth Iſagc, 11. The pofterity of Iſhmael, 12-15 $7 
age and death, 17. Their habitation, 18. The generations of Iſaac, 19 
His age when married, 20. He prays for children ; God anſwers * Two 
children ſtruggle in the womb ; Rebekah enquires of the Lord "22. God 
gives the reaſon, 23. She delivered of twins, 24. The firſt-born red 
and hairy; his name, 25. His brother takes him by the heel: his 
name: Jjaac's age when they were born, 26. The eldeſt a cunning 
hunter ; the other a plain man, 27. Iſaac loves the eldeſt ; Rebekah the 
youngeſt. 28. The eldeſt ſells his birth-right for red pottage, and u called 
hs, 30---32, Confirms the ſale by an oath, 33. Deſpiſms hi: birth- 
rizht, 34. x 

J en a again Abraham took b a wife c, and her 

name as Keturah #4. | 

a Afﬀter Sarah's Death and 1/aac's Marriage. b Not from any in« 
ordinate Luſt, which his Age and nay hes Grace aa Calficienety 
evince, but from a deſire of more Children, and of accompliſhin 
God's Promiſe concerning the great Multiplication- of his Sced. 
c A ſecondary Wife, or a Concubine, as ſhe 15 called, verſe 6. and 


4 Chron, 


up in the morning, and he ſaid, * Send me away unto * Verſ.56: 


and 56. 


f Or,a fu? 
year,or tex 
months, 


*Chap: 223 
I7. 


_ 


* 
well La- * Chap: 


I6. 14. 


r2. 9. at Beer-ſheba, whi- and 25.13 


t Or, zo 


at the eventide b3 and he life up his eyes,and ſaw, and 2% 


Chap. XXV, | C 


*Chap 


23. 16, 


* Chap 
x60. 
I. G2. 


GENESIS . Chap. XXV. ® 


| 1 G:ron: 0, 32. # A I ah - 95 — acap_—_ from werſe | 12 T Now theſe 2 the generations of Iſhmael x A- 
E, and 12: and as it ſeems, of better Quality, an ounger, for ls | 20h Bl ge 2p 
Har was now Eighty years old, and not likely to be a Mother of brahams ſon, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarahs hand- 
56: {ix Children. y maid, bare unto Abraham. 
s 2 And ſhe bare hime Zimran, and Jokſhan, and Me- | , . * Mere Secorn niderree of God's faickfulnelh in INny 
dan f, and Midian g, and Iſhbak, and Shuah h. Ty ORIG, Pane-2E 207 an 275] 2 nn 
ult p hb How could Airahom, being now about One hundred 74 And theſe are the IO of the ſons of Iſhmael, : 1Chron 
fer years old, have ſo many Children, when his Body was dead in his by their names, according ro their generations: The a oy. 
firſt-born of Iſhmael, Nebajcth y; and Kedar z, and * © 


hundredth year ? 4:/w. Becauſe that renewed ſtrength which was 
miraculouſly confer: cd upon him, did ſtill in a great meaſure re-. 
main in him, being not a temporary ACtion, but a durable Habir 
or Power. f Theſe Perſons were the Heads of ſeveral People dwel- 
ling in Arabia and Syria, where we ſhall find evident foorſteps.of 
their Names amongſt Ancient Geographers, only a little changed, 
which cou'd not be avoided in their Tranſlation into another Lan- 
guage: & The Father of thoſe Midianites, of whom we read, Gen. 
3*: 35. Juds: 6: 2: 1Js: 10: 26. kh From whom Bilaad ſeems to be 


deſcended, 'Jov 2. 11. 
2» * And Jokthan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And 


p4 . , l 
* 1Chron. the ſons of Dedan were A\burim, and Letuſhim, and 


Leummim, £ 
4 And the ſons of Midian ; Ephah i, and Epher &, 


and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah. All theſe were 


the Children of Keturah. | 
5 Of whom ſee 1ſa:60: 6: k From whom ſome think 4f-ica re- 


ceived its name. 


5 4 4ud Abraham gave / all that he had # unto 


Iſaac. ; : 
/ Which before he purpoſed and promiſed to give, Gen. 24. 36. 


And now adtually gave. m# Except that which 1s excepted in the 
foiloxing Verſe, and except the uſe and enjoyment of his Eſtate 


dwing his own Lite. ; 
5 1ur uriro the ſons of the concubines » which Abra- 


ham had, Abraham gave gifts, and fent them away 
from ilaae his fon «( while he yet lived ) caftward,un- 
to the ealt countrey Pp. 

» Hagar and Keturzh. Concubines are ſometimes calleJ Wives, as 
Gen: 16: 3: judgeilg 1, 2, 3, 29- bur their Children had no right to 
the Inheritance {or tho the Childien of Jacob's Concubines did e- 
qually partake of the Inheritance with the other Children, that was 
done by Divine Appointment,and Jacob's Vojuntary Att, and upon 
ſpecial reaſon, b2cauie of the vat Inheritance promiſed, and atter- 
wards given to them,which made it no loſs,bur a great convenience 
and advantage tuthe Children of the chief Wives to have their Halt- 
brethren, the Sons of the Concubines, ſeated ſo near to them. o 
Partly that 'the entire Poſſeſſion of that Land might be reſerved to 
the Children of 1ſaac ; and pou y, leſt nearneſs of relation joyned 
with Cohabication or Neigh ourhood ſhould beget a great familia- 
rity »etween them, whereby 1/aac's Seedwere likely to be infe&ed 
by their Brethren, whoſe Degeneration and A poltacy Avrabam might 
eilily foreſee from the evil Inclinations of their on Hearts, and 
Go.'s £xcluſion of them from that Covenant of Grace a:d Life, 
which was the only effe&ual Remedy againſt thar powerful and uni- 
ve: ſal Corruption. p Into Arabia, and other Part- of 4ſia the Great- 
er, which were ſcituate Eaſt-ward from the Southern part of Cana- 
an where Abraham now was, whence theſe People are oft called the 
Children of the Eaſt, as Judges 6: 3: and 7:12: Job 1: 3. 

7 And thele a:e the days of the years of Abrahams 
life which he lived, an hundred threeſcore and fifteen 


years, | 
8 Then Abraham gave up the ghoſt 9, and died in a 


—_——_ 


Adbeel, and Mibſam,. 

y Of whom ſce 1aizh6o: 7. From whom part of Arabia was called 
Navathea. z Of whom ſee Pjalm 120: 5: Iſaiah 21: 16: Jer: 49: 28: 
the Father of thoſe called Cedrei, or C:dareni in 4rabin. 

14 And Miſhma, and Dumah a, and Maiſa, 

a From him Dumah, Iſaiah 21: 11: or Dumatha, a place in Arabia, 
ſeems to have received its Name. Others make him the Father of 
the Idumeans. 


15 + Hadar, and Tema 5, Jetur c, Naphiſh, and,,. _ 
Kedemah. y : J . P TON Ha= 


b He gave his Name to the City and Covntry bf Tema, or Teman, , 


Job 2. 11. and. 19. Jer. 25. 23. c The Father of the [ureans, as , 


may be gathered from 1 Chron. 5. 19. | 
16 'Thele are the ſons of Itbmael, and theſe ave their 


Chron. 
39. 


names, by their towns, and by their caſtles* ; twelve *Chap. 17. 
20, 


princes according to their nations. 

17 And theſe are the years of the life of Iſhmael, an 
:undred andthirty and ſever years ; and he gave upthe 
ghoſt, and died, and was gathered unto his people. 

18 And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is 
before Fgypt, as thou goeſt towards Aſlyria F : and 
ae * died in the preſence of all his brethren d. 


*H &b fell. 


T (z. e.) On that part or ſide of Egypt which leans to 4ſjria. d 2 Sam. 21. 


1s Brethren ſurviving him,and being his Neighbours,and therefore g, 


's they had Converſation with him in the time of his Life, ſo now 
chey did him Honour at his Death. But this Tranſlation and Inter- 
pretation may ſeem improbable. 1. Becaule his Death was related, 
verſe 17, and would not be ſo preſently repeated. 2. Becauſe the . 
foregoing wo:'ds in this Verſe ſpeak not of his Death, bur of his 


Iwelling,to which theſe words. do very well agree. For what we ' 


tranſlated and he died, is commonly rendred and he fell, or it fell, and 
is moſt commonly uſe concerning alot whereby Mens Portions are 
deſigned and divic.ed, as Levit: 16: 9, 10: Numb: 33: 54: Joſ: 16; 1. 
and fo the ſenfe may be; it fel; i: e: that Country fellto him or his; 
or he lay, or was ffretched out, o1 pofted himſelf, as the Hebrew word is 
uſed, Juag: 7: 12. 5. e. he dwelt in rhe preſenceof all his Brethren ;. and 
'o indeed his Conntry lay between the Children of Keturah on the 
£af, and the Children of 1/aac and {raelon the W-f. 

Ii; 4 Arid theſe are the generations of Ifaat, Abra- 


:ams ſon: * AbrahambegatIfaac. . 


20 And Haac was forty years old when he took Re- 1. 


»vekah to wite, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of 
Padan-Aram e, the ſiſter to Laban the Syrian. 

e Either of the Country of Syria, as it is called, Hoſea 12-12.0r rather; 
Padan of Syria, oras the Septuagint and Chaldee render it, Meſopota- 
nia of Syria : For that Padan is the proper Name of a place, may be 
gathered from G22: 48: 7: and it is ſo called from its Scituation be= 
-ween two Rivers, for Padan ſignifies 2 pair or two. 

21 And Ifaac intreated the LORL-f for his wife g; 
Hecauſe ſhe was barren þ: and the LORD was intreat- 


:d of him, and * Rebekah his wife conceived. ' & 


* Matth, 


2, 


Rom. 9. 


f He prayed, as the Hebrew word ſignifies, inſtantly br fervent- 0, 
ly, frequently and continually, for near twenty years together ; 
for ſo long it was between their Marriage and the firſt Child. He 
was ſo much concerned, becauſe not only his Comfort, but the 


g00d # old age, an oid man, and full ef fyears s; and 


} Or,”/2ys. was gathered to [115 PeOPTEC F, 
9 His Soul was not required of him, as it was of that fool, Luk- 


% 


12: 20: notforced from him by ſharp and violent Diſeaſes, but was 
quictly, ea{ily,and chearfuliy yi-Ided up by him into the h»nyds of 
his merciful God and Father, as the word intimates. » Good both 
g atioully, his hoary Head being found in the way of Righreoui- 
neſs ; and natnrally, fiee from the manifold Infirmities and Cala» 
mities of old Age. Of which ſee Eceleſ: 12: 1, &c. In the Hebrew 
It 15 on:y full, or ſatisfied ; but you muſt under:tand, with Days or 
Tears, as the Phraſe is fully exprefſed, Gen: 35: 29: 1 Chron:23: i: and 
29: 28: Job 42: 17: Fer: 6: 11, When he had lived as long as he de- 
ſired, being in ſome ſort weary of Life,and deiirousto be diflolved; 
or full of all Good, as the Chaldee renders it ; ſatisfied,as it is ſaid of 
Naphtali, Deus: 33: 23: with favour, and full with the bleſſing of the Lord 
upon himſelf, and upon his Children. : To his Godly irogenitors, 
the former Patriarchs; the Congregation of the Juſt in Heaven, 
Heb: 15. 23. in regard of his Soul : bor it cannot be meant of his 
Body, hich was not joyzed with them in the place of Burial, as the 
Phraſe is, 1/a. 14 20. but buried in a ſtrange Land, where only $a- 
ral's Body lay. And ir is obſerved, that this Fhrale isuſed of none 
but go00.i Men, of which the Jews were ſo fully perſwaded, that 
from this very Expreſſion uſed concerning Iſhmael he:e below, v: 17: 
they infer his Repentance and Salvation. See this Phraſe, Gen: x5: 
IS: and 49* 29: Numb: 20: 24: and 27: 13: Judges 2: 19. | 

9 And his ſons Iſaac and Iſhmael « buried him in the 
cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, the fon of 


Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre. 

# T or !ſbmael, tho baniſhed from his Father's Houſe, hved in a 
Place nor very far from him ; and as no doubt he received many 
Favours from his Father after his Departure,whichis implied here, 
verſe 6: tho it be not mentioned elſewhere ; ſo it is probable thar ke 
had a true Reſpe& and Aﬀe&Qion to his Father, which he here ex- 
preſſeth. | 


| To * The field which Abraham purchaſed of th 
ſons of Heth : there was Abraham buried, and Sarah 
his wife. 

it C And itcame to paſs afrer the death of Abra- 
ham, that God bleſſed his ſon Iſaac, and Iſaac dwelt 


Truth of God's Promiſe depended upon this Mercy : And he knew 
very well, that God's i'urpoſe and Promiſe did not exclude, but 
require the uſe of all convenient Means for their accompliſhment. 
£ Or zn the preſence of his Wife, ſignifying, that, beſides their more 
ſecret Devorions, they did oftentimes in a more ſolemn manner; 
and v ith united force pray for this mercy,wherein they were both 
equally concerned. Or, over 2gainft his Wife, noting that each of 
them did ſeverally and apart intreart God for this Mercy, ſo that 
there was a concurrence, if not in place, yet in deſign and aQtion. 
bh As diverſe of thoſe holy Women that were Progenitorsof Chriſt 
have long been,that it might appear that that ſacred Stock was pro- 
pagated more by the virtue of Tou's Grace and Promiſe, than by 


the Power of Nature. = 
22 And the children ſtruggled together within her 3 ; 


and ſhe ſaid, If ir be fo, why ew Ithus &? And ſhe 


went to inquire of the LORD 7. oe | 

7 Inaviolent and extraordinary nianner, which was likely to cauſe 
both Pain and Fear in her - & The ſenſe may be cither, r. If-ir be 
thus with me; that there be two Children contending and fighting 
within me, likely to deſtroy one the other, and both threatning 
my Death ; why did I defire and pray for this asa great Mercy! Or 
why is it thus withme! Why hath God dealt thus with re, to conti- 


'nue my Life till it be a burthen to me,and-to give me Conception 


which is ſo painful and hazardous? Or rather, 2.If God hath grant- 
ed memy deſire in the Conception of a Child, what means this di- 
{turbance and confli& within me, which threatens me with the loſs 
of the Mercy before I enjoy it ? For ſhe ſeems nor ſomuchro mur- 
mur at it, as to wonder and ro enquire about it, as it here. follows 
I Either immediatly by ardent Prayers to God that he would revea 
his mind to her herein ; or mediatly by her Father. Abraham, who 
lived fifteen years after this time, verſe 7. or by ſome other godly 
Patriarch yet ſurviving, by whom God uſed to manifeſt his Will 
and Counſels to others, when he thought fit; a £” 
23 And the LORD ſaid unts her , Two natt- 
ohs 1 dre in thy womb, and two manner of people 


{hall be ſcparated o from thy bowels ; and che one peo- 
| F 3 ple 


2. 


———_ 


— 


- — - 
G--6 * AI " * an —_ - 
- - _ Cre ow vio ined. net ong og 
as 3 21 201m EO RA Se ina aan ng GD an Og 
I Ot = 


| *Chap.27. 
{ II, 16,23. 


-_# 


| + Heb. ve- 
| 2:iſon was 
| 72 his 

Wl 204th. 


+ Heb. 
with that 
red, with 
that red 

| Pottage. 


' 


hap. XXV. 


F* Rom. 9. p'e fall bs Rronger than he other people; and * the | 


+ Heb. go- L io, 
ing t die; 0; and what profit jhail this birth-righe do ro me 4 2 


elder p ſhall ſerve the younger. | 
772 Eherby inward [nf{pication,in a Dream or Viſion ; or by the 
Miniſtry of in Angel or Prophet. (7: e:) The Roots, Heads, or 
Parents of two diftiz& Nations,one oppoſiteto the other; the one 
blef{:d, the other curſed, namely the [raclites and Edomites. o Not 
only ſeparated from rhee,bur one ſeparated or greatly differing from 
the other in their frame of Body, temper of Mind, courſe of Lite, 
profeſſion and pratice of Religion. Or, the greater, namely Eſau, 
who was, as older, fo of a ſtronger Conſtitution of Body, and of 
oregter Power and Dignity in the World than Jacob ; and Eſau's 
Poterity were great Princes for a long time, when Jacob's Seed were 
Strangers in Ganaan, Slaves in Egypr, and poor afflifted Wanderers 
in the Wilderneſs. Burt faith he, Eſau and his ſhall not always be 
ſtronger and mightier than Jacob and his Poſteriry, the Tables ſhall 
be rurn:d, and the Children of Jr! thall be uppermoſt and ſubdue 
the Edomites, which was literally accompliſhed in David's tune, 2 
Sam. $8. 14. and afterwards 2 Chron. 25. IT, 12. and after that by 
the Maccabees, but much more eminently in a ſpiritual Senſe under 
the Goſpel, when one of Jaceb's Children, {even Jeſus Chriſt, ſhall 
obtain the Dominion, and ſhall rule the Edomzzes no leſs than other 
Heathen Nationswyith his Iron Rod, and make them ſerviceable one 
way or other to his Glory, and to the F elicity of his true: 1/rae!, 
24 4 And whenher days to be delivered were fulfil- 
led, behold, there ere twins in her womb. 
25 And the firſt came out red q, *all over like an 


hairy garment, and they called his name Eſau 7. 

4 With red Hair upon all the parts of his Body. From him the 
Rea-Sea is ſuppoſed to receive its name, 1t being ſo called, as the 
Hearhen Writers tell us, from one who reigned in thoſe Parts,and 
was called Erythras, or Erythrus, which ſignifies Red, the ſame with 
Edom or Eſau. r (i.e.) Madeor perfe# ; not properly a Child, but 
rather a Man as ſoon as he was born, having that Hair upon him, 
which in others was an evidence of Manhood. ; 

26 And after that came his brother out, and * his 
hand took hold on Efſau's heel; ans his name was called 


Jacob s : and Iſaac was threeſcore years old when ſhe 


bare them #. | | 
s ( 5. e. ) Supplanter, or one that taketh hold of, or trippeth up his 
Brother's heels. See Gen. 27.36. t Thus God exerciſed his Faith 
and Patience twenty years by comparing this with verſe 20. ere he 
gave him the promiſed Bleſſing. ; 
27 And the boys grew : and Eſau was a cunning 


hunter «, a man of the field x ; and Jacob was F a plain 


man y dwelling 1n tents z, | 

u Of wild Beaſts, and afterwards an opprefſor of Men. Com- 
pare Gen. 10. 9. This courſe of lifewas moſt agrecable to his com- 
plexion, fierce and violent. x Onethat delighted more in conver- 
ling abroad thanat home, whoſe employment it was to purſue the 
Beaſts through Fields, and Woods, and Mountains, who therefore 
choſe an Habitation fit for his purpoſe in mount Seir. y A ſincere, 
honeR, and plain-hearted Man ; or a juſt and perfe& Man, as the 
word is uſed, Gen. 6. 9. z Quietly minding the management of 
his own Domeſtick Afﬀairs, his Lands and Cattel, and giving no 
ciſturbance either to wild Beaſts or Men. 


28 And {aac loved Eſau, becauſe + he did cat of his 


veniſon a : but Rebekah loved Jacob 5. 

s Nor ſimply, nor chiefly, becauſe he pleaſed his palate, but be- 
cauſe this was an evidence of his Son's great reſpe& and affeQion 
ro him, that he would take ſuch pains and incur fuch hazards to 
which that courſe of life expoſed him, that he might pleaſe and 
ſerve his Father. 6b Upon better grounds, both becauſe of his more 
pious and meck Temper, and becauſe of the Oracle and Promiſe 
of God.- : 

29 © And Jacob ſod pottage : and Elau came from 
the field, and he 24s faint. 


>o And Efau faid to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, 


+ with thatſame red c portage ; for I am faint: there- 


fore was his name called Edom #4. 

c Red by the infuſion of Lentiles, or Saffron, or ſome other 
things of that Colour. The word is doubled in the Hebrew Text, 
to ſhew how vehemently he defired-it. 4 Which ſignifies Red, as 
he was at firſt;ſo called from the colour of his Hair ; ſo now that 
name was confirmed and given to him afreſh upon this occaſion, 

.4. He was rightly called Edom, or Red, not only Hiſtorically 
for his Colour, but Prophetically for this Accident. 
21 - And Jacob laid, Seil me this day e thy birth- 
right f. h : 

e (i. e. ) Speedily without delay. So this Hebrew Word is uſed, 
1 S2m. 2. 16. and 9-13, 27. 2 Chron: 18: 4. f The birth-right then 
had divers ſingular Priviledges ; as r. Dignity and Authority over 
his Brethren, Gen: 4: 7: and 27: 29, 37: and 49: 3. 2. A double 
Portion, Deut: 21: 17: 1 Chron: 5: 1. 3- A ſpecial Blefling from his 
Father, Gen: 27:4+ 4- The Prieſthood and chief Government of 
the Aﬀairs of the Church in his Father's abſence, or ſickneſs, and 
after his death, Numb: 8: 16, 17, &c. 5. The firft-born was a ſpe- 
cial Type both of Chriſt, who was to be a firſt-born ; and of the 
Church, which is called God's frff-born, as Exod: 4: 22: and of the 
great Priviledges of the Church, particularly of Adoption and E- 
ternal Life. See Heb: 12: 23. And therefore he is juſtly called 
profane, Heb: 12: 16: forflighting ſo ſacred and glorious a Priviledge. 
Nueft: 1. Could the birth-righr be loſt ? Anſw: Yes. See Gen:, 4: 7. 
-and 'r Chron: 5: 1. Que#: 2. Did Jacob wellin this matter ? Anſw: 

lo.; becauſe he tempted his Brother to an att of Profaneneſs and 


Folly, and fo was guilty of his Sin. And though God had de- 


ſigned and promiſed this Priviledge to him, yet he ſhould have 
waited till God had executed his Promiſe in his own way, as David 
did till God gave him poſſefſion of Sa*!'s Kingdom, and not have 
anticipated God, and ſnatched it by an irregular at&t of his own, as 
Jerobogm did the Kingdom from Rehoboars. 


22 And Eſaufſaid, Behold, I am: F at the point to dic 


GENESIS 


Chap. XXVT. Y har 


g Not with Famine,which could not conſiſt with 7ſaac's plentiful 


Eſtate and Houſe, but by the perpetual hazards to which his courſe 
of Iife expoſed him in the purſuit of wild Beaſts, and contendin 
with other Men. h By which heplainly ſheweth, that his Care _—_ 
AﬀeCtions reached no further than thepreſent life. 
33 And Jacob faid, Swear to me this day ;; and 
- —_ unto him : and * he fold his birth-right unto 
dACOD. 


z Jacob ated ſubtilly in this Afﬀair ; he knew that delays were 
dangerous ; and Eſa's conſideration, or ſecond thoughts, might 
have ſpoiled his Bargain, and therefore he requires haſte, as in the 
Sale, fo in his Oath ; wherein he addeth another Sin, in hurrying 
his Brother into an Oath by precipitation, which neither his Bro- 
ther ſhould have taken, nor Jacob ſhould have adviſed him to take 
without mature Advice. y 

\. 34 Then Jacob gave Eſau bread and pottage of len- 
tiles ; and he did cat and drink, and roſe up, and went 
his way &: thus Eſau deſpiſed bis birth-right 7. | 

k Secure and impenitent, without any remorſe for his ingrati= 
tude to God, or the injury which he had done to himſelf and to 
all his Poſterity. ! Preferring the preſent and momentary ſatisfaCti- 
on of his Luſt and Appetite, before God's and his Father's Bleſſing 
and all the glorious Priviledges of the Birth-right. : 

CH A P. XXVI. 

A famine in the land ; Iſaac goes to Gerar, x. God direfs him to abide 
there, and promiſes to be with him ; the covenant with Abraham alſo 
made with Iſaac, 2--==5, Through fear he denies Rebekah T7. Abimes= 
lech, ſeeing Iſaac and Rebekah together, concludes hey ro be bis wife 5 
charges him with it, he confeſſes it, 8, g« Abimelech reproves him 
charging his people not to touch them on pain of death, 1x. Iſaac Bleſſed 
with great plenty, 12----14. The Philiflines envy him ; fop his wells 
15. Deſirehim to depart, 16. He removes to the valley of Gerar 7. 
There he digs wells, but the herds-men ſlrive with him about them 
18----21. He hath reft, 22. Removes to Beer-ſheba, 23. The Lord 
renews his covenant, 24. Hecalls on the name of the Lord, 25. Abime- 
tech convinced that the Lord was with Iſaac, deſires to make a covenant 
with him, 26----29. They make a feaft, and ſwear to one another, 171. 
Eſau being forty years old, taketh to him wives of the Canaanites. 34- 
Iſaac and Rebekah grieved hereat, 35. ; 

N D there was a famine in the land, * beſides the 
firft famine that was in the days of Abraham. 

And Ifaag went unto * Abimelech « king of the Phili- 

ſtines, unto Gerar. 

a Not he mentioned, Gen: 20: 2: but moſt probably his So 
Succeſſor, called by his Fathers name. q F mem 


2 And the LORD appeared unto him, and ſaid, Go 


not down into Egypt: dwellin the Land which I ſhall 
tell thee of. | * 

6 Whitherit ſeems Iſaac intended to go, it being a very fruitful 
place, and being encouraged to doſo by his Fathers Example upon 
the ſame occaſion. But God ſaw good reaſons to forbid J1ſaac to 
"cog whichit is needleſs to enquire, and not difficult to con- 
jecture. _ : : 

3 Sojourn 1n this land, and I will be with thee, and 
will bleſs thee : for unto thee, and unto thy ſeed c * I 
will give all theſe countries, and I will perform * the 
oath 4 which I ſware unto Abraham thy father: 

c To thee, to enjoy for thy preſent Comfort,and to them to poſ- 
ſeſs as zn Inheritance. See the Notes on Gen: 13: 15: and 15: 18. 
d (i: e:) The promiſes confirmed by Oath, Ger: 22: 16, &c. 

4 And I will make thy ſeed te multiply as the ſtars 
of heaven, and will give unto thy ſeed all theſe coun- 
cries: and in thy {ced ſhall all the nations of the earth 
be * bleſled: 

5 Becauſe that Abraham ebeyed my voice e, and 


kept my charge, my commandments, my ſtatutes, and 
my laws. | 


__e Here was a Covenant made between God and Abraham ; and as, 
if Abraham had broken the condition of walking before God requi- 
red on his part, God had been diſcharged from the Promiſe made 
on his part ; fo contrarily, becauſe Abraham performed his conditi- 
on, God engageth himſelfto perform his Promiſe to him, and te 
his ſeed. Bur as that Promiſe and Covenant was made by God of 
meer Grace, as isevidentand confeſſed ; ſo the Mercies promiſed 
and performed to him and his, are ſo great and vaſt, that it is an 
idle thing to think they could be merited by ſo mean a Compenſa= 
tion as Abraham's Obedience, which wasa Debt that he owed to 
God, had there been no ſuch Covenant or Promiſe made by God 

and which alſo was an effe& of God's Graces to him and in him. ' 

6 4 And Ifaac dwelt in Gerar, 


7And the men of the place asked him of his wife ; and 


.he ſaid, She is my ſiſter: for:he fearedto ſay, - Sbe is 


my wife, leſt, ſaid be, the men of the place ſhould kilt 
me for Rebekah, becauſe ſhe was fair to look upon. 

8 Anditcameto paſs, when he had becn there a 
long time, that Abimelech king of the Philiſtines looked 
out at a window, and ſaw, and behold, Iſaacwas ſport- 
ing with Rebekah his wife g. ' 

£ Uſing more free and familiar carriage than became a Brother 
and Sifter, but ſuch as was allowable between Husband and Wife. 
See Deut. 24. 5. Prov.s5. 18, 19. But that this was not the Conjugal 
at, may eaſily. be gathered from the circumſtances of the time,and 
place, which was open to Abimelech's view ; and therefore that was 


” 


| Cha} 
bo. 9. 
$1: cb 
* Heb.12 
16. 
F Het 
: found. 
F Heb 
PEP 
: 
3 Or, 
$ovary. 
*Chap. 12. | 
T0. F Cha; 
*Chap. Fe 3* 
236. x. 


not conſiſtent either with 7aac's modeſty, or with his prudence, be« 


cauſe he would not have her thought to be his Wife. 

9 And Abimelech called Iſaac, and ſaid, Behold, of 
a ſurety ſhe is thy wife : and how ſaidſt chou, She is m 
ſiſter ? And Iſaac faid uno him, Becauſe I faid, leſt F 
dic for her, - ; no And 


: + Heb 


$vng. 


x+ That 


= CONFenti 


Z } Heb 


ing we. 


[. 


P.12. 


E Fhap- XX\1. 


| 
*+ That is, 


! 


10 And Abimelech Taid, What zs this thou haſt done 

unto us 2 one of the people might itzntly have hen with 

Chap- thy wife b, and * thou jhouldeit have brought 7 guilti- 

2.9. neſs UPON Us 2, ET es : 

+ tHicb. ”* 7, Becauſe the Heathens eſtcemed PFornication either no Sin,or a 

very litcle one. i The guilt of Adultery, which was heinous and 

formidable even among the Heathens, and cſpecially here,becauſe 

it was freſh in memory how ſorely God had punithed 4bimelech,and 

all his Family, only for an intention of Adultery, Ger. 20, Note 

here, they take it tor granted, that their Ignorance had not been a 
ſufficient excuſe for their Sin. 4s ; 

1x And Abimelech charged all his people, ſaying, 

THe that.toucheth & this man or his wife, fhall ſurely be 


put tO death. ; | 
& (5. e. ) Hurteth-or injureth. So that word isufecd, wer. 29, and 
of. 9. 19.P/al.:05.15. Zech,2.8. and being applied ro a woman, it is 
1ſed for the dehiling or humbling of her, asGenr, 20.6. Prov. 6. 29. 
12 Then Iſaac ſowed in that land /, and | received 
in the ſame year an hundred fold w, and the LORD 


bleſled hum 

[Either in the Grounds which he had hired of the right Owners; 
or in ſome Grounds which lay negle&ed ; and therefore were free 
to the firſt Occupier ; which was nor ſtrange in that Age of the 
World, when the Inhi.birants of Countreys vere not ſo numerous 
asafterward. m2 (7.e. ) An hundred timesas much as he ſowed. 
The ſame d&gree of increale is intimated, Marth. 13.8. and atfirmed 
ſometimes of other places by Heathen Writers, but then it was in a 
bert-r Soil and Seaſon than this was ; for this was a time, of Fa- 
mine or Sca1 City. | 

13 Ard the man waxed great, and | went forward, 
and grew until he became very great. C 

14 For he had poſleſſion of tlucks, and poſieflion of 
Huſ. herds, and great {roce of | ſervants». And the Phili- 


ftines envied him, | 

» Or rather, of Husbandyy, as this word is elſewhere uſed ; of 
Corn-fields, Vineyards. &c. for he 1s deſcribing his Riches, which 
then conſiſted in the two things here expreſſed, Cattcl and Lands, 
which he diligently and ſucceſsfully managed, wer. 12. 


: 15 For ail the welis * which his fathers ſervants had 
7 Chap. giggedin the daysof Abraham his father, the Philiſtines 
[- 3” had ſtopped them, and filled them with earth. 
16. Az d abimelech ſaid unto Iſaac, Go from us, for 
—_ i, X thou arc much mightier than we 0 
Y 


W275 


F Heb. 
mY T0ng. 


: 

F Or, 
$avary. 
w 


o Which breeds Envy, and Jealoufic, and Fear, among my Sub- 
je&s, and may occaſion greater miſchiefs ; and therefore it 15 bet- 
ter that we ſhould part Friends, than by continuing together be 
turned vito Enemies. 

17 And Iſaac departed thence, and pitchzd his tent 
in the valley of G:rar, and dwelt there. © 

i8 And Ifaacdigged again the weils of water , 
which they had digged in the days of Abraham his fa- 
ther q ; for tnePhiuſtines had ttopped them after the 


7 


* 2 Ab FINES 0h: 455 


I L 4s - 


if death of Abraham : ane he called their names after the 


names by which his fither had cailed chem. 
p For though there might be a Rrook the e, probably it was but 
little, and ſoon d:i1ed up. q He digged thoſe rather than new ones, 


CS INE 
7 


moſt right to them, and others leſs cauſe of quarrel with him abour 
them. 


i9 And Ifaag's ſervants digged in the valley, and 
found there a well of | ſprizgug water. 

20 And the herdmen of Gerar did itrive with Iſaac's 
: herdmen, ſaying, The water zs ours 7: and ne called the 
> That is, Name of the wel; + Efek, beciuſe chey ſtrove with him 
* contention. = Becauſe digged in our Soil : Which was no good Argument, 


becauſe he digged it by their conſenc or permiſicn at his own 
charge, and for his 0«n uſe. | 

2i And they digged another we'l, and ſtrove for that 
alſo, and he calied the name of ic | Sitnah. 

22 And he removed from thence, and digged ano- 
ther well; and for that they ſtrove nct: and he called 
the n ame of it | Rehoboth ; and he ſaid, For now the 
LORU hath made room for us, and we ſhall be fruicful 
in the and. | LE | 

22 And he wentup from thence to Bcer-ſheba 5s. 

s Where he lived before the Famine drave him thence. 

24 4nd the LORD appear.d unto him the fame 
night, and ſaid, 1 am the God of Abraham thy father: 
fear rot, for | am with thee, and will bleſs thee, and 
multiply thy feed formy fervant Abrabam's fake. 
| | 25 Andhe * built an altar there, and ca'icd upon the 

"Chap. name ofthe I ORD, and pitched his tent there ; and 
12. 740d there lfaac's ſervanrs digyed a well. 
He 26 Then Abimeiech went ro him from Gerar, and 
Ahuz:ath one of his triends, and Phicol the chief cap- 
tain © his army. 

et Ths may be either 1. The tirle of an Ofce; for the word ſigni- 
fies;rhe nouth of all;or he by whom al] tie people were to preſent their 
Addreſkes to the king,ard receive the x ng SCommands. Or,2. The 
name of a man : And then t is inig.at be the Son of him mention- 
ed Gen. 21.32. Called by his tarher's name, as 4bimelech allo was. 

27 And Hazc 141d unto them, Whne. cfore come ye to 
me, ſeing ye hete me.,and haveſent me away from you? 

23 And they kid, + We taw ceitainiy that the 
LORD was with thee 3 and we ſaid, Let there be 


* + Heb. li- 


$vIng. 


Y red. 


"hat 1s, 
s F027. 


* +Heb.ſee- 
ing we ſaw, 


CENESTIS. 


partly to keep up his Father's meniocy, and partly becaule he had | 


Chap. XXVII 7 
n0v an oath beewixt us, ever betwixt us and thee, and 
tet us make 2 Covenant with thee ; 

29 * That thou wit do us no hurt, 2s we have not , _ 
touched thee 7,. and as we have done unto theenothing ;,, Thats 
bur good, and liave ſent thee away in peace : thou 'art &c. 
now the blefled of the LORD »«. 

+ To wit, fo as to injure or hu:t thee, as above, wer. rx. uw Or, 
O thou who art now the bleſſed of the Lord, whom God hath inriched 
with great ahd manifold Bleflings, which we did not take away from 
thee,as we could eaſily have done, but thou doſt ſtill enjcy them z 
and now art, as-thou wert amongſt us, the bleed of the Lird. Or, 
Seing God hath blefſed thee, it will not become thee to cu: ſe us, 
or to bear any grudge againſt us for that little unkindneſs which - 
we expretled to thee. Or, itmay bea wiſh, if thou makeſt this 
Covenantwith us, be thou now the bleſſed of the Lord, we heartily wiſh, 
thy Bleſſings and Proſperity may increaſe. 

30 And he made them a featt, and they did eat and 
drink. ELF 6% , 

31 And they roſe up betimesin the morning. x, and 

ware One to another: And 1faac ſent them away,and 
they deparred from him in peace. | 

x Partly for the diſpatch of theix Journey and Buſineſs, and parta 
Iy becauſe then their minds were moſt vigorous and ſcber, and fit 
to perform ſo ſacred an Action as an Oath was. | 

32 And it came to paſs the ſame day, that Iſaac's 
ſervants came, and told him concerning the well which 


they had digged, and ſaid unto him, we have found 
water. | | | 


33 And hecalled it Sheba: therefore the name of + Thati«. 
the city is * Beer-theba y ynto this day. an oath. 
| } This name had been given before, either tv this, or a neigh- by Thar . 
bouring place, by Abraham, Gen. 21. 31. But was now buried in ob- the well oj 
livion, as his Wells were ; and the Wel's being revived, he revives, ##e 0arh. 
and renews the name, which proved now a lalting name, wnto this - 
day, as here fol'ows. which 1s not ad.icd, Gen. 21.31 becauſe then 
the Name, though given by Abraham, was ſoon fo:gotten and ne« 
gletted by others. | | 

24 Aud Efau was forty years old when he took to 
wite Judith, the daughter of Bceri the Hittite, and Ba- 
.nemath-the daughter of Elon the Hittite z: 6 

z Both Airtires, the worſt of the Canaamtes, Exek. 16. 3. Which 
from his Grandfather 4brahar?'s ſevere Charge, Gen. 24 3. he muſt 
accds know v. ould be highly difpleaſing, both to God, and to his 
Parents. Andas Eſau has ſeveral Names, being called alſo Exam 
and Seir ; ſo it ſeems theſe Women and their Fa:ents had,by com- 
paring this 'with Gen: 36: 2: which was ufual in thoſe times and 
places. Or Eſau had more Wives than theſe. | a 

35 Which * weie Fa giief of mind unto Iſaac, and * Chop. 
| 27. 46 
:0 Rebekah a. ; . ©" 4&4 

a Becauſe to their Tdolatry and other Wickedneſs, they added ;,ye(; 6 
Obſtinacy and Incorrigiblenets, defpiting their Fe:fons, and godly ſorrit. 
_ounſels, whereby they invited them to Kepentance. | 

CHAP. XXVII. 
Iſaac being aged, ſends Efau for veniſon, that he might eat theredf, and 
bl:ſs him, 1----4. Ejau obeys his father, 5. Reockah hearing it, tells 

Jacob, 6, 7. Her contrivance and aavice to him to intercept the bleſſmg, 

8----10. Jaceb is afraid of a curſt in ſtead of a bliſog, 11, 12. His 

mother encourageth him, 13. He complies ; puts 0n Ejau's raiment, and 

the skins of the kids ; goes with the veniſon his mother prepared : I[aac 
eats of it, ana bl ſth him, 1 4---29. Ejau brings the veniſon he had ta 
ken, 30, 31. 1/aac 13 exceedingly ſurpriz'd, vut confirms the blefſmg on ja= 
cob, 32, 33- Eſau weeps bitterly, but prays for a bleſſing, 34. Expo= 
| fulates with his father, and o23ains one, 35=--40. Eſau hates Jacob, 
41. Rebekah hears of it, 41, 42. She adviſes Jacob to go to her kin» 
dared, 43, 44. Complains of Eſau's wives to Iſaac. | 
AN L> it Came to pals, that when Iſaac. was old a, 

A and his ey«<s were dim, ſo that he could not ſeeb, 

aecalled Eſau his eldeſt ſon, and faid unto him, My ſon. 
\nd he ſaid unto him, Behold, here am 1. | 

a Abour one hundred and thirty ſeven years old. 6 Which was or- 
dered by God's wiſe Providence, not only for the exerciſe of /aac's 
parience, bur alſo as a means to transfer £E/aw's right to 7acos, 

2 And he ſaid, Behold now, I zm oid, Iknow not 
che day of my death. | 

23 Now therefore, take, I pray thee, thy weapons; 
thy quiver F, and thy bow, and go out to the field,and | 
* take-me /omeveniſon, }. bs 

+ Or, As the Chaldee and H-brew DoCQors renders it, thy ſword, a 
Weapon no leſs neceſfary for an Hunter of Eeaſts, than a Bow. 

4 Ard make me lavoury mear, fuch as 1 love, and 
bring it to me, that I may cat c, that my ſoul may bleſs 
thee 4 before I die. "Y | 

: Nusſf., Why doth he require this before he blef, him? Avfw. r. 
Thar being refreſhed, and delighted therewith,bis Sy»icit mightbe 
more chearful, and ſo the litter for the giving of this Fropherical 
BenediQion ; for which reaton alſo the Prophet E///ha"called for a 
Minſtrel ere he could utter his Propheſie, 2 Kings 3. 15. 2. By the 
ſpecial direction of Divine Providence, that Ejau's abſence might 
give Jacob the advantage of getting'the Blefiing. d Be ſpeaks not 
here bfa common and cuſtomary tlefſing, which Parents may beſtow 
upon any of their Children, as, and when they pleaſe ; but of the | 
lait, ſolemn, extraordinary and Prophetical BenediCtion, whereby | 
theſe Holy Parriarchs did by God's appointment, and with his con- 
currence, conſtitute one of their Sons Heir, not only of their Tnhe« 
ritance, but of Abraham's Covenant, and all the Promiſes, borkh 
Temporal and Spi:itual, belonging to it. As for the Oracle deli- ' 
vered to Rebebnh, which transfe:-red this Blefſing upon Jacob, chap. 


Heb. 
hunt. 


25. 23..cither 1azxc knew-nort of it, not being fithcient!y informsd 
thereof by Rebckan ; or he gJzd not throvghty underitagd 17 ; or he. 
| F 4 Might 


4 


43. ae tn. Rt 8 * wY rats 
9 - Aon 4 . —_ 


0 ORR MAEDA or Et nes f oe ER Ia AN ES; ra, 1 3 AA. - 
"Yo | * L sf D _ , 


A 


© Im 


"W=> 


= 
io OS! 


- FN 


\ 


AS - 
might apprehend : i : 
. of Er 5+ Jacob, but in their Polſterity ; or at this time 1t was quite 


out of his mind, or he was induced to negle& itthrough his patho- 


nate aſieQion to his San Eſau. | 
F And Rebekal heard when Iſaac ſpake to Eſau his 


ſon : and Efau went to the fieid ro hunt for veniſon, 
;nd to bring it. 

67 And Rebekah 
Behold, I heard thy 
daying, 

7 Bring me 
that I may eat, and blels 
fore'my death, = 

e Solemnly, as 1 


ſpake unto Jacob her ſon, ſaying, 
father ſpeak unto Eſau thy brother, 


veniſon, and make me Tavoury meat, 


thee before the LORD e« be- 


n God's preſence, in his Name, and by his Au- 
thority, and with his leave and favour, which I ſhall heartily pray 
For thee. So he ſignifies that this was more than an ordinary Blet- 
fing which he now intended to give him- | : 

8 Now therefore my ſon, obey my voice, accerding 
to that which I command thee. 

9 Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence 
two good kids of the goats f, and I will make them ſa- 
voury meat g for thy father, ſuch as he loveth ; 
Flt is obſerveable, That as Jacob deceived his F ather by a Kid,ſo 
His Sons deceived him by the ſame Creature,Gen: 37:3 r,32,33. £ Out 
of their moſt tender and delicate parts:Wherewith it was nor diiticulr 
ro deceive 1ſaac,partly becauſe of rhe likeneſs of the Fleſh, eſpecially 
being altered by convenient Sawce; and partly becauſe the ſame old 
age which had dimmed Iſaac'sSight, had alſo dulled his other Senfes. 

to And thou ſhalt bring # to thy father that he may 
eat, and that he may bleſs thee before his death. 

11 And Jacobſaid to Rebekah his mother, Behold, 
Eſau my brogher is an hairy man, and I am a ſmooth 
man. : 

12 My father peradventure will feel me, and I ſhal] 
ſeem to him asa deceiverg ; and1 ſhall bring a curſe 
upon me þ, and nota bletling | | 

g I ſhall appear to him to be indeed a Deceiver,one that abuſerh 
his Age «iT @ Blindneſs. The Particle as ſometimes ſignifies nor the 
likeneſs, but the truth of the thing, John 1.14. 2 Cor.3.18. þ Which 
is due to every one that deceiveth the blind, Deur.27.18. eſpecially 
his Father, and eſpecially in a religious concern, Jer. 48. 10. Mal. 
I. 14. ſuch as this was, = ] 

13 And his mother ſaid unto him, Upen me be thy curſe 
;, my ſon ; only obey my voice, and gofetch me cher. 

7 She faith ſo, out of an aſſured confidence in the Divine Oracle 
and Promiſe. | ; 

14 And he went and fetched, and brought rhe to 
his mother : and his mother made ſavoury meat,ſuch as 


his father loved. ; 

15 And Rebekah took + goodly raiment & of her el- 
deſt ſon Eſau, which ere with her in the houſe,and put 
them upon Jacob her younger ſon. 

k Either his Sacerdoral Garments which the eldeſt Son wore in 
the adminiſtration of that Office which belonged to him ; or rather 
ſome other Suit better than ordinary. ; | 

1s And jhe put the skins ot the kids of the goats up- 
on his hands, and upon thie ſmoorh of his neck /, 

{ Upon the two naked parts of his Body,which were molt likely 
to bediſcovered. As for his Face, it is more than probable from 
his Age, which was the ſame with Eſau's, chap: 26:34: that Nature 
had given him a covering like Eſau's. ; 

17 And ſhe gave the {avoury meat,andthe bread which 
ſhe had prepared, into the hand of her ſon Jacob. 

18 © And he came unto his father, andiaid, My fa- 
ther: and he ſaid, Here am I : who art thou, my fon? 

19 And Jacobfaid unto his father: 1 an Efau thy 
firſt-born #2 ; I have done according as thou badſt me : 
ariſe, I pray thee, fit and cat of my veniſon, that thy 
ſoul may bleſs me. = iN: 

» This cannot be excuſed, for it wasa manifeſt untruth, and no 


leſs is all this following Relation, though it pleaſed wod graciouſly 
to pardon it; and notwithſtanding theſe failings, to conter the 


Blefling promiſed upon Jacov. : j- 
' 20 And Ifaac ſaid unto his fon, How 7s it that thou 


| haſt found it ſo quickly,my ſon? And he ſaid, Becauſe 

+11cb. 3,. he LORD thy God brought 1t tro me. 
fore we, 2t And Ifaacſaid unto Jacob, Come near, 1 pray 
thee, thar I may feel thee, my ſon, whether thou ve 
my very ſon Eſau, or nor. o 

22 And Jacob went near unto Iſaac his father, and 
he felt him ; andſaid, The voice is Jacob's voice, but 
the hands are the hands of Eſau. 


NJ 


+ Heb. de 


ſable, 


Fr 
that it was tobe accompliſhed not in the*perſons | 


+= —_— 


; as becauſe of his falſeneſs and deceitfulneſs, and his tri 


23 And he diſcerned him not », becauſe his hands | 


were hairy,as his brother Eſau's hands: So he Þleiled him. 

2 Becauſe all his Senſes were not only dulled wirh Age-and In- 
firmity, bur alſo held by Divine Providence, as theirs, Luke 24. 16. 
for the bringing about his own purpoſe : So thar it is no wonder 
he was ſo groſly deceived in the whole buſineb.. | 

24 And he ſaid, Art thou my very fon Efau? and 
he faid, I am. | : 

25 And he ſaid, Bring it near to me, and I will cat 
of my ſon's veniſon, that my ſoul may bleſs thee. And. 
he brought # near ro him, and he did cat; and he 


brought him wiae, and he drank, 


Chap. X? 


26 And his father Iſaac ſaid unto him, Come neas 
now, and kiſs me o, my ſon. 

0 Which he did, either that he might more fu 
concerning the perſon,or rather as a mark of th 
altection wherowith, he beſtowed the Bleſſing. Compare Gen. 48. 10 

27 Andhe came near, and kifſedhim : and he {me]-" 
led the fmell of his raiment, and bleſſed him, and ſaid, 
See, the {mell of my ſon 5s as the ſinell of afield, which 
the LORD hath bleſſed f. 

f Which is full of odoriferous Herbs 
and Spiccs,with ſome of which Eſau's Garments michtb fu 
in the Cheſt wherein they were laid, as the ME row Theſe 
Garments ſmell not of the Sheep-cotes and Stables, as Jacob's do,but 
of the Fields in which Eſa is converſant. ? 

28 Therefore, * God give thee of the dew of hea- * Heb: 1 
ven g, and the fatneſs of the earth h,and plenty of corn 2: 
and wine. "; 

* Or, willgive, For it is both a Prayer and a Propheſie. & He 
mentions the dew rather than the Rain, becauſe it was of more con- 
ſtant uſe and neceſſity in thoſe parts than the Rain, which fell con« 
ſiderably but twice in a year, the firſt being called the former, and 
the other thelatter Rain. And under this and the following Bleſſings, 
which are but 'Temporal,are comprehended all manner of Bleſſings, 
borh Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal, according to the uſage of 
that Time and State of the Church. h A far and fruitful Land, 
which Canaan was, abounding with all ſorts of precious Fruits. 

' Compare Dewt.'8. 8. and 32. 13, 14. 
29 * Let people ſerve thee, and nations bow. down .+ Chap! 
ro thee: be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mo- +5. * 
thers ſon bow down to thee ;: * Curſed be every one t Chay: 


chat curfeth thee, and bleſſed be he that bleſſeth thee. 4% * | 

: How, and when this was fulfilled, ſee on Gen. 25. 23. Chap 'r. 

39 C And it came to paſs as ſoon as Iſaac had: made * 
an end of blefling Jacob,that Jacob was yet ſcarce well 
gone Out from the preſence of Iſaac his father, that E- 
fau his brother came in from his hunting, _ 

31 And healſo made ſavoury meat, and brought it 
unto his farher &; and faid unto his father, Let my fa- 
ther ariſe, and eatofhis ſon's veniſon, that thy ſoul 
may bleſs me 

k Thar Eſau did not come to his Father till the Meat was dreſſed, 
may be aſcribed partly to his own choice,that he might come with 
more acceptance ; and partly to Rebekah, who could caſily hinder 
his coming ſooner by ſpectous Pretences and Artifices. 

32 And Haac his father faid unto him, Who art thou? 
And he ſaid, I a» thy fon, thy firſt-born Eſau. 

33 And Ifaac Ftrembled very exceedingly Land ſaid, + Heb, 
Who,wiere zs he »» that hath * taken veniſon,& brought #remld 
it ms, and [I have caten of all before thou cameſt, and ®*-* * 
have hletled him ? yea, and he ſhall be bleſſed ». EE 


{ He was filled with aſtoniſhment and horror in confgderation of _ 
Jacob's kraud, and the ſad diſappointment and great milery of his I ek 
beloved &/au, and his.own raſhneſs and folly in ſuffering his fond ' BASS" Y 
affection towards him to carry him headlong into an oppoſition ro : 
the Divine Oracle, Gen. 25. 23. which naw came to his remem- 
brance, as appears by his ratification of Facob's Blefling. m A fhort 
Speech proceeding from a diſcompoſed Mind. » This Blefling,tho 
otherwiſe intended by me, and pronounced upon a miſtake of the 
perſon, ſhall and muit reſt upon the head of Jacob; and I neither 
can,nor dare undertake to revoke and contradi& God's appointment, 
which now T more fully diſcern,and in which borh thou and I and 
all men mult fu/ly acquieſce: And now Jſaac fixeth the Bleſſing up- 
on Jacob by Faith,as is expreſſed, Heb. 11.20. which before, through 
miſguided Fancy and Aftettion, he intended for Eſav. 

34 And when Efau heard the words of his father * * Heb:r: 
he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry o,and ſaid 17. 
unto his iather, Bleſs me, ever me alſo, O my father p. 

o Nor for any ſenſe of his former ſin, in deſpiſing his Birth-rishr, 
but for grief ar his great loſs therein, hecauſe God would not ſuffer 
him to be perjur'd in keeping thatBixth-right-bleſſing which he had 
ſold and ſworn away. p (z e.) Thou art my Father no leſs than 
his, and therefore as a Child, I claim a ſhare in thy Bleſfling. 

35 And he ſaid, Thy. brother came with ſubtilty, 
and hath taken away. thy blefling 9. | 

q Which was thine by the right of Nature, and by cuſtom of Na. 
tions, and by my hearty deſire and intention, as well as by thy 
own expectation and opinion. 


35 4nd he ſaid, * Isnot he rightly named 4 Jacob * Chap: 
r ? for he hath ſupplanted me theſe two times: * he 25:.26-, 
took away my birth-right s: and behold, now he hath T forked 
taken away my blefling. And he ſaid, Haſt thou mt re- e-, oY 
ſerved a blefling for me ? * Chap: * 


Jly ſatisfy himſelf 


at ipecial favour and 


, and Flowers, and Fruits, 


> ww 13 ef 


SRO © © LIE IG 


*( 


. 


+( 


2C 


r He putsa perverſe Conſtruftion upon Jacob's Name, as i* it be. 25: 33+ * 
longed not to him ſo properly, becauſe of the manner of hi: Birth, : 


his Brothers Heels. s A falſe Accuſation ; Jacob did not tile "xg 
ceitfully, bur Eſau ſold it profanely. | 
37 And Ifaac anſwered and ſaid unto Eſau, Behold 
IT have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have L 
given to him for ſervants ; and with corn ard wine | 
have I Þ ſuſtained him : and what ſhall I do ncw unto E 
thee ?, my ſon ? F ws oy. 
# The bleſling of Abraham is not at my diſpoſa?, but God's, who es I 
hath manifeſted his Mind and Will by my Errcr ; it cannot be di- . 
vided into ſeveral hands, nor imparted to ons, Who, tho my Son, © 
| yet hath mage kimiclf unworthy of it, 


28 And 


" AGADII*- 3; 


WY 

Chap. XXVII. 
23 And Efau ſaid unto his father, Haſt thou burone 
blefliing, my father #? Bleſs me, evesmea!ſo, O my fa- 

* Heb 12. ther. And Eſcu jiit up bis voice, * and wept. 
hs « By which wor: £/:14 manifeſts his profane and worl !ly Mind, 
thit he eſftcemed tis Ble!ting bur as one among many others equal 
to it, and did nor apprehoad toe true and peculiar excellency and 
abſolute p<ciliiry of 1r, and that it was impoſſible for him or his 
Poſterity to be tuppy v 1t10Ut an interc{t in this Covenant, and con- 

tinuance ia ihr Church ro which it was appropriated. 
29 And ilaac his father an{wered,aud ſaid unto him, 
* Ver. 29. Behold, * chy dwelling ftall be | the facrneſs of the 

Heb. 1:5. earth, and of the dew of heaven from above x 
20. x In a Country competeatly fruitful and refreſhed with conve- 
+ Or, of nient Dews and Showers. Obj. Thus Eſau ſeems ro have the ſame 
the farnels. Bleſſing which was before given to Jacob Av. 1. Tho it may ſeem 
to be the ſame asto the fertility of the Soil, in which divers other 
parts of the World did and do equal the Land cf Canaan;yet there 
1s an obſervable difference in the manner of 1ſaac's Expreflion. 
When he ſpeaks of Eſau, he only faith, Thy dwelling ſhall be the fat- 
neſs, &c. But when he ſpeaks to Jacob, heſaith, God give thee,- or 
ſhall give thee of the faracſs, &c. which words being, as it may ſeem, 
purpoſely omitted concerning Eſau, and ſo empharically expreſled 
concerning Jacob, ſeem to intimart, eſpecially if compared with ma- 
ny other Scriptures where that Phraſe is applied to good Men, that 
Eſjau's fat Soil was rather taken by himſelf, than given by God ; or 
if given by God to him, it was only by his general Providence by 
which he giveth food ro all Creatures; whereas Jacob's fat and fruit- 
ful Soil was derived to him and his by God's ſp: cial gift,as a token 
of his ſingular kindneſs, and pledge of greater Bleſſings. 2. This 
is but one branch of the Blefſing, the other part which concerns 
Dignity and Superiority, is expreſly given to Jacob, werſe 29. and 

denied to Eſa, werſe 40. 

40 And by thy ſword ſhalt thou live y, and baltfſerve 
* . Gm, thy brother : and * it ſhallcome to pals when thou ſhale 
8.14. TÞ have the dominion z, that thou ſhalt break his yoke 


2 Kings8. from off thy neck. EE 
20- » By Violeace and Rapine, inan unquiet and military Poſture, 
1 Or,have troub/ing fhcrs,; and forced to defend thy ſelf. But this,as alſo the 
mourned, following Clauſe, tho ſpoken ro Eſau, was not fulfilled in him,bur 
or, ben jn, his Poſterity the Edomites, whoſe Hiſtory makes good this. Pro- 
d-jcited, hecy. Thus things ſpoken and promiſed to Abraham vere fullil- 
Pal: 55:2. Jed in his Poſteriry, as Gen. 12. 3. and 22.18, » When thou |halt 
grow potent. Some render the words thus, When thou ſhalt have 
mourned or groaned, as the ſame word is uſed, Pſalia 55. 2. When 
s thou haſt oppreſſed as long as I think fit. 
| 41 Y ind Efau hated Jacob b, becauſe of the blefling 
wherewith his father bleſſed him: and Eſau faid in his 


heart c, The days of mourning for my father are at 


» I: 


ME CER 


d:, *Obad.:9. hand, * then will I ſlay my brother Jacob. 
He b And this hatred was hereditary,extending to their Poſterity alſo. 


See Ezek: 35: 5: Amos 1: 11: Obad: v; 10. c Within himlelft Although 
he could not contain it there, but declared his intentions to ſome 
of his Confidents, by which means it came ro Rebekah's ear. 
y. 42 And theſe words of Eſau her elder ſon were to'd 
to Rebekah : and ſhe ſent andcalled her younger ſon, 
andſzid unto him, Behold, thy brother Eſau, as couch- 
ing thee, doth comfort himſelf, purp-/ing to kill thee. 

43 Now therefore, my ſon, obey my voice: and a- 
riſe, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran. 

44 Andtarry with him * a few days 4, until thy bro- 
thers fury curn away. 

4 So ſhe expeRed and intended, but was greatly diſappointed, 
for he tarri:d there twenry years. 

45 Unriil thy brothers enger turn away from thee,and 
he forget :5as which thou haſt done to him: then 1 will 
ſend, and fetch thee from thence. Why thould I be de- 


4 Or,even, Prived Þ alſo of you both in one day e ? 

e Of thee by Eſaz's bloody Hands ; and of £ſav, who was likely 
to ſuffer Dcath for his Murther, eirher by the Authority of the Ma- 
giſtrat, as God commanded, Ger: 9: 6: or by the hand of Ged,who 
oft times ſupplies the Magiſtrats defe&s in that pirticular, and in 
ſome extraordinary manner exceutes this Vengeance. See Gen, 4. 
IT, 16, As 28. 4. | 

46 And Rebekah ſaid to Ifaac,* I am weary of my life, 
becauſe of the daughters of Heth |: if Jacob take a wife 
of the daughters of Heth, ſuch as theſe which are of the 


daughters of the land, what good ſhall my life do mef ? 

t Eſau's wives, who were Hittites, Gen: 26: 34. f Therefore let 
us, after the Example of Abraham, ſend him to fetch a Wife from 
his own Kindred. This indeed was one reaſon, but the other ſhe 
conceals from J1ſazc ; thus prudently alledging ſeveral reatons, one 
to Jacob, and another, as it is probible, to Eja, and each moſt fu- 
: . table to the Perſon ro whom the ſpeaks. : 


| CHAP. XXVIIL 


Waac calls Jacob ; charges him not to marry a Canaanite, but one of his 
kindred in Padan-Aram, 1, 2. Confirms the bleſſmg to him; 3, 4- 
Jacob obeys his father, and goes to Laban, 5. Eſau perceiving this, 
marries one of his kindred, but of iſhmaels family, 6---19. Jacob 
journeys rowaras Haran ; in his way takes of th2 ſtones of the place for 
pillow;, 11. ina dream fees a ladder reaching from earth ta hexven, 
angels aſcending and deſcending on it, 12. , The Lord landing above it, 
renews his covenant concerning, Canaan, and the promiſed ſeed, &*«c. 
I J<=-15, Jacob amaicued,, acknow':/ges God's. prejeuce there, and is 
afraid, 16, 17, Sets up the ones jor a pillar, pours oz] on it, 18. 

TInmes the piace Beth-el, 19. 
return him in Pens 


A *Chip. 
. 2. Js 


* Chap. 


29. 20, 


;11 


* Chap. 
26s 35. 


- BST 


ſn. 
| 11 Pence, 20--==22, 
N D lizac called Jacob, and blefled him «, and 


charged him, and ſid unto him, * Thou ſhait 
not take a wife of the danzincers of Canaan, 


ASA * 3; 


GENESIS. 


i his Children. 


Makes a wow to be the Lords, if God will 


f 


Chap. XXV 
s Confirm'd his former Blefling, being now thoroughly ſenſible 
both of God's Purpoſe, and of his own Duty, wiſhing him allo a 
proſperous and ſucceſsful Journey ; as the word is uſed, 7of. 22. 7. 
2 Azile, go to Padan- Aram, to the houſe of Bethuel 
T, thy mothers father; and take thee. a wife from + He 


thence of the daughters of * Labanthy mothers brother. x2. 
+ See Gen. 22. 22, 23. and 25, 20. * Cha 


3 And God Almighty bleſs thee, 24- 26 
fruicful, and multiply + Heb 


multitude of peoyle : 2 


4 And give thee * the bleſſing of Abraham, to thee, Char 
and to thy leed with thee ; that thou mayeſt inkerit the 
land Þ wherein thou art a ſtranger, which God gave . 
unto 4braham. 

5 And Iſaac ſent away Jacob, and he went to Padan- 
Aram unto Laban, fon of Bethuel the Syrian b, the 
brocher of Rebekah, Jacobs and Efaus mother, © 

b 0bj. He was no Syrian, but a Meſopo:amian. Anfſ. Syria is ſome- 
times largely taken, and fo it comprehends Meſopotamia, or Chaldea, 
yea, and 4ſjria, as appears from loiah 36. I1. Dan. 2. 4. 

6 4 When Eſau ſaw that Iſaac had bleſied Jacob, 
and ſent him awzy to Padan-Aram, to take him a wife 
from thence ; and that as he blefled him, he gave him a 
charge, ſaying,Thou ſhalt not take a wife of the daugh- 
ters of Canaan ; 

7 And that Jacob obeyed his father, and his mother, 
and was gone to Padan-Aram ; | 

8 And Eſau ſecing that the daughters of Canaan + + Het 
pleaſed not Iſaac his fathec : Were s 

9 Then went Eſau unto Iſhmael -, and took unto ooo. 
the wives which he had, Mahalath / ce daughter of **© 
Iſhmael Abrahams fon, the ſiſter of Nebajoth e, to be 
his wite. 

c Either tohis Perſon ; or rather to his Pamily, called Iſhmael by 
their Father's Name, as David is ſometimes put for David's Poſteri- 
ty ; for 1bmael ſeems to have been dead before this, from Gen. 25. 
17. tho that may poſlibly be a Prolepſis, and then this may be 
Jjbmasl himſelf. 4 called allo Baſbemarh, Ger. 36. 3. He thought by 
this means to ingratiat himſelf with his Father, and fo to ger ano- 
ther anda betrer Bleſſing ; bur he takes no care to reconcile himſelf 
to God,nor obſerves his hand in the buſineſs. Beſides, he mends one 
fault by commitring another, and raking a third Wife when ke 
had one too many Lefore, and her roo he unwiſely fetcheth our of 
that Stock which was begotten to Pond+ge, and was utterly unca-» 
pable of the Inheritance. e 1bmae!'s eideit Son, Gen. 25. 13. who 
alone is here mentioned, either in the name of all the reſt, whoſe 
Siſter ſhe is by conſequence ſuppoled ro be ; or becauſe peradven- 
ture ſhe and Nebsjoth were Iſbmael's Children by the ſame Mother, _ 


and the reſt by another. | | ; fra 
10 4 And Jacob went f X out from Beerſkeba, and : Hel 


went toward * Haran. | | \ * Calle 
F It is not ſtrange that Jacob went alone, as it appears that he did Ads 5 
from Gen. 32. 10. When his Grandfather's Servant was attended Charr, 
with a great Retinue, Ger. 24. becauſe Attendance was then neceſſa- 
ry to procurehim Reputation, and to obtain the Conſent of the 
Virzin and her Parents to fo long a Journey ; bur hete as it was 
unneceſfary, . ſo it would have been troubleſome . and prejudicial, 
expoſing him both ro the Envy and Snares of his Brother Eſa#,which 
by this privat Departure he did avoid, Beſides, God in his wiſe 
Providence did ſo order this,and ſome cther matters of the like na 
ture, for the greater Illuſtration of his care and kindneſs towards 
Add to this'\the great ſimplicity, . Humility, and . 
Innocency of thoſe times, if compared with ours, which made mas , 
ny things then uſual, which now would be ridiculous  _. |, 
11 And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried | 
there all night, becauſe the ſun was ſet : and he took 
of the ftones of that place, and put themfer his pillows, 
and lay down in that place to ſleep. ” 
12 And he dreamed, and behold a ladder. ſet up- 
on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven»and 
behold, * the angels of God aſcending and deſcending 
ON It g: . poets ; : 
Z This Ladder may be conſidered, either 1. Literally, and fo it 
repreſented to Jacob the Proviience of God, who, though he dwell 
in Heaven, extends his Care and wovernment ro the tarth, and 
particularly makes ule of the Angels as Miniſtring Spirits for the 
good of his People. And theſe Angels do not appear idle, or 
itanding {till, but always in motion, either aſcending to God ta 
receive his Commands, or defcending to Earth for the Execurion 
of them. Which was a molt ſeatonable Viſion for faceb in his ſad 
and forrowful Con4ition, that he might ſee that though he was 
forſaken and perſecured by Men, and forced to flee away ſecretly 
for fear of his life, yer he neither was, nor ſhould be neglected, or 
fortaken by God in this whole Journey. Or 2.. Myſtical'y, and fo 
it zepreſents Chrift, by whom Heaven and Earth are united, who 
is called the way to Heaven, which this La:'der was, who, as the 
head of Angels, is perpetually ſending them forth either ro God, 
or from God to miniiter ro the Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And 
this Explication, or Accommodation of this Viſion, is warranted 
by our Saviour himſelf, 7ohr 1.571. = . + 
i3 * Andbehold, the LORD ftood abore it, and «cp, 
ſaid, I am the LORD God of Abraham thy father,and 35: x. 
the God of Ifaac : the land whereon thou lieſt, ro thee andgh, 
will I give it, and to thy ſeed, EEESN 
14 4nd thy ſeed ſhall be as the duſt of the earth ; +. pe 
and thou ſhalt + ſpread abroad * to the welt, and to + 


an make thee 
thee, that thou mayeſt be Þ a 


* Heb. 
14. 


the eali, and tothe north, and to rac ſouth ; and in x2, 5g 
LR | 'S 


thes 


4 


Chap. 
4M 
d18.18. 


Ac 22.18. 
1 26, 4. 


c hap.37. 
5. and 
5. 14. 


; udp. 1. 
23. 26. 
Joſ.4.15. 


*r Tim. 


Heb. lift 
7 his feets 
} Heb. 
philaren. 


hap. XXVIII: 


thee, and * in thy ſced ſhall all the families 5 of the | 


earth be bleſſed. 
þ ( 5. e. ) The Nations, as that word 1s uſed. ; 
15 And behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee 


in all pleces whither thou goeſt, and will bring thee a- 
ain intothis land : for I will not leave thee, until I 


have done that which I have ſpoken to thee of 3. 

; Nor ever after ; for fo the word until is frequently uſed, as 
2 Sam: 6: 23: Matth: 1: 25: not ſo as to exclude the time follow- 
ing, but ſo as to include al! the foregoing time, wherein the thing 
ſpoken of might be moſt ſuſpeCted or feared ; as here the worit 
and moſt dangerous ſtate in which Jacob was, or was like to be, 
was this time of his Baniſhment from his Countrey and Kindred, 
againſt which he is therefore particularly armed, and comforted 1n 
theſe words. 


16 And Jacob awaked out of his ſleep, and he ſaid, 
Surely the LORD is in this place &; and I knew 1t 
not 4, 

k By his ſpecial and gracious Preſence, and the manifeſtation of 
his Mind and Will to me. I little expe&ed to meer with, ſuch a 
Revelation out of my Father's Houſe, much leſs in this deſartand 
doleful State and Place, when Ithought my ſelf rejeted by God, 
as well as abandoned by men. ; 

17 And he was afraid, and ſaid, How dreadful » is 
this place ! this is none other, but the houſe of God », 


| and this is the gate of heaven. 


m Or, venerable, both for the Majeſty of the Perſon preſent, and 
for the glorious manner of his diſcovery of himſelf. » The Habi- 
tation of God, and of his Holy Angels. "FH 

18 And Jacob roſe up early in the morging,and took 
the ſtone thathe had pur for his piliows, ahd * ſet it up 
for a pillar 0, and poured oil p upon the top of it 4. 

' 8 As a Monument of God's great Kindneſs and /gracious Mani- 
feſtation of himſelf to him ; which might bringrzhis Mercy to his 
remembrance in his return, Gen. 31: 13. This wasan ancient pra- 
Rice among the Patriarchs, Gen: 35; 14: but afterwards upon the 
growing abuſe of it among the Heathens, it was forbidden by God, 
Levit: 26: 1: Deut: 7: 5: and 12: 3. p Which he brought with him 
either for Food or Medicine, or for the anointing of himſelf, as 
need required. 9 As a token of his Conſecration thereof to this ute 


' to be a memorial of God's Favour to him. Oyl was uſedin Sacri- 


fices, and in the Conſecration of Perſons and Places, Exod; 30: 25, 


26: and 40: 9. 
19 And he called the name of * that place | Beth-el: 


but the name of that city r was called Luz at the firſt. 
r Either of that City which was neareſt to the | Field in which 


That is. Jacob lay ; or of that City which afterwards wds built in ornearto 
he houſe of this place, and was known by the name of Berhel. 


20 And Jacob vowed a yow 5, ſaying, If God will be 
with me z, and will keep me in this way that I go, ang 
will give me * bread « to cat, and raiment to put on ; 

5 (t:e:) Bound himſelf by a ſolemn Promiſe or Obligation. 
Compare Gen: 14: 22: Eccleſ: 5: 4. t He ſpeaks not thus as if he 
doubted of the truth of God's Promiſes, or would like a merce- 
nary Perſon make a bargain with God, but rather ſuppoſeth that 
God will do this for him, as he had in effe& promiſed, werſe 15: 
and thereupon obligeth himſelf to a grateful return to God for.this 


| Mercy, If God will be with me, &c. as he hath juſt now aſſured me 


he will ; or, Seing God will be with me, &c. for the Hebrew im doth 
not always imply a doubt, but rather a ſuppoſition, and 1s oft 
ren.ered ſeing that, as Exod: 20: 25: Numb: 36: 4: 1 Sam: 15: 
17: 4mos 7: 2. And fo the Greek Particle anſwering to the He- 
brew im is uſed Matth: 6: 22: Luke 11: 34. #u Food convenient, as 
it is called, Prov: 3o: 8: which is oft ſignified by the name of Bread. 


' See Gen: 3: 19. 


21 So that I come again to my fathers houſe in peace: 


then ſhall the LORD be my God «. 

x I willpublickly own him for my God and the Saviour of Men, 
and will eſtabliſh his ſolemn Worſhip, as it follows. 

22 And this ſtone, which i have ſet for a pillar,ſhall 


be Gods houſe y: and of all that thou ſhalt give me, I 


will ſurely give the tenth unto thee z. 

7 ( 5.e. ) Aplace where I will offer Prayers and Sacrifices to God: 
Such places being commonly called God's Houſes, and God is oft 
ſaid to dwell in them, in regard of his ſpecial Preſence there. See 
Exod. 20..24. Compare verſe 17: of this chapter and Gen: 35: 1, 3, 7. 
z To be laid out in thy Service, and for Sacrifices, and for the uſe 
and benefit of thoſe who ſhall attend upon ſacred Things; as alſo 
for the relief of the Poor and Needy, whom God hath ſubſtituted 
in his room, and to whom part of the Tithes were to be given by 
a following Law, Deus: 14: 28, 29. | 

CH A P. XXIX. 

Tacob comes to the well of Haran, 1--3. Enquires of the ſhepherds concern- 
ing Laban, 4--8. They ſhow him Rachel Laban's daughter coming with 
the ſheep, 9. Jacob goeth near to her ; waters the flock, to. Tells her 
who he was, 11. Shetells it her father, who brings him to his houſe, 
h:ars what had hapned to him, 12--=14. They bargain that Jacob ſhould 
ſerve ſeven years for Rachel, 15--19. He performs his ſervice, and deſires 
her to be given him, 21. Laban makes a feaſt, and invites all the men 
of the place, 22. And puts Leah, his eldeſt daughter, in the room of 
Rachel, 23--26. Jacob obtains Rachel, promiſing other ſeven years ſer- 
wice, 27--30. Rachel is beloved and barren; Leah hated and bears 
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, 32--35.\ 

; l * Hen Jacob} went @ on mms journey, and came in- 

to the land of the + people of the eaſt 5. 

a Heb. Lift up his Feet ; which may note either the geſtare of 
his Body, that he went on foor ; or the temper of his Mind, that 
he went not ſadly and unwillingly, drawing his Legs after him, 
as weuſe to ſay, bur readily and chearfully, being encouraged by 


God's Word, h Which lay eaſtward from Canasr, as Meſoporamis 


did, £: 


fats" o outs ann ood ene n—_adhoest ant endh ch De 


CHNESIS Chap, XXIX, 


© — — 


2 Andhe looked, and behold a well in the field, and 
lo there ere three flocks of ſheep lying by it ; for out 
of that well they watered c the flocks: and a great fione 
was upon the wells mouth #4. 

c The People belonging to that place watered ; or, the flocks were 
watered : It is an imperſonal Speech. d To preſerve the Water 
which was ſcarce in thoſe parts, and to keep it pure. ; 

3 Andthither were all the flocks gathered : and they 
rolled the ftone from the wells mouth, and watered the 
ſheep, and pur the ſtone again upon the wells mouth in 
his place. 

4 And Jacob ſaid unto them,My brethren e, whence 
beye? And they ſaid, Of Haran are we. 

e So he calls, them partly in token of reſpe& and affef&tion; and 
partly becauſe they were of the ſame nature and employment with 
himſelf. 

5 And he ſaid unto them, Know ye Laban the ſon 
of Nahor ? And they ſaid, We know him. 

'6 Andhe ſaid unto them, Is he well ? And they ? Heb. » 
ſaid, He is well: and behold, Rachel his daughter co- qe + 
meth with the ſheep f. iy 
R f peting wm (oens.o of _ times, Exod:-2: 16: Cant: 1: 

, 8. when Humility, Innocency, Simplici 
in faſhion, both ——_ Men —_ 1 wg. Fenn Cy There 
are ſome that quarrel with the Scripture, and queſtion the truth of 
__ wr qa a. any "5s pon of ancient Times 

INgs, the preſent age, where 7 

and deep RN mgs o the fre of raves; Rong pred center 

7 4nd he laid, Lo, | It zs yet high day, neither is it f Heb. 34 
time that the cattle ſhould be gathered together g: wa-' eb 
terye ths ſheep, and go and feed ther. dh 

*: coor ſhould be taken from their paſture, and brought to 

8s And they ſaid, We cannot 5, until all the flocks 
be gathered together, and zl/ they roll the fone from 
=o _— _—_—_ _ we water the ſheep. 

ither becauſe of rhe greatneſs of the Stc 
not remove till more hel rome * = ey wor vg : $a 
Order and Agreement made amongſt themſelves about it. We can. 
20t, to wit, rightly ; or we may not, as that word is uſed, Gen.34. 
14. and 43. 32. and 44. 26. _ 

9 4 And while he yetfpake with them, Rachel came 
wh her mo ſheep : for ſhe kepr them 5. 

# Having probably o 
er Offices® Zia be ——— ner Sywhe didthe mean= 

Io Anditcame to paſs, when Jacob ſaw Rachel the : 
daughter of Laban his mothers brother, and the ſheep 
of Laban his mothers brother ; that Jacob went near 
and * rolledthe ſtone from the weljs mouth &, and wa. Exod. : 
tered the flock of Laban his mothers brother. "7 
_ & Either with the afliſtance of others; or, by himſelf, he be. 
+. —"__ ſtrong, and luſty, and purting forth all his might before 

ee, 

11 And Jacob killed Rachel Z, and lifted up his 
voice, and wept m. 

I As the cuſtom of Friends then ; : 
as verſe 13:and Gen: 33: 4: Exod: 4: A have © 
Parture, as Ruth 1: 14; 1 Sam: 20: 41: 1 Kings 19: 20, m Tears of 
Joy ; like thoſe Gen. 33. 4. at the gracious Providence of God to 
27g Spy an ares. Fay _— to _ deſired place, and ſo hap 
ok ſo defitcetle rnd Gear > him, Ry 


12 And Jacob told Rachel that he was her fa 
brother *; and that he was Rebekahs ſon ; and "arp 
and told her father, | 
* Hisnear Kinſman ; as that word is frequently uſed, as Gen. 12: 
8. and r# rf af h : "Ip 
13 And it catne to paſs, when Laban heard the + Tt Heb. 
tidings of Jacob » his ſiſters ſon, that he ran to —_ nas 
him, and embraced him, and kiſſed him, and brought 
him to his houſe. And he told Laban all theſe things 
n. The report of his Father's Family, of the cauſe of his coming 


in ſo mean circumſtances, of the occurrences in his journey, and 
of his providential meeting with Rachel at the well. : 


14 And Laban faid to him, Surely thou ar: my 
bone and my fleſh 0; and heabode with him the + ſpace + Heb # 
of a month. Fs month of 

o Ofthe ſame bone and fleſh with my ſe anys. 
father Terah, and therefore art juſtly = ney wich _— : 
ſhalt be in ſafety. Sce the ſame, or like expreſſion, Gen. 2. 23. Jud 
FE et Lobo ian oe Snob 

IF cob, Becauſe tho 
my brother, Shouldeſt thou therefore ſerve hs he 
nought ? Tell me, What ſhall thy wages be ? 

16 And Laban had two daughters, the name of 
the elder as Leah, and the name of the younger war 
Rachel. | 

17 Leab 2s; tender eyed | : but Rachel was beauti- 
ful ond well-fayoured. : ” 

+ Her eyes were ſoft and moiſt, and therefore unſightly. 

18 And Jacob loved Rachel; and faid, 1 will ſerve 
thee ſeven years for Rachel thy younger daughter p 

p Ir being then the cuſtom for Men to buy their Wives. See 
Geneſis 34. 12, Ex0Aaus 22, 17, I Samel 18, 25, 2 Samui 3. 14. "* 


Hoſ. 3. 2, 
En 19 And 


FS. - 
ated EINE. nets 


* Hi 


-Y% -— 


F Thai 
ſee a ſo 


+ Tha 
'- bearing 


 F That 
Jomned, 


- —_ = VV YLIW y 
"* ; - map. . 
4 - 19 And Laban ſaid, 1: 5s better that T give her to 
thee, than that I ſhould give her to another man q : a- 
abide with me. 
q An ambiguous and crafty anſwer, wherein he doth not direQly 
rant his deſire, but only inſinuares it in ſuch terms as might hide 
Ki deſign, which the event ſhewed. | 
20 And Jacob * ſervedſeven years for Rachel : and 
they ſeemed unto him vu: a few days r, forthe love he 
had co her. : = 
. r He ſpeaks not of the time, which in ſuch cafes ſcems long, Prov. 
| 13. 12. but ofthe ſervice of that time which ſeemed but little and 
f far below the worth of Rachel. 
: 21 | And Jacob faid unto Laban, Give me my 
wife s ( for my days are fulfilled : ) that I-may go in 


unto her. 


* Hof. 12: 


I2, 


ſpouſed, being oft called Wives in Scripture, as Matth: 1: 18, "19: 
Luke 2:5. t The ſeven years of ſervice agreed upon, "wer: 18. 
22 And Laban gathered together all the men of the 


place «, and madea feaſt. 

« Kindred and Neighbours,according to the cuſtom. See Judg: 
14: 10, i1: Fon 2: 1, 2, &c. He gathered a great number together, 
” I both that the Marriage might be more Solemn and Publick, and 
that Jacob might be overawed by their Preſence and Authority,and 
not dare to diſannul the Marriage, and reje& Leah afterwards, 
which otherwiſe he might have done. 

23 Andit came to pals in the evening, that he took 
Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he 


went in unto her x. 

x The occaſion of the deceit was the cuſtom of thoſe times, 
which was to bring the Bride to her Husband in the dark, and 
with a Veil upon her Face. See Ger: 24: 65. And Leah being in-. 
{tru&ed by her Father,and confederat with him in the deceit,was, 
doubtleſs, carcful not ro diſcover her ſelf by ſpeech, or any other 
way to him. | : 

24 And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah, Zilpah 
his maid, for an handmaid- / 
. 25 Andit came to pals, that in the morning, behold 
it was Leah: and hefaid to Laban, What is this thou 
haſt done unto me? Did notT ſerve with thee for Ras 


chel ? Wherefore then haſt thou beguiled me y ? 

y Though Laban could not ſolidly anſwer the queſtion, yer Jacob 
could do it, and had juſt caſe to refle& upon his own former a&i- 
on of beguiling his Father ; for which God had now puniſhed him 
4 in the ſame kind. 

* + Heb. 26 And Laban faid, It muſt not beſo done in our + 
| place. countrey z, to give the younger before the firſt-born. 
= z This ſeems to be a falſe pretence ; but if it had been true, Cu- 
ſtom is to give place to Juſtice, by which he was obliged to per- 
form his Contratt with him. 

27 Fulfil her week a, and we will give thee this alſo, 


for the ſervice which rhou ſhalt ſerve with me yer ſeven 


1 AY —_— O__—” 


| 


=y 
| 
bo 

= 


Py 


other years. - 
# Theſeven days uſually devoted to the Feaſt and Solemnity of 
: Marriage, as Judzes 14: 12, 15,17. And this he defired, that a 


weeks Co-habitation with Leah, might cither knit his AﬀeCtion to 
her; or at leaſt confirm rhe Contratt and Marriage with her. 


28 And Jacob did ſo, and fulfilled her week : and he 


gave him Rachel his daughter to wife alſo 6. 

b Ir was not ſo ſtrange that Laban ſhould give,as that Jacob fhould 
take, not only two Wives, but two Siſters to wife, which ſeems 
to be againſt the Law of Nature, and was exprelly forbidden by 
God afterward, Levit: 18: 18: 
might diſpenſe with his own Inſtitution, or permit ſuch things in 
hs ch a upon ſpecial. Reaſons, which are not to be drawn into 

xample. 
' 29 And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter, Bilhah, 
his handmaid, to be her maid. : 
20 And he went in alſo unto Rachel, and he loved 
alſo Rachel morethan Leah, and ſerved with him yet 
ſeven other years. | 

341 T And when the LORD ſaw that Leah 4: hated 
c, he opened her womb : but Rachel was barren 4. 

c Comparatively to Rachel, leſs loved, flighted. So that word is 
oft uſed, as Deut: 21: 15: Matth: 6: 24: and 10: 37: compared with 
Luke 14: 26: John 12: 25. d Thus variouſly doth God dittribute his 
Favours, that all may be contented, and none deſpiſed. 


32 And Leah conceived and bare a ſon, and ſhe cal- 
led his name + Reuben : for ſhe ſaid, Surely che LORD 
hath looked upon my afflition e ; now therefore my 
husband will love me. 


e With an eye of pity and kindneſs ; as that general Phraſe is ofc 
underſtood, 


33 And ſhe conceived again, and bare a ſon; and 
ſaid, Becauſe the LORD hath heard f that I 5-as hated, 
R he hath therefore given me this ſor alſo: and ſhe called 


- Þ+ Thatis, his name+ Simeon. 
'. tnaring. | 


+ Thar is, 


ee a ſons 


 f(*.e.) Perceived or underſtood; hearing being oft put for un- 
derſtanding. 


34 And ſhe conceived again, and barg a ſon; and 
faid, Now this time will my husband be joyned unto 
me g, becauſe I have born him three ſons : therefore 

' } That is, Was his name called + Levi. 
Jomned, g In moreſincere and fervent AﬀeSion. | | 
35 And ſhe conceived again, and bare a fon; and |} 


s So ſhe was by Promiſe and Contra@ ; perſons Betrothed, or E- | 


Though it be alſo rrue that God [| 


the ſaid, Now will Ipraiſe the LORD 5 ; therefore ſhe / 


called his name * + Judah, and + lefc bearing. * Matth: 


h More ſolemnly and continually; for otherwiſe ſhe did praiſe, 3: 2- - | 
and acknowledge God for the former Mercies. 7 bo is; 
praiſe. 
CHAT. XXX. hey 


Rachel being barren, envies her ſiſter, impatiently defiv25 children of Jacob, flood fr ons *; 
Ii. He is angry, and reproves her, 2. She gives him hcr hand-maid bearing. 
Bilhah, who bears him Dan and Napthai;, 3---8. Leah ceaſing fo bear, 
gives Zilpah her maid to Jacob, 9. S/'2 bears him Gad and Aſher, 
Io---13. Reuben Leahs ſon finds mandrake: and brings them to his mo- 
ther ; Rachel defires them ; they bargain, 14, 15. Jacob goes in to 
Leah, who conceives again and bears Iſſachar, Z:bulon, and Dinah, 
I6---21. God remembers Rachel, ſhe conceryes and bears Joſeph, 22-==24. 
Tacob deſires to return into his own countrey with his wives ard children, 
25, 26. Laban denies his conſent. ; having learnt by experience that God. 
had bleſſed him for Jacob's ſake, 27. They make a new contraft, 28-36. 
Facob's device, and the ſucceſs of it, 37-==43. 
N D when Rachel ſaw thac ſhe bare Jacab no 
children, Rachel envicd her filter ; and faid un- 


co Jacob, Give me children, or elſe I dic 4. D 

2 A Speech full of Impatience, and bordcring upon Blaſphemy, 
and {triking at God himſelf through Jacob's fides. For which 
therefore ſhe afterwards ſmarted, dying by that very means,where- 
by we hoped to prevent her Death, and prolong her Life, Geneſis 
35: 18. hs 

2 And Jacobs anger was kindled againſt Rachel 5; 
and he ſaid, 4m Tin God's ftead «? who hath with. 


held from thee the fruit of the womb ? 
b For the injury done to himſelf, and eſpecially for the Sin againſt 
God, in which caſe anger is not only lawful, but neceflary. «c Ic 
is God's Prerogative to give Children. See Gen: 16: 2: 1 Sam: 2: 5, 
6: Pſal: 113: 9: and 127: 3. | h 
3 And ſhe ſaid, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto 
her ; .and ſhe ſhall bear upon my knees 4, that I may , - 
alſo # have children by her e. .._ . t Heb. 6 
d An Ellipfis or ſhort Speech, ſhe ſhall bear a Child which may wilt by 
be laid «por my knees, or in my lap, which I may adopt and bring her. 
up as if it were my own. See Gen: 59: 23:-1ſa: 66: 12. e For 
as Servants, ſo their Work and Fruit were not their own, but their 
Maſters. : : SD 4 
4 And ſhe gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife : 
and Jacob went in unto her. 
5 And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob.a ſon. _ 
6 And Rachel ſaid, God hath judged me *, and hath 
alſo heard my voice, and hath given me a ſon: there- ... 
fore called the his name Þ Dan. | | 4 Thats, 
* Pleaded my Cauſe, or givenScntence for me ; 2s this Phrafe judging, _ 
is oft taken. REN . 
7 And Bilhah Rachels maid conceived again, and 
bare Jacob a ſecond ſon. <=) 
8 And Rachelſaid, With + great wreſtlings f have I + Heb:-: 
wreſtled with my ſiſter, and I have prevalled g : and ſhe wreftlinge | 
called his name + * Naphtali. | God. 
f Heb. With wreſtlings of God, either with great and hard Wreſt- 
lings or Strivings ; or by wreſtling with God in fervent Prayer, 
and by God's Grace and Strength. g Which was not true; for 
her Siſter exceeded her both in the number of her Children, and 
in her Propriety in them, being the Fruit of her own Womb, 
not ofher Handmaids, as Rache!'s were. Here is an inſtance how 
partial Judges moſt Perſons are in their own cauſes and concern= 
ments. | | DE IE he: 
9 When Leah ſaw that ſhe had left bearing, ſhe took 
Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wite. 
10 And Zilpah Leahs maid bare Jacoba fon. , _... 
11 And Leah ſaid, 4 troop cometh 4: And jhe called  .., . _ 
his names | Gad. | EE Ee :  14+Thatia | 
h Or, Good luck cometh ; ry deſign hath well ſucceeded ; an hap- a zroop or + 
y Star hath ſhone upon me ; and ſuch a Star in the Opinion of company, 
Aſtrologersis that of Jupiter, which by the A4rabians is called Gad. 
This may well agree to Leah and her Heatheniſh Education, and 
the Manners of the Chaldeans, who were much given to the Study 
of the Stars. : | DE ow | 
12 And Zilpah Leahs maid bare Jacob aſecond ſon, ,.., ... 
13 And Leah faid, + Happy am I, for the daugh» + Heb, 5 
ters + will call me bleſſed: and ſhe called his name Þ my happi- 


bi 


Alber, 75401) - meſs. 
+ Of Men, 7: e: Women, as Prov: 31: 29: Cant: 6:9. _ 7 Thee is; 
14 T And Reaben went in the days of wheat-harveſt, PPPY» 


and foind Mandrakes 7 in the field, and brought them 
unto his mother Leah. Then Rachelſaid to Leah, Give 
me, I pray thee, of thy ſons Mandrakes &. .. 


i The word is only found here, and Gant: 7: 13: whence it ap= 
pears, thar it isa Plant or Fruit of pleafant Smell,ſuch asth2 Man« 
droke is faid to be by Dioſcorides and Levinus Lemnius, and by St. Au-. 
ſiin upon his own experience. If it be ſaid, this was too early for 
Mandrakes to be ripe, it being now but W heat-harveſt ; it may be 
replied, that Fruits ripen match ſooner in thoſe hot Countries, than 
elſewhere, and that they are not ſaid here to be ripe, but only to be 
gathered» & Which ſhe might defire,either becauſe they were plea, 
fant ro the Eye or Taſte, or becauſe they werz thought helpful to 
Conceprion} | | 

I5 Azd tbe faid-tmto her, 1s it a ſmall matter that 
thon haft taken my husband 2 and wouldſt thou take 
away my fons mandrakes alſo? And Rachel faid, 
Therefore he ſhall lie with chee to night /, for thy ſons 


Mandrakes. | | PEE 
1 Fatobeither did equally divide the times between histwo Wires, 
or rather had more cftranged himfelf from 725, and cohabvired - 
G >» princ'pally ' 


—_—_ 


principally with Rach, which occaſioned the foregoing Expoſtu- 
lation. [ | 4 
16 And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, 
and Leah went out to meet him, and ſaid, Thou mult 
come in unto me, for ſurely I have hired thee with my 
ſons Mandrakes. And he lay with her that night m. 
m He ratified their azreement, that he might preſerve Peace and 
Love amonglt them. 
17 And God hearkned unto Leah », and ſhe concei- 


yed, and bare Jacob the fifth ſon. 

» Notwithſtanding her many Infirmities. Hence it appears,that 
ſhe was moved herein, not by any inordinat Luft, but by a deſt.e 
of Children. 17 : 

138 And Leah ſaid, God hath given me mine hire, 


becauſe I have given my maiden to my husband 9: and 


+ That is, the called his name 7 Ifſachar. | 
a1 hires. o Thus ſhe miſtakes the Anſwer of her Prayers fora Recompenſe 


of her Error. : : | 
19 And Leah conceived again and bare Jacob the 


ſixth ſon. | , 
20. And Leah ſaid, God hath endued m2 with a good 


dowry ; now will my husband dwell with me, becauſe 


+That is, ] have born him fix ſons : and ſhe called his name + * 
dwelling. Zebu'un 
_ * Called ; 4 | | "TEE 
Marth. 4. 21. And afterwards ſhe bare a daughter, and called 
' 13. 2abu- her name | Dinah, 
lon, 22T AndGod remembred Rachel, and God heark-. 
ns, ned to her, and opened her womb, ” #2 
JW. 22 And ſhe conceived and bare a fon, aid faid, God 
' hath taken away my reproach p. =P 
Barrenneſs was then accounted a great Reproach, eſpecially in 
that Race, becauſe it was a kind of Curſe, wherevy ſuch Perſons 
were excluded both from the firſt and general Ble{ing of 7ruttifi- 
cation given to all Mankind, Gen. 1. 28. and from the ſpecial Bleſ-_ 
given tO Abraham for the nniltiplication of hi« Seed; and from 


: ry 6 of being the Progenitors of the Blelied M:fas. 
po 5 24 And jhe cailed his name T Joſeph ; and faid, The 
"5* LORD ſhall add to me another ſon. 
25 Andit came to paſs, when Rachel had born Jo 
ſeph, that Jacob ſaid unto Laban, Send me away, that 
I may go unto mine own place, and to my country 9. 


- g Canaan, which he calleth his Country, in regard both of his for- 
mer and long Habitation in it, and of the Righr which he had to 


it by God's Promiſe. See 28. 13. : | 
26 Give me my wives and my children, for whom | 
have ſerved thee, and let me go: for thou knoweft mz 

{ſervice which I have done thee. 
* Chap... 257 And Laban ſaid unto him, I pray thee, if Thave 
29.21. X* found favour in thine eyes, tarry : for I have learned 
by experience, that the LORD hath bleſſed me for thy 


ſake. +. 
28 And he ſaid, Appoint me thy wages, and I will 
give it. - 


29 And he faid unto him, Thou knoweſt how Þ have 


ſerved thze, 'and how thy cattel was with me y. 
+ How carefully it was managed, and how greatly improved by 
my Care and Induſtry. 
30 For #t was little which thou hadlt before I came x, 
+Hcb. and itis ow | increaſed unto a multitude, and the LORD 


broker hath bleiſed thee + ſince my coming 7? : and now when 

forth. ſhall I provide for mine own houſe alſo «? 

t Heb. + , Comparatively to what now it is. t Heb. At my foot, 7: e. 

. my foot. upon my coming ; ſince my Feet ent-red into thy Houſe : Or, by 
my foot, i. e. by my Miniſtry and Labour, as this Phraſe is uſed, 
Devt. 11. 10. #u According to my Duty, which alſo is thy In- 
terel{t. 


21 And he ſaid, What ſhall I give thee ? And Jacob 
ſaid, Thou ſhalt not give me any thing; If thou wilt 
do this thing for mis, I will again feed and keep thy 


Ef flock. | 
- + 32 I will paſs through all thy flock this day, remo- 
ving from therice all the ſpeckled and ſpotted cattel x, 
We; and all the brown y cattel among the jneep, and the 
# ſported and ſpeckled among the goats : and of ſuch (hall 
| be my hire 2: 
x Which may ſcem to be thus diſtinguiſhed ; ſpeckled with little 
Spots,and ſported with greater Spots Or Stains,both of divers Colours 
from the reſt of the Body. Or,the ſpeckled may be the ſame with the 
Ring-ſtraked, by compa:ing this with verſe 35. y Or Black, or Dark- 
coloured, forthe Hebrew word ſignifies alſo great hear which produ- 
ceth ſuch a Colour. z Or, then ſhall be my hire ; and for then, as is 
frequent in Scripture. The ſenſe is, Then, when the ſpeckled, and 
- . ſpotted, and brownare ſeparated, and none but white remaining, 
my hive ſhall be out of thoſe white ones, and that in ſuch manner as 
is expreſſed in the following Verſe, all the white young ones ſhall 
be thine, and the ſpeckled, and ſpotted, and brown, which ſhall 
be brought forti by thoſe white ones, ſhall be mine. 
-33 So ſhall my righteouſneſs anſwer for me 2+ in 


time to come, when it ſhall come for my hire before 
_ thy face b: every one that zs not ſpeckled and ſpotted 
amongſt the goats, and brown amongſt the ſheep, that 


ſhall be accounted ftollen with me. 
# When the. Cattel fhall, contrary to their natural and uſual 


+ Heb. zo 


merrow, 


courſe, bring forth young ones of a contrary Colour to their own, | 


— 


it will hereby beevident that this is the work of Cod, who hereby 
pleads my righreous Cauſe againft a cruel and unjuſt Maſter. Or 
thus, When thou thallaccuſe meof doing rhee Injury, I ſhall have 
this manifeſt and undeniable Evidence of my Righteouſneſs or In- 
nocency, that I have no Catrtel but of that Colour which is by A- 
gicement appropriated to me. b When zt, i. e. my Righteouſneſs 
jball come to, or upon my reward, i.e. when my Righteouineſs ſhall ap- 
pear in the very colour of that Cattel which 1s alloted to me for 
my Reward or Hire; before thy Face, i. e. 'thou being preſent and 
diligently obſerving whetherT have any Cattel of another colour 
Pur the t;ebrew word Tabo is alſo of the ſecond Perſon, and fo 
the ſenſe ſeems to be this, when thou ſhalt come upon my Hire or Re. 
ward, to wit, to obſerve and ſee whether I have any other Cat- 
te] than what belongs to me. And ſo theſe words come in by 
way ef Parentheſis ; and the following words, before my Face, © are 
to be joyned to the former words, thus, ſo ſhall my Righteouſneſs 
anſwer for me in time to come ( when thou ſhalt come upon my Hire) before 
thy Face. This I prefer before the other, becauſe the Phraſe of coming 
upon his Hire ſeerns more properly to agree toa Perſon, than to his 
Righteouſneſs, 

34 And Laban faid, Behold, I would it might be 


according to thy word c. 
c Labar'truſted to the Courſe of Nature, whereby Catte! 
_ bring forth their Young of their own Colour ; wu wn gant 
= the Providence of an Almighty God, and his Gracious 
25 And he removed that day the he-goats that were 
ring-ſtraked « and ſpotted, and all the ſhe-goats that 
were ſpeckled and ſpotted, and every one that had ſome 
e whitein it, and all the brown amongſt the ſheep, and 
gave them into the hands of his ſons. : 

da Which had lines or ſtrakes like Bands about them of div 
lours from the reſt of their Body. e This word is oft An eu Song 
in other Texts of Scripture, and heie it is ſo neceſfarily ; as apears 
_— ___ thing it ſelf, as it is related, and from the Phraſe: 
o* he ſaith not that was white, butrhat had white in it ag 
ed with other Colours. MN In > OY os 

36 And he ferthree days journey f betwixt himſelf 
and Jacob g: and Jacob fed the reſt of Labans flocks. 

f Underſtand it of the journeying or travelling of Sheep, not of 
Men. g Leſt either Jacob ibould mingle and exchange the Sheep 
o: theSheep by the Contemplation of the divers coloured hs 
ſhould b:ing forth others like to them. 

37 4 Ard Jacob rook him rods þ of green poplar 
and of the haſel, and cheſnut tree ;; and pilled white 
itrakes in them, and made the white appear 7 which 
was inthe rods. | 

h By Divine appointment, as will appear in the Sequel,which ; 
ſufficient for Jacob's Juſtification. 7 Either becauſe thel- Tees my 
next at hand; or becauſe he ſaw theſe in the Divine Viſion after. 
wards ment oned, and would exaQly follow his Pattern. 7 By pil- 
ling offthe Rind which covered.it. 


33 And he ſet the rods which he had pilled before 
the flocks in the guttersin the watering troughs when 
the flocks came to drink, that they ſhould conceive when 


they came to drink & 
k When by their refreſhment and meeting together, they were 
molt likely to generate and conceive. - 


29 And the flocks conceived 1 before the rods _d 
brought furth cartel ring-{traked,ſpeckled, and ſpor- 


ted m. 

[ Beb. Were heated, i. e. inflamed or excited and diſpoſed to con. 
ceive, and this in a more than ordinary manner by the Divine 
Diſpoſal. m2 This hath ſome foundation in Nature, becauſe of the 
great power of Imagination ; and there are divers Inſtances in ma. 
ny Authors,both of Women and of Beaſts, who cither by the ftron 
Fancying, or by the aQual and frequent Contemplation of "Wt, 
certain Ovje&c,haye brought forth young ones exattly of the ſame 
Colour and Complexion, as one did an Ethiopian, &c. But the 
Providence of God was the principal Cauſe of this Effe&, without 
which the ProduQtions of that kind weuld neither have been fo 
many, nor ſo certain. This Policy of Jacob's could ſcarcely be ex- 
cuſed from Deceit and Injuſtice, if it were not manifeſt that jt 
was done by the Dire&Qion and Authority of the Sovereign Lord of 
all Eſtates, Ger. 31. 9, 11, &c. who may take them from one, and 
give them to another, as it pleaſeth him ; who alſo obſerved Lz. 
ban's Injuſtice, and gave to Jacob no-more than he abundantly de. 
ſerved from Laban, 


40 And Jacob did ſeparate the lambs », and ſet the 
faces of the flocks towards the ring-liraked, and all the 
brown in the o flock of Labarrand he put his own flocks 
by themſelves; and put them not unto Labans cattel Po 

n Such as were ring-ſtraked and brown, from the white, as it 
here follows. o He cauſed them to go foremoſt, and the white to 
follow them, that by the continued beholding of them in the time 
of their conjunttion, they might have their Colour more imprint= 
ed upon their Fancies, and thereby convey it to their young ones 
p Which he did upon the ſame reafon, leſt the conſtant beholding 
of them ſhould make them bring forth, the like, 5. e, ſingle colour- 
ed ones. 


4x And it came te paſs, whenſoever the ftronger 
cattel did conceive q, that Jacob laid the rods before 
the eyes of the cattel in the gutters, that they mighs 
conceive among the rods, 

q It is known that the Cattel in thoſe parts did conceive and 
bring forth twice in a year, at Spring and in Autumn ; and it is 
ſuppoſed that the ſtronger here mentioned, -are ſfuchas joyned in the 
Spring, and the feeble they that joyned in Autunm. 

[42 Buy 


De | ap. 


*N 


I2. 


+ Or, 
goat. 


ap. 


+ Heb. as 
yeſterday, 
and the day 
before. 


* Neh: 4. 


I2. 


+ Or, he- 
goat. 


y Chap.28 
18. 


* Chap: 
32: 9. 


TT 


qF e y 1 
®» 


> But when the cattelwere feeble, he put them not 

*1: ſo the feebler were Labans, and theſtronger Jacobs. 
42 ad the man increaſed exceedingly,and had much 
cattel, and maid-feryants, and men-ſervants, and Ca- 


mels, and aſſes. | 
C HAP, XXXI. 

Facoh obſerving Laban's envy, and God's command and promiſe, with the 
conſent of his wives, departs Jecretly, 1 -21. Laban purſues him ; 
God in a dream warns him not to treat Jacob ill ; he overtakes him 0n 
Mount Gilead ; taxes him: ſbarply for his [ecret departure, and with ſteal- 
ins his gods, 2330. Jacob excuſes his departure, 31. Denies the tak- 
ing either gods, or ought elle that was Labans, 32. Laban ſearches, but 
Gnds not, 33--=35- Jacrh is wroth, and rebukes him vehemently for all 
he had ſuffered from him, 36---40. He owns God as his defence in the 
day of his affiifion, 41.42. They make a covenant, in which Laban 
obliges Jacob not to hurt his aaughters, nor take other wives to them, 
44 52. Jaced ſwears by the fear of I/anc, and offers ſacrifice,53, 54+ 
Laba? returns to his place,5 5. 

A ND he heard the words of Labans ſons, ſaying, 
Jacob hath taken away all that as our fathers; 


and of that which as our fathers hath he gotren all this 


#lory 6. | 
a Theſe riches, which are called glory, Gen: 45. 13. Pſal. 49. 16. 
Iſz. 66. 12. compared with 1/a. 60. 6. becauſe their poſlſeſſors 


uſe to glory in them, -artd by them gain glory and eſteem from 
others. 
2 And Jacob beheldthe countenance of Laban,and 
behold, it 2vas not towards him Þ as before 6, 

b And this change of his counteriance argued a change in his 
Mind, and preſaged ſomeevil intentions in him towards-Facos, 


And the LORD {aid unto Jacob, Return unto 
theland of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will 


be with thee. | 
And Jacob ſent and called Rachel: and Leah « to 
the field 4 unto his flocks; |. 
c Rachel is firſt named here, as alſo Rat5 4. 11. becauſe ſhe 
was his chief, and by right, his firft and only deſigned Wife. And 
therefore it is obſervable, that inthe enumeration of Jacob's Wives 
and Children, Gen: 46. Leah is only mentioned by her name, werſe 
25. but Rachel is called Jacob's wife, verſe '19. by way of eminency, 
and in a peculiar manner. 4 Where they might more freely diſ- 
courſe of their buſineſs, and without fear or interruption, 
5 And ſaid untothem,. I ſee your fathers counte- 
nance, that zs not toward me as before 3 But the God 


ofmy father hath been with me e. | 

e Either 1. Hath bleſſed me; hath ſtood conſtantly by me,when 
your Father hath failed anddeceived me. Or, 2. Hath appeared 
unto me, as verſe 13. ; 

6 Andye know that with all my power f I have ſer- 
ved your father. : 

f Bothof my Mind and Body, as I would.have done for my ſelf 
as became a faithful ſervant to do. ; 

7 And your father hath deceived me, and changed 
my wages * ten times g 3 but God ſuffered him not to 
hurt mee 

g (5. e. ) Oft-times,as that certain number is commonly uſed, as 
Levit. 26. 26. Numb, 14. 22: 184.1» 8. Job 19: 3, Oc. 

8 If he faid thus, The ſpeckled ſhall be thy wages ; 
then all the cattel * bare ſpeckled ; and ifhe ſaid thus, 
The rinpg-ſtraked ſhall be thy hire +; then bare all the 


cattel ring-ſtraked, 


* All is here, as oft elſewhere, put for the greater or the berter: 


part, as appears from Chap. 31. 1, 8. Or, for a'l that Jacob defired 
to be ſuch. h Hence it appears, that Laban through Envy and Co- 
vetouſneſs did break his ag- cement made with Jacob, and altered it 
as he thought meer, and that Jacob patieatly yielded to all ſuch 
changes. : 

9 Thus God hath taken away the cattel of your fa- 

ther, and given them to me. | 
? . t lng "SEP 

10 And it came to pals at the time that the catte] con- 
ceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and faw in a dream, 
and behold, the} rams which leaped upon the cattel, 
ere ring-ſ{traked, ſpeckled, and grizied 7. 

# Which were marked with Spots, like Hail in colour and pro- 
portion, as the word ſignifieth. 

11 And the Angelof God ſpake unto me in a dream, 
ſaying, Jacob ; and, I ſaid, Here am I. 

I2 And he faid, Lift up now thine eves, and ſee, 
all the rams which leap upon the cattel are ring-ſtraked, 
ſpeckled, and grizled; for I haveſeen all that Laban 
doth untothee» 

13 I am the God of Bethel, * where thou anointedſt 
the pillar, azd where thou vowedlſt a vow unto me & 
now * ariſe, get thee out fromthis land, and return un- 
to the land of thy kindred. 


k Of which ſee Gen: 28. 19, 20. And this God here mentions to | 


ſhew his acceptance of that a&tion of Jacob's, his mindfulneſs even 
of the pait and forgotten ſervices of his People, and his purpoſe 
now to fulfil the p:omiſe there made to him. _ 

I4 And Rachel and' Leah anſwered and ſaid unto 
him, 1s there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our 


fathers houſe /? | | 

I We can expe& no further benefit from him, but Deceit, and 
Oppreſſion, and Injury, and therefore are willing to leave him. 
This was the fruit of his unnaturaland unwcrthy Carriage to them, 
that it did eat out their natural Aﬀe&ion to him. | 


a5 Aig we not counted of him ſtrangers 22 forhe L 


\ whatſoever God hath ſaid unto thee, do. 


«» I& - | 12D. 4 
[ hath ſold us», and hath quite devoured aiſo our mo- *Chap:2 
ncy 0» J F3 27. 


m As if we had no more right to his Eſtate than Strangers. » In” 
ſtead of a good part of his Eftare, which by the Law of God and Na- 
ture belongs to us, 2 Cor. 12. 14: wherewith he ſhould have endow- 
ed us upon our Marriage, he hath made tals of us for this :4 years 
hard Se vice, ſeeking only his own, not our advantage. . o Hath 
not on!y with-held from us, bur ſpent upon himſelf that Money 
| which he got by thy care and Induſtry, whereof a conſiderable 
' partwas due in equity to us and to our children. 
| 15 Forall the riches which God hath taken from 


| our father, hat is ours p, and our childrens: Now then 


} 


| _ þ Not only by God's ſpecial gifr, but by the natural right which 
Children have to a ſhare in his Eſtare, and upon the account of thy 
faithful and laborious Service. | | 
17 Then Jacob roſe up, and ſethis ſons, and his 
wives upon camels. | ka 
18 And he carried away all his cattel, and all his 


\ 


goods which he had gotten, the catcel of his getting, 
which he had gorten in Padan-Aram ; for to go to Iſaac 
his father to the land of Canaan. - 
19 And Laban went to ſhear his Sheep: and Rachel _ 
had ſtollen the + Images that ere her father's g. # Heb. Te- 
9 Queſt. 1: What were thoſe T:raphims or Images ? © Anſs They rophim, |. 
were Images made in the ſhape of Men, 1 S-m.19. 13, 16. Which 
the Gentiles worſhiped as ſubordinate gods, wer. 3o, 32, of this ap= 
ter,to which they committed the proteQion of their Families, 1 Sam, 
19. 13. which they uſed ro conſult about ſecret or future things, & 
from which they received anſwers about them, Ezek: 21. 21. Zechs 
10, 2, Of theſe ſee more Judg: 17. 5. and 18. 14, 17, &c." Hoſ. 3. 4. f 
And theſe Idols Laban worſhipped together with the true God. 
Queſt. 2. Why did Rachel ſteal them ? »/. Partly, leſt her Father 
by conſulting them ſhould diſcover their flight, and the courſe 
which they took ; and partly becauſe ſhe ſeemed-yer to retain a ſu- 
perſtitious conceit of them, as may be gathered from Gen. 35. 2. O- - 
thers, becauſe they were pretty and precious things, made of Silver j 


and Gold, which ſhe took as a part of what was due to her both as 
his daughter, and for her Husband's ſervice. Others, that ſhe 
might remove ſo great an occaſion ofher Father's Idolatry,and ſhew 
him the vanity of ſuch gods as might be ſtoln away. . - 

20 And ſacob ſtole away F unawares to Laban r the + Heb. th8 
Syrian, in that he told him nor that he. fled. _ ; Peart of 

# Heb. . Stole away the heart of Laban, to wit, his daughters, his Laban. 
Cattel, and his gods, upon which his heart was vehemently ſer, as . 
Michal's was, Judg. 18. 24: Bur if this had been meant, it hid been 
imputed to Rachel,a nd not to Jacob, who knew nothing of the pods. 
Or rather, ffole away from the heart, &c. the Hebrew eth being put 
for meeth, as G.n: 4.1. and 49. 25. 71 King: 8: 43. compared with 
2 Chron: 6: 33: Mic. 3:8: 5. e: without the knowledge ind conſent 
(f Laban, which ſenſe is confirmed by the words next following,and 
by wer. 25, 27. and by the like uſe of the Phraſe, 2 Sam:19. 3: Thug 
he fled, becauſe he knew Labar's ſclfifh, and unrighteous, and cru« 
el Di/poſti-m that he would always hinder him from departing, 
either by frau'\ulent Pretences,or by open force, nor ſuffer ſo great: 
a diminntion in that Eſtate.. which he thought one time or other 
he might in good meaſure recover to himſelf. | f 

21 So he fled with all that hehad, and he roſe up, 
and paſſed over the river s, and ſet his face # toward the 
mount Gilead «, 

s Euphrates, which lay between Meſopotamia and Chaldea, Gen: rg, 
18; which for its largeneſs and famouſi eſs is oft called the River em-« 
vhatically, as Exod: 23 31. Jo. 24. 2, 3, &c. t(7.e.) Reſolurely, 
dire&ed his cowirſe. See Fer. 50: 5. Luke 9. 51, 53. « Avery higts 
and:long Mountain beyond Jordan; adjoyning to the :Mountain of 
Lebanon, at the foot of -which there was a large and fruitful Coun« 
try, which from the mountarn received-the name of Gilead, Deut.z 4. 
I: Fer. $8. 22. and 22.6. This Mountain is here called Gilad by an« 
 ticipation, as appears from wer. 48. - - . $ES-h | 
| 22 And ir was told Laban on the third day x, that 
Jacob was fled. MET 2 | 

x That he heard of it no ſooner, muſt be aſcribed to the great di- 
ſtance which Laban had pur berween his and. Facob's Flock+, Gen: 30. 
$6. and to the care andart which Jacob uſed to prevent. a ſooner 
diſcovery. * oy ; | | | 

23 And he took his brethren with him, and purſued 
after him ſeven days jourgey ; and they overtook him 

. a 


in the mount Gilead. | | 

24 And God came to Laban the Syrian * ina dream . Jet b | 
by night,and ſaid unto him, Take heedchat thou ſpeak ,;. 'Y 
not to Jacob Þ either good or bad y. _ _ + Heb. , 

y Neither perſwading him by flattering Promiſes, and cunning: from good » 
Artifices, nor compelling him by Threatnings to return. 'For ſo #0 bad. | 
theſe general words muft be 1:mited, as is evident from: God's de- 
ſign in them,and from the toJlowing Relation. So this is a Synec= 
dochical Expreſhon. | 


25 Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had 
 Ditchedhis tent in the mount, and Laban with his bre- 
 chren picched in the. mount of Gilead. _ Ae: 
' 26 And Laban faid to Jacob, What haſt thou done, 
that thou haſt ſtoln” away unawares tome, and carricd 
1way my daughters, as captives zaken with the ſword 2? 
: 2 By force and violence, A falſe Accuſation ; for they freely 
conſented, wer. 14, 15, 16. | : 
27 Wherefore didſt thou flee away ſecretly, and F +Heb, £56 
ſteal away from me; and didft not tell me, that [ might ſtolten yy 
{have ſent thee away with mirth, and with fongs; with 
'tabret, and withharp? : > | 

"EL G 2 33 And 


! ' 28 And haſt not ſuffered me to kiſs my ſons and my 
daughters? thou haſt now done fooliſhly info doing 6. 
# As was uſual at the parting of Friends. See the Note on Ger. 
29. rr. b Butindecd Jacob took the wiſeſt courſe for the ſecurity 
of his Perſon and Eſtate, eſpecially having the dire&ion-and pro- 
reCtion of God in it, 4 
29 Iris in the power of my hand to do you hurt : 
but the God of yourfather c ſpake unto me yeſternight, 
ſaying, Take thou heed, that thou ſpeak not to Jacob 
either good or bad. ; | 
, © Iſaac or Abraham,by which he difowns him for his God,and ta- 
citly reproacheth him with rhe novelty of his Religion which was 
firlt brought in by his Father} Compare wer. 53. 
o And now though thou wouldit needs be gone,be- 


cauſe thou ſore longedſt after thy father's houſe ; ye: 


wherefore haſt thou ſtollen my gods 4? 

d Laban could not be ſo ſenſeleſs, as to take thoſe for true gods 
which could be ſtollen away ; bur he called them gods, becauſe 
they werethe meansor repreſentations whereby he worſhipped his 

ods. 
: 21 AndJacob anſwered and ſaid to Laban, Becauſe 
I was afraid: for I ſaid, Peradventure thou wouldft 


take by force thy daughters from me: 

44. 23 With whomſ6ever thou findeſt thy gods, * let 
|  bim not livee: before our brethren decein thou what 
is thine with me, -and take it to thee: for Jacob knew 


not that Rachel had ſtollen them. | 
e T give my conſent that he ſhall die by the hands of Juſtice. 
A raſh and inconſfiderate Sentence. - , : 
22 And Laban went inte Jacob's tent, and into Le 


ah's tent f, andinto the two maid-ſervants tents ; but 
he ens them not. Then went heout of Leah's tent, 
and entered into Rachel's tent. 
f The Men and Womens Tents, were difſtin& and ſeparate. See 
Gen. 18: 2. and 24: 67. | 
34 NowRachel had taken the Images, and put them 
- - In the camel's furniture, and fat upon them : and La- 
Heb.felr: ban 4 ſearched all the tent, but found them not. 
, And ſhe ſaid to her faeher, Let it not diſpleaſe 
my Lord that I cannot riſe up before theeg ; for the 
cuſtom of women is upon me: andhe ſearched, but 


found not the Images. ; 
£g Nzeſt. How could that occaſion hinder her from riſing up to her 
Father ? Anſw. 1. It might be attended in her, as it was, and is, in 
ſome other Women, eſpecially in thoſe hut Countries, with a great 
flux of Blood, or with more than ordinary infirmity and ſickneſs ; 
and this Laban might know to be uſual with her by former obſerva- 
tion or information : 2. She offers this as a reaſon, not why ſhe 
could nor riſe upto ſhew a civility to him, but why ſhe could not 
riſe up from his face, or from before him, as the words in the Hebrew 
. ſound, 4.e. ſo as to give way to him that he might come and ſearch 
there for the Images: Becauſe menſt:-uous Women were anciently 
eſteemed polluted,and to pollute the things which they touched,or 
ſar upon ; as you may ſee by L-vir. 15. 19,20,27, 22. Which Law, 
though it were not yet given and written, yet that, as well as divers 
other Ceremonial Rights, might be enjoyned by God, & obſerved 
by ſober Heathens at that time, eſpecially by ſuch as were a kin to 
Abraham,as Laban & his Family were, who by that means might ea- 
fily come to the knowledge of ſuch matrers. Add to this, one of 
the ſeven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, was that of uncovering 
nakedneſs ; which both Jewiſh and ChriſtianWriters take tobe avery 
comprehenſive Expreſtion, and to include all ſuch things as have a 
natural turpitude in them,among which this is confeſſed to be one. 
And the words thus underſtood,contain a ſolid &fatisfaftory reaſon 
whyLaban thould not now come nearher,nor ſearchthe thingswhich 
ſhe ſatupon, which had been an uncival and immodeſt thing. 
26 And Jacob was very wroth, and chode with La- 
ban, and Jacob anſwered, and ſaid to Laban, Whart is 
my treſpaſs ? what is my ſin, that thou haſt ſo hotly 


purſued after meh? _ 

h With ſo much fury and violence. 

37 Whereas thou haſt + ſearched all my ſtuff, what 
haſt thou found of all thy Houſhold-ſtu&? ſet ithere be- 
fore my brethren, and thy brethren, thatthey may judge 
betwixt us both, ; : 

338 This twenty years heve I been with thee 37 thy 
ewes, and thy ſhe-goats have not caſt their young ;,and 
the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. 

; Which thou oweſt in a great meaſure to my care and diligence 
in ordering them,and principally to God's bleſſing given to thee for | 
my ſake, by thy own confeſſion, Ger: 30, 27. 

39 That which was torn of beeffs I brought not unto 
thee ; I bare the loſs of it : of * my handdidſt thou re- 
quireitk, whether ftollen by day, or ſtollen by night, 
 k Which was unjuſt and unreaſonable, except where it fell out 
through the Shepherds defaulr,Sec Exod: 22.13. Queft. How could 
7acob pay theſe loſſes, ſeing he came empty from his Father's Houſe, 
& got nothing by his ſervice for the firſt 14 years,but his Wives? 41ſ. 
Either 1: he had ſome ſupplies ſent from his Father, though ir be 
not mentioned in this-hiſtory : Or 2. he might have ſome inconſj- 
derableAllowances or Priviledges from Laban,out of which he could 
eaſily defray. theſeCharges,which becauſe of his great care & watch- 
fulneſs did but ſeldom: happen: Or 3. theſe loſſes were put to his 
account,to be ſatisfied by him as ſoon as he ſhould be able to do it. | 

40 Thus I was in the day, the drought conſumed me, 


_ and the froſt bynight, and my llgep departed trom mine 


ul 


| T Heb-/elr- 


Sane 


and called his brethren to eatbread, andthey did cat 


+ Through my extraordinary thoughtfulnefs and care aboutthy 
Cattel, eſpecially in caſes of danger. 

41 Thus have I been twenty years in thy houſe: T 
ſerved thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and 
fix years for thy cattel ; and thou haft changed my 
wages ten times, | 

42 Exceptthe Godof my father, and the God of A. 
braham, and the fear of Iſaac, had been with me: ſure- 
ly thou hadft ſent me away now empty: God hath ſecn 
my attliction »,, and the labour of mine hands, and re- 
buked thee yeſternight. 

{ ( 7:2.) The God whom my Father Iſzac worſhips with reverence 
and godly fear, as appears by comparing, ver: 53. The A is here 
put tor the objeR, as it frequently is ; and particularly) God iscal- 
led our fear, 1ja. 8. 13. And fear is one of God's Names amongſt 
the Rabbins. He calls him not 1ſaac's God, but hi- fear, becauſe 
Iſaac was yet alive, andin the ſtate of probation, and ſerved God 
with fear and trembling. See Gen. 27.33- The Jewso ſerve that 
God isnot called the God of any particular perſon,/ as of Abraham, 
Iaac and Faceb, till after their death- m With compaſſion and in« 
tention of good to me for it. God's ſeeing is oft uſed for his reliev- 
ing and helping, as Gen: 16. 13. and 29. 32. Exod, 3. 7,9. Orhath 
ſhewed or proved it, to wit, that he hath ſeen, &c./ Compare Gen: 20. 
16. Either way it is an Ellipfis of the Pronoun, which is uſual, as 
appear+ by comparing 1 K:gs 10. 75, with 2 Chron:9. 6. and Pſal. 41. 
9. with Joh, .3 18. 

43 AndLaban anſwered, andſaid unto Jacob, Theſe 
daughters are my daughters, and theſe children are my 
children, and theſe catrel are my cattel, andall that 
thouſceſt is mine: and what can 1 do this day unto theſe 
my daughters, or untotheir children which they have 

orn 0? 

0 He pretends thatto be an a& of his natural affeQion and kind« 
neſs, which was indeed the effe& of his fear. 

44 Now therefore come thou, let us mzke a cove- 
nant, Iand thou; and let it be for a witneſs between 
me and thee p. 

? Both to our own Conſciences of our mutual Obligat'ons, and 
to God againſt either of us who ſhall break ir,that he may ſeverely Z 


ad 


| puniſh us for it. 


45 And Jagpb took a ſtone,andſet it up for a pillar g. 

'9 In teſtimony of his comp!yance with Laban's Propoſal, and 
1s entering intothis Covenant, See Exod, 24. 4. 

46 And Jacobſaid unto his brethren, Gather ſtones: 

and they took ſtones, and made an heap, and they did 


eat 7 there upon the heaps. | 

r Towir, afterwards, ver.54. though it be here mentioned by an- 
ticipation. ' Or rather by or beſide the heap, as the Hebrew Particle 
al 1s oft underſtood, as Pſal. 23: 2. and 81. 7. 

47 And Laban calledit + Jegar-fahadutha : but Ja- 
cob called it Galeed x. 

# Both names ſignifie the ſame thing, an heap of witneſs 
Laban gives the name in the Syrian Language ; but Jacob, though he 
had been long converſant in Syria, and underſtood that Language, 
yet he choſe to give it in Hebrew, which was both a ſecret renoun- 
cing of the Syrian Manners and Religion, together with their Lan- 
guage, and an implicit profeſſicn of his conjun&ion with the He- 
brews, as in their Tongue, ſo in their Religion. 

48 And Laban ſaid, This heap is a witneſs between 
me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it 
called Galeed ; | 

49 And + Mizpahs for he ſaid, The LORD watch 


between me and thee, when we are abſent one from 


; only Pitneſs, 
Þ 


t Thats, 


4 beacon, 
another. Or watchs 
5o If thou ſhalt afli& my daughters, or if thou ſhalt zower. 


take other wives beſide my daughters s, no man is with 
us x; See, Godis witneſs betwixt me and thee. 

The curſe is here underſtood, as it commonly is,to maintain a 
greater reverence for Oaths, and to beget a greater dresd of the 
curſe belonging to the violaters of it. x ( 5.e. ) Heres now noman 
with us, who when we are parted can witneſs and judge between us, 
and puniſh the Tranſgreſſor. Or thus, Though now we have ma« 
ny with us, as Witneſſes of this Agreement, yet ſhortly when we 
ſhall be parted, mo man wilt be with us, toobſerve and report our 
ations to the other, or to do the injured perſon right. 

51 And Laban faid to Jacob, Behold this heap,;and be- 
hold this pillar, whichT have caft betwixt me and thee. 

52 This heap bewitneſs, and this pillar be witneſs, 
that I will notpaſs over this heap to thee, and thatthon 
ſhalt not paſs over this heap and this pillar unto me, 
for harm. 

53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, 
the God of their father y, judge betwixt us. And Ja- 


cob ſware by the fear of his father Iſaac, 

y He joyns Idols with the true God, and ſecretly chargeth the 
Religion of Jacob and Abraham with novelty, and prefers his own ag 
the moſt ancient Religion. Sce Joſh: 24. 2. Whenee we may learn, 
that Antiquity of itſelf isno certain argument of the true Church 
or Religion. x 


54 Then Jacob Þ offered ſacrifice z upon the thount, 


bread, and tfarried all night in the mount. 

z Either to give God thanks for the great merciesand deliveran- 
ces vouchſafed to him, or to beg God's bleſſing upon the preſent 
Treaty,and upon their whole Family. But it is not fo probable that 


Jacob yyould chuſe that tune for the offering of Sacrifices when -_ 


cyes fo 


7 Thatis, 
the heap of 


+ Or, kk 
bed beaſts. 


*Chap.33. 
*2, 


V 


Lhap. XXXIT. "OM 

; En . m_ he could neither honeſtly admit to them, 
! Nay wes anti, BREE de from them. And therefore ſeing the 
| {\meHebrew word fignifies king as well as ſacrificing,as appears from 


r Sam: 28:24' I Kings 1: 9. 2 2, C 
5 killing of beaſts in order to a Feaſt which hemade 
m he called, as it here follows,to eat bread, &c. 


Neumbi 22: 40: 
underſtand it ofhi 
for his brethren, who 
under which phraſe 
ture, as hath been aireat ; 
this praQtice was uſual 1n thoſe times, 


Feaſt. See Gen: 26. 39- 


Iready nored, and will appear hercafter. And 


And early in the morning, Laban roſe up and kiſ-. 


ſed his ſons, and his daughters,and blefled them : and 


departed, and returned unto his place. 
man 6p" © it Ab. On 


The anceis of God meet Jacob, 1. He calls them God's hoſt, and the pipes 
Mahonaim, 2. Sends meſſengers to his brother Eſau, | aaa} They 
return, and bring word that Eſau comes to meet him with four _ re 
men, 6. Fncob is afraid ; divides his people and cattle into two banas, 7; 
Gives erders concerning them,8. Prays to God in a very fervent and "_ 2 
MANNEF, === 12. Sends preſents to his brother, with direfFions, gets his 
wives and children over the foord by night, 13--=-23- Facob wreſtles with 
God, and prevails ; is called Iſrael : God bleſſeth him ;, he enquires efer 
Gods name ; calls the place Peniel. Jacob halrs, 24-31. The Jews 06= 


ſervation in memorial of it, 32. 
A ND Jacob went on his way, and theangels of God 


met him 4, 
2 In viſible, humane, and glorious ſhape,as they frequently ap- 
peared to the Patriarchs. 


| 2 And when Jacob ſaw them, he ſaid, This is God's 
+That;s, hoſts: and he called che name of chat place 5 Maha- 


' wo hoſts or NA1M c. 
: noniog | b. So the Angelsare juſtly called for their great number, Dan. 7. 


10. Luke 2. 13. excellent order, mighty power, and for, their uſe 
and ſervice ro God, and to his Church, for whoſe proteQtion they 
are ſent. See 2 Kings 6. 17. Pſalm 34. 7.c (i.e. ) L£wo hoſts; ſo cal- 
led, either becruſe the Angels divided themſelves into two com- 
panies,& placed themſelves ſome before,others behind him,or ſome 
on each iide of him,for his greater comfort and ſecurity;or becauſe 
the Angels made one hoſt, and his Family another. : : 
And Jacob ſent metſengers before him to Eſau his 


p brother, unto the land of Seir d, the + countrey of 


Edom es, oy - 

d Of which ſee Gen: 14: 6.and 36: 9, 20, 21. whither Eſau had 
removed his habitation from Canaan, partly out of diſcontent at 
| his Parents ; partly as moſt convenient for his courſe of life ; and 
principally by dire&ion of Divine'Providence, that Canaan might 
be left free and clear for Jacob and his poſterity. e So that Seir and 


Edom either are one and the ſame place ; or rather Seir was a part of 


Edom. Some ſay both names are put here ſor diſtin&ion. For they 
make two Lands of Edom,the one Southward from Canaan, the other 
Eaſtward, and this latter they underſtand here, alledging that the 
other or Southern was ſo remote from Mount G:lea#, whence Jacob 
was now deſcending, that Jacob need not fear Eau at that diſtance, 
nor ſend to him. Bur as thar diſtin&tion ſeems to be without ſolid 
ground,ſo this reaſon ſeems to have bur little weight 1n it,both be- 
cauſe though this Hiſtory immediatly follows his deſcent from 
Mount Gilead, yet it might be done ſome competent time after it, 
and becauſe Facob in his journey to thoſe parts where his father 1/aac 
lived, and whither he was going,was ſtill drawing nearer and near- 


er to Eſau. - 
| x ye And he commanded them, ſaying, Thus ſhall ye 
; ſpeak unto my lord f Eſau, Thy ſervant Jacob faith 


thus ; I have ſojourned with Laban, and ſtayed there 


until now g, | I ne 
f Which Title being but a civil reſpet commonly given in Scri- 
pture to ſuch perſons as have no authority nor ſuperiority over them 
: who uſe it, as Gen: 23: 6: and 24. 18. Jacob doth not hereby re- 
nounce his Right of Primogeniture which was devolved upon him, 
nor return it to Eſau, Nor if he did hereby acknowledge Eſau his 
) Superioc for the preſent, would this have been injurious to thar 
. Right, becauſe Jacob was not yet in aCtual poſſeſſion of it, for it 
| was not to commence till his Father's death ; and indeed did more 
belong to his poſterity than to his perſon ; and asto his perſon,did 
more reſpett his ſpiritual advantages, than his worldly greatneſs. 
See Gen. 27. 29. g As a ſtrangerand exile, and ſoa more proper 
obje& for thy pity, than for thy envy. 
5 And I have oxen, and aſles, flocks, and men-ſer- 
vants, and women-ſervants h: and I have ſent to tell 
my Lord 7, that I may find grace in thy ſight &, 

h Yet in my exile God hath blefſed me with a competency of 
worldly goods, and therefore I am not likely to be either a burden 
to thee, or adiſgrace to our Family. i To acquaint him with my 
coming, and with the ſtate of my Aﬀairs. E Thar I may obtain 
pardon for my former errors, and thy favour and friendſhip for the 
future. 

6 And the meſſengers returned to Jaceb,faying, We 
came to thy brother Eſau /, and alſo * he cometh to 
meet thee, and four hundred men with him x. 

{ Who gave them but an imperfe& and a doubtfiil anſwer, as ap- 
pears from Facob's fear, ver. 9. m Which he brought either as his 
uſual guard, he being then a great man in thoſe parts; or in oſten- 
cation of his power and greatneſs, in ſpight of all the injury which 
his Father or Brother did him ; or becauſe at firſt he deſigned miſ- 
chief to Jacob, as may ſeem by his diſmiſſing of his meſſengers 
without any teſtimony ofhis favour ; though afterwards upon Ja- 
cob's prayer, God changed his mind. OC 


7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid », and diſtreſſed, 
and he divided the people that wes with him, and the 
Hocks, and. herds, and the camels into two bands, 

» Notwithſtanding the renewed promiſe of God, and thi late 
apparition of Angels; wherein he ſhewed the werknels of his Faith, 


**Chap.33. 
*2, 


at 4-7 


Chron.18. 2, ©. I rather 


all meats are uſually. comprehended in Scrip- . 


ro confirm Covenants by a |. 


| dred, and TI will deal well with thee : 


ESIS. 
to which God left him for his Trial and Exerciſe, and to quicken 


him to prayer, that ſo God might have more Glory, and he more: 
Comfort in the Mercy. 


8 And ſaid, If Eſau cometo the one company, and 
Imite it, then the other company which is left, {hall e- 
ſcape s | | 

o Either by flight, or becauſe he ſuppoſed Z/au's Revenge would 
be ſatisfied with thefirit ſlaughter. 


9 And Jacob ſaid, O God p of my father Abraham, 
and God of my father Iſaac, the LORD which faid(t 


. - - 4 b 
unto me, * Return unto thy countrey, and to thy kin- ; Chap-31 


T3. 
p Ir is obſervable,that Jacob direQts his prayers to God immediate- 
ly,and not to the Angels, though now, if ever, he had reaſon and 
obligation to do ſo, from their viſible apparition to him for his ſuc- 
cor and comfort. = 
1o + I amnot worthy of the leaſt of all the mercies, + Heb. 7 
and of all the truth, which thou haſt ſhewed unto thy ,,, fe 
ſervantg: for with my ſtaff, I paſſed over this Jordan :han all, 
s, and now I am become two bands z. wr: 
q In fulfilling thyp :iſes made to me ; and much more am I 
unworthy of thoſe furti mercies which I am now about to beg of 
thee. r Having nothing, "ith me bur.my travelling ſtaff for my * 
ſupport. s Or, that Jors  cither which I now ſee, as being at 
this time upon an high hi!' ; or, which my mind is ſer upon, as 
that river which I am going ©» repaſs,that I may go t6 my Father, 
and to that good Land which thou haſt given to:me and mine for 
ever. #t Or, two Troops, or companies; into which he had now 4di- 
vided his people and cattle, wer. 7. 
*- x8 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my 
brother, from the hand of Eſau : for Ifear him,leſt he + p5.1,; | 
| will come, and {mite me, and the mother, + with the »pon. 
children u, * ; 
u A proverbialſpeech, noting a total deſtrution. Compare De. 
22: 6. Hoſ: 10:4. | 
12 And* thou faidft, T will ſurely do thee good,and 
make thy ſeedas the ſand of the ſea, which cannor be 
numbred for multitude, . | 2A | 
13 And he lodged there that ſame night,. and took 
of that which came ig his hand x, a preſent for Eſau 
his brother : 008 
x Either that which was -in his hand and power; 6r rather, that 
which was neareſt ar hand, and moſt ready for him, becauſe the ap- 
proaching night, and his own great fear, gave him not leave to 
make ſo ſcrupulous a choice as otherwiſe he would have made, 


14 Twohundred ſhe-goats, and twenty be-goats,two 
hundred ewes, and twenty rams, | 

15 Thirty milch camels with their colts,fourty kine, 
and ten bulls, twenty (he-afles, and ten foals. . 

16 And he delivered :hem into the hand of his ſe:= 
vants, every drove by themſelves, and faid unto his ſer= 
vants, Paſs over before me; and put a ſpace berwixt 
drove and drove y. | 

» That his gift might be repreſented to Eſau with moſt advantage; 
and his mind mighr by little and little be ſweetned towards hims 

17 And he commanded the foremoſt ſaying, When 
Eſau my brother miceteth thee, and asketh thee, ſaying; 
Whole artthou ? and whither goeſt thou > and whoſe 
are theſe before thee ? 

13 Then thou ſhalt ſay, They be thy ſervant Ja- 
cob's : itis a preſent ſent unto my lord Eſau : and be< 
hold alſo, he is behind us z. 

_ z Coming toſee thy face, and beg thy favour. pk 

I9 And fo commanded he the ſecond, and the third, 
and all that followed the droves,ſaying, On this mannec 
{ball you ſpeak unto Eſau, when you find him. 

20 And fay ye moreover,Behold, thy ſervant Jacob is 
behind us : for he ſaid, I will appeaſe him @ with the 
preſent that goeth before me,and afterward I will ſce 
his face: peradventure he will accept} of me b.__ 

a Heb. appeaſe or allay his anger : for the Hebrew word panim ſig- 
nifies both anger, as Pſal: 21.9. and 34. 16. and face, as every where; 
becauſe a mans anger is moſt diſcernable in his face or counte- 
nance, Prov: 21:.14. b Heb. will lift up my face 'or countenance, whiclt 
now is dejetted with the ſenſe of his diſpleaſure. Compare Gen:4: 
6: or, will accept of my perſon, as this phraſe is oft uſed. , 

21 So wentthe preſent over before him : and himſelf 
lodged that night in the company, INS 

28 And he roſe up that night, and took his two 
wives,and his two women-ſervants,and his eleven ſons 


13, I4s 


T Heb: ſe: 
face. id 


c, and paſled over the foord Jabbok 4. | 
c And Pinah, though ſhe be not htzre mentioned ; as the women 
are oft omitted inScripture,as being comprehended under the men: 
a4 Which is here generally related, but the time and manner of it is 
particularly deſcribed inthe following verſes. Of this Foord Jab- 
bok ſce Numb: 21; 24: Deut: 3: 16; | 


23 And he took them,and ſcent them over the brook, 
and ſentover thathe had.|- | ' 

24 And Jacob wasleft alone e: and there wreſtle a | Hell 2 
man f with him, until che + breaking of the day, cending of 
e In ſomeprivate place, it matters not on which fide Fabbok,that the morning. 
he might more freely and ardently pour our his ſoul unto .God.f AA. 

Angel, yea, the Angel of the, Covenaar, the Son of God; .,asit is 
| plain from ver: 28, 30: ard Ho. 12: 3, 4. who did-here, as oft ele. 
ma?, that he might 20 th? 


eb. caun 
ed io po. 


| where, aflume rhe ſh-pe ard body of a this 
. CG 4 Work ; 


(Chap. XXXH 


*Chap.:$. 


_—— 
rs 
NM »1 
linw.- 
- 


a * » Xo 
- % > 
"> CyrYFus 
© = A 


Ds In neg - 


w—_—_ I Ae ae nh, 


- Ee er eee ee ee ea al AG es 


| T Heb-felr: 


Je { — Der > 


! 28 And haſt not ſuffered me to kiſs my ſons and my 
daughters? thou haſt now done fooliſhly in fo doing 6. 

a As was uſual at the parting of Friends. See the Note on Gen. 
29. 11. 6 Butindeed Jacob took the wiſeſt courſe for the ſecurity 
ofhis Perſon and Eſtate, eſpecially having the dire&ion.and pro- 
re&ion of God in it. ; 

29 Iris in the power of my hand to do you hurt : 
but the God of yourfather c ſpake unto me yeſternight, 
ſaying, Take thou heed, that thou ſpeak not to Jacob 
cither good or bad. ; | 

c Iſaac or Abraham,by which he diſowns him for his God,and ta- 
citly reproacheth him with 'the novelty of his Religion which was 
firlt brought in by his Father.) Compare wer. 53. 

o And now though thou wouldit needs be gone,be- 
cauſe thou ſore longedſt after thy father's houſe ; yer 
wherefore haſt thou ſtollen my gods 4? 

4 Laban could not bs ſo ſenſeleſs, as to take thoſe for true gods 
which could be ſtollen away ; but he called them - gods, becauſe 
they werethe meansor repreſentations whereby he worſhipped his 

ods. 

; 21 AndJacob anſwered and ſaid to Laban, Becauſe 
T wasafraid: for I ſaid, Peradventure thou wouldft 
take by force thy daughters frommes: 

22 With whomſoever thou findeſt thy gods, * let 
bim not livee: before our brethren decern thou what 
is thine with me, -and take it to thee: for Jacob knew 
not that Rachel had ſtollen them. 

e I give my conſent that he ſhall die by the hands of Juſtice. 


A raſh and inconſiderate Sentence. : ; L 
22 And Laban wentinte Jacob's tent, and into Le 


ah's tent f, andinto the two maid-ſervants tents ; but 
he found them not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, 
and entered into Rachel's tent. 
f The Men and Womens Tents were diſtin& and ſeparate. See 
Gen. 18: 2. and 24: 67. 
34 Now Rachel had taken the Images, and put them 


| in the camel's furniture, and ſat upon them : and La- 


b.felt: ban + ſearched all the tent, but found hem not. 


And ſhe ſaid to her father, Let it not difpleaſe 
my Lord that I cannot riſe up before theeg ; for the 
cuſtom of women is upon me: andhe ſcarched, bur 


found not the Images. | 

g Queſt. How could that occaſion hinder her from riſing up to her 
Father ? ſw. 1. It might be attended in her, as it was, and is, in 
ſome other Women, eſpecially in thoſe hor Countries, with a great 
flux of Blood, or with more than ordinary infirmity and ſickneſs ; 
and this Laban might know to be uſual with her by former obſerva- 
tion or information : 2. She offers this as a reaſon, not why ſhe 
could nor riſe upto ſhew a civility to him, but why ſhe could not 
riſe up from his face, or from before him, as the words in the Hebrew 
ſound, z.e. ſo as to give way to him that he might come and ſearch 
there for the Images: Becauſe menſt:-vous Women were anciently 
eſteemed polluted,and to pollute the things which they rouched,or 
far upon ; as you may ſee by L-vir. 15. 19,20,27, 22. Which Law, 
though it were not yet given and written,yet that, as well as divers 
other Ceremonial Rights, might be enjoyned by God, 8& obſerved 
by ſober Heathens at that time, eſpecially by ſuch as were a kin to 
Abraham,as Laban & his Family were, who by that means might ea- 
fily come tothe knowledge of ſuch matrers. Add to this, one of 
the ſeven Precepts given to the Sons of Noah, was that of uncovering 
nakedneſs ; which both Jewiſh and ChriſtianWriters take to be avery 
comprehenſive Expreſhion, and to incJude all ſuch things as have a 
natural turpitude in them,among which this is confeſſed to be one. 
And the words thus underſtood,contain a ſolid &fatisfaftory reaſon 
whyLaban ſhould not now come near her,nor ſearchthe thingswhich 
ſhe ſatupon, which had been an uncivil and immodeſt thing. 


6 And Jacob was very wroth, and chode with La- 


ban, and Jacob anſwered, and faid to Laban, What is 


my treſpaſs ? what is my ſin, that thou haſt ſo hotly 
purſued after me þ ? | 

h With ſo much fury and violence. © 

37 Whereas thou haſt Þ ſearched all my ſtuff, what 
haft thou found of all thy Houſhold-ſtuf? ſet it here be- 
fore my brethren, and thy brethren, thatthey may judge 
betwixt us both, wy : 

33 This twenty years heave I been with thee :? thy 
ewes, and thy ſhe-goats have not caſt their young ;,and 
the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. 


; Which thou oweſt in a great meaſure to my care and diligence 
in ordering them, and principally to God's bleſſing given to thee for 

| my ſake, by thy own confeſſion, Ger: 30. 27. 
29 That which was torn of beeffs I brought not unto 
thee; I bare the loſs of it : of * my handdidft thou re-. 


"| *Rx00.22. quireitk, whether ftollen by day, or ſtollen by night. 


* & Which was unjuſt and unreaſonable, except where it fell out 
through the Shepherds default, See Exod: 22.13. Queft. How could 
7acob pay theſe loſſes, ſeing he came empty from his Father's Houſe 
& got nothing by his ſervice forthe firſt 14 years,but his Wives? 4, 
Either 1: he had ſome ſupplies ſent from his Father, though ir be 


not mentioned in this hiſtory : Or 2. he might have ſome inconſi- | 


derableAllowances or Priviledges from Laban,out of which he could 
eaſily defray. rheſeCharges,which becauſe of his great care & watch- 
falnefs did but ſeldom happen: Or 3. theſe loſſes were put to his 


une,to be ſatisfied by him as ſoon as he ſhould be able to do it. | 
account,to | 1 y Al Out. | ces vouchſafed to him, or to beg God's bleſſing upon the preſent 


40 Thus T was in the day, the drought conſumed me, 
and the froſt by night, and my {lcep deparced trom mine 
cyes Þo i] 


' n E - ve "- ” 7 : 6 wks C - 


LC 


HS > 
wW 


t Through my extraordinary thonghtfulneſs and care aboutthy 
Cattel, eſpecially in caſes of danger. 

48 Thus have I been twenty years in thy houſe: T 
ſerved thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and 
ſix years for thy cattel ; and thou haft changed my 
wages ten times, 

42 Except the Godof myfather, and the God of A. 
braham, and the fear of Tiaac/, had been with me: ſure- 
ly thou hadiſt ſent me away now empty: God hath ſecn 
my attlition », and the labour of mine hands, and re- 
buked thee yeſternight. 

[ (i:e.) The God whom my Father 1aac worſhips with reverence 
and godly fear, as appears by comparing, ver: 53. The A is here 
put tor the objeR, as it frequently is.; and particularly God iscal- 
led our fear, 1/2. 8. 13. And fear is one of God's Names amongſt 
the Rabbins. He calls him not 1/aac's God, but hi- fear, becauſe 
Iſaac was yet alive, andin the ftate of probation, and ſerved God 
with fear and trembling. See Gen. 27.33- The Jews o ſerve that 
God isnot called the God of any particular perſon, as of Abraham, 
Iſaac and Faceb, till after their death. m With compaſſion and in- 
tention of gcod to me for it. God's ſeeing is oft uſed for his reliev- 
ing and helping, as Gen: 16. 13. and 29. 32. Exod. 3. 7,9. Or,hath 
ſhewed or proved it, to wit, that he hath ſeen, 8&c. Compare Gen: 20» 
16. Either way it is an Elliptis of the Pronoun, which is uſual, as 
appear+ by comparing 1 Kmgs 10. 7. with 2 Chron: 9. 6. and Pſal. 41, 
9g. with Joh, 3 18. 

43 And Laban anſwered, andfſaid unto Jacob, Theſe 
daughters are my daughters, and theſe children are my 
children, and theſe catrel are my cattel, andall that 
thou ſeeſt is mine: and what can I do this day unto theſe 
my daughters, or untotheir children which they have 

orn 02? 


o He pretends thatto be an a& of his natural affeQtion and: kind« 
neſs, which was indeed the effe& of his fear. 


' 44 Now therefore come thou, let us mzke a cove- 
nant, Iand thou; and let it be for a witneſs between 
me and thee p. 


p Both to our ewn Conſciences of our mutual Obligat'ons, and 
to God againſt either of us who ſhall break ir,that he may ſeverely 


| puniſh us for it. 


45 AndJacpb took a ſtone,andſet it up fora pillar g. 
'9 In teſtimony of his comp!yance with Laban's Propoſal, and 
his entering into this Covenant, Sec Exod. 24. 4. 

46 And Jacobſaid unto his brethren, Gather ſtones: 
and they took ſtones, and made an heap, andthey did 
eat 7 there upon the heap s. | 

r Towit, afterwards, wer.54. though it be here menticned by an- 
ticipation. ' Or rather by or beſide the heap, as the Hebrew Particle 
al 1s oft underſtood, as Pſal. 23: 2. and 81. 7. 

47 And Laban calledit + Jegar-ſahadutha : but Ja- 
cob called it Galeed r. 

t Both names ſignifie the ſame thing, an heap of witneſs ; only 
Laban gives the name in the Syrian Language ; but Jacob, though he 
had been long converſant in Syria, and underſtood that Language, 
yet he choſe to give it in Hebrew, which was both a ſecret renoun- 
cing of the Syrian Manners and Religion, together with their Lan- 
guage, and an implicit profefſicn of his conjunQion with the He- 
brews, as in their Tongue, ſo in their Religion. 

48 And Laban faid, This heap is a witneſs between 
me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it 
called Galeed ; | 

49 And Þ Mizpah:s for he faid, The LORD watch 
between me and thee, when we are abſent one from 
another. 


take other wives beſide my daughters s, no mn is with 
us x; See, Godis witneſs betwixt me and thee. 

u Thecurſe is here underſtood, as it commonly is,to maintain a 
greater reverence for Oaths, and to beget a greater dresd of the 
curſe belonging to the violaters of it.  ( i.e. ) Heres now noman 
with us, who when we are parted can witneſs and judge between us, 
and puniſh the Tranſgreſſor. Or thus, Though now we have ma« 
ny with us, as Witneſſes of this Agreement, yet ſhortly when we 
ſhall be parted, »o man wilt be with us, toobſerve and report our 
ations to the other, or to do the injured perſon right. 


51 And Laban faid to Jacob, Behotd-cthis heap,and be- 
hold this pillar, which TI have caft betwixt me and thee. 

52 This heap bewitneſs, and this pillar be witneſs, 
that I will notpaſs over this heap to thee, -and that thou 
ſhalt not paſs over this heap and this pillar unto me, 
for harm, | 

53 The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, 
the God of their father y, judge betwixt us. 4nd Ja- 
cob ſware by the fear of his father Ifazc, 

y He joyns Idols with the true God, and ſecretly chargeth the 
Religion of Jacob and Abraham with novelty, and prefers his own ag 
the moſt ancient Religion. See Joſh: 24. 2. Whenee we may learn, 
that Antiquity of itſelf isno certain argument of the true Church 
or Religion. | 

54 Then Jacob f offered facrifice z upon the mount, 
and called his brethren to eat bread, and they did cat 
bread, and tarried all night in the mount. 

z Either to give God thanks for the great merciesand deliveran=- 


Treaty,and upon their whole Family. But it is not fo probable that 


Jacob yvould chuſe chat tine for the offering of Sacrifices when __ 


? : 


Pi 


5o If thou ſhalt afli& my daughters, or if thou ſhalt cower, 


Chap.33. 


+ Or, kl 
bed beaſts. 


+ Heb; 
gd. 


Fhap. XXXIL. \ =" IOM 
72 WW: -.1t, whom he could neither honeſtly admit to them, 
Re + det from them. And therefore ſeing the 


CmeHebrew word ſignifies king as well as Jacrificing,as PPT - wm | 
Neumbi 22: 40: 1 Sam: 28:24* I Kin2s 1: 3. 2 Chron.18. OE 1s 
underſtand it ofhis killing of beaſts in order to a Feaſt w wn _ : 
for his brethren, whom he called, as 1t here follows,to _ me CC. 
under which phraſe all meats are uſually. comprehende : in _—_ | 
ture, as hath been already nored, and will appear hercatter. 


this praftice was uſual in thoſe times, to confirm Covenants by a 
Fealt. See Gen: - 39. FR DET 
And early in them , ! 
ſed his ſons, and his ghrn_nn _ them :; 
I retur; 6. 
Laban departed, and returned unto his plac 
, C H A P. XXXII. DOTS 
Jacob, 1. He calls them God's hoſt, ana the prace 


Eſau, 3-======5. They 
with four hundred 


and 


anecls of God mect 
m—_— 2. Sends meſſengers to his brother E 
return, and bring word that Eſau comes to meet him w : 
men, 6. Jacob is afraid ; divides his people and cattle into two banas, / 
Gives erders concerning them,8. Prays to God in a wery fervent and m_ e 
MANNEY, Qo==n—= 12. Sends preſents to his brother, with direfiions, gets w 
wives and children over the foord by night, 13--=-23. Facob wreſtles wit 
God, and prevails ; is called Iſrael : God bleſſeth him ; he enquires Ke 
God's name ; calls the place Peniel. Jacob halts, 24-31. The Fews 00= 


ſervation in memorial of it, 32. ; 
AN D Jacob went on his way, and theangels of God 


met him 4, 
2 In viſible, humane, and glorious ſhape,as they frequently ap- 
-ared to the Patriarchs. ; os E 
i= And when Jacob ſaw them, he ſaid, This is God's 
FE Thatis, hoſth: and he called che name of chat place | Mahas» 


wo hoſts or NA1M C. : : f 
aps, b. So the Angelsare juſtly called for their great number, Dan. 7. 
: 10. Luke 2. 13. excellent order, mighty power, and for their uſe 
2 and ſervice to God, and to his P 
_ are ſent. See 2 Kings 6. 17. Pſalm 34. 7.6 ( 7. e. ) Lwo hoſts; ſocal- 
"| led. either becuuſe the Angels divided themſelves into two com- 
panies,& placed themſelves ſome before,others behind him,or ſome 
on each iide of him,for his greater comfort and ſecurity;or becauſe 
the Angels made one hoſt, and his Family another. 
2 AndJacob ſent meiſengers before him to Efau his 


brother, unto the land of Seir 4, the F countrey of 


Edom Co = 

d Of which ſee Gen: 14: 6. and 36: 9, 20, 21. whither Eſau had 
removed his habitation from Canaan, partly out of diſcontent at 
his Parents ; partly as moſt convenient for his courſe of life ; and 
principally by direC&tion of Divine Providence, that Canaan might 
be left free and clear for Jacob and his poſterity. e So that Seir and 
Edom either are one and the ſame place ; or rather Seir was a part of 
Edom. Some ſay both names are put here ſor diſtin&ion. For they 
tmake two Lands of Edom,the one Southward from Canaan, the other 
Eaſtward, and this latter they underſtand here, alledging thatthe 
other or Southern was ſo remote from Mount Gilead, whence Jacob 
was now deſcending, that Jacob need not fear Eſau at that diſtance, 
nor ſend to him. But as thar diſtinftion ſeems to be without ſolid 
ground,ſo this reaſon ſeems to have bur little weight in it,both be- 
cauſe though this Hiſtory immediatly follows his deſcent from 
Mount Gilead, yet it might be done ſome competent time after it, 
and becauſe Jacob in his journey to thoſe parts where his father 1/aac 
lived, and whither he was going,was {till drawing nearer and near- 
er to Eſau. : 


4 And he commanded them, ſaying, Thus ſhall ye 
ſpeak unto my lord f Eſau, Thy ſervant Jacob faith 
thus ; I have ſojourned with Laban, and ſtayed there 


until now g, EE RIS 
f Which Title being but a civil reſpe& commonly given in Scri- 
pture to ſuch perſons as have no authority nor ſuperiority over them 
who uſe it, as Gen: 23: 6: and 24. 18. Jacob doth not hereby re- 
nounce his Right of Primogeniture which was devolved upon him, 
nor return it to Eſau. Nor if he did hereby acknowledge Eſau his 
t Superioc for the preſent, would this have been injurious to that 
Right, becauſe Jacob was not yet in aQual poſleſſion of it, for it 
was not to commence till his Father's death; and indeed did more 
belong to his poſterity than to his perſon ; and asto his perſon,did 
more reſpet&t his ſpiritual advantages, than his- worldly greatneſs. 
See Gen. 27. 29. g As a ſtranger and exile, and ſoa more proper 
obje& for thy pity, than for thy envy. | 

5 And I have oxen, and aſles, flocks, and men-ſer- 
vants, and women-ſervants h: and I have ſent to tell 
my Lord z, that I may find grace in thy fight &, 

h Yet in my exile God hath bleſſed me with a competency of 
worldly goods, and therefore I am nor likely to be either a burden 
to thee, or adiſgrace to.our Family. # To acquaint him with my 
coming, and with the ſtate of my Aﬀairs. & That I may obtain 
pardon for my former errors, and thy favour and friendſhip for the 
future. 

6 And the meſſengers returned to Jaceb,ſaying, We 
came to thy brother Eſau /, and alſo * he cometh to 
meet thee, and four hundred men with him »s. 

{ Who gave them but an imperfe& and a doubtful anſwer, as ap- 
pears from Jacob's fear, ver. 9. m Which he brought either as his 
uſual guard, he being then a great man in thoſe parts; or in oſten- 
cation of his power and greatneſs, in ſpight of all the injury which 
his Father or Brother did him ; or becauſe at firſt he deſigned miſ- 
chicf to Jacob, as may ſeem by his diſmiſſing of his meſſengers 
without any teſtimony ofhis favour ; though afterwards upon Ja- 
cob*s prayer, God changed his mind. 


7 Then Jacob was greatly afraid », and diſtreſſed, 
and he divided the people that wes with him, and the 


flocks, and. herds, and the camels into two bands, 
» Notwithſtanding the renewed promiſe of God, and the late 


+ Heb: 
4d, 


Thap.3 3. 


GENESIS. 


Laban roſe up and kiſ-. 


| dred, and I will deal well with thee ; 


Chap. | 


to which God left him for his Trial and Exerciſe, and to quicken 
him to prayer, that ſo God might have more Glory, and he more” 
Comfort in the Mercy. 


8 And ſaid, If Eſau come to the one. company, and 
{mite it, then the other company which is lefe, (hall e- 
ſcape 8 t 

o Either by flight, or becauſe he ſuppoſed Eſau's 
be ſatisfied with thefirſt ſlaughter. 

9 And Jacob ſaid, O God p of my father Abraham, 
and God of my father Iſaac, the LORD . which faidft 
unto me, * Return unto thy countrey, and to thy kin- 


Revenge would 


FChap. 33 
1 3- 


p It is obſeryable,that Jacob direRs his prayers to God immediare= 
ly,and not to the Angels, though now, if ever, he had- reaſon and 
obligation to do ſo, from their viſible apparition to him for his ſuc- 
cor and comfort. 

10 + I amnot worthy of the leaſt of all the mercies, + Heb. 7 
and of all the truth, which thou haſt ſhewed unto thy ,, bſe 
ſervantq: for with my ſtaffr, I paſſed over this Jordan han all, 
s, and now I am become two bands z. _ &. 

q In fulfilling thy promiſes made to me ; and much more am I 
unworthy of thoſe further mercies which I am now about to beg of 
thee. r Having nothing with me bur. my travelling ſtaff for my 
ſupport. s Or, that Jordan, either which I now ſee, as being at 
this time upon an high hill ; or, which my mind is ſer upon, as 
that river which I am going to repaſs,that I may go t6 my Father, 
and to that good Land which thou haſt given to:me and mine for 
ever. t Or, two Troops, or companies; into which he had now dis 
vided his people and cattle, ver. 7. 

* 11 Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my 


| brother, from the hand of Eſau : for Ifear him,leſt he n 
| will come, and ſmite me, and the mother, + with the pon. 
Church, for whoſe proteCtion they 


Heb: 


children «. * | ; 
u A proverbialſpeech, noting a total deſtrution. Compare Deus. 
22: 6, Hoſ: 10:4. : : 1Chap.a8; 
12 And* thou faidft, T will ſurely do thee good,and : 'D 4 
make thy ſeedas the ſand of the ſea, which cannot be ? © 
numbred for multitude, TT | 
13 And he lodged there that ſame night, and took 
of that which came g his hand x, a preſent for Eſau 
his brother : 
x Either that which was in his hand and power; or rather, that 
which was neareſt ar hand, and moſt ready for him, becauſe the ap- 
proaching night, and his own great fear, gave him not leave to 
make ſo ſcrupulous a choice as otherwiſe he would have made. = 
14 Twohundrd ſhe-goats, and twenty he-goats,two 
hundred ewes, and twenty rams, | 
15 Thirty milch camels with their colts,fourty kine, 
and ten bulls, twenty (he-afles, and ten foals. _ 
16 And he delivered hem into the hand of his ſe;« 
vants, every drove by themſelves, and ſaid unto his ſer= 
vants, Paſs over before me; and put a ſpace berwixt 
drove and drove y. | | 


% 


» That his gift might be repreſented to Eſau with moſt advantage; 
and his mind might by little and little be ſweetned towards hims 
17 And he commanded the foremoſt ſaying, When 
Eſau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, ſaying; 
Whoſe artthou ? and whither goeſt thou > and whole 
are theſe before thee ? | 
13 Then thou ſhalt ſay; They be thy ſervant Ja- 
cob's : 'itis a preſent ſent unto my lord Eſau : and be< 
hold alſo, he is behind us z. 
_ & Coming toſee thy face, and beg thy favour. bs Ch 
19 And ſo commanded he the ſecond, and the third, 
and all that followed the droves,ſfaying, On this manner 
ſhall you ſpeak unto Eſau, when you find him. | 
20 And ſay ye moreover,Behold,thy ſervant Jacob is 
behind us : for he ſaid, I will appeaſe him @ with the 
preſent that goeth before me,and afterward I vill - 
his face: peradventure he will accepty of me b, — 

a Heb. appeaſe or allay his anger : for the Hebrew word panim ſig- 
nifies both anger, as Pſal: 21.9. and 34. 16. and face, as every where, 
becauſe a mans a»ger is moiſt diſcernable in his* face or counte-= 
nance, Prov: 21: 14..6 Heb. willlift up my face 'or countenance, whiclt 
now is dejected with the ſenſe of his diſpleaſure. Compare Gen:4: 
6: or, will accept of my perſon, as this phraſe is oft uſed. \ , 

21 So wentthe preſent over before him: and himſelf 
lodged that night in the company, a ph nit bobs oO 

28 And he rcofe up that night, and took his rwo 

wives,and his two women-ſervants,and his eleven ſons 


T Heb: mp 
face. f 


c, and paſled over the foord Jabbok 4. | | 
c And Dinah, though ſhe be nor h=re mentioned ; as the women 
are oft omitted inS$cripture,as being comprehended under the men: 
d4 Which is here generally related, bur the time and manner of it is 
particularly deſcribed inthe following verſes. Of this Foord Jab- 
bok ſee Numb: 21: 24: Deut: 3: 16. ; | 


23 And he took them, and jſcnt them 
and ſent over thathohad. - + 4 |. 
24 And Jacob wasleft alone e: and thee wreſtled a 4,14 
man f with him, until che breaking of che'day. cending of 
e In ſomeprivate place, if matters not on which fide Fab$0%,that ;p, marnins. 
he might more freely and ardently pour our his ſoul unto ,God.f Ad. 
Angel, yea, the Angel of the, Covenaar, the Son of God; .asit is 


over the brook, | 
eb.cults 


E ro Fe 


| plain from ver: 28, 30: ar:d Hof. 12: 3, 4. who did here, as oft elſes, 


thaghe might 40 this 


SOT of Angels; wherein he ſhewed the werkaneſs of his Faith, 


| where, aflume the ſhope mm body of a tma?, 
4 
» &w 4 


work ; 


T EB AN 
\ Alle 
work: For this wreſtling was real and corporeal in its nature, tho 
it was alfo myftical and fpirirual in irs fignification, as we ſhal ſee, 
and it was accompanied with an inward wreſtling by ardent pray- 
ers joined with tears, Hoſ. 12. FU 
25 And when he faw that he prevailed not againſt 


® 04, him os, he touched * the hollow of his thigh + * andthe 
See Mat. 25 _ WA 
26: 4x. hollow of Jacob's thigh was our of joint, as he wreſt- 


2Cor:12:7: Jed with him 6, 

g Not through impotency, but in deſign, heſuffered himſelf to 
be-conquered, to encourage Jacob's faith and hope againſt the ap- 
proaching danger. + The joint of his Hip-bone, or rather the 
hollow in which that joint was. þ Which was done, that Jacob 
might ſee that it was not his own ſtrength, but only God's grace, 
which got him this Viftory, and could give him the deliverance 
which Fe hoped for. 

26 And he ſaid, Let me go 3, for the day breaketh 
* of 12. &; and he ſaid, * I will not let thee go, except thou 
4+ bleſs me }, 

; ; He faith this, partly to ſhew the prevailing power of his pray- 
er with God,and partly te quicken and encourage7acob to periiit in 
his conflid. Compare Exod. 32. 10. Deut. 9. 14. k And Iam not wil- 
ling that there ſhou!d be any ſpeQators or witneſſes of theſe things. 

{ With the bleſſings which thou haſt promiſed to 4braham and to 
me, among which one is proteCtion in this hour of my danger. 
For Jacob now began to think that it was no man, nor ordinary 
Angel, that was with him, but God himſelf, as he ſaith, ver. 30. 

27 And he ſaid unto him, What is thy name? And 
he ſaid, Jacob. : 

28 And he faid,* Thy name ſhall be called no more 
Jacob m, but Iſrael »: for as a Prince haſt thou power 
with God and with men s, and haſt prevailed p. 

-m Not Jacob only. See the like manner of expreſſion, 1 Sam.8.7. 
Jer. 23. 7. 'Joh. 7. 16. x Cor. 1. 17. = Which ſignifies @ Prince or pre- 
wailer with God + or a Prince of God ; i. e. a great Prince and Con- 
queror. o Thou haſt in ſome ſort conquered both God in this con- 
fAi&t, and men, Laban, Eſau, &c. p Or, and ſhale prevail over Eſau 
of whom thou art afraid. 

29 And Jacob asked b/m,and ſaid, Tell me,] pray thee, 
thy name-9; and he ſaid, Wherefore is it that thou doſt 
ask after my nam? 7 ? and hebleiled him there 5. 

9 That I may give thee the honour due to it. Artthou a created 
Angel, or att thou the Eve: bleſſed God ? r A queſtion which car- 
TICS 11 it both a denial of his requeſt, as Judges 13. 17, 18. anda 
reproof of his curiofity. 5Ta an eminent and pecu'iar manner,which 
was a real anſwer to Jacob's queition, and gave him to underſtand 
both his name and nature. 

20 AndJacobcalied the name of the place F Peniel : 
for I * have ſcen God face to face ?, andmy life is pre- 
ſerved «, 

*Exod.24. #* Notin his Eſſence, for ſo no man ever ſaw God, John 7. 18. nor 

11. and Yetin a dream or viſion, but in a moſt evident, ſenſible, familiar: 

33- 20, and friendly manifeſtation ofhimſelf. » And I am now well afſur- 

Deut:s. ed cf my ſafety from Eſau,whoſe approach threatned my life. Or 

24. he ſpeaks of it with-wonder, as others did, that he ſhould ſee God, 

Tfa.6.5. and not be ſtruck dead by the Glory of his preſence. Compare Ger: 
IG: 13: Exod. 20. 19. Judges 6. 22, 23. and 13: 22. 

31 And as he pailed over Peniel, the ſun roſe upon 
hyn, and he halted upon his wr; 

32 Therefore the children of Iſrael eat not » of the 
ſinew which ſhrank, which is upon the hollow of the 
thigh, unto this day : becauſe he touched the hollow 
of Jacob's thigh, in the finew that ſhrank. 

- x Not from any ſuperſtitious conceit about it, but only for a 
memorial cf this admirable confli&, the bletied effets whereof e- 
ven the future generations received. 

CHAP. XXXIII. 

Jacob ſets his wives and children in the order they ſhall travel, r, 2. Meets 


ju RT 
w4qeer 


8 v& | 


*Chap.35. 


his brother; his obeyſance ts him, 3 Eſau kindly embraces Jacob, 4. His | 


wives and chilaren freſent themſelves to Eſau, 7. Jacob offers a preſent to 
his brother, 8. He refuſes it, g. Jacob preſſes him, and he accepts, 10, 
11. They part friendly, 12-=--==i 5, Elau returns to Seir ; Jacob comes 
zo Succoth, 17. from thence hegoes to Sichem; where he buyes a field 
for 100 pieces of money ; builds an altar; calls 7 El-Elohe-Ijrael, 
1 8----20, 


: ND Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and be- 
*Chap.32, hold, * Eſau came, and with him four hundred 
6 men: and hedivided the children unto Leah ,and unto 
Rachel, and unto the two handmaids. | 

2 And he put the handmaids,and their children fere- 
moſt, and Leah and her children afrer, and Racheland 

Joſeph hindermoft . 

a Placing his be? beloved in the laſt and ſafeſt place. 

And he pailed over before them b,and bowed him- 
ſelf to the ground ſeven times, until he came near to 
his brother. | 

b Expoſing himſelf to the firſt and greateſt hazard for the ſecuri- 
ty of his Wives and Chiidren. : 
4 And Eſau ran to meet him, and embraced him,and 
fell on his neck, and kifſed him, .and they wepr. 

5 4ndheliftup his eyes, and ſaw the women, and 
the children, and ſaid, Whoare thoſe + with thee? and 
he ſaid, The children which God hath graciouſly given 

thy ſervant. | 

6 Then the handmaidens came near, they and their 
children, and they bowed themſelves. | 
7 And Leah alſo with her children came near, and 


+ Heb. 70 


thee. 


bowed themſclves ; and after came Joſeph near, and | 
4 


F 
o 


ſervant, and 1will lead on ſoftly, according Þ as the + 5 


which 1 met ? + And he ſaid, Theſe ars to find grace in 
the ſighe of my Lord. . all thi 
+ He knew his meaning before fromthe Servants meuths: but he £94 
asks, tharhe might both be more certain] y informed cf the Truth Fee 2 
and have an occaſion for a civil refuſal of the gift. ; 
9 And Eſau laid, I have enough,my brother: 
that thou haſt unto thy ſelf c. 


c I ne:ther need itfor my uſe, nor defire it as a compenſation for FI 
thy former Injuries: that ts 


io And facob faid, Nay, I pray thee: If now 1 pn 
have found grace in thy ſight, then receive my preſent 
at my hand: for therefore 4 I have ſeen thy face, as 
though 1 hadſeenthe face of God e, and thou waſt plea- 

{ed with me. 

4 Or, Fir I therefore tender it unto thee,and humbly beg thy ac- 
ceptance of it, becauſe : For thus the Heb. ew 4! cen is uſed, Numb: 
14: 43: andelſewhere. e Iris in a manner as pleaſant a ſight to me 
as the ſight of God himſelf, becauſe in thy reconciled Face,[I fee the 
face and favour of God thus manifeſted unto me. 

11 Take,] pray thee, my blefling f that is brought to 
thee;becauſe God hath dealt gracioully with me,and be- 
cauſc'I have | enough:and he urged him.and he took it. 

f This Gift, which as I received from God's bleſſing, ſo T hear- Þ} Heb, 
tily give it to thee with my bleſſing and prayer, that God would thing: . 
abundantly bleſs it to thee. Gifts are oft called Bleſimgs,as Joſ. 15. 

I9. 1 Sam. 25. 27. and 30. 26. ; 

12 And he ſaid, Let ustake our journey, and let us 

go, and I will go before thee g. 


g Or rather, beſide thee, ſo as to keep thee company, or to keep 
pace with thee. 


13 And he ſaid untohim, My Lord knoweth, that 
the childrenare tender 6, and the flocks and herds 
wich young are with me zz: andif men ſhould over-drive 
them one day, all the flock will die. 

h The eldeſt of them,Reuben, notbeing yet fourteen years old. 


/ Or, upon me, i. e. committed to my care,to be managed as their 
neceſſities requize. Sec 1/a: 40: 11. 


14 Letmy Lord, 1 pray thee, paſs over before his 


cattle that goeth before me, and the children be able to. craig 
the fon 
the war 


15 And Eſau ſaid, Let me now fleave with thee , .... 
ſome of the folk that are with me: And he ſaid, + What TRY 
needeth it? * let me find grace in the ſight of my + Heb, 


16 So Eſau returned that day on his way unto Seir. 7? 
17 And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and buiit him ©? 


. TI, 
an houſe / , and made booths for his cattle ; therefore 


the name of the place is called Þ Succoths + Tha 

I Which douttleſs was ſome ſlight building, becauſe he intended booths. 

not to ſtay there. : ; 

18 Ard Jacob came to Shalem »2,a City of * Shechem, 
which is in the land of Canaan;whenhe came from Pa- 
dan- Aram,and pitched his tent before the city ». 

m Moſt take it for the proper name of a place belonging to She 
chem, as it here follows,called Salm,John 3. 23.and Sichem or Sychar 
Joha 4. 5. But others take it for an appellative Noun, and tender 
the place thus, he came ſafe or whole to the City of Shechem ; to note 
ther that he was then cured of the lameneſs which the An 
him;or rather,to note the good Providence of God that had brought 
him fafe in his Perſon, Family, and Eſtate,through all his dan _ 
firſt from Laban, then from Eſau,till he came to this place 64% it 
feems heintended to make his abode for a good while, had not the 
following Miſcarriages obliged him to remove. =» (7.e. ) Near to 
it, but not in it, for the conveniency of his Cattle. 


19 And * he bought oa parcel of a field where he 
had ſpread his tent, at the hand of the children p of 
f Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred + pieces *Jo 
of money 9+ 32-1 
o For hispreſent poſſeſſion and uſe;for the right which he had to T 2Y 
it was only in Revyerſion after the time that God had allotted for it E n 
þ ( 7.e. ) Subjetts, called his Chilaren, to note the duty which they oy" p 
owed to him,and the care and affe&ion that he owed tothem. Co 105, 


* Calki 
As). 
Sychen, | 


Cl 
gel gave 


pare Numb, 11: 12. q The word isuſed only here,and Jof. 24.32. 76h 


42. 11. and it may ſignifie either Lambs, given in way of exc 

for 1t,or pieces of Money, which ſeems : ah AL bock pres. 

paring 4s 7.16.and becauſe Money was come into uſein that place 

and time, Gen. 17. 12, 13. and 23.16. and 47, 16. which were cal. 4 
led Lambs poſſibly from the figure of a Lamb ftamped uponir, as the 
Athenian Money was called an Os for the like reaſon,and as we call 

2 piece of Gold a Jacobus,becauſe the Pifture cf that King is upon 


it £ 
and called it + El- tThity 


20 Andheereded there an altar, — 
04 I” 


Elohe- Iſrael z. Gol 
UL, acl, 


- | Chap. JR | ' 
Rachel, and they bowed themſelves. J 
8 And he ſaid, What meaneſt thou by all this drove + Heh! 
Wit i 


that tot 


hap 


*Chap.: 


2T, 


+ Heb: 
humblea 
her. 

+ Heb: 
the hear 
of the 
Damſel. 
See Ida: 


2. 
Hoſ:2: 


v Cl 
33-1 


* Tc 


0 There w vn Ode, os the cxamebe oe 
RY 2m” ok _ ſuch law yet in force, as the examples of 1ſaac 
Rs 0 __ the dagghters of uncircumciſed per- 

-refore they do not here reje& it as ſimply cope kn 


Elohe-Iſrazl, the particle Lo, being redundant, 


+ Or, Ca'l:d pon El. 
12: I. and Joſbus 20: 2, 


as ſuch P:onouns ofc are, as Gen. 


thy CO or ut only as dith x 
Dinah going forth to ſee the Daughters of the countrey, is ab , y a5 Euthonouravle and reproachful 
wy "by Sichem, fon of Hamar, 2. Who lover her, 3. Re uſed Los di /- I5 bur 1a this will we confanc unt = : 
fe . Jacob hears it, 5. Hamoy treats with Jacob and his Pane « wi be, as w2 be, that every male of 07 _ : if ye will 
They anſwered him deceitfully, making a condition that all the —_ 16 Then will we gi Age +—- be circumciſed: 
the Sichemites ſhould be crreumciſed, 13=-*=-17. They and their c: ou of '! we will take vor & g1VE Our daughters unto you and 
Heh, conſent to it, 18---23. Are circumciſed, and, when ſore, ſurpriz ER ith vc i daughters to us, and we will d 
at totl murthered by $1me0n and Levi ; the city is plundered b So Gu _— wit you, and we will become one ] __ 
at ts | women and children are carried away captive, 24---29 ck bes nay TAR i- Bur if ye will not h ; My PEOPIC. 
reed  Þ monbled and afraid. 30. They j Are pre gs is exceding- | cif Lien Hill we tak earken unto us to be circum- 
"Chap2% ND Way the daughter of Leah, which ſhe bare gONC. take our daugher, and we will be 
| unto Jacob, went out 4 to ſee the daug 18 And the; | 
{ land. | RONon0s GET oh _ words pleaſed  Hamor, and Shechem 
\ 2 From her Father's Houſe into the cit : : | 
wD y, out of curioſi I 
; _eing then,as Joſephus reports,a great concourſe of — bec - Fare drhe " 50s, I deferred not to do the thin 
> ſhe pur her {elf our of her Father's prorettion, and mere! . } becauſe he had delight in Jacob's daughter : and 5» 
Se a ht pam pc _ her felf and others to pen : more honourable than all the houſe o bis fathe JO 
? - which was the worſe, becaule it : 20 'Ar g er, 
had no fear of God, to reſtrain them from ears ee them that Ard Hamor and Shechem his {on came unto 
Sh enormous Crimes. | S84t& of their ; 0 the 
e was now fourteen or fifteen year old. 'F chakrroton—d City p, and communed with the men of 
> 2 _ mw rg a ſon of Hamor the Hivite p The 91 OW | 
: rince of the countrey ſaw her, he 9 ace where all publick affairs were d | 
+ Heb: with her, and + defil J h , he took her, and lay cd. Secon Gen. 22: 17: and 23:10. ebated and cohclud- 
: humbled » a efiled ner. 0 | 21 Theſe men are ve with we 
__ ber. And his ſoul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Ja- them dwell in the 1 — 0 with wh GE 
»z:.. + Heb: to cob, and he loved the damfſel, and ſpake Þ kind! land, behold it is la Wy, ene tredy RI FOO 
| a” the damſe! 5. ; Y UND} their daughters ” yy, ng or Ho OS 
c b ivi : rs to us for wives 4 
ot OE Peri ter oe excengy erg and pplctar is | Or daughters, and let us give them 
. b C alc 7 Y 
See Iſa:40+ ger her conſent to marry him. ppeaſe and ſweeten her, and tof 22 Only herein will th | Ke 
2 And Shechem ipak to dwell wi ill che men conſent unto ns, for 
Hoſ2:14- 7 Shechem ipake unto his father Hamor,ſayin ell with us, to be one people, if n 
Get me this damſfel to wife c. l 8» | among us be circumciſed, as they a ape alu roma 
c He deſires both his Father's conſent and aſſiſtance herein - Shall not their carte! and Y OI 
5 And Jacob heard that he had-defiled Dinah his | ;? eaſt of theirs be ours q ? a v1 qa qt 
— m_ = ſons were with his cattel in the field) them, and they wii ett widows _ CINE 
and Jacob held his peace until they wer 7 Either for 6 the EC; | 
d Being unable to puniſh the Dellnqun, and —_ g. I. Tr2de; or ——_ porn) ip the way of Commerte and 
to do, he waits for his Sons coming and advice tknowing whar | well as theirs ; or becuaſe we ro tame Teas ear SIE 
6 And Hamor the father ot Shecl . they, can eaſily over-gule th g more numerous and poten: than 
echem, went out un- || all thi y overxule them, and when we think -\p6 
| to Jacob to commune with him. N- q F ings to our own advantage. Thus the meet, diſpoſe 
; And the ſons of eſign with the ſpecious thew of publi y Conn "OTE 
[ch 7 And the lons© Jacob came out of the field wh 24 And unto H of Ponce gong 
Fa they aaperr gy 4 _ men were grieved : and they whe hearkened r _ — and ny Shechem his ſon, 
| very wroth, becauſe he had wrought nt out of the gate of his ci 
wh hag” - y ughrttolly e in Iſrael and every male was ci TH 5 Ky 7s 
in lying with Jacobs daughter ; which thing ough ary mks- of his ci 5 circumciſed, all that went out of 
al to. be do GOT hd. 
- © Thar _ / "UI Ss ge ; r They yielded to Circumciſion, partly in compli :th th 
Sy - which ho . - oun i ? 1ance wit 1 
1 ellen chats with, by Fig pe go or dg nar noe times | the — mee, Won they _— loved or feared ; and bs for 
Fo ' counted: md commenty in Seeipmre” called fall; as Dy od is ac- | willing to expoſe ee advantage ;for which men are frequenrly 
Joſhua 7: 15, Juages 19: 23: and 20: 6, &c. f Or acainf I wy 21. | Citizens that went out of = to great pains and hazards. s All the C 
ther 1 axnialt the perſon, and in or againit the Family ofa NN OCONEE IEIG, UG: or cons = 
perſon near and dear to God, and highly honoured b Ba Iſrael, a had conſented s Ih. _ ? 17: 20. F ur when the chief perſons 
Poa a ox _- _ therefore cſteems the ir Army, ram pe comply with Hm ” eaſily pefriwade : or over-rule others to 
, as if they were done to himſelf. See Gen: 12: . v 25 Andi . FE 
Z __—_— CS Gen: 12:3, Jock 3:22. IF Fi _- it _ to paſs on the third day t,when they 
4b _ - —_— oy gy to that Family, and which Fr ofe pormy os _ Sings, Di? [8 ar two of the ſons of Jacob Simeon and 
Ja amend cr See Deut: 22: 21. Joſh: 7: 15. And Miſes may here ix, Dinah's brethren p, took each m in his { 
eb bb Is Fong ge" _ ”_ uſed in Jacob's time, to wh _ and came upon the city boldly and * flew all th ": _ 
oy | ime, the ſenſe being in bork the : £ When the pai e males 2. 
efts not altered by ſuch a change. g Heb ame, and therefore | cja e pain and grief of Wounds is the greateſt Virt 
, not, &c. Bur in the Hebron # eb: ſhall not be done, 1. e. ſhould yy ws note. u And therefore not well able to AFend th ALS: « Cha 
i = ngnify ST gs I ap of the furuce time rus 2 —— _— great pain In Children, err ns 49: " 
8 And Hamor communed with them ks ſaying, T Sec Joſ: 5:8. pong 4: 25. much more in grown. men. 
hat _ of my ſon Shechem longeth for your mg evans of CO RnN (nn Canduttors ofthe retvin che & ne 
| pray you give her him to wif iter 3: | tion ; bur it is probable from wer: 27. that IS SID 
, | ife. | : 27. that moſt of the 
hin With Jacob's ſons, to whom Jacob committed the buſineſs, bei ber a —_ pom them, and that they had a Dag wat vo 
1 7 OE Pprefed _ _ and grief, and fear for age wn. venge their MA ion - mn ps would be ready enough Us a 
w ughter of your Family ; - : er. | . ' $ QuUArrei,and to unith ſo wy" ht 
b thers, becauſe they rented if Nag hr Farber, an af - v7 —_— EP aſcribed to them E cg + ye te : 
/ 9 And make ye marriages with _ General, when i ay this or that was done by ſuch a Caprai n 
daugh us, and give you , when in truth ir was done by hi 14; $6 
ghters unto us, and take our daughters unto YOUT | were both by the' Father and Moth ex wh ——_ _ 
b £ And ye ſhall dwell with us, and the land Nat b wg and noel hw the teft--- = Suck < —_ — 
CIOre yOu k : dwell and trad + By : all be | up, by comparing werſe 2 fo as Were grown 
: d\ e you tl 9 for thele, or ſome 
oſlas therein you therein,nd gee you | de Een the tet of the iu apinl thei Ser nd Fr: 
& (7. e.) In your power, to dwell where you pleaſc ſufficienr Auchavig ' — was manifold ; that they did it wichius 
_ ſame by Priviledges in it which —_ qe ig have | werſe 20. and Ger: _ wages rem Mind,as appearsfrom 
: I5. : take Poſſſſon in is, i.e. in a : . See Gen: | bonds, raſh p - 0. ich they Well Xnew : and with 
for Paſture or Tillage, as you wet Aus TR__E part of it, uſe it Guilty = uy, and cruelly puniſhed the Innoce = — 
| Your ſelves. ak good, and take the benefit to | lying _ that wa uſher'd in this fa with horrible deceir _ 
_ het EL ts S , er pretence of Friendſhip,and ſhew of Religion 
ap: brethren. * Lec Gn | ner, and unto her 26 And they flew Hamor and Sh i on 
33-15. Fay me find grace in your eyes, and what | the | edge of . echem his ſon, with 
ye ſhall fay unto me, I will give. , whatl OB of the ſword, and took Dinah out of She- 
: I2 Ask me never ſo much dowry and gift y —_— NIE One. a 
| will give according as ye git, andT] 2/7 he ſons of Jacob came upon the lai : 
'P = y ſhall ſay unto me - þ ed th im, and ſpoil- 
2 me the damfſel to wife. 5 but give | = £2 wry, became they had « defiled their ſiſter 
\ 7M Dowry to her for he : : 7. e.) One of tnem, as oft-times that which 1 "8" 
« Mens Caving -chele =_ S camp aco— the Cm _— Oy py ro he whole body. See Jof ow Is ne Ax 
ou either for reparati ts al Cat : 22: 17. and Gift to : 2: 20, Or they impute Sheche 4h wo att. a 42s 
reſpett to you, 6. -"s rw hey ogy or in teſtimony of my _ and cunningly to take off from Cher Sling ary = en gy 
12 And the fore of = en: 24: 53. this cruel a&tion ; or becauſe they made xr. proach o 
Hamor his father d " | og anſwered Shechem, and | {er by not diſcouraging and hindring that ove wag wh 
| ather deceitfally », a they might ; or by their being i re «rv ofiny 
1 had Cefiled Dinah theis oy #, and 166, (I TEE. 
'# Pretending and promiſir : . ; ; . 
dition, which they P = : wr with themupon that con- | . Fra 4 ey nn ms ſheep and their oxen, 'and their 
14 And they ſaid unto them, We c do thi was in th Kiel which as in the city, and that which 
; * thing, co g1ve our ſiſter to one that 1 my 1 Sw b Thus th _ 
4 * Jo 55 for * that were a reproach unto us is circuraiſed 0 3 | I do rh they bronghe the ſpoil Rome, and 
FE ONE ET ig Ns In [ _” rhen they brought the poil home, and 
r 73 
etuined þagk both ghe fyrviy ing Pcople and their Goods, w_ 
it 


- within doors, as the word ſignifies. 


' Phraſe is uſed, Deut: 4: 27. and 33:6: oppolite to which are men 


it be paſſed over in ſilence, as many other things are. See on Gen: 
33 14+ , 0h 

29. And all their wealth, and all their little ones, 
and their wives took they captive, and ſpoiled even all 
that was in the houſe c. 

c Either in the Prince's Houſe, or in their ſeveral Houſes ; or 


20 And Jacob faid to Simeon and Levi, * Ye have 
troubied me 4, * to make me to ſtink e among the in- 
habicants of the land, amongſt the Canaanites, and 
the Perizzites : and I being few in number f, they 
ſhali gather themſelves together againſt me, and ſlay 
me 7}, and1I ſhall be deſtroyed, I, and my houſe. 

d You have not only diſcompoſed my Mind, bur perplexed my 
Afairs, and brought me into ſuch rroubles and dangers, as I am 
never likely to eſcape. e You have made me odious to them, who 
will imputethis perfidious and bloody fa& to my contrivance. f Heb. 
Men of Namber, 1. e' few. ; for ſuch can eaſily be numbred. So this 


without number,2 Chron: 12: 3. FHe could expe& no other in humane 
reaſon, and they were hindred from ſo doing only by the hand of 
The great God =P; them with terrour Gen: 35. 5. © 

d 


5 
31 And they ſaid, Should he deal with our fiſter as 


with an harlot g ? ; 

2 Shal we expreſs no more reſentment of this abominable abuſe 
of our Siſter, than if ſhe had been ſome common Harlot, whoſe 
abuſe no Man either regardeth or revengeth ? Thus they excuſe 
one fault by commiting another, and defend themſelves by accu- 


ſentations or Enſigns of theirTdols engraven upon them. See 5udges 
8: 24. 7 Afﬀter he had melted or broken them, which ſeems p: 04a. 
ble from parallel inſtances, as Exod: 32: 22. 2 Kings 18: 4, k Under 
a certain Oak, though not known to his Family which it was. He 
chuſe that place, either as moſt proper to put Monnments of Ido« 
latry under thoſe Trees which were ſo much, and fo generally 
abuſed to Idelatry, as Oaks eſpecially were, 1/a: 1: 29: or as the 
ſafeſt place, where they were likely ro remain longeſt hid, becauſe 
the Heathen had a Veneration for Oaks, and therefore would not 
cut them down, nor dig them up, nor doe any thing which had a 
tendency that way. | 


} was upon the cities that were round about them, and 16:and 34 
they did not purſue after the ſons of Jacob. a4. Donn 
F ( 7.2.) A great terrour ſent from God, as Exod: 23: 27. Jof: 2. Tof: OY 
9, 11. 2 Chron: 14: 14: and 17: 10. So we read of a ſleep of God, 19 Leak 

1 Sam: 26: 12. Nothing leſs could have ſecured Jacob, conſidering © 
the great Number, Power, and Rage of his Enemies. © 
6 1 So Jacob came to Luz, which 5s in the land of 


Canaan ms, (that js Beth-cl) he and all the people that 
were With him. 

2 Properly ſo called, or where the 
dwelt : Thus it is diſtinguiſhed from another Luz, Juag: 1. 26. 

7 And he huilt there an altar, and * called the * Chap: 
place } En-beth-el », becauſe there God appeared unto 2:19. 


him, when he fled from the face of his brother. the Gee 
» (7. e. ) He confirmed the name which he had formerly given Bethel. 


to the place. 


8 But Deborah Rebekahs nurſe o died, and ſhe was 


Canaanites properly ſo called 


5 And they journeyed 2: and * the terrour of God *Exod: r; 


Chap. XXxy. | 


* Ch 
49: « 
s Co 


*Cha 
8: Ez 
To 2, 


ſivg their Father of ſtupidity, and inſenſibleneſs of ſo great an in- 
dignity and injury. 


CH AP. XXXV 
God commands Jacob to dwell at Berhel, and build an altar there, 1. He 


buried beneath Beth-el under an oak : and the name of 
2+ was called } Allon-bachurh p. + That is 
o Who came with Rebekah into Canaan, Gen: 24: 59. and pro- the oak of 
bably tarried with her whileſt the lived, and after her death, as it weeping. 
commands his family to purge themſelves from Idols, and go to Bethel, 2. ſeems, and upon Jacob's deſire, after his return from Haron. came 
they obey, 3. He and they go thither ; none purſuing them ; the reaſon | 1nto his Family ;'where,being a perſon of great prudence and piety, 
thereof, 5, 6. There he builds an altar. 7. The death and burial. of ' her preſence and advice was very uſeful in his numerous and divi- 
Rebekah's nurſe, 8. God appears to Jacob, confirms his name of Iſrael, | ded Family. p From the great lamentation which they made there 
renewes the promiſes, g---13. For which he ſ«ts up a pillar, pours oyl | for the loſs of a perſon of ſuch ſingular worth. 
thereon, and calls the place Bethel, 14, 15. Going thence Rachel dies in | 9 T And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he 
labour of Benjamin, and is buried there, 16--==2e, Reuben commits inceſt | came out of Padan- Aram, and bleſſed him. 
Io And God faid unto him, Thy name is Jacob * 


in his father's houſe, 22. Jacob's ſons _—_ A z--==-26. Jacob wiſits his 
father Iſaac, 27. His age, death, and buriat. 28, 29. | n 
; thy name hall not be c * Chap: 
A N D God ſaid unto Jacob s, Ariſe, go up to Beth- | FR be thy _ bs ; —_——— -=_ = acl q2zal? 
A. el, and dwell there, and make there an altar unto} , x 96 no repent  &j adias ade Þ nes os <-oog _ 
God * that appeared unto thee, * when thou fleddeſt I do again confirm it ; and as then thou didſt jews over thy 
from the face of Eſau thy brother 6. brother Eſau, ſo now thou ſhalt prevail over thoſe of whom thou 
a This was a word inſeaſon to comfort his diſquieted Mind,and art afraid. X : 
convey him to a ſafer place. b Underſtand, and pay thy Vows 11: And God ſaid unto him, * T am God Almighty: *Chap: 17: 
there _ the time - thy —_ _ oe = paid s, whether be fruitful ard multiply : * a nation, and a ay e207: 
it was Jacob's errour to forget and negleCt his former Vows an . 4 be 
Promiſes - or whether he eiced for a fit time, or an admonition - ax reiad ſhall be of thee, and kings (ball come our 6 —_ 
from God concerning the ſeaſon of paying them. {© thy loins s. | WI 
2 Then Jacob faid unto his houjhold, and to all that |, (; Lage = As _— power, equal to ſo many Nations. 
were with him, Put away the * ſtrange gods c that are ;(,," <6 — Kone 8: 59: as yon ; as this phraſe is taken alſo in 
among you 4,and be clean e,8 change your garmentsf;' 12 And the land * which I gave Abraham and Iſaac, * Chap. 


c The Iaols, which are ſo called here, and Deut: 31: 16. and 32: . ———_ A ; 
12. Jof: 24: 20. becauſe they were the Gods of ſtrange and foreign rata : 61VE It, and to thy ſeed after thee will i _ 4 and 


Nations, ſuch as all were accounted who were not 1ſraelires. Queſt: 0 
How came theſe to be, and to continue ſo long in Jacob's Houle ? I2 And God went up from him? in the place where 
Anſw. Either x. by Rachel's means, who brought them from her | he talked with him. | 
Father's Houſe, which haply was not diſcovered till this time. Or | *Eitherlocally and viſibly ; to wit, in that humane ſhape in which 
2. by Leah, and by *3acob's rwo Concubines, who might poſlibly | he appeared to him ; or by withdrawing the ſigns of his ſpecial 
bring ſuch with them. Or 3. by the means of Jacov's gentile Ser= nn. as Gen: 17: 22. Judg. 13: 20. as on the contrary God is 
vants who might ſecretly worſhip ſuch gods ; or having taken | {;q tg come down, not by change of place, but by ſome ſignal mani- 
them from the Sichemires, they might keep them for their precious gation of his Preſence and Favour, as Exod: 3: 8. Numb. 11: 
Matter, as Gold and Silver, though not for Religious uſe. d Like [1-2 4 And Jacob ſet up a "Har es —_ rage : a? 
a good Man, and a good Maſter of a Family, he takes care not only ! RO pÞaP place where he 
talked with him, ever a pillar of ſtone : and he poured 


for himſelf, bur for all his Family to keep them from the exerciſe of : a 
a falſe Religion, and to engage them as far as he can in the profeſſi- | a drink-offering x thereon, and he poured oyl thereon. 
z Either he repaired the 01d pillar, ſet up by him, Gen: +8: 18: 


on and praftice of the true. Compare Gen: 18: 19; Joſ: 24: 18. | 
e Cleanſe your ſelves by outward and ritual waſhing, as Exod: 19. | which was ruined by the injury of time, or by the neighbouring 
10,14. which even then was in uſe ; and eſpecially by purging your ! Tdolaters ; or rather ere&ed a new one, more ſtable and durable 
Hearts as well as Hands from theſe Idols, which, I perceive, to my ! than he could do in that time, as a monument or Witneſs of God's 
ſorrow, ſome of you have till retained ; and from your late deteſt- | manifold Favours, -and of his own Gratitude. x Of Wine, as may 
be gathered by comparing Exod: 29: 40. Numb: 28: 14. 


able cruelty ; that you may be fit to approach to that God who hath 

now ſummoned me and you, to make a ſolemn appearance before | I5 And Jacob called the name of the place where 

him. f Either by putting on new Garments, as 2 Samuel 12. 20. God ſpake with-him. * Beth-el 3 

or by waſhing the old ones, as Exodus 19: 10. Leviticus 15: 13. And P "Js > 26 28. 19. 
16 0 And they journeyed from Beth-el 2 and there + j7:. - 

was but Þ a little way to come to Ephrath ; and Ra- 7th piece 


theſe, a> well as other ceremonical Inſtitutions and Prattices, were 
profeſſions of their Repentance ; which conſiſts 1n putting off the | 

chel travailed, and ſhe had hard labour. of ground. 
17 Andit came to paſs, when ſhe was in hard labour, | 


old man, and putting on the new, Eph: 4: 22. 
7 Beth-el, and I will 

that the midwife ſaid unto her, Fear not : thou ſhalt 

have this ſon alſo, 


And jet us ariſe, and go up to 
18 Andit came to paſs, as her ſoul was in departing 


make there an altar unto God, who anſwered me in 
the day of my diſtreſs g, and was with me in the way 

7, ( for ſhe died ) that ſhe called kis name + Ben-ogi : + Thar is, 
but his father called him F Benjamin &. the ſon of 


which I went. | 
g He takes Gods gracious Promiſe, and the comfortable hope 
7 Or, tn going out, namely out of the body, as Pſal: 146: 4. which 72) ſorrow. 
is an argument of the Souls immortality, eſpecially if compared That is, 


and aſſurance of God's Favour to him, and care of him, impreſſed 
by God upon his Mind and Heart, for an anſwer to his Prayers, 

with Eccl: 22: 759. From which places, laid together, we learn the the ſon of 
two terms of the journey, whence it" goes, and whither jt goes. right 


though he had then ſeen no ſucceſs nor accompliſhment of God's 
z Either as near, and dear, and precious to him as his right hand, 9% 


word to him. | 
4 And they gave unto Jacob all the ſtrange gods 

which is both more uſeful and more honourable than the left See 

Pal: 80: 17. or inſtead of his right hand, the ſtaffſtay, and com« 


which were in their hand, and all their ear-rings which 
were in their ears þ, and Jacob hid them 7 under the * 
fort of his old Age» 
19 And * Rachel died, and was buried in 


k6: Judg. oak & which was by Shechem. . + 
6. þ Either becauſe they had been abuſed-to Idolatry and Superſti- 
to Ephrath «, which 5s Bethlehem, : 
a Not in the City,though that wasnear ; for in ancient times their 


tion at Sichem, or elſewhere, and therefore were to be deſtroyed ac- 

cording to God's command now fignified to Jacob, and afterwards 
Sepulchres were not in the places of reſort, bur in ſcperated places, 
and out of Cities, See Matth; 27; 60; Like 7; x2, | 
; 29 Ang 


| 
: 
| 
| 
| 
{ 


*Cha 
I 8:41 
23; 2 


*Cha; 
15: ai 


25: 8. 


*Verſ 


"Chap: * 


4! 7 CET EY Penn te 9 VO Wo Inc Ines AAS ooo —_ 
4 7 . 
mY % 


the WAY » Chap. 


delivered to his Poſterity, Deut: 7: 5: and 12. 3. or for fear they 48. 74 
ſhould be ſo abuſed. For the Scripture ſeems to inſinuat, and 
other Writers expreſly affirm, That divers Heathen People did 


wear car-rings for the Honour of their Idols, and with the Repre- | 


TI BE IO I i ers; 


= 


_ - Chap. XXXVI 
20 And Jacob ſet a pillar þ upon her grave : that is 


the pillar of Rachels grave unto this dayc. 

bþ As a monument or memorial of her life and death, and as a 
teſtimony of her future” reſurre&ion. c (i.e. ) Unto the time 
wherein Moſes writ this Book, and long after. See 1 Sam. 10: 2: 
T0: 487 £4, ; : 

21 4 And Iſrael journeyed, and ſpread his tent be- 
yond the tower of Edar 4. 

4 Orr, The tower of the fleck, place where were excellent Paſtures. 


See Mic 4.8. : 
22 Andit came to paſs, when Iſrael dweltin that land, 


that Reuben went, and * lay with Bilhah his fathers 
concubine e : and Ifracl heard ir fo Now the ſons of 


Jacob were twelve g. . 

2 An horrid Inceft. ; for Concubines were a ſort of Wives. See 
Gen: 22: 24: and 25:1. f And doubtleſs ſadly reſented it, both in 
Reuben, as appears from Gen: 49: 4: 1 Chron: 5: I, 2: and 1n Bilhah 
whoſe Bed without queſtion he forſook upon ir, as afrerwards David 
did in the like caſe. * See 2 Sam: 16: 22: and 20:3. Yet here isno 
mentienof Jacob's reproof of it, nor any cenſure of Moſes added to it ; 
poſſibly to teach us, that we are not to approve of every fatt which 
is mentioned in Scripture without cenſure, and that the miſcarriages 
of Profeſlours of Religion are rather to be ſilently bewailed, than 
publickly reproached, leſt Religion ſhould ſuffer by it. g Which were 
heads of the twelve Tribes ; therefore his daughter Dinah is not here 
mentioned, becauſe ſhe was not the head of a Tribe. 


23 The ſons of Leah : * Reuben Jacobs firſt-born, 
and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Iffachar, and 


Zebulun. we 
24 The fons of Rachel : Joſeph and Benjamin. 
25 And the ſons of Bilkah, Rachels handmaid : Dan 


and Naphrtali. 
26 And the ſons of Zilpah, Leahs handmaid, Gad 


and Aſher. Theſe are the ſons of Jacob which were 


born to him in Padan- Aram 6. 

h All but B:njamin, who muſt in all reaſon be ſuppoſed to be 
excepted here, b=cauſc he is ſaid to be born elſewhere, above, werſe 
16. Bur is an ulual Synecdoche, whereby thar is aſcribed to all in 
oroſs, which belongs to the greateſt part. See Gen: 15: 13: and 46: 15: 
Exod: 12: 40: Judges 20: 46: John 20: 24: 1 Cor: 15: 5. 

27 4 And Jacob came unto Ifaac # his father unto 
* Mamre, unto the city of Arbah ( which is Hebron ) 


where Abraham and Iſaac ſojourned. | Sl 

; Either with his Wives, and Children, and Eſtate, to dwell with 
him ; or rather in perſon to viſit his fick and dying Father ; for 
otherwiſe Jacob having been ten years near his Father, mo doubt he 
had oft viſited him, and carried his Wives, and Childrea rhither, 
though Scripture be ſilent in this particular : Bur they could nor 
live together becauſe of rhe greatrnels of their Eſtates, as it happened 
with others. See Gen: 13: 6: and 36: 7. 

28 And the days of Iſaac were an hundred and 


fourſcore years. | 
29 And Ifaac gave up the ghoſt, and died, and was 
*Chap:15: * gathered unto his people k, being old and fuli of days: 


15: and and his ſons Eſau and Jacob buried t im. 
25: $8: k Either ro the ſociety of the dead, or to the Congregation of the 
juft. See Ger: 15: 15: and 25: 8. 


CHAP XXXVT. 


Eſaw's wives and children born in Canaan, 1—5. They remove from Jacob 
f0 Seir ; the reaſon, 6 —=8. His poſterity, 9 —— 19. 4s alſo that of 
Seir the Horite, 20. Among whom is Ana, who firſt found out mules in the 
wilderneſs. 24. Hy children, 25 =—— 3o. 2 catalogue of kings and 
princes in Edom, 31 —43. 


N OW theſe are the generations of Eſau 
EFdom. 

a They are here mentioned partly to fhew the effeſt ofhis Father's 
Bleſſing, Chap: 27: 39: partly that the 1/raelites might be admoniſhed 
to trear the Edomzites like Brethren, and nor to invade their Land. 
See Der. 23. 7. 

2 Eſau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan : 


*Verſ: 25: Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and *Aholibamah 
the daughter of Anah, the "daughter of Zibeon the 
Hivite 6. | 


b If this account be compared with that Gen: 26: 34: we ſhall find 
ſome difficulties, which yer admit of an eaſy reconciliation, if theſe 
things be conſidered. 1. That it is very utual and confeſſed by all, 
thar the ſame perſons are off called by tfeveral names. 2. Thar the 
names of ſome perſons are in Scripture-given to others, bec:uſe of a 
grear reſemblance between them. Upon which account the Parents 
of the Iſraelites are called Amorites and Hittites, Ezek: 16: 3: and the 
Governours of Jeruſalem are called the Rulers of Sodom and Gomorrah, 
Iſs: 1: 10: and John the Baptiſt is called Eliar, Matth. 17: 12. 3 That 
the ſame men are oft-times denominated from leveral Countries, as 
Chriſt is noted to have a threefold Countrey in Scripture ; Bethlehem 

- by hisBirth ; Nazareth by his Education ; and Capernaum by bis much 
\eſtdence and Preaching there. 4. That the tame names are ſome- 
times common to Men and Wemen. 5. That perſons are called the 
Children, nor only of their immediate Parents, but of their Grand- 
Parents, and of thoſe Who adopted them. Theie things premited, 
the ſeeming contradiQtiens objetted by Infidels, do vaniſh. She who 
was 'preperly called Judith; Chap. 26: is here cailea Aholibamah, a 
name which ſeems to be given her either by 1ſaac, or by Moſes, from 
her ſettledneſs in her Idolatrous courſes. Anu Adeh was aito called 
Baſhemath ; and Maþalath, Iſbmaels daughter; was called Baſbemath, 
Chap. 26. either becauſe in her Principles and Manners ſhe relembled 
Eax's other Wife ſo called, or ro thzw that Jbmae!'s Mrriage to a 
third Wife was no leſs opprobrious ro him, aud difpicaiing co vs 
Parents than the former; aha Man, and the Son of Zibeon, as 


*Chap:46: 
8: Exod: 
I+ 3, 


*Chap: 13: 
18:and 
23: 23 


s, Who is 


GENESIS 


| 


4 


Chap. XXXVI, 
appears frem Y-rſe 24. called here an Hivite, is called Beeri the Hittite, 
Chap. 26. either becauſe thoſe two People were mixed together in 
Habitation and by Marriage, or becauſe the one People were larger 
than the other, and comprehended under their name, or becauſe he 
was an Hivite by birth, an Hittite by habitation or incorporatich 
with them. Hence alſo we may learn how Abolibamah here comes 
ro be the Daughter borh of Anak, and of Zib:ovn ; the ene being 
either the Natural or Proper Father, and the orher either the Grand- 


father, or Father by Adoption. 
2 And * Bajſhemath, Iſhmae!'s daughter, fiſter of 


Nebajoth. 

4 And * Adah bare to Eſau, Eliphaz c : and Baſhe- 
math bare Reuel 4. | 

c The progenitor of that Eliphaz, Job 2. 11. d The father of Jethro. 
See Exod. 2. 18: Numb. 10. 29. 

5 And Aholibamah bare Jeuſh, and Jaalam, and 
Korah : theſe are the ſons of Eſau e, which were born 


unto him in the land of Canaan. 
e He had alſo Daughters, Yerſe 6. though their names be not here 


mentioned. 
6 And Eſau took his wives, and his ſons, and his 


daughters, and all the + perſons of his houſe, and his + Hebz 
Cattel, and all his beafts, and all his ſubſtance which he Jonls. 
had got in the land of Canaan : and went f into the 


countrey g from the face of his brother Jacob. 
f Queſt. x. Why went he thither ? 4Aſw. Partly by his own choice; 
that Wild and Mountainous Countrey being very commodious for 
hunting, ro which he wholly addited himſelf; partly by his Wives 
perſwaſions, who were both utterly averſe from Cohabitarion witt 
Iſaac or Jacob, and ſtrongly inelined to their own Countrey ; but 
principally from the ſecrer condut of Divine Previdence, thus ac- 
compliſhing his promiſes. See Joſh. 24. 4. Male 1. 3. Bueft. 2. When 
went hethirher ? A»ſw. He went thircher before this time in di/con- 
rear at his Parents, and dweltin Seir before Jacob's return to Canaan; 
as appears from Gen. 32. 3. and 33+ 14, 16. Yet ſo as he Came ſome. ' 
times to Canaan, and to his Father's houſe, and did not quir his ins 
rereſt in his Father's eſtate. But when his Father was dead, and Jacob 
and he agreed about the partition of the Eſtate, hedid rorally and 
finally forſake Canaon,partly for the reaſon here following ; partly for 
the other reafons now alledged; and part'y to avoidall cccafion both 
of Communication and Contention with his Brother. g (7.e.) Further 
up into the Countrey : Or, ints another Countrey, as the Cheldee renders 
it, namely, into Seir ; the word another being ſuppited. If thar ſeems 
too bold a ſupplement, the place may be rendred thus, he went into a 
land diſtant or remote fom the face of his brother, which ſupplement 
lies hid, and is implied in the word Mipne, from the face: Or thus, he 
went out of the Land : For ſo the Hebrew Pcepoſition E! is ſometimes 
uſed for Min, which ſignifies of. or out of, as appears by comparing 
r Kings: 8: 30: with 2 Chron: 6: 21: and Ia: 59: 26: Rom: 11: 26: and 
Judges 17: 2: 2 Chron: 1: 13: and many other places. ; | 
| 7 * For their riches were more than that they might * Cy; 
dwel! together: and f the land wherein they were ttran- r3:.6; :t#; 
gers þ, could not bear them; becauſe of their catcel. Chap: . . 
h Which words contain the reaſon - why thar Land which was ' 7: 8: at@” 
large and fruitful could not bear them, becauſe they were not entire 293 45 
poſſeſſors of it, bur only ſajourners in it, and therefore muſt reks | 
the owner's lJeavings, which were not ſufficient for boch of them and 
their nvmerous Families. 
8 Thus dwelt Eſau in *mount Seir: Eſau is Edomi. * Joſh, 
7 This ſeems tobe mentioned by the Holy Ghoſt by way of con= 24: 43 
tempt or reproach ; this is he who ſold his Birth-righr for a meſs of | 
Red Potrage, and therefore was called Eom or Red. : 
9 And theſe «re the generations of Eſau, the father + Hebz 
of + the Edomites in mount Seir. | Edom. _. 
10 Theſe are the names of Eſau's ſons : * Eliphaz " —_— 
the ſon of Adah the wife of Eſau, Reuel the ſon of 35 v* 


Baſhemath the wife of Eſau. ; 
1:1 And theſons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, + Or; 
+ Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. | Zephns 
12 And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Efſau's ſon, 
and ſhe bare to Eliphaz, Amalek : theſe were the ſong 
of Adah, Efſau's wife. x 
13 And theſe are the ſons of Reuel: Nahath, and , 
Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah : theſe were the ſons of 
Baſhemath, Efſau's wife. | h 
i4 And theſe were the ſons of Aholibatmah, the 
daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon, Eſau's wife, 
and ſhe bare to Etau, Jeuſh, and Jaalam, and Korah. 
i5 Theſe were Dukes & of the ſons of Eſau; the ſons - 
of Eliphaz the firſt-born ſon of Eſau, Duke Teman; E 
Duke Omar, Duke Zepho, Duke Kenaz, , =: ol 
k Princes or Heads of theit ſeveral Families and little Principalities; _— 
2ccording to the manner of theſe times, who ruled thcir Dominions; = 
either ſevera!ly, each his own, or joincly by common advice, or is q-, 
may be under one chief Prince, their ſuperior either in Title or in : 
Power. And in this diviſion El:phaz, as he was Eſau's firſt-bora, ſo 
he had more than a double portion, his tix ſons being made Dukes, i 
as Ejau's immediate Sons were. Compare 1 Chron: 5. 1, " 
16 Duke Korah 1, Duke Gatam, «nd Duke Amalek. | 
Theſe are the Dukes har came of Eliphaz, in the land 
of Edom : Theſe were the ſons of Adah. 


1 He is not mentioned among Eliphaz his ſons; atid therefore is 
thought ro be his Grandſon. There is another Korah, ver. 14. and 18: 
17 And theſe ere the ſons of Reuel, Efau's fon : Duke 
Nahath, Duke Zerah, Duke Shamimah; Duke Mizzah: 
Theſe are the Dukes that came of Reuel, in the land of 
| Edom. Theſe are the ſons of Baſhemath, Eſau's wife. 


* Chaps 
26: 2.4: 
"1 Chror 
I: 358 


'Þ 


H 2 18 And 


? 


” 


£2643 echt 


Oy 0s PY 
OO EO O44 4S0O HA eo 44 


"Chap. XXXVI. 


# 


| x Chron: 


ww 4% 44 


GEN 
" x8 Ard theſe are the ſons of Aholibamah, Efau's 
wife : Duke Jeuſb, Duke Jaalam, Duke Korah : Theſe 
ere the Dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter 
of Anah, Eſau's wife. 
19 Theſe ere the ſons of Eſau ( who is Edom ) and 
theſe are their Dukes. 
20 * Theſe are the ſons of Seir »: the Horite, who 
inhabited the land o, Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, 
and Anah, 


-m Who are here mentioned, partly becauſe cf therr alliance with 
_ Eſau's Family, Verſe 2. 20, 22, 24, 25. and partly becauſe the Govern- 
ment was tranſlated from his to Eſau's Family. o And ruled there, 


i Chron: 
x: 38: 


till Eſau and his Poſterity drove them out, Dex. 2. 12, 22. 

21 And Diſbon, and Ezer, and Diſhan : theſe are 
the Dukes of the Horites the children of Seir, in the 
land of Edom. 

22 And the children of Lotan, were Hori, and 
Heman : and Lotan's ſiſter was Timna. | 

23 And the children of Shobal were theſe : * Alyan, 
and Manahath, and Ebal, + Shepho, and Onam. 


+ Or, 


Homan, 


I: 39: 
. 


Or, . 4 R 
Alian, 24 And theſe are the children of Zibeon, both Ajah, 
1 Chron: and Anah : this was that Anah that found * the mules 

3 Ppinthe wilderneſs, as he fed the aſles of Zibeon his 
$%p;;, father. 
by "0 p So moſt underſtand the word Jemim, which is no where elſe 
1: 4=: Uſed, and give this ſenſe of it. Thar he found out the way of the 
* Levit: | Generation of Mules by the Copulation of an Horſe and a Mare, 
© 19: 19: Others render it waters, that he found out ſome ſprings of water, 
which in thoſe hot Countries were rare and precious; or hot waters, 
ſome hot and medicinal ſprings. But the Chaldee renders it Giants, 
and the Samaritan Verſion Emims, a ſort of Giants mentioned Deur. 2: 
10, 11: who alſo were Neighbours to the Horites here ſpoken of, as 
appears from Gen: 14: 5, 6: and therefore might, according to the 
manner of thoſe times, make inroads one upon another. So Jemim- 
1s put for Emim, either by an Apocope of the firſt letter, or by the 
change of the Hebrew Letter Jod into Aeph, both which are frequenr 
among the Hebrews. And the ſenſe 1s, that 4nah the Horite found 
out the Emims, that is, he met with them, or came upon them ſuddenly, 
and ſmote them. In this ſenſe the word finding is oft uſed, as Juaz: 
I: 5: 1 Sam: 31:3: Pſal. 21: 8: Iſa: 10: 10. 

25 And the children q of Anah were theſe ; Dinoſh, 
and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah. 

9 Heb. Sons, though but one'Son be mentioned. Either then he 
had other Sons not here expreſſed : Or the plural number is pur for 
the ſingular, as Gen. 21. 7. : 

+ Or 26 And theſe are the children of Diſhonz THemdag, 
| Aram, and Eſbban, and Ithran, and Cheran. 
x Chron: 27 The children of Ezer are theſe : Bilhan, and 
£4": Zaavan, and * Akan. 
boa 28 Thechildren of Diſhan are theſe: Uz, and Aran, 
7 Chron: 29 Theſe are the Dukes zthat came of the Horites : 
: Duke Lotan, Duke Shobal, Duke Zibeon, Duke Anab, 


30 Duke Diſhon, Duke Ezer, Duke Difſban : theſe 
ore the Dukes that came of Hori, among their Dukes r 
in the land of Seir. 

# Among other Dukes vwrhich were in that Countrey. Or, according 
zo their Dukedoms or Principalities : The word Duke being here pur for 
Dakezem, as the word King is put for Kingdom, Iſaiah 23: 15: Daniel 


L 7: T7. 
| *; Chron: 31 And * theſe are the kings that reigned in the land 
þ 2:43: 


of Edom s, before there reigned apy king over the 


children of Ifrael z. 

s He ſpeaks of the poſterity of Eſau, who after they had ſubdued 
the Horjtes, erefted a Kingdom there. # Here Prophane Woirs tri- 
umph. How ſay they, could Moſes write this, when as yet there was 
no King inJſrael ? Anſw. 1. The word may be taken for any chief 

Governor, in which ſenſe the Title of King is given to Moſes, Deut: 
33: 5: and to the Judges, Judg: 17: 6: and to others who were not 

- Kings, properly ſo called, Pſal: 119: 46: Zuke 22: 25: Arg: 15, Of. 
Anſw. 2. Moſes might well ſay thus, becauſe he did by the Spirit of 
Prophecy foreſee, and therefore could foretell that the 7ſrazlites 
would have a King, as appears from Deut: 17: 14, 15+ Anſw. 3. This, 
with other Clauſes of the ſame nature, might be inſerted afterwards 
by ſome Holy and Inſpired Man of God, as it is confeſſed that part 

- of the laſt Chapter of Deuteronomy was. 


' 22 And Bela the ſon of Beor reigned in Edom, and 


the name of his city « was Dinhabah. _ 

# Where he was bornor dwelt, and ſo in the reſt. The diverſity 
of their Ciries makes it probable,that theſe Kings had not their power 
by ſucceſſion, but either by ele&ion, or by uſurpation, according to 
Tſaar's Prophecy of them, Gen: 27: 40. By thy ſword thou ſbalt live, 


33 And Bela died, and Jobab the ſon of Zerah of 
Bozrah reigned in his ftead. 
24 And Jobab died, and Huſham of the land of 


Temani x reignedin his ſtead. 

x Of which Land ſee Jer: 49: 7, 20: ſo called either from the City 
Teman, or from Teman the ſon of Elphaz, Verſe 11. Or, of the ſouth 
Corntrey, as the ancient Tranſlations render it. 


25 And Huſham died, and Hadad the ſon of Bedad 
( who ſmote Midian in the field of Moab) reigned in 
his ftead : and the name of his city was Avith. 

26 And Hadad died, and Samlah of Maſrekah 
reigned in his ftead. 

27 And Samiah died, and Saul of Rehoboth, #4 the 
river reigned in his ftcad, 


/ 


_ 


ESIS: Chap. XXXVIT. + Wh 


y Either Euphrates, or a Branch of if, Ealſed Chabras, by which a 
there is even at this day a City called Rahabath-Melic, i. e. Kings, : 
Rahabath, as the Learned obſerve-: Or ſome other River of Note in -Y 
thoſe Times and Parts. pos : 

28 And Saul died, and Baal-hanan theſon of Achbor 
reigned in his ſtead. 

29 And Baal-hanan the ſon of Achbor died, and 
+ Hadar reigned in his fiead : and the name of his city + Or, 
2as * Pau, and his wife's name as Mehetabel, the H-d-d. 
daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab z. . _ _ 

z Either Matred was the Father and Mezahab the Mother ; or Matred 50! 
was the Mother, and Mezahab the Grandmother. : | 

40 And theſe are the names of * the Dukes Þ that *, Chron. 
came of Eſau, according to their families, after their 1: 51: 
places, by their names : Duke Timnah, Duke * Alyah, * or, 
Duke Jetheth. Aliahs 

+ Of their Perſons, and Generations, and Families. The ſtate of 
Erom between the times of Eſau and Moſes ſeems to have been this ; 


There were firſt Dukes, then Kings, and after them Dukes again. 


Bur if it be obje&eJ, that the time was too ſhort for a ſucceſſion of 
ſo many perſons, it may be replied, that what is confeſled concerning 
the Dukes preceding the Kings, might be true alſo of theſe ſucceeding 
Dukes, and that the Edomites either having taken ſome diſtaſte at 
Kingly Government, or differing about the choice of a new King, 
divided themſelves again into ſeveral petty Principaliries or Duke- 
doms ; and ſo ſeveral of thoſe were Dukes at the ſame time indivers 


arts. 
; 41 Duke Aholibamah, Duke Elah, Duke Pinon, 
42 Duke Kenaz, Duke Teman, Duke Mibzar, t 
43 Duke Magdiel, Duke Iram. Theſe be the Dukes of 
Edom, according to their habitations, intheland of their 
poileffion. : he is Eſau the father of F the Edomites, 


CHAP. XXXVIL 
Jacob dwells in Canaan : Joſeph brings ts his father an ill report of his 
brethren, 2. He loves, they hate him, 3, 4. The more becauſe of his 
dreams which he tola them, 5. His firſt dream - 7. His brethren interpret 
it, and their hatred increaſes, 8. His ſecond dream, 9. Tells it his 
father, who rebukes him, but obſerves his ſaying, to, 11. He is ſent by 
his father to ſeek after his brethren, 13----17. They ſeeing him, conſpire 
his death, 18----20. Bit upon the interceſſion of Reuben, they frip and 
throw him into @ fit, 21----24. Some Iſhmaelites paſſmg by, by Judah's 
advice they ſell him to them, who carry him into Egypt, 2<---28. Reuben 

is concerned fer him, 29, 30+ Their contrivance to deceive Jacob, 31, 32. 

His grief for the loſs of Joſeph, 33-=-=--35, Joſeph ſold ro Potiphar an 

officer in Egypt, 36. 

N D Jacob dwelt in the land + wherein his father 
£ \ was a ſtranger, in the land of Canaan. 

2 Theſe are the generations @ of Jacob: Joſeph being 
ſeventeen years old, was feeding the flock with hts 
brethren, and the lad was with the fons of Bilhah, and 
with the ſons of Zilpah 6b, his fathers wives: and Joſeph 
brought unto his father their evil report c. 

2 ( i.e.) The events or occurrences which happened to Jacob in 
his Family and Hue, So that word is uſed, Gen: 6: 9: and Num: 3. 1. 
Or the word 7heſe, may relate to what is ſaid, Gen: 35: 22, &c. The 
Genealogy of E/au being brought in by way of Parentheſis, and that 
being finiſhed, Moſes xr turns to the Generations ef Jacob, as his principal 
buſineſs, and proceeds in the Hiſtory of their concerns. & Jacob 
places Foſeph with them rather than with the ſons of Lea 5, either to 
keep Joſeph humble; Or for oſeph's ſecurity, becaute the other ſons 
retained the old grudge of their Mother,and were more liketo envy, 

-centemn, hate and abuſe him ; Or as an obſerver of their aftions, 
whom he moſt ſuſpeRed, as the following words may ſeem toimply. |, 
c Acquainted him with their lewd and wicked courſes, to the dif- 
honour of God and of their Family, thar ſo his Father might apply, 
ſuck remedies as he thought meet. 


3 Now Ifrael loved Joſeph more than all his children, 
becauſe he was the fon of his old age d : and he made 


him a coat of many Þ colours e. 
4 Being born when Jacob was Ninety one yearsold: Such Children Judges 

are commonly beſt beloved by their Parents, either becauſe ſuch are 5* 3%? 

a ſingular blefling of God, and a more than common teſtimony of ? 237+ 

his favour, and a mercy leaſt expeCted by them, and therefore moſt 173: 18% 

prized ; or becauſe they have more pleaſing converſation with them, 

and leſs experience of their misbehaviour, of which the elder oft- 

times are guilty, —_— they alienate their Parents affeQHions front 

them. The ancient "Tranſlations, Chaldee, Perſian, Arabick, and 

Samaritan, renderthe words thus, a wiſe or prudent ſon ; old age being 

ofr mentioned as a token of prudence; one born old, one wiſe above 

his years, one that had a grey head, as we ſay, upon green ſhoulders 

This may ſeem the more probable, both becauſe Foſeph was indee 

ſuch a Child, and gave good evidence of it in a prudent obſervation 

of his brethrens treſpaſles, and a diſcreet choice of the fitteſt remedy 5 

for them ; and becauſe the reaſon here alledged ſeems proper and | 

peculiar to feſeph; whereas in the other ſenſe it belongs more to 

Benjamin, who was younger than Joſeph, and coſtthis Mother dearer, 

and therefore might upon that account claim a greater intereſt in his 

Father's affe&tions. e Probably made of threads of divers Colours 

interwoven together. Compare 2 Sam. 13. 18. This he gave him as 

a token of his ſpecial love, and of the rights of the firſt-born, which 

being juftly taken from Rewben, he conferred upon Joſeph, 1 Chron. 5. x. 
4 And when his brethren faw that their father loved 

him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and 


could got ſpeak peaceably unto him f., | 

f Their hatred was ſo deep and keen, that they could not ſmothes . 
it, as for their own intereſt they ſhould have done, but diſcovered 
it by their churliſhi\words and carriages to him. 


5 And Joſeph dreamed a dream g, and he told it his 
brethren, and they hatedlum yot the more, 


- c 


+ Heb, 7. 
Egon. a *| 


+ Heb. of 
his fathers 
ſojournings. 
: " Da 
28:L 
19,5 


fOr, pieces, | 


} Het 
be Pe: 
'f thy 


laren,t 


f+ Hg 
Maſter 
aArcam 


TO Ed a Wy PLL 


ENT zz s Which 


o 


ap. ANAV . = _ 


g Which it is probable he did not underſtand; for then he would 
never have told it to them, who, as he knew very well, were likely 


_ 


owh ambitious Deſi 


Dreams. | 
20. Come now therefore, and let us ſlay him, and 


gns-and Deſires with pretences or fiftions of 


to make an evil conſtruction and uſe of it. 
6 And he faid unto them, Hear, 
dream which I have dreamed 
<Chap:42 © For * behold, we were binding ſheaves in the field þ, 
6,9. and and lo, my ſheave aroſe, and allo ſtood upright ; and 
behold, your ſheaves ſtood round about z, and made 
obeiſancs to my ſheaf. = 
' -þ A ſecret Infinuation of the occaſion of Joſeph's advancement, 
which was from his Counſel and Care about the Corn of Egypr. 
This was a poſture of Miniſtry and Service, as is manifeſt Loth 


from Scripture and from common uſage. - 
8 And his brethren faid to him, Shalt thou indeed 


reign over us ? or ſhalt thou indeed haye dominion 
over us ? and they hated him yet the more, for his 
dreams, and for his words F. 


I pray you, this 


[Y 


43: 26. 
and 44. 
I+4 


+ For his relation of his Dreams, which they imputed to his Ar- | 


rOgancy. ; 

© 1 And he dreamed yet another dream &,and told it 
: his brethren, and ſaid, Behold, I have dreamed a dream 
* Chap: more ; and behoid *, the Son and the Moon /, and the 


45 29. eleven ſtars made obeiſance to me. = 
k That the Repetition of the ſame thing in another ſhape, might 
teach them, that the thing was borh certain and very obſervable. 
I Theſe weie not mentioned in the firſt Dream, becauſe in the 
event, his Brethren only went at firſt to Egypt and there worſhipped 
him, as afterwards his Father went with them. Ovj His Father 
did nor worſhip him in Egypt. Auſw. I He did worſhip him 
mediatly by his Sons, who in their Father's name'ahd ſtead bowed 
before him, and by the Preſents which he ſent as Teſtimonies 
of that re/pe& which he owed to him. 2. Ir 1s probable, that 7acob 
did, before the Egyptia 5, pay that Reverenice to his Son, which all 
the reſt did, & which was due ro the Dignity of his Place As the Re- 
»an Conſul - as commended by his i*ather for requi-ing him to alight 

from his Horſe; as the reſt did, when he met him upon the way. 
:zo And he roid zr to his Father, and co his brethren; 


and his farher rebuked him »,, and ſaid unco him, What 
3s this dream that thou haſt dreamed ? ſhall I, and why 
wotier f, and thy brethren indeed come $0 bow down 


our ſelves to thee, to the earth 2? 

3 Nor through anger at Joſeph, or contempt of his Dream, for 
it lows, he obſerved it ; but partly lelt Joſep ſhould be puffed up 
upon the account of his Dreams ; and principa'ly, to afley the envy 
and hatred of his Brethren. + Eirher 1. Rachel, who was no dead, 
and therefore muſt riſe again and worſhip thee; whence he may ſeem 
to infer the idl-neſs of the Dream, becauſe the fulfilling it was im< 
poſſible. Or rather, 2. Leah, his Step-mother,one thar filled his Mo- 
cher's place; being now7dcob's only Witfe,& the Mother of the Family, 

* Dan:7. ti And tt brethren envied him : but his father * ob- 


28-Luk:2. fpryed the ſaying», : 
02 05s » The words of Joſeph ; or the thing, the Dream which he told, 
well knowing that God did frequently at that time ſignify his mind 
by Dreams, and perceiving ſomething ſingular and extarordinary 
in this Drcam, and eſpeciilly in the doubling of ir : Es 
2 4 And his brethren went to feed their fathers 

flock in Shechem 0. 

o In the Parts adjoyning to Shethem, in the Lands which he had 
purchaſſed there, Gen: 33: 19. Let none think ſtrange that he 
ibould ſend his Sheep ſo far from him, both becauſe that Land was 
his own, and becauſe his Sheep being exceeding numerous, and he 
but .a Strangef in the Land, was likely to be expoſed ro many ſuch 
Inconveniences. Compare Gen: 3o: 36. One may rather wonder 
that he du: venture his Sons and his Catte! there, where that bar- 
barous Maſſacre had been committed, Chap: 34 25. Bur thoſe i'a- 
ſtures being his own, and convenient for his uſe, he did commir 
' bimſelfand them to tharſame good Providence which watched over 
him then and e-er ſince, and {tijl kepr up rhat terror which then he 
ſent upon them. Belides Jacob's Sons and Servants made a conſt- 
derable Company, and the Men of Shechem being univerially flain, 
others were not very forward to revenge their Quarrel, where there 
was any hazard to themſelves in ſuch an enterprize. 

t2 And Iſrael ſaid unto Joſeph,Do not thy brethren 
feed the flock in Shechem 2 Come, and I will ſend chee 


unco them p : and he ſaid, Here 2m [. 
p Having kepr him for ſome time at home, and ſuppoſing that 
'Jength of tim- had cooled their heats, and worn out their hatred, 


he now ſends hinr to them. 

14 And hefaid to him, Go, I pray thee, Þ ſee whe- 
ther it be well with thy brethren, and well with the 
flocks, and bring me word again : ſo he ſent him out 
of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechems 

i5 T And a certain man found him, and behold he 
was wandring in the field; and the man asked him 
ſaying, What ſeekeſt thou ? 

16 Andhe faid, I ſeek my brethren ? tell me, I pray 
thee, where they feed their flocks. | 

17 And the man ſaid, They are departed hence : for 


7 Heb: ſet 

'he peace 
1f thy bre- 
ire n,&C, 


went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. 
q X place not very far from Shechem, where afterwards a City 
was ble. Sec 2 Kings 6: 13. F #Y 
18 And when they lay him afar off, even. before he 
came near unto them, they conſpired againlt him, -to 
flay hams \ ; : 
19. And they faid one to another, Behold, this F 
dreamer 7 cometh. EDEN © 
. * Heb. This Moſfter of Dreams, this crafty Dreamer, that 


[ 


f + Hay. 
Maſter of 


Arcamy. t Jie 7 
covers his 


2957 ITINERARY 2 7 


| men, and they drew and lift up Joſeph out of the pir, 


T heard them ſay, Let us go to Dothan q. And Joſeph | 


caſt him inro ſome pit 5, and we will fay, Some evil 
beaſt hath devoured him : ; and we ſhall ſez what will 


become of his dreams. | 
5 Partly as unworthy of Burial ; partly to cover their villanous 
Action, and partly that they mighr quickly pur him out of theit 
fight and minds. # There being great ſtore of ſuch Creatures in 
thoſe Parts. See 1 Kings 13: 24. 2 Kings 2: 24. 
21 And * Reuben heard #t, and he delivered him « * Chap: 
out of their hands, and ſaid, Ler us not. kill him. 42:22, 
# He did fo, as to the violent and certain diſpatch of his Life 
s which was intended : Or the A& is herepur for the purpoſe and 
endeavour of doing it, in which ſenſe Balak is faid to fght againſt 
Iſrac!, Jof: 24: 9. and Abraham to offer up Tiaac, Heb: 11:17. So here, 
he delvred him, i. e. uſed his outmoſt power to deliver him,that fo 
he might recover his Father's favour loſt by his inceſtuous Aion. 


22 And Reuben ſaid unto them, Shed no blood, but 
caſt him into this pit that is in the wilderneſs, and lay 
no hand upon him ; that he might rid him out of their 
hands, to deliver him to his father again. | 

23 © Andit cams to paſs, when Joſeph was come 
unto his brethren, that they ſtripe Joſeph out of his ._. 
coat, his coat of thany colours that was on him. + Or, 

24 Andthey took him, and caſt him into a pit : and 5: 
the pit was empty, there 45 NO WAtETr In it. | 

25 And they fat down to eat bread x : and they life 
up their eyes, and looked, and behold, a company of 
* Iſhmaeiices y came from Gilcad z, with their camels, 
bearing ſpicery, and balm «, and myrrh, going to car- 
ry it down to Egypt SN . 

x To refieſh themſelves, their Conſciences being ſtupified ; and 
their hearts hardned againſt theic brother, notwithitand:ing all his 
m-{t paiſionate Tatreaties to them, Gen: 42: 21. y The Poſterity of 
Iſhmael See Gen: 25. 18. 2 Afamous place for Balm,and other excel- 
lent Commodities, and f:r the Co: fluence of Merchants. See jer:8: 
22: and 22: 6, a Or Roſin, as the Ancient, and divers other Trart- 
{lators render it. 

26 And Judah faid unto his brethren; What profit is 
it, if we ſlay our brother b, and conceal his blood c? 

6 IF we ſuffer him to periſh in the pit, when we may ſell him 


with advantage. c (7. e. ) His Death, as the word Blood is often uſed. 
See Deut:; x7: 8. 2 Sam: 1:16. and 7: 28. 


o 


* Seeverſa 
28:36» 


” 


27 Come, and let us fell him to the Iſhmaclites, and 

ler not our hand be upon him : for he is our brother, ,,, \ 

and our fleſh « and his brethren + were content. . + Heb: , 
28 Then they patied by Midianites 4, merchant- #arkeed, 


and * foid joſeph to the Iſhmaelices for * rwenty pieces * ppajnt + 
of fiivec: and they brought Joſeph into Egypt. , ; re5:19+ ,. 

4 This Story ſeems a little involved, and the Perſons to whom Wd; 192! 
he was fold, doubtful. Here ſeem to be two, if not three. ſorts of 13- Ads : 
Merchants mentioned, Jbmaelites, and Midianites here, and Meda- 7: 9- _: +, 
nites, as it 151n the Hebrew, werſe 36. which were a diſtin Peo- * See Math: 
ple from the Midianizes, as deſcended from Meaan; when the Mi- 27:9: 
dimites, deicending from Midian, both Abraham's Sohs, Gen: 25: 2, 
The buiineſs may be accomodared. divers ways, either 1. the ſame 
Pertons o: People are promiſcucuſly called both Ifhmaelizes and Mix 
dipnites, as they alſo are, Judges 8: 1, 24, 28 either becauſe they 
were mixed together in their Dwellings, and by Marriages-; or be. 
cauſe they were here joyned together, and. made one Caravan or 
Company of Merchants. And the next may be read thus, 2nd the Mia 
diamie Merchant-men (either the ſame who »ere called 1bmael:tes, werſe 
27. or others being in the ſame Company with them.) paſſed by. and 
they,i 6. not the Merchant-men, bur Joſeph's Brethren ſpoken- of,verſs 
27. the Relative being referred to the remoter Antecedent, as it ig 
frequently in the Scripture ) lift up Joſeph and ſold him t6 the Iſbmae- 
lites o: Maianites, &c. Or 2. The Perſons may be diſtinguiſhed, and 
the Story may very well be conceived thus, The 1hmaelites are going 
to Ezypr, and are diſcerned at ſome diſtance by 7oſeph's Brethren, 
while they were diſcourſling about their Brother. ; In the time of 
their diicourſe, the Midianizes, who feem to be. coming from Egypr,. 
coming by the Pir and hearing Joſeph's Cries there, pull him our of 
the Pir, and {ell him to the' bmaelites, who carrie him with thens 
into Egypt, There they ſell him ro the Medianites, tho that, as many 
other i1liſtorical paſſages, be omitted. in the Sacred, Story.. And the. 
Medanites, or Midianites, if you pleaſe, only ſuppoſing them to be 
other Perſons than thoſe mentioned, werſe 28. which is bur a fair 
and reaſonable Suppoiition, ſell him to Potiphar. 

29 1 And Reuben returned unto che pit e, and 
behold, Joſeph was nor in the pit: and he rent his 
clothes f. | — 1: 3% Res 

e That according to his Brethren's order, werſe 27. he might take; 
him thence and fel] him. f As the manner was upen doletyl Oc- 
currencies. See below, verſe 34: Numb: 14: 6. Ezra 9: 3. Job 1: 200 
:and 2: 12. | | 

. 30 And he returned unto his brethren, and faid,' 
The child g is. not b, and 1, whether ſhall I goz? _ 

£ So he calls him comparatively to his Brethren,' though he was 
17 years old, wverſe.2. . þ (i: e.) Is not in the Land of the Living, or, 
is Dead, as that Fhraſe is commonly uſed,' as Gen: 42. 13," 36. com- 

red with Ge, ,44;20+ 7ob 7: 21. Jer:31: 15, Lam: 5:7 Matth: 2.18. 
; Either to find the Ch11d,” or to fles from onr Father ?-He is more 
ſolicitous than the reit, becauſe he being the eldeſt Brorher,” his. 
' Father would require Joſeph ar his hayI,” ad- being-16 highly mcen= 
ſed againſt -him tor his former Crime, would be the more apt to 


hy 


| fulpect hun, and deal more Ro 7 with hum, F þ i Fl 


21 And they took Joſephs coat, and killed a kid of 

the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood. 
32 And they ſent the coat of many colours, and they 
brought & it te their father, and faid, This have we 
found : know now whether it be thy ſons coat or no. - 
k They brought it by a Meſſenger whom they ſent : Men are com- 

monly ſaid to do what they cauſe others to do. 

33 And he knew z, and ſaid, 1: 5: my ſons coat ; 
an * evil beaſt hath devoured him ; Joſeph is without 


doubt rent in pieces. 

34 And Jacob rent his clothes, and put ſackcloth 
] upon his loins, and mourned for his ſon many days. 

T (5.e.) ( A coarſe and mournful Habit. This is the firſt Exam- 

ple of that kind,but afterwards was in common uſe upon theſe oc- 
caſions. See 2 Sam: 3. 31. 1 Kings 20: 31. and 21:27. &c. - 

25 And all his ſons, and all his daughters »- roſe up 
to comfort him : but he refuſed to be comforted - and 
he ſaid, for I will go down into the grave » unto my 


{on o mourning : thus his father wept for him. 

m Dinh, and his Daughters-in-law, and his Son's Daughters. 
'y This Hebrew word Shel is taken ſomrtimes for Hell, as 0b 11. 
8. Prov: 15: 11. but moſt commonly for the Grave, or the place 
or State of the Dead, as Gen: 42: 38: and 44: 29, 31. Pſalm 6. 5. 
and 16: 10, &c. And whether of thoſe it ſignifies, muſt be deter- 
mined by the Subje& and the Circumſtances of the Place ; here it 
cannot be meant of Hell, for Jacob neither could believe thar good 
Joſeph was there, nor would have reſolved to go thither ; bur the 
ſenſe is, I will kill my ſelf with Grief,oc I will never leave mourn- 
ing till T dye.  s Or, for my ſon : ſo the Prepoſition E is oft uſed 
for Al, as 1 Sam: 1: 27. and 4: 19, 27, 22. and 2 Sam. 21. 2. 

36 And the Mcdianites fold him into Egypt unto 


Potiphar, an + officer of Pharaohs, and | * captain of 


the E wn fp 
p Whoſe office it was to apprehend and puniſh Criminal Perſons. 
See Gen: 40: 3. Jer: 39: 9. Mark 6: 27. 
- CH A P. XXXVIIE 


Tudah marries a Caananitiſh woman, who bears him three ſons, y==<=5. 
' He marries his eldeſt ſon to Tamar, 6. He being wicked is ſlain by God,7. 
The ſecond ſon is commanded to marry her, 8. His wickedneſs, 9. and 
| death, 10. He promiſes her his third ſon, but perforins not, 11. She by 
* a ſubtile praffice commits inceſt with him, 12. He gives her a pledge, 18. 
She is found with child ; Judah commands her to be burnt, 24. She brings 
to her father the pledge, 25. He acknowleages it ; Acquits her, and 

condemns himſelf, 26. She brings forth two ſons, 27——30- 

AND it came to paſs at that time s that Judah went 
down from his brethren b, and turned in to a 
certain Adullamite c, whoſe name was Hirah. 

# This Story is not withour difficulty, if we conſider how Jit- 
tle time is allowed for all the events of this Chapter, there being 
not above twenty three years between Judah's Marriage, and the 
Birth of Pharez, yea, andthe Birth of his Sons too, Eſrom and Ha- 
ful, who are ſaid to go into Egypr with Jacob, Gen: 46: 12. But 
there are two ways propoſed for the Reſolution of it, as the Phraſe, 
at that time, may be underſtood two ways, cither x. More largely, 
for the time ſince Jacob's return from Padan to Canaan, and 1o the 
Hiſtory may be conceived-thus ; Judah was married ſome years 
before the ſelling of Joſeph, tho it be here mentioned after ir, and 

 ſoour of its place, as being the foundation of all the following 
Events, which are here placed together, becauſe they followed the 
ſelling of Joſeph. Judah, and Er, and Onan, and afterwards Pharez, 
are ſuppoſed each to Marry,and have a Child art fourteen years old, 
which though unufual, wants not Examples both in Sacred and 
Profane Writers. And they that will quarrel with the Scripture, 
and queſtion its Authority for ſome ſuch uncuſtomary Occurences 
which it relates, ſhew more of Impiety than Witdom in it, and 
ſhall do well to conſider, that God mighr ſo order things by his 
Providence, and record ſuch things in his Word, upon the ſame. 
account on which he hath put ſeveral other difficult Paſſages in 
Scripture, partly to try and exerci(e Men's Faith, Humility, and 
Modeſty ; and partly to puniſh the evil Minds of ungodly Men,and 
for their Sinsto lay an occaſion of Stumbling and Cavilling it the 
Scriptures before them that greedily ſeek and gladly catch art all fuch 
occaſions. Or, 2 More ſtrickly, for the rime following the ſale of 
Joſeph, which ſeems the more probable way, and ſo the ſtory lies 
thus ; Judah was now about twenty years old when he married,and 
the three firſt years he hath three Sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah : The 
two firſt Marry, each when they were about Seventeen years old. 
Three years after both their Deaths,and when Shelah had been mar- 
riageable a year or two, and was not given to Tamar, Judah lies with 
Tamar and begets upon her Pharez. But as for Eſrom and Hamul,they 
are ſaid to go into Bgypt with Jacob, as alſo Benjamin 's ten Sons are 
| ſaid ro go with him thither, ro wit, in- their Father's Loins, becauſe 
they were begotten by their Father in Egypr,whileſt J=cob lived there, 
of which more in its proper place. & Probably in diſcontent, upon 
occaſion of Quarrels ariſen among them about the ſelling of Joſeph, 
whereof Judah was a great Promoter, if not the firſt Mover. c Of 
the Ciry of Adulam. Of which ſee of: 12. 15: and rg. 35. 


2 And Judah ſaw there a daughter of a certain Ca- 
naanite 4, whoſe name was * Shuah e: and he took her, 
and went in unto her. 

'  @ Whom he married, againſt the Counſel and Example of his 
Parents. But when Judah had committed ſo great a Crime as the 
ſelling of his Brother, and God had forſaken him, no wonder he 
adds one Sin to another« e The name, not of the Daughter, bur 


of her Father, verſe 12. 

2 And ſhe conceived, and bare a fon, and he called 
his name Er. | | | 

4 * And ſhe conceived again, and bare a ſon, and ſhe 
called his name Onan. RES 

5 And ſhe yet again conceived, and bare a ſon, and 


\ Tains,Cour- 
fFiers and 
Officers. 
+ Heb: 
thief of the 
| flaughter- 
men,or Ex- 
_ Ecutioners. 


-* Or,chief 
: Marſhal. 


©; Chron: 
2: 3: 


'* Num: 
26: 19. 


PROS” 2 S - - n= Le 


_ * W's F : ek, \ Bob 1» A Ll 
| called his trarffe Shelah ; and he was at Chezibf, when 
ſhe bare him. 

f A place near 44ullam, called alſo Achzib, Joſ: 19: 29. Mic: 1: 14: 

6 And Judah took a wife for Er his firſt-born, whole 
name 2yas Tamar. 

7 And * Er, Judahs firſt-born was wicked in the * 
ſight of the LORD g, and the LORD flew him 4. 

g (7. e.) Notoriouſly wicked. Compare Gen 10: g. and 13: 13, 
h In ſome extraordinary and remarkable manner, as verſe 10. 

8 And Judah ſaid unto Onan, Go in unto thy bro- 
chers wife, and marry her #, and raiſe up ſecd to thy 
brother k. 

# This, as alſo divers other things, was now inſtituted and ob- 
ſerved amongſt God's People, and afterwards was expreſſed in a 
written Law, Deut: 25: 5, 6. See alſo Num: 36: 6,7. Ruth 1. 17. 
Marth: 22: 24. k Beget a Child which may have thy Brothers Name 
and Inheritance, and may be reputed as his Child. So it was with 
the firſt Child, bur the reſt were reputed his own. 

9 And Onan knew that the ſeed ſhould not be his 3 
and it came to paſs when he went in unto his brothers 
wife, that he ſpilled ic on the ground, leſt chat he 
ſhould give ſced unto his Brother 1. 

? Two things are here noted, 1. The ſin it ſelf, which is here 
particularly diſcribed by the Holy Ghoſt, that Men might be in- 
{trutted concerning the nature, and the great evil of this Sin of 
Self-pollution, which is ſuch that ir brought upon the ARor of it 
the exteroardinary Vengeance of God, and which is condemned 
not only by Scripture, but even by the Light of Nature, and the 
Judgment of Heathens, who have expreſly cenſured it as a great Sin, 
and as a kind'of Murther. Of which ſee my Latin Smopſes. Whereby 
we may ſufficiently underſtand how wicked and abominable a 
Prattice this is amongſt Chriſtians, and in the Light of the Goſpel, 
which lays greater and ftrifter Obligations upon us to Purity, and 
ſeverely forbids all Pollution both of Fleſh and Spirit. 2. The cauſe 
of this Wickedneſs ; which ſeems to have been cither hatred of his 
Brother ; or envy at his Brother's Name and Honour, ſpringing 
from the pride of his own Heart. 

Io And the thing which he did, + diſpleaſed the 
LORD m», wherefore he ſlew him alſo ». 

m An Expreſſion noting a more than ordinary Offence againſt V® of the 
God, as 2 Sam: 11: 27. # This juſt, bur dreadful, ſeverity of God Lord. 
is noted both for the terror of ſuch like Tranſgreflors, and to pro- 
voke love and thankfulneſs to God in thoſe whom he uſeth more 
indulgently. 

1T Then faid Jndah to Tamar his daughter-in-law, 
Remain a widow at thy fathers houſe o, cill Shelah my 
ſon be grown þ: ( for he ſaid q, Left peradventure he 
die aiſo as his brethren did r ) and Tamar went ard 
dwelt in her fathers houſe. | h 

o Whether he ſent her from his Houſe, that Shelah might not be 
inſnared by her Preſence and Converſation. p So he diſmiſſed her 
with a pretence of kindneſs, and a tacit promiſe of Marriage to her, 
which he never intended to keep, as the following words imply. 

q Or rather, but he ſaid ; for the Hebrcw chi oft ſignifies but,as Genz 

45- 8. Pſalm 37: 20. Eccl: 2:10: and: 2. So here is an oppoſition be 

tween what he ſaid to Tamar, and what he ſaid to himſelf, or in his 

own heart, as that word ſaid is oft uſed: He intimated to her, that _ 

he would give Shelah to her, but he meant otherwiſe, and ſaid in 
himſelf, I will not do it. » Imputing the Death of his two Sons 
either to her fault, or to her unluckineſs, rather than to his own, or 
his Son's miſcarriages. 

12 © And # in proceſs of time / the daughter of 
Shuah Judahs wife died : and Judah was comforted,and 
went up unto his ſheep-ſhearers t to Timnath «, he and 
his friend Hirah the Adullamite. 

s When many days had paſſed, and Shelzh, tho grown, was not 

iven to Tamar. # To Feaſt and rejoyce with them at that time, 
as the manner was then and afterwards: See 1 Sam: 25:36. u A place 
not far from Adullam ; of which See Jof: 15: 57. | 

13 And it was told Tamar, ſaying, behold thy fa- 
ther-in-law goeth up to Timnath ro ſhear his ſheep. 

14 And ſhe put her widows garments off from her, 
and covered her with a vail x, and wrapped her ſelf, 
and ſatin Þ an open place y, which is by the way to + x7: 5; 
Timnath : for ſbe ſaw that Shelah was grown, and ſhe goor of eyes, 
was not given unto him to wife, or of Eno- 

x As Harlots uſed to do in thoſe modeſter Ages of the World, #/”- 
when they had not learnt to outface the Sun, nor to glory in theiv 
Villanies. y Where ſhe might be ſooneſt diſcovered by Paſlengers. 

This is noted as the praCtice of Harlots, Prov: 7: 12: and g: 14. Jer: 
J: 2. Ezek: IG: 24, 25. 

15 When Judah ſaw her, he thought her to be an 
harlot : becauſe ſhe, had covered her face z: 

z And was doubtlels careful not to diſcover her ſelf by her 
Voice. 


16 And he turned unto her by the way, and aid, 
Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee (for he 
knew not that ſhe wes his daughter-in-law ) and ſhe 
ſaid, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayeſt come 
in unto me? , 

17 And he ſaid, I will ſend thee + a kid fromthe flock: 
and ſhe faid, Wilt thou give »e a pledge till thou ſend it? ** 
18 And he ſaid, What pledge ſhall I give thee ? And © 
the ſaid, Thy ſignet, and thy bracelets s, 2nd thy ſtaff 
that is in thine hand : and he gave it her, and came ip 


i Heb:was 


days were 


kid ofthe 


FF, 


unto her, and ſhe conceived by him 6, 4 
4 p Q1, 


——— EET IE — 


evil in the 


t Heb. hs |. 
multiplied. : 


+ He! 
becom, 
C03tE 


T Or, 


Wherefore 


' haſt thou 


' made this 
* breach a- 
 &dtnlſt thee 


har 1: 


> 8 breach, 


+ Heb: & : 
3 2, 4: ; 
» Marth: 


4 


7: Chror, 


LE} 


?' 


7. ES ALPINA 3; 


_ 


= 


' made this 
* breach a- 


* Fx Chron; 


" Chap. XXXVIIL GEN 
a Or, handkerchief, os girdle, or any other Ornament made of 
:wiſted Thread, which the Hebrew word ſignifies» b God ſo ordering 
things by his Providence, that his Sin might be diſcovered, And 
this 2nd other ſuch horrid Crimes committed ſometimes by the 
Patriarchs, and other eminent Perſons, it hath pleaſed God for divers 
wiſe and holy Reaſons to Jeave upcn Record, partly to diſcover how 
great and deep the Corcuptien of Man's Nature js, and that even in 
che beſt ; partly to oblige all Men to an humble Senſe of their own 
Infirm:ity,and to a diligent Application of themſelves to God for his 
gracious Succors, andto a greater CircumſpeGion and Warchfulneſs 
to prevent thoſe Evils in themſelves ; partly re encourage even the 
greateſt ſinners to R:pentance and the hope of Pardon ; and partly 
for the juſt Puniſhment and Obduration of incorrigible Sinners, who 
make ſuch ſad Examples matter of their Delighr and Imitation, 
19 And ſhe aroſe and went away, and laid by her 
vail from her, and put on the garments of her widow- 
hood. 2 
20 And Judah ſent the kid by the hand of his friend 
the Adullamite, to receive bis pledge from the womans 
hand, but he found her not. 
21 Then he-asked the men of that place, ſaying, 
+ Or, = Where is the harlot that was + openly by the way fide? 
Enojim. And they ſaid, There was no harlot in this place. 
22 And he returned to Judah, and faid, I cannot 
find her : and alſo the men of the place {a:d, That there 
was no harlot in this place. 


And Judah ſaid, Let her take it to her, left we 
A rod wn behold, I fentthis kid, and thou haſt 


+ 20S. + be aſhameds : 
ecome 4 
not found her. 
comer pl. b Nore, That Fornication was eſteemed finful and ſhameful 


among{t the Heathens. 

24 4 And it came to paſs about three months after, 
that it was told Judah, ſaying, Tamar thy daughter-in- 
law hath playcd the harlot, and alſo behold, ſhe is with 
child by whoredom : and Judah faid, Bring her forth c, 


and let her be burnt de | 
c To the Magiftrat, from whom ſhe may receive her Sentence 


of and deſerved Puniſhmenre. Judah had not the power of Life and 
Death, at leaſt not over her who was 2 Canaanite, and who was not 
3n his, but in ker own Father's Houſe. Bur he being a perſon of 
great Eſtate and Authority, and as it ſeems, of obliging Converſation, 
could dovery much to perſwade thoſe who then had the power of 
the Sword, either to draw it forth, at leaſt in a juſt Caule, on his 
behalf, or to ſheath it upon his defire and fatisfaQtion. & As guilty 
of Adultery, which was puniſhed with Death by the Laws of God, 
Deut: 22: 23, 24: and of Nations too, Jer: 29: 22, 23. He chargerh 
her with Adultery, beczuſc ſhe was betrothed to Shelah. See Deur: 22: 
23. This eagerneſs of J#4a4 proceeded not from zeal of Juſtice, for 
then he would not have endeavoured to deſtroy the innocent Child 
with the guilty Mother, againſt God's Law, Deut: 24: 16: Ezek: 18: 20: 
but from worldly Policy, that. he might take her cut of the way, 
which he eſteemed a burden and a blot ro his Family. 
25 When ſhe was brought forth, ſhe ſent to her fa- 


ther-in-law, ſaying, By the man whoſe theſe are, am 
I with child: and ſhe {aid, Diſcern, I pray thee, whoſe 
are theſe, the ſignet, and bracelets, and itaft. 


26 And Judah acknowledged hem e, and faid, She] © 


hath been more righ:eous than I f ; becauſe that [ gave 
her not to Shelah my ſon : and he knew her agan no 


more g. 
e His guilty Conſcience, and the horrour offo foul a Fatt, together 


with his ſudden ſurprizal, forced him to an ingenuous Confeſſion, 
whereas he might have uſed many pretences and evaſions, which 
would eaſily have prevailed with ſuch partial Judges. f She was 
more unchaſt, becauſe ſhe knowingly committed Adultery and 
Inceſt, when he deſigned neither ; but he was more unjuſt, becauſe 
he was the cauſe of her Sin, both by withholding She/ah from her, 
who was hers both by Right and by Judah's Promiſe, and by whom 
her Chaſtiry ſhould have Been preſerved ; and by his ſolicitation and 
and encouragement of her to the Sin. g Shewing the ſincerity of his 
Confeſſion by his forſaking of the Sin confefled, See Job 34: 32. And 
it may be probably concluded rhat he neither knew her, nor any 
other Woman afterward, becaule there is no mention of any Child 
which he had after th1s time. Y : : : 
27 4 And it camets pals in the time of her trayail, 


that behold, twins were in her womb. 

28 And it came to paſs when the travailed, that the 
one put out his hand, and the midwife took and bound 
upon his hand a {carlet thread b, ſaying, This came 


out firſt. 

h In rcken of his being the firſt-born, which the confidently ex- 
| petted he would be. | . 

29 And it came to paſs, as he drew back his hand, 
that behold his brother came out : and ſhe ſaid, F How 
haſt thou broken forth ? this breach be upon thee z : 
therefore his name was called + * Pharez. 

z Be impured to thee, as the ſame phraſe 1s taken, Ger. 16. 5. 

30 And afterward came out his brother that had the 


T Or, 
wherefore 
' haſt thou 


giſt thee? 


+ T Thar is, ſcarlet thread upon his hand, and his name was called: 


” 8 breach, Zarah. 


CHAP, XXXIX. 


God profpers Joſeph in Potiphar's ſervice, 1, 2. , 
Jets hnm over all his houſe, 3——6. He is a goodly Perſon, and his miſtreſs 
ſollicites hum to lye with her, 7, He abhorring the ingratitnde againſt 
his maſter, and ſin againſt God, conflantly refujes, $ —10. They being 
fr the Houſe alone, fþe ſeizes his coat, which he leaves with her, and fled, 


L 24 
: Marth: 
MEE 


Potiphar obſerves it, and. 


ESTS ; Chap. XXXIX 
| IT w— 13, She accuſes him frft to the ſervants, 14, 15, Then to | 


his maſter, 16 =— 18. Who caſts hins into priſon, 19, 20. The Lord 
z with him there ; he finds favour with the keeper ; u ſet over the priſoners, 


and proſpers, 21 —23, 
A ND Joſeph was brought down to Egypt, and 
* Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the * Chap 
guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hand of the 37: 36 
ihmaelites, which had brought him down thither. | 
2 And * the LORD was with Joſeph a, and he was * ; $an 
a proſperous man, and he was in the houſe b of his maſter a 18: 


che Egyptian. eng 
aWirh his gracious Preſence and Bleſſing, as this phraſe is raken AQs 7: 

here, Yerſe 21. and Gen. 21. 22. and 26. 24, 6 He doth not endeavour 
to make an eſcape te his Father, bur demeaned himſelf pattently 
_ faithfully in the ſtation into which God's Providence had brought 

im. pe 

| 3 And his maſter ſaw that the LOR D: was with 
him c, and that the LOR D made all that he did to 


proſper in his hand d, 

c The Heathens owned a ſupream God, and his over-ruling 
Providence in Aﬀairs, though they did nor glorify him as God, bur 
worlhipped the Crearure with; and more than the Creator, Rom: 1:25. 

a (5. e. ) Under his Miniftry, as this Phraſe is uſed, Exod: 4: 133 

Levit: 8: 36: Prov: 26: 6: and oft elſewhere. : 
. 4 And Joſeph found grace in his ſight, and he ſerved 

him e, and he made him overſcer over his houſe, and 


all that he had he pur into his hand f. 

2 Not now as a Slave, but in an higher degree. f( #. e. ) Com» 
mitted to his care and management, as Gen. 16. 6. Objef#. How 
could this be, when Joſeph underſtood not the Egyptian Tongue ? 
Anſw. Joſeph doubtleſs when he came thither, did as much as poſſi. 
bly he could, endeavour to get the knowledge of that Language, 
and being a Perſon of excellent Parts would ſoon obtain ir, eſpecially 
becauſe of the grear Afﬀiniry between that Language and his own. 
Nor muſt we think that: Joſeph was thus highly advanced in an 
inſtant, but by degrees, ſtep by ſtep, and after ſome conſiderable 
time. 

5 And it came to paſs from the time that he had : 
made him overſeer in his houſe, and over all that + - 
he had, that * the LORD bleſſed the Egyptizns * Chap: 
houſe for Joſephs ſake : and the vlefling of the LORD 3® *7* 
bare upea all that he had in the houſe, and in the 
IEid., : 

6 And he left all that he had in Joſephs hand : and 
he knew not ought he had, ſave the bread which he 
did eat g:: and Joſeph was a goodly perfon, and well. 


favoured. | EEE 254 
g He took care for nothing, but that he might ear, and drink, and 


{ fare deliciouſly. Nor did he indeed rake any care for that, it being 


provided for him by other hands. Others thus, he took care for 
nothing, but committed all to Joſeph, except his Bread, which he 
would not have provided by an Hebrew hand, becauſe the Egyptians. 
might not eat Bread with the Hebrews, Gen. 43. 32. But that was no 
impedimenr, for neither did Joſeph eat with his Maſter, nor was he 
the Cook to dreſs it for him. Bur he might provide Feod for him, 
as afrerwards he did for all the Egyprians without any ſcruple on their 


1de. : 


7 And it came to paſs after. theſe things, rae his 
mafters wife caft her eyes upon Joſcph þ, and ſhe ſaid, 


Lice witch me. 
h Ta a laſcivious and unchaſt manner. See Job 31. 1. Matth. 5. 28: 


2 Pet. 2. 14. 
8 Bur he refuſed, and ſaid unto his maſters wife, 


Behold, my maſter wottsth nor what 3s with me in 
the houſe, and he hath commicted all that he hath to 
my hand: | 

9 There is none greater in this houſe than I: neither 
hatch he kept back any thing from me, but thee, becauſe 
thou art his wife: How then can I do this great 
wickednels, and * fin againſt God ? 

io And it came to paſs, as ſhe ſpake to Joſeph day 
by day, that he hearkned not unto her, to lie by her, 


or to be with her z. 

; He avoided her Company and familiar Converſation, as evil in 
it ſelf, the preſent circumſtances conſidered, and as an occation of 
furrhFevit. See Prov: 1: I5: and 5:8; 1 Cor: 15: 33: 1 Theſft 5: 22: 
1 Tim: 5: 14. 

Ir And it came to paſs about this rime &, that 
Joſeph went into the houſe to do his buſineſs 4, 
and there was none of the men of the houſe thers 
withia *. 

k Or, Upon a certain day, which ſhe thought convenient for the: 
reaſon foliowing. . { That which belonged to bis charge ; to caſt up 
his accounts, as the Chaldee renders it, which requiring privacy, gave 
her this opportunity. * To wir, in that part of the Houſe where 
Joſeph was. | 

12 And ſhe 'caught him by his garment, ſaying, 
Lie with me : and he left his garment in her hand 
and fled, and got him out, 


mm Which he would not ſtrive to get from her, partly for reye*, 
rence to his Miſtreſs ; partly in deteſtation of her Wickednels, 


_ 
*Chap:20: 
6: Lev:....; 
6: 2: Plak 
51: 4 


=— 


whereby even his Garment might ſeem to be infe&ed ; and partly - 
to put kunſelf and her out of the danger of furtter Tempratr 


Qn, | ; ; + 4 
| WH 4 x3 And 


Chan. 


— 
Ws 


Fans em 
_ —_. 


em 


gems, 
nn 


oe 


I” > mpeg 
_ een, 


Cn emu — 


Pon BREE 
$5 


ee I 


— ___ 
treo 


"Ins qe gve an _—_— 
wo anus Ren, —— _ 


+ Heb. 
extended 
\ kindneſs 
f unto him. 
[ * Exod: 3: 
- 21:and 11: 
3:ard 12: 
| 36:Pſal: 
{ 206: 46: 
' Prov:16: 
7. Dan: 
I: 9: 


00400 


12 And it came to paſs, when ſhe ſaw that he had | 


left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth ; 
14 That ſhe called unto the men of her houſe », 


and ſpake unto them, ſaying, See, he # hath brought 


in an Hebrew p unto us, to mock q usr : he camein 
unto me to lie with me, and I cryed with a # loud 


voice. 


» To ſuch as were in other parts of the Houſe, whom ſhe called 


in as Witneſſes for her Husbands ſatisfa&tion. o (7.e. ) My Husband, 
whom ſhe would not name, as it were out of diſdain and high 
diſpleaſure for being the occaſion of this horrid affront. Thus rhe 


Pronouns he and they are oft uſed by way of contempt, as Luke 14: 24: 


and 19: 27: John 7- 11: and 8: 10. p So lhe calls him to render 


him hateful and contemptible ro the Egyprians. q To abuſe me; or 


© vitiate and defile me ; for that word 1s oft uſed in an obſcene 
ſenſe. r She infinuartes, that this was not only an indignity to her, 
but an injury to all the Family, which therefore they were obliged 


to revenge. . ; 

'15 And it came to paſs, when he heard that I lifred 
up my voice, and cryed, that he left his garmenc with 
me, and fled, and got him our. 

16 And ſhe laid up his garment by her, until her 
Lord came home.. ; : 

17 And ſhe ſpake unto him according to theſe 
words, ſaying : The Hebrew ſervant which thou haſt 
brought unto us s, came in unto me to mock me. 

5 So ſhe makes her Hugband acceſſory to the Crime, that ſhe might 
provoke him to the ſharper revenge. : 

18 And it came to paſs, as I lift up my voice, and 


cryed, that he left hisgarment with me, and fled out. 
t An improbable tory, and an evidence that the violence was 


on her ſide ; otherwiſe if he had attempted violence upon her Per-* 


ſon, he would not have forborn violence to the recovery of his 
Garment, which he very well knew might be made a pretence againſt 


him. 
gre? And it came to paſs, -when his maſter heard the 


words of his wife, which ſhe ſpake unto him, ſaying, 
Aﬀeer this manner did thy ſervant to me, that his wrath 


was kindled. ; AOL 

20 And Joſephs maſter took him, and put him into 
the priſon «, a place where the kings priſoners x were 
bound : and he was there in the priſon. 

# Queſt. Why did he not kill him, the Crime being capital, and 
he having ſo'undoubred a Power in his hand todoit ? nſw. r. Tr 
is probable he was a little moderated by Joſeph's Apology, whick 
doubtleſs he made for himſelf, rhough 1t be not here recorded. 2. 
This is to be aſcribed to the good Providence of God, which reſtrins 
the Waves of the Sea, and the Paſſions of Men, and ſets them their 
bounds which they ſhall not paſs, which watched over Joſeph in a 
peculiar manner. x Traytors or great Offenders againſt the King, 
whoſe Priſon doubrleſs was none of the caſlieſt, and therefore it is 
called a Dungeon, Gen: 40: 15: and 41: 14. and he indured great hard- 
ſhip in it» See Pal. 105. 18. | 

21 7 Burt the LORD was with Joſeph, and Þ ſhew- 
ed him mercy, and * gave him favour in the ſight of 
the keeper of the priſon y. 
3 The Goaler, who under Poriphar was the Keeper, of thar par- 
ticular Priſon. j 

. 22 Andthe keeperof the priſon committed to Joſephs 
hand all the priſoners that were in the priſen, and what- 
ſoever they did there, he was the doer of it z. 

Z They did nothing bur by Joſeph's command or permiſſion. 

23 The keeper of the priſon looked not to any thing 
that was under his hand, becauſe the LORD was wich 
him : and that which he did, the LORD made it to 


P:oſper. 
CHAP. XL. 


Pharaoh's chief butler and baker are put into priſon ; and committed to 
Joſeph, 1=--=-=-4. They dream, and are ſad, 5, 6. He asks the reaſon, 
7. Their anſwer, and Joſeph's reply, 8. The chief butler tells his dream, 
9-==--=z1. Joſeph interprets it of his reſtoration, and d:ſires him to be 
mindful of him, 12-----15 The chief baker alſo tells his dream, 16, 17. 
Joſeph interprets it, 18, 19. Both made good by the event, 20-=---22, 
The butler forgets Joſeph, 23- 


N D it came to paſs after theſe things, that the 
butler of che king of Egypt, and bis baker, had 
offended their lord the king of Egypt, 
2 And Pharaoh was wroth againſt two of his officers, 
againft the chief of the buclers, and againſt the chief of 


the bakers. | 
2 And he put them in ward in the houſe of the 


captain of the guard «, into the priſon where Joſeph was 


bound b. AT 
a To wit, Potiphar, Gen: 37: 36: who being informed by his 


ps 


; 
- 


- Underkeeper of Joſeph's great care and faithfulneſs, began to have a 


berrer Opinion of him, though for his own quier, and his Wives 
reputation, he left him ſtill in the Prifon. b Was a Priſoner, as that 
word is uſed, Iſa: 22: 3, For Joſep, being now made Governour of 
the Priſoners, was doubtleſs freed from his bonds ; or had been bound, 
and that with Irons ina cruel manner, Pſal. 105. 18. 


4 And the captain of the guard charged Joſeph with 
them, and he ſerved them, and they continued a ſeaſon | 
c in ward, 


4 


GENESIS: 


Chap. XL 
c Heb. Days, 7.e. either many Days, or a Vear, as that word 
ſometimes ſignifies. See Gene 24. 55. 
5 4 And they ereamed a dream both of them, 
each man his dream in one night, each man according 
to the interpretation of his dream d, the butler and 
the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in 
the priſon. 
: &@ (7z.e.) Not a vain and idke dream, but one that had in it a 
; ſignification of future things, and need: ir!terpretation ; and the 
ſeveral Dreams were proper and agreeable to the ſeveral events which 
, befe! them, and to the ſeveral Inrerpretations which Joſepy put vpon 
| them : The Dream and Interpretation did ficly anſwer one to the 
OTNer. 
6 And Joſeph came in unto them in the morning, 
and looked upon them, and behold, they were ſad e. 
e Perplexed and terrified both, becauſe they perceived the Dream 
was extraordinary and ſent from God, compare Gen: 41: 8: Dan: 2: r: 
Matth: 27: 19: and becauſe they underſtoed not the meaning of 
it. 
7 Andhe asked Pharaehs officers that were with him 
12 the ward of his lords houſe, ſaying, Wherefore 7 + Heb. ar 
look ye ſo ſadly to day ? | your faces 
8 And they faid unto him, We have dreamed a me 
dream, and there isno interpreter of itf. And Joſeph 
ſaid unto them, * Do not interpretations belong ro *Seechap: 
God g ? Tell me h them, I pray you. 41: 16: 
7 To wit, with us, or to whom we can now reſort ; for other- Din: 2: 
wiſe there were many in Egypt of that profeſfion, Chap 41.8. g In 11, 28: 
vain do you expett (uch things from your Wiſemen, for it is only 
that God who tends theſe Dreams, that can Interpret them, and ro 
him you ſhould ſeek for it. þ Who am the Servant cf the true God, 
who uſeth to communicate his Secrets to his Pe: ple, and wio, 
I doubt not, will hear my Prayers for this Mercy. This he ſpoke 
- yy direCtion and inſtiat from God, who had given this gitt 
to hirg. 
'9 And the chief butler told his dream to Joſcph, and 
ſaid to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before 
me 3; 
Io And in the vine were three branches, and it 24s 
as though it budded, and her bloſſoms ſhot forth, azd 
the clutters thereof brought forth ripe grapes. 
I: And Pharaohs cup was in my hand, and I took 
the grapes, and preſſed them inco Pharaohs cup, and 
[ gare the cup into Pharaohs hand. 
2 And Joſeph faid unto him, This is the incer- 
_—— of it the three branches are 3 three 
ays. 
# (7.e,) Signify. So that word is oft uſed, as Yerſe 18: and 41. 
26, 27: Dan: 2: 38. and 4: 22: Matth: 13: 19, 38: and 26: 26, 28: 
Luke 8: 11: 1 Cor: 10: 4: And indeed there is no proper Hebrew 


word which anſwers to ſignify. 
13 Yet within three days ſhall Pharaoh Þ lift up » g, ,«x 


thine head k, and reſtere thee unto thy place, and thou on 7hee, 
ſhalt deliver Pharaohs cup into his haud, after the 


former manner whea thou waſt his butler 
k (7.e. ) Advance thee to thy former dignity. So that phraſ: is 
uſed, 2 Kings 25; 27; Pſal: t10: 79, Or, reckon thy head, 1. e. thy names 
or thy perſon, to wir, among his Servants, which is added, Yerſe 20. 
According to the cuſtom, which was this ; Ar ſer times Governours 
of Families uſed to take an Account of their Servants, and to have 
the Names of their Servants read to them, and they either left them 
in the Catalogue, or put any of them our, as they ſav, fit, and 
inflifted ſuch further Puniſhments upon any ofrhem as theP deſerved. 
This ſeems the truer Interpretation, b:cauſe it is ſaid that Pharaoh 
lifted up the head of his Butler, and of his Baker, Yerſe 20. and therefore 
the phraſe:muſt be ſo expounded, as to agree equally to both. 
14 Bur f think on me, when it ſhall be well with + x5. ; 
thee, and ſhew kindneſs, I pray thee, unto me, and member m: 
make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out with zhed 


of this houſe /. 

I Though he patiently endures his Priſon, yet he prudently uſeth 
all lawful means to get his freedom. 
15 For indeed I was ftollen away » out of the land 


of the Hebrews » : and here alſo have I done nothing 


o that they ſhould put me into the dungeon. 

mm Taken away by force and fraud without my own, or Father's 
conſent. » Our of the Land of Canaan, which he might cail the 
Land of Hebrews, either becauſe they now dwelt in it, or by way 
of proteſtation of their right and claim to it by God's Gifr. Or 
rather thus, outof that part of Canaan where the Hebrews dwell ; for 
the word Land 1s not only ſpoken of whole Countries, as of the 
whole Land of Canaan, but of any parts or parcels thereof, as 
Gen: 13: 6: and 22: 2: and 23: 5: and 34: 1. e« Obſerve, thar 
Joſeph doth not accuſe either kis Brethren or his Miſtreſs, but 
only aſſerts his own Innocency, which was neceſſary for his deli- 
Verance. . : 

x6 When the chief baker ſaw that the interpretation 


was good, he ſaid unto Joſeph, I alſo wasin my dream, 
and behold, I hed three + white p baskets on my +0Or, fu 
head. of holes. 


p So called from the Colour, either of the Baskets, which were 
made of pilled, and ſo white Twigs, or of the things contained in + Heb. 
them, as white Bread, Oc. meat of | 


of 17 And in the uppermoſt basket there was of all m— f 


manner of + bake-meats for Pharaoh, and the birds , zatr, | 
did cnc them out of the Dames pon wy head. — = «wh, | 
x3 And 


4 Heb.f, 


ec 


"7 
Tm 


heel 


Chap. XLI. 


4 Or, vt” 
01 thee,an 
rake thy 
Othce 
from thee 


* Mark 6. 


22. 
+QOr, reck- 
oned. 


# Heb.far. 


13 And Joſeph anſwered, and ſaid, This is the In- | 
terpretation thereof : the three baskets are three 
days : 
i9 Yet within three days ſhall Pharaoh Þ lifr up thy 
head from 9 off thee, and ſhall hang thee on a tree,and 
the birds ſhail eat thy fleſh from off thee. 

g This clauſe 1s induſtriouſly added here to the former Phraſe, 

to was now meant in another ſenſe. He ſball indeed 
lift up thy 222d, as well asthe chief Butlers, but in another manner, 
rotfor taee, but from thee, or ſo as to take away thy Head, or thy 
Life,( which eminently conliſts, and appears in the Head ) from 
thee, | : 
»o 4 Andit came to paſs the third day, hich was 
Pharaohs birth-day r, that he * made a feaft unto all 
his ſervants: and he + lifted up the head of the chief but- 
ler, and of the chief haker among his ſervants. 

7 Which by perſons of Eminency then was, and ſince hath uſu- 
ally been, cclebrated with Feaſting and Rejoycing. 

21 And he reftored the chief butier unto his but- 
lerſhip again, and he gave the cup into Pharaohs 


hand. : | : 
22 But he hanged the chief baker, as Joſeph had in- 


terpreted to them» 

23 Yetdid-notithe chief butler remember Joſeph, but 
forgat him 5. | 

s (7.e. ) NegleQed him and his defire ; as men 1 Scripture are 
oft ſaid to forget God, when they donor remember him fo as to love 
and obey him, as Pſal; 106. 13,21. Hoſ: 2. 13. 


C H A Þ. XLL | 
Pharaoh's two dreams, 1 7. Hes troubled ; ſends for interpreters ; 
their. inability, 8, The chief Butler ſenſible of his Fault, remembers 
Joſeph, g. Commends him to Pharaoh, 10 —=— 13. Who cauſes him 
zo be brough: before hm, 14. Expetting the Interpretation from him, 
Joſeph ajcribes all to God, 16. Pharaoh relates his dreams to Jo- 


ſhew that 1t 


15. 

ſeph, 17 24. He interprets them, 25----;1. The reaſon of theif 
being doubled,,2. His advice to Pharaoh againſt tle dearth to come, 
33----==36. Which he- approves of, 37. Appornts him governour, next 
himſelf, over the whale tans, 38 The enſigns of dignity, and 


ſtately preſents conferred on him, 42 -_ Alſo a new name Zaph- 
nah Paaneah, and a wife, 45: Joſeph no:o thirty years of age, makes a 
progreſs over all the land, inſpefts the ſtores,lays up Proviſions, 45 = 49. 
Has two Children Manaſſeb and Ephraim, 50 -—— 52. Bad years 


come 0n ; He ſupplies the Countrey, 53 <——_57. - 


A ND it came to paſs at the end of two Þ full years 
2, that Pharaoh dreamed: and behold, he ſtood 
by the river 6. 
a After the Butler's reſtitution' to his place. | Heb: Years of days, 
for full years, as 2 Sam. 14. 28. Jer: 28. 3.: as # month of days 1s put 
for a full month, Ger 29: .4 which is comp'eat to a day 


are called the Poer 
> And hciiold, there came up out of the river e, 


ſeven weli-favoured kine d, and fat-fleſhed, and they 
fed in a Meadow 


c This ſuits well with the nature ofthe thing. for both the fruit . 


fulneſs and the barcenneſs of Ezypr depended, under God,upon the 
increaſe, or diminution of the Waters of that River. 4d Which 
when they appeared in dreams did portend, in the Opinion of the 
learned Ezyprians, the ycars or times to come,and them either good 
or bad according to thelr quality. 
> And behoid, {even other kine c2me up after them 
our of the :iver, ill-favoured, and lean-fleſhed,and ſtood 
by the other kine upon the brink of the river e. 
e Which ſhews how ſparingly the River cver-flowed the Lands. 
4 And che ill-favoured and lean-flelhed kine, did 
eatup the ſeven well-favoured and fat kine. So Pha- 
raoh awoke 
And he ſlept, and dreamed the fecondtime: and 
beho'd, ſeven ears of corn f came up upon one italk, + 
rank and gond, 

f Which are fir and proper reſemblances of the thing here inten- 
ded, both becauſe the fertility of a Land doth mainly confiſt in 
the abundence and goodneſs of theſe; and becauſe ears of Corn ap- 
pearing to any in a Dream, did, in the judgmens of the Egyptian 
wiſe-men, ſignify years, as foſephus notes. | 

6 And benoid, ſeven thin ears and blaited with the 
eaſt-windg, ſprang up after them, 

| & Abaiſterous Wind, and in thoſ= parts of the World very per- 
nicious to the Fruits of the Earth, Exzek: 17. 10. and 19. 12. Hoſ: 
T3. 15. ; 

7 And the ſeven thin ears devoured the ſeven rank 
and fullears: and Pharaoh awoke, and behold it was 
a dream h. 

. hk Nor a real thing, as Pharaoh in his ſleep imagined it to be. Heb. 
Behold the dream, i.e. The Dream did not vaniſh, as Dreams com- 
omg For, but was fixed in his Mind, and he co::1d not ſhake it off; 
by wW ich he ſaw that it was no Common or Natural, but a Divine 
and ſignificant Dream. | 

8 Andit came to paſs in the morning, thathis ſpi- 
Tit was troubled 7, and he ſent and called for all the Ma- 
gicians k of Egypr, and allthe wiſe men / thereof ; and 
Pharaoh told chem his Dream 2 : but there was none 
that could interpriec them unto Pharaoh. | 

z Becauſe he underſtood not the meaning of it, and dreaded the 


GENESIS. 


b Nils, | 
called the River fimply, becauſe of its eminency, as Homer or Virgil | 


gonſequences of it, Compare Gen: 40; 6, Dan; 2.1 13+. Maith; 27-4 


Chap, XL 


'9. k Whoſe profeſſion it was to diſcover ſecret and future things; 
which they did either Ly the obſervation of the Sars, or by other 
ſuperſticious Prattices, and the help of evil Spirits. See Exod: 7. 
11. and 8, 19. Dan. 2. 2,10. | Who were converſant in the ſtudy 
of Nature; and by reaſon of their great Sagacity, did oft-times 
make happy conjeCtures. m He calls them both ene Dream, either 
becauſe they ſeemed to portend the ſame thing, or becauſe they 
were the produCt of one night, and were divided only by a very 
little interruption. 

9 75 Thea fpake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, ſay- 
ing, I doremember my faults this day. 

7 Not againſt Joſeph by ingratitude, bur againſt the King ; by 
which expreſſion he both acknowledgeth the King's Juſtice in im« 
prifoning him, and his Clemency in Pardoning him. 
 1o Pharaoh was wroth with his ſervants, andput me 
1n wardin the captain of the guards houſe, both me,and 
the chief baker. 

ir And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and 
he : we dreamed each man according to the interpre« 
tation of his dream *. h 

* Of which Phraſe ſee on Gen: 40. 5: 

12 And there as there with us a young man; an He- 
brew, ſervant to the captain of the guard : and we :.. _ 
told him, and he * interpreted to us our dreams, to *Chap.4e 
each man according to his dream, he did interpret. 12, O's * 

13 Andit came to paſs as he interpreted to us, ſo it 
was ;z me he s reſtored unto mine office, and him he 
hanged. 


0 Either r. Pharaoh. But then Hf would have mentioned either 
his name or Title, and not have ſpoken ſo ſlightly and indecently 
of him. Or rather 2. Joſeph, of whom he ſpake laſt, and who is 
here faid to reſtore the one, and to hang the other, becauſe he 
foreto'd thoſe Events, as Jeremy is ſaid to pull down and deſtroy thoſe 
Nations, Jer: 1. 10. whoſe deſtruftion he did only foretel. 

14 T* Then Pharaoh ſent and called Joſeph, and «pc ;54 
they + broughe him haftily out of the dungeon +: and +0. Ws 


he ſhaved himſelf p, and changed his raiment,and came + Heb... 


11 unto Pharaoh. . | 
, f Or, Priſon, by a Synecdoche of the part for the whole, For it 
1s not p: obable that Joſeph, who was now ſo much imployed, and 
entruſted with all the Aﬀairs of the Priſon and Priſoners, Gen. 39. 
21, 22, 23. thould ſtill be kept in the Dungeon properly ſo called. 
p For till then he ſuffered his Hair to grow, as the manner was for 
perſons in Priſon, or under g:eat Sorrow, , 2 Sam. 19. 24- But to 
appear in a mournfu] d-eſs before the King was not convenient! 
nor utual. Compare Eſther 4. 4. Fs 
i5 And Pharaoh faidunto Joſeph, I have dreamed 
a dream, and there is none that can interpret it : and ' 


I have heard fay of thee, that thou canit underſtand 


F- 


£. +840, 4 


a dream to interpret it. - Ore th 
16 AndJoſeph anſwered Pharaoh, ſaying, It is 4, 4m 


not in me q: God ſhall give Pharaoh an anſwer of :hocanſt | 
interpret Iz; 


a meadow. : : | : 

29 And behold, ſeven other kine came up after 
them, poor, and very ill-favoured, and lean-fleſbed; 
_ as I never ſaw in all the land of Egypt, for bad- 
neſs, | | | 

20 Andthe lean, andthe ill.favoured kine, did eat up 
the firſt ſeven far kine. _ 

21. And when they had F eaten them up, it could f Heb; ; 
not:be known that they had. eaten them r, but they ro thi 


were ſtill ill-favoured , as at the beginning : So _ 
awoke. at 


| them, 

r They ſeemed to be neither fatter in the fleſh, nor fuller in their 
bodies. As many times in Famine\men eat much, but are not ſa- 
tisfied, becauſe God withdraws his blefling from it, by which a» 
lone it is that meat nouriſheth us. 

22 And 1 ſaw in my dream, and behold, ſeven ears 
came up in one ſtalk, full and good. _. 

23 And behold, ſeven ears + withered, thin, and 
blaſted with the Eaſt-wind; ſprung up after them. 

24 And the thin cars devoured the ſeven goodears: 
and I told this unto the Magicians, bur there was none 
that could declare: ro me. on 

25 1 And Joleph ſaid unto Pharaoh, The Dream of 
Pharaoh is one s ; God hath ſhewed Pharaoh what he 
is about to do. 

s To wit, inits deſign and fignification ;- both 
the ſame thing. 

26 The ſeven good kine are ſeven years, and the 


1Or fig 


7 


dreams porten@ 


ſevcn good ears arg ſeven years ; the Dream is one. 


#7 Inf 


? TY > oF Fe PORE” 
SY ASS , 


| wn; P» XLI. 
j z 27 And the ſeven thin and il-favoured kine that 
| ' came up after them , - are ſeven years: and the ſeven 
| empty ears, blaſted wich the Eaſt-wind, ſball be ſeven 
years of famine. _ 

28 This s ths thing which IT have ſpoken unto Pha- 
raoh : what God is about to do, he ſheweth unto Pha- 


raoh. 0 
29 Behold, there come ſeven years of great plenty, 


GENESIS. 


| pare 2 Chron: 35. 24; Eſther 6« 8. and 10. 3. Dan: 5. 49+ h They 
commanded all that paſſed by him, or came to him, to ſhew their 
reverent reſpeCt to him in this manner. Compare Efher 3. 2. Others, 
tender father, to ſignify that he was to be owned as the Father of the 
Countrey, becaule by .his prudence and care he had provided for 
them all, and ſaved them from utter ruin, 

44 And Pharaoh ſaid unto Joſeph, I « Pharach 7, 
and without thee ſhall no man lift up his hand or foot 


k in allthe land of Egypt. 


throughout allthe land of Egypt. 
39 And there ſhall ariſe after them ſeven years of 
famine, and all the plenty ſhall be forgotten : in the 
land of Egypt: and the famine ſhall conſume the land, 
t There 7p be no relicks of it to keep it in mens minds,which 
will be ſo taken up with the contemplation of their preſent mitery 
and future danger, that they will have neither heart nor leiſure to 
refle& upon their former Plenty, the remembrance whereof will 
but aggravate the preſent calamity. 


_ 31 And the plenty ſhall not be known - in the land, 
by reaſon of that famine following : for it ſhall be very 
T grievous. 

4 Heb: 32 And for that the Dream was doubled unto Pha- 
+ Or, pre- Faoh twice, #t js becauſe the thing is 7 eſtablithed by 
Peredof God : and God will ſhortly bring it to pals. _ 
God. 33 Now therefore let Pharaoh look but a man diſ- 


creet and wiſe, andſet him over the land of Egypt» 
| 34 Let Pharaoh do rhis, and let him appoint of- 
FOr, over- © 8:5 over the land, and take up « the fifth part x of 


E” the land of Egypt in theſeven + recotrrg years 
# Not by force or violence, for Jeſeph would never be the author 
of ſuch uarighteous Counſels ; but by purchaſe at the common 
price, which was like to be very low in that caſe, and therefore 
might eaſily be compaſſed by thar rich and mighty Prince. x Queſt. 
Why n-t half, ſeing the years of Famine were as many as the years 
of Plenty? nſw: Becauſe 1. Men would and ſhould live more 
ſparingly in times of Famine. 2. It was likely that vecy many men 
would lay up great quantities of Corn in thoſe years, partly becauſe 
they could not ſpend it all, and pirtly in expeQatioiof a ſcarcer 
and dearer time, when they might cither uſe it themſelves, or ſell 
it to their advantage. 3. The fifth part of thoſe years of great 
Plenty, might be more than the half, yea equal to the whole Crop 
of ordinary years. K 
25 And let them gather all the food of thoſe good 
years that come, and lay up Corn under the hand of 
Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the Ciries. 
26 And that food (ball be for fiore to the land againſt 
the ſeven years of Famine, which ſhall be in the land 
- + Heb: be of Egypt, that the land + periſh not through the Fa- 
7408 cut off. mine. | 
; 37 And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, 
andin the eyes of all his ſervants» 

28 And Pharaoh ſaid unte his ſervants, Can we 
find ſuch a one as this is, a man in whom the ſpirit of 
God y is? 

y Or, of the gods, in his Heathen Language. One whom God 
hath endowed with ſuch admirable Knowledge and Wiſdom, 

29 And Pharavh ſaid unto joſeph, Foraimuch as 
God hath ſhewed thee all this z, there is none ſo dif- 
creet and wile as thou art : be 

z 7.e. Hath-given thee this extraordinary gift of foreſeeing and 
foretclling things to come, and of giving ſuch {age advice for the 
future. 

Lon 40 * Thou ſhalt be over my houſe, and acccording 

Pſal:ros. ; 

21:Mac:3. unto thy word a ſhall all my people be F ruled 5b: only 
53: At 7: inthe throne e will I be greater than thou, 

E Io. 2 7. e. Dire&ion & command. Heb.vouth, which is oft put for com- 
| T Heb. mand,as Exod. 17. 1. and 38.21. Numb: 3.16,39,8&c. b Or, be fed; they 
_ armed or ſhall receive their proviſions from thy hand, and according to thy 
kiſs, diſpoſal. Others, ſball kiſs, viz.the hand, as inferiors uſed to do,up- 
on their addreſs to, or conference with great perſons. See Job31. 27. 
Hoſ.13.2. But it was frivolous for Joſeph to command them to do thar 
which by the cuſtom of the place they were obliged and wont to 
do. Some render the words thus,znd that agreeable to the Hebrew, 
at thy mouth ſhall the people kiſs. Which may be underſtood either 
properly, as inferiors did ſometimes kiſs their ſuperiors in token of 
their homage, See 1 S2m: 10. 1. Or rather metaphorically, as the 
ſame phraſe is uſed, Pſal:2.12. Prov.24.26. reccive all thy commands 
with reverence & ſubmiſſion. c7.e. In ſoveraign power and dignity. 
41 And Pharaoh ſaid unto Joſeph, See, I have ct 
thee overall the land of Egypt. 
42 And Pharaoh took oft his ring d from his hand, 
and put it upon Joſeph's hand, and arrayed him in ve- 
| +Qr, fk. {tures of } fine linen e, and put a gold chain f about 
. his neck. : 
d W hich was both a token of higac{t dignity, and an inſtrument 
of greateſt power,by which he had authority to make and ſign what 
D-+crees he thought fit in the King's Name. See EZher 3.16.and 8.2. 
e Wherewith the greateſt Potentares were arrayed. See Prov. 31. 22, 
24. Ezek. 16: 10. Luke 16. 19. Rev: 19: 8. f Another badge of great 
honour. See Prov. 1. 9. Ezek: 164 11. Dan: 5: 7, 16, 29. 
s 42 And he made him to ride in the ſecond chariot 
which he had g: and they cryed before him, + Bow 


o 


> Jong the knee þ: and he made him ruier over all the land 
- Heb. 4 OfEgypt. : : 
brech. g In the King's ſecond Chariot,that he might be known and own- 


cd to bethe next perſon to the King in power and digniry. Com- 


z (i.e. ) I only am the King, I reſerve to my ſelf the ſoveroign 
power over thee, and over all. As the name of Cz{ar among the 
Romans was commonly uſed for the Emperor, ſo the name of Pha- 
raoh for the King. Or thus, I have the ſupreme power, and there- 
fore as I have authority to give thee the fullowing Power, ſo] will 
make it good to thee, and oblige all my people to obſerve and 
obey thee. k No man ſhall do any thing in the publick affairs of 
the Kingdom concerning matters of War or Peace, without thy 
commiſſion or licence. | 

45 4nd Pharaoh called Joſeph's name Zaphnath- 
Paaneah 1; and he gave him to wife AHenath the daugh- 
ter of Poti-pherah mm, Þ Prieſt » of On o © and Joſeph + or, 
went out p over all the land of Egvpt, Prince. 

I (7. e. ) The revealer of ſecrets, as the Hebrews generally underſtand 
it, and with them moſt others. 2 Not that Potiphar, Gen. 39. 1. 
both becauſe he had another Tirtle,+nd dwelt in another place ; and 
becauſe it 1s not probable Joſeph would have marricd the daughter of 
ſo unchaſte a mother ; but another and a greater perſin. It is the 
obſervation of a late ingenious and learned Writer, that ameng the 
Egyptians there were three words, or endings of words, near a kin, 
but differing in ſignification, and in the degree of dignity. and au- 
thority to which thoſe names were annexed : Phar, which belonged 
to inferior Othcers; and Pherah, which was given to thoſe of great-= 


erdignity and power ; and Pharaoh, which was appropriated to the 
King. » OrPrince, as the word ſignifies, Exod. 18: 1. 2 Sam: 8. 18. 
; and 20, 26. and elſewhere. This ſenſe is the more probable, both 
| from 7o/eph's high quality, and from his holy diſpoſition. whereby 
| he hated IdolJatry, and would never have married the daughter ofan 
{ ta0latrous Prie!t. o A famous City of Zgypr, called alſo A4ver,Exck: 
| 30.17: and «ft2:wards. as ſome think, Hel:opolis, now Damiata. See 
Fer. 43.13. þ Upon his employment, and to execute the King's 
command, and his own counſel. 

46 ( And Joſeph was thirty years old q when he ſtood 
r before Pharaoh King of Egypt) and Joſeph went out 
from the preſence of Pharaoh, and went throughout 
all the land of Egypt s. 

q Which is here noted to teach us, r. That Joſeph's ſhort afifti= 
on was recompenced with a much longer proſpe:ity, even for 80 
years. 2. That Joſeph's excellent wiſdom did not proceed from his 
large and long experience, but from the ſingular gift of God. r 
As his chief Miniſter : to ſand before another is the poture and de- 
ſ1gnation of a ſervant, as 1 Sam. 16. 21. Dan.1. 19. 5 Toprovide 
places for his ſtores, and to conſtitute Officers for the management 
of them. | | 

47 Andin the ſeven plenteous years, the earth 
brought forth by handfulsz. 

# Or, unto handfuls, to wit, growing upon on ſtalk ; or, unto 
heaps ; or, as the ancients render it, for the barns or ftorehouſes ; i.e. 
= ſuch plenty, that all their ſtorchouſes were filled with heaps of 

orn. 

48 And hegathered up all the food » of the ſeven 
years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the 
food in the citieszche food of the field which was round 
about every City, laid he up inthe ſame. 

Thar is, either all ſorts of grain which was properfor food : or 
all which he intended to gather, to wir, the fifth pait, wer. 34. 

49 And Joſeph gathered corn as the {and of the ſea, 
very much, until he left numbring : for it was without 
number. 

fo * Andunto Joſeph were born two ſons, before 
che years of famine came, which Aſenath the daugh- 
terof Poti-pherah, | Prieſt of On bare unto him. os 

51 And Joſeph called the name of the firſt-born T Fo: 
Manaſleh : for Ged, ſaid he, hath made me forget x all Prince: 
my toy], and all my father's houſe y. } Thats 

x (7.e. ) Hath expelled all forrowftal remembrance of it by m forgetting 
preſent comfort and glory. » ( 5:e:) The toil of my father's Gone, 
or the m_ __ ew which To gy _ I have 972 Hodge 
means Or MY Fatier $ rami:Y, and my own brethr ( 
hither. A Feigs called He ohadis, F TY RON 206 

52 And the name of the ſecond called he + Ephraims 


Fchap:46 
20: and 


for God hath cauſed me to be fruitful in the land of jmy tf Thats 
affliction 2. | on my fruirful 


z (i:e:) In the land which hitherto hath been to me a land of 
affliction. 


531 And the ſeven years of plenteouſneſs, that was 
in the land - Egypt, were ended. 

54 * And the leven years of dearth began to come, *pg,1.:o: 
according as Foleph had faid, and the dearth was in I 
- _ *: but in all the land of Egypt there was 

reads - 


*In all the neighbouring Countries,as appears by comparing this 
with Gen: 42, I. 


55 And whenall the land of Egypt was famiſhed 
the people cried to Pharaoh + for bread : and Pharaoh 
ſaid unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joſeph: what he 
ſaith to you, do. | 
| TAs to their King and common Father. Compare 2 Kings 6: 2. 
| $56 And the famine was over all the face of the 
earth ; 


"Chap, XLI. 


I 


Il 
IF 


"4 


LI 


it 15 
dl; 


105 


- Un 38; t. 


Chap. XL: 
+ Heb. all earth : and Foſeph opened all + the Rtore-houſes, and. 
wherein {1d unto the Egyptians, and the famine waxed fore in 


OY all the land of Egypt- | | | 
57 And all countries came into Egypt to Foleph for | 
to buy corn, becauſe that the famine was ſo ſore inall 


lands. | 
CHAP. XIE 


Jacob hioring there was corn in Egypt, ſends all his ſons thither, but Benja- 

” min, 4 -*-= $: They bow before Joſeph, who knew them,b11 not they him; 

he treats them roughly, 6 —- 8: Remembers his Dreams; charges them 

for ſpies, 9 12: They to vindicatethemſelves, declare that they 

were all ſons of one father, -and had a younger brother at home, 13: Joſeph 

impriſons them, but releaſes all but Simeon, and ſends the r-(t to fetch their 

brother, and ſo preve their words true, 14. Their con- 

ſciences are awakned, and charge them with their ſim againſt Joſeph ; they 

accuſe one another, 21, 22: Joſeph hears them; weeps; binds Simeon, 

23, 24: Joſeph orders their ſacks to be filled with corn,and to return their 

money, 25, 26: Inthe way one finds his money in his lack ; they arethe 

more afraid, 27, 28: At homethey relate to Jacob what hapne# to them, 

ſo far as to perſwade Jacob to let Benjamin go, 29 ' 35: He 

complains ; Reuben undertakes for him ; he cannot conſent to let himgo, 

2 36 
* Atts 7. 


I2, 


20; 


38. | ; 

OW when * Facob faw a that there was cornin 
Egypt, Facob ſaid unto his ſons, why do ye 

look one upon another b ? = 

a (i.e: ) Heard,as the word is uſed, Exod: 20: 18: as ſeeing is put 
for ſmelling,Exod: 5: 21: and for taſting, Pſal: 34 8. and for touch- 
ing, John 20 29. 6 Like lazy, careleſs, and helpleſs perſons, each 
one expeCting relief from the other, but none offering either coun- 
ſel or help for all our ſubſiſtance; : 

2 And he ſaid, Behold, I have heard c that there is 
corn in Egypt 2 get you down « thither, and buy for us 
from thence, that we may * live and not die e« 

c This word explains the word ſaw, werſe 1: 4 For Egypt was 
lower than Canaan; whence on the contrary they are faid to go upto 
Cannon, Gen: 45: 9: e Anempharicalrepetition of the ſame thing, 
uſed here to make them more ſenſible of their danger: 

2 4 4nd Foleph's ten brerhren went down to buy 
corn in Egypt. 

4 But Benjamin, Foſeph's brother, Facob ſentnot f 
with his brethren : for he ſaid, Leſt peradventure miſ- 
chief befal him, | 

f Becauſe he was very young, and now his beſt beloved ſon. 

5 And the ſons of Irael came to buy corn among 
thoſe that came : for the famine was inthe land of Ca- 
Naan, 

6 And Foſeph was the governour over the land, and 
he it as that ſold g to all the people of theland: and 
Foſeph's brethren came, and bowed down themſelves 
before himb, ith their faces tc the earth, 

£ Either 1.By his Miniſters and Commiſſioners appointed to that 
end,as men in Scripture and in all Authors are ſaid ro do that which 
others do by their authority and command. Or 2: he himſelf im- 
mediatly contratted with the Buyers, or at leaſt with ſuch as were 
foreigners; which he did upon prudential reaſons; both becauſe he 
would not have ther to pry into the ſtate of Egypr, ver: 12: and be- 
cauſe he would by that opportunity underſtand the ſtate of other 
lands,and improve that knowledgefor his maſter's ſervice. þ Thus 
unwittingly fulfilling Joſeph's dream, Gen: 37:7: 

7 And Foſeph ſaw his brethren, and he knew them, 
but made himſelf ſtrange unto them, andſpake t roughly 
untothem z. and he ſaid unto them, Whence come ye? 
and they ſaid, From the land of Canaan to buy food- 

7 Partly to bring their ſin to remembrance ; partly to get the 
knowledge of the true ſtate of his Father and Family ; and partly 


to further the following deſign, and make way for his and their 
greater happineſs. 

8 And Foſeph knew his brethren, but they knew not 
him &. 

k Becauſe his viſage was much altered by his beard, and by other 
things, it being about 20 years ſince they faw him ; and his Egyp- 
tian Language, and Habit, and Carriage, together with the great 
© ani of his Place, prevenzcd all ſuſpicions concerning their Bro- 
racr. 

| 9 And Joſeph * remembred the dreams which he 
dreamed of them, and ſaid unto them, Ye arefpies }: 
to ſee the nakedneſs of the land » you are come. 

/ Thus he faith, notbecauſe they were ſo, or he thought them to 
beſo, but that he might ſearch out the truth of their Aﬀair, ſpeak- 
ing too much like a Courtier or Politician. m2 (7z.e. ) The weak 
parts of it, and where it may be beſt aſſaulted or ſurprized. 

10 And th:y faid unto him, Nay, mylord, but to 
buy food are thy ſervants come. | 

it Weare all one man's fons » ; weare true men o: 
thy ſeryants are no ſpies, 

» And therefore not Spies; for it is not likely either that a Fa- 
ther would venture ſo many of his Sons upon ſo hazardous an em- 
ployment 3 or that ſuch a work would have been rruited in the 

ands of one Family only. o Who honeftly and truly mean what 
we pretend, and have noother defign in our coming hither. 

12 And he faid unto them, Nay, bur to ſee the na- 
kedneſs of the tand you are come. 

3 And they ſaid, "Fhy ſervants are twelve brethren, 
the ſons of one man in the land of Canaan : and be- 


hold, the youngelt ;s this day with our father, and one 


*Chap.43. 
8. Pal. 
I18, 17, 


Tt Heb. 
hard 
things 
with :hem. 


* Chap. 
Z7- 5+ 


*Lam.5.7 * 15 Not. 6 


GENESIS. 


} man ſhould have ſo many Sons, all grown up and living together 


| 


, eftectuil 


Chap. XL | 
p(4.e.) Is dead, as thar Phraſe often ſignifies both in Scripture, 
as Gen: 37 30. and 44. 20. Jer. 31.15. Matth: 2. 17, 18. and in 
other Authors, as Homer, Enripicles, &c. They concluded with 
great probability that he was dead, chap. 44. 20.. becauſe for twenty 
years together they had heard nothing, either of him or from himz 
which may ſeem {trange, conſidering the nearneſs of Egypt and Ca- 
nan ; But this came tr» paſs partly from his own long Impriſon- 
ment, and afterwards from his great and high Employment ; part- 
ly from his loathneſs to bring ſo much miſchief to his Father, and 
Brethren, as the diſcovery of his caſe might have produced ; and 
principally from the over-ruling Providence of God, which for 
its own glorious deſign diſpoſed of Joſeph's Mind and Afﬀairs, ſo 
that heceither did not fend to his Father's Houſe, or that the Meſla- 
ges were intercepted, there being not then thoſe conveniencies for 
mutua] correſpondencies which now there are. And it is not im- 
probable thar Joſeph might be further acquainted with the mind of 
Gold in this matter by Dreams, which may ſeem to have been fami= 
larly afforded to him, together with the Interpretation of them. 
See Gen: 40. 8. and 41. 16. | 
14 And Joſeph faid unto them, That is it that T 

{ſpake unto you, ſaying, Ye areſpies q. 
9 This juſtifies my Accuſation ; for it is not probable, that one 


in one Family, and that he ſhould expoſe them all to the perils of 
ſucha Journey. 

15 Hereby ye ſhall be proved : * By the life of Pha- *se2xSam; 
raoh 7,ye ſhall not gofurth hence, except your young- 1. 26: and 
eſt brother come hither. | T7-55+ 

r As ſure as Pharaohlives. It ſeems to be the form of an Oath 
inuſe among the Egyptians, as afterwards the Romans uſed to ſwear 
by the Name, Genious, Health and Life, of their Emperors. Com+ 
pare 1 Sam. r. 26.and 17. 55. 2 Kings 22. Ezek.33, 11. Andit is not 
{trange that Joſeph through humane infirmity was carried by the 
ſtream of the general praice of the Court, eſpecially when the 
law of God was not yet delivered concerning the appropriation of 
Oaths unto God. ; 

16 Send one of you, and let him fetch your bros 
ther, and ye ſhall be Þ kept in priſon, that your 
words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: 
or elſe by the life of Pharaoh ſurely. ye are ſpies. 

17 4nd heF put them all together into ward ſeyen 4 jp. 
dayes, thered; 

18 And Joſeph ſaidunto them the third day, This 
do, andlive s : * for I fear Godr. * Neh. 5 

5 I will ſpare your lives,and not puniſh you with death as Spies, 15. 
and you ſhall carry proviſions, that your family alſo may hve er. 
And therefore will not be cruel toyou, nor to your brother whom 
you ſhall live with me. This might haveraiſed ſome ſuſpicion 
concerning Joſeph. but that they knew there were divers among the 
Heathens who did own the true God,though they worſhipped Idols 
with him. 

is It ye be true men, let one of your brethren be 
bound in the houſe of your priſon * : go ye,carry corn 
for the famine of your houſes : 

* In which you are now imprifoned,and are ſtill like to be fo, if _ 
you accept not this condition. 2 

20 But * bring your youngeſt brother unto me, fo « cy,ugg 
ſhall your words be verified, and ye ſhall not die: and 43.5. 


they did fox. | 

# (7. e.) Reſolved and promiſed to do ſo. Theſe things are ofc 
ſaid to be done in Scripture, which were ſincerely refolved upon, 
as hath been noted before. 

2t And they faid one to another , We are verily 
guilty x concerning our brother, in that we ſaw the an- 
2uith of his foul, when hebefought us y, and we would - 
not hear: therefore is this diſtreſs come upon ns 2, 

\x Thisis the juſt puniſhment of that great wickedneſs, whicle 
though we could cover from men, yer we now ſee and feel was 
known to God, who is now reckoning with us forit. Thus Divine 
Vengeance overtakes them, and Conſcience tortures them for a ſin 
committed above 20 years beforc,and their affliftion brings them to 
Repentance. y Compare Gen: 49. 23. Yet this paſſage is not men- 
tioned in that Hiſtory, chap.37. Learn hence,that the filence of the 
Scripture is no good Argument that ſuch or ſuch a thing was not 
ſaid or done, except in ſome ſpecial caſes. z He is inexorable to 
us, as we wereto him. | ; _ 

22 And Reuben anſwered them, ſaying, * Spake I * Chaps. 
not unto you, ſaying, Do not ſin againſt the child, and 37. #4 * 
ye would not hear? therefore behold alfo his blood # 
is required. Ny Es | 

a The puniſhment of his blood or death occaſioned by us. 

23 And they knew not that Joſeph underſtood them: 
for F he ſpake unto them by an Interpreter. + Heb, 
24 And he turned: himſelf about from them, and ;urergrere 
wept 5, and returned to them again, and communed was be- 
with them, and took from them Simeon c, and bound #72 'am 


him before their ey es 9. 

b Tears partly of natural affetion and compaſſion fowards his 
brethren, now in great diſtreſs and anguiſh; and partly of joy to 
ſee the happy ſucceſs of his defign,and rigorous carriage, in bring» 
ing them to the ſight of their fins. c Whom he chuſeth ro punith, 
partly, becauſe next to Reuben he was the eldeſt, and as it may be * 
probably gzthered from his bloody diſpoſition, Gen: 34. 25. and 
49. 6. the moſt fierce and forward againſt Joſeph, when Reuven wals 
for milder counſels, as we ſee here, ver. 22. and chap. 37. 29. and 
partly becaufe the detainmenrt of one of ſo perverſe and furious a 
temper would leaſt afflift his father, and moſt ſecure Benjamin, who | 
was to come with his Brethren. d That irmight make deeper im- 
preſſion upon their hard hearts, and make their repentance more 


3 i 


+ Heb: 


bound. 


25 Then 


5 


E= 


25 Then Joſeph commanded to hil their ſacks with 
corn, and to reſtore every mans money inte his ſack, 
and to give themproviſion for the way, and thus did he 


- _ unto them. 
26 And they laded thcir aſſes with the corn, and de- 


parted thence. : 
27 And as one of them e opened hisſack, to give his 
aſs provender in the inn, he eſpiedhis money ; for be- 
hold, it as in his ſacks mouth. 

" e And afterhim the reſt by hisexample and information did ſo, 

as is affirmed, chap. 43. ver- 21. and itis not denied here. 
28 And he {aid unto his brethren, My money 1s 
tHebwer reftored,and lo, it is even in my ſack ; and their heart F 


97% > failedthem, and they were afraid f, ſaying one toano- 


ther, What is this that God hath done unto us 

f Left this ſhould be a deſign to entrap,and ſo to deſtroy them. 
+ Whoever were the inftruments, they knew that God was the 
chief Author of this occurrent, and wiſely refle& upon his Provi- 
dence init,and their own guilt which provoked him againſt them. 


29 And they came unto Facob their father, unto 
the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto 
them, ſaying 3 

30The man who isthe lord of the land,ſpake | rough- 
ly to us, and took us for ſpies of the countrey. 

21 And we ſaid unto him, We are true men, we 
are no ſpies, 

22 We be twelve brethren, ſons of our father: one 
5s not, and the youngeſt is this day with ourfather in 
the land of Canaan. 

And the man,the lord of the countrey, ſaid unto 


us, Hereby ſhall I know that ye are crue men, leave 


THeb with 
| ws hard 
| things. 


GENESIS. 


one of your brethren here with me, and take food for 
the famine of your houſholds, and be gone, 

4 And bring your youngeſt brother unto me: then 
ſhall 1 know that you reno ſpies, but that you are true 
men : ſo will I deliver you your brother, and ye (ball 


traffick in the land. 
And it came to paſs as they emptied their ſacks, 


that behold every man's bundle of money 4s in his 
ſack : and when both they and their father ſaw the 


bundles of money, they were afraidg. 

g (i.e.) Their fear returned upon them with more violence, 
having now more leaſure to conſider things, and their wile and ex- 
perienced father ſuggeſting new matters to them, which might 
more deeply affe& them. : ; 

35 And Jacob their father ſaid unto them, Me have 
ye bereavedof my children ; Joſeph is not, and Sime- 
on is not þ: and ye willtake Benjamin ay: alitheſe 


things are againſt me # 

þ He gave him up for loſt,as being, as he thought, in the power 
of a cruel enemy. 2 I am the great ſufferer in all theſe things : 
you carry your ſelves as if you were neither concerned nor affect- 
ed with them. 


27 And Reuben ſpake unto his father, ſaying, Slay 
my two ſons & if I bring himnot to thee ; deliver him 
into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again» 

k Two of the four mentioned Gen: 46. 9. An abſurd propoſition, 
neither fit for him ro make, nor for Jacob to accept. 

38 And he faid, My ſon {ball not go down with 

ou ; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone /: if 
miſchief befal him by the way ,in the which ye go, 
then ſhall ye bring down my gray-hairs with forrow to 


the grave, | 
1 To wit of his mother, my dear Rachel. 


CHAP. XLIIL 

The famine continuing, and their proviſion being ſpent, Jacob commana's them 
to go again to Egypt, 1, 2. They prevail with their father to ſend Ben- 
jamin ; Judah undertakes for him, 3 —=—- 10. He gives them preſents; 

P double money ; and his bleſſing, 11 - — I4. They go to Eeypt ; 
(rand before Joſeph, 15. He ſeeing Benjamin with them, canſeth then; 
to be brought to his houſe, and entertain'd, 16, 17. Whereat they are. 
afraid, and make an apology to the ſteward about their meney,18 —-22, 

- He bids them good cheer, nuſeth them courteouſly, brings Simeon to them, 
23, 24. They prepare to bring their preſents to Joſeph ; who ſpeaks. 
kindly to them, ( and asks them of their father ) eſpecially to Benjamin, 

' with whom he is ſo moved, that he muſt retire toweep, 25 30. 
He feaſts them, but Benjamin 1m a ſpecial manner, 31 
ND the famine was ſore in the land. 

2 And it came to paſs when they had eaten 
up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, 
their father ſaid unto. them, Go again, buy us a little 


food a. | 
a He faith 2 little, eitherto ſhew that he took no thought to ſa- 
risfy. hisor their curioſity or luxury, but only their neceſſity, fo 
which a little would ſuffice, and that they muſt all moderat their 
appetites, eſpecially in a time of ſuch ſcarcity; or to encourage 
them to the journey, by ſuggeſting to them that they needed not 
bring great ſtores, bur only what was ſufficient for that year, and 
&b.pro= that God would provide better for them hereafter,ſo as rhey ſhould 

ing he not need to go ſo far for corn any more. 

efted. 3 And judah ſpake unto him, ſaying, The man did 
h2p.42- + ſolemnly proteſt unto us, ſaying, Ye thallnot ſcemy 


- face b except your *brother be with you, 
: j 


34- 


, 


Chap. XLIN. 


b See the ſame expreſſion, 2 Sav.. 14. 24, 32. Afr 20. 25,38, Ye 
ſhall not be admitted into my preſence, nor to the purchaſing of 


any Corn here. 
4 If chou wilt ſend our brother with us, we will go 
down and buy thee food. 
5 But if thou wilt not ſend 5;im, we will not go 
down c ; for the man ſaid untous, Ye hal] not tee 
my face except your brother be with you, 


c Becauſe we ſhall both loſe the end of our journey, v/z. 
getting of Corn, and run the outmoſt hazard of all our lives. 


6 And Ifrael ſaid, Wherefore dealt ye ſo ill with me 
as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? . 
7 And they ſaid, The man Þ asked us ſtraitly of our 41, ,.. 


the 


tate, and of our kindred, faying, . 1s your father yet ;1g je ack. 


alive? have ye another brother ? and we told him ac- ed -. 
cording to the '* tenor of theſe words 4 ;- + could we * Heb. 
m_—_— know that he would ſay, Bring your brother ers 
own ? * 
: : know 
4 We gave anſwers ſuitable to his queſtions, or ſuch as hls words aetvgd 


required. know. 
8 And Judah e ſaid unto Iſrael his father, Send the 
ladf with me, and we will ariſe and go, that we may 
live, and not die, both we and thou, and alſo our lit- 

tle ones. 

e Who for his age and prudence, and penitent carriage for hi 

youthful follies, was moſt beloved and crap by his 5. og FS 

he calls him, becauſe he was the youngeſt of all, though he was 

now thirty years old,and a father of divers children, See Gen:30. 22. 


and 35. 18. and 41. 46. and 46. 21. 

9 I will beſurety for him: of my hand ſhalt thou 
requirehim: * IfIbring him not unto thee, and ſer *Chap. 44 
him before thee, then let me bear the blame g for 3* 
ever. 

g Heb. be an offender to thees Let me bear the guilt, and ſhame 

and puniſhment due to ſo great an offence. 

to For except we had lingred, ſurely now we had 
returned F this ſecond time» _ 

11 And their father Iſrael ſaid unto them, If it muſt 
be ſo now, do this: take of the beſt fruits of the land 
in your vetlels, and carry down the man a preſent, a 
little balm, and alittle honey, ſpices, and myrrhe * 
nuts h and almonds. i 

Of all which ſee Gen: 37. 25. h q] hich 
call Pifaches, as ſome md = E-.—r-hy CAN vs 


for that was both an excellent Fruit, and peculiar to 7udea and $y- 
ria, and well agreeing with the Almonds which here follow. 

12 And take double money # in your hand ; and the 
money that was brought again in the mouth of your 
ſacks, carry it again & in your hand ; peradventure it 
was an overſight /, 

i Double to what you carried laſt, either to procure more Corn, 

waich may prevent the frequency of ſuch perilous Journeys; or be= 
cauſe the continuance and increaſe of the ſcarcity had advanced 
the price. k For it is their money, not ours, and therefore muſt 
be reſtored. / Either in you, or in the Receiver of your mcney 
who through multitude of Buyers,and haſte in his buſineſs, might 
eaſily be miſtaken. 

13 Take alſo your brother, and ariſe, go again un- 
ro the man. 

14 And God almighty give you mercy before the 
man, chat hemay ſend away your other brother, and 
Benamin: If 1 be bereaved of my children, I am fOr, ani 
bereaved m, I, as Thave 
_m An expresſion whereby he ſubmits himſelf and chi been,SC. 
(zod's Will and Providence, whatever the ifſue ſhall bh _ 
Eſther 4. 16. Or thus, 4s TI have been already bereaved of ſome of m 


deareſt children, ſo 7 ſhall be bereaved of the reſt, and I th i 
ſolitary ; and if this be my portion, God's will be " — 


15 Andthe men took that preſent, and they took 
double money in their hand, and Benjamin, and roſe 
up, and went down to Egypt, and ſtood before Jo- 
eph. 

16 And when Joſeph ſaw Benjamin with them, he 
_ 11 any ruler of his houſe, Bring theſe men home, 
and + ſlay, and make ready: for theſe men ſhall + gi . 
with me at noon ». | mou as 

z The uſual rime for the more ſolemn Meal in the Eaſt C TH ; 

1 oune- eb.eat: 
_ gh Ry was the time, and the ſupper the great meal 

:7 And the man didas Joſeph bade : and 

: the n 
brought the men into Foleph's houſe. we: 

18 And the men were afraid, becauſe + 

| ; ; e tney were 
brought into Foſeph's houſe, and they ſaid Becauſe 
ofthe money that was returned in our {acks at the'firſt 
time, are we broughtin, that he may + ſeek occaſion 4- 


+ Or,ewice 
by this. 


gainſt us; and fall upon us, and take usfo Heb. rol 
2nd our aſſes. ; FE, ECB! 


0 _—_— ——_ for Thieves. 
19 And they came near to the ſteward of Toſenh? 
houſe, and they communed with him at the = Il | 
P-42, 


che houſe ; 
20 And ſaid, Ofir, *+ wegame i 3- | 
che firſt time (@ buy food, My vale indeed downat 0" 


We 0am 
Sl And aown; ; 


9 


Cha] 
* Cha 


42. 27 


+ Heb 
money 
rome. 


* Cha 
18. 4- 
24. 32 


+ Heb. 
peace, 

* Heb. 
therep 
Fo your 
ther. 

+Chap. 


II, 13. 


* Chat 
42.13 


f Heb 
tank 
| © ;prgely 


n. 


_ # 'Frgely, 


Chap. XL: GEN 


* Chap. 21 And * it came to paſs, when we came to the 

42-27- jnn, that we opened our facks, and behold, every 
mairs money was in the mouth of his ſack, our money 
in full weight: and we have brought 1t again 111 Our 
hand. ; : 

22 And other money have we brought down 1n our 

hands to buy food : we cannot tell who put our money 


in our ſacks. 

22 And he ſaid, Peace be to you p; fear not: your 
God, and the God of your father q hath given you 

+ Heb.your trealure in your ſacks 7: + Thad your money, And he 


money came brought Simeon out unto them. 

fo me. p No harm ſhall come ro you for that matter. q Thus he ſpeaks, 
becauſe Joſeph had inſtrufed him, as well as others of his family ,in 
the truc Religion, r By his powerand providence ſecretly putting 


it there. ; : 
24 And the man broughtthe men into Joſeph's houſe, 

* Chap. and * gaye them water, and they waſhed their feer, and 

18. 4. and he gave their afles provender. : 

St 25 And they made ready the preſent againſt Joſeph 
came at noon : for they heard that they ſhould eat 
bread theres ; 

26 And when Joſeph came home, they brought him 
the preſent which was in their hand, into che houſe, 
and bowed themſelves to him to the earth, 


+ Heb. 27 And he asked them of their | welfare, and faid, 
peace. i« *Ts yourfather well, the old man + of whom ye ſpake* 


there peace Is he yet alive? ; 

zo yur fo 28 And they anſwered, Thy ſervant 5 our father is 

zo. ,,- in good health, hes yer alive: and they bowed down 

Tc '3-+**- their heads, and made obeifance. : 

ed 5 By which expreſſion delivered-in Jacob's name,and by his order, 
Jacob himſelf made obciſauce to him, as was foretold, Gen: 37: 9. 

29 And he lift up his eyes, and faw 7 his biothet 

Benjamin, his mocker*s ſon,and ſaid, 1s this your youn- 

el ? And he ſaid 

ger brother * of whom ye ſpake unto me? An , 


* Chap. God be gracious untothes my ſons. | 
42. 13, t (7. e. ) More narrowly obſerved him, having now more leiſure 
than he ſeems to have had when he ſaw him firſt, ver: 16. « So he 
calis him, not from ſpecial affe&ion, which he intended not yer to 
diſcover ; but becauſe this compellationis commonly uſed when a 
man ſpeaks toanother who is his inferior inage or c1gnty. 

20 And Joſeph made haſte, for his bowels d1d yern 
x upon his brother 2 and he ſought where to weep, and 


heentered into his chamber, and wept there. 

x His heart and inward parts were vehemently moved, as they 
commonly are upon occaſion of any exceflive patſion,of love, pity, 
grief, or joy, Oc. \ 

31 Andhe waſhed his face, and went out, and re- 
frained himſelf, and\faid, Ser on bread. 

32 And they ſer gn for him by himſelf y,and tor them 
by themſelves,and for the Egyptians which did eat with 
him, by themſelves : becauſe che Egyptians might not 
eat bread with the Hebrews, for that i- an abomination 


unto the Egyptians 2, : 

y Partly becauſe the dignity of his place, and the cuſtom of Prin- 
ces required this ftate ; and partly for the reaſon here following. 
2 Not ſo much fiom rheir pride and diſdain of other people,as from 
their ſuperſtition and idolatry ; partly becauſe they worthipped the 
Creatures which the Hebrews and others did commonly cat ; and 
partly becauſe of ſome peculiar Rites and Cuſtoms which they had 
1n the dreifing and ore their diet, Whence Herozorus attirms, 
that the Egyptians would not uſe the pots nor knives of the Grecians 
about their food. Compare Gen: 46: 34. See there, Exod: 8: 26. 

23 And they fat before him, the firit-born accord- 
ing to his birth-right, and the youngeſt according to 
his youth a ; and che men 6 marvelled c one at an 0- 


ther. 

a Being ſo placed either by Joſeph's appointment ; or rather by 
their own choice, and according to their cuſtom ; by which the 
elder, though the handmaidens children,took place of the younger, 
who by that order were taught what veneration they owe to the 
aged, and how great a ſin it 15, though very cuſtomary, in young 
men to deſpiſe rhoſe whom they ſhould reverence. 4 Not the 
Egyptians, but the H-brews, the men laſt ſpoken of, «c Either at the 

: matter and manner of the feaſts and entertainments of the Egyptians; 
or rather, at the ſingular honour which Foſeph did to themabove all 
others, the reaſon whereof they could not conceive, and therefore 
marvelled at it. | 

34 And he took, and ſent meſſes unto them from 


before him d : but Benjamin's meſs was five times ſo 
much as any of theirs e : and they drunk, and f were 


merry f with him. 

d It was the ancient cuſtom of Egypt and other Countries 1n their 
Feaſts, that either all the mear, or at leaſt ſome eminent parts and 
parcels of it, were not promiſcuouſly ſet before all the Gueſts, but 
peculiarly diſtributed by the Maſter of tne Feaſt to the ſeveral 
Gueſts, and that differently, accordiity to his reſpe& and affeftion 
to them, or to their ſeveral qualities. See 1 Sam: 1: 5: and $22, 
23, 24. e Partly becauſe of his nearer relation and dearer affetion 
to him, and partly to obſerve wherher this would raiſe thatenvy in 
them towards him, which was the occaſion of their malicious en- 
terprize againſt himſelf, that he might accordingly provide for his 
ſecurity» The Hebrew woid oft fignities to be drunk, but oft-times 


f Heb.:hey 
tank 


it is only to arink liberaly,though not to drynkenneſs,ag may appear | 


#Frqm Cant: 5: 1; Hz; 1: 6; John: 19, 


-_—_ ” Y Y 
| CHAP, XLIV. 
Joſeph commands his fteward to fill their ſacks ; reſtore every man's money; 
— ana put his ſilver cup into Benjamin's ſack; ſends them away, 1-=-3. 

Thereby contriving to bring them back again ; they are purſued, mand 

Charged with theft, q=-+=-6. Whereat being greatly perplex'd, they 
- 7gnorantly make themſelves liable to puniſhment, 75---19. The cup is 

found in Benjamin's ſack ; they return to Joſeph, ſubmitting to bis cen= 

Sure, 10---14. Joſeph pretends the gift of prophecy, 15. Judah ſpeaks 

much and earneſtly on Benjamin's behalf, offering ro remain in his ſtead; 

I 6---34. 

N.D he commanded the | ſteward of his houſe, + Heb.him 
ſaying, Fill the mens ſacks with food, as much as #5 Fe 

they can carry, ahd put every man's money in his ſacks Loaf 5 
mouth. - | "_ 
2 And put my cup a, the ſilver cup, in the ſacks 
mourh of tie youngelt þ, and his cormm-money : and he 
did according to the word that Joſeph had ſpoken. © 
a It ſeems to have been a large cup, and of great price,and much 
uicd by Joſeph. b Wirth deſign to ditcover their intentions and af. 
fections towards Benjamin, whether they did envy him, and would 
deſert him in his danger, as.they did Joſeph ; or would cleave to 
him, that hence he might take his meafures how to deal with him 
and them. 

3 As ſoon as the morning was light, the men were 
ſent away, they, and their aſles, . 

4 And when they were gone out of the city, and 
not yet far off, Joſeph ſaid unto his ſieward, Up, fol- 
low after the men ; and when thou dott overtake them, 
ſay unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for 
good ? ES 
5 Is not this it in which my lord drinketh ? and 
whereby indeed he Þ divineth c? Ye have done evil * in + Or, 14« 
{o doing, #F keth trial. 
c Amongſt the ſeveral kinds of divination in uſe among the Egy- 
ptians and other Heathens, this was one;to do it by a cup or baſon; 
which they filled with water, and put in them plates of ſilver, or 
precious ſtones, in which certain charafters were engraven, by 
which, and ſome words they uſed,they called upon the Devil, who 
gave them anſwer. 7oſcph did nor uſe this courſe, nor was a Divi- 
ner, but the people thought him ſuch a one, and the ſteward might 
repreſent him as ſuch, for the betrer covering or carrying "vn his 
delign. Butthis ſenſe agrees not with the 15:4 verſe of this Chap= 
ter, 1/0 you not, &c, Which words ſhew that he ſpeaks of ſome. * 
thing which they all might eaſily know ; but they did not+ know 
that Joſeph was a Diviner, muchleſs that he divined by that Cup, 
whereas that kind of divination was generally performed by a Glas, 
not by aCup Others obſerve, that the Hebrew word oft-times 
ſignifies not to avine, but only to obſerve and diſcover a thing,as Gen. 

30: 27: 1 Kings 20: 33: and render the place thus, whereby he will cer 
tainly obJervve or diſcover, to wit, what you are, and do. Bur this alſo 
lecms not to conſiſt with ver. 15. and the ſupplement is too large 
and remote. The true ſenſe then is this, the Hebrew bo is not to 
be render'd by which, but concerning which, as the Particle beth is oft 
uſed, and it notes not the Inſtrument whereby, but the Obje& 
about which he did divine, and the words muſt be rendred, con 
cerning which he can or would certainly divine. And this agrees well with 
ver: 15: q:d. Did you think you could deceive my Maſter > Did 
not you and all others know that he could divine, and diſcover ſe 
cret things, whence he had both his name and preferment ? And 
this Cup being much prized and uſed by him, you might ealtly , 
ju9ge that he would uſe his art to recover it. * (i: e: ) Veryevil, 
unjuſtly, unthankfully, ahd fooliſhly. | | 

6 And he overtook them, and he ſpake unto them 
theſe ſame words. | 

7 And they ſaid unto him, Wherefore faith my lord 
theſe words? God forbid that thy ſervants ſhould do 
according to this thing. | 

8 Behold, tlie money which we found in our ſacks 
mouths, we brought again unto thee our of the land of 
Canaan 3: how then ſhould we ſteal out of thy lords 


houſe ſilver or gold 4? 

d It is not probable that we who reſtored that which was in our 
power to keep, and to conceal without any danger,ſhould ſteal that 
which was likely to be diſcovered with ſo much ſhame and hazard 
to our ſelves. 

9 With whom ſoever of thy ſervants it be found, 
both * let himdye, and we aiſo will be my lora*, bond- » Chap: 
men e. 31. J2, 
e This over-daring offer proceeded f:om hence, that they were 
all conſcious of their own innoceiicy, and did nor ſuſpe& any fraud 
or artifice in the matter. £ 

Io And he faid, Now alſo let it be according unto 
your words: he with whom it is found, ſhall be my. 
ſervant, and ye ſhall be blameleſs f. | 

f Thus he moderats the conditions which they propoſed,exempt« 
ing the innocent, and exchanging the deſerved,and offered death 
of the nocent into ſlavery. : 

11 Then they ſpeedily took down every man his 
ſack to the ground, and opened every man his ſack. 

12 And he ſearched, and began at the eldeſt g, and 
lefe at the youngeit : andthe cup þ was found in Ben- 
Jamin's ſack. | | 

g To take off all their ſuſpicion of hisfraud. þ He found doubt- 
leſs the money there, but he accuſed them not abour that matter; 
both becauſe they had an anſwer ready to th:t charge from hisown | 
mouth, chap: 43: 23: and becauſe the greater crime, rhe ſtealing of 
the Cup which Joſeph ſo much prized and uſed, might {ceem to ex- 


tngulk the leſs, or at leaſt cauſe him to negled it, 
[1 3 % T3 Th. 


ap. XLIV. 


13 Then they rent their cloaths} and laded every | 


. man his aſs, and returned tothe city 2. | 
"0 Being afrajd and aſhamed to go to their Father without Benja- 
-in, concerning whom they had received fo ſevere a Charge, and 
made ſuch ſolemn Promiſes and Imprecations. 


14 And Judah | and his brethren came to ay 
houſe : ( for he wasyet there ) and they fell before him 


on the ground. _ 
15 And Joſeph ſaid unto them, What deed 1s this 


that ye have done ? Wor ye not that fuch a man as I 


t Or, make can certainly | divine ? 


16 And Judah & faid, What ſhall weſay unto my lord? 
what ſhall we ſpeak? or how ſhall we clear our ſelves? 


God hath found out the iniquity } of thy ſervants : be- 
hold, we are my lord's ſervants, both we, and he ailo 


with whom the cup is found 

k Who ſpeaks in the cauſe, as being one of the eldeſt, and a per- 
ſon of molt gravity and diſcretion, and readineſs of ſpeech, and 
moſt eminently concerned for his brother. / viz. 'T his iniquity, of 
which it ſeems ſome of us are guilty, and God hath diſcovered it. 
Or, iniquity may be put for iniquities; whether we are guilty of this 
Fad or not, we are certainly guilty of \many other fins, for v hich 
God is now puniſhing us, to whoſe Providence we therefore wil- 
lingly ſubmir. : . x 

17 And he ſaid, God forbid that I ſhould do ſo: 
but the man in whoſe hand the cup is found, he ſhall 
be my ſervant : and as for you, get you up in peace 


unto your father. : ; 

18 Then Judah came near unto him »», and faid, O 
my lord, Jet thy ſervant, I pray thee, ſpeak a word 1n 
my lord's ears », and let not thy anger burn againſt thy 
ſervant : for thou art even as Pharaoh o 

m Made a little nearer approach to him,that he might preſent his 
bumble Petition to him. » In thy hearing : For this i aſe doth 
not neceffarily imply that he whiſpered in his cars; as appears 
from Numb: 14: 28: Deut: 32: 44: Judg: 17: 2. 0 As thou repreſenteſt 
his Perſon, ſo thou art inveſted with his Majeſty and Authority, 
and therefore thy Word is a Law; thou canſt do with us what 
thou pleaſeſt, either ſpare or puniſh us, and therefore we do juſtly 
deprecat thine Anger, and moit humbly intreat thy favourable Au- 
dience, and Princely Compaſſion to us. : 

19 My lord asked his ſervants, ſaying, Have ye a 
father, or a brother ? 

20 Andwe ſaid unto my lord, We have a father, an 
old man, anda child of his old age, a little one p, and 
his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, 
and hisfather loveth him. 

So they call him comparatively to themſelves,who were much 
elder; and withal,to ſignify the reaſon why he came not with them, 
becauſe he was young and tender, and unfit for ſuch a journey. 

21 And thou ſaidit unto thy ſervants, Bring him 
down urito me, that I may ſet mine eyes upon him 9. 

g (3: e: ) See him with mine own eyes, and therevy be ſatisfied 


of the truth of what you ſay. Compare Ger: 42: 15,16. Elſewhere, 


this Phraſe ſignifies ro jhew favour to a perſon, as Jer. 39: 12: and 
40: 4. But tho that wasJoſeph's intention, as yet he was minded to 
conceal it from them. . 

22 And we ſaid unto my lord, The lad cannot leave 


kis father : for if he ſhould leave his father, bis father 
would dye. 

23 And thou ſaidſt unto thy ſervants, * Except your 
youngeſt brother come down with you, you {hall ſee 


my face no more r. | 

r Queſt.Why would foſeph expoſe his Father to the hazard of his 
life, in parting with, his dear Child? Anſw. Joſeph ſuppoſed that to 
be but a pretence, and might fear leſt his brethren had diſpoſed of 
Benjamin as they did of him, and therefore could nor bring him 
forth. And as for his Father, the experience which he had of his 
continuance in life and health after the ſuppoſed untimely death of 
Joſeph, gave him good affurance that his parting with Benjamin for 
a ſeaſon, and that under the care and charge of his brethren, was 
aot likely ro make any dangerous impreſſion upon him. 

24 And it came to paſs when we came up unto thy 
ſervant my father, we told him the words of my lord. 

2 ; And * our father faid,Goagain, and buy us alit- 
tle food. | 

26 And we ſaid, We cannot go down: if our 
youngeſt brother be with us, then will we go down : 
for we may not ſee the mars face, except our youngeſt 
brother be with us. 

27 And thy ſervant my father ſaid unto us, Ye know 
that my wife 5 bare me two ſons. 

s He calleth her ſo by way of Eminency, as Ger. 46: 19: becauſe 
The only was his Wife by deſign and choice, whereas Leah was put 
upon him by fraud, and might have been refuſed by him,if he had 
ſo pleaſed;and the other two were given to him by Rachel and Leah. 


28 And the one went out from me,and I ſaid,* Sure- 
ly he is torn in pieces ; and I ſaw him not fince. 

29 And if ye take this alſo from me, and miſchief 
befal him, ye ſhall bring down my gray hairs with ſor- 
row to the grave. | | 

30. Now therefore when I come to thy ſervant my 
father, and the lad be not with us ; ({cing that his 
life is bound up in the lads life ) 


GENESIS. 


nt en 


: The death of the Child, which upon this occafion he will firm- 


ly believe, will unavoidably procure his death alſo. 


21 Itihall come to paſs when he ſeeth that the lad 7s 


not with us, that he will die, and thy ſervants ſhall 
bring down the gray hairs of thy ſervant our father 
with ſorrow to the grave, 


32 For thy ſervant became ſurety for the lad unto 


my father, ſaying. * If I bring him not unto thee,then * Chap. 
I ſhall bear the blame to my father for ever. 


33 Now therefore, 1 pray thee, let thy ſervant a- 
bide in ſtead of the ladz, a bondman to my Lord, and 
let the Jad goup with his brethren. 

Partly in compaſſion to our aged Father, and partly for thy 
own advantage; becauſe I can be more ſerviceable to thee than he, 
becauſe of my greater ſtrength and experience. 

34 For how ſhall 1 go up to my father, and the lad 
be not with me, leſt peradventure I ſee the evil that 
ſhall + come on my father ? 

CHAFP AEV, 


Joſeph no longer able to refrain, diſcovers himſelf to his brethren, and weeps; 
asks concerning his father : they are troubled at his preſence, <---=3. He 
forbia's their grief for their ſm, and comforts them with God's gracious 
deſign and providence in it, 4---8. He haftens them to. go and ac« 
quaint their father, and bring him xo Egypt ; his meſſnge to his father, 
9---13. His kindneſs to Benjamin and his brethremy, 14, 15. Pha- 
raoh is glad, andinvites them down to Egypt, 16---20. Joſeph diſmiſſes 
them with gifts and preſents to his father; exhorting them not to fall 
out by the way, 21---24. Coming home they relate all to their father, 
who at laſt believes them, rejoycing that he ſhould ſee his ſon before he di= 
ed, 25---28, A | 

: i 'Hen Joſeph could not refrain - himſelf before all 

them that ſtood by him, and he cryed, - Cauſe 
every man fo go out from me a: and there ftood no 
man with him, while Joſeph made himſelf known unto 
his brethren. 

a Remove all the Egyptians out of my Preſence and Chamber, 
Which he did, partly that he might maintain the honour of his 
place, and not make himſelf cheap and contemprible to the Egypri- 
ans, by his exceſlive tears and pafſions, and by his free and famili- 
ar, and affeCtionat converſe with his Brethren ; and partly to pre- 
ſerve the Reputation of his Bxethren,by conccaling their Fault from 
the Egyptians. 


the houſe of Pharzoh heard *. 


were near with their own ears, and others by report. 


anſwer him : for they were + treubled at his preſence}. 

c He repeats his former queſtion, Gen: 43: 27: either becauſe he 
queſtioned the truth of their former relation, or would be further 
{atisfied in it, it being uſual with men to ask over and over again 
whatthey long to know ; or becauſe he now deſired a more parti= 
cular relation of his Father's Condition, and how he did bear up 
under all his Calamities. f From a ſudden and deep ſenſe of their 
horrid guilt, and their juſt fear of ſome dreadful puniſtmentr. 

4 £ind Joleph ſaid unto his brethren, Come near to 
me 4, I pray you : andthey came near, and he ſaid, [ 
am Joſeph your brother, whom ye ſold into Egypte. 

4 Be not afraid of me, but come nearer to me with chearfulneſ; 
and confidence, that you may be aſſured that I am he, and that we 
may more freely and privatly diſcourſe together, ſoas none others 
may hear. It 1s probable that Joſeph ſat in State, and that they hi- 
therto kept a due diſtance from him. e ( 7. e. ) Sold unto them that 
brought me ints Egypr, and ſold me there. Sec Gen. 37. 28. and 39.1. 
So they ſold him into Egypt occaſionally and eventually. 


fact, neither break forth into contentions and wrath, and upbraid- 


ings of one another. þ God by his wiſe, powerful, and gracious 


Providence over-ruled your evil Intentionsto an happy end. i Nor 
only your lives, for the expreſſion is here indefinite and general, bur 
the lives of all the People in this and the neighbouring Countries. 
Which though it doth not leſfien your ſin, yet ought to qualifie 
your ſorrow. 

6 For theſe two years hath the famine been in the 
land: and yet there are five years, in the which there 
ſhall neither be earing nor harveſt &, 

k Neither ſowing nor reaping, except in a few places near N:lys 
becauſe the People could not ſpare ſeed-corn, and would not loſe 
it; underſtanding from Joſeph that their coſt and labour would be 
loſt, and that the famine would be of long continuance. 

7 And God ſent me before you ro Þ preſerve you a 
poſterity / in the earth, and te ſave your lives by a 
great deliverance . 
| T That you and your Children might be ſuſtained and preſerved 
in this time of Famine, and afterwards abundantly multiplied, ag 
God hath promiſed. » Or, For a great remnant, or eſcaping, ( 5. e. ) 
that you who are now but an handful, eſcaping this danger, may 
grow into a vaſt multitude. The word evaſion, or eſcaping, is here 
put for the perſons that do cſcape, agitis a Chron, 30, 6, 1/a, 10. 20. 


CO _ 


and 


Chap. XLV. 


— 
6" 


43-9- 


gr 


Sun” 2" 


2 4nd heT wept aloudb ; and the Egyptians, and + Heb. 


b His tears and voice which had been hitherto kept in by main his voice in} 
force, now breaking forth with greater violence. * Some who PPS. 


3 nd Joſeph ſaid unto his brethren, * I am Joſeph ; * As 7. | 
Doth my father yet live c ? And his brethren could not ! 


- 
ASAT 2 WOHRRNGE ATT As SY Port Tor gs - 
” 


5 Now therefore be not grievedf, + nor angry with n mad 
your ſelves g, that ye ſold me hicher : * for God did :;c; 1; | 
ſend me h before you to preſerve life 5. there be 

f To wit, immoderatly, and for the Injury which you did to anger in 
me, or for the danger which you have brought upon your ſelves. your eyes. | 
Otherwile he doth not difſwade them from a godly ſorrow for their * Chap. ! 
offence againſt God, for the procurement of which he deſigned 50. 20. 
and uſed that ſtrange and rough. carriage towards them. g Nei- Pſal. 105. 
ther exceſſively torment your ſelves with the remembrance of the I6, 17. 


+ Heb. 
put for yu- 
a remmdil, 


AQ 
14. 


4 He 
good! ; 


eyes 0) 
70 o. 


* Ch: 
28. 


+He 


710t yo 


ſpare, 


+} He 


ewe:!th 


tH 


ring 


find 


"er, 


i ee ae ee al ry Os 


TM a ana 


ſpare, &c. 


Chap- XLV. g | : 
and as captivity 1s oft put for the Captives, as 1t 18 Numb: 21:1:Dent: 
21:10. And fo what was faid in the former Clauſe is repeated in 
this, with an emphatical Addition. : 

$ So now it wasnotyou 7hat ſent me hither, but 

God »: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh o, 

- 3 _ £ 

ard iord of all his houfe, and a ruier throughout all the 
land of Egypt. | | 

» Thar I came to this place, and pitch of honour and power, 15 

not to be imputed to your deſign, which was of another nature,but 


. - ; i - 
to God's over-ruling Providence, which ordered the cu ON | 
ation, ſo as I ſhould be brought to this place and Rare. | 
o To adviſe him, and to provide for him as 


of your 
Compare Gen: 50: 29. | 
NI 4p do for their Children, and to have the authority, reſpeCt, 
and power of a Father with him. 

o Haſte you, and go up to my father, and fay unto 
him, Thus ſaich thy fon Joſephz God hath made me 
lord of all Egypt : come down unto me, tarry not. 

10 And thou ſhalt dwell in the land of Goſhen p, 
and- thou ſhalt be near unto me,thou, and thy chiidren, 
and thy childrens children,and thy flocks,and thy herds, 

. and all that thou haſt. 

p A part of Egypt bordering upon Canaan, well watered and fit 
for cattel, and therefore moſt proper for the 1/-a2/;tes nor only for 
preſent uſe, and to keep them at ſome diſtance from the inward 
parts of Ezypr, and from the Court, but alſo that they might have 
Canaanalways in their eye, and mind, and in God's time might 
with leaſt diſadvantage march thither. Joſeph promiſeth this place, 
cither becauſe it was leaſt inhabited, being in the borders of the 
Land, or becauſe he juſtly preſumed upon the King's favour, and 
knew that the growing Famine would give him opportunity to 
diſpoſe of the people as he pleaſed. | 

11 And there will I nouriſh thee ( for yet there are 
five years of famine ) leit thou, and thy houthold, and 


all that thou haſt, come to poverty. 

12 And behold, your eyes ſee, and the eyes of my 
brother Benjamin, that ic 7s my mouth that ſpeaketh 
unto you 9. 

9 BecauſeI ſpeak to you not by an Interpreter, as hitherto I have 
done, but immediatly, and in the Hebrew Language. : 

13 And you ſhall cell my father of all my glory in 

2ypt, and of all that you have feen,and ye ſhall halte, 
and * bring down my father hither. _ 

14 And he fell upon his brother Benjaminsneck,and 
wept: and Benjamin wept upon his neck. 

15 Moreover,he kiſſed all his brethren,and wept upon 
them : and after that his brethren talked with him r. 

r To wit, freely and familiarly, being encouraged by his kind- 


*AQs 7. 
14. 


els. 

16 © Ard the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoks 
+Heb.was houſe, ſaying, Joſephs brethren are come : and it | 
good in the pleaſed Pharaoh well, and his ſervants s. 
eyes of Ps 5 Becauſe they all owed their lives unto Joſeph, and his Favour 
740. was now freſh and preſent, and therefore he had more intiuence up- 
on them, and they more kindneſs for him. 

17 And Pharaoh ſaid unto Joſeph,Say unto thy bre- 
thren, "This do ye, Jade your beaſts, and go, ger you 
unto the land of Canaan, 

18 And take your father, and your houſholds, and 
come unto m2, and I will give you the good of the land 
of Egypt, and ye ſhall eat* rhe far of the land -. 

The choiceft Fruits of the Land. Fat oft 1s put for the beſt of 
any ſorr, as Numb: 18: 12, 29: Deut: 32: 14: Þſal: 63: Fe and I47: 14. 

[9 Now thou art cemmanded «, this CO ye; lake you 
Wagons our of the land of Egypt for your little ones, 
and for your wives, and bring your farther and come. 

# Beſides that abſoh:re power which I have given thee to diſpoſe 
of all things as tou pleateſt, I do particularly and eſpecially com- 
mand thee to co thi” thing. 

20 Allo } regard nor your ſtuff x: for the good of 
all the land of Egypt 1s yours, ; 

x Heb. Let not your eye pity or ſpare any part of your fiuff, as loath to 
leave it behind you, or afraid to loſe it» Sparing or pitying 1s an 
att of the Mind, bur it is aſcribed to the Eye here, as alſo Exzek: 7: 
"4, 9. and 16: 5. partly becauſe there it diſcovers it ſelf by tears;or 
otherwiſe ; and partly becauſe the fight of the Eye doth ofr affe&t 
the Hearr, and move Pity. 

2L And the children of Ifrael did ſo: and Joſeph gave 
them wagons, according to the F commandment of 
Pharaoh, and gave them proviſion for the way. 

22 To all of them he gave each man changes of 
raiment y : but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pie- 
ces of ſilver. and five changes of raiment. 

y New and hindſome Garments, which upon their coming into 
Pharaoh's preſence, and on other occafions they might wearin ſtead 
of thoſe more o!d and homely ones, which they brought with them 
from Canaan. Compare Judges 14: 12, 19: 2 Kings 5: 5. 

23 And to his father he ſent after this manner = : 
ten aſles 4 laden with the good things of Egypt, and 
een ſhe atles laden with corn, and bread, and meat for 
his father by the way: 

z Heb. Accor4nz to this, What ? Either what went before, chan- 
ges of raiment, or what follows, ten aſſes, &C. 

24 So he ſent his brethren away, and they departed, 
and hc faig unto them, See that ye fall not out # by the 


Wave 


*Chap.29. 
28, 


+Heb. lee 


not your eyes 


} Heb. 


ews:!ith. 


+ Heb.car- 
rying, 


— 


$ 4 12P. 

a Or, contend, one with atiother, each vindicating himſelf, and 
laying the blame upon his Brother. 

25 9 And they went up out of Egypt, and came in- 
to the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father. 

26 And told him, ſaying, Foleph is- yet alive, 2::d 
he is governour over all rhe land of Egypt. And + 7a- 
cobs heart fainted b, for he believes them nor c. 

6 Or, was weakned, or failed, he fell intoa ſwoon, as it is ordina- 
ry, becauſe of the grearnels and ſuddenneſs of rhe nev.s, and the 


T Hcb. his. 


conflict of contrary and violent paſſions, raiſed hereby, griefat the 

remembrance of his former loſs, and exceflive joy for /o/ph's reco- 

very and felicity ; hope that this might be true,and fear left it ſhould 
be bur a ſictionof theirs : Any one oftheſe pafi.ons are able to cauſe 

a fainting of the ſpirits, but much more when ail mecr together, 

efpecially in an aged perſon. c Partly becauſe of the grearnefs, 

and ſtrangeneſs, and celireableneſs of the thing. Compare Pa. 

126. 1. and partly becauſe they were by this very relation convyi- 

cted of one lye about Joſeph, in ſaying that he was dead, and the: e- 

fore might eaſily be thought guilty of ancther. 

27 And they rold him all the words of Joſeph which 
he had {iid unto them; and when he ſaw the wagons 
which Joſeph had ſent to carry him, the ſpirit of Jacub 
their father revived. 

28 And Iſrael ſaid, It is enough 4 ; Joſeph my ſon 
is yetalive : I willgo and ſee him before I dies 

@ I deſire no more, no greater happineſs in this World, than to 
ſee him. Which when I havedone, I am willing to die. 
GAP. XLYL, 

Jacob ſetF out towards Egypt with his family and ſubſtance ; offers ſacrifices 
at Beerſheba ; God appears to him in a viſion ; renewing h:s promiſes and 
bl:fling, 1---4. He goes to Egypt, 5. The names of the children of Iſrael, 
8---27. Jacob ſends Judah before him ; Joſeph goes to meet his father ; 
their joy, 28---30. Joſeph infirufs his brethren what to ſay to Pharaoh, 
fo dcclare themſelves ſhepherds, and deſire to dwell in Goſhen ; the reaſon, 
3 1===34- 

A N D Ifrael took his journey with all that he had, 

and came to Beerſheba, and ofiered ſacrifices 'o 


unto the God of his father Iſaac 5. 

2 Poth in thankfulneſs to God for former favours, and eſpecial- 
ly for Joſeph's preſervation and happineſs; :nd by way of ſupplica- 
-:vN to God for his diieQion in this great coſe, whether he might 


1 :1our to Abraham in gifts and graces, yet God was no leſs 1/azc's than 


Meave the promiſed land of Canaan, and go into the -idolatrous and 
1mpious land of Egypt ; and for his prote&tion and bleſſing, as well 
in his journey as in Egypt. 6 Whom 1ſac honoured and ſerved, and 
who had conttantly proteSed, and provided for 1aac,and confirmed 
his Covenant with him. He mentions {ſazc rather than 4braham, 
partly for 1ſaac's honour, to ſhew that though 1c was much inte- 


Abraham's Ged, and therefore woul:i be his God alfo, notwith« 
Tanding his unworthineſs ; and partly forhis own comfort,becauſe 
Iaac was Jacob's immediat Parent, and had transferred the Bleſſing 
of the Covenant from Eſau to Faceb, and the validity of that Tran{la« 
tion depended upon 7/azc's intereſt in God. 

2 And God ſpake unto Iſrael in the viſions of the * 
night c, and ſaid, Jacob, Jacobd : And he ſaid, Here - 


am l, | 

c ( i: e.) In that way or manner of Viſions which God afordeth 
ro Men by night, and in their fleep. See Gen: 20: 3: Job 33: 15, ; 
16: Matth: 1: 20: and 2: 13, 19: Aﬀs 16: 9g: and 18: 9, &c. E 
4 He douv!es the name both in token of his friendſhip and familia« 
'1ty with him, and to raiſe Jacob's attention. Compare Gene 22: 11: 


I Sam: 3: 10. : 
faid, Iam God, the God of thy father ; 


} And he 
fzar not e to go down into Egypt : for I will there 


make of thee a great nation» 

e And here were many caules of fear, leſt he ſkould do evil in 
forſaking the promiſed and bleſſed iand, and going to a place 
which had been incommodions to his Granefather, Gen. 12. 15.and' 
forbidden to his Father, Gen. 26. 2. leſt he ſhould expoſe his Chil- 
dren to manifold perils, as of being infeted with the vices, and 
particularly the Idolatiy which reigned there above allother Couns 
tries, and of being invengled by the pleaſantneſs and eminent fruit- 
fulneſs of that So1l, to give up themſelves to all manner of plea» 
{ures, and to ſettle themſelves there, and give over all thoughts of 
rerurning to Cana; and of being brought into that grievous 
bondage and afflition which was ſpoken of Gen. 15. 13. and leſt 
ſome miſchief thon!d befal him or his in ſo long and dangerous a 
journey. 

4 1 will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will 
alſo ſurely bring thee up againf « and Joſeph ſball pur 
his hand upon thine eyes g. 

F Though notin thy perſon, yet in thy body, Gen. 47. 29, 30, 
and 50.5, 13. and in thy pofterity, which are a part of thy ſelf, or 
thy ſelf multiplied, g Shall cloſe thy eyes; which office was uſu» 
ally performed by the neareſt and-deareſt Relations of the Cying 
party among the Jews, Greeks, and Romans. Hereby Jacob is affuret 
that ke ſhould dic in peace, and that Joſeph both now was alive, and 
ſhould ſurvive his Father. . | 

5 And * Facob rote up from Beerſheba : and the » gg, , 
ſons of iſraci carried. Facob their father, and their little j5, © 
ones, and tneir wives in the wagons which Pharaoh 
had fent ro carry him. | 

6 And they took their cattel, and their goods. which 
they had gotten in the land of Canaan4, and came into 
Egypt, * Jacob, andall his ſeed with him, h ; 

þ And in Meſopotramiz. But Canazn only is here mentioned, be-',, Pl. 
cauſe here they gor the far greateſt part of them, which by a Sy» 10g, 23. 
necdoche 15 pur tor the whote. ; : Ua. 52.4s 
7 His fogs, and his fons ſons wich him, his daugh- 


- 


I 4. Leſs 


4 SS 
» + WE: 


* Exod: 1: 
x7:and 6: 


14. 
Numb:26: 
8: and r 
Chr. 5. 1. 
* Numb, 
26» 5. 


*Fxod. 


'6. 15- 
| « Chron. 


p mM. 

* 1Chron. 
þ 2.3. and 
4-21 
Chap. 38. 


Q 1Chron. 
| 2- 5. 


8 


ſx Chron. 


oF * T. 
*F Or, P:«- 
ah--- A- 


: 


F Arod. 
'* I Chron. 
7. 30. 
Chap. 
30. 10. 
Chap. 
29. 24. 
* Chap. 
41. 50. 
C Or, 
ince. 
x1Chron. 
vr. 6- and 
B. 7. 
Numb. 
6. 38,39. 
1ranmle 


\ Shu- 
Ea. 


ham. 
 xChron, 
os I2. 
Shuham. 
ſumb. 26. 
* 1Chron. 
; I'3., 


4 ale tat 
"xo 3 Y/ wn 


rae} which came into Egypt &, Jacob and his ſons: 


- as his 


GT 


* z, ani his ſons daughters, andall his ſced brought | 


53th Liminto Egypt. ; 
pe _— His Dag tne Dyveb, the Plural Number for the Singu- 


« Gon: 21: 7: b: 26: 8: or Dinah and her Daugh- 
as verſe 23: Gen: 21: 7: Num . and 1 

an : EE atdren are commonly called their Grandfather s 
Chilcren, or Sons or Daughters ; or his Daughters-in-law, his 


) Wi e OT) 
_ & Lit * theſe are the names of the children of If- 


euben, Jacobs firſt-born. | 
" This eras is both here and elſewhere deſcribed exatly 


and particularly, as well to ſhew the faithfulneſs of God in the 
rakes Seed, and that in ſo ſhort a time, 
Tribes; which was of great importance, and neceſſury for the 
diſpoſal of the Kingdom and Prieſthood, and above all, for the 
diſcovery of the true Meſſias. Compare this following Catalogue 
with that Numb: 26: and 1 Chron: 6: and 7: and 8. 

9 And the ſons of Reuben, Hanoch, and Phallu, 
and Hezron, and Carmi. | 

10 © * Andthe ſons of Simeon ; + Jemuel, and Fa- 
min, and Ohad 1, andF Fachin,and i Zohar,and Shaul 
the fon of a Canaanitiſh woman m. | 

/ Who is not mentioned in thoſe parallel places, becauſe he was 


then dead, and that without iſſue. » Which is here mentioned as 
a Brand upon him, and as an Intimation that the reſt of them, ex- 


* cept Judah, marricd to Perſons of a better Race. 


11 C 4ndthe ſons * of Levi, | Gerſhon, Kohath, 


. and Merarl. 


12 | And the ſons of * Fudah: Er, and Onan, and 


- Shelah and Pharez, and Zerah : but Er, and Onan, di- 


ed in the land of Canaan. », And the ſons of Pharez 


were * Hezron, and Hamul o. | | 

» And therefore are not contained in the following number, 
verſe 15. o Who, though they ſeem to have been born in Egypr,yet 
are here ſet down amongſt thoſe who came into Egypr, becauic they 
came tiither in their Father's Loyns, as Levi 15 ſaid zo pay rithes 1m 
Abraham, Heb: 7: 9. And the Children may as well be faid ro come 
thither in their Parents, as their Father Facob is ſaid to return from 
thence, werſe 4: in his Children. 06j. If this be the ſenſe, why thould 


' theſe two be mentioned rather than the Grandchildren of the other 


Brethren, who came into Egypt in the ſame manner ? Anſw. "This 
may be done either, 1. From ſome ſpecial Excellency or Eminen- 
cy in them above the reſt, as Hezron , was eminent for being the 
Progznitor of the Meſſiah, and Hamul might be ſo for ſome other 
cauſe though unknown to us. Or 2. Becauſe they were the firſt 
Grandchildren that were born in Egypr,, and it may be all that were 
born whilſt Jacob lived there, and therefore are not unfitly named 


* wi and allotted to him, as Joſeph's tro eldeit Sons, Ephraim 
- wo 5 ee F h were by Jacob appropriated to himſelf, and reckoned 


*mmediat Sons, when all the reſt of Foſeph's Sons were ex- 
cluded from that Priviledge, Gen: 48: 5, 6. And the like may be 
ſid of the other two Grandchildren mentioned verſe r7. 


13 © * And the ſons of lifachar ; Tola and + Phu- 


] d Job, and Shimron. | 
we NA the ſons of Zebulun : Sered, and Elon, 


d Jahleel. 
 Y : "Theſe be the ſons of Leah which ſhe bare unro 


Jacob in Padan-4ram with his daughter Dinah: all 
the ſouls of his ſons and his daughters q, were thirty and 


hree. : ; 
> This is true properly and immedaatly of the Soris, who were 


indeed born there, but improperly and mediatly of the Grand- 
children, which are as truly ſaid to be born of Leah in Pa4an, as to 
to be born of her at all, becauſe they were indeed born of them 
which were torn of her, and that in Padan. q To wit, which came 
into Egypt as before ; ſo that Er and Onan are excluded, as dying 
before this Journey into Ezypr, verſe 12. Daughters is here put for 
Daughter, as verſe 7. becauſe Dinah was all the Daughters which 
Zaceb had. Heb. all the Souls, Sons and Daughters, being reckoned to- 


* gether with their Father. 


16 4 And the ſons of Gad : * Ziphion, and Haggi, 
Shuni, and + Ezbon, Eri, andÞ Arodi, and Areli. 

17 4 * Andthe ſons of Aſher : Jimnah,and Thhuah, 
and Ifui, and Beriah, and Serah their ſiſter ; and the 
ſons of Beriah, Reber and Malchiel. 

18 * Theſe are the ſons of Zilpah, * whom Laban 
gave to Leah his e's and theſe ſhe bare unto 
Tacob. even ſixteen 1louls. | 
- 19 The ſons of Rachel, Jacobs wife, Foleph and 
Benjamin. | 
”_ « 4nd unto Joſeph in' the land of Egypt, were 
born Manafſeh and Ephraim, * which Aſenath, the 
daughter of Poti-pherah, +-prieſt. of On bare unto 

m. 
exca=a * And the ſons of Benjamin were Belah, and 
Becher, and A{bbel,Gera, and Naaman, * + Ehi,and 
Roth, + Muppim, and F Hupyim, and Ard r. 


+ Whereof part ſeem to be born before his coming to Egypr, 
and part in Egyp', Benjamin being now but twenty and four years 


d. | | : 
- 22 Theſeare the ſons of Rachel, which were born 


to Jacob: all the ſouls were fourteen- 
23 q* And theſons of Dan: Huſhim. | 
241* And the ſons ofNaphtali, Zahaegl, and Guni, 

and Jezer, and Snullemy 


--—— <a **%, 


w 


formance of his Promiſe concerning the vaſt Multiplication of: 
as to diſtinguiſh the | 


—— " 7 Chap. XLVI 


25 * Theſe are theſons of Bilkah, which Laban give * Chap. 
unto Rachel his daughter, and ſhe bare theſe unto Ja- 43 
cob : all the ſouls were ſeven. s” 

26 All the * ſouls that came with Jacob into Egypt, + Hes. 
which came out of his F loyns 5, befides Jacobs ſons Thigh. 
wives, all theſe ſouls were threeſcore and fix z. | 

s Heb. Thigh, which is here put for the ſecret Parts between the 
Thighs, which are called ſometimes the Feet, as Gen: 49: 10: Deut: 
28: 57: Exek: 16: 25: for the like reaſon, becauſe they are between. 
the Feet. From this Eaſtern manner of Speech, came that Paſlage 
in the Greek Fables, concerning Bacchus being born out of Jupiter's 
Thigh. # So many they are, excluding Jacob, as the Common Pa- 
rent, and Joſeph and his two Sons, as being in Egypt before Jacob's 
coming thither ; which four being included they make up 70, as 


—__ 


"op 


' It is verſe 27. 


27 And the ſons of Joſeph which were born him in E- | 
gypt, were two ſouls : * all the ſouls of the houſe of Ja- *Deur: rc: | 


cob, which came into Egypt #, were threeſcore and ten. 22: Se 
u He doth not ſay, which came with Jacob. :nto Egypt, becauſe ſome Q&s 7.14. | 
of them came thither beforehim, and others with him,ſome in their 
Perſons, and ſome in their Parents. As for the difficulty ariſing 
from comparing this place with A#s 7: 14: it will be more fit to 
ſpeak of it when we come to that place. 
28 4 And he ſent Judah before him unto Joſeph, to 
direct his face unto Goſhen x ; and they came into the 


land of Goſhen. | | 

x Heb. To prepare, or to teach him, the way before his Face, 1. e. | 
before his coming to Goſhen ; #: e: to thew him where it was, and } 
into what part of it he ſhould come and ſettle himſelf; or #o 
4 notice unto Joſeph of his approach, before his face Sx coming into 
Goſhen. | D 

29 And Joſeph made ready his chariot, and went up 
to meet {rael his father to Goſhen, and preſented him» : 
ſelf unto him yz, and he fell on his neck, and wept on 
his neck a good while. 

y And doubtleſs fell down before him with. all that reverence 
which Children owe to their Parents, and in this poſture Jacob falls. 
upon his Neck, &c. Of which poſture ſee Gen: 33: 4: and 45: 14: 
Luke 15: 20; Atts 20: 37. 

30 And Iſrael taid unto Joſeph, Now let me die z, 
ſince I have ſeen thy face, becauſe thou art yet alive. | 
z Now I expe@ no greater happineſs upon Earth, and therefore 

am content to die. Compare Luke 2. 29. 

2x And Joſeph ſaid unto his brethren, and unto his 
fathers houſe, I will go up, and ſhew Pharaoh,and ſay 
unto him, My brethren, and my fathers houfe, which | 
were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me. ; 


» 


been to feed cattel : and they have broughe their flocks are mer of | 

and their herds, and all that they have. carte, | 

33 Andit ſhallcome to paſs, when Pharaeh ſhall | 

call you, and ſhall ſay, What is your occupation ? | 

34 Thatye ſhall ſay, Thy ſervants trade hath been 

about cattel from our youth, even until now, both we, 

and alſo our fathers : that ye may dwell in the land of $ 

Goſhen *. For every lhepherd is an abomination to the 

Egyptians }- j 
* In which deſign and choice Joſeph ſhews both his Prudence /' 

and Piety. He brings them not to Court, where it had been eaſy 

for him ro have pur them all into the beſt places and Offices of the 

Court; and as he is not afhamed to own himſelf a Brother to Shep- 

| herds, which were contemptible among the Egyptians, ſo he ſecks 

not to advance them higher, but continues them in their Employ- 

ment, and placeth them in Goſhen : whereby x. He kept them to-« 

gether, which was very convenient for them in many reſpe&s. 2. 

re ſecured them both trom Envy, and asfar as he could, from the 

Corruption of their Religion and Manners,' which was likely to 

follow their mixture with the Ezypprians, and eſpecially their being 

at the Courr. 3. He put them into a capacity of returning to Ca- 8 =-- 

naan, when (0d gave them opportunity. f Either,' r. Becauſe they 

did both kill and eat thoſe Creatures which the Egyptians adored. 

Or, 2. Becauſe of the freſh remembrance of the horrid Cruelties 


G__- 
= of OS 
; = Z 


32 And the men are ſhepherds, for | their trade hath : Heb.the) | 


lately committed there by the Phenician Shepherds, who as ſome 
very Ancient Writers aftirm, were ſeated in Egypt in great Num- 
bers, and had arrived to great Power, and waged a cruel War with 
other Egyptians, wherein they walted divers Cities, and burned 
rheir Temples, and barbaroutly murdered a multitude of People. 
And therefore it is no wonder if the Calling of Shepherds was 
grown out of uſe and credit among them. True it is, the Egypt: 


' Strangers which were diſperſed among them, and looked upon the 


ans had ſome Sheep, and other Cattel, Gen. 47: 6, 17: Exod: 8: 26: 
and 9: 3: which they kept for delight or profit by their Milk, Wool, 
&c. or for Sale toothers, but they did nor uſe them, as other Shep- 
herds generally did, kill and eatthem:; And it is probable that they 
committed even the keeping of their Sheep and Cattel to thoſe 


Employment as too vile and mean for any, Egyptian. And tho Pha« 
rao offered it to Joſeph's Brethren as a favour to be Rulers over his 
Cattel, Gen: 47: 6: that might proceedonly from hence, becauſe he 
ſaw them firmly reſolved upon that courſe of Life, and therefore 
could not beſtow any higher Preferment upon them. 


C H AP. XLVIL 

Foſeph acquaints Pharaoh with his father's arrival ; preſents five of his 
brethren to him, 1, 2. He after ſome enquiry inflates them in Goſhen ; 
they being ſhepheral, he orders Joſeph, if he knew any men of attivity 
amongſt them, to make them rulers over his cattel, 3-=--6. Joſeph 
likewiſe brings his father before Pharaoh, who enquires after his age, 
and is bleſſed by Jacob, 7-===10. Joſeph maintains his father; and 
all big houſe ins Goſhen, 33, 1. {92h gets all the money; cattel, and 


Jani 


\ 


EE Inns 


&4 a, = RV9@ m ns ls 


- 


*. Chap, 


k 
1 


XLVIL. 


lands of the Egyptians into bis hands for corn; yemoves them #1 diftant 
quarters of the land, 13---a===---=21. [he priefts only excepted, who 
have a portion aſſigned them by Pharaoh, 22, Joſeph leaves the land 
zo the people ro till, and_ groves them corn to ſow, they giving Pharaoh 
the fifth pars of the crop, 23-= -=-26. Facobs life in Egypt, and 
full age, 27, 28 He takes an oath of Foſeph concernirg his burial 


29--==3I. BR” 

ten Joſeph came and told Pharaoh, and ſaid, 

My father, and my brethren, and their flocks, 
and their herds, and all that they have, are come out 
of the land of Canaan : and bebold, they are 1a the 
landof Goſhen a» - 

2 Either to abide there * Or to remove thence to any other pace 
which thou ſhalt appoint for theme 

2 Andhe took ſome b of his brethren, even five men, 
and preſented them unto Pharaoh. | 

b Or, part, as this Hebrew word is uſed, Dan. 1: 2. Or the extre- 
mity,or #nd, or tail of them, 7.e. the meaneſt of chem for Perſon and 
Preſence, as the word is taken, 1 Kings 125 3: leſt if he had pre- 
ſented the goodlieſt of them, Phara2h might have required their atren- 
dance? upon him;either at Court orCamp.And for the ſame reaſon for 
which he did inluſtriouſly repreſent them to Pharaoh as contemprible 
in their imploym<nt, he mightalſo preſent thoſe to him who were 
ſo in their Perſons. : 

2 4nd Pharaoh ſaid unto his brethren, What is 
your occupation ? And they ſaid unto Pharaoh, Thy 
ſervants are ſhepherds both we, and alſo ourfachers- 

* This Employment is not pretended nor taken up by us in de- 
ſign, or in contempt of thee or thy People, bur was handed to us 
by our Fathers, and hath been our buſineſs to this day. 


4 They ſaid moreover unto Pharaoh, For to ſojourn 
in the land c are we come: for thy ſervants have no 
paſture fortheir flocks, for thefamine is fore in the land 
of Canaan 4: now therefore we pray thee, ler thy ſer- 
vants dwell in the land of Goſhen. _ -- 

c Nox to defraud thy People of their Lands and Habitations : 
but only to be here for a ſeaſon as Strangers and Sojourners till we 
can conveniently return to our own Land. 4 Which being an higher 
Ground than Ezypr, and watered in a manner on'y by Rain from 
Heaven, muſt needs ſooner and ſorer feel the effefts of a- Droughr 
and Scarciry rhan Ezypr, which had relief from Nilus in that kind. 

5 And Pharaoh ſpake unto Foſeph, faying, Thy 
father and thy brethren are come unto thee. 

6 The land of Egypt is before thee e ; in the beſt of 
the land make thy father and thy brethren to dwell, in 
the land of Goſhen let them dwell: and if thou knoweſt 
any man of activity f- amongit them, then make chem 
rulers over my cattel. | Ye 

e To view it, and takerhy choice where thou pleſeft, it is in thy 
power. Sze Gen. 13: 9: f Or, of Strength or Vigor of Body and Mind, 

-'fir for the Employment. By which Expreſſion ir ſeems probable 
that thote five preſented. to Pharaoh were of the meaneſt ſort of them. 
See On verſe 2. 


\ F | 
7 And Joſeph brought in Jacob. his father, and ſet 
him before Pharaoh : and Jacob bleſſed g Pharaoh, 
£ Not in an authoritative way, as the greater bleGeth the leſs,but 
In a general manner, 7. e. he ſalureth him, thank:d him for all his 
favours to him and his, and prayed to God to bleſs and recompence 
him for it. Thus bl-/ing is pur for ſalutmg, 1 Sam. 13: 10.2 Kings 
4* 29. for praying, Numb. 6. 23. 24. for chankſgiving, Matth. 26: 26, 
+ Heb, compare with Luke 22.19, 
how many And Pharaoh ſaid unto Jacob, T How: old art 
are the anys thou ? 
of he yeers 9g And Jocob ſaid unto Pharaoh, * The days of the 
of thy life? . . - -d d hi : 
{11.p." Years of mypilgrimageiarean hundred and thirty years: 
11:9,:13. few and-evil hath the days of the years of my life been, 
and have not attained untothe days of the years of the 
life of my fathers &, in the days of their pilgrimage. 
z; (7.e.) Of my unſtable or unſ-ttled Life, in which 1 have 


been flicting from place to place. Sce Gen, 17: 8: Pſalm 119: 19: | 
belonging tothe Territory and Government of each City;fcr the ſeed 


Heb. 11: 9, 13: k. Though I ſeem old in compariſon of thy People, 
yer I fall much ſhort of my Progenitors, Iſaac, and AYravam, and 
Terah. 


10 4 And Jacob bleſſed Pharaoh, and went out. 


' Famine, out of the Publick Srore-houſes which were there ; or that 


from before Pharaoh. 


11 1 AndJoſeoh placed his father and his brethren, | 


and gave them a poſſeſſion in the land of Egypt, inthe 
beſt of the land, ia the land of Rameſes 7, as Pharaoh 


had commanded. 
{ A part of the land of Goſhen, poſſibly that part where after- 


wards the City Rameſes was iLuilt by the Tſraelites, Exod. 1: 11: | 
and 12:37; whence it is ſo called here by Anticipation. For the | 
Iſraelites were not-now numerous enough ro poſſeſs rhe whole Land 


of Goſhen, which was given ro them, but contented themſelves with 
a part of it, leaving the 'reſt to the management of the Exyprians, 
and therefore when they encreaſed greatly, they were forced to 
ſpread their Habirxcions amongſt the - Egyptians. See Exod. 12: 7, 23, 
\\355 37» So £ r 
'| 12 And Foſeph nouriſhed his facher and his brethren, 
* Or,os # £2dall his fathers houſhold with bread, + # according to 


little child heir families wm. 

3rnouriſhed * m Or, According ro the Mouth of the Family : Mouth being put fg, 

+ rear their Will or Deſire, as it is Gen. 24: 57+ 1{aiah 30: 2: as much a 

eording to every one deſired, without any reſtraint : Or, according to the gy,,_ 

the littly mer of a litzle Child, he put their meat into their very Mourhs ; i; was 

01s, brought to them withoug any more care or pains of theirs, ; thay 2 
Intans takes for its food, 


L, &.. | : i 


Mo _— =---4 


va 


"TFT 


13 T And there was no bread in all the land : for 
the famine was very ſore, ſo that the land of Egypt, 
and all the land of Canaan fainted by reaſon of the fa- 


mine s. L = 

» Queſt. Whence came it. that the people in this extremity did 
not take the Corn by force out of the ſeveral Store-houſes ? Anj. Be- 
des that ſingular Providence ofGod which watcherh over Kings and 
Rulers, and ſtilleth the Tumu!rs of the People, Jeſ-ph had no doubr 
foreſeen this difficul:y, and took due care to prevent it, partly by 
di'poſing the S:oies in ſtrong and well guarded Places ; partly by 
adding Wealth and Srrengrh tothe King,whereby he mighr more ea- 
ily Cippret any ſeditious Rifings ; and principally by not permit- 


-® 
4 


giving them reliefin a!! their Exigencies. 

14 And Joſeph gathered up a!l the money that wa 
found in the land of Egypt o, and inthe land of Ca- 
naan, for the corn which they bought: and Joſeph 
broughe the money into Pharaohs t ouſe. 

0 Whereia hedil no moce than any of the Subjz&s might have - 
done; he bought great Store of Corn in the plenrifull years with the 
King's Money, «nd kept ir tilla timeof Famine, and fold it ata rate 
which was agreeable ro the ſeaſon, 

i5 And when money failed in the land of Egypt, 
and in the land of C2naan, all the Egyptians came unto 
Joſeph, and ſaid, Give us bread: for why ſhould we 
die inthy preſence? for the money faileth p, _ 

2 Why ſhouldit thou ſee and ſuffer us to periſh for our want © 
Money, when thou canſt relieve us ? f 


glve you for your cattel if money fail. 
17 And they brought their cattel unto Joſeph 2 and 
Joſeph gave them bread in exchange for horſes, and ior 


for that year. ; 

18 When that year was ended, they came unto him 
the ſecond year q, and {aid unto him, We will not 
hide ic from my lord, hew that our money is ſpent, 
my lord alfo hath our herds of cattek., there is not ought 
FN in the ſight of my lord, but our bodies, and our 
iands. ; 

q Not the ſecond from the beginning of the Famine, but from the 
theirgrear extremity,ch2 ſecond year after that Jaſt mentioned,where- 
in”. they had ſold their Cattel; bur this ſeems to have been the laſt 
year of the Famine, beciuſe he now gives them Corn for food and for 
iced to0, ver. 23. whereas in the firſt ſix years there was no ſowing 
nor reaping, Gen. 45: 6; | | 


19 Wherefore ſhall we die before thine eyes r, both 
 weand our land 5? buy us and our land for bread, 
and we and our land wiil be ſervants unto Pharaoh s z 
and give us ſeed u that we may live and not die, that 


the land be not deſolate x. ; 

r ( 5. e. ) Whileſt thou lookeſt upon us like an idle ſpetztor, not 
pitying and relieving us. 5 The land is ſaid ro dye improperly, 
when it is deſolate and barren, and when the fruics of ir dye, or 
which is equivalent to it, do nor live, ? Pharaoh ſhall be the ſole 
Proprietor, and we are content to-be his Tenants, ro manage it for 
his uſe. « Becauſe this was the laſt year of Famine, as;Joſephinformed 
them, and therefore they tilled and fowed the ground fer the fol-« 
lowing year. « Without inhabitants, as it will be if chou ſuffcr- 
eſt us to dye for want of bread. | 


20 And Joſeph bought all the land of Egypt for Pha- 


Taoh : for the Egyptians ſold every man his field, be- 


cauſe the famine prevailed over them : fo the land be- 
came Pharaoh's. | | 

21 And as for the people, he removed them to ci- 
tiesy, from one end of the borders of Egypt, even to 


the other end thereof z. , 
y Under the Cities are here comprehended the Villages and Lands; 


which he gave them was not to be ſown in Cities, but in the C-uns 
trey ; but the Cites only are here mentioned, becauſe chey were jent 
thither firſt,either for the convenienc; of nouriſhing them during this 


they might all profeſs their SubjeCtion to the Goverments of the ſe- 
veral Cities, which was convenient for the management of that 
numerous and tumultuous people; or that the Cities might be firſt 


and moſt repleniſhed with Inhabitants,as being rhe principal Honour, 


and Srrength,and Security ofa Kingdom, and that Arts, and Trades, 
and Merchandiſe might flouriſh, wichour which the Commodities 
of the Countrey would have been of leſs Price and Uſe. But the 
Cities being firſt ſupplied, the reſidue, which doubtleſs was vaſt, 
were diſperſed in the Countrey. z Far from their Native Soil and 
Ancient Patrimonies, that none of them mighr plead Preſcription, 
bur that all might be foreed to acknowledge thar they owed their 
Eftates not to their ewn Wir and Induſtry, nor to their Parenrs 
Gifr, but wholly to the King's Favour; and that the remembrance 
of their Patrimonial Lands mighr be worn our, and therewith the 


| grief which would ariſe from their reſentment of their loſs of them, 
which probably would be matrer of Tumulrs 'and. Seditions, to _ 


which that people were very prone. And it is probable that he fo 


| diſpoſed of this affair, that thoſe who were apt and likely, and uſed 


to unite together in ſeditious Inſurre&tions, whether Kindred or 
others, ſhould be feparated one from another as faras might be. IF 
any think that Joſeph dealt hardly with them, and made an ill uſeof 
their necefliry, be will ſee how moderately and mercifully he deals 


with them, wer. 24. + OF 
Frinss 


22 Only the land of the + Prieſts a bought ke not b: 
K for 


"Ing the Peop's to Deſpair, or come to the utmoſt Extremity, but , 


16 And Joſeph ſaid, Give your catrel : ard I will - 


the tlecks, and for the cartel of their herds, and forthe.  } 
alies, andt he fedthem with bread, for all their catte] 7 He 


- 


« 


of b 


jap: 


TY. AT 


and grew and multiplied exceedingly. 


>.the 
of the 
P 


chap. 
+D , 


GENESIS. 


for the Priefts had aportion afligned them of Pharaoh, 
and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them -: 


'wherefore they fold not their lands, : 

s Under thisnime he underſtands chiefly thoſe who adminſtred 
the Worſhip of rhe gods or Idols of Egypr, and withal thoſe who 
applied themſelves to the Study of the Arts and Virtues, called 
their Wiſemen and Magicians, Though ſome underſtand it of the 
Princes ( as thar word ſometimes ſignifies ) or Officers of Pharaoh, 
who were nouriſh?d our of the King's Treaſures. And poſſibly the 
ſame Hebrew word may here comprehend both, wiz. the Miniſters 
of the King, and of their Idols roo, for both enjoyed the ſame Pri- 
viledges, as Diodorus Siculus relates. And that the Prieſts are includ- 
ed, if not mainly intended here, will be evident enough to any one 
that conſiders the ſtate of £zypr, how mad that people univerſally 
were upon their Idols, how numerous their Prieſts were and 
in kow great houour and veneration beth wich Prince and People : 
Beſtdes, reaſon of State obliged Pharaoh to engage and ſecure to 
himſelf that ſort of men, which bore ſo great ſway with the old 


more willing to go thither when Cod called them, by virtue of 

that inclination which is in moſt perſons, to be buried with their 

Fathers ; and in the mean time to declare his deteſtation of Idolaters, 

with whom he would have no communion either in life, as far as 

he could avoid it, or in the place of burial ; and on the contrary, to. 

profeſs his communion with his godly Anceſtors, by his deſire to 

be joined with them in burial. And for the ſame reaſons Joſeph deſired 

the tranſlation of his Bones thither, Gen. 50: 25: : 

31 And he ſaid, Swear unto me : and he {ware un- , "FIEa 


to him. And * Iſrael bowed himſelf »» upon the bed's * 
head ». | | 


Chap. XLVII:: b Evap.? 


mm Not to Joſeph, who being now not upon his Throne, nor | 
amongſt the FEgyprians, but in his Father's Houſe, was donbtleſs more | 
ready to pay that Reverence, ( as he did chap. 48: 12:) than to re- 
ccive Veneration from him, which he owed to his Father ; but ro 
God, who is here to be underſteod, as he is in the ſame Phraſe, 1 Kings 


the Promiſe of Canaan, and the aſſurance which he had now received 


inhabitants of their ſeveral places, and were likely to have the ſame 
authority with the new inhabitants, to quiet and fatisfie them at 
their firſt change , which muſt needs be very ungrateful ro them. 
b Ofthis Immunity of the Prieſts, that Ancient Writer Diedorw 
Siculus makes mention. But this is not to be aſcribed to Joſeph's will 
or choice ; for he who abhorred their Idolatry, could nor have a 
kindneſs for, nor would have given encouragement. to the great . 
upholders and promorers of it ; but in this he wasover-ruled either 
by Pharos expreſs command, ( it being nor probable thar ſo great 
an Intereſt as that of the Prieſts ſhould not have Friends at Court, 
or that their Friends ſhould not plead for them, or that their pleas 
and Deſires ſhould nor be granted by an Idolatrous Kiag ) or by the 
Laws of Eeypr, or by their Cuſtoms and Ulſages in things ofa like na- 
ture, which would have the force: of a law among them. 

22 Then Joſeph ſaid unto the people, Behold, I 
have bought you this day, and your land for Pharaoh, 


Lo, here is {eed for you, and ye ſhall ſow the land + : 


"A <4" 2-4 4 %s. 


+ For this was the Jaſt year of the Famine, as was noted before, 
24 Andit ſhall come to pals in the increaſe, that you 
ſhall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts 
ſhall be your own c, for feed of the field, and for your 
food, and fer them of your houſholds, and for food 
for your littleones, 

c Whereas he might have reſerved four parts to Pharaoh,and have 
allowed them only rae fifth. Herein he fhewed borh his bu | 
nity anJ kindneſs, in mitigating that hard bargain which themſelves 
had made, and were neceſſitated to make, and his prudence in com- 
poling, ſweetning, and winning the hearts of the ' people to the 
King,and making them pay their Tribute for the furure with more ' 
chearfulneſs. | 


25 And they ſaid, Thou haſt ſaved our - lives d 
let us find grace in the ſight of my lord e, and we will : 


be Pharaoh's ſervants *. | b 


d Without thy Care and Providence we had all been dead men : ' 
and therefore if thou hadſt kept us to the firſt bargain, thou hadfſt | 
done us more kindneſs than wrong, much more when thou hadſt uſed 
us with ſo much equity and clemency. e Be thou our friend with | 
Pharaoh inthis and upon all other occaſions. * To manage his land 
for him upon the terms which thou haſt propoſed. 

..26 And Foſeph made it a law over the land of 
Egypt unto thisday, that Pharaoh ſhould have the fifth | 
part f: exceptthe land of the + Prieſts only, which be- 


camenot Pharaoh's. 

f Thar the Propriety of the land ſhould be Pharaoh's ; and that 
in token thereof the people ſhould pay the fifch part of the Produds 
of it to Pharaoh. 

27 1 And Iſrael dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the 


countrey of Golhen, and they had poſleſlions g therein, 


g (7.e.) Lands, not for the Dominion of Propriety ofthem, for 
that reſted in Phara0,but for the uſe and profit of them for their 

preſent ſubſiſtance. | 
23 And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt ſeventeen 


years : ſo + the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty 


and ſeven years. | 

| 29 And the time drew nigh that Hrael muſt die, and 
he called his ſoa Foſeph, and ſaid unto him, Ifnow I 
have found grace in thy fight, * put, I pray thee, 
thy hand under my thigh þ, and dealz kindly and truly 
& with me, * bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt. 

h (7:.e.) Swear tome. (as ver. 31.) that thou wilt do what I 
am now deſiring of thee. Sez the Noteson Gen. 24: 2: He requires 
this, not out of any diſtruſt of Joſeph's promiſe, bur partly as a more 
ſolemn proreſtation of his right to, and affeftion for that promiſed 
Land ; partly as a motive to all his Children to have their minds 
and hearcs there, even when their bodies were in £zyp: ; and partly 
to give Joſeph an argument and excuſe to Pharaeb, that he mighr 
more willingly permit Joſeph to fulfil his father's deſire,becauſe of his 
own Oath. # Or,that theu wilt deal; as the Hebrew Yau joined with 
the Furure Tenſe, is elſe where uſed; as Pſal. 24: 7: and 35: 24: and 
51:+5: & Kindly in promiſing, andrtruly in performing thy promiſe. 

30 But i will lye wich my fathers /, and thou ſhalt 
carry me ourof Egypt, and bury me in their burying- 
place : and hefſaid, I will do as thou haſt ſaid. 

I. Abraham and Iſaac in Canaan. See Gen. 23: 19; and 25: 9: and 
35: 29: Which he deſired nor io much for himſelf, as knowing that 
wherever he was buried he ſhould riſe ro Glory ; as for hisChildren, 
to ſhew his own, and confirm their Faith in God's Promiſe of Cs- 
naan ; to diſcover his high valuation of that Land, nor only for it : 
{c}f, bur as ir'was a T'ypz and Pl:dge of the Heavenly Inheritance ; 


to keep his Childrens minis and hearts looſe from Egypr, a place of 
ſo much fin and danger, and fixed upon Canaan, that they might be 


————d# 


-_- 


nw A, 


——_w 


from Joſeph, of his being buried there, ſo for all his favours to him 
and to ſoſeph, and by him to all his Family. w Ja at this time 
was bed-rid through Age and infirmity ; but being now to give God 
ſolemn Thanks, though the words and manner of it be not here 
expreſſed, he raiſed himſelf and ſat upon the head or vpper-moft 


* part of his bed, as he did alſo Gen. 48: 2. that he might expreſs his 


Reverence to God as much as ke could by Bowing, when he could 


' not doit as much. as he would, being unable to do it Kneeling. 


Others for bes read fiaf, the diſcuſſing whereof I refer unto its pro- 
per place, Heb. 11: 27. 
C H A P. XLVIIL. 
Jacob being ſick, Joſeph comes and viſits him, 1,2. Jacob declayes God's 
appearances and promiſes to him, 3,4. Adopts Jeſeph's two ſons Manaſſeh 
and Ephraim to be fathers of two tribes in Jſrael,5, 6. Mentions Rachel's 
death, andthe place where ho buried her,7. Calls for his ſons to bleſs them: 
Joſeph brings and places them: Jaceb purpoſely croſſes his hands,8----=14. His 
bleſſing on Joſeph and his jons. 15, 16+ Joſeph interpo'es to remous his 
father's hands, 17,18: He declares the pre-eminence of the younger, 19« 
But the ether alſo bl:ſſed, 20: Prepheſieth of their return x0 Canaan, 2 1: 
He gives Joſeph a piece of land a part, 22. 
AND it came to pals after theſe things, that one 
told Joſeph, Behold, thy father is ſick : and he 
took with him his two ſons «6, Manaiſleh and Ephraim. 


| x To obtain his Venerable and Religious Father's Blefling for 
tacm, 


peared unto me at * Luz in the land of Canaan, and Se. 
letied me, 35:6: 
4 And ſaid unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruit- 
ful, and mulciplie thee, and'I will + make of thee a jug 
multitude of people; and will give this land to thy ſeed , nuiriruds 
atter thee, for an everlaſting poſſeflion. of peoples. 


6 And thy iſſue which thou begetteſt after them 
ſhall be thine e, and ſhall be called after the name of 
their brethren in their inheritance *. 

e Shall be reputed as thy Children, and my Grand-children, and 
ſhall not have any diſtin ſhare in my preſent or future Inheritance, 
but ſhall have a part of their brethrens Lor, in ſuch manner and pro- 
portion as thou ſhalt think fit, or as their ſucceeding Parents or 
Governours ſhall determine. Bur it doth not appear, nor doth Scri- 
pture any where mention, that Jejeph had any other Sons but theſe, 
and therefore it is probable he had no more : only Jaceb ſpeaks this 
upon ſuppoſition, in caſe he ſhould have any other. * Either Eph- 
raimites er Manaſſites, 


7 And asfor me, * when I came from Padan, Ra- *Gen.3s: 
chel died by me f in the land of Canaan, in the way 19: 
when yet there was but a little way to come unto Eph- 
rath : and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath g: 


the ſame is Bethlehem. 

f Or, beſideme ; near me, before mine eyes, I ſeeing, but not be- 
ing able to help her in her extremity ; which makes the remem- 
brance of it moxe grievous to me» This ſtory he bere mentions, 
partlybecauſe the ſight of Joſoph and his Children brought his belo« 
ved Rachel to his remembrance; partly to give the reaſon of this 
ation of his to the reſt of his Children, which was not only be. 
cauſe Rachel was his firſt rightful Wife by Deſignation and Contra, 
and therefore the right of the Firſt-born was truly Joſeph's; but bee a 
cauſe by her early death he was cut off from all hopes of having t: 
more Children by her, and therefore it was but fit he ſhould ſupply 
that defeCt, by adopting Joſeph's Children. g Not out of diſreſpect : 
to her, whoſe Perſon was, and Memory yet is, precious and ho- 
nourable to me, but either becauſe dying in Childbed they could 
not keep her $illthey came to the Burying-place of the Pacelarehs at 

Hiorolty * 


31-2: + 


” CPE ITIEL 2070 
ue: 3... a $4 
FY 
. has s 


— 


b_ : = 
+. As lod 


I, 47: whom with this Geſture he worſhipped and praiſed, as tor [ 


- re Sh Rd 


4 Heb. 
heavy » 


* Ht 
21. 
* Ch 
I7: 
24: 


B. % Be ade addy ts 
WIE IT 


— 


Chap. XLVIIL. 


4 Heb. 
hiavy » 


* Heb:11: 


21. 

* Chap: 
17: 1: and 
24: 404 


* Chap- 
ZI:11,13. 


+ Heb: as 


fiſhes do in- 


creafe: See 


Numb. 
26:34437: 


bron, Gen: 24. 19: eſpecially when they were tied to the ſlow mo- 
env the 3 bad herds; or becauſe I would not: bury her in the | 
common Burying-place with Heathens and Tdolaters, in the City of 

Ephrath. By which he tacitely implies, that he wou!d not have Jo- 

ſepþ joined with the Egyptians 1n Burial. | ; 

$ And Ifrael beheld Joſeph's ſons, and ſaid, Who are 
theſe þ? | 

h For Jacob's eyes were dim through age and infirmity, as 1s ob- 
ſerved wer. 10; and thzrefore he could not diſtin@ly diſcern them. 

o And Joſeph ſaid unto his father, They ares my 
ſons, whom God hath given me in this place : and he 
ſaid, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and. I will 
bleſs them 7: 


; Or, that 1 may bleſs them, not with a common, but with a Pater- 


GENESIS. 4 


nal and Patriarchal and Prophetical Bleſſing, in the Name and by 
the Spirit of God, praying for, and foretelling thoſe Bleſſings which 
God will confer upon them. Tn 

10 ( Now the eyes of Ifrael were | 'dim for age, /s 
that he could not fee ) andhe brought them near unto 
him, and he kiſſed them, and embraced them : 

11 And Iſrael ſaid unto Joſeph, I had not thought 
to ſee thy face, and lo, God hath ſhewed me allo thy 
ſeed. | 

22 And Joſeph brought them out from between 
his knees &, and he bowed himſelf with his face to the 
earth I. | ; 

þ Not his own knees, from which they had been taken before, 
bur Jacob's knees, berween which they ſtood-winilſt Jacob kiſſed and 
embraced them ; from which:Joſeph removed them, partly that they 
might not be burdenfome to their aged and weak Grandfather, and 
principallythat he mighr place them m fit order and reverent poſture 
to receive the Bleſſing for which he longed. 7 Teſtifying rhereby 
his Reverence to his Father, his Thankfulneſs for rhe Favour which 
he had now ſhewed to him ard his, and bis humble and earneſt Re- 
quelt for his Bleſſing upon them. fe 

i2 And Joſeph took them both, Ephraim in his right 
hand, towards Itrael's left hand : and Manaſleh in his 


left hand towards I{rael's right hand,and brought hem 
near unto him. 


14 And {ſrael ſtretched out his right hand m, and 
laid it upon Ephraim's head », who was . the younger, 
and his left hand upon Manaſſeh's head, guiding his 


hands wittingly s: for Manaſſeh was the firit-born. 

m Which was more honourable both in Scripture account, and 
amongſt the Gentiles. » Which was a rite uſed often, aud in divers 
caſes, as in the conferring of offices either ſacred or civil, as Num: 
8: 10: Deut. 14. 9. A#56:6. and 13. 3. and among ©: 2r thing:, in 
givii-g beneditions, as M3trh. 19. 13. 0 This proce:d-d nor trom 
chance, cr che miſtake and weakneis of his eyes, bur from deſign, 
and the wiſdom of his hands. Heb: He d:ſpoſed his hands prudently, «x 
he dealt wiſely with his hands, Here was a io bis witiom the ved; 
1. Humane, by which he gathered that Manaſſch was rhe eldeſt, 
becauſe Jojeph placed him towards his right hind. 2. Divine, and 
Provherical, by which he foreſaw Ephraim's advantiges above Ma- 
naſ-h, and wiſely ſuited the Ceremony to rhe Subſtance, giving 
the greater ſign of Honour to him, to whom God deſigned the 
thing. * 

15 T * And he bleſſed Foſephp, and ſaid, God, 
* before whom my fathers Abraham and Iſaac did 
walk,the God which fed me * all my life 101:g unto this 
day ; 

p Not now in his Perſon, but in his Children, which yer is cal- 
led here a bleſſing of Joſeph, becauſe they were a parc ©* himfelf. In 
which ſenſe, aid upon: the ſame ground the Jand 5+ Canaan is oft- 
times ſaid ro be not only promiſed bur given to Abraham, an Taac,&c. 
not as if rhey were in perſon to potl-1s ir, tut becauſe it ſhould be 
given to their Children. Thus Cham is {aid ro be curſed when his 


Son is curled, Gen. 9: 25. * ( 5z. e. ) Prote&ed, ſuſtained, and di- 
rected me. 


16 The angel q * which redeemed me from all evil, 
bleſs thelads, and let my name be named on them -, 


and the name of my fathers Abraham, and lfaac s, 


and let themgrow F intoa multitude in the midit of the 
earth, | 


q Not ſurely a created Angel, but Chrift Jeſus, who is called an 
Angel, Exod, 23.20 ant the Angel of the covenant, Mal. 3. 1. who 
was the conductor of the Iſraelites in the Wildernefs, as plainly ap- 
ous by comparing of Ex d.. 23: 20, 21. with 1 C9: 10. 4, 9, Add 

ereunto, that this Angei is called Jacob's r-decmer, which is tie Title 
appropriated by God to himſelf, 1/a. 43. 14. and 47: 4. 2nd that from 
all evil, and therefore from fin, from which no created Ange! cande- 
liver us, bur Chriſt only, Match: 1: 28. and thar Jacob w r{h:ppeth 
and prayeth to this Angel no leſs than ro God for che Bl-Mlinz, and 
that withour any nore of diſtin&tion, rhe word bleſs, b-:ig in rhe 
Singular Number, and equally relating to God, and to ths Angel; 
and that the Angel to whom hs here atcribes his Deliverir cs from 
all evi], muft in all reaſon bethe ſame ro whom he prayed for theſe 
very Deliverances which he here commemorates, and har was no o= 
ther rhan the very God of Abraham, as is evident from Gen: 28: 15, 
20, 21. and 32.9, 10, Ir and 35. 3. (5. e. ) Let tiem be -cal- 
Ted by my name, owned for my immediate Children, and inveſted 
with the ſame Priviledges with my other Children, be the heads of 
diſtin& Tribes,and as ſuch receive diſtin& Inherirances. And hence 
they are called the children of Jacob or Iſrael, no leſs than the childrer: 
of Joſeph. For the Phrale, tee Dewur: 28: 10: 2 Chron. 7. Iq. js 4. 1. 
Jer. 14.9. $ E=tthembe called their Children ; jet them nor 0n- 


ly have my bleiling, bur the blenflivs of Abraham and Iſaac ; ler all: Jacob truſted, and of which he had ample experience. 


meet together upon their heads; and let thar gracious Covenant of 


God made with Abraham, and confirmed with 7/asc and me, be ratified, 
and made good unto them, 0 


Chap. 
17 And when Fofeph ſaw that his father laid his 
right hand upon the head of Ephraim,it diſpleaſed him 5: 
and he heldup his fathers hand, co remove ic from E- 
phraims head, unto Manaſſehs head. 

: Becauſe of that affe&tion which Parents generally have for their 
firſt-born. See Gen. 21: It» : 

18 And Joſeph ſaid unto his father, Not ſo niy fa- 


ther : for this ;s the firſt-born, put thy right hand-up= 
on his head. , 


19 And his father refuſed, and ſaid, Tknow zt, my 
ſon, I know it : he aiſoſhall become a people, and he 
alſo ſhall be great: but truly his younger brother ſhall 
be greater than he «, and his { 
titude of nations x. 


« So the Tribe of Ephraim was both in Number, Nemb. 1: 
33, 35: and 2:19,21. and Oewt.33: 19: and in Power and Priviled- 
ges, for that Tribe was the ſeat firſt of the Tabernacle, and after= 
wards of the Kingdom. Whencethe name of Ephraim is ſometimes 
put forall the ten Tribes,as 7a. 7. 2: and ſometimes for Joſeph him= 
ſelf, as Numb: 1: 32: Rev: 75: 8: which Manaſhnever is. x( 7: ) 
Equal to many Nartions,in number and ſtrength; or, from them ſhal 
proceed many Nations, 8s, e. many numerous, potent, and flouriſh» 
ing Families, whereof each is equivalent to an ordinary Nation: 
For as Nations are ſometimes called Families, as Zech 14: 18: fo 
the Tribes and Families of I/rael are called Nations or People, as Exek, 
2: 2. As 4 27. ; 

20 And he bleſſed them in that day, ſaying, In 
thee y ſhall Iſrael bleſs, ſaying, God make thee as 


Ephraim, and as Manaſlſeh : and he ſet Ephraim be+- 
fore Manaſleh, 


y (7. e. ) In thy ſeed, as appears both from the relative, them, 
here, and from werſe 15. where tis biefling of rhem is called the 
bleſſing of Joſeph ; and from the following words, where this is in- 
rerprered of Epbraim and Manaſſeh. And n thee, or in thy ſeed, 1 e, 


uſing their names in« the form er words of blefling, as eminent ex+ 
amples of bleſſ:dneſs. 


21 And Iſrael faid unto Jofeph, Behold, I die & - but 


God ſhall be with you, and bring you again unto the 
land of your fathers 4. | 


z ( 7. e. ) TIamabout todie. The preſent time for that which 
will ſhortly and certainly be, as Gen: 19: 13: and 20: 3+ Joh; 14t 
2. a (i.e, ) Canaan, their Land, 1 By habitation, as Nazareth 
is called Chriſt's Countrey, becauſe he dwelt in it. 2. By the do« 
nation of God, who had promiſed, and would in his time give the 
actual poſl:flion of it to them, 7: e: to their feeds 


22 Moceover,] have given to thee b ene portion © 4» 
bore thy brethren,which I took out of the hand ef the 
Amorite with my ſword, and with my bow d. 

b ( 5.e. ) Idonow give to thee the righr,and Ido prophetically 
give, and God will really and attually give unto thy ſon Ephraim, 
or his poſtzrity, who ſhall pofleſs this part over and above that por- 
tion which ſhall fall co him by lot. This was all che Land woich 
Jacob had in Canaan, which he here gives to Joſeph, partly in Teſtis 
mony of his grear affeQion and obligarion ro him; partly as a ſign 
thar he did confer the right of the firſt-born upon him ; and parrly 


|. for the confirmation of the Fairh of Joſeph and his Brerhren, and ro 


ovlige them to ſet up their reſt no where bur in Canann. 6 The 
Hebrew word is Shechem, which word indeed ſignifies a jbould:r, as 
Gen: 9: 23: andis here put fora part of Land which is c'wice and 
good, as the ſhoulder is among the parts of the Body Se x Sam, 
9. 24. And he ufeth this word, that by alluſion he might fignifie 
what place he ſpeaks of, even Sh-chem, as may fuzther appear by 
comparing Joſ: 24: 32. J'h: 4: 5: Yea ſome «i uld have Shecherd 
here to be the proper name of the place, which might be if rhe 
word one were not added to it. d This place is underitood, 'either 
1: Ofrthe future Conqueſt of the Land of the Amorites or Canaanites 
by his poſteriry, which he here «ſcribes to himſelf, 
it in the paſt time, as of a thing already done, 
the Prophets is. But Facob would nor attribure that ro his Sword, 
whigh his poſterity deny to be done by their Sword, Pſal. 43- 4. 
And it 15 manifeſt, that /acob here ſpeaks of that which was his by 
a ſpecial Title, and which in a peculiar manner he gave to Joſephs, 
Or, 2. Ofthe City and Territory of Shechem, whoſe Inhabitants 
were rooted out by Simeen and Levi, and whoſe Land being void 
was pollefſed by Yacob. And rhis is ſaid "to be got by Jaceh's 
Sword and Bow, becauſe it was got with the Sword and Bow of hig 
Sons Simeon and Levi,and a great number of his Family,who doubt« 
Jeſs were aflcciated with them in this expedition. Bur ir is not! 
likely thar he would take to himſelf that which be declares bisutter 
abhorrency ef, Gen: 34: 30: and 42: 5, 6, or that he ſhould calf 
that #15 Sword and his Bow here which he calls inſtruments of crueity ins 
Simeon's ane Levi's hands, Gen: 49. 5. Or, 3. Which ſeems the 
trucſt,of that Land in the Territory of Sbechew, which Jacob bought 
of Hemor, Gn: 33: 19: Which 1s ſaid to be got by his Sword and 
Bow, either 1: Properly, becaufe he did by ' 24 of Arms expet 
rhoſe Amorires, who upon bis retirement from thoſe parts, after ths 
ſlaughter of the Sichemites, had invaded his Lands, though this fto« 
ry be not elſewhere recorded; as many things are mentioned by the 
by in ſome one place of Scripture, withour any particular account! 


of the circumſtances of them, eirher there oreH{ewhere, as Gen: 363: 


24. Deut: 2. 9, 10, 11; Jef, 24: it. And though Jacob was a 
man of Peace, yet his Sons were Warriors ; and they by las per- 
miſſion might drive out, by their Arms, thoſe ſtragling Canaanites 
which had raken poſſeflion of bis purchaſe, Jacob being. the more. 
willing to recover his right herein, becauſe irwas an earneſt of his 
future poſlefffon of the whole Land. And the neighbouring Ca+ 
naanites would not concern themſelves in the defence of the inva=- 
ders,both becauſe they were convinced of the righr of Jscob's Cauſe, 
and becaule they were over-ruled by Divine Sepia rag in —_—_ 

r, 2. Me« 
raphorically, # e. by his Money, which he calls his Sword and his 
Bow, not on'y becauſe Money isan{werable to the Sword and the 


K 2 Bow, 


and ſpeaks of 
as the manner of 


ed ſhall become a 4 mul- + Heb. 
32 J wines 


» 


121). ALite 


e things, Ecclef: 10. 19: and ire defence, Eccleſ: 7. 
peg ; ———_ may i627 _ called, even as prayers and zears 
are called the arms of the Church, becuaſe they ſerve for the ſame pur- 
poſe that Arms do againſt their Enemies ; but alſo and principally 
by way of oppoſition to the Sword and Bow of his cruel' Sons. So 
the ſenſe may be this, 1 have given to thee one portion, or one Skechem,not 
the City of Shechem, which Simeon and Levi took from the hand of the 
dmorite with their Sword and their Bow, but a part of the Terri- 
tory of Shechem which I took, or received from the hand of the Amo- 
rite by my Svvord and my Bovv, #. e. by my Money, vyhereby I pur- 


d it. 
__ CHAP. XLIX. 


2. Condemns Reuben's inceſt, 3, 4. Simeon's and Levi's cruelty, 5---7: 
Extols Judah; propbefict b of Chriſt, and the calling of the Gentiles,g----12: 
Of Zebulun, 13. 1ſachsr, 14, 15. Dan. 16: Expreſſes his faith on God 5 
ſalvation, 17: Of Gad, 19. Aſher, 20: Naphtali, 21: Joſephs peculi- 
ar bleſſing, 22=-=--26: Of Benjamin, 27: His charge concerning his bu- 
rial, and death, 28----33. : | 
AN D Jacob called unto his ſons, and ſaid, Gather 
your ſelves ' together, that I may tell you that 
which ſhall befal you in the laſt days . 
- 8 Or» In the following times, or latter days, when you ſhall enter 
into, and be ſettled in the Land of Promiſe. Hereby he ſignifies 
that he ſpeaks here of things which concern not ſo much their per- 
ſons, as their poſterity. 
2 Gather your ſelves - together, and hear 
Jacob, and hearken unto Iſrael your father. 
2 7 Reuben thou art my firſt-born, my might, and 


the beginning of my ftrength b, the excellency of digni- 
ty; and the excellency of power c. 

b The firſt inſtance, or evidence of my might, or ſtrength, or 
of that maſculine vigour, whereby God enabled me ro beget a 
Child. Compare Deut: 21: 17: Pſsl: 105: 36: Or the fict of my 
Children, which are the ſtrength, the ſtays, and ſupports of a Fa- 

| ther, and of his Fa'ily; thence called his Arrows,as Pſal:127: 4. and 
by other Authors, The pillars of the houſe. c As firſt-born thou hadft 
the right of precedency beforeall thy Brethren in point of Dignity 
and Power, or Priviledge ; thedouble portion, the Prieſthood, the 
Dominion over thy brethren were thine. 


Heb: 4 Unſtable as water 4, + thou ſhalt not excel e, be- 
& merb cauſe thou * wenteſt up to thy fathers bed : then defil- 


ye ſons of 


excel. edft thou 5rf, | He went up to my couch g, 
* Chap: * d This may concern either, r. Something paſt, or Reuber's fault; 
Chr.5:1 and ſo he is id to have been #»ſtable,or light, and vain, as the word 


is uſed, Judg: 9: 4: Zeph: 3: 4: like water, moved with every litrle 

_—Y wind" of Temptation, and unbounded in thy Luſt ; as Water of it 
#15 ſelf hath no bounds, but will ſcatrer itſelf every way, if it be nor 
' kept within Banks, or in a Veſſel: Or, hafty, wiolent, impetuous in 
thy Luſt, like Water, which eirher overflows or breaks its Banks. 
Or, 2. Something ro come, or Reuben's puniſhment, and ſo the 
meaning is, thou, 7. e. thy poſterity, ſhall be unf#able, orunſet:led, 
flicting and vanifhing, coming to nothing, or poured forth like Wa- 
ter, uſeleſs, contemptible and weak. Such indeed was the ſtate of 
that Tribe, of which we read nothing eminent in Scripture. See 
Fudg: 5: 15, 16. This I prefer before the former, xr. becauſe it is 
nor probable that this fault ſhould be deſcribed here in ſuch general 
and ambiguous and dark terms, which 1s deſcribed ſo plainly and 
particularly in the following words. 2. Becauſe this makes the co- 
herence moſt plain. Here is a deſcription, ( 1. ) Of Reuben's exce]- 
Jent fate to which he was born, werſe 3. ( 2. ) Of his fall from 
thar ſtate, in th:ſe words, and the immediatly following, #hou 
ſhalt not extel. ( 3. ) Of the reaſon of rkis fall, his great ſu. 3- Be- 
cauſe th2 ſimi'itude of Water applied to men in this manner, notes 


= 


% 


Pſal: 22: 14. e Or, B: the moſt eminent amongſt thy Brethren ; 
thou haſt left thy pre-eminency due to thee by birthright, both for 


Prieſthood ro Lovi, the Dominiofi to Fudah, and the double Portion 
to Joſeph. f By commitring inceſt with B:lhah, g He repeats the ſame 
thing, and that in an emphartica]l manner turning his Speech and 
Face from Reuben to his Brethren, in a poſture of Endignation and 
Dereſtarion ; which ye.-muſt nor impure to Jacob's paſſion, he bzing 
now a dying man, and this being forty years after the crime cony 
mirted, bur the Spirit of God guiding his Tongue to utter this, 
not only nor chiefly for the puniſhment of Reuben, who, as many 
think, had repented of hisjſin ; bur ſor terrour, inſtruction, and 
cautionto all. orhers, and to aſſure them that ſin, though ir may be 
long difſembled and born with, yer it will one time or other be 
ſorely puniſhed. Bur theſe and the next foregoing words may be 
thus rendred, Then defiledft thou my bed : He went wp to it, or rather 
heis gone up, i. e. heis vaniſhed, or periſhed, or loſt; for ſo this 
word is oft uſed, as Job 5, 26: I/a. 5: 24. Jer. 48. 15. And ic 
here is an elegant Figure, called Antansclafs, whereby the ſame 
word is repeated irc the ſame verſe in adifferent ſenſe, as Pſal: 18: 
26: Matth: 8: 22: Sohere; He went up wickedly to his Fathers Bed 
ro commit a great fin ; therefore now he is goneup penally, to receive 
condign punifhmenr; hisexcellency is gone up like Smoak, which 
aſcenderh and i: diſperſed in the Air. And this may ſeem to be the 
rrueſt Tranſlation,and Interpretation, becauſe it keeps cloſe to the 
Hebrew words and their order ; whereas, in our Tranſlation, there 


3s both a tranſplacing of the Hebrew words, and a ſupplement added 
ynneceſſarly. 


® Chaps: _5 T * Simeon and Levi re brethren b; + inftruments 
29:33,34 of cruelty are in their habitations 5. 
+ Oc,;her þ Not only by Nature, but in Iniquity ; of like eruel and blood 
Jwwrd; art diſpoſition, confegerate in the ſame wicked deſign, Gen: 34: 25: 
w# pen; of So the word Brother iselſewhere uſed, for him that agrees much 
\widlence.” with another in his temper, or employment, or deſigns, as Jeb 30 
| 29; Prov; 18: 9, Os. i ( i: e: ) Their bloody Swords are yet 
in their dwellings, to bear witneſs againſt them for their barbar- 
ous cruelty. But theſe words may be, and are by ſome both anci- 
ent and later Interpreters,rendred otherwiſe, For the Hebrew word 
Mecheroth, here rendred /abjtarimw, bg never ty uſed, nor indeed js 


GENESIS 


Jacob calls his ſons to bleſs them before his agath, 1. Beſpeaks their attention, 


| ments to break down a Wal), which doubtleſs they brought with 


| them, as eaſily forefeeing that difficu'ty in their enterprize. Bur 
rather their imporency and calamity, than their fin, as Foſ: 7: 5:| 


N 
Chap: XL: * 
found elſewhere in Scripture. Nor doth that fignification agree 
with the Hebrew root from whence this comes, which is'Machar,and 
ſignifies to Bargain, or ſell, or exchange. And accordingly this word 
is by the Samaritan Tranſlator, and by other learned Interpreters, 
rendred, their conventions, or compaitsy, or civil contraffs, or agre- 
ments. And whichis more, the Chaldee Verb, Mechar from whence 
this word may very well be dedveced ; fignifies to eſpoxſe, and the 
Noun, Mechirah, derived from it, ſignifies a ſpouſe. And fo the 
words may be rendred thus, their contratts, or agreements ( 07 their 
nuptial contraffs )) were inſtruments of craelty. Which Tranſlation 
ſeems better than the other, 1. Becauſe it keeps cloſeſt ro the words | 
of the. Text,and leaves oug that Particle,in, which is not in the He- 


brew Text, but was added by our Tranſlators to compleat the ſenſe” 


2- Becauſe this beſt agrees with the Hiſtory recorded, Gen: 34.where j 


we read that they did cover their bloody deſign with a pretence of an 

agreement, and nuptial Contra with the Srchemites, which was a 

great aggravation of their villany, that thoſe things which to 6- ; 

thers are bonds of love and peace, were made by them inſtruments of | 

cruelty. | 
6 O my ſoul, come not thou into their ſecret &: unto 

their aſſembly mine h onour / be not thou united ; for 


in their anger they flew a man mp, and in their felf-will | 
7 they + digged down a wall + Or, 


k Or, Counjel, or company, as the word 1s uſed, Pſal. 64. 2. Jer- houghed 
I5: 17: 7, e. donetpartake with them in their ſecret and wicked Ox. 
deſigns. Hereby heltignifies to all poſterity, that that bloody en= 
terprize was undertaken without his conſent or approbation, and 
that he could not think of it without dereſtation, ror let ir paſs 
without a ſevere cenſure. Or, O my ſoul, thow woſt net in their ſe= 
cret, as the Chald. Syr. and 4rab. take it, by acommon Enaliage of 
the future Tenſe for the paſt. / Either 1. properly ſo cailed. So- 
the ſenſe is, Let not my honour or good name be bound up with 
theirs; they gloried in this wickedneſs, which 1abominate, and 
which indeed 1s their thame. Or, 2. Improperly, ſo he underſtands 
either, 1. Bis Soul, which is indecd the glory of a man; though 
I do not remember ary place of Scriprure where that word muſt ; 
neceſſarily bz ſo underſtood. So this is a repetition of the ſame | 
thing in orher vvords, which 1s uſual in Scripture. Or rather, 2: His 
Tongue, for which the word honeur, or glory, is commonly put, as 
Pſal: 16; 9: compare with Aﬀs 2: 26: Pſal: 3o: 12: and 57: 8: and 
108: 1, becauſe the Tongue or Speech 1s the glory of a man, by 
which he 1s diſtinguiſhed from unreaſonable creatures, and, if well 
uſed, it brings much honour to God, and ro the man that ſpeaks 
with it. So the ſenſe 1s, As my Soul did not approve of that wick- | 
ed ation, ſo my Tongue never gave conſent to it, nor ſhal it now | 
by ſilence ſeem to own it, but ſhall publickly witneſs my abhorren» 
cy of it. ms ( i. e. ) Men, the Sichemites, Gen: 34: 25, 26: the Sin« 
gularNumber for the Plural, as Gen: 3: 2: and 32: 5. 1 Chron: 10. 
1: compared with 1 Sam: 31: 1. He ſaith an rather than men, 
either with reſpe& unto the Prince, whoſe ſlaughter was princi- 
paliy deſigned; or to ſhew that they ſlew them all ro a man. » Tt 
may note, that this cruelty of theirs was committed, 1. By their 
own will and choice, not by Jacob's will or conſent, which they 
never asked nor obtained. 2. Without any neceſſity or ſufficient 
provocaticn, bur meerly by their own will and proper motion. 3. 
Notrafhly and haſtily, but wilfully and reſo}vedly,after mature de- 
\ibefation. 4. Not unwillingly, tut cheerfully, and with delight, 
and good will, as that word commonly ſignifies. e Not the Walls 
of the City, bur of private Houſes ; ir may be only of the Prince's 
Houſe, who upon the firſt noiſe of the Tumult might, and pro- 
bably did retire and ſecure himſelf in ſome ſtrong Room of the 
Houſe, whoſe Wall they brake down that they might come at him. 
For neither were the Walls of Houſes or Cities ſo ſtrong then as 
now many are; nor were S/meen and Levi deftitute of fir Inſtru- 


Pym” hes 8 


becaufe the Hebrew word is not Shur, a Wall, but Sckor, an Ox, 
others traſlate rhe words thus, They houghed, or killed #n Ox, or Bul, 


a cd cette I Ind 


| meaning Shechem,ſo called either from. his Luſt,or from his Strength . 
thy ſelf and for thy poſterity, IF ſhal be, given to others; the | 


and Power, from which Princes are oft to called, as Deut: 33: 17: 


Pſal: 22: 12: and 68: 3e. Or, rather thus, Zhey rooted out,or drove 
away an Ox, i: e. the Oxen, the Singular Number for the Plural, as 


before, and under rhem are comprehended the other Cattel of the 


Sichemires, which they droveaway, and as we read they did, Gen.34. ] 
28, Forasthe words may bear this ſenſe, ſo ir ſeems more reaſon- ; 
able to underſtand them of that which certainly was done by them, 


than of their breaking a Wall, of which we do not read any thing | 
in the Hiſtory. | 


7 Curſed be p their anger,for it was fierce, and their 


wrath, for it was cruel: 1*will divide them in Ta- 
cob, and ſcatter themin Iſrael g. 


p Or, Curſed was. Ir was execrable and abominable bot 

God and Mcn;fuch as deſerved and brought the Curſe of of pur 
chemſelves, which, as God's Inſtrument, am now to pronounce a- 
gainſt them. q ( 7. e. )}I do here declare in the Name of God thet they 
ſhall be divided and di'pzrſcd in Faceb, &c. that is, among the Chil. 
dren or Tribes of Jacob or Iſrael. Prophets are ſaid to do what they 
forete] that God will do, as feremy is ſaid to root our and pull down king< 
dems, Jer. 1. 10: and Ezekiel to d:ftroy the city, Exek:43. 3. Add Hoſes 
6. 5. Note here how ſuitable their Puniſhment was to their Crime. 
They ſinned by Conſpiracy and Confederation in the Counſel and 
Action, and they are puniſhed with Diviſion or Szparation,not on<- 
ly of the two Brethren and their Tribes, but of the Children and Fae 
milies of the ſeveral Tribes, one from another. This was eminent= 
'y fulfilled in the Tribe of Levi, which had no proper Portion or 
Iaheritance, but was ſcattered among all the Tribes, Joſs 18: 7. 
though afrerwards God turned this Curſe into a Bleſſing, And for 
Simeon, he had no part ofhis own in the Diviſion of the Land,but the 
Portion of Judah being too large for that Tribe, he was taken into 
tharlot, and was as an Inmate to them, Joſ: 19. 1, 2 9. andafter- 
wards part of them were forced to ſeek new Seats, and ſo were di. 
vided from the reſt of ther Brethren, x Chron: 4: 25, 39, 42+ And 
moreover the Jewiſh Dottors write, that that Tribe was ſo firaitned 
in their Habitations and Conveniencies, that a very greatnumber of 
them were forced to ſcatter themfelves a 


m , 
get aſybfſtence by teaching their Children ade 


* Joſhi21; 
$2047 


8 5Tudah, 


Ld 


"Me *” 
o 


—_  — 


® i ( 


*Nt 


"327 


and 


213 


- © ————_—_—_—_—_—— 


——  — 


PIR 


A _ _ A) $I A 
Pr RT OR PI. T7 CRT _ 


hap. XLIX. 


*: Cho, mics 5 
5: 2. 


* Numb, 
23: 24: 


8 © Judah, thow art he whom thy brethren ſhall 
praiſe r + thy hand ſhe# be in the neck « of thine ene- 
* thy fathers children # fhall bow down before 
thee «. | 

7» Or rather, 7he4 art Tudah, thy brethren ſhall praiſe or celebrate 

thee. So the exprellion is like thar, 1 Sam. 25: 25: as his name 45, 
ſo is he : Navol 1s his name, and folly is with him, or in him. So here 
the ſenſe is, As thy name fignities Praiſe, Gen. 29. 35: ſo ſhalt thou 
have Praiſe or Honour from thy Brethren. He alludes ro lus 
Name. and to the occaſion of it, but with an elegant Variation, 
Thou Art deſerved y callzd Judah,not only becauſe thy Mother prais'd 
God for rhee, but alſo becauſe thy Brethren ſhall praiſe and bleſs 
thee for the reaſons here following, Bur this, as alſo rhe other Blet- 
ſings or Predifions, do not fo much declare the ſtate of Juazb, or 
the reſt of their own P-rſons,in as their Poſterity. s (#. e. ) Thou 
ſh:]c overthrow and ſubdue them. This was fulfilled in part, Juag 
7.1, 2, 4. and 3.9, 10: but more fully in David, 2 Sam. 8: 1: and 
Sel"mon, 1 Chron 22: 9- and moſt eminently, though ſpiritua'ly, in 
Chriſt. The phraſe is taken either 1- From the praCtice of Warri- 
ors, who uſe to aſſiulr their Enemies in that parr, that they may 
throw them down at their Feer; of which ſee Job 15: 26: and 16: 
12 Or, from the cuſtom of Conquerors, who are ſaid to pur 
the Yokes upon the Necks of the conquered: See Gen. 27: 49 Dur. 
28: 48: 1jarah 10: 27: Jer. 27 8. and 28: 14: ft (i.e. ) All thy 
Brethren, and my Poſteriry ; he ſaith not thy Mhers Children, for 
his Sons had divers Mothers. « (7 e. ) Shall own thee as their Su- 
perior and Lord, upon whom [I have devolved rt:is part of the righ: 
of the firſt born. By this and the following words we plainly ſe: 
that theſe Bleſſings and Prediftions were nor diitributed according 
to Jacob's AﬀeQions and Inclinations ( foy then Judah ſhould never 
have been advanced above his worthily beloved Joſepp)) bur by the 

diceQion of God's Spirit. 


9 Judih is a lions whelp x: from the prey, my ſon, 
thou art gone upy': he * ſtooped down, he couched 


and 24-9. ,, 25 a lion, and as an 0:d lionb:; who ball rouſe him 


*Plam 


up? 

x (4.e.) Is as a lions whelp, or 2s # young lien, for Courage, and 
Strength, and Ter-or to his' Enemies. , The particle as is here 
wanting, as alſo virſe 14, 17, 21, 22. 2nd in many other places, 
as Pſalm. 11: 1: and 12: 6: and 22:6, &c, And heis rightly com 
pared firſt to a Lion's Woelp, then to an old Ley, to fignfly the 
growth of that Ti1bein ſtrength and intere?, and that from fſmal) 
beginnings, and a .precedency of order only, ( Judges 1: 1, 2.) it 
ſhou'd aicend to rhe height of Honcur, and Power, and Hzppineſs 
in David, ad eſpecially in the Meſſiah, who ſhouid conquer all Na- 
tions. y Having raken the Prey, i. e. conquered thine Enemies, 
thou art gone up in triumph ; or gone wp, 4. grown greater and 
higher after thy Vi&ories, as the manner is. 'Or, he aliudes to the 
Lions, which utually dw-1! in Mountains, as divers Writers ob- 
ſerve, and come down :o Prey in the Valleys, and when they have 
gor their Prey, they go up to their Havitations, and fo ſhall Judah 
do. z A change of the Perſon very frequent in Prophe:rical Wrie 
tings, as we ſhall oft have occaſion to note hereafter. #s When he 
harh raken the Prey, he doth nor convey it away to his D:n with 
baſte and ſpecd for f?ar the Enemy ſhould return and overtake him 
bur like a Lion he fteops down to tzed upon his Prey, and ceucherh 
or ly:ch down ſecurely to reit himſelf after ne hath eaten ir, without 
the leaſt fear of any Enemy, as it is obſerved of him, Iſaiah 31: 4: 
Judah's Conqueſts ſhall nor be interrupted or followed with 1]! Suc- 
ceſſes, and Defears or Ov: rc1:0m5 afrerwa'd, as it frequently hap- 
pens in the Courſe of War, bur h+ ſhall quierly poſle!s his Spoils,and 
afrer the blovudy Wars to which te will be forced, thall enjoy a ſweet 
Peace and Tranqui'liry, which his Poſteriry did, vn Kings 4: 25: 
b Or rather a grown Lien, nota d=c:epit:nd impotent Lion, bur one 
come to his fuli ſhengr'. c Who thall preſume or dare to diſturb 
or provoke him ? All ſhall fear him, and ſeek peace with him. 


io The ſcepter d ſhall not depart from Fudah, nor 


Go. nd 2 * Law-giver e from berwcen his feer f, * until Shi- 


108, 8, 


loh + come: and unto him iball the gathering g of 


\* Luke 1» the people þ be. 


32» 


a( i.e ) The Dominion or Government, which is oft expreſſed 
by this word,as Numb. 24: 17: Pjalm 45: 6: Iſarah 14: 5: Exek» 19: 
Il, 14- Amos 1. 5, 8. Zeeh. 10: 14. beciule it is an Enfign of Go- 
vernment, Efthy 4: 11. So it is a Figure cailed a Metonymy of 
the ſign, than which not':ing more fr-quent. The ſenſe is, That 
Superioriry or Dominion over his Brerhren, which I ſaid he ſhould 
obtiin, (verſe 8 ) he ſhall keep ; ir thall nor depart from him. 
Orhers the Tribe, as the word Shebet fignifies, i Sam. 10. 19, 20, 21+ 
T1 Kin s 11. 32, &c. So the ſenſe isthis, Whereas the other Tribes 
ſhal] be caprivat. d, diſperſ-d and confounded, the Tribe of Judah 
| hill be k-pr enrireand diſt:n& until Chriſt come. This 1s a great 

and imp»-rcanr rruth, and a fingular Demonſtririon of the all-dif- 

poling Providence of God, and of the Truth and Divine Authority 
of the Scriptures ; bur it ſeems not to be the meaning of this place, 
, I, becAuſe borh the foregoing and following words do evidently 
* ſpeak of Judab's Power and Greatneſs, and particularly the Sheber 
or Scepter, 1s explained and reſtrained by th- following Law=gzver : 
2: Becauſethis renders the Phraſe improper and abſurd ; for the 


—_— 


—_ 


Tribe hid not depar.ed from Judah, nor had they ceaied to be a | 


. Tribe, if the other Tribes had been mixed with them in their Land, 
' as$ indeed they wer2 ſomerunes.. See 2 Chron: 11: 16: 3. Becauſe 
: This is not peculiar to the Tribe of Judah ; for in this ſenſe the Tribe 
did nor depart from Z:vi, nay, thar Tribe was kept more diſtin& 
than that of Judah; thus alſo the Tcibe did vor depart from Benja- 
2n1n, as appears from Ezrs# 1: 5: and 10. 9: Nehem: 11: 4: Nay, it 
1s queſtionable, whether in this ſenſe the Tribe departed from any 
of ihe other Tribes, nor only becauſe there is a diſtinſt mention 
of the ſeveral Tribes, Ezck: 48: which was wrirren after the Di- 
ſperſion and ſuppoſed Confuſion of the other T-ibes, and which 
ſpeaks of the times after the coming of the Mcfſiah, but alſo be- 
cauſe of the great care which the 1ſ-aelites generally took in diſtin- 
guiſhing not only their Tribzs, bur their tevoral Families in exat 
Genealogies, of which we have many proofs and inſtances, as 


T Chron: 4: 33+ and 5: 1,7, 17: and 7: 7, 9, 49: and 9: 1: 22: and 
Ezr8 2: 62; and 8; 1, 3: Nehem. 7; 5, 64 The Jews indeed have 


4 


GENESIS. 


of Aﬀi.Qtion. 


: there 1s nothing propheſied of Judsh, but Honour, and Dov-inion, 


! - 


another device to avoid the force of this Text. They ſry, Shebe# 
ſigniftes a Red, ro wit, a Rod of CorreQion, as the word is taken, 
Prov, 22:15: And fo they fay the fenſe is, ' The Tyrannical Scep- 
rer, or the Rod of the Oppreflor ſhall nor ceaſe or depart from 
_ 1ſrael, till the Meſſiah come, who ſhall ſave th:m from all their Op- 
prefſorsand Enemies. But this is a vain and frivolous conceit, for 
1- the following Sentence, which expounds the former, as It is 
uſual in Scripture, plainly ſhews that this Sh:ber or Rod, is ſuch as 
1s proper to th: Law-giver, and therefore isa Rcd of Authority, or 
a Scepter, which is called alſo a Rea, Ezek. 19. 14. andnot a Rod 
2. This is contrary to the whole-Contexr, wherein 


and Victory, and Safety, 3. There was no reaſon why the Rod of 
Afflition ſhould be appropriated ro Judah, which was common ro 
all the Tribes, and came foon»r, and fell heavier, and abode longer 
upon the other Tiives than upon Judsh. 4. This Inererpretation is 
coynfuted by tae Event or Hiſtery, both becauſe the Red of Corre- 
in did depart from Jada, and from them more than from the 
other Tribes, for ngaity Generations before the coming of the Meſ-- 
fiah; and becauſe rh: 4 15 not removed from them, bur hath 
cont nued longer and more dreadful'y upon them fince the coming 
of th: Meſſias, than ever before ; which one confideration hath been 
the occaſion of the Converſion of many Jews. 5. Howſoever the 
mod:rn Jews pervert this Word and Text out of Enmity ro Chriſt 
and Chriſtians ; it is certain that the Ancient Jews, the LXX. and 
tae Chaldee Paraphraft, with many others, tak: the word as we do, 
as the Learned have proved out of their own Writings. See my 
Latin Synopſis. e Sothe Hebrew word ſignifies, as here, ſo alſo Numb. 
21: 18: Deut, 33: 21: Pal. 60. 7; and 108.8: 7ai. 33: 22. And the 
Verb, from whence this word comes, ſignifies 79 make Laws, as Prov. . 
8. 15, &c. and the Hebrew word, Chok, which comes from the ſame 
root, conſtantly ſignifies a Law or Statute. Some render it, the 
S-ribe, and tiat either the Civil Scribe, who belongs to the Ruler ; 
or tae Eccleſiaſtical Scribe, the Interpreter of rhe Law ; and ſo it 
igyifies, that both che Civil and che Ecclefiattical Power ſhould 
continue in Judah til Chriſt came, and then ſhcu'd be rakea 
away borh which the Event did verify. Bur indeed the H:brew 
word for Scribe 1s Sopher, nut Mechskek, which never is ſo uſed in 
Scripture, but always for a Lawgive-r, as I: have ſhewed, and fa 
Kimchi and Aben Ezra, two Jate and learned Jzws, with others, ex 
pound it. f From his Poſteriry, or f:om rhote that come from 
berween his Feet, 5. e. that are begoct-n xvd borh of trhar Tribe. 
Aad thus K-c,z7, and the Chaldee Paraphraft,- and other Ancient 
ws underft.cd this p'ace. And the trurn of this Iaterprecation may* 
appear, by comparing this with other Texrs of Scripture, as Deut.\ 
28: 57: where the young one d-ſcribed to be one that cemeth from 
berween h.r (the Womans ) Fret ; and Ezek. 16. 25. and with thoſe. 
places where the word Feet is uſed for the Secret Parts, as 1/aisb 7. 
20: the hair of the feet, not properly ſo called, for Hair ie!dony 
grows there ; and 2 Kings 18: 27: Iſaiah 35: 12: where the Water, 
which comes from the tecret parts is called the Water of the Feet. 
And poſſibly that phraſe of covering ge Feet applied ro them that 
eaſed rheir Bellies, may note ſo much, becauſe the care of the Jews 
in that ation was nor to hide their Feet preperly ſo called, bur their 
Secret Parts, which without due care might be diſcovered vpon 
that occaſiun. f (z. e.) The Meſizs., Which we need nor ſtand to 
prove, becauſe it is ſo expounyed by all the three Chaldee Para 
phraſts, and by the Jewiſb Talmud, and by divers. of the latter Jews 
themſelves. And the word fignifies, either 4 Peace-maker or Savie 
our ; Or as Others, her Son, or One that came our of ths Womans 
Womb, or out of thar Skin in which th- Child in the Womb is 
«rapped, which this word, or. one near a kin to it ſignifies. So it 
notes, that the Mas ſhould be born cf a Womin, though without 


and to be ſent, And this Sigaification may ſeem to be w-rranted 
by compariiig John 9g. 7. with thoſe plzces of the N:w T:ſtament, in 
which the M ſas is deſcribed by thar Periphraſi. of one ſeus Or £09 be 
Jent, as Joh» 3. 39, &c. And the Phiaſe here uſed is remarkable, 
til the Shiloh come, for the Shiloh or M-ſjiah oft goeth unter the 
Name of him that was ts c:me, as Maith. 2124: Like 7. 20: and 133 
35: And hence the Kingdom of the Mrſiah is called the World, or 
Kingdom 0 come, 1. e.of him who was to come, Heb, 2: 5: and 6: 5. 
£ They ſhall be gather d together, or united both among theme 
ſelves, and with rhe Jews, under him as their Head. Others, the 


they that are gathered to him, dc a'to Reverence, Obey, and Worthip 
him. The H:br-w word is uſed only here,and Prov 30.17. h(5.e.) 
The Genizles; as the Jews thzmſclves underſtand it. And fo it is a 
| plain Prophely of the Converiion of rhe Gentiles by and under the 

Mzſſizh ; fignifyving, that whereas the Ocdinai-ces of God, and means 
of Worſhip nd Silvation were confined 19 the Jews before Chrift's 
coming, ( Pialm: 147:19, 20: ) when the M:ſiah ſhould come, the 
Pale of che Church ſhould be enlarged, rhe Partition wall between 
Jews and Gentiles taken down, and the Gentiles ſhould Worſhip the 
True God, and the M:fias. And this is no more than is foretold 
and promiſed inother Propheſies, as we fhall ſee hereafter. The fam 
of this Verſe is, The Scepter ox Dominion ſha'l be ſeated in the 
Tribeof Judah, though he doth ts Ig 4 when ir ſhall, come 
thither ; bur when onee it ſhall corke, ir ſhall nor depart from 
thence, ti]] the Miah come ; and then Judah ſhall loie his Scepter 
and other Prcivi'id es, aid th: Gentiles ſhall come inro the ſtead of 
the Jews, and ſhall embrace that Meſſiah whom they ſhall reje&. 
; So now here is an undeniable Argument to prove again rhe Jews, 
| that the M ſab is already come, and that the Lord Jeſus Chrift is 
he, becautc he was ro come during the time wherein the Scepter- 
was in the hands of Judah; and about that time when Jeſus Chriſt 
came, the Scepter was taken away from Judah and this Jews, and 
; hath now been loſt for Sixteen hundred years together. The Jews 
; are mightily perplexed and confounded with this Argument ; one 
evidence whereof 15 their various and contradi&ory Expoſitions of 
the place, waiileſt ſome of them affirin this $hilob ro be Ms/es, others 

Saul, others, Jerobiam, others N:bu-hadn:zz2ar, which neither necd 
nor deſerve Confuration ; others David. Which, though fome of 
the acureſt ef the Jewiſh Doors affect, is as contemptible as any 
of the reſt, it being ridiculous re 1xy the Sccpter Ceparted from 
Judah under him by whom ir firſt came into thar Tribe, having 
bzen till David'stime in other Tribes. But the great difficulty is, 
how this was accompliſhed ;, for if tke event fuly agrees withthis 


3 Prophelſy, 


- I — 


Chap. XLI 


the help of Man : Or, as others, he ſent, he who was oft promiſed , 


Rewerence, Ob:atence, 01 Worſhip : which comes to the ſame thing, for . 


E 


bo 


; LF £ «< 4 


3s uſe of the Jews is loſt, and Chriſt muſt be owned 
pin . rat The Scepter was for a time 1n other Tribes, 
as in Moſes of the Tribe of Levi, in divers of the Judges, who were 
of ſeveral Tribes ; and laſtly in the tribe of Benjamin under 
Saul, bur the Scepter departed from all theſe. Bur this is prophe- 
fied as Judsh's Privitedge, that when once the Scepter or Govern” 
ment came into that Tribe, which it did in Dewra's time, it ſhould 
not depart from it till Chriſt came, and then it ſhould depart. And 
thus it came to paſs. Concerning the time from David unto the 
Captivity of Babylon there is no diſpute, there being a conſtant Suc- 
celfion of Kings in that Tribe a!l that time. For the time of the 
Babyleniſh Captiviry, wherein there may ſeem to be more difficulty, 
it is to be conſidered, 7. That the Scepter or Government was not 
lot or departed from Judah, but only interrupted, and that but 
for Seventy years at moſt, which in ſo long a ſpace of time as 
above a Thoutand years is little to be regarded. As none will ſay 
the Kingdom was departed from the Houſe of Davia, becanſe of 
thoſe Inter-reigns or Interruptions which ſometimes fell out 1 that 
Family. Addto this, that God hath given them an abſolute pro- 
miſe and afſared hope of the Reſtauration of Juda/'s Scepter,to thar 
this was rather a Sleep than the Death of that Government. 2. Thar 
_ within theſe Seventy years there were ſome R=mainders and Beams 
of Judah" s Soveraignty in Jehoiachin, 2 Kings 25: 27: 1N Daniel, who 
was of that Tribe, Dan. 2: 25: and 5: 13: and of the King's Seed, 
Dan. 1: 3: and inthe ſucceſſive Heads or Governors of the Exiles, 
' of whom the Jewiſh Wrirers ſay ſo much, and they affirm that 
they were always of the Houſe of David, and were more honou- 
rable than the Governors of the Jews which were left in the Land 
of Iſrael. 3. All that was then left of the Scepter of the Jews was 
in the Tribe ef Judah ; nor was the Scepter departed from Jx4ah to 
any other Tribe; and that is the thing which ſeems eſpecially to 
| be reſpefted in this Propheſy : For Judah is here compared with 
the reſt of the Tribes; and it is here ſignified, that the Power and 
Dominion which was in Judah, when onceit came thither, ſhould 
not ſhift from Tribe to Tribe, as it had done, bur whilſt there was 
any Sceprer or Supreme Government aſong th: Jews, it ſhould be 
in that Tribe, even till the coming of the Meſſias. Bur 1f there 
ſhould happen any total, but temporary Intercition or Ceſſatioa of 
the Government among all the Tribes, which now was tne cafe, 
that was no prejudice to the truth of this promiſe, nor to the pri- 
viledge granted to Judah above the reſt of the Tribes. Afﬀrer the 
Captivity, the State of the Jews was very various. Sometimes they 
had Governers put in by the Perſian King, as Zorobabel, who was 
alſo of the Tribe of Judah, and, as it is ſuppoied, Nephew of Je- 
hojachin ; and Nehemiah, whom Exſebius afficms to have been of the 
Tribe of Judah: And though he may ſeem to be numbred among 
the Prieſts. Nehem. 10: 8. yet a diligent Reader will find that he is 
even there diſtinguiſhed from them by his Tirle the Tirſbaths, ver. 1. 
and the word Prieſts ( verſe 8.) relateth only to the reſt there men- 
tioned beſides him ; eſpecially if this be compared with Chap 9. 38: 
where the Princes ( among whom ſurely Nehemiah was the chief ) 
are deſtinguiſhed from the Prieſts. And ſometimes the People 
choſe Governors, or Captain-generals, as the Maccabees, and others. 
Bur under all their Viciffitudes, after their return from Babylon, the 
Chief Government was evidently and unqueſtionably ſeared in the 
great Council called Sanhedrim, or Synedrium, wherein though 
Tome of the Tribe of Levi were mixed with thoſe of the Trive of 
Judah ; yer becauſe they, together with other Members of that 
Council, had their power beth from that Tribe by which they- 
were choſen, 'and in it, and for it, the Sceprer did truly remain in 
the Tribe of Judah ; even as it was rightly called the Roman em- 
pire when Trajan a Spaniard, or other Foreigners adminiftred it ; 
Or as we call it, the Kingdom of Poland, when they chuſe a King 
of another nation. How greatand venerable the Authority of this 
Council was among the Jews, may ealily be gathered, 1. From the 
Divine Inftirution of ir, Numb. 11. 16. whereby indeed it was at 
firſt to conſiſt of Perſons indifferently choſen our of all the Tribes ; 
bur now the other Tribes being baniſhed and diſperſed in unknown 
laces, and Benjamin and Levi being as ic were Acceſſons ro the 
Tribe of Jadah, and in a ſort incorporated with it ; it now be- 
comes as it. were appropriated to the Tribe of Judah, as a&- 
ing in its name, and by its Authority ; and the whole Land is 
called Judza, and all the People Jews, from the predominancy of 
that Tribe above the reſt. 2: From the great Power and Privi- 
ledges anciently granted to it, Deut. 17: 8, &c. 2 Chron, 19:8, 11: 
Pſalm. 122: 5. 3. Frem the teſtimony of Joſephus, and other Jewiſh 
Writers, which is moſt conſiderable in this Argument, who jarge- 
ly deſcribe and magnify the Power and Authority of it ; who tel] us 
that the Power of their King was ſubjet& to that of this Council : 
and therefore one of them addrefling his Speech to that Council 
where alſo the King himſelf was prelear, firl ſalutes the Senators, 
and after them the King. They affirm alſo, that the Power of ma. 
king War or Peace was veſted in that Council; and that Herod was 
tried for his Life by it. If ir be ſaid, that the Power of this Coun- 
cil was 1n @ great meaſure taken away, which the Jews confeſs 
John 18: 31+ and thar the Scepter of Judza was in the hand of the 
Romans, and by them given #0 Herod, who was no Jew, but an 
Idumean, and this before the coming of the M:/jizs, which is the 
only remaining difficulty ; to this many things may beſaid, r. That 
this happened but a few years before the coming of Chriſt, when 
Chriſt was even at the Doors, and about to come, and therefore 
might we'l be ſaid to be come; eſpecially in the Prophetical Stile 
whereby things are oft ſaid to be done, which are near doins. 
2. That the Jewiſh Senators did long ſtruggle with H-red about the 
Goverpment, and did not yield it up ro him till his laſt year, 
when they rook an Oarh of Fealry ro him, which was afrer Chriſt 
was born Nor indeed was the Sceprter quite gone from them then 
for thar Council till had rhe Power, tho nor of Life and Death. 
yet of Civil and Ecclefiaſtical Matters. See John 18: 31: So thac 
if war was gone, 3 Law-giver remained there ſtil]. Nor 
was theirGovernment and Common-wealth quite deſtroyed unti 
Deſtruftion of Jeruſalem by Tirw., And hees ra Tan = 
Place thus, and that with great probability, The Scepter ſhall not de- 
part----wntiI the Shiloh eeme, and uncil ( which word is repeated out of 
the former Member, asir is moſt uſual in the Scripture ) the gatker- 
ing of the people be to him, ( 7. e.) until the Gentiles be eonverted and 
brought in co Chriſt, And this interpretation receiveth countenance 


from Match, 24: 14; The Goſpel ſhall be preached in all the worldes: =-and 


G E NESIS: 


| minding whereof he wholly gave himielf, negleCting more generous 


then ſhall the end come, not the end of the whole World, as itis evi- 
dent, but the end of the Gommon-wealth and Government of the 
Jews, when theScepfer and Law-giver ſhould be wholly taken away 
from that Tribe and Peoyle. ; 

Ir Binding his foal unto the vine, and his aſles colt 
unto the choice vine 7: he waſheth his garment in wine &, 
and his clothes in the blood of grapes 1, 

; He ſignifies the plenty of Vines in Judah's Portion, that they 
ſhall be planted every where, even in the Commons and High-ways 
where men travel, and where upon occaſion they uſe to tie the Beaſts 
en which they ride, ro any Tree which is near them. & Such ſhall 
be the plenty of it, that if it were convenient, Men might uſe Wine 
inſtead of Water to waſh their Garments. /So the Wine is called 
alſo in Deut. 32: 14: 1 Macc. 6: 34. and by Pliny, Heſiod, and others: 
As Oyl is called the Blood of the Olive. 

12 His eyes ſhall be red with wine 2, 
white with milk. 

m Which ſhews not onely the plenty of Wine, but alſo the ex- 
cellency and ſtrengrh of it, which though not drunk in great quan= 
tity, or to exceſs, will make.the eyes red. See Prov. 23: 29: 

123 * Zebulun ſhall dwell at the haven of the ſea », 


and his teeth 


.and he fball be for an haven of fhips, and his border Fey 
ſhall be unto Zidon o. Joſh 19, 


n Acknowledge here, and adore the Divine Providence, which go: 
dire&ted Jacob thus exaftly to foretel rhe Portion of Zebulun, « which 

tell to them 200 years after this, and rhat not by choice, or any de= 

ſign of men, but merely by Lor. His Portion was extended from 

the Sea of Galilee to the great Mediterranean Sea, And to ſuch parts of 
ir where there were convenient Havens. o Or his fide or ceaft, to 
wit, that which is upon the Mediterranean Sea, is near Siden, under« 
ſtanding not che Ciry, but the Territory belonging to it, unto which 
that Tribe reached upon the Sea-coaſt. For though 4fber might ſeem 
ro intercept them, yethe did nor reach to the Sea» Or, his coaff 
looks zewards Sidon ; hath it in view, and lies commodiouſly for 


Commerce with rhat great City, which then was the Mart of the 
Nations. 


14 Iſſachar is a ſtrong aſsp, conching down between 
two burdens 


p Heb. an aſs of bone, (i. e. ) of great bulk and bones, and ſtrength 
of body, bur of little ſpirit and courage. q Which are Jaid upon 
his back, and which he is contented ro bear. Or, lying down 1. e. 
enjoying his eaſe and reſt, between the borders, to wit, of the other 
Tribes, with which he was encompaſſed and ſecured from Foreign 
Enemies, which made him more ſecure and ſlothful. Or, berweer: 
the borders or folds of Cattel ; as a word very near a-kin to ir, and pro= 
ceeding from the fame root, ſignifies, Juag. 5: 16: to the feeding and 


things. 


Is And he ſaw that reſt » was good, and the land 


that 3* 2yas pleaſant, and bowed his ſhoulder to bear, 
and becamea ſervant unto tribute 5. 


r Or rather, his re#ing place, as this very word ſignifies, Gen. 8: 9: 
Plal. 116. 75: and 132.8: Iſs. 11. 10: (5. e.) his Portion or Habi- 
ration, as the Chal. and Syr. tranſlate it. So this agrees with the 
following member, where, after the manner of the Hebrews, the 
ſame thing is repeated in other words. And ifit be objeQed againſt 
this Verſion, that it is not ſaid his reſt, but re# in the general t 

be replied, thar ſo it is in the following branch, the land, though it 
be apparently meant of his land, or portion of land allotted to him 
Belides, the Pronouns are often omitted, and to be underſtcod bs 
Hebrew Text ; as may appear by comparing 1 Kings 10: 7: with 
2 Chron, 9: 6: and P/al. 41: 9: with John 13: 18: and Mat, 3: 13: with 
Luce 3: 17: 5 Waillingly paying whatſoever Tributes were impoſed 
upon him,either by the Neighbouring Tribes,or by Foreign Powers 
rather rhan to forfeit his pleaſant and frui - 


16 may 


1 C 
ſweet Repoſe. ttul Countrey, and his 
16 Dan ſhall judge # his pecple, as one of the tribes 


| of IHrael «. 


#*( 7. e: ) Rule and govern them. Though he be the ſon of my 
Concubine, yet he ſhall not be ſubje& to any other Tribe, but ſhall 
have an abſoJute Power within himſelf What is ſaid of h'm iS 
to be underſtood of the reſt of the ſons of the Concubines, and here- 


by ail difference between the ſons of the Wives and Concubines is 
raken away. It is ſaid of Dan, becauſe he is the firſt mentioned of thar 


ſort. « As the reſt of the Tribes do, having diſtin& Governments 
and Governors amongſt them. See Numb. 1. 4, 16. 

17 Dan (ball be a ſerpent by the way 
in the path « that biteth the horſe heels. 
ridder {hall fall backward. 


| | 
x Which covereth and hideth it ſelf in the ſand or duſt of the 


highway, watching for men or beaſts that pats 
he ſubrilry of chat Tribe, Wt paſsthat way. He notes 


( which ſhould < PRTT =o 
more by Craft and Cunning, conquer their Enemies 


+ Heb. «| 
an | adder pines 
Is, fo that his ſnake. 


18 I have waited for thy ſalvation, 


y I do earneſtly wait, -and hope, and pray for thy helping han 
to ſave me and my poſterity from the mninifo1d ed (Oran 
which I foreſee will come upon them, and eſpecially from ſpiritual 
and eternal miſchiefs,by that Meſſiah which thou haſt promiſed. Faceb in 
the midſt of his grear work doth take a little breathing, and finding 
himſelf weakned by his Speech to his Children, and drawing nearer i 
death, he opens his arms to receiveit,as the thing for which he had : 
long waited, as the only effe&tua] remedy and mean of Salvation or 
deliverance from all his pains and miſeries, and 


preſent horrors, upon the contemplation of the fu : 
Children. And this patherical "I" nr —_ rure ſtate of his 


ward, to the ſtate of the Tribe of Dan, CI IITEnns, © hack. 
deplorable, both for its great ſtraits and preſſures, of which ſee 
Joj. 19: 47: Tudg: 1: 34: and eſpecially for that Idolatry which that 
Tribe would introduce and promote, Juag. 18. 30:and 1 Kings 12:29: 
whereby they would ruin themſelves, and moſt of the other Tribes 


with them, Qs 2. forward, to the doubtful and miſerable condition 


5 C > = 
af . " Þ 4 


wo 


of Gad, 
16 Gad, 


» -M 
=- 


Chap, XLIX: 


particularly frem his -; 


than by ſtrength or force of Arms. ES 


b, « 


F "chap: XU: 


+ Heb: 


Daughters: 


Jo 
w_ 


| but that which he oppoted to all their injuries, to wit,his own Vir- 


. - perly ſignifies, and was juft now uſed ) che God if thy father, 5. e: whe 


r9 Gad, a troop = ſhall overcome him ; but he ſhall 


overcome at the laſt «. | : ; p 
2 (75. e. ) Trows of Enemies ſhall frequently invade his Countrey, 


and for atime conquer and ſpoil 1t- And fo it came to paſs,becauſe 
the Inherirance of that Tribe lay beyond Jordan,near to the Amme- 
nites and Meabites, two inveterate Enemies of Iſrael, and to other 
hoſtile Nations, on the Eaſt. « Or, afterward, This was fulfilled 
x Chron: 5; 18, &c. He ſhews thatthe Events of the Wars ſhould 
be various, but Gad ſhould one time or other ſpoil his ſpoilers, See 
Dext: 33. 20. 


20 Out of Aſher 6, his bread ſhell befat c, and he 


ield royal dainties 4. 
__ 4 e. ) os of the land of 4ſh!r. Or, 4s for or concerning Aſher, 
c His bread-corn ſhall be fuller and fweeter and better than ordina- 
ry. « Not only Oyl for Oyntments, bur alſo delicious and excel- 
lent Fruits, firto be preſented to a King. See Deut: 33: 24, 25. 


21 Naphtali is a hind let looſe e: he giveth goodly 


words fo | DEE 
e Not purſued by hunters, nor ſhut up.in ſome little incloſure, 


but wholly left to its own freedom, to-feed upon the beſt Paſtures; 
See Deut: 33: 23- Or, free from the yoke which they rogether with 
the other Tribes did bear in Egypt ; free from its former reſtrainrs, 
which make it run away more ſwiftly. So it may note their nim- 
bleneſs and expedition either in ercountering enemies, or 1n avoid- 
ing dangers. See Judg: 4: 6, 10: and 5: 18. Oc like a tame hind, 
left to its liberty, in which the Owner takes delight, as Prov, 5:19: 
For he ſeems to be commended rather for Arts of Peace than War. 
And this may note that his temper and converſation was civil, obli- 
ging, and anvable ; which ſenſe the next words favour. f His 
ſpeeches and diſcourſes with others are fair, and friendly, and Wwin*- 
ning. Ir is not ſtrange that this Tribe was generally of a ſweerer 
diſpoſition than others, ſeing it is commonly obſerved that thereis 
a great difference in the tempers of people of divers Provinces or Ci- 
Ties bordering one upon another, But this verſe may be otherwiſe 
rendred according to the opinion of a late Learned Writer ; Naph- 
zali is a tree (fo the Hebrew ward ſignifies, on!y jod 1s inſerted here,as 
it is in the ſame word, Iſs: 1: 29: and 61: 3. ) ſhot forth,or ſpread forth, 
( into many branches; for the Hebrew Verb Shalach 15 oft uſed con: 
cerning Trees, and: their thooting forth of Branches, as Pſal 80. 11: 
Ezek: 17: 6: and 31: 5: ) ſending forth goodly branchs: 3 the word imre, 
which 1s by others rendred words, here ſignifying branches, as either 
the ſame word, or one coming from the ſame root,and conſiſting of 
the ſame radical Letters, is raken 1/a: 17: 6,9. And it is uſual in 
the Hebrew Language for two words coming from the fame root, to 
exchange their ſignificarions. And this Interpreration 1s favoured by 
theAncient I'\t-rpreters,the LXX,and one of the Arabick Manulcripts, 
which mak2s Naphtali here to be compared to a goodiy Tree bring=- 
ing forth excellent Fruit. 

2: Joſeph is a fruitful bongh g, even a fruitfu] 
bough by a well +4, whoſe t branches run over the 


wa'l ; 

g I: regard of thoſe two numerous Tribes which preceeded from 
his two ſons. h Or, fountain, or watzr-courle, which fitution doth 
much further the growth of trees. See Pſal: 1: 3: and Exzek. 39; io 
7 ( 1: e. )Which is planted by a wall, whoſe heat furchers its growth 
no leſs than rhe moiftore of the water doth. : 

22 The archers & have ſorely grieved him /,and ſhor 


at him, and hated him : 

þ ( 7, e. ) His adverſaries, as well his own Brethren, »s his Maſter 
and Miſtreſs. 1 With their ſcoff., ad {landers, and injuries, which 
in Scripture are oft compnred to Arrows. 

24 But * his bow / abode in lirength, and the arms 
of his hands were made ftrong, by the hands of the 
mighty God of iacob w, from thence is the Shepherd, 


tne ftone of Iſrael ». 
I Waerewirh he oppoſed his enemies, which was no military Bow, 


rue, his Innocence,his Patience, his Temperance, his Faith and Hope 
in Go, whereby he reſiſted and vinquithed all che Temptations and 
D:fficulties which hz mer wath,ſfo thar all his Enemies cou'd neither-/ 
defiie nor deſtroy kim. w(# e: ) Ot my God ; the noun for the pro- 
noun, which is frequent. When men forſook and perſecured him, 
my God and his God ſtood by him. He thewed thar it was no: Jo- 
ſeph's Witdom or Courage, but God's gracious Afſiſtance thar mae 
hun Conqueror. = Either 1. From that grear deliverance vouch- 
ſafed by God to Joſeph it is,that 1/rael or Jacob hath a Shepherd te feed 
him, a Srone to lay his head upon, as once hedid, Gen: 28: 11;0r a 
rock of refuge tofly ro in his great diftrefles, or a foundation-Stone, 
or corner-Srone, or Pillar to ſuſtain or preſc:rve Jacob's Houſe. Or 
rather 2. fromthe hands of the mighty God of Jacob, laſt mentioned. Or 
from the God of his father, as it follows che next verſe. So rhe ſenſe 
is this, Though Jeſeph wis a bleſſed Inſtrument in this wonderfu 
work, yet the God of Jacob was the chief Authorof ir,by whoſe wiſe 
and merciful Providence it was ſo ordered that Joſeph ſhouid be firſt 
ſold, and afterwards advanced, and ailin order to this end, that his 
Iſrael, with whom h- hath been pleaſed to make a gracious and ever- 
Iafting Covenant, ſhould have a Shepherd to feed him in tie time of 
- Famine, and a Stoe or Rock to ſupport him. > 


25 Even by the God of thy father o who. ſhall help 
thee, and by the Almighty, who ſhall bleſs thee with 
b.cflings of heaven abovep, bleflings ot the deep that 
liech _—_ 7, bleſſings of the breafts, and of the 
womb r, 


0 Here he explains and d:termines that doubtful expreſſion from 
thence, by adding, even by ( or rather jrom,zs this Particle Mem pro- 


hath cholen and loved tny Father, and made a leagae' with him, an: 


bleſſed him wick all manner of bleſſings. » ( i:e: z The ſweet and 
powerful influences of the heavenly Bodies, and rhe Dews and Rains | 
which fall from Heaven, whereby the fruars of rhe Earti are produc- 


.ed in great plenry. See Levis: 25 4+ Deur. 28: £2: ainu 335 14-q(ie) | PCECPiC. 


Or that great Sea of vvarers borh abour the Earth, and in tae Earta, 


__— - 


'G E N ESTIS "I | > | Chap' XX. 


vvhence come thoſe Springs andRivers, by vvhich the Farth is moiſt 
ned and made fruitful. See Gen: 1: 2: and 7: 11: and Dext: 8: 7. 
» Whereby both Men and Beaſts ſhall be greatly multiplied, and a- 
bundantly ſupplied with al] neceſfaries. __ | 
26 The bleflings of thy father have prevailed above 
the bleflings of my progenitors « ; unto the utmoſt 
bound of the everlaſting hills: ; they ſhall be +on the 
head of Joſeph,and on the crown of the head of him that 


was ſeparate from his brethren «. 

s5 TheBleſlings vvinch T thy Father have conferred upon thee,are 
much more contiderable than thoſe which-I receiv-d from my Fa- 
ther Jazc,or from my Grandfather Hbraham.This was rrue, 1. inthe 
extent of the B'effings;Iſhm rel was excluded from Abraham's Blefling, 
& my Brother excluded from 1[/aacsBleffing,but both Foſeph*sChildren 
are comprehended in fac26* Blefling. -.In rhe diſtin&nets and clearneſs 
of them;For that Land of Canaan wich was tranſmitted to Iſaac and 
to Faceb only in the general,was now in ſome ſort par-icularly diſt= 
ribured ro Jeſeeh, and to the reſt of his Brethren,as afrerwards it was as - 
by Joſhua 3 In the nearneſs of the accompliſhment.Now there wasa 
more like'y proſpe& of the multiplication of their Szed, than there 
was to Abrahem,or 1/aac ; and in not very many years after this, they 
mulriplied ro aſton1ſhment, and drew nearer to the poſlcfſion of rhe 
promiſed Land. t Theſe words ſeem to note the duration of Joſeph's 
B'efſing, that it ſhou'd continue even to the bounds of the everlaſting, 
or lafting, or ancient hills, i, e. as long as the moſt ſalid ard ſtable 
Mountains ſhall laſt, 7, e. forever. Perperuity is deſcribed by the 
continuance of the Mountains, as 1/#. 54. 10. or of the Sun and 
Moon, as P/al: 72: 5, 7, 17: er of the Heavens and Earth, as Marth: 
5: 18: In the foregoing words of this Verie he commends rheſe _— 
Bleſſings from their excellency above all former Bieflings ; and here | 
he commends them frem their durablereſs. f Or, let them be For 
this may be a Prayer to God that theſe Bleſſings may be conſtant 
and perpecual. « So he was, when he was ſold into Egypr,and abode 
there in che Court when his Brethren were in Goſhen: Or, the crown- 
edof, or among his Brethren. e. who though he was once ſcorned and 
trampled upon by his Brethren, yet now 15 high'y honoured and ad- 
vanced above them, Others, the Nazariteof, cr among his Brethren ; as 
he may be called either for his purity and ſanftity, or for his emi- 
nency and digniry. But we muſt remeber that the N.zarites were 
yer unknown, being i-ſticur:d long after this rime. 

27 Benjamitf ſhall ravine as a wolf x: in the morning 


he thall devour tie prey,and at night he (ball divide the 


{poil y | 

x He notes the warlike and fierce diſpoſition and carriage of that 
Tribe. Inſtances wereof we' have, Juaz. 3: 15: and 19: and 20: 
I Sam. 12.and 14.and 5. y This may be underſtood, either of the 
ſame Wolf, which in the morning b:ing more hungry and greedy; 
devours his Prey alone; burtin the evening, being in ſome mea» 
ſure ſatisfieci, 15 conrent that bis Brethren ſhould fhare with him. 
Or ratt:er of teveral ſorts of Wolves, wt.ereof tem:e hunt and deveur 
alone, orhers hunt »n couples or troops, and troſe divide the Prey 
among themſelves. He menriens borh morning and evening, becauſe 
thefe are the rwo Seaſons when the Wolves prey, and to note that. 
this wonld be Benjamin's carriage both in rhe firſt and laſt times of 
that tribe, as indeed it was. : 

23 All theſe are the twelve tribes z of Iſrael ; and 


this is it that their father ſpake unts them, and bleſſed 
them : every one according to his bleſling . he bleſſed 


them | 
2 (i.e ) The Heads and Parents of the twelve Tribes. A Me- 
ronymy of the effet. The Tribes are generally accounted Twelve, 
though they were Thirteen, becauſe the Land was divid-d only into 
Twelve parts, Levi having nv diſtin& part of his own. # ( z. e.) Ac- 
cording to thar Bieſſing which God in his purpoſe hat allorted to each 
of them, which alto he manifcited unto Jaceb by his Spirit, Obje#. 
There isno Blcfling here given to Reuben, Simeon and Levi, but rather 
a Curie, how then is he 1:id to ble:'s every one of them ? Anſw. He 
biefſſed chem al' implicitly and really, chough not expreſly, or in : 
words, becauſe he gave each of them a part in Canaan;and his tak- wa 
ing away from Reuben on'y the right of the Firſt-born, plainly ſup- bo 


| poſerh that he left him bis ſinglePortion& Inherirance. And he might 


well be {ai ro vieſs them all, becauſe helefr chem all an intereft 
'n God's Covenant, one Article whereof was the giving of Canaan, 
or part of Cana#n, to them, and this was an earneſt of the other 
Branches cr Arricles of it. Though it is prebable he alſo added 
iome ſhort Bieſfſing or Prayer to God for his bleſſing upon theas 
all. ; 

29 And he charged them, and ſaid unto them,T am 
tobe gathered unto my people : * bury me with my fa- * Chap? 
chers 6, in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the 47: 39: 
ticrite. : 

b In Canaan. Whereby he deſigned to withdraw their minds fronx 
Egypt, and fix them upon Canaas. | 

30 In the cave that is it the field of Machpelah, 

which is before Mamrec: in the land of Canaan, 
* which Abraham bought with che field of Ephron the + cg; 
Hittite, for apoileflion ofa burying-place. | 23: 16; 

c He deſcribes it ſo particularly,” both tor their direQtion; becauſe 
they had been ſome years ablent thence ; and to expreſs how much 
his heart was ſer upon this mafter; and thereby to oblige them to 
the more careful performance of bis Command. 


31 (* There they buried Abraham and Sarah his 
wife, there they buried iaac and Rebekah his wife, and *Chap:55: 
there] buried Leah. ) | | rg: and 

22 The purchaſe of the field, and of the cave that is *5'F 
therein, was from the children of Heths 

33 And when Jacob had made an end of, command- 
ing his ſons 4,he gathered up his feet into the bed e,and 
yielded up the ghoſt, and was gathered unto his 


K 4 40 


x - >. s cat PO 
2 »E- O , PY 
Fe "i "> 26d * . - 
P , 4 
£ 
Cl : I » 


CE ee CEE 
_ A A a EE UA ts HOARY TA ns NY Mn: _— 
” 


+ Heb. 


in that mo 
;x Ange hwy and by the Spirit ef God, he uſed as reverend 


{ture as his ! , 
rofic marry his Bed-fide with his Fect hanging downwards: 


whe 


_— kimſelf roreſt, and waited for the comfortable approach of his 
death, which ſpeedily followed ir. 


Foſeph bewails his father's 


Ce ing the place of his burial. Whilft ke was 
far -rarn cn + at and religious work of bleſſing his | 


nfirm Body would permit, and therefore 1s —_— 
n 

he had finiſhed that great work, and wearied himſelf with ſo 

uoech delivered wick a moſt raiſed and affe&ed mind, he com- 


CHAP. L 


death ; and embalms him, 1, 2. The Egyptian? 
3. Joſeph with Pharaoh's leave carries him ſtat:= 
ly accompanied ts Canaan, 4---9. They mourn there ſeven days, and ſore 
ly, ſo that the Canaanites from thence named the place Abel-Miſraim, / a 
11. They bury him where he commanded, 12, 13. Th:y return t0 Egypt, 
T4. Jacob being dead, his ſons are afraid of their brother Joſeph, 15. mw 
tending their father”s order, they addreſs f'r pardon, 16- -- 18. He _ 
forgives, and encourageth them, 19, 21. Joſoph lives to ſee a third an 
fourth generation, 22, 23, Aſſure his brethren of their future return i 
Canaan, ' 24+ He takes an oath of them to carry his benes with them, 25+ 
Dies ; is embalmed ; and put in a coffin, 26. 


AN D Joſeph fell upon his fathers face 4, and wept 
upon him, and kiſſed him. 
a And doubtleſs cloſed his eyes,as God bad promiſed, Gen: 46: 4: 


mourn for him 70 days, 


which may be impliedin this general phraſe. 


2 And Joſeph commanded his ſervants the Phyſicians 
to embalm his father: and the Phyſicians embalmed 


Iſrael. 

b The dead Corps of his Father with Spices, and Oyntments,and 
other things neceſſary for the preſervation of the Body from putrifa- 
Qtion as long as might be. This J'ſeph did,partly becauſe he would 
comply as far as be could with the Egyptians, whoſe cuſtom this was, 
from whom alſo the Jews took it, + Chron: 16: 14: Jobn 19: 39, 40: 
Partly to do honour, and ſhew hisaffeQions to his worthy Father ; 
and partly becauſe this was neceſſary for the keeping 
long as the times of mourning and the journey to Canaan Ie 
quired. 


2 And forty days were fulfilled for him c, ( for fo 


are fulfilled he days of thoſe which are embalmed) and 


the Ezyprtians + mourned for him threeſcore and ten 
days d. 


c ( 5. e. ) For his embalming; that fo the Drugs or Spices which 
were applied, might more effe&tually reach ro all the parts of the 
dead Body, and kcep it from corruption. And theeff<Q of their di- 
ligence, and ſo leng continuance in this work was, that Bodies have 
been preſerved uncorrupt for ſome thouſands of years. @ ( i. e.  Thir- 
ty days according to the cuſtom of the Hebrews, Numb: 20: 29: Deut: 
34: 8: to which doubtleſs the Egyprians in this caſe did accommodate 
themſelves, beſides the forty days ſpent in emba/ming him, which 
alſo was a time of mourning. And chus I ſuppoſe, the Egyptians rec- 
koned thoſe ſeventy two days which Diodorw Siculus ſaith they ſpent 
in mourning for their deceaſed Kings. 


4 And when the days of his mourning were paſt. 
Joſeph ſpake unto the houſe e of Pharaoh, ſaying, If 
now I have found grace in your eyes, ſpeak, I pray you, 
in the ears of Pharaoh f, ſaying, 

e The Houſhold or Family, namely, thoſe of them which were 
Chief in place and. favour with the King. f Joſeph makes uſe of their 
interceſſion, either, 1. Leſt he might ſeem ro deſpiſe them, or to 
preſume too much upon his own ſingle inrereſt. Or, 2. By enga- 
ging them 1n this matrer to ſtop their mouths, who otherwiſe might 
have been ready enough to cenſure this Aion, which they would 
have a fair opportunity to do in Joſeph's abſence. . Or, 3. Becauſe it 
was the cuſtom here, as it was eliewhere, Eſth: 4: 2: that perſons 
in mourning habit might not come into the King's preſence, partly 
becauſe they won'd not give them any occaſion of ſadneſs,and part- 
ly becauſe,accordinz to cheir {uperſtitious conceits the ſight of ſuch 
a perſon was judged ominous. 

5 * My father made me ſwear g, ſaying, Lo, I die: 
in my grave, which I have digged for me b, inthe land 
of Canaan, there (halt thou bury me. Now therefore 
ler me go up,I pray thee, and bury my father,and I will 
come again- 

g Here is a triple obligation upon Joſeph, 1. His duty to fulfil the 
will of tae dzad. 2. The obedience which he owed to his Father's 
command. 3. The tye ef a ſolemn Oath : All which had weight 
even with the Hearhens, and were ſo many Arguments to Pharavh 
and his Courtiers. þ According to the manner of thoſe ancient and 
Fucceeiling times. See 2 Chron. 16: 14: Hai. 22: 16: Matth. 27: 60: 
Ia that large Cave which Abraham bought for a burying-place for his 


Family, Jeceb had digged a particular and ſmall Cell or Repoſitory 


for himſclf, as others did after him upon the like occaſtion. And 
thisreaſon is prudently added, to ſhew th:t this delire proceeded not 
from any contempt of Pharaoh, or his Land, but from that com. 
mon and cuſtomary defire of perſons of all Ages and Nations, to be 
buried in their Fachers Sepulchres, 


,, 6 And Pharaohſaid, Goup, and bury thy father,ac- 
cording as he made thee ſwear b. | 


h The Heathens by the light of nature diſcovered the ſacredneſs 
of an Oath, and the wickedneſs of Perjury, OY” 


7 And Joſeph went up to bury his father: and with 
him went up all the ſervants of Pharaoh &, the el- 
_ of his houſe /, and all the elders of the land »» of 

&YPt, | 


# ( 7. e. ) Agreat number of thew, as that word is underſtood, 


of the Body ſo- 


h. 4: 6: and oft elſewhere. For many of them were aged and in- 
p_ ren cou'd notbe ſpared from their attendance at Courr, 
or upon their Empioyments, &'c. k Courtiers of an inferior ranks 
] The chief Officers, and under him Governours of his Family and 
Counſe!s, who uſed to'reſide at or near the Court. »® The great Of- 
ficers Civiland Military, whoſe places of habitation 2ad command 


were diſperſed in the ſeveral parts of the Land, 


8 And all the houſe of Joſeph, and his brethren, and 
h& father's houſe : only theirlirtle ones, and their flocks, 
and their herds », they left in the land of Goſhen, 

» And ſuch as were neceſſary to take care of them, which muſt 
needs be underſtood. | 


g And there went up with him both chariots and 


horſemen 8, andit was a very great company, 
o For their defence, in caſe 0f any oppoſition. 


10 And they came to the threſhing-floor of Atad , 
which is beyond q Jordan, and there r they mourned 
with a great and very ſore lawentation s ; andhe made 
a mourning for his father ſeven days. ; 

? A manſo called, or, of thorn, or thorns, as the word ſignifies, 
Judg: 9: 14: Pſal: 58: 9g: So it might be a place either abounding 
or encompaſſed with thorns. q Or, on thi: ſide ; for the word figni- 
fies both, and it may be taken either vvay here, the one in reſpeCt 
of Egypt, the other in regard of the place in vvhich Moſes vvrote. 
Ir is certain they fetched a great compaſs, vvhether for the com- 
modiouſneſs of the way for their Chaitors;and for conveniencies for 
ſo great a company, or to prevent all jealouſies in the People, as if 
they came thither with ill deſign, is not material. r Becauſe there 
was the entrance into that Countrey or Territory where he was to 
be buried. s The Egyptians though they were not much grieved nor 
concerned for Jacob's death, yet they uſed bitter cries and Jamenta- 
tions which poſſibly were made or aggravated by perſons hired, 
and uſed upon ſuch occaſions. See Jer. 9: 17: # According to the 
cuſtom. See 1 Sam. 31, 13: 

11 And whenthe inhabitants of the land, the Ca- 
naanites, ſaw the mourning in the floor of 4tad, they 
ſaid, - This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptiays : 
wherefore the name of it was called + Abei-Mizraim, 
which is beyond Jordan: | 

12 And his ſons didunto him according as he com- 
manded them: SF] 

13 For * his ſons carried him unto the land of Ca- 
naan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Mach- 
pelah, which Abraham * bought with the field for a 
polle{iion of a burying-place of Ephron the Hittite, be- 
fore Mamre. | | 
14 And Foſeph returned inte Egypt, he,and his bre- 
thren, and all that went with him to bury his father,af- 
ter he had buried his father. 

15 And when Joſeph's brethren ſaw that their father 
was dead, they ſaid, Foſeph will peradventure hate ns, 
and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did 
unto him. 

16 And they j ſent a meſſenger unto Joſeph, ſay- 
ing, Thy father did command before he died «, ſay- 
Ing, ; 

# This looks like a lye ; for Jacob either did not know this fa&, 
or rather, was ſo well aſſured of Joſeph's Clemency and Goodneſs, 


that he never feared his Revenge. Bur Guilt doth ſo awaken Fear, 
that 1t makes a man never to think himſelf ſecure. | 


17 So ſhall ye ſay unto Joſeph, Forgive, I pray thee 
now, the treſpaſs of thy brethren, and their fin: for 
they did unto thee evil : And now, we pray thee,for- 
give the treſpaſs of the ſervants of the God of thy fa- 
_ x. And Joſeph wept x when they ſpake unto 

im. 
x For whoſe ſake Pardon thoſe that joyn with thee in his Wor- 
ſhip. » Partly in compaſſion to their Fear and Trouble ; and part= 


ly becauſe they ſtill retained a diffidence in his kindneſs, after all his 
great and real demonſtrations of it. 


18 And his brethren alſo went and fell down before 
his face, and they ſaid, Behold we bethy ſervants z. 


z Ready and willing to undergo that ſervitude, i 
ſo wickedly ſold thee. 5 go that ſervitude, into which we 


19 And Joſeph ſaid untothem, * Fear not 
Tin the place of God #2 


# It is God's Prerpgative to take Vengeance, which I dare not u- 
ſurp. See Deut: 32: 35: Or, Can T do what I pleaſe with you with- 
out God's leave? Therefore fear him rather then me,and upon your 
experience of his wonderful care and kindneſs to you, believe that 
God willnot, and therefore that I neither can, nor will do you a= 
ny hurt. Burt it isnoet unuſual to put the Hebrew be for hals,as it is, 
Gen: 27:36: 1 Sam: 2:28: 2 Sam: 23: 19: 1 Kings 16: 31, Oc, and 
ſo the words may be very well rendred, 4 not 1 under God? 5: e: 
Subje& to his Will, a miniſter ofhis Providence > Dare I deſtroy 


* for am 


thoſe whom God ſo eminently deſigned to fave ? *< tf 
whom God hath pardoned? y celignes to fave ? Dare ] puniſh thoſe 


20 But as for you, ye thought"evil againſt me b, but 
God meant it unto good, to bring to pals, as it is this 
oy, G lave much people alive. 
erefore t I 
agxinſt Deſorn Ho " excuſe your Guile, though I comfort you 
aſp . 


— 
—— _ 
-—_ - =, 


1 


it 21 Now 


charged, 


4 
© 


+ That 
the mOung 
ing of the 
Egypt ian; 


* AQs 7: 
I6. 


® Chap: 
23: 16, 


» 


+ Hed: 


- Chap! 
45:5 þ 


| 


MO IEr*T; oz 


Chap, 6 i 


*H 


ther 


heai 


- 


g.] 
I 4 


0 KB jo 


"hat ir 
7% CUNG 
of the 
pt 1 any, 


ged, 


hearts. 


_- % 


12p! ; 


Sþ 


| 


I Eager 7 tz 


D, 0 F Chap. I, 


and your little-ones c. 
ſpake 7 kindlie unto them; 


* Heb: zo 


their 


houfe : and Jo! 


* Numb: 
32: 39- 
tHeb:born 


drens Children. So-carly did Ephrain's priviledge above Manaſſeh 


ear, | 
Fe though he had but one Son, viz. Gilead by his firſt Wife, yet he 
married a ſecond Wife, and by her had two other Sons, 1 Chron: 7. 


* Heb: 11: 


22. 
Exod: 3. 
I6. 
*CChap.15 
14. and 
26:3:and 
IF. 22. 


and 46: 4« 


* Gen:46- 
8.Exod: 6- 


I4- 


T Hebs 
thigh.” 
* Gen:46. 


27, 


of a loving Brother. 


generation d : ure 
Manafleh, were | brought up:upon Joſepir's knees f. 


Children his Grandchildren alſo might be comprehended. So there 
is no need of that Enallage of Sors for one Son,which we meet with 
in other places. f Laid upon Joſeph's Lap or Knees, where parents 
uſe oft-rimes to take up and repoſe their Infants, to expreſs their 
love to them, and: delight in them. And ſome obſerve, that it was 
an ancient cuſtom in divers Nations, that the Infant, as ſoon as it 
was born, was laid upon the Grandfather's Knees. So it is an Ellipfis, 
whereby one word is put for two, orunder one Verb. Sec more of 


land, unto the land * which he ſware to Abraham, to 
Iſaac, and to Jacob. 


tka uſed after my deceaſe : or, fulfill his promiſed kindneſs 


ble Viſitation oft mentioned in Scripture, the one of Grace and 


2r Now therefore fear ye not 8 I will nouriſh; you 
And he comforted them, and 


_ 


c Expe&- not only a free Pardon from mey but all the kindneſs 


22 And Jotely dwels in Egypt, he and his father's 
eph Hved an hundred and ten years. 

23 * And Joſeph faw Ephraim's children of the third 

the children e alſo of Machir the fon of 


4 Reckoning from and after' Ephraim. i. e. Ephraim's Grandchil- 


and Jacob's Blefling, ( Gen: 48: 19. )- take place. e Heb. Sors. 


16. which Joſzph lived long enough to ſee. Or under the name of 


this phraſe on Gen: 30: 3. and 48: 12. ; 
24 And Joſeph ſaid unto his brethren, * I die : and 


God will {urelie viſit you g, and bring you out of this 


( 5. e. ) Deliver you out of this place, where T foreſee you will 


to. you, as that word-is uſed, Gen. 21: I» Exod: 4: 31. There is a dou- 


Mercy, which is; here meant ; the other of Juſtice and Anger, as 


elſewhere. 
; Y 


NEO OE res 


25 And Joſeph took an oath 4 of the children of If 


 raelz, ſaying, * God. will ſurely viſic you, and ye ſhall * Exod: 
carry up my bones & hence. 
þ For the ſame reaſon which moved Jacob to require an Oath Joſh: 24. 
; from him, Gen. 47. 30, 31. # He ſaith not, of his brethren, but of 
Iſrael's children ; under which his Grandchildren are comprehended, 


and ſeem principally intended here ;either becauſe his Brethren were 
moſt of them dead, or rather becauſe he knew that they were nor ro 
go out of Egypt in his Brethrens time,but in their ſecond orthird Ge- 
nerarion. & (2. e.) My dead Body : buthe mentions only his Bones, 
becauſe part of his Body was corrupted, and the other part though 
preſerved from Corruption by the embalming, yet was ſo changed 
and adulterated with the Spices, and other materiels which they 
uſed, that it looked like another thing : Only his Bones remained 
intire and unchanged. Nxeft. Why did he not deſire to be preſent= 
ly carried thither, and buried there, as his Father did? 4»ſw.r. Leſt 
he ſhould diſoblige the Zgyprians, and provoke them againſt his Bre- 
thren and Children. The removal of hjs father thither was neceſ- 
fary and forced from him by an Oath, but the order for the remo- 
val of himſelf would have been voluntary and deſigned, and there. 
fore could not have eſcaped the Cenſure of an ungreatful Contempr 
of the Land of Egypt,. which as it was thought. good enough for 


him and his to live in, ſhould have been judged to too for his bu- ' 
rial. 2. That by theſe his Remains, his Memory might be the lon 


ger and better preſerved both with the Egyptians, who for his ſake 
might ſhew kindneſs to his near Relations ; and with the 1ſraelites,to 
whom this was a viſible pledge of their Deliverance, and an. help to 
their Faith, and an obligation to them to perſiſt in the true Re- 


ligion. 


26 So Joſeph died, being an hundred and ten years - 


old 7: and they imbalmed him, and he was put in a 
coffin in Egypt. 


7' So for about Thirteen years of AfMi&ion he enjoyed Eighty 


him: 


years of Honour, and as much Happineſs as carth could afford 


<———_ 


Annatations on EXODUS. 


The ARGUMEN T: 


— 


1 
{ 


S 


Frer the death of Joſeph, ho had ſent for bis Father's Heuſe into Egypt, the Children of Iſrael exceedingly multi= | 
plied, notwithſtanding Pharaoh's cruel oppreſſing of then ; from under which, God, bearing their cry, brought them 
with a ſtrong hand. Wherefore this Book is ealled by the Greeks Exodus, 7. e. A going forth ; containing an Hiforical 
Account of paſſages for about ene hundred and forty years ; with the wonderful raiſing up of Moſes, who, together with 
Aaron, were to be inftruments of their Deliverance ; and accordingly after the inflicting ten dreadful Plagues upon Pharaoh, 
brought them into the Wilderneſs through tbe Red-Sea, wherein Pharaoh, ( his Heart being hardned under all theſe Plagues) 
and all bis Hoſt purſuing of them, were drowned ; God baving firſt inſtituted the Paſſover, as an abidting Sacrament to 
bring to their remembrance in after times this great Deliverance, | 
In their condutt through. the Wilderneſs, God gave them the ſignal mark of bis preſenes in the pillar of a Cloud, and the 
pillar of Fire 5 who,notwithſtanding their great aud reiterated murmurings.gave them Food, both Bread and Fleſh from Heaven, 
awd Drink out of the Rock ; and, when they were come to Mount Sinai, be there gave them the Meral Lew, beſide cther 
both Politick, and Eccleſiaſtical Ordinances ; Afterwards, the breaking of the Tables being eccaſioned by the Idolatry of the 
Golden Calf, God graciouſly renewed his Covenant with them : There being alſo a Tabernacle, and Ark, and other things to 


be made by 


God's command, the bounty of the People, in order to the making and furniſhing thereof, is bere (et down , which _ 


being finiſhed, the Tabernacle is anointed, and filled with the glory of Ged. 


CHAP. Lk 


The names and numbers of the children of Iſrael that came into Ezypt, 
Ver. J==—n—eg, Joſeph, his brethren, and that generation die, 6. A 
new king, who knew not Joſeph, 8. Goeth about by afflitfion, Oc. to 
ſuppreſs the Iſraelites, g--=-=-==== II. They increaſe, 12-=«==-=-14, 
Pharaoh commands the midwives to kill the male-children,. 15, 16. 
They fear God and obey not the king, 17. For this God bleſſeth the mid- 
Wives, 1$--==-.=--21. Pharach commands all the male-children to be 


drowned, 22. 


O W theſe are the names of * the children 
of Iſrael which came into Egypt a, every 
man and his houſhold 6 came with Ja- 

Y cob. 

a This Liſt is here repeated, that by comparing this ſmall Root 
with ſo vaſt a company of Branches as grew upon it, we may ſee 
the wonderful Providence of God in the fulfilling of his Promiſes. 
b His Children and Grandchildren, as the word houſe is taken Ruth 
4: II: 2 Sam: 7, 11. 1 Kings 21: 29. 

2 Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 

3 Iiffachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin c. 


c Who, though the youngeſt of all, is placed before Dan, Naph.' 


tali, &c. becauſe theſe were the Sons of the Hand-maidens. 


4 Dan, and N#phcali, Gad and Aſher. 

5 And all the ſouls that came out of the Þ loins of 
Jacob, were * ſerenty ſouls 4 : for Joſeph was in Egypt 
already. 

d Including Jacob and Joſeph, and his two Sons. See Gen: 46:26, 
27. and Dex; 10; 22, Or if they were but lixty nine, they are 


| 


called ſeventy by a round number, 
inſtances. 


6 And Joſeph died,and all his brethren, and all that 


generation e, 
Ee. (5:6 


Brethren. 


of which we ſhall have many 


increaſed abundantly and multiplied f, and waxed 


them. 

F Here are many words; and ſome very emphatical, to expreſs 
their incredible Multiplication. g This may relate either to Saks 
Numbers, which greatly added to their Strength, or to their Con« 


merous. Arheiſtical Wirs cavil at this Story, and pretend it im- 
poſhble that out of ſeventy perſons ſhould come above fix hundred 
thouſand men within two hundred and fifteen years : Wherein 
they betray no leſs Ignorance than Impiety. For to ſay nothing of 
the Extraordinary Fruitfulneis of /the Women in EZgypr, who oft 
brings forth four or five Children at one birth, as Ariſe. notes Hi. 
animal. 7: 4. nor of the long lives of the Men of thar age, nor of 
the pr of Wives then much in uſe, nor of the ſingular 
blefling of Gzod upon the Hebrews in giving them Conceptionsand | 
Births without Abortion ? all whichare bur very reaſonable fuppo- 
fitions, the probability of ic may plainly appear thus ; Suppoſe thiere 
were only 200 years reckoned, and only fifty perſons who did be- 
get Children, and theſe begin nor to beget betore they be twenty 
years old, and then each ot them beger only three Children. Dj- 
vide this time now into ten times twenty years. In the firſt time, 
of 50 come 150. In the ſecond, of 150 come 450: Of them in 


| che third, come 1352, Of w__ in the fourth 4050, 


£ theſe in 
the 


— 
Chap. L 


13:1% :; 


32. 
A&:7.16, 


5a: odtbne Sales 


) All that were of the ſame age with Joſeph and his | 
7 (* And the children of Iſrael were fruitful, and , as 
exceeding mighty g, and the land was filled with 


ſtzrution, ro note that their off-{pring was Strong as well as Nu 


of 


12. 
1-4 
*-, 


* Chap. I. 
Sa? TE bY ; 4 
Of theſe in the ſixth 36450. Of themin the ſevent 
— Of _ in the eighth 328050. Of theſe 1n the _ 
| 984150. And of them in the tenth 2952450. If at be object-d, 
That we read nothing of their great multiplication, till after J0- | 
ſeph's death, which ſome ſay was not above 50 years before heir go- 
ing 'out of Egypt, it may beealily replyed ; 1. This is a great miſta E, 
' for there were above 1140 Years between Foſeph s death and their go- 
ing out of Egypt, as may appear thus : Ir is granted that the Iſraelites 
1 _ werein Egypt about 210 or 215 years 1N all. They came not thither 
till Joſeph was near 40 Years old, as is evident by comparing Gen. oo 
46. with Gen:45. 6.50 there reſts only 70 years of Joſep#'s lite, wh-ch 
are the firſt part of the time of [/raz! s dwelling in Egypt, and theie 
remains 145 years, being the other part of the 215 years. 2. That 
the Iſ-aclites did multiply much befo:e Joſephs deat, though Scrip- 
ture be ſilentin it, as it is of many other paſſages confeliedly true, 
cannot be reaſonably doubred. Bur if there was any defe& in the 
Numbers propoſed in the firſt 55 years, 1t might be abundantly 
compenſated in the 145 years ſucceeding. And 1othe computation 
remains good. 


$ Now there aroſe up a new king g over Egypt, 
which knew h not Joſeph. _ 


g (#.e. ) Another King ; one of another Diſpolition, or Inte- 
reſt, or Family ; for the Kingdom of Ezypr did off. paſs irom one 
Family to another, as appears from tne Hiſtory of the Dynaſtes re- 
corded in ancient Writers. h Or, acknowleaged not the valit obliga- 

* tions which Joſeph had laid not only upon the Kingdoms of Egypr, 
' and the king under whom Joſeph lived, but upon all his Succeflors, 
in regard of thoſe vaſt additions of Wealth and Power, which he 
had made to that Crown. This phraſe notes his ungrat-ful diſown- 
ing,' and ill requiting of Joſeph's Favours. For words, of Know- 
ledge in Scripture commonly include the affetions and ations; as 
men are oft ſaid not to know God, when they do not love nor 
ſerve him ; and God is faid not to know men, when he doth not 


SD love them. | 
FPfal:ios 'g, And he ſaid unto his people, * Behold, the people 
24- of the children of Iſrael are more and mightier than 
: we z. 


7 This was not a true, but an invidious repreſentation and ag- 
90 of the matter, the better to juſtifie the ſeverities which 
e deſigned. 


Io Come on, * let us deal! wiſelie with them leſt 
they multiplie, and it come to paſs that when. there 
falleth out any war &, they joyn alſo unto eur ene- 
mies, and fight againſt us, ard ſo get them up out of 
the land 

k Which was not unuſual in that Countrey. 1 Which they 
might eaſily learn from ſome of the Hebrews, that they were in due 
time to do. And they were very unwilling to part with them, 
becauſe of the tribute and ſervice which they did receive and expect 
from them. 


AQs 7: 


+. Ir Therefore they did ſet over them task-maſters 
-Gen:15: 9 * to afflict » them with their burdens : and they 
built for Pharaoh treaſure-cities o, Pithom and Ra- 
amſes. is 
* n Heb. - Maſters of tribute, who were to exa& from them the tri- 
bute required, which was both Money and Labour ; that their Pur- 
ſes might be exauſted by the one, their Strength by the other, and 
their Spirits by both. » Or, oppreſs, or humble ; to ſpend their 
- Strength by exceſſive Labours,and ſo diſenable them for the Procrea- 
tion of Children. o Where they laid the Kings Money, or Corn 
which is reckoned among Treaſures, 2 Chron: 17: x2. and TY 27. 
and wherein a great part of the Riches of Zgypr conſiſted ; for they 
had Corn enough not only for themſelves, but to ſel] to other 
Countries ; ſo that Egypt was accounted the Granary of the Roman 
Empire. Or, defenced Cities, in which Gariſons were to be placed 
which ſeems beſt to agree with the place and uſe of them. F or 
they were in the borders of the Land, and among the 1ſraclites 
which appears concerning the one from Gm: 47: 11. ( where the 
Land in which they were placed is called Rameſes, which in H:brew 
conſiſts of the ſame Letters, with this Raam/es, and ſeems to be ſo 
called then by anticipation from the City of that name now builr 
in it) and may be reaſonably preſumed concerning the other; and 
therefore it is moſt probable tiiat they were built to keep the Iſ- 
nary in ſubjeQion, and to hinder them from going our of the 
and. ; 


H 12 + But the more they afflicted them, the more 

2. they multiplied p, and grew: and they were grieved 

beymul. * becauſe of the children of Iſrael. 

lied,&c, p Through God's over-ruling Providence, and ſingular bleſſing 
which God gave them purpoſely to haſten firſt their ſorer affliction, 

and next, and by that means their glorious Deliverance, * Though 


envy and fear. 


13 And the Egyptians made the children of Iſrael 
to ſerve with rigour 9. 

q Or, Cruelty, or tyrrany ; with hard words and cruel uſage 
without mercy, or mitigation. This God permitted for wiſe = 
Juſt reaſons ; 1. As a puniſhment of their-Idolatry into which di 
vers of them fell there, Joſ: 24: 14. Ezek. 29: Sf 8. and 2+- . 
2. To wean them from the Land of Egypr, which otherwiſe a s 2 
plentiful and defirabJe Land, and to quicken their deſires _- 


.ter Canaan, 3. To prepare the way for God's glori 
| Jfael's deliverance. 7 8'0r10us works, and 


14 And they made their lives bitter with hard bon- 
dage, * in morter, and in brick, and in ail manner of 
ſervice in the field 7 : all their ſervice wherein they made 
them ſerve, was with rigour. 

'r Which was the baſeſt and moſt laborious of all their ſer- 


VICES. 


f y \8$1, 


TY 5 | 


Chap. II, 
15 4 And the king of Egypt ſpake to the Hebrew 


midwives-s, ( of which the name of one was Shiphran, 


and the name of the other : Puah. ) 

5 Such as not only were employed about the Hebrew Women, but 
were Hebrews themſelves, not Egyptians, as ſome ſuppoie, as may 
appear, 1. Becauſe they are expreſly called not the midwives of the 
Hebrews, but the Hebrew midwives. 2. The Egyptian midwives would 
not willingly employ their time and pains among the meaneſt and , 
pooreſt of Servants,as theſe were. And if they were ſent in deſign by 
the King, he had loſt his end, which was to cover his crue'ty with 
cunning, and to perſwade the People that their dearth wa nurf: cn 
his Intention, but from the chances and dangers of Chilu- bearing. 
3. The Hebrew Women as they had doubtleſs midwives of their 
on, ſo they would never have admitted others. 4: They are ſaid 
to fear God, werſe 17:21. &You are not. to think rhar theſe were 
the only midwives to ſo many thouſands of Hebrew Women, but 
they were the moſt eminent among them ; and it may be for their 
excellency in that profeſſion called to the fervice of fome Egyptian 
Ladies, and by them known to Pharaoh, who might therefore think 
by their own intereſt, and by the promiſe of great rewards, or by 
{e. ere threatnings, to oblidge them to comply with his deliies ; and 
if he met with the deſired ſucceſs by them, he meant to proceed fur- 
ther, and to engage the reſt in like manner. 


16 And he ſaid, When ye do the office of: a mid- 
wife to the Hebrew women, and ſee them upon the 
ſtools «, if it be a ſon, then ye ſhall kill him x : but if 
it be a daughter, then ſhe ſhall live p. 


#u A ſeat uſed by Women when ready to be delivered, conveni- 
ently framed for the midwives better diſcharge of her office. 
x Which it was not difficult for them to do, without much objerva- 
tion. y Either 1. Becauſe he feared not them, but the males only; 
and ſome add.that he was adviſed by one of their Magicians, that a 
male-child ſhould be born of the If aeh gs, who ſhould be a dread- 
ful ſcourge to the Ezyprians. Or, 2. They reſerved them for their 
Juſt, or for ſervice, or for the increaſe of their People, and the rai- 
'fing of a fairer Breed by them. 


17 But the midwives feared God z, and did not as 
the king of Egypt commanded them, but ſaved the men- 
children alive. 

z More th:n the King, and therefore choſe to obey God ra- 
ther than the King, their Commands being contrary each to 
other. : 

18 And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, 
and ſaid unto them, Why have ye done tas thing, and 
have ſaved the men-chiidren alive ? 

19 And the miewives {aid unto Pharaoh, Becauſe 
the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women, 
for they are lively a, and are deiivered ere the mid- 
wives come in unto them 6. 

a Or, Yigorous and aftive in promoting the Birth of their own 
Children : Or, like the beaſts ; which withour any help of others 
bring forth their young. So the Hebrew word fignuies, and ſforthere 
is only a defe& of the Particle of fimilitude, which is trequeat, as 
T have noted before. b This might be no lye, as many ſuppoſe, 
but a truth concerning many of them, and they do not athrim it to 
be ſo with all And 1o it might be, either becauſc their daily and 
exeeſſive labours joyned with the fears of the Execution of the 
King's Command, whereof they ſeem to have gotren notice, dd 
haſten their Birth, as the ſame cauſes do commonly in other Wo- 
men ; or becauſe they underſtanding their danger, would not ſend 
for the midwives, but committed themſelves to God's Providence, 
and the care of ſome of their Neighbours preſent with them. So 
here was nothing but Truth, though they did not ſpeak the whole 
Truth, which they were not oblidged to do. 


20 Therefore c God dealt well with the midwives ; 
and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty 

c Becauſe they feared God, and ſpared the Children, werſe 17. 
whereby they expoſed themſelves to the King's diſpleaſure ; becauſe 
they would not offend God by murdering the Children, which they 


ing purpoſe, þ viz, 


might have done many times ſecietly, and therefore it was only 
the fear of God which reſtrained them from it. 


2s And it came to paſs, becauſe the midwives feared 
Ged, that he made them houſes 4. | 
d (1, e.) God greatly increaſed their Families both in Children 
and Poſterity, anu in Wealth, and other outward Bleflings. So 
this phraſe is uſed Gen: 30: 30. Deut: 25: 9. 1 Sam: 2: 35. 1 Kings 
2. 24 and 171. 38. Pſal: 127: 1. As houſes are commonly put for 
PO, ſo building is put for procreating of Children, Gen: 16: 2, 
and 3o: 3. 


22 And Pharaoh charged all his people, ſaying, 
Every ſon that is born, ye ſhall caſt into the river, and 
every daughter ye ſhall fave alive, | 


CHAP. IL 


Moſes's parentage and bir th, r, 2. His muther makes an ark, puts him 
therein; 3. Pharaoh s daughter going to waſh her ſelf, ſeeth him, takes 
him for her own child, ap{ gives him to his mather to nurſe, 4, 5, 6, 
1,8, 9. Moſes ſeeing an Tſraclite wronged by an Egyptian, kills him, 
11, 12. Pharath hearing this, ſeeks to ſlay Moſes ; he flees to Midian, 
I5. There he reſcues Reuel's daughters from the wiolence of the ſhepherds, 
17. Serves Reuel, and marries his daughter Zipporah, 21. She bears - 


him a Jon,his name, and the reaſon of it, 22. God heareth the cry of the 
Iſraelites, 25. ; 


N D there went a * a man of the houſe of Levi , 
/ \ b, and took fs wife a daughter of Levi c. 
a From the place of his abode to another place: for the follow- "3x 


dmram, Exod; 6s 20, Numb; 26. 58, 59. 


£ Namely 


1 Chro; 


| £0 


90 BR: TOO TIO RYE 5 


3 EIEALE( He IOTSY: 3 Ee 


ae CHOEAMAD SS 7 


}* Chap. 11. EXODUS. Chap. I]. 


« Namely Jochched, Namb: 26: 59 called a daughter, net ſtriftly, | x al | 
bur NE ts. ro wit, a Grandchild, as the words father and ſon | ud £ —_ _ bing _ _= ks. Ages yy ah, 
ace oft uſed for a Grandfirber and a Grandſon, as hath been ſhewed nic” * 7 ON? thou to kill me, as thou Kit mas, « 
ors oft wort fer End - 61 76) 16 06 te GI ledft the Egyptian * And Moſes feared r, and faid, Prince. 
ac brother is oft uſed for a Coulin. This ſeems more probable than Surely this thing is known. 
that an Iſrachte ſhould marry his own Siſter, which even Heathens + Through the weakneſs of his Faith, which afterwards growing 
light of Nature have condemued, eſpeciaily now when he : ſtronger, he feared nor, that which now he did fear, the wrath of the 
-bundant choice elſewhere. | Kiig, Heb. 121. 27. Diſticguiſh the times, and Scriptures agree 
| which ſe-med to c/aſh rogether. | 


2 And the woman condelved and bare a fon: and | S WS 
uh fr timing he ar 5 goody cl, "Ng hl re Phra, ae ting be hgh 


Tia 0-0 


by the 
had ſuch 


CW. " 


Veſt ETD EIRAIEY RT; 344 


Ma HOCALHPC I 7 e;] 


20: Heb. him three months. 7 - ; —_ 
01: 23: 2 And when the could not longer hide him 4, ſhe —_ on on in the land of Midian : and he far 


violent in executing that bloody Decree, and the Child growing up | - , TEE 
was more likely to be diſcovered, eſpecially ſeing the Egyprians | 26 Now the t Prieſt : of Midian had ſeven daugh- + Or; 
dwelt among them, Exod: 3: 22. e That Boats were made of fuch | ters, and they came and drew water, and filled the pr;yy 
materials in thoſe parts, 1s evident from Iſai: 18: 2: and from the | troughs to warer their fathers flock. ; 
Teſtimonies of Herod, Pliny, and others. * Slime within, and pitch ; Nor of Idols, for then Moſes would not have married into his 
without. f Which grew near the Rivers fide ; partly. thas the | Family ; but of the true God ; for ſome ſuch were in thoſe ancient 
Veſſel mighr not be carried away, and overturned by the violence times here and there, as appears by Melchiſedeck, rhough his manner 
of the Winds and Water, and partly that the Child might be ſooner of Worſhippiag God might be ſuperſtitious and corrupt : Or the 
ar eh and more caſily taken out thence: by any kind hand, | Hebrew Cohen may here ſignify @ Prince or a Potentate, as Gen. 42. 45. 
which ſhe hoped for. _ _ _ Pls 0 ne of his _ co pr rhatrcanſlation, 
A . . ecauſe Principalities were then many of them very ſmall and 
_ 4 rang ftood afar off g, to wit what would | can, and becauſe this employment then was pr atk ny Oo" and 
. : : worthy of great mens Daughters, as appears from Ger: 24: 15; and 
- * hat _ might not be thought to have laid the Child there, or | 29: 6, &c. 
to be related to it. 
17 And the ſhepherds came and drove them away « : 
5 © And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to but Moſes ſtood up and helped them x, and watered 
waſh her ſelf at the river, and her maidens walked along their flock. 
by the river ſide: and when ſhe ſaw the ark among the | * That they might enjoy the fruit of their Labours, and make 
Flags, ſhe ſent her maid to fetch it. -=_ - he I _ rake _ their own Cattel. x Mo 
& knd h ol nq; zr by perſwading them with fair werds, or by force; for Moſes 
Fs when ſhe had opened ;c, (he ſaw the child : | was ſtrong, and full of courage, and reſolution, wharewith the 
an ng __ _ A had compaſlion | Shepherds were ealily daunted. 
on him, and lai his is one Of the T . | 
Mais yy 3 Hebrews child. 1 © on when they came to Reuel their father x, 
_ k This ſhe might very probably gueſsboth from the circumſtances ; n —_ TORI 9 at YOU 256 Cn lo foon - 
in which ſh- found him, and from the finguar fairneſs and beauty 75 
of the Child, far differing from the Exyp:;an hew ; and ſhe might | _,* Either 1- Strily, and then he-is the ſame who elſewhere is 
certaialy know it by its circumciſion. OP — Exodus go I oft-times, and, as ſome think, 
ge obab, Judges 4: 11. r 2. Largely, 7 e. their Grandfather, f 
7 Then faid his fiſter to Pharaohs daughter, Shall ] | cb are oft called fathers, as Gan: 31: 43: 2 Kings 14: 3, &e. and 
go, and call to thee a nurſe of the Hebrew women | '& = and 18: 3: fo he was the Father of Jethro, os Hobab, Numbers 
that ſhe may nurſe the child for thee ? 7 hed G; SL FE ba 
8 And Pharaohs daughter faid unto her, Go: and et 20 __ on Egypoea 1» Colyergy! Gen 
the maid went and called the childs mother. 00 no Ro of the ſhepherds, and alſo drew, water 
9 And Pharaohs-daughter ſaid unto her, Take this enough © FR odmny ef rEapary 
hid : ” ; ig y So they gueſſed him to be/by his Habit and Speech, or he told 
child away and nurſe it for me, and I will give thee | them that he came from thence. z Heb- 1» drawing drew, which 
thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nurſed _ that he drew it very diligently and readily, which cauſed their > 
at, quick return. | \ 
a ARGOS 04 qe gn ſhe brought him unto | 29 And he faid unto his daughters, And whers is 
a 1s daughter, an he became her ſon;, And ſhe | he? Why isit that ye have lefr 2 the man ? Call him, ' « 
| In " m = _ + Moſes k: and tbe ſaid, Becauſe I drew | that he may cat bread. 
- hit of the water. a Heb.. Have left thus, or now, at this time of the day, when it 13 
z By adoption, Heb. 1 1+24. For as Philo reports, ſhe, though long ſo late, and he a Stranger and Traveller. | | Y, 
—— no ng of ay own; and —, treated him as her 21 And Moſes was content b to dwell with the man, 
, ave him Royal E:ucation and In?rufion. See Ats 7. es Z1 is d: | 
21, & It matters not whether this be an Egyptian name, or ws Hebrew _ : arts __ : ——_—_ ans RG 4 
name anſwering to it in ſisnification, ſering the meaning of ir is hz x] conſent nn mrs or offer.” Ang 530 185/p reſent and tem- » 
explained 5 , 5 is here | porary Repole there is turned into a ſettled Habitet.on. c Whom 
p ; ; Moſes married not inſtantly, bur after ſome years -of acquaintance P 
II | And it came to paſs in thoſe days 1 when with the Farmly, as may probably be gatkered from the youngneſs 
» nie was grown thas his warn and Ks * and uncircumciednels of one of his Sons 49 years after this, Exod. 
brethren », and looked on their burdens, and he k nw. h , ” pps woe —_—_— — 
, 5 : -C L n Ee | knowledge of the true God, whici he was able exceileatly to do, fo 
ſpied an Egyptian ſmicing an Hebrew, one of his | it 1s likely he had ſucceeded therein in ſome mealure, = therefore 
brethren. married Zipporah. 
! Whileſt Moſes lived at Court, and was owned as the Son of Pha- 
"_ j nr, ans; as rote wg 6 gprr ng ſucceed Pharaoh in F 22 -And ſhe bare him a {on, and he called his name 
e Throne. m To maturity #being 40 years ol » Aﬀts 7: 23. nPartl Gerihom 1 X . : ; 
by natural AﬀeCtion and Inclination, that he de Dead of {t;: —_ voe-bg =, 4 Dave DRmk8 Rranger PERRY Chap: 
his Brethren, and help them, as occaſion ſhould cffer ir ſelf; and TROSS . j 4 18: 3: 
partly by divine Inſtigation, and in deſign, that he mighr give ſome 2349 And it cime to paſs in proceſs of time 4d, * Hev:114 
manifeftation to them that he was raiſed, and ſent of God ro deliver that the king of Egypc e died, and the children of 13, 14 
them ; as may be gathered from As 7. 25. IHrael * thghed 
| | Urael * ſighed F by reaſon of che bondage, and they «yum 
12 And he looked this way and that way o, and cried, and their cry came up unto God, by reafon of 45: 16: : 
when he ſaw that there was no man, he flew che Egyp- the bondage. 2 
tian p, and hid him in the ſand. d Heb. In thoſe many days, viz. in which he lived or abode there, 
+ Nor from Conſcience of Guilt in- whet he lanended; hee afrer them. 7 is put for after here, as it is Numb: 28: 26: Iſat: 
humane and warrantable Prudence. p This Afton of Moſes was ex* 20: 1. Mark 13: 24: compared with Marth: 24: 29: Like g: 36 After 
traordinary, and is not to be juſtified by the common right of de- 40 years, as appears by comparing Exoaus 7: 7: with Aﬀs 7: 30. 
fending the oppreſſed, which belongs not ro private perlons, Rom: | * And after Tan ane'en CE of his Sorls or Sycoalibes, 200506 
and D, but only by his divine and ipecial Vccation to be the Ruler reſt who ſought for Myzs his Lite, Exod:4:19. f Becauſe though their 
and Deliverer of Iſrael. Which call of his, howſoever manifeſted, | 3**** ®PP reflor was dead, yet they found no rele, as they hoped-ro 
WE his agen, as Joſephus ſaith, or immediately ro himſelf, _ 
ident to 7 - . 
malls 5 oridans gh oo CER and he gave this as a ſignal to , wr Neves yo heard mm yt Rh 5 and God remem- W 
| red his ovenant with Abrah: Brxgns 
Koh, And _ he woes out the ſecond day q, behold, | with Jacob. ham, WH OS *Gen: x5 
o men of t : = 
bong Argon _ ebrews ſtrove together: And he ſaid | 25 And God looked upon the children of Iſrael, and 465: 4. | 
Oe e wrong, Wherefore ſmiteſt thou thy | God Þ * had reſpe&t unto 1hemr fe t Heb. | 
The ne Oc Rþ f Heb. Knew them, ſo as to pity and help them; as words of new. = 
Fa. + Aer-oageb Ay _ ow — he refurns to execute — -— _ uſed, as Plot $ and 31.7, He wio ſeemed to Chap. | 
1 et him as a Judzz:, whoſe work 1t 1 ave rejetted them, now owned them for his People, and came ti | 
both to deſtroy Enemies, and to reconcile f ix alc Y their reicue, : "RT PT ITE 


took for him an ark of bulruſhes e, and daubed it with 
lime and with pitch, and put the child therein, and 
ſhe laid ir in the flags f by the rivers brink. 


d To wit, with ſafety to her ſelf, becauſe they now grew more 


P 5 Nor out of zeal to puniſh a Murderer, but to ſecure himſelf 
rom ſe dangerous a” perſon, probably ſuppoſing that this was the 


Irae [ 6 


; man foretold to be the Scourge of Egypr, and the Deliverer of + 


—_— 


Fg 


E Deut: 
33: 16: 


* As 
7: 33: 


* Mat:22: 
32. Als 
7; 32; 


| oy Chap. 
. 2: 23, 


* to ſee, God called unto him * out pf the midſt of the 


- of God's Majeſty, and Holineſs: See Ger: 16: 13: and 17: 3: 1 Kings 


hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of 


CHAP. I. 


+ keeping Tethro's fock, cometh t6 mount Horeb, r. There God appears 
_ him is tte | 2. Moles beholds it, 3. God calls to him 9 
of the burning buſh, 4. Cautions him what to do, 5, G. God ſeet 
their afflifions, 75. Promiſes them a happy deliverance, 8. Sends y 
78 Pharaoh, 10. He deſires to be excuſed becauſe wnworthy, 1T. our 
encourages him, 12. And diretts him what t0 ſay to the chi laren of 69 , 
13s 14. Makes his name known.to Moſes, 15. Commands him to gather 
the elders of Iſrael, 16. And what he was to ſay tothem, 17. Likew! ſe 
zo Pharaoh, 18. Pharaoh's obſtimacy, 19. God threatens the Egyptians, 
20. Aid tells Moſes with what plenty the Iſraelites ſhould depart, 21, 
22. | 


OW Moſes kept the flock of Jethro @ his father- 
in-law, the prieft of Midian : and heled the flock 
to the back-ſide of the defart b, and came to the moun- 


tain of God c, even to Horeb 4. | | 

a Either the ſame with Revel, or his Son, who upon his Father's 
death, ſucceeded into his office. See Exod. 2. 18. 6 To its inner- 
moſt parts, which were behind Jerhro's Habitation, and rhe former 
Paſtures, whither he went for freſh Paſtures. «c So called, either as 
art high or eminent Mountain; or, from the Viſion of God here 
following. See A4#s 7: 30: 'or by anticipation, from God's glorious 
appearance there, and giving the Law from thence, Exod: 18: 5: and 
19.'3. See alſo r Kings 19: 8. d Called alſo Sinai, Exod: rg: 1: Ats 
7: 40: Or Horeb was the name of the whole tratt or row of Moun- 
rains, and Sinai the name of that particular Mountain where this 
Viſion hapned, and the Law was delivered. Or Horeb and Sinai 
were two feveral tops of the ſame Mountain. 


'2 And the Angel of the LORD e appeared unto 
him in a-* flame of fre f out of che midſt of a buſh, 
and he looked, and behold, the buſh burned with fire, 


and the buſh was not conſumed g. 
e Not a created Angel, but the Angel of the Covenant, Chriſt 
Jeſus, who then and ever was God, and was to be Man, and to be 


EXODUS 


that land, unto a good land and a large 9, unto a 
land flowing with milk and honey 7, unto the place 
of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, 


ſites s. 

? This word notes God's manifeſtation ofhimſelf and his favour, 
and giving help from Heaven. See Gen? 18: 21+ 9 SO it was not 
only comparatively to Goſhen, where they now dwelt, and to the 
number of the Iſraelites, at that time ; but abſolutely, if you take 
the Land of Promiſe according to its true and firſt & ancient Bounds 
of it, as you have them deſcribed, Gen: 15: 18. Det: 1* 7: and 11: 
24: and not according to thoſe narrow limits to which they were 
afterwards confined for their Unbelief, Sloth, Cowardice, and 
Impiety. » (45. e. ) Abounding with the choiceſt Fruits, both for 
neceſſity and for delight. The excellency, and fingular fruitfulneſs 
of this Land, howſoever denied or diſputed by ſome ill-minded 
Perſons, is ſutficiently evident, 1. From expreſs Teſtimony not 
only of Moſes, Deut: 8: 7, 8, 9: but alſo of the Spies who were ſent 
to view 1t, and, though prejudiced againſt it, yet acknowledged it, 
Numb: 13: 27: and ofthe Holy Prophets that lived long in it, as 
David, Pſalm 106: 24: Joel, Chap: 2: 3: and Ezekiel, who calls it 
the glory of all Land®, Exek: 20: 15, WhiChif it had not been true, 
1t 15 ridiculous to think that they durſt have ſaid and writ ſo, when 
the people with whom they conteſted, and thouſands of other Per- 
ſons there and then living, were able to confute them. After them 
Joſephus, and St. Hierom, and others ſince, who lived long in that 
Land, have highly commended it. And whereas $Srrabo tpeaks of 
the barrenneſs of the Soil about Jeruſalem, that is true, but by him- 
ſelf it 15 limited to the compaſs of 6o Furlongs from Jers/alem. 
And if at this day the Land be no'y grown barren in a. great 
meaſure, it is not ſtrange, conſidering both the great negle& and 
ſloth of the People as to the improvement of it, and the great wick= 
edneſs of its Inhabitants, for which God hath threatned ro turn z 
fruitful Land into barrenneſs, Pſal. 107: 34. 5 Theſe People are diverſly 
nuinbred, there are ten ſorts reckoned, Gen: 15: 19, 20, 21. and 
ſeven, Dent: 7: 1: and here but ſix, becauſe ſome of them werecither 
deſtroyed or driven out of their Land by others ; or did by choice 
and dcſign remove to ſome other place, as. many in thoſe times did, 


ſent into the World in our Fleſh as a Meflenger from God. And 
theſe remporary Apparitions of his were Preſages or Fore-runners | 
of his more ſolemn Miſſion and coming, and therefore he 1s fitly | 
called an Angel. Thar this Argzl wasno Creature, plainly appears | 
by the whole Context. and ſpecially by his ſaying, 1 am the Lord, 
&c. The Angels never ſpeak that Language in Scripture, 
ſent from God, and Iam thy fellow-ſervant, &c. And it is a vain 
prerence to ſay, That the Angel as God's Ambaſſadour ſpeaks in 
God's name and perſon ; For what Ambaſſadour of any King in the 
World did ever ſpeak thus, 1 am the King, &c ? Miniſters are God's 
Ambaſſadours ; but if any of them ſhould ſay, 7 am the Lord, they 


would he guilty of Blaſphemy, and ſo would any created Angel be ! 


but 7 aw | 


though it be not mentioned in Scripture ; or by Cohabitation and 
Marriage with ſome ofthe other People, did make a Coalition, and 
. were incorporated with them, and ſ their Name was ſwallowed up 


| in the other; or becauſe the Names of ſome of theſe People, as 


particularly the Canaanites, and the Amorites, were uſed ſometimes 
| more ſtrictly, and ſometimes more largely, ſo as to comprehend 
under them the other People, as the Girgaſhites, &c. whence it comeg 


{ 13: 7: and of the Amorites in ſome places of Scripture, as hath been 
ſhewed. 


9 Now therefore behold the cry * of the children 


too, for the ſame reaſon. f Whereby was fitly repreſented God's * of Ifrael is come unto me : and I have alfo ſeen the 


Majeſty, and Purity, and Power. g Which doubrleſs repreſented | 
the condition of the Church and People of [7ael, who were now in | 


oppreflion wherewith the Egyptians oppreſs them. 
* Either in Prayer ; or rather forced by their Oppreſſions, as the 


the fire of affliftion, yet ſo as that God was preſent with them, and | 44; Clauſe explains it, 


that they ſhould not be conſumed init, whereof this Viſion was a 
Pledge. 


2 And Moſes ſaid, I will now turn aſide, and fee 
this great ſight, why the buſh is not burnt. | 
4 And when the LORD {ſaw that he turned aſide 


buſh, and ſaid, Moſes, Moſes + ; and he ſaid, Here 


am I. 

h He doubles the Name, partly to ſhew kindneſs and familiarity, 
and principally to make Moſes more atteutive to the buſineſs before 
him. ; 


5 And he ſaid, Draw not nigh hither ; ; * put off 
thy ſhoes from off thy feer k, for the place whereon 


thou ftandefſt, is holy ground /. 

# Keep thy diſtance ; whereby he checks his curioſity and for- 
wardne's, and works him to the greater reverence and humility. 
Compare Exod: 19: 12, 21: Joſs 5: 15. k This he requires as an 
at and token, i. OF his reverence to the divine Mijeſty, then 
and there eminently preſent. 2. Of his humiliation for his Sins, 
whereby he was unfit and unworthy to appear before God ; for this 
was a poſture of Humiliation, 2 Sam: 15: 30: Iſai: 20: 2, 4; Ezek: 
24: 17, 23. 3. Of purification from the filth ofhis feet, or ways, 
or converſation, that he might be more fit to approach to God. See 
Joh: 13. 16: Heb: 10: 22, 4. Of his ſubmiſſion and readineſs ro 
obey God's Will, for which reaſon ſlaves uſed to be barefooted, 
I Witha relative holineſs at this time, becauſe of my ſpecial preſence 
IN 1t. 

6 Moreover he ſaid, * I am the God of thy father, 
the God of Abraham; the God of Iſaac, and the God 
of Jacob mw. And Moſes hid his face : for he was afraid 


to look upon God ». 

- The God ingaged to them by Covenant or Promiſe, whichT am 
now come to perform. n» As other excellent Servants of God have 
been through the ſenſe of their own Mceanneſs, and Sinfulneſs, and 


T9: 13: Iſai:6:2, 5, Oc. 

7 © And the LORD ſaid, TI have ſurely ſeen o the 
affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and * have 
heard their cry, by reafon of their task-maſters : for I 
know their ſorrows, 

o Heb. in ſeeing I have ſeen, (5. e. ) T have ſeen and obſerved it 
diligently, accurately, and certainly ; for ſo much the doubling of 
the Verb ſignifies. > 

8 And I am come down þ to deliver them out of the 


Pharaoh, that thou mayeſt bring forth my people the 
children of Iſrael out of Egypt. | 


the children of Ifrael out of Egypt ? 

t What a mean inconſiderable Perfon am I ? how unworthy and 
unfit for that employment ? He was more forward in the Work 40 
years ago, by reaſon of the fervours of his Youth, his inexperience in 
Afﬀairs, the Advantage of his Power and Intereſt in the Court, by 
which he thought he could and ſhould procure their Deliverance ; 
but now Age hath made him cool and conliiderate : the remembrance 


took away all probability of prevailing with them to fellow him, 
much more of prevailing with Phara9h to-let them go. 


God by himſelf, and by the probabilities or improbabilities of ſecon 
Cauſes. 


12 Andhe ſaid, Certainly T will be with thee ; and 
this ſhall be a token unto thee «, that I have ſent thee: 
When thou haſt brought fecth the people out of Egypt, 


ye ſhall ſerve God upon this mountain. 

z Either 1. this Viſion; or 2. the fulfilling of this Promiſe, that 
I will be with thee by Signs and Wonders, and a Strong Hand : or 
rather 3. this which here follows, that he and 1ael ſhould ſerve 
God there. Signs indeed are commonly given from things paſt or 
preſent, but ſometimes from things to come, as here, and 1 S2m. 2. 
34- Jai. 7. 13, 14. andg. 6, &'c. Yueft, How could Moſes be con- 
firmed in his preſent Calling and Work by a thing yer ro come ? 
Anſw. Such Signs if they were ſingle, and the only evidences of a 
Mans calling, might leave ſome ground for ſuſpicion ; bur when 
they are accompanied with other Signs, as it is here and in the 
other places produced, they are of great uſe for the Corroboration 
ofa Man's Faith. Moſes was otherwiſe aſſured of the Preſence, and 
Power and Faithfulneſs of that God who ſpake to him, and was 
to expeEt more aſſurances that God would be with him to help 
him an, and carry hira through his Work. And as an evidence 
that this Work of bringing Irael out of Egypt ſhould be compleat- 
ed, he gives him a promiſe that he ſhould ſerve God in that 
place ; which promiſe coming from God, he knew to be as in« 
fallibly certain, as if it were already come to paſs, and therefore 
this wasan apt mean to ſtrengthen his Faith in bis preſent undertak« 


ing. 
13 And Moſes ſaid unto God, Behold, when I come 


bnmnm—omtm 4 


unto the children of Iſrac), axd ſhall fay unto them, 
I - 


and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebu- 


to paſs, that all the reſt go under the names of the Canaanites, Gen: 


of his Brethrens RejeQtion of him, when he was a great Man at Court, | 


Thus Moſes 
falls into that Diſtemper to which moſt Menare prone, of meaſurin 


Chap. 11, } 


aa ts nr nn ll. 


> IRMA nc 7 


10 Come now therefore, and I will ſend thee unto 


11 T And Moſes ſaid unto God, * Who am Ir, that * gee 16! 
I ſhould go unto Pharaoh ; and that T ſhould bring forth 6: 5: | 


Jer: 1: & 


; 


| 


EE 


+3 


I LY 


ee Ic! 


| I am. See Exod. 6: 3. 


Chap. III. | EXO 
The God of your fathers hath ſent me unto you, and 
they ſball ſay unto me, Whar is his Name x ? what ſhall 
I fay unto them ? | 

x Since I muſt go to them in thy name, and thou haſt variety 
of Names ad glorious Titles, and ſome of them are aſcribed ro 


Idols, not only by the Egyptians, ; 
Ps. whe Nas {hall L uſe, whereby both thou maiſt be din- 
ſinguiſhed from falfe gods, and thy People may be encouraged 


to expect Deliverznce irom thee ? 
14 And God ſaid unto Moſes, I AM THAT I 
AM j: And he ſaid, Thus ſhalt chou fay unto the chil- 
* Chap:6: Aren of Iſrael, I AM * hath ſent me unto you. 
3. 2 Cor:: 3 A moſt comprehenſive and ſignificant Name, avd moſt proper 


2 for the preſent occaſion. It notes 1. The reality of his Being : 
Heb:13: whereas Idols are nothings, 1 Cor. 8. 4. all their Divinity is only in 
8 


| 


the fancies and opinions of Men. 2. The Neceſfarinefs, Eternity, 
and Unchangeableneſs of his Being ; whereas all other beings once 
were not,an:1 if he pleaſe, they thall. be no more; and all their be- 
ing was derived from him, and wholly depends upon him ; and he 
only is by and from himſclf. 3. The Conſtancy and Certainty 0: 
his Nature, and Will, and Word : The ſenſe is, I am the ſame that 
ever I was; the ſame who made the promiſes to Abraham, 8c. and 
am now come to perform them ; who asI can do whar I pleaſe, 
ſo I will do what I h+ve ſaid. Heb. 7 ſhall be what T ſhall be. He 
uſeth the Future Tenſe, either, 1. becauſe that Tenſe in the uſe of 
the Hebrew Tongue comprehends all times, paſt, preſent, and to 
come, to ſignifie that all times are alike to God,and all are preſent 
to him, and therefore what is here, 1 jha/ be, is rendred, 1 am, by 
Chrilt, John 8. 58. Sec Pſalm go. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 8. Or 2. To inti- 
| ' mate,though darkly,acco:ding to that State and Age of the Church, 
the Myſtery of Chriſt's Incarnation, 7 ſhall be what 7 ſhall be, #. e. 
God-man ; and I who now come in an inviſible,tho glorious man 
ner to deliver you from this temporal: Bondage, ſhall in due tim: 
come vilibly, and by Incarnation, to ſave you and all my People 
from a far worſe Slavery and Miſery, even from your Sins, and 
from Wrath to come. Of this Name of God, ſee Rev. 1. 4, 8. 
and 16. 5. 
15 And God ſaid moreover unto Moſes, Thus ſhalt 
thou ſay unco the children of Iſrael, The LORD T 
God of your fathers, the God of Abiaham, the Goc 
of Iſaac, and the God of Jacob, hath ſent me unto 
you : this is my Name tor ever, and this 15 my memo- 
rial z unto ail generations. 
+ Heb. Jehovah, a word of the ſame root and fignification with 
This he adds, becauſe God was beit known 
| to the I{-2c//tes by razt Name ; and to ſhew, that though he had gi- 
f ven himſelf a new Name, yer he was the ſame God. z By which 
I wit] be. remembred, o» ned, and ſerved by my People, and di- 
ſtinguiſthed fiom all others, See Palm 192. 12. and 105: 13. 


15 GO and * gather the Eiders of [ſrael together, 
and ſay unto them, The LORD God of your fathers, 
the Cod of Abraham, of Ifaac, and of Jacob, appear- 
ed uricto me, ſ>ying, I have ſurely viſked you, and 
ſeen that which is done to you in Egypt; | 

2 Either by Age, or either by Office and Authority.For though 
they were all Slaves to the Egyptians, yet among themſelves the; 
retained ſome Order and Government, an-. had doubtleſs ſome 
whom they owned as their Teachers and Rulers, as heads of Tribes 
and Families, c. 


| 17 And [| have ſaid, I will bring you up out of the 
| affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanites. 
l and the Hirrites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites. 
1 and the Hivites, and the Jebuſites, unto a land flowing 
with milk -nd honey. 

18 And * they ſhall hearken to thy voice, and thou 
ſhalt come, thou and the elders of Iſrael unto the King 
of Egypt, and you (balt ſay unto him, The LORD * 
God of the tiebrews hath met with us b ; and now 
let us go, ( we beſeech thee ) three days journey c into 
the wilderneſs that we may ſacrifice to the LOR L 
our God d. X 


b Hath appeared to us, expreſſing his diſpleaſure for our negle&t 
of him, and deciaring his Will that we ſhou!d do what follows. 
c To Sinai, which, going the neareſt way, was no further from 
Egypt ; for here God had declared he wouid be ſerved, werſe 12. 
Left. Was nor this deceitfully and unjuſtly ſpoken, when they m- 
tended to go quits away from him ? An}. No ; for 1. Pharaoh had 
no juſt Right and Title to them, to keep them in Bondage, ſeing 
they came thither only to ſo ourn for a time, and by Joſeph had 
abundant]y paid for their Habitation there, and therefore th-y 
might have demanded a total Diſmiſſion. 2. My2s doth nor ſay 
any thing which is falſe, but only conceals a part of the truth ; 
k and he was not obliged ro diſcover the whole'truth to ſo cruel a 
| Tyrant, and ſo implacable an Enemy. 3. Moſes carnot be blamed, 

borh becauſe he was none of Pharao)'s Subject ,and becauſe herein 


Rev: 1:4. 


% Chap. 4: 
29. 


Y Chap:4: 
3t 
* Chap: 5: 
3. 


Es "I 


; he follows the Dire&ion and Command of his Maſter that ſent him: 
: And God ſurei;; was nor obliged to acquaint Pharaoh with all his 
_* mind, but only fo far as he pleaſed. And it pleated him for wiſe 


and juſt reaſoas to propoſe only this to Pharaoh, that his denial of 
ſo modeſt a Requeſt ( whichGod foreſaw) might make his Tyranny 
more manfeſt, and G-4's © engeance upon him more juſt and re- 
| AS. da Which they could not do freely and ſafely in Egypr, 
| 04.8. 26, 


Or, b ; 
; ya 19 © AndI am fare e that the Kite cf Egypt .wall 
haud. mot let you go, | no not by a mighty hand f, 


DUS. 


but by too many of thy own - 


| AE Moſes anſwered and ſaid, But behold, they 


| the firſt Sign. For Moſes did not make dumb ſhews before them, 
M 


Chap. IV. ' 

e I know it infallibly before hand. f Though he ſee and feel 
the miraculous and dreadful Works of a Strong, yea Almighty 
Hand, yet he will not conſent to your going : which the Hiſtory 
makes good. Nor did he let them go till he could hold them 
no longer, till = pt hn own Life, and the clamours of his 
People forced hint to give way to it. And yet, after that he re- 
penrs of his Permiſſion, and labowed to bring them back again. 

Others, but, or except by a ſtrong hand. i. e. except by my Almighty 
244g he be forced to it. Both Tranſlations come to the ſame 
enſe. 

20 And I will firetch out my hand, and ſmite 
Egypt with all my wonders which 1 will do in the 
midit thereof ; and after that he will let you go. 

21 AndI will give this people favour in the ſight of 
che Egyptians g ; and ic ſhall come to paſs, that when 
ye go, ye ihall not go empty ! 

£ So thar they ſhall readily grant what the Iſraelites deſire. See 
Exod: 12: 36. 

22 * Butevery woman ſhall borrow of her neigh- * Chap: 
bour, and of her that ſojourneth in her houſe, jewels 27. 2: 
of ſilver, and jewels of goid, and raiment : and ye ſhal __ OP) 
put them upon y©ur ſons and upon your daughters, and 
ye ſhall ſpoil + the Egyptians h. | 

þ Whether this was juſt or no, ſee on Exod: 12: 36. 


CHAP, IV. 


Moſes's objefion, 1. The anſwer, 2. God turns his rod into a ſerpent 
3=--5. He adds another ſign, 6. And leſt they would not believe, 8. 
Water is turn'd into blood, g. Moſes's objeftion, 10. God argues with 
him, IT. God's command and promiſe; 12+ Moſes's anſwer, 13. God 
is angry, and tnjoyns Aaron to the ſame employment, 14. Tells what 
Aaron ſhould be, and what Moſes ſhould do, 15-17. Moſes returning 
zo Fethro, craves leave to go to Egypt to ſee his brethren. Jericho's grant, 
18, 19. Moſes having taken the yod of God, departs with his wife and 
children into Egypt, 20, 21. God tells him what he ſhould ſay to Phas 
raoh, 22,'23. God ſeeketh to kill Moſes, 24 Zipporah with a ſharp 
knife cutts off her ſon's foreckin, and what ſhe (aid, 25, 26. God com 
manas Aaron to meet Moſes, 27. Moſes aeclares to Aaron both what he 
had heard and ſeen, 28. They gather together the Elders of Iſrael, 29. 
And Aaron ſpeaks all the words, and does all the ſigns which God com< 
wanded, 30. The people belicrve, 3 1. | 


+ Or, 
Egypte 


' A will not believe me 4, nor hearken unto my 
voice : for they will ſay, The LORD hath not ap- 
peared unto thee. | 

a Which he conje&ured both from reaſon, becauſe the greatneſs 
*and ſtrangeneſs of theDeliverance made it ſeem incredible; and their 
minds were ſo oppreiled with Cares and Labours, that it was not 
likely they could raiſe them up to any fuch expettation ; and from 
rhe experience * hich he had of them fourty years before, when 
their Deliverance by his means and intereſt at Court ſeemed much 
more credible, than now it did. 

2 And the LORD ſaid unto him, What is that in 
chine hand ? Arid he ſaid, A rod. 

3 And he ſaid, Catl it on the ground. And he caſt 
it on. the ground. and it became a Serpent b ; And 
Mof?s fled from. before it. 

b ( i.e ) Was really changed into a Serpent ; whereby it was 
intimated what and how pernicious his Rod ſhould be to the 
Egyptians. 

4 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Pat forth 
:hine hand, and take it by the tail c : And he put 
forth his hand and caught it, and it became a rod in 
his hand : | 

c The dangerous part ; whereby God would try Moſes his Faith, 
and prepare him for the approaching difficulties. 

5 That they may believe 4 that the LO RD 
God cof their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God 
of Iſaac, and the God of Jacob hath appeared unto 
chee. 

4 An imperfe& Sentence, to be thus compleated, Thrs thou ſhalt 
do before them, that they may believe. See the like in 2 Sam: 5: 8. 
compared with 1 Chron: 11: 6. and Mark 14: 49. compared with 
Matth. 26. 56. 

' 6 © And the LORD ſaid furthermore unto him, 
Put now thine hand into thy boſom. And he pur his 
hand into his boſom : and when he took it out, behold 
his hand was leprous * as ſnow es * Kin 

e For whiteneſs. See Num, 12. 10+ Hereby God would ſuggeſt * gs 
ro them, how ſoon he could weaken and deſtroy the hard and ſtrong 5* 27: 
hand by which the Egyptians tyrannized over them. Ir might alſo 
be done to keep Moſes humble and depending upon God, and to 
reach him and 1/7rael to aſcribe all the furure Miracles nor to the 
hand of Moſes, which was weak and lyable to many Diſtempers,but 
» holly to the Divine Power and Goodneſs. | 

7 And he faid,Pur thine hand into thy boſom agairr. 
And he put his hand into his boſonie again, and pluck- 
ed it our of his boſom, and behold, it was turned 
again as his other fleſh, _ - / 

8 And itſhail come to paſs, if they will not believe 
chee, neither hearken to the voice of the firſt ſign f, 
:hat they will believe the voice of the latter figns | 

f To the Voice or Word of God delivered and confirmed by 


oh, On 


% 


a, 


but. 
. F, 


Chap. _— 


the Voice, to note \that God's works have a voice to ſpeak to us, 
which we muſt diligently obſerve. See Mic. 6- 9. 

9 Andit ſhall come to paſs, if they will not believe 
alſo theſe two ſigns, neither hearken unto thy voice, 
chat thou ſhalt take of the water of the river g, and 


pour it #por the dry land : and rhe water whici thou 


+ Heb. rakeſt out of the river, + thall become + blood upon the 
Jballbe,and dry land. | 
ſpai! be. Z Nils, well known to Moſes, and called ſo by way of Eminency, 
as Euphrates alſo is. þ Heb. ſhall be, even ſball be, 5. e. it ſhall af- 
turedly be 1o. 
10 © And Moſes ſaid unto the LORD, O my 
+ Hcb: » Lord, Tamnot f eloquent z, neither | heretofore,nor 
»-an of ſince thou haft ſpoken unto thy ſervant &:; but * Lam 
0125. flowof ſpeech, and of a flow tongue. 
$ Hed: 7 Not able to deliver thy Meſſage acceptably and decently,cither 
refer to Pharaoh, or to the Iſraelites. k Since thy appearance to me, thou 
Ys 24 haſt made ſome change in my Hand,bur none in my Tongue, but 
ws wy ſtill T am, as I was, moſt unfit for ſo high an Employment. But 
+ Ch "} 6. Indeed he was therefore fit for it, as the unJearned Apoſtles were 
*P- ®* for the Preaching of the Goſpel, that the Honour of their glorious 
262 Works mightbe entirely given to God, and not to the Inſtruments 
which he uſed. . | 
*Pfalm. xx And the LORD ſaid unto him, * Who hath 
94 9- made mans mouth ? or who maketh the dumb, or 


deaf, or the ſeeing, or the blind ? have nor I che 
LORD? | 


* Mar: 13: 12 Now therefore gO0, and I will be * with thy 


= _ mouth 1, and teach thee what thou ſhalt ſay. 
{ By my Spirit to dire& and affiſt thee what and how to ſpeak. 
Whence Moſes, though he ſtill ſeems to have remained //ow n Speech, 
yet vas in truth mighty in Words as well as Deeds, As 7. 22. Com- 
pare Marth, 10.19, 20. : 
12 And he ſaid, O my Lord, ſend, I pray thee, by 
f Or, , the hand of bim whom thou | wilt ſend ». 
ſhoulefs. m By one who is fitter for the work than I am. Heb. ſend by the 


hmd of him whom thou wiltft ſend, 7. e. ſhould ſend ; for the Furure 
Tenſe oft ſignifhes what one ſhould do. See Ger: 20: 9: and 34: 7: 
Aal: 1: 6: and 2: 7» Thou uſeſt according to thy Wiſdom to chuſe 
ft Inftruments,and to uſe none but w hom thou doſt either find or 
make fit for their Employment, which Iam not. Others, Send by 
the hand of Meſfias, whom thou wiltſt certainlie ſend,and canſt nor 
ſend art a fitter time, nor for better work. Moſes and the Prophets 
knew that Chriſt would come, but the particular time ofhis coming 
was unknown to theme See 1 Pet: 1: 11. , 

14 And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt 
Moſes, and he ſaid, Is not Aaron the Levite thy bro 
ther > I know that he can ſpeak well. And alſo be- 
hold, he cometh forth to meet thee »: and when he 


ſeerth thee, he will be glad-in his heart- 

» By my Inftigation and Direfion ; which, becauſe I ſee thou 
art ſhHll diffident, I give thee for a new Sign to ſtrengthen thy belief 
that I will carry thee through this hard work. | 

' 15 Avrd'thou ſhalt (peak unto him, and put words 
in his mouth os, and IT will be with thy mouth, and 
with his mouth, and EF will teach you what ye ſhall 

. do. 

o (7.2. ) Inftrutt him what to ſpeak, and command him freely 

and faithfully to expreſs it. See {ſa: 51: 16: and 59: 21. 
i6 And he ſhall be thy ſpokeſman unto the peo- 
ple: and be ſhall be, ever he ſhall be to thee in 
ſtead of a mouth, and thou ſhalt be to him in ſtead of 
God p. 
2 To teach and to command him. Sce Exod: 7:T. 
17 And thou ſhalt take this rod in thy hand, where- 
with thou ſhalr do ſigns 9. | 
9 Both thoſe which TI have already made thee to do, and others 
as I ſhall dire& and enable thee 
13 And Moſes went and returned to Jethro his fa- 
ther-in-law, and ſaid unto him, Lee me go, I pray 
thee, and return untomy brethren which are in Egypt, 
and ſee whether they be yet alive r. And Jethro ſaid 
to Moſes, Go in peace. | 
7 He pretends only a Viſit, and ſo indeed it was,and that no ve- 
ry long one neither : He knew that he ſhould certainly return to this 
place, and there meet with his Father-in-law So that he did nor 
deceive him,nor intended to do fo, though he thought fir to conce-1 
from him the Errand upon which God ſent him, left his Father o; 
Wife ſhould attempr to hinder or diſcourage him from ſo difficult 
and dangerous an Enterpriſe. Moſes ſhews here a rare Example, as 
well of Modeſty and Humility, that ſuch glorious and familiar 
Converſe with God,and the high Calling to whichGod had advanced 
him, did neither make him forget the Civility and Duty which he 
owed to his Father. nor make him break forth into publick and 
vain-glorious boaſting of ſuch a Priviledge ; as alſo of his Piery and 
: Prudence, that he avoided all Occaſions and Temptations to Diſo- 
bedience to God's Command. 


i9 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes in Midian s, 
Go, return into Egypt, for * all the men are dead 
which ſought thy life z. 

sThis ſeems to have been a ſecond Viſion, whereby God calls 


him forth to the preſent and ſpeedy Execution of that Command 
which before was more generally dehvered. #£ To wit, to take it 


but acquainted them with the mind of God therein. Or hefaith , 


EXODUS. 


FU 


Chap. IV, 


away. See the like exprefſion, 1 Sam. 22: 23, 1 Kings 19. 14. 
Matth. 2. 20. God knew very well that one great cautc of Meſes 
his unwillingneſs to this undertaking, was his carnal Fear, though 
he was aſhamed to profeſs it, and therefore - gives him this Cor- 
dial. . 

20 And Moſes took his wife, and his ſons », and 
ſet them upon an aſs x, and he returned to the land 
of Egypt. And Moſes took the rod of God in his 
hand. : 

u Gerſhom, Exod. 2. 22. and Eliezer, Exod. 18. 4 Whom he in- 
rended to carry with him, but afterwards obſerving that they were 


be 


like to be Impediments to him in his great buſineis,and being well 


aſſured thar it would not be long ere he returned to them,he ſcnr 
them bick to Jethro, as may ſeem from Exod. 38. 5. x One Aſs 
might be ſufficient for her and her two Children, becauſe one of 
them was bur little, verſe 25. Or, 4/s may be pur for 4s, which 
changes of the numbers is very frequent in Scripture. y His Shep- 
herds rod ſo called, partly becauſe ic was appropriated to God's ſpe- 
cial Service, to be the Inſtrument in all his glorious Works ? and 
partly to ſhew that whatſoever was done by that Rod, was not done 
by any vertue in the Rod, or in Moſes his hand, but meerly by 
the Power of God, who was pleaſed for the greater Confufion of 
his Enemies to uſe fo mean an Inſtrument. 


21 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, When thou 
goeſt to return into Egypt, ſee zhat thou do all thoſe 
wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine | 
hand'z : but * I will harden his heart s, that he ſhall * Chap.z: | 


not let the people go. apes x 
z (7. e.) In thy Power or Commiſſion, to be done by thy Hand, | 4 
and the Rod in it. a That he ſhall be unmerciful roa)l the Groans | 0 
and Preſſures of the Iſraelites, inexorable to the requeſts of Meſes,un- D A 
moveable and incorrigible by all my Words and Works. Bur God | * 175 
doth not properly and poſitively make mens hearts hard, but only ; — 2 
privatively, cither by denying to them, or withdrawing from x1 
them that Grace,which alone can make Men ſoft,and flexible,and 


pliable to the Divine Will ; as the-Sun hardens the Clay by draw- a Rom 
ing out of it that moiſture which made it ſoft; or by expoſing ”* To 
them to thoſe Temptations of the World, or the Devil, which 
meeting with a corrupt heart are apt to harden it. 

22 And thou ſhalt ſay unto Pharaoh, Thus faith the 
LORD, I1frael is my ſon, * eves my firſt-born 5. * Jer:3r: 


b By my Choice and Adoption. They are moſt dear to me, and 9: Jam:r: 
reſerved by me out of all Nations to be my peculiar People ; and 18, 
therefore I will no longer ſuffer thee to invade my Right,nor them 
to live in the negle& of my Service. 


23 And Ifay untothee c, Let my ſon go, that he 
may ſerve me: and if thou refuſe to let him go, be- 


hold, * I will flay thy ſon, ever thy firſt-born 4. * Chap: | 
c I command thee : For ſaying is put for commanding,Luke 4. 3. 11:5:and 
and 9. 54. and in 1 Chron. 21. 19+ compared with 2 Sam. ,24. 19. 12:29. 


4 By which plagne coming after the reſt, thou wilt be enforced to 
do what I adviſe thee now to do upon cheaper terms. 


24 4 And it came to paſs by the way in the inn, 
that the LORD * met hime ; and ſought to kill 
him f. | 

e (7.e.) Appeared to him in ſome viſible ſhape. f Whom ? Me- 
Jes,ſpoken of and to before. He offered and endeavoured to kill him, - 
either by inflicting {me ſudden and dangerous Diſe :ſe or ſtroke up- 
on him,or by ſhe ving himſelf in ſome threatning poſture, poſlib)y 
as the Ange] did to Balaam, and afterwards ro David,with a drawn 
Sword in his hand, ready to give him adeadly blow. The reaſon 
of this ſeverity was not Moſes his diſtruſt of God, or delay in hisjour- 
ney, nor the bringing of his Wife and Children along with him, 
(which it was convenient for him to carry with him, both that his 
Father might not think he intended to deſert them, and for the 
greater aſſurance and encouragement of the J/raelires, when they 
faw that he expoſed his deareſt Relations to the ſame hazards with 
them all ) bur the neglett of circumciſing his Child, which alſo 
the Lord ſome way or other ſignified to Moſes and Zipporah,as plain- 
ly appears, 1. From Zipporah's following fa& upon that occaſion. 
2. From the Lord's Diſmifſion of Moſes upon the Circumciſion of 
the Child. 3. From the threatning of Death, or cutting off for 
this Sin. Gen: 17: 14. which, becauſe there was now no Magiſtrat 
to do it, God himſelf offers to execute it, as he ſomerimes ſaith he 
would do in that caſe. And this was a greater Sin in Moſes than in 
another Man, and at this time than it had been before, becauſe he 
underſtood the Will and Law of God abour it better than any man, 
and God had larely minded him of that Covenant. of his with A4bra- 
ham, &c. whereof Circumciſion was a Seal ;'the Bleſſings and Bene- 
Hts of which Covenant Moles was now going to procure for himſelf 
nd for his People, whileſt he remained under the guilt of groſly 

'negleCting the Condition of it, Beſides, what could be more ab- 
'ſurd than that he ſhould come to be a Lawgiver, who lived in a 
manifeſt violation of God's Law ? or that he ſhould be the chiefRu- 
ler and Inſtrutter of the Iſraelites, whoſe duty it was to acquaint 
them with their Duty of circumciſing their Children, and as far as 


* Numb: 


22:22, 


'he.could, to puniſh the wilful neg'e& of ir, and yet at the ſame 


time beguilry of the ſame Sin? or that he ſhould undertake to go- 
vern the Church of God, that could not well rule his own Houſe, 
1 Tim: 3: 5: ? And this was not on'y a great Sin in it Self, bur a 
great Scandal to the 1/raelites,»ho might by this great Example eaſily 
be led into the ſame miſcarriage;and moreover might not withour 
colour of probability ſuſp=& the Call of ſuch a Perſon, and con- 
clude that God would nor honour that Man who ſhould continue in 
ſuch a viſible contempt of his law. And therefore it is no wonder 
that God was ſo angry at Moſes for this Sin. Queſt, How came 
Moſes to negle& this evident Duty ?/4uſ. From Zipporal's averſeneſs 
to, and dread of that painful, and. as ſhe thought, dangerous Ordi- 
nance of God, which ſhe her felfevidently diſcovers inthis place; 

and 


3 A CRIED IT en 3 ELIT R 


x4. 7. ” 


IV, 


'T: 
N:I: 


kd 


1b: 


Meet 


Chap. IV. 


+ Or,knife. 
* Heb. 
mate it 
touch, 


eldeſt Son. And as ſhe ſeems to have been a Woman of an eager, 
and paſlic nate temper, fo Moſes was eminently meek and pliable, 
and in this matter tco indulgent to his Wife, eſpecially 1n her 
Father's Houſe, and therefore he put it off til] a more convenient 
ſeaſon, when he might either perſuade or over-rule her therein. 

Uich was a orcat fault, for God had obliged all the Children of 
Abrabam not cnly to the thing, but to the time alſo, rodo it upon 
the eighth day, which Seaſon Moſes had groſly, and for ſome con- 
Cderable time {lipped, and ſo had preferred the pleaſing of his 
Wife before his Obedienceto God. 


25 Then Zipporah g took a ſharp | ſtone 5, and cut 
off the foreskin of her ſon, and * caſt zt athisfeer z, 
and ſaid, Surely a bloody Husband art thou to me &. 


g Perceiving the danger of her Husband, and the cauſe of it, and 
her Husbaad being difenabled from performing that work, whether 
by ſome ſtroke or ſickneſs, or by theterrour of ſo diſmal and unex- 
pe&ed an Apparition to him, and delays being highly dangerous, 
ſhe thought ir betrer to do it her ſelf as well as ſhe could, rather 
than pur it off a moment longer ; whether becauſe the adminiſtra- 
tion of that Szcrament was not confined to any kind or order of 
perſons, or becauſe, if it was ſo, the did not apprehend it to be ſo, 
or becauſe ſhe thought this was the leaſt of two evils ; and that it 
was ſafer to commit a circumſtantial Error, than to ccntinue-in a 
ſubſtantial' Fault. 4 Which ſhe took as next at hand in that ſtony 
Countrey. Lernonethink this ſtrange, fornot only this work, but 


+4 the rather becauſe of che experience which ſhe had of it jn her 


- the cutting off of that part, which ſome uſed to do, was commonly 


performed with a Flint, or a ſharp Stone, as is expreſly affirmed by 
Herodotus, 1. 2: Plin. 35: 12: See alſo Juvenal, Sat. 6: and Martial. 
Epigram: 3: 18: Bur the word may be rendred, a ſharp Knife. See 
Jo]: 5: 2, 3. i The words are very ſhort, and therefore ambiguous, 
and may be ren:red, either thus, be caſt her ſe]f at his feet, either 
1. At the feet of the Angel, as a Supplicant for her Husband s Life. 
But it is moſt probable that ſhe dire&ts this Ation and her follow- 
ing Speech to the ſame perſon. Or 2. Thefeetof her Husband, to 
make requeſt to him, that ſheand her Children might depart from 
him, and return to her Father, which alſo he granted. Bur neither 
was ſhe of ſo humblea temper, nor at this time in fo milda frame, 
as to put her ſelf into tuch a lowly poſture to her Husband, nor 
was ſhe likely to preſent her kumble ſupplication to him, to whom 
af the {ame rime ſhe ſhewed ſuch ſcorn and indignation. Or rather 
thus, ſbe caſt it at his, 7s ee her Husband's feet : 1t, either thz Child, 
But that being tender, and now in great pain, ſhe would nor ule it 


ſo roughly : Or rather the foreskin cut off, or at leaft the blood. 


which came fromir ; which ſhe did in ſpighrand anger againit her 
Husband, as the cauſe of ſo much pain tothe Caild, and grief to 
her ſelf. k This ſome think ſhe ſpake to the Child, whom ſhe calls 
her Sposſe, as fome late Rabbin; affirm the Infant uſed ro be called, 
when it was circumciſed ; though they bring no competent proof for 
this uſage ; or her So, as rhe Hebrew word chathan f1gnifies, But 
indeed that ſignifies only a Sor: in-law, as 18am: 18: 18. whichisnot 
true nor proper here. Yet ſome make theſe to be the form or ſolemn 
words uſed in Circumciſion, Thou art a Spouſe, or a Son of bloods to me, 
z.e. made fo to me by the blood of Circumciſion. Bur it doth not 
appear that *this was the uſual form. Now was it llkely, that ſhe 
being a Midianitiſh, not an Hebrew Woman, and doing this ſudden- 
Iy, and in a rage, ſhould be ſo expert to know, and {o punfual to 
uſe the right form of words, when ſhe did yot uſe a fir and decent 
carriage in the aCtion, as appears by her caſting ir at his feet. Ir is 
therefore more probable ſhe ſpoke thus to her Husband. And be. 
Cauſe: ſhe durſt not accuſe God, the Author of this work, ſhe falls 
fou! upon- her Husband as the occaſion of ir, and as'/a coſtly and 
bloody Husband to her, whoſe endangered Life ſhe was forced to 
redeem with blood, even the blood of her little Child, by which as 
he received a new Life after a ſort, ſo ſhe did anew, and the ſecond 
time eſpouſe him ; whence ſhe calls him cha:han, which properly 
ſignifies a Sporſe, not an Husband. 


26 So helet him go 7: then ſhe ſaid, A bloody hufſ- 
band thou art, becauſe ofthe circumcition m. 


I Or, He, i. e. God, or the deſtroying Angel ſent from God, 
departed from him, i. e. from Moſes, and removed the tokens of God's 
indignation, the ſickneſY or ſtroke laid upon him. » She both 
repeats and amplifies her former Cenſure, and reproachethnot only 
her Husband, bur alſo God's Ordinance. Which perverſe and 
obſtinate Spirit her Husbandobſerving in her, and wiſely forecaſting 
how much diſturbance ſhe might give him in his great and difficulr 
work in Egypt, he thought fit to ſend her and her Children back to 
her Father, as appearsfrom Exodus 18: 1, 2, 3. In the Hebrew it is 
becauſe of the circumciſums, to wit, of her two Sons, who poſſibly 
were both circumciſed at this time, tho it be norſo expreſſed ; but 
one being mentioned for an example, we are lefr to ſuppoſe the like 


concerning the other ; Or, the circumcifionof this Child bringsrhe- 


other to her remembrance, and ſoſheupbraids him with both. Only 
this doth mere provoke her than it ſeems the other did, becauſe ſhe 


was forced to do thisſpeedily, and with her own hands, and thar ro. 


a tender Infant ; whereas the elder peradventure was circumciſed 
when he was more grown and ſtrong, and able to bear rhe pain. 
Let none think it ſtrange that Zipporah ſhould quarrel ſo much ar 
Circumeiſion, becauſe rhe M:dianites were deſcended from Abraham, 
and therefore were circumciſed, For if they were ſo, it was done 
when they were grown up, about the 13th year of cheir age, from 
the example of 1hmae!, who was circumciſed at that age. Bur 
indeed it 1s more likely, that thoſe people, being caſt cur of God's 
ovenant, as to the benefit of it, would, and did ina little time, 
throw off the ſign of it, as having much more of pain and danger in 
:101t, than ofuſe and priviledge. 


wilderneſs to mcet Moſes. 


= 4 


bas 7 + EE 


EXODUS: _———— 


LORD, who had ſent him, and all the ſigns which, 


he had commanded him. 


together all the elders of the children of Iſrael ». 


ther, or all thar were in thoſe parts. Of thoſe. Elders, ſee Exo9'-s 
3: 16: and 24: I, 9: and Num: 11:16. 2 
20 And Aaron ſpake o all the words which, the 


LORD had ſpoken unto Moſes, and did p the ſigns in 


the ſight of the people. 

o Thus beginning to execute the Office which God had put npen 
him, which was to be Moſes his mecurh, or Spokeſman. p( 7. e.) 
Aaroz did them, as Moſes's Miniſter, or by the command and dire- 
Con of Moſes. 

31 And the people believed : and when they heard 


that the LORD had viſited qthe children of [ſrael, and 


bowed their heads and worſhipped 7. 

q (i.e. ) Taken cogni2e nce of their Cauſe and Condition, and 
reſolved to deliver them. r Acknowledging, and adoring the kind-= 
neſs and fairhfuineſs of God therein. | 


tp H A P . TE 

Moſes and Aaron entreateth Pharaoh to let the People go, x. Phavaob's 
blaſphemous refuſal, 2, 3. Chides Moſes and Aaron for their requeſt, 
4. Pharaoh, ſeeing the Iſraclites to be many, 5, commands the taik= 
maſters and officers to encreaſe their bondage, 6 =—=g. The task-maſters 
go and do as Pharaoh commands, 10, 11. The ſcattering of the peeple 
throughout Egypt, 12. The task-maſters cruelty to the officers of the 
Iſraelites, 14. The officers complaint to Pharavh, 15. He upbraids 
them with idleneſs, 17. His harſh anſwer, 18. The officers of the 
children of Iſrael meet Moſes and Aaron, and blame them, 20, 21. Moſes 
rerurns and complains to God, 22. | 


ND afterward Moſes and Aaron 2 went in,' and 
told Pharaoh b: Thus faith the LORD God of 
Iſrael, Let my - people go, that they may hold a feaſt 


c unto-me in the wilderneſs. | 
2 And with th:m ſome of the Elgers of 1-ael, as may ſeem from 
Exod: 3:18: though here only the two Chiefs be mentioned. Or, 
becauſe Moſes did nor ſeem to be ſatisfied with the affiſtance of the 
Elders before offered him, Exod: 3: 18: God was pleaſed to give 
him a more acceptable Aſſiſtant in their ſtead, even Aarm his Bro- 
ther, Exod: 4: 14: b Either both ſuccefſively-told him ; or Aarom 
did it immediately, and with his tongue, Moſes by his Interpreter, 
and by his command. . c Or, offer a Sacrifice, as they expreſs it, 
Perf: 3: and Chap: 10: 9: For both went together, and a good part 
of many Sacrifices was ſpent in feaſting before the Loxd, and unto 
the honour of the Lord. See Devut: 12:6, 7, 11, 12. 
2 And Pharaoh ſaid, * Who is the LORD, that I 
ſhould obey his voice 4 to let Ifracl go ? I know not 


the LORD, neither will I let I[frael go. * : - 
d I am the Soveraign Lord of Egypt, and I own no ſuperiour here, 
3 And they ſaid, The God ofthe Hebrews hath met 
with'use f Let us go, we pray thee, three days journey 
into the deſart, and ſacrifice unto the. LORD our God, 
leſt he fall upon us f with peſtilence, or with the ſword, 
e ( i e.) Hath appeared tous lately, and laid this command upon 
us. Others, is called upon 5, i.e. his name is called upon us, or we 
are called by his name. But why ſhould Moſes fo ſolemnly tell that 
to Pharaoh which all the people knew, to wit, that the Hebrews did 
worſhip the God of the Hebrews ? Andour Tranſlation is confirmed 
by comparing with Exod: 3. 18: where this very Meſſage is pre- 
ſcribed. f Left he puniſh, either us, if we diſobey his command, 
or the, if thou hindereſt us from obeyingit: Bur this latter they 
only imply, as being eaſily gathered from the former. _ 
4 And the King of Egypt faid unto them, Where- 
fore do ye, Moſes and Aaton, let the people from 


their works ? Get you unto your burdens g. | 
g Either 1. Ye, the Elders of 7-ael, who are here come with Moſes 
and Aaron ; ſee Yerſ: 1. Or, 2+ Ye, Miſes and Aayon. So far am I 
from granting the Liberty which you deſire for the people, that as a 
juſt puniſhment upon you for your ſeditious Attempt, I command 
you alſo to go with the reſt, and to take your ſhare in their burthens, 
and to perform the Task which ſhall be required of you. And thar 
ſo cruel a Tyraric did not proceed further againſt them, muſt be 
aſcribed to the mighty Power of God, who governs the Spirits, and 
reſtrains the hands of the greateſt Kings, when he pleaſeth. 
5 And Pharaoh ſaid, Behold, the people of the land 
now are many h, and you make them reſt from their 


burdens. 
b The 1/r2elites in this Land are very numerous, ' end therefore it 
were a madneſs in me to permittnem all to meet and ' go together, 
as you deſire, which may rend to the ruin of my whole Kingdom, 
and Probably it 1s deſigned by you to that purpoſe. Or, Therefore 
your injury to me is the greater, in attempting to rob me af the 
benefit of their Labours. . This I prefer, becauſe it ſuits beſt with 
the following words. | 
6 And Pharaoh commanded the ſame day the 
task-maſters of the people, and their officers,* ſaying, 
 * The Task-maſters were: Egyptians, and the Officers were 1/raelites, 
Under-officers ro them, Yerſ:; 14, 15, 19. 
7 Ye thall no more give the people ſtraw to make 


'þ brick z as heretofore : let them. go and gather ſtraw-for 


themſelves, : 
; The Straw was uſed either to mingle with the Clay, that it 
to cover the Clay when it was formed 


| Might not be £0 brittle ; or 


M 2 ante 


: 


29 And Moſes and Aaron went, and gathered. 


, All of them whom they could eaſily and quickly bring toge-. 


char he had looked upon their afflition, then * they , (__ 
12. 27. 


© Job-, 


- hs IX 
- S C 
- 
% 


21. IS, 


#* 


EF” me TY p 
Chap. V. | Af 
* +*nto Bricks, that the heat of the Sun tnight not dry them too _ 


; iohr hor Countrey ; or Tor rew 
— —_—_— Bag pare © Bricks <B. Straw being 
abundant there, and much uſed for that purpoſe. : k 

? And the tale of the bricks which they did make 
heretofore ye ſhall Jay upon them : you ſhall not dimi- 
niſh ought thereof: for they be idle, therefore they cry, 
| ſaying, Let ns go «nd ſacrifice to our God. _ 
| \ *9 f Let there more work be laid upon the _ 
| _ that they may labour therein, andlet them not regar 
| the . E-. | 
| — gy DENG £ of Miſes and 4aron, which are vain, or _ bh : 
| which they falſly pretend to come from God, when it 15 only an1 
deſign of their own to advance themſelves by raiſing ſedition. 

io And the task-maſters of the people went our, 
and their officers, and they ſpake to the people, ſaying, 
Thus ſaith Pharaoh, I will not give you ſtraw. 

11 Go ye, get youſtraw where you can find it : yet 
not ought of your work ſhall be diminiſhed. 

12 So the people were ſcattered abroad throughout 
all the land of Egypt *, to gather ſtubble inſtead of 
ſtraw. _ | 

* (:.e.) All that part of it ; which is a very uſual Synecdoche. 

12 And the task-maſters haſted hem, ſaying, Fulfill 
your works, your + daily tasks, as when there was 

raw. ; 

14 And the officers of the children of Krael, which 
Pharaoh's task-maſters had ſet over them, were beaten, 
and demanded, - Wherefore have ye nor fulfilled your 
| eask in making brick, both yeſterday, and to day, as 

heretofore ? ' Fe 

15 Then the officers of the children of Ifracl came 

and cried unto Pharaoh, ſaying, Wherefore dealeſt 
thou thus with thy ſervants ? | 

' x6 There is no ſtraw given unto thy ſervants, and 
they ſay to us, Make brick : and behold, thy ſervants 
are beaten ; but the fault is in thine own people /. 

»1 (i.e. ) The FEgyption Task-maſters, who by ſending us abroad 
to gather Straw, hinder us from doing the work which they require; 
And ſo they are both unjuſt and unreaſonable. They charge the 
Tisk-maſters, not the King, either in civility and duty, caſting his 
fault vpn the Inſtruments ; or becauſe they did not know, orat 
beſt nor believe that this was the King's AQ; Others. Thypeople, z. e. 
the Egyptians, make themſelves guilty, and will bring the vengeance of 
God upon them for their cruelty. | 

17 But he ſaid, Ye are idle, ye are idle therefore 
ye ſay, Letus go and do ſacrifice to the LORD. 

13 Go therefore now «nd work, for there ſhall no 
Rtraw be given you : yet {ball ye deliver the tale of 

' Þricks. X be » 

19 And the officers of the children of Iſrael did ſee 
that they werein evil caſe »z, after ir was ſaid, Ye ſhall 
not miniſh eygh: from your bricks of your daily task. 

- Oc, looked upon them with ſadneſs, or with an evil eye, i.e. with 


a ſorrowful and augry countenance, 2s taoſe that could obtain no 
xelaxation for themſelves, or for their Brethren. 


20 Andthey met Moſes and Aaron, who ſtood in 
the way, as they f came forth from Pharaoh : 

7 The Officers who went to pour out their complaints to Pharaoh, 
Perſe 16. 

21 And they ſaid unto them, The LORD look upon 
you, and judge, becauſe you have made our favour 
| + Heb. ts | to beabhored in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes 
| fink. of his ſervants, to put a ſword in theirhand'to ſlay us ». 
Gen: 34: _ 2 To give them, what they have long ſought and thirſted after, 
30 - - T0 wir, an occaſion to deſtroy and root us our. | 
E .. 22 Ard Moſes returned unto the LORD o, and ſaid, 
- LORD, wherefore haſt thou /o evil intreated this 

people p ? Why is it that thou haft ſenc me ? 

0 To expeſtulare with him, and pray to him. To the people he 
Naith nothing, but meekly paſleth by their ſevere Cenſures, as forced 
from theny by intoierableoppreſſiqn ; and becauſe their minds being 
now imbirter*d'and exaſperated, they were uncapable of admonition. 
> By giving occaſton to their greater bondage. He expoſtulates the 
matter with God, not from pride and arrogance, as one that would 
cenſure and condemn his Actions, but frem zeal for God's glory, 
and his Peoples happineſs, as one that would prevail with God ro 
relieve them. Though it muſk be confeſſed that Moſes exceeded his 
bounds, being tranſported with grief and paſſion, which the 
gracious God was pleaſed to paſs by. | . 

., 23 For ſince I came to Pharaoh to ſpeak in thy 
: Name 9, he hath done evil to this people, neither haſt 
'F Heb. thou. | delivered thy people at all z. : 
delivering q Not of my own head, but by thy Command and Commiſſion. 
Zhou haſt x Accordingto thy Promiſe and mine, and thy Peoples juft expe- 


wor deli= Ftation. | 
CHA PP. VL 


wered, 
God encourages Moſes, 1. Reneweth his Covenant, confirms it by his 
Name FEHOV AH, 3--=----8. Their unbelief, 9. God commands Moſes 
.:70. ſpeak to Pharaoh to let Iſrael go, 11=----13. The Genealogy of Reuben, 
' © T4. Of Simeon, 15. Of Levi, 16. Of Aarm, 23+ Fheſe all ſpaks to 
* * Pharaoh to let the children of Iſrael go, 27. is 
( 


1 
| 


. F Heb. a 
matter of 
a day in 
his day. 


DUS. 


| the Inſtrument was unfit. 


and Pallu, Hezor and Carmi : thefe be the 


Chap. V: 
Hen the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Now ſhalt thcu 


ſee what I will do unto Pharaoh : for with * a * Chap: 
ſtrong hand # ſball he let them go, and with a ſtrong 5." 
hand * ſhall he drive them out of his land. 46.q 
a Being compelled to do ſo by my powerful and terrible wo 


2 And God ſpake unto Moſes, and ſaid unto him, 
I mthe LORD. 
3 AndI appeared unto Abraham, unto Iſaac, and 
unto Jacob, by the Name of * God Almighty, but by my + Ge. 
Name * JEHOV AH was I not known to them *. 15: 1:and 
* Q»e#. How is this true, when God was knewn to them, and 48: 3: , 
called by the name Jehovah, Gen: 15: 7: and 26: 24: &*c? Anjw. 1, * Ci:.p: 
He ſpeaks notof the Letters or Syllables, bur of the thing ſignified 3: 14: 
by that name. »For that denotes all his Perfe&ions, and, amongſt 
others, the eternity, conſtancy ,and immutability of his Nature and 
Wl, and the infallible certainty of his Word and Promiſes. And 
this, ſaith he, though it was believed by Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacos, 
yet 1t was not experimentally known to them ; for they only ſaw 
the Promiſes afar off, Heb: 11: 13: Anſw. 2. Thisnegative Expreflion 
may be underſtood comparatively, as many others are, asGen: 32: 
29: Matth. 9:13: 1 Cor: 1: 17. 9.4. They knew this but darkly 


_ imperfettly, which wilt now be made known more clearly and 
ully. 


4 And I have aiſo eſtabliſhed my covenant with 
them, * to give them the land of Canaan, the land of 
their pilgrimage, wherein they were ſtrangers. 17: 8: and 

5 And * I have alſo heard the groaning of the 25: 4: 
children of Iſrael, whom the Egyptians keep in bon- * Chap: 
dage, and I have remembred my covenanc. WW 

6 Wherefore ſay unto the children of Iſrael, TI am 
the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the 
burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of 
their bondage, and I will redeem you with a ſtretched | 
out arm 6b, and with great judgments c. 


b ( i.e.) My Almighty Power. A Metaphor from a man that 
ſtretcheth out his Arm, and puts forth all his ſtrength to give the 
greater blow. c(5.e. ) Puniſhments juſtly inflifted upon them, as 
the word judging and judgmenns is oft uſed, as Gen: 15: 14: 2 Chron: 
20: I2: Prov: 19: 29: 


7 And I will cake you to me for a people d, and I 
will be to ou a Gode: and ye ſhall know that I am 
the LOR D your God, which bringeth you out from 
under the burdens of the Egyptians. 

4 ( i.e.) For myPeople; ye ſhall no longer be the People and 


Slaves of the King of Ezypr, bur my People and Servants, whom I 
will bleſs and preſerve. e To judge and deliver you. 


8 And I will bring you 1n unto the land concerning 
the which I did | ſwear* to give it to Abraham,” to 


\ 33» 39: 
Ks. 33» 39 


* Gen: 


—_ 


Iſaac, and to Jacob, and 1 will give jc you for an THe. 
heritage. I am the LORDf, lift upmy 
| yore ett . hand. 

f And therefore have Authority and Power to diſpoſe of Lands $22 Gen: 

and Kingdoms as I pleaſe ; and faithful to give you what I have 1: 22: . 
romiſed. >= aforg 32: 

9. And Moles ſpake ſo unto the children of Iſrael: 4* 
but they hearkened not unto Moſes for + anguiſh of _—_ 
ſpiritg, and for cruel bondage, | = S ad 


£ Their minds were ſo oppreſſed with their preſent burdens and 25: 
furure expettations, that they could not believe nor hope for any + Heb. 
deliverance, but deemed it impoſſible ; and having been once ſhortneſs or 
deceived in their hopes, they now quite deſpaired; and thought #rairneſs. 
their entertainment of new hopes, or uſe ef further endeavours, 
would make their condition worſe, as it had done. 


10 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, faying, 

11 Go 1n, ſpeak unto Pharaol#King of Egypt, that 
he let the children of Iſrael go out of his land. 

12 And Moſes ſpake before the LORD, ſaying, 
Behold the children of Iſrael have not hearkened unto 
me, how then ſhall Pharaoh hear me, * who am of 
uncircumciſed lips 4 ? Is 

h ( 5.e.) Ofpolluted lips. Uncircumciſion being a great defe& T 
and bleraiſh, whereby men were rendred profane, contemotible, and 
unfit for many Services and Priviledges; may note any defe& 
whether moral, and of the Spirit ; or natural, and of the Body. 
Sa here it notes Moſes his inability to cloath God's Commands in 
ſuch words as might prevail with Pharaoh. Burt this was a great 
weakneſs of faith, as if God could nor effe& his purpoſe, becauſe 


I'2; 


*Chap: 


13 And the LORD fpake unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron, and gave them a Charge unto the children of 
Iſrael, and unto Pharaoh King of Egypr to bring the 
children of I{racl out of the land of Egypt. 

14 Theſe be the heads of their father's houſes ;: 

* The ſons of Reuben the firſt-born of Iſrael, Hanoch, » A 


families of ,5. ©: 

Reuben. : Chron: 
; This Genealogy he deſcribes here, eo ſhewthe Lineage of Moſes 5: 3: 

and Aaron, by whom this great work was to be effeQed. Only he 

premiſcth in brief the Genealogy of his two elder Brethren, Reubew 

largely to inſiſt upon. And he mentions themrrather th 

either to advance the favour of God in preferrin = Core fart 


the Deſcendangs of their elder Breghren ; os ty ſhew that, although 
| | the 


OD 4 


y 
L 


» 
om IT 7 ED 
yy by 


TD. 


ISI 


and Simeon, to make way for the third, which he interided mors *' =:| 


Ch 


*Nt 


Tie 


d 


vo . 


= 


» 
vagperns Toa nog ne ae a ——_— 


ee 


uy Chap. 


EYXO 


the Parents were ſharply cenſured, and rather curſed that blefſed 
by 7acov, Gen. 49. Yet their Poſterity was not rejected by God, 
5k -eceived to mercy, and ad mited to rhe ſame priviledge with 


their Brethren. : : 
I5 * And the ſons of Simeon, Jemuel, and Jamin, 


VI. 


* 1 Chr. : l 
4: 124 and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul _—_ 
of a Canaanitiih woman ; thele are the families of Si- 
MNCON» ; 
4 And theſe are the names of the * ſons of Levi,ac- 
* Num: 3: IG , Koheet 
17. cording to their generations k : Gerſhon and Kohatnh, 
1 Chro: 5: and Merari ; and the years of ths life of Leyi were an 


” hundred thirty and ſeven years. _ 
| t From cach of which proceeded a diſtin Generation or F amily 


called by their Father's name. 

17 The * ſons of Gerihen, 
ding t6 their families: 

138 And * the ſons of Kohath, Amram, and Izhar, 


*,Chro:6. Libni end Shimi,accor- 
17. and 
$3: 7- 
*#Num2G: 
Kohath were an hundred thirtie and three years. _ 
19 And the ſons of Merari, Mahali, and Muſhi : 


theſe are the families of Levi, according to their gene- 


rations. 1 ; : « 5 
« Chap: 2: 29 And * Amram took him Jochebed his father's 


r: ſiſter Ito wife, and ſhe bare him Aaron and Moſes : 
Numb:26 and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred 


59 and thirty and ſeven years. . 

] Or rather,6inſworman, or Coin, or Niece ; for ſo this Hebrew word 
is ſometimes uſed, as appears from Jer: 32:8, 9, 12. Obj. She is cal- 
led the daughter of Levi, Exod: 2: 1. An. Even Nieces are off cal- 
led daughters, as we haye ſhewed. See Lyke 1.5. and the Notes on 
Exod: 2: 1. 

*rChro:6. 21 And * the ſons of Izhar, Korah, and Nepheg, 
37,38 and Z2icri. [- ; | 
*Levi:to: 2, And * the ſons of Uzziel, Miſhael, and Elza- 
Ham: 3, PÞ4n, and Zithri. | . . 
3o: 23 And Aaron took hiniEliſheba daughter * of Ami- 
7 Ruth:4: nadab »:, ſiſter of Naaſhon to wife, and the bare him 
19, 28: * Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 

x Chro:2: ,, A prince of the Tribe of Judah, Numb: 1: 7. and 2: 3. Mar- 
riages were not yet confined to their own Tribes ; and when they 
4 were,theLevites ſeem to have had thispriviledge,that they might mar- 
29 ry a Daughter of any other Tribe, becauſe indeed the reaſon of that 
_ 6: Law did not concern them, there being no danger of confuſign,or 
wy 1. * loſs of inheritance on their part.- And eſpecially there were many 
3: NC 24* Marriages made between the Tribes of Jud2h and Levi, to ſignify 
” that both were united in Chriſt, w1o was to be both King and Prieft. 

It is obſervable,that Moſes is here ſilent in his own Progeny,but gives 
a particular account of his Brother's,not only from his great humi- 
lity and modeſty,which ſhines forth in many other paſſages, bur be- 
cauſe 5t was of more concernment, and the honour of Prieſthood 
given to Agron was to be hereditary and peculiar to his Seed, and 
therefore it was neceſſary they ſhould be exatly known ; whereas 
Moſes his Honour and Government was only perſona], and did not 
paſs to his Children. . 
24 And the ſons of Korah, Aflir, and Elkanah, and 
Abiaſaph : Theſe are the families of the Korhites, 

25 And Eleazar Aaron's ſon took him oze of 'the 

*Num:25. daughters of Putiel to wife, and * ſhe bare him Phine- 
ary has : theſe are the heads of the fathers of the Levites, 

according to their families. | | 

26 Theſe are that Aaron and Moſes, to whom the 

LORD ſaid, Bring out the children of Iſrael from the 
land of Egypt, according to their armies ». 

n ( 7. e.) According to their numerous Families, which were 
equal to great Armies, and which went out of Egypr, like ſeveral 
Armies in military order, and with great power. Sec Exod:12.41,51. 
and 13: 18. and 14. 8. 

27 Theſe are they which ſpake to Pharaoh king of 

Egypt,to bring out the children of Iſrael from Egypt : 
Theſe are that Aaron and Moſes. hs 

28 And it came to paſs,on the day when the LORD 
ſpake unto Moles in the land of Egypt, | 

29 That the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, faying, I am 
the LORD, ſpeak thou unto Pharaoh King of Egypr, 
all that I ſay unto thee» 

30 And Moſes ſaid before the LORD, Behold, I1 
am of uncircumciſed lips,and how ſhall Pharaoh hear- 


ken unto me 2? 


$7- 
1 Chro: 6: 
. 


E H AP. VIL 


God encourages Moſes to ſpeak to Pharaoh, 1. God foretells the hardntſs 
of Pharaoh's heart, 3. That he might multiply his wonders in Egypt, 4- 
to declare to the Egyptians, that he only is the Lord, 5. Moſes and Aaron 
Ovey God's command, 6. Their Age, 97. God commands them to ſhew 
&, miracle for the confirmation of their authority, $, g. Their rod nurn'a 
unto a ſerpent, to. The magicians do the ſame, 11. Aarons rod de- 
Foureth theirs, 12, Pharaoh is hard"ned, as the Lord had ſaid, 3. 
Hind refuſeth to let the people 20, I4.. God denounces judgments 0n the 
Egyptians, 11, 18. Commands Moſes and Aaron to ſrretch out their 
hands over the waters. The waters are turned into blood, 20, The 
Fib die, and the rivers ſink, 21. The magicians do the ſame, whereby 
Pharaoh's heart is hard'ned, 22% The means they uſed againſe this 

» *lague, 24, The continuance of it, 25, OE | | 


I 


and Hebron, and. Uzziel. And the years of the life of 


DU Ss. 


ND the LORD faid unto Moſes, See, I have made. 


Chap. VI 


I. * 


54 


thee a god to Pharaoh a: and Aaron thy brother 


ſhall be thy Prophet 5. 


a To repreſent my perſon, to a& like God,by requiring his obe- 


dience to thy Commands,and by puniſhing his difobedience with 
ſuch puniſhments as none but God'can inflitt, to which end thou 
ſhalr have my Omniporent Aſſiſtance. 56 (z. e.) Thy. Interpreter, 
cr Spokeſman ( as Chap» 4. 16. ) to deliver thy Commands to 
Pharaoh. | | 4 

2 Thou ſhalt ſpeak all that I command thee, and 
Aaron thy brother ſhall ſpeak unto Pharaoh, that he 
{end c the children out of his land, | 
c Heb. and he will ſend or d:ſmiſs,' to wit, at laſt, being forced to 

Succeſs ſhall attend your endeavours. 

3 And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply 
my figns, and my wonders inthe land of Egypt, 

4 But Pharaoh {hall not hearken unto you, that I 
may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine 
armies, and my people the children of Iſrael out of the 
land of Egypt, * by great judgments. 

5 And the Epgyprians ſhall know that T a» the 
LORD, when I ſtretch forth mine hand upon Egypr, 
_ bring out the children of Iſrael from among 
TNEm. | 
6 And Moſes and Aaron did as the LORD com- 
manded them, fo did they 4, 

d An emphatical repetition, to ſhew their Courage in attempting 
to ſay, and do ſuch things to ſo great a Monarch in his own 
mn gs and their fidelity in the execution of all God's com- 
mands. | 

7 And Moſes was fourſcore years old, and Aaron 
fourſcore' and three years old, when they ſpoke unto 
Pharaoh e. . 

e The Ages of Moſes and Aaron here, as of Levi and Kohath chap- 
ter 6. 16, 18. and before them of Jacob and Joſeph, are ſo exattly 
ſer down, that thence we may underſtand the accompliſhment of 
God's prediction, Gen: 15: 13. and the time of J/raels being in 


Egypt. 

8 TAnd the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron, ſaying, 

9 And Pharaoh ſhall ſpeak unto you, ſaying, Shew 
a miracle for you : then thoy ſhait ſay unto Aaron F, 


It. 


* Take thy rod g, and caft it before Pharaoh, nd it : 


thall become a ſerpent h. 


f By whoſe hands this and other Miracles were to be done,and 


not by Moſes immediatly ; partly to take off the ſuſpicion that theſe 
Miracles were wrought by ſome magical Artifice of Moſes ; ol pe tr 
Iy for the greater honour of Mo{es, that he might be what Gol had 
ſaid, verſe 1. AGod to Pharaoh, who not only could work Wonders 
himſelf, but alſo give Power to others to do ſo. x The ſame Rod is 
called the rod of God,and of Moſes,and of Aaron,here and v. 12. becauſe 
1t was appointed,and as it were conſecrated by God,and uſed both 
by Moſes and Aron in their grear Works. © And this Rod Moſes ordi - 
narily held in his hand, and delivered it to Aaron upon occafion for 
the execution f his commands. h Heb. 4 dragon, which is,a 
great Serpfnt. Others, a Crocoailz, to whole Jaws he had expoſed 
the {raelifiſh Infants. 


Io And Moſes and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, 
and they did fo as the LORD had commanded : and 
Aaron caſt down his roa before Pharaoh, and before 
his Servants, and it became a ſerpent. 

11 Then Pharaoh alſo called the wife-men *, and 
the ſorcerers 8 now the wagicizns # of Egypt, they alſo 
did in like manner & with their inchantments. 

* Under which general Title he ſeems to comprehend all who, 
were molt eminent in any fort of Wiſdom,cither Natural,or Civil, 
or Divine, who were a!l called to give their Opinion and Advice 
ith theſe Matters. 5 The ſame now called Sorcerers, who ated by 
the power of the Devil, whom by certain Rites and*.C>remonies 
they engaged to their afſiſtance. OF theſe the two chief wers 
Jannes and Jambres, 2 Tim. 3: 8. k In ſhew and appearance, which 
was not difficult for the Devil to do, either by altering the air and 
the ſpeCtatours ſight, and by cauſing their Rods both tolook and 
move like Serpents ; or by a ſudden and ſecret conveyance of real 
Serpents thither, and removing the Rods. Nor is it {trange that 
God permitted thoſe deintions,partly becauſe it was a juſt puniſh< 


[| 


ment upon theEgyptians for their horrid and manifold Idolatry,and 


barbarous Cruelty towards the 1faclites, and their. other Wicked. 
neſs 3 and partly becauſe there was a ſufficient difference made be- 
rween their Impoſtures,and the real Miracles wrought by Moſes and 
Aaron, as appears from the next verſe, and from chapter 8:18. and! 
from other paſſages. And this is a great evidence of the truth of 
Scripture Story, and that it was not written by fiction and deſign, 
For if Moſes had written theſe Books todeceive the World, and"to 
advance his own Reputation, ( as ſome have impudently {aid ) it is 
ridiculous to think that he would have pur inthis, and many other: 
paſſages, which mighe ſeem fo much to eclipſe his:honour, and 
the glory of his Works, ; 


12 For they caſt down every man his rod, and they 
became {erpents /; but Aarons rod fwallowed up their 


rods ”m. 


_ 7 Either x. in appearance. For the Scripture oft Weaks of things. 


* Chap: 
6: 6: 


otherwiſe then they are,becauſe they ſeem to be ſo. And therefore. - 


as the*Devil appeareth to Saul in the likeneſs of Samuel, is -cailed. 


Saruuel ; fe may theſe Rods upon the ſame account be anited Ser-* 
M 3 pens, 


- Pay 4&6 + 


£ 
_ 


= Chap. 


wm _ 
5 becauſe through Diabolical illuſion they ſeemed to be ſo. 
[oat Shocerng in make expreſſed, werſe 11, m By which it was 
evident, either that Aaron's Rod was rurned into a real Serpent, be- 
cauſe it had the real properties and <ffe&s of a Serpent, wv:z. to de- 
vour ; or, at leaſt, thar the God of Iſrazl was infinitely more 

powerful than the Egyptan Idols, or Devils. 
13 And he F hardened: Pharaoh's heart that he 


* Chap: 4: 0 not unto them, * as the LORD had 
aid. 


el. 
+ The Lord, to whom this A& of hardening is frequently aſcri- 
bed both in this Book and elſe where. 
*Chap:3s: 14 { And the LORD faid unto Moſes, * Pha- 


15.andio- roah's heart is hardeneth »: he refuſed to let the 
1,29,27. people go. | 
» Is obſtinate, and reſolved in his way,ſo as neither my Word 
nor Works can make afiy Imprethon upon him. >=_ 
Is Get thee unto Pharaoh 1n the morning, lo he 
goeth out unto the water o, and thou ſhale ſtand b 
the rivers brink, | ri he come : and the rod which 
was turned to a ſerpent, ſhalt thou take into thine 
hand. 
o (5. e.) Nilus, whether he went at that time,cither for hisRecre- 
ation ; or to pay his Morning worſhip to that River, which the 
Egyptians had in great Veneration, as Plutarch teſtifies. 


i6 © And chou ſhalt fay unto him, The LORD 
God of the Hebrews hath ſent me unto thee, ſaying, 
. *Ch.o..,, Let my people go, * that they may ſerve me in the 
Chap: 3: ** ? 
12,18.and Wilderneſs : and behold, hitherto thou wouldelt not 


5:1, 3. hear. | 
17 Thus faith the LORD, In this thou ſhalt know 


* Chap.q. tat 1 am the LORD -: *X Behold, 1 will ſmite 4 


- . 
* Rev.16: which are in the river 7, and they ſhall be curned * to 


6. blood <s. | | 

p Becauſe thou ſaidſt, 170 is the Lord ? and I know not the Lord, 
chap: 5: 2. thou ſhalt know him experimentally, and to thy coſt. 
qviz. By Aaron's hand,who ſhall do it by my command :nd direEtion. 
Thus Pilate is ſaid ro give Chriſt's body zo Joſeph, Mark 1<: 45. be- 
cauſe he commanded it to be delivered by others to him. The fame 
ation is aſcribed to the principal and inſtrumental Cauſe. r N:lus, 
which was one of their principal! Gods ; and therefore 1: was inex- 
cuſable in them, that they would not renounce thoſe feeble Gods 
which were unable to help not only their worſhippers, but even 

- themſelves, nor embrace the ſervice and commands of that God 
whoſe almighty Power they ſaw and felt. 5 Which was a very 
grievous Piague to them ; both becauſe it was an eternal diſhonour 
to their Religion, and becauſe from hence they had both their 
drink, 'Deut: 11: 10, 11- Jer. :8. and their meat, Numb. 11: 5. 
for greater and lefſer Catrel they would not eat, Ezod: 8: 26: And 
it was a very proper puniſhment for them, who had made that River 
an inſtrument for the execution of their bloody Deſiga againſt the 
Iraelitiſh Infants, Exod: 1: 22. | 

18 And the fith that is in the river ſhall die, and the 
river ſhall ſtink, and the Egypcians 7 ſhall loath « to 
drink of the water of the river. 

t Therefore the 7/-aelites were free from this plague, and thoſe 
branches of Nilzs which they uſed were uncorrupted, when all 
others were tune} into Blood. « Or; ſhall weary themſelves, in run- 
ning hither and thither in hopes of finding Water 1n ſome parts, 
or branches of the River. | 

19 * And the ] ORD ſpake unto Moſes, Say unto 
Aaron, Take thy rod, and ſtretch out thine hand upon 
the waters of Egypt, upon their ſtreams, upon their 

+ Heb:ea- rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their + 

thering of pools of water x, that they may become blood, and 
ag ?3- that there may be blood throughout all the land of 
hs Egypt, both in weſels of wood, and in veſſels of 
fione. | . | | 
x Not that he was to gotoevery Pool to uſe this Ceremony there, 
but he ftretched his Hand and Rod over ſome of them in the name 
of all the reſt, which he might ſignifie either by his words, or by 
the various motions of his Rod ſeveral ways. 


| 20 And Moſes and Aaron did fo, as the LORD 
*Chap.1y commanded : and he * lift up the rod, and ſmote the 
waters that were in the river, in the ſight of Pharaoh, 
and in the ſight of his Servants : and all the * waters 
that were in the river, were turned to blood, 


Ay. 


5- 
P141:78:; 
44. and , 


ts 21 And the filb that as in the river died : and the 
river ftunk, and the Egyptians could not drink of the 
water of the river, and there was blood throughout all 

' the land of Egypt. 
* Wiſd: 22 * And the magicians of Egypt did ſo with their 
17-7- jnchantments y: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened : 


neither did he hearken uato them, as the LORD had 
ſaid. ( 

Tt was not difficult for the Devil to convey Blood ſpeedily,and 
unperceivably, and thart in a. great quantity, which might ſuffice to 
infe& with a bloody Colour thoſe ſmall parcels of Water which 
were left for them to ſhe their Arr in. 2«-f. Whence could they 
have Water, when all their waters were turned into Blood ? Avſw. 

= It might be had, either 1. by Rain, which ar that rime God was 
pleaſcd ro ſend down either for rhis purpyſe,or to mitigate the ex-. 


with the rod that is in my hand, upon the waters 


EXODUS. 


hs —_————_—_ 


'Room of their Houſe, which their occaſions would oft force them 


} ' peculiay-.. 


tremity of the Plague, or for other reaſons known to him,rhough 
not to us.For that Rain ſometimes falls in Egypz,though not much, 
nor ofren, is affirmed by ancient Writers, and late travejlers. Or, 
2. From Gojſhey, which was not far from the Court, or from ſome 
Houſes of the J/raelites, who dwelt amongſt the Egyptions,as appears 


Plagues. See Exod. 8: 22. and 9g: 26. and 10. 23, and 12. 13, &c. 


Chap. vm} 


from many places of this Hiſtory, and who were free from rheſe oh 


Or, 3. From the pits which they digged, wverſ? 24. Or, 4. From 
ſome branch of N/lus,or ſome Veſlels in their Houſes,whoſe Waters 
were not yet changed : For this change might be wrought not ſud- 
denly, ( which is not affirmed in this relation ) but by degrees, 
which God might ſo order for this very end, that the Magic.ans 
might have matter for the trial of their experiment. 

23 And Pharaoh turned, and went into his houſe, 


neicher did he ſet his heart to this z alſo. 

z He did not ſeriouſly conſider it, nor the cauſes or cure of this 
Plague, and was not much affeFed with ir, becauſe he ſaw this 
fact exceeded not the Power of his Magicians. 

24 And all the Egyptians digged round about the 
river for water to drink +: for they could nor drink of 
che water of the river. 

T It is ot much material to us,whether they loſt their Labour, 
and found only Blood there, as Joſephus alfirms ; or whether they 
ſucceeded and found Water there, which ſeems more probable, be- 
cauſe theſe come not within the compaſs of Moſes his commithon, 
verſe 17, 19, 20. or whether they found the Water ſomerhing pu- 
rified and leſs bloody, though mixed with Blood. Bur it is ob- 
ſerveable,that though the Devil could do ſomething which might 
increaſe the Plague, or imitate it, yet he could do nothing ro 
remove it. 

25. And feven days were fulfilled + after that the : 

LORD had tmicten the river. | ' 

T Ere all the Waters of Egypt were perfeQly free from this infe- 
tion. Ny, How could the Egyptians ſubiiſt ſo long without 
Water ? A2nſw. 1. Philo tells us that many of them diced of this 
Plague. 2. Asthe Plague mighr come on, 10 it might go off by de= 
grees ; and fo the Water, though mixed with Blood, mighr give 
them ſome relief 3. The juyces of Herbs, and others Liquors 
which were untouched ' with this plague, might refreſh them. 
4. They might have ſome Water, either from their Pirs, or by 
Rain trom t:eaven, as was faid befote ; or from Goſhen ; for though 
it be ſaid, that the Blood was in all their Veſſels, verſe 19. yetitis 
not faid, that all that ſhould afterwards be put into them, thould 
be turned into Blood. ; 


CHAP. VHL 


God ſends Moſes to Pharaoh that he might let the people go, 1. He threa« 
rens his denial with a judgment of frogs, 2, 3, 4. Aarons ſtretching 
forth his rod, Egypt is covered with frogs, 6. The Magicians do ſo, T. 
Pharaoh calls Moſes and Aaron to intreat the Lord ro remove the frogs, 
and promiſes them to let them go, 8. Moſes and Aaron cries to the Lord 
to take away the frogs, 12, Winch he did, 13. Pharaoh's heart fill 
hardned, I5. Aaron ſtretching forth his rod ſmites the duſt, which be= 
comes lice, 17. The magicians attempt rhe ſame, but could nor, 18. 
Which extorted a confeſſion from them, that this is the finger of God, yee 
Pharaoh 5 hardened, 19, Swarms of flies threatned, 20, 21, 22, 23. 
God fulfils his word, 24. Pharaoh ſends for Moſes and Aaron, and j 
permits a ſacrifice in Egypt, 25, Moſes would go three days into the wil- d 
derneſs, 27. Pharaoh permits that, but not far, 28. The flies are . 
removed, 29----31. Pharaoh's harducd, 32. 

ND the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, Go unto | 

4 Pharaoh, and ſay unto him, Thus faith the | 
LORD, let my people go, that they may ſerve me. 

2 And if thou refuſe to let them go, behold, I will 
{mite all thy borders a with * frogs, 

a Allthy Land, which is within thy borders. A Synecdoche ; ſo 
that word 1s uſed alſo, Exod: ro: 14, 19. 1 Kings 1: 3. Pſal: 147. 
14. Jer 15: 13. So the gate and the wa/ are put for the City to 
which they belong, Ge: 22: 17. Amos 1: 7, 10, 14. | | 

And the river 6 jhall bring forth frogs abundant- 
ly, which ſhall-go up and come into thine houſe, and 
into thy bed-chamber c, and upon thy bed, and into 
che houſe of thy ſervants, and upon thy people, and 


into thine ovens, and” into thy + kneading-troughs. 

b Under which are comprehended all other Rivers,Streams and 
Ponds, as appears from werſe 5. But the River Nilus is mentioned 
becauſe God would make that an inſtrument of their Miſery, in 
which they moſt gloricd, Ezek: 29: 3. and to which they gave di- 
vine Honours, and which was the inſtrument of their Cruelty 
againſt the Iſraelites, chap: 1: 22. c Either becauſe God made the 
ioors and Windows to fly open, which it is eaſy to believe con- 
cerning God, ſeing that this hath been many times done by evil 
Angels; or becauſe whenſoever men entered into any Houſe,or any 


F Rev,16. . 


SV 44 SHOW Ara AS 70k 


dough. 


to do, the Frogs, being always at their Heels in great numbers, 
would go in with them. This plague was worſe than the former, 
becauſe it was more conſtant and more general ; for the former was 
only in the Waters, and did only moleſt them when they went to 
drink or uſe the Water ; bur rhis infe&ed all Liquors,and all Pla- 
ces,and ar all Times, and annoyed all their Senſes with their filthy 
Subſtance, and Shape, and Noiſe, and Stink, and mingled them- 
ſelves with their Meats, and Sauces, and Drinks, and crawling into 
their Beds made them reſtl-ſs. And many of them probably were 
of a more ugly Shape and infe&ious Nature than ordinary. 


4 And the frogs ſhall come up both on thee, and 


upon thy people 4, and upon all thy ſervants. 
d Not upon the. Jraelites, whom he hereby.exempts from the 
number of Pharaoh's People and SubjeRs,. and owns them forhig : 


S 


"W, 


, 4 
a, us 


ev,16. : 


E 
? 
£ 


«HD. 


Chap. VIII. E X 
peculiar People, , 
+ Favit their Perſons, which is not ſtrange, conſidering that they 


were armed with 2 divine Commiſſion and Power. 


7, 4 And the LORD fſpake unto Moſes e, Say 


nnto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod 
over the ſtreams, over the rivers,” and over the ponds, 


and cauſe frogs to come up.upon the land of Egypt. 
e By inward in{ti:& or ſuggeſtion to his Mind ; for he was now 


in the King's prel=nce. 
G And Aaron ſtretched out his hand over the waters 


ſpp? of Egypt, and * the frogs came up, and covered the 
> GHJIC 


land of Egypr. = 
Je C* 70 6; . #t . - » 
* Wild: - * And the Magicians did fo with their inchant- 
17:7: ments f, and brought up frogs -upon the land of 


Epypt. 


f Nor was it hard ſor the Devil to produce them out of their 
own ſpawn, and the ſlime of the River. 


8 © Then Pharaoh called for Moſes and Aaron, 
and faid; Intreat the LORD, that he may take away 
the frogs from me, and from my people ; and I will 
let the peopie go, - that they may do ſacrifice unto the 
LOR D. | 

9 And Moſes ſaid unto Pharaoh, + Glory over me g: 

# Or, have * When ſhall I intreat for thee 4, and for thy ſervants, 
Hs honor 1nd for thy people, to Þ deltroy the frogs from thee 


Urea me » 4 : . 
* Or, and thy houſes, that they may remain in the river 
abninſt only F" ; 

when. Z A: T have gloried over thee in laying firſt my Commands, and 


7 Heh: to then my Plagues upon thee, fo now lay thy Commands upon me 
ent off, for the time of my Praying. and 1f I do not what thou requireſt, I 
am content tho': ſhouldeſt 1.:tult over me, and puniſh me. Or Glory 
or boaſt thy ſelf of, or concerning me, as one that by God's Power can do 
thai for rhee wiiich all rby Migicians cannor, of whom taerefore 
thou now ſeeſt rhuu canſt not glory nor boaſt, as thou hait hitherto 
done. h Appvint me what rime thou pleateſt. Hereby he knew 
that the hand and g'ory of God would be more conſpicuous in it. 
And this was no p:elumprion in Moſes, becauſe he had a large Com- 
miflion, chap. 7. 1 and allo had particular diegtion from God in 
a'l thar he ſaid or cid 1n theſe matters. 


19 And he ſaid, + To morr:wi. And he ſaid, Be 


{Or, #t accordirg tothy word, that thou mayeſt know that 


agoinſt 0. there is none like unto the LORD our God. 
Becauſe he hoped ere that 


RI ; Why not preſently? Anſw. 1. _— F 
time they mighr be removed, either by natura! cauſes, or by chance, | faith the LORD, Let m eople 20, that the 
and ſoheſh 1d not need the favour of Moſes or his God. 2. Becauie ſerve me # YR 9 
he thought it an hard and long work ty remove ſo vaſt a numbe nl? REL : LR 
' of Frogs, and that Moſes might uſe divers Ceremonies, as the ; _ =! Elſe, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, + Or. 4 - 
Magicians did, in his addreil:s to God, which would require ſome I will ſend + ſwarmis of flies y upon thee, and upon thy wixeure of 
conliderable time. : | {errants, and upon thy people, and intothy houſes :; ſome © 
11 And rhe frogs ſhall depart from thee, and from |! and the houtes of the Egyptians ſhall be full of ſwarms 4/7 &c, 
thy houſes, and frem thy ſervants, and from thy peo- | of flies, and alſo the ground whereon they are. 
ple 3 they (hail remain in the river only. | y H:b @ mixture, of Infe&;or Flies, as appears from Pſal. 18. 45. 
12 And Moſes and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, | which were of various kinds, as Bees, Waſps, —_— Hornets, &<c. 
©? | infinite in their numbers, and doub- leſs larger, and more venomous 
and Moſes cryed _ Unto the oleh k, ; —_— and p?rnicious than the commen ones-were 5, 4 
of 1 Frogs which he had brought againſt Pha-| 2, And*I will ſeverin that day the land of Goſhen,  c_—_ 
raoh I. . in which my people dwell, that no ſwarms of flies *"- 20 
| att ds 3 10: 234:and 
& Though he was aſſured that the Frogs would depart at his word, | (11 þe there, ro the end that thou mayſt know that 12: r3. 
yet he would vie the merns appuinred by God for cne accomp iſh- | SENT. : | 3 
ment ef it. 1 Or, as the place is fitly rendred by otners, becauſe of I am the LORD in the midſt of the earth &. 
the word, or matter of, or about the Frogs which he had given, og |  * Either 1. of the whole Earth, and conſequently of Egypr, that 
propounded to Pharach. Becaute he had given his word 'vo0ta for the | I amnot only the Lord of Iſrael, bur of thee and thy Domuint-ns 
thing and rhe time Fire prayed moreearveſtly, Iſt G24 ſhould | roo. God is here ſpoken of afrer the manner of earthly Princes, 
be diſhonoured, and Pharavh have occation of triun-ph, The who uſe to r-ſi.le in the midſt of rheir Kingdoms, that they may 
Hebrew Verbs t© put nd to give, are frequently exchanged, as | More conveniently rule and influence them. Or rather 2 of Goſben, 
appears by compariag 1 Kings 10. 9. with 2 Chron. 9.8. and 1/a. 42, x, the words being properly thus rendred, that 1 the Lord am in the midſt 
with Matth. 12. 18. © of that land, to wit, the Land of Goſh» now ſpoken of, to defend 
. . and preſerveir. For God is ſaid 0 be in the maſt of them whom he 
1; And che LOR D did according to the word of prore&s5, Deut..9.21. and 23: 14. Jo. 3. 10. Pſal. 46. 5. and not 6 
Moſes : and the frogs died out of che houſes 7m, out of | be in the midſt of others whom he fortakes, and deſigns or threatens 
the villages. ar:d out of the fields. to deſtroy, Num. 14. 42>Deut. 1. 42. and 31. 17. Compare £xod. 33 3. W 
m A ſhort Speech, for they died, and were removed on# of, &c. with 34. 9. ? CE | | 
as appears from the next Verſe. Ir being frequent in the Hebrew 23 And I will put T a diviſion a between my people, f Heb! 6: | 
Tougue-under one Verb exp: <fſed, ro underſtand anorher agreeable and thy people * to morrow [hall this ſign be 6b. — 
to it. See Examples in the Hebrew, Gen. 43. 33, 34. £xod, 18. 12 a Heb. a r:demption or d:liverance, i.e. a token or mean of delive. pl 
and 25. 2. Prov 25. 22. rance, by a Meronimy ; a wall of partition, by which I will preſerve TER 
14 And they zathered them together upon heaps », | the razhzes, whillt I deſtroy the Ezyp:ians. b This be faith, partly y 
and the land ftank. ro gain rhe more belief ro himſelf in what he now did or ſhould. 
n Which doubrieſs they caſt into their Rivers, or Pits. ec. further ſpeak in God's Name to them 3 and partly to warn them of 
though that be not here mentioned. God wou'd nor inſtantly and their danger, and make their difobecience more Ineatoulages en 
wholly take them away, both to convince taem of rhetiuch of the 24. And the LORD did {o c: and *® there came a — St 
Miracle, and to make them more ſenſivie of this judgment, and | grievous {warm of tlies d into the houſe of Pharaoh, Wiid: 
more fearful of bringing another vpon themſelves. and into his ſervants houſes, and into all the land-of Platt :/ 
” 15 But when Pharaoh ſaw that there. was reſpite, Egypt; the land e was ÞF corrupted by reaſon of the cs: 31e 
Chap: * he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unro them, | ſwarm of flies. 7-1. 
= 1M as the LORD had ſaid. c Immediatly by his own Word, and not by Myſes his Rod, leſt deſtroyed. 
the Egyptians ſhould think ir was a Magician's Wand, and thar all 


; 16 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Say unto 
Aaron s, Stretch out thy rod, and ſmite the duſt of 
the land, that it may become lice p throughout all cae 
land of Egypr. | 


ſe)f in the very laſt plague ro be Loch perfiaious 3nd incorrigible. 
Others think, he was forewarned, though har be not here expreſled, 
Þ So the Hebrew word 1s rendred by ail the Jew:jb, and molt other 
Interpreters, Burt it is probable, that wir is taid of the Locuſts, 


- 


The Frogs did not only invade their Houſes, bur 


o God, it ſeems, gave him no warning, becauſe he ſhewed him- | 


ODUS, Chap. VIlt. 
Exo2. to, 14. Was trite of theſe, that they were mnch more loath- 
ſomeand troubleſome than ordinary, 


17 And they did fo : for Aaron ſtretched out his 
hand with his rod, and ſmote the duſt 4 of the earth, 
and it became lice, in man and in beaſt : all the duſt 
of the land * became lice, throughout all the land of 
Egypt. | 

4 Which was not fit matter to produce Lic?,and therefore ſhews 
this work to be divine and miraculous: *i.e. A great part of 1t, 
the word al being commonly ſo underſtocd in Scriprure: 

13 And the Magicians did fo r with their inchant- 
ments to bring forth lics, but they could not 5s: ſo 


there were Jice upon man and upon beaſt. 
r ( 7. e. ) Tndeavonred to do ſo. 'Thus to cnter, Matth 7.713. 1s 
pur for ftriving to enter, Lnke 13. 24. Thus men are faid to del:ver, 
Gen. 37. 21. to fight, Jol: 24. 9. to retrrn, Jof. 10. 15. when rhey 
only atrempred or endeavouured to do ſo. And therefore when it is — 
ſaid in any of the Plagues, that the Magictans did fo, it is not to be ; 
underſtood, that they really did the 1ame thing, but that they 
endeavoured to do ſo, and that they did ſomething which looked 
ike it. 's It was as eafie for them ro produce Lice as Frogs, bur 
God hindred them, pzrtly to confound them and their devilith 
Arts, and to ſhew, that what they did before was only by his 
permiſſion ; and partly to convinge Pharavh and the Fgyptians of 
their vanity intruſtingto ſuch impotent Magicians, and in oppoſing 
that God who could control and confound them when he pleaſed. . | 
19 Then the Magicians ſaid unto Pharaoh, This 3s , 
* the finger : of God s, And Pharaoh's heart was 4. 
hardened, and he hearkened not unto them x, as the ' 


LORD had ſaid. 

t Which is put either Synecdochically for the hand, as it is Exod, 
31.18. Pſal. $, 3. and 144. 1. or metaphorically for rhe power or 
vertue, as 1uke 11. 20, compared with Matth. 12. 28. « Of that 
Supream God, whom both the Ezyprians and other Hearien Idolaters 
acknowledged as ſuperiour to ali men, and Liols, and Devii:. This 
they ſaid, leſt rhey ſhould be thought inferior 19 Moſes and Aaron in 
magical Art, But hereby they own the Sovera»gn (0d robe on I['reel!'s 
ſide; and yer, like the Devils, they proceed co fight againſt him. 
x Either ro his Magicians, of whom he laſt ſpake ; or rather to Moſes 
and Aaron, as the following words ſhew. For relatives of belon 
to the remorer antecedents, as Gen. 19. 13« 15am. 7. 17. Mark 
2.53; 

20 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Riſe up early 
in the morning, and ſtand before Pharaoh, lv, he 


cometh forth to the water, and ſay unto him, Thus 


1 Samy 
9: 


Moſes his Works were done by the power of the Devil. d Heb. ar 
heavy mixture of Flies : Heavy, 7. e. either grear, as this Hebraw word 
is uſed, G:n. 41.31. 1/ai. 32. 2. or miſchievous and troubjefome ; or 
rather, numerous, as 1t istaken, Ger. 50.9. Num. 11.14. I Kings. 3.9: 
compared with 2 Chron. 1.10.e (7. e. ) Either rhe Fruits or products 
of the Land ; or rather, the Inhabitants of the Land, as the word 
land is taken, Gen. 41. 36. 1- Sam: 27: 9: many of the people were 
poiſoned, or ſtung to death by them, as appears from Pſal? 78: 45: 
See alſo the Book of 1#:/dvm,. chap: 16: 9: Gee 2d 
| M 4 25 And 


* Gen. 43. 
32. and 


46. 34. 


$. 22+ 


* Pal. 
7 8, 48. 


701 


Chap. IX. 


- intreated the LORD. 


F-Chap. 


* Chap. one of the cattle of the Ifraclites dead. And * the 


T 


25 And Pharaoh called for Moſes and for Aaron, 
and ſaid, Go ye, ſacrifice to your God in the land. 

26 And Moſes ſaid, It is not meet f ſo to do : for 
we ſhall ſacrifice the * abomination of the Egyptians 
gto the LORD our God: Lo, ſhall we ſacrifice the 
abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and 
will they not ſtone us h ? | | 

f Heb. not right, neither in God's eyes, who hath appointed us 
the place, as well as the thing ; nor in the Egyptians eyes, as it fo]- 
lows. g That which the Egyptians abhor to kill, or ro ſee killed ; 
as not enly Scripture, but profane Authors, as Diodorus, and Tully, 
and j5rvenal, witneſs, becauſe they worſhipped them as Gods, as 1s 
notoriouſly known. h It was a juſt fear. For when once a Roman 
had but killed a Cat, though imprudently, rhe people tumultuouſly 
met together, and beſet his Houſe, and killed him in ſpight of the 
King and his Princes, who uſed their utmoſt power and diligence 


to prevent if. : ; : 
27 We will go* three days journey into the wilder: 


neſs, and ſacrifice to the LOR D our God, as * he 


ſhall cemmand us 3. ; 
i For we know not what kind or number of Sacrifices to offer 


to him, till we come thither. 

28 And Pharaoh ſaid, I will let you go, that ye 
may ſacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilder- 
neſs: only you ſhall not go very far away : intreat 
for me. 

29 And Moſes ſaid, Behold, I go out from thee. 
and I will intreat the LORD that the ſwarms of flies 
may depart from Pharaoh, from his ſervants, and from 
his people to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceit- 
fully any.more, in not letting the people go to ſacrifice 
unto the L ORD. 

20 And Moſes went out from Pharaoh, and 


21 And the LORD did according to the word of 
Moſes : and he removed the ſwarms of flies from 
Pharaoh, from his ſervants, and from his people : there 
remained not one. 

22 And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time 
alſo, 'neither would he let the people go, 


CHAP. Ix. 


God threatens to ſmite his cattle with a peſtilence, x === 3, But ſpares 
Iſrael's, 4. Appoints a time for the execution hereof, 5. wherein the 
Egyptians cattle dies, 6. Pharavh;'s obſlinacy, 7. God ſtrikes all Egypt 
with boils, which is the ſixth plague, 10. The Magicians are not able to 
ſtand before Moſes, 11. , Pharaohs heart hardned according to the word 
of the Lord, 12. God commands Moſes to repeat hu meſſage, 13, and 


threatens Pharaoh with more grievous Plagues, 14. God's end in raiſing | 


up Pharaoh, 16. The ſeventh plague ( viz. ) hail and rain, 18. God's 
counſel for the ſecuring of their cattle, 19. The execution of this plague, 
23. The effefts of it, 25. The land of Goſhen is preſerved, 26. Pharaoh's 
confeſſion, 27. Moſes's prayer for him, 29. He foretells Pharaoh's 
obſtinacy 30, 31. By Moſes's intreaty the plague is ſlaid, 33. Pharaoh's 
heart remains haraned. 
Hen the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Go in unto 
Pharaoh, and te!l him, Thus faith the LORD 

God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they 
may ſerve me. | 
* 2 For if thou refuſe to let them go, and wilt hold 
them ſtill, 

2 Fehold the hand of the LORD # is upon thy 
cartle b which is in the field, upon the horſes, upon the 
aſſes, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the 
ſheep : there ſha/l be a very grievous murrain. 

a In an immediate manner, not by my Rod, that thou mayſt 
knew, it isnotT, but the Lord, which dorh all theſe things to thee. 
 b Which they kept for their Wool or Milk, or manifold uſes and 
ſervices, though not for Food and Sacrifice. 

4 And * the LORD (hall ſever between the cattle 
of Iſrael, and the cattle of Egypt, and there ſhall 
nothing die of all that is the childrens of Iſrael. 

5 And the LORD appointed a ſet time, ſaying, To 
morrow the LORD ſhall do chis thing in the land. 

6 And the LORD did that thing on the morrow. 
and *all c the cattle of Egypt died, but of the cattle 
of the children of Iſrael died not one. 

c Either of all ſorts ; or a very great number of them, as the 
word al is frequently uſed ; or rather, all that were 1n the Field, 
as it 1s expreſly limited, wer. 3- but not all abſolutely, as appears 
from werſ. 9, 19, 25. and Chap. 14. 23. 

7 And Pharaoh ſent, and behold, there was not 


heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the 
people go. 
| 8 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron, Take to you handfuls of aſhes of the furnace 4, 
and let Moſes e ſprinkle it cowards the heaven, in the 
ſight of Pharaoh. 


EXODUS: 


them up, but Moſes only to fprinkle them, as at ether times 
Aaron only did the work, to ſhew that they were bur Irſtruments, 
which God could uſe as he pleaſed, and God was the principal 
Author of it. | 


9 And it ſball become ſmall duſt in all the land of 


LSyPt. i, | 
f A burning Scab, which quickly raiſed Blains and Bliſters ; 
whereby they were both vehemently inclined ro ſcratch themſelves, 
and yet utterly diſenabled from it by 1ts great ſoreneſs. 


Io And they took aſhes of the furnace and ftood 
before Pharaoh, and Moſes ſprinkled it up toward 


blains, upon man, and upon bealt. 
£ God multiplying that Duſt, and heating it, and then diſperſing 
it over all the Land, and cauſing it to fall and reſt upon the Bodies 
»Ff the Egyptians. 
i: And the Magicians could not ſtand before 
Moſes þ becauſe of the boils : for the boil was upon 


che Magicians, and upon all the Egyptians. 

h As they hitherto had done, both as Spies, and as Adverſaries ; 
for though their Underſtandings were convinced of God's Hand, 
ind infinite Power, yet' their hearts were not changed, but for 
their worldly Intereft they perſiſted to rebell againſt their lighr,aad 
raerefore are juſtly plagued. It was no favour to Pharavh, that the 
Plague was nor upon him, but only a reſervation to a greater 
miſchief, as it follows. 


12 And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, 


: * And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Riſe up early 
in the morning, and ſtand before Pharaoh, and ſay 
unto him, Thus ſaith the LORD God of the Hebrews, 
Let my people go that they may ſerve me» 

14 For 1 will at this time ſend all my plagues upon 
thine heart z, and upon thy ſervants, and upon thy 
people : that thou mayſt know that there & none like 


me in all the earth, 

; Or, into thy heart : Thou haſt hitherto not felt my Plagues 
upon thy own Perſon, or thy Body, bur I ſhall ſhortly reach and 
wound it, and thatnot only in the skin, as the Magicians and others 
are now ſmitten, but even to thy hearr, ſuch as ſhall make thy 
heart fick, Micah 6. 13. ſuch as ſhall give thee a mortal and 
irrecoverable wound. Some underſtand it of inward and ſpiritual 
judgments upon Pharaoh's heart, ſuch as hardneſs of heart ; bur 
that plague had been inflicted upon him, and is recorded before this 
rime. And Pharaoh's heart being here oppoſed to his ſervants and 


put Syaecdochically for the whole man- 


I5 For now I will ſtretch out mine hand, that I 
may {mite thee and thy people with peſtilence &, 


2nd thou ſhalr be cut off from the earth. 

k ( i.e. ) Not properly fo called, but largely, as the word is uſed, 
Hoſ. 13. 14. meaning, with an utter and irrecoverable deſtruQion. 
| This relates partly ro the killing of the Firſt-born, which plague did 
more immediatly and nearly concern bothhim and his People, and 
prinCipally ro their deſtruQtion 1n the Red Sea. 


my Names may be declared throughout all the earth. 

I So the Hebrew'word is tranſlated, Rom. 9- 17. I have raiſed thee 
up out of thy firſt nothing, into thy being, and life, and Kingdom ; 
and upheld thy being, and reign, evenin the midſt of thy Tyranny. 

Heb. 7 have made thee to ſtand, i.e. to remain alive and untouched, 
when thy Magicians could not ſtand, Yerſ. 11. I havepreſerved thee 
in life, not for want of power to deſtroy thee, as thou mayſt fancy, 
nor for want of provocation from thee, but for my own glory. 
» In thoſe mighty works which have been occaſioned by thy 
rebellion and obſtiaacy. #» My Being and Providence, and my 
manifold Perfe&ions ; my patience 1n bearing thee ſo long, my 
ſuſtice in puniſhing thee, my Power in conquering thee,my Wiſdom 
n over-ruling thy Pride, and Tyranny, and Cruelty, to thy own 
leſtruion, and the redemption of my, oppreſſed People, and my 
Faithfulneſs in making good my Promutes to them, and my 
T hreatnings to thee. 


17 As yer exalteſt thou thy ſelfagainſt my people o, 
that thou wilt not let themgo ? 

0 (i.e. ) Againſt me afting for my People. The gracious God 
rakes what is done to, or againſt his People, as done to, or againſt 
himſelf. See Zech. 2.8. Matth. 25: 40, 45. As 9.4, 5. 

18 Behold, to morrow about this time I will cauſe 
it to rain a very grievous hail, ſuch as hath not been 
in Egypt ſince the foundation thereof p, even until 
now. 

p Since they were a Kingdom, or a Nation. 

19 Send therefore now, and gather thy cattel q, and 
all that thou haſt inthe field : for #pozevery man and 
beaft which ſhall be found in the field, and ſhall not 
be brought home, the hail ſhall come down upon 
them, and they ſhall die. 


9 This forewarning God gives, partly to mitigate the ſeverity of 


d To mind them of their cruel uſage of the 7ſ-aelites in their 
Furnace, ofwhichics Deut. 4« 20. Jer. I, 4+ & Both wers 6g take 


the judgment ; partly that a conſiderable number of Horſes might 


be reſerved for Phararh's Expedition, Chap, 14. partly to RR 
. ulirice 


people, ſeems rather to denote his perſon, rhe heart or ſoul being often " 


a 


Egypt, and ſhall be a * boil breaking forth 27h blainsf, * Rev. 
_ man, and upon beaſt, throughout all the land 7% 2- 
O 


heaven : and it became a * boil g breaking forth ith * Deuts 
"US 27. 


and he hearkened not unto them, * as the LORD had * Chap. 
ſpoken unto Moſes. * 


21. 


16 Andin very deed, for this cauſe have I + raiſed + Heb. 
thee up /, for to ſhew in thee my power w, and that 79 the 


Chap. IX, 


CE .r as 


”* = 


kh 6 


E 


a4. 


IX, 


_ Chap. IK: 
Juſtice of Go 


+ Heb. ſes 


nat his 


heart unto, 
© Rev. 16. .1.- 3 dh that there may be * hail 
- 10. thine hand toward heaven, e may 


2TI. 


eb. 
e thee 


* Chap.s. ! 
22. and Qren of I{rael were, was there no hail, 


Tl.7. 


070 777" 7 FRESH II ING IE 9-33 


 +Heb. 


woices of 


a4. 1, 


THeb.hid- 
den or dark 


EO I 
- 


would take no warning neither from God's Words, nor f'om his 
forme: Works ; and partly to make a difference between the peni- 


d the incorrigible Egypt: ans. 
"20 He that feared the word of the LORD amonegſ! 


the ſervants of Pharaoh, made his ſervants and his cat- 


into the houſes- 
—_ ? yp he that + regarded net the word of the 
LORD left his ſervants and his cattel in the field. 
22 " And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Stretch forth 


: 7 all the land of Egypt upon man r, and upon beaſt, 
_s upon every herb of the field, throughout all che 


d of Egypt. a” 
—_ (.e.) Boon thoſe men that preſumed to continue in the field 


after this Admonition. 


d Moſes ſtretched forth his hand toward hea- 
” on the LORD ſent thunder and hail, and the fire 


oa, Prax upon theground 5s, and the LORD rained 


hail upon the land of Egypt. : : 
5 Davin both Herbsand Cattel which wereupon it, P/ſal.78. 


. Og. 32g . L 
_ mg was hail, and fire mingled with the hai) 
z, very grievous, ſuch as there was none like it in all 
the land of Egypt ſince it became anation . 

; Which ſtrange mixture much increaſed the Miracle. « For that 
Hail and Rin did ſometimes, though but ſeldom, fall in Zgypr, is 


atteſted by divers Eye-witneſles. | 
25 And the hail ſmote throughout all the land of 


Egypt all that 45 in the field both man and beaſt, and 
the hail ſmote every herb of the field, and brake every 
tree of the field x. , 

x (i.e. ) Moſt of them; or Herbs and Trees of all ſorts, as ap- 
pears from Chap: 10. 12, 15. See beforewverſe 6. 


26 * Only inthe land of Goſhen y, where the chil- 


y It ſeems the Egyprians that dwelt here were ſpared for the ſake 
of their Neighbours the 7/raelires: Which great Obligation preba- 
bly made them more willing to lend their Jewels to them, Chap: 


I2 


> 35. 
27 4 And Pharaoh ſent, and called for Mofes and 
"Aaron, and faid unto them, I have ſinned 74s time y : 
the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are 
wicked, . 0 

y I now plainly ſee and freely acknowledge my Sin in ſtriving 
with God.' He ſeems not todeny that he had ſinned before, for 
even the Light of Nature would diſcover his Sin, 1n breaking his 


Faith, and the Word of a King given to Moſes for Iſrael's Ditmiſ- 
ſion, 


28 Intreat the LORD, (for itis enough) that there 
be no more z + mighty thundrings and hail, and Lwill 


let you go, and ye thall ftay no longer. 

2 Or, and let it be enough, ( let f0d content himſelf that he hath 
puniſhed me ſo long, and that I have confeſſed my Sin, and pro- 
miſed amendment ) that there may be hereafter no more. 

' 29 And Moſes faid unto him; Afloon as I am gone 
eut of the city, I will ſpread abroad my hands unto the 
LORD, and the thunder ſhall ceaſe, neither hall there 
be any more hail : © that thou mayeſt know how that 


* PGlm. the * carth is the LORDS «5. 


# Or, that this land is the Lords, even his whom thou deniedſt to 
have any Juriſdi&ion in it, or over thee,Exod: 5. 2, Or the Earthis 


.put for the World, the Heaven and the Earth,q.d. That thou mayſt 


ſee that he can either cauſe the Heavens to ſend forth ſuch Thun- 
ders and Hails, or reſtrain themas he pleaſeth. 
30 Bat as for thee and thy ſervants, I know that ye 


will not yer fear the LORD God, 
21 And the flax and the barley þ was ſmitten : 
for the barley 2s in the ear, and the flax as bol- 


led. | 
b Which were not ſo neceſſary for Humane Life as the Wheat 


and Rye. Thus God till ſends ſmaller Judgments to uſher in 


the greater. : : 
22 But the wheat and the ric were not ſmitten : for 


they were t not grown up co | 

c The Hebrew word may be rendred either dark or hid, to wit, 
under the Ground, whereby t was ſecured from this ſtroke: or late, 
as divers of the Hebrews, and other Interpieters render it. This 
kind of Co:n coming Jater up, was now tencer and hidden either 
inthe ground, or in the Herb; whereby it was in ſome meaſure 
ſecured both from the Fireby its greeneſs and moiſture, and from 
the Hail by its plyableneſs and yielding to it, whereas the Stalksof 
Barley were more dry and {tiff, and therefore. more lyable to the 
Hailand Fire. 

33 And Moſes went out of the city 4 from Pharaoh, 


and ſpread abroad his hands unto the LORD; and the 


 thunders and hail ceaſed, and the rain was not poured 


upon the earth. | 
d That being ſolitary, he might pour forth his heart in fervent 


Prayers. 


d in puniſhing ſo wicked and obſtinate People, as 


T). T7 F 


hail, andthe thunders were ceaſed, he ſinned yet more 
and hardi.ed his heart, he and his ſervants, 
25 Andthe heart of Pharaoh was hardned ; neither 


cuſts, 
Pharaoh enquires of Moſes who are they that ſhould go to ſerve the Lord, 


8: Moſes Anſwer, 9g Pharaoh's reply, 11. Locuſts come over all 
Egypt, 15- (Pharaoh ſends for Moſes, 16. And confeſſeth his Sin, 17- 
Moſes prays to God, 18. The plague is ſtayed, 19. Pharaoh's heart 
haraned, 20. The ninth plague, to wit, darkneſs over all Egypt, 225 
23. Pharaoch would let Iſrael go but without cattel, 24 Moſes will 
not leave a hoof behind, 26, Pharaoh hardned, 27. And charges Moſes 


upon pain of death never to appear in his ſight any wore, 28« Which 
alſo came to paſs, 29. | 
ND the LORD faid unto Moſes, Go in unto 


Pharaoh : for * I have hardned his heart, and 
che heart of his ſervants, that I might ſhew theſe my 
1gns before him. | [=D 

2 And that * thou mayeſt tell in the ears of thy 
ſon, and of thy ſons ſon, what things T have 
wrought in Egypt, and my ſigns which I have done 
amongſt them: that ye may know how that I am the 
LORD. | 

3 ÞAnd Moſes qnd Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, 
and ſaid unto him, Thus ſaith the LORD God of the 


ſelf before me? - Let my people go that 
me, | 
4 Elſe, if thou refuſe to let my people go, be- 
hold, to morrow will 1 bring the * locuſts into thy 
coaſts. 

5 And they ſhall cover the | face of theearth, that 
one Cannot be able to ſce the earth, and * they ſhall 
eat the reſidue of that which is eſcaped a, which re- 
mainerh unto you from the hail, and ſhall eat every 
:ree 6 which ggoweth for you out of the field. * 

2 The Wheat and the Rye, the ſtaff of their lives. b The Fruits 
and Leaves of every Trees | 


6 And they ſhall fill thy houſes, and the houſes of 
all thy fervants, and the houſes of all the Egyptians, 
which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers fathers have 
ſeen 6, fince the day that they were upon the earth un- 
to this day, And he turned himſelf, and went outfrom 
Pharsoh. 

c Such for number, or ſhape, or miſchievous effeAs,* as were 


never ſeen before. — 
7 And Pharaohs ſervants ſaid unto him, How long 


ſhall this man bea ſnare 4 unto us ? Let the men go, 
that they may ſerve the LORD their God: Knoweſt 


thou nor yer that Egypt is deſtroyed ? 
a An occafion of Sin and Deſtruftion. © See Exod: 23. 33. Jo: 


. 13» 
8 And Moſes and Aaron were brought again unto 
Pharaoh 2 and he ſaid unto them, Go ſerve the LORD 
your God : but F whoare they that ſhall go? _ 

9 And Moſes ſaid, We will go with our young, and 
with eur old, with our ſons and with our daughters, 
with our flocks and with our herds will we go: for we 
wuft hold afeaſt unto the LORDee. 

e A Feaſt upon a Sacrifice, whereinallare concerned, and there« 
fore all muſt be preſent and ready to do-what God requires us. 

10 Andhe faid unto them, Let the LOKD be fo 
with you, as I will let you go f, and your little ones, 
Look toit ; for evil is before you g. | 

f I wiſh God may be no more ready and willing to be with you 
and to do you good, than TI am wiiling to let you go. g Either 


they may ſerve 


23 


up Sedition or War againſt me, or utterly to depart out of my 
Kingdom. Or rather 2. Evil of Calamity or Miſchief. r. Becauſe 
it 1s here ſaid to be before their Faces, whereas evil deſigns are in 
mens hearts, and the fair pretences wherewith they cover them are 
ſaid to be before their Faces. 2. The word of Caution he'gives to 
them, look z0it, or take heed, ſeems to imply that he ſpeaks not of 
the Evil they deſigned againſt Pharaoh,but of that which they would 
unavoidably bring upon themſelves from ſo Potent a King, by the 
refuſal of ſuch fair Offers, and continuing in ſuch infoleat and 
unreaſonable demands, 

11 Notſo: po now ye that are men and ſerve the 


LORD, for that ye did deſire | : and they were driven 


ous from Pharaohs preſence: 
tf Which was not true, but only was gathered by him out 
of their declared Intention of going to Sacrifice, wherein he 


ſary 


12 4 Andthe LORD aid unto Moſes, Stretch out 


34 Aud when Pharaoh ſaw that the rain, and the 


Ly 


thine hand oyeg the land of Egypt for the locults, that 
N they 


ll 


would he let the children of Iſrael go, as the LORD 

had ſpoken + by Moſes. | | 
CHAP. X 

The reaſon why God haraned Pharaoh's heart, 1. Egypt threatned with lo« 


4: Pharaoh's ſervants perſwade him to let the Iſraelites go, 7.- 


Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuſe to humble thy * 


r. Evil of Sin. You have ſome ill deſign againſt me, either to ſtir 


thought thepreſence of the Women and Children wholly unnecef- * 


® 


+ Heb. 
the ; 
Moſes. © 


* Chap. 
2 Te» anc 
I4. 


78. $5. : 


Xx Wid. 
I6. 9. 


+ Heb. 
* Joel, 


Heb. wh 
and who, 
&C, 


s. and 
D5o 34, 


+ Heb. 
faſtned. 


20, 


* 
2 3A 


018 May 
feel dark 
neſs, 


Pre” FJ X, 
ap. X. 


. 78. 


| He - * 
haſtned to 1 
all. ; 


F Joel 2. 


Chap.4. 


+Heb.that 


muy 7 7? ? 


4 


they may com? up upon the land of Egypt,and eatevery 
herb of the land 5, even all that the hall hath left. 

þ This is no unuſual Plague in Africa and Arabia, where when 
the Harveſt is ripe, they frequently come in valit numbers, upon 
all their Corn, and what they do not eat, they infe& with theit 
touch, and the moiſture coming from them, and afterwards dying 
io great numbers, they poiſon the Air, and cauſe a Peſtilence. So 
that it is no wonder that Pharaoh and his Servants were ſo concern- 
ed for this Plague. { well known to them, eſpecially confidering, 
that this was like to be far worſe than all of the ſame kind, which 
they hadeither ſeen or heard of. . 

13 And Moſes ſtretched forth his rod overthe land 


of Egypt, and the LORD brought an eaft-wind & upon 
the land all that day and all that night, and when 1t 


was morning, the eaſt-wind brougiit the locuſts. 

; Over divÞrg parts of the Land, ſhaking his rod towards the ſe- 
veral Quarters of it. & Which in thoſe Parts is a moſt violent and 
pernicious Wind, Exod: 14. 21. Numb: 11: 31, and ad'y W ind, and 
therefore fit for the ingendring of thoſe Creatures. This Wind 
brought them from Arabia, where they are in great numbers,as we 
have ſeen verſe 12. though God miraculouſly increaſed their num- 
bers, and their power of doing miſchicf 

14 And * he locuſts went up over all the land of E- 


gypt, and reſted in all the coaits of Egypt : very grie- 
vous were they : before them there were no {uch locults 


as they, neither after them ſhall be ſuch +. | 

+ Queſt. 'How can this be true, when the ſame words are uſed of 
the Locuſts in Joe!'s time ? Anſw. It might be true of both indi- 
vers reſpe&s ; oftheſe for number and quality, of them fo: long 
continuance, for they laſted three or four years, when theſe were 
bur'for a little time; of theſe for Ezypr, of them for Juder, where | 
they were fixed. 

H For they covered the face of the whole earth, ſo 


thatthe land was darkned /, and they did eat every herb 
of the land, and all the fruit of the -trees which the 
| hail had left 7, and there remained not any green thing 
in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through alt 


the land of Egypt. : 

1 Either by their flying in vaſt numbers, and ſo darkning the Air, 
as they have oft-times done; or by covering the green and Iight- 
ſome He bs and ProduGtions of the Earth with their dark and dire- 
ful Bodies. m How could this be, when the Hay] had ſmizter every 
herb, and broken everytree ? Chap: 9: 25. Anſ. 1. There ſeems to have 
been ſome diſtance of time bexween theſe two Plagues, in which 
ſpace, new ProduCions might be ſprouting forth both our of the 
Erownd, and from the Trees. _ The words all and every aie com- 

- monly underitood of the greateſt part. 
up4 T Then Pharaoh + called for Moſes and Aaron 


n haſte »:and he ſaid, 1 have ſinned againit the LORD 


your God, and againft you 0. ; 

nz Becauſe this kind of Plague in it ſelf ws moſt pernicious, 
whereby whole Countreys had been waſted, and grievous Famines 
and Peſtilences cauſed, and was mightily aggravated by the Venge- 
ance of God,and by the peculiar qualiry of theſe Locuſts, which did 
not only fall upontheir Herb and Fruits, as they vfe.to do, bur 
invade their very Houſes, verſe 6. infet their Meats, fill ther Beds, 
poiſon them with their Stink, and with their venomous Birings, 


 - whereby they killed many Men, as if is written in the Bouk of 


WWiſom, Chap. 16.verſe 19. 0 By contempt of your great and terrible 
Works, by breach of my Promiſe made\o you, and by my denial 
of your juſt Deſires and Commands given to mein his Name, whom 
I now find and feal to be the Almighty and Soveraign God. 

17 Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my fin on- 
ly this once p, and intreat the LORD your God, that 


he may take away from me this death 9 only. 

p I defire no further favour,T will no more offend nor need your 
pardon. q This Jeadly Plagne, Comprre 2 Krvgs 4. 40 and * Cor: 
11. 23. Beſides it did deftrcy the Life of Herbs and Trees; yea of 
Beaſts and Men, either direC&ly, or at leaſt by conſequence, in de- 
priving them of the neceſſary Supports -f Lite. : 

18 Andhe went out from Pharaoh, and intreated 


the LORD. . ; 

19 And the LORD turned a mighty ſrong weſt- 
windr, which took away the locuſts, and Þ cait thera s 
* into the Red-fſea t: there remained not one locutft in 


all the coaſts of Egypt» : 
r Heb: 4 wind of the Sea, 7. e. coming from the Sea, called there 
the great Sea, and the Mediterranean Sea, from whence came the- 
North-weſt Wind, which did-blow the Locuſts direQly into the 
Red-Sea. 5 Caſt them, as the Hebrew word ſignifies, with a great noiſe, 
- and with great force, ſo as they ſhould never riſe'again. to moleſt them, 
' : Heb. The Sea of Bulruſbes, ſo called from the great number of Bul- 
ruſhes near its Shore ; or, The Sen of Bounds or Limits, q: d. the nar- 
row Sea, whereas they could ſee no Bounds nor Shore beyond the 
Mediterranean Sea. It was called the Arabian Gulf, and by othersthe 
Red-Sea, either from its Red Sand; or rather from Eſau, called alſo 
Edom, which ſignifies. Red, Gen: 25. 30. from whom as the ad- 
joyning Countrey was calied Edom, or Red, fo this was called the 
Rea-Sen. 
20 But the LORD * hardned Pharaohs heart, ſo that 
he would not let the children of Ifrael go. 
21 4 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Stretch out 
thine hand towards heaven, thatthere may be darkneſs 
over the land of Egypt, + even darkneſs which may be 


felt wo : 

« It is an Hyperbolical Expreſſion,ſuch being very frequent both 
in Scripture and in *WH Authors. For Darkneſs being only a priva- 
tion, cannot be properly felt, yet it might be felt in its Cauſe, to 


wit, thoſe thick and groſs Vapours which filled and infected the 


EI ES HA 


es — 


& S 


Air. But the place may be rendred thus, that theve may be dark 
toſs = ofter that ( fo the Hebrew Yau 1s ſometimes uſed, as Mich: 7, 
3 ) the darkneſs (i e. the darkneſs of the Night, or the common and 
daily darkneſs ) is departed or removed, and the time of the day come ; 
*or ſo the root, from whence this word may be derived, ſignifies, 
Exod. 13. 22. And to this purpoſe the words are rendred by the 
Chaldee and Syiack, and ſome others ; and the ſenſe is, that che 
Darkneſs may continue inthe day-time as well as in the night. 
22 And Moles ftretched forth his hand toward hea- 
ven: and there was a * thick darkneſs in all the land *pry1.,os; 
of Egypt three days. 28. 

23+ They faw not one another x, neither roſe any | Ds 
from his place y for three days: * butall the children % trot 4 
of Iſrael had light in their dwellings z. 2: es 

x Becauſe theſe groſs and moiſt Fogs and Vapours did not only 
quite ſhut out the 1:ght of the heavenly Bodies, but alſo put out 
their Candles, or other artificial Lights, or at leaſt ſo da:ken rhem 
that men could have no benefit by them. y Place- here may be ta« 
ken, cither 1. More ſtri&ly and particularly ; 1o the ſenſeis, The 
horcour of that da: kneſs was fo gieat that they durit not remove at 
all, but ſtood or ſat where the darkneſs found them, like men aſto= 
nithed or affrighted, and therefore unmoveable,having their Minds 
diſturbed, being te:rified with their guilry Conſcicnces, which 
moſt affe&t men in the dark, ant; with the dreadful noiſes which 
they heard, W:/d.17 5. and with the Apparitions of evil Angels, as 
may ſeem from Pſa/m 78. 49. where the Plague of evil Angels is 
put 1ni:ead of this Plague of darkneſs, which therefore is omitted 
in that place » here all the reſt are reckoned up. O: rather 2. More 
largly, for their own Houſes or Dwellings, for ſo the Hebrew 
word 1s certainly uſe:!, Exod- 16. 29. So the ſenſe is, They did 
not ſtir abroad out of their Houſes upon their moſt neceſſary oc- 
caſions. Obj. He faith not that he could not go, but that they could 
not riſe from their place, which mzy ſeem to limit this expreſſion 
to their particular places. nſw; The word, to riſe, is commonly 
put for going abour any buſineſs; and here it is a pregnant word, 
as they call it, and implies going in it, none aroſe, viz. to SO Or 
remove jroz- his place, And 7:ij/ng cannot be preperly taken hcre for 
that particular poſture, unleſs we will ſuppoſe that this darkneſs 
four.d all men fitting, which is abſurd to imagine. z» Whereby 
they might have conveyed themſelves, and families. and goods a- 
way, as afrerwards they did 41 haſte ; but they waited for Moſes his 
Orders, and he for God's Command, and God intended to brin 
them forth, not by ſtealth, but in a more honourable and publick 


Manner, in ſpight of all oppoſition. 


24 4 Ard s Pharaoh called unto Moſes, and ſaid, Go 
ye,ſferve the LORD : only let your flocks and y ourherds 
be ſtayed 6 : let your little ones alſo go with you. 

a Or, Therefore; os Then, to wit, after the da: kneſs was either 
wholly, or in patt removed. b either asa Pledge of your return 
after your Sacrifice is ended; or as a recor penſe for the Cattel 
which I have loit by yur means. c And conſcquent'y the Wo- 
men, whole help an {e;vice was neceſſary for their little ones in' 
divers regards 


25 £AGAnd Moſzs faid, Thou muft give F us * alſo fa- fHeb. ma | 


crifices, ang but i3t=offerings, that we may ſacrifice un 9 #914. 
toche LORD our God. 

*7. e. Suffer us to take of our ovin Stock. 

26 Our cattel atſo ſhall go with us, there ſhall not an 
hoof be left behind, for thereof muſt wetake to ſerve the 
LORD cur Ged: and we know not with what we muſt 
ſerve ti:® LORD until we come thither d. 

a Wiiich was nor a Pretence, but a real Truth. For this being 
a folemn and extraordinary Sacrifice, by the expreſs and particulas 
appointment of od, they knew not either of what kinds, or in 
wiat nnmber or menner taerr Sacrifices muſt be offered. And for 
all theſe things they did not receive particular direQions till they 
came to Mount S727. : 

27 T Bur tne LORD * hardned Pharaohs heart, and *Chap: 14: 
be would notlet them go. 4, 8: 

28 And Pharaoh ſaid unto him, Get thee from me, 
take heed to thy ſelf? ſee my face no more ; for in 
that day thou feeit my face, thou ſhale die. 

29 And Moſes ſaid, Thou haſt ſpoken well e, I will 
ſee thy face again no more. 

e Heb» Right, not morally, for ſoit was very il! ſaid; but Logi- 
cally, that which ag-ees, though not with thy Duty, yet with the 
Event and Trurh of the thing : for as thou haſt warned me to ſee 
thee no more,ſfo ] in the name of God aſſure thee, that thou ſhalt ſec 
me no more,to beg my P-ayers,or to be helped out of thy Troubles 
'y my means. And therefore thar Diſcourſe of Moſes to Pharaoh, 
which follows chap. 11. 4, ©'c. though it be put there out of its 
order an4 proper place, as many other paſſages are, yet was deli- 
vered at this time, and upon occaſion of theſe words. 


CHAP, XL | 
God commanaeth the Iſraelites to borrow jewels of the Egyptians, 2. God 
giveth them favour among the Ezyptians, 3. Moſes denounceth the laſt 5 
plague, 4. A great cry, 6. The Iſraelites ſafety, 7. The Egyptians 
rhruſting themout, $8. God foretels Pharaohs hardneſs, g. | 


A ND the LORD faid unto Moſes «, Yet will I 
bring one plague more upon Pharach, and up - 
on Egypt,afterwards he will let you go hence : * when 
he ſhall let you go, he ſhall ſurely thruſt you out hence 

altogether b, : 7 
8s Either rn. Whilſt Moſes was not yet gone out of Pharaoh's pre. 
ſence ; ſo God might ſuggeſt this to his Mind, as he did other 
things to Michaiah, when he was before 4hab and Jehoſophat, 1 Kings: 
22. Or rather 2. Before his laſt coming to Pharaoh ; and the words 
may be rendred thus. Now the Lord had ſaid unto Moſes. And this 
is here added, ay the reaſon why Moſer ſpake ſo boldly to mw, 
ecauſe 


M-, 
” 


FChap: 12 
31,33, 39* 


Tam... CLF 


DER OT ET YO OIeET, PUT 1 


Chip. x1 


"> 


I "Chap. XI. 


Tow .,, IE r IIIp=Re__y: 


_ 


feet. 


becauſe God hath aſſured him'of a good iſſue, b Men,and Women 
and Children, and Cattel, and all that they had, which he would 
never do before. ; 
2 Speak now in the cars of the people, and let every 
man borrow of his neighbour c, and every Woman ot 
* Chap.3: her neighbour, * jewels d of ſilver, and jewels of gold. 
22. & 12: The Iſraelites, who at firſt lived diſtinly by themſelves, when 
35: they were greatly multiplyed, and Pharaoh began to caſt a jealous 
eye upon them, and to take cruel Counſels againſt them, were 
more mixed with the Egyprians, as appears from chap. 12. 12, 13- 
and many other places, either by their own choice,that they might 
receive ProteCtion and Suſtenance from them ; or rather by Pha- 
ya0b's deſign, who planted many of his own People among them, 
to watch and chaſtiſe them, Exod: 1. 11. and, it may be, removed 
ſome of them from Goſhen to the parts adjoyning toit, which were 
inhabited by his People. 4 Or, Yeſſels, as the Hebrew word pro- 
pecly ſignifies ; for they might more plauſibly ask, and the Egyprians 
would with leſs ſuſpicion lend them Veſſels, which might be pro- 
per and uſeful both for their Sacrifices and F eaſts, than Jewels for 
which they had no preſent need or ule. : 
3 And the LORD gave the people favour in the 
ſight of the Egyptians; Moreover, the man * Moſes 
was very great in the land of Egypt, in the fight of 


Pharaohs fervants, and in the ſight of the people e. 

| e Therefore they complied with their requeſt, nor only out of 
love 'to the people, but out of fear of Moſes, leſt he ſhould puniſh 
them ſeverely in caſe of refuſal. 


And Moſes ſaid f, Thus ſaith the LORD, About 
midnight will I go out g into the midſt of Egypt. 


f To Pharavh, before his departure, as appears by comparing 
werle 8. with chap. 10.29. And therefore the three firſt verſes of 
this chapter come in by way of Parentheſis; and now he returns to 
the Story, and lets down the laſt words which Moſes ſpake to Pha- 
raoh for a final parting. g God is ſaid ro go out, or go forth, or come 
down, &c. by way of condeſcenſion to the cuſtom and capacity of 
men, when he doth any eminent a& of Power either in way of Ju- 
ſtice, or Mercy. 

And all the firft-born of the land of Egypt ſhall 
die, from the firſt-born of Pharaoh that ſitteth upon his 
throne þ, even unto the firſt-born of the maid-ſervant 
that is behind the mill 5. and all the firſt-born of beaſts. 

þ Either now a&tually, ruling with his Father, as Solomon did e- 
ven whilſt David lived, 1 Kings 1. 34. or more probably, he that 
is roſit, the preſent time for the furure, he whoſe right this is by 
the Cuſtom of Egypr, and by the Law of Nations. i The poor cap- 
tive Slave that was in the priſon, as it is chap. 12: 29. 'and there 
did grind at the Milln. In thoſe times and places they had divers 
Millns, which were not turned about by Wind or Water, as ours 
are, but by the Hands of their Servants, who for that purpoſe ſtood 
behind the Milln, and ſo with hard labour turned it about, Sce 
Judg. 16. 21.1ſa. 47. 1, 2. Lam: 5. 13. 

6 And there ſhall be a great cry throughout all the 
land of Egypt, ſuch as there was none like it, nor (hall 
be like it any more. 

-7 * But againſt any of the children of Iſrael ſhall not 
a dog move his tongue &, againſt man or beaſt: that 
ye may know hew that the LORD doth put a difference 


between the Egyptians and Iſrael. 
k In ſtead of thoſe loud cryes of the Egyptian Families, there ſhall 
be ſo great a tranquillity among the 1/r2elites, that even the Dogs, 


*Eccl.45. 
I... 


* Chap. 8. 


22. 


which are ſenſible of, and awaked, and provoked by the leaſt noiſe, 


ſhall not be ſtirred up by them. 

8 And * all theſe thy ſervants / ſhall come down un- 
to me +, and bow down themſelves unto me, ſaying, 
Getthee out, and all the people that + follow thee m; 
and after that I will go out : and he went out from 


tHeb:h:a: Pharaoh in Þ a great anger », | 
of anger. I Thy Courtiers and great Officers, who now are ſo inſolent and 
obſtinate. + Both by their own inclination, and neceffity, and in 
thy name, and by thy command. m Thar are under thy condu& 
and command ; as this or the like expreſſion is uſed Judg. 4. 10. 
I.Kings 20. 10.1. 2Kings3: 9. Iſa: 41. 2. Not ſo much for the Aﬀront 
offered to himſelf, as for his incurable Rebellion againſt God. Com- 
pare Mark 3. 5. 

9 And * the LORD faid unto Moſes, Pharaoh ſhall 


not hearken unto you,that * my wonders may be mul- 
tiplied in the land of Egypt. 

io And Moſes and Aaron did all' theſe wonders be-- 
fore Pharaohe and the LORD hardenedPharaohs heart, 
ſo that he would not let the children of Ifſracl go out of 


his land. 
CHAP, XII. 


The month wherein they went out of Egypt to be to themthe firſt month of the 
year, 1, 2. God enjoyus them ro chuſe a ſpotleſs lamb for the paſſover, 3. 
How they were to eat the ſame, 4. The deſcription of the lamb, 5. The 
time of killing it, 6. The manner of ſprinkling, 7. The time and me- 
thod of eatingit, 8 -— -—11. God's purpoſe to ſmite the firſt-born, 12. 
The uſe of the blood upon the doors, 13. Seven days of unleavened bread, 
and the manner of keeping it, 15. Moſes direfteth the Elders, both for 
their preſent and future ſafety, 21 - 23 They inſtru# their chil- 
aren concerning it, 26, The firſt-born of all Egypt ſlain, 2g. A great cry, 
30. Pharaoh giveth Iſrael leave to go, 31. The Egyptians thruſt them 
our, 33. Their hafty departure, 34: They ſpoil the Egyptians, 35, 36. 
Their number, 37, Their baking unleavened bread, 39. How long they 
dwelt in Egypt, 4o. The time of their deliverance, 41. Who were to 


partake of the paſſover, 43, 44. The children of Iſrael did as the Lord 
commanded. 


AO the LORD ſpake a unto Moſes and 4aron, in 
the land of Egypt, faying: 


*Chap. 12: 
31. 33. 
tHeb that 


is at thy 


* Chap.3. 
19. 

* Chap« 7. 
J» 


"O 
) 


$2 0 7 


you 4. 


"3 4 $5 . þ 

VU 8 | Chap. Xl 
a Had ſpoken, before the three days darkneſs, as may appear by 
-omparing verſe 3. and 6. ofthis chapter with chop., 11. 4- And 
che mention cf it was put off by him till this place, as well that he 


might not interrupt the Hiſtory of all the Plagues, as that he mighr 
give the whole inſtitution of the paſſover rogerher. 


2 This month b ſhall beunto you the beginningec of 
months ; it ſhall be the firſt month of the year unto 


6 The firſt month after the vernal Equinox, called 4b, Exod: 
T3. 4. and 23.15. Deut: 16. 1: and Nijan, Neh: 2. 1. | Efther 3:7: con- 
taining part of our March, and-part of 4pril, c Heb: The head ; 
which, I conceive, notes not ſo much the order, which is more 
plainly mentioned in the following words, as the eminency of it, 
that ir ſhall be acc-unted the chief and principal of all months; as 
the Sabbath hath been called by ſome the Queen of days. And juſtly 
muſt they prefer this month before the reſt, whether they looked 
backward to their prodigious Deliverance from Egypt therein, os 
forward to their ſpiritual Redemption by Chriſt, and to zhe accep= 
table year of the Lord, Luke 4. 19. for in this very month our Lord 
Jeſus ſuffered, Joh: 18. 28. d Heretofore your firſt month for all / 
Afﬀairs hath been 7iſri, which in part anſwers to our September, and 
15 the firſt month after the Autumnal Equinox ; and ſo it ſhall be 
to you ſtillas to Civil Aﬀairs, as it appears from Exod: 23: 16. and 
34-.22. and Levit. 25, 8,9,10. But as to Sacred and Eccleſiaſtical 
Matters, this ſhall henceforth be your firſt month. | 
| 3 T Speak ye unto all the congregation of Iſrael, ſays 
ing, In thetenth day e of this month, they ſhall cake ro 
them f every man a lamb g, according to the houſe of 
their fathers +, a + lamb for an houſe. 

c Partly that they might have the Lamb ready for the Sacrifice, 
and might not be diſtratted about procuring it when they ſhould be 
going to uſe it ; partly that by the frequent Contemplation of the 
Lamb, as a ſign appointed by God, they might have their Faith 
ſtrengthned as to their approaching Deliverance, and afterwards 
might have their Minds quickned to the more ſerious Contiderati- 
on of thay great Deliverance out of Ezypt, and of that more glorious 
Deliverance from Hellby Chriſt the rrue Pafſover,which ſhculd be 
offered for them ; partly to teach the Church in all Ages, how ne- 
ceſfary a thing preparation is to the ſolemn Duries and Excerciſes 
of Religion ; and partly to ſignifie that Chriſt ſhould be firſt 
ſet a part, and ſeparated to the Miniſtry, which was done three or 
four Prophetical days, 7: e. years before his Death, and afterwards 
offered . Moſt of which reaſons being perpetual, it may ſeem this 
uſage was ſo too, and not for the firit Paſſover only. f Into their 
Houſes, where the Jews tell us he was tied to the Bedſpoſt. g Or; 
Kid, verſe 5. for the ſame word ſignifies both, though a Lamb was 
commonly uſed, and a Kid only in caſe of the want of a Lamb + 
and the Chaldee, and LXX do almoſt conftantly tranſlate the He- 
brew word Lamb. And Chriſt is ſeldom or never Typifyed by a 
Kia, but generally by a Lamb, as he is called Joh. 1. 29. partly for 
his Innocency, Meekneſs, Patience, &c. but principally with re- 
ſpe& to the Paſchal-lamb, inſtead whereof he was in due time to 
be offered ; whence he 1s- called our Paſſover, 1 Cor: 5, 5, + A 
Lamb was to be diſpoſed of to every Houſe or Family, accord- 
ing to its quantity,or the numbers of perſons in it,as the nexr verſe 
explains it. The ſeveral Families are called the houſes of their fa- 
thers, becauſe rhey conſiſt of thoſe perſons which come from one 
Father or Grand-father. The people were divided into Tribes,the 
Tribes were ſubdivided into Families, and the Families again into 
Houſes, which were like ſprigs taken from the greater branches, 
and planted a part, and each of theſe had their ſeveral Fathers,from 
whom they were denominated, as here they are. | 

4 And if the houſhold be too little for the lamb þ, let 
him and his neighbour next unto his houſe, take zt 3 ac- 
cording to the number of che ſouls &: every man accor- 


ding to his eating Þ ſhall make your count for/the lamb; 
h( i.e.) For the eating of the whole Lamb at one Meal, accord- 
ing to the rule, wverſe8. 16. If the perſons be ſo few that they can« 
not eat it uþ without gluttony. # Or rather thus, word for word; 
And, or Then he ( the Maſter of that Family ) ſhall take alſo his neigh- 
bour next unto his houſe, he ſhall take him and his Family into Society 
with himſelf; they ſhall joyn together. k Or perſons, 7. e. asthe 
two Families ſhall conſiſt of more or fewer perſons. I ſuppoſe the 
meaning is, that if his next neighbours Family were of it (elf ſuf- 
ficient for the eating of the whole Lamb, that he ſhould paſs over 
that ro the next ſmall Family, which being joyned with is,mighs 
make up a fit number, which, as the Hebrew DoQors tell us, was 
ten, belides Women and Children. t(7. e. ) According tothe pro- 
portion which he can, or commonly doth eat. The meaning is 
this, The whole Lamb being to be eaten at once, and a ſufficient 
number being neceſſary to that end, and there being great variety 
in mens ſtomachsand meals, they were to give allowance for that, 
and to take either more or fewer perſons, as their ſtomachs were 
better or worſe. = 
5 Your lambſhall be without blemiſh /, a male »» + + Heb. 
of the firſt year » : ye ſhall take ic out from the ſheep, of - y1ars 


or from the goats o. | 

1 Without any deformity or diſtemper of Body. Heb. perfet#; 
Of which ſee Levit. 22. 22, &c. Deut: 15. 21. and 17. 1, And 
this the very light of Nature taught the Heathens to obſerve in their 
Sacrifices. This property was required both to typify Chriſt, a. 
Lamb, without ſpot or blemiſh, Heb: 9.14. 1 Per: 1. 19. and to in- 
ſtrut us, that all our ſervicesto God muſt be as perfett as poffibly 
may be. m Partly becauſe rhat was better and more perfe& than 
the Female, whence a Male is oppoſed to a corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14. 
and partly to tipify the man Chriſt Jeſus. » (, i.e.) A year old, 
when it is in his vigour and perfettion,and the fitteſt rype of Chriſt. 
Moſt explain itthus, Thar it was not to be more then a year old, 
bur it mightbe much lcfs,ſeing it might be offered to God anytime 
after it was eight days old, Exod. 22. 3o. Levit: 22. 27. Bur though 
it was then fit to be offered ro God,it was not very fit to beeaten 
by Men. And the Hebrew Phraſe, tbe Son of a Tear, 1eems to require 
a years Age, as Saulis called the Son of one year, 1 Sam: 13. 1. when 
he had reigned oge whole Year, And it is remarkable, that he doth 


tOr, lidi 


N 2 Not 


My &v. 23, 


3-an 
p © .* 16. 


Heb. bc- 
, een the 
o Eye::- 
gs, 


» 


'* Chap. 
'23. 18, 


and34.25. 


hap. XI. 


@ * 


| ous uſe of the Relifts of that Lamb by the 79elires.xhothe-eby had 


E X O 


| be ſon of this or that Tear, which might agree to one brought 
roots a grakeh it was much younger than a Year, but#/- 
Son of @ Year, w.thout any reſtri&ive Article. » Heb. and from the 
Goats : If you want a Lamb, you ſhall take a kid of or from the 
Goats. But the Particle, and is here well rendred or as it is uſed, 
Gen. 13. 8. Exod. 21. 17. compared with Matt. 15. 4. Pſalm 8. 4: 
compared with Heb. 2. 6. l 
6 4nd ye ſhall keep it up ountil the fourteenth day © 


the ſame month: and * the whole allembly p of the 


Numb! congregation of Iſrael (ball kill ir F in the evening 9. 


o Separate it from the reſt of the Flock, and keep it in a ſafe 
place ; the reaſons of which ſee verſe 3. p Or rather,every aſſ-mbly, 


16. to wit, every ſuch Society as meet together for cating of the Lamb. 


And the Aſſembly is ſaid to kill it, becauſe one Perſon did it in 
their Name, and by their Appointment ; in «hich manne!:, and 
pon which reaſon the whole Congregation 1s ſaid to ſtone a Man, 
Levit: 24. 14, 16. Numb: 15. 35. Deur: 22. 21. It 1: probable ir was 
killed by the Maſter of the Family, who was a Prieſt in his own 
Family, &'c. q Heb, between the Evenings, or the two Evenings, 1.e. 
between the beginning and end of the Evening. The Evening 1s 
' one third part of the Day,and oneof the appointed and uſual times 
of Devotion, as appears from Pſalm 55. 17. Dan. 6. 10. and it be- 
gun at their ninth, or our third Hour, as may be gathe:ed from 
As 3.1. For then the Sun began more ſenſibly to decline, whence 
that time is fitly called by the Jews the firſt Evening, and that was 
the time of the Evening Sacrifice ; the Jecmd Evening was when 
the Sun was ſetting or ſet. Between theſe ir was ro be killei. 
This had a reſpe& both to the time ofthe Wo-1d's Age when Chritt 
came; which was its Evening, or declining Time, or Ed, Heb. r. 
2. and'g. 26.1 Pet. 1. 20. and tae time ofthe day in which Chriſt our 
Paſſover was killed, Marth: 27. 46 - 50. Mare is. 25, 33, 34 | 

7 And they thail take of the biood r, and itrikzit 5 


on the two ſide-poſts, and on the upper door-poſt of 


the houſes wherein they ſhall eatit 7. 

» This was afterwards reſtrained to the Prieſt:,but at this time it 
was allowed to the Matters of Families, as their preſent circum- 
ſtances required. 5s With a bunch of Hyſop, verſe 22.7 As a badge 
of diſtin&ion between their Houſes and the Egyptians, n-t ro di e& 
the deſtroying Angel where they were, who c.uld as well ditcer;, 
the Houſes as the Blood in the Night, bur to dire& their Thoughts 
to Chriſt, whoſe blood was hereby evidently typified, by whoſe 
Merits and Mediation they obtained this P:eſe' vation and Delive- 
Tance from Egypt, alſe well as their great deliverance from Hell. 
8 And they {hall cat the fleth in that night « roſt 
with fire x, and unſeavened' bread y, and with bicter 


herbs z they ſhall ear it, 

« (5. e.) The Night following the fourteenth, and beginning the 
fifteenth day. The Lamb was killed uponthe fourteenth day, in 
the Evening or Cloſe thereof, bur it waseaten upon the fifteenth 
day, to wit, in the beginning of it: whence the Paſſover 1s faid 
to be offered ſomerimes upon the fourteenth, and ſometimes upon 
the fifteenth day, which may ſerve for the Reconciliation of {. me 
ſcemingly contrary Scriptures. x Partly for expedition, werſe 171. 


and ns 906 to bea Type of the Lamb of Go1, Chriſt, and of the 


ſharp and dreadful Pains which he ſuffered not only fr:m Men,but 
from God too, and Tom the tire of his ſo-e !2iſpleaſure againſt Si:- 
ners, whoſe place and perſon Chriſt ſuſtained in his Sufferings. y 
Partly as a Monum-nt of their ſpeedy Departure out of Egypr, 


which gave them not time t» leaven their B ed, werſe 34. which is | 


the reaſon alledged for it, Deut: 16: 2. partly to teach us how Men 
ſhould be qualified that come to rhe Sacrament, they ſhould be 
purged from Error, and P-1de. and Malice, and Hypocriſy, which 
ae called and compared Yo Leven, Matrth: 16: 6, 11. Luke 12: 1. 
1 Cor. 5. 8. and part'y to ignify the Fngular Purity of Chriſt from 
all kind of 'piritual Leaven z Both to remind them of thgjr hard 
Service an1 bitter Uſage in Eyzypt, Evod. 1: 14. from which God de- 
livered them. Deut 16: 3. and to prefgure the further Croſſes and 
Troubles which they were to expett between their going out of 
Egypt and coming to Canaan. Or, with bitrerneſſes, i. e. with gre t 
bitterneſs, or with grief of heart, that together with Faith in God 
and in Chrift, and Hope, and Joy- for their approaching Delive- 
rance, they might ex-rciſe bitter and hearty Repentance for their 
Idolatries, and other ſinful Prattices whereof they were guilty in 
Egypt. And this inſtruQs us as well as them of the abſoJute neceſ- 
«ſity of true and bitter Repentance inall thoſe that would profitably 

feed vpn Chriſt ovr Paſſover. : 
9 Eatnot of it raw a, nor ſodden at all with water, 


Þut roſt 3th fire * his tead, with his legs, and with the 
purtenance b thereof, | 


a ( i: e:) Not throughly roſted, for ſuch we alſo ſay is Raw, 
and ſo the Hebrew word na is underſtood by the Jewiſh and other 
Doors. Ir ſignified, that Ch it ſhould ſuffer, as well as Save, 
to the uttermoſt, all that was due for our Sins. 6 Heb: the 1n- 
wards, which were to be taken and waſhed, and then to be roſted 
together with the ret. So-ne do here except the Fat, and Caul, 
and Kidneys, which were reſerved by God for himſelf, 2 Chron. 35: 
12. 14. But that Exception was not made till after this time, and 
it ſeems not certain that that Exception extended to the Paſchal 
Lamb. Theſe, and the Head and Legs are here mentioned, not to 
exclude other parts, but becauſe they are not commonly rofted ; 
but God would have the whole Lamb roed and eaten, to ſignify, 
that we muſt have either nothing of Chriſt, or the whale Chriſt, 
and all his benefits, his Spirit to ſanftify and rule us, as well as his 
Blood to fave us. 
io * Andye ſhall let nothing of it remain until the 
morning : andthat which remaineth of | it until the 
morning, ye ſhall burn with fire c: 

+ Which either was hot uſually eaten, or was more than all of 
you could conveniently ext. c T5 preventeither 1. the ſuperſtiti- 


received a greater benefit than they did afterwards by the Brazen 
Serpent, which upon that account they worſhiped : Or 2. the pro- 
fane Abuſe of that which had been conſecrated to God's Service. 
Compare Exod: 29. 34 


J: 


D D 5$. 

rr 7 And thns ſhall ye eat it 4; with your loins gir- 
Jed e, your ſhoes on your feetf, and your ftaff in your 
1and g: and ye ſhalleat it in haſte b : ic is the LORLS 
paflover z. 

d To wit, for this time, becauſe their Circumſtances required it, 
that they being ſuddenly trotake a great Journey, might be in a 
Travellers habit. But that theſe, and ſome other circumſtances 
now enjoyned and uſed, were only Temporary, and not perperu- 
il, nor Obligatory, ſufficiently appears from the prafice nct cnly 
of the Jews in following Ages, butalſo of Chriſt and of his Apo- 
tiles. And in like manner there are ſome Inſtitutions in the New 
T flament, which did only oblige that Age, andnot all that follow 
chem, as A#s 15. 28, 29. e Like Travellers and Perſons undertak- 
'ng ſome difficult Service; for ſuch uſed to gird up their Garments, 
which in thoſe Parts were long and troubleſome. See 2 Kings 4. 29. 
and g. r. Luke 12. 35. f A Badge, 1. of their readineſs for their Jour- 
ney, Iſaiah 5. 27. 48s 12.8: 2, Of their Freedom ; for Slaves ſuch 
as tne 1/raclites now were in Egypt, uſed to' go barefooted. 3. OF 
Joy, ason the contrary going barefoot was a Badge of Mourning, 
2 6am, 15. 30. g Like Perſons upon the point of departing, which 
was a very comfortable Circumitance. h For ſo the word !1gnifties, 
Deut: 16. 3. 1/a: 52.12. This Lamb, or y-ur cating of it, 1s the 
Lord's Paſſover, z. e. it isa ſign of Gods paſſing over you and your 
Houſes, when he comes to deſtroy the Egyptians on every ſide of 
you, verſe 13, 23. It isa Metonymy uſual in Sacramenta) Speeches, 
as Gen: 17. 10. Matth: 26: 26, 27, 28. 

tz For I will paſs through the land of Egypt this 

night, will ſmite all the firſt-born in the land of Egypr, 
both man and beaſt, and * againft all the + gods of E- *Numb: 
gypt I will execute judgment & : I am the LORD» 33! 4- 

k Either r. by expoſing them to ſhame and conrempt, as vain t Or, 
and impotent gods that could not ſave their Worſhippers. But Princes, 
that 2ppeared before. Or 2. by deſtroying thoſe Beaſts v hich they 
worthipped ; and it is not unlikely, | but thoſe particular Beaſts, 
which were their chicf Idols, as 4pis, Mnevis, &c. were firſt-born, 
and therefore periſhed in this Plague. Or 3. by overthrowing 
their Idols, as he afte wards did Dagon. And ſo ſome H:brew W ri- 
ters rell us, that this very Night all their Idols were broken and 
thrown down. And there are ſome F: ot-ſteps hereof even in 
Heathen Authors : Of whom ſome tell us, that moſt cf the 
Temples of Egypt at one time fell down by an Earthquake ; and 
others affirm, that the Egyptian gols for fear of one Typho ( by 
whom it is apparent they meant Moſes) did hide themſelves for a 
ſeaſon, &c. 

12 And the blood ſhall be to you for a token / upon 
the houſes where you are: and when I ſee the blood »», 
I will paſs over you, aid the plague ſhall not be upon 


jou Þ to deſtroy you, when I ſmite the lahd of Egypt. + Heb. for 

l Both to you, as he now ſaid, a ſign and a pledge to confirm , deſtruitis 
your Faith in the expeQation of the promiſed Deliverance; ar:d te on 
the Angel, that he may know and paſs over you: Houſes, as the * 
following words intimate. See on wer: 7. m This is ſpoken of God 
after the manner of Men ; the ſenſe is, if I find, that you keep rhe 
condition which I require, y-u may expe&the priviledge which I 
have promiſed you ; otherwiſe not. 

14 And this day ſhal! be unto you for a memorial » : 
and you ſhall keep ita feaſt * ro the LORD throughout 
your generations : you ſhall keep it a feaſt by an ordi- 
nance for ever 0: | 

n Or, Monument, both of this Deliverance from 
over of your Redemption by Chriſt, 
even the Ancient Jews underſtood it, who alſo noted, ,that Iſrael! 


From Egypt, and more«- 
of which that is a Type. as 


born were killed ; fo their Deliverance 


; was to be redeemed in the days of the Meſſias upon the ſame day on which 
| they were delivered from Egypt, to wit, up:n the fifteenth day of the Month 
of Nifan. Upon which day our bleſſed Lord was crucified for 
the Redemption of his People. * Ycu ſhallobſerve it for a Solemn 
Feaſt or Feſtival Time. o (7. e. ) So longas your State and Church 
continues, or till the coming of the Meſa, This word doth not; 
always fgnify Eternity, but any long time as Prov: 29. 14. Dan: 3. 
9. andoft elſewhete. 


Is * Sevendays p ſhall yeeat unleavened bread 9 3 *Chap.137 


even the firſt day ye ſhall putaway leaven out of Your 6. and 23; 
houſes: For whoſoever eateth leavened bread from the 15. and 


| firſt day until the ſeventh day, * chat ſoul ſhall b 34. 18. 
off from Iſrael », ” OE es 24 


þ Beſides, and after the day of eating the Paſſover, whi Pts 
diſtin& Feaſt, and no part of the Feaſt of unleavened _— 7To 
remind them of their Departure out of Egypt, which was fo ſud-= © 
den, that they had nor leaſure to leaven their Dough. See more on 
verſe 8. r Either by Excommunication, or by Death to be infli. 
ed by the Magiſtrate, and in caſe of his negle&, by God himſelf 
Nor let any one think that this was too ſevere a Puniſhment for 
what may ſeem no great Offence. For this was indeed a very-great 
Crime, being a manifeſt Contempt of God, and a Rebellion againſt 
God's Authority and expreſs Command, which ſurely deſerves ag 
ſevere a Puniſhment as is inflited upon Rebels againſt their Prince 
eſpecially conſidering that the 1raelites were the People & Subje&s 
of Godin a peculiar manner. Tt was alſo atacit Renunciation of 
their Religion, and of the Covenant of God with them, and of 
their Intereſt both in that paſt Deliverance out of Egypt, and in the 
future Deliverance by the Meſias. See more on Gen: I7. I4. 

. 16 And inthe firſt day there ſhall be an holy convoca« 
tions: andin theſeventh day? there ſball be an holy 
COnYOCation to you : no manner of work « ſhall be done 


in them, fave that which every + man muſt cat x, that + Hey 
only may be done of you. ſoul: © 
s A ſolemn day for the People to aſſemble together, and to at= 
tend upon the Publick Worſhip and Service of God in hearing his 
Word, Prayers, Praiſes, and Sacrifices. : Becauſe then Pharaoh 
and his Hoſt were drowned in the Sea. As on the firſt day the firſt= 
Was begun on the firſt, and 
; compleated 


i, 


Chap, XII. 


Tg 10 Bo 


# Or, 


* Heb 
28, 


 *Jol. 4 


« 


hap 
JI. 


Voip, x11 X00 DO s Chip; XII. = 
compleated on theſeventh day,and therefore thoſe days deſerved a m They killed, and did eat the Paſchal Lamb in ſuch manner as 

ſpecial Charadter of i:onour. And i,deed that there were ſeven God pretcribed. F 

days between thoſe to Mitac'cs, the Jews unanimouſly affirm, and 2y 4 * Andir came to paſs, that at midnighs »* the «cy, TH 
it ſcems probavle from the _—_— of clear FOO ES ; LORD ſmore ail the firſt-born o in the land of Egypt, 5 PIT 
Of ſervile Work, Lev; 23. 7. Xx xICrcln, 25 MANG , "| * from the firft- born of Pharaoh that ſat on his throne, * Numb. 


re infe:ior to the Sabbath, in which that was forbidden. Bur of ; k 
this ſee my Notes on Exod, 16. 23. and 35. 3. unto che fir{t-born of the caprivethat was in the + dun» *: 77: ang 


i7 And ye |bal obſerve thefeoſt of unleavened bread: | geon, and all the firft- born of cattel, | | pt _ 
for in this {elf-ſame day have I brought your armies y n A great Aggravation ofthe Flague : For then darkneſs it ſelf 51. and 


Shes. .ohh this | ſtrikes Men with ho-ro:, and makes any Calamity more terrible ; 
out of the land of Egypt: therefore ſhall MA obſerve this then they were aſleep and fccure, and Iaſi expend ſuch a ſtoke. =T 5a 


day in your generations, by an ordinance for ever. 0 Both of Man and Beaſt, whether Male or male. Some extend $. and 
7 So called, not fromtheir Military force or courage, but from | :+ roall that we«e firſt-born, and ſo many Perſons might be killed ts Yon 
their numbers, and the o:der and manner in which they came | ;9 one Houſe, as both i ather and Mother, and loverat=Sons, which + W.ſdo: 
forth, See Chap, 13. 18. mighr be the firit-born by ſeveral Mothers, and Sons Sons or jg x; 9 
13 q * In the fcſt month,on the fourteenth day of the Daughters, Fe. Others confine ir to the irft-born Child in the Chap. = 
* Lev.23- month, at even Ye (ball eat unleavened bread until the | Family. I couceive the heads of rhe } araily are net included, ,,. 


Mg x . | ; for theſe, though they might Le the fir{t-born ( hildren of their Pa- ; Heb. 
| 5.N one and twentieth day 2 of the month ar even rents Families, yet Were not, nor ever are, called or accounted the houſe of the 


28. 16. z Incluſively. For otherwiſe they were obliged to eat unleaven- 4 NE ng. 2 = 
| ed Bread eight days, viz. on the day of the Patlover, verſe 8. and firit-born of thei: PIN amplics, vere hs Hons and Nooey WOOg Pie. 
EE en - Bur for all the reſt I conceive they are all included, becauſe all ſuch 
e ſeven days after, which 1s ae. and properly called OY dn atrr really fiiſt-born, and did firit open their Mothers Womb,and 
=] unleavened Bread, becauſe in them they were tied to that Ceremo- } 11 « -þ were to be ſer apa:t unto the Lo:d, in ſtead of thele firſt 
| ny only, except the two daysof an Holy Convocation. | born 'of the Egyptians now {lain, Chap 23: 12, 15: and therefore are 
| 19 Seven days fhall there be no leaven found iN YOUT } {1 both places to beunderftood in the ſame latitude. 
houſes : for whoſoever eateth that which 15 leavencd, C- 30 And Phaiaoh role up in the night he and all his 
; ven that ſoul ſhall be cut off from the congregation of | ſeryants, and ail the Egyptians, and there was a great 


Iſrael, whether he be a ſtranger ,or born in the land Þ. | cry in Egypt : for there was not an houſe p where there 

| a To wit, a Proſclite : for Strangers unconverred to the Jewiſh | noe Ge daad. 

S--Þ Religion were not obliged nor admitted to the Ce'ebrotion, of the + To wit, of theſs Houfes which had any firfi-bort in che, for 

Paſſover or Feaſt of unleavened Eread. Though I ſce no inconve- Ian * #2 Fatih of ps i aha mers Bn And fach Keftria 
nience, if all Strangers, though Heathens, were forbidden to have Gions of the wat Pare les OY f.equently underſtood. 


or uſe any unleavened Bread at that time, leſt the Fews who con- , , ng | __ : 
everſed wha them might be tempted to deſire or pa: take of it with 31 Ard he calic.. for Motesand Aaron q by night, 


them. + To wit, of Canaan which I have promiſed to you, and to and faid, Riſe up, andFet you-forth from amoneglt my 
which I am now leading you, which was ſo well known to all of | yeople, * both you, and tre chiidren of Iſrael, and * Chap. 


them, that it was needlef; to expreſs it in this place. .- | 20, ſerve the LOR D, as ye hive ſaid. IO. 9. 
20 Ye ſhall eat nothing leavened: in ail your habi- q (i: e:) He ſent this Meſſage to them, for they came ne more to 
| tations (hall ye eat unleavened bread. : him, Chap: 10: 29. | | 
2t \ Then Moſes called for all the elders of Iſrael, 32 * Aiſo rake your flocks and your herds, as ye * Chap. 
# Or, kid. and ſaid unto them, Draw out, and take you a lamb | have ſaid, ard be gone, ard bleſs me allo r. IO. 26. 
accordin g to your families, and kill the patloxer. r Pray to God for me, that I may not periſh by this, or any other 
*Heb«11. 22 * And ye ſhall take a bunch of hyſop 6b, and dip | P!2gue- , « 
33 And the Egyprians were urgent s upon the peo- 


28, it in the blood that zs in the baſon, and ſtrike the lintel 
and the two ſide-poſts with the blood that is in the ba- 
ſon : and none of you ſhall. go out at the door of his 


pie, that they might ſend them our of the land in haſte; 


tor they ſ1id, We be all dead men. 
s Not by force, v hich they durſt not now uſe, but by earneſt 


for houſe c until the ae. d. and impoitunat Intreatics, Exod: 11: 8: This was the ground of 
'M b So the Hebrew word is rightly r endred, as appears from Heb: 9: | that Faule of the Heathens mentioned in Tacitus, That the Jews were 
19. c (i:e: ) Ofthe Houſe wherein he did eatthe Paſſover, which | q-iven out of £zypt for their Scabs : So they falſly and maliciouſly 


oft-times was his Neighbours Houſe : S:e werſe 4. 4 Till the be- | aſcribed their own Ulcers and Scabs ſent upon them. by God to the 
; ginning of the Morning after Midnight, and after the Slaughter of | 7{;aelites. 
the Egyprians firſt-born ; which may reconcile thoſe Scriptures that . h bef . ; 
ſeem to contradi& one another, while ſome affirm they went out 24 Andthe people took their doug _ DeFore 1t WAS fOr,dough 
of tigyprt by Night, and others by Day, for they went our in the | leavened, their F kneading troughs # being boundupin ***? : 
| NY very early when it was yet dark, as it is exprelſed in a like | their cloaths upon their ſhoulders. | 
TR FRS-S0e-X- . Al 0, th ightl der it, their dough linmps, or food, or | 
23 Foc the LORD will ps through to ſmite the | wnys feof cu EE. OE. hs 
EY P mags m —_— mou = Soon = _— 35 And the chiidren of Iſrael did according to the 
% Frek "WO On OO jb - Wt -PRS | word of Moſes ? and they borrowed of the Egyptians « 
Ezek. 9- over the door, and * wiil not ſutter e the deſtroyer f te | x jewels x of lilver, and jewels of gold, and raiment. 


« : | * 5 
2 _ - come 1n unto your houſes co {mir e you, | « Either before this time, as they had opportunity, when their Chap: 3? 
| e Heb. not give him Licenſe or Commiſſion. f( iwe: ) The de- | hearts were mollified by the foregoingPlagu.s or even at this time, *** 
+ ſtroying Angel,which whether it were a good or bad Angel is not | when the Iſraelites might well take coatidence ro borrow, and the 
agreed, nor 1s it neceſſary to determine. Egyptians would be willing to lend them. partly that they might gain 


24 And ye thall obſerve this thing g for an Ordinance | their Aﬀe&ions and Prayers, and partly that thcy might mote rea- 
to thee, and to thy ſons for ever. dily depart from them. x Wherewith they uſed to adorn themſelves 
g viz. The ſubſtance of the thing, the Paſſover and Feaſt of un- | i2,*he worthip of their Idols, and theretore ſuppoled the Jraelites 

, leavened Bread, though not all the Rites and Ceremonies, whereof | Pight uſe them in the worſhip oftheir God. Or, weſels ; of which 


divers were peculiar to the firſt time. ſee on chap: 11: 2, Y j #S | 
| 25 And it ſhall come topaſs when - ye be come to 35 And the LORD gave the people favour in the 


e s : 

2 the land b, which the LORD will give you according | fight of the Egyprians y, ſo that they lent unto them : 
as he hath promiſed, that ye ſhall keep my ſervice. ſuch things as they required % 3 and they * ſpoiled the ® Gen:1g; 

: h viz. Of Canaan, as verſe 19. For in the Wilderneſs they kept Egyptians 4. T : 

: ; this Lealt but once, ani that by God's particular Dire&ion, Numb: Y( 5: e: ) Inclined their hearts to do it willingly, and not only Chap: 3: 


9: 2. out of fe:r. z'tieb: and they lent them, to wit, the Jewels or Vel- Þ | 
| * Joſ. 4.6. 26 *® And it ſhall come to paſs, when your children | {-1s mentioned, wer. 35. # To wit, of their Ornaments. Queſt.Was ſal. 105, 


, . : CY not thi: unjuſtly done of the 1{ſraelites to borrow th:ſe Jewels which 375 
ſhall fay unto eh What mean  a-4e by this ſervice 5: they never payed ag1in? nſw. No, 1. Becauſe they did nothing in 


| a gr of Pirne Worlip, God expe rhigcve® om che | his mancr bury Godcappoinrmenr cop; 11 1,2 fochar iFelrs 
ſhou'd enquire and und:iſtand what is faid or done in the Publick | be any iT rv Fats at WO ay hey i wget 1 

. "He & . y in any thing, nor is in this thing, the lea?! blot or ſhadow of inju- 
Worſhip or Service of God,and therefore notto reſt in dumb Signs Y 'b he hack Brncmakie ela: d - 
whereof they neither enquire no- know the meaning, or in th MICE, 85 Wort me CN ny Ot Oe 
Service of Cod in's Lanenacwhiet ch a © | to diſpoſe of all perſFhs and rhings, as being the Miaker,and Giver, 
"Th (hk: 5 fo to 4 y h : ( OW c and Lord of all; as becauſe there was great and evident reaſon both 

27 1at ye Ihail lay, It 15 tne lacrihee of the why the 1/raelites ſhould be r:compen{cd for all their hard Labours 
LORDS paſſover k, who paſſed over the houſes of the | and Sufferings,and why the Ezyprians ſhould be ſpoiled for their Idos 


Children of [{rael in Egypt, when he {more the Egypti- larry, Luxury, and Cruelty to the J/raelites, and the great benefits 


as "W | »þ hf Ti x which they had received from 7oſ:ph,and from the ſervice of the I/- 
yg. and delivered our houſes. And the peopie * bow- raelites. = Becauſe the ſupreme Lord of all forbad them to reſtore 
ed the head /, and worikipped, 


| : what they borrowed, and gave them the entire right and ſole pro. 
. & The Paſſover was both a Sacrifice, as it was offered to God, as priety hk 3.Becauſe tho there was a form and eartieadd wok 

it appears from Exod: 23: 18: and 34: 25. Numb: 9:7, 1 3: Dent: 16: | rowing and lending,yet indeed the 1ſ-aelires did not ſo much borrow 
2, 5: andbecauſe there was in it the thedding and ſprinkling of | ag defire, as the Hebrew word rendred borrow, ( ver: 35:) ſignifies;and | 
Blood, wherein the Efſence of a Sacrifice couſiſts, 2 Chron: 30: 16: | the Egyptians did not reckon theſe things as lent,and to be reſtored, |: 
and 35: 11, 13: and alſo a Sacrament, azit was received and eaten | yur as given, and never to be expeCted again ; even as Pharaoh and | 
by Men. 7 In tok-n of their thankful acknowledgment of God's | his people rightly judged, that jfthe Jaelites were once permitted 
favours, .and of theirchearful ſuumiſſion to God's Command and | tg» go out of the Land with their whole Families and Eftates, they | 
Ordinance. See 2 Chron: 29: 30. would never return again, -chap: 14:5. And in truth the Egyptians 


28 And the children o - 1 | didand might eſteem it a good bargain to give theſe things to re- 
| as the LORD had  _ Dt oo on deem their Lives, and to 1Ngage the 1/raebtes to a ſpeedy deparrure, 
2 


knowing that otherwiſe both their Perſons and all their Eſtates were 


| did they ms, | in extrejae hazard, 4. Becauſe, if theſe Jewels were properly bor- 
| N 5 rowed 


* Chap. 4. 
J1. 


' ia 


12p. XI... | 
wed,yet theEgyptions by their cauſcleſs and hoſtile purſuit afrerthe 
Weaelires with —— to Moy them,did fully diſcharge them from 
all obligations to reſtitution,and give thema right nor only to keep 
i theſe Goods, but to take any other which they could from the Ezy- 
[ ptians,according to the known and approve Laws of War. 
W «Nom 7 * And the children of Iſrael journeyed from * Ra- 
| _YO- meſes to Succoth b, about * Six hundred thouſand c on 


[ : Gen. 47. foot, that were men 4, beſide children e. 
bl b A place ſo called, either becauſe there the 1/-aelites firſt lodged 


II. 

| * Chap. jn Booths or Tents, whereas before they dwelt in houſes ; or be- 
38. 26. cauſe there God firſt ſpread his Cloud of fire over them, for 4 cover- 

* Numb. r. ng, Pal: 105: 39+ c To wit, grown and ſtrong men, and fit for 
{ 46. and War, among whom there was none feeble or ſick, Pſa!: 105: 37- 
| ar. 21. Thus the Heathen Writer Cheremon, mentioned by Joſephus, ſpeak- 


ing of this matter, reckons up firſt 250 thouſand, and then 380 
thouſand more. 4 The Hebrew word properly ſignifies ſtrong and able 
men, fit to go on foot in battel-array ; ſo decrepit or weak old men 
are not comprehended in this number. e And Women, whole pre- 
ſence and afliſtance is neceſſary to them. See Exod: 10: 24. Some 
|  fay the Hebrew word taph ſignifies their houſholds or families, which 
| + Heb. « conſiſt principally of Women and Children. ; 
238 And a + mixed multitude f went alſo up with 


them, and flocks, and herds, even very much cattel. 
f Conſiſting of Egyptians or other people, who went with them, 
cither becauſe they were their ſervants, or that by this meansthey 
+ might tree themſelves from the ſervirude which they endured under 
hard maſters in Egypt ; or becauſe the glorious works which they had 
ſeen, had raiſed their eſteem of God and of his Feople, and made 
them expe& a fhare in the great Felicities which they preſumed 
would be conferred upon a People fo highly honoured and belove: 


| - great mix- 
— Number. 
S- 


Hearts were not lincere, nor their Ends right, they ſoon repented 
of their choice, Numb: 11: 4. Corfipare Zech: 8: 23. 
H 29 And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough 


 __ which they broughtforth out of Egypt, for it was not 
F * Chap.6. leavencd 7 : becauſe * they were thruſt out of Egypt þ, 
| 2.and 11. gndcould not tarry, neither had they prepared for 


= themſelves any victuals. 
£ Both becauſe leavenwas forbidden to them at that time, and 
becauſe the great haſte required, gave them not time for leavening 
it. þ Not by. force, but by importunat requeſts, as was obſerved on 
wer: 33. Thus men are ſaid to be driven to. worſhip the ſun, moon, &&. 
when they are perſwaded to it, Deut: 4: 19. 
40 Now the ſojourning of the chijdren of Iſrael, who 


*Gen. 15. dwelt in Egypt,wss * four hundred and thirty years 5. 

F 323. i It is plain that thoſe years are to be computed from the firſt 
AR. 7.6. Premiſe madeto Abraham, Gen: 12: 1, 2. to the giving of the Law, 
Gal. 3.17. from Gal: 3: 19: where this is affirmed. And although it doth nor 
plainly appear when that Promiſe was made, becauſe the Scripture 
mentions not Abraham's Age, neither when it was made, nor when 
Abraham came to Haran with his Father,Ger:11:31: but only when he 
went out of Haran, being 75 years old, Gen: 12: 4: yeta good while 
after it was made, and,as it may ſeem more than probable, 3o years 
afterward, it is manifeſt there were only 400 years of this time to 
- come, Gen: 15: 13. And many more years paſſed ere there was ſuch 
a man as Iſrael or Jacob, and more ere there were any chilaren of 1ſrael, 
or of Jacob, and yet more ere they came into Egypr. How then can 
this be true which is here ſaid ? nſw 1.Some affirm that they were 
- in Eeypt 430 years, which is ſooner ſaid than proved. 2. Some an- 
cietit Hebrew Copies are ſaid ro have had more words than ours now 
have ; for the LXX,and Samaritan Interpreters after the words in 
Egypt, read, and, in the landof Canaan. And ſome otifer Copies af- 
ter the word, who, add, together with their fathers,or,and their fathers. 
And fo the difficulty vanitheth.And if it ſhould be granted, thar 
there were ſome few ſuch errours in our. preſcnt Copies in matters 
urely Hiſtorical or Chronological, which God mighr permit to be 
there for many wiſe and holy Reaſons, yer this is no prejudiceto 
our Faith,or to {:o0d'S Providence, which hath been pleaſed to have ſo 
ſpecial a care of thoſe Texts which concern the eſſentials of Faith 
and a good life, that all Copies are agreed in them. 3. Theſe 430 
years are not by the Text confined ro Egypr,but may be extended to 
any place where they were ſojourners ; and the Hebrew word, 4ſber, 
is not to be rendred,which, as relating to the time of their ſojourn- 
ing, but who, as be)onging to the perſons ſojourning, as our Tran- 
ſlation well renders it ; and the ſenſe is, that they were ſojourners, 
or, which is all one, ffrangers,or dwellers in « land that was my theirs, 
as it is ſaid Gen: 15: 13: for 430 years. And the Emphaſis lies in 
the Hebrew word moſhab, which 15 here fitly rendred ſsjourning ; as 
zoſhab, coming from: the fame root, is commonly uſed for a ſojourner, 
or one that lives in a Place or Land which is not his, as Levir. 22. 
To. and 25. 35, 49. Numb. 35. 15. Pſal. 39. 12. There is now but 
one difficulty remains, How the Children of rae! can be ſaid to be 
ſojourners ſo long, ſeing much ofthis time paſſed before they were 
born ? Anſ. As Levi is ſaid to pay tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7. 9. be- 
cauſe he was in the Loyns of Abraham when Abraham paid Tythes ; 
with much more reaſon might the Children of 1ſrael! be ſaid to ſo- 
Journ ſo long,becauſe they ſojourned a great part of itin their own 
perſons,and the reſt in the Loyns of their Parents. And as oft-times 
when the Parents only are mentioned, the Children are included 
or intended, as Gen: 12: 3: thee, i: e: in thy Seed ; and Gen: 13:19: 
I will give it (the Land ) untothee, i: e: to thy Seed; and Jacob is ſaid 
to be brought up again out of Egypt, Gen: 46: 4: to wit, in his Poſte- 
rity ; and David is oft put for his Poſterity, as 1 King:12: 16: Exek: 
34: 23: and 37: 24, 25. why may not Parents alſo be underſtood 
ſometimes, when the Children only are mentioned ? But we need 
not make Suppoſitions, ſeing we have Examples ; the Perſecution 
in Egypt, and deliverance out of it, which happened to the Parents 
only, being attributed to their Poſterity, who neither felt the one, 
norſaw the other, Deut: 26: 5, &'c. Compare Pſal. 66: 6: Judg: 10: 
11,12. And the ſouls of the houſe of Facob ( i: e: ) of the Children . of. 
Iſrael, (for by houſe it isevident he means only Children ) which came 
with Jacob into Egypt; are faid to be threeſcore and ten ſouls, Gen 46: 
. 26,27 In which number and title 7acob himſelf is confeſſedly inclu« 
ded. And therefore upon theivery ſame ground,nnder this title of the 
children of Iſrae!,vre mult underftand 7/72e! himſelf, who being the chief 
author and ſubje& of this ſojourning in Ezypr, it were yareaſonable 


of ſuch an Almighty and All-tuffcient God. And becauſe their - 


EBXODUS. 


4 


to exclude him from the number of theſe ſojourtiers. And this Phraſe 
being once extended to their immediat Parent, may by a parity of 
reaſon be extended to their great Grandfather 4braham,asbeing the 
firſt Author of that famous Peregrination or Sojourning,which be- 
ing begun in Canaan,ended in Egypt. Add to this,that the word 1/rael, 
as it is put for the People or Children of Jſracl,iselſewhere uſed for 
the whole Church of God, as Rom: 9:6: and therefore may well in- 
clude Abraham as the Father,and,under God, the Founder of it. And 
the title of he children of 1ſrael might well be given toall rhar People, 
and to the Family from which they deſcended, becauſe they were 
now known by that name. And that this inaeed was Moſes his mean< 
ing, which 1s here produced,may be further gathered from hence, 
that otherwiſe Moſes had contradiGed himfelf ; for by the years of 
the Lives of Jacob, and Levi, and Kehath, and Amram,and Moſes him- 
ſelf, which he preciſely ſets down, it appears that the ſojourning of the 
Children of 1jrael,ſtrictly ſo called,in Egypr,was not above 215 years. 
And it is abſurd to think that ſo wiſe and learned a man, as all ac- 
knowledge Meſes to have been, ſhould commit ſo groſs an error, e- 
ſpecially ſeing that Generation could eaſily have confuted him. 

41 And it came to paſs at the endof chefour hundred 
and thirty years f, even the ſeif-ſame day k it came to 
paſs, that al! the hoſts of the LORD went out from the 
land of Egypt. 

T If this be the right Tranſlation,the 430 years mentioned Gal:3: 
T7: are to be taken in a latitude,for about or near ſo many years,as 
1s very frequent in Scripture,and other Authors ; elſe there wants 
one year of it, becauſe the Law was not given till about a year after 
their coming out of Egypr-. Nor was it of any concernment to the 
Apoſtle's Argument there,whether it wanted a year of thatnumber 
or no, as here it is. Bur the words may be rendred here, as Gen: 7: 
12: in the body or ftrength of the day, i: e:when the day-light was full, 
and clear, and ſtrong, when it was broad day-light, the Egyptians 
ſeeing, and not being able to hinder them. If it be faid,they wenr 
out by night, Deut: 16: 1: that 1s true,in regard of their reſolution, 
in } preparation,and the beginning of their journey; bur their a&ual 
marching forth was by day-light,or in the morning;nor could it be 
done ſooner from the nature of the thing, and the time neceſſarily 
required for ſo great a work. k This Circumſtance is noted to ſet 
forth the accurateneſs and infallibility of God's Fore-knowledge 
and the efficacy of his Providence in accompliſhing all his own 
Counſels in his own appointed time. 

42 It is * a } night to be much obſerved unto the + 
LORD for bringing them out from the land of Egypt : 16. 6. 
This is that night of the LORD to be obſerved of all the t Heb. 
children of Iſrael in their generations. night of tk 

43 And the LORD faid unto Moſes and Aaron MN OY 
This is the ordinance of the Paſloyer 1: there ſhall no 
ſtranger m2 eat thereof. | 

I This which here followeth is the law or appointment of God 
concerning the celebration of the Paſſover. m Or, foreigner, wha 
is ſo >oth by Nation and Religion : For, if he were circumciſed 
he might cat of it, wer: 44: 48. | : 

44 Bur every man-ſervant that is bought for money, 
when thou haſt circumciſed him », then ſhall he eat 
thereof. | 

z For the Maſter had a power to circumciſe ſuch perſons,Gen: 17: 

12. And though itis probable, that by their intereſt in them, and 
a diligent inſtruCtion of them, they made them willing to receive 
Circumciſion, yet it ſeems they had a power to compe] them to it; 
but then Circumciſion was not to them a Seal of God's Covenant. 
nor of their Relizion, for that muſt be matter of choice, but only a 
civil badge, or a note of that Family or People into which they 
were politically incorporated. 

45 A foreiner, andan hired ſervant ſhall not eac 
thereof o. 

o Excepthe ſubmit to Circumciſion, as ver. 43. See Numb: 9: 14. 

46 * In one houſe ſhall it beeaten, thou ſhalt not , 
carry forth ought of the fleſh abroad out of the houſe p, Num, 
neither ſhall ye break a bone thereof g. gigs 

_ þ Partly becauſe they were all obliged not to go out ofthe Houſe 
till the morning, wer: 22: and to leave none of it till that time.ver: 
10: partly,leaſt it ſhould be either ſuperſtitiouſly or profanely abu- 
ſed ; and partly to ſignify, that Chriſt and Salvation are not to be 
had out of God's Houſe or Church. q Totake out and cat the mar- 
row of it. This was required, partly to mind them of their haſty de- 
parture out of Egypr, wherein they had no leiſure to break and em- 
pty the Bones ; and principally,that ir might be an evident Type 
of the Lord Jeſus,in whom this was literally fulfilled, John 19. 36. 
The Bones were burnt with the other. remainders of the Lamb. 


47 All the congregation of Iſrael ſhall + keep it. 


| 


- 


_ Chop. Xt p 


"8. 


See Deutt 


4+ He 


wants 


\ *Ch 
| 23-1 
| Deut 
| 2, 


*Chap. 


48 And * when aſtranger ſhall ſojourn with thee 
and will keep the Paſſover to the LORD, let all his f Heb 
males be circumciſed, and then let him come near,and * N 
keep it: andhe ſhall be as one that is born in the land: I4 " 
for no uncircumciſed perſon ſhall eat thereof. 
49 One law ſhall be tohim that is home-born, and | 
unto the ſtranger that ſojournethameng you. 
fo Thus didall the children of Iſrael : as the LORD 
commanded Moſes and Aaron, ſo did they. | 
5x And it came to pals the ſelf-ſame day, that the 
LORD did bring thechildren of Iſrael out of the land 
of Egypt * by their armies. 
CHAP. XIII. 
God commands all the firſt-born to be conſecrated, 1, 2. The day of their go« 
ing forth out of Egypt to be had in remembrance,z. The feaft of unleaven=« 
ed bread to be kept in the land of Cannan, 5--8, The firfilings of beafts to 
be ſet apart for the Lord, 12. The reaſon of it, 15. The way Godled them 
znto the wilderneſs, 18. Moſes carries Joſeph's bones out of Egypt, 19. 1j- 
rael encampeth at Etham, 20. God condu&eth them by a Pillar of cloud by 


* Chap.6 
26, 


$ 


| 


any, and a pillar of fire by night, 22, 
| AND 


EIN DIL) 
- IO TEES 


29.and 
19. Det 
T5. I9, 


| Ezek, 4 
3 


9, 
T Heb. 
Cauſe 0 f 
over, 


T Or;k: 


þ [ wh 


4 AY WEI" De 


yo 


 Denth 
6. 
eb. 5 


+ of oh 
ation! 


| 


& 


34 19 IJfrael, both of man and of beaſt 4: itis mine e. WR > | 
Lev. 27 a To my uſe and {ervice, in manner as T hall herzafter explain.: | 1s uſed Deuz: 21: 4: 1/a: 66: 3: becauſe being conſecrated to God, it 
26. And ſan#ify, i:e: command all the people to fanCtify, as Moſes did, | was not to be applicd to any profane or common uſe. 
Numb. z. ver: 12. 6 wiz, If they be Males, as it ishimited, wer: 12. c—_ 14 4 And it thai; be when thy ſon asketh thee + in + Heb. i * 
n3. an” Child which is the antes vp of _ tare ear ini = time to come, ſfayirg, What 1s this ? that thou ſhalt ſay 970r70W. 
Fe any Wives, either together, orſucceliively, hi yeve- | ___ . | 
"Luk. 2-23- ” "oy bf cds ww a Zrit-bory, 4 Whether clean or unclean,tho OS him, By [trengrh of hand the LORD br ought us 
4. different manner ; whereof ſee Numb: 18: 13, 15, 17. e By ſpecial | Out COM Egypt. f 6m the kc uie of bondage F. 
right and title ; as being by my fingular care and favour preſerved | 9 Which iS auded to reach Parents in all ſucceeding Ages, that 
from the common deſtruftion, and therefore I challenge a peculiar | 1t 1s their Uuty to 1nitruct their ( hildren in the word and works 
intereſt in them,and dn hereby require thar they be devoted to me. | of God, and in the nature and reaſons of cvery particular kind or 
> And Moles ſaid unto the people, Remember this one's of God's worthip and lervice. See Deut; 15: 5. Pſal: 66: 4; s 
:n which ye came out from Egypt,out of the houſe | = 14 _, 3 
ay ys da LE for by ftrenerh go the LORD 15 Aid it came to paſs, when Pharaoh would hard- + 
4 Heb. ſer- - L "oy wn. He f; fin ir 7 ron .- cher thall oe havoc ly let us go, that the LORD ſlew all the firſt-born inthe 
ws boon bc Soviin : land of Egypt, both the firſt-born of man, and the firſt- + 
* Chap. 4 This day came ye out, * in the month Abib f. eges _ , therefore T facr BY aa op gw all 5 
23- 15- f See Exod: 12: 2: in the Spring time, the moſt proper ſeaſon for aq PeNern tNe MATrIX, DCINg MAIES 3 DuT A | che firft= BL” 
Deut. 36. 2 jong journey. born of my children i redeem. 3M 
i, 5 And it ſhall be when the LORD ſhall bring thee 16 And it ſhal! be for a token upon thine hand, and & 
into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and | for frontletsr between thine eyes: For by ſtrength of "A 
the Amorites,, and the Hivites, and the Jebuſites : | hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt. 3 
which he ſware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land — OS of it 2on gt "og _ OO {tall m_ ; 
E . . os .'- Ss ur deliverance from Egypt as freſh and evident to you, and ta 
| Che: FR flowing with mrg ww A that thou ſbalt keep your Children, asany thing which you ſee hanged or written upon 
25,29 this lerVIce £ :N ns Month. _ : one anothers Forcheads. See Ezek. 9.4. It ſeems ſtrange to me, 
| g Which is ipoken of before, and inthe following Verſes. From | that they that und-rſtand the [iz on the hand, and the memorial be 
this place ir 1s evident, the Ijraelites were nor obliged ro this ſervice tween the eyes, verle 9. Mcraphorically, {ſhould unierſtand the front= 
in the Wilderneſs without a particular command” from God. See | Jets berween the eyes 1n this place properly, ſeing the Phraſe is per- - 
Deut: 12: I, 9. fectly the ſame , only here is a more particular alluſion to the cu- 
FChap.12. 6 * Seven days thou ſhalt eat unleavened bread, and from of the Egyptians, which uſed to wear ſome devices upon their : 
15, 16. in the ſeventh day ſhall be a feaſt to the LORD. Foreheads, which properly they called Fo:aphoth, which were Me- : 
Unleavened bread ſhall be caren {-yen davs: and mortals of their Idols,or of ſomething relating to them. And there- bo 
#88 nd bean ts 6 il 1 FO L fore it ſeems unlikely,that he would here preſcribe the .uſe of the 'D 
there ſhajl noleavened brea | DC 1c&8 WIN NCC, RENNCT | fame things to the Jews; and the more probable meaning of the - 
ſhall there be leaven ieen with thee in all thy quarters. | Phraſe is only this, that this praftice would be as effeftualand uſe- | 
3 nd chow theis thaw: cx ow ts cs day, ſaying, a rememvrancer of this mighty and glorious work of izod in 
This is done becauſe of that 2vhich the LORD did uno | /' meg 101 6h HRJPy, as thoſe contrivances were-w the 51pe 
me, when 1 came torth our of Egypr. ; ; 17 TAnd it came to paſs when Pharaoh had let the ”," 
FSeeverſc 9 Andait ſhall be for * a ſign unto thee upon thine people go, that God led them not through the way of E 
pi - hand b,and for a _ quran ay 6 _—_ _— the | the land of the Philiſtines s, although that was near? ; 
EE LORDS law may be in thy mouth : for with a ſtrong | gg, &4q {aid, Leſt peradventure # the people repent 
18. hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt. chem when they ſee war x, and they return to Egypt y. 
Prov. r. 9. a 20 aagsgagr in of this Feaſt ſhall be hi _— —_ _ _ s A fierce and warlike People, whe:eof they had fad and late £x- 
which : makes, or a ring, or any thing elſe which he "She ; Sy oat” Ee, 
Mats 23.5. o = Mi Hand rm. Fido bean any hing a gegen: periefice, 1 Chron: 7. 21. #t There being - way bur a few days 
By er g's agaAh ranen Fave Cenuenely Axcd lnpaik. Con journey between Egypt and Canzan. u God ſpeaks after the manner 
rips ys 6: gpm of 22: 24: Haz: 2: 23, iIn Bod od any bg men, for nothing was unknown or uncertain to him. Though 
Monument or Memorial, which 1s placed between, and therctore e = INES db. oy py onge _ y WE ly cou— * 
diretly before a-man's Eyes, WES on eo ee they were likely to do, becauſe the War would probably 
. 2< | to -mbr: the thing whic - aan : 
RI as forger, Such Proverbial Phraſes are uſual in Scripture, | 2*,9"S and hot, and their Bodies were much weakned, and theix 
as De: E. &:  Piov: 3: 3: and 6 51: and 5+ 4+ a Wt woos Courage broken by a tedious and grievous Hnengy - 
underſtood literally, as the ſuperititious Jews underſtood them, =, _— —_ = _ - —_ ry ys EY — revs a 
who hence derive their cuſtom of wearing ſcrolls of rarchment bY bn, wan - 29 rg Rn Þ ft h 3h tarch 
upon their Foreheads, and Arms, and Garments, which they cal] COIN di ; P on their ig xc woofer pay, grade tf agar ; 
Phyla&eries, wherein they wrote certain Portions of Scripture. - Perienge On ES 4a 3 Of God = Mount Sinai Par” ola: "Com 
But they might as we!:] have added parcels of God's Law to be kepr —_— "Prout ind Bacours ements there given them. Bur 
in their Mouths, becauſe it follows, That the Lords law may be in thy anger th hic - S FI dy oe ok 
mouth ; from whence we may better infer, that neither mouth no , —_ nat ich is here mentioned was gs agen Þ> +; os he vo 
Ne Ss tied for then ir had bes $M reaſon of his Counſel, but there were other cauſes of it ; the 
—— LA gl” xt 1,0 Often a Parchment between their kyes that > + wok to'be ge = the os. _ yg prot - - ae —_ 
| ; , ws banpenens - t: $:2. to the Iniquity o > 
it might Brin their Mouths, but figuratively,as they are common!y ha ga we br pun 2 ey ears your er nn, —— 


| 


1 


Lap. 


| 


a Rd en 


3 hay. XIIF. 


| tus place with Numb: 18: 15. 


ETD 


EXO 


ND the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, -ſaying, 
2 * Sanctify unro mie #4 all the tiſt-born 5. 


*Chap.2 2+ | 
J whatſoever openeth the womb c among the children of 


29. and 


underitood in Scripture. 2 ; 
10 Thou ſhait therefore keep this ordinance in his 
{caſon from year to year |. 

k Heb. From aays to days. But drys in the Hebrew Tongue are 
oft put for a compleat year, Of which ſee Gen: 4: 3: Lev: 25: 29: 
AMOS 4: 4. | F 

it 4 Andit ſhall be when the LORD ſhall bring 
thee intothe landof the Canaanites 1, as he ſware unto 


thee, and to thy fathers, and ſhall give it thee : 
1 Unler which general name all the othex Nations are contained, 
as being all the Children of Canaan. | 
*Chap.22. 12 * Thatchou ibalr + ſet apart #2 unto the LORD 


29nd 34. all that openeth the matrix, and every fritling that co- 
19. Deut. meth of a beaſt which thou haſt ; the males thall be the 
i: LORDS ». 


m ( 3: e:) Separat it from the reſt; reſign thy right in it to God. 
Heb. Cauſe it to paſs, not through the Fire, as that Verb is uſed, 
cauſe ro paſs Deut: 18: 10: * 2 Kings 16: 3: but under the Rod; as itis uſed,and 
over. more fully expreiled, Lv: 27: 32: which was the Rite when any 
h thing was ſeparated and conſecrated to God. » Devored to him, 
Either to be {acrificed, if it was clean, or to be otherwiſe deſtroyed, 
if it was unclean, as it here follows. 
I3 And every firſtling of an aſs o thou ſhalt redeem 
10:,k4, *with a + lamb : and if thou wilt not redeem. it, then 
thou fbalt break his neck p: and all the firft-born of man 


amongſt thy children halt thou redeem. | 

-o An unclean Creature, and therefore this Rule was to be obſer- 
ved in all other unclean Creatures, as appears, 1. Becauſe the rea- 
ſon of this Law is common to all ſuch. 2. By comparing this 
3- Becauſe the firſt-born of all Beaſts 
were appropriated to God, and becauſe many of them were unclean, 
and ſo could nor be fſacrificed,there was'no other way of offering them 
to Tod, bur by redemption, or a price paid far them. And the 


DUS. Chap. XI 

Creatures was allowed and required. The Aſs alone 1s here nameg | 

for ail the rei', beczuſe this Creature was moſt common, and moſt 

uſcfu], ani yet was —_ be /pared ; whence it waseaſfy to infer, 
h 


that this courſe was muCTh rather to be obſerved in other Creatures 
which were of leſs uſe. p Or, Cut of *his neck, or head, as the word 


7 As afterwards they attempted to do, Numb: 14: up- 
On a like occaſion. 

18 But God * ledthe people about through the ye * Chap? 
of the wilderneſs of the r2d-fea, and the children of 1{- r,. .. 


rael went up f harneſſed z out of the land of Egypt. Þ Or, 
z Or, Armed, or girt with Swords and Belts about the fifth Rib, fve in 8 

as the Hebrew word may imply. Burt it doth not appear how, or 7%. 
whence they ſhovld get their Arms, or how the Ezyprians would 
permit ſo numerous a People to have, and to keep Arm-,cfpecially 
when they had a long time oppreſſed and exaſperated them, and 
made them deſperat. Ir is true, ſome few of them might procure 
Arms, but this word is here uſe concerning the whole Body of 
them. Others render it by fves, five and five in a. Rank, thar is, by 
an uſual Synecdoche, in Military Order, not doubrfully and fear- 
fully,but confidently and couragioufly; not confuſcd!y,as men that 
ſteal or run away, but in good order, ſo as one might nor hinder 
another. Which Interpretation is ſtrengthned by comparing Joſ: 1: 
14. It may be rendred girt, to wit, about the fifth Rib,as the-word 
implies, the place where men uſed. to gird their Garments, this 
being the ufual poſture for Travellers : He implies that they went 
'out reſolved upon, and prepared for their journey. 

19. And Moles took the bones of Joſeph a with him: 
for he had ftraitly ſworn oy children of Ifrael b, ſay- 


ing *, God will ſurely viſit you, and ye ſhall carryup * Gen: 50; _ 


A 
p: 


ſingle exception of the price of a og in this Caſe ( Deut: 23: 18: ) 
doth ſutficicatly intimate, that the & rige of all ogher wngean 


my bones away hence with you. 25. Joſh. 
4 And the other Patriarehs, as appears from Aﬀs 7. 16. b The 24- 32. | 
Oath was taken only þy the Parents ; but becauſe the matter of it Numb. 
was not perſonal, and.of particular .concernment-/ to them, but 33: 6. 
common to them and their Children; therefore it obli ed both the Chap.40. 
Parents and their Children, as Moſes here fignifierh. : 3 Numbg 
LE 4- 14s 
20 \ And * they took their journey from Suc- Dn 
coth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wil- 33. Pfl. 
derneſs. ' 7 8. 14.and 
| 21 And* the _ c went before them £2» rh AE 
4 4 ay x. 


= 


89. - 


| ® Chap. 
' x3. 18. 
 * Numb. 
33: 7- 


® Chap. 
+ 21, 


© Pal. 
IO5. 25. 


© Numb. 
33+ 3+ 


v Toſh, 24. 
6. 1 Mac: 
4- 9+ 


ard Ws —S 
+ gk ” 
Chap. 


® Nch. 9. 


L % % 


day in a pillar of a cloud e to lead them the way f,and 
by night in a pillar of fire, to give chem light to go by 


d night. 

wn —amge God, whoſe Preſence and Condutt the Iſraelites had 
in the Wilderneſs, as appears from 1 Cor. 10. 4, 9. Compare Heb 
1. 26. who is ſometimes called the Ange! of the Lord, chip. 14. 19 
becauſe he was, and was to be his Father's Angel or Meſſenger, 
ſent by God unto Men to ratify his Covenant with them; w hence 
he is called the Angelof the Covenant, Mal: 3: 1: as he is upon ano- 
ther account called the Angel of his Preſence, Iſa: 63: 9. «d Not b 
local Motion, but by his gracious and powerful Operations for and 
about them. e It was but one Pillar, Numb: 9g: 15. 16. having two 
different appearances and uſes ofa Cloud by day, to defend them 
from the heat, Pſal: 105: 39: which in thoſe parts was exceſſive ; 
and of a Fire by night ro illuminat them. Ir was a Cloud ecrecte.. 
' towards Heaven, like a Pillar upwards ; but downwards tat and 
broad, ſpread over the body of the People, and afterwards more 
eminently over the Tabernacle. f Which was alrogether necel{;- 


Iy in thoſe vaſt and pathleſs Deſerts, Numbers 10: 33: Deuterouomic 


| by 

I: 33. ; 
22 He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day. 
* nor the pillar of fire by night from before che people p, 
g Whilſt they continued in the Wilderneſs, and had necd of ſuch 


dircQion. 
CHAP. XIV. 
God commandeth the Iſraelites to encamp at Pihahiroth, 1, 2. The reaſon 
why, 3, 4. Pharaoh and his ſervants repent for lecting the people go, 5. 
Purſue and overtake the Iſraelites, 9. The Iſraelites are afraid, 10. 
And murmur againſt Moſes, 11, 12. Moſes encourAges the people with a 
promiſe of deliverance, 13, 14. God encouraging Moſes, 15. Bids the 
people go forward, 16, 17, 18. God leadeth the Iſraclites by a pillar of 
Cloud, 19. Moſes dividing the ſea, 21. The Ijraebtes paſs over on ar) 
ground, 22. The Egyptians with all their forces purſue them into the 
ſea, 23, 24, 25. God commands Moſes to cauſe the waters to rerurn on 
rhe Egyptians, 26. The ay return, 2Je The Egyptians drowned, 28 
Iſrael's ſafety, 30. And faith, 31+ 
N B "the LORD ſpake « unto Moſes, fay- 


in 
a Or of had ſpoken, to wit, before they came to Succoth, chap: 
12: 37. For what was there briefly and generally expreticd, Is 
here more largely and particularly declared, together with the oc- 
caſion of it, which was God's command. 

2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, * that they turn 
and encamp before * Pi-hahiroth b, berween Migdol c 
and the ſea, over againſt Baal-zephon 4: before ic ſhall 
ye encamp by the ſea. | 

b Heb. The mouth of Hiroth, i: e: the entrance or ſtraits of Hiroth, 
two great mountains, berween which they marched, and were cn- 


cloſed on both ſides. c A City in Egypt, Jer: 44: 1: wherein it is 
thought there was a Gaziſon. d Another place of note, ſituated in 


an hig" place, and having a fair and large Proſpe&, and peſlibly a 
Gariſfon too. 


2 For Pharaoh will ſay of the children of Ifſrae], 
They are entangled 1n the land, the wilderneſs hath 


ſhut them in e. | 
e They are incloſed with Mountains, and Gariſons, and De. 


ſerts. 


4 And * I will harden Pharaohs heart, that he ſhal] 
follow after them, and I will be honoured f upon Pha- 
raoh, and upon all his hoft, that the Egyptians may 
know that I am the LORD. And they did ſo, 

F By the manifeſtation of my Power and Ju'lice. 

5 © And it was told the king of Egypt that the 
Pceple fled g: * and the heart of Pharaoh and of his 
ſervants was turned againſt the people, and they ſaid, 
Why have we done this &, that we have let Iſrael go 


from ſerving us ? 
z Did nor only depart fo 


& 


r three days to ſacrifice at Horeb, as Moſes 
pretende1, but deſigned an eſcape and flight, as appeared by their 
ſpeedy march, and other ci: cumſtances. + They who never truly 
_— of their Sins, now heartily repent of their only good 
A; 


6 Abd he made ready his chariot,and cook his people 


with him. JE 
7 And he took fix hundred choſen chariots 7 and all 
k the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of 


them F. | ; 

7 Queſt. How could he uſe or carry his Chariots, when all his 
Horſes were killed by the Plague ? Exod: 9: 6. Anſw. That Plague 
flew only the Horſes which were in the Field, cha/:9:3: not choſe 
kept in Houſes, as the Chariot-Horſes generally were, and now 
are. k i; e: A great number; all that could be got together in 
haſte, which the preſent ſervice required. / Over the men that 
fought our of every Chariot. Or, over all of them, the command 
of all theſe Chariots being diſtributed to ſeveral Captains or Com- 


ders- 
8 And the LORD hardned the heart of Pharaoh 


king of Egypt, and he purſued after * the children of 


Iſrael: and the children of Iſrael went out with an high 
hand 2. | 

m Either 1. Of God,with a Divine Hand or Power, by compa- 
ring Exod. 13. 16. Or 2. Their own, not with Hands hanging 
down, a poſture betraying weakneſs, and fainting, fear,and ſhame, 
Heb: 12: 12: but with Hands lifted up ; with courage, and confi- 
gence, not like Fu itives,but like valiant and victorious Souldiers, 
openly, boldly, refolvedly ; as men arc ſaid to jmwith 4 high hand, 
Numb: 15. 39: that fin in ſuch a manner. 


9 But the * Egyptians purſued after them ( all the 


rc 


e 


1s Chariots, and upon his horſemen. 


neſs ts them x, but it gave light by night zo theſe + 3 fo 
that the one came nor near the other all thenight. 


darkneſs to mind, an 
rogether hinder them from motion or ation, as that alſo did for 
three days. f To the Jſraelites, as the oppoſition theweth. 


and the LORD cauſed the Sea to go back by a 
Eaſt-wind y all that night, and made the Sea dry land : 
and the waters were * divided z, ; 


and South,and to dry and harden the Mud 
Yet the wind could never have done ſo 
ſo ſpeedily, if there had not been an higher, even a divine hand to Pfal. 166 
manage and improve it. z So largely, that a great number of the 9- and 


Iſraelites might march in one rank, and the whole n 
| £0 a good way in it in the time here mentioned. 


of the Sea upon the dry ground, and the waters were a 3 
wall b unto them ontheir right hand, and on their lefe, P141.78- 


height, and for their defence, 


his chariots, and his horlemen, 


** 


'DUS. Chap 


his army ) and overtook them 'encamping by the ſes, 
beſide Pi-hahiroth before Baal-zephon., | 

10 T And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of 
Iſrael lifrup their eyes,and behold,the Egyptians march= 
:d after them, and they were ſore afraid », and the 


chi.dren of iſrael cryed out o unto the LORD. 
= Which is not ſtrange ; theſe being now a People of low Spi- 
its, depreſſed . y long and grievous Servitude ; being alſo gene- 
rally unarmed, wearicd with their journey, and their fears aggra- 
vated, by the preſence and outcries of their Wives and Chi!dren. 
Bur they \k-ould have ſupported themſelves by the conſideration of 
-he mighty Power of :,od, of which they had late and great expe- 
rence. 0 Partly by Petition, and partly by Complaint and Ex« 
politulation. 
1: And they ſaid unto Moſes, Becauſe there were 


- "1 


WP 2 7 99 VO 


0 graves in Egypt, haſt thou taken us away to die in 
he wilderneſs? Wherefore haſt thou deait thus with 
us, tO.Carry us forth out of Egypt ? 
12 * Is not this the word that we 
zypt, faying, Let us alone, that we may ſerve the E- 5: 27: au 
;yptians? for it had been better for us to ſerve the E- " 7 
gyPptians,than that we ſhould die in the wilderneſs. 
13 4 Anq Moles faid unto the people * Fear ye not; * 2Chry, 


1e will ſhew to youto day : | for the Egyptians whom 


p where 
ye have ſeen 9 to day, ye ſhall ſee them again no more have /:;,* 
for ever, the Egypti.| 


or ſtagger through unbelief, but with quier Minds look upto God. &Cc. 
it notes the frame of their Minds, not the poſture of their Bodies. 

/ Or, as ye have ſeen them, to wit, alive and armed, and ready 

ro - dogg you ; forotherwile tazey did ſee them dead and diſarmed, 
Verje 30. 


itand friiip, and ſee the Salvation ofthe'LORD, which 29: "5,1. 


r, for © 


p Heb. Make your ſelves to fland ; let not your hearts fail and fink, 9 #0 day, | 


did tell thee in E- * Chap, | 


14 The LORD f(kall fight for you, and ye ſhall hold 
your peace r. 

r (7.e.) Ye ſhall contribute nothing to the Viftory, neither by 
your words, nor by your deeds ; for this Hebrew word ſfgnifies a 
Deflation not only from Speech,but from Aion too, as 2 Sam: 19: 
11: Pſal: 83: 1: Iſa: 42: 14, 15. Or rather, do you hold your peace,the 
uture Tenſe for the Imperative, as it is very frequent ;« ceaſe 
your Murmuring againſt the Lord and me. | 


I5 YT And the LORD faid unto Moſes; Wherefore 
cryeſt thou unto me s ?. Speak unto the children of IC- 
rael, that they go forward. ; 
s By fervent, though ſecret Prayer ; for which he doth not re« 
prove him, but only bids him turn his Prayer into Aion, Com- 
pare Joſ. 7. 10, 13. 

16 But lift chou up thy rod, and. ſtretch out thine 
hand over the ſea,anddivide it ?t : and the children of If. 
-ael ſhall go on dry ground through the midft of the ſea. 

z ( 7. e. ) Do thou command it in my Name to divide it ſelfhi. 
ther and thither, and-I will divideit. 

17 And1, behold, I wiil harden the hearts of the 
Egyptians, and they ſhall follow them : and I will get 
me honour upon Pharaoh, and upen all his hoſt, upon 


| 
” 
py 
b; 
j 


18 And the Egyptians ſhall know that T am the 
LORD, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, 
upon his chariots, and upon hjs horſemen. 

I9 And the angel of God * which went before the * Chap. | 


YT TOE Pg Ins 


camp of Iſrael, removed and went behind them @; and 73: 21: 
che piliar of the cloud went from before their fac 


e,and 
{ſtood behind them. ; 
Not changing his place, for he was the Omnipreſent God, wer. 
15, but his operation, from leading the J1{-azlites forward in their 
way tothe proteCting of them from their Purſuers. 

20 Anditcame between the camp of the Egyptians, 

9 La 
and the camp of Iſrael, and * it wasa cloud and dark- © $* If 
FM * SO 
r Cor. 10 
I. 


to whom it brought their former horrible 


x viz. The Egyptians, 
Laid both exceedingly affright them, and al- 


d 


21 And Moſes ſtretched out his hand over the Sea, 


itrong 


Y A proper Inſtrument borh to divide that Sea, which lay North 16. and4 
$ 1 to di 1 at the bottom of the Sea, 23- # 
hat the Jraelites mightwalk upon it. See Gen: 8: 13: Exod: 15; 8g Nehemyg! 


great a work, eſpecially not 11. | 


umber might 114. 3- © 


22 And * the children of Iſrael went « into the midſt * yyymb,! 


3. 8. 

s About midnight, as may be gathered from wer. 24. + Both for 73; | 
s Cor. rol 

? s py - T. 

23 And theEgyptians purſued, and went in after Heb. iu | 
hem, to the midit of the Sea; eyenall Pharaoh's horſes, 2% -/ 


hoſes and chariots of Pharaoh , and his horie-men and 
1 


U 


(== 


24 And 


" 
F Joſh. j* $ 


, 
bY 
&- : 


Fd 


4 * 
- 6 
4 v3 


Q —— EET IEEE Ra 


c Fo. LORD 4 looked e unto the hoſt of the Egyptians, 
through the pillar of fire and of the cloud,and troubled 


f che hoſt of the Egyptians, 


© The night was anciently divided, not by hours, as now it 15, 
bur by warches, which ſometimes were accounted four, and ſome- 
times but three ; howſoever the laſt ofthem was calVed the morning- 
watch. Then when they hoped for moſt advantage in the purſuar, 
they met with their greateſt diſaſter. d Called the 4»g2! of God,v.19: 
By which promiſcuous uſe of theſe Titles it ſufficiently appears,that 
this was no ordinary Angel, but the Son of God. e With an eye of 
indignation and vengeance, as that phraſe 1s uſed, Job 497 12. See 
alſo mos ©: 4. f With moſt terrible and prodigious Winds, and 
Rains, and Lightnings, and both claps and bolrs of Thunder, as 
may be gathered from Exod: 15. 10. Pſal: 77. 18, 19. and as ſome an- 
cient Hiſtorians relate, with terrours alſo in their minds, ©. 


25 And took off their chariot-wheels g, + that they 
drave them heavilie þ : ſo that the Egyprians ſaid, Ler 
us flee from the face of Iſrael : for the LORD fighteth 


for them, againſt the Egyptians -. | Fe 

g Either burning them with Lightning,or tearing them in pieces 
with Thunder-bolts,or looſening them,and making them to fall oit. 
þ Heb. and he made him, or them, the ſingular number for the plu- 
ral, 7. e. The Egyptians, or their Chariots, to go heavily, hardly and 
flowly, either for want of Wheels, or for breaches in them, or be- 
cauſe the Rain had ſoftened the bottom. of the Sea, or becauſe the 
Lightnings and Thunders affrighted and diſpirired their Horſes. 
7 Prodigious ſtupidity ! They did not underſtand and conſider this, 
though it was notorious,to them eſpecially,by many great and freſh 
inſtances, till it was too late to prevent it : therein being a Type of 
moſt Sinners, who will not be convinced, nor repent, till they be 

aſt all benefit by it. 
Y 26 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Stretch gut 


thine hand over the ſea, that the waters may come 
again upon the Egyptians 3 upon their chariots, aiid 
upon their horſemen. 

27 And Moſes ſtretched forth his hand over the ſea, 


+ Or,nade 
them to go 
heavily, 


and the ſea returned to his ſtrengch & when the morn- 


ing appeared : and the Egyptians fled againlt it /: and 
the LORD + overthrew the Egyptians in the midſt of 


ſwok of. the ſea. be 
Deut: 11: | Tg jt's natural and ordinary courſe, and motion, which is ſwift 
+ and ſtrong,which it had been hitherto reſtrained by a ſtronger hand, 
and rendered in a manner impotent and weak. But now, Sampſon- 
like, when its bonds are broken,it puts forth its former and natural 
ſtrength. But indeed this word may belong to the morning,and fo 
a learned man tranſlates the place,and that very agreeably to the uſe 
and order ofthe Hebrew words, the Sea returned, to.,wit, to its courſe, 
' when the morning appeared according to, or in his ſtrength, 1. e. when it 
was full and clear morning ; as we off read of the ſtrength of the day. 
See Gen: 7: 13. Job 21: 23. So the ſtrength of the morning is here op- 
poſed' to the morning-watch. / Againſt the Sea, for which way 

ſoever they fled,the waters met them, and fought againſt them. 

28 And the * waters returned, and covered the cha- 


riots, and the horſemen, and all the hoſt of Pharaoh 
that came into the ſea' after them m2 : there remained 


*Plal:106- not ſo much as * one of them. 
IT. m ( i.e. ) Afﬀeer the Children of 1j-ae!. Note here, the relative 1s 
- put without an antecedent before it ; the antecedent being to be un- 
derſtood and gathered out of the following Verſe, or out of the 
courſe of the {tory. An obſervation which is very uſeful for the 
underſtanding of many Scriptures. See the Note on Gen: 3: 1. 

29 Bur the children of Itracl walked upon dry land in 
the midſt of the ſea ; and the waters were a wall unto 
them on their right hand and on their lefc. 

20 Thus the LORD faved Iſrael that day out of the 
hand of the Egyptians: and Iſrael ſaw the Egyptians 


dead upon the 1ea-ſhore », 

2» Which was done either 1. By the natural. power of the Sea, 
which caſteth up its dead bodies after a certain time ; till which 
time God cauſed the 7ſraelites ro abide near the Sea,that they might 
ſee this for their comfort, Or, 2. By the mighty power of God, 
which brought them, and their Arms too, as many probably con- 
ceive, to ſhore, before the uſual time. Queff. How could the 1/rae- 
lites, both they and their Cattle, in ſo little time get over that great 
Sea ? Avſw. 1.'Che Hebrewand ſome other Interpreters deny that they 

. went over, and tell us, they only went into the Sea, and fetched a 
compaſs in it, that they might allure the Egyprians to follow them, 
and then by Moſes his condutt returned to the Egyptians ſhore again. 
The principal ground of which Opinions this, 'That as they went 
into the Sea out of the Wilderneſs of Etham, Exod: 13: 20. 1o they 

. came again out of the Sea into the Wilderneſs of Etham, Numb: 3 3:8. 
Bur the ſameneſs of the name doth not prove that it is the ſame place, 
nothing being more frequent in Scripture, than for divers places to 
be called by one and the ſame name. And the Jſ/2elites might poſ- 
fibly give the name of Er/ham to this Deſart on the Arabian ſide of the 
Red-ſea, either for its great reſemblance to that DNeſart ſo called on 
the E-yptian ſide ; or to intimat, that God by dividing the Sea, had 
made thatand this to be one continued Defart. Or the name of Etham 
might be common to all that Deſart at the end of the Red-Sea, and 
on both ſides of it. Auſw. 2. They might all conveniently paſs over 
the Sea to the frabiantſhore in the time allowed for ir, either by the 
mighty power of God which could calily make both Men and Beaſts 
to do it in much leſs than ordinary time, or even by the courſe of 
nature ; for thar part of the Sea was not above eight or nine miles 
over, as Geographers and others affirm. And the time alloted for 
their paſſage ſeems to me to be much more thin Interpreters have 
aſſigned for it. For the Eryptians and Iſraelites were divided one from 
another by the cloudy Pillar all che night,ver: 20. and a ſtrong | aſt- 
wind blew all that night, ver: 2x. The next MOrning, as I appre- 
bend it, the Cloud Rill keeping between them, and poſlibly coyer- 


+ Heb: 


* Hab: 3. 


8, 10. 


EXODUS. 


And it came to paſs, that in the morning watch , 


| 


; Veity probable from the nature and reaſon of the thing, ſtand deba- 


Chap. 


ing the Egyptians with gro's and horrible darkneſs which hindred 
their march, the whole body of the 1ſraelires, and their Cattel roo, 
are drawn by Moſes his direction near the ſhore, and, it may be,the 
Cattcl were put into the Sea, all which might well take up moſt of 
that day ; then rowards the evening they enter into the Sea,and ſo 
p:oceed, and the Cloud withdrawing further from the Ezyprians, and 
following the {ſraelites, the Egyptians purſue after them, and, as it is 


ting ſome conſiderable time, when they came to the ſhore, wherker 
they ſhould venture to follow them into the Sea or no. Ar laft,the 
worſt Counſel prevails, as it generally happens when a People are 
under a Divine Infatuarion, and intro the Sea they oO, and by the 
beginning of the morning-watch they draw near the 1/-aelites, when 
(zod ſeaſonably appears for 1722's tuccour, and puts a ſtop to the 
march of the Egyptians, So the morning watch mentioned wer. 24, I 
rake to be, not the morning-watch of that night, mentioned ver: 20 

21, ( for al that night, and therefore rhe morning-wartch of that 
night, which was a third, or at leaſt a fourth part of it, was now 
paſt and gone ) but the next-morning-watch after that night, and 
the ſucceeding day ; which ſeems much more reaſonable, than to 
ſhrink up the maich, firſt of the 1-aelites, and then of the Egyptians 

into about three hours time,which is the time between rhe midnight 
and the morning-watch, Nor is there any thing in the Text which 
inthe leaſt contradi&s this Opinion, bur only that this days interval 
and work isnot mentioned in this Story ; whereas ſuch omiſſions are 
frequent in Scripture-relations,in which the ſubſtance only 1s men- 
tioned, and many circemſtances omitted, whereof we have ſeen 
ſome inttances already, and ſhall meet with many more hereafter. 


31 And [ſrael faw that great Fwork which the LORD + 


did upon the Egyptians: and the peoplefeared the Lord, #994 
and believed the LORD, and his ſervant Moſes. 


CHAP. XY. 


Moſes and the people proiſe the Lord, 1, &c. They want water, 22. The 
waters of Marah are litter, 23. Tae perple murmure againſt Moſes, 24. 


Hz cricth unto the Lord, the waters are ſweetued, 25, They come to 
El, where they find 12 wells of water, and threeſcore and ten palms 
res, 27. | 
'Hen ſang * Moſes and the children of Iſrael e this 
ſong unto the LORD 5, and ſpake, ſaying, I will 
: 9 
ſing unto the LORD ; for he hath triuniphed glorioully, 
the horſe and his rider hath he thrown into the ſea. 
a Moſes compoſed the ſong, and he, togerher with the Iſraelites, 
ſung it. 6 Unto the honour and praiſe of God. 


2 The LORD is my ſtrength and * ſong +, and he « x 

is become my falvation? he is my God,-and I will pre- 02x 

pare him an habitation c ; my father's God, and 1 will Pfal:r 

exalt him- and 2 

+ The matter or ſubje& of the preſent Song of praiſe. c A place 22410 

for his Service and Worſhip, where he will Jeet] by his ork _ and x, 
I4. 


ſence, | 
3 The LORD js a man of war 4; the LORD is his 1®? 
ame. 

d An eminent Warrior ; as the phraſe is uſed 1 S$am:17:33. Thus 


an eloquent man 1s called 2 man of words, Exod: 4: 10. and a mighty 
man, a man of arm, Job 22: 8. 3: 


4 Pharaohs chaitots and his hoſt hath he caſt e into 
the ſea : his choſen captains alſo are drowned in the 
red-ſea. 


e With great force like an Arrow out of a Bow ; as the Hebrew 
word fſignihes. 


5 The deeps have covered them ; * they ſank into * Nets 
the bottom as a ſtone. + It, 

6 Thy right hand, O LORD, is become plorious 
in power : thy right hand, O LORD, hath daſhed in 
pieces the enemy. | 

7 Andin the greatneſs of thine excellency * thou haſt 
overthrown them that roſe up againſt thee:thou ſenteſt 
forth thy wrath, 2bich conſumed them * as ſtubble +. 

© By thy great and glorious Power. + As eaſily, and as ſpeedily, * ff: 


and as irrecoverably. & 47: 
8s * And with the blaſt of thy noſtrils F the waters 7 
were gathered together : the floods f ſtood upright as *Chap 
an heap * and the depths were congealed g in the heart 27- 
h of the ſea. " , ny 
T Or, of thine anger, to wit, that vehement Eaſt-wind. wer: x0. 2 The 
and ch.14. 21. which was raiſed by thine anger in order to the ruin of ©* 
thine Enemies. f Heb. the ſtreams, or the flowing waters, whoſe nas 
ture it 1s to be conſtantly in motion. g (7. e. ) Hardned, ſtood fill 
as if they had been frozen, and ſo they were a wall on both hands, 
chap: 14. 22. þ(1.e.) The midſt ; as that word is uſed, Pſal: 18, 
16. and 46. 2. Exzck 28: 2. 
* The enemy faid, I will purſue, I will overtake, * fud 
[ will divide the ſpoil ; my luſt ; ſhall be ſacisfied upen 39. 
chem : I will draw my iword, mine hand ſhall + deſtroy t 9s 
them. pefeſis 
7 The Juſt of covetouſneſs and revenge too. * & F, 
of them and theirs : ſee of this word; Mina Males. i ht 
10 Thou didſt blow with thy wind, tlie tea covzred 
them ; * they ſank as lead in the mighty / waters. 
{ Heb. Magnificent, or honourable, made ſo by being the inſtrument 
of thy glorious wotk. 


tr © Who 7s like unto thee, O LORD, amoneſt the * 2 Sa 
+ gods m ? Who 3s like thee, glorious in holineſs », 2. 
fearful in praiſes s, doing wonders ? __ 
- So called and eſteemed ; or Princes or Potentates, as P{al: 29; x. PLA. 
Ezek: 32: 21. n Or, Righteouſnels ; ty power is great and glorious - Jer: of 
bur thou doſt nor abuſe it to unrighteous and unworthy purpoſes. +Or n 


* WC 


20, 


*V 


out to holy and honourable deſigns ; ro the punithment of wicked: 5y ones 
© Tyrants, 


5 ap. XV. | 
Tyrants, and to the vindication of thy oppreſſed and holy People, 
o In Praiſe-worthy aftions ; the aCt being pur for the objeQ, as fear 
is pur for a thing to be feared, as Pſal: 14: 5. 1 Pet: 3; 14. Or, to 
be feared or had in reverence when thou art praiſed : To be both 
loved and feared at the ſame time. 
12 Thou ſtretchedſt out thy right hand ; the earth 
p ſwallowed them. EE 
p Either 1. The Globe, conſiſting of Earth and Water,which 1s 
here called Earth ; as it is called the deep, and the waters. Gen: i: 2. 
Or, 2. The Earth is here pur for the Sea, the other part of the ſame 
Globe; as the Soul is put for the Boay, or the dead Carca(s,the other 
art of the man, Levit: 19. 28. and 21: 1, Numb: 6, 6,9, 11. Or, 
3- The Earth properly, either becauſe many of them ſunk 1aro the 
mud at the bottom of the Sea, and were buried in it: Or becauſe 
after they were caſt up upon the ſhore, they were buried by the 
Jraelites m the Earth. | 7 
13 Thou in thy mercy haſt led forth the people which 
* thou haſt redeemed : thou haſt guided he in thy 
ſtrength unto thy holy habiration 4 
9g (7.e. ) Canaan, the place where not only they ſhall dwell, but 
thou in and with them. See Pſal. 78, 52, Oc. ; 
14 * The people ſhall hear, and be afraid: ſorrow 
ſhall take hgld on the inhabicants of Paleſtina. 


— mighty men of Moab, trembling ſhall take hold upon 
+. them: * all the inhabitants of Canaan lhall melt away. 

16 * Fear and dread ſhall fall upon them by the 
greatneſs of thine arm : they (ball be as ſtill - as a ſtone, 
till thy people paſs over, O LORD ; till the people paſs 
over *- which thou haſt purchaſed. 


they ſhall be impotent both for ſpeech and: morion. 


" uary, O LORD, which thy hands have eſtabliſhed 5. 
s Either tr. In th: Country of Canaan, which is a mountanious 
_ Country, full of Hills and Vallies, Deut: 11: 11. not like Egypr, a 
. plain and low Country. Or 2. in and about the Mount 'of Moriah, 


Land, it being the moſt eminent part of it, round about which the 
people were planted, and to which they were fr-quently to reſforr. 
t Will certainly build and eſtabliſh, z. e. cauſe to. be builr and eſta- 
bliſhed. The paſt tenſe for the futtve3. to note the certainty of it, 
according to the ſtyle of the Prophets. 

18 * The LORD fall reign for ever and ever. 

I9 For the horſe of Pharaoh went in with his cha- 

* riots, 1nd With his- horſemen into the ſea,and the LORD 

. brough: again the waters of the ſea upon them : bur the 

__ of Ifracl went on dry land in the midft of che 
ca, | 

20 And Miriam the Propheteſs «,the ſiſter of Aaron 
x, took a timbrel in her hand, and. ail the women went 

. our after her, * with timbrels and with dances y. 

# So called, either in ageneral ſenſe, becauſe ſhe was an inſtruor 
of other Women in the praiſe and ſervice of God. Or in a more 
ſpecial ſenſe, becauſe ſhe had the ſpirit of Prophecy. See Nnmb: - 2. 
2- and Mic 6. 4. x Queſt. Why not of Moſes alſo ? Anſw. 1, She 
might be MofFFs Siſter only by one parent, Aaron's by both. 2 She 
was beſt known to the people by her Relation to Aaron, with whom 
ſhe had lived for many years, when Moſes was baniſhed. y Accord- 
ing to their ancient Cuſtom in publick Solemnities. See Juag. 11. 
34- and 21: 21.'1 Sam. 18, 6. 2 Sam 6.14.21. Jer: 31: 4, 13. 

21 And Miriam anſwered them z, Sing ye to the 
LORD : for he hath triumphed gloriouſly : the horſe 
and his rider hath he thrown into the ſea, 


lage of the Gender. Or 2. The Men ſpoken of before. They ſung 
by rurns, or by parts, either the ſame words being repeated, or 
ſome other words of a like nature added. See 1 Czron. 16. 41. 
' 2 Chron, 5: 13. Ezra 3. 11- 
22 So Moſes brought Iſrael from the red ſea, and 
they went out into the wilderneſs of Shur 4: & they went 


three days in the wilderneſs, and found no water. 

» & So uſually called, Gen: 16: 7 and by the Iſraelites Etham, as 
may be gathered by comparing this place with Nums:33:8. for both 
there and here it is ſaid they went three days in this wilderneſs. 


| 23'q And when they came to Marah, they could 
not drink of the waters of * Maran, for they were bit- 
_ ter: therefore the name of it was called + Marah. 

24 And the people murmured againſt Moſes, ſaying, 
Whar ſhall we drink? 

25 And he cried unto the LORD : and the LORD 
ſhewed him a * tree, which when he had caſt into the 
waters, the waters were made {weet b: there he made 
for then a ſtatute and an ordinance c, and there * he 

roved them X*. | 

b Not ſo much, by any vertue m that Tree, as by the Power of 
God who uſed this, rather as a ſign to the [raelites, than'as ian In- 
firument to himſelf in. this Work. c God, or Moſes in God's Name, 
and by his Order, conſtiruted and pub'iſhed to them a Stature. 
Which ſeemsto be underſto-d not of any particular Statute or Law, 
as that concerning the Sabbath, or their Duty to their Parents, or 
the like ; for the ſpecifying of their Duties 1s reſerved to another 
time and place ; but of a general Law or Rule ÞÞrmerly given, and 
now ſolemnly renewed by Moſes at Gods command, like that given 
to Abraham their Father, Gen; 17. 1, Walk before me and be pirfetF, 


” 


Is Then the Dukes of Edom ſhall be amazed : * the 


: ' 7 : | , 5 .. bs a 4 
= > a<&- x4 4 - . \ 4 - e % 4; ” E - J 
PE 61 M8 FF) 
we." 
. Js 2 


ww. 


Chap. XVI. 


God having thus far performed his part of that Covenant m:de with 
Abraham and his Seed, to bring them our of Egypr towards Canaan, 
tells them that he expe&s,and requires of them their Obſervance of 
the Condition of that Covenant, and gives them this indefinite and 
univerſal Law or Precept, that they ſhould obey and fulhll all the 
commands u hich God had already laid upon them or their Parents, 
and which he ſhould hereafter reveal to them. This ſenſe may be 
gathered our of the following verſe, wherein he explains what he 

meant by this Sratute, even all God's Stztutes or Commanaments, 

which if they would keep, he engageth himſelf to preſerve and 
deliver them. So it is only a change of the Number, the Singular, 

Statute, being put for the Plural, Statutes, which is a Figure very 

frequently uſed both in Scripture, and in other Aut-ors. God ha- 
ving now eaſed them of the hard and iron Yoke of the Egyprians,puts 

his ſweet and eaſy Yoke upon them ; and having undertaken to be 

their King, and Prote&or, and Captain, he claims their ſubjection 

to himſelf, and to his Laws or Statutes. * Or, tryed them, 1. e. the 

Iſraelites, There he tryed both their Faith by the difficulry now 

mentioned, viz. their want of Water, and their future Obedience 

by this general command, which he is about to branch forth into 

divers particulars. 


26 And ſaid, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the 
voice of the LORD thy God, and will do that which 


[is right in his ſight, and wilt give ear to his command- 


ments, and keep all his ſtatutes, * I will put none * Deut: 7: 
of theſe diſeaſes upon thee 4, which I have brought ;? 


upon the Egyptians 3 for I am the LORD * that a 
healeth thee e 103:3-and 


r Or, be as filent ; they ſhall be ſo ſtruck with amazement, that , Soul and Body. 


80, where the Temple was to be built; which is here put for the whole | 


4 Nor other Evils or Plagues; but on the contrary, I will bleſs 147:3. 
thee with all manner of bleflings. Under one branch or part of the 
bleſſings of God's Covenant, he includes all the reſt by a very com« 
mon Synecdoche. e Or, thy Phyſician, for all thy Maladies both of 


27 4 * And they came to Elim, where were twelve * Numb: 


17 Thou thalt bring them in,and * plant them inthe wells of water, and threeſcore and ten palm-trees f, 3* 9 
; mountain - of thine inheritance ; in the place, O Lord, ' and they encamped there by the waters. 
which thou haſt made for thee to dwell in; in the ſan- |} | 


þ 


f Which were both pleaſant for their ſhade, and refreſhing for 
their ſweet Fruit. Thus the Iſraelites are obliged and encouraged 
to the Obedience commanded, by being pur into better circum- 
ſtances tian they were under in their laſt {tation. 


CHAP. XVL 


The children of Iſrael ſojourn in the wilderneſs of Sin, rt. Murmur againſt 
Moſes, 2, 3. God promiſes to ſupply their wants with bread from hea= 
wen, 4 ÞAQAnd diretts about preparing this bread, 5. Moſes reproves 
the people for murmuring, 7, 8. Appoints them to come before the 
Lord, & God's glory appeareth in the clould, ro=---12. He ſendeth 
quails, 13. and manna, 15. Every one gather a quantity, 16===18. 
The command about keeping it, 19. is alſobeyed, 20. The time of 
gathering, 21, Ther increaſing the quantity on the ſixth aty, 22-==-24+ 
The command concerning the ſabbath, 25, 26. diſobeyed, 27, for which 
God is angry, 28. Moſes's counſel, 29. They reſt, 30. The name of the \ 
bread, 31. The command concerning the preſervation of the manna, 32, 
The time of the manna'”s continuance, 35. 


33- 
A N D they took their journey from Elim, and all 
the congregation of the children of Iſrael came 


:& unto the wilderneſs of Sin 64, which is berween Elim 
' and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the ſecond month, 


| 


[0 


2 Either 1» The Women, laſt ſpoken of, and then it is an Enz1- * 


after their departirg out of the land of Egypt. 

a Though not immediately ; for there is another Stage of theirs 
by the Red-Sea, mentioned Numb: 33. 10. ( in which Chapter Moſes 
deſigned exa&ly ro ſet down all their Stations) but omitted here, 
becauſe nothing rema:kable happened in it ; and Moſes in this place 
deſigned to record only the memorable Paſſages. b A great Wil- 
derneſs bet:veen the Red-Sea and Mount Sinai, but differing from 
that Sin mentioned Numb. 20: 1. * 

2 And the whole congregation of the children of 
Iſrael murmured c, againſt Moſes and Aaron in the 
wilderneſs. 

c For want of Meat, as appears from the following Verſe, their 
Provitions brought out of Egypr being now ſpent. | 

3 And the children of Iſrael ſaid unto them, Would 

to God we had died by the hand of the LORD din 
the land' of Egypt, * when we fat by the fleih-pots, * Numb: 
and when we did cat bread to the full e : for ye have 2+ 5: 
brought us forth into this wilderneſs to kill this whole 
aſſembly with hunger f, 

ad By any of thoſe Plagues wherewith God deſtroyed the Egyp-= 
tians. e Which 1s not probable ? but they amplify their former 
Mercies, that they might aggravate their preſent Calamity, as the 
manner of impatient and ungodly Men is. f Queſt. What danger 
was thzre of dying with Hunger, ſeing they had their Flocks and 
Herds which they brought out of Egypr ? Anſw: 1. There was no 
great danger of it, bur they uſe aggravating Expreſſions, as diſcon- 
rented perſons uſe to do. 2. Their Flocks and Herds were not ſo 
numerous as to ſuffice them for above a months proviſion, if they 
had all been ſlain and eaten, as it is implied Numb: 11. 21, 22. So * Pſal:78 
there was ſome danger of it, though neither immediate,nor great. 24 25.and 
3- They were it ſeems reſolved to ſpare theſe, partly for increaſe, 2195; 40. 


and for their future Subſiſtance ; and partly for Sacrifice, as not Joh: 6. JT 
——_ _ many of them they ſhould be required to offer. See 32. 1 Cor. 
Exoa. 10; 26. IO: 3, 

4 © Then ſaid the LORD unto Moſes, Behold, I +Heb. :he 
will rain * bread g from heaven + for you: and the ore in 
people ſhall go out, and gather F a certain rate every 7)” we 


day hb, that I may * prove them 3, whether they will Prov.30. 
walk 1n my law or no. X 8. Matth: 
g ( 7. e. ) Manna, which ſhall ſerve them inſtead of Bread, Numb: 6. 11. 


11: 8. and was a more delicate and pleaſant kind of Bread, called boy F. 
therefore The bread of Angels, Pſal: 78. 24, 25. + The Air, oft cal- 25+ Deut: 


led Heaven, in which Manns is produced. þ Heb, The thing, ( 7.2.) $+ 2, 16. 
the 


» oa RIHPRPTSY © 


ONES Weg WT Set; CR 


OO  ragrgs 


WT <P Me, os 


RIS TO DB Te WE Ong 7 


ao ro .o.4 SS 


PF Chap XVI. 


RE Oe DRE A TE WE Wen PT 


reed PR PTS, ©» 


 * Numb: 


viſion of a day in his day, i.e..every day, as much as was ſuf- 
-rpkay a Mats  whetees thar day. ; Either 1. Whether by my 
giving them ſuch miraculous and excellenc Proviſion they will be 
won tb love and obey me. Or 2. Wherher by raining it down upon 
them for ſeveral days together they will learn to truſt me for the fol- 
lowing days, and therefore gather no more than that day required. 


5 And it ſhall come to paſs, that on the ſixth day 
they thail prepare & that which they bring in, and it 


*See Lev: ſhall be * twice as much as they gather daily. _ 
k Lay up, grind, bake, or ſeethe. See verſe 23; and Num: 11: 8. 


6 And Moſes and Aaron ſaid unto all the children of 
Iſrael, at even, Then ye ſhall know that the LORD 
hath brought you / out from the land of Egypt. 

1 And not we by our own Authority or Counſel, as you ſuggeſt, 
Perle 3. ; 

7 And in the morning, then ye ſhall ſee the glory 
of the LORD mw, for that he hearech your murmurings 
againſt che LORD : And what are we that ye murmur 
againſt us ? EE | 

m Either this glorious work of God in giving Manns ; or rather 
the glorious appearance of God in the Cloud, as is evident from 
Perſe 10. | 

8 And Moſes ſaid, This ſhall be when the LORD hall 

ive you in theevening fleſh to cat, andin the morning 
| to the full: for that the LORD hearetch your 
mbrmurings, which ye murmur againſt him ; and what 
are we ? your murmurings are not againſt us, but 
*See Luke * againſt the LORD. 
pg 9 © And Moſes ſpaks unto Aaron, Say unto all the 
13:22 Congregation of the children of Iſrael; Come near 
before the LORD #= : for he hath heard your murmur- 
ings. | 
G Either before the cloudy Pillar, where God was eſpecially pre- 
ſent ; or in the place of God's Woxſhip. For though the great 
Tabernacle was not yet builr, yet it ſeems from Exod: 33: 7: there 
was « little Tabernacle. For as the Solemn, and Publick.and Savbath- 
Worſhip was among them before the Tabernacle was built, ſo it was 
neceſſary there ſhould be ſome place where they did Aſſemble roge- 
ther, and perform thar Worſhip which was proper to thoſe times, and 
there God was ſuppoſed to be preſent in « peculiar manner. 


25: 21; 


1s And it came to paſs as Aaron ſpake unto the 


whole congregation of the children of iſrael, that they 
looked toward the wilderneſs, and behold, the glory 
* Chap: of the LORD o * appeared in the cloud. 
83: 21: 0 An extraordinary brightneſs ſuddenly appearing in the Pillar of 
Cloud. See Levit. g. 6, 23. 

:r T And the LORD ſpake p unto Moſes, faving, 

p Or, Had ſpoken, to wir, before, by comparing this with Yerſe 7. 

12 1 have heard the murmyrings of the chiidren of 
Iſrael : ſpeak unto them, Caing, At even ye ſhall cat fleſh, 
and in the morning ye {hall be filled wich bread q ; and 
ye (ball know that I am the LORD your God. 

q God chuſerh the. proper time for each kind of proviſion ; the 

| evening for the Quails, which being brought from remore parts, by 

their days flight, abour evening came thirther ; and the morning for 
Manna, which uſually falls at that time. 

12 And it. came to paſs that at even * the quails 
came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning 
the dew lay r round abour the hoſt. 

r Heb. There was a bed of dew, wherewith the Manna was covered, 
Perſe 144 To this the 4id4den Manna, Revel: 2: r7: alludes. 
*Numb. 24 And when -* the dew that lay was gone up s, 
11:7: Plal; behold, upon the face of the wilderneſs there lay a 
78: 24: {mall round thing, «s ſmall as the hoar froſt upon the 
and- 105: ground. 
4::Wild: *, To wit, into the Air; or, was vaniſhed, as the word aſcend is 
16: 20; uſed, Jer: 48: 15. : | 
i5 And when the children of Iſrael ſaw it, they faid 


T3: $8; 
Pſalm 
105: 40; 


Or, one to another, F It is mannaz: for they wiſt not what 
what s jt was, And Moſes ſaid unto them, * This is the bread 
#**orits which the LORD hath given you to car, 
,4 Fohn 6: t Or, What i chis > which beſt ſuits with rhe following reaſon, 
0 - * For they wiſt not what it was. Man ſignifies what in the Egyptian Tongue ; 
37: s . Or: and it is not ſtrange that the 1/aelires ute one of their words, being 
one 8 newly come out of their Land. Hence this 15 called Manna, bur it is 
of a different Nature from the ordinary Manna which now we uſe 
only as phyfick for purging ; whereas this Manna was food, and 
nouriſhing, being prepared by the great God for this uſe. 
16 4 This #5 the thing which the LORD hath com- 
manded ; gather of it every man according to his cating. 
33> , #: anomer x | for every man, according to the number 
KA” : of your + perſons take ye every man for chem which 
+ Heb, #7 1n his tents. | | 
ſeuls. x (;.e.) As much as is ſufficient for his eating. » Which contains 


the tenth part of an Ephah, and therefore was a very liberal allowance, 
and ſuch as might abundantly ſuffice a man of greateſt Strength and 
Stomach. Ir might ſeem roo much, bur ir muſt be remembred tharx 
it was a very light Mear, and ealy of Digeſtion ; nor was every one 
obliged to eat up his whole portion, as we ſhall ſee. 


17 And the children of Ifracl did ſo, and gathered 
ſome more, ſome leſs y. : 


y Either s. According as their Families were more or leſs nume- . lon _ refuſe: ye. to keep my commandments, and my 
| 2 


| laws]? 


rous. Or rather 2. As the gatherers w>cg more or leſs ſtrong and 
atlive in gathering it, 


"EXODDS, 


. Not in the Original, and poſlibly are better left our than taken in 


_ Upon the Sabbath day ; for there is not a word here to that purpoſe ; 


'that unbaken and unſodden, otherwiſe it would not have been noted. 


' day which is the ſabbath, in it there ſbal] be-none. 


| : .27\4 Andiit came to paſs, that there went out ſome 
' of the people 
. they found:none,-: 


- # © nd : a 


_ _ Chap. XVI. © 


18 And when they did mete 5: with an omer, he 
that gathered much, had nothing over, and he that 
gathered little, had no lack z : they gathered every man 


according to his eating. E 
z All that was gathered by the Members of one Family was put 
into an heap, and then diſtributed to each perſon an Omer, neither 

more nor leſs. To which St. Paul alludes 2 Cor: 8: 13, O's. © 
19 And Moſes ſaid unto thetn, Let no man leave of 


it till the morning 4. Ts 

a Viz, For the ptoviſion of the next day, as diſtruſting God's care 
and goodnels in giving them more. Not that every one was boun 
to eat all of it, which certainly many of their ſtomachs could nor 
bear ; but thar they were to diſſolve ir, or burn it as they did the 
remains of ſome Sacrifices, Exod: 12: 10: and 29: 34: or conſume it 
ſome other way. | | 2 

20 Notwithſtanding, they hearkened not unto Moſes, 
but ſome of them lefr of ic 4 until the morning, and ic 
bred worms and ftank c; a..d Moſes was wroth with 


them. | 

6 Either diſtruſtiag God's Providence for their future proviſions ; 
or, out of curiolity to learn the nature of this Manna, and whatthey 
might do when occaſion required, c Not ſo much from its own 
nature, which was pure and durable, as from God's judgements 

2r And they gathered it every morning, every mat 
according to his eatirig : and when the ſun waxed hor, 


ic melted d. 

a Towit, as much of it as was left upon the ground. This was 
not from its own nature, which was ſo ſolid that it could indure the 
Fire, and was bruiſed by a Peſtel ; but from God's wiſe Providence; 
pirtly that it mighr not be corrupted or trodden under foot, or 
otherw1ſe abuſed, and ſo deſpiſed ; parrly that it might nor remain 
there ro tempt any of them to gather more of it than they ſhould ; 
and partly thar all their ſtock of proviſion being waſted, they mighr 
be obliged to the more entire dependance upon God. And this is 
here mentioned as a reaſon why they gathered it in the morning. 


22 4 And it cameto paſs, that on the ſixth day they 
gathered twice as much bread e, two omers for one 
man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and 
told Moſes f. FOE 

e Conſidering God's preſent Providence in cauſing it to fall ir 
double propertion,znd rememibring that the next day was the Sabbath- 
day, which God had Bleſſed and SanQtified to his own Immediate 
ſervice, Gen. 2. 3- and therefore was not to be employed in ſervile 
works, ſuch as the gathering of Manna was, they' rightly concluded, 
that God's commands delivered Yerſe 16. 19. reached only to ordinary 
days, and muſt in all reaſon give place to' the more ancient and 
neceſfary Law of the Sabbath. Ff Either to acquaint him with' this 
increaſe of the Miracle,.or to take his direftion for their Praftice, - 
becauſe they found rwo commands ſeemingly claſbing together; and ' 
therefore needed and deſired. his advice» Ek | 


» 23. And he ſaid unto them, This is that which the - 
LORD hath ſaid g, To mcrrow 35 the reſt of the holy 
ſabbath unto the LORD : bake þ that which you will - 
bake, zo dayz, and ſeethe & that ye will ſeethe, and 

chat which remaineth over, lay up for you to be kept 

until che morning +. 2 

_ £ Either to Moſes by Inſpiration ; or to the former Patriarchs upen 

like occaſions ; this praQice is agreeable ro the former Word and 


Law of God concerning the Sabbath, as it follows. þ The Manns 
was dreſſed theſe two ways, Numb. 11.8. i Theſe words, © day, are- 


or if they be raken'in, rhey do not ſeem to me, as they do ro many 
others, to prove, that they were commanded to bake or ſeethe on 
the ſixth day all that they were to eat both that day, and upoathe 
following Sabbath, or that they were forb:dden to bake or ſeethe it 


and it is'apparent from the whole Context, - that the Reſt of the 
Sabbath is not oppoſed to their baking or ſeething of it, but to their 
going out into the Field to gather it. Nay the contrary is here 
impited, becauſe after they had baken and ſodden what they intended. 
to bake or ſeethe, part of the Manna did, as is here expreſly added,” + 
remain over, and was reſerved for the Sabbath days Proviſion, and' 


as a miraculous thing, that it did 'not Stink nor breed Worms, 
Verſe 24. {+ What you do nor eat this day, keep for the next days © 
Proviſion. | | | TED 
24 And they laid it up until the morning, as Moſes 
bade : and ic did not ſtink, neither wasthere any worm 
therein &. Ss ES 2 Beglk 
k As there was before, Yerſe 20, So great a difference there is . 
between the doing ofa thipg upon God's Command, and with his 
Bleſſiug, and the doiag of the ſame thing againſt his Will, and wich ' 
kis Curie. * . | 35 Ws: —_ 
25 And Moſes ſaid, Eat that to day /, for today is © = 
a ſabbath unto the LORD m : to day ye ſhall nor figd _*© 
it in the field. ; | WW} 3:1 
1 Theſe words were ſpoken upont the Morning of the Sabbath- 
day, as appears fram the foregoing Verſe. m (5. e.) Wholly conſe-.;, 
_ to his Service, and therefore not to be employed in fervile 
OTKS. ' 4 | ; 


26 Six days ye (ball - gather it, bur on the ſeventh 


on the ſeventh day for co gather, and 


28 And th: LOR D Afaid unco Moſes », How 


O 2 n That 


"$0 


+2LO: 


| ſh: 5: 


.and at 


* 0 


” Thar hefmight ſpeak tt to the People. o He ſignifies that this 


was an old Diſcale in them, to diſobey God's Precepts, and to pol- 
lute his Sabbaths. L 
. 29 See, for that the LORD hath given you the 
ſabbath p, therefore he giveth you on the ſixth dayuthe 
bread of two days : abide ye every man in his place : let 
no man go out of his place q on the ſeventh. day. | 
p Hath given to you, and to your Fathers, that great command 
and priviledge of the Sabbath. q Our of his Houſe or Tent into 
the Fiel1 to gather Manna, as appears from the occaſion and reaſon of 
the Law bere before mentioned. For otherwiſe they might andought 
to go out of their Houſes to the Publick Aſſemblies, as appears from 
Levit: 23: 3: Aﬀs 15:21: and to lead their Cattel to watering, Luke 
13: 15: or to help them out of a Pit, Matth: 12: 11. Anda Sabbath 
days Journey was permitted, 4&#s 1: 12. 
309 So the people reſted r on the ſeventh day. 
7 Orceaſed, to wit, from gathering Mama, by comparing this with 
Perſe 27. and conſequently from all works of that nature. 
21 And the houſe of Iſrael called the name thereof 
Manna : and * it as like coriander-ſeed s, white : and 


the taſte of it * was like wafers made with honey. 

' 5 In Shape and Figure, but not in Colour, for that is dark colour- 
ed, bur this white, as it follows here, like Bdelium, 8c. Nam: 11: 7. 
5 When it was raw ; but when it was dreſt it was like freſh Oy], 
Numb: 11: 8. : : 

2 © And Moſes ſaid, This zs the thing which the 
LORD commandeth : Fill an omer of itto be kept for 
your generations, that they may ſee the bread where- 
With I have fed you in the wilderneſs, when I brought 


you forth from the land of Egypt. 
33 And Moſes ſaid unto Aaron, * Take a pot, and 
put an omer full of Manna therein, and lay it up before 


the LORD «, to be.kept for your generations. 
# In the Tabernacle, and by the Ark, when they ſhall be builr, 
preſent in the place where you meet for the Solemn Worſhip 
of God. . 
24 As the LORD commanded Moſes, ſo Aaron laid 


it up before the teſtimony x, to be kepr. 

.x (ie. ) Before the Ark, which is called, the ark of the teſtimony, 
Exod: 25: 16: and here, by way of Abbreviation, the Teſtimony, or 
Witneſs, becauſe-ih it were the Tables of the Covenant, er the Law of 
God, which was a Teſtimony of God's Authority and Will, and of 
Man's SubjeQion and Duty, or of the Covenant made between God 
and Man, See Deut: 10: 5: and 31: 26. Queft, Hew could this be laid 
up before the Ark, when the Ark was nor yet built ? Anſ. This Text 
only tells us that Aaron did lay it.up,. but it doth not determine the 
time, nor afficm tha it was done at this inſtant, but rather intimates 
the contrery, and that. it was done afrerwards when the Teſtimony, 
i. e. the Ark was buile. As'the next Verſe alſo ſpeaks of what was 
done in-the following forty years 

35 And the children ; 
years, *-until they came to a land inhabited: they did 
i (nn until they came to the borders of the land 
of C 


y This Moſes might well write ; for though he did not go into 
Canaan,yet he came to the Borders of Canaan. And though he did not 
ſce the Ceflition of the Manna, yer he fufficiently knew both from 
the Nature of the Thing, and by Revelation from God, that it would 
forthwith ceaſe upon their entrance into Canaan. -2 

26 Now an omer is the tenth part of an Ephah. | 
C HeA ÞP, XVII 
The children of Iſrael came to Rephidim, there is no water, therefore murmur 
againſt Moſes, 1— 3. Moſes crieth to the Lord, 4. The Lord ſendeth 
Moſes to Horeb; he fmiteth the rock, and water cometh out, 5, 6- He 
names that place, and the reaſon of it, 7. Amalek warreth againſt the 
Iſratlites, $. Moſes appointeth Joſbua to fight with him, 9g. YJeſbua's 
 facreſs when Moſes held up his hand ; when let down, Amalek prevailed, 
I1—13, Moſes buildeth an altar, and nameth it, 15. The reaſon of 


if, 16. 
A N D all the congregation of the children of Iſrael 
£4 X journeyed from the wilderneſs of Sin after their 
journeys 4, according to the commandment of the 
LORD, and pitched in Rephidim : and here was no 


' awater for the people to drink. 


| . fault, and murmuriag againſt 


' ſhall I do, unto: this people ? they be 


# By..divers Stations, recorded Numb: 33: 12, 13, &c. but here 

omitted; becauſe. there was nothing extraordinary hapned in them. 
b Engoeyed either by word of mouth, or by the motion or reſt of 
the clondy Pillar, Exod. 13:21. { ea ; 
2 Wherefore the* people did chide with Moſes, and 
faid, Give us water that we may drink. And Moſes 
ſaid unto them, Why chide you with me ? Wherefore 
do ye *.zempt the LORD « ? | 

c By diftruſting God's Power, and Providence, and Faithfulneſs, 
and Gobdneſs, upon ſuch a ſmall occaſion, 'by refuling to ſubmir to 
God's Will, and ro wait upon him by humble and fervent Prayers 
fof relief,” and inſtead thereof quarrelling with 'me as ifit were my 
nſt God under my name. | 

' 2 And the people thirfted there for water, and che 
people murmured againſt Moſes, and ſaid, Wherefore 
is this, that thou haſt brought us up out of Egypt, tokill. 
usand'otrchildren;: and our cattel wiachthirſt ? 

4 &And:Moſes cried unto the LORD, ſaying, What 
almoſt ready to 


ne me. 2 T£8. > ic 
5 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Go on before +,;: 


tho pebple; and take with thee of the eldersof IHrael 4; 
and-thy-rod 


in thire hand, and go. 


of Ifrael did eat Manna forty. 


d That they may be eye witneſſes of this glorious Work,and may 
report it to the people. e Either the Rea-Sza ; for an Arm of the 
Sea is ſometimes called a River; or, the River Ns. 

6 * Behold, I will ſtand before thee there fupon the « ,, ,. 
rock in Horeb g, and thou ſhalt ſmice the rock, and -c: 9: 
there ſhall water come out of it, that the people may P:al: 78: 
drink. And Moſes did ſo h, in the ſight of the elders "5 ”— 4 


of Iſrael. Wii: 

fIn my cloudy Pilar, which ſhall ſtand over that place. - g Horeb , ,. ,. 
and Sinai are ſometimes ſpoken of as the ſame place, and ſometimes 
as two differing places, as here compared with Exod: 19. 2. The 
Learned write, that this was one long Mountain, whereof there 
were two eminent Parts or Tops, the one at a conſiderable diſtance 
from the other, and Horeb was the firſt part ofir, and near Rephidim 
and Shai the more remote, to which they came afterwards. þ ( 7. e. } 
Smore the Rock, and the Waters flowed out plentifully and conti- 
nually, making a River, which God cauſed to follow rhem to their 
ſeveral Stations. See x Cor. 10. 4+ 


7 And he called the name of the place + Maſſah, +That is, 
and + Meribah, -becaufe of the chiding of the children 7727-07. 


of Ifrael, and becauſe they tempted the LORD, faying, A From bs 
Is the LORD amongſt us z, or not ? ftrife. 


7 Viz, To prote& and provide for usaccording to his Word given 
tous. Will God: be as good as his Word, or will he not? For its 
to us very doubrfu). 


Deut: 25: 17, 18» I The ground of the Quarrel was the proſecution 
of the old hatred of Eſau againſt Jacob, and the revenging of them< 
ſelves and their Father upon the Poſterity of Jacob ; for which rhey 
thought this the firteſt ſeaſon, they being now a great and porenc 
People, Numb: 24: 26: and Iſrael! now weak, and unarmed, and 
diſpirited with long Servitude. 


9 And Moſes ſaid unto *Joſhua, Chuſe us out men, * Called 
and go mout, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will 79. 
ſtand on the top of the hill », with * the rod of God o * Chap. 
in mine hand. 4. 2% 

7» Out of the Camp to, meet the Enemy. » Both to obſerve thy 
Carriage, and Succeſs or Defeat, that I may govern my ſelf accor+ 
dingly,and thet I may in that Retirement poutr out my foul untothe 
Lord of Hoſts, that he may give thee Vitorys oBy which having 
done fo great Exploits formerly, doubt nat of the fame Divine At- 
ſiſtance ro accompany it, and make thee Vitorious. | 

10 So Joſhuadidas Moſes had faid to him, and fought 
with Amalek : and Moſes, Aaron, and Hur p went up 
to the top of the hill. | 

p A Perſon of Eminency both for Wiſdom and Experience, and 
for Place and Authority, ſuppeſed to be the Husband of Miriam. 
See Exodus 24. 14. 

11 And it came to paſs when Moſes held up his 
hand 4, that Ifraei prevailed : and when he let down 
his hand, Amalek prevailed r. 

q With the Rod of God init. This Geſture, though fervent 
Prayer was dovbrleſs joyned with it, ſeems not to have been the |, 
Geſture of praying, which is the lifting up of both hands, but of 
an Enſign-bearer, or of one ready to {mite his Enemies Howſo« 
ever this was only a ſign whereby Moſes ſtrengthned his Faith, and 
quickned his Prayers, and heightned the Courage of the Soldiers 
below, and proteſted that he expe&ed ViRtory not from the $kill 
and proweſs of his Army, but from the Aſſiſtance of God. r God 
ſo diſpenſing his favour, that the Honour of the Day and Victory 
- »-"o be wholly aſcribed to the Rod and Power of God, not to - 
Iſrael. : 

12 But Moſes kands were heavy, and they took a 
ſtone and put it under him, and he fat thereon: and 
Aaron and Hur ſtayed up his hands s, the one on the 
one ſide, and the other on the other ſide, and his hands 
were ſteady until the going down of the ſun. 

5s Not that borh Hands were ere&ed and joyned together, which 
was not a fit peſture for one holding a Rod in his hand ; but that 
Moſes ſhifted the Rod out of one hand into the other when the former 
was weary, and that Aaro® and Hur did each of them with both 
hands hold up-that hand which was next to them, ſucceſſively, thats 
they alſo mighr relieve one the other. 


13 And Joſhua diſcomfited Amalek and his people £ 
with the edpge of the ſword. 
; Either 1. The King of the Amalekites, and his People. Or 2. The 
_ of the Amalekites, and thoſe other People who were leagued 
with them. 


14 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Write this. for 
a memorial in a Book «, and rehearſe it in the ears of 
Joſhua x.: for * I will utterly put out the remembrance *Nums: 
of Amalek y from under heaven &z, 24: 20; 

u Even in this Book, which Moſes was to write by God's Infpiration 1 Sam:15: 


and Appointment. See Exod' 34:27: Deut: 31: 9, 22| x Thy Succeſfor, 3 7: and - 


and the Captain of my People,, that he and all ſucceeding 3: T, 17: 
Governors may watch all occaſions to execute this command. ys. +5 2 Sam: 8: 
I willutterly deſtroy them ; fora-Perſon or People dead or deſtroyed 12: Eſth: 
are ſoon forgotten. Pſalm. $1+ 12. and the Grave is called the land of 9: 14: 
forgetfulneſs, Pjalm 88. 12. Or thus, Though'they are now a'nume- 

rous and flouriſking People, and in great Repute, I will make them 

'few and inglorious, for ſuch are little minded or remembred ; for 

thie is not to be underſtoodabſolutely ofa; peedy-and-utrer Extin&ion 


wherewith. * thou ſmoreſt the river-e, take | of 


of them, for he ſuppoſeth their being #0 Goneration to Generation, 
-+.— og but comparatively. #z From the face of the whole 
. . + That is, 
15 And Moſes built an altar «, and called the name :- 08D 
it 6b + JEHO V A E-Nifl. my. banner. 
, # Both 


8 1 * Then & came Amalek, and fought with Iſrael 'Deur:25: 


] in Rephidim, T7: 1Sam. 
k When they were upon their March from Rephidim to Horeb, {0.2 


Wiſcr I«4. 


Ads 7.4' 


NO eas 


« 42220 REES hs 


% 0% RN IH RPE TOO I EI ng oO 


VETO IRTP 


WOO Rn 7, GTG 


- 


% 0 RO IH RPA TO I EOS OT 


5 a. 


Chap. XVIIL 


EXODUS. 


Chap. XVIIL 


2 Both for the offering of Sacraſices cf Praiſe unto God, ant to jÞy a Letter, ot by a Mcſſenger, as thit.word is uſed, Matth: $:6,8. 
be a Monument of this Vifory, and of the Author of it. 65 x. compared with Luke 75: 3, 6. 


Of the Altar, which he ſo calls meronymically, becauſe it was the 
Sign and Monument of Fehovah-N:fFt ; even as Circumciſion 1s cal- 
Jed God's Covenant,Gen.t7. 13. and the Lamb,the Paſſover, Exod: 12. 
11. and the Cup, the New Teſtament, Luke 22: 20. becauſe they 
were the ſigns of them. Or the word, Altar, is to be repeated out 
6f the former member, which is frequent, and the place to beread 
thus, he called the name of it, the Altar of  Jehovah-Niſi, Or the 
name given to it ſignifies only the Inſcription ingraven upon t, 
which was not the 1tingle name of God, but an entire Sentence, 7/e 
Lord is my banner. By which words he takes all the praiſe ofthe Vi- 
Rory from the 1/raelites, and gives it to God. 


16 For c he ſaid, * Becauſe dj the LORD hath 
ſworn that th? LOR D will have war with Amilek 


from generation to generation. = 
c Or, And, as the Hebrew particle properly ſignihes ; for theſe 
words are nor a reaſon of the paſſage nexr precceding,but an additi- 
:h:LORD, on1l S:ntence. d Or, Surely, as that parricle 15 oft uſed, as Job 8:6. 
therefore, and 290. 20. Pſal: 10: 14. and 44. 22, Oc. @ Heb: the hand upon the 
Cc: throne of _—_ _ the hand of the Lord upon kis throne, which 1s 
Heb:the perfettly the ſame thing, 
= upon I os the manner of the Hebrew Tongue. Theſe woids then 
;he throne are a paraphraſtical Deſcription of a Solemn Oath,by the uſual po- 


X Or, be- 
cauſe the 
hand of A- 
malek is a- 
gainſt the 
throne of 


of th ture of it, wiz. the lifting up the hand, which is uſually pur for. ! all gods :* for inthe thing wherein they g dealt proud- * Chap:: 
70RD. ſwearing, -and in that ſenſe is aſcribed both ro Men, as Gen: 14* 22. |.]y bz 2yas above them. ES Ne 10, 16,22. 
and to God, as Dew. 32: 40. . And this hand of God Hifred up up- | © F yjz. More clearly and by certain experience ; as that phraſe ſig- and 52 7: 
on his Throne, where His Majeſty doth peculiarly and glorioully | je Gm:22; 15. i Kings 17: 18, 24. For otherwife it is more than and 14:18 
dwell, ſignifies that God ſwears by himſelf, as is ſaid, Hev. 6' 13. | probable, thar Jethro had the knowledge of the true God before this . 
And thus the Chaldeeand Arabick Interpreters underſtand it. Othe:s ; time,not only becauſe he was the great Grandchild of 4braham, but 
render the place thus, Becauſe the hand ( or, his' Hand, the pro= | 1 Lecauſe of his long converſation with a perſon of ſo great know= 
noun being here underſtood, as it frequently 1s in the Hebrew Lan- ledge, and wiſdom, and piety, as Moſes was. 2 Either 1. their falſe 
guige, of which ſeveral inſtances have been given before, 2. e. the | gods, who wrought ſtrange things in and by their Servants the Ma- 
hand of Amalek, which may eaſily be underſtood our of the follow- | 4 {9% yo conrended with Moſes,and proudly boaſted of their skill 
ing Clauſe in which Amalek is named ) was againſt the chrone of the * 1+ 4 whir inferior to that of Moſes, butatlait wereforced to yield 
Lord, i. e. was ſtretched out againſt God himlelf : for ſo, God : up the Cruſe, Exod.$.19.or rather, 2. the Egyptians, ſpoken of wer. 10. 
eſteems it, becauſe ir was done againſt that People among whom | 0 qeijr proudly, and ſcornfully, and ryrannically with the 1ſr2e- 
God had placed his Throne, or Seat, or Dwelling, accor dug to his ; Lites, but God ſhewed himſelf, to be above them, and above their 
Covenant made with them ; which alſo was well known to the ; py; though Pharaob would not own, him for his Superior, ( Exod: 
Amalekites by the Relation of their Progenitors, who in all probabi= | .. pv. 1; up his horn againſt God, and againſt his people : But 
liry had acquainted them with their own Rights, and with 7ac0's | the Torq brought that proud Prince upon his Linees, _ forced him 
Arts whereby he robbed Eſau, the Father of 4malek, ( Gen: 36. 15, ! oft ro confels his faults; and to become Supplicant to Moſes for de- 
16.) of his Birthright and Bleſfing, and conſequently of the Land of , 1;yor.nce from the Plagues ; 4nd at laſt, when he continued incor 
Canaan,to which now God was bringing them, that he might plaat rigivle, he drowned him in the Sea. 
them there,and ſet up his Throne among them. And the Amalekites | $I / And Jerhro Moſes father-in-law took b a burht- 
doubtleſs heard, as the other Neighbours alſo did, in what a mira- | "ek Geri : q q' 
culous manner God hath brought them- out of Egypt, and over the ; ONEring and facrifices i for God: an , Aaron came, an 
Red-ſea. And they knew better than others, by Tradition from the Elders of Iſrael to eat bread k with Moſes father- 
their Parents, that God had promiſed Canaan to them, and now | in-law. before God 1. ' ,; © | Fe 2 
they ſaw that he was condutting them thither, and therefore to}. p(7. « ) Gave, or offered ; as That Verb is uſed Pſal:68:18. com- 
prevent this, they now commence a War againſt them, and againſt | ,,r.q with xph: 4: 8: alſo Exod:25: 2: Which he did, that he might 
God or his Throne, whoſe Preſence with, and ConduRover them | publickly teſtify both his embracing of the true Religion, and his 
was moſt manifeſt ; which was a great aggravation oftheirSin And ' th,nkfujneſs to God for the great deliverance given to his people, 
this latter Tranſlation and Interpretation ſeems moſt probable, | ,p.0;, io himſelf and Family were concerned. And he took or 
x. becauſe it-exaQtly agrees with the Hebrew words, and the order ered theſe, tior.immediarly, or by himſelf, ( which would have 
in which they are placed. 2. It makes. the Coherence more clear , femme a preſumptuous and unwarrantable Attion for a ſtranger to 
than our Tranſlation doth, the former part of the verſe-containing yn errake in the Church of {{-ae!) but by thoſe who were appointed 
a reaſon of the latter, to wit, of that ſevere Curſe and everlaſting to do it; in which ſenſe David is ſaid to have ſacrificed, 2 Sam:24:25: 
War denounced «XN malek, beeauſe. they attempred by force , ,,q Solomon, 1 Kings 8:63: and all thoſe who brought their Offerings 
to overthrow God's Throne and People, and that with ſo many | +, the prieſts to offer for them. 5 To wit, of Thankſgiving,as isex- 
aggravating circumſtances ; of which ſee Dewt: 25; 17, 18. preſſed Exod: 24: 25. for part of theſe the Offercrs, with others,did - 
C H A P. . XVIIL eat, Levit: 7. 15. whereas no man _mighteart of the burnt-offerings, 
RO Res EY | Zevit:1:9; k(7. e.) To feaſt together of rhe remainders of the Sa- 
Fethro cometh to Moſes with his wife, and his children ; their names, | ccifices. 1 Either before the cloudy Pillar ; or. rather, before' the 
Ya 4. Moſes \Coing to meet his father, does obeiſance, 7 and re- | Altar,andin the place of publick Worſhip ; for ſome ſuch place un- 
lates to him God's providence, 8. Jethro's joy and thankſgiving, 9, | qoubredly they had, though the Tabernacle was nor yer built ; and 
19. Confeſſeth God's power therein, 11. Jethro ſacrificeth. 12. Moſes's | that was the place appointed for ſuch Feaſts. See Deus: 12:7: and 
Judging the people, 13, diſliked by his father, 14. Moſes's anſwer, 15, 27: 7: 1 Chron: :29: 21: Pſal: 116: 17. . 
16. Jethro's advice,  19-----=23, Moſes hearkening to his father, 24. þ {22 | 
chuſeth able men for rulers,-25. mho always judged the people, 26. Jethro's | 13 And it came to paſs on the morr ow, that Moſes 
| | departure, 27. rs far ro judge the people 2 : and the people ſtood by 
* Chap:2: JJ den * Jethro the Prieſt of Midian, Moſes father- | Moſes from the morning unto the evening. 721 
16s in-law, heard of all that God had done for Mo- m As a Civil Magiſtrate,by hearing and determining Cauſesand 
ſes, and for Iſrael his people, and 5ha: the LORD had | Controverſies ariſing among the people. ; 
brought Iſrael out of Egypt: . 14 And when Moſes father-1n-law ſaw all that he did 
2 Then Jethro, Moſes father-in-law, took Zipporah, | ©2 the people, ſaid, Whar is this thing that thou doeſt 
Moſes wife, after he had ſent her back 4, unto the people? Why fitteſt thou thy ſelf alone, and 
a From the. way to Egypt, upon the occaſion mentioned Exod: 4. all the people ſtand by thee fr om morning unto even ' 
24, 25. and becauſe he found by experience that ſhe was likely to IF And Moſes faid unro his father-in- law, Becauſe: 
hinder him from,or diſcourage him in the diſcharge of his great and | + the people come unto me to enquire of God ». 'f Lev:24: 
: dangerous Office, and to give an ilt example to > wa Iſraelites. n (i:e: ) Of the mind and will of God, both as to hiis Worſhip 12- 
:Chap:2. 3 And her two ſons, of which che * name of che | anq Service, and as to.their mutual duties to one another, See Num:15: 
_. he; ONE Was + Gerſhom, for he ſaid, I have been an alien | : $2: 9: 9. bb, | je. _ 
TO 5, in a ſtrange land ; 16 When they have a matter they come unto me,and 
thee. __ 4 And the name of the other was + Eliezer, for the | I judge berween + one and another, and I'do'make:t Heb: # 


tThatis, God of my father, ſaid he, was mine help, and deli- 
My God is yered me from the ſword of Pharaoh : | 


"WP 5 And Jethro, Moſes father-in-law, came b with his 
ſons and his wife, unto Moſes into the wilderneſs, 

*Chapry where he encamped at * the mount of God. 

« 6 Not at this time, but after the delivery of the Law at Mount 


Sinai ; as it may appear 1. becauſe he finds them encamped, as it here 
follows, at the mount of God, i: e: Sinai, whether rhey came not till 
Exod.19;2. 2. Becauſe the Iyws of Sacrifices were given before his 
coming,as appears from wer. 12. 3. Becauſe the Execution of this 
counſel here given about the choice of Magiſtrats, wer. 19. is rela- 
ted after the J7raelites departure from Sinai, Deut: 1: 7, &c. And 
therefore here is a tranſpoſal in this Hiſtory,which is alſo frequent 
in other places of holy Scripture. 

6 And he faid c unto Moſes, I thy father-in-law Je- 
thro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two 
{ons with her. ; 

c Not by word of mouth, as the next Verſe ſheweth, but either 


only the order of the words is a little va- | 


7 And Moſes went out to meet his father-in-law, . | 
and did obeiſance,and killed him : and they asked each '_. | 
other of their + welfare d; and they came into the tent. t Heb: - } 

4 Heb. of their peace, 7. e. proſperity and all happineſs, which alſo Foun" 
they wiſhed one to the other, as this phraſe implies. See x Sam:10:; 

4: and P/al: 122:6. 

8 And Moſes told his father-in-law all that the 
LORD had done unto Pharaoh,and to the Egyprians for 
iſraels fake e, and ail the travail that had 4 come upon # xep. 
them by the way, and ho the LORD delivered chem. found 

e Or, Concerning Iſrael's buſineſs, | them, 

9 And Jethro rejoyced for all the goodneſs which 
tne LORD had done co [rae] ; whom he had delivered 
out of'the Hand of che Egyptians. 

10 And Jethro ſaid,Bictled be the LORD, who hath 
delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and 
our of the hand of Pharaoh ; who hath delivered the 
people from under the hand of the Egyprians. 

. 21 Now I know f that the LORD is greater than 


- man 


them know »o the Statutes of God, and his Laws. : 
his fellow. 


o ( :: e: ) Do interpret and apply them to their ſeveral Cauſes and 


Circumſtances. | : 
17 And Moſes father-in-law ſaid unto him, The 


thing that thou doeſt, is not good p. 
? Not convenient either for thy telf, or for the people. 


this people » that is with thee 3: for this thing is too aing rhow 
heavy for thee 3 * thou art not able to perform it thy wits fade. 
felf alone. *Num. 
q Waſte and deſtroy thy health and ſtrength by exceſſive labour 
of mind and body. r By tedious attendance and expe&ation ere 
their turn comes for the deciſion of their matters. 
19 Hearken now unto my voice ; I will give thee 
counſel, and God thall be with thee sz Be thou for the 
| people to Ged-ward 7, that thou mayelt bring the cauſes 


unto God : 
| O 3 s (i.e.) 


14: 


— 


18 jt Thou wilt ſurely wear away q, both thou, and + Heb-fa- 


Deurt: 1:9» 


5 4 ITO 
ER 
FS 


Ri 
: 
'n 
: 


j 
l 


| * Deut:1: 
| 16; and - 
T6: 18: 


7, 9- 


c hap. 


| 2Chro:19: 


XIX. 
5 (4...) I doubt not, God will affift and bleſs thee as well in the 
courſe which I propoſe to thee,as in that which thou now doſt ule, 
becauſe God is a God of order,and loves order; and he is a God of 
mercy, and would not have thee deſtroy thy {elf in his work. Or 
ir may be taken for a Prayer, and God be with thee, i.e. bleſs and aſſiſt 
thee therein. * Heb. before God, 7. e. in hard and weighty Cauſes, 
which the inferiour Judges cannot determine,as it is explained,ver: 
22. where they need and ſeek dire&tion from God, there thou ſhalt 
be as a mediator between God and them, to bring their matters to God, 
as it here follows, and to receive direftions and commands from 
him. See Numb: 15: 33, 34.and 27: 5,6. _ | 

20 And thou ſhait ceach chem ordinances and laws «, 


and ſhalt ſhew them the way wherein they mult walk, 


EXODUS 


, 


2 For they were departed from Rephidim, and were 
come to the deſert of Sinai c, and had pitched in the 
wilderneſs, and there Iſrael camped before the mount. 

c ( i. e ) To that part of the Deſert which adjoyned ro Mount 
Sinai, as Rephidim, from whence they came, was in that part of the 
Wilderneſs adjoining to Horeb, which was another part of the ſame 
Mountain» See Exod: 17. 6. So they ſeem to have fetched a large 
compaſs, and to have come from one fide of the Mountain to the * 
other. 

2 And * Moſes went up to God 4 ; 
called unto him out of the mountain, ſaying, Thus 
ſhalt thou ſay unto the houſe of Jacob, and tell che 


children of 1{rael ; 


and the work that they muſt do. 

# Thou alone ſhalt deliver and explain God's Law to them, which 
they may apply to their particular Cauſes and Occaſions, and ſo 
end their Differences among themſelves without giving thee any 
trouble. X 

21 Moreover thou ſhalt provide out of all the people 


* able men x, ſuch as-feer God y ; men of truth z, ha- 
ting coverouſneſs s, and place ſuch over them to be ru- 
lers of thouſands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fif- 


ties, and rulers of tens. 

x Heb. men of might, not for ſtrength of body, but for greatneſs, 
reſolution, courage, and conſtancy of mind, which is the beſt pre- 
ſervative againſt partiality, and co:ruption in judgment, to which 
men of little minds, or narrow fouls, are eaſily ſwayed by fears,or 
hopes, or gifts. y Which will reſtrain them from all injuſiice, even 
when they have ability-and opportunity to do wrong ſo cunningly 
or powerfully, that they may eſcape the obſervation and cenſure of 
men. z Or, of faith, or faithful, ſuch as love the truth, and dili- 
gently labour to find it out in all cauſes, and then paſs a true and 
righteous ſentence ; not at all reſpe&ing perſons,burt only the truth 
and right of their Cauſes; ſuch as hate lies and flanders,and will ſe- 
verely rebuke and puniſh them. # This, though included in the 
former,is particularly expreſſed, becauſe gifts and bribes are the great 
corrupters of Judges and judgments. 

22 And let chem judge the people at all ſeaſons : 
and it ſhall be that every great marcer they ſhall bring 
unto thee, but every ſmall matter they ſhall judge : fo 
5 ic be caſier for thy ſelf, and they ſhall bear the bur- 
then with thee. 

23 If thou ſhalt do this thing, and God command 
thee /o b, then thou ſhalt be able to endure, and all this 


people ſhall alſo go to their place c in peace J. 

b If God approve of the courſe which I ſuggeſt,to whoſe wiſdom 
I ſubmit my opinion. .For-Fethro mTght well think, thar Moſes neither 
would, nor might make fo great an alteration in the Government 
without conſuiting God about it,and expeQting his Anſwer.Others 
render the place thus, borh God will girve thee his Commands, 1. e. thou 
wilſt have leiſure to ask. and take his counſel in ail emergencies, 
which now thou haſt not, andthou wilſt be able to endure. c To their 
ſeveral habitations, which are called mens places, Judg: 7: 7. and g. 
55: and 19: 28, 29. where their calling and buſineſs lies, from which 
they are now diverted and detained by fruitleſs and weariſom atren- 
dances. d Orderly and quietly, having their minds much eaſed 
by this courſe, and their contentions ſoon ended. 

24 So Moſes hearkened to phe voice of his father-in- 

law e, and did-all that he had ſaid f. 


e This is one evidence of that meekneſs for which Apjes is juſtly 
magnified, that he diſdained nor to receive advice from one ſo much 
his inferior in Wi'/dom,and Learning, and knowledge of the things 
ofGod.And God would have this wite Counſel to come from Jethro, 
not from. Moſes himſelf, to ſhew how variouſly he diſtributes his 
gifts, and to teach all men not ro think too highly of themſelves, 
nor to deſpiſe the counſels even of their inferiors. f Not immedi- 
atly, bur after he had received God's approbation, Numb: 11. 16. 
and the peoples conſent, Dent. 1. 14. 

25 And Moſes choſe g able men out of all Iſrael], 
and made them heads over the people, rulers of thou- 
ſands,rulers of hundreds,rulers of fifties, & rulers of tens. 
- g Not ſolely, bur together with the People,as appears from Deur: 
I: 13. - 

- 26 And they Judged the people at all ſeaſons : the 
hard cauſes they brought unto Moſes, but every ſmall 
matter\they judged chemſelves. 

27 And Moles let his father-in-law depart h, and he 
went his way into his own land. 

þ (3. e.) Diſmiſſed him honourably. See Numb: 10: 29. 


CHAP. XIX. 


The people come to Sinai, 1, 2. God's propoſal to them by Moſes. Of the 
. ferms of the Covenant, 3---=6, Moſes lays before them what God had 
commanded, 7. The peoples acceptance of the ſame, 8. God. direfeth 
Moſes how to ſanfifie the people, 10, 11. Moſes ſets bounds to the people 
, that they touch not the mount, 12. The puniſhment of thoſe that did, 13. 
Moſes 'janfifying the people, 14. commands them to keep from their 
wives, 15. The manner of Gods appearing, 16, 18, 19. God talketh 
with Moſes, 2 1-===43. 
N the third moneth 2 when the children of Iſrael 
were gone forth our of the land of Egypt, the ſame 
day b *-came they into the wilderneſs of Sinai. 
# Heb. Third new Moon, called Sivan, including the latter part of 


May, and the former part of June. b Heb: in that day, ro wit, when | 
the Month or New-moon began, and when they departed from Re- * 


phidim, to nore, that there was no Station between theſe two. This 
1s ſer down- thus-accurately,becaule it gives an account of the Origi= 
nal of the Feaſt of Pentecoſt, becauſe the giving of the Law, which 


d Into the Mount of God,to the place where God had now fixed 
his cloudy Pillar, and where he was about ro'manifeſt himſelf in a 
; glorious manner. So it is an anticipation. 


Chap. XX. 


- and the LORD * As 
7: 38: 


4 * Ye have ſcen whar I did unto the Egyptians, * Deur: 
and how I bare you on Eagles - wings e, and brought 2g: 2: 


you unto my elf f. 

e ( 5. e.) Safely, out of the reach of danger ; and ſtrongly,againſt 
all oppoſition. Compare Deut: 32: 117 1ſa: 63:9. Rev: 12:14. f Into 
my preſence, and favour, and fellowſhip, to be my peculiar people, 
to ſerve and worſhip me as your only Lord and King. 


2 and keep my Covenant, then * ye ſhall be a peculiar 
treaſure unto me þ above all people : for * all the earth 
1s nine 4. | 


5 Now * therefore if ye will obey my voice indeed * Deut: 
5 
* Deur. 4: 
20: and 7: 
6. and 14: 


2, 


g Heb. obeying ye will obey, i. e. if ye will obey me ſincerely, dili- 2: and 26: 


; gently, and conſtantly. þ Highly prized and loved, and carefully 
; kept by me, as mens Treaſures generally are. 7 For all people upon 
; earth are mine by creation and dominion,and I can diſpoſe of them 
all as I pleaſe, 'and either chuſe or refuſe any of them as I think fit; 
\ and therefore thoughT mighr refuſe you, as well as any others, yet 
| it is my pleaſure to fingle you out of all the world, upon whora to 


priviledge. : : 

6 And ye ſhall be unto me a * kingdom. of Prieſts &, 
and an holy nation /, Theſe are the words which thou 
ſhalt ſpeak unto the children of Iſrae]. 

k So they are called in regard, 1. of their exemption and ſepara- 
tion from all the people of the world, as Prieſts are taken out of the 
multitude of men. 2. Of their conſecration to the worſhip and 
ſervice of God, every Subje& of this Kingdom being in ſome ſort a 
Prieſt to offer ſome kind of Sacrifices to God. 3. Oftheir Priviledges, 
becauſe God conferred upon them ſingular honour, ſafety and immu- 
nity,and liberty of coming near to him,as prieſts among all Nations 
have been eſteemed privil-dged perſons. 1 Purged from the Idolatry 
and other abominations of the heathen world, and ſeparate from 
them by a wall of partition ; allied to me by an holy Covenant,and 
conſecrated to my uſe and ſervice. 

7 And Moſes came and called for the Elders of the 
people, and laid before their faces all theſe words which 


the LORD commanded him. 


that the LORD hath ſpoken, we will do. And Moſes 
returned-the words of the people unto the LORD . 

- Not for God's information, but for the peoples greater obli- 
- img and to learn what anſwer he ſhould return from God to 
tNEm. 

8 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Lo, I come unto 
thee »1n a thick cloud o, that the people may hear when 
I ſpake with thee, and * believe thee for ever: arid 
Moſes told the words of the people p unto the LORD 


of my mind to them. o See wer. 16: and compare 1 King: 8: 12, 
2 Chron. 6: 1. þ Thoſe mentioned wer: 8. Thus is here repeated, 
becauſe God's anſwer to them now follows. 


io And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Go unto the 
people, and fanctifie them q to day, and to morrow, 
and let them * walh their clothes r. 

q (7. e.) Command them to ſan&ify and cleanſe themſelves from 
all filthineſs of Fleſh and Spirit, and to prepare their Hearts for the 
right receiving of my Laws, and ſolemn entring into Covenant 
with me. Compare Lev: 11:45. Foſ: 3: 5. and 7.13. r By which ex- 
ternal waſhing, which was agreeable ro thar ſtate of the Church, 
they were taught to cleanſe their inward man. 

1r And be ready againſt the third day: for the 
third day s che LORD * will come down t in the 
of all the people upon mount Sinais 


noted before. # In a viſible and glorious manifeſtation of his 
preſence. | 


12 And thou ſbalt ſet bounds to the people round a- 
bout, ſaying, Take heed to your ſelves that ye go notup 
into the mount, or touch the border of it : * whoſoever 
toucheth the mount ſhall be ſurely put to death «. 


u By this Symbolical injun&tion, God deſigned, 1» To reſtrain 
Mens curious and bold enquiries into the things of God. 2. To 


j with the dread and reverence of the Divine Majeſty, and of his 
Holy Law. 3. To prepare and inure the People to the obedience 
of God's commands, even when they diſcern not the reaſons of 
them. 4+ To make them ſenſible of their own impurity and infir- 
mity, and of their abſolute need of a Mediator, through whom 
they might have acceſs to God See Gal. 3.19. | 


was 3 or 4 days after this time, w:s 5o days after the Paſſover, i 13 There thall not a hand touch it x, but he ſhall 


whereof 46 or 47 were paſt at their firſt coming to Sinai, reckoning 
from the 1<th day of the firſt month, when they came aut of Ezypr, 
to-this time, 


| ſurely be ſtoned or ſhort through ; whether it be beaſt 
| 7 or 


* Heb: 


I'2;: 225 


poſſeſs the J/raelires then preſent, and all ſucceeding Generations | 


18: and 
32:8, 9 
Pal. 135: 
4. 
Cant:8. ; 
I2: 


confer my chiefeit and peculiar bleſſings. 'Or, though all the earth be Tſa:43: r: 
mine, by general right, yet you only are mine by ſpecial title and Jer:10:16: 


Mal: 3:17: 
Tit: 2.14. 
* Deut. 


10. I4- 
Pal. 24.1. 


« 


and 5:10, 
and 20: 6, 


8 And * allthe people anſwered together,and ſaid, All *Chap.24. ' 


3+ 7+ 
Deur. gs: 
27. and 
26: I7« 


= 


Chap: 
14: 31; 


n As to the Mediator between me and them,and the Interpreter - 


* Gen: 
35: 2. 


ſight *Chap:34: | 
£0] 5: Deut; | 
s From this-time, and the fiftieth day from the Paſſover, as was 33: 2. 


CAA CERTAIN A 


Y 


$ 


$ 


L Ct ap- XIX. 
{Or, 
anne. 


EXO 


*+ ſhall not live : when the + trumpet ſound- 


they ſhall come up to the mount 4. 
1. Bur 1. This ſeemsro ” a groſs tau- 
or et wice forbidden in the words next foregoing. 2. 
S, ow reBi ker > ſ-.em ro be aſcribed borh to man and beaſ?, 
Orhers therefore render it, rouch him, i. e. they ſhall look upon bo 
an impudent tranſgreſſvr ot my expreſs command as an abominadbie 
perſon, whom they cannot touch without defilement, and arr | 
he ſhall be put to dearh in ſuch a manner as may be performed with- 
out touching him- » For though the Beaſts are not capable ors 
Law, yet thzy might be threatned for Man's caution, and puniſhe 
for the fault of their owners in not keeping them at a on 
the Mount. = ( 7. e. ) With one continued, equal and gentle found, 
a$ is uſual in the end of the Muſick-ſong, which is oppoſed to a 
rough, and loud, and unequal ſound. There was no real TRIER 
here, but an Angel made a ſound like that of a Trumper. a Object. 
Tis was forbidden to them Verſe 12. Anſw. 1 They were forbidden 
to come up to the Mount whileſt God was delivering his Laws, bur 
allowed it afterwards when that ation ceaſed, which was ſignified 
by the long ſound of the Trumper. 2. They might not come into 
the Mount or towards the top of it, but they might come to the 
bottom or lower parts of it, where the bounds were ſer, or at leaſt 
towards or near it, as the Hebrew Pcepoſition, beth, is ſomerimes 
uſed. So the Mount may be underſtood more ſtriftly, Verſe 12. for 
an eminent part or top of it, where the thick Cloud appeared, and 
where Moſes was, and here more largely for the whole Mountain. 
14 And Moſes went down from the mount unto 


y or man, 
eth long z 


_y 


"x ( 1. e. ) The Mountali 


_— — 


the people, and ſancified the people b, and they waſh- 


ed their clothes. ET 
b By commanding them ro ſanQify themſelves, and dirc&ing 


them how to doit. | Ee 
15 And he ſaid unto the people, Be ready againſt 
the third day, * come not at your wives c- 

c Abſtaia from the u'e of the Murriage-bed, partly becauſe your 
Wives may haply have their unc[2anne{supon them, though unknown 
to themſelves, at leaſt to you, whereby you may be legally defiled. 
See Lev: 15:18: and part]y that your Minds may be abltratted from 
all ſenſual Delights, and wholly employed abour this great and holy 
Work and Service. There is a like command x Cor« 7: 5: burboth 
this and that do indifferently concern both Minitters and People, and 
are limited to a certain time, and therefore are very impertinenrly 
alledged for the p2rpetual celibacy of Miniſters. Sze alfo x Sam: 


21:5. : : 
16 «© And it came to pals on the third day in the 


morning, that there were * thunders and lightnings 4, 
and a thick clond e upon the mount, .and the voice of 
the trumpet f exceeding loud, fo that all the people g 


that was1n the camp trembled. ; 

d Sent partly as Evidences and Tokens both of God's glorious 
Preſence, and of the Anger of God, and the dreadful Puniſhments 
due to the Tranſgreflours of the Law now to bedelivered ; and partly 
as means to humble, and awaken, and convince, and terrify proud 
and ſecure Sinners, that they might more reverently attend to the 
Words and Commands of God, more willingly yie!d Obedience to 


24. © 


them, and be more afraid of the Violation of them. e Wiich was both 
a fit mean for the Produttion and Reception of the Thunders and 
Lightnings, and a Signification as well of the inviſible and uncon- 
ceivable Nature of Go, as of the ohfcurity of the legal Diipenſation 
in regard of its Types and Shadows, ©. 2 Cor: 3: 13, 18: and 4: 6: 
f A fit Inſtrument both for rhe Promulgation of God's Law, and for 
the Signification of that War that is berween God and Sinners. g 
Moſes himielfnort excepred, as appears from Heb: 12: 21. 

17 And * Moſes brought forth the people out of the 
camp to meet wich God, and they ſtood at the nether 
part of the mount 6, : 

þ Therefore one part of the Mount they might come to, though 
not to another, to wit. the higher ; which may clearthe difhculry 
and ſeeming contradiCion betwixt Yerſe 12. and 13. 

18 And * mount Sinai was altogether on a ſmoke, 


becauſe the LORD deſcended upon it in fire z, and the: 


Deut: 
: 10: 


'c: {\moke thereof aſcended as the ſmoke of a furnace, and 
* the whole mount quaked greatly k, 

7 For further terrour to obſtinate Sinners, Hence this Law is 
called a fiery law, Deut:+33: 2. k By an Earthquake, as appears from 
Pſalm 60: 2: and 104. 32. : £ 

19 And when the voice of the trumpet iounded 
long, and waxed louder and louder }, Moſes ſpake, and 
. - * God anſwered him by a voice m2 

I Heb. We:nt en, or races” Ah grew very ſtrong, or vehement, or 
hud. This is oppoſed to the ſounding long, Verſe 13. m( 4. e. ) By 
Plain, diſtia&, and audible words, as Pſalm 81: 7: John 12: 29: ſo as 
the People alſo might hear, as appears from Yerſe 9. See Deut: 5: 24: 
x Kings 19: 12, 13: Heb: 12:19. _ Es 

20 And the LORD came down upon mount Sinaz, 
on the top of the mounts: : and the LORD called 
Moſes up to the top of the mount, and Moſes wentup. 

2 So here are three parts of the Mount manifeſtly diſtinguiſhed ; 
the top where the Cioud was, the middle part where Moſes now 
ſtood, and about which the bounds ſeem to have, been put, and the 
nether or lower part where the people were. 

21 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Go down, F 
charge the people, leſt they break through unto the 
LORD to gaze o, and many of them periſh. 

2 Through curioſity to know in what form. or manner I appear to 
ee. 
| 22 And let the prieſts p alſo which come near to the 


D U S. Chap, XX. 
offor them, which were either the firſft-born, who were conſecrated 
to God, and did execute the Office of Prieſts, as may be gathered 
from Exod +3: 2: and 24: «: Numb: 3: 12: and: 8:26: or ſome other 
perſons appninred by God for doing that work till the Office was 
ſettled in Aaron's Family. q Not at this time, for both Prieſts and 
People are nw kepr at equal diſtance, Yerſe 22. but uſually, 9. #. 
wno'e dury and privitedgeit is to approach unto God, an4 to pretent 
the P-oples Prayers and Sacrifices to him, and therefore are here 
particulzcly admoniſhed, becauſe they above all others are obliged 
to this care, 2n] becauſe they might ſeem to claim this priviledge 
by their FunCtion, 

23 And Moſes faid unto the LORD, The people 
cannot come up r to mount Sinai, for thou chargedſt 
us ſaying, Set b-unds about the mount, and ſandtifie 


It; : 
r The Peopleare ſufficiently admoniſhed in that particuler, becauſe 
as thou didſt command this ſame thing before. Yerſe 1:» fo T have 
informed and warned them of it; ſo that it may ſeem ſuperfluous 
for me to godown again to acquaint them herewith. Bur God, who 
berrer knew the dulneſ> and hardneſs of their Hearts than Moſes did, 
ſaw it neceſſary to repeat the ſame. command again and again. Some 
read rhe words interrogatively, Zo for halo, as it is 2 Sam: 13: 26: 
2 Kings 5* 26: Job 2. 10, Mal: 2: 15. May net the people ( i. e. ſome 
of the People, rhe Prieſts at leaſt, which, as thou baſt now ſaid, 
may come near to the Lord ) go up ? Is this an univerſal prohibition ? 
To this Anſwer is given by a diſtin&ion in the next Verlte, that he 
and 4aron might come up, but no other. 

24 And the LORD faid unto him, Away, pet thee 
down, and thou ſhalt come up, thou, and Aaron with 
thee: bur let not the prieſts and the people break through, 
to come up unto the LORD, leſt he break forth upon 


them. 
25 So Moſes went down unto the people, and ſpake 
unto them. 


GCHHAP. XX. | 

The obje of man's worſhip, 1, 2. The Decalogue, 3 ==119, The people 
fear, 18. They deſire Moſes to ſpeak to them, and not God, 19. Moſes 
encourages them, 20, Moſes draweth near the darkneſs, God ſpeaks to him, 
21, 22, God's charge about making ns other gods, 23. God's comman 
to build an altar, and of what they ſhould make it, 24, 25. And in what 
manner they ſhould approach ants it, 26. 


N D # God ſpake 6 all theſe words c, ſay- 
ing, . 

a Or, Then, to wit, when Moſ*s was returned into the Mount. 6 
Immediately, and not by an Angel. For though an Ambaſſadour 
or Meſſenger may a& in the name of his M after, yer it is againſt the 
uſe of all Ages and Places for ſuch to call rhemſelves by his name. 
As well might an Ambaſſadour of France ſay, I am the King of France; 
which all men would account abſurd, arrogant, and ridiculous, as 
an Angel might ſay, 1am rhe Lord. c (4. FY, Commands, for ſo the 
word 1s uſed Dewt: 17: 10: Efth: 1: 12. . 

2 * I am the LORD thy God 4d, which have 
brought thee, out of the land of Egypr e, * out of the 10. Ho 
houſe f of + bondage : 2 

a The only true God, and thy God by ſpecial Title, having entred * Chap. 
into Covenant with thee, and choſen thee for my peculiar People, to 13-3. 
protect, and rule, and bleſs thee above all others. God's Authority + Heb. 
and Right over them is ficly pur in the front, as the Foundation of ſervants: 
all God's Commands, and their Duries. e And ſo by Right of 
Redemption thou art mine. f (#.e. ) The p'ace ; for ſo the word 
houfe is tomertimes uſed, as Judges 16. 21. | 

3 Thou ſhalt have no other gods g before me þ. 

g Heb. There ſhall not be ro thee another god, or other gods, to wit, 

Idols, which others have, eſteem and worſhip as gods, and there- 

fore Scripture ſo calls them by way of ſuppoſition, Deut: 32: 21: 

1 Sam: 12. 21; 1 Cor: 8: 4, 5. but thou ſhalt not have them in any 

ſuch Reputarion or Veneration, bur ſhalt forſake and abhor rhem; 

and cleave unto mealone. þ( z.e. ) In my Preſence, in my Houſe 

or Church, which you are, where I am eſpecially preſent; and 
therefore for you to worſhip any ocher god 1s moſt impudent Idolas 

try, even as when a Woman commits Adultery before her Husband's 

Face. He may alfo intimate; that all the Idolatry which any of 

ctiem ſhall hereafter commir, though never ſo cunningly and ſecretly 
managed, is manifeſt to his eyes, Pſal: 44: 20, 21. ' Others tranſlate 

it with me, or beſides me, as itis rendred Matth: 12. 30. He forbids 

the worſhip of all others, not only in oppoſition to him, bur alſo in 
conjunttior. with him, or ſubordination co him. See 2 Kings 17: 33: 

Exod: 32: As 7: 41* Rev. 19: 10: and 22:8, 9. ; : 
4 * Thou ſhalt not make # unto thee & any graven * Ty: 1g; 
image 7, or any likeneſs of any thing that is in heaven » 1. Pl. 
above, or that is in the earth » beneath, or that is in 97* 7* 


the water o under the earth p. | | PEN 

7 Either in thy Min.', or with thy Hand, 4#s 17: 29: or by thy 
command. k(5s.e.) For thy uſe, or for thee to worſhip ; for 
otherwiſe they were not abſolutely forbidden to make any Images, 
but only to mak? them for worſhip, as may appear by comparing 
this place with Lewirt:"19: 4: Deut: 4: 15: and Amos 5: 26: with 4#s 
7: 43: and from Levit: 26: 1: where the ſetting up of a pillar, or ſtone, 
isas abſoJutely forbidden as the making of an Image. - And therefore as 
che former is not forbidden to be done ſimply and univerſally, as 
appears from Joſh: 24: 20: 1 Sam: 7: 12: but oply to bedone. in order 
to worſhip, ſcalſo is the latter. Moreover there were Cherubims 
and other Images in the Temple, and afterwards the Brazen Serpent, 
which, becauſe they were nor made to be worſhipped, neither were 
indeed, nor wereever eſteemed to be any contradictions to this Law. 
{ Or molten, or any other Image, as is moſt evident from the nature 
and reaſon of the Precept. Nor 1s any thing more common than 


* Dzur. g. 
6.Pſal.81, 


R 


oO 


LORD 9 ſan&tihe themſelves, left the LORD break 
forth upon them. 

| | ? For though the Azronical Prieſthood was not yet appointed, it is 
vertain, that as there were Sacritices before, fo there were Pricfts to 


i. 


ſuch ſynecdochical Expreſſions, wherein under one kind named, all 
other things of the like nature are contained. But for more abun= 
dant caution, and to pur all out of doubt, he adds a more general 
word, mor any likenzjs, m As of God, Dent: 4: 15: 1s: 44* 9y 20: 

O 4 Ange's, 


"OP"Ye" 4 , 
4, x* ho "a f 
" ho =x.4 ; .- 
* E 
6 Pp g 
: »* 
' 


*Chap:34: 


Deut: 


6:15.Joſh: 


*Chap:34* 
7: Num: 
14: 18: 


29: Job 5. 


o Deut: T2 
9: Pial: 
89. 34: 


* Lev. 19: 
zi 2: D-zur: 
<: 11; 
Marth: 
$4 33- © 


| Ange!s, Sun, Moon, 


or Stars, which the Heathens worſhipped, | 
Dent: 4: 19: and 17: 3. » Asof Men and Beaſts, and creeping things, 
which the Ezyptians and other Gentiles worſhipped as gods» 
Dent: 4: 16, 17: Jai: 44: 13: Exe h 
Dagon was ; or Serpents, Crocodiles, and ſuch other Egyptian Deities. 
p This is emphatically added, to note the ſingular care of Divine 
Providencein bringing the Waters under the Earth, which naturally 
are lighter and higher than it, and therefore might eaſily overwhelm 
ir. Compare Pſal: 104: 6. | 

5 Thou ſhalt nor bow down thy ſelf q to them r, 
nor ſerve them 5: for I the LORD thy God am a * 
jealous t God, « * viſiting x the iniquities of the fathers 
upon the children y, unto the third and fourth generation 


2 of them that hate me 2: 


them ; for to bow 
Scripture of the 


FXODUS. 


ee | 
Ezek: 23: 14. 0 As of Fiſhes, ſuch as | 


Beſides, the 


I2: 2I: 


Name, by vain and cuſtomary Oaths, Curſes, or Blaſphemies, 9. 4. 


| andthe fuithering of our own, and others SanQtifieation and Salvation. 


*Chapy 
12: and 
on thoſe days, as many Scriptures teach us. Or, 2. A permiſſion Lev: 1 

: 27 
I 2. Lui 
T3. 14} 


ſo farthe Memory of a Father may exrend, and be matter of imitation 


to his Children; and partly to ſhew the difference between hus 


excrciſe of Juſtice and Mercy, as appears by comparing the next 
Verſe. a This word is oppoſed to the conceit that Idolaters, at 
leaſt many of them, have of themſelves, thar they love God more 
than others do, becauſe they love, and. honour, and worſhip the 
Creatures for his ſake, and for thoſe Excellencies that he hath 
wrought in them ; but rhis will no more excuſe their Tdolatry, than 
it will excuſe him that commirs Adultery with his Friend's Wife, 
that he did it for his Fri:nd's fake, and from the love he had to his 
Friend, and for his Relations. | 


6 And * ſhewing mercy unto thouſands & of them 


that love me, and keep my commandments c. 

b To wit, of their Generations, 7. e. for ever ; whereas his Puniſh- 
ment extended only to three or four of them : So far is God's Mercy 
exalted above his Juſtice. Compare Pſal. 103. 17. c This conjunttion 
is very obſervable both againſt thoſe that falſly and foolifhly pre- 
tend or inſinuate, that the inward aff:Qion of Jove to God 1s not 
abſolutely and always neceſſary to Salvation ; and alſo againſt them 
who pretending inward love to God, live inthe cuitomary breach 
of God's known commands. 


7 * Thou ſhalt not take + the Name of the LORD 
d thy God in vain e : for the LORD will not hold him 


guiltleſs f that taketh his Name in vain. 

+ Or, not carry, or not take, or lift up, to wit, in er info thy 
Meuth, as the phraſe is more fully exprefſcd, Job 4: 2: Pſalm 16: 4: 
and 50: 16. So Men are faid to take up a proverb, or a lamentation, 
Iſai: 14. 4: Ezek: 26: 179. d Not only the proper name of the Lord, 
bur any of his Artribures, Ordinances, and Works, by which God 

' hath made himſelf known. e Or, unto vanity, or vainly. Either 1. 
Falfly, or in a falſe Oath ; thou ſhalt nor twear falſly by rhe Name 
of the Lord, or not lift up the name of God into thy Mouth in an 
Oath ro the confirmation of a Lie. Or, 2. In vain, as we render it, 
and as the word Schave is frequently uſed, as Job 7: 3: and 15: 37: 
Pſalm 65: 11: and 89: 47: Tſai: 1. 13. You ſhall not uſe the Name of 
God either in Oarhs, or in common Diſcourſe ; lightly, rafkly, 
irreverently,or uaneceſfarily, or without weighty or ſufficient Cauſe. 
Which being a Duty enjoyned not only in many places of Sacred 
Scripture, bur alſo in the Apocryphal Eccdefiaſticus, 23: 15, 16, 17: 
and even by Heathen Authors, as Plato in his Book of Laws ; and it 
being evident by the Light. of Nature ro Man's Reaſon, it were 
ſtrange if it were not here underſtood ; eſpecially conſidering, that 


4t is moſt reaſonable to take theſe ſhort Laws in the moſt compre- 


henſive ſenſe, tuch as this, not the former, is ; for the prohibition 
of uſing ir vainly and raſbly, doth certainly include that of ſwearing 


Chap. XN, _ 


Ezek.:i - 


11 For * in ſix days p the LORD made heaven and *Gal 
earth, the ſea, and all that in them is, and refted q the | 
ſeventh day : wherefore the LORD bleſſed r the ſabs 
bath day s, and hallowed it z. 

Þ And neither in more nor leſs time, as he could have done. 9g 
( 7. e. ) Ceaſed from his Creating Works ; otherwiſe he worketh ſtill, 
( Jobn 5: 19: ) by his Providence and Grace ; and neither js idle, nox 
weary, Iſa: 40: 28: but this reſt is aſcribed to him for our Admonition 
and Imiration. » ( #5. e.) Made it a day of Bleſſing, as well as of 
receiving Bleſſings and Praiſes from men,as of cenferring his Bleſſing, 
and Favours upon thoſe that religiouſſy obſerve it. The Day is ſaid | 
to be bleſſed, when Men are bleſſed by it, and in it, by a common . 
Metonymy, as a Man's Field, Gen: 27: 27: and basket and flore, Deut: | 
28: 5: and the work of his hands, Job 1: 10: areſaid to be bleſſed, when i 
a Man is bleſſed in them. 5 It is remarkable, the Bleſſing and San- : 
Ctification arenot appropriated to the Seventh day, but to the Sabbath | 
day, whether it ſhould be the Seventh day, as to the Jews it them © 
was ; or the firſt day, as to us Chriſtians now it is, which change g | 
ſeems hereby to be inſinuated. 7 (5. e.) Separated it from the reſt 4 
of the days, and from all common Employments, and conſecrated it 
to his own holy Service, and Man's holy Uſe. * Lew: 
6 


12 (* Honour « thy father and thy mother x : that 13ur' 
thy days may be long y upen the land, which the 5: ii! 
LORD thy God giveth thes, Epb 

s Which 


F 


", 


* A 
33, 
or 


FJob 


: hap 
:: and 
[: 14; 
CV: 2) 
zZek.ut * 
2. Lui 
3+ 14} 


"Gul 


* Dew?: 
09,1 Gs 


made and fearcheth, 


u Which word doth. net only not? the Reyerence, Love, and 
Cb:d.cnce we owe them, but alſo ſupport and maintenance, as ap- 
-:r3 rom Matth: 15: 4, 5, 6 and from the Jike ſignification of 
that word, » Tim: 5: 3, 17: which is ſo natural and neceflary a Du- 
ty, that the Jews ſoy, aman 1s bownd even tobeg, or to work with his 
Bands that he may relieve his Parents. 
th-+ Merber, Levit.19: 3 
m_— ju: indiffeieorly to both of them. Compare Exod: 21: 15, 
17: Dcut: 21: 18: and 27: 16: Prov: 20: 20: and 3o: i7. And be- 
cauſe theſe Liws are b:1ck, and yer comprehenſive, under theie 
are contained 41] cur Superiors and Governors. y Heb. that they 
5: 6 thy Parents, may prolong thy days, or the days of thy Life, 
to wit, inſtrumenraliy, by th+ir Prayers made to God for thee, 
arid by their vieſling in my Name conferred upon thee 3 though 
th: Aﬀive Verb is comment!y taken imperfonaliy, as Job 7: 3: Prov. 
9: 11. Luke 12. 10. and ſo it may be here, they prolong, for, he pro- 


longed. : 
13 * Thou ſbalt not kill z. | ; 

z Towit, any Man or Woman, without Authority,and without 
jult Cauſe ; * which exceprioa muſt neceffarly be underſtood, be- 
cauſe many other Scriptures command the Magiftratz ro kill grear 
Offenders. And this Prohibition, being delivered by God vvho 
and commands Mgns hearts, muſt be extend- 
ed not en'y to the external A& of killing bur to all motions of yhe 
H-art or Tongue which tend that way, / as Anger, Hatred, Envy, 
Malice, Strife, Blows, and the Challenges of Duelliſts; which is 
clearly manifeſt by comparing this with other Scriptures, as Mar. 
5:21: 1 John 3:15. &c, And here, as in the reſt, is commanded 
the contrary Duty of preſerving the lives of our Neighbours as much 
as lies in our Power. : 

14 Thou ſhalt not commit adultery «. _ 

s Here is mention<d one kind of Uncleanneſs,as being eminently 
ſinful, and unjuſt,and pernicious tro Humane Society. Bur under 
this are comprehended and forbidden all other kinds of Filthineſs, as 
Beſtiality, Sodomy, W horedom, Fornication, Cc. and all means, 
occa/ions,and appearances of them,as it appears 1. from orher Scri- 
ptures that forbid thoſe things, which either belongrto this Command, 
or to none of the Ten,whichis very improbable. 2. From the large 
extentof the orher Commands,noted before. 3- From cur Saviour's 
Explicarion, Matth: 5:27: And contrariwiſe,all Chaſtity and Sobriety 
in Thoughts, Aﬀe@ions, Words, Habits, and Geſtures, is here pre- 
ſcribed. See 1 Theſ: 4:3, 4+ Heb. 13: 4. 

«5 Thou ſhalt not ſteal 6. 

b (#: e: ) Either by deceit or violence, or without his knowledge 
a:id confenr, take away another Man's Goods, Eph: 4: 28. butanthe 
contrary ſhalt preſerve and increaſe them,as need requires,and occaſi- 
on :soff.red. 


16 * Thou ſhaltnot bear falſe witneſs c againſt t thy 
neighbour d, 


* **; Heb: not anſwer, viz, when thou art asked in Judgment. Lev:5: 


1. 19: 16:Or,n: ſpeak # falſe t:ſtimony, or as a falſe Witneſs Which 
d<th nor only forbid Perjury in Judgment, but alſo all unjuſt Cen- 
ſure, Slander, Backbiting, Scrnng, falle Accutation, and the like ; 
and alfo requires a juſt and candid Judgment of him, and of his 
Words and A&ions, ſpeaking well of him, as faras Truth and Ju- 
ſtice will permit, and defending his good Name againft the Calum- 
nies and DerraCions of others. + No, nor for thy Neighbours; but 
he ſaich againſt, both becauſe ſuch Perjuries, Slanders, &c. are moſt 
commonly deiigned againſt them, and becauſe this is a great aggra- 
vation cf the Sin, when a Man not only ſpeaks evil and falſhood, 
bu: doth th's from malice and ill-will. But under this kind are con- 
tained other Sins ofa like, though leſs ſinful nature, as in the other 
commards. 4 A Man's Neighbour here is not only the Jſraelite, as 
ſome would have it, but any Man ; as plainly appears, 1. becauſe 
that word is frequen:ly uſed in that ſenſe, not only in the New,as 
a'l agree, bur a'fo in the Old T:flament, as Gen: 11: 3: Lev: 20; 10, 
Eſth: x. 19. Prov. 18. 17. 2. Becauſe it is fo explained, Luke 10: 
29, 26. Rim 13. 9: compared with Match, 22: 39. 3. From the 
reaſon of rhe thing, whict is common to all ; unlels a man will be 
{o harlly to ſay, that he may bear falſe Wirneſs againſt a Stranger, 
though nor againſt an /ſr#elite;and,in like manner, that when God 
forbids a Man to commit adultery with his neighbours wife, Ley: 20 10: 
he may de it with a Stranger's Wife ; and that though a Man be 
commanded to ſpeak the truth to his neighbour Lech: 8. 16. he may tell 
lies roa Stranger. 4: Becauſe the gicat law of Love and Charity, 
which is the Life and Soul of this, and all the Commands, and binds 
us to all, binds us, and bound the Iſraelites to Strangers, as appears 
from Exod: 23: 4 and Levit: 19: 33, 34- : 

17 * Thou ſhalt not covet e thy neighbours houſe, 
thou ſhalt not * covet thy neighbours wife,nor hisman- 
ſervant, nor his maid-ſervant,nor his ox,ner his aſs,nor 


any thing thatzs thy neighbours. 

e The covering here forbidden is, either, 1+ The inward and de- 
liberate purpoſe and defire of a deceitful or violent raking away of 
another Man's Goods; but this is forbidden in the eight Command- 
ment. Ard it is hard to conceive, thar Sr. Paul ihould think, that 
this Command did not forbid ſuch a praftice, Rom. 7: 7: which 
even the betcer ſort of Heathens cſteemed a Sin, whoſe . words are, 
that they who are withhcld from inceſt, or whoredome, or thefr, only 
from a principle. of jear, are guilty of thoſe Crimes; eſpecially ſeing 
tne Old Tefament Scriptures, which dou" tleſs he diligently ſtudied, 
doo p ainly condema evil purpotes of the heart, as Levi. 19: 17: 
Deut. 9: 4, 5: and 15: 7, 9, &c. Or, 2 the greedy defire of th.t which 
15 ancther Man's, tnough it be without injury to him. Thus Ahab 
ſinacd in deſiring Naborh's Vineyard, ti:0! gh he offzred him Money 
for it, 1 Kings 21: 2 Or,rather, 3. thoſe inward motions of the Hearr, 


which from che Fountain of Original Corruption do ſpring up inte | 


Heart, and tickle it with ſomeſecret Deligitt, though they do nor 
obrain the deiib-rate Conſent ofthe Will. Far ſeing this Law ofGod 
75 Spiritualand Ho'y, Rom. 7: 12, 14-and reacheth the thoughts, in- 
t<nts, and ali rhe attuz] motions ofthe Heart, as is appareat from 
the Nature of Go4,and of his Law; and ſeing fuch morions are both 
the Fruits of a finful Nature, and the common Cauſes of finful A&i- 
Ons ard are not agreeable eirher ro Man s firſt and uncorrupted Na- 
ture, orto Goa's Law, they muſt needs be a ſwzrving from it, and 
Therefore Sin» And this is tae xeaion why this Commar:d is added as 
diſtugtt irom all tie rcit, 


EXOD 


| mountain ſmoaking: and when the peopie ſaw it, they 
| removed g, and ſtood afar off. 


x The Father is put firſt here, |, 
ro ſhew that we owe this Duty promil- | 


' 


# 3-7 4 
F «b 


13, 


8. | | C 
13 And * all the people ſaw the thunderings fand 
the lightnings, and the noiſe of the trumpet, and the 


f (#: e: ) Herd them. Ons: ſenſe is oft put for another, as ſeeing 
Gen, 4.2: 1. for hearinz, Aﬀs 7.12, g. From the bottem © of the 
Mountain, wtere it ſeems they ſtood. CO: 

19 And they ſaid unto Moſes, * Speak thou with us, * n.ye, 
ard we wiil hear ; butler not God ſpeak with us, leſt, 5.24. .an 


we die b. | eas - | 

þ This they ſpeak from a ſenſe of their own guilt, and of the eb, 12g 
Greatneſs and Holineſs of the Divine Majeſty, to whom they durſt 19» 
. nor approach but by a Mediator. See Devt. 5: 28: and 18: 16; Gal: 


3* 19. 
20 And Moſes ſaid unto the people, Fear not : for 
God is come to prove you 3, and that his fear may be 


before yourfaces-k, that ye tin not. 

i Or zry, or ſearch you, whether you are innocent, and ſuch as 
delight in my Preſence, or conſcious of your guilr, and therefore 
afraid of my Appearance ; whetier you have ſuch a righteouſneſs 
as can bide the trial of a Severe Judge ; or whether you ars fuch 
as have cauſe fo fear my Wrath,and to flee ro my Grace and Mercy; 
which of you are Sincere and Upr.ght, and which are Hypoerites 
| and ungodly Perſons; or, to try, whether this rerrible Appearance 
' will produce in you that Reverence, Fear, and Obedience, which I 
call for; or, to give you a Law, by which you will be proved 
whether you do indeed love and fear me, as you' pretend you do, 
or vvhether you do not, & God's fear is properly in Mens 
hearts; but here the ſenſe ſeems ro be this, That his Fear, z. e. .--. 
this dreadful Manifeſtation of his Majeſty and Juſtice ( the a& --1 :21 
being here put for the Obje& ) may be now and ever before your | 
Eyes, andin your Memories, | as an effeftual Prefervative from 
Sin, 


21 And the people ſtood afar off, and Moſes drew 


near unto * the thick darkneſs, where God was. * Chaps 
22 } And the LOR Ufaid unto Moſes, Thus thou: 19.16, 

ſbalt ſay unto the children of [ſrael, Ye have ſeen 7 chat Kings 

I have talked with you * from heaven m2. E270 þ Den 
I (5. e. ) Heard, asverſe 18: He may uſe the word, ſe:n, here,cto 36, 


intimate, that this was a'l they could fee of God, to wit, his Voice 
and Speech, and that they ſaw no Image of him, as is expreſſed in 
| a paral'el place,and therefore ſhould make no Reſemblances of him, 
as it here follows* m (7.e.) From the Lower Heaven, ro wir, the 
Air, or the Clouds, which were over the top of Mount Sinai, Drut 4. 
36: Neh. g: 13: and fo the word Heaven is of: underſtood, as Ger. r. 
20: Job 35: 11. Pſalm. 79: 2: And ſo this place may be reconciled 
with Heb. 12: 25: Where this is ſaid to be ſpoken upon Earth. 

23 Ye ſhall notmake * with me » gods o of lilver p, « |c, 


, neither ſhall ye make unto you gods of gold. | 4: 5. 
n ( i.e. ) To worſhip together with me, I will allow ne Compa-/2Kings 17 

nion ; or, to me, as it follows, wnto you ; *and verſe 24: wned me ;; and 1413, 
the particle, eth, 1s ſometimes uſed for el, or lamed,as 1 Sam: 22: 14: Ezek: 20, 
2 Kings 22: 14: Or, for me, either to repreſent my Perſon,by compar- 39; and 
ing this with the paralle! place,Deut: 4: 15, 16: or to worſhip me 43: 8: 
by, as it is apparent that the ſraelites afterwards did intend to Wer-, 2 Cor.6: : 
ſhip Jehrwah in the Golden Calf, and therefore Aaron calls the Feaſt 14,15,16s 
of the Calf, a F aft te Jehovah, Exod: 32: 5. and that with the appro- 
bation of the People, whom he then complied with,and durit not 
refiſt. o (7#:e:) IJiols or Images, to whom yeu may give the name 
and worſhip of gods. p Aad conſequent!y not of any ocher Materials, 
as Woud, or Stone : It is a Synecdoche. 


24 1 An altar of earth thou ſhalt make unto me 9, 
and ſhalt ſacrifice thereon thy burnt-otferings, and thy 
peace- offerings, * thy ſheep, and thine oxen 3 in-all 
places r where I record my Name s, I wiil come unto 


thee, and 1 will bleſs thee. | 


q For thy preſent uſe, or whileſt thou art in the Wilderneſs: This 
he commanded, part}y that they might eaſily and readily ere& an 
Altar upon all occaſions, which it might be hard for them ro do there 
of better Materials;partiy to mind tzem how much more God regar-= 
ded the inward Holineis,than the ourward pomp of their Devotions; 
partly becauſe God would mike a conſpicuous diff: rence between 
them and Idolaters, who uſed much cet and curiofity about their 
Altars; partly that the Alrars might, after they left them, fall 
down and mouider away,and not remain as !aſting Monuments,which 
might be afterward abuſed to Idolatry by any perſons that came this 
ther; partly becauſe they were u::certain of their ſtay any where, 
except at Sina, and therefore muſt raiſe fuch Altars as they could 
ſuddenly do. But this Command only concerned their Wilderneſs 
ſtate ; for there were better and more durable Altarsin the Taber- . 
nacle and Temple. r Therefore there is no need of building any 
ſtately Altarina certain place, as if my Preſence were fixed there, 
&not to be enjoyed elſewhere sOr,cauſe my name to be remembred by you 
7.e. Not in every place which you ſhall invent, bur in all ſuch places 
as ] ſhall appoint for the Remembrance or Celebration of my Name, 
or for the Service of my Majeſty, wiether ir be in the Wilderneſs, 
ad in divers parts thereof, or 1a the Tabernacle and Temple. 


25 And* if thou wilt make me an altar of ſtone r, *Deurt;u7; 
thou ſhale not + build of hewenſtone «: for if thou lift i 


up thy tool upon it, thou haſt polluted it x, £ no 
£ Wach in thoſe rocky parts might b2 as ealie for them to make,zs ,, 14 4. 

one of earth. « Which would require boich cune, and colt, andart; ip pun 

The reaſons of this Preceprt ate 18 part the ſame witl the former, ing; 

wer: 24: x By thy diſobedience to my expreſs command now given; ©" 

And howſoever they think to gratify me by this curivury, I thalinot 

look upon it as alacred taing, by whici che Sac: inces cifzied og ar 

ſhall be ſan&ified, bur as a prophane thing which will detile chem, 3 

So little doth God -value or approve the inventions of men in his 

worſhip, how coloutable ſaever they be, 


& 
\'Y y 
” 


"> 


"Levi: 


- #7 5b 
3 


__ 


Al- 


26 Neither ſhalt thou go up by ſteps x unto mine 
© | tac 


A 


Heb:ſay 
5ng ſbal 
US. 


'to beſold. Of which ſee Exed: 22: 3: 2 Kings 4: 1. Matth. 18. 25: 


y 


car, that thy nakedneſs be not diſcovered thereon =. 

y He ſeems to mean the ſteps of Ladders,or others of the ſame na- 
ture, which could ſuddenly be made,and were proper for their pre- 
ſent condition, where there was danger of the following inconvent- 
ence.For «fterwards God appainted an Altar ten cubits high, 2 Chron 
4: x. Though ſome conceive they went not up to that by ſteps, 
but by an inſenſible aſcenr upon the ground raiſed by degrees for 
that purpoſe. Bur if the Prieſts did go up to it by ſteps, God pro- 
vided againſt the _— here mentioned, by preſcribing linen 
Breeches to themin that ſervice. « For theſe linen Breeches were 
not yet appointed, and the manner then and there was for men to 
wear long Coats or Gowns like women. God wonld remove all ap- 
pearance or occaſion of immodeſty, eſpecially in ſacred perſons and 
—_ ; and the rather, to ſhew his deteſtation of that impudence 
and filthineſs which was very uſual in ſome of the Solemnities and 
Worſhips of the Heathen. 


CH AP. XXL 

Law conterning bond-men or ſlaves, I=-==5. Servants bored through the 
ear, 6. Ordinances for bend-women, 7---10. Of mwrtherers, 12. Of 
them that curſe their parents, 17. Of ſtrikers, 18, 19. Of them that 
hurt a woman with child, 22, 25. Of 4 maſter of a family that firikes 
out 8x eye or tooth of his man 0r maia-ſervant, 26, 27. Of a puſhing 
ox, 29. Of them that hurt thiir neighbour's ox by digging # pit, 33, Of 

one ox killing another, 35, 36+ ; 
O W theſe are the Judgments #4, which thou ſhalt 


* ſet before them: 

a Or, the judicial Lews, by which thou and the Judges before 
mentioned ſhall govern thy ſelf and the people in civil and criminal 
Cauſes, 

2 * If thou buy an Hebrew ſervanc b, ſix years he 
ſhall ſerre : and in the ſeventh year c he ſhall ge out 
free for nothing. 

b Of which prattice ſee Fer, 34: 14. This was allowed in tvvo 
caſes : 1. when a man for his crimes was condemned by the Judges 


— 


2. when a man preſſed by great poverty,ſold himſelf or his Chidren: 
OF which ſee Lev: 25: 39, 409. e Which is to be numbred, either 
1+ from the laſt Sabbatical year, or year of releaſe, which came eve- 
ry ſeventh year; and the ſenſe of the 7 prog is, not that he ſhall al- 
ways ſerveſix full years, but that he ſhall never ſerve longer, an1 
that his ſervice ſhall laſt only till that year comes. Oc heler 2.from 
the beginning of his ſervice; for 1. It were a very impreper ſpeech 
to ſay he ſball ſerve fix years, of one who poſſibly entred into bis ſer- 
vice but a month before the year of releaſe. 2. In the Law of the 
Sabbatical year there is no mention of the releaſe of Servants,as there 
is of other things, Lev:257Deut: 15:andin the year of Jubilee, when Ser- 
vants are to be releaſed, it is expreſled ſo, as Lev: 25: 54, 55. 

3 If hecamein t by himſelf 4, he ſhall go out by 
himſelf : if he were married, then his wife ſhall go out 


with him: 
- 4 (i.e. ) With his own perſon enly, not with a Wife, as the op- 
poſite branch ſheweth. : ] : 
4 If his maſter have given him a wife, and (he have 
born him ſons and daughters, the wife and her children 


ſhall be her mafters e, and he (hall go out by himſelff. 


4 That being a true rule,and approved both by Scripture and by 
Heathen Authors, that the birth follows the belly, Gen. 21: 10: Gal, 
4:24: 25, and he that owns the tree hath righe to all its fruit. 
Nuef. How was this ſeparation of man and wife agreeable with the 
firſt inſtirution of Marriage, by which that Bend is made indiſſolu- 
ble? Auſw. 1. That Bond was not neceſfarily diffolved by this 
Law, both becauſe the ſeparation was at the man's cheice, who 
mighr have ſtayed there,if he fo pleaſed ; and becauſe the diſtinQi- 
on of their Habitations might conſiſt with the right and uſe of Ma- | 
trimony, which the Maſter alſo would probably permit for his own 
advantage. Af. 2 God might here, as well as in the caſe of Di- 
vorces, diſpenſe with his own Laws and Inſtitutions, eſpecially in 


this caſe, where he might deſign this for a puniſhment to the man foasj 


marrying a ſtranger, which was not pleaſing ro God, asappears from 
Deut: 21: i 1.Ezr8 10:2: Neh: 13. 23: And that this woman was a ſtran- 
ger,and not an Hebreweſs, is manifeſt,becauſe then ſhe alſo muſt have 
gone out free; verſe 7, 8, 9. and Dew: 15: 12. 
'5 And if the ſervant + fhall plainly fay,IT love my ma- 
ſter. my wife,and my children, I will not go out free : 
6 Then his waſter ſhall bring him unto the Judges g; 
he ſhall alſo bring him to the door þ, or unto the door 
poſt, and his maſter ſhall bore his ear chrough with an 
awl #, and he ſhall ſerve him for ever &. 
g Partly, that it may appear he chuſeth this freelv,and is not over- 
awed nor over-reached by his Maſter; and partly,that the agreement 
being ſo publickly and ſolemnly confirmed, might be irrevocable. 


b To wit, ef his Maſter's Houſe, asit is expreſſed, Dext: 5:17. A+ 


token that he was fixed there,and never to go a Freeman out of theſe 
doors. # As anete ofa Servant ; asit continued to be long after this 
in Syria and frabia, as Juvengl and Petronins Arbiter affirm: And it did 
firly repreſent his ſertled and perpetual obligation to abide in thar 
Houſe, and there to hear and obey his Maſter's Commands: See Pſal. 
40; 6. k(3:e. |) Notonly for fix years more,but without any 1i- 

mitation of time, as long as he lives,until the Jubilee, which is an ex+ 
ceptien made by God to this Law,Lev: 25. 40: Deut.r5; 17. The He- 
brew word, elm, here ufed,oft ſignifies not eternity, jbut only a lon,, 
cime. See Exod, 12. 14. 


7 Andifa man [ſell his daughter to be a maid-ſer- 
vant »,ſhe ſhall not go out as the men-ſervants do ». 

I (i.e. ) An Hebrew, as appears by the oppoſition of one of a ſtrange 
wation, verſe 8. m Which was allowedin caſe of extreme neceſlity 
becaufe ofthe hardneſs of their hearts. » But upon better terms,a: 
being one of the weaker and mere helpleſs Sex. Que#: How doth 


EXODUS: 


Verſes ſufficiently imply. 2. Diftinguiſh things. The likeneſs be- 


caſe ſhe conſented tv perpetual ſervirude : The difference here 15, in 
:aſe they both were made free, in which caſe ſhe had ſome priviled- 
ves, which here follow. 


8 If ſhe + pleaſe not her maſter 
her to himſelf o, chen ſhall he let her be redeemed p: to 
ſell her unto a ſtrange nation he ſhall have no power 9, 


ſeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her r. 
0 For a Cencubine or ſecondary Wife. Not that Mafters did al- 
ways take Maid-ſervants upon theſe terms,as ſome conceive; but chat 
ſome did fo, and of them this place ſpeaks. Though here is a diffe- 
ring reading ; and as the Margent hath /» the Pronoun ſignifying ro 
him, ſo the Text hath Þ the Adverb ſignifying not ; and 1o the Text 
may be tranſlated thus, ſs that he doth not betroth her, to wit, to him» 
{elf, or to his ſon, as he gave her hopes he intended. Either reading 
or ſenſe is proper and probable. p Either by herſelf or Friends, or 
any other perſon that will redeem her. Que#. How could he part 
with her,and fell her, when ſhe was betrothed to him ? nſw. 1.This 
might be one of choſe many Indulgences given to them for the hard- 
neſs of their hearts, and there is no doubt God could diſpenſe with 
his own poſitive Laws. 2- The Jatter reading avoids this difficulty. 
9 This was in general prohibited for all Hebrew Servants, but it is par- 
ticularly. mentioned here, becauſe there was ſpecial reaſon for ic ; 
both becauſe there was more danger of her corruption in Chaſtity 
and Religion in regard of her Sex, and becauſe the Maſter in thasy 
caſe was under a greater temptation of ſelling her to a Foreigner, be= 
cauſe no Iſraelites would buy her, or give ſo much money for her as a 
Heathen would, whowould and-might keep her for a perpetual Ser- 
vant, which the Iſraelites might not do. r Yiz. In breaking his pro- 
miſe of marriage made to her, or blaſting the hopes ke encouraged 
her to have of it. The Hebrew words are exattly rendred thus,n dealing 
deceirfully or falſly with her or againft her ; and they mey be added as 
an aggravation of that ſin of ſelling her to a ſtrange Nation, wherein 
there was a double falſe dealing, the one towards God, whe by his 
Law forbad this ; the other towards her, whom he hired upon other 
terms, and not with a power to diſpoſe of her contrary to the Law 
and manner of the 1ſraclites. 

9 And ithehave betrothed her unte hisſon, he ſhall 
deal with her after the manner of daughters s, 

s (#.e. ) Give her a convenient Portion, as he doth to his own 
Daughters, Chap; 22; 16» 

to If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, 


and ker duty of marriage * (ball he not diminiſh «» 

# Called aue benevolence, x Cor;-7; 3. Or, her dwelling, as the word 
is oft uſed. So here are the three great conveniencies of life, food, 
and raiment, and habitation, all which he is to provide for her, or 
her cohabitation, or, her time, the convenient and appointed times for 
conjugal converſe with her ; for ſome times werediſallowed for it, 
Lev; 15; and when there were plurality of Wives,they had their vi- 
ciſſirudes, Gen; 30; 15, 16. w Or rather, not withdraw, or deny it, as 
the word ſignifies, and as the LXX. Chaldee, Samaritan, Vulgar,and 
others render it. 


11 And if he do not theſe three unto her, then ſha!l 
ſhe go out free x without money, 

x And with gifts alſo by vertueof che Law, Deut; 15: 14, The 
ſumis this, The Maſter was either 1. willing to part with her,and 
then he was to let her be redeemed by her ſelf,or any of her Friends, 
but not by an Heathen,verſe 8. Or 2. willing to keep her,and then as 
he had betrothed her,he was to perform all the duties of an Husband 
to her,. although he had another wife befides her, werſe 10; 3. If he 
would keep her, and yer deny theſe duties to her, then as his fault 
was aggravated, ſo was his punifhment ; for now he cannot ſell her, 
but mult let her go freely, inthis verſe. 

12 *He that ſmiteth a man y ſo that he die,(ball be ſure- 


ly put to death z. 


2 pardon, or accept a ranſom for him, Numb: 35; 31. 
13 And if a manlie not in wait a, but God deliver 


whither he ſhall flee c. 

s If it appear, that the Man-ſlayer did not intend nor deſire 1t,bur 
only it fell out by his heedleſneſs,or by ſome caſuality. b By ſome 
unexpected Providence ; or, God, and not Man, God without the 
Man's contrivance or deſign ; for otherwiſe in a general ſenſe and 
way, God delivered Chriſt into the hands of Judas and the Jews, who 
aid adviſedly and maliciouſly kill him. c( 7, e. ) A Ciry or place 
of refuge, Numb: 35: 11; Dent; 19. 5. 

I4 But if a man come preſumptuouſly 4 upon his neigh- 
bour toſlay him with guile, * thou ſhalt take him from 
mine Altar ethat he may die. 

4 ( i. e. ) Do this proudly, boldly, purpoſely and maliciouſly ; 
for ſo the word ſignifies. e Whichnot only in the Wilderneſs, but 
afterward,ſcems to have been eſteemed a place of refuge, 1 Kings 1: 
50: as it alſowas among the Heathens : But God ſo far abhors mur- 
rher,that he will rather venture the pollution of his own Altar, than 
the eſcape of the murtherer. See 2 Kings 11: 15: 

15 And hethat {miteth e his father, orhis mother, 
ſhall be ſurely put tedeath. 

e Either 1. So as is before mentioned,verſe 12. ſo as they die, And 
ro ſmite ſometimes ſignifies 70 kT, as Gen: 4: 15: 2 Kings 14; 5: com- 
pared with 2 Chron: 25:3. And this may be here added by way of 
diſtinQion. 9: 4. Thatkilling of another man which is puniſhed with 
death, muſt be done preſumpruouſly ; but the killing ef Parents,tho 
not done preſumptuouſly, 15a capital crime. Or 2. the meer ſmi- 
ting ofthem, to wit, wilfully, and dangerouſly. Nor will any think 
chis Law too ſevere, that conſiders that this is an a& full of horrid 


this agree with Dekr. 15. 17. Alſo unto thy maid-ſervant theu ſoalt do 
likewiſe? Anſw. 1. Diſtinguiſh perſons. She Dear: r5. was ſold by 
her ſelf, and that ro meer ſervirude;this here was ſold by her Father, 


mot only for ſervice, but in order to her Mariiage, as the following 


impiety againſt God, who hath ſoexpreſly and emphatically com«= 
manded Children to honour their Parents; of higheſt and moſt ug« 
natural ingratitude, and utterly deſtruQtive to humane Society. 


$6 And he that ftcaleth a man and {jlleth him, gy 
16 


tween Men-ſervants and Maid-ſervants was only in the Rites uſed,in 


who hath betrothed T Heb: 5s 


Knowingly and wilfully, as appears by the next verſe. z Nei- E£v:24; 
ir the friends of the Party ſlain,nor the Magiſtrate, ſhall give him 77- 


him into his hand 5, then* I will appoint thee a place om 
Jeſb; 20; 


cy. FP 


OL WR Oc... 2 


ER. 1 EI TE es Fl 


| 
: 
' 
| 
: 


* 1 Kings | 


*Gt 


9:6; 
43 


-19, 


205 


Chap. XXI. 
hebe found in his hand f, he ſhall ſurely be put to ; 


t Heb. ® + punilhed »: 


. 


death. 

f(3.e,) Ir the Man Realer's hand ; 9. d. though he keephim in 
his own hands for bis own uſe; for ſti!l it is a thetr, and he ismade 
that man's ſlave, and it is in his power to fell him to another when 
he pleaſeth,ard rherefore deferves death. 

17 And* he that + curferh * his father or his mother, 
* Lev:20: ſhall ſurely be put to death- I | ; 
__ _ * Or, revileth, ro wit, willfully, maliciouſly, obſtinateiy againſt 
2 ol admonition, by comparing Deur; 27: 18; EY 
Mt:rcra: 18 Andif men ftrive together, 2nd one {mite + ano- 
Mar. 7.16. ther with a ſtone g, or with his fift, and he dic not, 
+Or, ”e- but keep his bed : 
wileth. »& Or any other inſtrument 
T Or, 15 wfual Synecdoche. be 
neighbou'. 19 If he ariſe again, and walk abroad upon his ſtaff, 
' then ſhall he that ſmote him be quit : only he ſhall pay 
Heb.ces. | for the loſs of his time b, and ſhall cauſe bir to be 
throughly healedz. 
h ( i.e, ) Of the prefir which he could, or commonly did mate 
' "of histime in the way of his Calling; ( 7. e. ) Pay the charges otthe 
CUTE. 
20 And if a man ſmite his ſeryant &, or his maid, with 
- arod ], and hedie under his hand »», he ſhall be ſurely 


- 
Prov. 


fit for ſuch a miſchievous purpoſe. An 


+ 
ſong. 


ASS a nmr 


verges, k Namely a ſtranger ; for an Iſ-aclite, was to be better uſed. See 
Lew. 25: 39, 40. Oe, 1 Afir and uſual Inftrument for correftion, 
whereby it is implied, that if he kill'd him with a Sword, or any 
ſuch Weapon, hz was to die for it, m (7,e.) Whilſt the Maſter 
is corre&ting him. » Not with death, for tient would have been |} 


EXODUS. 


ſaid fo. as it is before and after ; but as the Magiſtrate or Judge ſhal | 
think fir, according to the diverity of circumſtances ; and therefore * 
no particular puniſhment is ſer down, _ 

21 Norwithſtanding, if he continue aday or two, ie , 


ſhall not be puniſhed, for he is his money 0» 

o (7.e,{ His poſſ-Tion bought with his money ; and therefore, r: ; 

hail a power to chaſtiie him according ro his demerir, which might | 

be very great, 2: Is ſufficiently puniſhed with his own loſs, 3: 

. May be preſumed not to have done this purpoſely and maliciouſly. : 
22 If men ſtrive and hurta woman with child p, to 

thar her fruit depart from her, and yet no miſchief fol- 

low 9, he {ball be ſurely puniſhed according as the wo- 

mans husband will lay upon him, and he ſhall pay as the 


Judges determine r. 
> Towit, the Wife of the other perſon, who interpoſed her ſe]f 
to ſuccour her Husbind, 9 Neither to the Woman, nor Chi!d ; for 
It is generally ſo as to reach borh, in caſe the abortive had iif2 in it. 
r The Husband thall impoſe the fine, and, if it be unrealonable, the 
Judges ſhall have a power ro moderate ir. 
23 And if any miſchicf s follow, then thou T $halt 


vive life for life, 

s Either to the Mother, or to the Chi!d, whether it be death, or 
any maim or miſchief, F Who? Avſw. Nor the private perſon, 
which would have introduced infinite miſchiefs ard confuſions, bur 
the Magiſtrate ; for theſe Laws are given ro Moſes, and the execution 
of theſe things was committed to Meſes,. ard others under him. - 

24 * Eye for cye r, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, 


—— 


he Me LES 2 


* Lev.24; 


2 foot for foor, 
pry 19- t# This iscalled the Law ofRetaliation,and from hence the Heathen 


| Lawgivers took it and put it into their Laws. Bur though this might 

* ſometimes be praiſed in the letter, yer ir was not neceſlarily ro be 
underſtood and executed fo; as may appear, 1: by the impoſſibility 
of the juſt execution of it in many cafes, as when a man that hid but 
one Eye or Hand, was to loſe the other, which to him was a far 
greater miſchief than what he did to his N-+ghbour, whom he depri- 
ved but of one of his Eyes or Hands. Aud tiis is a ſure and righre» 
ous Rule,Puniſhments may be leſs, but never ſhou'd be greater than 
the Fault, And how could a wound be made neither bigger nor leſs 
thin that which he inflicted ? 2. By comparing this with other 
Laws, wherein a compenſation is allowed in like cafes, as wer. 18; 
30: And when it is enjoined, that 10 ſatisfattion ſhall be taken for the 
life of a wilful murtherer, Num: 35:31; it ſeems therein implied, rhat 
ſatisfaction may be taken for lefſzr injuries. And indeed the pay- 
ment of ſuch a price, as the loſs ofan Eye, or Hand, or Foor, re- 
quired,though it mighr nor ſo much ſatisfy the revenge of theParty 
ſo injured, yet it was really moreto his benefit. This Law therefore 
was only minarory,but ſo as it was /iterally ro be inflicted,exceprt the 
injuring Party would give ſuch ſatisfaftion as the injured Perſon ac- 
cepted, or the Judges determined» 

25 Burning for burning, wound for wound, ſtripe 
for {tripe. 
26 And if a man fmite the eye of his ſervant «,or the 

eye of his maid, thart it perisch, he shalllet them go free 
for his eyes ſake. 


u Which ſome conſine to the 1/raelitiſh Servants, but the Text doth 
not ſo limit it ; and the reaſon of the L:w ſeems tro reach to Genti/e- 
ſervants, this being a juſt puniſhment ro unmerciful Mifters, ( who 
ought to be mercifull to their Beaſts, much more to ſuch Servants ) 
and a fir recompencse to a Servant for ſuch a Joſs. And this Law 
reacherh the loſs of any other Member, theſ: rwo being inftanced 
in, the one as the chief, and the other as the meaneſt, ro intimate 
that other parts of a like or middle nature are included. 

27 And ifhe ſmite our his man-ſervants tooth, or 
his maid-ſervants tooth, he $hall let him go free for his 


tooths ſake. 


; woman, verſe 29, And this is Added, leſt the foregoing ſenſ: ſhould 


+ yant, he ſhall give untotheir maſter thirty ſhekels 4; and 


. it x, and the dead ox alle they ſhall divide. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
{ 


28 EC ifanoxx gore a man or a woman that they die, 
*Gen.g:s. then * the ox shali be ſurely {toned y. and his tlesh Shall 
* not be eaten | ; but rhe owner of the ox 5hall be quit, 


Chap. XXI 

x Under which you are to underſtand 2ny other Creatures of like 
nature which hurt a Man in ſuch a dangerous manner, whether with 
their Horns, or Teeth, or Feet ; bur he mentions only the Ox or 
Bull, and his goring with his Horn, bec:uſe this is moſt frequently 
done, y Partly to prevent future miſchief: from that Creature; part= 
ly to puniſh its Maſter for his negligence in not keeping itin; and 
principally for Man's admeniticon, for whom ſeing the Beaſts were 
nadezit 1s not ſtrange nor unjuſt if it be deſtroyed for Man's grod, 

God would hereby fhew that he wonld not ; and Men ſhould not 
ſpare a wilfal Murderer FBoth becauſeirwas forbidden f-0d,itsBlood 
being not let out ; and for the Puniſhmenr of rhe Owner who was 
hereby hindred from the ale of it, ro beget in all the greater deteſ* 
tation of Murderers, when they obſerve the poor Beaſt upon this aC= 
count accurſed, and therefore not to be touched or rated, 
29 Burif the ox were wont to push with his horn 
in time paſt, and it hath been teſtified z to his owner, 
and he hagh nor kept him in, but that he hath killed a 
manor a woman 4, the ox $hall be ftened, and his ow= 
ner alſo s;all be pur to death. | 

= Which the Jews ſzy was to be done thrice, and before the Ma- 
giftrate, a towit, an raclite, ora tranger who is free, by Compa= 
11ng this with verſe 3 2: 

30 Ifthere he laid on him a ſum ofmoney, then he + Num 
Shall give for * the ranſome of his life whatſoever is 35: 31; 
laid upen him. 

6 Either by the avenger of Blood, the next a-kin to the party ſlain, 
who is willing to exchange the Puniſhment ; or by the Judge, who 
may diſcern ſome circumſtznces, which may much leflen the Crime, 
as1f an Ox had broken his Cords wherewith he was tyed, or broke 


forth through the careleſneſs or wickedneſs of his Servant to whoſe 
care he was commitrred. 


31 Whether he have gored a ſon c, or have goreda 
daughter, according to this judgment ſhall it be done 
unto him, | 

c Names ſignifying their tender Age, in reſpe&@ of the man or 


be reſtrained to their Parents, whoſe lives wer more precious,and 
therefore their loſs greater. , | 


32 Ifthe ox ſhall puſh a man-ſervant, or a maid-ſer- 


the ox ſhall be ſtoned. 
4 The ha!fthe freeman's Price, See on Matth. 26; rg. : 
33 4 And ifa man $hall open a pit, or if a man shall 
dig a pit e, and not cover it, and an ox or an afs fall 
therein ; | 
e If a Man ſhall either oper an old Pit, which hath been covered 
with Earth ; or 4ig a new p-?, to wit,in a publick way, as the rea- 
ſon of the Law ſhews ; for if it were done in a Man's own Houſe 
or Ground, there was no danger of ſuch an accident, except the 
Beaſt tranſgrefled his bounds, and then rhe man was not cuipable. 
34 Tte owner of the pit fshall make iz good, end 
give money f unto the owner of them, and the dead 
beaſt shall be his. | 
f C2 e:) He by whoſe Hand or Command it was made, f Equal 
to the worth of che dead Beaſt, in the opinion of the Judge. 
35 4 Andif onemans ox hurt another that the die, 
then they shall ſell the live ox,and divide the money of 


g Not equally, for ſo the Owner of the miſchievous Ox © might 
be gainer by the miſchief, his Ox being much worſe than that which 
was killed ; but in ſuch proportions as the Judges ſha!l rhink fir, 
conſidering the worth of the Cartel, and the circumſtanees of the 
Action. 

35 Or ifit be known that the ox hath uſed tro puſh 


in time paſt, and his owner hath not kept him in, he 
(hall ſurely pay ox for ox &, and the dead {hall be his 
Own, 

þ An Ox of equal value with thar {lain Ox, 


worth of it. | 
CHAP. XXII 


Of theft, 1--»=3: Of eating anocher man's wmeyard, 5. Of hurt come" 
ing by fire, 6. of hurt coming to goods committed to ones truſt, 75..--=1 35 
Of hurs befalling things borrowed, 15, Of committing adultery, 16: 17: 
Of witchcraft, 18 Of uncleann:ſs with beaſts, 19. Of idelatry, 20. 
The: none ſhall hurt ſtrangers, or widows, 22----24: Of uſury, 25. Of 
pawning clothes, 27, Of honouring magiſtrates, 28. Of the firſt ſruits.29, 

' Of eating fleſh torn by beafts, 31. 

F a man (ball ftealan ox, or a+ (beep a, and kill it, F Orgeat 
or ſell ir b, he ſhall reſtore five oxen for an ox, and 


* four $sheep for a sheep c. 

a Or, an aſs, which is added werſe 4; and conſequently any other 
living Creature, to be valued according to its worth and uſe to man, 
proportionably ro the rule here laid down. Only theſe are inſtanced 
in, for their uſefulneſs in the ſervice of God and of Men. 6 Which 
was an 2ggravatien of the Crime,and a token of greater Boldneſs,Re- 
ſolvednels, and Expertneſs in the Trade of Thieving, than was in 
him who kept it at home, werſe 4. EC Nueſt, Why ſomuch feing 
the ſtealer of other things was tied to reſtore but doyble? Anſw. 1, 
For terrour, becauſe thele beaſts being kept in the Fields might mere 
ealily be ſtoln 2. Becauſe the loſs of theſe was greater than ef other 
things; for they did not only loſs whar the Carre! might be fold for, 
but 21l the ſervice, increaſe, and ether benefits which a Mn mighr 
receive from them. 2ueſt ,2: Why more for Oxen than for Sheep ? 
Anſw. 1. Becaule it argued greater boldneſs and cuſtomarineſs in the 
Thief to ſteal that which might more eaſily be diſcevered.2.Becauſe 
beſides the intrinſecal worth of the Ox,the labour of the Ox was very 
conſiderable to his owner, Prov. 14: 4; and theretore the Jols 


greater. 
P 2 2 T If 


or the price and 


* 2 San 
12: 6: 
Luk: 19; 
8; See © 
Pre.6; 31 


Chap. XXII. 
" 2 Cf a thief 


"ten that he die, . 
a To wit, an hauſe, 


be found breaking up 4, and be ſmit- 
there ſhall no blood be ſhed forhim e- 
which the pos prong mage * ow by night, 
from the next verſe. e( z. e. ) For tne ief, thoug 
be Eekilled by a Man in his own defence. Becauſe in that caſe the 
Thief mighrtbe preſumed to have a worle Deſign, .and the Owner 
of the Houſe could neither expe&, or have the help of others to fe- 
cure him from the intended Violence, nor guide his blows with that 
diſcretion and moderation, which in the day time he might uſe. p 
3-If the ſun be riſen upon him, there fhail be bloo! 
ſhed for him f: for he ſhould make full reſticution : if 


he have nothing, then he inall be ſold g for his theft. 

f He that kills him -ſhall be pur ro death, becauſe he puniſhed 
him more than his Crime deſerved, and might bave been otherwue 
eirher ſecuredor righted;and in that caſe, ir is probable,the Thict de- 
ſigned not Murder,but Theft oaly. Bur if it were evident, that the 
Houſe-breaker deſigned Murder, he might doubtleſs Is]1 him in bis 

| own defence. g Either ſo long till kis fervice was worth the thing 
ſtollen, or rather for the ordinary time of ſix years, becauſe this was 
nota ſimple Thief, but ;n Houſe-breaker, which was much worſe. 
Deſt. How can he be ſold, who is ſuppoſed to be killed ? 4n[w. 1. 
The Hebrew word -may bebetrer rendred, ſhow! be ſold, as the fore- 
going word of the ſame future time isrendred, ſhould make reſtitution, 
to wit, if he were not killed ; and therefore the killer of him being 
ſufficiently ſecured againſt this injury, was more culpable in kill- 
ing him without neceſliry. , : ; 
4 If the thetr be certainly found in his hand alive 
b, whether it be ox, or aſs, or ſheep, he {ball reſtore 


double 5. 


h Not killed, nor ſold, as verſe 1. # Not more, 1. Becauſe in that 
caſe it was preſumed, either that he intended tro reſtore ir, or at 
leaſt that he was but raw and unexerciſed.in the trade of Scealing, 
and ſo ſhould be more gently puniſhed, 2. Becauſe the right Ow- 
ner recovered his Goods with lets charge and trouble. Or 3. Becauſe 
it was but a ſingle Crime, whereas the other werſe 1. was an aggrava- 
ted and complicated Crime, where one Sin and Injury was added ro 
another. Obj. It is ſa:d, he ſhall reſtore ſeven-fold, Prov 6: 31: Aniw. 
1. Seven-fold is put Yor abundantly,as that word is oft uled,as Ger. 4: 
24: Pſal. 12: 6: and 79: 12: and a learned man obſerves, it is never 
uſed tor that definite number. Anſw. 2. This ſeven-fold, or ſeven 
times, may relate not to the proportion of his Reſtitution ; bur to 
the number of his Thefcs, or rather of his Dereftions ; and the ſenſe 
is this, Though he be found guilty of Thefr ſeven-rimes,all his Puniſh- 
ment is, that he ſhall refore as the Law preſcribes. Whereas A'ul- 
teryof which he there ſpeaks in the following verſes, is a Crime of 
that nature, that ifa man be once found guilty of it, reſtirution can- 
not be made, nor will it ſerve histurn,bur he falls into all che miſ- 
chiefs there reckoned up. . | 

5 T Ita man fhallcauſe a field or vineyard & to be ea- 
ten, andshall put in his beaſt, and shall feed in another 
mans field, of the beſt ofhis own field, and of the belt 
of his own vineyard shall he make reſticution. _ 

k Or, Orchard, or other things of like nature ; which is gener- 
ally ro be obſerved in Laws. 

6 T If fire break out and catch in thorns, ſo that the 
ſtacks of cora, or the ſtanding corn, or the field: be con- 


ſumed therewith, he that kindled the fire/, shall ſurely 
make reſtitution m7, t 


I'W hether my for ſuch a purpoſe, or careleſl'y in ſuch a 
time or place as was dangerous. mw Which if he were notable ro do, 
It is probable he was to be (old for it, as in like caſes was provided. 


7 7 Ifaman $hal)l deliver unto his neighbour money 


if the thief be found, let him pay double. 
» Heb. Yeſſels, Garments, Utenſils, or any kind of Heuſholq- 


uff. 
8 If the thief be not found, then the maſter of the 
houſe shall be brought unto the judges 70 ſee o whether 
he have put his hand into his neighbours goods p. 


e That they may examine all Circumſtances, and uſe all means to 
find our the Trurh,by offering him his Oath, or otherwiſe. p Ei- 
ther to take and reſerve them for his own uſe, or to diſpoſe of them 
to another for his own advantage. 


For all manner of treſpaſs q, whether it be for ox, 
for aſs, for ſheep, for raiment, «or for any manner of 
loſt thing, which another challengeth co be his r, the 
cauſe of both parties ſhall come unco the judges, and 
whom the judges shall condemn 5s, he shall pay double 
unto his neighbour. 


q To wit, about matters depoſited upon truſt, and loſt, of which 
alone this place ſpeaks. r Oc, when, or concerning which he ſhall 
ſay, this is it, wiz. the thing that I have loſt; or rather, this is he, to 
whom I commirrted ir, and whom I ſuſpett and charge as guilty. 5 
Whether the perſon with whom the things were depoſited, if rhey 
judged him guilty of Thefr, or the Depoſitor, 1f he were con- 
victed of a falle Accuſation. 


10 If a man deliver unto his neighbour an aſs, or an 
ox, Or asheep, Or any beaſt to keeps, andirt die, or 
be hart, or driven away, no man ſecing t ; 

t As his Servant, not freely, but for wages. 

11 Thenshall an oath of the LORD &« be between 
them both x,that he hath not put his hand unto his neigh- 
bours goods : and the owner of it shall accept thereof, 
and he $hall not make it good. 

# So called here, as alſo, 1 Kings 1: 45: becaufe it is taken by his 
Authority and Appointment, and for h:s Honour, and in his Name 
alone, God being made both Witneis, and Judge, and Avenger 
thereby, # (7, e, ) Shall end the ditfrence between them both, 


——c 


or ſtuff » to keep,and it be ftollen out of the mans houſe; 


EXODUS: 


the one ſhall give his Oath, and the other ſhall accept of it ; or be 
taken by them both ; by rhe one, that he did deliver them to him 
upon Agreement and for Hire ; by the other, that he put not his 
Hand to them. 


12 And if it be ſtollen from him y, the ſhall make 
ſtitution unto the owner thereof. 


y Heb From with him, which is an emphatical Expreſſion,and notes 
that this was taken away, either 1. From thoſe things which were 
with him, or which were his, 7.e- from the midſt of his own 
Goods, which ſuppoſerth fraud in him: Or 2. From under his eye, 
when he either did know of it, or with common care and diligence 
it mighr have been known and prevented, and this argues greſs ne- 
glet in him. And this isone reaſon why this man is bound to make 
Reſtitution, when the other wer. 7. 1s not; another reaſon of tic 
difference 1s, becauſe thoſe things werſe 7. were only or principally 
dead rhings, and ſuch things as required no great care; or if they 
did, ( for in that caſe alſo were included, Oxen, Aﬀes, &'c. werſe 
9.) yet he with whom they were lefr, received no recompence 
tor them, and therefore was not obliged to any ſingular care about 
them ; but here the things were ſuch as needed great care and dili- 
gence, which alſo this man was obliged tro perform by the hire 
which he received upon that account, which was Jacob's caſe, Gen. 
31: 39: 


13 If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for 


witneſs 2, and he ſhall not make good that which was 
corn. 


z It ( i.e.) Some part of the torn Creature, which the wild Beaſt 
haply had lefr, Amos 3: 115 12: Queſt, What if the whole Creature 
were carried away, as 2 Sheep or Lamb is ſometimes by the Wolf? 
Anſw. 1.1 ſuppoſe this wasnot frequent, and that thoſe ravenous 
Creatures did ſpeedily All ro their mea!,and that ſomerhing was left 
not far from the place, which the Shepherd mighr eaſily procure. 
2. The words may be otherwiſe rendred, he ſball bring a witneſs, as 
the Choaldee and $1mar. render it; or a Teftimeny, (3 e.) ſome Evi- 
dence whereby the Judge might be farisficd , as for inftance, That 
ſome Wolf or Lion, &c. was ſeen in thoſe parts, &c..or ſome wit- 
neſs of his Diligence and Fairhfulneſs in all other things, which 
cherefore might well be preſumed in this, 


14 © And if aman borrow ought @ of his neighbour, 
and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not 
with it, he thall ſurely make ir good 5b. 

a ( i.e ) Any living thing,which may be hurt or die, as it follows. 
b This may ſeem hard, butall things conſidered is reaſonable; be- 
cauſe in doubrfull caſes, wherein it is not evident whether the bor- 
rower was faulty or nor, as it is here,. it ought to be interpreted in 
favourof the lender, rather than of the borrower; partly to oblige 
the borrowerto the greater fidelity and care in ſuch things, which 
being not his own, men are commonly more careleſs abuur ; partly 
becauſe the benefit being wholly the borrowers, the loſs alſo in all 
reaſon oughtt!» be hisand the lender ought not to ſuffer for his kind= 


neſs, leſt he ſhould be diſcouraged from ſuch aftions for the fu- 
ture, 


I'C= 


£L 


r5 But if the owner thereof be with it c, he ſhallnot 


ang itgoed d : ificbe an hired ing, it came for }.is 
iree. 


c In which caſe the Law reaſonably preſumes, both that the bor. 
rower would not abule it in the ſight of its owner, and that the Jen- 
der might and would rake due care about it» «4 Except there be ſome 
manifeſt fault in the borrower, as if he ſhould kill or wound the 
Beaſt in the lender's preſence ; which exception is eaſily to be under- 
ſtood from diverſe other Laws of God. «& (7. e. ) The benefit was the 
Jender's, and nor the borrower's, and therefore the former reaſon 
ceaſeth ; and whether the Maſter were preſent or abſent, he thac 
receives the Gain oc Hire ſhall bear the loſs, except when it came 
through the borrower's groſs and wilful default. 


15 4 And ifaman intice a maid f that is not betroth - 
ed g, and lie with her, he ſhall ſurely endow her to 
be his wife, 

f By perſ{waſions, promiſe of Marriage,allurements, or rewards. g 


Bur if ſhe were betrothed, it was puniſhed with death, Deur. 22. 
23. = 


17 If her father utterly refuſe h to give her unto him; 
he ſhallF pay money according to the dowry of virginss. 
h Which ſhews the neceſſiry of Parents .conſent in Marriage. z* 
(7.e.) In ſuch proportion as the virgins qualiry requires;for there was 
no certain and equa] dowry appointed for all Women. See 1 Sam. 
18: 25: Queſt Why is there no puniſhment for. the Woman? 4uþw. x; 
She had no diſtin& Eſtate, being yet in her Father's Houſe. 2: The 


* Deut: 
22+ 28; 


7 Heb. 


weigh, 


loſs of her Virginity wasa ſufficient Puniſhment, eſpecially in Iſrael, 


where it was 2 great reproach and prejudice- 3. She,was nut ſo culp- 
able as the Man; both becauſe ſhe was of the weaker Sex, and becauſe 
the was drawn to the Sin by the Man's per{waſien, 

18 7 * Thou thalt not {uffer a witch & to live. 

k (i.e ) Any Perſon that is in league with the Devil,and by his help 
eithzr doth any michief, or diſcovers and prattices things above the 
reach of other Men or Women. Of which ſee Exod. 7: 11: Levit. 20: 
27: Deut. 18: 10: 1 Sam:28; 9g; Theword isof the FeminineGender 
partly becauſe Women are moſt prone to theſe deviliſh Arts, and 
moſt frequent'y guilty of them ; and partly ro intimate, thatno pit y 


_ id be ſhewed ro ſuch Offenders, though they were of the wea- 
ker SEX. 


19 4 Whoſoeyer lieth with a beaſt ſhall ſurely be put 
to death- 


20 © He that facrificeth I unto a»y god ſave unto the 
LORD only, he thall be utterly deſtroyed m. 


! Or otherwiſe worſhippeth, as appears from Deut. 17: 2, 4, 4, 
and many other places. One At of worſhip put for a}l by a very 24: 
familtar Synecdoche. w Heb. anathematized, i.e. eſteemed exe- 


crable, and as ſuch deſtroyed vvithout Mercy. See Der, 13: 15, &c: 


Devt; 13: 
13,14, 15 
fo 1 Maci3 


1 and 18; 20; 
” 


21{T* Thou 


Shs 


Chap. XX1, 


 +He 
* fuln/| 


Et ETA BI PENG 3 ag 


[i 
. 


Ts, EAI 


ER | 


| HHb 


* a 
2+ 124 


34-15 
Deur 


. I9, 


UL, 


eut: 
28; 


chap. XXx1l, 


*Chap.23- 
g.Lev 19- 
33- an 

25+ 35. 
#])eut, 10- 
18. and 
24. 17- 
and 27 
19. 12. I- 
T7: Zech 
7, 10.Jam. 
1.27- 

* Lev,25:* 
37: Dcutr. 
23. 19- 
Pſal 15-5: 
Neh. 5-75 
Ezek. 18, 
8,17- 


* Job 24. 
3, 9- 
Prov. 20. 
16. and 
22. 27. 
Amos 2» 
8, 


+ Or, 


+ Heb:thy 
fuln-ſs. 


” Chap, r3 
34-19. 


Deur.15: 
| 19, 


Cd DS oe od FELT 


EE bk Ei os 


eut;r3} | 
114) 15 k 
Mac; % 

$ 


þo 


Wor 


TEL; AY 


eg 


hk. 0 


2+ 12+ aid 


21 CT * Thou ſhalt neither vex a ſtranger nor oppreſs 

him : for ye were ſtrangersin the Jand of Egypt . 
22 C* Ye ſhall nor afflit any widow, or fatherlels 

ild. 

_ Tf thou afflict them in any wiſe, and they Cry at 
all unto me, I will ſarely hear their cry: 

24 And my wrath (hall wax hot, and I will kill you 
with the ſword: and your wives ſhall be widows, and 
your children fatherlels 

25 © * If thou lend money to any ef my people »that 
js poor o by thee, thou ſhalt net be tobim as an uſurer, 


neither ſhalt thou lay upen him uſury p. 
»(ie.) Any Iſralite; for it was permitted to take Uſury of the 
o This ſeems to be added, not by way © 


Gentiles, Deut. 23: 207 y © 
Appolition, as if God's People and the Ponr were all one, becau'e 
ſuch are commonly Poor ; but by way of Reſtriction ; tor God bad 


promiſed greatly to bleſs and enrich the generality of his People, » 
they by thzir Wickedneſs did not hinder it, and that there ſhou 
befew Poor among them ; yet ſome ſuch there ſhould be for the 
tryal andexcerciſe of their Charity. See Levir. 19. 10: Deut. T5: 49 
7, 11: p The Hebrew word ſignifies Biting ; fo Uſury 18 called, not 
by way of diſtinftion, as if moderate Uſury were allowed in this 
caſe, which is manifeſtly falſe,becauſe the borrower is here ſuppoſed 
to be poor, to whom not the ule only, but oft-times even the Prin- 
Cipal is to be remitted, Luke 6: 34, 35: bur by way of Explicarion, 
becauſe all Uſury is of a biting orcating Nature, which commonly 
coaſumes the Perſon rhat pays it, . 

2 * If thou atall take thy neighbours q raiment to 


pledge, thou ſhall deliver it unto him by that the fun 


gocth down re | 

q To wit, that is Poor, as appears by comparing this with the 
next verſ:,wh-re he is iuppoſed ro have but ove Garment,and with 
Deus: 24: 12. 13 r Becatue he ſpeaks of ſuch Raiment or Cover- 
ing, wherein he uſ:d to S!eep, verſe 27. But ye are nor to think 
that the C: editor wouid ever) Mr :ing take, and every Night re- 
deliver his Pledge; and therefore th s is rather a Prohibition to rake 
any ſuch thing for a Pledge as a Man iarh great and daily need of, 
by this arguinent, that if ne did take it,he Couid not keep it. Com- 
pare Deut: 24: 6. 

27 For that is his coveringonly, it is his raiment for 
his skin : wherein ſhall hefleep? and ir ſhall come to 
paſs, when he criech unto me, chatT will hear : for | 
am gracious 

25 T Thou ſhall not revile the Þ gods 5, 
the rulerof thy people 7 

s Nor gods falſly fo cailed, as ſome wou'd have 1, as appears hy 
1 Kines 18; 27. Jer: 10: T1, bur Magiſtrates and Governours, wherber 
C: vil or Eccletiaſtical,as it is eviden: both from Aﬀs 23: 3,4, 5. and 
from the foilowing words, wh:cl 2xplain the f'1mer, according to 
the common ule o: Scripture, and from the Title of gods common=- 


ly give: to ſuch, as Exod: 7: 1. Pſalm 82: 6: John 10; 34,35: t Com- 
pare Eccl: 10; 20: Jude verſe 8, 


nor curſe 


29 1 Thoushalt not delay s tc offer the T firſt of thy 
ripe fruits x,and of chy + liquors 2 * che firft-born of thy 


{H-b.rear: {ons Galtthou give unto me y. 


* «u Beyond the tim+s appointed, leſt this delay grow to a total ne- 
g':& And delay may here be pur for nege#, as thar word is uſed, 
Deut: 7: 10: and 23: 21: Hab: 2. 3. which may ſcem to be fivoured 
by the following Clauſe, which commands,the giving or off-ring of 
the firſt-born withour any menrion of the haſtning or delaying of it. 
x Heb. thy tulneſs; and wheres 'his word 1s iomet: ates zpp'ied to Seed 
Oo; Corn, a+ Numb. 18, 27. ard ſomerimes to rhe Vintage, as Dent, 
22. 9. the circumſtapces muſt determine. as 1t doth in like cafes. how 
it muſt be taken ; which here izem ro reſtrain i* to dry Fruits, as 
Corn, &c, hecanſe it is >ppoſed ro Liquers ; a1:d ſo all ſorts of Fruits 
are comprehe:.d -d here. Unteſs you wil' make rhis an uſual fizure 
called Hendyzc:s. as judgment and juſtice, Dewt. ,6, 18, is put for judg- 
ment of juſtice. or juſt Fudgment; ſo here the fulneſs and liquors, for the 
fulneſs of thy liquers; ac 6 fo this may be one kind mcntioned for ail the 

veſt, than wh:ci: noth;ng more frequent. y Net in kind, bur by a 
Price of Redemprion tv be paid to me in their ſtcad. 


30 Likewiſe x ſhalt thou do with thine oxen,end with 
thy ſheep : ſeven days it ihali be with his dam, on the 
eighth day « thou lbalt give it me. 

z (7. e. ) Ye ſhall offer their firſt-born. # Not ſooner becauſe 
It was till then tender and imperfe&, and therefore 1.0: fir t» be of- 
fered to God ; bur ir was net ried to that day, fur it mig t be of- 


_ afterwards, as appears from Lev: 22: 27, even till it was a year 
Old, 


31 T And ye (ball be holy b unto me + neither (hall ve 
eat any fletb hat is torn of beaſts c in the field: ye (hall 
caft it to the dogs. 


b(:i.e,) Separated from all Filthineſs both moral and ceremonial. 
c Partly becaule the Blood was not taken outofit; partly becauie 
g* clean Bzaſt was ceremonial; defiled by rhe touch of the unclean; 
2 


d parrly to beget in them a deteſtatioa of Cruelty, even in the 
Beafts, and muca more in Mea. 


CHAP. XXIIL 

Falſe witneſs and report forbidden, 1, Right muſt not be wreſt:d, 2, He 
commanas man to dv good to hrs enemies, 3--==5, Brihes av? forbidden, 
G--=8, The years of jowing appornted, and gatherivg, 10. Of tbe ſe. 
venth year, which is the year of reſt; Gods command .Once'nmg it, IN. 
Of the ſabbath-day, 12, Other gods ſhall" nor bem-utioned, 1;, Of the 
three feaſts im a year, '4z the manner of k: eping the ealk, 15, G6, 
The times appointed for the males appearing b-fore the Lord, 1 1, No ſa- 
crifice to be offered without unleaventd bread, 18. Command concerning 
the farft- fruits, 19, God prom:ſech an angel to prepare a way, 20. Whe 
& commanaed ro be obey'd, 21, 22, God promijns them the 1and of rhe 


Sy 


EXODUS. 


| Or Controverſies, as the Hebrew Rib ſignifies ; and matters of Judgment, 
' Which were nor derermined by the Mulrirude, but by greet Men. 
' 2, Becauſe theſe are -ppoſed ro the Poor in the nexr Verle, 3.Becauſe 


| Anſwer, wien thou art ſummoned as a witn-{s in any cauſe, f Or 


Chap:XXll | 


Amorites, &C, 23. Forbidacth the hanouring #f rang? gods, 24» God 
promiſes to bleſs them that ſerve him, 25--«=27. Hornets ſhall expel che 
enemies of the Ijraclitrs, 28. 29;30. The borders of the land of Ir acl, 
31. A covenant with the heathen is forbidden, 32, Or to let them ina 
habits amon them, 3}. | 
Hou * ſhalt not} raiſe « a falſe report : put not * Palm 
thine hand b with the wicked to be an unrighte- 15 = 
ous witnels. bob, fo 
#4 Heb mor rake up, to wit, into thy Mouth, as Exod: 20: 7. either ©***** 
by the firſt railing, or further ſpreading of it ; or #07 b;ar, or cndures 
as that word oft ſignifies ; not heer 1t patiently, de'igi tiully, rea= 
dily, approvingly, as Perſons are very apr to do, but carier ſhale 
diicourage and reprove the ſpreader of it, according t@ Prov:25: 23, 
Poſſibly the Hely Ghoſt might chuſe a word of fuch general ſignt- 
fication to ſhew thar all theſe things were forbidden. 6b( 7, e.) Nor 
conſpire or agree with them, which is ſignified by joyning hands, 
Prov: 11 21. not give them an helping hand in it, not 1n:ccvrage 
them to it by Gifts or Promiſes, nor affiſt them by Counſel : r Irre- 
reſt. Others, not ſwear with them. But ſwearing 1s not noted by 
purting the hand, but by litring tt up, 

2 q Thou ſhalt nor foilow a multitudes to doevil & ; «x, ,g; 
neither (halt thou + ſpeak e in a cauſeto decline after 5: 
many, to wrelt judgment f. Dear: x, 

c Either their Counſel or Example. But the H-brew Rabbim both *7* 
here arid in the following Clauſe is by ſome rer.dred grest Men, Mz=n t Heb, 
in Power and Authority, whom we are commanded not ro follow. anſwer, 
And as the word is thus uſed, Fob 32: 9: Fer: 41. 1; fo this ſenſe may 
ſeem:moſt probible; 1, Becaute in the laſt Claute he ſpeaks ef Cauſes 


the Examples of ſuch Men are moſt prevaleat & Either in general 
or parricular,to work miſchief,ro oppreſs cr cruſh another. e Heb: 


79 turn aſide right, or #9 pervert thy ſelf, rhe Verb being raben reci- 
procally, as Hiphil is ott pur for Hirhpakel; or which isall one, ro do 
perwerſly, 7, e,unr ghreouſly, 


3 1 Neither ſhalt thou countenance g a poor-man in 
his cauſe. 

g Heb: Honour, i. 8, reſpe&, or prefer his Cauſe when the richer 
Man's Cavie 1s more juſt: The meaning of this and the former Verſe 
is, there ſhall benoreſpeC of Perſons, whether Rich er Poor, bur 
an impartial confideratiou of the Cauſe. See Levis. 19: 15: Plam 722 


A 

4 1* If thou meet thine enemies ox & or his afs *Deut:22: 
zoing aftray, thou (halt lurely bring ir back to him a- 1. Job 24. 
g UN. 3- Prov: 

þ So far ihalt thou be from revenging his Injuries, that thoy 2#17-"d 
ſhalr render good to him fo- them, whereby if thou doft not re- 25: 2'» 
gr him, thou wiltſt procure Peace to thy ſelf, and Honour to 

eligion. 

5 * If thou ſee the aſsof him thar hateth thee, lying 19** 

, » 1yINS * Deur, 
under his burden, f and wouldeſt forbear te help him, 22: 4: 
thou Shaltſurely heip with him 5. | + Or, 

; This Tranſlation depends upon this Suppoſition, that the He- wil rhow 
br2w Verb Azab, which 1s t'irice uſed in this Verſe ſignifies not-0n- ceaſe to 
!y to leave, bur a'ſo ro help, or ere, or lift up, or ftrengthen, or re- help him? 
ſtore; which lignification of rhe Verb inay be p:oved, 1. From that and would. 
uie of it, Nehem: 3: 8 and 4. 2. 2. From the parallel p/ace, Deut: ft ceaſe 10 
22: 4:* here inſtead of rais Verb, azab, is kbakim: which is properly leavethy 
t- er-# or lift up. But if the Verb did ſignify only to leave, ir may buſineſs 
b= thus readred according ro gþe Hebrew words, then, or therefore, ox for him? 
ſurely ( for al! theſe ways the "Hebrew Particie Yau is uſed ) thou thou (h-l? 
ſhalt forbear to leave it, to wit, the Als groaning under. his Burden, ſurely !-ave 
or the lifting up of the Ais and Burden, zo him alone ; but if thou it to join 
x 1}rſt be leaving, I will! appoint thee a betrer Obje& for it, thou with him, 
ſhalt ſurely leav-, or lay aſide whar thou haſt againft him, i: e: what- 
ſozver contro'erſfic thou haſt with him, that thal! not hinder thee 
from tuccovr'ng him, or his, inary diſtreſs, The Hebrew Prepo- 
ficion, im, doth oft fignifi againſt, as Gen. 26: 20. Pſalm 85; 4: 
and 94: 16 Heſ: 9: 8. Andirtis aconciſe or ſhort way 
of ſp:akinz, which is very common in the Hebrew Language, againſf 
him for, what theu haft aga:nſt him. Or thus, and would # forbear to 
leave, ro *1t, tny bulueis which thou art going about, for him, i. ts 
fo: the ſake of him who is thine Enemy, as the Hebrew Prepoſirion 
lamed. is oft uſed, as Exod: 14: 25: Numb: 25: 13: Jo: 16: 14. &c. 
thou ſhalt repretis thoſe malicious deſires, 2nd thex ſbalt ſurely leave it 
to be, or to carry, or to kelp with him to, lift up che Als. Sc there 
is only an Ellipfts ofthe Verb, which is moſt common in the Hebrew 
Tongue- 

5 Thou (balt not wreſt the 
his cauſe. 


k (t: e: ) Of the Poor which is among thee,not of the poor Jews 
on!y, as ſom« peradyenture may conceive; for common right muſt 
be done even to the Gemiles, Compare Deut: 27: 19. 

7 Keep thee far /from a faiſe matter m : 
nocent and righteous ſlay thon not =: 
juitify the wicked 0. 

[ ( z:e. ) Abſt.in from al! Occaſions, Degrees, or Appearances 
of it. Compare Job 22: 23+ Prov. 4. 14, 15. m(3.e. ) Anunrigh- 
reous Judgreart ; for he is ſpeaking ty the Judges, as appears borh 
by the foregoing and following Verſes: » Condemn not to Death, 
nor to any other unjuſt Penalry, for the ſame reaſon. « And 
therefore not condemn the innocent. one contrary being here un- 
derftood from the other, as is frequent in the Book of the Proverbs; 
and what I do not, thou who afteſt in my Name and Stead 
ſhouldeſt not do. Or rather thus, Know, O Judge, ( for to fuch 
he ſpeaks ) if thou doſt pronounce ſuch a wicked Sentence, 1 will ner 
juft' thee, or hold thee guilcleſs, 3. e. T will ſeverely puniſh thee, as 
x34, 20. 7, 


8 7 And* thou ſhalt take no gift p: for the gift * Ecd:20 


judgment of thy poor & in 


and the in- | 
for * I will nor * Chap: 


34 7s 


righteous r, 


 ightooe + the wiſe q, andperverteth the wards of the * Heb: the 


ſ «2g. 


\ Ss - 
P ind Ne1, 


P 3 


» 
- 


22. 2l, 
+ Heb. 
| foul.” 
2. 


grees 


K-13, 
I4. 


23: 


4: 


Chap. XXII 


þ 


'* Chip. 


 *Tev.25. 


fOr,oliva Nr thoushalc deal with thy vineyard, asd with thy 7 0- 


*Chap.20 
$,9.Dcurt. 


Luke 13. 


*Chap:24 
ut; 2 . 
yn the year 
 *Chap:13: 

3:and 34: 


16; 16: 
Eccl: 35: 


{ 


cauſe if thou doſt not ſell Juſtice forit, 
do ſo, and be tempt=d to do ſo. 
' 3; Prov: 17: 8, 23» and 19; 
who in this caſe cannot ſee, 


the righteous Judges, 7, e. of them who before were ſuch, and are 
enclined robe fo, and probably would be ſo, 
with Bribves; or of them who by their place ſhou'd be right2ous. 
So they are called righteous, toadmonifh them ofrheir Dury to be 
ſo,and te aggravate their Sin when they ar? unrighteous, and conſe- 
quently to aggravate the miſchief of Gifts, 
rightcous whoſe Office obligeth them to be righteous, Or thus, te 
matters or cauſes of therighteous, which, may be underſitocd net of the 
Judges, but of the Parties pleading, whoſe rightzous Canſe 1s by 
this means perverted by the Judge, and a wrong Sentence gt- 
ve 


know the + heart of a ſtranger s, ſeing ye were itran- 
gers in the landof Egypt. 


which makes him aa Obje& of Fity, not of Malice or Miſchic#. 


EXO 
Namely from ſuch whoſe Cauſes are depending before thee; be- | 
yet thou wilt both ſeem to 
Compare Deut: 16. 19, 1 Sam: 8; 
6. q Or, the open eyed, and quick-ſighted, 
partly becauſe they will not ſee, and 


becauſe Intereſt and AﬀeSion do exceedingly corrupt the 
and render it very partizl, r (:.e.) The Judgment of 


P 


artly 
udgment,. 


w2re they not tempted 


which make thoſe un- 


n. 
9 4 Alſo * thoushalt not oppreſs a ſtranger: for ye 


s (7. e. ) The Diſpoſicion, Deje&ion, and Diſtreſs of his Heart, 


10 And * fix yearsthou ſhalt ſowthy land, and halt 
gatherin rie fruits thereof. s 

11 Bute ſeventh year thou halt let it reſt, and lie 
ſtills: that the poor of thy people may eat « : and what 
they leave, the beafts of the field shail cat. In like man- 


live-yard x. 
t ( fe. ) From Manuring, Plowing, Tilling, and Sowing, and 
Reaping alſo, by comparing Lev. 25: 3, 4, 5. And this God or- 
dained not only for the reaſon here mentioned,rhe mor? comfortable 
Proviſion of the Poor, and for the Catte),but for other weighty rea- 
ſons ; as 1. That the heart and ſtrength of the Land might nor b 
eaten out by continual Tillage. 2. That he might both try and ex- 
erciſe, and alſo ſecure the Obedience of the Iſraelites, 3. That he 
might keep them in dependance upon himſelf,and give to then ans 
all their Neighbours a manifeſt proof of his ſingular and gracious 
Providence over his People. 4: That by this kind of Ouit-reat they 
might be admoniſhed that God alone was the Lord and Proprietiry 
ofthe Land, and they were only Tenants at his Will. 5. That being 
freed from their great Labours about the Land, they mighr have the 
more leaſure to meditate npon God's Werks,and to attend upon the 
Law, which ws to be ſolemnly read at this time; Dext: 31: 10, Cc, 
u Queſt, What had the Poor to eat ? »/. Not only che Fruits of the 
Vines, and Olives, and other Fruit-trees, but alto all that grew of 
its ewn accord, Levit. 25: 5: from thoſe Seeds which in the laſt reap= 
ing-time were ſcattered here and there, which were much more nu- 
merous ffow than in other years, becauſe God gave a ſpecial BJct- 
fing to the ſixth year, whereby itdid bring forth the fruit of three 
years, Levit: 25: 21: and in years of ſo great plenty, Men ore 
generally more negligent in their Reaping, and therefore the Re- 
licks are more. x (#.e. ) Thou ſhalt not prune nordreſs thern, 
nor gather and appropriate to thy own uſe what they ſhall produce, 
but ſhalt leave them to the Poor. 
12 * Six days thou ſhalt dothy work, and on the 


ſeventh day thou ſhalt reſt y: that thine ox and thy aſs 
may reſt, and the ſon of thine hand-maid, and the 


DDS. 


Paſſover ? Anſ. That Sheaf was generally of Barley, which was Jeſs 
conſiderable than their Wheat ; but this was the firſt-fruits of their 
Wheat, which was their principal Grain, and they had no Bread be- 
fore this time from the growth of that Year. 4 To wir, of all the 
reſt of the Fruits ofthe Earth, as of the Vines and Olives. This was 
alſo called the feaſt of Booths, and of Tabernarles. See Levit: 23: 43: Numb: 
29: 12. Dent: 16: 13. All their three Feaſts had a reſpe& ro the Har- 
veſt, which began in the Paſſcover, wascarried on at Pentecef?, and 
was fully compleated and ended in this Feaſt. e Of the common or 
__ eons, which began in September, as the ſacred Year began in 
Mareh. 

17 Three times in the year all thy males f ball ap- 
pear hefore the LORD God g. 


f To wit,fuch as zre of competent years,2nd health, and ſtrengrh, 
and ſuch as were at. their own diſpoſe ; for that Servants were not 
bound to this, may ſeem probable, becauſe none of theſe concerned 
were to appear before the LORD empty, or without an Offering,but 
t:1e generality of Servants had notany thing to offer. And the care 
and management of their domeſtick Affairs did require the preſence 
and care cf many of their Males. g( 7, e. ) In that place where God 
ihall record his name, Exod. 20; 24: as the Tabernacle or Temple. 


(bait not ſeethe a kid in his mothers milk 7. 


the year of reſt is mentioned, to teach them the Firſt-fruits were to 


ſtranger may be refreſhed, 

3 This command is here repeated, leſt any ſhould think the 
weekly Reſt might ceaſes when the whole Year was conſecrared r- 
Reſt. There were three ſorts of _—_— to the Jews, 1. Of Day's, 
2. Of Years, to wit, the ſeventh Year, 3. Of W-eksof Years, ro 
wit, the Jubilee; and all theſe ar= Types of tae eternal Reſt in {ea- 
ven. 

12 And in all things that I have ſaid unto you, be cir- 
cumſped : and * make no mention of the names of 0- 
ther gods z, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. 

z Towit, with Honour or Delight, or without Deteſtation; as 
forrzeation is not to. be named among Saints, Eph: 5; 3. Or, not mention 
them in your Worſhip, or in Oaths, or in common Diſcourſe, and 
without ſpecial Occatton. eſt the frequent mention of them might 
keep up their Memor}, or intro..:nce their Worſhip. Hence the 
Names of Idols and Idolatrous placts were oft-times changed by the 


Iſraeliter: See Numb. 32: 38. Joſ: 23: 7. Compar: Pſalm 16: 4: Foſ: 2: , 


17: Zech. 13: 2. ; 
14 1 * Three times thou ſhalt keep i. feaſt unto me 


15 * Thou ſhalt keep the feaſt of unleavened bread : 
thou ſhalt eat unleavened bread ſeven days, as I com. 
manded thee, in the time appointed the month of Abib: 
for in it thou cameſt out from Egypt * * and none ſhall 


appear before me empry «. 
. + This may be either 1. a Precept, asit is generally underſtood, 


that none ſhould ever come ar thoſe times withour ſome offering or : 


ether, for the ſupport of the Levites, and of the Worſhip of God ; 


bur the determination of this, or what they would give, was left 


to their choice. Or 2. a promiſe to encourage them ro come ſo oft 
from their remoteſt Habirations to Jeruſalem, - becauſe they ſhou!d ne- 
wer appear before God in vain, 3: e. to no purpoſe, or withour ſome be- 
nefit, for ſo the word, rekams, oft ſignifies So it may be parallel to 
Iſaiah 45: 19: 1ſaidno unto the ſeed of Jacob,ſrek ye me im vain. But the 
former ſenle 1s more probable, by comparing this with irs parallel 
place, Deut: 16: 16, 17. 


16 And the feaſt of harveſt b, the firſt fruits of thy 
labours c, which thou haft ſown in the field : and the 
feaſt of in-gathering d which is in the end of the year e, 
when thou haſt gathered in thy labours our of the field. 

b ( #: e; ) Of Wheat-harveſt;for Barley-harveſt was before this time. 
This Feaſt was otherwiſe called Pentecoſt. c Queſf. How were theſe 
$: e firſt-fruits, when a Sheaf was offered ta God inthe Feaſt gf the 


- 


OW accord, as 15 here implied. 7 He names one kind,under which 
he underitands a Lamb, or a Calf, &'c. according to the uſe of Scri- 
pture-{tile, This Law many underſtand literally, and that it is for- 


h 


Laws. The words may be rendred thus, Thow ſhalt 
( for the word 6ajhal ſignifiesto reſt, amor err 
dent from Deur. 16; 7. 5 a kia, being, or whilſt it is ( which is to 
the Verb ſubſtantive ) in his mother's milk ; which it may be ſai 

. . » . >? id e 
be, either 1. whilſt it ſucks its Mother's milk ; and mah Show &2 


the Pail-over, of which moſt conceive he had now ſpok : 
: 8 | : en, v; 18: in 
winch they uſed either a Lamb or a Kid, Zxod; x 2: - Kee then the 


word 6aſbal muſt be rendredre#. 2. That this ſpeaks not of Sacrifice 


| to God, wherein ſucking Creatures were allowed, Exod, 2 2: 30; Lev: 
| 22: 27, 1 Sam: 7: 9.but of man's uſe; and ſo God ordained this, part- 


| Iy becauſe this was unwholſome food, and principalh»- ro reſtrain 
, crue'ty, even towards Brute-creatures, and luxury in the uſe of 
them. Or rather 2. whilſt it is very tender and young, rather of a 
' milky than of a ileſhy ſubtgnce, like rhat young Kid of which JOvg= 
2g! thus ſpeaks, Yu plus IaFfis habet quam ſanguinis i.e,which hath wore 
; milk than blood in it. Andit may beſaid to be in its mother's milk, 


; by an uſual Hypallage, when its mother's milkis in it, i;e: whilſt the 


the Firſt-fruits or Firſt-born of the Carre! 


or till they were eight days old, fairh that place. 


men for food. | 


20 q *Behold, I ſend an Angel ms before thee to keep 2: * 
© bring thee into the place y _ 


thee in the way, and 
which Ihave prepared, 


Chap. X 7 6 \ 


k This ſeems ro be a genera} Rule exrending to all the Fruits Y 
which the Earth firſt produced;in every kind of which the very firſt 
2re here enjoined to beoffered unto God, before they ſhould pre. 
ſume to eat ary of them. Ir may ſeem to be repeated here, where * 


be given to God of all that rhe Earth produced, not only by their 
::bour and Seed, as might be thought from werſe 16; bur alſo of its 


bidden to them, becauſe the Idolaters had ſuch a cuſtom, whereof 
yer there ſecs to be no ſufficient proof; nor, if there were doth it 
ſeem to De a Rite of that importance or probability to entice the 1/- 
raelites toumitare it, that there needed a particular Law againſt this 

more than againſt an hundred ſuch ridiculous uſeges which were a= 
morg the Heathen,and are not taken natice of in the Book.of God's 


or rof 


as wel] as to boi], as it is evie 


| be underſtood, there being nothing more commen than an Ellipſis of 


| mitofa twofold interpretztion, 1. that this is to be underſteod of 


milk 1t ſucks, as it were, remains in it undigoſted and nnconverted 
.nto fleth, even as a man 1s oft ſaid to be in the ſpirit, when indeed the 
Joirit isin him. And what is here indefinitely prohibited, is elſewhere 
particularly explained, and the time defined, to wit, that it $ 
not offered to God before it was eight daysold. And this interpre- 
tation may receive light and ſtrength from hence, that the Law of | 
the Firſt-fruits, which both here and Exod; 34: 26; goes immediate- | 
ly before this Law, doth in Exod: 22. 30. immediately go before 
that Law of not offering them before the eighth days, which im- 
plies, that both of them ſpeak concerning the ſame thing, to wit, 
which were not to be of< 
fered to God while they were in their Mother's milk, ſaith this i K 

: And conſe - £ 
ly, if they might not be offered to God, they might not be uſed by 


ha $ 


F 


18 ,* Thou ſhait not offer the blood of my ſacrifice * Lev; vj} 
with jeavened bread h ; neither ſhall the fat of my Þ ſa- De 
crifice remain until the morning z. : ng 
þ This and the following clauſe moſt underſtand of the Paſſeover, + Or ſeas, 
by comparing this place with its paralJe), Exod: 34: 25: where the : 
Paſſeover is mentioned. Bur the words being here univerſal, by the | 
Laws of interpretation they ought to beuniverſally underftood, if * Ge 
they can bear that ſenſe; which here they may ; for both theſe J; 
Clauſes agree to other Sacrifices. For as every Sacrifice had a Minchah, Deu 
or 2 Mear-cfF-ring of Flour atrending upon it, 2nd offered with it;ſo 7 
ir was expreſly cautioned,that no Jeaven ſhould bein that Minchah, Jer:3 
Lev: 2: 11, And the fat of every Sacrifice was conſecrated to Ged, 7 Or 
Lev: 3: 16: 2 Chron: 35: 14, Oc. and was preſent!y to be burnt up- aff 4 
2N che Altar, Lev: 7:2,3. And for Exod: 34: 25. what hinders but that 
* ;2aT 1s here more generally preſcribed, may be there particularly thee. 
appiieo to the Paſicover ? and that ſeems more reaſonable, than ro ) "Ver 
ike that an idlereperition of the ſame thing. And my ſacrifice may * Chi 
ve here pur. for my ſacrifices, by the common Enallege. Moreover Jz 2 
t12 rwo principal things which were offered to God in every Sacri- ' | Joſt: 
hce, were bl2od and fat, Lev: 17:6, 11, &c, i This if underſtood of IT. 
2 Pafſeover may ſeem ſuperfluous, becauſe nothing of it, neither fat "Lex 
n=r lean, was to remainuntil the morning, Exod: 12; 10; but all of it J: 
was to be eaten, even the purtenance thereof, verſe 9: and that,for ought Deur 
I ſee, without ny exception ofthe fat,as there was in other Sacrifices i; 
L:v: 3; 16. And therefore in that parallel place, Exea;3 4:2 5:where Cha 
the Paficover is mentioned, there isnot a word of thefar,but only itis 361: 
faid in the genera), neither ſhall the ſacrifice of the feaſt of the Paſſeover bs Num 
loft until the morummg. And in that 2 Chron; 35: 14: where there is 52s 
mention of the far, it 1s manifeſtly reſtrained tothe Burnt-offerings Deut 
which are there diſtinguiſhed from the Paſſcover, werſe 11, 12. a 
19 The firſt of the firſt-fruirs & of thy land thou ſhalt [v2 
bring into the houſe of the- LORD thy God. * Thou "0 


*Cha bk 


2, 14: 


m To ? 


9 m © ; 
A. xx1uT 
. ; 4 12P- * 


\ 


* Gen,12: 


3; 
Deut: 30: 


+ Or,1wil 
affi# them 
that afflie 
thee. 

*Ver. 20 


* Chap; 

Jz 2; 
Joſh: 24; 
I 


I. 

3: 

Devur. 12; 
I; 


34413; 
Num:33: 
$2; 
Deut;7+5 
25; and 


| T2; 3: 


Dent: 
[| * 


* Deut: 
28: 5, 8; 
* Chap: 


- | x5; 26: 


oo ©. ER. ie ties 


Deut: 7: 


14; 


+ Heb; 


| necks: 


+. Chriſt, the Angel of the Covenant, as may begathe- 

red Aa wn the following Nords, becauſe pardon of ſin, which 15 

God's Prerogative, Mark 2: 7: is here aſcribed to him, and God's 

name is in him, and by comparing other Scriptures, as Exod. 32. 34: 
dts 7: 38, 39: 1 Cor: 10: 9: See Exod. 13: 21: and 14: 19. : 

2: Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him 

not : for he will notpardon your tranſgreſſions » : for 


my name #s in him 9. : | 

n (i.e.) He will ſeverely 7 mg you for them, by a common 
Meioſis, as Exod. 20:7: Underſtand, if you continue obſtinate 1n 
your fins. oe Heb. 1s in his inward parts, 3. e. is intimately united to 
him, according to Jeh. 10: 38: Tam i# the father, and the father n 
me. Tt net enly ſignifies that he aQts in his Name,and by his Power 
and Authority, which even the Apoſtles did, and other Miniſters of 
the Goſpel do, and therefore it is unreaſonable to think no more 1s 
aſcribed to this Angel, but that his divine Nature or Eſſence 1s 1n 
him, whence he is called the Lord our righteouſneſs, Jer. 23: 6: and 
God, who will not give his glory to another, Iſa. 42: 8: hath given it 
to Chriſt, that amen ſhould hononr the ſon even as they honour, the father, 

oh. 5: 23: which never was nor can be ſaid of any Angel withour 

blaſphemy. Add to this, that the word nemeis oft pur for the thing, 
or being, whether it be humane or divine,as 1s manifeſt from Devt. 
28: 58; Pſal. 20: 1: and 115: 1: Iſai. 3o: 27: AF I; 15: Rev. 3: 4: and 
11: 13. Andſo it muſt be here, becauſe this name is nor ſaid to be 
given to him, as it would be, if it were properly taken ; bur ro be 
in him, or in hit inwards, which agrees well to the Divine Nature or 
Eſſence, burnce to the meer Name. | 
22 Bur if thou ſhalt indeed obey his voice, and do all 
that I ſpeak p, * then I will be an enemy unto thine 
enemies and # an adverſary unto thine adverſaries 

p All that I bavealready commanded, and ſhall further preſcribe 
by him unto Moſer. ; 

23 * For mine Angel ſhall go before thee,and * bring 
thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the 
Perizzites, and the Canaanites, end the Hivites, and 
the Jebuſites : and 1 will cut them off, 

24 Thou ſhalt not bow down to their gods, nor ſerve 
them 9q,*nor do after their works 7:* but thou ſhalt utter- 
ly overthrow them s, and quite break down their im- 

CS7. 


ages 
*Lev:18 ; (5. e. ) Give them neither outward worſhip with thy body, nor 


inward with thy mind. r (7. e.) Nor follow their example in the 
worſhip of idols. s (#. e. ) The People, leſt thou be entnared by 
their counſel or example. * Or, ftarues, or pillars, or any thing 
elſe ere&ed in honour to their falſe gods. See Gen; 28; 18. and 


, 20, 
a 25 And ye ſhall ſerve the LORD your God ; and 
* he ſhall bleſs thy bread, and thy water « © and *I will 
take ſickneſs away from the midft of thee. 
u (45,e.) Thy meat and thy drink, that they ſhall be able to 


nouriſh thee, and give thee comfort,which withour my bleſſing they 
will n-ver be ablerodo. 


26 1 * There (ball nothing caſt there young, nor be 
barren x inthy land : the number of thy days I will ful- 
fil | 


» Deut:75 > avs was a double mercy. God gave them ftrength both to 


conceive, and to retain the conception till the natural and proper 
time of bringing forth came. » I will preſerve thee ſo as thou ſhalt 
live as long as the courſe of nature and temper of thy body will Per= 
mit, when evil men ſball noz live out ha'f their days, Pſal. 55: 23, 


27 Iwill ſend my fear z before thee, and will de- 
ſtroy all the people to whom chou ſhalt come, and I 
will make all thine enemies turn their f backs unto thee. 

z ( ce.) A great terrour, or a texrour wrought by me. See 
Exod, 53; 2: Joſb: 24: 12, 

28 And Iwill ſend hornets -« before thee, which 
ſhall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hit- 
tite b from before thee, 

a Properly ſo called, as may be gathered from Joſ. 24; 12: Devut. 
7;20: Hornets are of themſelves very troubleſome and miſchievous; 
but theſe it is very probable were like thoſe Egyptian Flies,Exod, 8. 21: 
of an extraordinary bigneſs and perniciouſneſs. Nor is it {trange that 
ſuch Creatures did drive many of thefe people from their Habitati- 
ons; for many Heathen Writers give us inſtances of ſome people 
driven from their Seats by Frogs, others by Mice, others by Bees 
and Waſps ; of which ſee Heredo1, Dioderus, Plin, lian, Juſtin, &Cc. 
6-He names theſe three people, either for all the reſt, becauſe they 
were the moſt potent about the time of ſree!'s firſt entrance into Ca- 
naay, and gave them moſt trouble; or becauſe theſe three were more 
infeſted with Hornets than the other Nations, as being more nume- 
rous and dangerous. 

29 * Twill notdrive them out from before thee in 
one year ; leſt the land become deſolate c, and the beaſt 
of the field multiply againft thee, 

c Void of Inhabitants in a great meaſure, becauſe thy preſent 
aumber is not ſufficient to ocupy and manage their whole Land. 

39 By little and little 1 will drive them out from be- 
fore thee, until thoube increaſed and inherit the land. 

3r And* I will ſet thy bounds 4 from the Red-ſea, 
even unto the ſea of the Philiſtinese, and from the 
deſert funts the river g : for I will deliver the inhabi- 
tants of the land into your hand, and thou ſhalt drive 
them out before thee. 

.d Compare this place with Gen. 15; 18: Numb: 34: 2; eC(i, e, 
The Mediterrancan or Mid-land Sea, upon whoſe Fas the $5 , 
the Philifines lay, f Of Egypt or Arabia; whereof See Gen, 16: 7: 
Exod, 15; 22; g To wit, Euphrares, as it is expreſſed Des. 1; 7; and 
#1: 24: Which is oft called the river by way of eminency. All 
within theſe bounds were given them by God, but upon Conditicng 


F YODUS. Chap. XX'V* 


; let them eſpecially, keep their diſtance ; and what worſhip either 


— 


which they manifeſtly broke, and therefore were for the moſt part 
confined to a much narrower compals. 
32 * Thouſhalt make no covenant with them, NOT 
with their gods h. | 
hb To warſhip them, as they made a Covenant with Jehovah ta 
worſhip him. The ſenſe is, Thou ſhalt not engage thy ſelf either 
to the p2ople, or to their gods, bur fhalt root out borh» ; 
33 They ſball nor dwell in thy land, leſt they make » Chap: 
thee fin againſt me : for if thou ſerve 3 their gods, * it 34: 123 
will ſurely & be a ſnare / unto thee. 4 _ = 
# Or, for thou wilt ſerve ; this will be the fruit of thy cohabitati- 7 he ad 
on with them,thou wiltſt thereby be drawn to Idolatry. k Or,and aſ- J at mh 
ſuredly this will, I An occaſion of further ſin and utter ruin. Jud : 2:3* 
CHAP. XXIV. 
Moſes, Aaron,Nadab and Abihu, are commanded to appear before the Lure: __. 2 
IWho was to come near the Lord, 2, 3. Moſes buildeth an altar, . and Pſal: 1<6. 
12 pillars, 4. He ſends young men to ſacrifice wnto the Lord, 5, He ſprinkles 36: 
the Altar with the blood, 6. The Cruenant being read, the" people pro- 
miſe obedience, 7. The people are ſprinkled with bleed, Moſes and the El 
' ders of Iſrael ſee the Lerd, 9, 10. God promiſes to give to Moſes two tables 
of ſtone, 12. Moſes and Jofhus ge up to the Mount, 13. Aaron and Hur 
Fook care for the peaple in the mean time, 14. Ged appeareth on the 
Arun like devouring fire, 15, 16. God's glory on the Mount, 17, Moſes 
remains there forty days and forty mghts- 
N D he faid unto Moſes, Come up 4 unto the 
LORD, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu 6, 


and ſeventy of the Elders of Iſracl c, and- worſhip ye 
afar. off d. 


a Afrer thou haſt gone down and acquainted the people with my 
Will, and received their anſwer, then come up again. This ſenſe 
1s gathered from the repeticion of this Command after that was done, 
: wer. 12; 6 Aaroaand his two eldeſt Sons whom by this ſpecial ho- 
nour and favour he prepared for that Office to which they were to 
be called, chap. 28. c Not the ſeventy Governours which were cho« 
ſen after rhis time, asappears from Num: 11: 24: compared with Num. 
33: 16: bur ſeventy perſons ſele&ed by Moſes our of thoſe Rules 
choſen and mentiened Exod. 18: 25: and poſſibly theſe were the chief 
Heads of thoſe ſeveral Families, which went with Jacob into Egypt, 
which were about 70.. See Gen. 46: 26, 27: d Though they may 
come up into the Mount further than the people, yet do thou, and 


da Chap:3: 
I5: 
Deut;7:8: 


thou or they ſhall offer to me, ſhall be performed afar off from the 
. top of the Mountain, whither thou only ſhalt be admitted, and that 
—_ to pray te me, but only to receive Laws and Oracles from me. 
. DCE VEre 2, 


i 2 And Moſes alone e ſhall come near the LORD 2 


i but they ſhall not come nigh,neither ſhall the people go 
; up with himf. | | 
e (i.e, ) Without the perſons now mentioned,though not with» 
out Joſhua his Miniſter, as ſome conceive from ver. 13; though even 
there Moſes ſeems to aſcend into the Mount withour Joſhus. f To 
any part of the Mount, as 4armm and Nadab, &c, did, but they ſhall 
| tarry at the bottom, Exod, 19; 12; 
3 I And Moſes came g and told the people all the 
words ofthe LORD, and all the judgments : and all , ,,, _ 
h - , = * Chap: 
the people anſwered with one voice, and faid, * All ,*; 
the words, which the LORD hath ſaid, will we do 56. Verſe 7: 
Z£ Down from the Mount to the people, after he had received the Deut 5: 
Laws from God, h This they ſo readily and raſhly promiſe, becauſe 27; 
they were not ſenſible of their own weakneſs, and becauſe they did 
not underſtand the comprehenſiveneſs, and ſpirituality, and ſtrict 
neſs of God's Law, but thought ir conſiſted only in the external per« 
formances and abſtinences expreſſed, | : 
4 And Moſes wrote ; all the words of the LORD, 
and roſe up carly in the morning, and builded an altar 


& under the hill, andtwelve pillars /, according to the 
twelve tribes of Iſrael. ; : 
s Towit, inaBook, Heb, 9: 19: And the Ten Commandments 
God himſelf wrote alſo in Tables of Stone, Exed. 31: 18: k Reprex 
ſenting God in Chriſt, as one party in the Covenant. / Repreſent- 
ing the people of 1/rael, the other party. So here are the outward 
7-ooy and ſymbols of a Covenant made between God and the Iſra- 
ites, : 6 
5 4ndheſent young men » of thechildren of Iſrael 2: 
which offered burnt-offerings,aad ſacrificed peace-ofte- 2 
rings of oxen unto the LORD. 3. 
_ mn Ir matters not whether they were the firſt-born, or others ; it = 
is ſufficient that they were perſons appointed and authoriſed forrhe *E 
preſent ſervice, not without Gcd's dire&ion,, » One kind, as the 
principal is named for all ; fur there was offered alſo Goats,as appears 


both from Hzb. 93 19: and from hence, thar 4wrnt offerings were utually . 
made of the Goats, Lev. 1: 10: Numb, 7; 28; S 


6 And Moſes took half of the blood » and put it in 


baſons ; and half of- the blood he ſprinkled on the al- 
altar 7. | 

o Of the Beafts killed, which for conveniency of ſprinkling was 
mixed with a lictle water, #6. 9; 19: whereby alſo Chriſt was moſt 
firly repreſented, who came by water aud blood, 1 Jon 5: 6: fTo 
fignify, as well chat God was appeaſed and atoned by this blood, as 


it repreſented the Blood of Chriſt, as alſo char Chriſt was ſanftified 
with his own Blood, Heb, 9: 12, 


- 7 And he took the book of the covenant p, and read *Vaſ 
in the audience of the peopleq,and they ſaid, * Allthar "© 3: 
the LORD hath ſaid, will we do, and be obedient. 

pþ Wherein Moſes had written the Conditions of this Covenant, to 
wit,the words and Laws of Gad, above ver. 4, q (5.e,) In rhe 


' hearing of a great number of them, or of ſome in the name of all 


the people, by whom it was tread, or otherwiſe publiſhed to all the 
people {uccefhively. 


8 4nd Moſes took the blood » and ſprinkled 5: on 
- P 4 : ths 


A" 


'4 Pet: 1: 
W 2: 


j 
: 
! 


=» © 
o 


*Chap.3r 
18 & Z2: 


* Numb: 


14: 10; 


if hap. XXIV. 


* Ezek. 1: 
- 26: and 10. 


the people s, and ſaid, Behold *, the blood of the co- 
vyenant # which the LORD hath made with you concer- 


ning all theſe words: KW! 

r The other half ofthe Blood, which was put in the Baſons fcr 
this end, ver. 6 5 Either upon the 12 Pillars repreſenting the peo- 
ple - ox upon the peoples Repreſentatives,to wit, the Elders mentio- 
ned wer. x. as when the people are commanded to lay on their harids, 
the Elders do it in their name and ſtead, Lev: 4: 15: Dew. 2:: 2: or 
upon thoſe of the people which are neareſt him, which was impured 
to all the reſt, and was to be taken by them as if ir had r:.ached vnro 
them all. Now this ſprinkling of the Blood upon the people 01d 
ſignifie, 1. their ratification of the Covenznt on their parts, and 
their fecret wiſhing of the effuſion of their own Blood if they did 
not keep ir. 2 Their ſprinkling of their Conſciznces wich the Blocd 
of Chriit, and their cbtaining redemprion,juſtificaticn, and acceſs to 
God through it alone. See Heb. 9: 20, 22: and 13 20. Whereby the 
Covenant is made and confirmed, as was uſual both in Scripture, 
Matth. 26: 28: Lnke 25: 20: and among Heathens-. 


9 1 Then went up « Moles, and Aaron, Nadab and 
Abihu, and ſeventy of the E'ders of Itrael. 


# In obedience to that command of God given wer. r. 


to And they ſaw the God of Iſrael x, and here 
2»»as under his feet as it were a paved work * of a {aphire 
ſtone 7, and as it were the body of heaven in his clear- 


neſs z, 1 

x Not any viſible reſemblance of the Divine Nature, which is ex- 
preſly denied, Dent. 4.15: 1 Tim. 6. 16. and was refuſed ro Moſes 
when he defired it, Exod. 33: 18, 20: and therefore ſurely would 
never be :ranred to the Elders of Iſrael ; but ſome gl -r1ous appearance 
or token of God's ſpecial Preſence ; or rather, the ſecond perſon in 
the Trinity, who now ſhewed himſelf ro them in an Humane an 
Glorious Shape, as an Efſay and Teſtimony of his future Incarnaci- 
on. This may ſeem probable, 1. Becauſe here is mention of his feer. 
2. Becauſe this way of Chriſt's appearance was not unuſual. See Gen. 
18, &c. 3. Becauſe the perſon who delivered the Law in Sinaz was 
Chriſt,as app-ars from A#s 7: 38: though he be there called an 4rge!, 
2 name oft given to Chriſt, as hath been formerly thewed. y. 
Which is ofa clear Sky-colonr,mixed with Golden ſpors like Stars in 
the Sky. z Or, For clearneſs. A clear Sky in Propherical Stile fig- 
nifying God's favour, as a cloudy Sky no'es his Anger. 


1r And upon the nobles « of the chi'dren of Iſrae] 
he laid not his hand 6: alſo they ſaw God, and did eat 


and drink c. 

a Or ſeparated of ſelef ones, 1. e. the perſons who were ſingled our 
to go up with Mvſes, werſe 1, 9: the ſam+ of whom it 15 ſaid here,and 
werſe 10: thor they ſaw Grd, b ( ive.) Dd nor hurt or deſtroy them 
as they might exp:& according to the vulgar O;1nion, G-7. 
16: 13: and 32: 20. Oc. and the Conſcience of their ewa Guilr, as 
being now before rheir Lord and Judge. And ſv the phrale of purting 


' or ſtretching forth the hand is moſt frequently uſed, as Gen 37: 22: 


1 Sam 26: 11, 23 Efth. 2:21: Job 1.11, 12- Pjal-1;8: 5: &c. ec So 
far were they from being deſtroyed,that they were not affrighte at 
this g'orious appearance of God, but were refreſhed and comforted 
by i', and did joyfully eat and drink together in God's Preſence, 
celebrating the ſacred Feaſt made of the remnanr of the Peace-offer- 
ings, according to the manner. Thus God gave them a raſte of his 
Grace and Mercy in this Covenanr,and an Aſſurance that he would 
not del with them according to the rigors of the Law, bur for the 

fake of the Blond of Chriſt rypically repreſented here, wou'd »4 

'ciouſly pardon and accept all thoſe that ſincerely, though imperteCt- 
ly, obey him. 

12 } Andthe LORD faid unto Moſes, Come up 
to me. into the mount, and be d chere: and I will give 
thee * tables of ſtonee, and a law, and commandmentsFf, 
which T have wricten ; that thou mayeſt teach them 

+ 4 ( i.e.) Abide, as that Verbis uſed 1 Tim 4: 15: and elſe- 
where e He cho'e that material, part)y as very durable, yer ſo that 
it was capable ef being broken, which God, foreſeeing their wick- 
edneſs, intended to do ; and part'y for fignifieation, ro note the 
Hardneſs of their Hearts, upon which no 1mprefſicn could be made, 
but by the Finger of God. f Or, th: law, and becauſe that is ambi- 
guous to the' Moral and Ceremonial, and Judicial, headds, even the 
commandment, or commandments, to wit, the Ten commandments, 
ſo called by way of Eminency, for theſe only were written by God 
upon the Stony Tables, as appears by Exod. 34: 28: the reſt were 
written by Moſes in a Book, above verſe 4. 


12 And Moſes roſe up, and his miniſter Joſhua g: and 


Moſes went up into the mount of God, | 

g Who did nor go up with Moſes to the rop of the Mount, as is 
ſoffi-iently implyed boti here and abeve. verſe 1, 2. bur abcde in 
ſome lower place, wairing for Motes his return, as appears from 
Exod. 32. 175. And there Jeſbz# abode forty days, not Faſting all the 
wile, but having, as the reſt had, Mznna for his Meat, and for 
his Drink, Water ous of the brook that deſcended out of the mount, as we 
read Dcut, 9. 21. 


14 And he ſaid unto the elders, Tarry ye here for 
us þ, untill we come again unto you : and behold A4a- 


ron and Hur i are with you : ifany man have any mat- ' 


ters to do, let him come unto them. 

hþ (:,e.) For me and Joſhua, and here, 3.e. in the Camp, where 
he was when he ſpake theſe words ; for it was where notonly Aaron 
and Hur, but the People mighr come, as it here follows, and there- 
fore not upon the Mount. ; Whom Moſes had made Joint-com- 
miſſoners to determine hard Cauſes which were brought to them 
from the Elders, according to the order, Exod. 18. »2. Some make 
Aaron the Eccleſiaſtical Head, and Hur the Civil! Head :. but Aaron 
was not authorized for Ecclefiaſtical Matters till chap 28. 

15 And Moſes went up into the mount, and a cloud 


covered the mount. 
16 And * the glory of the LORD & abode uponmount 


Sinai, and the cloud covered it/ ſix days ; and the ſc- | 


"EXODUS: 


venth day » he called unto Moſes out cf the m:icft ofthe 
cioud. 

k ( i.e. ) The tokens of his glorious Preſence in the Fire, wer. 172 
Deut. 4.36: I From the eyes cf the People. w So Jong God made 
M:ſes wait, either to excerciſe his Humility, Devotion, and Dep en- 
ance vpon God ; or to prepare him by degrees forſo grexta Work; 
zr b-cauie this was the Chock-day, called therefore the ſeu-n:6 with 
an emplatical Articie : And God might chuſe that day for rhe be- 
gining of thar glorious Work, to put rhe greater Honour upen it, 
and oblige the People to a ſtrifter obſervance of it. So it was vpon 
2 Lord's day that St. John had his Revelation delivered to him, Rew. 
I» 10. 


17 And the ſight of the glory of the LORD was like 
* devouring fire » on the topof the mount, in theeyes 


of the children of Iſrael. 

» He faith ke it, for it was not devouring fire, as appears by Moſes 
his !ong abode in it. Note here, wharſoever the E'der: of Iſrael ſaw 
before, the People ſaw no ſimilitude ot Gcd, as M-Jes obterves Deut, 


4. 15: 
18 And Moſes went up into the midſt of the cloud 
0, and gat him up unto the mount : and Moſes was in 


the mount forty days and forty nights p 
o The God that called him enabling him ro enter and abide there ; 

whereas, when he was Jeft to himſeif le could nor enter into the 

Tabernacle, Exod. 40: 35: p In which he did neither cat ney 

drink, Exed. 34 28. Dewt 9 9, 18 whereby it ſeems moſt probable 

the ſix days mentioned, verſe 16: were a part of theſe forty days, 
becauſe Moſes being in perpctual expeQation of God's call, ſeems nor 
to have had Ileaſure for eating and drinking, nor proviſion neither. 

B-ſides, he is not ſaid to be in the micſt of the C:oud fo long, bur 

on'y inthe mount, where he was thoſe ſix days, werſe 15, 16, 

CHAP. XXV. 

Moſes is commanded to take a free-will offering t0 ſet up the tabernacle, and 
of wha:,1----7. God commanas him to make a [anttuary, 8. Chargeth 
him how, ana whereof to make a tabernacle, 9, 10. The form of the 1a 
bernacle, 11----16: The mercy (eat, 17. The table for the ſhew-bread, 
with ether utenſils, 18---30 Of rhe candleſtick, with its employment, 
and othr furnitures for the tabernacle, 31----39: Moſes is cemmanded to 
make it adlwerable to the patzern which he ſaw in the mount, 40. 


ND the LORD fpake a unto Moles, 

in 
a H:ving de'ivered the M-ral and Judicial Laws, he now comes 
tothe Ceremonial Law, wherein he 1ets down all things very mi- 
nute'y and particular'y, whereas in the other Laws he was content 
to lay down general Rules, and leaveth many other things to be by 
analo;y deduced from them. The reaſons of the d.fference ſeems 
to be this, That the light of Reaſon imp'anted in all men, gives 
him greater he'p in che diſcovery of Moral and Judicial things, than 
in Ceremonial matters, or inthe external way and manner of God's 
worſhip;which is a thing depending wholly on God's inſtitution,and 
nor lefr ro man's invention, which is a very incompetent Judge of 
rhoſe things, as appears from hence, becauſe the wittieſt men, de- 
ſtirute of God's revel:rion, have been guilty of thoſt foolery in their 
devicesof God's worſhip. | 


2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, that they + bring 


ſay- 


me an Þ offering: * of every man that giveth ic will- 4xz,y,, 


ingly with his heart ye ſhall take my offering. 

3 And this is the offering whichye (hall take of them; 
gold, andfilver, and bras. 

4 And blue b, and purplez and ſcarlet, and fine 


Tlinenc, and goats hair d, 

6 Or, Sky-couloured ; but here you muſt not underſtand the meer 
Colours which could nor be offered, bur ſome materials proper for 
the Work, and ofthe Colours here mentioned, to wit, Wool, or 
Threads, or ſome ſuch like taings, as appears from Heb. 9: 19: and 
from the teſtimony of the Jews. c' Which was of great eſteem in 
ancient times, and uſed by Prieſts and great Officers of Srate. See 
Gene. 41: 42: Revs 19:8, 14: & Heb, Goats, Bur that their hair is 
underſtood, is apparer't from the nature of the thing, and from the 
uſe ofthe word in that ſenſe in other places. 

'F And rams skins died red, and badgers skins, and 
[Littim-wood e, 

e A kind of Wood growing in Ezypr and the Deſerts of Arabia 
very durable and precious. See Exod. 35: 24: Numb. 33: 49: 1/4 41. 
I9, Joel 3: 18: 


, 


and. for * {weeet incenſe h: 


upon the Altar. 
7 Onyx ſtones 7, and ſtones to be ſet & in the * e- 
phod, and in the* breaſt-plate /. 


| day, and much more may we ſafely be ignorant of them, the Reli. 
| gious uſe of them being now aboliſhed. k Stones of fulneſs, or filing, 
or perfeFing ſtones; ſocalled either becauſe they did perfe& and adorn 
_ nag the bopunth they __ up the ouches, or the hollow 
aces, which were left vacant to this purpoſe. 1 Wh 
| nw" Breaſt-plate were, ſee Exod. 28. EM, N = _ 
8 And let them makeme aſancuary », that * I may 
dwell amongſt thems., : 
” A place of publick and ſolemn Worſhip: » Nat by my Eſſence, 5 
which is every where, but by my Grace and Glorious Qperations. + 


« 


. 9 According toall that I ſhew thee, after the pattern x6:;Heb! 
of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the inſtru- 6Rwv: 
P'3 


ments thereof, even ſo ſhall ye make it» 
ze e* Ang 


for me, 


6 * Oyl for the light f, * ſpices for anointing oyl g, * Chap 
27; 20; 
* f For the Lamps or Candleſticks, verſe 37: g Wherewith the 4 
Prieſts, and the Tabernacle, and the Utenſils thereof, were to be 293 TP 
anointed. h Heb. Incenſe of Spices, or ſw:et Odors ; ſo called to di- Chap: | 


ſtinguiſh it from the incenſe of the fat of Sacritices, which was burnt 3934 
/ 
Y Chap; * 


# Or, Sardonyx fienes. Note, that the fignification of the Hebrew + 
names of the ſeveral Stones are not agreed upon by the Jews at this GC 


; T3; 


Clap. Xxy. ; 


—conmed 


E Deut., 
3G; 


T Or, 

heave of. 

fering. 
* Chapt 


962 $i 
t Or, 


Chap; 


$8: 4; | 
Chap; # 
8; 15; 


Chap: 
9: 453 
Kings 


Cor:6 


TW9 


| 


Det, 
6; 


F Chap; 
27; 20; 
F Chap; 
oO: 2J 
Chap; 
0*34; | 


' Chap; | 


28: 4; 


* Chap; 


28; 15; 


3 


W's 


Chap. XXV- 


* Chap: 


37* 


fDeut: 10; 


To 


contain a Foot 


10 T* 4nd they shall make attark oof shittim-wood: 
ewo cubits þ and an half fþa// be the length thereof, and 
2 cubit and an halfthe - _ thereof, and a cubit and 

joht thereorT, 
; ; —— or coffer, for the uſes after mentioned. p Un- 


. una Cubit, which is generally conceived to 
d it of (hire <UL 5 g any IVE 
derſtan and a halfof our meaſure. See Ger: 6. rs. 


1x Apdchou ſhalt overlay it with.pure gold ; with- 
in and wichout ſhalt thou overlay it, and ſhait make u- 
pon it a crown q of gold round about. 

4 Or, A border, raiſed up above the reſt of the Ark, as a Crown 
*« above that which it is applied to, only a Crown is round.and this 
was ſquare. This was both for Ornament, and for the faſtning of 
the covering ofthe Ark to 1t. 

12 And thou shalt caſt four rings of gold for je, and 

put them in the four corners » thereof ; and two rings 

all be in the one ſide of it, and two rings in the other 
ſide of it. | 

r In the middle of each corner for conveniency of carriage. 
See 1 Kings 7. 39. _ : 

13 And thou ſhalt make ſtaves of (bittim-woed, and 
overlay them with gold. 

14 And thou ſhalt put the ſtaves into the rings. by the 
ſides of the ark, that the ark may be born with them, 

15 The ftaves fhall be in che rings of the ark : they 
ſhall not be taken from it. "8, 


Lo s which I shall give thee. 


JOr,of the 
matper of 

the mercy- 
ſeat. 


*:King:8: 


T7 1 
28: 


Chr: 
18: 


Heb:g: + 


*Chap: 29 


42. 
36: 


&z30: 
Lev: 


16:2 


Nu 
$9. 


mb:7: 


s Towit, the two Tables of Stone, wherein the Necalogue was 
written; called the Teſtimony here, and Exod: 30. 6: Levit. 16. x3. 
and more fully the Tables of the Teſtimony, Exod: 31. 18. Numb: 1, 5O. 
becauſe they were witneſſe. of that Covenant made between God 
and his People, whence they are called the Tables of the Covenant, 
Deut. 9, 9. and the Ark, the Ark of the Cavenant, Numb. 10. 33- 
This being as a publick Record both of God's Mercy promiſed to 
them, and of the Duty and Conditions required of them. See Ex- 
0a; 16. 34. 

i7 And thon alt make a mercy-ſeat? of pure gold ; 
two cubirs and an half ſhall be the length thereof, and a 


cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 

t Or, Propitiatory ; which ſeems from the fameneſs of dimenſions 
to be nothing elſe bur the covering of the Ark,upon which God is 
ſaid to fit. whence the Ark is called God's foorffool, This covering 
is a manifeſt Type of Chriſt, who is therefore called the propitia- 
tion, or propitiatory, Rom 3. 25: t John 2. 2. and 4. 10. becauſe he 
interpoſeth himſelf between God our Judge,and the Law by which 
we all tand condemned and accurſed, Gal: 3. 10, 13. that Yod may 
not deal rigorouſly with us according to that Law, but me: cifully 
for hi: fake who hath fu'flled the Law, and therefo:e boidly pre- 
ſents himſelf ro his Fathe: on our behalf. | 

18 And thou thait make rwo cherubims # of gold : 


of beaten work x ſhalt thou make them in the two enes 


of the mercy-leat- | 

« Figures of humane ſhape, in which alone the Angels uſed to 
appear ; bur they had wing., to ſignify their Expedition in (3od's 
Work and Meſſages. And between theſe Angels God is ſaid to 
fit and dwell. So this place was a rep: eſentation of Heaven, where 
God *itreth and dwelleth among. the che ubims and other glorious 
Angels. » Not made of !evera] parcels joyned together, a< Images 
commonly are, nor yet melredand caſt in a frame o+ mould, bur 
beaten by the hamme” out ofone continued piece of Gold, pofli',- 
ly to notre the exatt unity or indiviſtbility,and the ſimplicity of the 
Angelical Nature. 

19 And make one cherub on the one end, and the o- 
ther cherub onthe o:2er end :cv2n þ+ of the mercy -{2at y 
ſhall ye make the cherubims on rhe two ends thereof. 


7 (i.e ) Of one and theſame pieceof maſſy Gold, out of which 
the cherubims were ma-(e. 


20 And the cherubims ſhall ſtretch forth rbeir * wings. 


on high, covering the mercy-ſeat with their xings,and 
their faces ſhall look one to another: toward the mer- 
cy-ſeat & tall the faces of the cherubims be 

z Toward: God, who 1s ſuppaſed to ſit there, whoſe face the 
Ange's in Heaven always behold, and upon whom their Eyes are 
fix:d to obſ-rve and receive his commands ; and towards Chrift, 
the true Propitiatory, which Myſtcry they dee to look into, 1 Pet.1. 
2: not envying Mankind their near and happy relation to him, but 
taking p'caſure in the contemplation of it. 

24 and thou thalt put the mercy-ſeat above upon 
the ark, and in the ark thou lbalt put 2 the teſtimony 
that I sha!l give thee. 

a Or, After thou ſtalt have put in the Ark; for the Ark was not to 
be opened after the covering was put upon. it. The Hebrew Par- 
ricle Yau oft ſignifies after that, os Fer. 43. 13. and 5r. 60. 

22 And there I wili meet with thee b, and I will 
commune with thee, from above the mercy ſeat, from 
* between the cherubimsc which «re upon theark cf the 
teſtimony, of all rings which I will give chee in com» 
mandment unto the children of Iſrael. 

b There I will be in a f pecial and gracious manner preſent with 
thee. c Which ſpreaving forth their wings formed a kind of ſear, 
which the Divine Majeſty was pleaſed ro poſleſs. 

23 T* Thou ſhait aiſo make a tabie of ſhittim-wood: 


*Chap:37 two cubits ſhall be the length thereof, and a cubit 


2 ng the breadth thereof, anb a cubic anda half the height 


E XZ © 


| 


16 And thou fhalt put into the ark,* the teſtimony | 


' 24. 7. Of this ſort there were twelve, one for every Loaf. # In 


| 


| diſtin& and ſeparazed from the 
I = 


$i 


S. Chap. 


24 And thou ſhalt overlay it with pure gold, and 
make thereto a crown &d of gold round about» 

a4 A ſquare Border at the top of it, as verſe 11: partly for Orna 
_ and principally to keep what was put upon it fiom falling 
off. 

25 Andthou shalt make unto it a border & of an 
hand breadth round about, and theu shalt make agot= 
den crown f to the border thereof round about. 

e Which encompaſſed and kepr ro gether the feer of the Table, 
and ſeems to have been towards the bortom of it, f Nor the ſame 


mentioned before, verſe 24: but another for further Ornament t6 
the Table. | 


26 And thou $halt make for it four rings of gold,and 
put the rings in the four corners chat are on the four 
feet there F. | | 

27 Over againſt the border g $hall the rings be for - 
places of the ſtaves to bear the table. 

s As much below the tip, as the Border was above the bottoms 
of the feet of the Table, which was a conv-nient place for the car- 


riage. Others, near the border, in that part of the feer which is next 
to 1t. 


28 And thou shalt make the ſtaves of $hittim-wood, 
and overlay them with gold,that che table may be born 
with them. | a el 

29 And thou shaltmake the dishes & thereof and ſpoons 
; thereof, and covers & thereof, and bowls thereof. + tro 


cover withal 7 » of pure gold shalt thou make them- 
þ Tawhich the Bread and Frankincen'e upon ir were put; Levit: 


+ Or, to 
pour ouf 


which Incenſe was put, as appears from Numb 7. 14 and by wh ch withal,.. 


Incenſe was either pur intothe Diſhes, or taken out of them, as oc 
cafion required. & So the Hebrew word is uſed, Exod: 37: 16. Numb: 
4:7. Herewith eitier the Pre:d, or Incenfſe,or both were covered. 
I To covei the ſame things. Yo this and the former were t»0 ſeve- 
ral ſorts of Covers, the one deeper than the othe?, one to cover the 
Bread,another the Incenſe. O:, Bowls thereof, to pour out withal, td 
wir, liquid things, as Wine and Oyl, when they were offered. See 
Gen: 35. 14. Or theſe lat words may relat= nor only to the Bowls, 
but the -ther things, here mentioned, and may be thus rendred, 
wherewith it, ro wit, the Table, ſhall be covered; as indeed it was in 
2 manner quite covzied with theſe Veſſels. | | 

o And thou shalt ſct upon the table * shew-bread 


before me alway, | 8 | 

m Heb: Bread of faces, or of the preſence, ſo called, becauſe it was 
conitantly placed in God's preſence. This Bread was divided into 
twelve Loaves, one for eve:y T:ibe; and they were in their name 
preſented to Go:i in the nature of an offeririg, as the Frankincenſs 
ſhews, as a publick acknowledgment, that they received all their 
Bread or Food, corporal and ſpuitual, from God's hand, and were 
to uſe it as in God's preſence. HF: | cx 8 

3r * And thou halt make. » a candleſtick of pure *Chap.z 
goid: of beaten work $hall che candleftick be made 2: Rs 
his shafr o, and his branches, his bowls, his knops p, and 9. _ 
his flowers shall be of the ſame g. 


+ Lev:34- 
5 


| | _._ Zech 4. 

n Either by thy ſe], or. by ſome other perſon whom thou ſhalt Rev-1.12 
cauſe to make it. o The trunk, or main body of it p Or, apples, and 4. 5+ 
made in form of a Pomegranite. q To wit, beaten out of the fame 
piece by the Hammer. Compare wer: 36: 

32 And ſix branches shali come cut of the ſides of 
it »- three branches of the candieftick out of the one 
fide, and three branches of the candleſtick out of the o- 
ther fide. | 

r Inevery one of which was a Lamp, and there was a ſeventh 
Lamp in the chief ſtem of it, as appears from wer: 37: And all theſe 
together repreſent the ſeven ſpirits of God, Rev. 1. 4. and 4: 5 and 
5. 6. Or the Spirit of God, the great Enlightner cf the. Church; 
with his ſevenfold or various Gifts and Operations. | 

23 Three bowls made like unto almonds with a knop 
an-' a flower in one branch : and three bowls made like 
almonds in the other branch, 23th a knop& a flower i ſo 
in the ſix branches that come out of the candleſtick. 

34 And inthe candleftick s ſh4/] be four bowls & made 
like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers. 

s (7; e., ) Inthe ſhafrorrrunk of the Candleſtick, which is here 
diſtinguiſhed from its branches #&- Whereas there were but thres 
incach of the br:nches: - 

35 Andrhere ſhall be a knop under two branches of the 
ſame, and a knopunder two branches of the ſame, and 
a knop under two branches of ctheſame, according to 


the ſix branches « that proceed out of the candleſtick. 

« And tro compleat the number of four, mentioned in the fores 
going Verſe, we muſt enderſtand, that there was another knop and 
vowt and flower in the upper-patt of the ſhafr, above all the brart« 
ches, as the rules of proportion, and common uſe in making ſuch 
things, will eaſily evince. ITE | | | 

36 Their knops and their branches ſhall be of the 
ſame: all ir ſhall be one beaten work of pure gold. 

37 Andthou ſbalt make the ſeven lamps thereof: and 
*they x thall F light the lamps thereof, that they may Fe 
give light over-againſt * it y. _ - "ca 

x Whom I ſhall appoint for that work. y( 3. e. ) Either i. The 20, and 
Table of Showbread Or rather 2. The Candleſtick as it is expreſ- 3%: 8- 
ſed, Numb. 8. 2: where by the CandleFick you are to underftand, as =&V- 26: 
here wer: 33, 34+ the ſtem or main body of it; and the ſenſe is, that 31,42 
the Lamps ſhall be ſo placed, that they and their 1:ght may look tos 1 7; 409 
wards that ftem ; unlefs you will ſuppoſe that the ſeven lamips were £9 2/cihd, 

Jielick, and Giſlasd ro the fides, . Heb: 
of 7460 of its 


It 


"| ap. XKVI A , j =S L : 
le, in ſeveral places, and all giving light to, or 0- 
ny end boar "erearCandleBic which was in the midit,as the Can- 
Jieſtick did over-againſt them, which is alſo now uſual among us: 
28 And the tongs thereof, and the Snuff-diſhes there- 

of ſhall be of pure gold. ; 
- Of a talent & of pure gold ſhall he make it, with 

all theſe veſſels. 

z Which contains three thouſand ſhekels, Exod: 38. 25.07 125. 


Num.s. Pwnd- 

| 8. *. 40 And * look that thou make ther after their pat* 

* Chron. tera | which was ſbewed thee in the mount. 

28:19: C H A P. XXVI. 

At: 7.44- Moſes is commanded to make the Tabernacle with ten curtains, 7. The length 
8.5. 


Heb. 8. and breadth of the curtains, 2. The form of the curtains, 3---6. He 1s 
t Heb. commanded to make eleven curtains of goats hair, 7: The manner of tne 


bich thou - making and placing it, 8-=—=i 4. Of what the Tabernacle is to be made, 

aft cauſed 15. The manner of its making, with other utenſils, 16 -—- 30. Of 

Jee. the vail, and what it is to be madeof, 31. The jajhion of it, 32, 33-The 
hanging for the tent-door,36. 7 

A AN Oreover, * thou ſhalt mzke the tabernacle a irb 


. . ten curtains of | fine twined linen, and blew, and 
en. the purple, and ſcarlet b: with cherubims F of cunning 


rkof 
© ay work c ſhalt thou make them. 
man s Or, Tent; a little Houſe wherein the Ark, Table and Candle- 


embroj= Mick were to be placed. 6 (7.e. ) With materials of theſe colours, 
er, to wit, Wool, as may be gathered from hence, that it is oppoled to 
Linen. Compare Exod: 25. 4. © Either woven, or rather wrought 
with Needle, wherein is moſt «kill and curio'ity. 

2 The length of one curtain ſhe be eight and twenty 
cubits, and the breadth of one courtain four cubits : 
andeveryone of the courtains ſhall have one meaſure. 
Heb:the 2 The fivecurtains ſhall be coupled rogether F one 
, rm E to another, and orher five curtains fha//be coupled one to 

another. | 
4 And thou ſhalt make loops «of blue upon the edg: 
of the one curtain, from theſelvedge e in the coupling f: 
and likewiſe g (halt thou makein the uttermoſt edge oi 
azother curtain, in the coupling of the ſecond. 
d Which together with the Taches were for the joyning the Cur- 
; tains together, as appears from verſe 17, which way of conjunttio!) 
X was moſt convenient for the often taking them down, and ſetting 
them up. e Or from, or in the extremity, or. end, or edge. Heb. lip. 
F(5: e: ). Inthe place where the two curtains are coupled together. 
£ The ſecond Curtain is to be made exaRly like rhe firit. 

5 Fifty loops ſhalt thou make in. the one curtain,and 
fifty loops ſbalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that 
5s in the coupling of the ſecond ; that the loops may 
take hold one of another. 

6 And thou fbalt make bfty taches of gold, and cou- 
'Þle the curtains together with the taches þ : and it ſhall 

one Tabernacle. 

hþ Or hooks or buttons, which were put into the loops to unite and 


faſten the Curtains. ; 7 
7 14 And thou ſbalt makecurtains of goats hair to be 


2 covering kupon the tabernacle : cleven curtains ſbalc 


thou make. 
; Spun, Exod: 35: 26. and woven into a ſtuff, like our Camſet 


k To be put next above the Curtains. 

8 And thelength of one curtain ſhall be thirty cubits, 
and the breadthof one curtain four cubits: and the e- 

even curtains ſhall be all of one meaſure. : 

9 And thou (halt couple five curtains by themielves, 
and fix curtains by themſelves, and ſhalt double the lixti 
curtain ] in the forefront of the rabernacie» 

1 For the better ſecurity of the inward covering. 

x0 And thou tbalc make fifty loops on the edge of 
the one curtain that is outmoftin the coupling, and fif- 
ty loops in the edge of the curtain which couplerh the 
ſecond. | 

1x: And thou ſhalt make fifty taches of braſs, and put 
+ Or, o- the taches into theloops, and couple the * tent together, 
wering:  thatitmay be one. 
12 Andthe remaant that remaineth of the curtains 
of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth ſhall hang 
over the ſide of the tabernacle. 
13 Anda cubit ontheone ſide, and the cubit on the 
+ Heb: in other ſide + of that which remaineth in che length of the 
[phe re- curtains of the tent, it ſhall hang over the ſides of the 
ee 2" tabernacle on this fide, and onthat fide to cover it. 
, 5. 14 Andthou ſhalt make a covering for the tent of 
rams skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers 
Skins . ' | 

m To preſervethe reſt from the injury of the Weather. | 

is qo And thou ſhalt make boards for the rabernacle 
of ſhittim-wood ſtanding up. 

16 Tencubits ſhall be the length of a board, anda cu- 
bit and a half ſhall be the breadth of one beard. 

17 Two ftenons » ſhall there be in one board, fet in 
order one againft another : thus ſhalt thou make for all 
the boards of the tabernacle. f 

» Heb. hands, (7: e: ) parts of the boards fo cut and framed, that 
like hands they may take bold of, and be faſtned into the ſockers, ; 


wer: 19, 


/ 


s 


o 
- 


— 


o Or baſes, or pedeſtals, or feet, upon which the boargs ſtood and 
to which they were faſtned. : 

20 And for the ſecond ſide of the tabernacle, an the 
north-ſide there ſhall be twenty 2oards, 

21 And their fourty ſockets of ſilver : two fockets un- 
der one board, and two ſockets under another board. 

22 Andfor the ſides of the tabernacle weſtward thoy 
ſhalt make fix boards. 

23 And two boards fhaltthou make for the corners 


of the tabernacle in the two ſides. 

Which were of another faſhion than the former,as may be ga« 
thered both from the diſtin nomination and uſe of them, and fon: 
the Laws of building. And whereas the reſt were but ſingle boa: ds 
theſe »e-e double for greater ſtrength and conveniency of joyning 
them together. 


unto one ring 7: thus shall it be for them beth, they 
(hall be for the two corners, 

q Heb. as twins, 7. e: equal and equally joyned together, and ex 
attiy anſwering one to the other. 7 Wiickring _ exattly in ho 
corner, and with the help of the bars kept the corner-boards, and 
with them the other boards of the Tabernacle cloſe together. But 
you muſt note, that here were two rings in each corner, the one in 
the upper, the other in the lower parts. 

25 And they ſhall be eight boards, and their ſockets 
of ſilver ſixteen ſockets : two ſockets under one board 
and two ſockets under another board, ; 
' 26 F And thou ſhalt make bars « of shittim-weod : 
hve for the boards cf the one fide of the tabernacle 

s By bars you may undecſtand either 1. ſeveral rows or artery of 
bars, one bar beginning at the end of the other, and each conrain- 
ng 4 cubirs.in length, and allt-gether 20 cubits, which was the 
iength of the Tabernacle; or 2. ſingle bars, which ſeem truer x be « 
cauſe the word ſignifies bars, not rows of bars ; and why ſhou'd we 

o {rom the proper ſignification of the word withour cauſe 2 ». If 
ars be put for rows of bars, there muſt be 5 rows of bars on a fide 
there being ſo mar.y bars ſa'd to be on a ſide. But rhe Abett:rs 
of that opinion aliow only four Rows ofBars ona ſide, & it is apy x 
rent the middle bar, which is one cf the five,is but one ſingie "6g 
28.&therefore it may be preſumed the reſt were ſo tov. 3.The —_ 
of the middle bar implies, that of the other 4 bars,two wee h—_ 
It, and two below it. Obj. But if they were each ſingle bars na 
ing the whole length of the Building,why is it ſaid peculiarly of the 
middle bar, that it ſhould reach from end to end, or from ney = 
extremity, verſe 28 ? Az. This may be peculiarly ſaid of this = 

becauſe the other 4 might want ſomething of the juſt length of th 
Building,or becauſe the middle bar might ſtand out beyond oo 
ends of it, for conveniency of the carriage of the Buildings. y 


27 And five bars for the boards of the other fide of 


of the tabernacle for the two ſides weſtward :, 


_ # There was but oneſide weſtward. Either therefore here is a tran. 


poſition of the. Hebrew words,which is uſual,and the word 
to be placed and rendred, weſtward, looking to both p Spe: war 
according to both the other ſides, now mentioned,to note that the num- 
ber and length of bars in the weſt-end ſhould be equal to thoſe on 
either of the other ſides; or here is an enallage of the number, the 
dual or plural for the ſingular, of which there are many Exam 
ples,and ſo the words are to be rendred,for the ſide looking weftward 
28 And the middle bar in the midft of the boards « 
sha!l reach from end to end. | | 
u Not within the thickneſs of the bords, as the Fews conce! 
but in the length of them ; as appears, 1. Becauſe this ba an wal 
m4 whe reſt, was ine, _ Fa _ was frivolous if it were ne. 
cen. 2. cauſe all the bars had ri 
CRETE. 3 Om s had rings made to receive and 
29 And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and 


make their rings of gold, forplaces for th , 
chou $shalt overlay the Mw 1 _F e bars: and 


ing to the the fashion thereof which was shewed thee 
in the mount. : ; 


x Either by viſible repreſentation to his e 
: _—_ ye, or rather b 
viſion or unprefſſion of it upon his imagination y mental 


31 T Andthou $halt make* a vail y of blue, and Pur- 


with cherubims $hall icbemade. 
y Which was thick and ſtreng that nore could fee through it 


called the ſecond vail, Heb. g. 3. whereby the Holy of Holies,which 


repreſented the higheſt Heaven, was divided from uh 
where the wg” pr mas or its Rratnacies, meet; 
od, ver: 33. Forthe fignificati is Vai 
Heb.g.8, 24. and 10. wi, 0; -peromn YN Or IEG rehs 
32 And thou $halt hang it uponfourpillars ef shittim- 
00d overlaid with gold: their hooks z $hall be of gold 
upon the four ſockets of ſilver. : 


z Which were faſtened to the tops of the Pillars, as the Vail was 


faſtened rothem. | 


33 YT And thou halt hang up the vail under the 


teaches F, that thou mayeſt bring in thither within the 


yail 


24 And they ſhall be F coupled together q beneath, f Heb: 
and they ſball be coupled together above the head of ic 29 


the tabernacle; and five bars for the boards of the ſide 


30 And thou+halt rear up the tabernable, * accorg. *Chap.:s:! 


” 9, 40 Þ} 
” As 7:44! 
Heb: 8: 5: } 


TRIBES Yo 


. 2 Chron: | 

: 3.14: 

ple, and ſcarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work ; Matth: :7 
FI. 


ebs } 
ed; 


hap.25: 
40: 

Is'7:44 
bs 8:5: 
Chron; 


4: 
atth: 27 


- 
acme, 6d 


[4 
% 
®: 
> 
4 Ss 


- 


© VE 


" 
L 
wy 
bt 
di 


o 


Re 


W3*%S © RTE Lowe 


SIM ae, — 
- 


Chap. XXVII. E X 0 


vail the ark of the teſtimony : and the vail ſha'l divide 
* Heb.g. unto you between the * holy place. and the molt holy. 

T Or, in the place ( asthe Hebrew racheth oft ſignifies) of 7h 
ztaches, to wit,where therwo Curtains are joyned together by taches 
werſ. 6: 

eh And thou ſhalt put the mercy-ſeat upon this ark 
of the teſtimony, in the moſt holy place. 

25 Ard * thou jhalt ſet the table without the vail 
*Heb.9-2. nd the candleſtick over-againft the table, on the ſide 

of the tabernacle , roward the ſouth: and thou ſhalt put 
the table on the north-tide. 
36 And thou ſhalt make an hanging for the door of 
the tent + of biue, and purple, and ſcarlet, and fine 
_tewiied linen, wrought with needle-work. 

+(i:e ) Of the Holy place, where it was divided from rhe Courr 
of the people» 

37 Andchou ſhale make for the hanging five pillars of 
ſhictim-2y02d, and * over-lay them with £vld, and their 
hooks ſhall be of goid : and thuu halt calit five ſockets of 
braſs for them. 


CHAP; AAFIL 


Of the brazen altar, x =—— 8. Of the court of rabernacde, 9 —* 17. 
the length of it, 18. Of the lamps burning always, 20. 
FChap.38. - 
T, 


oo 
- 


Fe 
3 2 


*Chaps36. 
38. 


3 


ND thou ſhalt make * an altar of ſhittim-wood, 
five cubits long, and five cubits broad: the altar 
ſhall be four ſquare 4 : and the height thereof ihall be 


three cubits, 

a Not that for Incenſe, but another for Sacrifices. 

2 And thou thalt make the horns of it þ upon the 
four corners thereof: his horns ſhall be of the lame c : 

*5zeNum. and * thou ſhalt over-lay it with braſs &: 

16. 38. 6 Which were elevated above the body of the Altar, in form et- 
ther of Pyramids or Spires, or rather of Horns, as the word fignt- 
fies ; nor 1s there any neceſſity of departing $ 0m the proper f1gnt- 
fication. "Theſe were not only for orna:nent, but for uſe allo, et- 
ther to keep things put upon it f. om falling, or that Beaits to be 
offered might be buund to them. Sec Pſal. 118.27, c Ofthe fame 
piece with the Altar, forits uſe required ſtrength. 4 With plates 
of Braſs of competent thickneſs, both above the Wocd and under 
it, that the Fire might not take hold of the Wood. , 

3 And thou jlalt make his pans to receive his aſhes, 
4Or,b-wls and his ſhovels, and his Þ baſins e, and his felh-hooks 
Gr. Vial. f, and his fire-pansg: all the veſie!s thereof thou ſhait 
2 Chron. make of braſs. 

4. 8. e To receive the Blond of the Sacrifices, which they were to 
ſprinkle. f Wherewith they took fleſh our of the pot in which it 
was ſecthed, as 1 $2m. 2.14. But this ſeems nut proper here, be- 
cauſe the Fleſh was never boiled upon the Altar, bur in other places 
appointed for thatuſe. And the Hebrew word is general, and may 
ſignify either Tongs, or Fire-forks. g In which they carried hve 
Coals from this Altar to that of Incenſe, as occalion required. 

4 And thou ſhalt make for it a grace of net-work þof 
braſs, and upon the net 5 ſhale thou make four brazen 
rings & in the four corners thereof, t- 

h Which was competently ſtrong and thick, this being asit were 
the Hearth of the Altar upon which they laid both the Wood and 
the Sacrifices,and it was full of holes,through which the Blood and 
Aſhes-might fall down into the place appointed for them. 7 Or ra- 
ther at, or beſide, or under the net, for 1o the Rings wece placed, as 
their uſe ſhews, and the Hebrew Prepoſition al, is oft ſo uſed. & 
Which were either 1. Peculiar to the Grate, which by theſe was: 
carried apart from the Altar, having the perpetual Fire kept nit; 
for had it been carried with the Altar, the '/Cloth wherewith the 
Altar was covered, N»mb: 4.13. would have been endangered by the 
Fire, Or 2. Common to the Altar, to which theſe were fixed on 
the outſide, as on the iniide to the Grate, that by them the Grare 
might be both kept evenand upright,and alſo carried together with 
the Altar, and thzt with ſuch caution that the Fire included mighr 
not hurt the Covering-cluth, which was not difficult to do. : 

5 And thou $halt put it under the compaſs / of the 
altar beneath, that the net may be even to the. midit of 
the altar m, 

I ( i.e. ) Within the ſquare and hollow ſpace of the Altar. m Or, 
an# the net ſhall be at (the Hebrew ad, being here uſed for el, as 
Hoſ. 14. 2. Joel. 2. 12. Amos 4. 6, 8.) the midff of the Altar, And 
theſe words ſeem added to explain the word beneath, to ſhew thatas 
it was not to be at the rop, ſo neither at the botrom of the Altar, 
but in the midſt of ir. 

6 And thou shalt make ſtaves for the altar, ſtaves of 
Shittim- wood, andover-lay them with gold. 

7 And the ſtaves shall be put into the rings », and 
the ftaves shall be upon the two fides of the aitar to 
bear it. 

» Which ſeem to-be the ſame both to the Altar an the Grate,” 
though ſome alledge that place for the contrary. 

*Chap.25. 8 Hollow with boards s {balt thou make it : 


* asf if! 
49.nd26. was lhewed theein the mount, ſoshall they makez:. 


J9. | ; y Ma: 
+ Heb h o (7. e. ) Not one entire piece of Wood, but conſiſring of four 
ſhewed, * ſeveral ſides, hollow within, for caſineſs and conveniency of car- | 


riage In their Wilderneſs-ſtate. 
9 4 Andrhou thalt make the court of the tabernacle 
p for the ſourth-fide ſouthward : rhere (hall be hangings for 
the court 49 of fine vwined linen of an hundred cubits 
long, for one fide. 
p A Court encompaſiing the Tabernacle, Exod: 40. 33. in the 
midſt whereof the Altar of Sac-ifices was placed, upon which the 
Offerings were burnt in the open Air, which was moſt convenient. 


D U'3 Chap. XXVIL 

ro And the twenty pillars » thereof, ' and their 
ewenty ſockets s [bal] be of braſs: : the hooks of the pil-' 
lars, and their fillets / ſhall be of filver, | 
_ + On which the Hangings were faftned, by the Hooks here men- 
tioned. 5 Or, baſes, upon which the pill:r tood. £ Or hoops, which 


encompeſſed the Pillars at the top, being placed there, as ut ſeems, 
tor ornament only. 


11: Andlike-wiſe for the north-fide in length, there 
ſhall be hangings of an hundred cubirs long,and his twens 
ty pillars,and their twenty ſockets of braſs: the hooks 
of the pillars and their fillets of filver. 

12 1 And fer the breadth of the court on the weft- 
tide, fhel! be hangings of fifty cubirs 3 their pillars ten, 
and their ſockets ten. 

13 And the breadth ofthe court on the eaſt -fide caſt- 
ward, ſhall be fifty cubits. 

14 The hangings of one ſide of the gate ſhall be fifteen' 
Cubirs s #8. their pillars three, and their ſockets three. 

« Which with the fifteen cubits, werſe 15. and the twenty cubitrs, 
verſe 16. make up the fifry Cubits mentioned werſe 15. 

«5 And on the other lide ſhall be hangings fifteen cu. 
bits : their pillars three, andtheir ſockets three. 

16 4 And for the gate of the court ſþ41] be an hang- 
ing of twenty cubits ef blue, and purple, and {carler, 
and fine-twined linen, wrought with ncedle-works and 
cheir pillars ſhall be four, and their ſockers four. 

17 All the pillars round about the court ſhall be filleted. 
with ſiver * their hooks ſhall be of filiver x, and their 
{ockets of braſs. 

x All filver, not only covered with Silver, as ſome unluly infer * 
from Exod: 38. 17. 

16 QC Thelengthof the court ſhall be an hundred cu- 
bits,and tne breadth Þ fifry every where,and che height +Heb #{ry 
ons C0 of tine twined linen, and their fockets of by fifty. 

rafs- 

19 All the veſſels of the tabernacle in all the ſervice 
chereof, and all che pins thereof, and all the pins y of 
che court ſhall he of brafs: 


» Wherewith the Tabernacle and Curtains thereof were faſtned 4 
to the ground, as Tents uſually arewith wooden Pins. 

20 4 Ard thou ſhaiccomma::dthe children of Iſrael 
that they bring thee pure oil-olive beaten x for the 
!:zhr, to cabfe the lamp F to burn alway @-  Þ} Heb. #6 

z Beaten our of the Olives with a Peſtle, which is freer from dregs aſcend up. 
than that which is ſqueezed our with a Preſs. 2 ( 7:e: ) Ar all the ; 
times appointed ; duly, though not continually ; as the Lamb of 
fered oniy every morning and every evening is called a continual 
burnt-offermg, Exod: 29. 42. For that theſe were lighted only at the 
evening, may ſeem probable from the next verſe,and from Exod.27, 
21. and 30. 8, Lev. 24.3. I Sam. 3. 3+ 2 Chron. 13. 11. But becauſe 
Joſephus and Philo, who were eye-witnefles of the Temple-ſervice, 
and had no Temptation to lye in this matter, expreſly affirm, thar 
ſome lighrs did burn in the day-time, and it may ſeem indecent 
and improbable thar God ſhould dwell and the Prieſts miniſter in 
darkneſs, and there were no Windows to give light to the Taber- 
nacle by day; it may be granted that ſome few burnt in the day, and 
all in the night, and that the latrer is only mentioned in the places 
alledged, as being a more ſolemn time when all are lighred: 

241 Inthe tabernacle + of the congregation b * with- 


out the vail c, which is before the teſtimony 4, Aaron + Heb. of - 


. . s . meeting, 
and his {ns ſhall order it e fromevening to morning be- Sce Chap. 
fore the LORD: #t ſpall be a ſtatute for ever unto their 25.22.and* 
generations, ON the behalf of the children of Iſrael, 29:4* 4 
* þ So called, becauſe there the people uſed to meet not only one Chap.z 
with another, butwith God alſo, See Exod: 25. 22. Numb. 19. 4, 37* 
Others render it, in the tabernacle of witneſs, becauſe there God de- 
clared his mind, and will, and man's duty. c To wit, the ſecond 
vail, in the holy place. 4 Aſhort ſpeech for, before the Ark of the 
teſtimony, as it is elſewhere more largely called, compare Exod. 25. 'P 
i6. e To wit, the lamp, or the lights, taking care that there be a TE 
conſtant ſupply of them, and that they burn well. *{D 

CHAP. XXVIIL , To 


Aaron and his ſons ordained for the prieſts office, 1. His holy garment, 2, 5. 
The ephod, 6. Curious girdle, 8. The two onyx ſtones on which the names 
of the children of Iſrael were engraven, 9 -14. Of the breaft- 
plate wheron was the ſame, 15 22. with two golden rings, © 

23 29. The Urim andThummim, 31. The golaenplate which 

had on't Holineſs tothe Lord, 36. The coats of Aaron's ſons, their girdles, 

caps, and their linen drawers, 40. which they put on when they ſerved in 

the holy place, 43. 


N D take chou unto thee #' Aaron thy brother, « px.q, 5; 


«4 


' office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar, and 
 Ithamar, Aarons ſons. 


9 Whereby the Court was diſtineu;{hed and encloſeds 


and his fons with him, .from among the children x, 4. 
of iſrae), that he may miniſter unto me in the prieſts 


a C:uſe them ro come near unto thee, that thou maycft before 
them ani before the people declare the will of God herein, and ſo- 
I:mnly ſet them apart for his Office. 

2 And * thou ibalt make + holy garments & for 4a- 
ron thy brother, for glory and for beauty ec. : 

b Garments to be uſed only in holy Miniftrations. « (z:e, )ſuch + Gr ah 
as are glorious and beautiful ; paitly to mind the people of. rhe holy foole 
digniry and exceVency of rlieir Office and Employment ; and prin- Rev. 7. 9 


*Chap.3g. 


cipally to repreſent the glorious Robs wherew1ch Chrift 3+ both 
clothed himſelf, and cloti::th all his peop!e, who ae made Priefts 


[4 
unto God, 
Q 2 


3 4nd 


[2.'and 


* W1ſd. 
18. 24. 


Chap. XXVIIL 


; F Or, em- | 
{ broidered. pon it p, shallbe of the ſameq, according to the work 


TY” > p . "5 


d * thou halt ſpeak unto all that are wiſe-heart- 


| p R n . « oy ” 
19h " & Fu * whom have filled e with the ſpirit of wiſdom, 
[*Chap.31. char” they make Aarons garments to conſecrate himf, 


35- that he may miniſter unto me in the prieſts offices 


- e.) Skilful Artiſts. The Hebre ws make the Heart,not the 
Ee is of Wiſdom. See- Job g. 4. e Either 1.By my ordinary 
Providence andAſſiſtance,giving them both ability and - cog 
to learn the Arts; or rather 2. By extraordinary inſpiration, which 
was neceſſary for the Iſraelites, whoſe baſe and laborious drudgery 
took off their Mindsand Handsfromall ingenious Studies and Arts. 
f(4.e.) Tobean outward fign of my calling and conſecration of 
him to my holy ſervice. A Metonymical Expreſſion. 

4 And theſe are the garments which they shall make; 
a breaſt-plate, and an ephod g. and a robe h,andabroi- 
dered coat 5, a mitre &, and a girdle /: and chey shall 
make holy garments for Aaronthy brother, and his ſons, 
that he may miniſter unto mein che prieſts office. | 

£ This was a ſhort upper Garment, made without Sleeves, which 
was girt about the Body. And it was two-fold, the one made of 
fine linen,which was common not only to all the Prieſts,as 1 Sam. 2: 
18. and 22. 18. butto ſome others alſo upon ſolemn and ſacred oc- 
caſions, as 2 Sam: 6. 14. the other made of divers Stuffs and Colours, 
peculiar to the High Prieſt; the parts whereof were not ſewed, 
but tied together. h An upper Garment like a Surpliſs. #{ An un- 
der Coat curiouſly wrought with circular works like Eyes, as the 
word notes, and richly adorned with Gems and other things. k A 
kind of Bonnet or Cap for the covering of the Head, ſuppoſed to 
be ſomething like a Turk;ſb Turband for the form of it. / To encloſe 
and faſten all the other Garments, which were looſe in themſelves, 
that he might be more expeditious in his work. 


5 Andthey $hall take gold, and blue, and purple,and 


ſcarler, and fine linens 
6 And they hall make the ephod of gold w, of 
blue and of purple, of ſcarlet, and fine twined linen, 


with cunning work. ; : 
2 Beaten out into plates, and cut into wires. l 
7 Itshall havethe ewe shoulder-pieces » thereof joyn- 


ed at the two edges thereof ; and ſo it 5hall be joyned 


together * ; 

» Which were two parts of the Ephod going up from the Body 
of the Ephod, the one before, the other behind, which when the 
Prieſt had put over his Head, were tied together, and covered the 
Prieſt's Shoulders, and part of his Back and Breaſt. ES 

8 4nd the + curious girdle of the ephod o which s 


thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and ſcar- 
let, and fine twined linen. F 

o Which was for the cloſer faſtning and girding of it. p This 
is added to diſtinguiſh it from the other Girdle, verſe 4. which was 
to gird all the Garments, and was tied in a lower place. 9 Either 
7. Ofthe ſame piece; or rather 2, Of the ſame kind of materials 
and workmanſhip; as the following words explain it. 

9 And thou shalttake twoonyx ſtones, and grave on 
them the names of the children of Iſrael : 

Io Six of their names on one ſtone, and zheorber 

ſix r names of the reſt on the other ſtone, according to 
their birth + . 

r Levi ſeems tobe omitted here, as being ſufficiently repreſent- 
ed by the High Prieſt himſelf. ; , 

1: * With the work of an engraver inſtone, /ike the 
engravings of a fignet ſhalt thou engravethe two ſtones, 
with the names of the children of Iſrael : thou ſhalt 
make them to be ſet in ouches s of gold, 

s Hollow places, ſuch as are made in golden Rings to receive 
and hold the precious Stones which are pur in them. 

12 And thou ſhalt put the two ftones upon the ſhoul- 
ders of the Ephod r, for ſtones of memorial unto the 
children of Iſrael. And Aaron ſhall bear their names 
before the LORD #« upon his two ſhoulders for a me- 
morial x. 

z (7.e:) In the place where the two Shoulder-pieces were joyned 
rogether. « Into the Holy of Holies. An evident Type of Chriſt's 
entring into Heaven with the names, and in the ſtead of his people, 
the true J/rae!, upon his Shoulders, and preſenting them to his Fa- 
ther with acceptance. x Not ſo much to the High Prieſt, that he 
ſhould not forget to pray for them, as to God, that he, beholding 
their names there, according to his order, might graciouſly remem- 
ber them, and ſhew mercy unto them. Such a memorial to God 
was the Rainbow, Gen: 9; 13. Such things are ſpoken of God af- 
ter the mannerofmen. | 

13 And thou ſhalt makeouches y of gold : 

y Not for the Stones, verſe 12: which had other Ouches,wverſe x71: 
but for the Chains, werſe 14. 

14 And two chains of pure gold at the ends z : of 
wreathen work {balt thou make them, and faſten the 
wreathen chains to the ouches. 

z Or, with ends, (i: e:) not like Chains that are faſtned about 
ones Neck or Arm, which ſeem to have no end; but two diſtin& 

* Chaihs with two ſeveral ends, both hanging downward ; compare 
werſe 22. The Syriack render it double, others equal, or of equal 
length. 

i5 4 Andthou ſhalt make the breaſt-plate of judge- 
ments with cunning work,after the Work of the ephod 
thou ſbalt make it : of gold, of blue, and of purple, and 
of ſcarlet, and of fine twined linen ſbalt thou make 
It. 

a This was a ſquare and curiouſly-wrought piece -put over the 


{ 


E X 0 D UW S. 


Ephod upon one's Breaſt, called of judgment, becauſe from thence 
the 1ſraehtes were to expe& and receive their judgment, and the 
mind of God in all thoſe weighty matters of War or Peace, where- 
in they conſulted God for dire&tion. _ 
1:6 Four ſquare it ſhallbe, being doubled 5 : a ſpan 
ſpat be thelength thereof, and a ſpan ſal! be the breadth 
thereof, 

þ Forgreater ſtrength, that it might better ſupport and ſecure 
the precious Stones which were put into it, and that it might re- 
ceivethe Urim and Thummim, Lev: 8.8. 


four rows of tone c : the firſt row ſhall be a | ſardius, 
copaz, and a carbuncle : this ſhall be the firſt row. 


Stones, which the Jewiſh Doors themſelves are nor agreed in, fe- 
ing this uſe of them is now aboliſhed. It may ſuffice to know,that 
they were precious Stones ſeverally alloted to the names of the ſe- 
veral Tribes, according to God's good pleaſure, poſſibly with re- 
ſpe& to ſome diſpoſition or concerament of each Tribe, whichar 
this diftance we cannot learn. - 

18 And the ſecond row ſhall be an emeraud, a ſaphir, 
and a diamond. 

19 And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an 
amethyſt. OE 


20 And the fourth row,a beryl, and anonyx, anda 
jaſper : they (ball be fer in gold in their + incloſings. 


dren of Iſrael, twelve, according to their names, like 
the engravings of a ſignet: every one with his name 
(ball they be according tothe twelve tribes 9. 

d (i: e: ) According to the order of their birth, the firſt ſtone 
to theeldeſt, the ſecond to the next, &c. 

22 And thou thalt make upon the breaſt-plate chains 
at the ends e, of wreathen work of pure gold. 

eSome think theſeare the ſame with thoſe mentioned,v: 14. Bur 
it ſeems improbable, and without example, that God ſhould in this 
ſhort deſcription, and that within a few Verſes, give a new and ſe- 
cond command concerning the ſame thing.It may rather ſeem thar 
theſe are other Chains faſtened to the Breaſt-plate, as it follows, 
whereas thoſe Chains, wer. 14. ſeem to have been faſtned to the E- 
phod, to thoſe ouches made in it for that purpoſe, wirſe 13. And 
whereas theſe Chains alſo are faſfened in the {aid ouches, werſe 25: 
two ſeveral Chains may well enough be faſtened in divers parts 
of each of the ouches; and there ſeems to be this difference be- 
tween the Chains, thoſe Chains mentioned wer: 14. are fſaid to be 
faſtened _ at one end, even to the ouches of the Ephod, whence 
they might hang down looſely, whereas theſe are manifeſtly faſte- 
ned at both ends, verſe 24, 25. 

| 23 And thou ſhalt make upon the breaſt-plate two 
rings of gold ; and ſbalt put the two rings on the two 
ends of the breaſt-plate. 

24 And thou ſhalt put the two wreathen chains of 
gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breafſi- 
plate. | 

25 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chaivs 
thou ſhale faſten in the two ouches, and put them on 
the ſhoulder-pieces of the ephod beforeit #. 

f (#:e.) In the fore-part of the Ephod ; or before him, 5: 6: the 
High-prieſt, in hisfore-part, upon his breaſt. 

26 And thou ſhalt make two rings of gold, and thou 
ſhalt put them upon the rwo ends g of the breaſt-plare, 
in the border thereof, which & inthe ſide of the ephod 
inward 6, | R 

g To wit, upon the lower ends, for there were other rings put: 
upon the upper ends, ver. 23. 24, 25. h(z.e.) In the inner tide 
of the Ephod, under which theſe rings were hid ; for the Ephod 
was double, wer: 16. 

27 And two other rings i of gold thou ſhalt make,and 
Shalt put them on the two ſides of the ephod under-neath 
k, towards the forepare thereof /, over-againſt the other 
coupling thereof m,above the curious girdle ofthe ephod. 

; To anſwer the two Rings in the Breaſt-plate, that by all theſe 
the Breaſt-plate might be the better faſtened to the Ephod. In the 
lower part of the Ephod, or in that part of it which is under the 
loweſt part of the Breaſt-Plate. ! Towards the Breaſt. (i:e. ) O- 
ver-againſt the Ouches on the ſhoulder-pieces, where the upper 
part of the Breaſt-plate was faſtened to the Ephod. 

28 And they $hall bind the breaſt-plate by the rings 

thereof,unto therings of the ephod with a lace of blue, 
that i# may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, 
and tharthe breaſt-plate be not looſed from the ephod. 

29 And Aaron.ſball bear the namesof the children of 
Iſrael in the breaſt-plate of judgment upon his heart », 
when he goeth in unto the holy place o, for a memorial 
before the LORD continually. 

» Partly to admoniſh the High Prieſt of that 4 
ſhould have ro his people, & with what ardency ory fr pum = 
them, and re” rw to repreſent the tender compaſſions of Chriſt 
the great High-Prieſt towards his people, and how mindful he is of 
them,and of all their concerns,even when he js in the Holy of Ho- 
lies, that 1s, in Heaven, where heremembers them ftill, and unceC. 


ſantly intercedes for them. o (7; e: ) Into th : 
poſitive degree being pur for the iactntvs,. moſt Holy place; the 


39 And* thou ſhalt putin the breaft-plate of ; : 
ment, the Urim and the Thummim P, Plate,of judge 


« 


Chap. XXVIn. | 


17 And thou ſhalt # ſet inir ſettings of ſtones, even , 11,1, ;, | 
4 71 it filling; 
of ſtone. 


© Ttis needleſs ro trouble the Reader with the explication of theſe tOr,7uvie, | 


« 
- 


| 


| 


+ Heb: ft. | 
2: And the ſtones (ball be withthe names of the chil- 5737 | 


PURE Pet IRFRD. = 
Ly 


A 
F# 
& 


One, IE Nee 4 EL ith; 
- - 


| and they ſhall * Dent | 
be upon Aarons heart when he goeth in before he 


2 
Ezra 2:6} 
LORNN:!7 a 


fOr, 


b: fill | 


ll ings 


' 


rubie, | 


eb: fl | 


It; 


v 


Chap. XX VIIT. 
LORD: and Aaron ſhall bear the judgment . of the 
children of Iſrael q upon his hearr, before the LORD 


continually r, | 

> The words confeſſedly ſignify {7z/:t, or illuminotions and perfe- 
Hions, which may be underſtood either of two differing things,the 
onc noting the knowledge, the other the perfe&ion,to wit, of ver- 
rues and graces, Which were required inthe High-Prieſt,and which 
were in Chriſt in an eminent degree,and from him alone communi- 
cated ro his people ; or of one and the ſame thing, noting perfe& 
light or illumination,by a figure called Hendyadis,oftt uſed in Scri- 
pcure, as Det: 16: 18: Mat: 4: 16: compare with Job 10: 20: Joh: 3:5: 
44s 17: 25: compare with Gen: 2: 79. Which may ſeem probable, 
1. becauſe the great uſe of this Inſtrument was to give light and di- 
retion in dubious and difficult caſes, and nor to confer any other 
perfetion upon any perſon. 2.Becauſe ſometimes both theſe words 
and things arc expretled only by one of them, and that 1s by Urim, 
Mmb: 29: 21: 1 Sam: 28: 6: which ſignifies lights. And the name 
lems to be given from the effe&t, becauie hence the 1/raelires had 
clear lighr, and perfe& or certain direttion in dark and doubtful 
matters. But the great queſtion is, What this Urim and Thummim 
was, and in what manner God anſwered by it. Which God having 
o11 purpoſe concealed from us,and not ſet down the matter or form 
of it,as he hath done of all the other particulars,it may ſeem curio- 
ſity and preſumption, for men ſolicitouſly ro enquire,and poſitively 
to determine. Many conceive it was nothing elſe, but the twelve 
precious Stones, whereih the narhes of the 12 Tribes wereengraven, 
& that the anſwer of God was compoſed out of thoſe letters, which 
either ſhew more brightly,or thruſt themſelves further outward than 
the reſt did. Which ſeems a frivolous and ungrounded conjeQture, 
both becauſe all the letters-of the Alphabet were not there, and fo 
all anſwers covlid not be given by them ;and becauſe it was thutup 
within the duplicature ot the Breaſt-plate, and therefore could not 
be ſeen by the High-prieſt, and there is not a word to ſignity that 
he was to take it out thence, and look upon it,but rather the con- 
trary is evident». And that this Urim and Thummim are not the 
Gme thing with thoſe 12 ſtones, may be eaſily proved. r. Becauſe 
the ſtones were ſet and ingraven in the Breaſt-plate, wer: 17:21: this 
was only put into it, which is a word of quite different and more 
looſe and large ſignification,and therefore probably doth not deſign” 
the ſame thing. 2. It is not likely, that in ſuch a brief account of 
the ſacred Utenſils, the ſame Command would be repeated again, 
eſpecially in' more dark and general words than it was mentioned 
| before. And how could Moſes now put it in, when the Workmen 
| had faſtned it there before ? Or why ſhould he be required to put 
| it in the Breaſt-plate, when it was faſtened to it already,and could 
not without violence be taken from it ? 3. Becauſe the ſtones were 
put in by the Workmen, Exod: 39: 10: the Urim and Thummim by 
Moſes himſelf, Lev: 8: 8» Ir is objetted; that where the ſtones are 
mentioned, there is no mention of Urim and Thummim, as Exod: 
39: and that where the Urim and Thummim are mentioned, there 
15 no mention of the ſtones,as Lev: 8: 8: whichſhews they were one 
and the ſame thing. But that is not neceſſary, and there 1s an evi- 
dent reaſon of both thoſe omiſſions ; of the former, Exod:39: becauſe 
he mentions only thoſe things which were made by the Workmen, 
whereas the Urim and Thummim ſeems to have been made imme- 
diatly by God, or by Moſes with God's direCtion:Of thelatter, Lev 8: 
becauſe the ſtones are implied in the Breaſt-plate as a part of it,and 
being faſtened to it, whereas there he only mentions what was put 
in by Moſes himſelf. There are other conje&ures, as that it was the 
name Jehovah, or ſome viſible repreſentations, ec. But ſuch con- 
jeQtures are as eaſily denied as afhrmed. Ir is therefore more modeſt 
and reaſonable to be ſilent where God is ſilent, than to indulge our 
ſelves in boundleſs and groundleſs fancies. It may ſuffice us roknow 
that this was a _—_— piece of Divine Workmanſhip, which the 
High-prieſt was obliged to wear upon ſolemn occaſions, as one of 
the Conditions upon which God engaged to give him anſwers. 
Which anſwers God might give to him either by inward ſuggeſtion 
to his mind,or by a vocal expreſſion to his ear. But which of thoſe 
ways, or whether by any other way, it is needleſs now to ſearch, 
| and impoſſible certainly to diſcover. q A ſhort Speech. As the 
| teſtimony is oft put for the ark of the teſtimony, ſo is the judgment here 
for the breaſt-plate of judgment, 7: e: that Breaſt-plate which declared 
the judgment, or oracle, or mind of God to the Iſraelites in thoſe 
caſes which they brought to the Lord. r(7.e. ) Ar all times when 
he ſhall appear before the Lord in the holy place. 

31 And thouſhalt make the robe of the ephod s all 


of blue. 

s Not the Ephod it ſelf, for that was preſcribed before,ver:6:but 
a long and looſe Robe called the robe of the Ephod,becauſe it was worn 
next under it, and was girded about the High-prieſt's Body with 
' the curious girdle of the Ephod. : RT 

32 And there ſhall be an hole in the top of it in the 
midſt thereof ; it ſhall havea binding of woven work 
round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an 
habergeon, that it be not rent. : 

33. And beneath upon the F hem of it thou ſhalt make 


: 
. 
- 


VU Ren og TO TIRE 


 TJOrghkires, 
' 


4 
2 * 


round about the hem thereof, and bells « of gold be- 


tween them round abour. 

* The figures of Pomegranates, but flat and embroidered. « By 
the ſound whereof the People might be admoniſhed of the work 
which the Prieſt was employed in,and thereby be provoked to join 
their affeQions and devotions with his. Theſe Pomegranates and 
Bells might note either 1. the qualifications of the Prieſt, who was 
both to declare or give forth the ſound of pure and wholeſomeDo- 
Arine,and to adorn his o&rine with the fragrancy and fruitfulneſs 
of a good converſation. Or, 2. The glorious Atchievements of 
Chriſt, who cauſell the ſound of his Do&rine to be heard by all 
men, and offered up himſelf as # ſacrifice ro God for a ſweet-ſmelling 
Jſawvour, Eph: 5: 2. 


24 A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell 


_ a pomegranate,- upon the hem of the robe round 
about, | 


/ 


BXODUS 


pomegranates #t of blue, and efpurple; and of ſcarlet, | 


Chap. XXIX | 
35 * Andit (ball be upon Aaron to miniſter,and his » p..j.t | 
ſound ſhall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy 45.9. | 


place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, thar 
he die notx. w 
# For his diſobedience or careleſn:ſs. For though the matter 
might ſeem ſmall in it ſelf, yet it was an errourin God's Worſhip, 
wherein God is more fevere than in other things;and it was aner- 
rour of the High-prieſt, who had more knowledge of God's mind 
herein, and wasobliged to more care and diligence, not only for 
himſe}f,bur for the influences of his bad example upon the People. 
36 Andthou $halt make a plate x of pure gold, and 
grave upon it, /ke the engravings of a fhgner, HOLI- 
NESS TO THE LORD y. | 
x Like an half Coronet, reaching, as the Jews ſay, from- ear to 
ear, y To mind the Prieſt of his ipecial conſecration ro God, and 
of that ſingular holineſs which was required of him,as at all time 
{o eſpecially in his approaches to God. Ir might alſo repreſent Chrifth 


» 


who is called the holy one of God,and who is a crowned Prieſt,or both 
King and Prieſt» | | | 

37 And thou ſhalt put ic on a blue lace z, that. ic 
may be upon the mitre, upon the forefrontof the mitre 
it ſhall be, | | 

z The words may be rendered, thou ſbalt put it on, or, bind it, as 
the vulgar renders it, with a blue lace, to wit, upon the Mitre, as iC 
follows. | 

38 And it ſhall be upon Aarons forchead, that Aaron 
may bear the iniquity of the holy things « which the 
children of Iſrael ſhall hallow in all their holy gifts 6: 
and it ſhall be always c upon his forehead, that they 
may be accepted before the LORD. Foy 

a Either, 1. that he, being conſecrated to God for this end,that 
he ſhould take care as far as he could that toth perſons and things 
preſented to God ſhould be holy or agreeable to the mind of God, 
might bear the puniſhment for any miſcarriage committed therein, 
which he could have prevented. Or rather, 2. that he being an 
' holy perſon,and appointed by God to make atypical reconciliation 
for the ſins of the Yeople, and to intercede for them, might rake 
away, orobtain from God the pardon of their iniquity, wherewith 
even their holy things are defiled,if God ſhould ſeverely mark what is 
amiſs in them. Which ſenſe the laſt words of the Verſe favour. And 
the High-Prieſt was herein eminently a Type of Chriſt, who pro= 
perly and-truly bare and took away the iniquity of his Peoples holy 
things, by his ſacrificeand interceſſion. 6 ( 7: e: ) Shall ſeparate or 
conſecrate unto God in all their offerings or gifts. If there be any 
thing amiſs either in the thing offered, or in the manner of offer- 
ing, God upon the Prieſt's interceſhon will pardon it. c( i: e:) At 
all times of his ſolemn appearance before God. | 

239 And thou ſhalt embroider the coat d of fine linen, 
and thou ſhalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou 


ſhalt make the girdle of needle work. 
d4 This was a looſe and large Garment made with ſleeves, worn 
under the Ephod, reaching down to the feet, which was girt with 
a girdle, Lev: $. 7. | 
40 And for Aarons ſons thou ſhalt make coats e, and 
thou ſhalr make for themgirdles, and bonnets ſhalt thou 
make for them, for glory and for beauty. 
e Not of Wooilen, Ezek: 44: 17: but of linen, Exed:39:247. Theſe 
were Ephods, 1 Sam: 22: 18. Is s 
41 And thou $halt put them upon Aaron thy bro- 
ther, and his ſons with him : and * shalt anoint them, * Chap. 
and + conſecrate them f, and ſanctify them, that they 29: 7+ and 
may miniſter unto me in the prieſts office. — 
f Heb. fill their hand, i: e: preſent them to God with part of the ;h4;r hand. © 
Sacrifice in their hands,as we find, Exod:29:24: by that rite putting 
them into their office. | 2 
42 And thou $shalt make them linen breeches to co- 
ver ftheir nakednefs, from the loins even untathe thighs + Heb.feſb ; 
g they $hall F reach, | | dro: 
g Including both. Compare Exod: 20; 26. + Heb, be 
43 And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his "I 
ſons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the 
congregation, or when they come near unto the altar, 
to miniſter in the holy place, that they bear not iniqui- / 
ty, and die» It ſhall be a ſtatute for ever, unto him,and 
his ſeed after him. | 
CHAP. XXIX. 
The manner of conſecrating Prieſts; 1--4. Of conſecrating Aaron and his 
ſons, 5, 6, 7. The Prieſts wveſture, 9. How the bullock of the fin-offei- 
ing was to be offered, 10--14. - One ram for a burnt-offering, and the 
manner of offering, 15--18. A ram for hallowing the Priefts, 19--31. 
Aaron and his ſons eat of the ram, wherewith they were conſecrated, 32, 
33- Fhe altar ſanfified for ſeven days, 36, 37. Two lambs offered 
daily, 38. The time, 39. The manner of offering, 40--43: God's 
promiſe to hallow the tabernacle, Aaron, ind his ſons; 44. and todwell 


with them, 45, 46. 
A N D this #s the thing that thou halt do unto them 
to hallow them, to miniſter unto me in the 

prieſts office. * Take one young bullock, and ewo rams * Lev.8. 
without blemish @ ; Es 

a See Exod: 12: 5: Mal: 1: 13, 14: *[e 

2 And * unleavened 5 bread, and cakes unleavened ,, 
tempered with oyl, and wafers unleavened anointed 
with oil : of wheaten flower ſhalt thou make them. 

b To ſhew that the Prieſts ſhould be, and that Chriſt really was, 


free from all malice and hypocriſy, both which are compared to 
leaven, Luke 12: 1: 1 Cor:5: 8: and that all the fervices offered £0 


—_— 


y. 6, 


God by the Prieſts were to be pure and unmixed. 
; 3 Ard 


IC!:zp, XXIX. 
| 3 And thou ſhalt put them into one basket, and 
bring chem «c in thebasket with the bullock and the two 


Tamsse 
c To the door of the Tabernacle, as it follows verſe 4. 


And 4aron and his ſons thou ſhalt bring unto the 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and ſhalt 
waſh them with water «. : 

4 Taken out of that laver,EZxod: 30: 18. This ſignified the uni- 
verſal pollution of all men,and the abſolute need they have of waſh- 
ing,eſpecially when they are to draw nigh to God. And this out- 
ward waſhing was only typical of their ſpiritual waſhing by the 
Bloed and Spirit of Chriſt in order to their acceptance with God. 

5 And thou ſhalt take the garments, and put upon 
Aaron the coar, and the robe of the ephod, and the 
ephod, and the breaſt- plate, and gird him with * the 
curious girdle of the ephod e. 

e Not about the Loins, but about the Paps, or Breaſt, as Chriſt 
and his Miniſters are repreſented, Rev: 1: 13. The linen Breeches 
are here omitted, becauſe they were put on privatly before they 
came to the door of the Tabernacle, where the other things were 
put on. l | : 

6 And thou ſbalt put the mitre upon his head, and 
put the holy crown f upon the mitre. 

# (#: e: ) The plate of gold, chap: 28: 36. as appears by compa- 
ring Lev: 8:9. : 

7 Then ſhalt thon take the anointing * oy1,and pour 
;3t upon his head, and anoint him g. 

£g Which ſignified the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghoſt where- 
with Chriſt was, and the Prieſts cughr to be repleniihed. See 1/a: 
G1: 1: Joh: 2: 27. But here ariſeth a difhculty ; for this anointing 
is ſometimes ſpoken of,a: peculiar to the High-Pricſt, as Lev:21:10: 
ſometimes as common to all the Prieſts, Exod: 30:30: and 40:14.15: 
which may be thus reconciled, The Oil was ſprinkled upon all the 
Prieſts,and their right Ears, Thumbs,and Toes, and their Garments, 
werſe 20, 21: Lev: $: 3o: but it was poured out upon the Head on- 
ly of the High-Prieſt, Pſal: 133: 2:who herein was a type of Chriſt, 
who was anointed above bis fellows, Pſal: 45: 7: Heb: 1: 9. 

8 And thou ſhalt bring his ſons, and put coats upon 
them : 

9 And thou ſbalt gird them with girdles ( Aaron and 
his ſons ) and ÞF put the bonnets on them: and the 
prieſts office (ball be theirs, for a perpetual fiatuce 5 : 
and thou lbalt + * conſecrate Aaron and his ſons. 

þ So long as the Jewiſh Pedagogy and Policy laſts. 

10 And thou ſhalt cauſe a bullock ro be brought be- 
fore the tabernacle ofthe congregation : and * Aaron 
and his ſons ſhall put their hands upon the head of the 
bullock 3. 


; To ſignifie that they offered it for themſelves and for their own 
ſins, which the offerer performing this Rite was to confeis, Lev: 16: 
21: that they acknowledged themfclve: ro deſerve that death which 
was in{i&ed upon this innocent Creature for their ſakes, and to 
reſtihe their Faith in the future Sacrifice of Chrift,upon hom their 
ſins were to be laid, and by whoſe Blood they were expiared, and 
thar they humbly begged God's meicy in pardoning their fins,and 
accepting them to and in their holy Office. 
it And thou & (halt kill the bullock before the 
LORD, by the door of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation. ; 
k Moſes, who though no Prieſt, yet for this time and occaſion was 
called by God to this work. 
12 And thou ſhalt take ofthe blood of the bullock,and 
* Chap. -put zx upon * the horns of the altar / with thy finger, anc 
27.2. and our ali the blood belidethe bottom of the altar. 
ws I Not of Incegſe, as ſome would have it. bur of the burnt-offer- 
ings, as may appear, 1. Becauſe it was that Altar at the bottom 
whereof the Blood was to be poured, as it is here expreiſed ; but 
that was not done at the Altar of Incenſe, as is evident and con- 
feſſed. Compare Lev. 16.18, &c. 2. It was that Altar upon which 
the parts of the Sacrifices were burnt, as it here. follows verſe 13. 
for there is no diſtin&ion here betscen the two Altars. It is true, 
in the following ſin-offerings of the Prieſts the Blood was put upon 
the Horns of the Altar of Incenſe, Lev. 4. 7. But ir muſt be conſi- 
dered, 1. That the Blood was nor poured out at the bottom of that 
Altar. 2.Becauſe Aaron and his Sons were nor yet compleat Prieſts, 
bur privat perſons, and therefore did this at the ſame Altar which 
the people uſed in their ſin-offerings, Lev. 4. 25, 30. 


13 Andthou halt take all the fat that covereth che 
++ ſeemeth inwards, 'and f the caul zhat 55 above the liver, and the 
by anatomy, Ewo kidneys, and the fat chat is upon them m, and burn 


and the He= chew upon the altar. ; 
brew Do- m The parts which in all Sacrifices were burned unto God, Lev. 
Fors, ro be .. - and 4. 19. to ſignify cither the mortification of their inward 
the miariff. 3nd mot beloved luſts,or the dedication of the beſt of all Sacrifices, 

. and of their inward and beſt parts to God and his ſervice. 


14 But the fleſh of the bullock, and his skin, and his 
dung, ſhalt thou burn with fire without the camp : it ss 
a ſin-offering ». 

= To wit, for the High-Prieſt, as is plain from the whole con- 
text, and therefore ought to be burnt by that Law, Lev. 4. There 
was indeed a Law, thac that ſin-offering, whoſe Blood was not car- 
ried into the Tabernacle, which was the caſe here, ſhould not be 
burat but caten, Lev. 6. 3o. and 10. 18. But that concerned the 
People, not the Prieſts,, who did not ear, but burn their own fin- 
offerings, Lev, 4. 3, I2: : 

15 Thou (halt alſo take one ram, and Aaron and his 


28. 41. 
*Lev. 1.4. 


E XO D 


DO S. 
16 4 And thou ſhalt ſlay theram, and thou ſhalt take 
his blood, and ſprinkle 5t round about up9n the altar o. 
o Which ſignifies, thatnot only our Perſons,but our very Altars 
and Sacrifices, and beſt Services, need the ſprinkling of Chriit's 
Blood upon them to render them acceptable to God. 

17 And thou ſhalt cut the ram in pieces, nd waſh 
the inwards of him, and his legs, and put tb: unto his 
pieces, and f unto his head. 

18 And thou ſhalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: 
it is a burnt-offering unto the LORD : it is a {weer ſa- 
your p, an offering made by fire unto the LORD. 

p Heb. 4 ſavour of reſt, wherewith God will be well pleaſed, and 
for which, as repreſenting Chriſt who oftered up himſelf, .he will 
graciouſly accept of the offerings of the Prieſts for themſelves, and 
for the People. 

I9 9 And thou ſhalt take the other ram q : and 
Aaron and his ſons ſball put their hands upon the head 
of the ram. 


q For a peace-offering. So here were all the three ſorts of Sacri- 
fices; which were afterwards to be offered by them for the People. 
20 Then ſhale thou kill the ram,and take of his blood, 
and put it upon the tip of the right ear » of Aaron, and 
upon the tip of the rightear of his ſons, and upon the 
thumb of their right hand , and upon the great toe of 
their right foot, and ſprinkle the blood upon the altar 
round about. 

7 Theſe parts are conſecrated in the name and ſtead of all the 
reſt ; the ear, as the Inſtrument of hearing and receiving the mind 
and will of God in all their ſacred adminiſtrations, and in their 
whole converſation ; the hand and foot, as the inſtruments ofaQtion 
and execution of that which they hear and underirand to be the 
mind of God : and the 7izht parts are choſen, rather than the letr, 
as being uſually morc vigorous and expeditious. And i] theſe parts 
are ſprinkled with thisBlood, to ſhew the abſolute neceflity of 
Chriſt's Blood to qualifie them for an acceptable and ſucceſsſul diſ- 
charge of their Oftce. 


21 Ard'thou ſhalt take of the blood that is upon the 
altar, and of * the anointing oyl, and ſprinkle ir upon * Chap, 
Aaron, and upon his garments,. and upon his ſons, and ?” ** 
upon the garments of his ſons wich him : and * he ſhall 
be hallowed, and his garments, and his fons, and his 
{ons garments with him, 

22 Aiſo thou ſhalt cake of the ram the fat, and the 
rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the 
caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that 
is upon them, ard the right ſhoulder: for-it is a ram 
of conlecration s; | 

5s Of the Prieſts in their Office, Therefore the right Shoulder 
was burnt, which in other Sacrifices was given to the Prieſt. 

23 And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled 
bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unlea- 
vencd bread, that is before the LORD. 

24 And thou jnalt put all in the hands of Aaron,and 
'in the hands of his ſons, and ſhalt F wave them # for a 
wave-offcring before the LORD. 

7 Eirher toſs them from one hand to another, as giving all from 
themſeives to God ; or ſhake them to and fro, towards the ſeveral 
parts of the World, to note God's dominion over all places and. 
p<ople, and the extent of that true and great Sacrifice, repreſented 
;atheſe I ypes to all. 

25 4:d thou ſhalt receive them of their hands, and 
burn :hem upon the altar fer a burnt- offering, for 2 
iweet favour before the LORD : it is an offering made 
by fire unto the LORD. 

26 And thouibalt rake * the breaſt of the ram of 4a- * Ley 8, 


rons confecrations, and wave it for a wave-offering be- 29. 
fore the LORD, and it ſhall be thy part «. 


# To wit, the Breaſt alone, whereas both Shoulder and Breaſt 
were given to Aaron afterwards ; the reaſon whereof might be, ei- 
ther vecauſe Moſes was not a proper and compleat Prieſt, as Aaron 
afterward was, but only appointed by God for this time, to do that 
work ; or becauſe now there were in amanner two Prieſts, the one 
conſecrating, to wit, Moſes; the other conſecrated, to wit, Aaron ; 
therefore theſe parts were divided, the Breaſt given to the former 
ro be eaten, the Shoulder offered unto God for the letter, werſe ->2: 
he being not yet a_perfe& Prieſt, and therefore not in a capacity 
of cating 1t. 


f Or, upon, 


2 5 
— ts 


to and fn, 


. 


Chap. XXIX. li 


T Heb. g, 


T Or, Fe "Cha 


-4O. I: 
7Or,z 
ſoever 
Lev. 6 
® Cha 


JO, 24 


+ * Nun 
28 Z. 
* Dan 
IT, 


: Tt Heb. 


tween t] 
Iwo eye 


27 And thou ſbalt ſanQifie * the breaſt of the. wave- + x0 1 
offering, and the ſhoulder of the heave-offering, which 34.Num 
is waved, and which is heaved up x of the ram of the 18. 18. 
conſecration, eves of that which 5s for Aaron, 
tbat which is for his ſons y. 

x This was done by throwing the parts upward, and catchins 
them again. » The words may be rendred thus, of which, Breaſt 
and ſhoulder ofthe Ram, ſhall be Aaron's portion, and of which ſhall 
be the portion of his ſons ; ſo there is only an Ellipſis of the Verb Sub- 


ſigns a thing belonging to the perſon to whom that is prefixed as it 


for ever, from the children of Iſrael: for it is anheave- 
offering z : and ir ſhall be an heave-offering from the 
children of Iſrael, of the ſacrifice of their peace-offer- | 
ings. even their heave-offering unto the LORD, 


Cons ſhall put their hands upon the head of the ram, 


& Under which is comprehended alſo the waye-offering; as plain- 


and of Tr itt 


ſtantive, which is moſt common. and the Hebrew prefix Lamed de. | 


is in other like caſes, as Gen: 40: 8: Dent: 1: 17: Pſal: 47: g. | 
-28 And itſhall be Aarons and his ſons by a ſtatute | 


Inge, 


Iy 


| hs Chop. FRIX. 
' Ty appears both from the context, and from the parity of reaſon, 
eſe offerings being of the ime nature, and deſigned for the ſame 


_—_— And the holy garments of Aaron ſhall be his 


ſons a after him, to be anointed therein, and to be 


conſecrated bin them, | 
a( i. e. ) His eldeſt Sons ſucceſſively. b By ſome other Prieft, 


there being no other higher perſon who could do it, and therefore 
the neceſity of it made it warrantable, : 

& And 7 * that fon thatis prielt in his read, ſhall pur 
them on ſeven days c when he cometh into the taberna- 


cle of the congregation, to miniſter in the holy place 4. 
c For ſo long the ſolemnity of the Conſecration laſted, werſe 35. 

4 Both that ſtuiQly ſo called, and in the moſt Holy Place ; for as 

none could go into the moſt Holy Place except the High Prieſt,ſo 

there was ſome things to be done in the Holy Place, which none 

but he could do. See Levit. 4. 7, 8. 

| 21 4 And thou ſhait take the ram of the conſecra*® 


tion, and ſeethe his fleſh inthe hoyy place e. 

e In this Court-yard at the Door of the Tabernacle,where it was 
both boiled and eaten, as appears frm this and the next verſe, and 
from Levit: $:31., And part of this was eaten by the perſon, or 
perſons that brought the oftering, though th.y were of the people, 
who were aot admitred into any other tjoly Place bur this. 

22 And Aaron ard his fons ſball eat the itelh of the 


*Lev.8. ram, and the * bread that is in the basket, by the door 
of the tabernacle of che congregation. 

23 And they hail eat thee chings f wherewith the 
atonement was made to confecrate, and tO lanctine 
them : but a ſtravger g ſhall not eat zheref, becaute they 
are holy. > ; 

f (#5. e. ) The remainders of the Oblations mentioned were 32. 
g ( i.e. ) One who iz not ot the Prieftly Race, whereas in other 
peace-offerings the otferer did cat a pait. 

24 An. if ought of the tieth of the confecrations, or 
of the bread remeoin unto the morning, then thou thalr 
burn the remainder with + fire : it ihall not be eaten, 
becaule it zs holy. | | 

h According to the Law of all peace-offerings,except thoſe which 
were vows or voluntary offerings, Levit: 7; 16, 17. which theſe 
were not, compare Exoa: 12: 10. ; 

25 And thus ſbalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his 
ſons, according to all things which I have commanded 
thee : ſeven days ſhalt thou conſecrate them, 

36 And thou ſhalt offer every day a builock for a ſin- 
offering for atonementi : and thou tha't cleanſe the altar, 
when thou haft made an atonement for it, and thou 
ſhale anoint it, to ſanctifie it, | 

; As well for the Prieſts, as for the Altar, both which as they 
were or might be polluted, ſo they needed the ſprinkling of this 
Blo -d to ſan&ifie them, ro ſhew that all perſons and chirds were 
fitte | for God's ſervice, and accepted by him only for and through 
the Blood of Chriſt. 

27 Seven days thou fhalt make an atonement for 
the altar, and ſanctifie itz *and it ſhail be an altar 
molt holy k : { * whatſoever toucheth the altar ſhall be 


holy /. 
i As appears from the following\reaſon, becauſe it wasnot on'y 
Holy in it ſelf, but by its rouch,communicated a legal Holinels 
"to other things. ! This may be underitood either 1. Of pe- ſons, 
as a caution that non? thould touch the Altar but holy and conſecra- 
ted perſons. Or rather 2. Of things, yet nor of all things, for 
polluted things were not made holy by the rouch of holy things, 
which is affirmed Hagga7 2:12: but of things belonging to the A'tar 
of offerings which by God's appointment were to ve offered, which 
were ſanC&ified by being laid upon this Altar, and therefore the 
Altar was greater and more holy than the gift, as our bleſſed Savi- 
our notes, Matth: 23: 19. 
, 28 Qq Now this zs that which thou ſhalt offer » upon 
+ * Num, * k t 
#3 - altar, * two lambs of che firſt year * day by day 


* Dan.12. Continually », 

It. m This is the chief end and uſe of this Altar, though it ſerved 
alſo for other Sacrifices. » To ſhew partly that men dodaily con- 
tra new defilement, and daily need new pardons; and partly taat 
God is not only to be worſhipped upon the Sabbath-days,and other 
ſet and ſolemn times, Hut every day. : : 

39 The one lamb ſhalt tho offer in the morning o, 


t Heb. be- and the other lamb thon ſhalt offer Þ at even. 

tween the o Which two ſeaſons were ſele&ted, as moſt commodious, that 

two even= men might both beginand end their worldly Attionsand Buſineſſes 

Ings, with God, and might ſee their need of God's affiſtance and bleſſing 
in all their conceruas, and the juſtneſs of giving him the praiſe and 
glory of all. 


40 And with the one lamb a tenth-deal p of flour, 
| mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil, 
and the fourth part of a hin q of wine, for a drink- 
offering. 

p The tenth part of an Ephah, as is evident from Nums: 28: 5: 
; which isan Omer, Exod: 16: 36. q An Hin was a meaſure for 1i- 
quid things, as the Ephah was for dry things, contzining ſix Pints 
of our meaſure. 


41 And the other lamb thou ſhalt offer at even, and 
ſhalt do thereto according to the meat-offering of the 
| morning, and accordin 
for a ſweet ſavour, an 


LORD. E 
| , 42 This ſoall be a continual burnt-offering throughout 


on, 

+ Heb. ve 

| of bis jons. 
* NumdD. 


20, 28. 


31. 
Matth. 
12. 4. 


ap, 


2 5, 


* Chap. 

- 40. 10. 
TJOr,what- 

| ſoever, 

Lev.6. 18. 

® Chap. 

30, 29. 


r, ſbak 
nd fn, 


ev. 8, 


i 
> 


oltering- made by fire unto the 


ae the: drink-offering thereof | 


EXODUS. 


'| 4 of gold rourd about. 


-— th 


Chap. 


7 of the f Heb. 
where 7 I will meet meeting. 


your generations, et the door of the tabernacle 
congregation before the LORD, 
you, to ſpeak there unto you, CRT 

r Either 1. At which Door, for there the I ord food and talked 
with Moſes, Exod: 33: 9, 10. Orrather 2. In which Tabernacle, to 
wit, in the innermoſt part of it,becauſe that was the principal place 
where God did ordinarily refide and meet with his people, Exod: 30: 
6: Levit: 16: 2: whereas God met bur once at the Door of the Ta- 
bernacle, and that with Moſes only, not with the people,with whom 
he is ſaid ro meer int this place, werſe 43. Add to this, - that the 
place whave GoJ meets themis the ſame place which is ſanfiified 
by his Glery, and that was the Tabernacle, werſe 43., as it is cx- 
preſſed in our Tranflation,and ſutfciently implied in the Hebrew, 
by a common Ellipſis of the Pronoun #, 7: e: rhat place where I 
meet with you, to wit, the Tabernacle, jhall be, &c. 

43 4nd there I will meet with che children of Iſrael : 
and T the tabernacle shall be ſandified by my glory s. 

s (7: e: } By my glorious preſence and appearance, of which ſee 
Exod. 40. 34, 35. Levit, 9. 24. ; 

44 Aud 1 will lintifie the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, and the altar: I will ſanctifie alſo both Aaron 
and his ſons to miniſter unto me in the prieſts office. 

45 © And *I will dwell : amongſt the children of 
Ifrael, and will be their God, 

; By my ſpecial grace, and favour, and bleſſing ; for by his ef- 
ſence he hills all places, 

465 And they shall know that TI aw the LORD their 
Go4 that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, 


m I may dwell among them : I am the LORD their 
od. 
CHAP.-/XXXY. 


He commands to make an Altar for Incenſe, aud of what, x. The length 
and breadth of it, The form of it, 3---6. Whereon the Prieſt was to 
kindle Incenſe every morning, berng commanded, 7, All the children 0 
Iſrael to bring half a jhekel for their ſouls, 11---=15, A Iaver of braſs, 
17, 18. Wherein Aaron and his ſons waſh thcir feet, 19---21. The 
making the oil of holy ointnient, 22---=25, Its uſe, 26-<=28, None might 
make the like, 32, 33. for himſelf, 38. 
N D chou thalt make * an altar to burn incenſe * Chap. 
upon 2: of Shittim-wood s$halt thou make it. 37. 25. 
s Incenſe ſignifies the prayers of God's People, Pſal: 141: 2: Revel: - 
8: 3: which are not acceptable to God, except they be offered upon 
th- true Altar,Chriſt. This Incenſe alſo was uſeful ro co:re& the bad 
ſmell of the Sacrifices, which were offered on another Altar,not far 
f.omir. Yea, ſome ſacrifices were offered upon this, Altar, as ap- 
pears from werſe 10: Levit: 4: 79. But here only the principal and 
conſtant uſe of it is noted. | 
2 A cubir ſhall be the length thereof, and a cubic the 
breadth thereof ( four-ſquare ſball it be ) and two cubits 


{1411 be the height thereof ; the horns thereof b ſhall. be 
of the ſame. WE | 
b See Exod 27. 2. Thoughtheſe horns, as they were for another 


uſe,ſo they ſeem to be here of another form,and for ornament more 
than fo: ſervice. 


3 And thou ſhalt overlay it with pure gold, the F 
top thereof c, and the + ſides thereof round about, and +Heb.reof 
the horns thereof : and thou ſhalt. make untoit a crown {Heb,walh 


fOr, fat 


* Chaps | 
2.4... 
Lev. 26. _. 


12. 2 Cors 
6. 16, 


* 


c This was made hollow like a Grate, that the Aſhes might fall 
thorough it. d A border which encompaſſed the Altar, that the 
things laii on it might not fall off 

4 And two goiden rings ſhalt thou make to it, un- 
der the crown of it, by the two + corners thereof, upon 
the two ſides of it thait thou make thers : and they ſhall 
be for places for the ſtaves to bear it withal, 

5 And thou ſhalt make the ſtaves of ſhittim<wood, 
and overlay them with gold. 

6 And thou ſhalt put it before the vail e that ;-by the 
ark of the teſtimony, before the mercy-ſeat that is over 
the teſtimony, where I will meet with thee. 


e Before the ſecond Vail, in the holy place;and near to the Holy 
of holies, and conſequently to the Ark and Mercy-ſeat. 


t Hebribs; - 


f Heb. id 


7 And Aaron (hall burn thereon + fweer incenfe 
every morning : when * he dreſſeth the lampsg he ſhall 77%, 7 
burn incenſe upon it. * Chap: 


f Aaron was to do this for the firſt time,but afterwards any Prieſt 27. 20. 
might do it, as appears from Luke r. 9. This nor being donein the 
Holy of Holies,which was the High-Prieft's peculiar. g( 5. e.) Clean-. © 
ſed them, and prepared them for the receiving of the new light. , Or, fas © 

8 And when Aaron + Flighteth the lamps Þ at even, ,,,y 
b he ſhall burn incenſe upen it, a perpetual incenſe be- + Heb,” 
fore the LORD throughout your generations. canſeth 16 * _ | 

hb The time whenall th: Lamps were to be lighted, 1 Sam: 3: 3. aſcend. 
See Exod: 27: 20, 2Ts + Hebs be« 

9 Ye ſhali offer no ſtrange incenſe 5 thereon, nor — 
burnt-facrifice, nor meat- offering, neither ſhall ye pour Cr LY IN 
drink-offering thereon, 

i ( 7: e: ) Ofany other ſort than what I ſhall here appoint, werſe 
34» C. 

10 And* Aaron ſhalt make an atonement upon the 
horns of it once int a year & with the blood of the fin- 
offering of atonements /; once in the year bal! he 
make atonefnent upon it throughout your generations 2 
it is moſt holy unto the LORD. | wy 

k On the day ofexpiation, Lev: 16: 19: Numb: 29: 7. 1 To note, 
that the Prayers of che Saints are - mtg to God no Rn 
2 4 "u 


hs Lev. 16; 
14. and 
23. 27: 


hap. 


EIN 


pom. 7. mana ranſom for his ſoul » unto the LORD when 
L 5. an 
l's » 2o 

| Heb. 
bem that 
re 70 be 


tbred. 


tee Num. God's mercy to continue their lives to them. » To wit, upon any 
I, FO, 


Mat. 17 


'*PRal. 26. and their feet thereat. 
6. Ifa. 52. 
11. Heb. handle holy things, or to come into the holy place,and their\need 


IO. 22. 


þ ap. XXX. | 


- fering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for 


bur through the Blood of Chriſt, who was offered for theexpiation | 
of our ſins. 


ir And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
12 * When thou takeft the ſum of the children of 11- 
rael after + their number, then ſhall they give every 


thou numbreſt them », that there be no plague amongſt 


them when thou numbreſit them. : 

» A certain price for the redemption of their lives; whereby 
they acknowledged the rightand power which God had over their 
livzs, and that they had forfeited them by their ſins,and thatit was 


juſt occaſion, either now in the Wilderneſs,or afterwards : It may 
ſeem that this payment was neither to be made at this rime only,as 
ſome would have it ; nor yet every year, as Je/ephus and others at- 
firm, becauſe it is not ſaid to be a perperual farureas other things of 
conſtant obſervance are,but upon any eminent occaſions, when the 
ſervice of the Tabernacle ( which 1s the end and uſe of this collection ) 
or Temple required it, as may be gathered from 2 Kings 12.4. com- 
pared with 2 Chron. 24. 6.Compare Neh. 10.32. Matth. 17. 24. And 
as now it was imployed in the building of the Tabernacle, fo after- 
wards it might be laid out upon'the repairs or other ſervices of it. 

13 This they ſball give, every one that paiteth a- 
mong them that are numbred, * half aſhekel, after the 

+ ſhekel of the ſanctuary o, ( athekel is twenty gerahs: ) 
an half ſhekel ſhall be the offering of the LOKD p. 

o Which though it hath been commonly conceived to be double 
to the common Shekel, yet divers late Learned men ſcem more 
truly to judge that it was no more than the common Shekel, con- 
ſiſting of Half a Crown of Englilh-money ; which is called :he jbeke! 
of - x, Joy Sajna becauſe the Standard by which all Shekels were to 
be examined, was kept in the Sanftuary, as afterwards the uit 
Weights and Meaſures were kept in Chriſtian Temples, or other 
publick places. See Lev. 27. 25. Numb. 3- 47. Exzek. 45. 10, 11, 12. 

Add to this, that it was a part of the Prieſt's Office to !ook to 

- the Weights and Meaſures, as plainly appears from 1 Chron. 23. 
29. þ Nor leſs, leſt it ſhould be contemprible ; nor more, leſt it 
ſhould be too burthenſome for the Poor. 

14 Every one that paſſeth among them that are num- 
bred, from ewenty years old and above q, ſhall give an 
offering unto the LORD. 

q The time when they began tobe fit for employment, and ca- 
pable of getting and paying Money. Women and Children are not 
included here, becauſe they are reckoned in their Fathers or Hus- 
bands. 

«5 The rich ſhall not + give more,and the poor ſhall 
not 7 give leſs 7 than half a thekel when rhey give an of- 


your fouls, 
r This was partly to teach them, that all Souls are of equal worth 
in themſclves,and price with God;that there is no reſpett of perſons 


with God, and in God's Worſhip and Service, but Goſpel-graces, ' 


Ordinances and Priviledges are common and equal to all, Exod.1 2. 
and 16. 18. Gal: 3. 28. Col. 3. 11. that all perſons are like obnoxious 
to Divine Juſtice, and are redeemed by one and the ſame price ; 
partly to check the arrogance and vanity of the Rich,who are very 
apt ro deſpiſe the Poor ; and partly that by this means the number 
of the People might be exattly known when occaſion required it. 
16 And thoulhalr take the atonemenc-money of the 
children of Iſrael, and * ſhalt appoint it for the ſervice 
of the tabernacle s of the congregation, that it may be 
a memorial z unto the children of Iſrael before the 
LORD, to make an atonement for your ſouls. 

s For the building and furniture of it, and the maintainance of 
God's Worthip in it. * Either to the People, who hereby profeis 
God to be their Lord and Owner, and themſelves his Subjetts and 
Tributaries ; or to God, who hereby takes occaſion to remember 
them, and to own them for his People. 


17 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes «, ſaying, 

u The frequent repetition of this Phraſe,and the ſhortneſs of theſe 
Diſcourſes, in compariſon of the length of the forty days,ſhew that 
God did not dcliver all theſe Laws and Preſcriptions at one time, 
but ſucceſſively at ſeveral times, poflibly upon the Sabbarh-days. 

13 Thou ſhalt alſo make a laver of braſs x, and his 
foot al/s of braſs, to waih 2vithal y, and thou ſhalt pur it 
between the tabernacle of the congregation and the al- 
tar 2, and thou ſhaltput water therein. 

x See the accompliſhment, Exod. 38. $. y Both the Prieſts, and 
the parts of the Sacrifices. z To wit, of Burnt-offerings. 

19 For Aaron and his ſons ſhall * waſh their hands 


a To ſignify their natural impurity and unworthineſs, either to 


_ of waſhing with the Blood and Spirit of Chriſt, which was typified 
by this waſhing. 

20 When they go into the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation, they ſhall waſh with water, that they die not b : 
or when they come near to the altar to miniſter, to 
burn an offering made by fire unto the LORD. 

b For though the Fault might ſeem ſmall,yet the Command was 
evident and eaſte,and therefore the diſobedience was worlſe,arguing 


prefumprion, rebellion, and contempt. And God is more ſevere 
in the matrers of his Worthip than in other caſes. 


21 So they ſhall waſh their hands and their feet that 
they die not: and it ſhall be a ftature forevertothem, e- 
ven tohim,and to his ſeed throughout their generations, 

22 Moreover,the LORD ſpake unto Moles, ſaying, 

23 Takethoualſounco thee c principal ſpices 4, of 


EXODUS. 


Chap. AXX 
mon half ſo much, even two hundred and fifty ſhekels, 

and of {weet calamus f two hundred and fifty ſhekel:, 

c The words are very emphatical, and the Jews from hence do 

rightly infer, that this Ointment was but once made, and that by 

Moſes his own hands. d See Cant. 4. 14. Ezek. 27. 22. and compare 

Pſal. 45. 8. Amos 6.6. e Heb. myrrhe of liberty, either 1. Free from 
adulteration or mixture, or rather 2. Freely dropping from the 

Tree, which 1s eſteemed better than that which isforced out of it. 

f A ſweet Recd, of which ſee 1/a: 43: 24: Jer: 26: 20. 

24 Andof caflia g five hundred ſhekels after the ſhekel 

of the ſanctuary, and oboil-olive an * hin. * Chap. 
g Not the common kind of Caſſia, which we uſe in purging, but 29. 49. 
another kind of it, there being ſeven ſeveral kinds of it, as the 
learned note. h 

25 And thou ſhalt make it an oil of holy: ointment ; 
ry : it (hall be an holy anointing-oil. fumer. 
26 And thou lhalt anoint hþ the tabernacle of the 
congregation therewith, and the ark of the teſtimony, 

h This was only an outward Ceremony,fignifying the ſeparation & 


ſanQification ot theſe things for the Service of God;as the anointing 
of Kings and Prieſts noted their deſignation to their Offices. 


27 And the table and all his veſiels, and the candle- 
ſtick and his veſſels, and the altar of incenſe, 

28 Andthealtar of burnt-offering with all his vel- 
ſe!s, and the laver, and his foot. | 

29 And thou ſbalt /anRifie them that they may be 
moſt holy ; whatſoever toucheth them ſhall be holy. 

20 And thou ſbalt anoint Aaron and his ſonss, ard 
conlecrate them that they may miniſter unto me in the 
prieſts office. 

; Not all of them, bnt only thoſe who ſucceed him in the High- 
Pric{t's Gtfice, as appears from Exod: 4o: 15: Levit: 4: 3, 5, 16: and 
16: 32: and 21:10, Fhis anointing of them lignihed both God's 
election or calling them ro this Otace,and the inward qualifications 
requiſite for it, to wit, the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghoſt, 
which are ofr deſigned by this word of anointing, as1ſa: 61: 1: Dan: 


9: 24: 1 John 2: 27. and the ſolemu ſetting apart of Chriſt, the true 
High-Prieſt, for the Mediatorial Office. | | 


an ointment compound after the art of the 4 Apotheca- + Or, per | 


| 


; 


31: And thou ſhalt ſpeak unto the children of Iſrael, 
ſaying, This ſhall be an holy anointing-oil unto me k 
throughout your generations. 

k (1. e. ) Reſerved for my Service alone, not employed to any 
profane'or civil uſe, as it follows. 

32 Upon mans fleſh ſhall it not be poured /, neither 
ſhall ye make any other like it, after the compoſition of 
ir: it zs holy, and it (hall be holy unto you >. 

[Except thoſe whom"God himſelf, the Author of this Law, ex- 
cepr:, to wit, the High-Prieſts ; of which ſee verſe 39. and ſome of 
the Kings, of which ſee 1 King. 1. 39. Pſal. 89. 20. though others 
think the Kings were only anointed with common Oi. m As it 
is unto me, verſe 31. you ſhall account it holy, as I do. 

33 Whoſoever compoundeth any like it, or whoſoe- 
ver putteth any of it upon a ſtranger », * ſhall even be 
cur oft from his people. 

n The word ſtranger is commonly uſed to note the Gentiles, or 
ſuch as were not of {fael's Race; but ſometimes it notes thoſe that 
are not ofthe Prieſtly Race, as Exod. 29. 33. Levit. 22. 12, 13. And 
ſo it ſeems to be here, And if any of the Kings were anointed 
with this Oil, it was done by God's ſpecial appointment, who may 
diſpenſe with his own Laws. 

34 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Take unto thee 
ſwect ſpices, ſtate, and onycha, and galbanum o : 
the/e ſweet ſpices, with pure frankincenſe, of each ſhall 
:here be alike weight p. 

o The Jews themſelves are not agreed what theſe were, and it 
concerns not Chriſtians much to know, the uſe of them being at o- 
liſhed. It is evident they were each of them ſweet Spices,and there- i 
fore this Galbanum was not of the common kind,which gives a very | 
bad ſcent. p Heb. Alone ſhall be with alone, 1.4, Each of theſe alone : 
ſhall be with another alone, to wir, in equal quantity. Or it may 
note, that each of theſe was to beraken and beaten apart, and then 
mixed together, Or, 7t ſhall be alone alone, 7: e: abſolutely and cers 
tainly alone, the doubling of the word increaſing the ſignification, 
and thus it doth not belong to all the ingredients, becauſe the He- 
brew Verb is here of the ſingular number, but only to the Frank- 
incenſe ; andthe ſenſe may be, that whereas the orher things ſhall 
be tempered together,the Frankincenſe ſhould be alone,which may 
ſeem moſt agreeable both to the common uſe of Frankincenſe, and 
to its differing nature from the other things mentioned, two of 
them at leaſt being confeſſedly liquid —_ 

35 And thou ſhalt make it a perfume, a confe&ion 
afcer the art of che apothecaty, + tempered together 4, 
pure r and holy, 

9 Heb. Salted, either 1. properly,for Sal: was to be offered with all 
offerings, Levit. 2. 13. And the Hebrew Doors tell us, thar ſix Egg- 
ſhells full of Salt were uſed ; or, metaphorically, well mixed to- 
gether, as Salt waswith things either cflered ro God, or eaten by 
Man. r Ofthe beſt of each kind of Drugs, the moſt perfe& and 
uncorrupted. 

36 And thou ſhalt beat ſome of it 5 very ſmall, and put 
it before the teſtimony in the tabernacle + of the congre- + Heb! 
gation, * where Iwill meet with thee : it ſhall be unto mes; 
you moſt holy. | * Clip 

5 So much as 15 ſufficient for the daily incenſe. 

37 And as fer the perfume which thou ſhalt make, ye 
(hall not make to your ſelves according to the compoſiti- 


x Gen. 
T4. ; 


j 
y 


þ 
q 
: 
F 


On BOO ry 3 omg ogg tat eu 


+ Heb, 
ſalted, £ 


29. 4%" 
Lev.i6% 


pure myrrhe e five hundred ſhekels, and of {weet cina- 


on thereof; it ſhall be uato thee holy for the LORD. 
28 Whoſloever 


” Wo ur ere nr rey oO EIS. "ag, 42s R 


Jp: 


Chap. XXXI. 
+3 Whoſoever ſhall make like- unto that to ſme] 
thereto, ſhall even be cut off from his pzople. 


C H A P.  XAAL 


Bezaleel and Aholia5 are call d for the work of the Tabernacle, 1-=-6, 7. 
The Table and Candleſticks, 8. The Alt, 9g. Hallowing of the: Sab. 
bath is commanded again, 1 2-====16, Moſes receiveth the two Tables 0 


hz , I8. 

AND the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, ſay- 
ing, 

. See I 

| the ſon of Hur, 4 of the tribe of Judah. 

| x He ſeems to be the ſame mentioned 1 Chron: 2: 20. : 

| 2 And Thave filled him with the ſpirit of God 6, in 

c wiſdom, and in underſtanding, and in knowledge, 


| and in all manner. of workman'hip. 
| þ Which was now neceſſary,becauſe the 1/-aelites in Egypt wanted 
ingenious education to learn theſe things, and therefore needed in- 
ſpiration. © Or, with, the following clauſes being explicatory of 
the former, ſhewing what gifts of the Spirit God had filled him 
with, to wit, Wiſdom, Oc. : 
4 To devite cunning works, ta work in gold, and 


in ſilver, and in braſs, ; | 

5 And incutting of ſtones to ſet them, and in carving 
of timber, to work in all manner of workmanſhip, 

6 And I, behold, I have given with him, Aholiab 
the ſon of Ahiſamach of the tribe of Dan : and in the 
hearts of all that are wiſe-hearted 41 have put wiſdom, 
that they may make all that I have commanded thee : 

d That have wiſdom and 5kill ſufficient to do theſe things under 
the inſpe&ion and direCtion of Bezalezl and A4holiab, the principal 

'O' KEN, , 
| w— The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark 
of the teſtimony, and the mercy-fear that is thereupon; 
and all the + furniture of the cabernacle : 

$ And the. tabls and his furaiture, and the pure 
| candleſftick e with all his furnicure, and the alcar of in- 
| cenle : 

e So called by way of eminency, not only becauſe it was made 
of pure Gold, and was not defiled with Blood, for ſo ſome other 
things were, but eſpecially to mind the Prieſts of their Duty in 
keeping it neat and clean, it being more ſubjett to defilement rhan 
other things. ; : : : 

9 And the altar of burnt-offering with all his furni- 


ture, and the laver and his foot : 
10 And * the clothes of ſervice f, and the holy gar- 
ments for Aaron the prieſt, and the garments of his 


ſons, to miniſter in the prieſts office z 
f Wherein the Ark and other ſacred Urentils were wrapped up 
when they were to be removed. See Exod: 35: 19. and Name: 4. 

1t And tae anointing oil, and F ſweer incerle for 
the holy place: according to all thac I have commanded 
thez ſhall chey do. _ 

12 J And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

13 Spzak thou alſo unto the chi:dren of [ſrael, fay- 
ing, Verily my ſabbaths ye ſhall keep g : for it z- aſign 
berween me and you þ throughout your generations, 
that ye mey know that I am the LOR D that doth 
landtihe you 7. . : 

g This precept is here repeated, either 1. To ſhew the chief uſe 
of the Tabernacle and all this colt and trouble about it, to wit.thar 
they might ther2 acceptably ſerve God, as in ſome meaſure upon 
every diy, ſoccſpccially upon the Sibbath-day. Or rather 2. To 
reſtrain the time for the doing of the forementioned works, 9. 4d. 
Though the work of the Tabernacle and Utenſils be holy, and for 
an holy uſe, yer I will not have it done upon my holy day. 'The 
Sabbath was not made for chem, bur they tor it, «nd theretore they 
ſhall give place to it. þ The Sabbath 1s a fivefold fign, r. Com- 
memorative,of God's Creation of, and Dominion over them, and all 
other things, to whom they do hereby profeſs their 1ubjeCttion. 
2. Indicative, thewing that they were made to be _ and that 
thir ſan&ification c2n be had from none but from God, as it here 
follows, and from the obſervation of God's days and appoint- 
ments. 3. Diſtin&tive, whereby they owned themſelves to be the 
Lord's peculiar people, by a religious keeping of thoſe Sabbaths, 
which the reſt of the World groily neglected and profanely ſcoffed 
at. 4. Piefigurative, of thar reſt which Chriſt ſhould purchaſe for 
them, to wit, a reſt from rhe burden of the ceremonial, and from 
the curſes and rigours of the moral Law, as alſo from fin and the 
wrath of (G4 for ever. See Heb: 4. 5. Confirmative, both affu- 
ring th-m of God's good will to them, and thar as he bleſſed the 
Sabb.th for their ſakes, ſo he would bleſs them in the holy uſe of it 
with temporal, fpiritual and everlaſting bleſſings, as he declares in 
many place: of Scripture ; and aſſuring God of their ſtanding to 
that Covenant made between God and them. So that this was a 
mutual ſtipulation, or ratification of the Covenant of Grace on 
both ſides. 7 That ſele&erh you out of all people, and confecrate 
you to my ſelf, and ro my ſervice and worſh p, a great part where- 
of is the obſervation of the Sibbath. Or, that ſanEiferh you 5y 
my Word and Ordinances, which are in m9:e eminenr and folemn 
b manner diſpen'ed upon the Sabbath-day, by the obſervation where- 


| + Heb: 
veſſel. 


1 I OR I I er OS Yn," , 0s 


*Chap: 39 


1, Oc. 


| Heb: in- 
cen{: of 


= Fro a Seen 


CE EE od an i rats 


on BO nn DIES 


+ Heb. 
ſalted, 


. + Heb of you dechire that y-u own me as your only /anRifier. And fo 
meetin. we may obſerve, the Sab-ath owns the Lord as our Creator, and as 
* Chap: our Redeemer, and as our SanQtifier ; and therefore it is no wonder 
29. 4% Gnd fo ſeverely enjoyns the ſanEitfication of the $abbarh,and puniſh- 
Ley.ils *Chap:20: erh the negleCt of ir, it being a racir renounceing, or diſowning of 
D > 8:Deut:c; God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghoſt. 
i 12: Ezck: 14 * Ye {ball keep the ſibbach therefore : for it 5s 
2.12. holy unto you ; every one that defileth jt, hall ſurely 
;r 


have called by name Bezaleel the ſon of Uri. 


EXNXNODUS=* 


—_ 


Chap. XXXII. 


* 
be put to death &: for * whoſoever doth avy work / Num: 
thercin,thit ſoui iball be cur off from amongſt his people. 7535 
k Of % hich ſce an example Numb: 5: 32, &c. { (7. e. ) Servile 
work, as it is explained, wv: 23. 7, Oc. | 
15 Six days Þ may work be done, but ir the ſeventh gr 
s the fabbach, of re{t -», + holy co the LORD : whe- +Heb: , 
.vever doch any work in the fabbath-day, he ſhall ſure- ne. 
;} be put to death. 
m Heb. The jabbath of ſabbaths, or of ſabbaths, i. e. the great and 
chief Sabbath, as the /org of Jongs is the moſt excellent Song,the holy 
of holies is the moſt Holy, ©. The Jews had many Sai-baths or Days 
of reſt,bur this is here preferred before them all,by this emphatical 
-epetition of the ſame word ; and by this argument the foregoing 
duty 1s preiſed upon them. | | 
16 Wherefore the children of Iſrael ſhall keep the 
ſabbach, to obſerve the ſabbath » throughout their ge- 
nerations for a perpetual covenant 9 
» Or, Shall keep the ſabbath by obſerving, or celebrating the ſabbath, 
2. e. by obſerving or celebrating it,the antecedent being pur for the 
relative, as is frequently done. So here is another moſt emphatical 
repetition to oblidge us to the greater caution and diligence in this 
great Duty, and to thew what ſtre:s God lays upon it, who hath 
therefore placed this in the midſt of the commands of the Decalogue, 
as the Heart which gives life and vigour to all the reſt. Or it may 
be rendered thus, Shall #bjerve the day of reſt to celebrate the ſabbath ; 
and fo the phraſe is like that in the Fourth Command, Remember the 
Sabbath-day to keep it holy. So here, Obſerve the ſabbath, i. e. watch its 
coming and approach, conſider attentively the nature and uſe of it, 
and that nor as a matter of idle ſpeculation, bur of ſerious praftice ; 
or ſo that you may do, or celebrate the ſabbath, 7. e. perform all the 
duties of it. Or thus, ſhall obſerve the ſabbath, to make it a ſabbath, 
or ay of reſt, and that no idle or carnal reſt, but a reff, holy to the A 
Lord, as 3t 1s called in the forgoing verſe. Or, by 4 perpetual cove- 
nant ; or, it is a perpetual covenant, i: e: condition or part of that 
agreement made ketween me and them. They have tolemnly co- 
venanted or promiſed that they will do all thar I commanded them, 
Exod: 24: 7,8. among which this is a chief branch ; and I have co- 
venanted to bleſs and ſanfify them in ſo doing. And this word 
perpetual, as alſo the word for ever being added to it in the next verſe, 
may intimate that this hath a longer perpetuity than the Ceremo- 
nies,to which this phraſe is ſometimes aſcribed, the rather becauſe 
the reaſon of this perpetuity given in the next verſe,is ſuch as hath 
its force not only till Chriſt, but even till che end of the World, 
and it is fir and juſt that men ſhould retain this monument, or me«= 
morial of the World's Creation, even till its diſſolution: 


/ 17 ltis a fign p between me and the children of 1f. 
rael for ever: for * in fix days the LOR D made hea- 
ven, and earth, and on the feventh day he reſted, and 
was refrelbed q, 

? A ſign of the Covenant between us, that I will be their God, 
and they will be my People ; both which dependsupon this amongſt 
other Duties, and upon this-in an eminent degrec. q Not as if he 
had been weary with working, which ſurely he could nor be with 
ſpeaking a fey words, nor can God be weary with any thing, 1/a: 
40: 28: bur it notes the pleaſure or delight God took in refle&ing 


_ his works, beholding that every thing he had made was very good, 
EN: 1: 3I, 


*Get 2:25 


18 © And he gave unto Moſes, when he had made * 
an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, 
* two tables of teſtimony r, tables of ſtone 5, 
with the finger of God te. 

r (i: e.) The Tables of the Law, which was the witneſs of God's 
Will and Iſaei's Duty. See Exod 16: 34. 5s W hereby was ſignt- 
fied both the durable and perpetual Obligotion of the Moral Law, 
whereas the Ceremonial Law was to end wirh the Jewiſh Polity at 
Chriſt's coming, and the ftonineſs of Mens Hearts by Nature, in 
which the Law of God could not be writren, butby a Divine and 
Omnipotent Hand # (7. e. ) With the Fow:r or Spirit »f God, 
by comparing Mazth: 12: 18: not by any Art of Man, but imme« 
diately by a Divine Hand. 


CH AP. XXXII. 


The people commit idolatry by worſhipping the molten image which Aaron 
made, 1---- 6, God makes it known to Moſes, and threatens their de= . 
ftruftion. 7----10. Moſes prayes for them, 11. God repents of the evil, ** * 
14. Moſes comes down from the mount with two tables, 15. being Godly” 
own writing, 16, Moſes hearing and ſeeing their idolatry, 17, 18. 
breaks the two tables, 19. and turns the calf into powder, 20. Aaron's 
exciſe, 2 [==--==2 4. Moſes ſeeing ther nakeaneſs, 25. Commanals them 
to be /lain, 26---=28. He bids them conſecrate themſelyes, 2 g. Miſe 
charging them with ſin, 30. Prayeth for them, 31---33. God ſpareth 
them, 34. But afterward plagueth them, 35. 


Yd D when the people ſaw that Moſes delayed to 
come down out of the mount a, the people b ga- 
thered themſelves together unto Aaron c, and ſaid unto 
him, * Up, make. us gods 4 which ſhall go before us | 
e: for as fer this Moſes f, the man that brought us up * A&s 7: 
out of the land of Egypc, we wor not what is become 4 
of him g. 

a Where he had row been for near fourty days. 4 ( 7. e. ) Moſt, 
or ſome of the people, as it is expretied, 1 Cor» 10: 5: c Asthe 
chief perſon in Moſes his abſence. & ( 7: e. ) Images or repreſenta- 
tions of God, whom, after the manner of Idolaters, they call by 
God's name. For ir is rediculous to think that the Body of the 
Iſraelites, who were now lately inftiutted by the Mouth,and Words, 
and Miraculous Works of the erernal God,thou!d be fo ſenſeleſs as to 
think that was the true God which themielves made, and that our Y 
of their own, Ear-rings ; much more, that that was the God that 
brought them our of Egypr, as they ſay, verſe 4. e To guide us 
through rhis vaſt Wilderneſs to the land of promiſe, where they 
longed to be ; For, as tor rhe a which hitherto had guided. 

thcas 


written , Chape3h | 
16. Deut: 
- 10, 


2Cor: 3.3: 


| Chap 


* 1 Kings 
x2: 28: 
Pal: 106; 
I 9» 


* x Cor: 
IO: 7: 


* Deut: 
9: | + 


0 04108 


at ſeemed now ; 
ek ther and Moſes had deſerted them. The Jewiſb Dottors 
note, that he doth not ſay, Make us gods whom we may worſhip, 
but which ſby/l go before us, which, as they truly ſay, ſhews that they 
wanted not'a God, whom they knew by infallible evidences they , 
had, but a viſible guide, who might ſupply the want of Moſes, as | 
the next words ſhew. f An expreſſion of contempt towards their ; 
great deliverer. g Whether he be not conſumed by the Fire in the 
Cloud, or taken up to Heaven, or conveyed away by God to ſome 
other place. . | 
2 And Aaron ſaid unto them, Break off the golden 
ear-ringsh which are in the cars of your waves z, of your 
ſons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. 
h Which were of good value and common ute among the Eaitern 
people, which ſeem to have uſed them ſuperſtitiouſly, Ger: 35. - 
Judg: 8: 24+ and therefore Aaron demands theſe, partly that he might 
take away one Vice, or occaſion of Vice, whiJeſt the people were 
intent upon another ; and partly that the propoſed loſs of their 
recious Ear-rings might cool their Idolatrous delires. #5 Whom 
he thought moſt fond of their Jewels, and moſt unlike]y to part 
with them. | 


2 And all the people brake off the golden ear-rings 
& which were in their ears /, and brought them unto 


Aaron. | : 
| k Whereby they ſhew both their madneſs upon their Idols, and 
their baſe ingratitude totheir God, who had transferred theſc Jewels 
from the Egyptians to them, Exod: 12: 35, 36+ which therefore God 
upbraids them with, Ezek: 16: 11, Oc. / (7. e. ) The mens ears, 
for the affix is of the Maſculine Gender ; whereby it ſeems the men 
were more ſet upon Idolatry than the women, arting with their 
Ear-rings for it, which the women would not do. 
*X And he received them at their hand, and fa- 


ſkioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a 
molren calf mz, and they ſaid, Theſe be thy gods », O 


I{rael, which brought chee up out of the land of Egypt. 
- The meaning of this Tranſlation is, That 4aron, to wit, by 
Artificers, did firit melt the Gold into one maſs, and then by the 
Graving-tool form it into the ſhape of a Calf, and poliſh it; or as 
others render the words, He formed it in a type or mould,made in the 
ſhape of a Calf, into which he caſt the molten Gold, and fo made it 
a molten Calf. But the words may be Tranſlated thus, He put ir, or 
them," into a purſe ; for ſo the Hebrew Verb and Noun are both uſed 
2 Kings 5+ 23: and in like manner Gideon diſpoſed. the Ear-rings 
given him for the like uſe, Judg: 8: 24. and atterwards, he made of 
them a molten calf. Now the people deſired, and Azron in com- 
pliance with them made this in the form of a calf, or an Ox ( for 
the word ſignihes both ) in imitation of the Egyprians, as Philo the 
Jew exprelly affirms, and the learned generally agree ; and it may 
thus appear, 1. The great Idols of the Egyptians, Apis, Seraphus and 
Tfs, were Oxen and Cows, as is confeſſed. 2. The Egyptians, be- 
ſides thoſe Creatures which they adored as gods, did alſo make, and 
keep, and worſhip their Images, as even the Heathen writers Mela 
and Strabo affirm. 3. The Iſraelites, whileſt they were in Egypr, 
were many of them infe&ed with the Egyprian Idolatry, as it ap- 
pears from Jof: 24: 14: Ezek: 20: 7,8. and 23: 3: A#57:39, And it 1s 
not unlikely divers of them hankered no leſs after the Idols, than 
after the Garlick and Onions of Egypt. And, being now, as they 
thought, forſaken by Moſes, they might think of returning to Egypr, 
as afterwards, they did, and therefore choſe a god of the Egyptian 
Mode, that they might more willingly receive them again. » (7.e.) 
This 1s thy God, the plural Number "_ put for the Singular, as 
it is uſual in this caſe, The meaning is, T his is the Sign, or Sym- 
bol, or Image of thy God ; for ſuch expreſſions are very frequent: 
Thus this Image of a Calf is called z calf frequently,and the Images 
of the Temple of Dana are called ſhrines or little temples, Atts 19, 
So they intended to worſhip the true God by this Image, as after- 
wards Jeroboam did by the ſame Image,as we ſhall plainly fee when 
wecome to that place of Scripture. And it is abſolutely incredible 
'that the generality of the 7/raelites ſhould be ſo void of all Senſe and 
Reaſon, as to think that this new-made calf did bring them our of 
Ezypt before its own Creation, & that this was the ſame Jehovah who 
had even now ſpoken tothem from Heaven with an audible Voice, 
ſaying, 1am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypr. 

5 And when Aaron ſaw oz, he builr an altar before 

it, and Aaron made proclamation, and ſaid, To mor- 


row is a feaſt to the LORD p. 


0 ( 5. e. ) Obſerved with what applauſe they received it,and with 
what fury and reſolution they proſecuted their former defire, he 
was born down with the {tream, and, as it is probable, by the 

| peoples inſtigation, built an altar to it. p Heb: 7o Jehovah. Which 
Title being peculiar to the true God, nd being here given by Aaron 
to the Calf, with the approbation of the people, makes it more than 
probable that the people deſigned to worſhip the true God in this 
Calf, which they made only as a viſible token of God's Preſence 
with them, and an image by which they might convey their wor- 
ſhip to God. 

6 And they roſe up early on the morrow, and offer- 
ed burnt-offerings, and brought peace-ofterings q : and 
the * people ſat down to eat and to drink r, and roſe 
up to play 5. | 

q But no ſm-offerings, which-they moſt needed. r For the Sacri- 
fices were accompanied with Feaſting, both among the Worſhippers 
of the true God, and among Idolaters. See Exod: 18: 12: and 24. 
117. 5 By ſhouting, and ſinging, and dancing, as it appears from 
verſe 19, 18, 19. : 

7 4 And the LORD {ſaid unto Moſes, * Go, get 
thee down : for thy people t which thou broughteſt out 
of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themſelves. 

: No longer wy people. as God had called them hitherto, Exod: 3.7. 
_ 5. 1, &c. they have forſaken me, and I do hereby renounce 
them, 


8 They have turned aſide quickly out of the way 


which I commanded them 3 they have made them a 
4 


EXODUS. 


to be fixed upon the Mount ; and they | molten calf, and have worſhipped it, and have ſacrificed * 1 King. 


thereunto, and ſaid, * Theſe be thy gods, O Iſrael, 17::* 
- 9 , Chap: 
which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt; 33: 3: 
'9 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, * I have ſeen Deur.g, 
this peeple, and behold, it is a ſtift-necked people v. 13: 
#, Untra&able, wilful and ſtubborn, incorrigible by my Judge- Ifa: 48:4; 
ments, ungovernable by mine, or by any Laws. A metaphor from 
_ Beaſts that will not bend their Necks to receive the Yoke or 
ridle. 


10 Now therefore let me alone x that my wrath 
may wax hot againſt them, and that I may conſume 
them ; and * I will make of thee y a great nation. * Numb: 


x Do not hinder me by thy Prayers, which I ſee thou art now 14: 12. 
about to make on their behalf. y To come out of thy Loins. 


11 * And Moſes beſought F the LORD his God z, * Deur: qt 
and faid, LORD, why doth thy wrath wax hot @ 18. Pfal: 
againſt thy people b, which thou haſt brought forth 726:23: 


out of the land of Egypt, with great power, and with gs ok 
a mighty hand? $ , facesf th 


z Emphartically ſo called, q: 4: Moſes had not loſt his intereſt in 
God, though 1/rael had. a So hot as to conſume them utterly. For 
though he 1faw reaſon enough why God ſhould be angry with them, 
yet he humbly expoſtulates with God whether it would be for his 
Honour utterly to deſtroy them. Or this is a Petition delivered in 
form of an interrogation or expoſtulation, as Matrh: 8: 29. compare 
with Luke 8: 28. b An ingenious retortion, q. 4. They are not 
my people, as thou calledſt them, werſe 7, but thy people, which he 
proves 1n the following words. *Numb 


12 * Wherefore ſhould the Egyptians ſpeak, and ,,.... 
. . - o 4: T3: 

ſay, For miſchief did he bring them out, to ſlay them Deur 9: 

in the mountains c, and to conſume them from the face 28: and 

of the earth 2 Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent 3* 27* 

of this evil againſt thy people. 

c (7.e.) In or at Mount Sinai, the pluralnumber for the fingular ; 
or, in this mountainous Deſert. 


13 Kemember Abraham, Iaac, and Iſrael thy ſer- 
vants,to whom thou {weareſt by thy own elf, and ſaidft . 
unto them, * I will multiply your ſeed as the ftars of Boy 4 : 
heaven, and all this land that I have ſpoken of, will I rorandag 
give unto your ſeed, and they ſhall inherit zr for ever. 18: and 
14 And the LORD repented & of the evil which he *£4- and 
thought to do unto his people, —_ "Ws 
d (7. e.) Changed his Sentence. See on Gen: 6. 6. + Wn 
15 And Moſes turned, and went down from the 
mount, and the rwo tables of the Teſtimony were in his 
hand : the tables were written on both their ſides e: on 
the one ſide, and on the other ſide were they written. 
e Not in the infide and outſide, which is unuſual and unneceſſary, 
bur in the iniide only, ſome of the Ten Commands being written 
on the right hand, and others on the left, not for any my1tery, but 
only for conveniency of writing. * Chap; 
16 And the * tables were the work of God, and the 31:18: 
writing 4: the writing of God, graven upon the tables. 
17 And when Joſhua f heard the noiſe of the people 
as they ſhouted, he ſaid unto Moles, There js a noiſe of 
war in the camp. | 
f Who had waited all this while upon the middle of the hi!l for 


Moſes his return ; and ſo neither knew what the people had d 
heard what Ged bad aid to Moſer. Hh Eee 


18 And he faid, I: i5 not the voice of ther that lhout 
fer maltery gy neirher #s it the voice of them that cry for 
j being overcome þ: but the noiſe of hers that ſing do I 
hear. 

g Heb. of » cry of ſtrength, (7. e. ) of ſtrong men,or of the ſtronger 
and vittorious party,whoulſs to expreſs themſelves with triumphant 
ſhouts. hþ Heb: of a cry of weakneſs, (7. e.) of weak, and wounded 
and vanquiſhed men, whouſe to break forth into doleful cries © 

[9 And it came to paſs, ailoon as he came nigh un- 
to the camp, that he faw the calf, and the dancing : 
and Moſes anger waxed hot, and he caſt the tables out 
of __ a _ brake them 7 beneath the mount: 

z : Not through raſh anger, but by divine inſt R ; 
their Idolatry Sack fo great a Joſs.and omen renprivel MS 
nant made between God and them ſo muci: ro their advantage, which | 


+ Heb» 


weakneſs 


Chap. 0+ 0108 


a 


——2% % moe 


i 


was contained in thoſe Tables, was by their ſin broken, and now of 
none effect, and not to be renewed bur by bitter repentance. | 
20 * And he took the calt which they had made, « ney. | 
and burnt 37 in the fire, and ground zt ro powder &, 9: 21 
and ſtrewed it upon the water /, and niade the children 
of Iſrael »: to drink of it n. 
k Melted ir either into one great maſs,or rather into divers little 
fragments, which afterwards by a file or other inſtruments, he, b 
the help of many others, might ſoon grind to powder, or duſt of 
Gold. ! Upon the Brook which came our of the Rock Horeb, Exod: 
17: 6. m Not all, which would require long time, but ſome in the 
name of the reſt ; and moſt probably either the chief Promoters of 


—_— A — 0 
Ps 
ms ett. nd A PER oo 6D 


this idolatrous Deſign,or the chief Rulers of the People,who ſhould 
by their power and authority have reſtrained the people from this 
wickedneſs. » Of the water into which that duſt was caſt ; partly 
to make them aſhamed of their madneſs in worſhipping a God which 
now muſt be drunk,and caſt out into the draught; and partly to fill 
them with terrourand dreadful expe&ation of ſome ill efte& or curſe | 
of God to come upon them.either by this draught, or by other means, ' 


21 And Moſes faid unto Aaron, What did this peo- 
ple unto thee o that thou Jiaft brought ſo great a fin 


eta. ai. 


upon them  ? | 
Wint 


PC OCIONTR 0», ET” ORIEL 


mb: 


re 
o 


1t: g8 | 
fal: 
3: | 
0D: the | 
F the 


ebe 


eut: 


, 
$4742 II —_—— FRO ” _ _ 
ER CR TREREPPTEDHST ITE em, " 


| Chap, XXXil. 


— 
F3 
———"> + ma 


s What injury or miſchief had they done to thee, which thou 
didſt ſo ſeverely revenge! p The fin of the people js charged upon 
Aaron, both becauſe he did nor reſiſt and ſuppreſs their wicked ſug- 
geſtion, Yerſe 1. by his counſel, and by the authority which Moſes 
had left in his hand, which he fhould have done even with the ha- 
zard of his life, as the R3bbins ſay that Hur did, : whom they report 
to have been {lain by the People whilſt he diſſwaded them from their 
attempt, and becauſe he did not promote, and dire& and manage 
their enterprize, Yerſe 4, 5- 

22 And Aaron ſaid, Let not the anger of my lord 


wax hot : thou knoweſt the people, that they are /er on 
miſchief 4. : 
q Heb. are in evil, i. e. are altogether wicked, addiQted to, or 
| bent upon wickedneſs, ſo that it was impoſſible for me to ſtop or 
© divert their courſe. 


23 For they ſaid unto me, Make us gods which (ball 
£0 before us: ' as for this Moſes, the man that brought 


us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is | 


become of him. 
24 AndI faid unto them, Whoſoever hath any gold, 


let them break it off: ſo they gave i: me: then 1 caſt 


it into the fire, and there came out this calf 7. 

7 Not that he meant, or thought to perſwade Moſes, that the melted 
Gold came out of the fire in the form of a Calf by accident, without 
any art or induſtry of his, which was a ridiculous conceit, and eaſily 
confuted.; but only he conceals his own fin in the forming and 
graving of it, and lays the whole blame upon the people. 

25 «And when Moſes faw that the people were naked s 

( for Aaron had made them naked # unto their ſhame 
#Heb.choſe amonglit Þ their enemies s. ) 
thatroſeup «5 (i.e. ) That they were ſtripped both of their ornament, which 


againſt was not ſo much the Jewels ofcheir Ears, as the innocency of their 
them, minds and lives; and of their defence, to wir, 'ofthe favour and 


EXODUS 


proteQtion of God, by which alone they were ſecured from the 
Egyptians, and were to be defended againſt thoſe many and mighry 
enemies towards whom they were about to march, and that being 
thus diſarmed and helpleſs, they would be a prey to every Enemy ; 
when Moſes conſidered this, he took the following courſe to cover 
their nakedneſs, to expiate their fins, toregain the favour of God, 
and by puniſhing the moſt eminent and incorrigible Offenders, to 
bring the reſt to repentance. ? As Ahazx is ſaid to have made Judah 
naked, 2 Chron. 28. 19. u Queſt. How were they made naked or aſhamed 
amongſt their Enemies, when at this time they were in their own 
Camp, remote from all cheir Enemies ? A»ſw. He ſpeaks not only of 


their preſent ſhame, bur of their everlaſting reproach, eſpecially 
among their, and God's Enemies, who being conſtant to their Idols, 
would juſtly ſcorn the 1/raelites for their levity in forſaking their 
God fo quickly and eaſily, See Jer. 2+ 11. But the Hebrew word | 


riſing is uſed Exod: 1:8: Matth: 11: 11. Ando the Chaldee here renders 


it, among#t their generations ; and the other Chaldee Interprerer, and | 
the Syriack, in their latter days, or in after times. * So the ſeaſe is, That | 
Aaron had puta note of perpetual infamy upon them, even to all after | 


Ages. | 

26 Then Moſes ſtood in the gate of the camp x and 
ſaid, Who is on the LORD'S fide y ? Jet bim come unto 
me. And all the ſons of Levi z gathered themſelves 


together unto him. | 

x He chuſe that place, 1. as the uſual place of Judicature. 2. That 
he might withdraw himſelf from rhecompany of Idolaters as far as 
he might. 3. As a fit place of concourſe and reſort for thoſe thar | 
were on God's {ide- 4. T'o prevent the eſcape of the greateſt Delins ; 
queats, the reſt of the Camp being probably ſurrounded with ſome | 
trench, orſuch like thing, elſe Gates had been ſuperfluous and un- | 
profitable. y Who will rake God's part, and plead his Cauſeagainft | 
Idolatry and Idolaters ? z ( i.e. ) The moſt of that Tribe, as that 
univerſal Particle is oft underſtood ; for ſome ofthem were deſtroyed 
as guilty, : ; 

27 And he ſaid unto them, Thus faith the LORD 
God of Iſrael, Put every man his ſword by his ſide, «nd 
gO in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, 
and flay every man his brother «, and every man his 


companion, and every man his neighbour. 

a The meaning is, Slay every principal Offender whom you meer 
with, witheur any indulgence or exception, though brether, or com- 
fanion, or neighbour, There was no fear of killing the innocent in 
this caſe, becauſe, 1. The people were generally guilty. 2. Moſes 
had called to himſelfall that were on God's fide, who thereby were 
ſeparated from the guilty. 3. The Nocent might eaſily be diſcerned 
from the Tranſgrefſors, either by the perſonal knowledge which the 
Levites or others had of the moſt forward IdolJaters, or by their abi- 
ding in their Tents as aſhamed and grieving for their ſin, whilſt the 
Tranſgrefſors were impudently walking abour in the Camp, as 
truſting to their numbers ; or by the direQion of God's Providence, 
if not by ſome viſible token. | 

28 And the children of Levi did according to the 
f Or, and : 
Moſes ſaid, Word of Moſes ; and there fell of the people that day 
Conſecrate about three thouſand men b. 
your ſelves b And no more, for it is probable they ſlew only thoſe whom they 
70 day co© knew to have been the Ringleadersto others in this miſchief. 
#heLORD, 29 f Fer Moſes had ſaid, * Conſecrate your ſelves 


b , 
ns ,, {© day to the LORD c, even every man upon his ſon, 


hath been 4Nd upon his brother, that he may beſtow upon you a 
«zainſt by blefling this day. 

0n, and c Offer up your ſelves to the honour and ſervice of the Lord in 
againft his this work, which becauſe'it was joined with the hazard oftheir lives, 


— 


: 


may be, and is by ſome tranſlated thus, amongſt thoſe that do or ſhall 
riſe up or be born of then, i. e. that ſhall ſucceed them ; for ſo the word | 


- —— 


to make it. 


brother, * hecalls it 2 conſecration or oblation of themſelves, 2s Abraham for | 
C. the like reaſon is ſaid to have offered up 1/2ac. 4 Heb. Fill your hands, &Cc. | 
T Heb. #1 ;. e. offer a Sacrifice, for ſo that Phraſe is oft uſed, as Exod. 28. 41. 


Your hands, Judg: 17: 5, 12. That work of Juſtice which they were going to | 


execute might ſeem an inhumane and barbarous AR,but he rel)s them 
it was an acceptable Sacrifice to God, as the deſtruttion of God's 
Enemies is cailed 4 ſacrifice, Iſs: 34: 6: Exzek: 39: 179. Or he hereby 
intimates, that this Tribe was deſigned by God for his immediate 
ſervice, and therefore recommends this work to them as an excellent 
initiation into their Office, and as a demonſtration that they were in 
ſome ſorr worthy of that great truſt. | 
30 C And it came to paſs on the morrow, that Moſes 


ſaid unto the people, Ye have ſinned a great fin : and 
now [I will go up unto the LORD, * peradventure 4 I * 2 Sam: 


ſhall make an atonement for your ſin. 16: 12; , 

d He ſpeaks doubtfully, partly becauſe he was uncertain how far AB 5: 
God wou!d pardon chem, and partly to quicken them to the more *5* + 
ſerious prattice of repenrance. 


31 And Moſes returned unto the. LORD, and ſaid, 
Oh, this people have ſinned a great fin, and have made 
them gods of gold. | 

32 Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their fin e: and if 
not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book f which 


thou haft written. 

e Underftand here, forgive it, or, or it is wel, or, I and others ſhall 
praiſe thy name. His great paſſion for his Peopie ſtops his words, and 
makes his Speech imperfe&. f( 7. e. ) Out of the Book of Life, as 
appears by comparing this with other places, as Pſal: 6g: 28: Dan: + 
12: I: Luke 10: 20 Phil: 4:3: Rev: 3: 5: and 13: 8: and 20: 12: org 
out of the Catalogue or number of thoſe that ſhall be ſaved. 7 ſuppoſe 
Moſes doth not in this caſe wiſh his eternal damnation, becauſe that 
ſtate implies both wickedneſs in himſelf, and the diſhonour of God, 
but his annihilarion, or the utrer loſs of this life, and of that to come, 
and of all the happineſs of both of them. Nor doth Moſer ſimply 
deſire this, but only comparatively expreſſeth his ſingular zeal for 
God's glory, and charity to his People ; ſignifying, that the very 
thoughts ofthe deſtruftion of God's People, and of the reproach and 
blaſphemy which would be caſt upon Gcd by means thereof, wereſa 
grievous and intolerable to him, that he rather wiſheth, if it were 
poſſible, that God would accepr of him as a S.crifice in their ſtead, 
and by his utter deſtruftion prevent ſo great a miſchief, And it is 
to be conſidered, that Moſes ſpeaks this, as alſo many other things, as 
the Mediator berween God and J{rael, and as the Type of the true 
Mediator, Jeſus Chriſt, who was 1n effect rs ſuffer this which Moſes 
was content to ſuffer. 


2 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, * Whoſoever +» po. 
hath ſinned + againſt me, him will I blot out of my 18: 4: 
book g. | 

+ Or, doth fin, to wit, preſumptuouſly, obſtinately, and impeni- | 
tently. g Him will I cut off our of the Jand of the hving, and eter= 


' nally deprive of my favour and glory, and not thee who art inno- 


cent and righteous. | 
34 Therefore now, go, lead the people unto the 


place of which I have ſpoken unto thee. * Behold mine * Chap: 
angel h (ball go before thee. Nevertheleſs * in the day 3 7 9 
ut? 


when I viſit, I will viſit their fin upon them 5. : 

h Not Chriſt, the Angel of the Covenant, who bad hitherto gone 32: Z53 
before them ; bur a created Angel, as appears by comparing this with # 
Exod: 33. 2, 3, 12: Though Moſes obtained the revocation of this | 
threatning, Exod: 33: 14,17. # When Ifhall puniſh them tor their 
other ſins, which I foreſee they will commit, I will remember and - 
puniſh this alſo. h | 

35 And the LORD plagued the people &, becauſe 
they made the calf which Aaron made /, 

& This relates either to the deſtruction of 3000 of them by the 
Levites, or rather to the future Plagues, in which God alſo reckoned 
with chem for this ſin. 1 They made it, becauſe they urged Aarm ta 
make it, as Fudge is {aid to purchaſe the field, As 1; 18: which was 
purchaſed by his Money ; and 4sron made it, by giving command 
The Chaldee, Syriack, Arabick, and Samaritan, render the 
words thus, They worſhipped or ſacrificed to the calf which Aaron made, 

And the word which ſignifies to make, is oft uſed for worſhipping os 
ſacrificing, as Exod: 10: 25: Judg: 13: 15: 1 Kings 18: 26, 


CH AP, XXXIIL . 
God refuſeth to go with the people as formerly, 1 == 3. The people mourn, 

. God's command what to ſay to the children of Iſrael,, 5, They mourn, 
and lay by their ornaments, 6. Moſes pitcheth the tabernacle without the 
camp, 7. And going in, Gods ſpeaks to him, 8, 9. A cloudy pillar © 
deſcendeth on it, 10. God ſpeaks to Moſes face to face, 11. He prays for 
his guidance, and preſence, 12, 13 — 16. God promiſes him, 
14 m——y7, Proclains his name, 19. Hi face can be ſeen by no man, 
20—23, ; 


N D the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Depart, and go 
{ \ up hence, thou and. the people which thou haft \ 
brought upout of the land of Egypt, unto the land which | 
I ſware unto Abraham, to Iſaac, and toJacob, ſaying, 
* Unto thy ſeed will 1 give it. 5 
2 * AndI will ſend an angel before thee, and I will, ._ . 
drive outthe Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, ,,. .. 
and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebuſite. * Chap: 
3 Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for] 32:34: 
will not go up in the midſt of thee 4 ( for thou art a , 77 
* ſtiff-necked people, ) leſt I conſume thee in the way. joſh: 24: 
4 By my own ſpecial and gracicus p—_ as hitherto I have 31. 
done, bur I will depart from thee. In purſuance hereof God re- * Chap: 
moves his Tabernacle without the Camp, Yerſe 7. I will only make 32: g: 
my Promiſe to thy Fathers, and fend an Angel to accompliſh Deut: g: 
it, bur 1 will ſhery no peculiar and further kindneſs to thee. 5 Leſt 1;, 
thy ſins ſhould be aggravated by my prefence and favour, and there. 
by I ſhould be provoked utterly to deſtroy thee. So he ſhews that 
their perverſeneſs makes this ſeverity neceſſary for them, and thar 


God evenin his judgment remembers mercy to them. 
R 2 4 T And 


— 


_ © _———— — EIS 
: 


+5 
my - 


” "oy 


i Py 
fe os hes 
Cy TOE 
"Cha 
| - 


K 


a 


XXII. 
4 4 And when the people heard theſe evil tidings, 
they. monrned:: and no man did put on him his orna- 
ments c. | 
c Their precious Garments, or Jewels, which the Women reſerved, 
as we ſaw, Perſe 3. This was a vilible ſign and profeſſion of rheir 
inward humijliation and repentance for their fin, and of their deep 


ſenſe of God's diſpleaſure. : 

5 For the LORD had ſaid unto Moſes, Say unto the 
children of Iſrael, Ye are a ſtiff-necked people : I will 
come up into the midſt of thee &d in a moment, ard 
conſume thee e : therefore now put off thy ornaments 
from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee f. 

4 Towit, in anger ; not in favour, Yerſe 3. where the words are 
the ſame, bur the ſenſe differing. e Obj. Bur God had promiied he 
would not do ſo, Yerſe 14. 4ſ. That was ſignified to Miſes, nor to 
the People, to whom the rhrearning was moſt proper and profitable; 
and thischreatning hath a condicion implied, to wat, l, rhey re- 
pent, as the next words plainly ſhew. f That I may either inflift my 
Judgments, or ſuſpend them, as thou art penitent or 1mpenitent. 


'6 And the children of Iſrael ſtript themſelves of their 
ornaments by the mount Horeb. : 
' 7 And Moſes took the tabernacle g, and pitched it 


* without the camp, afar off from the camp 4, and called 


Num: 


© 


: 


it the tabernacle of the congregation z : and it came to 
paſs, rhat every one which ſought'the LORD &, went 
out untothe tabernacle of the congregation, which was 


, withour" the camp. 1 
" g A Tent ſer up by Moſes for the People to meet in for ſacrifice 
and ſeeking of God, and other parts of God's Worſhip, unri) the 
great Tabernacle ſhould be finiſhed ; for ſuch a place was neceffary, 
or highly expedient for that uſe, and therefore it is nor probable 
they would be withour it for a years ſpace. h In teſtimony of God's 
alienation from them, and diſpleaſure againſt them, this being a kind 


of excommunication ; and all was too little to bring them to a | 
; ſuch as ſhall be ſeen in the other life ; or that glorious ſhape which, 


through repentance. 7 Ir was ſo before, but he called it ſo now, to 
ſhew that God had not wholly forſaken them ; and thar, if they trueiy 
repented, he ſtill permitted chem to come into his preſence, and to 
ſeck the Lord. &k Either for his favour, or for counſel and direCtion. 
See Exod: 18 15, 19, 20. | | \ 

8 And it came to paſs, when Moles went out unto 
the tabernacle, that all the people roſe up, and ſtood 
every man at his tent door, and looked after Moſes / 


until he was gone into the tabernacle. 

ITeſtifying their grief for God's departure, their reſpe& to Moſes 
whom they had larely deſpiſed, their earneſt defire of his interceſſion 
for them, their longing for God's favour, and their humble expeCta- 
tion of a gracious return from God by the hands of Moſes. 


9 Andit came to paſs as Moſes entred into the taber- 


nacle, the cloudy pillar deſcended 2, and ſtood at the door 
of the tabernacle, and the LORD talked with Moſes 

7 Whereby God teſtified his approbation of Moſes, and of that which 
Moſes had done, which might ſeem to ſome ſevere and cruel. 

ro *And all the people ſaw the cloudy pillar ftand at 

the tabernacle door, and all the people roſe up and 
worſhipped, every man in his tent door, 

ii And * the LORD ſpake unto Moſes face to face », 
as a man ſ{peakerh to - his friend. And he turned again 
into the'camp; but his ſervant Joſhua the ſon of Nun, a 


young man, departed not out of the tabernacle o. 

» Or, mouth to mout5,-as Numb. 12. 8. Not that God hath Face or 
Mourh. br that Moſes could behold it, which is denied, Yerſe 20. But 
the ſenſe is, He ſpake with him freely and f:miliarly, and immedi- 
ately, not by an Angel in adre:zm- or vifien, as hedid to other 
Prophets. See Deut: 34. 10. o Who abode there either to k:ep it 
from injury or inconvenience ; for as it was fer up by man's help, 
ſo it needed man's care to preſerve it ; or to affi!t and direQ thoſe 
who reſorted thither to ſeek Ged in Moſes his ablence. And Joſhua 
ſeems to be appointed for this work rather than Aaron, or any orher 
of the Elders, becauſe they had one way or other been guilty of the 
late Idolartry, and God would hereby puniſh them with a temporary 
ſuſpenſion from his ſervice, and their office. 

:2 E And Moſes ſaid unto the LORD, See, thou 
fayeſt unto me, Bring up this people, and chou haſt not 
ler me know whom thou wilt ſend with me p. Yet 
thou haſt ſaid, I know thee by name q, and thou hait 


alſo found grace in my ſight. 
Þ (7.0. ) What Angel it is, whether it'be a created Angel ; for then 
I profeſs I am unſatisfied with him, Yerſe 15. or the ſame increated 
Angel Chriſt, who hath hitherto accompanied us, and then I am 
cont=nr. Bur I am ar a great loſs by thy withdrawing thy cloudy 
Pillar froin the people to whom it is to be a guide. K (7. e.) Diſtin&ly 
and familiarly, as one whom I have much converfe with, and great 
kindneſs for ;. thy name is written in my Book. Compare Exod: ; 2: 
32, 33. Pſal: 87: 5, 6: Phil: 4 3. And knowing here notes approbation 
and afte&ion, as Pſal: 1: 6: Matth: 1: 23: compare Fer: 1: 5. 
13 Now therefore I pray thee, if I have found grace 
in thy ſight, ſhew me now thy way r, that I may know 
thee s, that I may find grace in thy ſight ; and conſider 


that this nation is thy people . 
7 The courſe and manner of thy dealings with men, and particu. 
larly thy purpoſe and will concerning me and thy people, 


mind herein ; men are ſaid ro know God when they know his mind ! 


and will ; or that I may experimentally know thee to be what thou © 
- "haſt promiſed thou wut be to me and to thy people ; or rather, that ſee my back-parts k : but my face (ball not be ſeen. | 


1 may thereby know thee, namely tka? I ſhall find grace in thy fight, ag it | 


EXODUS. 


-time I will bring them to their reſting place and ſertled habiration ; 


' grace in my fight, and I know thee by name. 


Chap. XXX&IH, 


follows ; that Imay be aſſured that thou wilt be reconciled to, and 
preſent with me and thy people. t Both by thy own choice and 
purpoſe, and Promiſe to their Parents, and by their recognition of 
thee for their God, and their returning to thee again. 


14 And he {aid * My preſence « ſhall go ich thee, * 2 Sam: 


and I will give thee reft x. 17: 11: 
u Heb. My face, i. e. T my ſelf, by comparing this with 2 Sam: 

17.11. The Angel of my preſence, Iſa: 63: 9: the pledge of my 

preſence, the cloudy Pillar ; and I will not turn thee over to an 

Angel as I threatned, Yerſe 2. See Dent: 4: 34+ x Not only reſt from 

thy preſent anguiſh and perplexity of mind for thy people, bur in due 


for it is evident from werſe 15. 16. that Moſes his care and prayer was 
more for the people than for himſelf. 

15 And he ſaid unto him, If thy preſence go not 
w1:h me, Carry us not up hence y. 

y Let us rather live and die in the Wilderneſs with thy preſence 
and favour, than go into Cana withour it ; for even that promiſe 
of reſt I value not without thy preſence. So he ecchoes back God's 
words to himſelf, and turns God's promiſe into a prayer. 


i6 For wherein ſhall it be known here z, that I and 
thy people have found grace in thy ſight? 7s is not in 
that thou goeſt with us ? ſo * ſhall we be ſeparated, I, * Chip: | 
and thy people, from all the people « that areupon the 34 19. | 
face of the earth. | 

z By what other token ſhall other Nations and after Ages know. 
a ( i.e. ) Diſtinguiſhed by thy peculiar kindneſs and priviledges 
afforded ro us. Or, be made wonderful, or eminent, or glorious above all 
other people. 


17 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, I will do this 
thing alſo that thou haſt ſpoken : for thou haſt found 


18 And he ſaid, I beſeech thee ſhew me thy glory, 
b (i.e. ) Thy glorious Majeſty, the brightneſs of thy countenance, 
ſome ſuch manifc{tation of thy ſelf as becomes thy excellency, and 


together with an humane voice, thou haſt now aſſumed. Bur for 
the eſſence of God, as that was and is and ever will be inviſible to 
bodily eyes, 1 7im.6. 16. ſoa man. of ſuch great reaſon and deep 
knowledge in Divine Things, and univerſal Learning could not be 
ignorant of it, and therefore would not deſire its 

19 And he ſaid, I will make all my goodneſs c paſs 
before thee, and I will proclaim the Name of the 
LORD 4 before thee ; * and will be gracious to whom , 
I will be gracious e, and' will ſhew mercy on whom I 


will ſhew mercy. 

c Or, My beauty ; for ſo that Hebrew word is ſometimes uſed, 
Gen: 6: 2: 1 Sam: 9: 2: or my excellency, or my glory, as appears from 
Perſe 22. which was the thing Moſes defired to lee : And the difference 
between his requeſt and Goa's anſwer, doth not lye in glory and 
goodneſs, but in fhewing his glory io as Moſes might gaze upon it, and 
making it only, as it follows, to paſs before him, to wit, in a ſudden 
and very. tranſitory Viſion. Though it may be underſtood properly 
of God's goodaeſs and kindneſs to men, of which the tollowing 
words ſpeak, and that was the great, 1f not the only thing aſcribed 
ro God, Chap. 34+ 6, 7. d(i.e.) My Name; the Noun for the 
Prenoun, as is very frequent. I will give thee notice when I come, 
that thou mayſt atrend ; I will nor furprize thee, nor ſteal by thee. 
Or will proclaira, or pulliſh of the Name of the Lord, or of my name, i.e. 
ſome part of ir, eſpecially my goodneſs, which may ſeem to be here 
principally intended, 1. By comparing this with Chap. 34. 6, 7. 
2. By the following words, which ſeem a limitation of this general 
expreſſion, 9. d. T will proclaim, manifeſt, and impart my goodneſs, 
bur with a difference, not to all men, bur to whom I pleaſe. 3. B 
other places, where the name of the Lord, 1s principally, if not ſolely 
underſtood of his goodneſs, as 7/a. 50. 10. and in many places of the 
Pſalms, e This may ſeem to be added, with reference to rhe people 
for whom Moſes is interceding, leſt Moſes ſhould miſunderſtand or 
miſapply what is ſaid here, and Chap. 34.6, 7. The ſenſe is, I will 
ſh2w this peculiar favour to thee, I will alſo be gracious towards 
the people thou pleadeſt for, but not promiſcuouſly. Some of them 
I will ſeverely and eternally puniſh tor this and their other ſins; and 
ſoine of them I will pardon and ſave, not becauſe they are Righteous, 
or Innocent, or lefs Sinners than the reſt, but meerly out of my own 
good Pleaſure and moſt free Grace, whereby I wilt ſhew mercy to | 
ſome, when I will not ſhew mercy to others. Thus this place is 1 
interpreted by the Apoſtle, Rom. g. 16, &c. 
. 20 And he faid, Thou canft not fee my face f'; for* 
there ſhall no man ſee me, and Jive g, 

f Either 1. My eſſence. But that no man can ſee, neither in this 
life, nor in the next. Or rather 2. My glorious preſence. g This 
may note either 1, God's purpoſe that that bliſsful Viſion of God in 
Glory ſhall be given to no Man here, but is reſerved for the future 
life. - Or rather 2. The impoſſibility of the thing from Man's 
weakneſs, which is ſuch, that 1f God ſhould diſplay all rhe Beams ; 
of his Glory to him, it would certainly aſtoniſh, averwhelm, and ; 
deſtroy him. , 


21 And the LORD faid, Behold, there is a place by 
me h, and thou ſhalt ftand upon a rock. 


þ Tn this Mountain where my reſidence and glorious preſence now 
is, and in that part of it whence my Voice now cometh to thine 


Rom: | 
9: I5: 


* Gen: 32: 
30: Deut: 
5:24: Jud: 
13. 22: | 
Rev: 1: |} 
16, 17: | 


[ 
J 


and the |; 
merhod which thou wilt chuſe for the fulfilling of thy promiſe, and 
the courſe which thou wouldſt have me take, and the way by which | 
* T ſhall conduft thy people to the promiſed Land. s (3. e.) Thy | 


ars. | 
22 And it (ball come to paſs, while my glory paſſeth | 
by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will | 
cover thee with my hand iwhile I paſs by. 


7 Thar thou mayſt not be undone by thy own deſires, nor ſwal- 
lowed up with the ſight of my glory. . 


23 And Iwill take away mine hand, and thou ſhalt 


k (4. ce) ImperfeRly and in part, ag when we ſee only a Man's 
Backs , 
| 


- IEA 


Chap. XXXIV. 


+ Deut. 
for: I. 


*Deur. 5: 


F 9: Jer:32: 


18. 
*Chap: 33 
7:21:Joſh: 
24:19:Job 
Do: 14: 
Nah:1:3. 


TR 


E X-O 


Back-parts and not his Face. Thou ſhalt ſee a ſhadow or obſcure 
delineation of my Glory, as much as thou canſt bear, though not 


as much as thou dolt detire. 


C H A P. XX XIV. 


God commands Moſes to kew-two tables of ſtone like the former, wherein he 
promiſes to write, I. loſes goes with theſ e tables up to the mounTr, 4. 
God deſcends in a cloud, 5. He proclaims his name, 6, 7. Moſes wor- 
ſhips, $, 9. God making a covenant with the people, COMMAnds them 
not to make a covenant with their enemies, 10----12. Bias them beware 
of molren gods, 13*====-17, The feaſt of unleavened bread, 18.. To reſt 
on the ſabbath=day, 19-=--=21, 


/ ee 4; s 
theſe words, 27. The time of Moſes's abode on the mount, 28. oſes's face 


ſhining, 29. 1s covered, 33. He acquaints the people with what the j ;b I r 
 unpuniſhed, which may make a good ſenſe, yet 1t ſeems much better 
| to be rendercd, - 1 will not utterly deſtroy ce. 


Lord told him, 31, 32. 
N D the LORD faid unto Moſes, F Hew thee 
ewo tables of ſtone a, like unto the firſt : and I 

will write upon theſe tables che words that were 1n the 


firſt tables b which thou brakeſt. £ 
a The firſt Tables were made immediately by God, who of his 
own meer Grace and good pleaſure, and without Man s merit or 
contrivance entered into covenant with Abrahamand his Seed. Theſe 
Tables muſt be made by Moſes, partly in token of God s diſpleaſure 
for their ſin, and partly to ſignify, that though the Covenant of 
Grace was firſt made without Man's care and counſel, yet it ſhould 
not be renewed but by Mans repentance. And as the Tables of 
Srone ſignificd the hardneſs of their Hearts, ſo the hewing of them 
by Moſes might ſignify the circumciſion and plowing up of their 
Hearts, that they might be fit for the receiving of Go $ mercies, 
and the performance of their duties. b To ſhew God's reception 
of 1[rasl into his favour, and their former ſtate, and that the Law 
& Covenant of God was neither aboliſhed,nor changed by their fin, 


c This is faid,not for the Beaſts, which are not capable of a Law, 


_ will leave the marks of his Vengeance for this Sin upon thy People, 


Other laws, 22---26. Moſes wrote , 


DU Ss. Chap. XXX1V.| 


doth not ſpeak of God's diſpoſition and carriage towards his Ene+ 
mies, againſt whom he proceeds with great feverity,and commands \| 
the 1/-aelites to do ſo in the verſes here following ; bur rowards his | 
People, whoſe caufe Moſes is all along pleading with God. Sce 
chap. 32. 11, 12, 13, 31, and 33: 13, 15. and 34: 19. 4. The 
Hebrew Verb here uſed frequently ,fignifies to 22ke empty or deſalate, 
ro empty Men of their Goods, or Places of Men. See 1/3: 3: 26. 
Amvs 4: 6. So here he will not utterly empty or defiroy : Though he 


5 


29; 


- even to their third and fourth Generation ;or if ir may be further, 
yet he will not utterly 100t them out, which is the great -thing 
thou feareſt or laboureſt ro prevent. And this very phraſe here 
uſed, we have in Jer: 3o: 11. and repeated Jer: 46: 28. where 
though Interpreters generally render it, 1 wi!! not leave thee altogether 


( 1. } Becauſe hereby 
theſe words exactly anſwer ro the ioregoing clauſe, yet will 7 no; 
make a full end of thee, and 'io the fame thing 1s elegantly repeated 
in other words, which is very frequent in Scripture. ( 2. ) Becauſe 
here is an oppolition between the ſeverity God uſeth to orher Peo- 
ple, and the kindneſs he uſerh ro his own People, which is ma- 
nifeſt in the former member of the ve:ſe, and therefore moſt pro- 
bable and agreeable in this. 5. This is much confirmed from * 
Numb: 14: 18. where Moſes, pleading with God for tte Pardon of his 
People's Sin,uſeth this very Phraſe and Argument, as taken out of 
God's Mouth,which in this ſenſe is very properand prevalent, Thou 
haſt ſaid,that even when thou doſt viſit Initquity, &'c. thou wilt not 
utterly deſtroy them. And God anſwers him, verſe 20. 1 have par- + 
doned according to thy word, 1. e. ſo as not utterly to deſtroy them: 
But truly as T live, &c. werſe 21, 22, 23+ 7. e. Bur T will ſeverely pt- 
niſh them. Bur if this had been Sh meaning, Lord thou haſt 
faid,-----thou wilt by no means clear the guilty, as we render ir, it was 

a moſt improper Argument, and put a Sword into the Loid's Hand 
ro flay them even by vertue of this conſideration. 

8 And Moſes m2de haſte, and -bowed his head to- 
ward the earth, and worſhipped. 

9 And he faid, If now I have found grace in thy 
ſight, O LORD, let miy LORD, I pray thee, go a- 
mongfit us, ( for it is a ſtiit-n:cked people 1, ) and par- 
don our iniquity, and our fin, and take us tor thine 


but to reſtrain the preſumption and curioſity of the people,by this 
argument, that even the Beaſts that come too near ſhall be deſtroyed, 
and much more Man, whoſe knowledge aggravatcs his fin and pu- 
niſhment. : 

4 < And he hewed two tables of ſtone like unto the 


firſt, and Moſes roſe up early in the morning, and went] 
up unto mount Sinai, as the LORD had commanded 
him, and took in his hand the two tables of ſtone. 

5 And the LORD deſcended in the cloud 4, and 
ftood with him there e, and proclaimed the Name of 
the LORD.. 


d In the cloudy Pillar, which ordinarily ſtood up in the Air 
above the Mount, but came down to the top of it, when God ſpake 
with Moſes. See Exod: 33: 9. Numb: 11: 17, 25+ e To wait, in the 
Mount, verſe 2, 4. and the clift of a Rock, Chap: 33: 22. which 
was in the Mount, and near the top of ir, as appears by comparing 
theſe places together. 

6 And the LORD paſſed by before him, and pro- 
claimed, The LORD, the LORD God f, merciful, 
and gracious, long-ſuftering, and abundant in good- 
neſs and truth g, 

f This Title ſhews his glorious Being,Power and Authority; the 
following titles note his Goodneſs to Men. g In fulfilling all his 
gracious promiſes made to 4b;2ham, and to his Seed, and to all his 
People ; wherein he is ſaid to be abundant, becauſe he generally is 
betrer than his word, and gives more then he promiſed. There is 
a truth in Divine Threatnings, but here the ſcituation of this word 
In the midſt oftheAttributes of Divine Goodneſs plainly ſhews that 
it is to be reſtrained to the Promiſes ; this being uſual and reaſon- 
able, that general words have their ſignification limited by the con- 
text. And indeed here ſeems to be a Henadyadis, goodneſs and truth, 
for true, ſmcere and hearty goodneſs, as mercy and truth are oft put for 
true and real mercy. See Pſa!: 25: 10: and 57: 3, Oc. 

7 Keeping mercy for thouſands b, forgiving iniqui- 
ty, and tranſgreflion, and fin z, and * that will by no 
means clear the guil'y k,* viſiting the iniquity of the fa- 
thers upon the children, and upon the childrens chil- 
dren, unto the third and to the fourth generation. 

| Þþ The Chaldee, and ſome others render it for 2 thouſand genera- 
Hons. t Sins of ail ſorts and ſizes, ſecret or open, infirmities or 
preſumprions, againſt God or Men, as the heap of various words 
here put together ſignifies. k This is commonly eſteemed a title of 
Juſtice or Vengeance, which is here added by way of corre&ion 
leſt Men ſhould miſtake or abuſe God's mercy. God is moſt gra- 
c1ous indeed, but fo as he is alſo juſt, and will not pity nor ?pare 
impudent and impenitent Tran'greflors, but will ſeverely puniſh 
them. And the Jewiſh Doors hereupon obſerve, that the Mercy of 
ets doth tar exceed his Jultice ; here being, as they number them 
tnurteen Attributes of Mercy, and bur one of Juſtice. But rhis 
Tranſlation and interpretation is rejected by ſome late learned Inter- 
P1eters, who make this an Attribute of God's f;oodne{s or Clemen- 
cy, and render the word; thus, arſtroymng he will not utterly deftroy 
though viſiting, &c. q. 4. He is ſo gracious, that though he will ſe- 
verely punith the Laiquity of the Fathers,and eſpecially their Idola- 
try, upon themſelves, and upon their Children, &c. as he hath ſaid 
Exod, 20: ©, yet 12 Judgment he w fl remember Mercy, and will 
nor utterly deftroy his people for their (11:Ss There are maiy thin $ 
which favour this Interpretation. | 
Solicitude and Prayer forthe Veople of Ijrael, 
would not utterly deſtroy them, as he threatned to do 
ſenſe beſt ag:ces with God's Promiſe, chap: 31: 19 
*y gooan.ſs to paſs befpre thee ; which genere! 
harly explained and performed in theſe two v; 


w 


2. This 
I wil make all 
Promitc is particus 


I- This ſuirg moſt with Moſes his | 
which was, that God | 


Tk mi 3*. , ; (].. s Ry __ by 
Hes. 3, This place { 17 Thou {att mate thee no molten gods 7, 
| R 7 


inheritance m. | 

| And therefore need thy gloricus and powerful Preſence to rule 
them. Or rather, though it be a ſliff-necked people, as thou fait, yet 
forſake them not. The Hebrew Particle, chi, oft ſignifies though, 
as Exod: 5: x1. Iſa: 54: 6. m (35. e.) Deal with us as Men do with 
their Inheritances, dwell among us, proteCt us, improve us. 

10 4 And he ſaid, Behold, * I make a covenant # :; 
before all thy people I will do marvels, ſuch as have 
not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation : and 
all the people amongſt which thou art, ſhale ſee the 
work of the LORD : for it is a terrible thing that T 
will do with thee o. x FE 16 

2 ( 3, e.) Ido hereby renew my Covenant with thy Peoplg which 
they had violated and voided by their fin. But the thorrneſs of tlie 
Phraſe, there being no mention here of any with whom this Cove- 
nant 15 made or renewed, and the following words, make it more 
probable, that this Covenant is nothing but a ſolemn promiſe or en- 
gagement that God will do the thing which here follows. And the 
word Covenant 1s oft uſed for a meer promiſe, as Gen: 9:9, &c, Lev: 
24.8: Num: 18: 19: and 25:12. 0 Either 1. By thy Minifſtery, as that 
phraſe is ſometimes uſcd,as 1 Cor: 15. 10. Or 2. In the midf of thee, 
7. e. of thy People, as ver: 11: before thee, 7: e: before thy People: This 
I prefer, becauſe the nexr Verſe explains this of fuch things as were 
not done by Moſes his Miniſtery, nor in his time, but aſterwards. 


1x Obſerve thou that which I command thee this 
day. Behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and 


* Deurt: 
53.23 


Y 


the Hivice, and the-Jebuſite. . __* Chap: 
12 * Take heed to thy ſelf, leſt thou make a cove- 23:32: 
leſt it be for a ſnare in the midſt of thee. - *Chays 
13 But ye ſhall deſtroy their altars, and * break their 53:24: 
p Which ar firſt were uſed by good men for their devotion, as 3: . 
Gen: 21:33. butafterwards. being horribly abuſed co Superſtiriun and + Heb: ft ; 
F27ES. 
14 For thou. ſhalt worſhip no other Ged ; for the © 
9 Who hath made himfelf known by, and glories in that name, wa rr 
The jealous God, who cannot endure any Competitor or Corrival "Im 
whereas the falſe and puny gods of the Hearhens | were contented + Chap: 
of God, whereby he is known and diitinguitked from all crher geds. 
T5 Leſt chou make a covenant r with the inhabitants 
and do ſacrifice unto their gods, and on? call thee, and 
chou eat of his ſacrifice 7. 
whom. you ſhould drive out. 5-(.7. e. Þ Commit Idotarry, which is 
oft called and compared to ſpiritual Whoredom. - Sec Fer: 2: afid 5, 
whereby thou wilt partake MTs 1 1n an idolatrons Worthip ; 
becauſe ſuch Feaſts were a part ey offered ro the det. 


the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite; and 
nant with the inhabirancs of the land whither thou goeft, Deur: 7: 
+ images, and * cut down their groves p.. Deur:15: 
Idolatry, were by God's command to be deſtroyed. —_ 
Juidg:6: 
LORD, whoſe name 3s jealous q 5 a*® jealcus God. |; *$.. 
* 23: 14: © 
with multitudes cf Partners. So-this is properly ſaid to be chename 4. 5 
of the land, and they go a whoring s after their 2002s, 
r For cohabitation, or to ſuffer them quecrly to live among you, 
and Exek: 16. + To wit, of the parts or remainders of his S2critice, 
! aedictions and Thankigivings 


and were accompanied with ſolemn t 

to the Idol: See Numb: 25: 2." Pſp; I6: 28, Exek; 18: 6: and 22: 9; 

x Cor: 10: 20: Rev: 2: 20, + WET | 
16 And tiioutaks cf * their daughters unto tliy ſons; 

and their daughters * go a whoring after their gods 

and make thy fons go a whoring after their gods, 


T I 1155 
- i & + & + 
* Nuztbe 


25.1,2, 


d . 

» v4 itY Fay | 
oy % 

Y - 


Chap. XXXIV. 


u Nor graven, 
nature of the things, 
mentions molten, beca 


as it plainly appears both from the 


nor any other, Bur he 


and. from many paralle] Scriptures : 
uſe their Jate Idol was of that kind. 


*Chap:12 18 © The feaſt of * unleavencd bread ſhalt thou keep: 
15, ©. ſeven days ſbalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I com- 
Il *3*'5*  manded thee, in the time of the month Abib; for in 
* Chap: the * month Abib thou cameſt out from Egypr. 
3: E 19 * All that openeth the matrix, 7s mine : and eve- 
| þ Chap * ry ficſtling among{t thy cattel, wherber ox or ſheep, 1ha# 
| Enea4: is male x. 
| 30: x Heb. 4&:d(for, That is,as the particle,and,is oft uſed; the words 
Luke 2. following here, and werſe 20: being a particular explication of ur 
23. general Sentence in the beginning of this Verſe ) all thy cattel whic 
| ( a particle oft underſtood) ſball be born male, ( as it is alſo explained 


whatſoever ( to wit, of the male-kind ) 
d is fitly underſtood out of the former 
) of Ox or ( and put for or,as it is oft 


Exod: 13: 12. ) the opening or 
openeth the Matrix (which wor 
Member, which is very uſual 


d Sheep. . 
—_—_ * firſtling of an aſs thou ſhalt redeem with 


20 Bur the 
12.1 a7+lambs and if thou redeem him not, then ſhalt thou 
+ 


Oc, kid. break his neck. All the firſt-born of thy ſons thou (halt | 
- * Chap: redeem : and none ſhall appear before me * empty y, 


|» Chap: 


z 
( 
} 
' 


| 23: I5. 7 Either without a gift to me, ſo it is a Precept ; or without | 
© 7 Sam:9: benefit to himſelf; ſo it is a Promiſe. See Exod: 23, 15. 

7 =_ 21 CT *Sixdaysſbalt thou work, but on the ſeventh 
2% ® day thou bale reſt 3 in caring-time, and in harveit thou 

| * Chap: ſhalt reſt z. _— 
23:12: =» Which times are expreſſed, becauſe the great profit and ſeeming | 


— Deurt 5:12 neceſſity of working at that time,was likely to be a powerful tempra- 

| Luke 13: tion to make Men break the Sabbath. 

| 24: 22 © * And thou ſhalt obſerve the feaſt of weeks a, 
* Chap: of 


che firſt-fruits of wheat-harveſt 5, ard the feaſt of in- 


S Het. re gathering c at the | years end d. : 
 wolution of # (7. e) Which is numbred by weeks, being juſt ſeven weeks after | 
' the year. the Paſſover, whence it is called Pentecoſt, 7. e. the fifticth day, to , 
| wit, after the Paſſover. See Levir. 23: 15. and 25: 8. 6 So this | 
is a deſignation ofthe time and buſineſs of the Feaſt of weeks. c To | 
wit, of the Fruits of the Earth. d So it was in regard of the Jubilce , 
E and Civil ContraQts. : 
| *Chap:23: 23 C* Thrice in the year (ball all your men-children 
14, <4 ; Appear before the LORD God, the God of Iſrael. | 
16 24 ForIwillcaſt out the nationse before thee, and 
* * Gen:35. enlarge thy borders : * neither [hall any man delire thy 
__ land f, when thon ſhalt. go up to appear before the 
==ax 15. LORD thy God thrice in the year. 

e So thou ſhalt have no inteſtine Enemy to do thee or thine miſ- 
chief. This God promiſed to do, but upon condition of 1/rae!'s dif- 
charge of their duty in following God in this work of driving them 
out, which they negle&ting,it was not fully done. f I will nor only 
tye their hands, that they ſhall make no invaſion upon you, but I 
will take off their thoughts and affe&tions from ſuch an Enterprize, 
which it was very eaſie for God to effte&t many ways» 

* Chap. 25 * Thou lbalt not offer the bluod of my ſacrifice 
23. 18. with leaven, neither ſhall the ſacrifice of the feaſt of | 
| ſſe-over be left unto the morning- 
 *Deut,  26*The firſt of the firſt-fruits of thy land g thou ſhalt 
+ 26.2. bring unto the houſe of the LORD thy God. Thou 
* Chap: ſhalt not 'ſeethe a * kid in his mothers milk. | 
23: 19: # Thou ſhalt not delay to do this,but ſhalt bring the very firſt of 
| Deut: 24: them. Or, the frſt-fruits, even the firſt-fruits of thy land. Which | 
EIT. limitation ſeems here conveniently added, becauſe they were not | 
bound to bring thither all their Firſt-fruits, to wit, thole of their 
own Bodies, their Children. | : 
27 And. the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Write thou 
theſe words 42 for after the tenour of theſe words I 
have made a covenant with thee, and with Lfrael, 

h- Obje#: God ſaith 71 will write, verſe 1. Anſw. 1. Moſes was to 

- write the ritual Precepts mentioned here above,God wrote theMoral 
|. -Law. 2. Moſes wrote what he wrote in a Book. See Exod: 24: 7. bur 
what was written upon the Tables of Stone, was written by God 
himſelf, not by Moſes, who had no graving Inſtraments with him in 

the Mount,and could not without them write upon the Stone. 
' . 28 And he was there with the LORD forty days 
-*Chap: and forty nights : he did neither eat bread, nor drink 
52P.3! water: and he * wrote & upon the tables the words of 

4: 3. | the covenant, the Ten }F Commandments. 

cut: 4..  # As he had been before, being now to renew the broken Cove- 
T3. nant- This forty days faſt of his is mentioned four times, Exod: 24. 
+} Heb. 18: and here, and Dexr: 9: 18: and 10: 10. but it is evident it was 
words. rformed but twice, as the occafion of it happened only twice. 


Not "Moſes, bur the Lord, as appears from werſe r. and from Devt: 
10. the relative Pronoun being here referred to the remoter antece- 
dent, of which there are many inſtances, as Gen: 10: 12. 1 Sam: 21. 
14:and 27:8. Pſal: gg: 6. | 

29 CE And it came to paſs, when Meſzs came down 
- from mount Sinai, (with the two tables of teſtimony in 
Moſes hand, when he came down from the mount ) 
that Moſes wiſt not that the skin of his face ſhone /, 
while he talked with him. "34 
I Queft. Why now, and notwhen he came down ſrom God be- 
fore ? Anſw. 1- Becauſe now he obtained what he did not before ; to 
wit,z glimpſe of theDivine Ek ich though but very tranſient, 
lefr its print upon his face. 2. it was more neceſſary than be- 
fore, to procure the greater honour to Moſes, and to the Law, 2 Cor: 
3.7,8,11. becauſeof the late horrid violation and contempt of them, 
which the Iraebrtes had fallen into. . 


EXODUS. 


. Ceprs both in -the Old and New-Teſtament, which yet are not in 


; would net have joyned in the violation of the Sabbath,went ro one 


Chap. XXXV, 


ſaw Moſes, behold, the skin of his face ſhone, and they 
were afraid to come nigh him. 

21 And Moſes called unto them : and Aaron, and 
all the rulers of the congregation returned wunto him m, 
and Moſes talked with them. 

m.To the Tabetnacle, which was ftill at a diſtance from the 
Camp, though afterwards, God being reconciled, it was ſet up in 
the Camp, Exod: 4o: 34. 

32 And afterward all the children of Iſrael came 
nigh : and he gave chem in commandment all that the 
LORD had ſpoken with him in mount Sinai. 

33 + And zi Moſes had done ſpeaking with them, 
he put * a vail on his face ». 

zu In condeſcention to their weakneſs. 

34 But when Moſes went in before the LORD to ;+h th,m 
ſpeak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out : and put « 
and he came out and ſpake unto the chiidren of Iſrac] v:! 9 ki: | 
that which he was commanded. a” | 

25 And the children of Iſrgel ſaw the face of Moſes SEP 
that the skin of Moſes face ſhone: and Moſes pur the wo 
__ upon his face again, until he went in to ſpeak with 

MTs 


tHeb:ani 
Moſes ceaſ. 
ed from 


ſpeaking 


CHA P. XXXV. 


The command to obſerve the Sabbath, 1--—3. and to bring a free-will 
offering to the Lord, 5. The furniture of the Tabernacle, 6--.-1 9. Men 
and women bring their jewels for the ſame. 20--===24, Underſtanding 
women ſpin, 25, 26. The chief of the people bring in precious ſtones, and © 
ſpices, 27 29. God endues Bezaleel and Aholiab with a fourit of 
wildom for this work, 30--==35. 

N D Motes gathered all the congregation of the 
children of 1fracl together, and ſaid unto them 

Theſe are the words which the LORD hath command 

ed that ye thould do them. | 

2 * Six days {hall work be done, but on the ſeventh * Chap: 

day there ſhaii be to you an Þ holy day, a ſabbath of 2 # 

reft to the LORD a: whoſoever doth work therein D ED 
ſhall be put to death. —— " 
a This Command of the Sabbath is repeated here, as alſo Exog: Luke T3: 

31: 13. together with the Inſtructions for the building of the Taber. 14. 

nacle, and its Utenſils, to thew that they were made for no other + Heb. 

uſe than the Service of God, which was to be performedas every day, lineſs, 


3 


ſo in an eminent and peculiar manner upon -the p 
to teach them the fokaes neceſſity of bo he — - _ : 0 
above all their Ceremonial Obſervations. uk 
3 Yethall kindle no fire b throughout your habitati. 
ons upon the ſabbath-day. A 
b This command ſeems to. be only temporary and extraordinary *Ch 
during the preſet ſeaſon and condition, and not extending to ſuc o_— 


cceding Generations, For 1. There are inſtances of temporary Pre- 
their piaces ſaid to be ſo. Such were ſome of the Precepts concer- 
ning the Paſſover, Ex9d: 12: 11. as is confeſſed. And ſuch was thar 
Law of abſtaining from things ſtrangled,and Blood, 4#:15; +. This 
Precept is nakedly propoſed, and not called a perpetual fatute, nor 
enjoyned to be obſerved in their Generations,as other Precepts are 
to whom thoſe, or ſome like Clauſes, are frequently added. 3- The 
S$2bbath is rather a Feaſt-day than a Faſt-day. And the Jews did make 
Feaſts, and invited Gueſts upon the Sabbath day, which could nor 
probably be without kindling a fire. And, which is more conſide. 
rable, Chriſt himſelf, who tulfilled all Righteouſneſs, and therefore 


of thoſe Feaſts, Luke 14. And the Corinthians, as they received the 
Lord's Supper upon that day, which none queſtion,ſo they had their 
Feaſts,as 1s confeſſed and apparent from 1 Cor:11. 21,22, &c. 4.The 
kindling of a fire was no greater hinderance to the religious obſet» 
vation of the Sabbath, than other things which were allowed upon 
thar day,ſuch as the waſhing and trefiing of themſelves,cating and 
drinking, &c. $5. This prohibition doth not ſeem to concern the 
drefſing of meat, as many underſtand it, by comparing this with 
Exod: 26: 23. ( which place I humblic conceive is miſunderſtood, as 
I. have there intimared, for that was lawful to be done upon their 
moſt ſolemn days, Eo: 12. 16:) but the ſervice of the Tabernacle 
which is the ſubje& of this Chapter,and the occaſion of theſe words: 
and the ſenſe ſeems to be this Ve ſhall kindle no fire for any hand 4 
work throughout your habitation ; no not for the ſervice of this 
Tabernacle, for the heating of any Tools, or the melting of an 
Merals, or other things belonging to it, which being to be bay 
for God's ſervice, and deſerving and requiring all expedition, the 
might probably conceive thar ſuch work might be done upon the 
day. And here alſo; as oft elſewhere, under one kind, all the reſt 
are comprehended and forbidden. 

4 © And Moſes ſpake unto all the congregation of 
the children of Iſrael, ſaying, This zs the thing which 
the LORD commanded, ſaying, 

5 Take ye from amongſt you an offering unto the 
LORD : * whoſoever js of a willing heart c, let him , 


bring it ; an offering of the LORD, gold, and ſilver. © 
and braſs, EF 

c For God values not forced nor grudged Services, 2 Cor: 9:57; 

6 And blue, and purple, and ſcarlet, and fine U- | 
nen, and goats bair, 
| 7 And rams skins died red, and badgers skins, and 
apy re 

8 And oll for the light, and ſpices for anointing oil, 
and for the ſweet incenſe, : $75 

9 And onyx ſtones, and ſtones to be ſet for the 


| 


haps? 


2 
E- 


; 


230 And when Aaron and all the children of Iſrael 


Or A OE oe HE 420 
£ & 


|<phod, and for the breaſt-plate. 


F-" 2d 


1o And 


2 his | 


Chap XXXV. 


_ 0, A PER et CHE TIE 


1» And * every wiſe-hearted {among you ſhall come, 
and make all that the LORD hath commanded, 


4( i.e ) Skilful Artiſt ; for tho God had preſcribed the things, yet 
it required wiſdom and skill to execute what God commanded. 


* Chap: 


31: 6: 


*Chap:26: 1x * The tabernacle e, his tent f, and his covering g. 
1, &. his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and hi: 
{ockets : | ; 

e (#. e. ) The Boards or ftrufure of the Tabernacle, as it appears, 


becanſe it is diſtinguiſhed here fromits Tent and Curtains ; whereas 
elſewhere the Tabernacle is put for all rogether. f The inward an 
finer C:1rtains which covered the boards of it. g The outward anc 
courſer COVeringse : 

12 The ark, and the ſtaves thereof, with che mercy- 


ſcat, and the vail of the covering bh. 
þ (#. e ) Which was hanged before the Ark and Mercys-ſeat. 
12 The table, and his ſtaves, and all his veilels, and 


the ſhew-bread z : 
; But neither did God preſcribe the making of the Shew-bread 
amongſt the other Utenſils, Exed: 25: nor was this made by the 
Workmen here ſpok-n of, but by others. How then comes this to 
be menrioned here ? Anſw. 1. The ſhew-bread may be here pur for the 
Veſſels for the receiving the Shew-bread, by an uſual Metonymy of 
the adjun&, the thing contained put for the thing conraining, as 
treaſures are put for the place where the Treaſures are pur, Pſal: 13 5+ 
7: Math: 2: 11: and 12: 35: and the gifts or offerings of God, for the 
Treaſury where they were put, Luke 21. 4. Hence Tremelins renders 
this place, ans the Veſlcls of the ſhew-bread, Obj. Al the Veſſels of the 
Table are mentioned before, of whic this was one: Av}. Ir 1s not 
unuſuz! after a general expreſſion comprehending all diſtin&tly, ro 
name one eminent member of that kind, ſuch as this unq eſtionably 
was, the Tavle being made principa'ily for this uſe. Thus Mark 
16 7. Tell my Diſciples and Peter. Like Examples are in 2 Sam: 2: 39: 
1 Kings 11: 1: Pſal: 18: the Title. As 11: 4: and in other Authors. 
And for the Particle Yau, and, whici: may ſeem to imply chat theſe* 
wer- things of another kind, an.' nor-ary V-F-ls of the Table, that 
is oft pur for eſpecially, as Joſ: 2: 1, Mark 16; 7. an1 only notes an 
eminent thing ofthe ſame kind, as hath been ſaid. 4ſ. 2. Tho God 
did not preſcribe tie making of the Stew-bread, yer he mentions it, 
togerher with the Table, Exod:25: 30: and r:crefore ir isconveniently 
mentioned with the Table ia tais place alſo, where Moſes to ſhew his 
exa&n«ſs and fidelity, doth pun&ua}ly repeat the ſame rthingsto the 
Peopie which he had received in command trom God. In like manner 
the Ovl, which fed the light ofthe L2mps, is mentioned here in the 
next Verſe, becauſe rhe /ighting of the lamps was preſcribed, Exod. x5 


Pl 


37» - 
14 The candleſtick Mo for the light, and his furniture, 
and his lamps, with the oyl for the light. | 


* Chap: i5 * And the incenſe altar, and his ſtaves, and the 
1%" anointingoyl, and the ſweet incenſe, and the hanging 
for the door at the entring in,of the tabernacle ; 

* Chap: 16 * The altar ofburnt-offering, with his brazen grate, 

27:1: his ſtaves, and all his veilels ; the laver and his foot ; 


17 The hangings of the court, his piilars, and their 
ſockets, and the hanging for the door of the court ; 


EXODUS. 


Chap. KXXVLI. 


27 And the rulers brought onyx-ſtones, and ſtones 
to be ſer for the ephod, and for the breaſt plate, 

28 And * ſpice, and oyl for the light, and for the + Chap! 
3nointing oyl, and for the ſweet wa fs. Z0; 233 

29 The children of Iſrael brought a willing offering 
unto the LORD, every man and woman whole hearc 
made them willing to bring for all manner of work, 
which the LORD had commanded (to be made, by the 
hand of Moſes. | | 

20 4 And Moſes ſaid unto the children of Iſrael, 
See, * che LORD hath called by name Bezaleelche fon 
of Uri, the ſon of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. 

21 And he heth filled him wich the ſpirit of God, in 
wiſdom, in underftanding, and in knowledge, and in 
all manner of workmanſhip, 

32 And to deviſe curious works, to work in gold, and 
in filver, and in braſs ; 

33 Andin the cutting of ſtones, to ſet them, and in 
carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work, 

24 And he hath put in his heart, that he may teach », 
"_ he, and Aholiab the ſon of Ahiſamach of thetribe 
of Dan. 


» To wit, others to work under him ; for the work required 
many hands ; and it is a peculiar Gift of God to be apt to teach, 
which every $kilful Man hath nor, x 


25 Them hath he filled with wiſdom of heart, to 
work all manner of work of the ingraver. and of the 
cunning workman, and of che embroiderer, in blue, 
and in purple, in ſcarlec, and in fine linen, and of the 
weaver, even of them that do any work, and of thoſe 
that deviſe cunning work, 


© Chaps 
- 2g 


- 


CH A P, XXXVL 


Moſes committeth the work to Bezaleel and Aholiab, 1-====4, The liberality 
of the people us ferbld, 5, 6. The curtains of cherubims, 8--—-13. The 


curtains of goats-hair, ©c. all belonging to the tabernacle, 13-=-==;7. 
f [ "Hen wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every 
wiſe-hearted man, in whom the LORD put 


wiſdom and underſtanding to know how to work all 


manner of work for the ſervice of the ſanctuary a, 


according to all that the LORD had commanded. 
a Or, Of che holy place, to wit, of the Tabernacle, ſo called by 2 


+ Prolepſis, and Synecdoche. 


2 And Moſes called þ Bezaleel and Aholiab, and 


every wiſe-hearted man, in whoſe heart the LORD had 


put wiſdom, even every one whole heart ſtirred him up 


to. come unto the work to do it. 


18 The pins of the rcabernacle, and the pins of the ' 


court, and their cords ; 


19 The clothes of ſervice, to do ſervice in the holy | 


place, the holy garments for Aaron the prieſt, and the 
garments of his fons to miniſter in the prieſts office. 


20 4 And all the congregation of the children of 


Iſrael departed from the preſence of Moſes, 


21 Andthey came every one whoſe heart ſtirred him ' 


up X, and every one whom his ſpirit made willing, and 
they brought the LORD) oftering to the work of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his ſervice, 
and for the holy garments. | 

k (i.e.) Whoſe Hearr being defirous and ready to ſerve God» 
engaged his Hand ro off:r whar he had, to his ſervice. 

22 And they came both men and women, as many 
as were Willing-hearted, aud broughr bracelers, and 
ear-rings/, and rings, and tablets, ail jewels of gold: 
and every man that offered, «offered an offering of gold 
unto the LORD. 


{ Obj. Azron had got theſe from them for the making of the Calf, 
Exod: 32. Anſw Though the generaliry of the People didthen part 
w:rh their Ear-rings, yet rhere was a confider:ble number whodid not, 
as being unſatisfied with that Idolatrous deſign ; and ir may ſeem that 
the Women would not part with theirs, being more fond of their 
Ornaments than of their Idols. See the notes on Exod. 32+ 3. 


23 Andevery man with whom was found blue, and 


purple and ſcarlet, and fine linen, and goats hair, and 
red skins of rams, and badgers skins, brought bem. 


24 Every one that did offer an offering of filver and 
braſs, brought the LORDS offering : and every man 
with whom was found jhittim-wood for any work of the 
ſervice, brought z-. 

25 And all the women that were wiſe-hearted, did 
ſpin with their hands, and brought that which they had 

pun, hh of. blue, and sf purpic, and of icarlet, and of 
fine linen. 

26 And all the women whoſe heart {tirred them up 
in wiſdom », ſpun goats hair. 

m I's word ſeems berter to agree with the folinwing than with 
the foregoing word, they ſpun with W403, 4.8, With Skill and arg, 


b God had qualified them before, bur that is nor ſufficient without 


; a Call. 


3 And they received of Moſes all the offering which 
the chiidren of Iſrael had b:ought for the work of the 
ſervice of the ſa::uary, to make ic withal. Ard they 
brought yet unto him inns every morning c, 

cW hich time rhey choſe as the ficit and beſt part of the dzy, and 


| therefore fitreſt for God's tervice. 


4 And all the wite-men tha: wrought all the work 
of the ſanctuary, came every nian from his work which 


. they made. 


5 And they ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, The people 
bring much more than enough for the ſervice of the 
work which the LORD hath commanded to make. 

6 And Moſes gave commandment, and they cauſed 
it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, ſaying, Let 
neither man nor woman d make any more work for 
the offering of the ſantuary : ſo the people were re- 
ſtrained from bringing. 

d For the Women did part of this work as well as the Men. Seg 
Exod. 35. 25. 

7 Eor the flufthey had was ſufficient for all the work 
ro make zt, and roo much. 

8 C And every wiſe-hearted man among them that 
wrought the work of the tabernacle, * made ten curtains 
of fine ewined linen, and blue, and purple, and ſcarlet: 
with cherubims of cunning work made he them. 

9 The length of one curtain was twenty and eight 
cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits : the 
curtains were all of one ſize. 

io And he coupled the five curtains one untoanother : 
and the other five curtains he coupled one unte another» 

it And he made loops of blue on the edge of one 
curtain from the ſcivedge in the coupling : likewiſe he 
made in the uttermoſt ſide of azoher curtain in the 
coupling of the ſecond. 


i2 * Fifty leops made he in one curtain + and fiſty » cap: 


U - . . . 
loops made he in the edge of the curtain which was iit 26. 10: 


the coupling of the ſecond : the loops held one ta 


* Chaps 
26: 3, 4 


| another, 


R 4 I3 Ang 


* Chap. XXXVII. .EXO 
| 13 And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled | 
the curtains one unto another with the taches, So it 
became one tabernacle. 
14 And he made curtains of goats hair, for the tent 
over the tabernacle e: eleven curtains he made them. 
e ( #.e.) For the outward covering of the Tabernacle. See 


Exod: 35:11. : | | 
15 The length of one curtain wasthirty cubits, avd 


four cubits 2yas the breadth of one curtain : the eleven 
curtains ere of one fize. 

16 And he coupled five curtains by themſelves, and 
ſixcurtains by themſelves. 

17 And he made fifty loops upon the uttermoſt edge 
of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops mage he 
upon the edge of the curtain which coupled the ſecond. 

18 And he made fifty taches of braſs to coupie the 
tent together that icmighr be one. 

i9 And he made a covering for the tent, of rams skins 
died red, and a covering of badgers skins above 7hat. 

20 JI And he made boards for tie tabernacle, of 
ſuitrim-wood, ſtanding up. 

21 The length of a board as ten cubits, and the 
breadth of a board one cubit and an half. 

22 One board had two tenons, equally diſtant one 
from another : thus did he make for all the boards of 
the tabernacle. 

23 And he made boards for the tabernacle: twenty 


| 


D U S: Chap. XXXVIII | 


3 And he caſt for it four rings of gold, 7 be ſet by 
the four corners of it : even two rings upon the one 
ſide of it, and two rings upon the other fide of it. 

4 Ard ke made ſteves of ſhittim-wood, and overlaid ' 
them with gold. 

5 And he put the ſtaves into the rings, by the ſides 
of the ark, to bear the ark. 

6 4 And he made the * mercy-ſeat of pure gold two * Chap: | 
cubirs and an half was the length thereof, and one cu- 25: 17: |: 
bit and an half the breadrh thereof. : 

7 And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out 
of one piece made he them, on the ewo ends of the 
mercy-leat. : 

8 One chetub Þ on the end # on this ſide, and ano- + Or, uf}. 
ther cherub on the s/h-r end on that fide ; out of the of, &c, {- 
mercy-ſcat made he the cherubims or the two ends gc *®! 
thereof. | 

a Or, made out of the end ; for they were to be of the ſame piece 
with the Mercy-ſcar. Exod 25. 19 

9 And the-cherubims ſpread out their wings on high, 
and covered with their wings over the mercy-ſcar, with 
their faces one to another: ever to the mercy-ſcar-ward 
were the faces of the cherubims. | 

io 4 And he made ® the table of ſhittim-wood : two * Clay, 
Ccubits as the length thereof, and a cubir the breadth 25: 23 | 
thereof, and a Cubit and an half the height thereof. 

11 And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made 


boards for the ſouth-iide, ſourhward- - 


24 And fourty fockets of filver he made under the : 


ewenty boards : two ſockets under one board for his 
two tenons, and two ſockets under another board for 
his two tenons. 

25 And for the other ſide of the tabernacle, which is 
toward the north corner, he made twenty boards, 

26 And their fourty ſockets of ilver : two ſockets un- 
der one board, andewo ſockets under another board. 

27 And for the ſides of the tabernacle weſt-ward, he 
made fix boards. 

28 And two boards made he for the corners of the 
tabernacle in the'two ſides. 


+ Heb. 29 And they were Þ coupled beneath, and coupled 

twinned. together at the head thereof, to one ring : thus he did 
to both of them in both the corners. 

30 And there were eight boards, and their ſockets 

+ Heb. were ſixteen ſockets of filver: + under every board two 


two ſockets, ſockets. 

2wo ſockets 2; 4 And he made * bars of ſhittim-wood: five for 
—_ * the boards of the one ſide of the tabernacle, 

- *Chap.25s. 32 And five bars for the boards of the other fide of 
28. and 
39-5- mMacle for the fides weſt-ward. 

23 And he made the middle bar to ſhoot through the 
boards frem the one end to the other. 

24 And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made 
their rings ef goid to be places for the bars, and overlaid 
the bars with gold. 

25 5 And he made * a vail f of blue, and purple, 
and ſcarlet, and fine twined linen : with cherubims 
made he it ef cunning work. 

f To wit, the ſecond Vail, which ſeparated between the Holy- 
Parts and the Holy of Holies, becauſe the firſt Vail is deſcribed 
Ferje 37... 

26 And he made thereunto four pillars of ſhittim- 
2000d, and over laid them with gold : their hooks were 
of gold: and he caſt for them four ſockets of ſilver. 

27 4 And he made an * hanging for the tabernacle 
a6: 36: door g of blue, and purple, and {carlet, and fine twined 
+ Heb. tbe linen + of needle-work. 
work of a g Which divided the Holy-place from the Court. 
weedle- | 28 And the five pillars of ir with their hooks * and 
wrHer,% he overlaid their chapiters, and their fillets with gold b, 
-wkgf | but their five ſockers ere of braſs. 

h Whereas the pillars are ſaid to be overlaid with gold, Exod. 26. 37. 
that hence appears to be a Synecdochical Expreſſion, in regard the 
rops and knobs ef the Pillars were wholly overlaid with Gold, and 
the reſt of the Pillars adorned with divers golden Girdles or Hoops ; 
for that place is inall reaſon to be explained by this, as coming after 
ir, and containing the execution et that Preſcript, and that more 
particularly than 1s there expreſſed, 

CH A Þ, XXXVIL 
Bezaleel makes the ark of ſhittim=wood, 1—6. The mercy-ſeat of cherubims, 

7 nn, The table with its veſſzls, 10 16. - The candleſtick with 

its lamps and inſtruments, 17 ====24. Thy altar of incenſe, 25 —28, 

The anointing oyl, and ſweet incenſe, 29. 

ND Bczaleel made che ark of ſhittim-wood : * 
two cubits and a half vas the length of it, and a 
cubit and an half the breadth of it, and a cubit and an 


half the height of iz. * 
2 And heoverlaidit with pure gold within and without, 
.and he made a crown ok gold $0 it gound about, | 


\ 


* Chap: 
26: 31: 


* Chap: 


25; lo; 


a thereunto a crown of gold round abevut. 


the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the taber- | 


I2 Alſo he made thereunto a border of an hand- 
| breadth round about 3 and made a crown of gold for 
the border thereof round abour. 

13 And he caſt for it four rings of gold, and put the 
rings upon the tour corners that were in the four feet | 
thereot. | 

1.4 Over againſt the border were the rings, the places 
for the ſtaves to bear the table. 

15 And he made the ſtaves of ſhittim-wood, and 
overlaid them with gold, to bear the table. 

16 And he made the veſlels which were upon the , 
table, his * diſhes, and his ſpoons, and his bowls, and | 
| his covers F to cover withal, of pure gold. + Or, af 

17 4 And he made the * candleſtick of pure gold, pour 
lf beaten work made he the candleſtick, his fhaft, and 9/44. | 
' his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers were - 

of the ſame. NY 

18 And ſix branches going out of the ſides thereof: 

' three branches of the candleſtick out of the one ſide 
' thereof, and three branches of the candleſtick out of 
the other ſide thereof. 

19 Three bowls made after the faſhion of almonds 
'1n one branch, a knop and a flower : and three bowls 
' made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a 
| flower : ſo throughout the ſix branches going out of the 
' candleſtick. 

20 And in the candleftick were four bowls made like 
almonds, his knops, and his flowers ; 

21 And a knop under two branches of theſame, and 
a knopunder two branches of the ſame, and a knop under 
twe branches of the ſame, according to the ſix branches 
20ing out of it. 

22 Their knops and their branches were of the ſame : 
all of it was one beaten work of pure gold. 

23 And he made his ſeven lamps, and his ſnuffers, 
and his ſnutf-diſhes of pure gold. | 

24 Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the 
veſſels thereof. n ; 

25 * Andhe made the incenſe-altar of ſhittim-wood : * Chap! 
the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a 0: : © 
cubit : ( #t was fourſquare ) and two cubits wasthe height 
of ir : the horns thereof were of the ſame. 

26 And he overlaid it with pure gold, bsth the top of 
it, and the ſides thereof round about, and the horns of it: 
alſo he made unto ir a crown of gold round abour. 

27 And he made two rings of gold for it, under the 
crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two 
ſides thereof, to be places for the ſtaves to bear it 
withal, | 

28 And he made the ftaves of ſhittim-wood, and 
overlaid them with gold, 

29 4 Andhe made*® the holy anointing oyl, and the 
pure incenlſe of ſweet ſpices, according to the work of 
the Apothecary, 


CHAP, XXXVII.. 
The altar of burnt-offering, with its furniture, 1 7. The laver of 
braſs, 8. The Court, and the hangings thereof, 9 —»—==-=20. Bezaleel 
and Aholiab make all ready, 2%, The ſums of what the people offered, 


Chap, þ 
6: 29; 


——— 


TPP CY ES OO PEE TIT TOI on" > 


"YE 


—_— — 


2.3 -<__—_—_—_——_ 
AND 


12Þ: 
I7; 


Chap, 


6: 29 


þ Or, Pp 


our 0 
pithal, 


' Caap! 


25: 30; 


Co RES a7 


"ee per 


XXX VII. 
N ÞD * he made the altar of burnt-offering ef (bit- 


tim-wood : five cubits was the length thereof: and 
kve cubits the breadth thereof - C it was fourſquare ) and 
three cubits the height thereof. 
> And he made the horns thereof on the four corners 
of ir + the horns thereof were of the ſame, and he over- 
114 it with brals. mn 
_ Sud be made all the veſlels of the altar, the pots,and 


fice-pans, all the veſſels thereof made he of braſs. 

4 Andhe made for the altar a brazen grate of net- 
work, under the compaſs thereof, beneath unto the 
midſt thereof. 

5 And he caſt four rings for the four ends of the grate 
of braſs, to be places for the ſtaves. ; 

6 And he made the ſtaves of ſhictim-wood, and over- 
laid them with braſs. ; : 

7 And he put the ſtaves into the rings of the ſides of 
the altar, to bear it withal ; he made the altar hollow 
with boards. 

$ © And he made the * laver of braſs, andthe foot of 
it of braſs, of the + looking-glalles « of the omen 7 al- 
ſembling, which afſembled ar the door of the taberna- 


cle of the congregation b- 
a Whieh as kh - are ſomtimes made of poliſh?d Steel, ſo 
anciently were inade of poliſhed Brafs, as appears both from facred 


and from profane Writers. See Job. 37: 18: Phil. 33; 9: &c, b It 
ſeems to note a company of religious Women, who in a more Pecus 
liar manner devoted themſelves to the ſervice of God in or about his 


Tabernacle, by faſting, prayer, Oc. ſee 1 Sam, 2: 22: and Luke 2: 37: 
And whereas ſome object, that the tabernacle was not yer built, it 
may be replied, either that thisis tobe underſtood of the Tabernacle 
ſpoken of Exod. 33: 7; which might ſerve for thar purpoſe rill this 
was built ; or that here is a proleplis or anticipation, and that he 
ſpeaks not of what the Women now did, but of what they did after 
the Tabernacle was built, which was tefore Moſes writ thele words, 

9 4 And he made * the Court : on the ſouth: ſide 
ſouth-ward, the hangings of the court were of fine twi- 
ned linen an hundred cubits. ; 

to Their pillars were twenty, and their brazen foc- 
kets twenty: the hooks c of the pillars, and their fillets 
were of [\Lvers 
- c Upon whichthey hanged the Beaſts to be ſacrificed, as the Fews 
affirm. | 


1t And for the north-fide, the hangings were an hun- 
dred cubits, their piilars were twenty, and their ſockets 
of braſs twenty : the hooks of the pillars, and their fil- 
lets of ſilver. | | 

12 And for the weſt-ſide, were hangings of fifty cubits, 
their pillars ten, and their ſockets ten ; the hooks of 
the pillars, and their fillers of ſilver. 

123 Andfor the caſt-ſide eaſtward fifty cubits. 

14 The hangings of the one ſide of the gate were fifteen 
cubits, their pillars three, and their ſockets three. 

15 And for the other ſide of the court-gate on this 
hand, and that hand,were hangings of fifrcen cubits, 
their pillars three, and their ſockets three. 

16 All the havgings of the court round about were of 
fine twined linen. 

17 And the ſockets for the pillars were of braſs, the hooks 
of the pillars, and their fillers of ſilver, and the over- 
laying of the chapiters of ſilver, and all the pillars of the 
court were filletted 22th ſilver. 

18 And the hanging for the gate of the court was 
needle-work, of blue; and purple: and ſcarlet, andfine 
twined linens and twenty cubits was the length, and 
the height in the breadth, 4 was five cubits anſwerable 
to the hangings of the court, 

d The h:izht reates to its ſtanding or hanging upright, and the 


breadth relates to the hanging it ſelf, and the heighc of the hanging 
was taken in the breadth. 


19 And their pillars were four, and their ſockets of 
braſs four, their hooks of ſilver, and the overlaying of 
their chapiters, and their fiilets of ſilver. 

20 Andall the * pins of the tabernacle, and of the 
Court reund about were of braſs. 

21 T This isthe ſum of the tabernacle e,ever of the ta- 
bernacle of teſtimony, as it was counted, according 
to the commandment of Moſes, fer the ſervice of the 
Levites f,by the hand of Ithamar ſon to Aaron the prieft 

e This doth not belong to the following account of Go d and Si!- 
ver, but to rhe foregoing particulars of holy things relacing ro the 
Tabernacle, for thele oniy were committed to the care of the Lewizes, 
as 1t here follows, but this Gold and Silver was put into other hands. 
#4 z. Qs ) For thoſe ho'y uſcs and ſervices which the Lewvires 
adminſtred. 

22 And Bezaleel the ſon of Uri, the ſon of Hur, of 


the Tribe of Judah, made all that the LOR D com- 
manged Moies, 


E XODUS. 


and thirty ſhekels, after the ſhekel of the ſanctuary, 


; ſins, and the fleſh-hooks, and the ; 1T | 
the ſhovels, and the baſins, 7 ' Exod. 30 13; It is not ſaid, that ail this Gold and following Cilver 


A——_— w___—_—_— 


hundred and fifty men. I; 46% 


| cording to the twelve Tribes. 


Chap. XXXV 
23 Ard with him was Aholiab,ſon of Ahiſamach,of 


the tribe of Dan,an engraver and a cunning workman, 
and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in fcar- 
let, and fine linen, 

24 All the goid that was occupied for the work, in 
all the work ofthe holy place, even the old of the offer- 
ing, was twenty and nine talents g, and ſeven hundred 


g Every Talent contained three thouſand ſhekels. See Gen. 23: 153 


were uict about the building of the Tabernac'e, for the people 
brought much 1 ore than enough, Exod 36: 5: Anil theſe remains, it 


is probable, were put into the ſacred Treaſury, to be uſed as occaſi- 
on ſhould require. | , 


25 And the ſilver of them that were numbred of the 
congregation 4s an hundred talents, and a thouſand 
{even hundredand threeſcore and fifteen ſbekels after 
the ſhekel of the ſanctuary. * 

26 A* Bekah F for every man, that ;s, half a ſhekel, ——_ 
after the ſhekel of the ſanQuary, for every one i that + Heb. 
went to benumbred, from twenty years old and upward, 2o/l. 
{or * ſix hundred thouſand, and three thouſand and five Num 


27 And of the hundred talents of ſilver were caſt the + Chap 
* ſockets of the ſanciuary, and the ſockets of the vail ; 26:19, 2 
an hundred fockets of the hundred talents, a talent for 25. 333 
aſocket. | | 
28 And of the thouſand ſeven hundred ſeventy and 
five ſhekels, he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid -- 
their chapiters, and filletted them. | | 
29 And the braſs of the offering, was ſeventy talents 
and two thouſand and four hundred ſhckels. ” 
30 And therewith he made the {ocker ro the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brazen al- 
car, and the brazen grats tor it, and all the veſlels of 
the altar. | | 
31 And the ſockets ofthe court round about,and the 
ſockets of the court-gace, and all the pins of the tabers *-*** 
nacle, and all the pins of the court round abouts | 
CH A ÞP. XXXIX. | 
The holy garments, x. The Ephod,. 2-=--5, The breaft-plate, "with 13 
ſtones therein, 8---=14: The robe of the Ephodl, 23--==26, The econte, 


mitre, and girdle, 6' fine linen, 27--=29. The plate of the Boly crown, 
JO, 31. Allis viewed and approved by Moſes, 4 2===43; * | 


N D of the blue, and purp'e, . and ſcarlet they made 
clothes of ſervice, to do ſervice in the holy place, _ 
and * madethe holy garments for Aaron, as the LORD * Chap: 
commanded Moſes. | 38: ro 

'2 And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, 35 '®* © 
and ſcarlet, and fine twined linen. | =o; 
3 And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and 
Cut it into wiers,to work it in the blue,and'in the purple, 
and in the ſcarlec, and in the fine linen with cunning 
work. 

4 They madeſhoulder pieces for it, to couple it tow 
gether: by the two edges was it coupled togerhers” 

5 And the curious girdle of his ephod that wes upon 
it was of the ſame, according to the work thereof, of 
gold, blue, and purple, and ſcarlet, and fine twined lin- 
en, as the LORD commanded Moſes: 

6 1 * And they wrought onyx-ftones incloſed in 
ouches of gold, graven as lignets are graven, with the 
names of the children of 1ſrael. 

7 And he put them on the ſhoulders of the Ephod, *. | 
that they ſhould be ſtones for a * memorial to the children * Chaps 
of Iſrael, as the LORD commanded Moſes. 20:79 

8 4 And he made the hreaſt- plate ef cunning. work K 
like the work of the ephod, of gold, blue, and purple; 
and ſcarlet, and fine twined linen. 

9 It was fourſquare, they made the breaſt-plate don- 
ble : a ſpan was the length thereof and a ſpan the 
breadth thereof beizg doubled. 

10 And they ſet 12 it four cows of ſtones : the fir# 
row was a | Sardius, a Topaz, and a Carbuncle : this 
was the firit row. | 

ix Andthe ſecond row an Emeraud, a Saphir, and 
a Diamond. 

12 And the third row a Ligure, an Agate, and att 
Amethyſt. 

12 And the fourth row a Beryl, an Onyx, and a Jafe 
per:they were inclofed in ouches ofgold in their incloſings, 

14 And the fiones wereaccording to the names of the 
chi;dren of1frael, ewelve according to their names, like 
the irgravings of a ſigner, every one with his name aC- 


hg 


Pd 


* Chap; 
28: 93 


15 And they made upon the Breaſt-plate chains at ths 
ends, ef wreathen work of pure gold. 


6 And they made two ouches of gold; and twey 
B) gold 


, XL. 

gold rings! 

the breaſt- plate. : 

17 And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in | 
the two rings on the ends of the breaſt-plate. 

18 And the two endsof the two wreathen chains they 
faſtned in the two ouches, and put them on the ſhoul- 

der-pieces of the Ephod before it, 

19 And they made two rings of gold, and put ther 
on the two ends of the breaſt-plate upon the border of . 
it, which was on the ſide of the Ephod inward. | 

20 And they made two #ther golden rings, and put 
them on the two ſides ofthe Ephod underneath, roward 
the fore-pare of it, over- againſt che orber coupling there- 
of, above the curious girdle of the Ephod _ 

21 And they did bind the breaſt-plate by his rings 
unto the rings of the Ephod with a lace of blue, that ir 

might be above the curious girdle of the Ept.od, and 
that thebreaſt-plate might not be looſed from the E- 
phod, as the LORD commanded Moſes. 

22 T And he made the robe of the Ephod of woven 
work, all of blue. 

223 And therewasa 
the hole of an habergeon, with a band round 
hole, that it ſhould not rent. b 

24 And they made. upon the hems of the T0Þe, 
pomegranates of blue, and purple, and ſcarlet,and twi- 
ned linen. h 

25 And they made# bells of pure gold, and put 6 
bells between the pomegranates, upon the hem of rhe 
robe, round about between the pomegranates. 

26 A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomezr?” 
nate round about the hem of the robe to miniſter 1,42 
the LORD commanded Moſes. . 

27 4 And they made coats of fine linen of woven 

' work, for Aaron, and for his {ons. 
Chap: -- 28 Anda mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of 
fine linen, and * linen breeches of fine ewined inen, 

29 Anda girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and 
purple, and ſcarlet of needle-work ; as the LORD 
commanded Moſes: | 

30 T And they made the'p!a 
Pure gold, and wrote upon it a 
P: vings of a ſignet, * HOLINESS TO THE LORD. _ 

31 And they tied unto it alace of blue, te faſten 3t 
on _ upon the mitre, as the LORD commanded 
Moles. s 

'32 Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the 
tent of the congregation finiſhed s and the children ot 
Iſrael aid according toall that the LORD commanded 
Moſes, 1o did they. 

33 7 And they brought the tabernacle unto Moſes, 
the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, 
his bars, and his pillars, and his ſockets, 

34 And the covering of raws-skins died red,and the co- 
vering of badgers skins, and the vail of the covering, 

25 The arkof the teſtimony, and the ſtaves thereof, 
and the mercy-ſeat, | 

36 The table nd all the veſlels thereof ,and the ſhew- 
bread, 

37 The pure candleſtick,»ith the lamps thereof, ever 
with the lamps to be ſet in order, and all the vellels 
thereof, and the oy] for light, 

' 28 Andthe golden altar,and the anointing oyl, and 
+ the ſweetincenſe,and the hanging for the tabernacle- 


» + ————t 


hole in the midſt of the robe, as 
about the 


Chap: 
8:33. 


= 


te of the holy crown of 
writing,/ike to the wngra- 


«/ EIS IILOSED = 8 os ” 
. q L 
. 


+ Heb:rhe g 
| incenſe of - 4OOT» ; 
 fwect ſpree, 39 The brazen altar,and his grate of braſs, his ſtaves, 


and all his veſſels, the laver, and his feet, 

40 The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his ſoc- 
kets,and the hanging for the court-gate, his cords, and 
his pins,& all the vcetiels of the ſervice ofthe tabernacle, 
for the tent of the congregation, 

41 The cloaths of ſervice to do ſervice in the holy 
place,andthe holy garments for Aaron the prieſt, and his 
. ſons garments to miniſter in the prieſts office. 

42 According to all that the LORD commanded 
Moſes,ſo the children of Iſrael made allthe work. 


. - 43zAnd Moſes did look upon all the work,and behold, 
"* they had done it as the LORD hadcommanded,even fo 
had they done it: and Moſes bleſſed them 4. 


a (5. e. ) both the People for their liberal Contribution, and the 
Workmen' for their great Care and Induſtry. 


CH ap. XL, | | 


The tabernacle is commanded to be reared, 1----8. and aninted, g=-=12, 
Aaron and his ſon? ſan#Fified, 14, 15- Moſes performeth all things ascor» 
dengly, 16u9.-33» A. cloyd covered the tabernacle, 34-=-38. = 

& 


| EXOD DS. 
and put the two rings in the two ends of A 


| 15 evident. 


Chap. XL, 
ND the LOR D ſpake unto Moſes, ſay- 


ing, 

2 On the firſt day of the firft month 2 ſhalt thou ſet 
up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. 

s Towit, of the ſecond Year after their coming cut of Egypt, as 


3 And thou ſhalt put therein the ark of the teſtimony 
and cover the ark with the vail. 


4 And * thou thalc bring inthe table, and ſet in or- * Chap: 
der | the things that are ts be ſet in order upon it b,and 2935 


thou ſhalt bring in the candleſtick, andlight the lamps Fer ane 
thereof. ws þ 


b The Veſſcls belonging to it, and the Shew-bread, Exod: 25: 29, 
30. 


; And thou ſbalt ſer the altar of gold for the incenſe 
before the ark ofthe teftimony,and put the hanging of 
the door tothe tabernacle, | | 
6 And thou lbalt ſet the altar of the burnt-offering before | 
the door of the tabernacle of the tent c of the congrega» 

tion. | 


c (7. e. ) The Tabernacle which is covered with a Tent. See 
Exod; 35: 11. Thoughelſewhere the words gabernacle and tent are 
promiſcuouſly uſed. 


7 And * thou ſhalt ſet thelaver between the tent of the * Chap: 
congregation andrhe altar,and ſhalt put water therein. 39: 18. 
s And thou ſhalt ſer up the court round about, and 
hang up the hanging at the court-gate. | 
9 And thou (halr take the anointing oil,and * anoint the * Chap, 
tabernacie,and all that zs therein,and (bait hallow it, agd 39:26; 
all the veſsels thereof : and it ſhall be holy. ; 
to Aad thou thalt anoint che altar of the burnt-offering 
and all his veſsels, and ſanctifie the altar, and * it +haj * Chap: 
be an altar + moſt holy. 


o 
dos 


11 Andtioushalt agoint the laver and his foo nd + Heb. bo- | 
- ® ®. t a Y 
ſancife it, 3 _ "_ 


: 12 And thou ſhalt bring Aaron and his ſons unto the 
oor of the t. bernacle of the congregation, and waſh 
them with water. 


13 And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy gar- ; 
ments,and anoint him, and tandifie him, that he may | 
miniſter unto mein the prieſts office. ! 

14 And thou fhalt bring his ſons, and cloath them | 
with Coats. | 

15 Ard thou ſhalt anoint them, as thou didſt anoint 
their facher,chat they may minifter unto me in the prieſts 
office : for their anointing bal ſurely be an everlaſting 
£52 IA hy throughout their generations, 

i; Co 1gn or yeal that their Prieſthood ſhall I 
long as their Poury laſts, till the coming _ rhe Mifiar. He fignte 
hes chat this Unttion ſhould be ſufficient for ail ſucceeding Prieſts 
they thou}dnor need to be anointed again,except the ſucceſſive High- 
prictts. See Exoz: 29: 7,29: Lev: 4: 3; and 16; 32. and 21. 10, 

16 Lhus did Moſes: according to ail that the LORD 
commanded him, ſo did he. 

17 4 And ircame to paſs in the firſt month, in the 
ſecond year e, on the firit day of the month, }hat the | 
tabernacle was reared up. | 

e After their coming out of Egypt, Numb: 7: 1. 

18 And Moles reared up the tabernacle, and faſtned 
his Tockets, and ſet up the boards thereof, and put in 
the barsthereof, and reared up his pillars Os 

19 And he ſpread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, | 
and pur the covering of the tent above upon it, as the | 
LORD commanded Moſes, 

20 4 andhe took and put * the teſtimony into the 
ark, and ſet the ſtaves on the ark,and put the mercy-ſeat 
above upon the ark, . 

21 And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and 
* ſet-up the vail ot the covering, and covered the ark 
.of the teſtimony,as the LORD commanded Moſes. 

22 { And be pur the table in thetent of the congre- 
gation upon the ide ofthe tabernacle northward with- 
out the vail. 

23 Andhe ſet the bread in order upon it before the 
LORD ; :s the LORD had commanded Moſes. 

24 Y And he put the candleſtick in the tent of the 
Congregation, Over againit the table, on the ſide of the 
tabernacle ſouthward. 

25 And he lighted the lamps before the LORD ; as 
the LORD commanded Moſes. ” 

26 T And he put the golden altar inthe tent of the 
congregation before the vail. 

27 And he burnt ſweet incenſe thereon;as the LORD 
commanded Moſes f. 

f This is wiſely and ſeaſonably added, becauſe this was a vvork 


peculiar to the Prieſt, and not to be done by Moſes without God's ex- 
preſs command. | 


28 1 And hg {vt up the hanging at the door of theta- 
bernagle. | , | 
29 And 


Py 


0 WO TER RS 0; - 
GI COT — 


ap! 


cr IR EY ALERT IE 


Chap. I: 


LEVITIECOUS. 


29 And he put the altar of burnt-offering by the 
door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, 
and offered upon it the burnt-offering, and the meat- 
offeringg ; as the LORD commanded Moles. Fo 

g For the Conſecration of the Altar, this being the firſt Sacri- 
fice. 

20 1 And heſetthe laver between the tent of the 
congregation and the altar, and put water there, to 


Chap. 


forfeited and loſt, was now returned to them, and took its Habitation 
among them, 
35 And Moſes was not able to enter into the tent 5 
of the congregation, becauſe the cloud abode thereon, | 
and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. | 
z Partly becauſe of the extraordinary thickneſs and brightneſs of 
the Cloud, which both dazzled his Eyes and ſtruck him with Hor- 
rour, as 1 Kings 8: 11. andpartly becauſe of his great Reverence and 
Dread of thar eminent and glorious Appearance of God, and partly 
becauſe he was not called to it, as he that was notable to go up in- 


| 


waſh withal. 
hands and their feet thereat. 


on, and when they came near unto the altar,they waſh- 
ed ; as the LORD commanded Moles. 


*Lev: 16: 

2. Numb: 
'I5: 

- King:8: 

10: Ia: 6: 

4;Rev:1 55 

$e 


*Chap: 22: 
r8: 


bernacle, and thealtar, and ſet up the hanging of the 
court-gate, ſo Moſes finiſhed the work. 


i And Moſes, and Aaron and his ſons, waſhed their 


22 When they went into the tent of the congregati- 


33 And he reared up the court round about the ta- 


to the Mount till he was called, Exod, 24: 


34 * Then a cloud covered the ten of the congrega- 
tion,and the glory of the LORD 5 filled the tabernacle. 
hb C i.e. ) The glorious Preſence of God, which having been 


16. | 
35 And when the c!oud was taken vp from over the 


tabernacle, thechiidren of Iſrael + went onward in all f Hebs 
| Jo urneyeay 


cheir journeys. 
37But if che cloud were not taken up, then they jour- 
neyed not, till the day that it was taken up. 

38 For the cioud of the LORD was upon the taber- 
nacle by day, and fire & was on it by night, in the 
ſight of all the houſe ef Iſrael, throughour all their jour- 
neys. 

! The ſame Pillar which in the day-time was like a Cloud, in the 


night-time had the appearance of Fire. See Exod, 13: 21: 


Annotations on LEVITICUS. 


The ARGUMENT, 


bf as Book, containing the Attions cf about one Months ſpace, acquainteth us with the Levitical Ceremonies uſed after 

the Tabernacle was eretied, and ancinied inthe Wilderneſs, and iis therefore called Leviticus: It treats of Laws con- 
cerning perſons, and things, clean and unclean, by infirmity, or accident; as alſo purifyings in general once « Year, and divers 
particular cleanſmgs,with a brief repetition of aivers Laws, Chap, 19, together with certain Feaſts, of ſeven Nears reſt, of the 
Fubilee, andthe redemption of things conſecrated 19 God, &c. but eſpecially of ſuch Ceremonies as were uſed about Offerings and 
Sacrifices, which were both expiatory for Treſpaſſes wi:tinsly or unwittingly committed, whether by the People or the Prieſfts;and 
alſs Euchariſticsl, in the owning of God's Bleſſings. Here are declared alſs Laws for the regulating of theſe, and preſcribing 
the lawful time fer Marriages ; here is ſet down how ſeveral abominable Sins are puniſhable vy the Magiſtrgre, and how theſe 


things are to be managed by certain perſons appropriated to the Tribe of Levi, 
and the fudgment particularly inflited on Nadab and hbihu for an Example. Her 


Male-adminiſtration of it - vhs 


whoſe Office is confirmed from Heaven, and the 


are alſo promiſes, and threatnings, to the obſervers, or breakers of this Laws 


CM AF 4 


God commands Moſes concerning free-will burnt-offerings of bullock o+ ſheep;mals 
without blemijh, 1---=3. The offerer 19 lay aus hand on the head of ihe offe= 
ring that it might be accepted jor him, 4. The bullock to be ſlain and its 
blood ſprinkled on the altar, 5. Its parts #9 be conſumed by fire, 7-==-9, 
Of goats, 10. Of fowls, as turtle-doues and young pigeons; their blaod 
7s be wrung out at the ſide of the altar, 14 «=-17; 


N D the LORD called unto Moſes 4, and ſpake 
unto him out of the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation b, ſaying, 

a Who ſtood withour, Exod: 4o: 35: waiting for God's call, 
bFrom the Mercy-ſeat in the Tabernacle. 

2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and fay unto 
them, * If any man of you bring an offering c unto the 
LORD, ye (bal! bring your offering of the cattel, eves of 
the herd, andof the flock 9d. 


. £ There are divers kinds of Sacrifices here preſcribed,ſome by way 
of acknowledgement to God for Mergies either deſired or recetv- 
ed;others by way of fatisfaftion to Ged for Men's Sins; others were 
meer exerciſes of Piety and Devotion. And the realon why there 
are ſo many kinds of them was, partly, reſpeCt to the childiſh eſtare 
of the Jews, who by the cuſtom of Nations,and their own natural In- 
clinations were. much addiCted ro outward Rites and Ceremonies, 
that they might have full employment of that kind in God's Service, 
& thereby be kept from temptations to Idolatry;and partly to repre- 
ſent as wel! the ſeveral perfe&ions of Chriſt, the true Sacrifice, and 
the various benefits of his Death, as the ſeverai Duties which Men 
owe to their Creator and Redeemer, all which could not be fo well 
expreſſed by one ſort of Sacrifices. 4 Or, Of the ſhzep ; though the 
H.brew word contains borh the Sheep and the Goats, as appears beth 
from the uſe of the word, Gen: 12: 16: and 27: 9: and 35: 17: and 
from verſe 16. and other places of Scripture» Now God choſe theſe 


| kinds of Creatures fer his Sacrifices, either 1. In oppoſition to the 


TOr, zo be 
Accepted 
for him. 
Ifa:56 T2 
and 58:5: 
and 60:7. 
Jer. 6: 20, 


Egyptian Idolatry, to which divers of the 1/raelitzs had been uſed, and 
were ſtill in danger of revoiting to again,rhat the frequent deſtruQi- 
on of theſe Creatures mighs bring ſuch filly Deities into contempr. 
Or 2. Becauſe theſe are the fitteſt repreſentations both of Chriſt and 
of true Chriſtians, as being Gentle,2nd Harmleſs, and Patient, and 
moſt uſeful to Men. Or 3. As the beſt and moſt profitable Creatures 
with which it is fir God ſhould be ſerved, and which we ſhould be 
ready topart with,when God requires us to do ſo. Or 4, As things 
moſt common and obvious, thar Men might never want a Sacrifice 
when they needed,or God required it. 


3 If his offering be a burntsſacrifice e ofthe herd,let 
him offer a male f without blemiſh g : he (hall offer it + 
of his own voluntary will þ, at che door of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation z before the LORD, 

e Stritly ſo called, fuch as was to be all burnt,the Skin excepted, 
Levit. 7: 8. See'Gen: 8: 20. and 1 Kings 3: 15: For otherwiſe every 
Yacriice was burnt, mare or leſs, T'ue Sacrifices did partly fignifte 


| that the whole Man, in whoſe ſtead the Sacrifice was offered, wag 


to be intirely and unreſervedly offered or devoted to God's fervices 
and that the whole Man did deſerve to beutrerly conſumed, if God 
thould deal ſeverely with him ; and dire&ed us ro ſerve the Lord 
with all ſingleneſs of Heart, without ſelf-ends, and to be ready to 
offer to God even ſuch Sacrifices or Services wherein we our ſelves 
ſhou!d have no part nor benefit, f As being more perfe& than the 
Female,Mal: 1: 14. and more truly repreſenting Chriſt: g Of which 
fee Exod; 29: 1. Levit: 22: 24, ©. To lignify, 1, That God ſhould 
be ſerved vvith the beft ef every kind, 2. That Man repretented 
by theſe Sacrifices, ſhould aim at all purity and perfe&tion of Heart 
ard Life, and that Chriſtians ſhould one day atrain ro it, Eph: 5:27; 
3- The ſpotleſs and complear holineſs of Chriſt, Heb: 9: 13, 14. 1 Per; 
I: 18, 19: and 2: 22, h According to this Tranſlation, the place 
ſpeaks only of free-will-offerings, or ſuch as were nct preſcribed. 
by God te be offered in courſe, but were offered ar the pleaſure, and 
by the voluntary devotion of any perſon, either by way of Suplica- 
tion for any Mercy which he needcd or cefired,or by way of Thankfa 
giving for any Favour or Bleſſing received. Bur it may feem impro= 
per to reſtrain the Rules here given to tree-will-offerings, which 
were to be obſerved in other offerings allo. And the Hebrew: word ig 


by the Seventy,Chaldee,Syriack, and drabick,and others rendred to this 


purpoſe, for his acceptation,or that he may be accepted with God, or that 
God may be atoned, as it is verſs 4. And fo this phraſe is uſed, Lev: 
23: 11, #Inthe Court near to tbe door, where the Altar ſtood,vers 
5, For here it was to be ſacrificed, and here alſo the People mighr 
behold the oblation of it. And rhis further fignitizd, rhat men could 
have no entrance,neither into the earthly Tabernacle, the Church, 
nor into the heavenly Tabernacle of Glory, but by Chriſt,who is the 
door, Feh.10: 7, 9. by whom alone we have acceſs to God. 


4 * And he ſhall put his hand & upon the head of the 


burnt-offering /, and it thall be accepred from him to FExX0d:2 


make atonement for him , 

k (7. e. ) Both his hands, Lev. 8: 14, 18: and 16: 21,A common 
Enallage. 1 Whereby he ſignified, 1. that he willingly gave it to 
the Lord, 2. Thar hedid wgally unite himſelf withit, and judged 
himſelf worthy of that death vvhich ir ſuffered in his ſtead;and thar 
he laid his fins upon it in a ceremonial way, and hadan eye to him 
upon whom God would /ay the iniquity of ws all, Iſa: 535 6: arid that 
rogether with it he did freely offer up himſelf to God. wm To wit, 
ceremonially and ſacramentally; as dire&ing his faith and thoughts 
to that true Propitiatory Sacrifice which in time was to be offered 
up for him. See Rem: 3: 25: Heb: 9: 15, 25,26. And although Burnt- 
offerings were commonly offered by way of thankſgiving, Gen:8:20: 
Pſal: 51.16, 17. yet they were ſometimes offered by way of atone« 
ment for ſin, to wit, for ins in general, as appears from Job 1. 
5. bur for particular fins there were ſpecial Sacritices, as vve ſhall 


ſee. 
5 And he » ſhall kill the bullock before the LORD: 
and the Prieſts, Aarons ſons,ſhall bring the blood, and 


{prinkle the blood round about upon the altar o that js +; 
by the door of the tabernacle'of the congregation. + 

| 2 n Eitl. 0 

5; A018 


Io, 153 


"M8, . 
—_ 


$ P- I. 
| s Either 1: the Offerer, whois ſaid to do it, to wit, by the 
Prieſt; for men are commonly faid to do what they cauſe others 
' ro do, as Joh: 4: 1, 2. Or 2. the Prieſt, asit follows, or the Levize, 
whoſe office this was, See Exed. 29: 11; Lev; 8; 15: Numb: 8: 19. 
3' Chron: 23: 28, 31. 2 Chron: 3o; 16: and 35; 11. 0 Which was 
Jone in 2 conſiderable quantity, as may be gathered from Zech: 9:15: 
and whereby was fignified, 1, That the Offerer deſerved to have his 
Blood ſpilt in that manner. 2. Thar the Blood of Chriſt ſhould be 
ured forth for Sinners, and that that was the only mean of their 
reconciliation to God, and acceptance with him. 
6 And he hall ſlay the burat-offering 7, 
to his pieces 9. 
p Partly for decency,becauſe the Sacrifices being as 1t were God's 
food and Feaſt, it was incongruous to offer to God that which men 
refuſed to ear ; and partly to ſignify,that the great thing which Ged 
required and bar in men was,not their outward appearance,but 
their inſide ; and that as he doth ſee all mens infides, ( Heb: 4: 13.)ſo 
he will one day make them viſible to ethers. q To wit,t he head,and 
fat, and inwards, and legs, wer. 8: 9. 


and cut it in- 


the altar,and lay the woodin order upon-the fire. 
r Or, diſpeſe the fire, i. e. blow it up, and pur it together, ſo 
2s it might be fit for the preſent work. For the fire there uſed and 
allowed came down from Heaven, Lov: 9: 24: and was to be care- 
| —_ preſerved there, and all other fire was forbidden, Levis: 10: 
I , 


2 c 
$ Andthe Priefts Aarons ſons shall lay the parts, the 
" head and the fats, in order upon the wood that 5s in 


the fire which is upon the altar. 

s All thefat ; which was to be ſeparated from the Fleſh, 
to be pur together, to increaſe the flame, and to conſume rhe other 
parts of the Sacrifice more quickly. Others tranſlate it, the trunkof 
rhe bedy, as diſtinguiſhed from the head, and joints, and inward 

arts. 
: 9 But the inwards and his legs, shall he wash * in wa- 
ter,and the prieſt shall burn z!l on the altar,ro be a burnt 
ſacrifice,an offering made by fire of a ſweet fayour x un- 
tothe LORD. 


t To ſignify theuniverſal and perfe& purity both of the inwards, 
or the heart, and of the legs,or waysor a&tions,which was in C briſt, 
and which ſhould be in all Chriſtians. Not only the parts now men- 
tioned, but all the reſt, the trunk ofthe Body, and the ſhoulders, as 
is apparent from the praCtice or execution of theſe Precepts. x Not 
in it {e}f, for ſo it rather cauſed a ftink, but as it repreſented Chriſt's 
offering up himſelf to God as a ſweet-ſmelling (aveur, Eph: 5: 2:and 
to admonith us ofthe excellent vertne of Divine inſtitution, with- 
out vvhich God values no vvorſhip, though never ſo glorious, 
and by which even the meaneft things are precious and acceptable 
to God: | 

' 10 And if his offering beof the flocks, remely, of the 
ſheep, or of the goats for a burnt-ſacrifice, he ſhall 
bring it a male without blemiſh. 

11 And he ſhall kill it onthe ſide of the altar north- 
ward y,before the LORD : and the Prieſts Aarons ſons 


ſhall ſprinkle his blood round about upen the altar. 

y Here this and other kinds of Sacrificeswere killed, Levi, 6: 25. 
and 7: 2. becauſe here ſeems to have been the largeſt and moſt con- 
venient place for that work, the Altar being probably near the mid- 
dle of the Eaſt-end of the Building, and rhe entrance being on the 
South-ſide ; ſo the North-ſide was the only vacant place. Beſides 
this might deſign the place of Chriſt's d:ath both more generally, 
to wit, in Jeruſalem, which wasin the ſides of the north, Pſal; 48: 2.and 
ly, to vvit,on Mount Calvery,vvhich vvas on the North 
and Weſt-ſide of Jeruſalem, a 

12 And he ſhall cut it into his pieces with his head 
and his fac : and the Prieſt ſhalllay them in order on 
the wood that zs en the fire which #5 upon the altar : 

2:3 But he ſhall waſh the inwards, and the legs with 
water, and the prieft (hall brings all, and burn z# upon 

: the altar: it 5s a burnt ſacrifice, an offering made by fire, 
of a ſweet ſavour unto the LORD. 
114 And if the burnt-ſacrifice for his offering to the 

' LORD be of fowls, then he ſhall bring his oftering of 


* turtle doves, or of young pigeons z, 

Chap:5: + Theſe Birds vvere appointed for the relief of t' e -oor who could 
7. - not bring better. And theſe Birds ae preferred before. oticrs, part- 
ly becauſe they vvere eaſily gotren,and partly becauſe they are fit 
repreſentations of Chriſt's Chaſtity, and Meckneſs, and Gentleneſs, 
for vvyhich theſe Birds are remarkable. The Pigeons muſt be young, 
becauſe then they are be ; but the Turgle-doves are better vvhen 
they are more grorvvn up,and therefore they are not confined to that 


\ 


g&- R L-. 

15 And the pricftſhall bring it unto the altar : and 
+ wring off a his head, and burn i: on the altar: and the 
blood thereof shall be wrung out * at the ſide of the 
altar. 

; '  #, To vvit, from the reſt of the body ; as ſufficiently appears, be- 
* Heb. uP- cauſe this was to be burnt by it ſelf, as it here follows, and the body 

the wa. .frerwards, wer, 17. And whereas it is {aid Levis. 5; 8: be ſball 
. | =*==wring his head from his neck, but ſhall net divide it aſunder, that is ſpo- 
ken not of the Burnt-offering, as here, but of the Sin-offering, in 

' which there might be a differing Rite. 


16 And he ſhall pluck away his crop with his + fea- 
' thers 6, and calt it beſide the altar on the Eaft-part c, 
by the place of the aſhes d. | 


6 Or, with its dung or filth, to vvit, contained in the crop, and in 


4 Or,pinch 
f the head 
; th the 


Or, the 
Sth theres 
P] « 


becauſe this vvasthe remoteſt place from the Holy of Holies,vvhich 
vvas inthe Weſt-end ; to teach us, chat impure things and perſons 


the guts. c Tovvit, of the Tabernacle. Here the filth vvas caſt 


SEFZ7ZTIC U & 


7 And the ſons of Aaron the prieſt ſhall putfice - upon 


. or proportion of it ; the other, of which this place ſpeaks, vv 

; diſtin&t and ſeparate Offering,and was left to the Offerd,'s owl 

| both for the thing, and for the quantity. And the matter of this 

and | Offering was things without Life, as Meal, Corn, Cakes, &'c, Now 
. this fort of Sacrifices were appointed, 1, Becauſe theſe are things of 


| 


Chap. 1. 


ſhould net preſume to appreach to God,and that they ſhould be ba- 
niſhed from his preſence. &d The place where the aſhes fel] down 
and lay, whence they vvere afterwards removed without the Camp. 
See Lew. 4. 12. and 6: 10, 11. and 8; 17, 

7 And he ſhall cleave it with the wings thereof, buy 
ſhall nor divide zt aſunder e; and the prieſt 5hall burn it 
upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fires it 
i5 a burnt-ſacrifice,an offering made by fire, of a ſweet | 
{avourunto the LORD. 

e Shall cleave the Bird through the whole length, yet ſo as not 


to ſeparate the one ſide from the other, and ſo as thero may be a 
wing left on each ſide, See Gen, 15: 10. 


CHAP. II. 

Concerning free-will meat-offerings ; of meal-flour with oil and frankincenſe 
upon it, I. for @ memorial, 2. The remainder moft haly,ro be eaten by Aa- 
ron and his ſons, 3 Of baked and wnleawened cakes mixed, and wafers ſprink- 
led with 6:1, 4. Oradreſt in the pan, 5. or in the kettle, 7. but without 
leaven or hey, T1. The firſtlings excepted, 12. Salt of the exvenant to 
be offered, 13. Firſt-fruits how to be offered, 14-16, | 

ND when + any will offer a meat-offering « unto + High: 
the LORD, his offering ſhall be of fine flour b: ou. 
and he hall pour oil upon it c, and pit frankincenſe 

thereon 4. 

# This was of two kinds, the one joined with other Offerings, 

Nwmb. 15. 4, 7, 10. which was preſcribed, together with themeaſure 


greateſt neceſſity and benefit roman, and therefore it is 

God ſhould be ſerved with them, and owned and praiſed dp mire 
of them 2. In condeſcention to the poor. that they might not 
want an Offering for God, to ſhew that God would accept even the 
meaneſt Services, when offered to him with aſincere mind. 3, Theſe 
were neceſſary proviſions forthe Feaſt which was here to be repre- 
ſented to God, and for the uſe of the Prieſts, who were to attend u- 
pon theſo holy miniſtrations. bSearched,or ſifted,and purged from 
all Bran,it being fit that the beſt things ſhould be offered to the beſt 
Beeing. c Which may note the Graces of the Holy Ghoſt, which 
are compared to Qi), and anointing with it, Pſal. 45: 7. I John 2: 
20nd which are neceſlary ro make any Offering acceptable to God, 
4 Which manifeſtly deſigned Chriſt's ſatisfaftion an interceſſion. 
which is compared to a ſweet odour, Eph; 5; 2, andto incenſe, Rev. 


4 GS ER react a . 


o Jo. 

2And he $hall bring it to Aarons ſons the prieſts:and 
he eshal take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, 
and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincenſe there- 
* and = aha burn the memorial of it f upon 
the altar, to bean oftering made by fire of a ſweet favour 
unto the LORD. 4 4 : 

e ( i, e. ) ThatPrieſt to whom he brought it, and who is ap- 
pointed to offer it. f That part thus ſelefted and offered; which is 
called a memorial, either 1. ro the Offerer, who by offering this 
part 1s minded, that the whole of that he brought, and of all which 
he. hath of that kind, is God's, ro whom this part was paid as a 
quit-rent, or acknowledgement. Or 2, to Grd, whom ( to ſpeak 
after the manner of men ) this did put in mind of his gracious C@- 
venant and Promiſes of favour, and acceptance.of the Offerers and his 
Offering. See Exod, 30; 16: Levit, 6. 15, Numb, 5; 26, 

3 And * the remnant of the meat-offering «hall be 
Aarons and his ſons + : iis a *thing moſt. holy g of the 
offering of the LORD made by fire. 

t To be eaten by them, Levir. 6.16. g(3i:e,) Moſt holy,or ſuch = Numb: | 


as were to be eaten only by the Prieſts, and that only i 
place near the Alrar. See Lev; 6; 26: and »: 6, prin holy 1g; 9. 


4 And if chou bring an oblation of a meat-offering 
baken in the oven 4, . it ſhall be an unleavened cake of 
fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers a- 
nointed with 611, 


h Made in the Sanfuary for that uſe, as may ſeem from 1 Chron: 
23: 28, 29. Ezek: 46: 20. 


5 And if thy oblation be a meat-offering bakey + in a 
. it (hal be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with 
oil. 

6 Thou ſhair partir in pieces 3, and pour oil there- 
on : it is a meat-offering. 


s Becauſe part of it was offered to God, 
Prieſt. 


: 
q 
{ 
: 
* 
p- 


* Chap:7: ; 
G: j 


Eccl:7:31, ! 


[ 


7 Or, 0: s | 
flat plate or | 
ſlice. 


and part given to the 


7 Andif thy oblation be a meat-offe ring bak: x i 
frying-pan, it ſhal be made of fine flour wich oil. _— 
8 And thou ſhalt bring the meat-offering that is made 
of theſe things unto the LORD, and when i 
ted unto the Prieft,he ſhall bring ic unto the altar 
9 And the Prieſt ſha] take from the meat-offering * 2. * Verſes, | 
memorial _, = ſhal burn ic upon the altar ; * ond MN 
it ;s an © offering made by fire of a\ nb. 
mY LORD. y a lweet favour unto 29. 18. | 
Io And tnat which is left of the meat-offering, ſhal 

be Aarons and his ſons: Tr g5 a thi — 
— of the LORD made by "Dia po 
11 No meat-offering & which he hall bring unto the 
LORD, s$hall be made with leaven /: for in Fer burn 


n? leaven, nor any honey ws in OE vw 
[LORD madoby foe CITE Ge :.. \-2] 


t To 


+ 


tis fpreſen- |, 99% | 


. | Chap. UL. 

& To wit, which is offered of free-will;for in Other Offerings it 
| might be uſed, Lewvir. 7: 13: and 23; 17: I This* was forbidden, 
partly to mind them of their deliverance out of Egypr, when they 
were forced through haſt2 to bring away their Meal or Dough 
( which was the matter of this Oblation) unleavened ; partly to 
fignify what Chriſt would be, and what they ſhould be, pure and 
free from all errour in the faith and worſhip of God, and from all 
hypocriſie and malice or wickedneſs, all which are ſignified by /ea- 
wen, Meaith. 16: 12: Mark8: 15: Luke 12:1: 1 Cors. 8: Gal. 5. 9: 
mn Fither x, becauſe it hath the ſameeffe& with leaven in Paſte or 
Dough,making it ſower, and ſwelling. . Or 2: in oppoſition to the 
Sacrifices of the Gentiles, in which the uſe of Honey was moſt fre- 
quent. . Or 3: to teach us, that God's worſhip is nor to be governed 
by mens fancies and appetites, to which Honey might have been 
grateful, but by God's will. The Jews conceive, that under the 
name of Honey all ſweet Fruits, as Figs, Dates, &c. are contained 
and forbidden. 


12 And for the oblation 7 of the ficſtfruits, ye ſhall 
offer them » unto the LORD ; but they ſhall not + be 
burnt o on the altar for a ſweet ſavour. 

» Or, Theoffering, or For the offering of the Firſt-fraits yiu ſhall or nay 
offer them, or either of them, to wit, Leaven or Honey, which were 
offered and accepted in that caſe, Levis. 23: 17: 2 Chron, 31: 5: @ 
But reſerved for the Prieſts, Numb. 18: 13; Dewt. 18: 4: 


13 And every oblation of thy meat-offering * ſhalt 
thou ſeaſon with ſalt p ; neither ſhale thou ſuffer the ſalc 
of the covenant of thy God q to be.lacking from thy 
meat-offering : with all thine offerings r thou ſhalt offer 


ſalt, 

p Either r. for the decency and conveniency of the Feaſt, which 
God would have here repreſented.Or 2.for the fignification of that in- 
coruption ef mind,& ſincerity of grace, which in Scripture is ſigni- 
fied by Salr, Mark 93 49: Col. 4: 6; and which is neceflary in all 
them that would offer an acceptable Offering to (od. Or 3: in teſ. 
timony of that communion which they had with God in theſe exer. 
ciſes of his Worſhip; Salt being the great ſymboleof friendſhip in all 
Nations and Ages. 9 So Salris called, either 7. becauſe it fitly re- 
preſentedrhe durableneſs8&perpetuity of God's Covenant with them, 
which is deſigned by ſalt, Numb,18: 19. 2 Chron. 13; 5: Or 2: becauſe 
| it was ſo particularly and rigorously required asa condition of their 
Covenant with God ; this being made abfolurely neceſſary in all their 
Offerings as it follows; and as the negleCt of Sacrifices was a breach 
of covenant on their part, ſoalſo was the negle& of Saltin their $a- 
crifices. r Not theſe only, but all other, as appears from Ezzk, 43; 
| 24; Mark 9: 49. 


14 And if thou offer a meat-offering of thy firſt-fruits 
s unto the LORD, thou (halt offer for the meart- offering 
of thy firſt-fruits, green ears of corn dried by the fire, 
even corn beaten out of full ears« 
s To wit, of thine own free-will; for there were other Firſt-fruits, 
- and that of ſeveral ſorts, which were preſcribed, and the time, qua- 
lity and proportion of them appointed by God, See Levir, 23: 10; 


I5 And thou (balt put oil upon it, and Jay frankin- 
cenſe thereon ; it zs a meat-offering- | 
IR 15 Andthe prieſt ſhall burn the memorial of ir, pax? 
of the beaten corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof 
with all the frankincenſe thereof: #: is an offering made 
| by fire unto the LORD. 

CHAP. III. | 
Concerning thank. offerings ; of bullocks, male or female, without blewiſh; the 
manner of this oblation, 1---==5. Of ſmall cattel,zmale or female, without 


blemiſh ; a lamb, G---==12: A goat, 13-"===16; All fat the Lord's: 
the fat and blood not tobe eate 17, ; 


p11 AN D if his oblation bs a ſacrifice of peace-offering 
«, if he offer zt of the herd, whether ;: be a male 


or temale 5, he ſhall offer it without blemiſh before the 
LORD. 


a Which was an offering for peace and proſperity, and the favour 
and bleſſing of God, cither 1. obtained ; and ſo this was a Thank- 
offering, as Levit: 75; 12, 16; or 2; defired; andſo it was akind of 
ſupplication ro God, as Judges 20: 26: 1 Chron 21: 26: 6 Which were 
allowed here, tho not in Burnt-offcrings, becauſe thoſe pricipally 
reſpeQed the honour of God, who is to be ſerved with the beſt - but 
che Peace-offcrings did primarily reſpe& the benefit of the Offerer, 
and therefore the choice was left to himſelf 


2 And * he (ball lay his hand upon the head of his 
offering, and kill it at the door ofthe Tabernacle of the 
congregation c:and Aarons ſons the Prieſts ſball ſprinkle 
the blood upon the altar round abcut- 

c Not on the North-ſide of the Altar, where the Burnt-offering 
Was killed, Lev. 1; 11: as alſo the Sin-offering, and the Treſpaſs- offe. 
ring,Levii.6;25:8 7: 2: but in the very entrance of the Courr where 
the Brazen Altar ſtood, which place was not fo Holy as the other; 
as appears both becaule it was more remote from the Holy of Holies, 
and' becauſe the Aſhes of the Sacrifices were to be laid here. And 
the reaſon of this difference is not obſcure, both becauſe part of this 
Sacrifice was to be waved by the Hands of the Offerer, Levir. 7: 30: 
who mighs not come into the Court ; and becauſe this Offering was 
aot fo Holy as the other, which were tobe eaten only by rhe Prieſt, 
wnen part of theſe were eaten by the Offerer. 

3 And he ſhall offer'sf the ſacrifice of the peace-offe- 


1. Ting, an offering mad by fire unto the LORD, * the 


_ * re} ONUS. err rr 2s <»=-»6/ 4 Ion 


4Or, of the 
rf p the 
{FILES » 
Fed. al. 
cend. 
Exod. 27: 


204; 


* Mark: 9: 
49: 


CEITIOTER I ate A 


522 


r,004 | 
plate or |þ 


4 And the twokidneys, and the fat that is on them, 
which zs by the flanks : andthe + caul aboys the liver 
with the kidneys, it ſhall hg take away, 


LEFFTA4C TM 


| he ihall offer it without blemilh. 


Chap. 1 


5 And Aarons ſons ſhall burh it on the altar upon 
the burnt ſacrifice d, which is upon the wood that is on 


the fire : it is an offering made by fire, of a ſweet favour 
untothe LORD. 

d Either 1, Upon the remainders of it, which yer were burning ; 
or rather 2.Afrer it;for the daily Burnt-offering, was firſt to be offered, 
both as more emineatly reſpe&ing God's Honour, which ought to 
be preferred before all things ; and as the moſt ſolemn and ſtated 
Sacrifice, which ſhould take place ofall voluntary and occafional 
Oblations, and as a Sacr ifice of an higher nature and uſe, being for 
Expiationand Atonement, without which no peace could be ob- 
tained, nor Peace-vffering offered with acceptance. 


6 1 And ifhis offering for a ſacrifice of peace-offe- 
ring unto the LORD, be of the flock, male or female, 


7 If he offera lamb forhis otfering, then (hal he offer 
it before the LORD, | 

8 And he ſhallay his hand upon the head of his offering, 
and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation : ! 
and Aarons ſons ſhall ſprinkle the blood thereof, round 
about upon the altar. 

9 And he fvall offer of the ſacrifice of the peace- offe- 
ring, an oftering made by fire unto the LORD, the fas 
thereof andthe who'e rump e, it ſhall he take off hard 
by the back-bone:and the fat that covereth the inwards, - 
and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 

e Which in Sheep is fat, and ſweet, and in theſe parts was very 


much larger and better than ours, as is agreed both by ancient and 
modern Writers, and therefore was fitly offzred to God. 


10 And the two kidneys, and the fart chat is upon 
thew, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the li- 
ver with the kidneys, it ſhall he take away 

11 And the prieſt ihall burn f it upon the altar : z# is J 
+ the food g of the offering made by fire unto the + Heb vhs 
LORD. rear, OY 

f (# e: ) The parts now mentioned, and for the reſt, they fell , gn 
to the Prieſt, Levit. 7: 31: g (1,e.) Theifewel of the Fire, or the Chap.21;6, 
matter of the Offering. Ir is called food, Heb. bread, to note God's 
acceptance of it, and delight in it, as Men delighr in their food. 


12 1 And if his offering be a goat,then he ſhall offer it 
before the LORD ; , Hy 

13 And he ſhall lay kis hand upon the head of it, an 
kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation : and 
the ſons of Aaron ſhall ſprinkle the blood thereof upon 
the altar round about, 


14 And he ſhall offer thereof his offering,, evenan 
offering made by fire unto the LORD, the fat that co- 
vereth the inwards,and all the fat that js upon the in- 
wards, | | 


15 And the two kidneys and the fat that is upon 
them, which zs by the flanks, and the caul above the 
liver, with the kidneys, it ſhall he take away, | 

16 And the prieft fhall burn them g upon the altar : 
it is the | food of the offering made by fire for a ſweet 
favour, all the fat þ is the LORD'.. 


£ The Parts mentioned, among which the Tail is not one, as it 
was in the Sheep, becauſe that in Goats is 2 refuſe Part. + This is 
to be limited, 1. To thoſe Beaſts, which were offered or might be 
offered in Sacrifice, as it 1s explained and reſtrained, Levis. 7: 23, 
25:2.To that kind of fat which is here abovementioned,and required 
tobe offered, which was ſeparated, or eaſily ſeparable from the fleſh ; 
for the fat which was here and there mixed with the fleſh they might 
eat, Deut, 32; 14: Neh: 8: 10. 


17 [ſhall be a perpetual ſtatute for your generations, 
throughout all your dwellings s,that ye ear neither far &, 


nor* blood /. 


5 Not only ax or near the Tabernacle, nor only of thoſe Beaſth/ Gen: 9-2 
which ye aftually Sacrifice, bur alſo in your ſeveral dwellings, and +*© pal | 
of all that kind of Beaſts. k This was forbidden, 1. To preſerve 23? 

the Reverence of the Holy Rices and Sacrifices. 2: That rhey might 
be taught hereby to acknowledge God aFheir Lord,and the Lord of 
all the Creatures, who might reſerve what he pleaſed to himielf, 
3.To exerciſe them in Obedience to God,and Self denial,and Mortifi- 
cation of their Appertites,even in thoſe things which probably many 
of them would much defire. | This was forbidden partly to maintain 
Reverence toGod and his Worſhip;partly out of oppoſirien to Idola- 
ters, whouſed to drink the Blood,of theirSzcrifices;partly with reſpe& 
unto Chriſt's Blood, thereby manifeſtly ſignified ; and partly fer 
moral admonition about avoiding cruelty, &c» 

CH AP. IV, 

Of {ins of errour or infirmity, and their ſacrifice, 1, 2. committed by the high- 
prieſt ; ſo the guils of the people ; ha muſt offer a perfett young bulleck, aud 
ſprinkle the blood ſeven times before the ail of rhe holy place, and upon 
the korns of the incenſe altar, 3-----14, or by the whole congregation, 

when their ſins is known, the eldeſt of the congregation to lay fts hand on 

the hsad of the offering to be offered in the ſame manner with chat of the 

high prieſts, 13---21;Or by @ prince and ruler he-when his ſus 6 made knows: 

ro him, muſt offer # high-gtat, 22=-==026. Or by a private perſon, muſt 

offer # he-goat, 27=====35: the ſin ts forgiven him. 


t Heb, 
bread. 


I7; I0,142 
Deut: 12: 
16; 1Sams : 


14: 33? 
Ezek: 44# 


ND che LORD fpake unto Moſes, foy- 
2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying, * If a  _ 
ſou! thall fin 2 through ignorance b againſt any of the ,7,.47,9 
commandments of the LORD ( concerning things Which nv; b; Jane 

: KS 5 oug hs 


ap. IV LEVIT 
eb;ſba? +. ought not to be done ) e and ſhall do againſt any of 
be gone. themd: ; 


:« moſt neceſſarily beunderſtood of more than common S1ns, 
nt FA Infirmities ; for if every ſuch Sin had required an Offe- 
ring.it had not been poſſible either for moſt Sinners to bear ſuch a 
Charge, or for the Altar to receive ſo many Sacrifices, or for the 
Prieſts to manage ſo infinite a work. And for ordinary Sins, they 
were ceremonially expiated by the daily Offering, and by that on the 
great day of Atonement, Zevit.. 16: 30: 6 Or, errour, either not 
knowing his Fat to be ſinful, as appears by comparing verſe 13, 14* 
or not conſidering it, but _ and unadviſedly falling into Sin 
through the Power of ſome ſudden Paſſion or Temptation, as the 
Hebrew word ſignifies, Pal. 119: 67: Compare Job 19: 4: Pſal. 19: 
13: c The-words may be thus rendred, in or about every, or any of 
the commandments of the Lord which ſhould not be donz, or, which con- 
cern things thar ſhould noz be done, to wit, in any negarive coauands. 
And there is great reaſon why a Sacrifice ſhould be more neceilary 
for theſe, than for other Sins, becauſe affirmative precepts do nor fo 
ftrialy and conſtantly blind Men as the negarive do; and if a Man 
through ignorance have neglected them, he may yet recover his er- 

rour, and fulfil them. d Then he fhall offer according to his qual- 
lity, which is here to be underſtood eut of the following verles. 


3 If the prieſt that isanoinced e, do fin f according 


ICUS. 


her Sin-cferings, Levie. 6; 26: The reaſon is plain, becauſe the 

Offerer micht not eat of his own Sin-cfering, and re Prieſt was the 

Offerer in this caſe, as alſo the Sin-offering for the whole Congrega= 

tion below, wcrſe21; of which the Prieſt himſelf was 2 Member. 9 

Nor himſe!f,which would have defiled him,but by another whom he 

ſhall appoint for that work, as may be gathered from Lew2re 16; 27, 

28: r To ſignifie either, 1. The horrible and abominable nature of Sin, 

eſpecially 1n high and holy perſons, or when it overſpreads a whole 
people. Or 2: The removing of the guilt and puniſhment 
of thar Sin from the people, and their dury of keeping ſuch wickea- 
neſs outof the Camp for time to come. Or 3+ That Chriſt ſhould 
ſuffer without the Camp or Gate, as he did. See Heb. 13: 12, 125 
s For the Afhes, though at firſt they were thrown down nezr the 
Alear, Levit, 1:16; yet afterwards they, together with the filth of 
the Sacrifice, vvere carried into acertain place vvithout the Camp. 
See Lev; 6: 10, 11: 

:2 1 And if the whole congregation of Iſrael z fin 
through ignorance, * and the thing be hid from the eyes 
of the allembly, and they have done ſomewhat againſt 
any of the commandmentsof the LORD, concerning things 
which (hould not be done, and are guilty : 


* The body ofthe pecple, or greater part of them, their Rulers 
concurring vvith them. 


to the ſin of the people g then let him bring for his fin 
* Chap.9: which he hath ſinned, * a young bullock þ without ble- 


- miſh unto the LORD for a fin-offering z. 
e (5, e. ) The High prieſt, who only was anointed after the firſt 
time. See Exod. 29: 7: and 30: 30: and 40: 15: Levit. 10: 7; Numb. 


3: 3: His anointing 1s mentioned, becauſe he was nor compleat 
High-prieft ell he was anointed. f Either In Dodrine or Prattice, 
which it is here ſuppoſed he may do. Andthisis noted as a blot and 
character of imperfe&ion in the Prieſthood of the Law, whereby the 
Iſraelites were dire&ed to expe another and better High-prieſt,even 


the fame manner asany of the people do ; which implies that God 
expeted more circumſpe&ion and care from him, than from the 
people. Burt the words may be rendred,#o the fin or guilt of the people, 
which may bemenrioned as a reaſon ofthe Law, and an agravation 
of his Sin, that by it he commonly brings Sin, and Guilt, and Pun- 
zhment upon the people, who are infetted or ſcandalized by his ex- 
ample. þ The ſame Sacrifice which was offered for all the people, 
to thew how much his Sin was agravated by his quality. © ; Heb, ſm, 
which word is ofc taken in that ſenſe, as Exod. 29: 14: - 

4 And he ſhall bring the bullock unto the deor of the 
tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD, and 
fhall lay his hand upon the bullocks head &, and kill the 


bullock 1, before the LORD. 

& To teſtifie both his acknowledgment ofhis Sin, and his Faith 
in God's promiſe for the expiation of his Sins through Chriſt, whom 
that Sacrifice typified. 1 Te wit, by one of the Priefts, whom he 
ſhall cauſe to do it ; for this Prieſt is diſtinguiſhed from che anointed 
Prief, werſe 5. ; ; b 

s And the Prieſt that is anointed ſhall take of the 
bullocks blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the 


| congregation /. 
} Into the Tabernacle ; which was not required nor allowed in 
any other Sacrifice, poſſibly to ſhew the greatneſs of the High-prieſts 
by - Sin,which needed more than ordinary diligence in him, and favour 
s from God to expiate it. : G 
6 And the Prieſt ſhall dip his finger in the blood, 
and ſprinkle of the blood ſeven times mz before the 


LORD, before the vai! o of the ſandiuary. 

» A number much uſed in Scriprure, as a number of perfe&ion ; 
and here preſcribed, cither to ſhew that his Sins needed more than 
ordinary Purgation, and more frequent and manifeſt excerciſes of 
his Faith and Repentance, both which Graces he was obliged to 
z0in with that Ceremonial Rite, To wit, the ſecond Vail de- 
viding berween the Holy of Holies, which is generally called by 
the name here uſed, as Exed. 26; 31, &c. and 35; 12; and 40: 3, 21; 
Numb. 4: 5. 


7 And the prieſt ſhall put ſoeof the blood upon the 
horns of the altar of ſweet incenſe before the LORD, 


which #3 in the tabernacle of the congregation, and 
ſhallpour all the blood o of the bullock ar the bottom of 


one who is holy, harmle(s, and ſeparate from ſinners, Heb. 7: 26: g In 


the altar ofthe burnt-offering, which zs at the door of 


the tabernacle of the congregation, 


» Which Altar; for the Altar of Burnt-offerings was without the 
w werſe 18, 30,34: to wit, all the reſt, as 


Tabernacle. o Se alſo 
it is expreſled Lev. 5; 9: for part was diſpoſed elſewhere. 


* crifice of peace-offerings: and the prieſt ſhall burn them 


8 And he ſhall take off from it all the fat of the bul- 
lock for the ſin-offering : the fat that covereth the in- 
wards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards, 

9 And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upen 
them, which 5 by the flanks, and the. caul above the 
liver, with the kidneys, it hall he take away, 

10 * As it was taken off from the bulleck of the ſa- 


upon the altar of the burnt-offering, 


14 When the ſin which they have ſinned againft it 


+ is known, then the congregation ſball efter a young 


bullock « for the ſin, and bring him before the taber- 


nacle of the congregation. 

f Againſt any one of the ſaid Commandments. » But if the Sin 
of the Congregation vvas only the omiſſion of ſome Ceremoni- 
al Duty, a Kid of the Goats vvas to be offered, Nwmb. 15; 24; 


I5 And the elders of the congregation x faall lay 
their hands upon the head of the bullock before the 
LORD: and the bullock ſhall be killed before the 
LORD, 


x (4. e.) The Rulers ef the people, of vvhem ſee Exod. 3: 16: and 
24: 1: vyho here aRted in the name of all the people, vvho could not 
poſſibly perform this AR in their ovvn perſons. 


16 And the prieſt that is anointed ſhall bring of 
the bullocks blood to the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation. 

17 And the prieſt (ball dip his finger i» ſowe of the 
blood, and ſprinkle iz ſeven times before the LORD, 
even before the vail. 

18 And he ſhall put /oze of the blood upon the 
horns of the altar, which is before the LORD y, that 
is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and ſhall pour 
Out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt- 
offering, which 3s as the door of the tabernacle of the 
Congregation, 


3 That 1s,before the Holy of Holiesvhere the Lord vvas ina more 
ſpecial manner preſent ; namely the Altar of Incenſe, as before wver.7. 


19 And he (ball take all his fat from him, and burn 
it upon the altar. 


the bullock for a ſin-offering, z, fo ſhall he do with this: 
and the prieſt ſhall make an atonement for them, and 
it ſhall be forgiven them. 
z To vvit, for the Prieſt's Sin-offering, called the fr/t bullock, wer. 21: 
21 And he ſhall carry forth the bullock without the 
camp, and burn him as he burned the firſt bullock : ir 
is a 1in-offering for the congregarion. 
22 C When a ruler @ hath ſinned, and done ſorme- 
what through ignorance b again#t any of the commangd- 
ments of the LORD his God, concerning things which 
ſhould not be done,and is guilty: 

s To wit, of the People, or a civil Magiſtrate. b Fither not know- 


ing it to be Sin, or not obſerving and conſidering it till it be done 
See before on verſe 2; . 


his knowledge, he ſhall bring his offering, a kid of the 
goats, a male without blemiſh, 
c ThedisjunQiive, or, 1s here put for the copulative, and, as it is 


x Cor 12: 13: and 13; 8: and 15: 11: For it is evident, that | 
ſpeaks of the ſame Perſon and of the ſame Sin. > that he 


24 And he (ball lay his hand upon the head of the 
goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt- 


offering 4 before the LORD: it 5s a ſin offering e. 


aSo called by way ofeminency, to wit, the dayly Burnt-ofter; 
of which Exod. 29: 38: of which place ſee Pp6tg I: oo e "AT 
therefore to be killed where the Burnt-offering is killed, as is ex- 


preſſed Leve 6. 25; and 7: 2. Whereby itis diſtinguiſhed fi 
Peace-offerings, which were killed elſewhere, gg ed from the 


2. 

25 Andthe prieſt iball take of the blood of rhe fin- 
offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of 
thealtar of burnt offering, and ſhall pourout his blood 
at the bottom of the altar of burnt-offering. 

26 Andhe ſhallburn all his fatupon the altar, as the 
fat of the ſacrifice of peace-offerings : and the Prieſt 
ſhall make an atenement for him, as 
and itſhall be forgiven himf; 

f Beth ceremenially and judicially, as to all eccleſiaſtical cenſure; 


orcivil puniſhments; and really,upon condition of their re 
and faith in the Meſſias to come, . pentance 


b 27 T And 


23 * Orc if his ſin wherein he hath ſinned, come to q,, 


* Chap: 
2s Jy 45 | 


230 And he ſhall do with the bullock as he did * with *Ver: 


EG TIP gy 


KE 
* 39. 


concerning his fin, *O# 


* . 
Py 
* 
4 
*, 
1d 
> 
"ut 
- 


þ 


| furatt 


A» &\; 


ap: 
3 4+ | 


mud ELL... 


_ CD 


*Verk: 


a0 net nad 


” WW 
FP 
© 
m4 
_- 


'S ] 


m4, 2 fwc i be 


| juration, 


dd 


NE APA gen ns Rar 


136d - d *if ne of the * common peopleg 
27 7 And*®uT any ence | 
*Num.15 fin through ignorance, while he doth ſomewbat againſt 
any one of the commandments of the LORD ,concerning 
things which ought not to be done, and be guilty : 
Whether 1f-aelites, or ſtrangers embodied with them and proſe- 
lites - forboth were under one and the ſame law, Exod: 12. 29.Num: 


a7 
4 Heb; 


Bo crop 
of the laud. 
15; 16. ; Sg : q "4 

* Or if his fin which he hath ſinned cometo h1 
heats . thenhe ſhail bring his offering, a kid ofthe 
goats, a Emale þ without blemiſh, for his ſin which he 
bath ſinned. 


h Which here was 
Jeſs than the ſin of the Ruler, 


w_ And he ſhall lay his hand upon the head of the 
G6--offering, and ſlay the fin-offering in the place of the 

-nt-offering. ; 
—_ And _ Prieft ſhall take of the blood thereof with 
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar, of 
burt-otfering, and ſhall pour out al the blood thereof 
at the bottom of the altar. b 

31 And *he ball take away all the fat thereof, * as 
the far is taken away from off the ſacrifice of peace-ofie- 
+ Chap'3: rings , and the Prielt ſhall burn i upon the alcar, for a 
* {\vect favour unto the LORD; and the Prieſt (hall 
make an atonement for him, and ir {hall be forgiven 
him- 

32 And 
bring it a female without b'emiſh. 

23 And he 3 jhallay his hand upon the head of the 
fin-offering, and ſlay & it for a ſin-offering in the place 
where they kill the burnt-oftering. | 

; Towit, the Offerer, k Nor by himſelf, but by the hands of 


he Priett. 
"oi And the prieſt ſhal take of the blood of the fin- 


offering with his finger, and p.t zt upon the horns of 
- the altar of burnt-oftering,, aud (hall pour out all the 
blood thereo' at the bottom ofthe aitar, 

25 And he (hall take away all the fat thereof, as the 
far ofthe lamb is taken away from the ſacrifice of the 
peace-offerings : and the prieſts ſhai burn them / upon, 
the altar, according to the offerings made by fire w un- 
torne LORD ; and the prieit ſhal make an atonement 
for his ſin that he hath committed, and it thal be forgi- 


ven him. I 
1 (i.e. ) The fat; but he uſeth the plural number, becauſe rhe 
fat was of ſeveral kinds, as we ſaw werſe $8: 9g. m Heb. upon the Of- 
ferings, togecher wirh them, or after them ; becauſe rhe Burit-offe- 

' Tings were to have the firſt place. See on Caap. 3. 5. 


CHAP Yv. 


If a man heard or knew of blaſphemy, and concealed i:, he muft atone it, 
1. Or if he tomch any unclean thing, and is mane ſenſible of it ; or hav: 
ſworn roſbly, he is guilty, mult confeſs it, and offer a lamb or goat, fe 


fOr, And: 


ſufficient, becauſe the fin of one of thoſe vvas 
for whom a male was required, werſe 
: - 


dpxod:29: 
18. 


male ; incale of poverty, :wo turtÞ doves, ar rwo young pig: 01s, one tor. 
But if this were tos much, 


# fn, ang one tor s burnt-offering, 2-=-I0, 
the temh part of an ephah of fine flour, without oil '7 frankincen). 
11- --1I3, He that purloineth holy things muſt off'r a ram, ana the worth 
in ſilver,a ſh:kel according to the weight of th- ſanffuary, 14 ---= 16, Sins 
of ignorance again m-ntion'd, and a perfet} ram, with the eſtrmation, for 
'a fm-offering, 17- -=-19. 
ND if a ſoul fin, and s hear the voice of + ſwear- 
ing b and i: a witneſ', whether he hath ſeen * 
or known c of it ; if he do not utter zz,then be ſhal bear 
his iniquity d. 
a And, for that is, as that Particle is often uſed, as Gen; 13. 15: 
1 Chron. 21, 12. compared with 2Sam: 24: 13. For this declares 
In particular what the ſin was, b Either 1, of adjuration upon oath, 
when the Judge adjures a Witneſs toſpeak the whole truth;of which 
ſee Marth, 26, 63, Bur his ſeems roo much to narrow the ſenſe ; 
an.. thi> and the other Laws, both before and after ir, ſpeak of privare 
ſis committed chrough 1g.-07rance. Or 2. of falſe ſwearing before 
a J. dge, But rrac is expicfly forbidden, Lev. 6: 3. | Or rather 3. 
o; curting, or blaiphemy, or execration, as the word commonly ſig- 
nihes, and tat -itiher 1, againſt ones ne1ghboi:r, as 2 Sam, 16. 7.07 
2 againſt Go.!, as Levit: 24; 10 11. which may ſeem ro be princi- 
pa:ly intended here, becau'e th: Crime hore ſpok-n cf is +f fo bigh 
a nature, th:t hz who heard it, was obliged tore-e l ir, an proje- 
cute the guiiry. And though God be nor here mentioned, yer the 
genera] word is here to be underſtood of the moſt famous particular, 
as 1t 1s frequently in all Authors, of which there are many isſtan * 
Ces. * Being preſent when it was ſaid, c By ſuffic.ent information 
from others. a (i e. ) The puniſhment of it ; as that word is oft 
uſed, as Gen; 19: 15 Numb: 18; 1. See of this Phraſe Lev: 17; i6;and 
20: 20: Iſa: $9: 2x. 
| | 2 Oi* ifa ſou) touch any unclean thing e, whether 
we it bea Carcaſsof an unciean beaſt, or a carcaſs of un» 
. Clean cattel, ortte carcaſsof unclean creeping tw'ings, 
and if it be hidden trom him f, be alſo (hal be wiclean, 
and guilty g : 
e To wit, c-remonially. Of which ſee more fully, Chay. x1: 
24, &c. and O-ut, 14. fIf.edoit wittingly,yet that would not 
excuic him,b=cauſe he ſhould have been more dil:g-nt and circum» 
ſpe& ro avoid all unclean rhings. Hereby God uchgned to awaken 
men to watchfulnefs againſt, and repentance for, their unk'ovvn, 
or unobſerved fins. Sce Pjal: 19; 12. 1 John 3: 20. £ Nor morally, 


for the Conſcience was no direQly polluted by theſe things, Matth: | 
25; 11, IS, but ccremonially, 


t Or, aa. 


"Chap:11, 


LEVITIE US$ 


2 —— 


[ 


-— 


if he bring alamb for a ſin-offering, he ſhal 


Chap. V. 


3 Or if he touch the'* uncleanneſs of man, whatſoe- mg 
ver uncleanneſs it be that aman ſhal be defiled withal, -— F Ts. 
and-i: be hid from him, when he knoweth of ##b6, then 
he (hal be guilty z. 

þ As ſoon as he knoweth it,he muſt not delay to make his peace 
with God. And though it was fin before, though nor known, yet 
the knowledge ef it made it worſe, and therefore required the more 
ſpeedy repentance. # Not only ceremonially by that touch, but 
morally for his violation and contempt of God's Authcrity and 
Command, 


4 Or if a foul {wear k, pronouncing with hs lips to 
do evil/, or* ro do good mm, whatſoever #: be that a man 
ſhal pronounce with an oath, and ir be hid from tim» ; 
when be knoweth of it o, then he ha} be guilty in one of 


Z 


theſe p. ! 

k To wit, raſhly, without conſideration either of God's Law, or 
his own power or right, as David did, 1 Saw; 25; 22. 1 Either 
1, to himſe'f, ro wir, to puniſh higaſelf, either in his Body, or E- 
ſtare, or ſomething elſe which is dear to him. Or rather 2. to his 
Neighbour, as 1 Sam: 25: 225 As 23; 12, mn To wit, to his Netgh- 
bour, as Mayk 6. 23, when a man either. may nor, or cannot do it, 
which may frequently happen. »(7.e. ) He did not know, or not 
conſider, that what heſwore to do, was or would be impoſlible, or, 
unlawful, o When he diſcovers ir to be fo, either by his own con- 
ſideration, Or by information from others. p Either in the good or 
evil which he ſwore to do. 


5 And it (bal be when he ſbal be guilty in one of . 


theſe :hings q, that be ſhal confeſsr that he hath ſinned in 
that 145ng. 

q In on of the three forementioned caſes, either by ſinful ſilence 
and compliance with others in their fin, werſe 1. or by an unclean 
touch, as wv:rſe 2, 3, or by raſh ſwearing, wer/e4. x Before the Lord 
in the place of pub'ick worſhip. And this confeſſion is not ro be re= 
ſtrained to che preſent caſe, but by a p>rity of reaſon,and comparing 


* Plal:49: 
18. 


; of other Scriptures,to be exrended to other Sacrifices for fin,to which 


this was a conſtant compamion;and as it were ſignified by the guilry 
p:r{on's laying his hand upon his Offering, ſo it is probable it was 
expreſſed in words, See Numb. 5.6, 7, 


6 Andhe ſhal bring his tieſpaſs-offering + unto the 
LORD tor his fin which he bath ſinned, a temale s frym 
che tock, alamb or kid of the goats, fora ſin-offering: 


and the prieſt ſhal make an atonement for him concer- 
ning his lin. 

T 2ueft, How comes confeſſion and a ſacrifice to be neceſſary for 
him thar rouched an unclean thing,when 'vch perſons were cleanſed 
w:th fimpl: waſhing, as appezrs trom Levit: 11: and Numb. 19 ? 
nſw; This place ſpeaks of him tar being ſo unclean did comeinto 
the Tob-rnacle, as may be gathered by comparing this place with 
Numb: 19: 13. which if any man did,knowing himſelf to be unclean 
which was the caſe there, he wastobe cur off for it; and if he did 
ir 1gnorantly, which is the caſe here, verſe 2. he was vpon diſcovery 
of 1t'o offer this Sacrifice. Inrerprerers diſpute much whar the dif- 
"e:ence 1+ between ſins and treſpaſſes, and berween ſon-offerings and treſ< 
paſ+- offerings, Some make the one for omiſſions, rhe ocher fo: come 
.n-\ſ1»1s; theone for greater, the ether for leſſer fins; the one for 
known fins, the other for ſins of ignorance;in all which there ſeems 
to be more curiofiry than folidiry: Either they ſeem to be the Tame, 
is may be gathered from werſe 6. where thoſe two words, aſham and 
cha:a, which they fo caref.Uully and critically diſtinguiſh, are both 
uted concerning the Treſpaſs-offering, and from wer 9: or the dif- 
ference may be this, that ſ-offerings were more indefinite or g-neral, 
being for any particular ſin; and rreſpaſs-oferings more reſtrained 
and particular for fuch ſins as were mor? ſcandalous and injurious ei- 
ther to God by bl:ipkemy, as verſe 1; or ro his Sanftuary, by ap- 
proaching to if in one's uncleanneſs, verſe 2, 3. as hath bezn now 
ia'd ; orto one's Neighbour, by ſwearing to do to them either the 
good which weafterwards canner or do n>t, or the evil which vve 


ſhou'd nor ; or to the Prieſts and holy things of God, werſe 15. £ Be- 
cauſe thoſe fins were leſs than orhers, as being commirted 1grorants 
ly or u;wirtingly, and therefore God would accept a meaner Sacri- 
fice for them. 


7 And * if the be not t ab'eto bring a lamb, then * Chap; - 
he (hal biing for his treſpaſs wi-ich he hath commited, 14:21- < 
ewo turtie doves, or two young pigeons « unto te fr 1 Fo 


R a 
LORD; one fora ſin-offeringx, and the other for a mr reach 
burnt- offering. 


to che ſuffi- 
s Through poverty, as ver, 11. and 25, 26, And this exception c/ency of 8 

was allow. d allo in other Sin-offerings. « Of which ſee Lev 1: 14 lamb. 

x Wanich was for that. particular ſin, and therefore is offered firſt be= 

fore the Burnt-off-ring, which was for fins in general ; to teach us 

not to reſt in general confeſſions and repentancesfor ſin,as Hypocrites 

commonly do,bur diſtindaly and particularly,as far as we can,ts ſearch 

out,and coafels,and loith,and leave our particular fins, without which 

God will not accept our other religicus Services. Note that the 

Burnt- offering was for the expiation of ſin,as well as the Sin-offeri 

Lev. 1: 4: only that was for {inin genera],and this for particular ſing 


28 And he hal bring them unto the prieſt,who ſhal of- 

fer 1har which is fer the ſjn-offering firſt,8& * wring off his *Chap; 1. 
head from tis neck; but ſhal not divide iz aſunder. 15, 
9And he {ha ſprinkle of the blood of the lin-offering up- 
on the fide of the airar, and the reſt of the blood lhall be 
wrung out at the bottom of the altar:it js a ſin-otfering y. 

y This is added as the reaſon why its blood was fo ſprinkled and 
ſpilt. See Lev: 4; 7, 18, 30, 34. 


+ Or, &- 
ainance, 

* Caap: 1. 
MAKE 14. 


10 And ke ſhal offer the ſecond for a burnt-offeriag, 
according to the F * manner z ; and che Priclt ibail 
_— 


Chap. VI. SV 
make an atonement for him «for his fin which he had | 


finned, and it ſhall be forgiven him. : 

x Or order appointed by God. &# Either declaratively, he ſhall 
pronounce him to be pardoned ; or typically, with reſpe& to 
Chriſt. : 

18 © But if he be not able to bring two turtle doves, 
or two young pigeons, then he that ſinned jhail bring 
for his offering the tenth part of an ephah b of tine flour 
for a fin offering : he ſhall put no oil upon it, neither 
ſhall he put any frankincenſe thereon c: for it is a fin- 
oftering. | 

b About a pottle of our meaſure. See Exod: 16; 36, cEirher to 
diſtinguiſh theſe from the Meat-offzrings, Lev: 2: 1: or as a it ex- 
preſſion of their true ſorrow for their ſins, in the ſenſe whereof thzy 
were to abſtain from things pleaſant. and delightful. Sce Numb: 5:15, 
or to fignify that by his fins he deſerved to be utrerly deprived both 
of the oil of gladneſs, the gifts, graces and comforts of the Holy 
Ghoſt;and of God's gracious acceprance of his Prayers and Sacrifices, 
which is ſignified by Incenſe, Pſal: 141: 2. or to teach them hovv 
evil a thing ſin was, how hateful ro God, and how uncomfortable 

' to themſelves. 


iz Then (ball he bring it to the Prieſt,and the prieſt 
* Chap:2. ſhal take his handful of it, * eve a memorial thereot,& 


*Ch burnit on the altar, * according to the offerings made 
6: wg by fire unto the LORD : it 5s a lin-offering. 


13 And the Prieft hal make an atonement for him 
as touching his ſin that he hath ſinned in one of cheſe 
and it ſbal be forgiven him ; and the rewnan! (hal be the 


Prieſts, as a meat-offering d. | 

d Asit was in the Meat-offering, where all, except one handful, 
'fell to the ſhare of the Prieſts. See Lev; 2: 3: and 7: 9, And this 
is the rather mentioned here,becauſe in rhe foregoing Sacrthices, Lev. 
4:3, &c. 13, &c. the Prieſt had no part reſerved for him. 


14 4 And the LORD ſpake unco Moſes, ſaying, 

15 If a ſoul commit a treſpaſs e, and lin ta-ough ig- 
norance fin the holy things of theLORD g,then he ſha] 
bring for his treſpaſs unto the LORD, a ram þ without 
blemilh out of the flocks: with thy eſtimarion 3 by ſhe- 

*Exod:30: kels of ſilver, after the * ſhekel of the ſanctuary * fort a 


T3: treſpaſs- offering, : x ne 
# Heb. 4 - e Againſt the Lord and his Prieſts. f For if a man did it know- 
preſpaſs: ingly, he was to be cut off, Numb; 15: 30. gln things conſecrzted 


to God, and ro holy uſes ; of which ſee Lev; 22: 2: ſuchas Tythes 
and Firſt-fruirs, or any things due, or devoted, or offered to God, 
which poſſibly a man might either with-:old, or employ to ſore 
common uſe. See Exod. 34; 26. Deut, 12: 17, 18. and 15: 19;Jer. 
2: 3- b'A morechargeable Sacrifice rhan the former, as the tin of 
Sacriledge was greater. '# As thou ſhalr eſteem or rate it, thou O 
Prieſt, as appears from werſe 16, 18, and Levit. 6: 6, See alſo Lev; 
22: 14. and 27; 2, 3. and at preſent, thou O Myſes, Lov. 27. 3. for 
he as yet performed the Prizft's part. And this enter 1. way be 
referredto the ram, which wasrto be of ſuch a price and vvorth as 
the Prieſt ſhould appoint, Or rather 2. is an additional charge and 
puniſhment to him, which beſides the ram. he was to pay for the 
holy thing which ne had with-h-id or abu <d, ſo many ſheke's of 
ſilver as the Prieſt ſhou'd eſteem proportionablie to it ; which wasas 
it were another part or branch of his T:eſpals-offering.'* Of which 
ſee on Gen. 23, 15. 
16 And be ſhal make amends for the barm t? at ke hath 
* Chap:22 done in the hoiy thing, and ſhal "add the fifth part I 
14: and thereto, and give it unto the prieſt ; and the prieſt ſha] 
27:13,15, make an atonement for tim with the ram of the wreſpals- 
7 offering, andit ſhatbe forgiven him. 
Num'5:7: þ $9 much they were to add to holy things redeemed, Levit: 27: 
13, 15, 19. : ; 

17 7 Andifa * ſoul fin and commit any of. theſe things 
I which are forbidden to be done by the commandments 
Numb: 5:- of the LORD, though he wilt zz not, yer is he guiity, 
6. and (hal bear his iniquity. 

3 To wit, concerniag holy things, of which he is yet ſpeaking, 
though wirh ſome difference and addition as it may ſeem. The for- 
mer Law concerns the alienation of holy things from the ſacred to 
2 common ule ; and this may concern other miſcariages about 
holy things, and holy duties,as may be gathered from ver; 19.where 
this is ſaid ro be a zreſpaſs agaiuſt the Lord, not in a general ſenfe, for 
ſo every ſin was; but in a proper and peculiarſenſe. m2 For if hedid 
it knowingly, be muſt die, Numb; 15: 3e- 

18 And he ſhal bring a ram without blemiſh out of the 
flock,with thy eſtimartion,for a treſpaſs- offering unto the 
prieſt; and theprieſt ſhal make an atonement for bim, 

concerning tis ignorance wherein be erred, and wiſt ;: 
not; andit ſhai be forgiven bim, 

19 It isatreſpaſs- offering 3 be bath certainly treſpaſled 
againſt the LORD. 


CHAP. VI 
Treſpaſs-offerings for fins of deceit, or violence, and perjury ; reftoration 
muff be made, and a ram offered, x -—— 7. The lawful manner of 
this burnt-gffering further declared ; the fire to be ever burning upen the 
altar, 8 ---- 13. Of mea:-offerings for a memorial unto th? Lord, 
and every one that rowcheth them is ſuly, 14, ————18, Meat offerings 
far the conſecratioof Aaron and his ſons, 19 == 23. Of the ſm-offerng, 


—— 30. 
A ND the LORD fpake unto Moſes fay- 


* Chap:4: 
2: 


ing, 
2 If - ſin and commit a treſpaſs againſt the 
LORD#, andlic unto bis neighbour in caat which 


LO —— 


LEVITICUS. 


Or ba Or, in 


was delivered him to keep 5, orin * 7 felrowship c, Me 


ina thing taken away by violence 4, or bath deceived 


þ1s neighbour e. : | 

s This ſin, though direQly committed againſt Mzn only, is here 
emphatically faid to be done again#? the Lord, not only in general, 
for ſo every fin againſt Man is alſo againſt the Lord, whoſe Image 
'n Man is thereby injvred, and whoſe Law, which obJigerh vs to 
Love and Fidelity, and Juſtice to other Men, is thereby violate; 
Dur in a more ſpecial ſenſe, becauſe this was 2 violation of humane 
Scciety, whereof God is the Author, and Preſident, and Defender. 
See Numb; &: 6: and becauſe it was a ſecret fin, of Which God alone 
was the Wirneſs and Judge, See As 5: 4* and becauſe God « Name 
was abuſed in it by Perjury, werſe zz 6 To wir, in truſt. c eb. Or 
in putting ef the hand, Winch may be either, 1. Another expreflicn 
of the iame thing immedciatly going before, which 1s very trequent 
in Scpturz;8 ſo the ſerſe is, When oneMan puts any thing into ano- 
therMan's Hand to keep for him;& when he zequires it, t6 r-ſtore it 
to him. Or, 2. Adiſtin& branch, which ſeems more probable,and 
io it belongs to commerce or feilov ſhipin Trading, which is very 
uſual when one Man puts ary thing into another's Hard, not to 
keepit, as in the foregoing Word or Member, butto uſe and 117. 
prove it for the cemmon benefit of them both, in which cafes of Parte 
nerſhip, it is eaſte for one to d2ceive the other,and therefore provitis 
on is here made againſt ir. And rhis 1s called a purring of the hand, bee 
c:uſe ſuch Agreements and Afociations v'ed to be confirmed by giz 
ving or joining their Har.ds rogetber, Jer 50: 15: Gal. 2:9: Compare 
Exod, 23: i: d Towit, ſecrer'y ; for heſ.ems to ſpeik here of twch 
{ins as cou!d not be preved by Witneſs. e Got any thiag from him by 
Calumny, or Fraud, or Circumvention ; for 1o the word ſignifies. 


3 Or have found that which was loſt, and lieth con- 
cerning it, and * ſweareth faſlyf; inany of all theſe 
that a man doth, finning therein. 

f His Oath being required, ſeing there was no other way of dife 
cove: y letr. 

4 Then ir ſhall be, becauſe he hath ſinned, and is 
guilty g, that he ſhal reſtore that which he took violent- 
'y away, or the thing which be hath deceitfully got- 


11'S, Of the 
hand, 


* Numb; 
5: 6. 


| cen, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the 


!o!t thing which he found: 

g This Guilt of his. being manifeſted, either by his refuſing to 
{» ear when calied ro it, as in ſom? of the caſes alledged; or by his 
voinrary confeſſion upon remorſe, whereby he reaperh this benefit, 
that heonly reſtores the principal with the addition ofa fifth part ; 
whereas if he were convitted of his fault, he was to pay double 
Exod. 22: 9 

5 Oral that about which he hath ſworn falſly, he , 
ſhal even.* reftore it in the principal, and ſhal add , 
the fifth part more thereto, 
whom it appertaineth, 
offering h. 

h It muſt nct be delayed, but retirution to Man muſt 2 
repentance towarcs God, Compare Matth. 5. 23. 

6 And he (hai bring his treſpaſs-ottering unto the 
LORD,a ram without blemiſh out of the * flock. with 
thy eſtimation, for a treſpaſs-offering unto the prieſt, 

7 And the prielt ſhal make an atonement for him be- 
fore the LORD:& it ſhal be forgiven him, for any thing 
of all chat he hath done, in treſpafling therein. 

8 4 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

9 Command Aaron and his ſons 3, ſaying, This is 
the law of the burnt-offering k: ( it is the burnt-of- 


tering, + becauſe of the burning upon the altar all + Or,fr 
night unto the morning /, and the fire of the altar ſhal *** #7 
be burning 1n it. ) 27g. 

; Hitherto he hath preſcribed the S:crifices the 
comes to the manier of them, k Towit, 
which Exod. 29.38; Numb. 98: 3:as the foilo 
meaning 1s, the evening Burtnt-cffering wa 
Jaid on picce afier piece, that the fire mich be conſtantly maintains 
ed byit. It is tobe underſtood, that the mornins Burnt-offerir og 
were to be kept burning all the day from Morning to night alſo; but 
he mentions nor that, becauſe there was {o great a nuinber 'and 
ſuch a conſtant ſucceſſion of Sacrifices in the dzy-time; that there 
needed no Law for feeding and keeping in the firethen;the on! dan= 
ger was for the viyhr, when other Sacrifices were hor offered” but 
only the evening Burnt-offe:ing, which if it had been conſumed 
quickly, as the morning burnt-offering was, there had been dange 
of the going out of that tire, which they were commanded di 
gently and conſtantly ro keep in and maintain here below, verſe 
13. 


Chap:;: 
og : 6. 
and give it unto him to *Or,inth: 
* + in the day of his treſpaſs- 4a» of ki 
being found 


try. 
ccompany THE, the 
day 0; his 
treſpaſs. 
* Chap. 5. 
TH 


mſelves ; now he 
of the daily one, of 
wing words ſhew. / The 
S tvbe fo managed and 


10 And theprieft ſhal pur on his linen 
and his linen breeches ſhal be put upon his fleſh, and 
take up the aſhes which the fire hath conſumed g with 


the burnt-offering on the alcar,and he ſh 
QC Jhal put th is 
ſides the altar, i P em be 

m (4. e, ) His linen Coat, of which ſee Exod: 28: » 
aſhes are {aid to beconſumed improper iy,when the wand ba 5k lo 
ed into aſhes : as meal is ſaid to be ground, 1 1= 


garment 2, 


Chap. VI Þ# 


> Ire FI IIA Tae Le 25 re RAGE: 


: ſa. 47: 2, wh 
is ground into Meal ; and the naked to be ſtripped of their i rim 


22: 6: when by being ſtripped they are made naked, 
11 And he ſhal put off his garments, 


ther garments o, and carry forth the ath 
camp, unto a clean place p. 


and put on 6- 
es without the 


s Becauſe this was no ſacred, b 


ut a common work. þ» Wh 
dung or filth was laid, Sce Levit: 4: - P creng 
| . s 4: I2; and Compare Levit: 3,- 

422 4, FAT AM Aga | 
22 And 


—_— 


4» 
3 


iHcb.purs” ; | 


*C2 
4,5 


* Ex 
I6: 3 


{ul 


le 


CM eur er EE CCA TO OT 


Chap. VI. LEYI 


12 And the fire upon the altar ſhall be burning in 
it : it (ſhall not be pur out q ; and the priefts thall burn 
wood on it every morning ”, and lay the burnt of- | 
fering in order upon it, and he ſhall burn thereon 5 

* Chap:3: * the fat of the peace- offerings. 

3, 9s 14: q The fire coming down from Heaven, vir: 9g: 24. was to be 

perpetualiy preſe;ved, and not ſuffered to.go out, partly that there 

might be no occalion nor tempration ro oifer ſtrange fire, nor to 
mingle their inventions with God's appointments ; and partly to 
teach them whence they were to expect the acceprance of all their 

Sacrifices, even from the Divine mercy and Grace,fignified by the 

fire which came down from Heaven, which was an uſual token of 

God's favourable acceptance. See the notes on Geri: 4: 4: 5. 

» Though the evening alſo be doubtleſs intended,as 1t appears from 

ver. 9. and from the nature of the thing ; yer the morning 15 only 

mentioned, becauſe then the Altar was cleanſed,and the aſhes taken 
away, and a new fire made. s (. e. ) Upon the Burnt-offering, 
which thereby would be ſooner conſumed, that ſo way mighr be 
made for other Sacrifices, which were many. : 
13 The fire (hall ever be burning upon the altar, it 
ſhall never go our. : 
14 4 * And this zs the law of the meat-offering z 3 


2: I: the ſons of Aaron ſhall offer it before tke LORD, be- 


Num 15: fore the altar. 
F: + To wit, of that which was offered alone,and that by any of the 
People, not by-the Prieſts, for then it mult have becn all burnt. 
This Law delivered, Lewvit: 2: is here repeated for the fake of ſome 
Additions here made to it ; as it 15 a common praftice of Law- 
makers, when they make additional Laws, to recite ſuch Laws to 
which ſuch Additions belong. — = 
i5 And he ſhall rake of it his handful of the flour 
of the meat-offering, and of the oil thereof, and all 
the frankincenſe which is upon the meat-oftering, and 
ſhall burn it upon the altar for a ſweet favour, even the 
* Chap: * memorial of it unto the LORD. : 
2 "4 . 16 And the * remainder thereof ſhall Aaron and his 
= wP* © ſons « eat : + with unleavened bread x ſhall it be eaten 
+ Heb. in the holy place : in the court of the tabernacle of the 
#t ſhall be congregation y they ſhall eat it. 
eaten le « The Males only-might eat theſe, becauſe they were moſt holy 
leguencd, things ; whereas the Daughters of Aaron might eat other holy 
Chap: 10. things, Numb: 18: 11- « Or rather, wnleavened, for with 1s not 1n 
ae the Hebrew, and it diſturbs the ſenſe ; For ſince the Meat-offering 
it ſelf was fine flour, Levit: 2:1. it is not likely that they eat it with 
unleavened bread. y In ſome ſpecial Room appointed for that pur- 
poſe. See Levit: 8: 31: 1 Sam:3:3: Ezek: 42: (3: and 46: 19, 24. The 
reaſon why this was to be eaten only by holy perſons, and that in 
| an holy place, is given verſe 17. becauſe zt is moſt holy, and therefore 
*Nuamb: 2 be treated with greater reverence. 
18:0 16: 47 Its (ball nor be baken with leaven: *T have gi- 
* Chap: 2: VEN it unto them: for their portion of my offerings made 
5. by fire : it is * moſt holy, as zs the fin-oftering, and as 
the treſpaſs-oftering. | 
z Thar part which remains to the Prieit ; for the part here offer- 
ed to God ſeems not to have been baked ar all. 
138 All the males among the children of Aaron ſball 
eat of it : it ſhall be a ſtatute for ever in your genera- 
: tions, concerning the Offering of the LORD made by 

5 fire : every one that toucheth them thall be holy z. 
+» 5» - a It may be underſtood either 1. Of Perſons, that none ſhould 
touch, or eat them, but conſecrated Pertons, to wie, Prieſts. Or 
this may be an additional caution, that they who eat them ſhould 
be not only Prieſts, or their Male-children, but alſo hely, 3. e. ha- 
ving no uncleanneſs upon them, for in thar caſe even the Prieſts 
themſelves mighr not touch them. Or rather 2. of things, as may 
be gathered by comparing this with ver:27,28. Whatſoever toucheth 
them, as ſuppoſe rhe Diſh that receives rhem, the Knife, or Spoon, 
&-c. which is uſed about them, thoſe ſhall Le taken for holy, and 
not employed for common uſes. Sce Exod. 29: 37. 

19 © And the LORD ipake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

20 This is the offering of Aaron, and of his ſons, 
which they ſhall offer unco the LOR D, in the da 
when he is anointed b : the tenth part of an * Ephah of 
fine flour for a mear offering perpetual c, half of ir in 
the morning, and half thereof at night 4. 

6 When any of them are anointed for High-Prieft ; for he only 
of all the Prieſts was to be anointed in future Ages. This Law of 
his Conſecration was delivered before, E:od: 29: 2, 24, 25: and is 
here repeated becauſe of ſome additions made to it. c To wit, 
whenſoever any of them ſhall be fo anointed. d Or, i the evening; 
the one to be annexed to the Morning-Sacrifice, the other to the 
Evening-ſacrifice, over and beſides that Meat-offering which every 
day was to be addcd to the daily Morning and evening Sacrifices, 
Exod. 29: 40. 


2T Ina pan it ſhall be made wich oil, and 29hen it is 
bakzn e, thou f thalc bring ic in : and the baken pieces 
of the meat-offering thalc thou offer fer a ſweer favour 
unto the LORD, 

e Or, Fried, fo that it ſwells and bubbles up. f Who are ſo 
anointed and conſecrated, werſe 22. 

22 And the prieſt of his ſons * that is anointed in his 
ſtead ſhall offer it: 3t js a Sarute for ever unto the 
LORD ? * it ſhall be wholly burn. 

23 For every meat-offering for the prieſts ſhall be 
| wholly burnt: it ſhall not be eaten f. 

f No part of it ſhall be eaten by the Prieſt, as it was when the 


' 
' 


*.Chap: 


* Exod: 
I6: 36. 


* Chap: 
4: 3. 
D Exod: 
29: 25, 


| it for himſelf ; partly to ſignify the imperfe&ion of the Levitical 


might eaſily ſink into it, whereby it was ceremonially holy, and 


Y I] flanks. For it ſeems prepoſterous after a plain and exa& deſcription 


FT 1 C0 | Chap. VIL 
becauſe when he offered it for the People, he was to have ſome re- 
compence for his pains, which he could not expe& when he offcred 


Priefts,who could not beor their own iniquity ; for the Prieſt's cat- 
ing part of the Peoples Sacrifices did ſignify his typical bearing of 
the Peoples iniquity, as appears from Levit: 10: 17. and partly to 
teach the Prieſts and Minitters of God, that it is their duty ro ſerve 
God wirh tingleneſs of heart, and to be contenr with God's honour, 
though they have no preſenr advantage by ir. | : 

24 4 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

25 Speak unto Aaron and to his fons, ſaying, [This 
is the law of the ſin-offering : * in the piace wherethe 
burnt-offering is killed, ſhail che fin- offering be kilied 29, 33. 
before the LORD : it is moſt holy. / *Chap:2 

26 * The prie{t that offereth ic for fin g, ſhall eat jt : **: 
in the holy place ſhall it be eaten, in the court of the 
cabernacle of the congregation. 

g For the ſins of the Rulers, or of the people, or any of them, 
bur nor for the ſins of the prieſts ; for then it's blood was broughr 
into the Tabernacle, and therefore it might not be eaten. _ 

27 | Whatfſoever ſhall couch the fleſ thereof, ſhall T Or, whe 
be holy F : and when there is ſprinkled of the blood FR 
thereof upon any garment h,thou (halt waſh that where- ** * 
ON it was ſprinkled in the holy place 5. 

* Of which ſee the Note on verſe 18. h Upon the Prieſt's Gar- 
ment ; for it was he only that ſprinkled it, and in ſo doing he 
might eaſily ſprinkle his Garments. #7 Partly out of reverence to 
the blood of Sacrifices, which hereby was kept from a profane or - 
common touch ; and partly that ſuch garments might be decent, 
and fir for ſacred Adminiſtrations. e 


28 But the earthen veilel wherein it is ſodden,* ſhall 
be. broken &: and if it be fodden in a brazen pot, it 
ſhall be both fcoured, and rinſed in water /. 

k Becauſe being full of pores, the Liquor in which it was ſodden 


* Chaps 
II: JZs» 


therefore was broken, leſt afterwards it ſhoul4 :e abuſed to prophane 
or common uſes. 1 And not broken, as veing of conſiderable va- 
lue,which there fore God would not have unneceſlarily waſted. And 
this being of a more lolid ſubſtance than an earthen Veſlſe}, was 
not ſo apt to drink in the humour. 

| 29 All the males amonglit the prieſts ſhall eat thereof: 
it zs molt holy. 


30 * And no ſin-offering wz whereof any of the blood * Heb:13 


is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to **' 
reconcile withal in the holy place ſhall be eaten, it ſhall 
be burnt in the fire. | 

» Such were the Sacrifices offered for the High-prieſt, or for the 
whole Afſembly,either ſeverally,Levit: 4: 7, 18: or jointly for both, 
1a the yearly atonement, Levt: 16: 27, 33. 

CHAP. VII 

The law of the treſpaſs-off-ring, "and what fell to the prieſts, both of this, - 

and ſome other ſacrifices, 1----===-=10. The law of the jacrifires of peace= 

offerings, of thankſgivings, 11-----15, Of vows and free-will-offerings ; 

the unclean perſon eating thereof, to die, 16-----21. Fat not to be eaten; 

what fat might be uſed for other. things : he that eats of the fat of the 

offering,t0 die, and no blood to be eat, 22--===279, Another caution con- 

cerning thank-offerings, 28--===-34. The concluſion of the former laws, 

which are repeated, 35, 38. 

Fo * chis 4s the law of the treſpaſs-offering *: * Chap:52 
it 15 molt holy. and 6. 

2 In * the place where they kill the burnt-offering, * Chap: | 
hall they kill the creſpaſs-offeriag, and the blood there- 722... 
of ſhall he ſprinkle round about upon the altar, 3,5, — 

3 And he ſhall ofter of it * all the fat thereof, the and 4: 247 
rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, 297 33: 

4 And the two kidneys, and the far thae 7s on them , = 
which 3s 4 by the flanks, and the caul that js above the Chapel 
liver, with the kidneys, irc ſhall he take away. | 10:and 4s 

a Or, and that which is, S&c. . So this is another Fat, as may ſeem 


8,9. 
probable from the mention of the ſeveral parts, the Kianeys, and the . | © 


of the very particular place of the Fat, the KXaneys, to add another 
more dark and doubrful deſcriprion of it from the flanks. And the 
Hebrew Writers, whoſe common praCtice of theſe things makes them 
the beſt Inrerprerers of it, makes theſe divers kinds or parts of Fart. 
And fo there isonly an E!lipfis of the Conjun&ion copulative,which 


is Pjal: 133: 3. and in many other places, as hath been already 
ſhewed. 


5s And the prieſt ſhall burn them upon the altar, for 
an offering made by firs unto the LORD : it 5s a treſ- 
palſs-offering. 

6 * Every male b among the prieſts ſhal eat thereof: *Num:1$ 
it fhal be eaten in the holy place : ir is moſt holy. 9, 10. 


b Supp-ſing him nor to have any uncleanneſs upon him,ver: 26, 
or other impediment. . 


7 As the ſin-offering 3s, fo is * thetreſpaſs-Offering c 2» py... 
: : S ©** Chap: 6, 
there is one law tor them: the prieſt that maketh atone- 26: 
ment therewith ſhal have 3: 4. 

c To wit, in the matter here following, for in other things they 
differed. 4 (7. e. ) By a Synecdoche ; that part of ir,which was by 
God allowed to the Prieft. See Lewit: 6: 26. 

8 And the prieſt that offereth any mans burnt-offer- 
ing, ever the prieſt ſhal have ro himſelf the skin of the 
burnc-offering which ke hath offered. £15 

9 And all * che meat-offering e that 15 baken In + q,,,,, , 


Offering was for the People, The reaſon of the diflcrence 1s,partly | 


ths oven, and all that is drefled in the frying-pan, 3, ro; 
42 ard 


Or, cz 
he flat 
plate, or 
ice. 


*Chap: 19 
5, 6: 


- Chap. VI.. 


ſhall be the prieſts that offereth it f- 


and fin the pan 
F 7% God, Levit. 2. 2, 9. f Becauſe 


e Except the part reſerved by ; 
theſe were ready dreſt and hot, and not to be preſently eaten z 
and becauſe the Prieſt, who offered it, was in reaſon to expe&,and 
have ſomething more than his Brethren who laboured not abour it; 
and thr he had only in this Offering, for the other were equally 
diſtributed. 


10 And every meat-offering mingled with oil, and 
dry g, ſhall all the ſons of Aaron have, one as much #5 


another b. 

£ Without Oil, or Drink-offering, as thoſe Levir. 5. 11. Numb. 5: 
15. h The ſenſe may be either 1. That every Prieſt ſhall have 
equa] right to this, when the courſe of his minittration comes. But 
then there was no reaſon to make ſo great an alteration of the phraſe, 
no: to make any diſtin&ion of the differing kinds of Meat offerings, 
if in both they were to be the Prieſts that offered them, as 15 expreſic 
werſe 9. and here, as they ſay, intended. Or rather 2. That theſe 
were to be equally divided among all the Prieſts. And there was 
manifeſt reaſon for this difference, becauſe theſe were 1n greater 
quanti'y than the former ; and being raw, might more ealily and 
commodiouſly be divided and reſerved for the ſeveral Prieſts to 
dreſs it in that way which cach of tiem beſt liked. 

1: And * this is the law of the ſacrifice of peace- of- 
ferings which he (ball offer unto the LORD. 

12 If he offer it for a thankſgiving i, then he ſball 
offer with the ſacrifice of thankſgiving unleavened cakes 
mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with 
oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour fryed. 

; For mercies received. See Lewit: 22. 29, 2 Chron. 29. 31.and 


33. 16. R : 
13 Beſides the cakes, he ſhall offer for his offering 
leavened bread &, with the ſacrifice of thankigiving ot 
his peace offering 7. : | 
& Partly becauſe this was a Sacrifice of another kind thin thoſe 
in which Jeaven was forbidden, this being a Sacrifice of Thankſgt- 


ving for God's bleſſings, among which leavened bread was one ; 


partly to ſhew that leaven was not ſo ſtrifly forbidden in other Sa- 
crifices, as if it were evil in it ſeIf,bur to teach us wholly to reſt in 
the will of God in all his appointments, without too ſcrupulous an 
enquiry into the particular reaſons of them. Obj. Leaven was un1- 
verſally forbidden, Lev: 2: 11. 4». 1. That prohibition concerned 
only things offered and burnt upon the Altar, which this Bread was 
not, but it was offered only towa:ds the Prieſt's food. 2. That was 
an-ther kind of Sacrifice, and therefore it is no wonder if 1t had 


_ Other Rites. 3. That Leaven was not univerſally forbidden, appears 


from Lovit: 23. 17. 1 Or, With the ſacrifice of thankſgiving for his 
peace or proſperity. 


14 And of it »: he shall offer one cut of the whole 


_ oblation for an heave offering » unto the LORD, an« 


;t shal be the prieſts that ſprinkleth the blood of the 


peace- offerings. 

m Of it, (5. e.) Fither of the Loaves of leavened bread men- 
tioned werſe 13. or of the Offering, one of each part of the whole 
oblation, as it follows ; it being moſt probable and agreeable to rhe 
Rules and Laws laid down before and afterward, that the Prieſt 
ſhould have a ſhare in the unleavened Cakes and Wafers, as well 
as in the leavened Bread. # Concerning the Heave-ofterings, ſec 
Exod: 29: 24, 28. A ; 

15 And the flesh of, the ſacrifice of his peace offer- 
ings for thankſgiving shal be eaten » the ſame day that 


it is offered : he shall not leave any of ir until the mor- 
ning. 

n By the Prieſts and Offerers, Levit: 22: 30. 

16 But* if the ſacrifice of his peace-offering be a vow 
0,0r a voluntary offering p, it shal be eaten the ſame day 
that he offereth his ſacrifice ; and on the morrow alſo 


the remainder of it shal be eaten 9. 

o Offered in performance of a Vow,the man having deſired ſome 
ſpecial favour from God, and vowed the Sacrifice to God if he 
would grant it. p Which a man freely offered to God, in teſti- 
mony of his faith and love to God, without any particular injun&i- 
on from God, or deſign of his own ſpecial advantage thereby. Sce 
Levit: 22. 23. Execk: 46: 12. q Which was not allowed for the 
Thank-offering. The reaſon of which difference is to be fetched 
only from God's _” | - and will, to which he expe&s our 
obedience, though we diſcern not the reaſon of his appointments. 

17 But the remainder of the flesh of the fſacritice on 


the third day, $hal be burnt with fire r. 

+ That it might neither putrefy, and thereby be expoſed to con- 
tempt ; nor yet be reſerved either for ſuperſtitious abuſe, or for 
the prieſt's domeſtick uſe, which would favour of coyetouſneſs, and 
of diſtruſt of God's care for their future proviſions. 


18 * And if axy of the flesh of the ſacrifice of his 


peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it shal 


not be accepted, neither $shall it be imputed unto him 
s that offereth it : it shall be an abomination, and the 
ſoul that caterh of it shal bear his iniquitys 

s For an acceptable ſervice to God. 

19 And the flesh s that toucheth any unclean thing 
z, Shall not not be eaten: it shall be burnt with fire : and 
as for the flesh x, all that be clean y shal eat thereof. 

t To wit, of the holy Offering, of which he is here treating ; 
and therefore the general word is to be ſo limited ; for other fleſh 
one might eat in this caſe. Deut: 12: 15, 22. # Aﬀeer its oblation ; 
which might eaſily happen, as it was ccnveyed from the Altar to 
the place where it was eaten : For it was not eaten in the ho] 
Place, as appears, becauſe it was eaten by the Prieſts,together ah 
the Offerers, who might not come thither. x 7. e. The other fleſh; 
that which ſhall not be polluted by any unclean touch, x Wherher 


LEVITICOUS. 


Chap. YII. 


Prieſts or Offerers, or Gueſts invited to the Feaſt. See 1 Sam:9. 
12. and 20. 26. Both the fleſh and the Eaters of it muſt be 
clean. 


20 But the ſoul that cateth & of the flesh of the ſa- 
crifice of peace-offerings that pertain unto the LORD, 
* having his uncleanneſs upon him 4, even that ſoul * Chap: 
:  $hall be cut off from his people. AF 
j * Knowingly ; for ifit were done ignorantly,a Sacrifice was ac- 
| cepred for it, Levit: 5.2. a (7: e:) Not being cleanſed from his 
{ uncleanneſs according to the appointment, Levit: 11: 24, &c. This 
! Verſe ſpeaks of uncleanneſs from an internal cauſe, as by an Iſſue, 
-<07 ogy what was from an external cauſe 1s ſpoken of in the next 
: Verſe. 
21 Moreover, the ſoul that shal touch any unclean 


: thing, as * the uncleanneſs of man 6, or any * unclean *Chap: 1: 


beaſt, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the and 23: 
tlesh of the ſacrifice of peace-offerings, which pertain _ oO 
unto the LORD, even that ſoul hal be cut off 

his people. b 

b Or, Of women, for the word ſignifies both ; and that there were 
ſuch things coming from Men or Women, the touch whereof did 
pollute men and things, may be ſeen Levit: 15: and elſewhere. 

Otchers make it an Hypallage, wncleaz;zeſs of man, for a man of un« 
cleanneſs, or, an unclean man. But that ſeems not neceſſary here. 

22 Andthe LORD ſpike unto Moſes, ſaying, 

23 Speak unto the chidren of Iſrael, ſaying, Ye shal 
eat no manner fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat c, 

c The general prohibition of eating Fat, Levit: 3: 17: 1s here ex- 
plained of, and reſtrained to, thoſe kind of Creatures which were 
lacrificed to God. 

24 And the fat of the + beaſt that dieth of it ſelf,and + Heb. 
the fat of that which is torn with beafts 4, may be uſed £97c9/s. 
in any other uſe : but ye ſhall in no wiſe eat of it. 

d He ſpeaketh ſtill of the ſame kinds of Beaſts, and ſheweth that 
this prohibition reacheth not only to the Fat of thoſe Beaſts which 
were offered to God, but alſo of thoſe that died, or were kill'd at 
home. And if this ſeems a ſuperfluous prohibition concerning the 
Fat, fince the Lean as well as the Fat of ſuch Beaſts was forbidden 
Levit: 22: 8. it muſt be noted that that prohibition reached only 
to the Prieſts, werſe 4+ 

25 For whoſoever eateth the fat of the beaſt, of 
which men ofter an oftering made by fire unto the 
LORD, even the ſoul that eateth ic, ſhall be cut off 
from his people. 

26 * Moreover, ye ſhall eat no manner of blood, *Gen:g.4. 
whether it be of fow|, or of beaſt, in any of your dwel- Chap. 3. 
1NgS, . py 

27 Whatſoever ſoul zt be that eateth any manner of MY 
blood, even that ſoul ſhall be cur off from his people. 

28 T And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

29 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying,He that 
offereth the ſacrifice of his peace-offerings unto the 
LORD, ſhal bring e his oblation f unto the LOR D 
2, Of the ſacrifice of his peace-offerings. 

e Not by another, but by himſe!f, as it 1s explained werſe 3o. 
f (7. e.) Thoſe parts of the Peace-offering, which are in a ſpecial 


manner offered ro God, to wit, the Fat and Breaſt, and ſhoulder 
as it follows. g (7.e.) To the Tabernable, where the Lord was 


from 24:28: 


preſent in a ſpecial manner. He ſhews, that though part of ſuch 
Offerings might be eaten in any clean place, Levit: 10: 14. yet not 
till they had been killed, and part of them offered to the Lord in 
the place appointed by him for that purpoſe. 
20 X His own hands ſhal bring h the offerings of the * Chap:3 
LORD made by fire z, the fat with the breaſt, it ſhall 3,4,19, 14. 
he bring, that the breaſt may be waved & for a wave- 
offering before the L OR D. 
h After the Beaſt was killed,and the parts of it divided, the prieſt 
was to put the parts mentioned into the hands of the Offerer. See 
Exoa: 29+ 22, 23, 24. i So called not ftriftly, as Burnt-offerings are 
becauſe ſome parts of theſe were left for the prieſt, wer: 31. but 
more largely,becauſe even theſe Peace-offerings were in part,though 
not wholly, burnt. &k To and fro, by his hands, which were ſup= 
ported and direQtcd by the hands of the Prieft. 
31 And the prieſt ſhall burn the fat upon the altar : 
tra _— ſhall be Aarons and his ſons J. 
I ( i. e. ) The portion of every ſucceeding High-pri 1 
Family ; compare Exod: 29; 26. £ EE nn Als 

32 And the right ſhoulder ſhal be given unto the 
prieſt for an heave-offering of the ſacrifices of your 
peace-offerings. 

33 He among the ſons of Aaron that offereth the 
blood of the peace-offerings, and the fat, ſhal have the 
right ſhoulder for bis part. | 

34 For * the wave-breaft and heave-ſhoulder w have * Exod. 
I taken of the children of Iſrael, from off the ſacrifices 29. 28+ 
of their peace-offerings, and have given them unto A- Chap- 
aron the prieſt, and unto his ſons, by a ſtatute for ever, 17; "# 
from among the children of Iſrae]: _ 


1 8. 18: 
The breaſt or heart is the ſeat of W; FYR. - 
firength for a&ion, and theſe = - Wiſdom, and the ſhoulder of Deut. 


may denote that Wiſdom,and 18: 3. 


Vertue, or Power, which was in Chriſt ae —_ 1 
\ 24: and which ought to bein every Pricfh. High-prieſt, x Cor: 1: 


35 T This is #he portion of the anointing s of Aaron 
and of the anointing of his ſons, our of the offerings of 


a LORD made by fice, in the day o when he preſons- 
-- us 


: 


ap:It: 


*F'xc 
T3, 
Cha 


£3, 


* Ex0 
29 I: 
* Exo 
28: 2, 
* Exorc 
89: 24 


*Exod 


| 29, 43 


*Pxod 
28: 30 


*Exod: 
39, &c 


* Exod 


39: 26; 


—_—— 


* Exod 
297 7; 

Ecclus, 
$5315: 


* Exod 
29: $8: 
t Heb: 
boung, 


Exod 
a91, I( 


#, 


| 


*Ex0d;40: 
T3 I5: 


Chap: 8; 


12, J9; 


* Exod: 
29; I: 

F Exod: 
28: 2, 4: 
* Exod: 
30; 24: 


*Exod; 
| 29. 43 


L Pxod: 


28; 3o: 


*Exod:28: 
39, &c. 


* Exod: 


30: 26; 


VIIL. : 


ed them, to miniſter unto the LORD in the prieſts 
office. 


n ( i.e.) Ofthe Pc'2 hood ; the ſign put for the thing ſignified ; 
and the an9:nting by 5 like figure is put for the righr, or part of the 
Sacrifices be.ouging T0 ths Prieſt by verrue of his anoiating, as 
plainly app=ars {om the words here following, out of the offerings, 
Yo. o This was their poction appointed them by God in that day, 
and therefore to be given to them in after Ages. Or,Fom the day,&cC. 
and thenes forward ; the Hebrew Prepolition ber? being put for min, 
as it is frequently. 

26 Which the LORD commanded to be given them 
of che children of iſrael, * in the day that he anointed 


them, by a ſtatute for ever throughout: their generati- 


ONS. : 
27 This 5s the law of the burnt-ofering, of the 
meat-offering, and of the {in-offering, and of the trel- 
pals-oftering, and of tlie conſecrations p, and of the 
ſacrifice of the peace-ofterings : 

p (#.e.) Of the Sacrifice offered at 


ieſts. ; 
y 23 Which the LORD commanded Moſes in mount 
- that ke commanded the children of 


Sinai in the day 
Iſrael co offer their oblations unto the LORD, in the 


wilderneſs of Sinai. 
CH AF: FRM. 


Moſes by God's command calls together Aaron and his ſons, and the mo 
congrezation, 1-5. Waſbes Aaron and his Jous, 6. Puts on the prieſily 
garments, J==-===9g. Anomts the tabernacle, with the #irar and laver, ta 
ſanfify them, 10---=11. Anoints Aaron, 12. Puts the holy garments 0n 
his ſons, 13. Offers ſacrifices for them, a bullock for a ſm=offering, 1 4-=-18. 
And a ram for a burnt-offering, 18-----21. And a ſecond ram for conſe 
cration ; uſes the blood about [ome parts of their bodies ; gives the parts into 
their hands to wave before the Lord, and ſprinkles of the anointing oyl and 
blood from upon the altar, on them and their garments, 22-30. Declares 
to them God's charge, which they perform, 3 1-=--36. 


the Conſecration of the 


4 ND the LORD ſpake unto Moſes «, fay- 
ing 


a This is here premiſed, to ſhew that Moſes did not confer the 
Pri-thood upon Aaron by vertue of his relation or affettion to hira, 
but by God's appointment, which alſo appears from the following 
Story. 

2 X Take Aaron and his ſons with him, and the * 
garments, and * the anointii'g oyl, and a bullock tortne 
lin-ofering, and two rams,. aud a bazket of unicavencd 
bread, . 

2 And gather thou all the congregation 5 togetner, 
unto the door of the tabernacle of tic congregation. 

b The Elders which repreſented all, and as many of the People 
as would, and could ger thirher, that ali mighr be witnefl:s both of 
Aaron's Commiſſion from God, and of his Wark and Buiinets. 

4 And Moſes did as the LORD commanded him, 
and the aſſembly was gathered together unto the deor 
of the tabernacle of ce congregation. 

And Moſes ſaid unto the congregation, * This zs 
the thing which the LORD commanded to bs done. 

6 And Moſes brought Aaron and his ſons, and 
waſhed them with water. : : 

7 And he put upon him the coat c, and girded him 
with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and 
put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the 
curious girdle of the. ephod, and bound #: unto him 
therewith. 

c The linen Breeches preſcribed Exod. 28. 42. are not here men- 
tioned, becauſe rhey were not to be pur on at his Conſecration, bur 
afterwards in the execution of his Oihce. 

8 And he put the breaft-plate upon him: alſo*he put 
in the breaft- piate the Urim and the Thummim. 

9 And he put the mitre upon his head: alſo upon 
the mitre, ever upon his foretront did he put the golden 
plate, the holy Crown *, as the LORD * commanded 
Moſes. 

* Of which ſee Ex29w. 29. 6. 

ro * And Motes took the anointing oyl, and anointed 
the tabernacle, and all that was therein, and ſanRified 
them. 

11 Andhe ſprinkled thereof uponthe altar ſeventimes 
d, and anointed the altar, and all his veſlels, both the 
laver e, and his foor, to ſandtify them. 

ad To ſignify the fingular uſe and holineſs of it, which it was not 
only to have init fe!t, bur allo ro communicate to all the Sacrifices 
tid upon ir. e Where the Prieſts wathed themſelves, and the Sa- 
crifices, and Veilels or Inſtrumeuts of the holy minifirecion. See 
Levi. 6. 28. | 

12 And he * poured f of the anointing oyl upon 
Aarons head, and anointed him, to fanctify hun. 


f In a plentiful marner, as appears from Pſa/: 133: 2: whereas other | 


zr{ons and things were only awvinted er ſprinkled with it. 

13 * And Moſes brought Aarons ſons, and put coats 
upon them, and girded them with girdles, and + put 
bonnets upon them, as the LORD commanded Moſess 

I4 * And he brought the bullock g for the ſin-offering, 
and Aaron and 'his ions laid their gands upon the head 
of the bullc- for the fin-offering; 


LEVITICDS. 


| 


Chap. VINE. 


| £ There were indeed ſeven Bullocks to be offered at his conſecra» 
tion, one every day, Exod: 29: 35, 36. but here he mentions only 
one, either by a common Ena!11ge of number, or bec2uſe he here 
deſcribes only the work of the firſt day, and leaves the reſt to be-ga- 
thered from it ; of which ſee wer. 33. | 


15 And he ſlew zt, and Moſes took the blood, and 
put zt upon the horns of the altar round about, with his a. 
finger and purified the altar, and poured the blood art 
the bottom of the altar, and ſandtified it, tro make re- 
COnCliiation upon It, 

16 And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, 
and the caule abeve the liver, and the two kidneys, and 
their fat, and Moſes burned 3t upon the altar. 

17, But the bullock, and his hide þ, his fleſh, and his 
dung, he burne with fire without the camp, as the 
LORD * commanded Moſes. 


þ Which in the offerings for the people was not burnt, 
to the Prieſt. 


13 C * And he brought the ram for the burnt-of- * Exod: 
fering: and Aaron and his ſons laid their hands upon 29 15: 
the. head of the ram. : 

I9 And he z killed iz, and Moſes ſprinkled the blood 
upon the altar round about. | 


# Either Moſes, as in the following Clauſe, the Pronoun being put 
for the Noun ; or ſome other perſon by Moſes his appointment ; 
which may be the reaſon why he is not named here; as he is to the 
ſprinkling of the blood, which was anA&ion more proper te thePrieſt, 
and more eſſential to the Sacrifice, as the Learned have obſerved. 


20 And he cut the ram into pieces, and Moſes burnt 
the head, and the pieces, and the far. 
21 And he waſhed the inwards and the legs in water, 
and Moſes burnt the whole ram upon the altar : It 
2045 a burnt-ſacrifice for a ſweet ſavour, and an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD, Kas the LORD * Exod: 
commanded Moſes. 29: 183 
22 4 And * hebrought the other ram, the ram of 'Exod- 
+ conſecration, and Aaron ard his ſons laid their hands Y Heb 
upon the head of the ram, fillngr, 
23 And heſlew i, and Moſes took of the blood of it, 
and put zt upon the tip & of Aarons right ear, and upon 
the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of 
his right foot. 


k& The loweſt and ſofreſt 
the Ear. See Exod. 29. 20. 


24 And he brought Aarons ſens, and Moſes put of 
the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the 
chumbs of- cheir right hands, and upon the great toes 
of their right feet : and Moſes ſprinkled the blood uport 
the altar round about, 

25 And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the. . 
fac that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the 
liver, and the two kidaeys and gheir fat, and the right 
ſboulder. 

26 Andout ofthe bask=t of unleavened bread that was 
before the LORD, he took one unleavened cake, and a 
cake of oyled bread, and one wafer, and put themupon 
the fat, and upon the right ſhoulder. 

27 And he purall * upon Aarons hands, and upon 
his fons hands, and waved them for a wave-offering 
before the LORD. 

28 And Moſes took them from off their hands, and 
burnt hens on the altar, upon the burnt-offering : they + Heb: 
were F confecrations for a ſweer favour : itis an offering filings. * 
made by fire unto the LORD. 

29 And Moſes took the breaſt, and waved it for a 
wave-oftering before the LORD: For of the ram of $i 
conſecration it was Moſes * part 1, as the LORD FE 
commanded Moſes, "0 


{ Who at this time adminiſtring the Prieſt's Office was to receive 
the Prieſts Wages; it being meſt juſt and reaſonable that the Work 
and Wages ſhould go together. 


zo * And Moſes took of the anointing oyl, and of * Exod: 
the blood which was upon the altar, and ſprinkled it 3% 3%: 
upon Aaron, 44 upon his garments and upon his ſons, 
and upon his fons garments with him : and ſanRified 
Aaron, and his garments, and his ſons, and his ſons 
garments with him, 


31 4 And Moſes faid unto Aaron, and to his ſons, 
Boil the fleſh w2 at the door of the tabernacle of the . 
congregation : and there * eat it with the bread that is * Exod? 
in the basker of conſecrations, as I commanded, ſaying, ** 3* 


* Exod: 
but given 295 14* 


part of the Ear, called the tip or lap of 


* Exod: 


| Aaron and his fons ſþall eat ir. 


» That which was left of the Ram, and particularly the Breaft, 
which was ſaid ro be Mo/es his part, Yerſe 29, and by him was given 
ro Aaron, that he and his Sons might eat of it, in roken that they 
and only they ſhould have the right ro do fo for the future. 


22 Ard that which remaineth of the fleſh, and of 
the br-ad, wall ye burn with fire. Wi 
33 R) 14} Je alt NOT £0 one of che door of the tabernacle 


2 of 


29: 24,&C} | 


Exod: 
9: 30,35: 


* Exod: 
29; 1; 


* Chop, 
4: 23: 
Ezra: 
Go T7: 


*Ver:23. 


Heb: 
3-35 


Chap. 1X.” | 
| of the conpregation i» ſeven days, until the days of your | 


conſecration be at an end : for * ſeven days # ſhall he 0 


conſecrate you. 

n Tri which the ſame Ceremonies were to be repeated, as the next 
Verſe implies ; and other Rites to be performed. 0 Either God ; 
or Maſes ; for the words may be ſpoken by Moſes, either 1n God's 
Name, or in his own ; Moſes ſpeaking of himſelfin the third perſon, 


which is very common in Scripture. | 
24 As he hath done this day, /o the LORD hath 


commanded to do. to make an atonement for you. 

25 Therefore ſhall ye abide at the 
gregation. day and night ſeven days, and keep the 
charge of the LORD p, that ye die not 9, for ſo I am 


commanded. | . 

p What God hath commanded you concerning your Conſecration. 
q If the threatning ſeem too ſeverefor the fault, ir muſt be conſidered 
both thar it is the uſual praftiſe of Lawgivers moſt ſeverely to punt 
the firſt Offences for the terrour and cautien of others, and for the 
maintenance of their own Authority ; and that this Tranſgreſſion 
was aggravated by many circumſtances, being commurted by ſacred 
and eminent Perſons, and that in the preſence of the Peopl:, which 
made it a publick Scanda], and in God's Worſhip, where he 15 very 
tender arid jealous, and againſt a plain and eaſy command of God, 
and atatime when they were receiving high Favours and Priviledges 
from God. Nor is Sin to beeſteemed or meaſured by the idle fancies 
of Mea of corrupt Minds and Lives, whoſe Intereſts and Luſts eaſily 
blind their Minds; but by the Authority, Majeſty and Will of the 


_ Great, and Wiſe, and Juſt Lawgiver. 


'26 So Aaron and his ſons djd all things which the 
LORD commanded by che hand of Moſes. 


CHAP. Ex. 


Moſes commands Aaron to offer a ſn-offering, and burnt-offering, and peace 
and meat-offering ; the congregation drawing near, and ſo the glory of the 
Lord ſhould appear to them, to make atonement for himſelf and the people, 

Aaron's offering for himſelf, 8— 14. For the people, 15-21. 

whom he bleſſes, firſt by prayer to God, and then by ſolemn declaration to 

them ; the glory of God appears ; fire from heaven conſumes the ſacrifice ; 
the people ſhout and are amazed, 22--=-=24. 


A ND it came to paſs on the eighth day a, that 

Moſes called Aaron and his ſons, and the elders 
of Ifrael 6. 

s To wit, from the firſt day of his Conſecration, or when the 
ſeven days of his Conſecratien were ended, chap: 8:33, 35. as appears 
from Exod, 29: 30, &c. Exek: 43: 27. The eighth day is famous in 
Scripture for the perfe&ing and purifying both of Men and Beafts. 
See Levit: 12: 2, 3: and 14: 8, 9, 10: and 15; 13, 14:and 22: 27. þ All 
the Congregation were called to be Witneſſes of Aaron's Inſtalmenr 
in'o his Office, to prevent their murmurings and contempr, which 
beingdone, the Elders were now ſufficient to be Witnefles of Aaron's 
firſt execution of his Office. 

2 And he ſaid unto Aaron, * Take thee a young calf 
c for a ſin-effering d, and a ram for a burnt-oftering 
without blemiſh, and offer them: before the LORD. 

c Heb.: A calf, the ſon of 8 Bull or Cow ;: Which may ſeem to be added 
purpoſely to intimare that it was not a young Calf properly ſo called, 
but a young Bullock, for that wt the Sacrifice enjoyned for the High- 
prieſt's Sin-off:ring, Levit: 4. 3. Though it be nor material if this 
be a young Calf, and that a young Bull, becaule the grounds and ends of 
the ſeveral Sacrifices differ, that Levit: 4: being for his particular 
Sin ; and this for his own and Family's Sins in general, and therefore 
no wonder if the Sacrifices alſo differ. d For himſelf and his own 
Sins, which was an evidence of the imperfeQtion of that Prieſthood, 
and of the neceſlicy of another anda better. 

3 And unto the children of Iſrael thou ſhalt ſpeak, 
ſaying, K Take ye a kid of the goats for a fin-ofering e, 
and a calf, and a lamb, bob of the firſt year, without 


blemiſh for a burnt-offering. 

e For the People, as it is expreſſed here werſe 15- for whoſe Sin a 
young Bullock was required, Levit: 4: 15: but that was for ſome 
particular Sin, but this was more general and indefinite for all their 
Sins. B:ſides, there being an eye here had to the Prieſt's Conſecration 
and entrance into his Office, it is no wonder if therebe ſome difference 
in thele Sacrifices from theſe before preſcribed. 


4 Alſo a bullock, and a ram, for peace-efferings to 
ſacrifice before the LORD, and a meat-offering mingled 
with oyl : for * to day the LORD will appear f unto 

= - - 
4 |f See the fulfilling of this Promiſe, verſe 24. Heb. Hath appeared. 
He ſpeaks of the thing to come as if it were paſt, which is frequent 
in Scripture, to give them the more aſſurance of the thing, 
C And they brought :hat which Moſes commanded 
before the tabernacle of the congregation : and all the 


—— 


- congregation drew near and ſtood before the LORD 8. 


£ Before the Tabernacle where God dwelt. 


6 And Moſes faid, This is the thing which the 
TL.ORD commanded that ye ſhould do : and the glory 


of the LORD 4 ſhall appear unto you. 
þ The glorious manifeſtation of God's powerful and gracious 
preſence, verſe 24. Compare Ex0d: 24: 16, 17: and 40: 34, 35. Exek: 


—_ And Moſes ſaid unto Aaron, Go unto the altar and 


* offer ; thy ſin-offering and thy burnt-offering, and make 
an atonement for thy ſelf, and for the people & : and 
ofter the offering of the people, and make ag atonement 
for them, as tke LORD commanded, 


door of the con- | 


LEVITICUS. 


| the horns of the altar 1, and poured out the blood at 


Chap. 1 


7 Moſes had hitherto Sacrificed, but tow he reſigneth his Work to 
Aaron, and aQtually gives him that Commiſſion which from God he 
had received for him. k The Order is very abſervable, firſt for thy 
ſelf, otherwiſe theu art unfit to do it for the People. Hereby God 
would teach us, both the deficiency of this Prieſthood, and the abſo- 
Jute neceſlity ofan higher and better Prieſt, Heb: 7: 26, 27: and how 
important and needful it is that God's Miniſters ſhould be in the 
Grace and Faveur of God themſelves, that their Miniſtrations may 
be acceptable to God, and profitable to the People. 

8 Qq Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and ſlew 
the calf of the ſin-effering which was for himſelf. 

9 And the ſons of Aaron brought the blood unta 


him, and hedipt his finger in the blood, and put i# upon 


the bottom of the altar. 

! To wit, of Burnt-offerings, of which alone he ſpeaks both in the 
foregoing and following words ; and the Blood was poured out at 
the bottom ofthis Altar only, not of the Altar of Incenſe, as appears 
from Levit: 4. 7. where indeed there is mention of putting ſome-0 
the Blood upon the Horns of the Altar of Incenſe, in this caſe ofthe 
Prieſt's Sacrificing for his own Sins. Bur there ſeems to be a double 
difference, 1. That Sacrifice was offered for ſome particular Sin, 
this for his Sins indefinitely. 2. There he is ſuppoſed to be compleat 
in his Office, and here he is but entring into his Office, and therefore 
muſt prepare and. ſan&ify himſelf by this Offering upon the Brazen 
Altar in the Court, before he can be admitted into the Holy Place 
where the altar of Incenſe was. And the like is to be ſaid for the 
—_— between the Sin-offering for the People here, and Levir. 
4. 17, 18. 

10 But the fat and the kidneys, and the caul above 
the liver of the ſin-efſr5»g he burnt 2 upon the altar, * *Chap: 43 
as the LORD commanded Moſes. 8. 

m Either - 1, Diſpoſed it for the burning, ( z.e. ) laid it upon the 
Altar where it was to be burnt by the heavenly Fire, verſe 24. Thus 
Interpreters generally underſtand the word here, as alſo verſe 13:17,20. 
by an anticipation ; or the conſequent is put for the antecedent, of 
which there are Examples in Scripture. Or 2. Properly burnt by 
ordinary Fire, which was uſed and allowed until the Fire came down 
from Heaven, verſe 24. though afterwards it was forbidden. And 
if it had not been aJlowed otherwiſe, yet this being done by Aaron 
at the cominand of Moſes, and conſequently with God's approbation, 
1t was unqueſtionably Lawful. And therefore there ſeems to beno 
neceſſity of departing from the proper ſenſe of the word. Add to. 
this, that there is nothing ſaid to be conſumed by that heavenly Fire, 
bur the burnt-ofering with thefat belonging to it, namely, that Burnt- 
offering mentioned werſe 16. which therefore is not there ſaid to be 
burar, as it is faid of the other burnt-offering, verſe 13. and of the 
reſt of the Sacrifices in their places. 


11 And * the fleſh, and the hide he burnt with fire, *-Chap; 


without the camp. OY 
12 And he ſlew the burnt-offering, and Aarons ſons | 
preſented unto himthe blood, which he {ſprinkled round 
abour upon the altar. 
13 And they preſented the burnt-offering unto him, 
with the pieces thereof, and the head: and he buine 
them upon the altar. 
14 And he did waſh the j-wards and the legs, and 
burnt them upon the burat-offering on the altar, 
15 4 And he brought the peoples offering w, and 
rook the goat which 29a: the ſin-offering for the pegple, 
and flew it, and offered it for ſin, as the firſt 0. 
= Which was to be off:red for the People, asthe former was for 
himſelf, werſe 7. o To wit, in like manner as he did that for the 
Pricit, verſe 8. and conſequently burat this, as he did the other 
verſe 11. for which Moſes reproves him, Levis. 10. I7. 2 
16 Andhe brought the burnt-oftering p, and offered 
it * coorting to the. manner. * Chap:1: 
_ the Lars —"_ offered for the People, as the laſt mentioned 3» Ig 
I7 And he brought the * meat-offer; png 
took an handful th - f, and b ns BT * Ghop 
ergo, and burnt it upon the altar * 2: r, 2: 
nc the burat-ſacrifice of the morning x,  THeb:jles 
q Wnch was alwayes to be added to the Burnt- I > 55 Aand 
_ n a ror _ to be _ — every nodremogy; Gn - of it. 
111 not have his ordinar s . 
extraordinary, es A Rs mes n ddd = 


18 He ſlew alſo the bullock and the & | 
ſacrifice of peace-offerings, which was hehe 'oodbnlg * Chap! 
and Aarons ſons preſented unto him the blood ( which EY 
he ſprinkled upon the altar round about. ) 


19 And the far of the bullock and of the ram, the 
rump, and that which covereth the inwards s and the 
kidneys, and the caul above the liver : 

s The Fat which covereth the Inwards, or the Guts 
are here underſtood, as appears by comparing this pl 


3: 3, 9: and 4: 8: and 7: 3: where they are expreſſed. ace with Ley: 


Which words 


fe 
IKin 
38 2\ 
7.12 
2:10, 


*Num 
3: 4. a 
26.65 
1 Chr! 
24. 2, 


20 And they put the fat upon 
burnt the fat upon the altar, 


t Which were reſerved for the Prieft . 
which were offered for the People. "Lee _ m—etning, 

2t And the breafts, and the right ſhoulder, Aaron 
waved for a * wave-offering before the LORD 
Moſes commanded. x 


22 And Aaron life 


as *F,xod:29 ; 
24, 28; 


up his hand « tewardsthe people, 


and bleſſed them x, and came down y from oftering 


of 


the breaſts z, and he | 


—. 


Chap- XN, 


FGen:4:4- 
iKing: 8. 
38 24h: 
q.1:2\Mac. 
£:19,11, 


mY 


of the ſin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and peace- 
offerings: 
v His right Hand, w - 
F dine to the other reading, 
: Re ow ke 24: 5o. By this poſture he ſig 


_ he Blefſing _— 
whence be open manizer; as is related, Numb:*6: '24, Oc. 
tnem, 


: ſame form, as ſome ſuppoſe, for it is not pro- 

Though iy a bery bo before God delivered it. ) | 

pin yn f his Prieſtly office,no leſs than Sacraficing. See Gen. 14. 

ago oe” 6: 23. Devut. 10: 8. and 21: 5. Luke 24: 50. y To 

18, 19. wt Altar ; whence he is ſaid to come down, either 1. Be- 

h ye ſtood upon raiſed ground to which they went up 

cauſe the cle atcent. Compare Exod. 20: 26. Or 2. Becauſe it 

: gunmen Holy Place, and the Hole of Holies, which was 
was c 


the upper end. 


22 And Moſes > 


cle of the congregation, 
people 4 : and the glory of the 
le. : hs 

all oP _—_ in with Aaron to dire& him, and to ſee him per- 
B hoſe parts of his Office, which were to be done in the Holy 
form t a the Lights, and the Table of Shew-bread, and of the 
Pl-ce, = Mncenſe, upon which part of the Blood of the Sacrifices 
O__ .. Aron to be ſprinkled, according to the Law, Levir: 4:7, 
_- : s ( ;. e.) Prayed to God for his Bleſſing upon the People, 
n hi hraſe is explained, Numb. 6. 23, &c. and particularly for 
as this [FO Acceptation of theſe and all ſucceeding Sacrifices, 
__ gra his ſignification thereof by ſome extraordinary Token, 
ans ccordingly happened. b Either a miraculous brightneſs 
gar — Ws te Cloudy Pillar, as Exod. 16. 10. Numb. 14« 10. 
Or # lecious and viible Diſcovery of God's gracious Preſence 
dot” Acceptance of the preſent Miniſtry and Service, as it fol- 
ws” And * there came a fire c out from before the 
LORD 4, and conſumed upon the altar the burnt of- 
fering and the fat: which when all the peopie ſaw, 

3 


e, and fell on their faces. 

deve En ” God's Acceptation and Approbation of the Prieſt- 
hood now inſtituted, and the Sacrifices now offered, and conſe- 

- Iy of others of the like nature. See the like inſtances Judges 
| mgros J Ss 9, 20.1 Chron: 2: 26: And t:1s fire now g1veEn was 
- ho carefully kepr, and nor ſuffered to go out, Levitt: 6: 13+ and 
herefo-e was Carried in a peculiar Vetlel in their Journies in 
= Wildern:{s. 4 Or, from the face or preſence of the Lord, 3:6 
from t»e place where God «vas in a ſpecial manner preſent, either 
a Erom Heaven, as 1 Kings 18: 38. 2 Chron: 7. 1. which 1s oft cal- 
led God's dwelling place, as Deut: 26: 15. Iſa, 63: 15, Or 2. from 


i ſay was lifred up higheſt ; Or 
kick the Jerstop which was uſual Rite 
nified both 


wit, from 


and Aaron went into the taberna- 
and came out, and bleſſed the 
LORD 6 appeared unto 


the Holy of Holi-s, where alſo God is ſaid to dwell, 2 Kings 19: 


*Numb: 
3: 4. and 
26.61 
1 Chron. 
24 2, 


Jron: 6: 2+ Pſal: 80. 1. And what is done before the Ark is 
621 — done before God, as 1 Chron: 13. 8, 10. and 16, 1. Oc. And 
this may ſe?m more probable by comparing tn1s with Lovir, ro. 2. 
e As « ondring at. rejoycing in, and vl-fling God for this wonder- 
ful and gracious diſcovery of himlſell, and of his favour to them 


therein. 


CHAP. A 


Nadah and Abihu offering ſtrange fre, are devoured by fire from 
heaven, 1, 2. For God will be ſanttificd by them that draw near unto 
him, 3. Their aead bodie* carried without the camp, 4, 5. Aaron 
and 'bis two other Jons forbid to mourn, 5. Alſo to arink wine or any 
ſtrong drink, 8, 9. Their duty to aiſtinguiſh between holy and unholy ; 
and to teach the pe'ple all the ſtatures of the Lord, 10, 11. , He d-clares 
to them what of the burnt-offerings they might eat, 2----I5. is angry 
that the (in-0ffering was nor eat, nor the blood! carried into the holy place, 
1G--=--i8. He is appeaſed by Aaron, 19, 290. 


N D * Nadab and Abihu the ſons of Aaron, took 
A either of them his cenſer, and pur fire therein 
and pur incenſe thereon, and ottered ſtrange fire @ be- 


fore the LORD b, which he commanded chem not c. 

a So called, as not appointed for, nor :elonging to, the preſent 
wok; fie not tak-a fr m the Altar, as 1t ougat, bur from ſ.-me 
commr'n fire. 6 Upon the Altar of Incenſe. c For ſcing Moſes 
himſelf neither did, nor might do any thing in God's 
Worſhip +ithour God's Command, which | is oft noted of 
him ; f-r theſe to doit, was a more unpardonable and inexcuſable 
perſumprion. Beſides, nor commanding may ve "ere put for forbid- 
ding, as it is Jer: 32 35. Nov as this was forbidden implicitly, 
Levit: 6. 12, eſp:cially when G-d himſelf made a Comment upon 
that Text, and by ſending fire from Heavei declared of » hat 
fire he there ſpake ; ſo it is more than probable it was forbidden 
expreſly, though that be not here mentioned, nor was it neceflary 
it ſhould be. 

2 And there went out fire from the LORD 4, and 
devoured t''em e, and they died before the LORD. - 

d From Heaven, or rather from the Santuary. See chap: 9: 24. 
e Deſtroye? their Lives ; for their Bodies and Garments were not 
conſumed, as it appears from verſe 4, 5. 
devour, 2 Sam: 2: : 
withour any hurt to their Bodies or Garments. 


3 Then Moſes ſaid unto Aaron, This 5s it that the 
LORD ſpake f, ſaying, I will be ſancified g, in them 
that come nigh me h, and before all the people I will 


be glorified ; : and Aaron held his peace &. 

f Though the expreſs words be not recorded in Scripture, where 
only the heads of Sermons and Diſcourſes are contained, yet it 
1s probable they were uttered by Moſes in God's name Howſoever 
the ſenſe and ſubſtance of them is in many places. See Exod: | g: 
22:and 29:43. Levit: 8: 35g This may note,cither 1. their duty co 
ſan&ify God, 7. e. to demean themſelves with ſuch care,and reve- 


rence, and watchfulnels, as becomes the Holineſs of the God 


LEVITICUS. 


and his hearty detire of it for | 


| when he had neither his Miter nor any of the Holy Garments 


Thus t!:e Sword is ſaid to | 
26. Thus lightning many times kills perſons, | 


q 


whom they ſerve, and of the Worſhip in which they are engaged ; 
whence he leaves them to gather the juſtice of the preſent judg- 
ment for their groſs negle& herein. Or 2. Gods purpoſe to ſan- 


ify himſelf, 7. e. to declare and manifeſt himlelf to be an holy 
and righteous God by his ſevere and impartial puniſhment of all 
Tranſgreſſors, how near ſoever they are to him. kh (#.e.) Who 
draw near to me, or to the place where I dwell, and are admit- 
| ted into the holy place, whence others are ſhut out. Ir 


- | 1s a deſcription of the Prieſts, 
And this Bleffing 


See Exod: 19: 22. Levit: 21; 17: 
Ezek; 42: 13, 14. # As they have ſinned publickly and ſcandalouſ- 
ly, fo T will vindicate my Honour in a publick and examplary 
manner, that all men may learn to give me the glory of my So- 
veraignity and Holineis by an exatt conformity to my Laws, 
k Partly throng exceſſive grief, which is ſometimes ſignified by 
ſilence, as Ta: 47; 5: Lam: 2: 10; and principally in acknov ledg» 
ment of God's Juſtice and ſubmiſſion to it. Compare Pſal: 39: io: 
Ezck: 24: 179: He murmured' not, nor replied againſt God, nor 
againſt Moſes ; wiſely coniidering that rheir fin was dire&ly againſt 
God, and in that which is moſt dear and honcurable in G- ds ac- 
count, to wit, in his Worſhip ; and that Gods honour o::ghr ro be 
dearer to him than his Sons ; and that this b-ing the firſt viol:tion 
of the Law newly given, and committed by thoſe who ſhould have 
been the ftrifteſt Obſervers and Ailertors of it, did deſerve a very 
ſevere puniſhment. 


4 And Moſes called Miſhael and E!zaphan 7 the ſons 
of Uzziel, the uncle of Aaron *, and faid unto them, 


Come near, carry your brethren m from before the 
Sanctuary, out of the-camp »- 


7 For Aaron and his Sons had ſcarce finiſhed their Conſecration« 
work, and were imployed in their holy Miniſt:ations, frota which 
they were not to be ca'led fyr Funeral Solemnities, See Levit: 21:1, 
Occ * See Exod:6. 17.Numb: 3: 19. m(i. e.) Kinſmen, as that word is 
oft uſed, as G2n:13+ 8: and 24:27. » Where t..e burying_ places of the 
Jews were, that the living might neither be annoyed by the un« 
png ſcent of the dead, nor defiled by the touch of their 
raves. 


5 So they went near, and carried them in their 
coats 0 out of-the camp, as Moſes had ſaid. | 
0 in the holy Garments wherein they miniſtred ; which might 
be done either 1. as a teſtimony of a re{pe& due tro them, not- 
withſtanding their preſent failure ; and that God in judgment re- 
membred mercy, and when he took away ti:eir Lives, ſpared their 
Souls. Or 2. becauſe being polluted both by their ſin, and by the 
touch of their dead Bodies, God would not have them any more 
uſed in his ſervice 


6 And Moſes ſaid unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar, 
and unto Ithamar his ſons, # Uncover not your heads 
p, neither rend your clothes q, left you die 
and leſt wrath come upon all the people : 
ler your brethren, the whole houſe of Iſrael bewail the 
burning which the LORD hath kindled 7. | 


? Either 1. by putting off your Miters and Bonnets, or Orna+ 
ments, and going bare-headed, as mourners ſometimes did. See 


your heads and beards, as mourners did. ' See {6 1: 20: Jer: 7: 29. 
and 4 + 5+ Ezek: 44; 20; Mic: 1: 16. This latter may ſeem to be 
principally intended, 1. becauſe this Ceremony of uncov'r' ag the 
head being uſed by the People as well as by the pricſts in caſe of 
mourning, as tie places now alledgQ ſhew ; and the other Cere. 
mony here joyned ith ir, of renaing the clothes, being alſo com- 
mon to rhe People, ſeems to imply that he ſpeaks not of that un- 
co'ering of the Head which was peculiar to the Prieſts, but of that 
which was common borh to prieſts and people, eſpecially ſcing 
that which is here forbidden to theſe Prieſts, is in the following 
words allowed to the People, to bewail their Death, which as at 
other times it was, ſo now probably might be performed by theſe 
ſame Ceremonies. 2. Becauſe tie High-prieſt is forbidden to 
uncover bis hend in way of Mourning for the Dead, not only at that 
rime when he was in aCGtua] Miniftration, bur at all times, even 

uphs 
on him, Zevit, 21: 16. q Give no ſignification of your nes. ; 
mourn n't for them ; part'y leſt you ſhould ſeem tro juſtifie and 
approve of your Brethren, and tacitly refle& upon God as tog 
ſevere in his Proceedings with them, and pr:tly leſt thereby you 
ſhould be diverted from, or diſturbed in your . preſent Service, 
which God expeGs ſhould be done chearfully. r Not ſo much in 
compaſſhon to them againſt whom God hath ſhewed ſuch great and 


juſt Indignation; as in Sorrow for the Tokens of Divine Di. 
pleaſure 


+ And ye ſhall not go out from the door of the taber« 
nacle of the congregation -, leſt you die : for the anoin- 
ting oil of the LORD is upon your : 
according to the word of Moſes. Wn : 

s Where at this tinie they were; either becauſe this happened 
within ſeven days of their Conſecration. See Lew: 8: 35: or bez 
cauſe they were longer detained there about ſome other Holy Mi- 
niſtrations. Though the former may ſeem more probable, be. 
cauſe the meat-offering here mentioned, werſe 12. and the ſim-offering, 
verſe 16 were pait of the Conſecration-offerings. #t You are per- 
ſons conſecrated peculiarly to God's Service, which therefore it is 
juſt and reaſonable you thould prefer before all Funeral Solemnites: 


8 And che LORD ſpake unto Aaron, ſaying, 
9 * Do not drink wine nor ſtrong drink u# ; thou, 


{ nor thy ſons with thee, when ye go into the taberna- 


cle of the congregation, leſt ye die : I: ſhall be a ſtatute Fin. 4.4 


for ever throughout your generations: = 
» This is here added, either becauſe Nadab ind Ahihu had 
been led to their Errour by drinking roo much, which might 
eaſily fall our when they were Feaſting and full of Joy for their 
entrance into io Honourable, and Prohtable an;Employment ; or 
ax leaſt,becauſe others might thereby be drawn to commit the fame 
- 3 Fol Miſearfiagess 


Chap. X. . 


Levit: 13: 4+: Exek: 24. 17, 23. Or 2. by ſhaving off the hair of 


and they did 


"4 


| 


»*Num:d; | 


6. Deutsz 


* Fack: 


”Þ 


Chap. X. 


Miſcarriages, 
Drunkennefſs is ſo 


which they might now commit from other Cauſes. 
odious a fin in it ſelf, eſpecially in a Miniſter,and 
moſt of all in the time of his Adminiſtration of Sacred Things,that 
God ſaw fit to prevent all occaſions of it. And kence the Devil, 
who is God's Ape in his preſcriptions for his: Worſhip, required 
this Abſtinence from his Prieſts 1n their Idolatrous Service. 
Jer: 75: 10 And that ye may * put difference berween 
>: Ezek: and unholy x, and between unclean and clean. 
:26:and ,. Perſons and Things, which Nadab and Abilu did not, miſta- 
* 23+ ing Unholy or Common Fire for that which was Sacred and Ap- 
pointed by God for their uſe. 

11 And that ye may te 
all the ftatures which the LO 
by the hand of Moſes. 


7 Be apt to teach aright, which drunken Perſons are very unfit 


to do. 
i2 © And 


holy 


ach y the children of Iſrael 
RD had ſpoken unto them 


> 


Moſes ſpake unto Aarcn, and unto Ele- 
azar, and unto Ithamar his ſons, that were left * i ake 
the mear-offering that remaineth of the off-rings of the 
LORD made by hre, and eat it z without leayen, Þe- 


ſides the altar : for ir is * moit hoiy. 

z Moſes repeateth and reinforcerh the former Command, part!y 
leſt their great Loſs and Gricf ſhould cauic them to forgc-t or 
negle& their Meat preſcribed the:m by God, which Acſtinence 
would have been borh a ſignification of their So-row v hich God had 
forbidden them, and a new tranſgrefſion of a Divine Precepr ; and 
partly to encourage them to go on in their Holy Services, and not 
to be dejeged for the late Severity, as it God would no more 
accept them or thzir Sacrifices. | 

13 And ye ſball cat it in the holy place «, becauſe 
it is thy due 6, and thy ſons due of the ſacrifices of the 


LORD made by fire: for fo I am commanded. 

a In the Court, near the Altar of Burnt-offe: ings. See Lev. 
26: b See Lev: 2: 3: and 6: 16, 17. 

14 And * the wave-breaſt, and heave-(boulder (ball 
ye eat in a clcan place c, thou, and thy ſons, and thy 
daughters d with thee, for rey be chy due, and thy ſons 
due, which are given out of the facritice of peace-ofte- 
rings of the children of Ifrac] 

c In any of your Dwellings, or any 
he ſuppoſ. th to be kepr clean from all ceremonial Deflement, as 
they ought :o be; whence re Lepers were pur out of the Camp. 
See Numb $5: 1,2, 3. In any place where che Women as well as the 
Men might come, for the daughters of the Pricit> might cat theie 
at well as their Sons, as it here follows. d To wit, if tiey were 
Maids, or Widows, or di ozcud, Lev? 22; I, It, 13. 

I5 houGer and the wave breaſt ſhall 


6: 


* Exod: 
[29: 24: 

| Chap: 7: 
31, 3+ 


place in the Camp, which 


* The heave-i 
they bring, with the offerings made by tire of the fat, 
to wave it for a wave-offeiir.g before the LORD ; and 
it (ball be thine, and thy ſons with thee by a ſtature 
for ever, as the LORD hath c >mmanded 

16 4 And Moſes diiigently fought * the goat of the 
ſin-effering d, and behold, it was burnt : and he was 
angty with Eleazar and Ithamar e the ſons of Aaron 
which were left alive f, laying, 

d To wit, for the People, mentioned, Lev: g: 15: to know what 
was done with that part of it which was the Prieſts. Which he 
enquired into, more than into the other Sacrifices, becauſe a miſtake 
+ there was eaſie and probable, becau'e that matter might ſeem {ome- 

thing doubtful, by reaſon of two laws concerning it, ſeemingly 

contrary, the one Lev: 4: 21: where it 1s tobe buxned, the orher 

Lev: 6: 26: where it was to be eaten. But rhey- are thus reconciled : 

Tt was to be burnt, when the blood of this ſacrifice was brought 

into the holy place, Lev: 4: 16, 17: and when that was cor done, 

which Aaron this firſt time could nor do, for the reaſon expreſſed 
in ver: 18: it was to be eaten, and here lay their miſtake. e He 

_ Aaron at this time, as overwhelmed with ſorrow,and becauſe 

the rebuking of him before his ſons might have expoſed him to 
ſome contempt; but he knew that the reproof though diretted to 
them, would concern him too, as he alſo apprehended it. f Pre 
ſerved from death when their brethren were deſtroyed, which is 
here mentioned as an aggravation of their ſin. 


17 Wherefore have ye not eaten 'the fin-efering in 
the holy place, ſeing it is moſt holy, and G:d hath 
given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation 

to make atonement for them before the LORD ? 
g ( i.e.) Asa reward of your ſervice and fun&ion, whereby you 
do expizte, bear and take away their fins, by offering thoſe ſac: ifi- 
ces and performing thoſe rites, by which God through Chriſt is 
reconciled to the penitent and believing offerers. 


18 Behold.the blood of it was not brought in within 
the holy place þ ; ye ſhould indeed have. eaten it in the 
holy place, * as I commanded. 


25 


* Chap: 
G. 26. 


3 


into the holy place, whither that blood !.0u)d have been brought 


offered in the Court, 


19 And Aaron faid unto Moſes, Behoid, this day 
have they offered # their fin-effering and their burnc- 


LEVITICUS. 


Chap. XI. 


burn it, as I did other ſacred relicks, than to profane it by eating 
it unworthily. 

20 And when Moſes heard that, he was content 2. 

m He reſted ſatished with his anſwer, either becauſe he thought 
it reaſon-ble, ſeing the letter ot rhe law eft-times yields to neccſ< 
ſities or great accidents, 2 Chron: 40: 18. Mat: 12: 3, 4. or at leaſt 
becauſe the things alledged were mitigations of his fault, and he 
would not add affliction to the afflicted, bur rather defer the ucs 
bate of it to a fitter opportunity. 


CHAP. XL 


caſts clean and unclean, 1---=-8, Of fiſhes, 9—---12, Of fowls ond 
creeping things, 13-===23, In touching of a dead Carcaſs, 24---- gee 
Other Creatures unclean, 29-====43. Thiy are exhorted 'o viY et 
holineſs from the nature, ana his goodneſs to them in takius hots p 4 Fs 
people, 44, 45. The whole repeated, 46, 47. 2 pap 


” Jp D tne LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and to Aaron 
2 s, Jaying unto them, 
rom the laws concerning the Prieſt 
_— a7 to all the ——_ Tg nn 6s the 
a To both of them, becauſe the cognizance of th ing 
matters belonged to borh, the prieſtwas bo diveld the wa br ne = 
things forbidden or allowed, where any doubr or difficulty aroſe ; 
and the Magiſtrate was to ſee the diie&ion here given, followed. F 


2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying. * Theſe * 
: 1 Deut: 
are the bealts which ye ſhall eat b am Ex «- Pug» 
that are on the earth : ET Try As: ay 


b Though every creature of God be good and pure in ir feig 21+ 
as appea s from Gen: 1: 3:i, Mat: 15: 11: Rom: x4. 14 yet 3t-p1] 7g 
(rod ro make a difference between clean and unclean,and to . ftra 
the'uſe of them, which he did in geneial and in part befor pn 
flood, Gen: 7: 2. but more fully and particularly here for og oi 
fons, as 1. To atlert his own ſoveraigaty over man, and « 4 ge 
the creatures, wilich men may nt uie but with God's lea wg ne” 
ro 12ure that ſNtid-necked people to obedience. ». To k hen 
wall of partiti. n between the Jews and other Nations yo 3 _ 
very uſctu] and neceilury for many great and wiſe pu: poſes | Thar 
by bridling their apperite in thing- in themſelves lawful ind {{ - 
of them very delucable and delightful for food, the 'n I "rag 
better prepared and enabled to deny themſelves in thin «7 ; ly 
ad grofly finfu!. 4. Fo the pretervation of their health. — 
-he creatures forbidden being, though uſed by the nei mar - 
Nations, of unwholeſome nouriſhment, eſpecially to the 5 Dr. 
were very obnox'ous to lep olies, which ſome of theſe Fas 
apt to produce and foment. 5: For moral {ignification *o - ih 
taem to abhor that filthineſs, and all thoſe i1] qualities for which 


-ſoine of theſe cieatures are noted. 


3 by apt man the hoof, and is cloyen-footed 
c, and chewcth the cud 4 among the be 
a 
- ak g ſts, that ball 
c To wit, is divided into two pa 
: arts 
oo 5: he Horſe, Camel Oc ow 
and undivided. This clauſe is added onlv I 
'y to expla !M1 
for er, 8-APPEALY from wer: 26: for rhe tive s. hooks of D = 
i.ats Oc. are parted or cloven into many 'parts . Heb: and bri ink 
up _ cud, i.e. the meat once chewed out of the fomach I 
rag 1 again,that 1. may be cheweda ſecond time for better . 
10n And this branch is to be joyned with the form wy on 
properties being neceſſary for the allowed Beaſts. Burt e) - fo 
hereof muſt be reſolved into the will of the lawgiver ; thor oh 0 
Terpreters guels that God would hereby fignifie their duties = 
the nrſt, that of dividing the word of God aright, and diſcergi , 
between go00d and evil, between God's inſtitutions and ATT 
ventions z and by the latter, rhar duty of recallin God' 20m pul 
our minds and ſerious meditation upon it. " Ca 
4 Nevertheleſs, theſe thall ye not eat, of them that 
chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof : a; the 
camel e, becauſe he cheweth the cud, but divigeth not 
he oor f, he zs unclean unto you 
e An uſual food in Arzbia, but vi is 
G4 | n b yielding bad nouri 
Galen notes. f To wit, ſo as to have his yp cloven in wy wi h 
being expreſled wer: 3: 1s here to be underſtood. Otherwiſe ks c: 
me!s hoof is divided, bur it 1s but a ſmall and imperfe& divif gg 
Ariſtotle and Pliny obſerve, and obiervation ſhews. pat 
5 And the cony g, becauſe he cheweth the cud, bur 
25 Unclean unto you, : 


divideth not the hoof, he 

g Some underſt:ind by this Hebrew w 

g ord Shaphan 7 
which were of a much greater ſize than ky Mice Ms Mouſe 
by the Arabians for 06d, Bur for the names «of the fo] Fo R #9 wen 
tu;es, ſeing the Jews rhemſcl-es are uncertain and divide? = wag 

; u 

ader with 


them, I thiak 1t 1mproper to trouble the unlearned Re 
diſputes about them, and for the learned they may hav recourſe 

ay h: rſe 
ake them according to 


Fl 
as in the Coney, 
ave their hooks entire 


to my Latin Synopſis. I ſhall therefore t 
our "Tranſlation. 


6 And the hare, becauſe he cheweth tht 
divideth not the hoof, he is unclean =p <p but 


bþ The reaſon whereof was, becauſe 4rron was not yet admitted ' 


till he had prepared the way by the ſacrifices which were to be | 


and be cloven footed, ye Ms. 
: | , yet he cheweth no » Macs. 
; he zs ® unciean unto you. t the cud : 5 

a: 5:4» 


7 And * the ſwine 6, though he divide the hoof. « 
3 


h Which the Jews would not ſo much 
as na; R 
ner. _= a — —_ _ the naming of by re Mi Py he = ns 
at this meat whic . 
ed by others. was 10 commonly uſed,and ſo much eſteem- 


$s Of their fleſh ſhall ye not eat, and their carcaſs 


offering before the 1 ORD ; and ſuch things have be- p 
fallen me k : and if I had eaten the ſin-offering to day, mall ye not touch z : * they are unclean unto YOU, *0 [ 5 —_ 
ſhould it have been accepred in the ſight of the LORD /? hi o wit, in order 4 cating, as may be gathered by comparin = Ads Mark; 
- -# They have done the ſubſtance of the thi this with Ger: 3: 3. Cok 2: 21, For ſince the F d - ring. dara 
a ns; rm | ny wt an t PU, though they have | ſome of the forbidden Creatures were uſeful * pa he Ns gf and 2 5:29 | © " 
ſed with icf, 4 Salads breels f on} having been cppreſ- | other good Uſes, and were uſed by good M , 'S Mudicinal and Rom: Is | 

ith grief, and almoſt berefr of my reaſon, ir is not brange | ir is not probable that God woul S en. voce Matth: 3: 4. 14, 17. 
nor unpardonable if I have miſtaken. / Becauſe ir was not to be would have them caſt away. "Thus x Cor:$:8 


God forbad the making of Images, Exodus 20: 
univerſally, but in order to the eioning ao oioueel 
| ſlian Interpreters agree, Or, » AS 


y and 
they were here forbidden to wu 


them, 


eaten with ſorrow, but with rejoycing and thankſgiving, as appears 
from Deut: 12: 7; and 26; 14: Ho: 9: 4. and I thought it —_ to 


A 


Chap XI. 


them, ro wit, unneceſſarily ; andif he that touched them for ſome 
neceſſary uſe were pollured by it, it was but a ſlight and tranſient 
pollution, ending at evening, as appears from verſe 24, 25, Oc. 

9 © Theſe shall ye eat, of all that are in the waters, 


whatſoever hath fins and ſcales & in the water, in the 


ſeas, and in the rivers, them hall ye cat. 

& To wit, both of them ; ſuch Fiſhes being both more cleanly, 
and more wholeſome Food than others. The names of them are not 
particularly mentioned, partly becauſe moſt of them wanted narnes z 
the Fiſhes not being brought to Adam and named by him as other 
Creatures were; and partly becauſe the Land of Canaar had not many 
Rivers, nor great ſtore of Fiſhes. : 

to And all that have not fins nor ſcales in the ſeas, 


and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and 
of any living thing which 7s in the waters /, they ſhall be 
an abomination unto you : 

L (5. e. ) Either of the imaller ſort of Fiſhes, or of the greater, 
which are called here living creatures or beaſts, as ſome of them are 
called the beaſts of the ſea by other Authors. _ 

11 They $hall be evenan abomination unto you m: 


ye 5hall not eat of their flesh, but you shall have cher 


carcaſles in abomination. | 

- To wit, for Food. This clauſe is added to ſhew that they were 
neither abominable in their own Nature, nor for the Food of other 
Nations, and conſequently when the Partition-wall between Jews 
and Gentiles was taken away, theſe diſtin&tions of Meats were to ceale. 
See Atts 10. HH 

12 Whatſocver hath no fins nor ſcales in the waters, 
that ſhall be an abomination unto you. : 

12 < And theſe are they which ye shall have in abo- 
mination among the fowls n, they shall not be eaten 
they are an abomination, the eagle, and the oflifrage, 


and the olpray o. 

» The true ſignification of the following H:brew words is now 
loſt, as the Jews at this day confeſs, which not falling our without 
God's ſingular Providence may "intimate the Ceſſation or Abolition 
of this Law, the exact obſervation whereof (ince Chriſt came 15 become 
impoſible. In general, this may be obſerved, That the Fuwls 
forbidden in Dtier, are all eicher Ravenous 2n1 Cruel, or ſuch as 
delight in the Night and Darkneſs, or ſuch as feed upon impure 
Things; and ſo the fignification and reaſon of theſe Prohibtrions 1s 
manifeſt, to teach Men to abominare all Cruelty or Opprefſſion, and 
all Works of Darkneſs and Filthineſs. o Which are two peculiar 
kinds of Eagles, diſtin& from that which being the chief of its 
kind, is called by the name of the whole kind, as it uſually 
happens. | = 

T4 And the vulture, and the kite after his kind: 

15 Every raven after his kind p : | 

p (#.e.) According to the ſeveral kinds of Birds, known by this 
general Name, which includes, belides Ravens properly ſo called, 
Crows, Rooks, Pyes, &c. | 

16 And the Owl q, and the Night-hawk, and the 
Cuckow, and the Hawk after his kind, 

9 Heb. the daughter of the Owl, which he mentions as the beſt of 
the kind both for Sex and Age, and therefore more deſired for Food 
than the Elder er Males. And it is hereby implied, that the very 
youngeſt and beſt of all the other kinds are forbidden, and much more 
che reſt. 

17 And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the 


great owl, ; 

18 And the ſwan, and the pelican, and the gier- 
eagle, | ; 

19 And the ſtork, the heron after her kind, andthe 
lapwing, and the bar, , 

20 All fowls that creep r, going upen «ll four s, fhall 
be an abomination unto you. 

r That crawl or creep upon the Earth, and fſo' degenerate from 
their proper Nature, which is to flie, and are of a mungre! Kind, which 
may intimate that Apoſtates and Mungrels in Religion are abominable 
in the ſight of God, and in converſation with Men. 5 Upon four 
Legs, or upon more than four, as Bees, Flies, &c. which is all one 
to the preſent purpoſe, theſe pluraliſts for Legs being here oppoſed 
©o thoſe that have bur two. : : 

2x Yet theſe may ye eat, of every flying creeping 
thing that goeth upon all four, which have legs above 
their feet z, to leap withal upen the earth : 


L EFITICURE 


LL ES 


| Chap. XI. | 


nouriſhment ; and the familiar uſe of them made them more agreeable 
to their bodies ; For even poiſons themſelves have by frequent uſe 
been made not only harmleſs, but nouriſhing alſo to ſome perſons. 
23 But all other flying creeping things which have 
four feet x, ſhall be an abomination unto you. _ 5 
x (5.e. ) All ſuch except thoſe now mentioned ; the word other 
being here underſtood our of the former Verſe, without which there 
might ſeem tobe a contradiction between this and that Verſe. Bar 
the words may be, and by the vulgar Latin, are thus rendred, But 
all flying creeping things which have only four feet ; which word only, is 
to be gathered out of Yerſe 20, 21. 7. e. which have nor thoſe legs 
above and beſides their feet mentioned, Yerſe 21. And fo all the 
Verles agree well together. 


24 And for theſe ye $shal be unclean : whoſoever 
toucheth the carcaſs of them, shall be unclean & until 
che even #. Ez 

z And ſuch were excluded borh from the courts of God's houſe, 
and from free converſation with other men. a Which pcflivly 
might ſ{ignifie, that even the ſmalleſt defilements could not be cleanſed 
bur by the Death of Chriſt, who was to come and offer up himſelf 
1n the evening or end or declining age of the world, as the Prophers 
ſ1gnifie, and the Apoſtle expreſſcth, Heb. g. 26. 


25 And whoſoever beareth 6b cght of the carcaſs of 
them, hall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the 
even. 


b Or, taketh away, our of the place where haply it may lie, by 
which others may be either offended, or polluted. 


26 The carcaſſes c of every beait which divideth the 
hoof, and is net cloven footed, nor cheweth the cud, 
are unclean unto you ; every one that toucheth them, 
{ball be unclean. 


c Which word is eaſily to be underſtood out of Yerſe 24: and 25. 
Where it is expreſſed. 


27 And whatſoever goeth upon his paws d, among 
all manner of beaſts that go on al! four, thoſe are un- 
clean unto you z whoſo toucheth their carcaſs, ſhall be 
unclean until the even, 

d Heb. upon his hands ; i. e. which hath Feet divided into ſeveral 
parts like figures, as Dogs, Cats, Apes, Bears, &c. 

28 Andhe that beareth the carcaſs of them ſhal wafh 
his clothes, and be unclean until the even : they are 
unclean unto you. _ 

29 9 Theſe alfo ſhall be unclean unto you, among the 
creeping things that creep upon the earth ; the Weaſel, 
and the * Mouſe, and the Tortois after his kind, 


1 


30 And the Ferret, and the Camelion, and the Ly 66: 17 | 


zZard, and the Snail, and the Mole. | 

31 Thele are unclean to you among all that creep. 

whoſoever doth touch them when they be dead, ſhall 
e unclean until the even. 

32 Andupon whatſoever any of them, when they are 
dead doth fall, it ſhall be unclean, whether ir be any 
veſſel of wood, or rayment, or skin, orſack, whatſoever 
veilel it be, wherein «»y work is done, ic muſt be put 
into water, and it ſhall be unclean until the even : G it 
{hall be cleanſed, 

33 And every earthen veſſel, whereinto a»y of chem 
falleth, whatſoever 5s in it 
ſhall break it, 

34 Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which ach 
water cometh e, ſhal be unclean: And all drink thatmay 


be drunk in every /«cb veſſel, (hal be unclean. 

e The meaning is, that fleſh or herbs or other food which is dreſſed 
in water, to wit, in a vellel ſo polluted, ſhall be unclean ; nor'ſo, 
if it be Food which is eaten dry, as Bread, Fruits, &c. the reaſon of 
which difference ſeems to be this, that the water did ſooner receive 
the pollution in it ſelf, and convey it to the Food fo dreſſed. 


35 And every thing whereupon any part of their 
carcaſs falleth, ſhal be unclean, herher it be oven, or 
ranges for pots, they ſhal be broken down : for they 
are unclean, and ſhal be unclean unto you. 

36 Nevertheleſs, a fountain, or pit Þ wherein there is 


(hall be unclean, and * ye * Chapi 


' 


1 


f The truth of this Tranſlation may feem evident both from the f Heb. 
following clauſe, zo [zap withal, and eſpecially from the next Vegſe, 
where one of this kind 1s the Locy#s, which, as it is manifeſt, have 
two Legs wherewith they leap, beſides the four Feet upon which 
they walk. The Adverb 4 is here put for the Pronoun Ho, as it is 
alſo 1 Chron: 11: 20: compared with 2 Sam: 23: 18. Others take the 
words as they lye, and readthem negatively, which have not legs upon 


plenty of water f, ſhal be clean : * that which touchech gathering 
their carcaſs (hal be uFlean, together | 
f Of which no ſolid reaſon can be given, whilſt ſuch unclean of watersi/ 
things remain in them, bur only the will of the Lawgiver and his * Or, 
merciful Condeſcention ro Mens neceflities, Water being ſcarce in #e that 
thoſe Countries ; and for the ſame reaſon God would have the toucherÞ; 


their Feat, and fo the ſenſe may be this, That they might eat the 
Locuſts, Graſhoppers, &c. when they were very young, and 
therefore more wholeſome for Food ; for they are born withour legs, 
Plin. nat. Hiſt. 11, 29. or, their legs at ficſt are very ſmall and ſcarce 
to be diſcerned, and in eff:& none. And the Canon of the Fews in 
this matter is this, Thoſe which yet have not wings and legs may be eaten, 
though they be ſuch as afterward would have them. 

22 Even theſe of them ye may eat ; * The Locuſt « 
after his kind, and the Bald-locuft after his kind, and 
the Beetle after his kind, and the Grashopper after his 
kind : 

u Locuſts, though unuſual in our Food, were.commonly eaten 
by the Ahiopians, Lybians, Parthians, and other Eaſtern people 
bordering upon the Jews, which 1s expreſly affirmed by Diodorws, 
Siculus, Ariftotle, Pliny, St. Hierom and others, as well as Maith: 3. 4. 
And it is Certainthat the Eaſtern Locuſts were much larger than ours, 


do jt is probable they were of different qualities, and yielded beteer.- . 
i 


ceremonial Law of Sacrifices to be offered to God; give place to the 
moral Law of Mercy towards Men, 


37 And if any part of their carcaſs fall upon any ſow- 
ing ſeed which is to be ſown g, it ſhall be clean. 

g Partly becauſe this was neceſſary Proviſion for Man; and partly 
becauſe ſuch Secd would not be Ufed for Man's Food till it had 
received many Alterations in the Earth, whereby ſuch Pollution was 
taken away. See John 12: 24; 1 Cor: 196.36. 

38 But if ay water be put = the feed 5; and any 
part of their carcals fall thereon, it ſpall be uncteanunto 
you. | BAK | | 

þ The teaſon of the difference is, partly becauſe wet Seed doth 


ſooner receive, and longer retain any Pollution; and partly becauſe 
ſuch Seed wasnet fit to be ſown preſently, and therefore that neceflity 


" which juſtified the uſe of the dry Seed, which was ſpeedily ro Ge 


fown, could nor be pretended in this raſes 


- 39 And 


| Chap. XIL 
| 29 And ifany beaſt of which ye may eat, die z, he 
that toucheth the carcaſsthereof, ſhall be unclean until 
the even. 

; Eicher of it ſelf, or being 


caſes the Blood was nor poured forth, as it was when they were 
killed by Men either for Food or Sacrifice. 


[+ Chap: 40 And * he that eateth of the carcaſs of it &, ſhall 
x7: 15:- waſh his clothes, and be unclean until the even : he 


_ 22:8: 1ſo thar beareth the carcaſs of it, ſhall waſh his clothes, 
: "4 5 and be unclean until theeven. 


k To wit, vnwittingly, for if he did it knowingly, it was a 


| 
| 
: 
| 


| 
| 


yy preſyumoruous Sin againſt an expreſs Law, Deut: 14: 21: and therefore 
puniſhed with cutting off, Nums. 15. 30. 
41 Andevery creeping thing / that creepeth upon the 
earth, ſhall be an abomination : it ſhall not be eaten. 
1 Except thoſe before expreſly excepted above, verſe 29, 30. 
42 Whatſoever goeth upon the belly 2, and whatſo- 
| Heb. doch ©VET goeth upon all four », or whatſoever Þ hath more 
multiply feet 0, among all creeping things that creep upon the 
| feet. earth, them ye ſhall not car, forthey arean abomunation. 
2 m As Worms and Snakes. » As Toads and divers Serpents, 0 To 
wit, more than four, as Caterpillars, ©. 
Þ Chap: 43 * Ye (hall not make your + ſelves abominable 
20:25: With any creeping thing that creepeth, neither ſha]] 
| + Heb. ye make your ſelves unclean with them, that ye ſhould 
| ſouls. be defiled thereby. 
44 For I -mthe LORD your God : yeſhall therefore 
Chap: ſanify your ſelves, and * ye ball be holy p, for I 
x9: 2 holy: neither ſhall ye defile yourſelves with any manners 


and 20: 7: Of creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. 
x Pet: + p By which he gives them to underſtand, that all theſe Cautions 
25,16, and Prohibirions about the ezting or touching of theſe Creatures was 


bur only that by the diligent Obſervation of theſe Rules they might 
learn with greater care to avoid all moral Pollurions, and to kee 
themſelves from all fil:hineſs of Fleſh and Spirit, and particularly 
from all familiar and intimate converſe with notorious Sinners. 


the land of Egypt to be your God : ye ſhall therefore 
be holy, for I aw: holy. 


+H:b: Of every living creature that + moveth in the waters, 
fwinmeth. and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth. 
47 To make a difference between the unclean and 
the clean, and berween the beaſt chat may be eaten, 
and the beaſt that may not be eaten. 


CHAP. XIL 


and her purification thirty three days, 1==-====q, Of a daughter fourteen 
2] days, and her purification ſixty ſix days, 5» Her offering, if rich, a lamb 
of a year old, a young pigeon, or rurtle-dove for a ſm-ffering, 6, 7. If 
Fe poor, two turtle doves, or two young pigeons ; one for a burnt-offering, and 


one for a ſin-offering, 8. 


N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying, If a 


*Chap: * woman have Þ conceived ſeed, and born a man-child, 
SETS: then * ſhe ſhall be unclean # ſeven days & : according to 
| ferdes. Fe days ofthe ſeparation for her infirmity c ſball ſhe be 

*Tuke: unclean. - 

2: 22: From uncleanneſs contratted by the touching or eating of external 
things, he now comes to that uncleanneſs which ariſeth from our 
ſelves. . " 

a Not for any filthineſs which was either in the Conception, or 
In bringing forth, but to ſignify the univerſal and deep Pollution of 
Man's Nature even from the Birch, and from the Conceprion. 4 For 
ſo long, or thereabouts, Nature is employed in the Purgation of 
moſt Women- c (7.e. ) For her monthly Infirmiry. And it may 
note an agreement therewith not only inthe time, Levit: r5: 19: but 
in the degree of uncleanneſs, which was ſuch that ſhe defiled every 
thing ſhe touched, &c. 
 SGen:19: 3 And in the * eighth day, the fleſh of his foreski® 


12:uke ſhall be circumciſed 4. 

1:59: nd &@& Which Law is here repeated, becauſe the Womans uncleanneſs 
2:21:John laſting for ſeven Days. was one, though not the only reaſon, why the 
7:2242 _Child's Circumciſion was put off till the eighth Day. 


4 And ſhe ſhall thencontinue e in the blood of her 
purifying f three and thirty days : ſhe ſhall crouch no 
hallowed thing g, nor come into the ſanctuary, until 
the days of her purifying be fulfilled. 

e Heb. ſit, 5. e. abide, as that word is oft uſed, as Gen: 22: 5: and 
34: 10: or tarry at home, nor go into the San&tuary. fIn her polluted 
and ſeparated Eſtate ; for the word Bleed or Bloods {ignifies both guilr, 
as Gen: 4: 10. and Uncleannefs, as here and eHewhere. See Ezek: 16: 6: 
And it is called the Blood of her purifying, becaule by the Expulſion 
or Purgation of that Biood, which is done by degrees, ſhe is purified. 
£g Ske ihall not eat any part of the Peace-offerings which ſhe or her 
Husband offered, which otherwiſe ſke might have done ; and, if ſhe 
be a Prieſt's Wife, ſhe ſhall noteart any of the Tythes or firſt Fruits, 
or part of the hallowed Meats, which at other tunes ſhe togerbes 
with her Husband might eat. 


LEVITICUS. 


killed by ſome Wild Beaſt, in which 


not for any rea' Uncleanneſs in them,all beingGod's goodCreatures, ; 


45 For I am the LORD that bringeth you up out of 


5 But if ſhe bear a maid-child, thet ſhe ſhall be 
| unclean two weeks, as in her ſeparation : and ſhe ſhall 
! continue in the blood of her purifying threeſcore and 
ſix days h. 


þ The time in both particulars is double to the former, not fo 
much from natural Cauſes, becauſe the Purifications in Female Births 
are longer and flower; which if it were true, yet doth not extend to 
any ſuch time as here is mentioned, as for moral Reaſons ; either ta 
to be as a blot upon that Sex for being the firſt in Mans Tranfgrefſion, 
1 Tim: 2* 14. or to put an Honour -upon the Sacrament of Circumci- 
ſion, which being adminiſtred to the Males, did put an end to that 
Pollution ſooner than otherwiſe had been; or to ſhew rhe priviledge 
of the Man above the Woman, and that the Women were to be 
purifi-d, ſan&ified, and ſaved by one of the other Sex, even by the 
M:n Chriſt Jeſus, without-whom they ſhould have till continued 
in their impurity» | =p 

6 And when the days of hor purifying are fulfilled 
for a ſon, or for a daughter i, ſhe ſhall bring alamb of 
the + firſt year for a burnt-offering, and a young 1, .. 
pigeon, or a turtle-dove for a ſin-oftering &, unto the ,#,; ,.,. 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation unto the 
prieſt : 

; For the Birth of a Son, or of a Daughter : but the Purification 

was for her ſelf, as appears from the following Verſes. & Either 
becauſe of her ceremonial Uncleanneſs, which required a ceremonial 
| Expiation ; or for thoſe particular Sins relating to the time and ſtate 
| of Child-bearing, of which ſhe 1s juſtly preſumed to be guilty, 
which might be many ways. 
7 Who s$hall offer it before the LORD, and make 
an atonement for her, and she s$hall be cleanſed from 
the iſſue of her blood, This is the law for her that hath 


' born a male, or a female /. 
I For though there was a difference in the time of her Uncleanneſs 
for the one and for the other, yet both were to be purified one and 
the ſame way ; to note, that though all Sins and Sinners were not 
: equal, yet all were to be cleanſed by the ſame means, to wit, by 
Chriſt, and by Faith. See x Cor: 7: 14: Gal: 3: 28: 
8 * Andif 7 she be not able to bring a lamb, then * Luke 


' he $hall bring two turtles, or twoyoung pigeons, the 22+ 
— , + Heb. 

' one for the burnt-offering, and the other for a ſin-of- ;,, ,,,z 

| fering, and the prieft shail make an aronement for her, fd mr 


' and she $hall be clean, 


CHAP. XHL 


46 Thiss the law of the beaſts, and ofthe fowl, and | 


4 Laws touching the uncletwmneſs of women in child-bearing. Of a ſon, ſeven day:; | 


: Laws touching Leproſies ; its different kinds how to be known: and judged of 
by the pri-ſt, 1——8. Of the ſwelling, 9g —17. Of the Sores or Boils, 
18 un=—_—z, Of the fiery Inflamation, 24 - 28. Of the ſcall, 
29 —— 37, Of the Bliſters, 38. 39. Of baldneſs, 40 44. The Leper 
with clothes rent, bare-head, and covered lips, muſt cry Unclean, unclean, 
and dwell alone, 45, 46. Of the leproſie m Clothes, Linen, Woollen, and 
Skins, 47 - 59. 


ND the LORD fſpake unto Moſes and Aaron 
ſaying, 

2 When a man ſhall have in the skin &@ of his Fleſh 
a F rifing, a ſcab, or bright ſpot b, and it be in the 
Skin of his Fleſh like the plague of leproſfie c, * then he 


ſhal be brought unto Aaron the pricſt 4, or unto one 
of his ſons the prieſts. 

a For there was the Seat of the Leproſie. 6 Shining like the Scale 
of a Fiſh, asit isin the beginning of a Leprofie. c A Diſtemper 
moſt frequent in Egypt and Syria, &c. known alſo among the Greeks 
| who note chat it was not ſo properly a Diſeaſe, as a Defilement or 
| Diſtemper in the Skin, whence Chriſt is not ſaid to heal, but ro 
; cleanſe the Lepers thar came to him. And this Diſtemper is here 

provided againſt, not becauſe it was worſe than others, but becauſe 
1t was externally and viſibly Filthy, and becauſe of its infe&ious 
Nature, that hereby we might be inſtruted to avoid Converſe with 
ſuch Vicious Perſons who were likely to infe& us. d Not to the 
Phyſician, On 2s we now ſaid, it needed not ſo much bealing 
as cleanſing, and was rather a ceremonial Pollution than a Diſeaſe : 
and becauſe it belonged to the Prieſt to cleanſe him, and therefore 
to ſearch and diſcover whether he wasdefiled and needed cleanſing 
The Prieſt alſo was to admit to, or exclude from, the Sanftuary, 
and therefore to examine who were to be excluded. And the diſ. 
covery of this Diſtemper was not ſo difficulr that it required the 
Phyſicians art, bur the Prieſt, by experience, and the obſervation of 
thoſe rules might eaſily make it. 
3 And the prieſt shal look on the plague e in the skin 
of the flesh, and when the hair in the plague is turned 


white f, and the plague in ſight is deeper than the skin 
of his flesh g, it 5s a plague of leproſie : and the prieft shal | 
look on him, and F pronounce him unclean þ. + Heb gil 


e ( 7.e« ) The ſignor appearance of the plague of Leprofie. And it | 
is obſervable, that the ſame ſigns of it Far given by Noſe bid, and (nee HO 
by the Learned Phyſicians in their Works. f And whea the Loprofic 

came to its height, not the Hair only, but alſo the Skin was turned 


f Or, 

ſwelling 
* Deut: 
17:8:and 
24: 8; 


Chap. XII. 


| 


5 * 
V - 
4 
Ch 
{ 


pag: "| Pape. © <li /anaud 


+ Hz 


clean 


tHe 
lute b 


1 
$ 


ſufficiencydf | 


white, as Exod: 4: 6: Numb: 12: 10. Andthis change of Co 

an evidence both of the abundance of pmne/reeByry 3. | pray —_ 
of the weakneſs of Nature, as we ſee in old and ſick Perſons. g Fos 
the Leproſie did conſume both the Skin and the Fleſh, as appears from 
2 Kings 5: 14+ hHeb. make him unclean, 1. e. miniſterially and decla- 
ratively, in which ſenſe Miniſtecs are ſaid to remir ſens, Matth, 16: 19: 
and to deffroy Nations, Jer. r. 10. ; 


4 Tf che bright ſpot be white in the skin of his flesh, 
and in ſight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair 


| thereof be not turned white, then the prieſt shal shue 
| up hin 1hat hath the plague i ſeyendays, | 


; For 


f He 
quick? 
of liv 


fleſh. 


| © Chap. XU: 


d 


pub 
{/Þ 


' 


| 


: Tor greater aſſurance; to teach Miniſters not to be raſh nor 
iy in their Judgments and Centures, but diligently to ſearch 
1d examin? all things before-hand. The plague 1s here put for the 
1/22 that hath the Plague, as Pride is.put for a proud-Man, Jer. 50. 31. 
and Dreams for the Dreamers, Fer. 27.9. _ 

5 And the prieſt ſhall look on him the ſeventh day : 
and behold, ;f che plague 1n his ſight be at a ſtay &, and 


the plague {pread not 1n the skin, then the prieſt ſhall 
thut him up feven days more. : _ 

{ This Tranſlation is juſtified by the following Clauſe which is 
added ro explain it. Otherwiſe the words are and may be rendred 
thus, and or vine mits Own Color; the Hebrew word being uſed 
for Colour as well as for Sight. : : 

6 And the pricit ſhall look on him again the ſeventh 
Eay : and behold, if the plague be ſomewhat dark ,, and 
thc plague ſpread not ſomewhat in the skin, the prieſt 

+ Heb fhall | pronounce him clean: it is bet aſcab: andhe 
demſehim. $hall wash his clothes m2, and be clean- 

I Which is oppoſed to the white Colour of the Leproſy. But the 
word may be rendicd, have contrated it ſelf, or, be reſtrained Or con- 
fined to its former place and bigneſs; and thus the Oppolition Jeems 
to be moſt clear tothe ſpreading of its ſelf, mentioned both in the 
foregoing Verſe, and in the following Clauſe. »» Though it was 
no Leproſy, but a Scab only : to teach us, that no Sin was 10 ſmall 
which did" nor necd to be waſhed by th: Blood of Chriſt, which 
wil the thing deiigned by all theſe waſhings. . ; 

7 Bucif the fcab ſpread much abroad in the skin, at- 
ter that he hath been ſeen of the prieſt for his cleanting, 
he shall be ſeen of the prieſt again. 

$ And if che prieſt ſee, thar behold the ſcab ſpread- 

tHeb.fo- eth in the skin, then the prieſt shal F pronounce him un- 
ure Pim Ciean: it is alepiotie. 

9g When the plague of leproſy is in a man, then he 
Sha] be brougiit unto the prielt 3 


1 And the priett shal ſee 4z», and behold, ph ri- 


ſing be white » inthe skin, and it have turned th&khat 
f Heb.:he white, and o there be + quick raw flesh p in theriling : 
quickning 1 To wir, with a preternatu:al and extraordinary Whiteneſs, as- 
of living Numb: 12. 54. 0 Or rather, or, the Copulative pur for the Diſjun&t- 
feſh. ive, as hath been nored before ; foi either of theſe were ſigns of 
a Leproſy, and one of theſe may ſeem 1nconliftent with the other; 
the former lign of white Hair ſuppoſing the Skin in which the Hair 
was to rem-1n, and the Jatter of {ive F/ejh ſup poſing the Skin to be 
conſumed by the Leproſy. p Which ſhewcd that this wa; not a 
ſuperficial Leproſy, but one of a deeper and more malignant Na- 
ture, that had eaten into the ve'y Fleſh, for which cauſe ir is in 
thenext Verſe called az old, or inveterate, or grown Leproſy. 

11 It is an oid leproſy in the skin ot his tleth, and 
the prieſt ſhall pronounce him unclean, ane ſhall not 
ſhut him up, for he is unclean. 

12 And if aleproſy break out abroad inthe skin, and 
the leproſy cover all the skin of himthat hath the plague. 
from his head even to his foot, whereſoever the prieſt 
looketh : 

13 Thenthe prieſt shall conſider, andbehold, if the 
leproſy q have covered all his flesh r,he shail pronounce 
him Ciean that batb the plague 3 it is all turned white : 
hezs clean: 

q(i.e.) The fign or appearance of the Leproſy : or the Scab is 
called » Leproſy,becauſe at firſt view it ſeerned to be fo tothe Prieſt, 
and to other beholdeis »r When it appeared in ſome one part it 
diſcovered theill humor which lurked within, and withal the ina- 
bil-ty of Nature ro expel it, bur when it overſpread all, it mani- 
feſted the ſtrength of Nature conquering the Diſtemper, and pur- 
ging outtheill Humors into the outward Parts. 

14 But whenthe raw tlesh appeareth in him, r, he 
Shall be unclean. - 

» Or rather, 7» zt, 7. e. in the place where the ſign or appearance 
of Leproſy was, when the Fleſh was partly changed into a whiter 
Colour, and partly kept its natural Colour, this vai iety of Colours 
was an evidence of the Leproſy, as one and the ſame Colour con- 
tinuing was a ſign of Soundneſs. 

i5 And the prielt shall ſee the raw flesh, and pro» 
nounce him to be unclean * fer the raw flesh is unclean 
Ss: itzisa leproly. | 

5 Thisis repeated again and again, becauſe raw or living Fleſh 
might rather ſeem a fign of Soundneſs, and the Prieſt might eaſi- 
ly be deceived by it, and therefore he was more nar-owly to look 
into it, and to obſerve the place and manner, and other Circum- 
ſtances in which itappeare1. 

16 Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed 
unto white t, heshall come unto the prieſt : 

t Asit is uſual with Sores, when they begin tobe healed, the 
Skin, which is white, coming upon the Fleſh. 

17 Andthe prieſt shallfee him: and behold, 5f the 
plague be turned into white, then the prieſt shal pro- 
NOUNCce bim clean that hath che plague : he is clean. 


18 4 The flesh alſo, in which, even in the skin there - 
of was a bile, and is healed : 


19 And inthe place of the bile there be a white ri- 


ling, or a bright ſpot white, and ſomewhat reddiſh «, 
and it be shewed ro the prieſt : 

u (:.e.) White mixed with Red, as when Blood and Milk are 
mixed together, A late learned Writer rendcrs the words thus, 
white and very bright or light, which .indeed is the rrue Colour of 
Leproſy, to wit, when it is in its perfection, as Exod, 4.6,%6, But 


ATAASES Az 


, ? y F, 
Chap. XIII; 
here it was only beginning arid ariſing vut of a Biſe, 'n which to- 
gether with the white, which was the Colour of the Leproſy, 
there might be ſome mixture of redneſs ariſing from the Bile, or 


thar part of it which was not yet turned into the Nature and Co- 
lour of Leproſy. | 


20 And if when the prieſt ſeethit, behold, it be in 
ſight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turn- 
ed white, the prieſt Shal pronounce him unclean : it 4s 
a plague of leproſy broken out of the bile. | 

21 Bur if the prieft look on it, and behold, rhere be 


| the burning: wherefore the prieſt (hal pronounce him 


no white hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the 
skin, but be ſomewhat dark 7, then the prieſt shai shut 
; him up ſeven days: 
| + Or, and be contrafted; of which ſee verſe 6. . 
22 Andifitſ{pread much abroed in the skin, then the 
prieit shal pronounce him unclean ; it 7s a plague x. 
x Or, the plague, to wit, of Leproſy,of which he is ſpeaking. 
23 Bur if the bright ſpot ftay in his place and fpread 
not, itis a burning bile, and the prieſt shal pronounce 
him clean. | 
24. C Or if therebe #ny flesh in the skin,whereof there is 
a Þ hot burning y,and the quick feſh that burneth have a + xeb. 4 
white bright ſpot, ſomewhat reddilh or white z : byrning of 
y Heb. &@ burning of Fire, by the touch ofany hot Iron, or burning fre. 
Coals, which doth naturally and uſually make an Ulcer or Sore in 
which the following Spot is, xz ( i: e: ) Or only White, without 
any mixture of Red in ir. This Clauſe ſeems to overthrow that 
Expoſition of the Hebrew word Adamdam whichis given by a Learn- 
ed Man, werſe rg. becauſe this Colour which is here ſaid tobe on= 
ly White, 1s diſtinguiſhed from that which is here called Adamaam, 
which therefore muſt be ſome other Colour than that of Snow, 
which tho very light or bright, yet is only White. 
25 Then the prieſt thall look upon it : and behold, 
if the bair in the bright {pot be turned white,and it be in 
ighe deeper than the skin, it is a leproſy broken out of 


— 


unclean * it is the plague of leproſy. _ | 
26 Bur if the prieſt look on it, and behold, there be 
no bright hair in the bright ſpot, and it be no lower 
than the other skin, bur be ſomewhat dark a, then the 
prieſt (hal ſhur him up ſeven days, 
a Or, contra#ed, i. e. not ſpreading. See on verſe 6, | 
27 And the prieſt ſhal look upon him the ſeventy 
day: and if it be ſpread much abroad in the skin, then 
the prieſt ſhall pronounce him unclean, it 4s the plague 
of leproſy. | 
28 And if the bright ſpot ſtay in his place,& ſpread not 
in the skin, but it be ſomewhat dark. it za riting ofthe 
burning,and the prieſt fhal pi onounce him clean : for it 
is an inzamation of the burning b. . 
b (i.e:) Ariſing from the burning mentioned werſe 24. 
29 EC If a man or woman hath a-plague upon the 
nead or the beard. | 
30 Then the prieſt ſhal ſee the plague, an&behold, 
if it be in ſight deeper than the skin, and there he in it a 
yeilow thin hair c, then the prieſt ſhal pronounce hint 
unclean : it is 2 dry ſcall, even a leproſy upon the head 
Or beard, p 4 
c The Leproſy in the Body turned the hair white,in the Head or 
Beard it turned it yellow. Andif a Mans Hair was yellow, before; 
this mighr eaſily be diſtinguiſhed from the reſt, either by the thin 
neſs or ſmalneſs of it, which is here nored,or by its peculiar kind of 


Yello-« fo: thereare divers kinds or deg: ees of the ſame Colour ma« , 
nifeſtly diffecing one from another, as in green Colours, &c. 


21 And it the prieſt look on the plague of the ſcall,and 
behold,it be not in ſight deeper than the skin. & that there 
;s no bl-ck hair in it 4, then the prieſt ſhall tbur up bim 
that hath the plague of the ſcall ſeven days. 

d For had that appeared, it had ended the doubt;tlie black Hair 


being a ſign of ſoundneſs and ſtrength of Nature, werſe 37. as the: 
yellow Hair was afign of unſoundneſs. 


32 Andin the ſeventh day the prieſt ſhal look on the 
plague: and behold, if the ſcal ſpread not, and there 
be in it no yellow hair, and the fcal be not in fight 
deeper than the «kin, | BE a ; 

32 He ſhal beſhavene : but the ſcal shal he not ſbave: 
and the prieſt shal shut up him chat bath the ſcal, ſeven « 
days more, 

e For the more certain diſcovery of the growth or ſtay of the 
Plague. 


4 And in the ſeventh day the prieſt hal look on the 
{cal: and behold, jf the [cal benot ſpread in the kin, 
aor bein ſight deeper than the skin, then the prieſt ſhal 
pronounce himclean ; and he fthal wash his clothes, and 
be clean, : 

35 But if the ſcal ſpread much in the skin after his 
cleanſing, 

35 Then theprieſt $hal look on him, and behold, if 
the ſcal be ſpread in the skin, the prieſt shal nor teek 
:or yellow hair f: he 5: unclean, 

f He neednot ſearch for the Hair, -or any other Sign, the ſpread. 
ing or running of it being a ſure ſign of Leproſy,- without any &6- 
ther evidence. 7 | 


37 Bang. 


JP. XII. 
27 But if theſcall be in his ſight at a ſtay, and that 
there & black hair grown up therein ; the ſcall is healed, 


he « clcan,and the prieſt ſhall pronounce him clean g- 
g The Truth ofthe Thing, and not the Sentence of the Prieſt, 
made him clean ; and if the Prieſt had partially pronounced one 
clean who was not clean, his Sentence had been null. And there- 
fore it is afond and dangerous Conceit to think that the Abſoluti- 
on given to any Sinner by a Prieſt, wall ſtand him in any ftead if 

he do nottruly repent. : 
28 © If a man alſo, or a woman, have in the kin 

of their fleſh bright ſpots, ever white bright ſpots-_ 

39Then the prieſt ſhall look : and behold, /f the bright 
ſpots in the skin of their fleth be darkiſh white d, it « a 


freckled ſpot that growethin the skin : he is clean 
h Or, contrafed, or confined tothe place where they are, and 
white. 


40 And the man whoſeÞ hair is fallenoff his head, 


he is bald, yet is he clean. 
41 And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part 


of his head toward his face, he is forehead-bald : yer 5s 


he clean. 
42And if there be in the bald head, or bald fore head, 


2 white reddiſh ſore, it is a leproſy ; ſprung up in his 
bald head. or his bald forehead, 

7 Itis a ſign that ſuch Baldneſs came not from Age, or any Ac- 
cident, but from the Lep:oſy. 


y . 

42 Then the priett jhall look upon itz and behold. 
if the riſing of the ſore be whitereddilh in his bald head, 
or in his bald forehead, as the leproſy appeareth in the 


skin of the fleſh, | | 
44 He #s a leprous man, he #s unclean, the prieſt 


ſhall pronounce him utterly unclean : his plague #s in his 


head. 
45 And the leper in whom the plague zs, his clothes 
ſhall be rent &, and his head bare /, and he ſhall pur a 
covering upon his upper lip 2, and ſhall cry, Unclean, 
unclean ». 

t To wit, in the upper and former Parts, which were maſt vi- 
ſible This was done partly as a token of Sorrow, Ezra: g. 3, 5. 
706. 2. 12. becauſe tho this was not a Sin, yet it was aneffett of Sin, 
and 2 fore Puniſhment, whereby he was cut off both from Con- 
verſe with Men, and from the enjoyment of God in his Ordinan- 
ces; partly as a warning to others to keep at a due diſtance from 
him whereſ-ever he came; and partly, as ſome add, that it might 
conduce to his Cure by giving the freer vent to the ill Humors. 
But the expoſing ofthe affe&ed Part to the cold, would rather hin- 
der than further Evaporation. ! Anotherſign of Mourning, as ap- 
pears from Levir. 10. 6. God would have Men tho not overwhelm- 
ed with, yet deeply ſenſible of his Judgments. m Partly as another 
badge of his Sorrow and Shame, as Ezek. 24. 17, 22» Micah 3.7. and 
partly for the preſervation of others from his infeQtious Breath or 
Touch. » As begging the Pity and Prayers of others, and confeſ- 
ſing his own Infirmity, and cautioning thoſe who came near him, 
to keep at a diſtance from him. | 2 

46 All the days wherein the plague ſhal bein him, he 
ſhall be defiled, he is unclean, he ſhall dwell alone, o* 


without the camp pſhal his habitation be: 

o Partly fr his Humiliation ; partly to prevent the Infe&tion of 
others;and partly to ſhew the danger of converſe with ſpiritual Le- 
pers.0r notorious Sinners. This rule excludes the Society of ſound 
Perſons, but not of Lepers. Sec 2 Kings 15. 5. 2 Chron.26. 21. pSo 
Numb. 12.14. and afterward without Cities and Places of great 
Concourſe, whereof we have Examples, 2 Kings 7.3. Luke 17. 12. 

47 < The garment alſo that che piague of leproſy 
isin q, whether it be a woolen garment, or alinen gar- 


ment 

q Leproſy in garments and Houſes is unknown in theſe Times 
and Places, whichis not ſtrange, there being ſome Diſeaſes or Di- 
ſtempers peculiar to ſome Ages and Countries, as the Learned 
have noted. And that ſuch a thing was among the Fews, cannor 
reaſonably be Youbred ; for, if Moſes had been a Deceiver, as ſome 
have impudently affirmed, a man of his Wiſdom would not have 
expoſed himſelf to the disbelief and contempt of his People by gi- 
ving Laws about that which their experience ſhewed tro be but a 
Figion. r Theſe two ſorts are put by a Synecdoche for any other 


Garments. 1 . 
48 Whether it be in the warp, or woof « of linen or 


- of woolen, whether in a skin, or in any | thing made of 


Heb. 


p———_y 


| + Heb. skin: 
work of. 5 Alcarned Man renders it in the outſide or in the mide of it. Tf the 
Signification of theſe words,be doubtful or unknown now,as ſome 
of thoſe of the living Creatures and preciousStones are confeſſed to 
be, itis not material to us, this Law being aboliſhed; it ſufficeth 
that the Jews underſtood theſe things by frequent experience. 

49 And if the plague be greenifh or reddiſh in the gar- 
ment, or in the skin, either in the warp, orin the 
woof, or in any thing of skin, it « a plague of lepro- 

| FHeb. fh (> d : oft 
* weſeter in. 1, 20d forall be ſhewed unto the prieſt. 
firument, © $© And the prieſt ſhall Jook upon the plague,and ſhut 


up it that hath the plague, ſeven days. 

51 And he ſhall look on the plague on the ſeventh 
_ day: if the plague be ſpread in the garment, cither in 
the warp, or in the woof, orina skin, sr in any work 
that is made of a skin, the plague is a fretting leproſy, 


it is unclean. 


LEVITICUS. 


52 He ſhall therefore burn that garment, whether | 


warp, or woof, in woollen, or in linen,or any thing of 
kin, wherein the plague 5s: for it ;sa fretting leproſy, 
it ſhall be burnt in the fire. 

53 And ifthe prieft ſhall look,and behold, the plague 


be not ſpread in the garment, either in the warp, or 


in the woof, or inany thing of skin : 

54 Then the prieſt ſhall command that they waſh the 
thing wherein the plague is, and he ſhall ſhut it up {e- 
ven days more. | 

55 And the prieſt ſhall look on the plague after that 
it was waſhed: and behold,if the plague havenot chang- 
ed his colour z, and the plague be not ſpread, it is un- 
cle2n, thou ſhalt burn it in the fires itis fret inward, 
whether it be + bare within, or without #. _ + Heb. 

* Tf waſhing doth not take away that vicious Colour, and re- whethc; :7 
ſtore it toits own native Colour. u» In the outfice of che Garment, be bald in 
which is here called the Forehead or Foreſide,as being moſt viſible, the head 
or 1n the inſide of it. Some of the Jewith Dottors underitood it thereof, 
thus, whether the Garment was made thread-bare by the Leproſy, or in th? 
or by former wearing of it. forehead 

56 Andif the prieft look, and behold, the plague be #hereef. 
ſomewhat dark after the waſhing of it, then he ſhall 
rend it out of the grament, or out of the skin, or out of 
the warp, or out of the woof; 

57 Andifit appear ſtill in the garment, either in the 
warp, or inthe woof, or in any thing of skin, it 5s a 
ſpreading plague,thou ſhaltburn that wherein the plague 
is, with fire. | 

58 Andthe garment, either warp, or woof, or what- 
ſoever thing of skin it be, which thou (halt walh, if the 
plague be departed from them, then it shall bes washed 
the ſecond time, and ſhah be clean. 

59 This is the law of the plague of leproſy, in a gar- 
ment oz woollen, or linen, either i» the warp,or woof 
or any thing of skins, to pronounce itclean, orto pro- 
nounce it unclean. 


CHA ÞP. XIV. 


Rites and Sacrifices for the cleanſiug of a Leper ; the Leproſte beings beal, 
and judged ſo by the Prieſts, who going 4 the : 6-7 muſt Sts = 
living clean birds, &c. The manner of it : One to be /lain, the other to 
be let looſe, x — 9g. On the eight day two male Iambs and one ewe-lamb 
and mear-offering, 10 —— 20: If poor, ' 21 = 32, Of the Leproſie of 
houſes how to be known, 33z— 48. The manner of cleanſmng them,qg==5 3 
A repetition of this and the former Chapter, 54 57. ; 

| © apa LORD ſpake unto Moles, ſaying, 

4 2 This hall be the law of the leperin the day of 

1s cleanſing © he * shall be brought unto the prieſt a, 
A Not into the Prieſts Houſe, but tro ſome place without the 24, M 

Camp or City, Levzt. 13. 46. which the Prieſt ſhall appoint, -y wi 

3 And the prieſt shall go forth out of rhe camp, and "wu F 

the pricſt shall look, and behold, ;f the plague Of lepro- 12,14: 

{y be heaied b in theleper, and 17.14, 
b To wit, by God. Fer God alone did heal or cleanſe him re- 

ally, the Prieſt only miniſterially and d:claratively, as Miniſters 

are ſaid to remit fins, though it be granted that none can truly and 

properly forgive ſins but God, Mark 2.7. | 

- 4 Then 5$hall che prielt command to take for him 

that 1s to be cleanſed, two F birds c alive, and clean 4 

and * Cedar-wood e, and ſcarlet f, and hy flop g ? TOr, ſpar- 
c The one to repreſent Chriſt as dying for his ſins, the other to * N. 

rereſent him as riſing again for his Purification or Juſtification w_ 

a Allowed for food and for Sacrifice. e A ftick of Cedar,to which STO 

the Hyſop and one of the Birds was tied by the ſcarlet threed ma 

Cedar ſeems tro be choſen, to note that the Leper was now freed 

from that Putrifa&tion,or Corruption which his Leprofie had 

brought upon him. that kind of wood being in a manner jncorruy- 
tible. fA threed of wool of a ſcarlet colour, Heb: 9: 19. to re - 
ſent both the Lepers ſinfulneſc, Iſa: x. 18. and the Blood of Chiift 
and the happy change of the Lepers Colour and Complexion, 
which before was wan and Joathſome, now ſp:ightly and beautify]. 

Ancona _ for - fragrant ſmell, which fignified the Cure of 
e Lepers11l ſce a "WE 

mn pe anyone? geen partly tor conveniency in the uſe of ſprink- 

5 And the prieſt ſhall command that one of the birds 

be killed þ in an earthen veſſ1,over + running water z. + Feb. 7; 
h To wit, by ſome other man. The Prieſt did not kill ir hem ey * = 

ſelf, becauſe it was not properly a Sacrifice, as being killed with- G = 

out the Camp, and not in. that place to which all ſacrifices were 7 

confined; and if it had been a Sacrifice, that mishrbe killed b _ 
another, ſo long as the ſprinkling of the blood of it, which ys 

the moſt proper and effential'a& in the Sacrifice, was done by the 

Prieſt. ; It ſeems to be a Metatheſis or tranſplacing of words, for 

over-ruming water put in an earthra veſſel, Thus the blood of the 

bird and the water were mixed together, partly for the convenj- 

ency of ſprinkling, and partly to ſignifie Chriſt, who came by wa- 

ter and blood. T John 6. 6. The running water, 2. e, ſprins ras onal 

word A = SG NY did fitly ſignifie the reſtoring of 

ine e Leper, w I i . 
nag _ © was 1N a manner dead with his lepro- 


6 As for theliving bird he $hall take it. and th 
dar-wood, and theſcarlet, and the A" bay wi 9 


* Matf, 8. 


'dipthem, andthe living bird in the blood of the bird 


that was killed over the running water, 
7 And he 5$hall ſprinkle upon him that is to be 
cleanſed from the leproſy, ſeven times &, and 5hatl 


Pro- 


_ Chap. XIV, | J 


——_— — 


D ye 


"i 
29 


Chap. XIV: 


_ 


pronounce him _— 

\ 4. + into the open field -. 8: | 

F ny ; k To enifie his pe:fe& cleanſing and reſtoration to all his for- 
on 7727 | + us 

of the field. mer priviledges. 


and ſhal let the living bird looſe 


reſtraint which was laid vpon the Leper, and the libe:ry which 
the Leper now had to rerutn £0 his former habjtation and converſa- 
tion with corher MEN. | ; 

3 41d he that is to be cleanſed,fhal waſh his clothes, 
and ſbave off all his hair », and wath himſelf in water, 
thathe may be clean: And afcer that he ſhall come in- 

* Numb. to the camp, and ſhal * tarry abroad out of his tent » 
12.159 fcvendays. ; 

» Paitly to diſcover his perfe& ſoundneſs; partly to preſerve 
him from Tclapſe through any ſeeds or relits ofit which might re- 
main in his hair or in his clothes; and partly toteach him to put 
off his old luſts, and become a new man. 7 Our of his former habi- 
ration, in ſome ſeparate place, leſt ſome of his leproſy yet lurking 
in him ſhould break forth tothe infe&tion of his family. 

9 Bur it ſhal be on the ſeventh day,chat he (hal ſhave 
all his hair e off his head, and his beard, and his eye- 
brows, even all his hairhe (bal ſhave off: And he hal 
waſh his clethes, alſo he ſhal waſh his fleſh in water, 
and he ſhal be clean. 

0 Which began to grow again fince it was firſt ſhaved, and now 
for more caution is ſhaved again. 

ro And on the cight day he ſhal take two he-lambs 
without blemiſh,&one ewe-lamb of + the firlt year with- 
out blemilh, and three tenth deals of fine flower for * a 
meat- offering mangled with oylp, and one log q of oy]. 

p Oylis added here asa fit ſign of Gods graceand mercy, and 
of the lepers healing. q A meaſure for liquid things containing 
ſix eggſhells full. _ . 

11 And the prieſt that maketh him clean r, ſhal pre- 
ſent the man that is to be made clean, and thoſe things 
before the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of 
the congregation * 

r The healing is aſcribed to God, wer. 13. but the ceremonial 
cleanting or making of him clean and ht for ſociety was an at of 
the Pricit uſing the Rites which God had preſcribed, whereby the 
ſinner was cleanſed. ; 

12 And the prieſt ſhall take one he-lamb,and offerhim 
for a treſpaſs-offering s, and the log of oyl, and * wave 
them fora wave-ofering, before the LORD. 

s To teach them, that fin was the cauſe of leprofſy,and ofall diſ- 
eaſes, and that theſe ceremonial Obſervations had a further mean- 
ing, even to make them ſenſible of their ſpiritual diſeaſes, their 
ſins, and to fly to God in Chriſt for the cure of them. 

12 And he ſhalflayche lamb in * the place where he 
ſhal kill the fin-offering, and the burnt-offering, ir the 
holy places; for * as the ſin-ofering & the prieſts, fo 
is the treſpaſs-offering : it is * molt holy «» 

24. : To wit, in the Court of the Tabernacle. See Levit: 1:11: and 


7:7: u Both of them arc equally holy, and therefore to be offered 
in the ſame place. 


14 And the prieſt ſhal take ſome of the blood of the 
treſpaſs- offering, and the pricſt hall pur iz upon * the rip 
> © of the right ear of him that is to be cieanſed, and 
:9. upon the thumb of his right hand x, and upon che great 


+ Heb. 
daughter of 
her year: 

* Chap. 


3. I. 


. 29: toe of his right foot Ye 


:23 wx To ſignifie, that he was now free to hear God's word in the 
appointed places, y from which he was before excluded, and to 
touch any perſon or thing without defiling it, and to go whither 
he pleaſcd, 

:5 And the prieſt ſhall take ſore of the log of oyl z. 
and pour zt into the palm of his own left hand. 
z As the %/ad fignified Chriſt's Blood by which men obtain re- 


miſſion of ſins, ſo the Oyl notcd the graces of the ſpirit by which 
they are regenerated and renewed. 


16 And the prieſt ſhal dip his right-hnger in the oyl 
that is in his left hand, ard (hal ſprinkle of the oyl with 
his finger ſeven times before the LORD «©. 


a( 7.e. ) Before the ſecond vail which covered the Holy of Ho- 
lies, where God is oft ſaid to dwell, and to be preſent in a peculi- 
ar manners 


17 And of the reſt of the oyl that 3s in his hand, ſhall 
the prieſt put upon the tip of the right ear of him that 
is to be cleanſed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, 
and upon the great toe of his right foot,uponthe blood 
of the treſpaſs-offering b. 

b (7.e.) Upon the place of that blood, as ir is expreſſed, werſe 
28. or where that blood was put, verſe 14 Or, over and beiides rhe 


m_ &c, 1i:e: Asthe Blood was put in thoſe places, ſo ſhall the 
oy1 be. 


18 And the remnant of the oyl that zs in the prieſts 
hand, he ſba}l pour upon the head of himthat is to be 
cleanſed: and the prieſt ſhal make an atonement for 
him before rhe LORD. 

19 AnGthe prieſt ſhal offer * the ſin-ff.ving. and make 
an attonement for him that is to he cleanſed fromhis 
uncleanneſls, & afterward he ſhal kill the burnt-offering 
DS 00 Andcthe prieſt (hal offer the burnt-offering, and 
mw; - the meat-0otkring, upon the altar : and the priett ſhal! 
+ Heb: for Make an atonement for him, and he ſhal be clean. 
Waving. 21 And * ithe be poor, and + cannot getſo much | 


* Chap: 5: 
J* 


"chap: 5:7: 
t Heb: his 


EE87Y 171m 


Compare Levit: 4.17 and 7: I5, 16. and 10 18. | 
19. | The place of its former abode, ſignifying the taking off that | 


- . Chap. & 
then he ſhal take one lamb for a treſpaſs-effering F to be 
waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth= 
deal of fine flour mingled with oyl, for a meat-offering, 
and a log of oyl, # I | 

22 And two turtle doves.or two young pigeons, fuch 
as he is able toget: andthe one ſhall be'a ſin-offering, 
and the other a burnt-offtering, gs 

23 And he ſhall-bring chem on the eighth day for his 
cleanſing unto the prieſt, unto the door of the taberna- 
cle of thecongregation before the LORD, | 

24 And the prieft thal take the lamb of the treſpaſs- 
offering, and the log of oyl, and the prieſt {bal wave . _ 
them for a wave-offering before the LORD. . | 

25 Andheſhal kill the lambof che treſpaſs-offering, 
and the prieſt ſhal take ſome of the blood of the treſpaſs- 
offering,and put it upon the tip ofthe right ear of him that 
15 to be peph ar = 4 and upon the thumb of his right hand, 
and upon the great toe of his right foot. 

26 And the prieſt (hal pour of the oyl into the palm 
of his own left hand. 

27 Andthe prieſt ſhall ſprinkle with his right finger 
ſome of the oyl that is inhis left hand,ſeven times before 
the LORD: | 

28 And the prieſt (bal put of the-oyl that 5s in his 
hand, upon the tip of the right ear of him that is tobe 
cleanſed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and u- 
pon the great toe of his righe foot, upon the place of 
the blood of the treſpaſs-ffering. JOYS 

29 Andthe reſt of the oyl that 7s in the prieſts hand, 
he ſhal put upon the head of him that is to be cleanſed, | 
to make an atonement for him before the LORD. _ 

30 Andhe ſhall offer the one of the turtle doves, or | 
of the young pigeons, ſuch as he can get: 

31 Even ſuch ashe is able to get,the one for a ſin-offe- 
ring, and the other for a burnt-offering,with the meat-of- 
ferins. And the prieſt ſhal make an atonement for him 
that 1s to be cleanſed, before the LORD. | 

32 Thiss thelaw of him in whom is theplague of 
leproſie, whoſe hand is. not able to get that which per- 
eaineth to his cleanſing, - 

; 23 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes,and unto Aaron 
aying, | 

24 When ye be come into the land of Canaan which 
I give to you. for a poſſeflion; andT put the plague 
of leproly in a houſe of the land of your poſſeflion : 

35 And he that oweth the houſe ſhall come and tell 
the prieſt, ſaying, It ſeemeth to me, rhere 5s as it were _ «. .. 
a plague inthe houſe ; | [ Or,on# 

36 Then the prieſt ſhal command that they c||empty ROE: 
the houſe before the prieſt go into it, to ſee the plague 
that all that is in the houſe be notmade unclean 4: and 
afterward the prieſt ſhal go into ſee the houſe, 

c (4. e. ) The Poſſefſours of th: houſe. 2 it is obſervable here; 
that neither rhe people nor the houſhold ſtuffe were polluted till 
the leprofie was diſcovered and declared by the Prieſt,ro ſhew what 


great difference God makes bet een ſins of ignorance, and fins a- 
gainſt Knowledge and Conſcience. | 


37 And he jhal look on the plague : and behold if 
the plague be in the walls of the houſe e, with hollow 
{trakes f, greeniſh or reddiſh, which in ſight are lower 
than the wall : 


e This was an extraordinary judgment - of God peculiar to this 
people, either as a puniſhment oftheir ſins, which were much more 
ſinful and inexcuſable than the fins of other Nations : or as a ſpe- 
cia] mean and help to repentance, which God afforded ro ther a-- 
bove other people ; or as a document of the miſchievous nature of 
ſin, typified by leproſy, which did nor only deſtroy perſons, 'but 


their habitaticns alſo : ſee Zech: 5:4. f Such as were in the bodies 
of leprous perſons, Levit 13. 3. 


338 Thenthe prieſt ſhall go out of the houſe to the 
door of the houſe, and {bur up the houſe ſeven days. 

29 And the prieſt ſhall come again the ſeventh day, 
and (hal look: andbehold, zf the plague be fpread in 
the walls of the houſe, 

40 Then the prieſt ſhal command that they take a 
way the ſtones in which the plague 5s, and they ſhall caſt 
them into an unclean place g without the city. 

g Where they uſed to caſt dirt and filthy things. ST 

41 And he ſhall c2uſe the houſe to be {craped within 
round about, and they ſhal-pour outthe duſt þ that they 
{crape off, without the City into an unclean place. 

hþ The Mortar or other Rubbiſh. 

42 And they ſhall take other ſtones, and pur chem in 
the place of thoſe ſtones, and he ſhall take other mor- 
cer, and fhal plaiſter the houſe. 

43 Anc if the plague come again, and break out in 
che houſe, afrer that he hath taken away the ſtones,and 
afrer he hath ſcraped the houſle,and after ic isplaiſtered : 

44 Then the prieſt {hall 5 and look, and behold 

2 


} 
3 


if 


har. XV. | EI IT IC © >» Chap. XV. Ch: 
B'S. . | Re . _ 4 he that hath an iſſue toucheth another with unwaſhen hands. Thus | 
if the plague be {| read _ the houſe, it is a fretting le moſt take it. But why then ſhould it be limited to his hands ? for 
proly in the houſe: it is unclean, if he had touched him by any other part, as ſuppoſe by kiſſing him, 
45 And'he ſhal break down the honſe, the ſtones of | jc had defiled him, though his hands had been waſhed. Or rather, 
ir, and the timber thereof, andall the morter of the | >: Of the perſon touched to whom the waſhing of his hands is pre- 


: -. 3 | ſcribed as an eafier way of cleanſing himſelf, if ſpeedily uſed, but 
houſe " and he {ball car ry them forch out of the _ if that was negle&ed or delayed, a more laborious courſe was en- 


to an unclean place. ; joyned him. And thus the Syriack Interpreter underſtands it. 
46: Moreover, he that goeth into the houſe, all the | *,, And the * veſſel of earth that he toucheth which , Chap.s. 

while that itis fbuc up, ſbal be unclean until the even. hath the iſſue, ſhal be broken : and every veſlel of wood 

47 And hethat leth in the houſe,fhal waſh his clothes: | th4jl be eked Ion wetiair. gp NY 
and he that eateth in the houſe,ſbal wash his clothes» : I2 And when he that hath an 1llue T cleanſed of his 
Heb. #n 48 And if the prieſt F qa boy or: wo - iſſue f, then * he ſhall number to himſelf ſeven days * Chap. 
mine i= and behold, the plague hat os fe. 1N tne NOUIE,At- for his cleanſing g, and walh his clothes, and bathe his 14- 10. 
comein ter the houſe was plaiſtred, + then the prieft ſhall pro- |feſh in running water, and ſhall beclean þ, 


nounce the houſe clean, becauſe the plague is healed. f When his ifſuc is not only ſtopped in part or for a ſeaſon, but 
49 And he lthal take to cleanſe the houſe, two birds, | hath wholly ceaſed. g To wit, for the uſe of the Ceremonies pre- 

and cedar-wood, 'and ſcarlet, and hyſop. ſcribed in ſuch caſes. See Numb. 19.11, 12. hi.e. Admitted to 
_ 3 3 


converſe with men, and with God in publick ordinances. 

14 And on the eighth day he ſhal take to him * two * Chap. 
turtle doves, or two young pigeons, and come before 14: 22- 
the LORD unto the door of the tabernacle of the con - 
2regation, and give them unto the prieſt, 

I5 And the prieſt ſhall offer them, the one for a ſin- 


'5o And he ſhal kill the one of the birds in theearthen 
veſſel, over running water. 

51 And heſhal take the cedar-wood, and the hyſop, 
and the ſcarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in 
the blood of theſlain bird, andinthe running water,and 


ſprinkle the houſe ſeven times FEA b Fe l 
| 1e . = þ g, and the other fer a burnt-offering,and the prieſt 
52 And he ſhal cleanſe the houſe with the blood of | q..11 7! an atonement for him 5 
the bird, and with the running water, and with the li- | &. 1-977 + before the LORD, 
ving bird, and with the cedar-wood,and with the hyſop, | 3; Nor as if this was in it ſelfa ſin, butonly a puniſhment of ſin; 
and with the ſcarlet. : though oft-times it was ſinful as being a fruit of a mans intempe- 
'53 And he hal let gothe living bird out of the city | rance, and po" ii Juſt, See Levit: 14. 12. 
into the open fields, and mike an atonement for the | . 16 And if * any mans ſeed of copulation go out from * Dent. 
houſe.: and it (ball be clean. _— k, —__ {ball waſh all his fleſh in water, and be 23: 19- 
4 This is the law for all manner of plague of leproy | £2&!can until the oven. 
* Chap. fe 1 s. ok ſcatl, | PIAg P k Not through weakneſs of the parts, as that wer: 3. but-in his 


03. 30. | : ſleep, which is called nightly pollurion, which theugh invol 
, 55 And for the leproſie ofa garment,and of an houſe, mightariſe from ſome luſtful Dream or bation: Burif © 5 


F6 And for ariſing, and for a {cab, and for a bright voluntary, and by a mans own procurement when awake, it was | 
ſpot ; 6 eſteemed abominable, and a degree of murder. See Gen: 38. g. 
+ Heb. in | 57 To teach ; + when 3t is unclean, and when #t is 7 And every garment, and every skin whereon « 
tbeday of Clean: this z the law of leprofie. the ſeed of copulation ſhall be waſhed with water, and 
theunclean, + To Gire& the Prieſt when to pronouncea perſon or houſe clean be unclean until the even. 
and in the or unclean. So it was not left to the Prieſts power or will, but 18 The woman alſo with whom man / ſhall lie with 
dey of the wy —_—_ rules, ſuch as the people might diſcern no | ſeeq of copulation, they Shal borh bathe themſelves in wa- 
CHAP, XV: Rb 
; . 2 , The man, to wit, that had ſuch an iſſue, which is plain! 

n—_ wh ark {ner _— _—_— te Of I 1 ——_ RT = be pears out of _ whole context.- For though 4 rand 

ſes ordinarily, 19 24. Extraordinary, 25 —— 28. Their Expia- pecial caſes relating to the worſhip of God, men were to forbear 


: $ E? e the uſe of the marriage-bed, as Exod: 19. 15. and x Sam: 
tion. 29, 30. An Exhortation to cleanneſs, leſt they die, and that they 2 "—_ M: 2I. 4. yet 
pollute = the robarm acle, 31. A repetitionof the whale. 32, 33. toalfirm that the uſe of it in other caſes did generally defile the 


, 1 erſons, and make them-unclean till even, is 
AMP the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, BING: of Scripture, which affirms the = ning ors A bs OS 
2 Speak unto the children of Ifrael, and ſay un- | Heb. 13. 4+ to the praQtice of the Fews, which is a good comment *Ch 
*Num. Tothem, * When any man hatha T running iſſue out of | upon their orkgs ark andto the light of nature and reaſon, 2, 
PE his fleſh ., becauſe of his iſſue he is unclean. 19 And* if a woman have an iſſue, and her iflue in * Chap 
Or, rm. »@ His ſecret parts, called fb. Levit: 6: 10. and 12. 3. Ezek. 16. her flesh be blood mm, she shal be 7 puta part » ſeven 12. 2. * 
ming of the 26, and 23." 20. 2 = 2N days 0 : and whoſoever p toucheth her, shall beunclean t Heb: * Ex 
reins, 3: And this ſhal be his uncleanneſs in his iſſue : whe- | untill the even. tn berſe. 4h 
ther his fleſh run with his ilue, or his fleſh be {topped m Heb. And a woman when ſhe ſhall have an iſſue of blood, ( and be« paration, - 4 
from his iſſue b, it 5s his uncleanneſs. cauſe thar might bear her noſe or other parts, he adds ) and her we 
b Orif it have run, and been ſtopped in great meaſure, either | [#2 ſhall be in her fleſh, 7. e. in her ſecret parts, as the word feſp is 1Ki 
by the groſineſsof the humour,or by ſome obitruQton in parts that Faken, ver: 2. So 1t notes her monthly diſeaſe. » Not out of the I2 
it cannot run freely, as it did, but only droppeth. camp, as the Lepers and ſome others, but from converſe with her 


4 Every bed whereon he liech, that hath the iſiue is Husband and others, andfrom acceſs to the houſe of God. o For 


h | ſomerimes it continues ſo long, and it was but decent to allow 
+ Heb, unclean: andevery f thing c whereon he ſitteth, ſhall {£5 purification after the ceaſin s of bur ue” + To On 
weſſel. be unclean. grown perſons. For the infant, to whom in that caſe ſhe might 
c Heb.veſe, by which the Hebrews underſtand all forts of houſ- give ſuck, was exempted from this pollution by the greater law of 


hold-tuf. necefſity,and by that antecedent law which required ; 
5 And whoſoever toucheth his bed (hal waſh his fuck to their own children, - ono ow 
clothes, and bathe hiwſe/f in water, and be unclean un- | 20 And every thing that ſhe lieth upon in her ſepa 
till the even, ration {hall be unclean: every thine alſo t : 
6 And he that ſitteth on any thing whereon he ſate upon {hall be unclean. 7 : bat ſhe ſitteth 
that hath the iſſue; ſhal wafh his clothes,and bathe him- 21 And whoſoever toucheth hee bed. ſhall waſh his 
ſelf in water, and be unclean until the even. clothes, and bathe bimſelf in water, and be unclean un- ® ch 


7 And he that toucheth the fleſh 4 of him that hath | il the even. 
the iſſue, (bal waſh his clothes, and bathe hbimſe/fin wa- : 
ter, and be unclean until the even. 22 And whoſoever toucheth any thing that ſhe ſate 


4 Thar is, any part of his body : the word fſþ being taken.o- | *P >n,(hall waſh his clothes, and bathe bimſelf in water 
therwiſe her than v. 2. As the {ame word is frequently uſed in | and be unclean until the even. 
Scripture in differing ſignifications in the ſame chapter, and ſome- 


times in the ſame verſe, as Marth.8. 22. 23And if it be On. her bed, or ON any thing whereon ſhe *Exo 
8 And if hethat haththe iſſue ſpit upon him that is | fire<th, when he toucheth ir, he ſhall be unclean un- 39, 4 

clean, then he thal waſh hisclothes,and bathe bimſelfin | 41 the even. 

water, and be unclean until the even. 24 And if any man lie with her at all, and her flow- Ka 


9 And what {addle ſoever he rideth upon that hath | ers be upon him, he ſhall be unclean ſeven days qz and 
the iſſue, ſhall be unclean. : all the bed whereon he lieth ſhall be unclean. 

io And whoſoever toucheth any thing that was under q If he did this unwittingly ; but if the Man and Woman did | 
him, ſhal be unclean untilthe even: and he that bear- | his knowingly, this was a groſs ſin, Ezek. 18. 6, and they being | 
eth any of thoſe things, ſhal waſh his clothes, and baths accuſed and convicted were puniſhed with death, Lovit: 20. 18. 


o id . fo th 1 1 1 4 . . 
himſelf in water, and be unclean until the even. cial anon oo OG "ans. Ro 
. 5 : bl niy C - 
11 4nd whomſoever he toucheth that hath the iſſue, | prous, or otherwiſe diſordered ; which was alſo an iy —_ 


( and hath not rinſed his hands in water) e, he ſhall | Common-wealth of 1/rae, and redounded to the diſhonour of Go | 
waſh his clothes, and bathe bimſelf in water, and be and of the true Religion, that the profeſſors thereof gave ſuch pub- | 
unclean untill the even. lick evidence of their intemperance. : 5 

e This may be underſtoed, cither 2, Of the perſon touching, if 25 And 8a woman have agillue of her blood many 


days 


O 


Chap. XVI: | 
days out of the time of her ſeparation, or if it run be-' 
ond the time of her ſeparationr,all the days of the iſlue 
of her uncleanneſs ſhall be as the days of her ſeparation: 
ſhe ſball be unclean» | | 
» To wit, the ſeven days mentioned, Zevit. 12: 2. as ſuppoſe ſhe 


had the Emerods, &c. : 
; 26 Every bed whereon ſhe lieth all the days of her 


ifſue, ſbal be unto heras the bed of her ſeparation : and 
whatſoever ſhe fitteth upon ſhal be unclean, as the un- 
1 neſs of her ſeparation. 

= And whelbercy tcoucheth thoſe things ſbal be un- 
clean, and ſhal waſh his clothes, and bathe himſelf in 
water, and be unclean until the even. 

28 But if ſhe becleanſed of her iſſue, then ſhe ſhal 
number to her ſelf ſeven days 5, and after that ſhe ſhal 
be cleans 


s From the topping of her iſſue, as it is apparent. And this was 
for trial, whether it was only a temporary obſtrution, or a real 


ceſſation. 


29 Andon the eighth day ſhe ſbal take unto her two 
turtles, or twO young pigeons, and bring themunto the 
prieft, to thedoor of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

20 And the prieſt ſhal offer the one for a 1in-offering, 
andthe other for a burnt-offering, and the prielt ſhal 
make an atonement for her before the LORD, for the 
iſſue of her uncleannels. 

31 Thus ſhal ye ſeparate the children of Ifrael from 
their uncleanneſs,that they die not in their uncleanneſs, 
when they. defile my tabernacle z, that is among them. 

# Which they did both ceremonially, by coming into it in their 


uncleanneſs, and morally by the groſs negle& and contempt of 
Gcds expreſs and poſitive command to cleanſe themſelves. 


32 This is the law of him that hath an ilſue, and of 
him whoſe ſeed goeth from him,and is defiled therewith. 
23 And of her that is ſick of her flowers, and of him 
that hath an iſſue, of che man and of the woman, aid 
of him that lieth with her which is unclean. 
CHAP. XVL 


Aaron not permitted at all times to go into the holy of holies, 12, 2. He is 
commanded to + make a general Expiation, and wherewith, 3-==5. He- 
Goats, the one for Sacrifice, the other to eſcape, 6---8. The manner of 
offering, 9---14. and miniftring the Sacrifice, 15---19. The Scape- 
Goat, with the ſins of the People laid on his head, ſent into the wilder- 
neſs, 20-23. After which Aaron, and he who let go the Goat, and he 
who burnt the Sacrifice without the Camp,muft waſh themſelves, 24--28. 
This day of Expiation, which was on the tenth Day of the ſeventh Month, 
zo be a ſolemn Faft, and Sabbath of Reft, and they cleanſed from all their 

ſins, 29=--34- 

- ) Kg the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, after * the death 

Chap.10. of the two ſons ef Aaron, when they offered 

” before the LORD and died. 

2 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Speak unto 4aron 

*Fxod. thy brother, that he * come not at all times @ into the 

30. 10, holy place|| within the vail b, before: the mercy-ſear, 

Heb. 9. 7. which 7s upon the ark, that he die not c : for * I will 


_ ' appear4 inthe cloud e by the mercy-ſeat. 
p40 g, # Not whenſoever he pleaſcrh,but only whenT ſhall appoint him, 


to wit, to take down the parts and furniture of it upon every re- 


I2, 


demonſtrate, which is ſometimes called only the holy place, as Heb. 
9. 2, 3. the poſitive degree put for the comparative, which is not 
unuſual in Scripture. 6 To wit, the ſecond vail. See Lewit. 4. 6. 
c For hisirreverence and pteſumption. 4 Viſibly and glorioully : 
That is as it were my preſence-chamber, whither the prieſt ſhall 
not dare to come but when I call him. e Either in that dark place, 
for there was no light came into it,, and clouds and darkneſs go to- 
gether, and one may be put for the other : orina bright and glo- 
rious cloud which uſed to be over the mercy-ſeat, or rather in the 
cloud of incenſe mentioned afterward wer. 13. 
3 Thus f ſhal Aaron come into the holy place, with 
*ch. 4.3- * a young bullock g for a lin-offering bh, and a ram for a 
burnt-offering. 

F In this manner or upon theſe terms. g ( 7. e.) with the blood 
of it,as it 1s explained ver. 14. So it is 'a Synecdoche, the whole put 
for the part. For as for the body of it,that was to be killed and of- 
fered without upon the Altar of burnt-ofterings. þ For his own and 
families ſins, for a goat was offered for the ſins of the people. 


*Fxod.23. 4 He tbail put onthe * holy linen coat z, and he ſhall 

39, 43- have the linen breeches upon his fleſh, and ſhall be gird- 

ed with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre {hall he 

I be attired. Theſe are holy garments & : therefore*(hall 
0. 20, 


he waſh his fleſh in water, and /o put them on. 

7 It is obſervable that the High-prieſt did not now uſe his peculiar 
and glorious robes, but only his linen garments, which were com- 
mon'to him with the ordinary prieſts. The reaſon whereof was, 
either becauſe this was not a day of feaſting and rejoycing, but of 
mourning and humiliation, at which times people were to lay alide 
their ornaments, Ezod. 33. 5, Some conceive, that under the linen 
garments here named are comprehended his more glorious robes 
alſo by a Synecdoche, Butthat dorh not appear neither from hence, 
nor from other places alledged. Had only his holy garments been 
mentioned in general, all might have been underſtood, but when 
only the linen apparel is mentioned here and after wer. 23. and 
when that is ſo particularly expreſſed in four ſeveral parts of it, 
and not a word of the other either here or in the reſt of the chapter, 


__ 


{8 


LEYVITIC i 


moval, and to miniſter unto me once in the year, Exod.z0.10. ||. e. 
into the moſt holy, or the holy of holies ; as the following words | 


% 


Chap. XV1, | 
it ſeems preſumptuous to add them here without any ground 6r e- 
vidence. Or becauſe it was fit he ſhould nor exalt but abaſe him- 
ſelf, when he wasto appear before the divine Majeſty,and therefore . _ , | 
he was to come in the meaneſt of his Prieſtly habits: Or that ir 
might be an evidence of the imperfeCticn of this Prieſthood, and 
of the great difference between the Levitical, and the true High- 
Prieſt Chriſt Jeſus, whoſe prerogative alone it is to go into the true 
Holy of Holies with his glorious robes, when this muſt carry thiz 
ther the chara&ers of his meanneſs & Becauſe appropriated to an 
holy and religious uſe, for which reaſon other things are called ho- 
ly. See Exod. 29. 31. and 3o. 25. and 2 Chron, 5. 5. 

5 And he ſhal take of the congregation of the chil- 
dren of Iſrael two kids of-the goats for a fin-Fering,and 
one ram for a burnt-offering, 4 

6 AndAaronſhal offer his bullock of the fin- ofering, | 
which 7s for himſelf, and make * an atonement for him- * pre, g.\ 
ſelf, and for his houſe /, | 7. | 

[ (7.e.) His family, as Ger. 7. 1. to wit, thePricits and Levites. | 
See Numb. 1. 49: | 

7 And he ſhal take the two goats, and preſent them 
before the LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the 
Congregation. 

8 And Aaron ſhal caft lots upon the two goats: one , 7. ; 


lot for the LORD m1, and the other lot for the + ſcape- TI 
goat. 


m For the Lord's uſe and ſervice by way of ſacrifice. Both this 
and the other Goat typified Chriſt ; this in his death and paſſion 
for us; that in his Reſurre&ion for our deliverance. 

9 And Aaron ſhal bring the goat upon which the 
LORDS lot + fell », and offer him for a ſin-offerizvg. + Heb: 

2 So the lot is ſaid to fall, Jonah 1: 7. AG: 1. 26. Heb. went up, went up; 
to wit, out of the veſle], into which the lots were put, and out of 
which they were brought up. 

10 Þur the goat on which the lot fell to be the ſcape- 
goat, ſhal be preſented alive before the LORD,co make 
an atonement with him o, and to let him go for a ſcapes 
goat into the wilderneſs. 

o In mannerhereafrer expreſſed, wer. 2r, 22. 

11 And Aaron ſhal bring the bullock p of the ſin-of- 
feriug which is for himſelf, and ſhal make an aronement 
forhimſelf, and for his houſe, and bbal kill the bullock 
of the ſin-offering which 3s for himſelf. 

þ Mentioned in general wer. 6. The ceremonies whereof are 
here particularly deſcribed. This was a differing bullock or heifer 
from that Numb. 19. as appears by comparing the places. ; 

12 And he $haltake a cenſer full of burning coals of 
fire from off the altar q before the LORD, and his hands 
ful! of ſweet incenſe r beaten ſmall, and bring i: within 
che vail s. 

q Towit,of burnt-offering, where the fire was always burning, 
and whence fire was taken for ſuch uſes 2s theſe. r Of which ſee 
Exod. 30. 34, 35, 38. 5 (71.e. ) Into the Holy of holies, wer. 2. > 

13 And he $hal put the incenſe upon the fire : be- 
fore the LORD, that the cloud of the incenſe may cos» 
ver the mercy-ſeat that js upon the teſtimony, that he 
die not s, 

t Which wasin the cenſer, wer. 12. # For ſo groſs an errour 
committed in the higheſt a&s of worſhip, and that by an High- 
Prieſt, whoſe knowledge and funftion was a great aggravation to 


his ſin» 


14 And * he ſhal take of the blood of the bullock, 
and * ſprinkle i: with his finger upon the mercy-ſear x 
eaſtward y : and before the mercy-ſeat z ſhal he ſorin- 
kle of the blood with his finger ſeven times. 

x To teach us that God is mercitul to ſinners only through and 
for the blood of Chriſt. y (z. &. ) With his face caſt-ward, or upon 
the eaſtern part of it, towards the people, 'who we:e in the cou:r 
which lay caſt-ward from the Holy of holies, which was the moſt 
weſtern part ofthe Tabernacle. This ſignified that the High-prieſt 
in this at repreſented the people, and that God accepted it on their 
behalf. z On the ground. 


15 Then ſhal he kill - the goat of the ſin- offering that 
is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, 
and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the 
bullock, and ſprinkle it upon the taercy-ſeat, and bes 
fore the mercy-ſeat, Lt 

2 Either this was done before he entred into the Holy of holies, 
though ir be mentioned after, fuch cranſ-placings of pailages being 
not unuſual : or ratherhe went out of the Holy of holies, and kil- 
led it, and then returned thither agaire with its blood, and this 2- 
grees beſt with the text, nor are tranſpoſitions to be allowed withe 
our neceſſity. And whereas the High-prieſt is ſaid to be allowed 
to enterinto that place but once in a year, that is to be underſtood, 
but one day ina year, though there ſeems to have been occaſion 
of going inand coming out more than once upon that day. 


16 And he thal make an atonement for the holy 
place b, becauſe of the uncleannefles of the chiidren of 
{ſrael c, and becauſe of their tranſgreflions in all their 
ſins : and ſo ſhal he do for the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation that + remaineth among them, 'in the midlt of , ,, 4 


their uncleannefs 4. dudlah, 
b Of which ſee below wer. 19, to. and Exod. 29. 36. Lev, 8. 

15. Heb. 9. 13. c For though the people did not enter into that 

place, yet their ſins entred thirher, and would hinder the ef- 

te&s of the High-prieſts mediation on their behalf, if God was nor 


* Heb. 9. | 
13. and  } 
19. 4. 
, che 4 6, 


U 3 reconciled 


Chap. XVI. - ITC: - 
WR m.. a Eneompaſſed with their ſins, being in the 
wer 1 | Spratt who file not themſelves only, but alſo 


San&uary, as God complains, Exzek: 23:38, 39. 
—_ wo And there ſhall be no man in the tabernacle | 


of the congregation e when he goeth in to make an a- 
tonement in the holy place, until he comeour, and have 
made an atonement for himſelf, and for his houſhold, 


or all the congregation of Iſrael. 
__ e. ) In the CESS. wher? the Prieſts and Levites were at 


imes. This was commanded for the greater reverence to 

rey Serv Majeſty than in a more ſpecial manner appearing, and 

that none of them might caſt an eye into the Holy of holie, asthe 
High-prieſt went in or came our. : 

8 And he thal go our unto the altar f thatis before 

the LORD, and make an atonement for it, and (hal 

take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the 


goat,and put it upon the horns of the aitar rour:d about 

f To wit, the altar of incenſe, where the blood of ſacrifices was 
to be put, Lev, 4. 4. and particula'ly the blood of the ſin-offerings 
offered upon thi+ day of aton -ment, Exod. 35. .0.and whichis mot! 


erly ſaid to be before the Lora, 1. e. befo.e the place 
TT bs Gpecial manner dwelt, to it, the Holy of _ 
Some underſtand it of the altar of burnt-offcrings, becauſe he 1s fai 
togoout to it. But that gong out relates not to the Tabeinacl?, bur 
to the Holy of holies, into which he was ſaid to go ix, v. 17. Add 
to this, that this altar which is atoned-by the High-prieſt ſeems to 
be in that place where he only might now come, and therefore in 
the Holy place, called heie ze Tabernacle, from which all other 
prieſts were for this day excluded, wh-1eas the altar of burnt-offer- 
ings was without the Holy place or Tabernacle, to witatthe doer 
| of it and in the court of the Prieſts. 


19 And he tal {pitokie of the blood upon it with: 
his finger ſeven times g, and cleanſe it, and hallow it 
from the uncleanneſles of the mm of _ : 

ifie 1 rfe& cleanſing, ſeven being a number of per- 
| fic perk. reconciliation by the blood of Chriſt he: e 


ſented. 111 
{5,052 We when he hath made an end of reconciling 


the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, 
and the altar, he ſbalbring the live goat : 

21 And Aaron ſhallay both his hands & upon the head 
of che live goat, and confeſs over him # all the iniqui- 
ties of the children of Iſrael, and all their tranſgreſfions 
| in all their ſins &, putting them upon the head / of the 
| +Heb & goat, and ſhal ſend him away by the hand of | a fit man 
man of op= m3 into the wilderneſs ». : 
| <Portunity. h See on Exod. 29.710. and Lev. 1.4. T. Confeſſion of fin being 
a duty to accompany the ſacrifice offered for it, as we ſee Lev. 5. 5. 
Numb. 5. 7. k Or, with or accoraing to all their ſins : for ſo the Hebrew 
particle is oft uſed. He mentions iniquities, tranſgreſſions, and ſms, to 
note ſins of all ſorts, and that a very fice and full confciſion wa- to 
be made, and that the ſmaileſt ſins needed, and the greateſt fins 


were not excluded from, the benefit of Chriſts death here rep-eſent- 
ed. I Charging all their fins and the puniſhment due to them upon 


* Luk. r. 


T0, 
+; Heb. of 
- mneeting. 


co Gods appointmeiit,-nd manifeſtly pointing at* hriſt upon whom 
their iniquities and puniſhments were laid, 1s. 53.5, 6 it was a- 
vailable for this end. And hence the heathens rook their cuſtom 
of ſelefting one beaſt or man, upon whom they Jaid all their im- 
precations and curſes, and whom they killed as an expiatory ſacri- 


I > ir ruine. # One that knows 
fice for their ſins, and to prevent their r 


the wilderneſs, and the way to it, and what places in it are moſt 


that uſe. Heb. 2 man of time, 7 e. of years of diſcre- 
ESE crates with this work. = Which ſignified the re- 
moval! of their ſins far a- ay both from the people, ans our of Gods 
ſight,or from the place of his preſence. And here the goat being ne- 
gleQed by all men,and expoſed to many hardſhips and hazards from 
wild beats which were numerous there, might further ſignifie 
Chrifts being forſaken both by God ani by men, even by his own 
diſciples,and the many dangers and ſufferings he underwent. The 
Jews write,that this goat was carried to the mountain called Hazel, 
whence the g-at is ſo called, v 10. and that there he was caſt down 
headlong,and that the red ſtring by which he wasled turned white, 
when God was pleaſed with the 1raelires,otherwiſe it remained red: 
and then they mourned all rhat year. And the ancient Hebrews write 
that 45years before the deftruQtion of the Temple, which was about 
the time of Chriſts death, this red ſtring turned no more white. ; 
-22 And the goat (bal bear upon him all their iniqui- 


ties unto a land + not inhabited : and he ſhallet go the 
of goat in the wilderneſs. ; 
\ 23 And Aaron ſhal come » into the tabernacle of the 
ngregation, and ſhalpur oft the linen garments which 
h& put on, when he went into the holy place, and ſhal 
leave them there. | 
oForthwith, not expeEing the return of the man who carried 
the goat aay, but ſecurely committing that to Gods providence 
he ſhall go on in his work. . } 
: "4 And he ſhall waſh his fleſh with water in the holy 
lace p.and put on his garments q,and come forth,and of- 
fer his burat-offering,&the burnt-offering of the people, 
and make an atonement for himſelf, and for the people. 
Either in the laver appointed for that purpoſe,Or,in ſome other 
veſſel within the holy place,becauſe after he had waſhed in it he is 
* Faid to comeforth. q Not his ordinary Prieſtly linen garments, for 


+ Heb. 
' ſeparatio 


SEFITICOS. 


the goar, which though only a ceremon, , yet being done according 


he was to Jzave them in the Tabernacle,v. 23. but the High-prieſtly 
garments, called his garments properly and peculiarly, and by way 
of diſtin&tion from the former garments,which are called holy gar- 
ments, ©. 4+ and the linen garments, v. 23. but never his garments, as 
theſe are. And this change of his garments was not without cauſe. 
For the common Prieſtly garments were more proper and fit for / 


him in the former part of his miniſtration, both becauſe he was to 
appear before the Lord in the moſt holy place ro humble himſelf 
and make atonement for his own and for the peoples ſins,and there 
fore his humbieſt and meaneſt attire was molt fit, and becauſe he 
wastolay his hands upon that goat on which all their {ins were pur, 
by which touch both he and his garments would be in ſome ſort de- 
filed,and therefore as weread here that he waſhed himſelf or ki: fefb, 
ſo we may well preſume his linen garments were laid by for the 
waſhing,as the cloaths of him who carried away the ſcape-goat were 
wajbed, v. 26. And the High-prieſtly garments were moſt proper 
for the latter part of his work, which was of another nature. 


the altar. I 


26 And he that let go the goat for a ſcape-goat, ſhal 
walk 7 his clothes, and bathe his fleſh in water, and af- 
terward come into the camp. 

x Becauſe he had contrafted ſome degree of ceremonial unclean- 
neſs by the touch of the goar. 


27 * And the bullock Þ fer the ſin-ofering, and the , 


Skins, and their fleſh, and their dung. IT. 


28 And he that burneth them ſhal waſh his clothes, 
ind bath his fleſh in water, and afterward he ſhal come 
into the camp. 

29 And this ſhal be a ftatute for ever s unto you, rhat 


month, ye ſhall affli your ſouls x, and do no work at 27: 
a.l, whether it be one ot your own country, or a ſtranger | _ 
chat ſojourneth among you. 

5 See on Exod. 12.14. t Anſwering part to our September and part 
to our Offover ; when they had gathered in all their fruits,and were 
moſt at leiſurefor Gods ſervice : This time God choſe for this and 
other feaſts, herein graciouſly condeſcending to mens neceſſities 
and conveniencies, being contented with that time which men 
could beſt ſpare. u Obj. It was on the ninth day, Lev. 23. 32. Anſ. 
It began in the even ng of the ninth day, and continued till the 
evening of the tenth day, as is there ſufficiently implied. x 7. e. 
Your ſelves, a+ the word ſoul is frequently uſed, both your bodies 
by abſtinence from food and other delights, and you: minds by 
anguiſh and grief for former ſins, which though bicter, yer is - vo- 
luntarily in all true penitents; who are therefore here ſaid not to 
be afflicted, but to afflitt themſelves, or to be aQtivein the work. 

30 For on chat day thal he prief make an atonement 
for you. to cleanſe you, that ye may be clean from all 
your ſins before the LORD. 

21 Itſhal/bea ſabbath of reſt y unto you, and ye ſhal 
afflit your ſouls by a ſtatute for ever; 

3 Obſerved as a ſibbarh-day by ceſſation from all worldly and ſer- 
vile works,and diligent attendance upon Gods worthip and ſervice, 

32 * And the prieſt whem he ſhal anoint z,and whom 
he ſhal + conſecrate to miniſter in the prieſts office in My 
his fathers ſtead, ſhal make the atonement, and ſhal put + H 
on the linen clothes, even the holy garments. 

& He,7.e. either God,who commanded him to be anointed,asmen 
are oft {aid ro do what others do by their command, or the High- 
prieit, who nas to anoint his ſucceſſor. Or, the third perſon is 
here pur indefinitely or imperſonally, for, who ſhall be anointed. 

33 And he ihal make an atonement for the holy ſan- 
ctuary, and hethal make an atonement for the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, and for the altar : and he 
{hal make an atonement for the prieſts, and for all the 
people of the congregations 

34 And this ſhal be an everlaſting ſtatute unto you, 
to make an atonement for the chiidren of 1ſrael forall 


encir fins * once a year. And he did as the LORD « 


Sacrifices to be offered only in the temple, 1--6, and not to devils, 7. on 
pain of death, 8, 9. blood not tobe eat : on the ſame pain : the life be. 
ng inthe blood, and it given for an atonement, 10-14. nor any beaft 
that died of it ſelf, or was torn by beaſts, 15. ? 

N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2 Speak unto Aaron, and unto his ſons, and unto 

all the children of Iſrael, and ſay unto them, This ;s 

the thing which the LORD hath commanded, ſaying, 

3 Whatman ſoever 7here be of the houſe of Iſrael that 
killeth 2 an oxe, orlamb, or goat inthe camp 6b, or that 
killeth ir, our of the camp, 

a Not for common uſe or eating, for ſuch beaſts mj ght be killed 
by any perſonor in any place,burt for ſacritice,as manteſtly appears 
both from v. 4. where that is expreſſed, and from the reaſon of this 
law, which is peculiar to ſacrifices v. 5. and from Deut. bHL2,09,27. 
b In Canaan, the city anſwered to the camp, andſo it forbids any 
mans doing this either in the city or in the country, 

4 And bringeth it not unto the door of the taberna- 

cle c of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the 

LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD, blood ſhal 

be imputed unto that man 4 he hath ſhed blood, and 

that man ſhal be cur off from among his people e: 

c This was appointed, partly in oppoſition to the heathens, who 
ſacrificed in all places ; partly tocut off occaſions of Idolatry;part- 
Iy to prevent the peoples uſurpation of the Prieſts office; and part- 
ly to fignifie, that God would accept of no ſacrifices but-through 
Chritt 


commanded Moſes. 2g 
| * CHAP. XVIL H.. 


Chap. XVI: 


25 4nd the * fat of the ſin-effering (hal he burn upon * chap, 4: 


. hap: 4 
goat || for the ſin-offering, whole blood was brought in Ga _—_ 
to make atonement in the holy place, ſhal ene carry forth 6: ;o. 


without the camp, and they {hal burn in the fire their Heb: 3: 


7 Heb. of. | 
[| Heb. of, 


mb: 
7To 


F chap: 4 


, 16, 
eb. fil 


las hand. 


14K age o 


| 


* inthe ſeventh month ?, on the tenth dey « of the * chap:2;; | 


—_— A rr CC 


_ IS 


"77 ap. X VI. 


): 4 


ad. 


I nent Perm nng, es ——_— —— 


EI II 


Chriſt and in the Church ; ( of both which the Tabernacle was a 

See Heb: g: 11: ) andaccordingto his own preſcript. But 
though men were tyed to this Law, God was free to diſpenſe with 
hisown Law,which he did ſometimes to the Prophets,as 1 $am:7:9: 
und 11: 15, ©c.and afterwards more fully and generally in the days 
of rhe M:/iab,Mal:1:1 1: Joh:4:21,24. 4 He ſhall be eſteemed and pu- 
aiſhed asa murderer both by God and by men. See J/a: 66:3. The 
reaſon is,becauſe he ſhed rhat blood, which,though nor mans blood, 
yet was as precious,being ſacred and appropriated to God, and ty- 
pically the price by which mens lives were ranſomed. _e By death, 
either bv the hand of God, in caſe men do not know it or neglect 
to puniſh it, or by men, if the fact was publick and evident. 

5 To che end that the children of 1irael may bring 
their ſacrifices, which they f ofter in the open field, 
even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto 
tae door of the tabernacle of the congregation unto the 
prielt, and ofler them for peace-ofterings g unto the 
LORD. Ds 

F Either 1 the Egyptians and other 1dolatrous nations,which com- 
monly ſacrificed to Idols or Devilsin fields orany places : who are 
{ nothere named bur may be deſigned by the Particle they, in way of 
contemprt,as if they were not worthy to be named,as that Particle 15 
uſed, Luk:14:24:and 19: 27:70þ:7:11:and 8:10. Or rather, 2. the Iſfrac- 
lites now mentioned, and plainly underſtood in the following they, 
who, before the building of the Tabernacle, took the ſame liberty 
herein which the Gentiles did, from which they are now reſtrained. 
s He nameth theſe not excluſively to others, as appears from the 
reaſon of the law,and from v:8,9:but eſpecially,becaulſe in theſe the 
temptation was more common in regard of their frequency, and 
more powerful,becauſe part of theſe belonged to the of.erer,and the 
pretence was more plautible, becauſe their ſanctity was ſomething 
ofa lower degree than-others,theſe being only called holy,andallow- 
ed'in part to the people, when the other are called mo? holy, and 
were wholly approp-1atcd cither to God, or to the Prieſts. 

© And the prielts thal ſprinkle the blood b upon the 

altar of the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the 


congregation, and burn the fatfor a * ſweet ſavour un. 


type, 


*Ex09.29. | l 
18. ch. 4+ 0,0 tie LORD. ; 
31. h This verſe contains a reaſ.n of the foregoing Jaw, becauſe of 


Gods propricty in the blood and far, wherewith alſo God was well 
pleaſed, and the people reconciled. And theſe ewo parts only are 
mentioned, as the moſt eminent, and peculiar, though other parts 
alſo were reſerved for God. ; ; 

- And they thal no more offer their ſacrifices unro 


deviis z, after whom they have gonea whoring &: This 


— — \fſhai bea ſtatute for ever unto them throughout their ge- | 


Nerations. : 

i So they did, not direftly or intentionally, but by conftruftion 
and conſequence, becauſe the Devil is the author of Idolatry,and is 
eminently ſerved, plealed and honoured by it And as the Ezyptians 
were notorious for thei: Idolatry, as appears by the teſtimony of 
Scripture, and of a'] antient Writers, ſo the Iſraelites were infe&ed 
with their leaven 70:24:14: Ezek 20:7: and :3. 2,3. And the name of 
Devils is commonly given in Scripture to Idols, yea even to thoſe 
which ſeemed mo!t innoc-nt, as to feroboams Ca'ves, 2 Chron:11:15. 
by which he and the people defigned and profeſſed to worſhip the 
true God,as is manifeit from the nature of the thing, and from ma- 
ny places of Scripture, and the worſhippers of Idols are eſteemed 
and called worſhippers of Devils. See Dent:32:17: Pſal:106:37: 1 Cor: 
19: 20: Rev: 9: 20. The Hebrew word rendred Devils ſignihes goats, 
either becauſe goats were eminently worſhipped by the Egyptians, 
as Heroaotus, Strabo, and others note, and divers of the Idols of the 
Heathens were of that or a like form ; or becauſe the Devil did ofr 
appear to the Heathens in that ſhape, as their own authors note. k 
For Idolatry, eſpecially in Gods people, is commonly called whore- 
dom, as Ezek: 16: 16, 26: and 23: 8, 19, 21, Oc. and that juſtly, be- 
cauſe it is a violation ofthat Covenant by which they were pecu- 
liarly betrothed or married to God. See Hol. 2. 17, 18, 19. 

s And thou ibair {:y unto them, Whatſoever man there 
be of the houſe of Iirael,or of the ſtrangers which ſojourn 
among you, that oftereth a burnt-offering, or ſacrifice, 

9 And bringeth it nor unto the door of the taberna- 
cle of the congregation, to offer it unto the LORD, 
even that man (hal becut off from among his people. 


ana 6 * 4nd whatſoever man there be of the houſe of 1{- 


I5. 23 

yi . I (i:e: ) T will be anenemyto him, and execute vengeanceupon 
33. Ezek, him immediately; becauſe ſuch perſons probably would 1o this in 
44. 7. private, fo as the Magiſtrat could not know nor puniſh it. See 
Fer. 44. this or the like Ph:aſe, Lev: 20:3: and 26: 17. Jer: 3: 12. Ezek.14.8 


11 For the þ life of the fleſh 2 is in the blood », and 
ave given it to you upon the altarto make an atone- 
ment for your ſouls : for ic it the blood that maketh an 
atonement for the ſoul 0. 

m (i: e: Of living creatures, » (7: e: ) It depends upon the 
blood, is preſerved and nourithed by it, an4 is extinguiſhed when 
the blood is gone. And this law was given to the jews, and hard- 
hearted people, as they are oft ſaid ro be, thar by this reſtrainr 
from the blood of brute crearures they might be « rought to the 
greater abhorrency of taking away the life of a man. o Typically, 
and 1n reſpe&t of the blood of Chriſt which it repreſented, by 
which the atonement is really made, Heb: 9: 12. So the reaſon is 
double ;' 1 becauſe rhis was the caring up of the price or ranſom 
of their own lives, which in con” ruction was the deſtroying of 
themſelves. 2 becauſe this was ingiatitude and irreverence to- 
wards that ſacred blood of Chriſt which they ought to have in con- 
tinual veneration. 


Ir. 
i Heb. ſoul, Ih 


- 


LEVITICUS. 


| 


'T am the LORD. 


Chap. XVIIE 

12 Therefore I ſaid unto the children of Iſrael, No 
ſoul of you ſhal eat blood, neither ſhal any ſtranger 
that ſojourneth among you eat blood. 

13 And whatſoever man there be of the children of 
Ifrael, or of the ſtrangers that ſojourn _— you, F +17ch. 144 
which * hunteth and catcheth any beaſt p or fowl that hurerh any 
may be eaten, he ſhal even pour out the blood thereof, hunring. 
and cover it with duſt 9. *, Chap.7. 

2 He inſtancerh in this kind, cither becauſe perſons much given 0. 
to that exerciſe are commonly too licentious, and being in haſte 
might eaſily tranſgreſs, or becauſe ſome might think the former 
prohibition did only reach to the blood of ſuch creatures as were 
offered to God in ſacrifice- q Partly to beget an honourable reſpe& 
unto the blood even of beaſts, and much more of men; partly leſt 
the beaſts ſhould lick it up, and by taſting the ſweerneſs of it be 
made more fierce and cruel to devour and deſtroy others; and 
partly asa licence from God upon this condition giving them a 
right to kill and eat ſuch creatures, without any fear of the blood 
being imputed to them ; for as the not-covering of the blood por- 
tends the puniſhment which the ſin of blood-ſhedding calls for, 
Job 16: 18: Exck: 24: 7, 8. ſo covering it notes impunity. 

14 * Fort js the | life of all fleſh ; the blood of it is ; | 
for the Þ life thereof : therefore I ſaid unto the chii- om 
dren of Ifrael, Ye ſhal eat the blood of no manner of + Heb./ſoul | 
fleſh : for the Þ life of all fleſh is the blood thereof: + Heb.ſoul. 
whoſoever eateth it, ſhal be cut off. 


15 * Andevery ſoul that eateth r # * that which di- *Exod.22- 
ed of it ſelf, or that which was torn with beafts, ( whe- 31. Ezck- 
ther it beone of your own country, or a ſtranger 5) he 42. 3% 
thal both waſh his clothes,” and bathe himſelf in water, re ? 


and be unclean until the even ; then ſhal he be clean. * chap.24. 

r To wit, through ignorance or inadvertency, as appears by the 8. 
fleighrneſs of the punithmenr; for if it was done knowingly,it was 
a preſumptuous fin againſt an expreſs law here, and Deut: 14: 21: 
and therefore more ſeverely punithed. 5s Underſtand of the Proſe- 
lyres, either of the Proſelytes of the gate, who were obliged ro 
obſerve the precepts of Noah, whereof this was one, or of the 
Proſelytes ofrighteouſneſs, or converts to the Jewith Religion: for 
other itrangers wereallowed roeat ſuch things, Deut. 14. 21. 

16 ÞBut if he wath <exs not, nor bache his fieib,then 

he ſhal bear bis iniquicy r. 

t (7:e: ) The puniſhment of it, and therefore muſt offer a ſacri- 
fice for'it. See Levit: 5; 1, 2, Oc. and 7, 18. 

CHAP. XVIIL 

Iſraelites not to live after the Cufloms of the Egyptians or Canaanites, but 

according to Goas Inſtitutions, 1-=5, To abſtain from Incefluous Marria- 

ges, 6--18., And Copulation with a menitrous Woman, 19. And Adul- 

tery, 20. And offering Children to Moloch, 21. And all uniatural Co- 

pulation with Man or Beaft, 22, 23. Theſe things the Nations do : and 

the Land is defiled, and God is provoked : and they who do thoſe things 

fhall die: but God was their Lord, 24-30. 


A N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and ſay un- 
to them, I am the LORD your God s. 

a Your Soveraign, and Law-giver, * This is oft repeated here, 
becauſe the things here forbidden were praiſed and allowed by 
the Gentiles, to whoſe cuſtom he here oppoſgh Divine authority; 
and their obligation roobey his commands. 

3 After the doings of the land of Egypt b wherein ye 
dwelt, thal ye not do ; and after the doings of the land 
of Canaan b whither I bring you, ſhal ye not do: nei- 


therſhal ye walk in their ordinances c. 

b Theſe t'vo nations he mentions, becauſe their habitation and 
converſation among them made their evil example in the following 
matters more dangerous. But under them he includes all other na- 
tions, as h- elſewhere expreſleth ir. c Or ffatures, either becauſe 
their laws did indeed allow ſuch things, or becauſe prevailing cu- 
ſtoms have the force of laws. 

4 Ye jhal do my judgments, d and keep mine ordi- 
nances, to walk therein: I am the LORD your God. 
 d@ Mine univerſally, Deut.27.26.Gal.3.10. for though the vvords be 
indefinite, the matter is neceſſary, and mine ſolely, Dent. 6. 13. 
compared with Mat. 4. 10. and therefore thoſe thar here follovv, 
though you do nor ſee the particular reaſon of ſome of them, and 
though they be contrary tothe lavvs and uſages of the nations. 

5 Ye thal therefore keep my ſtatutes, and miy judg= 
ments ; * which if a man do, he ſhal live in them e z * 

* Ezck.200 
11, 3h. 
Luk. 10. - 
28. Rom, 


IO. 5s. 
Gal.3.124 


e Nor only happily here, but alſoeternally hereafter, as it is ex- 
pounded, Mar. 19. 17. Rom. 10.5. This is addedas a povverful ar- 
gument vvhy they ſhould follovy Gods commands, rather than 
mens examples, becaule their life and happinefs depends upon the 
one, not the other. And though in ſrif&neſs, and according to the 
lavy or covenant of vvorks they could-not challenge life for doing, 
except their obedience vvas univerſal, perfe&, conſtant and perpe- 
tual, and therefore no man fince the fall could be juſtified c the 
lavv, as the apoſtlesattirms an proves, Rom: 4: and Gal: 3: yet by 
the covenant of Grace. this life 1s promiſed to all that obey Geds 
commands fincerely, though not perfe&ly, 1 7m. 4. 8. | 


6 None f of you ſhal approach g to any that is | + Heb. #6 
near of kin tohim, þ to uncover their nakedneſs i: I am mainder of 
the LORD. his fleſh. 

f Heb. Noman.For though the Womenalſo be bound by this lavy, 


yetthe menaloneare mentioned, borh becauſe they are molt aftive 
12 the choice of their Yoke-fellovv<, and therefore moſt likely to 
tranſgreſs theſe lavvs, and becauſe they having authority over the. 
Women could have the greater influence upon them by theirpovver, 
counſel, or example, to oblige them either to the obſervation or 
violation of them. g This vyord ſignifies the conjugal aft here, or 

U +4 iT 


2p. XVIIE. 4 


jt doth Gen: 20. 4. 1/a: 8:3. but becauſe it is atnbignous in it felf,it 
3s ſo limited &. explained in the end of the verſe. þ This is the ge- 
neral rule, which is particularly expounded and applyed in the fol- 
towing inſtances. And theſe Laws are ſo juſt and reaſonable, thar 
although the barbarous nations did allow of ſuch inceſtuous marria- 
ges, yet wiſer and civil heathens by the meer light of yature con- 
demned them, as may be ſeen in Szetonius, Tacitus, Catullus, & others. 
5 (5.e: ) Theirſecrer parts, fo called to put us in mind of the fall of 
our firſt Parents,whote firſt ſence and ſhame of their nakedneſs had 
3ts riſe from thence. This phraſe notes the ſame thing with know- 
ing, Gen: 4. 1. and with diſcovering oness&irr, Deut: 22. 30. and 27-20. 

7 The nakedneſs of thy father, or & the nakednels of 
thy mother, ſhalt thou not uncover: ſhe is thy mother, 


] thou ſ{ha!r not uncover her nackedneſs. 

k Heb. and, pur for that is, or to wit, as it is oft uſed. Here it 
notes, that the nakedneſs of the father, and the nakedneſs of the mother are 
one and the ſame thing, becauſe they two are one Fleſh, and there- 
fore her nakedneſsis his alſo. Which further appears becauſe the 
morher only is mentioned in the following words, which contain 
the reaſon of the law. 1 And therefore even natu:e teacherth thee 
to abhor ſuch inceſt. Yet the Perſian: uſed to marry their morher ; 
theiein worte than the very Camels, whom no force will drive to 
that aC&t with their dams. | 

hap.20. 8 * The nakedneſs of thy fathers wife m ſhalt thou 


-Deut. not uncover: it is thy fathers nakedneſs ». 

30: m (i:e: ) Thy Step-mother. Examplesof this are Gen: 35. 22. 
7-209- and 49: 4+ 1 Cor: 5. 1. » By intereſt and relation; that whica he 
NOS 2.7- only may uncover. 

ns 5 F * The nakedneſs of thy ſiſter o, the daughter of thy 
>: >$am. father p, os daughter of thy mother , whether ſhe be 
3-12. bornathome 9, or born abroad r, even their naked- 


zek.22. neſs thou ſhalt not uncover. 

To o By both Parents. p Thy ſiſter by either of thy parents. q To 
wit, of thy father by another wife, whom he hath taken into his 
houſe. r Either of thy mother, by another, wherher a former, or 
a ſecond Husband, in another Houſe and Family ; or, of thy fa- 
ther by you ſtrange woman : for there might be ſome doubr in 
theſe caſes. 

10 The nakedneſs of thy ſons daughter, or of thy 
daughters daughter s,ever their nakedneſs thou thalt not 
uncover : for theirs is thine own nakedneſs t. 

s And conſequently of all thy Children and childrens children, 
and all downwards. # They are a part of thy ſelf as coming out 
of thy loins, and out of thy wife, whoſe nakednefſs is thine own. 

11 The nakedneſs of thy fathers wives daughter, be- 
gotten of thy father «, ( {bs is thy ſiſter) thou ſhalt not 


uncover her nakedneſs. 

# Or,being a kin to thy father. He ſeems to ſpeak of the daughter of 
the fathers brother by his wife, whom the father here ſpoken of, 
being brother to the deceaſed perſon, married by vertue of that 
Law, Devt: 25. 5. by which marriage there was a near kindred 
contracted between the two Families, ſo that the Son of the one 
could not marry the daughter of the other: Thus this Law 1s dif- 
fering from that ver. 9g. And that ſeems more probable, than that 
in ſo brief a Table of Laws the ſame thing ſhould be forbidden both 

; there and here. Obj. The word being the ſame here and wer.g. 
muſt be underſtood in the ſame ſenſe, and therefore here muſt be 
rendred begotten or born, as it is there. 4}. It may be rend:ed there 
as well as here, "akin, as ſome render the words there, of domeſtick, or 
ofanorther, a foreign Madred : and if the word had been participially 
pur for begotten or born, it is likely the prepoſition Mem or Lamed 
would have been prefixed to the Hebrew word, abicha, as is com- 
mon in thoſe caſes. | 

12 * Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneſs of thy fa- 


x thers ſiſter x: $he 5s thy fathers Þ near kinſwoman y. 
fejb. Gen. , * Thy Aunt by the fathers ſide, as the- next verſe ſpeaks of the 
37-27: Aunt by the mothers ſide. If Amrams example be alledged to the 
. contrary, ſee on Exed. 6. 20: y Heb. thy fathers fleſh, a member and 
' produt of the ſame fleſh from which thy father came. 

E.. « 13 Thoushalr not uncover the nakedneſs of thy mo- 
#1eb-#eſs- thers ſiſter ; for she is chy mothers | near kin{woman, 
*Chap.20. - 14 * Thou halt notuncover the nakednels of thy fa- 
"Hh thers brother z, thoushalt not approach to his wife: she 


is thineauntT. 

z (i: e.) Of his wife, as the next words explain it. And asa man 
may not marry his aunt, ſo neither may a woman marry her uncle, 
theie being alrogether the ſame diſtance in kindred, 2nd the ſelt- 
ſame reaſon of the law. And for the examples of Abraham, Amram, 
Othoniel, &c. to the contrary, they were before the publication of 
this Law,by which it pleaſed God toreſtrain the liberty allowed for- 
merly when the holy ſeed was in a narrower compaſs, and fewer 
perſons, which altered the caſe. For in that regard there was a 
time when God allowed brethren and ſiſters to marry,to wit, when 
there were no other in the World, which was the caſe of Adams 
immediate children. We learn from hence, that the ſame degrees 
are forbidden in conſanguinity or kindred by Blood, and in afhnity 
or kindred by marriage. F Some infer from hence, that it is un- 
Jawful for Couſin-germans, or the children of brethren and ſiſters 
to marry. Bur there is not the ſame reaſon, nor the ſame degree 
of diſtance, for my uncle or aunt are nearer akin to me than their 
children are. Yet becauſe it ſeems doubtful to many, and may 
hereafrer ein occaſion of grievous perplexities of mind, eſpecial- 
ly to tender and ſcrupulous Conſciences, Chriſtian prudence di- 
res us to chuſe rhe ſafeſt way, there being ſo great a latitude of 
unqueſtionable perſons. 

15 * Thou halt not uncover the nakedneſs of thy 


danghter ia law : he is thy ſons wife, ' thou $halt nor 
22.11: Uncover her nakedneſs. 

*Chap.20z x6 *# Thou ſhalt not uncover the nakedneſs of thy 
21. "#: brothers wife & » it is thy brothers nakedneſs. 

a Neiths: in his life time, nor after his deatb, and therefore a 


"Chap. 20. 
12+ Ezck: 


$2 oY 


LEVITICUS. 


woman might not tharry her hnsbands brother, nor might a man 
marry his wives ſiſter, either before or after his wives death, for fo 
all the prohibitions are to be underſtood : which will give light to 
ver: 18. But God, who can undoubtedly diſpenſe with his own 
laws, did afterwards make one exception to this rule, of which ſee 
Deut. 25. 5. 

17 * Thou ſhalt not uncover the nakedneſs of a woe |, 
man and her daughter b, neither fhalt thou take her chap: 20; 
ſons daughter, or_her daughters daughter, to. uncover 
her nakedneſs : For they are her near kin{women ; it is 


wickedneſs c. 

b To vvit, thy ſtep-daughter, and ſo thy fep-ſons daughter,ec. 
c Becauſe they are very near to thy wife by conlanguinuy, as ca- 
ming direC&ly from her ; and therefore they are as near to thee by 
affinity, vvhich binds as much as conſanguinity ;*the wife, vvio 
is only related by affinity, being nearer to a man than any other by 
conſanguinity, they two being made one fleſh, and theretore the 
ſame diſtance 1s to be obſerved in both of them. 

18 Neither ſhalt theu take || a wife to her ſiſter d, 
to Vex her, to uncover hernakednels beſides the other, 
in her life time e. 

d The word ſifter is here underſtood either 1. properly, ſo ſome : 
whence others infer, that it is lawtul to marry ones waves ſiſter af- 
ter the wives death. Or 2. improperly for any other woman, as 
not only perſons, but things, of the tame kind are oft called, ſiſters 
and brethren, of which ſee plain examples, Exod:26:3: and 32:27,29: 
Ezek: 1: 9: and 3: 13: and 16: 45,48,49. SO the ſenſe is, thou ſhalt net 
take one woman to another. And this ſenſe may ſeem more probable, 7. 
becauſe elſe here were a tautology, the marriage of a man with his 
waves fifter being ſufficiently forbidden, wer. 16: where marriage 
with his brothers wife is forbidden, as alſo ver. 9. and 11. where 
he forbids the marriage of ones own ſiſter, and conſequently the 
marriage of ones wives ſiſter, it being manifeſt and confeiled that 
atfiniry and conſanguinity are of the lame conſideration and obli- 
gation in theſe matters. Nor can this be added f explication,for 
then the comment would be darker than the text, * nay it would 
deſtroy the text, for then what wasſimply and abſolutely and uni- 
verſally forbidden before,is here forbiddcn doubrfully and reitrain- 
edly, and might at leait ſeem to be allowed after the wives death; 
which 1s rejected by thoſe who own the former interpretation. 2. 
Becauſe the reaſon of this prohibition, which is leſt he ſhould vex 
her thereby, is much more proper and effe&ual againſt marrying 
any other woman than againſt marrying the wives tiſter,ſo near and 
dear a relation being moſt commonly and probably a means to in- 
duce them rather to love and pleaſe and ſerve, than to vex one a- 
nother in ſuch a relation And therefore to take hernatural ſiſter 
to vex her would ſeem a courſe unſuitable to his end or deſign. 3. 
Some add another reaſon, that Folygamy,which Chriſt condemns, 
Mat: 19: 5: 1s either forbidden here or no where in the law.But this 
may admit of great diſpute. And it is obſervable that Chriſt con- 
fures Polygamy and divorces, not by any of Agſes his laws (which 
probably he would not have omitted, -if they had been to his PUr- 
poſe) bur by the firſt inſtitution of marriage, Gen. 2. 23. whence al- 
1o Malachi ſeems to fetch his argument, chap.2.14,15. And that law 
Deut. 21. 15,16. may ſeem to intimat that God did then, in conſi- 
deration of the hard-heartedneſs of the Jewiſh N ation,diſpenſe with 
that firſt and primitive law eſpecially if we conſider the prattice of 
divers holy men amongſt the Jews, not only before the law, as 4- 
braham and acob,bur alſo after it, as Elkanah, and David,who wou!d 
never have livedin the violation of a known law, or, if they had 
would have been blamed for it, whereas on the contrary God men- 
tions it as one of his favours vouchſafed ro David, that he gave him 
his maſters wives into his boſom, 2 Sam. 12,8. and affirms, that David 
turned not afide from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his 
life, ſave only in the matters of Uriah, '1 King. 15. 5. Peradventure 
therefore it may deſerve ſome conſideration which a learned man 
in part ſuggeſts, that this Text doth notſimply forbid the ta- 
king of one wife to another, bur the doing of it in ſuch a manner 
or for ſuchan end, that he may vex or puniſh, or revenge himſelf 
of the former; which probably was a common motive amongſt thar 
hard-hearted people todo ſo, and therefore the forbicding hereof 
might give a great check to the praQtice of Polygamy amongſt them. 
e This clauſe 1s adced to ſignifie Gods allowanceto marry one wife 
after another, when ſhe 1s dead, and thereby to intimat how the 
word Siſter is to be underſtood. 


19 * Alſo thou S$halt not approach unto a woman f to 
uncover her nakedneſs, as long as she is put apart for , 
her uncleanneſs. 

fNonottothy own Wife. See chap.12.2. and 15.24,25. This was 
not only a ceremonial pollution,bur an immorality alſo,whence it 
is putamongſt groſs ſins,Ezek. 18.6. There isalſoanatural turpitude 
in this ation. And therefore it is now unlawful under the Goſpel. 

20 Moreover, * thou ſhalt nor lie carnally with thy + 
neighbours wife, to defile thy ſelf with her. . Exod: 

« I4: 

| 21 And thou ihaie not let any of thy ſeed * paſs chap: 20: 
through rhe fire gto * Moloch bh, neither ſhalt thou PrO- 10. 
phane thename of thy Godz ; I am the LORD. *chap: 20: 

g This wasdone two ways.either 1.By burning them in the fire, * 2108: 

of which ſee 2 King: 3: 27: 2 Chron: 28:3: Plal: 106: 37, 38: Iſa: 57: ly 23: 10, 
Or 2. By making them paſs between two great fires, which was a \Called. 
kind of luſtration or conlecration ofthem to that god. Which lat- 
ter ſeems to be here meant. See on Deut:18:10: where the word fre Moloch, 
here underſtood, is expreſſed. þ Or, Moloch ; called alſo Milcom. an 
Idol chiefly of the Ammonites, as appears from 1 King: 11: 7: 2 King: 
23: 13: Jer: 49: 1, 3. This ſeems to be the Saturn of the heathens. 
to whom eſpecially children and men were ſatrificed. This'is men. 
tioned, becauſe the neighbours of 1rae! were moſt infe&ed with this 
Idolatry, and therefore they are particularly cautioned againſt ir 
though under this one inſtance all other Idols and a&s, or kinds 
of Idolatry, are manifeſtly comprehended and forbidden. 7 Either 
by joining him with,or by forſaking him for,ſuch a baſe and bloo- 
dy Ido], whereby the name, honour, and ſervice of God would be 
horribly defiled, and expoſed to the ſcorn of the Heathen, as if he 

were but one ofthe fame kind with their mungrel-deities. 


22 * Thoy 


l Or, 07o 
wife t0 a. 
nother. 


Chap: 20: 
18: Ezek: 
22; Ii; 


Chap. XVII. « * | 


*Thap: | 
TI: 44. 

and 20: 7. 
IPet: 1:16 


* Exod: 


20: 12. 
*Exod: 8: 
and31:13: 


T7 chip. XIX. LEVI 
*;Cor:6: 2 # Thou ſhale not lie with mankind & as with wo- 
gi Tim: man kind t it #5 abomination. 


F 1. 19. þ See Levit:- 20: 13. I Kings 147 24. | 
*Chap:20 ,, * Neither ſhalt thou lie with any beaſt to defile 
. 7 L -- . 54 AP c a 
- _ thy ſelf therewith : neither ſhall any woman ſtand be 


fore beaſt to lie down thereto, it is confuſion}, 

1 Amr horrible confuſion of rhe natures which God hath diſtin- 
guiſhed, and of the order which God hath appointed, and an Overe 
throw of all bounds of Religion, Honeſty, Sobriety and Modcitys 

; 24 Defile nor ye your felves in any of theſe things : 
for in ail theſe m the nations are defiled, which I caſt 


our before. you. : EH 
m To wit, above-mentioned fins. Whence it is apparent, that 


the ſeveral inceſts here prohibited are not only againſt che potitive 
and particular Law given by God to the Jews, but alſo againſt the 
gencral Lat and Light of nature. And therefore the Law about 
theſe things was one of the ſeven Precepts of Noah. And the ſover 
Heathens condemned ſuch inceſtuous Marriages. The Roman Hilto- 
rians obſerve, that when Claudius the Emperor had married his 
Neice, (which is one of the loweſt kinds of incelt here mentioned ) 
and the Senate in complaiſance with him had made it Jawful for 
any to do ſo, ef there x but one, and he too an abſcure perſon, 
that follo»ed his example. | 

25 And the land is defiled : therefore I do viſit the 


iniquity thereof upon it,and the land it ſelf vomiteth out 


her inhabitants m. | 
12 I ana now viſiting, or about to viſit, 7, e. to puniſh. See Eſa: 


' , n 131 q I d 
WY} As no leſs burdens to the Earth than corrupted food is | 0 
26: 21. n Asn | the obtaining of ſome mercy deſired ; for the other ſort, which was 


to the tomach. See Fer: 9g: 16. Mich: 2: 19. 
26 * Ye ſhall therefore keep my ſtatutes and my 


judgments, and ſhall not commit any of theſe abomina- 
tions, neither any of your own nation, NOr ary ſtranger 


o that ſojourneth among you : 

o In Nation or Religion, of what kind ſoever. For though they 
might not force them to ſubmit ro their Religion, yet th:y might 
reſtrain them from the publick contempt of the Jewiſh Laws, and 
from the violation of natural Laws, which, beſides the offence 
aoainſt God and nature, were matters of evil example and conſe- 
quence to the I;raelites themſelves. - 

27 ( For all theſe abominations have the men of the 
land done,which were before you;and the land is defied.) 
28 That * the land ſpue nor you out alſo when ye 
defile it,as it ſpued out the nations that were before you. 

29 For whoſoever ſhall commic any of theſe abomi- 

nations, even the ſouls that commit hem (hall be cut 


off p, from among their people. _ | _ 
p To wit, by death to be inflicted by the Magiſtrates, as at is 


er:9:19: 
Ezek: 36: 
13, 17+ 


puniſhmenr, according to the differing natures of the offences for 
which it is inflicted. 


conmit not any ove of theſe abominable cuſtoms, whici 

were committed before you, and that ye defile not your 

{elves therein : I am the LORD your God. 
CHAP XIA. 


Iſraelites muſt be holy, 1, 2. mu$# honour their Parents, and keep Sabbaths, 
3. Shun Idolatry, 4. Duly to ſlay and eat their Peace-offerings, 5-----8. 
In harveft time, leave Gleanings for the poor and ſtranger, 9. 10. Not 
ſeal, deceive or lie, 11. Nor ſwear falſly, 12. Nor defraud,rob,or detain 
13. Nor curſe the deaf, nor put a Stumbling-block before the blind, 14. 
Nor judge unjuſtly, 15. Nor be Tale-bearers ; nor bear falſe witneſs againſt 
their Neighbour, 16. But rebuke their Brother for Sin, 17. Not revenge 
themſelves, but love their Neighbours, 18, Not to mix different things, 
19. The puniſhment of a man lying with a bond-maid, 20-----22, They 
muſt not eat of the fruits of Canaan till after four years, 23. To eat no 
blood : And uſe no Soothſaying, 26. Nor any heatheniſb method of Mour- 
ning, 28. Nor proſtitute their Daughtcrs, 29. But muſt reverence God and 
his Ordinances, 30. Not regard Gonjurers and Wizards, 31. Honour the 
Ancient, 32. Love and right Strangers, 33. 34. Do no Unrighteouſneſs, 
either in Judgment or Commerce, 35, 36. 
ND the LORD fpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2 Speak unto all the congregation of the chil- 
*Thap: , dren of Iſrael, and fay unto them, * ye ſhall be hoiy 
1: 44+ ator I the LORD your God am holy 6. 


| and 20:7: 2 Separated from all the forementioned defilements, and intire- 
3Þct:1:16 ly contccrated to God and obedient to all his Laws and Statures. 
b Both in my Effence, and in all my Laws, which are holy and 
juſt and good, and in all my ations: whereas the gods of the 
Heathens are unholy born in their Laws and Inſtitutions, whereby 
they allow and require filthy and abominable ations, and in their 
practices, ſome of them having given wicked examples to their 
Worlſhippers. 


*Exod: . 3 * Ye ſhall fear every man his mother, and his fa- 
_ ther c, and * keep my ſabbaths 4: I 2» the LORD your 


God. 


c The mother is put firt, partly becauſe the praftice of this duty 
begins there, mothers, by perpetual converle, being more and 
ſooner known to their children than their fathers ; and partly be- 
cauſe this duty is moit commonly neglefed to the mother, upon 
whom chi!d:en ave not ſo much dependince as they have upon 


and; 1:13: 


rence and obedience. d This is here added, ro ſhew, that, whereas 
It is enjoyned to Parents that they ſhould take care that the Sab- 
bath he obſerved both by themſelves and by their children, it is 
the duty of children to fear and obey their Parents in this matter, 
and moreover, that, if Parents ſhould negle& their duty herein, or 
by theis command, counſt), or example, draw them to pollute the 


apparent in caſe of Idolatry with Moloch or pes _ oo ; 200; | 
in caſe of the Magiſtrates negle&, by God himſelf. us phraſe : ol 
therefore of grins, is to be underſtood variouſly, as many o- ; part of them to the poor, 
ther phraſes are, either of Eccleliaſtical, or Civil and Corporal | |, 
' ie one to another m. 


20, Therefore ſhall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye | g nd. 
I icem here to reſtrain it, though it be true, that all ſorts of lying 


their Father. And tus feor includes the two great duties of reve-: 


a—_— m"—_— 


FICOS . - 
Sabbath, yet the Children in that caſe muſt keep the Sabbath, and 
in all ſuch caſes prefer the command of God before the commands 


, of their Parents or Superiours. 


4 * Turn ye note unto Idols f,nor make to your ſelves * mop 


* molten gods g : I aw the LORD your God. ww 

e Turn nor your hearts and faces from me,whom alone you pre- 
trend to reſpe&, unto them. He intimates, that their turning to 
Idols is a turning from God, and that they could not ſerve both 
God and Idols, f The word ſignifies ſuch as are #0 gods, or nethings, 
as they are called, r Cor: 8: 4. many Idols having no being, but only 
in the fancy of their Worſhippers, and all of them having no vertue 
or power to do good or evil, Eſa: 41: 23. g Nor graven gods nei- 
cher, as appears from Evod:20: whereby we learn, that ſuch exprefli- 
ons are generally to be underſtood Synecdochically. 

5 And if he offer a facrifice of peace-offerings unto 
the LORD, ye ball offer it at your own will 4. 

h Or, according to your own good pleaſure, what you think fit : For 
though this in the general was required, yet it was left to their 
choice to determine the particulars. See Levit: 7: 16. Or rather, 
to your acceptation, i: e: in ſuch manner as it may be accepted by God 
on your behalf,which is explained in the next verſe,and not in ſuch 
manaer as to loſe the end you aim at, to wit,Gods acceptance : for 
if ye do otherwiſe than God hath preſcribed, it ſhall nor be accepted, 
as h- adds ver: 7: but on the contrary ſeverely puniſhed, wer: 8. 

6 Ic (hall be eaten the ſame day ye offer it,and on the 
morrow z: and it ought remain until the third day, it 
(hall be burnt in the fre. 


z By which clauſe ir appears that he ſpeaks here only of that ſort 
of peace-offerings, which were offered either by vow or freely for 


Exod: 
33+ 17. 
Deur. 27, 


15+ 


by way of gratitude for mercies received, were to be eaten the ſame 
day. Levit; 73 15, | FELT 

7 And if it be eaten at all on the third day : it 5s a- 
bominable, it ſhall not be accepted. 

8 Therefore every one that cateth ir,ſball bear his ini- 
quity &, becauſe he hath prophaned the hallowed thing 


; of che LORD, and that ſoul ſhall be cut off from a- 


mong his people ! | 

k ( i: e: ) The puniſhment of his iniquity ; inſtead of acceptation 
he ſhall receive puniſhment. 

9 * And when ye reap thz harveſt of. your land, * Chap: 
thou ſhalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, 23 2z- 


neither ſhalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harveſt, Pvt © 
io And thou ſhalt not glean thy Vineyard, neither Ruth x: 
ſhalt chou gather every grape of thy vineyard : thou-ſbalt 15: 16. 
leave them for the poor and ſtranger : I aw the LORD' 
your God /, * 
/ Who give you all theſe things with a reſervation of my au- 
thority over you, and right in them, and with a charge of giving 


11 * Ye ſhall not ſteal, neither deal falfly, neither — 
Mm Or, one againft another to the defranding of him of any of his tag "8 


goods, to which kind of Iying the words forgoing and following chap:6:2; 


are unlawtul. 

13 And ye fhall not * ſwear by my name falſly », * Exod. 
neither ſhalt thou profane the name of thy God o; 20:7- 
I 2m the LORD. ET on pa 

n This is here added, to ſhew how one ſin draws on another, Mir: : _— 
and that when men will Iye for their own advantage, they. willeaſily J: = $7345 
be induced to Perjury. 0 By any unholy uſe of it. So it is an ad- 9036 
ditional precepr, thou ſhalt not abuſe my holy name by ſwearing 
either falſly or raſhly. Or this may be a reaſon of the former pro- 
hibition, becauſe in ſo doing thou wilt profane the name of thy God. ] 

13 * Thou ſhale nor defraud thy neighbour, neither *Deut:24; 
rob him : the wages pof him that is hired ſhall not abide 14, 15. 


with thee all. night q, until the morning. lal.3:5- 
p Heb: 7he work, put for the wages, as Dent: 24: 15: Joo 7: 2: Fer: 22: Jam. 5.4+ 
13- 9 Becauſe his urgent neceflities require it for preſent ſubſiſt= 
ENCe. 
:4 Thou ſhale not curſe the deaf, 
bling block before the blind 


I am the LORD. 

-r To make them fall. Under theſe two particulars are mani- 
feſtly and eſpecially forbidden all injuries done to ſuch as are una- 
ble to right or defend themſelves ; of whom God here takes rhe 
more care, becauſe they are not able to ſecure themſelves. s Who 
both diſcerns th2 injuries you do them, and can avenge them, 
though the blind and deaf cannor. 


15 Ye (ball do no unrighteouſneſs in judgment ; thou 
ſhale not * reſpect the perſon of the poor t, nor honour *Exod:23 
the perſon of the mighty: 2x7 in righteouſneſs ſhalt thou 3.Deur.1z 
judge thy neighbour. 17:2nd 1 
# So as though pity to him to give an unrighteons ſeritence ; 19:Prov: 
Compare Dent: 1: 17: and 10: 17+ Phov: 24: 23. 24: 23? 
16 * Thou ſhalt not go up and down 2: a tale-bearer Ln 
u among thy people 2 neither ſhalt thou ſtand x againſt 23: 1. 
the blood of thy neighbour : I a»: the LORD. 
Who makes it his buſineſs to go up and down fiom one to 
another,and divulge evil and falſe reports concerning others,which 
though many times it proceeds only from levity and talkativeneſs, 
yet apparently tends to the great injury of our neighbour. See 
Prov: 11: 13. Jer: 6: 28: and 9:4+ x To wit, in judgment as a falſe 
accuſer. or falſe witneſs : For accuſers and witneſſes uſe ro ſtand, 
whileſt the Judges fate, in Courts of Judicature. | 


17 * Thou ſbalt not hate y thy brother z in thine * 2 John? 
2X : 


* Deut; 


nor put a ſtum- Fig 
2 . py 


7, but ſhalt fear thy God 5: 


hearts * 


Chap. XIX. = 


- 


| 38:15. 

| ff Or, that 
\, thou bear 
zot ſim for 
him, 

| 


{ 


* Mat: (2 
F  43:and 22 
 39:Rom: 
13: 9:Gal: 
5:14.Jam. 
2: 8. 


Jed by any. 
+ Heb. ze- 
proached by 
or,forman. 
|| Or they. 
' + Heb. 
there ſball 
be a ſcoitt- 


ging, 


* 

| C / 
” 

7 

»5© 

- 

* 


e Chap.s. 
I5. 


Tas Fi on +» 2451 ws IEC 
ASE SES od SORES 

We 4 Jon - A 7 : 

q xa : ; 

- C Wu XIX. 

: - - 

= 
' 


* Mat: heart: thou ſhalt not in atiy wiſe rebuke thy neighbour 


for it is manifeſt, that Gods Law commanded them to love ftran- 
Sers no leſs than Iſraelites. 
others any injury, 
bearer, +4 aw him, and ſmother that hatred by ſullen filence, 
as 2 Sam: 13: 22. nor juſtifie and 
= ſhalr freely and in love, 
thou by rebuking of him, 
pentance, couldſt in ſome ; 
juffering ſm upon him ſeems imperfe& and unuſual in Scripture, and 
T doubt whether the Hebrew verb Naſa be uſed ever for permirring or 
ſuffering. The words may be rendred thus, 4nd ( or ſo 
 0t bear ſin for him,or for his ſake, thou ſhalt not make thy ſelf guilty 
' of his fin, as thou wilt affuredly do, if thou doſt not perform thy 

; duty of rebuking him for his fin, 

' courſe appointed by God to 
and confequently, as 1t was 
guilt, ſo it is thy 

*things favour this ſenſe. 7. 


ſm or iniquity 


- works of God ; Partly that by the reſtraints here Jaid even upon 


_ a further puniſhment to the man, either becauſe he only could do 


a || and not ſuffer ſin upon him 6. | 
l To prevent murder, laſt ſpoken of, he forbids hatred, which 

5s the common cauſe, and a degree, of murder, 1 Joh: 3-15. % he 

ſame with neighbour, as it follows, z. e. every man, Matth: 5: 44- 


a If thy Brother hath done thee or 
thou ſhalt neither devulge it to others as a tale- 
flatter and encourage him therein, 
not with hatred, tell him of his faulr. 
( 5. e. ) Not ſuffer him to lye under the guilt of any fin, which 
and thereby bringing him to true Re- 
ſort free him from. Bur the phraſe of 


) thou ſhalt 


which is a likely way, and a 
remove the guilr of his ſin from him, 
his fault that he ſinned and contratted 
fault, that his guilt continues upon him. Many 
This 1s the proper and uſual ſignifica- 
2. The fame words are uſed in this ſenſe, 
Levit: 22: 9: Numb; 18: 32. 3- The prepoſition al is oft uſed thus 
as Gen: 37: 8, 34: Judg>9: 9. 1 Kings 16: 7+ 4» This phraſe of bearing 
is conſtantly uſed in this book for being guilty and 

And ſo the ſenſe is here full and complear, 
reaſon here given to enforce the foregoing 


tion of the word Naſs. 


lyable to puniſhment. 
and a very weighty 
precept. 


18 Thou ſhalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge c a- 
vainſt the children of thy people, * but thou ſhalt love 
thy neighbour 9, as thy ſelf e : I am the LORD. 

> Hebmor keep, either 1. The \injury here ſuppoſed, in thy me- 
mory : So it is oppoſed to thoſe who ſay they will forgive,but not 
forget, an injury. Or 2. Anger or hatred, in thy heart. So this 
veib is uſed, Jer; 3:12. Nah: 1: 2. d By which he underſtands not 
the 1/aelites only, as ſome would perſwade us, bur every other man 
with whom we converſe, as plainly appears 1. By comparing this 
place with werſe 34. where this very Jaw is applyed to ſtrangers. 
2. Becauſe the word neighbour is explained by another man, Levit: 20; 
10. Rom: 13:8. See more on Exod: 20: 16. e With the ſame ſince- 


rity, though not equality, of affeQion, as to thy ſelf. 


19 Ye ſhall keep my ſtatutes f. Thou ſhalt not let 
thy cattle gender with a diverſe kind g : thou shalr nor 
ſow thy field with mingled ſeed 4 : neither shall a gar- 
ment mingled of linen and woolen come upon thee, 

f Either 1. My Laws. So this is fitly premiſed, becauſe other- 
wiſe ſome of the following commands might ſeem rtrifling, and 
obedience to them unneceſſary ; Or 2. My Ordinances, to wit, of 
nature ; or the order which I have appointed in creatures, as the 
word is uſed Job 26. 10: and 38: 33* Pſal; 148: 6. Prov: 8: 29: and 
therefore they ſhall not confound- thoſe things that I have diſtin- 
guiſhed, which were in ſome ſort to reproach and corre&t my 
works, and which may ſeem to be done in ſome of the following 
inſtances» g This was prohibited, partly to reſtrain the curioſity 
and boldneſs of men,. who might attempt to amend or change the 


Eruit-creatures men might be taught to abhor all unnatural and 
unlawful luſts : Partly to teach the {7aelites to avoid mixtures with 
other Nations either in Marriage or in Religion : Which alſo may 
be ſignified by the following prohibitions. h See of this and the 
next, Deut: 22. 9, 10, IT. _ z 

20 And whoſoever lieth carnally with a woman that 
is a bondmaid || + betrothed to an husband + and not 
at all redeemed, nor freedom given her, || + ſhe ſhall be 
ſcourged 3 : they (ball nor be put to death &, becauſe 


ſhe was not free }. 

+ Or, reproached,or diſpiſed, and therefore forſaken, of her husband. 
For as his continuance with her in his and her maſters family and 
ſervice, is mentioned as an evidence that he loved her, Exod. 21. 
5, 6. So on the contrary his forſaking of her was a reproach to her, 
and a ſign of contempt. z Heb. There fhall be a ſcourging, which 
may belong, either 1. To her alone, as the Jews underſtand it, for 
the mans puniſhment follows, ver: 21, 22. Or, 2- To both of them, 
for 1. Both were guilty. 2. It follows, they ſhall not be puniſhed with 
death, which may ſeem to _ that they were to be puniſhed 
by ſome other common and conſiderable puniſhment,which ſcour- 
ging indeed was, but the paying of a ram was a ſmall penalty and 
very unſuitable to the greatneſs of the offence. Add the offering 
of the ram as a treſpaſs-offering for the ſin againſt God is not in- 
conſiſtent with making ſatisfa&tion otherways for the injury done 
to men, as we may ſee Leviticus 6. 4, 5, 6. but-only added here as 


this, and not the woman, who being a bond-woman had nothing 
of her own to offer : Or becauſe his Sex and his Freedom aggravat- 
ed his fin. k Which they ſhould have been, had ſhe been free, 
Deut: 22:23, 24. 1 The reaſon of this difference is not from any 


LEYITICOS 


a 


reſpe& which God gives to perſons, for bond and free are alike to 
him, but becauſe bond-women were ſcarce Wives, and their Mar- | 
riages were ſcarce true Marriages, being neither made by their 
choice, but by their maſters authority, nor continued 'beyond the ' 
year of releaſe, but at their Maſters or Husbands pleaſure » of which ' 
ſee Exod: 21: 4; &c. TY | 
21 And * he ſhall bring his treſpaſs-efering unto the 

LORD, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congre- ! 
gation, ever a ram for a treſpaſs: offering. 

22 And the prieſt ſhall make an atonement for him 
with the ram of the treſpaſs-offering before the LORD, 
for his ſin which he hath done : and the fin which he 


hath done ſhall bg forgiven him, 


— 


! 


23 And when ye ſhall come into the land, and ſhall 


have planted all manner of trees for food ; then ye ſhall 
count the fruit thereof as uncircumciſed m : three years 
» ſhall it be as uncircumciſed unto you : it ſhall not be 


eaten of, 

m (3. e. ) As unclean,not to be eaten but caft away,and counted 
abominable, as the foreskins are. n This precept was ſerviceable, 
I. to the Trees themſelves,which grew the better and faſter, being 
early ſtript of thoſe fruits, which otherwiſe would have derived to 
themſelves and drawn away much more of the ſtrength from the 
root and tree. 2. To men, both becauſe the fruit then was water- 
iſh, indigeſted and unwholſome, and becauſe hereby men were 
taught to bridle their appetites ; a leſſon of great uſe and abſolute 
neceflity in a godly life, 3. To God, who required and deſerved 
the fir{t-fruits, which muſt be alſo of the beſt, and ſo they could 
not be in this time. 

24 But in the fourth year al! the fruit thereof shall be 


+ holy o to praiſe the LORD withal p. 


o Conſecrated to the Lord, as the firſt-fruits and tithes were, 


T Heb ho. 


lineſs of 


and therefore given to the prieſts and Levites, Numb: 18: 12, 13. praiſes to 
Deut:18:4. yetſo that part of them were communicated to the poor the LORD, 


Widows and Fatherleſs and Strangers. See Deut: 14: 28. 
blefs the Lord, by whoſe power and goodneſs the trees bring forth 
fruit to perfe&tion. 


To Chap: 23s 


20. 


Num. 5.8; 


25 Andin the fifth year ſhall ye eat of the fruit there- Joſh.6.19, 


of, that it may yield unto you the increaſe thereof 9: 
I am the LORD your God. 

9 That God may be pleaſed to give his bleſſing, which alone 
can make them fruitful. TA: 

26 * Ye $hall not eat any thing with the blood r, nei- 


ther shall ye uſe inchantment, nor obſerve times s. 

ry ( 7. e.) Any fleſh out of which the blood is not firſt poured. 
See 1 Sam: 14; 32. The Jews write, that the Egyprians and other 
Nations, when they offered Sacrifices to the Devils, did eat part 
of the ſacrifices, betide the blood which was kept in baſons for that 
end, which alſo they believed to be as it were the ſpecial food of 
the Devils. 5s To wit, ſuperſtitiouſly, by the obſervation of the 
clouds, or ſtars, or otherwiſe, by eſteeming ſome days lucky, o« 
thers unlucky. See Deut: 18. 10: 11, Efth: 3: 7. 

27 * Ye $hall not round the corners of your heads 7, 


neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard. 

t (5. e. ) Your Temples: Ye ſhall not cut off the hair of your 
heads round about your Temples. This the Gentiles did, either 
for the worſhip of the Devils or Idols, to whom young men uſed 
to conſecrate their hair, being cut off from their heads, as Homer, 
Plutarch, and many others write ; or in funerals or immoderate 
mournings, as appears from Eſa: 15: 2. Fer: 48. 379. And the like 
15 to be thoughr concerning the beard or the hair in the corner. 
( 7. e.) corners of the beard, The reaſon then of this prohibition 
is becauſe God would not have his people agree with Idolaters, 
neither in their Tdolatries, nor in their exceſſive ſorrowing, no 
nor ſo much as in the appearances and outward ſigniſications or 
expreſſions thereof. 

28 Ye $hall not * make any cutting in your flesh « 


for the dead x, nor pri u: 
| E print any mark upon you : I am the 
LORD. 

w Which the Gentiles commonly did both in the worſhip of their 
Idols, and in their 1o0Jemn mournings, Jer: 16. 6. x Heb: for a ſoul, 
z. e. either 1 improperly, for a dead body ; as that word is ſome- 
times uſed, as Lev: 19. 28: and 21: 1. Numb: 6: 6: or 2. properly, for 
the ſoul; ye ſhall not cur your fleſh or your bodies, for your ſouts, 
or upon pretence ot doing your ſouls any good, either in way of 
ER, or —_— worſhip of God, as they did, 1 King: 18. 28: 
in like manner as others were willing togive to God the fruit ir 
body for the ſin of their joul, Mic, 6: wn , -omtmaat 

29 Do nor þ proſtitute thy daughter to cauſe her to 
be a whore y, leſt the land fall to whoredom, and the 
land become full of wickedneſs, 


y As the Gentiles frequently did for the honour of ſome of their 


one OO diverſe women were conſecrated, and publickly 


IO. OCCy 


* Chap? 


21:5. 


*Deut: 
$4: ©. 


tHeb:proe 
phane, 


39 * Ye ſhall keep my ſabbaths, and reverence my * Chap: 
26: 2; 


ſancuary z: I am the LORD. 
.z N-tpreſuming to approach it without reverence, 
kind of uncleannels upon you. 


31 * Regard not them that have familiar 
neither ſeek afrer wizards 


or with any 


ſpirits a, *7c; 
b:T am the LORD your God. Afts 16 


8:19, 


| # That have entered into covenant with the Devil, by whoſe 16. 


help they forets! many things to come, and acquaint men with ſe. 
cret things. See Lev. 20: 27. Deut: 18: 11: 1 Sam: 28: 3,7,9. 2 Kings 
21:6. 6 Another name expreſſing the ſame thing for ſubſtance 
wit, perfons in 1-agu= with the Devil, with ſome difference on] 

in the manner of their opperation. of 


32 Thou ſhalt riſe up c before the hoary head, and 
honnur the face of the old man, and fear thy C c : 
I am the LORD. ET Oe 2 


c To do them reverence when they paſs by, for which 
were obliged, as the Jews ſay, whe tm bo ig down ok rh 4 
they were paſt, that it might be manifeſt they aroſe out of reſpe&F+ 
ro them # A reaſon of the former precept, voth becauſe old - 2 
in ſome reſpe& do moſt reſemble God, who is tiled che ancient 
days, Dan; 7.9, 13. and becauſe this reſpe& is due to ſuch 
for themſelves, who may be unworthy or contemptible 
Gods ſake, who requires this reverence, / 


if not 
yet for 


be 


of 


and whoſe ſingular bleſſing *Pyod.22 


; Old age is. 
0 o * 4 4 
33 And * if a ftranger ſojourn with thee in your gt 
land, ye ſhall not || vex him e. || Or, 9+ 
e Either with opprobrious expreſſions, or grievous exa&ions. pref , 
XOG@s 
34 !, But the ſtranger that dwelleth with you ſhall 3:8. 


| 


*Chap:17 


| 


Chap. XR, Tx 


"> =+ 00 bo ax 


'*Ex 


20: 5 


ah Chap. XX. 


: ; jt ky peed L - b = . B 
LEAWVFTICUS Chap. XX. 
* Deut: be unto you as ons born amongſt you £ and * thou [ [(7.e) $ tw m__— you from = Nations, and res hay i 
7 "Pp : . 1mpurities ar o1atries, to be a peculiar people to my lelf, and 
10.19: ſhalt _ him m—_ _ oy tx _ gersg inthe | PucO er will noe ſoffer yo.eo — Cans nn fre Sony Bar 
land of Egypt : 1am th 7 x5 nk really fan@ify.you, and give you my grace to do what I require, 
f Either 1. as to the matters of common right, as1t here follows: 7. e, ro keep-my tarutes, Or the argument is this, Thoſe Idols and 
ſv it reacheth re all ſtrangers. Or 2. as to Church-priviledges : Jdolatries will defile you and make you worſe, -but Ionly and my 

to i avnirerts only _ "_ mou profelyees of righnoulRgy js pe” will ſanftify you and make-you better. SIE 
And therefore are {ſenſible ot the Tears, dItreies, and mMUeries Ortuch, 9 For mm every one th (: h » hi f. h hi *Fod 
ens. 7 - ery. at Curieth » his tather, oro his : 
which call for your pity, and you ought todo to them, as you would mother, thall be ſurely put ts death :he hath curſed his ? A Dy 

27: 


that others ſhould do to you when you were ſuch. : o_ ; of 
25 Ye ſhall do no untighteouſneſs in judgment, in father, or his' mother, his blood ſhall be upon him Pf” Piovm 
| 2m Or, ſurely, as that particle, chi; is oft uſed, as Job $8. 6. & 20. 20. 208 T7 


mete-yard 6, in weight,' or in meaſure 5. Pad es 2 25 ; 
, . needs no diſpute about the connexior, © 2 
h In the meaſuring of1ands, —_- IG — ey 3s |, reafonof WER ; hating) Sits —_—_ paler I 5: 4; * 
cloth, ribband, ©. 3 _ the meaſuring 0 "is we rk ye on. of bitter reproaches or imprecations. o Heb. and put for'sr, as hath 
as are not continued, only contiguous, as or corn or wine, 2%. Ur,tii ted before. p He is waiy Elias oor dadch 2 hs Lc ; 
the former may note greater, the latter leſs, meaſures. die for Gn ke. | th: s to 


36 * Juſt balances, juſt + weights, a juſt ephah, and| 1 a+ the man that committeth adultery with * Deut; 
a juſt hin # ſhall ye have: I a» the LORD your Go another mans wife, even Faro commutteth —_— wh —_ 
his neighbours: wife, the adulcerer and the adultereſs 12545 
hall ſurely be put to death. | 
Ii * And theman that lieth with his fathers wife, hath * Chap: | 
uncovered his fathers nakedneſs: both of them ſhal ſurety 3:8: 
be put to death ; their blood ſhe# be upon them. | 
12 * Andif a man lie with his daughter in Jaw, both * Chap: } 
of them (hall ſurely be put to deach: they have wrought 18: 15: * 
confution q ; their blood ſhall be upon them, —__ 
9 By perverting the order which God hath appointed, and "0" 


* Deut? 
25: 13: 
Prov:11:1 which brought you out of the land of Egypt. 
& 16: 11* ; Theſe two meaſures are named as moſt common, the former for 
& 20: 10: dry, the lafter for moiſt things : but under them be manifeſtly 
t Heb: comprehends all other meafures; 


Jones 27 Therefore k ſhall ye obſerve all my ſtatutes, and 
all my judgments, and do them : I aws the LORD» 


Becauſe my bleſſings and deliverances are not indulgences to fin, 
but greater obligations to all duties to God and Man. So that if 
religion and righteouſneſs were utterly loſt in the World, they ought 
in all reaſon to be found among yau as my peculiar people and freed 


g'0 


men, 
C.H A-P. XX: 

Iſraelites muff not offer their Children to Molech on pain of Death, 1 —3. 
Which if not infliffed by the Mogiftrate, ſhall be by God himſelf, 4, 5. 
The ſame, againſt running after Sooth«ſayers, 6. | 
Parents, 9g. Againſt Adultery, 10. Or inceſtuous md unlawful copulation 
with Women, Men, or Beaſis, 11 21. They muſt put a 
difference between clean and unclean, 22 
ſtoned, 27. : 

k N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 


* Chap: 


18: 21: 


Ifrael z, * Whoſoever he be of the children of Iſrael, or 


*Deut: ofthe ſtrangers b that ſojourn in Iſrael, that giveth a»y of. 


18:10 his ſeed unto Molech c, he ſhall ſurely be put to death : 


whe the people of the land shall ſtone him with ſtones. 

23: 10: a Here follow the puniſhments of the crimes forbidden in rhe 

Jer:32:35: former Chapters. 6 Not only ſuch as were Proſclytes, bur all others, 
theſe being groſs immoralities, and ſuch as the precepts of Noah 
reached to, and ſuch as the laws of nature and nations obliged them 
to. And therefore the toleration offuch aQtions was not only againſt 
reaſon of ſtate, and the intereſt of the common-wealth of 7/rael,"and 
dangerous to the infe&ion and deſtru&ion of the 7jraelites by the 


imitation of ſuch examples, bur alſo againſt the lighr of nature and . 


laws ef humanity. c Or to any other Idol ; for the reaſon of the 


law equally coneerns all. See Zevir. 18. 27. 
3 And I will ſet my face againſt that man 4, and 


will cut him off from among his people e : becauſe he 
hath given of his ſzed unto Molech, to defile my ſanetu- 


ary f, and to prophane my holy Name g. 

4 (i.e.) Deal with him as an enemy, and mikz: him a monument 
of my juſtice, either by puniſhing him immediately and eminently, 
when the Magiſtrate cannot or will not do 1t, or by adding to his 
corporal puniſhments my curſe upon his ſcul and name. See Lev: 17: 
19. e From the number of his people, of what nation or kindred 
ſoever he was, or, from the land of the living. f Which was done 


by this wickedneſs, either becauſe ſuch perſons did, for the cover of ut off the occaſions of further fil-hineſs. Or rather. 2. improperly, 
their Idolatry, come into God's Sanftuary, ' as the reſt did; See for touching her or lying with her ; 


Lev. 15. 31. or becauſe the Sanftuary was, and was faid to be defiled 
by groſs abominations committed in that city or land where Gods 
Sanctuary was : or becauſe by theſe ations they did pronounce and 
declare to all men that they eſteemed the SanCttuary and Service of 
God abominable and vile, by prefering ſuch odious and pernicious 
Idolatry before it. 'g Partly by deſpiſing it themſelves, and parcly by 
diſgracing it to others, and giving them occaſion to blaſpheme it, and 
to abhor the true religion, becauſe they ſaw it deſerted and condemned 
by thoſe that beſt knew-it ard once embraced it. | 

4 And if the people of the land do any ways hide 
their eyes from the man b, when he giveth of his ſeed 


unto Molech, and kill him not: 

h ( i.e.) Wink at his fault, and forbear to accuſe and puniſh him. 
Compare 4#s 17. 30. 

5 Then I will ſet my face againſt that man, and * 
againſt his family i, and will cut him oft, and all that 
0 a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with 


Molech, from among their people. 

; (7.e.) Either, r His poſterity, whom God threatned to puniſh 
for their farhers Idolatry, Exod. 20. Or 2. his peovle, as that word 
isuſed, Jer.8.3. Mic 2.3. to wit, the people of that Jand, who by rheir 
connivance make themſelves guilty of his ſin, v. 4. Or 3. his diſciples 
and followers, who are oft called the ſons or children of their maſters. 
And ſo it may ſeem to be explainedin the following words, o/ that go 


'* Exod: 


20: F: 


a whoring after him,as the firſt clauſe which concerns the head or chief 


perſon himſelf, 1-wil ſer my faceeagainſt that man, is explained by 
theſe words, I will cnt him off. | 

6 And * the foul thateurneth after ſuch as have fami- 
liar ſpirits and after wizards, to. go a whoring after them 
k, I will even ſet my face againſt that ſoul, and will 
cut him off from among his people. . 

k To ſeek knowledge or counltl or help from them. 

7 XK Sandtifie youe {elves therefor 
for I 2m the LORD your God. 

8 And ye ſhall keep my ſtatutes, and do them ; I aw 
the LORD which ſanctifie you 7, 


* Chap: 
I9: 31; 


*Chap: 11: 
44. & 19: 
2: 1 Pex, 
I; 16: 


Againſt Curlers of 


26. Soothſayers to be 


2 * Apain, thou ſhale fay to the children of ' 


' 7. 12, Exod. 20. 18. Revel. x. 12. and for touching, as John 20. 25, 29, 
| 2. That aQ is expreſſed by words parallel te this of ſeeing as by 


re, and be ye holy: 


| :neir genuine children, but baftards, and theretore excludedfrom 


mixing the Blood which God would have ſeparated, and making 
the ſame ©Off-ſpring both his own immediate Child and his Grand- 


child. #* 
13 *If a manliealſo with mankind, as he lieth with — | 


a woman, both of them have commitcted an abomina- 
ton : they (hall ſurely be put to death r; their blood 
[hall be upon them. . 

r Except the one party was forced by the other. See Deut. 22. 25, "I 
14 And * if a man rake a wife, and her mother, it * Chap; 
, is wickednefs 5: they ſhall-be burnt with fire, both he 28: 17e ; 
and they ?, that there be no_ wickedneſs among you. _ 

5 (1.e.) Abominable and extraordinary wickedneſs, as the fingularity 
of the puniſhment ſhewerh. 7: Either, or both or all of them, if 
; they conſented to. it. . 

15 * And if a manlie with a beaſt, heſhall ſurely be ,,,__.., 
put to death 2: and ye (hall flay the beaſt s. De 

% Partly for the prevention of monſtcous Births, partly to blot 27: 21; 
out the memory of ſo loathfome a-crime, ani partly that by ſa 
ſevere a puniſhment of that creature which was only a pſlive inſtru« 
ment to mans {in, men might be aſſured that a more dreadful puniſhe - 

T0" than corporal | death | was relcryed for them, if they repeated 
16 Andif a woman approach unto any- beaſt, and _ ;; « 
lie down thereto, thou (halt kill the woman and the ::- 41 
beaſt : they (hail ſurely be pur to death ; * their blood 
ſhall be upon them. | ron: 
 I7 * And if a man ſhalltake his fifter, . his fathers *Chap:18: 
| daughter, or his mothers daughter, and ſee hernakedneſfs 
' x, and ſhe ſee hisnakedneſs, it i-a wicked thing, and they 
; ſhall be cut off in the ſight of their people y 5 he hath | 
uncovered his filters nakednefs, he ſhall bear his iniquity, 
x Szeing is here underſtood, either x. properly, and fo God would 


1 


for 1. the ſence of ſceing 15 ofc 
put for other ſences, as for hearing, Gen. 42 1. compared with 4#s |, 


uncovering or diſcovering, and by knowing, Gen. 4. 1. 3. Soitis dire] 
explained, in the following words, he hath uncovered his fiſters nabodreſ?, 
which manifeſtly fignifies lying with her. 4+ Ir 15 nor probable 
thar an equal puniſhment would have been appointed to an-1immgdeſt 
ſighr, as to the higheſt a& cf filthineſs. 5. Nor ſeems there to be 
any reaſon why this crime ſhould be reſtrained ro this: rather than 
to any other relations, when it was 35 grear, yea a greater crime in 
ſome other relations. y (. e.) Publickly, for the terrour and caution 
of orhers. ; ; plc 

18 X Andifa man (hall lie with a woman z having *Chap: 18: 
her ſickneſs a, and ſball uncover her nakednefs, he hath 19- See 
+ diſcovered her fountain 6, and ſhe hath uncovered the Ch:15:24: 
fountain of her blood : and both of them (hall be cut off ,,,;.* 


from among their people. > naked. 

z Wirtringly and willingly. See on Lev. 15. 24. and 18s 19. ' 4 
(5.2. ) her monthly inficmity. 6 Oc her iſſue. Thus the fontumn' of 
Blood in Mark 5. 29. is the iſſue of blood, Luke $: 44: the fountain'pur 
for the ſtream; the cauſe tor rhe effe@, which is common. " -* 

19 * And thou halt not uncover the nakednef of thy , 
mothers ſiſter, nor of thy fathers fiſter : for he uacovereth 
his near kin : they ſhall bear cheir iniquity. , 

20 * Andifa man ſhall lie with his uncles wife, he 
bath uncovered -his uncles nakedneſs ; they ſhalt bear 
their ſin, they ſhall die chaldlefs c. 3s | 

c (i: e: ) Either ſhall be ſpeedily cur off ere they can have a child 
Oy that inceftuous conjunttion, that the remembrance of rhe fat may 
be blotted out : or, if this ſeem a leſs crime than moſt of the former © © 
inceftnous mixtures; becauſe the relation is more remote, and there= * 
fore the Magiſtrare ſhall forbear to puniſh it with death, yet they - ; 
ſhall either have:no .children from tuch an unlawful bed, or their 
children ſhall die before them, #9: 9. 11, 12: or ſhall not be repured + 


Ch. 18: 


I2, 13. 


* Chap: 
18:14 


che congregation of the Lord, Deut: 23: 2. 
X 2 21 * Ard 


[1 42-4: 
Or, 


rover 7. 


F Verſe 7; 
{Chap: 19: 
2: 1Pert: 
£7; 16; 
FDeurt:18: 
f10,-I1: 

4 Sam-28; 
js 6: 

FE 


| 4 


"defile bim- 
ſelf for his 
wife, &-c 


Bee's ke I RA RD” EXE ' 
WOES —£ _— 
, .Charx. XX. 

: £.£ > £ - > x 

F 


| nable thi 
"oft exp! 


- allowance 
- as we ſhall ſee. 


21 * And if a man: ſhall take his brothers wife 4, it 


1 : + an unclean thing e : he hath uncovered his brothers 


nakedneſs ; they ſhall be childleſs. | : 
4 Except in the caſe allowed by. God, Deur: 25: 5. e An abomi- 

- like the uncleanneſs of a menſtruous woman, which 1s 

©d by Yhis werd ; Heb. & ſeparation, or removing, 3.e. 2 

thing deſerving ſeparation or excluſion from ſociety with others ; or ; 

a thing to be removed out of ſight or out of the world. 

22 Ye ſhall therefore keep all my Þ ftatutes, and all 
my judgments, and do them : that the land whither I 
bring you to dwell therein, * ſpue you not out. 

23 Andyeſhallnot walk in the manners of the nation | 
which I call out before you : for they committed all 
theſe things, and * therefore I abhorred them. 

' 24 But I have ſaid unto you, Ye {hall inherit their 


land, and I will give it unto you to poſſeſs it, a land 


that floweth with milk, and honey : I am the LORD 
your God, which have ſeparated you from other people f. 

f By my ſpecial grace and favour vouchſafed to you above all peo- 
ple, in"glorious and miraculous works wrought for you and among 
you, and in ordinances and ether ſingular priviledges and bleſſings 


imparted to you, all which calls for your ſpecial love and ſervice. 


25 Ye hall therefore put difference between clean 
beaſts; and unclean, and between unclean fowls, and 
clean: and ye ſhall nor make your ſouls abominable by 


| beaft, or by fowl, or by any manner.of living thing 


that | creepeth on the ground, which I have ſeparated 


from you as unclean g. 
g (i. e. ) As things which by my ſentence I have made unclean, 


.and which ye muſt avoid as ſuch. 


26 And ye ſhall be holy unto me : * for Ithe LORD 
am holy, and have ſevered you from other people, that 


ye ſhould be mine. : 
27 * A man alſo, or woman that hath a familiar ſpirit, 


or that is a wizard, ſhall ſurely be put to death : they ſhall 
ſtone them with ſtones : their blood ſhall be upon them, 


CHAP. XXL. 


Prieffs muſt not defile themſelvas, in mourning over the Dead: Caſes excepted, 


1 amunn== 6, Nor marry with a Whore, Profane, or Divorced Woman, + 
qo, 8 His Daughter, if a Whore, to be burnt with fire, 9. The High 
Prieſt muſt in no caſe defile himſelf with the Dead, 10 === 12. Muſt marry 

a Virgin of his People, 13<==15. Perſons having bodily defetts, allowed 
10 eat of the holy things, but not 80 ſerve in the Tabernacle, or offer ro Gad, 
16 ———— 24 


"A N D the LORD faid unto Moſes, Speak unto the 
A Priefts, the ſons of Aaron, and ſay unto them, 


'* There ſhall none be defiled for the dead a among his 


ople: | 
19 fs wit, by toucking ofthe Dead Body, or abiding in the ſame 
houſe with it, or aſſiſting ar bis Funerals, or cating of the Funeral 
feaſt. "The reaſon of this law is evident, becauſe by ſuch pollution 
they were excluded from converſe with men, to whom by their 
funAion they were to be ſerviceable upon all occaſions, and from 
the handling of holy things, Num: 6: 6: & 19+ 11, 14, 16. Deut: 26; 14: 
Hoſt9:4. And God would hereby reach them,and inthem all ſucceſſive 
Minifiers of holy things, that they ought ſo entirely to give them- 
ſelves to the ſervice of God, that they ought to renounce all expreſſions 
of natural afe&iens, and all worldly employments fo far as they 
are impediments to the diſcharge of their holy ſervices; See Lev: 10: 
3,7: Deut33:9: Mat: 8:22. Hereby alſo God would beget in the people 
2 greater reverence tothe Prieſtly funQtion, and oblige the Prieſt to a 


greater degree of ftriftneſs and purity than other men. 


2 But for his kin that 1s near unto him: b, that 3s for 
his mother, and for his father, and for his ſon, and for 


his daughter, and for his brother c. 

þ Under which general expreſſion kis wife ſeems. to be compre- 
hended; though ſhe be not expreſſed in the following inſtances, be- 
cauſe from the mention of others more remote it was eaſie to gather 
that ſo near a relation was not excluded. And hence it is nored as 
a peculiar and extraordinary caſe, that Ezekze!, who was a Prieſt, was 
forbidden to mourn for kis wife, Ezek:24: 16, &c. Theſe exceptions 
God here makes in condeſcention to humane infirmity, becauſe in 
ſuch caſes it was very hard to reſtrain 'the affetions. But this 
Jowance concerns only the Inferiour Prieſt, not the High Prieſt, 
| c Obj. Eleazar and Ithamar are forbidden to mourn 


for their brethren,. Nadab and Abihu. Anj. r. That caſe was ſingular, 


- both becauſe ſuch a mourning might ſeemto be a cenſure to God's 


i them, and becauſe they were then in the aQtual exe- 
beet 04 yt 20 office and in their initiation to it, and they were the 
only. perſons, beſides Aaron, that could perform that work, and 
therefore their attendance upon it was more neceſſary than it would 
be inafcer-times and other caſes. 2+ The latter law can either limit 
or enlarge the former at the pleaſure of the Lawgiver. And this 
Jaw-may ſeem to be added, leſt that protubition Lev: 10; ſhould be 
taken for a general rule. ON ER ; 
. 2 And for his ſiſter 4a virgin, that isnigh untohim e, 
which hath had no husband f ; for her may he be defiled. 
d Either by father, or mother. e (i.e.) oy nearneſs not of relation, 
( for that might ſeem a needleſs addition but of habitation, 5. e. 
one not yet cur off from the family, as it follows. f For if ſhe was 
married, ſhe m_ of another family, and under her husbands 
cial care in thoſe matters. : : . 
TT But || he ſhall nor defile donde: cakeg a chief man 
| his people g, to prophane himlelt. 
I PIT Pe NE oe or ruler, &c. for ſuch not only 


ſeing he is 4 ch: : 
a Bok PrER but orhers alſo of the Inferiour Prieſts were. And 


"LEVITICUS. 


{ the law here added concerns all. 


| upon whoſe head * theanointing oyl was poured s, and 


yet he, above all others; muſt take heed ſo to do ie that he do nor 
prefane himſelf by doing as follows. Or, for a chief man, &c. the 
prepoſition Lemed being eaſily underſtood from the former Verſe, 
where it is oft uſed, ſuch ſupplements. being nor unuſual in the 
Hebrew tongue. So the ſence is, He ſba/l net defile himſelf for any other 
perſon whatſoever who is not thus near of kin to hira, no not for a 
prince or chief ruler among his people, who might ſeem to challenge this 
duty from him, to joyn with all others in their reſentment of the 
pubyck loſs, much leſs ſhall he defile himſelf for any other. And 
© the laſt word, to profane himſelf, may be added as a reaſon why he 
ſhould not defile himſelf for the prince or any other, except the - 
perſons named, becauſeſuch defilement for the dead did profane him, 
or make him as a common perſon and unclean, and conſequently 
unfit to manage his ſacred Employment, which was an impediment 
to the Service of God, and a publick inconvenience to the people: 
whoſe concerns with God he negotiated. . And it was not meet ſuch 
great and important affairs ſhould give place to the ceremonies of a 
funeral for a ſtranger. : 


5 * They ſhall not make baldneſs upon their head þ, * Chap: 
neither ſhall they ſhave off the corner of their beard, nor "ro 


make any cutting in their fleſh, | jo 

h To wit, in Funerals, as the Heathens did: 9. & Though I 
allow them to defile themſelves for ſome of the Dead, yetin no caſe 
ſhall they uſe theſe Superſtitious and Heatheniſh -rites, which alſo 
the people are forbidden to do, Levit: 19: 27: Dent: 14: 1. but the 
Prieſts in a more peculiar manner, becauſe they are by word and 
example to teach the people their Duty not to ſorrow fer the Dead 
as perſons without hope. 

6 They ſhall be holy unto their God 3, and not pro- 
fane the Name of their God & : for the offering of the 
LORD made by fire, andthe bread of their God / they , 


do offer : therefore they ſhall be Þ holy. - Heb. 


; Devoted to God's ſervice, and always prepared and fit for it, and holineſs. 
therefore ſhall keep themſelves, as far as they can, from all defile- 
ment, which makes them unmeet for their Maſters uſe. k Which 
they eſpecially bear : they ſhall not diſparage the ſervice of God 
by making it give place to ſuck ſleight occaſions. 1 ( 7. e. ) the ſhew- 
bread : or rather, all the other offerings, beſides burnt-offerings : 


' which are called bread, either becauſe bread is commonly put for 


all food, as below, Yerſe 17, 21: or, becauſe God is ſatisfied and 
refreſhed with theſe offerings, asa man is with his bread : or rather, 


| becauſe they, or part of them, are the bread or food of the Prieſts, 


and are here called the bread of their God, either objeftively beeauſe 
they were offered to God, or efficiently , becauſe they were given by 
God to the Priefts- And theſe are called bread in oppoſitien to the 
burnt-offerings, which being wholly conſumed gave no food to the 
Prieſts, Or, the offerings made by fire are here put Synecdochica)ly 
for all the reſt, the moſt eminent kind for all, which are here called 
bread, becauſe devoured by fire to the honour of God. For the pax- 
ticle and is not in the Hebrew, and may be omitted. | 

7 *. They ſhall not take a wife ha: is a whore, or 
profane m, neither ſhall they take a woman put away 


from her husband# : for he is holy unto his God. 

m Or, aefilzd, or defloured, though it were done ſecretly, or by 
accident, orby force : becauſe the Prieſt muſt take care that all the 
members of his family be free not only from groſs wickedneſs, bur 
from all ſuſpicions of evil, and occaſions of reproach or contempr, 
becauſe this would refle& upon himſelf, and upon his God, and re- 
ligion alſo, The word may note one defloured by any perſon, though 
it were by her husband ; or a widow, becauſenot only the High-Prieſt | 
was obliged to marry a virgin, ver: 13: but alſo the inferiour Prieſts, 
as appears from Ezek; 44: 22: and that iseither ſignified by this word, 
or by none other here. It is true, & widow, and a profane perſon are 
diftinguiſhed, werſe 14. but the ſame word may be, and ott is taken 
in-differing ſences, both more largely and more ftriQtly, inthe ſame 
Chapter. And there wasſome reaſon why it ſhould-be more expreſly 
and diſtinly ſer down there, # widow, or one profane or defloured, 
otherwiſe, becauſe there was the more need of caution in the High- 
Prieſt, and therefore the widow is particularly mentioned, which in 
the former caſe might be ſufficiently comprehended under a general 
title. » Tho' not for adultery, but for light cauſesand by the husbands 
faulr, becauſe tho' the woman might be wholly innocent and free, 
yet it would leave ſome blemiſh upon her. 

8 Thou ſhalt ſanctifie him s therefore, for he offereth 
the bread of thy God ; he ſhall be holy unto thee : p for 


I the LORD which ſandtifie you am holy 9. 


o Thou, O Moſes, and whoſoever ſhall ſucceed in thy place, to 
whom it belongs to ſee thoſe and other of my laws obſerved, ſhajl 
take care that the Prieſt be holy, and do not defile himſelf by any ef 
theſe forbidden marriages, though he would de it. p Either, r, in 
thy eſteem, and therefore ſhall not give thee cauſe to think mean]! 
and irreverently of him by his defiling or debaſing of himſelf wich 
irregular mixtures: or, 2. te thy uſe or ſervice, in whoſe name he is 
to a&t with God, and therefore ſhall preſerve himſelf in a ſtate of 
holineſs and acceptation with God. 9 And therefore my Miniſters 
muſt be ſuch alſo. 


9 And the daughter rof any prieft, if ſhe profane her 
ſelf by playing the whore, ſhe profaneth her father s ; 
ſhe ſhall be burnt with fire 7. 

r Andby analogy his ſon alſo, and his wife, becauſe the reaſon of 
And nothing is more common than 
ro name one kind for-the reſt of the ſame nature, as alſo is done 
Lev: 18, 4 (5: e: ) Expeſeth his yerſon and office, and conſequent! 
religion, one of whoſe prime Miniſters he is, to contempt. * Whic 
was the ſevereſt of all the kinds of puniſhments among the Jews. 
Whereby God would ſhew, both the greatneſs of their fins who and 
in nearer relation to God than others, and how far God is from 
allowing ſin in thoſe who are neareſt to him. 

x0 And be that is the high prieſt among his brethren, * Exod: 

l :26; 
* that is conſecrated to put on the garments x, ſhall * foes 


7 Ezek: 
44: 237 


— though he might defile kimſclffor the perſons now named, 


not uncover his hgad 7, nor rent his clothes z, 16; 323 
| * Leu, 


Chap. XXI. " 


FOr,foo, 


age *. ks 


” Chap. XXI. 


* Exod: 
28: 36. 
| Or. 97» 


ſecrati on, 


or ſepara-- 
ti0n, 
Numb: 

6: 7- 


FOr,food, 


_*Chap; 


22, 23, 


_ or ccookedne(s of it, Bug according 30 others, 


u_Levit. 8: 12. Which was only ſprinkled upon inferiour Prieſts, 
blood alſo being mixed with it, Lev: 8; 3o. - x To wit, thoſe holy 
garments which were peculiar to him, as well as thoſe common to 
others. » This being then the poſture of mourners Lev: 10: 6. tho 
4frerwards the cuſtom was changed and mourners covered their 
heads,2 Sam:15:30. E#6:6.12. Or if this cuſtom was now in uſe,the 
meaning may be,he ſhall nor pur off the Prieſtly covering or mitre, 
which was neceſſary for him to do if he had pur on the mourners co- 
vering upon his head,otherwiſe the holy covering had been defiled, 


but he ſhall continue in the exerciſe ofhis office, which is ſignified by , 


keeping on his Prieſtly garments.z Anotherexprethon of mourning. 
1x Neither ſhall he-go in @ to any dead body, nor 
defile himſelf for his father b or for his mother. _ 

a To wit, into the chamber or howſe where they lie. This and 
divers other rites here preſcrived were from hence tranſlated by ti-< 
Heathens into their uſe, whoſe Prieſts were put under the ſame obli- 
gacions.b Becauſe upon his fathers death he was aftually High-prieſt, 
having been conſecrated to this office in his Fathers life-time. 

12 Neither {ball ye g9 out of the ſanctuary c, nor 
profane the ſanctuary 4 of his God : for * che || crown 
of the anointing oyl e of his God is upon him : I aw 
the LORD. 


c To wit, to attend the funeralls of any perſon : for upon other 
oecaſions he might and did commonly go out. 4 Either by making 
the ſervice thereof give place to the diſcharge of his paſſions,or the 
performance of a civility, or by entring into the SanCtuary before 


the ſeven days alloted for his cleanſing, Numb: 19:11. were expired. 


e (i. e.) The anointing oil, which to him was in ſtead of a crown,by 
which he was advanced not only above the reft of his brethren, bur 
even above all the people, whoſe chief Governour he was in the 
things of God, tho' ſubje& and accountable to the civil Magiſtrate, 
by which alſo he was made an eminent type of Chriſt who was to 
be King and Prieſt. Or, the crown, to wit, the golden plate,which 1s 
Called the holy crown, Exod: 29: 6: and the anointing oyl of his God are 
upon him. So there is only an Ellipſis of the conjunCtion, and,which 
is frequent, as Pſal: 33: 2: and 144: 9 1/a: 63: 11. Hab: 3: 11, ©s. 
And theſe twothings, being moſt eminent, are put for the reſt, and 
the ſign is put for the thing lignified,9:4:for he is Gods High-prieſt. 
Or, the conſecration ( for ſo nezer ſignifies ) of the anointing oil, which 
by an Hypallage may be put for the anoint:ug oil of the conſecration,i: e: 
whereby he is conſecrated,zs upon him,i:e: though that aCtion be pat, 


yet the vertue of it remains ſtill upon him, he is a ſacred perſon in | 


the higheſt degree, and therefore not to detile himſelf in any kind, 

12 And he ſhall take a wife in her virginity f. 

f Or, a Virgin, partly for the decency of the type, becauſe as 
he was a type'of Chriſt, ſo his wife was a type of tlie Church, 
which is compared to a Virgin, 2 Cor: 11: 2. Rev: 14: 4« and partly 
for greater caution and aſſurance that his wife was not a defiled or 
defloured perſon. This and the follo:ving rule belong nor to all 
the Prieſts, for then this were a groſs tautology, the'e iame things 
or moſt of them being expreſly forbidden to them wv.7. bur only to 
the High-prieſt, to ſhew that he alſo and he eſpecially is obliged 
to the ſame cautions. : 

14 A widow g, or a divorced woman, or profage, 
or an harlot, theſe ſhall he nor take : but he (hall take 
a virgin of his own people h to wife. 

g Except ſhe were the widow of his predeceſſor, which ſome ga- 
ther from Ezek- 44. 22. But that place ſpeaks only of the common 
Prieſt, not of the High-prieſt. þ (:.e.) Eirhzr r. of his own tribe, 
which is confuted by the examples of holy men. See 2 Chron: 22.11. 
Or 2. of the feed of Jae, as it is explained, Ezek: 44: 22. 

I5 Neither ſhall he. profane his ſeed ; among his 
people : for I the LORD do ſandtihe him &. 


; By mixing it with forbidden kinds, whereby the children would 


be diſparaged and rendred unfit for their Prieſtly fun&ion. & (+. e.) 
have ſeparated him from all other ſorts of men for my eſpecial 
and * qo ſervice, and therefore will not have that race cor- 
rupted. 
"6 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
17 Speak unto Aaron, ſaying, Whoſoever he he of 
thy ſeed / in their generations m,that hath any blemith =, 


let him not approach to offer the Þ+ bread os of his God. 
I Whether the high-prieſt, or the inferiour ones m2 In all ſuc- 
ceſſive ages, as long as your Prieſthood and polity i 
Any defe& or exceſs of parts, any notorious deformity or imper- 
fe&tion in his body. The reaſon hereof is partly typical, that he 
ight more fully repreſent Chriſt, the great High-prieſt, who was 
ypified both by the prieſt and ſacrifice, and therefore both were to 
be without blemiſh ; partly moral to teach all Chriſtians and e- 
ſpecially Miniſters of holy things, whar purity and| perfe&ion of 
heart and life they ſhould labour after, and that n-torious blemi- 
ſhes in the mind or converſation render a man unfit for the Mini- 


ſtery of the Goſpel, and partly prudential, becauſe fuch blemiſhes ; am preſent, which commonly is 
were apt to breed contempt of the perſon, and co Rqwently, of i 


his funCtion, and of the holy things wherein he miniſtred. For 
which reaſon, ſome conceive, that ſtill ſuch perſons as have noto- 
r10us defeQts or deformities which render them contemprible, are 
not fit for the Miniſtery, Which may be true in the general, ex- 
cept where there are eminent gifts and graces, which are ſufficient 
to vindicate a man from the contempribleneſs of his bodily pre- 
ſence. The particular defe&s here mentioned, I ſhall nor enlarge 


upon becauſe ſome of the Hebrew words are diverſly interpreted, 


and becauſc the uſe of theſe things being aboliſhed, the knowledge 
of them is not very neceſſary. o Either the ſhew-bread, one emi- 
nent part being named for the whole : or the food, 3. e. all the ob- 


lations. See before on wer: 8. 
18 For whatſoever man he be that hath a blemiſh,he 
ſhall not approach p : a blind man, or a lame, or he 
that hath a flat noſe q, or any thing * ſurerfluous. 
2 Unto God, or to ſerve him in his fanduary. © 9 Moſt reſtrain 
this word to the noſe, and to ſome great deformity relating to it 
either the want of it wholly or in part, or the thortnels, tlatneſs, 


ut ignifies more 


LEVITICOUS. 


ures. #2 1:C. ; 


- o 


Chap. XXII. 
generally, a perſon that wants ſome member or members, becauſe 

the next word, to which it is oppoſed, ſignifies one that hath more 
members than he ſhould. Does: 

19 Or a man that is broken footed,or broken handed, 

20 Or crook-backt, or a dwarf; orgthat hath 4 + Or, #4 
blemiſh in his eye, or be ſcurvy, or {cabbed, or hath /ender. 
his ftones broken. 

21 No man that hath a blemiſh 7, of the ſeed of 
Aaron the prieſt, ſhall come nigh to offer the offerings 
of the LORD made by fire: he hath a blemiſh, he 
ſhall nor come nigh to offer the bread of his God, | 

r Any notorious blemiſh whereby he is di:hgured, though not 
here mentioned. 


22 He ſhall eat the bread of his God, both of the 
molt holy, and of the holy 5. 
s Which a prieſt having any uncleanneſs upon him might not 
do. Whereby Gcd would ſhew the great, diflerence between na- 
tural infirmities ſent upon a man by God, and moral defilemenrs 
which a man brought upon himſelf. What was holy, and what 
moft holy was declared betore, See Levir. 2..3. and 6. 17. and 7.1. 
and 14. 13. and 22. 10. 

23 Only he ſhall notgo in unto the vail z, nor come 
nigh unto the altar «, b2cauſe he hath a blemiſh, chat he 
profane not my ſanctuary x : for I the LORD do fan- 
ctitie them y. 

7 (7+ e.) To the ſecond vail which was.between the Holy and 
the moſt Holy place, Exod: 26: 13: 36. to burn incenſe, to order 
the ſhew-bread, and to dreſs the lamps, which were nigh unto that 
vail though without. ) « (7.e.) The altar of burnt-offering, which 
was without the ſantuary. The ſenſe is, He ſhall not execute the 
prieſts office, which was to be done in thoſe two places. x Heb: 
y ſanfuaries, in the plural number, as it is alſo, Levit, 26: 31. Jer: 
51: 51. Ezet: 28: 18. For though the fanQtuary was bur one, yet 
there were divers parts, to wit, the Courr, the Holy place, and 
the moſt holy, each of which was in a large ſenſe a San#uary, or 
an holy place ſer apart for Gods worſhip. y (i e.) Do ſer theth 
apart for high and holy uſes, ro manifeit my preſence and grace, 
and to receive my Worſhip and ſervice in them. And therefore 1 
will not have them polluted or diſparaged by the admiſſion of de. 
filed or deformed prieſts to Miniſter therein. 

24 And Moles told it unto Aaron, and to his 


and to all the children of Iſrael. 
CH A P. XXII. 


! 4 Prieſt, with any Uncleanneſs, muſt not eat of holy things, on pain 

| —_ rill Sew fos ani he be torr Fad" Rs. Meche en ps pA 
a dead Carcaſs, nor that which was torn, $8. No ſtrangers nor hired Ser- 
vant to eat of holy things, 10. Not the Prieſts Daughter, if married t0 
a Stranger, 12. Concerning ſuch as eat thereof unwillingly, 14.16. 
Concerning Free-will-offerings and their conditions, 17. 24. Not #9 
be received from a Strangers hand, 25. Of what Age, 26. No Beaſt ta be 
offered with the Dam, 28. Offerings to be eat the ſame Day, 29. 30 

Au Exhortation to obedience, 31. 33. ; 


A N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, _ 

2 Speak unto Aaron, and to his ſons, that they 
ſeparate themſelves « from the holy things & of the 
children of. Ifrael, and that they profane noc my holy 
name in #hoſe things which they c hallow unto me :- I am 
the qr | 

a To wit, when any uncleanneſs is upon them.as i | 
v, 3, 4+ b (ie.) _ eating of thoſe ns of the bes tug or 
belong to them. Only of thetirhes they might eat in thar caſe 
c Eirher the children of Jael, or the Prieſts : for both of them 
did in their kinds hallow, conſecrate or offer them to» God. Bur 
; the former ſeems more probable, both becauſe they are mentioned 
; here, and v: 3: where they are ſaid zo ha/low, &c. and becauſe rhis 

makes the argument ſtronger, it ill became the Prieſts to-profang 
_ or pollute what the people did hallow. 

j 3 Say unto them, whoſoever he be of all your ſeed 
i among your generations that goeth untg holy things 
. d,which the children of Ifrael hallow/linto the LORD, 


- 


ſons, 


| having his uncleanneſs upon him, that ſoul ſhall be cur 

' off from my preſence e : I am the LORD. 

' &d To catthem, or to touch them ; for if the touch of one of th» 
people having his uncleanneſs upcn him defiled the thing ks 
touched, much more was ir ſo in the Prieſt. e Either, from the 

| place "f my preſence and from my ordinances by excommunicati- 

; on : He ſhall be excluded both from the adminiſtration, and fron 

| the participation of them. Or, from the people among whom I 


expreſſed by cuttin par: 
Or, fiom the land of the living. s off from his peo 


4 What man f ſoever of the ſeed of Aaron 5s a le- 
per, or hath * a + running iſiue, he ſhall nor cat of 
the holy things until he be * clean. And * whoſo _ 
roucheth any thing #hat is unclean by the dead; or * a * Clizp: 
man whoſe feed goeth from him, : Heb 
f (7. e.) Or woman, of Aarons ſeed : for they were under the Bao: 


ſame law. hams. of 


5 Or * whoſoever toucheth an creeping thing,” * Ch:14:23 
whereby he may be made unclean,or*a man of whom he and 15:13 
may take uncleanneſs, whatſoever uncleanneſs he hach ;  Numbz 

6 The ſoul which hath touched any fuch,ſhall be un- EN 
clean until the even,and (ball nor eat of the holy things, 15: n. 
unleſs he waſh his fleſh with water. * Chap: 

7 Ang when the fun is down he ſhall be clean, and 172+ 
bal afterward cat Of the holyrhings, becauſe it 5s his toodg. 

z ( z- e.) His portion, the means of his fubſiſtance. This may 
| be added, co lignitie why _ was n9 greater nor longer a penal. 
: 3 fy 


ple. 


the reins. 


T3 19+ 


IP IRE ELIT IST SRI ICI re lapEI=; 


þ 
| 
i 
| 
Li 


ap 


OO =O SET 


Po 


| Snap _ he ſhall not vat, to defile himſelf therewith : I am the 


[ *ch:17:15 LORD. : 
| Ezek:44 g They hall therefore keep mine ordinance þ, leſt 


_* Heb: 


ut upon the prieſts than upon the people in the ſame caſe, 

Hm ad I53 cath his neceſſity craved ſome mitigation : Tho 

otherwiſe the prieſts being inore ſacred perſons, and obliged to 
greater care and exemplarineſs deſerved a greater puniſhment. 

> $8 * That which dieth of it ſelf,or is torn ith beafts, 


23 they bear fin ; for it &, and die therefore, if they pro- 
fane it |; I the LORD do ſanRifie them. 


þ Either this ordinance here treated of concerning abſtaining 
from holy things when they are unclean : Or more generally, that 
great ordinance whereby I have made them the Guardians of holy 
places and things to keep them from all defilement by themiclves 
or others. Heb: my watch, ( i.e.) the watch or guard which I 
have commanded them to keep. (7. ec.) Incur guilt and punith- 
ment. & ( 5. e. ) For the negle& or violation of it. /(#.c.) Their 
charge, or Gods ordinance about it. : 

* See 10 * There ſhall no ſtranger » cat of the holy thing; 
x Sam: . ſojourner » of the priefts, or an hired ſervant ſhall 


not eat of the holy thing 0. | 

m (i: e: ) Of a ſtrange family, who is not a prieſt, as ver. 12. 
compare Matth:-12: 4. But there 1s an exception to this rule, v: 11. 
» One that comes to his houſe and abides there for a ſeaſon, and 
eats at his table. o Of theſe parts of the offerings, which fell to 
the preiſts ſhare, as the breaſt and ſhoulder. | 7 Bi 

be ., 18 Burif che prieſt buy -»y ſoul + with his money, 
kao of he ſhall eat of it, and he that is born in his houſe ; they 


his money. ſhall eat of his meat p. : 
> Becauſe they were wholly his, and as ſuch they were circum- 
+ Heb: a ciſed, Gen: 17; Exod: 12. 


man 3 x2 If the prieſts daughter alſo be married unto | a 
ftrarges. ſtranger q, ſhe may not eat of an offering of the holy 
things. 


q (i. &) To one of another family, who is no prieſt. Yet the 
prieſts wife, though of another family, might eat. The reaſon of 
which difference is, becauſe the wife paſſeth into the name, ſtate 
and priviledges of her husband, from whom the family is denom1- 
——_ and eſteemed. 


13 Bar if the prieſts daughter be a widow, or di- 
yorced and have no child, and is returned unto her fa- 
* Chap: thers houſe, * as in her youth, ſhe hall eat of her fa- 
10:14. hers meat, but there ſhall no ſtranger eat thereof, 
14 And if a maneat of the holy thing unwittingly, 
then he hall put the fifth part thereof unto it r,and $hall 
give it unto the prieſt, with the holy thing 5. 
7 Over and above the principal, and beſides the ram to be offer- 
ed to God, Levit: 5: t5. '5 Or, and ſhall give unto the Prieſt the holy 


thing, 3. e. the worth of it, which the Prieſt was either to take to. 


himſelf or to offer to God, as the nature of the thing was. 
i5 And they t ſhall not profane the holy things of 
the children of Iſrael, which they offer unto the LORD. 
: Either 1. The people ſhall not profane them, by eating them : 
Or 2. The Prieſts ſhall not profane them, 7. e. ſuffer the people to 
profane them, without cenſure and puniſhment. Both come to 
the ſame thing : The people ſhall not do it,nor the Prieſts ſuffer it. 
[| Or, !/ad2 16 Or || {uffer them to bear the iniquity of treſpaſs «, 
rhenjeiver when they eat their holy things : for I the LORD do 
eons of Tandtifie them. 
treſpaſs in _ * (7. e.) They i. e. the Prieſts, ſhall not ( the negative particle be- 
:heir eat= 19g underſtood out of the foregoing Clauſe, as Pſa!: 1: 5: and 9: 18.) 
ing: ſuffer them, i: e: the people, 70 bear the iniquity of treſpaſs, i: e: the pu- 
Py niſhmenr of their ſin, which they might expe& from God, and for 
the prevention whereof the priett was to ſee reſtitution made, &c. 
The words may be rendred thus, But ( ſo the Hebrew wau is oft 
tranſlated ) they 7. e. the Prieſts, ſhall make them, i. e. the people, 70 
bear the iniquity, or puniſhment of their treſpaſs or ſin, 7: e: they ſhall re- 
quire from them reparations in manner here expreſſed. 


17 And the LORD ſpake unto Moles, ſaying, 
18 Speak unto Aaron, and to his ſons, and unto all 

*Ch.;., the children of Ifrael, and ſay unto them, * Whoſo- 

3:10: | Ever be be of the houſe of Iſrael, or of the ſtrangers x 
in Iſrael, that will ofer his oblation for all his vows y, 
and for all his free-will-otterings, which they will offer 
unto the LORD for a burnt-ofttering: 

x Such as were Proſelytes. y See on Levit:: 7: 16s 

19 Ye ſhall «ffer at your own will a male z without 
blemiſh of the beeves, of the ſheep, or of the goats. 

x For a burnt-offering, which was always of that kind : but the 
females were excepted in peace-offerings, Lev. 3: 1: and fin-offer- 
ings, Lev: 4: 32:and 5.6. ; 

* Deut: 20 * But whatſoever hath a blemiſh, hat ſhall ye not 

15:21: offer : for it {ball not be acceptable for you. 

idk 21 And * whoſoever oftereth a ſacrifice of peace-of- 

* Ch: 3: 1: ffering unto the LORD, te aecompliſh þ;s vow, or a 

[Or,g0as: free-will-offering in beeves or || ſheep, it thall be perfec, 
to be accepted 3 there ſhall be no blemiſh 2 therein. 

a To wit, none of the blemiſhes mentioned, v. 22, 24. for ſome 
blemiſhes did not hinder the acceptance of a free-will-offering,but 
only of # vow, v, 23. 

* ver: 20 22.* Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having awen, 
or ſcurvy, or {cabbed, ye {hall not offer theſe unto the 
LORD ; nor make an offering by fire of them upon 
the altar unto the LORD. 

| Oc.t;2, 23 Either a bullock, or a [lamb that hath any thing 

ach;21:18 * ſuperfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayeſt thou 


< 


F Gp. m_ _—_— LEVITICUS. Ci. SAL 


offer b for a free-will-offering : but for a yow 1t - 


not be accepted. : | 

þ Either 1, To the Prieſt, who might, according to the 71/-5 
given by God, either convert it to his own uſe, or ſell it, anc |, 
out the price of it upon the Temple and Sacrifices. Bur in this feri'e. 
any of the other kinds, as blind, or broken, &c. might be ole ed, 
which yes are forbidden to be offered, v. 22. or rather 2. T« the 
Lord, as is expreſſed, v: 22: 24: this being put down by way of op- 
poſition to thoſe defe&ts, v: 22: and by way of exception from the 
general rule, v: 21. | 


24 Ye ſhall not offer unto the LORD that which is 
bruiſed, or cruſhed, or broken, or cut, neither ſhall ye 
make any offering hereof in your land. 

25 Neither from a ſtrangers hand c (ball ye offer the 
bread dof your God of any of theſe e; becauſe their 
corruption 3s in them f, and blemiſhes be in them * they 
ſhall not be accepted for you g. 

c To wit, from proſelytes, from whom leſs might ſeem to be 
expeCted, and in whom God might bear with ſome things, which 
he would not bear with in his own people : Yet even from thoſe 
ſich ſhould not be accepted, much Jeſs from the 1ſaelires. d (7: e: ) 
The ſacrifices. See on Levit: 21:8, e (7: e:) So corrupted or defe- 
&ive. Which clauſe limits the ſenſe and kinds of offerings, and 
cuts off another more general interpretation received by many, tO 
wit, that he forbids the receiving of any offering, whether ble- 
miſhed or perfe&, from the hands of a ſtranger remaining in blea- 
theniſm, f (7: e:) They are corrupt, vitious and unlawful facri» 
ficess g Or, from you, O Prieſts, to whom it belongs ro offer. You 
ſhall bear the blame of it, for the ſtrangers might do ſo through 
ignorance of Gods Law. 


26 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
27 * When a bullock, or a ſheep, or a goat is brought * Exoq, 
forth, then it ſhall be ſeven days under the dam, and 34:26: 


cepted for an offering made by fire unto the LORD. ** 
h See On Exod: - & + Zo: and 23: I9. 


kill it * and her young both in one day 5; 
z; Becauſe it ſavoured of cruelty. See on Deut: 22: 6. 12.6 
29 And when ye will offera ſacrifice of thankſgiving 
unto the LORD, offer it at your own will F. 
k ( (7: e: ) What and when you pleaſe, ſo the rules be obſerved : 
Or, for your acceptance, as Levit: 1: 3: i:e: in ſuch manner that God 
may accept it, 7: e: regularly, chearfully, &c. 
30 On the ſame day it ſhall be eaten up ; ye [ball 


* Deut: 


31 Therefore ſhall ye keep my commandments, and r5: 
do them : I am the LORD. 8 
' 32 Neither ſhall ye profane my holy name 7, but * fp. 
I will be hallowed » among the children of Iſrael ; I '* 3 
am the LORD which hallow you = ; 


7 Either by diſpiſing me and my commands your ſelves, or by 
giving others occaſion to profane it. m2 Or, ſan#ified, either by 


| you in keeping my holy commands, cr upon you in executing my 


holy and righteous Judgments Lev: 19: 3 1/a. 26, 15. I will ma- 
nifeſt my ſelf to be an holy God that will nor bear the tranſgreſſi- 
on of my laws. » By ſeparating you from all the world unto my 
ſelf and ſervice, by giving you holy laws, and my holy ſpirit to 
enable and incline you to keep them, and therefore you have the 
more reaſon to hallow me and keep my commands, and are the 
more inexcuſable if ye tranſgreſs them. 

33 That brought you out of the land of Egypt to be 
your God: I am the LORD: 


CHAP, XXIIL 
Concerning the Feaſt: of the Lord, 1, 2. The Sabbath, 3. Paſſover, 4---$, 
The firſt Fruits, Q===a=> 14. Of Pentecoft, 1 5--=--- 22. Of the Feaſt of 


Trumpets, 2.3----=25, Of Atonements, 26-=---32, Of the Feaſt of Ta- 
bernacles, 3 3-=--=44., 


N D the LOR D ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
A 2 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and ſay 
unto them concerning the feaſts of the LORD which 


ye ſhall proclaim a to be holy convocations, b ever theſe 
are my feaſts c» 


2 ( 7: e. ) Cauſe to be proclaimed, by the Prieſts. 'See Numb. ro 
8, 9, 19 b Days for your aſſembling together to my worſhip and 


ſervice in a ſpecial manner. c which I have ; 
- . RI appointed, and 
right obſervation whereof I will accept. PP ; ew 


3 * dix days thall work be done, but the ſeventh day » 
is the. ſabbath of reſt, an holy convocation ; Ye ail _— 


do no work & therein : it 55 the ſabbath of the LORD in and 31.13 
all your dwellings e. and 34.21 

d So it runs in the general for the Sabbath q 
of expiation, wv. 28: excluding all works about 
employments whether of profit or of pleaſure 
days he forbids only ſervile works, as wer: 7 
manifeſt difference in the expreſſions uſed 
needs imply a difference in the things. 
guiſh the ſabbath from other feaſts, 
the Lord in Jeruſalem only, 


Cas! 
ha 


ay, and for the day 
carthly occaſions or :c-19 
; but upon other feaſt $a 
21, 36: for ſureby this ,.. _ 
by the wiſe God muſt '3*'4 
'e This is added to diſtin- 

which were to be kept, before 


whither all the 

=— _ that _— _= _ Sabbath was to be q” Ml ahees 
where they were, both in Synagogues, whi 

end, and in their private <A 5 Fl s s$, Which were ere&ed for that 


4 Theſe are the feaſts of the LO 


vocations, which ye hall proclaim in their ſeaſons f, and13.3 
F In their appointed and proper times, as the word is uſed, Gen: 224 23-15 
I: grin 19. 2 © and 3418 
5*In tne fourteenth day of the firſt moneth at even ;; Nom9®! 
the LORDS paſſeorer, oy: 


29: Je, 


6 An] 


from the eighth day 4 and thenceforth, it ſhall be ac- Put 14, 


28 -And whether it be a cow, or |lewe, ye ſhall not - oy, os 
oats 


leave * none of it until the morrow : I am the LORD. *Chap.1? 


RD, even holy con» *Ex:12:18 | 


and 28:16 © 
Deur. 161 


FF, 
23; 

Nut 
28: 

JOr 
hana 
+H 
an 0 


* De 
6: 9; 
tjOr, } 


weeks. 


*Ex:2 
I9: ar 
34:22( 

um. 
20; ar 
28: 20 


Deut: 


Chap. XXII. 


*Exod; 


23: 16; 


Numb; 
9$: 26: 
[Or, 
handful. 
+ Heb: 
an Omer” 


* Deut: 


5 And on the fifteenth day of the ſame month zs the 
{-aſt of unleavened bread unto the LORD : ſeven days 


ye muſt eat unleavened bread. 


ye ſhall do no ſerviie work therein. 
"8 Bur ve ſhall offer an offering made by fire unto the 
LORD feven days g : in the ſeventh day js an holy 
convocation, ye ſhall do no ſervile work therezn, 

The matter. and manner whereof, ſee Num: 28: 18: &C. 

9 And the LORD lpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

10 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and fay unto 
them, * When ye be come into the land þ which I give 
unto you, and ſhall reap # the harveſt thereof &, then 
ye ſhall bring a || + ſheaf / of the firſt-fruics of your 


harveſt unto the prieſt : 

h Therefore this obliged them not in the defert, where they 
reaped no harveſt, ©. 7. (7. e.) Begin to reap, as it is expounded, 
Deut: 16: 9. So he b:22t, i.e. began to beger, Gen: 5: 32: and 11: 26: 
and he built, 1 Kings 6: 1. i.e. he began to build, as iris explained, 
2 Chron: 3: 11 k To wit, Barly harveſt, which was before Wheat 
harveſt. See Exod: 9:31, 32: and 34: 22: Ruth 2: 23. 1 Heb. 4r 
omer, which is the tenth partof an Ephah. Ir ſeems here to note the 
meaſure of corn which was to be offered. For it is to be conſidered, 
that they did not offer this Corn in the ear, or by a ſheaf or handful, 
but, as Joſephus, 3: 10: affirms, and may be gathered from Zevir: 2: 
14, 15, 16. purged from the chaff, and dryed, and beaten out, and, 
ſome add, ground into Meal and Sifred into fine Flour ; though 
this may be doubted of, becauſe the Meat-offering attending upon 
this was of fine Flour, wver(e 13: and becaule this offering 1s ſaid to 
be of green ears of Corn dryed, &c. Lev: 2: 14; 

11 And he shall wave the sheaft before the LORD, 


to be accepted for you #» : on the morrow after the 


ſabbath » the prieſt shall wave :. : 

m That God may accept of you and bleſs you in the reſt of your 
harveſt. » ( i. e. ) After the firſt day of the feaſt of unleavened 
bread, which wasa Sabbath or Day of Reſt, as appears from werſe 7. 
or upon the ſixteenth day of the Month. And this was the firſt 
of thoſe fifty days, in the cloſe whereof was the feaſt of Pentecoſt or 
Whitſuntide. 

12 And ye $hall offer that day, when ye wave the 


sheaf, an he-lamb s wichout blemisk of che firſt year, 


for a burnt-offering unto the LORD. 

o Beſides the daily morning and evening ſacrifice, which it was 
needIlz{s to mention here, and beſides one of thoſe ſacrifices ro be 
offered every day of the ſeven, verſe 8. 

12 And the meat-offering thereof ſhall be two tenth- 


deals p of fine flour mingled with oy], an offering made 
by fire unto the LORD for a ſweet favour : and the 
drink-oftering thereof q ſhall be of wine, the fourth part 


of an hin r. 
þ Or, parts, to wit, of an Ephah, 7.e. two Omers, whereas in 
other ſacrifices of Lambs there was bur one tenth deal preſcribed 
Num: 15.4. The reaſon of which diſproportion may be this, that one 
of the tenth deals was a nec<{[iry atrendant.upon the Lamb, and the 
other was peculiar to this feaſt and occaſion, and was an attendant 
upon thatof the ſheafor Corn, and was offered with it in thankſgiving 
to God for the fruics of the Earth. .q Drink-offerings were addedto 


| all burnt-offerings, as we may ſee, Numb: 15: 5. r The meaſure 


appvinted for every Lamb, Num: 15: 5. This alſo probably would 
have been doubled, for the reaton now mentioned, had this been a 
thank-cffering for the vintage as it was for the Harveſt. 

14 And ye shall eat neither bread s, nor parched corn, 
nor green ears t, until the ſelf-ſame day « that ye have 
brought an offering unto your God : it ſhall bea ſtatute for 
ever throughout your generations, in all your dwellings. 

s Made of new Wheat, as the nature and reaſon of the Law 
ſheweth. + Which were uſual, net only for offerings to God, as 
Levlt: 2: 14: but alſo for Mans Fcod. See Joſh. 5: 11: Ruth 2: 14; 
1 Sam: 17: 17: Matth: 12:1, #u Good reaſon God ſhould be firſt 
ſerved and owned as the Supream Landlord. 

15 And * yeshall count unto you from the morrow 


aſter the ſabbath x, from the day that ye brought the 


Or frven Sheafof the waye-offering, | ſeven ſabbaths y shall be 


weeks. 


*Ex:23:16 


19: and 
34:326; 
Num: 1 


compleat. 

x (i. e.) From the ſixteenth day of the month, and the ſecond day 
of the feaſt of unleavened bread incluſively. Seeon werſe 11. (5. e.) 
weeks, which are ſo called, by a Synecdoche, from the chief day 
of it, borh here and Luke 18: 12; Afﬀs 20:71; 1 Cor: 16: 2. 

16 Even unto the morrow after the ſeventh ſabbath 
& ſhall ye number fifty days, and ye $hall offer a new 


meat-offering a unto the LORD. 

z (:.e. ) Afﬀeer ſeven weeks or fourty nine days, the morrow after 
which was the fifcieth day, called alſo Pentecoſt. # To wit, of new 
Corn made into loaves, as it follows. 

I7 Ye ſhbalbring outof your habitations þ two wave- 
loaves of two tenth-deals c : they ſhall be of fine flour, 
they (hall be baken with leaven 4d, :they are the * firſt- 
fruits unto the LORD. 

b (i-e.) Our of the Corn of your own land, for which and for the 
| fruits of it you are now to offer praiſes unto God. And this alſo, 


" as well as the former ſacrifice, w:s brought our of the common 


charge, and inthe name of the whole nation, whence it is ſaid to be 
brought out of their havitations in the plural number. Some conceive 
two ſeveral loaves were brought fromevery Family, or, as others, 
f:om every City or Town. But this is cafily confuted from werſe 18; 
where we read that with the bread, 149) wit, th: two loaves, were t0 be 
Offered ſeven Lambs, one Bullock, &c, which doubtleſs was a common 


oblation, and in thename of all, « In double proportion, as before, 


L BFY-IT41C DS 


7 In the firſt day ye ſhall have an holy convocation : 


 forthetwo lambs, otherwiſe they had been roo big and too heavy to 


Chap. XXIIL 


verſe 13. d Becauſe theſe were not offered to God, but wholly given 
to the Prieſts for Food. S:e on Lew: 2: 11; and7. 13. - | 

18 And ye hall offer with the bread ſeven lambs 
without blemiſh of the firſt year, and one young bullock; 
and two rams e: they (hall be fer a burnc-offering ur to 
the LORD, with their meat-offering, and their drink- 
ofterings ; even an offerizg made by hire of ſweet ſarour 
unto the LORD. 

e In Numb: 28: 11, 19: It is two young Bullocks and one Raw, Firher 
therefore ir was left to their liberty rochuſe which they ould offer, 
or one of the Bullocks there, and one of the Rams here, were ths 
peculiar ſacrifices of the feaſt-day, and the other were attendants 
upon two loaves, which were the principal and mol? proper offering 
at this time. And the one may be mentioned there, and the other 
here, to teach us, thar the addicion of a new ſacrifice did not deſtroy 
che former, but borh were to be offered, as-the extraordinary }. 
ſacrifices of every Feaſt did not hinder the oblation of the daily 
ſacrihce. 

19 Then ye ſhall facrifice * one kid of the goats 
for a ſin-ofzring f, and two lambs of the firſt year for 


a ſacrifice of * peace-offerings. 

f In Lzvit: 4: 14: the fin-offering for the ſin of the people is a 
bullock, but here # kid, &c. the reaſon of the difference may be this, 
becauſe that was for ſome particular ſin of the people, but this Only 
in general for all their ſins. If it be ſaid, then this ſh:uld have been 
che better ſacrifice,as beingfor far more and poflibly greater offences, 
it may be replied, that this is not the only inſtance wherein the 
greater f1ns are expiated by ſmaller ſacrifices, , and the ſmaller ſins 
by greater ſacrifices; which was to inftrutt us, that fins were not 
expiated by the ſacrifices for any worth in them, but only in reſpe& 
of Chriſt ; and thar, rhough all fins are not equal, yet they are 
_ explated by one and the ſame Price, even by the Blood .of 

rilt. | 

20 And the prieſt shall wave them g with the bread 
of the firſt-fruits for a wave-offering before the LORD, 
wich the ewo lambs : * chey shall be holy to the LORD, * 
+ for the prieſts 6b. | 


g (7.e.) Some part of them in the name of the whole ; and fo 


Ee 


Nums 
8: 125 
Deur: | 
18: 4s _ 
be waved. So it 1s a Synecdochical exprefſion. þ Who had to them- TIRE 
[elves not only the breaſt and ſhoulder, as in others, which belonged 
ro the Prieſt, bur alſo the reſt which belenged to rhe offerer ; becauſe 
-he whole Congregation being the offzrer here, it could neither be 
diſtribured to them al], nor given to ſome without offence or injury 
to the reſt. | 

21 And ye ſhall proclaim on the ſelf-ſame day, hat 
it may be an holy convocation 3 unto' you : ye ſhall do 
20 fervile work therein : it ſhall be a ſtatute for ever in all 
your dwellings, throughout your generations. 

# A Sabbath or day of Reſt, called Pentecoſt; which was inſtituted, 
-artly 1n remembrance of the conſummarion of their deliverance 
»ur of Egypt by bringing them thence to the mount of God, or Sinat, 
iS God had promiſed, and of that admirable Bleſſing of giving the 
Law to them at that time, and forming them into a Common-wealth 
ander his own immediate Government; and partly in gratitude 
for the further progreſs of their Harveſt, as in the Paſſeover they 
_ a Thank-offering to God for the beginning of their Har- 
Veir. 

22 And * when ye reap the harveſt of your land, thou 
& ſhalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy 
held when thou reapeft, * neither ſhalt thou gather any 
gleanings of thy harveſt : thou ſhalt leave them unto the 


poor, and to the ftranger ; I am the LORD your God. 

k From the plural, ye, he comes to the ſingular, thou, becauſe he 
would preſs this duty upon every perſon who hath an harveſt to reap, 
chat none might plead exemption from it, And it is obſervable, 
thar though the preſent buſineſs is only concerning the Worſhip of 
God, yet he makes a kind of excurſion to repeat a former Law of 
providing for the Poor, to ſhew that our piery and devotion to God 
15 lirtie eſteemed by ham. if it be not accompanied with atts of Charity 
ro Men. 

23 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

24 Speak unto the child:en of Iſrael, ſaying, in the 
* ſeventh month, in the firft < of the month, ſhall ye 
have a ſabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets 7, 


an holy convocation. 

I ( 5. e.) Solemnized with the blowing of trampets by the 
Prieſts, not in a common way, as they did every firſt day of every 
month, Numb: 11: 10, bur in an extraordinary manner, not only 1n 
Feruſalem, bur in all the Ciries of 1{-ae/, This ſeems to have been 
inſtitured, 1. ToSolemnize the beginning of the new year, whereof 
as to civil matters, and particularly as to the Jubilee, this was the 
firſt day ; concerning whichit was fitthe people ſhould beadm-niſhed; 
both to excite their thankfulnets for Gods Bleſſings in the lalt year, 
and to dire& them 11 the management of their civil affairs, 2. To 
put a ſpecial honour upon this month. For as the ſeventh day was 
che Sabbath, and the ſeventh year was a Sabbatical year, ſo God 
would have the ſeventh month to be a kind of Sabbaticatmoath, for 
the many Sabbaths and ſolemn Feaſts which were obſerved in this 
more thaiuin any other month. Ard by this ſcundiag of the rrumpets 
in its beginning God would quicken and prepare them for the fol- 
lowing Sabbaths, as well thatof atonement and humiliation for theie 
ſins, as thole of thankſgiving for Gods Mercies. 

25 Ye ſhall do no farvile work therein : but ye ſhail 
ofter an offering »» made by fire unto the LORD. 

-m What that was, fee Numb: 29: 2, &c. | 

26 And the LORD ſpake unco Moſes, ſaying. WP es. 
25 * Alſo on the tenth dy. of this ſeventh month, x,,?.<. 
there ſhall be a day of aconement ; it ſhall be an holy-- 2g: 5; 
X 4 EONVOCAatiOon 


* Nuttbh: 


-* Chap: 


angry en cpmpRp,-pibnyngs 0 RR 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


——_> > oe COSI ID IO eWE e ED Ines > ns eo SIA er oo 


£ . 
— 


: 
: 
: 
x 


| 


29; Is | 


| Gen: 
7: 145 


\ 


_. 

hl 

># 
iy 


+ Heb: 
jr 


; 
[; 


78 
{i 
'll 
f 


A IRE pe R—__ 2” OO III 200g o 
I oa a ES 2 F< nm TP ND D CIDIE 
SAII9aD qa ARK of gee rome. SISTCRES = ICSD = 
- . Ee ee ee ee eee ee eee eee 
, - 


{ * Num: 
i 29; 12: 


—_ _ Ea EE SIA I ES m5 Ee DEE ACTA 0 CO — 


37:an 
Chron: 
7: 9: 

+ Heb: 
day of 


Chap. XXII. 


*John 7: 


reftraint. 


convocation unto you, and ye ſhall afii& your ſouls”, 
and offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD. | 

» With faſting, and bitter repentance for all, eſpecially their 
National fins, among which no doubt God would have them remem- 
ber their fin of the golden Calf. For as God had threatned to 
remember it in after times to puniſh them for it, Exod: 32: 344 10 
there was great reaſon why they ſhould remember 1t to humble them- 
ſelves for it. 


28 And ye ſhall do no work in that fame day : for 
it zs a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you, 
before the LORD your God, | : 

29 For whatſoever ſoul iz be 9 that (ball not be afili- 
&ed in that ſame day, * he ſhall be cut off from among 
his people. 3 - 

o Either of the Jewiſh Nation, or Religion. Hereby God would 
ſignifie the abſolute neceſſity which every man had of Repentance 
and Forgiveneſsof fin, and the defperate condition of all imperutent 
Perſons, ; 

20 And whatſoever ſoul 5: be that doth any work in 
that ſame day, the ſame ſoul will I deſtroy fromamong 
his people. : 

21 Ye ſhall do no manner of work : #t ſhall be a 
ſtatute for ever throughout your generations, in all your 
dwellings, 

32 It fall be unto you a ſabbath of reſt, and ye (ball 
afli& your ſouls in the ninth day of the month at even, 
from even unto even ball yet celebrate your ſabbath p. 

p This clauſe ſeems tobe added to anſwer an objeftion, how this 
day ofatonement could be both on the zenth day, ver. 27. andon the 
ninth day here. The anſwer is, it beganat theevening or cloſe of 
the ninth day, and continued till the evening or cloſe of the tenth 
day, and ſo both were true, eſpecially if you conſider, that the Jews 


did take in ſome part of the ſix days evening by way of preparation | 


for the Sabbath, and therefore would much more take in a part of 
theninth day to prepare and begin the great and ſolemn work of 
their yearly atonement. And this clauſe may be underſtood eirher, 
1. Of this particular Sabbath called here your Sabbath in the ſingular 
number, poſſibly to note the difference between this and other 
Sabbaths : for the weekly Sabbath is oft called che Sabbath of the Lord, 


becauſe that was in a ſpecial manner appointed for the praiſing, | 


honouring and ſerving of God and celebrating his glorious works, as 
alſo the other Sabbaths here mentioned were, whereas this was 
principally ordained for their need and for their good, even to ſeek 
and obtain the pardon of their fins. Or 2. Of all their Sabbarhs, 
and conſequently of this. The Jews are ſuppoſed to begin every 
day, andconſequently their Sabbaths, atthe evening, in remembrance 
of the creation, Gen. 1. 5. as Chriſtians generally begin their days 
and Sabbaths with themorning in memory of Chriſts Reſurre&ion. 


22 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
24 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying, ® The 
fifteenth day of the ſeventh month ſhall be the feaſt of 


tabernacles 9 for ſeven days unto the LORD. 

q (5. e. ) Of Tents or Booths or Arbours. This feaſt was appointed 
principally to remind them of that time when they had no other 
dwellings in the Wildernefs, as it is expreſſed, v. 43. and to ſtir them 
up to bleſs God, as well for the gracious condutt and ProteQtion then 
afforded them, as for their morecommodious and ſecure habitations 
now given them: and ſecondarily to excite them to gratitude for all 
the fruits of the year newly ended, which were now compleatly 
brought in, as may be gathered from v. 39. and Exod: 23: 16: Deut: 
16: 13, 14. See an inſtance of this feaſt, Neb: 8: 16. 


35 On the firft day ſpall be an holy convocation: ye 
ſhall do no ſervile work zherein. : | 
26 Seven days ye (hall offer an offering r made by fire 
unto the LORD ; * on the eighth day - hall be an holy 
2 convocation unto you, and ye ſhall offer an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD : it isa Þ ſolemn aſlembly 
z, and ye ſhall do no ſervile work therein. 

+ A ſeveral offering each day, which is particularly deſcribed 
Numb. 29. 13, &c: s Which though ir was not one of the days of 
this feaſt firitly taken, nor is it here affirmed to be {o, bur on rhe 
contrary is expreſly ſaid to conſiſt of ſeven days, v. 34, 39. nor did 
they dwell longer in Tabernacles, yet in a larger ſence it belonged to 
this feaſt, and is called the great day of the feaſt, John 7. 37. And ſo 
indeed it was, as for other reaſons, ſo becauſe, by their remova] 
from their Tabernacles into more fixed and comfortable habitations, 
it repreſented that happy time wherein their 4o years tedious march 
in the Wilderneſs was ended with their inrroduCtion into and ſetrle- 
ment inthe land ofCanann, which it was moſt fit and juſt they ſhould 
acknowledge with ſuch a Solemnday of Thankſgiving as this was. 
z Heb. a day of concluſion, becauſe it was . the end of the feaſt, John 
7. 37. Or, of reſtraint, becauſe they were reſtrained from ſervile 
work, and obliged toattendance upon Gods worſhip ; or, of detention, 
becauſe they were yet detained before the Lord, and kept together 
for his ſervice, and not ſuffered to return to their tenrs, till this 
was Over. | 


27 Theſe are the feaſts of the LORD, which yeſhal! 
proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering 
made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt-offering, and a 


-meat-oftering, a ſacrifice «, and drink-offerings, every- 


thing upon his day : 

w ( 7. e. ) Another ſacrifice, to wit, for a ſfin-offering, as we ſhall 
find it, Numb: 29: 16, 19, 22, Oc. called by the general name, » 
ſacrifice, becauſe it was deſigned for thar which was the principal end 
of all ſacrifices, to wit, for the expiation of ſin. 


138 Beſide the ſabbaths x of the LORD, and beſide 
'your.gifts y, and beſide all your vows, and beſide all 


your free-will-offerings, which ye give untothe LORD. , the reſt belonged to the Pricſts, 


LEYITICUS. 


x*( 5. e. ) The offerings of the weekly Sabbaths, by a Metonymy, . 
as the day is ſometirhes put for the ations done in it, as Prov, 27. 1. 
r Cor. 3. 13. God will not have any Sabbath-ſacrifice dimin:ſhed 
becauſe of the addition of others, proper to any other feaſt. And it 
is here to be noted, that though other feſtiva} days are ſometimes 
called Sabbaths, as here Yerſe 39. yet theſe are here called the 
Sabbaths of the Lord, in way of contradiſtinQion to other day's of reſt, 
to ſhew that this was more eminently ſuch than other teaſt-days, 
which alſo ſufficiently appears from the fourth Commandment. y 
Which, being here diſhingviſhed from the free-will-offerings made 
to the Lord, may ſeem to note what they freely gave to the Prieſts 
over and above their firſt-fruits and tithes or other things which they 
were enjoyned to give. 

29 Alfo z, in the fifteenth day of the ſeventh month, 
when ye have gathered in the fruit « of the land, ye 
{hall keep a feaſt unto the LORD ſeven days. On the 
firſt day ſhall be a ſabbath, and on the eighth day ſhall be 


a ſabbath. 

z Or, rather ſurely, as this particle 1s oft uſed : For this 1s no 
addition of a new, but only a repetition of the former injun&ion, 
with a more parricular explication both of the manner and reaſon 
of the feaſt. a Not the corn, which ws gathered long before, but 
of their trees, as vines, olives, and other fruit-trees: which compleated 
the harveſt, whence this is called the fea#? of in-gathering, Exod. 234 
I6, 


boughs b of goodly trees c, branches of palm-trees, and" 
the boughs of thick trees 4, and willows of the brook e, 
and ye ſhall rejoyce f before the LORD your God ſeven 
days. 

b Heb. the fruit, 1. e. fruit-bearing boughs or branches with the 
, fruiton them, as the word #uit ſeems to be taken, 2 Kings 19. 30. 
: 'Exzck 19.12. c To wit, the olive, myrtle, and pine, as they are 
; mentioned, Neherr. 8. 15, 16. which were moſt plentiful there, and 

which would beſt preſerve their greenneſs or freſhneſs. &d Fit for 

ſhade and ſhelrer. e Which might do well to mix with the other 
. and in ſome ſort to bind them together. And as they made their 
| Booths of theſe materials, as is apparent, Nehem: 8. ſo it ſeems they 
| did alſo carry ſome of theſe boughs in their hands, as is affirmed by 
| Jewiſh and other ancient writers: f Which joy they teſtified by 
, feaſting, thankſgiving, ©. 

41 And ye ſhall keep it afeaſt unto the LORD ſeven 
days in the year, it ſhall be a ſtatute for ever in your 
; generations : ye ſhallcelebrate itin the ſeventh month. 

42 Ye lhall dwell in beoths g ſeven days: all that 
are Iſraelites born ſhall dwell in booths ; 

g Which were ereQted in their cities or towns, either in their 
ſtreets, or gardens, or the rops of their houſes, Nehem. 8. 16. which 
were made flat, and therefore were proper and fir for that uſe. 

43 Thatyour generations may know that I made the 
children of Iſrael to dwell in booths, when I brought 
, them outof theland of Egypt: I aw the LORD your God. 
| 44 And Moſes declared unto the children of Iſrael] 
' the icaſts of the LORD, 


| CHAP... XXIV- 

' Laws about the oyl of the Candleſticks and the preparation of it jp Cm. "9 
the Shew-bread, 5 — 9. Shelomith's Son Blaſphemes : He is Put im Cuſtod : 

and God conſulted ; and all that heard him, laying their hands on his Head, 

he is ſtoned ; and this paſſes into a Law, 10 ==16, Life for Life Beaſt 

for B: aſt, Eye for Eye, &c. The ſame Law for the Stranger 4s 4 Native, 


I 7] mmm 2 2, 


| ” D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

: 2 Command the children of Ifracl, that the 
bring 4 unto thee pure oyl-olive, beaten, for the lights 
F to Cauſe the lamps to burn continually. : 


# At their common charge, becauſe it was for their commo 
and ſervice. This command was given before, Exod; 27: 208 


2 Without the vail of the teſtimony 5, inthe tabernacle "_ 
of the congregation ſhall Aaron c order it from the 
eveningunto the morning, before the Lord continually ; 
it 78 ” a ſtatute for everin your generations. 
i.e.) Which was before the Ark of the i : 
by par Kaedr his ſons, Exod poi m_OORy. -c Either 
4 He ſhall order the lamps upon * the pure 4 c 

| andle- 

ſtick before the LORD continually. q ” *E 


a So called, partly becauſe ic was made of 
becauſe it was to be oft dreſſed and always kept F aragg gold, partly 


5 And thou e ſhait take fine tlour, and bake twelve, 


31:8: 


e By the Prieſts or Levites, whoſe work it was 
1 Chron: 9: 32. ft Re refonris th "> to Prepare them 25: 30: 
TR Rheroges = g the twelve Tribes. g (i.e. ) Two 

6 And thou ſhalt ſet them in two rows 5, fix on a 


row, upon the pure table ; before the LORD. 
| h Not. one above another, but one beſide another, as the frank. 
incente put upon each, werſe 7: ſhews. 7 So called becauſe it was 
covered with pure gold, Exod: 25: 24: and becauſe it Was aiways to 
be kept very pure and clean by the care of the Prieſts. 4 

7 And thou ſbalt pur pure frankincenſe k upon each 
row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial 
—_—_ oting made by fire unto the LORD. : 

AmIxed and uncorrupted, or of the beſt ſort. / Or, * 

m_ or for zhe bread, to wit, to be burnt before the "oa" ag 
- the bread, which could not conveniently be offered to God in 
_ _ And this was done every time that the bread was 
changed. 7 Forthat part which properly belenged toGod, whereas 
956 on Z2v27; 2; 2, 


8 Every 


Chap. XXIV, 


4s And ye (hall take you on the firſt day the + T Heb: 


t Heb: 
n good ;, cauſe to 


xod: 


*cakes f thereof ; two tent-deals g ſhall be in one cake. * Exod: 


70 

* «'Y 
bh 
T, 
- 


Nu! 
+ 
tHeb 
expour 
wnto t/ 
accord; 
to the 

mouth 
the LO 
*Deut 
9. & 1 


—— 


I "Chap. XXV. | 
$ Fvery ſabbath he ſhal ſet it in order before the 
LORD » continuallie, being taken o from the chiidrez, 


of Iſrael by an everlaſting covenant p. 

7 Whence it was called rm, benny" Heb. the bread of faces, Or 
of preſente, i. e. the bread which was put upon the Table in the 
Lo: d's preſence. o Such ſupplements are nor unuſual. Thus7n the 
floor, 1 King. 22. 10. is put for ſiting the floor, 2 Chron. 18. 9g. and 
burdens- 2 Chron. 2. 18. for carrying burdens, IT King. 5.15. And theſe 
cakes are ſaid to be received from or offered by the children of Ijracl, 
becauſe they were bought with the money which they contributed, 
as may be ſeen Nehem. 10. 32, 33. as Judas 1s ſaid ro purchaſe the feld, 
AE. 1. 18. which was purchaſed by his money, Mar. 27. 7. p. By 
vertue of that compatt made between me and them, by which they 
are obliged to keep this amongſt other Commands, and, they ſo do- 
ing, I am obliged to be their God, and to bleſs them. And this 
may be here called an everlaſting Covenant, not only becauſe it was 
to endure as long as the Jewiſh religion and polity ſtcod, bur alſo 
becauſe this was to ſtand there everlaſtingly, or continually, as 1s 
here ſaid, and therefore the new cakes were firſt brought betore the 
old were taken away 


#xod.2g. 9 And * it q hall be Aarons and his ſons, and they 
;3. ch. 8. ſhall eat itin the holie place : for it is moſt holie unts 
31. 1 Sam. hjm, of the offerings r of the LORD made by fire, by 


wg *- a perpetual ſtature. 
hy q (i.e.) The old bread now to be taken away. 7 Or, as one or 
being one of the offerings, &c. in regard of the incenſe which was 

offered by fite,and that ior or inſtcad of the bread,as was ſaid on ver 

7. and therefore the bread was reputed as if ut had been ſo offered. 

10 And the ſon of an Iſrae;itiſh woman, whole fa- 

ther vas an Egyptian s, went out # among the children 

of Iſrael: and this ſon of the Ifſraelitiſh woman, and a 


man of 1fſrael ſtrove together « in the camp. 

s This circumance ſeems noted, partly to ſhew the danger of 
marriages with perſons of wicked principlcs 01 p-aftiſes, wherein 
the children, as one wittily and truly obſerves, like the concluſion, 
do commonly follow the wo:ſe part, and are more eaſtly taught by 
word or example, to do ten things agreeable to their corrupt na- 
tures, than one thing contrary to it; and partly by thi ſeverity 
againit him who was a ſtranger by the father, and an Iſraelite by 
the mother, to ſhew that God wou'd not have this lin to go unpu- 
niſhed amongſt his people, whatſoever he was that committed it. 
: To wit, out of Egypt, being one of that mixed multitude, which 
came out with the 1ſraehzes, Exod. 12.32. It is pr: bable, this was 
done when the 1ſraelites were near Sinai: u This 1s added to ſhew, 
that provocation to ſin is no juſtification of lin. 

11 And the Ifraclitiſh womar.s ſon | blaſphemed the 
10c, nan. Name of the LORD x, and curſed y, and they z brought 
ed. Gen. him untoMoſes s, (and his mothers name 45Sh2lomith, 
the daugater of Dibri. of the tribe of Pan 

x The words of the Lord, or of Jehovah, are here conveniently ſup- 
plied out of v. 16. were they areexp el{-d,but here they are omited 
for the aggravation of his crime. He blaſphemed the Nam? ſo. called by 
way Of eminency; that Name which is above every name ; that 
Name which a man ſhould .n ſome ſort tremble to mention; which 
1s not to be named without cauſe, and withour reverence. For 
which reaſon the godly Jews did many times :ather underſtand than 


LI E Y I T 1 Ca 


Chap. XXV 


wer. 15. but the difference they make ſecms arbitrary, and without 
zvidence from reaſon, or the uſe of the words, And therefore 
this may be a repetition of the ſame ſin in other words, which is 
common, and as this law is laid down in more general terms, 
ver. 153 fo both the fin and the puniſment a:e more particularly 
expreſſed, wer: 16: Or the firſt part of ver: 16. may be an ap- 
plication of the former rule to the preſent caſe. And as for him 
that blaſphemeth, &c: or, is blaſpheming, &c: in the preſent tenſe, 
which 1s fitly uſed concerning woids juſt now utte: ed, and ſcarce 
yet out of their ears, he ſball. &c. And fo the f:llowing words, 
as well the ſtranger, &c. may be a repeticion an! amplificat:on of the 
former law, þ To ſhew their zeal for God, and to beget in them 
the greater dread and abhorrency of blaſphemy. | 

17 * And he that t kilieth avy man z, ſhall ſurelie *x,,q 5; 


be put to death. 12. Nums 
; This law is repeated here, either to juſtifie this ſentence of 35: 31: 
purting blaſphemers to death, from the ſame ſeverity executed for Deut: 1992 
alels c:1me; or, to prevent the miſchievous efle&s of mens ſtri- 21: 

ving or contending togethe:, which as here it cauſed blaſphemy, tHeb:ſmi= 


ſo ir might in others lead to murder. teth the ſou 
18 And he that Þ killeth a beaſt, ſhall make it good, 9 -7n: 

+ beaft for beaſt. WY TH 
19 And if a man cauſe a blemiſh in his neighbour ; Fiodars 

as * he hath done, ſo (bail it be done unto him. 24: Deutz 


* 19: 21: 
Mat: 5:382 


* Exod: 
21: 33. 
* Exods 
12. 493 


20 Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth 
as he hath cauſed a blemiſhin aman, fo ſball it be done 
to him again, : 

21 * Ard he that killeth a beaſt, he ſhall reftore it: 
and he that killeth amin, he ſhall be put to death. 

'22 Ye ſhall have * one manner of Law &, as well for 
che ſtranger, as for one of your own country : for I am 
che LORD your God. 

k To wit, in matters of common right, but not as to Church 
Priviledees. ; 

23 And Moſes fpake unto the children of Iſrael, that 
:hey ſhould bring forth him that had curſed, out of the 
camp, and ſtone him with ſtones: and the children of 
Ifrael did as the LORD commanded Moſes. 


ER AP. XXY:; | 

The Land not to be Tilled, but reſt the ſeventh: year: And that which grew 
of is ſelf in Field or Vineyard, to be meat for th:m and their Cattle, 
7. The ubile on the day of Atonement : A year of Liberty 
and Reſtoration; A year of reſ# to the Land: Of the peculiar Bleſſing of God 
on it, 8 22. Sold Inheritances to.be redeemed at any time ; buf 
now #0 be reftored: 4 Dwelling-Houſe in a walled City only excepted, 
23 — 34 MKinaneſs to the Poor. Uſury forbidaen: an Irael:ite muſs 
210; be a Bonaman or Maid, but an Hired Servaut till the year of Jubile 2 
Bond-men or Maids tobe taken from the Heathen: An Inheritance for ever, 


35 46: Of an Iſraelite that ſhould ſell himſelf to a ſtranger, 
47 53s | 
AD the LORD ſpake unto Moſes in mount Sinat 
a, faying, + | 
.@ (i. e.) Near mount Sinai. So the Hibrew particle Beth is ſome- 
times uſed, as Gen: 37. 13. Joſ: 5 13. Jurg: 8-5. 2 Chron: 33. 
20 compared with 2 King :1. 38. Sothere is no need ro diſturb 


j —- 


the power of God, a+ it is Luk. 22. 69. and the bl:ſſcd for the Pl:fſed God, 
Mas. 26.63. Mark 14. 61. y Not the {ſaelites only, but his God alſo, 
as appears from wv. 15. -6. z Either the people who hea:d him, or 
the inferiour Magiſtrate, ro whom he was firſt brought. @ Ac- 
*Numb: cording to the order ſettlea by Jethro's advice Exod. 18. 26. 
ag 12 And they * put him in ward ÞF tiat the mind of 
tHeb: « the LORD might be ſhewed them b. 

expound b For God had only ſaid in general, that he world not hold ſuch 
wnto them giiltleſs, i, e. he «ould puniſh them, but had nor declared how he 
according would have them puniſhed by men, 


to the 1; And the LORD ſpake urto Moſes, ſaying, 
: —_— 14 Bring forth him that hath curſed, wichout the 


*Deur:13, amp, and let all thar heard him, * lay their hands upon 
9. & 17.7. his head c, and lerallche congregation ſtone him 4. 

c Whereby they gave publick teſtimony that they heard this per- 
ſan ſpeake ſuch ords, and did in their own and inall the peoples 
names, deſire and demand Ju''ice to be executed u-on him, that 
by this ſacrifice God might ve appeaſed, and hi Judgements turn- 
ed away from the people, upon whom they would certainly fall 
if he »ere unpuniſhed. 4. The ſame puniſhme::t « hich was be- 
fore appointed for thoſe v» ho cu:ſed their Pa-ents, whereas it de- 
ſerved a far more grievous death, Thus God in this !ife mixerh 
mercy «ith Judgement, and puniſheth men leſs than their iniqui- 
tics deſerve. 

15 And thou ſhalt ſpeak unto the children of Iſrael, 
ſaying, whoſoever curſeth e his God. ſhall bear his fin f. 

e (41.e:) Speaketh of him reproachfully and with contempr. 
They therefore a e greatly miſtaken that underſtand this of the 
heathen gods, whom their worſhippers are forbidden to reproach 
or curſe But Moſes is not here giving las to Heathens, bur to 
the J/raelites, nos wou!d he concern himſelf ſo much ro vindicate 
the honour of Idols, nor doth this agree either with rhe deſign of | 
the holy Scriptures, which is to beget a contempt and deteſtation ' 
of all Idols and Idolatry ; or with the praftice of the holy Pro- 
phets, who uſed oft to vilify them. See 1 King. :8. 27 Fer. 10. ; 
11. f (7.e.) The puniſhment of it; ſha'l not go unpuniſhed. j 
Some fay he was to be beaten with ſtripes : Others ſay with death, 
which is deſcribed wer. ' 6. 

16. And 7 he that blaſphemeth the Name of the 
LORD g, he ſhall ſurelie be put to death, end all the 
congregation bþ ſhall certain!lie ftone him: as well the 
ſtranger, as he thar is born in the land, when he F blaſ- 
| Toy »an-phemerh the name of the LORD, ſha!l be pur to death. 

th, $ This ſome make a diſtin& ſin from c:rſig his God mentioned 


fOr, he 
that nam- 
eh, 


—] "A 


expreſs the name of God, as Mark 14: 62. the right hana f power, for of 


| the order of the hiſtory in this place, 
2 Speak unto the children of Ifrael, and ſay unto 
them, When ye come into the Jand b which I give you, 'Hebyeft: 
then ſhall the land Þ keep * a ſabbath c unto the { ord d, Exod:23: 
b. Soas to be ſettled in it; for the time of the wars was not to - 0.5ee ch: 
be accounted, nor the rime before Joſhus's diſtribution of the land © 34+ 
among them, Joſ: 14. 7,.10. c (7.e.) Enjoy reit and freedom from 
plowing, tilling, ©. & (7. e.) In obedience and unto the honour 
of wod. This was inſtituted partly for the aflertion of God's ſo« 
veraign right to the land, in which the 17aelizes were but tenants 
at Go':'s will, partly for the trial and exerciſe of their obedience, 
partly for the demoaſtration of his providence as well in the gene- 
ral rowards men, as more eſpecially towards his own people, of 
which ſee belov,v: 20, 21, 22. partly to wean them from inordinate 
love, :nd pu-ſute of, or truſt to worldly advantages, and to inure 
them to depend upon God alone, and upon God's bleſſing for their 
ſub:iftence, partly to put them in mind of that bleſſed and eternal 
Reſt p.ovided for all good men, wherein they ſhould be perfe&ly 
freed from all worldly labours and troubles, and w ho!ly devoted to 


ly, that by their own {traits in tht year they might learn more 
| compaſſion to the poor who were under the ſame ſtraits every year. 
; 3 ix years rnou (balcſow thy field,and fix years thou 


| ſhalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof. 


neither ſow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. 


' nour of God, and ro the ends and uſes appointed by God ; or, the 


the ſervice and enjoyment of God. ' Sez on Exod: 23 11. And laſt- 


4 Butin the ſeventh year ſhall be a ſabbath of reſt 
unto the land, a fabbath for the LORD : thou ſbalt 


* 2King: 
I9. 29. 

+ Heb: of 
thy ſepara- 
£107ts 


5 * That which groweth of its ewn accord e of thy 
harveſt thou ſhalt nor reap f, neither gather the grapes + 
of thy vine undreiled g :; for it is a year of reſt untothe 
land. 

e From the grains that fell out of the ears the laſt reaping time. 
f (i. e.) As thy own pecuharly, bur only ſo as othe:s may reap it 
with thee, for preſent tood. g tieb. the grapes of thy ſeparation, 
7 e. The Grapes which thou haſt ſeparated or ſer a part to the ho- 


giapes of that year, which are in this. like the Nazarites hair, not 
cut off by rhee, bur ſuffered to grow to the uſe of the poor. 

6 Andthe ſabbath 4 ofthe land thall be meat for you, 
for thee, and forthy ſervant z, and for thy maid and for 
thy hired ſervant, and for the ſtranger thar ſojourneth: 


with thee, 
Y (þ Ze e.) The 


> <4 


ap. XXV. 


þ ( 5: ©) The growth of the Sabbath, or that fruit which grow- 


eth in the Sabbarical year. See on Levit: 23: 38. where the word, | 


Sabbath, is taken in the like ſenſe. 7 For all promiſcuouſly,to take 
food from thence as they need it. : 
7 And for thy cattle, and for the beaſt, that are 1 


thy land, ſhalall theincreaſe thereof be meat. 

'8 And thou ſhalt number ſeven + ſabbaths of years 
unto thee, ſeven times ſeven years, and the ſpace of 
the ſeven {abbaths of years {hal be unto thee fourty and 
nine years: 

9 Then (halt thou cauſe the trumpet F of the Jubile 
k to ſound on thetenth dey of the ſeventh moneth /, *in 
the day of aronementm ihal ye make the trumpet ſound 


"throughout all your land. 


k Which ſignified the true liberty from our ſpiritual debts and 
flaveries to be purchaſed by Chriſt,and to be publiſhed ro the world 
by the ſound of the Goſpel. 7 Which was the firſt month of the 
year for civil and worldly affairs, which were mainly concerned in 
the jubile, and therefore itbegan in that month ; and, as 1t ſeems, 
upon this very tenth day,whien the trumpet ſounded,as other feaſts 
generally began when the trumpet ſounded. m A very fit time, 
that when they faſted and prayed for Gods mercy to them 1n the 
pardon of their ſins, then they might excerciſe their charity and 
kindneſs to men in forgiving their debts,which isthe true faſt,as15 
noted, Iſa: 58. 6. and to teach us, that the foundation of all ſolid 
comfort and joy muſt be Jaid in , bitter repentance and atonement 
for our ſins through Chriſt. ; 

10 And ye ball hallow the fiftieth year », and pro- 


claim liberty throughout al the land, unto all the inha- 
bitants thereof o: it ſhal be a jubile p unto you, and 
e ſhall return every man unto his poſeflion q, and ye 


{hall return every man untohis family r. 

» By which it ſeems moſt probable, that the year of jubile was 
not the forty and ninth year, as ſome learned men think, bur pre- 
ciſcly the fiftieth year. Which may appear, 1. Becauſe the Jews ac- 
count it ſo, which is confeſſed by the adverſaries of this opinion, 
who ſay, that the Jews err in the computation of the Jubile, as they do in 
Chriſt, the great end and antitype of the Jubile, But it is not probable 
that the Jews ſhould univerſally err ina matter of conſtant pra- 
Etice among themſelves, eſpecially when there was nothing of in- 
tereſt or prejudice in the caſe,as there was in reference to Chriſt. 2. 
Becauſe it was expreſly called the fftieth year here, and wer: 11: that 
fiſtieth year, which was nor true, if it was but the nine and fortieth 
year. It is faid,it is called ſo popularly,and it was ſo, if you take in 
the foregoing Jubile. Bur it muſt be remembred, that there was 
not yet any foregoing Jubile, bur the very firſt of the kind is ex- 
preſly called zhe fftieth year, which intruth it was not, if the Jubile 
was ended ete the fiftieth year began.3- From the common courſe 
of computation. The old weekly Sabbath is called zhe ſeventh day, 
becauſe it truly was ſo, being next after the fix days of the week 
and diſtin& from them all : and the year of releaſe is called the ſe- 
wenth year, wer: 4: as immediatly following theſix years, ver: 3: and 
diſtin& from them all. And therefore in like manner the Jubilee 
muſt needsbe called the fiftieth year, becauſe it comes next after ſe- 
even times ſeven or forty nine years, ver: 8. and is diſtin from them 
all. 4. From wer: 11.12.where it is ſaid, ye ſballnot ſow, norreap, 8c. 
For it is the Fubile, &c. which looks Jike a vain and uſeleſs repeti- 
tion, ifthis year were but one of the ſeven years, for this very com- 
mand was given concerning every ſeventh year, ver: 4: but if this 
year of Jubile was, as indeed it was,a year diſtin from, and com- 
ing after the ſeven ſevens of years,then this repetition and applica- 
tion of that command to it washighly neceſſary, becauſe otherwiſe 
3t might ſeem hard and unreaſonable that they ſhould forbear ſow- 
ing and reaping two years together,which hereby they are command- 
ed to do. A thingsare objefted againſt this, 1. That the Jubi- 
Je was only a revolution of fourty nine years. But that ſeems a 
great miſtake, for it is moſt expreſly diſtinguiſhed from them all, 
and by way of diſtinCion called 7he fftierh year,therefore ſurely none 
of the forty nine. 2. Thedifficulty propounded,v.20. concerns on- 
ly the 7th year,whereasit had been a greater diffticulty,ifit had been 
extended to the Jubile, and the Jubile had been another vacant 


\ year coming next after the ſeventh year. Burt though the difficulty 


was greater for the Jubile, yet it was more frequent for the ſeventh 
year : and the reſolution of the one made the way plain for the ſa- 
tisfaQtion of the other. For as God promiſed ſo to bleſs every ſixth 
year,that ir ſhould bring forth fruit forthree years, ver. 21. ſowhen 
thecaſe was extraordinary, as in the Jubile, it was but reaſonable 
to expe an extraordinary bleſſing from God upon that ſixth year 
which went next before the laſt of the ſeventh years, or the forty 
ninthyear,that ir ſhould then bring forth fruit for four years.oUn- 
derſtand ſuch as were Jſraelites; principally to all ſervants, even to 
ſuch as would not and did not go out at the ſeventh year,and to the 
poor, who now were acquited from all their debts, and reſtored to 
their poſſeſſions. p So called either from the Hebrew word Jobe! 
which ſignifies firſt a ram, and then &@ rams horn, by the ſound 
whereof it was proclaimed; or from Jubal, the inventor of muſica] 
inſtruments, Gen: 4. 21. Becauſe it was celebrated with Muſick and 
all expreſſions of joy. q Which had been ſold or otherwiſe alienated 
from him. This Law was not at all unjuſt, becauſe all Buyers and 
Sellers had an eye to this condition in their bargains ; bur it was 
neceſſary and expedientin many regards, as 1. To mind them that 
God. alone was the Lord and owner and proprietor both of them and 
of their Jands, and they only his Tenants and Farmers ; a point 
which they were very apt to forget. 2. That hereby Inheritances, 
Families, and Tribes, mightbe kept entire and clear until the co- 
ming of the Meſſias, who was to be known as by other things, ſo by 
the Tribe and Family out of which he was to come. And this ac- 
Cordingly was done by the ſingular providence of God until the 
Lord Jeſus did come. Since which time thoſe Chara&ers are miſe- 
rably confounded : Which is noſmall argument that the Meſſas is 
come. 3. To ſer bounds both to the inſatiable avarice of ſome, and 
the fooliſh prodigality of others, that the former mightnot wholly 
and finally ſwallow up the inheritances of their brethren, and the 


TRYITIC Chap. XXV, 


r From whom he was gqhe, being fold to fothe vther Family ei- 
ther by himſelf or by his. Father. 

1x A jubile ſhal chatfijieth year be unto you : ye bal 
not ſow s, neither reap that which groweth of it ſelf in 
it, nor gather #begrapes in it of thy vine undreſſed. 


s Though it come immediatly after a ſeventh year, wherein alſo 
this was forbidden to you. 

12 Foritzs the jubile; it ſhall be holy unto you r; 
ye ſhall eat the increaſe thereof « out 6f the field x. 

t Soit was, becauſe it was ſequeſtred in great part from worldly 
employments and dedicated to God, and to the exerciſe of holy 
joy and thankfulneſs; and becauſe it was a type of that holy and 
happy Jubile which they were to expe& and enjoy by and under 
the Meſſias, u Such things as it produced of it ſelf : For the year be- 
fore nothing was ſowed. » Whence they in common with others 
might take it as they needed it; but muſt not put it into barns. 
See wer: 5. and Exod: 23.171. 


13 In the year of this jubile ye ſhall return every man 
unto his poſſeſſion, 

14 Andif thou ſell ought unto thy neighbour,or buy- 
eſt ought of thy neighbours hand, - ye ſhall not oppreſs 
one another y. 

7 Neither the ſellerby requiring more, nor the buyer by taking 


the mage from his brothers neceſſities to give him leſs than 
the worth of it. | 


15 According to the number of years after the jubi- 
'e, thou ſhalt buy of thy neighbour, and according unto 
the number of years of the fruits z he ſhalſell unto thee. 

z Or, Of years of fruits, or, of fruitful years ; for there were ſome 


unfruitful years, to wit, ſuch wherein they were not allowed to 
ſow or reap, Cc. 


16 According to the multitude of years thou ſhalt in- 
creaſe the price thereof: & accecrding to the fewneſs of 
years, thou ſhalt diminiſh the price of it : For according to 
the number ofthe years of the fruits a doth he ſell unto thee 


a Or, For the number of the fruits, The meaning is, he ſelleth not 
the land, but only the fruits thereof,and rhat for a certain time. 


17 Ye ſhall nor therefore oppreſs one another,but thou 

(halt fear thy God: for I «aw the LORD your God. 
18 Wherefore ye hal do my ſtatutes, and keep my 

judgements, and do them, and ye ſhall dwell in the 
land in ſafetys | : 
19 And the land ſhal yield her fruit, and ye ſhal cat 
your fill, and dwell therein in ſafety. 
20 Andifyelbalſay, Whar ſhall we eat b the ſe- 
venth year ? behold, weſhall net ſow, nor gather in 
our increaſe. ; 
b A like obje&tion, See Exod: 34. 23, 24. 
24 Then I will command + my bleſſing upon youin 
the ſixth year, and it jhal bring forth fruic for three 
Years Cc. 


T ( 7. e. ) Give. Commanding is oft uſed in Scripture either for 
the performance of promiſed bleſſings, as Deut: 28+ 8. Pſal. x11. 9. 
and 133. 3. or for the execution of thieatned Judgments, as 1ſa. 5+ 
6, Amos 9. 4. both being atts of Gods providential Will,as the com- 
mand is of his legiflative Will. c Not compleatly, but in great 
part, to wit, for that part of the ſixth year which was berween 
the beginning of harveſt and the beginning of the ſeventh year, for 
the whole ſeventh year, and for that part of the eighth year which 


was before tie harveſt, which reacheth almoſt until the beginning 
of the ninth year. And by this expreſſion we may underſtand. the 
meaning of that eminent paſſage of Chriſt's being three days and three 
nights in the grave, to wit, one whole day and part of two days 3 
Of which more, if God pleaſe, inits proper place. This is added 
to ſhew the equity of this command. _ As God would hereby try 
their Faith, and exerciſe Obedience, ſo he gave them an eminent 
proof of his own exaCt Providence and tender care over them in 
making proviſions ſuitable to their neceſſities. Albeit it be alſo 
probable, thar divers of them, eſpecially ſuch as were more ſoli- 
citous or diſtruſtful of Gods providence, did lay up ſomething of 
the fruits of former years againſt this time. 


22 And ye ſhal fow the eighth year, and eat yer of 
old fruit 4 until the ninth year ; until her fruits e come 
in, ye hal eat of the old Fore. 


d Of the ſixth year principally, if not ſolely. e ( 5:e: ) The fivits 
of the eighth year. 


23 The land {hal not be ſold || F for everf: forthe | Or, #04; 


land & mineg: forye are * ſtrangers and ſojourners quite eurof 
with me þ, t Heb. for 


f Or, abſolutely and properly, fo as to become the proprict cutting of} 
buyer : Or to the extermmation or utter cutting off, to oy _ the lng *Pal. x19: 
from all hopes and poſlibility of Redemption. & Procured for you 19. 
by my power, given to you by my mere grace and bounty, and ? Pet: 2" 
the right of propriety reſerved by me, and to be diſpoſed of by 17s 
you only to ſuch perfons and in ſuch manner as I ſhall have _ 
dained. þ (#: e: ) In my land or houſes : thus he is ſaid ro ſojourn 
with another that dwells in his houſe. Thus the poor decayed 1/- 
raelites and the ſtrangers are ſaid to live with them, 5: e: with the 
other Iſraelites, to wit, in the land or houſes here, wer: 35, 36, 40 
45. Or, beforeme, in my ſight, orin my account. Mtever ws 
your own or other mensopinions you paſs for Lords and Proprie- 
tors,yet in truth,according to which my judgment always is, you 
are but ſtrangers and ſojourners, not to poſſeſs the Land for ever 
bur only for a ſeaſon, &to leave it to ſuch asI have appointed for it. 


24 Andin all the land of your poſſeflion, ye thail 
grant a redemption z for the land. 
£ (i:e:) Aright of redemption in the time and manner follow. 


1 =T) 


latrer might not be able to undo themſelves and their poſterity 
for ever, which was a ſingular priviledge of this Law and People. 


ng, 
25 If 


wort AC 


XXV. 
25 If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath-fſold away 
ſome of his poſſeſſion &, and ifany of his kin come to re- 
deemit [,then ſhal he redeem thae which his brother fold. 
+ To wit. in the fields, but norin cities, ver: 29. | Or, If the re- 
dleemer come, being near akin to him,to whom the right of Redemption 
belonged. Ruth. 3. 2, 9, 12. Jer. 325 7: ho in this att was an emi- 
nent Type of Chriſt, who was made near akin tous by raking our 
fleſh, that he mighr perform the work of Redemption for us. 
+ Heb: his 26 And it the man have none to redeem it f and 


hm? hath himſelf be able co redeem it : 
attained 254 Then let him count the years of the fas thereof 2, 
and found _ ] reſtore the overplus » unto the man to whom ae {old 
Juſpcien it, that he may rerurn unto his poſſeſſion. 

m (i.e, ) From thetime of the ſale to the Jubile. See above, 
wer. I5, 16, n( i.e ) Aconvenient price for the years from this Re- 
demption to the Jubile. | 

28 But it he be not able to reſtore ;z to him, then 
that which is ſold ſhall remain inthe hand of him that 
hath bought it uncil the year of jubile : andin the jubile 
it ſhall go out 9, and he ſhall rerurn unto his poſlefigon. 

o (7. e. ) Out ofthe buyers hand, without any redemprion-Money. 

29 and ifa man ſella dwelling houle in a walled City, 
then he may redeem it within a whole year after It 1s 

fHeb:d2ys ſold ; within + a full year may he redeem it. 
9 orgs 20 And if it be nor redeemed within the ſpace of a 
an” 27-7: full year, then the houſe thatis in the walled city ſhall 
be eftablithed forever to him that boughr'it, throughout 
his generations : it ſhall not go out in the jubile p. 
Þ The reaſon is from the great difference between ſuch houſes 
and lands. The reaſon before alledged for lands do nor hold in ſuch 
Houſes : there was nodanger of confuſion in Tribes or Families 
by the alienation of Houſes. The ſelleralſo had a greater pro; riety 
in Houſes than in Lands, as not coming to him by Gods meer gift, 
bur being commonly built by the owners coſt and diligence, and 
therefore had a fuller power to diſpoſe of them. Beſides, God would 
hereby encourage perſons to buy and poſſeÞ+ Houſes inſuch places, 
which frequency and fulneſs of Inhabitantsin Cities, was a great 
ſtrength, honour and advantage to the whole Land. 

21 Bur the houſes of the villages q which have no wall 
round about them, ſha!l be counted as the helds of the 
countrey : + they may be redeemed, and they thall go 
out in the jubile. 

q Becauſe they belonged to and were neceſſary or very conveni- 
ent for the management of the lands. : 

22 Notwithſtanding the cities of the Levites,and the 
houſes of the cities of their poſſeſſion may che Levites 
redeem at any time, | | 
Or, one 423 And if || a man purchaſe of the Levites, then the 
Ahg houle that was ſold,and the city of his polſeſiion ſhal go 
paves {yy out 7 inthe year of jubile:for the houſes of che citiesotthe 

Levites are their poſleflion among the children of 1{rael. 

» Or thus, But he that ſhall redeem it ſhall be or mu be of the Le- 
wites, i; e: No perſon of another Tribe, though by Marriage near 
akin to the ſelling Levite, ſhall redeem it, but Levites only, and a- 
ny of them ſhall have the ſame power to redeem it, which in other 
Tribes only the neareſt kindred have : and, incaſe none of them 
redeem it, yet the houſe that was ſold, ana the city of his poſſeſſion, 7: e: 
his ſhare or intereſt in the Ciry of his poſſeſſion, ſhall go out and re- 
turn to the Levites without any Redemption. 

34 Bur the field of the ſuburbs of their cities s may 


not be ſold er, for it is their perpetual! poileflion, 

s Ofwhich ſee on Numb: 35. 5. #t Not ſold at all, partly, becauſe 
it was of abſolute neceſſity for them for the keeping of their Cat- 
tle,and partly becauſe theſe were no cncloſures, but common field-, 
in which all the Levites that lived in ſuch a City had an intereſt, 
and therefore no particular Lev:te could diſpoſe of his pait in it. 
Some conceive, that this Law was altered in enſuing ages, which 
they gather from Jer: 32, 7, 8, &c. and A#: 4: 36. 37. Bur thoſe ex- 
amples do not prove it. That fale of Jeremiah's was made by apar- 
ticular diſpenſation and command of God, and that ina time when 
the Levites, as well as the people, were to be deſtroyed ordiſperſed, 
and carried into captivity, and therefore could receive no confide- 
rable injury by it : and. beſides this ſale was only made formally 
and for {ignification, as it 1s explained, wer: 14- 15. And for the 
Jand fold by Barnabas a Levite, A. 4. as it was ata time when the 
Jewiſh Church was diſſolved, and their State upon the brinks of ut- 
ter ruine,, ſoit is not evident that it was ſuch Suburb land, which 
would have yeilded but a ſmall price, but it mighr be other land, 
either fuch as he might have in right of his wife,or ſuch as he might 
have purchaſed. For though the Levites in general had no other 
ſhare of Land, beſide this, alloted them by God, yer it is conceiv- 
ed that particular Levites might purchaſe lands to themſelves. 

t Heb: his 35 And if thy brother be waxen poor, and # fallen 
hand fail- 1n decay «4 with thee, thenthou ſhalt F relieve him x, 
- = though he be a ſtranger, or a ſojourner y, that he 
ſrengchen. PAY live with thee. 

Heb. his hand wavereth or faileth or is decayed, fo that he hath 
not powerto get or keep wealth as the phraſe is, Deut: 8, 18. as on 
the contrary, when a man is able, his hand is ſaid ro attain and find 
ſufficiency, as here above, wer. 26. x Heb. trensti-n him, comfort his 

., Heart, and pine ps his Hand. y Underſtand it of Profelytes on- 


© Iy, forof other ſt; angers they were permitted to rake uſury: Deur: 
23:20. | 


- oy 36 * Take thou no uſury of himz, or increaſe a, 
- 255: but * fearthy God.that thy brother may live with thee. 


Eze *10: . E 
k LOGO Y ( i: e. } Of thy brother, whether he be 1ſ-aelite, or Proſelyte. 
* a This ſome conceive relates to the fruits of the earth. food, &c. 


Chap. 


{ Heb. re- 
demption 
belongeth 
wnto it. 


£ EYVITI1I CES 


| forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of 


Chap. X 
expreſling the ſame thing, ( r. ) to meet with the ſubtile evaſions 
of crafty and covetous men, who make gain of their poor brethren 
( for of ſuch only he ſpeaks here, as is evident from- ver: 35. ) By 
rhe lending of money or other things ; and that they may quicr 
their conſciences, and palliate their fin, they diſguiſe it under 0- 
other names: and ( 2.) to ſhew that all kinds of uſury are in this 
caſe forbidden, whether of money, or of vifuals, or of any thing that i: 
.commonly lent by one to another upon uſury, or upon condition of 
recerving the thing lent with advantage and overplus, as it is ſaid, 
Devwt: 23. 19. 

37 Thou ſhalt not give him thy money upon uſury, 
norlend him thy viftuals for increaſe. 


38 I amthe LORD your God which brought you 


Canaan, «2d to be your God. 

39 Aiid *if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen 
poor, and be fold unto thee, thou ſhalt not + compel * Exod:| 
him to ſerve as a bond-ſervant b, 21:2. Þ 

þ Neither for the time, for ever, nor for the manner, with the Deur: 15 


hardeſt and vileſt kinds of ſervice, rigorouſly and ſeverely exaQted 7: Jer: | 
from him. 34. I4. 


40 But as an hired ſervant, and as a ſojourner he ſhat tHeb- 
be with thee, andſhal ſerve thee unto the year of jubile. pts: 
4T Andthen ſhal he depart from thee c, bo:h he and his with the 
children with him, and (hal return unto hisown f:mily, /ervice,s 
and to the poſſefion of his fathers ſhal he return.  ©* 
c Thou ſhaltnor ſuffer him orhis to abide longer in thy ſervice 
as thou mighteſt do in the year of releaſe, Exod: 21; 2, 6. ; 
42 For they are my ſervants 4,which I brought forth out 
of the land of Egypt: they ſhal not be fold+as bondmen, # Heb: 
4 They, no leſs than you, are members of my Church and Peo- 9th rhe 
ple; ſuch as I have choſen out of all the world to ſerve me here. ale of a - 
and toenjoy me hereafter, and therefore are not to be opprefled or bond-m, 


abuſed, neither are you abſolute Lords over them to deal with 
them as you pleaſe, 


43 * Thou ſhalt not rule over him with rigor, 
ſhalt fear thy God e. 


e Though thou doſt not fear them who are in thy power, and 
unable to right themſelves, yer fear that God who hath command. 
ed thee to uſe them kindly, and whocan or will avenge their cauſe, 
if thou dolt oppreſs them. 


44 Both thy bond-men, and thy bond- maids which 
thou ſhalt have ſhall be of the heathen that are round a- 
bout you 2 of them (ball ye buy bond men, and bond= 
maids. 

45 Moreover, of the children of the ſtrangers that 
do ſojourn among you, of them ſhall ye buy, and of | 
their families that «re with you, which they begat in | | 
your land ; and they ſhall be your poſſeflion. | 


but *Eph: & 
Col: 4: x 


46 And ye ſhal take them as an inheritance for your t 
children after you, to inherit - :bezy for a poſſeflion ; + ” 
they (hal be your bord-men for ever : but over your ſal ſewoe | 


brethren the children of Iſrael, ye ſhal not rule one 0- gour ſelves| 
ver another with rigor. | of them: 
47 Andif a fojourner or ſtranger wax rich by thee, 
and thy brother har dwelleth by him wax poor, and fell 
[:imſelf unto the ſtranger or ſojourner by thee, or tothe 
ſtock f ofthe ſtrangers. 


f Heb. roor, # e. one of the root or ſtock. So the word root is elſe. 
where uſed for the branch or progeny growing fron: it,as Numb: 13. 
28. 2 Chron. 22-10. He ſeems to note one of a foreign race and coun- 
trey, tranſplanted into the Jand of 1ael, and there having taken 
root amongſt the people of God, yer even ſuch an one, though he 
hath ſome priviledge by it, yet he ſhall not have power to keep an 
Hebrew ſervantfrom the benefir of Redemprion. 


43 After thathe is ſold, he may be redeemed again; 
one of his brethren may redeem him. 

49 Either his uncle,or his uncles ſon may redeem him, 
or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his fimily may rC- 
deem him : or, if he beable,he may redeem himſelf, 

5o And he ſhal reckon with him that bought him, 
from the year that he was ſold tohim, unto the year of 
jubile, and the price of his ſale ſhal be according unto 
rhe number of years, according tothe time of an hired 
ſervantg ſhall itbe with him. 

g Allowance ſhall be made for the time wherein he hath ſerved, 
p! oportionable to that which is given to an hired ſervant for ſo 
long ſervice, becauſe his condition is in this like theirs; that it is 
not properly his perſon, bur his work and labour that was fold. 

51 If rhere ve yer many years behind, according unto 
them he ſhall give again the price of his redemption out 

of the money that he was bought for- 

52 An! if there remain but few years unto the year 
of jubile, then he ſhal count with him, and according 
unto his years ſhall he give him again the price of his 
redemption. 

53 Andasayearly hired fervantſhall he be wich him: 
&the orher ſhal not rule with rigor over him in thy fighth 

L Thou ſhalr nor ſuffer this to be done, but whether thou art 2 


Magiſt:ate, or a private perſ-n, thou ſhalt take care according ro 
| thy capacity to get it remedied. 


a. And if he be not redeemed || in theſe years, then 0:,5;1h 
he ſhal go our in the year of jubile, £955 he and his chile meonc; 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ofs 


as uſurydoth to money. But here may rather {e:m to be two words | 


dren with him, 
| F-2 gs For 


F bs 


».f Exod. 
Cho: 4. 

Deur. 5:8: 
*/\and 16.12 
and 27:15 
8 Pſal.77:7: 
j Or pillar. 
14 Or, figu- 
5 Iyed fone. 
b. 2 
ge of 
pifture: 

# Chap. 
T9. 30: 


+ $i 


1* Deut: 
& 28:1: 


© Deurt, 
28: 15. 
Mal: 2:2. 


ap. XXVI. 


of Egypt : 


OGEY/ 1 
. bo 

55 For untome the children of Iſrael are ſervants, 
they are my ſervants; whom I brought out of the land 
I aw the LORD your God. 

CHAP, XXVLI. 

God commands them to ſhun Idolatry, 1. Keep bis Sabbaths, andreverence 
his Senfuary, 2. And walk in his Statutes, 3. Promiſmsg plenty, peace, 
wifory, Fruitfulneſs, his Tabernacle and Preſence, 4—13. Dreadfu 
Threatnings againſt the Deſpiſers, Haters and Breakers of þis commanas : 
He will-givethem over.to Diſeaſes, their Enemies, Drought, Peſtilence, 
Sword, Famine ; they who remain ſhall fall one upon another, and pine a- 
way in their ſms, 14 — 39. But if they confeſs their ſms, and are hum” 
bled under Gods Judgments, God will remember his Covenant, and ſhew 
them favour in their Enemies Land, 49 — 45. Theſe Statutes the Lord 
gave to Iſrael in Mount Sinai by Moſes, 46. 

YE hall make you * no idols,nor graven image,net- 

ther rear you up a || ſtanding image «, neither 
ſha) ye ſet up any || + image of ſtone in your land, to 
bow down untoit : for I -» the LORD your God. 

a Or, pillar, to wit, to worſhip it, or bow down to it, as it fol- 
lows. Otherwiſe this was not ſimply prohibited being praftiſed 
by holy men, both before and after this Law. Compare Exod: 23: 
24. Deut. 16. 22+ SO Exod: 20: 4. They are forbidden to make ima- 
ges, not ſimply or for any uſe, but for worſhip. 

2 * Ye thall keep my ſabbaths, and reverence my 


ſahcuary, b: I «m the LORD. 

b By purging and preſerving it from all uncleanneſs, by ap- 
proaching to it and managing all the ſervices of it with reverence, 
and inſuch manner only as God hath appointed. 


2 * If ye walk in my ſtatures, and keep my com- 
mandments, and do them ; 

Then I will give you rain c in due ſeaſon, and the 
land ſhall yield her increaſe, and the trees of the field 
ſhall yield their fruit. 

© Therefore God placed them not in a Land where there were 
ſuch rivers as Nilus, to water it and make it fruitful, but in a 
Land which depended wholly upon the rain of Heaven, the Key 
whereof God kept in his own hind, that ſo he might the more cf- 
> gd oblige them to obedience, in which their happineſs con- 
UItTEd. : 
5 And* your threſbing ſhall reach unto the vintage 4, 
and the vintage ſhal reach unto the ſowing time : and 
ye ſhal eat your bread to the full, and * dwell in your 


land ſafely. 


d (i:e:) You ſhall have ſo plentiful an harveſt, that you ſhall 
not be able ts threſh out your corn in a little time, but that work 


will laſt till the vintage. 


6 AndI will give peace inthe land, and * ye lballlie 
down and none ſhall make you afraid : and I will F 
rid evil beaſts out of the land; neither ſhall the ſword e 


* gothroughyour land f\ 


e (i,e:) War, as the ſword is oft taken, as numb. 14. 3. 2 Sam: 
' 12. 10. Otherwiſe there is the ſword of juſtice. f (7: & ) Ir ſhall 
not enter into it, nor have paſſage through it, much leſs ſhall your 
land be made the ſeat of War. | 

7, And ye ſhall chaſe your enemies, and they ſhall fall 
before you by the ſword. 

$ And * five g of you ſhall chaſe an hundred, and 
an hundred of you shall put ten thouſand to flight: and 
your enemies shall fall before you bythe ſword. 

g (5. e:) A ſmall number ; a certain number for an uncertain. 

For I wil) have reſpec unto you, and make you 
fruitful, and multiply you, and eftabliſh my covenant 
withyou 6b. . 

h ( i:e. ) AdQually perform all that I have promiſed you in my 

covenant made with you. : 
io Andyelhalleat old ſtore, and bring forth ; the 
old, becauſe of the new. 

s Or, caft our, throw them away as having no occaſion to ſpend 
them, or give them to the poor, or even to your cattel, that you 
may make way for the new corn, which alſo is ſo plentiful, that 
of it ſeIf it will fill up pamberns: 

1x * AndI willſet \k my takernacle amongſt you: 
and my ſoul ſhall not abhor you. 

k As IT haveplaced it, ſo T will continue it among you, and not 
remove it from you, as once I did upon your miſcarriage, Exod: 


12 * And T will walk among you 7, and will be your 
God, and you ſhall be my people m. 

1 As I have hitherto done, both by my pillar of cloud and fire, 
and by my Tabernacle, which have walked or gone along with you 
in all your journeys, and ſtayed among you in all your ſtations, to 
prote&, conduR, inſtru and comfort you. Twill owne you for 
that peculiar people which TI have fingled out of the maſs of man- 
kind, to bleſs you here and to ſave you hereafter. 


13 I awthe LORD your God which brought you 
forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye ſhould not be 
their bond-men, and I have broken the bands of your 
yoke, and made you go upright ». 

n with heads lifred up, not prefſed down with a yoke. It notes 
_— _ ſecurity,, confidence and glory. See Exod: 14. 8. 
UMVL: > $s 

14 Butif you will not hearken untome, and willnot 
do all theſe commandments : 

15 Andif yeſball diſpiſe my ſtatutes, or if your ſoul 
abhor my judgments, fo that ye will not do all my ; 
commandments, bt that yg brgakmy covenant o, 


| preſent life, P/al. 104. rs. 


T 1/C-& vs 


o (i: e: ) Break your parf or conditions of that covenant made 
between me and you, and thereby diſcharge me from the bleſſings 
promiſed on my part | 
16 I alfo will do this unto you, I will even appoint 
+overyou þ terrour,conſumption,and the burning ague, 
that ſhall conſume the eyes 9,and cauſe ſorrow of heart: 
and * ye (ball ſow your ſeed in vain, for your enemies *Job:;r:s, 
ſhall eat it. Jer.5.17. 
p I'will give them power over you, that you ſhall nor be able to & 12.13, 
avoid or reſiſt them. 9 By the decay of ſpirits and affluence of ll 
humors. 
17 And * I will ſet my face againſt you, and ye hal * Chap. 
be ſlain before your enemies: they that hace you ihall PS 
reign over you,8& * ye ſhall flee when none purſueth you. .' MN 
is Andifye will not yet for all this hearken unto Prov.28.x 
me,then I will puniſh you ſeven times more foryour ſins: 

19 And I will break the pride of your power q, and I 
will make your heaven as iron,and your earth as braſs 7: 

q(3i: e:) Your ſtrength of which you are proud,your numerous 


and united forces, your kingdom, yea your Ark and SanQtuary. 
7» The Heavens ſhall yield you no rain, nor the earth fruits. 


20 And your ſtrength s ſhall befſpent in vain : for 
your land ſhall not yield her increaſe, neither ſhall the 
trees of the land yield their fruitse 

s Spent in plowing and ſowing, and tilling the ground. 

21 Andifye walk || contrary unto me z, and will | Or, at 
not hearken unto me, TI will bring ſeven times more adventures 
plagues upon you, according to your fins, with me, 

t Or, carele/ly, or heedleſly with me or before me. i, e. ſo #s to becare- and fo 
leſs and unconcerned whether you pleaſe me or offend me. This is ** *+* 


oppoſed to exatt and circumſpe& walking with God, as Abraham did 
Gen. 17.1: and all are to do, Epheſ. 5. 15. 

22 * 1] willalſoſend wild beaſts among you, which *neut:; 2: 
ſhal rob you of your children, and deſtroy your cattel, 24- Ezck. 
and make you few in number, and * your high ways 5: 17: 
ſhal be delolate «. *Tudg.5.6: 

u By reaſon of the fewneſs of Travellers and People, and the ter- 2Chro.rs: 
rour of wild beaſts growing more numerous thereby. ; 5: Ifa 33. 
23 Andif ye will notbe reformed by theſe things :: IP 


+ Heb, 


upon you, 


but will walk contrary unto me 2 + 2 Sam. 
24 * Then will I alſo walkcontrary unto you x, and 22* 27- 
will puniſh you yet ſeven times for your fins; 5d og Pp 
Io0: 20, 


x Or, careleſly with you or cowards you, 3. e: T will put 
care and prote&ion. , FE FER our of my 


25 And I will bring a ſword upon you, that ſhal a- 
venge the quarrel of my covenanty: and when ye are 
gathered together within your cities, I willſend the pe- 


ſtilence among you, and ye ſhal be delivered into the 
hand of the enemie 2. 
9 ( #:e: ) My quarrel with you for your breach of your fai 
pr made with me. z Anker E4-cae few , wma vo 
, - | qa will be _ to defend you in your cities or ſtrong- 
26 * And when I have broken the ſtaff of your bread #, * 1c, 3.1: 
ten women bþ ſhall bake your bread in one oven, and Ezek.5:16 


they ſhal deliver you your breadagain b Fey x 
weight c: and &X 14 23: 

” Aw wh and not be ſatisfied. S2L , _ my 

_ & Either 1. by taking away that power and vert a Wea 

riſhing, which I have pur into hd food, w__ the wich. RY 

draw, it will be unable ro nouriſh. Or rather 2. by ſending a f 

mine or ſcarcity of bread, —_ is the ſtaffe and ſupport of mans 

or ſo this phraſe i ; 

and el{where explained, as Pſal: 10s: 16: Feek: Rp yy and he Re. 

lowing words expound it here. 6 (7:e: ) Ten or many Familie : 

for the women took care for the bread and food of all the famil : 

c This is a ſign and conſequence both of a famine. and of the = 

—_ of the bread of ſeveral families together in an oven br 

each family t2ok care to weigh their bread,and to receive the ſa By 

as —_— they put in. Compare Ezek. 4. 16 ame 

27 Andif ye will not for all this hearkes 
: '2 nu 
but walk contrarie unto me; nan, 


28 Then I will walk contrarie unto you alſo in fury / 
and TI, even TI will chaſtiſe you ſeven times for hay 4 : 
« Or, In fury of raſbneſs or careleſneſs with you or amongſt you fa 
raging lion breaking into a multitude of people, and iefiro bi wage 
E LH with promiſcuouſly or without any ditinEion T 
righteous and wicked together, as is threatned, Fzek: a1. , _— 
in fury of contrariety, or meeting with you, or againſt hs” mY - Es 
that MCCts hisenemy in the fury of battel. OY "97 © WOO 
29 * And ye ſhal eat the fleſh of 
the fleſh of your daughters ſhal ye eat, 
e RW extreme hunger, See 7m. 4 19. 
2d _ I will deſtroie your high places f, and * cut Fl Fs 
L your 1mages g, and caſt your carcaſes upon the 347: _ 

carcafes of your idols þ, and my ſoul ſh Eze 

age | y loul ſhal abhor you 

which you will ſacrifice afrer the manner of the ” »o-HY : 


See Levit: 19.26. Numb: 
.26. : 33- 52. g Or, Nour images of th 
the honour and worſhipping of the Sun, __ ME ot fr 


Under this one kind of idolatry 


our {ons 
y e, and *Deut:28. 
53: Ezek: 


: 6:4: 
*, 


together in a forlorn and loathſome ft ; 
J ate 
31 And Lwill make your cities Epck: 
1 & waſt I Ee 195:Ezek: 
e, and* bring 9:6: & 27 
youT 7, 


Ch;v. XX VI, 


(hap- 


| *Deut. 
| 97 and 2 
62, 64. 


| *:Chro! 


36. 21, 


| | Or, ac 
| compliſh. 
| See Job 


14; 6. 


| ®*Proy. 2 


4 I; 
| + Heb. 


| griven. 


. Iſa, IO.« 


(hap. XXVT. 


your ſan&uaries 7 unto deſolation, and I will not ſmell 


+ the favour of your ſweet odours /+ | 
; Either x. GodsſanQtuary, called Sanffuaries here, as alſo Pſal. 
73. 17. and 74. 7. Jer. 51. 51. Ezek. 28, 18. becauſe there were di- 
vers apartments in it, each ofwhich was a SanQtuary, or, which is 
21l one, an holy place, as they areſeverally called. And -your em- 
phatically, not mine, for I diſown and abhor it, and all the ſervi- 
ces you do in it, becauſe ye have defiledir. Or 2. The Temples 
built by you to Ido's, therefore called their Santtuaries, in oppolitt- 
on to Gods. Or 3. Your Synagogues. Burt the firſt is molt pro- 
bable, becauſe he ſpeaks of the place where they uſed to offer their 
ſweet odours here following. k& ( 7. e. } Not own or accept them.See 
Gen. 8. 21. 1ſa. 1 11, &c. [Either of the incenſe, or of your facri- 
fices, which, when offered with faith and obedience, are very ſwect 

and acceptable to me. ; : 
z2 And Iwillbring the land into deſolation : and 


LL EF FITC © 


with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember 
the land z. | : | | 

y To wit, ſo as to perform it, and make good all that T have 
promiſed in It, For words of knowledge or remembrance in Scri- 
pture, do moſt commonly connote afte&ion and kindneſs : of 
which there are many inſtances, ſome given before, and more 
hereafrer« 2 Which now ſeems to\be forgotten and neg'e&ed;and 
deſpiſed, as if I had never choſen ir to be the peculiar place of my 
preſence and blefling. E 

4.2 The land alſo (bal be left of them, and ſhal enjoy 

her ſabbaths, while ſhe lieth defol-te without them: and 
they ſhal accept of rhe puniſhment of their iniquity : be- 
cauſe, even becauſe they deſpiſed my judgments, and 
becauſe their ſoul abhorred my ſtatutes. 


44 Ard yet forall chat, when they be in the land of 


Chap. XXVII. 


cheir enemies,* I will not caſt them away,: either will 1 * Deur. 4 


your enemies which dwelltherein m, ſbal be aftoniſhed 
abhor them,to deſtroy them utterly,and to break my co- 3”: Roms 


atit 2, 


Ii. 26, 


| 


» Having driven you out and poſſeſſed your places. n See Lam. 
$. v3 


venant with them 2 for I am the LORD their God +, 


+ Neither the deſperateneſs of their condition, nor the greatneſs 


| fr 33 And * T will ſcatter you among the heathen, and of their ſins, ſhall make me wholly make void my covenant with 

F4 4, | will draw out a {word after youo: and your land ſhal be | them and their anceſtors, butT will in due time remember them 

2, 04- deſolate, and your cities wade for mm and _— __ ſake —_— " them 'in mercy. 

, YI ſhall | From this place the fews take great comfort, and aſſure themſelves 

"0 __ Soong follow you into ſtrange lands, and you of gp oe _ of their m_ eden wy miſery. And from 

| #*.Chron. . "Aly . this, and ſuch other places, t. Pau! concludes, that the 1ſraelitiſh 

| TO 24 * Then (hal the land [| enjoy her ſabbachs,as long nation, though then reje&ed and ruined, ſhould be gathered pant a 
| fOr, ac: As It heth deſolate, and ye bein your enemies land, eve® | 119 reftored. | 

| onpliſh. then ſhalthe land refit, and enjoy her {abbaths p. 45 Burt I will for their fakes || remember the covenane 

| See Job p Either r. Becauſe it ſhall berid of you who were the unprofita- | \F their anceſtors, whom I brought forth out of the land 

14: 6. ble and heavy burdens thereof, under whom it ina manner groan- of Egypt, in the ſight of the heathen, that 1 might bs 


| *Prov. 28. 
| 


ed. Or rather 2. Becauſe it ſhall now enjoy thoſe Sabbarical years 


of reſt from tillage, which you through covetouſneſs oft-times 
would not give it, as the next verſe informs us, though God com- 
manded it, Levit. 25. 4. ; 

25 As long as itlieth deſolate, it ſhal reſt : becauſe ir 
did not reſt in your ſabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it. 

26 And upon them that are left alive of you, I will 
ſend a faintneſs q into their hearts, in the lands of their 
enemies, and * the ſound ofa + ſbaken leaf hal chaſe 


their God: I am the LORD. 


[| Or rather, 70 or for them, 3. e, for their good or benefit : for 
ſurely, if one conſiders what is ſaid before concerning the wicked- 
neſs of this people, he cannot fay this deliverance was given them 
for their ſakes, but muſt rather ſay with the Prophet, Exzk. 36. 22, 
32. not for your ſake, O houſe of Iſrael, &c. | 

46 Thele are the ſtarutes, and judgments, and laws 
which the LORD made between him and the children 


of Iſrael in mount Sinai, by the hand of Moſes. . 


| + Heb. them, and they ſbal flee, as fleeing from a ſword: and CHAP. XXVIEL 
| driven. they ſhal fall, when none purſueth. Laws touching the redeeming of Men, devoted to God, 1---8. Orof Beaſts, 
| q The word notes.a tenderneſs and ſoftneſs of mind whereby they g---13. Of houſes, 14, 15. Of Fields or Grounds, 16---25, What 
are diſenahled from bearing the preſent miſeries, and are 1a conti- things might not be vowed, and being ſo, what redeemable, avid what 
F nual dread of further and ſorer miſeries. - not, 26---29, Of redeeming the Tenths buth of Fruit and Cattel, 
Ih.19.4 2+ And * they (bal fail one upon anotherr, as it [| $0---33. | 
were before a ſword, when none purſueths: and ye A N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, | 
ſhal have no power to ſtand before your enemies. 2 Speak unto the children of lfrael,and fay unto 
r As Soldiers uſe to do when their ranks are broken, and they | them 5 When a man ſhal make a ſingular vow a, the per- 
forced to flee away hattily from their purſuers. 5 Your guilt and | ſong ſhall be for the LORD b, by thy eſtimation c. 
fear cauſing you to imagine that they do purſue you when indeed 2 Or, an eminent or hardox wonderful vow, not concerning things, 
they do nor. 4 which was not ſtrange, but cuſtomary, bur concerning perſons,as 
38 Andye hal periſh among the heathen, and the | ;. here follows, which he vowed,or by vow devoted unto the-Lord, 
land of your enemies ſhal eat you up. which indeed was unuſual and ditficult ; yet there want not in- 
*Frek: 4: 39 And they that are left of you * ſhal pine away t poop page vo and "w =. 19-9500 noun "_ them- 
"thr Eras. "SO Ay . . elves or theirchildren to the ſervice of God, and that either more 
4 args in their ag _ or wg ey _— and alſo in = ſtritly and particularly, as the Nazarites, and the Levites, 1 Sam. T. 
Pe eve. : como a ern mes ney pine away WI | ir. andfor theſe there was no redemption amitred, but they were 
& 33: 10: them. = ; in perſon to perform the ſervice ro which they were devoted : or 
& 36: 31: © Beconſumed and melt away by degrees through diſeaſes, op- | more largely and generally, as ſome who were not Levites, nor ins 
Hoſ. 5-15. Preſſions, griefs and manifold mileries. DW 9; tended themſelves or their children ſhould be Nazarites, might yet 
40 If they ſhal confeſs « their iniquitie, and the ini- poten: axon - dog = + 15-6 won ” — oo = oa ? = 
” . | . . 7 . ZIV1 ITea, ” 
quitie of their fathers, with their treſpals which they ing ron from ſome evil felt or feared, devoted themſelves or their 
treſpaſled againſt me, and that alſo they have walked | c1j1qren to the ſervice of God and of the ſanftuary, tho' not in 
contrary unto Me, | ſu-h a way as the Levites, which they were forbidden to do, yet in 
u Heb. And they ſhall confeſs, where our Tranſlation and many o- | ſome kind of ſubſerviency to them. And becauſe there might be too 
thers underſtand the Particle ifi which is alſo wanting and under- | great a number of p-rſons thus dedicated, which might be burden- 
ſtood, Exod. 4. 23. Mal. x. 2. and 3. 8. So here, And if they ſhall con- | ſome and chargeable ro the SanEtuary, therefore an exchange is al- 
feſs, &rc. But there ſeems no neceſlity of any ſuch ſupplement, but | lowed, and the Prieſts are dire&ed toimpoſe and require a tax for 
theſe and the following words may be taken as they ly in their | their redemption. 6 (3.e.) Dedicated to the Lord,and conſequent- 
plain and proper ſignification, to thispurpoſe, ver. 40. And through | ly to thePrieſt. c By whoſe eſtimation ? Anſ. Either 1. Thine, O 
the heavineſs and extraordinarinels ot their affliction, their conſci- | Prieſt, ro whom the valuation of things belonged,and here is aſcri- 
ences will force them to confeſs their iniquity, and the iniquity of their | bed,ver.12. Or rather 2.Thine, O man that voweſt, as appears from 
fathers, with their treſpaſs which they have treſpaſſed againſt me, i e with | ver. $. where his eſtimation is oppoſed to the Prieſts valuation. Nor 
their prevarication with me and defe&ion from me to Idolatry, | was there any fear of his partiality in his own cauſe, for the price ig 
which by way of eminency he calls their treſpaſs : and that alſo they | particularly limited. But where the price is undetermined, there, 
hate walked contrary to ma, ver. 41. and that I alſo have walked contrary | to avoid that inconvenience, the Prieſt is to value it, as ver. 8,12. 
rnto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies : 7. e. that 3 And thy eſtimation ſhal be, of the male from twen- 
they are or comeinro theſe Calamiries by chance, nor by the ml: | ry years old even unto ſixty years old 4, even thy efti 
confeſſion is no a Pharaoh made in o diſtreſſes, and than mation ſhal be fifty ſhekels of ſilver, after the ſhekel of 
Hypocrites in their affli&tion uſe to make. And therefore he adds, | the ſanctuary. 
if then their uncircumciſed, i. e. impure, carnal, profane. and impent- d Which is the beſt time for ſtrength and ſervice, and therefore 
tent hearts be humbled, i. e. ſubdued, purged, reformed : if to this | is prized at the higheſt rate. 
confeſſion they add ſincere humiliation and reformation, I will do 4 And if it be a female, then thy eſtimation ſhal be 
what follows. | thirty ſhekels e. | 
41 And that I alſohave walked contrary unto them, e Leſs than the mans price, becauſe ſhe is inferior to him both in 
| and have brought them ivto the land of their enemies : | *1-ngth eh ny 
Jer.6.10, if then their * uncircumciſed hearts be humbled, and | m he = —_—_ may wr we pare abwcn. 
9. 6g, Fey then accept of the puniſhment of their iniquitie x. . | 2 ed 7 g 1 ” 6 —_ al 7 yo 1C Male twen- 
RE ns x The Hebrew word avon commonly ſignifies iniquity, but it is ty IDEKels, ana Tor TNE TEmale TEN INEKEIS. 


_— — — — — 


oft uſed for the puniſbment of iniquity, as here and x Sam. 28. 10. Pſal. 
31. 10. 1a. fo 6,11. The meaning is, if they ſincerely acknow- 
ledge the righteouſneſs of God and their ov» n wickedneſs, and pa- 
tieggly ſubmit to his corre&ing hand, and would rather be in their 
preſent ſuffering condition, than in their former ſinful, though 
proſperous eſtate ; if with David they arz ready to ſay, 7t is good for 


- them that they are afflied,that they may learn Gods ſtatutes,and obedience 


to them for the future,which is a good evidence of true repentance. 
42 Then will I remember my covenant y with Jacob, 


and alſo my covenant with Iſaac, and alſo my covenant | 


f Art whatage they mighr be vowed by their parents, as appears 
from 1 Sam. 1. tho' not by themſelves; and the children were ob- 
liged by their parents vow, which i: nor Orange conſidering the 
parents power and right to Ciſpoſe of their children ſo far as is not 
contrary to the mind of God. 

6 And ifit be froma month old, even unto five years 
old, then thy eſtimation (hal be of the male five ſhekels 
of ſilver, and for the female thy cſtimatien ſpa/ be three 
(hekels of ſilver, | | 

YF' 2 And 


A. 2 


' not offer a ſacrifice unto the LORD, then he ſhal pre- 


& FHeb. ac- bad: + as thou valueſt it, 2vbo art the prieſt,ſo ſhal ic be. 
' "Yording to 
 zhy eftima- 


#:i0n, O 


Prie#, &c. . 


[| Or, the 
lond ofan 
homer, 


"OP 


XXVIE! 


J if ir be from:ſixty years old, and above,if it be | 
A A then thy eſtimation ſhal be fifteen ſhekels, and 


the female ten ſhekels. 
= Bur if he be poorer than thy eſtimation g, then he 


tal preſent himſelf before the prieſt, and the prieſt ſhal 
wr 1. him :; according to his ability 6 that vowed, ſhal 


e prieſt value him. 
_ if after his vow he be decayed and impoveriſhed, and not able 
ro pay the price which thou, according to the rules here given, re- 
quireſt of him. þ Which God alſs conſidered in other caſes, as 
Levit. 12. $8. Compare 2 Cor. 8. 12. oY” 
9 And if it be a beaſt whereof men bring # an offer- 


ing unto the LORD, all that a» m4 giveth & of ſuch 
unto the LORD, ſhal be holy 7. 


'; To wit, uſually and according to Gods appointment. & (7. e. ) 
Voweth to give. {/ (7. e. ) Conſecrated ro God, either to be ſacri- 
ficed, or to be given to the Prieſt according to the manner of the 
vow, and the intcntion of him that voweth, 

1o He hal not alter it, nor change it »», a good for 
a bad,or 2 bad for a good »: and if he ſhal at allchange 
beaſt for beaſt, then it, and the exchange thereof » 


ſha! be holy. ; : 

» Two words expreſling the ſame thing more emphatically, 9. 4. 
He ſhall in no wiſe change it, neither for one of the ſame, nor of 
another kind. n Partly becauſe God would preſerve the ſanCtity 
ind reverence of conſecrated things, and therefore would not have 
them alienated, and partly to prevent abuſes of them who on this 
pretence might exchange it for the worſe, as reſerving the judgment 
To himſelf, © (7.2. ) Both the thing firſt vowed, and thing offered 
or given in exchange. * This was inflifted upon him as a juſt pe- 
nalry for his raſhnels and levity in ſuch weighty matters. 


ix And if it be any unclean p beaſt of which they do 


ſent the beaſt before the prieſt : 

þ Either for the kind, or for the quality of it, if it were ſuch an 
one as might not be offered. The Dog only may ſeem to be cx- 
cepted, for his price might not be offered. See Det. 23. 18. 

12 And the prieft ſhal value it, whether it be good or 


I3 But if he will at all redeem it, then he ſhal add a 
fifth part thereof unto thy eſtimarion. 
14 4nd when a man ſhal ſanctifie q his bouſe 7 be 
holy unto the LORD r, then the prieſt ſhal eſtimate it, 
whether it be good or bad: as the prieſt ſhal eſtimate 


it, ſo thal it ſtand -. 

qTo wit, by a vow, for of that way and manner of ſanQtifica- 
tion he ſpeaks in this whole chapter. r In which caſe the benefit 
of it redounded either to the Prieſts for their maintainance, Num. 
18. 14+ or to the ſanQuary for its reparations or expenſes. 5 Sup- 
poſing that the Prieſts eſtimation doth not notoriouſly ſwerve from 
the rules of valuation -preſcribed by God. For if the Prieſt deter- 
mined moſt unrighteouſly and unreaſonably, as ſuppoſe an hundred 
times more than the true value of it, I preſume no man is ſo void 
of ſenſe as to ſay they were all boundto ſtand to the Prieſts deter- 
mination in that caſe. Even as in caſe a mans leprofie was notori- 
ous and unqueltionable, if a Prieſt ſhould through partiality pro- 
nounce him clean, this did notmake him clean. And therefore all 
thoſe paſſages of Scripture which leave things to, and command 
men to acquieſce in, the determination of the Prieſt or Prieſts, are 
to be underſtood with this exception, that their determinations be 
not evidently contrary to the revealed will of God,to whom Prieſts 
are ſubje& and accountable. Otherwiſe if the Prieſts had com- 
manded men to profane the ſabbath, this would have acquitted 
them from rhe ovligation of God's command of keeping it holy, 
which is impious and abſurd to affirm. And this conſideration will 
give light to many Scriptures. : ; 

15 Andifhe that ſandtihed it, will redeem his houſe, 
then he ſhal add the fifth part t of the money of thy eſti- 


mation unto it, and it ſhal be his. 
£ Which he might the better do, becauſe the Prieſts did uſually 
put a moderate rate upon it. | 
16 Andif a man ſhal ſancifie unto the LORD ſeme 
part of a field of his poſſeflion #, then thy eſtimation 
shal be according to theſeed thereof x: ||an homer of 
barley ſeed ſhall be walued at fifry shekels of filver y. 


« (:.e.) Which is his by inheritance, becauſe particular dire&i- 
on is given abour purchaſed lands, ver: 22. And he faith pare of z#, 
becauſeit was unlawful to vow away all his poſſeſſions, becauſe 
thereby he had diſenabled himſelf f: om the performance of divers 
duties by way of ſacrifice, almfgiving, &c. and made himſelf bur- 
denſome to his brethren. x (7. e. ) According to the quantity and 
quality of the land, which is known by the quantity of ſeed which 
It can receive and return, y Not tobe paid yearly, till the year of 
Jubile, as ſome would have it, but once for all, as is moſt proba- 
ble, 1. Becauſe here-is no mention of any yearly payment, 
only of one payment, and we muſt not add to the Text. 2. Be- 
cauſe it is moſt probable that lands and all things were favourably 
and moderately valued, ſo that men might be rather encouraged to 
make ſuch vows upon juſt occaſions, than tobe deterred fromthem 
by exceffive impoſitions. Bur if this were yearly rent, it was an 
exceſſive rate, and much more than the land ordinarily yielded. 
For an Omer 1s bur the tenth part of an Ephah, Exod. 16. 36.and there- 
fore not above a pottle of our meaſure, which quantity of ſeed 
would not extend very far, and in ſome lands would yield bur an 
inconiiderable crop eſpecially in barley, which was cheaper than 
wheat, and which for that reafon, among others, may ſeem to be 
here mentioned rather than wheat. 


17 If he ſandtific his field from the year of Jubile x, 


- LEVITICUS. 


but A 


according to thy eſtimation @ it shal ſtand 6. 


| 


z (5. e. ) Immediately after the year of Jubile is paſt. » Now 
mentioned, to wit, of 50 ſhekels for an homer of barley ſeed. 5 
(5. e.) Thar price ſhall be paid without diminution. 

18 But if he ſan&tific his field after the Jubile c, then 
the prieſt ſhal reckonunto him the money, according to 
the years that remain, even unto the year of the Jubi- 
le d, and it ſhal be abated from thy eſtimation. 

c ( i:e: )- Some conſiderable time after the Jubile, « as appears 
from thefollowing words. 4 The defalcation from the full price 
of fifty ſhekels being to be more or leſs as the yearsare more or few- 
er. See Levit: 25: I5, IG, I7. : DE ER 

19 And if he that ſandiified the field will in any wiſe 
redeemit, then heſhal add the fifth paz? of the money 
of thy eſtimation untoirt, andit ſhal be affured ro him. 

20 And if he will norredeem the field e, or if he have 
ſo!d the field fto another man, itſhal not be redeemed 
any more g. : 

c To wit, when the Prieſt ſhall ſet a price upon it,and offer it to 
him in the firſt place to redeem it. f He, who ? Either 1. the man 
chat vowed it; if he, after ſuch a vow made ſhall negle& to pay his 
vow,and ſhall ſacrilegiouſly ſell the ſame land to another man : or if 
he ſell it, i: e: ſuffer it to be ſold to another, and will not prevent 
that by redeemingit to himſelf. Or rather 2. the Prieſt, or ſome in 
his name, who though nor expreſſed, is ſufficiently underſtood our 
of the foregoing clauſe, If he will not redeem or buy again the field, 
to wit, of the Prieſt, who is now the ſeller of it ; or, or rather 
and, for this ſeems to be added by way of accumulation, if he, :: e: 
the Prieſt, of whom he might have redeemed it, upon his refuſal, 
offers itto ſale, and have ſold the field to another man, Add tothis, 
that none but the Prieſt could fell this land, after it was once vow- 
ed and declared to be ſo, and offered by the Prieſt to him againto 
redeem it, which is apparently the preſent caſe. g (i: e: ) He ſhall 
for ever loſe the benefit of redemprion. | 

21 Butthe field when it goeth out + in the Jubile, 
[hal be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted : the 
poſſeflion thereof ſhal be the prieſts z. 

h (i:e: ) Out ofthe poſſeſſion of the other man to whom the 
Prieſt ſold it, # For their maintainance. Nor is this repugnant to 
that/law, that the Prieſts ſhould have no inheritance in the land, Numb. 
18. 20. for that is only ſpoken of them and the whole tribe of Lev; 
in general, and in reference to the firſt diviſion of the land, where- 
in the Levites werenot to have a diſtin part of land, as other tribes 
had ; bur this doth not hinder, but ſome particular lands might be 
vowed and given to the Prieſts either for their own benefit, or for 
the ſervice of the SanQtuary. 

22 And if a man ſandifie unto the LORD a field 
which he hath bought, which 5s not of the fields of his 
poſlefiion & ; | 

& Which is not his patrimony or inheritance. 

23 Thenthe prieſt thal reckon unto him the worth 
of thy eſtimation /, even unto the year of the Jubile mn, 
and he ſhal give thine eſtimation »in that day, as a ho- 
ly thing 0 unto the LORD. 

_ T(:e: ) The price or ſum at which thou,O Prieſt, ſhalt reckon 
it. So itis only a change of the perſon, which is frequent : or 
the price which thou, O Moſes, by my dire&ion haſt ſet in ſuch 
caſes. m (7.e) As much as it 1s worth, for that ſpace of time 
between the making of the vow and the year of Jubile : for he 
had no right to it for any longer time, as the next verſe tells us 
» Without the addition of the fifth part, which he was to pa for 
his lands of inheritance, wer: 19: as being of a better and So du- 
=_ —_ _ nur lands which were his only till the Ju- 
ile. o As that which is to be conſ 
land redeemed by ir. ITT Gd bs lead of the 

24 Inthe year of the jubile the field ſhal return un- 
to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom 
the poſleflion of the land did b-long p. 


Þ By original right, which no other perſon by vow or otherwiſe 


. 


could give away from him. 
25 And all thy eſtimation ſhal be according to the 


hekel of the ſanctuary: * twenty gerahs thal be the TIE 
*x0d.30 


ſhekel. 


26 Only the  * firſtling of the beaſt, which ſhould he er 
q, whe- Ezek. 45. 
I2. 


be the LORDS firſtling, no man ſhalſan&ikfie it 
me be Ox or lheep 7: it is the LORDS 

9 To wit, by vow ; becauſe it is not his own. 
already, and therefore to vow ſuch a thing toGod Long po 5 on 


gation from, and an uſurpati 
of God by pretendin pation of the Lords right, and a mockin 


_ r _ theſe two emine 
eaſts which might be ſacrificed to God, the firſtl; 
could not be redeemed bur were to be ſacrificed ; na es theſe 


lings of men were to be redeemed 
being vowed, as we ſee 1 Sam: 1: "__ IR ns it adage 
then he ſhal 


27 And if ;r be of an unclean beaft A 
—_—_— : according to thine eſtimation, and ſhal add 
a fifch pert of itthereto : orif it be not redeemed, then 
it ſhal be fold 5 according to thy eſtimation ; 

r (7: e: ) Tf it be the firſt-born of an un 


from wer: 26: which could not be vowed 
nor offered, becauſe it was uncle 


, and 
tholrtibromn ol the ts . te - the firſt-born of them, becauſe 


without the addition of any ſuch 
Which is true of the firſt redemption of them, bur then as after 


they were redeemed they mi 
ghr be again vowed unto Go 
when the owners would redeem them a ſecond time, it va. = 


reaſonable 


Chap. X xvn. 


+} Heb. 
fir ſt-born, 
&c 


g to give him what we cannot withhold th "Exod; 
nt kinds he comprehends all other *? '* 


© Cha] 


* Joſh 
19- 


|. 30, 


* Chap. [ 


- Jolk. 6. 
19- 


_— 


* Exod; 


30. 12, 


N U M 
reaſonable they ſhould pay a better price for them. And if this 


were meant of unclean beaſts in general, this were the very fame 
low which is mentioned before, ver. IT, 12, 13: which, it is not 
probable, would after a few verſes be unneceſlarily repeated again 
like a diſtin& Jaw. s And the price thereof was given to the Prieſts, 
or brought into the Lords treaſury. . | 
2x * Notwithftanding, no devoted thing t that a 


in (bal devote unto the LORD, of all that he hath « 
bob of _ and beaſt, and of the field of his poſſeſſion, 
ſhal be {old or redeemed : every devoted thing 3s moſt 


unto the LORD x- 

way ;. e. ) Nothing which is abſolutely devoted to God with a 
curſe upon themſelves or others, if they diſpoſed not of it accord- 
ing to their vow ; asthe Hebrew word implies. « To wit, in his 
pover 0; poſſeſſion. » (z. e.) Only to be touched or employed 
by the Prieſts, and by no other perſons ; no not by their own fa- 
milies, for that wasthe ſtate of the 20ſt holy things. 

29 None devoted, which ſhal be devoted of men y. 


ſhal be redeemed : but {bal ſurely be put to death. 

y Not by men, as ſome would elude it ; but of men, for it 1s ma- 
nifeſt both f om this and the for-going verſes, that zen hereare not 
the perſons devoting, but devoted. (eff. Was it th:n lawful for 
any man. r men thus to devote another perſon to the Lord, and in 
purſuance of ſuch vow to put him to death ? Anſw. This was un- 
queſtionably lawful, and a duty in ſomecaſes, when perſons have 
been devoted to deſtruttion either by God's ſentence, as IcolJaters, 
Exod: 22: 20: Deut: 23: 15: the Canaanites, Deut: 20: 17: the Hmale- 
kites, Deut: 25: 19: and 1 Sam: 15: 3, 26: Benhadad, 1 King: 29: 42: 
orby men, in purſuance of ſuch a ſentence of God, as Namv: 21: 
2, 3: and 31: 17: or for any crime of an high nature, as Judg: 21: 


-== > ; 
B EB K % 
vow as this. But for the CoMrantes, Amalelites, 8c. Cod the un- 
doubted Lord of all mens lives, gave to' the Iſraelites a power over 
their perſons and lives, and a command to put them to death. 
And this verſe may havea ſpecial reſpe& to themor ſuch as them. 
And »Ilthough the general ſubje& of this and the former verſe be 
one and the ſame, yet there axe two rema:kable differences to this 
purpoſe; «1. The verb is aQtive, werſe 28. and the agent there ex- 
preiied, that a man ſhall devote, but it is paſſive werſe 29. and the a- 
gent undetermined, which ſha!l be devoted, to wit, by God, or 
men in conformity to God's revealed will. 2. The devoted per- 
ſon or thing is only to be ſold or redeemed, and ſaid to be moſt ho- 
ly, verſe 28. but here it is to be put ro death, and this belongs only 
ro men, and thoſe ſuch as either. were, or ſhould be devoted in 
manner now expreſſed. 

20 And * all the tithe of the land z, whether of the 
ſeed of the land or of the fruir of the tree, is the LORDS: 
it is holy unto the LORD. 


z There are divers ſorts of Tithes, but this ſeems to be under- 
ſtood only of the ordinary and yearly Tithes belonging to the Le- 
wvites, &C» as the very expreſſion intimates, and the ad-ition of the 
£fh part in caſe oftedemption thereof implies. 

31 And if a man will at all redeem ought of his 
tithes, he ſhal add thereto the fifth part thereof, 

32 And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the 
flock, ever of whatſoever pafſeth under the rod |}, the 
tenth ſhal be holy unto the LORD. 

| Either x. the tithers rod, it being the manner of the Jews in 
tithing to cauſe all their cattel to paſs th'ough ſome gate or nar- 


row paſſage, where the tenth » as marked by a perſon appointed 
for that purpoſe and reſerved for the Prieſt. Or 2. The y ( ds 


5: Joſe 7: 15. Burt this is no: to be generally underſtood, as ſome 
have taken it, as if a Jew might by ve:tue of this Texr, devote his 
child or his ſervant to the Lord, and thereby cblige himſelf ro put 
them to death, which peradventure was Jepthe's errour. For this 
is expreſly limited ts af thar a man hath, or which is his, i.e which 
he hath a power over. Burt the Jews had no power over the lives of 
their child: -n or ſervants, but were dire&ly forbidden to take them 


away, by that great command, thou ſhalt do no murder. And feing 


he that killed his ſervant caſually by a blow with a red was ſurely 
to be puniſhed, as is ſaid Exod. 21. 20. it could not be Jawful wilfglly 
and intentionally to take away his life upon pietence of any ſuch 


rod, under which the herds and flockspaſſed, and by which they 
were governed ard numbred. See Jer. 33, 13. Ezek. 20. 37. 


| 33 He ſhalnot fearch whether it be good or bad, 
' neither (hal he change it: and if he change it t all, 
then both it, and the change thereof ſhal be holy,it ſbal 

_ not be redeemed. 
34 Theſe are the commandments which the LORD 
commanded Moſes for the children of Iſrael in mount 


Sinal, | 


NUMBERS. 


The ARGUMENT. 
=» Book giveth us an Hiftory of almoft feurty years travel of th: children of Ifrael through the Wilderneſs 2wberenve have 
a1 account of their journeys, and wht happened to them therein, wich their Governm-nt, and how they were man«g 4 
thrreby;Called Numbers by reaſon of the ſeveral Numbrings of the peeple,as at the efſ.rings of the Princes, end at their [eweral 
Journeys, &c. But eſpecially rwo, One, Chap. i- Out of which the Prieits and Levites were excepted, but - numbred by 


Chap. I: 


* Gen.28 


22, Num{ 
18 21,24 | 
Mal. 3. 84 


Io, 


themſelves, viz. In the ſecond year after they were come outof Egypt, in the firſt month whereef the Paſſover was inſtituted ; 
with the order about the Tabernacle both of the Levites, and People and their ſew ral marches, encampings, and manner of 
pitching their Tents, the Priel(t's maintain. nce and eftabliſhment, by the miraculous budding of Aarons rod, with the ſevera] 
mp. diments in 'hcir marches, buth am»ng th: mſelves by ſeveral mu- murings, feditiorvs, and conſpiracies ; and frem their 
enemies, Viz. the Edomites, Canaanites, over whom hawing obt»ined a victery, and afterwards murmuring they were ftung 


with fiery Serpents, and cured by the brazen one ; Amorites whoſe Kings, Sihon and Og, they evercame, and ſlew; and 
Moabites, where by the allurements of Balaam who was hired by Ba'ak to curſe Hrael, they jeyned themſelves to Baal-peor, 


and are plagued foris ; that epenly oppoſed them. 


The «ther chief numbring is i» Chap, 26. where they are found aimoFt ag 


many as at the firft, though among hem were nene of the firtt numbring,( according ts what God had threatned Chap. 14. [ave 
Moſes, Joihua, and Caleb, by reaſon of their d fire to return back into Egypt upon the diſcoureging report of ten of theſe twelye 
that Moſes ſen; to ſpy out the Land ; whereupun thy were forced ro wander above 3B years in the wilderneſs; where he pave 


them leveral Laws, Civil, Eccleſfialticai a»d Military ; as at/o p-rticular direftions about women's inheritirg. 


the caſe of Le\ophead's daughters, and concerning vows ; 


ccccſirned by 


And then brings them back to the borders of Canaan, where, after 


divers victories obtained againſt their enemies, they were direfied h-w the Lund of Canaan was to be divided among rh: Tribes 
and what portion the Levites were to have among them; together with ſix cities of Refuge let apart for the Man ſlayer : At length 


Aaron veing dead, and Feazar placed inhisfread, and Moles «1, h 
pointment, deliver up the people uniathe charge and condutt of Jolhuas 


CHAP. I, 

God commands Moſes and Aaron to number the People that were fit for 
IWar, 1----3. Twelve Captains choſen, of every Tribe one : Their 
Names : The number of each Fribe, 4-45, 46. The Levites exem- 
pred : To take care of the Tabernacle : The other Tribes Camping round it, 
47-===54- 

N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſesin the wil- 
derneſs of Sinai s, in the tabernacle b of the 
congregation, on the firſt day of the ſecond + 
month, in the ſecend year after they were 

come out of the land of Egypt, ſaying, 

# Where now they had been a full year or near it, as may be ga- 
thered by comparing this place with Exod. 19. 1. and 40. 17. and 
other places. b From the mercy-ſeat. 


2 * Takeye the ſum c of all the congregation of the 
children of Iſrael 4 after their families, by the houſe of 
their fathers, e with the number of their names, every 
male by their poll : 


c This 1s not the fame muſter with that Exod. 38. 26. as plainly 


.ving receivea the ſentence of Death, doth by Ged's ap- 


for the charges of the Tabernacle; but this was for other ends, part- 
ly thar the g:eat number of the people might be known to the 
praiſe of *-od's faithfu/nefs, in making good hi: promiſes of multi. 
plying them.and ro their own comforr and encouragement; partly 
for the v tter o1de- ing of their camp and march,for they were now 
beginning theirjourney ; and partly that this account might te 
compared with the other in the cloſe of the Book, where we read 
that not one of all this vaſt number,except Caleb & Joſtua, v ere lefe 
alive ; hich was an evid:nt diſcovery of the miſchievous nature 
of ſin, by which ſo vaſta company were deſtroyed, and a fair war« 
ning to all futu:e' generations to take heed of rebelVing againſt the 
Lord,for which their ancettors had been ſo dreadfully plagued even 
ro extirpation. Ir is rrue, the ſums and numbers agree 11 this and 
that computation, which is nor ſtrange, becauſe there n as not much 
time between rhe two numbrings, and no eminent fin among the 
people in that interval, whereby God was provoked to diminiſh 
their numbers. Some conceive, that in that number, Exod.zo and 
38. the Levites were included, which are here excepted, wer. 47. 
and that in that interval of time, there were grown up as many 
more men of thoie years as there were Levites of the ſame age. 4 
So the ſtrangers mixed with them were not numbred. e The peo= 


appears, becauſe that was before the building of the Tabernacle, 
which was built and ſet up on che fir any of the fir'' month, Exod.go.2- 
but this was afrer it,ro wit, or the firſt day of the Jecond month, as is ſaid 
Ver. i» And they were for differing cnds ; that was to tax them 


ple were civided into twelve Tribes, the Tribes into great Fami- 
lies, Num. 26. 5. theſe great Families into leſſer Families called the 
houſes of their Fathers, becauſe they were diſtinguiſhed one 
from another by their fathers.* 

Y 4 


3 From 


— 


Pp. I. 
feb. 
| il 'y 012 
[ goeth 
4! 


OO IInY " NODOMBBER 6: 


2 From twenty years old and upward þ all that are 


able to go forth to war in {ſracl ; thou and Aaron (bal 
number them by their artmes. 50s 
4 And with you there ſhal bea man ct every tribe f: 
every one head of the houſe of his fathers. | | 
f To inſpe& the work, that it might be faithfully and impartial- 


ly done. 
; n And theſe are the names ofthe men that ſhal ſtand 


with youg: of the tribe of Reuben b, Elizur the ſon of 
Shedeur. | 

g To wit, with Moſes and Aaron, who were the chief managers 
of the work. þ The Tribesare herenumbred according to the or- 
deror quality of their birth, firſt the children of Leah, then of 
Rachel, and then of the handmaids. : : 

6 Of Simeon ; Shelumiel the ſon of Zuriſhaddai. 

7 Of Judah ; Nahſhon the ſon of Amminadab, 

$ Of Iffachar ; Nethaneel the ſon of Zuar. 

9 Of Zebulun ; Eliab the ſon of Helon. 

10 Of the chi!dren of Joſeph ; of Ephraim, Eliſha- 
ma the ſon of Ammihud : of Manaſich ; Gamaliel the 
ſon of Pedahzur. MS 

ir Of Benjamin ; Abidan the ſon of Gideoni- 

12 Of Dan ; Abiezer the ſon of Ammilhaddai, 

13 Of Aher ; Pagiel the ſon of Ocran. 

14 Of Gad, Elialaph the ſon of Deuel z. 

; Called Rewel, Numb. 2. 14. the Hebrew letters Daleth andReſb be- 
ing very like and oft changed. 

15 Of Naphtali ; Ahira the ſon of Enan, 

16 Theſe were the renowned & of the congregation, 
princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thouſands 
Lin Ifrael. 

- &þ Heb. the named or called, to wit, by Moſes and by Gods appoint- 
ment, to manage this affair,and others as there was occaſion.Com- 
pare Numb. 16: 2. and 26. 9. 1 See Exod. 18. 21. Numbs 10. 4. 

17 And Moſes and Aaron took theſe men which arc 
expreſſed by their names. 

18 And they aſſembled all the congregation together 
on thefirſt 4ay of the ſecond month, and they declared 
their pedigrees after their families,by the houſe of their 
fathers, according to the number of the names, from 
twenty years old and upward, by their poll. 

19 As the LORD commanded Moſes, fo he num- 
bred them in the wilderneſs of Sinai. | 

20 And the children of Reuben, Iſraels eldeſt ſon,by 


* their generations m, after their families, by the houſe 


of their fathers, according to the number of the names, 


' by their polls, every male from twenty years old and 


upward, all that were able to go forth to war ; 

- Heb. to wit, their generations, 7. e. the perſons begotten of Reu- 
bens immediate Children, who are here ſubdivided 'into families, 
and they into houſes, and they into particular perſons. 

21 Thoſe that were numbred of them, even of the tribe 
of Reuben,were forty and ſix thouſand and five hundred. 

22 Of the children of Simeon, by their generations,at- 
ter their families,by the houſe of their fathers.choſe that 
were numbred of them,according to the number of the 
names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

23 Thoſe that were numbred of them, even of the 
tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thouſand and three 
hundred. = 

24 Of the children of Gad,by their generations,afcer 
their families, by the houſe of their fathers, according 
to the number of the names, from twenty years old and 
upward, all that were able to go forth to war: 

25 Thoſe that were numbred of them, even of the 
tribe of Gad, were forty and five thouſand fix hundred 
and fifty. | 

26 Of the children of Judah,by their generations, af- 
ter their f:milies,by th e houſe of their fathe:s,according 
to the number of the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

27 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ever of the 
tribe of Judah, were threeſcore and fourteen thouſand 
and fix hundred », | 

z Far more than any other Tribe, in accompliſhing of Jacobs pro- 
phecy, Ger. 49. 

* 28 Of rhe children of Ifſachar, by their generations, 


after their families, by the houſe of their fathers, accord- 
ing to the number of the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war. 

29 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ever of the 
tribe of Iilachar, were fifty and four thouſand and four 
hundred. 

30 Of the childrenof Zebulun, by their generations, 
after their familics,by the houſe of their fathers,according 
to the number of the names, from twenty years oldand 
upwards, all that were able to go forth to war. 

21 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ever of the 


trive of Zebulun,were fitry aud yen thouland andfour | 


. hundred. 


32 Of che children of Joſeph, »mely, of the chil- 
dren of Ephraim, by their generations, after their fa- 
milies, by the houſe of their fathers, according to the 
number of thg names, from twenty years old and up- 
ward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

2 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ewes: of the 
tribe of Ephraim, were fourty thouſand and five hun- 
dred 0. 


o Above 8000 more than Manaſſeh, towards the accompliſhment 
of that promiſe, Gen. 48. 20. which the Devil in vain attempted to 
defeat by ſtirring up the men of Gath againit them, I Crow. 7. 
21, 


22, 
34 Of the children of Manaſleh,by their generations, 
after their families, by the houſe of their fathers,accord- 
ing tothe number of the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

25 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ever of the 
tribe of Manaſſch, were thirty and two thouſand and 
ewo hundred. | 

35 Of the children of Benjamin by their generations, 
after their families, by the houſe of their fathers,accord- 
ing to the number of the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

37 Thoſe that were numbred of them, eves of the 
tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five thouſand and four 
hundred p. 


 Þ The ſmalleſt number, except one, though Benjamin had more 
immediate children thanany of his brethren, Gen. 46. 21. whereas 
Dan had bur one immediate ſon, Gen. 46. 23. yet now his number 
is the biggeſt but one of all the Tribes, and is almoſt double to 
that of Benjamin. Such great and ſtrange changes God eaſily can, 
and frequently doth, make in families, x Sam. 2. 5. And there- 
fore let none boaſt or pleaſe themſelves too much in their nume- 
rous off-{pring. 

35 Otche children of Dan, by their generations,af- 
tertheir families, by the houſe of their tathers, accord- 
ing to the number of the names, from twenty years old 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war: 


tribe of Dan, were threeſcore and two thouſand and 
ſeven hundred. 

40 Of the children of Aſher by their generations, af- 
ter their families, by the houſe of their fathers, accord- 
ingto the number of the names, from twenty years eld 
and upward, all that were able to go forth to war : 

41 Thoſe that were numbred of them, even of the 
tribe of Aſher, were forty and one thouſand and five 
hundred. 

42 Ofthe children of Naphtali, throughout their ge- 
nerations, after their families, by the houſs of their ta- 
thers, according to the number of the names, from 
ewenty years old and upward, all that were able to go 
forth to war : 

43 Thoſe that were numbred of them, even of the 
tribe of Naphcali,zere fifry and three thouſand and four 
hundred, 

44 Theſe are thoſe that were numbred, which Moſes 
and Aaron numbred, and the princes of 1ſrael, being 
ewelve men : each one was for the houſe of his fathers, 

45 So were all thoſe that were numbred of the chil- 
dren of Iſrael, by the houſe of their fathers, trom ewen- 


ty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth 
co war in L[fracl, 


48 For the LORD had ſpoken unto Moſes, ſaying, 

49 Only thou thalt not number the tribe of Levi q, 
neither take the ſum of them among the children of 
Hrael. 

q Becauſe they were not generally to go out to war, which was 
the thing principally eyed 1n this muſter, wer. 3. 20, 45. but were 
to attend upon the Service of the Tabernacle, and therefore are 
reſerved to anorher. diſtint muſter, Numb. 3.15. and 4.2. &c. And 
leſt this ſhould be thought to be deſigned and done through Moſes 


his ambition to give his own Tribe the preeminence, he aflures 
them it was done by God's expreſs command. 


5o Bur thou jhalr appoint the Levices over the taber- 
nacle of teſtimony 7, andoyer all the veſſels thereof and 
over all things that beloxg to it:they ſhall bear the taber- 
nacle, and allthe veſlels thereof, and they ſhal miniſtes 
unto it, and ſhal encamp reund about the tabernacle, 

r $o called here, and Exod, 38. 21. becauſe it was made chiefly - 


for the ſake of the Ark of the Teſtimony, 2 Sam. 7. 2. which is oft 
called che Teſtimony, as hath been aforrediveſers COT TT 


51 And when the tabernacle ſerterh forward, the 
Levites (hal take it down : and when the tabernacle is 
co be pitched, the Levites ſhal ſet icup: and the ſtran- 
Ars chat compre gh 5, (hal be pat ro deaths 


;The 


Chap. 1. 


39 Thoſe that were numbred of them, ever of the 


46 Even all they that were numbred, were * fix * Exod: 


hundred thouſand and three thouſand, and five hundred go i" 


and fifty. 12. 39 
47 But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers, chap. 26. 
were not numbred among them. | Fl. 


F .Cl 


{Heb 01 
againſt, 


{Heb: over 
againſt, 


lg Chap. II. 


another Tribe, one no Levirte. # Soas to do the offices mentioned 

crſe'5o, 
"2 And che children of Iſrael ſhall pitch their tents 
every man by his own camp, and every man by his own 
ſtandard, throughout their hoſts, 

But the Levites ſhall pitch round about the taber- 
nacle of teſtimony, that there be no wrath s upon the 
congregation of the children of Ifrael : and the Levites 
ſhall keep the charge x ef the tabernacle of teſtimony, 

u To wit, from God, who is very tender of his worſhip, and will 
not ſuffer the profaners of it go unpunifhed ; whoſe wrath 1s called 
{imply Wrath by way of eminency, as the moſt terrible kind of wrath, 
« ( 5..e. ) Shall fuffer no ſtranger to approach through curioſity or 
any other motive. 


54 And the children of Hrael did according to all that 
the LORD commanded Moſes, ſo did they, 


CHAF. £4 


Order for the Marckes and Camping of the Tribes, 1, 2. Judah on the 
Eaft-ſide, with 1ſachar and Zebulon, who led the Van, 3—9. Reuben 
on the South-ſiae, with Simeon and Gad : then the Tabernacle was to follow, 
the Levites camping round it, 19 -— 17. Ephraim on the Weſt-ſide with 
Manaſſes and Benjamin, 18 — 24. Dan on the North Quarter, with Aſher 
and Naphtali, 25. 


ND the LOR D ſpake unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron, ſaying, ; ; 

2 Every man of the children of Iſrael ſhall pitch by 
his own ſtandard 4, with the enſign of their fathers houſe : 
+ far of b about the tabernacle of the congregation ſhall 
they pitch. | 

a Or, Enſign; by that to which: he is allotted by the following 
order. It is manifeſt that there were four great Standards or Enfigns, 
which ixre follow, diſtinguiſhed by their Colours or Figures, cr 
otherwiſe ; alſo that there were other particular Enſigns belonging 
to each of their Fathers houſes or Families, as is here taid. 6 Partly 
out of reverence to God and his worſhip, and the portion allotted te 
it, and partly for caution, leſt their vicinity to it might tempt them 
to make too near apyroaches to ir. Ir is ſuppoſed they wereat 2000 
cubirs diſtance from it, which was the ſpace between the people and 
the Ark, Joſ: 3: 4 and it is not improbable, becauſe the Levites 
encamped round about it, between them and the Tabernacle. 


And on the eaſt-fide toward the riting of the Sun, 
ſhall they of the ſtandard of the camp ef Judah pitch, 
threughout their Armies : and Nahſhon theſon of Am- 
minadab ſhakl be captain of the children of Judah. 

4 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred of them, 
were threeſcore and fourteen thouſand and ſix hundred. 

5 And thoſe that do pitch next unto him, ſha# ve the 
tribe of Ifſachar c; and Nethaneel the fon of Zuar ſhall 
be captain of the children of Iflachar. 


c He and Zebulon were Leah's two youngeſt ſons, and therefore 


would more contentedly ſubmit to Judah. | 

6 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred there- 
of, were fifty and four thouſand ard four hundred. 

7 Then the Tribe of Zebulun : and Eliab the ſon of 
Helon (hall be captain of the children of Zebulun. 

8 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbredthereof, 
were fifty and ſeven thouſand and four hundred, 

9 All that were numbred in the camp of Judah, were 
att hundred thouſand and fourſcore thouſand and fix 
thouſand and feur hundred d, throughout their armies: 
theſe ſhall firſt ſer forth. 


4 This was the moſt numerous camp, becauſe they marched firſt, 
23S being placed on the Eaſt and going towards the Eaſt, and becauſe 
they guarded the SanQtuary. 


xo On the ſouth-ſide ſpall be the ſtandard of the camp 
of Reuben e, according to their armies : and the cap- 
eain of the children of Reuben fall be Elizur, the fon of 
Shedeur. 
 e Who being the firſt-born, was the leader of the ſecond camp. 

1t And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred there- 
of were fourty and ſix thouſand and five hundred. 

12 And thoſe which pitch by him, ſhe# be the tribe 
of Simeon : and the captain of the children of Simeon 
ſoall be Shelumiel the ſon of Zuriſhaddai. 

13 Andhis hoft, and thoſe that were numbred of them 
were fifty and nine thouſand and three hundred. 

14 Then the tribe of Gad : andthe captain of the ſons 
of Gad ſhall be Eliaſaph the ſon of Reuel f. 

f Called Devel, Num: 1: 14: the Hebrew letters Daleth and Reſb being 


very like, and ofr changed, asappears by comparing Gen: 10: 3; with 
1 Chron: 1:6: and Gen: 36: 26, 38. with x Chron: 1:41, 50. 


15 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred of them, 
were fourty and five thouſand and lix hundred and fifty. 

16 All that were numbred in the camp of Reuben, 
were an hundred thouſand and fifry and one thouſand 
and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies : 
and they ſhall fer forth in the ſecond rank. 

17 Then the tabernacle of the congregation ſhall ſet 
forward with the camp of the Levires in the midſt of che 
camp g : as they encamp, . fo ſhall they ſer forward, 
every man in his place by their ſtandards, | 


NUMBER 8. 


+ The franger elſewhere is one of another Nation, here one of 


g Which 1s not to be underftood ftriftly or exaQtly, but largely ; 
for in their march they were divided, and part of that Tribe marched 
next after Judah, Numb: 10: 17: and the other part exaQly in the 
midſt of the camp. 


138 On the weſt-{ide ſhall be the ſtandard of the camp 
of Ephraim h, according to their armies ; and the cap- 
tain of the ſons of Ephraim ſhall be Eliſhama the ſon of 
Ammihud. 


h Who is here preferred before his Brother, according to the 
prepheſie, Gen: 48: 19, 20. 

i9 And his hoft, and thofe that were numbred of 
them, were fourty thouſand and five hundred : 

20 And by him ſhall be the tribe of Manafſeh : and 
the captain of the children of Manaſich ſbc!! be Gamaliel 
the ſon of Pedahzur. 

21 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred of them 
were thirty and two thouſand and two hundred. 

22 Then the tribe of Benjamin : and the captain of the 
ſons of Benjamin jhu!] be Abidan the ſon of Gideoni. 

23 Andhishoft, and thoſe that were numbred of them, 
were thirty and four thouſand and five hundred. 

24 All that were numbred of the camp of Ephraim, 
were an hundred thouſand and eight thouſand and an 
hundred, threughout their armies : and they ſhall go 
forward in the third rank. 

25 The ſtandard of the camp of Dan ſhall be on the 
north-flide by their armies : and the captain of the children 
of Dan ſpall be Ahiczer the ſon of Ammiſhaddai. 

26 And his hoſt, and thoſe that were numbred of them, 
wcre threeſcore and two thouſand and ſeven hundred. 

27 And thoſe that encamp by him, 4/1 be the tribe 


of Aſher : and the captain of the Children of Aſher 
ſhall be Pagiel the ſon of Ocran. | c 

28 Ard his hoft, and thoſe that were numbred of them 
were feurty and one thouſand and five hundred. 

29 Then the tribe of Naphtali : And the captain of 
_ children of Naphtali, /all bs Ahira the ſon of 

nan. 

39 And hishoſt,and thoſe that were numbred of them, 
were fifty and three thouſandand four hundred. 

31 All they that were numbred in the camp of Dan, 
were an hundred thouſand and fifry and ſeven thouſand 
and ſix hundred s : they ſhall go hindmoft with their 
ſtandards. 


; The ſtrongeſt camp next after Judah, and therefore he comes in 
the Rear, as Judah marched in the Front, that the Tabernacle might 
be beſt guarded where there was moſt danger. 


32 Theſe are thoſe, which were numbred of the chil- 
dren of Iſrael, by the houſe of their fathers ; all thoſe 
chat were numbred of the camps throughout their hoſts, 
ere {ix hundred thouſand and three thouſand and five 
hundred and fifty. | 

33 Butche Levices were not numbred & among the 
children of Iſracl, as the LORD commanded Moſes. 


k Becauſe their warfare was of another kind. 
34 And the children of Ifrael did acccording to all 
chat the LORD commanded Moſes : ſo they pitched by 
their ſtandards}, and fo they ſet forward, every one after 


cheir families, according to the houſe of their fathers, 
{( i.e. ) Each of them under his principal Standard. 


CHAP, IIL 


The Genealogie of Moſes, Aaron, and his ſons, Nadab and Abihu, 1 —4. The 
Levites are joyned with them in the Admmiſtration of the Tabernacle, 
g—10. Inſtead of all the firſt-born, 11 —13. The three Families of 
the Levites mumbred, 14 39 The firſt-bern numbred, 40-==-43s 
Being more than the Levites, ſome of them are redeemed, and the Money 
given to Aaron and his Sons, 44 GT. 


Heſe 4 alſo are the generations b of Aaron and 


Moſes, in the day :4a: the LORD ſpake. with 
Moſes in Mount Sinai c. 

#s Which follow in this Chapter. 6b(73.e. ) Either r. The things 
done by them ; as the word generation is ſometimes uſed, as Gen: 6: 9: 
and 25:19:and 37-2. Or rather 2. The Kindred or Family, for that is 
the ſubje& of this Chapter,and nor their events or a&ions. Obj. Aarons 
Family indeed is here mentioned, but not Moſes his Family. Anſw. 
Moſes his Family and Children are here included under the genera? 
name of the Amramite, werſe 27. which includes all the Children'and 
Grand-children of Amram, the perſons only of Aaron and Moſes bein 
excepted. And the generations of Moſes are thus obſcurely garters, 
becauſe they were but common Levites, the Prieftheod being given 
ſolely to Aarons poſterity, whence Aaron is here put before Moſes, who 
elſewhere 1s commonly named after him. «c This ſeems to be added, 
becauſe Nadav and A4bihu mentioned verſe 2. were then alive, though 
deadat the time of taking this account. A 

2 And theſe are the names of the ſons of Aaron ; 
Nadab the * ficit-born, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Itha- 
mar 


3 Theſe are the names of the ſons of Aaron, the prieſts 
which were anointed, + whom he conſecrated co mini- 


ſter in the pricits office, 
of 4 


4.4 L. * And 


Chap. 1!l. | 


T Heb. 


* Fxod: 
6G. 23. 


whoſe hand | 
be filed. | 


| Clap. Ht. NOUMYBE 


4 * And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, 
when they offered ſtrange fire before the LORD, in 
che wilderneſs of Sinai, and they had no children : and 
Eleazar and Ithamar miniſtred in the prieſts office 1n 
the ſight of Aaron 4 their father. : 

4 In the time of Aarors life, as this phraſe is taken, Numb: 3: 4. 
See alſo Pſak72:5,17. and under their fathers inſpeRion and direttion, 
and as their Fathers Servants or Miniſters in the Priefts-office : for 
Servants are oft deſcribed by this phraſe of being, or ſfanading, or 
ſerving in the ſight or preſence of their Maſter. 

5 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſcs, faying, 

6 Bring the tribe of Levi near, and preſent them e 
before Aaron the prieſt, that they may miniſter unto him, 

e Off:r them to the Lord for his ſpecial ſervice. This was promiſed 
to then» before, and now aQually conferred upon thern. 

7 And they ſhall keep his charge f, and the charge 
of the whole congregation g before the tabernacle þ of 
the congregation, to do the ſervice of the tabernacle, 

f(7i.e-) Aarons charge, or thoſe things which are committed 
principally to Azrons care and overſight, and under him and his 
dire&ion to the Levites. g (3.e. ) Of all the ſacrifices and ſervices 
which are due to the Lord from all the people, and becauſe all rhe 

. people could not and might not perform them, or at leaſt diverſe of 
them, in their own perſons, therefore they were to be performed 
by ſome particular perſons in their nameand ſtead ; formerly by the 
firſt-born, Numb: 8: 16; and now by the Levites, See Numb: 1; 53: 
and 16: 9. hþ Emphatically ; not within the Tabernacle, for the 
care of theſe things within the holy place was appropriated to the 
Prieſts, as the care of the moſt holy place was Peculiar to the High- 
Prieſt. 

8 And they ball keep all the inſtruments of the taber- 

nacle of the congregation, and the charge of thechildren 


of Ifrael 3, to do the ſervice of the tabernacle. 
7 Thoſe things which all the children of J/-2el are in their ſeveral 
places and ſtations obliged to take care of, though not in their per- 


\ - 
ST JO; I: 


| | Chap: 


E R S. 

20 And the ſons of Merari by their families ; Mahli 
and Muſhi : theſe are the families of the Levites, accor- 
ding to the houſe of their fathers. 

21 Of Gerſhon was the family of the Libnites, and 
the family of the Shimites : theſe are the families of the 
Gerſhonites. 

22 Thoſe that were numbred of them, according to 
the number of all the males, from a month old and 
upward, even thoſe that were numbred of them, vere 
ſeven thouſand and five hundred. 

23 The families of the Gerſkonites ſhall pitch behind 
the tabernacle weſtward. 

24 And the chief of the hou ſe ofthe father of the 
Gerſhonites ſhall be Eliaſaph the ſon of Lael, 

25 And the charge of the ſons of Gerſhon, in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, ſhall be the * tabernacle q, and 
the * tent r, * the covering thereof s, and the * hanging 
for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, - 


curtains mentioned Exed: 26: 1, 7 To wit, the curtains of goats 
Hair. s( 7.2.) The coverings, of Rams-skins and Badgers-skias. 
See Numb. 4: 25. s 
26. And the * hangings of the court, and the * cur- 

tain for the door of the court which is by the tabernacle 
and by the altar round about, and the cords of it z, for 
all the ſervice thereof. ; 

: By which the Tabernacle was faſtned to the pins, and ſtretched 
out, Exod. 35:18. 

27 Andof Kohath « vas the fanuly of the Amramites, 
and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the 
Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites : theſe are 


the families of the Kohathites. 
us This family had many priviledges above the others : Of that 


tons, yet by others” in their ſtead. ; 
9 And * thou ſhalt give the Levites unto Aaron and 


'\\W) % 4 
bt np * to his ſons they are + wholly given unto him & out of 
i + Heb.g;- the children of Iſrael. 
wen given. k Toattend upon him and obſerve his orders and eaſe him of part 
| of his burden in things hereafter mentioned. 
10 And thou ſhalt appoint Aaron and his ſons, and 
chey ſhall wait on their prieſts office / : and the ſtranger 
2 that cometh nigh » ſhall be put to death. 
1 In their own perſons, not by the Levites. m (1. e.) Every one 
who is of another family than Aarens, yea though he be a Levite. 
See Numb: 1: 53: and 16: 40. # To wit, to execute any part of the 
Prieſts office. 
1t And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
Wt = ©, 12 And1, behold, * I have taken the Levites from 
* 8: "6.8 among the children of Iſrael, inſtead of all the firſt-born 
| 18:6: # that openeth the matrix among the children of Iſrael ; 


therefore the Levites ſhall be mine. 

n Who were God's propriety by right of Redemption, Exod: r3: 
12: and to whom the adminiſtration of holy things was former] 
committed, which now was taken away from them, either ws 4 
they had forfeired this priviledge by joining with rhe reſt of their 
brethren in the Idolatrous worſhip ofthe calf, or becauſe they were 
to be mainly concerned in the dittribution and management of the 
inheritances which now they were going to poſſeſs, and therefore 
could not be at leiſure to attend upon the ſervice of the SanQuuary ; 
Which made it fit that this Work ſhould be committed to other 
hands. And God would not commit it to ſome other perſons in each 

"Tribe, which mightbe an occaſion of Idolatry, cenfuſion, diviſien, 
and contempr of ſacred Things, but to one diſtin Tribe, which 
might be iatirely devoted to that ſervice, and particularly to the 
Tribe of Levi ; partly out of his reſpe& to Moſes and Aaron, branches 
of rhis Tribe ; partly as a recompence of their Zeal for God and 
againſt Ido!aters. See Exodus 32: 26, 29: Deut: 33: 9: And 
partly becauſe it was the ſmalleſt of the Tribes, and rherefore 
=_ hkely to find both employment in, and maintenance for the 
ork. 
' #5... _13 Becauſe * all the firſt-born are mine ; * for on the 
Exod:13; * 
2: Ley:27: day that I ſmote all the firſt-born in the land of Egypt, 
| 26: Ch: 8: T hallowed unto me all the firſt-born. in Iſrael, both 
; 36: Luke manand beaſt ; mine they ſhall be : I the LORD o. 
| *. 62% 0 Who may appoint whom I pleaſe for my Service. : 
by x rag 3* 14 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes in the wiider- 
neſs of Sinai, ſaying, . 

15 Number the children of Levi, after the houſe of 
their fathers, by their families: every male from a 
month old p and upward, ſhalt thou number them. 

p Becauſe at that time the firſt- born, in whoſe ſtead the Levites 
came, Numb: 8: 16: were offered ro God, Luke 2: 22: and to be re- 
deemed, Numb: 18: 16. And from that time the Levites were con- 
ſecrated te God, and were, as ſoon as they were capable, to be in- 
firuted in their Work. Elſewhere they are numbred from twent 
five years Old, when they were entred as novices to part of their 
Work, Numb: 8: 24: and from thirty years Old, when they were 

_compleatly admitted to their whole Office. 


16 And Moſes numbred them according to the 


G: 16: Ch 
| 26. 57: by their families ; Libni, and Shimei. 
2 Chron: © 19 And the ſons of Kohath by their families ; Am-. 


| were Meſes and 4aron, and all the Prieſts: They had the chief place 
, about the Tabernacle, and the care of the moſt Holy Things here 
below, verſe 31. and in the Land of Canaan they had twenty three 
Cities, which were almoſt as many as both their brethren received. 
| See Joſ. 2r. 

28 In the number of all the males, from a month 
old and upward vere eight thouſand and ſix hundred, 
keeping x the charge of tie fanuary j. 

x Or, keepers, &c. i.e. appointed for-that Work, as foon as they 
were capable ofit. y (.e- ) Of thoſe holy things contained in ex 
nearly belonging to the ſanCtuacy, expreſſed werſe 31. 

29 The families of the ſons of Kohath ſhall pitch on 
the ſide of the tabernacle ſouthward. 

3o And the chief of the houſe of the father of che 
mp of the Kohathites, fhell be Elizaphan the ſon of 

zriel, 

31 And their charge ſhall bethe *ark, and the * table, 


| and the * candleſtick, and * the altars, and the veſſels 


of the ſanctuary wherewith they miniſter, and the 
han ings &, and all ys ſervice thereof a. 

Z ich covered the moſt holy place, for all other hangi 
belonged to the Gerſhonives. 8 ( 7. e. Al the other i "= 9% 4 
ing to it, of which ſee Numb: 4: 7,9, 14. 

32 And Eleazar the ſon of Aaron the Prieft ſhall be 
chief b over the chief of the Levitesc: and have the over- 
ſight of them that keep the charge of the ſanQuary. 

b Next under the High-Prieſt ; whence he is called the ſecond 
Prieſt, 2 Kings 25. 18. and in caſe Bf the High-priefts abſence by 
ſickneſs or other neceſſary occaſions, he was to perform his Work 
1 Kings 4: 4: and he had a ſuperiority over all the reſt of the Prieſts 
and Levites.. c { 7. e ) Over theſe three perſons, who were each 
the chief of their ſeveral Families ; of whom ſee here, verſe 24, 31, 


35+ 
33 Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the 


family of the Muſhites; theſe arethe families of Merari. 

34 And thoſe that were numbred of them, according 
to the number of the males, from a month old and 
upward, were ſix thouſand and two hundred. 


35 And the chief of the houſe of the father of the 
families of Merari, as Zuriel the ſon of Abihail : :heſe 
ſhall pitch on the ſide of the tabernacle northward. 

36 And ÞF wnder the cuſtody and charge of the ſons 
of Merari, ſhall be the boards of the tabernacle, and 
the bars thereof, and'the pillars thereof, and the ſockets 
thereof, and all the veſſels thereof, and all that ſerveth 
thereto: 

37 And the pillars of the court round about, and 
their ſockets, and their pins, and their cords d. 


> -+— Las theſe were for another uſe than thoſe mentioned 


38 But thoſe. that encamp before the tabernacle to- 
ward che eaſt, even before the tabernacte of the con- 
gregation eaſtward ; ſhell be Moſes and Aaron, and his 
ſons, keeping the charge of the ſanQuary for the charge 
of the children of Iſrael e: and the ſtranger that cometh 
nigh ſhall be put to death. 


e Either in their ſtead, that charge which they were obliged to 


 & 23; 6; Tam, a 


keep cither by themſelves gr by others appointed by them, if God 
had 


Chap. It: 1 F 


q Not the beards, which belonged to Merari, verſe 36: but the ten : 


Cy: #6 
Ch: 
26; 
Y Exod 
25: 9: 
* Exod 
26: I: 
Exod: 
6:7, ls 
* Exod: 
26: 36; 
- Exod: 
27: 9: 
* Chap 
27: 16; 
| 
Feh:25:10 
Feh:25:23 
*eh:25:31 
"*ch: 27:1 
& 30; 1 
*ch:26-31 
] 
*Ex 
73 
27: 
Che 
I8: 
Eze 
45: 
+ Heb. 
office of thi 
charge. 


« 


ww I 
A - + Soop— 


JT ctup. 1V- 


1. 
"4+, 


| TO 
Chep: 
a6; 62+ 


"Pxod:30: 
13 Lev: 
27:25; 
Chap: 

18: 16: 
Ezek: 


45: 12: 


had not commirted it to thoſe : or for their good and ſerviee, and 
benefit ; for their preſeruation, as the word may be rendred. : 
29 * All that were numbred of the Levices, which 
Moſes and Aaron numbred at the commandment of 
the LORD, throughout their families, all the males, 
from a month old and upward, were twenty and. two 


thouſand f. : | 

f 0bj. Bur if the particular numbers, mentioned Verſe 22, 28, 34: 
be pur together, they make exaftly 22300. 4n/w. The odd 3co 
are omitted here, either according te the uſe of the holy Scripture, 
where in ſo great numbers ſmall ſums are commonly aegletied, or, 
becauſe they were the firſt-born -f the Levites, and therefore belonged 
to God already, and ſo could not be givento him again inſtead of the 


other firſt-born. See Lev. 27. 26 IF, this number of firkt-born ſeem 


very ſmall to come from 22000 Levites, it muſt be conſidered, that 
only ſuch firſt-born are here named as were males, and ſuch as con- 
tinued in their parents Families, not ſuch as had ereQed new families 
of their own. Add to this, that God ſo ordered things by his wiſe 
Providence for divers weighty reaſons, that this Tribe thould be 
much the leaſt of all the Tribes, as is evident by comparing the 
nembers of the other Tribes, from twenty years old, Numb. 1. with 
thenumber of this from a'month old ; and therefore it is not ſtrange 
if the number of their firſt-bora be leſs than in other Tribes. 
Although if the other Tribes had been computed from a month old, 
as this was, their number of 600000 had probably been double or 
treble to that, and contequently the nu 1ber of their firſt-born being 
22273 verſe 43. would have been as unproportionable to their whole 
ſum, as this of 300 firſt-born Levites teems to their whole number. 
And ſome add, thar only thoſe firſt-born are numbred both 1n this 
and in the other Tribes, which were born ſince they cameout of 
Ezypt, when God challenged all the firſt-born to be his. 

40 And the LORD ſaid unco Moſes, number all the 
firſt-born of the males of the children of Iſrael g from 
2 month old aad upward, and take the number of their 
NAmESs. 


Z That they may be compared with the number of the Levites 
for the reaſon here following. 


41 And thou ſbalr take the Levites for me (TI am the 
LORD } inſtead of all the firſt-born among the children 
of Iſrael þ, and the cattel of the Levites 7 in ſtead of all 
the firitlings among the cattei of the children of Iſrael. 

þ To wit, ſuch are now alive of them, byt thoſe which ſhould 
be born of them hereafter are orherwiſe diſfoſed. 7i Not that they 
were to be taken from the Levites, or to be ſacrificed to God, any 
more tian the Levires themſelves were, but char they rozether with 
the Levites were to be preſented before the Lord by way of acknow- 
Jedgment, that the Levites might be ſer apart for God's ſervice, and 
their cattel for themſelves as God's Minitters, and for their ſupport 
in God's Work. 

42 And Moſes numbred, as the LORD commanded 
him, all the firſt- born among the children of Iſrael. 

43 And all the firſt-born males by the number of 
names, from a month old and upward, of thoſe char 
were numbred of them, were twenty and two thouſand 
twe hundred and threeſcore afid thirteen. 

44 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

45 Take the Levites k& in ſtead of all the firſt-born 
among the children of Iſrael, and the catrel of the Levites 
in ſtead of their catrel, and the Levires ſhall be mine, I 
am the LORD. 


k To wit, the 22000 reckoned up, Ycrſe 39: of which ſee the 
notes there, 


46 And for thoſe that are te be redeemed of the two 
hundred and threeſcore and thirteen of the ficſt-born of 
the children of Iſrael, which are more than the Levites ; 


47 Thou ſhalr even take five ſhekels a piece / by the. 


poll, after the ſhekel of the ſanctuary ſhait thou cake 
them : * the ſhekel is twenty gerahs. | 

I Which was the price to be paid tor the redemprion of a firſt-born 
a month old, Numb: 18:15, 16: but this mony though paid for theſe 
273 perſons was probably paid our of the common ſtock of all, excepr 
lots were caſt who ſhould pay, which is not probable in lo ſmall a 
concern accompanied with 1o much trouble. 

48 And thou ſhalt give the number wherewith the 
odd number of them is to be redeemed unto Aaron and 
to his ſons . 

m To whom all the Levites were given, and therefore the mony 
which came in their ſtead. 

49 And Moles took the redemption money, of them 
that were over and aboverhem that were redeemed by 
the Levites.: 


5o Ofthe firſt-born of the children of Iſrael took he 


the money, a thouſand three hundred and threeſcore | 


and five ſhekels, after the ſhekel of the ſanctuary. 

fr And Moſes gave the money of; them that were 
redeemed, unto Aaron and to his fons, according to 
the word of the LORD, as the- LORD commanded 


Moſes. 
CHMHAF 3%: 


God Commands the Levites to be numbred from 3o till 50 years old ; fi: for 


the ſervice of the Tabernacle : Ther Charge, 1 - 16, Of the 
Kohathites, 17 ——21. Of the Gerſhonites, 22 — 28. Of the 
Sons of Merari, 29 =— 33- The number of each, 34——45. Ojallm| 


general, 46 49. 


N D the LORD ſpake unto Mofes, and ugto Aaron, 
ſaying, | 


NUMBER 5s. 


_—— 


2 Take the ſum of the ſons of Kohath from among 


their fathers : | Y” BY 

3 From thirty years old a and upward, even until 
fifty years old 6b, all that enter c into the hoſt 4, to do 
the work of the tabernacle of the congregation. | 

a This age was preſcribed, as the age of full ſtrength of body, 
and therefore moſt prep-1 for their preſent laborious work of carrying 
the parrs and v<ſſels of tte Tabernacle, and of matu:iry of judgment, 
which, is neceflary for the right management - of Holy Services. 
Whence even Jo/m and Chriſt entred not upon their Miniſiery till 
that age. And it ' may ſhll ſeem to be the fitreſt ſeaton for mens 
undertaking the Mini{tery of the Go'p-!, ex--pt in caſe of extraor- 
dinzry abilities, or tke Churches prefling nec ſhy. Obje#. They 
might enter upon this work at their 25th year, Numb: 8: 24 and in 
David's time and aiter ward at their 20th year. Auſw. 1. Their firſt 
entrance upon their work was at their :5th year, when they b:gart 
as learners, and ated only under 'he inſpe&ion and dirc&ione«£ 
their brethren ; but in their 3oth yeor they wer compleatly admitted 
toa full diſcharge of their whole office. 2 David, veing a Propher, 


and did make a change in this mutrer, which ke might rhe bercer 
do, b-th becauſe it was bur 2 change in a circumſtance, and becaute 
the magnificence of the Temple, and the-gt2xr multi-ude of ſacred 
urenſils and ſacrifices, required a greater number of ar-endants than 
formerly was neceflary. 6 When they were exempred from the 
toilſome work of carrying burdens, but nor diicharged. from tae. 
honourable and eafie work done within the Taberiiacle, Numb 8: 26: 
c (i.e. ) That do and may enter, having no defect, Levit; 21. 17. 
nor other impediment. & The fociery of ſacred Minitters he Calls 
an koſt, becauſe of that excellent order which was among them, as. 
to perſons, place, time, the matter and manner, of their ſer- 
VICES. 


4 This ſhall be the ſervice of the ſons of Kohath in 
the tabernacle of the congregation, abour the moſt holy 
things e. 3 | | 

e Hereafrer mentioned, as the Ark, Tble; Altar, &'c, Compare 
Numb: 3: 31. ns 50 | 

5 And when the camp ſetteth forward, Aaron ſhall 
come, and his ſons, and they f ſhajl take, down the co- 
vering vailg, and cover the 41k þ of teftimony with it: . 

f For upon this neceſfary occaſion the inferiour Prieſts are allowed 
to come 1mco the Holy of Hobes, which otherwiſe was peculiar tg 
the High-Prieſt, H:b 9. 7« g The ſecond vail, of which fce Exod: 


26: Zi, &c. Levit: 4: 6: Heb: 9: 3: wherewith the Ark was covered 
while the Tabernacle ſtood, Exod: 40: 3 hþ Becauſe the Levires, 


who were to carry the Ark, might ucither ſee, nor immediately 
touch it, | | 
6 And (ball put thereon the covering of badgers-- 

skins 3, and ſhall ſpread over 3t a cloth wholly of blue, 
and ſhall pur in the faves thereof k. Fae 

5 Whereby the Ark was ſecured from the injuries of the weather, 
k Objeff. How could theſe ſtaves be put in, when they were never to 
bz raken our, Exod: 25: 15: compared with 1 Kings 8: 8: 1. An(w. 
Theſe p!:ces may [peak of the ftaves while the Ark and Tabernacle 
ſtood, but when they were to be removed the poſture of all things 
wasaltered. 2. The Hebrew Verb doth nor ſignifie putting in, bur 
barely putting or placing or diſpoſing, and may be underſtood .nor of 

artingt: e itaves 'nto che rings, wherein they conſtantly remained, 
Ghar of the putting of rhem either upon their ſhoulders. to try and 
fit them for carriage, or into the holesor receptacles which probably 
were made in theſe coverings for the receiving and covering of theſe 
gilded ſtaves, to keep them both from the rouch of the Levites, and 
f:om the inconveniences of bad weather. 


7 And upon the * table of ſhew-bread 1 they ſhall 
ſpread a cloth of biue, and put thereon the dilhes m, 
and the ſpoons, and the bowls and covers to cover 
withal : and the continual bread » ſhal' be thereon. 


1 Heb. Of faces or preſence, for ' of the bread of faces or preſence, i.e. 
of the bread which was continually ſtinding in the preſence ,of the 
Lord. m Upon which the ſhew-bread was pur. »( 7.e. ) Shew-bread ; 
io called becauſe it was continually to be ther-, even in the wilders 
neſs ; where though rhey had only Manna, for themſelves, yet they 
reſerved Corn for the weekly making of theſe loaves, which. they. 
might with no grear difficulty procure from ſome of the people 
bordering upon the Wildernels in the innermoſt parts whereof they 
were. 


8 And they ſhall ſpread upon them a cloth of ſcarlee; 
and cover the fame with a covering of badgers-skins, 
and ſhall pur in the ftaves thereof. , F 

9 And they {hall take a cloth of blue, and cover the 
X candleſtick of the light, K and his lamps, and his 
congs, and his ſnuff.dithes, and all the oyl-veiſels thers- 
of, wberewith they miniſter unto it. EIS 

io And they (ball put it, and all the veſſels thereof 
within a covering of badgers-skins : and ſhall put ji# upon 
a bar », To 0h | | 

» So contrived that this cloth containing the candleſtick, &ci 
might bz either laid upon it, or ſome other way faſtened to ir. 


11 And upon the golden o altar they fhall ſpread a 


| cloth of blue; and cover it with a covering of badgers- 


skins, and ihall pur to the ſtaves thereof. 
o All covered with plates of Gold. 


12 And they ſhall take all the inſtruments of miniſtery 


2, wherewith they miniſter in the ſanctuary, and pur 
-vers 1 A Cloth oi biue, and cover them with a covering 


If badgers-$Kins, and _—_ Pur theres ON a bar, 
= 


the ſons of Levi, after their families, by the houſe of 


and particularly dire&ed by God in the affur. of rhe Temple, mighe © 


; Thi 


Chap. IV. 


* Exod 


25: 38% 


* Exe 
25: ZI2 
25:371 


| Ex: 25:6; 

if Exod: 
Bo: 34: 

3 Exod: 


38 9: 25:5 


f Heb. 


par the 


warfare 


1] Or, 
carriage. 
* Chap: 
3325: 


@hap.. IV. 


not touch @»y holy thing # leſt they die «. * Thele 


. 2 Sam: 6:6, 7. 


- covering e, and the covering of the badgers-skins that 


p The ſacred m__ uſed by the prieſts in their holy miniftra- 
S152 


m_ And they ſhall take.away the aſhes from the altar 


and ſpread a purple cloth thereon : , 
a” of © ey" Way Whereby it may ſeem probable, though it 
be denied by moſt, that they did offer ſome ſacrifices in the Wil gd 
neſs, though it may not be ſo frequently nor orderly as afterwards 
they did. Whence elſe were theſe aſhes ? And there are ſome 
undeniable inſtances of their ſacrificing there, as Exod 18. 12+ and 
24. 4. Numb« 7. &c. from whichat ſeems rational to conclude, wor” 
they did offer ſacrifices at other times, though not ſo conſtantly an 
diligently, as they did in Canaan. And for the argument againſt 1t 
from Amos 5« 25. that may be eaſily diſſolved, as we ſhall there ww 
if the Lord pleaſe. Moreover the taking away of the aſhes only dot 
ſufficiently imply that the fire was preſerved, which as it came 
down from Heaven, Levit: 9. So it was by God's command to be 
continually fed and kept burning, and therefore doubrleſs was put 
into ſome Veſle!, which mizhr be either faſtened to the Alrar and 
put within this covering, or carried by ſome perſon appointed there- 
unto. | | 

14 And they (ball put upon it all the veſſels threof 7 
wherewith they miniſter about it, even the cenſers, the 
fleſh-hooks, and the ſhovels, and the || baſins, all the 
veſſels of the altar ; and they ſhall ſpread upon it a 
covering of badgers-skins, and put to the ſtaves of it. 

» Amongſt all theſe veſſels here and abovenamed there 1s no men- 
tion of the brazen laver, though that be elſewhere reckoned among 
the holy things, as Exod: 35; 16: and 38: 8: and 39: 39; and 40: 39: 
whereof poſſibly the reaſon may be becauſe it was not covered, as 
not being capable of much hurt by the Weather. Though ſome 
antient Tranſlations of the Bible do here add theſe Words. They 
ſhall take s purple covering, and cover the laver, &C. 

15 And when Aaron and his ſons have made an end 
of covering the ſanctuary, and all the veſſe]s of the 
ſanRuary, as the camp is to ſer forward ; after that the 
ſons of Kohath ſball come to bear zz s : but they (ball 


things are the burden of the ſons of Kohath, in the 


tabernac'e of the congregation. 

s To wit, upon their Shoulders, not upon Carts or Wagons, as 
appears from Numb: 7. 9: the negle& of which order did provoke the 
Lord, 2 Sam: 6: 6, 7: 1 Chron: 13:7: and 15: 12, &'c. Afterward the 
Prieſts themſclves, being mulciplied, carried theſe things, as appears 
from Deut: 3 1: 9: Jof: 3: 6:and 8: 33: 1 Sam: 4; 4: though the Levites 
alſo were not excluded, Chron: 5: 5. t Immediately, or before 
they be covered. # As ſome did for that Sin. See 1 Sam: 6: 19: 


16 And to the office of Eleazar the ſon of Aaron the 
rieſt, pertainerh x. * the oyl for the light, and the * 
[mat incenſe, and the daily meat-offering y, and the * 
anointing oyl, and the over-ſight of all the tabernacle 
z, and of all that therein #s, in the ſancuary, and in 


the veſſels thereof. 

x (i.e.) He himſelfis to carry theſe things,and not tocommit them 
to the Sons of Kohath. y Of fine flour, which was to be offered every 
Morning and Evening with the daily burnt-effering. See Exod: 29: 
38, 39. * (5.e.) Thecare that all the things above-mentioned be 
carried by the Perſons and in the ntanner expreiled. 

i7 And the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron, ſaying, i 

18 Cur ye not off # the tribe of the families of the 
Kohathites from among the Levites. 

a (#. e.) Do not by your negle& provoke God to cut them off 
for rouching the holy things. 

19 But thus do unto them, that they may live and not 
die, when they approach unto the moft holy things, 
Aaron and his ſons ſhall go in and appoint them every 


one to his ſervice b, and to his burden. 
b To that which is peculiarly allotted to him, the ſervices and 
burdens being equally diſtributed among them. 


20 But they ſhall not go in to ſee when the holy 
things are covered, leſt they die. 

21 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

22 Takealſo the ſum of the ſonsof Gerſhon through- 
out the houſes of their fathers by their families : 

223 From thirty years old and upward, until fifty 
years old ſhalt thou number them : all that enter in F 
to perform the ſervice, to do the work in the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 

24 This 3s the ſervice of the families of the Gerſho- 
nites, to ſerve, and for || burdens. 

25 And * they ſhall bear the curtains of the taber- 
nacle c, and the tabernacle of the congregation d, his 


3s above upon it, and the hanging for the door of the 


NUMBER S. 


tabernacle of the congregrtion. 

c ( i. e.) The curtains or covering of goats-hair. d ( 7.e. ) The 
ten curious curtains which covered the boards of the Tabernacle ; 
for the boards themſelves were carried by the Merarites. e (:.e.)| 
The covering of Rams-skins which was put next over thoſe ten 
Curtains. \ | 

26 And the hangings of the court, and the hanging. 


- for the door of the gate of the court, which. is by the. 


tabernacle, and by the altar f round about and their 
cords, and all the inftraments of their ſervice, and all 
that is made for them j; ſo ſhall they ſerve, | 


Ff (5. e. ) Which court compaſſed both the Taberhacle and the 
Altar, Exod: 27: 16. 

27 At the + appointment of Aaron and his ſons ſhall 
be all the ſervice of the ſons of the Gerſhonites, in all 
their burdens, and in all their ſervice: and ye ſhall 
appoint unto them in charge all their burdens. 

28 This #s the ſervice of the families of the ſons of 
Gerſhon in the tabernacleof the congregation : and chei: 
charge ſhall be under the hand g of Ithamar the ſon of 
Aaron the prieſt. 


£ Under his condu& and direQion. Thus the hand of Hege, Efth: 2: 3: 
1$ his care and cuſtody. 


29 As for the ſons of Merari, thou ſhalt number 
them after their families by the houle of their fathers. 

30 From thirty years old and upward, even unto 
fifry years old ſhalt thou number them, every one that 
entreth into the + ſervice, to do the work of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation. 


to all their ſervice in the tabernacle of the congregation, 
* the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and 
the pillars thereof, and ſockets thereof þ. 


bh Which were as the feet upon which the pillars ſtood; of which 
ſee Exod. 38. 27. 

32 And the pillars of the court round about, and 
their ſockets, andtheirpins, and their cords with all their 
inſtruments, and with all their ſervice : and by name # ye 
ſhal reckon the inſtruments of the charge of their burden. 

i Every part and parcel therefore ſhall be put in an inventory ; 
which is required here rather than in the foregoing particulars , 
partly becaute theſe were much more numerous than the former ; 
partly becauſe being meaner things and ſuch as might eaſily be 
ſupplied, they might etherwiſe have been negleGed ; and partly to 
teach us, that God eſteems nothing ſmall in his worſhip and ſervice, 
and that he exvetts his Will ſhould be obſerved in the minuteſt 
circumſtances. 


33 This 5s the ſervice of the families, of the ſons of 
Merari, according to all their ſervice, in the tabernacle 
of the congregation under the hand of Ithamar the ſon 
of Aaron the prieſt. 

24 And Moſes and Aaron, and the chief of the con- 
gregation numbred the ſons of the Kohathites,after their 
families, and after the houſe of their fathers. 

35 From thirty years old and upward, even unto 
fifry years old, every one that entreth into the ſervice, 
for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation. 

35 And thoſe that were numbred of them by their 
families, were two thouſand ſeven hundred and fifty. 

37 Theſe were they that were numbred of the fami- 
lies of the Kohathites, all that might do ſervice in the 
tabernacle of che congregation, which Moſes and Aaron 
did number, according to the commandment of the 
LORD by the hand of Moſes. 

38 Andthoſe that were numbredof the ſonsof Gerſhon; 
throughout their families,8 by the houſe of their fathers, 

39 From thirty . years old and upward, even unto 
fifty years old, every one that entreth into the ſervice 
for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation : : 

40 Even thoſe that were numbred of them, through- 
out their families, by the houſe of their tathers, were 
ewo thouſand and ſix hundred and thirty, 

41 Theſe are they that were numbred of the families 
of the ſons of Gerſhon, of all that might do ſervice in the 
tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moſes and Aaron 
did number, according ro the commandment of the 
LORD. 

6 = _ Rr numbred x the families of 
tne lons or Merari, throughout their famili 
houſe of their fathers : s | _ 

43 From thirty years old and upward, even unto 
fifty years old, every one that entreth into the ſervice 
for the work in the tabernacle of the Congregation, Z 

44. Even thoſe that were numbred of them after their 
families, were three thouſand and two hundred k. 

_ k Here appears the wiſdom of Divine providence, that whereas 
in the Kohathites and Gerſhonites, whoſe burdens were fewer and ea« 
ſier, there were but about a third part of them wbich were fit for 


ſervice, the Merarites, whoſe burdens were more and heavier, had 
above one half of them fic for this work. 


45 Theſe b» thoſe that were numbred of the families 

0 x ſons - Merari, whom Moſes and Aaron num- 
red, according to the word of the LO 

hand of 0" wg 16h tram 

46 All thoſe that were numbred of the Levites, whom 
Moſes, and Aaron, and the chief of Iſrael numbred, af- 
ter their families, and after the houſe of their fathers: 

47 From thirty years old and upward, even unto 
fifty years old, every one that came to do the ſervice of 
the miniſtery, and the ſervice of the burden in the ta- 
bernacle of the congregation; 


48 Even 


Chap. I. 


f Feb. 


mouth, 


t Heb. 


warfare. 
31 And* this 3s the charge of their burden, according + Chap. 


3: 36; 


* Exod: 
26: 15: 


*Lev. 


*Ley- 


F Chap. V. 


1 Lev:134 


"Tos © 


*Ch 9:6, 


10 and 
'n 


19 


*Lev.6:3: 


48 Even thoſe that were numbred of them, were eight 


thouſand and five hundred and fourſcore 1, | 

! Which number was much inferior to any other Tribe, for the 
reaſon mentioned on, Numb: 3: 39. 

49 According to the commandment of the LORD 


they were numbred by the hand of Moſes, every one 
according to his ſervice, and according to his burden : 
thus were they numbred of him, as the LORD com- 
manded Moles. 


CHAP. V. 


God commands to put away all unclean Perſons from the Camp : it 1s exe- 
cuted, 1-==-4. Reſtitution commanded, and an Offering, 
Hallowed things, which belong to the Prieſt, 5 10. Laws 
Fealouſie, bitter Warer Ordain:d, 11----31. 


N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

A 2 Command the chi:dren of Iſrael, thar they 
pur out of the camp # every * leper,and every one that 
hath an* illue 6.and whoſoever is defiled by the dead c, 

2s In which the Pcople dwelt ; as afterward out of the cities and 
to-vns, that they might not converſe with others and infeCt them. 
b To wit,of genital {ed in men,or of blood in women in their ſea- 
ſons. « (; e-) by the touch of the dead. See Lev: 24: 1. Num: 6: 6. 

; Boch male and female ſhall ye put out ; without the 
camp ihall ye put them,that they defile nor their camps d, 
in the mid{t whereof L dwell e 

d By which cuution God would intimate the poſſibility and dan- 
ger of mens being made guilty by other mens fins, and the neceſ- 
lary duty of avoiding intimat converſe with wicked men. e By 
my ſpecial and gracious preſence ; and therefore the perm:iſion of 
ſuch impurities is the greater 10jury and rovocation to me, as be- 
ing done in my fight, and refletting diſhonour upon my Name 

4 And the cnildren of Iſrael did fo, and put them 
out, without the camp, as the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, 
ſo did the chiidren of Iſrael. , 

5 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, faying, 

6 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, * when a man or 
2 woman (ball commit any fin that men commit f,to do j 
a treſpaſs againſt the LORD g,& thac perſon be guilty #: 


f Heb: any ſins of men, 3. e. either 1. of common intirmity, Or 
ſuch ſins as men commir through humane frailty, for if this were 
done knowingly and willingly,a greater puniſhment was appointed. 
See Lev: 6: 5, 6. Or rather 2. fins againſt men, or belonging to 
mea, to wir, deceits or wrongs, whereby other men are injured, 
of which he manifeſtly ſpeaks,as appears from wv. 7, 8. ſo thus 1s a 
Genitive caſe of the obje&, as Mat: 12: 31. blaſphemy of the Jpirit, 
(for ſo it is in the Greek ) 7s blaſphemy againſt the Holy Ghoſt, as 1t 1s 
called Mark 3: 28. Luke 12: 10: and power of all fleſh, Joh: 17: 2. 1S 
power over all fleſh, and power of ſpirit, Mat: 10i 1. 1s power over Or 
againſt ſpirits, Luke g- 8. and prayer of God, Luke 6: 12. is prayer di- 
refed unto God : and the ſpoil of the poor, 1ſa:3:14. is the ſpoil taken 
from the poor : and violence of the children of Judah, Joel: 3: 19. 1s Vi0- 
lence againſt them,as we trantlate it. g Which words may be added, 
either r. to expreſs a new fin, or prevaricating or dealing falſly 
with God, either by a falſe oath, which is a ſpecial injury ro God, 
or by a lie or ſimple denial that he hath taken any thing of his 
neighbours, which alſo God takesas a fin eſpecially concerning him- 
ſelf, who in ſuch caſes is the only judge of what is falſly 1aid or 
ſworn. See As 5. 3,4. Or 2. to aggravate the former fin, and to 
ſhew that ſuch injuries done to men are alſo ſins againſt God, who 
hath commanded juttice to men as well as religion to himſelf. But 
the former is more probable,both becauſe here is aram ofaronement 
to be offered to God for the ſpecial injury done to him,as well as ſa- 
tisfattion is to be made to the man whom he injured; and afpecially 
by comparing this with the parallel place, Lev: 6: 2, &sc.. h (:: e:) 
Shall be ſenſible of his guilt,or be convitted in his conſcience of his 
fin ; for otherwiſe this might ſeem a meer tautology,if it were only 
meant of being really guilty of ſin, which was expreſſed before in 
thoſe words when one ſhall commit any ſin, i. e« be guilty of any fin. 

7 Then they ſhall confels their ſin ; which they have 


in caſe of 


0, GC Cs 


*Ley-6:5; done, and he ſhall recompence his treſpaſs * with the 


fLev;6:6. 


and 7.8. 


principal thereof k,and add unto it the fifth part chereof 
], and give it unto him againft whom he hath creſpaſſed. 
; They ſhall not eontinue in the denial of the fa, as ſuch perſons 
oft do,but ſhall give glory to God, and take ſhame to themſelves by 
acknowledging their tin, with grief and remorſe. See Lov: 5: 5. aad 
6: 4. k(7.e.) The thing he took away, or what is equivalent to it. 
IWhich is added both as a compenſation to the injured perſon for the 
want of his goods ſo long,and for his trou»le for the ſuppoſed utrer 
loſe of them,an4d asa penalty upon the injurious dealer to diſcourage 
others from ſuch arremps. Qu. How doth this aggree wirh that law, | 
Exod: 22: 1 ? Anſ That law was made againſt notorious and obſti- 
nate thieves, who were legally convitted of their crime, and this 
againſt more modeſt thieves, whoſe neceflities might induce them 
to ſteal, and whoſe conſcience are affeted wirh rheir fin, 
8 2 if the man have ne kinſman -, to recompenſe 
the treſpaſs unto, let the treſpaſs be recompenſed unto 
the LORD,eves to the prieſt » : belide the * ram of the 


atonemens, whereby an atonement (hall be made for him- 

m Which might bethe caſe commonly with Proſelytes,if not with 
Iſraelites. This alſo ſuppoſeth the perſon injured to be dead or gone 
away unto ſome unknown place, and the perſon injured to be 
known to the injurer. » Whom God appointed as his deputy to 


lOrheave receive his dues, and take them to his own uſe, that ſo he might 


Wfering. 


more cheerfully and intirely devote himſclf to the miniſtration 


*Lev.6::g Of holy things. This is an additional explicarion ro. that law, Lev:6: 
26. and 7, 2- and ſor the ſake thereof it ſeems here to be repeated. 


6, SS 


9 And every || * offering o of all the holy things of 


Ch: 1848. the children of [fracl,which they bring unto the pricits 
Deut.18.3 p ſhall be his q« : s , ; 


eſpecially of 


is 


S 
Law 


2 


NUMBERS. 


1 


o Heb. every heave-offering, the heave-offering being here taken 
largely, ſo as to comprehend alſo the weave-offering, for both theſe 
was Aaron: portion. See Exod; 29. 26, 27, 28. p To wit, to offer 
unto the Lord by his hands. 9 (:.e.) the Prieſts. See Levit. 6. 16. - 

10 And every mans hallowed things r ſhall be his : 


whatſoever any man giveth the prieſt, it ſhall be * his. 

r Underſtand this not of the Sacrifices, no not ſuch of them as 
were voluntary or vowed,as moſt underſtand it, becauſe theſe were 
notthe Prieſts peculiar,but a good part of them was offered to God 
and the remainder was eaten by the offerer as well as by the Prieſt, 
as is manifeſt ; bur of ſuch other things as were devoted to God, 
and were ſuch as could not be offered in facrafice ; as ſuppoſe a 
man conſecrated an houſe, or rent of it to the Lord. this was to 
be te Prieſts. And this reſtriftion may be eaſily colle&ed from 
race nature of the thing, becauſe he ſpeaketh in this and the other 
branches here of ſuch things as were appropriated to the Prieſts, as 
t11s portion, which none of the ſacrifices were. ; 

11 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

12 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and ſay unto 


them, If any mans wife s go aſide t, and commit a treſ- 
paſs againſt him, | 

5 This law was given partly to deter wives from adulterous pra« 
ctiſes, and partly to ſecure wives againſt the rage of their hard« 
hea:ted husbands, who otherwiſe might upon meer ſuſpicions de- 
{troy them, or at leaſt pur them away. Queſt. Why was there not 
the ſame law forthe tryal of the husband, when the wife was jealous 
of him ? Avſ. This might be eicher 1. becauſe rhe womans ſin is 
greater, becauſe there isnot only filthineſs and falſneſs in it, whiclz 
iS alſo in the mans ſin, bur alſo peculiar unrigh"eouſneſs in diſho= 
nou-ing his name and family, and transferring his eſtate to ſtran= 
gers and orher mens children : Or 2. becauſe there was nor like 
fear of inconveniencies to the husband from the jealoufie of the wife 
who had nor that authority and power,and opportunity for the put= 
ting away or killing of the husband, as the husband had over the 
wite. O. 3. Becauſe being the inferiour and the weaker ſex, and 
more ſubje& ro jealouſies & groundleisſuſpicions it was not thoughe 
expedient to truſt them with ſuch a power or priviledge. # From 
the way of religion and juſtice,or from hes faith given to her hus- 
band, or to the by-paths of falſhood and filthineſs, and that either 
in truth, or in appearance, and in her husbands opinion. 

13 And a man lie with her carnaliy, and it be hid 
from the eyes of her husband, and be kept cloſe «,and 
ſhe be defiled, and there be no witneſs againſt her x 

. . IF 
neither ſhe be taken with the manwer ; 


% She utrerly denying it, Proz 39+ 20: and none being able and 
willing to diſcover it. x For if it was witneſſed, ſhe was to die 
for it, Lev: 20: 10, Deut: 22:22, : 

14 And the ſpirit of jealouſie y come upon him, and 
he be jealous of his wife, and ſhe be defiled : or if the 


ſpirit of jealouſie come upon him, and he be jealous of 
his wife, and ſhe be not defiled : 

y (7.e.) A ſtrong opinion or ſuggeſtion or inward motion of 
thar kind, whether from a good or evil ſpirit. This we read of 
the ſpirit of wiſdom, Iſa: II: 2, of perverſeneſs, Iſa: 19: I4: of fornication 
Hoſe 33S: of fear, 2 Tim; 1; 7: of ſlumber, Rom: 11. 8. : 

is Then = (hall che man bring his wife unto the 
prieſt, and he thall bring her offering a for her, the 
tenth pare of an Ephah of barley meal, he ſhall pour no 
oyl upon it, nor put frankincenſe thereon b ; for it is 
an offering of jea.oulic, an oitering of memorial, bring- 
ing iniquity to remembrancee: 

z She perſiſting in her denial.and her kusband requiring her ſub- 
mithon to this way of tryal. # Which was partly belong { Fave 
to appear before God empty,Exod:23: 15. partly by way of tolemn 
appeal to God, whom hereby the deſired to judge between her and 
her hushand ; and partly by way of atronement to appeaſe God, who 
had for her fins ſtirred up her husband againſt her, and ſent an evil 
ſpirit between them. See 1 Sam: 26: 19. b Both becauſe it was a 
kind of ſin-offering, from which theſe were excluded, Lev: 5. 10, 
and to teſtihe her ſorrowful ſenſe of the hand of God, and of her 
husbands diſpleaſure, and becauſe ſhe came thither as a delinquent 
or one ſuſpected of delinquency, and under an ill fame, and un- 
pleaſing both ro God and men ; as one that wanted that grace and 
amiableneſs and joy which oy! ſignified 
God which frankincenſe deſigned, Pſal: 141. 2. c Both to God be- 
fore wt.om ſhe appeared as a ſinner, and ro her own conſcience, if 
ſhe were guilty, and, if ſhe were not guilty of this, yet it reminde@ 
her of her »ther ſins, for which this mighr be a puniſhment. 

16 And the prieſt ſhall bring her 4 near and ſet her 
before the LORD e. 

4 (6. e.) The woman : Bur of her he ſpeaks, wer: 18: or it, 7. e: 
t1e offering, which is laſt ſpoken of, ſo the feminine gender is put 
tor the maſculine or the neuter, of both which we have inſtances. 
e (ie e.) Before the ſanftuary where the Ark was. 


17 And the prieſt ſhall take holy water fin an earthen 
veſſel g, and of the duſt b that is in the floor of the taber- 


nacle z the prieſt (ball rake, and put it into the warer ks 
F Either water our of the holy laver, Exod: 3o. 18. or rather the 
water of purification appointed for ſuch kind of uſes, Num. 19. 9. 
This was uſed, that if the were guilty, ſhe might be afraid to add 
profaneneſs and the pollution of holy things to her other crime. 
g Either to. ſignific thar fraulty and vileneſs of which ſhe ſtood ac- 
cuſed, or expreſs her ſorrowful and ſhameful! condition,or becauſe, 
after this uſe, it was to be broken in pieces, that the remembrance, 
of it might be blotted out as far as was poſſible. Compare Levit: 6. 
28. and 11: 33: and 15; 12. h Anemblem of vitenefs and miſery, 
as appears from Job 2. 12, Pſal. 22: 15 Lam: 3: 29. and the ſer- 
pents food, Gen: 3. 14. very proper for her who had been ſeduced 
ro folly by the ſerpents inftigation. / Which made it holy duſt 
and ſtruck the greater terrour into the woman, if ſhe were guilty. 
k To make it m re unpleaſant and bitter, which was ſuitable ro one 

in that forcowful ſtate. 
Z 1 13 And 


Chap. V, 


, and that acceptance with - 


* Levits | 
10; 133 


T. Chiap. = 


of thy 


t Heb. 


ro fall. 


13 And the pricft ſhall ſet the woman before the 
LORD J, and uncover the womans head »s, and put 
the offering of memorial in her hands » which is the jea- 
louſic-offering : and the prieſt ſhall haye in his hand the 


bieter o water that cauſeth the curſe p. 

1 Before the tabernacle with her face toward the Ark. 2: Part- 
ly that ſhe might be made ſenſible how manifeſt ſhe and all her 
ways were to God, and that ſhe might be more viſible to the con- 
gregation, that her ſhame might be greater if ſhe were guilty ; 
partly in token of her ſorrow either for her ſin, or at leaſt tor any 
cauſe of ſuſpicion which ſhe had given ; partly as a ſign that ſhe 
was after a ſort deprived of the help and prote&ion of her husband, 
which the covering of the womans head ſignified, 1 Cor: 113 5, 6,7, 
10. and that ſhe was neither virgin nor loyal wife, for the heads 
of both theſe uſed to be covered. » That ſhe her ſelf might offer 
it, and therefore call God to be witneſs of her innocency: 0 So 
called either from the bitter taſt which the duſt gave it, or from 
the bitter effe&s of it upon her, if ſhe were guilty. Compare Exod; 
32: 20. þ Not by any natural power, but by a ſupernatural eſh- 
cacy ordained and wrought by God for her puniſhment,and for the 
terrour and caution of orhers: 


19 And the prieſt ſhail charge her by an oath q, and 
ſay unto the woman, If ne man r have lien with thee, 


{| jOr,bcing and if thou haſt not gone alide to uncleanneſs|| F 2vith 
| :nehepower cher £ inftead of thy husband, be thou free from this 


995" Litter water that cauſeth the curſe. 


band. R , 
; To anſwer truely to his queſtion, or to declare by oath whe- 
| -»5 gy ther ſhe be guilty -4 no, and after ſuch oath ſhall ſay as follows. 


» To wit, except thy husband, as is manifeſt from the whole con- 
text, or 70 other man, the word another being underſteod here, as 
it is thought to be alſo, Gen: 14: 1: and 36. 6: Exod. 22: 20. s Or, 
with him, i: e: the man now mentioned» So it is an Ellipfis caſily 
ſupplied out of the Texr. f 

20 But if thou haſt gone aſide to another in ſtead of thy 
husband, and if thou be defiled ; and fome man have 
cn with thee beſide thins husband ; 

21. Then the prieſt ſhall charge the woman with an 
oath of curſing, and the prieſt ſhall ſay unto the woman, 
The LORD make thee a curſe, and an oath : among 
thy people, when the LORD doth make thy thigh #« 
to + rot x and thy belly to ſwell y. 

t (i.c.) A form of curſing or imprecatory. oaths, that when they 
would curſe a perſon, they may wiſh that they may be as curſed 
and miſerable as thou waſt upon this occaſion. See-the phraſe, Iſa: 
65: 15. Jer: 29: 22: and compare Gen: 48: 20. Ruth 4: 11, 12. u A 
modeſt ſignification of the pony parts, uſed borh in Scripture, 
as Gen: 46. 26, Exod; 1: 5. and other authors, that the fin might be 
evident in the puniſhment. x Heb. zo fall, 3. e. to die or waſt away, 
as the word is uſ:d, 1 Chron: 21: 14. compared with 2 Sam: 24: 15. 
y Suddenly and violencly till it burſt, which the Jews note was 
frequent in this and like caſes, as Exod: 32: 20. And it was a clear 
evidence of the truth of their religion, 

22 And this water that cauſeth the curſe ſhall go into 
thy bowels, to make thy belly to ſwell, and by thigh 
to rot : and the woman ſhall ſay, Amen, amen =. 

z (5. e, ) So let it be if I be guilty. The word is doubled by 
her as an evidence of her innocency, and ardent deſire that God 
would deal with her according to her deſert. , 

23 And the prieft ſhall write theſe curſes ain a book, 

and he ſhall blor them out with the bitter water c. 
a Wherewith ſhe curſed her ſelf. to which peradventure her 
name was added. b (5. e.) In a ſcroll of parchment, which the He- 
brews commonly call a book, as Dent: 24. 1: 2 Sam 11. 14. 1/a: 39: 1. 
c Or, raſe or ſcrape them out and caſt them into the bitter water. 
W hereby it was ſignified that if ſhe was innocent, the curſes ſhould 
be bloted out and come to nothing, and, if ſhe were guilty, ſhe 
ſhould find in her the.effes of this water which the drunk, after 
the words of this curſe had been ſcraped and pur in. 

24 And he ſhall cauſe the woman to drink dthe bit- 
ter water, that cauſeth the curſe : and the water that 
cauſeth the curſe ſhall enter into her, and become bitter. 

dTo wit,after the jealouſic-offering was offered, as is afftirmed,v:26. 

25 Then the prieſt ſhall cake the jealouſic-offering 
out of the womans hand, and ſhall wave the offering 
before the LORD, and offer it upon the altar. 

26 And the prieft (ball take an handfu] of the offering, 

© even the memorial thereof e, and burn it upon the altar, 
and afterward ſhall cauſe the woman to drink the water. 
8 Of which, ſte Lev: 2. 2. l 
 27-And when he hath made her to drink the water 
then it ſhall come to paſs,zbar if ſhe be defiled, and have 
done treſpaſs againſt her husband, that the water that 
cauſeth the curſe, ſhall enter into her, and become bitter, 


- and her belly ſhall ſwell, and her thigh ſhall rot : and 


*Deut: the woman ſhall be * a curſe among her people. 
28.37 . 28 Andif the woman be not difiled, but be clean, 
4 fal:83? then ſhe ſhall be free f, and ſhall conceive ſeed g. 


Jer:24:9: , 5 
and 29. brin 


f To wit, from theſe bitter curſes aud miſeries. g (7.e.) Shall 
forth children, as the Jews ſay,in caſe of her innocency, in- 
fallibly ſhe did, yea though ſhe was barren before : or ſhall be as 


: gs capable of bearing children, as other women: 
6 29 This is the law of jealouſies, when a wife goeth 
8:13, aſide ts another in ſtead of her husband, and is defiled. 


30 Or when the ſpirit of jealouſie cometh upon him, 
ahd he be jealous over his wife,and ſhall ſer the woman 
before the LORD,and the prisſt (ball ex5cute upon her 
all this law. 


NUMBERS 


Chan, V1 
l 


31 Then (ball the man be guiltleſs from iniquity ». 


and this woman ſhall bear her iniquity z. 

þ Which he ſhould not have been,if he had either diſſembled c. 
indulged her in ſo great a wickedneſs,and not endeavoured to brin.. 
her either to repentance or puniſhment : See Mt: 1:19. or cheriſheu 
ſuſpicions in his breaſt,and thereupon proceeded to hate her or caſt 
her off Whereas now, whatſoever the con{equent 1s, tne hu«banG 
ſhall not be blamed or cenſured either for bringing ſuch curſes an.? 
miſchiefs upon her, or for defaming her, if ſhe appar to be inn 
cent. # (3. e.) The puniſhment of her iniquity, wether ſhe vw - 
falſe to her husband, or. by any light and fooliſi carriage gave hu: 
occaſion to ſuſpeCt her to be ſo. 


CHAP YL 


The law of the Nazaritcs : From what they ſhould abſtzin : How becor- © 
Unclean they. were to be purified, 1 The Vow of ſeparation +. 
fulfilled, the Ceremonies to be obſerved, 13-»===21, The form of Ec)" _ 
to be uſed by the prieſt in the Congregation, 22, 27. 


A N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes ſaying, 

2 Speak unto the children of Hrael and ſay ui 
them, When eicher man or woman #4 ſhall || ſepatete :;>, :..,, | 
themſelves to vow a vow of a Nazarite b,to ſeparate thcm- 11; | 
ſelves unto the LORD : On | 

a For both ſexes might make this vow, if they were fiee and ar 044 # 
their own diſpoſe, for etherwiſe their parents or hu:bands cc uld 
diſanul the vow, Numb: 30: 4. and in that caſe they ſinned in taking 
Gods name in vain, and vowing what they could not perform: 
bW hereby they did ſequeſter themſelves in a great part from world- 
ly employ ments and enjoyments,that they might intirely conſecrate 
tiemſclves to Gods ſervice,and this either for their whole life time, 
of which ſee Judg; 13: 5. and 16. 17. 1 Sam: 1: 11. Luke 1+ 15. or 
for a leſs and limited ſpace of time, of which in this chapter. 

3 He ſhall ſeparate himſelf from wine and ftrong 
drink c, and ſhall drink no vinegar of wine,nor vinegar 
of ſtrong drink, neither ſhall he drink any liquor of 
grapes, nor eat moiſt grapes, or dried c. 

b Leaſt they ſhould either inflame or diſpoſe him to luxury,and 
conſequently to the breaking of his vow . or cloud his reaſon and 
thereby occaſion ſome miſtake or miſcarriage in the rules to which 
he had bound himſelf. Compare Lev: ro: 9g. c Which was for- 
bidden him for greater caution to keep him at the further diſtance 
from wine. | 

4 All the days of his || ſeparation 4 ſhall he eat no- 
thing that is made of the Þ vine-tree, from the kernels 
even to the husk. 


d Which were ſometimes more,ſometimes fewer, as be thought 
fit to appoint. 


5 All the days of the vow of his ſeparation, there 
ſhall no * raſor e come upon his head, until the days be 
fulfilled, in the which he ſeparateth himſelf unto the 
LORD, he ſhall be holy f; and ſhall let the locks of the 
hair of his head grow. 

e Nor ſciſſars, or other inſtrument to cut off any part of his hair. 
This was appointed,partly as a ſign of his mortification to worldly 
delights and vain affe&ation of outward beauty,which is promoted 
by the polling or cutting off the hair; partly as a teſtimony of thar 
purity which hereby he profeſſed, becauſe the cutting off the hair 
was a fign of uncleannefs, as appears from w g. and Levit: 14: 8; g. 
partly that by the notoriouslength of his hair he mighrbe conſtantly 
minded of his vow, and the exquiſite holineſs it required, and that 
others might thereby be admoniſhed and ſtirred up to the imitation 
of his holy example ; and partly that he might reſerve his hair 
entirely for God to whom it was to be offered,v:18. f(.e.) WhoHy 
conſecrated to God and his ſervice, whereby he ſhews that inward 
and ſubſtantial holineſs was the great thing which God required and 
valued in theſe, and conſequently in other rites and ceremonies. 

6 All the days that he ſeparateth himſelf unto the 
LORD, he ſhall come at no + dead body. 


7 He ſhall not make himſelf unclean for his father,or 1 - Heal 
for his mother g, for his brother, or for his ſiſter, when you 


they die : becauſe the + conſecration þ of his God j 3s + Heb: + 
upon his head. 

g Wherein he was equal to the High-prieſt, Lev: 21: r1. 
in ſome ſort, as ſacred a perſon, 


"kh 
17, 
es 


*Le 


i 
[| Or, Ne | 
zariteſhip, 
+ Heb: f 
the wine 
the wine, 


* Judg: 
I3: Fo 
1 Sam: 1: 
Ile 


” Ac 


paration, 
: | being, 
and as eminent a type of Chritt, 
Heb: 7: 26: and therefore juſtly required to prefer = ſervice of 


God to which he had ſofully and peculiarly given himſelf before th 
expreſſions of his affeQtions tohis deareſt od neareſt elationes Ge) 
"ay —_ - his a ye Eaton ay rag re long hair. 7 (:.e.) Where- 
y he hath devoted himſelf to his God in an emi . 
The Genitive caſe of the obje&. CO ny 


q bAq the days of his ſeparation he 3s holy unto the 


9 And if any man die very ſuddenly by him, and he 
hath defiled the head of his doaacion he ſhall 


ſhave his head & in the day of his cleanfin 
ſeventh day / ſhall he ſhave A a= 


k Becauſe his whole body, and eſpecially his hair was defiled | 
by ſuch an accident, which he oughr to impute either to his own 
heedleſsneſs, or at leaſt to Gods providence fo ordering the matter t 
poſſibly for the puniſhment of his other ſins, or for the quickening 
of him to more caution and purity and deteſtation of all dead works 
whereby he would be defiled. 7 To be reckoned from the time 
of his pollution, for uncleanneſs conrra&ed by the dead continued 


for ſeven days, and the ſeventh day was the day of cleanſing for 
it, Lev: 15: 13. Numb: 19: 11, 12. 


*Exod 
27,28, 


10 And on the * eighth day he ſball bring two tur- 


tles, or two young pigeons m to the prieſt, to the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation. 


m As in the caſe of him that had a running iſſue, Lev: I5: 14. 
ii Ard 


F[.ev:5"t 
and14-25 


Y 
F 


x, del 


(eb: (6 


11 101, 


Chap. VI. NOM 


It: And the prieſts ſhall offer » the one for a fin-of- 
fering o, and the other for a burnt- — and make 
an atonement for hint, for that he ſinned p by the dead, 
and ſball hallow q his head that fame day. 

» Heb, mote: which is oft put for ſacrificing or offerings as Exod: 
9: 36: 1 Chron: 23. 23- compared with 2 Sam: 24: 22. 0 Becauſe 
ſuch a pollution was, though nor his fin, yet the chaſtifement of 
his fin, and had an appearance of fin, to wit, of neg]1gence 1n 
not ſtanding ſufficiently upon his guard, which in ſuch perſons was 
in a manner equivalent to a fin. p (7. e.) Contra&ed a ceremonial 
uncleanneſs, which 1s called ſmning, becauſe it was a rype of ſin,and 
a violation of a law, though through Ignorance and inadvertancy, 
as many other ſins were. q Begin again to hallow or conſecrate it. 

12 And he ſhall conſecrate unto the LORD the days 
of his ſeparation r, and ſhall bring a lamb of the firſt 

*Lev:5:6: year * for a treſpals-effering ; but the days that were 
tHeb:#37. before ſhall + be loſt 5, becauſe his ſeparation was defiled: 

» As many days as he had before ſeparated or vowed unto God. 
5 (i. e,) Not reckoned or imputed to him. Heb: fall, to wit, to 
the ground, 7. e. be void or of none etfe&t, ; 

13 And this zs the law of the Nazarite ; when the 
days of his ſeparation are fulfilled, he ſhall be brought 7 
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

f By the Prieſts appointment and direCtion. 

14 And he ſhali offer his offering unto the LORD, 
one he-lamb of the firſt year without blemiſh fora burnt- 
offering, and one ew-lamb of the firſt year without 
blemiſh for * a ſin-efering #, and one ram without blem- 

* Lev:4:2: iſh for * peace-offerings x : 

17, 32: u Whereby he confeſled and bewailed his frailties and miſcarri- 

*Lev:3:6. ages,notwithſtanding the ſtrineſs of his vow and all the diligence 
and care which he could uſe, and conſequently acknowledged his 
need of the grace of God in Chriſt Jeſus the true Nazarite» x For 
thankfulneſs to God, who had given him grace to make and in 
fome meaſure to keep ſuch a vow. So he offered all the three ſorts 


of offerings, that he might ſo far fulfill all righteouſneſs and pro- 
feſs his obligation to obſerve the will of God 1a all things. 


15 And a basket of unleavened bread, * cakes of fine 
flour mingled with oyl, and wafers of unleavened bread 
anointed with oyl, and their meat-oftering, and their 
drink-offerings y. 

y Such as did generally accompany the ſacrifices ; of which,ſee 
Lev: 2.1: and Numb: 28. 

16 And the prieft ſhall bring them before the LORD, 
and ſhall offer his ſin-offering, and his burnt-offering. 

17 And he (hall offer the ram for a ſacritice of peace- 
offerings unto the LORD,with the basket of unleavened 
bread : the prieſt ſhall offer alſo his mear-offering, and 
his drink-offering. : 

18 X And the Nazarite ſhall ſhave the head of his 
ſeparation & at the door of the tabeenacle of the con- 

regation 4, and ſhall rake the hair of the head of his 
eparation, and put z# in the fire b6, which zs under the 
ſacrifice of the peace- offerings. 

z Or, of his Nazariteſhip, i. e. in which the chief of his Nazarite- 
ſhip or ſeparation to God conſiſted.  Publickly, that it might 
be known that his vow wasended, and therefore he was at liberty 
as ro thoſe things from which he had reſtrained himſelf for a 
ſeaſon, otherwiſe ſome might have been ſcandalized at his uſe of 
his liberty. See As 21: 26. b Either 1. the fire of the Altar. But 
why then is this reſtrained to the peace-offerings, ſeing it was 
common to the burnt-offerings, and to the ſin-offerings ? Or ra- 
ther 2. to the fire of the kitchen, upon which the fleſh of the 
peace-offerings was boiled. | 

19 And the prieſt ſhall take the ſodden ſhoulder c of 
the ram,and one unleavened cake out of the basket,and 
one unleavened wafer,and ſhall put themupon the hands 
of theNazarite 4,after the hair of his ſeparation is ſhaven. 

c The left ſhoulder,as it appears from wv: 20; where this is joyned 
with the heave-ſhoulder, which was the right-ſhoulder, and which was 
| thePrieſts due in all facrifices,Lev: 7-32. and in this alſo. Bur here 
the other ſhoulder was added to it, as a ſpecial token of thankful- 
neſs from the Nazarices for Gods ſingular favour vouchſated unto 
them. d That he may give them to the prieſt, as his pecular gift. 

20 And the prieſt ſhall wave them*for a wave-offering 
e before the LORD : this is holy for the prieſt with the 
wave-breaſt, and heave-ſhoulder : and after that the 
Nazarite may drink wine f. 

e Of the wave-offering and heave offering, ſee Lev: 7:30. f And 
return to his former freedom and manner of living, he is diſchar- 
ged from his vow. 

21 This #« the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, 
and of his offering unto the LORD for his ſeparation, 
beſides char that his hand (hall ger g : according to the 


vow which he vowed, ſo he muſt do, after the law of 
his ſeparation. 

g ( # e: ) Beſides what he ſhall voluntarily promiſe and give ac- 
cording to his ability. | 

22 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

23 Speak unto Aaron, and unte his ſons, ſaying, On 
this wiſe b ye ſball bleſs che children of Ifrael 3, laying 
unto them, 


þ Heb. Thus, in this manner, or in theſe words ; yet ſo as that 
they were not tied to theſe very words, becaule afrer this we have 
examples of Moſes and David and Solomon and others blefling the peo- 
ple in ether viords, # To wit, in the publick aſſembly. 


"Lev: 2:4: 


* Alts 


2 


*Exod: 29 
27,28, 


BE REM 
24 The LORD bleſs thee &, and keep thee / : 


k (#: e:) Beſtow upon you all manner of bleſſings, temporal and 
ſpirirual. Compare Gen: 12: 2. 1 (7. e.) Continue his bleſlings to 
thee, and preſerve thee in and to the nſe of them ; keep thee from 
ſin and its bitter effe&s. 

25 The LORD make his face ſhine upon thee », 
and be gracious unto thee: 

[ (7. 2.) Smile upon thee : this is oppoſed to the hiding of his 
face, and to the covering himſelf or his face with a cloud ; and it 
;s explained by the following words. be gracious unto thee. - Others 
expound it of i]Jumination or direQtion, and the revelation of him- 
ſelf, and of his will to them. | : 

26 The LORD life up his countenance upon thee », 
and five thee peace », | 

2 (7: e: ) Look upon thee with a chearfull and pleaſant counte- 
nance, as one that 1s recor.ciled to thee, and well pleaſed with thee 
and thy offerings and ſervices. See of this phraſe, Pſal: 4: 6. Prove 
16: 15. To this is oppoſed the falling and the caſting down of the coun= 
tenance, of which ſee Gen: 4: 5, 6. Job: 29: 24. Or, Regard, Prote&, 
and help thee. Compare Pſal: 33: 18. o Peace with God and with 
my own conſcience and with all men, and all proſperity, which is 
comprehended under this word. 


27 And they ſball put my Name upon the children 
of Iſrael p, and I will bleſs them 9. 

p (7:e:) Shall call them by my name,ſhall recommend them to 
me as my own people, and bleſs them and pray unto me for thent 
as ſuch : which is a powerful argument to prevail with God for 
them, and therefore hath been oft uſed by the Prophets interced- 
ing for them, as Jer: 14: 9. Dan: 9. 18, 19. Compare 1 Sam: 12: 22, 


q I will ratifie their bleſſings, and give thoſe bleſſings to the peo-+ 
ple which the Prieſts pray for- 


Chap. Vil. 


. 
' 

| 

1 

} 


a 


j 
{ 


CHAP. VIL 
The tabernacle being fully finiſhed, the twelve Princes offer Gifts : which ars 
delivered to the Gerſbonites and the Mcrarites, L=====c- 11. What they 


offered in particular of Silver, Gold Y+ſſels, and Beaſts, 12--=-83. The ſum 
thereof, 84----84. God ſpake to Moſes from the Mercy-Seat, 85. 
A N D it came to paſs on the day s that Moſes had ' 
fully * ſer up the tabernacle, and had anointed 
it 5, and ſandiified ir, and all the inſtruments thereof, 
borh the altar, and all the veſtels thereof, and had a- 
nointed them, and {ancified them ; 


@ Either 1. preciſely, and ſo this hiſtory, as many others,is put 
out of 1ts proper place, and this chapter and the 8th, gth, roth,and 
11th, ſhould follow next after Exod: 40. and this day is the fame 
on which the Tabernacle was ere&ed, which was ' the firſt day of 


7 Exod. 
40: 18, 


; and thoſe things were done in the ſecond month of the ſecond year 


the firſt moneth of the ſecond year, Exod: 40. 17,18. Or 2. largely, 

| day being put for time, and on the day, for about the time, or, 

, little after the time. And thus it ſeems to be taken here, becauſe 

; all the princes did not offer theſe things upon one and the ſame 

; day, but on ſeveral days, as here it follows. And ſo there is no 
diforder in the Hiſtory, and this chapter comes in its proper place, 


after the Tabernacle and Altar, and all other inſtruments thereof 
were anointed, as is here expreſſed ; and after the Levites were ſe- 
parated to the ſervice of the Tabernacle, and appointed to their 
ſeveral works, as is manifeſt from v. 5, 6,7, 8, 9. which was done 
about a month after the Tabernacle was ere&ed, &c. and after the 
numbering of the people, Numb: 1. when the Princes here em- 
ployed in the offerings were firſt conſtituted ;. and after the diſpo- 
fal of the Tribes about the Tabernacle, the order of which is kere 
obſerved in the time of their offerings. +5 Lev: 8: 10. ; 

2 That * che princes of Iſrael, heads of the houſe of 
their fathers ( who were the princes of the tribes, + and 
were over them that were numbred ) oftered «c ; 

c To wit, in the manner and days hereafter mentioned. : 

3 And they brought their offering before the LORD, 
ſix covered wagons d, and twelve oxen ; a wagon for 
ewo of the princes, and for each one an ox : and they 
brought them before the tabernacle. : 


4 For the more convenient and fafe carriage of ſuch things as 
were moſt cumbertome. 


4 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

5 Take it of them, that they may be to do the ſer- 
vice of the tabernacle of the congregation, and thou 
ſhalt give them unto the Levites ; to every man accord- 
ing to his ſervice e. 


e (5. e.) More or fewer of them, as the nature of their ſervice and 
of the things to be carried required. 


6 And Moſes took the wagons, and the oxen, and 
gave them unto the Levites, | 

7 Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the ſons 
of Gerſhon, according to their ſervice : 

8 And four wagons and eighr oxen he gave unto the 
fons of Merari, according unto their ſervice,under the 
hand of Ithamar frthe ſon of Aaron the Prieſt. 

f ( i.e. } Under his care and inſpe&ion. See Gen: 59. 22. And 
it muſt be noted that theſe words belong both ro the Meraritcs here, 
and to the Gerſbonizes, wer: 7: becauſe both of them were under his 
hands, as 1s affirmed, Numb, 4: 28, 33. 

9 But unto the ſons of Kohath he gave none: kecauſs 
the ſervice of the fancuary 'belonging unco them, was 
that chey ſhould bear upon their ſhoulders g. 

Z Becauſe of the greater worth and holineſs of the things which 
they carried. See Numb: 4, 6,8, 10, 12, 14. 2 Sam: 6:6, 13- 

io And the princes offered for dedicating of the al- 
tar b, in the day 5 that it was anointed,even the princes 


+ Heb. 
who ſtod, 


: 
| 
| 
| 
i 
{ 
| 
i 
| 
| 
| 
{ 


otfered their oftering before the alcar. 
£4 


hk T's 


—— Fr 


L 4 Or,/ial. 
7 Exod; 


"(| Bo. I 3: 
I *Lev:2:1: 


*Lev:1: 2: 


*Lev 4:23 
*Ley. J:T. 


Chap. VII. 


N DO M 

þ To wit, of burnt-offerings, and incenſe too, as appears from 
the matter of their offerings. The ſingular number for the plural. 
Not for the firſt dedication of them, for it is apparent they were 
dedicated or conſecrated before this time by Moſes and Aaron for 
diverſe days together, Numb: 8: and 9: but for a further dedication 
of them, theſe being the firſt offerings that were made for any 
particular Perſons or Tribes. 7 (. e. } About the time, as ſoon as 
it was anointed. See on verſe 1, 

1x And the LORD {aid untoMoſes, They ſhall ofter 
their offerings each prince on his day &, for the dedicat- 


ing ofthe altar. 

E As well for the greater ſolemnity and ſplendor of the work, as 
for the prevention of confuſion. And in this offering tiey follow 
the order of their camp, and not of their birth. 

12 And he that offered his offering the firſt day, was 
Nahſhonthe ſon of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah /. 

1 In whoſe name and behalf, this offering was made, and ſo in the 

reſt. | 

12 And his offering 24s one filver charger » the 
weight thereof a5 an hundred and thirty ſbekels, one 
filver + bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after * the ſheke! of the 


ſanctuary, both of them were full of fine flour mingled 


with oyl, for a * meat-offering. 

m A large diſh orplatter ; of which ſee Exod:25:29: robe employed 
about the altar of burnt-offering, or in the court, not in the San 
Qtuary, for all its veſſels were of gold. : 

14 One ſpoon of ten ſhekels of gold o full of incenſe : 

o And therefore belonging to the altar of incenſe. 

I5 * One young bullock, one ram, ene lamb of the 


firſt year, for a burnt-offering : 


16 One kid of the goats for a * ſin-effcrivg : 
17 And fora * ſacrifice of peace-offerings p, two oxen, 


. five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. 'Ltis 


4s the offering of Nahſhon the ſon of Araminadab, 

p Which are more numerous, becauſe the Princes and Pricits, and 
ſome of the people did make a feaſt before the Lord out of them, 
and celebrated it with great rejovcing. 

18 On the ſecond day Nethaneel che ſon of Zuar, 
prince of Iffachar did offer : 

19 He offered for his offering one ſilver charger, the 
weight whereof 2a; an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one 
filver bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after the ſhekel of the 


ſanQuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with 


oyl, for a meat-offering. 

20 One ſpoon of gold of ten feekels, full of incenſe : 

21 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for a burnt-offering : 

22 One kid of the goats for a fin-oftering : 

23 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offerings five oxen, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. 
This as the offering of Nethaneel the ſon of Zuar, 

24 On the third day Eliab the ſon of Helon, prince 
of the children of Zebulun did offer. 

25 His offering as one ſilver charger, the weight 
whereof was an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one ſilver 
bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after the ſhekel ofthe ſanctuary, 
both of chem full of fine flour mingled with oil, for a 
meat-offering : | 

26 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels, full of incenſe : 

27 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 


| firſt year for a burnt-offering : 


28 One kid of the goats for a ſin-effering : 
29 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, 


- five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. This 


was the offering of Eliab the ſon of Helon, 
30 On the fourth day Elizur the fon of Shedeur, 
prince of the children of Reuben, did offer: 

21 His offering was one ſilver charger of an hundred 
and thirty fpekgls, one ſilver bowl of ſeventy ſhekels 
after the ſhekel of the ſanctuary, both of them full of 
fine flour mingled with oy], for a meat-offering. 

32 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels full of incenſe : 

23 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firft year for a burnt-offering : / 

234 One kid of the goats for a ſin-efering : 

25 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. 
This was the offeriag of Elizur the ſon of Shedeur : 

35 On the fifth day, Shelumiel the ſon of Zuriſhaddai, 
prince of the children of Simeon, 4:4 offer : 

27 His offering was one filver charger, the weight 
whereof was an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one filver 
bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after the ſhekel of the ſanQuary, 
both of them full of fine flour niingled with oyl for a 
meat-offeaing. 

38 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels, full of incenſe: 

29 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for a burnt-offering : 

40 One kid of the goats for a ſin-offering : 


B E R S, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. This 


as the offering of Shelumiel the ſon of Zuriſhaddai. 
42 On the fixth day Eliaſaph the fon of Deuel, prince 


of the children of Gad, efferes. 


43 His offering was one filyer charger, of the weight 
of an hundred and thirty ſhekels, a ſilver bow! of ſeventy 
ſhekels after the ſhekel of the ſanRuary, both of them full 
of fine flour mingled with oyl, for a meat-offering: 

44 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels full of incenſe : 

45 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for a burnt-offering : | 

46 One kidofthe goats for a ſin-offering : 

47 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offterings, two oxen, 
hve rams, five he-goats, five lambs. This as the ofic- 
ring of Eliafaph the ſon of Deuel. 

48 On the ſeventh day Eliſhama the fon of Ammihud, 
prince of the children of Ephraim, offered. 

49 His offering was one ſilver charger, the weight 
whereof 2945 an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one ſilver 
bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after the {hekel of the ſanuary, 
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oyl, for a 
meat-oftering : 

5o One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels, full of incenſe : 

51 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for-a' burnt-offering : 

52 One kid of the goats for a ſin-offering ; 

53 And for a facritice of peace-offerings, two oxen, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. This 
was the offering of Eliſhama the ſon of Ammihud. 

54 On the eighth day ofercd Gamaliel the fon of 
Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manaſlch. . 

55 His offering was one filver charger, of an hundred 
and thirty ſhekels, one ſilver bowl of ſeventy ſbekels after 
the ſhekel of the ſanuary, both of them full of fine 
Hour mingled with oyl, for a meat-offering : 

56 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels, full of incenſe: 

57 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for a burnt-offering : 

.58 One kid of the goats for a ſin-offering : 

59 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firft year. This 
as the offering of Gamaliel the ſon of Pedahzur. 

60 On the ninth day Abidan the ſon of Gideoni 
prince of the children of Benjamin, offered. a 


61 His oftcring was one ſilver charges, the weight 


| whereof was an hundred and thirty ſhekels, a filver bowl 


of ſeventy ſhekels after the ſhekel of the ſancuary, both 
; of them full of fine flour mingled with oyl, for a meat- 
oftering ; R 

62 One golden ſpoon of ten frekels, full of incenſe : 

63 One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firft year for a burnt-offering. 

64 One kid of the goats for a fin-ofeing : 

65 And for a ſacrifice of peace-offerings, two oxen 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. This 
was the offering of Abidan the ſon of Gideoni. 

66 On the tenth day Ahiezer the ſon of Ammiſhaddai: 
prince of the children- of Dan, offered. : 

67 His oftering was one filver charger, the weight 
whereof was an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one ſilver 
bowl of ſeventy ſhekels after the ſhekel of the ſanuary 
both of them full of fine flour mingled with oyl, for " 
meat-olfering : 

68 One golden ſpoon of ten fhekels, full of incenſe : 

69 One bullock, one ram, one lamb of the firſt year 
for a burnt-offering : 

79 One kid of the goats for a ſin-offering : - 

71 And for a ſacrifice of peace-otterings two oxen 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of the firſt year. This 
was the oflering of Ahiezer, the ſon of Ammiſhaggai 

72 On the eleventh day, Pagiel the ſon of Ocran 
Prince _ the Sage of Aſher, offered, l 

73 ts Offering was one filver charger, th 7 
whereof was an hundred and thirty ket wes a8 
—_ eter” A after the ſhekel of the ſanctuary 

oth of them Tull of fine flour mi 7 
- arr rae flour mingled with oy], for a 
74 One golden ſpoon of ten ſhekels, full of incenſe 
75 One young bullock, o : A 
firſt year for a bacon. Te he 
76 One kid of the goats tor a ſin-efering. 

77 And for a facritce of peace-offerings two oxen 
five rams, five he-goats, five-lambs of the firſt year. This 
was the offering of Pagiel the ſon of Ocran. 

. 78 On the twelfth day, Ahira the ſon of Enan,prince 


| 4 And for 2 ſacrifice of peaceeoftcrings, two oxen, of the children of Naphtali, offer ed, 


29 His 


Chap. VII, 


t Or, 


[That 
God, 


*Exod.2 
J7. & 4 
25, 


* Exod 
We 37. 
Exod. 
IF. I$. 
Exod, 
IF. 40, 


-9 His offering was one ſilver charger the weight where- 
of was an hundred and thirty ſhekels, one ſilver bowl of 
ſeventy ſhekels,after the ſhekel of the ſanuary, both of 
them full of fine flour mingled with oil, for ameat-offering: 

8 One zolden ſpoon of ten 5hekel: full of incenſe : 

8x One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the 
firſt year for a burnt-oftering : 

82 One kid of the goats for a ſin-offring. 

82 And for a facritice of peace-offerings two oxen, 
five rams, five he-goats, five lambs of che firſt-year, 
This was the offering of Ahira the fon of Enan« _ 

84 This was the dedication of the altar, ( in the day 
when it was anointed q) by the princes of Iſrael : 
ewelve chargers of ſilver, twelve ſilver # bowls, twelve 
{ſpoons of gold : —_ 

q This is again repeated, to ſhew why it 15 called the dedicati- 
on of the Altar, becauſe it was the firſt offering made by any par- 
ticular perſons or Tribes. 

&5 Each charger of filver weighing an hundred and 
thirty ſhekels, each bowl, ſeventy : all the ſilver veſſels 
weighed cwo thouſand and four hundred ſhekels after 
the. thekel of the ſanctuary : 

86 The golden ſpoons were twelve, full of incenſe, 
weighing ten ſhekels a yiece after the thekel of the ſanau 
ary : all the gold ofthe ſpoons was an hundred and 


twenty ſhekels. 
87 Al} the oxen for the burnt-offering were twelve 


bullocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the firſt year 
twelve, with their meat-offering r : and the kids of the 


goats for a ſin-offering gwelves | 

» Which was not mentioned before, becauſe it was ſufficiently 
underſtood from the Law which required it, Numb. 15. 3, 4, 5-but 
for greater aſſurance is here expreiled. _ | 

88 Andall the oxen for the ſacrifice of the peace- of- 
ferings were twenty and four bullocks,the rams ſixty, the 
he-goars ſixty,the lambs of the fiiſt year fixty. "1 his was 
the dedication of the altar after that it was anointed s. 

s Which words are very conveniently added to explain in what 
ſenſe he had ſo oft ſaid that this was done in the day when it was a- 
nomted, to wit, not exa&tly, but in alatirude, ro wat, a little afrer 
that it was anointed, as is here ſaid. 

89 And when Moſes was gone into the tabernacle of 
the congregation 7 to ſpeak with || him «, then he heard 

' the voice of one ſpeaking unto him fromoft che mercy- 
ſeat x that was upon the ark of teſtimony, trom be- 
tween the two cherubims: and he ſpake unto him. 

# Into which Avſes, though no Prieſt, was permitted to enter by 
Gods ſpecial licence. # (7. e. ) To conſult Gud upon occahon. x 
Which Moſes ſtanding without the vail could eaſily hear. And this 
ſeems to be added in this place, to ſhew that when men had done 
their part inthe dedication of the Tabernacle, Alrars, ©c. , God 
was not wanting in the performance of hispart,and promiſe made, 


Exod, 25. 22. 
| CH A FP: -vM. 
How the Lamps are to be lighted, 1---4. God commands the Levites to be 
cleanſed, 5--=15. That they may ſerve with Aaron and his Sons in flead 
of the firſt-born, 16---22. Their Age and Service, 23---26. 
AND the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2 Speak unto Aaron, and fay unto him, When 
*Txod.zs. £012 *lighteſt the lamps, the ſeven lamps ſhal give light 


37. & 40. OVer againft the candleitick 7. 
25, a ( 5.6.) Either r. On every ſide of the candleſtick.So the candle- 
fick is here put for the bulk or ſhaft of the candleſtick, as Exod: 25: 
34, 35: andthe lamps when they were lighted were put into the 
branches of the candleſtick,and raken our upon occaſion. Thus the 
meaning is that all the lamps were to be lighted on that part which 
was towards the middle, looking that way whence they had their 
light : for the middle Jamp was lighted with the fie of the altar, 
and from that the other lamps received light. Bur againſt this ſenſe 
it is obje&ed, that the lamps could not be otherwiſe ordered, bur 
that they muſt give light round about the candleſtick,and therefore 
that ſenſe ſeems to make this direttion idle and frivolous. Or, 2. 
On that part which is before the candleitick, Heb. over againſt the 
face of the candleſtick, 1. e, in that place towards which the candleſtick 
looked, or where the candleſtick ſtood in full view, 7. e. upon the 
Northſide, where the Table of Shew-bread ſtood, as appears from 
hence, becauſe the candleſtick ſtood cloſe to the boards of the San- 
Qtuary on the South-ſide,Exod. 26.35. And thus the lights were on 
both ſides of the SanQtuary, which was fit and neceſlary,becauſe 
it was wholly dark in itſelf, and had no window 1n it. 
3 And Aarondid \o : he}tghred the lamps thereof over 
againſt the candleſtick,as the LORD commanded Moſes. 
4 * And this work of the candleſtick was of beaten 
gold b,unto the ſhaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof was 


* beaten work : according unto the * pattern which the 
LORD had ſhewed Moſes, ſo he made the candleſtick. 
| 6 Not hollow, but ſolid and maſſie gold, beaten out of one 
piece,and not of ſeveral pieces joined or fodered rogether.See Exod: 
25: 18, 31: and 37: 17. 
5 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
6 Take the Levites from among the children of Iſrael, 
and ecleanſe them. 
c Or, waſh or purifie them, which was alſo done with the Prieſts 


and others when they were toapproach to God and his ſervice. See 
Exod; 19: 10, 15: Levit: 14: 9. 


+ 0r,vials. 


[That 1s 
God, 


TDOUHBERS 


 therwiſe they ha4 bern obliged ro do in their own perſons. p How 


Chap. VIE. of 

7 And thus ſhalt thou do unts them,to cleanſe them: __ | 
ſprinkle water | of purifying 4 upon them, and Þ let f Heb. of 
chem ſhave all their fleſh e, and let them waſh their /#- ch. 19. } 
clothes, and ſo make themſelves clean. Heb. ts | 

4 Heb. Of ſm, (1. e. ) for the expiation of ſin. This water was 296 tonl q 
mixed with the aſhes of a red heifer, Numb. 19. 9. which therefore vel 
may ſeem to have been preſcribed before, thouzh it be mentioned aſs _ | 
after ; ſuch kind of tranſplacings of paſlages being frequent in Scri- ;* Sr, L 
pture- d Which external rite ſignified the cutting off their inor- © © | 
dinate concupiſcences of earthly things, and that ſingular purity of 
heart and life which is required in the miniſters of God. See 1/a: 52. 
11. 2 Tim, 2: 21. : -|l 

8 Then let them take a yourg bullock with his * meat- * 
offering, even fine flour mingled with oil, and another 
young bullock e ſhalt thou takefor a fin-efferizg. 

e The ſame ſacrifice which was offered for a ſin-offering for the 
whole congregation, Lewir. 4. becauſe the Levites came in the ſtead 
of all the tirſt-born, which did in a manners repreſent the whole 
Congregation. : 

9 And thou ſhalt bring the Levites before the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, and thou ſhalt gather the 
whole aflembly of che children of Iſrael together. 

10 Andthou ſhalt bring the Levites before the LORD, 
and the children of Ifrael f ſhal put their hands upon the 
Levites g. 

f Not all of them, which was impoſlible, but ſome in the name 
and ſtead, and by the appointment of all, to wit, either the firſt- 
born, or rather the Princes or Chiefs of each Tribe, who uſed to 
:ranſatt things in the name of their Tribe. g Whereby they fig- 
nified their transferring of that right of Miniftring to God from 
the firſt-born in whoſe hands it formerly was, unto the Levites,and 
their renouncing of their intereſt in the Levites, from whom they 
might otherwite have expetted help by their perſons or purſes, as 
they from othgr Tribes, in their common concernments, and 
their enfire reſignation and dedication of them ro God's ſervice ; 
as the perſon ottering by laying his hand upon the head of his ſa- 
crifice, ( Lvit. 1. 4- ) fignified his tranſlation of his guilt upon 
the beaſt, and his dedication of it unto God. 

it And Aaron thal + offer the Levites before the 


ll; 
lt | 


LORD for an || offering & of the children of 1ſrae}, that Liang 
+ they may execute the ſervice of the LORD. || Heb. 


h Heb. For a wave-offering. Of which ſee Exod. 29. 24. Not that wave- 
Aaron did ſo wavethem, which he could not do, but that he cau- offering. 
ſed or commanded them to imitate that motion, and to wave | Heb. 
.hemfelves towards the ſeveral parts of the world: whereby they they maybe 
might ſignifie their readineſs to ſerve God, according to their ca- 70 execute, 
pacity whereſoever they ſhould be. Thoughthe word may be ta- &c. 
ken more generally for any offering made ro God, as Exod, 35- 22. 

12 And the Levites ſhal lay their hands upon the 
heads of the bullocks j: and thou ſhalt offer the one for a 
ſin- cffering, and the other fora burnt-offering unto the 
LORD. to make an atonement for the Levites, 

z; To ſignifie thar they were offered by them and for them. See 

Exod: 29: 16, 19. Levit: 1: 4. and 3: 2 and 4: 4. 1 
13 Andthou ſhalt ſer the Levites before Aaron and 
bef-re his ſons &, and ofter them for an offering unto the 
LORD | 

k (ie: ) Putthem into the power of Aaron and his ſons, go em- 
ploy them in holy miniſtration : for ſo that phraſe is ſometimes 
uſed, as Gen: 13. 9. theland is before thee, 3. e. in thy power, to uſe 
or enjoy it Or, ſetting rhe Levites before them, did ſignifie the 
giving the Levites to them, or to the r ſervice. 7 Forto him they 
were firſt properly offered, and by him given to the Prieſts in order 
to his ſervice. 

14 Thus (balt thou ſeparate the Levites from among  - 
che children of Iſrael, and the Levites ſhal be * mine. * cb. 3.45. 

15 And after that ſhal the Levites go in m2, to do the 
ſervice of the tabernacle of the congregation : and thou 
thalt cleanſe them, and offer them for an offering, 

m To wit, into the Court, where they were ro wait upon the 
Prieſts at the Altar of burnt-offering ; and, at prefent, into the Tas 
bernacle, to rake it down and ſer it up. 


16 For they are wholiy givenunto me » from among 
the children of Urae] : in ſtead of fuch as open every *c<. ;.r3 

womb, * cven in fead of the firſt-born ofall the children Exod.13:>; 
of Iſrael have | taken them unto me. Luk: 


- 3 3523, 
n By the peoples conſent, as well as taken ( as it follows ) by my 
choice and command. See Numb. 3. g. 


17 * Forall the ficſt-born of the children of Ifrael +p,,q.r; 
are mine, beth man and beaſt : on the day that I ſmote «, 12, rs. 
every tirſt-born in the land of Egypt, I ſanGified them ch. 3. 13- 
for my ſelf, | Luk.2, 23- 
18 And Ihave taken the Levites for all the firft-born 
of the children of Iſrael. * ch 
19 And * L have given the Levites asa | gift to Aaron, + Heb. $7 
and to his ſons, from among the children of Iſrael,to do ver. 
the ſervice ofthe children of Iſrael o, in the tabernacle 
p of the congregation, and * to make an atonement for * ch.1. 53 
the chiidren of Iſrael q 3 that chere be no plague r among 
the children of Iſrael, when the children of Irael come 
nigh unto the ſanctuary. 
0 (7. e. ) To ſerve God in their ſtead and behalf, to do whar 0+ 


in it, ſee on verſe 15, q Not by offering Sacrifices, which the 
Prietts alone mighr do, bur by affiſting the Prieſts in that ex- 
piatory work, and by a diligent performance of all the parts of 


lp 


2 A \ their 


we 


_— eo where NOUOMB E R S. Ch: 
their office, whereby God was pleaſed both with them and w1 ap.  W.: 
he 4 Is o 4 as a -_— why God Ns 3 _— _ the LOGO will command concerhing you 4 F—" "Ch 
k out the Tabernacle, th . | havin romiſed t 4 } : 
gin it, and not ſuffer any of the Mn huge Hrs ot watch and | dreſs to him in Aiicult caſcs anſwer and dire&@ him upon his ad- 
anvich holy things, which if they did, it would ar it,ormed-| And theLORD fj ; 
a plague upon them. _ ; uld certainly bring | 10, Sreakunto th pake unto Moſes, ſaying 
20 And Moſes and Aaron, and all the co jon | man of 0 the children of Iſrael, ſaying, If any 
children of Iſrael, did to the Levites accordin ſon of a dead bod poſterity, ſbal be unclean by rea 
unto all that the LORD comman 364 Moſes Se urns at bow ws y, or be ina journey zi afar off & et 
the _ {o did the children of Iſrael unto them 5 | 7 Under ou mo _ et _— LORD. a he 
. : i” anc 7 _ 

.21 nd the Levites were purified 5, and they waſhed derances ef ib aa _ t argc ch think that other hin- mane 
their clothes: and Aaron offered them as an offerin tas orby any other ſuch prom Bay if one be hindred by | dap. 
before the LORD, and Aaron made an aton f . of = a p_ both from the nature of = Fannels ; Which may 
them, to cleanſe them. ement LOor = Sag —_— iS = ſame ia other caſes po 1 Boaep reaſon 

s Which was d , : 7 SIM : e to other caſes, 2 Chron. 3 e applica- 
R And after that went the LR intel dbtheir (or they ſhalt & ourtsenth day of theſecond month at e 
vice in thetabernacle of the congregati ” of hy eep it, andeat it with unleavened b Yen *2 Chron, 
Store bi : gregation,before Aaron, itter herbs. ed bread and 3: 2,15 
: M F EIOre his {ans t:; as the LORD had commanded 12 * They that 1 : 215o 
OIes.CO 1 - : | al 1CaVe 5 : 
_ 6 ape tel HEL eriees, ſo did they unto them. | * nor break any bone © "mg of it unto the morning 7, * Exod. 
| 2 preſence, and by their dire&ion and appointment. nances of th {ih i. + TE ding toall the © ll. T2. 10 
I *; Chron wy, Thi ye cri po : pake unto Moſes, laying, [ But thorns bk he. ſhal keep it. "Exod 
{4 : $ is it that belongeth unto, th 58 £5. WH rn it before that ti Le 
| 23. 24: | 'g o the Levites: from 12 But the man 7 _ een 
Num. 1.3. CORY and five years 01d s and upward, they ſhal go in and forbeareth ons zs clean,and is not in a journe FEEL9I0 
+ Heb. o | £0 wait upon the ſervice of the tab { to keep the paſfoyer cy 
Þ Dock gregation tabernacle of the con- | foul ſhal be cut off from his peop! fat even the ſame 
EET of Oo am aren+.-4- 3. not the offering of the LORD En ecauſe he brought 
Th ©ficb OE And from the age of fifty years they ſhal 7 ceaſe qyrme = bear his fin. appointed Icafon : 
[| - **- waiting upo 2 . 'hrough contempt 
| eur from — ( z: 5" Up _ ſervice thereof x,and (hal ſerve no mOre: impediments, as hadors: ornegleCt, without theſe or any other juſt 
the warfare : &: pon the difficult and cumberſom fthei 14 And if SO 
of the ſer- , 26 But hal niiniſter wi . e part oftheir work. | . 4 And if a ſtranger » (hal fſoj | pY 
. | r with their brethren y in the ta will keep tl p ojourn among yo [. -- Jn 
wice. bernacle of the congregation to k J * EP tne paſſover unto the LORD you, and | 38.26 

WES Sovice: thus ſbal o keep tþe charge, and | *he ordinance of the paſlover F b according ro I 

- diag cheir eh alt thou do unto the Levites, —_ thereof, ſo ſhal he do * * ye "0957 on to the | 
y By way of advi inance, both for t 4 al have one or- * _ 
| y way of advice, _ n_ in a and eaſier works. born tn che "99" he ſtranger, and for bim that was _- | 

The Paſſover kept inthe Wilderneſs on the 7 7 z To wit, a Proſelyte 

ourteenth d, ' bur | 
Frhs By thoſe who were then wot oj Jourweyind jd placdaryyes Fx And * on the day that the tabe 
of the ſecond month, 6--=12, Fhey who otherwiſe neglef i ; ay | up, the cloud o covered the tab rnacle was reared * Exod: 
Death, 13. Proſelytes are to obſerve the ſam S OE 2o ben of the teſtim wo ernacle, namely, th O: 3 | 
ſelf to Iſrael ina Cloud by Day and Fi þb  <kro God manifeſts him- b onyp: and at * even there 5 come © 
when and where to camp, 15-- ire by Night, by which they knew tabernacle, as it were the a was upon the *Exod:1;: 
ND the LORD fpake unto Moſes in the wil the morning. ppearance of fire 9, until 2%: 
; TENT » es in the wil- | 9 Of whi h 40: 38. 
derneſs of Sinai, in the firſt month of the ſecond the Tent of _ _ Exod. 13. 12, p Or, The Tabernacle t 40: 3 
year a, after they were Co! X ce, SEIATY Fetimony, 7: e: that part of the T owards or above 
faying come out of the land of E _— _ - aan. or the Ark of the racks in which 
. dy pillar ood, Levir: 16: ny ; for there th 
3 And therefore b : , God's ſpecial 7: 16: 2, This was a the 

not till rhe Bond wan ' IONS of the people, which was | 7+ io, Age BE: qonrng with and providence Pur ogy _—__— Con *Ia: 

CR SE« Gpecial cal &; & : , 2. Bur it is placed afterir, —_ ao. lo 5.39 And this cloud was eafj] I Ex6d : ne by '$ 

after it, and which is here _ : the Paſſover, which happened wehdence in that of oth by its peculiar figure and al 20 inguifhed 59- 

Wild © mgporaaipad we for the keeping * che Paſt eof he men- | dire themiiives and the AN they mighr better | Sang yp 

ilderneſs, which was done b the Paſſover in the 16 Sol e1r journeys or ſtations by j ON 
they had not been obliged ut once, and without this command 1t was alway : the cloud cover = 

land - _ See — = "oP it at all till they came to the _- —— office by night. ered it by day and 

#E20d.12, 2 Letthe children 0 + *&h when the clou 

b end felon f Iſrael alſo keep * the paſſover at ——_ then after that ringt-roan of 4 wx $09--0u 
v. 43-5. 2 Tn the fourteenth : andin the place wl 1 of Iſrael journey- 

=-a-ed, ſhal keep it in its app day of —_— + = even, ye png Inc! pieced ehetr cob abode, there ho 

"ay - . p : accordin 7 Or, Aſcended ; . 

+ Heb. be- the rites of 6 ir, and ac g to all : ed on high, aboy 

tween the thereof ſhal ye keep it cording to all the ceremonies ——_ rags ce to all the nes ” ordinary place, by which it 

70 even= \ b So far as concerned the Lamb and the un] dren of If! 1 nas pg of the LORD s tl 7 

angs. for there were ſome things pecul e unleavened bread, &c rael jeurneyed ; and ; 5 the Chil- 

that the ngs peculiar to the firſt Paſſover in E » ©. | the LORD th ; , at the command 

on ther, 2 omrtr fareS bv haſte, with their loins girded wo 0 move dh. icched, * as lon h __ 

Ri heir feet, and their ftaff in their hand which girded, their ſhoes upon the tabernacle, the S asthe cloud abode 

ites or Ceremonies of the Paſſover b ich were not properly ; The motion or ſtay « 1ey reſted in the tents. * x Cor: 

preſent condition, being then Mp ut circumſtances of their | God, becauſe it w ay of the cloud is fitly called th To: 2 

Qs. Whence had they Meal to - ers and ready to depart, & ok + waa To a ſignification of God's will e command — oo 

They were not make unleavened bread 2 nſw. and properly 1s. and their dur 

+ now in haſte, and ſo had time e ? Anſw. 19 And when t& Y, 

out of the land of Midian by the hel nough to procure | b 1e cloud ÞF tarried| 
win lived y p of Moſes his F . ernaclemany d ong upon th 
ived there, which land was notfar fi O ather-in-law h y days, then the childr c the ta- 
pears f om 5 7 4 ar from Horeb or Sinar, as ap- | © uy of the LORD rv, and jou und Iſrael keptthe 7 Heb: 
4 And Moſes ſpake un : + ( 5: e: ) The command © rneyed not. prolonged, 
they ſhould keep the over. e children of Iſrael that | fegiy raked below ger ITT ahes, that. they | 
5 And they kept the paſſover on tl long in oy ara Andrhis, Pink he, COTE owes 

of the firſt month at even. i ene fourteenth day places, and 9 _ uich was tedious to them = rey tho' it were Tor: « 

according to all that th n, in the wilderneſs of Sinai : againſt their NED OO they obe Oe cmge ed, or p 

+» - —» oil WIS {5 | in fo obſtnare a people, ir sf Which becauſe it was remarkable forthe 

| I 1ere, as an inſt , itis ſo largely and particular kable "ther, 
* ch. 5.3.. 6 And there wer oe inſtance of their obedic particularly mentioned 
p OE , the T the dead body ofa wma _ = o were * defiled by wah And /e: aqeg wed cheir Apolacy and Dif en of the 
| ſoul of ® the paſlove c, toat they could o1t was when tl - 1lobedience. 
rd 6 not ke 1e cloud 
man. fo P ow on that day : and they came befo LP the tabernacle; according to tl was a few days upon 
ch.6. 7. + Rs : (- 4907 _orom on that day re Mo- | LORD they abode in their —_ commandment of the 
ouch of a dead Mi CO S, an : 

Eo 8 Boca - earl or kivg belonging to it. See gegen of the LORD they jo d according to the 

of hol ; things. Sec Levit: 7: 20: ap ons were prohibited to eat ns nd /o it was when the cl #, urneyed. 

their _ : 7:20; and 22:3. e For reſolution of unto the morning , and that wy _ abode from even 

7 thoſe men ſai . morning,then nas cloud was taken up i + Heb.was 
dead body of a man : _—_— him, We are defiled by the by abfroken rang Aon eg Whether it was by da eons 
we may not off ore are we kept back O oud was taken u : Jon 

y not offer f an offe c , that 22 Or whether p, they journ 
appointed ſeaf; ring of the LORD © in i it were two days eyed. 
DO hich _ _ among the children of bac "ban year, _ the cloud tarried —_ ng s month, or a 
1 we negleQ, we muſt b ; : maining thereon, tl . e tabernac] 
theſe circumſtances, w 4 e cut off, and if we keep it j EreON, tne children of I * Cle, TC- 
g(#e:) The Paſſover, abr b* aero off. What ſhall hy fps vas, and journeyed not ; but eng abode in their 

eaten in obedience to God's nga m_ e it was both killed and they journeyed. n 1t was taken up, *F 

as a thank-offering to God for his great "om God's honour, and Ng. Atthe commandment ofthe LOR ng | 

8 And Moſes ſaid "RG the tents,and LORD they reſted in © 

unto th . 2at5,and at the co y reſted in 
em, Stand ſtill, and I will | commandment of the LORD they | 
journeyed | 


. 


Tr 


40 


"Chap. X1. 


N U M 


:d by the fleſh you defire an ; | 
fivel from the wia:h-of Gol. Sandifying is oft uſed for preparing, 
as Jer: 6. 4. and 12.3-and 51. 28.  # Not ſecretly in your cloſets, 
but openly and impudent!y 1n the doors of your tents, wer: 10. 
calling Heavenand earth to witneſs your cries and complaints. 

19 Ye ſhall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five 
days, neither ren Cays, nor twenty days : 

20 But even a | whole moneth, untill it come out at 
your noſtrils &, and it be loathſome unto you /; becauſe 
ye have deſpiſed the LORD #» which 15 among you », 


+ Heb. 
moneth of 
days. 


eat, ver: 33, 34. your ſouls may be | 


| FJ $ :, RE 51 
B E R S. BEE 
26 Butthere remained two of #he men in the camp z, 
the name of the one 2vas Eldad, & the name of the other 
Medad: and the ſpirit reſted upon them (and they were 
of them that were written «, but went not out unto the 
tabernacle) and they propheſied in the camp. PE 
2 Not going to the Tabernacle, as the reſt did, either modeſtly 
declining that high employment from a humble ſenſe of their own 
inſufficiency, as Saul did, 1 Sam: 10, 22. or not having ſufficient or 
ſeaſonable notice to repair thither : Or, being detained in the camp, 


and in their dwellings, » hether by uncleannefs,or ſickneſs, or ſome 
urgent occaſion, not without God's ſp«:cial providence, that ſo the ' 


2nd have wept before him, ſaying, Why came we forth 
out of Egypt 0? 

*k Whick 0 loathed and violently vomited up frequently doth. 
1 Being glutted with the abundance of ir. Thus God deſtroys 
them by granting their deſires, and turns even their bleſſings intro 
he alſo fell into the ſame fin with the people, 7. e. impatience and 
ſons and perſons, and between Moſes his fins of infirmity, and the 
peoples preſumpruous and cft repeated provocations. 7 (7. e.) You 


and other things, and have preferred the leeks, onions, ©: of 
Egypt before them all: You have {lighted and diſtruſted his promiſes 
and providence after ſo long and large experience of it. » Who 
is preſent and reſident with you to obſerve all your carriages, and 
to punith your offences. This is added as a g:eat aggravation of 
the crime,” to ſin in the prefence of the Judge. o Why did God 
do us ſuch an injury ? Why did we ſo foolitbly follow and obey 
him in coming forth? | 
2: And Moſes faid, * The people amongſt whom I 
am,are ſix hundred thouſand footmen p, & thou haſt ſaid, 
* ] will give them fleſh that they may eat a whole month. 
p Fit for war, Exod: 12.37. befides women, children, &'c: Thar 
Moſes ſpeaks this as doubting or diſtruſting God's words, is evident 
enough from wer: 22, 23. And that Moſes was not remarkably pu- 
| niſh:d for this as he was afterward for the ſame fin, Numb: 20.next 
| to God's good pleaſure may be imputed to the different circum- 
| ſtances of this and that ſin . This was the firſt great offence of this 
kind, and therefore more eaſily paſſed by, that was after warning 
and againſt more light and experience. This ſeems to have been 
ſpoken ſecretly in Moſes his br att; That openly and publickly be- 
fore the people, and to their ſcandal, and therefore it was fit ro be 
openly & ſeverely puniſhed to prevent the contagion of that examyle. 
22 Shall the flocks and the herds be ſlain for them, 
to ſuffice them q, or ſhall all the fiſh of the fea be gather- 


ed together for them to ſuffice chem ? 
q Will they be ſufficient for them? or where ſhall they have 


? | 
"M0 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, *Is the LORDS 
hand waxed ſhorty? thou ſhalt ſee now whether my 


word ſhall come to paſs unto thee, or not. 

y (5. e.) Leſs able to work ſuch great and glorious miracles as I 
have done. 

24 And Moſes went outs and told the people the 


words of the LORD, and gathered the feventy men 


*Iſa: 50.2. 
& 59. 1, 


the tabernacle «. 

s Out of the tabernacle into which he entered to receive God's 
anſwers from the Mercy-ſeat, Numb: 7. 89. #t Either they are cal- 
led ſeventy from the ſtated number, though two of rhem w-:e lack- 
ing, ver: 26. as the Apoſtle. aie clled the twelve, Mat: 26. 20. when 
one of that number was abſ:nt: Or, he is ſaid to h:ve gathered 
them, when he gave command to gather them. « Partly thar the 
awe of God might be imprinted upon thei- hearts, that they mighr 
more ſeriouſly undertake, and more faithfully manage their high 
employment, partly to gain them the more author'ty and reſpe& 
from the people, and principally, becauſe that was the place where 
God martifeted himſelf, and gave his bleſſings, and therefore there 
he would beſtow his ſpirit upon them. 

25 And the L*)RD came down in a cloud, and ſpake 
unto him, and took of the ſpiric that was upon him, and 
gave it unto the ſeventy eideis; and it came to paſs, 
that when the. ſpirit reſted upon them x, they prephe- 


fGr: ada. fied y, and Þ did not ceaſe ||. 

ed, or pro= & (z.e.) Not ny moved them for a time, but took up his ſettled 

ceeded uw abode with them, becauſe the uſe and end of this gitt was not tem- 

further, porary but perpetual. y (7. e.) Diſc urſe! ot the wo'd and wo: ks 
of God in a ſingular and marvellous manner, as the Prophets did. 
So this word is uſed, 1 Sam: 10. 5, 6. Foel 2. 28. Aiﬀts 2. 17. 1 Cor: 
14- 3- Yet were they not hereby conſtituted Prophers or Teachers, 
but civil Magiſtrates and Rulers, who rogether with the ſpirit of 
government, which is here ſufficiently implied,received allo the ſpirit 


ple, that God had called them to that empl -yment and would be with 
them in it, as it was with Sau! upon the ſame occaſion, 1 Sam 10. 
10. || Either for that d:y, they continued in that exerciſe all that 
day, and, it may be, all the night too, as it is ſ:id of Saul, i Sam: 19. 
24. Or, afterwards alſo, to note that this was a continued gift con- 
ferred upon them to enable them the better to diſcharge their Ma- 
giſtracy; which was more expedient for them than for the Rulers 
of other people, becauſe the Jews were under a Theocracy or the 
; Government of God, and even their civi! controverſies were de- 
| cided out of that word of God which the Prophets expounded, and 
in their wilderneſs condition-they had frequent occaſions of ſeeking 
counſel from God, which was the work of Prophets, and they were 
to determineall things agreeably to the mind and will of God, which 
therefore they were obliged ro ſtudy. Others tranſlate the words, 
and they added not: So the ſenſe is, they propheſied only this day for 
ant aſſurance of vocation to, and due qualification for their work, 
bur afterwards they propheſied no more ; the gift of prophecy ceaſ- 
ed in them, and oaly the ſpirit of goyernment reſted upon them. 


curſes. whileſt he deals much more favourably with Moſes, though | 


murmuring. But God wil make a gieat difference between per- | 


have lightly eſteemed his bounty and manifold bleffings in Manns | 


z of the elders of the people, and ſet them round about 


of Prophecy, as a ſign and ſeal both ro themſelves and to the peo- | 


Macle might be more evident, and their call and authority more 
unqueltionable to all the people. 2 To wit, in. a bock or paper 
by Moſes, who by God's direQion nominated the fitteſt and worthi= 
e{t perſons. | | 

z7 And there ran a young man, and told Moſes band 
ſaid Eldad and Medad do prophchie in the camp. | 

b Fearing leaſt his authority ſhould be diminiſhed by their pro« 
pheſying; And thereby, as by the ſignal given ar this time, taking 
authority to themſelves without his know letgeand conſent. 

28 And Jothua the fon of Nun the ſervant of Moſes, 
: one of his young men c anſwered, and ſaid, * My iord *Sce Luk 
| Moſes, forbid them 4+ 9- 49- 


"_y | 
| ©c Or, one of his choice miniſters, a choſen or excellent perſon : 


which may be empharically added, to note that even great and 
good men may mittake and mij-ju:ge ab ut the works of God. 
Or, from his youth, as the words will bear, and the Chaldee, Syr. Cc. 
render it. So it may be ad-ed as a reaſon why Joſbua above others 
were concerned for Moſes his honour and autho:iry. d He teared 
either ſchiſm, or ſedition, or that by their uſurpation of authority 
independently upon Moſes and ſeparately from him, his power and 
eſteem might be leſſened, as the next words ſhew. 

29 And Moſes faid unto him, Envieff thou for my 
ſake e? would God that all the LORDS people were 
prophetsf, and that the LORD would part his ſpirit u= 
pon them« 

e Art thou grieved becauſe the gifts and graces of God are im- 
parted to others belides me? Compare Joh: 3. 26. f He ſaith Pro- 
phets, not Rulers, for that he knew was abſurd and impoſſible. 

39 And Moſes gat him into the camp g, he and the 
elders of Iſrael. 


g Among the people, to exerciſe the gifts and authority now, 
or formerly rec:ived. 


21 And there went fortha * wind from the LORD * Exod: 
h, and brought quails 3 from the ſea &, and let them fall 76: 23 
by the camp, Þ as it were a days journey on this ſide, ;,.1 200) 
and as it were a days journey on the other fide round a- 40. 


face of the earth /. 
þ (i. e.) An extraordinary and miraculous wind both for its ve- 2% eb 
hemency and for its effetts. 7 A delicious and very nouriſhing 7” 
food, which, conſidering their greedy appetite, and the newnelſs 
and plenty of it, diſpoſed them to ſurfers and other diſtempers of 
| bocy, and prepared the way for the following plague. God gave 
them quails once before, Exod: 16. 13. but neither in the ſame 
| quantity, nor with the ſame defign and effe& as now. &k Princi« 
' pally from the Red ſea, and both ſides of it; where, by the report 
of ancient heathen Writers, they were then in great numbers, and, 
, no doubt were wonderfully increaſed by God's ſpecial providence 
| for this very occaſion. #/ Not as if the quails did cover all the 
' ground two cubits high for a days jou:ney on each ſide of the 
| camp, for then there had been no place left where they could ſpread 
| them all abroad round about the camp, as it is ſaid they did, wer: 32. 
bur the meaning is, that the quails came and fell down roi:nd a- 
bout the camp for a whole days journey on each fide of it, and 
that in all that ſpace they lay here and there in great heaps, which 
were oft-times two cubits high. 

32 And the people ftood up m all that day, and all 
that night », and all the rext day, and they gathered 
the quaiis: he that gathered leaſt, gathered ten homers os 
and they ſpread them all abroad for themſelves p, round 
about the camp. | | | 

m Or rather roſe up, which word is oft uſed for attempting or be« 
ginning to do any buſineſs. » Some at onetime, and ſome at the 
other, ' and ſome, through the greedineſs or diffidence, at both times. 
0 (i.e.) Ten aſs loads. Which if it ſeem incredible, you muſt 
conſider, 1. That the gatherers here were not all the people, which 
could not be without great confuſion, and other inconveniencies, 
bur ſome on the behalf of all, poſſibly one for each family, or the 
like, while the reſt were exerciſed abour other neceſſary things. So 
the meaning is not, that every 1ſ/raelite had ſo much for his ſhare, 
| but that every colleftor gathered ſo much for the family, or others 
by whom he was intrufted, 2. That the people did not gather for 
their preſent uſe only, but for a good while ro come, as we ſhall 
ſee; and being greedy and diſtruſtful of God's goodneſs, it is not. 
ſtrange if they gathered much more than they needed. 3. That 
the word, rendered homers, may ſignifie heags, as it doth, Exod: 8. 
14. Judg: 15. 16. Hab: 3: 15, and zen is oft put for many, and ſo 
the ſence 1s, that every one gathered ſeveral heaps. If yer the 
number ſeems incredible, it muſt be further known. 4. That 
heathen and other authors affirm, that in thrſe eaſtern and ſouthern 
countreys quails are innumerable, ſo that in one pait of 1aly, 
within the compaſs of five mile:, there were taken about an hun- 
dred thouſand of them every day for a moneth together ; and that. 
ſometimes they fly ſo thick over the ſea, that being weary they fall 
mto ſhips, ſometimes in ſuch numbers that they ſink them with 
their weight, as Yarro and Solinus affirm. And Atheneus relates, 
that in Egypt, a country prodigioully populous, as all agree, they 
were in ſuch pl-nty, that all thoſe vaſt numbers of people could 


. Hot conſume them, but were forced to ſalt and keep them for theif 


; future uſe. So that there is no need at all that God ſhould create 
2 A3 17UMCr- 


% 4 
XI 
. Fl. 


PC: 58:26. 


t 
{14uK 


't 
} 
| 
| 


1 


1 


| 
| 


i 
: 
[ 
l 
; 


k 
[ 
Ls 
4 
| 
[ 
! 


| 
| 
| 


! 


| 


| 


j 
| 
| 
| 


Th. 
4 


i 
4 
) 
| 
{ 
[ 
| 
| 
v 
[1 
N 


wit 
Ho 


i 
} 
: 
i 
! 
[| 
a8; 
46 
1h 
; 
i 
1 


: 


| 


"nr 


| 
| 


; 
' 
; 
: 
; 
: 
| 
: 
: 
bi 


| 
: 
: 
: 
[ 


bout the camp, and as it were two cubits bizh upon the t Heb: «* 
it were the) 


lap. XIL. -., 
MW  jonumerablequails for this purpoſe: Whichyet if it were affirmed 
he did, Atheiſts and Ante-ſcripturiſts have no occaſion of triumph, 
ſince they muſt either own the Creation of the World, which 1s a 
far greater Miracle, or aſcribe the produQion of the world to a 
caſual jumble of Atoms, . which is more ſenſeleſs and ridiculous 
than all the fables of the Poets. p Thar ſo they may dry them, 
and ſalt them, and preſerve them for their future uſe, according to 
what they had ſeen and learned in Egypr. 
23 Andwhile the* fleſh was yet between their teeth, 
efre it was chewed q, the wrath of the LORD was 
kindled againſt the people, aud the LORD ſmore the 


People with a very great plague 7. | 

q Heb: cut of, to wit, from their mouths, which is here under- 
ſtood, and expreſſed Joel 1. 5. 7. e. e're it was taken away, as the 
flocks are ſaid to be cut of from the fold, Heb: 3. 17. when they are loſt 
and periſhed. The ſenſe is, before they had done eating their 

uails, which laſted for a moneth, as appears from wer: 20. r Whe- 
ther it was leanneſs ſent into them, Pal: 106.15. whereby the food 
was deprived of its nouriſhing power v hich it hath only from Gods | 
blefling; or ſurfet, a puniſhment moſt ſureable ro their fin, and | 
moſt likely to follow their intemperat defire and uſe of this tood ; 
or the peſtilence, it is not much material: Bur a great and ſore | 
plague unqueſtionably it was. Queſt: Why did God fo ſorely pu- 
niſh the peoples murmuring and complaining for lack of fleſh here, 
when he ſpared them after the ſame fin, Exod: 16? An: Becauſe 
this ſin was a far greater ſin than that, and aggravated with worſe 
circumſtances; as proceeding not from neceſbty, as th t did, when 
as yet they had no food, but from meer luſt and wa::tonneſs, when 
they had Manna conſtantly given them ; as committed after large 
experience of God's care and kindneſs, after God had pardoned 
their former ſins, and after God had in a ſolemn and terrible man- 
| ner made known his laws and duty to them. 
WW Thatis 34 And he called the name of that place*Kibrothhat- 
lhe groves taavah s,becauſe there they buried the people that luſted. 
Bf 1uf. s Heb. the graves of luſt, (3. e.) of the men tht luſted, as it here 
fallows. The abſtra& for the concrete, which is frequent, as po- 
werty, 2 King: 24.14, pride, Pſal: 36. 11. deceit, fins, Prov 13. 6. 
ec: dreams, Jer: 27. 9. are put for men who are poor, ©: proud, Or 
deceitful, or ſinful, or dreamers. And it notes, that this plague did 
not ſeize upon all that did eat of the quails, for then all had been 
deſt:oyed, but only upon thoſe who were inordinate both in the 


NUMBER 6& 


delire and uſe of them. ? - 
25 And the people journeyed from Kibroth-hattaa- 
vah unto Hazeroth :: and} abode at Hazeroth, 


j' Heb; 


h : Of which place ſee on Numb: 33. 17. and Dent: 1. 1. 
"a CHAP. XII. 


Miriam and Aaron murmur againſt Moſes, 1,2, 3. God commandeth him, A- 
aron and Miriam t9 come to the Tabernacle, which they did, 4, 5. God 
rebuketh Aaron and Mimam, 6-9. Miriam becometh Leprous, 10. 
Aaron humbling himſelf before Moſes, 11, 12. He interceedeth for him, 
13. Miriam remains without the camp ſeven days, 14+ 16. 

AND Miriam and Aaron # ſpake againſt Moſes, be- 

Ca cauſe of the * Ethiopian woman b whom he had 


married, (tor + he had * married an Ethiopian woman. ) 
a Whom God permitted r& murmur againſt their brother, partly 
to exerciſe and diſcover his admirable meckneſs and patience for 
the inſtrution of after-ages: And partly that by this thaki:'g Moſes 
his authority might take the deeper root, and the people might be 
deterred from all ſedition and rebellion againſt him,by this example. 
Miriam ſeems to be firſt named, becauſe ſhe was the chief inſtigatou: 
or firſt mover of the ſedition ; wherefore ſhealſo is more eminently 
puniſhed. b Which was either 1. Zipporah, who 1s here called an 
Ethiopian, in the Hebrew a Cuſbite, becauſe ſhe was a Midianite: The 
word C#ujb being generally uſed in ſcripture, not for Erh;opia pro- 
perly ſo called below Egypt, but for Arabia, as ſome late learned 
men haveevidently proved from 2 King: ig. 9. 2 Chron: 21. 16, Ezek: 
29. 10. and 30.8, 9, Hah: 3.7. and other places. If ſhe be meant, 
as it is commonly conceived, I ſuppoſe they did not quarrel with 
him for marrying her, becauſe that was done long ſince, bur 
for indulging her too much, and being ſwayed by her and her re- 
lations, by whom they might think he was perſwaded to make this 
innovation, and to chuſe ſeventy Rulers, as he had been formerly, 
Exod: 18, By which co-partnerſhip in government they thoughr 
their authority and reputation much diminiſhed, eſpecially when 
no notice was taken, nor uſe made of them in the choice, but al] 
was done by the direQion of Moſes, and for his aſſiſtance in the 
government. And becauſe they durſt not accuſe God,who was the 
chief Agent in it, they charge Moſes, his inſtrument, as the manner 
of men 1s. Or 2. Some other woman, though not named in Scrip- 
ture, whom he married either whilſt Zipporah lived, or rather be- 
cauſe the was now dead, though that, as many other things, be 
not recorded. For, as the quarrel ſeems to be about h's marrying 
a ſtranger, ſo it is probable it was a late and freſh occaſion about 
which they contended, and not a thing done 40 years ago. And 
it was lawful for him as well as any other to marry an Ethiopian or 
Arabian woman, provided ſhe were, as doubtleſs this woman was, 
a ſincere proſelyte, which were by the law of God 2dmitted to the 
ſame priviledges with the 1ſrazlites, Exod: 12.48. So there might be 
many reaſons why Moſes might chuſe to marry ſuch a perſon ra- 
ther than an Jſaelire, or why God ſo ordered it by his providence, 
either becauſe ſhe was a perſon of eminent worth and vertue, or 
becauſe God intended that the government ſhould not be continued 
in the hands of Moſes his children, and therefore would have ſome 
political blemiſh to be put upon the family, as being ſtrangers by 
one parent. And this they here urge as a blemiſh to Moſes alſo. 


wy 2 And they ſaid, Hath the LORD indeed ſpoken on- 
*Mic:6.4. ly by Moſes ? * hath he not ſpoken alſo by us c? And 
the LORD heard zt 4. 
c Are not we Prophets as well as he? So Aaron was made, Exod: 
4. 15, 16. and ſo Miriam is called, Exod: 15. 20. See alſo Mic: 6. 4. 
And Moſes hath debaſed and mixed the holy Seed, which we have 
not done. Why then ſhould he take all power to himſe'f, and 
make rulers as he pleaſeth, without conſulting us in the caſe : 


Chap, XII, 


3 (Now the man Moſes was very meek c, above all 


the men which ere upon the face of the earth. 

c This is added as the reaſon why Moſes took no notice of their 
reproach, but was one that heard it not, .and v hy God did io ſpee- 
dily and ſeverely plead Moſes his cauſe, becauſe he did not avenge 
himſeJf. Queſt: 1. Did it become Mo/zs thus to commer.d | imſelt ? 
Anſw: 1. The holy pen-men of Sc1ipture are not to be mciaftir<d or 
cenſured by other profane writers, becauſe they are guided by 
ſpecial InſtinQ, in every thing they write; And as they oft-times 


; publiſh their own and their near relations greateſt faults, where it 
! » . . 

' may be uſeful to the honour of God, and the edification of the 
, Church in after ages, ſo it is not ſtrange if for the ſame reaſons 
: ſometimes they commend themſelves, eſpecially v hen they are 


forced to it by the inſolence and contempr of their adverſa: ics, 
which was Moſes his caſe here, in which caſe St Paul allo commends 
himſelf, 2 Cor: 21. 5. and 12.11, 12. Which they might the bet- 
ter do, becauſe all their writings and carriage made it evi..ent to 
all men, that they did not this out of vain-glory, and har they 
were exalted above the affeation of mens praiſes, and the dead 
of mens reproaches. =. This might be added, as ſome other c'avſes 
were,by ſome ſucceeding Prophet, which was no diſparagement to 


| the authority of the holy Scriptures, ſeing itis all written by one 


hand, though divers pens be uſed by it.» MYweſt: 2. How was Moſes 
ſo meek, when we oft-times read of his anger, as Exod: 11. 18. and 
16. 20. and 32. 19, Levit: 10. 16.%Numb: 16. 15. and 20. 10, 17. 
compared with Pſal: 106. 32, 33+? As 1. The meekeſt men upon 
earth are provoked ſometimes, yea oftner than Moſes was. .2. True 
meekneſs doth not exclude all anger, but only ſuch as is unjuſt or 
immoderate or implacable. Moſes was and ought to be angry where 
ng _ offendedand diſkonoured,as he was in almoſt all the places 
alledged. 


4 And the LORD ſpake ſuddenly f unto Moſes.and 
unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out g ye three 
into the tabernacle of the congregation, and they three 
came Our, 

f Partly to ſhew his great reſpe& unto Moſes and unto the grace 
of meekneſs; And partly to ſtifle the beginnings of the ſedition, 
that this example might not ſpread amongſt the people, who had 
too much of that lJeaven among them. g To wit, out of your pri- 
vate dwellings, and from amongſt the people, both that you may 
not infett them by ſuch ſcandalous words, and partly that you may 
know, my pleaſure and your own doom. 

5 And the LORD came down in the pillar of the 
cloud, and ſtood in. the door of the tabernacle þ, and 
called Aaron and Miriam, and they both came forth. 

h Where they ſtood without, not being admitted into the Ta- 
bernacle, as Aaron. uſed to be: Wh.ch is noted as a fign of God's 
diſpleaſure. 

6 And he ſaid, Hear now my words: if there be a 
prophet among you ;, I the LORD will make my ſelf 
known unto him in a viſion &, end will ſpeak unto him 
in a dream]: 

z If you be Prophets, as you pretend, yet know there is a diffe= 
rence among Prophets, nor do I put equal authority and honour 
upon all of them. k Whereby God repreſents things to the mind 
of a Prophet when he is awake, as Gen: 15. 1. and 46. 2. Dan: 8. 18. 
and 10.8. I By which God manifeſts his mind to them in a dream, 
as Gen: 20. 3. an4 28. 12. 

7 My ſervant Moſes is not fo, * whos faithful in all , Saks ©: 
mine houſe m. . TOTP 

» (i.e) Whom T have ſet over all my houſe, 7. e. My Church ** 
and people, and therefore over you, and who hath diſcharged his 
Office fairhfuily, and nor partially and ſelf-ſcekingly, as you falſly 
accuſe him. 

8 With him will I ſpeak * mouth to mouth », even 
apparently o, and not in dark ſpeeches p, and the ſimi- + p,,g. 
licude of the LORD g, ſhall he behold : wherefore then ;1. x5. 
were not ye afraid to ſpeak againſt my ſervant r Moſes? 

2 (7. e.) Diſtinaly, by an articulate voice; immediatly not by 
an interpreter, nor by ſhaddows and repreſentations in his fancy,as 
it 1s in viſions and dreams; and familiarly. This is called peaking 
face to face, 2 Epiſt: of Joh: ver: 12. and 3 Epiſt: wer: 14. +0 lJainly 
and certainly. p Not in parables, fimilitudes, riddles, dark re- 
ſemblances; as by ſhewing a boiling pot, an Almond Tree, &c, to Je- 
remy, a charior with wheels, &c. to Ezekiel. q Not the face or cſ- 
ſence of God. which no man can ſee and Jive, Exod: 33. 20. it be- 
ing inviſible, Col: 1. 15. and never ſeen by man, John 1. 18. but 
ſome lingular manifeſtation of his glorious preſence, as Exod: 33. 

IT, 20, &c. and 34. 5, &Cc. Deut: 34. 10. Yea the Son of God ap= 
peared to him in an humane ſhape, which he took up for a time, 
that he might give him a fore-taſte of his future incarnation. 
r Who is ſo in ſuch an eminent and extraordinary manner. 

' 9 And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt 
them, and he departed 5s. 

s From the door of the Tabernacle, in token of his great diſ- 


pleaſure, not waiting for their anſwer, and judging them unworth 
of any further diſcourſe. ing F 


10 And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle *, 
and * behold, Miriam became leprous s, white as ſnow * Denr- 


x : and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and behold, ſhe 24. g. 
Was leprouse | FF; 


# Nor from the whole Tabernacle, for then they muſt have re- 
moved, but from that partof the Tabernacle, whither it was come, 
to that part which was dire&ly over the Mercy-ſcat, where it con- 
ftantly abode. « She, and not Aaroy, either becauſe ſhe was firſt or 
chief in the tranſgreſſion; or becauſe God would not have his wor= 
ſhip either interrupted or diſhonoured, which it muſt have been, 
if Aaron had been Jeprous. x This kind of leproſie was the moſt 
virulent and incureable of all, See Exod: 4. 6. 2 Kings 5, 27. ' Ic 


d (i,e.) Obſerved their words and carriage to Moſes, 


's true, when the leprofie began in a particu'ar part, and thence 
ſpread it {elf over all the fleſh by degrees, and in Jaf made it all 


white 


CITI nr” Er eye 
WL 


wy bake Anh _—_ 


Ch: 


TToc 


* ch. 
16,24 


—— 
FR. 


Chap. , © : | | 
journeyed : they kept the charge of the LORD, atthe 
commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moſes. 

CHAP. om ES 

y , lucr commanded to be made; with a direfion to what 
Rn and with what ſucceſs they jhould be uſed, 

you Io- The Iſ-aclites remove ts Paran : The order in which they go, 

I four Moſes endeavours to get Hobab his Father-in-Law along with 

him, 29-="-32. Moſes his Prayer and Bleſſing when the Ark was remo- 

wed and ſet down again, 33=-==36. 
AND the LOKD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

2 Make thee two trumpets « of filver b : of .an 
whole piece c ſhalt thou make them, that thou mayeſt 
uſe them for the calling of the aſſembly, and for the 
journeying of the camps. 

a For Aaron's two Sons: though afterwards the number of the 
trumpets was much increaſed, as the number of the Prieſt: alſo 
was. See 2 Chron 5.12. Theſe trumpets were ordained, both for 
ſignification of the great dury of Miniſters, to wit, to preach the 
word ; and for uſe, as here follows. þ A meta] pu'e and precious 
and giving a clear ſound. « See Exod: 25: 31, Numb: 8: 4. 

2 And when * they 4 ſhal blow with them e, al! the 
aſſembly ſhal aſſemble themſelves to thee at the door of 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 

d (i.e. ) The Prieſts by comparing this with verſe 8. e(7.e.) 
With both of them, by comparing this with the next verſe. 

4 And if they blow but with one irumper, then the 
princes which are heads of the thouſands of 7irael, (bal 
gather themſelves unto thee. : 

5 When ye blow an alarm e, then the camps that lie 
on the ecaſt-part, ſhal go forward. 

e To wit, once, as appears from werſe 6. 

6 When ye blow an alarm the ſecond time, then the 
camps that lie on the ſouth-ſide, ſhal take their journey: 
they ſhal blow analarm for their journeys f- 


f As a ſign for them to march forward, and conſequently for the 
reſt to follow them, which iseaſily underſtood'out of thele words. 

7 But when the congregationis to be gathered toge- 
ther, ye thal blow: but ye ſhall not ſound an alarm. 

8 And the ſons of Aaron,the prieſts, ſha) blow with 
the trumpets g : and they ſhall be to you for an ordi- 
nance forever throughout your generations. 

g To oblige them to the greater regard and obſervance, asif God 
himſelf had called them. 

9 And ifye go to war in your land againſt the ene- 
my that oppretteth you, then ye ſhal blow an alarm 
with the trumpets þ, and ye ſhal be remembred before 
the LORD your Gcd, and ye ſhal be ſaved from your 
enemies z. 

h Which was pra&iſed accordingly. See Numb. 31. 6. 2 Chron. 13. 
12. i If you uſe this ordinance of God with truſt and dependance 
upon God for help, which condition is neceſſarily to be underſtood 
from divers other Scriptures, where it is exprefled. 

* ch:29:1. 10 Alſo * inthe days of your gladneſs &,and in your 
1 Chr0:15: ſolemn days /, and in the beginnings of your months 
— Ek ;. m, ye ſhal blow with the trumpets over your burnt-of- 
1:.&7. 6. ferings, and over the ſacrifices of your peace-ofterings, 
& 29. 26: that they may beto you for a memorial before your God 
_ 3*'0: 3: IT am the LORD your God. 

ch, 12. þ (#. e. ) Days appointed for rejoycing and thankſgiving to God, 
35- either for former mercies, or for ſucceeding deliverances, as Efth, 
9+ 18, &c. Compare Hof. 2. 11. / Your ſtated and conſtant feſtivals. 
-m Of which ſee, Pſal: 81: 3. n Thar God may remember you for 
good to accept and bleſs you, as that phraſe oft ſignifies. 


:r Andit came to pals on the twentieth «ey of the 
ſecond month, in the ſecond year, that the cloud was 
taken up from off the: tabernacle of the teſtimony. 

* ch. 2.9, 72 And the children of Ifrael took * their journeys 
16,24, 31. Out of the wilderneſs of Sinai, and the cloud reſted in 
the wilderneſs of Paran o: 


_ © From which they travelled to other places, and then returned 
into it again, Numb. 12 16. 


13 Andthey firſt cook their journey, according tothe 
commandment of the LORD by the hand of Moſes. 
14 * In the firſt place went the ſtandard of the camp 


TJoel2:15. 


. 2.3. of the children of Judah,according totheir armies: and 
*ch.;. , Over his hoſt yas * Nahſhon the ſon of Amminadab. 
+ 15 And over the hoſt of the tribe of the children of 

Ifſachar, was Nethaneel the ſon of Zuar. - 
16 And over the hoſt of the tribe of the children of 
Zebulun, was Eliab the ſon of Helon. 
*ch.1.5r 17 And*the tabernacle was taken down, and the 


« . 
kan 4-24, ſons of Gerſhon, and the ſons of Merari ſet forward, * 
; bearing the tabernacle, 


ch.z. 10 18 And the* ſtandardof the camp of Reuben ſet for- 
ward according to their armies: and over his hoſt was 
Elizurthe fon of Shedeur. 
_ 19 And over the hoft of the tribe of the children of 
Cn: 


4: 4. Simeon, was Shelumiel the ſon of Zuriſhaddai. 


A 20 And overthe hoſt of the tribe of the children of 
ies, ara Gad, was Eliaſaph the ſon of Deuel. 

the Mera. 21 And the Kohathites ſet forward, bearing the * 
ms ſanctuary, and || the other p did ſet up the tabernacle a- 


gainſt they came, 


NUMBE R S. 


# 2 0 = - 
Chap. X: | 
p (7. e. ) The Geyſhonites, and Merarites, as 1s evident both frem Il. 
their work and office, which wasto take down and ſet up the T*- "1 
bernacle, Numb. 3. 25-----26. and 4. 22-----33. and from wer. 17. 
who therefore marched after the firſt camp, a good diſtance from j 
and before the Kohathites, that they might prepare the Taternacle f 
for the reception of its utenſils, which the Kohathites brought ſome | 
time after them. 


22 And * the ſtandard of the camp of the children of * ch:z: 18| 
Ephraim ſet forward according to their armies: and 0- il 
ver his hoſt as Eliſhama the ſon of Ammihud. 
23 And over the hoſt of the tribe of the childrea of 
Manaſfeh, was Gamaliel the ſon of Pedahzur. 
24 And over the hoſt of the tribe of the children of 
Benjamin, was Abidan the fon of Gideonis» | 

25 Ard * the ſtandard of the camp of the children »* ch. 3:4 
of Dan ſet forward which was the rereward of all the , 
camps throughout their hoſts, and over his hoſt was A- 
hiezer the ſon of Ammiſhaddai. 

O 


"4 


$ | 
Fi 
” 
! 


! 

{ 
+ | 
1 
T | 


26 Andover the hoſt ef the tribe of the children 
Aſher, vas Pagiel the fon of Ocran, 

27 And over the hoſt of the tribe of the children of 
Napheali, as Ahira the ſon of Enan. 

28 F Thus ?erethe journeyings 4 of the children of , x,y, 
Ifrael, accordinf to their armies when they ſer torward, 7zeſe. 

q ( 5.e. ) In this manner and order they marched. 

29 And Moſes ſaid unto Hobab,the ſon of Raguel r the 
Midianite, Moſes his father in law s, Weare journeying | 
unto the place of which the LORD ſaid, I will give it q 
you: come thou with us, and * we will do thee good : 
for the LORD hath ſpoken good concerning I1rael. 

r Called alſo Revel, Exod. 2. 18. who ſeems to be the ſame who is 
called Jethro, Exod. 3. 1. it being uſual in Scripture for one perſon to 
have two or three names. And therefore this Hobab is not fethro,but 
his fon, which may ſeem more probable, becauſe Jethro was o1d & un- 
fit for trave], and defirous,as may well be thought, ro die in his own 
Country,whether he returned,Exed.18.27 but Hobab was young, 8 fit- 
ter for theſe journeys, and therefore intreated by Moſes to fray and 
b-ar them company. s Which words are ambiguous,bur ſeem to be= 
long to Raguel,or Revel,not to Kobab, tho' others are of another mind. 

3o And he ſaid unto him, I will nor go r, but I will 
depart to mine own land, and to my kindred. | 

t So he might truly and ſincerely ſay, though after this ſpeech he 
was overcome by the intreaties and perſwaſions of M:jes. Or, he 
did go and ſettle his affairs and afterwards return : for wefind his 
poſterity ſettled among the 1ſraelites. See Fudg.1.16.and 4.11,18, &c. 

31 And he faid,Leave us not, I pray thee, foraſmuch 
as thou knoweſt how we are. to encamp in the wilders 
neſs, and thou mayeſt be to us in ſtead of eyes x. _ 

u Todire&ahd guide us: for though the cloud determined them 
to a general place, yet many particulars might be uncertain and 
unknown to Moſes, wherein Hobab, having long lived in thoſe parts, 
might be able to adviſe him, as concerning the conveniences of 
water for their Cattel, concerning the fafety or danger of the ſeve- 
ral parts by reaſon of Serpents or Wild-beaſts, or Enemies, in the 
paits adjoining to them, that ſo they might guard themſelves better 
againſt them. Or, this is to be underſtood of his direfting them 
not ſo much in their way, as about great and difficult -matrters, 
wherein the counſel he had from God did not exclude the advice 
of men, as we ſee in Hobab's father Jethro, Exod. 18. And it is pro« 
bable, this was the wiſe ſon of a wiſe father. ; 

32 And ir ſhal be if thou go with us, yea, it ſhal be, 
that what goodneſs the LORD ſhal do unto us,the ſame 
will we do unto thee. | 

33 And they departed from the mount of, the LORD 
three days journey x: and the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD wentbefore them y in the three days journey: 
co * {earch out a reſting place z for them. * Deuf: i 

x With continued journeys, only it ſeems moſt probable, that 33. 

the cioud made little pauſes that they might have time for ſleep Jer. 514 2 
and neceſlary refreſhments, which their natures required. And Ezek.20. 
thus all Writers, when they relate the continued journeys of per- 
ſons for many days together,are ro be underſtood with this excepti- 
on. y Not ſo much in place, ſay ſome, for fo it went in the midſt,or 
at leaſt after the firſt camp, as may ſeem from wer. 21. as in office 
and authority, as a general who is ſaid to go before or lead his Ar- 
my, though he do not go in the very firſt place. But others more 
p-« bably rhink, that the Ark, which indeed is not mentioned, ver. 
21. albeit in their lations it was in the middle,where alſo the cloud 
was, yetin their marches it went before them, as alſo the cloud 
did, and ſo the cloud was conſtantly over the Ark whether ir 
ſtood or went, and therefore the Ark is ſaid to go before and di- 
rett them, notas if the Ark could beſeen of alt the camps, which 
being carcied only upon mens ſhoulders was impoſflible,but becauſe 
the cloud, which always attended upon the Ark, and did together 
with the Ark conftitute in a manner one ſign of God's preſence,did 
lead and dire them. z Where they might ſafely arid commodi- 
ouſly reſt. Bur this is a metaphorical expreſſion, for diſcovering 
to them ; for otherwiſe the Ark could nor ſearch; and God, who 
knew all places and things needed not to ſearch. 


* Judg: | 
16, 1 


34 And the cloud ef the LORD was upon them by 
day +, when they went out of the camp. 
t And ty night too, as was expreſſed before. So we muſt learnt 
to compare places of Scripture, and'to ſupply the defe&s of one 
out of another, as we do in all authors. 

35 Andit came to paſs when the ark ſet forwardythat 
Moſes faid, * Riſe up, LORD,and let thine enemies be * pp,j gg, 
{cattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee, 1, x. 


2 A 2 36 And 


j 26 And when it reſted, he ſaid, Retutn]], O LORD, 


B+ Heb. zen unto the F many thouſands of Iſrael. 
ac bouſand || Or, give reſt, 7. e. a ſafe and quiet place, free from enemies 


8c hou/ands. and dangers. . 

| CHART XL, 

| | The murmuring of the People, for which the fire breaketh in upon them, 1. 
| | Moſes prayeth to God, the fire is quenched, 2. The Name of theplace,ond 
| 

1 | Manna deſcribed, 7-==9. Moſes's Complaint and Prayer, 10+=-15. G0 
| | ' commandeth him to gather 70 of the Elders of Iſrael to help him, 16, 17. 
Mi Promiſeng them fleſh ro eat, 18, 19, 20. Moſes his Unbelief, 21, 22. 
A 

at 


' 


z 

U 

" 

' 
: 


why called, 3. The People murmur again, and luſt after fleſh, 4---6. 
God is angry with him, 23. Moſes having gathered 7o of the Elders of 
Iſrael together, rehearſeth the words of the Lord to him, 24. God coming 
down ina Cloud, taketh of Moſes's ſpirit and giveth to the 70; The 
effefts thereof, 25. Eldad and Meaad propheſie in the Camp, 26---29. 
God giveth them Quails to eat, 39-=-32. And ſmiteth the People with 
a very great Plague, 33, 34, 35- 
ND whe the people [| complained «, | it diſpleaſed 
Wodatues A the LORD, and the LORD heard zt, and his 
W+ Heb. i£ aPger was kindied, and the fre of rhe LORD 6 burnc 
wa: evil in among them, and conſumed them that were in the utter- 


the ears of, moſt parts of the camp c. 
C&C. s Or, murmured, the occaſion whereof ſeems to be their laſt three 
$ Pal. 78. gays journey in a vaſt howling wilderneſs, without any benefit ; 
Wt 27+ and thereupon the remembrance cf their long abode in rhe wilder- 
neſs, and the proſpe& and fear of many other tec ious,and fruitleſs, 
and dangerous journeys,whereby they were like to belong delayed 
from coming to that reſt, that land of milk and honey, which God 
had promiſed them, and that which they thirſted afrer. 6b( 7 e. ) 
A fire ſent from God in an extraordinary manner,poſſibly from the 
Pillar of cloud and fire, or from heaven, as 2 King. 1. 12. © Either 
becauſe the ſin began there among the mixt multitude,who probab- 
ly had their place there, or amongſt thoſe who were feeble and wea- 
ry with their laſt journey, and therefore hindmoſt in the march : 
or in mercy to the people, whom he would rather awaken to re- 
pentance than utterly deſtroy, and therefore he ſent it into the 
Skirts and not the heart and midſt of the camp. 

2 And the people d cried unto Moles e : and when 


W #Heb.ſurk Moſes prayed unto the LORD, the fire F was quenche«. 
| d The murmurers, being penitent ; or others for fear. eWhom 
| they knew to be very prevalent with Gods 

|| That is, 3 And he called the name of the place || Taberah f : 


# buriivs. becauſe the fire of the LORD burnt among them. 
f From this fire; as it was called Kibroth-hattaavah from another 
occaſion, werſe 34, 35. and Numb. 33. 16. As it is no new thingin 
* Scripture for perſons and places to have two names. Both theſe 
names were impoſed as monuments of the peoples ſin and of Gods 
juſt judgment. See Dent: 9: 7, 22, 24. 
4 And the * mixt multitude g that wes among them, 
+fell a luſtivg, and the children of Iſrael þ alſo} wept 
agains,and ſaid, * Who ſhal give us fleſh & to eat ? 
+ Heb. re- &£ Conſiſting of Egyptians or other people, which being affeted 
turned and with God's miraculous works in Egypt, and thereupon believing 
wept. the promiſe of God to carry them to a land of milk and honey, for 
* | Cor, their own advantage joyned themſelves to the 1ſ7aelites.Exod: 12: 38: 
"10:6. Pſi], and now finding themſelves ſadly diſappointed they diſcover their 
78: 18: & evil minds. þ Whoſe ſpecial relation and obligation to God ſhould 
106: 14. have reſtrained them from ſuch carriages: # This word relates e1- 
th-rto their former murmuring upon this occaſion a twelve month 
before, Exod: 16:2: or rather to their complaining mentioned.ver:1: 
ronote the aggravation of their ſin, that having juſt now ſinned in 
the ſame kind,and ſorely ſmarted for their ſin,and being bur newly 
delivered from their fears and dangers cauſed thereby, they forth- 
with return to their vomit and murmuragain, and that more pafſio- 
nately than before,expreſling themſelves in tears and bitter words. 
k This word is here taken generally ſo as to include fiſh,as the next 
word+ ſhew, and as it is uſed, 7 Cor. 15. 39. - They had indeed flefh 
and-catrel which they ouger with them out of Fgypt, but theſe 
were reſerved for breed to be carried into Canaan, and weie ſo few 
that they would ſcarce have ſerved them for a- month, as may be 
gathered from Numb: 11; 20, 27, 22. . : 
5 * We renmiember the fiſh which we did cat in Egypt 
freely 1 : the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, 


andthe onions, and the garlick. 
I Either. without price, for fiſh was very plentiful, and fiſhing 
' was there free,or with a very ſmall price; for nothing is ſomerimes 
pur for a little, as Joh: 18: 20: 4#: 27: 33: and none for few, as Jer: 
8: 6: 1 Cor: 2: 8. © And this is the more probable becauſe the Zgypr;- 
ans might not taſte of fiſh, nor ofthe leecks and onions, which they 
' worſhipped for gods, and therefore the Iſraelites, who ſpeak theſe 
words, might have them there upon cheaper terms. 
6 Burt now our ſoul »: is dried away » ; there is no- 


thing at all beſides this Manna, before our eyes 0. 

»» Either 1. our life, as the ſou! ſignifies, Gen. 9. 5. Pſal: 33. 19. 
Job. 36. 14. or 2. our body, which 1s oft Ponified by the ſoul, as Pſal. 
IG. 10. and 35. 12. and 105 18. So Levit. 19. 28. and 21. 1. Numb. 
5. 2. ».Is withered and pines away ; which poſſibly might be true 
through envy and diſcontent, and inordinate appetite, as 2 Sam 13. 
4. Prov 14. 3o. 0 Heb. Our eyes ſee or look to nothing but this Man- 
»z. They ſpeak as if the Manns were only uſeful to pleaſe their 
eyes, with its fine colour and ſhape, but not to fatisfie their appe- 
tites, or ſuſtain their natures. 

7 And * the manna was as coriander-ſeed 
+ colour thereof as the colour of bdellium 9. 

þ Not for colour, for that is black, but for ſhape and figure. 9 
Which iseither 1. the gum ofatree, of a white and bright colour, 
or rather 2-a gem or precious one, as the Hebrew Do@ors take it ; 
and particularly a pearl, as ſome render it, wherewith the Manna 
doth may#feſtly agree both in its colour, which is white, Exod. 16. 
14. and 1n its figure which is round. See more on Gen. 2. 12. 


$ And the people went about, and gathered ir, and 
ground # in mills, or beat it. in a mortar, and baked it 


: 
bl 
4 
f 
4 


: 
| 
i 
i 
{i 
: 
| 


| 
#1 Or, were 
UN! 45 zf were 


*Exod.12: 


38. 
THeb.lu#- 
ed a luſt. 


* Exod: 
IG: 3. 


*Exod.16. ?, andthe 


14: 3I. 
eb. eye 
of it as the 
ee of. 


N U M. 


1 | this was. 


B ERS. Chap. X1,- | Ch! 


in pans, and made cakes of it : and the taſte of it wes as 
the taſte of freſh oyl yr. 


r Or, of the moſt excellent oyl ; or, of the flour of oz! : or, as others, 
of cakes or paſte made with the beft oyl, the word cakes bei 1g eaſily fup= 
plied our of the foregoing member of the verſe : o , which is aot 
much differing, {ike wafers made with honey,as it 1s fa:d E. od, 16, 37x. , 
The nature and uſe of Mama is here thus particularly de!c: ibed, to 
ſhew the greatneſs of their ſin in deſpiling ſuch exceilent food as 


9 And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, 
the manna fell upon it s, 
s And then the dew fell again upon it and covered it,as we ſee 
Exod. 16. 13, 14. fo the Manna lay hid as it were between two beds 
of dew. Hence the phraſe of hidden Manna, Rev. 2. 17. 
10 Then Moles heard the peopie weep throughout 
their families, every man in the door of his tent t, and : 
* the anger of the LORD was kindled greatly ; Moſes * Pal. 78, 
alſo was diſpleaſed «. | wo 
t To note, that they were not aſhamed of their ſin. » Partly for 
their great unthankfuſneſs; partly foreſecing the dreadful judg- 
ments coming upon them ; and partly for his own burden expieſ- 
ſed in the following verſes. 
11 And Moſes faid unto the LORD, Wherefore haſt 
thou aftlicted thy ſervant? and wherefore have I not © 
found favour in thy ſight x, that thou layeſt the burden 
of all this people upon me ? 

* Why didſt thou not hear my prayer, when I deſired thou 
wouldeſt excuſe me, and commit the care and government of this 
unruly people to ſome other perſon ? See Exod. 3. 11. and 4. 10. 

12 Have I conceived all this people ? have I [] be. || Or, tn 
gotten them y, that thou ſhouldeſt ſay unto me, Carry them. 
them inthy boſom (as a nurſing father beareth the ſuck- 59 Gr. 
1ng-chiid 2 ) unto the land which thou ſweareſt unto 
cheir fathers ? 

y Are they my children, thatT ſhould be obliged to provide food 
and all things for their neceſſity and deſire ? z Which exprefſion 
.ews the tender care and affe&ion that governours by the com- 
mand of God ought to have towards their people. | 
i3 Whence ibould 1 have fleſh to give unto all this 
people ? for they weep unto me, ſaying, Give us fleſh 
that we may eat. 

14 I am not able to bear all this people # alone b, 
becauſe it is too heavy for me. 

a ( i. e.) The burden of providing for and ſatisfying of them: 

b Obj. How was he alone, when there were others added to help 
him, Exod 18. 21, 24? Anſw. Thoſe were only afliſtant tro him in 
civil cauſesand ſmaller matters, but the harder and greater affairs, 
ſuch as this unqueſtionably was, were brought to Moſes and deter- 
mined by him alone, Exod. 18. 22. 

15 4nd if thou deal thus with me, * kill me, I pray *See 1Kin 
thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy fight, 29- 4- 
and let me not ſee my wretchedneſs c. Joon; 4+ 

c Heb. my evil, 7. e. my intolerable anguiſh and torment, ariſing 
from the inſuperable difhculty of my office and work of ruling this 
people, and from the dread of their utter extirpation which they 
will bring upon themſelves, and the diſhonour which thence will 
accrue to God and toreligion, as if not I only but God alſo were 
an Impoſtor, Seeing is here put for feeling, as to ſee death, Pſal. 8g. 

48. Luke 2. 26. 15 to ſuffer it, and to ſee the ſalvation of God, Pſal. 59. 
23. andgr. 16. 1s to enjoy it. 

16 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Gather unto M 
me * ſeventy men of the elders of Iſrael d, whom thou WEE 
knoweſt to be the elders e of the people, and officers © *” 
over them : and bring them unto the tabernacle of the 


congregation, that they may ftand there with thee. 
ad Of whom ſee Exod: 3: 16: and 5: 6: Levit: 4: 15: Dent: 16: 18. 
e Whom thou by experience diſcerneſt to be Elders not only in 
years, and name and place, but alſo in wiſdom and gravity, and 
authority with the people. | 
17 And I will come down f, and talk with thee there, 
and T * will take of the ſpirit which is upon thee,and will * ch. ge 
put zt upon them g, and they ſhal bear the burden of the 20. 


people with thee, that thou bear zr not thy ſelf alone. 

f Not by local morion, but by my powerful preſence and opera- 
tion. See Gen: 11: 5: and Exod::34: 5. g (i:e: ) 1 will give the ſame 
ſpirit to them which I have given to thee. Bur as the ſpirit was 
not conveyed to them from or through Moſes,but immediately from 
God, ſo the ſpirit or its gifts were not by this means impaired in 
Moſes. The ſpirit is here put for the gifts of the ſpirit, as it is Numb: 
27: 18: Joel: 2: 28: Joh: 7: 39: As rg: 2, 6: 1 Cor: 14: 12, 32: and 
particularly for the ſpi-it of prophecy, v: 25: whereby they were 
enabled, as Moſes had been and ſtill was, to diſcern hidden and fu- 
ture things, and reſol-e doubrful and difficult caſes, which made 
them fit for government. It is obſervable, that God would not 

and therefore men ſhould not, call any perſons to any office for 
which they were not ſufficiently fit and qualified. 

18 And fay thou unto the people,SanGifie yourſelves 
b againit to morrow, and ye ſhal cat fleſh: (for ye have 
weptin the ears of the LORD 5, ſaying, Who ſhal 
give us fleſh to eat ? for ir was well with us in Egypt ) 
therefore the LORD will give you fleſh,and ye ſhal car. 
h ( i: e: ) Prepare your ſelves, either to receive the miraculous 
bleſſings of God, the fleſh you defire: or rather, prepare to meet thy 
God, O Iſrael, inthe way of his judgments, and to receive the PU= | 
niſhment which God will inflict upon you; for it is evident from 
verſe 20: that God anſwered them with a curſe in ſtead ofa bleſling. 
Prepare your ſelves by true repentance, that you may either obtain 


*o24 
12. 


*L 
46. 


ye 


* Cl 
32. 8 
Deut 
22, 


ſome mitigation of the plague, or, whileſt your bodies are deſtroy 
: E & 


0 


"Chap: XIIT: "FD" 
white, that was an evidence of the cure of the leprofie, Levit: 13 
12, 13. But it was otherwayes when one was ſuddenly and extra- 
ordinarily ſmitten with this univerſal whiteneſs, which ſhewed the 
great corruption of the whole maſs of blood, as it was here, 

i find 4aron ſaid unto Molzs, Alas my LORD, I be- 

eech thee, lay not the ſin upon us y wherein we have 
9 ay # 

done fooliſhly, and wherein we have ſinned. 

y Let not the guilt and puniſhment of this ſin reſt upon us, upon 
he: inth:s kind, upon me in any other kind, but pray ro God for 
the pardon and removal of it. 

i> Lec her not be as one dead 2, of whom the fleſh 
is haif conſumed, when he cometh ont of his mothers 


womb 5. 

z Either naturally, becauſe part of her fleth was putrefied and 
dead, and not to be reſtored but by the mighty power of God: Or 
mo- ally, becauſe the was cut off from all converſe with others, Lev: 
13:4" 8 Like an untimely birth withour due ſhape and proportion 
or like a {tjll bo-n child,that hath been for ſome time dead m the 

* Heb: womb, hich + hen ir comes forth,is white and putretied, and 
12. 9. part of it conſumed, 


tz And Moſes cryed unto the LORD, ſaying, Heal 

- her now, O God, I beſeech thee. 
14 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, * If her father 
had but ſpit in her face 6, ſhould ſhe not be aſhamed c, ſe- 
ven days? let her be * ſhut out from the camp ſeven 


daysd, and after that let her be received in agazm. 

þ (i. e.) Expreſſed ſome eminent token of indignati:n and con- 
tempt, which this was, Fob 3o. 10. 1a: 50. 6. c And withdraw her 
ſelf, from her fathers preſence, as Jonathan did upona like occaſion, 
x Sam: 20: 34: So though Goi healed her according to Moſes his 
requeſt, yer he would have her publickly bear the ſhame of her fin, 
and bea warning to -thersto keep them trom the ſame tranſgrettion. 
4 The time appointed for cleanſing the unclean. See Numb: 6: 9: 
and 31: 19: 

t5 Ard Miriam was ſhut out from che camp ſever 
days : and the people journeyed not, till Miriam was 
brought in 4g ain ee 

e Which was a teſtimony of reſpe& tro her both from God and 
from the people, God ſo ordering it, partly leſt ſhe ſhould be 0- 
verwhelmed by ſuch a publick rebuke from God, and partly leſt, 
ſhe being a Prepheteſs, together with her perſcn, the gift of Pro- 
pheſic ſhould come into contempr. 

16 And afterward the people removed from Haze- 


roth f, and pitched in the wilderneſs of Paran g. 
Ff Where they abode, as isfaid, Numb: 11: 35: for Miriams ſake; 

g (7.e:) In another part of the ſame wilderneſs, as may be gathered 

from Numb: 10: 12: See alſo Deut: 33: 2: Ir is poſſible they might 
' have removed out of one part of that wilderneſs into another wil- 

derneſs, and then returned again into another part of it, as we know 
the Iſraelites had many ſtrange windings and turnings in their 

Wilderneſs travels. And this part was more eſpecially called 

Rithmah, Numb: 33: 18: and Kadeſh-barnea, Numb. 13: 26: Deut: 1: 

Ty. which were two not:d places inthatpait, b"th which ſeem to 

be comprehended within their camp, or near adjoining to it. 

CHSAF. 205: 
God commandeth Moſes to ſend Spies to ſearch out the land of Canaan, 1, 2, 
3. their names, 4 -—- 15. Moſes's ommanament where to go, and what 
70 do, 16 22. The:r return with the fruits of the land, and 
their report, 23 29. They are encouraged by Caleb, 30, 31. But 
zen other diſheartens them by their falſe Report, 32 -- 
A N D the LORD fſpake unco Moſes 
ing, 

a In anſwer to the peoples petition about it, as is evident from 
Deut: 1. 22+ And it is probable from the following ſtory, Thar 
the people deſired it out of diffidence of God's promile, and provi- 
dence,though Moſes liked of it as a prudent courſe to learn where or 
how to make the firſt invaſion. And God granted their deſire for 
their trial and puniſhment, as well knowing from what rootit came. 

2 * Send thou men 6, that they may ſearch the iand 
of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Iſrael: of 
every tribe of their fathers c ſhall ye fend a man, every 
one a ruler d among them. 

b Do as the people preſs thee to do. c (7.e. ) Which comes 


from their ſeveral parents or Patriarchs. 4 A perſon of wiſdom 
and authority, which might make his witneſs more conſiderable 


with the people. 
2 And Moſes, by the commandment of the LORD, 


ſent them from the Wiiderneſs of Paran : all thoſe men 
ere heads of the children of Iſrael, 
4 And theſe were their names Of the tribe of Reu- 
ben, Shammua the ſon of Zaccur. 
5 Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the fon of Hori. 
6 Of the tribe of J udah,Caleb the fon of Jephunnehs 
7 Of the tribe of Iffachar, gal the fon of Joſeph, 
8 Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oſhea e the ſon of Nun. 

e Called alſo 7oſbua, wer: 16. 

9 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palto the ſon of Raphu. 

10 Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the ſon of Sodi. 

11 Ofthe tribe of Joſeph, namely, of the tribe of Ma- 
naſſeh f, Gaddi the Som of Suſi. 

F (i. e.) Of that part of the tribe of Joſeph, which is peculiarly | 
Called zhe tribe of Manaſſeh, as the other part of it was called rhe tribe 
of Ephraim, ver: 8. The name of Joſeph is elſewhere appropriated 
to Ephraim, as Ezek: 37. 16, 19. Rev: 7. 8.c here to Manaſſeh ; poſ- 
ſibly to aggravate the ſin of the Ruler of this tribe, who did ſo 
baſely degenerate from his noble anceſtox Joſeph. 


35- 
a, ſay- 


- 


"BB KM 


14 Of the tribe'of Naphtali, Nahbi the ſon of Vophſi. 
15 Ofthe tribe of Gad, Geuel the fon of Machi. 
16 Thele are the names of the men which Moſes ſent 
to ſpy out the land : and Moſes called Oſkea the ſon of 
Nun, Jehoſhua g. CE ON 
g Ojhea notes a deſire of Salvation, fignify g, Save we pray 
thee, but Jehoſhua , or Joſhua includes a promiſe © of Salvation, that 
he ſtould fave, or that God by his hands ſhould ſave the people. 
50 this was a prophecy of his ſucceſſionto Meſerin the government, 
and of theſucceſs of his arms. 

17 And Moſes ſentthem to ſpie out the land of Ca- 
nzan, and faid unto them, Get ye up this wey ſouthe 
ward þ, and go up into the mountain z:. | 

hþ (z.e.) Tnto the Southern part of Canaan, which was the near- 
eſt part, and the worſt roo, being dry and deſert, 7: 15. 1, 3s 
Judg: 1. 15. Pal; 126. 4. And therefore fitteſt for them to enter 
and paſs through with leſs obſervation. # (:. e.) Into the moun- 
tainous country, and thence into the valleys, and ſo take an exa&t 
turvey of the whole land, : 

1s Andfſee the land what it is &, and the people that 
dwelleth therein, whether they be ſtrong or weak, tew 
or many. , 

k Both for largeneſs, and for nature and quality; as is more 
particularly exprefled, wer: 19. 29. 


19 And what the land js that they dwell in, whether 
it be good or bad 1, and what cities they be that they 
dwell in, whether in tents »s or in {trong hoids: 

{ Healthful, or unwholeſome, fruitful or barren. m As the 
Arabians did, or in unwalled Villages, which, like tents, are ex« 
poſed to an enemy. 

20 And whae the land is; whether jr be fat » or lean, 
whether there be wood therein, or not. And beye of 
good courage o, and bring of the fruit of the land, 


(now the time was the time of the firſt ripe grapes) 

z Rich and fertile. o Doubt not but God will preſcrve you in this 
dangerous Journey, and be not wfiſmayed or diſcouraged if you 
find the people numerous, porent, arid well fortified. 


21 So they went up, and ſearched the land, from 
| the wilderneſs of Zin p, unto Rehob, as men come to 


Hamath 9. 

p In the ſo»th of Canaan, Numb: 34. 3. Joſ: 15. 3. differing from 
the wilderneſs of Sin which was nigh unto Egypt, Exod: 16. r. 
q (7. e.) Fromm the South they paſſed through the whole land, even 
ro the Northern patts of it, Kehob, a city in the North: weſt parr, 
Joſ. 19: 28: Juag: 1: 31: and Hemath, a City in the North-eaſt part, 
Joſ: ig. 35. Exek: 47. 179. And that they might more expediti- 
ouſly and ſecurely perform this office, it is probable, thar they 
divided themſelves into ſeveral ſmall parties, and informed them- 
ſelves not only by their eye, bur alſo by their ear, and the infor- 
mar#10n of perſons of whom'they enquired abour the nature and 
condition of their land ” 


22 And they aſcended by the ſouth r, andcame s un- *Joſh: x5; 
to Hebron: where * Ahiman, Sheſhai, and Talmai, the 7g, © 
children of Anak t weire: (now Hebron wes built ſeven Judg: r.. | 


years before Zoan in Egypt «.) Gs 

r Here Moſes having generally deſcribed their progreſs and 
courſe from South to North, now returns more particularly to re- 
late ſome memorable places and paſſages, as that having entred the 
land in the Southern parts, they travelled them till they came to 
Hebron. 5s Heb: He came, to wit, Caleb, as appears from Jof: 14. 9g, 
12, 14. For, as we now intimared, the ſpies diſtributed their 
work among them, and went either ſeverally; or by pairs, and, 
it ſeems, the ſurvey of this part was left to Caleb. + A famous 
giant ſo called, whoſe children theſe are called, cither more gene- 
rally, as all giants ſometimes were, or rather more ſpecially be- 
cauſe 4rbah, from whom Hebron was called Kiriath-arbah, was the 
father of Anak. of: 15. 13. And this circumſtance is mentioned 
as an evidence of the goodneſs of that land and ſoil, becauſe the 
giants choſe it for their habitation. « This ſeems to be noted to 
confront the Ezyptians, who vainly boaſted of the antiquity of their 
City Zoan above all places. 

23 * And they came unto the + brook of Elhcol, and 
cut down from thence a branch with one cluſter of 
grapes, and they bare ic between two upon a ſtaff x; + br Pala 
and they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs. ty. . 

x Either for the weight of it, conſidering the length of the way 
they were to carry 1t, or for the preſervation of it whole and entire. 

In thoſe Eaſtern and Southern countries there are vines and 
grapes of an extraordinary bigneſs, as Strabo and Pliny affirnt. 


24 And the place was called the * brook +Elſhcol,be- .*_ . 
cauſe of the ciuſter of grapes which the children of Iſ- b Or, Yi. 
rael cut down from thence. That 3s 

25 And they returned from ſearching of the land af. - duftes of 
ter forty days. grapes. 

26 And they went and came to Moſes, and to Aa- 
ron, and to all the congregation of the children of I. 
rac], unto the wilderneſs of Paran, to Kadeſh y, and 
brought back word unto them, and unto ail the con- 
gregation, and ſhewed them the fruit of the land. 

» So called by way of abbreviation, which is frequent 1m Hebrew 
names, for Kadeſh-barnea, Deut: 1. 19. which ſome raſhly confound 
with Kaeſb in the wilierneſs of Sin, Numb: 20. 1, and 27. 14. and 


33- 16. into which they came not rill the goth year after their 
coming out of Zgypr,, as appears fiom Numb: 33. 37, 38. whereas 


cut: x. 


4 


32 Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the ſon of Gemalli. 
x3 Ofths cribs of Aſher, Shether the ſon of Michael, 


P_—_ 


[7 


; 7 
-p Av 


they were in this Kadeh in the ſecond year, and before they recety- 
ed the ſentence of their forty years abode in the wildernets. 


2A4 27 And 


4: M —_ 


a, XIV. N U M 
27 And: they told him z, and ſaid, We came unto 
the land whither thou ſenteſt us, and ſurely it floweth 


FF Exod: with * milk and honey «, and this « the fruit of it. 
UNE 3: 3- '2 In the audience of the people, as appears from wer: 30: 4 
| They craftily began their relation with commendations, that their 
Deut: 2. following flanders might be more eaſily believed. , 
Ulf o, 21. 28 Nevertheleſs, the * people be ſtrong 6b that dwell 
SP Deur: 7. in the land, and the cities are * walled, ond very great : 
|; | inks and moreover, we ſaw the children of Anak there. 
b Potent for the ſtrength of their body, and the valour of their 
minds. 


A 4 


* 


2 And wherefore hath the LORD # bronght us unto 
this land, to fall by the ſword, that our wives, and our 
children ſhould be a prey e? were it nor better for us to 
return into Egypt? 

4 From the inſtruments they riſe higher, and ſtrike at God the 
chief cauſe and author of their journey ; By which we ſee the pro- 


digious growth and progreſs of fin when it is not reſiſted. e To the 
Canaanites whoſe land we were nude to believe we ſhould poſſeſs. 

4 And they faid one to another, Let us make a cap- 
tain f, and let us return into Egypt g. 

F Inſtead of Moſes, one who will be more faithful to cur intereſ! 
than he. g This was but a purpoſe ora defire, and yer it is imput- 


$ 
29The Amalekite dwelleth in theland of the ſouth c: 
and the Hittite, and the Jebuſite, and the Amorite dwel- | 
teth-in the mountains 4d: and the Canaanite dwelleth | 
by the ſea e, and by the coaſt of Jordans 


c Where we are to enter the land, and they who were ſo eager 


| land, and are about to {:ttle in their neighbourhood, the rather, 
ro revenge themſelves for thzir former loſs and ſhame received by 
us. Therefore they mention them, though they were no Canaz- 
Lires. d(:. e.) In the mountainous country in the South-eaſt part 
of the land, ſothat you cannot enter there without great difficulty, 
both becauſe ofthe noted ſtrength and valour of thoſe people, and 
becaulſe' of the advantage they have from the mountains. e Notrthe 
mid-land Sea, which is commonly underſtood by that expreſſion, 
but the ſalt or dead ſea, as appears, - :.Becauſe ir is that ſea which 
is next to Jordan, as here follows, 2. Becauſe the Canaanites dwelt 
principally in thoſe parts, and not near the mid-land ſea. Sotheſe 

' euard the eatrance on the Eaſt-fide, as the others do on the South. 
20 And Caleb f ftilled the people g before Moles 6, 
and faid, Let us go up at once, and polleſs it, for we 


are well able to overcome it 2. . 
f Together with Joſbus, as is manifeſt from Numb: 14. 6. 7, 39. 
bur Caleb alone is here mentioned, poſſibly becauſe he ſpake firſt 
and moſt, which he might better do, becauſe he might be preſumed 
to be more impartial than Joſhua, who being Moſes his Minitter 
might be thought to ſpeak only what he knew his maſter would 
like. g Which implies either that they had begun to murmur, or 
that by their looks and carriages, they diſcovered that griefand 
anger which boiled in their breaſts, þ Or, towards Moſes, againſt 
whom they were incenſed, as the man who had brought them into 
ſuch ſad circumſtances. # Partly in moral probabi'iry, becauſe we 
/are one people united under one head, whereas they are divided 
into ſeveral nations, and governments of differing counſels and 
intereſts and inclinations ; And principally becauſe of the afliſt- 

ance of the almighty God. : : 
31 Bur the men that went up with him &, (aid, We 


be not able to go up againſt the people, for they ere 


ſtronger than we 4 

k All of them, Joſhua excepted. 7 Both in ſtature of Body and 
numbers of people. Thus they wickedly queſtion the power and 
truth and goodneſs of God, of all which they had ſuch, ample teſti- 
monies. 

32 And they brought up m an evil report of the land 


»”, which they had ſearched, unto the children of Ifra- 
el, ſaying, The land through which we have gone to 
ſearch .it, & aland * that eateth up the inhabitants 
thereof 0: and all the people that we faw in it, are 


* men of great ſtature- 

-m Heb: brought forth, to wit, out of their mouths: They uttered 
a reproach or reproachful words. » (i. e.) Againſt, or, concern- 
ing the land. It is the genitive caſe of the obje&, as Marth: 10. 1. 
and 14.1. o Not ſo much by civil wars, as moſt think, for that 
was likely to make their conqueſt more eaſie ; nor by the barren- 
\ neſs of the ſoil, which conſumed the people with the exceſſive 

pains it required to make it fruitful, as others think, for they con- 

feſſed the excellency of the land, wv: 27. but rather by the unwhole- 
ſomeneſs of the air and place, which they gueſſed from the many 
funerals, which, as ſome Hebrew Writers, not without probability 
affirm, they obſerved in their travels through it : Though that came 
ro paſs from another cauſe, even from the fingular providence of 

God, which, to facilitate the Jraelites conqueſt, cut off vaſt num- 

bers of the Canaanites, either by a plague, or by the horner fent be- 
fore them, as is expreſled, Joſ:'24. 12, or ſome other way. 

And there we ſaw the giants, the ſons of Anak, 
which come of the giants : And we were in our own ſighe 
as graſhoppers p,and ſo we were in their ſight. 

? (i.e) Small and contemprtible. 
H A P. XIV. 

The children of Iſrael murmur againſ# Moſes and Aaron, x —=4q, Moſes, 
Aaron, Caleb and Joſbua go to appeaſe the people, 5--=-9. wherefore the 
people would have ſtoned them, xo. The Lord threatneth them with the 
peſtilence, 11. 12. Moſes intreateth the Lord for the people, t3-=—==19. 
The Lord heareth Moſes, 20----22, yet promiſeth that the murmurers ſball 
never enter into the Land of Canaan, 23. Judgements on the murmur=- 
ers, 24. They that brought an evil report on the land die of the plague, 
37. They who would take poſſeſſion of the land contrary to Gods command 
are ſmiten, 40 45 : 

ND all the congregation # lifted up their voice, and 
cryed, and the people wept that night, 

a Except Caleb "and Joſbua, and ſome few others. A Synecdo- 
chical expreſſion, the whole for the greateſt part. - 

. 2 And allthe children of Iſrael murmured againſt Mo- 
* See wer: ſes,and againſt Aaron b, and the whole congregation ſaid 
28, 29. unto them, *Weyld God that we had died inthe land of 

pt,or wouldGod that we haddiedin this wilderneſs. 
 & As the inſtruments and occaſions of their preſent calamity. 
c It was not long 
wilderneſs. 


 *Lev: 26, 
38. 
tAmos 2: 
9. 

* Heb: 


men of ſta= 
rures. 


and fierce againſt us,that they came into the wilderneſs to fight with | 
us, will without doubt oppoſe us when we come cloſe by their | to feed them? Who ſhould conduct them over the Red-ſea? Or, 


before they had their deſire, and diddicin the. ſpeak, ſaying, b 


ed to them as if they had done it, Nehem: g. 16, 17. they appointed 
a captain, &#c: even as Abrahams purpoſe to offer up Iſaac is reckon- 
ed for the deed, Heb: 11. 17. g Stupendious madneſs! Whence 
ſhould they have prote&ion againſt the many hazards, and proviſli- 
on againſt all the wants of the wilderneſs ? Could they expe& ei- 
ther God's cloud to cover and gnide them, or Manna from heaven 


ifthey went another way, who ſhould defend them againſt thoſe 
nations whoſe borders they were to paſs? What entertainment 
could they expet& from the Egyptians, whom they had deſerted and 
brought ro {vo much ruine ? 

5 Then Moſes and Aaron fell on their faces þ before all 


the aſſembly ; ofthe congregation of the children of Iſrael. 
þ As humble and earneſt ſupplicants, either to the people, to 
intreat them to deſiſt from their wicked and pernicious enrerprizez | 
Or rather to God, by comparing this with Numb: 16. 4. and 20. 6. | 
the only refuge to which Moſes reſorted in all ſuch ſtraits, and who 
alone was able to ſtill and govern this tumultuous and ſtif-necked 
people. # That they might be awaked to apprehend their ſin and 
danger, when they ſaw Moſes at his prayers, whom God never uſed 
to deny, and never failed to defend even with the deſtru&ion of 
his enemies. 
6 And Joſhua the ſon of Nun, and Caleb the ſon of 
Jephunneh, hich were of them that ſearched the land, 
rent their cloaths k» 
To teſtifie their hearty grief for the peoples blaſphem 7 
God, and ſedition againſt Moſes; and that dreadful vr mos Bye 
they eaſily foreſaw this muſt bring upon the congregation and 
people of God. 
7 4nd they ſpake unto all the company of the chil- 
dren of iſrael, ſaying, The land which we paſſed 
through to ſearch ir, is an exceeding good land. 
8 If the LORD delight in us7, then he will bring us 
into this land, and give it us, a land which floweth with 
milk and honey, 
I If by our rebellion and ingratitude we d | 
to loath and forſake us. - CO PT OE ed | 
9 Only rebel ye not againſt the LORD, neither fear _ 
ye the people of the land, for they are bread for us w : 
their + defence » is departed from them, and the + Heb: 
LORD ro —_— 0: fear them not. - ſhadow. 

2» We ſhall deſtroy them as eaſily as we d b 
mon food. Compare Numbers 24. 8. Plot. , "46g _ ry Their 
counſel, condut, and courage, and eſpecially, God; who was plea- 
ſed to afford them his proteCion, till their iniquities were full 
Gen:15 aaa _— from them, and hath given them up as 
a prey tous. 0 By his ſpecial grace and almigh 
us from them, and from all our Sins RR Wes ive 

io Bur all the congregation bade ſtone them with 

fiones: and the glory of the LORD appeared 7 in the 
tabernacle q of the congregation, before all the children 
of Iſrael. | 

þ Now in the extremity of danger to reſcue his faith 
and toſtop the rage ofthe people. 9 (5. e.) Upon on beaten 
gry where the —__ uſually reſided, in which the glory of 

od d1d appear upon occaſion, and now i ic 
ner, as the ſtate of things required. 0 Os TRIO Won 
: II _ the LORD laid unto Moſes, How long will 
this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere 
they believe me, for all the ſigns which I have ſhewed 
among them 2? | 


12 [ will ſmite them with the peſtilence, and ciſfinhe- 
rit them r, * and will make of thee a greater nation and * Exod: 


mightier than they. 32. 10. 
7 This was not an abſolute determination, as th 
_—Wx a A like that of Nineveh's nn ond, 
40 days, with a condition implyed, except 
tance, or powerful interceliion.. TO Qnody hn 
13 And * Moſes faid untothe LORD, Then «: the , 
Egyptians faall hear iz (for thou broughteſt up this peo- Exod: 
ple in thy might from among them #2.) | "wing 2 
: 38. 


s (z. e.) In caſe thou doſt utterly deſtroy th 
thou didſt oy them. # Whereby 27. 
n hy — great honour to thy ſelf, which now thou wilt cer. 


14 And they will tell jr to the inhabit 7 
land «: * for they have heard that thou, LORD = + 
among this people ; that theu LORD, art ſeen face to m_ 
face, and zbat * thy cloud ſtandeth over them, and that Joſh: 2. 9. 
thou goeſt before them, by day time in apillar of a cloud, and s. i. | 
and _ we avoena of fire by night. " "Exod: 
% For there was much entercourſe between the ionss 3 32? 
15 Now #f thou ſhalt kill all this nai — . 
then the nations which haye heard the fame of thee will 


'# (6, e.) Al. 


Chap. xv. "* 


th 


a + mo we MY ry bot ef yg & 


I——_— 


F Chap. XIV. 
x (7.e.) Altogether, or to a man; and ſuddenly as it were by 
one blow, as if all had but one neck. ; 
:6 Becauſe the LORD was not * able to bring this 
people into the land which he {ware unto them y, 
therefore he hath flain them in the wilderneſs, 
y His power was quite ſpent in bringing them out of Egypt,and 
could not finiſh the work he had begun and had ſworn to do. 
17 And now, I beſeech thee, let the power of my 


Lord be great z, according as thou haſt ſpoken, ſaying, 

z (i. e.) Appear to be great, diſcover its greatneſs. A real verb 
put for a declarative, or the thing for the manifeſtation of the 
thing. And this may be underſtood either 1. of Gods power 1n pre- 
ſerving the people and carrying them on into Canaan, whech ſenic 
may ſcem to be favoured by the foregoing verſe, where the £2yp77- 
aus deny that God had power to do ſo. And according to that 
ſence he adds the following words, not as an explication of this 
po ver, but as an argument to move him to ſhew forth his power 
for his people notwithſtanding their ſms, according as, or rather 
becauſe ( as the H:brew word is oft rendered) he had ſpoken ſaying,&c. 
and ſo he ſhould maintain the honour and the truth of his own name 
or of thoſe tirles which he had aſcribed to himſelf. Or 2. the 


power of his grace and mercy, or 7h? greatneſs of his mercy, as he 
calls it, wer: 19, in pardoning of this and their other fins: for to 
this the following words manifeſtly reſtrain it, according as thou haſt 
ſpoken &c. where the pardon of their ſins is the only initance of 
thi, power both deſcribed in Gods titles,ver: 18. and prayed for by 
Moſes, wer: 19: pardon, I beſeech thee, ©&c. and granted by God in an- 
ſwer to him, wer: 20. I have pardoned, &'c. Nor is it ſtrange that 
the pardon of ſin, eſpecially of ſuch great ſins, be ſpoken of as an 
at of power in: God, becauſe undoubtedly it 1s an aft of omni- 
potent, and infinite goodneſs ; whence deſpairing ſinners {ome- 
times cry out, thar their fins are greater than Go.1 can pardon, as 
ſome tranſlate Cains words. Gen: 4: 13. And ſince power is applied 
to Gods wrath in puniſhing ſin, Rom: 9. 22. why may it nor as well 
be attributed to Gods mercy in forgiving it ? Eſpecially if it be 
conſidered that even in men, revenge 15 an att of impotency, and 
conſequently it muſt needs be an a& of power to conquer their 
paſhons and inclinations to revenge, and to pardon thoſe enemies 
whom they could deſtroy. : 

is The LORD 5s * long-ſuffering, and of zrear 
mercy, forgiving iniquity and tranſgreflion, and by no 
means clearing rhe guilty, * viſiting the iniquity of the 
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth 


generation A, 

a3 Theſe words may ſeem to be very improperly mentioned, as 
being a powerful argument to move God ro deſtroy this wicked 
people, and not to pardon them. Ir may be anſwered, that Moſes 
uſeth theſe words together with the reſt, partly becauſe he would 
not ſever what God had put together, and 
did not deſire a full and abſolute pardon, Fhak was willing that 
God ſhould execute his vengeance upon the principal authors of 


* Exod. 
34. 6. 
Pfal: 
104.8, 
*Exod. 
20.5.and 


34- 7+ 


NUMBE R S. 


—— 


artly to ſhew thar he 


this rebellion,and leave ſome charaQter of his diſpleaſure upon all the | 


people, as God did, but only that God would not difinherit them 
wer: 12: nor kill all the people as one man, wer; +5. nor deſtroy them 
both root and branch, becauſe he had promiſed not to extend his 
wrath againſt them in puniſhing their ſins beyond the third and 
fourth generation. But the truer anſwer ſeems to be, t!1at theſe 


words are to be tranſlated otherwiſe, and in deſtroying he will not ut< | 


terly deſtroy, though he viſit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, 
unto the third and fourth generation, Of which ſee the nutes on Exod: 
34: 7. where all this verſe is explained. 

19 Pardon,l beſeech thee,the iniquity of this people, 
according to the greatneſs of thy mercy.and as thou haſt 
forgiven this people from Egypt, even * until now 6. 

b Aﬀer many and great provocations : ſhew thy ſelf ſtill to be 
the ſame ſin-pardoning God 

20 And the LORD ſaid, I have pardoned according 


to thy word c. ; 

c So far, as not utterly to deſtroy them, as I threatned wer: 12. 
and thou didſt fear, and beg the prevention of it, wer. x5. 

21 But truly as I live, * all the earth ſhall be filled 
with the glory of the LORD 7. 

a ( #. e.) Wirth the report of the glorious and righteous a&s of 
God in puniſhing this rebellious people in manner follo:»1ng. That 
this is the true ſence, appears both from the particle of oppoſition, 
and the ſolemn introduction of them, Bur truly as I live, and from 
the following verſes, becauſe all theſe zen, &c. which come in with- 
out any note of oppoſition, and have a manifeſt relation to and 
connettion with this verſe. 


* Or, hi- 


therto. 


* Pfal. 
2.19. 


ry e, and my miracles which I did in Egypt,and in the 


Chap. 
Univerſally and conltantly,in and through diſficultiesand dangers, 
which made his partners halt. & In general, Canaan, and parti- 
culaily Hebron, and the adjacent parts, Joſz 14: 9. 1 Or, ſhall expel 
4, 1. e. its innabitants, the land being oft pur for the people of it, 
Compare 7oſ: 8: 7: and 14: 12. 
.aF( Now the Amalekites, and the Canaanites dwelt 
in the valley ms ) ro morrow turn ye, and get ye into 
the wilderneſs, by the way of the Red-ſea n.. _T 

1 Beyond the mountain at the foot whereof they now were, v.45. 
And this clauſe is added, cither r. as an aggravation of Iſrael's mi- 
ſery and puniſhment, that being now ready to enter and take poſ- 
ſcion of the land they are forced ro go back into the wilderneſs : 
or 2. as ait argument to oblidge them more willingly to- obey the 
tollowing command of returning into the wilderneſs, becauſe their 
enemies were very near them, and ſevered from them only by that 
l1iumean mountain, and, if they did nor ſpeedily depart, their ene- 
mes would hear of them and fall upon them,and ſo the evil which 
before they cauleleſly feared would come upon them ; they, their 
w1ves and their children would become a prey to the Amalekites and 
Canaonites, becauſe God had forſaken th:m and would nor affiſt nor 
defend them. The verſe may be rendered thus, And or But, for the 
preſent, the Amalekite, and the Canaanite dwell in the valley ; there- 
fore ( which particle is here underſtood, as it is in othe: places) to 
morrow turn ye, ©, Though ſome knit theſe words to the former, 
and read the place thus, Caleb and his ſeed ſhall poſſeſs it, to vat, the 
land near Hebron, and alſo, the land of the Amalekites, and of the 
Canaamtes that dwell in the valley. Queft. But how are the Canaanites 
ſaid ro dwell in the valley, here, when they dwelt in the hill, v. 45. 
and by the ſea-coaſts, Numb. 21. 1? Auf. 1. Part 0: them dwelt in 
one place, and part in other places. - 2. The word, Canaanite, may 
here be underſtood more generally of all the inhabitants of Canaan. 
» (7.e.) That leadeth to the Red-ſea, and to Egypt, the place whi- 
ther you deſire to return, wv. 3, 4- 

26 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and unto Aa- 
ron, ſaying, | 

27 How long ſhall I bear with o this evil congregation 
which murmur againſt me ? I have heard the murmu- 
rings of the children of Iſrael which they murmur a- 
gainfſt me. 

0 Or, pardon, as v. 19, 29. or ſpar? : which words are neceſſarily 


and eaſily underſtood. Iris a ſhort and imperfe& ſpeech, which is 
frequent in caſe of anger, as Exod. 32, 32. Pſal. 6. 3.an4go. 1 


28 day unto them,* As truly as I live. faith the LORD 


as * ye have ſpoken p in mine ears, ſo will I do td youg : 65.and | 


> When you wickedly wiſhed you might have died in the wil- 
derneſs,v.3. q I will bring your 1mprecations upon your heads. 
2) Your carcaſes jhall fall in this wilderneſs, and all 
that were numbred of you, according to your whole 
number,from ewenty years old and upward which have 
murmured againſt me, 
30 Doubtleſs ye ſhall not come into the land concer#- 
ing which I + ſware to make you r dwell therein, ſave 


| Calebthe ſon of Jephunneh,and Joſhua the ſon of Nun, 


r (z.e.) Your Nations ; for God did not ſwear to do ſo to theſe 


_ particular perſons. 


[] 


3 


3 1 But your little ones which ye ſaid ſhould be a prey, 
them wall I bring in, and they ſhall know the land 


' which ye have diſpiſed. 


32 Bur as for you, your carcaſes they ſhall fall in this 
wilderneſs. 


33 And your children ſhall || wander 5 jn the wilder- 


neſs fory years t,and bear your whoredoms « until your 
Carcaſes be walted in the wilderneſs. 

s Like ſheep feeding in the deſerts : or, ſhall be ſhepherds, 5. e. | 
Iive like the ſhepherds of Arabia, in tents = —— from boo 
to place, having no certain dwelling. # (7.e. ) So long as to make 
up the time of your dwelling in the wilderneſs forty years, as ap- 
pears from Numb. 33.8. Deut. 1. 3. and 2, 14. Compare Amor i. 24. 
It is manifeſt, that one whole year and part of another were paſt be- 
fore this ſin or judgment. « (/.e.) The puniſhment of your whore- 


; doms, to wit, of your Apoſtacy from, and perfidiouſneſs againſt 
, your Lord, who was your husband,and had married you to himſelf, 


wilderneſs,and have tempted me now theſe ten times f, 


and have not hearkened to my voice ; 

e (7. e.) My glorious appearances in the cloud, and in the Ta- 
bernacle. f (i. e.) Many times. A certain number for an uncertain, 
as Gen: 31: 7. Levit: 26: 8. Joh: 19: 3. Though ſome reckon ten 
times preciſely, wherein they did eminently provoke God. 

23 * Þ Surely they (hall not ſce che land which I 
ſware unto their fachers,neither ſhall any of chem that 
_— provoked me, fee it : 

_— 24 But my ſervant * Caleb g, becauſe he had ano- 
Heb.3.17. ther ſpirit with him h, and hath followed me fully z ; 
+ Heb. if him will T bring into the land, whereinto he went |, 
rad the and his ſeed {hail poflels it /. 
- Joſh £ Joſhua is not here named, becauſe he was not now among the 
6 8 -14- people, but a conſtant atrendant upon Moſes, nor was he to be reck- 
19:9- onedas one of them, any more than Afſes and Aaron were, becaule 
he was to be their chief commanuer, þ (:. e. ) Was a man of ano- 
ther temper, and carriage, faitiiful and couragious, nor a&ed by 
that evil ſpirit of Trowardize, unbeliet, unthankfulneſs, difobedi- 
ence, which ruled in hus brethren, byt by the ſpirit of God, 7 (7 e.) 


* Deur. 


3.39. 
Pſal.gs. 


' ye bear your iniquities - e 
22 Becauſe all thoſe men which have ſeen my glo- : Y y quiries ; even forty years, 


; » That as you have firſt broken the covenant berween 


| 


See Fer. 3. 14. Whence Idolatry is called whoredom,. 


34*Afcer the number of the days in which ye ſearched 
the land, even * forty days (each day fora year #) ſhall 


and ye ſhall 

know || my breach of promiſe z. , 
x So there ſhould have been 40 years to come, but God was 
pleaſed mercifully ro accepr of the time paſt as a part of that time. 


: N t you and me, 
by breaking re terms or conditions of it, ſo I will make it void on 


my part, by denying you the bleſſings promiſed in that covenant, 
and to be given to you in caſe of your obedience. So you ſhall ſee 

that the breach of promiſe wherewirh you charged me, wer. 3. lies 
at your dcor, and was forced from me by your pertidiouſneſs. Or 

my breach, either paſſively, 7. e. your: breaking off from me, as ſuch 
pronouns are oft uſed, as Gen. 50. 1.-4ſa.55.11.and 56. 7. or attive- 
ly, /.e. my breaking of or departing from you, and ſtoping the 
current of my bleſhings toward you : you ſhall feel by experience, 
how fad your condition is when F withdraw my grace and favour 
trom you. 

35 I the LORD have ſaid, I will ſurelie do ic unto 
all this evil congregation, that are gathered together, 
againſt me ; in this wilderneſs they ſhall be conſumed,- 
and there they ſhall die, 


36 And the men whom Moſes fene to fearch the land: 
who returned, and made all the congregation to mur 
mur againſt him, by bringing up a flander upon the land 

2 B 37 Even 


XIV. 


T. 35. 


l 


| 
* Ch.2 s | 


22.10.85: 


Deur. 


' See V.2s 


F Heb, 
lifted up 
my hand, 


| Or. fe 


* Chap, 
17.28. 
* Pal. 
F. 10., 
xek.4 
|! Or, alt 
ring of m 
purpoſe. 


"Chap. XV. FT” 
ii 27 Even thoſe men that did bring up the = = 
+; Cor. port upon the land, * died by the plague z betore the 
ORD «. 

_ Either by the peſtilence, threatned wv: 12. or by ſome other 
Cadden and extraordinary judgment. # (:. e.) Sent from the cloud in 

which God dwelt, and from whence he ſpake to Moſes, and —_— 

his glory at this time appeared before all the people, v. 10. W 4 

therefore were all, and theſe ſpies among the reſt, before the Lor © 

28 Bur Joſhua the ſon of Nun, and Caleb the fon 0 
Jephunneh, 2bich were of the men that went to ſearch 
the land, lived {//. | us 

29 And Moſes told.theſe ſayings unto all the children 
of Iſrael, and the people mourned greatly. 

40 And they roſe up early in the morning, and gat 
them up b into the top of the mountain, ſaying, Lo, 
we * be here, and will go up into the place which the 
LORD hath promiſed : for we have ſinned. 

b (i.6.) Deſigned-or attempted or prepared themſelves to g0 up : 
for that they were not yer actually gone up, plainly appears from 
V. 42, 44. and from Deut: 1. 41. Things deſigned or indeavoured 
in Scripture-phraſe are oft ſaid to be done. See on Ger. 37. 21,22. 
Exod. 8. 18: 0 ( 

41 And Moſes ſaid, wherefore now do ye tranſ{greſs 
the commandment of the LORD <c? bur it ſhall not 

roſper. ES 

n c Either that command, Go not up, &c. which, though in this 

place mentioned after, yet may ſeem to have gone before their 

tranſpreſſion, by comparing this place with Deur. 1. 42, 43- Or 

that command above, v.25. turn ye and get ye into the wilderneſs, &C. 

which was a courſe dire&ly contrary to that which they took. 

42 Go not up, for the LORD 3s not among you, 
that ye be not ſmitten before your enemies. 

43 For the Amalekites, and the Canaanites are there 
before you, and ye ſhall fall by the ſword ; becauſe ye 
are turned away from the LORD, therefore the LORD 
will not be with you. 

44 But they preſumed d to go up unto the hill top : 
nevertheleſs the ark of the covenant of the LORD,and 

| Moſes departed not out of the camp. 

d Guilty both of raſhneſs and rebellion, thus running from one 
EXtyFeme tO another. 

. 45 Then the Amalekites came down, and the Cana- 
W Deut. | Anites e which dwelt f in that hill, and ſmore them, * 
We +7. . and diſcomfited them, even unto * Hormah g. 

| Ch.23. 3. ry 

int e Largely ſo called, but ſtriftly the 4morites,as appears from Deut. 

I. 44. f So they were a part and branch of thoſe that dwelt in the 
valley, v. 25. Or, ſat, z. e. placed themſelves, lay in ambuſh, ex- 
peQing your coming. g A place ſo called afterwards, Numb. 21. 3+ 
from the great ſlaughter or deſtruftion of the 77-elires at this time. 


CH A P.j XV. 


of Meat and Drink-Offerings, 1=-=16. The Law of the firſt of the Dough 
for a heave-offering, 17----21. The Sacrifice for ſins of Ignorance of the 
whole congregation, 22==----26. or when a ſmgle Soul is guilty, 27---29, 
Puniſhments for preſumptuous Sinners, JO 31. Of che Man that ga- 
thered Sticks on the Loras Day, and his Death, 32-----36, God com- 
mandeth them to wear Fringes on their Garments, 37-====38. The uſe 
thereof, 39=—=-41. 


N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes ſaying, 
A 2 * Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and ſay 
unto them, When ye be come into the land of your 
habitations, which I give « unto you, 


a (i.e. ) Will certainly give you, notwithſtanding this great 
provocation, ang my unchangeable comminarion. And for their 
better aſſurance hereof he repeats and amplifies the laws of facrifi- 
ces, whereby through Chritt he was or would be reconciled to 
them and theirs upon their repentance. 

2 And will make an offering by fire unto the LORD, 
*Le.17.16 a burnt-offering,or a ſacrifice b* in F performing a vow, 
and 22.21 or in a free-will-oftering, or * in your ſolemn feaſts, to 


_ make a * ſweet favour unto the LORD, of the herd or 


*Lev.13.8 Of the flock, 

22,36.Ch. + (7. e.) A peace-offering, as appears 1. becauſe that word put 
28.16.17. by it {elf is often ſo taken, as Exod. 18. 12. Levit. 17: 5,8. and 23. 
& 29.2,8, 37- Deut. 12. 27. 2: becauſe the offerings for ſins and treſpaſſes had 
13. Deut. 10 meat-offerings and drink-offerings attending upon them, excep- 
16. 10. ting only the caſe of Lepers cleanſing, Levit- 14, 10. 3. becauſe this 
* Exod. is explained by and called peace-oferings, wer. 8. 4. from'the words 
29.18, here following, becauſe peace-offerings were commonly offered 
th either in performance of a vow, or freely, or by Gods command 
in their ſolemn feaſts, all which are here expreſſed. 


4 Then * ſhall he that offerech his offering unto the 
LORD, bring a * meat-offering of a tenth-deal c of 
flour, mingled with the fourth par: of an hin of oil 9. 


c; Or, tenth part, to wit, of an Ephah, 7. e. an Omer, Exod. 16. 
36. d Wherein it ſeems to differ from ſuch meat-offerings as were 
ſolitary, and nor acceſlories to other ſacrifices. 


5 And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink- 
offering ſhalt thou prepare, with the burnt-offering, or 
ſacrifice, for one lamb. 

6 Or for a ram,thou ſhalt prepare for a meat-offering 
two tenth-deals e of flour mingled with the third par: 
of an hin of oil. 

e Becauſe this belonged to a better ſacrifice than the former ; 


* Levit. 
23.10. 


*Lev.2.1. 
* Exod. 
129.409. 
Vit. 23. 
I3. 


tenth deals. 


So the acceſlory ſacrifice grows proportionably with 
the principal. | - . 


V UO M B \ 


"R-S Chap. % '/ 


7 And for a drink-offering, thou ſhalt offer the third 
part of an hin of wine,for a ſweet ſavour unto the LORD. 

8 And when thou prepareft a bullock for a burnt: of- 
fering,or fer a ſacrifice in performing a vow,or * peace- * Levir. 
offerings f unto the LORD: 7-H. 

f (5.e. ) Or any other peace-offerings, to wit, ſuch as were offe. 
red either freely or by command, which may be called peace-ofe-ings 
or thank-offerings, by way of eminency, becauſe ſuch are offered 
purely by way of gratitude to God, and with ſingle reſpet to his 
command and honour, whereas the peace-offerings made in perfor 
mance of a vow were made and offered by way of Contract, and 
with deſign of getting ſome advantage by them, 

9 Then fhall he bring with a bullock a meat-offering 
of three tenth deals of flour, mingled with half an hin 
of oyl. 

10 And thou ſhalt bring for a drink-oftering half an 
hin of wine, for an offering made by fire of a ſweet 
ſavour unto the LORD. 

11, Thus ſhall it be done for one bullock, or for one 
ram, or fora lamb, or a kid. 

12 According to the number that ye {ball prepare, fo 
ſhall ye do to every one according to their number g. 

g (7.e.) As many cattle as ye ſacrifice,ſo many meat and drink- 
offerings ye ſhall offer. 

13 All that are born of the countrey ſhall do theſe 


by fire of a ſweet ſavour unto the LORD. 

14 And if a ſtranger þ ſojourn with you, or whoſo- 
ever be among you in your generations, and will offer 
an offering made by fire of a ſweet ſavour unto the 
LORD : as ye do, fo he ſhall do. 


: To wit, Proſelyte, for ſuch offerings were not accepted from 
others. 


15 * One ordinance fball be borh for you of the con- * E924 
gregation, and alſo for the ſtranger that ſojourneth, (1;*2; 
with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations : as my 
ye are, ſo (hall the ſtranger be before the LORD ;. 

z (i.e.) As to the worſhip of God: his ſacrifices ſhall be c£. 
fered in the ſame mannerand accepted by God upon the ſame terms 
as yours: which wasa preſfage of the future calling of the Gentiles. 
And this is added by way of caution and diſtin&ion, to ſhew thax 
ſtrangers were not upon this pretence to partake of their civil Pri= 
viledges. 

16 One law, and one manner ball be for you, and 
for the ſtranger that ſojourneth with you. 

17 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

18 Speak unto the children of Ifrael, and {ay unto 
chem,When ye come unto the land whither I bring you 

19 Then it ſhall be, that when ye eat & of the bread 


] of the land, ye ſhall ofter up an heave-offri 
the LORD m. 4 ring unto 


 & (7.e. ) When you are about to eat it: for before they did eat 
it, they were to offer this offering to God. 1! (7. 2.) The breadcorn 
as that word is uſed, Job. 28.5. Pſal. 10g. I14. Iſa. 28.28. m(i.e ) 
To the prieſts of the Lord, as appears from Exek. 44. 30. oy 

20 Ye hall offer up a cake of the firſt of your dough 


for an heave-otfering : as ye do * the heave offering of * Levit.2. 
the threſbing floor z, ſo ſhall ye heave it 0. 14.and 23 
n (7. ec.) Of the corn in the threſhing floor, as Dexz. 16. 13. when i 
you have gathered in your corn. 0 (7.e. ) You ſhall offer this in 
the ſame proportion, to the ſame perſons, 7. e. the Prieſts. and with 
the ſame rites. : 
21 Of the firſt of your dough ye hall give unto the 
LORD an heave-oftering in your generations. 


22 And* if ye have erred, and not obſerved all theſe *Lev.4.2. 


commandments p which the LORD hath ſpoken unto 
Moſes ; 


? To wit, thoſe now ſpoken of, thoſe which concern the out= 
ward worſhip and ſervice of God,or the rites or ceremonies belon 
ingtoit. And herein principally this law may ſeem to differ from 
that Lev. 4. 13. which ſpeaks of ſome poſitive miſcarriage or doin 
that which ought not ro have been done about the holy things of 
God, whereas this ſpeaks only of an omiſſion of ſomething which 
ought to have been done about holy ceremonies. But beſides this 
that law, Lev. 4. 13. concerns the whol: cengregation of Iſrael, as it is 
there expreſſed, bur this concerns only the congregation, or a congre= 
gation, as it 1s here expreſſed, v. 24. 7. e. any particular wins 
gation of 1/raelites, whether of a whole tribe meeting together by 
their repreſentatives, or a leſſer congreg:tion, ſuch as there were *d 
be many in Canaan, and the words rendred, all the congregation, ma 
be, and are by ſome here, rendred every congregation. And by ns 
of this law, as ſome ſuppoſe, the 16-aelires newly after their return 
from the captivity offered 12 bullocks,one for each tribe, Ezra8.35. 


things after this manner, in offering an offering made | 


23 Ever all that the LORD hath commanded 
the hand of Moſes, from the day th 
manded Moſes, and had joint 


rations z _ 
24 Then it ſhall be, if o»ght be committed by igno- 


you by 
D com- 
eforward among your gene- 


. for aburnt-offering 7,for aſw 
' with his meat-offering,and his drink- 


and therefore in the next ſacrifice of a bullock, there are three . 


range, T without the knowledoe of ; 

that a!l the congregation ſhall offer A nn, * Loprr 
eet ſavour unto the LORD, 9%. 
oftering,according 

ats for a ſin-offerin | 


OV OY Ms et 


to che [[manner,and one kid of the g0 
7 In Levit. 4. the bullock is for a 


burnt-offering, either becauſe they are different laws, as hath been 4i9#"* 


ſaid 


ſin-offering, here it is for a [| Or, Or- i 


STS Ms ah 1. 


branes &, or if they be viſited after the viſitation of all men 7, 
lieth. then the LORD hath not ſent me m-. 
k (i.e.) By a natural death. / (z. e.) By plague, or ſword, or 
* ſome uſuil judgment. m» (7: &«) I am content that you take me for 
an Impoſtour, tallly pretending to be ſent of God. This be might 
well tay, bzcauſe he was inipired by God to ſay this, and infallibly 
aſſured by God that this ſhould be done. 
}Heb:ore- 3o But if the LORD + make a new thing », and 


6: Pfal: 32 And the earth opened her mouth, and ſwallowed 
ohio them up, and their houſes, and * all the men that apper- 


+ Heb: 


Chap. XVI. 
| things, ſo concernin? the Prieſthood, which 1s the ground of the 
preſent quarrel ; and, that which vexeth them moſt, that wv hen 
they were upon the borders of Canaon, and ready to enter 1n, I 
outd canſe them to go bick into this vaſt howling Wildemeſs, 
and tix theft there for forty years. # By pretending or uſurping 
an authority which God gave me not ; by feigning words or meſ- 
ſaves from God to eſtabliſh my own inventions, and to comply 
with my own will or luſt or intereſt, as I am now accuſed to have 
done. For this phraſe ſec Numb: 24:13. Ezek: 13: 2, | 
29 If theſe men dic | the common death of all men 


22 4 crea= the earth open her mouth, and ſwallow them up, with 
_—_ all that apperiaiz unto them, and they go down quick 
HHeb:into | into the pit 0, then ye ſhall underſtand that theſe men 
bel. have provoked the LORD p. | 
n (i: e;) Do ſuch a work as was never heard before. o (7:e:) 
Into the grave which God thereby makes. The Hebrew word Scheol 
ſometimes ſignifies hell, and: ſometimes the grave, as Gen: 37; 35 
Pal; 55: 15: p By making his words and works to be nothing but 
my devices and artifices. 
*Chap.26 . 31 * And it came to paſs as he had made an end of 
10:& ip ſpeaking all theſe words, that the ground clave alunder 


Deut:11: that was under them : 


i7; and tained unto Korah q, and all zhcir goods. 
Chap. 26: q (.e.) All his family which were there, women, children, 
1. and ſervants : but his ſons, who were ſpared, Numb: 26: 11, 58+ 


N UV MBS EE Rx : 


1 Chron: 6: 22, 37. were abſent cither upon ſome ſervice of the Ta- | 
ernacle, or upon ſome orcher occaſion, God fo ordering it by his'! 


providence, either becauſe they diſliked their fathers act, or upon * 


Moſes his interceſſion for them, or for ſome other reaſon. This: 


expreilion may ſeem r0 intimate, that Korah himſelf was .not here, ; 


bur that he continued with his 250 men before the Lord, wer: 18: 
19. where they were wairing for Gods decition »f the controveriie, 
nor is it probable that their chief captain would deſert them, and 
leave them ſtanding there without an head, eſpecially, when Aaron, 
his grear adverſary, abode there ſtill, and did not go with Azſes to 
Dathan, &c. wer: 25. And Korah may ſeem to have been conſu- 
med wit thoſe 250. ver: 35: though he be not mentioned r:1ere, 
bur is ealily underſtood by comparing that verſe with ver: 16, 17. 
18. and from the narure of the thing it ſelf, there be.ng no cauſe 
of doubr, but that deſtruction which befel the acceſlaries did much 
more involve the principal And ſo much is intimated, wer: 40: 
that no ſtranger come near to offer incenſe before the Lord, that he be not 
as Korah, and as his company, i. e. deſtroyed, as th-y were, by fire 
from the Lo-d. And when the Pfalmiſt relares this "iſtory, Pſal; 
126. the earths ſwallowing them upis contined to Dathunu and Abi- 
ram, wer: 17. and for all the reſt of that conſpiracy, it is added, 
wer: 18. Acid a fire was kindled in their company, the flame burnt up the 
wicked, As for Num. 26: 10- which fe:ms to oppoſe this oppinion, 
we ſhall ſee more on that place, if God permir. 

23 Tney and ail that «ppertazined to th:'m, went down 
alive into Þ the pit ”, and the earth cloſed upon them ; 
and they periſhed from among the congiegation 

r (7: e:) Into the earth, which firlt opened it ſelf to receive them 
and then ſhoor it ſelf to deſtroy them and tranſmit them to fur- 


bll. 


ther puniſhment. ; 


24 And alli Iſrael that were round abou: them, fled at 


the cry of them : for they ſaid, Leſt the earth ſwailow 


up us alſo, 


25 And there cam? out a fire from the LORD -£,and 


conſumed the two hundred and fifty men thar offered 
incenſe. 


Ver: 19. to give ſentence 1n this cauſe. 


35 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 


37 Speak unto Eleazar # the ſon of Aaron the prieſt, 


that he rake up the cenſers our of the burning «, and 


ſcatter thou the fire x yoiuder y, for they are haiiowed z. | 
£ Rather taan to Aaron, partly becauſe the rroubleſome part of ! 


tne work was more proper for him and partly leſt Aaron ſhould be 


polluted by going amongſt theſe dead carcaſles ; f r it is p:obable 
tais fi-e conſumed them, as lightning ſometimes doth others, by \ 


taking away tneir lives, and leaving their bodies dead u;0on the 
place. n id 
were burnt. 
the captives, Numb 21 1. and poverty for the poor, 2 Kings 24: 14. 
x (::e:) The cinders or aſhes which are left in or near their cen- 
ſers. y (i: e ) Far from the altar and ſanqtuary, into an unclean 
place, where the aſhes were wont t» be caſt : by which God ſhews 
his rejection of their ſervices. -z Either 1. by Gods appointment 
becauſe they were preſented before the Lord vy his expreſs order 
ver: 16. 379. Or 2. by Gods juſt ju.igment, becauſe they, rogether 
with the perſons that uſed them, were accurſed and devored by 
Go.i, and therefore were the Lords, and not to be imployed in any 
profane or common ule, as appears from Lev: 27: 28 But the firſt 
reaſon is the chief, and is rendred by God himſelf, wer: 38. 

38 The cenſers of theſe tinneis againit their own 


fouls 2, ler them make them broad plates fer a covering 


of the Altar b: for they offered them before the LORD, 


; Ntaff : oy rather, that Naff or rod, 


therefore they are hallowed, and they (ball be a ſign c 
unto the children of Iſrael, 


—_ 


Orb ” 


i: e: ) From among the dead b-:dies of thoſe men who ' 
Burning put for thoſe who art burnt, as captivity for : 
: God confirming Aarons calling by the budding 


a (i:e.) Their own lives : who were the authors of their own 
death and deftruion. Compare r Kings 22 23: Prov: 25:*2. This 
he faith for the vindicaticn of Gods juſtice and his own miniſtry 
in this ſevere diſpenſation. 6 To wit, of burnt-cfferings, which 
was made of wood, bur covered with braſs before this tine, Exod: 
27: I, 2. tO Which this other covering was added for further orna- 
ment and ſecurity againſt the fire, which was continually burning 
upon it. c A monument or warning to all ſtrangers to take heed 
of invading the Prieſthood, as it follows, wer: 40. 

39 And Eleazar che prieſt took the brazen cenſers, 
wherewith they that were burnt had offered, and they 
were made broad plates for a covering of the altar : 

49 To be a memorial unto the children of Iſ;ael, that 
no ſtrangzr, which js not of the ſeed of Aaron, come 
near to offer incenſe before the LORD, that ke be not 
as Korah, and as his company 4: as the LORD ſaid 
to him e by the hand of Moſes. | 


d (i:c.) That he do not imitate them in their fin, and there- 


| fore bring upon himſelf the ſame plague. e (7. e.) To Eleazer 


Theſe words belong to ver: 38. the meaning is, that Eleazar did as 
God bade him. 

41 But 6n the morrow fall the congregation of the 
children of iſrael murmured againſt Moſes and againſt 
Aaron, faying, ye have killed g the people of the 
LORD 5b. | 


f Prodigious wickeineſs and madneſs ſo ſoon to forget ſuch a 
terrible inſtance of divine vengeance. g You, who ſhould have 
preſerved them, and interceded for them, have pull-d down Gods ' 
wrath upon them. for the maintainance of your 0+ n .uthocity and 
intereſt. þ So they call thoſe wicked wretches, and rebels gainſt 
God : which ſhews the power of paſſion and prejudice to cor: upt 
mens judgment. | 

42 And ir came to paſs, when the congregation was 
gathered againſt Moſes, and againſt Aaron, that they 5 
looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation, and 
behold, the clood covered it,and the glory of the LORD 
appeared. 

i (i:e: ) Miſes and Aaron, who in all their diſtreſſes made God 
their refuge. 

43 And Moſes and Aaron came before the taberna- 
cle of the congregation &. 

k To hear what God, who now appeared, would ſay to him, 

44 And the LORU ſpake uaro Moſes, ſaying, 

45 Get thee up from among this congregation, that I 
may conſume them as in a moment : and they fell upon 
their faces /. ; 

1 To beg pardon and mercy for the people,as they oft did ; thus 
rendering good to them for evil, which the people requited with 
evil for their kindneſs. 

46 And Moſes ſaid unto Aaron, Take a cenſer, and 
pur fire therein from off the Altar, and put on incenſe 
m, and go quickly unto the congregation », and make 
an artonement for them : for there is wrath gone out 
from the LORD ; the piagne is begun o. | 

m Which was a ſign of interceſſion, Pal: 141: 2. and was to be 
accompanicd with it, Luke 1. 9: 10. » With the incenſe, to ſtir up 
the peopl- to repentance and prayer to prevent their utter ruins 
This he might do up 'n this ext'ao:dinary occaſion, having Gods 
command for _ CI mough ordinarily :!ncen'e was t: be of 
fered only in the Tabernacle. o In cuting off th 6 
den and miraculous ſtroke. T © PE I 

47 And Aaron took as Moſes commanded, and ran 
into the midſt of the congregation p : and behold, the 


plague was begun amonglt the people: and he put on 
incenſe, and mide an atonement for the people. 


p Hazarling his own life to obey God and to do this wicked 
people good. 
45 And he ſtood between the dead and the living q 


s (i:e.) From the cloud, wherein the glory of the Lord appeared ' and the plague Was ſtay ed. 


q Whereby it may ſeem that this plague, like that fire, Numb: 
71: 1 began in the uttermoſt parts of the congregation, and ſo 
proceeded de:'r-ying one afrer another in an orderly thing 
which gave Aaron occaſion and dire&ion fo to place himſelf ; 
Mcdiatour to God on their behalf. » Sa 


49 Now they that died in the plague.we 
thouſand and ſeven hundred, beſide Ss n_ prone 
bout the matter of Korah. 


5o And Aaron returned unto Moſes unto the door 
of the tabernacle of the congregation : and the plague 
was ſtayed. CH AP. XVII 7 


and the bloſſoming of his xod, 
1=---=9. Commandaecth it to be laid up for a —_ po. ba 20 
Rebels, 10. | 


Toe People being terrified thereby, ſeek to Moſes for ſuccour 
oem TY : 


A N D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaving 
2 Speak uno tlie Children of Iirae! a, and take 
of every one of them þ a rod c, according to the houſe 
of their fathers d, of all their Princes according to the 
houſe of their tathers, twelve rods : write thou every 
mans e name upon his rod. 
a That I may fully and finally fatisfie all their ſcruples, and rake 


away all pretence and cauſe of mourmurinss.b Not of ever erſd 
. . : X N 
but of every Tiibe, as it follows. c Either an ordinary walking 


; w hich the Princes crried ir 
their hands as tokens of their dignity and authority ; as may be ga- 


thered from Numb: 21; 18; compared with Pjal; 110: 2. Jeremiah 48: 
2B 3 16, 


" | 
Chap. XVII. | 


nn i 


; Ge I IIS ITN ESE SIS © LAS << 


| Chap. XVILL « N O M 
| 6.1,” d (5. e.) According to each family proceeding from the 
Puakenh A. AA of that Tribe. e (7. e.) Every Princes : for 
they being the firſt-born, and the chief of their Tribes might a- 
bove all others pretend to the Prieſthood, if it was communicable 
ro any of their tribes, and beſides each Prince repreſented and aU- 
<d for all his Trib* : ſo that this was a full deciſion of the whole 
queſtion. And this place feems to confirm, what was before ob- 
ſerved, that not only Korah and the Levites, but alſo thoſe of other 
Tribes conteſted with Moſes and Aaron about the Prieſthood,as that 
which belonged to all the congregation, they being all holy, as 
they faid, Numb: 16: 3. 
And. thou thalt write Aarons name fupon the rod 
of Levi ; for one rod ſhall be for the head of the houſe 


of their fathers g. 

Rather than Zevi's name, for that would have left the contro- 
verſie undecided between Aaron and the other Levites, whereas this 
would juſtifie the appropriation of the Prieſthood to Aaron: family. 
g (i.e. ) There ſhall be in this, as there 1s 1n all the other Tribes, 
only one rod, and that for the head of their Tribe, who 1s Aaron 1n 
this Tribe : whereas it might have been expe&ed rhat there ſhould 
have been two rods, one for Aaron, and another for his Compett- 
tours of the ſame Tribe: But Aarons name was ſufficient to derer- 
mine both the Tribe, and that branch or family of the Tribe, to 
4 whom this dignity ſhould be aflixed. | 

I® ExoJ: 4 And thou thalt lay them up 1n the tabernacle of the 
#25: 22.  congregation,before the teftimony þ X where 1 will meet 
LM with yOu 5. | ts | 

h (5. e.) Before the ark of the teſtimony, either mediately,cloſe 
by the vail behind which the Ark ſtood : or rather immediately, 
within the vail in the moſt holy place, cloſe by the Ark, as may be 
gathered by comparing this place with wer. 19. and with Heb: 9: 4. 
7 And manifeſt my mind to you for the ending of this diſpute. 

5 And it ſhall come co paſs, zhat che mans rod whom 
I ſhall chooſe, ſhall blofſom : and I will make to ceaſe 
from me the mournings of the children of Ifrael, where- 
by they murmur againſt you. ; | 
W + He: .. $ And Moſes ſpake unto the children of Iſrael, and 
WF rod fer one EVETY One of their princes gave him + a rod a piece, for 
Wy prince, - each prince one, according to their fathers houſes, even 
Hy rod for ore twelve rods:andthe rod of Aaron was among their rods h. 
\ Wi þ (i. «) Was laid up with the reſt, being either one of the 

twelve, as the Hebrews affirm, or the thirteenth, as others think; . 

7 And Moſes laid up the rods before the LORD in 
the tabernacle of witneſs, 

8 And it came to paſs, that on the morrow Moſes 
went into the tabernacle of witneſs /, and behold, the 
red of Aaron for the houſe of Levi was budded, and 
brought forth buds, and bloomed bloſſoms, and yeilded 


almonds ». | 

1 Into the moſt holy place, which he might ſafely do under the 
prote&ion of Gods command,though otherwiſe none bur the Hi gh- 
prieſt might enter there, and that once in a year. m This being, 


Ki 
wil ft 
: [{ 

| 


as the reſt alſo were. 

9 And Moſes brought out all the rods from before the 

LORD;unto all the Chi!dren of Ifrael : and tiey looked, 
*Heb:9:4: and took every man his rod. ; 
10 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, * Bring Aarons 
+Heb:ch;1. Tod again before the teſtimony, to be kept for a roken 
dren of re« againit the + rebels,and thou ſhalt quite take away their 
beliom. murmurings from me, that they die not . | 

» For if after all theſe warnings and prohibitions, backt with 
ſuch miracles and judgments, they ſhall uſurp the Prieſtzood, they 
ſhall aſſuredly die for it. 

it And Moſes did ſo: as the LORD commanded 
him, ſo did he. | 

12 And the children of Iſrael ſpake unto Moſes ſay- 
ing, Behold, we dic, we periſh, we all periſh s. 

o Words of conſternation ariſing partly from the 409 pt ce 
of theſe ſevere and repeated judgments, partly from the threatniny 
of death upon any ſucceeding murmurings, partly from the ſenile 
of their own guilt and weakneſs, which made them fear leſt rhey 
ſhould relapſe into the ſame miſcarriages, and thereby bring the 
vengeance of God upon themſelves. _ 

12 Wholoever cometh any thing near p unto the ta- 
bernacle of the LORD, ſhall die : ſhall we be conſu- 
med with dying q ? 

p (7.e:) Nearer than he ſhould do ; an errour which we may, ea- 
fily commit. q Will God proceed with us in theſe ſevere courſes, 
according to his ſtri& juſtice ? will he ſhew us no mercy nor pity, 
till all the people be cut off and deſtroyed with dying one after 


another ? 

C H A P. XVIIL. 

God ſheweth to Aaron, his ſons and the Levites, their Office, 1==-==y, Ap- 
pointeth ro Aaron and his ſons their maintenance, 8----=20. Aud alſo to 
the Levites, 21=---=24. He commandeth them by Moſes, t0 give Tenths 
of their Tenths to the chief Prieſts, 25-==--3 2. 


N D the LORD faid unto Aaron, Thou, and thy 
>. ſons, and thy fathers houſe with thee, (hall bear 

*Levit: * the iniquity of the ſanctuary # : and thou and thy ſons 

18: 25. With thee, ſhall bear the iniquity of your prieſthood 6. 

a (3. e. ) Shall ſuffer the puniſhment of all the uſurpations, or 
pollutions of the SanEtuary, or the holy things,by the Levitesor any 
of the people, becauſe you have authority and power from me to 
keep them all within their bounds, and I expe& you uſe it to that 
end. Thus the people are in good meaſure ſecured againſt their fears 


as Joſephus with great probability affirms, a ſta of an almond tree, 


+ 3 4. * Chap. XVII.. 


ſuch reaſon to envy him as they might think,if the benefits and en- 


all the errours commited by your ſelves, or by you permitted in 
others in things belonging to your Prieſthood. : 


2 And thy brethren alſo of the tribe of Levi, the 


tribe of thy father,bring thou with thee, that they may 


be * joyned unto thee,and miniſter unto thee c;but thou 
and thy ſons with thee ſhall miniſter d before the taberna- 
cle of witneſs. 

c About ſacrifices and offerings and other things, according to 
the rules and limits I have preſcrived them. 'The Levites are faid 
to miniſter to 42r0» here, to the Church, Numb: 16:9. and to God, 
Deut. 10: 8. They thall not contend with thee for ſuperiority, as 
they have done, but they ſhall be ſubordinate and ſervants to thee. 
4 Or, both to thee, and to thy ſons with thee : Which tranſlation may 
ſeem to be favoured by the following words, before the tabernacle, 
which was the proper place where the LZewites miniſtred, whereas the 
Prieſts did miniſter to God both before and in the Tabernacle, 
Beſides, both the foregoing words, and the two following verſes, 
do intirely ſpeak of the miniſtry of the Levites, and the miniſtry 
of the Prieſts is diſtin&ly ſpoken of, wer 5, 

3 And they tbalt keep thy charge e, and the charge 
of all the tabernacle f : only they ſhall not come nigh 
the veſlels of the ſanctuary, and the altar s, that neither 
they, nor ye þ allo die, | 

e (7.e.) That which thou ſhalt command them and commit un- 
to them. f (7. e.) Of the boards and hangings and utenſils of the 
Tabernacle, to take them down and carry them, and ſet them u 


again. g Which therefore were to be covered by the prieſt bef, 
the Levires might meddle with them, þ They for emo t= 


touch them,and you for your negligence in not covering them well, 
or not looking to them. 


4 And they ſhall be joyned unto thee, and keep the 
charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for all the 
ſervice of the tabernacle : and a ſtranger ſhall not come 
nigh unto you. 

5 And ye ſball keepthe charge of the ſanctuary 3, and 
the charge of the altar,that there be no wrath any more 
upon the children of IfraeÞk. 

7 ( 7.e.) Of the holy, and of the moſt holy place. & For coming 


too near the holy place, or for uſurping any part of your ſacred 


through your carlefineſs or remiſneſs,in which caſe they ſhall nerj 
for their errour, but their blood will I require at Ne a" _ 
ſhould have adviſed them better, or over-ruled them. T 


| 6 And 1, behoid, I have* taken your breth 
Levites from among the children of Iſrael : to * you they 
the tabernacle of the congregation. 


- | (i.e.( For the ſervice of the Lord, to affift v SEES 
. ou there 
the ſervile and troubleſome parts of it. ; ? eng 


7 Lheretore thou and thy ſons with thee ſhall keep 
your prieſts oifice for every thing of the altar m, and. 
within the vail, and ye ſhall ſerve: I have oiven your 
prieſts office unto you, as a ſervice of gift o ; and the ftran- 
ger that cometh nigh ſhall be put to death. 


m To wirt,of burnt-offering,as appears from the following words 
7 This phraſe elſewhere ſignifies the inward or ſecond vail,but here 
it fignifies either the outward vail only, or rather both the vails 
the ſingular number being pur for the plural, as when the altar js 


put for both the altars, as hath been noted : a t 
prehends both the holy and the moſt holy = nf raph cv are 
| have freely conferred upon you,and upon you alone; and therefore 
let no man henceforth dare either to charge you with arrogance and 
-— in appropriating this to your ſelves, or to invade your 
Cc. 

8 And the LORD ſpake unto Aaron, Behold, I alſo 

have given thee the charge of mine heave-offerings, of 


all che hallowed things of the children of Iſrael, unto 


$\ thee have I given them p by reaſon of the anointing 9, 


[0 
and to thy ſons by an ordinance for ever. 
Þ Not only the charge of them, but the uſe of them for thy ſelf 
and family, in ſuch manner as T have elſewhere expreſſed To 
wit, to the Prieſtly office, 7, e. becauſe thou art Pricſt, and :2 ro 
devote thy ſelf wholly to my ſervice : which that thou maiſt Per- 
form more diligently and cheerfully, I give thee this recompenles 
9 This ſhall be thine of the molt holy things r reſerved 


from e528 )blati ; 
the fire 5 3 every 0blation 7 of theirs, every * meat- 


ottering of theirs, and every * ſin-effering of theirs, and 
every treſpaſs-offering of theirs, which they ſhall render 


no __ #, (hall be me holy for thee, and for thy ſons x 

7 QUCH as were to be eaten only by the Prieſts ; 
Santtuary. How theſe differ Grom the bel things, - apa a P _ 
Y (i: e:) Such ſacrifices or ſuch parts of Sacrifices as were not "Pd 
in the fire. * Which may be underſtood either 1. of the wave loaves, 
Levit: 23: 17. and the ſhew-bread,which were moſt holy things, Lev: 2 4 
29: and 24: 9. and which did be'ong to the Prieſt ; nor beds he 
any other fuch oblation, beſides whar is here particular] expreſſed: 
for the peace-offerings were not moſt holy,and the his, Iran . 
were not the Prieſts. Or. 2. of oblations in general ; and ſo the 
following particulars are mentioned by way of explication and re 

ſtriftion of that general word, to ſhew what oblations are here 
meant, and to exclude peace-offerings and burnt- Offerings. » B _ 
of compenſation for a treſpaſs committed againſt me, in Bets 4 ie 


and _ be [i ogaggones deligned here. 
; a moſt holy thing, and ſhalt uſe ir ; dinoly. j 

expreſſed Numb: 17: 12, 13. Alſo they are informed that Aarons | ing. Or, theſe are moſt holy, and hevefors tant! 4 45 rig 4 
high dignity was attended with great burdens, haying not only his | by ſons, to wit, excluſively, none elſe m 


a ram was to be offered, Lev: 6:2. 6. which was a moſt holy thing 
Me, 
x» Thou ſhalt eſteem it fs 
| be for thee and for 
ay eat them, ; 
10 In 


own, but the peoples ſins to anſwer for : and therefore they had no 


cumbrances and dangers were equally conſidered. 6 (7, e, ) Of 


gee Gen. 


29: 34: 


funQion,or for any other miſcarriage which they may be guilty of 


ren the + Chap;z: 


T2: 45: 


*[ey: 2, 


- WE 
*Lev:4:22 


27:06:25. 


*Lev:5:6. 
& 7: 7.6 


14; 13- 


are given as a gift for the LORD /, to do the ſervice of *Chap:3:9 


Thee aaurnot—; ws 


+ Het 
" with a 


high þ 


* Exoc 
JI; 14 


* Deut 
22: 12: 
Mair: 2 
Tt Heb 


W1Ngs, 


Wy" 25> 6s 


"73 


* Lev. 
| g: 275 


+, + Heb: 


' doth. 


+ Heb: 
with an 


high hand. 


* Lev: 
24; 12; 


* Exod: 
JI; 14: 


* Deut: 
22:12: 
Mit: 23:5: 
t Heb, 


WINgs, 


© - 


Chap. XV. 


(id : or, becauſe here is added a new penalty, to breed the greater 
caution and diligence in the 7/aelites, who had given many inſtances, 
and now a freſh and eminent inſtance, of their heedleſneſs in obſer- 
ving the commandsof God: and 1o, beſides that bullock for a ſin- 
offering, which he leaves to be gathered out of Lev: 4. 14: he now 
requires another bullock for a burnt offering. 

25 And the prieſt ſhall make an atonement forall the 
congregation of the children of Ifrael, and it hall be 
forgiven them, for it is ignorance : and chey (hall 
bring their offering, 4 ſacrifice made by-fire unto the 
LORD, and their ſin-efering before the LORD, for 


their ignorance. 
>6 Andit (ball beforgiven all the congregation of the 


children of Iſrael,and the ſtranger that fojourneth among 


them, ſing all the people ere in 1gnorance. 

27 * Andif any foul ſin through ingorance, then he 
ſhall bring a ſhe-goat of he firſt year for a ſin-effering. 

28 And the pricſt ſhall make an aronement for the 
ſoul thac ſinneth ignorantly, when he ſinneth by 1gno- 
rance before the LORD, to make an atonement fo; 
him, and it ſhall be forgiven him. | 

29 Ye (hall have one law for him that F ſinnet! 
through ignorance, beth for him that 1s born amongfi 
the children of Iſrael, and for the ſtranger char ſojour- 
neth among them. | 

30 But the ſoul that doth ought 5+ preſumptuouſly #, 
( whether he be born in the land, or a ſtranger ) the ſame 
reproacheth the LORD « ; and that ſoul ſhall be cut 
off from among his people. 

5s Und:zrſtand, ſuch things as cught not to be done, and things 
relating to the worſhip of God. #t Heb. with an high, or lifted up hand, 
i.e. knowingly, wilfully, boldly, reſolv2dly, deliberately, delignedly 
ſo this phraie is ellewhere uſed. See Exod: 14: 8: Levit: 26: 21. 
Numb: 33: 3: Job 15: 26: Pſal: 19: 13. #u (i.e.) He ſers God at 
defiance, and expoſeth him to contempr, as if he were unworthy of 
any regard, and unable to puniſh trantgreflors, 


21 Becauſe he hath deſpiſed the word of the LORD, 
and hath broken his commandment, that ſoul ſhall urterly 
be cut off : his iniquity ſhall be upon him x. 

x (5. e. ) The pumithment ſhall be confined to himſelf, and not 
fall upon the congregation, as 1t will do, if they neglet to cut him 


32 And while the children of Iſrael were in the wile 
derneſs, they found a man that gathered ſticks on the 
ſabbath day y. 


y This ſeems to be added as an example of a preſumprtuous fin : 
for as the law of the Sabbath was plain and poſitive, ſo this tranſ- 
greflion of it muſt needs be a known and wilful fin. 

33 And they that found him gathering ſticks, brough: 
him unto Moſes and Aaron, and unto all the congrega- 
tion 2. 

Z (i.e.) To the Rulers of the congregation, who as they repre- 
ſented and governed the congregation are called by the name of the 
congregation. : ? : 

34 And they @ put him * in ward, becauſe it was 
not deciared what itould be done unto him 5. 

a (i.e. ) Moſes and. Aaron, and the 75 Rulers laſt mentiened. 4 
(7. e. ) In wht manner he was to be cut off, or by what kind of 
Death he was to die, which therefore God here particularly deter- 
mines : otherwiſe it was known in general that ſabbath-breakers 
were to be pur to death, from Exod: 31: 14: and 35: 2. 

25 And the LORD {aid unto Moſes, * The man 
ſhall be ſurely put to death : all the congregation ſhal; 
ſtone him with ftones without the camp. _ 

35 And all the congregation brought him without 
the camp, and ſtoned him with ſtones, as the LOR 
commanded Moſes. 

37 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

38 Speak unto the children of Iſrael, and bid * them 
that they make them fringes b in the Þ borders c of thei 
garments d, throughout their generations, and that they 
put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband e of blue f. 

b Theſe were certain threeds or ends of their garments, ſtanding 
our a little further rhan the reſt of their garments, left theve fo: 
this uſe. c (7. e. ) In the four borders or quarters, as it 1s, Deut* 22: 12. 
Heb. wings, which 1s oft uled for the borders or ends, as Ruth 3:9. 
1 Sam: i5: 27: and 24:5: Oc. d(1i.e.,) Of heir upper garment. 
or that wherewith they covered themſelves, as it is exprefled Dent: 22: 12. 
This was praCtiſed by the Pharitees in Chriſts rime, who are nored 
for making their borders Jarger than ordinary, Matrh: 23: 5: and by 
Chriſt himſclf, as may be gathered from Luke 8: 44. e To make 1 
more obvious to the fight, and conſequently more ſerviceable to the 
uſe here mentioned. f Or, of a purple colour, as the Jewiſh Writers 
agree, whoſe opinion 1s the more conliderable, becauſe it was matter 
of conſtant praftice among them. 

39 And it ſhall be unto you for a fringe g, that ye 
may look upon it, and remember þ all the. command- 
ments of the LORD, and do them : and that ye ſeek 
not z after your own heart, and your owneyes &, after 
which ye uſe to go a whoring 1: 

gk (:.e. } the ribband, ſhall be unto you. 7. e. ſhall ſerve you for 
the tinge, to wir, to render it more vitible and notorious by its certain 
and remarkable and diſtin& colour, whereas the fringe withour this 
was of the ſame piece and colour with the garment, and therefore 
leis obſervable. Or, tr, (7. e. ) the ribband, Jha be in your fringes, 
or, put zo your Finger, faſtened to chem. h 'Tuat by looking upoa it 


NUMBE KS | Chap. XVI. 


+ 
you may remember; that your eye may affe& your mind and heart« 
; Or, inquire n0t. for other rules or ways of ſerving me than I have 
preſcribed you. k( 7. e, ) Neither after the devices and inventions 
of your own minds or hearts, as Nadab and Abihs did when they 
offered ſtrange fire, and as you new did when you pretended to ſerve 
and pleaſe me by going up the hil and towards Canaan without and 
againſt my command ; nor after the examples or inventions of others 
which your eyes ſee, as you did when you were ſet upon worſhipping 
2 calf after rhe manner of Egypt. 1( 7.e.) To depart from me, and 
ro prefer your own fancies b:ztore my commands, and to live only by 
preſent ſight or ſenſe, and not at all by faith in my promiſes. 

40 That ye may remember, and do all my com- 
mandments, and be holy unto your God. 

41 I am the LORD your God, which brought you 
out of the land of Egypt, to be your God : I a» the 
LORD your God m». 


m Though I am juſtly diſpleaſed with you for your frequent and 
horrid rebellions, for-which alſo I will keep you 40 years in the 
Wildernels, yerT will not utterly caſt you off, but will continue ta 
be your God, to preſerve and provide for you there, and after that 
imme to bring you 1ato Canaan. 


CHAP. XVI. 

Korah, Dathan and Abiram, raiſe Seditim againſs Moſes and Aaron, 
j-—z, Moſes reproving them, 4— 11. Scenes for Darhan aid Abiram; 
their Refuſal and Anſwer, 1214. The manner of therr puniſhment, 
1 5 enm_—_, Th perfumi'g Cenſers are kept fer a Memorial and 
Warning, 36 --+ —-——-:40. The people murmur againſt Moſes and 
Aaron, for which they ara conſumed by the plague, which Aaron by Moſes's 
Order ſtays, 41---50. 


O W * Korah 4 the ſon of Izhar b, theſon of * Chap: 
Kohath the fon of Levi, and Dathan, and Abiram, 27: 33 
che ſons of Eliab, and On the ſon of Peleth, ſons of Jude 21: 
Reuben c, took men d: 
a The firſt and chief author of this rebellion, ver: 21, Jude wer: 17, 
b Amrams brother, Exod: 6. 18: therefore Mo/es and he were Couſen 
germans. Moreover, Izhay was the ſecond -ſon of Kehath, whereas 
Eltzaphm, whom Moſes had preferred before him, and made prince” 
or ruler of the K1bathites, Num: 3: 30: was the fon of Uzziel, the fourth 
ſon of Kohath. This, the Jewiſh writers ſay, made him mal-contenr, 
which at laſt broke forth inro ſedition. c Theſe are drawn into 
confederacy with Korah, partly becauſe they were his next neighbours, 
both being encamped on the ſouth-ſide, and therefore could eaſily 
communicate counſels, par:ly in hopes ro recover their rights of 
prumogeniture, in which the Prieſthood was comprehended, which 
was given away from their father. 4 To wir, thoſe 250 mentioned 
verſe 2. In the H:brew there is nothing bur zook, and the Hibrew words 
are placed and may well be rendred thus, Now Korah———took both 
Dathan and Abiram, &c. or took Dathan, &c. the particle Yau bang 
here ſuperfluous, asirt is Gen: 8: 6. and elſewhere. 


2 And they e role up f before. Moſes g, with certain 
of the children of Ifrae], two hundred and fifty princes 


of che aſlembly, * famous .b in the congregation, men * Chap! 
of renown. 26: 9: 

e(i.e.) Korah, Dathan and Abiram, laſt mentioned. f ( #. e. ) Ruth 4: 
Contpired together, and-put their ſedirious deſign in execution. g 11: 14: 
Nor privily and obſcurely, bar openly and boldly, not fearing nor 
regarding the preſence of Moſes, who was an Eye-witneſs of their 
conſpir.cy. þ For place and birth. 

3 And * they i gathered themſelves together againſt * pg: 
Moſes, and againſt Aaron &, and ſaid unto them, f Ye 106: 16: | 
take too much upon you 1, ſeing all the congregation t Heb. it | 

ho! f th d - 1s much 
are holy m, every one of them, and the LORDis among fir guy 
them 3 wherefore then lift ye up your ſelves o above?” 
the congregation of the LORD ? 


# (i: e ) Either, Korah and the 250 Princes, which may ſeem 
probable by comparing this with werſe 12, 25, 27. where we find 
Dathan and Abiram in another place, even in their rents, whither it 
's I:kely they were gone by content to form and ſtrengthen their 
parry there, while Korah and the reſt went ro Moſes, Or, Korah 
Dathan and Abiram, ard the reſt, who were all together when Moſes 
ſpake thoſe words, verſe 5, 6, 7. but after that, Dathar' and Abiren 
r=tired to their Tents, and then Moſes ſent for Korah and the Lewites 
who had moreſpecial and more colourable pretences to the Prieſthood 
nd treats with them apart, and ſpeaks what is mentioned, werſe 8. 
9, 10, 11. and then having diſpatched them, he ſends for Dathan and 
Abiram, verſe 12. that he might reaſon the caſe with them alſo apart 
& Againſt Aaron, to whom the Prieſthood was confined, and againſt 
Moſes, both becauſe this was done by his order, and becauſe before 
Aarons conſecration Moſes appropriated it to himſelf. For whatever 
cacy intended, they ſeem not now direly to ftrike at Moſes for his 
ſupreme civ1i] government, but only for his intereſt and influence in 
che diſpeſal of the Prieſthood, as may appear by the whole conrexr, 
and particularly by werſe 5,10, 15, &c. | By perpetuating the Prieſt- 
hood in your ſelves and family, with the excluſion of allothers from 
it- 92 4 kingdom of Priefts, an holy Nation, as they are called, Exod: 
19: 6: a people ſeparated to the ſervice of God, and therefore no leſs 
fir to preſent themſelves before God, and to offer ſacrifice and incenſe 
for themſelves, than you are. » By his Tabernacle and cloud, the 
rokens of his ſpectal and gracious Preſence, and therefore ready to 
receive all their ſacrifices and ſervices from their own hands. o Thou 
Meſes, by preſcribing what Laws thou pleaſeſt about the Prieſthcod, 
and confining it to thy brother; and thou Aaron by uſurping it as 
thy peculiar priviiedge. 8 

4 And when Moſes heard it, he fell upon his face p. 

p Humbly begging thar God would dire& him and defend and 
vindicate him from this falſe and odious impuration. See Numb: 
14: 5. Accordingly God anſwers his Prayers, and inſpires him with 
this follewing antwer to Korah, ard ſtrengthens him with new 
courage, and confidence of good ſucceſs, 


5 And he ſpake unto Korah, and unto all his com- 
pany, ſaying, Even to morrow q the LORD will ſhew 
2 B 2 Who 


Chap. 


+ Heb: 


bore out. 


* Gen: 


 4:4,5; 
* Atts 


207 33; 


" 


at your peril. 
fore the LORD to morrow : and it ſhall be that the 


ye take too much upon you, ye ſons of Levi. 


XVI. 


who are his; and who 3s holy, and will cauſe him r to | 
£ome near unto him 5: even him whom he hath choſen, 
will he cauſe to come near unto him z, 


q Heb. in th! morning, the time appointed by men for admini- 


ſtring juſtice,. Pſal: 108: 8: Fer: 21: 12: and choſen by God for that 
work, Pſal: 73: 34: Iſa: 47: 11; Zeph: 3:5. 
partly that Koyah 7 
their cenſers.; and partly to give them ſpace 
repentance. » Or, and whom he will cauſe. 
ſome evident and miraculous token declare his 
and his miniſtery. 


Some time is allowed, 
and his company might prepare themſelves and 
for conſideration and 
s (5. e.) He will by 
approbation of him 


6 This do ; take ye cenſers « Korah, and all his 


company : 


u Since ye will be Prieſts, rake your cenſers, and a& as Prieſts, 


7 And put fre therein, and put incenſe in them be- 


man whom the LORD doth chooſe x, he ſhall be holy ; 


x (7. e. ) Declare his choice and appointment of them for that 


k. 
8 And Moſes ſaid unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, 


ye ſons of Levi. 
y Conſider what 
great Wickednels. | 
9 Seemeth it but a ſmall thing unto you, that the God 
of Ifracl hath ſeparated you from the congregation of 
Iſrael, to bring you near to himſelf z, to do the ſervice. 
of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to ftand before 


the congregation, to miniſter unto them 4, 
z Nearer than the other Tribes, though not ſo near as the Prieſts. 
a ( i.e.) In their ſtead and for their good. So they wete the ſervants 
both of God and of the Church, which was an high dignity,though 
not ſufficient for their ambitious minds. 
ro And he kath brought thee near zo him, and all thy 
brethren the ſons of Levi with thee : and ſeek ye the 


prieſthood alſo b 2 . 


b There being at this time but very few Prieſts, and the profits 
and priviledges belonging to them being many and great, they 
thought it but fir and reaſonable that they, or ſome of the chief 
of them, ſhould be admitted to a ſhare in their Work and Advan- 
tages. ; 

11 For which cauſe $o:h thou and.all thy company 

* are gathered together againſt the LORD «c : and what 
is Aaron that ye murmur againſt him 2? 

c Whoſe Miniſter and choſen Servant Aaronis. You ſtrike at God 
ghrough Aaron's ſides, Compare 1 Sam: 8: 7; Luke 10. 16: John 13: 20, 

12 And Moſes ſent to call Dathan and Abiram 4 the 
ſons of Eliab : which ſaid e, We will not come up f. 

a4 To treat with them, and give them as he had done Korah and 
his company, a timely admonition. e Unto the meſſengers ſent to 
them by Moſes. f To Moſes his Tabernacle, whither the people uſed 
to go up for judgment, Men are faid in Scripture-phraſes to go up 
ro places of judgment. See Deut: 25: 7: Ruth 4:1: Exra 10; 7, 8+ 
Bur becauſe they would not now go »p, therefore they went down 
quick into the Pit, Verſe 3 3. 

12 1s jt a ſmall thing that thou haft brought usup out 
of a'land that floweth with milk and honey g, to kill 
us in the wilderneſs, exceps thou make thy ſelf altoge- 
ther a prince over us ? 

Z ( i: e: ) Out of Egypt, a place indeed of great plenty, but to 
them a place of torment and intolerable ſlavery. They invidiouſly 
and ſcctfingly uſe the ſame words wherewith God by Moſes com- 
mended the land of Canaan. 

14 Moreover, thou haſt not brought us into a land 
that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheri- 
tance of fields and vineyards, wilt thou + pur out the 
eyes of theſe men &? we will not come vp z. 

h (i.e. ) Ofthoſe who are confederate with us, and of all the 

ople who are of our mind : Wilt thou make them blind, or per- 
Fade them that they are blind, and that they do nor ſee whar is 
viſible to all that have eyes, to wit, that thou haſt deceived them, 
and broken thy faith and promiſe given to them? or wilt thou lead 
them about like blind men whither thou pleaſeſt, one rime towards 
Canaan, another time towards Egypt again? # We will not obey 
thy Summons, nor own thy Authority. 

15 And Moſes was very wroth þ, and faid unto the 
LORD K* Reſpe& not thou their offering /, I * have 
not taken one aſs ys from them, neither have I hurt one 


of them », 

k Not ſo much for his own ſake, for he had learnt to bear in- 
dignities, Numb: 12. as for Gods ſake, who was highly diſhonoured, 
Blaſphemed and Provoked, by theſe ſpeeches and carriages, in which 
caſe he ought to be angry, as Chriſt was, Mark3. 5. 1 (5.e.) 
Accept not their incenſe which they are now going to offer, but 
ſhew ſome eminent diſlike of ir. He calls it :heir offering, though 
it has offered by Korah and his companions, becauſe it was offered in 
the name and by the conſent of all the conſpiratours, for the deciſion 
of the preſent controverſie berween them and Moſes. » ( ;. e. ) 
Not any thing of the ſmalleſt value, as anaſs was. See 1 Sams. 12. 3. 
1 T have never injured _ nor uſed my power to defraud or 

"opprefs them, as I might have done, bur, which is here implied, I 
bave dene them many good offices, but no hurt : therefore their 
crime is inexcuſable, becauſe without any cauſe or provocation on 


my part. 
16 And Moſes {aid unto Korah, Be thou and all thy. 


company before the LORD 0, thou, and they, and 
Aaron to morrow, 


I ſay before it be too late, and repent.of your 


NUMBERS. 


Chap.” 


o Not in the Tabernacle, which was not capable of fo many per- 


ſons ſeverally offering Incenſe, but at the door of the Tabernacle, 
werſe 18: which place is oft ſaid to be before the Lord, as Exod: 29: 42: 
Levit: 1: 11: Ofc. where they might now lawfully offer it by. Woſes 


his dire&ion upon this extraordinary occaſion and neceſſity, becguſe 
this work could not be done in that place, which alone was allowed 
for the offering up of incenſe, not only for its ſmallneſs, but alfa 
becauſe none but Prieſts might enter to do this work, Here alſo the 
people,who were to. be inſtrufted by this experiment,might ſee the 
proof and ſucceſs of it. : : 

i7 And take every man his cenſer, and put incenſe 


in them, and bring ye before the LORD every man 
his cenſer, two hundred and fifty cenſers : thou alſo 
and Aaron, each of you his cenfer. 

18 And they took every man his cenſer p, and put 
firein them 9, and laid incenſe thereon, and {tood in 
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, with 


Moſes and Aaron. | 


2 Which they could eafily make in a flight manner, which would 
ſutfice for the preſent purpoſe. 9 Taken from the Altar which 
ſtood in that place, Lev. 1. 3, 5. for Aaron might not uſe other fire, 
Lev. 10.1. Andit is likely the remembrance of the death of Nadas 
and 4;hu deterr'd them from offering any ſtrange fire. 

.I9 And Korah gathered ali the congregation r 


. againſt them, unto the door 'of the tabernacle of the 


congregation : and the glory of the LORD appeared s 
unto all the congregation. 

r That they might be witneſſes of the event, and upon their 
ſucceſs, which they doubred not of, might fall upon Moſes and Aaron 
with popular rage, and deſtroy them. And it ſeems by this that 
the people were generally incenſed againſt Moſes, and inclined to 
Korahs ſide. s In the cloud, which thenſhone with greater brightneſs 
and Majeſty, as a token of Gods approach and preſence. See-Exod; 
16; 7, 10; Lev: 9:6, 23: Num; 20:6. 

20 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and unto 
Aaron. ſaying, 

21 * Separate your ſelves from among this congrega- 
tion ||, that. T may conſume them in a moment, 

|| To wit, Korah, and his 250 men, and the people whom he 
gathered againſt Moſes and Aaron.wverſe 19. : 

- 22 And they fell upon their faces, and ſaid, O God, 
* the God of tie ſpirits e of all fleſh #, ſhall one man « 
ſin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation ? 

t (7. e. ) Of Souls, as the word Spzrit in Scripture is oft uſed, as 
Pſal: 31: 5: and 77: 3: Prov; 17: 22: Ecdl: 12:7: Luke 23; 46: Ats 7: 59. 
And this 15s no empry title here, but very empkatical and argumenta- 
tive, thus, Thou art the maker of ſpirits, Zach: 12: r. deſtroy not 


men, and of their ſpirits : the Lord of ſpirits, Job 12: 10: who as 
chou mayeſt juſtly deſtroy this people, ſo thou canſt preſerve whom 
chou pleaſeſt : rhe father of Spirits, Heb: 12: 9. O deal mercitully 
with thy own children: the ſcarcher of ſpirits, thou canſt diſtinguiſh 
beeween thoſe who have maliciouſly raiſed this tumulr, &thoſe whoſe 
1gnorance and fimple credulity harch made them a prey*to crafty 
ſeducers. # (i,e. ) Ofall mankind : the word fb is oft put for 
men, as Gen: 6: 13: Job 12: 10: Iſa: 40; 5, 6: Ezek: 20: 48:and 21: 4,5. 
x To wit, Korah, che ringleader of this (edition. 


23 And che LORD ſpake unto Moſes, laying, 
24. Speak unto the congregation y, ſaying, Get ye up 


y Whom for your ſakes I will ſpare upon the condition here 


lowing. 2 


And On too, who is mentioned werſe 1. though ſome 


25 And Moſes roſe up, and went unto Dathan and 
Abiram a : and the elders of Iſrael b followed him. 

a Becauſe they refuſed to come to him, he goes to them, to their 
coſt. 6b The 70 rulers, whom he carried with him for the greater 
iolemnity of the athon, and for his own better vindication, becaule 
ae lay under ſuch calumnies, and to encourage them in their work, 
notwithſtanding the obſtinate and intratable nature of the people 
they were to govern. 

26 And he ſpake unto the congregation, ſaying, De- 
part, I pray you, from the tents of theſe wicked men c, 
and touch nothing of theirs 4, leſt ye be conſumed in all 
their ſins e. | | 

c Shew yourdiſlike of them and their wicked ways by a ſpeedy 
removal of your perſons and tents frem about them. d Becauſe they 
arfd all that was theirs was under a curſe, and therefore not to be 
couched. See Deur: 13: 16, 17. e Leſt being guilty of their ſins, 
you periſh together with them. * 

27 SO they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, 
Dathan, and Abiram fonevery ſide: and Dathan and 
Abiram came out, and ſtood in thedoor of their tents [8 
and their wives, and theirſons, and theirlittle children: 
f Whoſe tents were not far aſunder, being both on the ſouth-fide 
of the Tabernacle, as appears from Num: 2: 10: and 3: 29. g An 
argument of their fooliſh confidence, pride and impudence, obſtinacy 
and 1mpenttency, whereby they declared that they neither feared 
God, nor reverenced Man, and made themſelves ripe for the approach- 
ing judgment. | 


28 And Moſes ſaid, Hereby ye ſhall know that the 


not done __ of mine own mind #« 

þ To wit, which I have done, and for which 1 am traduced b 
cheſe and ſuch like wicked men, as the bringing of the people as 
of Egypt ; the conduting of them through, and the keeping of them 
ſo long in the wilderneſs ; the exerciſing of power and authority 


400g and over them ; giving of Laws to them, as about other 


things, 


thy own workmanſhip, 77a: 64: 8. O rhou who art the preferver of 


from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and 4b1 
ram Ze nA 
Ol- 


chink be deſiſted and repented, and therefore is not now mentioned. 


Joſh: 5:19, 


Xvr.., 


« 
; 
" * Dent: 
In 22: P ny Jn 
er:Fr. Js | . 
Rev: 18:4, | tHeb. fa! 
N Chap: 
27: 16; | 
Job 12:10, |: 
Eccl:12:7 
Ifa:57:16' | 
Zac: 
Heb:12:9' Þ 
* © Exod:22 
þ 29: & 23 
# 19: & 34: 
'Þ 526: Lev: 2 
| 14: Chap 
: $15; 20, 
PF Dent: 
26: 2; 
SM *Lev: 
27; 28; 
i q 
| *Exod:1 3: 
2:and 22: 
29: Ley; 
© Þ 2736: 
, 7 13: 
| Exod: 
34: 20: 
| 
þ 'Ex:30:r3 
V:27:25 
#7 Ch: 4: 47: 
| Eck:45. 
T2; 
i 
; 


LORD hath ſent me to do all theſe works b, for I have +Gr.of m 
ſelf. Chap: | 


24. 13: | 
32; and ® 
$3: 2$:and ©. 
12: 49; 


NUMBERS. Chap. XVIIL. 


| \4 Chap. XVIII, 


t 10 In the moſt holy place y ſhalt thou eat it; every 


malc z hall eat it : ir {hall be holy unto thee. 
4 To wit, in the court of the Prieſts, where there were places 
See Lev. 6. 16, 17, 26. and 7.6.and 8. 31, and 14. 13: 


18 And the fleſh p of them ſhall be thine : as the * *Exod:29: | 


wave-breaſt, and as the right ſhoulder are thine. 
? All the fleſh of them, and not only ſome parts, as in other 
ſacrifices. | 


- 


26, 28: 


his uſe. ; / : 5 : 
era 5, 9. Exch. 42. 13. Whichis called :he mt holy place, not 19 All the heave-offerings of the holy things, which 
| ſimply and abſolutely, as the place within goat ve peg the children of Iſrael ofter unto the LORD, have I 
| of the thing he ſpeaks of, beccuſe m"_ ag Ween co on day given thee, and thy ſons, and thy daughters with thee, 
laces appointed for eating of holy things, whereof ſome migh pl f —_— Tr alas 
þ Ee in 2n clean place in the camp, Lev. I©, I4. Or 1n their OWNn by a atute Or EVECT: 1tzs a CoOVEnant O alt q foi EV cr, 
T hoes: Sod as the moſt holy place is ſometimes called ſimply Holy, | before the LORD, unto thee, and to thy ſeed with thee. 
ſo it is ner ſtrange if an holy place be called mof? holy, eipecially q (i.e. ) A durable and perperual covenant ; ſo called here and 
| this place which was near to the altar of burnt-offerings, which iS | 2 Chron. x 3. 5. either, becauſe Salt isa ſign of incorruption, as being 
5 called moſt holy, and made all thar toucheth it holy, Exod. 29. 37- of ſingular uſe to preſerve things from corruption : or, becauſe itis Fe 
I And God w.ull have rheſe things eaten by them in an holy place, | confirmed and rarified on their part by Salt, which 1s therefore called 
| as in Gods preſence, that they might be obliged t5 the grearer caution, | #he Salt of the Cavenant, for which the Prieſts were obliged ro take 
and not to abule God's good creatures, and eſpecially holy things, care, that it ſhould never be lacking om any meat-offertng, Lev. 2.13. 
ro intemperance,and that they might learn to eat this and their other | And this promiſe or priviſedge conterr:d upon the Prieits is called 2 
' Food with thankfulneſs ro God the javer of it, and with reſpect *O | covenant becaule it 1s given them conditionally, upon condition of 
his ſervice and glory, which was afcerward preſcribed to Chriſtians, their ſervice, and care about the worſhip of God, and ſacrifices, 
1 Cor. 10. 31. 1 Tim. 4.3. % Andthey only ; whereas of pzace-ofte- | which were commonly accompanied with meat-offerings, and there- 
rings the females might cat their ſhare, Dezxr. 2. 18. Rs fore with Salt. | 
\p* 11 And this is thine : the heave-offering # of their gife 20 And the LORD fpake unto Aaron, Thou ſhalt 
b, with all the wave-offerings c efchechildren of Iſrael: | have no inheritance in their land 7, neither [balc thou 
| «Tov: 10; 1 have given them unto * thee, and to thy ſons, and tO | have any part among them : * { a» thy parts, and thine *Deut: 10: 
|, 14: Deut: thy daughters with thee &, by a ſtatute for evec :*every | inheritance among the children of Iſrael. g and 12 


one that is clean in thy houſe e ſhall eat of it. | 
a (i. e.) The right ſhouider, which was the Prieſts. L To wit, 
of th-ir p?ace-off-rinzs, as may appear becauſe here is an enumera- 
tion of al: that belonged to the Prieſt in the ſeveral oblations, and 
th:refore it is not likely that he would omit the peace-offerings, 
wherein the Prieſt had a ſhare, and the very ſhare here ſpoken of 
and called an heave-offering, which was the right ſhoulder, Lev. 7. 32. 
which alſo might be eaten by the daughters, Lev. 7. 34. and 10. 14. 
aSis here ſaid. See Numb. 6. 17. &c. c To wit, the breaſts of the 
peac--offerings, which were waved, Lev. 7. 30, 31, 34. d(i.c. Who 
are with thee in thy houſe ; for if they were married to ftrangers, 
they might not ear of them, Lev. 22. 12, 13. e To wir, as fixz2d 
members of thy houte, though they be bond-ſlaves : for ſtrangers 
and hired ſervants were excepted, Lev. 22. 19, IT. 
12 * Allthe + beſt f of the oyl, and all the beſt of the 
wine, and of the wheat, the firſt fruits of 6$em g which 


. they ſhall ofter unto the LORD, them have I given thee. 


f Heb. the fat for the beſt : the fat of wheat is the beft of it, Deut. 
32. 14. Pſal. $1. 16. and 147. 14 g As well thoſe which were 


- offered in the name and behalf of rhe body of the people ar the 


ſolemn Feaſts, Levit. 23. 10, 17. as thoſe which were required of 
particular perſons, Exod. 22. 29. and 23. 19. whereof the preciſe 


r (7. e. ) In the land of the children of 17ae!, mentioned werſe r3. 12: & 18:: 


You ſhall not have a diſtin& and ſeparate portion of land, as the 
other Tribes ſhall. The reaſon of this Law, was, partly becauſe 
God would have them wholly devoted to and employed in his ſer- 
vice, and therefore free from worldly encumbrances and buſineſſes ; 
partly, becauſe God had abundantly provided for them otherwiſe by 
tithes and firſt-fruits and oblations of all ſorts; partly becauſe God 
would have their worldly comfort and happinels depend ſingly 
upon him and his ſervice, and fo would oblige them ro uſe more 
zeal and diligence in the advancement of piety, even for their own 
intereit, which was either better or worſe as true religion flouriſhed 
or decayed. See Judges 17. 9, 10. and 19. 18. 2 Chron. 13. 9. and 
30. 22. and 371. 4. partly that this might be a firm bond of hearzy 
love and affe&tion berween the people and their teachers the Levites, 
who as they p-rformed religious Services for the People, ſo they 
received their Subſiftence from them ; and partly that by this means. 
being diſperſed a:nong the ſeveral Trib-s, they might have the 
betrer opportunity for Teaching and Watching over the People, 
which was their Duty, Det. 33. 10. 2 Chron. 30. 22. Mal. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. 
s ( 7. e. ) I have appointed thee a liberal Maintenance out of my 
oblations. n 


21 And behold, * I have given the children of Levi 


2:Joik:13: 
14, 33: 


Exek: 44: 


208z 


* Lev: 273; 


ſe - .- | allthe tenth: in Iſrael, for an inhericance. for their ſervice 
; uantity is not'determined, bur left free to the giver, as an ex2rciſe : 5 . , 30; 
; 2 his " ind charity, only they are enjoyned to give the firſt | Which they ſerve, even the ſervice of the tabernacle of 
of | and the beſt of rhem. : . , | the congregation. 
* Þ *Exod:22: 13 And whatſoever is firft ripe hin the land, * which _ # For the tithes were all given to the Levites, and out of their 
+ 29: & 23. they ſhall bring unto the LORD, {hall be thine : every | tithes the tenth was givan to the Prieſts, here 7*rſe 26, &c. and 


_ 
N 

ba 
wa 
+ 


' one that is clean # in thine houſe (hall eat of it. 


h (i.e. ) Not only the firſt-fruirs of the Oyl and Wine, and 


* Wheat now mentioned, bur all ether firſt-fruics of all other grains, 
| and all frifit-rrees, &c. 


i And none elſe, becauſe theſe were firſt 
offered to God, and by conſ:quent. given ro the Prieſts ; bur for 
thoſe which were dire&ly and immediately given to the Prieſts, the 
clean and unclean might car of them. 


14 * Every thing devoted &in Iſrael, ſhall be thine. 


Neh. 10.37, 38. 

22 Neither muſt the children of Iſrael henceforth come 
nigh the tabernacle of the congregation «, leſt they bear 
fin, + and die. 


t Heb, 


u (i.e.) So nighas todo any a& proper to the Prieſts or Levites. 0 «ie. 


23 But the Levites ſhall do the ſervice of the taber- 
nacle of the congregation, and they lball bear their 


= | ” 8: k Dedicated to God by vow or otherwiſe,. provided it be ſuch a iniquity x8 it ſhall be a ſtatute for ever throughout their 
7 | thing as might be caten or conſumed by ule: tor the veſſels or trea- | 5enerations, that among the children of iſrael they have 
| res of gold and ſilver which were devored or dedicated by Foſbua, no inheritance 
p- David; or others, were not the Prieſts, but were appropriated to x (5.e.) The puniſlmene due not only for their own, but alſo 
FP the uſes of the Temple. | ale $rgrin” Aa : Me 
—_- Ay K "TOR, for the peoples mulcarriage, if ir be committed through their con- 
Exod:13; "3 Every thing that openerh the TI 90 all fleſh, nivance 6s. nega And this was the reaſon with the Prieſts 
2:and 22: which they bring untothe LORD, whether it be of men | $virhftood King Uzziah, when he would have burnt inccnſe ro the 
Woes } or beaſts, ſhall be thine : nevertheleſs, the * firft-born | Lord, 2 Chrox. 26. 17, 18. : 
Cy: Of man (balt thou ſurely redeem, and the frſtling of 24 Bur che tithes of the children of Iſrae], which they 
tap: ; 
3:13: unclean beaſts ſhalt thou redeem. offer as an heave-offering unto the LORD y, I have 
| * Exod: &L Which were offcred to God in his Temple, Exod. 13.12. Luke | given to the Levites to inherit : therefore I have ſaid 
3:20: . 2, 22, and fo his ſervice and diſpoſa]. p unto them, Among the chiidren of Iſrael they ſhall have 
| 16 And thoſe that ars to be redeemed », from a | 1.2 ce 
month old ſhalt thou redeem, according to thine eſti- (i.e. ) Asa rent-charge oran acknowledgement that they have 
mation », for the money of five fhekels, afrer the ſhekel | 4nd hold all their lands and the fruits of ir from Gods bounty. Note 
; | TEx:30:15 of the ſanctuary, * which zs twenty gerahs. thar the word wb which is for the moſt part underſtood 
t MNajing m To wit, of men only, not of unclean beaſts laſt mentioned, as | of a particular _—_— rings heaved or lifted up to the Lord, is 
© | Clr3: 4g; 1s manifeſt from the time and price of redemption here mentioned, | here uled for any offering un general, as before, werſe 8. 
| | Ek: 4s. _ wrap ts .gj 4 men z ignges worry 0 —_ 25 And the LORD ſpake unto M oles, ſaying, 
; % J- 46, 47. but neitter 2gr S, V r » - - 
redeemed with a ſheep, Exod. 13. 13. and that after ir was 8 days old. 26 Thus ſpeak pry the Levites, and fay unto chem, 
n This belongs, either 1. to the toregoing clauſe, to this purpoſe, When ye take of che chiidren of Iſrael the tithes, which 
that whereas _ newly — of a wa pan 1n their | I have given you from them for your inheritance, tnen 
uncleanneſs either a longer or ſhorter time, according ro the quuiity | ye (hajl offer up an heave-offerins of it fo 
of the birth, as it was male or female, Lev. 12 4, 5. and the temper Y + 4h ab he ales 5 r the LORD, 
of the mother, the Prieſt was to take that time when he judged the | ©V P : , 8 
mother to be clean, thar ſo the morher mighr be purified, and rhe 27 And this your heave-offering ſhall be reckoned 
child redeemed at che ſame time. Or rather 2 To the following | unto YOU, as chough it were the Corn of the threſhing- floor 
clauſe, to wir, che price which was to be pid, x appeary by com- | 2, and as che fumeſs of the wine-preſs 
-parin 1S Place wit eV. 27. 2, J, - n . all b -pted of . "Ef 
{aid to ws according to the Prieſts a pus rhough a —_ Beaton Kane RR as much as if you offered it out 6f 
rule be added to guide his eſtimation, and a certain price ſet, becauſe ogy ; ! : : 
| the Prieſt was to apply that general rule to each perſon, and ro pur | _ 2? I nus ye alſo (hail offer an heave-offering unto the 
| that price upon him. LORD of all your tithe; which ye receive of the chil- 
+ 17 Bur the firitling of a cow, or the firftling of a | dren of Iſrael, and ye hall give thereof the LORDS 
| ſheep, or the firſtling of a goat, thou ſhalt not redeem, | neave-oftering to Aaron the pricſt 5. 
- | they are holy 0 : thou (halr {ſprinkle tlicir blood upori A wg his —— which were one with him, and were all 
the altar ; and ſhalt burn their far fc; an offering made | *2 _ One _— SA fre bve fhall of DOSS. 
:19, | by fire, for a ſweet favour unto the LORD. x 9 1 of th OD 2 L bz aprons : db 
d | e Towit, ina peculiar manner, «ad higher degree than other | O!70) ing & or tne , 2 OE AL TNE | DEIT TNETEO?, CUE T Heb f#: 
and * . beaſts, eon{ecrated to an holy uſe, even to bez facrificed unto Goa, | thE hallowed part thereof e out of it, 


and not to be redeemed, nor alienatzd to any orher uſe. Compare 
Deut. 15+ 19. 


þ Not only ou: of your tirhes, but out of the other gifts which 


NUMBERS. 


Even Ys, 


O 


Chap. XIX, 
you receive fi | 
belong to e from the people 
h FT. an 
gifts {0 me _— c To wit n out of thoſe fields 
ofthem for " —— _— o the Prieſt. 4 (7: which ſhall | Pa 
proportion of %; rieſt, e Thism you ſhall reſerve a :e; ) As many | in v _ to teach vs the 1 Chat " 
ages wy 4 was Bo ering, and rd TN — either m_——_ ach wt rye F PRO himfelf mperfeQion of the Lev! hap . NIX " h 
to himſelf as hi part or propo 4 r2 venture he m ature and part! olute neceflicy was defiled by {i eviticalPrieſth 0 
N ground of thi ion, both h allowed or ſan&i yet was re hriſt himſ and holj $ CL BIS work 
appropriated b this offeri ere and elſewh anQified {ſinful puted by m m elf, though h &r Friefthood , 
becauſe th y God to Þ pars 2. becauſe it is a thi ere : or 2. the ul perſon, b en, and jud gh he had no i od ; and 
" t , : » Oy re ged b in of 
may uſe ET of 0g Se given by him hing hallowed or 53. 12. 2Cor. 5. Ty of our fins Thich God, as _ ns own, 
31, 32 th comfort and doth hallow all th the Prieſt and 8 And he were laid upo : an and 
: good conſcie the reſt, ſo - the? water that burneth h pon him, J1/s 
Te or thou ſhalt nce, as it follows, ws —_ - we bathe his fleſh in er, ſhall waſh his clotl : 
counted u e beſt thereof f| -q them, Whe 9 And a m p all be unc] 
flo nto the Levi rom it, then 1 n ye | of the hei an that isCc ean 
MR or, and as the 1 tes.as the wevall n it ſhall be | cl e heifer, and | lean, ſhall gather up * 
5.18, oulholds : | all eat it in -prels. 1e childr all be ke the camp 1 eb. 
* for * its every place r15 — of Iſrael Pc for the cong:r : Pp mnayg9.rn 
_ _— of the w_ ur reward AY C- nd your | * (G pure _w for ag a water p of +2045, a0 "ps 
| 6.) In every gregation ervice in| FI or their uſe, and vl 101 qc 1 
_*Lev. 22 Zz And hy clean place, and . y of them might ,and therefore 1 oo 
-22. ha ye ſhall bea , and not in the h put to the wa eaſily procure i in a fit place or 
on” voor ed from it Sy wh by reaſon - of gy a ne RN —_ ie. 9 Ne ns Sos 
: e a Fo J » 7.7. 
: holy chings of es ph, KU bider fall ye managed, o he Wars Cogan, BO fr thes checkin 
g Implyir ren of I e | akindofanofferi bow ans. eng PI i as uncleannef: 
EEE ET Ne be 1 | fon offi. Theneme of inde april 1 Heb a chu 
0 : owed F is d z an {{ : e of ſe: 1 - n x0rt . D. 4 ſM, 1. 
ſe nan ek by reſerving - a * you he HR fu ſinned in the 10 Fan mona" to the rar ow OR ley mer or a 
and partto the -2—— ma as he ws act your Xa roi er ga _—_ his oor, Os the we __ ſin. puniſhment of | 
. inte d ev an SO . 
The CH » tO Wit, part tO i all beunco the chi be unclean unti the heifer,b | 
Aager of making th ; A P. X TX you, that CR children of Trae! until the even 3 3 - 
e U e of it wh 'e Water of Separ . i c 3) . amon 3 and un an it 
* r200% rt of —_ org are to be SEFT 0. — by is th any _ op for _ Ser | 
j 14 —_ 7 F , and t c z AS - | 
Aaron, |: Oo RD ipake — 13. | generally (| n ax where the _ other ceremonial - ova underſtand 1 | 
2 This beam -- unto Moſes, and here, than Penh of a Profelyte, i of franger 13 _— do not oblige 
LORD h i; the ordinance of unto | exceptionfrom w_ any reaſon or — more Ba cry here it is, it 
dren of If l oinipanded Cay ae? law a which the | 7 : * He that — - oe oe av rake it ſo 
. rael, th , {aying, Speak the all b ucheth particular 
nev : ip ot, wherein 7 y OS thee b a red a chil- u Whereas th ſeven days . body of any + 
a = 7 0 yoke e sno blemilh 4d, and u e heife, till even, Levit n ww of a dead be {t 7 T7 00, "Leys 
I, The con ES 4 pon whi 12 * . ©'T. She aſt made C -2L.I 
nn Oo gyms promadigerd "Y Maher gears, ann a man unclean only Lime 
ommo ? r thei od h . : the with 1 "peas 
Een once of "hiir common charge, becuſeie ws Re pre nor him he id ke xn th hind HIS 
OT Sr DET btn | ay tet nor declen al beckan 5: bur oy 
es ad thei 4 p ri fr PE aa e nhuma 05 ) X {i Z E CG ean y the ; agg ue aP, 
ſuch, Heb ir purifying vert om which this W ne nature, an | fur .e. ) With th &. , then the ſev 31, 1 
, Heb. 7. : , Qi the Wate enth * Ye 
that ae 4 26. 1Per.1n.1 ue. d Afit Ty ater and all oth: ” reCtion on that d r of Separati 
in hi 0. # wW pe of Ch e o teach ay b . ation. = 
Gods Command, cl for our eh pry my beſide perfe ill e come "by which we are cane or ndibl. = 
under the L our ſakes h OE Canes of day reſpeCted e to that e is life 1 ified. 
undertake eLaw ; or th E rook up © 1gat10n of afcer th . @ But ternal Sabb 15 gradual S 
See John 1 our burden and C ar Chriſt was n ur yoke, and atto be clean was firſt to py _ mk of . and not 
0.17, 18 roſs, but that h Frey drawn or fo = 12 Whoſ, purifie himſelf, the ſevench 
5 And ye {| e did voluntaril rced to | that 1 oever touch , and four da 
- th all give y chuſe it, 15 dead p eth b the YS 
Heh at he may bring her * her unto Elea bernacle of t and purifieth n dead body of a 
T3. 17 = 4. ſhall ſlay wa, befc - th without id the prieſt #, from Iſrael _— LORD c fo _ + Soak vg. ogy 
. ho was th ore Us face camp 4 {| ri » 1» ecaule 4 enact ſoul ( 1 TNC ta- 
or Deputy of e ſecondPrieſt, Go g, and Pp inkled upon him; the water o all be cut 
rvicemade © don np and, in ſome caſes, the vicegs af wg roles eo wn ongrrgenaeee S 
it fo _ unclean for , 0 4 ren oY TE . U 
ME eng earns [5 NE ea Eaſyiots depot is uncleanneſ 
and conſtantly fi , to be preſerved fi e High-prieſt equent]\ c By approachi y, he was on] done preſum 
was reputed y fit for his high and h rom all ſorts of was, as fa were Cerem ing to it in his uv y to offer m_—_— - for ifi 
laden with "9p unclean and acc oly Work. g P of defilement ching. $ onially defiled wi ncleanneſs : fo H ce, Lev.5.3,6 if 1t 
ſhould Es e ſins of all the wy Orgs thing, bein artly becauſe "I in his Pas Levit. 15.31. a _ the rouch _ oly — dA 
wh r without th people - and part] g ceremonio to be oe and filth, . and 16. 16. Hag, any unclea places 
Ele nr agen > > ne gp whe did, = op 4 _ hee I bf —rEg by —_ . wot ro be SU ara a He —_ 
is Work. . Lev. 24.14. b AP : 12. in the place h is the | : y this es 
4 And erſon appoi place | *nat CO , AW. W water, b 
* Heb. = pF jo prieft ſhall take of h om by 100 RR x _ rent, wes n dieth in a te 
9:13, {The tabe prinkle of er blood wi ven da that zs 1 nt, all 
. rnacle ; of tl of her blood di with | ; IF And ey be J'S. s 1n the te 3 
; Or, Toward the congregati realy before bound ery * open vel nt, (ball 
«nd ſo we wane of or ovsr againſt ion ſevenrti CIOTE upon it, 7 ellel e, whi 
, fin the Taber VEN TLMESs. | + Becauſe i , is uncle » Which hath 
curnerorhiopheeagin: Wh ok ome of he Blooin 3 Bf TO ery ws 5 Ch 
re ex in; Whi 4 abe aſin , w codes g ich it 1 | . 
wee chi ſprinkling fee Which migh bedone, though ber fend Fine arm —_— cc... ;1.0 
rnacle, g ſeven time ree beſt wi it benot | * Man n fields that 15s ſlai . 
ar a ye SI EISIN a, or a grave, ſhall be unclean = Ahn brag 
0:26 win tntimation char he curning and wee — frna molly F <4 And for her violent fag __ Goren days _—_ 
2sdone, but e went 1 ing towards 1 it, | fath an uncl 4 5. 
being defil rather the co into the cam ards it. F aſhes of Clean 
it was ſuſhci Ion work he could P ied, werſe this work | unning wa rnt heifer of , EN y ſhall cake 
this are fn for him to not come nea T- And becauſf. g (i cer g ſhall b purificati g of the 
ſignified hi turn and look r tothe Tab E .e. ) Wa 1 be put th . on for {i 
way of at ed his preſenti ook towards i abernac] pureſt. ters flow ereto In, and 
Tera os preenring fits Blood betre the Lo ul, | te. "Theſemuny ne Coe Jin aveſleth, [16s 
is mercy-ſeat 1n 3 £ roma and pard is and the people ord by »btained. þ W 7- 38, 39. ods Spirit, w 7er, which _ 
| ſin 3 | w; here and by whi , Which are the 9:1, 
5 Ando @ e Tabernacle. on only from God S fins, and 25 to be ftrai rhey wer ich alone is oft com 
*Fx.29.1 Ski ze (ball bur , and from 18 ned cute the be mi true purific; pared | He" 
. . 3 n n the . . s . An ke - ixed, NCat 1110 wh 
0" halthe bum. he heifer Ln his Gghe : * her | 1 18 Anda clean prion alia and hem the Water fr 
3 I2. k Toſi 1 . , with h . 1eCTr all the V it 3 n prinkl . take hyſl given 
ſins 4 0 the ſhar 4 oh er dung 2 d J els k and C ut upon th of OP, and di . ; [ 
6 And the pri £45 as Bane ba formate of Chriſt £ dead, or a that toucheth perſons that w nd upon $$; 3- 
and ſcarlet all take ced prinkling. or our | i To wi grave. a bone, or © ere there chap. 1 
of th . _y and caſt zt 1 ar-wood priated it, a Prieſt; f F ne !ſlain.o 3 1, 33. 
mM Er. into the midſt of _ flop by he fi See Lev. 13 ON the work 25a 14: 37 
hich 1e burn) - re. See N q ven th T of cl I6- ; 
they mi - are here b rNnN umb, ofe wh eanſin 32,3 
. ght be fa Qi urat, and as £4 Y 31. 23, ich were i g was appro- 46. 
_— of things a coop o this holy uſe fo ere offered to God —_ And the clean CO POR En 'E 
7 7 wg, prinkle made wherewich che for ofcheſs | the fore che third day erſon hall ſprinkl : 
| "Fo 1th £ Ie e in s 
- bache his f ey prieſt ſhall Leah hi he unclean oo his tr gon day, he _ on the _ yo the 
into the = 99s = _— and \ olany ap Fe and he ſhall | clean at agg bathe ts himſelf —_ __ 
, and the pri ard he ſh " 2 a IN wa « wa 
ic o Bu | ter 
pricſt ſhal} bg unc! all come | puriti it che man th - and ſhall be 
lean until che ifie himſelf b: chat f ſhall be u 
| the COngre Sis thae foul ſh nclean, and ſh 
| 6 hath defiled he amons |þ 
" ce lynctuary ; 
F 


- + *Þ N OD M B E R , 7 Chap. XX: 
of the LORD, the water of ſeparation hath not been , congregation,and * they fell upon theirfaces: and * the 
ſprinkled upon him, he is unclean. | glory of the LORD appeared unto them. 


bk " 4 hap- 


* chap. 14. 


* Exod» 2 And the people * chode with Moſes, and ſpake, and aÞfiCftions of our parents and of us their children, which doubt- 
27.2 faving, Wou!d God that we had died * when our bre- | leſs have come to thine ears. . 
Chap. by thren died before the LORD g. 15 How our fachers went down into Egypt, and we 
hl ">. (:. e. ) Suddenly,rather than todie ſuch a lingring and painful | have dweltin Egypta long: time: and the Egyptians 
16 32,35 oo ens en _—_ greater than _ Paren*s in like caſe, | yexed us and our fathers, 
132, becauſe they ſhould have taken warning by their miſcariiages, and X - - + | 
” by the terrible effes ofthem, which their eyes had ſeen. « 16 And _ we cried unto the LORD, he heard _ 
Exod.17, 4 And * why have ye breught up the congregation | ur — ent = angel, and hath brought us forth 3. 7+ 
3. of the LORD into this wiiderneſs,that we andour car- | 92 Ot Egypt and behoid, we are in Kadcſh y, a city 


k (5. e. ) Shal contempruouſly refuſe to ſubmit to this way of 
purification. 

21 And it ſhal be a perpetual ſtatute unto them that 
he that ſprinklech the water of ſeparation ihal waſh his 
clothes i; and he that toucheth the water of ſeparation 


7 ſhal be unclean until even. 

1 Becauſe he is unclean, as it here follows. It is ſtrange, that the 
ſame water ſhould cleanſe one perſon, and defile another, but God 
would have it ſo, partly to teach us that it did not cleanſe by any 
vertue in it ſelf, or in the work done, but only by vertue of Gods 
appointment : partly to mind the Jews of the imperfeQtion of their 
Prieſthood, and their ritual purifications and expiations, and con- 
ſequently of the neceſſity of a better Prieſt and Sacrifice and way 
of purifying, which rheſe outward Rites did point at : and partly 
to ihew that the etficacy of Gods ordinances doth not depend upon 
the p:rſon or quality ofhis Miniſters, becauſe the ſame perſon who 
was polluted himſelf could and did cleanſe others. # Either by 
ſprinkling of ir, or by being ſprinkled with it, for even he that was 
cleanſed by it, was not fully cleanſed as ſoon as he was ſprinkled, 
but only at the even of that day, as isfaid here and above, wer.19. 

22 And whatſoever the unciean perſon » toucheth, 
ſhal be unclean : and the ſoul that toucheth ir ſhal be 


unclean o until even p. 

1 Not he who is ſo onely by touching the water of ſeparation, 
wer. 21. but he who is ſo by the greater tort of uncleannets, which 
lated ſeven days, of which verſe 11, 16. and which was not remo- 
ved without the uſe of this water of purification,as is manifeſt from 
the context and other places of Scripture,and from the nature of the 
thing : For the leſſer ſort of uncleanneſs, mentioned in the forego- 
ing verſe, laſted: only till even,and was cleanſed by the ſole wathing 
of his clothes and fleſh in water verſe 79. withour any uſe of this 
water of purification, which, ifit had be?n neceſſary, muſt have 
beenuſed on the third, and on the ſeventh day, according to the 
rule, verſe 12. 19. and ſo the uncleanneſs of one day had been made 
an uncleanpels of (even days, which is a cont. adiftion. Betides 1t 
is unreaſonable,that he who immediately rouched the defiling thing 
ſhould be no more and longer unclean, than he » ho couched ttar 
perſon on'y; and it is contrary to other rules in like caſes,as Lever. 
15.where the Man or Woman having an iſſue are thereby made un- 


_ for ag" Heme” a but ay OO EY iS —_ che eyes of the children of Hrae' P, therefore ye ihal yt 
unclean only till even, werſ- 7. 27. And therefore this cannot be © . W's :37- & 32 
ED wks as dds by touching this water, who-di Bone bring this congregation into the land which I have .;. & 32: 
ſelf was unclean only till even, verſe 21. as alſo he who roucherh | 81VEN them. : | ; |: Ir 

him is in this place. o To ſignifie to us, the very infe&iqous nature » But ſhewed your infidelity : which they did, either by their t Heb. nof 


of ſin and of ſinful company. p Becauſe as his cefilement was leſs, 
ſo it was fit the duration of it ſhould be ſhorter. 
CHAP AX. 

The people journey in the wilderneſs of Zin : They murmur againſt. Moſes for 
want of water, 2----5.” God commandeth Moſes to ſpeak to the Rock, 
that it might yield water, 6, 7. Moſes ſtriking the Rock twice, 
8-----11. diſpleaſethGod, 12, Moſes deſiring paſſage through Edom, 
1 3-===17. # denied, 18---- 20. Aaron by Gods command delivering 
up his Office to Eleazar his Son, dieth, 21---28. All the Congregation 
bemoan him. 

Hen 4 came the children of iſrael. ever the whole 
congregation, into the deſert of Zin 6b , in the 
firit moneth c, and the people abode in Kadeſh 4; and 

Miriam died there e, and was buried there, 

a To wit, after many other ſtations and long journeys here o- 
mitted, bur particular'y deſcribed, Numb. 33, b A place near the 
land of Edom, diſtin& and di'tant from that Sin, Exod. i6. 1. c To 
wit, of the fortieth year, as is evident, becauſe the next ſtation to 
this was in mount Hor, where Azron died, verſe 22, 23, ic. who 
dicd in the fifth month of the fortieth year, Numb. 33. 38. Moſes 
doth not giveus an exact journal of all their occurrences in the wi!- 
derneſs, but only of thoſe which were moſt remarka le, and efpe- 
cially of thoſe which happened in the firſt an ſecond, and in the 
fortieth year. 4 Whether the ſame pJ-c- called Kad.ſh-barnea,w here 
they were long ſince, Numb. 13, 26. and ro which they now return 
afrer 38 yea-s tecious travels and wandrings in the deſert, Det. 2. 
14. Or another place more ſoutherly, it 1- not marerial. e Four 
months before Aaron, and but a few more before Moſes. | 

2 And there was no water for the cor.g'egation f : 
and they gathered themſcives together againſt Moſes, 
and againſt Aaron. 

f Which having follow2d them through all their former jour- 
neys, began now to fail them here, becauſe they vere now come 
near Canaan and other countreys, where waters might be had by 
ordinary means, and therefore God wou'd nor uſe extraordinary, 
leſt he ſhonJd ſ.em to proſtitute the honour of miracles. This © 0- 
ry, though like that, Exod. 17. is different from it, as appears by 
divers circumſtances. 


tel ſhould die there ? 

5 And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of 
Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? ir js no place 
of ſeed, or of figs, orvines, or of pomegranates,neiche! 
is there any water to drink. 

6 And Moſes and Aaron went from the preſence of 
the aflembly 5, unto the door of the tabernasle of the 


. 
: 
[1 


| 


[1 
+ 


h Partly to avoid the growing rage of the pecple, for Gods fin- 


gular proreQion of them did not exclude theuſe of ordinay means : , ,, 
; and partly to go to God forrelief and redreſs, 


7 And the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

8 * Take the rod z, and gather thou the ailembly toge- 
ther,thou and Aaron thy brother,and ſpeak ye unto the 
rock k before theireyes,and it ſhal give forth his water.& 
thou ſhalt bring forth to them water out of the reck ; ſo 


thou ſhalt give the congregatien and their beaſts arink. 

/ Thar rod which was laid up before the Loid in the tal ernacle, 
as aPPCears from verſe 9. But whether it was Aarons rod, which was 
undoubtedly laid up there, N76. 17. 10. or Moſes his rod by which 
he wrought ſo many Miracles, it is not conſiderable : or whether 
it was not one and the ſeme rod, wh:ch was commonly called Moſes 
his rod, as here, verſe 11. and elſewhere, and ſometimes A4arons rod, 
as Exed.7. 12. which may ſeem moſt protable.For itis likely,though 
not related elſewhere in Scripture, that vw onder-v orking 10, cal- 
led therod of God, Exod. 4. 20. was laid up in ſome -part of the taber- 
nacle, though nor in or near the Ark, v here 4arozs bloſſoming ' od 
for a particular reaſon was put. k Which will ſooner hear and 0- 
bey my Commands than theſe ſottiſh and ſtubborn people. 

9 And Moles took the rod from before the LORD Z/, 
as he commanded him, 

1 (i.e. ) Out of the Tabernacle. 

10 And Moſes and Aaron gathered the congregation 
together before the rock, and he {aid unto them, Hear 
now,ye rebels,muſt we fetch you waterout of this rock ? 

1s And Moſes lift up his hand, and with his rod he 
{mote the rock twice : & the ® water came outabundant- 
ly, and the congregation drank, and their beaſts alſo ms. 

m Tothe men it was a Sacrament, 1 Cor: 10: 3, 4.but to the beaſts 
it was no holy bur a common thing. So that the Elements in the 
Sacraments have no inherent and inſeparable holineſs, but only a 
relative holineſs with reſpe&t to their ule, 
unholy and common. 


12 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and Aaron, 


Becauſe * ye believed f me not », to ſandtifie meo in *chap. 27; 


looks and ge'rures, or rather by the m:trer and manner of their ex- inme; 


p-efſions and ations, either -. by ſmiting the rock,and that tice, 
« hich i+ emphatically noted,as if he doubted whether once ſmiting 
would have doneit, wv hereas he was not commanded to ſmite 10 
much as once, butonly to ſpeak to it : or 2. by the doubtfulneſs of 
theſe words, verſe 10. Muſt we fetch water out of the rock? which ims 
plies a ſuſpicion of it, as the like word. do,Ger. 18. 13 whereas they 
ſhould have ſpoken poſitively and contdently to the rock to give 
forth waters. and yetthey did nor doubr ofthe power of God,but 
of his wil!, whether he would gratiie theſe rebels with this further 
miracle,after ſo many of the like kind. And beſides the words thems 
felces, it is conſiderable, both with what mind they were ſpoken, 
which God ſaw to be diſtruſtful, and in what manner they were de- 
livered, which the people might diſcern to come from misbelief or 
Joubhr. And there might be divers other unbelieving wo: dsuſed by 
the this tine and place, though they be not here recorded, it 
bein uſual in Scripture to give only the ſum or principal heads of 
diſcourſes or events,leaving rhe reſt to be gathere® out of them. See 
Pjal. 106.32,33. 0 (i: e:) To give me glory of my power in doing 
this wiracle, and of my truth in punctually fulfilling my promiſe 
ſo ro Co, ani of my goodneſs in doing ir notwirhlanding the eos 
ples perverſeneſs. p 1 his made their fin f:andalou to the 1/raelites, 
who of themſelves were roo prone to infideliry, and little needed 
fuch an ill example ; to prevent the -ont:gion whereof (:od leaves 
a monument of hi« great *1ſpleaſu:e upon them, and inflifts a pu- 
niſhment as publick and manifeſt as thei: fin was. 

12 * This is the water of || Meribah g becauſe the 
chi!dren of iſrael firove with the LORD, and he was 


ſanctifed in them -. 
q Called Meribah Cadeſh, to diſiinguiſh it from another Mcribah 
Exod.17.7. r Or,among them,to wit,the children of Iſrael! laſt mentioned 


by the demonſtration of his omnipotency,veracity,and clemency to- ſtrife, 


i ards the Iſ-aelites,and.of his impartial holineſs ani ſeverity againſt 
ſin even in his greateſt friends and favourites, as Moſes was. 


14 And Moſes ſent meifengers s from Kadeſh unto 
the king of Edom, Thus faith thy brother z Iſrael, Thou 
knoweſt all the travel thar hath + befallen us «, 

s By Gods dire&ion, Deus. 2. x, 2, 3. & For wasnot Eſau ( who is 


in the uttermoſt of thy border. 

x To wit,the Angel of the covenant,Chriſt Jeſus,who firſt appear- 
ed to Moſes in the buth,Exod.3.2. and afterward in the cloudy pillar, 
who condutted Moſes and the people out of Egypr, and thorough the 
wilderneſs, as appears from . Exod. 14.39. and 23.20. and 33. 14» 
1 Cor. 10. 4. For though Moſes may ! e called an ge! or Meſſenger, a 
title given to Phinehar, Judg. 2. 1. andtothe Prophers, 2 Chron. 36. 
16. and to Haggai, Hag.z.13, yet itis not pr{ba'le that he is meant, 
partly becauſe Moſer was the perſon that ſent this meJage, partly 

3 C DeG3ls 


< — 


our of which they are - 


+ Heb, 
* Edom, Gen. 36. 1. ) Jacobs br1ther? Mal 1. 2. uAll the wandrings found us, 


7:&15:5. 
© Chap: 14. 


A Exod. 
I7: $5. 


we Exod: 
17: 6. 


*Deutf. 33s 
8. Plal.g5. 
8. & 106; 
32. &c. 

ih Thatis; 


Chap. XX. NUMB 
| becauſe there was no reaſon why he ſhould expreſs himſelf by ſuch 
a da:k and doubtful title to them ; and partly becauſe another An- 
o] beſides and above Moſes did condu@ them, and the mention 
POE to the Edomites was likely to give more authority and efficacy 
to their preſent meſſage. y ( i: e: ) Near the city Kadiſh, the Par- 
ticle in being oft ſo uſed, as we have ſhewed. 

17 Let us paſs,I pray thee,through thy countrey: We 
will not paſs through the fields,or through the vine-yards, 
neither will we drink of the water of the wells z: we will 
0 by the kings higb-way, we will not. turn to the right 
hand, nor tothe left, until we have paſſed thy borders. 

z Or, pits, which any of you have digged for your private ule, 
to wit, without paying for it, verſe 19. Deut. 2. 6. but only of the 
waters of common rivers, which are free to all Paſſengers, and will 
not be prejudicial ro thee. ; 

18 And Edom {aid unto him, Thou ſhalt not paſs by 
mes, leſt I come out againſt thee with the ſword. 

a ( 5. e. ) Through my country,as thou defireſt : I will not ſuffer 
thee to do ſo: which was an a& of common policy toſecure them- 
ſelves from ſo numerous an ho#. : ; 

19 And the children of [ſrael ſaid unto him b,We will 

go by the high-way * And if Tand my cattel drink of 
thy water, then I will pay for itc: I will only ( with- 
out doing any thing elſe ) go through on my feer. 

þ (5.e. ) Their Meſſengers replied unto them what here follows 
c For water was a ſcarce commodity in thoſe parts. 

20 And he ſaid, thou thalt not go through- And 
Edom came out againſt him with much people, and 
with a ſtrong hand. 
21 Thus Edomrefuſed to give Iſrael paſſage through 
his border 4: wherefore Iſrael turned away from him e. 
d But permitted them to goby their border, Deut: 2: 4, 8. Juag 
11: 18: and furniſhed them with vicuals for their money, Deur- 2: 
29. e According to Gods command, Dez. 2. 5. 
22 And thechildren of Iſracl,eves the whole congre- 
* chap.33. gation, journeyed from *Kadeſh,and came unto mount 
37- or f. 
fWhoſe inhabitants were then called Horims, Deut: 2: 12. and 
Eſau the Horite, Gen: 36: 20. 
23 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes and Aaron 1n 
mount Hor, by the coaſt of the land of Edom, ſaying, 
24 Aaron ſhal be gathered unto his people : for he 
ſhal not enter into the land which I have given unto 
+Heb. the children of Iſrael, becauſe ye rebelled againft my j 
muy. words at the water of Meribah. 

g This was one but not the only reaſon. God would not have 

Moſes and Aaron to carry the people into Canaan, for this reaſon al- 
ſo, to ſignifie the, inſufficiency of the Moſaical Law and Aaronical 
Prieſthood to make them perfe&ly happy, and the neceflity of a 
berter, and ſo keep the Iſraelites from reiting in them ſo as to be 
taken off from their expeQation of Chriſt, and from the entertain- 
ment of him when he ſhould come. 

* chap.33. 25 * Take Aaron and Eleazar his ſon, and . bring 


38. them up unto mount Hor. 
Deut. 32» 26 And ſtrip Aaron of his garments h, and put them 
_ upon Eleazar his ſon i, and Aaronſhal be gathered unto 


his people, and thal die there. 

þ To wit,of his prieſtly garments, Exod.28:2:Levit:8:7,8,9.in token 
of his reſignation of his ofice. See the like 1ſa: 22: 15, 19, 20, 21. 
i By way of admiſſion and inauguration of him to his office. 

27 And Moſes did as the LORD commanded : and 
they went up into mount Hor, in the fight of all the 
congregation &, | 

k Thar their hearts might be more affe&ed with their loſs of ſo 
great a pillar, and that they all mighr be witneſſes of the tranflati- 
on of the Prieſthood from Aaron to Eleazar, and therefore might 
give him the honour due to him. : 

25 And Moſes ſtripped Aaron of his garments, and 

Deur.1o. put them upon Eleazar his ſon, and * Aaron died there 
6. and 32.7 in the rop of the mount : and Moſes and Eleazar came 


os down from the mount. 

I To wit, in mount Hor. Obj. He died in Moſer, Deut. 10. 6. 
Anſw. Moſera was the general name of the place where that ſtation 
was, and mount Hor is a particular place in it, where he died, and 
was buried alſo, Deur. 10. 6. k 

29 And when all the congregation ſaw m that Aaron 
was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days », ever 
all thehouſe of Iſrael. 

m (i.e. ) Underſtood by the relation of Moſes and Eleazar, and 
by other ſigns. So ſeeing 1s uſed, Gen. 42. 1. As 7. 12. n The time 
of publick and ſolemn mourning for great perſons. See Der. 34. 8. 


CHAR XXL 
The Canaanites fizht againſt Iſrael, and take ſome of them Priſoners, x. 
Through God's aſſiſtance they overcome them, and deſtroy their cities, 2, 3. 
The people murmur, 4, 5. Areplagued with fiery Serpents, 6. They repent, 
7. A brazen Serpent erefed, to which they look, and are healed, 8, g. 
They journey, 10--16. Their Hynm for water given at Beer, 17. They 
ſue for paſſage to the Amorites : are denied : fight them: overcome, and 
dwell in their cities, 18--26. Proverbial ſayings concerning it, 27--30. 
Og King of Baſhan, his ſons, and all his people, are killed by the Iſraelites, 
* chap.33, ard rheir Land poſſeſs'd by them, 33=--35- 

ND when * 7 King Arad theCanaanite a, which 


40. 
bs ow. Foe dwelt in the ſouth b, heard tell that Iſrael came 


ef drad. by the way of the ſpies c, then he fought againſt Iſrael, 
Joſ.12-14. and took ſome of them priſoners «, | 
Jud. 1.16. | 


E R S. Chap. XXL. 


a Or rather, the Canaanite King of Arad : for Arad is not the name 
of a man, but of a city or territory, asmay ſeem from Foſ. 12. 14: 
Judg. 1. 16. ifat leaſt this was the ſame place with that. And he 
ſeems to be called a Canaanite in a general ſenſe, as the 4morites and 
others ſometimes are. b To wit, of Canaan, as appears from Num. 
33. 40. towards the Eaſt, and near the dead Sea. c Not of thoſe 
Spies which Moſes ſent to ſpic the land, Numb. 13.17. for that was 
done 38 years before this, and they went ſo privately, that the Ca- 
naanites took no notice of them, nor knew which way they came 
or went ; but of the ſpies which he himſelf ſent out to obſerve the 
marches and motions of the Iſraelites. But the words may be 0- 
therwiſe rendred, either thus, in the manner of ſpies, ſo the tenſe is, 
when he heard that divers of the 1ſ7aelites came into or towards his 
country in the nature of Spies, to prepare the way for the reſt : or 
thus, by the way of Atharim, a place fo called, as the ſeventy Inter- 
preters here take ir, and it ſeems not improbable. d Which God 
permitted for Jſroels humiliation and puniſhment, and to teach 
them not to expe the conqueſt of that land from their own wit- 
dom or valour, but wholly from Gods favour and affiſtance. See 
Deut. 9. 4. Pſal. 44. 3, 4. 
2 And Iſrael vowed a vow unto the LORD e, and 
ſaid, If thou wilt indeed deliverthis people intomy hand, 
then I will utterly deſtroy their cities f. 
e Being ſenſible of their own weakneſs, they endeavour to engage 
God to help them in the war, which they intended to renew. fl 
will reſerve no perſon or thing for my own uſe, but devote them 
all ro rotal deſtrution, which was the conſequent of ſuch vows. 
See Lev. 27. 29. Deut. 13. 15. 
3 And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Iſrael, 
and delivered up the Canaanites : and they | utterly de- t Gr. aw 
ſtroyed them g, and their cities, andhecalled the name ny ay 
of the place || Hormah. Hick So 
g When? Anſw.Either 1. Some time after this, under Joſhus, who | Thar ; 
ſubdued, among others,the King of Arad, Joſ. 12. 14. And ſo this is ,,,.,, by, 
mentioned here by anticipation, that the vow being now made and ftruftion 
mentioned, the effe& or performance of it might be recorded, ; 
rhough our of its place ; and ſo this verſe muſt be ſuppoſed to be 
added by ſome of the Prophets, and inſerted into Moſes his hiſtory, 
as lome other paſſages ſeem to be. Or 2. at this time : and fo this 1s 


" Cha 


; Hl 
ball 


wail 
fi! 1 
gait ſt 


not the ſame rad with that, Joſ. 12. 14. nor this the ſame Hormagh : . 


with that there mentioned, but another of the ſame name,which is 
moſt frequ-nt in perſons and places in Scripture. And this is the 
more probable, becauſe that Arad and Hormah, Joſ. 12.14. are two di- 
ſtin& places, and had diverskings, whereas here the ſame place is 
called both Arad 2nd Hormah; and becauſe that Arad ſeems to be at, 
ſome good diſtance from this, and more within the conntry, and 
more northward, as may be gathered from the other places joyned 
with it, Zoſ. 1 2.whereas this Arad was near Edom, verſe 4. and inthe 
ſouth, verſe x. Queſt. x. How could this be done in the land of Canaay, 
when Moſes neither entred himſelf,nor led the people into that land? 
Anſw. Neither Moſes nor the whole body of the people did this ex- 
ploit, but a ſele& number ſent out for this purpoſe to puniſh that 
king and people,who were ſo fierce and malicious that they came out 
of their own country to fight with the 1ſ-aelites in the wilderneſs ; 
and theſe,when they had done this work,returned to their brethren 
into the wilderneſs.Qxeſt.2.Why cid they not all now go into Cana- 
 an,when ſome of them had once centred it,and purſue this viQory ? 
Anſ. Becauſe God would not permit it, there being ſeveral works 
yet to be done,other people muſt te conquered,the 1/aelites muſt be 
further humbled and rried and purged,Moſes muſt die,and then they 
ſhall enter, and that in a more glorious manner, even over Jordar, 
which thall be miraculouſly dried up, and give them paſſage. 


4 And they * journeyed from mount Hor by the way * chap.;; 
of the Red-ſea h to compaſs the land of Edom: and-the 41: 
foul of the people was much || + diſcouraged becauſe of Or.g 


the way 5. + Heb 
h ( i. e. ) Which leadeth to the Rea-ſea, as they muſt needs do to ſhortened. 
compaſs the land of Edem. # By reaſon of this journey, which was 
long and troubleſome, and prepoſterous ( for they were now goin 
towaras Egypr ) and unexpetted, either becauſe they doubted not 
bur their brethren the Edomites would grant them their reaſonable 
requeſt of paſſing through their land, which diſappointmentmade it 
worſe ; Or, becauſe the ſucceſsful entrance and viftorious progreſs 
which ſome of them had made in the borders of Canaon,made them 
think they might have ſpeedily gone in and taken pofleſſion of it 
and ſo have ſaved their tedicus travels and further difficulties, in. 
to which Moſes had again brought them. ; 
5 And the people ſpake againft God &,and againſt Mo- 
ſes, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egype to 
die in the Wilderneſs?for there isno bread, neither js there 


any water, and * our ſoul loatheth this lighe bread 1, * chap.n; 
k Againſt Chriſt, their chief conduQor, whom | ws tempted x 6. : 

Cor. 10. 9. 7(7.e, ) Of ſmall ſubſtance and virtue. Thus contem- 

ptuouſly do they ſpeak of Mama, whereas it appears it yielded ex- 

cellent nouriſhment, becauſe in the ſtrength of it they were able 

to go ſo many and ſuch tedious journies. 


6 And* the LORD ſent hiery ſerpents » among the * ; Cor, 


people, and they bit the people, and much people of 10. 9. 
Iſrael died. 
m Such there were many in this wilderneſs, Deut. 8. 15, whi 
having been hitherto reſtrained by God, are now let hd ang 
among them. They are called fery from their effes,becauſe their 
_- way" = man 1g heat and burning and thirſt in the bo« 
ies of the [raelites, which was aggravated wi IS CI 
of the place, that here was no bas. na F. Ces 


7 Thereforethe people came to Moſes, and {aid, We 
have ſinned: for we have ſpoken againſt the LORD,and 


the ſerpents from us : and Moſes prayed for the peopl *X- 
8 And the LORD faid unto Meſas Make _ ny 
ſerpent», and ſetit upon a Pole oz and it ſhal come to 


againſt thee : pray unto the LORD that he take away | 


paſs 


{Hel 
mot th 
red fi 
&c. 


*cha 
13. 


THe 


Satat 


" Chap. XXUl. NOM 
and the only poſſible way of ruining them,was by engaging their 
God againſt them : As the known way of the Romans and other 
Heathens, when they went to beſiege any City, they uſed Inchant- 
ments to call focth thar God under whole peculiar proteQion they 
were. t And of Mia/an too, as is manifelt from ver. 7. which was 


[needleſs to repeat here. : 
9 And God came unto Balaam «, and ſaid, What 


men are theſe with thee x? 

, Not to gratifie his covetous deſire, bur to advance his own ho- 
nour ard ſervice, even by the Counſels of his enemies. « He ask- 
eth not this for his own Information, but partly that Ba/aam by re- 
peating the thing in God's preſence, might be convinced and a- 
ſhamed of his ſin and folly in offering his lervice in ſuch a curſed 
buſineſs; And partly for a foundation to the following anlwer 

io And Balaam faid unto Ged, Balakthe ton of Zip- 
por, King of Moab, hath ſent unto me, ſaying, 

11 Behold, there & a people come out of Egypt, 
which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curſe 


4th me them ; peradventure + I ſhall be able to overcome 
w_ P them, and drive them out. 
ring a= 12 And God faid unto Balaam y, Thou (halt not go 


zainſt him. with them ; thou thalt not curſe the people, for they are 
bleſſed =. 


y To whom God revealeth his mind, not for any love to him, 
bur for the ſake of his people concerned in it, as he did to Pharavh, 
Gen.q1.25.and to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.45. 2 By my irrevocable de- 
cree and ſentence, and therefore it is in vainfor men to curſe them. 


Alas . R CEENY 

iz'd 13 And Balaam roſe up in the morning,and faidun- 

So to the Princes of Balak, get ye into your land : for the 
LORD refuſeth to give me leave to go with you 4. 

bs a He conceals the principal things, to wit, the reaſon of God's 


prohibition, which might have given a ſtop to their further courſe 
and counſels in this matter, and ſecretly intimates his own good wall 
and readineſs to comply with them, if God had nor hindered him. 


14 And the Princes of Moab roſe up, and they went 
unto Balak, and ſ:id, Balaam refuſeth to come with us b. 
b Thus they lay the blame upon Balazm, which he 1mputed to 


God. 
15 And Balak ſent yet again Princes, moe, and more 


honourable than they. 
16 And they came to Balaam, and faid to him, Thus 


Logo _— ſaith Balak the ſon ef Zippor, | let nothing c, I pray 
|: from " thee, hinder thee from coming unto me. 
"a c No counſe} or ſuggeſtion either of God or man. 


17 For L wiil promote thee unto very great honour 4. 
and I wiil do whatſoever thou fayeſt unto me : come 


therefore, I pray thee, curſe me this people. 
d Before he wrought upon his covetouſneſs, now upon his am- 
birion. 
' 18 And Balaam anſwered and ſaid unto the ſervants 
chap. 24+ of Bajak, * If Balak would give me his houſe full of til. 
_ ver and gold, I cannot e go beyond the word of the 


LORD my God f, to do lefs or more. 
| e You deſire and expett that from me which 1s out ofmy power, 
to re{iſt the will of the great God He {lily infinuates, Thar he 
wanted not Will, but Power on!y. f So he calls him partly to mag- 
nifie himſelf as the ſervant ot the ,re.t Jehovah; partly, that by pro- 
feſling this reſpe& unto God, he might the ſooner induce him to 
grant his Nefice; And partly becauſe he worjhipped th= true God, 
together with Idols, as many in thoſe times and places did. 
iy Now therefore, 1 pray you, tarry ye aifo here 
this night, that I may know what the LORD will ſay 


unto me more g. 
z Poſlibly he may change his mind, or'yield to my renewed ſuit. 
Thus he ſought to make God and his conſcience ſtoop to the fer- 
vice of his pride and covetouſneſs, which was abominable. 
20 And God came unto Balaam at night, and {aid un- 
to him, If the men come to call thee, riſe up and go 
with them b: bur yer the. word which I ſhall ſay unto 


thee: char thalt thou do z. 

h Since this is thy great deſire and purpoſe, as far as thou can'ſt, 
take thy courſe; I will, acco:ding to thy wiſh, withdraw my re- 
ſtraint, and leave thee to thy ſe!f and thy own choice. Compare 
Pſal $1.11.12. i Theſe words iignifie not ſo much his duty, as the e- 
vent and his diſappointment, Thou ſhalt not do what thou d-ſireſt, 
to wit, curſe my people and ſo enrich and advance thy felt, but Twill 
ſo over-rule thy mind and bridle thy tongue, that thou ſhalr ſpeak 
nothing but whar is contrary to thy deſire and intereit ; And there- 
fore, though I permit thee to go, thou ſhalt loſe thy deſign in it. 

21 And Balaam roſe.up in the morning, and fſadled 
his aſs, and went with the princes of Moab. | 

22 AndGod's anger was kindled becauſe he went &, 
tHeb. /z- and the Angel ofthe LORD ſtood in the way Þ for an 
"am. adverſary againſt him!: now he was riding upon his af, 


and his two ſervants were with hira w. 
| þ Either 1. Becauſe he went of his own accord,with the Princes 
' of Moab, and did not wait till they came tocall him, (z. e.) urged him 
to go, which was the ſign and condition of God's permiſſion,v,20. 
but rather himſelf ;ofe and called them, as it may ſeem from v. 21. 
Or 2. Becauſe thoſe words, v. 20. did contain no approbation nor 
licence, but a bare permiflion, and that in ariger, as Ba/aam might 
eaſily have underitood, it he had conſidered hi: own heart, or the 
circumſtances of his conceſſion, This was no more an app:obati- 
on than thar paſlage of Chrilt ro Judas, John 13. 27 That thou doeſt, 
do quickly. Or 3. Becauſe he went with ill deſign, and deſire to do 
contrary to what God had charged him, ro wit, ro curſe the people, 
as plainly appears from the following ftory, and from Devt. 23. 5. 
for Gad hath been oft and juſtly angry with thoſe who have done 
what God bad them,when they did it in evil manner, or for evil 


l, 


| 


| 


B E K S. Chap. XX 


ends, as appears from 1/z. 10. 6, 7. and many other places. /(. e.) 
To oppoſe and rerrifie, if not to kill him. » The reſt of the coni- 
pany being probably gone before them. For in thoſe ancient times 
there was more of {implicity, and leſs of ceremony ; And there- 
fore it 15 not firange that Balazm came ar ſome diſtance, after the 
reſt, and attended only by his own ſervants. 


% 


23 And * the aſs ſaw the Angel » of the LORD 
ſtanding in the way, and his ſword drawn in his hand, Jud. rx. 
and the aſs turned «fide our of the way, and went in- 
co the field s and Balaam ſmote the aſs, to turn her into 
che way. 

» Which Balaam ſaw not, becauſe God withheld his eyes as he did 
the eyes of Daniel's companions, Dar. 10.7. Ir is a truth, which 
meer Philoſophers own, tiaat when God withdraws his concuiſe 
or help from any of his creatures, they cannor perform their na- 
tural acts and offices ; The eye cannot ſce, Ger 19. nor the car heas; 
nor the fire burn, as Dan. 3. 

' 24 Bur the Angel of the LORD ſtood in apath of the 
vineyards:a wall being on this fide, anda wall on that ſide: 

25 And when the aſs faw the Angel of the LORD, 
ſhe thruſt her ſelf unto the wall, and cruſht Balaams foot 
againft the wall: and he ſmote her again. 

26 And the Angel of the LORD went further, and 
ftood in a narrow place, where 245 no way to turn, Ei- 
ther to the right handor to the left. 

27 And when che afs ſaw the Angel of the LORD, 
the fell down under Balaam,and Balaams anger was kind- 
led, and he {mote the afs with a ſtaff. 

28 And the LORD opened the mouth of the aſs o, 
and ſhe ſaid unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, 
that thou haſt ſmitren me theſe three times ? 

0 (:.e.) Conferred upon her the power of Specch and reaſoning 
for that time. Impudent are thoſe heathen: tht disbelieve and ſcotf 
at the Scripture for this and ſome ſuch relations contained in it, 
when there are examples of the 1ame kind of Prodigies, to wit, of 
Oxen and othe- brut--creatures ſpeaking ſome few words, in the 
greateſt and moit approved writers of the Roman Hiſtory, as Plu- 
zarch, volybius, Livy, and others. See the particulars in my Latin 
Synoplis on this place. 

29 And Baiaam {aid untothe aſs p, Becauſe thou haft 
mocked me ; I would there were a {word in mine hand, 


tor now would I kill thee. 

P Balnam was not much terrified with the Aﬀes ſpeaking, be- 
cauſe he was much accu'omed to converſe with evil jpirits which 
oit app*ared to him, and diſcourſed with him in the ſhape of ſuch 
creatures. 

3o Arid the Afs ſaid unto Balaam, 4m not I thine FHev. who! 
als F upon which thou haſt ridden || ever ſince I as #-ft ridden} 
chine, unto this day? Was Lever wont to do ſo unto 2% 7% | 
thee ? and he ſaid, Nay. ub 

31 Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balaam, wap, &c. | 
and he ſaw the Angel of the LORD ſtanding in the way, 
and his ſword drawn in his hand: -and he bowed down 
his head, and ||fell flat on tis f ce 9. 

q In token of :everence and ſubmiſh n. 

32 And the Angei of the LORD faid unto him, 
Wherefore haſt thou ſmitten thine aſs theſe three times ? 
Behold, Iwent ourf to withſtand thee, becauſe thy way tHeb. /e- 


is perverſe before me 7. ſatan, that 
r Howſoever thou mayeſt, deceive thy ſelf or others, I ſee the '5; *? be an 
perverienels of thy heart anc way; the wickednets of thy deſign and a—_ J 
deli:es in this jrurney, which thou haſt undertaken, nor to pleaſe *9 ****- 
me, but to gratitie Balak; and, if it be poſſible, to curſe my people. 
33 And che afs faw rue, and curned from me theſe 
three times : unleſs ſhe had turned from me, ſurely now 


alſo I had flain thee and ſaved her alives. 
5 T had {lain thee alone, and nor her, and therefore her turning 
aſide and falling down was wholly for thy {ake and benefit, not for 
her own, and thy anger againſt her was unjuſt and unreaſonable. 
24 And Balaam faid unto the Angel of the LORD, 
I have iinned, for I knew not that thou ſtoodeſt in the 
way againſt me: now therefore if ic | diſpleaſe thee #, #Heb: be 
1 will get me back again. evil in 
: A frivolous ſuppoſition; for it was apparently diſpleaſing to *#:7e eyes. 
God, who had now faid that his way was perverſe, and had there- 
fore oppoſed him and ſought to flay him: Bur hereby he ſhews how 
loth he was to go back and loſe the hopes he had conceived, and 
beſides he ſpeaks of deliſting from the ourward afion, but ſhews 
no ſenſe of the plague of his heart, his vile affe&tions, which were 
the coor of this 11] deſigned journey. 
35 And tie angel of the LORD ſaid unto Balaam, 
Go with the mien s: but only the word that i ſhall ſpeak 
unto thee, that thou ſhalt ſpeak x : ſo Balaam went with 


che Princes of Balak. 

#s This may be either 1. A meer permiſſion, ſince neither the 
convictions of rhy own conſcience,nor the experience of thy dan- 
ger have weaned thee from thy baſe deſigns and inclinations, I ſhal 
no further reſtrain thee ; my. Angel ſhalt give thee no more diſtur- 
bance; go on and proſper« Or 2. A conceſſion; 4 allow thee to 
go, upon the following terms. For the words here are more abſo- 
lute and unconditional than thoſe, wer. 209. x Theſe wards may 
expreſs either 1. The event; Or, 2. His duty.See above on wer. 20. 

36 And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he 
went out to meet Him y unto a city of Moab, which # in 
the border of Arnon, which & in the utmoſt coaſt z, 

y That by this great honour he might give him a taſte and ear- 


3 net 


Ii ] 


if 


© 2Per. kd, 


l|'Or, bowed 
himſelf. | 


"4 


—_ = 


az 
SY, 


We neſt of thoſe greatrewards he deſigned him,and thereby oblige him 


to uſe his utmoſt skill and intereſt for him. = Not far from the 
camp of the {ſraelites, whom he deſired him to curſe. 


27 And Balak faid unto Balaam, did I not earneſtly 
ſend unto thee, to call thee? wherefore cameſt thou 
not unto me 2 Am I notable indeed to promote thee 
to honou; ? | 

28 And Balaam ſaid unto Balak, Lo, I am comeunto 
thee : have I now any power at allto ſay anything ? the 
word that God putreth in my mouth, that ſhall T ſpeak 5, 

a To wit, agrezable to thy expeQation or my own inclination. 
þ I am forced to do ſo by his ſuperiour power, and therefore be 
not offended with me, it 4 ſpeak things unpleaſing to thee. 


Or, - city 
\of ſtreets. 


| i 
18 
! 14 
WT: 


unto || Kirjath-huzoth. 

$40 And Balak offered c oxen and ſheep, and ſent to 
Baiaam 4d, and to the princes that were with him e. 

Or, killed, either for ſacrifice ; or rather for a feaſt: For the 
ſacrifices were offered after this, Numb. 23. 1, 2. d To invite him 
to the feaſt. e Whom the king had left to accompany him and at- 
tend upon him. , 

41 And it came to paſs on the morrow,. that Balak 
took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places 
of Baal f, that thence he might ſce the utmolt par? © 
the people g. * 

f(G. e.) Conſecrated ro the worſhip of Bazl, 7. e. of Baa! Peor, 
who was their Baal or god, Numb 25; 2,3. or of Chemeſh. g (:.e) 
All that people, even to the utmoſt and remoteſt of them, as ap- 
pears by comparing this with Numb. 23. 13. He hoped that the 
fighr of ſuch a numerous hoft ready to break in upon his countrey, 
would ſtir up his paſſion and further his charms. 

C H A P. XXIIL 
Balak and Balaaw ſacrifice : God meets him,and he bl:ſſes Iſrael, y------ ro, 

Balak is troubled : they go to another place to curſe them: they ſacrifice 

again : Balaam conſults God, who meets him, and he again bleſſes Iſrael, 

1 1I=---=-24, They go to a third place and ſacrifice again, 27----= 30. 

ND Balaam ſaid unto Balak, /Build me here 1even 
altars «, and prepare me here ſeven oxen, and 


ſeven rams 6. 

a Either 1. To Baa!, in whoſe high places this was done, and to 
whom alone Balak uſed to ſacrifice. Or rather 2. To the true God, 
otherwiſe he would not have mentioned it to God as an argument 
why he ſhould grant his requeſts, as he doth wv. 4. And though Ba- 
lak was averſe from God and his worſhip, yet he would be eaſily o- 
ver-ruled by Balaam, who doubtleſs told him that it was in vain to 
make an larefs ro any other than the God of 1rae!, who alone was 
able cither to bleſs or curſe them,as he pleaſed. And therefore when 
Balaam loſt his deſign this way,he tried it another way with greater 
ſucceſs,but Kill uſed the ſame method, in provoking their own God 
to deſtroy the Iſraelites, Numb. 25. But though he dire his ſacrifices 
to a right obje&, he chooſeth a wrong place, and, ro comply with 
Balak's deſire, makes uſe of the high places of Baal for this end, and 
mingles his own ſuperſtitions with the Worſhip of God, in erett- 
ing divers Altars, according tothe manner of Heathens and Idola- 
ters, 2 Kings 18. 22. Iſa. 17.8. Jer: 11. 13. Hoſ. 8.11. and 10. 1. and 
and 12. 11. whereas God appointed and holy men uſed but one 
Altar, though many ſacrifices were to be offered upon it, Gen. 8. 
20, Exod. 17. 15. and 24. 4. 6 This being the folemn and utual 
number in ſ:crifices, 1 Chron 15. 26. 2 Chron 29. 21. Job 42. 


8. 
2 And Balak did as Balaam had ſpoken,and Balak and 


Balaam «c offered on every altar a bullock and a ram. 

c Balak by procuring them, and Balaam by offcring them ; though 
in antient times Kings were Prieſts alſo, and ſo might perform a 
prieftly work, as this was. 

3 And Balaam faid unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt- 
offering d, and I will go e: peradvencure the LORD 
will come to meet me: and whatſoever he ſheweth mef, 


T will tell thee. And || be went to an high place g. 

d As in God's preſence, as one that offers thy ſelf as well as thy 
ſacrifices to obtain his favour. e To ſome ſolitary and convenient 
place, where I may by my inchantments prevail with God to ap- 
pear to me, and to anſwer thy and my defires in curſing this people. 
f (i. e.) Reveals to me, either by word or ſign. g Or, into the plain 
as that word properly ſignifies, for he was now in an high place, 
Num: 22. 4!.- But this is not material, it was doubtleſs ſome ſo- 
litary place, where he might uſe ſome geſtures and ceremonies, 
which he would not have others ſee, and where he might more rea- 
ſonably expe& to meet with God ; for both good and evil ſpirits 
moſt commonly appeared to perſons in ſuch places. 

4 And God mer Balaam b; and he faid unto him, I 
have prepared ſeven altars, and I have offered upon e- 


wvery altar a bullock and a ram z. 

þ Not to comply with Balaam's charms, nor to gratifie, but to 
oppoſe his wicked deſires, and to force him againſt his own incli- 
nation and intereſt toutrer the following words. # Which I pray 
thee accept, and give me leave to curſe thy people, as their abun- 
dant wickedneſs deſerves. 

5 And the LORD put a word ia Balaams mouth &, 
and ſaid, Return unto Balak,and thus thou ſhalc ſpeak. 

k He ſuggeſted what he ſhould ſay, even.thoſe words, v. 8, 9, 10. 

6 And he returned unto him, and lo, he ſtood by bis 
burnt ſacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab. 

7 And he took up / his parable ws, and faid, Balak the 
King of Moab hath brought me from Aram »,out of the 
mountains of the eaſt o, ſaying, Come curſe me Jacob p, 
and come, defie Iſrael. 

I To wit into his mputh, he expreſſed or ſpoke. m (7. e.) His 
oracular and prophetical ſpeech, which he calls a parable, becauſe 
of the weightineſs ofthe matter, and the majeſty and ſunartnels of 


Il Or, he 


went ſoli- 


rary. 


_— 


9 And Balaam went with Balak, and they came : 


 kons, non of which have place in God, 


Y © & -0. 


the expreſſions which 1s uſual in parables. » From Aram,Naharain; 
or Meſopotamia, Deut. 23. 4, See Gen. 10. 22. 0 In which quarter 
Aram lay. The Eaſt was infamous for charmers or ſoothiayers 
Iſa. 2, 6. p The poſterity of Jacob, 7. e. Iſrael, as it here follows. : 

8 How ſhall 1 curſe bom God hath not + curſed q ? ich: 
or how ſhall I defie hom the LORD hath not defied? © =: 

q God hath not curſed but bleſſed 1ael, and therefore it is a vain 
and ridiculous attempt for me to curſe them in ſpight of God. 

9 For from the top of the rocks r 1fſce him 5s, and 
from the hills I behold him : lo * the people ſhall dwell «1 


alone,and ſha}l not be reckoned among the nations z. 

r Upon which I now ſtand. - I ſee the people,according to thy de- 
fire, chap. 22, 41. but cannot improve that ſightto the end for which 
thou didſt deiign it, to wit, to curſe them. # This peop'e arc ot 
a diſtin& kind from others, Ged's peculiar people, feparated from 
| all other nations, as in Religion and Laws, fo alſo in divine Pro- 
; tection; And therefore my inchantments cannot have that power 
againſt them, which they have againſt other perſons and pcople. 
See Exod. 19. 5. Levit. 20. 24, 26. 

to Who can count the duſt of Jacob «, and the num- 
ber of the fourth part of Iſrael x: Letf me dye * the +Heb> » 


death of the righteous, and let my laſt end z be like his. ſou! or my 
u (7. e.) The numberleſs people of Jacob or Iſrael, who according fe. 
to God's promiſe, Ger. 13: 16. and 28. 14. are now become as the *Pfal.116. 


eur.z5* 
29. 


fg | duſt of the earth. x (7. e.) Of one of the camps of 1ſ-ael; For they 15. 


were divided into four camps, Numb. 2. which Balaam from this 
height could eatily diſcover: Much leſs can any man number all 
their hoſt. » (7. e.) Of this righteous and boly People, the 1/-aelites, 
called Jeſurun, Deut. 32.15, which word ſignifies upright or righteous. 
The ſenſe is, they are not only happy above other nations in this 
life, as I have faid, and therefore in vain thould Icurſe them, bur 
they have this peculiar priviledge, that they are happy after death : 
Their happineſs begins where the happineſs of other people 
ends; and therefore I heartily wiſh that my ſoul may have its por- 
tion with theirs when I dye. But it was a vain wiſh; for as he would 
not live as God's pe: ple cid, ſo he died by the ſwoid, as others of 
God's enemies did, Numb: 31.8. Jo. 13. 22. 2 (5. e.) My death, as 
the- word 1s uſed. Or, My poſterity, as this Hebrew word ſignifies Pſal, 
109. 13. Dan. 11. 4. Amos 4. 2. And as the covenant and bleling 
of God given to Abraham did reach to his poſte: ity, ſo this might 
not be unknown ro Balaam, which might give him occaſion for this 
wiſh. Or, my reward, as the word is taken, Prov: 23. 18. and 24 20 
But the firſt ſenſe ſeems the moſt true, becauſe it agrees beſt with 
the uſage of Scripture to repeat the ſame thing in other words, and 
this includes the third ſenſe, to wit, the reward which is here ſup- 
poſed tro follow dezth; And for poſterity, it doth not appear that 
he had any, or, ifhe had, that he was ſo very ſolicitous for them : or 
that he knew thetenour of God's covenant with Abraham and his 
poſterity. Nay he rather ſeems to have had ſome hope of ruining 
£Zoraham's poſterity, which he attempted both here and afterwards. 
11 And Balak faid unto Baiaam, What haſt thou done 
unto me? I took thee to curſe mine enemies, and be- 
hoid, thou haſt bleſſed rherz altogether. | 
12 And he anſwered and faid, Muſt I not take heed 
to ſpeak that which the LORD hath pur in my mouth «? 


a I ſpeak not theſe words by my own choice, b : 
ſtraint of an higher Power which 76% hn reſiſt. » but by the con- 


13 And Balak faid unto him, Come,I pray thee with 
me unto another place, from whence thou mayelt ſee 
chem : thou ſhalt ſee but the utmoſt part of them, and 
ſha}tnor ſee themall b: and curſe me them from thence. 


b He thought the ſight of the people neceſſar 
{ ary both to excite Ba- 
laam's paſſions, and to ſtrengthen and dire& his cc Exarpang = 


Chap XXII, J 


he would now have him ſee but a pa 
cauſe the tighr of all of them miche ye 179i wes -o 
and, as it did before, raite his fancy to an admiration of "'., Ie. 
tude and of the felicity of the people, wer: 9, 10. Ng 

14 And he brought him into the field of Lophim c 
to the top of || Piſgah 4, and built ſeven altarsz and of. || Or, 
rod : bullock and a ram on every altar. _ 

c aceſo ca!l'd from the ſpie 77 :hich wer | 
'd An figh hill inthe land of Nah, x er I mg - oqpine oe: 

15 And hefaid unto Balak, Stand here by thy burne- 

offering, while I meet the LORD e yonder. 

e To conſult him, and to receive an anſwer from him, if perad- 


venture thoſe renewed ſacrifices will im i 
: melt him into : 
ance with our deſires. ſome compli- 


16 And the LORD met Balaam f, and * put a word 


in his mouth, and ſaid, go again to B 7: Fchap. 21] 
| alak CHAP. 22 
f See above on werſe 4. and Numb: 22. 35. » and ſay thus. 35: 


| _ 17 And when he came to him, behold, he ſtood by 
his burnt-offering, . and the princes of Moab with hin 
And Balak faid unto him, What hath the LORD ſpoken? 
18 And he took up his parable, and ſaid, Riſe up 
Balak, and hearken unto me, thou ſon of Zippor: _- 
f This word implies, either 1. The reverence wherewith he ſhould 
hear and receive God's meſſage, as Ehud did, Judg: 3. 20. whi h 
might have been probable, if Balak had been now ſittins. as Ebud 
there was: But he was ſtanding, wer: 15. Or rather 2. The dil bt 
attention required; roufe up thy ſelf and carefully mind whatT fay. 
Ig * God is not a man that he ſhould lie þ neither *1 Sam, 
the ſon of man, that he ſhould repent i : hath he ſajg —_ 
3 


and thall he not do it 4? or hath he 155 297 
he not make it good? 1 ne Ipoken, and ſhall SHES. 


h (i. e.) Break his Faith and Promiſes made ; | 

. / : | to his P oo 
their preſervation and benediQtion. 7'(7. e.) Change his as 1A — Jam, 1117! 
purpoſes; Which men do, either becauſe they are not able to exe. 

cute them, or becauſe they are better informed, and their minds 


changed by ſome unexpe&ed occurrent, or by their Juſts and paſ- 
And therefoze I plainly 
lee 


PA 


i(e 
#n$ 


lean 


I's 


WI 
vo 


P 


he 


22] 


'F 


[i 


Tf chap. XX. 


g 


paſs, that every ore that is bitten, when he looketh 


upon it, {hal live p. | Es 
n (i. e.) The figure ofa ſerpent in braſs, which is of a fiery co- 
Jour. This would :equire ſome time : God would nor ſpeedily take 
off the judgn.ent, becaule he. ſaw they were not thoroughly hum- 
bled. o That the people might ſee ir from all parts of the camp,and 
therefore the pole mutt be high, and the ſerpent large. p This me- 
thod of cure was preſcribed, partly that it might appear to be Gods 
own work, and not the cffect of nature orart: and partly that it 
might be an eminent type of our ſelvation by Chriſt. See 70þ.3.14, 
15. The ſerpent ſignified Chriſt, who was 7 the likeneſs of ſmful feejb, 
Rom. 8.3. though withour ſin, as this brazen ſerpent had the out- 
ward ſhape, bur n-t the inward poiſon, of the other ſerpents : the 
pole reſembl-d the croſs upon which Chriſt was lift up for our fal- 
vation : and looking up to it deſigned our believing in Chift. 
 ..., 9 And* Moſes made aferpent of braſs ,and put it upon 
+ Kng: avole,and it came to paſs,that ita ſerpent had bitten any 
Jak. 14. man, when he beheld the ſerpent of braſs, he lived gq. 
9g He wasdelivered from death, and cured of his diſcale. : 
10 And the children of Iſrael fer forward, and 


pitched in Oboth r, | 
r Not immediately,burt after two other ſtations mentioned,Num.33. 


11 And they journeyed from Oboth, * and pitched 
at + lje-Abarim, in the wilderneſs which is before Mo- 


ab 5 toward the {un-rifing. 
s Called the wilderneſs of Moab, Dent. 2.8. ; k 
12 From thence they removed, and pitched in the 


valley of Zared z. 


t Or rather, by the torrent or brook of Zared,as we render it, Deut. 
2. 13. which ran into the dead fea, and from which the valley al- 
ſo might be ſo called. : 

12 From thence they removed, and pitched on the 


other ſide of Arnon «, which is in the wilderneſs, that 
cometh out of the coaſts of the Aworites : for Arnon 2. 


the border of Moab,between Moab and the Amorites x. 

u Or rather, on this fide of Arnon,for ſo it now was to the Jſraelites, 
who had not yet paſſed over it, as appears from Deur. 2. 24. But 
the ſame words, judg. 11. 18. are to be rendred, on the other ſide of 
Arnon, for ſo it was to Jephthah : and the ſame Prepofition lignihieth 
on this fide, or beyond, accoruing tothe circumſtanc.s of the place. x 
( i. e ) Though formerly it and the land beyond it b longed ro 
Moab, yet af.crwards it had been taken from them by $/hon, werſe 
26. 28. This is added to reconcile two ſeemingly contrary .com- 
mands of God, the one that ofnot medling with the land of the 
Moabites, Det. 2. 9. the other that of going over 4770 and taking 
poſſeſſion of the land beyond it, Devt. 2. 24. becauſe, ſaith he, ir 
is not now the land of the Moabites, but of the Amorites. 

14 Wherefore it is ſaid in the book of the wars of the 


10r 74heþ LORD 7, || what he did in the Red-lea z, and in the 


#Suphah. brooks 4 of Arnon ; 
We y This ſeems to have been ſome Poem or narration of the wars 
and victories of the Lord, either by or relating to the Iſraelires, 
which may be alerted without any prejudice to the integrity of the 
Holy Scripture, becauie thi: book doth nt appear to have i cen 
written by a Prophet,or to be deſigned fo-a pa r of the Canon,bur 
by ſome other ingenious perſ n,who intended on'y to write an h - 
ſtor ical relation of theſe matters, which yer Moſes might quoreza,; St. 
Paul doth ſome of the heathen Foets. And as St.Lyke aſſures u+,that 
many {:id write an i:1ſtory of the things done a-d fail by Chris, 
Luke 1.1.whoſe w:itirngs were never received as Cinonical ; the like 
may be juſtly conceived concerning this and fome few or er books 
m-ntioned in the old Teſtament. Though the » o ds may be thus 
rendrea,rerefore it ſhall be (aid in the relation or narrati:n ( for ſo the 
Hebrew Sepher is confeſſed ro ſignihe ) of the wars of the Lord. xz Or,At 
Vaheb in Suphah,or in the land of Suph. Vahcb ſeerns to be the name not 
of a man, but of a city or place,and Suphah the name of the country 
where it was ; and the Hebrew particle eth1is oft rendred at. And 
whereas the ſenſe ſeems to be imperfeC&, it mu be noted, that he 
quotes only a f-14gment or piece of the book,and that principally to 
prove the ſ{cituation of Arnon,which he had aſſerted wer. +. for which 
end the paſſage qu red is ſutticient. And the ſenſe 15 eaſily ro be un- 
derſtood, for it is plain enough that this Poet or Writer is deſcri- 
bing the wars and works of God by the ſeveral place: where they 
were done, and having bezu' the £: tence befo-e. and mentione1 
other places, he comes to theſe here me tioned, Ar Yaheb in Suphah, 
and at the brooks of Arnon, &c. And it ſeems probable that the was 
here deſigned was that of Sihon again'! the M abites, mentioned be- 
low, ver.26.which is fitly aſcribed to the Lord,becauſe it was under- 
taken and perfe&ed by the ſingular dir-&ion and affiftance ot God, 
an© that for the ſake of the 1ſ-aelites, that by thi. means that coun- 
try might be invaded and poſſeſſes by them, withour taking it a- 
way from the M abites which they were forbidden to mecdle with 
or to diſtu:b Deut. 2.9.and ſo their title to it might be more juſt and 
unqueſtionable. See Judg. 11. 12, 13, 27. # (7.e. ) The brook, the 
plural number for the ſingular, as the plural number rivers is ſed 
concerning Jordan, Pſal. 74. 15. and concerning Tigris, Nah. 2.6.and 
concerning Euphrates, Pſal. 137. 1. and co'.cerning 7hermod.on in 
Virgil,all which may be ſo called becauſe of the ſeveral little fNreams 
into which they were divided. 
15 And art the ſtream of the brooks that goeth down 
to the dwelling of Arb, and Flieth upon the border of 


Moab. 
b A chief city in Moab, as appears from 1ſs.15.1. of which v. 28. 
16 And from thence th-y went to Beer c : that is the 
we!l whereof the LORD ſpaks unto Moſes, Gather the 
people together, and I will give them water d. 

c This place and Mattanah, Nahaliel,and Bamoth named here, werſe 
T9. are not mentioned among thoſe places where they pirched or 
encamped, Numb. 33. Either therefor they did not pitch or en- 
camp in theſe places, butonly.paſs by or through them, nor indee- 


* chap.33- 
43: 
* chap. 333 


44 
+} Or,heaps 
of Abarim, 


t Heb: 
leaneth, 


IS it hexe ſaid they pitched or encamped in theſe places, which is 
{aid of thoſe places, Numb, 33. bur only that they went to them,ve/c 


IIS 


N O M HE RY 


Chap. XXI; 
18. or, theſe are ſtations omitted there, and to te furplicd frem 
hence; for though it be there ſaid they went frem juch a place, 
and pitched in tuch a place, yet it is not ſaid they went in medi- 
ately from the one place to the cther, and therefore they might 
take theſe places in their way. - 4 To wit, in 2 wiracu!ous manner. 

17. Then lirael fang this ſong e, + Spring up f, O + Heb, 
well, [|Sing ye unto it ||. aſcend. * 

e To praiſe God for giving them ſuch a ſeaſonable bleſſing,befo:e |. Or, 4 
they asked it or complained for the want of it. fGive forth thy ſwer. 
waters that we may diink.Heb.oſcend, 7.e.let thy watcrs,v hich now 
ly hd Lelow in the earth,aſcend for thy uſe. Iris cither a predi&i- 
on that it ſhould ſpring up,or a prayer that it might,or a command 
in the name of God direticd to the well, by an utual Prolopopzia,as 
when God bids the heavens hear and the earth give ear, (jc. 1.2.Apy cf 
theſe ways it ſhes their taith. , Or, fag ze of t, cr, :2jwer 70 7t Or 
concerning it ; it being the manner of the Jew!ſb ſingers, thar one 
ſhould anſwer to another, of which fee Exod. 15. 21. 1 Sam. 18, 7. 

138 The princes digged g the well, the nobles of the 
people digged it, by the diredien of the lawgiver b, with 
irftaves;: And from the wilderneſs hey went to 
Macttanah : 

Z Either by themfclves, or by others whom they commanded to 
do it. h Or, with the lawgiver, i. e, Moſes, they together with Moſes, 
or they by Moſes his direttion and appointment, which is ſignified, 
verſe 16. i Which arehere mentioned,cither i.as the enſigns of their 
aut:0:1ty, Judg. 5. 14. by which they gave' this command of dig- 
ging: 2. as the inſtruments of their work, not that they did for- 
mally and effe&ually dig the well or receptacle for the water, for 
which ſpades were more proper than ſtaves, but that «s M:ſes ſmote 
the rock with his rod, fo they ſtruck the earth with their ftaves 
making only ſome fmal) impreſſion for form ſke, or as a figit that - 
God would cauſe the water to fiow forth our of the earth where 
they ſmote it, as he did before out of the rock. 

19 And from Matranah to Nahalicl, and from Naha- 
liel tro. Bamoth &. 

k See the Notes on verſe 16. 

2v And from Bamoth i» the valley ]; that is in the 
# countrey of Moab, to the top of || Piſgzh », which FHeb:#l 
ooked toward || Jelhimon. || Or, he 


bl 
0:3C 


: : 7 5 ll, 
I Or, the valley, «hich might be called Bamoth, not becauſe it was 10+ the 
" I . A . * : - = . _ 5 , 
a place naturally high, bur trom div:rs other re-fons which may be ,,;14; of 


eaſily gueſſed. Or, to the valy, or to that walley, that fawous or 
rather infamous valley, t> wit, of Abel-ſhiztim, Numb. 33+ 49. v here 
they committed thoſe foul abominations recorded Numb 25. m This 
was the top of rhoſe high-hills of 4barim ; of which ſee Dent. 3.17, 
27. and 32.49. and 34. 1, 6. 
21 Andifraeitent meſſengers » unto Sihon the king 
of the Amorirtes, faying, | 

2 Py Gods allowance, that fo S:hons malice might be the more e- 
vident and inexcuſable,and thar their title ro his country more clear 
inche judgments of all men, as being gotten by a juſt war, into 
which they were forced for their own cefence. 

22 Lerme paſs through thy iand ; we will not turn + p,,,, , 
into the fields, or into the vineyards; we will nor 4, Judg 
drink of the waters of the well : but we will go aiong 11. 1g. 
by the kings high way, unti} we be paſt thy borders o, 

o They ſpoke v hat they ſeriouſly intended and would have done, 
if he had given them quier patſag- : tur withal they knew that 
Sihon would not do it, and'har he would wi hſtand them, and that 
they ſhould ſui due him and take his land, as ©0d had troli them 
before they ſent this mNage, as appeais from Deut. 2. 24,26, 27.and 
accordingly God hardened his ſpirit, and made his heart obſtinate,fo: this 
end, that he might deliver him into Iſraels hand there, verſe zo. And 
no wonder, for he and his people were Amorites, and, therefore 
devoted to deſtiuCtion, as all that people were. | 

22* And Sihon woyid not {utter Iſrael to paſs through * Deut. 


his border : but Sihon gathered all his people together, 29- 8. 


5 SC 
———  —  — 


| 
4 


l 
! 


| ry uſual: 
| Shons conqueit and kingdom.thar ir extended only {rom Arnon---unto 


4 


— 


and went out againſt Iſrael into the wilderneſs: and he 
came to Jahzzp. ard fought againſt Iſrael. 
? Acity, of + hich ſee Deut. 2. 32. Fer. 48. 21- 

24 * indIfrael ſmore him with the edge of the ſword, * Deut. + 
and poſleiied his land from Arnon q unto Jabbok r,even 32.&29.7 
unto the children of Ammon; for the border of the J9{-12. 
children of Ammon was ſtrong s. I, B 

q Or, which reached from 4rnon, 8&c. ſuch ſupplements being ve- |, , "= 
and fo here is contained a deſcrpprion or limitation of ,, ,,, 


Amos2.9 


the children of Ammon ; and then the foilowing words, for the border 
of the chilarenof Ammon was ſtrong, come in very fitly, not as a reaſon 
why the Iſraelites did notor could not conquer the Ammonites, for 
they were abſolutely forbidden to meddle with them, Deur. 3 8. 
bur as a reaſon why $S:hon could not enla' ge his conqueſts and em« 
pire to the Ammonites,. a+ he had done to 6 Moabites. v A river by 
» hich the countries of 47mm and Moab were in part bounded and 
div'ded. « Either by the advantage of the river, or by their ſtrong 
holds in their frontiers. 

25 4nd rac} took allthefe cities ; and Ifrael dwelt 
in all the cities of the Amorites t : in Heſhbon, and in 
all the + vill-ges thereof. | 

t Having deſtroyea theantient Inhabitants, Devr. 2. 34, 

26 For Heſl:bon was the city of Sihon « the king of 
the Amorites, who had fought againftthe former king of 
Moab x, and taken all his land out of his hand, even 
unto Arnon. | 2: 

This is added as a reaſon why 1-22! took poſſeſſion of this land, 
notwithſtanding God's prohibition of meddling witch th-m or their 
land, Dent. 2. 9. becauſe it was not now the Jand of the Me25ites,bur 
had been ſome time ſince taken from them, and in the poil-fion of 
the Amoriter, x ( i,e,) The Predeceſſor of Balak, who was the pre- 
ſent King. 

2 C 


+ Heb. 


237 Nherefors 


{10 
' 


” - A 


 T*Deut.3.1 
& 29. 7. 


x36- 209, 


[hap. XXL. 


Judgment of Gol in ſpoiling the ſpoilers, 
inſulted over their conquered Enemies. z Theſe are the words el- 


*Pſal.r35. 
10,11.and 


NUMBERS. 


27 Wherefore they that ſpeak in proverbs y, ſay, 


Come into Heſhbon &: let the city of Sihon « be built | ſefſed hisJand. 


and prepared. 8 FY | 
y The poets or other ingenious perſons, to wit, of the Amorites 
or Canaanites, who made this following Song of Triumph over the 


vanquiſhed Moabites : which is here brought in, partly as a proof 


that this was now Sihor's land, and partly as an evidence of the juſt 
and ſubduing thoſe who 


ther of $Sihon ſpeaking thus to his people, or ofthe people exhorting 
one another to come and poſſeſs and repair the citywhich they had 
taken. » That which once was the royal city of the king of Moab, but 
now is the city of Sihon. 

28 For there is a * fire « gone out of Heſhbon 6, a 


flame from the city of Sihon : it hath conſumed Ar of 


Moab c, and the lords of the high places 4 of Arnon. 

a (5. e. ) The fury of war,which is oft and fitly compared to fire 
here, as 7/4.47.14. Amos 1. 7,10,12,14. & 2. 2,5. b That city which 
before was a refuge and defence to all the country, now 15 turned 
into a great annoyance and a publick miſchief. c Queſt. How can this 
be, ſince Ar was yet in the hands of the Moabites, Dent. 2. 9, 18,2 ? 
nf. 1.This may be underſtood not of the city 4r, but ofthe peo- 
ple or the country ſubje& or belonging to that great and royal ci- 
Ty,as the Chaldee underſtands it. 2.Poſhbly Ar was taken by S:hon of 
the Moabices, but afterwards was either recovered by the Moavites, or 
upon the Jſraelites approach quitted by Sihon,gathering all his Forces 
together, that he might fight with the 1/-aelites,and fo repoſſefled by 
the Moabites. '3.This place may be thus rendred, 1t ſhall conſume 4r 
of Moab,the paſt tenſe being pur for the furure as is uſual 1n prophe- 
rica? paſſages; and ſo this may be rhe Amorites prediCtion or pre- 

* ſage, That having taken Heſbbon and its territories, they ſhould now 
extend thcir victories to &r of Moab, though they fell ſhort of that 
hope, as ordinarily men do. Either 1. the Princes or Governours 
of the ſtrong holds, which were frequently in high places, efpecial- 
ly in that mountainous country,and which were in divers parts all 
along the river of Ann, and having taken ſome of theſe, they pro- 
miſed to themſelves that they ſhould take all the reſt, and fo pro- 
ceed further and further, till they had taken 4 it ſelf. Or rather 
2. the prieſts and people that worthip their god in their high places: 
which may ſeem more probable, 1. becauſe as the 7/raelites worſhip- 
ped God, {o the heathens worſhipped Bal, in high places,Numb.22. 
41. and particularly the Mo#bites are noted for ſo doing, Jer. 48. 35. 
2. Becauſe 2mongſt theeminent places of Moab there is mention of 
Bamoth-baal, or, of the high places of Baal, Joſ. 13. 17. 

29 Wo to thee, Moab e ; thou art undone,O | SY 
of * Chemoſh f : he hath given his ſons that eſcaped, 
and his daughters into captivity g, unto Sihon king of 


the Amorites 4. 

e Alas poor Moab, thou couldſt not fave thy ſelf from $ihon's ſword. 
f (7. e.) The worſhippers of Chemoſh : ſo the god of the Moavites 
was called, 1 King. 11. 7,33. 2 King. 23. 13. Jer. 48. 46. g He, (7. 
e. ) their god, hath delivered up his own people to his and their 
enemics ; he could nordefend them, but ſuffered many ofthsm to 
be killed, nor could he ſecure even thoſe that had eſcaped the 
ſword, but ſuffered them to fall into their enemies hands, and by 
them to be carried into captivity. þ Now the words ofthis and the 
following verſe ſcemto be not a part of that triumphant ſong or po- 


em made, as I ſuppoſe, by ſome 4moritijþ bard or poet, which ſeems | 
to be concluded, werſe 28. but of the Iſraelites making their obſerva« | 


rion upon it. And here they ſcoffat the impotency nor only of 
the Moabites, but of their god alſo, who could not fave his people 
from the ſword of Sihon and the Amorites. 

20 We have ſhot at them : Heſhbon is periſhed,even 
unto Dibon &, and we have laid them waſte even unto 


Nophah, which reached unto Medebah 7. 

.; Though you feeble Moabrres, and your god too, could not re- 
ſilt $iton, we Iſraelites, by the help ofour God, have hor, to wit, with 
ſucceſs and viory, as the following words ſhew, at them, to wir, 
at Sihonand his Amorites ; which is eaſily and plainly underſtood, 
both from the foregoing and following words. k Heſbbou the Roy- 
al City of Sihon, and by him lately repaired, 7s periſbed, 1s taken a- 
way from Sihon, and ſo is all his Territory or Country, even as far 
as Dibon, which, as ſome think, is called Dibou-gad, Numb. 33. 45. 
I (i.e. ) Whoſe Territory extendeth to Medeba. Or, yea, even to 

Medeba : for the Hebrew word aber, is ſometimes uſed for yea, or 
moreover, as 1 Sam. 15.20. Pſal. 10. 6. and gs. 11. The ſenſe is, 
the whole Country of Sihon, taken by him from the Moabires, is 
waſted and periſhed. - 

31 Thus Iſrael dwelt in the land ofthe Amorites. 

32 And Moſes ſent to ſpy out Jaazer m,, and they 
took the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites 
that as there. 

»2 One of the Cities of Moab formerly taken from them by $S:hon, 
and now taken from him by the 1ſraelires, Numb. 32. 1, 3, 35. and 
after the decay or deſtru&tion of the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, 
repoſleſled by the Moabites, Fer. 48. 32. 

233 * And they turned, and went up by the way of Ba- 
ſhan: and Og » the king of Baſhan 0 went out againſt 
them, he, and all his people, tothe battel at Edrei. 

n Who alſo was a King of the Amorites, of whom ſee Deur. 3. 1 
11. And it may ſeem that Sihon and Og were the leaders and Cap- 
tains of two great Colonies which came out of Canaan, and drove 
out the former Inhabitants of theſe places. o A rich Country, fa- 
mous for its paſtures and breed of Cattel, Deur. 32. 154. Pſal. 22. 12. 
Jer. 50. 19. and for its Oaks, Ezek. 27. 6. 

34 And the LORD faid unto Meſes, Fear him not p:for 
I have delivered him into thy hand,and all his people,and 
his land,and * thou ſhalt do to him, as thou didſt unto 
Sihon King of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heſhbon. 

p A neceſſary caution, for he wasa great Giant, Deut.3.11. likely 
T0 ſtrike them with terrour. 

25 So they ſmote him, and his Sons, and all his peo- 


Chap. 
ple, until there was none left him alive, and they poſ- 


CHAP. XXI.. 

Fhe Iſraelites pitch in the Plains of Moab, 1. Balak the King ſends for Ba» 
lanm to curſe Iſrael, 2-8, He enquires of the Lird, who forbids him 
70 20: He goes nit, Q=—14. Balak jends again: The Lord permits 
Balaam to go, 15--==——=21, 4n Angel lands in the way ; which his A(s 
perceives : His eyes are at length opened to ſee the Angel, who rebukes 
him, 22===-=-=33. He confeſſes his fault, . and offers to go back: He is 
commanded to go on, and ſpeak as ſhould be revealed to him, 34, 35. Ba= 
lok c:mes to meet him ; receives him ; expoftulates with him ; he declares 
he has no power but to ſpeak the Word which God ſhould put into his mouth, 
3G===n——4 I. 

A ND * the children of Iſrael ſet forward,and pitch- 
ed in the plains of Moab 4, on this ſide Jordan 


by Jericho b. 

a Which fill retained their antient title, though they had been 
taken away from the Moabites by Sihon, and from him by the 1ſraelites. 
b (i.e. ) Over againſt Fericho, Or, near the paſſage over Jordan to 
Jericho, or its Territories, 

2 And Balak the ſon of Zippor c ſaw all that Iſrael 


had dene to the Amorites. 

c The ſun or ſucceſſour of him whom S:hcn had ſpeiled of part of 
his Kingdom, N#umb.21. 26. Of him ſee Fudg. 11. 25. Mic. 6. 5. 

3 And Moab was ſore afraid 4 of the people beczuſe 
they were many, and Moab was diſtreſſed becauſe of the 
chiidren of Ifrael. 

d As it was foretold both in general of all Nations, Deut.2.25. and 
particularly concerning Moab, Exod. 15, 15. 

4 And Moab ſaid unto the elders of Midian e : Now 
thal this company lick up f all 7bat are round about us g, 
as the ox licketh up the graſs of the field. And Balak the 
fon of Zipporwas King of the Moabites at that time. 

e Called the Kings of Midian, Namb. 31.8. and Princes of Midian, 7of. 
13. 21. who though divided into their Kingdoms,y et were now u- 
nited upon the approach of the Jſraelires their common Enemy, and 
being,as it ſeems,a potent and crafty people, and Neighboursto the 
Monbites, theſe ſeek Confederacy with them. We read of Midianites 
near mount Sina, Exod. 2: and 3. which ſeem to have been a part or 
colony of this people, tnat went out to ſeek new quarters, as the 
manner of thoſe times was, but the body of that people were ſeated 
in thoſe parts, as is evident from many Scriptures. f (7.e:) Con- 
ſume and utterly deſtroy, in which ſenſe the fire is ſaid to lick up 
the water and ſacrifices, 1 King, 18. 38, The meaning is, we can 
expeCt no mercy from them, they will utterly root us out as they 
did the Amorites, if we donot make a fiout and timely oppoſiticn. 
g ( 7.e.) All our people, who lived in the Country and Territory 
adjoyning to cach City, where the Princes reſided. 


{on of Beor ; to Pethor k, which #s by. the river of the 


againſt me #7. 

þ Whois called a Propher, 2 Pet. 2. 16. becauſe God was pleaſed 
ro inſpire and dirett him to ſpeak;the following propheſy, as he did 
inſpice Caiaphas to ipeak thoſe words, Joh.11.51,52.and as ſometimes 
he c1d for a time inſpire other wicked men, bur in truth he was a 
Jothſayer, as he is called, of. 13. 22. See Numb. 24.1: # Or Boſor 
2 Pet. 2, 15. for he had two names, as many others had. k A City 
in Meſopotamia or Aram, ſee Numb: 23. 7, Deut: 23. 4. I(5.e. ) By 
Euphrates, which 1s oft called the River, by way of eminency, as Ger 
15. 18. Joſ. 24, 2, 15.and here the River of Balaams land or country, 
ro wit, of Meſopotamia Or Aram, Numb: 23. 7. m They are encamped 
in my neigh>ourhood, ready to invade my Kingdom. 

6 Come now therefore, I pray thee, curſe me » this 
people, for they are too mighty for me : peradventure I 
jhal prevail, :#at we may {mite them o, and rbat I may 
drive them out of the land:for I wot that he whom thou 


blefleſt, is bleſied,and he whom thou curſeſt,js curſed p. 

2 ( i.e? ) Curſe them for my ſake and benefit; uſe thy utmoſt 
power, which thou haſt with thy gods or infernal ſpirits, to blaſt 
and ruine them, o Thou by thy magical imprecations, and I by 
my ſword joyned with them. p He had ſome experience of, or, at 
leaſt, a great confidence in Balaam: skill and power in theſe matters. 


departed, with the rewards of divination qin their hands, 
and they came unto Balaam, and ſpake unto him the 
words of Balak. 


q Reb. with divinations, by which he underſtands not the Inſtry- 
ments of Divination,which it was needleſs and abſurd to bring to ſo 
eminent a Diviner, who doubtleſs was throughly furniſhed for his 
own trade ; but the Rewards of it,asit is explained 2 Per.2.15.and as 
in the Hebrew, 2 Sam: 4.10. good tydings is put for the reward of good ty 
dings- Nor isit probable, they would £0 to, or could expett to 
prevail with ſuch a perſon, eſpecially being noted for his covetouſ- 
neſs, as appears from the ſtory, without that powerful engine, 


$ And heſaid unto them, Lodge here this night », 
and I will bring you word again, as the LORD s ſhal 
ſpeak unto me : and the princes of Moab z abode with 
Balaam, 
r The night was the time when God uſed to reveal his mind b 
dreams. Here is the firſt diſcovery of his Wickedneſs, that he 
takes time to conſider,and doth his endeavour to effe& that wicked 
motion of curſing the Iſraelites, which he ſhould have rejeQed and 
abhorred at the firſt mention of it. 5s Heb. Jehovah, the true God, 
whom he here mentions, either for his own greater reputation, as 
if he conſulted not with inferiour ſpirits, as other Soothſayers did, 
but with the ſupreamGod, ; or rather becauſe this was Jrae!'s God, 


and 


* chap. 


< 


land ofthe children ef his people 1, to call him, ſaying, , 
Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt : behold, Jude. ;1 
they cover the jface of the earth, and they abide over Rev. 2.14. 


7 And the elders of Moab, and the elders of Midian 


3. X11; 


1 
I 3, 


5 * He ſent meilengers therefore unte BaJazam h the *Joſ.29?g! 
Ne. 13.1,2 


ic. 6. 5! 
Per.2.15, 


Heb. eyey 


——— — — rr PO EIIIOD 


fGer 


{ 


9 Ie eee Ie GROSS wt 


i . 

" Chap. XX NOM 
ſec that all onr endeavours and repeated ſacrifices are to no purpoſe, 
and can make no impreſlion in God, nor induce him to curie thoſe 

| vhom he hath purpoſed, and ſolemnly and frequently promiſed, to 

| bleſs. & Is he like a man that oft ſpeaks and promiſes what he ei- 
ther never intends, or cannot or will not perform? 

20 Behold, I have received commandment to bleſs ]: 


and he hath blefied, and I cannot reverſe it. 

{ Or. I have received a bleſſmg, to wit, a ſentence of bleſſing, which 
Ged hath put into my mind and mouth, and which I cannor for- 
bear to utter. Heb. 1 have received to bleſs. "The infinitive put for 


the noun, as 1s frequent. TELE: 27 : 
2: tie hath not beheld iniquity in-Jacob, neither hath 

he ſeen perverſeneſs in Iſrael m: the LURD his God « 

with him », and theſbout of a King # among them o. 

” He, (i. e.) God, underſtood, v. 20. and expreſſed, v. 19- hath not 
or doth nor behold or ſee iniquity or perverſeneſs, i.e. any fin, in Jacob Or 
Iſrael; Which cannot be meant of a ſimple ſeeing or knowing of 
him, for ſo God did ſee and obſerve, yea and chattiſe their fins, as 
is manifeſt, Exod. 32. 9. Deur. g. 13. But of ſuch a ſighr of their fins 
as ſhould provoke God utterly ro torſake and curſe and deſtroy them, 
which was Balak's delire,, and Balaam's hope and delign. For as 
Balaam knew that none bur J/raels God could curſe or deſtroy 1ſr2e!, 
EY: ſo he knew that nothing bur their ſin could move him fo to do ; 

And therefore he took a :ight though wicked courſe afterwards, to 
tempt them to fin, and thereby to expoſe them to ruine, Numb. 25. 
And Balaam had now hoped that God was incenſed againſt I/rae! 
for their ſins, and therefore would be prevailed with to give them 
up to the curſe and ſpoil. Bur, faith he, I was miſtaken, I ſee God 
hath a ſingular favour to this people, and though he ſees and pu- 
nitheth tin in other perſons and people wirh utrer deſtruction, as 
he hath now done in$S:hon and Og and the 4morites,yet he will.not do 
ſo with 1{rae!; He winks at their ſins, forgers and forgives them, 
and will not puniſh them as their iniquities deſerve» In this ſenſe 
God is ſaid not to ſce fin, as elſe where he is ſaid to forget them, 1/a. 
43- 25. Jer. 31. 34. and, to cover them, Pſal. 32. 1. which keeps 
them out of ſight, and 1o out of mind, and to b/or them our, P/al. 
51. 1,9. and to caſt them behind his back Iſa. 38. 7, cr intorhe depth 
of the ſea, Mic. 7. :9. In which caſes they cannot be ſeen nor read. 
And men are oft ſaid 207 :o know or ſee thoſe lins in their children 
or others, which they do not take notice of to as to puniſh them. 
And this ſenſe beſt ag-ees with the context, God taath wecreed and 
promiſed to bleſs this people, and he hath bleſſed them, ana I canuer 
reverſe it, verſe 20. and he will not reverſe it, though provoked to 
do ſo by their fins, which he will take no notice of- Orhers thus 
He hath not beheld, as hithe-to he hath nor, ſo for the future he wil 
not behc1d, z. e. {: as to approve it, as that word 1s oft uſed, as Gen. 
7. 1. 1ſa. 66. 2. Hab. 1. 13. or ſoas to ſuffer it, injury againſt jacob, &c. 
For aver here rendred iniquity, is oft uſed in that ſenſe, as Job 5. 6, 7. 
Prov. 12. 21.and 22. 8. and the other word amal rcndred perve;ſe- 
neſs oft notes vexation and trouble, as Job 5. 6, 7. Bſal. 25. 17. and 3. 
4. and the pa:ticle bcth rendred in is oft uſed for againſt, as Exod. 4. 
25. ant 20. 16. Numb. 12. 1. So the ſenſe is, God will not fee rhem 
wronged, or ruined by any of their adverſaries, wicreof the follo+ - 
ing words may be a good reaſon, for God is with hem. &c. 3 (1.e.)He 
hath a favour for this peopl=, and will defend and fave them. So 
the phraſe 0; God's being with a perſon or people ſignihes, as Juag. 6. 
13. Pſal. 46. 7. Iſa. 8. 10. o (7.e.) Such joyful and triumphant ſhouts 


4 


as thoſe wherewith a people congratu'ate the approach and preſence | 


of their King when he appears among them ujon tome ſolemn oc- 
caſion, -r +h-n he returns from bartel with vigo.'y and ſpoils. 
The exp-efſion implic God's being th..ir King and Ruler and their 
abundant ſecurity and juſt confidence in him as ſuch. And here 1; 
an alluſion to the 'ilver trumpe's which were made by God's com- 
mand, and uſed upon great ſolemniries, in which God their King 
was preſent in a ſpecial manner, Numb. 10. 9. Joj. 6. 16, 20. 1 Sam. 4. 
5. 2 Chron. 13. 12. | 
22 * Gud brought them out of Egyprtp 2: he q hathas 
it were the firength of an unicorn »- | 
p To ” it, by a ſtrong hand, and in ſpight of all their enemies, 


and therefore 1t is in vain to ſeek or hope to overcome them. 9q Ei- 


*chap. 24+ 
8. 


B E MES Chap: XXi1\ 
[ not thee, ſaying, all that the LORD ſpeaketh, that I 
muſt do? = | 
27 And Balakſaid unto Balaam, Come, TI pray thee, | 
[ will bring thee unto another place: peradventure it will | 
pleaſe God,that thou mayeſt curſe me them from thence. 
28 And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor z, 
that looketh toward Jeibimon. 
z An high place called Pet/5-Peor, Deut. 3. 29. i.e. the houſe or 
temple of Pcor, becauſe there they worſhipped Bazal-Peor. 
29 And Balaam ſaid untoBalak, Buiid me here ſeven 
altars,and prepare me here ſeven bullocks and ſeven rams, 
30 And Palak did as Balaam had ſaid, and offered a 
bullock and a ram on every altar. 
HR A P; XXIV. 


Balnam lay: aſide his ſorceries, and the Spirit of God comes upon lim : hi; Eyec 
are open; Hears the words of God; and ſees the Viſion of the Almizhty, 
I— 4. Propheſtes of Ijrnels proſperity, 5F— 9. Balak is Angry; come 
man's him to fiy; tis anſwer, 10 - 14. He propheſics of the Meſſias 
the King, and of the deſtruction of the Nations, 15 =—24, He returns to 

his place, and Balak goes bis way, 25. 
NDP when Balaam faw that it pleaſed the LORD | 
to bleſs Iſrael, he went notas * atother times, + *chap. 2} 


:o ſeek for inchantments # ; but ſet his face toward the 315- 
wilderneſs 6. TH 


eb. zo 

a (i.e.) To uſe enchantments, which he 1s faid ro have done,either theme | 
becauſe when he conſulted and facrificed ro God, he did alſo uſe en- ,.,.. | 
chantments and conſuir with the devil, that if one would nor, the : 
otaer might help him; or,becaule he conſulted God ina magical and 
ſuperſtitious way, by uſing ſuch poſtures or inſtruments or forms of 
+ ords as inchanrters uſed. b Where Iſrael4ay encamped, either with 
intent to curſe J/rae! without Gods leave : Or rather, expetting what 
God of his own accord would ſuggeſt to him concerning this matter. 

2 ind Balaam lift upbiseyes, and he ſaw Iſrael abid- 
ing 5» his tents, according to their tribes c: aud the ſpirit 
of God came upon him d. 

c In the order appointed, Numb. 2. d (5, e.) Inſpired him to ſpeak 
the following words, and ſq, conſtrained him again to bleſs theſe 
xhom he delired to curſe. . 

* nd he took up his parable, and 1aid, Balaam *chap. 2: 
che ſon of Beor hath ſaid, and the man + whoſe eyes are 7, 8. | 
open e, hath faid ; tHeb wh 

e Theeyes, either 1. of his body, as in the following verſe: Or 2. #24 hirey 
of his mind, which God had opened in a peculiar and propherical ſut, but 
manner, whence Prophets are called Seers, 1 Sam.9g. 9g. He implies 20Wopel 
that before he was blind an ſtupid, having eyes, but nor ſeeing nor. | 
anverſtan.ing. Some render the words, having his eyes ſhut, as the 
Hebrew verb Satham ſignifies, the letters Schin ani Samech being fre- 
quently exchanged; And ſo the meaning is, that he received this 
;evelation either in a dream, when mens eyes are ſimply ſhut; Or 
in an extaſie or trance, when mens eyes, though open, are in a 
manner ſhut, to wit, as to the uſe and exerciſe of them. 

4 He hath ſaid, which heard the words of God, which 
{aw the viton f of the Almighty, falling into # trance g, 
but having his eyes open + | 

f So called cither ſtritly and properly, becauſe he was awake 
when this was revealed to him : Or largely and improperly,for any 
extraoruinacy diſcovery of Gods mind to him, whether ſleeping or . 
waking. g Or, extaſy, fainting and falling upon the ground, as the 
Prophets uſed to co. See » Sam. 9. 24. Exex. 1.28. an 3. 23. and 
4i- 3- Dan.8. 17, :8. and :0. 6. Rev. 1. :7. Others, falling ſuddenly 
into a ſleep,as the Prophets ſometimes cid,as Ger. 15. 12. Dan. 8. 18. 

5 tow goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy ta- 
bernacles, O Ifrael ? 

6 Asthevalleys h are they 3 ſpread forth, as gardens 


by the rivers ſide &, as the trees of Lign-aloes / which 


f 


{ 


if 
: 
: 


'| 


ther 1, :d, laſt mentioned. Burt ſo rhe compariſon is mean and 
unbecoming. Or rather, 2. J/rae/, whom God brought out 'of 
Egypt, ſuch change of num-ers being very common in the Hebrew 


language. 


invincible. » Whoſe great ſtrength and fiercenef is celebrated in 
Scripture, Nwmb. 24.8. Deut. 33. 17. Job 39. 9. Pſal. 22.21.and g2. 
10. Bur whether ir be an Unicorn, er a Rhinoceros, or a ſtrong 
and fierce kind of wild goat, which is here called reem, it is not need- 
ful here to determine. : 

22 Surely there s no inchantment || againſt Jacob s, 
neither 3s there any divination againſt lrae]: according 
tro this tims 7 it (ball be ſaid of Jacob, and of Iſrael, What 


hath God wrought s? 

5I find by experience and ſerious conſideration, that all mine and 
thine endeavours to enchant Iſrael are in vain, being fruſtrated by 
their omnip-»tent God. I can do there no ſervice by my art againi} 
them. #t Not only in ſucceeding times and age-, of »hich he ſpeaks, 
chap. 24. 17, &c. but even now, in this time and age, and fo fore- 
ward. u(:i.e.) How wonderful and glor:ous are theſe works which 
God js now about to do for 1rael, by drying up Jordan, by ſubduing 
the Canaanites, &fc. Thele things will be matter of diſcourſe and 
admiration to all ages. 

24 Behold, the people ſhall rife up x as *a great lyon, 
and lifrup himfelf asa young lyon: he 'fball notlie down y, 
until he eat of the prey and drink of the bloud ofthe ſlain, 

x As a lion rowzeth up himſelf to fight, or to go out to the prey, 
ſo ſhall 1/2! ſtir up themſelv-s ro warlike attempr: againſt all their 
enemies, as Occaſion ſhall offer it ſelf. y (3. e.) Not rett or ceaſe 

from fighting and purſuing. 


Fo 


*Gen. 49. 


The ſenſ” is, Iſrael is not now what he was in Egypt, a : 
po 1, weak, diſpirited, unarmed people, bt high and 9:ong, and | 


the LORD hath planted »,, and as cedar-trees » beſide 


; the waters o. _. 

' +h Which oft-times from a ſmall beginning are ſpread forth far 
an. wide, Others, as the brooks, or rivers, as the word ſignifies, 
' which ſtretch our and diſperie their waters into ſeveral channels, 
and ſomertim-s furth:r. 7 (7. e.) The Iſraelites laſt mentioned. k Plea- 
ſant and f uirful and ſ:cured by a fence. / An Arabian and Indian 
tree of a ſweet ſmell, yeilding good ſhade and ſhelter both to man 
an} beaſt: Such is rae, famous among the nations, and not on! 
ſafe themſelves, but yeilding ſhelter to all that joyn themſelves to 
them. »» Wh:ch are the b<ſ{t of the kind ; ſuch as not man but 
Go : might ſeem 60 have planted, as the beſt of all ſorts are aſcribed 
to Go-:, as the trees, hills, cities of God, &c. Compare Pſal: 104. +6. 
2W hich are famous for growth and height and ſtrength and durable. | 
neſs, whence Solomons Temple was builr of this wood, 1 Kings 6. g, | 


19, 0 Where trees thrive beſt. 4 
7 He hall pour the waters out of his buckets p, and his «neye. g| 
ſeed ſhall bein mafiy ® waters q, and his King r (ball be ;. | 


higher than Agag s, and his kingdom ſhall be exalteds ; 
p He (z.e.) God, will abundantly water the the valleys, gardens 
and trees, which repreſent the Iſraelites, wer.s6. 1. 7. e. hewill won- 
derfully bleſs this people, not only with outward bleflings,of x hich 
a chief one in thoie parts was plenty of water, but alſo with higher 
gifts an graces, with his word and ſpirit, which are oft-n fignitied 
by waters, Joh. 3.5. and 4. 10. and 7. 38, 39. and at laſt with eternal 
life, the contemplation whereof made Balaam deſire to Cie the 
death of the Righreous. Others thus, God ſhall make bis poſterity 
numerous: For the procreation of children is oft ſignified by wa- 
ters, fountains, ciſterns, &c. as Pſal. 68. 26. Prov. 5. 15, 18. andg. 
17. 1a. 48. 1, Burt there is no neceſlity of flying to Metaphors 
here, and therefore the other being the literal and proper ſenſe, is 


25 And Balak ſaid unto Balaam, Neither cupſe them 
at all, nor bleſs them art all. 
26 But Balaam anſwered and faid unto Balak, Told | 


by the laws of good interpretation to be preferred before it. 4 This 
alſo may be literally underſtood of their ſeed, which ſhall be ſown 
in waterifh ground, and tferefore bring forth a better encreaſe, 

- #&9 Io. 


y Iſa: 32. 40. Others thus, His ſeed ſhall be ſo numerous, that it 
ſa.ull branch forth into many people, the ſeveral tribes being reck- 
oned and ſometimes called ſeveral people, Or, his ſeed ſhall rule 0- 
ver many people or nations, which are ſometimes ſignified by ma- 
ny waters, as Pſal 144+ 7. 1a: 57. 29. Jer: 47. 2. Rev: 17. 15. But 
here alſo the literal ſenſe ſeems beſt. » (7. e-) The King of Iſrael, 
cither God, who was in a peculiar manner their King, or Ruler, 
Numb: 23. 21. Jedg: 6. 13. 18Sam:8.7, Iſa: 33. 22. or their chief 
Governour or Governours, whether King ort others: For Moſes is 
called their kin, Deut: 33. 5. and the Judges were in a manner 
Kings. s (i.e. Than the King of the Amalekites, which King and 
people were famous and potent in that age, ver: 20. as may be 
gueiſed by their bold attempt upon ſo numerous a people as Iſrael 
was. Andit is probably rhought by the Jewiſh and other Interpre- 
ters, that 4zag was the common name of the Amalekitiſh Kings, as 
Abimelech was of the Philiſtines, and Pharaoh of the Egyptians, and 
Ceſar of the Romans. Bur though this King only be inſtanced in, 
yet other Kings, to wit, ſuch as did- or ſhould border upon the Iſ- 
raclites, are doubtleſs to be underſtood, above whom the Kings and 
people of 1ſr2el ſometimes were advanced, and oftner ſhould have | 
been, if they had not been their own hindrance by their fins. Some 
make this a prophecy of Saul's conquering 4zag and his people, 
x Sam; 15.7, 8. But the words ſeem to be more general, and to 
0 ſignifie a greater honour and advantage to Iſrael than that was. 
[chap: 23, 8 * God brought him forth our of Egypt, he hath as 
Wh,  itwere the ftrength of an unicorn : he (hall eat up the 
| nations his enemies, and ſhall break s. their bones, and 


pierce them through with his arrows. 
5 Or, unbone, or, taken out, i. e. ſhall eat the fleſh to the very bones, 
and then break them alſo. 

* He couched, he lay down #, as alion, andasa 
great lions who ſhall ſtir him up«? * Bleſſed is he that 
bleflech thee, and ciirſed is he that curſeth thee. 

t Having conquered. his enemies the Canaanites, and their land, 
he ſhall quietly and ſecurely reſt and ſettle himſelf there. u (7. e:) 


Awake or provoke him. 
10 And Balaks anger was kindled againſt Balaam, 


and he ſmote his hands together x: and Balak faid unto 
Balaam, I called thee to curſe mine enemies, and be- 
hold, thou haſt altogether bleſſed zhems theſe three times. 

x A ſign of great anger, Ezek: 21. 17. and 22+ 13+ 

11 Therefore now,flee thou to thy place y : I thought 
to promote thee unto great honour, but lo, the LORD z 
hath kept thee back from honour. 

y Whence I ſent for thee, Numb: 22.5. » Whoſe commands 
thou haſt preferred before my defires and intereſt ; And therefore 
ſeek thy recompence from him, and not from me. 

f 12 And Balaam ſaid unto Balak, Spake I not alſo to 
i thy meſſengers which thou ſenteſt unto me, ſaying, 

'12 * If Balak would give me his houſe full of jilver 
| 8. and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of 
| +Gr:ofmy the LORD, to do either good or bad | of mine own 
| ſelf- chap: mind ; bt what the LORD faith that will I ſpeak. 

y 16. 28. 4 14 And now behold, Igo unto my people: come 
therefore, and * I will advertiſe thee 4 what this people 
ſhall do to thy people in the latter days 5. 

' Or, inform thee, to wit, concerning future things, as it here 
follows, for this word ſeems inſeparably joyned with the followi:g. 
Others, give thee counſel, and tell rhee what this people, &©'c: So it 
| 5$a ſhort and defeftive ſpeech, ſuch as we have, Exod: 4. 5. and : 3+ 

8. And, by counſel they underſtand that which is related, Numb: 25. 

1, 2. which was done by Balaam's counſel, Numb: 31. 16. Revel: 2 

14. But the former ſenſe is more unforced and agreeable to the 

following words, as they ly. b Not in thy time, therefore thou 

haſt no reaſon to fear, but in ſucceeding ages, as 2 Sam: 8. 2. &c. 

15 And he took up his parable, and ſaid, Balaam the 
ſon of Beor hath ſaid,, and the man whole eyes were 
open bath faid : | | 

16 He hath ſaid, which heard the words of God, 
and knew the knowledge of the moſt High, bich ſaw 
the viſion of the Almighty, falling into # zrance, but ha- 
ving his eyes open : 

17 I ſhall c ſee him d but not nowe: I (all behold him, 
' #Mar:>.2, but not nigh: there ſhall come a * ſtar four of Jacob,and 
" *Pſa. 110. & ſcepter £ ſhall rife out of Iſrael, and (hall || ſmite the 


Y- 
' 


# Gen.49.9 
ZGen.' 12” 


| i.5 .& 27. 


| *chap?227 


| +Mic. 6.5. 


2 corners þ of Moab, and deſtroy all the children of 
Or, ſmite Sheth ;, y 
thrmughthe |. Or, 1 have ſeen, or, do ſee, for the future is oft put for other 


princes of 


pag" times or tenſes: He ſpeaks ofa propherical fight, like that of 4bra- 


ham's, who ſaw Chriſt's day, Joh: 8. 56. @ To wit, the #ar, and 
ſeepter as it here follows, 7: e: a great and eminent Prince, which 
was to come out of Jſrae!'s loyns, either 1: David, who firitdid the 
things here ſpcken of, 2 Sam: 8: 2: Pſal: Go: 8. and 108: 9g: and ſome 
of the Kings of Judah and Jſrae! afrer him, for it is not neceſſarily 
underſtood of one particular perſon : Or, 2. The Meſſias, as both Jewiſh 
- and Chriſtian Interpreters expound it, who moſt eminently and ful- 
ly performed what is here ſaid, in deſtroying the enemies of 1/-ae! 
or of God's Church, who-are here deſcribed under the names of the 
neareſt and fierceſt enemies of 72el: Which he doth partly by him- 
ſelf, by his word and ſpicit, and ſpiritual plagues3 And partly by 
his miniſters, thoſe Princes whom he makes nurſing Fathers to his 
Church, and ſcourges to his enemies: .And to him alone agrees the 
foregoing verb properly, T ball ſee him, to wit, in my own perſon 
or with the eyes of my own body. as every eye ſhall ſee him, Rev: 1:7: 
when he comes to Judgement. Nor can it ſeem ſtrange that Balaam 
ſhould ſpeak of ſuch high and remote things, ſeing he ſoreſaw and 
forerold theſe things by the revelation of the ſpirit of God, by 
which alfo he forcſaw the great felygitry of good men, and the mi- 
ſerable ſtate of bad men after death and judgement, Numb: 23: 10: 
e Not yet, but after many ages» 7} A title oft given to Princes and 


| 


S RS. Chap. XXTy; Vf © 
eminent and illuſtrions Perſons, and patticularly to the Mefiar, Rev; 
2: 28: and 22: 16: g i.e. A ſcepter-bearer, a king or ruler,even that 
ſcepter mentioned, Gen: 49: 10: þ Either 1. literally, the borders; 
which by a Synecdoche are oft uſed in Scripture for the whole 
country to which they belong, as Exod: 8. 2. Pſal: 74. 17. and 147. 
14. Jer: 15. 13. and 17. 3. Or, 2, Metaphorically, to wit,Princes 
and Rulers, who are ſometimes compared to corners, as Zach: 10. 
4. And Chriſt himſelf is called a Cornerſtone, becauſe he unites and 
ſupports the Building. Burt I preier the former ſenſe. 7 Which 
ſeems tobe the name of ſome then eminent, though now unknown, 
place or prince in Moab, where there were many princes, as ap- 
pears from Numb: 23.6. Amos 2. 3. there being innumerable in- 
{ſtances of ſuch places or perſons ſometimes famous, but now utter- 
ly loſt as to all monuments and remembrances of them: 


18 And * Edom thall be a poſleffion &d, Seir e alſo *:Sam. g; 


ſhall be a poſleflion for his Enemies f, and Ifrael ſhall do 14: 
valiantly ge oo Ga! 


d Which was alſo foretold, Gen: 25. 23. 'and in part fulfilled 
2 Sam: 8. 14. 1 Chron: 18. 13. but more fully by Chriſt, 4mos 9. 12. 
Obad: ver: 18. who ſhall fubdue and poſſeſs all his encmies; Here 
ſignified by the name of Edem, as Jacob or Iſrael, his brother fig- 
nifies all his Church and people. e A part and mountain of Edom 
Gen: 36. 8. which may be here mentioned as the ſtrongeſt part of 
Edom, to ſhew that not only the reſt of Edom, which is more acceſ- 
ſible, but even the rocks and beſt munitions of it, ſhall be taken. 
f The Iſraelites. g Or, gain power, or riches, or vifory, all which-are 
comprehended in this phraſe. ; 


19 Out of Jacob b ſhall come he that ſhall have do- 


minion #,& ſhal deſtroy him that remaineth of the city k: 
h Our of Jacob's loyns. # David, and eſpecially Chriſt. k Or 
from or out of this city, i, e. The cities, the tingular number for the 
plural, which hath been oft noted before. The ſenſe is, He ſhall 
not only ſubdue thoſeMoabites and Evomites which meet him in the 
field, but he ſhall purſue them even to. their ſtrongeſt holds and 
cities, and ſhall pull them our thence. Poſſibly he may note ſome 
eminent” City in which they confided moſt, their Metiopclis or 
Royaj City, as may be gueſied from Pſal: 60. 9 P 

20 And when he looked Jon Amalek, he took up his [| The f-/ 
parable,and {aid, Amalek was || the firſt »: of the nations, ofthe natic 
but his latcer end || ſhall be that he periſh for ever » * ons that 

{ From the top of P:jzah, which was excceding high and gave 2 c4 6 
him the proſpe& of parts of all theſe Kingdoms. »: Heb: fl. ferſt gainſt = 
fruits ; So called either, 1. becauſe they were the firſt of all the rael, Exod! 
neighbouring nations which were embedied together in one eration il, f 
ment: Or, 2. becauſe they were the moſt powerful and ava av of | Or, ſhat 
them, as 1s implied above, wer: 7. the beit things in each kind be be, event 
ing oft ſignified by the name of fr/i-fruirs, Or, 3. Becauſe he was deſtrutzim. 
the firſt who fought againſt 1ael and was vanquiſhed by them bs 
that famous battel Exod. 17. which vi&ory was an earneſt and firſt 
fruits of that Jarge harveſt of vitories which the 1ſaelites ſhould i k 
due time get over all their enemies, and among others, over — %o 
lk himſelf, 1 Sam. 15. 3. = He began with Gcd and with Iſrael 
bur God will end with him, and the firm purpoſe and will of G 1 
OI utterly deſtroyed, Exod. 17. 14. ſo that "_ 

oft his kingdom for nor executing thi : p 
ood "apt wang g this decree and God's command 

21 And he looked * on the Kenite o, ar 
parable, and faid, ſtrong is thy dwellin 
thou putteft-thy neſt p ina rock: 

o The pcſteriry or kindred of Ferhro; n : 
dwelt a the tookive to whom the fo "un 1nd gee _ 
gree, but thoſe of them who were mingled with the Amalek Gor 4 
Miaianites. See Exod: 3.1. Juag: 1. 16. and 4.11. IT Sam: T 
(7. e.)Thy dwelling-place, ſo called,cither becauſe it was %y gk hi h 
placz, a« neſts commonly are: Or from their ſecurit and - 
dence cfcontinuing long and fafe in it: See Job 29 MM : _— 
ſion to their name, for ken in Hebrew ſignifies ant. OY 00: os 

| 22 Nevertheleſs | the Kenite q ſhall be 
cull — ſhall carry thee away captive 

9 Heb: Kain, 1. e. the Kenite, ſo called, ei "2 | 
of letters, which is very uſual in the Ons: by Is _ ſition long ſhall 
name of ſome eminent Place where they lived or Pe p om the jr be ere 
whom they were deſcended, though now the memor of th wo 
utterly loft, as - it hath. fared with innumerable il PI ——_ 
Perſons famous in their Generations mentioned in choc hos _ 
writers. r (7,e. ) Shall be by degrees diminiſhed and es oo 
the incurſions of divers enemies, till at laſt the Aſſyrian => Id 
compleat the work and carries them into captivity For th # =D 
lived partly among the ten tribes, 5of. 19, 33, compared na "6x6 
4, 11. and partly with the two tribes, Judg. 1,16, and 65. xp 
were caricd captive with them, part by Salmaneſer . of 5” hogay 
Arie. 2 King I 7s 6. " part by One, who alſo ps. oe 

n Aſſyrian, Ezra 6, 22, Iſa. 52, 4. he wor be 
ſhall be waſfed. How long? to wit, ſhall they Con ba venfend! rim, 
— ag = uſed m_— and patherically in the ſame er, 

at. 6, 3, and 90 . I - 
x 1 cues "a 13. Ja.6.11,) till Hſbur comes, Ljhur ſball carry 

2: And he took up his parable, and ſai 
ſhall live s when God Ha this? © = Abs / who 

- _ yg _ miſerable will r 
when the 4ſjrian, and after him th 
over-turn all theſe parts of the World> Wh: ky Ae oem ro 
and keep his heart from fainting under ſuch grievous _ oe | 
How few will then eſcape the deſtroying front” ? CO 
24 And ſhips ſhall come from the coaft of 
ſhall affliet Aſhur, and ſhall afMiidt Eber « 
ſhall periſh for ever. aa 


# A place or people ſo called from Chittim the ſon of Javan G 

10,4,whoſe poſterity were very numerous, and were firſt ſeated - 

os Teigy #s, _- m_ thence ſent forth colonies into the iſlands 
gean lea, and into Cyprus, : . 

and other parts of Greece, an yh ——— oy Matadanis, | 

paſs that by this name is underſtood ſometimes Mbcodbnis as - 

pears from 1 Mzcc, 1. 1. and 1 Mace, $, 5: and ſometimes 7 


MAN i 


d took up his , 


g-place, and I Sam? 


5. 6. 


* To: 
17. 
106, 
Hoſ 


waſted, [| un- T Heb: 
Kain. 


Or, hw 


Liſhur care 
ry thee as 
way Cape 
tive? 


he ſlate of the Worldte, 


Chittim ?, and 
and he alſo x, 


I's 


*Toſh.2 2. 
17, Pſal. 
106.28. 


Hoſ.g.10, 


4 


*Deu.4.3 
Joſ.z2:17 


TW c:p. 
* 


XXV. . NO 


; om Daz. 11. 29,30. and ſometimes both, as in this place: 
ng ay bo here of the Peowd e that God hath appointed for = 
Aſſrian afrer he had done God $ work in punijhing of his peOp e 
and the bordering nations. Now although the Aſjrian is _ 
dan empire vas ſubdued by the Medes and Perſians, yet the © _ 
aMi&ions and calamities of that people came from two hands,bot 
beyond the fea and, brought to them by ihips,as is here expreſled ; 
{irit from the Greciaws under Alexand:r and his Succeſlors, by whom 
thar people were grievouſly oppreſſed and waſted ; then from the 
Romans, who ſubdued all the Grec/an empire, one great part where- 
of were the Aſjrians largely ſo called, and after many bloody wars 
made them a colony. # ( 7. e. ) The poſterity of Ever, Gen. han 
the Hebrews, who were the chiefand flower of Ebers goes. ps 
therefore are here de{igned by that general name, ſuch genera = 
preſſions being oft uſed concerning one particular and the _ 
eminent of its kind. And it pleaſed God to exprels it thus _ [ly 
here.becauſe though he would foretell this for the comfort an hn 
iruction «| his people in after ages, yet he would not have Bs ws 
nor Balaam neither, underſtand or utter any thing which _—_ r 
ſ::m to thwart that happy eſtate of 7/-aet, which Balaam c_ 
ſaw and openly applauded. x Not the Hebrews, as ſome underſtand, 
for his affliction was now mentioned before, and other FA 
tell us rhey ſhall have a better end, and that all Jſrael ſhall be ſave . 
and therefore not periſh for ever, bur the afflifter or ſcourge 0 
Aſher and Eber, to wit, the Grec:an and Roman Empire. , 

25 And Balaam roſe up, and went, and returne 


to his place y : and Balak alſo went his way. 

7 (i.e.) To Meſopotamia. Obj.He went only to Midian,where he was 
ſlain, Nwmb,z 1.8.4nſw.1i. He is faid to return home, becauſe _ inten- 
ded and began to doſio, tho' he was diverted by the Miazamres: 
for men in Scripture are oft ſaid to do what they deſign or — 
ro do as Exod. $8.18. Numb. 14.40. Anſw: 2, He did go home - - 's) 
afterwards he returned to the Midjanites, either becauſe they _ 
for him, or to recover his loſt cregir, and to do that by pony 
which he could not do by charms,to which purpoſe he gave h _ 
that deyiliſh counſel which was pur in praftice, Nums. 25. and that 
by his advice, Num. 31. 16. Rev. 2. 14. 


CHA FP, AXF: 


l try : God commands tie guilty to be put #0 

rhe Hats 7 s —_ : for which God ance hin the 

priefthood, E---15. God commands the Midianites to 62 ſlain far this their 
Tyeachery in drawing the People 7d ſin, 1 Gonee 18. | 

N D Ifrael abode in * Shittima «, and the people 

þ began to commit whoredom c with the daugh- 


of Moab 4. Ns 
res” place called more largely, Abel-Shittim, Numv.33.49. it being 
uſual with the Hebrews to abbreviate long proper names,as Hermon 1s 
ut for Baal-hermon, Judg. 3.3. Tholad for Ei-tholad, Fol, 19.4. Nimrim, 

iſa15.6. for Beth-nimrim,Numb.32.36. And this was their laſt ſtation, 
from whence they paſled immediatly into Canaan.So this is here no- 
ted as a great aggravation of their ſin, that they committed ir, when 
God was going to put them into the poſſeſſion of their long-expetted 
and much defired land. + Not all, but many of them, as appears 
from Deut. 4. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 10.8. c Both corporally and ſpiritually, 
either becauſe they proſtituted themſelves tothem upon condition of 
worſhipping their god ; or becauſe rheir filthy god was worſhipped 
by ſuch tilthy atts, as Priapus and Yenus were. d And of Mid:an too, 
as is evident from ver.6.17,18. and Numb.z 1. 16. for borh theſe peo- 
ple being confederated in this wicked deſign, the one 1s put for the 
other, and the daughters of Moab may be named, either becauſe 
they began the tranſgreſſion, or becauſe they were the chief per- 
ſoas, poſſibly, the relations or courtiers of Balak king of Moas. 

2 And * they calied e the people unto the ſacrifices 
e of their gods f': and the people did cat, and bowed 


to their gods þ: ; 

downs may be 94 either 1. as the conſequent of their 
whoredom, an invitation to further ſociety in their ſacred feaſts ; 
or rather 2. as the cauſe or occaſion of their whoredom, the He- 
brew wvau here ſignifying for, as it oft doth. The Meabires being 
now neighbours to the Jſraelires, and finding themſelves unable 
to effe& their deſign againſt 17a] by war and witchcraft, they 
now fell another way to work, by contrafting familiarity with 
them, and, perceiving their evil and Juttful inclinations, 7hey, 
7. e. their daughters, laſt mentioned, invited them co their feaſts. 
e (7. e.) Unto the feaſts which were made of their parts of their 
ſacrifices, after the manner of the Jews and Gentiles too, the par- 
ticipation whereof, was reckoned a participation in the worſhip 
of that god to whom the ſacrifices were offered, 1 Cor. 10. 8. and 
therefore was forbidden to the 1ſraelizes when ſuch feaſts and ſacri- 
fices belonged to a falſe god, Exod. 34.15. Yet this was aleſsand 
more modeſt kind of Idolatry, and therefore is firly uſed to uſher 
in whar was more groſs and impious. f(.e. ) Of their god, Baal- 
peor, the plural Eloim being here uſed, as commonly it is, for one 
God. g Which properly notes the outward a& of worſhip, which 
here conſiſting in, or being accompanied with filthy a&ions, may 
either ſignifie or connote them. þ Before their gods, or, to the 
honour and worſhip of their gods. 


2 And Iſrael joyned himſelf ; unto Baal-peor k.: and 
the anger of the LORD was kindled / againtt Iſrael. 


7 The word implies a forſaking of God to whom they were and 
ſhould have been joyned, and a turning to, embracing of, ſtrick 
conjunGion with, and fervent affe&ion after, this falſe god. Com- 
pare Hoſ. 9. 10. and 2 Cor. 6. 14. k Called Baal, by the name com- 
mon to many falſe gods, and eſpecially ro thoſe rhar repreſented 
any of the heavenly bodies, and Peor, either from the hill Peor,where , 
he was worſhipped, Nu. 23. 28. or rather from a verb ſignifying 
to open and wicover, either becaule of the obſcene poſture in which 
poſlibly rhe Idol was ſer, as Priapus was: or becauſe of the tilthineſs | 
which was exerciſed in his worſhip. / (:. e.) Diſcover it ſelf jn a | 
dreadful plague, ?ſal. 106. 29. 


* 4 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, * Take all the 
* heads of the people, and hang them up m before che 


LORD = againſt the ſun o, that the fierce anger of the 
LORD may be turned away from Iſrael], 


BE BE R-S” 


Chal | 


m The ſenſe 1s, either 1. Take, to wit, to thy ſelF and thy aflift- 
ance, all rhe heads, i. e. the Judges, as they are called wer. 5. Or 
Rulers, of he- People, and in their preſence, and by their help, Fang 
them, i.e. the people, now mentioned, to wit, ſuch of them as were 
guilry, as was ſaid ver. 2. And this ſenſe ſeems to be favoured by 
the next verle, where the execution of this command is mentioned, 
Moſes ſaid upto the Judges of Iſrael, whom he had taken to himſelf and 
called together, Slay ye every one his man, i. e. Each of you execute 
this command of God, and hang up the d-linquents under your 
ſeveral juriſditions. Or 2. Take, i. e. apprehend, all the heads, 3. e. 
the chief, of che people, ſuch as were chief,cither in this rranſgreſſion, 
or rather in place and power, who are finsled out to this examplary 
puniſhment cither for their negle& in nor preventing, reſtraining 
or puniſhing the offenders according to their power and duty, or 
for their concurrence with others in tis wickedneſs, which was 
more odious and miſchievous in them than in others. And then 
this mult be neceffarily limited to ſuch heads as were guilty, which 
15 evident from the nature of the thing, and from the words of 
the verſe. And fo theſe heads of the people differ as in name and 
title, fo in place and dignity fiom the Judges of the People, werſe 5. 
which may ſeem to note the ſuperior Magiſtrats,. even the 70 
Elders, which, being perſons of great worth and piety, choſen by 
God, aniendowed with his ſpirir, molt probably kept themſelves 
fiom this contagion, and therefore were fitter to puniſh others ; 
and che heads of the People, ſeem to be the inferiour Magiſtrates, the 
rulers of tens or hundreds, or the like, who as they did many of 
them, partake with the people in other rebellions, !o probably 
were involved in this guilt. Now theſe are to be hanged up as 
other malefaQors,and condemned perſons were, Deut. 21.23. 2 Sam. 
21. 6 # To the vindication of God's honour and juſtice. 0 (7. e. ) 
Publickly, as their fin was publick and ſcandalous, and ſpeedily 
before the Sun go down. But withal this phraſe may tignifte, 


that theſe alſo muſt be raken down about Sun-ſetting, as other 
malefattors were, Deut. 21. 23. 


5 And Moſes faid unto the judges of Iſrael, * ſlay ye * Exod. 


32.27. 


every one his men p that were Joyned unto Baal-Peor. 

? (7.e.) Thoſe under his charge : for as theſe 70 were choſen 
to afliit Moſes in the government, ſo doutrtleſs the care and manage- 
ment of rhe people was diſtributed among them by juſt and equal 


, proportions. 


6 And behold q one of the children of Ifrael came, 
andbrought unto his brethrenra Medianiciſh woman,in 
the fight of Moſes 5s, and in the ſight of all the congre- 
gation # of the Children of Iſrael, who were weeping 
# before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 

q This was done, either 1. Before God's command to Moſes, and 
by him to the Judges, ver. 4, 5. ſuch tranſpoſitions and diſorders 
being not unuſual in ſacred ſtory. Or rather, 2. In the order ir 
is related, to wit, when Moſes had given the charge to the Judges, 
and, as it may ſeem, before the execution of it, otherwiſe it 1s Pro= 
bable he would not have been ſo bold and fooliſh ro have run upon 
preſent and certain ruine, when the examples were freſh and fre- 
quent before his eyes. 7 (5.e. ) Into the camp of the 1/-aelites, or 
to his Friends and Relations in his tent, whither he carried her,v, 
8. for 11s or their fleſhly fatisfaQtion. s An Argument of intolerable 
1mpudence and contempt of God and of Moſzs. # (:. 2.) The rulers 
of the congregation with divers of the people. « Bewailing the 


| abominable wickedneſs of the people, and the dreadful judgments 


of God, and imploring God's mercy and favour. 

7 And* whea Phinehas the * ſon of Eleazar, the ſon 
of Aaron the prieſt, ſaw ir, he roſe up from amongſt 
the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand, 

8 And he went after the man of Iſrael into the||cent 
x, and thruft both of chem through y, the man of Iſrael 
and the woman through her belly z : ſo the plague «was 
ſtayed from the children of Iſrael. | 

x Or, Brothel-houſe : For ſince they gave way to ſuch lewd Pra- 
ices, no doubt they ſingled out convenient places for theirwicked- 
neſs. ; Which is no warrant for private perions to rake upon them 
the exccution of juſtice upon any, though the greateſt malefaQors, 
becauſe Phinehas was himſelf a man in great authority and power, 
and did this after the command given by Moſes to the rulers to flay 
theſe tranſgreſſors, and in the very ſight, and no doubt, by the CON 
ſent of Moſes himſelf, and alſo by the ſpecial inſtin& and dire&ion 
of God's ſpirir. z Or #n her brothe!-houſe, for the word is the ſame 
before uſed, and tranſlated renr, and it may be called hers, becauſe 
ſhe choſe or uſed that place for her wicked: purpoſes, as the reſt 


doubtleſs did other places of like nature. 2 Either the peſtilence, 
or ſome other ſudden and grievous mortality, 


9 And * thofe that died in the 
and four thouſand b. 

b Objeft. They were but 23090. 1 Cor. 10, 8. Auſw. The odd 
thouſand here added were {ſin by the Judges according to the or- 
der of Moſes, the reſt by the immediate hand of God, but both ſorts 


died of the plague, the word being uſed, as off it is, for the {word, 
or hand, or ſtroke of Ged. 


io And the LORD ſpake"unto Moſes, ſaying, 

11 * Phinehas the ſon of Eleazar, the ſon of Aaron 
the prieſt hath turned my wrath away from the children 
of Ifrael, ( while he was zealous c for my fake 4 among 
them ) that I conſumed not the childrea of Iſrael in my 
jealouſie. 

e Fervent and reſolute and valiant. 
vindicatien. ; 

12 Wherefore ſay, Behold, F give unto him my co- 
venant of peace e, | 

ce (7. e. ) The covengnt of an everlaſting Prieſs2002, as it is expound. 
£d, v. 13. which is called » covenant of peace, partly with reſpe& 
to the happy effeCt of this heroical ation of his, whereby he made 
peace between God and his people; and partly with regard to the 
principal end and wle of the Prieftly office. which was conſtantly 
to do that which Phincþzs now did, even co mediate between _ 

z D an 


plague, were twenty 


4 For my ſatisfation and 


Chap. XXV. 


* Pal. 
108.30? , 
* Exod.6 
25, 
| Or,. , 
brothel, 


og S 


—- 


>>. 


I 3. 20—E —— ti —anrIn IR ALI > 7 - 
Ir CLARET T7 "EEE > T7 RI EEE 


} Heb. 


| houſe of a 
| father, 


| * Chap: 


Chap, 
.” Zo 


"Chap. XXVI- 


"MM 


7 d re- 
+0 obtain and preſerve his own and Iſrael's peace an 
puter ry: Ta Sick God, TX offering up ſacrifices and incenſe, = 
ravers, to God on their behalf, Numb. 16. 57, 48. as alſo by _— - 
_ Show away from iniquity, which is the only peace-breakers,and by 
reaching and preſling the obſervation of this Law, which is the 0n- 
ly bond of their peace, Mal. 2. 5,6,7. _ : 
” 13 And he jhall have it, and his ſeed after him f,ever 


the covenant of an everlaſting prieſthood g. becauſe he 
was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for 


ildren of Ifrael. 32 Hi : 
_ _— What advantage had he by this promiſe, ſeing the thing 
here promiſed was due to him by birth ? Anſw. 1. The ſame _ 
ſing may be oft-rimes promiſed, as the Kingdom was to Davis ; 
and the renewing of this promiſe might ſeem convenient here, to 
ſignifie that bloodſhed was ſo far from polluting him, and thereby 
caſting him out of the Prieſthood, that it was a mean to confirm 
him in it. 2. This promiſe ſecured him and his againſt divers con- 
tingences. which otherwiſe might have befallen him or them, as 
that he ſhould live longer than his father, elſe he could nor have 
been the High-prieſt ;that he ſhould be preſerved from thoſe blemi- 
ſhes which might have rendered him uncapable of the Prieſthood, 
which were many ; that he ſhould have a ſeed,and they ſuch as were 
fir for that office: g (7. e.) To continue as long as the Law and Com- 
monwealth of the Jews did: Queſt. How was this verifed,ſeing the 
Prieſthood went from Eleazar's to Ithamar's line in Eli and three or 
four of his Succeſſors ? Anſw. 1. This promile, as others of the like 
nature, was conditiona), and therefore might be made void and of 
none effe&, by the miſcarriages of Phinehas his ſons, as it ſeems It 
was, and thereupon a like promiſe was made to. £17 of the line of 
Ithamar, that he and his ſhould walk before the Lord,to wit, in the of- 
fice of High-prieſt, for ever, which alſo for his and their fins was 
made void, 1 Sam, 2. 30. 4nſw. 2. That was but a ſhort interruption, 
and not conſiderable in ſo long a ſucceſſion, for the Prieſthood re- 
rurned to Phinehas his line in the time of Solomon, Kings 2.26,27,34- 
1 Chron. 24.3. and continued in that line till the captivity of Baby- 
lon, as is evident, and. afterward too, 1 Chron: 6: 4. Ezra 7:1,5. even 
until Chriſt's time, for any thing which appears to the contrary. 
14 Now the name of the Iſraelice that was lain,ever 
that was ſlain with the Midianitiſh woman, was Zimri 
the ſon of Salu,a prince þ of | a chief houſe 3 among the 
Simeonites &. T7 = 
h This is adeed as a proof of Phinehas his zeal that he durſt ven- 
rure upon ſo great a perſon, who was likely to have many avengers 
of his blood. i Heb. Of the houle of his Father. Every Tribe was di- 
vided into great Houſholds called the houſes of their Fathers, Numb. x. 
2. and he was the Prince or chief of one of theſe, though not of the 
whole Tribe. k Of the Tribe of Simeon,which ſeems to have been 
too much influenced by his and other ſuch examples, ſo that for 
59300. which were numbred, Num. 1. 22, 23. there were now 0n- 
ly 22200. Numb. 26. 14. 10 | 
15 And the name of the Midianitiſh woman that was 
flain, was Cozbi the daughter of Zur 1; he was head 
over a people, and of a chief houſe in Midian. 
1 One of the Kings or Princes of Mid/an, Numb.z1.8. Jof, 13\'21. 
7 Or, and over her fathcrs houſe, 
16 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
17 * Vex the Midianitess: and ſmite them e. 
u And why not the Moabites, who were as guilty, ver, r. 4vſw. r. 


Becauſe God will reſerve to himſelf a liberty of puniſhing or ſpa- | 


ring, according to his own good pleaſure. 2. God had a kindneſs 
for the Mosbites for Let's ſake, Deut. 2.9.3. God puniſhed the Moabites 
in another manner, partly by his own immediate hand, whereby it 
is p:obable he cut off thoſe Moabitiſh women' that were guilty of 
this fa&, partly by a particular and dreadful kind of excommunica- 
tion, Deut. 23,3. and partly by impunity, which in its conſequences 
is commonly worſe and more pernicious than any or all temporal 
puniſhments, which none that believes the Bible can deny. 4. Ir is 
probable the Midanites were moſt guilty, as in perſ\ wading Balak to 
ſend for Balaam, as may be gathered from Numb. 22, 4,7. So in the 


reception of Balaam after Balak had diſſmiſſed him, Numb. 31.8. and 


in further conſultation with him, and in contriving the means for 
the executing of this wicked plot. o (7. e.) Kill them : in which 


words as there is a command to war againft them, ſo there is a pro- 


. miſe of ſucceſs. 

18 For they vex you with their wiles p, wherewith 
they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor,and in the 
matter of Cozbi 9,the daughter of a prince of Midian, 
their ſiſter 7, which was ſlain in the day of the plague 
for Peors ſake. 


p For under pretence of Kindred and Friendſhip and Leagues, 
yea and Marriages, which they offered to them, inſtead of that 


Wir which' the Iſraelites expe&ed from them, they ſought only an 


opportunity to infinuat themſelves into their familiarity, and exe- 
cure their helliſh plot of bringing that curſe upon the 1ſrael:tes, 
which they had in vain attempred to bring another way. 9g By 
drawing you both to ſpiritual and corporal whoredom. 7 In a 
large ſcnſe, to wit, their Counery. woman. 


C H AP. XXVI. 


Iſrael numbred : ſuch as were fit for War : of every Tribe + Levi excepted : 
their Number, 1---=---51, The Land to be diſtributed according to 
their Numbers 52, 56. ' The Levites numbred by themſ:lves, be- 
cauſe they had no Inheritance, $7---=—62. All that were numbred by 
Moſes and Aaron at Sinai, ſave only Caleb and Joſbua, died in the Wil- 
derneſs, 63--—65. 

AN D it came to paſs after the plague & that the 

LORD ſpake unto Moſes, and unto Eleazar b the 

ſon of Aaron the prieſt, ſaying, 
s Laſt mentioned. Chap. 25.8, 9. 6 Who, his father being dead 
was High-prieſt. : 
2 Take the fum c of all the congregation of vhe chil- 
dren of Iſrael * from twenty years old and upward, 


3 R dv. 
throughout their fathers houſe, all that are able to 80 
to war in Ifrael. : 

c They were numbred twice before, Exod.z0.11. 12. and Numb.1. 
1, 2, Now they are numbred a third time, partly to demonſtrate 
the faithfulneſs of God, both in cutting all thoſe off whom he had 
threatned to cut off, Numb. 14. 29. and in a ſtupendious increaſe and 
multiplication of the people according to his promiſe, notwith= 
ſanding all their ſins, and the ſweeping judgments inflitted upon 
them ; and partly to prepare the way for the equal diviſion of the 
Land which they were now going to poſleſs. - 

2 And Moſes and Eleazar the prieſt ſpake with them 
in the plains of Moab d,by Jordan wear Jericho efaying, 

a See Numb. 22. 1.and 33. 48. e See Numb. 22. T. 

4 Take the ſum of the people f, from twenty years old 
and upward as the LORD * commanded Moſes, and the 
children of Ifraei which went forth out of the land of 
Egyp 


(of 
F NW kich words are eaſily ſupplie4 and neceſſarily to be under- 
ſtood from wer. 2. 


Reuben ; Hanock, of whom cometh the family of the 
Hanochites : of Pallu, the famliy of the Palluites : 


6 Of Heſron, the family of the Heſronites : of Car- 
mi, the family of the Carmites. 

7 Theſe ere the families g of the Reubenites : and 
they that were numbred of them, were forty and three 
thouſand and ſeven hundred and thirty þ. 

g (4. e.) The chief houſes, which were ſubdivided into divers 
lefler families. þ Whereas in their laſt numbring they were 46500, 
Numb. 1, 21. for Korah's canſpiracy, as well as other provocations of 
theirs had cut off many .of them. 

8 Ard the ſons ; of Pallu ; Eliab. 

7 For, ſon,of which change of the number. See Gen.21.7. and 46.7. 

9 And the ſons of Eliab ; Nemuel, and Dathan,and 
Abiram : this is that Dathan, And Abiram, which were 
*famous in the congregation, who ſtrove againſt Moſes, 


itrove againſt the LORD. 
io And the earth opened her mouth, and ſwallowed 
them up together with Korah &, when that company 
died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and 
fifty men : and they became a fign /: 
'& According to this tranſlation Korah was not conſumed by fir 
with his 250 men, Numb. 16. but ſwallowed up by the Earth. But 
others rather think he was devoured by the fire, of which ſee on 
Numb. 16. 32, 35. and render theſe words, and the things of Korah, 
or belonged to Korah, to wit, his tent and goods, and family, 
children excepted as here follows. Which interpretation receives 
ſtrengta by comparing this place with Numb. 16: 32+ And the earth 
opened her mouth, and ſwallowed them ( to wit, Dathan and Abiram, as is 
manifeſt from wer. 24. 25, 27.. ) up and their houſes,and all the men that 
appertained unto Korah, which variation of the phraſe plainly ſhews 
that Korah himſelt was not ſwallowed up with them, but only his men 
and his tabernacle, which is mentioned there rogether with the tas 
bernacles of Dathan and Abiram, wer: 24: 27. bur his perſon is not 
there mentioned with their perſons.Nor is it unuſual both in ſacred 
and profane authors, by the name of a man who is the head and 


- maſter to underſtand only his houſe and family, though himſelf be 


not included. But this difficulty may be cleared another way. The 
Hebrew particle eth may be here the note of a Nominative caſe, as 
it is 2 Kings 6: 5. Neh: 9: 19. Jer; 38. 16. Ezek. 39: 14: and 43.7. 
and there may be a defeCt of a verb,which is moſt frequent,and ſo 
the place may be rendred thus, and the earth opened her mouth, and 
ſwallowed them up,to wit, Dathan and Abiram, wer; g. and Korah, or, and 
as for Korah he died;(which verb is eafily underſtood our of the fol- 
lowing noun, of which Ellipſis there are many iuſtances in Scrip- 
rure, ſome whereof have been given before,and more will follow in 
their places) in the death of that company, or when that company died, 
what time the fire devoured the two hundred and fifty men. And 1o this 
place, and Numb. 16: 35. explain one another, and whereas there is 
mention only of 250 men cenſumed by that fire, Korah is here 
added to the number. / (7. e,) God made them a monument or 
example, to warn others not to rebel againſt God nor againſt Ma- 
giſtracy, nor to uſurp the Prieſtly office. 

11 Notwithſtanding the childrenof Kerah died not m,, 
m God being pleaſed to ſpare them, either becauſe they diſown- 
ed their fathers fa&, and thereupon ſeparated themſclves both from 
his tent and company, or becauſe Moſes interceeded for them, or be- 
cauſe God would glorific his own free mercy in ſparing ſome, while 
he puniſhed others,according to his declararion in a like caſe, Exod: 
33: 19. Hence the ſons of Korahare mentioned, 1 Chron: 6: 22, 38: 
and of in the book of Pſalms. 

12 The ſons of Simeon after their families : of Ne- 
muel », the family of the Nemuelites : of Jamin,the fa- 


mily of the Jaminites : of Jachin o, the family of the 
Jachinites : 

nu Called Femuel, Deu: 46: 10, Exod 6: 15. 0 Called alſo Jarib, 
1 Chron: 4:24. And ſuch names might be either added or changed 
upon ſome ſpecial occaſion not recorded in Scripture. 

13 Ot Zerahs,the family ot the Zarhites : of Shaul, 
the family of the Shaulites. 

o Called alſo Zohar, Gen: 46; ro. Exed. 6: 15. There is another 
of his ſons, Ohad, mentioned Gen: 46: 10. not here, poſſibly be- 
cauſe his family was extin& before rhis time. 

14 Theſe are the families of the Simeonites : twenty 
and two thouſand and two hundred p. 


p Whereas there were 35400 in Numb: 1: 23. Ir is thought the 
example of Zimri, one of their princes, Numb: 25. and ſome others 


among them, did infe@ the generality of the Tribe, and ſo cauſed 
Fas great dimuaytion, in their numbers, 


15 The 


and againſt Aaron in the company of Korah,when they 


Chyp. Xxv1,- 


* Ch.1.1, 


5 * Reuben the eldeſt ſon of Iſrael : the children of * ce. 


46.8. 
Ex: 6: 14. 


"Ch.16.2 


—————— — — 


Macs Ing Ie" | 


® Cha 


*Gen' 39 
« &C. C 
gh: 12: 

*; Chron 
2! 3» 


*: Chro! 


7:1: 


* Gen: 
46. 16: 


* Gen: 
46: 20 


* Joſh 


17: I. 


| 
| 


1 In 


'P Chap. XXVI. 


*Gen' 39 
« &C. & 
46. ['2: 

*; Chron: 
23. 


*: Chron: 
1: 1; 


* Gen: 
49. I: 


* Gen: 
46: 20: 


* Toſh: 


77: 0. 


* Chap. 
27;1; & 
36: 11, 


N U M 


15 The children of Gad 9 after their families : of 
Z.2phon r, the family of the Zephonites ; of Haggji, 
thefamily of the Haggites : of Shuni, the family of the 
Shunites: 

q Who is placed next, becauſe he was joined with Revben and 
Simeon in the ſame camp and quarters. Numb. 2. 10, 14. r Called 
Zephion, Gen 46 16. 

16 Of Ozni s, the family of the Oznites : of Eri, 
the family of the Erites 3 

s Called Ezhon, Gen. 46. 16. 

17 Of Arod ?, the family of the Arodites : of Areli, 

the fomily of the Arelites. 

t Called Arod:, Gen. 46. 16. 

18 Fheſe are the families of the children of Gad. 
according to thoſe that were numbred of them, fourty 
thouſand and five hundred #. 

Fewer by above 5000 than there were 1a their laſt numbring, 
Numb. 2.15. 

19 * The ſons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er 
and Onan died in the land of Canaan. : 

20 And the ſons of Judah after their families were ; of 
Shelah,the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family 
of the Phaizites : of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites. 

21 And the ſonsof Pharez x were ; of Heſron, the 
family of the Heſronites ; of Hamul, the family of the 
Humuiites. 

* Which though J:4ahs Grandchildrenare here mentioned among 
his ſons, becaule they are pur in the ſtead of Er and Onan, which 
died before. 

22 Theſe are the families of Judah,according to thoſe 
that were numbred of them, threeſcore and ſixteen 
thouſand and five hundred y» 

y About 2000 more than they were, Num. 1. 27. whereas the fore- 
going Tribes wer- all diminiſh<0d. rhis Trive was now encreaſed,2nd 
the bleſſing promiſed tn that Tribe above the reſt, Ger. 49. 8. doth 
herein begin to ſhew it ſelf. ? = 

2 * Of the ſons of Iffachar after their families : of 
Tola, the family of the Toiaices + of Pua z, the family 
of the Punites. 

z Called alſo Phavah, Gen. 46. 13. as his brother Jajbub, verſe 24. 
is called Job, Gen. 46. 13. ; : 

24 Ot jaibub, the family of the Jaſhubites ; of Shim- 
ron, the family ofthe Shimcomires. : 

25 Theſe -re the tamilies of lifachar, according to 
thoſe chat were numbred ot them, threeſcore and four 
thouſand and three hundred 4. 

a A great increaſe. Compare Numb. 2. 6. | 

26 Of* the ſons of Zebulun, after their families, of 
Sered, the families of the Sardites: of Elon, the tamily 
ot the Elonites : of Jahlcel, the family of the Jahleelices. 

27 Theſe are the families of the Zebulunites, accor- 
ding to thoſe that were numbred of them, threeſcore 
thouſand and tive hundred 5b. 


bþ Whereas before they were but 57400 in Numb. x. 31.and 2.8. 
So that Judahs camp was much encrealed, as Revbens was much 


diminiſhed, 

25 * The ſons of Joſeph, after their families, were 
Manaſleh and Ephraim. 

29 Of the ſons of Manaſſeh 8 of * Machir, the fa- 
mily of che Machirites : and Machir begar Gilead: of 
Gilead come the family of the Gileadires. | 

c Gilead is here mentioned as Machirs only ſon, and therefore ſome 
conceive that the family of the Machirites, and of the Gileaartes, are 
one end the ſame family. only called by cwo n-mes, firſt Machirites, 
bur afre: wards Gileaditcs. Others make them diſtin families, becauſ: 
Machir had other children, Gen. 50- 23- 1 Chron. 7. i4, 15, 16. which 
are callcd by their fathers name, Machirites ; whereas the children of 
his e/deft ſon Gilead are called by his name, Gzleadites. But though 
Machir had other children, it ſeems they and their politcriry were 
extin& ar this time, and that Machir alone was left and his poſteriry, 
as may be gathered by comparing this and the following Verſes 
with Jef. 17. 1,2,3. and 1 Chron. 7. 14, 15, 16,17, 18, 19. 

20 Theſe are the ſons of Gilead, of Jeezer d, the 
family of the Jeezerires : of Helek, the family of the 
Helekites. 

d Called alſo Abiezer, Jof. 17. 2. Judg. 6. 11, 34. 1 Chron. 7, 18. 

21 And of Afriel, the family of the Aſnelites ; and 
of Sechem, the family of che Sechemites : 

22 And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites : 
and of Hepber, the family of the Hepherites. 

23 And * Zelophead the ſon of Hepher had no ſons 
but daughters : and the names of the daughters of Ze- 
lophead, were Mahluh, and Noah, Hogiah, Milcah, 
and Tirzah. 

34 Theſe are the families of Manafſeh, and choſe 
that were numbred of them, fifry and two thouſand 
and ſeven hundred e. 

e Whereas they were but 32200. in Num. 1.35. So they are now 
increaſed above 20000. according to that prophecy, Gen. 49. 22. 

Theſe are the fons of Ephraim, after their fami- 
lies : of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhires : of 
Becher f, the family of the Bachrites ; of Tahan, the 
f-mily of the Tahanires. 

t Called alſo Bered, 1 Chron. 7. 20, 


B E R S. | 
36 And'theſe arethe ſons of Shuthelah : 
the family of the Eranites. 


evident from Scripture-inſtances. 

37 Theſe are the familics of the ſons of Ephraim, ac- 
cording to thoſe that were numbred of them thirty 
and ewo thouſand and five hundred. Theſe are the ſors 
of Joſeph after their fimilies. 


Bela, thefamily of the Belaites: of Aſhbel 3, thef amily of 
the Aſhbelitesz of Ahiram &,the family ofthe Ahiramites: 

h Who were ten, Gen. 46. 21. whereof only five are here menti- 
oned, the reſt probab'y, together with their families, being extinCt 
ere this time. 7z Called alſo Fedaiel, 1 Chros. 7. 6. kCalled alfo 
Abarah, 1 Chron 8. 1. and Ehi. Gen. 46. 21. 


39 Of Shupham } the family of the Shuphamites : of 
—— _ wy family of the Huphamites. 
alled a! 
Called Heppinn, pre bg 125 Lie on 0p DO 

49 And the ſons of Bela were Ard and Naaman : of 
Ard 1, the family of the Ardites : and of Naaman. the 
family of the Naamites. ; 

» Or, Arde, and by tranſpoſition, Adar, 1 Chron: $. $. 

41 Theſe aze the ſonsof Benjamin atter their families: 
and they that were numbred of them, were fourty and 
five thouſand and ſix hundred. 

42 Theſe are the ſons of Dan after their families : of 
Shuham o, che family of the Shuhamices. Theſe are the 
ates gy Dan after their families p. 

0 Called, anſpoſition, 'm. Gen. 
families he fey ng - 055 ory na on þ The greater 

43 All the families of the Shuhamites, according to 
choſe that were numbred of them, were threeſcore and 
four thouſand aad four hundred 4. 

7 All fromone ſon and family, whereas of Benjamin who had t:n 
ſans, and here five families, there were only 45600 to ſhew that the 


increaſe of families depends lingly upon God's blefling and good 
pleature. 


of the Jeſuires z of Beriah, the family of the Beriites. 
r Called Ju, Gen. 46.17. where alſo there is another ſon of Aſber 
named, to wit. 1buah, waoſe family ſeems now to be loſt. 


45 Of che ſons of Beriah: of Heber, thefamily of th 
Heberites : of Maichiel, the family of the Malchielites 
46 Andthe name of the daughter ot Aſher,was Sarah s. 


5 Who ſeems to be here mentioned becauſe the was a woman of 
maſculine wiſdom, or courage, or other vertue. 


' 47 Theſe are the tamilies of the ſons of Aſher, accor- 
ding to thoſe that were numbred of them who were 
fity and three thouſand and iour hundred z. 

# Whereas they were oniy 41500 in Numb; 1. 41. 

48 * Ot the ſons oft Naphrali after their families : 
Jahzeel, the family ofthe Jahzeelites : of Guni 
mily of the Gunites : : 

49 Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerices ; of * Shjl- 
lem, the family of the Shillemites. 

50 Thele are the fami'ies of Naphrali, according to 
cheir families : and they that were numbred of them 
ere fourty and five thouſand, and four hundred. : 

5I Theſe were the number of the children of Iſrael 
ſix hundred thouſand, and a thouſand ſeven hundred and 
thirty «. | 

u Very nigh as many as there were before, 
and marvellouſly &id God at the ſame time manifeſt his juſtice in 


cutting off ſo vaita number, and his mercy in givi 

and numerous ſupply, and his truth in Rds A ans _ 
52 And the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
53 Unto cheſe x the land ſhall be divided z for an in- 

herirance, according to the number of names z. 

x To theſe families now mentioned. y By lor, werſe 55, The 
iand was divided into nine parts and an half, reſpe& being had in 
ſach diviſion to the goodneſs as well as to the largeneſs of the ſeveral 
portions, and the Jot gave each Tribe their part. & (7.e. ) Ofthe 
perſons, names being ott pur for perſons, as A#s x. 15. Phil, 2. 9. 
Rev. 3.4.and 11.13. The meaning is, that the ſhare of each Tribe 
wasdivided amonglit the ſeveral families, to ſome more, to ſome leſs 
according to the nur ber of the perſons of each family, Num.z3. 54. 
And withal, if one «f the lors or portions proved roo large or roo 
little for all the families and perſons cf that Tribe, in this caſe they 
might either give part of tizeir portion to another Tribe, as Simegx 
and Dan had parts of Judahs ſhare, 5:ſb. 19. 4, 40. or take away 2 part 
from the portion belonging to another Tribe : 


of 
the fa- 


Num. 1. 46. So wiſely 


tance, and to few thou ſhalr fgive the leſs inheritance : 
to every one ſhall his inheritance be 
thole that were numbred of him 6. 


2 Thou Moſes, partly by thy ſelf, fr he divided the land beyond 
Jurdaw ro the two Tribes and an half, and partly by thy ſucczilor 
Jojvua, whom thou ſhalt empower and command to do it. & Accor- 


veing 20 years old, no regard being to be had either to any increaſe 
of the number by thoſe who came up to thar age between this time 
and the diviſion of the land, or to rhe dimiaution of this number by 


| the {word of Canannites or other wile, 


2 D 2 55 Nots 


_ 44 * Ofthe children of Aſher after their families : of *; chro 
Jimna, the family of the Jimnites : of Jeſuir, the family 7: 30: 


* 297 | | . . 
54 * Io many thous thalt + give the more inheri- ; 


_ Chap. XXVI. 
of Eran g, 


g Called Edan or Hadan, x Chron. 7. 26. the letters Daleth and Re 
being alike in the Hebrew tongue, and therefore of+ changed, me 


38 * The ſons of Benjamin 6 after their families : of *: Chron 


7: 6; 


n: 


* Gen: 


46: 24:) 


1 Chron: 
7:13; 

*x Chron: 
9: 335 
Shallum, 


Chap 


33: 545 

given, according to + Heb. _ 
multiply his 
inheritance. 
+ Heb. 

diminiſh his 
| ding to the. number of the tamilies and perſons now numbred and inheritance. 


Chap. XXVII NUMB E K I. | Chap. KXVit.. c 
5 Notwithſtanding, the land ſhall be * divided by | ther againſt the LORD * in the company of Korah « : *Chuc;, 


IChap:33: _ ut WHEN - 
| ny Joſh: lot c:; according to the names of the tribes of their fa- | but died in kis own fin 4, and had no ſons. 


hp rt 23. & thers « they ſhall inherit. : 

| | a c Which Sn ſeem to have been caſt enly for the tribes, Kot 25 
Wl! ſome would have it for the ſeveral families, for the diſtribution of it might poſſibly be accuſed to be guilty of this : Or 2. becauſe, he 
to them was left to the rulers wiſdom according to the rule now I | 1.1 tt nent perſon might be thoughe guilty of that rather than 


given, verſe 54. Yet, if any Lot was too large for the IG, they |. .f any other, becauſe the great and famous men were more cencerned Ze 
might give up part of their Right to others, with the Rulers x64 in that rebellion than others ; Or 3. to gain the favour of Moſes, aginft 10. 2 
ſent, as Judah gave 2 fhareto Simeon and to Dar within his Lot. 4 4m that rebellion was more particu/arly dire&.d, and more Mitt 
# (7. e.) The Lots ſhall go under the names of each Tribe or each deſperately proſecuted than any or'::r. Or 4. becauſe peradventur? 36. 


Patriarch. 

56 According to the lot ſhall the polleflion ther cf | that crime. Or, rather, 5. beczuſe that ſin, and, as it moy ſeem, 
be divided between many and few e. chatonly of all the ſins coinmitred in the wildernefs, was of fuch a 

e (i.e. ) That ſhare, which ſhail by Lor fall to each Tribe, ſhall | flagitious nature, that God thought fir ro extend the puniſhment 
be diftribured to the ſeveral families and perſonsin ſuch proportions | notonly ro the perſons of thoſe rebels, bur Io ro their chiilren and 
Y * Gen: a6; 45 Their numbers ſhall require. Gaualies, Naws: THe 334 $02: HEE OEN SI or 2... _ fn 
ag er 57 X And theſe are they that were numbred of tne Fo): 7.24. Whence IT 1S noted as a ſtngulas priviiedoe granted to Tae 
l 6:16, 17, Levites : of Gerſhon the family of the Gerſhonites : of 


y 18, 19. 'Kohath, the family of the Kohathites ; of Merari, the argument here more proper and powerful, that he did not die in 
it d _ family of the Merarites. _ ſin for which _— OY were to be cut off, and to ſole either 
 O.1, I0. 4 : | cho : their livesor their 1nheritances, and therefore their claim wes more 
| Fs Theſe are the ſes cx che Levires f : the _ juſt. d Either 1. for that fin mentioned Numb: 14: which they call 
of the Libnites, the family © the Hebronites, the family | ;,.,;,, fo, in oppoſition not to the reſt of the people, for it was 2 
of the Mahlites, the family of the Muſhites, the famil common ſin, but to his children, 7. e. the fin for which he alone was 
of the Korhites : and Kohath begat Amram. | to ſuffer inhis perſon and not in his poſterity, as God had ap:011:.:4, 
f Which are here numbred by themſelves, Lecauie they were nor Numb: I4: 33. Or rather 2. for his own pzrſona! ſins, foi ; . OE ie 
to have a diſtin& ſhare of the land, whence it is that rhey are nor | Were more properly his own ſins, 2. It was a truth, 2nd ca; v4 ved 
ſo diſtinaly and exzQly mentioned as the other Tribes, but confu- T _ ae hg pt opting Aly a + nn RS The 
a "ECBO . : f - 7 ( VC Calils 

—_ E—_—_ ly, _ I Ng many prgceed here, Sec bur excluſion from the land of Canaan, and death ok by way Os 


* Exod:2: _, And the name of Amrams wife wes * Jochebed, | <7'<4uence upon That, 


_ 7 Ra LT ) 
hog wig the daughter of Levi, whom her mother g bare to Levi + Why ſhould che INTE, of our father wp. 7 "5 oF - $ { Hel 
Ie. E 4 d be b uns Meram. Aofodand Moſes | 2vay e from among his family, becaufe he hath no fon ? inijhud, | yy, 
16. / mr P o'e3, | give unto us therefore a poſleffion f among the brethren Jolemal 
and Miriam their ſiſter. ; of our farher | 
g To wit, Levi's wife, which muſt neceſſarily be underſtood. 5 Pins will Bi if it be not preſerved by an inheritance given to 
60 And unto Aaron was born Nadab and Abihu, us in his name and for his ſake. Hence ſome gather, that the firſt 
bt. Fleazar and Ithamar. : : Son of each of theſe heireſſes was called by their fathers name, by 
Lev: 10; 61 And * Nadab and Abihu dicd, when they offered | vertue of that law Denr: 25: 6: whereby the brothers firſt ſon was | 
2: Ch:3:4: Soance fire before the LORD. to bear the name of his elder brother, whoſe Widow he married. | 
« Chron: : 5 EEC: hes "ers Geet i hem. w f In the Jand of Canaan upon the diviſion of it, which, though not | 
24: 2: 2 And tholc tna , IC | yer conquered, they concluded would certainly be ſo, and thereby | 


twenty and three thouſand 6, all males from a month | gave glory to God by believing: 
old and upward z:for they were not numbred among the | 5 And Moſes broughttheircauſe before the LORD g. 
children of Iſrae}, —_ — Sad inheritance £ _ e. ) Into oy CO where —_— — np" to ſpeak | 
. | : w1th MoJer Upon OCCailons, Exoa; 25; 22: Numb; 7: 89. For 1t was 
pq them among MEETS 05 Lach an hard caſe, and chou i : 
"HRS . , ANC gh their plea ſeemed reaſonable, yer Meſes, 
—_— {any — for => Nemo ag mn Se ———— modeſty, that he would nor | 3mm it 
: BE ; 8: intelf without Gods particular dire&ion. 

63 Thele are they that were numbred by Moſes rd | © 5 Arg the LORD fpake unto Moſes, ſaying, ' Exc 
Eleazar the prieſt, gg f 7-8 2n04, 1 ay of Ifracl | - The daughters of Zelophehad ſpeak right : thou 28.30 
in the plains of Moab, by Jordan rr Jericho. | ſhat ſurely give them 5 a polſleflion of an inheritance 

64 But among theſe there was not a man of them 


whom Moſes and Aaron the prieſtnumbred, when they among their fathers brethren, and thou ſhalt cauſe the 


, . 6 1-7 | inhericance of their fathers z to paſs unto them. 
* Chap: riumbred the children of Ifrae} in the wilderneſs of Sinai. h In Hebrew it 1s of the maſculine gender, to ſhew that women 


74:28, 29: 6F For the LORD had faid of them, They * ſhall Þ in this caſe ſhould enjoy the mans priviledge, and that the heavenly 
x Cor: 10: ſurely die in the wilderneſs: and there was not left a Ws, when this was a Type, did belong no leſs to women 
5, 6. man of them z, ſave Caleb the ſon of Jephunneh, and | 5279 men, Go: 3528. 3 (5. e. ) Which belonged to their fathers, 


Joſhua the ſon of Nun in caſe they had lived. 
i To wit, of thoſe who then murmured and rebelled againſt God, bs And thou ſhalt ſpeak unto the children of Iſrael, 


as plainly appears both becauſe this threatning and puniſhment is laying, If a4 man die, and have no ſon, then ye ihall 
confined to thoſe tranſgreſſors, and becauſe otherwiſe this had not cauſe his inkeritance to paſs unto kis daughter. 


been true, for ofthoſe that were then numbred there were now lefr | 9 And if he have no daughter, then ye ſball give his 
Eleazar and- Ithamar, and poſſibly many of the Levites, and ſome | inheritance unto his brethren 


others, who being not guilty of that fin did not partake of thej : : 
judgment. ary per Joſhua are mentioned here, as alſo Numb. *ug 10 And if he have no brethren &, then ye ſhall - 


not by way of Exception, as if theſe were murinurers, which Is his inheritance unto his fathers brethren. 
utterly denied, Numb. 14. 24. but by way of oppoſition, to ſignify k Nor ſiſters, as appears from weyſe 8. - 


_ they, _ _ a+ dent ee _— me _ panions of | I1 And if his tacher have no brethren, then ye ſhall 
them who were the chief authors and ringleaders of that mutin 1 i 1 - * 1,» x 
yet they kepr themſelves from their fin, and therefore God "de give his inheritance unto his kinſmany that is next to 


them from their plague and deſtruRtion, as allo he did ſome others him of his family » and he (hall poſſeſs ic : and it ſhall be 
for the ſame reaſon. | unto the children of Iſrael a ſtatute of judgment 7, as 
C H A P. XXVII the LORD commanded Moſes, 


A ſtarite or rule, by which the Maziſtrate ſhall civej 
The Law of inheritance : for Daughters on defef of Sous : and on defef of | in ſuch caſes. 4 agiſtrate ſhall givejudgment 


them to the Brother : and if there be none, to the next kinſman, x —=1 7 FE *& 
God Commands Moſes to go [4 into a Mountain to view the land of Canaan, nag wi we {aid unto Moſes, Get hee UP * Deut:z 
and die there : The Reaſon, 12 — 14. Moſes prays to the Lord to appoint ; —— arim _ and fee the land which I 27: and 
an able Succeſſor, 1517. Joſhua choſe, and confirm'd in his Office by have g1Ven unto the children of Krael. 32: 49; 
Impoſition of hands before all the People, 18 23. m The whole tra& of mountains was called Abarim, Numb: 33: 47: 
whereof one of the higheſt was called Nebo, Der: 32+49. and the 
*Chap:26: Hen came the daughters of * Zelophehad #, the ſon | *9P of that Piſgah, Deur: 34: 1. 
33: & 36; of Hepher, the ſon of Gilead, the fon of Machir, 13 And when thou haft ſeen it, thou alſo ſhalt be 
11. Joſh. the ſon of Manaſſeh, of the families of Manaſleh, the gathered unto thy people #, as * Aaron thy brother *Chapas 
17:3: fon of Joſeph; andtheſe are the names ofhis daughters ; | Ws gathered. 24: & 
Mahlah, Noah and Hoglzh, and Milcah, and Tirzah. n rg okay Phraſe ſee Gen: 15: 15: and 25: 8. ES OTE 
# Perceiving that the males only were numbred, and that the land 6s. Soy ye rebelled againſt my commandment ( in , ay” I.& 
was to be divided to them only, they put in their claim for a ſhare | tÞ© deſer t of Zin, inthe ſtrife of rhe Congregation ) to + Chap: WE. 
in their fathers inheritance. ſan&tifie me at the water, before their eyes : that is the 2: 24: | Mal. 
2 And they ſtood before Moſes, and before Eleazar | * water of Meribah in Kadeih,s in the wilderneſs of Zin, Deut: | 2. 
the prieſt, and before the Princes, and all the COnNgre- o This 1s added, ro diſtinguifh this miſcarriage of Moſes from that 1:,37* Tek 
gation, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation | of the people in Rephidim, Exod: 17: 7. Te OO 
b, ſaying, 15 And Moſes ſpake unto the LORD p, ſaying, ea } reft 
þ Nigh unto which it ſeems was the place where Moſes and the p The words here following, and others too, which are recorded, j go : 
chief rulers aſſembled for the adminiſtration of publick affairs. | 24 3+ 23» 26. * Chap: | 


which alſo was very cenvenient, becauſe rhey had fr:queat occaſion 7 TT * . : OE 
of recourſe to God for his affiſtance and direction beta. 16 Let the LORD * God of the ſpir its of all fieſh 7» 5 2 


puny 6 3 Our father * died in the wildernels, and he was not m_ of ay bog the congregation 2 is X ; 
3s: i Re tb Be Þ : The LeAarcner OF Ipirits, Fat Cit Whit 
64, 65: inthe company of them that gathered themſelyes toge- | is fit for this great emgloymenc ; the Father and Ge van 


NAUT 


6:1 


A; 
1 
Lo,t 


| Chap 


+ Heb. 
gry, or 
jplmaor. 


. XXVII. 


the congregation «,and give him a charge x in their ſight. 


made by fire b for a } {weet favour unto me, ſhall ye ' the burnt-offering of every month throughout che 


! months & of the vear. 


7. e, my offering or ſacrifices, and wy bread, j, e. cither my fhew | 
'Y Lo 


who canſt raiſe and ſuit the ſpirits of men to the 


nour of ſpirits | 
TY has as thou did{t thote Numb: 11. 26, 17. 


h gheit and hardeſt works, 
See Numb: 16: 22, : 

17 Which may go out before them, and which may ! 
g0 in before them 7, and which may lead them out,and : 
which may bring them in ; that the congregation ot ; 
the LORD be not * as ſheep which have no ſhepherd. ; 


ry (4. e: ) Which may wiſely condutt them in all their affairs, ' 


'9: hats when they go forth to war, os upon other occaſions, and ; 


when they return home and live in peace. A metaphor from 
ſhepherd-, a5 it here follows, which in thoſe places ufed not to go * 
behind their ſheep, as ours now do, but before them, and to lead ; 
them forth to their paſture, and in due time to lead them home 
again. Of this phraſe ſee Deut: 28: 6. AF. 1. 21. 

- And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Take thee Joſhua, 


L &. 


the ſon of Nun, a man in whom zs thee {piric 5,and ay 
hine hand upon him 7 ; 
t ” —_ ſpirit - government, of wiſdom, and of the fear of the 
Lord, &c. t By waich ceremony Moſes did both deſign the pe:ſon 
and confer the power,and by his prayers, which accompanied that 
rite, obtain from God all the ſpiritual gifts and graces neceſſary 
for his future employment, as appears from Dewr. 34: 9. See of 

this cuſtom Gen: 48: 14. Levit: 1: 4: Numb; 8: 10.1 Tim: 4: 14. 
:9 Andiec him before Eleazar the prielt, & before all 


« That they may be witneſſes of the whole action, and may __ 
knowledge him for their ſupream ruler. Thou ſhalt ira 
him in my name to undertake the government of my people, 
which otherwiſe he will be afraid and unwilling to do, and thou 
ſhalr give kim counſels and inſtructions for the right management 


of that great truſt. ; 
20 Sd chou ſhalt pat ſome of thine | honour upon 


him y.that all the congregation of the children of Iſrael 


may be obedient. ; 
Thou {halt not now uſe him as a ſervant, as thou haſt done” 


bit as a brother and thy partner in the government, ſhewing re- 
ſpeC& ro him, and cauſing others to do ſo, and thou ſhalt impart 
to him the enſigns and evidences of thy own authority,whatſoever 
they be. Some underſtand this honour of thoſe ſpiritual endow- 
ments which did adorn Moſes, which Moſes was now to confer upon 

him. Bur this 7Joſbua had before, for in him was the Joirit, wer: 18: 

and he received a further meaſure of the ſpirit by Moſes his laying 

on of hands, from both which ti11s honour 1S diſtinguiſhed, and had 
he mcanr this,he would not ave expreſled 1t 1n ſo dark and doubt- 
ful a phraſe, but have called it a purting not of honour, but of the 
ſoirit, uponrhim, as it is called, Numb; 11: 17. And ſeing the word 
honow heremay very well be properly underſtood, why ſhould we 
run to figurative ſignifications ? 


21 And he ihall ſtand before Eleazar the prieſt, who 
ſhall ask counſel for him z, *after the judgment || of Urim 
+ before the LORD *: at his word || ſhall they go out, 
and at his word they ſhall come in, 6:5 he and all the 


children of Iſrael with him, even all the congregation. 

z When he requires him to do ſo, and in important and difh- 
cult matters. See Jof. 9g: 14. Judg: 1: 1- and 20. 48. 1 Sam: 23. 
9. || Or, by or from the judgment, i. e. by ſceking and receiving 
ind communicating to him the judgment or ſentence thereby given : 
or, by the judgment 1s here put defeQtively for, by the breaſt plate of 
Judgment, as 1t 1S called, Exod: 28: 3o. as the teſtimony is off pur for, 
Ps ark of the teftimony. Or, concernng the judgement, or ſentence, 
7 e. what the mind and will of God is in the matter. Or, after 
the manner or rite, for ſo the Hebrew word miſhpat here uſed off ſig- 
nifies. + Underſtand, and of Thummim, for rheſe two generally go 
together, only here, as alſo r Sam: 28; 6. Urim is ſynecdochically 
put for both Urim and Thummim, For the manner of this enquiry 
and anſwer ſee on Exod: 28: 3o. * Ordinarily in the Tabernacle 
near the ſecond vail ſetting his face ro the Ark, or otherwiſe pre- 
ſcnting himſelf as in Gods preſence, as Abiathar did by David; dis | 
re&tion, 1 $4m: 23:9. when they were both baniſhed from the Ark. 
| (7. e.) The word of the Lord, laſt mentioned, delivered to him 
by the High-prieſt. : 

22 And Moſes did as the LORD commanded him : 
and he took Joſhua, and ſer him before Eleazar the 
prieſt, and before all the congregation. : 

23 And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a 


—_— as the LOR D cemmanded by the hand of 


Moſes. | 

| C H A P. XXVIIL 

Ofer:ngs to be obſerved at ſet times: the daily burnt-0ffering in the morn= 
ing : together with its meat and drink-offering : and at evening, I===<8, 
The ſabbath-offering, 9, 10. The burnt-offering of the new-moons, with | 
its meat, drink, and ſin-offering, I l===-= 15. The Paſſwer's, 16, 18. 
Sacrifices : their continuance, 19---=25. The Pentecoſt and the ſacrifices | 
thereof, 26--===3 1. 
A N ÞD the L OR D ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

2 Command the children of Iſrael a, and ſay 


Q 


N DU M B 


; ings. Or thus, My offering, to wit, my bread, (i. e.) my meat-of- 


| portion Jay in the other ſacrifices only, or 2. ſpecially and properly 


| mingled with oyl,for one bullock; and two tenth deals of LE 


unto them, My offering and* my bread tor my ſacrifices : 


obſerve to offer unto me in their due ſeaſon. 

a God here repeats ſome of the former laws about ſacrifices, ! 
nor without great reaſon, partly becauſe they had heen general:'y : 
diſcontinued for 38 years together ; partly becauſe the generation ' 
to which the former laws had been given about theſe things was 
wholly dead,and it was fit the new generations ſhould be inftruted 
about them, as their parents were ; partly to renew the teſtimonics 
of God: grace and mercy, notwithſtanding their frequent forfei- 
tures thereof by tncir horrid Apoftacies and Rebellions : and prin- 
cipally becauſe they were now ready to enter into that land, in 
which they were obliged to pur theſe things iu praftice, Deut: 12. 
8: &c. 6 According to thus tranſlation the ſenſe is, My offering, 


{ wine unto a bullock,and the third par of an hin unto a 


Which the Gentiles offered it. 


E R $8. Chap. XXVIII. | 


bre:d, or rather my meat-offering made of bread or meal, for my 
ſacrifice made by fre, i. e. which is to accompany my burnt-offer-" 


j 


fering,which was made of bread or meal, which is oft expreſſed by 
this very name of horban or offering, as Levit: 22 1: and 6: 20. but be- 
cauſe korvan ſignifies not only a meat-offering but other offerings 
alio, as Levit. 7.37, 38. thereforc he limits that general word by 
adding, my bread ) with ( ſothe Hebrew Lamed is oft uſed, as Cen: 46. 
26. Ezra1. 5. and 2. 63. ©c.) my ſacrifices made by fre, which may be 
underſtood either +. generally for all the ſacrifices, as that phraſe 
1s ſometimes taken, as 1 Sam. 2; 28. where it muſt needs be fo 
meant, becauſe rhe burnt-ofterings properly ſo called were not 
gi-en to t::e prieſt, but reſerved to God himſelf, and the Prieſts 


for burnr-offerings ; and ſo under them, as the moſt eminent kind, 
are contained all other ſacrifices ; as under the meat-offering here 
15 contained the drink-offering. And according to this tranſlation 
and explic:tion theſe words contain a full and general rule, com- 
prehending all the particulars following in this chapter, as in 
reaſon they ought to do, and which otherwite they do not. 


* Exod: 
3 And thou ſhalt fay unto them, * This is the offer- War 


ing made by fire, which ye ſhal} offer unto the LORD : f Heb. aj 
ewo lambs of the firſt year without ſpot, + day by day, * %» | 
for a continual burnt-offering. 

4 The one lamb (bale thou offer in the morning, and + Heb. þ 1 
the ocher lamb ſhalt thou offer at even. —_— 

5 Anda tenth part of an ephah of flour for a * meat- wo evens | 
oftering c, mingled with the fourth part of an * hin of *, |} 
beaten oyl. "Levz, 

c Which was an appendix or acceſlory to the principal ſacrifice. *Fxod 
See on Lev. 2. I. and Numb. 15. 4. _* ho. 


6 It is Aa continual burnt-offering, which was or- 
dained din mount-Sinai for a ſweet favour, a ſacrifice 
made by fire unto the LORD. 


4 Or, pre(cribed, inſtituted by God. Or, made, z. e. offered at that 
Place ; though ſince omitted for 38 years. 


7 And the drink-oftering thereof ſhall be the fourth 
part ofan hin for the one lamb : in the holy place e ſhalt 


j 
'I 
j 


thou cauſe the 7 ſtrong wine f to be poured unto ti.e Bars; þ 
LORD for a drink-offering. * Ge. Smil 


e (7. 2.) Upon the altar of burnt-offerings which was in the court See Luke | 
of the Prieſts nigh to the entrance into the SanQtuary. See Exod: 1 _ 15. ' 
29. 42. 2 Chron: 29: 7. f Heb. Shecar, which though it fignifie in 4 
the general all kinds of ſtrong drink, yet is here pur for the mot 
famous of thar kind, to wit, for wine, which alone was uſed in 
offerings, as appears below, wer: 18. Exod. 29: 40. 


8 And the other lamb ſhalt chou offer at even : as the 
meat-offering of the morning,and as the drink-offering 
thereof,chou ſhalr offer ir g, a ſacrifice made by fire, of 
a ſweet favour unto the LORD. 

g Or, thou ſhalt offer with it. Or, with the meat-effering of the mor. 
ning, and with the drink-offering thereof, thou ſbalt offer it ; the letter 
caph being put for beth, which are alike in Hebrew, and the words 
are ſaid to be read with beth in ſome copies. 


9 And onthe ſabbarh day two lambs 5 of the firſt year 
without ſpet, and two tenth-deals of flour for a meat-of- 
fering, mingled with ovi,and the drink-offering thereof, 

þ Beſides that for the daily ſacrifice, wer. 10. 

ro This is the burnr-offering of every ſabbath, beſide 
the continual burnt-oftering, and his drink-offtering. + ep,q 

pry BE Dy P- 

Ir And * in the beginnings of your months z ye ſhall 0. 10. 
offer a burnt-offering unto the LORD : two young bul- « Sam: 
locks,&one ram,feven lambs ofthe firft year without ſpor, 3?: 5- 

z; Which, though not reckoned among the ſolemn feaſts, Lev: 23. 
yet were celebrated as ſuch, by the ſound of trampets, Numb: 16, 
10. by extraordinary ſacrifices, by abſtinence from ſervile works, 
Amos 8, 5. and by attendance upon the miniſtry of Gods word, 
2 Kings 4: 23. And God ordained it thus, Partly that by giving 
God the firſt fruits of every month, they ſhould acknowledge him 
as the Lord of all their time, and own his providence by which all 
times and ſeaſons and all the fruits and bleſſings of them,and a&tions 
done in them are ordered, and partly that it might be a type of 
the future renovation of the world by Chriſt. | 


12 And chree tenth deals of flour for a meat-offering, 


flour for a meat-offering mingled with oyl, for one ram. | 
13 And a ſeveral tenth deal of flour mingled with '1 
oyl, for a meat-offering unto one lamb, for a burnt-_ '1 
offering of a ſweet favour, a ſacrifice made by fire unto 
the LORD. B6. 

14 And their drink-offerings ſhall be half an hin of 


ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb : this is 


k (7. e:) To be offered in the beginning of every month. 
I5 And one kid of the goats / for a ſin-oferinp unto 
che LORD mw ſhall be offered, belides the continual 
burnt-offering, and his drink- offering. | 
/ An he-goat. Sec Numb; 15; 24, #2 Not unto the moon, to # Tok 


1s * And in the fourteenth day of the ficſt month Lev.23.8- | 

zs the paſlover of the LORD s. Chap.9.3- | 

» Inſticuted by him and to his honour and ſervice. See on Lev: Deur.16. | 

$3.4: | Ries q 
2 D3 17 And 


{ 
| 
L100 
KJExod: 
Þ: 16. 
12337. 


Heb:the 


2. I1,1G, 


Exod: 
23: 16. 
and 34. 
22. 
Deut: 16. 
qz0. 


* Ley: 
23: 24» 


* Chap. 
28; 11+ 

4 Chap: * 
BG. 3. 


| Chap. XXIX. 


17 And in the fifceenth day of this moneth zs thefeaft o, 
ſeven days ſhal unleavened bread be eaten. 

o To wit, of unleavened bread ; of which ſee on Lev. 23. 6. 

18 In the * firſt day ſhall be an holy convocation : ye 
ſhal do no manner of ſervile work therein. 

19 Bur ye hal offer a ſacrifice made by fire for a 
burnt-offering unto the LORD,two young bullocks,and 
one ram, and ſeven lambs of the firſt year : they hal 
be unto you without blemitlh, 

20 And their mcar-oftering ſhall be of flour mingled 
with oyl: three tenth deals ſhal ye offer for a bullock, 
and two tenth deals for a ram. 

21 A ſeveral tenth deal shale thou offer for every lamb 
throughout the ſeven lambs. | 

22 And one goat for a ſin-offering, to make an atone- 
ment for you. HE 

23 Ye shal offer theſe beſide the burnt-offering in the 
morning p, which is for a continual burnt-offering. 

> And that in the evening too, as is evident from the nature of 
the thing, and from other ſcriptures, but the morning-ſacrifice 
alone is mentioned, partly becauſe the celebration of the feaſt 
began with it, and principally becauſe this alone was doubtful, 
whether this might nor be omitted when ſo many other ſacrifices 
were offered in that morning, whereas there was no queſtion but 
the evening ſacrifice ſhould be offered, when there were none other 
beſides it to be offered. | 

24 Aﬀeer this manner ye $hal offer daily chroughout 


the {even days7 the meat of the ſacrifice made by hire q, 


beſide the continual burnt-offering,& his drink-offering. 
g (72 e.) The ſacrifice made by fire, which is as it were my meat 


or food ; for as God is ſaid to ſmell the ſacrifices, to wir, meta- | 


phorically, 7. e. to accept of them, ſo is he {aid to eat them, 2. c. 
to devour or conſume them, and to be ſatisfied with them ; ſuch 
things ſpoken of God after the manner of men are to be underſtood 
ſo as to aggree with the majeſty of God. | 
23 And on the ſeventh day ye shal have an holy 


convocation : ye shal do no ſervile work. 


- 26 Alſo * in the day of the firſt-fruits 7,when ye bring | 
a new meat-offering unto the LORD ,after your weeks | 


be out t, ye shal have an holy convocation ; ye shal do 


no ſervile work. | 
# In the feaſt of Pentecoſt, 48. 2. 1. 5s New fruits, two loaves 

made of your new corn, Levit 23. 16. #(7.e. ) The ſeven weeks 

which you are to number from the Paſſover, Lev. 23. 15. Heb. i 

the weeks,in being put for after,as it is Js. 20. 1. Lukeg. 36.and 11.37. 
27 But ye shal offer the burnt- offering # for a ſweet 

favour unto the LORD, two young bullocks, one ram, 

ſeven lambs of the firſt year. 

« For the celebration of the feaſt over and beſides thar other of- 
fering which was joyned with the firſt-fruits,Lev.23.18. ſo here 1s a 
new additional facrifice preſcribed, which doth not deſtroy the 
former. ; 

28 And their meat-offering of flour mingled with 
oyl,three tenth deals unto one bullock, two tenth deals 
unto One ram. 

29 A ſeveral tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout 
the ſeven lambs. 

30 4nd one kid of the goats to make an atonement 
for you. | 

21 Ye hall offer them beſides the continual burnt- 
offering, and his meat-offering, ( they shal be unto you 
without blemish ) and their drink-offterings, 

CH A P. XXIX. 

The Sacrifice at the Feaſt of the trumpets : it's Burnt-offering : and. Sin- 
offering, 1=--—-4" Of the Feaſt of Attonement : it's Offerings, 5--—-11. 
Of the Feaſt of Tabernacles : during 7 days : their Offerings : the 8th 
day a great Holiday, 12====36. 

N D in the ſeventh month «, on the firſt day of 
the month, ye shal have an holy convocation, Ye 

Shal do no ſervile work : * it is a day of blowing the 

crumpets b unto you. 

' @ So it was in their Eccleſiaſtical account, in which the month 

Abib was the firſt : bur as to civil matters this was the firſt month: 

þ Whereby the people were admoniſhed ſolemnly to prepare them- 


ſelves for the feaſts, which were as many in this month, as in all 
the year beſide. 


2 And ye hat offer a burnt-offering c for a ſweet ſa- 
vour unto the LORD, one young bullock, one ram,end 
ſeven lambs of the firſt year without blemish« 

cBeſides the offerings of every month and day,as is expreſſed,v.6. 

3 And their meat-offerings ſhall be of flour mingled 
with oy], three tenth deals for a bullock,evd two tenth 
deals for a ram : 

4 And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the 
ſeven lambs : | 

5 And one kid of the goats for a ſin-effering,to make 
an atonement for you. 

6 Beſide * the burnt-offering of the month 4d, and his 
meat-offering, and * the daily burnt-offering, and his 


meat-offering, and their drink-offerings according to 


their manner e for a ſweet favour, a ſacrifice made by 
fire unto the LORD, | | 
d Belonging to eyery new moon, of which ſee Numb: 28; 11, 12, 


NUMBE RS. 


| 


; 


ead.Lev. of a ſweet {favour unto the LORD : it shal be offered ; 


; 
j 


2 Chron. 2« 4. e According to the order, rites and ceremonies 
appointed by God. 


7 And * ye ſhal have on the tenth day of this ſeventh +. . 


month an holy convocation ; and ye ſhal ati your 
ſouls f': ye ſhal not do any work therein. 


Chap. XXIX. 


29. and 


23: 27. 


# (4. e. ) Your ſelves, by faſting and abſtinence from all delight- | 


ful things.and by compunQtion and bitter ſorrow for your fins and 
the judgments of God either deſerved by you or inflifted upon 
you for your ſins. See Levi. 16. 29, 30. and 23. 27. : 

$ But ye ſhal offer a burnt- oftering unto the LORD, 
for a ſweet ſavour, one young bullock, one ram, and 
ſeven lambs of the firſt year ; they ſhall be unto you with- 
out blemiſh. 

9 And their meat-offering ſhall be of four mingled 
with oyl, three tenth deals to a bullock, and ewo tenth 
deals to one ram :; 


ro A ſeveral tenth deal for one lamb,throughout the 


ſeven lambs. 
1x One kid of the goats for a ſin-effering, beſides the 
* ſin-ofering of atonement g, and the continual burnt- 


; offering, and the meat-offering of it, and their drink- 


offerings. 
g By which the High-prieſt made atonement ; of which ſee Lev. 
16.9. 29. 30. 
12And*on the fifteenth day of the ſeventh. moneth,ye 


| ſhal have an holy cenvocation, yeſhal dono ſervile work, 
and yc ſhal keep a feait h unto the LORD ſeven days z. 


h The feaſt of booths ; of which ſee Lev. 23. 34, 35. Deut. 16.13. 
z Not by abſtaining ſo long from all ſervile works, but by offering 
extraordinary ſacrifices each day. 

13 And ye * ſhall offer a burnt-effering, a ſacrifice 
made by fire, of a ſweet ſavour unto the LORD, thir- 


teen young bullocks k,twe rams and fourteen lambs & of ? 


the firſt year : they ſhall be without blemish. 

k More lacrifices than at any other feaſt, partly becauſe this feaſt 
was.1n the cloſe of the year, when it was meet to ſupply the defets 
of tie year paſt, and when they had gathered in all their fruits, 
Deut. 16. 13, 15. and therefore ought to make the larger returns and 
ackaowledgment to God: partly becauſe it was Gods pleaſure ſo to 
order it, for reaſons known to himſelf, in whoſe will we ought to 
acquieſce. And the fame reaſon holds why theſe ſacrifices grew 


fewer and fewer every day. 

14 And their mead-offering ſhall be of flour mingled 
with oyl, three tenth deals unto every bullock of the 
thirtcen bullocks, two tenth=-deals to cach ram of the 
two rams 3; 


is Anda ſeveral tenth deal to each lamb of the four- 
teen lambs : | 

16 And one kid of the goats for a fin-offering beſide 
the continual burnt-offering, his meat-offering, and his 
drink-offering. 

17 And on the ſecond day ye ſhall offer twelve young 
bullocks,two rams,fourteen lambs of the firſt year with- 
out ſpot. 

18 And their meat-offering, and their drink-offerings 
for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs.ſha/l be 
according to their number, after the manner 1. 

which ſee for - 1 a © ' drink 
offerings, Numb. 2 he” EIT 0-0 wk for dent: 

19 And one kid of the goats for a ſin-offering, beſide 
the continual burnt-offering, and the meat-offering 
thereof, and their drink.offerings. 

20 And on the third day,eleven bullocks, two rams 
fourteen lambs of the firſt year without blemish. 4 

21 And their meat-offering, and their drink.offerings 
for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, ſhall be 
according to their number, after the manner : 

22 And one goat for a ſin-effering, beſide the continual 
burnt-offering, and his meat-offering, and his drink-of- 
fering. 

23 And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams 
and fourteen lambs of the firſt year without blemich. * 

24 Their meat-offering,and their drink-offerings, for 
the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, ſhall be 
according to their number, after the manner : 

25 And one kid of the goats for a ſin- offering, beſide 
the continual burnteoffering, his meat-effering, and his 
drink-offering. 

26 And on the fifth day nine bullocks,two rams,and 
fourteen lambs of the firft year withour ſpot : 

27 And their meat-offering,and their drink-offerings 
for the bullocks, fort the rams,and for the lambs, ſball be 
according to their number, after the manner: 

28 And one goat for a ſin-offering,belide the continual 
burnt-offering, and his meat-oftering.and his drink- 
offering. 

29 And on the ſixth day eight bullocks, two rams 
and fourteen lambs of the firſt year without blemish : © 
 3o And their meat-offering, and their drink-offer- 
ings, for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, 


ſha F4 


* Lev. 


£aA and A ac colds. <<. _ ac oy Fo mo ai A. Py _ 4 es. 


— TY pans 4 


* Lev. 23- 


® Chap. XXX. 


ſhall be according to their number, after the manner : 
31 And one goat fora ſin-offering, beſide the continual 

burnr-offering, his meat-offering, and his drink-offering. 
22 And on the ſeventh day fevenbullocks, eworams, 

and fourteen lambs of the firſt year without blemiſh : 

And their meat-offering,and their drink- offerings, 
for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, (ball be 
according to their number, after the manner : * | 

34 And one goat fora ſin-effering, beſide the continual 
burnt-offering, his meat-offering, and his drink-oftering. 

25 On the eighth day ye ſhall have a * ſolemn aflem- 
bly : ye ſhall do no ſervile work 7herein. : 

- 36 But ye ſhall offer a burnt-offering, a ſacrifice made 
by fire of a ſweet favour unto the LORD, one bullock, 
one ram, ſeven lambs #2 of the firſt year without blemiſh : 

m Thig was the laſt and great day of the Feaſt, as it is called, 
John 7. 37. and yet the ſacrifices were fewer than any other day, to 
teach them not to rruſt to the multirude of their ſacrifices, nor to 
exp:& remiſſion of ſins from them, but from the one and only 
ſacrifice of Chriſt. 

Their meat-offering, and their drink-offerings for 
the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, ſa/l be 
according to their number, after the manner z _ 

38 Andone goat for a ſin-offering, beſide the continual 


' burnt-offering, and his meat-offzring, and his drink- 


| offer. 
"Lev. 7. 
11, 16. 


offering. ; 
29 Theſe things ye ſhall || do unto the LORD, in 
our ſet feaſts, beſides your * vows, and your free-wi'l- 
offerings », for your burnt offerings, and for your meat- 
offerings, and for your drink-offerings, and for your 
peace-offerings. 
» Your ordinary ſacrifices ſhall not bz emitted becauſe of the 
extraordinary, which ye offer on ſpecial occaſions. : 
40 And Moſes toid the children of Iſrael according 
to all that the LORD commanded Moles. 
CHAP.XXxX 


Fows not to be broke : If a man wow, he muſt perform, 1, 2. If a daughter 
living with ag? pr vows, and he dil[approves thereof, jhe 1s free, 


0” ſhe us free, 6==8, Awidow or divorced woman's vow binding, 9. 
but not thoſe of a married woman, unleſs her husband conſent or be ſilent, 


—15. 

A N D Moſes ſpake unto the heads of the tribes s, 
concerniag the children of Iſrael, ſaying, This zs 

the thing which che LORD hath commanded. 


a The chiefRulers of each Tribe, who were to cummunicate 
it to the reſt, 
2 If a man b vowavowc unto the LORD 4, or 


ſwear an oath e to bind his Soul with a bond f, he ſhall 


[not | break his word g : he ſhall do according to all that 


proceedeth out of his own mouth 6. 

b Which notes both the Sex, as appears by ver. 3. and the Age, 
that he be grown up, for none can be ſo weak as to think the vow 
of a youny Child wou'd bind it. «c 7.e. A ſimple vow to do ſome- 
thing tble and lawfui. 4d To the Honour and Service of God. 
e Confirm his Vow by an Oath. f To reſtrain himſelf from ſome- 
thing otherwiſe lawful, as ſuppoſe from ſuch a ſort of Meat or 
Drink ; or to oblige himſelf to the performance of ſomething other- 
wiſe not neceſſary, as to obſerve a private day of faſting. g Heb. no: 
pollute, or prophane his word, as the ſame phraſe 15s uſed, Pſal. 55. 20. 
and 89. 34+ 7z.e. not render his word, and conſequently himſelf 
prophane, or vile and contemptible in the eyes of others. hþ And 
that withoat delay, Devr. 23.21. Eccleſ. 5. 4. provided the thing be 
not unlawful and forbidden by. God, A#s. 23. 14. for it is an idle 
conceit that a man can give away Gods Right, or that he can make 
void Gods Commands by his own vows, which was the dotage of 
the Phariſees, Mark 6. 23, 26 

If a woman # alſo vow a vow unto the LORD, and 
bind her ſelf by a bond, being in her fathers houſe &, in 
her youth / : 

i; Or a man in the ſame circumſtances, a ſon or a ſervant, as 
plainly appears from hence, becauſe the reaſon of this Law is perfe- 
Qly theſame in both Sexes, which is, that ſuch perſons have given 
away what was not their own, but anothers, even their ſuperiours 
righc, which is againſt the Rule and Law of Natural Reaton, and 
againſt the Word ef God, which binds all perſons ro give to every 
one their due. He inſtanceth only in the Woman, becauſe that Sex 
IS both by Creation and Sin put into a ſtate of ſubjeQionr, but under 
the chief and moſt unqueſtionable kind all other SubjeQs in like 
circumſtances are comprehended, as is very uſual. k(7z.e.) Under 
his Care, Power, and Government which ſhe is, whilſt ſhe conrinues 
in her Fathers Houſe, being a Virgin, as appears by the oppoſition 
of a married Woman, v. 6.and of a Widew, and Divorced Woman, 
V. 9. and by this Phraſe of being in her Fathers Houſs, for when ſhe 
marries, ſhe is removed into her Husbands Houſe, Ruth 1,9. Or, 
being 7n, or of her Fathers Family, the word Hſe being commonly 
uſed for Family, for when ſhe marries. ſhe is tranſlated and removed 
into another Family. /When not only her Sex, but her Age diten- 

ables her for vowing ; and this clauſe is added not by way of reſtri- 
Qion, as.if Virgins 1n their riper years were freed from their Parents 
juriſdi&ion, and at their own diſpoſal, ( which undoubtedly they 
are not -) but by way of addition, or amplification, q. 4. eſpecially 
{ which particle is here to be underſtood, ſuch def-&s of particles 
being frequent in the Hebrew Tongue ) im her Youth, which is 
commonly reckoned about her Twelfth or Thirt:ench year. 

4 And her father » hear her vow, and her bond, 
wherewith ſhe hath bound her ſoul, and her father ſhall 
hold his peace at her » : then all her vows ſhall ſtand, 


and every bond, wherewith ſhe hath bound her ſoul, 
ſhall Rand « ; 


NUMBE R Ss. 


| 


—_— 


5. If a married woman voweth, and her husband diſapproves . 


Chap. 


» Under which Title ſeem-to be comprehended, as in other places 
of Scripture, Maſters, Magiſtrates, and all other ſuperiours, in 
ſuch caſes wherein their right is given away by the inferior's vow ; 
as for-inſtance, when a Servant yows ta goa long journey for his 
Friend, and his Maſter will not permit him to do ſe ; but not in 
other cafes; as ifa Servant vows to do ſomething for another in that 
time which his Maſter alloweth to his own uſe and diſpoſal, in this 
caſe his vow binds him, but not in the former. » His ſilence being an 
interpretative conſent, and much more if he declares his approbation 
of it. 0 7. e. Beeſtabliſhed, or confirmed, or be in force. 

5 But if her facher diſallow her in the day that h 
heareth p; not any of her vows, or ofher bonds, where- 
with ſhe hath bound her ſoul, ſhall ſtand : and the LORD 
ſhall forgive her q, becauſe her father diſallowed her. 

? 7. e. Speedily, or without delay, allowing cnly neceſſary and 
convenient time for deliberation. And it 1s hereby intimared, that 
the day or time he had for difallowing her vow,was not to be reckoned 
from her vowing, but from his hearing, or knowledge of her vow. 
q Or will forgive either her raſhneſs of making ſuch vows, or rather 
her not performing of it. But this is to be underſtood only of iuch 
vows which could not be performed withour invading the Fathers, 
or Superiours right ; for if one ſhould vow to forbear ſuch, or ſuch 
a fin, and all unneceflary oecaſions or means leading ro it, and. to 
perform ſuch, or ſuch duties, when he had opportunity, no Father 
nor Superiour can diſcharge him from ſuch vows. 


6 And- if ſhe had at all an husband » when + ſhe 
vowed s, or uttered ought out of her lips :, wherewith 
ſhe bound her ſoul ; is 

r To whoſe Will and Authority ſhe was thereby made ſubje&. 
5 To wit, when ſhe was in her Fathers houſe, as is evident by com 


paring v. 10. and this clauſe ſeems to be added by way of exception 
to that which was ſaid, wv. 3, 


her Fathers houſe, yet if ſhe were married, her Husband only, and 
not her Father, could difoblige her from her vow, 7 Either 1. By 
way of vow, and fo thisclauſe explains and determines the former, 
7.e.1f ſhe expreſs her vow in words.Or 2.By way of Oith,concerning 
which this ſame phraſe is uſed Lev. 5. 4. and ſo this clauſe is diftin& 
from the former, which the disjunQtive particle, or, implies, 

7 And her husband heard zr, and held his peace at 
her in theday that he heard zt: then her vows ſhall ftandg 
and her bonds, wherewich ſhe bound her ſoul, ſhall ſtand. 

8 But if her husband diſallow her, on the day that 
he heard zr, then he ſhall make her vow which ſhe vow- 
ed, and that which the uttered with her lips, wherewith 
ſhe bound her ſoul, of none effet, andthe LORD ſhall 
forgive her. 

9 But every vow of a widow, and of her that is di- 
vorced «, wherewith they have bound their ſouls, ſhal 
ſtand againſt her. 

z Though ſhe be in her Fathers houſe, whether ſuch perſons oft 
returned : which limitation may be gathered both from the OpPo= 
ſitionof her being in her Husbands houſe, Verſe 10. and from hence, 
that this was the only doubtfal caſe, for if fuch a perſon was not in 
her Father's houſe, ſhe was unqueſtionably bound by it, but being 
now freed from her Husband, and returned to her Father, ir wag 
doubtful whether ſhe was notreturned to the ſame ſtate of ſubje&ion 
in which ſhe was before, and conſequently unable to make or 
perform 2 vow without her Fathers conſent, as ſhe was before, which 
1s here denied. 

io And if ſhe vowed in her husbands houſe x, or 
bound her foul by a boxd with an oath; 

x 7, e, If ſhe that now is a Widaw, or Divorced, made that vow 
whileſt her Husband lived with her ; as ſuppoſe ſhe then vowed, that 
if ſhe was a Widow ſhe would give ſuch a proportion of her eſtats 
to pious or charitable Uſes, of which vow ſhe might repent when ſhe 
came to be a Widow, and might believe or pretend ſhe was free 
from ir, becauſe that vow was made in her Husbands life time, 
which is here granted, in caſe her Husband then diſallowed ir, bur 
denied, in caſe by ſilence, or otherwiſe he conſented to it. And thus 
this Law 1s ſufficiently diſtinguiſhed from that above, v.6, 7,8. 

11 And her husband heard zr, andheld his peace at her, 
and diſallowed her not: then all her vows ſhall ſtand,ard 
every bond, wherewith ſhe bound her ſoul, ſhall ſtand. 

12 Burt ifher husband hath uttterly made them yoid on 
the day he heard them, then whatſoever proceeded out of 
her lips, concerning her vows, or concerning the bond 
of her ſoul, ſhall not ſtand, her husband hath made them 
void, and the LORD fhall forgive her. 

13 Every vow, and every binding oath to afflit the 
ſoul y, her husband may eftabliſhit, or her husband may 
make ir void. 

3 2, e, Her ſelf by faſting, which oft goes under that name, as 
Lev. 16. 29, 31. and 23, 27,32. 1/4. 58. 5. by watching, or the like. 
And theſe words are added not for limitation, for it is manifeſt fronx 
v. 5. 8, 10, 12. tharthe power of Parents and Husbands was more 
general and large, but for amplification, to ſhew that the Husband 
had this power nor only in thoſe yows which concerned himſelf for 
his eſtate, bur aiſo in rhoſe which might ſeem only to concera hee 
own Perſon, or Bedy. And the reaſon hereof is, becauſe rhe 
Wives perſon or body being the Husbands right, ſhe might not da 
any thing to the injury of her body without his conſent. 


14 But if herhusband altogether hold his peace at her, 
from day to day, then he eſtabliſherh all her vows, or all 
her bonds which are upon her : he confirmeth them, 
— he held his peace ather, in the day that he heard 
them. | 

15 Butif he ſhall any ways make them void after that 
he hath heard thems z, then he ſhall bear her Iniquity F. 

z And approved them by his ſilence from day to day, ifnow aftes 
.that time fſpent, hs ſhall upon further thoughts diſlike and hinder 
2D; it, 


XXX. | | 


7 Heb. 
Her vows 
were vp 


4 to ſignifie, that though ſhe were in 


| | 5, which he onght hot to do. + Her non-perſormance of her vow 


ſhall be imputed to him, not to her. - 
16 Thefe are the ſtatutes which the LORD command- 


ed Moſes,hetween aman and his wife.between the father 
& his daughter;being yet in her youth in herfathers houſe. 
Sn. CHAP: KAXL 
God commands Moſes, before he die, to avenge Ilrael of the Midianites, 1, 2. 
he” chooſes 12000 men ;_ and: Phinehas : The Kings of Midian and Balaam 
ſlain, 3 6. Their Women and Cattel taken : and Cities burnt : 
they bring the. ſpoil to Moſes and Eleazar, 1-12. Moſes is wroth with 
the Officers for ſaving the Women alive : commands them to kill every 
Male-child and Woman that had known man. : the reſt ſaved alive: and to 
purifierhemſthues and the captives, 13—24. ALaw for dividing the 
Booty : executed; and the ſum of the Booty, 2 5==40. The Tribute-offering 
of the Lord given te the Prieſts. and Levites, 41 ———47. The 
Captains make an Offering to the Lord : which is laid up inthe Tabernacle 
for a' Memorial, 48 54. ; 
A N. D- the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 
2: * Avenge thechildren of Iſrael of the Midianites : 


a afterwards ſhalt thon *be gathered unto thy people. 
« For their malicious deſigns and praQtices againſt rel, both by 
hiring Balazm to curſe them, and by ſending their Womea to in- 
ſnare them. | The Moabites alſo were guilty, but God out of his 
ow good pleaſure, and in kindneſs to Lot, was pleaſed to ſpare them, 
.the rather, becauſe the meaſure of their Iniquity was mot yet full. 
3 And Moſes ſpake unto the people,ſaying, Arm ſome 
of your ſelves unto the war, and let them go againft the 
Midianites, and avenge the LORD b of Midian. 


b For the affront and injury which they offered to God, partly by 


their own Idolatry and lewdnefs, and partly by ſeducing Gods people- 


into R-bellion againſt him. Gods great care was to avenge the 1jrae- 
lites, v. x. and Moſes his chief deſire was to avenge God rather than 
himfelfor the people. Withal he doth hereby infinuate, that God 
and' his people have the ſamecauſe, the ſame Friends and Enemies. 

4 + Of every tribe a thouſand, threughout all the 


| _ f tribes of Krael, ſhall ye ſend to the war. 
| thouſand of 


5 So there were delivered out of the thouſands of 
Ifract, a thouſand of every tribe c, twelve thouſand 


armed for war. 

\c To prevent Emulationsor Diviſions. 4 God wbuld ſend no more, 
though it is apparent that the Midianites were numerous and ſtrong, 
becauſe he would try and exerciſetheirtruſt in him, and becauſe he 
would hereby give them an ecaraeſt of their Canaanitiſh Conqueſts. 

6 And Moſes ſent them to the war,athouſand of every 
tribe; them and Phinehas e the ſon of Eleazar the Prieſt 
cothe war, with the holy inſtruments f, and the trumpets 


to blow g in his hand. 
© Who fed the charge not of the Army, as General, ( an Office 
never committed to any Prieſt in all the Old Teſtament ) but of 
rhe Holy: Inſtruments, &c: as is here exprefled, and was alſo ſent to 
encourage, and quicken, and confirm them in their good enterprize. 
It is not here mentioned who was the general, whether Joſua, as ſome 
think, becauſe he is not named amongtit thoſe who went out to meet 
the returning hoſt, though that might be for other reaſons, or ſome 
other Prince, nor is it worth while to determine. f Either r the Ark, 
withithe things belonging to it, which before the building of the 
Temple, they did ſometimes carry into the War for the encourage- 
ment of their Army. See Num.14.44. Joſ.6.9. r Sam.4.4. and 14. 18. 
But why then js it thus 4mbiguouſly expreſſed, ſeing in aJl the 
other places it is called by its proper Name ? Noris the Ark ever ſo 
called in Scripture. Or 2. The Trumpets, as it herefollows, the 
words being thus to be Read, the holy Inſtruments, that u, the Trumpexs : 
for and is ofc times put exegetically for that is, or to wit, as Gen:13.15. 
1 Chron. 21. 12, compared with 2 Sam. 24. 13. Zech. 1. 4. & 9.9; Oc. 
Or rather 3. The Holy Breaſt-plate, wherein was the Urim and 
Thummim, whieb was eaſily carried, and uſed, and very uſeful in 
War upon many emergent occaſions. See 1 Sam. 23.9. and 3o.- 7. 
£ Which were to be uſed in War as well as in the ſervice of the 
Tabernacle. See Numb. 10. g. 2 Chron, 13+ 12. 
7 Andthey warredagainſt the Midianites, as the Lord 
commanded Moſes, and they flew * all the males 6. 
" bþ Namely all whom they took in that war ; Or, all who lived 
in thoſe parts, forit is probable ( and was then very uſual) (ome 
colonies of them were ſent forth to remoter places, which therefore 
had no hand either in their former ſin, or in this preſent ruine, of 
whom we read afcer this, Juag. 6. And herein they did according to 
Gods own order concerning ſuch people, Dene. 20. 13. only their 
fault was, that they did not conſider the ſpecial reaſon and great 
obligation which they had to invelve the Women in the deſtruction, 
for which reaſon Moſes blames them afterward, v. 15. 16. 
8 And they ſlew the kings of Midian z, belides the reſt 
of them thatwere ſlain ; namely, * Evi, and Rekem, and 
Zur k, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian : Balaam 


alſo ] the fon of Beor, they flew with the ſword. 

5 Called Dukes or Princes of Sihon, Jof. 13. 21. becauſe they were 
ſubje&rto him while he lived, but upen his death they reſumed their 
Kingly power. k The Father of Cozbi, Num. 25.15. 10bj. He was 
gone and returned to his own place, Num: 24:25: which was Aram 
or Meſopotamia, Num: 23:7. Anſw. Either he did go thitherward, but 
in bis journey made ſome ſtay in Midian, where he was evertaken by 
divine vengeance : or underſtanding theſucceſs ofhis wicked counſel 
lefr with Balaam, in the fin and ſlaughter of the Ifraclites, he retur- 
ned, partly to enjoy the reputation and reward of his counſel which 
he had loſtbefore, and partly to employ his Helliſh arts againſt 1/e!, 
now they were, as he thought forſaken by their God, and expoſed to 
his malice. Here Balaam dies the death of the wicked, and not of the 
righteous, as he deſired, Numb. 23. 10. 


9 And the children of Iſrael took «# the women of 
Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the ſpoil 
of all their cattel, and all their flocks, and all their goods. 

4 10 And they burnt all their cities 9» wherein they 


ND MM 


'were, 1n which ſuch dead Bodies lay, or from the rouch of the Iſra- 


B E R S. 
dwelt, and all their goodly caſtles with fire. 


: mn Partly to blot out the name and memory of ſo lewd.and vile a 
people ; partly left any of the Iſraelites ſhould be tempted to ſettle 
there, and ſo be diſcouraged in their progreſs to Cana ; and partly 
left they ſhould be poſlefſed by other people who might prove as bad 
Neighbours to them as theſe would have been. 


11 And they took all the ſpoil, and all the prey bob 
of men and of beaſts. 

12 And they brought the captives and the prey and 
the ſpoil unts Moſes, and Eleazar the Prieſt, and unto 
the congregation of the children of Iſrael, unto the camp 
at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan zear Jericho. 

13 And Moſes, and Eleazar the Prieſt, and all the 
Princes of the congeegation went forth to meet them 
without the camp #. 

2 Partly to pur reſpe& upon them, and congratulate with them 


for their happy ſucceſs; and partly to prevent the pollutign of the 
Camp by the untimely entrance of the Warriors into it. 


14 And Moſes was wroth with the officers ofthe hoſt 
0, with the captains over thouſands, and captains over 
hundreds, which came from the | battel. 


o Becauſe they had ſpared thoſe who were moſt crimina), and who 
by the law of God and ef Nature were worthy of Death. 


I5 And Moſes ſaid unto them, Have ye ſaved * all 
the women alive ? 


of war, 


20! 2J; 


16 Behold, * theſe cauſed the children of Iſrael, 'z Sam:;; 


3: 

*Chz25t2; 
*ch:241, 
2 Pet; 2 


through the * counſel of Balaam, to commit treſpaſs 
againſt the LORD in the matter of Peor, and * there was 
a plague among the congregation of the LORD. 

17 Now therefore, * kill exery male among the little 
Ones p, and kill every woman ther hath known man q 
by lying with + him. 

? Which they were forbidden to do to other people, Dert.20. 14 
except the Canaanites, to whom this people had equalled themſelves 
by their horrid crimes, and therefoxc it is not ſtrange, nor unjuſt 
that God, the ſupream Lord of all mens lives, who as he-gives them, 
ſo may take them away when he pleaſeth, did equal them in the pu- 
niſhment. 9 Partly for puniſhment, becauſe the guile was general, 
and though ſome of them only did proſtitute themſelves to the I 
raelites, yet the reſt made themſelves acceſſory by their confent gr 
concurrence, or approbation ; and partly, for preventian of the like 
miſchieffrom ſuct an adulterous generation. 

18 Butall the womencchildren that have not known 
a man r by lying with him, keepalive for your ſelves <. 

r Towit, carnally. See on Gen: 48: x; and 19: 8. Lev. 18. 22.. $ 
Either to ſell them as flavesto others, or to uſe them as Servants to 
your ſelves, or to marry them, when you have prepared and inſtru- 
Qed them. 

19 Anddo ye abide without the camp ſeven days s : 
whoſoever hath killed any perſon, and * whoſoever hath + cþ,y, 
touched any ſlain, purify # beth your ſelves, and your rg: u, 
captives on the third day, and onthe ſeventh day. £M 
5 According to the Law, Levit. 15. 13. and Numb. 19. 11. 12. © Heb, 
t With the water of ſprinkling, Numb. 19. 9. 

20 And purifie all « your raiment,and all that is} made ;;. 
of skins, and all work of goats hair x, and all things 
made of wood. 

# To wit, your ſpoil and prey. See Lev: 8: 15: and 14: 49. « All 
which had contrafted ſome ceremonial] uncleanneſs either from the 
dead Bodies which wore them, or the tents or houſes where they 


T5: 


2T: Is 


a mal, 


elitiſh Souldiers,who were legally defiled by the ſlaughtersthey made. 

21 And Eleazar the prieſt ſaid unto the men of war 
which went to the battel, This is the ordinance of the 
Law which the LORD commanded Moſes. 

22 Only the gold, and the ſilver, the braſs, the iron, 
the tin, and the lead. 

23 Every thing that may abide the fire, ye ſhall make 
it go thorow the fire,and it ſhall be clean : nevertheleſs, ic 
ſhall bz purified * wich che water of ſeparation ; and all . ,, 
that abideth notthe fire,ye ſhall make go thro the water. 1g; g,i 

24 And ye ſhall waſh your clothes 6n the ſeventh day, 
and ye ſhall be clean, and afterward ye ſhall come into 
the camp. 

25 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, 

26 Take the ſum of the prey # that was taken, beth , py, 
of man and of beaft, rhou and Eleazar the prieſt, and of 
the-chief fathers of the congregation :; captivi, 

27 And * divide the prey into two parts, between 'Jek* 
them that took the war upon them, who went out to a 
battel, and between all the congregation y. 6H We 

y The Congregation hath ſome ſhare, becauſe the Warciors went 
in the name of all,and becauſe all having been injured by the Midia- 
nites, all wereto have ſome ſhareinthe reparations : but the War- 


riors who were but 12000, have a far greater ſhare than others of 
their brethren, becauſe they underwent greater pains and dangers. 


28 And levy a tribute unto the LORD of -the men 
of war which went out to battel one ſoul z of five 
hundred, beth of the perſons, andof the beeves, and of 
the aſſes, and of the ſheep. 

z ( i. e. ) One perſon, as it follows here and verſe 50. 
29 Take it of their half, and give ir unto Eleazar the 


Chap. XXXI. 


} Heb:h | 


*SeeDeut 


*Ch:25:9; 
- j udp: 


+ Heb, 


TInſtirumm! 
or wveſſl1 


f Heb. 


kand, 


}Heb, 
found, 


f Heb. 
he AJOm | 
Ofering, 


prieſt for an heave-offering of the LORD 5. | 
s In thankfulneſs to God for rheir preſervation and good ſucceſs. | | 


39 And 


bf 


] chap. XXXI. 


| [|Ox,g09ts. 
| * chap. 3- 


n,6 25, 
31, 36. 


tHeb. 


kand, 


+ Heb. 
fund, 


{ Heb. 
he AJOm | 
offering, 


| N O M 
30 And of the children of Ifraels half, thou ſhalt take 
one portion of fifty b,of the perſons,of the beeves, of the 
ades,and of the|| theep,of all mannerof beaſts, and give. 
{,:m unto the Levites, * which keep the charge of che 
tzbernacle of the LORD. | 
þ Whereas the former part was one of 500;the reaſon of the diffe- 
rence is, partly, ecaule this was taken out ofthe peoples portion, 
whoſe hazard- being leſs than the others,their gains alſo 1a all reaton 


were to be leſs; partly becauſe this was to be diſtributed into more 
hands theZevites being now numerous,when thePrieſts were but few 


21 And Moſes and Elcazar the pricſt did as the 
LORD commanded Moſes. : 

32 And the booty, being the reſt of the prey c which 
the men of war had caught, was ſix hundred thouſand, 
and ſeventy thouſand, and five thouſand ſheep, 

c All which was now left of the prey. Ir is ſo expreſſed becauſe 
they rook more,but ſome of the perſons were ſince killed,ver.17.and 
ſome of the catrel was ſpent for the neceſlary proviſions of the army, 

22 And tirceſcore and twelve thouſand becves, 

:4 And threeſcore and one thouſand afles, 

25 And thirty and two thoufand perſons in all, of 
women that had not known man, by lying with kim. 

26 And thehalf, which was the portion of them that 
went out to war, was in number three hundred thouſand, 
and ſeven and thirty thouſand, and five hundred ſheep. 

27 And the LORDS rribute of the ſheep, was fix 
hundred and threeſcore and fifteen. 

23 And the beeveswere thirty and fix thouſand, of 
which the LORDS tribute as threeſcore and twelve. 

And theatieswerethirty thouſand and five hundred, 
of which the LOR DS tribute was threeſcore and one. 

40 And the perſons were fixteen thouſand, of which 
the LORDS tribute was thirty and two perſons. 

4i And Mcſes gave the tribute which was the LORDS 
heave-offering unto Eleazar the prieft, as the LORD 
commanded Moſes 4, 

d Either now upon his conſulting of God in the caſe,or formerly 
in general rules and laws for ſuch occaſions, ſuch as Numb. 18. 8. 

42 And of the children of Iſraels haif, which Moſes 
divided from the men that warred : 

43 (Now the half that pertained unto the congregation, 
was three hundred thouſand and thirty thouſand, end 
ſeven thouſand and five hundred ſheep, 

44 And thirty and fix thouſand beeves : 

45 And thirty thouſand aſles, and five hundred, 

46 And ſixteen thouſand perſons, } 

47 Even of thechildren of Iſraels half, Moſes took one 
portion of fifry,borh of man and of beaſt, and gave them 
unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the taberna- 
cle of the LORD, as the LORD commanded Moſes, 

48 And the officers, which were over thouſands of 
the hoſts, the captains of thouſands, and captains of 
hundreds came near unto Moſes. 

49 And they ſaid unto Moſes, Thy ſervants have ta- 
ken the ſum of the men of war which are under our + 
charge, and there lacketh not one man of us : 

50 We have therefore brought an oblation for the 
LORD, what every man hath {| gotten, of jewels of 
gold, chains and bracelets, rings, earings,and tablets,to 
make an atonement for our fouis e before the LORD. 

e For their error noted werſe 14, 15, 16. and withal for a memeri- 
al, as it is ſaid werſe 54. or by way of gratitude for ſuch a ſtupen- 
dious aſſiſtance and deliverance, as appears from the word therefore 
in the beginning of this verſe, and from werſe 49. | 

51 And Mcics and Eleazar the priett took the gold 
of them : ever all wrought jewels. 

52 Andall the gold of the F offering that they offered 
up to the LORD, of the captains of thouſands, and of | 
tie captains of hundreds, was ſixteen thouſand ſeven | 
hundred and 6fry ſhekels, | 

53 ( For the men of war had taken ſpoil, every man | 
for himſelf. ) | 

54 And Moſes and Eleazar the prieſt took the gold of | 
the captains of chouſands and of hundreds, and brought 
it mto the tabernacle of the congregation.,for a memori- 
al tor the chitdren of Iſrael beforethe LORD. 

CHAP, XXXIL 


The Reubenites and Gadites ſue for their Inheritance on that ſide Jordan, as 
being fit for Cattel, 1--5. Moſes reproves them as diſcouraging the People, 
and herein following their Fathers ill example, 6--15. They promiſe to leave 
their Children and Cattel there,and go armed before their Brethren till Ca« 
nan ſhould be ſub1ued, 16--19. Of which condition, they, together 
with the half Tribe of Manaſſth, obtain their deſire, 20-42, 

OW the chiidren of Reuben, and the children of 

Gad, had a very great multitude of cattel, and 

when they ſaw the land of Jazer a, and the land of Gi- 
lead. b, thar behold, the place was a place tor cattel : 

@ A city and corfhtry taken from the Amerites, Numb. 21.342. þ A 

mountainous country, famous for paſturage, Jer. 50. 19.Mic. b. 14. 
2 The chiidren of Gad, and the chiidren of Reuben 

gang and ſpake unto Moſes, and to Eleazar the pricft, | 


BB K Chap, XX XII 
and unto the princes of the congregation, ſaying, 
3 Ataroth c, and Dibon,and Jezer,andNimiah 4, and 
Heſhbon,and Elcaich,and Shebam e,ard Nebo,& Beonf. 
c Different from that Ataroth, Joſh.16.2.7.-which was on the other 
ſide of Jordan. d Called peth-rimrah,uer.z6.and Jef 13.27.and the waters 
of Nimrim, Jſa.1.5,6. eCalled Shibmah,ver.z8. f Which is thought to be 
the ſame place called 2azl-meon,uer. 3& and Beth-meon, Jer. 48- 23. { 
4 Even the countrey * which the LORD ſmote be- * chap. 2} 
fore the congregation of Iſrael g, is a land for cattel,and 24:34. #4 
thy ſervants have cattel, 
g And-given to them for a poſſeſſion, in the ſame manner as he 
will give the land of Canaan: 
5 Wherefore, ſaid they, if we have found grace in 
thy ſight, let this land be given unto thy ſervants for a 
poitefhion : and bring us not over Jordan b. 
h To wit, to give us our poſſeſſion there, but let this land on 
this ſide Jordan be our whole poſleſiton. 
6 And Moſes faid unto the children of Gad, and to 
the chiidren of Reuben, Shal your brethren go to war, 
and thal ye fit here z ? 
7 In eaſe and peace, whileſt your brethren are engaged in a bloo- 


dy war. Their words were ambiguous, and Moſes thought this to 
be an aft of unbeliefand floth, and ſelf-love and policy 


7 And wherefore | diſcourage ye the iicart of the 4 Heb, | 
children of I{rael, from going overinto the 'and which break. . | 
the LORD hath given them 2 _- | 

8 Thus did your fathers, when I * ſent them from * ch. 13.3. 
Kadeih-barnea * to ſee the land. * Deur. 1.8 

9 For * when they went up into the valley of Eſhcol, +; 
and ſaw the land, they diſcouraged the heart of the | 
children of Iſrael, that they ſhould not go & into the 
land which the LORD had given them. | 

k That they ſhould not attempt ro go, but rather return to E- 
gypt, Numb. 14. 4. 

io And tke LORDS anger was Kindled the ſame 
time, and he ſware, ſaying, 

11 Surely none of the men that came up eut of Egypt, 
* frem twenty years old and upward, (bal ſee the land 
which I ſware unto Abraham, unto Iſaac, and unto ja- [ 
cob, becauſe * they have nor + wholly followed me: * chap.14z 3 

I2 Save Caleb the fon of Jephunneh the Kenezice /, 28, 29. | 
and Joſhua the ſon of Nun: for they have wholly folow- * +Þ4P-14+ | 
ed the LORD. +tixeb. futs | 


{ So called from Kenaz, his grand-father, or one of his eminent filled after 
ancettors, Jo. 195.17. 1 Chron. 4. 13, 14, IF. >. . 


13 And the LORDS anger was kindled againſt Iſra- _ 
el, and he made them wander in the wilderneſs forty 
years, until all the generation that had done evil in the 
light of the LORD were conſumed. 

14 And, behold, ye are rifen up in your fathers 
ſtead, an increaſe of ſinful men w, to augment yet the 
fierce anger ofthe LORD toward Iſrael. 


_ m Succeeding your fathers, as in their places and eſtates, ſo alſo 
in their ſins, 


15 For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet 
again leave them in the wilderneſs, and ye ſhal deſtroy 
all this people n. 


» Who being moved by your counſel and example, will refuſe to 
go over Jordan, and to poſleſs the land of Canaan. 

16And they came near unto him,and ſaid, We will build 
ſheep-folds here for our cattel,& cities for our little ones: 

17 But we our ſelves o will go ready armed before 
the children of Ifrae}, until we have brought them unto 
their place : and our little ones fhal dwell in the fen- 
ced cities, becauſe of the inhabitants of the land p. 

_ 0 Either all, or as many of us as ſhall be thought neceſlary, lea- 
ving only ſo many as may be neceſſary to provide for the ſuſte- 
nance and defence of our wives and children here. See Jof: 4: 12, 
13.- þ The Moabites and Edomites, or other bordering people. 

i8* We will not return unto our houſes, until tkechil- *Joſh.22.4 
dren of I{racl have inhericedevery man his inheritance : 

i9 For we will not inherit with them en yonder ſide 
Jerdan, or torward, becauſe our inheritanceis fallen to 
us on this ſide Jordan eaſtward, 

20 And* Moſes ſaid unto them, If ye will do this *Joſh.1r.13 
thing, if ye will goarmed before che LORD þ, to war, 

? Either x. ſincerely and heartily, asin God's preſence. Orrather | 
2. before the Ark, which was the token of God's preſence. Heallndes - 
either to the order of the rribes in their march, whereby Reuben and 
Gad marched next and immediately before the Ark,as appears from 
Numb: 2: 10,14,16,17. Or to the manner of their paſſage over Jordan, 
wherein the Ark went firſt into 5o-42n, and ſtood there whileſt all 
the tribes marched over Jordan by and before it, Jo: 3: and 4: and 
theſe amongit thereſt, as is exprely noted in theſe very words, 
that they paſſed over before the Lord, Jo). 4: 13. 

21 And will go all of you armedover Jordan before 
the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from 
before him. 

22 And* the land be {ubdned before the LORD 9g; 
chen afterward ye ihal return, and be guiltleſs before 
the LORD, and before Iſrael ; and * this land thal be» Der. ,, 
your poſleflion beiore the LORD. 72, 15,16. 

q (4. e. ) By his preſence and gracions and powerful #fiftarice, Joib-r.e5. 

2 E By 2983 73. 8, 


13:24. | 
"F 


* Deurt. 7. 


| 22 But if ye will not do ſo,behold,ye have ſinned a- 
eainſt the LORD; and be ſure your ſinr will find you out. 
y (5.6. ) The puniſh mcar of your ſin;as/that word is very oft uſed. 
24 Build ye cities for your little ones, and folds for 
your ſheep, and do that which hath proceeded out 0 
'our mouth 5- | 
E * Which you have uttered and promiſed to do. Sce this or the 
like phraſe, Numb. zo: 2. Mar. 15. 18. : 
| Ky And the children of Gad, and the children of 
Reuben, ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, Thy ſervants will 
do as my lord- commandeth. | | 
26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our | 
cattel ſbal be there in the cities of Gilead 7. | 
t Largely ſo called, as that word 3s oft uſed, for thar whole 
q country beyond Jordan, aSin other places it 1s taken more ſtr:&ly 
4 for a part of it, as here below, verſe 39, 40. and elſewhere. 


NID H SE RS: 


Hh Joſh. 4. _ 27 * But thy ſervaiits wili palsover,every man armed 
Bt: >. or war, before the LORD to barrel, as my lord fuich. 
& Joſh. 1 "28 So * concerning them, Moſes commanded Elea- 
b3-./ zar the prieft, and Joſhua che ſon of Nun,and the chicf 


fathers of the tribes of the children of 1frael : | 

29: And Moſes faid unto them, If the children of 
Gad, and the children of Reuben will paſs with you 
over Jordan, every man armed to batrel before the. 
LORD, and tbe land ſhal be ſubdued before you, then 
ye ſhal give them the laad of Gilead for a poileflion : 

- 30 Bur if they will nor paſs over with you armed,they 
ſhal have poſſeſſion among youin theland of Canaan s. 

« They ſhall forfeit and loſe their poſſeſſions in Gilead, and thall 
be conſtrained to go over Jordan, and to ſeek poſſeſſions there a- 
mons their brethren. ; 

by And the children of Gad, and the children of 
Reuben anſwered, ſaying, As the LORD hath {aid x 
unto thy ſervants, fo will we do. 

x Either ar this time by thy mouth : or formerly ,where he com- 
mandeth us as well as our brethrento go into Canaan and potllets it. 

22 We will paſs over armed before the LORD into 
the land oft Canaan, that the poſieflion of our inheri- 

tance on this fide Jordan »ay be ours : 

23 And * Moſes gave unto them,even to the children 
of Gad,and to the children of Reuben,and unto half the 
tribe of Manaſſch y the ſon of Joſeph, the * kingdom of 

ihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og 
king of Baihan, the land with the cities thereof, in the 
coalts, even the Cities of the country round about, 

3 Who are there added to the Tribes of Reuben and Gad, either be- 
cauſe "upon the good ſucceſs of the two Tribes of Reuben and Gad, 
they were encouraged ro make the ſame requeſt for themſelves, as 
having much'catte}, as well as they : or becauſe upon further con- 
fideration it was found that this portion of land was more than fut- 
ficient for thoſe two tribes,and it was given by Mo/es to theſe rather 
than to any other, becauſe they fought againſt rhe Amorites with 
great courage and ſucceſs, here verſe 39. and Fol. 17. ki 

24” And the chiidren of Gad built z Dibon, and A- 
_ taroth, and Aroer, 

2 ( i.e. ) Repairedand fortified, as that word is oft uſed,as 1 King. 
12. 25. 2 King. 14. 22. 2 Chron. $. 1. and 11. 5, ©. and 26. 2. Dan. 
4- 3o. For they neither had need nor leiſure as yet to do more, the 
o1d cities not being burnt and ruined, as divers in Canaan were. 

25 And Atroth,Shophan,and *Jaazer,and Jogbehah, 

6 And * Beth-nimrah,and Beth-haran,fenced cities: 

and folds ſor ſheep. 

' 27 And the children of Reuben *buile Heſhbon, and 
Elealeh, and Kirjathaim, 

*Seever:3 38 And Nebos, and Baal-meon, ( * their names be- 
Joſh: 23:7. ing changed b ) and Shibmah: and þ gave other names 
THed 2 unto thecities which they buiided. 

_—_— Of which city ſee Deur.34.1.Jer-48-1. b Either becauſe conquerors 
-<0ihwY of places uſe to do ſo: or becauſe the names of other gods ( which Nebo 
"age A and Baal-meon unqueitionably were ) were not to be mentioned, Exod. 
ONT. , 23.13.eſpecially ar the firſt ſertling of the 1/raelites there,that the ve- 
a ry femembrance of the Idols might be blotted out, and fo the tem- 
ptation t6 Idolatry removed,though afterwards, when that danger 
was over,they were called by their old names again, Joſ: 13: 17, 20. 
* Gen:5o: F9 And thechildren of * Machir the fon of Manaiſleh 
23. went to Gilead, and took it c,and diſpoſſeiied the Amo- 
* xites which was 1n It. 

c( 7. e. ) Part of it,or Gilead is here taken more ſtrictly. See above 
on verſe 29: and Gen; 31: 21: Deut: 3: 12, 13. 

40 And Mofes* gave Gilead unto Machir the ſon of 
Manafſeh 4, and he dwelt cherein. 

d ( 7. e. ) Not to Machir himſelf, who doubtleſs was long ſince dead, 
(ſee Gen:50:23:) bur the family or poſterity of Machir, which are cal- 
Jed by their fathers name;as the names of Abraham, 4#:7:16: of 1/a- 
ac, Amos F: g: of Jacob or Iſrael frequently ,of Judah and Simeon,Judg. 1: 
3. of David, 1 King: 12: 6: are manifeſtly put for their poſterity. 
41 And* Jair the ſon of Manaiſeh e went and took 
" the {mall cowns thereof, and called them Havoth- jair. 

e Called here the ſon of Manaſſeh, partly becauſe he was ſo by his 
mother, Chron:2:21,22:and partly becauſe he joined himſelf with the 
-* > Manaſſites in this expedition, and ſettled himſelf among them. 
Feb. 42 And Nobah f went and took Kenath, and the + 
7:2iter;, Viliages thereof,and called ic Nobah,after bis own name. 

f Who, though not elſewhere named, was doubtleſs an eminent 
perſon of the Tribe of Manaſſeh, 


| *Deut:3:2 
Joſh:1 J: 8: 
] and 22: +4- 
| * chap:21: 
24) 33* 


*Ver: 1:3 


® Denr. 3. 
I2, 13,15. 


—. 


Chap. AXADT 
CH A ÞP;  XXXIHI. =. 


A relation of the marches and campings of the Iſraelites from Exypt to Gans 


an, 1-=50. They are commanded to drive out the Canaanites, and deſtroj 
their P:fures, Molten Images, and high Places, - and to divide the Land by 
Lot, 51--54. The Canaanites,if not diſpoſſeſfd, ſhould trouble md wer 
them;omd God would do to them as he thought to do to the others, 55, 56, 
Hele are the journeys of the chiidren of Iracl, 
which went forth out of the land of Egypt with 

their armies a, under the hand of Moſes and 4aron. 
a ( 7.2, ) In great number and exadt order, as armies march, and 

rhcy did, Exod. 12. 37, 38. and 13. 18. 


2 And Mofes wrote thsir goings outaccording to their 
journeys, by the commandment of the LURD 6 : and 
theie are their journeys, according to their goings Our. 
5 ho would have this done.partly to evince the truth of the hi- 
ſtory, partly ro preſerve the remembrance of God's glorious and mi- 
raculous works both of judgment and mercy towards his peop!e,und 
thereby to confirm their faith in their preſent difficult undertaki;-g. 

2 And they * departed from Rameſes c in the h: it 
month, onthe fifreenth day ofthe firſt month : onthe 37. 
morrow after the paſſover the children of Iſrael went out 
* with an high hand, in the ſight of all the Egypti-is 4 

c Whither they all repaired by Moſes his order from all parts of 
the land. & See Exod. 14. 8. Numb. 15. 30. | 

4 { For the Egyptians buried all their firſt-born, * '# 
which the LORD had ſmitten among them : * upon 
their gods e alſo the LORD executed judgment. ) 

e Either, r, their princes and rulers, who are ſometimes called 
gods in Scripture ; and ſo this is added by way of amplification, 
God flew their firſt-born, not only of the meaner ſort, but even of 
their King and Princes. Or, 2. their falſe gods,to wit,thoſe beaſts 


Q5 
4 
C 


which the bruitiſh Egyptians worthipped as gods, which were killed 
with the reft, for the firſt-born both of men and beaſts were thei 
killed, Exed. 13.15, See more on Exod. 12% 12. and 18. 171. 


5 Andthe children of Ifrael removed from Rameſes, 
and pitched in Succoth. 

6 And they departed from * Suceoth, and pitched in 
Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderneſs. 

7 And they * removed from Etham,and turned again +; 
unto Pi-hahiroth, which 7s before Baal-zephon 3; and 
they pitched before Migdol. 

8 And they departed from before Pi-hahiroth, and * ; 
pallſed through the midit of the ſea,into che wilderneſs, 
and wentthree days journey in the wilderneſs of Etham, 
and pitched in Marah : 

9 4ind they removed from Marah, and * came unto 
{.lim, and in Elim were twelve fountains of water, and 
threeſcore and ten palm trees, and they pitched there: 

10 4nd they removed from Elim, and encamped bv 
the Red-ſea 

F ( 7. e. ) By another part of that Sea which they paſſed over. 

11 And they removed from the Red-ſea,and encamp- 
ed in the * wilderneſs of Sin. 

i2 And they took their journey out of the wilderneſs 
of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah. 

13 Andthey departed from' Dophkak, and encamp- 
ed in Aluſh. 

_ 14 And they removed from Aluſh, and encamped at 
© Rephidim, where was no water for the peopleto drink. 

15 And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched 
in. the * wilderneſs of Sinai, 7 

16 And they removed from the deſert of Sinai, and 
pitched * at || Kibroth-hattaavah. | 

17 And they departed from Kibroth-hattaavah,and ? *ch:11:34 
encamped at Hazeroth, || That is 

15 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched 5; F 
in Rithmah. *chap:11; 

g A place in the wilderneſs of Poran, near Kadeſh-barnea. $5. 

19 And they departed from Rithmah,and pitched at 
Rimmon- parez. 


20 And they departed from Rimmon-parez, and 
pitched in Libnah. 

21 Andthey removed fromLibnah,andpitched at Riſſah. 

. 22 And they journeyed from Riflah, and pitched in 
Rehelathah. 


23 And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in 
mount Shapher. 


24 nd they removed front mount 
camped in Haradah. 


25 And they removed from Haradah, 
Makheloth. 


26 And they removed from Makheloth, 
camped at 'Tahath, 


27 And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at 
Tarah. 


28 And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in 
Mithcah. 


29 And they went from Mithcah, 
Haſhmonah. 


"E:x0:16; 


*Ex0:17;3 


raves of 


Shapher, anden- 
and pitchedin 


and en- 


and pitched in 


*Ex0:16: : 


30 And they departed from Haſhmonah, and * en- 
camped at Moſereth, 


*Deut 16: | 


6 
21 And 


" Ezek 
I4 


* ch.22 


| Or, z 
Plain of 
Shittims 
* ch. 2: 


*h.26. 
7 Heb. 

multiply 
mheritan 


T Heb. / 


pomp 
. + 


6:1 


6; 


q 


| 


Chap. 


: 
. 


ed at Ebronah. 

35 And they departed from Ebronah, and encamp- 
ed at Ezion-gaber k. 

k A place upon the Red-ſea,as appears from 1 King.9.26.and 22.48. 

36 And they removed from Ezion-gaber,and pitched 
«< 20. 1. 12 the * wilderneſs of Zin, which #: Kadeſh 
«420.22 , 37 And they removed from * Kadeſh, and pitched 
In mount Hor in the edgeof the land of Edom. 
*h,20.25. 38 And * Aaron the prieſt went up into mount Hor, 
Deut. 32. at the commandment of the LORD, and died there 1n 

the forrieth year, after the children of Iſrael were come 
- outof the land of Egypt,in the firſt 4ay of the fifth month. 

39 And Aaron wasan hundred and twenty and three 
years old, when he died in mount Hor. 

40 And* king Arad the Canaanite ( which dwelt 1n 
the ſouth, in the land of Canaan ) heard of the coming 
of the children of Iſrael. 

41 And they departed from mount* Hor, and pitch- 
ed in Zalmonah. 

42 And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched 
in Ptnon. | 

43 And they departed from Punon, and * pitched in 
Oboth. 

44 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in 


n_- 


50, 
*ch. 21.1, 
&c. 


ch. 21.4- 


*ch.21.10, 


- [Or, heaps || Tje-abarim, in the border of Moab. 


of Farm. .- and they departed from lim 7, and pitched in 
6. 21-11- Djbon-gad 
I Rather, Jim, #. e. the heaps, as the word ſignifies, even the 
heaps of Abarim, laſt mentioned, the Hebrew word is the ſame with 
Tje, ver. 44. only there it is in the conſtrued, and here in the abſo- 
Jute, form. m Socalled partly by way of diſtin&ion of this from 
another Dibon, in the portion of Reuben, Joſ. 13. 17. and pait'y be- 
cauſe it was rebyylt by the tribe of Gad. 
46 Andthey removed from Dibon-gad,and eacamp 
' Ezek. 6. ed in * Almon-diblathaim. 
I4. : 47 Andthey remoyed from Almon-diblathaim, and 
pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo ». 
» Of which ſee Numb. 27. 12. Deut. 32. 49, 50. and 34. T. 
45 . And they departed from the mountains of Aba- 
*<h.22. 1, rim, and * pitched in the plains of Moab, by Jordan 


near Jericho. 
49 Andthey pitched by Jordan from Beth-jeſimoth. 
|Or, t&e even unto || * Abei- Shictim o, in the piains of Moab 
plain of o Called Sittim, Numb. 25. 1. and here Abel-ſittim, for the grievou: 
Shitim- mourning which there was both for the heinous crimes committed, 
*ch. 25.1, and horrible judgments there infl: Qed. 
5= And the LORD fſpake unto Moſes, in the plains 
of Moab, by Jordan ner Jericho, ſaying, 
51 Speak unto the children of Iſrael.andiay unto them 
When ye are palſed over Jordan into the land of Canaat. 
*Deut: 7, F2 * Then ye ſhal drive outp ail the inhabitants of 
2, the land frombefore you, and deſtroy all their pictures 
Joſ.11.12. * , and deſtroy all their molten 1mages r, and quite 
4+ pluck down all their high places 5. 
gl p Not by baniſhing, but by. deſtroying them, as it isexp/ained. 
Deut. 7.1,2. and elſewhere. q W hich ſeem to have been ſtones curi 
ouſly engraven,and ſet up for worſhip. See Deut. 16. 22. r See Exod. 
23.24,32. Deut.7.5. 5 (7. e. ) By a Metonymy, the Chappels, Altars, 
Groves, or other means of worſhip there ſet up, for the hills them- 
ſelves could not be deſtroyed by them. See on Dent. 12. 2. 

523 And ye ſhal diſpollets the inhabitents of the land, 
and dwell therein : for I have given you the land to pol- 
{els it. 

"26.53, 54 And *ye ſhal divide the land by lot for an inheri 
t Heb, © tanceamong your families, ard to the more ye ſal | 
multiply his give the more inheritance, and tothe fewer ye ſhal | 
we ance. give the leſs inheritance : every mans inheritance ihal be 

eb. di. * f , . . 
miniſþ þ;3_ 12 the piace where his lot falterh,according to the tribes 
inherit ance. of your fathers ye (hal inherit. 

LA 23: FF But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the 


d > - . . 
Gulg, 2.3 thoſe which ye let remain of them, ſbel/l be * pricks in 


your eyes ?, and thorns in your ſides, andibalvex you 
in the land wherein ye dwell, 
t (7. e. ) Both vexatious and perr:icious, for the eye is a tender 
part, and a wound there is very miſchievous. 
56 Moreover, it thal come to pals, t4arT ſhal do un- 
to-you, as I thought to do unto them. 
Y CHAFP. XXXIV. 
God deſcribes the Borders of Canaan, 1-15. And names thoſe who fbould'| 
Aivide the ſame among the Children of Iſrael, 16-—29. 


land frem before you, then it thal come to paſs, that | 


NUMBE R S. 


XXXIME 
21 And they departed from Moſeroth, and pitched | 
in Bene-jaakan hk. © 

h Called more fully Beereth-benc-jaacan, Deut. 10.6. 
See Gen, 32 And they removed from * Bene-jaakan, and en- 
36.27. campedat * Hor-hagidgad z. 
Deut-10.9 ; Called Guagrdeh, as Jorbathah is called Jotbath, Dent. 10. 7. ©, 
in +* 33 Andthey went from Hor-hagidgad, and pitched 

 Deut-19: 56 Jotbathah. 
34 And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamp- 


RT 


| Chap. XXXIV; 
AN D the LORD. ſpake unto Moſes, faying, 
2 Command the children of Iſrael, and ſay un- 

to them, When ye come into the Iand of Canaan ( this 
is the land that ſhal fall unto you for an inheritance, 
even the land of Canaan with the coaſts 2 thereof, ) 
as Or, limits or bounds, to wit, of the land beyond fordan, Which 
are here particularly deſcribed, 1. to dire& and bound them in 
their warsand conqueſts, that chey might aot ſ:ek the enlargem-nt 
of their empire, after the manner of other nations, but be content- 
ed with their 0--n portion. 2. To encourag: them in their attempt 
upon Canzan, and aiſure them of theirſucceſs. . 3. To guide them 
in the approaching diſt: ivution of the land. : 
2 Then * your fourth-quarter b ſhal be from the wil- *Joſ. 15.1? : 
derneſs of Zin, along by the coaſt of Edomc; and your | 
ſouth-border thal be the outmoſt coaſt of * the ſair-ſea d * Gen. 14: | 
eaſtward e, 3. i 
b Which is here deſcribed from Eaſt to Weſt by divers windings 
and turnings, by reaſon «f the mountains, riveis,&c. c Bordering 
all along upon the Edomites, d So called f om the falt and fulphu- 
rous taſte of its waters. e(3.e.) Ar the eaſtern part of that ſea; 
where the Eaſtern and Southern bor.ers meet. 
4 And your burder ſhal turn from the ſouth ro the af- 
cenc of Akrabbim f, and paſs unto Zin : and the going 
torch thereof ihal be from theſouth g ro Kadeſh Barnea h, 
and ſhal go on to Hazar-addar z,and paſs on ro Azmon &. 
f Called Maaleh-akrabbim, Joſ. 15. 3. which was at the ſouth end 
of the ſalt or dead ſea. g Or, on the ſouth, i.e. p:oceeding onwa-d 
towards the South. hþ Which wason the Southern part of Canaan, 
Numb. 13.17: # Which in of. 15. 3. may ſeem diſtinguiſhed into 
two places, Hezron and Addar, which here are unired, becauſe per- 
adventure they were contiguous,or joined together. Or, the village 
of Adaar,and ſo this is the ſame place called Aaaar, Jo. r5. 3. and for 
Hezrwn, that may be anorher place her- omitred, and there ſupplied 
for more exaCtneſs.k Whichis at the Weſt-end of the mount of Eaom. 
5 And the border ſhal ferch a compaſs rom Azmon 
unto the river of Egypt /, and the goings out of it ſhal 
be at the ſea mw. 
I Called Sihor, Fof. 13. 3. which divided Egypt from Canaan, See 
Gen 15. 18. m The midland ſea, called the ſex emphatically, w here- 
as the other ſeas there, as they are called, are indeed bur lakes. 
6 And as for the weſtern border,ye (hal even have the 
great » ſea for a border : this ſhal be your weſt-border. 
z The micland ſea from the South to the North ſo far as runs pa« 
callel with mount Libanus. 
- And this {bai be your north border : from the great 
{ea ye ſhal point out for you mount Hor o. 
o Not that Hor where Aaron died, Numb. 20.22. which was South-« 
ward, and bordering upon Edom, Numb. 33. 37, 38. and therefore 
could not be their northern border, but another mountain, :nd, as 
it is conceived, the mountain of Libanus, which is elſewhere men- 
rioned as the northern Border of the land,and which, in regard of 
divers parts, 0» by divers people, is called by divers names, as Siri« 
on and Senir, Deut. 3. 9. and Sion, Dent. 4. 48. and Hermon, Joſ. 3. 
5. an. here Hor, which ſignifies a mountain, and rhis may be cal- 
1:d ſo by way of eminency. Certain it is, that as Hey hete, ſo Hers 
mn, 7oſ- 13. 5. is Joined with the entrance of Hamath, which makeg 
it p. obable they are one and the ſame place. | 

8 From mount Hor, ye {hal point out your border n- 
to the entrance of Hamath p, and the goings forth of 
tie border ſhal be to Zedad. 

p Called Hamath the great, Amos 6. 2. which is among the Nor- 
rhern borders, Ezek. 47. 16, 17. See Gen. 10. 15, 18. Numb, 13. 21s 
Fudg 3.3. 1 King. 8. 65. : | 

9 Ard the border ſhal go unto Ziphron, andthe go- 
ings out of it (hal be at Hazar-enan : this ſhal be your _ 


10rth-border. 

10 And ye ſbal point out your eaſt-border, 
Hazar-enan to Shepham. 
11 And the coaſt ſhal go down from Shepham to 
Riblah, on the eaſt-ſide of Ain: and the border ſha] 
deſcend, and fbal reach unto the | ſide of the ſea ot 
Chinnereth q eaſtward. 

7 Of this name we have a city, Jof. 19,35. and a country, Jof: 
IT. 2. 1 King. 15- 20. and a Sea or Lake, here and Joſ. 12.3. and 
13.27. which in the New Teſtament is called the ſea of Geneſareth 
Luk, 5. 1. and of Galilee, and of Ttberias, Joh, 6, r. 

12 And the border ſhal go downt© Jordan r, and the 
goings our of it ſhal be at the falt ſea: this ſhal be your 
'and with the coaſts thereof roundabout. | | 
r ( 7.e. ) All along the river of Jordan even to theend of it,which 
is tae caſtern border. 

12 And Moſes commanded the children of Ifrael, 
ſaying, This zs the land which they ſhal inherit by lot, 
which the LORD cemm anded to give unte the nine 
tribes, and to the halt tribe. | | 
14 * For the tribe ofthe children of Rerben, accord- 4, ,,:;x; 
ing to the houſe of theirfathers, and the tribe of, the Joſk;14.2, 
chiidren of G:1d.according tothe houſe of their fathers, 3. 

have received their inheritance, and haltrche tribe of Ma- 

nafleh have received their uheritance. 

15 The two tribes, and the, half cribe, have received 


from 


ſboulaer: d 


their inheritance on this ſide Jordan neer Jericho, caft- 
| ward, toward the ſun-rifing. 


16 And the LORD -ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, DT 3h 
17 Theſe are the names of themen whicty ſhal divide 


[| 


Z E 2 the 


| lap. XXXV. 
>.14.r the land unto you : *Eleazar the prieſt s, and Joſhua 
Wy 59: 55- the ſon of Nun. LI 
1 8 s Who was to a& in God's name, 1 
rences and contentions, to conſult with Godin caſes of difficulty, 
to tranſa& the whole buſineſs in a ſolemn and 145,gt j27 —a_geges 
18 And ye ſhal take one prince of every tribe, to dt- 
vide the land by inheritance, 
19 Andthe names of the men are theſe : 
of Judah #, Caleb the ſon of Jephunneh. 
£ The order ofthe Tribes is here differing from that Numb. 1- 7, 


26. and in other places, being here, as , 
and 19. conformed to the order of their ſeveral inheritances,which 


afterwards 


[16 I 
+ 


to caſt lots, to prevent diffe- 


71 

: Hl : 
: 1 : 
' = 


of the tribe 


eculiar care over his people- | | 
; 20 And of the tribe ofthe children of Simeon, She- 


muel the ſon of Ammihud. 

21 Of the tribe of Benjamin,Elidad 
22 And theprince of the tribe 

Dan, Bukki the ſon of Jogli. 


the ſon of Chisbon. 


RE +. of the children of Manaſſeh, Hannie! the ſon of 
Ephcd. 7 

9 And the prince of the tribe of the children of E- 
phraim, Kemuel the ſon of Shiphtan- 


bulun, Eiizaphan the ſon of Parnach. 

26 And the Prince of the tribe of the children of 
Iſlachar, Paltiel theſon of Azzan. 

27 And the prince of the tribe of the 
Aſher, Ahihud the fon of Shelomi.- 

28 And the prince of the tribe of the children of 
Naphrtali ; Pcdahel the ſon of Ammihud. 

29 Theſe are they whom the LORD commanded to 
divide the inheritance unto the children of Iſrael,in the 
land of Canaan. 

C H A P. KXXV. 

Eight and forty Cities given to the Levites : together with their ſuburbs : an 
mong which ſix Cities of Refuge : for an Ijraelite or Stranger who had kill'd 
another unawares, 1=-15. Wilful murther decided : and the murtherer t0 
be put to death, 16-21. Fhe Man-ſlayer muſt abide in the City of Refuge 
till the death of the High-Prieſt : and if caught out of it might be killed, 
25-29. Fwo witneſſes required to condemn a man to die, 30. No ſatisfa- 
Aion to be taken for the Life of a Murtherer, 31. nor that any one might 
return from a City of Refuge before the time, 32. -that the land be not 
acfiled and polluted and not cleanſed of the Blood ſbed in it, 33, 34. 

AN D the LORD ſpake unto Moſes in the plains of 

Moab by Jordan, mear Jericho, ſaying, 

2 * Command the children of Iſrael, that they give 
| © unto the Levites of the inheritance of their poileſlion, 
\5O% wiay * Eities to dwell ins and ye ſhal give 4//o unto the Le- 
21 ſuburbs for the cities round about them. 


children of 


goods, and for all their beaſts, 

a For paſturage for their cattel: where they might not build 
houſes, nor plant gardens, orchards or vineyards, no nor ſow corn, 
for which they were abundantly pro) ided out of the firſt-fruits and 
tithes. And theſe ſuburbs did not belong ro the Levites in common, 
but were diſtributed ro them in convenient proportions,as may ap- 
pear from fof. 21.18. 1 Chron. 6. 60, 

4 And the ſuburbs ot the cities which ye ſhal give 
unto the Levites, ſhall reach from the wall of the city and 
outward, a thouſand cubits round about 5. 

bObj. In the next verſe it is wo thouſand. How do theſe agree: 
Anſw. 1. LXX Interpreters read both here and wer. 5. zwo thouſand cu- 
bits, rhence ſome ſuppoſe this to be an error in the Hebrew Text, which, 
being in a matter neither concerning faith nor good manners,is not 
prejudicial to the authority of the holy Scriptures. nſw. 2. The 
one thouſand cubits may be in length from the city, and the two 
thouſand cubits in breadth on each tide of the city, and fo they well 
agree ;' for a line of a thouſand cubits being drawn in length eait- 
ward and another weſtward and another northward and another 
ſouthward, a line, d at a thouſand cubits diſtance from the 
city,from eaſt I contain two thouſand cubits, and 
ſo mult the other;Jine: north to ſouth, and io on every fide of 
the city there muſt be rwo thouſand cubits. 47ſw. 3. This verſe and 
the next do not ſpeak to the ſame thing : this ſpeaks of the ſpace or 
Place from whence the ſuburbs ſhall be meaſured, the next verſe 
ſpeaks of the ſpace unto which that meaſure ſhall be extended ; and 

e words may very well be read thus, And the ſuburbs-- ſhall be ( fo 
it is only an elJlipſis of the verb ſubſtantive,which is moſt frequent, 
and the mezning is, ſhall be taken or accounted ) from the wallof the 
city and from ( that particle being ſupplied or underſtood from the 

' foregoing words, which is very uſual ) without it, or, from the out- 
.\ ward parts of it, ( which being a general and indefinite expreſſion is 
limited and explained by the following words )even from a thouſand 
cubits round about. Which are mentioned not as the thing meaſured, 
for as yet there is nota word of meaſuring, but as the term or ſpace 
from which the meaſuring line ſhould begin. And then it follows 
wer. 5. And ye ſball meaſure from without the city, (not from the wall of 
the city, as was ſaid before wer. 4. but from without it, i. e. from the 
ſaid outward part or ſpace of athouſand cubits without the wall of 
the city round Se on the caft-{ide two thouſand cubits, &c. So in 
truth there were three thouſand cubits from the wall of the city 
whereof one thouſand probably were for out-houſes, ſtalls for cat- 
tel, gardens, vineyards and olive-yards, and the like, and the 0- 


NDMBERS. 


ther two thouſand for paſture, which are therefore called the field of 


- 044 een 


alſo Fol. 16, and 17,and 18) | 


fell to them by Lot. Whichis an evident demonſtration 
of the infinite wiſdom of God's providence, and of his exaCt and , 


22 The prince of the ehiidren of Joſeph : for the 


25 And the prince of the tribe ofthe children of Ze- | 


the ſuburbs, Lev 25: 34: by way of diſtinion from the ſuburb: them- - 
_ which conſiſt of the firſt thouſand cubirs from the wall of 
the city. 

F And ye ſhal meaſure from without the city on the 
eaft-ſide two thouſand cubits, avd on the ſouth: fide two 
thouſand cubits, and on the weſt-ſide two thouſand cu- 
bits, and on the north-ſide two thouſand cubits : and 
the city ſal be in the midft : this ſhal be to them the 
ſuburbs of the cities. 

6 Andamong the cities which ye ſhal give unto the 
Levites, .tbere ſhall be * ſix Cities for retuge c, which ye 
ſhal appoint for.the maneſlayer 4d, that he may flee thi- 
ther : and | tothem ye ſhalt add forty and twocities, * Der. 4, 

c Or, of rcceit, or eſcape, or reſort, to wit, for man-ſlayers: And 41. Joth. 
theſe cities are aſſigned amongithe Levites, partly becauſe they might 29. 2. and 
be preſumed to be the moſt proper ' and impartial Judges between 21: 3, 21, 


| man-ſlayers, and wilful murderers ; partly becauſe their preſence eb. 
of the children of | and counſel and authority would more etieQually bridle the paſſi- above them 


ons of the avenger of blood who might purſue him thither ; and Jefba!lgive 
partly to ſignifie, that it is only in Chriſt ( whom the Levitical Prieſts 
did repreſent ) that ſinners tind refuge and ſafety from the deſtroy- 


' er. The names of theſe Cities we have Deut: 4: 41, 43: Joſ: 20: 8. 


d Such as is here deſcribed, wer: 17, 15, 22, 23. 
7 So all the cities which ye ttal give to the Levites 


ſhall be forty and eight cities : them ſhall ye give with 
their ſuburbs. 


8 And the cities which ye ſhal give.ſhall be of the poſ- 
ſeflion oi thechildren of Iſrael: * trom thews that have ma- 
ny,ye (bal give many c ; but from them that bave few,ye 
ſhal give few. Every one ſhal give of his cities unto the 
Levites according to his inheritance whichthe inheriteth» 

e Compare Numb: 33: 54: Jof: 20: 2. 

9 And the LORD ſpake unto Moſes, ſaying, | 

Io Speak unto the children ot [{rael,and ſay unto them, 
* When ye be come overJordan,into the land of Canaan: * Deut.tg, 

It Then * ye ſbal appointyou cities to be cities of 2: Joſh.2o. 
refuge for you, that the ſlayer may flee thither, which 2;.. 
killeth any perſon Þ at unawares f. TG 


 ( 4. e. ) Not wilfully, deſignedly or maliciouſly, but inconſide- 

rately,through miſtake or indiſcretion or careleſneſs, See Levit.4:2. 

12 And they thal be unto you cities for refuge from. 
the avengerg, that the man-ſiayer die not 64, until he 
ſtand before the congregation 7 in judgmgnt k. 

g To wit, of the party ſlain, or, of bloo#, as it is fully expreſſed 
below wer: 19: 25. Heb. from the redeemer, or, from the next kinſman 
to whom by the law belonged the right of redemption of thelands 
of, a: d viadication of the injury done to, the perſon deccaſed. 
( 7.e. ) Be not kijled by the avenger meeting him in ſome other 
place. 7(7. e. ) Before the ſociery or convention of Judges or Elders 
who we.e appointed in every City for the deciſion of criminal cau- 
ſes, who were 23 who were to examine the matrcr, and that pub- 
Iickly before the people, whether the murder was wilful or caſual. 
Qreſt. In what City was this cauſe to be tried ? Anſw. Some ſay 
in the City of refuge, others ſay, in the City in or near which the 
Fatt was committed. It ſeems to me it was done in both, at firſt 
in the City of refuge, as 1s manifeſt in Jof, 20. 4. but if thar trial 
and ſentence did not ſatisfhe the avenger of blood, it was fully .and 
finally determined in the. other City, as is ſufficiently evident both 
by comparing this place with wer. 25, and 5of. 20. 6. and from the 
uſual and moſt reaſonable courſe of Juſtice, which is that fas 
ſhould be examined, as far as may be, in or near the places where 
_ ra ogy mes and where the witneſſes and evidences were 
at hand. r, for judgment, 7,e, to receive ſentence th X 
ing to the nature of the fa. ging 

it; And of theſe cities which 
ſhal ye have for refuge. 

14 Ye ſhal give three cities on this ſide Jordan 7, and 


three cities ſhal ye give in the land of Canaan, which 
[hal be cities of refuge : | 
! Becauſe that land was as long as Canaan, though not ſo broad, 


and beſives theſe might be convenient for many of them that lived 
in Canaan. 


I5 Theſe fix cities ſhal be a refuge, 4:5 for the chil- 
dren ot Iſrael, and for the ſtranger ”, and for the ſo- 
journeramong them : that every one that killeth any 
perſon unawares, may flee thither. 

1 Not the proſelyte only, but all ſtrangers, this being no mat- 
ter of religious p: iviledge, but of common rioht and agreeable to 


2 : % O 
the Law of nature and practice of wiſe heathens. 


16 * And if he imite kim withan inſtrument of iron 
» ( ſo that he die 0) he'is a murderer 8 the murderer ſhal 
ſurely be put to death p. | 

» Wittingly and wilfully, thovgh not with premedi 

: tated 

or deſign, asappears by comparing this with = "_, . q _ 
o To wir, ſuddenly, not 'o, if he walked abroad afterward Euod, 
21+ 19,20. pVYea though he werefled into the City of refuge. 

17 And ithe ſmite him Þ with throwing a frone 9 +FTeb.with 
(wherewith he may dic) and he die, he ;s : ie 
the murderer (hal ſurely be put to death. 


q Heb. with the fone of the hand. 7. e. c: 
knowingly, as — rays z, e.caſt by the hand, and that 


18-Or if he ſmite him with an hand-weapon of w 
( wherewith he may die ) and he die, he 44 omg | 
the murderer ſhal ſurely be put to death. : 


* chap. 26, 


+ Heb.ch4 


inherit, 


21.13. 
T Heb. by 


g£rrour, 


ye [bal give, fix cities 


*E-xod.21. 


I2, I4, 


the hand, 


a murderer : a /oncof Þþ 


| Chap. XXXV. '1 


19 lhe 


- De 
19. 1 


6 Ex 


216 


+ H: 
blood 
be 7 


I; ' Chap. XXXVI. 


N U M 

19 The cevenger of blood himſelf ſhall flay the mur- 
derer 7: when he meeteth him, he ſbail ſlay him. 

ry Either 1. By bi'mſc!f, as the following words ſhew : So it 1s 
only a permiſſion, that he may do it withour offence to God or 
danger to himſelf. Or 2. By the Magiſtrate, from whom he ſhall 
demand Juſtice : So it 1s a c: mmand, as may appear by comparing 
this with verſe 31. and Deut. 19. 12, 13. 

20 But * if he chruſt him of hatred, or hurl at him 
by laying of wait, that he die: | 

21 Or in enmity {mite him with his handhat he dic: 
he that ſmote him (ball ſurely be put to death,'for he is a 
murderer : the revenger of blood ſhall ſlay the nmreerer 


when he meeteth him. : 

22 But ifhe chruſt him ſuddenly s,'* without enmity, 

or have caſt upon him any thing without laying of wait : 
s Th:ough ſudden paſſion, or provocation. Or, by chance, or 
YNAawares. ; : 

23 Or with any ſtone wherewith a man may die, 
ſceing him nor, and caſt iz upon him that he die,and 245 
nor his enemy, neither ſought his harta. 

24 Then « the congregation ſhall judge between the 
flayer, and the revenger of blood, according to theſe 
judgemez:ts. 

u If the Man-ſlayer flee to the citie of Refuge. 

25 And the congregation ſhall deliver the ſlayer out of 
the hand of the revenger of blood,and the congregation 
ſhall reftore him to the ciry of his refuge, whither he 
was fled: ard he ſhall abide in itx, unto the death of 
the high Piieſty, * which was anointed with holy oyl. 
Le" 4: 3- + Be confined to it, partly to ſhew th> hatefulneſs of wilful mur- 
1nd21.10. , * Be confined to it, partly to ſhew the hatefulnels of wil 

der in God's account by ſo !evere a puniſhment, as this in many 
caſes mighr prove, inflifted upon the very appearance of it, And 
. partly for the ſecurity of the Man-flayer, leitthe preſence of fuch 
a perſon, and his converſation among the kind: ed of the deceaſed, 
might occaſion repioach and blood-ſhed. »y Partly becauſe the 
publick grief for the loſs of ſo publick a perſon was likely to af- 
{wage the private griefs and paſſions of men, the rather, becauſe 
by this example, they were minded of their own mortality, and 
thereby wirhheld from taking vengeance; And principally to ſhew 
that the death of Chriſt (the true High-prieft, whom rhe others 
did evidently and eminently repreſent and typific) isthe only mean 
whereby ſins are pardoned, and ſinners are ſet at liberty. - 
26 But if the ſlayer ſhall ar any time come without 
the border of his city of refuge, whither he was fled : 
27 And the revenger of blood find him without the 
t Heb. Nv borders of the city of his refuge, and the revenger of 
bbod ſhall blood kill the ſlayer, he + ſhall not be guilty of blood z. 
be 70/1”. »_ (1.e.) Not lyable to puniſhment from men, though not free of 
y P 
guilt before GoJ, becauic h2 kills an in1ocent perſoa, as appears 
from Dent, i9. 10. This God ordained to oblige the Man-{layer to 
abide in his City of Refuge. See verſe 32. | 

28; Becauſe he {bouid have remained in the city of 
his :efuge, until the death of che high Prieſt: bur after 
the deach of the high Prieſt, the {layer (hall return into 
the land of his polleſſion. | | 

290 theſe things ſhall befora ſtatute of judgernentun- 
to you, throughout your generations,inall your dwellings. 

30 Whoſo killech any perſon, the murderer ſhall be 


« Deut. 
19. I I o 


*Fxod. 


21s I3, 


” 
: yk 4 Put to death by the * mouth of witneſſes: but one wit- 
19. 25. neſs ſhal not teſtifie againſt any perſon 70 cauſe hizs to die 8. 
Matt. 38, # NoJudge ſhall condemn any man to death upon a ſingle teſti- 
16. mony. | 

2 Cor. 3, 31 Moreover, ye {ball take no ſatisfaction for the 
5 life of a murderer b which 5s | guilty of death, but he 
8 ſhall be ſurely put to death. 

4 Heb b No Inrerceſſion nor Ranſom ſhall be accepted to fave his Life, 
faukie t& Or procure him a pardon. 


ae. 22 And ye ſhall take no ſatisfa&ion for him that is fled 
to the city of his refuge, that he ſhould come again to 

dwell in the land, until the death of the Prieſt c. - 
cWhereby God would ſignifie the abſolute and indiſpenſable ne- 

ceſlity of Ch:iſt's death to expiate ſin, and to red-em the ſinner. 
22 So ye ſhall nor poliute the land whereinye are ; 


EY For biood, it * defileth the land: andthe land cannot rincipal reaſon why God was ſoli 

} Heb: be clearſed of the biood that is ſhed therein, but by the F:milies unmixed was, that the T 
There can blood of him tha: ſheddeth it d. which the Meſſiah was to come, and by w 
be no expi= @ Theſe words are added as a reaſon not of the laſt Law, werſe [ynighr be evident and unqueſtionable, 
ation for the 32. for in that caſe the Jand was cleanſed without the blood of the F 

land. Man-ſlayer, but of the Liw next forgoing that verſe 31. in which 


caſe it holds, and the ſenſe is, if you |} all ſpare the murderer or 
take any ſarisfattion for him, you do together with your ſelves in- 
volve your Lind and People in guilt, and will certainly bring 
down God', vengeance upon your ſelves and them. 

24 Lefile not therefore the land which ye ſhall in- 
herit e, wherein I dwell: For I the LORD dwell a- 


mong the children of Iſrael. 
e Be not cruel to your own land by making ita den of murderers 
CHA P. XXXVL | 

The mconvenience of Daughters Inheriting is remedied by a general Command, 
Thar all ſuch marry in the Tribe of their Fathers ; To which of them they 
ſhall think beſt, 1 - 9. They obey, io =—— 12. Theſe Commands 

God gave by Moſes to Iſrael in the Plains of Moab, 13. 
ND the chief Fathers of the Famihes a of the chil- 
dren of Gilead, the ſon of Machir, the ſon of 


Manaiich, of te Families of the ſons of Joſeph catne / unto the children of Iſracl in the plains of Moab, by 
near, and ſpake betore Moſes, and before the Princes, ! Jo:dan zear Jericho. 


B B KK 
the chief Fathers of the children of Iſrael. 


a Who had the care and management of the publick affairs of | 
that Tribe committed to them. | 


2 And they ſaid, * The LORD commanded my + Ch: p.2 
lord co give the land for an inheritance by. lot to the 5 * 
children of Urael; and * my lord was commanded by *Chap:27; 
the LORD, to give the inheritance of Zeclophehad our 7: þ 
brother, b unto his daughters. Joſh:17:38 

b (i.e.) Our kinſman, one of our Tribe, Joſ: 17. 2, 3. 

3 And if they be married co any of the fons of the 
other Tribes ot the children of 1frael, then ſball their in- 
hericance be taken from the Inheritance of our Feathers, | 
and ſhall be put to the inhericance of the Tribe,twhere- + Heb: u#| 
unto they are received c : fo ſhall it be taken from the 2 29m | 
lot of our inhericance. hey ſÞ oy 

c For their inheritance will paſs to their children, who will be * i 
of another Tribe by their fathers ſide, which alone is conſidered in 
this place. 

4 And when the * jubile of the children of Iſrael ſhall 
be 4, then (hall their inheritance be put unto the inhe- 
ritance of the Tribe whereunto they are received: So 
ſhall cheir inheritance be taken away from the inheri- 
tance of the Tribe of our Fathers. 

_ 4 Which God appointed principally for this end, to preſerve the 
inheritance in the hands of the Tribes and Families to which they 
were firſt given. 

5 And Moſes commanded the children of Iſrael ac- 
cording to the word of the LORD, ſaying, The Tribe 
of the ſons of Joſeph harh ſaid well e. 

e Theirplea is jult and reaſonable. God did not take particular 
care about every occurrence that happened or might happen, bur 
left divers things to be found out by humane prudence, which be- 
ing his own gitt, it was meet there ſhould be opportunities left for 
the exerciſe of it, and God thought fit to approve and ratifie the 
prudent and profitzble inventions of Men, by his own law or ſan&i- 
on, as in the caſe of Jethro, Exod. 18. of Zelophehads Daughters 
Numb: 27. and here of their brethren. But it is obſervable, that 
God allowed this only in civil affairs, but never in the-matters of 
his worſhip, where he utterly forbids it. 

6 1his is thething which the LORD doth command 
concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, ſaying, Let 
them F marry. to whom they think beſt : only to the + Hebt 8 
Family of the Tribe of their Father f ſhall they marry. Jug.” 

* WY, 

f They ſeem hereby to be contined not only to the ſame Tribe ; 
but alſo to the family of their Tribe, asappears from the reaſon 
of the Law, for God wou!d have the inheritance of Families as well 
as Tribes kept entire and unmixed: And this was one reaſon of 
that Law of marrying the Brother's wife, Deut; 25. And although 
the next verſe may ſeem to thwart this interpretation, the reaſon 
of this Law being there given, that inheritances might not go from 
Tribe to Tribe, yet verſe8. confirms it, where the very ſame phrate 
is repeated, and that more emphatically, that ſuch ſhall marry one 
of the Family of the Tribe of her Father ; and this further reaſon and re- 
{tri&tion is added, That they may enjoy every man the inheritance (not 
only ofhis Tribe, bur) of his Fathers, to wit, belonging to his Fa- 
ther's family. | - 

7 So hail not the inheritance of the children of Iſrael 
remove from tribe to tribe: For every one of the chil- 
dren of Iſrael ſhall + keep himfelf co the inheritance of + xxep.; | 
the Tribe of his fachers. | cleave to | 

8 And every daughter that poſleſſeth an inheritance #hee, &64 
Fg in any tribe of the children of Iſrael, ſhall be wife unto | 
one of the family of the tribe of her father: that the 
children of Iſrael may enjoy every man the inheritance 


of his fathers. 

g By which clauſe itſeems thatthis Law was not general to: for- 
bid every woman to marry into another Tribe (as may be reaſon- 
ably concluded from the praftice of ſo many Patriarchs, Kings 
Prieſts, and other holy Men, who have married women of other 
Tribes, yea, ſometimes of other Nations, which: it is hot like] 
they would have done, if this had been a tranſgrefſion of God's 
Law) but reſtrained to heireſles, or ſuch as were likely ro be ſo. 
See 1 Chron: 23+ 22. Bur if they had Brethren, it is probable they 
were free to marry into any Tribe, yet ſo, that if their Brethren 
dyed, their puniſhment was, that the inheritance went from them 
to the next a kin of their Father's Trike. and Family. And the 
+ preſerve Tribes and 
nd. Family too, -out of 
ich he ſhould be known, 


Chap. XXXVI 


*Lev: 25) 
19, [/ 


£ 


9 Neither hall the inheritance remove from ze Tribe |. 
to another Tribe: But every one ef the Tribes of the chil- - 
dren of Iſrael ſbalikeep himſelf ro his own inheritance. 
10 Even as the. LORD commanded Moſes, fo did 
the daughters of Zelophehad. 
' 11 * For Mahlah, Tirzah,; and Hoglah, and Milcah, , 
and Noah the daughters of Zeluphehad, were married b, *Þ: 275 
unto their fathers brothers ſons þ. : 
þ Tt is uncertain whether Brothers or Sos be taken ſtrifly and 
properly, or more largely ,as thoſe words are oft uſed in Scriptuze. 
12 Axudthey were married + inco the families of the + Heb: 
ſons of Manafleh,the ſon of Joſeph, and their inhericance ſome rhat 
remained in the tribe of the family of cheir father. were of th 
13 Theſe are the commandments. and the judgements families. + 
which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moles, 


259 DELU. 


—_—— 


[. 


- 
'k 
g 2 
» - 


here mentioned 
after ht had conſecrated him, to ſucceed. 
CHA P. jL 
4 Rehearſol of what had befallen Iſrael in their forty years march, as God's 
Command to depart, 1-=-6. Moſes's inability to juage alone, g---:2 Other 
' Fuages and Officers appointed, 13-16. Charge given the Judges, 17, 18 
Their paſſage to Kadeſb-Barnea, 19, 20, 21. Spies ſent to ſearch the Land of 
the Amorites, 22. Their Return and Report, 23. The diſobedience of the 
people, 26, God's Wrath, 34. They ſmitten by the Amorites, 44» Their 
- complaint to God, which the Lord regards not, 45. 
Heſe be the words which Moſes ſpake 4 un- 


to all Iſrael 6, on this ſide Jordan, in the 
' wilderneſs, in the plain c over againſt the 

|| Red ſea, between Paran 4, and Tophel, 
and Laban e, and Hazeroth f, and Dizahab. 


a Theſe are the Laws, Counſels, and Admonitions delivered by 
* Moſes from God to {ſrael, which are here repeated for the inſtrutti- 
on and obligation of thoſe who by reaſon of their tender years were 
incapable cither of underſtanding them, or of entring into Cove- 
nant with God. b To wit, by the Heads or Elders oi the ſeveral 
Tribes, or others, who were to communicate theſe diſcourſes to 
all the people in ſeveral Aſſemblies. c Either 1. In the vaſt deſert 
of Arabia. But that is no where called » pai, Or rather 2. In 
the plain of Moab, as may appear by comparing this with v.5. and 
| Numb: 22, 1. and Det: 34. 8. Obj. That was far from the Red-ſea here 


' 
: 
[ 
l 
} 
if 
i 
» 
3 
"4 
* % 
© i 
Pi 
{6 
ip 4 
's 
1 
13 
oh 
l 
& 2 
'F 
1 j 
: 
if 
- 4 
h 
Rk 
t 
+ # 
1 
x 


Red-ſea, which is commonly called jam-ſuph, and which was at r00 
great a diſtance, but ſome other place now unknown tous (as alſo, 
moſt of the following places are) ſo called from the Reeds or Flags, 
or Ruſbes (which that word ſignifies) that grew in or near it; which 
reaſon of the name being common to other places with the Red-ſea, 
it is not ſtrange if they got the ſame name. Compare Numb: 21. 14. 
4 Not that Numb: 10. 12. which there and elſe where is called zhe 
Wilderneſt of Paran, and which was too remote, but ſome other place 
called by the ſame name, than which nothing more uſual. e Places 
not mentioned elſe where. f Of which ſee Numb: 11. 35. and 33. 


not of the whole Country of Moab, but of the plain of Moab, where 
Moſes now was, and ſpake theſe words. 


the way of mount Seir i, unto Kadeſh-barnea &.; 
g This is added to ſhew that the reaſon why the 7jraelires in ſo 
many years were- advanced no further from Hoyeb, than to theſe 
plains, was not the great. diſtance of the places or length of the way, 
which was but avjourney of eleven days at moſt, but becauſe of their 
rebellions, as is mentioned before, and repeated in this Book. þ Or 
Siagi, the place where the Law was given, which is promiſcuouſly 
called by both thoſe names. #5 Or Mount Edem, i.e, The mountai- 
neus Country of Seir,which was firſt poſſeſſed by the. Horims, an af- 
rerwards by : the Edomites, Deut: 2. 12. k Which was not far from 

the borders of Canaan. See Gen: 16. 14. Numb: 13. 26, | 

2 And it cameto paſs in the fortieth year, in the elc- 


venthimonth /, on the firſt dey of the month, zhat Moſes 
ſpake unto the children of Iſrael, according to all thar 


| I Which was but a little before his death. % 

Numb. © , *Aﬀerhe had ſlain Sihon the King of the Amorites, 

£1-24, 33- which dwelt in.Heſhbon ; and Og the King of Baſhan, 

Job. 13. hich dwelt at * Aſtaroth, in Edrei m 

mm His Palace or Manſfion-houſe was at Aftharoth, and he was ſlain 

Earei, Numb: 21. 23. of both theſe places, ſee Gen: 14. 5. Joſ: 13.37. 
5 On' this ſide Jordan, in the land of Moab, [began 


Moſes to declare this law, ſaying, 


IT, 


'Or,willed ** 
0 declare, 


aat IS, _ 5 

illingly _ 6 The LORD our God ſpake unto us in Horeb, ſay- 
eclared: ing, Ye have dwel p enough in this mount z. 
- _ 6." 7Of Horth. where theFTontinued about a years ſpace, Exod: 19. 


I. Numb. 10, I1, 12+ - | 
> . Turn yez''and take your Journey, and go to the 


mount of the Amorites &, andunto Þ all rhe places nigh \ 
thereunto, in'the plain, in the hills and in the vale, and 
in theſouth;” and by the ſea-ſide, to the landof the Ca- 
_ Of -aanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, th 
HUPIIT Bat £5 


Heb. 4 
bis Newgh- 


”0Rrs. 


' river | Euphrates. | | 
þ (3. e.) To the mountainous Country where the Aworites dwelt, 
+ which'is oppoſed to the plain here following,where others of them 
dwelt. . And this is the firſt mentioned, becauſe it was in the bor. 
ders of the land'; See below, v. 19. 20. The divers parts or bounds 

f the lind are here mentioned: : ; 
Heb, © g Behold, I have-Þ ſer the land before you ]: go in, 
*G.... and poſſeſs the land, which the LORD ſware unto your 
'& 15.5. fachers, * Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacobto giveunto them, 


d 17. 7; and to their ſeed after them. | i 6 
$.18.and {1 Heb, Before your faces + it is open to your view, and to your poſ- 
26. 4. and ſeſſion ; There is no unpediment in the way. Sec of this phraſe, 
26. 13. Gen: 13.9. and 34. 19. Þ 


hr — —— 


17, 18. And theſe places ſeem to be the ſeveral bound: and Jimits, 


2 ( There are eleven days journey g from Horeb þ, by 


the LORD had given himin commandment unto them; | 


TERONOMY. 

| The ARGUMENT. 
Ofſcs, in the two leſt Moneths of bis life, . rebearſeth, what God had done for them, and their frequent murmurings, 
M rebellions, and conflant ingratitude; He begs to exter into the Land, but is permitted enly to ſee-it; He forbidaeth any 
communion with the Nations for ſeveral reaſons. Chap. 7.. He gives a ſhors repetition of thoſe ſundry Laws, Moral, 
Ceremonial, Fudicial, and Military, which he had given them, from hewce this Book s called Deuteronomy. Then, af- 
ter many Exbortations, be propheſieth of Chriſt, afterward: he ſhews how matters of War are to be managed, and, giving many 
other particular dire&ions with reference to Duties, Conditions, and Perſons of both Sexes, he prenounceth Bleſſings on the Obe- 
dient, and Curſes on the Diſobedient ; He then gives # charge for laying up, and reading of the Law at certain times, and eve- 
17 ſeven years to be ſolemnly read be/ore all the people; He compoſeth a Song for common uſe, comprizing the wonderful things 
| ; He propheſieth of Chrifts coming, and the calling of the Gentiles, ſeeth the Land, and dieth, leawing Joſhua, 


| 


mentioned. Anſw. The word Suph here uſed doth not fignifie the ! 


—___ 


CHAP. I 


9 AndI ſpake unto you atthat time mm, ſaying, I am 
not able to bear you my ſelf alone: 


» (i.e.) About that time, to wit, a little before their coming to 
Horeb, Exod: 19. 18. 


10 The LORD your God hath multiplied you,and be- 
hoid,ye are this day as the ſtars of Heaven for multitude. 
11 * The LORD God of your fathers make you a , 
thouſand times ſo many moe as Fe #re,and bleſs you, * as *Gen. ;- 


F2Sam.24 


he hath promiſed you. 5.22.17.& 
I2 How can I my ſelf alone bear your cambrance, SS + _ 


and your burden » and your ſtrife #? « 

» The trouvle of ruling and managing ſo perverſe a people, ” 
0 Either your quarrellings with God ; or rather your contentions 
among your ſelves : For the determination whereof, the Elders were 
appointed. 


13 7 Take ye wiſe men, and underſtanding p, and 
known q among your tribes, and I will make them + Hob 
rulers over you. 6 

p Perſons of Knowledge, Wiſdom and Experience. q Men Fa- 


mous, and had in Reputation, for Ability and Integrity : For to 
ſuch they would more readily ſubmit. 


14 Andye anſwered me, and ſaid,The thing which 
thou haſt ſpoken js good for #s to do. 

15 Sol rook the chief r of your tribes, wiſe nzen and 
known, and + made them heads over you ; captains o- t Heb. 
ver thouſands, and captains over hundreds, and captains **** 
over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers 5s among 
your tribes. 


7 Not in Authority, which yet they had nor, but in endowments 
for good government. 5s Inferiour Officers, that were to attend 
upon the Superiour Magiſtrates, and to execute their Decrees. 

16 And lcharged your Judges at that time, ſaying, * Joh. y. 
Hear the cauſes between yourbrethren, and * judge righ- i 
teouſly between every man and * his brother, and the "EV: 24 
ſtranger that is with him 7. "I 

# That converſeth or dealeth with him. To ſuch God: would 
have Juſtice equally adminiſtred as to his own people, partly for 
the honour of Religion, and partly for the intereſt whigh every 
man hath in matters of common right. he 

17 * Ye ſhall not} reſpe&perſons «in Jadgergent, bur 
ye thall hear the ſmall x as well as the great, ye fall not 
be afraid of the face of man : For the judgement is Gods 

): and the cauſe that is too hard for you, 
me, and ] will hear jt. 

» Heb; Not know, or acknowledge Faces, i. e. Not give ſentence 
according to the outward qualities of the perſon, as he is poor or 
rich, your Friend or Enemy,but purely according to the merits of 
the cauie. For which reaſon ſome of the Grecian Law-givers ordered 
that rhe Judges ſhould give ſentence inthe dark where they could 
nor ſce mens faces. Sce the ſame or the like phraſe, Deur. 10. 17. 
2 Chron: i9, 6, 7. Job 13. 8. Jam. 2.1, 9g, x Perſons of the meaneſt 
rank » (7. e.) It is paſſed in the name of God, and by commiſſion 
fiom him, by you as repreſ-nting his perſon, and doing his work, 
who therefore will own and defend you therein againſt all your 
Enemies, and ro whom you muſt give an exaC account. 

18 AndIcommanded you at that timeall the things 
which ye ſhall do z. 

z I delivered unto you, 


Laws, Statutes, 
in Horeb. 


19And when we departedfrom Horeb,we went through 
all chat'great and terrible}wilderneſs, which yeſaw by the + Thc; 
way ofthemountain of theAmorices,astheLOR DourGod of Poron, 
commanded us, and* we came to Kadeſh-Barnea. Num. 10, 
20 And I faid unto you, Yeare come unto the moun- *Numb 
tain of the Amorites, which the LORD our God doth 1; 14) 
give unto us. Þ- 
21 Behold the LORD thy God hath ſer the land be- 
fore thee : Go up, and poſleſs ir, as the LORD God of 
thy fathers hath ſaid unto thee: Fear not, neither be 
dilcouraged. % 
22 Andye came near unto me every-one of you, and 
ſaid, We will ſend men before us, and they ſhall ſearch 
us out the land, and bring us word again, by what way we 
mult go up, and into what cities we ſhall come. 
23 And the ſaying pleaſed me well b: And * Itook *Nymb. 


Grve. 


*Lev.: 19 
15. chap. 
I6. 19. 


bring if unto Sam. 16. 
7. Prov. 


24. 23. 
THeb. 
knowledge 


aces. 


and eſpecially unto your Judges,a!l the 
and Judgements revealed unto me by the Lord 


twelve men of you, one of a tribe. 13. 3- 
b For there ſeemed to be ſome prudence and good policy in it : 
bur 


—_ 


Fa: 
Hoſ: 


* Exc 
T3. 21 
* Nu 
TO. 37 


Ezek: 
6. 


*Nurr 
T4 23 
Pfal: « 


it, 


f Heb 


' fulfilleg 


$0 aft, 


F Chap. I D 8 U T E RK © N oe Chap. 
but Moſes could not ſee into their hearts, -nor from what root this | 40 But as for ou, turn ve, and take your journey 1N- | 
deſire grew: But God faw it, and therefore 12 juſt Jadyamens to the wilderneſs by the way of the Red-ſea. mr [| 
| complyed with your _ and permitted*them to do fo for their AT Then ye anſwered and ſaid unto-me, * We have NT 
ial and exerciſe, Numb. 13. I, 2, 3: ; p . | . xp. 14. 40. 
* Numb: ©"! 4 7 for * they turned and went up into the moun- Linned againit the LORD, hoteg will go up and fight, ac | 
13. 24+ 2+ d came 4:10 the valley c of Eſchol 4, and ſearch- cording 'to all that rhe LORD our God commanded us. | || 
og bf = ES 7 : And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of | 
ed it out. ; : i 
: Or. the brook : the word ſignifies both, for b:ooks commonly | War, Ye WEre ready « tO £0 UP into the hill. ; 
ita Valleys. d (i. e.) Of grapes, ſo called from the goodly cluſter # Or, ye offered your ſelves, or you began, or you earneſil; reſolued and 
of grapes which they brought from thence, Numb. 13. 23. F attempted. | { , ( | 
25 And they took of the fruit e of rhe land in their | 42 And the LORD aid unto me, lay unto them, Go 
hand, and brought ir down unto us, and brought us | not up, neither fight, for I am not among you w : left ye 
word again, and ſaid, 1t isa good land f which the | be ſmitten before your encraies. | 
o- WE "> ?. x With my powerful Preſence and Aftiſtance. | 
LORD our God doth give unto us. yY.P | | 
e Grapes, Pomegranates and Figs, Numb. 13. 23. f Which ac- 4.3 50 I ſpake unto you, and ye would not hear, but : |: 
kn danong coming from its Enemies, ſhould have prevailed | rebelled againſt the commandment of the LORD, and + Heb: 2 
with you to go in; more than their diſcouraging words ſhould have | + went preſumptuouſly up into the hill. were pre=| 
bear you off, becauſc mw Lord who had os _ _ "| 44 And the Amorices which dwelt in that mountain jg 
unqueſtionably able to ſettle you in 1t in ſpight of all oppoition. hi | / ; 
* Norwichſtanding ye would not 4,0 up,but rebelled Toft our Ars and chaſed Y v-n- Ire do y, and up, 
againſt the commandment of the LORDour God. erroyed you 1N dSE1r, evey unto Forman. |» 
5 0 Rs 4 ſaid: B $42 As Bees which being provoked come out of their Hives in 
27 And ye murmured 1n your tents,and 191d, Becau great numbers, and with great fury purſue and ſting their Adver- 
the LORD hated us g, he hath brought us forth out of | {ary and Diſturber, Pſal: 118. 12. 
the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the A- | 45 And ye returned, and wept before the LORD, 
morites to deſtroy us. but the LORD wculd not hearken to your voice, nor 
Zz And therefore deſigned to deſtroy us. ' 4.6 | g1ve ear unto you. : 
FRO 28 Whither jhall we go up? our brethren have T dif- 46 Soye abode in Kadeſh many days, according un- 
— couraged our heart, ſaying,* The people # greater b and | (9 the days that ye abode there x. | 
3:28, 29, taller than we, the cities are great, and walled up tO = (;.e.) As you abode in Kadeſh many, even 45 days, until the 
12, 53. Heaven z ; and moreover, we have ſeen the ſons of the | ſpies which you ſent returned to give you an account, fo you alſo 
*Numb: * Anakirns & there abode there many days, or a long time after, and were not now 
13» 28. þ In number and ſtrength and valour. 7 (i.e.) Toa great height, permitted to make any __ th Tv. ds Canaan. 
A common Hyperbole, as Ge”. 11. 4. Pſal. 107. 26. k The Chil | © - AF. 1. 
dren of Anak or Enak, See Juaz. 1. 10, 20. c Tier —_ Jr oe, - 7 3-: 4 charge that | they rhe 
Tj 28> —_ : - . afraid not the Eaomites, 4, 5. nor the Moabites, 9g. nor the Aimonites, 19.. bur 
_ Then Itaid amps” Ac, Dread _—_ neither be atr are encouraged to fight the Amorites ; they put them to flight, and take 
of them. poſſeſſion of their Lands, 26 cd 


X 20 The LORD your God which goeth before you, | 
he ſhall fight for you, according to all that he did for | 


you in Egypt 1, before your eyes, 
{ Where you were weak, diſpirited, divided, raw and unexpe- 


rienced,and in a great meaſure unarmed, and able co do norbing as | 
gainſt your numerous, porent, united Enemies, bur to ſtand {H11 

And therefore now your diſtruſt is | 
highly unreaſonable, when you have been hardned and fired for | 
military ſervice by your travels, diſciplined and experienced in | 
ſome degree as to Martial Aﬀairs, encouraged by frequent and glo- 

rious Miracles for 4o years together, and you are going into a | 


and ſee the Salvation of (ad. 


Country divided into ſeveral Nations and Kingdoms, 
: Andin the wilderneſs, where thou haſt ſeen how 
"T6: 63.9. that the LORD thy God * bare thee 22 as a man doth 
Hoſ: 11. 3- bear his ſon, in all the way that ye went, until ye came 
into this place. 


-m Or, carried thee, as a father carries his weak and tender child in 
his arms, as 1ſa. 49. 22. or as upon Eagles wings, as it 1s, Exod: 19. 4. 


through difficulties and dangers, gently leading you according as 
you were able to go, and ſuſtaining you by his power and goodneſs. | 


See of this or the like phraſe, Numb: 11.12. Dewt: 32» 10, 11. Pſal. 
91. 12, 1/a: 46. 3, 4. : 

32 Yet inthis thing » ye did not believe the LORD 
your God ; | 

2 In this matter which God commanded and encouraged you to 
do, to wit, in going in confidently to poſſeſs the land. Or, in this 


word, whereby God promiſed to fight for you, and affured you of 


good ſucceſs. 
* Bod: 22 * Who went in the way beforeyou, * to ſearch 
13.21, Yyou out a place to pitch your tents in fire by night,to 
* Numb: thew youby what way ye ſhouldgo, & in a cloud by day. 
E,.??:. _ 34 And the LORD heard che voice of your wordso, 
6. _ and was wroth and ſware, ſaying, 


o To wit, your murmurings,your unthankful, impatient,diſtruſt 
ful and rebellious ſpeeches and carriages. 


"Numb 25 * Surely there ſball not one of theſe men of this ' 
14- 23. Cvil generation ſ:e that good land, which I ſware to give » 
Pal: 95. unto your fathers 3 | 
I1, 36 Save Caleb p the ſon of Jephunneh,he ſhall ſee it, | 
+ Heb: and to him will I give the land q that he hath troden 


fulfilled to upon, and to his children, becauſe he hath + wholly fol- 
g0 after. lowed the LORD. 

p Under whom Joſhua 1s comprehended,as is manifeſt from v.38. 
and Numb: 14. 39. though not here expreſſed, becauſe he was not 
now to be one of the people, but to be ſer over them as chief Go- 

"Numb: V<r2our. q That particular part of the Land. Compare Jef: 14. 9. 

$0. 12. 37 * Alfo the LORD was angry with me for your 

& 27. 14+ ſakes r, ſaying, Thou alſo ſhalt not go in thither. 

Ch: 3.26. 7 Upon occaſion of your wickedneſs and perverſeneſs, by which 

and 4. 21. you provoked me to ſpeak unadviledly, Pal 106. 32, 33. 

and 34.4 438 But Joſhua the ſon of Nun, which ſtandeth before 
thee 5s, he (ball go in thither ; Encourage him; for he 
ſhall cauſe Iſrael co inherit it. 

s (i.e.) Whois now thy Miniſter and Servant, for ſuch are oft 
deſcribed by this phraſe, as 1 Kirgs x. 2, Dan: 1. 5, 19. 


9 
39 Moreover, your little ones, which ye ſaid ſhould 


; LORD fſpake unto me: and we compaited mount Seir a 


| 37- : ; 
; oY we turned, and took our. journey into the 
wilderneſs, by the way of the Red-ſea, * as the 


* Numbs 
k4 25. 1 
many days 6. A 
3 The mountainous Country of Seir or EJom: 
even for 38 years. 
2 And the LORD ſpake unto me, ſaying, 
3 Ye have compailed this mountain long enough, 
turn ye northward c. 
c Towards the land of the 4morites and Canaanites. . 1 
4 And command thou the people, ſaying, * ye are to * Numb 
paſs through the coaſt «4 of your brethren, the children 29 14+ } 
of Efau, which dwell in Seir e, and they ſhall be afraid | 
of you f: take ye good heed unto your ſelves therefore. 
4 Or, by, or near the coſt or border; For they did not paſs through 


b Or, many years 


their borders, as it is ſaid, Numb: 20. 21. And the particle B:th 
doth oft ſignifie by or near, as Gen: 37. 13. Jof: 5. 13. Fudg: 8. 5. Fer: 
32.7. Thus that difference may be reconciled, which others re- 
concile thus, that they at firſt denyed ir, bur afterwards granted 
it. e Theſe words reſtrain the prohibition to theſe particular Chil 
dren of Eſau, for there were another ſort or branch of Eſau's Chil- 
dren, which were to be meddled with and deſtroyed, even the 4ma- 
lekites, Exod: 17. 14 Deut: 25. 17. who were Eſau's poſterity, Gen: 36. 
12. f BurI charge you take no advantage of their fears, which you 


w1ll be very apt to do. 
5 Meddlenot with them f, for I will not give you of f Heb: 


4 p - eventot, 
their land, F nonot ſo much as a foot-breadth, * becauſe tar 
1 have given mount Seir unto Efau for a poiteflion. the ſole of 

f To wit, in battel at this time. the fort, 


6 Ye thall buy meat of them g for money, that ye may * Gen: 36| 
eat, and ye ſhall alſo buy water of them 6 for money, F. tha 
that they may drink. , Jolh:248 


£ For though the Manna did yet rain upon them, they were not 


| Gen: 26. 18. Numb: 21. 18. 


— 


; 6, and 31. 7. Which experience of God's ſingular goodneſs to thee, 


be a prey, and your children which in that day had no 


knowledge between good and evil, they ſhall go in thi- | Moabites, neither contend with them in battel: for I will 
ther,and unto them will I give it, and they ſhal! poſſeſs ir. 


f£ Acommon deſcription of the {tate of childhood, as 709% 4. £1. 


not give thee of their land for a puilefton,becaulc lhave 34. 


forbidden to buy other meats when they had opportunity, bur only 
were forbidden greedily to hunger after them when they could not 
obtain them. h For water in thoſe paits was ſcarce, and therefore 
private perſons did ſevera!ly dig pits for their particular uſe. See 


7 Forthe LORD thy God hath bleſſed thee 5 in all 
the works of thy hand ; he knoweth & thy walking 
through this great wilderneſs:theſe forty years theLORD 
thy God hath been with thee, thou haſt lacked nothing. 

7 By Gods bleſſing thou art able to buy thy conveniencies, and 
therefore thy theft and rapine will be inexculable, becauſe without 
any pretence of neceſſity. & Heb: He hath known, «. e. obſerved, or re- 
garded with careand kindneſs, which that word oft notes, as Pſal: r. 


ſhould make thee truſt him ſtil}, and nor uſe any undire& and un- 
juſt praCtices to procure what thou wanteſt or deliceſt, 

8 And when we pailed by from our brethren,the chil- 
dren of Eſau whichdwelt in Seir,through the way of the 
piain from Elah, and from Ezion-Gaber /, we turned m 
and palled by the way of the wilderneſs of Moab. 

1 Of which fee Numb: 33. 35. which may be either thar place us 
pon the Red-ſea, 1 Kmgs g. 26. or anothe: of the fame name. »» To 
wit; from our direCt road which lay through Eons land. 


9 And the LORD faid unto me, |} Diſtreſs not the 


ſj Or, uſe Vil 
0f; ity Fs 
88111 Aſgo 

aE | 


4 givca 


it eb. in- 
ited 


Numb. 
br. 12. 
*Or,valley 7, 


coaſt of 


aps IE. 
[ » The chief City of the Moabires, Numb. 21. 15. 28. here put for 
| | i the whole Country which depended upon it. 0So called to ſignifie 
| | | cd people, but for Lots ſake whoſe memory God yet honours. 
kn © 2 The Emimsp dwele therein in times paſt,a people 
p Men tersible for ſtature and ſtrength, as their very name 1M- 
ports. See Gen. 14. 5. whoſe expulſion by the Moabires is here noted 
much more drive out the wicked and accurſed Canaanres. 
11 Which alſo were accounted giants ; as the Ana- 
12 *The Horims q alſo dwelt in Seir before-time, but 
the children of Eſau +{ucceeded them, when they had 
IDr, rom. ſtead, as Ifrael did unto the land of his poſſeſſion, which 
the LORD gave unto them r. 
given it unto them. ſw. 1. The paſt tenſe is here pur for the fu- 
cure, will give, after the manner of the Prophets. 2. Things are ofc 
ted to be done, in which ſenſe Reuben is ſaid to deliver Joſeph, Gen: 
37. 22. Balak to fight againſt iſrael, Joſ. 24. 9. Abraham to have offered 
not only becauſe he had purpoſed and promiſed to give ir, but alſo 
becauſe he was now about to give it, and had already given them 
be particularly underſtood of that part of {raels poſſeſſion which was 
beyond Jordan, which God had aQually given to them, that is, to 
not given to all of them, bur only to ſome of the tribes. 
13 Now riſe up, «id 1, and get ye over * the || brook 
14 And the ſpace in which we came from Kadeſh- 
Barnea, until we were come over the,brook Zered, 24s 
of war were waſted out from among the hoſt, as the 
LORD ſware unto them. 
them, to deſtroy them from among the hoſt, until they 
were conſumed. 
conſumed and dead from among the people. 
17 That the LORD ſpake unto me, ſaying, 
- Moab s, this day. ; 
s Or, to paſs by the border of Moab, by Ar. : 
dren of Ammon, diſtreſs them not, nor meddle with 
them: For I will not give thee of the land of the chil 
unto the children of Lot fer a poſleflion. | 
' 20 (That alſo was accounted a land of giants: giants 
*Zamzummaims ? ; | 
£ Which ſignifies men moſt wicked and abominable, or moſt preſump- 
21 A people great,and many,and tall as the Anakims: 
but the LORD deſtroyed them before them «, and they 
« Who therefore will certainly do as much for his own people. 
22 As he did tothe children of Eſau, * which dwelt 
them, and they ſucceeded them, and dwelt in their 
ſtead, even unto this day. | 
"unto Azzah, the Caphtorims x, which came forth out of 
Caphtor y, deſtroyed them, and dwelt in their ſtead.) 
with them in this enterprize, and ſo dwelling together, and by de-, 
grees were probably united rogether by Marriages or otherways,and 
Philiſtines, See Jer. 47. 4. Amos 9.7. ) Which is by the Learned 
thong to be Cappadocia, Whither theſe people might make an 


| given Ar» unto the. children of Lot o for a poſſeſſion. 
that this preſervation, was not for. their ſakes, for they were a wick- 
28,33- great and many. andtall as * the Anakims. 
as 4 great encouragement to the 7/raelites, for whoſe ſake he would 
| | en. 36. Kims : but the Moabites call them Emims. 
deſtroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their || 
q Of whom ſee Ger. 14. 6. and 36. 20. 7 0bj. God had nor yet 
ſaid to be done, when they arc only reſolved, or decreed, or attemp- 
his ſon; Heb. 11. 17. 3. God may well be faid to have given it, 
ſome part of it, and that as an earneſt of the whole. 
ſame of them, for even the land of Canaan on this fide Jordan, was 
ered: and we went over the brook Zered. 
thirty andeight years,until all the generation ofthe men 
15 For indeed the hand of the LORD was againſt 
16 So it came to paſs when all the men of war were 
18 Thou art to paſs over through Ar, the 
I9 And »hes thou comelt nigh over againſt the chil- 
dren of Ammon #»y polleffion, becauſe I have given it 
dwelt therein in oldtime, and the Ammonires call them 
rzuous, or maſt crafty. 
ſucceeded them, and dwelt in their ſtead. 
in Seir, when he deſtroyed the Horims from before 
22 "And the * Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, ever 
x A people a kin to the Philiſtines, Gen. 10. 14. and confederate 
became one people, the Caphrorims being at laſt ſwallowed up in the 
expedition out of Egypt, either becauſe of the report of the great 


Riches of part of that Country which drew others thither from 
places equally remote, or after the manner of thoſe ancient times, 


 * Numb. or for ſome other reaſon now unknown? 

21.3, 16, 24 Riſe ye up, take your journey, and * paſs over 
+ Heb. be- the river Arnon: behold, I hare given into thy hand 
giv, 29ſ2ſ. $jhon the Amorite, King of Heſhbon, and his land: + 
begin to poſſeſs zz, and contend with him 3n barrel. 

25 This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, 
and the fear of thee upon the nations hat are under the 
whole heaven 2, who ſhall hear report of thee,and ſhall 
tremble, and be in anguiſh becauſe of thee. 


z Which is a Synecdoche and an Hyperbole, but is explained by 
the following words, which reſtrain the ſentence to thoſe nations 


that heard otthem. | 
26 And 1 ſent Meſſengers out of the wilderneſs of 


Kedemoth a, unto Sihon king of Heſhbon, * with 


| werds of peace b, ſaying, 
& So called from a city of that 


Fch'20.10 


name, Jof. r3. 18. and called Jeſe- 


1 


DEBUTERONO MY 


4. This may 


, people, to fight at Jahaz. 


j 21. 15. 28. Joſ. 12.2. and 13. 9. He ſpeaks excluſively, for this 


mom, Numb 20. 6 With offers of 1 | _—_ _ 
L . 2I. 20. ith 0 
their deſtruftion was highly juſt TIT woes my 
27 * Let me paſs through thy land; I will go along 
by the high way c, I will neither turn unto the right "Numb, 
_—_ _ to the leſt. ; A. 
c In my dire& road to Canaan, fr '1 
into thy Fields, or Vines, X, —-— "_qg 2 
28 Thou ſbalr ſell me meat for money,that T may eat 
and give me water for money, thatT may drink : 'only 
I will paſs through en my feet 4. : 
d Or, with my foot-men,or with my company which are on foot : which 


is added ſignificantly, becauſe if their Army had conſiſted as much 


of Horſemen as many other Armies did, their paſſage thiough his. 


land might have been more miſchievous and &ai;o 3B 
= 0099. fey us and dangerous: Bur they 

29 (As the children of Eſau which dwell in Scir, and 
the Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me e) until 
I ſhall paſs over Jordan, into the land which the LORD 
our God giveth us. 

e Oj. The King of Elom, 7.e. of the children of Eſav, did not gra 
them paſſage, Numb. 20. Anſw. They did permit them s —_ Sts 
Iy by the borders, though not through the heart of their lanc,, and 
In their paſſage the people ſold them meat and drink, being it ſ.cms 
more kind to them than their king would have had them ; ang there- 
fore they here aſcribe this favour not to the king, though they are 
now treatin g with a King, but tothe people, the children of Eſqu. 

30 But Sihon king of Heſbbon would not ler us paſs 
by him f': For * the LORD thy God hardened his ſpi- 
rit, and made his heart obftinate g, that he might de- 
_— a me chy hand, as appeareth this day. 

z.e. By his Borders. & Unmoveable and inexorable to our def 

31 And the LORD faid unto me, Behoid, I have he 
gun to give Sihon and his land before thee, begin to 
polieſs, chatthou mayeſt inherir his land. 

32 * Then Sihon came out againſt us, he and all his 


P ofh, Ye, 
20. 


33 And the LORD our God delivered him before us Kara | 
and we ſmote him, and hisſons, and all his people. : 
34 And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly 


deſtroyed g the + men, and the women, and the little t Heb- 


*Joſh 
Kok 
11, 


every ot) 
of men atid 
nero women, and 
ruction [;77 

See Deut. 7. 2. and 20. 16. —_— 


ones of every city, we left none to remain. 

gs By God's command, theſe being a part of thoſe peo 
were devouted by the Lord of life and death, to vitve ho 
for their abominable wickedneſs. | 

35 
and the ſpoil of the cities which we took ; 

36 From Aroer h, which s by the brink of the river 
of Arnon, and froms the city that 5s by the river 3, even 
unto Gilead, there was not one City too ſtrong for us? | 
the LORD our God delivered all unto us. ; 

h Which was in the border of Moab, but now in the hands of t! 
Amorites, i Heb. In the river, wherewith it was encompaſled, Namb, 


was 4r, which now wasin the Moabites juriſdiftion, above v. 9 
37 Only unto the land of the children of Ammon 


thou cameſt not, nr unto any place of the river * Jab= Gen xx; 
en.32 


Only thecartel we took for a prey unto our ſelves f 
Þ 


bok &, nor unto the ciries in the mountains, 
mover the LORD ourGod forbad us w 
27, e, Beyond 7abbok, for that was the border of ; 
2 , for that w: the 4 
gp Obj. Half the land Ly 7 the Amonites is ſaid to be given EE. 
Gad, Joſ. 13. 27. Anſw. This is true of thet half of it which the Aonh. 
24 had taken from them, but not of the other half which yet wasin 
the poſſeſſion of the Amonites. I The mountainous Country of the 4 
_ mM - eb. GIO us, commanding is put for forbidding "vw 
en. 2,16.and ;.11. Lev. 4. 2. Deut. 4. 23. The w 
thus rendered, Concerning which the Lord gave us OOOANY Bs 
” wit, that we ſhould not meddle with them, as was ſaid before. 
o1t1s only anellipſis of the prepoſition, which is very frequent 
=P TO CHAF BL : 
er march to Baſhan, x. Og its King is put to flight, they þ 
2—711. which: is diſtrivuted to two Tribes _ half, -4.-thog gr 
are commanded to aſſiſt their Brethren to poſſeſs the land beyond Jordan 
———_ 20. Moſes encourages Joſhua, $722. #7 Prayer ro go into the 
promiſed land, 23-25. God grants not his requeſt, 26. He gives him 
a proſpett of it, 27. and bids him encourage Joſuah, 28. 
Hen we turned, and went up the way to Baſhan 
and " Og the King of Baſhan came out again Us: 
he and all his peopie to battel at Edrei *N 
And the LORD fai ar hi 17 
2 aid unto me, Fear him not a: For 21.33. Kc. 
I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land into NG 
thy hand,and thou ſhalt do unto him,as thou didſt unto* *Numb 
Sihon King ofthe Amorites, which dwelt at Heſhbon, 27: 24: 
2 Though he be of ſo frightful a lookand ſtature, v. 17. 
3 So the LORD our Ged delivered into our hands * 
Og alſothe King of Baſhan, and all his peeple : and we Numb. | 
{mote him, until none was left to him remaining. Eh 
4 And we took all hiscities at that time, there was not 
a City which we took not from them; threeſcore cities 
all the region of Argob b the kingdom of Og in Baſhan, 
b A Province within Baſhan, or at leaſt ſubje& and belonging bo 


Baſban, as appears from v. 13. and 1 Kin : 
_- . gs, . I . called A # 
ſibly from the name ofa man its former Los _ owner. rg0b, pol: 


5 All theſe cities were fenced with high walls, gates, 


AOT UNtO 22. 


a 


and barsc, beſides unwalled towns a great many. 


c Which may encourage you in your attempt upon Canaan, not- 
: wWith- 


—— 


* ,San 
12:26. 


Jer.49 


*Num 
$2:33- 
Joſh:1 3 
&c, 


*; Chre 
2:22. 

*Num 
22. 41. 


* Num! 
J2. 39. 


* Num 
21. 24. 


Joſh.12 


. I: DEUTE. 


withſtanding the fenced cities which the ſpies told you of,and you 
m Fi = utterly deſtroyed them, as we did unto Si- 
hon King, of Heſhbon, utterly deſtroying the men,wo- 
men, and. children of eyery 

7 But all the cattel,and the 
for a prey to our ſelves. 

$ And we took att 
two Kings of theAmorites,t 
Jordan d,fromthe river of Ar 


F Chap 


2. 
ſoil of the cities, we took 


hat time out of the hand of the 
he land that was on this ſide 
non,unto mount — e: 
when Moſes wrote this book, but afterward when 

tee paſſed. _ Jordan it was called the land beyond Jordan. 
"9 ( Which Hermon the Zidonians cali S1r1on : and the 


-ites Call it Shenir) e. 
ASIC called _ and Libanus or Lebanon,and here 
Shenir, and Sirion, and, by abbreviation, Sow, Dent. 4. 48. Which 
ſeveral names are given to this one mountain partly by ng peo- 
ple, and partly in cegard of ſeveral tops and parts of it, whence 
Schenir and Hermon are mentioned as diſtinCt places, Cant. 4. S. je 
ro All the cities of the plain,and all Gilead f, and 
all Baſhan, :unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the king- 


dom of Og in Baſhan. | 
f Gilead Sy, norm taken largely for all the 1/-aelites poſſeſſions 
beyond Jorday, arid ſo it comprehends Baſban, but here more ſri 
ly for that part. of it which lyes in and near. mount Gilead, and fo 
it is diſtinguiſhed from Baſbar and 4gob. 42s 
11 For only Og king of Baſhan remained of the rem- 
nant of giants g : behoid, his bedſtead was a bedſtcad of 
iron : js it not in * Rabbath of the children of Ammon #? 
nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubirs the 


breadth of it, after the cubit of a man &. _.. 

2 The other giants.of Baſhan were deſtroyed before ; and there- 
fore when Og was killed, the Jraelites work was done, 1 Where it 
might now be, either becauſe the Ammonites 1n ſome former battel 
with Og had takea ir as a ſpoil : or becauſe after Og's death, the 4m- 
monites deſired to have this monument of his greatneſs, and the Iſ- 
raelites permitted them to carry it away to their chief city. & Io 
wit, of ordinary ſtature. So. his bed was four yards. and an half 
long, and two yards broad. | | 


12 And-this land which we poſſeſſed at that time from 
Aroer, which 5s by the river Arnon, and half mount Gi- 
lead,and *the cities thereof,gave I unto the Reubenites, 
and to the Gadites. 

13 And the reft of Gilead, and all Baſhan, being the 
kingdom of Og,gavel unto the half cribe of Manaileh : 
all the region of Argob, wich all Baſhan,which was cal- 
led the land of giants 

14 * Jair the ſon of Manaſſch took all the countrey of 
Argob, unto the coaſts of Geſhuri /, and Maachathi m, 
and called them after his own name Baſhan * Havoth- 


Jair unto this day ». | 

1 Or, Geſburites, a people towards the North of Canaan, 2 Sam. 
3. 3. and 15. 8. See alſo Jol. 13. 13. m Of whom ſee 2 San. 3. 3- 
and 10. 6. » This muſt be put among thoſe other paſſages which 
were not written by Moſes, but add:d by thoſe holy men who di- 
geſted the books of Moſes into this order and inſerted ſome yery few 
paſſages to accomodate things to their own time and people. 

15 And * I gave Gijcad o unto Machir p. 

0 (7.e.) The half part of Gilead, as appears from v. 12,,13. See 
on Numb. 32.40. p (3. e. ) Unto the children of Machir ſon of Ma- 
naſſeh, for Machir was now dead. 


16 And unto the Reubenites,and unto the Gadites I 
gave from Gilead even unto the River Arnon, half the 
valley q, and the border, even unto the river Jabbok r, 


* which # the border of the children of Ammon x. 

q Or rather 70 the middle of the River ; for the word rendred half 
ſignifies commonly middle, and the ſame Hebrew word fignifying 
both a valley and a brook or river,it ſeems more reaſonable to under- 
ſtand it of a River, as the ſame word is-here rendred in the next 
foregoing clauſe of this verſe, chan ofa valley, which was not men- 
tioned before, eſpecially ſcing there is here an article added which 
ſeems to be emphatical, and ro note that River, to wit, now men- 
tioned. Add to this, that there was no ſuch valley, much leſs any 
half-valley, bzlonging both unto the Reubenites and Gadites. But 
according to the other tranſlation the ſenſe is plain and agreeable 
to the truth, that their Land extended from Gileadunto Arnon,ani to 
ſpeak exaQly, to the middle of that River, for as that River was the 
border between them and otiers,ſo one half of it belonged to them, 


*Joſh. 12 a 
5. 13. 
11, 


* ,Sam. 
12:26. 


Jer 49.2+ 


*Numb: 
32: 33+ 
Joſh:13:8. 
Kc. 


*; Chron: 
2:22. 
*Numb. 
22. 41. 


* Numb: 
$2. 39- 


* Numb. 
21. 24. 


Joſh.12.2. 


. as the other half did to others. And that this is no ſubtil device,as | 


ſome may think ir, bur the truth of the thing, and the real meaning 
of the place, will appear by comparing this place with two others, 
7. with Joſ. 12. 2. where the ſame thing is expreſſed in the ſame 
words in the Hebrew whici are here,though our tranſlators render 
the ſelf-ſame words there, from the midale of the River, which here 
they render, half of 


kingdom, which was the ſame portion here mentioned! as given to 


Reuben and Gad, and thus deſcribed, from Aroer, which is upon the 
bank of the River of Arnmm, and frm the midale of the River, and from 
half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the chil- 
#ren of Ammon. 2.With Deur.2.36. From Aroer, which is by. the brink of the 
river of Arne, and f:om the city that is by the River, or rather, as the 
Hebrew hath it, in the River, 3. e. from Ar, which 'was the chief 
city of the Moabites, and therefore denied to the Iſraelites. as 
1s here implied, and more fully expreſſed, Deut. 2. 9. which City 
was ſeated inan iſland in the middle of the Rives 
have a juſt and full reaſon why the border of this Land given to 
Reuben and Gad is ſo nicely and crifieally deſcribed here, even to 
the middle of a River, which alrhough in truth and ftri&neſs it te 
the bound of choſe Lands which are divided by a River, yet is not 


che walley ; and where the bounds of Sihons + 


ver:;, So thar hereve } 


R.O N O M TY. Chap. IL. | 


uſually expreſſed in the deſcription of borders, either in Scripture 
or other Authors, becauſe here was an eminent City of the Moabites 
in the middle of this River,which by this curious and exa& deſcrip- 
tion is excepted from their poſſeſſion, as God would haye it to be. 
» The meaning ſeems to be this, And the border, to wit, of their 
Land, was, which verb ſubſtantive is common!y underſtood, or 
went forth, (as the phraſe is, Joſ. 15, 6, 7, &c ) from thence, to wit, 
from the River Arnon, even unto the River Jabbok, for ſo indeed their 
border &id proceed. 5 Obje#. This was the border between them 
and the Manaſfes, as is evident. and therefore not the border of the 
Ammonites, ': Anſw. It bordered upon the Manaſites in one part, and 
upon the Ammonites 1n another part, to wit, in that part which is 
remoter from Jordan, and ſo both are t:ue. 
i7 The plain 7 alſo, and !ordan,and the coaſt zb-reef 
from Chinnereth «,even unto the ſea of the plain x even | 
the ſalt ſea, || under A{hdoth Pifg1h y eaſtward. | Or,under | 
5 The Low Countrey towards Jordan. u Of wiich ſee on Numb. the ſprings | 
34.11. Joſ. 12:3. x (5. e. ) That falr Sea, as it here follows, which of P:[gah, 
before that dreadful conflagration was a goodly plain, called rhe or the hill. | 
_ of Jordan, Gen. 13. 10. y The proper name ofa Ciry,of which, j 
Jo). 13. 20. Fe. | : | 
18 And I commanded you & at that time, ſaying, 
The LORD your God hath given you this iand ro ha. 
ſeſs it : * ye (hall-paſs over armed before your breth:en, * Numb: 
the children of Iſrael, all :hat are F meer for the war s. 32: 20. 
z To wit, the Reubenites and Gadites mentioned, v. 16. to whom t Heb./one 
he now tu:ns his ſpeech by an Apoitrophe. # In ſuch number as of 2997. 
your brethren ſhall judge neceffary. See Joſh. r. 14, and 4; 13, 
19 But your wives, and your little ones, and your. 
cattel ( for I know that ye have much catcel) ſhall abide 
in your cities, which I have given you. 
20 Until the LORD hath given reſt 6 unto your bre- 
thren, as well as unto you, and wnril they aifo poſſeſs 
the land which the LORD your God hath given them 
beyond Jordan : and then ſhall ye * return every man +Jye,2.47 | 
unto his poſſeflion which I have given you. | 
b A peaceable and fixed poſſeſſion. 
2T. And * I commanded Joſhua at that time, ſaying, + num; 
Thine eyes have ſeen all that the LORD your God hath 27+ 18. 
done unto theſe two kings: ſo ſhall the LORD do unto 
all the kingdoms whither thou paſleft. 
22 Ye ſhall nor fear them 3 for the LORD your God 
he ſhall fight for you. 
23 And I beſought the LORD at that time, ſaying, 
24 O LORD God, thou haſt beguv to ſhew thy ſer- | 
vant thy greatneſs,and thy mighty hand: for * what God , p, 1.96. | 
is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to g_ and * | 
thy works, and according to thy might ? 89. 6+ 


25 I pray thee let me go overc, and ſee the good 
land that is beyond Jordan,chat goodly mountain Fo and 
Lebanon e. | | 
c For he ſuppoſed Gods threatning might be conditional and re- 
verſible, as many others were. 4 Or, that blefſid monntain,which the 
Jews not improbavly underſtand of that mountain onwhich theTem= 
ple was to be built. For as Moſes deſired and determin<d to prepare 
an habitation for Gz0d,Exed:;15:2.and knew very well that God would 
chuſe a certain place for his habitation,and to put his name there,Deut.12.5. 
So he alſo knew tat it was the manner both of the true worſhip- 
pers of God and of Idolaters to worſhip their God in high-places,and _ 
particularly that Abraham did worſhip God in the mount of Moria, 
Gen: 22: 2. and therefore did either reaſonably conjeQure that God 
would chuſe ſome certain mountain for the place of his habiration, 
or poſlibly underſtood by revelation that in that very mount of 
Moria, where Abraham performed that eminent and glorious a& of 
worſhip, there alſo the children of Abraham ſhould bave their place 
of conſtant and ſertled worſhip. This he ſeems to call that moun: ain, 
emphatically and eminently, that which was much in Moſes his 
tioughts, tzough not in his eye, and zhe bleſſed ( as the Hebrew rob 
oft ſignifies) or the goodly mountain. Or, the mountain may be here 
put for the mountainous count!ies, as that word is oft uſed, as Ger, 
36. 9. Numb. 13. 29. and23.7. Deut.1.7. fo. 10.6.and 11. 16,2+:, &c. 
And itis known that a great part of the glory and beauty and pro- 
fir of this Country lay in its Hills or Mountains. See Dez. rr. rr. 
and 33.15. And that goodly mountain may by an Enallage of the num«. 
ber be put for thoſe goodly mountains in Canaan, which were many. 
Thus alſo he proceeds gradually in this deſire and deſcription,and 
prays that he may ſee in general the good land that is beyond Jordan, 
and then particularly, the goodly mountains of it, and eſpecially that 
famous mount of Lehbanon,which was ſo celebrated from irs tall and 
large. Cedars,and other Trees and excellent Plants. See Pſal. 29, 5: 
and 104. 16. 1a. 2. 13. and 14. 8. 
26 But the LORD * was wroth with me for your « (qa. 
| fakes f, and would not hear me : and the LORD faid 0: 12. 
| unco me, Let ic ſuffice thee g, ſpeak no more unto me and 27:34 | 
; of this matrer. | Ch:1:37. 
| fBy occaſion of your fins which provoked me to unadviſed words & 32 514 i 
and carriages, Pjal: 1c6. 32, 33: See Numb: 20: 12. Deut. 23. 2. || 
and 34:4. 2 Thar this is my pleaſure and unaltetable reſolution. 
Compare » Cor: 12: 8, 9g. 
27 * Get thee up into the top of || Piſgah þ, and lift + Numb: 
up thine eyes; weltward,atzd northward,and fouchward, 27: 12- 
{ and eaſtward, and behold jr with thine eyes: for chou !, 72, 
; ſhalt not go over this Jordan. - 
h Of which fee on Numb: 29: 12. #5 Towards the Land of Canaan 
' and its ſeveral quarters. 
28 But * charge Joſhua &, and encourage him, and * yy; 
ſtrengthen him /: for he ſhall go over m: before this peo- 27:18. 
{ ple, and he ſhall cauſe them to inheric the land which 
{ thou ſhalt ſee, 


| 


, 


: FE k Give 


I Chap, IV. | 44268 Fan 

; :þ Give him commiſſion and authority, and a command to 

| lis rn hd out the people. ! With go yet nr _ | 

promiſes and aſſurances of my preſence and help and of goo woe 

ceſs. -» It was not Moſes, but Joſhua or Jeſus that was to give 
eople reſt, Heb. 4: 8. : | 

" Y 9 So we abode in*the valley over againſt Beth-peory. 
» The Houſe or Temple of Peor, or of Baal-Peor, of which ſee 

Numb. 25. 3. whence this place or city bad its name. 


CHAP. 


KN Deur: 
13 4: 6. 


Ep - 4 
-—=24. From the miſchief of it upon themſelves and Children, 25. 2 
Gets non Rog upon their Repent ance, 29--==3I. And from Gods wouders 
towards them, 32-40. Cities of Refuge are appointed, 4 l===43. 
| OW therefore hearken,O Ifrael,unto the ſtatutes s, 
N and unto the judgments b which I teach you, for 
to do them, that ye may live, and goin, and poſleſs the 
land which the LORD God of your fathers giverh you. 
» The Laws which concern the worſhip and ſervice of Gods 
b The Laws concerning your duties to men. So theſe two com- 
prehend both Tables, and the whole law of God. _ 
2'* Ye ſhallnot add unto the word which I com- 
* Chap: mand you c, neither ſhall ye diminiſh ought from it 4, 
12:32." that ye may keep the commandments of the LORD 
Jolh-1:7- your God, which I command you. 


#0:30:6. , « By deviſing other do&rines or wayes of worſhip than what I 


12,33. Prov.30:6. Math:15.9. For this were to accuſe me of want of 
wiſdom or care or faithfulneſs in not giving you ſufficient inſtruQti- 
ons for my own ſervice. d By rejetting or neglefting any thing 
which T have commanded, though it ſeem never ſo ſmall. 

2. Your eyes have ſeen what the LORD did becauſe 
of *Baal-Peor : for all the men that followed Baal-Peor, 
T * Numb: the Lord thy God hath deſtroyed them from among you. 

| 25:4.&c. © 4 But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God, 
Jolh.22. ,ze alive every one of you this day. [ 
17, 5 Behold, I have taught you ſtatutes and judgments, 


ſhould do ſo in the land whither ye go to poſleſs ir. 

6 Keep therefore, _ atid do them, for this js * your 
*Job28:28 wiſdom and your underſtanding in the fight of the nati- 
Pfal. 111. 6ns 4, which ſhall hear all theſe ſtatutes, and fay,Surely 
this great nation js a wiſe and underſtanding people. 

4 For though the generality of Heathen people in the latter and 
degenerat ages of the world did through invererate prejudices and 
:For their own luſts and intereſts condemn the Laws of the Hebrews 
as fooliſh and abſurd, yet it;is moſt certain, that divers of the wiſeſt 

heathens did highly approve of them ſo far that they made uſe of 
divers of them,and tranilated them into their own Laws and Con- 
'> ..- Nitutions; and Moſes, the giver of theſe Laws, -hath been mentio- 
ned with great honour for hiswiſdom and learning by many of them. 
And perticularly the old Heathen Oracle expreſly ſaid, that the Chal- 

deans or Hehrews, who worſbipped the uncreated God, were the only wiſe men. 


. + For * what nation 3s there ſo great, who hath + God 
* ſo nigh unto theme, as the LORD our God x: in all 


* things that we call upon him for ? ; 
c Þy glorious miracles, by the pledges of his ſpecial preſence, 


JO. 
Prov: 1:7. 


* Sam. 
7. 23* 
+ Heb. « 
God, So Gr. 
© i ineſs to hear our prayers, and to give us thoſe ſucco 
&145:18. by tus readineſs to hear our prayers, g1\ urs 
& 148:14, Which we call upon him for. 
Ifa-55:6, 8 And what nation 3s there ſo great,that hath ſtatutes 

and judgments /o righteous f, as all this law which I ſer 

before you this day ? | 

f Whereby he implies that the true greatneſs of a nation doth not 

conſiſt in pomp or power, or largeneſs of empire, as commonly 
* men think, bur in the righteouſneſs of its Laws. 

9 Only take heed to thy ſelf, and keep thy ſoul dili- 

gently,leſt thou forget the things which thine eyes have 
| ſeen, and leſt they depart from thy heart all the days of 
*Gen. 18. thy life : but * teach them thy ſons and thy ſons ſons : 
19.ch.67, * xo Specially * the day that thou ftoodſt before the 
| og '9- LORD thy God in Horeb g,when the LORD ſaid un- 
p wy - to me,Gather me the people together, and I will make 
*Ex:19:9, them hear my woerds,that they may learn to fear me all 
16 & 20. the days that they ſhall live spon the earth, and har 
38. Heb; they may teach their children. 
22, 28. £ Some of them ſtood there in their own perſons, though then 
they were but young, the reſt ſtood then in the loins of their Pa- 
rents, in whom they may well be ſaid to ſtand there, becauſe they 
are ſaid ro have entered into covenant with God, becauſe their Pa- 
rents did ſo in their name and for their uſe. . 

11 And yecame near, anditood under the mountain, 
and the * mountain burnt with fire unto the + midſt of 
heaven þh, with darkneſs, clouds and thick darkneſs. 

þ Flaming up into the air, which is oft called Heaven, and the 
midſt or the hears of it 1s not only that which is ſtritly and pro- 
perly the middle part, but that which is within it, though but a 

little way, in which ſenſe places or perſons or thingsare ſaid to be 
in the heart of the Sea, Exod. 15. 8. Prov: 23: 34. Ezck: 28: 2. and 
- Chriſt in the heart of the Earth, Matth. 12. 40. | 


12 And the LORD fpake unto you out of the midſt 
of the fire : ye heard the voice of the words, but ſaw no 
ſimilicude 5, F only ye heard a voice. 

i (5.e.) No reſemblance or repreſentation of God,whereby either 


his-eſſence or properries or aCtions were repreſented, ſuch as were 
uſual among the heathens. . 


13 Andhe declared unto you his covenant, which he 


*Ex:19:18 
+ Heb: 


hearts 


iHeb.ſave 
. | woice, 


DEUTEROMNO MT 


An Exhortation to obey the Law, 1---13. And warning againſt Idolatry, | 


have taught or preſcribed. See Num.15.39, 49. Deut 12.8,32; 1 Kings | 


even as the LORD my God commanded me, that ye | 


by the operations of his grace, and particularly, as it here follows, | 


commianded you to perform,eves * ten commandments, *Ex-34.13 
and * he wrote them upon two tables of ſtone. \ 3Ex.24:12 
x4 And * the LORD commanded me ae that time, ****-'- 
to teach you ſtatutes and judgments k, that ye might do 
them in the land whither ye go over to poſleſs it. 
k (i.e.) The ceremonial and judicial Laws which are here di. 
ſtinguiſhed from the moral, or the tex commandments, wv. 3. 
IfTake ye therefore good head unto your ſelves (for 
ye ſaw no manner of ſimilitude on the day that the Lord 


{pake unto you in Horeb m,out of the mid of the fire.). 
! By which caution he infinuats mans great. proneneſs to the 
worſhip of Images. m God, who in other places and times did ap- 
Pear in a ſimilitude, in the faſhon of a man, now in this moſt {o- 
lemn appearance, when he comes to give cternal Laws for the re- 
gulation and direCion of the Iſraclites in the worſhip of God, and 
in their duty to men, he purpoſely avoids all ſuch repreſentations, 
to ſhew tat he abhors all Worſhip of images, or of himſelf by ima- 
ges of what kind ſoever, as it here follows, v.16,17,18, 19. becauſe 
he 15 the inviſible God and cannot be repreſented by any viſible 
1mage. See 1/a. 40. 18. AF. 17. 29. NILS $I 


I6 Leſt ye corrupt your ſelves n, and * make you a 
graven image o, the ſimilitude of any figure, the likeneſs 
of mate or female : | j 

n» (3. e.) Corrupt your minds with mean and carnal thoughts of 
God. Or, corrupt your ways or courſes, by worſhipping God in a 
corrupt manner, or by falling.into Idolatry. - o To wit, for wor- 
ſhip, or for the repreſentation of God, as-it is explained v. 19. for 
otherwiſe it was not ſimply unlawful to draw- the Pifture or make 
a figure of a man or a beaſt. x 


17 The likeneſs of any beaſt p that is on. the earth, 


*Ex;24:5- 


the likeneſs of any winged fowl that flieth.in the air :_ 
þ Whereby the Heathen nations did repreſent and worſhip God; - 

ſome by an Ox,ſome by a Goat,or an Hen,or a Serpent,or a Fiſh,e*c. © 

18 The likeneſs * of any thing that creepeth on the & 


- 


ground, the likeneſs of any fiſh that 7s in the waters * Rom: 
beneath the earth « | 7. 23 


h: 19:3, 


of o ; *C 
19 And leſtthou*lifcup thine eyes unto heaven, and Job:31::7 


when thou ſeeſft the ſun,and the moon and the ſfars,even *Gen:2:1, 
* all the hoſt of heaven, ſhould be driven. to worſhip | 0. 
them q,and ſervethem, which the LORD thy God hath  d-$avr-106 
divided uato all nations » under the whole heaven. © ; 
q (7. e. Strongly enclined,and in a manner conſtrained partly by 
the glory of theſe heavenly bodies, which may ſeem to be made for 
higher purpoſes than to enlighten this lump of earth ; partly from 
that natural propenſion which is in men to Idolatry. Or, ſhouldeft be 
ariven or thruſft,to wit,out of the way of the Lord,(as it 1s more fully ex- 
preſſed,Deur, 3.5.) or,be ſeduced,or led aſide,as ſilly ſheep eaſily ate, 
and worſhip them. Or,ſhouldeſt be caft down, or throw down thy ſelf and wor- 
ſhip them, i.e, Worſhip them by falling down before them: » Which 
are notGods,butCreatures, made notfor theworſhi p,but for the uſe of 
men, yea.of the meaneſt and moſt barbarous people under Heaven, 
and therefore cannot without great abſurdity be worſhipped, eſpe- 
cially by you who are ſo much advanced above. other Nations .in 
Wiſdom 8& Knowledge,and in this,that you are my peculiar people. 
20 But the LORD hath taken you,and * brought you , ..- 
forth out of the iron furnace s, ever out of Egypt,to be ,_ A 


unto him a people of inhericance, as ye are this day. Jer:11:4. 
5 (7.e.) The furnace wherein Iron and other Metals are melted, 
; to which Egypt is fitly compared, not only for the Torment and 
; Miſery which they there endured, but alſo becauſe they were 
; throughly tryed and purged thereby,as Metals are by the fire, ; His 
' peculiar poſleſſion from generation to generation. See Exod I9. 5. 
 Dewt 7.6. Tit. 2. 14. And therefore for you to forſake God, and 
worſhip Idols, will be not only wickedneſs and madneſs,but moſt 
abominable ingratitude. 

21 Furthermore,* the LORD was angry with me for ; 
your fakes, and ſware that I ſhould not go over Jordan, = = : 
and that I ſhould not go in unto that good land,which © © -* 
the LORD thy God giveth thee # for an inheritance. 

# God hath granted you the favour which he denied to me ; 
which greatly increaſeth your obligation to God. 

22 But I muſt die in this land, I muſt not £0 over 
Jordan : burtye ſhall go over, and poflefs that good land. 

23 Take heed unto your ſelves,leſt ye forget the co- 
venant ofthe LORD your God, which he made wich you, 


and make you agraven image,or the likeneſ; of any thing, 
* which the LORD thy God hath forbidden thee a. 

u Or,command?th thee,to wit,not to do,which is eaſi 
by comparing this place with Exod. 20. 4, 5. and w 
where this phraſe is fully expreſſed. See mo 

24 For the * LORD thy God 55 
even a * Jealous God y, 


x A juſt and terrible God, who, notwithftand; hi 7 
lation to thee, will ſurely puniſh and fetroy _ | ppb Font 
vokeſt him by Idolatry, or other ways. Who being eſpouſed to 9 "w_ 
thee, will be highly incenſed againſt thee, (if thou followeſt after 227" 
other lovers, or committeſt whoredom with Idols,) and will Ifa.424 
no rival or partner. | | 

25 When thou ſhall beget children, and childrens 
children, and ſhall have remained long in the land,and | 
ſhall corrupt your ſelves,and make a graven image, or the 
likeneſs of any :hi»g, and ſhall do evil in the ſight of the | 
LORD z. thy God, to provock him to anger. 

2 Which words are here added, Either r. As a caution. Your 
Idolatry, though poſſibly ſecretly and cunningly managed,will not 


* Exod: 
ly underſtood 20: 4,5: 
ith Gen, 3. 17. 
re On Lev. 4.-2.Deut.3.37. 
a conſuming fire x, : 
* Ch: 95; 
Ifa:33:14 


bear 


Chap. IV; 


* Chap: 
19: an 
29; 3: 


*Chap; 
32+ 39: 
* Exod: 
24: 16: 
Hed: 12: 


- 


Joſh: 2: 


be hid from ham 3 he ſees it, and he will puniſh it. Or 2. To ag- 
gravate their ſpiritual Whoredom, as being commited in the ſight | 
and preſence of their Lord and Husband, whoſe eye is more Pecu= 


larly 


3 


2, 


*Levit: 
a6: 33: 


| Ch:28 64: 


Nen: 8: 8: 
+;]cb. men 
of numbey. 
* Ch: 28: 
36, 64: 
Jer:16:133 
*P(a):1153 
4, 5* an 
135; I5- 
þ2:45: 20: 


| 41d 46: 7: 


* Levit: 
26: 40; 
Chap: 
30: I, 


Neh: 1:9: 


Ci1ap. IV. 


liarly upon them in all theic ways, than it is unon other people. Oc 
3. By way of oppolirion unto m?ns judgment. Idolatry oft-times 
ſeems good and reaſonable, and religious 1n the eyes of men, bur 
ſaith he, it is evil in the eyes of the Lord, whoſe judgment 15 moſt 
conſiderable. : : 

26 1 call heaven and earth » to witneſs againſt you 
this day, that, ye ſhall ſoon utteriy perith from offthe land 
whereunto ye go over Jordan to poſſeſs ir ; ye ſhall not 
prolong your days upon it ; but ſhall utcerly be deſtroyed. 

a Either r. Figuratively, 7. e. God, and Angels, and Men. Or 
rather 2. Properly ; it beinguſual in Scripture to call in the ſenſeleſs 
Creatures as witneſſes ſuch caſes, as Devt. 32. 1. Iſs. 1.2. Jer. 2. 12. 

275 And the LORD * thall ſcatter you among the 
nations, and ye ſhall be lefe + few in number among 
the heathen, whither the LORD ſhall lead you. 

28 And * there ye ſhall ſerve gods b, the work of 
mens hands, woed and ſtone, * which neither ſee, nor 
hear, nor eat, nor {mell, 

b (i.e.) Idols. You ſhall be compelled by men, and given up by me 
to Idolatry. So that very thing which was your choice, ſha] bz your 
puniſhment : it being juſt and uſual for God to puniſh one fin by 
giving them up to another, as 1s manifeſt from Roz, 1. 24. 25. 

29 * But if from thence thou ſhalt ſeek the LORD 
thy God, thou ſhalt find im, if thou ſeek him c with all 
thy hearr 4, and with all thy foul. 

c If thou deſiceſt his help and favour. Sez Deut. 30.1. 1ſa. 55.6. 
d(7.e.) ſincerely and fervently. : = 

30 When thou art in tribulation, and all theſe things 
+ are come upon thee, even in the latter days e, if thou 


fe, Eurn to the LORD thy God, and ſhalt be obedient unto 


thee. 


* Chap: 7; 
19: and 
29: 3: 


*Chap; 

32: 39: 

* Exod: 

24: 16: 

Heb: 12: 
Ws | /- 


F. * Joſh: 2: 


his voice 3 

e Either in general, in ſucceeding Ages and Generations: or par- 
ticu/ariy, in the days of the Meſſizzs, which are commoaly called in 
Scripture the latter, or laſt days, as Iſa; 2: 2: Hof: 3: 5: Micah 4: 1: 
Dan: 2: 44: Heb: 1: 2: and 9: 26. And ſo this may reſpect the con- 
verſion 'and redemption of the F-wiſh Nation even in thoſe times 
when their caſe ſeems moſt deſperate, when they bave forlaken their 
God, and reje&ted their Meſfias for many ages, to. wit, towards the 
end of the World. 


21 ( For the LORD thy God 3s a merciful God ) he 
will not forſake thee, neither deſtroy thes,nor forget the 
covenant of thy fathers f, which he ſware unto them. 

F (5.e.) Made with thy fathers including their poſterity ,as Gen.17.7-. 

22 For ask now of the days that are paſt, which were 
before thee, ſince the day that God created man upon 
the earth, and «5k from the one ſide of heaven g unto 
the other, whether there hath been any ſuch thing, as this 
great thing 5s or hath been heard like ir. 


g ( i.e. ) Of the Earth under Heaven. Ask all the Inhabitants 
of the world. Compare Marth. 24.31. with Mark 13. 27. 


Did ever people hear the voice of God ſpeaking our 
of the midiſt of the fre, as thou haſt heard, and. iive b? 


h (i.e. ) And was not overwhelmed and conſumed by ſuch a glo- 
T10usS appearance. See Exod. 24.11. and 33. 20. 


34 Or hath God affayed to go and take hima nation 
from che midſt of another nation, * by temptations z, by 
ſigns, and by wonders, and by war, and by a migtity 
hand, and by a ſtretched-our arm, and by great terrours 
k, according to all that the LORD your God did for 
you in Egypt before your eyes ? 

7 By tribulations and perſecutions, which are commonly called ter:- 
prations, which are here fitly mentioned, as one grear occaſion firſt of 
their cries unto God, and then of Gods coming tor their reſcue. Or, 
zemptations 1s the general title, which is explained by the following 
particulars, ſigns, and wonders, &c. which are called temptations, be- 
cauſe they were trials both to the Fgyptians and Iſraelites, whether 
thereby they would be induced to believe and obezy God or no. k Rai- 
ſed in the minds of the Egyptians, as the Hiſtory ſheweth : comprr- 
Dent. 2. 25: and 34. I2, or, by terrible things done among them. 

35 Unto thee it was ſhewed, that thou mightelt know, 
that the LORD he #is God, *there is none elſe belides him. 

36 * Out of heaven *t he made thee to hear his voice, 
that he might inſtruct thee : and uponearth « he ſhewed 
thee his great fire, and thou heardeſt his words out of 


the midft of the fire. 


s ( (7. e. ) Our of the air, above Mount Sina:. 
20- 18, 22. « at the top of Mount $:1at. 


37 And becauſe he loved thy fathers, therefore he 
choſe their ſeed after them, and brought thee out in his 
ſight x with his mighty power out of Egypt ; 

x Keeping his eye fixed upon him, as the Father doth on his be- 
loved child. Or, with his preſence. i. e. He did not ſend them forth 
by Moſes, but he himſelf was preſent with them, and as it were 
marched along with them, in the pillar of cloud and fire. 

33 Todrive out nations from before thee, greaterand 
mightier than thou arr, to bring thee in, to give thee 
their land for an inheritance, as #t is this day. 

39 Know therefore this day, and conſider it in thine 
heart, that * the LORD he is God in heaven above, 
and upon the earth beneath, rhere js none elſe. 

49 Thou ſhalt keep therefore his ſtatutes, and his 
commandments, which I command chee this day, that it 
may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee: 
and that thou mayeſt proloag thy days upon the earth, 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for cyer, 


See Exod. 19. 9. & 


DE UT E R @' I RR 


hy a F 


Chap. V. | 


41 Then Moſes ſevered three cities y on this ſide 
Jordan towards the ſun-riſing. | 
y As God had commanded him, Numb, 35.6, 14. 

42 That the ſlayer might flee thither, which ſhould kill 
his neighbour unawares, and hated him nor in times paſt ; 
' and that fleeing unto one of theſe cities, he mightlive : 

43 Namely, * Bezer in the wilderneſs. in the plain + x,g.. 
countrey of the Reubznites ; and Ramoth in Gilead of 25: s: 
the Gadites, and Golan in Baſhan of the Manaſlites. 

And this z 5s the law which Moſes ſer before 
the children of Iirael : 
z Which hath been generally intimated already, bur is more 
particularly and punCtually expreſſcd inthe following Chapter, to 
which theſe words are a preface. 

45 Theſe are the teſtimanies, and the ſtatutes, ard the 
judgments which Moſes ſpake unto the children of [frael, 
after they came forth out of Egypt ; 2 

46 On this ſide Jordan, * in the valley over againſt + chap: 
Beth-Peor,in the landefSihon King ofthe Amorites,who 3: 29: 
dwelt at Heſhbon, whom Moſes and the children of Iſrael 
* ſmote, after they were come forth out of Egypt. 

47 And they poſſeſſed his land, and the iand of * Og 
King of Baſhan, two Kings of the Amorites, which were ,; , | 
ou this fide Jordan toward the ſun-riſfing, * Nam, | 

43 From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river 21 33: | 
Arnon, even unto Mount Sion, whieh is * Hermon ; Go, 3: Js} 

49 Andallthe plain on this fide Jordan, eaſtward,even ,. ,** | 
unto the ſea of theplain under che * ſprings of Piſgah. Pal: 133; 


ERHAP. Y. 

Gud 1:pon Mount Horeb, makes a Covenant with Iſrael, 1 ===5, The Covenant 
or Cen Commandments is delivered to Moſes in two Tables, 622. The 
Iſraelites deſire, that not God, but Moſes may ſpeak to them, 23-=-27. which 
God approves of, 28, 29. Mefeexhorts them to Obedience, wich a promiſe 
of life. 32, 33- bo 

A*N D Moſes called all Iſrael 4, and faid unto them, 
3. Hear, O LItrael, the ſtatutes and Judgments,which 

I ſpeak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, 

and tf kezp, and do them. + Heb: 
a Fo wit, by their Elders, who were to impart it to the reſt. keep to do 

2 * The LORD our God made a covenant with us them. 
in Horeb. * Exod: 

3 The LORD * made not the covenant with our 
fathers b, but with us : even us, who are all of us 
alive this day c. 

b Eitier 1. Not only with, them, the word only being here under 
tood, as it is Gen. 32. 28. & 35. 10. 1 Sam, 87. Jer. 7. 19. & 31. 34. 
Ma#.9. 13. Or, 2. Not at all with them. But then the word Covenant 
15 not hereto be taken for the Covenant of Grace in general, for io it 
was made with their fathers, Exod, 2. 24. but for this particular and 
maxed diſpenſation of the Covenantar Sinai, as appears both by the 
foregoing and following words. c He faith nor, that all who made that 
Covenant at Siva are now alive, for many of them were dead, but 
that this Covenant was made with all that are now alive, which is 
moſt crue, for it was made with the elder fort of them in their own 
perſons, and with the reſt in their Parents, who did covenant for 
them : for this phraſe with ws, is put excluſively as to their fathers, 
but not as tn their poſterity, as is evident from rhe nature of the 
Covenant, As 2, 39. and courſe of the ſtory. ; | 

4 * The LORD talked with you face to face d, in, *Exod:tgz 
the mount out of the midlt of the fire. 2, 19- 

4 Not in a viſible ſhape, which was utterly denied, Dezr. 4.12,15. . 
but perſonally and immediately, not by the Mouth or Miniſtery 
of Moſes ; plainly and certainly, as when two men talk face to face ; 
freely and fami'iarly, ſo as not to overwhelm and confound you. 
Compare Exod. 33. 11. Numb. 12.8. 

5 ( Iſtood between the LORD and you eat that time, 
to ſhew you the word of the LORD f : for yewere afraid, 
by reaſon of the fire, and went not up intothe mount 

{faying, 

e As a Mediator or Meſſenger between you, according to your 
deſire, below v. 27. Compare Exod. 19. 16, &e, and 20. 19. Gal.3.19, 

f Nat the ten Commandments, which God himſelf uttered, bur the 

following ſtatutes and judgments. 


6 * I am the LORD thy God b, which brought thee +p,_ 0:4; 
out of the land of Egypt, fromthe houſe of F bondage. &. Lev. 
þ The ten Commandments delivered Exod. 20, are here repeated 26. r. 


with ſome ſmall! diff-rence of words, but the ſence is perfe&ly the Pal. 81. 
ſame, and therefore the explication of chem muſt be ferched thence, 10. 


7 Thou ſhalt have none other gods before Me. + Heb. 

8 Thou ſhalt not make thee any graven image, or any {#2 
iikeneſs of any thing that is in heaven above,or that zs in the 
earth beneath, or that zs in the waters beneath theearth. 

9 Thou ſhalt not bow down thy ſelfunto them,nor ſerve 
them: for I the LORD thy God ar a jealous God, * viſi- 
ting the iniquity of the fachers upon the children,unto the *Ex. 34-7 
third and fourth generation of them that hate me z | 

10 * And ſhewing mercy unto thouſands, of them «,, .., 
that love me, and keep my commandments. 18. 

11 Thou ſhalt not take the Name of the LORD thy 
God in vain : for the LORD will not hold i guiltlets 
that taketh his Name in vain. | 

12 Keep ithe ſabbath-day to ſanctifie ir, as the LORD 
thy God hath commanded thee &. 


i To wit, in mind and memory, as it is Exod. 40. 8. & To wit, 
S i 


*Num.21x | 


by Chap: | 
3: 17: | 


19: 5; | 
* See Mata 
here 23: 1259s "i 


Heb: 8: 9; | 


_ wy F 
<- 


# Chap. V. 
| *n Exodus 20: whither he direfts them, and therefore he here omits 
the Argumient of the Creation, whichis urged there. 
13 Six days thou ſhalt labour, and doall thy work. 
x4 But the ſeventh day isthe *ſabbath of the LORD 
thy God, in it thou ſhalt not doany werk, thou, northy 
ſon, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-ſervant,nor thy maid 
ſervant, nor thine ox, mor thine afs, nor any of thy cattel, 
nor thy ſtranger that is within thy gates ; that thy man 
ſervant, and thy maid-ſervant may reſt as well as thou. 
15 And remember that thou waſt a ſervant / in the 
land of Egypt, and that the LORD thy God brought 
thee out thence through a mighty hand, and by a ftretch- 
£d-out arm: therefore the LORD thy God commanded 


thee to keep the ſabbath-day. 

1 And therefore art highly obliged both to ſerve that God who 
redeemed thee, eſpecially upon his own day, and not to grudge thy 
ſ:rvants their reſt upon that day. 

16 * Honour thy father and thy mother, as the LORD 
27:15: thy God hath commanded thee, that thy days may be 
Coloff: ; les bas 
3: 20: rolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee. 

{ >a. c. 17 * Thou ſhalt not kill. 
Mat: 5: #*7 . : 
21: 18 * Neither ſhalt thou commit adultery. 
{ *Luke 18; 19 * Neither ſhalt thou ſteal. 
by 20 Neither ſbalt thou bear falſe witneſs againſt thy 


CARL, IR 


£0:2:2: 
eb: 4: 4: 


* Chap: 


# *Rom:13; - 

Do: neighbour. ? ; 
4 Rom: 7: 21 * Neither ſbalt thou defire thy neighbours wife, 
7: neicher ſhalt thou covet thy neighbours houſe »s, his field, 


or his man-ſervant, or his maid-ſervant, his ox, orhis aſs, 
or any thing that is thy neighbours. 

m In Exodus 20. the order is contrary, and thy neighbou's houſe is 
put before his wife, whereby it is evident, thar Me; intended this 
but for one Commandment, wherein the order of the words was an 
inconſiderable circumſtance : for if this were two Commandments, 
as ſome would have it, it would be altogether uncertain which is rhe 
Ninth, and which the Tenth Commandmenr, ſeing the one is firſt, 
Exodus 20. and the other here. 

22 Theſe words the LORD ſpake unto all your aſſem- 

bly in the mouut,out of the midit of the fire, of the cloud, 
and of the thick darkneſs, with a great voice, and he 
added no more »,. and * he wrote them in two tables 
*Exod:24: of ſtene, and delivered them unto me. 
T2: n He ceaſed for that time to ſpeak immediately,and with that loud 
voice unto the people,for the reſt were delivered to Moſes, and by him 
communicated to the people. This he did to ſhew the preeminency 
of that Law above the reſt, and its everlaſting Obligation. 

23 * Andit came to paſs, when ye heard the voice 
out of the midſt of the darkneſs, ( for the mountain did 
burn with fire )that ye came near unto me, even all the 
heads of your tribes, and your elders. 

24 And ye ſaid, Behold, the LORD our God hath 
; o. {bewedus his glory and his greatneſs, and * we have heard 
*'7* his voice out of the midſt of the fire : we have ſeen this 
*Chan: ,: Gay that God doth talk with man, and * he liveth. 

25 *® 25 Now therefore why ſhould we die 0? for this great 
| fire will confume us, If we} hear the voice of the LORD 
THeb. add gyr Ged any more, then we fhall die. 
Fo bear. o For though God hath for this ſeaſon kept us alive toour admi- 
ration, yet we ſhall never be able to endure any further diſcourſe 
from him in ſuch a terrible manner, but ſhall cerrainly fink under 

the burden of it. Compare Gen: 16: 13: Jag: 6: 22. 

26 For who 3s there of all fleſh p, that hath heard the 
yoice of the living God, ſpeaking out of the mid(t of 
the fire ( as we have ) and lived ! 

? Fleſbis here put for Man in his frail corruptible and mortal ſtate, 

as Mat: 16. 17* 1 Cor: 15: 56: Eph: 6: 12: Heb: 2: 14: 

27. Go thou near, and hear all that the LORD our 

God ſball ſay, and * ſpeak thou unto us all that the 
'LORD our God ſhall ſpeak unto thee, and we will 
hear z#t, and do ze. 

28 Andthe LORD heard the voice of your words, 
when ye ſpake unto me, andthe LORD ſaid unto me, I 
have heard the voice of the words of this people, which 
they have ſpoken unto thee : * they have well ſaid all 
that they have ſpoken. | | 

* Ne .'29 | * O that there were ſuch an heart in them 
ut. that they would fear me, and keep all my command- 
a8: 17: | i SF Be . s 
+Heb who Mentsalways, thatit might be well with them, and with 
will give their Children for ever ! 
#heir heart q Heb. Who will give them ſuch an heart ? This is ſpoken of God 
#6 be ſuch after the manner of men, to ſhew that ſuch an heart is deſirable to 
in them, him, and required by him : otherwiſe it 1s certain that God can 
Chap: give ſuch an heart, and hath Promiſed to give it, Jer. 32: 40: Exek; 
——— 36: 27. And if God will work, who can hinder him ? Job 11. 10. 
gy : 20 Go, fay to them, Getye into your tents again. 
I(a:48: 18: * 31 But as for thee, ſtand thou here by me, and I will 
Mat: 23: ſpeak unto thee all the commandments, and the ftacutes, 
and the judgments which thou halt reach chem, thatthey 
may do them in the land which I give them to pollels it. 
.32 Ye ſhall obſerve to do therefore as the LORD 
' 28. 14. your God hath commanded you : * ye ſhall not turn 


Joik: 1:7 aſide to the right hand, or to the left r. 


*Exo0d:20: 
18; 


T9: 


*Exo0d:20: 
19: 


 * Chap: 
17; b & 


EMT ZR 0NOM 7, 


Chap. VI. 
y Neither by ſuperſtitious additions to God's Commands, nor by 
2 bold or prophane reje&ion or contempt of any one of them. 
22 Ye ſhall walk in all the ways which the LORD 
your God hath commanded yon, that ye may live, and 
that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong 


your days, in the land which ye ſhall poſſeſs. 


CHAP. Th 
The end of the Commandment, Obedience, 1 —2. He exhorts them thereto, 3. 

The Unity of the Divine Eſſence aſſerted, 4. The Duty required of the 

Iſraelites 5. To Love God, 5, 6, And teach thetr Children, 7. Ty ve 

Signs, as Memerials of it, 8, g,. Not to forget God in proſperity, 1to==*12, 

Not to worſhip other gods, 134, ——=15. Not to tempt God, 16. Bit keep 

his Commandments, 17. And to tranſmit the Knowledge of Gods worrs to 

their proſperity, 20 — 25. 

O W theſe are the commandments, the ſtatutes, 

and the judgments which the LORD your God 
commanded to teach you, thatye might do rhe 1n the 
land whither ye + go to poſſeſs it : 

2 That thou mighteſt fear the LORD # thy God, to + Heb, 
keep all his ſtatutes ; and his commandments which [ 2-/:ver. 
command thee, thou and thy ſon, and thy ſons ſon, all 
thedays of thy life : and that thy days may be prolonged. 


4 Which ke hereby implies to be the firſt principle of true Obes 
dience. 


2 Hear therefore, O Iſrael, and obſerveto do z:, that 
it may be well with thee, and that ye may increaſe 
mightily, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promiſed 
thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey. 
4 * Hear O lfrael, F the LORD: our God zs one 
LORD 2. * Mark 
6 One in Eſſence, and the only obje&t of our Worſhip. I 2: 29; 

5 And * thou ſhalt love the LOR D c thy God with all t Heb. 
thine heart, and withall thy ſoul, and with all thy might. £RD wn 
c Now he ſhews another ſpring or principle of ſincere Obedience ©%*> 74 
to God, even hearty love to God, which will make his work and is 
ſervice eaſie, and that the fear he mentioned before, v. 2. was ſuch 9-5 Gr, 


as would conſiſt with love to God, and not that ſlaviſh fear and ho- 
nour which produceth hatred. 


6 And *theſe words which I command thee this day 
{ball be in thine heart /. Mark * 


a i.e. Inthy mind to remember them, and meditate upon them, 3o: 
andin thy AfﬀeCtion to love and purſue them. Luke 10, 


7 And thou ſhalt * F teach them diligently e unto 27. 
thy children, and ſhalt talk of them when thou ſitteſt in *Chap.rr. 


(ap; 
TO: 12: 


Mart: 23: 


when thou lieſt down, and when thou riſeſt up. 31. & 40: 
e Heb. Wzet, or ſharpen them, ſo as they may pierce deep into their 8. 8& 119, ' 
hearts: This Meraphor ſignifies the manner of inſtructing them, 98. Ifa, 
that it 15 to be done diligently, earneſtly, frequently, diſcreetly and 571. 7. 
dexterouſly. * Ch: 4:9: 
8 And thou ſhalt * bind them for a fign upon thy + Heb. 
hand, and they ſhall be as frontlets between thy eyes f. 2% 7 
 f Thou ſhalt give all diligence, and uſ- all means to keep rhem 
in thy remembrance, as men off times bind ſomething upon their 
hands, or put it before their eyes to prevent forgetfulneſs of a thing þ* #0; 
which they much deſire tro remember, Compare Prov: 3; 3: and 6: 21: # Heb: fr 
and 7: 3. See the notes on Exodus 13. 16. frontlets, 


9 * And thou fhalt write them upon the poſts of 
thine houſe, and on thy gates. 

10 And it ſhall be, when the LORD thy God ſhall 
have brought thee intothe land, which heſware unto thy 
fathers, to Abraham, to Iſaac, and to Jacob, to give thee 
great and goodly cicies * which thou buildedſt not ; 

11 And houſes full of all good things, which thou *Pſal:ro. 
filledſt not, and wells digged which thou diggeft not, 4+: 
vineyards and olive-trees which thou plantedit nor, * 
when thou ſhalt have eaten, and be full, 


* Chap: 
T1, 207 


Ia: 57:8, 


* Chap.$ 


brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the 


houſe of + bondage. + Heb. 

13 Thou ſhalt * fear the LORD thy God, and Terve 319m 
him, and thalc ſwear g by his Name þ. > pong 
g When thou haſt a call and juſt cauſe to ſwear. þ Underſtand Ln 


only, as Deut: 5: 2: not by Idols, or any Creatures. 

14 Ye lba]l not go after other gods, of the gods of 
the people which are round about you : 

15 (For the LORD thy God 35a jealous God among 
you ) leſt the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled 
againſt thee, and deſtroy thee from off the face of the 
earth. | 

i Heb. In the midft of you, to ſee and obſerve all 
your turnings aſide to gther gods. *Mat,4.” 

16 Ye ſhall not tempt the LORD & your God * as Luk.4. 
ye tempted him in Matſah. "Ex.17-2 

k 7. e. Not provoke him, as the following inſtance explains. Sin- Nuns. - 
ners, eſpecially preſumptuous ſinners, are off ſaid to rempt God, i. e, *: + 
to make a trial of God, whether he be what he prer2ads to be ſo 
wiſe asto ſee their ſins, ſo juſt and true and powerful as to take VEN- 


N 10, 
Luke 45 


& 13. 4 
Aar.4. 


your ways and 


_. ——_—— 


*Nut 


ow 
THel 


morroy 


thine houſe, and when thou walkeſt by the way, and p{:; ” | 


12 Then beware leſt thou forget the LORD which ?* © | 


geance onthem for their ſins, concerning which they are very apt 
doubr becauſe of the preſent impunity and proſperity of any back 


perſons. See Numb. 14. 22. Pſal. 78. 18. Mas. 4:7. Aﬀs 5. 9. 


17 Ye ſhall diligently keep the commandments of the 
{.ORD your God, and his teſtimonies, and bis {tztutes 
which he hath commanded thee. | 


| 


13 And 


+ Heb. 
righteo! 
meſs jb 
to us, C 
mercy jþ 
beto us." 
Ch.24. 
*Rom 
lo. 5, 


*Ch.3 7: 


*Num.3 
52,Joſh. 
17:6&8:2 

To: 2 
$9: & x 
IT, T2, 
*Ex:23.; 
&34:12,1 

eb. 
Wm vena; 
Pith they 
SeeJoſh: 
14:and & 
'5.Juds 
I: 24. 


"Ex:23:2 


I Heb: 
Wvues or 
Pillars. 


| 


Chap. V1L. 


13 And thou ſhalt do that which is right and good in 
che ſight of the LORD / that it may be well with thee, 
and that thou mayeſt go in, and poſſeſs the good land 
which the LORD ſware unto thy fathers : 

1 Not that which is right in thine own eyes,as many ſuperſtitious 
and ſinful pra&ices ſeem right and good to evil minded men. Let 
Gods will and word, and not thine own fancy or invention, be thy 
rule in Gods ſervice. Good ations are oft ſaid to be right in Gods 

ſih:, as Jer. 34. 15. As 4: 19. and evil ations are oft ſaid to be 
right in aur own ey2s, as Dent. 12. 8. Judg: 17: G. 


"_m_ 19 * To caſt out all thine enemies from before thee, 
2Hxeb:ro as the LORD hath ſpoken. | 
marrow: 20 And when thy ſon asketh thee + in time to come, 


ſaying, What mean the teſtimonies, and the ftatutes, 
and the judgments which the LORD our God hath 
commanded you. 

21 Then thou ſhalt ſay unto thy ſon, we were Pha- 
raohs bondmen in Egypt, and the LORD brought us 

1£c:3:199 out of Egypt * with a mighty hand. 

ind 13-3, 22 And the LORD ſhewed figns and wonders, great 

Hed nd + ſore upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon his 
houſhold: before our eyes : 

22 And he brought us out from thence, that he might 
briag us in,to give us the land which he {ware unto our 
fathers. 

24 And the LORD commanded us to do all theſe 
ſtatutes, to fear the LORD our God for our good wal- 
ways, that he might preſerve us alive as 37 is this day. 

-m The benefit of Obedience is ours, not Gods, Job, 35.7: and 


DEUTEROTNY 


ASL. Chap. VII. 


7 The LORD did not ſet his love upon you; nor 
chooſe you, becauſe ye were moe in number than any | 
people : ( for ye were the feweſt of all people e. ) 

e To wit, at that time when God firſt declared his love to you, | 
and choice of you for his peculiar people, which was done to Abrae 
ham. For Abraham had but one Son concerned in this choice and. 
covenant, to wit, Iſaac, and that was in his hundreth year ; and 
Iſaac was 60 years old ere he hada Child,and then they had only two 
Children; and though 7acob had 12 Sons, yer it was a long time erc 
they made any conſiderable increaſe. Nor do we read of any great 
multiplication of them till after Fejeph's death, Exod. 1. 6, 7. 


8 But becauſe the LORD loved youf, and becauſe he 
would keep the oath which he had ſworn unto your fa- 
thers, nath the LORD brought you out with a mighty 
hand, and redeemed you our of the houſe of bondmen. tj 
from the hand of Pharaoh King of Egypt. 4 

f i. e. Becauſe it pleaſed him to love you, ir was his free choice, 


without any cauſe or motive on your part. Compare Deut. 10.15. 
rt. Sam. 12. 22. Pſalm 43. 4. | 


9 Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is God, 
the faithful God g,* which keepeth covenant and mercy *Ex:20.6. | 
with them that love him, and keep his commandments, _ = 
co a thouſand generations : | 

S True to his word,and conſtant in performing all his promiſes. Al 

10 And repayerh them that hate himb, to their face 3, 
to deſtroy them : he will not be flack & co him that ha- 
teth him, he will repay him to his face. 


h Not only thoſe who hate him dire@ly and properly, (for ſodid 
few or none of the Iſraelires to whom he here ſpeaks, ) but thoſe 


| 
if 


fo 
C 
! 
: 
: | 
4 : 
jt 
! 


therefore our Obedience is highly reaſonable,& abſolutely neceſfary. * 


+ Heb.avdd 25 f Andit * ſhall be our righteouſneſs n,it we ob- 


righte9uſ= ſerve to do all theſe commandments, before the LORD ! op | 
' 7 7. ee Openly,and ſo as they ſhall ſee ir,and nor be able to avoid ir. 


ak - God : the LORD thy God hath choſen thee to be a 
Amos3.2; ſpecial people unto himſelf,aboye all rhe people that are 
r Pet. 2.9. Upon the face of the carth, 


' as appears from v. 9. where the love of God, to which this hatred is 


— 


nr oa * our Ged, as he hath commanded us. 

'.y #1 Heb. Righteouſneſs ſhall be to us. We ſhall be owned and pro- 
mercy jball - s . ( 
1w.See nounced by God to be truly righteous and toly perſons, 1f we fin- 
Chace, cerely obey him,otherwiſe we ſhall be declared to be unrighteous & 
, eo ungodly perſons, and all our profeſſion and Religion will appear to : 
10, c be in Hypocriſie. Or, mercy ſhall be ro us, or with us. For as the Hebrew 

" word rendred -ighteouſneſs 1s very oft put for mercy,as ?ſal:24;5:and 36: 
10.and 51:14: Prov. 10;2:and 11:4: Dan:g: 16. &c. ſo this ſenſe ſeems 
beſt ro agree both with the Scripture uſe of this phraſe, in which 
righteouſneſs, ſeldom or never,to my remembrance, but grace or mercy 
frequently,is ſaid to be to us or with us,as2 Sam: 15:20:Pſal 89:24.Prov. 
14:22: Gal.6:16:2.70h:3:and with the foregoing verſe and argument, 
God,ſaith he,v:24. commanded theſe things for our good,that he might 
preſerve uſe alive, as it is this day, And, ſaith he in this verſe, this is 
nor all, for as he hath done us goud,ſo he will go on to do us mere 
and more good,and Gods mercy jhall be to ws, or with us,in the remain= 
der of ous lives, and for ever, if we obſerve, &c. 

CHA P. VI. 
Iſrael is Commanded to caſt ont the Hittites the Perizites, Oc. 1. All com- 
munion with them forbidden, 2-1, For fear of Idolatry, 4. They muſt 

ruin the places of Idolatry, $5. The Iſraelites holineſs and relation to God, G. 

His faithjulneſs to the Obedient, 9; And vengeance on them that hate | 

him, co. The advantage of Obedience, 12, 16. God encourages them, 

and promiſes to drive out the Nations before 'em, 17----=24, They are 
commanded to deftroy their Images, 25. And keep themſelves clean from 
their curſed things, 26. 
'Ch.31:3: Hen the * LORD thy God ſhall bring thee into 
the land whither thou goeſt to poſleſs it,and hath 
caſt out many nations before thee, the Hittites,and the 
Girgaſhites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and 
the Perizzites, and the Hivices, and the Jebuſites, ſeven 
Nations « greater and mightier than thou: 

a There were ten in Gen. 15.19. But this being ſome hundreds of : 
years after that. it is not ſtrange if three of them «vere either de- 
ſtroyed by Foreign or Domeſtick wars,or by cohabitation and mar- 
riage united with, and ſwallowed up in ſome of the reſt. 

: 2 And when the LORD thy God lthall deliver them 
Num-33 before thee, thou ſhalt ſmite them, and * urterly deſtroy 
52.Joſh.6: « (h k . 

17:88:24, Dem _; * thou ſhalt + make no covenant with them 6, 
& 10: 28, nor ſhew mercy unto them. 

40: & x3, b To ſpare them, or permit them to dwell with thee in the land, 
I, 12, Other Nations had more favour, bur theſe were for their great 
*Ex:23.32 wickedneſs, and for the good of Iſrael devoted routrer deſtruttion. 

34:12,5 3 Neither thalt thou make marriages with them, thy 

= ne daughter thou ſhalt not give unto his ſon,nor his daugh- 
»ih:5,,, Cr chou ſhalt nor take co thy ſon. 
SecJoſh:2 #4 For they will turn away thy ſon from following me, 
14:and 9. that they may ſerve other godsc:1o will the anger of the 
nag LORD be kindled againſt you,& deſtroy thee ſuddenly. 
"i c 1. e. There is manifeſt danger of Apoſtacy and Idolatry from 
ſuch matches. Which reaſon. doth both limit the Law of ſuch of 
theſe as were unconverted, otherwiſe Salmon married Rabab.Mat 1. 5: 
| and enlarge it to other Idolatrous Nations, as appears from 1 Kings 
_ It. 2. Ezrag.2, Neh: 13,23. 
ne + 5 Bue thus (hall ye deal with them ; ye ſhall * deſtroy 
fatus os ERIE altars,and break down theirfimages,and cut down 
pillar, their groves d, and burn their graven images with fire. 

d Which Idolaters planted about the Temples and Altars of their 
Gods. Hereby God defigned to take away wharſoever might bring 

4 ok their Idolatry to remembrance, or occaſion the reviving: of it. 

:14:22 6 * For thou art a holy people unto the LORD thy 


; he 


who hate him by conttruttion and conſequence ; trioie who hate 
and oppoſe his People, and Word, an: Image, thoſe who preſump. 
tuouſly and wilfully perſit in the breact' of Gods commandments, 


opp ite, is deſcribed and expreſſed by the keeping of his commandments. 


k To wir, ſo as ſome men count ſlackneſs, 2 Pet. 3, 9g. ſo as to delay it 
beyond rhe fit time or ſeaſon for vengeance, yer withal he is long. 
ſuffering, and ſlow to anger, as that and other places inform us. 


11 Thou ſhalt therefore keep the commandments,and 
the ſtatutes, and the judgments which I command thee 
this day, to do them. | 

12 * Wherefore it ſhall come to paſs,* if ye hearken Ch:28::. 
to theſe judgments, and keep and do them, that the i Heb: be« | 
LORD thy God ſhall keep unto thee the covenant and ©*** 
the mercy / which he ſware unto thy fathers. 


{ i. e. The Covanant of Mercy. or Grace,which he out of his own 
meer grace made with them. A figure called Hendiaduo. 


13 And he will love thee », and bleſs thee,and mul- 
tiply thee, he will aiſs bleſs the fruit of thy womb, and 

| the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy wine, and thine 
' oyl, the increaſe of thy kine,and the flocks of thy ſheep 
in the land which he ſware unto thy fathers to give thee. 


m He will continue to love thee,and ro manifeſt his love to thee 
will not repent of his love to thee. *Exod:33 


14 Thou ſhalt be bleſſed above all people : * there £6. &c: 
ſhall nor Þz male or female barren among you, or a- 
mong your cattle. ; 

15 And the LORD will take away from thee all ſick- ,.. 
neſs,and will put none of the * evil diſeaſes of Egypt », er « 
(which thou knowelt) upon thee, but will lay them all TION 
upon them that hate thee, 'Y 

n Such as the £gyptians were infeſted with, either commonly | 
as thar botcÞ, Deur. 28. 27. or miraculouſly and extraordinary from 
x hand of the Lord, as Exod. g. 10, 15: Compare Exod, 23. 25. 

P/al. 105. 3Z7- La 

16 And thou ſhalt conſume all the people which the #Heb +giz 

LORD thy God # ſhall deliver thee ; thine eye ſhall th tehs , | 


| 
| 
have no pity upen them, neither ſhalt thou ſerve their | 
| 
| 


: 


*Lev:26.y | 


gods, for that will be a * ſnare 0 untothee, *Ex:23:33 


o An occaſion of tin and utter deſtru&tion. See Exod. 2 3:43.and 
34, 12. Juadg. 2. 3. 

17 If thou ſhalt ſay in thine keart, Theſe nations are 
moe than I, how can I dſ{poſleſs them ? 

13 Thou ſhalt not be afraid of them 2: but ſhalt well 
remember p what the LORD thy God did unto Pha- 
raoh, and unto all Egypt ; | 

p Heb. Remembring, remember, 1. e. remember it frequently, con- 
ſiderately,praftically,and fo: thy encouragement ; for men ate ſaid, 
to forget thoſe things which they donor remember to good purpoſe. 

I, * Ine grear temptations q Which thine eyes ſaw, Ch: 
and the ſigns, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, & 
and the ſt:erched out arm, whereby the LORD thy God 
brought the out;io ſhail the LORD thy God dv tinto 
all the people of whom thou art afraid 7. Foes OR 

q The Trials agg. Exerciſes of thy Faith and Obedience to my call 
_ og 2am r So as he did to Pharaoh and his people, mentio- 
ned, v. 18. E 

20 * Moreover, the LORD'thy God will ſend the *Ex:23:28 
hornet s among them, until they that are left and hide Joth.24.12 
themſelves from thee, be deſtroyed. wy orud 


:4* 34% 
29. 3- 


s Of which, ſee on Exod. 23. 28. 
21 Thou {halt not be afrighted ac them : for the 
LORD thy God is among you,a mighty God andrerrible, , xz... 
'22 And the LOR D: thy God will F put out thoſe p1uk of, 
- | TE  agations 


Chap. VIII. 


nations before thee by little 
not conſume them at once ?, 
increaſe upon thee. 1. 

5 Or,Thou ſhalt not be able to conſume them at once, i. e. 11. an inftant. 
I will not affift thee with my omnipotency,to cruſh them in a mo- 
ment,bur will bleſs thee in the uſc of ordinary means, and deftroy 
them ſucceſhvel pu ſeveral battels. : 

Heb. be- 23 But the L RD thy God ſhall deliver them | unto 
Wore :by thee, and ſhall deſtroy them with a mighty deftruction, 

ace 7 

Joſh, 12:3 98A they be deſtroyed. ; | = 

' 24 And * he ſhall deliver their Kings into thine hand, 
and thou ſhalt deſtroy their name from under heaven : 
there ſhal no man be able to ſtand before thee,until thou 
have deftroyed them «. 

» This promiſe is made upon condition of their performance of 
their duty, which they neglecting, they juſtly loſe the: benefit of 
L : it, as we ſee, Judg. 2.1, 2, 3- ; 

Ch:12'3: ' 2c The graven images ef their gods * ſhall ye burn 
Ex.32:20. » 5 © | 
* Joſh. 7: With fire : thou * ſhalt not deſire the ſilver or gold that is 

on them x, nor take it unto thee, leſt thou be * ſnared 
therein: forit is an abomination to the LORD thy God. 

» Wherewith the Idols are covered or adorned,not conſequently 
any other of their ornaments. This he commands to ſhew his utter 
deteftation of Idolatry, and to cut off all occaſions of it. 

26 Neither ſhalt thou bring an abomination into thine 
houſe, leſt thou be a curſed thing y like it : bz thou ſhalr 
utterly deteſt it, and thou ſhalt utterly abhor it: for* it 


is a curſed thing. . 
7 3. e. Devoted to utter deſtruQtion, as that was. 


21, 24, Oc. 
C H A P. VIIL 


Iſrael is exhorted to Obedience, 1, and to remember God's Judgments and 

© Mercies, 2-6. The excellency of the Land they were going into, 7-9. 
Nor to forget the Lord in their Fulneſs and Proſperity, 10-—16. nor 
aſcribe their wealth to their own power, 17. but to God,18. God threatens 
to defltroy Idolaters, 19, 20. 


LL the commandments which I command thee this 
day, ſhall ye obſerve to do, that ye may live a, 
and multiply, and go in, and poſſeſs the land which the 


LORD ſware unto your fathers. 
s i. e. Live comfortably and happily, as /ife 1s oft taken, as 
Gen: 17: 18. Prov. 3. 2. as On the contrary, troubles or afflictions 
- are called Death, Exod: 10. 17+ 2 Cor. 11. 23. 
2 And thou ſhalt remember all che way 5 which the 
| LORD thy God led thee thoſe fourty years in the wil- 
+-+...... derneſs. to humble thee, and to * prove thee, to know 
| *Ch:13:3. » © L 
| what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldeſt keep 
his commandment Or no. 

b 5, e, All the events which befel thee in the way,the miraculeus 
proteC&tions, deliverances, proviſions, inſtruttions which God gave 
thee : and withal the frequent and ſevere puniſhments of thy difobe- 
dience. c i.e. That thou mighteſt diſcover to thy ſelfand others that 
infidelity, inconſtancy, hypocriſie, a oftacy, rebellion and perverſ- 
neſs, which lay hid in thy heart;the diſcovery whereof was of ſingular 

uſe both to them,and to the Church of God in all ſucceeding ages. 
| *Bx:16: 2 And he humbled thee,and * ſuffered theero hunger 

:10:3. —_— . 3 
| + Fx: 16. and fed thee wich * Manna ( which thou kneweſt not, 


and little : thou mayeſt 
leſt the beaſt of the. field 


7: 2T. 
Pfal: 
106.36: 


See Joſ.7.11, 


12.4. neither did thy fathers know ) that he might make thee 
| Mar, KNOW, that man doth * not live by bread only, but by 
Luk. "ag every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the 
LORD 4 doth man live. 
d i.e. By every or any thing which God _— for this end, how 
unlikely ſoever it may ſeem to be for nouriſhment,as appears in the 
Manna ; ſeing it is not the Creature,but only Gods command and 
bleſſing upon it, that makes it ſufficient for the ſupport of life. 
*Ch.29.5- 4 hy raiment waxed not old upon thee e, neither 
Neh:9:z1 did thy foot ſwell f theſe fourty years. 


| + Did not wear away through age, which they muſt needs have 
'. > done without a miracle, f Notwithſtanding thy long and hard 

trayels, which alſo was miraculous. ' _ 
5 * Thou ſhalt alſo conſider in thine heart, that as a 


- man chaſteneth his ſon g, /o the LORD chy God cha- 


. Chap. 


11.10,11. 


A land of wheat,and barley,and wines,and fig-trees, 
f Heb.of and pomegranats, 4 land of þ oil olive z, and honey. 


olive-trree # Heb: Of the Olive-rree of 9h 7. e. Not of wild and barren, but 
of ol, of fruirful Olive-trees, whic yield plenty of Oy]. 
Aland wherein thou ſhalt eat bread without {carce- 
* Chap: 4 chou ſhalt nor lack any thing in it : a land *whoſe 
33:25. , ſtones ere iron &, and out of whoſe hills thou mayeſt 
dig braſs /. 


+ Where are mines of iron in a manner as plentiful as ſtones, 
and upon which Travellers muſt tread, as in other parts they do 
upon ſtones. {1 To wit, in great plenty. Theſe are mentioncd, 

| becauſe they had none ſuch in Egypt whence they came, 


BR WITERON 0 M 1 


F cha 


'Rom: 1 1 
6,20- 
Cor: 4+ 


Chap. IX. 
ws Chap.6: 


"7 3 i 


Io * When thou haſt eaten, and art full, then thou 
ſhale bleſs the LORD thy God m»», for the good land 
which he hath given thee. 

m (:. e.) Solemnly praiſe him for thy food ; which is a debt both 
of gratitude and juſtice, becauſe :t is from his provi*ence and fa- 
vour that thou receiveh borh thy focd and refreſhment ind firength 
by it. The more unworthy and »bſurd 1s that too commou pro= 
faneneſs of them, who, profeſſing to believe a God and his Provie 
dence, from whom all their comforts come, gruige to own him 
at their meals, either by deſiring his bicſling before them, or by 
offering due praiſe to God after them. 

12 Beware thac thou forget not the LORD thy God, 
in not keeping his commandments, and his judgements, 
and his ſtatutes which I command thee this day. 

12 * Left,when thou haſt eaten,and art full, and haſt * Ch.:x 
built goodly houſes, and dwelt rherezs : 47. and * 
13 And when thy herds,and thy flocks multiply, and 3” -> 
thy filver and thy gold js multiplied, and all chat thou Of OR 

haſt is multiplied : 

14 Then thine heart be lifted up », and thou forget 
the LORD thy God, ( which brought thee forth out 
of the land of Egypt, from the houſe of bondage ; 

» As if thou didfſt receive and enjoy theſe things either by thy 
own wifdom and valour, and induſtry, wer: 17. or for thy own 
merit, Deut: 9. 4. See Hoſ. 13. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 7. 

15 Who led thee through that great and terrible wil- 


derneſs, * wherein were fiery ſerpents, and ſcorpions,and 19-136. 


drought, where there was no water,* who brought thee ; Hof. Fxod:14 


forth water out of the rock of flint ; 13.5, | n:&16 
16 Who fed thee in the wilderneſs with * manna, * Numb. | 'z& 17:2 
which thy fathers knew not,that he might humble theeo, 2% 77: | Nun! 
and that he might prove thee to do thee good at thy Ex. - ge 
4 q | | &2573] 
atter end p. ) * Exod: 
0 By keeping thee in a conſtant dependance upon him for every | an & 
days food, and convincing thee what an impotent, helpleſs, and Pial: 
beggerly Creature thou art in thy ſelf, having nothing whereon to 106; 19; 
ſubliſt, but from hand to mouth, and being ſuported wholly by of 
the alms of divine goodneſs given to thee from day to day. The | 
mercies of God, if duly conſidered,are as powerful an argument or 
mean to humble us as the greateſt affliftions,becauſe they increaſe 
our debts to God, and manifeſt our dependance upon him, and in- 
ſufficiency without him, and by making God great, they make us 
little in our own eyes. Though this clauſe, as well as that which 
follows, may have reſpett to their afflitions, mentioned, wer. r5. 
? (7.e. ) That after he hath purged and prepared thee by afflitions, 
he may give thee, and thou mayeſt receive and enjoy his bleſſings 
with leſs diſadvantage, whilſt by the remembrance of former affii« 
Qtions thou art made thankful for them, and more cautious not to 
abuſe and forfeit them again. . 
17 And thou fay in thine heart, My power, and the 
might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth. 
18 Put thou ſhalt remember the LORD thy God ; 
for it i: he that giveth thee power to get wealth 9, that 
he may eftabliſh his covenant which he ſware unto thy 
fathers, as it is this day. 
q So this word is uſed, Numb. 24. 18. Job 20. 18, Prov. 31. 29. 
19 And it (hail be,if thou do ac all forget the LORD 
thy God,and walk after other gods,and ſerve them,and 
worſhip them,I teftifie againſt you this day that ye ſhall 
{urely periſh. | | 
20 As the nations which the LORD deſtroyeth before 
your face, fo ſhall ye periſh ; becauſe ye would not be 
obedient unto the voice of the LORD your God. 
CHA P, IX. 
Iſrael's moych over Jordan to poſſeſs Canaan, 1-—-3. But muſt not aſcribe 
it to their own Righteouſneſs, g.=6. A rehear{al of their manifold pro- 
Vocations at Horeb, 8. at Taberah, 22. and at Kadeſh-Barnea, 23, 24. , 
H Ear,O Ifrael,thou art to paſs over Jordan this day #, 
to go in to poſſeſs nations b greater and mightier 


than thy ſelf c,cicies great and * fenced up to heayen 4. * Chup. 
# ( :e.) Shortly, within a little time, the word day being oft put x, 28. 

for time, as Job. 8. 56. 1 Cor. 4. 5. Revel: 16. 14. within two moneths; 

for Moſes ſpake this on the firſt day of the eleventh month.,Dev. 1:3. 

and they paſſed over Jordan on the tenth day of the firſt moneth. 

Joſ. 4. 19. b( (7. e.) The land of thoſe nations ; for that only they 

were to poſſeſs, but as for the Nations or people they were not to 

poſleſs, but to deſtroy them. Thus they are ſaid to inherit Gad 

Jer: 49: 1. 7.e, the Country and Cities of Gad, as it is there explain= 

ed. c This he adds, partly that they might not be ſurpriſed when 

they find them to be iuch : partly that they might not truſt to 

their own ſtrength, but wholly rely upon Gods help for the de- 

ſtroying of them, and, after the work was done, might aſcribe the | 

praiſe and glory of it ro God alone, and nor to themſelves: d As 

the Spies reported, Deut: 1:28. See on Ger. 11: 4. 

'2 A people great and tall, the children of * the Ana- * Numb. 
kims, whom thou knoweft,and of wbom thou haſt heard 13-28,29 
ſay e, Who oan ſtand before the children of Anak ? 

e Either from the ſpies, or rather from common fame, for this 
ſcems to be a proverb uſed in thoſe times. : 

3 Underſtand therefore this day,that the LORD thy 
God is he which goeth over before thee as a * conſurg- *Ch.4.4 þ,. 
ing fire : he ſhall deftroy them and he ſhall bring them Heb. 
down before thy face ; fo ſhalt thou drive them out,and ** | 


deftroy them quickly fas the LORD hath ſaid 
f Without great ron Lo or long wars. -pngen _ 


4 Speak not thou in thine heart,after that the LORD 


< Te 
tGen: 
kt 16; 


+ Exod: 
9 
34: 


*Ex.32.: 


* Fxad. 


thy 


*Rom: 3 1 


* Fxod: 
3? 9: & 
44% 


*[x00:14: 
| 11: & 16: 
| 4: & 17:2: 
| Num 11: 
4; & 20:2; 
| $2573} 
; * Exod: 


4 32: $ 


Pal: 
106; 19: 


Chap. IF. 
thy God hath caſt them out from before thee, ſaying, * | 


For my righteouſneſs the LORD hath broughtme in to 


ofle(s this land: but*for the wickedneſs of theſe nations 


the LORD doth drive them out from before thee. 

| 5 Not for thy righteouſneſs, or for the uprightneſs of 
thine heart g, doſt thou go to poſſeſs their land ; but for 
the wickedneſs of theſe nations the LORD thy God doth 
drive them out from before thee, and that he may per- 


| form *the word which the LORD ſware unto thy fa- 
" thers, Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacoh 4. 


z Neither for thy upright heart, nor holy life, which are the two 


: things which God above all things regards, 1 Chron. 29. 17. Pſal. 15. 


1, 2. And conſequently he excludes all merit. And ſurely they who 


- did not deſerve this earthly Canaan, could not meric the Kingdom 


of Glory. h To ſhew my faithfulneſs in accompliſhing that promiſe 
which I graciouſly made and confirmed with my oath. By which 
words it 1s impiied, that this land was not given to; them for the 
righteouſneſs oftheir fathers, though they were righteous and holy 
perſons, and much leſs for their own righteouſneſs, which they had 
nor, as it follows. 


6 Underftand therefore, that the LORD thy God 
giveth thee nor this good land to poſlels it for thy righte- 


ouſneſs, for thou art a * ſtiff-necked people z. ; 
| i Rebellious and perverſe, and fo deſtitute of all pretence of righ- 
tconſneſs ; ſuch were the people, but there were divers particular 


. perſons amongſt them truly righteous and holy, and yet even their 
.- : righteouſneſs is denied to be the procuring cauſe of this land. 


7 Remember, nd forget not how thou provokedit 


. the LORD thy God to wrath in the wilderneſs: * from 


the day thou didfſt depart out of the land of Egypt, until 
ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious againſt 
the LORD. 

8 Alſo * in Horeb &, ye provoked the LORD to 


wrath, ſo that the LORD was angry with you, to have 
deſtroyed you. 


k When your miraculous deliverance out of Egypt was freſh' in 
memory ; when God had but newly manifeſted himfelf ro you in 
ſo ſtupendious and dreadful a manner, and had taken you into cove- 


.. : nant with himſelf, when God was actually conferring further mer- 


* Exod: 
24: 12:1 F: 
* Exod. 
24: 18; & 
34: 28; 


* Exod. 
31.18. 


* Exod: 
19: 17, & 
29. 1, 


Cies upon YOu. : ; 

9 * When I was gone up into the mount, to receive 
the tables of ſtone, ever the tables of the covenant which 
the LORD made with you, then * Iabode in the mount 
fourty days and fourty nights ; I neither did cat bread 
nor drink water /. 

1 ( i.e ) I wholly abftained from all meat and drink. ; Compare 
x' Kings 13. 8,9, 13. 2 Kings 6. 22. 

10 * And the LORD delivered unto me two tables 
of ſtone, written with the finger of GOD mz, and on 
them 24s written according to all the words which the 
LORD ſpake with you in the mount, out of the midſt 
of the fire, * in the day of the afſembly ». 

m Immediatly and miraculouſly, which was dene not only to 
procure the greater revereuce fo the L1w, buralfo t:: ſignifie, thatic 
was the work of God alone to write this Law upen't he Tables of mens 
hearts. See Jer. 31. 33. 2 Cor.3.3, 7. n(7i.e.) W:-:n tie people were 
gathered by Gods command to the bottom of Mount Sinai to hear 
and receive Gods Ten Commandments from his own mouth, 

11 Andit came to paſs at the end of fourty days, and 


| fourty nights, that the LORD gave me the two tables of 


*Ex.32.3. 


ſtone, even the tables of the covenant. 

12 Andthe LORD faid unto me, * Ariſe, get thee 
down _ from hence ; for thy people which thou 
haſt brought forth out of Egypc,have corrupted themſelves: 
they are quickly turned atide out oftiie way which com- 
manded them ; they have made them a molten image. 

13 Furthermore, the LORD ſpakeunto me, ſaying, 


| T have ſeen this people, and behold, it zs a ſtiff: necked 


* Fxad. 


people. 

14 Let mealones, that Imay deſtroy them, and blot 
out their name from under heaven ; and I will make of 
thee a nation greater and mightier than they, 

o Stop not the courſe of my fury by thy interceſſion. 

IF. So1 turned and came down frem the mount, and 
the mount burned with fire : and the two tables of the 
covenant ere in my two hands. 

16 And * I looked, and behold, ye had ſinned, 
againft the LORD your God, and had made you a 
molten calf: ye had turned aſide quickly out of the way 
which the LORD had commanded you. 

17 And1I took the two tables, and caſt them out of 
my two hands, and brake them before your eyes p. 

þ Nor by any unbrid!ed paſſion, but in zeal for Gods honour, and 
by the dire&:on of Gods tpirit, to ſignific co the pcople, rbar the 
covenant between God and them coitained in tivie Tables was 
broken and made void, and taey were now quite caſt out of Gods 


favour, and could expe noching from him bur fiery indignation 
and ſevere juſtice. See on Exod. 32, 19. 


18 And *Ifcli down q before the LORD, as at the 
firſt fourty days, and fourrty nights ; 1 did neither eat 
| bread; nor drink water, becauſe of ill your fins, which 
ye ſinned, in doing wickedly inthe ſighc of che LORD, 
to provoke him to anger. 
q In way of humiliation aad ſupplication, on your behalf. 


D EB U T EB RK © N UmeET 


Jacob : look not unto the ſtubbornneſs of this people, 


by thy ſtretched ont arm. 


puvlick'y owned them for thine, and haſt purchaſed 8ni rede 


Chap. X. 


19 (ForTwas afraid of the anger and hot diſpleaſure 
wherewith the LORD was wroth againſt you, to deſtroy '_ 
you ) But the LORD hearkened unto me at that time 

0. 

20 And the LORD was very angry with Aaron r, 
to have deſtroyed him: And I prayed for Aaron alſo 
the ſame time. | 


7 Though he was only acceilary, as being perſwaded, and in a 
manner cempelled to comply with your deſice. ' 


21 And * I took your ſin s, the calf which ye had « gyoq. 
made, and burnt it with fire, and ſtamped it, a»d ground 32. 20. 
it very ſmall, ever until it was as ſmall as duft : and IT 

caſt the duſt thereof into the brook t that deſcended out 

of the mount. 

5 (i.e.) The obje& and matter of ycur ſin, as in is taken 1s. 31. 7. 

t That there might be no monument of remembraace of it leff. - | 
22 And at * Taberah, and at* Mafla, and at * Ki- Numb. 
broth-hattaavah, ye provoked the LORD to wrath. ho 
23 Likewiſe * when the LORD ſent you from Kadeſh- +7. 7. 
barnea, ſaying, Go up, and poſleſs the land which I * Numb. 
have given you, then ye rebelled againſt the command- 17.3% ' 
ment of the LORD your God, and ye believed him ,, ny 
not, nor hearkened to his voice. 

24. Ye have been rebellious againſt the LORD, from 

the day that I knew you. 

25 Thus I fell down before the LORD fourty days 

and fourty nights «, as I fell down * as the firſt, becauſe *Verſe 18: 
the LORD had ſaid, he would deſtroy you. OA 
4 The ſame mentioned before, v. 18. as appears, r. By COmpa= 
ring this with Exodus, where this Hiſtory is more fully relared, and 
where this is ſaid to be done twice only. 2. By the occsſion and > 
mat:er of Mes his prayer here following, which is the ſame with : 
tne former, 3. By the words here followiug, as I fell down at firſt, 
which ſhew that this was the ſecond time of his 1o doing. 


26 I prayed therefore unto the LORD and ſaid, 2 
O LORD God, deftroy not thy people, and thine 

inheritance, which thou haſt redeemed through thy $ 
greatneſs x, which thou haft brought forth our of Egype I 
with a mighty hand. . 2 


x (i.e, ) Through the greatneſs of thy power, which appeared 
moſt eminently in that work, as is noted, v. 29. Fe We: Ne 


27 Remember thy Servants y, Abraham, Iſaac, and 


4 


the 
TT 5 


nor to their wickedneſs, nor to their ſin. 


y (#.e. } The promiſe made and ſworn to thy Servants, which 
was mentioned above, wv 5 


28 Leſt the land whence thou broughteſt us out; ſay, 
* Becauſe the LORD was not able tobring them into the * Numb: 
land which he promiſed them,and becauſe he hated chem, 14: 6 

he hath hrought them out to ſlay themin the wilderneſs. 
29 Yet they «rechy people z, and thine inheritance 
which thou broughtett out by thy mighty power, and 


z Whom thou haſt choten to thy felf out ofall mankind; an 


them from tae Egyptians. A. 
CHAP. Xx. ty 
Moſes repeats God's mercies in reſtoring the two Tables, 1 ===; JHaron's 
death. Eleazar his $1n officiates in hu flead, 6, 7. The Tribe of Levi i 
ſeparatea for the Priefthoed, 3, 9. God hearkning to Moſes not to deſtroy 
them, 10. He is commanded to lead towards Canaan, 11. God requires 
their Obedience, 12 —15. Tocircumciſe their Hearts, 16, 17. To help 
the Fatherle(s and Widow, 18. To love ſtrangers, 19, To fear and ſerve 
the Lord for his Mercies towards them, 20 === 22, 


T that time 4 the LORD ſaid unto me, * Hew , 
thee two tables of ſtone like unto the firſt, and 
come up unto me intothe mount, and make thee an ark 
of wood b. 

2 When God was newly appaſed by my interceſſion. b Either a 
temporary Ark for this uſe, till the other was finiſhed : or the famous 
Ark, as may ſeem'by comparing this with wv. 5. Ir is not evident in 
what order theſe things were done, nor is it ſtrange if Moſes in this 
ſhort and general relation neglef the order oftime, asbeing nothing 
to this preſent purpoſe. 

2 And I will wrice on the rables, the words that were 
in the firſt tables which thou brakeſt, and thou ſhalt put 
them in the ark. 

And I made an ark of * ſhittim-wood, and hewed 
wo tables of ſtone like unto the firft, and went up into *Fxod253 
the mount, having the ewo tables in mine hand. PTE 

4 And * he wrote on the tables according to the firſt * gxo& 
writing, the F Ten Commandments, which the 34: 28: 
LORD ſpake unto you in the mount, out of the midſt f HeÞ- 
of the fire, in the day of the afſembly ; and the LORD __ 
gave them unto me. | 

5 AndI turned my ſelf: and came down from the 
mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made, 
and there they be, as the LORD commanded me. 

6 Andthe children of Iſrael took their journey c from pq. 
Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to * Moſera &« ; * there I ; 


Aaron died e, and there he was buried, and Eleazar his * Numb: 
20; 28; 


Exod: 


43 13 


1 ſon miniftred in the prieſts office in his ſtead, 


2 F 4 e This 


| 
| 
| 


| 


Chap. NX. DB = PIT E 


«following Hiſtory comes in manifeſtly by way of Paren- 

By. + _ Ds "nth Ky 10. where he returns to his (ne 
diſcourſe; and it ſeems to be here inſerted, either, 1. Becauſe the 

- Priefts and Levites here mentioned were the Guardians and Keepers 
of the Ark and Tables here mentioned. Or rather, 2. As an evidence 

of God's gracious anſwer to Meſes his prayers, and of his reconcilia- 

tiog to the peop'e, nctwithftanding their late and great provocation. 
For, ſaith he, after this they proceeded by God's guidance 1n their 
Journeys, ſome eminent ſtages whereof he names for all: and though 
Aaron died in one of them, yet God made up that Breach, and 
Eleazar came in his place, and miniſtred as Prieſt, one branch of 
which office was to intercede for thepeople. Then, ſaith he, God 
brought them from the barren parts of the wilderneſs to.a land of 
rivers of waters, ver. 7. a pleaſant and fruitful Soil. Then he adds, 
God ſeparated the Levites, &c. Yerſe 8. dObjefi. This place ſeems 
direQly contrary to that, Numb. 33. 31. where their Journey 15 quite 
contrary to this, even om Moſeroth to Bene-jaakax. This indeed 1$ a 
great difficulty, and prophane wits take occaſion to cavil. And ifa 

. . farisfaftory anſwer be not yet given to it by Interpreters, 1t ought. 
Hot therefore to be concluded unanſwerable, becauſe many things 

' formerly thought unanſwerable, have been ſince fully cleared, and 
therefore The Tike may be preſumed concerning other doubts yet 

© remaining. And it were much more reaſ-nable to acknowledge 
© here & tranſpoſition of the words through the Scribe's miſtake, than 
- - upon ſuch pretence to reje& the divine Authority of thoſe ſacred 
* *- Bopks, which hath been coyfirmed by ſuch irreſiſtable Arguments. 
Burt there is no need of theſe general pleas, ſeing particular anſwers 

are & may be givenrto this difficuity ſufficient to ſatisfie modeſt and 
impartial enquirers. Anſw. r. The places here mentioned are differing 
from thoſe, Numb. 33. it being very frequertin Scripture for divers 
perſons and places to be called by the ſame names, and yet the names 

are not wholly the ſame ; for there it is Bene-jaakan,and here Beeroth 

”  Bene-jaakan, or Beeroth of the children of Jaakan ; there Moſeroth, here 
_ __ "Mbſerab; there Hor-hagidgad, here Guagodah ; there Jotbathah, here 
TJotbath. Ttthe places were the ſame, it may juſtly ſeem ſtrange why 

Mdſes how'd fo induftriouſly make achange inevery one of the names. 

Add therefore thete may bt other Stations, which being omitred 1n 
Numb. 33. are ſupplied here, it being uſual in ſacr2d Scripture to 
ſupply the defe&ts of one place out of ancther. Aw. 2. Admitting 


. 


d then back again from Meſer#h or Meſerorh to Bene-jaakan, as 1» 
nk - for which. return there might then be ſome ſufficien* 


ings are: or Gag might order ir ſo for his own pleaſure, -and it 1s 
_ ofible wy. en do it for this reaſon, that b this ſeeming 
contradiQion, as well as ſome others, he might in juſt judgment d- 
he threatned to the Nwe, Jer. « Fog __ lay « pon. A _—_ 
before prophane and proud wits, and give them thad «ccaſion © 
JeceiPing Go be handblres, which they ſo greedily ſeek and 
gladly embrace ; which isthe reaſon given by ſome ofthe antients 
why God hath lefe ſo many difficulties in Scripture. nſw. 3. The 
words may be otherwiſe rendred, fom Beeroth of the children of Faakan. 
and from Moſerah : where the Order of the places is not obſerved, as 
was noted before of the order of time, wv. 1. becauſe it, wasnothing 
ro the purpoſe here, and becauſe that might be eaſily fetched from 
Numb. 33. where thoſe journeys are more particularly and exaQtly 
deſcribed. For the conjun&tion and, that may be here wanting, and 
to be ſupplied, as it is, Exod. 6. 23, 1 Sam. 4. 7. Plal. 133. 3. Is. 
63. 11. Heb. 3. 11. And the prepoſition Fom is eaſily ſupplied from 
the foregoing words, as is moſt uſual. Nor ſeems there to be any 
more reaſon to render ito Moſerah, than Fom Moſerah, ſeing the Hebrew 
Jetter Hein the end is made a part of the proper name, and therefore 
is na local. e Qyeft. How is this true ? when Aaron dyed nor in 
Moſerab, but in Mount Hur, Numb. 33.57. Anſw. 1. Miſerah may be 
a diffcrent place from Moſeroth, and that may be the name of a Town 
or-Ree&9n in which Mount Hor was, or to which it belenged. Or, 
the ſam>.mounrain, in reſpe& of divers parts and oppoſite ſides of it, 
might betalled by divers names, here Moſerah, and there Hor. And 
it is pofſivle they might go ſeveral journeys, and paſs to divers 
Nations, and by fetching a compaſs ( which they oft did in their 
wilderneſs travels ) come to the other ſide of the fame Mountain. 
Anſ. 2. The Hebrew-Partiele, ſcham, may here note the time, and not 
the place of £aror's death, and may be rendred hen, as it is taken, 
Gen. 49.-24. Pſal. 14. 5. Eecleſ. 3.17. Zephan. 1. 14. And then is not 


Scripture ; that is, abour that time, afcer a few remoyes more ; as 
the words, at that time, wv. 8. muſt neceſſarily he underſtood. 


7 * From thenoe e they journeyed unto Gudgodah, 
*Num:33: and from Gudgodah to Jorbath,a land of rivers of waters. 
32: 343 e Either, 1. From that place, and that either from Moſer, Jaſt 
mentioned : or from Bene-jaskan : for relatives many times in Scri p- 
ture belong to the remoter- antecedent. Or, 2. From that time : 
for this particle ſometimes notes not place, but time, as 2 Kings 2. 21. 
Iſa. 65+ 20. So the meaning is, At, or about that time, as it is verſe 8. 
which being conſidered, may ſerve to clear the great difficulty 
- diſcourſed upon the laſt verſe concerning the ſeeming contradiQion 
_ of this place, and Numb. 33. 31, 32. 


8 Art that time f * the LORD ſeparated the tribe of 
*Num; 3: Levi to bear the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to 
4 4:4: ſtand before the LORD g to miniſter unto him, and to 

* 74% bleſs in his name þ unto this day. 

F About that time, 7. e. when I was come down Fom the Mount, as 
was {aid v. 5. For theſe words manifeſtly look to that verſe, the 6. & 
7. verſes being put in by way of Parentheſis, as was ſaid before. Or, 
if it relate to the words immediately foregoing, this may be meant 
of a ſecond ſeparation of them upon Aaron's Death, and having 
mentioned the ſeparation of Eleazar to the Office of the high Prieſt in 
his Father's ſtead, v. 6. he now repeats it, that the Levites who were 
his, as they had been his Father's Servants, were ſeparated as before, 
or were confirmed in their Office. g A phraſe uſed concerning the 
Prophets, 1 Kings 17. 1. & (8. 15. this being the poſture of Miniſters. 
Heace the Angels are ſaid to ſtand, 2Chron. 18.18. Luke 1.19. h Either, 
I. Particularly, to pronounce the ſalemn bleſſing of God upon the 
Congregation, which was done in God's Name, of which fee Livir. 


theſe two places to be the ſame with thoſe, Numb. 33. 31. yet tke\ 
ourneys = divers. They went from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan. 
70 Moſers, which is omitted in Numbers, and therefore here 1v pplyed C 


reaſon, though now unknown tous, as the reaſons of many ſuch like 


ro be raken preciſely, but with ſome Jaritude, as it is oft uſed in | 


R O0O N O on TM. Chap. RX. 
' 9. 23. Numb.6. 23. &c. But that work was peculiar'to the Pricſts, 

{ not common to all the Levites, Or, more generally, to bleſs, Either 

| x. God, 2. e. to praiſe him, which being a conſiderable part of the 
Levites work, 1 Chron. 16. it is not probable it wou'd be omitted 

here, where their Office is ſo particularly deſcribed. Or, 2. The 
people, whom they did bleſs by performance of thoſe holy miniſtrati- 

ons for the people, and giving thoſe inſtiuQtions to t! em, to which 

God's bleſſing was promiſed and uſually given ; and this they did 

in Gods Name, i. e. by command, and commiſſion from him. : 

9 * Wherefore Levi hathno part nor inheritance with + yy 
his brethren : the LORD 5s his inhericance z, according rg: ,,. 
as the LORD thy God promiſed him. 

; (i.e. The Lords portion, to wit, tithes and offerings, which 
belong to God, are given by himto the Levites for their tubſiſtence 
from generation to generation, as inherirances run, _ 

io And * I ſtayed in the mount, according to the || * Exog. 
firſt time, fourty days, and fourty nights : and the LORD 74 28: 
* hearkened unto me at that time alſo, avd the LORD F Or, 

- JOormey 
would not deſtroy thee. ; 


poſſeſs the land, which I\ware unto their fathers to give I, '7 
unto them. | od:32; 


whom therefore he led forwards towards Canaan. | in j urney 
12 And now, Ifrael, * what doth the LORD thy * Mic, 
God require of thee }, but to fear the LORD thy God, 6: 8: 
towalk in all his ways, and * ts love him, and to ſerve + Chaps 
the LORD thy God with all thy heart, and with all 6: 5: 
thy ſoul, | 
I By way of duty and gratitude to God for ſuch amazing mercies. 
13 To keep the commandments of the LORD, and 
his ſtatutes, which I command thee this day for thy good? 
14 Behold * the heaven #1, and the heaven of heavens , Plate) 
is the LORD thy God's, * the earth alſo, with all'; 48: 4+ 
hat therein 5s 0. * Exod: 
m The airy and ſtarry heaven. #* The higheſt or third heeven, 19: 5: 
I Kings 8. 27. 2 Cor. 12. 2. called the Heaven of heavens, for its Pal: 
eminency, as ths Song of ſongs, King of kings, Holy of halies, &c. o With 24: 1; 
all cre-tures and all men, which being all his, he might have choſen 
what Nation he pleaſeth to be his people. 
, 15 Only the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to 
love them p, and he choſe their ſeed after them, evey 
you, above all people, as zt is this day. | 
þ He ſhews that God had no particular reaſon nor obligation to 
their Fathers any more than to other perſons or peeple, all being 
equally his creatures, and rhat his choice of them cut ofand above all 
ot ers, proceed:d only from God's good pleaſure and free love. 
16 Circumciſe therefore * the foreskin of your hearts 
1, _ be no more ſtiff-necked. at 
_ qReſt aotin your bodily circumciſion, but ſeriouſly ſet vpon thar 69155 313 
ſubſtanrial work which is ſignified and deſigned me fra pres 
your hearts from all filthineſs and ſuperfluity of naughtineſs, which 
firly compared to the forezkin which if not cut off, made perſons 
profane, unclean and odious in the ſight of God. Compare Dent. 
30. 6. Jer. 4. 4. & 9. 25. Rom. 2. 28, 29. Col. 2.11, 
17 For the LORD your God zs God: of gods, and 
* Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, 
which * regardeth not perſons r, nor taketh reward, *R: 
r Whether Jews or Gentiles, but deals juſtly and equally with all +7 <# 
forts of men; and as whoſoever fears and obeys him ſhall be accep- he 
' ted of him, ſo all incorrigible tranſgreſfors ſhall be ſeverely puniſh- pg 7:Job 
_ and mou by leſs _ other people : therefore do not flatter your 2608 
ſelves as if God would bear with your ſins becauſe of hi , 
| kindneſs to you or to your Sr wok 99-0 poocioder 34: Ront: 
X . 2; 11: 
| [Harwrorn _ _ _ pu s of the fatherleſs, Gal: »:& 
dow, and loverth the ſtranger, in giving him food Eph: 6:5 
_—_ raiment. | Col.z. 25. 
s (f.e. ) Plead their cauſe, and give them right againſt their xPet: 1117: 
more potent adverfaries, and Pome”. he expos you ſhould do fo * Pfal, 
roO, 8: 5: 
I9 * Love ye therefore the ſtranger z for ye were 246 9: 
ſtrangers in the land of Egypt. | th 


20 * Thou ſhalt fear the LORD thy God: him ſhalt * Chat 


thou ſerve, and to him ſhalt thou * cleave t, and ſwear 6: 13: 
by his Name. 


atthr 
t With- firm confidence, true affeQion, and c 4+ 105 
; opſtant att 
and obedience. ; : t attendance Luke 4: 


21 X Hes thy praiſe «, and he is thy God that hath oP 


done for thee theſe great and terrible things whi "ER > A 
eyes have ſeen. g5 Which thine * Exod: 


z Either, r. the obje& and matter of thy praiſe, as Zx d 
whom thou ſhouldeſt ever praiſe. Or A +. the nouns of the 
praiſe, 2. e. of thy praiſe-worthineſs ; he who makes thee honourable 
and glorious above thoſe people whoſe God he is nor. 

22 Thy fathers went down into Egypt * with three- 
{core and ten perſons: and now the LORD thy Gog * Gem: 
hath made thee * as the ſtars of heaven for multitude. at - 

: X06:1:5: 
CHAP. XI. AQ:7:14 
Moſes exhorts them to Obedience by rehearſing God's Works, 1 =——=9, And * Get: 
by the excellency of the Land they were to poſſeſs, 1to===12.. A Promiſe 15: 153 
of bleſſings to their Obedience, 13 —15. They are warned againſt Idolatry, 
16, 17. To teach it their Children, 19, And keep Memorials of it, 20. 
for their own Benefit, 2x, God promiſes again, upon thiir Obedience, to 


I5: 2: 


. days 
11 * And the LORD ſaidunto me, Arife, f take hy — FI 
journey before the people, that they may goin '&, and 32 33: & 


k This ſhews, that God was appeaſed and reconciled to the people, Fes a 


drive out the Nations, 22 25, 4 rs and a Curſe is ſet befere them, 


©) — $. . 4 
—_ _— _. are bid to bleſs on Mount Gerizim, but curſe.on 


| Therefore 


Cha! 


+ He 
ſeeket 
” x: 


9. 3. 


Chap. XI D- RU: F- &6 M 

T*Herefore thou ſhalt love the LORD thy God, and 

'T keep his charge, and his ſtatutes, and his judg- 
ments, and his commandments alway. 

2 And know « ye this day : for 1 ſpeak not with your 
children, which have not known, and which have not 
ſeen the chaſtiſement of the LORD your God, his great- 
neſs, his mighty hand, and his ſtretched-out arm : 

a ( 5. e. ) Acknowledge and conſider it with diligence and thank- 


fulnels. - id 1 
"I And his miracles,and his a&ts, which he did in the 


mid{t of Egypt, unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and 
unto all his land. : 
4 And what he did untothe army of Egypt,unto their 
horſes,and to their chariots,* how he made the water of 
the Red-ſea to overflow them,as they purſued after you, 
and bew the LORD hathdeſtroyed them unto this day 5: 


b The effe& of which deſtru&tion continuerh to this day, in their 
weakneſs and fear, and our ſafety from all their further attempts 
againſt us. ; ; 

5 And what he did unto you in the wilderneſs, unti 

| ye came unto this place : ; 

*Num.16. 6 And * what he did unto Dathan and Abiram the 
31.827-3- ſons of Eliab, the ſon ef Reuben : how the earth opened 
Pſ196-17. per mouth,and ſwallowed themup, and their houſholds, 
| Ordiving 108 their tents, and allthe ||ſubſtance that F ves in their 
5 poſſeſſion c, in the midſt ofall Ifrael : | 
has c Heb. 4+ their feet, i.e. under their power, Pſal. 8. 6. which 
Heb. was followed them or belonged to them. c 
«their fees 7 But your eyes have ſeen all the great acts © the 
ORD &4, which he did. 

d All of them had ſeen ſome, and ſome of them had ſeen all the 
great things done in Egypr and at the Red-ſ?a, and in the Wilderneſs . 

8 Therefore ſhall ye keep all the commandments which 
I command you this day, that ye may be ſtrong, and go 
in, and poſleſs the land whither ye go to poſlels it: 

9 And that ye may prolong yeur days in the land 
which the LORD ſware unto your fathers to give unto 
them, and to their ſeed, a land that floweth with miik 
and honey. | 3 

10 For the land whither thou goeſt in to poſſeſs it, 7s 
not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, 
where thou ſowedlt thy ſeed, and wateredft 5: with thy 


foot e as a garden of herbs z 
e (5. e,) With great painsand labour of thy feet, partly by go- 
ing up and down to fetch water and diſperſe it, and partly by dig- 
ging furrows with thy foot, and uſing engines for diſtcibuting the 
water, which engines they thruſt with their feer. For though the 
River Nilus did once in a year overflow the grounds,and made them 
fruitful, yet oft times it filed or ſcanted them,and then they were 
pur to great pains about their ground ; and when it did overflow 
{ufficiently, and left its Mud upon the earth, yet thar Mud was 1n 
4 lictle time hardned, and needed another watering and much dig- 
ging and labour both of the hand and feer, eſpecially in places 
ſomething higher oc more remote from that River ; which incon- 
venience Canaan was free from. : 
1: Bur the land whither ye goto poſleſs it, is a land 
of hills and valleys f aud drinketh water of che rain of 


heaveng : 

f And therefore much more healthful than Egypr was,which as it 
was enriched,ſo it was annoyed, with N:ilus, which overflowed the 
Jand in ſummer time,and thereby made the Country both unplea- 
fant,and,which is much worſe, unhealthful. And health being the 
greateſt of all outward bleſſings, Canaan muſt therefore needs be a 
more deſireable habitation rhan Egypr,which is the thing here imply- 
ed. g Which is. more honourable, becauſe this comes not from man's 
art or induſtry, but immediately from God's power and goodneſs ; 
more eaſie,being given thee without thy charge or pains; mo.e ſweet 
and pleaſant,not hindering thy goiug abroad upon thy occaſions,as 
the overflow of Nitus did, whereby the Egyptians were confined in a 
great meaſure to their ſeveral houſes ; more ſafe and healthful,being 
free from that Mud which attends upon the waters of N:lus ; and 
more certain too,the formerand the latter rain being promiſed tobe 
given to them in their ſeveral ſeaſons, upon condition of their obe- 
dience,which condition,though it may ſeem a clog and inconveni- 
ence,yet indeed was a great benefit,that by their own neceflities and 
worldly intereſt they ſhould be obliged ro that obesjence, upon 
which their happineſs depended both for this lifeand for the next. 


* Fxod. 
14) 27+ 


_ * the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it 
from the beginning of the year, even unto the end of 
the year z. | , 

h To wit,jn a ſpecial manner, watering it immediately as it were 
by his own hand, without man's help,and giving peculiar bleſſings 
to it, which Egypt enjoys not. # To give it the rain, and other 
bleſſings proper to the ſeveral ſeaſons. Bur all theſe mercies, and 
the fruitfulneſs of the land conſequent upon them, were ſuſpended 
upon their diſobedience, as it here follows. And therefore it is 
not at all ſtrange that ſome later Writers decry the land of Canaan 
as 1n great part a barren ſoil, which is ſo far from affording any 
ground to queſtion the divine authority of the holy Scriptures, in 
which its fruitfulneſs is declared, that it doth much more confirm 
it, this being bur an effeC&t of that threarning that God would turn 

a fruitful land into barrenneſs for the wickedueſs of theſe that dwell in it, 
Pſal. 107. 34.and elſewhere; and the wickedneſs of the 1ſ-2elites in 
ſucceeding ages being notorious, it is bur ju't and fir that the bar- 
rennefs of their land ſhould be as evident and infamous. 


I3 Andit (hal cometo pals, if ye ſhal hearken dili- 
gently unto my commandments, which I commanded | 


12 A land which the LORD thy God + careth for 6: |/ 


O NOM YT. Chap. XI 
you this day, to lovethe LORD your God, and tofſerve | 
him with all your heart, and with all your foul; 

14 That I will givejouthe rain of your land & in his due 
ſealon,the firſt rain,and the latter rain /, chat thou may- 
eſt gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. 

k (3. e. ) Which is needful and ſufficient for your land ; or which 
is proper toyour land, not common to Egypt, where, as all authors 
agree, there is little orno rain. / The firſt fell in ſeed-time, to 
make the corn ſpring, the other a little before harveſt, to ripen it. 
See Jer. 5. 24. Joel 2. 23. Am 4. 7. Jam.s.7. 
15 AndTI will + ſend grals in thy tields for thy catte], 
that thou mayelt ear and be full. 

16 Take heed to yourſelves, that your heart be not 
deceived m, and yeturn afide, and ferve other gods,and 
worlbip them. 

m By the ſpecious pretences of Idolaters, who will plead the ge- 
neral conſent of all nations, except yours, in the worthip of c1ca- 
tures, and that they worſhip the creatures only for God's {ake,and 
as they are glorious works of God, whom they worſhip in and by 
them : which, and the like arguments, being commonly alledged 
by Heathens for their Idolatries,as their own writers declare,mighr 
poſlibly ſeduce an unwary {/raelite : and therefore they are here cau- 
tioned againſt ſuch deceit, and withal it is implyed, that if a man's 
mind be corrupted and deceived, ſo as he believes Idolatry to be 
lawful, this will not excuſe him in the fight of God. 


17 And then the LORD's wrath be kindledagainſt you, 
and he ſhut up the heaven's, that there be no rain, and 
that the land yield not her fruit,and/eft ye periſh quick- 
ly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you. 

» Which is compared ſometimesto a bottle, 70b.38.37. which may 
be either ſtopped or opened:ſometimes to a great ſtore-houſe where-= 
in God lays up his treaſures of rain, 70b 38.22, Pſal. 33. 7. the doors 
whereof God 1s ſaid to open when he gives rain, and to ſbut when he 
with-holds it. See x King. 8.35. 2 Chron. 6, 26. and 7. 13. 

18 Therefore * ſhal ye lay uptheſe my words in your 
heart,and in your ſoul,& *bind them for aſign upon your 
| aand,thart they may beas frontlets between your eyes. , 

19 And * ye bal teach them your children, ſpeaking + A 
of them when thou ſitteſt in thine houſe,and when thou & 6. þ 
walkeſt by the way, when thou lieſt down, and when 
chou riſelt up. | 

20 And thou ſhalt write them upon the door-poſts 
of thine houſe, and upon thy gates: 

21 That your daysmay be multiplied, and the days 
of your children, in the land which the LORD ſwars 
unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven 
upon the earth o. 

o(#.e.) As long as this viſible world laſts; whilſt the heaven 
keeps its place and continues its influences upon earth, until all 
theſe things be diſſolved. Compare P/al. 72. 5. and81. 5. and 89. 
29. Jer. 33.25. 

22 For it ye ſhal diligently keep all theſe command- 
ments which I command you, to do them, to love the 
LORD your God, to walk in all his ways,and to cleave 
unto him : 

23 Then will the LORD drive out all theſe nations 
from before you, and ye hal poſſeſs greater nations,and 
mightier than yourſelves, 

24 * Every place whereon the ſoles of your feet ſhal ,, ,; 
tread p, ſhal be yoursq : *trom the wilderneſs r, and *Ny J 
Lebanon s,, from the river, the river Euphrates 7, even - 
unto the uttermoſt ſea «, ſhal your coit be. 

p Not abſolutely, as ifthe Jews ſhould be Lords of all the world, 
as the Rabbins fondly conceit, but in the promiſed\land, as it is re 
ſtrained in the following words. q Either by ied, or by do- 


minion, to wit, upon condition of your obedience. »r To wit, of 
Sin, on the ſouth-t1de. 5 - na from Lebanon : Su to Lebaneon,which 


tHeb.gi 


2 FR 
«+, & + 
F# % 


* ch. 6.6 


T 


was the Northein border. 5 Onthe Eaſt. So far Xheir Right of Do- 
minion extended, but that their fins cut theni ſhort: and ſo far 
Solomon extended his Dominion. « Th eſtern or Midland Sea : 
Heb. the hindermoſt Sea : for the Eaſtgfh part of the World being ge- 
nerally eſteemed the foremoſt, az&The Southern on the right hand, 
Pſal. 89. 12. and conſeque the Northern on the left hand, the 
Weſtern part muſt needs be behind. Oftheſe bounds cf the Land 
ſee Gen. 10. 19.and 15. 18. Exod. 23. 31. Jo. 1. 3, 4* 

25 There ſbal np man be able to ftand-before you : 


2+ the LORD your God ſbal lay chefear of you, and the 


dread of you upon all the land that ye ſhal tread upon, 
as he hath ſaid unto you. 
26 * Behold, I ſet before you x 
and a curſe: 
x I propoſe them to your minds and to your choice. 

27 * A blefling, if ye obey the commandments of the , 
LORD your God, which I command you this day: 
28 Anda *curſe, if ye will not obey the command- +,,, 
ments ofthe LORD your God, but turn aſide out of the 
way which I command you this day, to go after other 
gods which ye have not known y. | 


» Which you have no acquaintarge with,nor experience of their 
power or wiſdom or goodneſs, as you have had of mine. 


29 And it ſhal come to paſs, when the LORD thy 
God hath brought thee into the land whither thou goett 
to poſſeſs it, that thou ſhalt = pur * the bleſſing upon . , ._ 
mount Gerizzim, and the curſe upon mount Ebal. 12, 13. 
bs 2 G z Heb Joſ's.33. 


this day a blefling , , 
ch.30.15 


ch. 28.2ÞJ 


28.r5 


ap. XII. 


nounced. So the word ro give is uſed, Deut. 13. 1, 2. J% 36. 3- 
Prov. 9. 9. This is more particularly expreſſed, Deut. 27. 12, 13: 
and Jof. 8. 33, whitherl refer the Reader. 

20 Are they not on the other ſide Jordan by the way 
where the ſun goeth down, in the land of the Canaa- 
nites, which dwell in the champian over againſt Gil- 
gal || beſide the plains of Moreh? 

|| Looking tewards Gilga!, though at ſome conſiderable diſtance 
from it, as this particle is ſometimes uſed. : 

31 For ye ſhall paſs over Jordan, to go in to poſleſs 
the land which the LORD your God giveth you, and 
ye {hal poſſeſs it, and dwe!l therein. 

32 Andye hal obſerve * to do all the ſtatutes and 
judgments which I ſet before you this day. 

GHAP. XS. 

Fhey are commanded to deſtroy all the places of Idolatry, 1---=3. And muſt 
worſhip Ged in his own place, and after his Will, 4----15. The eating 
of blood prohibited, 16. Where and how they ſhould eat the Tithe, 17,18» 
The Levite not to be forſaken, 19. They may eat Fleſh clean or unclean 
any where, 20---22. But nor the Blood, 23-25. Holy things 70 be 
eaten at the Altar of the Lord, 26-=28. They are. forbidden to enquire 
after the Heathen Worſhip, 29, 30. Or, to worſhip the true God, asthey, 

31. But to keep to the Law in their Worſbip, 32. ; 

6 | \Heſe arethe ſtatutes and judgments which ye ſhal 

obſerve to do, in the land which the LORD 

God of thy fathers giveth thee to poſſeſs ir, all the days 
| thatye live upon the earth, ; 

hap.7.5- 2 * Yeſhal utterly deſtroy all the places « wherein the 

$7, 77% nations, which ye ſhal || poſſeſs, ſerved their gods, up- 

” - on the high mountains b, and upon the hills, and under 

q: every green tree Cc. | 

$ 2 Temples, Chappels, Altars, Groves, as appears from other Scri- 
ptures. 6 Which the Gentiles uſed to employ for their Idolatry. See 
Iſa, $7. 5,7. Exek. 6. 13. Hoſ. 4. 13. c As the Gentiles conſecrated di- 
vers trecs to their falſe gods,ſo they worſhipped theſe under them, 

3 And* ye ſhal + overthrow their altars, and break 
their pillars d, and burn their groves with fire, and ye 
ſhal hew down the graven images of their gods, and 
deſtroy the names of them e out of that place, : 

4 Upon which their Images vere ſer. e (3. e. ) All the memori- 
als of them, and the very names given to the places from the Idols. 

4 Ye tbal not doſoeunto the LORD your God. 

e ) 7. e.) Not worſhip him in ſeveral places, mountains, groves, 

&-c. which ſenſe is evident from the following oppoſition. 


5 Bur unto the place which the LORD your God 


0 Fe 32 


[Judg. 2 


Heb. 
cak down 


1King.8: 

$9.2 Chr. . +" { hi 
"12. theref, even unto his habitation ſhal ye leek, and thi- 
ther thou ſhalt come. | 

f(#. e. ) To ſetup his worſhip there, or which he ſhall call by 
his-name, as his houſe, or dwelling-place, &c. to wit, where the 
Ark ſhould be, the Tabernacle, or Temple : Which was firſt Shiloh, 
Joſ. 18. 1. next and eſpecially Jeruſalem. ; 

6 And * thither ye ſhal bring your burnt-offerings, 
and your ſacrifices g, and your tithes 6, and heave-offer- 
ings i of your hand, and your vows, and your free-will- 
ofterings &, and the firſtlings of your herds, and of your 
flocks /. 


g Which were wiſely appropriated to that one and publick place, 
partly for the ſecurity of the true Religion, and for the prevention 
of Idolatry and Superſtition, which otherwiſe might more eaſily 
have crept in : and partly to ſignifie that their Sacrifices were not 
accepted for their own worth, but by God's gracious appointment, 
and for the ſake of God's Altar,by which they were ſanCtified, and 
for the ſake of Chriſt, whom the Altar did manifeſtly reprelaggy 
h Of which ſee below on wer. 17. 7 (7. e: ) Your firſt-fruits, to wit, 
of the carth, as of corn and wineand oyl and other fruits,as plain- 
ly appears by comparing this place with Deur. 18. 4. and 26. 2. 
where theſe are commanded tobe brought thither ; and ſeing here 
i5an exatt and particular enumeration of all ſuch things, and theſe 
cannot be put under any of the other branches, theſe muſt needs 
be intended here, the rather, becauſe the other kind of firſt-fruits, 
to wit, of the herds and flocks, are here expreſſy mentioned. And 
theſe are called here the heave-offerings of their hand, becauſe the offer- 
er was firſt to take theſe into his hands, and to heave them before 
the Lord ( as other places tell us ) and then to give them to rhe 
Prieſt, as appears from Deut. 18. 3, 4. and 26. 4. &k Even for your 
voluntary oblations, which were not due by my preſcription, but 
only by your own choice and voluntary engagement: you may 
chuſe what kind ofoffering you pleaſe to vow and offer, but not 
the place where you ſhall offer them. 7 Either 1. the holy firſtlings 
or firſt-born, as appears by Numb. 18. wherethey are commanded 
ro be broughtto this one place here deſigned, and to be offeredupon 
God's altar, ve 17. Itis objeQed by ſome, that thoſe were given 
to the Prieſts, Numb. 18. 18. but theſe were to be eaten by the peo- 
ple here, wer. 7. But that the next verſe doth not ſay, but only 
in general, there ſhall ye eat, to wit, ſuch of the offerings mention- 
ed v.6. as they were allowed to eat,but not ſuchas were the Prieſts 
peculiar, for theſe they might not eat, nor all there expreſſed ; for 
it is evident they might not eat any of the burnt-offerings,nor ſome 
parts of the orher ſacrifices, which are here mentioned. Or 2. the 
ſecond births, which were the peoples frſt-born, or the firſt which 
they could eat of, which they were to cat before the Lord by way 
of acknowledgement of his favour in giving them to them and all 
their ſucceeding births. See more on wer. 17. 

7 And theremye ſhal eat » before the LORD o your 
God, and ye thal rejoyce in all that ye put your hand 
unto p, ye and your houſholds, wherein the LORD thy 


:: God hath bleſled thee, 


* 


Lev. 17 


z Heb. Thin fha!t gi we, 7. e. Tpeak or pronounce or cauſe to be pro- | 


DEUVTER ONO M TY. 


ſhal * chuſe out of all your tribes, to put his Name |. 


| 


” 


Chap. XIT, Chap 
» Not in the moſt holy place,wherein only the Prieſts might ear, | 
Numb, 18.10. but more generally in places allowed to the people for 
this end in the holy city. » To wit, your part of the things men- 
tioned, wer. 6. 0 (7. e. ) In the place of God's preſence,where God's 
SanCtuary ſhall be. p Either to beſtow your pains and labour upon 
it : or,to take and uſe or enjoy it. Theſenſe 1s, You thus doing thall 
be blefled and enabled to rejoyce, or to take comfort in all your 1a- 
bours and enjoyments, which otherwiſe would be :ccurſed to vorr. 
We have the fame phraſe below, ver. 18. and Dert. 15. 10. 

8 Yeſhallnor do after all rbe things that we do here q 


this day,every man whatſoever is right in his own <yes ||. 
q Where the inconveniency of the place and the uncertainty of 
our abodein and removal from ſeveral places,would not permit ex- 
act order in ſacrifices and feaſts and ceremonies, v hich therefore God 
was pleaſed then to diſpenſe with;bur,ſaith he,he will not doſo there 
[Not that univerſal liberty was given to all perſonsto worſhip whom 
and how they liſted, but that in many things their unſerled condi- 
tion gave every one opportunity to do ſo, if he thought good. 
9 For ye are notas yet come to the reſt, and to the 
inheritance which the LORD your God giveth you. 
1o But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the 
land which the LORD your God giveth you to inhe- 
rit, and whey he giveth you reſt from all your eneniies 
round about, ſo that ye dwell in ſafety, | 
1: Then there ſha] be * a place which the LORD * i King, 
your God ſhal chuſe to cauſe his Name » todwell there, 8. 29. 
thither thal ye bring all that I command you:your burnt- F£78.68. 
offerings, and your ſacrifices, your tithes,and the heave- + Heb. the 
otierings of your hand, and all your choice vows s, {j,;.. of 
which ye vow unto the LORD. 

7 (7. e.) His Majeſty 2nd glory, his worſhip and ſervice, his ſpe- 
cial and gracious preſence, and the tokens of it. 5s Heb. the choice 
of your vows, 2. e. your ſele& or choſen vows ; ſo called, becauſe 
things offered for vows were to be perfe&, whereas ſuperfluous or 
defeCtive creatures were accepted in free-will offerings, as appears 
from Lev. 22. 21, 22, 23. 


12 And yeſhal rejoyce before the LORD your God, 
ye, and your ſons, and your daughters t,and your men- 
ſervants, and your maid-ſervants, and the Levite that 
is within your gates, foraſmuch as * he hath no part 
nor inheritance with you, 

# Hence it appears, that though the males only were obliged to 
appear before God in their ſolemn feaſts, Exod. 23. 17. yet the wo- 
men aJſo were permitted to come, as they did. See Juag. 21. 19, 
21, I Sam. 4,3, 7, 21,.22, 23. 

13 Take heed to thy ſelf, that thou offer not thy 
burnt-offerings « in every place thattbou ſeeſt x : 
 u Nor the other things mentioned above, this one and moſt emi« 
nent kind being put for all the reſt, as is uſual : for being all ex- 
preſſed before, ir was needleſs to repeat them again. x To wit, 
with. complacency and approbation, which thou thinkeſt very fit 
and proper for ſuch a work, as one might poflibly judge of ſome 
high-places or groves or gardens. 

14 But in the place which the LORD fhal chuſe in 
one of thy tribes, there ſhalt thou offer thy burnt-offer- 
ings, and there ſhalt thou do all that I command thee. 

15 Notwithſtanding thou mayeſt kill and eat fleſh y in 
allthy gates z, whatſoever thy ſoul luſteth after , ac- 
cording to the blefling of the LORD thy God, which he 
hath given thee b: the * unclean c and the clean may 


eat thereof d, as of the roe- buck, and as of the hart. 

y To wit, for thy common uſe and food. z (7. e. ) Thy cities or 
dwellings. - What you ſhall deſire either for quantity or quality, 
provided always you obſerve the laws given you clſewhere about a- 

oiding exceſs and uncleannefs in the things you eat. b According 
to thy quality and eſtate : whereby he manifeſtly condemns thote 
who prufuſely and riotouſly ſpend other mens money, and live at 
a rate which their conſciences know to be much above their ability : 
which certainly is an ungodly and unrighteous, though too com- 
mon, pra&tice. 'c Who is forbidden to eat of holy meats,Lev.7.20. 
a To wit, of any ſort of creatures, even of thoſe ſorts which are 
offered to God in ſacrifices, which are as free to your uſe, as the 
roe-buck, and the hart, which were not accepted in ſacrifice, Lev.22. 
19. yet were clean beaſts, Deur. 14. 5. and therefore here is a tacit 
exception of unclean beaſts. - 
16 * Only ye {hal not eat the blood, ye ſbal pour it 
out upon the earth as water, "Eorragghaghd 

.17 Thouef mayeft not eat within thy gates f the ch. 5.:3. 
tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine,or of thy oil g, or the + Heb. 
firſtlings of thy herds, or of thy flock h, nor any ofthy wy oh 
vows which thou voweſt, nor thy free-will offerings, or ?" ng ' 
heave-offerings of thine hand. | 

eEither 1. thou,O0 Levite : or rather 2. thou,O Iſrazlite,wvhom he di- 
ſtinguiſherth from the Levire, wer. 18. accordingly as the following 
particulars agree to the one and tothe other of you. f (3. e.) In your 
private habitations, here oppoſed to the place' of God's Worſhip, 
ver. 18, g Here ſcems to be a great difficulty, not yer ſufficiently 
obſerved nor cleared by Interpreters. There were divers kinds of 
tithes, 1:The tithes given to the Levites out of all, of which Numb: 
18:21,24:Deut:14:22:Neh:10:37: 2, The tithe of thoſe tithes, which 
were to be given by the Levites to the Prieſts,of which Numb. 18.26, 

28. Neh.10.38. 3. The third years tithe,of which Deut: 14: 28. To' 

which ſome add another tithe, which they call the ſecond tithe which 

they ſay was taken after the Levites tithe was laid by. Now each 

of theſe hath its difficulty. Ir ſeems this place cannot be under. 

ſtood 7. of the Levites tithe, partly becauſe it might ſeem a great | 
and wholly ſuperfluous trouble to carry all their tithes up toJeruſa- 

lem, and to carry them back to their ſeveral habitations for their 


your Vows, 


f ch.10.9, 


*h.14.: 
t Heb. 
the days 


upon thy 
land, 


*Gen. 2 


14. 
<>, 19, 


$ yer. 22, 


* Gen.9.4. 


* ver. r5 


*ver: 16 
THrb. þ 


5+ 


uſe ; partly becauſethoſe were holy to the Lord, Levi27:30; and not to 
þ THebsſo 


E 


Chap. X1- © 
| he caten by the people, ver. 31. whereas theſe belonged principally 
to the people, the Levites being only taken in_as acceflorics to cat 
with them,as it is here v.18.and partly becauſe thoſe might be cat- 
en in every place,as 1t 15 expreſly atfirmed,Num. 18.31,Nor2.ofthe tithe 
of the tithe, which was the Prieſts, and neither Levites nor others 
might cat of it, except they were of or in the Prieſts houſhold.Nor 
3. of the third years tithe, becauſe that was to be eaten within their 
gates, Dent. 14. 28, 29. 4s this was nor. I do therefore humbly con- 
ceive, that this is meant of the ſecond tithe, ſpoken of Deut.14.22. 
and that this was the very ſame tithe with that third years tithe, 
with this only difference, that in the third year they were to eat 
them, together with the Levites within their gates, Deur. 14.28,29. but 
in the two firſt years they were to eat them, together with the Le- 
wites alſo, in the place of God's worlhip,as it is preſcribed here and 
Deut. 14. 23- And that it is one and the ſame tithe which is ſpoken 
of Deut. 14.22. and ver. 28. ſeems more than probable, both becauſe 
they are called by the ſame name, all the tithe of their increaſe, and 
becauſe that ver. 28. manifeſtly looks back to that wer. 22. and be- 
cauſe otherwiſe every, third year the Jraelires were to pay three ſe- 
veral tithes one after another, which Scripture no where affirms, 
and it ſeems to make the peoples burdens and the Levites proviſions 
too great. For the Objection taken from Dez. 26. 12, 13. it ſhall 
be conſidered in its place. And the' reaſon of that difference of 
place, and why the {ame tithes were eaten for two years together 
in Jeruſalem, and the third year in their own gates,ſeems to be this, 
That in the two firſt years there was a more ſpecial regard had to 
the Levites, who were very much converſant in Jeruſalem, where 
thoſe tithes were then eaten, and in the third year there is a reſpe&t 
had to the firanger, and the fatherleſs, and the widow, who are mention- 
ed as joynt-ſharers with the Levizes in this third years tithe, whoſe 
occaſions and obligations of coming to Jerſalem were not ſo many 
nor ſtrong as thoſe of rhe Levires, and therefore they were to be 
found generally within their gates, where theſe were to be eaten. 
And whereas the obje&ion made before againſt the chargeable and 
uſeleſs carrying of the firſt tithes to Jeru/alcm might be applied 
here, it is anſwered there, and it is provided, that when they lived 
at a great diſtance from Jeruſalem they might turn it into money 
and beſtow it there, Deur. 14. 24, 25, 26. which both confirms the 
objeCion as to the firſt-tithe,for which no ſuch proviſion was made, 
and anſwers it as to this, where ſuch a remedy is expreſſed. And 
whereas it may be pleaded on the behalf of the firſt, or the Leviti- 
cal tithe, that thoſe tithes were brought to Jeruſalem, and that there 
were ſtore-houſes or chambers in the Temple appointed for the re- 
ceiving of the tithes, -2 Chr. 31.5, 6, 11, 12. Neh. 10. 37, 38. and 
32. 44. it may beanſwered, That thoſe chambers, being _ 38 
in number, and each of them, except two,but ſix cubits broad,and 
twelve cubits long, were altogether uncapable of all thoſe tithes, 
and ſeem principally, if not ſolely appointed for the Prieſts tithes, 
and nor for all them neither, but only for ſo much of them as 
would ſerve for the uſe and neceſſity of thoſe Prieſts and Levites too 
that were in the actual miniſtration. h As the tithes now mention- 
ed were not the Levitical, but ſecond tithes,as hath been diſcourſed, 
ſo theſe fr/lings do not ſeem to be the firſt firſtiings, which being 
appropriated to the Levites were not to be eaten by any of the peo- 
ple, except thoſe of or in the LevitesFamilies, but the ſecond firſt- 
lings, which were the firſt which the owner could diſpoſe of, and 
which, in conformity to the ſecond tithes, he is required to ſet 
apart for this uſe, 

18 But thou muſt eat them before the FORD thy God, 


in the place which the LORD thy God ſhal chuſe,thou. 
and thy ſon, and' thy daughter, and thy man-ſervant, 
and thy maid-ſervant, and the Levite that zs within thy 
gates 23 and thou ſhalt rejoyce before. the LORD thy 
God, in all that thou putteſt thine hands unto. 
*h.14.27: 19 * Take heed co chy felf j, that thou forſake not 
tHeb. !! the Levite, + as long as thouliveft upon the earth. 


RZ 


the days i Left a worldly mind and felf-love make thee rob the Lewites of 
upon thy their dues, as afterwards the ungodly 'Jews did. See Mal. 3. 8. 
land, 20 When the LORD thy God thal enlarge thy borde: 


*Gen. 28. &, * as he hath promiſed thee, and thou ſhait ſay, I will 
eat fleſh ; ( becauſe thy ſoul longerh to eat fleſh ) thou 
mayeſt eat fleſb, whatſoever thy ſoul luſteth after. 

k Which will make it inconvenientand impoſſible to do what 
now thou doſt, and becauſe of the narrow bounds of thy Camp 
canſt conveniently do, to wit, to bring all the cattel thou uſeſt to 
the Tabernacle, which it ſeems probable they did,to prevent their 
eating of blood. Compare Levir. 17. 3. 1 Sam. 14. 34. 

21 If the place which the LORD thy God hath choſen 
to put his name there, be too far from thee ||, then thou 
ſhalt kill of thy herd,and of thy flock, which the LORD 
hath given thee, as I have commanded thee /, and thou 
ſhalt eat in thy gates whatſoever thy ſoul lufteth after. 

| In which caſe being obliged to carry their ſacrifices to the place 
of worſhip, that the blood might be there poured forth, &c. they 
might think themſelves obliged, for the ſame reafon,to carry their 
other cattel thither to be killed. They are therefore releaſed from 
all ſuch obligations, and left at liberty to ki!l them ar home, whe- 
ther they lived nearer to that place, or further from ir; only the 
latter is here mentioned, as being the matter of the Scruple, and as 
containing the former in it. / In ſach manner as the blood may 
be poured forth, as above, wer. 16. and below, wer. 24. 

22 * Even as the roe-buck and the hart »» is eaten, 
{o thou ſhalt eat them: the unclean and the clean ſhal 
eat of theni alike ». 

 m As common or unhallowed food, rhough they be of the ſame 
kind with the ſacrifices which are offered to God. n Becauſe there 
was no holineſs in ſuch meart for which rhe unclean might be exclu- 
ded from it. 
"ver: 16, 23 * Only be fure that thou eat not the blood: for 
Tthb. be the blood #: the life 0, and that thou mayeftnor eat the 
+ Heb fout: t life with the fleth. 
4 " o Of which ſee on Ger; 9.4. Lev. 17. 11.Ths animal life depends 
Ucbyo V.pon the blood. | 


14. 
(>, 19, 8. 


. Ver, I5, 


D RF UT REA NS 


M T. Chap. X[IT. | 

24 Thou fhalt not eat it, thou ſhalt pour it upon the 
earth as water. 

25 Thou fhaltnot eat it, that it may go well with 
thee, and with thy children after thee ; when thou ſhalt 
do that which is right in the ſight of the LORD. 

26 Only thy holy things p which thou haſt, and thy 
vows thou (balt take, and go unto the place which the 
LORD hal ckuſe. 

£ "Hp: before, vez. 6. 12, 17. which thou haſt conſecrated | 
to God. p11 
27 And * thou fhaltofferthy burnt-offerings,thefleſh and * E<Y: *: 
the blood, upon the altar of the LORD thy God,and the 5? *3* if 
blood of thy ſacrifices ſhal be poured out upon the altar 
of the LORD thy God, and thou ſhalt eat the fleſh 9. 
9 Excepting what ſhall be burned to God's honour, and given to 
the Prieſt according to his appointment. | 

28 Obſerve and hear all theſe words which Icommand 
thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy chil- 
dren after thee for ever, when thou doſt that which is 
good and right in the ſight of the LORD thy God. 

29 When the LORD thy God ſhal cut off the nations 
trom before thee, wkither thou goeſt to poſſeſs them 7, 


and thou Þ ſucceedeſt them, and dwelleſt in their land: T Heb. im 
r Of which phraſe ſee Dev. g. 1. and 11. 23. a——_— 
39 Take heed to thy ſelf, that thou be not ſnared 5 Pele 
7 by following them, after that they be deſtroyed ?, + Heb: af 
from before thee ; and that thouenquire nor after their #er chew, 
gods », ſaying, How did theſe nations ſervetheir gods ? 
even fo will I do likewiſe. 
5 Drawn intotheirſin and ruine. * ( 5.e. ) By following the ex- 
ample they lefr, when their perſons are deſtroyed. « Throughcu- 
riotity to know their gods and the manner ofthe worſhip, leſt thy 
vainand fooliſh mind be ſeduced by its ſpeciouſneſs or newnelſs. 

31 Thouſhalt notdo fo unto the LORD x*thy God:for | 
every t abomination tothe LORD which he hateth, have 411eb. at6- 
they done unto their gods : for * even their ſons and mination 
their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods. *** 


x Either 1. Not offer him that indignity and injury to worſhip * Lev: 18: 
other gods together with him. Or rather, 2. Norworſhip him in 21:6t 20:22 
ſuch manner as they worthipped their gods, towit,by offering thy ©Þ: 18: 103 
children to him, as they did to their gods, as it here follows,or by J<£3%:35- 
thy own devices or ſuperſtitions, as is implied, wer. 32. 

32 Whatthingſoever I command you, obſerve todo * ch: 4: 
it : *thou ſhalt not add thereto, nor diminiſh from it. Jo: T: [+ | 
CHAP. XU. Roti 
Enticers to Idolatry, being permitted by God, ta try Iſrael, were to be ſtoned © 

to death, 1---5. though near of kin, 6-11, A city found guilty of 

Idolatry, to be burnt and utterly deftroyed, 12---16. They were not to 

take any of its curſed things, but to obey God's Command, that his mercy 

might be upon them, 17, 18. | | 
| F there ariſe among you # a prophet, or a dreamer 
of dreams b, andgiveth thee a tign or a wonder c : 

a ( i.e, ) One of your nation, for ſuch might be both ſeduced 
and afterwards ſeducers. + One that pretends himſelf to be one to 
whom God hath revealed himſelf, either þy viſions or dreams. See 
Numb, 12.6. c ( 3, e. ) Shall foretell ſome ſtrange and wonderful 
thing to come, as appears from wer. 2. as the true Prophets uſed to 
do, as 1 Sam. 10. : 

2 And * the ſign or the wondercome to paſsd, whereof « cg. .. 
he ſpake unto-thee, ſaying e, Let us geafter other gods, 18: 22: 


( which thou haſt not known ) and let us ſerve them ; Jer: 28: 9. 
4 Which God may ſuffer for the reaſon after mentioned. s This Mat: 7:22: 
word is to be joyned with the beginning of werſe 1. If there ariſe 
among you a prophet, or dreamer of dreams, ſaying, what there follows, 
and giveth thee a ſign, &Cc. to confirm his doQrine, ſuch tranſpoſi- 
tions are frequent. 
3 Thou ſhalt not hearken to the words of that prophet 


e,or that dreamer of dreams; for the LORD your God * *1Cor:122 
proveth you f, toknow g whether ye love the LORD 9 


your God with all your heart, and with all your ſoul. 

e Not receive his doQtrine, though the ſign come to paſs. For 
although when ſuch a ſign or wonder foretold did not follow or come 
to paſs, it was aſign of a falſe prophet, as Is ſaid, Dewt. 18, 22. yet 
when it did come to paſs, it was no 1ufficient or infallible ſign of a 
true one, eſpecially in ſuch a caſe when he brings in new gods. The 
reaſon of the difference is, becauſe many cauſes muſt concur to make 
a thing good and true, bur any one failure is ſufficient to make a 
thing bad or falſe. And parricularly there are many ſigns, yea fuch as 
men may think to be wonders, which may be wrought by evil ſpi- 
rits,God ſo permitting it for divers wiſe and juſt reaſons, not only 
for the trial of the good, as it here follows, bur alſo for the puniſh- 
ment of ungodly men, who wonld not receive Divine Truths, 
though atreited by many evident and unqueſtionable Miracles,and 
therefore are moſt juſtly expoſed to theſe temptations to believe lies: 
f(#. e. ) Tryeth your faith and love and obedience,examinerh your 
ſincerity by your conſtancy. See Mat: 24: 24: 2 Theſ: 2: 11: Rev: 
13:14. See on Gen; 22: 1, Dent:'8: 2, 7. g That he may know it, 
to wit, judicially, or in a publick manner, ſoas both you and 0- 4 
thers may know and ſee it, that fo the juſtice of his judgments up- 
on you _—_— more evident and glorious, NR 


4 Ye ihal walk after the LORD your God, and fear 

him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, 
and ye (hal ſerve him bh, and * cleave unto him. *&. 
b To wit, only asappears from the oppoſition. Compare Dent: , * 
6: 13: with Mats 4: 10. *ch 18.29. 
ſhal Zech.r 3-3 


2: 


5 And * that prophet, orthat dreamer of dreams -w 
2G 2 A 


hep, KUL. 
Hb ſp:-be put to death ( becauſe he hath ſpoken to turn yo# 
Fen 1-21* away from the LORD & your Ged, which brought you 
KE3:2 © out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out ef the 
Fc: > 21, houſe of bondage, to thruſtthee out ofthe way / which 
[$>4. : Cor. the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk in, ) * {0 


$-13- {halt thou put the evil » away from the midft of thee. 
| ; (5. e. ) Taught or perſwaded you. & To forſake God and his 
worthip. He thews that the chieteſt and moſt certain chara&ter of 
a true Prophet,is to be taken from his doQrine rather than from his 
miracles. / This phraſe notes the great force and power of ſeducers 
to corrupt mens minds. Compare Dezt.4. 19. 2 King. 17.21. Mat.24. 
24. m Either 1. that evil thing, that wicked do&rine and praCtice. 
Or 2. that wicked and ſcandalous man, that Idolater and Seducer. 
- _ 6* It thy brother, the ſon of thy mother », or thy 
ſon, or thy daughter o, or the wife of thy botom p, or 
thy friend, which #s as thine own ſoul q, entice thee r 
ſeccetly,faying,Letus go and ſerve other gods 5; ( which 


thou halt not known, thou, nor thy fathers, ) 

» This is added, to reſtrain the ſignification of the word brother, 
which is oft uſed generally for one near a kin, and to expreſs the 
nearnef; of the relation,the mothers ſide being the ſureſt, and uſu- 
ally the ground of the trueſt and moſt fervent affeCtion. See Ger.20. 
12, o Thy picty muſt overcome both thy affe&ion to thy neareſt 
relation, and thy compaſſion to the weaker Sex. p Either 1. that 1s 
near to thy heart, that hath thy deareſt love. Or rather 2. that lyeth 
in thy boſom, as it is expreſſed, Mic. 7. 5. Compare Gen. 16. 5. Prov. 5. 
20. Deut. 28. 54. So we read ofthe husband of her boſom, Deut. 28. 56: 
q As dear to thee as thy ſelf. The father and mother are here omitted, 
not, as ſome fancy, becauſe children might not in this nor in any 
caſe accuſe their Parents,for certainly they owe morereverence and 
duty to God,who is injured in this caſe, than to their parents, and 
L.:vi is commended for negleQing his father and mother in this caſe ; 
but becauſe they are ſufficiently contained inthe former examples ; 
for ſince mens love doth uſually deſcend more ſtrongly than it aſ- 
cends, and the relation of a wife is and ought to be nearer and 
dearer than of a Parent, that favour which is denied to wives and 
children cannot be thought fit to be allowed to Parents. r Though 
it be without ſucceſs, becauſe the very attempt of ſuch an abomina- 
ble crime deſerved death, as it is judged in caſe of treaſon. 5s Un- 


crime,to forſakea God whom thou and thy fathers have long known, 
and had great and good experience of, for ſuch upſtarts. 

7 Namely, of the gods of the people which are round a- 
bout you,nigh untothee, or far off from thee, from the 
cnc end ofthe earth,even unto the other end of the earth r: 

c He arms againſt the pretence of the univerſality of this Idol- 
worſhip, wherewith they were like to be oft aſſaulted. 

8 Thou ſhalt not conſent unto him, nor hearken un- 
to him, neither ſhal thine eye pity him, neither ſhalt 
thou ſpare, neither ſhalt thou conceal him «. 

u { 7,e.) Smother his fault, hide or prote& his perſon, but ſhalt 
accuſe him to the Magiſtrare,and demand juſtice upon him, which 
was not to be done in moſt other criminal cauſes; and no wonder, 
this crime bzing of a far higher nature than others. 

9 But * thou (balt ſurely kill him x ; thine hand ſhal 
be firſt upon him,to puthim to death y, and afrerwards 
the hand of all the people. 

x Not privately, which pretence would have opened the door to 
innumerable murders, but by procuring his death by the ſentence 
of the Magiſtrate. y Thou ſhalt caſt the firſt ſtone at him, as the 
Witneſs was todo. See Deut: 17: 7: At: 7: 58. 

io And thou ſhaltſtone bim with ſtones that he die :; 
becauſe he hath ſought to thruſt thee away from the 
| LORD thy God which brought thee from the land of 
+ Heb.bond EgyPt, from the houſe of F bondage. 

_ it And * all Ifrael ſhal hear, and fear, and ſhal do 
no more any ſuch wickedneſs as this is, among you, 
12 If thou ſhalthear /ay in one of thy cities which the 
* LORD thy God hath given thee,to dwell there, ſaying, 
{Ornaugh- 13 Certain men, || the children of Belial z, are gone 
ty men. out from among you 4, and have withdrawn the inha- 
x Sam; 2 birancs of their city ſaying, Let us go and ſerve orher 
25.2 Cor. gods ( which ye have nor known: ) 
G. 15+ z A title oft uſed in Scripture, as Juadg.19.22. 1 Sam.1.16. and 25. 
25. 2Sam.16.7. It ſignifies properly perſons without yoke, vile and 
wretched miſcreants, lawleſs and rebellious, that will ſuffer no re- 
ſtraint,that neither fear God,nor reverence man. 3 ( #.e.) From your 
Church 2nd Religion. It notes a ſeparation or departure from them, 
not in place ( as appearsby their partnerſhip with their fellow Ci- 
rizens both in the ſin & puniſhment as it here follows bur in hearr, 
doftrine and worſhip, as the ſame phraſe isuſed, 1 5oh: 2. 19. 

14 Then ſhalt thou b enquire,and make ſearch, and 
ask diligently : and behold, if ;: be truth, and the thing 
certain, that ſuch abomination is wrought among you: 

b This is meant of the Magiſtrate, to whoſe office this properly 
belongs, and of whom he continues to ſpeak in the ſame manner, 
thou, wer. 15. and wer. 16. ; | 

1; Thou ſhalt ſurely ſmite the inhabitants of that ci- 
* Joſ.6.17. © © with the edge of the ſword,* deſtroying itutterly d, 

and all that therein #s, and the cactel with the edge of 
the Iword. 

c To wit,all that are guilty,not the innocent part,ſuch as diſown= 
ed this Apoſtacy,who doubtleſs by choice and intereſt, atleaſt upon 
warning, would come out of ſo wicked and curſed a place. d4 'The 
very ſame puniſhment which was inflifted upon the cities of the 
curſed Canaanites,to whom having made themſelves equal in fin, it 
is but fit and juſt that God ſhould equal them in puniſhment. 

16 4nd thou ſhalc gather all the ſpoil of ic into the 


W* ch.17. 7. 


known and obſcure and new gods; which greatly aggravates the, 


DEUTERONOM T 


Chap. XY; 
midſt of the ſtreet thereof, and ſhalt burn with fire the 
city,/and all the ſpoil thereof every whit,for the LORD 
thy God e : and itſbal be an heap for ever, it ſhal not 
be built again f. 

e (i.e. ) For the ſatisfa&tion of God's juſtice, the maintenance of 
his honour and authority and laws, and the pacification of hi: of- 


fended Majeſty. fIt ſhall be an eternal monument of God's juſtice, 
and terrour to after ages, who may be tempted to like prattices. 


17 * And there ſhal cleave nought of the || curſed .,, 
thing g to thine hand, that the LORD may turn from |; ©; SY 
the fierceneſs of his anger, and ſhew thee mercy, and red. 
have compaſhon upon thee, and multiply thee +, as he 
hath ſworn unto thy fathers. 

g (7.e. ) Of the goods of that accurſed city. þ So thou ſhalt have 
no loſs of thy numbers by cutting off ſo many people. 

18 When thou ſhalt hearken to the voice of the 
LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which 
I command thee this day, to do that which 7s right in 
the eyes of the LORD thy God. 


CHAP. XIV. 


Heatheniſh Rites of Mourning prohibited, 1, 2. And the eating of any abo= 
minable thing, 3. All unclean Beaſts, q===8. Fiſh, 9, 10» and Biras, 
prohibited, 11, 12. True tything commanded, 22. And where it was 
to be eaten, 23---27, A command about the third years tything, 28. 
And who (hould eat it, 29: 
Y E are the children of the LORD your God a: * ye , | 
(hal not cut your ſelves, nor make any baldneſs Ss 19, 
between your eyes 6 for the dead c. 
aWhom therefore you muſt not diſparage by unworthy or unbe- 
coming prattices, ſuch as here follow, and whom you muſt not 
diſobey. b Which were the praftices of Idolaters, both in the 
worſhip of their Idols, as 1 King: 18: 28: or, in their funerals, as 
here, and Jer: 16; 6: or upon occaſion of publick calamities, as Jer: 
41: 5: and 47: 5. See more on Levit: 19: 27, 28. and 21: 5. 
c Through exceſſive ſorrow for your dead friends, as if you had no 
hope of their happineſs after death, 1 The 4: 13. 


2 * For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy .,,., . 
God, and the LORD hath choſen thee to be a peculiar 8 we 
people unto himſelf, above all the nations that are up- 
on the earth. ; 

3 Thou ſhalt not eat any abominable 4 thing. 


a ( 7. e. ) Unclean and forbidden by me, which therefore ſhould 
be abominable to you. 


4 * Theſe re the beaſts e, which ye ſhal eat, the ox, 
the ſheep, and the goat, | 

e Of which ſee on Levi. 11. Theſmall differences between ſome * 
of their names here and there are not proper for this work. The 
learned Reader may find them cleared in my Latine Synopſis. For 
others, they may well enough want the knowledge of them, both 
becauſe theſe are the ſmaller matters of the Law, and becauſe this 
diſtinCtion of clean and unclean beaſts is now out of date. 


5 The hart, and the ro-buck, and the fallow deer, 
and the wild goat, andthe || + pygarg, and the wild ox, ||Or,b;ſ. 
and the chamois : + Heb. di. 
6 And every beaſt that parteth the hoof,and cleaveth ©" 
the cleft into two claws, end cheweth the cud amongſt 
the beaſts : that ye ſhal ear. 
7 Nevertheleſs, theſe ye ſhal not eat, of them that 
chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hoof, 
as the camel,and the hare,and the coney: for they chew 
the cud, but divide not the hoof, therefore they are un- 
clean unto you, 
8 And the ſwine, becauſe it divideth the hoof, yet 
cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you 3 ye ſhal 
not eat of their *fleſh, nor touch their dead carcaſe. *Lev. rv 
9 * Theſe ye hal eat, of all that «re in the' waters: 27- 
all that hath fins and ſcales ſal ye ezr. 'Lev.119 
10 And whatſoever hath not fins and ſcales, ye may 
not eat : 1t zs unclean unto you. 
11 Of all clean birds ye ſhal ear. 
12 But theſe are they of which ye (hal not eat : the 
eagle, and the offifrage, and the ofprey, 
12 And theglede, and the kite, and the vulture after 
his kind, 
14 And every raven after his kind, 
I5 And the owl, and the night-hawk, and the cuc- 
kow, and the hawk after his kind, 
16 The little owl, and the great owl, andthe ſwan, 
17 And the pelican, and the gier-eagle, and the cor- 
morant, 
18 And the ſtork, and the heron afterher kind, and 
the lapwing, and the * bar. 
19 Andevery creeping thing that flyeth 
unto you: they ſhal notbe eaten. 
20 But of all clean fowls yemay eat. 
21 Ye ſhal not eat of my thing that dieth of it ſelf; - 
thou ſhalt give it unto the ſtranger that 3s in thy gates, 
that he may eat: or thou mayeſt ſell it unto an alien: 
tor thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God 
* Thou ſhalt norſeeth a kid in his mothers milk, ' *Bx.23-19 
f Not to the proſelyte,for ſuch were obliged by this Law, Lev. 19? & 34+ 26. 


* Lev. 11, 
&c, 


* Ley. 11/ 
is unclean 7g. 


nn" 


I5. but to lych as were ſtrapgerg in Religion as well as in Natian. 
22 * Thoy 


CH 


*Ch: 
6.1 


*cha 
19, 


tHe 
eth of 


*ch:1 
*Nu:; 
18. 2 


Tee ] 


3. I0 


*Ley: 
24, 


THeb: 


frer of 
lending 
his han 


| CHAP. XV. 
; 22 * Thou ſhalt truely tithe all the encreaſe of thy 
*Chap'12. ſeed g, that the field bringeth forth year by year. 
6, 17- - This is to be underſtood of the ſecond tithes, which ſeem to be 
the ſame with the tithes of the third year, mentioned here below, 
ele 28. and Dent. 26. 12. on which ſee above. on chap. 12.verſe 17. 
And to confirm this opinion, (though I would not lay too great a 
freſs upon criticiſmes) yet I cannor but obſerve that this tithing 
is ſpoken of only as the peoples aEt here, and Devr: 26. 12. and the 
Levites are not at all mentioned in either place as receivers or takers 
of them, but only as partakers of them together with the owners, 
and therefore they are ſo ſeverely charged here upon their conſci- 
ences, thou ſhalt truely tithe all thine increaſe, becauſe the execution of 
this was left wholly to themſelves, whereas the firſt tithes were re- 
ceived by the Levites, who therefore are ſaid zotake or receive thoſe 
tithes, Numb. 18. 26. Neh. 10. 38. Heb. 7. 5. 
23 And thou ſhalt eat before the LORD 56 thy God, 
in the place which he {hall chuſe to place his Name there, 
' the tithe of thy corn,of thy wine, and of thine oil, and 
*chapx 15- * the firſtlings of thy herds, and of thy flocks, that thou 
19,29 mayeſt learn to fear the LORD thy God always. 
h See onDeut.12.6,17. ; 
24 Andif the way be too long for thee, ſo that thou 
art not able to carry it,or if the place be too farfrom thee, 
which the LORD thy God ſhall chuſe to ſet his Name 
there, when the LORD thy God hath bleſſed thee : 
25 Then ſhalt thou turn it into money, and bind up 
the money in thine hand z, and ſbalt go unto the place 
which the LORD thy God ſhall chuſe. 
3 (5.e.) In a bag to be taken into thy hand and carried with thee. 
26 And thou ſhaltbeftow that money for whatſoever 
#Heb:a:k- thy ſoul luſteth after,or for oxen,for ſheep, or for wine, 
«h of thee. or for ſtrong drink,or for whatſoever thy ſoulfdeſirerh : 
and thou ſhalt cat there beforethe LORD thy God, and 
and thou ſbalt rejoyce, thou and thine houlbold. 
nd * the Levite that is within thy gates, thou 


"h:12.19. 2 
_ ſhall orſake him & ; For he hath no part nor inher1- 


tance with thee. | 

Feng ſhalt give him a ſhare in ſuch tithes, or in the produt 
ofthem. | 

28 At the end ofthree years / thou ſhalt bring forth 

all rhe tithe of thine increaſe m the ſame year », and 
ſhalr lay iz up within thy gates, | 

I (i.e) Inthe third year, as it is expreſſed Deut. 26. 12+ So in the 
end of three years, or of ſeven years, is the ſame with 7» the third or 
ſeventh year, as appears by comparing Deut. 31. 10. Jo. 9. 16, 17- 
2 Kings 18. 9, 19. and 17.6. m I joyn with thoſe Expoſitors who 
make this the ſame tithe with the former, werſe 22. as being called 
by the ſame title without any diſtinftion between them, fave only 
asto the place of cating them. See above on werſe 22. and Deut. 12. 
17. 2 This is added to ſhew that he ſpeaks of the third year, and 
not of the fourth year, as ſome might conjeCure from the phraſe, 
at the end of three years. IE - 

29 And the Levite (becauſe he hath no part nor inheri- 
tance with thee) and the ſtranger,and the fatherleſs, and 
the widow, which are within thy gates, (hall come 8 ſhall 
«Se Mal, C2tzand be fatisfied, that * the LORD thy God may bleſs 


thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doelſt. 


. yo 
; CHAP. XV. 

The ſeventh Year a Year of Releaſe, 1. To their Brethren only, 2. God pro- 
miſeth ta bleſs them in the Land of Canaan, 4--— G6. And commana- 
eth them to lend freely to the poor, 14----18. The Firſtlings to be janfiified 
and eaten before the Lord, 19 23. 

"Lev: 25, T che end of * every ſeven years a thou ſhalt make 
24, a releaſe. 
2 (i.e) In the laſt year of the ſeven, as is moſt evident from werſe 

9. Exod: 21.2. Jer: 34. 14. So the like phraſe is oft uſed, as Deuz: 

14. 28. Joſ: 3- 2. Jer: 25. 12. Luke 2.21. Ads 2. 1; And this Tear 

of Releaſe, as it is called below, werſe 9. is the ſame with the Sabba- 

tical Year, Exod; 23. 11. Levit: 25. 4- 

fHcb:ma. 2 And this is the manner of the releaſe. Every | cre- 
fer of the ditor that lendeth ought unto his neigabour, (hall releaſe 
{ending of 5tb;he ſhal not exaG& ir of his neighbour, or of his bro- 


bis hand, 


ther c,becauſe it is called the LORD's releaſe 4. 


6 Not abſolutely:and finally forgive it,but forbeac it for that year, 
as may appear, 1. Becauſe the word doth not ſignifie a total diſmiſ- 
ſion or acquitting, but an intermiſſion for a time, as Exod: 23. 11. Heſball 
70 exatt it, as it here follows, 7.e. force it from him by courſe of 
Law or otherwiſe, to wit, that year, which is caſily underſtood out 
of the whole context. 2. Becauſe the perſon releaſing is called a 
Crediter, and his eommunicating to him what he defires and needs 
1s called lending here, and verſe. 8, whereas it were giving, and the 
perſon giving it were no creditor, but a donor, if it were to be whol- | 
Iy forgiven to him. 3. Becauſe the reaſon of this Law is tempora- ! 
Ty and peculiar to that year, wherein there being no ſowing, nor 
reaping, they were not in a capacity to pay their Debts. 4. Be- 
cauſe it ſeems unjuſt and unreaſonable, and contrary to other Scrip- 
tures, whichrequire men to pay what they borrow, as Pſal. 37. 21. 
YetI deny not that in caſe of poverty the debt was to be forgiven ; 
But that was not by vertue of this Law, but of other commands of 
God, c This is added to explain and limit the word Neighbour, 

" which is more general, unto a Brother, to wit, in Nation and Reli- 
gion: To an I/-aelite, who is oppoſed to a Foreigner, verſe 3. Heb. 
and a brother, for, that is a brother, the pa: ticle and being oft ſo uſed, 
as Gen: 13.15, &c. d Or, areleaſe to or for the Lord, in obedience to 
his command, for his honour, and as .an acknowledgment of his 
rightin your eſtates, and of his kindneſs in giving and continuing 


D 8 DU 7 6 


them toyou. If you are unwilling to releaſe this for your brothers | 
Gake, yer do it for God's ſake, your Lord and the chief creditor. | 


« 


O N a F. CHAP. A 


3 Of a forreigner e thou mayeſt exact: again: but 
that which is thine f with thy brother, chine hand ſhall 
releaſe. 

e Orftranger, yea though a proſelyte. For 1. They are ofc called 
by this name, as Ger: 17. 12. Ruth 2+ 10. 2, Though proſelytes were 
admitted to the Church-priviledges of the 7razlites, yet they were 
not admitted to all their civil immunirtiesor priviledges. See 1 Chron: 
22. 2. and 2 Chron: 2.17. 3- Such were not then freed from their 
perſonal debt, to wit, of their ſervice, Levit: 25. 44. Dent: 15. 12. 
Jer: 34: 14. therefore not from their real debr. f To wit, by right 
though lent to him. | ul 

4 || Save when there ſhall be no poor among you g ; Or, of 
For the LORD ſhall greatly bleſs thee þ in the land end ra 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheri- #-ere bY 
cance, to poſlels it, ras 

Z So the words are an exception to the foregoing clauſe, which Jos 
they reſtrain to the poor, and imply that if his brother was rich, he 
might exaCt his debr of him in that year- And indeed this Law 
ſeems to be chiefly, if not wholly, deſigned and given in favour to 
the poor and to the borrower, as is manifeſt from werſes 6,7,8,9, 10, 
11. But the words are and may be rendred thus, as in the margent 
of our Bibles, To the end that there be no poor among you. And ſo they 
contain a reaſon of this Law, to wit, that none be impoveriſhed and 
ruined by a rigid and unſeaſonable exaftion of Debts. They may 
alſo be tranſlated thus, Nevertheleſs of a truth, or aſſuredly (as the par= 
ticle chi is oft uſed) there ſhall be no poor among you, and the ſenſe may 
be this, Though I impoſe this Law upon you, which may ſeem hard 
and grievous, ,yet the truth is, ſuppoſing your performance of the 
conditions of God's Covenant, you ſhall not have any great occaſi- 
on to exerciſe your charity and kindneſs in this matter, for God will 
greatly bleſs you,&c.ſo as you ſhall be in a capacity of lending, and 
tew or none of you will have need to borrow, and thereby to ex- 
poſe his brethren to the inconvenience and burden of this Law. 
Thus the connexion is plain and eaſie, both with the foregoing and 
following words. Objet#. It is ſaid, the poor ſhould never ceafe, werſe 
11. Anſw: Thatalſo is true, and affirmed by God, becauſe he fore- 
ſaw they would not perform their duty, and therefore would be- 
reave themſelves of the promiſed bleſſing. þ And therefore this 
will be no great inconvenience nor burden to thee. 

5Oaly if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the 
LORD thy God, to obſerve to do all theſe command- 
ments, which I command thee this day. 

6 For the LORD thy God bleſſeth thee, as he promi- 
{ed thee, and * rhou ſhalt lend unto many nations z, but 
thou Malt nor borrow ; and thou ſhalt reign over many 
nations, but they [hall not reign over thee. 

7 Thou ſhalt be rich and able to lend not only to thy poor bro-= 
ther, bur even to ſtrangers of other Notions, yea to many of them. 

7 If there be among you a poor man, of one of thy 
brethren, within any of thy gates, in thy land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, thou ſhalt not harden thy 
heart, nor ſbutthine hand from thy poor brother : 

8 * But thou ſhalt open thine hand wide unto him 
and ſbalt ſurely lend him ſufficient for his need, 
which he wanteth, 

& (i.e.) Deal bountifully and liberally with him, giving him as it 
were by handfuls. a 

9 Beware thatthere be not a | thought in thy + wick- + Hobs 
ed heart 1, ſaying, The ſeventh year, the year of releaſe 5, 
is at hand, andthineeye be evil »z againſt thy poor bro- + Heb. | 
ther, and thou giveſt him nought, and he cry unto the #61. 
LORD againſt thee, and it be fin » unto thee. 

I Suppreſs the firſt riſings and inward motions of ſuch unchari- 
tableneſs. m2 (7; e.) Envious, unmerciful, unkind, as this phraſe is 
uſed, Prov: 23.6: Matth: 20. 15. as a good eye notes the contrary 
diſpoſition, Prov? 22.9. # (5. e.) It be charged upon thee as a fin, 
and as a great fin, as the word ſz ſometimes ſignities, as Prov: 24: 

9: John 15: 24: James 4: 17. | : : 

10 Thou ſhalt ſurely give him, and thine heart ſhall not 

be grieved when thou giveſt unto him 0: becauſe that for 


this thing the LORD chy God (hall bleſs thee in all thy 
works, and in all chat thou putteft thine hand unto p. 
o (i:e:) Thou ſhalt give, not only with an open hand, but with 

a willing and chearful mind and heart,Rom: 12: 8: 2 Cor: 9g: 7: with 
out which thy very Charity is uncharitable, and not accepted by 
God, who requires the heart inall his Services. p (:: e:) In all thy 
works, as before, for the hand is the great inſtrument of a&ion. 

11 For* the poor ſhall never ceaſe out of the land g: *Mat. x6 
therefore I command thee, ſaying, Thou ſhalt openthine ,'*** * 
hand wide unto thy brother, ro thy poor, and to thy Joh. 12.8; 
needy in the land. 
q God by his Providence will ſo order it, partly for the puniſh- 
ment of your diſobedience, and partly for the tryal and exerciſe of 
your obedience to me, and charity ro your brother, both which are 
beſt diſcovered by your performance of coſtly duties. 

I2 And * if thy brother,an Hebrew man, or an He- *F;. 21.2. 
brew woman be ſold unto thee r, and ſerve thee ſix Jer.34-14. 
years s, then in the ſeventh year thou ſhalt let him go 


free from thee. 

y See on Exod: 22; 3. 5 Tobe computed, Either, 1: From the 
year of releaſe; As they gather from hence that perſonal and real 
debts were both releaſed together. But that ſeems to be ſuppoſed 
rather than proved ; Nay there is a manifeſt difference between rhem, 
for the releaſe of real debts 4sexpreſly mentioned and required in the 
year of releaſe, bur ſo is nor the releaſe of the perſonal debr of ſer. 
vitude, either here or elſewhere. Or rather, 2. From the beginning 
of thir tvirade, which is every where limited unto the ſpace of 
ſix years, as here and below. __ 18. and Exod. 21, 2. Jer, 34 14. 


Ang 


*chap: 
12. 44.4 


. k, *Matth: 
in that ,, Luk: 


34, 35s 


Þ 


Mp. XV1. | 
| And ir ſeems a ſtrange and forced expoſition, to take theſeſi.z years, | 
for ſo much of the ſix cars as remains until the year of releaſe, which 
poſſibly might nor be one quarter of a year, whereas an hired ſer- 
vant ſcrves for a far longer time, and this is ſaid to be worth # double 
hired ſervant, in regard of the longer time of his ſervice, werſe 18. 
Add to this, that it is mentioned as the peculiar priviledge of the 
year of Jubilee, that ſuch ſervants were then freed though their 
fix years of ſervice were not expired. _ 

12 And when thou ſendeſt him out free. from thee, 


chou ſhale not let him go away empty. 

14 Thou ſhalt furnilh him liberally out of thy flock, 
and out of thy floor, and out of thy wine-preſs, . of that 
wherewith the LORD thy God hath bleſſed thee, thou 


ſhalt give unto him. 
15 And thouſhalt remember that thou waſt a bond-man 


in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeem- 


ed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day. 
£ And brought thee our with triumph and with riches, which 
becauſe they would not, God did, give to thee as a juſt recompence 
for thy ſervice ; and therefore thou ſhalt follow his example, and 
fend out thy ſervant furniſhed with all convenient proviſions. 
16 And it (ball be if he ſay unto thee, 1 will not go 


away from thee (becauſe he loveth thee, and thine 


houſe, becauſe he is well with thee «.) 
* Becauſe he is ſenſible that he fares well with thee. Or,becayſe it 
is good, i. e. acceptable in his eyes, or pleaſing to him, to be with thee. 

17 * Then thou ſhalttake an awl,and thruſt zz through 
his ear Hnto the door, & he (ball bethy ſervant forever x: 

| and alſo untothy maid-ſervant thou ſhalt dolikewiſe y. 

* (3.e.) All the time of bis life, or, atleaſt, till the year of Ju- 
bile. See on Exod. 21. 6. y (i? e.) Either diſmiſs her honourably, 
and with plenty of proviſions; Or engage her to perpetual ſervirude 
in the ſame manner and by the ſame Rites. Whence it appears, that 
this caſe differs from that, Exod. 21. 7. and that the maid-ſervant 
there was taken in upon other and better terms than this here. 

| 18 It hall not ſeem hard unto thee,when thou ſendeſt 
* See T6, him away free from thee: For he hath been wortha dou- 
bop & , 
16. 14. ble Fhiredſervanc torbeez, in ſerving thee ſix years, and 
the LORD thy God (ball bleſschee in all that thou doeſt. 
z Or, he deſerves double wages to an hired ſervant, becauſe he ſcr- 
ved thee upon better terms, both without wages, which hired ſer- 
vants require, and for a longer time, even for 6 years, as it here fol- 
lows, whereas ſervants were ordinarily hired but from year to year, 
Levit, 25. 53. or at moſt but for three years, as they gather from 
this place, and 7s. 16. 14: 
19 * All the firſtling males that come of thy herd, and 


_— of thy flock, thou ſhalt ſan&ifie unto the LORD thy God: 


26. Num. thou halt do no work with the firſtling 4 of thy bullock, 
3-13. nor ſhear the firſtling of thy ſheep. 

a This is meant, either, 1.Of the male firſtlings; which, they ſay, 
is forbidden here, becauſe ſome did plow with the firſtlings of their 
oxen, and ſhear the firſtlings of their ſheep, before rhey were offer- 
ed. But this ſcems abſurd and incredible, becauſe they were to be 
, Exod. 22. 30. when they were very 
er, 2. The ſecond firftlings, of which 


L1 
[1 
$4 
it 
| 
! 


Exod. 
b1. 6. 


cﬀered upon the eighth da 
unfit for ſuch uſes. Or, rat 
ſee on Deut. 12. 17. 


209 Thou b (halt eat it c before the LORD thy God 
year by year 4, in the place which the LORD ſhall 


chuſe, thou and thy houſhold. 

. b Either, 1. Thou, O Prieſt. Or rather, 2.7hov, O Iſraelite. For it is 
evidear that the ſame perſon who was forbidden to work with theſe, 
©. 19, is here commanded to cat them, &c. c Together with the 
Levites, as it is to be underſtood from Deut. 12. 18. and 14. 27, 29. 
where that is expreſſed in like caſes. 4 To wit, in the ſolema feaſts 
which returned upon them every year. See Dew. 16. 11, 14. 

"Lev. 22. 21 * And if there be any blemiſh therein, «: if ir be 
20.ch. 17.]Jame, or blind, or have any ill blemiſh, thou ſhalt not ſa- 


_ crifice it unto the LORD thy God. 
22 Thou ſhalt eat it within thy gates: the * unclean 
and the clean perſon ſhall cat ir alike, as the ro-buck, 


and as the hart. 
*ch.12.16. 23 *Only thou ſhalt not eat the blood thereof: thou 


23- ſhalt pour it upon the ground as water. 
| C H A P. XVI. 

Their Feaſt of the Paſſover to be kept, 1 —— 7. And to eat unleavened bread, 
8. Theſeven Weeks and their Feaſts, 9—— 12. The Feaſt of the Tabernacle 
to be obſerved by them, and their Family ſeven days, 13=—15. Allthe 
Males to appear before the Lord three times a year, and at theſe three 

' Feaſts, 16, 17. Judges and Officers are appointed 18 — 20. And are 
prohibited to ſet up Idolatry, 21, 22. 
Bſerre the * month of Abib, and keep the paſſover 

*Px0d.12- unto the LORD thy God: For * in the month of 

2. &c. Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth out of E- 

*Ex. 13-4- pypt by * night «. 

"Exod. 12. ow 0h. Tiey came out of Egypt by day, and in the morning, as 

29. 42: appears fcom Exod.12.22. and 13. 3. Numb. 33.3. Anſw. They are ſaid 

to be brought out by night, becauſe in the night Pharaoh was forced 
to give them leave to depart, and accordingly they made preparati- 
on for their departure, and in the morning they perfeQed the work. 
2 Thou ſhalt therefore ſacrifice the paiſover b unto the 

: LORD thy God, ofthe flock,and the herd in the * place 
ch. 12+5+ which the LORD ſhall chuſe to place.his Name there. | 
b (i. e.) Either 7. GED and ftrialy ſo called, which was the 

Paſchal Lamb, and . fo Sheep and Oxen, which here follow, are 
mentioned only as additional ſacrifices, which were to be offered 


*ch.12.15. 


EE DIZERONO M TY. 


uſed, 2 Chron, 35:8, 9. And this fi 
RY _—_ it _ here ſaid to cone 
Sheep and Oxen, and partly becauſe it follows, verſe 3. Thou ſhal 
leavened bread with it, ſeven days ſhalt thou eat oy "009 1 enimteg 
7. e. With the Paſſover, which could not be done with the Paſſover 
ſtri&ly ſo called, whica was to be wholly ſpent in one day. Or 
3- The Feaſt of the Paſſover, and ſo the place may be rendred, 7hou 
ſhalt therefore obſerve or keep the Feaſt of the Paſſover (as thoſe ſame 
Hebrew words are taken, Numb. 9.5. Jef. 5. 10. 2 Chron. 45. x, 17; 
18, 1 9.) unto the Lord thy God, with Sheep vi 
ſcribed, Numb. 28. 18, &c. 


days ſhalt thou eat unleavened breed therewith, ev 
Ou « ; tl 
bread of affliction 4 (for thou cameſt forth our of > 


offered after the Lamb in the ſeven days, and ſo this very word is 
nification ſeems neceſſary here, 
ſt of the flock and of the herd, or, of 


ana with Oxen, as is pre- 


3 * Thouſhalc cat no leavened bread with it c::ſeven , 


land of Egypr in haſte) that thou mayeſt remember the 

day when thou cameſt forth out of the land of Egypt,all 

the days of thy life. : 

_ c To wit, with the Paſſover, in the ſenſe delivered : Or, in i: 

z.e. during the time of the Feaſt of the Paſſover. 4 (5. e.) Bread 

which is not uſual nor pleaſant, but unſavory and unwholeſome 

” Linh -_ in mind _— of rs Pager wage endured in Egypt, and of 
ality coming out of it,which all I 

ge Ao mg ety it, which allowed thee no time to leaven 

4 * And there ſhall be no learened bread ſeen with * 


m_ e —_— all night until the morning, 

e (:.e.) Of the Paſſover properly ſo called, and by th 

plainly deſcribed: Which Circumlocution may Sc oe was 

mm wo —_— _ > _ improperly uſed, and therefore he 
rather to deſcribe it, than ton It, 191 

the word ſhould occaſion ſome ——_ Ry of 


—_ yay which __ RIO thy God giveth thee. 
E6 t . 
24. 6o.. Deut. wg kg ge PEAFERR, 07 Gan, 93. x7; and 


6 Bur at the place which the LORD thy God ſhal 
chuſe to place his name in, there thou ſhalt Sr = 
palloyer g, at even, at the going down of the ſun, at 
the ſeaſon b that thou un forth out of Epypr. : 


Chap. XV1. 


Exod. 


I2. I5 


Exod, 


thee in all thy coaſts ſeven days, * neither ſhall the : 
thing of the fleſh which thou facrificeſt the firſt " gs Feb. la 
Ven. 


*Exod.12, 
10. 


5 Thou tmayelit not || ſacrifice the paſlover within any t Heb. 
can#t not. 


ch. 12.17, 


l|Or, kl, 


g To wit, in the Court of the Tabernacle or Temple, This he 


preſcribed, partly that this great work might be 7 
tolemnity and care in ſuch a as God ER wn bay 
cauſc it was not only a Sacrament, but alſo a Sacrifice, as a pears 
becauſe it is ſo called, Exod. 12.27. and 23. 18. and 26. 25 gf "rar 
9. 7. and becauſe here was the ſprinkling of blood, which is the eC. 
ſenrial part and charaCter of a Sacrifice ; And partly to defign the 
place where Chriſt, the true Paſſover or Lamb of God, was to beflain 
þ Underſtand this with fome latitude,as fuch phraſes are commonly 
taken, about that ſeaſon,when you had received command from __ 
to go out of Egypr, and were preparing your ſelves for the journey. 
7 And thou (halt roſt 5, and eat it in the place which 
the LORD thy God ſhall chuſe, and thou thalt turn in 


the morning oa go unto thy tents J. 
2 do that word:is uſed alſo, 2 Chron.zs5. 13. kEither 1. The D 
ing after the ſeventh day, as appears, oariky by the following verſe 
which is added to explain and limit this ambiguous word; partly b 7; 
the expreſs command of God, that the people ſhould come to uber 
lem to keep this Feaſt, which by God's appointment laſted for ſeven 
days; partly from the examples of the people ſtaying there the 
whole time of the Feaſt, 2 Chron. 30. 21. and 35. 17. and partly from 
the nature and buſineſs of this Feaſt, wherein there being ſo man 
extraordinary Sacrifices to be offered, and Feaſts made by the peo Fe 
upon the Sacrifices, and two days of folemn aſſemblies, itis not =. 
bable,that they would abſent themſelves from theſe ſolemn ſervices: 
For the performance , whereof they came purpoſely to Jeruſalem. 
Or 2. The morning after the firſt day, and ſo they were permitted 
to-go then, and poſſibly ſome that lived near Jeruſalem might go 
and return again to thelaſt day of the ſolemn aſſembly. But the ie 
mer ſeems more probable. ! (5. e.) Thy dwellings, which he calls 
Tents, as reſpeCting their preſent ſtate, and withal to pur them in 
mind afterwards when they were ſettled in better habitations, thar 
there was a time when they dwelt in Tents. : 

8 Six days m thou (balt eat unleavened bread, and on 
the ſeventh day ſhall be a + ſolemn aſſembly to the LORD 


thy God, thou ſhalt do no work therein. 


Or rather beſides the ſeventh and the laſt day.which ij j 
; day, s here s 
ed a part,not as if leavencd bread might be tn "5" 19, nora 
ry was evident from many places, but becauſe there was ſomethin 
more to be done, to wit-a folemn allembly to be kept. Soin all = 
were Jeven days, as 1t 1s ſaid, Exod: 12. 15. Lev; 23. 6. Numb: 28 17 
9. * Seven weeks »thou ſhalt number unto thee: be- 


beginneſt zo pus the ſickle to the corn. 0. 


23. 10, IT. 
10 And thou (balt keep the feaſt 
RE P the feaſt of weeks punto the 


——_ LORD thy God hath bleſſed thee: 
þ Ge entecoſt, AZ: 2. x. 444" 
appointed, Lev: 13. 17, 20. Numb: 48. TOE was 


Ix Andthou ſhalt rejoyce before the LORD thy God 
thou, and thy ſon, and thy daughter, and thy 4-207 
vant, and thy maid-fervant, and the;Levite that is within 


| In the ſeven days of the Paſchal Solemnity, Num. 28. 18, 19. &c. 
Oc, 2. Largely, to wit, for the Peſſover-offerings, to wit, which were 


thy gatss, and the ſtranger, and the fatherleſs, and the 
widow 


m To wit, beſides the firſt day, on which the paſſover was killed: p ang rÞ 


gin to number the ſeven weeks from ſuch time as thou *£x.21.19 
n Of which ſce on Exod; 34. 22. Levit; 23 wy 
$ 34. 22. Levit; 23. 10.15, o(;. ce. TIF. 
reap thy Corn, thy Barly, when the firſt-fiuits ww 2-0 = 28, 26. 


God, with a [| tribute of a free will- offering of | Or, 6 
thine hand, which thou ſhalt give q unto rhe LORD hy God, 4 


Hel 
<7 
wi? 


*Fxoc 
14,17 
34. 2: 


*Fxod 


{Heb. 
cording 
the gift 
his han 


Heb. 
buwled; 
*Exod.: 
8. Lev.) 


I5. 
l Or, mM, 
ny. 


fHeb.hju 


Ie, juitic 


"Lev. 26 


I. 
l|Or,fatue 
or pillar, 


*ha I I5Fo 
21,.Mal.r. 
8 


[Or, gear. 


cy. 13. 


Chap. XVII: DEUTR 


widow that are among you, in the place which the | 
LORD thy God hath choſen, to place his Name there. 
12 And thou ſhalt remember that thou waſt a bond-man 
in Egypt; and thou ſhalt obſerve and do theſe ſtatutes. 
1cb.f0 13 Thou ſbalt obſerve the feaſt of Tabernacles r ſe- 
ur ;by ven days, after that thou haſt gathered in thy T corn, 
#i#?77ſ- and thy wine. 
r Of which ſee on Exod. 23, 16. Lev. 23. 34. Numb. 29, 12. 

14 And thou ſhalt rejoyce in thy feaft, thou, andthy 
ſon, and thy daughter, and thy man-ſervant, and thy 
maid-ſervant, and the Levite, the ſtranger, and the fa- 
therleſs, and the widow, that «re within thy gates. 

I5 Seven days ſhalt thou keep a ſolemn feaſt unro the 
LORD thy God, in the place which the LORD hall 
chuſe: becauſe the LORD thy God ſhall bleſs thee in 
all thy increaſe, and in all the works of thine hands, 
therefore thou (halt ſurely rejoyce 5. 

s To wit, in God and the Effe&s of his Favour, praiſing him 


with glad heart, | : 
Fxod.23. 16 * Three times, in a year ſhall all thy males r ap- 
1417.and pear before the LORD thy God, in the place which 
34-23- he ſhall chuſe ; in the feaſt of unleavened bread, and 
xod.z4: 12 the feaſt of weeks, and in the feaſt of tabernacles, 
* they ſhall not appear before the LORD empty. 
: Not the women, partly becauſe of their infirmity and unfit- 
neſs for many journeys, partly becauſe the care of their children 
and families Jay upon them, and partly becauſe they were ſuffiei- 


ently repreſented in the men. : 
feb. ac» _ 17 EVery man ſhall give + as he is able, according to 


rding to the bleſſing of the LORD thy God which he hath given 
tegift of thee. 
hs han. 18 Judges « and officers x ſhalt thou make thee in all 
thy gates y which the LORD thy God giveth thee 
throughout thy Tribes, and they ſhall judge the peopl 


R 


O N O M YT. Chap. XVII 


3 And hath gone and ſerved other gods, and wor- 
ſhipped them, eicher the * ſun or che moon, or any of 
the hoſt of Heaven e, which I have not commanded f; 
e Thoſe glorious Creatures, which are to be admired as the won« 
derful works of God, but not to beſet up in God's ſtead, nor wor- 
ſhiped as Gods ; ſee Job 31+26. By condemning the moſt ſpecicus 
and reaſonable ofall Idolaters, he intimats, how abſurd a thing it is 
to worſhip ſtocks and ſtones, the works of mens hands. f7. e.I have 
forbidden, to wit, Ex. 20. Such negative expreſſions are oft emphati- 
cal and imply the contrary, as Prov. 10. 2. and 17. 21. and 24. 23. 

4 Andit be rold thee g, and thou haſt heard of ir, and 
enquired diligently ||, and behold, itbetrue, andthe thing 
certain, thatſuch abomination-is wrought in Iſrael: 

' 8 By any perſon, thou ſhalt not ſlight fo much. as a rumour or , 
ying report of ſo groſs a crime. || By ſending meſſengers, exas. 
mining witneſles, &Cc. | 

5 "Then ſbalt thou bring forth that man, or that wo- 
man (which have commited that wicked thing) unto « 

h i - P * 4 (h {} . 
thy gates: even that man,or that woman, * andſhalt ſtone | 
them with ſtones, till they die. *Numb. 

6 * Atthe mouth h of two witneſſes, or three witneſſes 3, 3 5 30- 
ſhall he that is worthy of death, be put to death : but at ©9P:19- 


' 


the mouth of one witneſs, he ſhall not be put to death. Matt. 18.M 
h (i.e.) Upon the teſtimony delivered upon oath before the Magi- 16. John ll 
ſtrares. i To wit, credible and competent witneſſes. The Jews re- 8. 179, WM 
jetted the teſtimonies of mad-men,children, women, ſervants,famili- 2Cor.13.1'8 
ar friendsor enemies, perſons of diſſolute lives and eyil fame, 1 Tim. 5 
7 * The hand ofthe witneſs ſhall be firſt upon him &, to 19 A} 
put himto death,and afterwardthe hand of all thepeople Heb: 10. 
/: ſo thou * ſhalt put the evil away from among you. 5c. 3M 
& Either laid upon his head to deſign the perſon, or ſtretched out a 
to throw the fir ſtone at him.God thus ordered it, partly for the + 
caution of witneſſes, that, if they had through malice or wrath ac- 5 
cuſed him falſely, they might now be afraid to imbrue their hands 
in innocent blood ; Partly for the ſecurity and fatisfa&tion of the 
people, in the execution of this puniſhment. 1 Who being all 
highly and particularly obliged to God, .are bound to expreſs their 


* chap. « | 


19, hoohe 


Chap. 13. | 


with juſt judgement. 2 

u Chief Magiſtrates to examine and determine cauſes and diffe- | 
rences. &« Who were inferiour and ſubordinate to the other to | 
bring cauſes and perſons before them, to acquaint people with the | 


: ir {; 5 . : 
mind and ſentence of the Judges,and to RT Th Gs . pleao, and between ſtroke and ſtroke p, being matters Heb. 


which he here calls gates, becauſe there were ſeats of Judgement | 


Deut. 20. 5, 9. Yoſ. 1. 19, 11. and 3. 2, 3. 


ſet. Compare 1 Chron, 23+ 4, : 
Heb. a:= 19 Thou faait not wreſt Judgement z; thou ſhalt 


bopledge. not + reſpec perſons «,. * neither take a gift : for a gifc 


by args doth blind the eyes of the wiſe 5,and pervert the || words 
ts * of the righteous e. 
|Or, mar. * (7. e.) Nor give a perverſe, forced and unjuſt ſentence. See on 
fer Exod. 23.8. # (i: e.) Not give ſentence according to the quality of 
" * the perſon, his riches or poverty, friendſhip or enmity, but accor- 
ding to the juſtice ofthe cauſe. 6b Corruprs and byafleth his mind, 
that as he will not, ſo oft-times he cannot, diſcern between right 
and wrong. c Either 1. The words, (:.e.) The ſentence, of thoſe 
Judges who are enclined and uſed to do righteous things, and have 
the Repute of Righteous Men, it makes them give wrong judge- 
ment, Or 2. The words, 7. «. The matters, or cauſes, (as word oft 
ſignifies) of Righteous Perſons, or of them whoſe cauſe is o_ 
{HcbJjuſt= 20 4 Thar which is aitogether juſt 4 ſhalt thou follow, 


iz, juice. that thou mayeſt live, and inherit the land which the 


LORD thy God giveth thee. 
4 Heb. Righteouſneſs, Righteouſneſs, i:e. nothing but Righteouſneſs in 
all cauſes and times,and to all perſons equally. Compare 1/2. 26: 7, 
21 Thou ſhalt not planc thee a grove of any trees e, 
near unto the Altar of the LORD chy God, which thou 


/ ſhalt make thee. 

e Becauſe this was the praftice of Idolaters, 1 Kings 157 13. and 
might be an occaſion of reviving Idolatry. See Juages 3, 7. 1 Kings 
14. 23. and 16. 33. and 18. 19. 

22 * Neither ſhalt thou ſet thee up «»y || image f, 
which the LORD thy God hateth. 

f Heb. ſtatue, whether with a pifture or repreſentation, or with- | 
out it, as the Idolaters uſed to worſhip ſmoothed and poliſhed 
ſtones or pillars, without any image upon them. 


CHAP. XVIL 


"Lev. 26. 
I. 
|Or,fatue, 
or pillar, 


They are not to offer blemiſht Sacrifices, 1. Jdolaters are to be put to death, 
2 ——7.. Doubts in difficult matters to be reſolved by Prieſts and Judges, 
8-—13. To chuſe a King of their own Brethren, 14, 15. Aud not ® | 

* Stranger, 16. The duty of their King, 17 20, 

Hou ſhalt not ſacrifice unto the LORD thy God 


*chap. 15. 

21.Mal.r. «ny bullock or || ſheep s, wherein 5s blemiſh, or 

10: roar, ANY evil favouredneſs: for that is an abomination b un- 
1804, 


to the LORD thy God. 

a (i.e.) Either greater or ſmaller ſacrifices, all being compre- 
hended under the two moſt eminent kinds. See Lev. 22. 20, 21: 
b (7.e.) Abominable, as Deut. 18. 12. 

2 * If there be found among you within any of thy 
gates, Which the LORD thy God giveth thee, man or 
woman c that hath wrought wickedneſs in the ſight of 
the LORD thy God, in tranſgrefling his covenant d. 


c The weakneſs and tenderneſs of that Sex ſhall not excuſe her 
ſin, nor prevent her puniſhment: 4 7.e. In Idolatry,as it is explained } 
v. 3. which is called a tranſgreſſion of God's Covenant made with 1/rel, 
partly becauſe it isa breach of their Faith given ro God,and of thar | 

aw which they covenanted to keep ; And principally becauſe it is 
a diſſolution of their matcimonial Covenant with God, a renoun- 


cing of God and his worſhip and ſervice, and a chuſing other Gods. 


"chap. 13. 


zeal for his honour and ſervice, and their deteſtation of all perſons | 
and things ſo highly diſhonourable and abominable to him. 
8 Jlt th iſe a matcer to hard for th in judg- Jer33.28 | 
2 2. 


cre arl ceminyg 
ment between blood and blood », between plea and | - 
If «i 

of controverſie q, within thy gates: then ſhalt thou a- —_— Wl 

riſe, and get thee up into the place which the LORD regs 

thy God (ball chuſer. ——— 
-m He ſpeaks to the inferiour Magiſtrates, who were ereCted in ſe- | 22.6 

veral Cities,as appears by the oppoſition oftheſe to them at Jernſalem, * * 2 Ol 

IF, faith he, thou hait nor skill or confidence to determine ſo 

weighty and difficult a cauſe. » (5.e.) In capital cauſes in matter 

of blocd-ſhed, whether it be willful os cafual murder, whether 

puniſhable or pardonable by thaſe Laws, Exod.2r. 13,20; 22, 28. and 

22.2, Numb, 35. 11, 16, 19. Dent. 19. 4, 10. 0 In civil catiſes or 

ſuits between plaintiffs and defendants about words or eſtates þ (7. 

e.) Either firſt in ceremonial cauſes, between plague and plague, between 

the true leproſie, which is oft-rimes called the plague, an the ſeem- 

ing and counterfeit leproſie; which was oft-times hard ro determine. 

And under this as the moſt eminent of the kind, may ſeem to be 

contained all ceremonial uncleatineſſes. But this ſeems not probable, 

1. Becauſe the final determination of the matter of leproſie is ma- 

nifeftly left to any —_ Prieſt, Levit. 13. and 14. 2. Becauſe 

the perſon ſuſpe&ed of leprofie was not to be brought to Jeruſalem, 

to be tryed there, but was to be ſhut up in his own Ciry and 

houſe, Levit. r3. 4, 5. and the Judges at Jeruſalem neither could nor 

would determine his caſe without once ſeeing the perſon. 3. Be- 

cauſe the caſe of leproſie was not hard or ditficult, as thoſe cauſes 

are ſaid to be, but plain and evident, and ſo particularly and pun&tu- 

ally deſcribed, that the Prieſt needed only eyes to decide it. Or 

rather 2. In criminal cauſes, concerning blows, or wounds infli&- 

ed by one man upon another, and to be requited to him by the ſen« 

tence of the Magiſtrate, according to that Law, Exod. 2r, 23, 24,25. 

wherein there might be many cates of great difficulty and doubr, 

about which ſee the Annotations there. q (5. e.) Such things or 

maters of blood, and pleas and ſtrokes, being doubtful, and the 

Magiſtrates divided in their opinions about it, for if it wasa clear 

caſe, this was not to be done. Some make this an additional clauſe 

ro comprehend theſe and all other things, thus as if he had ſaid, and 

in general, any words or matters of ſirifes or contentions. r To wit,to 

ſer up his Worlbip and Tabernacle, or Temple there; Becauſe 

there was the abode, both of their Sanhedrim, or chief Council, 

which was conſtituted of Prieſts and civil Magiſtrates, who were 

moſt able to determine all controverſies, and of the High-Prieſts, 

who wer2 to conſult Ged by Urim, Numb. 27. 21. in'great matters, 

which could not be decided otherwiſe, 
9 And thou ſhalt come unto the Prieſts the Levites s, 


and unto the Judge #that (ball be in thoſe days,& enquire, 


and they (ball ſhew. thee the ſentenceof Judgement #. 

s (i, e.) Unto the great council, which it is here denominated 
from,becauſe it conſiſted chiefly of the Prieſts and Levites, as be- 
ing the beſt Expoſitors of the Laws of God, by whichall thoſe 
Controverlies mentioned v. 8. were to be decided. And the High- 
Prieſt was commonly one of that number, and may ſeem to be un- 
derſtood here under the Prizf#s whereof he was the chief. £ This 
Judge here, is either 1. The ſupream civil Magiſtrare, who was 
made by God the keeper of both Tables, and was by his Office to 
take care of the right adminiſtration both of Juſtice and of Reli- 
gion, who was to determine cauſes and ſuits by bis own skill and 
authority in civil matters, and by tke Prieſts dize&ion in ſpiri- 
tual or ſacred Cauſes. But this ſeems obnoxious to ſome dithcul- 
ties, becauſe this Judge was obliged to dwell in the place of God's 
Worſhip, which the civil Magiſtrate was not,and oft-times did nor. 


2. This Judge was one whoſe Office it was to expound and teach 
a G 4 othery 


_ wks "Me 


| | the law of God, as it here follows, v. 11. therefore not the 
| 13h MT airace, Or, 2. The High-Prieſt who was obliged to live 
(| in this place, ro whom it belonged to determine ſome at leaſt of 
| thoſe controverſies mentioned, wv. 8. and to teach and expound the 
Law of God: And he may be diſtinaly named, though he be one 
of the Prieſts, partly becauſe of his eminency and ſuperiority over 
| the reſt of them, as after al! Davids enemies Saul is particularly men- 
| tioned, Pſal 18. title, and partly to ſhew that amongſt the Prieſts, 
he eſpecially was to be conſulted in ſuch caſes. Bur tis alſo ſeems 
liable to obje&ions, 1. That he ſeems to be included under _ 
| general expreſſion of the Prieſts and Levites, 2. That the High-Prie 
| 15s never in all the Scripture called ſimply the Judge, but | 
called the Prief, or the High-Prieft, or Chief-Prieſt, or the like ; An 
it is moſt probable if Moſes had meant him here, he would have ex- 
refſed him by ſome of his uſual Names and Titles, and not by a 
Hr Title which was not likely to be underitood. 3. That di- 
vers controverſies between blood and blood, plea and plea, ſtroke and ſtroke, 
were not to be determined by the High-Prieft, but by other Per- 
' ſons, as appears by Exod. 18. 22. Deut. 1. 16, 17. Or 4. fn et 
hedrim, or Supreme Council, which as was faid before, conliſte 
partly of Prieits, and partly of wiſe and learned Perſons of other 
Tribes, as is confeſſed by all the Jewiſh, and moſt other Writers. 
And fo this is added by way of explication, partly to ſhew that the 
Prieſts and Levites here mentioned, as the perſons to whom all hard 
controverſies are to be referred, are not all the Prieſts and Levites 
which ſhould reſide in Jeruſalem, but only ſuch of them as were or 
ſhould be Members of that great Council, by whom, together with 
their fellow Members of other Tribes, theſe cauſes were to be de- 
cided ; Partly to intimate, That rhat great Council, which had 
the chief and final determination of all the above ſaid controverſies, 
was a mixed aſſembly conliſting of wiſe and good Men, ſome Ec- 
cleſiaſtical, and ſome Secular, as it was moſt meet it ſhould be, be- 
cauſe many of the cauſes which were brought untothem were mix- 
ed cauſes. As for the conjun&ive particle, and, that may be taken 
either disjun@ively for or, as it is Exod. 21. 15, 17. compared with 
Matt. 15.4. and Numb. 30.5,6. compared with Matt. 12. 37. and 
Lev. 6.3, 5. 2 Sam. 2. 19, 21+ or exegetically, for, that is, or, #0 17, 
as Jung, 7. 24. 1 Sam. 17. 40. and 28. 3. 2 Chron. 35+ 14. and ſo the 
ſenſe may be, the Prieſts,the Levites,or the Judge, as 1t 1S V. 12, OT, the 
Priefts, the Levites, that is, the Judge, or the Judges, a ppointed for this 
work. And though the word Juage be in the ſingular number, and 
may ſeem to denoteone perſon, yer itis only an Enallage, or change 
of the number, the ſingular for the plural, Judges, which 1s moſt 
frequent, as Gen. 3. 2,7. and 49. 6. 1 Sam. 3I. I. I Kings 10: 22. and 
2 Kings 11. 10. compared with 2 Chron. 9. 21. and 23. 9. and in the 
Hebrew, 1 Chron. 4. 42. where divers Officers are called one Head. 
And ſo it is moſt probably here. 1. Becauſe the following words 
which belong to this, run altogether in the plural number, hey, 
they, they, &c, here and v. 10, 11. 2. Becauſe here is the ſame E- 
nallage in the otherbrznch, rhe ſame perſon or perſons being called 
the Prieſts here, and the Prieſt, v. 12. 3. Becauſe for the Judge, here 
is put#he Judges, Deut. 19. 17. where we have the ſame phraſe uſed 
upon the ſame or a ike occaſion, the Men between whom the controverſie 
3s, ſhall ſtand before the Lord, before the Prieſts and the Fudges, which ſhall 
be in thoſe days. Nor is it ſtrange, but my fit and reaſonable, that 
ſo many perſons being all united in one body, and to give judge- 
ment or ſentence by the conſent of all, or the greateſt part ſhould be 
here called by the name of one Judge, as indeed they were ; And 
for that reaſon the Prieſts are ſpoken of in the plural number, becauſe 
they were many, as alſo the other members of that aſſembly were, 
and the Judge in the ſingular number, becauſe they all conſtitu- 
red but one Judge. » Heb. The Word, or Matter of Tudgement, (i. e.) 
The true ſtate and right of the cauſe, and what judgement or ſen- 
tence ought. to be given in it. : : 
io And thou ſhalt x do according to the ſentence, 
which they of that place(which the LORD ball chooſe) 
| ſhall ſhew thee, and thou ſhalt obſerve to doy according 
$o all that they inform thee. l 
x(7.e.) Thou ſhalt paſs ſentence: For he ſpeaks to the inferiour 
Magiſtrates, as was before noted, who were to give ſentence, and 
came hither to be adviſed abour it. » It is very obſervable that this 
place doth not ſpeak of all controverſies of Faith; as if they were 
to believe every thing which they ſhould teach, but only of ſome par- 
ticular matters of prattice and ſtrife between man and man, to 
which ir is plainly limited, v.8. And they are not here command- 
ed to believe, but only ro do, which is thrice repeated. = 
.11 According to the ſentence of the law which they 
ſhall teach thee z,and according to rhe judgement which 
they (ball tell thee thou ſhalt do : thou ſhalt not decline 
from the ſentence which they ſhall ſhew thee, to the 


righthand, nor to the left. 

z Theſe words are a manifeſt limitation of the foregoing aſſertion, 
that they were to do according to all that the Judge or Judges in- 
formedhim. And they ſeem to limit and regulate, 1. The Judges 

' In their ſentence, thar they ſhall not,upon prerence of this Supreme 
Authority put into their hands, preſume to teach or dire& other- 
wiſethan the Law preſcribes. 2. The People in their obedience : 
Thar they ſhall nor ſimply obey them in all things , bur ſo far forth 

' as their ſentence is according to the Law and Word Of God, butnor 

when 'their commands are evidently contrary to Gods Law, for 
then, ſay even Popiſh Commentators on this place, they muſt obey 
God rather than Man. And this cannot be denyed by any Man of 
ſenſe, upon ſuppoſition 'that this place ſpeaks of, and this power 
ven to the Prieſt or Judge reacheth to, all controverſies or que- 
Rions'of Faith and Manners, as the oy would extend it: For 
- put the caſe theſe Prieſts or Judges ſhould give a ſentence dire&ly 
- contrary to the exprefs words of God's Law, Thou ſhalt worſhip a gra- 
wen Imaze, as Aaron did in the caſe of the calf; Thou ſhalt prophane the 
Sabbath, thou ſhalt difhpnour thy Father and Mother, thou ſhalt Murder, Steal, 
Commit Adultery, &c:* I ask, were the people in this caſe bound to 
' do as the Judge determined, or not? If any ſay they were, ſuch 
a bold and wicked affertion muſt needs-ſtrike all ſober Chriſti- 
ans with horrour; And if they ſay they were not, then this muſt 
needs be taken foralimitation* Bur if this place ſpeak only of par- 
* ficular ſuits between man and man, as is apparent from the notes | 


on v. 8. And in all ſuch caſes, although the Judge be hereby cons 


Ione os 


4 
4 


lap. XVII. HEDITZER ONO M T. 


fined and tied to his rule in giving the ſentence, yet it ſeems bur 
fit and reaſonable, that people ſhould be bound fimply to ac- 
quieſce in the ſentence of their laſt and higheſt Judge, or elſe there 
would have been no end of ſtrife. 


the Judge, even that man ſhall die, and thou thalt pur 
away the evil b from Iſrael. 

a (i.e.) That will proudly and obſtinately oppoſe the ſentence 
given againſt him. 'This isoppoſite to ignorance and errour, E::02. 
21. 13, 14. 6 Either 1. Theevil thing, that ſcandal, that pernicious 
example. Or, 2. That evil, refrattory, pernicious perſon, whoſe 
prattice herein tends to rhe diſſolution of all Government, and the 
ruine of the Common-wealth of 1/rael. 


13 And all the people ſhall hear,and fear,and do no 
more preſumptuouſlly. 

14 When thou art come into the land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, and ſhalt poſſeſs it, and 
(halt Awel therein, and ſbalt fay, I will feta King over 
me c, like as all the nations that are about me. 

c He only foreſees and foretells what they would do, but doth 
not ſeem to approve of it, becauſe when they did this thing for 
_ wg"; reaſon here alledged, he declares his utter diſlike of it, 
1 Sam. 8. 7, 


15 Thou ſhalt in any wiſe ſet 4 bi King over thee, 


mayeſt not ſet a ſtranger over thee g, which is not thy 
brother. | 


d (i. e.) Appoint, or inſtal. If you will chooſe a King, which I 
ſhall ſuffer you to do, T command you to mind this in your choice. 
e Approve of, or Appoint. $0 it was in Saul, and in David, God 
reſerved to himielf the nomination both of the Family, and of the 
Perion. See 1 Sam. 9g. 15. and 10. 24. and 16. 12+ 1 Chron. 28. 4, 5. 
f Of the ſame Nation and Religion; partly becauſe ſuch a perſon 
was moſt likely to maintain true Religion, and to rule with Righte- 
ouſneſs,Gentleneſs,and Kindneſs to his Subje&s; and partly that he 
might be a fir Type of Chriſt their ſupreme King, who was to be 
one of their Brethren. g To wit, by thy own choice and conſent; 
but if God by his providence and for their ſins ſhould ſet a ftran- 
ger over them, they might ſubmit ro him, as appears from Jer. 38. 
17. Ezeck. 17. 12, Mat. 22. 17. 

16 Bur he (ball not multiply horſes to himſelf g, nor 


cauſe the peopleto return to Egypt h, to the end that he 


!hould multiply horſes : fora»zmuch as the LORD hath * chip. ul, 
ſaid ; unto you, * Ye tball henceforth no more return = 


thar way &. 


gs To wit, exceſſively, beyond what the State and M ajeſty of his 
place required. Hereby God would prevent many ſins and miſ- 
ehiefs, As 1. Pride of heart, and contempt of his people. 2. Op- 
preſſion and Tyranny, and the impoſition of unnecetlary burdens 
upon his people. 3. Carnal confidence, which by this means would 
be promoted. See Pſal: 33.17. Prov: 21: 31. 4. Much commerce 
with Egypr, as it here follows, which was famous for horſes, as ap- 
pears from Exod: 14. 23. 1 Kings 10 26, 28. 2 Chron, 1. 16. and 9. 28. 
Iſa: 31. I, 3. Zzek: 17.5. h Either for habitation, or for trade. 
'Fhis God forbad to prevent, 1: Their unthankfulneſs for their de- 
liverance out of Egypr. 2. Their confederacies with the Egyptians 
their truſting ro them for aid, which they were very prone to and 
their infeaion by the Idolatry and other manifold wickedneſſes 
for which Egypt was infamous. 3, Their multiplication of Horſes, 


as it here follows. 2: When or where? Anſw: Either implicit 
when he ſhewed his diſlike of their return to Egypt, as Fagan 5d 
Numb: 14. 3, 4 or exprelly at this time, The Lord hath now fid ir 
ro me, and Tin his name, and by his command, declare it to You 
k inthe way that leads to that place. bh 
17 Neither ſhall he multiply wives to himſelf }, that 


his heart turn not away m : neither ſhall he great| % 
tiply co himſelf » ſilver and gold. 5 y mul 


{ As the manner of other Kings was. m To wit, from C 
his Law, Either r. To Idolatry a Superſtition, to = Agence 
are oft-times prone, and eſpecially ſuch women as he was likely to 
chuſe ; even the daughters of neighbouring and idolatrous Kings 
and Princes, as Solomon did. Or, 2. To other manifold ſins and 
violations of his duty to his people, either by negle& and contem t 
of his buſineſs, through effeminacy and ſloath, or by oppreſſing fo 
people, and perverting Juſtice ro comply with the vaſt and &xor- 
birant deſires of his wives. m2 Leſt this ſhould lift up his heart in 
confidencg and pride, which God abhorrs, and beget in him a con- 
tempt of his people; And leſt it ſhould encline or engage, or en- 
able him to burden his people with immoderat exa&jons. The 
are not ſimply forbidden to be rich, if God made them either 
þy the voluntary gifts of theirſubje&s, or by the 1poils of their ene-' 
mies, which was the caſe of David and Solomon, and Jehoſhaphat, 8&c 
But they are forbidden either inordinatly to deſire, or irregular] ; 
to procure: great riches, by grinding the faces of their poor x2 
or by other wicked arts and courſes, as the manner of their ne: he 
bouring Kings was. 5 
18 And ic ſhall be when he ſitteth upon the throne of 
his kingdom, that he (ball write o him 
law in a book, out of that hich is befor 
Levites p. | 

o Either with his own hand, as the Jews ſay, or, at leaſt by his 
command and procurement. þ (, e.) Out of the Original] x which 
was carefully kept by the Prieſts in the SanQuary; Deut: 31 26 
2 Kings 22. 8. partly that it might be a true and perfe& copy, and 
partly that it might have the greater authority and influence upon 
him, coming to him, as from the hand and preſence of God. 


19. And "it ball be with him,agd he ſhall read there- *Tof, ib" 
: in 


12 And * the man that will do preſumptuouſly #, *Hoſ. 4.4, 
Tand will not hearken unto the Prieſt ( that ſtandeth THeb. 
to Miniſter there before the LORD thy GOD) or uno *? "*#"* 


whom the LORD thy God ſhall chuſe e. One * from a- 'Jcr- 36. 
mong thy brethren f ſhale thou ſet king over thee: thou * 


a 7 copy of this 4174.4 


e the Prieſts the plicate, | hefather 


Chap: Xvn | © 


0 
r 


"Numb 
1% 20, 
Chap. 
10. 9. 
*; Cor 
q. 13+ 


*Num. 
18.12,24 


*Exod: 
28. r. 
Nums3. 
I9, 


? Heb. 
bis ſales | 


Ws Ghar. XV1IE. 


* 10. 9, 


in all the days of his life q, that he- may learn to fear 
che LORD his God, to keep all the words of this law, 


and theſe ſtatutes, to do them : 


(i.e. ) Diligently and conſtantly, 
pes 2 —_ Fatake and multitude of his buſineſs 


or hinder him. | 
20 That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren 


and that he turn not aſide from the commandment, to 


neither the greatneſs of his 
ſhall excuſe 


| the right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may 


*Numb. 
1% 20, * 


Chap. 


9 
*; Cor. 
q. 13+ 


*Num. 
18.12,24. 


*Exod: 
28. r. 
Numsz. 
10, 


prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children in 
the midſt of Itrael. 


+ He intimates, that the Scriptures diligently read and ſtudied, 
are a powerful and probable means to keep him humble, becauſe 
they thew him that, though a king, he is ſubje& to an higher Mo- 
narch, to whom he muſt give an account of all his adminiſtrations 
and a&ions, and receive from him his ſentence and doom agreeable 
to their quality, which is ſufficient to abate the pride of the haugh- 
ticft perſon in the world, if he duly conſider it. 

C A A P, XVIIL 
The Lord is the Prieſts and Levites Inheritance, 1, 2, Their due from the 

people, 3===5. 4 Levites portion that came to ſerve voluntarily, 6--8. 

All unlawful arts prohibited, g-=-=14. Chriſt is promiſed, whom they 

muſt hearken to, 15-==19. Falſe prophets threatned, 20. The mark of 

# falſe prophet, 21, 22. : : 

HE prieſts, the Levites, «-d all the tribe of Levi, 
* ſhall have no part nor inheritance with Iſrael : 


they * ſhall eat the offerings of the LORD made by fre a, 


_ and his inheritance b. 


a By which phraſe we here manifeſtly ſee that he means not 
burnt-offerings, which were wholly conſumed by fire, and no part 
of them eaten by the Prieſts ; but other Sacrifices, whereof part 
was offered to the Lord by fire, and part was alloted to the Prieſts 
for their food. 6 (5. e.) The Lords portion or inheritance, which 
God had reſerved to himſelf, as Tithes and firſt Fruits, and other 
oblacions diitin& from thoſe which were made by fire, and ſo theſe 
two branches make up the whole of that which belonged to God, 
and was by him given to the Levites. ; : 

2 Therefore ſhall they have no inheritance among 


their brethren: the LORD « zs their inheritance, as he 


hath ſaid unto them. 
c (5. e.) The Lords part and right, .as was now ſaid. 


3 And this ſhall be the prieſts due from the people, 
from them that cffer a ſacrifice 4, whether iz be ox or 
ſheep, and they ſhall give unto the prieſt the ſhoulder, 


and the two cheeks, and the maw e. 

4 To wit, a Sacrifice of Thankſgiving, or a Peace-Offering, as 
appears from Levit? 7: 31, 33- which is ofc times called ſimply a 
Sacrifice, as Exod: 18; 12. Levit. 17; 5, 8. Numb. 15: 3. Deut, 12.27. 
e 2s. How doth this agree with other Texts, in which the ſhoul- 
der and the breaſt, and thoſe parts only are the Prieſts due, not 
the cheeks and maw ? Anſw. i. Who ſhall tie Gods hands: what if 
h2 now makes an addition, and enlargeth the Prieſts commons ? 
Nothing more uſual than for one Scripture to ſupply what is lack- 
ing in another,and for a latter Law of God to add a former. 2. The 
Breiſt may be ere omitted, becauſe it is comprehended under the 
Shoulder, to which it is commonly joyned,and with which it was 
waved before the Loid. 3. The Hebrew word here rendered Maw 
or Stomach,which was reckoned among dainties by the Ancients, 1s 
not to my remembrance uſcd elſewhere, and therefore it may have 
another ſignification, and ſome render it the breaſ?, others taks it 
for the uppermoſt part of the ſtomach, which lies under the breaſt. 


The * firit fruit alſo of thy corn, of thy wine, and 


DY 0 T 6 © O N ab 


i # 


he ſaw occaſion for it. Heb. beſet his falzs by the fathers, i.e. Of 
that which came to him by his Fathers, or, according to his Fathers, 
or, his Fathers houſe ; and thele words may be joyned not with the 
word immediatly foregoing, but with the former part of the verſe, 
the next word coming in by a kind of parentheſis, in this manner, 
and order, Beſidzs that which cometh by the ſale of their goods, they 
Jhall have like portions to eat to what their Brethren have, each of 
them eating according to his Fathers houſe, 7. e. A Gerſbonite ſhall eat 
with his Brethren the Gerſhouites who are then miniſtring, and a 
Merarite with the M:rarites, &c. and ſo there ſhall be no diſturbance 
nor change in the appointed courſes bytheir acceſſion to the number. 

9 When thou art come into the land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, thou ſhalt not leara to do 
after the abominations of theſe nations. 

Io There ſhall not be found among you any exe that 
maketh his fon, or his daughter * to paſs through the 
fire &, or that * uſeth divination 1, er any obſerver of 
times -, Or an inchanter z, Or a witch 8. 

& Either by a ſuperſtitious luſtratien or purgation, or by a cruel 
ſacrificing, of them. See Leviz: 18, 21. 2 Kings 17: 31. and 23: 10. 
2 Chron: 28; 3. Pſal: 106: 37. Jer. 7: 31. and 19: 5. Exzek: 16; 29, 21. 
and 23: 37, 38, 39. 1 (7. e.) Foretelleth things ſecret or to come 
Mr. 3: 11. by unlawful arts and pratices. » Superſtitiouſly pro- 
nouncing ſome days good and lucky, and others unlucky for ſuch 
or ſuch ations. Or, an 0bſerwer w the clouds or heavens, 7. e. one 
thar divineth by the motions of the clouds, by the ſtars, or by the 
flying or chattering of Birds, all which heathens uſed to obſerve: 
n Or, a Conjefurer, that diſcovers hidden things by a ſuperſtitious 


uſe of words or coremonies,by obſervation of water or ſmoak or any }. 


contingencies, as the meeting of an hare, &c. See on Lev: 19; 26. 
o One that is in covenant with the Devil, and by his help deludes 
their ſenſes or hurts their perſons. See Exod. 7: x © and 22: 18. 
1x * Ora charmerp,or a conſulter with familiar ſpi- 
rits q, or a wizard r, or * a necromancer s. 
p One that charmeth Serpents or other cattel, Pſal. 58: 6, Or, 


nap. XVIII, 


I8. 24 Wl | 
* Lev. 19. vl | 


'  fortune-teller, that fortelleta the events of mens lives by the cons 
: junCtions of the ſtars, &'c. See more on Levit: 19. 31." and 20.6. 
| q Whom they call upon by certain words and rites to engage them 
'1n evil deſigns. » Heb. 4 knowing or cunning man, who by any ſu- 
perſtitious or forbidden wayes undertakes the revelation of iecret 
_ s One that calleth up and enquireth of the dead, r Sam, 28. 
8, 11a: 8.19. 
12 For all that do theſe things are an abomination un- 
to the LORD :; and becauſe of theſe a bominations,the 


LORD thy God doth drive them 7 out from before thee. 


t The people of the land which thou art going to poſſeſs men- 


| tioned above, wer. 9. 


13 Thou ſhalt be || perfe&t with the LORD « thy God. 


deve peN with Devils or their agents, ſuch as were now men. 
tioned. 

14 For theſe nations which thou ſhalt || poſſeſs, 
hearkened unto obſervers of times, and unto diviners * 
but as for thee, the LORD thy God hath not ſuffered 
thee ſo to do x. 

x Hath nor ſuffered thee to follow thy own vain mind and theſe 
ſuperſtitious and Diabolical prattices, as he hath ſuffered other na. 

tions to do, As 14. 16. but hath inſtruted thee better by his word 
and ſpirit, and thereby keep thee from ſuch courſes, and will more 
fully inſtru& rhee by a great Prophet, &'c. Or, hath net given to 
thee, to wit, ſuch perſons to conſulc with, but hatffFiven thee pro- 
phets to inſtru thee, and will in due time give thee an eminent 


of thy oyl, and the firſt of the fleece of thy ſheep ſhalt prophet as it here follows. 


thou give him. 
5 For* 
all thy tribes, to ſtand to miniſter in the Name of the 


LORD F, him, and his ſons for ever. 
f (5.e. ) Either by Authority and Commiſſion from him, or for 


- his Honour, Worſhip or Service. 


6 And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of 


e 


f 
i 
[1 


i5 * The LORD thy God will raiſe up y unto thee a 


the LORD thy God hath choſen him out of prophet z from the midlt of thee, of thy brethren, like 


unto_me, unto him ye ſhall hearken. 

y ( 7. e. ) Will produce and ſend into the world in due time: 
x Thoſe words may be underſtood ſecundarily concerning the ſuc. 
c:flion of Prophets which God would raiſe for the inſtru&ion of his 
Church, back becauſe this is alledged as an argument why the 
need not conſult with diviners, &c. becauſe they ſhould have Pro. 


*Levit. 


26, ZI. 


Ia.8.19. 


* Levit. 
20, 27. 
* I Sam. 
28. 7. 


| Or, #p- i 
u Sincerely and wholly his, ſeeking him and cleaving to him 27'Sht» or | 
and to his word alone, and therefore abhorring all commands aid ſencere. | 


herit. 


T ' 
and 20.27 || 


-- \1 


| Or, i#« 


all Iſrael, where he ſojourned,8& come wirh all the deſire 
of his mind unto the place which theLORD ſhall chuſeg ; 


g Eirher for any private occaſions, or to ſojourn there for a ſea-. 


phers at hand whenſoever it was needfu], to adviſe them, and be 
cauſe this Prophet is oppoſed to the falſe propher, and a general rule 
is herupon given for the diſcovery of all ſucceeding Prophets whe. 


4 


q 


? Heb. 
bis ſales by 
the fathers. 


ſon, or rather with full purpoſe to fix his abode, and to ſpend his 
whole time and ſtrength in the ſervice of God, as appears by the 
ſale of his patrimony mentioned, wv. 8. It ſeems probavle thar the 
ſeveral Prieſts were to come from their Cities to the Temple by 
turns, before David's time, and it is certain they did ſo after it. 
But if any of them were not contented with this ſ:ldom attendance 
upon God in his Tabernacle, or Temple, and deſired more intirely 
and conſtantly to devote himſelf to Gods ſervice there, he was per-, 
mitted ſo to do, becauſe this was an eminent att of piety joyned 
with ſelf-denial to part with thoſe great conveniencies which he 
could and did enjoy in the Ciry of his poſſeſſion, and to oblidge him- 
{ſelf to more conftant and laborious work about the Sacrifices, &c. 
- 7 Then he ſhall miniſter in the Name of the LORD 
his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which ftand 
there before the LORD. 
8 They ſhall have like portions þ to eat, beſide F that 
which comerh of the ſale of his parrimony 
hþ To wit, with theic Brethren who were in a&tual miniſtration : 
as they ſhare with them in the work, ſo ſhall they alſo in the in- 
couragements. : Though he have an eſtate whereby he may ſub- 
fiſt raiſing by the ſale of his Houſe in his City, and his Cartel,and 
other moveables, yet you ſhall nor upon this ground either deny 
or diminiſh their part of your maintainance. The reaſon of this 
Law was, partly, becauſe he that waired :/n the Altar, 'ought tc 
live by the Altar: and partly. becauſe it was fit he ſhould keep'his 
money, wherewith he might redeem what he fold, if afterwards 


| 1is mouth 6b, -and he ſhall 


ther they be true or falſe, wer. 20, 21, 22. but they are chiefly to 


be underſtood of Chriſt, as the following words ſhew which do 
not truly and fully agree to any other ; particularly where he is 
ſaid to be like unto Moſes, which is ſimply denied concerning all 0. 
ther Prophets, Dewt. 34. 19. and therefore it is not probable that ir 
ſhould be ſimply affirmed concerning afl true Prophets ſucceeding 
him. But Chri't was ey, and in all commendable parts like 
him, in being both a Propher and a King and a Prieſt and Media- 
tour, as Moſes was, in the excellency of his Miniſtry and work, in 


' the gloa:y of his miracles, in his familiar and intimate converſe 


wich G-d, &c. And this place 1s expounded of Chriſt alone by 
God himſelf in the New Teſtament, 4s 3. 22. and 5. 37. See alſo 
Joh. 1.45. and 6. 14. | 


16 According to all that thou defiredft of the LORD 
thy God in Horeb,in the day of the afſembly a, ſaying, 
* Let me not hear again the voice of the LORD my God 
neither Jet me ſee this great fire any more,that Idie nor. 


a To wit, -of that great and general congregation of all the 
people together. 


/poken that which they have ſpoken. 

© 18 * I will raiſe them up a prophet from among their 
brethren, like unto' thee, and * will put my words in 
ſpeak unto them all that I 


| [hall commang him «, 


ah 


17 And the LORD faid unto me, * They haye well '7 


5s Wil 


* Exod: 


20: 19- 
Heb.1 


19 SF: 
« Chap. : 


gs. W-<2 
Job3-43 
Q+3..22:. 
& 7: 37: 
* Ta. 51:16. 


ap. XIX: Hh 
| > W:11 inftra& him what to ſay, reveal my ſelf and my Wullto 
Re He will faichfully execute the office and truſt I commut to 

him. ; 

; 19 And it ſhall come to pals, that whoſoever will not 
hearken unto my words which be ſhall ſpeak in my 
Name, I will require it of him g. | | 

d (5. e.) I will puniſh him ſeverely for it, as this phraſe is taken, 
Gen. 9. 5. and 42. 22. The fad ef:& of this threatning the Jews 
have felt for above 1600 years together. 
hap. 20 Burt * the prophet which ſhall preſume to ſpeak a 


.5- word in my Name, which I have not commanded to 
1:14:14 ſpeak,or that ſhall ſpeak in the name of-other gods,even 
2-3. That prophet ſhall die. 

#3 _ 2r Andif thouſay in thine heart, How ſhall we know 


DEUTERONOM YT. 


the word which the LORD hath not ſpoken ? 
Jer: 22 * When a prophet ſpeaketh in the Name of the 
:9 LORD, if the thing e follow not, nor come to paſs, 
| that is the thing which the LORD hath not ſpoken f, 
but the prophet hath ſpoken 1t preſumptuouſly g : thou 
ſhale not be afraid of him 6 : | 

& Which he gives as a fign of the truth of his prophecy ; He 
means the predi&ion of ſome ſtrange and wonderful event, as ap- 
pears by comparing this with Dent. 13: 1, 2. f The falſhood of hs 
prediQtion ſhews him to be a falſe prophet, though the truth and 
accompliſhment of his prediftion had nor proved him to be a true 
Prophet, as is evident Fon Deut. 13: 2, 3- 5 Impudently aſcribing 
his own vain and lying fancies to the God of truth. + (z. e.) Of 
his prediftions or threatnings, ſo as to be ſcared from doing thy 
duty in'bringing him to deſerved puniſhment. 

CHAP. XIX. 

cities of refuge, for him that killeth his neighbour igno- 
but he that hateth and killeth his neighbour, tho" fled 
I I-=-I3. Ne removing of old Land- 
15. The puniſhment of falſe-wit- 


The rehearſal of the 
rantly, 1-10. 
into one of theſe cities, muſt die, 
| marks, 14. The number of witneſſes, 

Chap. oo 


I06---21. 
WH the LORD thy God * hath cut off the na- 
"tg tions, whoſe land the LORD thy God giveth 
Heb: thee, and thou # ſucceedeſt them, and dwellelſt in cheir 
anheriteſt. cities, and in their houſes : 


-y Fel - 2 * Thou ſhalt ſeparate three cities for thee in the 
x00: mid of thy land , which the LORD thy God giveth 


21: 13. 

am- 35. thee to poſſeſs ir. ; 
To: II: a To wit, beyond Jordan, as there were three already appointed 
Toſh:20:2. on this fide Jordan, Numb. 35. 14. He ſaith, in the midſt of the land, 
either for, in the land, as in the midſt of the city, Jer. 52: 25: is the 
ſane with that, in the city, 2 Kings 25: 19. or to deſign the places, 
that they ſhould be ſituated in the midſt of the ſeveral parrs of their 
land, to which they might conveniently and ſpeedily flee from all 
the parts of the land. n 


coaſts of thy land ( which the LORD thy God giveth 
thee to inherit ) into three parts c, that every ſlayer 
may flee thicher. 

b Diſtinguiſh it by evident marks,and make it plain and conve- 
nient,: to prevent miſtakes and delays. c Not into more, becauſe 
it was fit that theſe places ſhould, as far as it was poſſhvle, be at 
ſome conſiderable diſtance from the friends of the lain perſon, leſt 
the ge of the manſlayer might have provocked their paſſion and 
occationed his ruine. 

4 And this 5s the caſe of the ſlayer which hall flee 
thither, that he may live, whoſo killecth his neighbour 
ignorantly, whom he hated not Þ 1n time paſt, * 
fromjeſter. 5 As when a man goeth into the wood with his neigh- 
day the bour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a ſtroke with 
#hird 8. the ax to cut down the tree : and the + head ſlippeth 

"* from che helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour that 
he die, he (ball flee unto one of thoſe cities, and live : 

. 6'Left the avenger of blood purſue the ſlayer 9, while 
his heart” is hot, and overtake him, becauſe the way is 
Ing, and j ſlay him e ; whereas he was not worthy of 
death, inaſmuch as he hated him not Þ in time paſt. 

4 This verſe is to be joyned with wer. 3: as is evident, the 4th 
and 5th verſes, coming in 2s a parentheſis, which is uſual, in Scrip- 
ture and other authors. e Which is ſuppoſed, but not allowed, as 
appears from the following words. But the avenger of blood is not 
to be puniſhed with death for killing the manſlayer in caſe he found 
him without the borders of the city of refuge after be had been 
received there, Numb. 35: 26, 27.-becauſe then he was guilty of a 
new crime, to wit, a contempt of Gods ordinance, and a groſs 
negle&-of the duty of ſelf preſervation, and therefore deſerved 
death from God, who might permit it to be inflicted by the aven- 
ger df blood. | | 


7 Wherefore Icomtnand thee, ſaying, Thou ſbalt ſe- 
perate three cities for thee. 

8 Andif the LORD thy God * enlarge thy coaſt f (as 
he hath ſworn unto thy fathers ) and give thee all the 
land which he promiſed co give unto thy fathers : 

F As far as Ewphrates, See Gen: 15: 18. Exod. 23. 31. Dew. 1: 7, 
9 ( If theu ſhalt keep all theſe commandments to do 
them, which I command thee this 'day, to love the 
*Joſ: LORD thy God, and to walk ever in his ways ) * then 
2:7. (ſhalt thou add three cities moe for thee, belides theſe 
three : | bf To 
* To That innocent blood. be not ſhed in thy land 
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheri- 
' tance, and /e blood bs upba thee. li E 


+ Heb: 


zron. 
+ Heb! 
woed. 
S ; _ 
t Heb: 
mite him 
#n ſoul. 
_— 
Je- 
fterday 
third day. 


* Chap: 


T2. 20. 


hou ſhalt prepare thee a way b, and devide the 


—_— 


| leſt he die in the battel, and another man dedicate it e. 


Chap. XX, 


1x But if any man hate his neighbour,and lie in wait 

for him, and riſe up againft him, and ſmite him | mor- + ev, 
cally, that he die, and flieth into one of theſe cities #2 Jo. 
12 Then the elders of his city g ſhall ſend, and fetch 

him thence h, and deliver him into the hand of the a- 
venger of blood, that he may die. 

g Either of the ſlain perſon, who were moſt likely to proſecute 

the murderer : or, of the murderer,becauſe God would oblige even 

his own fellow citizens to proſecute him to death, that it might 
appear how hateful murder and the murderer is to God and ought 

to be to all men. þ Demand him of the Elders of the city of re- 

fuge, who upon the hearing of the cauſe and the evidence of the 
murder were oblidged to deliver the offender to juſtice. 


13 Thine eye thall-not pity him, bur thou ſhalt put 
away the guilt of innocent blood from Iſrael, that it may 
g0 well with thee. 

14 * Thou ſhalt not remove thy neighbours Þ /and- * Chap: 
mark 5, which they of old times have ſet in thine inhe- 77/77: 
ritance, which thou ſhalt inherit, in the land that the ; 
LORD thy God giveth thee to poſſeſs it. 

: By which the ſeveral portions of lands diſtributed to ſeveral 
families were diſtinguiſhed one from another. See Job 24 2. Prov; 
22: 28. Hoſ. 5.10. | ; 

15 * One witneſs ſhall not riſe up & againſt a man for Num 
any iniquity, or for any fin, in any fin that he fineth : 01,4. 7., 
at the mouth of two witnefles, or at the mouth of three 6. 
wicneſles ſhall the matter be eſtabliſhed. Mat: .18 

| k Or, not ftand, or, not be eftabliſhed, accepted, owned as ſuffi- 16. . 
cient : it is the ſame word which in the end of the verie is rend- Job8.17: 
red, be eſtabliſhed. 2 Cor: 

16 If a falſe witneſs / riſe up againſt any man to te- [#," | 
ſtihe againſt him || :hat which 3s wrong : py 

{ A ſingle witneſs, though he ſpeak truth, is not to be accepted + Or fat. 
for the condemnation of another man, but if he be convitted of j;,- awa). 
falſe witneſs, this is ſufficient for his own condemnation. a 

17 Then both the men between whom the contro- 
verfie is,ſhall ſtand before the LORD, before the prieſts, 
and the judges 2, which ſhall be in thoſe days: 

9 See on Dent. 17: 9, 12. and obſerve that the controverſies both 
here and there referred to,and to be determined by the Prieſts and 
Judges, are only between man and man, and not dotrines of faith 
and manners, as the Papiſts for their own advantage pretend. 


18 And the Judges ſhall make diligenc inquitition : 
and behold, if the witneſs be a falſe witneſs, and hath 
teſtified falſly againſt his brother : 

i9 * Then ſball ye do unto him, as he had thought 
to have done unto his brother : * ſo ſhalt thou pur the 
evil away from among you. ; 

20 And thoſe which remain » ſhall hear and fear, and 
ſhall henceforth commit no more any ſuch evil among 

ou. 
4 n (7. e.) The reft of the people. See Deut: 13: 11. and 17. 13. 

21 And thine eye ſhall not pity, but * life ſhall go for 
life, eye for eye os, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot. 2-23: 
for foot. | | 

o What puniſhment he intended or the law alloted to the ac- \ 


curſed, if he had been convitted, the ſame ſhall the falſe accuſer 
bear. Of this law ſee on Exod: 21: 24. Lev. 24: 20. 


CHAP, XX. 


The prieſts exhortation to encourage the people to fight their enemies, 1-==q.; 
The officers Proclamation, who are to be diſmiſſed frow the war, 5----g. 
A proclamation of peace to be made to beſieged cities, 10. and to deal 


Rf o . 
with 'em as they aicept or refuſe it, 1 1-==—=18. What trees ware to be 
cut down for the ſiege, and what nt, 19, 20. 


Wien thou goeſt out to battle @ againſt thine ene- 
mics, and ſceſt * horſes and chariots,and a people * pſutm: 
more than thou, be not afraid of them : for the LORD 25. 7. 
thy God 3s with thee, which brought thee up out of 15-31 
the land of Egypt. 

a Upon a juſt and neceſſary cauſe,as upon great provocation, or 
for thy own defence. | 

2 And it ſhall be when ye are come nigh unto the 
battel, that the prieſt & (hall approach, and ſpeak unto 
che people c, 

b An eminent Prieft appointed for this work, and to blow with 
the holy trumpets, Numb. 10; 9: and 31: 6. c Either ſucceſſively to 
one regiment of the army after another, or to ſome by himſelf, to 
others by his brethren or deputies, which accompanied him for that 


ound, 


end. 
3 And ſhall fay unto them, Hear, O Iſrael, ye ap- 
proach this day unto battel againſt your enemies: ſet not 
your heart Þ faint 4, fear not, and do not tremble, = 
neither be ye terrified becauſe of them. 7 = ; 
4 Heb. be ſoft or tender. Softneſs or tenderneſs of heart towards t Heb. 


God is commended, 2 Kings 22. rg. but towards enemies it is con- 11ake haſt 
_ = make hoſt 
demned, here and ver. 8. Lev. 26. 36, 2 Chron: x3: 5. Iſa: 7: 4. _— v0, 


4 Forthe LORD your Gods he that goeth with you, 
to fight for you againſt your enemies, to ſave you. * 

5 And the officers ſhall ſpeak unto the people, ſaying, 
What man 3s there that hath built-a new houſe, and-hath 
not dedicated it e? let him go and return to his houfe f, 


"Ch 


+ Hel 
made 1 
PITS. 
&eLe 
19-235 


* Chap 
2 5. 


*Judg 
7. 3- 
+ Heb. 


melt. 


t Heb. 
tobe in 7 
huad of 7 
people, 


v, Sam 
to. 19, 


fOr, x. 
O war, t 
Free of th 


field is t, 


be 7 b 
In he 14 
i Heb. 


' + Which was done by feaſting and thankſgiving rs6*Godl; Sec 
the title of P/al. 3. and Nehem. 12: 27, Heb, hath initinted it, 7. e. 
entered 


Fo go fron 
before rh 


' Chip. XX, 
entred upon it, taken poſſcſſion of it, dwelt in it. f Leſt his heart 
be ſet upon it, and thereby he be negligent or timerous 1n the batte] 
to the ſcandal and prejudice of others. g And ſo he ſhould loſe and 
anorher get the fruit of bis labours, which niight ſeem un juſt or hard. 
And Gad provides even for mens infirmuttes: Biit this and the fol- 
lowing exceptions are to be underſtood only of a War allowed by 
God, not in a War commanded by God, not in the approaching 
War with the Canaanites, from which even the Bridegrooqs was not 
exempted, as the Jewiſh writers note. _ 

6 And what man #s hethat hath planted a. vineyard 


b, and hath not yet | eaten of it z ? let him l/s go and 


Heb. - £20 
or i* return unto his houſe, leſt he die in the batcel, and 
©". another man eat of it. 
Gee”. Þ This and the former diſpenſation were generally convenient, 


19 23224" bu: -nore feceſſary in the beginning of their ſertlement in Canaan, 
far the encouragement of thoſe who ſhould build Houſes or plant 
Vineyards, which was chargeable to them, and beneficial to the 
common=wealth. #i Heb. mad: it common, to wit, for the uſe of him- 
ſeiF and family and friends, which it was not till the fifch year, 
Lev. 19. 23, &c. Jer. 31. 5. 

* And what man #s there that hath betrothed & a 
wife, and hath not taken her ? let him go and return 
unto his houſe, leſt he die in the batte], and another 
man take her. . 

k Which was done by a ſolemn and mutual promiſe; but not by 
an aftual contratt. See Gen. 19. 14. Deut. 22 23. 

Ss Ard the officers (ball ſpeak turther untothe people : 
*Judg. andthey (ball ſay, * What man is zhere hat 3s fearful and 
faint-hearced 2 lechim go and return unto his houſe, leſt 
his brethrens heart Þ faint as wellas his heart. 

9 Andit ſhall be when the officers have made an end 
of ſpeaking unto the people, that they ſhall make cap- 
+ Heb. tains of the armies F to lead the people L. 
bein the 1 Or rather, as the Hebrew hath it, they ſhall ſet or place the captains 
head of the of the armies in the head or font of the people under their charge, that 


people, they may condutt and manage them, and by their example —_— 
their ſouldiers. Bur it is not likely they had their captains ro make 


or chuſe when they were juſt going to battel. 

10 When thou comeſt nigh unto a city tofight againſt 
it, then * proclaim peace unto it m. 

1m This ſeems to be underſtood not of the cities of the Canaanites, 
as ismanifeſt from ver. 16.17,18. who were under an abſolute ſentence 
of utter deſtruQion, Exod. 23. 32, 33. Deut. 7. 1, 2. whence they are 
blamed that made any league or peace with them.. 7udg.'2. 2. butof 
the cities either of other nations who injured or diſturbed them, or 
commenced War againſt them, or aided their enemies, or oppreſſed 
their friends, and allies ; or of the Hebrews themſelves, if they were 
guilty or abettors of Idolatry or Apoſtacy from God, or of ſedition 
or rebellion againſt authority, or ofgiving proteftionand defence to 
Capital offenders. See Gen. 14. Judg. 20. 2 Sams 20. &C. 

11 And it (ball be, if it make thee anſwer of peace, 
and open unto thee, then it ſhall be, rhat all the people 
that is found therein, ſhall be tributaries unto thee, and 
they ſhall ſerve thee ». 

n By their purſes, and 

T Kings 9. 15. 2Chron.$.7, 

12 And ii it will make no peace with thee, but will 
make war againſt thee, then thou (balt beliege it. 

13 And »hen the LORD thy God hath delivered it 
into thine hand, thou ſhalt ſmite every male thereof 
with the edge of the ſword o. 

o Ajuſt puniſhment of their obſtinate refuſal of peace offered. 
"Joſh. 8, T4 But the women, and the little ones p, and * the 
2. cattel, and all that is in the city, ever all the ſpoil thereof, 
We ſbalt thou + take unto thy ſelf, and thou (balt eat the 

"  ſþoilof thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath 

given thee. 
Excuſedi by their Sex or Age, as not involved in the guilt, nor 
being likely to revenge their quarrel. 

15 Thus ſhalt thou do unto all the cities which are 
very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of 
theſe nations. | 

*Num. 16 But * of the cities of theſe pesple which the 
Fu. ? LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou 
tz. 7: ſhalt avealive nothing that breatheth q: 

x q Heb. 70 ſoul, i. e. no man, as that word is oft uſed. Compare 

Joſ. 10. 40. with 11. 14. For the beaſts, ſome few<xcepred as being 
under a ſpecial curſe, were given them for a pray. 


I7 But thou ſbalc utterly deſtroy them, namely, the 
Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the 
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebuſites, as rhe LORD 
thy God hath commanded thee. 

.18 Thatthey teach you not to do after alltheir abo- 
minations which they have done unto their gods : ſo 
ſhould ye fin againſt the LORD your God. 

I9 When thou ſhalt beſiege a city a long time in 
making war againſt it, to take it, thou thalt not deſtroy 
the trees thereof r, by forcing an ax againſt them, for 
thou mayeſt eat of them, and thou {hair not cut them 
down ( || for the tree of the field is manis Iife s, J + to 
my _ - imploy _ = the ſiege. | 
. "mptoyes” r To wit, the fruit-trees, as appe: | wing words. 
y tree. Which is to bs underſtood of a EY phat mo 


7 Heb, the cutting down of ſome few of them, as the conveniency of the 
go from ſiege might require. s(7.e. ) The ſuſtenance or ſupport of his life, 


* Chap: 
2% 5- 


v, Sam. 
to. 19, 


by their labours too, as appears from 


F Or 1 For, 
0 wan, the 
Free of the 


= 
, 


Wfore thee. as life is taken Devt, 24. 6. But this place may be otherwiſe tranſlated, | 


DEUTERONOM YN 


MM 


that is beheaded in the valley, 


as it isin the Margent of our Enpliſh Bibles : For, © 11an ( the Hebrew 
letter Hz being here the note of a vocative eaſe, asit is Pſal.g. 7.) 
the tree ( or, trees, the ſingular numbet for the plural, as is common } 
of the field is ( or ought, as the Hebrew Lomed is uſed Eſth. 9. 1. Pſal. 
62. 10. ) to be employed in the ſiege, or, as it is in the Hebrew, #0 go before 
thy face, 1. e. tomake fences for thy ſecurity, in the ſiege. The trees of 
the field, I here underſtand nor 1ts general ſignification of all trees 
including fruit-bearing-trees, as that phraſe is commonly uſed, bur 
in its more ſpecial and diſtin ſignification, for urfcuirful trees, as 
it is taken 1/a. 55. 12. orfuch as grow only in open fields, ſuch as 
are elſewhere called the trees of the wood, 1 Chron. 16. 33; Iſa. 7. 2: or 
the trees of the foreſt, Cant: 2: 3: Iſa: 10: 19; which are oppoſed to the 
trees of the gardens, Gen: 3: 2, 8: Eccl: 2: 5: Exek: 31: y: as the flower 
of the field, Pal: 103: 15: Iſa: 49: 6: and the lilies of the field, Mat: 6: 28; 
are oppoſed to thoſe rhat grow in Gardens, and are preſerved and 
cultivated by the gardners art and care; And ſo it isa yery proper 
argument to diſſviade from the deſtroying of fruit-rrees, becauſe 
the wild and unfruitful trees were ſufficient for the uie of the ſiege, 
And this ſence fitly agrees with the following words, where the con. 
ceſſion or grant which here is delivered in more ambiguous rerms 
of the trees of the field is repeated and explained eoncerning the trees 
which thou knoweſt that they be not trees for meat, 

20 Only the trees which thou knoweft that they be 


not trees for meat, thou ſhalt deſtroy, and cut them 
down, and thou (halt build bulwarks, againſt che cicy 


that maketh war with thee; until F it be ſubdued. + Heb; 
; it coms 
CHAP XX down. 


How to expiate an uncertain murder, 1===g, The uſage of a Captive 
taken to Wife, 10 mn=un==1y,, The firſt-born, though the ſon of the hated. 
i not to be diſinherited, 15 —17- The puniſhment of ſtubborn ſew. 
viz, Death, 18 —--===21, The curſed death of them that art hanged, 


22, 23: 
[* one be found ſlain in the land which the LORD 
thy God giveth thee to poſſeſs ir, lying in the field 
a, and it be not known who hathſlain him : | 
.» Or, in the city; os any place: only the feld is named, as the 
place where ſuch murders are moſt commonly committed, and moſt 
eaſily concealed. | 


, 2 Then thy elders and thy iudges þ (hall come forth, 
and they ſhall meaſure c unto the cities which are round 
about him that is ſlain. RS . | | 

b Thoſe of thy Elders who are Judges : for the latter word ex< 
plains and reſtrains the former, the Judges or Rulers of all the 
neighbouring cities,who were all concerned in this enquiry. c Unleſs 
it be evident and confeſſed which city is neareſt, for then meaſuring 
was ſuperfluous. | EE | : 

3 And it ſhall be zbat the city which is next unto the 
f1:in man, even the elders of that city ſhall take an heifer 
which hath not been wrought with, a»d which hath nov 


drawn in the yoke 7, Rl EY | 

a A fit vicegereat and repreſentative of the murderer, in whoſe 
ſtead it was killed, who by this a& hath ſhewn himſelf to be a ſont 
of Belial, who would not bear the yoke of Gods Law. A type alſo 
of Chriſt, who was obliged to no work, and under no yoke, but 
what he had voluntarily taken upon himſelf: 

4 And the elders of that city ſhall bring down the 
heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor 
ſown e, and ſhall ſtrike off the heifers neck f there in 
the valley. LIES IR 

e Partly to repreſent the hard and unprofitable anduntutoured” 
heart of the murderer ; and partly that ſuch a defarr and horrid 
place might beget an horrour of murder and of the murderer. f To 
ſhew whar they would and ſhould have done to the marderer if 
they had found him. | | | : 

5 And the priefts the ſons of Levi ſhall come near g 
(for *themi the LORD thy God hath choſen to miniſter |, 
unto him,and to bleſs in the Name of the LORD ) and 
* by their | word (ball every controverſte b, and every + chap, 


ſtroke be cried. BE». 11.8, ge 

g Both to dire& them in all the circumſtances of Aftion and to + Heb. 
ſee that the law was obſerved, and to bleſs them in Gods Name, by mouth. 
praying for them, and abſolving or pronouncing them guiltleſs in 
this matter. h Not abſolutely all manner of controverſies that could 
poſſibly ariſe, as if their word were to determine whether there were 
a God or providence or no, whether God ſhonld be worſhipped, and 
his commands obſerved or no, whether Moſes was a true Prophetor an 
impoſtour, whether Apoſtate and Idolatrous J7ael:tes ſhould be puni-= 
ſhed or no; which is apparently abſurd and ridiculous ; bur every 
ſuch controverſie as might ariſe about the matter here ſpoken of ; 
nothing being, more uſual rhan to underſtand univerſal expreſſions in 
a linited ſenſe; and indeed this is limited and explained by the fol- 
lowing words, and every ſtroke, the particle and being put expoſitively ; 
of which inſtances have been formerly given, 7.e. every controverſie 
which ſhal arite abour any ſtroke, whether ſuch a mortal ſtroke as is 
here ſpoken of; a murder,which may well be called a ffroke,as toſmite 
is oft uſed for to kZ, as Gen. 4. 15. Levit. 24. 17. &e. or any other 
ſtroke or weund given by one man to anorher. 

6 And all the elders of that city that are next unto' 
the ſlain man, * ſhall waſb their hands 3 over the heifer 


4 . 
- 


Chap: 
Th 


*See Plal; 

| [-£ - 19. 12, 
* 5In teſtimony of their innocency. S:e on Mat. 27. 24. . + 
7: And they ſhall anſwer & andſay, Our hands have 
not ſhed this blood }, neither have our eyes ſeen #t pr,... 
& To wit, to tae Priefts who ſhall examine them and determine 
this controverſie, «This about which the preſent enquiry is fade ? 
or ths which is here preſent: for it is thought the Corps_of che 
| (lim man was brought into the ſame place where the heifer was 
flein. m Nor have we ſeen or underſtood how or by whomthis was 


done. a 
p 2 Hz ' "8 B&# 


Chap. 040 


4 
1 
' 
[1 
: 


©. Chron. 


Cha P. XXL. 


| deſire this, or not delight in her, 


of her renouncing her heatheniſh 


'8 Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Iſrael 
whom thou haſt redeemed, and *lay not ianocent blood 
+ unto thy people of Ifraels charge: and the blood ſhall 


be forgiven them ». : | 
2 ( 4 ) Not imputed to them nor puniſhed in them : for God is 


ſometimesſaid to forgive, when he doth not puniſh, as Pſal. 18. 38. 
Beſides though there was no mortal guilt in this people, yet there 


way A ceremonia 
2 9 $ ſhalt chou put away the guilr of innocent blood 
from among you, when thou ſhalt do ther which is right 


in the ſight of the LORD. ; ; 
io When thou goeſt forth to war againſt thine ene- 


mies 0, and the LORD thy God hath delivered them 


into thine hand, and thou haſt taken them captive ; 
o Of other nations, but not of the Canaanites, for they might not 
ſpare their Women, and much leſs marry them, Exod. 34. 16. Deut. 


£ os And ſeeſt among the captives a beautifal woman, 
and haft a deſire unto her p, that thou wouldeſt have her 


to thy wife : 205 
p o: haſt cleaved to her, to wit, in love : or haſt taken aelight in 


her, Which may be a modeſt expreſſi-n for hying with her, and ſeems 
probable, becauſe it is ſaid werſe 14. that he had humbled her , to wir, 
by military inſolence when be took her captive, not after he had 
married her, for then he would have expreſſed it thus, becauſe thou 
haſt married her, which had been more emphatical than to ſay, becauſe 
thou baſt humbled her, And here ſeem to be two caſes ſuppoſed, and 
dice&ion given what to do in both of them, x. that he did deſire to 
marry her, of which he ſpeaks werſe 11, 12,13. 2. thathe did not 
of which he ſpeaks, wer. 14. 
12 Then thou ſhalt bring her home to thine houſe, 


and ſhe ſhall have her head, and || | pare her 
nails q. : 

q Either 2. to take off his affe&ions from her by rendring her 
uncomely and deformed, but then the laſt words muſt not be rendred 
ſhall pare her nails, but ſhall nowriſb them or ſuffer them fo grow, as the 
Chaldee, Arabick and divers of the learned Fews and other Interpreters 
render it. Or 2. to expreſs her ſorrow for the loſs of her father, 
and mother, as it follows ver. 13. it being th: antient cuſtom of 
mourners in moſt nations to ſhave themſelves, and in ſome to pare 


their nails, in others to ſuffer them to grow. Ocrrather 3. in token 
| Idolatry and ſuperſtition, and of her 


bracing the true religion. Which 


becoming a new woman, and em 
5 | « tion to his will would make her 


her captive condition and ſubje 
inclinable to do in profeſſion. : EG 

- 13 And ſbe ſhall pur the raiment of her me 
r from off her, and ſhall remain in thine houte, and 
bewail her father and mother 5 a full month : and after 
chat thou ſhaltgo in unto her, and'be her husband, and 


ſhe ſhall be chy wife.z.... LE 
r(7.e. ) Either 1. thoſe goodly raiments 1n which ſhe was when 
ſhe was taken captive, in ſtead of which ſhe now muſt pur on a ſer- 
vile habit, as this is generally underſtood, or rather 2. thoſe ſervile 
and ſordid raiments which were put upon her when {te was taken 
captive, as the manner was to do with captives, as the phraſe it ſe}f 
ſeems to intimate, as priſon-garments, Jer. 52. 33. are ſuch garments 
as*priſoners uſe to wear ; and garments of praiſe are praiſe-worthy or 
glorious garments, and it ſeem harſh to call thoſe garments of captivity, 
which are made for and generally worn by free perſons only, and 
which are uſually taken away from ons when they come into 
captivity ; Add, that this doth not ſeem to be any part or roken of 
her farrow, but rather a mending of her condition, andexchanging 
her ſerviie habit for a better and more decent one, which mighr be 
though this werea mourning habit. 5 Either their death, or, which 
was in effe& the ſame, her final ſeparation from them. Wirthall 
this ſignified her alienation from them or from their ſuperſtitious 
and Idolatrous courſes, and her tranſlation of her Jove from all other 
perſons to ker husband and to the true religion. | Compare P/al. 45. 
11, * Suppoſing what might very rationally be ſuppoſed of one 11 
her circumſtances, and what ſhe ſignified by the foregoing rites, that 
ſhe ſkould ſubmit to her Husbands Religion, in which caſe the 
' marriage might be tolerable.” Or this wasa permiſſion and indulgence 
iven to them for the hardneſs of their hearts, as in the caſe of 

ivorce, Deut 24. 1. Mat. 19.8. 3 

14 And it (hall (94 if thou have no delight in her «, 
then thou ſhalt let her go whicher ſhe will ; butthou ſbalt 


not ſell her at all for money, thou ſhalt not make mer- 
chandiſe of her x; becauſe thou haſt humbled her z. 

» Either 1. afcer thou haſt married h*r, and ſo this is a permiſſion 
of a Divorce, which being indulged towards an J-aelitifh Woman, 
was.not likely to be denied towards a ſtranger. Or rather 2. before 
thy marriage 3. for it is not probable, that God having given him 
comperent time for the trial of his affeCtions to her before he was 
permitted tq marry her, would ſuffer him upon ſo flight an occaſion 
within a day or two : 
nor is there a word ſpoken here of any Divorce. x (3. e. ) Make 
gain of her, either by uſing her ro thy own ſervile works, or by 
proftituting her tothe Juſts or to the ſervice of others. y (7. e. ) Lain 
with her as this phraſe is.oft uſed, as Gen: 34: 23 Deut: 22: 24g 29: 
Fudge* 19: 24: Exch: 22: 10, IT. , 


another hated ,' and they have born him children ,berh 
the beloved, and the hated ; and if the firſt-born ſon be 
.hers that was hated + 2h, 

"/iFither t. both rogether : which pra&ice, though tolerated, is 
nothereby madelawful, but only proviſion is made for the children 
in chatcaſe. Or 2.-one after another. s Comparatively, 7.e. leſs 
loyed, is Gen:,29: 31: Matz:6: 24: Luke 14: 26. 


"x6 "Then it 


DEDTERONOM YT 


} uncleanneſs in the land, which was to be expiated' 


for an inheritance. 


after. ſo ſolemn a contra@, to ſend her away : 


15 If a man have two wives z,.0ne beloved, and| 


ſhati'be,” when he ® maketh his ſons to [| 
11.19422. nhexit that which he hath, rhar he may not 6 make the |, 


ſon of the beloved, firſt-bort, before the ſon «© of the 
hated, which 3s indeed the firſt-born. 


b Ttis not lawful, becauſe contrary to the rights and law of na= 
ture, c Or, before the face of the ſon, i. e. 1 his life time, as this 
phraſe is underſtood, Gen; 11: 28: and 16: 12:and 25: 18. And when 
this phraſe is rendred before another it ſignifies only in the preſence 
of another, but never notes the preference of one perſon to another 
which the Hebrews expreſs in another manner. And this may be 
added to intimate, that if the eldeſt ſon were dead and had Jefr a 
child, the father was free to give the right of his firſt-born unto his 
ſecond ſon rather than to the child of the eldeſt. Or this paraſe 
may bean aggravation of the fat, whereby his father did in a man=- 
ner ſpit in his face, and faſten a reproach upon him inhis very ſight 
and preſence. | 


17 But he (hall acknowledge &d the ſon of the hated 
for the firſt born, by giving him a double portion e of all 
7 that he hath: forhe is the * beginning of his ſtrength 7; 


the righr of the firſt-born 7s his. 

d { 7.e. ) Make it appear that he owns him. 
2 Kings 2:9: Zach: 13:8. and for the thing ſee Gen: 25: 31: 1 Chron: 
5: 1. f(7.e.) The firſt evidence of his manly ſtrength and ability, 
for procreation. | 

18 Ifa man have a ftuhborn and rebelliousſon, which 


will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his 
mother, and that when they have chaſtened him, will 
not hearken unto them : 

19 Then ſhall his father and his mother g lay hold of 
him, and bring him outunto theelders of his city 5, and 


unto the gate of his place. 

£ The conſent of both is required to prevent the abuſe of this 
Law to cruelty. And it cannot reaſonably be ſuppoſed that both 
would agree without manifeſt neceſſity and the ſons abominable and 
:ncorrigible wickedneſs, in which caſe ir ſeems a fir and righteous 
Law, becauſe the crime of Rebellion againſt his own Parents was 
fo high in it ſelf, and did fo fully fignifie what a pernicious 
and ton of Belial he would bein the Common-wealth 
had diflolved all his Natural Obligations. Yer the Jews ſay this 
Law was never put in praCttice, and therefore it m7ght be made for 
terrour and prevention, and to render the authority of Parents more 
ſacred and powerful. þ Which was a ſufficient caution to preſerve 
Chi:idren from the malice of any hard-hearted Parents, becauſe theſe 
Elders were firſt to examine the cauſe with all exa&neſs, and then 
to pronounce the ſentence. 

20 And they ſball ſay unto the elders of his city, This 
our fon;s ſtubborn and rebellious z, he will not obey our 
voice : he js a glutton, and a drunkard &. 

i Adds incorrigibleneſs to all his wickedneſs. k Under which 
two off<nces others cf a like or worſe nature are comprehended by 


a Syneccoche. | 
21 And all the men of his city ſhall ſtone him 7 with 


ſtones that hedie : ſo ſhaltthou puc evil away from among 


you, and all Iſrael ſhall hear, and fear. 

] Which was the puniſhment appointed for blaſphemers and 
Idolaters ; which if it ſeem ſevere, ir 1s to be conſidered that Parents 
are in Gods ſtead, and entruſted in good meaſure with his authoriry 
over their Children, and that Families are the matter and foundation 
of the Church and Common-wealth, and they who are naughty 
Members and Rebellious childrenin them, do commonly prove the 
bane and plague of theſe ; and therefore no wonder if they arenipped 
12 the bud. 

22 And if a man have commtitted a fin worthy of 
death, and he be put to death, and thou hang him on 
da tree 77 3 

» Which was done afrer the MalefaQtor was put to death ſome 
other way, this publick ſhame being added ro his former puniſhment 
See Foſ: 7: 25: and 8: 29: and 10: 26; 2 Sam: 4: 12. 

23 His body ſhall not remain all night upon the tree, 
but thou ſhalt in any wiſe bury him that day (for* he 


that is hanged, is F accurſed of God z ) that thy land " Gab x | 


T Heh. 


that T 


Chap. XX, } 


e For the phraſe ſee 'magg Þuth 
2:1 


* Gen: 


99 3 


be not defiled o, which the LORD thy God giveth thee + Heb. 


the curſe 


n (i.e.) He is ina ſingular manner curſed and puniſhed by Gods of God. 


appointment witha moſt ſhameful kind of puniſhment, as this was 
held among the Jews and all Nations ; and therefore this puniſhment 
may ſuffice for him, and there ſhall not be added to it that of lying 
unburied, which was another great calamity, Fer: 16: 4. And this 
curſe is here appropriated to thoſe that are hanged, partly becauſe 
this puniſhment was inflifted only upon the moſt notorious an 
publick Offenders, and ſuch as brought the curfe of God upon the 
community, as Numb: 25: 4: 2 Sam: 21: 6, and principally to fore- 
ſignifie that Chriſt ſhould undergo this execrable puniſhment, and 
be made a curſe for us, Gal: 3: 13: which though it was yet to come 
in reſpe& to men, yer was preſent unto God, and in his eye at this 

time. And fo this is delivered with reſpe& unto Chriſt, as many 

other paſſages of Scripture manifeſtly are. o To wit, morally, either 

by inhumanity towards the dead : or rather by ſuffering the monu- 

ment or memorial of the mans great wickedneſs, and of Gods curſe, 

to remain publick and viſible a longer time than God would 
have it, whereas it ſhould be pur our of ſight, and buried in 


oblivion, 


CHA P. XXII. 


Laws about ſtray Cattel, x, 2. About thy neighbours Ox fallen in the way, - 


4. Woman's wearing of Apparel diſtini# from Man's, 5. Of Birds 
caught, 6, 7. Of Battlements for Houſes, 8. Of divers Seeds ſown, g. 
Of Plowing with an Ox and ſs, 10. Of Garments of divers colours,” 11: 
Of Fringes' upon the four quarters of a Garment, 12. The puniſhment of 
him that ſlandereth his Wife. 13, 19. Her puniſhment if the ſcandal be - 
true, 20, 21. The puniſhment of Adultery, 22, Of Rape, 23, 24. Of 
Fornication, 25 ==27, Againſt Inceſt, 30. 
Thou 


LA 


*Levit. 


ulneſs 
#4 


2334 


| Hou * ſhalt not ſee thy brothers @ ox,or his ſheep 
| * Exod, T 


, 


go aſtray, and hide thy ſelf from them 6, thou 


ſhalt in any caſe bring them again unto thy brother. 

2 So called by communion not of Religion, but. of nature, as 
having one Father, even God, Mal. 2. 10. as appears, I. Becauſe the 
ſame Law is given about their Enemies OX, Oc. Exod. 23.4. 2. Be- 
cauſe elſe the obligation of this Law had been uncertain, ſeing 
men could not o:dinarly tell whether the ſtraying Ox or Sheep be- 
longed to a Jew or to a ſtranger. 3. Becauſe this was a dury of 
common juſtice and charity, which the Law of Nature taught e- 
ven Heatiens, and it is abſurd to think that the Law of God de- 
livered to the Jews ſhould have leſs charity in it than the law of 
nature given to the Gentiles. 5 (7. e. ) Difſemble or pretend rVat 
thou doit not ſee them ; or negle& or paſs them by as if rhou hadſt 
nor ſeen them. : 

2 And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee c, or if 
thou know him not d,then thou ſhalt bring ic unto thine 
own houſee, and it ſhall be with thee until thy brother 


ſeek after it, and thou ſhalt reſtore it to him again. 

c Which may make the duty more troubleſome or chargeable. 
d Which implies, that if they did know the owner, they thould 
reſtore it to him. e To be uſed like thine own Cattel. f The 
owner, as it may be preſumed, paying the charges. 

3 In iike manner {talt thou do with an Afs, and fo 


ſhalt thou do with his raiment,and with all loſt chings of 
thy brothers, which he hath loſt, and chou haſt found, 


ſhalt thou do likewiſe ; thou mayeſt not hide thy ſelf g. 
g (5. e. ) Diſſemble that thou haſt found it. Or, hide zt, 7. e. con- 

ceal the thing loſt. . 
4 Thou ſhalt not ſee thy brothers aſs, nor his ox fall 


down by the way, and hide thy ſelf from them : thou 
ſhalt ſurely help him h to life :hem up again. 
h (i. e. ) Thy Brother, the owner. Compare Exod. 23. 5. 

5 The woman ſhall not wear that which percaineth 
unto a man, neither ſhall a man put on a womans gar- 
ment # : for all that do ſo, are abomination unto the 
LORD thy God. 


7 To wir, ordinarily or unneceſlarily, for in ſome caſes this may 
be lawful, as to make an eſcape for ones life. Now this is forbid- 
den, partly for decency ſake, that men might not confound, nor 
ſcem to confound thole Sex:s which God hath diſtinguiſhed, that 
all appearance of evil might be avoided, ſuch change of garments 
carrying a manifeſt umbrage or ſign of ſoftneſs and effeminacy in 
the man, of arrogance and impudency in the woman, of lightneſs 
and petulancy in both ; and partly to cut of all ſuſpicions and oc- 
caſions of evil, which this praCtice opens a wide door unto. 

6 If a birds neſt chance to be before thee in the way, 
in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young 
ones, or eggs, and the dam fitting upon the young, or 
upon the eggs, thou ſhalt not take the dam with the 


young. 
7 But thou ſhalt in any wile let the dam gok,and take 
the young to thee, that it may be well with thee, and 


that thou mayeſt prolong 757 days. 

k Partly for the Birds ſake, which ſuffered enough by the loſs of 
its young ; for God would not have cruelty exerciſed towards the 
brute Creatures : and partly for mens ſake to reſtrain their greedi- 
neſs and covetouſneſs that they ſhould nor monopolize all ro them- 
ſelves, but might leave the hopes ofa future ſeed for others. 


8 When thou buildeſt a new houſe, then thou ſhalt 
make a battlement / for thy roof, that thou bring nor 


blood 1 upon thine houſ?, if any man fall from thence 
{ (i.e.) Afﬀecnce or breaſtwork, becauſe the roofs of their houſes 
were made flat or plain, that men might walk on them. See 7uag. 
16. 27. 1 Sam.9. 25. 2 Sam. 11. 2, Neh. 8: 16. Mas. 10. 27. m(i.e. ) 
The guilt of blood, by a mans fall from the top of thy houſe, 
through thy neglett of this neceſſary proviſion. þ : 
9 * Thou ſhalt nor ſow thy vineyard with divers 
feeds » : leſt the+ fruic of thy ſeed o which thou haſt ſown 


and the Truit of thy vineyard be defiled p. 
xn Either 1. With divers kinds of ſeed mixed and ſowed together 
between the rows of Vines inthy Vineyard : which was forbidden 
to be done in the Field, Levit. 19.19. and here, in the Vineyard. 
Or 2. With any kind of ſeed differing from that of the Vine,which 
would produce Herbs, or Corn, or Fruit-bearing Trees, 
whoſe fruit might be mingled with the fruit of the Vines Now 
this and the two following precepts, though in themſetves ſmall 
and trivial,are Shapes 5. to that time and ſtate of the Church, 
for documents or inſtruftions in greater matters, and particularly 
ro commend to them ſimplicity, and fincerity in all their carriages 
towards God and Men, and to forbid all mixture of their Inventi- 
ons with Gods Inſtitutions in Do&rine or Worſhip. o Heb. The ful- 
neſs of thy ſeed, i. e. that ſeed when it is ripe and full. See Exod; 22. 
29. Numb. 18. 27. p Either x. Naturally, corrupted or marred, 
whileſt one ſeed draws away the fat and nouriſhment of the Earth, 
from the other, and ſo both are ſtarved and ſpoiled. Or rather 2. 
Legally and Morrally, as being prohibited by Gods Law,and there- 
by made unclean ; as on the contrary, things are ſan#ified by Gods 
werd, allowing and improving them, 1 7im. 4. 5. Heb. be ſan#ifeed, 
or, be as # ſanfified thing, by an Elipſis of the particle, as, 7. e. un- 
lawful for the owners uſe, as things ſanCtified were. Or, ſan#ifying 
is put for polluting, by a figure called Euphemifſmus, which is fre- 
quent. in Scripture, as. when blefmg is put for curſmg, as Job 2.9. 
and in other Authors, as when they ule facred for exccrable. 


Xo Thou ſbalt not plow with an ox and an aſs toge- 
ther 9+ Es 

q Either r. Becauſe the one was a clean beaſt, the other unclean ; 
whereby God would teach men to avoid polluting themſelves by 
the touch of unclean perſons or things, 2 Cir. 6; 14. 


DBUTEROMNO MY 


_—_— 


Or 2. Be- 


Chap. 


cauſe of their unequal ftrength, whereby the weaker, the aſs would 


be opprefled and over-wrought. Or 3. Fos myſtical reaſons, of 


which ſee on v. 9. and Levzt: 19: Ig, 


x1 * Thou ſhalt not wear a garment of divers ſorts, * Lev. 


as woolen and linen together. ..-: 19.10 
12 Thou ſhalt make thee*fringes » upon the fourftquar- A wg 


taeir remembrance, as it 1s expreſſed. Numb: 15: 38. and partly as 
a publick profeſſion of their Nation and Religion, whereby they 
might be diſcerned and deſtinguiſhed from ſtrangers, that fo they 
might be more circumſpett. to behave themſelves as became the 
people of God, and that they thould not be aſhamed ro own their 
God and Religion before all the World. s Theſe words are either 
reſtrictive ro the upper Garment wherewith the reſt were covered ; 
or argumentative, why they thould ufe theſe things, becauſe here- 
with they might poſſibly taſten their Garments, and prevent the 
uncovering themſelves, as might eaſily happen, when they wore 
no Breeches, but only looſe Garments. ' | 

i2 If any man takea wife,and go in unto her ?, and 
hate her, 

t (7.e.) Hath had carnal knowledge of her. : 

14 And pive occaſions of ſpeech « againſt her, and 
bring up an evil name upon her,and fay,I took this wo- 
man, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid; 

u Heb. of words, 3. e. of diſcourſes or diffamations. 


15 Then ſhall the father of the dam/el, and her mo- 


ther, take and bring forth rhe tokens of the damfels vir- . 
ginity x, unto the elders of the city, in the gate. 


x (7.e. ) The linen cloth or ſheer, as is expreſſed v. 17. which 
in the firſt congreſs was infe&ted with blood, as is natural and 
uſual. But becauſe this is not now conſtant,the enemies of Scrip- 
ture take occaſion to quarrel with this Law, as unreaſonable and , 
unjuſt, and ſuch as might oppreis the innocent, and hence take 
occaſion to reject the Holy Scriptures, It were nuch more reafon- 
able for theſe men either to expound this place metaphorically of 
producing thoſe proofs & teſtimonies of her virginity which ſhould 
be as ſatisfaQtory as if that cloth were produced,as ſome of the Jews 
underſtand it,or modeſtly to ackno ledge their own Ignorance in 
this, as they are foiced ro do in many otaer things, and not im-= 
pudently ro conclude it is inſoluble, becauſe they cannot reſolve it. 
Burt there is no need of ſuch general anſwers, many things may be 
particularly faid for the vindication of this law. 1. That it was ne- 
ceſſary for that people, becauſe of their hard-heartedneſs towards 
their Wives,and their levity and deſire of change of Wives. 2. That 
either this tryal, or at leaſt the proof of her Virginity, . was to be 
taken preſently after the day of marriage, and that proof was to be 
admitted afterwards upon occaſion.. 3. That this Law was ſeldom 
or never put in execution, as the Jews note, and ſeems to be made 
for terrour and caution to Husbands and Wives,as many other Laws 
have been in like caſes. 4. That that God who gave this Law,did 
by his Providence govern all Aﬀairs, and rule the Tongues and 
Hearts of M-n, and therefore would doubtleſs take care ſo to order 
matters that the innocent ſhould not ſuffer by this means, which 
he could prevent many ways. 5. That there is a great difference iny 
times and climates. Who knows not that there are many things 
now by our Moderns thought uncertain or falſe, which by the 
Ancient Phyſicians were thought and affirmed to be true and cer=- 
tain in their times and Countreys, and that many ſigns of Diſeaſes 
and other things do generally hold true in thoſe more Southernly 
and warmer parts of the World, which are many times deceitfuf 
in our Northern and Colder Climates ? 6. That this very way of 
tryal of Virginity hath been uſed nor only by the Fews,bur alſo by 
the 4rabians and Egyptians, as is affirmed by divers Learned Writers, 
among whom yet 1t was more doubrful and hazardous than among 
the Jews, who might promiſe to themſelves thar God would guide 
the execution of his own Law to a juſt and good iſſue. 5. That 
this ſign if it were uncertain in perſons of riper years, yet it may 
be reaſonably thought certain and conſtant in Virgins of young 
and tender age,and that the Jews did ordinarily marry their Daugh- 
ters when they were about 12 or 14 years old, as is confeſſed, as 
making haſte to roll away that reproach which they thought to be 
in an unmarried ſtate. --4 

I6 And the damſels father ſhall ſay unto the elders, 
I gaye my daughter unco this man to wife, and he hat- 
eth hers - | | 
. 17 And lo, he hath given occaſions of ſpeech againf 
ber. ſaying I found not thy daughter a maid : and yet 
theſe are the tokens of my daughters virginity ; and they 
ſhall ſpread the cloth before the elders of the city. 

18 And the elders of that city ſhall take that man; 
and chaſtiſe him . - EE 

* Either r. By the following mul&. Or, 2. By ſevere reproofs 
which that word off ſignifies. Or, 3. By ſtripes, as is expreſſed, 


Deut.25.2,3. Which is not ſtrange,conſidering how precious a thing 
ones good Name is, of which he endeavoured to deprive his Wife. 


19 And they ſhall amerce him in an hundred ſhekels of 
filver, and give #bexz unto the father of the damfſel y be. 
cauſe he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of 
Ifrael : and ſhe (ball be his wife, he may not put her a- 
way all his days z. ene SES 
- y Becauſe this was a reproach to his family, and to himfelf, be= 
cauſe ſuch a miſcarriage of his daughter would have been aſcribed 
to his evil education. x Which Feras to have been his deſign in 
this falſe accuſation, and rherefore that liberry of a divorce whiclz 
15 permitted to others, Der. 24. 1. ſhall be denied ro him. 

20 But if this thing be true, and the rokens of virgini- 
ty be not found for the damfel : | | 

2r Then they (hal bring out the damſel to the door 
of her fathers houſe, and the men of her city ſhall _ 

2 Il 2 Ty 


——  X- 


X$11: 


j 
jt 


Þi 
Þ| 
i 

bh 


ters of thy veſture, wherewith thou covereſt thy ſelf s, + 5p 't 


r Or Laces, or Strings, partly to bring the commands of God to Wings, 


0 | 

'N 
Il | 

i 


JF 


| | 
i 
| | 


her with ſtones that ſhe die «,becauſe ſhe hath wrought 
folly in Iſrael, co play the whore in her fathers houle : 


ſo * ſhalt thou put evil away from among you. 

s Ns. Why ſhould ſhe die when her crime was only Fornication, 
which was not puniſhed in a woman with death, Exop. 22. 16; 17 * 
Anſw. Becauſe there was not only Fornication in this caſe, as Exoa. 
22. but this was accompanied with deep difſimulation and injury 
to her Husband in the falſe profeſſion of Virginiry,and it might be 

reſumed that ſhe committed this folly after ſhe was betrothed to 
him, and therefore ſo obſtinately denied it, as knowing the dan- 
ger of it in that caſe; Or God ordered it thus for the honour and 
cuſtody of the matrimonial bed from all defilement, that ſhe, who 
being defiled before ſhe was married or betrothed, and therefore not 
punithable by death, yet if ſhe ſhould preſume to carry her deiile- 
ment into the married eſtate with a pretence of Virginity, ſhe 
ſhould then be pur to death. ; : 
22 * If a man be found lying with a woman married 


b to an husband, then they ſhall both of chem die : both 
the man that lay with the woman, and the woman : ſo 


ſhalt thou put away evil from Iſrael. 
b Tf he be convicted of this faulr, though nor taken in the 


&. ] 
—S k If a damſel that 3s a virgin be betrothed unto an 


husband c,and a man find her in the city,& lie with her : 


Chap: 
13s 5o 


'Levit. 
©: I1IO©, 


DF VITERON 0 M T 


would bring into diſgrace thoſe heatheniſh praQtices of making 
Eunuchs and getcing Baſtards, which d-ubtlets he would eſpecial- 
Iy do among his own people. 6 Which phraſe cannot be under- 
ſtood, ſo that tiey might not come into the Church, or Holy 
Aſſemblies to worſhip God, to pray, or hear, &c. becauſe Proſe» 
Iytes of any Nation being admitted to common Church-priyied- 
ges, no leſs than the Jews, ( as is evident from Exod: 12. 48 Levir: 
22. 18: Namb: 9: 14. and 15. 15.) it were abſuid to think that any 
of the 1/raelites, for ſuch a natural or involuntary defe&, thould be 
ſhut our from all Gods ordinances ; nor ſo that they were to be 
put out of the muſter-10ll of Gods people,or to loje the Priviled ges 
common to all 1aelires, to wit, the benefit of the year of relcaſe 
or Jubile ; which it is not probable the 7razlites were to forteir 
meerly for this unculpable imperfeCion ; bur either, r. That they 
ſhould not be incorporated into the body of J/rae! by martiage ; 
for ſo this phraſe may ſeem to have been underſtood by the wizole 
Congregation of Iſrael, Nehem. 13. 1, 2, 3, 23, 24, 25. Alttough 
at*that time the Government was in part in the hands of tuch pe:- 
ſons as are here mentioned, w. 3. or of their children, ſeing it is 
apparent from Ezra 10. that many Prieſts and Levites and other 
Othcers and Rule:s of 1{rael were married to ſtrange Womea,:: hoſe 
iſue are by this Law excluded from all ſhare in the Government, 
and for that, among other reaſons, Nehemiah ſeparated them from 
Irael by vertue of the Law here following. Or 2. That they ſhould 
not be aumitted to Honours and offices either in the Church or 
Commonwealth of 1ſ-ael, and ſo the congregation of the Lord doth not 


c For by this betrothing ſhe had aQtually engaged her ſelfro ano- 
ther man, and was in ſome ſor his Wife, and therefore is ſome- 
times ſo called, as Ger. 29. 21. Mat. 1. 20. 

24 Then ye ſhall bring them both out unto the gate | 


of that city, and.ye ſhall ſtone them with ftones, that ! 

they die : the damfel becauſe ſhe cried not d, being in the 

city : & the man becauſe he hath humbled his neighbours | 
' wife : ſo thou ſhalt put away evil from among you. 

4 And therefore is juſtly preſumed to have conſented to it. 

'25 Bur if a man find a berrothed damſel in the field, 
and the man || force her e, and lie with her : then the 
man only that lay with her ſhall die. | 

e Which was to be examined and determined by the conſidera- 
tion of all the circumſtances. | 

26 But unto the damlel thou ſhalt do nothing ; zhere ! 
3s in the damſel no fin worthy of death : for as when a | 
man riſeth againſt his neighbour and flayeth him, even” 
ſo 5s this matter f. | | 

f Not an a of choice, but of force and conſtraint. 

27 For he found her in the field, and the betrothed | 


damfel cried g, and there was none to fave her. 


[! 
s 


believe the beſt till the contrary be manifeſt. I | : 
28 * If a man 6 find a damlſel that is a virgin, which | 


is not betrothed,and lay hold on her z, and lie with her, } 
and they be found : | 


h (i.e.) An unmarried man, as appears, 1. From his obligation 
to marry the perſon he abuſed, which it is not probable would have 
been impoſed upon him had he been married. 2. Becauſe if the 
man had been married, this had been adultery, and ſo had been 
puniſhed with death. Which notes ſome kind of force or artifice 
whereby ſhe was overpowred ; whereas Exod: 22: 16, ſhe was en- 
ticed, which implies conſent, and therefore the man doth here re- 
ceive a greater puniſhment, becauſe he uſed hoſtile violence to- 
wards her, which was the greater fin. 

29 Then the man thar lay with her ſhall give unto the 


damſels father fifty ſhckels of ſilver &, and ſhe ſhall be his 
wife /, becauſe he hath humbled her : he may not put 


her away all his days m. 

& Beſides the dowry, as Philo the Learned Jew notes, which is 
here omitted, becauſe that was common and cuſtomary, and be- 
cauſe it might eaſily be gathered out of Exod: 22; 16. it being ſuf- 
ficient here to mention what was peculiar to this caſe. / To wir, 
if her Father conſent to it, which is to be ſuppoſed out of Exod: 
22: 16. it being) nor likely that the Father ſhould loſe his paternal 

*right of diſpoling his Child when ſhe was in ſome ſort forced, ra- 
ther than when ſhe was inticed. » Which others were ſuffered to 
do, Deut: 24. 1. and he who inticed the maid, Exoa: 22: 16, was 
not prohibitzd'to do. ; | ; 

30 * A man ſhall not take » his fathers wife o, nor dif. 


cover his fathers skirt p. 

» Towife. So this reſpeQ&s the ſtate,and the next branch ſpeaks 
of the a& only. o His Mother in law. See Levit. 18. 8. and 20, 
T2. 1Cor. 5.1. þ ( 7.e. ( The skirt of che mothers Garment, 7. e. 
the nakedneſs,which is here called his fathert skirt, becauſe his Fa- 
ther and Mother were one fleſh,or becauſe his father alone had the 
right to uncover it. The phraſc is taken from the ancient cuſtom 
or cxremony of che Bridegrooms ſpreading the skirt of his Garment 
over the bride, to ſignifie his right to her, and authority over her, 
and his obligation to the marriage duty. See Ruth 3, g. Ezek: 16:8. 

| C HA P. XXIIL 
IWho are to be excluded from the congregation, 1-= 6. An Edomite and E. 

\£yptian not to be abhoyred, and why, 7. 8. No uncleanneſs to be in the 

camp, 9-—i4. No filthineſs, 17. No abominable ſacrifice muſt be, 18, 

No uſury, but to ſtrangers, 19, 20. Vows muft be kept, 21---23. The 

liberty that was lawful in their neighbours field or ineyard, 24. 25. 
E that is wounded in the ſtones a, or hath his 
Privy members cut off, ſhall not enter into the 
congregation of the LORD 5. 
s Heb. wounded by compreſſion or attrition or contuſion, to wit, of 
- the ſtones, which was the courſe the Gentiles took with Infants to 


© Lev: 
a8. 8. 


here ſignifie, as commonly it doth, the body of the people, but 
the ſociety of the Elders or Rulers of the people, who, as they re- 
preſent the whole Congregation, and a& in their name,and for their 
{ervice and good, ſo they are ſometimes called by the name of the 


| Congregation, as Numb: 35.12, 24, 25. Jof. 20:6, 9. 1 Kings8: 5. com- 


pared with wv. r, 2,3. and 1 Chron. 13: 1, 2,4. and 29, 1, 10, 20. com- 
pared with 1 Chron. 28: 1: and 29: 6; and of the congregation of God, 
as1t15 1n the Hebrew of Pſal. 82: 1. Howſoever, ſeing they are oft 
called the congregation, they may very well be called in a ſpecial 
manner 7/2 congregation of the Lord, becauſe they were appointed by 
God, and at in his name and ftead, and for his work and ſervice, 


, and did alſo oft aſſemble near the Tabernacle where God was emi. 


nently preſent. Add to this, that the Hebrew word, Kahal, cene- 
rally ſignifies a Congregation or Company of men met together, and there- 
fore this cannot ſo conveniently be meant of all the body of the 
people, which coulJ never meet in one place, but of the chiefRy- 
lers, which frequently did ſo.” Nor is it ſtrange that Funuchs are 
excluded from government, partly becauſe ſuch perſons are com- 
monly obſerved to want that courage which is neceſſary for a Go- 
vernour, Exod: 18: 21. and partly becauſe as ſuch perſons ordi- 
nar1]y was deſpicable, ſo the Office and Authority in their hands 
was likely to be expoſed to the ſame contempt. 


2 A baſtard c (ball not enter into the congregation of 
the LORD: even-to his tenth generation 4d ſhall he not 


g Which is in that caſe to be preſumed ; charity obliging us to | enter into the congregation of the LORD. 


c So the word is commonly rendred, and ſo it notes a perſon 
' baſe-born, or born in Fornication or Adultery,or by inceſtuous or 
any prohibired mixtures of man and woman. Obj. 1. This Law 
ſeems harſh, and too ſevere for the innocent Baſtard. Anſ. 1. Tt was 
only an excluſion from Government, which was a tolerable burden. 
2. Ir was a neceflary caution to prevent and brand the fin of un- 
cleanneſs, ro which the Jews wer: more than ordinarily prone. 
Obj. 2. Pharez and Jephthe were both Baſtards, yet advanced to orear 
Honour and Authority. 4». God gives laws to us,and not to him= 
ſelf; and therefoyre he might, when he ſaw fir, confer what favour 
or power he pleaſed upon any ſuch perſcn, as he did to theſe. Bur 
ſome add,thar the Hebre»' word mamzer ſignifies not every Baſtard 
but a Baſtard born of any ſtrange woman, as the word may ſeem to 
intimate ; and as ſuch perſons generally ſeem to have been,bec:uſe 
of thar ſpecia) proviſion,that there ſhould be no whore of the daughters 
of Iſrael, as it is here below, v. 17. d Or, his tenth generation, as it 
is in the Hebrew, and ſo in the following verſes. g 

3 * An Ammcnite, or Moabite e ſha.l not enter into » Neb 
the congregation of the LORD; even to their tenth ; +. 4g 
generation ſhall they not enter into the congregation of 
the LORD for ever f. | 

e This may be underſtooJ either 7. Of the Males only, or the 
children of ſuch fathers, as Interpreters commonly take it. Or ra- 
ther 2. Of Females alſo, or of all that were born either of ſuch Fa. 
thers or Mothers, as may be gathered from Ezra 10. and Nehem: x ++ 
where the Children of {ſtrange Wives were ſeparated from Iſrael _ 
leſs than the Children of ſtrange Fathers. And itis an allowed ma- 
xim, that the birth follows the belly. And whereas the Children 
of Rahab and Ruth are produced to the contrary, it may be ſaid as 
it was before, that theſe were extraordinary inftances,and that God 
when he pleaſed might exempr any particular perſon of them from 
this curfe, though the 17-azlizes might not do ſo. f So it ſeems to 
note the immutability and perpetuity of this Law, thac it ſhould 
be inviolably obſerved in all ſucceeding ages,and not difpenſed with 
for any merit in the perſons,or any pretence what 'vever. But wh 
then ſhould this clauſe be added only here, ſcing the foregoin 
Laws are as inviolable as this? Ir ſeems therefore to extend the 20 f 
ration of this excluſion of them from the Congregation of the Lord 
beyond what was faid art firſt, and to be added, by way of aggra- 
vation,, even #0 their tenth generation ſhall they not enter-====yea, even for 
ever ; 7, e. they ſhall never enter, as it is expreſſed, without any 
mention of the tenth generation, Neh 13: 1. that they ſhall not come 
into the congregation of God for ever, t 


4 Becauſe they met you not with bread and with wa- 
ter in the way g when ye came forth our of Egypt, and « yum: 
* becauſe they hired againſt thee Balaam the ſon of Beor 22; 5, 6 
of Pethor of Meſopetamia, to curſe thee. 5 


g As the manner of thoſe times was to wait, and provide for 
ſtrangers and travellers, ſee Gen, 14: 18. and 18; 2, 3, and x 9. 1, 2. 


make them Eunuchs. And theſe Eunuchs and Baſtards, v. 2. ſeem 
to be not only thoſe of other nations, as ſome underſtand it, with- 
out any foundation for ſuch reſtri&ions, bur alſo of the Iſraelites, 
the reaſon of this law being the fame in all, to wit, that God 


>" 
J = 
- 


Juag: 19. 18, 19, 20, 21. which was the more neceſſary, becauſe in 
thoſe times and countries there were no ſuch publick houſes of en« - 
tertainment, as now there are among us. Their fault then was un- 
mercifulneſs to ſtrangers and pilgrims, and afflifted perſons, which 
was aggravated borh by their relation to the 1aelires, as being the 
children 


Chap. RXIT | 


Ch 


jHebs 0) 


ens IS co @ A od EIT OTST 


Wwarg. 


: 
; 
| 


a 


j Heb. 
turneth 
wward. 


FReb. fo. 


te down. 


Y 


F chap. XXuL 


Heb god 


There is a manifeſt reaſon of rhe diff:rence, becauſe in their houſes 
they had private Chambers, where they could in fuch caſes k2ep 
themſelves from converſe w:th : thers, whereas in the Camp thet: 
conveniencies were ſo ſmall, and their occaſions of a&ion ſo many, 


in the ſame Tent, »r part of tie C:mp, to avoid che touching of 


waſh himſelf wich water : and when the ſun is down, he 
ſhall come into the camp again. 


whither thou ſhalt go forth abroad 9. 


and it ſhail be when thou F wilreaſe thy ſelf abroad, thou 


follows. 5 Part!y to prevent the annoyance of our ſelves or others : 
.partly to preſerve and exerciſe Modeſty and natural Honeſty ; and 


greater reverence of the Divinz Mzjeſty, and che greater caution to 
avoid: all real and moral uncleannels, eſpecially now when it was 


7-1o6res to them, in not fighting againſt them, as they had juſt 
occation to do, and as they did by others, Derr. 2. Obj. Q«. How 
doth this agree wirh Der. 2. 28, 29. where the Moabites which awelt in 
4r are ſaid to have fold them meat and drink ? Anſ. 1.It is one thing 


voluntarily to meet them, and kindly to relieve them with bread and - 


water, which they are here denied to have done, and a quite dif- 
fering thing to ſe'] them bread and water when they are upon their 
very borders, and their own intereſt forced them to do ſo. 2. It 
may ſeem that it was only thoſe Moabites that awelt tn Ar did fo, as 15 
ſaid Devt. 2. 29. and that all the reſt of the people negletted or re- 
faſed to do it ; and therefore theſin being ſo general and national], 
no wonder if che puniſhment be ſo too. 3. Theſe and the following 
words, both here and Neher. 13. 1. are to be taken diſtributively, 
and this firſt member of the verſe' belongs ro the Ammonites, who 
did not meet them with bread, &c- and the latter part to the Moabites, 
who together with the ' Midianites, -but not with the Ammonites, 
hired Bal aam, &c. 

5 Nevertheleſs the LORD thy God would net hearken 
unto Balaam ; but the LORD thy God turned the curſe 
intoa blefling unto thee b becauſe the LORD thy God 


loved thee. | 

h (i. e. ) Forced Balaamto bleſs thee, who was hired and inclined 
to curſe thee, if poſſibly he could. | 

6 Thou thalt not ſeek their peace 7, nor their | pro- 
ſperity all thy days for ever. 

i (i.e. ) Make no Contrafts either by Marriages or Leagues, or 
commerce with them, but rather ſhalt conſtantly keep a jealous 
eye over them, as enemies who will warch every opportunity to 
enſnare or diſturb thee. This counſel was now the more neceſſary, 
becauſe a grea: part of the 1/-ae/ites lived beyond Jordan in the borders 
of thoſe pzopl:, and therefore God iets up this wall of partition 
betwixt them, as well knowing the miſchief of bad Neighbours, an: 
Iſrael's proneneſs to receive infe&ion from them. Each particula 
Iſ-aelite is not hereby forbidden to perform any Office of humauity 
to th:m, -but the body of the Natioa are forbidden all friendly anc 
familiar converſ«tion with them. : 

7 Thou ſhait not abhor an Edomite &, for he is thy 
brother: thou ibait nor abnor an Egyptian, becauſe 


thou waſt a ſtranger in his land m. 

k The children of E£dom on'y the Amalekites are excepted by God's 
particular order, and upon ſp-cial re'fon, Devut. 25. 17, 18, 19. 
1 By Eſau, Jacob's Brother. m And didft receive habitation, protetion 
and proviſion from .them a long time, which kindneſs rhou mutt 
not forget for-their following perſecution. Ir is ordioary with great 
menand cthers, thar ons injury or offence blots out che remembrance 
of twenty courreſi:s ; but God doth not deal ſo with us, nor will 
he have us to deal {> with others, but commands us to overlook and 
forget injuries, and to remember kindneſl:s. 

$ The children that are begotten of them, fhall enter 
into the congregation of the LORD in their third ge- 


neration ”. 

» Suppoſing their Grand-father, or great Grand-father turned 
Proſelyte, and the children continue in that faith received by ſuch 
anceſtors. : 7” : 

9 When the hoſt goeth forth againſt thine enemies 
then keep thee from every wicked thing 6. 

o Then eſpecially rake heed, becauſe that is a time and ſtate ot 
confuſion and licent;outneis ; waen, as one ſaid, the Laws of God 
and Man can:ot be heard for the noile of Arms; and becauſe th: 
ſucceſs of thy Arms and Encerprizes depends upon God's bleſſing, 
which wicked men have no reaſon to expe& ; and becuuſe thou doi: 
then carry thy /ife in thy hand, and therefore haſt need to be well 
Prepared for Death and Judgment. ; 

10 It there be among you any man that is not clean 
by reaſon of uncleannels that chanceth him by night p, 
then ſhall he go abroad out of che camp q, he ſhall nor 
come within che camp. 

p Of which ſee, Levir. 25. 4, 16, 17 or by uncleanneſs of any 
like kind, one kind being here, as ofc, put for ail. q Qy. Why dorr. 
this uncleanneſs oblige a man to go ou* of the Camp, when ict did 
not eblige him to ſuch a removal. Levir. 15. ? Arſ 1.. It is not 
unreaſonable if they were obliged to grearer ſtr:Ctnets and purity 
when they were undercak-ng ſo difficu:t aud dangerous a work. 2. 


that it was very hard for his f:llow- Soldiers th-t continued with him 


him, which yet was infectious, Lev, 15. 7, 22. 
11 But it fall be when evening} cometh on, he ſhall 


12 Thou ſhalt have a place alſo without the camp, 


q Towit, to eaſe thy (elf, as it follows, werſe. 135 
13 And thou thalt have a paddle r up2n thy weapon 3 


ſhalt dig therewith, and (halt turn back, and cover that 
which cometh from thee 5. 
r The narure of which may be known from the uſe, which here 


principally that by ſuch ourward rites they might be :nured to the 


moſt neceſſary fo to do. | 
"x4 For the LORD thy God walketh in the midlt of: 
thy camp 7 to deliver thee, and co give up thine enemies 


DR UT B RK © XN GST 
children of Lt, and by the ſpecial kindneſs of God, and of the 


at leaſt ſome of the holy Inſtruments, 


before thes ; therefore thall thy camp be holy, that he | 


ſee no Þ unclean thing in thee, 
thee, : 
: Either becauſe the Ark was commonly preſent with them, 


and turn away from 


which were pledges of God's 
preſence : or, becauſe God had promiſed to go forth with them, 
when they engaged ina juſt and neceſſary war. 

15 * Thou ſhalt nor deliver unto his maſter the ſer- 
vant which is eſcaped from his maſter unto thee s. 

# This is not to be underſtood univerſally, as if all {:rvants that 
flee from their maſters, though without any ſufficient cauſe or co- 
lour of juſtice, might be detained from them by any perſon to whom 
they fled tor refuge, for this is apparently contrary toall the Laws 
of Religion and Juſtice & Charity, ard would open a door, to infinite 
diſorders and miſchiefs; but it is to be underſtood, r. OF the 
Servants of Strangers, becauſe it follows, werſe 16. he ſhall awell with 
thee, even among you, which ſhews that he had dwe't wich and belcng- 
<d to another people. 2. OF ſuch as belonged to the Canaanites, or 
o:her neighbouring Netions, becauſe if he had lived in remote 
Countries, it is nor probably that he would flee ſo far to avoid his 
Maſter, or thar his Maſter would follow him ſo far to recover him. 
And for the Cansanites this ſentence was moſt juſt, becauſe both they 
and theirs were all forfeited to God and to Iſrael, and whatſoever 
they enjoyed was by ſpecial indulgence. And for the other Neigh- 


-ours it may ſeem jult alſo, partly, becauſe ſome of them were . 


within the larger limits ofthe land belonging to 1/rael by God's grant 
or deed of gift, Gen. 15. 18. Jef. r. 4. partly becauſe by their hoſtile 
carriages they had given (rae! a right to much more of theirs, than 
2 few Servants that might poſſibly run away from their Mafters ; and 
eſpecially becauſe both Maiters and Servants of theſe and other 
Nations are unqueſtionably ar the diſpoſe ef rhe Lord their Maker 
and Soveraign Ruler. 3. Of ſuch as upon enquiry appear to have 
Deen unjuſtly oppreſſed by their Maſters, as is implied by that 
phraſe of his, making an eſcape, which ſuppoſeth a deliverance from 
lznger or vexation.Ncw it 1s not ſtrang« nor unjuſt, if the greatGod, 
who hates all Tyranny, and ftiles himſelf the refuge of the oppreſſed, 
loth intrpoſe his auchority and help to reſcue ſuch perſons from 
their cruel Maſters, who otherwiſe would be too ſtrong for them. 
+. Of ſuch ascameto them our of a deſire to embrace the true Re- 
1g10n, which poſſibly his Maſter perceiving, endeavoured by force 
to reſtrain him fiom, as it may be probably thought from his chuſing 
and liking to live among the 1/aelrtes, expr-fſed v. 16. Now if this 
great and ſupreme Miſter, to whom all other Maſters are but Ser- 
vants, and they and theirs are abſolutely in his power, ſhail receive 
and protect one that gives up himſe!f ro*kis Service againſt the Will 
of: the under-maſter, who in rhis caſe rebels againſt his Soveraign 
Lord, what ſhadow is there of injuſtice in the caſe ? 


16 He (hall dwell with you, eve» among you in that 
place which he ſha'l chuſe, in one of thy gates where ir 
+ liketh him beſt : thou ſra't not oppreſs him e. 


e Taking advantage from his low and afflifted condition to be 7 


unreaſonable or injurious to him, | 

17. There (ball be no || whore f of the daughters of 

[ſraelg, nor a Sodomite b of the ſons of 1{rael. 
f No common proſtitute, ſuch as were tolerated and encouraged 
oy the Gentiles, and uſed even in their religious Worſhip. g Not 
tha* ſuch prattices were allowed to the ſtrangers among them, as is 
vident from many Scriptures and Reaſons, bur that it was in a 
pecu'iar manner, and upon ſpeci: reafons, forbidden ro them, as 
»:ing much more odious 'in them than in ſtrangers. Though the 
w-wrds may be rendred among the daughters, and 19 in the following 
clauſe, among the (ons, for the Hebrew Mem is ſometimes uſed inthar 
ienſe, as Numb. 32. 22. Pal. 31. 12. and ſo it notes that none of that 
{ort ſhould be permitted among them, whether Jews or Strangers. 
h Or buggerrer, who defileth or ſuffereth himſelf to be defiled with 


mankind, See Gen, 19, 5. Lev. 18. 12, 1 Kings 14, 24. and 22. 47. 
Rom, 1.27. 


138 Thou (balt not bring the hire of a whore s, or 
the price of a dog 4 into the houſe of the LORD thy 
God for any vow 3: for even both theſe & are abomina- 
tion unto the LORD thy God. ; : 

£ This is oppoſed to rhe praftice of the Gentiles, who al'owed both 


ſach perſons and their oblations they made our oftheir wicked and 
infamous gains ; and ſome of them kept lewd Women, who proffi- 


-uted themſelves in the Temples, and to the honour of their falſe 


gods, and offered parr of their profit to them. See Mich. x, 7. 
Baruch 6. 43. Herod. in the end of his firſt Book, and Strabe in his 
eightn Book. þ Either 1. Properly; the dog being a vile and con= 
temptible creatwme in thoſe Eaſtern parts, 1 Sam. 17.43. and 24.15. 
and 2 Sams. 3. 8, Eccleſ. 9g. 4. and unclean by God's deſignation, which 
yer ſhould have bzen redeemed by virtue of thar Law, Num. 18. 15. 
nad 1t nor been for this prohibition. And this may be here prohibited, 
«ither r. Thar by this one inftayce, put for all athers of the like 
kind, they might be taught not to offer to God what 'coft them 
nething, or was worth nothing : or e. to bring contempt vpon the 
Creature, which divers of the Gentiles offered up to their gods, and 
the Egyptians worthipped as gods. Or, 3. That by comparing Whores 
any Dogs together, and equalliing the prices of them, he mighs expoſe 
Whores to rhe higheſt d:ſgrace and infamy. Or, I. Metaphorically, 
as that word is oft uſed in Scripture, as 1 Sam.24.14. P/al. 22. 16,20. 
Iſa. 56. 10, 11. Mat. 7. 6. Phil. 3.2, and particularly it is uſed for 
unclean or filrhy perſons, 2 Per. 2.22. Revel, 22. 15. as Horace alſo 
calls Whores Bitches, Which name doth moſt properly agree ro them 
in reſpe& of that umpudence and filthineſs, and infatiableneſs, for 
which both of them are branded. Ad this ſenſe may ſeem moſt 
proper in this place, becauſe it agrees with all the orher expreſſions, 
and as the hire of a whora anſwers to the where, v. 17. ſothe price of 3 
dog may ſeem to anſwer to the Sodomite,v.17. and fo all concern the 
ſame thing, whereas the price of a dog, properly fo called, may ſeem 
to be quite incongruous and foreign to the place. Ir is true which 
is obje&ed, that Law-givers uſe to deliver their Laws in proper and 
not. in metaphorical terms, to prevegt miſtake and ambiguity. Bur 


there ſeems 'te beno great danger of miſtake here, where the Meta- 


phor 1s ſo clearly explained and determined by ſo many words joyned 
with it. 7 And much lefs in other ſacrifices, which being of an 
higher Nature, and prefcribed by God, muſt needs require more 
D 2 Ha4 | exatnsſs 


Chap. XXIIT. 


CY any th;1g. 


+ Heb. n2- 
keaneſs of 


* x Sam: 
39: IFo 


Heb. « 


good for 
him. 


|| Or, Sodge 


miteſs, 


Chap. XXIV. | 
exaRtneſs than thoſe which depended much upon a mans Will and 
thotes, 25 vows and free-will-offerings did. & ( 5.e. ) The Whereand 

| the Dog, and therefore the price of either of them cannor be accept- 
able. And this may ſeem to favour the latter opinion, that the Dog 
is here taken metaphorically rather than properly, becauſe there 15 
no mention'in the Law ( favein this place which is in queſtion ) of 
any abeminableneſs of a dog unto God, morethan of an aſs, or any 
other unclean creature ; but how abominable Sodomites are to God 15 
ſufficiently evident fromother Scriptures, and from undeniable Rea- 
fons. 


19 * Thou ſhalt not lend upon wy Ito thy brother, 
d: uſury of money, uſury of viduals, uſury of any thing 
.. that is lent upon uſury. | : : 
36: T1 (6.e.) Soasto receive thy principal mony or thing lent with ſuch 
Pfal:r5:5: encreaſe or improvement of it, as was uſual and allowed among the 
| Gentiles. But whether all uſury be unlawful to Chriſtians 1s too 
great a queſtion to be determined in a work of this nature. See Exod. 
22. 25. Deut. 15+ 3. Pſol. 15, 5. Neb. 5. 2. Luke6. 34. 
20 Untoa ſtranger» thou mayeftlend upon uſury, but 


unto thy brother thou ſbalt not lend upon uſury : that the 
LORD thyGod may bleſs thee inall that thou ſetteſt thine 


hand to, in the land whither thou goeſt to poſſeſs it, 
mm (5. e.) Toa perſon of any other Nation, for ſo that word 1s 
generally uſed, and therefore they who reſtrain it toth urſed Ca- 
naantiſh nations ſeem to do ſo without any ſolid or ſutheient grounds. 
And though the word brother is oft-times uſed in a general fenſe for 
every man, yet 1 think I may affirm that whereſoever the words brother 
and ſtranger are oppoſed in the Jewiſh Law, the brother ſignifies the 
Iſraelite only, and the ftranger ſignifies any perſon of what Nation or 
Religion {ng whether proſelyted to the Jew:ſþ Religion or nor, 
and ſo it ſeems to be meant here. And the reaſon why uſury is 
rmitted to a ſtranger, not to an Jſraelire, may ſeem to be this, 
becauſe the Iſraelites generally employed themſelves in the manage- 
ment of land and cattel, and therefore could not make any advantage 
of borrowed money to ballance the uſe they ſhould pay for it, and 
conſequently it may be preſumed that they would not borrow money 
upon uſe but for want and poverty, and in that caſe, and principally 
- for that reaſon, uſury ſeems to be forbidden to them, as may be 
thought from Lev. 25. 35, 36. But the ſtrangers made uſe of their 
money in way of Trade and Traffick with the 7raelites, which was 
more gainful, and could much better bear the burden of uſury, and 
reap advantage from money ſo borrowed, and theſe ſtrangers here 
ſpoken of are ſuppoſed tobe competently rich, and not poor, as may 
plinly appear by comparing this place with Lev. 25..35, 36. where 
they are no leſs forbidden to take uſury of a ſtranger than a brother, 

in caſe of poverty. 

21 * When thou ſhalt vow a vow unto the LORD 


thy God, thouſhalt not ſlack topay it »: for the LORD 
thy God will ſurely requireit of thee: and it would be 


ſin in thee 0. 
» To wit, if the matter of it be lawful and ia thy own power. 
See Numb. 30. 2. Not ſlack or delay, becauſe delays may make thee 
both unable to pay ir, and unwilling too, the ſenſe of ones obliga- 
tion growing every day weaker than other, ©c. o (7.e. ) It would 
be laid to thy charge as a fin, and bring judgment upon thee. 
22 But if thou ſhalt forbear to vow, it ſhall be no 


ſin in thee. 

23 That which is gone out of thy lips, thou ſhalt 
keep and perform ; even a free-will-oftering p, according 
as thouhaſt vowed unto the LORD thy God, which thou 


haſt promiſed with thy mouth. 
" p Which though thou didſt freely make, yet being made, thou 
art no longer free, but obliged to perform it. : 
' 24 When thou comeſt into thy neighbours vineyard, 


| then thou mayeſt eat grapes thy fill, at thine own plea- 


ſure 9 2 but thou ſhalt nor pur any in tby veſſel. 

9 Which was allowed in thoſe parts, becauſe ofthe great plenty 
and fruitfulneſs of Vines there. 

25 When thou comeſt into the ſtanding corn of thy 


* Match: neighbours, * then thou mayeſt pluck the ears with thine 
" hand: but thou ſhalt not movyea ſickle unto thy neigh- 


COrn. 
C H A P. XXIV. | 
Of the Woman that was diſmiſſed by her Husband with a Bill of Divercement, 
1. Theliberty of the new married Man, 5. Pawns and Pleages, 6, 
Man-ſtealers, 7. Leproſie, 8. And again of Pawns or Pledges, 10, Of 
Day-wages, 14. | None to be puniſhed for another's Offence, 19. Of Juſtice 
and Love towards Widows, Fatherleſs, and Strangers, 17. ; 
* Matth: Hen * a man hath taken a wife, and married her, 
4 45M arid and it come to pals that ſhe find no favour in his 
© gti 4. £yes #, becauſe he hath found ſome Þ uncleanneſs þ in 
+ Heb. © her: then let him write her a bill off divorcement, and 
matter of "give it in her hand, and ſend her out of bis houſe c. 
nakeaneſs. ,g(5.e.) He diſlike and lgath her. Iris a figure called Meier, 
Ch:2 :14 whereby more is underſtood than is expreſſed, as Prov. ro..2. and 
THeb cut- ;, 21. and 24. 23. b Heb. nakeaneſs, or ſhamefulneſs, or filthineſs of a 
ving off. wvhing, i.e. ſome filthy or hateful thing, ſome loathſome diſtemper of 
body or quality of mind nor obſerved before Marriage: Or ome lighr 
and unchaſt carriage, as this or the like phrafe commonly ſignifies, 
but net amounting ro adultery, which was not puniſhed with divorce, 
but with death. c Which is not a command to divorce them, as 
ſome of the Jews underſtood it, nor an allowance and approbation, 
as plainly appears, not only from the new Taſtement, Mas. 5.31, 32. 
and 19. 8. 9. bur alſo from the Old Teſtamenc, Ger. 2.24. Mal. 2.16. 
bur meerly a permiſſion or toleration of that prattice for prevention 
of greater miſchiefs and cruelties of that hard-1earted people rowards 
their Wives, and this only for a ſeaſon, even until the t:me of refor- 
mation, as it is called Heb. 9g. 10. 1.e. till the coming of the Meſſias, 
When things were to return to their firſt inſticution and pureſ! 
condition. The husband is not here commanded to put her away, 
but if he do put her away, he is commanded to write and give her 8 


*Eccl:5:4: 


12:1: 
Mar:2:23: bours ftandin 
Luke 6: 7 | | 5 


DEUVTE RON OO M TV. 


bill of divorcement, before he ſend her out of his houſe. And though it 
be true, as our Saviour obſerves, that Moſes did ſuffer theſe divorces, 
to wit, without puniſhing them, which 8Jſo is here implied, yet it 
muſt be acknowledged, that if we conſult the Hebrew words, thoſe 
three firſt verſes may ſeem to be only a ſuppoſition, and the words, 
rendred, then let him her, 1n the Hebrew run thus, and hath 
written her, and ſo it follows, wer. 2. And ſhe be departed out of his houſe 
and be gone and become another mans wife ; then follows wer. 3. which, 
even according to our Tranſlation carries on the ſuppoſition, 4nd if 
the rap husband hate her, &c. Then follows the poſition or prohibition 
verſe 4. 

2 And when ſhe is departed out of his houſe ſhe may 
go and be another mans wife d. 

d For although he could not cauſeleſly put her away without fin, 
yet ſhe being put away, and forſaken by her husband, might marry 
another without fin, as is determined in the ſame or a like caſe, 
T Cor. 7. 15. 

3 And #f the latter husband hate her, and write her a 
bill of divorcement, and giveth it her in her hand, and 
ſendeth her out ofhis houſe : or if the later husband die, 
which took her to be his wife : 

4 * Her former husband, which ſent her away, may 
not take her again e to be his wife after that ſhe is defi- 
led f: for that is abomination before the LORD, and 
[| chou ſhalc not cauſe the land to ſin g, which the LORD 


thy God giveth thee for an inheritance. 

e This is the puniſhment of his levity and ipjuſtice in putting 
her away without ſufficient cauſe, which by this offer he now ac- 
knowledgeth. f Not ſimply and{abſolutely, as if her ſecond Mar- 
riage were a fin, but reſpeCively, or as to her firſt Husband, to 
whom ſhe is as a defiled or unclean Woman, that is, forbidden ; for 
things forbidden are accounted and called unclean, Judg. 13. 1. be» 
cauſe they may no more be touched or uſed than an unclean thing. 
g (i.e.) Thou ſhalt norſuffer ſuch abominable lightneſs and lewdneſs 
to be practiſed, leſt the people be polluted, and the land defiled and 
accuried by that means. 


*Ter: 3: r: 


||'Or,polu 
ſo Gr. 


go out to war, Þ neither ſhall he be charged with any T H-b.w 


buſineſs þ : buthe ſhall be free at home one year 3, and ro/gw: 
{ball chear up his wife which he hath taken. pon him, 
h ( i.e.) Any publick Office or Employment, which may cauſe 
an abſence from or negle& of his Wife. # That their affe&ions 
newly engaged may be firmly ſettled, ſo as there may be no occa- 
ſions for the divorces laſt mentioned. 
6 No man ſhall take the nether or the upper milſtone 


z to pledge: for he takech a man's Þ lifek to pledge. 

z: Uſed in their hand-mills, of which ſee Exod. 11. 5. Num. 11. 28. 
Jer. 25. 10. Under this one kind, he underſtands all other things 
neceſſary to get a livelihood, the taking away whereof is againſt 
the Laws both of Charity and Prudence, ſeing by thoſe things alone 
he can be enabled both ro ſubfiſt and to pay his debts. & (5. e. ) His 
livelihood, or the neceſlary ſupperts of his life. | 

7 If a man be found ſtealing any of his brethren 7 of 
the children of Ifrael, and maketh merchandiſe of him, 
or ſelleth him, then that thief (ball die, and thou ſhalt 


put evil away from among you. 
1 See on Exod. 21. 16. s 
s Take heed in * the plague of leproſie, that thou * Lev:1y 
obſerve diligently, and doaccording toall thatthe prieits & 14 
the Levites ſhall teach you : as I commanded them ms, 
ſo ye (ball obſerve to do. 

m By which words he plainly intimates, that they were'not only 
to have an eye to the Levites Inſtruftions, but alſo and eſpecially | 
unto the Word and Command of God, and that if the Levites ſen- 
tence were manifeſtly contrary to the Command of God, it were 
not to be obeyed. As now if a Levite or Prieſt ſhould, for fear, or 
favour, or gain, pronounce a perſon to be clean, who were really 
and manifeſtly unclean, and had the unqueftionable marks of leproſie 
upon him, I ſuppoſe no man in his wits will queſtion, bur every 
man that ſaw and knew this were bound to avoid the teuching of 
him, and that if he did touch him he ſhould be defiled by it. 

9 Remember what the LORD thy God did * unto * Num: 
Miriam » by the way after that we were gome forth out 12: 19 
of Egypt. 

7» Whom God ſmote with leprofie for her contempt of Moſes, and 
therefore thou mayſt expe the ſame or like puniſhment, if thou doſt 
deſpiſe the counſe] and dire&ion of the Levites, which I have ſet over 
thee, and commanded thee to obſerve in this and the like matters. 

10 When thou doſt + lead thy brother any thing, +1cs.lw | 
thou ſhalt not go into his houſe to fetch his pledge #9. the boy | 

| any thin 

o To prevent both the poor man's Reproach by having his wants ng &c. 
expoſed to view, and the Creditor's Inſolence and greedineſs which 
might be occaſioned by theſight of ſomething which he deſired, and 
the Debtor could not ſpare. 

It Thou ſhalt ſtand abroad, and the man eo whom 
_ doſt lend ſhall bring out the pledge p abroad unto 
tnCee. 

2 He ſhall chuſe what Pledge he pleaſe, provided only it be ſuf- 
ficient for the purpoſe. 


12 And if the man be poor, thou ſhalt not ſleep with 
his pledge 9g: 

q Bur reſtore it before night, which intimates that he ſhould 
take no ſuch thing for pledge, without which a man canner ſleep, 
ſince it were an idle thing to fetch it and carry it every day. Ses 
on Exeadus 22.26, 27. 

13 * In any caſe thou ſhalt deliver him the pledge 


tHeb,/u 


* Exod; | 


22; 26; 


Chap. XXIV. © 
: | *Job 


5 * When a man hath taken a new wife, he ſhall not *Ch:20:y; | 


"Cha 


$0, 


*Le.ig 
er.22 
? Heb 
lifteth | 
owl wah! 


'Ex 22, 
22, Pro? 
22-22, j6 
22. 3. F 
22.29, E 
22, 26, 


*Lev.19 
9. & 23, 


22, 


i Heb.tho 
ſhalt nos 
bough it af- 
ter thee. 


THeb. af. 


ter thee, 


5 
pups A eas 


again when the ſan goeth down, that he may ſleepin his 


@Wp 


; Chap. RXV. 


own raiment, and * bleſs thee» : and it ſhal be righte- 
ouſneſs unto thee before the LORD thy God 5. 


- Inftrumenrally,. as Miniſters are faid to convert and fave fin- 
ners, to wit,bring down the bleſling of God upon thee by his pray- 
ers: for though his prayers, if he be not a good man, ſhall not a- 
vail for his own behalf, yet they ſhall avail for thy benefit. - (7.e) 
Efſtcemed and accepted by God as a Work of Righteouſneſs,or,Ho- 
lineſs, or Goodneſs and Mercy, which oft is called righteouſneſs, as 
Pſal. 112.9. Prov. 10. 2. Dan. 4. 27. TO : 

14 Thou ſhalt not oppreſs an hired ſervant 7 rhat 5s 
poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy 


ſtrangers that are in thy land within thy gates. 
t Either by laying too grievous Burdens of Work upon him, or 
by with-holding his Wages from him, as it follows. 8 
. ic At his day « * thou fhalt give him his hire, neither 
'Le.19.13- ] Y p 5 : 
513. hal the ſungo down upon itx, for hes poor, and | ſet- 
+ Heb. he teth his heart upon ity, leſt he cry againſt thee unto 
if7eb b5 the LORD, and it be fin unto thee. 
mute i» , Ar the time appointed, weekly or daily. x To wit, after the 
day upon which ir is due, and deſired or demanded by him ; for 
Juſtice muſt not be denied ordelayed. y Heb. Iifteth up his ſoul to 
it, which notes his great deſire and hope of it,and his deperidance 
upon it : See Pſal: 24: 4: Fer: 22: 27. 
* Kin.14 46 * The fathers thal not be put to death for the chil- 
6. 2 Chr. qren, neither (bal the children be pur to death for the fa- 
wy” ht thersz : every. man ſhal be putto death for his own fin #. 
Freke 's, 2 Underſtand it thus, if the one be free from the guilt of the o- 
- thers ſin, and except in taoſe caſes where the ſovereign Lord of Life 
: and death, before whom none is innocent, hath commanded it, as 
Deut. 13. Joſ. 7. 24. Forthis Law is given to men, got to God,and 
though God do viſit the fathers ſins upon the children, Exod. 20. 
yet he will not ſuffer men to do ſo, # Underſtand only, and not 
for any other man's ſin. : 
17 Thou (balt not pervertthe judgment of the ſtran- 
"Fx 22,21, Ber, nor of the fatherleſs 5, * nor rake a widows raiment 


:2. Prov. c tO pledge. | 

22-22.jer. 6b Nor of the widow, which is to be ſupplied out of the laſt mem- 

22. 3. Ez. ber; nor indeed of any other perſon, but he particularly mentions 

22.29. Ex. theſe, partly becauſe men are moſt apt to wrong ſuch helpleſs per- 

22.26, fſons,and partly becauſe God is pleaſed eſpecially to charge himſelf, 
and ſo to charge others, with the-care of thoſe who have no other 
refuge. See fa. 1. 23. Jer. 5. 28; c To wit, ſuch an one as ſhe 
hath daily and neceſſary uſe of, as being poor, as may appear by 
comparing this with wer. 12, 13. and with other places. Bur this 
concerns not rich perſons, nor ſuperfluous raiment. 

18 But chou ſhalt remember d that thou waſt a bond- 
man in Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee 
thence : therefore I command thee to do this thing e. 

d To wit, affe&ionately and pratically, and by the compaſſio- 
nate ſenſe of others miſeries, thou ſhalt wake it evident that thou 
haſt not forgotten thy own diſtreſſes and deliverances. eI having 
thereby authority to command thee, and thou having obligations 
on that account, both to obey me, and to pity others in the ſame 
calamities which thou haſt felt. .. 

*Lev.19. ig * When thou cutteſt down thine harveſt in thy 
og 23- field, and haftforgot a ſbeaf in the field, thou thalt not 
; go again to fetch it : itſhal be for the ſtranger, for the 
fatherleſs, and for the widow : that the LORD thy 
God may bleſs thee in all the work of thine hands. 

20 When thou beareſt thine olive-tree f, + thou ſhalt 
not go over the boughs again ; it ſbal be for the ſtranger, 
" for the fatherleſs, and for the widow. 

f With ftaves, as they uſed to do to fetch down the olives. 

21 When thou gathereſt the grapes of thy vineyard, 
thou ſhalt not glean it + afterward : it hal be for the 
" ſtranger, for the fatherleſs, and for the widow, 
22 And thou ſhalt remember that thou waſt a bond- 
man in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee 


to do this thing. 
; CHAP. XXY. 
Judges muſt do juſtly, 1, 2. Stripes not to exceed forty, 3: The threſhing 
Ox not to be muzzled, 4. The Duty of raiſmg Seed uuto a Brother, 5--=10, 
The Puniſhment of an immo1eft Woman, 11, 12, A juſt weight and mea- 
fure, *13==*16» The memory of Amalek is to be blotted out, 17--=19, + 
| | F there be a controverſy between men 4, and they 


come unto judgement, that the judges may judge 


*Tob 3T. 


'20, 


i Heb.thou 


them, then they ſhal juftifie b the righteous, and con- 


demn c the wicked. 

a About criminal matters, as it follows. 6 (z. e.) Acquit him 
from guilt and falſe accuſations, and free him from punifhment, c 
Declare him guilty, and paſs Sentence of Condemnation to ſuitable 
Puniſhments upon him. ; 


t Heb. 2 Anditſhal be, ifthe wicked man be + worthy to 


@ſonof 
beating. 


1$ 1 
an. 26. by @ certain number. 


d Which the Jews ſay was the caſe of all thoſe crimes which the 
law commands to be puniſhed, without expreſſing the kind or de- 
Free of the puniſhmenr. e That the puniſhment may be duely in- 

icted, without exceſs or defe&, which otherwiſe might eaſily 
happen through the Executioners Paſſion or partiality. 


Xor.n1, 3 * Forty itripes he may give him, and not exceed f : 


7s 


many ſtripes, then thy brother g ſhould feem vile unto 
thee 5. | 


would not exceed 39 ſtripes, 2 Cr; 11: 24: left through miſtake os 


- 


DEVUVTERONOM Y. 


be beaten 4, that the judge ſhal cauſe him to lie down, 
and to be beaten before his face e, according to his fault: 


leſt if he ſhould exceed, and beat him above theſe, with . 


| Chap. X q 
forgetfulneſs or eagerneſs they fhovId go -beyor d their. bounds, L 


'F 
| 3 
j 


J 


boured for them, and eſpecially to their Miniſters, x Cor: g: 9g. 

5 *If brethren & dwell cogether /, and one of them m 
die, and have no child », the wife of the dead (bal not 
marry without, untoa ſtranger o: her || husbands bro- 
ther ſhal go in unto her p,and take her to him to wife, 3 
and perform the duty of an husbands brother unto her. |j Or, = 

k Stri&ly ſo called.,as is evident from wer:7: Gen: 38:8: Ruth 1:15; kinſman. 
Mat: 22:24, 25. TEither 1. ſtriftly, in the ſame houſe or family : 
which 1s not probable, becauſe the married brother may be preſu- 
med to have left his fathers houſe and ſetup a family of his awn.Or 
2 more largely,in the ſame Town or City,or,at leaſt, Countrey.This 
is added for a Reliefof their Conſciences, that if the next brother 
had removed his Habitation into remote parts, or were carried thi. 
ther into Captivity, which God foreſaw would be their caſe, then 
the Wife of the dead had herliberty to marry te the hext kinſman 
that lived in the ſame place with her. » Either 1. the firſt and 
eldeſt of them, as it was prattiſ:d, Ger: 38: 6, &c. and expounded 
Mat: 22: 25: one being cft put for the firſt, as Gen: 1: 5: and 3: 11: 

Hag: 1:1: Mark 16:2.And the chief care was about the fixſt-born,who 
were inveſted with ſingular piiviledges, and were Types of "; ©" 
Or 2.any of them, for the words a.e general,and ſo the praftice may 
\{eem to have been,Ruth 3. and the reaſon of the Law may ſeem to 
be in a great meaſure the ſame, which was to keep up the diſtin- 
Qtion as of Tribes and Families, that ſo the Meſſias might be diſco 
vered by the Family from which he was appointed to proceed, © 
alſo of Inheritances, which were divided among all the Brethren 
the firſtborn having only a double Portion. » Heb. no ſon. But ſos 
is oft put for any child, Male or Female, both in Scripture and other 
Authors; and therefore the Hebrew no ſon is rendred no child here. is 
it is in effe&,Mot;22:24: Mark 12:19: Luke 20: 28. And indeed this 
Caution was not neceſſary,when there wzs a daughter, whoſe child 
might be adopted into the Name and Family of its Grandfather. o 
(7. e.) To one of another Family, as that word is oftuſed. p Except 
he was married himſelf, as may appear by other Scriptures, and 
by the reaſon of the thing, and, as ſome add; from rhe Phraſe of 
dwelling tegether, to wit, in their Fathers Family. 

6 And it thal be rb? the firſt-born which ſhe beareth, 
ſhal ſucceed inthe names of his brother q which is dead, 
that his name be not pur out of [Iſrael y. 

q Shall be called and reputed his ſon. See Ruth 4. 17. r That a 
Family be not loſt. So this was a proviſion that the nuinber of 
their Families might not be diminiſhed. . | 

7 And if the man like nor to take his || brothers wife, | Or, next | 
then let his brothers wife go up to the gate, unto the e]- kinſman's _ | 
ders, and ſay, * My husbands brother refuſeth to raiſe »#- 
up unto his brother a name s in Iſrael : he will not per- 


form the duty of my husbands brother. 
s To revive his Brothers Name and Memory. _ 

8 Then the elders of his ciry ſhal call him, an dſpeak 
unto him # ; and ifhe ſtand to zt , and ſay, I like not 
to take her: - Fg 

t To convince lan of the duty, and perſwade him to it. « If he 
obſtinately refuſe it. | "- 

9 Then ſbal his brothers wife come unto him in the 
preſence of the elders, and looſe his ſhoe from off his 
foot x, and ſpit in his face y, and ſhal anſwer, and ſay, 
So ſhal it be done unto that man, that will not build up 


z his brothers houſe. Sx | HAST . 

x Partly, as a ſign of his reſignation of all his Righr to the Wo- 
man, and to her husband's Inheritance ; for as the Shoe was a ſign 
of ones Power and Right, Pſal. 60. 8 and 168. 9g. ſo the parting 
with the Shoe was a token of the Alienation of ſuch Right;and that 
he would not and henceforth might not enter upon his brethers 
land ; and partly as a note of Infamy, to ſignifie that by this unn#- 
tural and diſingenuous aftion he was unworthy to be amongſt Free- 
men, and fitto be reduced to the condition of the meaneſt Servants 
. or Captives, whouſed to go barefoot, ſa. 20. 2,4; yAs a returis 
of his contemptupon himſelf. See Numb. 12. 14. 1a.5o. 6. Mat.'26. 
67. and 27, 30. This was not done, Ruth 4. either becauſe he wis. 
nota Brother, but a remoter Kinſman, and ſo deſerved leſs ſhame; 
or becauſe Ruth did not profecute him tothe utmoſt, but freely con-. 
ſented to this exchange. z A Phraſe oft uſed for the Procreation of _ 
Children, and the encreaſe of a Family. See Gen. 16. 2. Exod. 1.21. 
1 King, 11. 38, 1 Chron. 17. 25. _OE OS: 

1s And his nameſhal z becalled in Ifrael,The houſe 
of him that hath his ſhoe looſed. s 

a (3. e.) His perſon, names being oft 
fterity alſo. So it was a laſting blor, | 

11: When men ſtrive together one with another, and 
the wife of the One draweth near for to deliver herhus- 
band out ef the hand of him that ſmitech him, and puts 
tcth forth her hand, and taketh him by the ſecrets: 


7« 


put for perſons; and his po- 


F It ſeems not ſuperſtition, but prudent caution, when the Fews | | 


|. T2 Then thou ſbalt cut off her hand ; thine 8ye ſhal 
not pity her c, 


+0 L Partly 


uth. 4: | 


_ 


> "a i C 4 


- op. XPVI. ? | 
b Partly beeauſe of the great thiſchief {he dif to him, both to his 
Perſon and Poſtericy, ad pittly ro deter alt Women from all 1m- 
modeſt and impudent carriages, ahd to ſecuire that modeſty, which 
is indeed the guardiari of aff rhfie Yirtues, as immodeſty is an inlet 
to all Vices, as the fad experictice of this degenerate age ſhews;and 
therefore it is riot fringe char it is ſo ſeverely reſtrained and pu- 
wthed. « Which thou wite be very apt to do, becauſe of the infir- 
mity of her Sex and the urgency, of the occaſion, this being done 
for the neceſſary preſervation of her Husband. : 
13 Thou jhalt not have in thy bag + divers weights, 
(35,36. 2 greatanda ſmall d. 
| Heb. a @ The great, cither to buy with, or openly ro make ſhew of; the 
| Hopes s ſmall, for their private uſe in ſelling. | 
[fone 14 Thou thalt not have in thine houſe | divers mea- 
[+ Heb. a» ſures, a great and a ſmall. ; 

Ephab and 1; But thou ſhalt have a perfe& and juſt weight, a 
* perfetand juſt meaſure ſbalt thou have: that thy days 
| may belengthned in the land which the LORD thy 
God giveth thee. | 
! *pro.12.z. 16 For * all that do ſuch things, aud all that do un- 
WH rigtiteouſly;are an abomination unto the LORD thy God. 

* Ex.15.8. 17 * Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the 
_—_ way, when ye were c6me forth out of Egypt e. 
| -e Which circumſtance greatly aggravates their fin, that they 
| vr 40 do thus to a people, who had been long exerciſed with ſore 
= - affli&ions, to whom pity and help was due by the Laws of Nature 
| and Hu ahity, and for whoſe Reſcue God had inſo glorious a man- 

ner appeared, which they could nor be ignorant of. So this was 
' barbarouſheſs to Iſrael, and ſetting the great Jehovah at defiance. 

18 How he met thee by the way,and ſmore the hind- 
molt of thee f, even all that were feeble behind thee, when 
thou waft faint and gunry : -and he feared not God. 

FfWhich God permitted,both for the puniſhment of /ſraelsſins, and 
to harden and prepare them for the diffcultics of their Expedition. 
ie os». Therefore it ſhal be, * when the LORD thy God 
- 39415:3- hath given thee reſt from all thine enemies round about, 
in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for 
an inheritance to poſſeſs it ; zhat theu ſhalt blot out the 


remembrance of Amalck. g from under heaven, thou 


Thafr not forge 3:. 

gs Which was in great meaſure done afrerward. Sce 1 Sam. 15. 
and 27.8. and 3o. I, 17. 1 Chron. 4. 43. Efth. 9. 12, 13. 

2 baba 4 CH AP. XXVL. 

The Confeſſion, Thankſgiving, and Rejoycing befere the Lord, of him who 
offereth firſt=fruits, 1-===-—=--11, £6 alſo of the three years Tythes, 12, 
16. | The Covenant between God and his People ratified, 17----19. 

AN Dit fhal be when thou 77 come in unto che land 

-\vkich the LORD thy God giveth thee for an in- 
heritange, and polſeſſeſt ic, and dwelleſt therein. 

- 2 * Thar thouſbalt rake 2of the firſt of all the fruit of 
the carth þ, which thou ſhalt bring of thy land: that the 
LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou ſhalt pur zt in a 
baskec,. and ſhalt go unto the place which the LORD 
thy God ſhal chuſe to place bis Name there. 

a This ſeems to be required of each particular Maſter of a Family, 
citker upon; his firſt Settlement, or once every year at one of their 
three feaſts, when they were obliged togo up to eruſalem, as here 
they are. b Either of their Corn, or of the Fruit of Trees. ; 

3 And thok ſhalt go unto the prieſt c that (bal be in 
thoſe days, and ſay unto him, I profeſs this day unto 
the LORD thy God, that I 2meome unto the countrey 
which the LORD {ware unto our fathers for to give us. 

c (i.e.) To any of the Prieſts, who ſhall be appointed in God's 
ſtead to receive theſe oblations and acknowledgments. 

k And the prieft ſhal rake the basker out of thine 
hand gd ſet it down. before the altar of the LORD 


thy God, { 
©  5- And thou ſhalt ſpeak, and ſay before the LORD 
'thy God, 4 Syrian d ready to periſh e was my father, 
and * he went down into Egypt, and ſojourned there 


ay 'witha few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, 


4 So Jacob was, partly by his original, as being born of Syrian Pa- 
-rents, as Were 4braham and Rebecca, both of Chaldes or Meſoporamnia, 
which was a part of Syria largely ſo called, as is confeffet by Strabo, 

* 6.16.: an by Pliny, b. 5. c. 12. partly by his education and converſa- 
.tion, for which reaſon Chriſtis called a Nazarite, and a Capernaite; 
.and partly by:lis relations, his wives being ſuch, and his children 
too by their Mothers. e Either through want and poverty ; ſee 
Gen:-28. T1, 20, and 32. 10. or through the rage of his brother Eſau, 
. and the; rreachery and cruelty of his father in law Laban. 


*Ex.23 19 
Ch. 16. 10. 


Ed ts, and laid upon us hard bondage. 
= Ex. 2.23. ::9 And * when we cried unto the LORD God of our 


aMficion, and our labor, and our oppreffion. 

8 And * the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt 
with a mighty hand,and with an out-ftretched arm,and 
with great terribleneſs,and with ſigns,and with wonders. 
_ 9 And he hath brought us into this place, and hath 
given us this land, ever a land that floweth with milk 
and honey. - } Þ ; 

x0 And now,behold, I have brought che firſt-frnits of 


*Exod.12. 
36, 37» 


Wh; 


DHEBUTRAROMNOM T. 


*Ex.1,11:: 6 Afid *the-Egyptians evil intreated us, and afflit- 


fathers, the LORD heaxd our voice,and tooked on our | 


| thee to do the 


the land, which thou, O LORD, haſt given me; and ; 


thou ſhalt ſet e it f before the LORD thy God,and wor- 
ſhip before the LORD thy God. 

e To wit, mediately, by the Prieſt who was to ſet it there, v. 4. 
F (5. e.) the basket of frſt-fruits, v. 2. 
11 And thou fhalt rejoyceg in every good th7mg which the 
LORD thy God hath given unto thee, &unto thine houſe, 
thou, and theLevite, and the ſtranger that zs among you. 

£ (i. e.) Either 1. thou ſhalt hereby be cnabled to rejoyce and take 
comfort in all thy enjoyments, when thou haſt ſanftifhed them by 
giving God his portion. Or 2. thou ſhalt feaſt, ( which is oft ex- 
preſſed by rejoycing) with the Levites and ſtrangers upon the obla- 
tions which at theſe ſolemn times were offered. Which e> poſition 
is confirmed by comparing Den. 16. 10, 11, 14, 15. 

12 When thou hatt made an end of tithing all the 

tithes þ of thine increaſe, the third year, which is * the . 


CES - p a h : 
year of cithings, and haſt given #7 unto the Levite, the .g "P14, 


ſtranger, the fatherleſs, and the widow, that they may 


eat within thy gates, and be filled : 

h Of which ſee on Deur: 14: 28. i Heb: the year of that tithe, fo 
called,cither 1.becauſe theſe tithes were gathered only in that year. 
Or rather, 2.becauſe then only they were ſo beſtowed or uſed;and 
whereas theſe ſecond tithes for two years together were eaten only 
by the owners and Levites, and that in Jeruſalem, in the third year 
they were eaten alſo by the ſtrangers, fatherleſs, and widows, and . 
that in their own dwellings. The ſeventy joyn theſe words with 
the following, and for Shenath, the year, read Shenith, the ſecond, and 
take Yau for redundant, asſometimes it is, and read the place thus, 
The ſecond tithe thou ſhalt give, to the Levite, &Cc. : 

13 Then thou ſhalt ſay beforethe LORD thy God &, 
I have brought away /the hallowed things »s out of mine 
houſg, and alſo have given them unto the Levite, and 
unto the ſtranger, to the fatherleſs, and to the widow, 
according to all thy commandments which thou haſt 
commanded me : I have not tranſgreſſed thy command- 
ments, neither have I forgotten them. 

k (i. e.) Either before the Tabernacle or Temple : or rather, in 
thy private and domeſtick Addreſſes to God ; for this is to be faid 
preſently upon the diſtribution of theſe tithes, which was not done 
at Feruſalem, but in their own private gates or dwellings; except we 
will ſuppoſe that after he had given away theſe tithes at home he 
ſhould go up to Jeruſalem meerly to make this acknowledgment, 
which ſeems improbable. And this is to be ſpoken befere the Lord, 
z:e: ſolemnly ; ſeriouſly, and in a religious manner, with due re- 
ſpe& ro God's preſence and will and glory, which ts a ſufficient 
ground for that Phraſe. 1 Or, ſeparated, or removed, to wit, from 
my own proper and private Fruits. m2 (7.e.) The tithes which have 
been ſan&ifiedand ſer apart for theſe uſes. 

14 I have not eaten thereof in my mourning », nei- 
ther have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean ſe o, 
nor given ought thereof for the dead p: but I have bear- 
kened to the voice of the LORD my God,and have done 
according to all that thou haſt commanded me. 

n (7.e.) Either 1. in my funeral ſolemnities for the dead. But this 
falls in with the laſt branch. Or 2. in my diſtreſs or poverty,or up- 
on pretence of my own want, in whichcaſe men are tempted and 
inclined to fall upon ſacred or forbidden rhings. Or 3. in ſorrow, 
or grieving that I was to give away ſo much of my profits to the 
poor, but I have chearfully eaten and feaſted with them, -as I was 
obliged to do. For though it be taken for granted by ſome learned 
Expoſitors, from Deut: 14: 28, 29: that the owner was not to eat any 
part of the rhird years tithe, but ro give it all away to the ſtranger 
and fatherleſs, &c. the contrary ſeems to me more probable from 
that very place, where it is ſaid, thou ſhalt Iay it up within thy gates, 
and then it follows, that the Levite, ſtranger, &c ſhall come,to wit,to 
thy gates, and jball ear, to wit, there, as is expreſſed wv: 12: that they 
may eat within thy gates, and be filled ; which implies, that theſe tithes, 
or ſome part of them, were eaten in the owners gates or dwelling, 
with holy rejoycing and feaſting, wherein it is moſt probable the 
owner had his ſhare, though ir be nor there expreſſed, becauſe it 
wasevident in itſeffrom the foregoing paſſage, Dent: 14: 23, Oc. 
where the owner 15 allowed and commanded ro eat thoſe tithes to- 
gether with the Levizes. And howſoever ſome think the third years 
tithes, v: 28: were not the ſane with thoſe v:23:yer it eannort with 


any colour of reafon be thought that thoſe tithes which were to be 


eaten, nctonly by the Levires,but alſo by the ſtrangers, wv: 29:were 


"more ſacred than thoſe that were to be eaten by nche but the Le- 


vites and the owners, v: 23, 27: or that the owner might eat ofthe 
one,and nor of the other. o (#:e:) For any common uſe ; the words 


common and unclean being oft indifferently nſed one for the other, or 


for any other uſe than that which thou haſt appointed, which would 
have been a pollution of them. þ (7: e:) For any funeral pomp or 
ſervice or feaſt; for the Jews uſed to ſend in proviſions to feaſt with 
the neareſt relations of the Party deceaſed, of which ſee Jer: 16: 7: 
Exzek; 24: 17: Hoſ:9: 4: and 1n that caſe both the gueſts and food were 
legally polJuted, Nirmb: 19: 17, 14: and therefore the uſe of theſe 
tithes in ſuch caſes had been a double faulr, both the defiling of ſa- 
ered food, and the imploying of thoſe proviſions upon ſorrowful oc- 
caſions, which by God's expreſs command were to beeaten with re- 
joycing, Deut: 14: 26: and 26: 11. 
15 *Look down q from thy holy habitation, from *1ſ53"! 


heaven, and bleſs thy people Ifrael, and the land which 2" 


thou haſt given us, as thou ſwareſt unto our fathers, = 
land that floweth with milk and honey. | 
- q Aﬀeer that ſolemn prefefſion of their obedience to God's com- 


mands, they are taught to pray for God's blefling upon their 1and, 


whereby they areinſtruQted how vain and ineffeftual the prayers of 
ighdons or diſobedient perſons are. Payer 0 


16 This uy the LORD thy God hath conwtmnanded 

e ſtatutes and judgments: thou (halrthere- 
fore keep.and do them with all thine heart, 'and with 
all thy ſoul. 17 Thou 


Chap. XXVL 


| 


1 


Cha 


*Tof. 
*Joſ.8 


*Ex.20 


Joſh.s.; 


' Chap. 


*Joſ.8.3 2, 


*Ex.20.25 
Joſh.8.31. 


*Tol. 4.1. 


4 - 
XXVII. : — 
15 Thou haft avouched r the LORD this day « to be 
thy God, and to walkin his ways, and to keep his ſta- 
tutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and 
to hearken unto his VOICE. ; 
r Or declared, or, profeſſed, or, owned. 5s (3. e.) At this time, in this 
wilderneſs, where thou haſt accepted and ratified God's covenant. 
18 And * the LORD hath avouched thee 7 this day to 
be his peculiar people, as he hath promiſed thee, and 
that thou ſthouldeſt keep all his commandments. 

t Hath owned thee forſuch before all the world by eminent and 
glorious communications and manifeſtations ofhis powerand grace 
and favour in thee and for thee, by a ſolemn entring into covenant 
with thee, and giving peculiar laws, promiſes, and priviledges to 
thee above all mankind. « Which is here mentioned as an aCt of 
God's, becauſe though this be Man's duty, yet it is the work of 
God's grace that he will vouchſafe to give us ſuch commands, that 
he oth require and will accept of our obedience to them,and that 
we have any power or will to obey them, Ezek. 36. 26, 27. 

19 And to make thee high above all nations which he 
hath made, in praiſe, and in name, and in honour, and 
that thou mayeft be anholy people unto the LORD thy 


God, as he hath ſpoken. 

CH A P. - XXVIL. 

A Command to ſet up flones for a Remembrance, and to write the Law upon 
them. ; They muſt build the Altar of the Lord with whole ſtones, 1--=8, 
To pronounce the Bleſſmg on Gerizzim, and the Curſe on Eball, g-==-26. 

ND Moſes with the elders of Iſrael commanded 
the people, ſaying, Keep all the commandments 


which I command you this day. 

2 And it ſhal be on that day # * when ye ſhal paſs over 
Jordan, unto the land which the LORD thy God gi- 
veth thee, that * thouſhalt ſet thee up great ſtones,and 
plaiſter them with plailter 5. | 

a ( i. e.) About that time, for it was not done till ſome days af- 
ter their paſſing over. Day is oft put for time, as hath been noted 
before. 6b For conveniency of writing upon them. 

3 Andthou ſhalt write upon them all the werds of 
this law c when thouart pailed over that thou mayelt go 
in into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, 
a land thac floweth with milk and honey, as the LORD 
God of thy fathers hath promiſed thee. 

c Either 1. All the words of this book of Deuteronomy. But that 
ſeems too large for this place. Or 2. The dleflings and curſes here 
following. Burt they are mentioned as a different thing. Or 3. The 
law properlyeſo called, i« e. the ſum and ſubſtance of the precepts 
or laws of Moſes, eſpecially ſuch as were moral and general,as may 
be gueſſed from the following, part of the chapter, where the curſes 
pronounced againſt all :hat confirm not all the words of this law to do 
them are particularly applied unto the tranſgreſſours of moral laws 
only, v. 15, 16, &c. And eſpecially the Decalogue,which oft goes 
under that name. Compare Jef. 8. 32, &c. 

4 Therefore it ſhal be when ye are gone over Jordan, 
;hat ye (bal ſet uptheſe ſtones, which I command you 
this day, in mount Ebal || and thou ſhalt plaiſter them 
with plaiſter. 

|| The mount of curſing. Here the law is written, to ſignifie that 
a curſe was due to the violatours of it, and that no man could ex- 
pet juſtification or bleſſing from the works of the law, by the ſen- 
rence whereofall men are juſtly-accurſed,as being all guilty of the 
tranſgreſſion of it in one kind and degree or other. Here the ſa- 
crifices are to be offered,toſhew that there is no way to be delivered 
from this curſe, but by the blood of Chriſt, which all theſe facrifi- 
ces did rypifie, and by Chriſt's being made a curſe for us, Gal.3.13: 

5 And there thou ſhalt build an altar unto the LORD 
thy God, an altar of ſtones: *thou ſhalt not lift up a»y 


iron zoo] upon them. 

6 Thou ſhalt build the altar of the LORD thy God 
of whole ſtones 4: and thou (halt offer burnt-efferings 
thereon unto the LORD thy God, 

d( 7.e. ) Rough, not hewed nor poliſhed. 

7 And thou fhalt offer peace-offerings, and ſhalt eat 
there, and rejoyce before the LORD thy God. 

. 8 And thou thalt write upon the ſtanes all the words 
of this law very plainly e. | 
e So as to be eaſily read by all. 

9 And Moſes,and the Prieſts the Levites, ſpake to all 
Ifrael,ſaying, Take heed,and hearken.O Ifrael; this day 
thou art become the people of the LORD f thy God. 

f By thy ſolemn renewing of thy Covenant with him. 

10 Thou ihalt therefore obey the voice of the LORD 
thy God, and do his commandments, and his ſtatutes 
which I command thee this day. 

11 And Moſes charged the people the ſame day,faying, 

12 Theſe ſhal ſtand upon mount Gerizzim g,to bleſs the 
people b,when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon,and Le- 
vi, and Judah,and Ifſachar, and Joſeph,and Benjamin 3. 

.£ Obj. In Jo. 8. 33. they ſtood over againſt Mount Gerizzim. Anſw. 
x. Both aretrue: they who ſtood upon the one mount, ſtood over 
againſt the other. 2. Theſe words may be rendred beſide or near to 
(as the Hebrew al oft ſignifies) mount Gerizzim, which might be ever: 
againſt it. . þ Whence it appears that the Bleſlings alſo were pro- 


nounced as well as the Curſes, though they be not here mentioned. 
See Joſ. 8. 33. 1 All theſe were the children of the free-women, 


— 


- Leah and Rachel, to ſhew both the Dignity of the Bleſſings above the 
* Curſes, and that the Bleſſings belong oply ro thoſe as are Evange- 


lically ſuch, as this is expounded and applied, Gal. 4. 22, &«c. even 


D BUTTE. 


| becauſe he uncovereth his fathers skirt x: and all the 


to thoſe that receive the Spirit of Adoj tion 2hd Liberty. Joſeph is 
here put for both his Sons and Tribes lanoſſ and Epbravin, which 
are here reckoned as one Tribe, becauſe Levi is here numbred ; bur 
when Levi is'omitted, as it is where the diviſion of the Land is 
made, there Manaſſeh and Ephraim paſs for two Tribes. 
13 And * theſe ſhal {tand upon mount Ebal+ to curſe *ch ao 
& : Reuben, Gad and Aſher, and Zebulun, Dan, and + Eeb. j 
Naphcaali /: . # curſmg. 
k He faith, to bleſs the people, wer. 12, bnt here only to curſe; not | 
expreſſing whom, either Lecauſe he was loath to mention the p£0- 
ple as Objetts of the Curſe;or tecauſe he preſumed and hoped that 
rhough ſome particular perſons might de:erve the Curle, yer the 
generality of the people would keep out of the reach of it: or to 
intimate, that though the Bleſſing was peculiar to the people of 1/- 
rael, yet the Curſe was indefinite and common to all Nations, as 
may appear from the particular fins here num bred, which are ſuch 
as made the Gent:les guilty and abominable ro Ged, as is elſewhere 
afhrmed. See Lev. 18. 28. 1 Four of theſe are the children of the 
Bondwomen, to ſhew that the Curſe belongs to thoſe of ſervile and 
diſingenuous ſpirits and carriages to God, With theſe are joyned 
Reuben, who by his ſhameful fin fell from his Dignity, Gen. 49. 4, 
and Zabulon, as the youngeſt of Leahs Child:en, who wis neceſlary 
to be joyned with thoſe, that the numbers might be equal. = 
14 And* the Levites mz ſhal ſpeak, and ſay unto all *Dan.g.r 
the men of Iſrael with a loud voice »: J 
m (i. e.) Some of the Levites, to wit, the Priefls, which bare the 
Ark, as 1t is exprefled of. 8. 33. for the body of the Levites ſtood 
upon mount Gerizz/m, v. 12. But theſe ſtood in the Valley bet» cen 
Gerizzim and Ebal, looking towards the one or the other Mountain 
as they pronounced cither the Bleſſings or the Curſes, as m. y be gay 
thered from Joſ. 8. 33. » So as they might be heard by a g-eat num- 
ber of the people, by whom the reſt were informed and dire&ed by \| 
ſome Signal when they ſhould anſwer. | = 
15 * Curſed be the man that maketh any graven or *Exod.2qf 
molten image o, an abemination unto the LORD, the + 2" 
work of the hands of the craftſmen, and p putteth irin Lon 19:4] 
a ſecret place q; andall the people ſhal anſwer and fay, | 
* Amen. | WER 
o Under this particular he underſtands all the groſs Violati 
of the firſt Table, as underthe following Branches be comdatnts 
all other Sins againſt the ſecond Table, as is manifeſt from hence, 
that there ate other Sins, not here mentioned; which are as Yfinful 
as theſe, and will as certainly expoſe a man to the Curſe as any of ' 
'thereſt. p Or, although, as that Particle ſometimes ſignifies. q He 
takes ſpecial notice of ſuch, partly to ſhew the folly of thoſe men - 'W 
who think to hide their Sins by this means ; and partly to deter , . 
men from ſuch Prattices, which men could not ſee nor puniſh,by {| 
makirig them their own Condemners and Executioners. r ( 5. 6. ) 
So let it be : I wiſh this Curſe may befal me ifT be guilty of this 
Crime. See Numb. gs. 22. Jer. 11. 5. Fa 
16 * Curſed be he that ſerreth light gby his father or £5.10; 
his mother ? and all the people ſhal ſay, Anien. & 21:47; 
s Or, deſpiſeth in his heart : or reproacheth or curſeth, to wit, ſ6- \. 
cretly, as before : for if the fa& was notorious, it was puniſhed p 
with death, Levit, 20. 9. 
17 *Curſedbe hethat removeth his neighbours land- 
mark #: and all the people (hal ſay, Amen. ; 
t To wit, deſignedly, to defraud his Neighbour, or enlarge kis 
own portion. tf » 
18 * Curſed be he that maketh the blind to wander 
out of the way «: andall the people ſhal ſay, Amen: 
» That miſleadeth ſimple ſouls, giving them pernicious Counſel, 
either for this life, or for the next. 
19 * Curſed be he that perverteth the judgment of *Ex;22:24 
the ſtranger, fatherleſs, and widow : and all the peo- a 
ple ſhal ſay, Amen.. _ ; P Let ys 
20 * Curſed be'-he that lieth with his fathers wife, A 


| 
| 
x 
1 


[ 


*1iCor:14 
16. | 


Tch:r9:1 | 


*Lev:19:1 


people ſhal fay; Amen. : 
x See Deite 22, 20, | 
21 * Curſedbehe that lieth with any manner of beaſt: 
and all the people (bal fay, Amen. | 
22 * Curſed be he that lieth with kis ſiſter, the daugh- 
is father, or the daughter of his mother : and all 


*Le:18:29 


P,. » x Noow 
ter of his (Le:18 


the people ſhalſay, Amen. 
23 * Curſed'be he that lieth with his mother in law : & 20006 
and all the people ſhal fay, Amen. xa 
24 '* Curſed be he thatimiteth y his neighbour ſecret- &21:12 
ly : and all the people (bal ſay, Amen. Le:24-17, 
y (5. e, ) Killeth, as that word is oft uſed. | Ne.3%-08 
25 *Curſed be he that taketh reward to ſlay an in- 4.50% uy 
nocent perſon : and all the people (hal ſay, Amen... & 16.19. 
26 * Curſed be he that confirmeth not x all the words of Eze.22.12 
this law to do them : andall the people ſbal ſay, Amen. | Jer.11.3. 
2 (i.e.) Performeth not: for he that tranſgrefſethdoth in ſome ſorr al.3.19. | 
deſtroy and make void the Law of God,as to the main end for which 
it was given, even to the Regulation of his life and a&tions, and as 
far as lies in himdiſannuls the authority and force of God's Law, 

| oil CH AP. Fog | 
T''e Bleſſmgs of Obeatence, 1-=-=14. Curſes for Diſobedience, 15-=--38. - 
ANDic ſhal come to pats, * If thou ſhalc henrken di- *£69-26.3 
ligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, 

to obſerve, and to do all his commandments which [I 
command thee this day; that the LORD thy God wal 
ſet thee on high « above all nations of the carth. 

s (i.e. ) Advance and honour thee with divers Priviledges and 


FLe:18:1 


—_ 


bleſſings, as it here follows. Ac 
' 2 And 


2 £' 2 


lap. XX VIII 

2 Andall theſe bleſfings ſhal come on thee, and o- 
vertake thee b, if thou ſhalt hearken unto the veice of 
the LORD thy God. 

þ Thoſe bleſſings which others greedily follow after, and off- 
times never overtake,they ſhall follow after thee,and ſhall be thrown 
into thy lap by my ſpecial kindneſs. 

2 Bletſcd ſha/tthou be in the city, and bleſſed ſhalt 

| thou be in the field. 
Gen. 49. 4 Bleſſed ſball be * the fruit of thy + body, and the 

PL.127- fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cartel, the 1n- 
Heb. bety creaſe of thy kine, and the flocks of thy ſheep. 
Dr,dough, 5 Bleſſed ſhali be thy basket, and thy || ſtore c. 
r knead. < (5. e.) It ſhall always be well repleniſhed, and the Proviſion 
e-frough4 thou haſt there ſhall be preſerved for,and in due time brought forth 


to, thy uſe and ſervice: See Devr: 26: 2, 10. ; 

6 * Bleffed ſhalt thou be when thou comeſt in, and 
bleſſed ſhalt thou be when thou goeſt our 4. 

d (5. e.) In all thy affairs and adminiſtrations, which are oft 
expreſſed by this Phraſe, as Numb: 27: 17; Dent; 31: 2: 2 Sam: 3: 25 
2 Chron: 1; 20: At: 1: 21: and 9g: 28. : ; 

7 The LORD (hal cauſe thine enemies that riſe up 
againſt thee, to be ſmitten before thy face : they (bal 
come out againſt thee one way, and flee before rhee 
feven ways e. | | 

e (i:e:) Many ways, asis uſual whenan Army is totally over- 
thrown and difſpated. 


P{.121.8. 


Or,hor- in thy || ftore-houſes, and in all that thou ſerteſt thine 
hand unto, .and he hal bleſs thee in the land which the 
LORD thy God giveth thee. ; x 

F( 5:6: ) Shall by his ſovereign and powerful Providence give t, 
even when it ſeems furtheſt from thee. and not likely to come to 
thee without a Word of Command from God himſelf. 

9 * The LORD (hal eſtabliſh thee an holy people un- 
to himſelf g, as he hath ſworn unto thee : if thou ſhalc 
keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, and 
+ walk in his ways. 


Exod.19. 


3 6. 


which he ſeparated thee to himſelf as an holy and peculiar people, 
and ſhall publickly own thee for ſuch, as it follows, werſe 10. 


Gen.2r. art called by the Name of the LORD b,* and they (bal 
2, 23. & be afraid of thee. 
6, 28. h (#: e: ) That you are in deed and truth his People and Children: 
See Deut: 14: 1: and 26: 18. For to becalled oft-times ſignifies 70 be, 
as Iſa: 47: 1, 5: and 56: 7: Mat: 5: 9, 19: and 21: 13. : 
chap.zo, 11 And*the LORD (bal make thee plenteous [lin 
,&. goods, in thefRir of thy + body, and in the fruit of thy 
Or, fir cattel,and in the fruit of thy ground 3,in the land which 
Heb. 5211, the LORD ſware unto thy fathers, to give thee, 
belly . | . 
| : The ſame things which were ſaid beforeare repeated, to ſhew 
that God would repeat and multiply his bleſſings upon them- 
' 12 The LORD ſhal open unto thee his good treaſure 
| k,the heaven to give the rain-unto thy land in his ſeaſon, 
15.6. nd to bleſs all the work of thine hand : * and thou 
' ſbalt lendunto many narions,and thou (halt not borrow. 
k To wit, the Heaven or the Air, as it here follows, which 15 
God's Sr 
things for Man's uſe. See fob: 38: 22: Pſat: 33: 7. 
\ 13 And the LORD fhal make thee the head/, and 
not the tail,and thou ſhalt be above only, and thou ſbalr 
not be beneath : if that thou hearken unto the command- 
ments of the LORD thy God, which I:command thee 
- this day, to obſerve and to do them? >; F | 
I The chief of all People in Power, or at Jeaſt, in Dignity; -and 
Priviledges ; ſo that even they that are not under thine Authority 
ſhall reverence thy. Greatnefs and Excellep:y: So it was in. David's 
and Solemon's time,and ſo it ſhould have been much oftner and much 
more, if they had performed the Conditions here required. For the 
Phraſe ſee 1/a. 9. r3; 14.' and 19. 15. © © 4 
14 And thou ſhalt not go aſidefrom any of the words 
which I command thee this day;to the 'righthand or to 
the. left, to go after other gods to ſerve them. 
* Lev.26. T5 Butir ſhal cometo paſs, *if thou wilt not hear- 
24-Lam.2- ken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to obſerve 
27.Dan.9. to do all his commandments, and his: ſtatutes, which I 
M1 >. ». command thee this day; that all theſe curſes ſhal come 
upon thee, and overtake thee mw. © | 
» $o-asthou ſhalr not be able to eſcape them, as thou ſhalt vain- 
ly hope and endeavout to do. 


16 Curſed ſhalt thou be in the city, and curſed ſhalt 
thou be in the field; | [2% 5 

17 Curſed ſhall bethy basket and thy ſtore. 

18 Curſed ſhall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit 
of thy land, the increaſe of thy kine, and the flocks of 
thy ſheep. . | | 

19 Curſed ſhalt thou be when thou comeſt in, and 
curſed ſhalt thou be when thou gaeſt out. 

20 The LORD ſhal ſend upon thee curſing, vexati- 
on », and rebuke o, in all that thou ſetteft thine hand 
'+Heb. Unto + for todo, until thou be deſtroyed, and until thou 
which thes periſb quickly,becauſe of the wickedneſs of thy doings, 
; wouldeſt do» whereby thou haſt forſaken me. 


. 


D-BUTERON.O MT. 


8 The LORD ſhal command f the blefling upon thee | 


g ( i: e: ) Shall confirm andeſtabliſh his Covenant with thee, by | 
| Egypt, and with the * Emerods, and with the ſcab,and Pies 9-3 
io And all the peopleof the earth ſhall ſee that thou - 26, 


onſe, where he treaſures up Rain or. Wind or other 


» Or, diftirbance. This ſeems chiefly to concern the mind, and its 
torment ariſing from the diſappointment ofhopes and the preſages 
of its approaching miſeries. o To wit, from God, not ſo much in 
words as by his ations, by croſs providences, by ſharp and ſore if. 
flitions, which are oft called rebukes, as 2 King 19. 3. Pal. 18. I5, 
and 39. 11. and 80.17. 1/a, 51.20. and 66. 15. Exch. 5. 15.and 25. 17. 

21 The LORD (bal make the peſliience cleave unto 
thee, until he have conſumed thee from off the land 
whither thou goeſt to poſſeſs it. | 

2 * The LORD ſhal ſmite thee with a conſumpti- * Lev. «. 
on, and with a feaver, and with an.inflammation, and 25 
with an extream burging, and with the || ſword and ||Or, 
with blaſting, 2nd with mildew p: andthey ſhal purſue ©%: 
thee until thou periſh. 

p Two plagues or evil affe&ions of corn. See 1 King: 8: 37: 2 Chr: 

G6: 28: Amos 4: 9: Hag: 2: 17. 

23 And the heaven that is over thy head ſhal be braſs 
9, and the earth that js under thee ſþ:// be iron 7. 

9 ( 7:e: ) Like braſs, hard and dry,and ſhutup from giving rain, 

See Levit: 26: 19. 7 Hard and chaprt and barren. 

24 The LORD ſhal make the rain of thy land pow- 
der and duſt 7; from heaven ſhal ic come down upon 
thee, until thou be deſtroyed 5. 

r Either 1. thy rain ſhall be as unprofittble to thy ground and 
ſeed as if it were only ſo much duſt. Or 2. In ſtead of rain ſha:l 
come nothing but duſt from heaven, which being raiſed and carri- 
ed up by the wind in great abundance, doth return and tal! upon 


the earth as it were in clouds or ſhowrs. 5 To wit, by famine fol- 
lowing theſe great droughts. 


25 * The LORD fhal cauſethee to be ſmitten before , 
thine encmies: thou ſhalt go out one way againſt them, x7, Hogs 
and flee ſeven ways before them, and * ſhalt be + re- | 
moved rt into all the kingdoms of the earth. 


# Heb. for # removing ; to be toſſed like a football from place to 
Place, and from people to people. 


24. 9. 
Ez. 23.46. 
T Heb. fr 


26 And * thy carcale tbal be- meat unto all fowls of 77%. | 


theair, and unto the beaſts of the earth, and no man Jer 4g _ 
ſhal fray them away. & 16.4. & 


27 The LORD will ſmite thee with * the botch of 34: 20. 
with the itch, whereof thou canſt not be healed. 

28 The LORD bal ſmite thee with ' madneſs, 
blindneſs «, and aſtoniſhment of heart x. 

u To wit,of mind,ſo that they ſhall not know what to do:ſee Jobs. 
13.14:{0 as they ſhall commonly chuſe and follow theeworſt counſels 


and courſes,to their own ruine. x They ſhall be filled with wonder & 
horror becauſe of the ſtrangeneſs and ſoreneſs of their calamities. 


29 And thoulbalc* grope at noon days y, as the blind *Job 5.14. 
gropeth in darkneſs, and thou ſbalt ne proſper in thy 11s. 59:10. 
ways z, and thou ſhalt be only oppreſſed, and ſpoiled 
evermore, and no man lbal fave hee. 

Y(2.e.) In the moſt clear and evident matters thou ſhalt oroſly 


miſtake and miſs thy way. z Thy counſels and enterprizes fhall b 
fruſtrated and turn to oy deflen tion DE Og e Jer: 
er:$: 10, 


30 * Thou ſbalt berroth a wife, and another man ſhal ; ke” 
lie with her a: thou * ſhalt build an houſe, and'another F and 
ſhal dwell therein : *chou ſþalt plant a vineyard, and Am: 5:1: 
ſhalt not Þ gatber the grapes thereof. 


*1Sam.5.6 
and Pſ. 78. 66. 


Zeph:1:13 
a Before thou canſt conſummare th 1 J *Ch 20: 6 
thy wife. And fo in the following = Smorvaray +-corp nan + Heb. 

37 Thine ox ſhalbe ſlain before thine eyes, and thou gg | 
Shalt not eat thereof : thine aſs ſhall be violently taken pet 
away from before thy face, and F shal not be "reſtored mer. 
to thee: thy sheep ſhall be given unto thine enemies,and tHeb/tal 
thou ſhalt have none to _—_ them. mag" 

32 Thy ſons and thy daughters ſhall be given unto a- Cs 
notker people 5, and thine eyes $shal look, and fail c 
with longing for them all the day long: and there $hal 
be no might d in thine hand. 

b By thoſe who have conquered them, and taken them captives, 
who ſhall give or ſell them to other perſons, as the manner was. c 
Or, be conſumed, partly with grief and plentiful tears fhed for them ; 
and partly with earneſt delire, and vain and long expeQation 'of 
their return. See Pſal. 119. 82. 4 (7. e.) No power toreſcue them, 
nor money to ranſom them. ' : | 

33 Thefruitofthy land and all thy labours $hal a 
nation which thou knoweſt not e cat up : and thou shalt 
be only opprefled and cruſhed alway f: 

e Which ſhall come froma far country, which thou didft not at 
all expeCt orfear, and therefore will be the more dreadful when 
they come; a nation whoſe language thou underſtandeft not, and 
therefore can(t not plead with them for mercy, nor expett any fa= 
vour from them. f Not ſometimes conquered, and ſometimes con- 
quering, as the courſe of War commonly is, bur in all times, and 
in all thy aQtions and attempts, foiled and worſted. 

34 SO that thou shalt be mad for the ſight of thine 
eyes which thou shalt fee. . 

35 The LORD $hal ſmite thee in the knees, and in 
the legs, with a fore botch that cannot be healed, from 
the ſole of thy foot, unto the top of thy head. 

36 The LORD hal bring thee, and * thy king *,Kin:1: 
which thou $halt ſet over thee,unto a nation which ne1- 4.5: & 24: 


Chap: xxvm. F 


ther thou nor thy fathers have known, and * thereshalt 12: & 25: 
thou ſerve other gods b, wood and ſtone, *- 7. 2 Chro: 


Cha 


*;Ki 
oF 
Js 
Zect 
13- 


*Mic. 


Hag. 


#Heb 
ſoalln 
thines 


[Or,p 


{ Het 
ſcend f 
the up 
and. th 

It o 
fend q 
down. 
*Lam 


. 


chap. 
I5. 


Chap. XXWHIL. | 

| | g/ The calamity ſhall be both univerſal, which even thy King 
ſhall not be able to avoid, much leſs the Subje&s, who have far leſs 
advantage and opportunity for eſcape ; and irrecoverable, becauſe 
he who ſhould prote& or ſecure them 1s loſt with them. See Lam: 
4. 20. h Either being corrupted by their examples and counſels, or 
compelled to it by th-ir tyranny.5o what formerly was their choi-e 
and delight,now becomes their plagueand miſery. And this doubt- 
leſs was the condition of many J/raelites under the Aſhrian and Ba- 
byloniſh captivities,as We may gather from Jer:44.17,18,19. and other 
places, tho' many of them kept themſelves free fromthat infettion 


27 And thou ſhalt become *an aſtoniſhmenr,a prove:b 
and a by-word, among all nations ; whither the LORD 
ſhall lead thee. | 

7 All other nations ſhall wonder to ſee ſuch calamities befal ſuch 

a people; And when they would expreſs any dreadful affliction 1n 

a proverbial way, they ſhall make uſe of thy example: They ſhall 

alſo iport themſelves in thy miſeries, and ſay, Theſe are the peo- 

tic6.15. ple of the Lord, the only Saints upon earth, Oc. 3 
Hag. 4.6. 38 * Thou ſhalt carry much ſeed out into the field, an 
ſhalt gather but little in* for the locuſt ſhall conſume it. 

29 Thou (balt plant vineyards, and dreſs them, but 
ſhalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes 3 
for the worms ſhall ear them. 

40 Thou ſhalt have Olive-trees throughout all thy 
coaſts, but thou ſhalt not anoint 5hy ſelf with the oil; 
for thine olive ſhall caſt his frur. 

x Thou ſbalt beger ſons and daughters, but | thou 
(balt not enjoy them: for they ſhall go into captivity. 

42 All thy trees, and fruit of thy land (hall the locults 
[Orpoſeſe» [| conſume. 

43 The ſtranger that is within thee &, ſhall Þ get up a: 


*;Kin.9.7 
Jer. 24+ 9+ 
and 25. 9- 
Zech. 8. 


13- 


+Heb.they 
ſhall not be 
thines 


+Heb. a/- hoye thee very high,and thou (balt come down very low. 
ſend above |, (i. e.)Within thy gates; who formerly honoured and ſerved 
gr hg : _ and were ſome of them glad of the crums which fell from thy 
taDdIC. . 
| {cre 44 He ſhall lend to thee, and thou ſhalt not lend to 
wn. him: *he fall be the head and thou ſhalt be the tal. 
'Lam.1-5- 45 Moreover, all theſe curſes ſhall come upon thee, 
and ſhall purſue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be de- 
ſtroyed, becauſe thou hearkenedſt not unto the voice of 
the LORD thy God, to keep his commandments, and 
his ſtatutes which he commanded thee, 
46 And they / ſhall be = thee for a ſign, and for a 
wonder »», and upon thy ſeed for ever : 
I (z.e.) Theſe curſes now mentioned. m (i.e.) Signal and won- 
derful to all that hear of them. 
47 Becauſe thou ſervedſt not the LORD chy God 
"hap. 32. With joyfulneſs, and with gladneſs of heart, * for the a- 
15. bundance of all things ». 


7 Or, tnthe abundance of allthings ; for this is oppoſed to in hun- 
ge”, inthirſt, &c. verſe 48. And the Hebrew Mem: oft ſignifies in, as 
Exod:.25. 18. and Job. 19. 26. Pſal: 72. 16. 

$ Therefore ſhait thou ſerve thine enemies, which 
the LORD hall ſend againſt thee, in hunger, and in 
thirſt, and in nakedneſs, and in want of all :hings, and 
he ſhall put a yoke of Iren o upon thy neck, until he 
have deſtroyed thee. | 
| o Which thou canſt neither well bear, nor break. See Fer: 28. 


I3, 14. 

PPP _ * The LORD (hall bring a nation againſt thee 
and 6.2, from far, from the end of the earth, «s * /wift as the 

Luk. i9.. eagle flyeth p; a nation whoſe tongue thou ſhalt not F 

43. underſtand : 

Je.48.40. > Heb: 4s the Eagle flies, (i.e.) not only ſwiftly, as 1s expreſſed in 
49- 22. our tranſlation, for which the Babylonian is noted and compared to 

He 4's an Eagle, Jer: 4. 13. Ezek: 17. 3. Dan: 7. 4. Butallſo fiercely and 

tHeb ra greedily, as the Eagle to its prey; "alſo ſtrongly and irreſiſtibly. 

-9ea7 Poſlibly this may be underſtood of the Romans, who did come from 
far, from the end of the earth, more truely and literally than the Chal- 
deans, whoſe Country was not far from Jude, and this may allude 
to the Eagle which was in their Enfigns. 

5o A nation Þ of fierce countenance p, which ſhall 
not regard the perſon of the old, or ſhew favour to the 
young. 

p Heb: Strong of face or countenance, (7.e. ) bold and impudent, 
hardy and undaunted, cruel and uncompaſſionate and inflexible, 
ſparing no Age nor Sex. | 

51 And he (hall eat the fruit of thy cattel, and the 
fruit of thy land, until thou be deſtroyed ; which alſo 
ſhall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the in- 
creaſe of thy kine, or flocks of thy ſheep, until he have 
deſtroyed thee. 

52 And he ſhall beſiege thee in all thy gates.until thy 
high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou cruſt- 
edſt, throughout all thy land, and he ſhall beſiege thee 
in all thy gates,throughout all thy land which the LORD 
thy God hath given thee. 

53 And * thou tbalr eat the fruit of thine own +body, 

Jo. = the fleſh of chy ſons, and of thy daughters (which the 
Lan, 2,7. LORD thy God hath given thee)in the fiege,and inthe 
and 4.10, ſtraitneſs wherewith thine enemies ſhall diſtrefs thee. 

bHeb,belly 


*Lev. 26. 
29.2King. 
6 28, 29, 


4 
g” 


DE U T B R © N 0 2Z 


| 


£3 t: , } 
| | Chap. XXVIIF 
and toward* the wife of his boſom,and toward therem- _ | 
nant of his children, which he (ball leave: | 
q (i.e.) Unkind, envious, covetous to monopolize theſe dainty 


*ch. 1: 
its to themſelves, and grudging that their deareſt relations ſhould 
have any part ofthem. | 


55 So that he will not give to any of thetn, of the 
fleſh of his children whom he ſhall eat: becauſe he hath 
-othing left him in the ſiege,and in the ſtraitneſs where- 
with thine enemies ſha!] diſtreſs thee In all thy gates. 

56 The tender and delicate woman among you, which 
would not adventure to ſet the ſole of her foot upon the 
ground for delicateneſs and tenderneſs, her eye ſhall be 
evil r towards the husband of her boſom, and towards 
her ſon, and towards her daughter. 


r (7.e.) Unmerciful: She will deſire or deſign their deſtru&ion 
for her food. 


57 And towards her f young one 5, that cometh out + Heb« 4 | 
from berween her feet, and towards her children which 7-974 
the ſhall bear :: for ſhe ſhal) eat them for want of all 
things ſecretly in the ſiege,and ftraitneſs wherewith thine 
enemy ſhall diſtreſs thee in thy gates. 

s Heb: Afrer-birth: That which was loathſome to behold. will now 
be pleaſant to eat; and together with it ſhe ſhall eat the child which 


was Wraptup in it, and may be included in this expreſſion. # Or, 
which ſhe ſhall have born, 7. e. her more grown children. 


58 If thou wilt not obſerve to do all the words of 
this law, that are written in this book, tha: thou may- 
eſt fear this glorious and fearful Name «, THE LORD 
THY GOD: 


u (7.e.) Thing or perſon, to wit, this glorious God. Names ate 
oft put for things, as « Kings 5. 3. Pſal: 20. 1.and r1s5. 1. Atts 4. 12. 
Eph: 1. 21. and for Perſons, as 4s 1. 15. Rev: 3. 


59 Then the LORD will make thy plagues wonder- 
ful, and the plagues of thy ſeed, ever great plagues, and 
of long coutinuance, and fore ſickneſſes, and of long 
continuance. ; | 

60 Moreover, he will bring upon thee all the * diſeaſes ch. 7.1 
of Egypt, which chou walt afraid of: and they ſhall 
cleave unto thee. | 

61 Alſoevery ſickneſs, and every plague which is not lj 
written in the book of this law, them will the LORD = 


: 
£ 


| 
| 
if 
| 


f bring upon thee, until thou be deſtroyed. Heb. | 
62 And * ye ſhall be left few in number , whereas ye _ ” 


were * as the ſtars of heaven for multitude: becauſethou *ch. 4.254 
wouldelt not obey the voice of the LORD thy God. *ch.10.2 
63 And ir ſhall come to paſs, tha: as the LORD re- 


joyced over you to de you good, and to multiply you, , 
ſo the LORD * will rejoyce over you to deftroy U by OY - 


andro bring you to nought, aadye ſhall be plucked from 
off the land whither thou goeſt to poſleſs it y. | 
x His juſt indignation againſt you will be fo great, thats will 
be a pleaſure to him to take vengeance on you. For though he doth 
' not delight in the death ofa Sinner in it ſelf, yet he doth doubtleſs 
.clight in the oo of his Juſtice upon -incorrigible ſinners, 
icing rhe exerciſe of all his attributes muſt needs pleaſe him, elſe 
he were not perfe&ly happy. y Which was no wo land, but 
a moſt pleaſant land, a land of Promiſe, a token of God's favour, 
and a pledge of their eternal Inheritance, which was a great ag- 
gravation of their loſs of it. 


64 And the LORD * ſhal ſcatter thee among all people, *Lev. 26 
fromthe one end of the carth, even to the other end of the 33; Xe 

- 1 8, Jer. 
earth; and there thou ſhalt ſerve other gods, which neither 16. 13. 
thou nor thy fathers have known, eve» wood and ſtone. 

65 And *among theſe nations (halt thou findno eaſe, *Amosg. 
neither fhall the ſole of thy foot have reſt z, but the + 
LORD {ball give thee there a trembling heart, and fail- - 
ing of eyes, and ſorrow of mind. E 

2 Ye ſhall have no ſettlement in the land whither you are baniſh- 
ed, but there you ſhall be toffed about from place to place, and 


ſold from perſon to perſon, or Cain-like, wander about like a ya« 
gabond. 


£6 And thy life ſhall hang in doubt before thee s, 
and thou ſhalt fear day and night z and ſhalt have nons 
aſſurance of thy life. 

4 Either becauſe thou art in the hands of thy enemies that have 
power, and want not will, to deſtroy thee : Or becauſe of the ter- 
rors ofthy own mind, and the guilt of thy conſcience making thee 


ro fea:, even where no great cauſe to fear is. 

65> * In the morning thou ſhalt fay, Would Ged it * Joby: 4. 
were even : and at even thou ſhalt ſay, Would God it 4 
were morning : for the fear of thine heart wherewich 
thou ſbalt fear, and for the fight of thine eyes, which 
chou (halt ſee. 

68 And the LORD * ſhall bring thee into Egypt a- *Jer.44. 4. 
gain b with ſhips c by the way «4 whereof I ſpake unto Hoſ's. 13! 
thee, * Thou ſhale ſee it no more again: and there ye. 2nd 9. 3- 
ſhal be ſold unto yourenemies for bond-men,and bond- "©7726 


women, and no man ſhall buy you e. 
b Whence he hath now fo glorioufly delivered thee, as repent- 


ing of all his kindneſs ro thee, and refolved ro undo w hat he hath 
done for thee. And the remembrance of what they endured in E- 
Zypr, could not bur make the thoughts of ceturning thither again 
very terrible to them, c Which was litterally fufilled under 7icus, 

2k 3 wha 


"= 
” 
j P- 
[ 


*-Numb: 
21.24,33- 
Chap. 2. 
' 32, and 3. 


XXIR. 


- mind them of that time when they went over the Sea without 


' now they would have occaſion ſadly to 


God, had their hearts made fat, and their eyes and ears cloſed, that 


- the LORD your God g. 


- the half tribe of Manaſſeh. 
| do them, that ye may Þ proſper in all that ye do. 


- your God h: your captains of your tribes, your elders, 


# that zs in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood, un- 


D E U T E 


when multitudes of them were carried thither in ſhips, and fold 
brferrag for Slaves, as Joſephus relates. and this expreſſion ſeems to 


ing up the Seca before them,&c.which 
remember. d Or, 7s the "oy: 
the Hebrew Beth here ſignifying 70, as it doth Ger. 11. 4, Zevit. 16. 
22. Pſal. 19.5. and g1. = For A 8. And the way ſeems not to be 
meant here of the uſual road-way from Canasn to Egypt, which was 
wholly by land, bur to be put for the end of the way or journey, 
even the land of Egypr, for to this, and not to the road-way be- 
tween Canaan and Egypr, agree the words here following, whereof 
I ſpake unto thee, thou ſbalt ſee it, (3. e.) Egypt) no more again, And ſo 
that way is put for, to that land, in a place parallel to this, where 


ſhips,” God miraculouſly d 


*® O-N.O MN T 


Cliap. —_ "” 


12 That thou ſhouldeſt + enter inte covenant / with 


the LORD thy God, and into his oath, which the LORD # Heb; 


thy God maketh with thee this day : 


[ (5.e.) Into covenant or agreement confirmed by a ſolemn oath. 


paſs. 


13 Thathe may eſtabliſh thee to day for a people un- 
to himſelf,and hat he may be unto thee a God, as he 


hath ſaid unto thee, and as he hath ſworn unto thy fa- 
thers, to Abraham, to Iſaac, and to Jacob. 

14 Neither with you only do I make this covenant, 
and this oath : 


the very fame words are uſed, Deur. 17, 16. to which this place 

palpably alludes. e Either becauſe the number of you captives | 

thall be ſo great, that the market ſhall be glutted with you; 'Or be- | 
cauſe you ſhall be ſo loathſome and contemptible, that men ſhall ! 
not be willing to have you for Slaves. | 
of the Jews, after the deſtruQtion of Jeruſalem, as Joſephus the Jew |; 
hath left upon record. : 

CHAP. XXIX. 

The manifold Works and Mercies of G1d. a Motive to Obedience, 1=—=9. Mo- | 
ſes ſolemnly engageth them to keep Covenant with God io —=17. Unbe- | 
lief, careleſs Contempt, and breach of Covenant, ſhall be ſeverely puniſbed, | 
18 28. Theend and uſe of the revealed Will of God. . 

Heſe are the words of the covenant «, which the 
LORD commanded Moſes to make with the 
children 'of Iſrael, in the land of Moab, * befide the 


covenant b' which he made with them in Horeb. 
| @ Theſe are the terms or conditions upon which God hath mae, 
7. e- renewed Covenant with you: 6 (7.e.) That cntring into or 
ſtriking of Covenant. The Covenant was but one-in ſubſtance, but 
various in the time and manner of its diſpenſation. 

2 And Moſcscalled untoall Iſrae},and ſaid unto them, 
* Ye have ſeen all that the LORD did before your eyes 
in the land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and unto all his 
ſervants; and unto all his land: ; 

3 * The great temptations which thine eyes have 
ſeen, the ſigns, and thoſe great miracles : 

4 Yet the LORD hath not given you anheart to per- 


not here with us this day m: 

7 (i. e ) With your poſterity. For fo the covenant was made at 
to continue the bleſſing of Abraham upon his poſterity, ſo Le alſo 
engaged them to the ſame duties and conditions which were requir- 
ed of Abraham. So it is even among men, where a King confers an 
eſtate upon a Subje& and his Heirs for ever, uponſome certain con- 
ditions, all his Heirs who enjoy that benefit, are obliged to the 
ſame conditions, But whatſoever becomes of mans right, God the 
Creator and Soveraign Lord of all men and things,hath an unqueſti- 
onable right and power to oblige all perſons that are or ſhall be, to 
ſuch conditions. as he pleaſeth, and eſpecially to ſuch conditions 
as are for their own benefit, which is the preſent caſe. 


Egypt», and how we came through the nations o which 
ye pailed by. 


them, as the Golden Calf ſhewed, and therefore need to renew 
your Covenant with God ; where alſo we were in dreadful bondage, 
whence God alone hath delivered us, to whom therefore we are 
deeply obliged, and have all reaſon to renew our Covenant with 
him. o (7.e.) With what hazards, if God had nor appeared for us. 

17 And ye have ſeen their abominations, and their 
7 idols p, wood and ſtone, ſilver and gold, which were 
among them.) | 

2? What ſorry tools they are,what ſenſeleſs and ridiculous deities; 


ceive, andeyes to ſee, and ears to hear, unto this day c: 
c This verſe comes in by way of corre&iqn or exception to the 
foregoing clauſe in this manner, I faidindeed, ye have ſeen, &C.v. 2. 
and rhineeyes have ſeen, &c. but I muſt xecal my words, for in truth 
you have not ſeen them; in ſeeing you have not ſeen, and perce:- 
ving you have not perceived them: You have perceived and ſeen 
them ,with the eyes of your body, but not with your minds and 
hearts ; you have not ſeen them to any purpoſe : You have not yet 
learned rightly to underſtand the word and works of God, ſo as to 
know them for your good, and to make a rightuſe of them, and to 
comply with them: Which he exprefſeth thus, The Lord hath not 
given you, &c, not to excuſe their wickedneſs, bur partly to dire&t 
them what courſe to take, and to whom they muſt have recourſe 
for the amending of their former errours, and for a good under- 
ſtanding and improvement of God's works ; and partly to aggra- 
vare their fin, and to intimate, that although the hearing ear, and 
the ſeeing eye, and the underftanding heart, be the workmanſhip 
of God, Prov. 20. 12. and the effeQts of his ſpecial grace, Deut. 30. 


their own fault, and the juſt puniſhment of their former ins ; their 
preſent caſe being like theirs in 1aiz's time, who firſt ſhut their 
eyes and ears that they might not ſee and hear, and would not un- 
derſtand, and then by the tremendous but righteous Judgement of 


they ſhould not be able to ſee and hear, and underſtand, as is ma- 
nifeſt from the hiſtory of their carriage in the wilderneſs. 


- 5 AndI have led you forty years in the wilderneſs, 
your cloaths are not waxen old upon you, and thy ſhoe 
is. not waxen old upon thy foot d. 


d So far, that it was neceſſary for you to throw them away, and 
to get new ones. See on Deut. 8. 4. 


' 6 Ye have not eaten bread e, neither have ye drunk 
wine or ſtrong drink f, that ye might know that I am 


e (i.e,) Common bread purchaſed by your own money,or made 
by your own hands, but Heavenly and Angelical Bread, Devr. 8. 2. 
Pal. 78.,”24, 25. You have ſubſiſted without bread the Naffe of life. 

But only water out of the rock. g The Lord Omnipotent and All- 
ſufficient for your proviſion without the help of any Creatures, and 
Jour God in covenant with you, who hath a true affe&ion to you, 
ftherly care of you, even when ordinary means fail. 

- 7 And when ye came unto this place. * Sihon the 
King of Heſhbon, and Og the King of Baſhan came out 
againſt us unto battel, and we ſmote them, 

'$ And we took their land, and* gave it for aninhe- 


ritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to 
9 * Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and 
xo Ye ſtand this day all of you befere the LORD 


and your officers, with all the men of Iſrael. 
. b In his preſence, who ſees your hearts and carriages, and before 


his Tabernacle, where it is probable they were now called together, 
and aſſembled for this work. See verſe 2. : 


Ir Your little ones, your wives, and thy ſtranger 


ſo that you have great reaſon to value your God,_and to cleave to 
him in Covenant, .and to take heed of ſuch abominable Idolatries, 


18 Leſtchere ſhould beq among you,man or woman, 
or family, or tribe, whoſe heart turneth away r this day 
from the LORD our God, to go, «nd ſerve the gods of 
theſe nations: * leſt there ſhould be among you a root 
s that beareth || gall and wormwood xz. 

q Or take heed or beware /eſt there be. For it ſeems to be an Ellip- 
ſis, or defe&t ofa verb which is uſual in ſcripture; and which we 


, have in a caſe parallel to this, Ger. 3. 22. And now we muſt take 
| care left he put forth, &c. Or this particle, le#, may be joyned with 


* I5 But with him that ſtandeth here with us this day? 
| before the LORD our God, * and alſo with bi that is *$:2 ag, 


16 (For ye know how we have welt inthe land of 


2. 39. 
1 Cor: 7. 


And this was the condition ; firſt with 4braham and his ſeed, by which as God engaged himfelf 4. 


2 Where you have ſeen their Idolatries, and learned too much of 


f Heb: 
dungy gads. 


* Heb: 12, 
I5. 
|| Or, - 


' v, 14, 15. to this purpoſe, I now renew the covenant with you, - 


and with your poſterity, leſt any of you or yours ſhould be tempted 
| to depart from God, &c. » (3.e.) Who turneth away from God to 
' Idols, not by conſtraint, but by choice, and the inclination of his 
; own heart. By this phraſe he leads them to the ſpring of their fin 
| and ruine, even their ewn hearts, which he admoniſheth them 


6. Jer. 31. 33. and 32. 39. &c. yet their want of this grace was | hereby to look to above all things. s Either 1. Anevil heart enclin- 
n . « ZZ. J2. . . | 


ing you to ſuch curſed Idolatry, and bringing forth bitter fruits. 
Or,rather, 2. Some ſecret and ſubtile Apoſtate who lurks and works 
like a 10ot under ground, and fliely conveys his poiſon to the in- 
fettion of others; for both the foregoing and following words ſpeak 
of ſome particular perſon. # (z.e.) Which though for the preſent 
ir may pleaſe your fancy, yet in the end, aſſure your ſelves, will 
produce bitter fruits, not only diſtaſteful ro God, but alſo poiſon- 
ful and deſtruttive to your ſelves. 


19 And it come to paſs when he « heareth the words 
of this curſe x,that he bleſs himſelf in his heart y, ſaying, 


I ſhall have peace z, theugh I walkin the || imagination f ara 


of mine heart «,to add + drunkenneſs to thirſt b : 
u (i.e,) That root, or that man mentioned verſe 18. 
that oath mentioned werſe 12. wherein he ſwore that he would keep 


hears of it from others. y (7.e, ) Flatter himſelf in his own eyes, 
as Pſal. 36. 2. with vain conceits and hopes, as if God did not mind 
ſuch things, and either could not, or would not puniſh them. 
Compare Pſal. 49. 18. Jer: 2. 20, Zech:'11.5. & (6. e.) Safety and 
proſperity, # Though in my pra&tices and worſhip I do not fol- 
low God's command, but my own devices,and whatſoever my fancy 
beſt liketh, minding nothing but the gratifying of mine own fancy 
and humour. 56 (7. e.) Nor only to ſatisfie his thir#, 7.e. his concu- 
piſcence and inclination to wickedneſs, but even to exceed it, as 
drunkards take oft-times more than their appetite deſires, and drink 
out of meer wantonneſs, or from a deſire to be drunk ; and as filthy 
perſons commir lewdneſs with others more than their natural incli- 
nations deſire, or theirſtrength can well bear,meerly from a wicked 
mind, and from contempt of God, and becauſe they will do ſo! 
The words may be rendred, to add thirſt to - aw Hong the particle 
eth, which is a note of the Accuſative caſe, being joined with thirſt, 
and not with drunkenneſs, and fo the ſenſe may be this, That when 
he hath multiplied his ſins, and made himſelf as it were drunk with 
them, yet he 1s nor ſatisfied therewith, but ſtill whets his appetite, 
and provokes his thirſt after more, as drunkards commonly will uſe 
means and temptations to make themſelves thirſt after more drink, 
that they may drink more abundantly. Or thus, 10 add the moift or 
moiſtening to the, thirf, (7. e.) In ſtead of reſtraining and mortifying,as 
he ought to do, fully and greedily. to ſatisfie his idolatrous or wick- 


to the drawer of thy water & ; 


- . # Such ſtangers as had embraced their Religion. & All forts of 


perſons, yea, even the meaneſt of them, ſuch as theſe were, of. g. 
- 27. all ſorts and ranks of feryants.- : 


ed inclinations, and reſolved to give up himſelf to all the deſires 


of his own heart. Compare Job 34. 7. Prov. 23. 35. Iſa: 30. 1. and 
56. 127 Eph: 4. rg. ; 


20 * The LORD will not ſparc him, but then the 
anger 


bboyu- 
x (ie) Of,” 


} Heb: 7h 


covenant with God, and that with a curſe pronounced againſt him- ;7,,yken 
ſelf if he did not perform it. Now if when he reads this again, or ;;, thirflp 


math 


j He' 
that 15 
write. 


+ He 
where 
the L( 
hath 
it ſuck: 


*Gen. 
24,25, 


| Or, n 
had not 
given 1 
them ar 

rr101 
F Heb. 
divided 


"Lev. : 


*Excki 14 
7, 6. 


"&2 p. XXX. 


anger of the LORD, and his jealouſic ſhall ſmoke e, a- 
inft that man, and all the curſes that are written 1n 


chis book. ſhall lie upon him: and the: LORD ball blot 


out his name from under heaven 4. 
c (2. e.) Shall, burn and break forth with flame and fmoak, as it 
were from a furnace, Compare Pſal: 18.8. & (i.e) deſtioy his 
perſor! and memory from amongſt men. : . 
21 And the LORD ſhall ſeparate him unto evil e, out 
of all the tribes of I{rae},according toall the curſes of the 


covenant f, that + are written in this book of the law: 


j Heb. e (i.e.) Unto ſome li d 1 1 - He will 
un” -« peculiar and exemplary plague ; He w1 

m— make him a monument of his diſpleaſure to the whole land. f He 
mY intimates that the Covenant of Grace, which God made with them, 


hath not oaly Bleſſings belonging to it, as this foolith perſon 1ma- 
gined, but curſes alſo to the tranſgreſſours of it. : 
22 So that the generation to come of your children 


that ſhall riſe up after you, and the ſtranger that ſhal! 


+ Heb. come from a far land, ſhall ſay g, when they fee the 
wherewith plagues of that land, and the ſickneſſes + which the 


z LORD ORD hath laid upon it 3 

bath made £ The words following, verſes 24, 25, ©. 

_ 23 And that the whole land thereof is brimeftone,and 
ſalt, and burning 4, that is not ſowen, nor beareth, nor 
any graſs groweth therein, * like the overthrow of So- 
dom and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, which the 


LORD overthrew ia his anger, and in his wrath. 
h (i.e.) Is burnt up and made barren, as _ brimſtone and ſalt. 
See Jude: 9.45. Pſal, 157: 34: Jer: 17: 6: Exek: 47: 11. 
24 Even all nations ſhall ſay, * Wherefore hath 
*rKing. the LORD done this unto this land ? what meaneth the 


g heat of this great anger ? 
25 Then men ſhall ſay, Becauſe they have forſaken 
the covenant of the LOR D God of their fathers, which 
he made with them, when he brought them forth out 


of the land of Egypt. 
re: we 26 For they we:t and ſerved other gods, and wor- 


rs ſhipped them ; gods whom they knew not, and || whom 


given unto he had nor 7 given unto them 7z. ; 
them any #7 (i: e:) Whom God had notgiven or divided to them, as their 
portion. Portion, or fortheir worſhip, but hath divided them wnto all Nations, 
+ Heb. Aa: itis ſaid, Deut 4: 19: not for their worſhip, but for their uſe and 
divided, ſervice. So h. ſpeaks here of the Sun ani; Moon and Stars, which 
were the principal gods worſhipped by the neighþouring Nations 
Or, to whom none hath given this, 7. e: ,That they ſhould be worſhip- 
ped, or, to whom no worſhip belongs. So this 1s an argument a- 
gainſt Idolatry. Or, who had not give unto them, to wit, any thing: 
It is an Elliphs of the Accuſative, which is very frequent: gods 
known to them by no benefits received from them, as they had 
from their G0d, whom therefore it was the greater folly and ingrati- 
tude to foreſake. 


27 And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt 
this land, to bring upon it all the curſes that are written 


in this book. 
28 And the LORD rooted them out of their landin 


anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and caſt 
them into another land, as #5 zs this day. 
29 The ſecret things belong unto the LORD our God 


k: but thoſe things which are revealed, be/:ng unto us, 
and to our chiidren / for ever, that we may do all the 


words of this law. 

& Having now mentioned the dreadful and amazing Judgements 
of God upon the whole land and people of 1/rael, and foreſeeing 
the Spirit of prophecy the utter extirpation and deſtruftion w_ 
would come upon them for their wickedneſs, he bre:ks out into 
this pathetical exclamation, either to bridle their curiolity, who 
Hearing this, would be apt to enquire into the time and manner of 

* fo greatanevent; or to quiet his own mind an fatisfie the ſcru- 
ples of others, who perceiving God to deal ſo ſeverely with his 
own people, when in the mean time he ſuffered thoſe Nations 
which were guilty of grofſer Atheiſm and Idolatry, and impiety, 
than the generality of the Jewiſh people were, to live and proſper 
in the world, might thence take occaſion to deny or roprcach his 
providence, or queſtion the equity of his proceedings. To this he 
anſwers, That the ways and judgments of God, though never un- 
juſt, are oft-times ſecret and hidden from us, and unſearchable by 
our ſhallow capacities, and are matter for our admiration, not for 
our enquiry. / But the things which are revealed by God and his 
word, theſe are the proper obje&t of our enquiries and ſtudies, that 
thereby we may come to the knowledge ot our duty, by the pra- 
Ctice whereof, we may be kept from ſuch terrible puniſhments and 
calamities as theſe now mentioned. 


CH A P. XXX. 


A Promiſe of Gracious Deliverance j0- the Jews upon their Repentance, in fus 
| Fure times, x —-10. The Law of God manifeſt and juſt, 1114. 


. Life and Death ſet before them, i 5 20, | 
4 26. * AND it ſhall come.co paſs, when all theſe things 
'' +2 are come upon thee, the blefling - and the curſe 
þ, which I have ſet befote thee c, and: thou ſhale call 


them to mind 4 among the nations whicher the LORD 


thy God hath driven thee. 
# When thou art obedient. 


*Gen. 19. 
24, 25. 


9.09. 
Jer. 22. 


b When thou becomeſt rebellious 


* and apoſtatical. « Heb: Placed before thy face, 7. e. propounded to ' 


thy conſideration and choice. 4 Or, bing them back r9 thy heart, 
(i. e.) deeply affe& thy heart with the ſenſe of theſe things, ro wit, 
ofthe bleſſings offered and given to them: by God's mercy, and the 
gurſes brought upon themſelves by their fins. 

2 And jhalt return unto the LORD thy God, and 


DEUTERONOM YT. 


Chap. X W 
ſhall obey his voice, according to all that I ccmmand l 
thee this day,thou and thy children. with all thine heart, | | 
3 * Thatthen the LORD thy God will turn thy cap- *Pſal.r2 | 
tivity e, and have compaſlion upon thee, and will re- *pr1.14 
turn, and * gather thee f from all the nations whither \ 14 

e (i.e.) Bring back thy captives, as captivity is taken, Pjal: 14. 7. | 
Eph: 4. 8 f( i.e. ) Thy children, either ſpiritually ſuch, as it is | 

4 * If any of thine be driven out unto the urmoſt — 
parts of heaven, from thence will the LORD thy God *Neh.1. 

5 And the LORD thy God will bring thee into the 37- || 
land which thy fathers pcſſeſied, and thou ſhalt poſſeſs | 
thy fathers. 

6 And * the LORD thy God will circumciſe thine 
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy ſoul, that "—_— | | 
thou mayelt live. FT l 
and Spirit change and purge thy heart from all thine Idolatry and 
Superſtition and wickedneſs, and encline thy heart to love him, ag 
why and how thoſe great things ſhould be accompliſhed, God 
would firſt convert and ſanfifie them, the fruit whereof ſhould be 
and then ſhould proſper in all things, v. 9. The Hebrew Yas is oft 
rendred for, and notes the reaſon of athing, as 1 Kings 1. 21. and 18. 
principally. reſpefs the times of the Goſpel, and the Grace which 
was to be then imparted to all God's Iſrael by Chriſt, by whom a- 
deſcribed to them the Law of God, the rule of their obedience ' 
here, and in foregoing chapters, and conſidering their great inſta- 
ably adds a glorious Goſpel Promiſe, and dire&s their Faith to the 
Meſſias, by whonralone they could expe& or receive the eſtabliſh- 

7 And the LORD thy God will put all theſe curſes 
upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, which 

8 And thou ſhalt return, and obey the voice of the 
LORD, and do all his commandments which I com- 

9 * And the LORD thy God will make the plente- 2 
ous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, *chap. 234 
goodg. for the LORD will again rejoyce over thee for 
go0d þh, as he rejoyced over thy fathers. ; 
for thy hur:, through thy own wicked and fooliſh hearr, when 
thou waſt full and fat, forgetting God, and kicking againſt him, 
thy heart ſhall be ſo changed by the Grace of the Goſpel, that thou 
ſhal: no: now abuſe them, bur imploy them to the more chearful 
good; as he did rejoyce to deſtroy thee, Deut: 28. 63. 

10 If thou (halt hearken ; unto the voice of theLORD 
which are Written in this book of the law, and if thou 
turn unto the LORD thy God with all thine heart, 

; This caution and condition is added to warn them that they 
ſhould nor receive the Grace of God in vain, and to teach them that 
nor excuſe him for the negle& of ir, and that Converſion and San- 
Qification, though ir be God's Work, yet it is man's duty. 
this day &, it * is not hidden from thee 1, neither zs it = £2 
far off m. 455.19 
| loving and obeyingGod,mentioned here v. 2,6,10,16, Which is the 
{um of the Law, of which yet he doth not here ſpeak ſimply, br as 
of the Goſpe], whereby God circumciſerh mens hearts to do this, 
as is exprefled, v. 6. The meaning is, That although the praftice 
our ſtrength, yer, conſidering the advantage of Goſpel Grace, where- 
by God enables us in ſotte meaſure to our duty, andaccepts of our 
feftRighteouſmeſs unto us that believe, now it is near and caſte to 
us. I ſo this place well agrees with Rom: 10. 6, &c., where St. : 


F 
and with all thy ſonl : ; 
4 T. | 
the LORD thy God hath ſcatered thee. 
explained John 11.51,52. or literally ſuch, as it is promiſed, Roze.11. 
gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee. * Jer. 3ill 
it, and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above 
heart f, and the heart of thy ſeed, ro love the LORD *Ezek.r 
F Or, M$ the Lord will circumciſe thine heart, i. e. will by his word 
it here follows. See Dent: 10. 16. And ſo this is produced to ſhew 
this, That they ſhould return and obey God's commandments, and wv. 8. 
3,4. Pſal: x. 3. and 5. 12. 1/a: 16. 2. arid 64. 5, And this promiſe 
lone this circumciſion 1s obtained, Col: 2. 11. And ſo having fully 
bility in the performance of their obedience to it, he now ſeaſon- 
ment of their hearts in the ways of God againſt Apoſtacy. 
perſecnted thee. 
mand thee this day. 
in the fruit ef thy cattel, and in the fruit of thy land for **- 
£ Whereas thou didſt formerly receive and enjoy theſe mercies 
| Deut: 31. 20. and 32. 15. Now thou ſhalt have them for thy good, 
and faithful ſervice of God the giver of them. þ (i.e.) To dothee 
thy God, to keep his commandments and his ſtatutes 
and with all thy foul. 
the Grace of God doth not diſcharge mans obligation to his duty, 
11 For this commandment which I command thee *chap. 45; 
k He ſeems to ſpeak of the Law. or of that great command of 
itis init ſelf, but as it is mollified and accompanied with the Grace 
of God's Law ſtrialy and ſeverely be now far from us, and above 
ſincere endeavours in ſtead of perfe&tion, and impurts'Chrifts per- 
Paul expounds or applies this place to the Righteouſneſs of Faith; 


by which alone the Law is ſuch as it is kere deſcribed. 1 Heb: 1s not 
foo wongerful for thee, as Deut: 17, 8. Prov: 20. 18. Jer: 52.17: (4.e.) 
Nor too hard for thee to know and do the will of God, which is 
but darkly manifeſted roother Nations, A#s 17. 27. is clearly and 
fully revealed vnto thee: Thou canſt nor pretend ignorance or 
invincible difficulty. m2 (5. e.) Out of thy reach, _ | 
12 * It 5s not in heaven » that thou ſhouldeſft ſay, 


Who ſball go up for us to heaven, and bring ic unto us «pq, _ 4 
that we may hear it, and do it? 6, &'. 


» (7.e.) Shut up there, but ir hath been thence delivered and 
publiſhed in thy hearing. | | 3 a 
13 Neither is it beyond the ſea o, that thovi ſhouldeft 

2 F 4 fay 


thap. XXXE. 'D'EVUTE 
| ſay, Who ſhall go over the ſea for us, and bring it unto 


us that we may hear it, and do it. 
" © The knowledge of this commandment is not te be fetched 
from far diſtant places, to which divers of the wiſe Heathens tra- 
velled for their wiſdom, but it was brought to thy very doors and 
ears, and declared to thee in this Wilderneſs. ; 

14 But the word 3s very nigh'unto thee, in thy mouth 


?, and in thy heart q that thou mayeſt do it. 

p Thou knoweſt ir ſo well, that it is the matter of thy common 
diſcourſe ; thou profeſſeſt thy knowledge and belief of ir. Or, mn 
the mouths of thy Prieſts and Levites, who are dayly preaching 
| of it, and inſtru&ing thee init. 9 (5. e.) In thy mind, (as the hearr 

2p. x1, 15 very commontly taken) to underſtand and believe it. 


pF 19. 15 * See. I have ſer before thee this day, life and 


good r, and death and evil. 

r (5.e.) A good or an happy life. A figure called, Hendiaduo, 
or, life, and all the bleſſing®6f life, as good is oftuſed, as Job. 7. 7. 
P/al. 4. 9. and 128. 5. Eccleſ. 2. 24. and 4. 8. and 6. 3. 

16 {n that I command thee this day, to love the 
LORD thy God, to walk 'in his ways and to keep his 
commandments,and his ſtatutes,and his Judgements,that 
thou mayeſt live and multiply ; and the LORD thy God 
ſhall blef thee intheland, whicther thou [age to poſſeſs it, 

17 But if thine heart turn away, fo that thou wilt 
not hear, but ſhalt de drawen away s, and worſhip other 
gods, and ſerve them: 


- # Either by thy own evil mind, or by the examples or perſwaſi- 

ons of others. 

Chap 18 I denounce unto you this day, that ye ſhall ſurely 

©: 4+ . 

26.ve.rs. periſh, and that ye ſhall not prolong your days upon the 
_ * Jand-whither thou paſleft over Jordantogo to poſſeſs it. 

| 19 *I callheaven and earth to record thisday againſt 

you ?, that Thave ſet before you life and death, blefling 

[ 

{ thy ſeed may live. 

p + Compare Dent. 4. 26. Joſ. 24. 27+ Pſal. 50. 4. Iſa. 1.2. 

| 20 That thou mayeſt love the LORD thy God, and 

that thou mayeſt obey his voice, and that thou mayeſt 

5 cleave unto him:* (for he 3s thy life «, and the length of 

4 thy days) that thou mayeſt dwell in the land which the 

Wh LORD ſware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Ifaac, 


and to Jacob, to give them. 
u (i.e:) The cauſe or author of thy life, as life is uſed Joh. 14. 6. 


and 17. 3. 
CHA P. XXXI. 
Moſes declares to the people his approaching death, and encourageth them, 


and curſing: therefore chuſe life, that both thou and 


R ONO M YT. 
e Largely ſo called, the whole Law or DoQrine delivered unto 
Moſes contained in theſe five books. f That they might keep it care 
fully and religiouſly, and bring it forth upon occaſion, and read it. 
and inſtru the people out of ir. g To wit, ſometimes in great ſo- 
Jemnities, as Joſ. 3. 13, 17- and 6. 12. 1 Kings 8. 3. though the Le- 
vites alſo might bear it, as _—_ from Numb. 3. and 4. and 10. x 
Chron. 15. 2. þ Who were Aſſiſtants to the Prieſts, and Overſeers 
to take care that the Law ſhould be kept, and read, and obſerved. 
io And Moſes commanded them, ſaying, Art the 
end of every ſeven years, in the ſolemnity of the * year xc, , 
of releaſe ;, in the feaſt of tabernacles, Res 


; When they were freed from debts and troubles, and. cares of 
worldly matters, and thereby fitter to attend upon God and his 
ſervice. 

11 When all Iſrael is come to appear before the LORD 
thy God in the place which he ſhall chuſe, * thou fhalt 


read & this law before all Iſrael in their hearing. * Joſh. g, 

k Thy ſelf in part, for the Jews tell us that the King was in per- 34 35. 
ſon to read ſome part of it, or at leaſt, thou ſhalt cauſe it to be read 
by the Prieſts or Levites, for he could not read it himſelf in the 
hearing of all Ifrae), but this was to be done by ſeveral perſons,and 
to the people met in ſeveral congregations. See Nehem.8. 1, &c: 

12 Gather the people rogether /, men and women 
”, and children » and thy ſtranger s, that is within thy 
gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn p, 
and fear the LORD your God, and obſerve to do all the 
words of this Law. 

I Not into one place, where all could not hear, bur into divers 
Aſſemblies or Synagogues. m Who hereby are required to go to 
Jeruſalem at this ſolemnity, as they were permitted to do in other 
ſolemnities, when the Males only were enjoyned to go, Exod. 23. 
17. n= Towit, ſuch of them as could underſtand, as appears from 
Nehem. 8. 2, 3: 0 (i. e.) The Profelytes, though others alſo were ad- 
mitted. p That they may then certainly and conſtantly do ſo, 
though they had alſo other opportunities to do ſo, as upon the Sat- 
dath-days, 4#s 15. 21, and other ſolemn feaſts, yea even in their 
private houſes. 

13 And that their children which have not known 
any thing, may hear and learn to fear the LORD your 
God, as long as ye live in the land, whether-ye go over 
Jordan to poſlels it. | 

14 And the LORD ſaid unto Moſes, Behold, thy 
days approach that thou muſt die : call Joſbua and pre- 
ſent your ſelves in the tabernacle q of the congregation, 
that * I may give him a charge ry. And Moſes and Jo- 


ſhua went and preſented themſelyes in the Tabernacle _ 


of the congregation. | | 
9 Either properly ſo called, for though the Prieſts only might 


and Joſhua, 1=—8. He delivereth the Law unto the Prieſts to read it 
5 every ſeventh year to the People, 9 — 13. God putteth Joſhua into his 
Office; foretelleth to Moſes and him the future diſobedience and miſery of 
the People, enjoyneth Moſes a ſong to teſtifie againſt the People, 14 — 23. 
Moſes chargeth the Levites to lay wp the Book of the Law beſide the Ark 
of the Covenant, 24 27. Aſſembleth all the People to hear his ſong, 
28 30. 
Ae Moſes went and ſpake @ theſe words unto all 
Iſrael, 

a (3, e.) Proceeded or continued to ſpeak an uſual Hebrew 
phraſe. Or,went to the place where he had afſemblcd all the People, 
that he might ſpeak to them. 
Po, 2 And he. ſaid unto them, * I aw an hundred and 
| 'Ch:34-7- twenty years old this day : I-can no more go out and 

| eNum.... Oe in b; alſo the LORD hath ſaid unto me, * Thou 
- .- 43 ſbalt not go over this Jordan. 
| 27. : b (7. e) Perform the Office of a Leader or Governour, cither be- 
We. cauſe I now find a decay of my mind and body : Which ſeems not 

well to agree with Deut. 34. 7. or becauſe I foreſee the time of my 
death approaches. 

3 The LORD thy God he will go over before thee 
and he will deftroy theſe nations from before thee, and 
thou ſhalt poſſeſs them : and Joſbua, he ſhall go over be- 

. forethee, * as the LORD hath ſaid. 

| 4 And'the LORD ſhall dounto them, * as he did to 

'*Numb:' Sjhon, and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and unto the 
21: 24:33" Jand of them c whom he deſtroyed. | 

of £ Which he gave to you to poſleſs. | 

*Cb.7.2. «| And * the LORD hall give them up before your 
faced, that ye may do unto them according unto all the 
commandments which I have commanded you. 

d (5. e.) Into your power. See on Deut. 1.8. 


6 Be ftrong and of good courage, fear not, nor be 
afraid of them: for the LORD thy God, he #t 3s that 
doth go with thee, he will not fail thee,nor forſake thee. 


| *Numb: 
a7. 2I. 


fToſh:1.5. 

"EN the fight of all Ifrael,be ſtrong, & ofa good courage; for 
| thou muſt go with this people unto the land which the 

LORD hath fworn untotheir fathers to give them, and 

thouſbalt cauſe them to inherit ir. 
| 8 And the LORD he #: is that doth go before thee, 
- *Joſh.1.9. he will be with thee, he will nor fail thee, neither for- 
bs,  ake thee : * fear nor, neither be diſmayed. 

9 And Moſes wretethis law e, and delivered it unto 

the prieſts, the ſons of Levif, which bare the ark g of 
| the was of the LORD, and unto all the elders of 
' Urael 5. 


kt 
* 


ms 


| bernacle, at the door of which God ſtood in the cloudy pillar, verſe 


7 And Moſes called unto Joſhua, and ſaid unto him in | 


ordinarily enter there, yet others might go in upon a call and com- 
; mand from God, which here they had : Or in the Court of the Ta- 


| 15. The Court coming here under the name of the Tabernacle, as 
elſe-where it comes under the name of the Temple, » Immediately 
fiom my ſelf for his greater encouragement, and to gain him more 
authority with the People. 7 Exod? 

I5 And * the LORD appeared in the tabernacle, in 33g. 
a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar cf the cloud, ſtood 
over the door of the tabernacle. 

16 And the LORD faid unto Moſes, Behold, thou , .. 
ſhalt +TNeep s with thy fathers,and this people will riſe j;, ju, 
up, and go a whoring ? after the gods of the ſtrangers 
of the land «, whither they go to beamongſt them,and 
will forſake me, and break my coyenant which I have 
made with them. 

s The death of Men, both Good and bad, is oft called a /teep, be- 
cauſe they ſhall certainly awake out of it by reſurre&ion. See Pal. 
76.5. Dan. 12.2, 1 Theſ. 4.13, &c. 2 Pet. 3. 4. t God certainly fore- 
ſees all things to come, yea,even thoſe which depend upon the wills 
of Men, or contingencies of the things, as this un abbienabiy did. e 
% (7, e.) Of the Canaanites, who now are Poſſeſſors, but ſhortly will 
be turned out of their Poſſeſſions, and become as ſtrangers in their 
own land. This aggravates their folly to worſhip ſuch gods as 
could neither preſerve their friends, nor annoy their enemies. 


17 Then my anger ſhall be kindled againſt them in 
that day, and I will forſake them, and Iwill * hide m 
face x from them, and they ſhall be devoured, and ma- Pl. 
ny evils and troubles ſhall + befall them, ſo that they {7;.,. -, 
will ſay in that day, Are not theſe evils come upon ns, ray # 
becauſe our God 7s not amongſt us ? | 

x (i.e.) Withdraw my favour and help. 

18 And I will ſurely hide my face in that day, for all 
the evils which they ſhall have wrought, in that they 
are turned unto other gods. 

19 Now therefore write'ye this ſong y for you, and 
teach it the children of Iſrael ; put it in their mouths z, 
that this ſong may be a witneſs for me a againſt the 
children of 11raet. n | 


Chap. XRNt, f 


y Which is contained Dev, 32. and is put into a ſong, that it may 
be better learned, and more fixed intheir minds and memories. z 
Cauſe them to learn it, and ſing it one to another, to oblige them 
to more circumſpettion and watchfulneſs. s Of my kindnefs in 
giving them ſo many Bleſſings, of my patience in bearing ſo long 
with them, of my clemency in giving them ſuch fair and plain 


warnings, and my juſtice in puniſhing ſuch an unthankful, perverſe 
and incorrigible people, E 
20 For when I ſhall kaye brought them into the land 

| which 


*Ch 
10," 
and 
and 


+He 


fore. 
tH 


"ol 


” Chap. XXX. | 
which I ſware unto their fathers, that Boweth with milk 
*Chap. 6. and honey, and they ſhall have eaten and filled them 


1o,&c. ſelves, and waxen fat ; * then will they turn unto their 


and 8.10. 


gods, and ſerve them, and provoke me, and break my 
and32.15 


- covenant. 

21 And it ſhall come to yaſs, when many evils and 
troubles are befallten them, that this ſong (ball teſtify | 
againſt thern as a witneſs: for it ſhall not be forgotten » 
out of the mouths of their ſeed ; forT know their Imagi- 
4, nation,which they + go about even now c, before I have 

brought them into the land which I ſware. _ 

b This ſeems not to be a precept that they ſhould remember it, 
but a prediQtion, that God would give them ſad occaſion to re- 
member it, by bringing upon them the dreadful calamities ment1- 
oned init. c Either their inward inclinations to Idolatry, which 
they do not check, as they ought, but rather entertain with delight, 
and ſome of them do not only cheriſh it in their hearts, but as far 
as they can and dare, ſecretly praftiſe it, as may be gathered from 
Amos 5. 25. As 7. 43. or their ſecret purpoſes to allow themſelves 
therein, when they are ſettled in their land , which were clearly 
known to God, though it may be not fully evident to themſelves. 

22 Moſes therefore wrote this ſong the ſame day, 
and taught it the children of Iſrae]. 

23 And he gave Joſbua the ſon of Nun a charge, and 

'Toſh.1.6. ſaid; *Be ſtrong and of a good courage: for thou ſhalt 
bring the children of Iſrael into the land which I ſware 
unto them 4: and I will be with thee. 

d This wickedneſs of theirs which I now foreſee and foretel ſhall 
not hinder me from bringing them into Canaan. 

24 And it came to paſs when Moſes had made an end 
of hang ry words of this law in a book, until they 
were finiſhed 

25 That Moſes commanded the Levites e which bare 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD, ſaying, 

e (i.e.) The Prieſts, verſe 9. who alſo were Levites. 

26 Take this book of the law, and put it in the fide 
f of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, 

that it may bethere for a witneſs againſt thee g: 

f (4. e.) In the out-ſide, in a little cheſt fixed to ir, for nothing 
but the Tables of ſtone were contained in the Ark, 1 Kings 8. 9. 
Here ir was kept for greater ſecurity and reverence: 2 (i.e.) A- 

ainſt thy people, to whom he turns his ſpeech, that they mighr 
e more affe&ed with it. 

27 For I know thy rebellion, and thy ſtiff-neck; be 
hold, while I am yer alive with you this day , ye have 
been rebellious againit the LORD, and how much more 
after my death ? | 

28 Gather unto me a!l the elders of your tribes, and 
your officers, that I may ſpeak theſe words in their ears, 
and call heaven and earth to record againſt them. 

29 For I know that after my death ye will utterly 
corrupt your ſelves, and turn aſide from the way which 
I have commanded you: and evil will befal you in the 
latter days, becauſe ye will do evil in the ſight of the 
LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of 
your hands. 

z0 And Moſesſpakein the ears of all the congregation 
of Iſracl, the words ofthis ſorig. until they wereended. 

CHA P. XXAII. 


The Divine Song, in which God's Power, Mercy to his People, and vengeance 
on his enemies is exalted, their ingrat:tude is rebuked, 1-=-18. God's 
wrath and future judgements, 19---26. Net, the Idolarrous Nations to be 
deſtroyed; and they at laſt to be enlarged, 27---43. He exhorts them to 
ſet their hearts on theſe words for their good, 44---4.7. God ſendeth him up 
to Mount Nebo, there to ſee the promiſed Land and dye, 48-==52. 


tHeb. be- 
fore. 


+ Heb, 


* Chap. 4. Ive * ear, O ye heavens, and 1 will ſpeak: and 
1,36.&30. hear, O earth 4. the words of my mouth. 
I9. Plal. # Either 1. Angels and Men. Or 2. You lifeleſs and ſenſeleſs 


Fo, 4. Iſa. creatures, Heaven and Earth, which he calls upon, partly to accuſe 
I,2, Jer. the ſtupidiry of Jael, that were more dull of hearing than theſe : 
2,12. and and partly as witneſſes of the truth of his ſayings, and the juſtice of 
6. 19, God's proceedings againſt them. 

* Ik. 55. 2 * My doctrine (hall drop as the rain b, my fpeech 
To, 11. fball diſtil as the dew, as the fmall rain upon the tender 


ag 3- herb, and as the flowers upon the graſs. 

as b Look what effe& rain and dew have upon herbs and grafs which 
they make freſh, and fragrant, and growing, the ſame effet TI may 
juſtly expe& and hope chat my diſcourſe will have upon your hearts, 
z. e. to make them tofr and pliable and fruitful. Or this may be a 
prayer, Let my Dofrine drop, 8c. O that it might do fo, that my 
diſcourſe might not be loſt upon you, but be profitable to you; the 
future tenſe of the indicative mood being put for the imperative 
mood, as is uſual. 


3 Becauſe I will publiſh the Name of the LORD «, 
alcribe ye greatneſs unto our God 4. 

c (i. e.) His glorious Excetfencies, and righteous and worthy 
Aions, by which he bath made himfelf known as a nanis known 
by his name, and by which it will appear both that there is no; 
blame to be laid wpon him whatſoever befals you, and that it is] 
grofs madneſs to foreſake ſuch a God for dumb idols and meer vani-! 
ties. 4 As Tam about to publith the:grear Power and Majeſty and! 
Glory of God, and fo do you. alſo own and acknowledge it, as you 

| havereaſon to do; ordo you attend to the words Which God hath: 


commanded me to ſpeak to you im his Name, with that diligence,. 


| 


xeverence and godly fear which the preſence of fo great and glori- 
gus a Majeſty calls for. 


DEBUTBRONOM T. 


Chap. XXY 

4 He is the rock e, his work is perfe& f: for all his 
ways are judgement g : a God oftruth b, and without 
iniquity, juſt and right 7s he. 

e Or, a rock, as for the ſtability and everlaſtingneſs of his Na« 
ture, and invinciblenefs of his Power, ſo alſo for his fixednefs and 
immutability in his Counſels and Promiſes and Ways; So that if 
there ſhall be a fad change in your affairs from an high and proſ- 
perous, to a calamitous and deplorable conditicn, as there will be 
remember that this proceeds from your ſelves, znd from the change 
of your ways and carriages towards God, and not from,God,- in 
whom there is no variableneſs nor ſhadow of change, Jam. 1. 17. Y All his 
works and aQtions are unblameable, as being perfe&, wiſe and righ- 
teous, as it follows. g All his adminiſtrations in the world, and 
particularly all his dealings with you are managed with Jud gement 
and Juſtice. þ Conſtant to his Promiſes : You cannot accuſe him 
of any levity or unfaithfulneſs towards you ro this day. 

5 Tt They # have corrupted themſelves k, || their ſpot 
is. not the ſpot of his children: / they are a perverſe and 


crooked generation . himſe 
7 (i. e.) The Jrazlizes, as the following words manifeſt. & This Or. th 

phraſe ſometimes in Scripture notes ſin, and ſometimes deſtruQion. they | 
And ſo the ſenſe may be, Either r.. Their wickedneſs is not from not his 
God but from themſelves, and their own choice ; they have wilfully dren tf 
and induſtriouſly depraved themſelves, and ſold themſelves to fin. js het 
Or rather 2. Their deſtruftion is net from God, who is Fuft and bios, 
True, &Cc. as was now ſaid, but wholly and ſolely from themſelves : 
and from their own wickedneſs, as it here follows. 1 (i. e.) Their 
blemiſhes or ſinsarenor committed through ignorance or frailty, or 
ſurprizal, as good Men ſometimes ſin, but they proceed from de- 
ſign and deliberation, are accompanied with malice and wilfuineſs 
and contempt, and followed with obſtinacy, impenitency and incor- 
rigibleneſs. So that they carry themſelves not like my children and 
people, as they ſeem to be and profeſs to be, bur like mine enemies. 
m Not only ſome few of them, but the whole body or generation of 
them are perverſe, (7.e.) froward and untraQtable, and crooked, (5. e.) ir- 
regular and diforderly, not agreeing with the ſtraight and righte= 
ous nature of God and of his law, Compare 1/s. 42. 16. 

6 Do ye thus require the LORD, O fooliſh people 
and unwiſe ? isnothe thy father hat hath bought thee »? 


Hath he not made thee o and eſtabliſhed thee p? 

z» Thar hath redemed and reſcued thee from Egyptian bondage. 
0 (i.e.) Advanced thee, as that word is uſed, r Sam. 12.6. Efh. 6. 6. 
and Pſal. 95.6. and 149. 2+ 1/a. 43. 7. Made thee, not only in a ge= 
neral and common way, by Creation or produQion, bur in a pecus 
liar manner by adoption, or making thee his peculiar people arid 
children. p (1. e.) Renewed and confirmed his grace and favour 
to t':ee, and not taken it away from thee, which thou haſt oft pro- 
voked him to do. 

7 Remember the days + of old q ; conſider the years + Heb 
of + many generations ; ask thy father, and he will ſhew ernity, 
thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee. Ia. 634 

q (i.e.) The hiſtory and events of ancient days or former ages, 
and thou wilt find that T had a reſpe& unro thee, not only in Abra- ,__ -: 
ham's time, but long beforeir. Compare Jer. 2. 20. "— 

8 When the moſt High * divided to the Nations their Ek 
inheritance r, when he ſeparated the ſons of Adam [ſhe + Aas 
{er the bounds of the | people according to the number 26: | 
of the children of Iſrael 7: + Heb, 

r When God by his providence did allot the ſeveral parts of the **? y 
world to ſeveral people, which was done Ger. 10. and » 1. See Deutr. 
2 5, 9. Amos 9 7. Atts 17.26, 27. 7 (i.e.) Divided them in their 
languages and habitations, according to their families. * (i.e.) He 
diſpoſed of the ſeveral lands and limits of the people, ſo as hedid re 
{ſerve a convenient and ſufhctent place for the great numbers of the 
people of 1/razl, whom: he deſigned to make as numerous as the ſtars 
of Heaven. And therefore he ſo guided the hearts of ſeveral people, 
that the Poſterivy of Canaan,which was accurſed of GoJ,Gen.g. 25,26, 
27, and devoted to ruine, ſhould be ſeated in that country, which 
God intended for the chi'dren of Jae, that ſo when their iniqui- 
ties were ripe and Gods time came, they might be rooted out, and 
the 1/razlites might come in their ſtead. 

5 For the LORDS portion zs his people « : Jacob is 
the Þ lot of his inhericance. ® Foc 


+ Heb 
hath 
rupted | 

| 


. 
1 
: 


Mic. 5 
+ Heb! 


u Tt is no wonder God had ſo great a regard to this people; for 15: 16. 
he choſe them our ofall Mankind to be his peculiar portion and fHebe 
treaſure. ; 

10 He found him x * in a deſert land y, and in the 
waſt howling wilderneſs z: he || led him abont @, he * Chap 
inſtructed him, 'he * kept him as the apple of his eye b. 15; 

x Not by chance, but as it were looking out and ſeeking for him, y5 I 
he met wirh him there. He did indeed manifeſt himſelf to him in | 7 
Egypt, but it was in the wilderneſs at Sinai, where he found God, paſſe 
and God found him in an eminent manner, and revealed his mind *Pſal:- 
2. 8, 


and will to him, and entred into covenant with him, and imparted 
himſelf and his grace and bleſſing to him, that being the place a 
pointed in Egypt for God and 1ſrael to meet together, Exod. 3. 12. 
this word he alſo ſignifies both their loſt condition in themſelyes,and 
that their recovery was not from themſelves, but only from God, 
who ſopght and found them out by his grace. » Ina place deſti« 
tute of all the neceſlaries and comforts of Life, which alſo was a 
| type of that deſolate and comfortleſs condition in which all men 
are, before the grace of God finds them our. See Cant. 3,6+and 8. 
5. Exek. 16. 4, Hoſ. g. 19. and 13. 9. x Where, in ſtead of the voices 
| of men. is nothing heard but the howlings & yellings and ſcreirches 
of ravenous birds and beaſts. See 7/a, 43. 20. Mich. 1.8: a He conduQ- 
ed them from place to place, by his cloudy pillar and providence. 
See £xod. 13. 18, &c. Or, he compaſſed him about, by his provideat care 
over him, watching over him and preſerving him on every fide, 


Compare Ffal. 32.7. b As men uſeto'keep the apple of their eye, ; 

it e. with ſingular care and diligence, this being as a moſt tender *g,g, , 
ſoa-moſt uſefal part. Compare Pſal. r7. 8. Prov. 7. 2. Zech. 2.8. .- .ch.r.3 
11 * Asancagle ſtirreth up her neſtc, fluttereth over If 37. 

IS 4 | | her 


DBUTER 


ber young; f preadeth-abroad her wings d, taketh them, 


_ beareth them on her wings e. 
c (i. e.) Her young ones in the neſt, by a common Metonymy; 
whichſhe by her cry and motion provoketh to flic by her example. 
d As preparing her ſelf ro flie. e Or, as on her wings, (i.e) gently 
_ and tenderly and ſafely too, as if ſhe carried them not in her claws 
- For fear of hurting them, but upon her wings. 50 it is only an 
Ellipfis of the particle as, which is frequent, as hath been ſhewed. 
Though ſome ſay, the Eagle doth uſually carry her young ones 
wpon her wings. : ; 
12 Sothe LORD alone did lead him f, and there was 
* no ſtrange God with him g. 
F (i. e.) When they were ſhut up in Egypt as in their neſt whence 
durſt not venture to fly nor ſtir, he taught and incouraged and 
enabled them tofly out and free themſelves from that bondage, 
and brought them into a ſtate of liberty and ſafery ; he dealt ren- 
derly with them, bearing with their infirmities, keeping them from | 
all harms. g To wit, to affiſt him at that work, or to deliver them. 
'The more unworthy they in giving to Idols a ſhare in that wor- 
” ſhip and ſervice which they owe to God only. | 
EOS x Ln made him ride on the high places of the earth 
b, that he might eat the increaſe of the fields, and he 
©made him to fuck * honey out of the rock i, and oil out 
al: 81. - 
| ofthe flinty rock k. : 
h (i. e.) To conquer their ſtrongeſt holds, which oft-times are 
in the Mountains, and their Cities fenced with walls of greateſt 
' height and ftrengrh, Dew. r. 28. and 2. 36. and 33. 29. 1s. 58. 14.\ 
' Toride upon in Scripture phraſe, is to ſubdue or conquer, as P/al. 
- 45. 4. and 66. 12. Rev. 6.2. and 19. 11, 14. # This being a land 
fowing with honey, Exed.38.17. where the bees made honey even in 
woods, as 1 Sam. 14, Or in the holes of rocks, or in the trees that 
grew upon or among rocks. k The olive trees grow and fruQtifie 
Moſt in rocky or hilly places. | : 
' T4 Butter of kine, and milk of ſheep with far of 


' Lambs 1, and rams of the breed of Baſhan m,, and goats, 
with the fat of kidneys of wheat », and thou didit drink 
the you blood of the grape o. 
or 


| 1 For though the fat wherewith the inward parts were covered, 
was not to be eaten by them, but offered to God, Lev. 3. 9, 10 yet 
thatfat which was faſt joined to and mixed with thefleſh.they might 
eat, as the Jewiſh DoQors note. 1 A place famous for excellent 
cattel, Numb. 32. 4, and 33+ = (i. e.) With the fineſt of the grains 
or kernels of wheat; compared to kidneys for their ſhape and 
plumpnefs and largeneſs. Compare Pſa 87. 17. and 147. o Wine 
- Not mixed with water, but pure as it comes from the grape, which 
was of a red or bloody colour. See Pſal: 75. 8. I'a WS  - 
15 But * Jeſurun p waxed fat and kicked 9: * thou 
** art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou arc covered 
with fatneſs 7: then he forſook God which made him, 
7. and lightly eſteemed the Rock of his ſalvation. 
7. þp (ic.) Iſrael, as is agreed by Chriftian and Jewiſh Interpreters; 
-6. whom he calls right or upright or righteous, (as the word lignifics) 
' not thar they weie ſo indeed, bur parily by way of Inſtruction to 
mind them what they profeſſed and promiſed and ought to be ; and 
partly by way of exprob:ation,to ſhew them how unlike they were 
ro the people of God, which they pretended to be, and what a 
ſhame it was to them to degenerate ſp much from their name and 
profeſſion. 9q As well fed and wanton cattel uſed to do : he grew 
inſolent and rebellious againft God and againſt his word and ſpirit. 
r Which is here rightly underſtood and ſupplied, by comparing 
- this place with Job. 15. 27. Pſal. 17. 10. 


' T6 They provoked him to jealouſie s with ſtrange 
. gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger. 
5 (i.e.) To anger and fury, for jealouſie 15 the rage of a man, Prov. 
6. 34. And withal it implies the ground of his anger, to wit, their 
falſeneſs to God whom they had owned and accepred as their hus- 
band, and their ſpiritual whoredom with other gods. 
717.7. 17 * They facrificed unto devils r, ac. ro God x: 
pals m to gods whom they knew not x, to new gods, that came 
7. 1 newly up y, whom your fathers feared nor z. 
dey-0.20. * (1- ©.) Un'o idols, which the devils brought into the world. 
Or. which 12 oppoſition to God, in and by which the devils oft-times mani- 
Shed d themſclves unto men, and gave them anſwers, and received 


; 43-12. 


by. 


[1 


O NOMT 


Iſraelites are ſaid to have tempted, there verſe 9. 5b(1. &) Who hath 
adopted you to be his people, and- hath fhewed as much care and 
kindneſs to you, as if he had begotten you. 
19 And when the LORD faw it, he [|abhorred them, be- NP 
cauſe of the provoking of his ſons, and of his daughters c. Poiſed on 
c Becauſe of their ſins whereby they provoked him to anger. ing 
Or, by reaſon of his great and juſt anger againſt them, he abhorred or 
reprobated or caſt of his ſons and his daughters, for ſuch they were by 
calling and profeſſion, but not in Truth and reality, verſe 5. 
_ 20 And he ſaid, I will hide my face from them, Iwill 
ſee what their end feall be d: for they are a very froward . 


generation, * children in whom there 5s no faith e. 

d T will ſee and obſerve what will be the iſſue of all this, what 
will become of them at laſt : But this God doth not ſee only by 
way of ſpeculation but praQically, (7. e- ) conſiders with himſe]f 
what he ſhall do with them, and how he ſhall puniſh them, and 
ſees what he will or purpoſes to do. A ſpeech after the manner of 
men. Or, I will ſee is put for 1will make them and others to ſee, what 
the fruit of ſuch aCtions ſhall be. Hebrew verbs in Cal do oft-times 
take the ſignification Of Hiphile e Perfidious, that have broken 
their covenant ſo ſolemnly made with me. 

2x They have moved me to jealoufie with that 2vhich 
is not God, they have provoked me to anger with | 
their vanities: and * I will move them to jealouſie with Hof1.10 
thoſe which are not a people f, I will provoke them to 32 2% 


anger with a fooliſh nation £- - 
f (i.e.) With the Gentile or Heatheniſh nations, who are none 
of my people, who ſcarce deſerve the name of a people, as being 
withour yoke, without the knowledge and fear of God which is 
the foundation of all true policy and government, and without 
righteous and neceſſary Laws ; And many of them are deſtitute of 
all government and laws and order, barbarous and rude and fſa- 
vage and brutiſh in their manners. And yet theſe people I will 
prefer before you, and take in your ſtead, receive them and re- 
jet you; Which, when it came to paſs how deſperately it pro- 
voked the Jews to jealouſie, may be gathered from Matth. 21. 43, 
&c. Afts 11. 2,3. and 22. 21, 22, 23. 1 Theſ. 2. 15, 16. g Sothe 
Gentiles were both in the opinion of the Jews, and in truth and rea- 
lity, notwithſtanding all their pretences to Wiſdom, Rom. x. 22, 
there being nothing more fooliſh or brutiſh than the worſhip of i- 
dols. See Fer. 10. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 2. .; 
22 For * a fire is kindled þ in mine anger, and[}ſhall * Jer: rs: 
burn unto the loweſthell 3, and || ſhall conſume the earth 14 4m 
with her increaſe, and ſet on fire the foundations of the q Or, hath 


mountains. burned. 
hb (i.e.) Great and grievous judgements ſhall be inflited, which || Or, hath 
oft come under the name of fire, &c. See Deut. 4. 24. Ezek. 30. 8. conſumed. 
Amos 2. 2, 5. 3 Or, unto hell or the graves beneath, The ſenſe is, 
ir thall not only burn up all the corn and fruits and buildings 
which appear above ground, but it ſhall reach to the inwards and 
depths of the carth, and burn up the very roots and hopes of future 
increaſe. | | 
23 I will * heap miſchiefs upon them, I will * ſpend + x5. ,; 
mine arrows k upon them. "87 
k (i. e.) Even empty my quiver, and ſend upon them all my * Pal: 7: 
Plagues, which, like arrows ſhot by a skilful and ftrong hand, ſhall 12, 13. 
ſpeedily reach and certainly hit and mortally wound them. Com- Ezck: 5. 
pare Zach. g. 14. I'Ge 
24 They thall be burnt with hunger 7, and devoured 
with + burning heat », and with bicter deſtruction : I f Heb: 
will alſo ſend * the teeth of beaſts upon them, with the ©9775 


poyſon of ſerpents of the duſt ». + ; 
With famine, which burneth and parcheth the inward parts, * Lev, 26. 

and makes the face black as a coal, Lam. 4. 8. m From feversor car=- 22 

buncles, or other inflaming diſtempers. n» Who feed upon the 

duit, Ger. 3. 14. and lurk in it that they may ſurprize unwary 


paſſengers. Gen. 49. 17. 


Ifa: 30.9, 


25 * The (word without, and terrour f within ſhall * Lam. 
# deftroy, both the young man and the virgin, the ,” Tack 


ſuckling «lo, with the man of gray hairs. tHeb: from 
26 1 faid, I would ſcatter them into corners, T would the Chan- 
make the remembrance of them to ceaſe from among **”*: 


£7© 7 - their worſhip. Compare 1 Cor. 16. 20. The Gentiles pretended to 
worſhip God in thoſe idols, and the devils which inſpired them 
deluded the nations with falſe pretences, that they were a ſort of 
lower gods. Moſes therefore takes off this mask, and ſhews the 1/ra- 
elites that theſe prerended gods were really devils, thoſe great ene- 
mies of Mankind, and therefore that it was the height ofmadneſs 
to honour or worſhip them. « This he faith, either becauſe though 
at firſt they joined God and idols together in worſhip, yet at Jaſt 
they quire forſook God and adhered to idols only: Or becauſe God 
- utterly reje&ed thoſe ſacrifices which they offered to him, together 
with idols, and took them for no ſacrifices. See 1 Cor. 10. 21. x Or, 
who never knew them, (i.e.) never ſhewed any kindneſs to them, or 
did them any good : For ſo words of Knowledge are oft uſed, as 
Pſal. 1.6. Hoſ. 13. 5. y Not ſimply or abſolutely, for ſome of theſe 
gods had been worſhipped for many generations,and had a fair pre- 
"rence of long antiquity, but comparatively ro the true God, who 
is the antient of days, Dan. 7. 9. and who was worſhipped from the 
beginning of the world. To this original and firſt antiquity Moſes 
recals them; as alſo our Saviour doth recall the Jews to the firſt In- 
 Nirution, Matth. 19. 8. And therefore we may ſafely follow both 
"their patterns in deſpiſing all pretences of antiquity,which are con- 
trary to God's firſt Inſtitutions contained (as all confeſs) in the ho- 
ly Scriptures. = (i.c.) Seryed not, worſhipped not, but juſtly de- 
PÞiſed and abhorred them. 


I :44.8. I8 Ofthe* Rock s that-begat thee b thou art unmind- 
ful, and haft forgotten God that formed thee. 
# (i. e.) Of God, one of whoſe titles this is, above verſe 4. 1. 


men. + Heb: be 


; re 
27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy ET 
0, leſttheir adverſaries ſhould behave themſelves ſtrange- 
ly p, and leſt they ſhould ſay, || Our hand js bigb, and || Or, w 
the LORD hathdone all this high hand, 
o (1i.e.) Their rage againft me, as it is expreſſed, 1ſs. 37. 28, 29. 49d mt the 
their inſolent and furious reproaches againſt my Name, as if I were LORD hath 
unnatural and cruel to my people, or unable to deliver them. Com- 4one all 
pare Exad. 32. 12. Numb. 14. 13, Deut. 9. 28. Joſ. 7, 9g. The fear this. 
hereof is aſcribed to God after the manner of men, þ (i. e.) Inſo- 
lently and arrogantly above what they uſed to do. Or, make them- 
ſelves ſtrangers, (i. c.) Either really not acknowledge or pretend the 
did not know that which I had publickly declared, and they either 
did or cafily might have known, to wir, that this Judgement was 
inflicted upon them by my hand for their fins. 
28 For they q are a nation void of counſel”, neither 
is there any underſtanding in them. 
q Either r. The enemies laſt mentioned, who are fooliſh people 
and therefore make ſo falſe and fooliſh a judgement upon things. 
Or rather 2. The I/raclites themſelves, of whom he ſpeaks both in 
the foregoing verſe 26. and in the whole foregoing chapter, and 
in the next verſe 29. and afterwards. » That have not wiſdom to 
dire@ theſelves,nor diſcretion to deſire and receive counſel from o- 
thers, but raſhly and madly go on in thoſe courſes which will cer. 
tainly ruine them. : 
29 *-O that they were wiſe, that they underftood , * ſal: 8r, 


44.8, ar of Chriſt, who is callcd the Rock, x Ger: 16, 4. whom the | 


- wort - A 


this,  :hes they would conſider theig latrgr god «. "bam; 
ETC” he þaw;1.9- 


Pia + 
-” 

7 So Ng - 

. 4 


/ 


op Romo 


Chap. XXXn, chu 


*Toſb 


|| Or, 
worl 
than ? 
wine 0 
fem, « 


*Pfal. 
45: Ji 
JI: 2C 
t Het 
band, 


"Chap: XX XYile 
| « What their end will be,and that although God ſpare them long, 
vet atlaſt judgment will certainly overtake them. 

' 3o How lhould * one chaſe a thouſand z, and two 
put ten thouſand to flight, except their Rock « * had 
fold them x, and the LORD had ſhut them up y ? 


24; 24* + Whence ſhould this miraculous change come,that whereas God 
Iſa: ah had promiſed that five Iſraelites ſhould chaſe an hundred of their Ene- 
* Pſal. 44+ mies, &c, Levit. 26. 8. now on the contrary oze Enemy ſhould chaſe 
12: 1a:50: ,, thouſand Iſraelites. u (4.e.) Their God, as before wer. 4, 18. who 
1; and 52: ves their only refuge and defence. » To wit, for bond-ſlaves,had 
3o quitted his right and relation to them, and given them up into their 
| enemies hands. y Asit were in the ner which their enemies had 
laid for them. 

31 For their rock js not as our Rock, even our ene- 


mies themſelves being judges &z. 

z Who by their dear bought experience have been forced to ac- 
knowledge that our God was far {tronger than they and their falſe 
gods together, See Exod. 14. 25. Numb. 23. 1 Sam. 4. 8. Jer: 40.3. 

32 Fora their vine || is of the vine of Sodom' 5, and 


of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of 


gall, their cluſters are bitter c. 

a Or, But ; for theſe words ſeem to contain an anſwer to that 
queſtion, wer. 30» how ſhould, &c. Tothis he anſwers, 1. Negative- 
ly it was not from impotency in God, for if he had not forſaken 
and delivered them up, they could not have been ſo eaſily chaſed. 
2. Poſitively, But, ſaith he, the true reaſon was this, their wine,Oc, 
b The People of 1a, which I planted and brought up as a choice 
vine, are now degenerated and become like the vine of Sodom,their 
principles and practices are all corrupt and abominable. Compare 
Iiſa. 1. 10. c Their fruits or ations are moſt loathſome to me, ma- 
licious and miſchievous to others, and at laſt will be pernicious to 
themſelves. : 

33 Their wine is the poiſon of dragons 4, and the 


cruel venome of aſps e. 

d For althoughſome write that the Dragons of Greece have no poi- 
ſon in them, yet that the African and 4rabian Dragons, of which 
Moſes here writes, have poiſon in them, is confeſſed by ancient hea- 
then Authors. e Whoſe poiſon kills certainly and ſpeedily, as A.. 
riſtotle and others write. : 

34. 5s notthis f * laid up in ſtore wich me, and ſeal- 
:. ed up among my treaſures ? 

f (i. e.) All their wickedneſs mentioned before. My long ſuffer- 
ing towards them may make them and others think that I have fo.- 
gotten their ſins, but I remember them punQually, they are ſealed 
up as in a bag, Job. 14. 17. and as men ſeal up their treaſures, that 
nothing be loſt ; and I ſhall bring them to their remembrance alſo. 

*Rom:12: 35 Lo me belowgeth * vengeance g and recompence : 


19: Heb: their feet ſhal ſlide þ in due time 5: for * the day of 


*Joſh: 23: 


JO. 
, Chron: 


| Or, is 
worle 
than the 
wine of S0= 


gm, &C. 


+> Boe. ,, their calamity is at hand &, and the thingsthat (bal come 
2. _ upon them, make haſte, 


gIr is my office to puniſh ſin, and therefore as I know their fins 
ſoI will affuredly puniſh them. þ 'They who now think they ſtand 
faſt and unmoveable, they ſhall fall into utter deſtru&tion. / Though 
| not ſo ſoon as ſome may expett it, yet in that time when it ſhall 
| | be moſt proper and ſeaſonable, when they have filled up the mea- 
ſuce of their ſins. This due time may be the ſame with thar fulneſs of 
time, Gal. 4. 4. when Chriſt came into the world, » hom this peo- 
ple by wicked hands crucified and flew, ©# 2. 23. for which wrath 
came upon them to the uttermoſt, 1 The). 2. 15, 16. k Heb. is near. So 
the Scripture oft ſpeaks of thoſe things which are at many hun- 
dred years diſtance, ro meet with objettions arifing in mens minds 
from the delays of them, and to fignihe, that though they may be 
afar off as to our meaſures of time & expeCtation of the things, yet 
in Gods account they are near, they re as nea! as may be, as {oon 
ever the fit and the full time is come,they come inſtantly, they are 
nearer than ſinners would have them ; when the meaſure of their 
ſins is once ful}, the judgment ſhall not be deferred. 


26 For /the LORD ſhal judge his people », and * 
repent himſelf for his ſervants », when he ſeeth that 


*Pfal: 106: 
45: Jer: 
31: 20. 

t Heb. 


* wag { Or,Nevertheleſs,or,But yet, as the particle, ch, is ſometimes uſed, 


as Job 5.7. Tſag.1.and 49. 25- Having now ſpoken of th. d:eadful 
calamity which would come upon his people, h- nw tu:ns his 
diſcourſe into a more comfortable ſtrain, ac-o ding to the ufual 
method of the Prophets, and here begins to fhev' that after G04 had 
humbled and ſorely chaſtiſed his People, yet a' la” he would have 
mercy upon them and turn their captivity, as it here follows m 
(7. e.) Shall plead their cauſe,ſhall protett and deliver them, as that 
Phraſe is oft uſed. See Pſal.7. 8. and 10. 18. 1/a.1 17. and 11. 4. 
Fer. 5.28. and 22.16. (7. e.) Repent of the evils he hath irought 
upon them, will change his courle and carriage towards them. o 
None ſhut up, either in their ſtrong cities or ca!tles or other hiding 
Places, - or in the enemies hands or priſons, whence there might be 
ſome hope or poſlibility of redemption ; and non: / fr, as the poor 
and contemptible people are negle&ted and uſually leſt by the Con- 
querours in the conquered land, as 2 King. 25. 12. but all icem to be 
cut off and the people quite deſtroyed. So this phraſe is uſed 1 King. 
I4. 10. and 271. 21. and 2 King. 9.8. and 14. 26. 

37 Andhe bal fay p, * where aretheir gods, 
rock in whom they truſted ? 

þ The Lord,before he deliver his people,will firſt convince them 
of their former folly in forſaking him and following idols; he will 
find an occaſion from that miſerable and hopeleſs condition into 
which their Jdols have brought themto upbraid them with it. 

38 . Which did eat the fat of their ſacrifices, and drank 
OY the wine of their drink-offerings,q? let them riſe up 
s"ngfor and hel db ic! ; 
wo. and help. you r, 4z4 be | your protection. 

* Plal:rog: 7 (7 e.) To whom you offered ſacrifices and oblations after the 
27. , | manner of the Gentiles. See Exod. 34. 13.-Pſal. 106 28. 1 Cor.10.20. 
*ch: 4:35. 7 If they can do it. Compare 7udg. 10. 14. Jer. 2. 28. 


*1Sam:2:6 29 See now s, that * I even T am he r, and * there is 
* no god with me; * I kill, andI make alive ; I wound, 


*Judg:10: their 


14, 


{i Heb: an 


_ 
Cv 


their F power is gone, and there is none ut up,or left o, 


| 


DEUTERONOM TY 


Chap. XXXI 
and I heal : neither 7s there any that can deliver you out 
of my hand. 

5 Learn now by your own fad experience what vain and impo- 
tent things Idols are, and what a filly thing it was in you to pur 
your truſt in them, as they did wer, 37. t (7. e.) The only true and 
omniporent and irreſiſtabie God, as it here follows. 

40 For lift up my handto heaven «, and fay, I live 
forever x. 

u ( 1,e.) I ſolemnly ſwear, thatI will do what here follows, that 
as I willdeliver my people, fo I will fully avenge my ſelf upon all 
mine enemies, whom I have uſed as rods to ſcourge my people. 

(i.e.) As ſure as I live. Compare Jer. 4. 2. Heb. 6. 13. Rev. 10. 5,6. | 

41 If * I whet myglittering ſword y, and mine hand *16: 214 
take hold on judgment z, I will render vengeance to & 34:5:}f 
mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. $66: 16: N 

z If once begin to prepare for war and for the execution of my Ezck: 2 | 
ſentence. = (z. e.) Of the inſtruments cf judgment, of the weapens 1+ 2%: 
of war. A metaphor from warriours, that take their weapons into | 
their hand, when they intend to fight, 

42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood C and 
my {word ſhal devour fleſh) and that with the blood of 
the lain, and of the captives, from rhe beginning of 
* revenges upon the enemy 6. 

a Whom my ſword hath ſorely wounded, though not uttterly kil- 
led. 6 ( 7: e: ) When once I begin to revenge my ſelf and my peo- 
ple upon mine and their enemies,I will go on and make a full end: 
Or, with the head, or with the blood of the head, i.e. of the chief or 
chiefs, of the revenges of the enemy, i.e. of the revengeful or malici- 
ous enemy of God and of his people. The noun Subſtantive is oft 
put for the AdjeQtive, as Ger. 17. 5. a multitude of nations, is put for 
many nations, Rom. 4.17. and Gen. 45. 22. changes of raiment, i. e. 
changeable raiment ; and Pſal.gg.4. the kings ſirength, 7. e. the {:rong 
and mighty king. And fo here, he revenges of the enemy, 3. e. the _ 
revengeful enemy. And by the bead may be here underſtood eitter 
the Devil, or the heads and rulers ofthoſe Empires w hich were ene- 
mies to.Gods people.: Or, of the head ſhall be the revenges upon the 
enemies, 1. e. 1 will take vengeance upon all mine enemies, yeaupon 
the head or heads of them. | | 

43 [| * Rejoyce, O ye nations, with . his people c, || Or.pral 
for he will avenge the blood of his ſervants, and will his Perp! 
rendervengeanceto his adverſaries, and will be merciful 14 21} 
unto his land, and to his people. of gl fl 

c This tranſlation is juſtified by St. Paul, Rom: 15:10: the particle Be _ | 
with, being oft underſtood, as Lev:26:42.He calls upon the nations * 
to rejoyce and bleſs God for his favours, and eſpecially for the laſt 
wonderful deliverance which ſhall be ye to the Jews, when they 
ſhall be converted unto the Goſpel in the laſt days, which they have 
all reaſon to do not only from that duty of ſympathy which they 
owe to all people, and eſpecially to Gods ancient people, whereby 
they are to rejoyce with them that rejoyce, but becauſe of that ſingular 
advantage and happineſs which all nations will have at that time 
and upon that occaſion, Or, rejoyce, © ye Gentiles, his peaple, 7. e. 

O you Gentiles, who once were not Gods people, but now are his 
people, do yourejoyce for Gods mercies to.the Jews his ancient peo-« 
ple, bleſs God for their converſion and ſalvation. 

44 And Moſes cameand ſpake all the words of this 
ſong in the ears of the people, he, and || Hoſbea 4d the | Or, 7s 
ſon of Nun. | | ſua. 

d Or Joſhua: who is here joyned with Moſes in this ation, becauſe 
though Moſes only ſpake the words, yet Joſbua conſented to them, 
and, it may be, afterwards repeated them ; this being not a ſong to 
be ſung once for all, but a ſtanding monument which was written 
and kept for future uſe, Deut: 31: 22, &c and to be repeated again 
and again upon ſolemn occaſions, which Joſhua and other ſucceed- 
ing Magiſtrates were to take care of. 

45 And Moſes made an end of ſpeaking all theſe 
words to all Iſrael, | 

46 Ard he ſaid untothem, * Set your hearts unto all *chap'6 
the words which I teſtifie among you this day, which & 53: 1 
ye ſhal command your children to obſerve to doe,all the 
words of this law. | 

47 For it is not a vain thing for you e, becauſe it is 
your life, and through this thing you (hal prolong your 
days, in the land whither ye go over Jordan to poileſsit. 

eIt is not an unprofitable or contemprible work I adviſe you to, 
but well worthy of your moſt ſerious Care, oftto remember and di- 
ligently to conſider it. 

48 * Andthe LORD ſpake unto Moſes that ſelf-ſame *Nam.s 
day, ſaying, | | 123 
| 49 Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto 
mount Nebo f which is in the land of Moab,thar is over 
againſt Jericho, and behold the land of Canaan, which 
I give unto the children of Iſrael for a poſſeffion : 

} Nebo wasa ridge or top of the mountains of 4barim, See on 
Numb. 27, 12. Deus. 3. 27. 

5o Anddie in the mount whither thou goeſt up, and | 
be gathered unto thy people, as * Aaron thy brother «x,,,. 
died in wount Hor, and was gathered unto his people. 

 F1 Becauſe * ye treſpaſſed againſt me among the 
children of Iſrael, at the waters of || Meribah- kadeſh in 
the wilderneſs of Zin : becauſe ye fancified me not in ,.? 
a . 7: 14. 
the midſt of the children of Iſrael. || Or, ſtri 

52 Yet thou ſhalt fee the land before hee, but thou at Kadeſb 
ſhalt not go thither unto the land which I give. the chil- 
dren of Itrael. | | 

GH A P.  XXXxuUE G 
The Majeſty of God; 1-===5. Bleſſings propheſied of the twelvs Tribes, G--25. 
The excellency of Iſrae], Ny 


Lad Lak? "I 


" 
[l 


Cr 
24.Jer.3il 
14. Lay 


*: $. 


25, 28: « 
33: 38. 
*Num:2 
12, 13: $ 


Snag 


/ Rs La 
And 


yriads, 

, ten 

d Gr. 

ze Jude 
. I4. 
Heb. z 

c of Law. 


XXXIIL 


w— T 
a 87 


' the ſervant or prophet or miniſter of God, 


-——C 


ND this is the blefling, wherewith Moſes the 
A man of God bleſſed « the children of Iſrael 6 be- 


fore his death. | : 
s He is ſaid to bc them miniſterially, partly by praying to Go 
with faith for his bleſſing upon them ; partly by forctelling the 
bleflings which God would confer upon them: for the Prophets are 
oft ſaid to do what they forctel ſhould be done,as Ger.49.7.Fer-1.10- 
Exek.q3.3.Hoſ.6.5. And Moſes calls himſelf here the man of Goa, 2. e- 
as this phraſe ſignifies, 
x Sam. 9. 6, 7- 1 Tim. 6. 11.to acquaint them that the following proc- 
pheſies were not his own inventions, but divine inſpirations. b (7. 
e. ) The ſeveral Tribes : only Simeon is omitted, either 1. in dete- 
ſtation of their parent Simeon his bloody and wicked carriage, for 
which Jacob alſo gives that Tribe a curſe rather than a bleſſing, 1 
Gen.49. But as for Levi,who is joyned with him in that cenſure and 
curſe, Gen. 49. 5, 6, 7. he is here ſeparated from him, and exempt- 
edfrom that curſe, and blefſed with an eminent bleſſing for a ſingu- 
Jar and valuable reaſon expreſſed here v.8, 9. whereas Simeons Tribe 
had been ſo far from expiating their fathers crime that they added 


new ones, their Prince being guilty of another notorious crime, 


Numb. 25. 6, 14. and his Tribe too much concurring with him 1n 
ſuch a&ions, as interpreters gather from the great diminution of 
the numbers of that Tribe, which were 59300 in Numb: 1. 23. and 
but 22200 in Numb. 26. 14. which was near 4o years after. Or 2. 
becauſe that Tribe had no diſtin& Inheritance, but was to have his 
portion in the Tribe of Judah, as he had Jof: 19: 1: and therefore 
he muſt needs partake with them in their bleſſings. 


2 And he ſaid, The LORD came c from Sinai 4, and 


' roſe up e from Seir f unto them : he ſhined forth from 
Heb.boly mount Paran g, and he came with | ren thouſands of 


Saints þ : from his right hand # went Þ a fiery law & for 


them. ' 

c To wit, to the Iſraelites, 7. e. manifeſted graciouſly and glori- 
ouſly among them. 4 (7. e.) Beginning at Sina!, where the firit and 
moſt glorious appearance of God was, and ſo going on with them 
to Seirand Paran. Or, to Sinai, the particle, mem, oft ſignifying, zo, 
as is evident by comparing 7/s: 59; 20: with Rom: 11: 26: 1 King: 8: 
30: with 2 Chron: 6: 21. and 2 Sam. 6.2.with 1 Chron. 13.6: See allo 
Gen.2.8.and 11.2.and 13. 11. 1 S977. 14+ 15. Or, in Sinai, mem being 
put for beth, in, as Exod. 25. 18. Deut. 15. 1. Job 19. 26. Pſal. 68. 29. 
and 72: 16. He appeared or ſhewed himſelf, asthe Sun doth when 
it riſeth. f 7. e. From the mountain or land of Edo, which is called 
Seir, Gen: 32: 3: and 36;8: Deut:.2:4: to which place the 1ſraclites came, 
Num: 20: 14,&c« and from thence God led them on towards the land 
of promiſe, and then gloriouſly appeared for them in ſubduing $:- 
hon and Og before them and giving their countries unto them. W hich 
glorious work of Gods is particularly celebrated Juag: 5:4. But be- 
cauſe the land of Seir or Edom is ſometimes taken more largely,and 
ſo reacheth even to the Red-ſea, as appears from 1 Kings 9: 26; 2nd 
therefore mount Sinai was near to it, and becauſe Paran,which here 
follows, was alſo near Sinaz, as being the next ſtation into which 


. they came from the wilderneſs of Sinai,Numb: 19: 12: all this verſe 


may belong to Gods appearance in mount $Sinaz, where that glori- 
ous light which ſhone upon mount Sa; dire&ly, didin all proba- 
bility ſcatter jts beams into adjacent parts, ſuch as Seir and Paran 
were, and ſo this is only a Poetical and Prophetical variation of 
the phraſe and expreſſion of the ſame thing in divers words, and 
God coming or riſing or ſbining from or to or in Sinai and Seir and Paran 
note one and the ſame illultrious aftion of God appearing there 
with ten thouſands of his Saints or holy Angels, and there giving a fe- 
ry law to them, as it here follows. And this interpretation may re- 
ceive ſome ſtrength from Hab: 3: 3: where this glorious march of 
God before his people is remembred, only Teman,which ſignifies the 
South is pur for Scir, which is here, poſſibly ro ſignify, that that Seir 
which is here menticned was to be underſtood of the Seuthern part 
of the country of Serr or Edom, which was that part adjoyning ro 
the Reaiſes Others refer this of Seir to the Brazen Serpent, that 
eminent type of Chriſt, which was eretted in this place. z A place 
where God eminently manifeſted his preſence and goedneſs, both 
in giving the-people fleſh which they deſired, and in appointing 
the 70 Elders and pouring forth his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11. 
Though the Expoſition mentioned in the foregoing branch may 
ſcern more probable. + (z.e.) With a great company of holy An- 
gels, Pſal: 68: 17: Dan: 7: 10;which attended upon himin this great 
and glorious work of giving the law, as may be gathered from 4#s 
7. 53+ Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2. 2. and 12. 22. # Which both wrote the 
law and gaye it to men. An alluſion to men who ordinarily write 
and give gifts with their right, and not with their Jefr, hand. k 


' The law is called fry, partly becauſe it is of a: fiery nature, purging 


and ſearching and inflaming, for which reaſons Gods word is com- 
pared to fire, Jer. 23. 29. partly to ſignify that fiery wrath and curſe 
which it inflieth upon ſinners for the violation of ir, 2 Cor. 3: 7, 
9: and principally becauſe it was delivered out of the midſt of the 
fire, -Exod. 19: 16, 18. Deut: 4: 11. and s. 22, 23. 

3 Yea, he loved the people }: all his ſaints mare in 


.thy hand », and they fat down at thy feet ; every ne 


ſha] receive of thy words p. 

I (3. e.) The Tribes of Iſrael, which are called people, Gen. 48. 19. 
Judges 5. 14. Ads 4. 27. The ſenſe is, This law, though delivered 
with Fire and Smoak and Thunder, which might ſeem to portend 
nothing but hatred and terrour, yet in truth it was given to Jſ-ael 
in great love, as being the great mean of their temporal and eter- 
nal Salvatien. And although God ſhews a general and common 
kindneſs to all men,yethe loved this people in a ſingular and pecu- 
liar manner. # A!l Gods Saints or holy ones, (3. e.) his People, as they 
are now called, the people of /-ael, who are all called holy, Exod. 19.6. 
Num. 16.3.Deut.7.6.Dan.7.25.and 8.24.and 12.7. becauſe they all pro- 
feſſed to be ſo, and were obliged to be ſo, and many of them were 
ſuch.Though ſome appropriate this to the true Saints in 1ſ-ael. 
» Or, were in thy hand, i.e. under Gods care to prote& and dire& 
and govern them, as that phraſe ſignifies, Numb. 4. 28, 33. Joh. x0. 
28, 29. Theſe words are ſpoken to God, and for the change of per- 
ſons, hisand#hy, that is moſt frequent in the Hebrew tongue, See 
Dan. 9. 4. Thisclauſe may farther note Gods kindneſs to 1ſ7gel in 
upholding and preſerving them when the fiery law way delivered, 


DEUTERONO MT. 


which was done with ſo much dread and terrovr,that not cnly the 
People trembled and were ready to fink under it, Exod. 20. 18,19. 
but even Moſes himſelf did exceedingly fear ana quake, Heb:12: 21. Eut 
in this fright God ſuſtained both Moſes and the people, in or by his 
hand, whereby he in a manner hid and covered them that no harm 
might come to them by this terrible Apparition. o Like Scholars 
to receive InſtruQtions and Counſels from thee. He alludes either 
1: Tothe manner of Diſciples among the Jews who uſed to fit at 
their Maſters feet, Luke 10: 39: Ads 22: 3. Sec allo Gen: 49: 10: 2 
Kings 4: 38. Burt it is doubtful whether this cuſtom was ſo ancient 
as Moſes, Or, 2. To the place where the people waited when the 
Law was delivered, which was at the foot of the Mount. p The 
people, eaſily underſtood from the foregoing words, did or will re- 
ceive or ſubmit to thy Inſtructions and Commands. This may re- 
ſpe& either 1. The peoples promiſe when they heard the Law ,that 
they would hear and do all that was commanded, Dert: 5: 27. Or, 
2. 'The peoples duty to doſo. 3. The peoples Priviledge that they 
were admitted to receive ſo great a Priviledge as the words and 
Laws of God were. 


4 Moſes commanded us a law q; even the inheritance 
of the congregation of Jacob 7. 

q Moſes ſpeaks this of himſelf in the third perſon, which is very 
uſual in the Hebrew language. r The Law is called their inheritance, 
partly becauſe the obligation of it was hereditary, paſſing from Pa- 
rents to their children, and partly becauſe this was the beſt part of 
all their inheritance and poſlefſions, the greateſt of all thoſe gifts 
and favours which God beſtowed upon them. 

' 5 And he was * king s in Jeſurun *t, when the heads *See Gen; 
of the people, and the tribes of Iſrael were gatheredto- 30. 30. 
gether «. Ig Te 

s Moſes was their King not in Title, but in reality, being under *' 
God, their ſupream and uncontrolable Governour, and Lawgiver. | 
Though the word oft ſignifies only a Prince or chief Ruler, as Judges 
Ig: I: Jer: 19: 3: and 46: 25. # z.e. In Iſrael, ſo called Dent. 32.15. 
# When the Princes and People met together for the management 
of publick Afairs,Moſes wasowned by them as their King and Law- 
giver, and he direfted and ruled them as their Superiour. This 
he ſaith ro ſhew that the people approved and conſented to the Au- 
thority and Law of Moſes. . 

6 Let Reuben live, and not die, and let »et his men 
be few x. | 


t) 

x Though Reuben deſerve to be cut off or greatly diminiſhed and 
obſcured, according to Jacobs prediCtion, Ger. 49. 4. Yet God will 
ſpare them and give them a name and portion among the Tribes of 
I/rael, and bleſs them with increale of their numters. 

7 And this is the bleffing of Judah : and he ſaid, Hear, 
LORD, the voice of Judah y, and bring him unto his 
people z: let his hands be ſufficient for him a, and be 
thou an help to him from his enemies 6. 

77, e. God will hear his Prayer for the accompliſhment of thoſe 
great things premiſed to thar Tribe, Gen. 49. 8,9, 10, 11. Thisim- 
plies the delays and difficulties Judah would meet with herein, 
which would drive him to his Prayers.and that thoſe Prayers ſhould 
be crowned with ſucceſs. z Either 1.When he ſhall go forth ro Bat- 
tel againſt God's and his enenues and ſhall fall fiercely upon them, 
as was forerold,Gen.q9.8,9. bring him back with honcur and viQory 
and ſafety ro his people, 7. e. either to the reſt of his Tribe who were 
left at home when their brethren went to batte]: or to his brethren 
the other Tribes of 1r7ael. Or 2.When that Tribe ſhall go into cap- 
tivity, let them not always be kept in captivity, a+ theten Tribes 
are like to be, bur do thou bring him again to his people. Or 4. As 
thou haſt promiſed the gathering of the people to him, even to the Shi. 
loh, who was to come out of his Joyns, Ger. 49. 10. ſo do thou bring 
him, 7. e, the Meſſias who may be underſtood our of that parallel pro- 
phefie, and who may be here called Judah, becauſe he was come 
from him, as he is for that reaſon called David in Civers places, 70 
his people, i. e« to that people which thou haſt given to him. Or 4 
Bring him in, to wit, asa Prince and Governour, as thcu hit Pre= 
miſed Gen: 49: to his people, 7. e. to thy people of Iſrael, now to be 
reckoned as his people, becauſe of their ſubje&ion ro him. Or rather 
5. Bring himin ro his people, to that people which theu haſt promi- 
ſed and given to him, z.e. to thar portion of Land which thou haſt 
allored ro him,ſettle him in his poſſ*flion : the people or inhebitanrs 
being here put for the Land inhabited by them, as the 1/raclires are 
told they ſhould poſſeſs che Nations or people of Canaan, Deuz, 11. 23. 
and 12. 2. 7.e. their Land as itis explained, Deur. 17. 14. and 30. 
18. for the peoplethey were not to poſſeſs but to diſpoſſels 2nd to 
root out. & This Tribe ſhall be ſo numerous and potent and vali- 
ant, that it ſhall ſuffice ro defend it ſelf withour any aid either 
from forreign nations or fiom other Tribes : as appeared when this 
Tribe alone was able to grapple with nine or ten ofthe other Tribes. 
b Thou wilt preſerve this "Tribe in a ſpecial manner, ſo as his ene- 
mies ſhall nor be able ro ruine it, as they will do other Tribes.and 
that for the ſake of Meſias who ſhall ſpring our of it. 

8 And of Levi he ſaid, 7 Le thy Thummim and th 


Urim be with thy holy one c, * whom thou didſt A 


. Prove 3o., 
d at Maſlah e, and with whom thou didft ftrive f at the *Num.2v 
waters of Meribah ; 136 


c The Thummim and the Urim, which are thine, O Lord by ſ pecial 
inſtitution and conſecration, by which he underſtands the ephod 
in which they were put,Exod. 28. 30. by a ſynecdoche,and the High 
Prieſthood, to which they were appropriated by a Meronymy; and 
withall the gifts and graces ſignified by the Urim and Thummim, and 
neceſſary for the diſcharge of that high office, ſhall be with thy holy 
one, 5. e.with that Levitez that Prieſt, which thou haſt conſecrated to 
thy ſelf, and whictis holy in a more peculiar manner than all the PEO 
ple were, 7. e. The Prieſthood ſhall be confined to and continued in 
Aarons Family. d This ſeems added by way of anticipation,although 
thou didſt try him, and rebuke him,and ſhut him out of Canaan for 
his miſcarriage about fetching water eur of the rock, yet thou didit 
not therefore take away the Prieſthood from him. e Not at that Maſa 


ſah mentioned Exod. 17. which is alſo called Meribah where neither 
Moſes nor Aaron are reproved, nor is Aaren ſo much as named, but 


Chap. XXXI1, © Fe 


Ghar 


mnen[e. 


+ Heb 
thy noſ 


* Gen 
25. 


tHeb 


thruft 
tf Heb, 
mens, 


at that other Meribah, Nymb, 26, where this is #xprefiod, whigh as 


43 


ir Ghap- X XXII. ; | 
*+is called by one of the names of that place, Exog. 17. to wit, Me- 
ribah, Numb. 20. ſo it may be here called by its ether name, Maſſah ; 
and well may the ſame names be given to thoſe two places,becauſe 
the occaſion of them was in a great meaſure one and the ſame. 
Though this place may be otherwiſe rendred, whom thou didſt try in 
+rying or with trial, 7. e, whom thou didft exattly and throughly try, 
ſuch repetitions being very frequent and elegant in the Hebrew 
language. And it may be obſerved, that in the Hebrew text here 
are two ſeveral prepoſitions, though the Engliſh tranſlation render 
them both by at, here, beth, in or with, and in the next branch, al, 
#7 or near or concerning the waters of Meribah ; which may ſeem to intt- 
mate that the former is not the name of the place as the latter 15: 
why elſe ſhould they not have been expreſſed by the ſame prepolt- 
tion ? f Or, contend, 7. e. whom thou didſt reprove and chaftile, as 

_ that phraſe ſignifies, Iſs: 49: 25: Jer: 2: 9. : 
9 Who ſaid to his father, and unto his mother, 1 
havenot ſeen him g, neither did he acknowledge his 
*Mal2:5- brethren, nor knew his own children : * for they have 


obſerved thy word, and kept thy covenant +: 
g (i. e.) T have noreſpe& unto them, for ſo knowledge is oft uſed, 
as Job 9:21: Prov:12:10,11: I Theſ. 5: 12. The ſenſe is, who followed 
God and his command fully, and executed the judgment enjoyned 
by God without any reſpe& of perſons, Exod:32: 26,27. This ſeems 
better than to refer it, either ro their not mourning for their next 
kindred, for that was allowed to all but the high Prieſt in caſe of the 
Death of Father or Mother, and that was only a ceremonial Rite 
and no matter of great commendation ; or to their impartiality 1n 
executing the judgments committed ro-them, Deut: 17:9: of which 
they had as yet given no conſiderable proof. +(7. e.) When the 
reſt broke their covenant with God by that foul ſin of Idolatry 
with the calf, that Tribe kept themſelves more pure . from that 1n- 
feftion. and adhered to God and his Worſhip and Service, as ap- 
pears from Ezod 32: 26, 28. Compare Mal: 2: 6, 7. | 
| Or /et 10 || They # ſhal teach Jacob thy judgments, and I{ra- 
tem reach, C1 thy law : || they ſhal put incenſe + before thee &, and 


whole burnt-ſacrifice upon thine altar. 
j( i.e.) The Prieſts and Levites. &k (7. e. ) Upon thine Altar of 
incenſe which ſtood before the-Ark, the place of Gods ſpecial pre= 


ſence. 

"I Bleſs, LORD, his ſubſtance 7, andaccept the work 
of his hands ws ; ſmite throughthe loins of them that riſe 
againſt him », and of them that hate him, that chey riſe 


not again. 

1 (5. e.) His outward eſtate, as Deut. 8. 18. becauſe he hath no 
inhe. itance of his own and therefore wholly depends upon thy 
bleſſing Or, His Hoft or Army, as the word is uſed Ez. 37. 10. 
The Prieſts that attended upon Gods ſervice in the Tabernacle or 
Temple are oft compared toan hoſt or army in regard of their exqui- 
ſite orders and courſesand conſtant watches there. See Numb: 4: 3- 
m (i.e.) All his holy adminiſtrations which he fitly calls #he works 
of his hands, either more largely, the hand, one great inſtrument 
of a&tion being put for all the reſt ; Or becauſe a great part ef the 
ſervic- of the Levites and Prieſts was done by the labour of their 
hand and body, whereas the ſervice of Evangelical Miniſters is more 
ſpiritual and heavenly. n He prays thus earneſtly for them, part'y 
becauſe he foreilaw they who were to teach and admonith, and re- 
prove, and chaſtiſe others who would have many enemies, Jer. 15. 
10. Amos 5. 10. and partly becauſe they were, under Grd, the 
great preſervers and uphoJders of Religion,and their Enemies were 
the Enemies ofReligion it ſelf, as is evident from the hiſtory of 
the Old Teſtament. 

12 And of Benjamin he ſaid, The beloved of the 
LORD o ſhall dwell in ſafety by him p, and the LORD 
q ſhal cover him all the day long r, and he ſhal dwell 
between his ſhoulders s. 

0 (i, e.) This beloved Tribe, fo called partly in alluſion to their 
Father Benjamin who was the belov=d of his Father Jacob : and part- 
ly becauſe of the love and kindneſs of God towards this Tribe which 
appeared both in this, that they dwelt in the far!teſt and beſt parr 
of tne Land, as Joſephus affirms, and eſpecially in the following pci- 
viledge. p (5. e.) Shall have his Jot nigh unto Gods Temple,which 
was both» a ſingular comfort and ſafeguard ro him q Who may 
well be underitood here becauſe he was expreſſed in the former 
member. » Shall prote& that Tribe continually while they cleave 
to him + The Lord ſhall dwell, z. e. his Temple ihall be placed, 
berween his ſhoulders, i. e in his portion, or between his borders, or 


&c, 

Or, ler 
them 
incenſe. 


4 Heb. at 
thy noſe. 


D EB U T E K 0 N ER 


Chap. KXXTL] 


ſuch as have been from the beginning of the worid, and likely to 
continue to the end of it, in oppoſition to thoſe hills or mounts 
which have been caſt up by the wit of man. | 

16 And forthe precious things of the earth 5, and 
fulneſs thereofc, and for the good will of him that dwelt 
in the buſh 4: let the blefling come upon the head of 
Joſeph e, and upon the top ofthe head of him that * was: * Gen. 4 
ſeparated from hiz brethren. 26, 

b And in general for all the choice fruits w hich the Land produ- 

ceth in all the parts of it, whether Hills or Valleys. c (-e. ) The 
Plants and Cattel and all Creatures that grow; increaſe, and flou- 
riſhin it. d4 For allother effe&s of the good will and kindneſs of 
God, who not long ſince did for a.time dwell orappear in the buſh 
ro me in order to the relief of his people, Exod. 3. 2, e(z.e.) Of 
Joſephs poſterity. | | 

17 His glory is like the firſtling of his bullock f, and . Ll 
his horns #re /ike the horns of [| unicorns g,with them he || Or, of | 


ſhall puſh the people þ together,to the ends of the earth ;; 77s bud. 
and they aze the ten thouſands of Ephraim, and they are HED. Ren 
the thouſands of Manafleh &. ; 


f In whoſe countenance there is a kind of awful Majeſty and , 
comely generoſity,as Tully, Zlian,&c.obſerve. This ſeems to note the 
Kingdom which Ephraim ſhould obtain in Jeroboam and his Succeſ= 
ſors. g His ſtrength and power ſhall be very great. + (7. e.)All that 
ſhall oppoſe him,and particularly the Canaamites. i(i.e.) Of the land 
of Canaan. k Though Manaſſeh be now more numerous, yet Ephraing 
ſhall ſhortly outſtrip him, as was foretold Ger. 48. 29. 

18 And of Zebulun he faid, Rejoyce / Zebulun, in 
thy going our 7, and Iflachar » in thy tents , 

{ Thou ſhalt proſper and have cauſe of rejoycing. m Either r, 
To war,as this phraſe is oft uſed,as Ger. 14. 18. which was in part 
verified, Juadg. 5.18. Or2, To Sea, in wy of Traffick, Lecauſe 
their portion lay near the Sea. Or both may be joined, and in 
botlr reſpe&s his courſe is oppoſite to that of Jſachar, who was a 
lover of peace and paſturage. See Gen, 49. 14, 15. » Who is here 
joined with Zebulun, both becau'e they were brethren ty Father and 
Mother too, and becauſe their poſleti. ons Jay near together. o (7. e.} 
Thou ſhalt give thy ſelf ro the management of Land and Catrel, 1i- 
ving quietly in thy own poſſeſſions, diſliking the troubles of war 
and of merchandite. So the phraſe is uſed, Gen. 25. 27. Joſ: 22, 4. 
Judg. 5.24. and 7. 8. ? 

19 They plhall call the people q unto the mountain x, 
there they ſhal offer ſacrifices of righteouſneſs 5: for they 
ſhal ſuck of the abundance of the ſea z, and of treaſures 
hid in the ſand #. 

? Either 1. Zebulun and 1ſachar. Or rather 2. Zebulun only, as the 
following matter ſhews,andit was Zebulun that Moſes takes more ſpe- 
cial notice of wer, 18.bringing in Iſachar only by the by in conjun« 
tion with him, or in oppolition to him. And lo having diſpatch= 
ed Iſachar in two words, he returns to Zebulun;a more attive Tribe. 
q (i. e) The Gentiles, either thoſe of Galilee, which was czlled Gali. 
lee of the Gentiles, who were their Neighbours ; or people of other 
nations, with whom they had commerce, which they endeavcmed 
to improve in perſwading them to the true God and his Worſhip 
and Service. 7 (5. e.) To the Temple, which Moſes knew was to be 
ſeated upon a mountain. 5(7.e.) Such as God :equires and Righ- 
teouſneſs obligeth them to offer. Their trafficking abroad with Hea« 
then nations ſhall not make them forget or negle& their duty at 
home, nor ſhall their diſtance from the place of ſactifice hinder 
them; from coming to it to diſcharge that duty. # They ſhall grow 
rich by the traffick of the ſea, and their riches ſhall not make them 
the worſe as they do others, but they ſhall conſecrate themſelves 
and their riches to the ſervice of God. # Such precious things as 
either 1. Are contained in the ſand of the Sea and Rivers,in which 
ſometimes there is mixed a conſiderable quantity of Go!d and Sil- 
ver. Or 2. Such as grow in the Sea, or are fetched from the ſandy 
bottom of it, as pearls, coral, amber-greaſe, &c. Or 3. Such as 
being caſt into the Sea by ſhipwrack are caſt upon tie ſhore by 
the workings of the Sea, an! thence taken either by Merchants cs 
| by the people that live upon the Sca-Coalt. | : 

20 And of Gad he ſaid, Biefſed be he that * enlat- * Seefs 
geth Gad x : he dwelleth as a lion y, andteareth the arrh 8, &c: 
with the crown ofthe head z. 1 Chron. 

x By praiſing God for enlarging Gad he ſuppoſeth the ground of 17: 8, &C 


| 
| 


i 
i 
[ 
{ 
i 
l 
l 
i 
' 
; 
(i 
Ll 
i 
/ 
| 
; 


: 
: 
;: 


: 
: 
; 
; 


ſides as the word Shoulder is oft uſed, as Exod: 28. 7. Numb, 34. 11. 
Joſ. 15.8, 10. Ezek. 47. r, 2. 


on which the Temple was built, was in the Tribe of Benjamin 

13 And of Joſeph he ſaid, * Bletſed of the LORD be 
hisland z, for the precious things of heaven «, for the 
dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath x: 

z His portion ſhall be exc-llent and endowe'! with choice bleſſings 
from God, as it here follows. »u (5. e.) The precious fruits of the 
Earth brought forth by the influences of Heaven, the wa: mth-of 
the Sun, an4 the Rain which God will ſend from Heaven. x The 


* Gen. 49. 
25, 


And this was truly the ſituation of 
th- Temple, on both ſides whereof was Benjamins portion, and | 
though mount Zzon was in the Tribe of Judah, yet mount Moriah, ' 


ſprings of water bubling our of the Earth. 
14 And for the precious fruits brought forth by the 
ſun y, and for the precious things + put f-rth by the | 
T moon z. | 
y Which opens and warms the Earth, cheriſheth and improveth 
and in due time ripeneth the ſeeds and fruits of the Earth.zWhich 
by its moiſture refreſhes and promotes them. Heb. Of the moons, 
or months, 3. e, which it bringeth forth m the ſeveral Months or 
Seaſons of the year. 
i5 And for thechiefthings of the ancient mountains, 
and for the precious things of the laſting hilis a. 
@ (7.e.) The excellent fruirs,as Grapes, Olives, Figs, &c. which 
delight in Mountains, growing upon, or the precious. Minerals 
contained in, their m0wntains and hills called ancient and laſting, 7. e. 


t Heb. 
thruſt forth. 
f Heb. 


nns, 


— _— 


| hid or protefed : for their Wives and children were ſecured in their 


theſe p:aiſes, that God would <nlarge Gad, 5. e. either 7. enlarge 
his Territories : which ſeems needleſs, becauſe they had a very 
large portion now when Moſes uttered theſe words. Or 2.bring him 
out of his ſtraits and troubles, which he was likely to be oft er ga« 
ged in, becauſe he wasencompaſſed with potent Enemies. And in 
thi- ſ-nſe the phraſe is uſed, P/al. 4.2. compare Pſal. ; +. 8: and 118. 
5. One inſtance of the fulfilling hereof we have Juag: 11. y(5#:8:) 
Safe and ſecure from his Enemies, and terrible to them when they 
rouſe and moleſt him. See 1 Chron. 5. 18, &c. and 12,8. (5. e. } 
Utterly deſtroys his Enemies, both the head, the ſeat of the crown 
their dignity and principality, ard the Arm, the ſubje& of ſtrength 
and inſtrument of aCtion ; both chicf Princes,and their inſtruments 
and ſubjeQts. 


21 And * he provided the firſt part a for himſelf.be- 
cauſe there i» a portion of the law-giver þ was he + ſeat- 
ed c, and he came with the heads of the people 4, he ex- 
ecured the juſtice of the LORD, and his judgments with 
Iſrael e. | 

a The firſt-fruits of the Land of promiſe, the country cf Sibor, 
which was firſt conquered, which he is ſaid to prove for bimſelf, 
becauſe he deſired and fo obtain'd it of Moſes, Numb. 32. b (i. e } OF 
Moſes whoſe portion this is called, either becauſe this part of the 
Land beyond Jordan was the only part of the Land which At:ſes 
was permitted to enter upon : or becauſe it was given to him by 
| Moſes, whereas the portions beyond Jordan were given to the ſe- 
; veral Tribes by Zojbua according to the dire&ion of the lot. c Heb. 


* Nut. 
32. 17. 
1Heby 


ciele a, , 


Cities, whilsſt many of their men went over to the War in Ca- 


2 K 3 


WEE LS 


ap. XXX. DEBUTEROMNOM TY. Chap, XXxIVv. Vip. ! 


: eter tenſe being put | 11: 10: Revel: 5: 5: and as Jacob or Iſrael who 1s the fountain, 1s oft 

—_ £..4 44 - ab: Smqed "ey w__ _— rs x54 to the os put for the children of 1/7ael. Or the eye ( for ſo the Hebrew word 

-— Cana a», with the Princes, or Captains, or Rulers of the people of 1ſra- oft ſignifies ) of Jacob, 7. e. of the People of Iſrael, and ſo the ſenſe iS, 

el. i.e. under their command and conduQ, as indeed they did; or They who now only hear ofthe Land of promiſe ſhall ſhortly ſec it, 

With the firſt of the people ; or, in the front of the people, as the Sjriack | which I am not ſuffered to do, and ſhall enjoy it, which is oft fig- 

renders it ; for this tribe and their brethren whoſe lot fell beyond | nified by ſeeing, as Pſal: 4: 6: and 27: 13: and $4: 132 Eccleſ: 2:1: and 

Jordan, were to march and did march into Canaan before their bre= | 3: 13. } (3. e. ) Thoſe Heavens or that Air which hangs over his 
thren, as it is expreſſed, Jof. 1. 14. And the Hebrew word roſch oft Land. : EEK 

ſignifies the beginning or firſt of a thing. (7. e.) He did or will exe- 29 Happy art thou, O Iſrael 3 who Fs like.unto thee, 

cate the juſt judgment of God againft the Canaanites, as the reſt of | O people, ſaved by the LORD, the ſhield of thy help, 


the Iſraelites 61d; he will joyn in the war againſt them, as he pro-| 4 wy ho ;r the ford of thy excellency, and thine ene- 
:{ed tro do Numb. 32. 27, &c. and aftually did, Jof. 1. 14. : ? 3 
_ 4 _ ir Is "” [51 Dan = lions whelp f: he | Pies || ſhal be found liars unto theeſ], and thou Jhalc | Or, Bal 
ſha!l leap from Baſhan g. tread upon their high places 7 . be ſubdued, 
f (4.e.) Courageous and generous and ftrong and ſucceſsful a- | © The giverand preſerver of all that excellency, that glory, fſatc- 


: : ; 'h3 © clauſe | 5» and happineſs, which thou haſt above all other people, which 
_ och wp "ag = = (rm; Ea parry | pupae di thou doſt not obtain either by or for thy own wiſdom or ſtrength 
ance from Bafhan, even atthe other end of the Land,and therefore we goodneſs. Or, Thy moſt excellent ſword, 7. e. Thy ſtrength and the 
this ſeems too great a leap for him, and if he did leap fo far he - ta -4 all thy paſt or approaching ViRories. |! ( 5. e. ) Shall be 
ſhould rather be ſaid to take hisleap from his own lot in the South ES as to all their vain hopes and confidenccs of deſtroying 
of Canaan, and thence to leap not from Baſban, but to Baſban, to fall n ee eatery. themſelves, wherher grounded upontheir own num- 
upon his "Enemies there : bur it rather is a continuation of the Me- Fry and vaJour and ſtrong holds, or upon old Propheſies and pre- 
mphor, and belongs to the Lim, which is ſaid to leap from Baſhan, yy rt of ſucceſs, or upon their idols. Or, ſhall lie unto thee, 7. e. 
becauſe there were many and fierce Lions in thoſe parts, ſee Judg. nies ene mg "_ Nao — » be done but feignedly 
14. 5. whence they uſed to come forth to prey, and their manner "7 y ang AS THIS Phrale er ed, Pſal: 18: 44: and 66: 3: & 
was to leap upon the prey. 1: 15. Poſſibly this may deſign the lies and frauds which the Gi- 


_ ; p ; . beonites would uſe to deceive them, Joſ: 9:4. Þ 7. e. be 
23 And of Naphral he ſaid, O Naphtali ſatisfied due their greateſt princes, and their "ata "ul geo _ : 
with favour g, and fall with the blefling of the LORD 5: | and their Idols, Temples, and Worſhip. 
- poſſeſs thou the weſt and the ſouth z. Fr C H A P. XXXIV,. 
g Either 1. With Gods favour, as it follows: Or 2. With mens | Moſer from Mount Nebo wieweth the Land, 1==-4., He dieth there, 5. Mis 
favour or good-will, his carriage being peaceable, courteous and Burial, 6. Hisage, 7. Thirty days mourning for him, 8, Joſhua ſuc* 
obliging, as isintimated, Ger. 49. 21. according to the common | ceederh him, 9. The praiſes of Moſes, 10==-12. 
Tranſlation; fee the notes there. h (7. e.) Seated 1n a pleaſant and AN D Moſes went up 4 from the plainsof Meab, un- 
fertile and happy ſoil ; ſuch as Galilee, ( in which their ſhare Jay ) to the mountain of Nebob to the top of {| ÞiC, 
eminently was, as Joſephus and others report. # Or, zhe Sea and the has ; . k p of || Fiſgah, | Or, th 
- South. This is not to be underſtood of the places, that his lot ſhould tat zs Over againſt J ericho: and the LORD ſhewed hell” 
<6 fall there ; for he was rather in the Eaſt and North of the Land ; him * all the land of Gilead c unto Dan d. * chap. 4, | 
but of the pleaſures and commodities of the Wef or of the Sea, a In compliance with Gods will that he ſhould then and there 27. 
which were conveyed to him from his neighbour Zebulun; and of | refignup his foul ro God. b Of which fee Num: 27: 12: and 32: 38: 
zbe South, i.e. fromthe ſouthern tribes and parts of Canaan, which | & Der. 32. 49. c Whereof Moſes had as yer ſeen and era, 7a 
were brought tohim down the River Joraan,and both ſorts of com- | a ſmall part. Of this Land ſee Gen: 31: 21: Numb. 32. 1, 19, &c 
modities were given him in exchange for the fruits of his rich ſoil | 4 To that city which after Moſes his death was called Dan, Joſ. 19. 
which he had in great abundance. 47. Juag. 18. 29. So that here is an anticipation. But it ſeems moſt 
24 Andof Alher he ſaid, Let Aſber be bleſſed with | probable, and is commonly believed,that this chapter was not writ- 
children & ; let him be acceptable to his brethren 7, and ten by Moſes but by Elegzar or Joſbua or Ezra or ſome other man of 


_—_— * qaÞ | God diretted herein by the Holy Ghoſt ; this being no more im- 
let him dip his foot in oi] wry Maſe 0 1k peachment to the divine authority of this chapter, wa hs n- 
k He ſhall have numerous and thole ftrong an ealthful and man is unknown, which alſo is the lot of ſome other Books of *Dent, x. 
comely Children. Or,ſhall be bleſſed or praiſes of or above the ſens, i. e. | Scripture, than itis to the authority of the AQs of the K; $ 
the other Sons of Iſrae!, or his brethren, as it here follows, 7» e. His "4. Sg A 


- portion —_ fall in ITRE par 3 whgee By may have the bene- = _—_ that they are Written or Printed by ſome unknown 

-fits both of his own fat ſoil, and of the Sea, by his neighbours, 7y- . : 

-rus and Sidon. 1 By his ſweet diſpoſition and winning | —INs _ -* 2g all Napheali e and the land of Ephr aim,and Ma- 
communication of his excellent commodities to his brethren he | 29 eh, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmoſt ſea F. 

ſhall gain their affe&tions. » He ſhall have ſuch plenty of Oil thar e (7.e.) The land of Naphrali, which together with Dan, was in 
he may not only waſh his face bur his feet alſo in ir. Or, the fatneſs the North of Canaan, as Ephraim and Manaſſch.were in the mid-land 
and fertility of his Country may beexpreſſed by Oil, as Fob 29. 6. | P75, and Judah on the South, and the Sea on the Weſt. So theſe 


'And ſo it agrees with Jacobs bleffing ot him, Gen. 49- 20. parts lying ia the ſeveral quarters are put forall the reſt. He ſtood 
Tor under 25 | Thy ſhoes ſhall be iron and braſs » : and as thy in the Eaſt and ſaw alſo Gilead, which was in the Eaſtern part of the 
| hy ſboes days fo ſhall thy ſtrength "mg land, and thence he ſaw the North and South and Weſt. LENS 


ſhall be iron »y, This may note, either 1: Their ot Kernel] by which they hehe vere ap on which was the utmoſt bound of the land of pro- 
ſhould be able to tread down and cruſh their enemies, as Chriſts . | 

feet for this very reaſon are ſaid to be of braſs, Revel. 1. 15. Or,2. | 3 And the ſouth g, and the plain of the valley of Je- 
The Mines of Iron and Copper,which were in their portion, whence | * icho h, the city of palm-trees z, unto Zoar. 

Sidon their neighbour was famous among the heathens for its plen- | , £ (3. e. ) The ſouth quarter of the land of Judah, which is towards 
ty of braſs, and Sarepta 1s thought to have its name from the braſs the ſalt ſea, which is deſcribed Num. 34. 3, 4, 5. Joſ. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4+ 
and iron, which were melted there in great quantity, Compare Deur. | * the weſtern quarter of Judah was deſcribed in the words next fore- 
8.9. Or 3. The ſtrength of its ſituation, and ſo ſome antient; and | $228: hOr, in which lies Jericho : which was in the Tribe of Ben- | 
\noderns render the words, thy habitation or thy encloſure ſhall be iron | 199% # (7. e.) Jericho, ſo called both here and Juag. 1. 16. and 3.13. | 
and braſs, i. e. fortified as it were with walls and gates of ircn and | ? Chron. 28. 15. from the multitude of Palm-trees which were in 
braſs, being def-nded by the Sea on one fide, by their brethren on thoſe parts, as Joſephus and Strabo write, From whenceand the balm 
other ſides, asalſo by mountains and rivers. 0 (z.e. ) Thy ſtrength there growing it was called Jericho, which ſignifies, ogoriferous or 
ſhall not be diminiſhed with thine age, but thou ſhalt have the vi- | /»eet ſmeling. | 

gour of youth even in thine old age ; thy Tribe ſhall grow ttrong- 4 And the LORD faid unto him, * This 5s the land 


er and ſtronger- | which I ſware unto Abraham, unto Iſaac * Gen, 12 
26 There is none like unto the God of Jeſurun, ho | jacob, ſaying, I will give it ——_—_ thy ſoeq 7 nm - 7. and 13. | 'Dent.rr 


rideth upon the heaven p in thy help, and in his excel: | ſeq thee to ſee it with thine eyes &, but thou ſhalt not ws . — 
" JU =o age uds to ſuccour thee fi h by ſend DIO HE. ht 

| WI PO CHE CLOMC'S ur Thee rom thence, by lend- | & To wit, by a miraculous power ſtrengthnins thy fro | 

ing cu = 4cal5agpeny * Rowe” + + > nogry See > 18. 7, | king a clear repreſentation En eons. nor « Ana or ma= 
 orkally DI wick areas Majeſty arhrell ed NT. 5 50 Moles the fervantof th e LORD died there in 3.31. 

_ |, 27 The 0K Gods iby refuge r, and underneath s +5 =p of Moab /, according to the word of the _ 
are the everlaſting arms: and he ſhal thruſt out the ene- _— 
my/from before thee, and ſhal ſay, Deſtroy ther z. Pw Pe wane el oe Iſrael took from the Amorites,which all 

7 Or, thy dwelling place. Compare Þſal. gr. 1. 5(7.e. ) Under thy 6 ind he ws breed "MR , hw | : 
arms to hold thee up, as my hands were once held up by Aaron and IN 4 VAUCyY 1n the land of Mo- | 


Hur. He will ſupport and defend thee. Or the meaning is, Though ab, over againſt Beth-Peor : but no man knoweth of 
he dwellerh on high, yet he comes-down to the earth beneath to | his {epulchre » unto this day. , 
aſſiſt and deliver thee. 2 (7. e.) Shall give thee not only command | w (7.e. ) The Lord, laſt mentioned, buried him either immedi- 


and commiſſion, but alſo power to deſtroy them : for Gods ſaying | ately, or by the miniſt fA : : 
5sdoing, hiswor I comes with powey. Jaying my” 42 RY = _ - "— 7 _ whereof Michael was the Chief 


: ) Of th icul 2 
| 28 * Ifrael then ſhal dwell in ſafety alone « ; thefoun- | ley where he was buried: which God "O, amg 1 > un oahyreddceng 
Fer? 2.6. tain of Jacob E: hi all be upon a land of corn and wine : | vent their Superſtition and Idolatry, to which he knew their great 


alſo his heavens y (hal drop down dew. 1 r;ong 1 _ _ bart 5 —_ OR endeavoured to have 

u Fither 1. Though they be alone, and have no confederates . chaet about it, Jude ver. 9. And 
defend them, but 5 all the world againſt th:m, yer my Gngle _ God would _ endure the worſhip of the Relicks or Tomb 
prore&ion ſhall be Gifficient for them. © Or 2. Diſtia& and "a. -.O , porn - Oy rs as Moſes was, it 1s ridiculous to think God 
ed from all other nations, with whom I will not have them to G: rg, LE , ” Re TY g1ven to any of the ſucceeding 
mingle themſelves. See Numb: 23: 9: Ezra 9.1, 2. x(7.e.) The aints who were ſo far inferior to him. 2 
poſteriry of Jacob, which flowed from him as waters from a Foun- 7 And Moſes Was an hundred and twenty years old +Heb.. 
tain, in great abundance. Compare Pſal: 68: 26: 1a: 48: 1. The | when he died : his &Ye Was not dim. nor his 4 natural welft ; 
Fountain 1s here put for the Rzver or Streams which flow from it, as | force Þ abated o, V9 ages 23 400A Ath + Heb ft 
Pſal; 103; 10; as the Rooz is put for the Branch, 2 Chron; 22; 16; n Iſa: | - 


| o By 


” 
: 


ll 


A Fs , - 
U 
IN PL k 
A! , » 
% j 


*Deut, 1, 
is, 


*Denvt.r1. 


| | 24. Chap. 


I4. 9. 


o By a- miraculous work of God in mercy to his Church and 


Peep nd the children of Iſrael wept for 2oſes in the 


plains of Moab thirty days p 3 ſo the days of weeping and 
mourning for Moſes were ended. _ | 

> Which was the uſual time of mourning for perſons of high 
place andeminency. See Gen: 50. 3, 10. Numb, 20. 29: For others 
{even days ſufficed. = 

9 And Joſhua the ſon of Nun was full of the ſpirit of 
Wiſdomg: for Moſes had laid his hands upon him r, and 
the children of Iſrael hearkened unto him, and didas the 
LORD cemmanded Moles. 5 

9 And other gifts and graces too, as appears from the Hiſtory, 
but #iſzom is mentioned as being moſt neceſſary for the Govern- 
ment to which he was now called. » Which God had oppointed 
as a ſign to Moſes and Joſbua and the Jraeliter, that this was the per- 
ſon whom he had appointed and qualified for his great work. See 
Numb. 27. 18, &c. Compare Gene 48. 10. Numb. 8. 19. ; 

10 And there aroſe not a Prophet ſince in Iſrael like 


0s H 0 A 


Dy - 
» 


unto Moſes s, whom the LORD knew face to face t: 
s In the priviledges here following. # (i. e.) Whom God did ſo 
freely and familiarly and frequently converſe with. See on Exed. 
33.11, Numb. 12. 8, Dent. 5. 4. 
11: In all the ſigns «, and the wonders which the 
LORD ſent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, 


and to all his ſervants, and to all his land. | | 

# This is to be joyned, Either r. With the words immediately 
foregoing, as an eminent inſtance wherein God did know or ac= 
knowledge and own or converſe ſo familiarly with Moſes, namely 
in the working of all his ſigns and wonders in Egypt, where God 
ſpake to him ſo oft, and ſometimes even in Pharaoh's preſence, and 
anſwered his requeſts, ſo particularly and pun&tually, whether he 
called for vengeance or for deliverance. Or, 2. With the more 
remote words, there was none like unto Moſes in regard of all the 
ſigns, &c, the words, whom the Lord knew face to face, coming in by 
way. of Parentheſis. 


12 And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great 
terrour which Moſes ſhewed in the ſight of all Iſrael. 


Com 


ST 


4 


The ARGUMENT. | 
TT js rot material to know who was the Pen-man of this Book, whether Joſhua, as ſeems moſt 
26, or ſome other boly Prophet. It 'is ſufficient, that this Book as a part of the holy Scriptures er Orac 


— 


probable How Chap. 24. 


es of God, com- 


mitted to, and carefully kept by the Jews, and by them faithfully delivered to us; as appears by the concurring Tefi- 


m07y 


of Chriſt and his Apottles, who 0jvned and approved of the ſame Holy Scriptures which the Church of the Jews did. But 


this is certain, that divers Paſſages in this Book, were put into it after Jolbua's death, as Jolh. 10. 17. compared with 2 Sam. 


I. 18. and Jolh. 19. 4 
in the froe Books of Moles, - 
CHAP. L 

God commands Joſhua to lead the People unto the Land of Canaan, — 
It's Borders, 4. God promiſes to aſſiſt him, 5,6. Commanding him 70 
obſerve the Law, 7-—9. He prepares the People to paſs over Jordan, 
10, 11. Remmds the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Ma- 
naſſek. of their Promiſe to Moſes, 12==15. Which they are ready to 
ao; and all promiſe to obey, 16——=18. 

OW after the death of Moſes s, the ſervant,of the 
N the LORD 5, it came to paſs that the LORD ſpake 
c unto Joſhua the ſon of Nun, Moſes *miniſter 4, ſaying, 

Either immediately after it, or when the days of mourning for 


Moſes were expired. Joſhua was appointed and declared Moſes his Suc- 
ceſſor in the Government before this time; and therefore doubrleſs 


 entred upon the Government inſtantly after his death ; and here he 


receives confirmation from God therein. 6 This ritle is given to 
Moſes here and verſe 2. as alſo Deur. 34. 5. and is oft repeated not 
without cauſe, partly to refle& Honour upon him, partly to give 
Authority to his Laws and Wcirings, in publiſhing whereof he on- 
ly afted is God's Servant, in his name and ſtead. And partly that 
the 1/raelites might not think of Moſes above what was meet, remem- 
bring that he was not the Lord himſelf, but only the Lord's Servant; 
and therefore not to be worſhipped,nor yet to be too pertinaciouſly 
followed in all his Inſtitutions, when rhe Lord himſelf ſhould come 
and aboliſh part ofthe Motaical Diſpenſartion ; ir being bur reaſon- 
able that he who was only a Servant in God's houſe, ſhould give 
place to him who was the Son, and Heir, and Lord of it, as Chriſt 
was. See Heb. 3. 3,5, 6, <c Either in a Dream or Viſion, or by 
Urim, Numb. 27. 21. 4 (i.e.) Who had waited upon Moſes in his 
great Employments, and thereby been privy to his Managery of 
the Govetnment, and ſo fitted and prepared for it. : 

2 Moſes my ſervant is dead: now therefore ariſe, go 


over this Jordan e, thou, and all this people, unto the 
land which I do give f to them, ever to the children of 


Iſrael. 

e This which is now near thee, which 1s the only obſtacle in thy 
way to Canaan. f (i. e.) Am now about to give the aQtual Poſlei- 
ſion of iv, as I formerly gave a riglit ro it by promiſe. 


'2 * Every place g that the ſole of your foot ſhall 
tread upon, that bave I given unto you, as I ſaid unto 
Moſes. 


g To wit, within the following bounds. 
4 * From the wilderneſs, and this Lebanon þ, even 


unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of 
the Hittites 5, and unto the greater ſea k, toward the 


g0ing down of the ſun, ſhall be your coaſt /. 

h This emphatically, as being the moſt eminent Mountain in 
Syris, and the Northern border of the Land : Or this which is with- 
in thy view ; as if the Lord appeared to him in the form of a man, 
and pointed to it. # (i. e.) Of the Canaanites, who elfe-where are 
all called Amorites, as Gen. 15. 16. and here Hittites by a Synecdoche : 
the Hiztites being the moſt conſiderable and formidable of all, as 
may appear from Numb. 13. 33. and 14. 1. 2 Kings 7.6. And many 
of them being of the race of the Giants, dwelling about Hebron : See 
Gen, 25.9, 10. and 26, 34. and 27. 46. k The Midland-ſea, great 
in it ſelf, and eſpecially compared with thoſe leſſer Colle&ions of 
waters, which the Jews called Seas. 1 Obje#. The Iſraelites never 
poſſeſſed all this Land. Arnſw. r. That was from their own ſloth 
and cowardize, and diſobedience to God, and breach of thoſe 
Conditions upon which this Promiſe was ſuſpended : See Juages 2. 
20, 2, This Land was not all to be poſſeſſed by them at once, but. 
by degrees, as their numbers and neceſlities increaſed ; But Canaan' 
being fully ſufficient for them, and many of the Iſraelites being 
from time to time either cut off, or carried captive for their ſins, 
There was never any need of enlarging their Poſſeſſions. 3. Though 


their Poſſeſhons extended not to Euphrates, yet their Dominion did, 
andall thoſe Lands were tributary to them 3n David's and. Solomon's 


kyne, 


CONE 


7. compared with Judg. 18.1. and Joſh. 24. 29. 30. And ſuch like Inſertions have been obſerved 


5 There ſhall not any man be able to ſtand before 


thee all the days of thy life : as I was with Moſes mv, ſo "Heb. 14. 


I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forſake 5- Deur: 
thee ». | | 31. 6, 18; 
m To aſliſt him againſt all his enemies, and in all the difficulties 

of governing this ſtitf-necked people, which 79/bus might juſtly fear 
no Iſs than the Canaanites. n I will not leave thee deſtitute, nei- 
ther of inward ſupport, or of outward afliſtance, = | 
6 ” Be ſtrong, and of a good conrages: for unto , _ 
this people ſhalt thou divide for an inheritance, the land ——_ 


? which I ſware unto their fathers to give them. + 0:57 
0 Foſbua, though a perſon of great Courageand Reſolution, where- ſhal; x cauſe 


of he had given ſufficient Proof, yet needs rheſe Exhorrations, this people = 


partly becauſe his work was great, and difficulr, and long, and in 7, inherit 
2 great meaſure new; Partly becauſe he had a very mean opinion :he land; 
of himſelf, eſpecially if compared with Moſes; and remembririg gc. 
how perverſe and ungovernable that people. were, even under Moſes, 

he might very well ſuſpe& the burden of ruling them would be too 

heavy for kis ſhoulders. p Which ſuppoſeth the full conqueſt of the 

Land. That Honour and Aſſiſtance which I denied to Moſes, I will 

give to thee. : 

7 Only be thor ftrong, and very courageous, that , ,_.. 
thou mayeſt obſerve to do according to all the Law * - pop 
which Moſes my ſervant commanded thee q: * turn not * Deur. 
from it to the right hand or to the left r, that thou may- 5. 32. and 
eſt + proſper s whitherſoever thou goeſt 7. | + ts 

q Remember, that though thou art the o_ and Comman- u Y f LL. 
der of my people, yer thou art my Subje& and obliged to obſerve 99: 
all my Commands. »r (i.e. ) In thy ig, or upon any pretence. 

5 Which plainly ſhews, That God's Afﬀiſttace promiſed to him and 
to the 1/raelites, was conditional, and might juſtly be withdrawn 
upon their breach of the Conditions. s Or, That thou maye#t do wiſe- 
ly. Whereby he inffrudts him in the true Art of Gove: nn.ent ; 
and that his greateſt Wiſdom will lie in the obſervation of all God's 
Commands, and not in that pretended reaſon of State which other 
Princes govern all their Aﬀairs by. - # (i.e.) Whatſoever thou do. 
eſt. Men's aCtions are oft compared to ways, or journeys, of ſteps, 
by which they come to theend they aim at. | 

8 * This book of the law ſhall not depart out of thy » g.ys; 
mouth #,but* thou ſhalef meditate therein day and night 15. 18; 193 
x, that thou mayeſt obſerve todo according to all rhat is *Pial. Fr 
written therein y; for then thou ſhalt make thy. way noſe of FA 
proſperous, and then thou ſbalt F have good ſucceſs. $7 pray. 

u (i. e-) Thou ſhalt conſtantly read it, and upon occaſion diſcourſe ,,_ 42, 
of it, ard the ſentence which ſhall come out of thy mouth, ſhallin 4 Or, as 
all things be given according to rhis Rule. & (i.e.) Diligently ſtu- wiſely; | 
dy,and frequently and upon all occaſions conſider what is Gods will 
and thy duty. The greatneſs of thy place and employments ſhall 
not hinter thee from this Work, becauſe this is the only Rule of 
all thy private Attions, and publick Adminiſtrations. - » Whereby 
he teacheth him, that it is: his duty-to ſee with his own eyes, ahd 
to underſtand the Mind and Law of God himſelf, and not blindly 
to follow what any other ſhould adyiſe, him to. EN a | ſ- 

9 * Have not Icommanded thee z? Be ſtrong, and * Deut. 
of a good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dif- 37+ 7» 5+ 
mayed; for the LORD thy God 7: with thee 'whither- 
ſoever thou goeſt.. = TTL 

2 I whom thou art obliged to 6bey : I who can. earry thee 
through every thing I put thee upon : Tof whoſe Faithfulneſs and 
Almighrineſs thou haſt had large experience ? | 

10 ThenJoſbua commanded -the"Officers of the peo» 
ple, ſaying, | 

11 Paſs through the hoſt, and command the people, 

SK 4 aying, 


Chaps 


' 
: 
' 


"1 
\ 


oo 


. 


fo will -we hearken unto thee 5: only the LORD thy 


ſaying, Prepare you viduals a: for within three days 6 
ye ſhall paſs over this Jordan, to go in to poſſeſs the land 
which the LORD your God giveth you co poſlels it. . 
a For although Manna as mn them to ſupply their want of 
ordinary Proviſions in the Wilderneſs; yet they were allowed, 
when they had opporrunity, ro purchaſe other Proviſions, and did 
ſo, Deut. 2. 6, 28. And now having been ſome time in the land of 
the Amorites, and together with Mana uſed themſelves to other 
food, which that Countrey plentifully ſupplyed them with ; they 
are warned ro furniſh chometeud therewith for their approaching 
march. 6 Qzef: How can this be, when the Spies, who were not 
yet ſent away, continued three days hid in the Mountains, 7oſb. 2. 
22. and the 
returned, Joſh. 3. 2 ? 


Spies ; Such Tranſpoſitions being ſo frequent in Scriprure, that 
Interpreters have formed this general Rule, That there z5 no certain 
Order, no former nor latter in the Hifories of the Scripture. And hence it 
comes, that theſe three days mentioned here below,after the Hiſtory 
of the Spies, are again repeated, Joſh. 3. 2. ' Beſides, the Septe.agint 
render the words, Tet three days ; and the Chald:e, In the end of three 
days; others, After three days, as it is, Foſb, 3. 2. Or, theſe three 
days may be the ſame with thoſe, Joſh. 2. 22. and the matter may 
be conceived thus, Joſhuz gives the people notice of their paſſage 0- 
ver Jordan within three days, here, and at the ſame time, ſends away 
the Spies, - who refurn e're thoſe three days be ended. For the 
three days, Joſh. 2. 22. may be underſtood of one whole day, and 
part of two other days, as it is in that famous inſtance, Mat 27. 63. 
of which ſee more on that place, and on Matth. 12. 40» The Spies 
came to Jericho in the evening of the firſt day, and intended to le 
there, '5oſb. 2. 8. but being diſturbed and affrighted by the ſearch 
"made after them, they go away that night into the Mountains,and 
there abide the time mentioned. Joſhua having delivered this meſ- 
ſage. from God to the J#azlires, - and ſent away the Spies, removes 
from Shiztiw to Jordan, Joſh. 3. 1. being ſufficiently aſſured of his 
ſafe paſſage over Jordan, whatſoever became of the Spies; and af- 
ter thoſe three days mentioned here were paſt, Joſh. 3. 2. he ſends 
the Officers to the people with a ſecond meſſage, about the manner * 
of their aQtual paſſing over. BY 

12 And to the Reubenites,and to the Gadites,and to 
half the'tribe of Manaſſeh, ſpake Joſbua, ſaying, 

13 Remember * the words which Moſes the ſervant 
of the LORD commanded you c, ſaying, The LORD 
your God hath given you reſt 4, and hath given you 
this land. 

c His charge to you, and your promiſe to him, which they were 
obliged to keep ; and Joſhua was to ſee that they did ſo. d (i. e.) A 
place of reft, as that word ſignifies ; See on Ger. 49. 15. 

14 Yout wives, your little ones, and your cattel ſha]! 
remain in the land which Moſes gave you on this ſide 
Jordan ; but ye ſhall paſse before your brethrenf farm- 
&d g, allthe mighty men of yalour h, and help them: 
| Fo wit over Jordan... f Either 1. In their preſence. Or, 2. In 
the of all of them; which was but reaſonable ; Partly, becauie 
they h 


the advantage of their brethren, having aCtually received 
their portion,, which cheir Brethren bad only in hope, and there- 
fore, 'were obliged to more ſervice, the rather to prevent the envy 
_ of the other Tribes ;; Partly becauſe they were freed from thoſe 
Impediments which the reit were expoſed to, their Wives, and 
. Children, and Eſtates being ſafely lodged ;; And partly to prevent 
their retreat and wighdrawing themſelves from the preſent ſervice, 
which they otherwiſe ſhould have had opportunity and temptati- 
on to do, becauſe of the nearneſs of their Habitations. g' For by 
this time they were well furniſhed with Arms, which they had 
either from the Egyptians, or Amalekites, or Amorites, from whom 
_ they had taken rhe; Or by purchaſe from thoſe people by whoſe 
borders . they pa Or, :n military order : See on Exod. 13. is. 


' þ All ſuch were obliged to go over if occaſion required ir, but Jo- 


' ſbua took only ſome of them, partly becauſe they were ſufficient 
for - his purpole, and partly becauſe ſome were fit to be left, both 
to ſecure. their own Wives,Children,and Poſſeſſions,and to prevent 
their 
drance in their enterprize whom Canaan. 


I 5 Until the LORD have given. your brethren reſt. 


. 5 be' bath given you, - and they alſo have poſſeſſed the 


 andwhich the LORD your God giveth them : then ye 
ſhall return unto the land of your poſſeſſion, and enjoy 

It, which Moſes the LOR D's Servant gave you on this 
ſide Jordan, toward che Sun-riſing. 


x6 And they anſwered þ Joſhua, ſaying,All that thou 


. -*commandeſt us, we will do, and whitherſoever thou 
| ſerideſt 3 we will go. 


.b (i,.c.) The Renbeniter, &c. mentioned werſe 12. to whom Jo- 
's. Diſcourſe is confined, werſes 13, 14, 15. No doubt the other 
Tribes expreſſed the ſame thing ; but this is only recorded con- 


: wy ee. lp 568 becauſe that might ſeem moſt doubtful, and the o- 


;e of the. reſt was unqueſtionable. 


+d *f 


ording as we hearkned unto Moſes inall things 


us 


God be with thee, as he was with Moſes &. 
5 The ſame obedience which we owed, and thoſe of us who are 
now alive generally performed to Moſes, we promiſe unto thee. 
- k This is not a limitation of their obedience, as if they would not 
-obey him any further or longer than he was proſperous or ſucceſ]- 


- ful ; bur an additional Prayer for him. As we have hereby pro- 


miſed thee our obedience, ſo our Prayer ſhall be, That God would 


. eG and grotper thee, 'as he did Moſes. | 
- 18 Whoſoerer be be that doth rebel againſt thy com- 
_ mandment, and yrill not heacken unto thy words in al} 


that thou commandeft him 7, he ſhall be put to'death : 


only be ſtrong, ang of a good courage. 


ople pafſed nor over till three dayes after the Spies | 
Anſw: Theſe words, though placed here, | 
ſeem-not to have been delivered byyfoſbus till after the return ofthe | 


mies on that ſide from giving them diſturbance or hin-| P 


I Not repugnatit to God's commands ; for none can be ſo fooliſh 


| to think, that if he had commanded the people to blaſpheme God, 


or worſhip Idols, the people were obliged to obey him therein. 
C H A P . Io . ; 

Joſhua ſends two Spies to Jericho; they are ſought after ; Rahab hide: 
them ; deceives the Meſſengers, 2 —— 7. She acknowledges that God had 
given them the Land ; her Reaſons, 8 — 11. The Covenant between hey 
and them, 12==—212 Their Return and Relation, 22==24. 


ATP Joſhua the ſon of Nun ſent 4 out of Shittim, 


view the land, even Jericho f: and they went *, and 


Called alſo Abel-ſhirtim, Numb. 33. 49. c Not twelve, as Mojes did, THeb, ls, 


partly becauſe the people of Canaan were now more alarm'd than in 
Moſes his time, and more ſuſpicious of all ſtrangers ; and partly be- 
cauſe thoſe were to view the whole land, theſe bur a ſmall parcel of 
it. 4 (1. e.) To learn the ſtate of the land and people, and what wa 
and method they ſhould proceed in. Ir is gvident enough, Thar 
Joſhua did not this out of diſtruſt, as the people did, Deur. ». and it 
15 moſt probable, he had God's command and dire&ion in it, for 
the encouragement of himſelf and his Army in their preſent Enter- 
Prize. e With reference not to his enemies, which being the con- 
ſtant and neceſſary praftice of all Spies, was needleſs to be menti. 
oned ; but to the Iſraelites, withour their knowledge or deſire. And 
this ſeems added by way of oppoſition unto the like Aion, 
Deut. 1. where it was done with the peoples privity, and upon their 
motion: And therefore 2n account was given, not only to Moſes, 
but alſo to the Congregation ; Whereas here it was given to Joſbus 
only, v. 23. which was a good Caution to prevent the inconveni- 
ency which poſſibly might have ariſen, if their report had been 
doubrful or diſcouraging. f (i. e.) The land about Jericho, toge- 
ther with the Ciry. Heb. The Land and Jericho, (i.e. )eſpecially Jericho. 
So and is uſed, 2 Sam. 2. 3o. 1 Kings 11. 1. Pſal. 18.1. * They obeyed 
Joſhua's command, even with the hazard of their own lives, conſi- 
dering that they were under the prote&ion of divine Providence, 
which could very eaſily many ways ſecure them; or being willing 
to ſacrifice their lives in their Countrey's ſervice. g So the Hebrew 
word 1s uſed, Judges 11. 1. and 16. 1. 1 Kings 3. 16. Exek. 23. 44. and 
ſo it is rendred by two Apoſtles, Heb. 11. 31. James 2. 25. ſuch ſhe 
either now was, or formerly had been ; and ſuch a perſons houſe 
they might come to with leſs obſervation than to an Hoſteſs,as ſome 
render it, or to a publick Vicualing-houſe. And ſuch a courſe of 
life was very common among.the Gentiles, who eſteemed Fornica- 
tion to be either no fin, or a very ſmall and trivial one. h Or, 


themſelves to reſt ; but they were diſturbed and hindred from their 
Intentions upon the following diſcovery. 


2 And it was told the king of Jericho, ſaying, Be- 
hold, there came in men hither to night z, of the chil- 
dren of Irael, to ſearch out the country, 

; This evening, by comparing this with verſe 5. 

3 And the King of jericho ſent unto Rahab, ſaying, 
Bring forth che men that are come to thee, which are 
entred into thine houſe: for they be come to ſearch out 
all the country, | 

4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them 
k, and ſaid thus, There came men unto me, but I wiſt 


not whence they were /: | 

k Or, But the Woman had taken , and had hid them to wit, be- 
fore the Meſſengers came from the King ; as ſoon as ſhe underſtood 
from her Neighbours or common Rumor, that there was a ſuſpici- 
on of the matter, and gueſſed rhar ſearch would be made. And 
this is juſtly mentioned as a great and generous aCt of Faith, Heb. 
11. 31. for the t1d apparently venture her life upon a ſtedfaſt per- 
ſvaſon of theTruth of God's Word and Promiſe given to the 1/-a- 
elites. I Her anſwer contained in theſe and the following words, 
was palpably falſe, and therefore unqueſtionab'y ſinful ; howſoe- 
ever, her intention was gocd therein : See Rom. 3.8. But it is very 
robable, ſhe being an Heathen, might think, What, ſome Chriſti- 
ans have thought and ſaid, That an officious lie is not unlawful. 
Or at worſt, this was her Infirmity, which was graciouſly pardon- 
ed by God, and her Faith was amply rewarded. 


the gate 72, when it was dark, that the men went our : 
whither the men went, I wot not: purſue after them 
quickly, for ye ſhall overtake them. 


m Either of her houſe, or rather of the City which was fſkut at a 
certain time. 


6 Bur * ſhe had brought them up to the roof » of the 
houſe, and hid them with the ſtalks of flax, which ſhe 
had laid in order upon the roof o. | 

n Which was plain after the manner : See Deur. 22.8. Matth. 10. 


27. Afts :0. 9. Mark 2.4. o That they may be dried by the heat 
of the Sun. 

7 And the men purſued after them the way to Jordan 
unto the foords p: and afſoen as they which purſued af-- 
ter them were gone out, they ſhut the gate 9. 

p Or, Paſſages, i.e. The uſual places where people uſed to paſs 0- 
ver Jordan, whether by Boats or Bridges; or rather, becauſe of the 
ſhallowneſs of the River, which a little after this,ſwelled higher, as 
the Hiſtory will tell us; And as itis very uſual for Rivers to do. 
9 Of the City, partly for their ſecurity againſt their approaching e- 
nemies; and PArely to prevent the eats of the Spies, if peradven- 
ture Rahab was miitaken, and they yet Jurked in the City. 

8 And before they were laid down r, ſhe came up 
unto them upon the roof, 

r To reſt or ſleep, as they intended, being now, after the de- 


parture of the Searchers, come: from theic hiding-phce vo theit 
reſting-place, 
9 Ard 


ewo men c, to ſpy d | ſecretly e, faying, Go ? Heb, 


entl. 


' * came into an harlots g houſe, named * Rahab, and 4 
7 lodged 4 there. "Jam. 
a Or, had ſent, as that Tenſe is oft uſed : See on Joſh. r. 11. 6b Mar. Is 


lay down; as the ſame word is rendred, wv. 8. intended and compoſed - 


5 And it came to paſs about the time of ſhutting of ' 


* Cee? 
Sam Ih 


19. 


Chap. 


She! Son 


OE" bt i fe \ 
; "Ea Neri 
Ws 7 

; by O- S 


9 And ſhe ſaid untothemen s, Iknow that the LORD 
* Gen. 35- hath given.you. the land, and-that * your terror #1s. fal- 
len upon-us, and that all the-inhabitants. of the land J 


0 OF” Chap. IL. 


L 
+Heb. faint becauſe of you. | 
mel. 5 Qs. How could: they underſtand one the other? nf. 1.The Hebrew 
and the Cazaanor Phenician-Languages have a very great reſemblance, 
and are thought to be. but differing Diale&s ot one and the ſame 
Tongue, as the learned prove. by a. multitude, of words which are 
I þ common to both of them. Or 2. ſome of the Hebrews had either out 
+ of curioſity,or by Joſbua's order and direQtion,learnt that Language 
1, for thisor other ſuch like Occaſions. # (7. e. ) The dread of you: 
" See Exod. 235 27. and 34. 24. Dent. 11. 25.and 28. 7. 
I} :p,04.14. 20 Forwehave heard howthe LORD * dried upthe 
b, ln 1. chap. water of the Red-ſea for you, when ye came out of E- 
23-, gypt, and whatye did unto the two'kings of the Amo- 
*Numb. res, that were 0n the other ſide Jordan, * Sihon and 
21: 2-5 Og whom ye utterly deſtroyed, 
Exod» | : A 
15. 14-1 11 And afſoen as we had heard theſe things, * our 


' #Heb-797 hearts did melt «, neither Fdid-there remain any more 
any Ag courage in apy man, becauſe of you : for * the LORD 
more/P”"'.. your God, he is God in heaven above, and inthe earth 


in any man. : 
*chap.5-1- beneath * x, : 

+ Deut. 4+ u (5. e.) Was difſolved,loſt all conſiſtency and courage: This phraſe 
39- is oft uſed, as Dew#. 1. 28. and 20.8. Joſb. 5. 1. and 7.5. x He can 
do whatſoever he pleaſeth in Heaven and Earth; whereas our gods 

are incloſed in Heaven, and can do nothing to us upon Earth. 
12 Now therefore, I pray you, ſwear unto me by 
., the LORD y, fince I have ſhewed you kindneſs,that ye 
k will alſo ſhew kindneſs unto * my fathers houſe z, and 


iTim.3.8. give me a.true token s :; 

7 By your God who is the only true God ; ſo ſhe ſhews her Con- 
verſion to God, and owns his Worſhip, one eminent A& whereof 
is ſwearing by his Name. z My near Kindred, which ſhe parti- 
cularly names, v. 13. Husband and Children it ſeems ſhe had none. 
And-for her ſelf, it was needleſs to ſpeak, it being a plain and 
undeniable Duty to ſave their Preſerver. 2 Either an aſſurance that 
you will preſerve ine and mine fiom the common Ruine : or a To- 
ken which I may pr-duce as a Witneſs of this agreement, and a 
mean of my ſecurity. _ | 

13 And that ye will ſavealive my father, and my mo- 
ther, and my brethren, and my liſters,and ail that they 
have b, and deliver our lives from death. 

b (i. e.) Their Children, asappears from Zoſh: 6: 23. 
14 And the men anſwered her,Our life + for yours c, 
: e utter not this our buſineſs d. And it (hal be when 
| Fr of 1% the LORD hath given us the land, that * we will deal 
* Judg. 1. Kindly and truly with thee. 


24. c We pawn and will venture our lives for the ſecurity of yours. 
Or, may we periſh, if you be nor preſerved 4(z. e.) This Agree- 
ment of ours, and the way and condition of it, leſt others under 
this pretence, ſecure themſelves. By which they ſhew both their 
Piety and Prudence in managing their Oath with ſo much Circum- 
ſpetticn and Caution, that neither their own Cunſciences mightbe 
enſnared, nor the publick Juſtice obſtructed, 

15 Then ibe letthem down by a cord through the 
window : for her houſe was upon the Town-walle,an 


ſhe dwelt uponthe wall f. | 
e Which gave her the opportunity of diſmiſſing them when the 
ates were thut. f Her particular dwelling was there : which may 
poſſibly be added, becauſe the other part of her Huuſe waweſerved 

for the entertainment of Strangers. 

16 And be faid unto them,Getye tothe mountain g, 
leſt the Purſuers meet you : and hide your ſelves there 
three days bh, until the Purſuers be returned, and after- 


ward may ye go your way. 

Z (i. e.) To ſome of the mountains wherewith Jericho was encome 
patſed,in whichalſo there were many Caves where they might lurk. 
h Not three whole days, but ons whole day,and parts of two days: 
See on Jof. 1. 17. ” 

i7 And the men ſaid ; unto her, We 24/l be blame- 


leſs & of this thine oath, which thou haſt made us ſwear: 
; Or, had ſaid ; namely, before ſhe ler them down ; itbeing ve- 
Ty improbable, either that ſhe would diſmiſs them before the Con- 
dition was expreſſed and agreed ; or that ſhe would diſcourſe with 
them, or they with her, about ſuch ſecret and weighty things after 
they were ler down, when others might over-hear them ; or that 
ſhe ſhould begin her diſcourſe in her Chamber, and nor finiſh it till 
they were gone out of her Houſe. 06j. They ſpoke this after they 
were let down:; for itfollowswv. 18. this=-thread--which thiu aidft let 
5 down by. Anſ. Thoſe words may be thus reudred, which thou deft 
let us down by ; 1. e. artabout to do it : it Leing frequent for the 
Preter Tenſe to be uſed of a thing about to be done, by an Enalla- 
ge af Tenſes, as Joſb. 10. i5. k (3. e.) Free from guilt or reproach if 
it ry violatzd, namely, if the following Condition be not obſer- 
ved. 
18 Behold, whe» we comeinto the land /, thou (batt 


bind thisline of ſcarlet threed,inthe window ww, which 


+ Heb. in if 


67 
Iþ 


JHeb. 


gather. 


ther, and:thy Mother, and thy Brethren, and all thy 

Fathers Houjhold home untoithee. | 
I (5. e.) Over Jordan, and near the-Ciry. m That,it may he caſfily 

diſcerned by our Soldiers. 


our head o, if any hand be upon him p, | 


_—_— 


—— _—— 


thou didſt let us down by : .andthou thalt} bring thy Fa-. | 


19 And it ſhalbe, thar whoſoever ſhal £0 out of the 
doors of thy houſe into the ſtreet, his blood all be upon. 
his head. »,.,and we wil! be guiltleſs :- and whaſoeyer 


ſhal be with thee in-the houſe, his blood ſhall he #90) ich Aw 


H 'O A, 

The blame of his Cetth ſhall reſt who!!7,vupcn himſelf, as being 
occaſioned by hisown negl<& or contempt ot the means of ſafery. 
o Weare willing to bear the fin, and ſhame, and puniſhment of it. 
þ Towit, ſoasto kill him, as this Phraſe is uſed, E/þ.6.2, Job 1. 12. 

20 And if thou utter this our buſineſs, then we will 
be quict ofthine oath, which thou haſt made us to ſwear. 

21 And ſhe ſaid, According unto your words, fo bs 
it. And ſhe ſent them away, and they departed: and 
ſhe bound the ſcarlet line in the window 

q Forthwith, partly that the Spies might ſce it hung cut before 
their departure, and fo the better know it at ſome diſtance ; partly 
leſt ſome accident might occaſion a miſtake or negle& about it z 
and partly for her own comfort, it being pleaſant andencouraging 
to her to have in her cye the pledge of her deliverance. 

22 Andthey went,and came unto the mountain, and 
abode there thres daysr, until the purſuers were return- 
ed. And the purſuers ſought hems throughout all the 
ways s, but found ther not. | 

r Supporting th-mſelves there with the Provifions which after 
the manner of thoſe times and places they carried with them,which 
Rahab furniſhed them with. s 7. e. In the 10d to Jordan, and the plaa 
ces near it, but notin the Mountains. 

, 23 Sotke twomen returned, and deſcended from the 
mountain, and paſſed over z, and came to Joſhua the 
ſon w Nun, ang cold him « all :h;»gs that befel them. 

# 10 wit, Jordan oſhua, u Hi 
PS gs = " unto Joſhua, u Him alone, not the people,as they 

24 And they fajd unto Joſhua, Truly the LORD hath 
delivered into our hand all the land: for eyen all the 
Inhabitants of the ccuntry do + faint becauſe of us. 


Joſhua comes with the Iſraelites to Jordan, 1. The officers infiru# the people 
and prieſts for the paſſage, 2-<6. G:d encourages Joſhua, and hs encouras 
geth the people, giving them for a ſign, the dividmg the waters of Jordan 
till the Ark and people ſhiuld paſs over, 7--13. The people paſs over ; the 
priefts ſtanding all the time in the midff of Fordan, 14--17. : 

A ND Joſhua roſe early in the morving a, andthey 

A removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he, 
and all the children of 1ſrael, and lodged there b before 
they patlſed over, 

a Not after the return of the Spies, as may ſeem at firſt view ; 
bur after the three days, as it follows, wv. 2. b That night;thar they 
might goover in the day time, partly that the Miracle might be 
more cvident and unqueſtionable ; and paitly to ſtrike the greater 
terror into their Enemies. W297: 6 HY 

2 And it came to pals afterthree daysc, that the offi= 
cers went through the hoſt d ; 77 

c Either, 7. at the end of the three days mentioned; Joſ. 1. 114 

or upon the laſt of them, as this Phraſe is uſed. See on BVenr. 15. 1. 
Or 2. after thoſe days were expired. See on bf P 11. d The ſea 
cond time to give them more particular Dire&ions, as Ok bs gis 
ven them a general notice, Joſ. 1. -10, 17, | ; "2.35 
3 Andthey commanded the poople e, ſaying, When 
ye ſee the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, 
and the prieſts the Levites f bearing it, then ye hal re« 
move fron your place, and go after it g. 

In 7oſbus's name, and by his Authority. f Who were not only 
Levites, but Prieſts alſo. For although the Levites were to ca 
the Ark, Numb. g. yet the Prieſts might p:1ferm that Office,and did 
ſo upon ſome ſolemn occaſions, a+ here, and Jof. 6. 6. ch 3.3.'g Tos 
wards Jordan, to go over it in ſuch manner as I am about to de« 
ſcribe. Till this-time the Ark went in the middle of the cloudy Pils 
lar, probably being now vaniſhed ; now it goes in the Front. 

4 Yer tizere al be a ſpace berween you and it, about 
ewo thouſand cubirs þ by meaſure: come nor near unto 
it z, that ye may know the way by which ye muſt go &: 
for ye have nor paſled 1bis way Þf heretofore. 

hþ Which make a thouſand yards, and at which diſtance from it ,o/f, 
the 1/raelites ſeem to have been encamped in the Wilderneſs. And _ 


God, eſpecially on the Sabbath-cays; hence it hat! been conceive 
that a Sabbath-days journey reached only to 2000 Cubits. But rhar 
: may be doubred ; for thoſe who encamped neareſt the Ark, were 
| at thar diſtance from it,and came ſo far; but the moſt were further 

| from ir, and their Sabbath-days journey was conſiderably longer. 

| ; Partly from the reverent reſpe& they thould bear to the Ark; and 
partly for the following reaſ-n_ k That the Ark 'miarching ' ſo far 
before you into the River,and ſtanding ſtill there rill'you paſs over, 
may give you the greater aſſurance of your ſafe paſſage. | 


5 And Joſhua faid / unto the people, * Sandifie your ,_ 
ſelves m: for to morrow the LORD will do wonders 


it follows, to morrow, m Both in Soul and Body, that you' ma 
meet to receive ſuch a favour, and with more Attentionand Reve- 
rence obſerve and ponder this great Work, 
and Memories : See on Exod. 19. 10. Lev. 20. 7, 

6 And Joihuaſpake unto the prieſts, ſaying, Take up 
p the ark af the covenant, andpaſs over before the peo- 


|.ple 9. And they took up the ank of the covenant, and 


went before the yeople. | 

» To wir, upon your thoulders ; for ſo they were to carry it, 
Numb..7. g. Not in the middle of chem, as you uſed ro do. 
7 Andhe-LORD faid unto Joſhua, This day will 
begin to magnijfie.thee in the fight of all Iſrael p, thar 


they may know,that * as I was with Moſes, /o Lwill be * 6h 
| "P | 


# 4. 4 


Chap. |! | 


+H 
CHAP. IT A. 


+ Heb 


becauſe they generally went f:um their Tentsto the Aik to: ny third : 
3 


14, I5. 
among you. Jy 
1 Or rather, had ſaid, to wit, the day before their paſſage ; for Lore 


be 18. ch. 


es I 3. T9ar 
and fix itin your Hearts 16.5, Je 


2, 16, 7 


| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


- F 

No 
* 
| 
we. | 

| 


— 


.T. 


ks & 
ff 6 


—_ 


- © MES, 
"Ft. 'S " « 
—_——_—_ - a. —— 
Tm " _ o _— A 
_ A ne etigs" afro 6 =E . = iy oe o 
—_— = - _— CSS TL + ct. AS p 
_ EE CS > _— 


- 

F * = EIS: - FRI LETT; — 
Li is on Ia" 7 HF 4 4 - : = . = 
n TIE IEEE ra LD ae on . EEE: IE 
A 223 yet” EEIY mas > net — #0 WE 7. p -_ 

—— - . —_——_ Arty nn mr ne 

—_ era > 4 — —— - —————y—t——gy - 
Q . 
> 


— - - 


a 


Aa, 


IT EO 


LY -* 
CE CCS 
- T - 


YE ITT IRA pr ET "PITW. 
Ty 4 5 bs W 
= < 
Dh, py _> . 
- _ 


4s + B29 
jo 


Ann =o SES IS one. ee En. _ = Ag 
= 2 " wo x C——_—_ 


; Cap. I. 
| faying, Prepare you vicuals a: for within three days b 


e ſhall paſs over this Jordan, to go in to poſſeſs the land 
which the LORD your God giveth you co poſlels it. . 


@ For although Manna was given them to ſupply their want of 
ordinary Proviſions in the Wilderneſs; yet they were allowed, 
when they had opportunity, to purchaſe other Proviſions, and did 
ſo, Deut. 2. 6, 28. And now having been ſome time in the land of 
the Amorites, and together with Mama uſed themſelves to other 
food, which that Countrey plentifully ſupplyed them with ; they 


H D A 
I Not repugnaht to God's commands ; for none can be ſo fooliſh 
| to think, that if he had commanded the people to blaſpheme God, 
or worſhip Idols, the people were obliged to obey him therein, 
9 . - II. 

Joſhua ſends two Spies to Jericho; they are ſought after ; Rahab hide: 
them ; deceivves the Meſſengers, x —— 7. She acknowledges that God had 
given them the Land ; her Reaſons, 8 —— 11. The Covenant between hey 
and them, 12===—=21> Their Return and Relation, 22==24. 


are warned ro furniſh themſelves therewith for their approaching 
march. b Qz:e#: How can this be, when the Spies, who were not | 
yet ſent away, continued three days hid inthe Mountains, 7oſb. 2. 
22. and the people paſſed nor over till three dayes after the Spies 
returned, Joſb. 3. 2? Anſw: Theſe words, though placed here, | 
ſeem not to have been delivered byjJoſhua till after the return ofthe | 
Spies ; Such Tranſpoſitions being ſo frequent in Scripture, that 
Interpreters have formed this general Rule, That there 75 no certain 
Order, no former nor latter in the Hiftories of the Scripture. And hence 1t 
comes, that theſe rhree days mentioned here below,after the Hiſtory 
of the Spies, are again repeated, Joſh. 3. 2. Beſides, the Sept.ogint 
render the words, et three days; and the Chald:e, In the end of three 
days ; others, After three days, as it is, Joſh, 3. 2. Or, theſe three 
days may be the ſame with thoſe, Joſh. 2, 22. and the matter may 
be conceived thus, Joſbuz gives the people notice of their paſſage 0- 
ver Jordan within three days, here, and at the ſame time, ſends away 
the Spies, who refurn e're thoſe three days be ended. For the 
three days, Joſh. 2. 22. may be underſtood of one whole day, and 
part of two other days, as it is in that famous inſtance, Mat 27. 63. 
of which ſee more on that place, and on Matth. 12. 40» The Spies 
came to Jericho in the evening of the firſt day, and intended to lie 
there, Joſb. 2. 8. but being diſturbed and affrighted by the ſearch 
made after them, they go away that night into the Mountains,and 
there abide the time mentioned. Joſhua having deliverec this meſ- 
ſage from God to the {#azltes, and ſent away the Spies, removes 


from Shittim to Jordan, Joſh. 3. 1. being ſufficiently aſſured of his 


ſafe paſſage over Jordan, whatſoever became of the Spies; and af- 
ter thoſe three days mentioned here were paſt, Joſh. 3. 2. he ſends 
the Officers to the people with a ſecond meſſage, about the manner 
of their aCtual paſſing over. 

12 And to the Reubenites,and to the Gadites,and to 


half the tribe of Manaſſeh, ſpake Joſbua, ſaying, 

13 Remember * the words which Moſes the ſervant 
of the LORD commanded you c, ſaying, The LORD 
your God hath given you reſt 4, and hath given you 
this land. 

c His charge to you, and your promiſe to him, which they were 
obliged to keep ; and Joſhua was to ſce that they did fo. d (i. ec.) A 
place of reſt, as that word ſignifies ; See on Gen. 49. 15. 

14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattel ſhall 


remain in the land which Moſes gave you on this ſide 
Jordan : but ye ſhall paſs e before your brethrenf jarm- 


ed g, allthe mighty men of valour þ, and help them: 

e To wit, over Jordan. f Either 1. In their preſence. Or, 2. In 
the front of all of them; which was but reaſonable ; Partly, becauie 
they had the advantage of their brethren, having aCtually received 
their portion, which rcheir Brethren bad only in hope, and there- 
fore were obliged to more ſervice, the rather to prevent the envy 
of the other Tribes ;:; Partly becauſe they were freed from thoſe 
Impediments which the rett were expoſed to, their Wives, and 
Children, and Eſtates being ſafely lodged ; And partly to prevent 
their retreat and withdrawing themſelves from the preſent ſervice, 
which they otherwiſe ſhould have had opportunity and temprati- 
on to do, becauſe of the nearneſs of their Habitations. g For by 
this time they were well furniſhed with Arms, which they had 
either from the Egyptians, or Amalekites, or Amorites, from whom 
they had taken them ; Or by purchaſe from thoſe people by whoſe 
borders they oallel. Or, zn military order : See on Exod. 13. i8. 
hþ All ſuch were obliged to go over if occaſion required ir, but Jo- 
ſhua took only ſome of them, partly becauſe they were ſufficient 
for his purpoſe, and partly becauſe ſome were fit to be left, both 
to ſecure their own Wives,Children,and Poſleſſions,and to prevent 
their enemies on that ſide from giving them diſturbance or hin- 
drance in their enterprize upon Canaan. 


Is Until the LORD have given. your brethren reft. 


. 85 be bath given you, and they alſo have poſleſſed the 


land which the LORD your God giveth them : then ye 
ſhall return unto the land of your poſleflion, and enjoy 


it, which Moſes the LOR D's Servant gave you on this 


ſide Jordan, toward che Sun-riſing. 
'16 And they anſwered h Joſhua, ſaying,All that thou 
commandeſt us, we will do, and whitherſoever thou 


 ſendeft us, we will go. 


b (i. c.) The Reubenites, &c. mentioned werſe 12. to whom Jo- 
ſbua's Diſcourſe is confined, werſes 13, 14, 15. No doubt the other 
Tribes expreſſed the ſame thing ; but this is only recorded con- 


- cerning theſe, becauſe that might ſeem moſt doubtful, and the o- 


bedience of the.reſt was unqueſtionable. 

175 According as we hearkned unto Moſes inall things, 
fo will - we hearken unto thee 5: only the LORD thy 
God be with thee, as he was with Moſes &. 


#5 The ſame obedience which we owed, and thoſe of us who are | 


now alive generally performed to Moſes, we promiſe unto thee. 
k This is not a limitation of their obedience, as if they would not 
obey him any further or longer than he was proſperous or ſucceſſ- 
ful ; bur an additional Prayer for him. As we have hereby pro- 
miſed thee our obedience, ſo our Prayer ſhall be, That God would 
bleſs and proſper thee, as he did Moſes. 

18 Whoſoerer be be that doth rebel againſt thy com- 


_ mandment, and yill not hearken unto thy words in ali 


that thou commandeft him /, he ſhall be put to death; 


only be ftrong, and of a good courage. 


A ND Joſhua the ſon of Nun ſent 4 out of Shittim, 
-A 5 cwomenc, to ſpy d | ſecretly e, ſaying, Go 
view the land, even Jericho f: and they went *, and 
* 4 * l 
came into an harlots g houſe, named * Rahab, and 
T7 lodged h there. 
Or, had ſent, as that Tenſe is oft uſed : See on Joſh. 1. 11. b 


partly becauſe the people of Canaan were now more alarm'd than in 
Moſes his time, and more ſuſpicious of all ſtrangers ; and partly be- 
cauſe thoſe were to view the whole land, theſe but a ſmall parcel of 
it. 4 (i, e.) To learn the ſtate of the land and people, and what wa 
and method they ſhould proceed in. Ir is gvident enough, Thar 
Joſhua did not this out of diſtruſt, as the people did, Deut. ». and it 
15 moſt probable, he had God's command and direCtion in it, for 
the encouragement of himſelf and his Army in their preſent Enter- 
Prize, e With reference not to his enemies, which being the con- 
ſtant and neceſſary prattice of all Spies, was needleſs to be menti. 
oned ; but to the 1aelites, without their knowledge or defire. And 
this ſeems added by way of oppoſition unro the like Aion, 
Deut. 1, where it was done with the peoples privity, and upon their 
motion: And therefore 2n account was given, not only to Moſes, 
but alſo to the Congregation ; Whereas here it was given to Joſhua 
only, v. 23. which was a good Caution to prevent the inconveni- 
ency which poſſibly might have ariſen, if their report had been 
doubrful or diſcouraging. f (i. e.) The land about Jericho, toge- 
ther with the City. Heb. The Land and Fericho, (i.e. eſpecially Jericho. 
So and 1s uſed, 2 Sm. 2. 3o. 1 Kings 11. 1. Pſal. 18.1. * They obeyed 
Joſhua's command, even with the hazard of their own lives, conſi- 
dering that they were under the prote&ion of divine Providence, 
which could very eaſily many ways ſecure them; or being willing 
to ſacrifice their lives in their Countrey's ſervice. g So the Hebrew 
word 1s uſed, Judges 11. 1. and 16. 1, 1 Kings 3. 16. Exek. 23. 44. and 
ſo it is rendred by two Apoſtles, Heb. 11. 31. James 2. 25. ſuch ſhe 
either now was, or formerly had been; and ſuch a perſons houſe 
they might come to with leſs obſervation than to an Hoſteſs,as ſome 
render it, or to a publick Victualing-houſe. And ſuch a courſe of 
life was very common among the Gentiles, who eſteemed Fornica- 
tion to be either no fin, or a very ſmall and trivial one. h Or, 
lay down; as the ſame word is rendred, v. 8. intended and compoſed 
themſelves to reſt ; but they were diſturbed and hindred from their 
Intentions upon the following diſcovery. 

2 And it was told the king of Jericho, ſaying, Be- 
hold; there came in men hither to night z, of the chil- 
dren of Irael, to ſearch out the country, 

; This evening, by comparing this with verſe 5. 

3 And the King of jericho ſent unto Rahab, ſaying, 
Bring forth che men that are come to thee, which are 
entred into thine houſe: for they be come to ſearch out 
all the country. | 

4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them 
k, and ſaid thus, There came men unto me, but I wiſt 


not whence they were /: 

k Or, But the Woman had taken , and had hid them to wit, be- 
fore the Meſſengers came from the King ; as ſoon as ſhe underſtood 
from her Nezghbours or common Rumor, that there was a ſuſpici- 
on of the matter, and gueſſed thar ſearch would be made. And 
this is juſtly mentioned as a great and generous aCt of Faith, Hc6. 
11. 31. for the 41d apparently venture her life upon a ſtedfaſt per- 
ſ-afon oi the Truth of God's Word and Promiſe given to the 1/-a- 
elites. I Her anſwer contained in theſe and the following words, 
was palpably falſe, and therefore unqueſtionab'y ſinful ; howſoe- 
ever, her intention was gocd therein : See Rom. 3.8. But it is very 
probable, ſhe being an Heathen, might think, What, ſome Chriſti- 
ans have thought and faid,: That an officious lie is not unlawful. 
Or at worſt, this was her Infirmity, which was graciouſly pardon- 
ed by God, and her Faith was amply rewarded. 

5 And it came to paſs about the time of ſhutting of 
the gate #2, when it was dark, that the men went our : 
whither the men went, I wot not: purſue after them 
quickly, for ye ſhall overtake them. 

m Either of her houſe, or rather of the City which was ſkut at a 
certain Time. 

6 Bur * ſhe had brought them up to the roof » of the 
houſe, and hid them with the ſtalks of flax, which ſhe 
had laid in order upon the roof o. | | 

n Which was plain after the manner: See Deur. 22.8. Matth. 10. 
27. Afts :0. 9. Mark 2.4. o That they may be dried by the heat 
of the Sun. 

7 And the men purſued after them the way to Jordan 


unto the foords p: and aſſoen as they which purſued af-- 


ter them were gone out, they ſhut the gate 9. 

p Or, Paſſages, i.e. The uſual places where people uſed to paſs 0- 
ver Jordan, whether by Boats or Bridges; or rather, becauſe of the 
ſhallowneſs of the River, which a little after this, ſwelled higher, as 
the Hiſtory will tell us; And as itis very uſual for Rivers to do. 
94 Of the City, partly for their ſecurity againſt their approaching e- 
nemies; and partly to prevent the eſcape of the Spies, if peradven- 
ture Rahab was miſtaken, and they yet Jurked in the City. 

8 And before they were laid down r, ſhe came up 
unto them upon the roof, 

r To reſt or ſleep, as they intended, being now, after the de- 


reſting-place, 


9 Ard 


*Mar, ls 
Called alſo 4bel-ſhirtim, Numb. 33. 49. c Not twelve, as Mejes did, THeb, ly 


parture of the Searchers, come: from theic hiding-phace vo theit 


Chap. d 


7 Heb, k 
ently, 
F Heb. lt, 
3T. 
Jam.a,y 


* Cee? 
Sams 1 


19. 


' 


p. 


p 4 
= 


=. ” 


F Chap. Il. 
9 And ſheſaid untothemen s, I know that the LORD 

* Gen. 35+ hath given you the land, and that * your terror #15 fal- 
len upon us, and that all che inhabitants of the land TJ 


5- 

+Heb. faint becauſe of you. | 

melt. «5 Qs. How could they underſtand one the other? Av. r.The Hebrew 
and the Cazcanor Phenician Languages have a very great reſemblance, 
and are thought to be bur differing Diale&s ot one and the ſame 
Tongue, as the learned prove by a multitude of words which are 
common to both of them. Or 2. ſome of the Hebrews had either out 
of curioſity,or by 7eſbua's order and direQtion,learnt that Language 
for this or other ſuch like Occaſions. z (7z.e. ) The dread of you: 
See Exod. 235 27. and 34. 24. Dent. 11. 25. and 28.7. 

*Fx00.14- 10 For we have heard how the LORD * dried up the 

\. chap. water of the Red-ſea for you, when ye came out of E- 

423- BYPH, and whatye did unto the two kings of the Amo- 

*Num®: rites, that were on the other fide Jordan, * Sihon and 

* Exod- Og whom ye utterly deſtroyed, 


Boot 11 And afſſoen as we had heard theſe things, * our 
+ Heb 79 hearts did melt «, neither fdid there remain any more 
rherew®"Y Courage in any man, becauſe of you : for * che LORD 
; __— your God, he is God in heaven above, and inthe earth 


in any man. w 
*chap.5-1- beneath * x. : 
* Deut. 4+ # (7.e.) Was diſſolved,loſt all conſiſtency and courage. This phraſe 
39- is oft uſed, as Dent. 1. 28. and 20. 8. Joſb. 5. 1. and 7.5. x He can 
do whatſoever he pleaſeth in Heaven and Earth; whereas our gods 
are incloſed in Heaven, and can do nothing to us upon Earth. 
12 Now therefore, 1 pray you, twear unto me by 
the LORD y, ſince I have ſhewed you kindneſs,thatye 
*& Will alſo ſhew kindneſs unto * my fathers houſe z, and 


[Tim.3.8. give me a true token # : 

7 By your God who is the only true God ; ſo ſhe ſhews her Con- 
verſion to God, and owns his Worſhip, one eminent A& whereof 
is ſwearing by his Name. z My near Kindred, which ſhe parti- 
cularly names, v. 13. Husband and Children it ſeems the had none. 
And-for her telf, it was needleſs to ſpeak, it being a plain and 
undeniable Duty to ſave their Preſerver. a Either an affurance that 
you will preſerve te and mine fiom the common Ruine : or a To- 
ken which I may pr-duce as a Witneſs of this agreement, and a 
mean of my ſecurity. _ ; 

13 And that ye will ſave alive my father, and my mo- 
ther, and my brethren, and my liſters,and ail that they 
have b, and deliver our lives from death. 

b (i. e.) Their Children, asappears from 7oſh: 6: 23. 
14 And themen anſwered her,Our life + for yours c, 
n e utrer not this our buſineſs d. And it (hal be when 
feat of J"" the LORD hath given us the land, that * we will deal 


*Judg. r. kindly and truly with thee. 
5 ; : 
24. c We pawn and will venture our lives for the ſecurity of yours. 
Or, may we periſh, if you be nor preſerved 4(:. e.) This Agree- 
ment of ours, and the way and condition of it, leſt others under 
this pretence, ſecure themſelves. By which they ſthew both their 
Piety and Prudence in managing the'r Oath with ſo much Circum- 
ſpeC&ticn and Caution, that neither their own Cunſciences might be 
enſnared, nor the publick Juſtice obſtrutted, 

i5 Then tbe let them down by a cord through the 
window : for her houſe was upon the Towrn-walle,an 


ſhe dweirt uponthe wall f. | 

e Which gave her the opportunity of diſmiſſing them when the 
gates were thut. f Her particular dwelling was there : which may 
poſſibly be added, becauſe the other part of her Huuſe waweſerved 
for the entertainment of Strangers. 

16 And be ſaid unto them,Getye tothe mountain g, 
leſt the Purſuers meet you : and hide your ſelves there 
three days hb, until the Purſuers be returned, and after- 
ward may ye go your Way. 

g (i. e.) To ſome of the mountains wherewith Jericho was encom« 
paſſed,in whichalſo there were many Caves where they might lurk. 
h Not taree whole days, but on: whole day,and parts of two days: 
See on Jof. 1.11. EE” 

i7 And the men ſaid 7 unto her, We 241] be blame- 
leſs & of this thine oath, which thou haſt made us ſwear: 

i Or, had ſaid ; namely, before ſhe ler them down ; it being ve- 
Ty impro'able, either that ſhe would diſmiſs them before the Con- 
dition was expreſſed and agreed ; or that ſhe would diſcourſe with 
them, or they with her, about ſuch ſecret and we'ghry things after 
they were ler down, when others might over-hear them ; or that 
ſhe ſhould begin her diſcourſe in her Chamber, and not finiſh it till 
they were gone out of her Houſe. 06j. They ſpoke this after they 
were let down; for it follows wv. 18. this--thread--which thou didft let 
us down by. Anſ. Thoſe words may be thus reudred, which thou oſt 
let us down by ; 1. e. artabout to do it : it Leing frequent for the 
Preter Tenſe to be uſed of a thing about to be done, by an Enalla- 
ge of Tenſes, as Joſh. 10. i5. & (7. e.) Free from guilt or reproach if 
it ” violat:d, namely, if the following Condition be not obſer- 
ved. 

18 Behold, hes we come into the land }, thou (batt 


bind thisline of ſcarlet threed in the window m7, which 


+ Heb. in if 


JHeb. 


gher. ther, and thy Mother, and thy Brethren, and all thy 


Fathers Houjhold home untothee. 
I (i. e.) Over Jordan, and near the Ciry. m That it may be eaſily 


diſcerned by our Soldiers, 


19 And it ſhalbe, that whoſoever ſhal go out of the 


doors of thy houſe into the ſtreet, his blood all be upon 


his head », and we will be guiltleſs: and whoſoever 


ſhal be with thee in the houſe, his blood ſhall he upon: 


our head o, if any hand be upon him p, 


—_ 
Cm ny 


+0'S HU 4, 


_ —— 


; ; Partly from the reverent reſpe& they ſhould bear to the Ark; and 


thou didfſt let us down by : andthou thaltf bring thy Fa-. 


: may be coubred ; for thoſe who encamped neareſt the Ark, wers 
! at that diſtance from it,and came ſo far ; but the moſt were further 


, ,' 


Chap. 1 


3 The blame of his Gedth thall reſt who! mpcn himſelf, as being 
occaſioned by hisown negle& or contempt of the means of ſafery. 
o Weare willing to bear the fin, and ſhame, and punifhment of zr. 
p Towit, ſoasto kill him, as this Phraſe is uſed,Efth.6.2. Job 1412. 

20 And if thou utter this our buſineſs, then we will 
be quit ofthine oath, which thou haſt made us to {wear. 

21 And ſhe faid, According unto your words, fo be 
it. And ſhe ſent them away, and they departed: and 
ſhe bound the ſcarlet line in the window g. 

q Forthwith, partly that the Spies might ſee it hung cut before 
their departure, and fo the better know it at ſome diſtance ; partly 
leſt ſome accident might occaſion a miſtake or negl:& about it 3 
and partly for her own comfort, it b<ingpleaſant andencouraging 
to her to have in her eye the pledge of her deliverance. 

22 Andthey went,and came unto the mountain, and 
abode there three daysr, until the purſuers were return- 
ed. And the purſuers ſought hem throughout all the 
ways s, but found them not. | 

r Supporting th-mſelves there with the Proviſions which after 
the manner of thoſe times and places they carried with them,which 
Rahab furniſhed them with. 7. e. In the 10d to Jordan, and the plaa 
ces near it, but notin the Mountains. 

23 Sotke twomen returned, and deſcended from the 
mountain, and paſſed over z, and came to Joſhua the 
ſon of Nun, and told him « all zh3»gs that befel them. 

#5 5 - OY unto Joſhua, u Him alone, not the people,as they | 

24 And they ſaid unto Joſhua, Truly the LORD hath 
delivered into ourhand all the land: for eyen all the 
Inhabitants of the ceuntry do + faint becauſe of us. 

CHAP. UL 


Joſbua comes with the Iſraelites to Jordan, 1. The officers inftruF the pecpls 
and prieſts for the paſſage, 2-<6. G.d encourages Joſhua, and he encourax 
geth the people, giving them for a ſign, the dividing the waters of Jordan 
till the Ark and people ſh;uld paſs over, 7--13. The people paſs over ; the 
priefts ſtanding all the time in the midſt of Jordan, 14-17. 

A ND Joſhua roſe early in the morning a, andthey 
removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he, 
and all the children of 1ſrael, and lodged there b before 


they patled over. 

a Not after the return of the Spies, as may ſeem at firſt view + 
bur after the three days, as it foliows, wv. 2. 6 That night,thar they 
might goover in the day time, partly that the Miracle might be 
more cvident and unqueſtionable ; and paitly to ſtrike the greater 
terror into their Enemies. | 

2 And it came to pals afcerthree days c, that the offi= 
cers went through the hoſt 4 ; 

c Either, 7. at the ens of the three days mentioned; Jof. 1. 112 
or upon the laſt of them, as th's Phraſe is uſed. See on Vent. 15. 1. 
Or 2. after thoſe days were expired. Sce on Jof. F. 11. d The ſea 
cond time to give them more particular Dire&ions, as they had gis 
ven them a general notic:, Joſ. r. -10, 11. ; 

And they commanded the people e, ſaying, When 
ye ſee theark of the covenant of the LORD your God, . 
and the prieſts the Levites f bearing ic, then ye ſhal re- 
move from your piace, and go after it g. 

In Joſbua's name, and by his Authority. f Who were not only 
Levites, but Prieſts alſo. For although the Levires were to carry 
the Ark, Numb. g. yet the Prieſts might p:i1furm that Office,and did 
ſo upon ſome ſolemn occaſions, a+ here, and Joſ. 6. 6. ch 2.3. g Tos 
wards Jordan, to go over it in ſuch manner as I am about to de« 
ſcribe. Till this time the Ark went in the middle of the cloudy Pils 
lar, probably being now vaniſhed ; now it goes in the Front. 

4 Yer tuere wal be a ſpace berween you and it, about 
two thouſand cubirs þ by meaſure: come not near unto | 
it z, that ye may know the way by which ye muſt go &; | 
for ye have nor paſled :his way Þ heretcfore. + Heb. 

h Which make a thouſand yards, and at which diſtance from it efterday 
the 1/raelites ſeem to have been encamped in the Wilderneſs. And _ the 
becauſe they generally went f: cm their Tents ro the Ark to worſhi hird « 
God, eſpecially on the Sabbath-cays; hence it hat!, been concei-e _ 
that a Sabbath-aays journey reached only to 2000 Cubits. Rut that 


t Heb; 


welt, 


from ir, and their Sabbath-days journey was cor:\iderably longer. 
partly for the following reaſ:n & Thar the Ark marching fo far 
before you into the River,and ſtanding till there till you paſs over, 
may give you the greater aſſurance of your ſafe. paſſage. 

5 And Joſhua faid / unto the people, * SanRifie your 


ſelves m: for to morrow the LORD will do wonders "Exod.r 


" T4, 34 
among you. | | 2 
1 Or rather, had ſaid, to wit, the day before their paſſage ; for Le 


it follows, ro morrow, Mm Both in Soul and Body, that you' may be 18. ch. 
meet to receive ſuch a favour, and with more Attention and Reve. Ny 1 Sari 
rence obſerve and ponder this great Work, and fix itin your Hearts 16.5. Jodi) 
and Memories : See on Exod. 19. 10. Lev. 20. 7, 2.16, i 

6 And Joihuaſpake unto the prietis, ſaving, Take up [| 
z the ark af the covenant, and paſs over before the peo- 
ple . And they took up the ark of the covenant, and 
went before the yeople. 

n To wir, upon your ſhoulders ; for ſo they were to carry it, 
Numb..7. 9g. 0 Not in the middle of them, as you uſed to do. 


7 Andthe LORD faid unto Jolhna, This day will I 
begin to magnifie.thee in the ſight of all Iſrael p, that | 
they may know. that * as I was with Moſes, /o I will be * 5h. r. 


| wath thee, 
2 4 þ 5. 8} 


SIM x7 EIS: HCIACIIIES EK 
CCS ee 
Ge Ee IR PSS ESC 

on 4 
; 
hwas 
Yr—_— 
pn 
. 


—— — = 
— ——— ————— _—— 
SCRE 7 
EIA TCO - IIS 


— 
— ————— 


i 

£ : 
h [ 
44/ 
L 

t 

il 

' 

f 


> OO —R-" 


ep. ae re anroregett a- _ T - 


rien nerd Gs Ge pl tor re 
- rn rt ons ng 


= —— INPOTICEIRcrtn as _ 


w w—— — _s "_y 
— — — —  — 


>. 15. 


Lites, an 


- Xagement to their preſceat Expedition. 


perſon whom T have ſet in Moſes his ſtead, and by whom I will con- 
du& them to the Poſſeſſion of the promiſed Land. 


When ye are come to 
ſhal ſtand ſtill 


in Jordan r. ; 

q Heb. to the extremity, ſo far as the River then ſpread it ſelf, 
which was now more than ordinary, v. 15. r Within the waters 
of Jordan, in the firſt entrance into the River ; where they ſtood 
for a ſeaſon, till the River was divided, and then they went into 
the midſtof it, as it is implied, v. 17. and there abode till all the 
people were paſſed over, as it follows in the Hiſtory. : 

' 9 And Joſhua ſaid unto the children of Iſrael, Come hi- 
ther s, and hear the words of the LORD your God 7. 

To the Ark or Tabernacle, the place of publick Aſſemblies. * 
Who is now about to give a proof that he is both the Lord,the Om- 
nipotent Governour of Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures; and 
your God, in Covenant with you, having a tender care and true af- 
feQtion for you: 

10 And Joſhua ſaid, Hereby ye ſhal know « that the 
living God x js among you y, and that he will without 
fail drive out from before you the Canaanite, and the 
Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the 


Girgaſhice, and the Amorite, and the Jebukie. 
# To wit, by experience and ſenſible evidence, x Not a dull, 


' dead, ſenſeleſs and unaQive God, ſuch as the gods of the Nations 


are ; but a God of life, and power, andaQtivity to watch over you, 
and wcrk for you. y Is preſent with you to ſtrengthen and help you, 
as the Phraſe ſignifies, Exod: 17: 7: Deut: 31: 17: Joſh: 22: 31- 

' 1x Behold, the ark of the covenant, of the LORD 
of all the earth, pafſeth over before you into Jordan z. 

z Tato part of the River. 

12 Now therefore take ye twelve men - out of the 

T ribes of Iſrael; out of every Tribe a man. 

a For the work deſcribed, Joſb: 4: 2, 3. 
13 And it ſhal come to paſs at{oon as the ſoles of the 
feet of the prieſts that bear the ark of the LORD 5,the 
Lord of all the earth c, ihal reſt in the waters of Jor- 
dan, hat the waters of Jordan ſhal he cut off fre the 


l.114- waters that come down from above 4: and they * ſhal 


ſtand upon an heap e. © | 7 
b That ſoit may appear that thisis the Lords doing, and that in 
purſuance, and for the accompliſhment of his Covenant made with 
Iſrael. c The Lord of all thisterreſtrial Globe made of Earth and 
Water, who therefore can diſpoſe of this River and the adjoyning 
Land as he pleaſeth. 4 The Waters which now are united ſhall be 
divided, and part ſhall low down the Channel towards the Dead- 
Sea,and the other part that is nearer the Spring or Riſe of the River, 
and flows down from it, ſhall ftand ſtill. e Being as it were con- 
gealed, as the Red-Sea was, Exod: 15: 8: and ſo keptfrom overflow- 
ing all the Country. 
14 And it came to paſs when the people removed 


from their tents, to paſs over Jordan, and the prieſts 


IA&.7.45. bearing the * ark of the covenant before the people ; 


15 And as they that bare the ark were come unto 
Jordan, and the feet of the priefts that bare the ark were 


' 
FxChron. dipped in the brim of the water, (for * Jordan over- 


floweth all his banks all the time of harveſt ) f. 


{EF- 32-5- . f Which is alſonoted, 1 Chron: 12: x 5: Eccluſ: 24:36:and by Ariſtzas 
FF 49- 19: jo the Hiſtory of the LXX Interpreters. This is meant not of the 


Wheat-harveſt, but of the Barley-harveſt, (which was before it, Ruth 
I: 22: 2 Sam: 21: 9:) as is manifeſt from their keeping of the Paſſover 
4t their firſtentrance, Joſ: 5: 10: which Feaſt was kept on the four- 
reenth day of their firſt Month, when they were to bring a Sheaf of 
their fiſt-fruits, Lev: 23: 10; Deut:16:9, 10: which were of Barley,as 
Joſephus affirms, and is evident from the thing it ſelf. So that this 


Harveſt in- thoſe hot Countries fell very early in the Spring, when 


Rivers uſe to ſwell moſt; partly becauſe of the rains which have fal- 
len all the Winter,and partly becauſe of the Snows which then melt 
into Water and come into the Rivers; for which Reaſons the ſame 
overflowing of Water which is here aſcribed to Jordan, is by other 


Authors aſcribed to Euphrates, and Fygris, and the Rhine, and Maine, + 


&c. And this time God choſe for this Work, partly that the Mi- 

. rYacle might be more glorious in it ſelf, more obliging to the 7ſrae- 

7 more amazing and terrible to the Canaanites ; and partly 

that the Iſ-aelites might be entertained at their firſt entrance with 
more plentiful and comfortable Proviſions. 


16 That the waters which came down from above, 
ſtood and roſe up upon an heap g very far from the ci- 
ty Adam that is beſide Zaretan þ ; and thoſe that came 
down toward the ſea of the plain,ever the falt ſea ſailed, 
and were cut off : and the people paſlled over right againſt 
Jericho 5z. 

£ Which having been affirmed by Heathen Writers to have been 
done by Magicians, it is great impudence to disbelieve or doubr of 
Gods power to do it. þ The City Adam being more obſcure, is de- 
ſcribed by its nearneſs to a more known place, Zaretan, or Sarthan, 
which ſome think is the ſame place mentioned, 1 Xing: 4: 12:and 7: 
46: but it rather ſeems to have been another place then eminenr, 
but now unknown, as many thouſands are. The meaning is, That 
the Waters were ſtopped in their courſe at that place, «+. 
at a duediſtance from the Jſraelites whilſt they paſſed over. 
God carried them over, becauſe this part was, z. The ſtrongeſt,as | 
having in its Neighbourhood an eminent City, a potent King, and 


efreſhment of the 1(. | 


| 


a ſtout, and Warlike people. 2. The moſt pleaſant and fruitful, | 
and therefore more convenient both for the R 


raelites after their long and tedious Marches, and for their Encoy- 


J0$SH DU 4. 


17 And the prieſts that bare the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD, ſtood firm & on dry ground in the midft of 
Jordan 1, and all the Iſraelites paſſed over on dry ground, 


untilall the people were paſſed clean over Jordan. 

k i.e. Tn one and the ſame place and poſture ; their feet neither 
moved by any Waters flowing in upon them, nor ſinking into any 
mire, which one might think was at the bottom of the River. And 
this may be oppoſed unto their other fanding in the brink of the water 
when they came to it, commanded, wer. 8. which was but for a 
while, till the Waters were divided and gone away ; and then they 
were to go further,even inro ;he midft of Jordan. as is here ſaid, where 
they are to ſtand conflantly and fixedly, as this Hebrew word lignifies, 
until all were paſſed over. If it be ſaid, that what is preſcribed, v. 8. 
is nere ſaid to be executed ; and therefore themidſt of Jordan here, is 
the ſzme place with the brink of the water of Jordan, wv. 8. It may be 
anſwered, That the manifeſt variation of the Phraſe ſhews, that it 
1s not abſolutely the ſame thing or place which is ſpoken of there 
and here ; but what is there enjoyned, is here executed with ad- 
vantage; for when it is ſaid, that they ſtood firm-----=in the midFt of 
Jordan, it muft needs be ſuppoſed, that they firſt came to the brink of 
the water, and that they flood there for a ſeaſon, till the Waters were 
cut off and dried up, as appears from the nature of the thing ; and 
that then they went further, even into the midſt of Jordan, 1 Ei- 
ther, 1. within Jordan, as it is expreſſed above, wv :8: for that Phraſe 
doth not always ſignifie the exa& middle of a place, but any part 
within it, as appears from Gen. 45. 6. Exod. 8. 22. and 24. 18. Joſh. 
7. 13. and 10, 13. Prov. 30«-19. Orrather 2. in the middle and 
deepeſt part of the River. For, r. words ſhould be taken properly, 
where they may without any inconveniency,which is the caſe bere. 
2. The Ark went before them to direQ, and encourage and ſecure 
them in the dangers of their Paſſages, for which ends the middle was 
the fitteſt place. 3. In this ſenſe rhe ſame Phraſe is uſed, Joſh. 4. 
Ve 3, 8. For certainly thoſe Stones which were to be Witneſſes and 
Monuments of their Paſſage over Jordan, ſhould not be taken from 
the brink or brim of the River, or from the Shore which Jordan o- 
verflowed only at that ſeaſon, bur from the moſt inward and deep- 
eſt parts of the River ; and v. 16, 17, 18. where the Prieſts are ſaid 
to aſcend or come up out of Fordan, and out of the mid of Jordan unto the 
ary land ; whereas had this been meantonly of the firſt entrance in. 
to the River, they muſt have been ſaid fuſt ro go down into fordan 
and then to go up to the land, : 

CH AP. IV. 


God commanas them to carry 12 flones for a memorial, out of Jordan : 7% 
ſhua orders it : the people perform, 1----8. Twelve other fones ſet up for & 


purpoſe declared, 20---24. 
ND it cameto paſs, when all the people were clean 
paſſed * over Jordan, that the LORD ſpake « 

unto *Jolbua, ſaying, 


with enlargement, as being now to be put in Execution. - 
2 Takeye twelve men our ofthe people,out of every 
tribea man b, | 


b For the greater evidence and certainty, and the more cfleQu- 
o ſpreading of the Report of this marvellous work among all the 
1ibes. 


And command ye them, ſaying, Take ye hence 
out of the midſt of Jordan c, out of the place where the 
prieſts feet ſtood firm, twelve ſtones, and ye (balcarry 
them over with you,and leave themin the lodging- place 
where ye ſhal lodge this night d. 

c Of which ſee on Joſh. 3.17. dz. e. InGilgal, as iy expreſſed be- 
low, ver. 19, 20. 


prepared e of the children of Iſrael, out of every Tribe 
| a mans 


ei, e. Appointed or choſen for that work, and commanded them 
to be ready for 1t. 


5 AndJoſhua ſaid unto them, Paſs over before the 
ark f of the LORD your God into the midſt of Jordan, 
and take ye up every man of you aſtone upon his ſhoul- 
der, according unto the number of the-Tribes of the 
children of Iſrael : 

#3. e. Go back again to the place where the Ark ſands. 
6 That this may be a lign g among you, rhat when 


What mean ye by theſe ſtones ? 

g A Monument or Memorial of this days \work. 

7 Then ye (hal anſwer them, That the waters of 
Jerdan were cut off before the ark 4 of the covenant of 
the LORD, when itpaſſedover Jordan, the waters of 
Jordan were cut off: and theſe ſtones ſhal be for a me- 
morial unto the children of Iſrael for ever. 


h As it were at the ſight and approach of the A "gr 
and the Iſraelites a ſafe Js PP of the Ark, to give it 


8 And the children of Iſrael "did ſo as Joſhua com- 
manded, and took up twelve ſtones out ef the midſt of 
Jordan, as the LORD ſpake unto Joſhua, according to 


ſo kept | he number of the Tribes of the children of Iſrael, and 
7 Here | carried them over with them untothe place where they 


lodged, and laid them down there, 

9 And Joſbua ſet up twelve ſtones in the midſt of 
Jordan 3, in the place where the feet of the prieſts, 
which bare the ark of the covenant, ſtood : and they 
are there unto this day k, 


a 7 Preperly 


Memorial in the midſt of Jordan, 9. The pecple paſs over : the order they 
obſerve, 10----13. God magnifies Joſtua, 14. The prieſts with the Ark 
are commanded to come up out of Jordan, 15---17. The waters return, 18. 
The time of this paſſage, 19. Twelve flones ſet up in Gilgal ; ty what 


a This was commanded before, Joſh. 3. 12. and is here repeated 


_ Chap. 1V. 


* Deut.27; 


2» ; 
"ch. 3.1% 


4 Then Joſhua called the twelve men, whom he had + 


your children ask heir fathers + in timeto come, laying, + Heb. 
20Yrow, 


"Ch 


\ 
*N' 
32, 


+ O 


arm 


*c> 


* Ex 
IG, : 


+ He 
plucke 
T Hel 


Went, 


| Chap. IV- 


*Ntmb. 


32. 20)27- 


+ Or,ready 


armed, 


eh. 3. 9: 


* Ex. 25. 
16, 23% 


+ Heb. 
plucked up. 
t Heb. 


Went, 


}Heb. #0 


morrow, , 


; Properly ſo called, as Joſh. 3. 17. Queſt, How could theſe ſtones 
be a Monument of this work, when they were not ſeen, but gene- 
rally covered with the Waters of Jordan? Anſw. Theſe ſtones are not 
the ſame with thoſe which a man could carry upon his ſhoulders, 
ver: 5. and therefore might be very much larger ; and being ſet up 
in two rows one above another, they might poſſibly be ſeen, at leaſt 
ſome times when the Water was low,and eſpecially where the Wa- 
ter was commonly more ſhallow, as it might be ordinarily in this 
place,though not at this time, when Jordanoverflowed all its banks. 
Add to this, That the Waters of Jordanare ſaid to be very pure and 
clear; and therefore theſe ſtones,though they did not appear above 
ir, might be ſcen in it, either by thoſe who ſtood upon the ſhore, 
becauic that River was not broad ; or at leaſt by thoſe that paſſed 
in Roats upon the River, who could cafily diſcern them by the pe- 
culiar noiſe and motion of the Water occaſioned by that heap of 
ſtones. And this was ſufficient, eſpecially conſidering that there 
was another more diſtin& and viſible Monument of this Miracle 
ſet up in Gilgal, k This might be written, either 1. by Joſhua who 
wrote this Book near 20 years after this wasdone : Or, 2. by ſome 
other holy man divinely inſpired and approved of by the whole 
Jewiſh Church, who inſerted this and ſome ſuch paſſages both in this 
Book, and in the Writings of Moſes. 

1o For the prieſts which bare the ark, ſtood in the 
midſt of Jordan, until every thing was finiſhed that the 
LORD commanded Joſhua to ſpeak unto the people /, 
according to all that Moſes commanded Joſhua mz: and 


the people haſted and paſſed over n» 

1i. e. To command the people to do. » Which he did not parti- 
cularly,but in the general ; becauſe he commanded Joſhua to obſerve 
and do all that God had commanded him by Moſes, and all that he 
ſhould command him any other way. » z. e. Paſſed over with haſte, 
which is noted as an Argument of their fear, or weakneſs of their 
Faith ; as on the contrary, the Prieſts are commended that they 
ſtood firm, and fixed, and ſettled in their minds, as well as in the 
poſture of their Bodies. | 

11 And it came to paſs when all the people were 
clean paſſed over, that the ark of the LORD paſſed 0- 
ver, and the prieſts in the preſence of the people o. 

o The people looking on, and beholding this wonderful work 
of God with Att-ntion and Admiration. 

12 And * the children ofReuben, and the chiidren 
of Gad, and half the Tribe of Manaileh, paſſed over 
armed before che reſt of the children of Iſrael, as Moſes 

\ ſpake unto them : 

13 About torty thouſand | prepared for war, paſſed 
over before the LORD p unto bactel, to the plains of 
Jericho. 

p Either, x. befoze the Ark, by which they, as well as the reſt 
paſſed when they went over Jordan. Or 2. in the preſence of God 
who diligently obſerved whether they would keep their Fromuſe 
and Covenant made with their Brethren, or nor. 

14 On that day-cthe LORD * magnified Joſhua ir 
the ſight of all Iſrae)],and they feared him,as they feared 
Moſes, all the days of his life. | 

i5 And the LORD ſpake unto Joſbua, ſaying, 

16 Command the Prieſts that bear * the ark of the 
teſtimony, that they come up 7 out of Jordan. 

q For being now in the middle, an loweſt, and deepeſt place of 
the Rive:, ( of which ſee on Job. 3. 17.) they are mo!t properly 
ſaid to aſcend or go up to the land ; which word is thrice uſe in th1s 
and the two next following Verſes. 

17 Joſhua therefore commanded the Prieſts r, ſaying, 
Come ye up out of, Jordan. 

» Who ſtayed contentedly in the River, till God by Joſbua called 
them out. _ | 

18 And it came to paſs, when the prieſts that bare 
the ark of the Covenant of the LORD, were come u; 
out of the midſt of Fordan, and the ſoles of the prielis 
feet were Þ lift up unto the dry land, that the waters of 
Fordan returned unto their place s, and F Bowed over 
all his banks, as they did before. | 

s Came down from their heaps, and returned with all convenient 
ſpeed into their proper Channel, according to their natural and u- 
ſual courſe. 

.v And the people came out of Fordan on the tenth 
day of the firſt month ?, and encamped in Gijgal #, in 
theeaſt border of Fericho. | 

t To wit, of Niſan, which wanted but 5 days of 4o years from 
the time of their coming out of Fgypr, which was on the fifte-nt* 
day of this month. So punQual 1s God in the performing of his 
word, whether promiſe« or threatned. And this day was very ſea- 
ſonable to1 thz taking up of the Lambs which were to be we: four 
days after,accor.iing to the Law, Exod. 12:3,6. u A place ſocal 
led hereafter upon a following occaſion, Joſh. 5. 9g. So here it 1s an 
Anticipation. 

2c And thoſe twelve ſtones which they took out of 
Fordan, did Foſbua pitch in Gilgal x. 

x Which moſt probaÞly were placed ſeverally and in order like ſo 
many little Pillars, fhich was moſt proper to keep up the remem- 

rance of this miraculous Benefit vouchſafed to this people. 


21 And he ſpake unto the children of Iſrael, ſaying, 
When your children ſhal ask their fathers f in time co 
come, ſaying, What mean theſe ſtones > 

22 Then ye ſhal ler your children know, faying,Iſra- 
el came over this Fordan on dry land. 

24 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of 
Fordan from before you, until ye were paſſed over, as 


$0 8H 3 


Chap. Vil 
the LORD your God did to the Red-ſea *, which | e * Fxod., 
dried up from before us y, until we were gone over. 1+ 3% |} 

3 (i.e.) My ſelf and Caleb, and all of us here preſent ; for this Wi! | 
Benefit, though done to their Fathers, is juſtly and rightly faid to Wil | 
be done to themſelves, becauſe thev were then in their Parents 
loyns ; and their very being, and all their Happineſs, cepenced 
upon that Deliverance. 

24 That all the people of the earth might know the 
hand of the LORD, that ic ;s mighty, that ye might 
fear the LORD your God þ for ever. 


GHAP. YV. 

The Amorites and Canaanites hear »f this and are afraid, 1. The Males born 
in the Wilderneſs are Circumciſed, 2---9. The Paſſcver is celebrated, 10. 
They eat of the Corn of the Land, and the Mama ceoſeth, 11, 12. Chrift 
a#ppeareth to Joſbua in form of a Man of War; he worſbips him; the 
place of his preſence holy gruund, 13----15. ; 

AND it came to paſs when all the kings cf the 

Amorites a which were on the fide of Jordan | 
weſtward 6b, and all the kings of the Canaanites c, which ; 
were by the Sea d, *heard that the LORD had dried * Nomb! | 

up the waters of Fordan e from before the children of 13- 29- 

Hrael, until we were paſſed over, that their heart melt- Ex94- T | 


ed f, neither was there ſpirit in them any more,becauſe *'? 
of the children of Iſrael. | 
4 Theſe and the Canaanites are mentioned for all the reſt,as bei 
the chief of them for number, and power, and courage b This 2 
added to diſtinguiſh them from the other Amorites, Eaſtward from 
Jordan, whom Moſes had ſubdued. c So the proper place of this Na- 
tion was on both ſides of Jordan. d The Midland Sea, all-long the 
Coaſt of it, which was the chiefſeat of that people, though divers 
Colonies of them were come into, and ferrled in other places e 
Which was their bulwark on the Eaſt-fide,where the 1jraelites were 
for it is very probable they had taken away all Bridges near thoſe 
parts ; and the /ſraelites having been ſo long in thar Neighbouring 
Country, and yet not making any attempt upon them, they were 
grown ſecure ; eſpecially now, when Jordan ſwelPd beyond Its or= 
dinary bounds ; and therefore they did not endeavour to hinder 
their paſſage. f They loſt all their courage, and durſt atrempt nos 
thing upon the Jſraelites, not without Gods ſpecial providence,that 
the 1ſraelites might quietly participate of the two great Sacraments 
of their Church, Circumciſion and the Paſſover, and thereby be 
prepared for their high and hard work, and for the poſieſſion of the 
Holy and Promiſed Land, which would have been Defiled by an 
Uncircumciied People. 


2 At that time g the LORD faid unto Foſbua, Make 


+ Heb. 
aayre 


h thee * ſharp knives #5, and circufyiciſe again the chil- * Exod: 
dren of Iſrael the ſecond time &. | 4. 25. 
g As ſoon as ever they were come to Gilgal, which was on the yas. 


ren:h day ; and fo this might be execured the next,or the eleventh 
day,and thatin the morning : on the thirtcenth day they were ſore 
of their wounds, and on the fourteenth day they recovered, and at 
the Even of that day kept the Paſſover. h Or, prepare, or make vea- 
ay, as this word 1s ſometimes uſed. As it was not neceſſary for 
thoſe who had ſuch Knives already to make others for that ule ; ſo 
it is not probable that ſuch were commanded ro do ſo, but only to 
make them ſharp and fit for that work. 7 Called in Hebrew, Knives 
of Flints, not as if they were all neceſſarily ro be made of Flints,but 
becaute ſuch were commonly uſed, eſpecia)ly in thoſe parts where 
the:e was but little Iron ; and becauſe ſuch Knives were oft uſed 
'n this woik, as the Jewiſh Doors norte, and in ſuch like works, as 
the Heathen writers relate. Thus we call that an Ik-horn, which 
:s made of Silver, becauſe thoſe Urenſils are commonly made of 
Ho:n. k& He calleth tiis a Jecond Circumciſion, not as if theſe ſame 
perſons had been Circumciſed once before, either by 7oſbua, or by 
any other, for the contrary is athrmed below, v, 5 but with reſpe& 
unto the body of the People, whereof one part had been Circums 
ciſed b-fore, and the other at this time, which is called a ſerond: 
:ime, in relation to ſome former time wherein they were Circiim- 
ciſed, either, 1. in Egypt, when many of the people, who poſſibly 
for fear or favour of the Egyptians, had negle&ed this Duty; were 
by the command of Meſes ( who had been awakened by the remems 
brance cf his own negle& and danger thereupon ) Ci-cumciſed ; 
which during the Ten Plagues, and the grievous confuſion and 
conſternation of the Egyptians, they might eaſily find opportunity 
to do. Or 4. art Sai, when they received the Paſſover, Numb 9: 
5: which no uncircumciſed perſon might do, Exod. 12. 48. and 
therefore it may not ſeem improbable, that all the Children born 
in that firſt year afrer their coming out of Fgypr, and all they who 
peradventure might come out of Egypt in their uncircumciſion; 
were now Circumciſed. Obj. 1. All that came out of Egypt were Cirs 
cumciſed, v. 5: Anſ. 1, This may be true, but he doth not fay when 
and where they were Circumcited; nor doth he deny that this was 
done to ſome of them, either in time of the Plagnes in Egypt, orat 
Sinai 2. All is very oft uſed of the greateſt part, as is confeſſed 
Obj. 2. All the people that were born in the Wilderneſs were not Circums 
ciſed, v. 5. An}. 1. Underſtand this 'alſo of the greateſt part. 2; 
This is limited to them that were born by the way, as it is faid 
there, and emphatically repeated, wv. 7. z.e. in their Journeys and 
Travellings ; which iniinuats the reaſon why they were not Cir- 
cumciſed, becauſe they were always uncertain of their ſtay ir any : 
place ; and were conſtantly to be in a readineſs for a removal when 
God took up the Cloud : Bur this reafon ceaſed at Sinai, where they 
knew they were to abide for a conſiderable time ; and ſeing they 
took that opportunity for the celebration of the Paſſover,it is like= 
Iy they would improve it alſo, to the Circumciſion of their Chil- 
dren or others, which they ought to prize highly, and to embrace 
a'l occaſions offered for it ; which though the people might, ir is 
not likely that Moſes would negle&.. Obj. 3. hey are ſaid to have 
remained uncircumciſed Forty whole Years in the Wilderneſs, v. 6: Anſw., 
i. e. for almoſt forty years ; as the ſame Phraſe is uſed; Numb, x4, 
33, 34. and 32; 13. when there was above one year of that nhmber 
paſt and gone. Or 3. in — and ſo the fenſe may be; The 
h 2 L 2 firs 


flints. 


Yep. v. Fj O |» 
ſl firſt Circumciſion conferred upon 4brahem, and continued in his 
Poſtecity, hath been for many years negle&ted or omitted ; and 
ſo thar grear and ſolemn pledge of my Covenant with you, 15 11 a 
manner wholly loſt, and therefore it is but fit and necetlary to have 
this long intercupted praftice of Circumciſion revived, and to have 
Abrahams Poſterity circumciſed a ſecond time for the renewing of 
the Covenant b:tween them and me again. 


Fr 10s (A ' 3 And Joſhua made him ſharp knives, and circum- 
HITEr, G:- cifed /the children of Ifrael mat the * hill of the fore- 
0109 £22-" ckins. | 
| | I (i. e.) He cauſed this to be done ; and, becauſe it was to be 
done ſpeedily, the Paſſover approaching, it was neceſſary to _ 
many hands in it, either Prieſts and Levites, or other Circumciſe 
perſons, who, at leaſt in thoſe circumſtances, were permitted to 
doit. -+:(7.e.) Such of them as were uncircumciſed. And,though 
it be not mentioned, it is morethan probable, that the Jraelites be- 
yond Jordan were Circumciſed at the ſame time. 


4 And this is the cauſe why Fothua did circumciſe : 
All the people that came out of Egypt m, that were 
' males, even all thepeople of war died in the wilderneſs 


by the way, after they came out of Egypt. 

mm 'Fhis is tobe reſtrained to ſuch as were then above 20 years 
old, and ſuch as were guilty of that rebellion, Numb. 14. as 1t 125 
expreſled below, v. 6. ; 

5 Now all the people that came out, were circum- 
ciſed : but all the people that were born in the wilderneſs 
by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, hem they 


» had not circumciſed. | | 

» Either theic Parents,or the Rulers of !-ael, whoſe omiſſion here- 
of was not through negle& ; for then God, who had ordered the 
negleQer of Circumciſion to be cut off, Gen. 17.14: would not have 
left ſo groſs a fault unpuniſhed: but by Divine Permiſſion and In- 
dulgence ; partly becauſe they were now in a Journey, 1n which 
caſe the Pafloveralſo might be negle&ed, Numb: 9: 10, 13. _— 
that Journey the Paſſover was but once obſerved ; and partly be- 
cauſe there was not ſo great a neceſſity of this note of Circumciſion 
co diſtinguiſh them from other Nations, whileſt they dwelt alone 
and unmixed in the Wilderneſs, as there was afterwards. 

6 For the children of {ſrael walked forty years in the 
wilderneſs, till all the people o that were men of war, 
which came out of Egypt, were conſumed, becauſe 

f they obeyed not the voice of the LORD, unto whom 

8 Numb. che LORD ſware*that he would not ſhew them p the 

F4- 23- land which the LORD ſware unto their fathers,chat he 

$ would give us aland thatfloweth with milk and honey. 

a o The Hebrew word commonly ſignifies the Gentiles '; ſo the calls 
them, to note that they were unworthy of the name and priviled- 
ges of Iſraelites. p (7. e.) Not give them ſo much as a fight of it, 
which he granted to Moſes, much leſs the poſſeſſion and enjoyment 
Or ſhewing is put for giving, as it is Pſal. 4. 6. and 60. 3. Ec- 
cleſ. 2. 24. ; ; 

7 Andtheic children whow he raiſed up in their ſtead, 
them Foſhuacircumciſed q, for they were uncircumci- 
ſed : becauſe they had not circumciſed them by the way. 

g Which God would have now done, 1. As a Teſtimony of Gods 
reconciliation to the people, of which Circumciſion was a ſign, and 
that God would not further impute their Parents Rebellions to 
them. 2+ Becauſe the great impediment of Circumciſion was now 
removed, to wit, their continued Travels, and frequentand uncer- 
rain removal. yg. Toprepare them for the approaching Paſſover. 4. 

. To diſtinguiſh them from the Canaamtes, into whoſe land they were 
now come. 5. To ratify the Covenant between God and them, 
whereof Circumciſion was a Sign and Seal, to aſſure them that God 

would now make good his Covenant, in giving them this Land ; 
and to oblige them to perform all the Duties and Services to which 
that Covenant bound them, of which Circumciſion was the begin- 
ning and foundation, all which they were expreſly enjoyned to do, 

_ as ſoon as ever they came into Canaan, Exod. 12. 25. Levit, 23. 10. 

| Numb. 15. 2. | ; 

E 8 And it came to paſs * when they had done circum- 

| _ ciſing all the people, that they abode in their places in 

the people the camy, till they * were whole 7. 

[bad made r Free fiom that pain and ſore which Circumciſion cauſed, Gen. 

anend tobe 34. 25. It was indeed an a@ of great Faith, toexpoſe themſelves tro 

Circumci= To much pain and danger too, in this place where they were hem- 

ed. -- med in by Jordan and their Enemies ; but they had many eonſide- 

'* Heb. k. OC: their Faith, and ſuppreſs their Fears; the freſh 

wed. experience of -Gods powerand readineſs to work Miracles for their 
| - preſervation ; the great conſternation of all their Enemies, which 
' they _ obſerve and rationally preſume; the conſiderable num- 
ber of the people who were above 4o years old, and therefore cir- 

- cumciſed before this time, their great General being one of this 

- number ; the time it would require for their Enemies to bring to- 

_ - gether a force ſufficient to oppoſe them? 

.9 And the LORD faid unto Joſhua, This day have 
| I rolled away the reproach of Egypt s from off you : 
* That is, Wherefore the name of the place iscalled * Gilgal, unto 
rolling. * this day. 

s (7. e.) Uncircumciſion, which was both in Truth, and in the o- 
pinion of the Jews, a matter of great reproach, Gen: 34: 14: 1Sam: 

" T4: 6; and 17: 26. And although this was a reproach common to 

- moſt Nations of the World, yet it is particularly called the reproach 
of Egypt, either, 1. Becauſe the other neighbouring Nations, being 

'the children of Abraham by the Concubines, are ſuppoſed to have 
been Circumciſed, which the Egyprians at this time were not, as 

- may be gathered from Exod: 2: 6: where they knew the Child to be 
an Hebrew þy this mark. Or 2. becauſe they came out of Egypt, and 
were eſteemed to be a ſort of Egyptians, Numb: 22: 5: which they juſt- 
ly thought a great reproach ; but by their Circumciſion. they were 
now diſtinguiſhed from them, and manifeſted to be anether kind 

 ofpcople, Or 3, Becauſe many of chem lay under this reproach in | 


Ce ET? & 


n . . Os 
= : 3 oy wm 200m ORB ——_—_ 
2 A - AI ; 
"2 5” OR. Fe. — - DO F. 
LY 2 - « TO eg 1-8 . Soy Se PSY 
- = OX - -_ By = {v4 54 Fi. Jn . _* cpomt gee >> _— 
F 7 . x : - 3. a : LE Tad . - 
—_—_ = —— —— - . > = pa I z- : 2145 Y - py 
- ——_— —mngmemfn wed EEE oe EEG - I _ > ——_——<—=— A eres SD 2 a v 
- ——— CEA Ce En nr =e RE,” -_ ms X _ 
EI EDI - : : bl —_ 
hand 4 ——_ _ - - CEE ATE = 


wtf 


- 


DLz Chap. VI. 


Eeypt, having wickedly negleQed this Duty there for worldly rea- 
ſons ; and others of them continued inthe ſameſhameful condition 
for many years in the Wilderneſs. ; 
10 And the children of Iſrael encamped in Gilgal, 
and kept the Paſſover, on the fourteenth * day of the ,,. FI 


moneth at even, in the plains of Jericho e. p 

t Which was their third Paffover: the firſt was. in Egypt, Exod: * 
12: the ſecond at Mount Sinai, Numb: 9: the third here ; for in their 
Wilderneſs Travels, theſe and all other Sacrifices were negleCed, 
Amos 5. 25. 

11 And they did eat of the old corn « of the land, 
on the morrow after the Paſſover x ; unleavyened cakes, 
and parched cor» y, in the ſelf-ſame day z. 

z The Corn of the laſt year,which the Inhabitants of thoſe parts 
had left in their Barns, being doubtleſs fled for fear cf the 1jrac- 
lites into their ſtrong Cities, or other remoter and ſafer parts. 
(7. e.) On the ſixteenth day ; forthe Paſſover was killed berweenthe 
two Evenings ofthe fourteenth day, and was eaten in that evening 
or night, which, according to the -Jewiſh computation, whereby 
they begin their days at the evening, was q part of the fifteenth 
day, all which was the feaſt of the Paſſover; and ſo the morrow 
of the ſixteenth day, was the morrow after the Paſſiver,vhen they were 
obliged to offer unto God the firſt ſheaf, and then were allowed to 
eat of the reſt. y Of that years Corn, which was moſt proper and 
cuſtomary for that uſe. z Having an eager deſire toenjoy the Fruits 
of the Land. 

12 And the * Manna ceaſed a on the morrow after *p,Qq.;6 
they had eaten of the old corn of the land, b neither 35. 
had the children of Iſrael Manna any more, but they 


did eat of thefruit of the land of Canaan that year. 

a Which God now withheld, 1: To ſhew that Manna was not an 
ordinary produttion of Nature, as by the long and conſtant enjoy- 
ment of it, they might be prone to think ; but an extraordinary 
and ſpecial gift of God to ſupply their neceſſity. 2. Becauſe God 
would not be prodigal of his favours,nor expoſe them to contempr 
by giving them ſuperfluouſly, or by working Miracles where ordi- 
nary means were ſufficient. 6 (7. e.) On the ſeventeenth day. 

13 Andit came to paſs when Joſhua was by Jericho c, 
that he life up his eyes, and looked, and behold, there 
ſtood * a man d over againſt him with his ſword drawn *Exod, 
e in his hand : and Joſhua went unto him,and ſaid unto 23: 23- 
him, Art thou for us, or for our Adverſaries ? ecl. 1.8, 

c Heb. 1: Jericho, 7. e. in the Country or Territory adjoyning to 
Jericho ; whither he went to view thoſe parts,and diſcern the fitteſt 
places for his attempt upon Jericho, as Generals uſually do. 4 One 
in the appearance of man. e In readineſs to fight, not, as Joſhus 
thought, againſt him, but for him and his people. 

14 And hefaid, Nay f, but as F Captain of the hoſt + Or, 
of the LORD g am I now come. And Joſhua fell on 
his face to theearth, and did worſhip, and ſaid unto 
him, What ſaith my Lord unto his ſervant 4? 

f I am neither Jaelize,nor Canaanite. g Either, 1. of all Creatures in 
Heaven and Earth,which are Gods Hoſts. Or,2. of the Angels, who 
are called the Hoſt of Heaven, 1 Kings 22.19. 2Chron.18.18. Luke 2.13,Or 
3. of the hoſt or people of rae, which are called the Lords Hoſt, Exod. 
12.41. The ſenſe is, I am the chief Captain of this people, and will 
condutt and afliſt thee and them in this great undertaking. Now - 
this perſon is none other than Michael the Prince, Dan. 10. 21. and 
12. I. not a created Ange], but the Son of God, who went along 
with the Jraelites in this Expedition, 1 Cor, 10.4. not ſurely as an 
underling, but as their Chief and Captain. And this appears, 1. by 
his acceprance of Adoration here, which a created Angel durſt not 
admit of, Rev: 22: 8, 9. 2. Becauſe the place was made holy by his 
preſence, wv: 15: which was Gods Prerogative, Exod: 3: 5. 3. Becauſe 
he 1s called the Lord, Heb. Jehovab, Joſh. 6. 2. hT acknowled ge thee 
for my Lord and Captain, and therefore wait for thy Commands 
whuch Iam ready to obey. | , 

5 Andthe Captain ofthe LORD's hoſt ſaid unto Jo- 
ſhua, * Looſe thy ſhoe from off thy foot 3, for the place *Exod.z.; 
whereon thou ſtandeſt 3s holy &: and Joſhua did ſo. AQ. 7.33- 

z In token of reverence and ſubje&ion : See on Exodus «4. & 
Conſecrated by my preſence ; which when it was withdrawn, it 
was no more holy than any other place, the reaſon of its holineſs 


being removed, 
CHAP. VL 

Jerlcho is ſkut up by the Iſraelites, 1, The People and 7 Priefls with the Ark 
go round it 7 days, 2-14. On the 7th day they go round it 7 times ; the 
Prieſts blow the Trumpets ; the People ſhout ; the City Accurſed ; nothing 
to be taken, but all conſecrated ; the Walls fall down ; Men, Sm and 
Cattel deſiroyed, 1 5----21. Rahab and her kindred are ſaved, 2 I 5 
Joſbus curſeth the Manwho ſhould rebuild Jericho, 26. : 


N' OW Jericho | was ſtraitly ſhut up #, becauſe of 
the children of Iſrael, none went out,and none 

came in. 

| @ Not only by night, as before, Joſh. 2. 5. but conf} 

ligently. 

2 And the LORD ſaid unto Joſhua,See, I have given 

into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the 

mighty men of valour b, 

6 Who arc in it, reſolved and ready to defend it with their wt- 

moſt ſtrength. 

3 And ye ſhal compaſs the City, all ye men of war, 

aud go round about the City once c : thus ſbalt thou do 

ſix days d. | 

c At convenient diſtance, out of the reach of their Arrows. - 

a Every day once, Thisand the following courſe might ſeem ri. 

diculous and abſurd, and is therefore preſcribed and uſed by God 

that they might learn to take new meaſures of things, and to cx- 

their own valour, or skill, or proÞablemeansg 


x 


+ Heb. 4d 


ſhut up, and 
was ſbut up. 


antly and di- 


= ſucceſs not from 


ut meerly from Gods appoinzment and' blefling ; and in genera}, 


NgT 


emu... 


CneP. 


+ Heb. 
under it. 


26.and I 3 : ( 


17s 


+ Heb. 
under it, 


77 
Vis 


Chap. \ 


not t2 judge of any of God's Inſtitutions by meer carnal reaſon, to 
which divers of their Ceremonies: would ſeem no leſs fooliſh than 
thisa&tion; and thar they might have a full Demonſtration of the 
All-ſufficiency of that God who can do what he pleaſeth, even by 
the moſt contemprible means. 

4 And ſeven Prieſts ſhall bear before the Ark ſeven 
trumpets of rams horns e : and the ſeventh day ye ſhall 


compaſs the city ſeven times, and the Prieſts fhall blow 


with the trumpets. 
e Or, of the Jubilees; (i. e.) ſuch Trumpets wherewith they were 


to ſound in the years of Jubilee, Lev: 25. 9. Either this, or one of 
the other ſix was certainly a Sabbath day ; and it is not material 
which was it, for the Command of the Lord of the Sabbath was ſufh- 
cient to legitimate any Attion. 

5 And ir {ball come to paſs, that when they make a 
long bla f with the rams horns, and when ye hear the 
ſound of the trumpet, all the people ſhall ſhout with a 
great ſhout: and the wall of the city g ſhall fall down-7 
flat þ, and the people [ball aſcend up every man ſtraight 
before him. | 

f As is uſualin the cloſe of muſical ſounds. g Not all of it ; 
which was not only unneceſlary, but inconvenient, and might 
have given the people better opportunity of eſcaping, but only a 
conſiderable part of it where the J/razlites might fitly enter : For 
Rahab's houſe was not overthrown, verſe 22. þ Heb. wnaer zr, 
(i: e.) below the place they ſtood in : Or, #n its place: It was not 


- battered down with Engines, which would have made part of itfall 


out of its place ; but-it fell out without any force, and of its own 
accord, and therefore in the place it did formerly ſtand 1n. 

6 And Joſhua the ſon of Nun called the Prieſts, and 
ſaid unto them, Take up the Ark of the Covenant, and 
let ſeven Prieſts bear ſeven trumpets of rams horns be- 
fore the Ark of the LORD. 

7 And he ſaid unto the people, Paſs on, and compaſs 
the city, and let him that is armed # paſs on before the 


Ark of the LORD. | 


; God would have them armed both for the defence of them- 


. ſelves, and the Ark, in caſe the enemies ſhould make a ſally upon 


them, and for the Execution of the Lord's vengeance upon that 
City.; 
| 4 "And it came to paſs when Joſhua had ſpoken unto 
the people,that the ſeven prieſts bearing the ſeven trum- 
pets of rams horns paſſed on before the LORD, & blew 
with the trumpets: and the Ark of the Covenant of the 
LORD followed them. . 
And the armed men went before the Priefts that 
blew with the trumpets: ſand the F rereward came &, 
after the Ark, the Prie#Fs 1, going on, and blowing with 


the Trumpets. 

k Which being oppoſed to the armed men, may ſeern to note the 
unarmed people, who were deſircous to be ſpeftators of this won- 
derful work. 1 Which is rightly ſupplied here from verſe 4. 

10 And Joſhua commanded the people, ſaying, Ye 
ſhall not ſhout m, nor | make any noiſe with your voice; 
neither ſhall any word proceed out of your mouth, until 
the day I bid you ſhout, then ſhalbye ſhout. 


m Becauſe ſhouting before the time appointed, would be inef- 
fe&ual, and ſo might give them ſome Diſcouragement, and their 


encmies matter of inſulting, IE 
'- Ix So the Ark of the LORD compalſſed theeity, go- 


ing about it once: and they came into the camp;-and 
lpdged in the camp. Tp og 

12 And Joſhua roſe early in the morning, and the 
Prieſts took up the Ark of the LORD. 

12 And feven Prieſts bearing ſeven trumpets of rams 
horns before the Ark ofthe LORD, went on continually, 
and blew with the trumpets : and the armed men went 
before them, but the rereward came after the Ark of 
the LORD, rhe Prieffs going on and blowing with the 
Trumpets. | 

14 And the ſecond day they compaſled the city once, 
and returned into the camp 2 fo they did fix days. 

15 Andit came to paſs on the ſeventh day, that _- 


roſe early about the dawning of the day, and compal- | 


{ed the city after the ſame mannei ſeven times: only on 
that.day they compaſſed the city ſeven times. 

16 Andit came to paſs at the ſeventh time,when the 
prieſtsblew with the trumpets,Joſhua ſaid uncothe people, 
Shout », for the LORD hath given you the city. 


» To teſtifie your Faith in God's promiſe, and thankfulneſs for | 


this glorious Mercy, and to encourage your ſelves and Brethren, 


_ and to ſtrike a terrour into your enemies. 


17 And the city (tall be F accurſed o, eves it, and all 
that «re therein, to the LORD p : only Rahab the hat- 


.2, lot ſhall Jive, ſhe, and all that «re with ber in the houle, 


becauſe *ſhe hid the meſſengers that we ſent. 
0 (i. e.) Devouted to utter deſtrution; Levit. 27.21, 19» Dent. 


12. This he ſpake by inſtin& or dire&ion from God, as is evident || 
from 1 Kings 16. 34. f Partly becauſe the firſt-fruits were appropri- | 
ated to God ; Partly leſt the foldiers being glutred with the ſpoil of þ 


+ this rich City, ſhould grow ſenſual and ſluggiſh intheir work; and 


partly to ſtrike the greater terrour into the reſt of their enemies. 


£0 $H VU 4. 


take of the accurſed thing, and make the camp of Irael 


a curſe 9, and trouble it. 


might take what occaſion he ſaw fit to infli& this puniſhment. _ 
19 But all the filver, and gold, and veſlels of braſs and 
iron 7, are | conſecrated untothe LORD s: they ſhall 
come into the treaſury of the LORD x. x 
r Except that of which Images were made, which were to be 
utterly deſtroyed, Exod. 32. 20. Deut. 7. 25. 5 Being firſt made to 
paſs through the fire, Numb. 31. 22, 23. 


uſe of any private perſon or Prieſt. 

20 Soche people ſhouted when the Priets blew with 
the Trumpets: and it came to paſs when the people 
heard the ſound of the Trumpets, and the people ſhout- 
ed with a great ſhout, that * the wall fell down + flat, 
ſo that the people went up into the city, every man 
ſtraight before him, and they took the city. 

21 And they utterly deſtroyed all that was inthecity, 
both man and woman, young and old #, and ox, and 
ſheep, and aſs, with the edge of the ſword. 

% Being commanded to do ſo by the Sovereign Lord of every 
mans life ; and being informed by God before that the Canaanites 
were abominably wicked, and deſerved the ſevereſt puniſhments. 
As for the Infants, they were guilty of Original ſin, and otherwiſe 
at the diſpoſal of their Creator, as the clay is in the hands of the 
Porter ; bur if they had been wholly innocent, it was a great fa- 
vour to them to take them away in infancy, rather than reſerve 
them to thoſe dreadful calamities which thote who ſurvived them 
were liable to. 5 

22 But Joſhua had ſaid unto the two men that had 
ſpied out the country, Go into the harlots houſe x, and 
bring out thence the woman, and all thar ſhe hath, * as 
ye ſware unto her. | | 

x Which, together with the wall upon which. it leaned, was left 
ſtanding, either by a ſpecial favour of God to her, or for the rea:z 
ſoh alledged upon, verlie 5. 

23 And the young men that were ſpies, went in,and 


her brethren,and all that ſhe had: and they brought out 
all ther kindred, & left them without the camp of Iſrael y; 


3 Till they were cleanſed from the impurities of their Gentile 
ſtate, and inſtrufted in the Jewiſb Religion, and ſolemnly admitted 
into that Church in the uſual way, to which Rahab's good Counſel 
and Example had doubtleſs very much prepared them; and this 
ſtupendious work of God confirmed their purpoſes. 


24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was 
therein: only the ſilver, and the gold, and the veſſels 
of braſs, and of iron, they put into the treaſury of the 
houſe of the LORD. 

25 And Jolbra ſaved Rahab the harlot alive z, and 
' her fathers houſhold, and all that ſhe had: and be dwel= 
leth in Iſrael, evez unto this day, becauſe ſhe hid the 


meſſengers which Joſhua ſent to ſpy out Jericho. 
z For the general command of rooting out the Cananites, ſeems 
to have had ſome exception, in caſe any of them had fincerely 


ted themſelves to the 1/-aelites, as we ſhall ſee hereafter. 


ing, * Curſed be the man before the LORD, thac riſeth 
up and buildeth e this city Jericho,he ſball lay, the foun- 
dation thereof in his firſt-born, and-in his youngeſt ſor 
ſhall he ſec upthe gates of it d. 


t t To beemployed whol- 
ly for the ſervice or uſes of the Tabernacle, nor to be applicd to the 


26 C And Joſhua adjured them 2 at that time, ſay- 


q By provoking God to puniſh them for your ſin, ia which they 
may be one way or other involved; or at leaſt upon the occaſion of 
your ſin ; For to ſpeak properly, God will not (the caſe of Adams fin 
only excepted) puniſh one man for the ſin of another, as he hath 
oft declared; but the whole Camp having ſins of their own, God 


+ Heb: 
holineſs. 


& 


Heb 
30. 


+ Heb. 


under it; 


*Chap. 2. 


14. Hebr, 
rx: q8; * 


brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and + 1:6: 
families 


and ſeaſonably caſt of their idolatry and wickedneſs, and ſubmirs - 


- 


IG. 34. 


—_ 


»* 
. 


3 Or, made them"to ſwear ; cauſed the people, or ſome in the name 
of all, to ſwear for the-preſent and ſucceeding Generations,and to 
confirm their Oath by a*curſe. 6 (i.e.) * From God's preſence, 
and by his ſentence,as they are ſaid to caf# lots before the Lord, Joſh. 18. 
8, 10, 7. e. expefting the Deciſion from God. He intimates, thar 
he doth not utter this in a Pafſſion,-or upon a particular ' diſlike of 
that place, but by divine Inſpiration, as appears from 1 Kings 16. 34. 
God would have the ruines of this ciry remain as a ſtanding monu= 
ment of God's Juſtice againſtthis wicked and idolatrous people, and 
of his Almighry Power in deſtroying ſo great and-ſtrong a City by 
ſuch contemptuble means. c (i.e.) That ſhall attempt or endavouy 
to build it. So this Curſe is reſtrained to the Builder, but no way 
belongs to thoſe who ſhould inhabit it after it was built, as is evi- 
dent from 2 Kings 4. 18. Luke 19. i, 5.” 4(i. e.) He ſhall loſe all his 


' Children in the work, the firſt ar the beginning, others in the pro4 


greſs of it by degrees, ind the youngeſt in the cloſe of ir, whery 


the Gates uſe to be ſet up, This was fulfilled, r Kings 16. 34. 


27 So the LORD was with Joſhua; and his fame was 
noiſed throughout all the countrey. | 


CHAP. VII 


Achan takes of the accurſed and devouted things-:- God is angry with Iſrael; 
1: Joſhua ſends 3000 men againſt Ai: They flee, and 36 are ſlain, 
2 5. Joſhua complains ro God: Who diſcovers the cauſe, ani 
enjoins a Lot, 6mm 15. Achan is found guilty: Joſhua's Advice 


and his Confeſſion, 16= -21. He and his are ſfloned and burnt; The 


UT the children of Ifracl! 


z committed a treſpaſs ia * Chap: 


ih 


- 


1 King: 


1 
: 
#1 


k1 
177 
gl |! 


411414 
Wt 


Chap. Viz 


. Ii. if if 


”- 
— SD ESC ace rereoene—oc— D= mo 


3 lace named the valley of Achor, ,22==—26. 
"Dent 7. . 18 And ye, *'in any wife keep your ſelves from the ac- B 
I curſed thing, leſt ye make your ſelves accuried; when ye 


22. 20, 
1 Chrog. 


3 2; P- 


| 
| the accurſed thing 5: -_ * Achan the fon of Car- 
SL 3 m1 


3 


0 | 1p. VII. | 

206 FR mi, the ſon of Zabdi c, the ſon of Zerah 4 of the tribe 

WITTE! of Judah, took of the accurſed thing: and the anger of 
BU 2tt: the LORD was kindled againſt the children of Iſrael e. 

a (i e.) One of them, by a very uſual Synecdoche or Enallage, 
as Gen..$. 4. and 19. 29- and Marth. 26. 8. where that 1s aſcribed to 
the Diſciples, which belonged to Judas only, John 1244. 6 (1. e. 
In taking ſome of the forebidden and accurſed goods. c Called, 
alſo Zimri, x Chron. 2. 6. d Or, Zarah, who was Judah's immedi- 
ate Son, Gen. 38. 30. who went with Judah into Zgypt: And ſo 
for the filling up of the 256 years that are ſuppoſed to come be- 
tween that and this time, we muſt allow chan to be now an Old 
man, and his three Anceſtors to have begotten each his ſon ar about 
Go years of age ; which at that time was not incredible nor unuſu- 

' al. e Whydid God puniſh the whole Society for this one man $ 
fin ? Arſw, All of them were puniſhed for their own fins, whereof 
each had a ſufficient proportion ; but God took this occaſion to 1n- 
fli& the puniſhment upon the Society, partly becauſe divers of them 
might, be guilty of this ſin, either by coveting what 
did, or by concealing of his fault, which it 1s robable could nor 
be unknown to others ; or by not ſorrowing for it, and endeavour- 
ing to purge themſelves from it : Partly ro make fin the more hate- 
ful ; as bring the cauſe of ſuch dreadful and publick judgements : 
And partly to oblige all the members of every Sociery to be both 
more circumſpe& in the ordering of their own aftions, and more 
diligent to watch over one another, and to prevent the miſcarriages 
of their Brethren, which is a great Benefit and Bleſſing to them, 
and to the whole Society, and worthy to be purchaſed by a ſharp 


n 
TT 4 


he a&rally | 


7 OSHVU A 


affliction upon-the Society. : 
2 And Joſhua ſent men from Jericho to Ai f, which 


ſpake unro them, ſaying, Go up and view the countrey, 


and the men went up and viewed Ai, 
f Called Hai, Gen. 12. 8. and Aijah, Nehem. 11. 31. They were 
, Not to go into the City of 41, but inro the Countrey bordering and 
belonging to it, and there to underſtand the ſtate and quality ofthe 
place and people. g So the Hebrew im is wſed, Gen. 25. 11. and 3s. 
4. Judges 9.6. and 18.3. and 19. 11. h. A City or Town diſtinet 
from, but nigh unto Berhel, though Berhel was afterwards by alluſt- 


Compare Gen. 12. 8, Joſ. 8. 9, 12. 


+ Heb: 
about two 
thouſand 
men, 0r 
about. three 
thouſand 
men. 


thouſand men go up &, and-ſmite Ai, and make nor all 


the people to labour thither, for they are but few. 

k Which was done by the wiſe Contrivance of Divine Providence, 
that their fin might be puniſhed, and they awakened and re- 
formed with as little hazard, and miſchief, and reproach, as might 
be: For if the defeat of theſe cauſed fo great a conſternation in 
Joſhua, it is eaſic to gueſs what dread, and confuſion, and de'pair, 
it would have cauſed in the people, if a great Hoſt had been de- 
defeated. 

4 S0 there went up thither of the people about three 


thouſand men, and they fled I before the men of Ai. 
Not having their uſual Courage to ftrike a ſtroke, which was a 
plain Evidence that God had foreſaken them ; and an uſeſul in- 
ſtruftion, to ſhew them whar weak and inconſiderable Creatures 
they were when God left them; and that it was God, nor their 
_ valour, that gave: the Canaanites and their Land into their 
ands. | 
5 And the men of Ai fmote of chem about thirty and 


+ Or, in fix men 2 for they chaſed them from before the gate. 
| Aorad. even unto Shebarim, and ſmote them in the T going 
| down #2: wherefore the heart of the people melted, and 


became as water 0. | 
m A dear Victory to them, whereby Iſrael! was awakened, and 
reforined, and reconciled to their God and Shield, and they hard- 
ned to their own ruine. » By which it ſeems it was a down-hil] 
- way to,Jericho, which was nearer Jordan. o Soft and weak, and ful) 
of uGuarion and rrembling. } 
+. *6 © And Joſhua rent. his Clothes p, and fell to the 
earth upon his face q, before the Ark of LORD, until 
the 'even-tide r, - he, and the elders of Iſrael, and pur 


duſt upon their heads 5. 

' p In teſtirfiony of great ſorrow, as Gen.37.34. and 44. 13. for the 
loſs felr, the conſequent miſchief feared, and the fin which he ſu. 
ſpeed. 9 Indeep humiliation and fervent ſupplication. » Con- 
tinuing the whole day. in Faſting and Prayer. f As was uſualin 
caſe of grief and aſtoniſhment, 1 Sam. 4. 12; 2 Sam. t. 2, and 13. 19. 
Jon, 3.'6. Mich. 1.10. 1 | | 

...7 And Joſhua ſaid,” Alas, O LORD GOD ; where- 
fore haſt thou art all brought this. people over Jordan r, 
to deliver ws into the hand of the Amorirte todeſtroy us? 
would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the 


other ſide. Jordan. | | 

t This and the following Clauſe, though well intended, and 
offered to God only, by 'way of Expoſtulation and Argumeat, yet 
do favour of Humane | Infirmity, and fall ſhort of that reverence, 
and modeſty, and ſubmiſſion, which he owed to God ; and are 
mentioned as inſtances, that the holy men of God were ſubje& to 
like paſſionsand infirmities with other men. 


8 O LORD, what'ſhall I ſay -, when Iſrael xturn- 


+ Heb: Eth their | backs before their Enemies ? 


necks. 
| fingled out of all Nations for his-own Peculiar. 


land ſhall hear of it, -and 


cutoff our name om. che earth ; and 
do unto thy great 1 


what wilt thou 
ame y ? | | 


3s beſide g Beth-aven b, on the eaſt-ſide of Bethel 5, and 


on called Beth-aven, Heſ. 4. 15. and 10.5. Compare Sol. 28. 12. # 


! 
{ 


3 And they returned to Joſhua, and ſaid unto him, | 
Letnot all the people go up 3 but ler | about two orthree | ſome ſort contrafted by this accurſed fat, and prepare your ſelves 


# In anſwer to the reproaches caſt by. our-inſulting enemies u-| 

on us,” and upon thy Name: x Gods own people, which he hath | | k 
Foled'out ws | © | Zerah, of the tribe of Jndah was taken. 
9g For the Canaanite,' and all the inhabitants of the | | 
all environ us round, and{| 
' pray thee, 


Chap. VI. 


y Which will typot this occaſion be blaſphemed and charged 
with inconſtancy, unkindneſs, and unfaithtulneſs to thine own 
people, and with inability to reſiſt them, or to do thy people that 
good thou didſt intend them. - Compare Exod. 32. 12. Numb. 14. 13. 
Deut. 33.27. Joel. 2. 17. 


10 \ Andthe LORD ſaid unto Jothua, Get thee up; 
wherefore # lieft thou thus upon thy face z ? + Heb 
z This bufineſs is not to be done by unaCtive ſupplication, bur falles * 
by vigorous endeavours for Reformation. : 
11 I{rael « hath ſinned, and they have alſo tranſgreſ- 
ſed my covenant b which I commanded them: for they 
have even taken of the accurſed thing c, and have al.ſo 
ftollen d, and diſſembled e alſo, and they have put iz e- 
ven amongſt their own ſtuff f. | 
: a Some or one of them, as before on v. r. 6 (i.e.) Broken the con- 
ons of my Covenant which I have commanded them, and they 
—_ promuſed to perform, wiz. Obedience to all my Commands, 
"= - 19.8. and 24. 79. whereof this was one, not to meddle with 
- c accurſed thing. c Which I charged them not to meddle with. 
(1.e.) Taken my portion which I had reſerved, Joſ. 6. 19. e Co- 
vm the fat mith deep diſſimulJation, and a real, if nct verbal pro- 
4 10n of their Innocency. Poſſibly Achan might be ſuſpe&ed, and 
eing accuſed, had denied it, or was reſolved to deny ir. f Con- 
verted it to their own uſe, and added obſtinacy and reſolvedneſs to 
the crime ; Thus he loads this fin with divers aggravations. 
12 Therefore the children of Iſrael could not ſtand 
before their enemies, but turned their backs before their 
enemies, becauſe they were accurſed g, neither will I 


be with you any more, except ye deſtroy the accurſed 
perſon from among you. 

g ASI warned and threatned them, 5of. 6. 18. they have put them» 
ſelves our of my Prote&ion and Bleſling,and therefore are lyable to 
the ſame deſtruQtion which belongs to this accurſed people. 

13 Up, fanctifie the people, and ſay, Sanctifie your 
ſelves b againſt ro morrow : for thus faith the LORD 
God of Iſrael, There is an accurſed thing in the midit of 
thee, O Ifrael: thou canit nor ſtand before thine enemies, 
untill ye take away the accurſed thing from among you. 

þ Purifie your ſelves from that defilement which you have all in 


to appear before the Lord, asit is moſt probable they were required 
to d..; as 1mploring and expeCting the ſentence of God for the diſ- 
covery and puniſhment of the ſin, and that the guilty perſon might 
hereby be awakened and terrified, and brought ro a free and ſeaſon- 
able confeſſion of his fault. And it is a marvellous thing that Achar 
did not on this occaſion acknowledge his crime ; bur this is to be 
imputed to the heart-hardening power of ſin, which makes men 
grow worſe and worſe; Partly to his pride, being loath to take to 
himſelf the ſhame of ſuch a miſchievous and infamous a&ion ; Part- 
ly to his ſelf-flattering and vain conceit, whereby he might think 
many others were guilty as well as he, and ſome of them might be 
taken, and he eſcape; And partly to the juſt Judgement of God, 
whereby he blinds and hardens ſinners to their own ruine. See a like 
inſtance, Marth. 26. 21, 22, 25. 

14 In the morning therefore ye ſhall be brought ac- 
cording to yourtribes: and it (hal be that the rribe which 
the LORD taketh 3, ſhall come according tothe families 
thereef: and the family which the LORD ſhall take, 

{hall come by houſholds: and the houſholds which the 
LORD thall take, ſhall come man by man. 

 # Which ſhall be diſcovered or declared guilty by the Lor, which 
is diſpoſed by.the Lord, Prov. 16. 33. and Sch Gon to be caſt in 
the Lords preſence before the Ark. Of ſuch uſe of Lots, ſee 1 Sam. 
I4. 41, 42. Jon. 1.7. As 1.26, 

15 And it (ball be,zhbat he thatis taken withthe accurſed 
thing, (hall be burnt with fire &, he and all that he hath 
:: becauſe he hath tranſgreſſed the covenant of theLORD, + Or, , 
and becauſe he hath wroughc + folly »s in Iſrael z. 

k As perſons and things accurſed were to be. See Numb. 15: 30, 
35. Deur. 13.16. 1 His Children and Goods, as is noted verſe 24. 
according to the Law, Deut. x3. 16. m So fin is oft called in Scrip- 
cure, as Gen. 34. 7. Judges 20. 6, &c, in oppoſition to the idle opini- 
on of ſinners, who commanly eſteem it to be their wiſdom and inte- 
reſt. 7 (i e.) Among the Church and people of God who had ſuch 
excellent Laws to dire& them, and ſuch an All-ſufficient and graci- 
ous God to provide for them, without any ſuch indire& and un- 
worthy praftices. _ 

16 4 So Joſhua roſe up early in the morning, and 
brought Iſrael by their tribes, and the tribe of Judah 
was taken. | | 

17 And be brought the family oof Judah,and he took 
the family of the Zarhites z and he brought the family 
of the Zarhites, man by man.p, and Zabdi was taken. 

o Either, 1. The Tribe or people; - as the word Family ſometimes 
ſignifies, as Judges 13. 2. Zech. 12, 13. Amos 3- I, . 48s, 3.25. com- 
pared with Revel. 1. 7. Or, 2. The Families, as v. 14. The ſingular 
Number for the Plural, the chief of each of their five families, Numb. 
26, 29, 21. p Not every individual perſon, as is evident from verſe 
18. But every Head of the ſeveral Houſes, or leſſer Families of that 
greater Family of the Zarhites, of which ſee 1 Chron. 2.6. 

18 And he q brought his houſhold, man by man, and, 
Achan the ſon of Carmi. the-ſon of Zabdi, the ſon of 


q Either Joſbua, or Zabdi by Joſbua's appointment, 


wickeani\. | 


# Heb 
my 


{ Heb.) 
poured, 


19 And Joſhua fajd unto Achan, My fon 7 give, I + Or,g's | 


=" heft done ; hide is not from me, 


glory to the LORD God of. Iſrael 5, and # raj 


make confeſſion unto him, and tell me-now what thou: - 


4 SO 


1 


Apa +4 IAA, D +a ,vz£  Y: -x . a. mA ©. m- So” avs. Aa. as ot ot... os ob 


heed # 


FJ O08 M Chap. VIy,, | 


hap: Yit- | 
ſuch a publick ſcandal and miſchief. And for the burning of Achor i 


» So he calls him, to ſhew, that this ſevere Inquitition and Sen- 


Jr, 


9! 
*|þ 


tence did not proceed from any hatred to his perſon, which he 
loved as a Father doth his Son, and 2s a Prince oughr to do each of 
his Subje&ts. 5 As thou haſt highly diſhhonoured him, now take 
the ſhame and blame to thy ſelf, and aſcribe unto God the Glory of 
his Omniſcience in knowing thy {in, of his Juſtice in puniſhing 
it in thee, and others for thy ſake ; of his Omniporency, which 


waiting for the iſſue of this buſineſs. 


24 And Joſhua, and all Iſrael with him, took Achan 
the fon of Zereh, and the filver, and the garment, and 
the wedge of gold, and his ſons, and his daughtersg, and 
his oxen, and his aſſes, and his theep 5, and his tent, 
and all that he had : and they brorght them unto the 


valley of Achor. 

g But this ſeems hard and unjuſt, and therefore forbidden by 
God himſelf, Deut. 24. 16- Avſw. 1. That Law was given ro men, 
not to God, who certainly hath a more abſolute Right and Sove- 
raignty over men, than one man hath over another. 2. Their 
death was a debt they owed to nature and to their own fins, which 
debr God may require when he pleaſeth; and he could nor rake 
it in more honourable and excellent Circumſtances than theſe, That 
the death of a very few in the beginning of a newEmpire, & of their 
ſettlement in the Land, might be-uſeful to prevent the death of 


many thouſands, who rook warning by this dreadful Example, 


whom, if the fear. of God did not, yet the love of their own, and 
of their dear Children's lives, would reſtrain from ſuch dangerous 
and pernicious praftices. 3. Ir is very probable they were conſci- 
ous of the fa&, as the Jewiſh Doors affirm. If it be pretended 
that ſome of them were Infants, the Text doth nor ſay ſo, but only 
calls them Sens and Daughters. And conſidering that Achan /was an 
old man, as is moſt probable, becauſe he was the fifth perſon from 
Judah, (of which ſee on verſe 1+) it ſeems moſt likely, that rhe Chil- 
dren were grown up, and ſo capable of knowing, and concealing, 
or diſcovering this Fat. Nor doth it follow, that they were not 
guilty, becaule it is nor ſaid ſo; For it is apparent, thar'many Cir- 
cumſtances are omitted in divers hiſtorical Relations in Scripture, 
which ſome-times are ſupplied in other places. þ Which, though 
not capable ofſin, nor of puniſhment properly ſo called, yer as they 
were made for man's uſe, ſo they are rightly deſtroyed for man's 

ood; And being daily killed for our bodily food, it cannot ſeem 

range to kill them for the Inſtru&ion of our minds, that hereby 
we might learn the deteſtable and contagious nature of fin, which 
involves innocent Creatures in its plagues ; And how much ſorer 
puniſhments are reſerved for man, who having a Law given to him, 
and that excellent gift of Reaſon and Will to reſtrain him from the 
tranſgreſſions of it, his guilt muſt needs be unſpeakably greater, and 
therefore his ſuffering more ſevere and terrible. Further, by this 
enumeration it appears, that he had no colour of neceſſity to in- 
duce him to this fa&, but was wholly inexcuſable. 

25 And Joſhua ſaid, Why haft thou troubled us? the 
LORD ſhall trouble thee this day. And all Iſrael ſtoned 
him with ſtones z, and burned them with fire, after they 
had ſtoned them with ſtones k. 

3 And burned him with fire; which is eaſily underſtood of both 
out of the following words, and from God's Command to do ſo, 
verſe 15. which doubtleſs was here executed. k Queſt. How could 
both theſe Deaths be inflicted upon them > Avſw. It ſeems they 
were ſtoned to death, which was the puniſhment of ſuch offenders, 
Lev. 24. 14. Numb. 15. 35. .and not burned to death ; and there- 
fore the ſtoning only of Achan is mentioned here, and- nor his 
burning : And God would have their dead Carkaſſes burned to ſhew 
his utmoſt deteſtation of ſuch perſogy as bieak forth into ſins of 


commanded verſe 15. Ir ſeems not likely ro be meant of his burn- 
ing alive, becauſe that burning is common to him, and all that he 


hath, as is there expreſſed ; bur of the burning cf his dead Carkaſs, 


and other lifeleſs things, as the manner was with accurſed things, 
Deut, Il3. 16. 


26 And they raiſed over him a great heap of ſlones / 


mighty men of valour, and ſent them away by night. 

c (i.e,) To confider and conclude abour this Expedition of go« 
ing againſt 4/; not as if all the people of war did a&ually go ups 
which was both unneceflary and burdenſom, and might hinder 


-their following deſign: Bur it ſeems to be reſolved by Joſbua and 


all the Council of War, That the 3ooco here following ſhould be 


ſelefed for the Enterprize. Either 1+ The 30000 now mentioned; 


Or, 2. Peart of them; To wit, Such as were to lie in wait, 
as ſeems moſt probable both from the next verſe, which limits it 
ro thoſe who were to /ie in wait, and from verſe 9. where what is 
here mentioned «©nly by anticiparion, is aftually put in execution ; 
and it is ſaid of them that were ſent forth, that they went to lie in am- 
buſh, and did ſo; And theſe were only 52509 men, as is expreſſed 
verſe 12. And the only inconvenience of this Expoſition is, That 
the Pronoun Relative them, 1s pur without, or before its Anteces 
dent, which is lef: to be gathered our of the following words, which 
1s not unuſual in the Hebrew Tongue,as plainly appears from Exod, 
14. '9. Numb. 18. 9,and 24. 17. Pſal. 87. 1. and 105. 19. and 114, 
2. Prov. 7.8. and 14. 26. 


was obſtrudted by thee ; and of his ig; = COON his | unto this day : ſothe LORD turned from the fierceneſs * Us Ox: 
Rn eby _ Fe" >" Bo pennry ty, To om his anger : wherefore the name of thar place was cal- ,_';;. © 
2o And Achan anſwered Joſhua, and ſaid, Indeed, I led, * the valley of F Achor ” unto this day. | + Thar is, 
. re mentioned, that #reuble, 
h faad 2 | the LORD » God of Iſrael x, and ! As a monument of the ſin and judgment here d, that #rouble 
ave nned 7 again 5 others mighr be inſtrufed and warned by the Example; and as a 
thus and thus have I done. brand of infamy, as Joſh. 8. 20. 2 Sam. 18. 179. m Or, thewalleyof . 

5 He ſeems to make a ſincere and ingenuous Confeſſion, and | ;944/e, from the double trouble expreſſed, verſe 25: 
loads his fin with all juſt Aggravations. « Againſt hisexpreſs Com- C H A Þ. VIIL | 
mand, and _ Rights, _— a wage regs on le hope men God puts new courage into Joſhua : Commands him to go and beſiege Ai, pro= 
who hath choſen me and all Jae! to be the peop P miſing he ſbould rake it, 1,2.” Tye Stratagem whereby it is taken. 3. I 
Love and Care. s te Dolndlceath is burnt, 5 22. The King is taken priſoner : The inhabitants areput 

21 When [ ſaw 7 among the ſpoil a good y DAaDbyion! to the ſword : The cattel and goods ſpoiled : The King is hanged, 23 —29, 

Heb. garment 2, and two hundred ſhekels 4 of {11ver, and a T' Joſhua builds an Altar, 30, Offers thereon, 31. Writes the Law on 

mgut wedge of gold, of fifty (bekels weight :, then l coveted Stones, 32. - and its Bleſſmgs and curſes are read before the People, 
chem, and took them, and behold, they are hid in the | BIS 7 Gp 5g nco Jolkua, * Fear noe. nes. * Deutt: 
earth in the midſt of my tent, and the ſilver underit 6. A ther be cd: obo h ms I 21. & 7. 

3 He accurately deſcribes the progreſs of his ſin, which began : -( JE@: tAKEAI the PEOPIE Of WAT 18. 
at his eye, which he permitted to gaze and fix upon them, which with thee a, and arile and go up to Ai; fee, I have gi- ' 
inflamed his deſire, and made him cover them ; and that deſire put | ven into thine handthe king of Ai, and his people, and 
him upon Attion, and made him #ake them ; _ — _— re- | his City, and his land. 4 
Which were Lompoſtd rich great art with divers colours, and of | ,, 2 2%5"1Y+ © Arengrhen them agzinſt rhoſe fears which cheir lat 

"9 deteat had wrought 1n them ; and partly that all of them might be 
Ee erent Fn ny Larin Haſs 3s To wit, in | bars ofthis haſt ſpoil, and thercoy be encouraged eo proceed in 
| - . . ; 'ork. ak e were not to go, becauſe the 
gt not " P57 - = 14 _ O—_ PREY might have hindred them in the following Stratagem; And it _ 
bf vgs, apt ” _ D naecr ) ; oy fit _ _ EY _ "a TURE row owes hazards, ſhould 
: av recedency an 

' 22 SO Jothua ſent meſſengers c, and they ran 4 unto y wes And thou ut dba Ai b and he King, as thou + 644, 6 
_ _ and behold, it e was hid in his tent, and the | 1:46... * Jericho and her King c 2 * only A fooll 0 ap. 6. 
HVET Under It. 

c That the truth of his Confeſſion might be evidenr and unqre- — (> rag 19190 99 = _ for a prey un-_ — 
ſtionable, which ſome, peradventure migh: think was forced from your  1ay Ne m u or the City behindit. 2%. 44+ 
him. dPartly longing to free themſelves and all : he people from the 4 (i.e:) The City and People of 47. c (*. e.) Overcome and de- 
curſe under which they lay: and partly that none of Achans Relations ſtroy them. This was enjoyned par tly rochaſtiſe their lait Inſolence, 
or others might get thither before them, and take away : hoſe things. and the triumphs and þlajphcmies which doubtleſs their ſucceſs proa 
e (1.e.) The parcel ofthings mentioned verſe 21. and ry _—— pouuy vey" nes moons ng wit 

: : k L Sruine, and had been much. 

br And they cook them Ga ur of _ _ O— abared by the late ſucceſs of 4;; and their confidence and expeQati« 

, an brought them unto Joſbua,and unto a U1GTICN | on of further and greater fucceſs much raiſed, ; 
Heb.) of Iſrael, and Þ laid them our before the LORD f. SO joilua arole, and all the people of war, ro go 
pred, f Where Joſhua and the Elders continued yer in their Aſſembly, | 15*$,04;inft Aj ct And Joſhua choole out thirty thouſand 


4 And he commanded them «, ſaying, Behold, ye . 


ſhall lie in wait againſt the cicy, ever behind the city 3 
20 not very far from thecity, bar be yeall ready : 


d the ſame party laſt ſpoken of verſe 3. even the 5000 mention= 
ed verſe 12. This hiſtorical Narration ſeems obſcure and intricate, 


at firſt view to make three parties, one of 30000, verſe 3. one of 


5000, verſe i2. which may ſeem to be two ſeveral Ambuſhes ; and 


a third of all the people, verſes 5. 11. Bur ifir be more narrowly 


and confiderately obſerved, it will appear, that there are only two 
parties ingaged in the taking of 47, and but one Ambuſh, as plain- 
ly appears by comparing verſe 9. ( which manifeſtly ſpeaks of tha 
party which is mentioned verſe 3.) with verſe 12. which ſpeaks on- 
ly of 5000, which is juſtly ſuppoſed to be a part of thoſe 30009 
named verſe 3. and that part which was to 'ie in ambuſh ; unleſs we 
w:ll tuppoſe that there were two Ambuſhes, one of ;0000, and the 
other of 5000, both lying in wait in the ſame quarter, even between 
Bethel and 4i, on the weft ſide of 4i, the only place where the Am- 
buſh lay, as is ſaid borh verſe g. and 12, 13. whicl: ſeems abſurd 
and incredible. And beſides, in the execution of this Command, 
there is mention but of one Ambuſh, verles 12, 13, 14, 19. ans they 
are ſaid to coniiſt only of (009, verſe 12. and they only take and 
burn the Ciry, verſe 19. ſo that the orher ſupp: ſed Ambrſh of 30000 
is perſe&ly vanithed and loft, and did nothing in this work; which 
alſo is ve:y improbable: And therefore, that 30000 verſe y. are the 
ſame who are called the pe ple, and the people of war that were with Joſhua, 


verſes «, 11. which is pirched oh the North-ſice of 4, verſes 11, 13. 
as the Ambuſh did on the Weſt-fide; but for any other ſide of the 


City, or a third party pl:ced elſe-where about Ai, we read not one 
word; .and therefore it may well be preſumed there were no more 
imployed to take it. 


5 And 1, and all the people that are with me, will 
approach unto the-city : and it ſhall come to paſs, when 
they come out againſt us, as at the firſt, that we f will 


. flee before them. 
e Or, that ſhall be; For at preſerit he ſent them away, v. 9. _ 
F ; 


L 4 


. 
1 
[13 
| 
x 
| | 
[1 
; 


) 
bY - 


Rs 


—IF B- 7.2. Gs wo BE ATE AG re EA OT TOE: at. 


> 


+ Or, ff 
Ali. 


+ Heb: 
their lying 
in wait. 


Map. Vim. 


them. 


| yr = the people &, 
0 


vere With him mw, went up, and drew nigh, and came 


' night into the midft of the valley p. 


| Was 'arly in the morning, 'as is faid'v. 10. forit ſeems moſt probable, 


_ "upon foſe wp eavly to fight withthem, v. 14. Though others conceive 


*that they haſted, and roſe up early, and the men of the 
*behind the City. 


fame 


- wards or inſight of that- plain or valley in which the 1/r2elires were, 


; + 0- 


the next morning followed them, ahd joined himſelf with them, 
verſes 10, 11. f IT and the 25000 with me. ; 

6 C For they will come our after us) till we t have 
drawen ther from the city ; for they will ſay, They flee 
before as, as at the firſt: therefore wee will flee before 


7 Then. ye ſhal riſe up from the ambuſh f, and ſeize 
xipon the city * for the LORD your God will deliver 
it into your hand. 

f. To wir, upon the ſignal given, of which verſe 18. | , 

8 And it thall be when ye have taken the city, 947 
ye fhall ſer the city on fire g : . according to the com- 
mandmentr of the LORD (hall ye do. See, I have com- 


HU 4 
ſuch caſes; God alſo blinding his mind, and infatuat ing him, 
he uſeth to do with thoſe which he intends to deſtroy. 

I5 And Joſhua and all Itrael made as it they were 
beaten before them.s, and fled by the way of the wil- 
derneſs x. 

# (i. ce.) Fled from them, as it were for fear of a ſecond blow : 
And peradventure ſome of them might be wounded, though none 


were killed ; and might make thar the prerence of their flecing 


away. x Which lay between 4 and Jericho, whither they now 
ſeemed to flee. 


16 And all the people y that were in Ai, were called 
together-ro purſue after them, and they purſued after 


Joſhua, and were drawn away from the city. 
y To wit, all that were able to bear arms, for old men and 


manded you. 
£ To wit, part of it, 
For the whole City was not burnt now, 
verle 28. 3 EY 
5 Joſhua therefore ſent them 5 forth, and they went 
to lie in ambuſh, and abode between Bethel and Ai, on 
the weſt-ſide of Ai; But Joſhua lodged that night among 
the people z. 
be Neg fams / party deſigned by the Pronoun them, verſe 3. of 
which ſee the notes there. - ; Heb. that people, ro wit, the people of 
war, as they are called verſe 11. to wjt, the main body of that hoſt 
conſiſting or 30000. : : p 
x0 And Joſhua roſe up early in the morning, and 
and went up ; he, and the elders 


Ifrael /, before the people to Ai. | 
& Heb. that people, not all the people of Iſrael; which was need- 
Jefs, and required more time than could now be ſpared ; but the 
reſt of that hoſt of 30000, whereof 5000 were ſent away ; and now 
the remainder are numbred, partly to ſee whether ſome of them 
had nbt withdrawn themſelves, taking the advantage of the nighr, 
and ofthe defign of laying an ambuſh ; and partly that ir might be 
evident, that this work was done without any loſs of men, and 
thicteby they might be encouraged to truſt in God, and to proceed 
vigoroully and reſolutely in their work. / Either, 1. The Milita- | 
ry Elders, the chief Commanders of his Army. ' But they !eem to 
included in the:30009 verſe 3. which are ſuppoſed to be furniſh- 
». and led by their ſeveral Commanders; and ſuch perſons are 
ſcarce ever called the Elacrs of Iſrael. Or rather 2. The chief Magi- 
ſtrates and Rulers of J#ael under Joſbus, who are commonly f' cal- 
led; and theſe, I ſuppoſe went with Joſbza, and with the Army, to 
take care thar the cattel and the ſpoil of the Ciry, which was given 
by God to all {rael for a prey, verſes 2, 27- might be juſtly and c- 
ually divided berween thoſe that went to barte], and the relt of 
epeople, according to the Example and Preſcript, Numb. 31. 27. 
and thar they who were preſent and affiſtant in the taking of that 
, might nor ingroſs the whole ro themſelves, as is uſual for 
Soldiers in tlioſe cafes to do. 


1z And all the people, ever the people of war that 


as aſign to their Brethren of their ſucceſs; 
but afterwards, as is faid 


before the ciry, and pitched on the north-ſide of Ai : 
now rhere-asa valley between them and Ai. : 

# To wir, the 30000 mentioned verſe 3. or the moſt of them. 

12 Arid he took # abour five thouſand men, and ſet 
them to lie in ambufh berween Bethel, and Ai, on the 
welſt- ſide + of the city. Eo! | 

# 'Or rather, but he had taken, to wit, out of the ſaid number of 
30000, for this is added by way of Recapitulation and further Ex- 
plication of » hat is ſaid in general, verſeg. 
13 And when they had fer the people, ever all the 
hoſt that 4s on the north-ſide of the city, and + their 
liers in wait on the weſt of the city, Jothua went © that 


o To'wit, accompanied with a ſmall part of the hoſt now menti- 
oned, z. e. Very early'in the morning, when it was yet dark, as is ſaid 
3n'alike cafe, Joh. 20. 1. whence it is here called Night, though it 


har all was done in one nights ſpace, and inthis manner; Joſhua 
Conde way chrataduſh by n-ebr, 4 3. and lodgeth that night with 
25000 1tien, vg. /not'far from the city. But'nor able nor willing to 
Neep'all' night, he riſes very early, v. 20. and numbers his men, 
which by the help of the ſeveral Officers was quickly done, and fo 
Sminediately leads them towards 47; and while it was yer duskjſh 
-or night, heigoes into the midſt of the valley, wv. 13.and when the 
"day dawns he is diſcovered by'the King and people' of 4,who there- 
"this was the ſecond night, and ſo the ambuſh had lain hid a-nighr 
Ln day" togerber. But then there might be 'danger of their being 
-difcovered, 'although that danger may 1tceem to be thelefs,-becaufe. 
"Ai might be fhur up, that none might go out nor come in, 'but-by 
order, 'andupon' neceſſity, becauſe of the nearneſs of rheir enemies, 
"3s Fericho formerly was for the ſame reaſon, Joſb, 6. 1. -p Which-was 
iniear the City, thereby roallure them forth. 


L4 


Ta 'And'it came to paſs when the king of Aiſfaw it, 


city went out againſt Iſrael to battel,: he, and all his 
people q, at a tirne appointed r, before the plain s, but 
*Fe wiſt not that there were liers in ainbulb againſt him rc, 
/ q To wit, all his men of war, for the reſt were lefc in 4, v. 16. 
'r At a certain hour agreed upon between the King and People of 4s, 
.*-nd of Bethel roo, who were their Confederates in this Enterprize, 
"as it'may fecmn "from verſe 16. Poſſibly they might appoint the! 
Fat 'of the day on which they had fought againſt Ire! with' 
ſuch good ſuccels, looking upon it as a lucky hour. .s (i. e.) To- 


children wereunfit for the purſuit or fight ; and that they were yer 
lefr, may ſeem from verſes 24, 25. 


17 And there was not a man zleftin Ai, or Bethel &, 
that went not out after Iſrael: and they left the city 0- 
pen, and purſued after Iſrael, | 

z To wit, fit for war. @ Which, being a neighbouring City, 
and incouraged by the former ſucceis, had ſent ſcme Forces to aſ- 
lift them; and now, upon notice ſent to them of the flight of their 
common enemies, or upon ſome other ſignal given, which might 


eaſily be done, having been appointed before-hand, as is uſual inſuch 
caſes, all their men of war join with thoſe of 4 in the purſuit. 


18 And the LORD faid unto Jobua, Stretch out the 
ſpear b, thats in thy hand toward Ai, for I will give it 
into thine hands And Joſhua ſtretched out the ſpear 
that he had in his hand toward the city. 

6 Or, thy bamer : Or there might be ſome banner in the end of 
his Spear. This was preſcribed and praQiſed, Either 1. For a ſign 
to his Hoſt preſent with him, to ſtop their flight, and make head 
againſt the purſuers. Or, 2. For a {1gnal to the liers in wait,as may 
ſcem from verſe 19. who, though they were at ſome diſtance, might 
know this from perions whom they had ſet in ſome high and conve- 
nient places ro obſerve Joſhua's motion, and to give notice from one 
ro anorher, and that ſpeedily, as is common in ſuch caſes, until it 
came to the whole ambuſh. Or 3. As a myſtical roken of God's pre- 
ſence and afliſtance with them, and of their ViQory ; .or as a mean 
by God's appointment contributing to their good ſucceſs, as the like 
poſture of Moſes lifting up his hand, was Exod. 17. 11, 12. which may 
be the reaſon why he continued this poſture till all the enemies 
were deſtroyed, verſe 26, whereas if it had been a ſignal only, it 
was ſuthcient to do it for a little while. I know no reaſon why all 
theſe ends might nor be joined together. 

19 And the ambuſh arofe quickly out of their place, 
and they ran afloon as he had ſtretched our his hand: and 
they entred into the city, and took it, and haſted, and 
ſet the city c on fire. | | 

c (1. e.) Not all of it, asappears both from verſe 28. and becauſe 
then they had loſt that prey which God had allowed them ; bur 
ſome part of it, enough to raiſe a ſmoke, and give notice to their 
brethren of their ſucceſs. 

20 And when the men of Ai looked behind them, 
they ſaw, and behold, the ſmoak of the city aſcended 
up to Heaven, and they had no * power 4 to flee this ; jx.4. 
way, or that way, and the people that fled to the wil- 4, 
derneſs, turned back uponthe purſuers. - 

a Or, place, for ſo the Hebrew word is oft uſed, as Numb. 2. x74 
Neh. 7.4. Job. 37.7. Bſal, 104. 25. 1a. 22. 18. and 56. 5. 

21 And when Joſhua and all Iſrael eſaw that the am- 
buſh had taken the city,and that the ſmoak ofthe city aſe 

ended, then they turned again, andſlew themen of A; 

e (1.e.) All the [raelites there preſent, or all thoſe who ſeemed 
to flee away before. ; 

22 And the'other f iſſuedout of the city againſt them, 
ſo 'they were in the midft of 1ſrae}, ſome on this fide, 
and ſome on that ſide, and they fmore them, ſo thar they , 

* ler none of them remain or eſcape g. De 
f They. whoyzlay in ambuſh, g So their late ſucceſs was a real 7' ® 

muſchicf to them, as being the occaſion of their total wine. 

23 Anditheking-ot Ai they took alive h, and brought 

him to Joſhua. 

h Referving him to a peculiar and more ignominious puniſh- 

ment for the'terror of the other Kings, who were-the chief cauſes 

of all that oppoſition and diſturbance which 1/rae! met with in gains 

ing the Poſſcſſion of the'promiſet'Land. 

24 And it came to paſs when Iſrael had made an end 

of ſlaying all the Inhabitants of Ai, in the field, inthe, 

wilderneſs wherein they -chaſed-them, and when they 

were all fallen on'the edge of the ſword, until they were 

conſumed, that all the Iſraelites returned unto Ai, and 

{more it-; with the edge of the ſword. 

7 (i. e.) The inhabitants of it, the men, who th 

firmity-were unfit for war, and the women, verſe 25. 

25 And ſoit was, hat all that fell that:day, both of 

men and women, weretwelve thouſand,ever ul the men 

of Ai k. 

k Nor ftrily, but largely ſo called, who.were. mow in Ai, el- 

cher as conſtant and ſettled Inhabitants, or as Sojourners and ſuch 

14S came to them for their help, ſuch as being confederare with them, 

are eſteemed as one with them ; for it is evident. that. the men of Be= 

thelare included in this number, verſe r9..the Iaelites who took this 


ut. 


rough-age or, i= 


and who to the other. 


Chap. Vit. f 


* Cha 
a6, 


*Deur. x 
29. and 
.27. 12, 


aumber, being-unable to-diſtinguiſh who-belonged to the one City, | 


26 . For Joſhua drew nothis hand back,wherewith he 


xt ſo they mighr put” themſ#lves in Battel-array. 7 The fotmer 
+ nnd oe 4 kim more Careleſs and ſecure, as is uſual in ' 


{tretched out the ſpear 1, until he had-utterly. deſtroyed 
all the inhabitancs of Ai, ; Y -J-Eithgr 


JO 8H OD 4. Chap. xt. 


In, Chap. VII. | | 
[Either 1, He ceafed not to fight with that Hand, Or 2. Hef 


| # Numb. 


{ame poſture, both ſtretched - out 


his Hand and Spear in the 
kept his Hand and Speai them,and to dire& them 


and lifred up,as a Sign both to encourage 


togo on in the work. See on v. 18. 7 Th 
2” * Only the cattel, and the ſpoil of that city,Iſrael 


6. : 
JT. _ took for a prey unto chemſelves,according unto the word 


: Verſl. 


* Chap. 7. 
ab, 


*Exod.20. 


A 


Deut. 27, 


5: 


9g 


of the LORD, which he * commanded Joſhua. 
28 And Joſhua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for 


ever ww, even a deſolation unto this day. - 

-» Or, for a leng time, as that word oft ſignifies, as Gen. 6s 3. Iſa. 
42.14.For that it was after ſome Ages rebuilt,may ſeem from Nehem: 
11. 31. unleſsthat were another City built near the former, there 
being ſome little difference in the name alſo. ; 

29 Andthe king of Aihe hanged on a tree », until 


even-tide : and afſoon as the ſun wasdown.Joſhuacom- 
manded,that they ſhouid take his carcaſe down trom the 
trees, and caſt it at the entring of the gate ofthe city p, 
and * raiſe thereon a great heap of ftones, that remainerb 


unto this day. 
» He dealt more ſeverely with the Kings of Canaan than with the 
people, partly becauſe the abominable wickedneſs of that people 
was not reſtrained and puniſhed (as it ſhould have been) but coun- 
renanced and encouraged by their evil examples and adminiftrati- 
ons ; and partly becauſe they were. the principal Authors of the 
deſtruftion of their own people, by engaging them in an obſtinate 
oppoſition againſt the 1#-aelites. o According to Gods command in 
that caſe, Deut. 21. 22. p Which place he choſeeither as moſt com- 
modious, now eſpecially when all the city within the gate was al- 
ready turned intro an heap of Stones and Rubbiſh; or becauſe this 
was the uſual place of Judgment; and therefore properto bearthe 
monument of Gods juſt ſentence againſt him, not without refleCti- 
on upon that Injuſtice which he had been guilty of in that place. 
20 Then 9 Joſbua builr an altar” unto the LORD 


God of Iſrael in mount Ebal s. 

9 To wit,after the taking of 47. For they were obliged to do this, 
when they were brought over Jordan into the Land of Canaan, Der. 
11.29.and 27. 2,3.Which is not to be underitood ſtriftly,as if it were 
to be done the ſame moment or day; for it is manifeſt they were 
firſt to be Circumciſed, and to eat the Paſſover,which they did, and 
which was the work of ſome days ; butas ſoon as they had cppor- 
tunity to do it, which was now when theſe two great Frontier Cities 
were taken and deſtroyed, and thereby the Coaſt cleared, and the 
bordering people under great conſternation and confuſion, that all 
the 1ſraehtes might ſecurely march thither. And indeed this work 
was fit to be done as ſoon as might be, that thereby they might re- 
new their covenant with, and profeſs their ſubjeCtien to that God 
by whoſe help alone they could expett Succels in their great and 
difficult enterpriſe. r To wit, for the offering of Sacrifices, as ap- 
pears from the following verſe, and from Deut.27.5,6,7. 5 Why not 
on mount Gerizim alſo; Anſ. Becauſe Gods Altar was to be but in 
one place, Det. 12. 13, 14. and this place was appointed to be 
Mount Ebal,Deut.27.4,5. which alſo ſeems moſt proper for it,that in 
that place whence the Curſes of the Law were denounced againſt 
Sinners, there might alſo be the rokens and means of Grace, and 
Peace, and Reconciliation with God, for the removing ofthe Cur- 
ſes, and the procuring of Gods Bleſſing unto Sinners. | 

21 As Moſes the ſervant of the LORD commanded the 
children of Iſrael, as it is written in the* book of the law 
of Moſes,an altar of whole ſtones, over which no man 
hath lifrup a»yiron ; and they offered thereon burnt-of- 
ferings unto the LORD, and ſacrificed peace-offerings. 

22 Andhe wrote there upon the itones 7 a copy of 
the law of Moſes «, which he wrote in the preſence of 
the children of Iſrael. 

£ Not upon the Stones of the Altar, which were to be rough and 
unpoliſhed, v. 13. but upon other Stones,ſmooth and plaiſtered,as is 
manifeſt from Deur. 27. 2. u Not certainly the whole five Books of 
Moſes, for what Stones and time would have ſufficed for this ! nor 
the Bleſling+ and the Curſes here following, which never are nor can 
without great impropriery be called the Law of Moſes, ſeing they pre- 
ſuppoſe the Law, and the Obſervation or Tranſgrefſion thereof, to 
which they belong, only as rewards of the one, and puniſhments 
of the other : but the moſt weighty and ſubſtantial parts of the 
Law, as may be gathered from the Laws which are mentioned,and 
to the violaters whereofthe Curſes are applied, Deur. 27. 15, &c. 
and eſpecially the Law of the Ten Commandments. 

233 And all Iſrael x, and their e'ders,and officers, and 


their judges ſtood on this ſide theark, and on that ſide y 
before the pricſts and Levites, which bare the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, as well the ſtranger, as he that 
was born among them : half of them over againſt mount 


*Deut. xx, Gerizim 2, and halfofthem over againſt mount Ebal * 


29. and 
E 7, I 2, 


as Moſes the ſervant of the LORD had commanded be- 
fore, that they (bould bleſs a the people of Iſrael. 


x (7. e. ) The whole congregation, old and young, male and fe- 
male, as it follows, v: 35. y ( z. e.) Some on one ſide of it, and 
ſome on the other. z Theſe two places were in the Tribe of E- 
phraim, not far from Shechem, as appears both from Scripture, Veur. 
11. 29, 30. and 27. 12. Juag. 9. 7. and from other Authors who li- 
ved in thoſe parts, as Joſephus and the Jewiſh Do&ors. # Or Curſe, 
which 1s eaſily underſtood out of the following verſe, and from 
Dent. 27.13, &Cc. 

34 Andafterward b he read c all the words of the 
law, the bleflingsand curſings 4, according to all that is 


written in the book of the law e. 
6 Aﬀer the Altar was built, and the Stones plaiftered and writ 
Upon. c(#. e.) He commanded the Prieſts or Levites to read, Deut. 


| 


and above the words of the Law, e He ſaith not, atrording to all 
that was written upen thoſe Stones, but in the Book of the Law,which ſhews 


written upon theſe Stones. | 

; 35 There was not a word of all that Moſes command- 
ed, which Joſhua read not f before all the congregation 
of Iſrael, * with the women and the little ones, and the 
ſtrangers that * were converſant among them g. 

f Therefore he read nct the Bleſſings and. Curſes only, as ſome 
think, but the whole Law, as themanner was when all Iſrael Men 
and Women, were aſſembled together, as we read Deut: +1: 10, 11 
I2. £ i. e. Who were Proſelytes, for no others can be ſuppoſed to 
be with them at this time. : 

ESA P.. IX. | 
The Kings of Canaan hear of Joſhua's exploits; conſult together, and con- 
clude to fight againſt Irael, 1-2, The Gibeonites feigning then 
ſelves to be of a far countrey, obtain a League, 3-==15. The Craft is 
diſcovered ; the Promiſe which was confirmed with an oath remains firm 

I6----20, But for a puniſhment they are condemned to perpetual ſlavery, 

21====27,, WS 
AND it came to paſs when all the kings which were 

on this ſide Jordan,in the hills, and in the valicys 

and in all thecoaſt of the great ſea over againſt Leba- 

non, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite : 

the Perizzite, the Hivite and the Jebulice heard rhereof : 

2 That they gathered themſelves together # to fight 
with Joſhua, and with Iſrael with one * accord. 


intoa league or confederation to do this. 

3 and b when the inhabicantsof Gibeon c heard what 
Jolbua had done unto Jericho, and to Ai, 

b Or,But; for he ſhews that theſe took another and a wiſer courſe 
c A great and royal city of the Hivites, 7of: 10: 2: and 11: 19. ; 

4 They did work wilily,and went and made as if they 
had been ambaſladours #, and took old ſacks upon their 
alles, and wine botries, old and rent, and bound up 

d Sent from a far country, as they ſay, v. 6. ; 

5 And old thoes and clouted upon their feet, and old 
garments upon them ; andall the bread of their provi- 
tion was dry and mouidy : 

6 And they went to Joſhua, unto the camp at Gilgal 
e, and ſaid unto him,andto the men of Iſrael f, We be 
come from a far country : now therefore g make ye a 
league with us. , 

.e The place of their Head-quarters. f To wit, thoſe who uſed 
to meet in Counſel with 7obua, ro whom it belonged ro make 
Leagues, as it here follows, even the Princes of the Congregation; 


not the common people, as appears both from v. r5, 18 
from common uſage of all Ambaſſadors, who generally 7K bra or 


word :ſch, here uſed, ſometimes nores men of eminency and digni- 
ty. . g Becauſe we are not of this people, whom, as we are inform- 
ed, you are obliged utterly to deſtroy ; that which appeared ſutf- 
ciently, by the 1/raelites prattice in deſtroying the Amorites beyond 
Jordan, and the people of Zericho and 4i, without anv #lowance for 
Sex or Age ; and by common rumour, and the report of the J/rae- 
lites and other p=rſons who dwelt among them,or had converſe with 
them,as Rahaband all her kindred ; and by the nature ofthe thing 
becauſe they were to poſſeſs that whole Land, and were not to mix 
themſelves with the people of it. 

7 And the men of If{tael ſaid unto the Hivites g,Per- 
adventure ye dwell among us þ, and how ſhal we make 
4 league with you? _ 

g i.e. The Gibeonites who were Hivites, Joſ: 11: 19. hi.e, In 
this Land, and ſo are of that people with whom we are forbidden 
to make any League or Covenant, Exod: 23: 32,33, 34. Deut: 7: 2: 
and 20: 15, 16. : | 

8 And they faid unto Joſhua, We are thy ſervants 5, 
And Joſhua ſaid unto them, Who are ye? and from 
whence come ye &? 

; We deſire a League with you upon your own ferms; we are 
ready to accept of any conditions. & For this free and general con- 
cefſion of theirs gave Joſhua juſt cauſe to ſuſpe& that they were of 
the curſed Canaanites. | 

9 And they ſaid unto him, From a very far country thy 
ſervants are come, becauſe of the Name of the LORD 
I thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all 
that he did in Egypt ». | 

! Being moved thereunto by the report of his great and glorious 
nature and works ; ſo they gave them hopes that they would em- 
brace their Religion. w They cunningly mention thoſe things 
only which were done ſome time ſince, and fay nothing of the di- 
viding of Jordan, nor of the deſtruftion of Jericho and 47, as if they 
_ ſo far off that the fame of thoſe things had not yet reached 
them. : 

10 And* all that he did to the two kings of the Amo- 

rites,that were beyond Jordan,to Sithen king of Heſbbon, 

and to Og king of Baſhan, which was at Aſhtaroth. 
x1 Wherefore our Elders and all the inhabicants of our 


your ſervants, therefore new make ye a league withus. 

12 This our bread we took hot for our proviſion out 
of our houſes, on the day we came forth to go unto 
you : but now behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy. 


27. 14. @ Which words come in not by way of Explication, as if | - | IF 
the words of the Law were nothing elſe beſides the Bleſſings and 13 And theſe bottles of wine which we filled, were 
Curſes ; but by way of addition, to note that thele were read over | Z M new,” 


the miſtake of them that think the ſame things were both read and 


meſſage to, and treat with Princes, not people. And the Hebrew + 


*Deut.3þ || 


12. 
* Heb. 
walked. 


5 
a Not attually, as the following Hiſtory ſhews ; but they entred — 


/ 


"Num. 21: 
24, 33+ 


country,ſpake to us,ſaying,Take Vituals * with you for * Heb. i 
the journey,and go to meet them, & ſay untothem, We are your hand. 


Or, they 


I Ihceived the 


_ _ 


nt ———_——_——— 
Snort ox 


— _ 


I -”_ 


Ee EEO SINE 


> ——— 


ES,  ., NITIY 
«vs —_— OE —_ 
AE 


= e—ers RAY — 
Fr - oro _—I- nk _— 
Soren ut ming =o Im y nr = 
= -nirarthg = ernment PIR ICI ey 
CERES Eh One BS > > rn 
ACE, — - 3 — 


ESL, 
en favs 


eB oem 


> oe oat 7 
PE du 
APE oo ach _— - 
——_ ———  —  —— 


tao mr 
Chimie 
PRI i re  re £2-IG o 


19 fiber by rea 
| ih, of eherr 


ifuals. 


hap. IX. 7 0 8 


new,and behold, they berent : and theſe our garments 
and our ſhoes are become old, by reaſon of the very 


long journey- © 
14 And*the men » took of their vifuals o, and ask- 
ed not counſel at the mouth of the LORD p. 


i. e. The Princes as before v. 79, o Not from their want or any 
defire they could have to ſuch unpleaſant and unwholeſome food ; 
nor in a Ceremony uſual in making Leagues, for that was not now 
done,but in thenext verſe : but that they might examine the truth 
of what they ſaid. p As they ought to have done upon all ſuch 
weighty and doubtful occaſions. So they are accuſed of raſhneſs 
and negle& oftheir Duty. For though it is probable, if God had 
been conſulted, he would have conſented to the ſparing of the Gi- 
beonites ; yet it ſhould have been done with more caution, and an 
obligation left upon them to embrace the true Religion which here 
was omitted. ; 

15- And Joſhua made peace with them, and made a 


league wich them, to let them live 9 + and the princes 


of the congregation {ware unto them. | 
q(4i.e. )That they would not deſtroy them.Some queſtion whe- 
ther this League was lawful and obliging, becauſe it is contrary to 


a poſitive and precedent Law of God, by which they were enjoyned | 


to make no peace with them,bur utterly to deftroy them, Exod.23. 
32.and 34.12,0c.But this law ſeemsto adnurt of ſome exception and 
favourable interpretation,and that raken from the reaſon and ſoul of 
that Law ; which was this, that the 7/raelires might not be tainted 
with their Idolatry and other Abominations by cohabitation with 
them ; and therefore when that reaſon ceaſed,(3. e.)if they were wil- 
ling to relinquiſh their-Poſſeſſions and Idolatry, and other wicked- 
neſs,and to embrace the true Religion, they might be ſpared. And 
tho this Law was delivered in general terms, becauſe God foreſaw 
that the Iſraelites would be moſt prone to err on that hand, by ſpa- 
ring thoſe whom they ſhould deſtroy ; yet that it was to be under= 
ſtood with an exception of Penitents,and true Converts, might ca- 
fily be gathered both from the example of Rahab,and from the Te- 
nor of Divine Threatnings,which though abſolutely delivered, al- 
Jow of this exception ; as appears from Jer. 18,7, 8. Jonah 3. 4. and 
from the great kindneſs and favour which God hath manifeſted un- 
ro all true Penitents, in delivering them from evils threatned to 
them, and inflited upon others; which kindneſs of God we alſo 
are obliged to imitate by vertue of that natural and moral Law of 
God implanted in us, and revealed to us, to which ſuch poſitive 
Commands as this of killing the Canaanites mult give place. An 
that this League was lawful and obliging, may ſeem probable, 1. 
Becauſe Jeſhus and all the Princes npon the review concluded it ſo 
to be,and ſpared them accordingly, v. 19,20,22,23. 2. Becauſe God 

uniſhed the violation of it long after, 2 Sam.21.1. 3. Becauſe God 
is faid to have hardned the hearts of all other Cities, not to ſeek 
Peace with 1/ael,that ſo he might utterly deſtroy them, 7oſ. 11. 19, 
20. which ſeems to imply that their utter Deſtru&ion did not ne- 
ceſſarily come upon them by vertue of any abſolute and perempto- 
ry Command of God to deſtroy them, but by their own obſtinate 


" hardneſs, whereby they negleQed and refuſed to make peace with 


the Iſ-acliter. Obj.This League was grounded upon a Deceit and Er- 
rour of the Perſons,which alſo they had entred a caution againſt,v. 
7. Anſ.Their ſuppoſition that they were Canaanites,was indeed a part 
of the foregoing Diſcourſe, v. 7. and the Jſraelites reſted ſatisfied 
with their An{wer,and believed they were not, and ſo entered into 
the League ; but that League was abſolute,nor ſuſpended upon that 
or any other condition; and the error was not about the perſ'ns, 
but about the country and People to which they belonged, which 


- Was not material to this Contra, no more than itis to a Contra&t 


of Marriage, that rhe one perſon believed the other to be of an<- 
ther Country or Family than indeed they were. 


16 © And it came to paſs atthe end of three days r, 


after they had madea league with them,that they heard 


that they were their neighbours, and har they dwelt a- 
mong them. 

r (7. e.) At the laſt of them, or upon the third day, as it is faid, 
wv. 17. ſo this phraſe is elſewhere uſed, as Deur. 14. 28. and 31. 10. 
Or it may be properly underſtood, that after three days they heard 
this, and on the day after they heard this, they came £0 their Ci- 
mes, asSis faid, wv. 17. . 

17 And the children of Iſrael journeyed,and came un- 
to their cities on the third day : now their cities ere Gi- 


' beon, and Chephirah,and Beeroth,and Kirjath-jearim s. 


a 


F Which Cities were ſubje& to G:beon, which was the royal City, 
Jol. 10. 2. 

18 And the children of Iſrael ſmote them not, be- 
cauſe the princes of the congregation had ſworn unto 
them by the LORD God of Iſrael: and all the congre- 
gation murmured againſt the princes ?. 

t Partly from-that proneneſs which is in people to cenſure the a- 
Qions of their Rulers ; partly becauſe they might think the Prin- 
ces by their.caſhneſs had brought them into a ſnare, that they could 
neither kill them for fear of the Oath, nor ſpare them for fear of 
GodsCommand to the contrary ; and partly from their deſire of 
the poſſeſſion and ſpoil of theſe Cities,of which they thought them- 
ſelves hereby deprived. . 

19 Burall the Princes faid unto all the congregation, 
We have ſworn unto them by the LORD « God of 1\- 
rael: now therefore we may not touch them x. 

u They plead not the lawfulneſs, or the prudence of the ation ; 
but only the Obligation of an Oath; of which, though it was pro- 
cured by Fraud, they perceived the people ſufficiently ſenſible. 
(+. e.) Nor hurt them, as that wordis oft uſed, as Gen. 26. 11. Pſal. 
105. 15. and 144. 5. Or not ſmite them, as is ſaid v. 18. 


' 20 This y we willdotothem : we will even let them 
live, leſt wrath be upon us, becauſe of the breach of 
the Oath which we ſwarse unto them, | 

5 Which follows, v, 27+ | 


” 


H U A. Chap. x. 


21 And the prinees ſaid unto them, Let them live 
( but letthem be hewers of wood, and drawers of water 


unto all the congregation z) as the princes had * pros. + Ver; 
miſed them #5. = 


z 7, e, Let them be publick Servants,and employed in the meaneſt 
Offices and Drudgeries ( ſuch 25 this was, this one kind being pur 
for all the reſt, as it is Dent. 29. 11.) for the uſe and bench of the 
Congregation ; to do this partly for the Sacrifices and Services of 
the houſe of God, as it is expreſſed wv. 23. which otherwiſe the J7aclites 
themſelves muſt have done ; partly for the Service of the Camp or 
body of thepeople; and ſometimes upon occaſion,even to particular 
Iſraelites: whence they are made Bond-men, which is mentioned as 5 
thing diſtin& from their ſervice in the Houſe of God,v.23. And fo they 
are 1n effett ſtripped of all their Poſſeſſions, whereby the min 
ground of the Peoples Quarrel was taken away. a Or, becau{c or 
Jeeing that ( as the Hebrew word ſometimes ſignihes ) :he Princes (7. e. 
we our ſelves, they ſpeak of themſelves inthe third perſon, which 
is very frequent in the Hebrew Language ) had promiſed it to them, to 
wit,that they ſhouid live ; and confirmed their promiſe by an Oath. 


So the Princes ſpeaking here to the People, alledge the Promiſe or 


Oath of the Princes, when they met among themſelves, and apart 
from the People. And this change of perſons may poſſibly ariſe 
from hence, becauſe ſome of the Princes who were preſent in the 
Aſſembly of the Princes, might now be abſent upon ſome occaſion. 
And this clauſe relates not to the next words, which are fitly enclo- * 
ſed within a Parentheſis, but to the foregoing clauſe, let them live, 
becauſe the Princes have promiſed them their Lives. 

22 And Joſhua called for them, and he ſpake unto 
them, ſaying, Wherefore haveye beguiled us, ſaying, We 
are very far from you: when ye dwell among us » 

23 Now therefore ye are curſed b, and there ſhal + + Heb.n; 
none of you be freed from being bondmen c, and hew- «tf 


_ of wood, and drawers of water forthe houſe of my #3": 
od d. 


6 You ſhall not eſcape the Curſe of God which by Divine Sen- 
tence belongsto all the Canaanites, whoare a People devored by God 
to ruine; but only change the quality of it, you ſhall feel thar 
Curſe of Bondage and Servitude, which is proper to your race by 
vertue of that ancient decree, Gen.9. 25. you ſhall live indeed, bur 
iN a poor, vile and miſerable condition. c The Slavery which is 
upon you ſhall be enrailed. to your poſterity. d This only Service 
they mention here, becauſe it was their principal and moſt durable 
ſervitude, being firſt in the Tabernacle, and then in the Temple, 
whence they were called Nethinims, 1 Chron. 9. 2, Ezra 2. 43. 
whereas ther ſervitude to the whole congregation would in a greit 
meaſure ceaſe when the J/-aelites were diſperſed to their ſeveral ha- 
bitations, : 

24 And they anſwered Joſhua, and ſaid, Becauſe it 
was certainly told thy ſervants, how that the LORD thy 
God * commanded his ſervant Moſes,to give you all the * Deut. 7. 
land, and todeſtroy all the inhabitants ofthe land from > *: 
before you,: therefore we were ſore afraid of our lives, 
becauſe of you, and have done this thing. 

25 And now behold, weare in thine hand e : as it 


ſeemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do ff. 

e i.e. In thy power to uſe us as thou wilt. f We refer our ſelves 
ro thee and thy own Piety, and Probity, and Faithfulneſs to thy 
Word and Oath ; If thou wilt deſtroy thy humble Suppliants, we 
ſubmit. 

26 And {odid he untothem,and delivered them out of 
the hand of the children of Ifrael,that they ſlew them nor. 

Z SO as was ſaid, wv. 23. and ſo as here follows. 

27 AndJoſbua made them that day hewers of wood, 
and drawers af water for the congregation, and for the 
altar of the LORD bh, even untocthis day, in the place 
which he ſhould chuſe. | 

hþ By which it appears, .that they were not only to do this Ser- 
vice in Gods Houle, but upon 3ll other occaſions, as the Congre- 
gation needed or required their help. 

HAT 2. 

Five of the Kirgs of Canaan afraid of Joſhua, are angry with the Gibeo- 
nites and wage war againft them, they ſend to Joſhua for Succours, 1--6. 
He Reſcues them, 7---19. Gad caſts down Hail-ſtonesupon the Enemy, 1 1., 
Joſhua Prays to God and commane's the Sun to ſland ſti!l, which it dues 
for the ſpace of a day, 13-=-15. The five Kings hide themſelves in Cavss 
where Joſhua caruſeth them to be ſhut up, afterward: to be brought forth, 
ſcornfully uſed and hanged,and thrown into a Cave by Makkeda, 16--27. 

Fhis place taken, the King, City, and all therein are burnt ; Joſhua 

doth the ſame to Libnah and Lachiſh, 28---32. To Gezer, Eglon, 

Hebron, Debir, and all the Land, 33---42.- Joſhua returns to Gil- 

gal, 43. ; | , 
N OW it came to paſs, when Adoni-zedek king of Je- 
ruſalem had heard how Joſhua hadtaken Ai,and , A 
had utterly deſtroyed ir ( * as he had done to Jericho , © 

and her king, ſo he bad done to * Aj, and her king) and *chap 8.3. 

how the inkabicants of Gibeen had made peace with 

Iſrael, and were among them «. 

a i. e. Were converfant with them, had yielded themſelves to 
their diſpoſal, ſubmitted themſelves to their Laws, had mingled 
Intereſts with them. 

2 That they 5 feared greatly, becauſe Gibeon was a | 
greatcity,as one ofthe} royal cities c,and becauſe it was + Heb. 
greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty. - > - 

bi, e. He and his people, the King being ſpoken of v. 1. is a King 
publick perſon repreſenting all his people. Or, He and the follows 
ing Kings, v. 3. Butthis fearis mentioned, v. 2. as the cauſe why 
he ſent to thoſe Kings. c Either 1. really a Royal City, the Hebrew 
particle Caph oft ſignifying the truth of a thing, as Ho. 4. 4. and 


5. 19, and off elſewhere, Or, 2, equal to one of the Royal Cities, 
h though 


*Ia. 28 
21. 
{ Or,terr 


'fed.So G 


* Ta. 28, 
1, Hab, 
3.11 


? Heb. b 
|" 


\ of 


—z 


X. 7 0 8 
though it had no king,but ſeems tobe governed Ariſtocratically by 


their Elders, Joſ. 9. 11. Ef 
2 Wherefore Adoni-zedec king of Jeruſalem ſent 4, 


anco Hoham king of Hebron; and unto Piram king of 
Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachiſb, and unto 
Debir king of Eglon, ſaying, Þ oy 

4 Either becauſe he was Superior to them in Power or Dignity, 
or becauſe he was neareſt the danger, and moſt forward in the 


work. 
by Come up unto me, and help me, that we may! 


ſnite Gibeon : for it hath made peace with Joſhua,and 


with the children of Ifrael. | : 5 
' 5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites ?, the king 


of Jeruſalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, 
the king of Lachiſh, the king of Eglon gathered them- 
ſelves together and went up,they,and all their hoſts,and 


 encamped before Gibeon, and made war againſt it. 
e This name being here taken largely or generally for any of the 
Canaanites, as is frequent ; for to ſpeak ſtriftly, the Citizens of _ 
bron here mentioned, v. 3. were Hittites ; thus the Gibeoniter, who 
were Hivites, Joſ. 11. 19. are called Amorites, 2 Sam. 21. 2. It is 
reaſonably ſuppoſed, that the 4morites being numerous and _— 
ous beyond Jordan, did pour forth Colonies or Forces into the _ 

of Canaan, and there ſubdued divers places, and ſo communicate 


their name to all the reſt. h 
61 And the men of Gibeon ſegt f unto Joſhua to the 


camp to Gilgal, ſaying, Slack not thy hand g from thy 
ſervants h, come up to us quickly, and ſave us, and help 
us : for all the kings of the Amorites, that dwell in the 


mountains z, are gathered together againſt us. 

f Or, had ſent,. when their Enemies were drawn towards them, 
which they could eaſily learn. g Do not negle&nor delay to help 
us. h Whom thou art obliged to proteC both in Duty as thou art 
our Maſter and Ruler ; and by thy own Intereſt, we being part of 
thy Poſſeſſions; and in ingenuity,becauſe we have given our ſelves 
to thee, and put our ſelves under thy Prote&tion. 7 In the moun= 
tainous Country. : | s 

7 So Joſhua aſcended & from Gilgal, he, and all the 
people of war with him,and /all the mighty men of valour 

k Having, no doubt, asked advice of God firſt, which is implied 
by the Anſwer God gives to him, v. 8. / Or, even, or that is, as 
this Particle. is oft uſed, hath been noted before. So it ſeemsputhere 
by way of Explication and Refiriftion ; having faid all the people of 
war, he now adds, even all the mighty men, &c. 1. e. an Army of the 
molt valiant men picked out from the reſt ; for it is not probable, 
either thar he would take ſo many hundred thouſands with him, 
which would have hindred one another,or that he would leave the 
Camp without an Army to defend it. 

8 © Andthe LORD ſaid unto Joſbua,Fear them not : 
for I have delivered thetn into thine hand ; there ſhal 
not a man of them ſtand before thee- 

9 Joſhua therefore came unto them ſuddenly m, a4 


went up from Gilgal all night ». 

7 Though aſſured by God of the ViQory, yet he uſeth all pru- 
dent means, and ſurprizeth them. » Ir is not ſaid, that he went 
from Gilgal to Gibeonin a nights ſpace ; but only that he travelled all 
night: unto which you may add part either of the foregoing, or of 
the following day. 

2 10 And the LORD * + diſcomfited them' before Ifra- 


+Ortery;. £1, and flew them o with a great ſlaughter at Gibeon p, 
fri So Gr, and chaſed them along the way that goeth upto Betho- 
ron, and ſmote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah. 
o Or, he flewthem ; either God, or Iſrael; for Gods work is de- 
ſcribed v" 11. p Heb. in Gibeon, not in the City, but in the Terrt- 
tory belonging toir ; as Joſhua is ſaid to be in Jericho, Joſh. 5. 13. 
11 And it came to paſs asthey fled from before Iſrael, 
and were inthe going down to Bethoron,that the LORD 
calt down great ſtones q from heaven upon them unto 
Azekah, and they died ; They were moe which died 
with hailſtones, than they whom the children of Iſrael 


ſlew with the ſword. | 
q.i, e. Hailſtones of extraordinary greatneſs and hardneſs, caſt 
down with that certainty, as to hit the Canaanites, and not their 
Purſuers the Jſ-aelites; and with that force as to kill them. Joſephus 
affirms, That Thunder and Lightning were mixed with the Hail, 
which may ſeemprobable from Ha. 3. 11: : 
12 C Then ſpake Joſhuauntothe LORD rin the day 
when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the 
'k, ., Children-of Iſrael, and hefaid in the fight of Iſrael s, * 
11. Hab, Oun Tf ſtand thou ſtill upon Gibeon?, and thou moon in 


3.1, the valley « of Ajalon x. 

T Heb, be »r To wit, in way of Petition for this Miracle : being moved to 
beg it out of zeal to. deſtroy Gods Enemies,and dire&ed to it by the 
motion of Gods Spirit,and 'recciving a gracious Anſwer, and being 
filled with _ Confidence of the ſucceſs, he ſpeaks the fotlowing 
words before the people, that they mighr be Witneſſes of it. s ( 2. 
e.) In'the preſence and audience of 1ſrael.; ſeeing being ſometimes 
put for hearing, as Gen.42.1. compare with 4#+ 75.12: Although theſe 
words may ſeem rather. to be joyned with the following, thus,. in 
the ſight of Iſrael, ſtand till, O-Syn, &c. which ſenſe the Hebrew ac< 
cents favour. t 1. ce. Over and above. or againſt Gibeon.” (7 e.) In that 
place and. poſture ,in which now it ſtands-towards and looks upon 
Gibeon,. Let it riat go down lower, and by degrees, out : fthe fight 
of Gibeon, Itmiay ſeem, that the-Sun was declining, and Joſbus per- 


Chap. 


*Ifa. 28, 


ceiving that his work was great and.long, and histime but ſhort, 
begs of God the lengrhning out of the day,: and thar- the Sun and 
moon might ftop their courſe, and keep the place in which rhey now 


were, 4 Or, upon the valley ; as before, upon Gibeon;z the Prepolition 
4 


i 


WH U 4. Chap. 


being the ſame there and here. . x Either, r. that fialov which was 
in the Tribe of Zebulon, Judg: 12: 12: Northward from Gibcon. Or 
rather, 2. that Ajalon which was in the Tribe of Dan, 7eſ. 19. 42. 
Juadg. 1. 35. Weſtward from Gibeen. For, 1. this was nearer Gibeox 


Sun and Moon, which is from Eaſt ro Weſt. 5. This way the bat-= 
tel went from Gibeon Weſtward to £Hjalon, and 1o further WeRtward 
even to Lachiſh, v.31. And he mentions two places; Grbeon and 4- 
jalon, not as if the Sun ſtood over the. one and the Moon over the 
other, which is abſurd and ridiculousto affirm, eſpecially theſe pla- 
ces being ſo near the one to the other;butpartly to vary the phraſe, 
as is common in Poetical Paſſages; partly becauſe he was in his 
March in the Purſuit of his, Enemies, to paſs from Gikeon to 4jalon ; 
and he begs that he may have the help and benefit of lenger lighr 
to purſue them, and to that end that the Sun might fiand 1till, and 
the Moon aJſo ; not that he needed the Moons light when he had 
the Suns ; but becauſe it was fir,” either that both Sun and Mcon 
ſhould go, or that both ſhould ſtand fill to prevent Diſorder and 
Confuſion in the heavenly Bodies. JS 


13 And the Sun ſtood ſtill y, and the moon ſtayed, 
until the people had avenged themſelves upon their ene- 


ed not to go down abouta whole day 4. | | 
y Heb- was ſilent ; 1. e. ſtill, 2s this Phraſe is commonly uſed, as 

I Sam: 14: 9: Pſal: 4: 4: Jonah 1: 13: the ceffation of the Tongues mo« 
tion being put ſynecdochically for the ceſſation of any other Mo- 
tion or Attion. = 7: e; Till they had utterly deſtroyed them, as is 
» 


. mentioned in the following Chapter. &# Either of a man ſo calle 


or of the righteous or upright, wherein poſſibly the memorable Afions 
of worthy men were recorded, and this amongſt the reft.And this 
Book was written and publiſhed before Joſhua wrote his,and ſois fit= - 
ly alledged here.But this,as well as ſome few other Hiſtorical Books; 
1s loſt;not being a Canonical Book, and therefore nor preſerved by 
the Jews with the ſame care as they were. b Here is ne mention of 
the Moon, becauſe the Suns ſtanding was the only thing which Jo- 
ſhua deſired and needed ; and the Moons ſtanding he detixed only by 
accident to prevent irregularity in the motions of thoſe Celeſtial. 
Lights. Some take this to be but-a Poetical Phraſe and Relation of 
the Viftory, that Joſhua did ſo many and ſuch great things in that 
day, as if the Sun and Moon had ſtood ſtill and given him longer 
time for it. But the frequent Repetition, and magnificent Declara- 
tion of this wonder, manifeſtly confutes that fancy. That the Suri 
and Moon did really ſtand ſtill, is affirmed Hab: 3: 11:and Sirach 46. 
5, 6. And if it ſeem ſtrange to any one, that ſo wonderful a Work 
obferved by the whole World that then was, ſhould not be-men- 
tioned inany Heathen Writers ; he muſt needs be ſatisfied, if he 
conſiders,that it is confeſſed by the generality of Writers, Heathens 
and others, that there is no certain Hiſtory or Moriument in Hea« 
then Authors of any thing done before the T-0jan Wars, which was 
a thouſand years after Joſbua's time ; and that all time before thar,is 
called by the learnedſt Heathens, the uncertain, unknown, or obſcure 
time, c Not Mathematically, in the very Meridian cr middle p 

of that Hemiſphere ; bur morally, and with ſome Latitude, when 
it had begun a, little to decline, the conſideration whereof ſeems ts 
have given Joſhus occaſion for his deſire. 47. e. For the ſpace of 4 
whole day. Underſtand an artificial day between Sun-rifing and 
Sun-ſetting; for that was the day which Joſbua needed and dehred, 

a diy to give him light for his work-. 

14 And there was nb day like that e, before it, or 
after it, that the LORD k2arkned -unto the voice of a 
man f: for the LORD foughtfor Iſrael gs. n 

e To wit, in thoſe parts of the World in which he kere ſpeaks; 
and about which the Compariſon is here made : vain. therefore is 
that ObjeQion,that the daysare longer near the Northern and Sbu- 
thern Poles, where they are conſtantly longer at certain Seafons; - 
and that by the order of Nature ; whereas the length of: this da 
was purely contingent, and granted by God in anſwer to Joſhua's 
Prayer, as is here added. 06j. In HezekiaHfs time, and at his Prayer 
there was a day which may ſeem to have been longer; for the Sun 
went back ten Degrees in ten hours, and then returned again ten 
Degrees in ten hours, and ſo it was 20 hours longer than a' common 
day, and ſo longer than this. 4»/.It is not certain, either that eacly 
Degree deſigned an hour, and not rather half art hour, or a quar-. 
'ter, as others think ; or that the Sun returned thoſe: ten Degrees as 
ſlowly as he went down before or after, Beſides, it wasnow near - 
Summer Solſtice, when the day was Iongeſt, and about 14 hours 


cauſe there is not the leaſt evidence that Hezekiabs 'day 'was longer, 
but rather of the contrary ; it is nach more reaſohtiable 'to beheve 
this Sccipture-aſſertion, than to deny or queſtion upon. meer Syp- 
poſitions, or idle Conje&ures. f.'To wit, in ſuchamanner to.alrer 
the Courſe of nature, and of the heavenly Bodies, thataman might - 
have more time to-purſue and deſtroy his Enemies. ig This /is ad- 
ded as the reaſon why God was fo ready to anſwer pans Petition 
herein, becauſe he was engaged and reſolved to fight for Ie, and 
that ina more than ordinary manner. , | SN ID 

r5 © And Joſhua returned b; and all Hradl With him, 
unto. the camp to Gilgal- 6 

h Not immediately, or upon the ſame day, but after he had dif 
patched the matter which here follows ; as appears by v, 43. where 
the very ſame words are repeated to ſhew, that that wat the mean« 
ing of them. © And they are put here to cloſe the general diſcourſe 
of the fight which begun v; io: and ends here ; which being; done, 
| he particularly deſcribes ſome” remarkable Paſſages, , and clofeth 
them with the ſame words. * 6 2 : 

16 But theſe five kings i fled; and hid themſelves in 
a cave k at Makkedah/. DA Wen 

z: Named above v. 3. % As a place of moſt ſecrecy or, ſectrity ; 
but there is no-eſcaping the eye or hand of God, who here brought 
them.into a net of their own making. . /Heb. i» Makke#ah, not Ut. 
| the Ohm, that was nor yet taken ; bat in the Territory of it ; 


| aSIN Gio%0n, v.10, CE p + 4 
17 And it was told Joſhna, faying, The fire kings 


. 


are found hid in a cave at Makkedah, 


2 M 2 13 And 


than the other. 2, This was moſt agreeable to the covrſe. of the _ + 


mies z. 7s not this written in the book of + Jaſber a? + Or, #þ\| 
fo the Sun ſtood {till 5 in the midit of heaven c; and haſt- »prighr. "|| 
101141 


and that being doubled, the Artificial day was 28 hourg: and bes », -*| 


I, j 


Ut 
41 
914 
if 
vi#ht 1 
| ' 
BIS | 
»t 
| 


THEM. 
SHE Keb: cat 
$9! i 'Þe tail. 


Deut.21. 
3. chap. 
. 29, 


4+ . 


ſÞ ap. X 


chap. 21. hs 


o_ 
* 


of the cave, and ſet men by it, for to keep them. | 
19 And ſtay ye not m, but purſue after your enemies, 


and + ſmite the hindmoſt of them » , ſuffer them not to. 


enter into their cities «; for the LORD your God hath 
delivered them into your hand p. | 
 m Loſe not your opportunity by ad floth or negligence." Their 
rereward, all whom you c#n' overtake. o Whereby they will reco- 
ver their ſtrength, and renew the War, p Your work will be eaſte, 
God hathalready done the work to your hands. : 

20 And it came to paſs when Joſhua and the children 
of Iſrael 9 had made ancnd of flaying them with a ver 
oreat ſlaughter, till they were conſumed, that the ret 
which remained of them, entred into fenced cities. 

9 i, e. Joſbus by the children of 1-9el; or the Children of Jſrael, 
7, 6. a Party of them by the Command, Direttion and Encourage- 
ment of Joſbus ; for Joſhua himſelf went not with them, but abode 
in the Siege before Makkedab, v. 21. 

21 Angall the people returned to the camp r to Jo- 


ſhua at Makkedah ip peace : * none moved his tongue 


azainft any of the children of racl. 
So oe body of the Army which were encamped there with J0- 
ſbua to beſiege that place. « Not ſo much as a Dog, as it 15 cx- 
preſſed Exod: 11; 7. Not only their men of war could not find their 
hinds, bur they were all ſo confounded, that they could not move 
their rongyes ih, way of Inſultation and Reproach, as doubtleſsthey 
did when the / bad; were repulſed and ſmitten at 4/; but now 
they were ſilenced as well as conquered : they durſt no more pro- 
voke nor injure the Iſraelites. 

32 Then id folbua, Open the mouth of the cave, 
and bring out thoſe five kings unto me out of the Cave. 

23 And they did fo, and broughtforth thoſe five kings 
unto him out of the cave, the king of Jeruſalem, the 
ing ofHebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of La- 
chith, a:4the king of Eglon. , 

24 And itcame 10 paſs when they brought out thoſe 
ep unto Foſbua, that Joſbua called all the men of 11- 


ract, and faidunto the captaingof the men of war which 


. went With him, Come near, put your feet upon the 


necks of thefe kings ?. And they came near, and pur 
their feet upon the necks of them. « 

£ This he did not from Pride and Contempt of their Dignity 1n 
3t ſelf; but partly as a puniſhment of their impious Rebellion again{t 
their Sovereign Lord; partly in purſuance of that Curſe of ſervili- 
ty due.to "11 this people, Ger. 9. 25. partly as a token to aſſure his 
Capraigs, that God would ſubdue thy groiets of them all under 
their feet ; a; d partly to obligeand teach his people ſeverely to ex- 
ecute the ent of God, upon them, and not to ſpare any of 
them, eit er out of a fookiſh Pity, or out of reſpe& to their Digni- 
ty, as Saul Werwards pare Ap to his own ruine. ; 

25 And Joſhua ſaid. ynto them, Fear not,nor be diſmay - 
ed, be ſtrong, and ofgood courage : for thus ſhal the 
LORD do to all your enemjes againſt whom ye fight. 

26 And afterward Joſhua ſmore them,and flew them, 
and hanged them « on five trees : and. they were hang- 
ihg upon the trees * until the evening. 


. 
A 


g gre 3 V r 
$ 


n{kru&ion of others. 

27 Andit came to paſs atthetime of the going down 
of the ſun, that Jolhua. commanded, and they * took 
chem down off the trees, and caſt them into the cave, 
wherein they had been, hid, and laid great ſtones in the 
caves mouth x, which remein unto this very day. 

x That neither wild, beaſts could come at them. to devaur them,. 
nor mh hy people to give them honourable Burial. 

28. Ws 
FE, with the edge of the ſword, and the king there- 
of he-utterly deſtroyed ;. them, and all the ſouls that 


\-* as he did unto the king of Jericho.z. 
3 Qa. which the Sun. ſtood ſtil}, or on which. the five Kings were 
hang : Noris.it ſtrange that ſo much work was done, and places 
— wes truck with, ſuch a terror. =. Who was hanged,or other- 
wiſe killed, -as-appears from. Foſb: 6; 2. 
a Hep @ with him;unto Eibnah 6b, and fought againſt 
A —_ TQT-. F 
2 s To wit, who were with him in this Expedition. 6b A City of 
Julah, Joſh? t5:42. . ; 6 
.30 And,the LORD delivered it alſo, and the king 
thereof, ingo. the handof Iſrael, and he ſore it with 
the edge; of the ſword,and all theſouls c that were there- 
in; he let none remainin it,but did unto the king there- 
of;"as he did untothe, king of Jericho. 
'7, e:The lumane Souls; for all the Cattel they had for a prey. 
31 © And Joſbua paſſed from Libnah, and all Iſrael 
with him, unto Lachiſh, and encamped againſt it, and 
tought againſt it. - __ | 
*-22. And,the; LORD delivered Lachiſh into the hand 
of Wracl, which took it on the ſecond'day 4; and ſmote 
it withthe edge of the ſword, and all the ſouls that were 
therein, according to all that he had done, to Libnah. 


. 
C * 


* d Either the day after his firſt laying of the Siege ;- or, after the ta- | 


king of Makkedah and Libnah, 


at day y. Joſhua took. Makkedah, and | 


70 8 H. QD. 4. 
18 And Joſbua ſaid, Roll great ſtones upon the mouth | 


p 


X 


tant, taken in.one day,,when the day was ſo long, and the | 


- 


' that implacable hatred and heinous cruelty, 


” 
» 


therein, he let none remain: and he did to.the king | 
3 


. 


. 
Y 


33 © Then Horam king of Gezer e came up to help 
Lachiſh, and Joſhua ſmote him and his people, until he 
had left him none remaining. 

e Either that in Ephra:m,of which Joſh: 16: 3: Fudg: 1: 29. But that 
ſcems too remote from the other places ; or rather, that in Judah 
which was near Lachiſh, 1 Chron: 14: 16: whoſe King therefore was 
more capable, and more obliged to help them for his own ſake. 

34 Q And from Lachiſh Joſbua paſſed unto Eglon /, 
and all Iſrael with him,and they encamped againſt it,and 
fought againſt it. 

f A City of Judah, Joſh: 15. 39. 

35 And they rook it on that day g,and ſmote it with 
the edge of the ſword, and all the fouls that were therce- 
in,be utterly deftroyed that day,according'to all that he 
had done to Lachilh, 

g On which they firſt attempted ir. 

356 And Joſhua went up from Eglon, and all Hrael 
with him unto Hebron þ, and they fought againſt ir. 

+ Which though they took and killed all its Inhabitants,yet they 
did not _ It ; and therefore when Joſhua and his Army had for- 
ſaken it, and were returned to Gilgsl, it ſeems the Giants and other 
Canaanites being burnt out, or driven away from their former ſeats, 
planted and fortified themſelves there ; which made it neceſſary 
for Caleb to take ita ſecond time, as is recorded 5ofb. r5. 14. Judg. 
1- 10, Or, this is the ſame Story, and the ſame Conqueſt of Hebrin 
which is here generally related, and afterwards repeated, and more 
particularly deſcribed, Joſh. 15. 13, 14. 

37 And they took it,and fmote it with the edge of the 
ſword, and the king thereof ;, and all the cities thereof 
&, and all the fouls that were therein ; he left none re- 
maining,according to all that he had done to Eglon:but + 
deſtroyed it utterly, and all the ſouls that were therein. 


z Either him mentioned before, v.23. whoſe death is here repeat- Or,anathe. 
ed in this acconnt of the general DeſtruQion of all the Inhabitants matized it. 


of that place or his Heir or Succeſſor, & Which were ſubje& to its 
Juriſdiction ; this being, itfeems, a Royal Ciry as Gibeon was, v, 
2. and having Cities under it as that had, Joſb. g. 17. : 

38 And Joſhua returned, and all Ifrael with 
Debir }, and fought againſt it, 

I He is ſaid toreturn thither, not as ifhe had been there before 
but becauſe having gone as far Weſtward and Southward as he 
thought fir, even as far as Gazs, v.41. he now rerurned towards 
Gilzal, which lay Northward and Eaſftward from him, and in his 
return fell upon Debir, ſee an. Joſh. 15. 15. ; 


39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the 
Cities thereof, and they fmote them with the edge of 
the ſword, and utterly defttoyed all the ſouls that were 
therein, he left none remaining: as ke had done to He- 
bron, ſe he did to Debir, and-to the king thereof as he 
had done alfo to Libnah, and to her king. : 

40 T So Joſhua ſmote all the country of the hills 
and of the ſouth, and of the vale, and of the fprings, 
and all their kings, he left none remaining,but utter] | 


him to 


deſtroyed Þ all that breathed mw, as the LORD God of i wy a 
t 


Iſrael * commanded ». | 
w: i.e. All mankind, by a Synecdoche : for they reſerved the 


in their Repura- 
'e he acquitsthem of 
which they might be 


tion for executing his Commands; and therefore h 


| thoughr guilty of, and aſcribes it to himſelf and his own juſt In- 


dignation againſt this moſt wicked people. 
41 AndJoſhua ſmote them from Kadeſh-barnea 0, C- 


venunto Gaza p, andall the.country of * Goſhen 9, e- 
ven unto. Gibeon. | | 
o Which lay in the South;of Canaan, Numb. 


fies, that Foſbuadid: in this expedition ſubdue all thoſe parts which 


' Jay South and\ Weſt from Gilgal. q Not that Goſben- 12 Egypt,but ano- 


ther in Judgh, Joſb.1.1.16. and 15, 5x. 
42 And all theſe kings andtheir land did: Joſhua take 
at onetime, becauſe the LORD God of Ifrael fought 


for Krael. 
43 And Joſhua returned, and all Iſrael with him,un- 


i to the camp to Gilgal, 
Then Jolbua paſſed down from Makkedah, and | 


CHA P: XI, | 
The other Kings and. Cities. of Canaan-gather themſelves togither to fight a- 

gainſt Iſrael, 1-5. God encourages Feſhua, promiſing him Vittory, 6 

The Canaanites. deſtroyed, their. Cities taken and burnt : Hazor : the Ena. 

kims, 7---20, theſeinGaza, Gath, and Afbdod excepted, 2.1===23, 

A ND it came to paſs when Jabin king of Hazor 

« had. heardzhoſe things b, that he. ſent to Jobab 
king of Madon, andito the king ef Shimron c, and to 
the king of: Achſhaph &, 

a The chief City of allthoſe parts, v. x0. b This wasaremarkable 
inſtance of the Wiſdom and Goodneſs of Divine Providence,which 
ſo governed the minds and hearts of the Canaanites, that they. were 
not at all united'under one King,but divided amongſt many petty, 
Kings ; and next, that theſe did not all unanimouſly, joyn their 
Counſels and Forces together to oppoſe the 7aelites at their firſt en- 
trance, which their own Wiſdom and Intereſt obliged them ro.do, 
but quietly ſuffered the deſtruQtion of their Brethren, thereby pre- 
paring the way for thezr ewn. c Called Shimronmeron, Joſb. 12. 10. 
d A place in the Tribe of Fr, the furtheſt part of the land toward 
the North and Weſt. : 

2 And to the kings that ere on che north of the 
mountams 


5 
' a 34+ 4+ Dent. I.I . . 
- I5. 3. þ Which wasin the South-weſt of Canaan. So he LES 


Chap. XI, 


+ Heb. 


madeit a 


curſe. 


Y:ALD. 


*Deur.20, 


Cattel for their own uſes. » This is added for the Vindicati 16, 17, 
| the Jſraclites, whom God would not have to ſuffer <= 1157 ot 


F chap.?!. 
16. & 15. 


I, 


{Heb 
ſemble 


appoin 
ment. 


*Heb 


[8 
t. 


ll 


'FHAP. XI. 


mountainse, and 6f the plains, ſouth of Tinneroth F, and | 
in the vale, andin the borders of Dorg, en the welt. 

£ Heb. on the North, (which may be the general deſignation of 
all the particular places following, that they were in the Northern 
parts of Canaan, as thoſe mentioned Joſ. 10. were in the Southern 
parts) in the mountain, either in or near the famous mountain of Ze- 
banon, called the Mountain by way of eminency ; or in the mountain- 
ous Countrey f Heb. in the plaiu lying Southward from Cinnerech, 
or the Lake of Geneſareth; ſee Deut. 3.17. Luke 5. 1. g Aplace u- 
pon the coaſt of the Midland-ſea, 

3 And tothe Canaanite on the eaſt,and on the welt þ, 


and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, 
and the Jebuſfite in the mountains, and to the Hivite un- 


der Hermon 3, in the land of Mizpeh &. 

þ The Canaanites properly ſo called, lived part of them on the 
Eaſt near Jordan, ev. part on the Weſt near the Sea, and both are 
here united. 7 That dwelt undermount Hermon in the North of Ca- 
nan, whereby they are differenced from thoſe Hivites who lived in 
Gibeon, of which before... k That Mizpeb which was in the North- 
ern part of Gilead, of which Gew. 31. 49: Juag. 11. 29.. But there 
were other Cities called by that name,.. which ſignifying a Watch- 
ing-place, might beeaſily applicd to ſeveral places of good proſpett. 
Beiles this, there is one Mizpeh of Judah, Jeſb. 15.-38, another of 
Benjamin, 5oſb. 18. 26. a third in Moab, 1 Sam. 22.3. : 

4 Ard they went out, they, and all their hoſt with 
them, much people even as the ſand that is upon the ſea- 
ſhore in multitude, with horſes and chariots very many. 

5 And when all theſe kings were met 7 together, 
they came and pitched together at rhe waters of Me- 


rom 1, to fight againſt Iſrae). q 

1 A lake made by the River Jordan in the Northern part of it, 
which was in theTerritory of the King of Schimron or Schimron-Meron, ' 
and near Hazor, Fabins royal City, and almoſt in the middle of 
theſe confederate Kings. . ? 

6 © And the LORD ſaid unto Joſhua, be not afraid 
becauſe of them; for to morrow abour this time will I 
deliver them up all ſlain before Iſrael : thou ſhalt hough 


their horſes », and burn their chariots with fire. 

m (i. e.) Cut their Hamſtrings that they may be ynfit for War. 
For God forbad them to have, or keep many Horſes, Det. 17. 16. 
now eſpecially, that they might not truſt to their Horſes, as men 
are apt to do, nor diſtruſt God for want of ſo neceſſary an help in 
Battel ; nor aſcribe the conqueſt of the Land to their own ſtrength, 
bur wholly to God, by whoſe power alone a company of raw and 
unexperienced Footmen were able to ſubdue ſo potent a people, 
which beſides their great Numbers, and Giants, and walled Cities, 
had the advantage of many thouſands of Horſes and Chariots. 

7 So Joſhua came, and all the people of war with 


him, againf them by the waters of Merom ſuddenly », 
and they fell upon them. 


» When they leaſt expe&ed them, intending there to refreſh, 
and prepare, and order themſelves for the offenſive War which they 


deſigned. 
Ard the LORD delivered them into the hand of 


Iſrael, who ſmore them, and chaſed them: unto Þ great 
f Or, Zi- Z;idon 0, and unto | * Miſrephoth-maim p, and unto 
the valley of Miſpeh q eaſtward, and they ſmote them, 


bah. : OF 
TA ſal; until they lefe them none remaining. 

pits. o A great and famous City in the North-weſt part of Canaan,and 
* Heb. upon the Sea, þ A place not far from Ziaon, ſuppoſed to be ſo 


burnings of called from the Salr or Glaſs which they made there. q Under 
| waters, Mount Hermon, as appears by comparing this with v. 3. and 17. 
where it ſeems to þe called 7he walley of Lebanon. This lay on the 
Eaſt, as Sihon did on the Weſt, and ſo it ſeems they fled ſeveral 
ways, and the Iſraelires alſo divided themſelves into two Bodirs, one 


purſuing Eaſt, and the other Weſt. 

And Joſhua did unto them as ; 
him: he houghed their horſes, and burnt rheir chari- 
ots with fire, 

10 'T And Joſhua at that time turned back, and 
took Hazor, and ſmote the king thereof r with the 
ſword : for Hazor before time was the head of all thoſe 
kingdoms /. | 

r Either in the former Battel,chough it be mentioned here: Or 
rather, in his Royal City, ro which he- fled out of the Battel. 
Not of all Canaan, bur of all thoſe who were confederate with him 


in this Expedition. | 
iz And they ſmote all the ſouls that were therein 
wich the edge of the ſword, utterly deſtroying hens; 
there was not * any t left. to breathe,and-he burnt Ha- 
zor with fire. 
? (1. e.) No Humane Perſon. 


12 Andallthe cities of thoſe. kings, and all the kings 
of them did Jeſhua take, and ſmote them with the edge | 
of the {word, and he utterly deſtroyed them, * as Moles | 
the ſervant of the LORD commanded. 


*Heb, an 
breath, 


*Numb. 

33: 52. 
Deur. 7. 

S. and 20, 

I6, T7. 

ft Heb. on 

their heap. 


ſtrength. », Iſrael burned' none of them, fave. Hazor 
only x, that did Joſhua burn y. 

s Heb. with. (for ſo this Prepohition-is-oft uſed; as Exod, 35.. 12. 
Levi 2. 2. Exek. 16. 37; &c.) their. Fence or Fences, Walls or Buiwarks; 
5, e,, which-were- not utterly ruined togerher with-their Walls 1n 
the taking, of them. Which-though- taken by: the {jraelttes,was- not 
ſo much deſtroyed as other. places-were: y Becauſe this Ciry- began 
the War, and-being; the chief and- royal City,, might' renew'the 


0 TTEVUL. 


the LORD bade | 


' CHAP, 


moved.\\|| 
thing. 


4 
4 
' 4 
1 


16 $0 Joſhua took all that land z, the hill a, and all = 
the ſouth countrey 6, and all the land of Goſhen «c, and 
the ale 4, and the plain e, and the mountain of Iſrael 
f, and the vale of the ſame g : 

z Of Canaan, whoſe parts here follow. a Or, the Mountain, i. e. 
the Mountainous Country, to wit, of Judea, as may ſeem, 1. Be- 
cauſe in the following enumeration te begins in the Sourh parts, 
where there was an eminent Mountain, N«mb. 1 3- 17. 2 Becauſe 
a conſiderable part of Judeas was called the Hilly, or the mountainous 
Country, Luke 1. 39, 65+ . Which is nor likely ro be omitred in this 
particular deſcription of the Land; the rather becauſe Hcbron, one 
of the places taken by Joſhua, chap. 19. 36, 37. was inthe Mountain of 
Judah, Joſ. 20, 7, 3. Becauſe this 1s here diſtinguiſhed from the 
Mountain of Iſrael, and therefore moſt likely to be the Mountain of Ju- 
dah, eſpecially if you compare this with v. 21. where having men« 
tioned the Mountain in general, from which Joſhua cut off the Ana- 
kims, he comes to particularize, and names only two, ll the Moun- 
tain of Judah, and all the Mountain of Iſrael. & (:.e.) Not only the 
Mountainous pact, bur all the Countrey of Judes, which lay in the 
Southern part of Canaan, and oft comes under the name of the Seurh, 
as Numb, 13.22, 29. and 21. 1, Jo. 10. 40. and 18. s, &c. c Of 
which ſee Joſ. 10. 41. d The low Countries, e The Fields or 
Champion Grounds. f Either 1. Some one particular and eminent 
Mountain, poſſibly the Hill of Samaris, mentioned r Kings 16. 24. 
Or rather 2. The Mountains or Mountainous Countrey of Jſ#ae!. 
Sec the ſecond nore on this verſe. g (:..e) Of iſrael. 

I7 Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to . 


Seir þ, unto Baal-Gad 3, in the valley of Lebanon un- , , | 


der mount Hermon # And all their kings he took, and \yunrary 
{more chem, and ſlew them. = 

h (i.e.) To the Countrey of Seir or Edom; to wit,that part of it; ll 
which was Soath from Judez, not that which was Eaſtward from ir, Ml 
as appears from hence, that here, as alſo Joſ: 12. 7. is mention of 
the two extream bounds of the Land conquered by Joſhua; whereof 
the other which follows being inthe North, this muſt needs be in 
the South of the Land. # A part of Monnt Lebanon. 

118 Joſbua made war @ long time & with all thoſe 
Kings. | 

k For divers years together, as is evident by the following Hi- 
ſtory, and by comparirg Det. 2. 14. with Joſ. 14. 7, &c. And this 
is here expreſſed, left it ſhould be thought that as all rheſe Wars are 
here recorded in a ſhort Narration, fo they were diſpatched in a 
ſhort time. And God would have the Land to be conquered gras 
du.Illy, for many weighty Reaſons ; 1. Leſt the ſudden extirpaiion 
of thoſe Nations ſhould have made a great part of the Land delſerr, 
and thereby have encreaſed the numbers of wild Beaſts, Deut. 7. 22, 
2+ Leſt being done ſuddenly and cafily, it ſhould ſoon be forgotten 
and deſpiſed, as the nature of man is apt to do in thoſe caſes. 
3- That by long exerciſe the J/raelites might grow skilful in the 
Art of War, which was very uſeful and needful for them in that 
Land. 4. For the tryal and exerciſe of their Patience and Courage, 
and Truſt in God. 5. To oblige them tothe greater Care to pleaſe 
and obey God, whom they yet needced for their Help againſt their 
enemies. 

i9 There was not a city that made peace with the — 
children of Iſrael, fave * the Hivites the inhabirancs of * Clup-$ 
Gibeon ; all ether } they took in battel. 3 

I To wit, all that were taken by Joſhus, were taken by the 
ſword, and therefore it is no wonder that the War was long, 
when the enemy was ſo obſtinate. 

20 For it was of the LORD'to harden their hearts mw, l 
that they ſhould come apainſt Iſrael in Bartel, thathe  =|& 
| might deſtroy them utterly,and that they might have no *Heur.4 

favour: but chart he might ceſtroy chem, *as the LORD 16, wn 


|| 
; | 
| 
{ 


[4 
| 


» 
'0 
if 

1 
wy 


commanded Moſes/ | 
mm It was the deſign' of God's: Providence not to ſoften their 
hearts to a compliance with the [rael7res,bur to give them up to their 
own Animoſiry, Pride, Confidence, ata Stubbornneſs'; thar ſo both 
their abominaile and incorrigible wickedneſs mighr be ſevere 
. puniſhed, and'thar-rhe [/raelires might not bemixed' with them, bur 
be intire among themſelves in the poſſeſſion of the Land; Compare 
Deut. 2. 3o. and for the Phraſe Exod.7. 13. and 'g. 12. and 14. 17. 
21 And at that time * came Joſhua, and cur off the 
Anakims from the mountains os, from Hebron,from De- 


bir p, from Anab q, and from'all the mountains of Ju= 


' and 
| | Mountains,che' Singular Number fot thePliral; Theſe barbarons an 
13 But as for the cities that ftood ſtill F in their.| monſtrous perſons either chofero live in tke Dens or Caves,whi 


| 


War, ifthe Canaanites ſhould ever ſeize uponit. 


14. And all the ſpoil of theſe cities, and the cattel,the 


dab, and fromrall the mouncains'of Ifrael: Joſkiua de- 
ſtroyed thert urrerly witty their cities / 

* ze. In thar'War, for-it+ canriot be'meant of any particular and 
ſhort rime, becauſe the work here related'was done in divers'times 
years. Y A race of Giants, of which' ſte Numb. 13. os Or 


werefrequenit in'the Mourttains of thofe' parts ; Or clfe they wers 
diiven'thitherby rhe Armsattd Snccefs'of the 1faelires. p* Eirhier 
1. From the Territories belonging to theſe Cities, as we have oft 
ſees in this Hiſtory; Cities mentioned for the Countrey ſubje& to 
thertt ;. for the Cities were taken before by" Foſbz#, chap: 10. 36; 37, 
38. Or 2. From the Cities themſelves ; and fo cither the Cities 
were re-taken by the Giants, which ir i5* not probable chat-God 
would permit in Jofbua's time; or he ſpeaks here of that rune when 
he took thoſe places mentioned here;and chap. 10. Which Hiſtory 
he-here in-part repeats'and enlargethi, with this memorable Cir- 
cumſtance, That, together with the reſt, he deſtroyed alſo the 
| 2 M 3 Giants 


mn ap» XII. ; SEA 
hl : nts which were in thoſe places. 4 A place in the Tribe of Jus 
ml yrag# 15.50, r It wag not follow from hence, which ſome 
* || | conclude, that this Book was written by ſome other perſon long 
after Joſbua's death, even after the diviſion of the Iſraelites into two 
| Kingdoms, of Ire! and Judah ; but only that this was one of thoſe 
lauſes which were added or altered, and ſuited to the ſtile of the 
preſent times by, Ezra, or ſome other Prophet ; though that be not 
neceſſary : For ſince it was evident to Joſhus, from Gen. 49. 10, Cc. 
That the Tribe of Judah was to be the chief of all the Tribes, and 
ſome dawnings of its Eminency appeared in that time, in their ha- 
ving the firſt Lot in the Land of Canaan, Jo. 15. 1. andthe largeſt 
inheritance, Jo. 19. 9. It is no wonder that it is mentioned apart, 
and diſtinguiſhed from the reſt of the Tribes of rel. though that 
alſo be one of them ; even as the daughters of Pharaoh is diſtinguiſh- 
ed from the frange Woman, 1 Kings 11. 1. and Saul from all David s 
enemies, Pſal: 18."Title, and Peter from the Diſciples, Mark 16. 7. 
though they were each of the ſame nature and quality with the reſt, 
I Queſt: How could Feſtus utterly deſtroy theſe, when Caleb and Oth- 
niel deſtroyed ſome of them after Joſbua's death, Joſ. 14. 12. Tudges 
T. 10, 11, 12 ?.., nſw: This might be, cither 1. becauſe theſe pla- 
ces being in part deſtroyed and negle&ed by the 1/raelites, might 
be re-poſſefſed by the ve, either in Joſbua's time, or after his 
- death, and by them kept till Caleb diſpoſſeiled and deſtroyed them. 
Or rather, 2. Becauſe this work, though done by the particular va- 
Jour and induſtry of Caleb, is aſcribed to Joſhua as the General of the 
Army, according to the manner of all Hiſtorians; And therefore 
it is here attributed to Joſbua, though afterwards, that Caleb might 
not loſe his deſerved Honour, the Hiſtory is more particularly de- 
ſcribed, and Caleb owned as the great Inſtrument in the atchive- 
ment of it, Joſ: 14. and Juages r. 

22 There was none of the Anakims left in the land 
of che children of Ifrael : only in Gaza,in Gath,and in. 
Aſhdod * there remained | 

* Three Cities'of the Philiſtines, to which they retired, and 
where we find ſome'of them afterwards, 1 Sam. 17. 4. and 2 Sam. 
21. 16. Which 'may be one reaſon why the Jr2elites durſt not 
make an- attempt upontheſe places, though they were a part of their 
Poſſeſſion. - | : 

23 So Joſhua took the whole land «, according to all 

Numb: that the LORD faid unto Moſes, and Joſhua gave it for 
6-53- an inheritance unto Iſrael, * according tc their diviſi- 
ons by their Tribes : and the land refted from war x. 
# Synecdochically, 7. e. the greateſt and the beſt part of it, for 
ſome parts and places are expreſly excepted in the following Hiſto- 
iy. x From a&ual War, ſo far that they could now quietly ſurvey, 
and diſtribute, and poſſeſs the Land- _ 
H A P. XIL 
A Catalogue of the Kings, and their Poſſeſſions, out of which they were driven 
by the Iſraelites: Firſt in thetime of Moſes on the other fide Jordan, 
1 —— 6." ind afterwards by Joſhua on this ſife of Jordan, 7—=23. 
In all, one and thirty Kings, 24. 
.] OW theſe are the Kings of the Land, which the 
children of Iſrael ſmore, and poſſeſſed their land 
. on the other ſide Jordan, toward the riſing of the Sun : 
from the river Arnon, unto mount Hermon, and all 
- the plain of the calt «. 
a On the Eaſt of Jerdan, called the Plain, Deut r. 1. and the Plains of 
| Moab, Deur. 34. 1. * 
Numb. 2 * Sihon;king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heſh- 
1.24 bon, «nd ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of 
Deu: 3-6- the river of Arnon, and from the middle of the river 6, 
and from - half Gilead c, even unto the river Jabbok, 
which is the border of the children of Ammon. 

b Ir is not unuſual even amongſt us, for a River to be divided be- 
tween two Lords, and for their Territories or Jeriſditions to meet 
in the middle- of the River : | And beſides, here is a very particular 
Reaſon for this Exprefſion, becauſe the ciry 4r, which was no part 
of Sihon's Dominions, but belonged to the Moabites, Der. 2. 9, 18. 
was in the middle of the River mon, Deut. 2. 36. and 3.-16. and 
therefore the middle of the River ts moſt fitly and properly here 
mentioned, as the bounds of Sihorn'S Dominion on that fide. c Heb. 
and the half Gilead, (5. e.) half of the Countrey of Gilead ; The par- 
ticle from is not inthe Original,-and this doth not ſeem to denote 
the term-or bound from which his Dominion begun, as our Ver- 
fion implies, for ſo indeed it was not, but the place or Country, 
in and over which his Dominion' was, which, as is here ſaid, be- 
gan at Arno, and took in half Gilead, and ended at Jabbot, beyond 
which was the other hatf of Gilead, which belonged to Og, as is 
expreſly ſaid, verſe'5; where the words being wholly the ſame that 


- —— = ———_ 7. -——<y * =— — 
= : - ———— IS _—_ 
-—Þ IS + "DAF1 VI. :- .- —_ SA. »- —- = 


ke ARREST La 


ſame manners BOW | 

-.3 And*fremthe plain unto the ſea of Cinneroth on 
the eaſt 4, and unto the ſea of the plain e, ever the ſalt 
'Or, 7e- ſea on the eaſt, the way to Beth-jeſhimoth: and from 


an, * the ſouth f under + * Aſhdoth-piſgah. | 
Or, the d Which words deſcribe the ſituation not of the ſea of Cinnerorh, 


Deut: 3. 


prings of * which was part of the Weſtern border of $Sihor's Dominion, but 
Piſgah, or of the Plain, which is here ſaid to ly eaſtward from the ſea of Cin- 


he bill. neroth, and alſo eaſtward from the Salt-ſea, as. it here follows. 
Deur: 3. And this was indeed. the ſituation of the Plains of Moah, which 
7.and 4. are here ſpoken of, to wit, that they lay berween the two Seas, 
9. that of Cinnerorh, and-the Salt-ſea, and eaſtward ro them both, 
e The Salr-ſea is fo called, becauſe it was a-famous Plain, pleaſant 
and fruirfu], before it was turned into a Salt-ſea, f Or, On, or t0- 
wards the South. © | 


4 © And the coaſt of Og king of Baſhan which was 
of the F remnant of the Giants that * dwelt at Aſhta- 


Dent: 3. oth, and at Edrei g. Y 


are here,it-is moſt reaſonable to underſtand and tranſlate them in the 


JOSH U 4. 


in all Baſhan, unto the border of the Geſburites b, 2nd 
the Maacathite, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon 
king of Heſhbon. 7 

hþ Of which ſee Devz. 3. r3. Joſ. 13. 13. 2 Sam. 13. 37.and rs. 8) 

6 * Them did Moſes the ſervant of the LORD, and 
the children of Iſrael ſmite, and * Moſes the ſervant of 
the LORD gave it for a poſleflion unto the Reubenites, 
and Gadites,and the half tribe of Manaſſeh. 32. 29, 

7 And theſe are the kings of the countrey,which Jo- P*ut33-12 
ſhua and the children of Iſrael ſmote on this ſide Jordan, ©” 3:8 
on the welt, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon, 
even unto * the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, «, 
which Joſhua gave unto the tribes of I{rael for a poſlel- ;-** 
ſion, according te their diviſions. : 

8 In the mountain, and in the vale,and in the plain, 
and in the ſprings, and in the wilderneſs ;, and in the 
ſouth countrey; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Ca- 
naanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebuſites. 


; This word here and elſe-where in Scripture notes not a Land 
wholly deſert and.unhabited, but one thin of Inhabitants, as 1 Kings 


2. 34. and 9. 18. Matt. 3.1, 3. .* 
9 © * The king of Jericho one : * the king of Ai * Chap: 
which is beſide Bethel &, one: | ©, 
& "This is added to diſtinguiſh it from 4: of the Ammonites, of , "ic 
which, Jer. 49. 3. : # Chap: 
10 * The king of Jeruſalem, one: the king of He- ,.',- 
bron, one: 
11 The king of Jarmuth,one 3 the king of Lachiſh one: 
I2 The king of Eglon, one : *ehe king of Gezer one: + chp. 
* . . . . 
13 "The king of Debir, one: the king of Geder,one: 10. 33. 
14 The king of Hormah, one: the king of Arad, one: aps 3 
I5 The king of Libnah,one: the kingof Adullam,one: *** 3*: 
16* The king of Makkedah,one: the king*of Bethel,one: 
17 The kingof Tappuah,one: the king of Hepher,one: » cy, 
18 Theking of Aphek,one: the king of + Laſharon,one: yo. :g. 
19 The king of Madon, one: *the king of Hazor, one: * Chap. 
20 . The king of Shimron-meron, one z the king of 14.23 
Achfhaph, one : Fg 
21 The king of Taanach, one 3 the king of Megid- + Or, 5. 
do, ane . hgh 
22 The king of Kedeſb, one : the king of Joknean '<*11.0 
of Carmel, one : 
. 23 The king of Dor /, in the coaft of Dor, one : the , - 
king of ® the nations of Gilgal »z, one : — 
F Of which, Joſ.r1. 2. 2: Not of that Gilgal where Joſhna firſt 
lodged after his paſſage over Jordan; where it doth not appear, that 
there was either King or City ; bur of another City of the ſame 
Name, (as was frequent in thoſe parts) probably in Galilee, towards 
the Sea, whither divers people might poſſibly reſort for 'Frade and 


Merchandiſe, over whom this was King, as formerly 7idal ſeems to 
have becn, Gen. 14. 1. 

24 The king of Tirzah, one : all the kings thirty and 
ane , 

z Each being confined to a narrow compaſs, and being King on- 
ly of one City, or ſmall Province belonging to it, which was by 
the wiſe and ſingular Providence of God, that they might be more 
eaſily and ſucceſſively conquered by the 1ſraelites, one after another, 
as they were. 


"Numb: 


21.24, 33, 
*Numb: 


C H A P. XII. 


God makes known to Joſhua the bounds of the Land not yet conquered, T---G. 
Communal it to be divided among the nine Tribes and an half, 5. The In- 
heritance of the two T:ibes and an half on the other (de Jordan, 8-=-1 3. 
The Lord and his Sacrifices the Inheritance of Levi, 14. The Portion of 
the Reubenites, 15 ———23: Of the Gadites, 24 28, 
Of the half Tribe of Manafſeh, 29 — 32. ; 

N OW. Joſhua * was old, and ftricken in years, and 

the LORD. faid unto him, thou art old s, and 

ſtricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much + Heb: , 

land Þ to be poſſeſſed 5. poſoſs it. 

a Therefore delay not to do the work which I have appointed 
and commanded thee to do. 5 To be conquered, and ſo poſſefled 
by the people. 

2 * This is the landthat yet remaineth c: all the bor- +5uag:z:; 
ders of the Philiſtines, and all Geſburi 4. *Tec: 9: 5: 
© Unconquered by thee, and to be coriquered by the 1ſraelites * 
if they behave themſelves aright. d A people in the North-eaſt 
of Canaan, of which ſee Deut. 3. 14. as the Philiſtines are on the 
South-weſt. 

3 From Sihor e, which 3s before Egypt, even unto 
the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to 
the Tanaanite f* five lords of the Philiſtines; the *Ga- | 
zathites, and the Albdothites, the Eſbkalonites, the Git- | 
tites, and Ekronites, alſo the * Avites £: 

e A River, of which ſee I. 23. 3. and Jer. 2.18? f (e.) 

Which, though now poſſeſſed by the Phili#ines, who drove out the 

Canaanites the old inhabitants of it, Dewt. 2. 23. Amos 9.7, yet is a 

part of the Land of Canaan, and therefore belongs to the Iſraelites, | 

g Or, the Avims, as they are called, Deut. 2+ 23. who though they | 


*See chap; 


Chap. XI 


. "chap: A gs ; ; were expelled out of their antient Seft, akd moſt of th ftroys 
4 <p g To wit, ſucceſſively, ſometimes at the one, ſometimes at the | eq by. the Caphrorims or PhiliPines, 42S is - Fra fard, yet many of HCl 
Dene, Other City ; both being his Royal Manſions. ; | probably eſcaped, and planted rhemfelyes in ſonic other place nor 
4 5s And reigned in qount Hermon,and in Salcah,and | very far from rhe former, 


4 From 


' - 
C:1a7 


{Or, 


GAVE. 


*IKt. 
Pal, 1 


*<.1 


* Der 
11. ch 
Ig, 4. 


"Verſe 


Ci: an. ja j [ 5 


4 From the ſouth, all the land of the Canaanites bh, 
1Or, 2 and + Mearah 5, that is beſide the Sidenians, unto A- 


phek &, tothe border of the Amorites /: 

þ (i.e.) From thoſe Southern parts of the Sea-coaſt, now poſleſ- 
ſed by the Philiftines, all the more Northern parts. of the Sea-coaſt 
being yet inhabited by the Canaanites, almoſt as far as Sidon, as 1t 
hee follows. For there is no mention made of any Conqueſts of 
Joſhua upon the Sea-coaſt: The Canaanites, properly ſo called, are 
{aid to dwell by the ſea, Numb. 13. 29. and theſe are here ſpoken of, 
though ſome of them dwelt in other parts of the Land. 7 A ftrong 
place; ir matters not whether it was a City, or an impregnable 
Cave, which ſome Writers mention to be in thoſe parts. k Nor, 
That of Juda, of which Joſ. 15. 53. but another in the Tribe of 
Aſer, of which Joſ. 12.18. Judges 1. 31, 1 The Amorites were a 
ſtrong and very numerous people, and we find them diſperſed in 
ſeveral parts, ſome within Jordon, and ſome without it, ſome in the 
South, and others in the North, of whom he ſpeaks here. 

5 Andthe land of the * Giblices », and all Lebanon 
*;Xi.c.18. toward the Sun-riting, from Baal-Gad under mount 


Pal. 83.7. Hermon, unto the entring into Hamoth. 

-m A people dwelling near S:don in Gebal, of which ſee 1 Kings 
5. 18. Exeb. 29. 9. 

6 Ail the inhabitants ofthe hill-countrey from Leba- 
non * unto Miſrephoth-maim, ard all the Sidonians, 
them will I drive out from before the children of Iſrael 
», only divide thou it by lot unto the Ifraclices for an 
inheritance o, as I have commanded thee. ; 

n Preſently aftes thy Death, if the 1/-aelites do not hinder 1t by 
their unbelicfor wickedneſs. o Though they be now unconquered, 
yet divide them, partly as a pledge to aſſure them ofmy help in con- 
quering them after thy death, partly to lay an obligation upon the 
Iſraelites to proceed in Conquering-work, and to bear witneſs againſt 
them in caſe they did not ; and partly as a wall of partition berween 
them and the Canaanites, to prevent all Agreements, ContraQs, and 
Confederacies with them, to which God faw they began to encline. 

7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance 


Num:32, unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manaſſeh. 

13. Deut, 8 With whom p the Reubenites,and the Gadites have 
3. 2, 13, received their inheritance, * which Moſes gave them be- 
. 22- 4. yond Jordan eaſtward, ever as Moſes the ſervant of the 


LORD gave them 49. 

p Heb. With him, (i. e.) with the half tribe of Menaſeh, not that half 
which is expreſſed v. 7. as is evident from the thing ; but the other 
half, which is ſufficiently and ' neceſſarily underſtood, the relative 
being here put for the antecedent, underſtood, as it is, Numb. 7. 89. 
Pſal. 114. 2. Iſa. 8. 21. Jonah 1. 3. q Which Moſes gave them by my 
Command, and therefore do not thou diſturb them in their Poſleſ- 
ſions, but proceed to divide the other Poſleſſions to the reſt. 

9 From Aroer that is upon the bank of the river Ar- 
non, and the city that is in the midſt of the riverr, and 


all the plain ot Medeba unto Dibon /. 

» Of which ſee the notes on Devt. 3. 16. and on Jof. 12. 2. Either 
this is the ſame City now mentioned, even Aroer, which is ſaid to 
have been a double City, as the very name ſeems.to import, where- 
of one part was on the bank of the River, and the other in the mid- 
dle of it, whence we read of the Cities of Aroer, 1/a. 17. 2. or it 1s 
another City, poſſibly Ar, as it is elſe-where named. / Two Cities 
antiently belonging to the Moabites, and taken from them by the 
«<tmorites, Numb; 21. 30. and from them by the [/raelires; and after 
the 1/raelites were gone into Captivity, recovercd by the firſt Poſleſ- 
ſors the Moabites, as may ſeem from 1/9. 15. 2. ; 

ro And all the cities ot Sihon king of the Amorites, 
which reigned in Heſhbon, unto the border of the chil- 
dren of Ammon : : | 

11 And Gilead, andthe berder of the Geſhurites, and 
Maacathites e, and all mount Hermon, and all Baſhan, 
unto Salcah : : 

# Whoſe Land God had given to the 1/raclites without Jordan, 
though they had not yet uſed the gift of God, nor taken Poſſeſſion 
of it, as 1s noted, v. 13. 

* Deut. 3. T2 All the kingdoms of Og in Baſhan, which reigned 

11.chap. in Aſhtaroth, and Endrei, who remained of * the rem- 

12.4 nant of the Giants: for theſe « did Moſes ſmite, and 
caſt them out. | 

# Not all now mentioned, as appears from v. 13. but Sihon and 
Og, and their people, and the generality of them, which he had 
now named, ſome of them being cxcepred, 

42 Nevertheleſs, the children of Iſrael expelled not 

the Geſhurites, nor the Maacathites : but the Geſhurires 
and the Maacathites dwell among the Iſraclites unto 


this day x. ' 


GAVE. 


*<,11. 8, 


x This ſeems added by way of anticipation 2nd refleion upon | 


the preſent Iſraelites; Tmplying, that alchough Moſes did and might 


permit them to remain, both becauſe the Land which he had con- | 


quered was more than enough for the 7/raeliziſh Poſſeſlors; And be- 
cauſe being intent upon their paſſage over Jordan into the Land o 
Canaan, he would not delay them, by ſearching their Enemies out 
ofall their corners; Yet they were in fault, in not going on and 
perfeC&ting the work which was begun by Moſes, and carried on ſo 
tar by Joſhua. 


14 Only unto the tribe of Levi he y gave none inheri- 


tance z: the ſacrifices of the LORD God of Iſrael made 


« 
Ver " . . 
"0: 2, by fire « are their inheritance, * as he {aid unto them. 


9 1. &« Moſes, as is expreſſed v. 33. z To wit, in the Land beyond | 


Jordan, where yet a conſiderable part of the Levites were to-have 
their ſettled abode] This is mentioned as the reaſon both why Moſes 


FOSH UM 


I 


; il 
Chap. ! 

by a Synecdoche are here put for all thoſe Sacrifices and Oblations, | 
including firſt Fruits and Tithes, which were affigned to the Levites; 
And this paflage is ſo oft repeated and urged, to prevent thoſe 
calumnies and injuries which God foreſavs the Levites were likely to 
meet with from the malice, envy, and covetouſneſs of their Bre- 
thren ; and to oblige allthe other Tribes to a chearful and conſcion- 
able giving to'the Levites their dues, to which they had as good 
a Right and Title, as they had to er ſeveral Poſleflions. 2 

: 5 And Moſes gave unto the tribe of che children of 
Reuben inheritance according to their families 6. 

> Dividing the inheritance into as _ parts as they had Fami- 
lies; Bur this 1s only ſpoken of the greater Families, for the leſſer Di- 
viſions or Diſtributions to the ſeveral ſmall Families, was done by 
inferior Officers, according to the Rules which Moſes gave them. 

16 And their coaſi was from Aroer that is on'the bank 
of the river Arnon, and the city that 5s in the midſt of 
the river c, and all the plain by Medeba: 

c Of which ſee Deut, 3. 16. and Jo. 12. 2, 
17 Heſbbon 4, and all her Cities that are in the plain : 


Dibon, and *Bamoth-baal e, and Beth-baal-meen f. 

d This City ; and Dibon and 4taroth were upon the borders of Rex- 
ben and Gad, and therefore ſometimes are aſcribed to Revben, as here, 
and Numb, 32. 37. ſometimes to Gad, as Numb. 72. 34. 1 Chron. 6.81. 
by whom Heſbbor is ſaid to be given to the Levites, of. 21. 39. Poſ- 


high pl | 


horv(e of 


4 


falem was by Jews and Benjamites., e Of which, Numb. 21. 28. 
f Called Beth-meon, Jer. 48. 23. and Baal-meon, Exzk. 25.9. part of 
the Name being cut off, as 1s uſual with the Hebrews, 

18 And Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 
19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethſhahar, 
in the mount of the valley p. | | 

g In the Mountain bordering upon that Valley, which then was 
famcus among the J/raelites; whether that where Moſes-was buried, 
which was near to the place here following, Berhpeor, Deut. 34. 1, 6. 


or ſome other. And this cauſe is thought to belong to all the Ci- 
ries now mentioned. | 


17- 
ings 


Beth-jeſhimoth : F 
Piſgah, 


21 Andall the cities of the plain 6, and all the king- 


Heſhbon, whom Moſes ſmote * with the princes of Mi- * 
dian &, Evi, and Rekem, and Zior, and Hur, and Reba, ? 
which were dukes of Sihon 7, dwelling in the countrey ws. 
L Oppoſed to the foregoing Cities of the Mountain of the Valley, i A 
Synecdochical expreſſion, for a great part of it ; in which ſenſe we 
rea:! of all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, Mat. 3. 5. and 
all Galilee, Mat.”4. 23. and many others. Or, which all were the King= 
doms of Sihon, 3.e. belonging to his Kingdom. The Hebrew con- 
junction and, 1s oft put for the relative particle which, as Judges 2. 
21. Prov. 19. 1. Eccleſ. 6. 12. k Not in the ſame time or batte], as 
appears by comparing Numb. 21, 23, 24. with Numb, 33.8. butin the 
ſame manner. And they are here mentioned, partly becauſe they 
were ſlain not long after, and tupon this ſame occaſion, even their 
enmity againſt Jae; And partly becauſe of their relation and ſub- 
jettion to Show, as it here follows. ! Quzeft. How could they be ſo 
when they were Kings of Midian ? Numb. 31. 8. nſw. There were 
divers petty Kings in thoſe parts, which were ſubje& to greater 
Kings; and ſuch theſe were, bur are here called Dukes or Princes 
of S:hon, becauſe they were Subje& and Tributaries to him, and 
therefore did one way or other aſſiſt $:hox in this War, though they 
were not killed at this time. Ir is probable, that when $ihon deſtroy- 
ed thoſe Moabites which dwelt in theſe parts, he frighted the reſt of 
them, and with them their Neighbours and Confederates, the M:- 
aianites, into ſome kind of Homage or Tribute, , which they were 
\ willing to pay to him. » Heb. Inhabiting that Land, namely Midian, 
laſt mentioned ; whereby he ſignifies, that though they were ſab- 
jeCt to Sihon, yet they did not dwell in his Land, bur in another. 


did the children of Iſrael lay with the ſword, among 25. 
them that were flain by them. 

1 So he was in truth, though a Propher ( 2 Pc#. 2, 16.) in Title wViner. 
and Profeſſion. See Numb. 24. 25. | 

23 And the border of the children of Reuben wa 
Jordan, and the border thereof 0: this was the inheritance 
of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities 
and villages thereof. 

o (7, e.) Thoſe Cities or Places which bordered 
Compare Numb. 34.6. 

24 And Moles gave inheritance unto the Tribe of Gad, 
evi: unto the children of Gad, according to their fa- 
milies, 

25 And their coaſt was Jazer, and all the cities of Gi» 
lead p, and half the land of the children of Ammon g, 
. unto Aroer 7, that 3s before Rabbah /: 

? (7.e.) All the Cities of note and eminency ; all Cities proper- 
ly fo called, which it ſeems lay in that part of Gi/ead; And fo this 
may well agree with verſe: 31. where half the Countrey of Gilead is 
' ſaid to be given to the Manaſſites; but there is no mention of any 
; Cities there.  q Not of that which now was theirs, for that chey 
were forbidden to meddle with, Deur. 2.9. bur of that which was 
anciently theirs, but taken from chem by the Amorites, Numb. 21. 
26. from whom the Iſraelites took it, Judges. 11.15. + The border 
between them and Moab. { The chief City of the Ammonites, 2 Sam, 
r1*1.and :2. 26, 27. | 

26 And from Heſhbonz unto Ramath-mizpeh «, and 
Betonim : and from Mahanaim x, unto the border of 


Debir. 


upon Jordan, 


gave all that land to the Reubenites and Gadites and Manaſſites; And | 


why 7oſbua ſhould divide the land only into nine parts and an halfaas 
way ſaid, v, 7, becauſe Levi was otherwiſe provided for. & Which 


t Either exclafively or incluſively. See before on vaſe 17. r Cal 
led Ramoth-Gilead, or Ramoth in Gilead, Jo). 29, 8, and clic-where. 
| 2 4 & Ex+ 


Po_ tt Bp-h3> > ER Iz = _ 
Ee EE ee CEC Eee We > Fee wn rm rs I PW en 


*Or, | | 
of Baal,| 
/ 


fibly it and the reſt were joyntly inhabited by both Tribes, as Jeru- —_— j | 


| 
| 
Wi 
20 And, Beth-peor, and * + Afſhdoth-Piſgah, and : Dev. | | 


dom of Sihon z king of the Amorites, which reigned in he hilly} 
Numl 


22 * Balaam alſo the fen of Beor the + ſoothfayer », *Num:z| 


T Or, ai | 


| 
| 


4 
4 
" 
0 


Wl | 
1 


F 
| 


| 
: 
1 


' 


' 
110181 
il | 


Ann 


; 
i 


il 
fi 
| 


3! 
TH 


EPIRRSneRp.y Y.-M . E —_ 
Aenean a < * 


| 


+) 
if 
| 


= 
REESE ESO IEEE 


ww 


HAP. 


: 
' 
F 


[ 
. 


-_ 


ERS Rez 


—x 


—_— "oY _ 
—_y 


— - to _t 


1am nnep mage 
— 
— 


nepeinehng edh 


| 
EL Irene 


——— mm ene <P renee EI amp — —— —— 


Ar T— Pn 
«= AIRED 


Numb: 
3 39- 


Ch.18.7. 
Numb: 


8. 20. 


Numb: 
34. 17. 


"Num.26. 
.and 33. 


*Numb. 
35. 2. 


Ch: 21. 2. 


XIV. 
. Mahanaim Was in the portion of Manaſ?h, be- 
Ee , okick was the border of Ged and Manaſſeh. " 

27 And in thevalley Beth-aram, and Beth-nimrah, 
and Succoth, and Zaphon, the reſt of the kingdom of 
Sihon y king of Heſhbon, Jordan, and 4is border, ever 
unto the edge of the ſea of Cinnereth, on the other ſide 


Jordan eaſtward. 

3 The Northern parts of his Kingdom. _ 

28 This 5s the inheritance of the children of Gad, 
ter their families, the cities and their villages. 

29 And Moſes gave i»heritexce unto the half tribe of 
Manaſleh z: and this was the poſſehow of the hall tribe of 
the children of Manaſlſeh by their families. 

z Not that they deſired it, as Reuben and Gad did, Numb. 32. I. 
but partly as a recompence to Machir the Manaſſite,for his valiant atts 
againſt Og ; And partly for the better ſecurity and defence of the 
other two Tribes, by ſo conſiderable an acceſſion to them, which 
alſo was without any inconvenience to them, becauſe the Countrey 
was too large for the two Tribes of Reuben and Gad. | 

30 Andtheircoaſt wasfrom Mahanaim, all Baſhan,ali 
the kingdom of Og king of Baſhan, and all the Lowns 
of Jair #, which ere in Baſhan, threeſcore cities. 

a Who, though of the Tribe of Juda, by the Father, 1 Chr: 2. 
21, 22. yet is called che ſon of Manaſeh, Numb. 32. 47. becauſe he 
married a daughter of Manaſſh, and wholly aſfociat=d himſelf with 
thoſe valiant Manaſſites; And with their help took ſixty Cites or 
oreat Towns, Deut. 3. 4, 14. Which thence were called zhe Towns of 


gr” And half Gilead, and Aſbtaroth, and Edrei, cities 
of the kingdom of Og in Baſhan, vere pertaining unto the 
children of Machir the ſon of Manaſſeh, eve» to the 


one half of the * children of Machir b, by their tamiltes. 

bþ Whom before he called the children of Me, he now calls 
the children of Machir, becauſe Machir was the moſt eminent, and as 
it may ſeem, the only ſurviving Son of Manaſſeh, Numb. 26. 29. 
1 Chron. 7. 14, 15, 16: For the other half of Machir's, or Manaſſeh s 
Children, ſee Joſh. 17. 1, &c. : MI 

22 Theſe are the countreys which Moſes did diſtribute 
for inheritance in the Plains of Moab, on the other fide 


Jordan by Jericho eaſtward. 
33 * But unto the cribe of Levi Moſes gave not any 


inheritance: the LORD God of Iſrael was their inhe- 


ritance, * as he ſaid unto thern. 
| C'H A Þ.j XIV. 

The Land and its Inheritances to be divided by Lot, 1=—=5. Caleb, having 
on his Return from ſpying the Land encouraged the People, Moſes then pro= 
miſed him the Land of Hebron; which he now claims of Joſhua, 6 — 12. 
Who grants his Requeſt, 13 IS. 8: 

ND theſe @ are the countreys which the children of 
Iſrael inherited in the land of Canaan, * which 

Eleazer the Prieſt b, and Jofbua the ſon of Nun, and 

the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of 

Ifracl diftribured for inheritance to them. 

a Mentioned, Chap. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 6 See on Joſh. 8. 33. 
and 9. 15, 18. and 19. 51. He beſt underſtood the Laws of God 
by which this diviſion was to be regulated ; and he was to conſult 
God upon any difficult Occurrence. c Twelve perſons, cach the 
head of his Tribe, which were appointed and named by God, 
Numb. 34. 19. and if any of them were now dead, no doubt 7oſbua 
and Eleazer, by God's DireQion, put others in their ſtead. 

' 2 * By Lot ws their inheritance 4, as the LORD 
commanded by the hand of Moſes, for the nine tribes, 
and for the half tribe. 

d This courſe God ordained, partly to prevent Diſcontents, En- 
mities, Animoſities and Quarrels among the Tribes, about the 
quality of their ſeveral Portions; And partly to demonſtrate the 
Truth and Wiſdom of his Providence, by which alone thoſe 
Parts fell to each of them, which Jacob long ſince, and Meſes lately, 
foretold ; ſo that as a learned Man faith, He muſt be more ſtupid 
than Stupidity, and more impudent than Impudence it ſelf, that 
doth not acknowledge and confeſs a Divine Hand and Providence 
in this Matter. The Lot did only determine the ſeveral Parts or 
Provinces to the ſeveral Tribes, but did not preciſely fix all the 
Bounds of it, but theſe might be either enlarged or diminiſhed, 

according to the greater or ſmaller number of the Tribes, Numb. 
26.53, 56. and 33.54. and that by the direQion of thoſe perſons 
mentioned v. 1. and Foſb. 17. > 18. | 

For Moſes had given the inheritance of two tribes, 
anda halftribe, on the other ſide Jordan: but unto the 
Levites he gave none inheritance among them. 

4 For the children of Joſeph were two tribes e, Ma- 
naſlſeh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto 
the Levites in the land, ſave citiesto dwell zz with their 


ſuburbs, for their cattel, and for their ſubſtance. 

e (7. e.) Had the double Portion, or the Portion of two Tribes, 
1 Chron. 5. 1, 2. and therefore though Levi was excluded, there re- 
mained nine Tribes and a half,as was faid-v. 2. to be provided for 
in Canaan. | 

5 * As the LORD commanded Moſes, ſo the chil- 
dren of Iſrael did, and they divided the land f. 

f They (6. e.) the perſons named v. 5. who repreſented and aQed 
in the name of the Children of J1/rael, divided it, Either now, or 
preſently after ; which 1s here ſpoken by Anticipation. 

6« Then gthe children of Judah came þ unto Joſhua 
in Gilgal 3: and Caleb the Son of Jephunneh & the Ke- 


nezite /, ſaid unto him, Thou knoweft the thing that 


af- 


508SHU 4. 


the LORD ſaid unto Moſes »w the man of God 2, COn- 
cerning me and thee in Kadeſh-barnea. 

g Either 1. At that time when Joſbua and the reſt were conſulting 
about the diviſion of the Land, though they did nor yer aQually 
and fully divide it. Or, 2. When Joſbua, and himſelf, and the 
Iſraelites, were proceeding in their Conqueſts, and were going a- 
gainſt Hebron, Foſb. 10. 36, Whick Expedition there mentioned in 1 
general manner, may be particularly deſcribed in this Chapter, and 
Joſh. 15. 13, 14. But the former ſeems more probable, becauſe this 
was done when Joſhua was in Gilgal, and not when he was purſiing 
his Enemies. +h Not ſo much to intercede for Caleb, which was 
not needful with Joſhua, eſpecially in a thing already promiſed by 
God, bur only to juſtifie and countenance him in his deſire. 7 
Where the diviſion of the Land was deſigned and begun, though 
it was executed and finiſhed at Shiloh, Joſh. 18-1, &c. k So he is 
called here, and 1 Chron. 4. 15. to difference him from Caleb the 
Jon of Hezron, x Chron. 2.18. 1 Of the Poſterity of Kenaz, of whom 
ſee Judg. 1.13. 1 Chron. 4. 13, 15. 2 In general, the gracious and 
comfortable Promiſe he made us of poſleſſing this Land; and in 
particular, for my part, that which is expreſſed here, v. g. » Whoſe 
words therefore thou art obliged to make good. 

7 Forty years old was I 0, when Moſes the ſervant 
of the LORD ſent me from Kadeſh-barnea to eſpy out 
the land, and I brought him word again, as it was in 
mine heart p. 

o See on, Joſh.11.18. þ Iſpake my opinion ſincerely, without 
flattery and fear, when the other Spies were byaſſed by their own 
fears, and the dread of the people, to ſpeak otherwile than in their 
Conſciences they believed; as appears from Numb. 13. 3o, 31, 32. 
and 14. 36, 

8 Nevertheleſs * my brethren that went up with me, *Numi, 
made the heart of the people melt; but I wholly * fol- 23: 3132. 
;owed the LORD my God 9. _— 


q Which ſelf-commendation is juſtifiable, becauſe it was neceſ- 4. 2+ 
ſary, as being the ground and foundation of his Petition. 


9 And Moſes {ware on that day, ſaying, Surely the 
land whereon thy feet have trodden ſhall be thine inhe- 
ritance r, and thy childrens for ever, becauſe thou haſt 
wholly followed the LORD my God. 


r See Numb. 14. 24. Deut. 1. 36. 

Io Andnow behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, «x; 

& x umb: 
as * he faid, theſe forty and five years /, even ſince the ;,. ;o. 
LORD ſpake this word unto Moſes, while tbe children of + Heb. 
iſrael + wandred in the wilderneſs: and now, lo, I an 4. 
this day fourſcore and five years old. 

JS Whereof 38 years were ſpent in the Wilderneſs, and ſeven ſince 
they came into Canaan. | 

11 As yet 1 amas ſtrong this day, as I was in the day 
that Moſes ſent me: as my ſtrength was then, even lo is 
my ſtrength now, for war z, both to go out,and to come 
In #. 

t Not only for Counſel, but for Aion ; for marching and fight- 
ing. And therefore this gift will not be caſt away upon an unpro- 
fitable and unſerviceable perſon. « To perform all the Dutics be- 
longing to my place. 

12 Now therefore give me this mountain x, whereof 
the LORD ſpake in that day ; (for thou heardeſt y in . 
that day, how the * Anakims ere there, and that the 
Cities were great and fenced) if ſobe the LORD wll be 
with me z, then I ſhall be able to drive them our « as 
the LORD ſaid. 


x (i.e) This mountainous Countrey, in which was Hebron, Joſhe 
II. 21. and 20. 7. and Deber and Anab. He names the Countrey 
rather than the Cities, Either 1. Becauſe the Giants here following, 
were already driven out of their Cities, but yer abode in their 
Caves or Holds in the mountains, whence they much' moleſted the 
Iſraelites, Or, 2 Becauſe. the Cities were given to the Leviter, 
Joſ: 21+ 11, 13. » (7.e.) Didſtunderſtand, both by the Reports of 
others, and by thy own obſervation, as I alſo did. Hearinz, the 
ſenſe by which we get knowledge, is oft put for knowing or un- 
derſtanding, as Gen: 11. 7. and 42. 23. 2 Kings 18. 26. 2 A mo- 
deſt, and humble, and pious Expreſſion, ſignifying both the abſo- 
lute neceſflity of God's help, and his godly fear, leſt God for his ſins 
ſhould deny his Afſiſtance to him, as he mighr juſtly do; For al- 
though he was well aflured in general, that God would crown his 
people with ſucceſs 1n this War, yet he might doubt of his parti- 
cular ſucceſs in this or that Enterprize. &@ Out of their Faſtneſles 
where they yet remain. Caleb deſires this difficult work as a Tefj- 
mony of his own Faith, and as a Motive to quicken and encour- 
age his Brethren to the like attempr. 

13 And Joſhua blciſed him b, and gave unto Caleb 
the ſon of Jephunneh, Hebron for an inheritance. 

b Either 1. Prayed to God to bleſs and help him according to 
his own deſire. Or, 2. Acknowledged his praiſe-worthy Carriage 
in the matter of the Spies, and the reaſonableneſs of his Requeſt. 
Or, 3. Conſented to his deſire, and, as it follows, gave it to him - 
as God's Bleſſmg is oft put for his aual conferring of favours upon | 


*Ec: 46.9, 


Num:13, | 
28,32, 33- 


14 * Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Ca- *Chop-2 
leb the ſon of Jephunneh, the Kenezite unto this day : '* 
becauſe thathe wholly followed theLORD God of Iſrael. | 

15 And * the name of Hebron before was Kirjath- +4. 15. 


Men. l 


CHAP. xy, | "l 


arba, which Arbs was a great man c among the Anakims: ; 3. 


and the land had reft from war 4. 

c In ſtature, and ſtrength, and dignity, and authority, as being | 
the Progenitor of ak, the father of thoſe famous Giants called 4- ; 
nakims, Joſh: 14. 15. d Which gave them opportunity for the di- | 


ſtribution of the Land, 
CHAP, 


*Nu-3 
x Nu: 
33e 3 


+ Heb, 


Og ues 


7 Or, 
Boing v 
Acrabb1 


* [Kt 


I. He 


| Chap. 


* Nuit 
33 36 


+ Heb. 


tnguts 


$oing up 


* 1 Kin 
I. 9s 


4. EIT 7 9 yer 


*Nu-34:3* 


t Or, the 


Arabbims 


XV. 
CH AP. xY; | 


The Borders of the Let of Judah, 112. Among thew Kirjath-arba Ca- 
lebs inheritance : He drives thence the three ſons of Anak ; promiſes to 
give his daugher in marriage to him who ſhould fmite Kirjath-ſepher ; 
which Othniel does, and obtains her : She requefts of her Father ſome 
Land for a Dowry ; which he grants, 139— — 19+ Tyecities of Judah, 
20 G2. The Jebuſites could not be conquered by them, 6 3. 

His then was the lot a of the tribe of the children 

of Judah b by their Families, * even to the border 

of Edom c 3 the * wilderneſs of Zin ſourhward was the 
uttermoſt part of the ſouth-coaſt. | 

a For the general underſtanding of this buſineſs, it muſt be known 

1. That this work of caſting Lots was tranſa&ed with great ſericul- 

neſs and ſolemaity,in Gods preſence,with Prayer and Appealto him 

for the deciſion of the matter. 2. That although an exatt Survey cf 
this Land was nor taken till Joſb. 18. 4, 5. yet there was, and muſt 
needs be a general deſcription of ir, and a divifion thereof 1nto nine 
parts and a half; which, asfaras they could gueſs, were equal either 
in Quantity or in Quality. 3- That the Lor did not at this time ſo 
peremptorily and unchangeably determine each Tribe, thar cheir 
portion could neither be encreaſed nor diminiſhed ; as 1s manifeſt, 
becauſe after Judah's Lot was fixed, Simeen's Lot was taken out of it, 


Joſh. 19. 9. though afier the Land was more diſtin&ly known and | 


ſurveyed, Joſh. 18 3t js likely the Bounds were more certain and 
fixed. 4. That the Lot determined only in general what part or 
quarter of the Land belonged to each Tribe, but left the particu- 
Jars to be determined by Joſhvz and Eleazar, &c. For the manner O 
this Lottery, it is probably conceived, that there were two Urns 
or Pots, iato one of which were put the Names of all the Tribes, 
each in adiſtin& Paper, and into the other the Names ot each Por- 
tion deſcribed; then Eleazar, or ſome other perſon, drew our firſt 
the Name of one of the Tribes our of one Por, and then the Name 
of one Portion out of the other Pet, and that Portion was appro- 
priated rothat Tribe ; and fo in the reſt. And wich reſpe&ro theſe 
Pots, in the botrom of which the Papers lay, theſe Lots are oft 
ſaid to come up,or come forth, b WhoſeLot came out firſt by God's dif- 
poſition, as anote of bis Preeminency above his Brethren. c Which 
lay South-eaſt from Judahs portion. 

2 And their ſouth-border was from the ſhore of the 


ſalr-ſea, from the F bay d that looketh ſouthward. 
a Heb the Tongue: By which he underſtands either a Creek or 
Arm of that Sea ; or a Promontory, which by learned Authors is 
ſometimes called a Tongue ; it is not material to know which of 

theſe ir was. 

2 Andit went out to the ſouth- fide e to F Maaleh- 
acrabhim, and paſſed along to Zin, and aſcended up on 
the ſouth-fide unto Kadeſh-harnea : and paſled along 


to Hezron, and went up to Adar, ard fetched a com- 
pals to Karkaa. 
e Concerning this diſcription of the Southern-Ccaſt of Judah ſee 
Numb. 34. 3» 4» 5. 4 
4 Froms thence it paſſed toward Azmon, and went out 
unto the river of Egypt and the goings out of that coalt 
were at the ſea : this ſhal be your ſouth-coaft. | 
5 And the eaſt-border was the fſalt-ſea, even unto 
the end of Jordan f: and their border in the north 
quarter 4s from the bay of the ſea, at the uttermoſt 
part of Jordan. 
F i. e. The place where Jordan runs into the Salt-ſea. 
6 And the border went up to Beth-hogla, and paſſed 
along by the North of Beth-arabah g, and the border 


went up to the ſtone of Bohan the ſon of Reuben 6. 

g Or, on the North, or Northward to Beth-arabaheW hich place isattri- 
buted to Judah h-:re, wer. 61« and to Benjamin, Joſh. 18. 22. becaule it 
was a Frontier Town inthe nos of Judah and Benjamin, & there- 
fore promiſcuouſly belonging to both ; which alſo was the Caſe of 
ſome other Places : And rhis Cohabitation was convenient to main- 
tain brother]y Love and Union between the ſeveral Tribes, eſpeci- 
ally in the borders, where differences oft ariſe, h A place ſo called, 
not frem Bohans dwelling there, ( for the Reubenites had nv portion 
on this ſide Jordan) but from ſome notable Exploit which he did 
there, though 1t be not recorded in Scripture. 

7 And the border went up toward Debir ; from the 
yalley of Achor, and ſv northward, looking roward 
Gilgal &, that js before the going up to Adummim, 
which 3s on the ſouth fide of the river /: and the bor- 


der paſſed towards the waters of En-ſhemethb, and the 
goings out ther2of were * at Enrogel. 

z: A diff:ring place from that Debir, vere 15. which was near He- 
bron, & remote from Juda*s border ; as alſo from that Dcbir.Jothe 173. 
26. which was beycne Jordan. k Either that Gilzal nigh Jordan, Joſh. 
4+ I9. Or anotner place efthat name. [. Or, brook, or valley. 

8 Andrthe border went up by the valley of the ſon 
of Hinnom », unto the ſouth ſide of the * Jebuſite o, 
the fame is Jeruſalem p : and the border went up to the 
top of the mountain, that /izth - before the valley of 
Hinnom, weſtward, which js at the end of the valley 
of the giants, northward. 

mn Properly, tor the Line went from Jordan and the ſalt Sza to the 
higher giounds nighJerrſilem; & therefore the Line is ſaid to go «own, 
Joſh. 18. 16. becaule there ittakes a contrary courſe,and goes down- 
wards ! 0 Jordan ang the Sea. n A very. pleaſant place, but afterward 
made 1N'amous, 2 King. 23, 10. 0 (5. e. ) Of rhe city of the Jebuſites, 
which wes encieatiy called Jef, Joſh 18. laſt, Judg, 19. 10. p Ir 
may ſeem tence, and from Deur, 33. 12. Joſh. 18. laſt, Jud. r. 21 
thar Jer ſalcm properly, -Or ar lealt principally, belonged to Benja- 
min; ni. yct.tis atcribed to Juds/ alſo here, verſe 63. and elſewhere, 
£1t.-r b-caule a part Otthe Lity was allotted to Judah ; or becauſ: 
the Zenjamnices necded or defied the help and Conjunttion of this | 


fo 


FC 


Jo 


30;MFWA 


c| paſſed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabne- 


powerful Tribe of Jud#h, for the getting and keepirg of this mott 
important place. And when the Benjamites had in vain attempted 
to drive out the Jebuſites, this work was at laſt dene by the Tribe 
of J»dah, who therefore had an intereſt init by the Right of War; 
as Ziglag which belonged to the Tribe of Simeon, being gotten from 
the Philiſtines by David, was adjoyned by him to his Tribe of }uda/, 
I Sam. 27. 6. 

9 And the border was drawn fiom the top of the hill, 
unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went 
out to the cities of mount Ephron 9, and the border 
was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjath-jearim re. 

q (+. e, ) belonging to, or bordering upon Mount Ephron. r Cal- 
led Kiriath-baal, v. 60. and Joſh. 18. 14+ 

10 And the border compailed from Baalah weſtward 
unto mount Seir s, and paſſed along unto the ſide of 
mount Jearim, ( which 5s Cheſalon ) on the north ſide, 
and went down to Beth-ſhemeſh r, and paſſed on to 
Timnah. 


s Not that of Edom, but another ſo called from ſome reſemblance 
it had with that in quality. s There were divers Cities of this 
Name ; this in J:4ah here, Joſh. 21, 16. 2 Kings, 14 11. another 
in 1ſachar, and a third in Naphtali, Joſh. 19 22, 38. 

11 And the border went out unto the ſide of Ekron 
northward, and the border was drawn to Shicrsn and 


el : and the goings out of the border were at the ſea. 
12 And the weſt border was to the great ſea, and 
the coalt tberesf: this is the coaſt of the children of Ju- 
dah round about, according to their families. 
13 T Andunto Caleb the fon of Jephunneh he « gave 
a part among, the children of Judah, according to the 
commandment of the LORD to Joſhua,ever * the city , ny 
of Arba x the father of Anak, which city is Hebron, \ g,, yr 
% 1. e. Joſbua, as appears by comparing this with Joſh. 14- 6. 12. jatharha.3 
13. x Or, Kir:ath-arba. Net the City which was the Levites, bur 
the Territory of ir, Joſh. 21. 13. 
14 And Caleb drove thence y * the three ſons of » 5yages 
Anak, Sheſhai, and Ahiman, and Talmai z, the chil- 1: x0. 
dren of Anak, 


3 ( z. e. ) From the ſaid Territory, -frem their Caves and Forts in 
it; compare Joſh. 14. 12. This and the following work was done 
either in Joſbua's life-time, as may ſeem from Joſh. 11. 21. or after 
his death, as is related Jud. 1- 10. Theſe Giants having either reco- 
vered theirCities,or defended themſelves in the mountains. z Either 
the ſame who are mentioned, Numb. 13. 33+ and fo they were long= 
lived men,ſfuch as many were in thole times and places : or their 
Sons, called by their Fathers names, which is very uſual. 

15 And he went up thence to the inhabitants of 
Debir @, and the name of Debir before was Kirjath- 
ſepher 6. 


# The ſame mentioned abeve, v. 7. 6b. This clauſe ſeems tobe 
added to diſtinguiſh this from the other Debir ſubdued by Jojbus 
Jojh. 19. 38, 39. ? 

16 C And Caleb ſaid, He that ſmitteh Kirjath-ſes 


pher, and takech it, to him will I give Achſah my 
daughter to wife c. 

e Which is to be underſtood with ſome Conditions, as, if he were 
one who cculd marry her by Gods Law ; for every promiſe con- 
trary to that, is void ; and if ſhe were willing ; for theugh Parents 
had a great Power over their Children, they could not torce them 
ro marry any perſon againſt their own Wi!ls. He might otherwiſe 
be an unfit and unworthy perſon ; bur this was no ordinary motion 
propounded to the imitation of others, bur a divine impulſe, that 
Othri:!s valour might be more manifeſt, and ſo the way prepared 
for his future Government of the People, Juag. 3. 


9 
17 And * Ochniel the fon of Kenaz, the brother of , 


Caleb « took it: and he gave him Achſah his daugh-  *o__ 
ter to wife. 00 

d Obj. This Marriage was unlawful. Anſwer No, for it was not * © 
O:hniel, but Kenaz, who was Calcbs Brother ; and beſides, rhe ney, "fg 
Brother 1s commonly uſed fer any Kinſman; And that Caleb was nor 
properly Orhniels Brother, ſufficiently appears, becauſe Caleb is can- 
ſtantly called the Son of Jephunneh ; and Othniel, the Son of Kenaz, 
here, and 1. Chron. 4+. 13» 

18 And ir came to paſs as ſhe came unto hix: e, that 
ſhe moved him to ask f of her father a field , and the 


lighted off her aſs g, and Caleb ſaid unto her, What 


wouldelſt thou ? 


e Or, 2s ſhe went, to wit, from her Fathers houſe to her Huſ= 
bands, as the manner was : See on Matth. 1. 18. f She perſvaded 
her Husband, eirher, 1. That he would ask : or rather, 2. That he 
would ſuffer her ro ask, as ſhe did. g Thar ſhe might addreſs her 
{-]f ro her Father in an humble peſture, and as a Suppl:ant, which 
he underſtood by her geſture. 

iI9 Who aniwered, Give me a bleſling h : for thou 
haſt given me a louth land #, give me alſo ſprings of 
water &. And he gave hec the upper ſprings, and the 
nether ſprings /. 

h (i.e ) A gift, asrhit word ſignifies, Gen. 33. 11. 5 (5-6) A 
dry land, which was much expoted to the South-wind, which in 
| thoſe parts was very hor-and drying, 2s coming from the Deſarts 
of Araiia. k (i.e) A field, as the delired, wv. 18. wherein are 
Springs of Water, which in that Countrey were of great Price; for 
it is not probable, that be would give ker the Springs, and give 
ro anether the grounds in which the Springs were ; who could 
thereby at their pleaſure deprive her of the uſe and benefit of her 


Springs; So ſhe begs a weli morftened Field, which alſo mighr 
give ſome reliefto raat which was dry 2nd barren. /. ( s. e. ) Springs 


| 
I 
\ 


4 
x 


! 
} 


Chap. XV. 


: 
1 


il} 
| 
li 
(f 
| 
| 


| 
| 


% 
+ 
o 


ih 
£ 


[ 


1 


. 
£ 
oC 


of Chap. XV. TD's 
Wl both in the higher and in the lower grounds : or two Fields, one 
in high, another in low grounds ; or rather, one above, and the 
other below that South and dry ground which ſhe complained of, 
that by ths means it might be watered on both ſides. : 

20 This zs the inheritance of the tribe of the chil- 
dren of Judah, accordiag to their Families. 

; iti f & ibe of the 

21 And the utrermoſt cities ys of the tribe © 
children of Judah toward the coaſt of Edom, fouth- 
ward, were Kabzeel », and Eder, and Jagur ; - 

m Thoſe which were on the borders of the Land, not the mid- 
land cities. 1t is apparent, that all rhe Cities belonging to —_ 
Tribe, are not mentioned in this Catalogue. » Called Jekabzeet, 
Neh. 11. 25. : L 

22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah, 

23 And Kedeſh, and Hazor, and Ithnan. 

24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, ; 

25 And Hazor, and Haddattah o, and Kerioth, and 
Hezron, which is Hazor p 

0 Poſſibly it ſhould be read as one word, Hazor-haddatiah, as there 
is Hazar-gaddah, v. 27. and Haſar-ſhua!, wv. 28. ſuch compounded 
Proper names being uſual ; and this may ſeem the more probable, 
becauſe if Hazor and Hadattah were two different Cities, the Con- 
Jun&ion and would have been pur between them, as it 1s generally 
in the reſt. p Or, which «lfo is called Hazor ; but to diſtinguiſh 11 
from the other Hazor, V+ 23+ this was called alſo Hezron. 

26 Aman, and Shema 9, and Moladah, 

Called alſo Seba, Joſh. 19+ 2+ 
27 And Hazar-gaddah,and Heſhmon,and Beth-paler. 
28 And Hazar-ſhual,and Beer-ſbeba, and Biz-jorhjah, 


29 Baalah, and lim, and Azem, 
30 And Eltolad, and Cheſil, and Hormah, 
31 And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sanfannah, 
32 And Lebaoth, and Shilbim, and Ain, and Rim- 
T mon + all the cities are twenty and nine 7, with their 
villages. 

” a4 Here are 37 or 38 Cities named before ; how then are they 
only reckoned 29 ? Anſw. There were only 29 of them, whicheither, 
7. properly belonged ro Judah ; the reſt fel] to Simeons Lot; Or 2+ 
Were Cities properly 'o called, ( 5. e. ) walled Cities, or ſuch as hac 
Fifages under them, as it here foilows, the reſt being great, but 
unwalled Towns, or ſuch as had no Villages under them. 

33 Andin the vale,Eſhtaol, and Zoreah,and Aſhnah, 

24 And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, & Enam. 
25 Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah, 

Or. or. 35 And Sharaim, and Adithaim,and Gederah, * and 
' * Gederothaim ; fourteen cities / with their villages. 

ſ 0bj. There are r5 numbred. nſw. Either one of them was 
no city ſtrifly called ; or, Gederah, and Gederothaim is put for Gede- 
18h, or Gederothaim, ſo called ; poſſibly becauſe the Ciry was double, 
and there want not inſtances of one City divided into two parts, 


called the old and the new City. Se the conjunttion and is pur 
for the diſjunQive or, whereof examples have been given before. 


enan, and Hedaſhah, and Migdal-gad, 
2” war Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Jokthee], 
29 Lachi(h, and Bozkah, and Eglon, 
45 And Cabbon, and Lahmas, and Kithliſh, 
1 And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and 


Makkedah : fixteen cities with thetr villages, 
42 Libnah z, and Ether, and Aſhan, 
b. Libnah. See Joſb. 10. 29. | 
ax Jiphra, ard Aſhnah, and Nezib, 
44 And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareſbah : nine 


Cities with their villages. 

45 Ekron « with her + towns x, and her villages y. 

T Heb. u Here and in the following Verſes are contained all the Cities of 
Daugh- the Philiſtines, among W hich are Gath and Askelon, which peradven- 
ny. ou ture are here emitted, becauſe they were nor at this time places of 
dd power and eminenCy, AS afterwards they were, but were the 
Daughrers of ſome of thele following Cirtes, though afrerwards the 

Daughter might overtop the Mother, as is uſual. x Heb. Her Daugh- 

ters, 5. e+ leſſer Cities, or great Towns, ſubje& ro Ekroxs Juriſdidi. 


owns or Hamlets. 

24 46 CS Ekrda even unto the ſea, allthat lay + near 

Aſhdod with their villages. 
+ ab. by 47 Aſbded with her T towns and her villages ; Gaza 
the place with her * towns and her villages, unto the river of E. 
of. oypt, and the great ſea, and the border thereof 2. | 
* Feb. Z i. e The Sca-coaſt and all other cities, towns and villages upon it. 
Daugh- 48 © And in the mountains «, Shamir, and Jattir, 
— w_— _— higher grounds called mountains or hills, in com- 
pariſon of the Sea-coaſt. 


49 And Dannah,and Kirjath-ſannah, which 5: Debir 6. 

bþ Which allo is called Kiriath-ſepher, above v. 15: So this City 
had three Names: 

5o And Anab, and Eſhtemoh, and Anim, 

51 And Gofhen c, and Holon, and Giloh : eleven 
cities with their villages. 

Ee Joſ[np: IO: | þ- 

pr Ab. wad Dumah, and Eſhean, 
lor, Ja. $3 And|{Januw, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah, 
a 54 And Humrab, and * Kirjath-arba, ( which ;s He- 
* Chap. bron ) and Zior : nine cities with their villages. 
14-15- «os Maond, Carmel e, and Ziph f, and Jurtah, 


d Of which ſee 1 Sam: 23: 25: and 25: 2: e Navals Conntrey, 


H UDO 4. Chap. Xv1.. | 


1 Sam: 25: f Which gave its name to the Nei ghbouring Mountain, 
1 Sam: 26: 1: 


56 AndJezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zzroah, 

57 Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah : ten cities with their 
villages. 

58 Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedeor, 

59 And Maarath. and Beth- anoth, and Eltekon : fix 
cities with their villages. 

60 Kirjath-baal ( which 5s Kirfath-jearim ) and Rab- 
bah : two cities with their viiages. 

61 © In the wilderneſs g, Beth-arabah, Meddin, ar:d 


Secacah, 
g So the Hebrews call places either uninhabited by men, or having 
bur few Inhabirants. 


62 And Nibſhan, and the city of ſalt b, and Enx <di : 
ſix cities with their villages. 

þ So called either from the Salt-ſea, which was near it ; or from 
the Salt which was made in it, or about it: 

63 As for the Jebuſites the Inhabicants ef Feruſa- 
lem z, the children of Judah could not drive them: out k: 
but the Febuſites dwell with the children of Judah ar 


| Zeruſalem / unto this day w. 

; For though Jeruſalem was in part taken by Joſhua before this; yet 
the upper and ſtronger part of it, called Zico, was ſtill kept by the 
Jebuſites, even until Davids time ; and it ſeems from thence they de. 
{cended to the lower Town called Jeruſalem, and took it ; ſo that the 
Iſraelites were forced to win it a ſecond time ; yea, and a third time 
alſo: for afterwards ir was poſſeſſed by the Jebuſites, Jud: 19: 11: 
2 Sam: 5: 6, 7: k Namely, becauſe of their unbelief, as Chriſt could 
ao no mighty work == becauſe of the peoples unbelief, Mark 6: 5, 6: Mat; 
13: 58: and becauſe of their Sloth, and Cowardice, and Wickedneſs, 
whereby they forfeited Gods help, and then they muſt needs be im- 
potent ;bur this inability was wiltul, and brought upon them by 
themſelves: 1 The ſame things which are here ſaid of the children 
of Judah, are ſaid of the Benjamites, Jud: 1: 21: Hence ariſeth a que. 
tion, To which of the Tribes Jernſalem belonged ? whether to 
Benjamin, as 1s gathered from Gen: 49: 27: Deut. 33: 12: Jer: 6: 1: 
or to Judah, as is implied here, and Pſal; 78: 68, 69: Some think, 
that being in the Bo:ders of both, ir was common to both, and pro- 
miſcucuſly inhabited by both ; and ir is certain, thar after the Cap- 
cvity 1t was pcfl f{:d by both, Neh; 11. 4+ But for the orelent, 
*thovgh it did be!ong to Benjamin, yet the children of Judah being 
poſſibly very ative in the firſt raking cf it by Jeſbua, as they cer- 
tainly wereafrer his Death, Jud. 1. 8. they might thereby get ſome 
right ſhare with the Benjamites in the poſſeſſion of ir, It ſeems 
moſt probable, that parr of it, and indeed the greateſt part, and 
main body of it, ſtood in the Tribe of Benjamin ; and hence this is 
ment;oned in the Liſt of theis Cities, and not in Judahs Liſt ; and 
part of it ſtcod in Judahs ſhare, even Mount Moriah, on which the 
Temple was built; and Mount Sioz, when it was taken from the 
Jebuſites, mw When this Book was written, whether in Joſtuas Life 
and Old Age, which continued many years after the taking of Je. 
ruſalem ; or af er his death, when this Clauſe was added here and 
elſewhere in this Book by ſome other man of God, which muſt neecs 
be done before Davids time, when the Jebuſites were quite expelled; 


and their Fort taken» 
CHAP. XYL 
The gencral Boyders of the ſons of Joſeph, 1—— 4. The Borders of Ephraim, 
5—9. Some of rhe Canaanites not expelled, but made tributary. 10. 


Nd the lor of the children of Foſeph a *fell from + 
.Fordan by Fericho, unto the + water of Fericho Went 
þ on the caſt, to the wilderneſs that goech up from Fe- forth. 


richo throughout mount Beth-el ; 

a ( i.e.) Of Exiraim, and the half Tribe of Manaſih, which are 
here pur togetherin cne ; not becauſe they had bur or:e Lor, for E- 
Phraim had one hers, wv. 5 and Manaſſeh another, 7oſ. 17. 1. but be- 
cauie in theſe firſt Verſes heſp@ks of them in common, and of the 
South-border, which ſeems to be the ſame, either wholly or in a 
great part: and then he comes to the particular deicription of their 
ſeveral portions. It is here farther remarkable, that God to diſpoſed 
of theſe Lots, that they came forth in decent and due order; 7Ju- 
aaks firſt, to whom the Sovereignty was promiſed; and then Joſephs, 
who tucceeded Reuben in the cther Priviledge of the Birth-right, 
the double portion, 1 Chron, 5. 1, 2- b Of which ſee 2 King. 2. rg, 
20, 21, 22, © The Wildernets of Berh-aven, as appears by COmPa= 
ring Joſ. 18. 12+ which ſpeaks of the very ſame border which was 
on the South of Ephraim, and on the North of Benjamin: 


2 And goeth out from Beth-el to* Luz 4, and paſſeth , Jud 


along unto the borders of Archi, to Ataroth, 

d Or, from Bethe!-luzzh, as the LXX, here join the words; for 
Bethel was ancicntly called Luz, Gen- 28. 19. and 48. 3. Though 
ſome think this was another Luz, ſpoken of Judg. 1. 26. Others make 
Bethet and Luz two neighbouring Towns, which afterwards being 
more built and inhabited, became one, as oft hath happened. 

3 And goeth down weſtward to the coaſt of Faph- 
leti, unto the coaſt of Beth- horon the nether e, and to 


Gezer : and the goings out thereof are at the ſea. 
e Of the two Beth-horons, ſee Joſh. 10. 10, 11. 


4 So the children of Foſeph, Manaſleh f, and E- 


phraim, took their inheritance g. 

f (7. e ) Half Manaſſeh, by a Synecdoche g (3. e. ) Their ſeveral 
Portions which here tollow, Some think that they had but one Lot 
between them, and therefore they are now ſaid to take their inheri« - 
tance, to wit, by dividing it between them according to the di- 
rettion of Joſhua and Eleazar, &c. For that Phraſe teing uſed of 
them, and not, to my remembrance, of any other Tribes, may ſeem 
to have ſome peculiar ſignification, which doth not agree to the 
other Tribes: Burt there being mention of a peculiar Lot taken vut 
for #4anaſſeh, Joſh. 19. 1. ſhews that their ſeveral inheritances fell 
ro them, as the reſt did to the other Tribes, even by ſeveral Lots : 


and it is faid of them, that they reok ther inheritance, a = 
uanh 


[4 


* Chi 
17. 9 


| 


—W-. 


*Gen. 
FI. and 
46. 20, 
t Gen. 
23. Nu 
32. 39,« 


* Num! 
26.29, 


* Numi 
26. 33: 
and 27, 
and 36. 


[3 


- $M 
PA”; 


4 


hap. XVI - 


7Tudzh had done before them, becauſe the Tribes of Judah and Joſeph 
did take their inheritances before the rel; and it was fit they ſhould 
do ſo, for the ſecurity of the main Camp, and the body of the 
people which were at G/{z2l. See To. 18. 5. ; 

5 © And the border of the children of Epraim, ac- 
cording to their families, was 1hus: even the border 
of their inheritance on the eaſt-ſide þ, was from Ara- 
roth-addar unto Beth-horon the uppers 

g ( 7. e. ) The North-eaft tide It is no wonder, if ſome of theſe 
Deſcriptions are dark and doubtful to us at this diſtance of time 
and place ; there having been ſo many alterations made in places, 
and ſo many circumſtances, being now altogether undiſcoverable. 
Bur this is evident to every man of common ſenſe, that this and all 
the deſcriptions here mentioned, were then certain and evident to 
the Iſraelites, becauſe theſe were the foundation of their preſent 
practice, and of all the poſſeſſions which then they took, and 
peaceably poſſefled in ſucceeding Ages+ | 

6 And the border went out toward the ſea z, to 
Mickmethah on the north-ſide, and the border went 
abour eaſtward unto Taanath-ſhiloh, and paſſed by it 
on the eaſt to Janohah : | 

i The Mid-land fea, towards the Weſt, 

7 And it went down from Janohah te Ataroth, and 
to Naarath, and came to Jericho k, and went out ar 
Jordan« 

k Not to the City of Jericho, which belongel to Benjamins Lot, 
Joſh. 18. 21. but to its Te:ritory, 

$ The border went up from Tappuah weſtward un- 
to the river Kanah ; and the goings out thereof were 
at the ſea, This*s the inheritarice of the tribe of the 
children of Ephraim by their famiiies. 

9 And the * ſeparate cities / for the children of E- 
phraim were among the inheritance of the children of 


Manaſſeh, all the cities with their villages. 

[ ( 5, e.) Beſides thoſe{Cities which were within Ephraims bounds, 
he had ſome other Cities, to which all their Territories were an- 
nexed out of Manaſſih: Portion, becauſe his Tribe was all here, ar.d 
was larger than Mmaſſc/% 

10 And they * drafe out the Canaanites that dwelt 
in Gezer 2»; but the Canaariices dwell among the 


Ephramites unto this day, and ſerve under tribute ». 
m Nor were they driven our til] Solomons time, 1 Kings 9g. 16. 
As feof. 17. 13. 1 Kings 9. 16. 
CH AP. XF 

The inheritance of Manaſſeh : and its Borders, 1-== 11» They could not 
drive out the Comaan'tes, but made them tributary, 12, \'3. The Chil- 
dren of. Joſeph complain, that their Borders are too narrow : Jjbus pro- 

miſes them the ſubauing of the Canaanites, 14 —— 18. 
Here was alſo a lot for the tribe of Manafſek ( for 
y he as the * firſt born of Joſeph a ) to it, for 
5s T Machir 6, the firſt born c of Manalleh, the facher of 


tGen.5o, Gilead 4: becauſe he was a man of war e, therefore he 

23 Num. had Gilead and Baſhan f. 

32.39,40 a The ſenſe is, though Ephraim was to be more potent and num-=- 
rous, yet Manaſch was the Firſt-born, and had the priviſeuge of rhe 
Ficſt-born, which wastranſlated to Joſeph, to wir, a double pork;- 
on ; and therefore though this were bu: half the Tribe of Manaſſeh, 
yet they are not made Inmates to Epraim, bur have adiftivct Lot 
of their own, as their Brethren, or other 6a!f Tribe had beyond 
Jordan, b The only Son of Mimnaſſih, who therefore' is here, and 
Judg.-5. 14+ pur for the whole Tribe. c So even onely Sons are 
ſomerimes called, as Mat. 1. 25. See Exod. 4. 22. 4 Or, and the Fa- 


F Chaps 
17» % 


*Gen.41. 


20 $HU 4 


| Michmethth, that th before Shechem, and the border 


Chap. XVI! 
; Ww ” . p . i 
| E (5. e.) Ekazar, or Joſbns, with the conſent of the Princes ap- 

pointed for that work. 

5 And therefell ten portions to Manaſſch, beſide 
the land of Gilead, and- Baſhan, which were on the 
other ſide Jordan : | 

» Either 1. Six portions for the ſix Sons, whereof one was Hepher; 
and becauſe he had no Sons, his part was ſub4ivided into five equal 
parts, for each ofthe Daughters ; Or, 2. Ten Portions. five for 
the Sons, and five forthe D.uyhrers ; for as for Hepher, both he and 
his Son Zelophehad was dead , and that withour Sons, and therefore 
he bad no Portion; but his Daughters had ſeveral Portions allot. 4 
fo them. 

6 Becauſe the daughters of Manafſeh had an inheri- 


tance among his ſons » : and the reſt of Manaſſchs ſons 
had the land of Gilead. 


| 2 (;.e. ) No leſs than the Sons, ſo their Sex was no barto their 
Inhericance. 


7 © And the coaſt of Manaſſeh was from After to 


went along on the right hand, unto tie inhabitants of 
En- tappuah. 
8 Now Manaſlſch had the land of Tappuah : but the 


| city of Tappuah on the border of Manailch belonged to 
the children of Ephraim. 
9 And the coaſt deſcended unto the {| river Kanah ſ[o-,Breok WW 
ſouthward of che river : * theſe cities of Ephraim 0 are of Reeds. | 
among the cities of Manaſſeh p; the coaſt of Manaſſeh * Chap: 
alſo a on the north-ſide of the river, and the out- 6% 
goings of it were at the ſea. 
0 Tappuah, and the cities upon the Coaft deſceniing tothe River, %c. 
laſt menricned. p (7 e. ) Are intermixed with their Cities, which 
was not ſtrange nor unſir, theſe two being linked rogether by a 
nearer Alliance than the reſt. 
Io Southward if was Fphraims, and northward jt was 
Manaſſehs, and the ſea his border 9, and they met roge- 


therin Aſherr on the north, and in Ifſachar on theeaft. 

9 Either 1. Manaſchs, whoſe portion 1s h:re deſcribed, and whoſe 
Name was Jait mentioned. Or, 2. Ephraims and Manaſſths both ex 
preſſed in the foregoing word, and implied in the foliowing, they. 
r (7. e. )) Upon the Tribe of 4ſher; for though Zabulun came be= 
tween £jbe: and them for the greateft parr of their Land; yer it 
ſeems ther-- were ſome Necksor Parcels of Land, both of Ephraims 
and of Manaſehks, which jurted out farther thin the reſt, and rouchs 
ed :he b-rders of 4ſh-r. And it is certain there were many ſuch in- 
curſions of the Land of cone Tribeup-n ſome parcels of another, al- 
thoug': they were otherwiſe conſiderably diſtant one from the 
ot';cr. See Joſh. 19. 34+ And you muſt nor ju.'ge of theſe things by 
the p:eſ-nt Maps, which are drawa according ro the Opinions of 
I: re Aurhors, which many times are falſe ; aud they are tr be jud- 
ged by rhe Scriprure, and not the Scripture by them : Bur, that 
part of Manaſſeh did reach to 4ſber, appears from hence, that Dor, 
a Cit+ of Manaſſeh, ve. 11. was, as FY..2 witncflerch, near Carmel, 
which belonged ro Aſher, Jol. 19. 26. 

11 And Man«fleh had in Iifachar, and in Aſher 7, 
Beth-ſhean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, 
and the inhabitants of Dor « and her towns, and the in- 
habicants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants 
of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Me- 
giado and her rowns, even three Countreys x. 

t Ericiier 1, Bordering upon them, as in Aſher is taken v. 10. and 
as 2arons Rod 15 ſaid ro beinthe ark, 1. e. cloſe by it, Heb. 9. 4, or 
2. //'roperly in them, as Ephraim had ſome Cities ih the Tribe of Ma- 


ther, or who was alſo the Father of Gileaa ; not of rhe Land of Gi» 
lead, but of the man Gilead who was Machirs Son, Numb. 26. 29. e 
He, i. e. Machir, had given great proof of his Valour in his Gener:- 
tion, ( thou, hrthe particular Hiſtory be not mentioned ) ard his 
Poſterity were not degenerate Sons, bur had his vahant Blood it11 
running in their Veins. f( #. e. ) Part of choſe Covntreys ; for parr 
of them was alſo given to the Reubenires, and part to the Gadites, as 
appears from Joſ, 13. 30, 31- This may beadded as a reaſon, either 
1. Why he got thoſe places from the Amorites : or 2. Why they were 
zllotted to him or his Poſteriry, becauſe ri.is was a Fronrier Coun- 
trey, and the Out-works to the Land of Canaan, and therefore re- 
quired ſuch valiant perſons to defend it. 


2 There was alſo « le g for * the reſt of the children 
of Manaſſeh h by their families: for the children of 
Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the 
children of Aſriel, and for the children of Shechem, nd 
for the children of Hepher, and for the children of She- 
mida 2 theſe vere the male children s of Manafſeh the ! 
ſon of Joſeph by their Families. 

g Or, a Portion, er diſtin& Inheritance. þ To wit, thoſe of 
them which had not received their Pofſefſions beyond Jordan, 


Numb. 26. zo, &c, # This expreſſion is uſedro bring in what fol- 
lows, concerning his Female Children. 


26. 22: 3 But* Zeloph-had the {on of Hephir, the ſon of Gi- 
bh | lead, the ſon of Machir, the ſon of Manafſeh, had no 
and 36. 2, {Ons but daughters &: and theſe are the names of his 


daughters, Mahlah,& Noah, Hcglah,Milcah,and Tirzah. 
k Of whom ſee on Numb. 26. 33. and 27. '. 


4 And they came near before EleaZar the prieſt, and 
before Joſhua the ſon of Nun, and before the princes 
faying, The LORD commanded Moſes to give us an in- 
heritance among our brethren: therefore according to 
the commandment of the LORD he I gave them an in- 
hericance among the brethren of cheir father, 


ur CSS 


"HM $99 


» Numb. 
26-29, 


— 


* Numb, 


naſlih, Tort. 16. g.and as it was not unuſual,when the placeailotted to 
ary Tr be was too narrow for it, and the next too large, to give 
awa. part trom the larger to the leſs portion ; nay ſometimes one 
w! l- -ribe was taken into another; as Smeon was into Judshs Pare 
rion, when it was found too large for 7:4, Joſ 19. 9g. « Not the 
places 0-1, bur the people; whom, contrary to Gods Command 

they ſpire? - »d ud for Servants, whom therc fore they are ſaid to 
hae cx 2 iT fie x This may bereferred either to ſome, to wit, the 
"ree 'alt p:ces, ortoa!l the places named in this verſe, which are 
h r- 'a'd, either to have three Countreys or Tratts of L:nd be- 


1o5:;,1:.,, to them, or to be in three ſeveral Countreys or Portions, 
aS *ii.y ſee n to have een, ſome in Iſachar, and ſome in Afber, and © 
ye; i h helongirg ro Manzaſſeh. Or, the words may be rendred, 


the third part of that Countrey ; tor the Hebrew word is of the Singular 
Nu:inber, and the Avricle ſeems empharical ; and ſo the meaning 
may be, Thar the Cities and Towns here mentioned are a third 
part of that Countrey. 7. e. of that part of 1ſachars and Aſhers Por* 
tion, 12 which tho'e places lays ; 

12 Yer * the children of Manaſſeh cou'd not y drive * Judges 
out the inhabitants of thoſe cities, but the Canaanites 1. 27; 
wouid dwell z in that land. : 

y S:eon Joſh. 15. 63. z Were reſ-Ived to Fight, rather than be 
turned out vt rhetir ancient habitations, 

i2 Yetit came to paſs when the children of Iſ:ael 
were waxen ſtrong, that they put the Canaanites to 
tribute bur did not utterly diive them out 3. 
 # Which they were o lidged to, now they were ſtrong and nu« 
merous enough 70 poll-{s thoſe places. 

14 And the children of Joſeph 5 ſpake unto Joſhua c 
ſaving, Why haſt thou given me 54; one lot, and one 
portion 4 to inherit, feing 1 az a great e people, for- 
aſmuch as the LORD hath blefled me hicherto ? 

b (i. e.) Of Ephraim and Manaſ-h, as is manifeſt, partly from 
v. 17. where it 1s ſo explained ; and partly, becauſe they mention 
it as an unreafonable thing, thar they being two, thould have but 


one Lot. c(.e.) Expoſtulared with hum, w!.en they went and 
faw that Portion which was allotted to them, and found] ic much 
2 N 2 ſhore 


j [i | phaims. 
{1997 


hap, XVIIE J 0 $5 
"Nt | 1 ettat 
Td 131.18 + 1 gon Por eee ifterwards divided by the Arbitrators between 
|. 4:16 [ them. Or 2». Becauſe the Land ſeverally allotted to them, was no 
A more than was little enough for one of them. o Or, numerous, for 

ſo the Hebrew word off ſignifies. 
15 And Joſhua auſwered them, If thou be a great 


people f, then ger thee up to the wood-ceuntry g, and 
cut down & for thy ſelf there in the land of the Periz- 
zires i, and of the {| giants &, if mount Ephraim be too 


narrow for thee /. 

f He retorts their own Argument ; ſeeing thon art a great and 
num:rous people, turn thy Complaints into Actions and valiant 
Exploits, and enlarge thy Borders by thy own hand,'to which thou 
maiſt confidently expe& Gods aſſiſtance. g To the Mountain, as it 
js called v. 17. where among ſome Towns there is much Wood- 
Jand, which thou maiſt without much difficulty poſl:ſs, and ſo get 
the more room, h Either the Wood, v. 18. for thy own advantage 
and uſe; partly in building more Cities and Towns ; and partly 
for preparing rhe Land for the uſe of paſture and Tillage. 7 Sup- 
poſed to be afſavage and brutiſh kind of People, that lived in Woods 
and Mountains. & Who lived in Caves and Mountains, now eſpe- 


Hi} | 
i k | Or, Re- 


jon. d Either 1. Becauſe they really had but] 


= OS 2 


cure, and were unwilling to run into new Hazards ard Wars, as. 
hey II by Jeſhuas anſwer to the Tribe of Joſeph, Joſs x79: 
ms -— Sexes likely to do when they entied upon their 

4 Give out from among you three men 4 for each 
tribe e: and TI will ſend them, and they ſh.ull riſe, and 
go through the land f, and deſcribe it accoiding to the 


inheritance of them, and they ſhall come again to me. 

a Three, not One, for more exaC& obſervation bok of the mea- 
ſure and quality of the ſeveral portions, and for greater aſſurance and 
eViG2nce of their care and faithfulneſs in giving in their Accounr. 
e Either One of each of theſe Tribes, who were yet unprovided for; 
or rather Two of all the Tribes, even of them who had already re- 
ceived their Portions ; which was highly expedient, that in calc it- 
ſhould appear that there was not a tufficiency for each of theſe 
Tribes who wanted their Portions, their Brethren might be more 
ready either to afliſt them in procuring more Land, or to part with 
ſome of their own portion to them. f Which they might now ſafe- 
ly do, becauſethe Terror of the late War was yer upon the Consa- 
tes, who were loath to rouſe ſo near and potent an Enemy. 


5 And they ſhall divide it into ſeven parts f : Judah 


cially when they were driven out of their Ciries. / Or, ſeing Mount 
Ephraim fs too narrow for thee, as thou complaineſt ; take to thy ſelf 
the reſt of that Hilly and Wooa Connrrey. Mount Ephraim was a 
particular and eminert portion of the Land, belonging to the 
Tribe of Ephraim, «S appears from Joſh. 19. 50. and 20. 7. and 21. 
21. Judg 4: 5: And this ſeems to be here mentioned Synecdochi- 
cally, for all the portion allotted to Ephraim and Manaſſeh, as ap= 
pears from their complaint, which was not, that this part, bur that 
their whole portion was too ſtrait for them. = 

16 And the children of Joſeph ſaid, The hill is not 
enough for us : and all the Canaanites that dwell in 


67 | * Judg. the land of the valley », have * chariots of iron o, both 
4. 3» they who are of Beth-ſhean, and her towns, and they 


who are of the valley of Jezreel p. 

2 If we ſhould Invade and Conquer at, and cut down both Woud 
and Men, yetit would not be ſufhcient for us. Heb. The HH: will/not 
be found, 1. e. obtained by us; thoſe fierce and ſtrong people the Pe- 
rizzites and the Giants will eaſily defend themſelves, and fruſtrate 
our attempts, having the advantage of the Woods and Mountains. 
n ( 7. e.) And ifthou ſayeſt, as we know thou wilt reply, That if 
the Hill either cannot be Conquered, or be not ſufficient for us, we 
may go down and take more Land out of the pleaſant and fruirtu] 
Valleys, we ſhall meet with no leſs difficulty there than in the 
Mountains. Or thus, in going to the Hills to which thou di- 
reteſt us, we mult paſs through Valleys, where we ſhall be way- 
laid by powerful and armed Enemies. o Not all made of Iron, but 
armed with iron, not only for Defence, but for Offence alſo, ha- 
ving as it were Sithes and Swords faſtened to them, to cut down all 
thar ſtood in their way. p Which waseither in the Tribe of 1/achar, 
or upon the Borders of it, Joſh. 19: 18. 


17 And Jofhua ſpake unto the houſe of Joſeph, ever 
to Ephraim, and to Manaſleh, ſaying, Thou art a 
_ great people, and haſt great power : thou ſbalt nothave 


one lot only q. | 
q Thou needeſt and deſerveſt more than that Lot, of which thou 


art actually poſſeſſed, and thou haſt power to get more; which 
-fchou endeavoureſt to do, God will bleſs thee, and give thee 
more. : HR 

18 But the mountain ſhall be thine : for it 7s a wood, 
and thou ſhalt cut ir down : and the outgoings of it 
» ſhall be thine: for thou ſhalt drive out the Canaa- 


nites, though they have iron chariots, and though they 
_ be ſtrong. 


r Either 1. The Produfions orFruits of that Land, when it is 
cleared from the Wood, and purged: or rather, 2. The Valleys 
and Fields belonging or adjoyning to 1t, for there the Canaanites 


Were, V. 16. 
| CHAP. XVII. 

The tabernacle is ſet up in Shiloh, 1+ The remainder of the Land deſcribed 
and divided into ſeven parts, for the ſeven Tribes which as yet had no In- 
heritance, 2— — 9: Joſhua caſts the Lot at Shiloh : The firſt comes out 
for Benjamin, 10: Whoſe Borders and Cities are deſcribed, 11 —-28- 

Nd the whole congregation of the children of It- 
'rael aſſembled together at Shiloh, and ſerup the 
.., tabernacle of the congregation there a; and 6 the land 


was ſubdued before them. 

a By Gods appoiatment, as is manifeſt from Dexre 12: 5: OF 
Jer, 9: 12: Hirher it was removed from G:{zal, partly for the ho- 
nour and conveniency cf Joſhua, that he being of the Tribe of E- 
phraim, and ſeating himſelf there, might have the opportunity of 
conſulting with God as off as he deſired and needed; and partly for 
the conveniency of all the Tribes, that being in the heart and 

' center of them, they might more ealily reſort to it £:om all places. 
Here the Tabernacle continued for above zoo Years, even till 
Samuels days, 1 Sam: I: 3: b Or, for, becauſe theſe words contain a 

' reaſon of the former ation : the Partic'e and is oft uled for for, as 
bath been ſhewed. : 

2 And there remained among the children of Iſrael 


ſeventribes, whichhad notyet received their inheritance 
2 And Joſhua ſaid unto the children of [rac], How 
long are you flack to go to poſlleſs the land c which the 


Lord GOD of your fathers hath given you ? 

c This flackneſs is ſuppoſed to ariſe, partly from their diffatis- 
faQion in the portions already allotted, Judas being roo large, as 
itappeared ; and Jeſephs too narrow, as they complained; partly 
from an opinion of the impoſſibility of making any regular and 
equal diſtribution of the Parts, till the whole were better known, 
and more exaQtly ſurveyed, which accordingly is here done ; and 
partly, becauſe being weary of War, and having ſufficient plenty 
of all things in their preſent condition, they grew flothful and 1c. | 


ſhall abide in their coaſt on the ſouth g, and the houſe 
of Joſeph ſhall abide in their coaſt on the north 5h. 

f Which were of equal extent or worth: for no Tribe was ſo great, 
bur one of theſe parts in its full extent would abundantly tuffice 
them ; and there was no reaſon why the portions ſhould be greater 
or leſs according as the 'Tribes at preſent were more or fewer in 
number, becauſe of the various changes which happened therein ſuc- 
cefſively ; it being uſual for one Tribe to be more numerous than 
another in one Age, which was fewer in the next. And if the ſeveral 
Tribes had increaſed more, and not diminiſhed their Numbers by 
their Sins, they mighr have ſent forth Colonies, and taken any part 
of the Land, even as far as Euphyates, all which the Lord of the 
whole Earth had given them a Rightro, which when they vleaſed 
they might take poſſeſſion of. g They ſhall nor be diſturbed in their 
poiteflion, bur thall keep it, except {ome partof it ſhall be adjudg- 
ed to another Tribe. þ In reſpet&t of Judah, not of the whole Land ; 
for divers other Tribes were moze Northern than they. 4 

6 Ye ſhall therefore deſcribe the land into ſeven parts, 
and bring the deſcriptics hither to me, that I may caſt 
lots for you here before the LORD # your God. 

2 7. 6. Before the Ark or Tabernacle, that God may be Witneſs 
and Judge, and Author of the Diviſion, that each may be contented 
with his Lot, and that your ſeveral poſſeſſions may be ſecured to 
you as things Sacred, and nor to be alienated, | 

7 Bur the Levites have no part among you &, for the 
prieſt-hoed of the LORD is their inheritance: and 
Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manaſſeh, 
have received their inkeritance beyond Jordan on the 
eaſt, which Moſes the ſervant of the LORD gave them. 

8 T And themen roſe, and went away : and Joſhua 
charged them that went to deſcribe the land, laying, 
Go, and walk through the land, and deſcribe it, and 
come again to me, that I may here caſt lots for you be- 
fore the LORD in Shiloh. 


T : __ : 
oy > herefore it ſhall be divided only into ſeven parts, as 1 have 


9 And the men went, and paſſed through: the la 
and deſcribed it by cities /, into ſeven way, in a one 
and came again to Joſhua to the hoſt ar Shiloh. | 


I Or, according to the Citie 7 
: s, to which the ſeveral Parts or 
tories b2longed. on qa 


10 4 And Joſhua caft lots for them in Shiloh 
the LORD.: and there Joſhua divided the Oe 
the children of I{rael according to their diviſions, 
11 ©« Andthelot of the tribe of the children of Ben- 
jamin came up according to their families : and the 
coaſt of their lot came forth between the children of 
Judah, and the children of Joſeph m-. 


m Wherein we ſee the wiſdom of Divine providence, this being 


the only place in which that Prophecy, Der. 33+ 12. could have WEN 


8 


been accomplifhed. 

12 And their border on the north-ſide was from 
Jordan, and the border went up to the ſide of Jericho 
on the north-ſide, and went up through the mountains 
weſt-ward, and the goings out thereof were at the wil- 
derneſs of Beth-aven ». 


2 A place diſtin& from,- but ne 
red from Joſ. 16. r. amr: 


13 And the border went over from thence toward 
Lvz,to the fide of Luz (* which Beth-el)ſouth-ward, * Gen: 
and the border deſcended to Ataroth-adar, near the hill 28: 19 
thar /zeth on the ſouth-ſide of the nether Beth-horon 

14 And the border was drawn thence, and compaſſed 
the corner of the ſea ſouth-ward, from the hill that 7;eth 
betore Beth-horon ſouth-ward : -and the goings our 
thereof were atKirjath-baal( which js Kirjath- jearimo) 

a ny o he —— of Judah: This was the weſt-quarter 
noel. Camper Nr re i A on onindrance 
. I5 Andthe ſouth-quarter p 24s from the end of Kir- 
jath-jearim, and the border went out on the weſt and 
went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah, ; 
} The ſame with the N orth-quarter of Judz/.See Joſ: I5* 5: Gy 
16 And the border came down to the end of the as. 


Beth.el, as may be gathe- 


tain q that /ieth before the vallev of the ſon of Hin- 
nom, 


—— 


20 2 Ren. 


hap. XVI " Tay 


«> 1 
tcb-15 


t Gr. 
Betha 
r» Jc 
I' 28, 


1.” ; wap. XIX. 7 0 8 


>. 15-8- north s, and deſcended to the valley of Hinom * to the 
th.15-7. ſide of Jebuſi t on the ſouth, and deſcended to * Enrogel, 
Et q i.e. Theplace where the Mountain ends,and the Valley begins. 
7 1. e. In the proſpeCof that Valley;or,that reacheth to that Vailey 
on the South. 5 Which extends to this other Valley on the North- 
ſide of it. t To that part where the Jeb»ſires lived, which was in and 
near Jeruſalem. 

17 And was drawn from the north,and went forth to 
En-ſhemeſh, and went forth toward Geliloth «, which 
js over againſt the going upof Adummim,and deſcended 
to * the frone of Bohan' the ſon of Reuben, 


"0p" Called alſo Gilgal, as appears from Jof. 15.7. Judg. 3- 19. but 
If * differing from thar Gilgal by Jordan. : 

18 And paſſed along toward the ſide over againſt 
| | Arabah x norchward, and went down unto Arabah, 
| gn the x Called Beth-arabah, Joſ. 15. 6. 
pialſte 


19 And the border paſſed along to the ſide of Beth- 
hoglah northward : and the outgoings of the border 
were at the north + bay of the ſalt ſea y, at the ſouth 
t Hb end of Jordan z : this was the ſouth coaſt. 
ts 20 And Jordan was the border of it on the eaſt-ſide: 
This vas the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, 
by the coaſts thereof round about, according to thei 
families, 


y Where an Arm of that Sea runs into the Land, which is oppoſ- 


ed to the South-bay that was in the South-border of the Tribe of 
Judah Joſe 15. 2. 2 Where it enters into the ſalt Sea, which 3s here 
oppoſed to the North-end of it, or the Spring-head, which was 1n 
the North. : 

21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Ben- 
jamin,according to their families, were Jericho 4, and 
Bech-hoglah, and the valley of Keziz 6, : 

a For tho' the City was deſtroyed, the Territory remained, and 
ſome Houſes probably were built and inhabited there, though ir 
was not made a City with Walls and Gares,which was the only thing 
forbidden, Jo. 6. 26. 4 Or, Emec-keziz, the proper name of a City 
or great Town. 


Te 22 And + Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim ec, and Bethel. 

Rthaba» 23 And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah, 

rz. Joh 24 And Chephar-haammonai,and Ophni, and Gaba : 
1+ 28+ 


twelve cities with their villages. 
25 Gibeon, and Ramah» and Beeroth, 
c Which either gave name to, or took name from that Mountain, 
2 Chron. 13. 4. 
26 And Mizpeh 4, and Chephirah, and Mozah, 
27 And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah, 


a Near Reamah,in the ſame Mountain where Silo was. There were 
| divers other Cities of that name. 
| 28 And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebuſi ( which zs Jeruſa- 
| lem e) Gibeath, and Kir-jath : fourteen cities f with 
| their villages. This zs the inheritance of the children of 
| Benjamin, according to their families. 

e Soit ſeems this City did properly and primarly belong to Binja- 
nin, altho' the Tribe of Judah had alſo an Inrereſt in it, either be- 
| cauſe ſome part of 1t was aJlotted to them, or becauſe the Benjamites 
gave them a ſhare in it, for the aſſiſtance which either they had 
received, or did expe& from that. potent Tribe, for the getting or 
defending of that very imporrant place. See more on Jo: 15. 63. f Ir 
is more than probable that all the Cities belonging to this Tribe are 
not here named, becauſe Anathoth and 4lmon are omitted here, but 

exprefied Jof. 21. 18. 
0 A FA 
The ſccind Lot falls to Simeon : his Borders among the Tribe of Judah: whoſe 

Inheritance was too great for them, 1 g9- The third Lot falls to 

Zebulun, 10 16. The fourth to Iſſathar, t7 —m 23. Tre fifth 

to Aſer, 24 ———31, The ſixth to Naphtali, 32 46. The ſeventh 

to Dan, 47, 48. The Children of 1ſyael give an Inheritance to Joſhua, 49, 

50. The aviſion of che Land finiſhed, 5 1. 

Nd the ſecond lot came forth to Simeon, ever for 

the tribe of the children of Simeon, according to 

their families: and their inhericance was within the in- 
heritance of the children of Judah #4. 

a This was fo order'd by God's providence, partly to fufill that 
threatning that he would divide and ſcatter this Tribe in Iſrael, Gen. 
49- 7- which was hereby done in part, becaule they had no diſtin 
part cf their own, but were as Inmates ro Judah ; partly, becauſe 
now upon the more exatt ſurvey of the Land, it appeared to Joſbua 


) Judah themſeves,that the part given to Judah did far exceed the Pro- 
portion which either they need-d and could occupy, or which the 
otaer Tribes could expett ; and partly, becauſe this was the leaſt of 
the Tribes, as is evident from Numb. 26. 14. and therefore fitteſt to 
be put within another Tribe. 


2 And they had in their inheritance Beerſheba, and 
| Sheba and Moladah, | 


6\Or, or, i. e. otherwiſe called ; for that Beerſh:ba and Sheba were one 
and the fame City, is macifeſt both from v. 6. where all the Cities 
are\reckoned to be bur 7h:ricen : and from 1 Chron 4. 28. where Si- 
meops Cities are enumerated, and Sheba omitted as ſuperfluous 
And Hazar-thual, and Balah c, and Azem, 
c/Called alſo B:Uah, 1 Chron: 4* 29. and Baalah, Joſ* 15: 29. For 
letjthis be obſerved once for all, that the. names of Perſons or Pla- 
ces are trequ-atly chang=4 through length of Time, or difference of 
—DaaleCts, ur ſtudy of brevity and eaſineſs in Pronuciation, or new 
Accidents, or ot:er Caves, Thus Eltolad and Bethul, vw. 4+ are cal- 


led T:iad nd Bethuel, 1 Chron. 4+ 29; JO» and for Beth-lebaokh, V, 6, 
15 Beth» biret, 1 Chron, 4 31. 


A 


WE < 


nom r, ##d which 7s in the valley of che giants on the | 


and Eleazar, and all rhe Princes and People, even to the Tribe of | 


H A. 

4 And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah, 
5 And Ziklag,and Berh-marcaboth,and Hazar-ſuſah, 
6 And Beth-lebaoth,and Sharuhen : thirteen cities d, 
and their villages. 


4 Or, Towns, as ſome of them are called, 1 Chron: 4; 32, Nor are 
all Simeons Cities here numbred, for Elam 1s added, 1 Chrom 4: 32. 
unleſs that were built afterward. 


7 Ain,Remmon, and Ether, and Aſhan: four cities 
and their villages. 

$ And all the villages that were round about theſe 
Cities,to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the ſouth : "This zs che 
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon, ac- 
cording to their families. 

9 Out of the portion of the children of Judah was 
the inheritance of the children of Simeon : for the part 
of the children of Judah was too much for them : there- 
fore the children of Simeon had their inheritance with- 
in the inheritance of thems 

Io © And the third lot came up fer the children of 
Zebulun e, according to their families, and the border 
of their inheritance was unto Sarid, 


e Who is here put before 1ſachar his elder Brother, as he is alſo 
(zens 493 3, Deute 338 18- 


ir And their border went up toward the Sea f, and 

Maralah, and reached to Dabbaſheth, and reached to 
che river that zs before Jokneam g- 
f i:e: The Midland Sea, as on the other (ide ir reached to the Sea 
of Galilee, and ſo thoſe Propecies concerning him, Gen? 49: 3. Deus 
33-18, were abundantly fulfilled. g Suppoſed to be Kiſhm, Juag: 4* 
7. or Bel, or Pags. ; 

12 And turned from Sarid eaſtward, toward the 
\un-rifing, unto the borderof Chiſloth-rabor, and then 
goeth out to Daberath þ, and geeth up to Japhia, 

h A City in Iſachar, as appears from Joſs 21: 28. 

t2 And from thence paſlſech on along on the eaſt to 
Gittath-hephir, to Ittah-kazin, and goeth out to Rem- 
mon || Methoar to Neah. 1 Or, 

14 And the border compaſleth it on the north-ſide to which :: 
Hannathon : and the out-goings thereof are in the yal- 4rawn- 
ey of Jipthah-el. 

I5 And Kattath,and Nahallal,and Shimron,and Idalah, 
and Beth-lehem z: twelve cities & with their villages. 

z; Not that where Chriſt was born, which was 1n Judah,thence cal- 
led Bethlehem Judah, Matt: but another. k There are more numbred 
here, but the reſt either were not Cities properly ſo called, having 
Villages under their Juriſdiction; or were not within this Tribe, 
but only bordering upon it,and belonging to other Tribes, which is 
evident of ſome of them, and may well be preſumed of others. 


16 This zs the inheritance of the children of Zebulun, 
according to their families,theſe cities with their villages. 

17 C 4d the fourth lot came outto Ilachar,for the 
children of Iffachar, according to their families. 

18 And their border was toward Jezreel /, and Che- 
{ulloth, and Shunem »-. 

1 The Royal City, 1 Kings 21: 11 This Tribes becauſe it lay be-. 
eween Benjamin on the Sourh, and Zeb:lun on the North, isnot here 
Jeſcribed by its borders, which were the ſame with theirs ; bat by 
ſome of its Cities. »» The Birth-place of Abijhag, 1 Kings 1: 3. 

i9 And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath, 

20 And Rabbith, and Kijhion, and Abez, 

21 And Remeth,and En-gannim », and En-haddah, , 
and Beth-pazzez. L 

n A different place from that Znganmim in the Tribe of Judah, Joſ. 

I5: : NS.” 
24 ad the coaft reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, _ 
and Beth-ſbemeſh,. and the out-goings of their border 
were at Jordan: ſixteen cities with their villages. 

23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children 
of lifachar, according to their families, the cities and 
their villages. 

24 CT And the fifth lot came out of the tribe of the 
children of Aſher according to their families. 

25 And their border 0 was Helkath, and Hali, and 
Beren, and Achfihaph, 

o On the North-weſt-ſide. " | 

26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Miſheal, and 
reacheth to Carmel weſtward p,and to Shihor-libnath ; 

p Or, Carmel by the ſea, to diſtinguiſh it from that Carmel in the 
Tribe of Judah, 1 Sam. 25. 2. This was a placs ofeminent fruit- 
fulneſs, 1/a. 33- 9- and 35+ 2. 37: 24+. agreable to the Prophecy 
concerning 4ſber, Gen. 49: 20. Deutt 15; 24. | 

27 And turneth roward the ſun-riting, to Beth-dagon,. 
and reacheth to Zebulun,and tothe valley of Jiphthahel 


coward the north-fide of Bethemek,and Neiel,and goeth 
out to Cabul q on the left hand r, 

q Either 1. That Coeuntrey called Calu/, wherein were 20 
Cities, of which 1 Kings 9. 13. But this is not probable,becuule rhat 
was not within,nor belonging to any particular Tribe; for then S9/0- 
29x Could not have aliznated it from rhem,and given it unto Hiram, 
whereas this did belong ro 4jher; or 2+ A certain City ſo called. -. 
r 1+ e. On: the North, which, when men luok towards the Eaſt, 
as iS uſual), is On their lefe hand. 

E 2'N 28 And 


on 


3 


_- 


| {4 5 


a 


Chap. XIX | 


I! | 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
lt 
| 
| 
| 


> + 98. 9 =" RACE I ELIT, RS" LIT £3. EEE cg, TI id 


U 


28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and 


Kanah /; ever unto great Zidon ?. 

{To wit, Kanah the greater, in the upper Gal:l:e; not Kanah the 
l:ſs, which was in the lower Galilee. ? Called great for its Aniqut- 
tys and Riches, and Glory. This Ciry either was not given to the 
Iſraelites, but is only mentioned as their border ; or at leaſt was ne- 
ver poſſeſſed by them; not withour a ſingular Providence of God, 
that they might not by the opportunity of {o good a Port, be 1n- 
gaged in much Commerce with other Nar10ns; from which, toge- 
ther with Wealth, that great corrupter of Mankine\, they might 
contra& their Errors and Vicese 

29 And then the coaſt turneth /toRamah,and to the 


ſtrong city F Tyre 7, and the coaſt turneth to Hoſah ; 
and the outgoings thereof are at the ſea, from the coaſt 


-_ - 
* 248, co Achzib. 
th: 15h 1: FJ From the North Southward. 
31. no part of the Land given them» LS 
Mic:1:14, 20 Umma alſo, and Aphek, and Rehob : twenty an 


two cities x with their villages. 
x Here are more named, bur ſome of them were not 
Tribe, but only bordering-placcs- : ; 
21 This zs the inheritance of the tribe of the children 
of Aſher, according to their families, theſe cities with 


their villages. 
32 © The ſixth lot came out to the children of 


Naphtali: even for the children of Naphtali, according 


co their families. 
33 And thcir coaſt y was from Heleph, from Allon to 


Zaanannim, and Adami,Nekeb, and Jabneel unto La- 
kum : and the out-goings z thereof were at Jordan. 

7 Their Northern Border drawn from Weſt to Eaſt, as appears, 
becauſe when this Coaſt is deſcribed and brought to irs end, 742 Coaſt 
is is ſaid to tun from the Eaſt Weſtwardy ve 34+ & is e The end of 
that Coaſt. 

24 And then the coaft turneth weſtward a to Az- 
nothcabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and 
reacheth to Zebulun to the ſouth-ſide, and reacheth to 
Alher on the weſt-ſide, and to Judah upon Jordan b to- 


ward the ſun-riſing. 

@ This is unqueſtionably the Southern Border deſcribed from Eaft 
to Weſt, b Qu, How can this be, when there were divers Tribes 
between this and Jadahall which reached to Jordan ? Anſ, He doth 
not ſay of Judah, as he doth of Zebulun and 4jher, that it reacheth to 
5t; but as it ſeems» purpoſely leaves out that word which he had 
aſed in both the former branches, left it ſhould be underſtood of a 
Local Reaching to it, or being Contiguous with ity which was Not 
true ; and that he mighr ſignifie, that he meant this Clauſe in ano- 
ther ſenſe; to wit, that it did in ſome ſort go or reach to, or COn- 
verſe with Judah by Jordans And ſo this may be here added, to ſhew 
the accompliſhment of rhat famous and obſcure Prophecys That 


; Excluſivelyy for this City was 


within this 


Naphtaliy though he ſhould be planted in the utmoſt border of the. 


La'', on the North-eaſt, yet he, ſhould poſſeſs the riches of the Weſt 
and Suth, Devte. 33: 23; i» ec; of thoſe Tribes which were at great 
dift:nce from him Weſtward and Southward ; and this he ſhou!d 
do by way of Commerce with them by their famovs River Jordan, 
which he'did not cnly touch in a {mall party as ſome of the orher 
Tribes did, but lay all along it fora good ſpace together, even from 
the very Fountain unto the S:a of Geneſarethe Some think that this 
is verified by that Rovalty of this Rivery which they ſuppoſe God 
gave to the Tribe of Judah, which extended as far as Naprhalie 
5 And the fenced cities are Ziddim,Zer, and Ham- 

math c, Rakkath and Cinnereth «, 

: Or Hamath, of which ſee Numb. 34. 8. 1 Kings 8. 6s. 2 King. 23. 
33- 4 Whence the Like of Cinnereth or Geneſareth received its Name. 

36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor, 


: 27 And Cedeſh, and Edrei, and En-hazor, 


38 And Iron,and Migdal-el, Horem,and Beth-anath, 
and Beth-ſhemeſh: nineteen cities e with their villages. 


e See On V. IF. 223 30. |» 
39 This zs the Inheritance of the Tribe of the chil- 


dren of Naphtali, according to their families; the cities 
and their villages. 

o © 4d the ſeventh lot came out for the tribe of 
the children of Dan, according to their families» 

1 And the coaſt of their inhepitance f was Zorah, 
and Eſtato), and. Ir-ſhemeſh. 
 f Which is here deſcribed onely by its Cities, not by its Borders, 
which are in part the ſame with Judah's, and their Taheritance 14 


in good part taken out of Judah's too Jarge portion; as appears 
from divers of the Cities mentioned, which are alſo reckoned as in 


Judah's portion. 


42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah, 
And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron, 

44 AndEltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath, 

45 And Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-rimmon, 
lor, over 46 And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border || 
againſt, before || Japho. 
| 0r,Jo® 47 And the coaſt of the children of Dan went out 
Ls 9236. #00 little for them g, therefore the children of Dan went 

up to fight againſt Leſhem hb, and took it, and ſmore it 

with the edge of the ſword, and poſſeſſed it, and dwelt 

+ Judg: therein, and called Leſhem + Dan, after the name of 
18: 29. Dan their father. 

g Heb: Went our from them, to wit, out of their hands or poſſeſti- 

pn; for ſo this Hebrew Word is uſed conceraing thoſe Lands, which 


| 


EY Fy "| 


. c / Chap. XN, 
in the year of the Jubilee are ſaid to go 7, Lev:t, 25. 28, 15, 31, 3} ; 
7. e. out of the hands of the preſent Pcfleflor,to the firſt and ancient 
Owners And fo peradventure this may !ignitie, that many of the 
Danites were forced by their powerful Neighbours the Ph;//f/n:25 to 
relinquiſh their Coaſt, and their alloted Habititions : which Put 
them upon the following courſe. þ This was done after 7ofhun's 
deathzas appears from Judg. 18. and ſeems to be here inferre3,partly 
that all the chicf places where the Danizes dwelt ( tho' far diitant, ) 
might be mentioned together ; and partlygto give an acconar of this 
ſtrange accident,why they removed from their appointed Pur:ion to 
lo remore a place; which may be this, That being much moleſted 
and terrified by their bad Neighbourgthey thought firt - go te ſome 
place remote from them, which alto they were in a manner cons 
trained to do, becauſe otherwiſe they muſt have taken fome part 
of the Portions of other Tribes, whereas now going to ihe very ur. 
mot Northern point of the Lands they rook that which did nor be- 
long to, or at leaſt, was not in the poſſeſſion of any other Tribe. 
| See more on Jud. 18. 

48 This zs the inheritance of the tribe of the children 
of Dan, 2ccording to their families; theſs cities with 
their villages. 

49 4 When they had made an end of dividing the 
land for inheritance by their coaſts,the children of Iſrae! 
gave 5 an inheritance to Joſhua the ſon of Nun among 
them. | 

i 7. e. They are ſaid to give it,becauſe the whole Land was given 
to Joſhua, and El-azor and the Princes, as joint Truſtees, acting in 
the name, and for the good of the People: {o that even Joſhua could 
take nothing without their gift. 

59 According to the word of the LORD K&, they gave 
him the city which he asked,eves * Timnath-Serah / in x 


mout Ephraim,and he built : the city,and dwelt therein. 

k As God promiſed, or commanded ; either, firſt, formerly, as 
may be gathered from Jef. 14 6. Where we read, That the Lord 
ſaid ſomething unto Moſes concerning me Caleb, and thee Joſhua ; tho? 
only what is ſaid to Caleb be there expreſſed, the other nor being to 
his purpoſe there : for 79bua having ſhewed the ſame courage and 
faithfulneſs which Caltb did,did doubtleſs receive equal encourage- 
ment and comfort from God at that time. Or, Secondly, now at 
this time by Eleazar. I Calle! Tinmath-heres, Fudg. 2. 9.9 1, e. Res 
paired and enJargedit, in which ſenſe Nebuchaanezzar is ſaid to have 
bult Babylom, Dan. 4+ 3o. 

51 * Theſe are the inheritances which Eleazar the 
prieſt, and Joſhua the ſon of Nun, and the heads of the 
fathers of the tribes of the children of Ifrael, divided for 
an inheritance by Jot,in Shiloh before the LORD,atthe 
door of the tabernacle of the congregation: ſo they made 
an end of dividing the countrey. 

CHAP AX 
God commanas ſix: Cities of Refuge for thoſe, who unawares ſhould tay man, 
y==4. The right uſe of them, 5, 6' The Iſraclites appoint hereunto three 

Cites 01 this, and three on the other ſide of Jordan, 7 -— 9g. 

He LORD alfo ſpake unto Joſhua, ſaying, 

- 2 dpeak tothe children of Iſrael, ſaying, * Ap- 
pPoInt out @ for you cities of refuge, whereof I fpake un- 
ro you by the hand of Moſes. 

_ # The Poſſcſſions being now divided among you, do 
tome of them for the uſe which I have commanded. 

3 Thar the ſlayer that killeth ay perſon unawares, 
and unwittingly b, may flee thither: and they ſhal be 
your refuge from the avenger of blood c. 

. 6 Heb. Through Ignorance, or Errour, or MiRake, and without Know- 
ledge. The ſame rhings twice repeated to cut off all the claims and 
expectations that wittu! Murdere:s might have of ProteQion here : 
2nd God having declared, That ſuch thould be taken even from his 
Altar, that they might be killed, Exod. 21. 14. and accordingly 
Joab was by Solomon's Order killed even at the Altar, 1 Kings 2, 28 

29, 30, 31, 34+ it 1s the more ſtrange and impudent, thar any Chri- 
ſtians ſhould make their SanQtuaries give ProteC&ion to ſuch perſons 
whom God hath ſoexpreſly excepred from it, which the Papiſts do ; 
and their Doftors are not aſhamed to defend it upon frivolous rea- 
ſons. c The Kinſman, who had right or power to demand, to take 
vengeance of the flaughrer. | 

4 And when hethatdoth flee unto one of thoſe cities, 
ſhal ſtand ar the entring of the gate of that city, and 
ihal declaie his cauſe e in the ears of the elders of that 
city ; they ſhal take him into the city f unto them, and 
give him a place g that he may dwell among them. 

ad Where the Judges uſed to fir. e Or, his marters or br.ſmeſs, what 
he hath done, and why, and how, he ſhal give them a true relation 
of the Fatt, and all its circumſtances. f Underſtand, if they are 
ſatisfied in the relation he makes, concerning the F:&, otherwiſe it 
had been a vain thing to examine his Cauſe. s Which they michr 
well allow him, becauſe God gave them the City with a reſervari- 
on for ſuch perſons. 

5 And if theavenger ef blood purſue after him, then 
they ſhal not deliver the ſlayer up into his hand : be- 
cauſe he ſmote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated 
him not before time, 

6 And he ſhal dwell in that city» until he ſtand þ be- 
fore the congregation i for judgement & * until the death 
of the hiZh prieſt & that ſhal be in thoſe days : then ſhal 
che ſlayer return and come unto his own city,and unto 
his own houſe, unto the city from whence he tied. 

. k Which was the poſture of the Accuſed and Accuſers, Exod: 18: 
13* Iſa: 50: 8: Zech; 3: 1, s Or, Company, os Aſſwmbly ; to wit, the 
Council appointed to judge of theſe matters, not the Council of the 
City of Retuge,for they bad examined him before, v: 4: but of the 
| Ciry 


* Numh; 


34 17+ 


* Exod::, 
I 3- Num: 
35.5641h 
Ig. 
you reſerve Deut: 19 
2+ 9. 


JF 12g 25! 


t 
) 


* Numb | 


(hap: 


Heb: 
i650 


» Deu* 
29! 

1 Ch c 
C. 78. 


* uhap 
I8. 1. 
tNum 
35+ 2s 


* Ge | 


+ Heb: 
Mnlified- 


» Deu:; 4: 
TH 

1 Ch on. 
(. 18. 


© uhap. 
I8. 1, 
= t Numb: 


35+ 2o 
vi ; 


* $& Ch. 
*& 33* 


Chap. XXL. 


30 $8 
City to which he belonged,or in or nigh which the Falt was commits 


tcd,as appears from Numb. 35. 25. k Of which ſee on Numb. 35+ 25» 
- C Andthey + appointed Kedefſh in Galilee in mount 


Naphtali,and Shechem in mount Ephraim,and Kirjath- 


arba ( which is Hebron ) in the mountain of Judah 7. 

| Concerning theſe Cities note, 1+ That they were all upon 
Mountains, that th-y mighr be ſeen at a great diſtance, and ſo dirett 
thoſe who fled tnither. 2- Thar they were ſeated ar convenient 
ditance one from another, for the benefit of the ſeveral Tribes ; 
for X:d:ſb was in the North, Hebron in the South, and Shechem be- 
tween them. 3. Thar they all belonged to the Levites ; partly that 
theſe Cauſes might be more impartially examined, and juſtly deter- 
mined by tkem who are preſumed beſt able ro underſtand rhe Law 
of God, and moſt obliged and likely to follow it in their Judge- 
ment.1nd not to be byaſs'd by any affeQtion or corrupt intereſk,and 
partly, thar their jult reputa'ion with the people, and their good 
Counſe!s, might lay ſome &ſtraint upon revengeful perſons, who 
might be inclined or tempted to follow the Man-ſlayer thither, and 
endeavour to kill him there. ; 

8 And on the other fide Jordan by Jericho eaſtward, 
they afligned mz * Bezer in the wilderneſs upon the plain, 
out of the tribe of Reuben,and Ramoth in Gilead,out of 
the tribe of Gad,and Golan in Baſhan,out of the tribe of 


Manaſleh. 


» Or, gave, or kad aſſizned or given; for they were given by Moſes. 
Deut: 4: qa, &C+ or, they confirmed Meſcs his Grant, and applied them 


| to thar uſeto which Moſes d.ſiyn<d and ſeparated them. 


9 Theſe were the cities appointed for ail the children of 
Iſrael, and for the ſtranger » that ſojourneth among them, 
that whoſoever killeth any perſon at unawares, might 
flee thither, and ner die by hand of the avenger of 
blood, until he ſtood before the congregatione 

n Not only Profclites, bur ochers alſo; becauſe this was a matter 
of common Tigir, that a diſtintion might be made between caſual 
Man-ſlayers, and wilful Murderers. 

CHAP XX6 
Cittes gin 0: of the other Tribes by lot to the Levites, n == 8. Particularly 
zo th. priefts, the children of Aaron, 9=—19. To the Levntes 3 the Koha- 
thites, 20 == 26. The Gerſhonites, 27 -—— 3 3.and Mcrarites, 34 —— 40+ 
in all 48 c tis; with their ſuburbs, 41. The Iſraelites quietly enjay the 
premiſed Land, 41 —— 45+ 
Hen 4 came near the heads of the fathers of the 
Levites b unto Eleazar the prieſt,and unto Jo- 
ſhua the ſon of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers 
of the tribes o' the children of Ifrael. : 

a When the whole Land was diſtributed unto the ſeveral Tribes, 
but 13ot aQtually puſſeſled by them ; which was the proper ſeaſon for 
them to pur in their claini» 6 The Fathers of che Levites were Kohath 
Gerſhom, and Merari, and the Heads ot theſe were the chief perſons 
now alive'of theſe ſeveral Fami'izs- : 

2 And they ſpakeunto them *at Shiloh in the land of 
Canaan,ſaying, F The LORD commanded by the hand 
of Moſes.to give us cities to dwell in, with the ſuburbs 
thereof for vur cattel. : 

2 And the children of Iſract gave unto the Levites 
c out of their inheritance 4, at the commandment of the 
LORD thee cities and their ſuburbs e. —_ 

c It tcems moſt probable, that they gave to the Levites promit- 
cuouſly ſuch Cities as God commanded, and that the Lor appro- 
priated them to their ſeveral Houſes or Families. & ( 7 e ) Uurct 
their ſeveral Poſſeſſions ; pircly, that the burden and lef's might be 
equally divided; and pri..c:pally, that the Levizes being ditperſcd 


SY 


- amorg the ſeveral Tribes, according to Jacobs prediction, Gen. 49- 


7- migÞt more eaſily, and frequently, and efteCtually Tech the /- 
rael.tes Gods Law ana Judgements, which they were engaged ro du 
D:«t. 33- 10. and thar the people might upon all occaſions reſort 
tothem, and require the meaning of the Lew at therr mouths, Mal- 2- 
7. eN tcnly the ute, bur the abſoJute Domiaion of them, as 1s 
manifeſt both from wv. 11. 12. where a diſtin&tion 1s made berween 
the C:ty and Suburb: of Hebron,and the Fielas and Villages thereof,and the 
former are given to the Levites, the latter ro Caleb; and from 
the return of theſe Cities in the J=bilee, unto the Levires as to the: 
proper owners, Levuit. 25. ZZ, 34« : 

4 And the lot came out ' for the families of the Ko 
hathites, and the children of Aaron the prieft, 2ubich 
ere of the Levites, had * by lot out of the tribe of Ju- 
dah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the 
tribe of Ber:jamin f, thirteen cities gp. 

f Which three rribes were neareſt to the Temple, where their 
buſineſs lay. g For though the Prieſts were now few enough for 
onz Ci 'y. yet reſpe& was to be had to their ſucceeding numbers; 
this Giviſion being made for all future Genenrations. Arid tecing 
the Zevires might tell rheic Houſes until the Jubilee, Lewic. 25. 33: 
mucin more might they Let them ; and therefore it 1s probable their 
Ci'ics were nor very long uninhabited, many being inclined ro dwell 
with them by vertue of relations contratted with them, or de- 
pendarce upon, or expettation from them ; or out of reſpe& to 
the 1ervice of God, and the good of their touls. 

5 And the reſt of the children of Kohath .þ had by 
lot, our of the families of the tribe of Ephraim ; and out 


of the tribe ot Dan, and out of- the half tribe of Ma- 
naſſeh z, ten cities &. 

þ-Who were of Aarons Family, not Prieſts, but Levites only. 
# W: ich Tribes are ncareſt to tve thiee former, and 10 the Koha- 
th.tes are piaced next to their Brethren the Aarinites. k Fewer than 
ti ey gave out of the three former Tribes, becauſe their inheritance 
was le's than the former. See Numb. 35. 8. 

6 And the children of Gerihon had by lot out of the 
families of the tribe of Iiiachar, and out ot the tribe of 


» w-_ 


HU 4A Chap. XXT 


Aſher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of che 
half tribe of Manaſſeh in Baſhan, thirteen cities. 

7 Thechildren of Merari by their families, had out of 
the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and. 
out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. 

8 And the children of Irael gave by lot unto the Le- 
vites theſe cities with their Suburbs &, as th: LORD 
commanded- by the hand of Mcfſes, 

k Of which, ſee on Numb. 35: 2» 

9 © And they gave out of the tribe of the children of 
Judah, and our of the tribe of the children of Simeon l, 
theſe cities which are here + meritioned by name. 


I Theſe are mentioned rogetber, 
within Judah's Portion. 


Io Which the children of Aaron beirg of the fami- 
lies 2 of the Kohathites, ho were of th: chiidren of 
Levi, had ; ( for theirs was the Firſt lor. ) 


7 (i.e) Of the family, the Plural Number for the Singular, 
which is not unuſua!. 


11 And they gave them || the city of Arbah, the fa- i| Or, Ki. lf 
ther of Anak, ( which cry is Hebron ) in the hill counrrey riatbarba. If 
of Judah, with the ſuburbs thereof round abour it. $ G- 
Iz But 7 the fields » of the city, and the villages > 

hereof gave they to Caleb the ſon of Sn 
thereof gave they to Caleb the ſon of Jephunneh, for his 
poſſeflion, | 1 Chron; 
2 (1.e.) All beyond the 2000 Cubites expreſſed, Numb.z 5:5:This © 59* 
is here mentioned, not as his peculiar caſe, bur as one eminent Ins 

ſtance,to ſkew,that it was ſo in all the reſt of the Cities here named; 

chat the Fields and Vill:ges thereof ſtill belonged to the ſeveral 

rribes from whom the Cities and their Suburbs were rzken ; and to 

make the reſt of the 179-lites more contented!y and cheartully reſign 

ſo great a part of their Pofſefſi-ns to rhe Levites, becauſe even Calcb 

did ſo,though his Poſſ-ſlion h:d been long b<tcre promiſed ard now 

aCtually given to him by Gods ſpecial conmand, »s a mark of ho-« 

ncur and compentation for h's long and faithtu] Service. 


13 T Thus they * gave to che children of Aaron the « 
prieſt, Hebron wich her ſuburbs, ro be a city of refuge 6. " Clies 
tor the ſlayer, and Libnah with her ſuburbs. os 

14 T AndJattir with her ſuburbs,and Ethtemoa with 
her ſuburbs, | 

15 And * Holon 0 with her ſuburbs, and Debir with 
her ſubutbs, = 


0 Called Hilen, 1 Chron. 6. 58. as Juttah, here is called, Aſhan, 1 
Chron. 6. 59. and Kibzaim called Jokmeam, 1 Chren. 6. 68. and fo ſome 
others, the names of rhe places being changed by lengch of time, 
and upon ſpecial occaſions, as was frequent among. the Jews. 
Though their D:.&ors add. that ſome of theſe places h:re mentz= 
oned being now in the Canaanires Poſſeſſion, and nor ſpeedi'y reco« 
vered from them, there were others put in their ſtead. 


16 And * Ain with her ſuburbs, and Juctah with her | 
ſuburbs, and Bethſhemeth with her ſuburbs, nine cities 
out ot thoſe two tribes. 


p Ain here, and Gibeon, v. 17. and ſome others here named are not 
named, 1 Chron. 6. either b-cauſe they were deſtroyed in ſome of 
chote Hoſtil: Invalions and Wars wherewith their Land was grie- 
vouſly haraſſed and waſted before that time ; or they appear taere 
u:;der other Names, as was ſaid. 


17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with 
her ſuburbs, Geba with her ſuburbs, 

18 Anathorh with her ſuburbs,and * Almon with her « 
ſuburbs : four cities. 6 

19 All the cities of the children of Aaron the prieſt, Aiemet 
were thirteen cities with their ſuburbs. 

20 4 And the families of the ciildren of Kohath,the 
Levites, which remained of the children of Kohath q,e- 
ven they had the cities of their loc our of the tribe of E- 
phraim. 

7 Over and above thoſe of them who were Prieſts. : 

24 For they gave them Schechem with her ſuburbs, 
in mount Ephraim, 7o be a city of refuge for the ſlayer, 
and Gezer with her fuburbs, 

22 And Kibzaim with her ſuburbs, and Beth-horon 
with her ſuburbs. tour cities. | 

22 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her ſu- 
burbs, Gibbcthon with her ſuburbs, F 

24 Ajjalon with her ſuburbs, Gath-rimmon with her 
ſuburbs : four cicies. 

25 And out ef the half tribe of Manaſſeh r, Tanach 
| with her ſuburbs, and Gath-rimmon with her ſuburbs: 
two Cit1CsS, 


r To wir, that half which dwelt in Canaan, by comparing this 
with v. 27. 


26 All che cities were ten with their ſuburbs, for the 
families of che children of Kohath that: remained. 

27 4 Andumto the children of Gerſhon of the fami- 
lies of the Levites,out of the other halftribe of Manaileh, 
they gave Golan in Baſhan wich her ſuburbs,re bea city of 
 retuge for the ſlayer : and Beeſhrerah with her ſuburbs: 
ewo Cities. 

28 Andout of the tribe of Iſfachar, Kiſhon with her 
ſuburbs, Dabareh wich her ſuburbs, 

29 Jarmuch with her ſuburbs, En-gannim with her 
| ſuburbs, four cities, 2 N 4 30 And 


becaule the Cit:es of Simenn lay 7 


x7 Chr: 
-Hilen 


x Chr 
EC. 59 
Athan. 


l'F Rl 
119. 16 

| 
t 


- » —— ——_— I —— - _ - 
_— IYER "ORE OP BAER 5 4-0” 
” _ I - _— 

_ * m - on INE I 


if 
i Chap. XXIT. 


l 
f 
I 


I 30 And out of the tribe of Aſher, Miſhal with her 


JOSHUA 


ſuburbs, Abdon with her ſuburbs, 


z21 Helkah with her ſuburbs, and Rehob with herſu- 
burbs : four cities. 

32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedelh in Ga- 
lilee with her ſuburbs,ro be a city of refuge for the ſlayer, 
and Hammoth-dor with her ſuburbs, and Kartan with 
her ſuburbs : three cities. 

33 Allthe cities of the Gerſhonites,according to their 
families,were thirteen cities with their ſuburbs. 

24 © And unto the families of the children of Merar1, 
the reſt of the Levites, our of the tribe of Zebulun.Jok- 
neam with her {ubucbs, and Kartah with her ſfubutbs : 
25 Dimnah with her ſuburbs,Nahalal with her ſubuibs: 
four cities. 

6 And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer s with her 
ſuburbs, and Jahazah with her fuburbs ; 

s ACity ofRefuge, as itis called Jef. 20. 8. and therefore needleſs 
to be here repeated. 

27 Kedemoth with her ſuburbs, and Mephaath with 
her ſuburbs : four cities. 

38 And our of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead 
with her ſuburbs,zo be a city of refuge for the ſlayer, and 
Mahanaim with her ſuburbs, 

39 Heshbon with her ſuburbs,Jazer with her ſuburbs, 


Four cities in all. 

40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their 
families, which were remaining of the families of the 
Levites, were by their lot, twelve Cities» 

41 All the cities of the Levites, within the poſleflion 
\ of the children of Iſrael were fourty and eight cities z, 
with their ſuburbs. 

£ Qz Why hath this Tribe, which was the leaſt of all, more Ci- 
ties than any of them? 4nſw. Firſt, It doth notappear that they had 
more : for though all the cities of the Levites be expreſled,it is not 
ſo with the other Tribes, but divers of their cities are omitted, as 
is evident. Secendly, The Levites were confined to their Ciries ard 
Suburbs; the reſt had large Territories belonging to their C1- 
ties, which alſo they were in a capaciry of improving, which the 
Levites were not; ſo that one of their Ciries might be more conſi- 
derable than divers of the Lewites.Thirdly,God was. pleated to deal 
liberally with his Miniſters,partly to put honour upon thoſe when- 
he forſaw many wouid be prone to deſpiſe; and partly, that beins 
Free from all outward diſtraftions, they might more ent:rely anc 
krvently devote themſelyes to the ſervice of God, and the inſtruQi 
on of Souls. ; 

42 Theſe cities were every one with their ſuburbs 
round abeut them : thus were al! theſe cities. 
| 43 © And the LORD gave unto Ufrael all the land 
u which he ſware to give unto rheir fathers; and they 
poſſeiied it, and dwelt therein. 

u He gave them the right to All, and the a&ual Poſſeſſion of the 
greateſt part of it, and power to Poſſeſs the reſt as ſoon as it was 
needful and convenient for them,which was by degrees, when their 
Numbers were increaſed, &c, Exod. 23. 29, 30. and the abſulute 
Dominion of all the people remaining in it. 

44 And the LORD gave them reft round about, ac- 
cording to ail that he ſware unto their fathers,and chere 
ſtood not a man of all their enemies before them x: the 
LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand. 

x To wit, all the days of Joshuagby compaiing J//. x. 5. for after. 

wards it was otherwiſe with then | : 
T Chap. 45 + There failed not oughe of any good thing, which 
3115*.-the LORD had ſpoken unto the houſe of 1frael: all 


came to pals. 


I —— i 2. SETIES ITY 


CHAP. AA 
The two tribes and half are ſent home with a bl. ſjmg ; fir. chargeto fear the 

Lord ; and great bioty, 1 ==9. they build om Altar of T:ftimony at the 

brink of Jordan, 10+ the Iſraelites are offended ; and afſ:wmble to wage 

war againſt them, 11. 12. they firſt ſend Phinehas and ten Princes Am- 
baſſaders to reprove them, 13. ——= 20. thcy clear themſelves ; ther bre. 

thren reft ſatisfied, 21=— 34. 

7 Hageey Joihua called che Reubenices,and the Gedites, 
and the half tribe of Manaſlleh, 

2 And ſaid unto them, Ye have kept * ail that Moſes 
theſervant of the LORD commanded you, and have o- 
beyed my voice in all that I commanded you. 

2 Ye have not lefr your brethren theſe many davs s 
unts this day,but have kept the charge of the command- 
ment of the LORD your Gods 

a (i.e. ) For divers years together, ſo long as the War laſted. 
See Jof. 11. 18. and 14. 10. 

4 And now the LORD your God hath given reſt unto 
your brethren,as he promiſed them : therefore now re- 
+ Num. turn ye,and get ye unto your tents b, and unto the land 
32- 33* of your polleſſion, | which Moſes the ſervant of the 
wa 13 LORD gave you on the other {ide Jordan. 

h b (#. e. ) Toyour ſettled habitations,as app:ars from wv. 8.which 

are oft called Tents, as Judg. 19.9. 2 Sam. 18.17. Ho). 9. 6. Mal, 2.12. 

5 But take diligent heed c to do the commandment, 

and the law «d which Moſes the tervant of the LORD 

+ Deut. charged you, * to love the LORD your Gcd, and to 
10. 12 walk in all his ways, and to keep his commancments, 


* Num- 
3 2s. 20s. 
Deut- 3+ 
18- 


Chap. XX j; 
and to cleave unto him, and to ſerve him withall your 
heart, and with all your foul e. - 

c Watch over your ſelves and all your aftions. d Two werds ex- 
prefling the ſame thing,the Law of Commandments delivered by 
Moſes, e With the whole ſtrength of your Minds, and Wills, and 
AﬀeQions, | 

6 So Joſhua bleſſed them,and Tent them away : and 
they went unto their tents. 

7 © Now to the one half of the Tribe of Manaſſeh Mo- 
ſes had given poſſeſſion in Baſhan : but unto the other half 
thereof gave Jolhua among their brethren on this ſide 
Jordan weſtward. And when Joſhua ſentthem away al- 
{ounto their tents, then he bleſſed them : 

8 And he ſpake unto them,faying, Return with much 
riches unto your tents,and with very much cattel, with 
filver,and with gold, and with braſs, and with iron,and 
with very much raiment : divide the ſpoil of your ene- 
mies with your brethren f. 

f (i. e.) With them who ſtayed beyond Jordan for the defence of 
their land, and Wives, and Children, who therefore were to have: 
thare, though not an <qual ſhare with theſe, See Numb. 31. 27. 
But for them, 8 Sam 3o- 24. their ſhare was equa], becauſe their 
danger was equal, | 

9 T And che children of Reuben, and the children of 
Gad,and the half tribe of Manaſlch returned,& departed 
from che children of Iſrael out of Shiloh, which 3s in the 
land of Cansn, to gointo the countrey of Gileadto the 
land cf cheir Poſſethion,whereof they were poſleſled, ac- 
cording to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moſes. 

io And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, 
thatare in the land of Canaan,the children of Reuben,and , 
che children of Gad,and the half tribe of Manaſſeh,built 


there g an alrar by Jordan, a great altar to ſee to. 

g Or, then, as this Particle is elſewhere uſed; and ſo Learned In- 
terpreters underſtand it, Pſal. i4, 5+ and 36 12. Eccleſ. 3. 17. Hoſ. 
2. 154And in theLatine Tongue Adverbs of Place are ſometimes pur 
for Adverbs cf Time: So I rakeit here. Firſt, Becauſe this beſt an- 
iwers to the when in the beginning of the Verſe.Secondly, This ſeems 
to me to clear a great difticuity as ro the place where the Altar was 
bilt, which though according to our Tranſlation it ſeems and is ge- 
erally thought by Interpreters to have been in the Land of Canaan; 
yetif things be more narrowly examined,it may be thought to have 
2CEN on the other ſide Jerdan in Gilead; and that both, Firſt, from 
v. 11. where :t 1s ſaid tc have been built over againſt,or,in the ſignt 
of the land of Canaan, therefore not in it. And Secondly, From the 
reaſon they give of the building of this Altar,for fear leſt the 1/rael- 
ites within Jerdany and in Canaan, fbould ſay unte their Chrildren awel - 
ling beyond Jordan,The Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and 
you,8&c, Which jealcuſie would have been much confirmed by build- 
ing the Alrar in Canaan, but would be ſatisfied and confuted by ha- 
ving on the cther fide of Jordan,and in their own Land,a pattern of 
thar Altar «t which God was ſerved 1n the Land of Canaan, asa Wit- 
neſs that they owned the ſame God, and the ſame way of Worſhip 
with their Brethren that lived in Canaan. Bur whether the Hebrew 
Particle be rendred then or there, it is not to be taken too ſtrictly ; 
'f then,the menu g 1s net,that they did this as ſoon as ever they came 
to the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canaan; but about that 
time when they come to them,that they thought and deſigned it,and 
as con as ever they were got over Jordan,which was 1n a very little 
ime,they effc&cd and pert ted it: if itbe rendred rhere, itis not to 
be limited ro the very fame ſpet ef ground mentioned before, as if 
it was bui't at that border of Jordan that was inthe Land of Canaan; but 
fo be a little more Jarge!ly underſtood ; to be built at one or other 
of the borders of Jordan ; or in general,by Jordan: which is here 
purpoiely added, for the Explicition of the Word zhere, and to pre- 
vent the reſtraint of it to the border of Jordan, within Canaan. 

11 9 And the children of Iſrael heard fay, Behold the 
children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the 
half tribe of Manafleh, have built an Altar over-againſt 
the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan,at the paſ- 


ſage of the chiidren of Iſrael þ. 
h Where they paſſed over Jordan,cither at their firſt entrance in« 
ro Canaan, Or afterwards, and uſually. 


12And when the children of Iſraeli heard of it,the whole 
congregation of the children of Iſrael gathered chem- 
ſelves together at Shiloh,to goup ro war againſt them k. 

;# Not 1a their own perſons, but by their Elders, who uſed to 
rraniatt all Afﬀairs of this kind in the name and ſtead of all the Pec- 
ple. k As Apoſtates from God,according to Gods command in that 
caſe, Deut. 13+ 13, &c. 

13 And the children of Iſrael ſent unto the children 
of Reuben,and to the children of Gad, and to the half 
cribe of Manaſleh into the land of Gilead, * Phinehas 
the ſon of Eleazar the prieſt. 

14 And with him ten Princes of each + chief houſe 
a prince,throughour all the tribes of Iſrael, and each one 
was an head ofti.e houſe of r5cir fathers among the thou- | _ 
ſands of lirael, "he father 

15 4 And they came unto the children of Reuben, 2nd 
to the children of Gad,and to the half tribe of Manaſleh, 
unto the land of Gilead,andthey ſpake with them, ſaying, | 
16 Thus faith the whole congregation of the LORD ;. 
What treſpaſs is this mm, that ye have committed againſt 
che God of Irael,to turn away this day » from follow- 
ing the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, 
tat ys might rebel o this day againlt the LORD ? 


* Exod.6- 


270 
Numb 
25. 7+ 


} rp ff 
fe 


MmMorr 


/ Who 


Chap. X XI. 


+Nvumb. 


+ Chip. 
7. I, $* 


{ Who do and are reſolved to cleave unto that God from whom 
you have revolted, and who ſpeak this to you in the name of the 
LORD. »» How hainous acrime is this! » (z.e. ) So ſoon after God 
harh obliged you by ſuch wonderful favours, and when God 1s now 
conduQing you home to reap the fruits of all your pains and ha- 
Lars. o With a defign to revolt from, and rebel againſt God, and 
againſt his EXPreis command of worſhipping him at one only Al- 
tar, Ex3a8 20: 24» Levite 17: 8, 9. Deuc: 5 2: Gy Ti 13» 

1 Is the iniquity 7 of Peor p too little for us, from 
which we are not cleanſed until this day 9 ( although 
there was a plague in the congregation.of the LORD ) 

p (7. ) Of our worſhipping of Baal-Peor, Numb: 25.4 For though 
God had pardoned 1t, as 10 the National Punithment of it, Numb. 
25: 11. Yet they were not yet thorowly purged from it; partly be- 
cauie rhs ſhame and blor of that filthy and odious prattice was net 
y=r wiped off: and partly, becauſe ſome of that corrupt leaven ſt1]} 
remained among them, and rhough ſmothered for a time, yet was 
r2:dy to break forth uponall occaſions. See Jof: 24: 23. And Gog 
alio took notice of thete Idolatrous inclinations in particular perſons, 
and tound out ways to puniſh them one time or other. 

18 But that ye muſt turn away this day from follow 
ing the LORD? and it will be, ſeing ye rebel to day 
againſt the LORD, that to morrow r he will be wroth 
with the whole congregation of Iſrael s. | 

r (1.e,) Suddenly, as rhar w-rd 1s ofr uſed, as Mat: 6; 30+ 1 Cor. 
255 33+ ©) 
puniſhing 1t+ 

19 Notwith{tanding, if the land of your poſſeſſion 
be unclean tr, then pals ye over unto the land of the pol- 
{:{tton of the LORD. wherein the LORD'S tabernacle 
dwelleth,and take poſſeflion among us «: but rebel not 
againſt the LORD. nor-rebel againſt us », in building 


you an altar, belide the altar of the LORD our God, 

t If you apprehend it ro be ſo for want of the Tabernacle and 
Altar thefe; as the following words imp:y # if you now repent of 
your former choice in preferring the wor'dly commodities of that 
Countrey before the advantage of Gods prelence and favour, and 
more frequent opportun'tics of his Service, 4 We will readily re- 
fign pirt of our polk:f115ns to you for the prevention of this fin and 
miſchiefy wherein they ſhew great zeal for Gods honour, and great 
pity and char'ty to their Brethrer, w For all the Tribes were uni. 
ted in one Body Politick, and made one Commonwealth, and one 
Church; and each Tribe was ſubj-& to rhe Laws and Commands 
of the whole Society ; ard of the chick Ruler or Rulers thereof, 
ſo its diſobedience to their juſt commands was properly Rebellion 
agiinſt them. 

20 + Did not Achan the ſon of Zerah * commit a 
treſpaſs in the accurſed thing, and wrath fell on all the 
congregation of Iſrael,and that man periſhed not alone 
7 in his iniquity & ? 

x (:7.e ) One of bs Poſterity, Joſt 7:17, 18+ y But brought de- 
ſtruction upon his whole Fzmily, and parr of our Forces tfent a- 
gainſt Ai. z Or, for his fn ; of which ſez Joſ: 78 24. | 

21 Thenthe chiidren of Reuben.and the children of 
Gad,and the half tribe ot Manaiich. anſwered and ſaid 
unto the heads of the thouſands of Ifrael a, 

2 Either Firſt properly, each was a Governour of a thouſand : 
for there were among them divers Ru'er', ſome of Tens, ſ-me of 
Hundreds, and ſome of Thouſands ; or 1ather, Secondiy, impro- 
perly, and indefinitely, z. e. of the Pcopie of Jj-a:l, which confilt of 
1o many Thouſands more than you, whole Authority therefore you 
owe a reverence to. For by comparing v: 14» theſe ſeem ro be 
greater Perſons than thoſe that were Rulers of Thouſands, 

22 The LORD God of gods b, the LORD God of 
gods, he knoweth & and Uraei he ſal know F, if it be 
d in rebellion, or if in tranſgreflion againſt the LORD 
( fave us not this day e. ) 

b That Jehovah, whom we no leſs rhin you acknowledge and 
adore as the God of gods, infiaitely ſuperiour to ail rhar are call<d 
Gods, The multipiying cf his Titles, and the reperition of rhete 
words, ſhew their zeal and earneſtnels in this matter, and their ab- 
horrency of rhe very thoughts of it. c To him we appeal who 
knoweth all things, and the truth of what we are now laying, 
+ Nor only our preſent words, but our future and conſtant courte 
ſhal fatisfie all 1ſ-ael of our perſeverance in the true Religion. d If 
this have been done by us with ſuch deſign, or 1a ſuch a manner. 
e Thou, O Lord. to whom we have appealed, and without whom 
we cannot oe ſaved or preſerved, fave us not from any of cur Enc- 
miesy nor from the Sword of vur Brethren. Ir is a ſudden Apo- 
ſt:aphe to GOD, uſual in ſich vehzmenr ſpeeches. 

23 That we have built us an altar co turn from fo]- 
lowing the LORD; or if co offer thereon burat-offer- 
ing,or meat-offering,or if to offer peace-offerings there- 
on, let the LORD himſelf require zr f. 

f( 4. e-) Call us ro an account and punith us for it; as that 
Phraſe is oft uſed, as Der: 185 19. x Sams 20; 16g Job 10: 6. P[al. 
ICs 13s 

24 And if we have not rather done it for fear of his 
thing, ſaying, + In time to come your children might 
ſpeak unto our children, ſaying, What have ye to do 


with the LORD g Gud of 1trae] : 


g Ycu haveno rtlauon to him, nor intereſt in h1m, or his Wor: 


nn 

gt For the LORD hath made Jordan a border be- 
tween us and you þ; ye children of Reuben, and chil- 
dren of Gad, ye have no part in the LORD z: fo hal 
your chidren makg- our children ceaſe from tearing the 
LORD. : 


JOSHUA « 


s With you for do:ng fo, and with us for fufferingy or not ] 


þ To ſhut you out of the Land of Promiſe 


Liz 


the Covenant made between GOD and ous Fatkers. 


See the like Phraſe. 2 Sam. 20. 1. Ezra 4. 8. Joh. 13+ 3. 


altar, not for burnt-offering, nor for facrifice : 


ings,that your children may nor fay to our children in 
time to come, Ye have no partin the LORD. 


preſence, in your Tabernacle, and upon your Altar. 


28 Therefore ſaid we, Thar it ſhal be, when they 


that we may ſay again, Behold the pattern / of the Aitar 
of the LORD, which our fachers made,nort for burnt- 
otfcrings,nor for ſacritices, but it zs a witneſs between us 
and you m, 

I An exaCtt repreſentation and reſemblance. m That we both ſerve 
one God, and approve aad make uſe of one and rhe ſame Altar. 

29 God forbid that wethould rebel againſt theLORD, 
and turn this day from following the LORD, to build 
an altar for burnt-offerings, for meat-offerings, or for 
{acrifices,beſides the altar of the LORD our God that #s 
before his tabernacle. | 


the congregation, and heads of the thouſands of Iſrael 
which were with him, heard the words that the children 
of Reuben, and the children of Gad,and the children of 
Manaileh fpake, F-it pleaſed them ». 
n» They were fully fatisfied with this anſwer. 
31 And Phinehas the fon of Eleazar the prieſt ſaid 


Gad, and to the children of Manaſſeh, This day we 
perceive that the LORD is among us o,becauſe ye have 


ye have delivered the children of Ifrae! out of the hand 
of the LORD p. 

o By his gracious preſence, and preventing goodneſs, in k:eping 
y ou from 10 great an offeace,and aliot us from choſe diſmal calami- 
ties that wouid have toilowed upon it. - p ( ze. ) From the Wrath 
and dreadful Judgements of GOD, by avording that Sin which would 
have involved both you and us in a molt Bloody War; you have 
delivered us from tute evils we feared. He that prevents an unex= 
petted or approaching Diſcafe or Miſchief, doth as truely deliver a 
man from it, as he thae Curcs or removes 1t after it hath been in« 
flicted. 

32 4 And Phinehas the ſon of Eleazar the prieit, 
and the princes, returned from the chiidren of Reuben, 
and from the children of Gad, our of the land of Gilead, 
unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Iſrael, and 
brought them word again. 

33 And che thing pleaſed the children of Iſrael, and 
the chi:dren of Ilracl blefied God, and did noc intend 
co go uP againſt chem in batte], to deſtroy the land p 
wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelr. 

fp As they were by the Law of GOD obliged to do, if they had 
been guilty and perfitted therein ; as afcerwards they did the Tribe 
of Benjamin forthe fame reaton. 
| 34 And thechiidren of Reuben, and the children of 
eween us, that the LORD is GOD, 
EMAP. AXH 


jor them: and would work in expell.ng the Canaanites, x ==5, Exhorts 

them to be couragious : to obſerve ths ' law: and beware of Iaolatry, 

6—8. which he enforces by former Benefites : and: promiſes, 91x, 

By threatnings, 12 — 

A Nd it came to paſs, a long time 2 after that the 
LORD had given reſt unto Ifrael from all their 


in age. 

a About 14 years after 1t. 

2 And Jothua cailed 6 for all Iſrael c, and for d their 
elders, and for their heads, and for their judges,and for 
their officers, and ſaid unto them, I am old and ftricken 
iN ages 

b Either to his own City,or rather to $h:1:h,the uſual place of ſuch 
Aitmblics, where his words being uttered before the Lord, were 
likely ro have the more effett upon them. «c Noe all the people in 
their own perſons, who could not either come thither, or hear him 
there; bur in their Repreſentatives, by their Elders, Heads, Judges, 
and Officers, which are here added for the reſtrition and explica:ion 
of that general expreſſion. a Or, even for, &c. 


3 And ye have ſeen all that the LORD your God hath 
done unto all theſe Nations, becauſe of you e: for the 
* LORD your Cod zs he that hath fought for you. 

e For your fake and good, rhar you might gaia by their lefles. 
4 Behold, I have divided unto ycu by lot thete natt- 
ons that remain f, to be an inheritance for your tribes g, 
+0 from 


” — 
— % —_ 
- 


þ That we and ours may have and hold our Priviledge of ſerving 
and worlhipping God, not upon this Altar, bur in theplace of Gods 


ſhould /o ſay to us,or to our generations in time to come, 


Chap. "I 


and conſcquently from 
: Nothing to 
do with him; no right to ſerve him or expe& favour from hint 


26 Therefore we ſaid,Let us now prepare to build an 
27 But chat it may be * a witneſs between us and you, . ,.. 
and our generations after us, that we might do the ſer- ,,. ,g 


vice of the LORD before him & with our burnt-offer- Chap: 24 
ings, and with our ſacrifices, and with our peace-offer- 27-ver- 34| 


20 And when Phinehas the prieſt, and the princes of 


+ Heb. it | 
was good \j 


not commurtred this treſpaſs againit the LORD : + now + Hc6: 


then 


Gad cailed the altar || Ed; for it ſhall bs a witnels be- Thar is, 


a Witnels. 
So chap: 


Joſhua being old, aſſembles the people : declares the wonders God had wrought 24% ©7* 


enemies round abour,that Joſhua waxedold,and + {tricken + Hebs 


come 1n'o 


d 2V'Se 


* Ex5ds 
14: 14. 


; x : in their _ 
unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of eyes» 


7 
i 
i 


- 1 


l' } 
[| | 


I 


| 
| 
| 


—__ 


: 


hap. XXI!, a ; 86 
j from Jordan v .ch all the Nations that I have cut off þ, 


[i 
1.3 even unto the great fea + weſtward z. 
i f Not yet ESC g You ſhal cercainly ſubdue them, a - 
| inherit their Land, as you have done the reſt, if you be not Waſneing 
[ to your ſelves. h ( :.e. ) With the Land of thoſe plyionss 't . 
People pur for their Land, as we have ſeen before; and as omg rh 
on the contrary, the Land is put for the People. 1 FT e * ? 
fines, your moſt formidable Adverſaries yet ſurvive; yy _ 
alſo and their Land 1 have given to you, and you _—_ tedly 
deſtroy thems if you will proceed vigoroully 3 WOI p E 

5 And the LORD your God, he ſhal expel t = 
from before you, and drive them from out of your ſight, 


and ye ſhal poſſeſs their land, as the LORD your God 


hath promiſed unto you. ; 
6 be ye therefore very COuragious k, to keep and to 


: do all that is written in the book of the law of _ 
[Deut. 5« * that ye turn not aſide therefrom, to the right hand or 


2.avd to the left /. 

9. T4. k For it will require great Courage ar 

: the Commands of Moſes, and particularly, 
deſtroying the reſidue of the Canaamies. 7 ( 
war wag bt adding to the Law, or diminiſhing from 1t, 
ſpeaks. : 
g's That ye come not among thele nations -,theſethat 


F Pfal.r6- remain amongſt you, neither * make mention of the 
name of their gods », nor cauſe to ſwear by thews o, net- 


ther ſerve them, nor bow your ſelves unto them p. | : 

m ( i.e. ) Avoid all familiar converſe and contraQts, but __ y 
Marriages with them.as it i$ explained, v- 12+ and as t EY ebrew 
Verb intimates ; being oft uſed of coming or 307g 1N TOA -—prige 
» To wit, unneceſſarily and familiary, Jett the mention ot £ ein 
breed diſcourſe about rhem, and ſo by degrees bring a man 06 
approbation and worſhip of them. Compare £x09: 237 31 yy 
I2: 3. Pſal: 16: 4. Ephe 5* 3- o Nor require nor compe! - Jen. 
tiles to ſwear by them, as they uſed ro do ; eſpecially in Leagues 
and Contra&s,which therefore the 1ſrazlites are here implicitely for- 
bidden to make with them. p Neither give them any inward 1 eve- 
rence, or outward adoration. Here 1san obſervable 41 1p pred pt 
by he ſhews what notable Progreſs Sin uſually makes,and horofre 
there is to look to the b-ginnings of ir, foraſmuch as a civ11an 
common converſation with their perſons was likelv ro bring chem, 
and indeed did aftually bring them, by inſenfible ſteps, to og my 
ſhipof their gods. So it is no wonder, if ſome things pe fog'y _ 
in themſelves evil, be forbidden by God, as here the _— of their 
gods is, becauſe they are occaſions and introductions to evil. 


| 0-3 for © 8 || But * cleave unto the LORD q your God, as ye 


ifyoa will haye done unto this day 7. : | 

| clave, q By firm Aﬀiance, conſt:nt Obedience, intire Aﬀetticn, faith- 
= ful Service and Worſhip of him alone. r To wit, ſince you came 
'*® Deur: into Canaan; ſince kei, time the body of the people (for of them 


and 


d Reſolution to execute all 
that of expelling and 
I (i.e. ) In one kind or 
as Moſes 


Were 5- 7-1 
4 eph- IoFo 


| Il» 22, ; t of articular. perſon ) had bebaved themſeves 
| por gd os tha 64d in the Wilderneſs, and had not been 
guilty of any groſs and general Apoſtacy from GOD, or Rebellion 
againſt him. : 
or, then , 9 || For the LORD hath driven out from before you, 
| the reat nations and ſtrong ; but s for you,no man / hath 
LORD o_ able to ſtand before you unto this day, 
o——— wit, whom you have _ otherwiſe ſome of thoſe 
cople did yer remain unconquereds ; : 
* Lev. 26. f to * One man ot you jhal chaſe athoutand : for the 
$8. LORD your God, he 3 that fighteth for you 7, * as 


 Devt. 32. he hath promiſed you. 


| 4 
4 + Impute not this therefore to your own vaJour, as you will be 


*—_— aptto do, but to Gods gracious 2nd powerful aſſiſtance. 

0 1x Take good heed therefore unto your 7 ſelves u, 

and 23 : God. 

27. that ye love the LORD your God. _ Le 

T Heb. u Now it requires more watchfulneſs and diligence than itdid in 

Souls, the Wilderne!s, b:cauſe your Temprtaricns are now more and 
ſtronger ; partly, from the . Examples and infinuations of your bad 
Neighbours; the remainders of this wicked p--p/e; and partly 
from your own Peace and Proſperity ; and rhe Pride, Security,For- 
getſulineſs of God, and Luxury, which uſually atrend upon that con» 
dition, as God had warned them, Deut: 6: 10, 11, 12: ; 

12 Elſe, if ye doin any wile go back , and cleave 
unto the remnant of theſe nations, ever theſe that re- 
main among you, and ſhal make marriages with them, 
and go in unto them y, and they to you ; 

x From God, and from his worſhip and ſervice. »y The Phraſe 
notes the Matrimonial att. 

12 Know tora certainty, that the LORD your God 
will no more drive out any of theſe nations from before 

*Fxod: you; * bur they ſhal be ſnares and traps unto you z,and 
23: 33- ſcourges in your ſides, and thorns in your eyes a; until 
Numb: ye perich from off this good Jand þ which the LORD 
335 $5» , : | 

our God hath given you. | | | 
mo 7. 7 z By your ur to them, and converſe with them, you will 


be inticed and drawn by degrees into their Errors, and Impieties, 
and brutiſh Luſts. « When chey have inveagled, and ſeduced, and 
thereby weakned you, then they will moleit and vex you, no lels 
than a ſevere Scourge doth amans ſides which are Jaſhed by ir,or than 
a ſmall Thorn doth the Eye when it is got within it. 6 They ſhal 
ſo Perſecute you, and Fight againſt you wich ſuch Succeſs, that 
you ſhal be forced to quit your own Land, and wander you know 
not whither; which muſt needs be very Terrible to them to think 
of, when they compared this preſent Eaſe, apd Plenty and Safety, 
with the Pains, and Wearinets, aad Hazards, and Waats of their 


former Wandrings- 


14 And behold,this day T a»: going the way ot all the 
earth c, and ye know in all your hearts, and in all your 


= — 


= & 2&,” 


fouls 4, that * not one thing hath failed e of all the good * Chap; 
things which the LORD your God ſpake concerning ** 45: 
you ; all are come to paſs unto you, and not one thing 


' hath failed thereof. 


c (7.e.) Of all fleth,or of all men; the way which all men go; 
I am about to Die as all men muſt, Heb: 9g: 5 The ſame Paralc is 
1 Kings 232, 4 (i.e. ) You k1ow afſuredly ; your own experience 
puts 1t out of all queſtion. e Qs. How is this ture when ſv great a 
part of the Promited Land and Pecple y.t remain unconquer:d ? 
Arnſ. God promiſed them to deſtroy all their Enemies, and td grve 
them the whole Land, not at once, but by degrees, by little and little, as 
is expreſled, Deut: 7: 22. and as was moſt convenient for them. 

I5 Therefore it ſha! come to paſs, that as all good things 
are come upon you,which the LORDyour God promiſed 

- o o + . 

you; ſo ihal the LORD bring upon you * all evil things * Levir. 
f, until he have deſtroyed you from off this gocd land, 2© '6 


j R I Deut: 28: 
which the LORD your God hath given you. , mgeS—7 
f The accompliſhment of Gods promiſes is a Pledge or Aſſurance, ? 
that he w1ll alſo fulfil his Threatnings ; both of them depending up= 
on the ſame ground, the faithfulneis of God 
16 When ye have tranſgrefſed the covenant of the 
LORD your God, which he commanded you, and have 
gone and ſerved other gods, and bowed your ſelves ts 
them ; then ſhal the anger of the LORD be kindled a- 
gainſt you, and ye hal periſh quickiy trom off the good 
land which he hath given you. 
CH A P. XXIV. 
Toſbua aſſembles all the tribes to Shechem, 1. A brief Hiſtory of Gods Benefits 
from Terah ; exhorts them faitefully to ſerve the true God, 2. 13" Re- 
neweth a Covenant between them and God ; promiſing for himſelf and his 
Houſe ; the people four ſeveral times promiſing for themſelves, 14— 25. 
He writ2s tis in the Book of the Law ; ana ſe!s up # ſlone for @ witneſs, 
26=— 28. His age, death, and burial, 29==31. The burying of Joſephs 
Bones, 32. The death and burial of Eleazar, 33. , 


AN Joſhua gathered all the tribes of Iſrael « to She- 

chem 6b, and called for the elders of Iſrael, and for 
the heads, and for the judges, and for their officers, and 
chey preſented themſelvs before God c. 

a To wit, by their Repreſentatives, as Joſ: 23: 2. b Either 1. To 
Shiloh, where the Ark and Tabernacle was ; becauſe they are here 
21d ro preſent themſclves before God ; and becauſe the Stone {et up here 
'S {aid to be ſet up in, or by the ſanRuary of.the Lord ; of both which I 
{hall ſpeak in their proper places. And they ſay Shiloh is here cal- 
ed Shechem. becauſe it was in the Territory of Shechem ; bur that 
may be doubted, ſeing Shiloh was Ten Miles diſtant from Shechem, 
as S. Jerom athrms, And had he meant Shilob, why ſhould he not 
expreſs it in its own and proper name, by which it is called in all o- 
ther places, rather than by agother name no where elſe given to it ? 
Or rather, 2: To the City of Shechem, a place convenient for the 
preſent purpoſe, not only becauſe ir was a Levirical Cityy and a City 
of Refuge, and a place near to Jeſbua's City, but eſpecialy for the two 
main ends for wh:ch he ſummoned them thither. 1. Forthe ſolemn 
Burial ofthe Bozes of Joſeph, as is implied here wv: 32: andof the reſt 
of tie Patriarchs, as is noted As 7: 15, 16: for whichthis place was 
deſigned. 2. For the fo'emn renewing of their Covenant with God; 
which in th.s place was firſt made between God and 4brabamy Gen: 


Chap. XIv | 


X SS *® > 


'2: 6, 7. and afterwards was there renewed by the /ſraclites at their 

rſt entranc= into the Land of Canaan, between the two mountains 
of Ebat and Gerizim, Jof. 82 30, ©: which were very near Shechem, 
as appears from ſuages 9: 6, 7. and therefore this place was moſt 
proper, both to remind them of their former obligations to Ged, and 

to engage them to a farther ratification of them. c Either 1. Be- 

tore the Ark or Tabernac'e, as that Phraſe is commonly uſed; 
which might beeither in $4.10þ, where they were fixed; or in She- 
chem, whirher the Ark was brought upon this great occaſion, as it 
was ſometimes 1emoved upon ſuch occaſions, as 1 Sam: 4: 3. 2 Sam: 

15*24 Or 2. In rhat Pubiick, and Venerable, and Sacred Aſſembly 

met togerher for Religious Exerciſes; for in ſuch God is preſent, 

Exod 203 24. Pſais 82: 1, Mats 183 203 Or 3. As in Gods preſence, 
to hear what Joſbua was to ſpzzk to them in Gods Name, and to re- 

ceive (Gods Commands from his mouth. Thus J/aac is ſaid to Bleſs 
Jacob before the Lord, 1 e. in his Name and Preſence, Gen: 27: 13 and 

Jephthah is ſaid to witer all his words before the Lord in Mizeph, i. e. as 

in Gods preſente, calling him in to be Witneſs of them. 


2 And Joſhua ſaid unto all the people 4, Thus ſaith 

the LORD God of Iſrae], * your fathers dwelt on the + 6: :, 
other ſide of the floud e | in old time, even Tera the fa- 26: 1. 
ther of Abraham, and the father of Nachor : and they and 12: 1. 
f ſerved other gods. 7 Heb. 

d ( 7. e- ) That people which were preſent, to wit, to the Zlders, 
&c. by whom 1t was to be imparted to all the reſt, and to as many of 

the people as came thither« e Or, the River, to wity Euphrates, "0m 0 
as all agree; ſo called by way of Eminency. f (7. e« ) Both Abra. Y 
ham and Nachor were no lets Idolaters than the reſt of Manking, "8 
T bis 1s ſaid to prevent their vain boaſting in their worthy Ance= 
ſtors, and to aſſure them that whatſoever good was in, or had been 
done by their Progenitors, was wholly from Gods free Grace, and 

not for their own merit or righteouſneſs, as the Jews were very apt 

bo concen, - 

3 AndI took g your father Abraham from the other 
fide of the floud,and led him throughout all the land of | 
Canaan þ, and muliplied his ſeed 3, and * gave him + Gn: 
Ifaac &. : 21; 2- 
g I apprehended him by my grace, and ſnatched him our of that 
Idolatrous and Wicked place, and tock him into Acquainrance and 
Covenant with my ſelf, which was the higheſt Honour and Happi- 

neſs he was capable of. þ ( 7.e.) I brought him after his Fathers 
Death into Canaan, Gen: 12: 1. and Icondutted and preſerved jm : 
in ſafety in all his Travels through the ſeveral parts of Canaan.; (:-e.) ; 
Gave 


Meolamy 
that is, 


*N 
21.3 
Deut 
326 


* Nu 
a2 
Dzut 


4» 


* Exod 
23. 28 
Deur. 


20, 
* Pl. 


J- Ge 


y Deut 
log 11, 


a 
i 


I, 


Chap. XXIV. 


» Gen- 250 
2 26» 
* Cow 36. 


8. 
* Gen. 


46+ I, 


* Exod: 


Jo 16+ 


* Exod- 


12: 37+ 
» Exod- 


I+ 9 


*Numb. 
21. 34, 
Deur, 
326 


Þ2 
. 


» Chap. 

Jo I 4+ 

* Chap. 

C, i- an 
1. 1, and 
Ils 1, 


* Exod. 
23- 28. 
Deut. 7. 
20. 


voy 44* ing Judgemerts. Or 2. Properly fo calicd. Sce on Exod: 237 48. 
3 6. 


* Deut: 6: labour, and * cities which ye built not y, and ye dwell 


* Ley; 
I7: To 
Ezzki 20 


Gave him a numerous Poſterityznot only by Hagar and Kerwrah,but 
even by Sarah and by Iſaac, as it follows. k by my ſpecial Power 
and Grace to be the Heir of my Covenant, and all my Promiſes, 
and the Seed in or by which ali Nations weie to be Bleſſed,Gen: 12+ 
1: and 21? 2. 

4 And I gave unto Iſaac, * Jacob and Eſau, and I 
gave unto * Eſau mount Seir to poſſeſs it /: * bur Jacob 
and his children went down into Egypt m. en 

/ That he might leave Canaan intire to his Brother Jacob and his 
Poſterity, Gen: 36: 7, 8. m Where they long lived 1n grievous 
Bondage ; which God having delivered us from, I ſhal now paſs 1t 
over. | 

5 * I ſent Moſes alſo and Aarcn, and I plagued E- 
gypt according to that which I did » amongſt them: 
and afterwards I brought you out. WH 

» ( ive. ) Ta ſuch manner,and with ſuch plagues as I infl;Qed,and 
are recorded. 

6 And TI* brought your fathers out of Egypt, and ye 
came unto the ſea, and the Egyptians purſued after your 
fachers with chariots and horiemen unto * the Red-ſea. 

> And when they cried unto the LORD, he pur 
darkneſs between you and the Egyptians, and brought 
the ſea upon them, and covered them, and your eyes 
have ſeen what I have done in Egypt o; and ye dwelt 
in the wilderneſs a long ſ{caſon. 

o He ſpeaketh this to the Elders, v. 1. who were ſo, not only by 
Power ard Dignity, but many of them by Age ; and. their being 
now nor ſfixry yeors patt fince rhoſe Egyprian Plagues, it is very pro- 
b.ble that a co'fi:izrab'e number of rhote here preſent, had fcen 
thoſe things 11+ Ezypr, and bu:ng not twenty years old, were exemp- 
r:d from 114 orcay ful Senrence of Dettruttion, patled upon all who 
were then of mor. years ſtanding, Numb: t 4+ 

8 And I brouz1i:t you iuto the hand of the Amorires, 
wiich dwelt onthe o: her ſide Jordan : *and they fought 
with you, and I gave them into your hand, that ye 


might poilcls their iand, and 1 deſfroyed them from be-. 


fore you. 
9 Then Balak the ſon of Zippor, king of Moab,aroſe 


and warred againſt Ifraei p and * ſent and cailed Balaam 
" the ſon of Beor ro cutfe vou. 


? Q-. How is this tru», wien Balak did never fizht again#t Iſrael, 
Judges 1 25 ? An. One Prince may commence a War againſt ano- 
ther though he never come to a Ba tel, nor ſt: ike one ſtroke ; So 
Balak warred, though not by op:n fo. ce, yer by Crafty Counſel and 
Warlike Stzatzgems, by Magica! Arts. by W ;ked Devices, by mak- 
ing bate betwixt them a; d God their Confederate ; or by Warlike 


a:ations, in caſe Balaams Charm: ha'i ſucceeded, as may be ga- ! : 
5. ; people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land: there- 


thered from Numb: 22:11. 6r ar leaſt by ceſign or intention; things 


JOSHUA. 


follows ; or ofa falſe corrupt worſhip of God, with that which 
God appoiated ; and Trurþ is oppoled rod flinulation and falſen«ſs, 
and inſtability of heart, a Whereby ir appears, Thar al:chough 
Jojbua had doubtleſs prevented and purged our 21 publick and ma- 
nifeſt Idolatry, yer there were ſome of thera who prattiſed it in 
their private houſes and retirements. See below v.23. .1mes 5;25,: 6 
AG 7: 423 43» b Terah, and Nachor, and Abral2m, as wv. 2. and 0- 
thers ot your Anceſtors. c Sce Exzek: 23: 3, 8, 19, 21, 27. Under 
theſe parciculars, no doubr he comprehends all other talſe gods 
which were ſerved by the Nations amongſt whcm they were, es ap= 
pears from wv. 15- but only mentions theſey as rhe Idols which rhey 
were in more danger of worſhipping then thoſe in Canaan; partly be- 
cauſe thoſe of Canaan had been now lately and pa!pably diſgraced by 
their inability to preſerve their Worſhippers from toral ruine; and 
partly, b-caufe che other Idols came recommended un'o them by the 
venerable name of Antiquity, and the cuſtom of their forefa: hers. 
See Jers 443 17. Exek:; 203 18. 

If And if itſeemevil 4 unto you to ſerve theLORD, 


gods which your fathers ferved, that were on the other 
tide of the floud, or the gods of the Amorites, in whole 


land ye dwell : but as ior nie and my houſe, we will 
ſerve the LORD F. ; 

4 Unjuft, unreaſonable or inconvenient: e Not that he leaves 
them to their liberty, wherher they would ſerve God or Idols; for 
Joſhua had no ſuch power or liberty himſelf, nor could give it ro any 
other ; and bath h: and they were obl'ged by the Law of Moſes, to 
give their worſhip to God only, and to torbear all Idolatry in them- 
{elves, and ſeverely to puniſh ic in others; hut it is a Rhercrical and 
powe:fu! infinuation, whereby he both impiies, That rhe worſhip 
of God :s fo nighly reaſonable, fo necclary ani beneficialz and the 
ſervice of dols is ſo abſurd, and vain, ard permiciovs, that if it 
were left free to all men io make their choice, every man in his 
right Wirs muſt needs chuſe the Ser-ice of God, befor» thar of Tils; 
and provokes them to bind themi: Ives faſter :o God ty their own 
choice. See ſuch manner cf ſpecci:es in Ruch 1:8, 15. 1 Kings 18. 


21. f But know this, ir you ſhou'd all be fo baſe and brutiſh, as to 
prefer ſenicleſs aud umporenrt Id. ls befoie rhe True and Living God, 
iris my firm purpoſe, Thar I wil',, and my El1'dren 5nd Servants 
C 5 as I can influence chem ) ſhalbe conſtant and faitiiful ro the 
LO * 


26 And the people anſwered and {aid, God forbid 
that we ſhouid forſeke the LORD, to ſerve other gods. 

17 Forthe LORD our<:od he ir ;5that brought us up, 
and our fathers out of the land of Egypr, from the houſe 
of bondage, and which did thcſe great ſigns in our ſight, 
and preſerved us in all the way wherein we went, and 
among all the people through whom we paſied. 

18 And the LORD drave out from before us all the 


being oft ſaid fo be done both in Scriprure and other Authors, fore will we alſo ferve the LORD, for he is our God. 


wi:ich were. only deſigned or intended, as here v. 11. Gen: 37: 21* | 


Ezcks 24% 13. Mat: 58 28. Joh: 10:32, 33: And theold Lawyers note, 


19 And Joſhua faid unto the people, Ye cannot ſerve 


Chap. XXIV. || 


* chooſe ye this day whom ye will ſerve e, whether the Joh: 6;67 


That he is rightly called a Thief or an Adulterer, &c« who wanted wthing_ the LORD g : for he is an holy God: he is a jealous 


but vccaſim to b» ſo. | ; 
to Bur I would not hearken unto Balaam q, there- ! your fins» 


fore he bletſed you {till ; fo I delivered you out of his| & He ſpeaks nor of an abſolute impoſſibility, ( for then both his 
hand r. ; reſolution to ſerve God himlielf, and his exhortarion to rhem to do 


' ſo, had beea vain and ridiculous) but of a moral impoſlibility, or 
q Who hereby 6.11 to hav APE” ns leave w Outs Og a very great difficulty, which he alledgerh nor ro d:tcourage them 
and pan en eas | wk, = yr ; - io Hera 7 wan IMP'Y : from Gods ſervice, which is- his great deſign to en;;age them in; but 
ro go, was highly angry wit'' hum Weary Fm " eg b Dll o::1y to make rhem more conſiderate and cantious in vbliging theme 
rene, _—_ 22; 20g 22, Z2. r ( lo Co ) rom Balaks malicious [1 1gn: ſeives ; and more circumfpe& and reſolved _ anſwering chals abs. 
agiinlt you. 
1: And * ye went over Jordan, and came unto ” 


gations, The meaning is, Gods ſervice is not, as you ſeem ro fancy, 
a : a flighr and eafie rh.ng as ſoon done as ſaid; but it is a work of 

richo : and * the men of Jericho tought againſt you 5s, ! greac difficulty, ard requ'res giear carey and courage and reſolution; 
the Amornes,and the Perizzites,and the Canaanites,and i and when I coaficecr the m ure purity of God, thar he will nor be 
che Eittices, and the Girgaſhires, the Hivites,and the Je- | **<&d or abulrdylanglwitball your grear and often manifelied 
; = - | pPr-nencfs to Super{tition and Idolarry, even during the Life of Mo» 
bulites z, and I deiivered them into your hand. Jer, and in ſome of you, whilſt I lice, and while# the ovl:gat'ons 
s Made oppſition againſt y ou by ſhutting their Gaces, by EN- ! wich God hath !ail upon you in this Jand, are freſh in remem- 
deavouring t cur off your Spies &c. they Wa:red againit yous 1f | brance ; [ cannot bur fear char afrer my Decesſe you wUl think rhe 
not by an Offe..live, yet by a Deferſive War. 7 To wit, ſuccelive=; Service: f God to9 hard and burdenſom for you, and theref:re will 
ly ; for in theſe few words be lecms to compriſe all their Wars, ! caſt it «M, and revole from him, :f you d& (wr doub'e your Watch, 
which being ſo freſh in their M<mory, he thought it needleſs par-, and carefully avcil all occaſions of Ico'atiyy whict: I teac you will 
ticularly ro men 10n. : not co, but 1 do hereby exhoit.you rodo. h He will nocendure a 
12 And * I {ent the hornet « before you, which drave| corrival,or partner in b1\ Worſhip;yeu cannot ſerve him ane Idols to- 
them out from before you, ever the two kings of the A- | gether,as you will be inclined & .empreil to do./If you who own your 


rites: 1 j* * Wi | ſelves for bis People and Servants, tha] wick:dly and wilfully tran. 
morires : but * not with thy _—_ > analy thy bow x, | refs his Lacy by BENS ve ocher Crlmem "#4 we” Ps ere bo np 
« Eicher fizuratively, z. e. errors and Plagues, or otter deſtroy- { unpuniſhed in you, as he doth in other Nations; Therefore cor ſi- 
; der what you do when you take the LORD for your GOD; weigh 
your advanteges and u:ccnveriencies together ; for as if You be fin- 
cere and faithful in Gods { rvice, you wiil have admirable berefirs 
by it; ſo if you be falſe to your own Prof. flions, and fort.ke him 
whom you have to {:}:mnly avouchzd to be your Ged, he will deal 
more ſeverely with you, than with any people in the World. 


25 If ye forfike the LORD, and ſerve ſtrange gods, 


And this being doae betore Joſbhuz's ent: ance into Canaan, it is not 
Nrange if it be not mentioned 1n this Book or Record of Jeſhuas | 
ations. x For though thou didſt fight with chemy and prevail a- | 
gainſt them in Battel, yer this was nor becauſe thou hadit more-force 
or Courage than they ; bur becauſe by my Hornet which I ſent 
Ike an Harbinger before t:e2, I bad both broken their ſpirits, and 
greatly diminithed cher Numoers, and particuliriy cut off thoſe 
G1ants, or others who were like to give thee moſt trouble and dif- 
ficuity; whence? it comes to paſs that we read of ſo few Giants in 
that Land which was called the _ and of Giants, Deut: 35 13. 


13 And [have given you a land for which ye did not 


you after that he hath done you good 7. 

k (i.e.) He will alter tvs courſe and tre manner of his dealing wirh 
you, and w:}l be as ſevere as ever he was kind and gracious. / He 
will repent of all his former kindnefs, and his goodneſs abuſed will 
be turned into fury. 

21 And the people ſaid unto Joſhua, Nay, but we 
will ſerve the LORD ». 


nm To wit, him on'y, and not ſtrange gods, as was ſuppoſed by 
Jojbua, v. 206 


in them: of ce vineyaids and oiveyards which ye 
planted not. do ye ear. 
3 See on Jo: 10: 12, 13. 
14 4 Now therefore fear the LORD, and ſerve him 
in fincerity and in truth z, and put away the gods a 
which your farcheis b ferved ou the other tide of the 
. * - | I . di Q7 i | He hy 
floud, and in EEgVPL c; and ferve ye the LORD. | And they ſaid, We are witnelles, 
z Either thcſe txo capitiitins note the faine rhing ; or ſmcerifty | Thi 
. _ ae oe 3-5, - 2 2 » This 
1s oppoſed to the mixtuic of ialls gods wita the trucy as 1t here | 


to {erve him, 


; God þ : he * will not forgive your tiranſereflions i. nor® Exol: 
5 give y 8 , heme 
2J» . 


* then he will turn &, and do you hurt, and conſume * Chap: 


22 And Joſhua ſaid unto the people, Ye are witneſſes - 
againit your ſelves z, that ye havz choſen the LORD, . 


hi 
: 

| 

| 
Wil | 


Wh || 
1m 


23; 15» 


9c 6. 


hap. I. 


| 
| 
" 
j 
j 
| | 


troubleſom to them, an 


» This ſfoſemn Profeflion will be 2 ſwife Witneſs againſt you, if 
hereafter you ApoBtatize from GOD. F 

22 Now therefore put away, ſaid he,the urange gods 
which are among you s,and encline your heart untothe 
LORD God of {{rae]). . | 

o Thoſe Idols v hich you either brought ont of Ezypty or have ta- 
ken in Canaay, which I have roo much reaton tO believe that ſome 
of y-u contrary to God's command do keep,whether for the preci- 
outneſs of the matter, or rather for ſome _— inclination to Super- 
ſtition and Idolatry, as the following words 1MP!y. SCE V. 14, 

24 And the people {aid unto Joihna, The LORD our 
God will we ſerve, and his voice will we obey. 

25 So Joſhua made a covenant with the people that 
day,andiet them a ſtatute,andan ordinance pinShechem. 

p Either, 1. He ſet, or propounded, or declared unto them the 
S:atut. and Ordinancey i. e. the ſum of the Statutes and Ordinances of 
GOD which thsir Covenant obliged them ro. Or, 2. He ſet or 
eftob'iſhed jr, to wit, that Covenant with them, 1 C the People for 2 
Statute or an Ordinance, to bind themſelves and their Poſterity unto 
GOD for ever as « Statute and Ordinance of GOD dothe 

26 And Joſhua wrote theſe words q in the book of the 


law of God r.and * took a greatſtone,and tet it upthere /. 


*See Judg.under * an oak that was by the ſanuary of the LORD : 


it of the people with the Lord. 


q i« e. This Covenant or Agreement 01 h 
in the Ark, Deut: 31: 9, 26. 


7 i.e In thac Volume which was kept 


. - Fd 4 a 6} Wh Ky ; 
- whence it was taken and put 1nto this Book of Joſhua $5 This ic dil 


partly for the perpetual remembrance of this grear and folemn AQ - 
on, partly to lay the greater obligation upon tae pcople to be true 
to their engagement ; and partly as a WIMNC!5TOF Godgand againſt rhe 
people. if afterwards he ſeverely puniſhed them for their defettion 
from God, to whom they had ſo folemniy and freely obliged them- 
ſelves. ſ As 2 witneſs and monument of tins great tranſaction, ac- 
cording to the cuſtom of thote anCient times, as Gen: 28: 18. and 31. 
45. 3nd 35: 14. Exod 24% q. Dext? 278 2+ Joſs 43 3» and $: 32 Pcfiibly 
this agreement was written upon this Srone, as was thenuſual.7 i. e, 
Nezr to the place where the Ark and Tabernacle then were ; for 
tho” they were ſorbidiecn to plant & Grove Cf Trees near unto the A'tar, 
Deur: 2% 21+ as the Gentiles did, yet they might for a time fer up 
an Altar, oz the Ark, near a great Tree which had been plantec 


tliere before. 


27 And Joſhua ſaid unto all the pzople, Behold, this 


7 SSH 5+ 0&1 : | Chap, 1, 


ſtone ſhal be a witneſs unto us ; for it hath heard « all 
the words of the LORD which he ſpake unto us ; it ſhal 
be there for a witneſs unto you, leſt ye deny your God, 
z2 It Thal be as ſure a Witneſs againſt you, as if it had heard. 
This is a common Figure, called Proſopopzia, whereby the ſenſe of 
hearing is oft aſcribed ro the Heavens and the Earth,and other ſenſe. 
leſs creatures, as Deut: 323 IQ Iſat 1: 26 Fer 2: 120 
28 50 * Joihua let the people depart, every man un- , Jud 
to his inheritance. 6. 3 
29 & And it came to paſs after theſe things, that 
Joſhua the ſon of Nun, the ſervant of the LORD died, 
being an hundred and ten years old, 
3o And they buried him in the border of his inheri- 
tance in * Timnath-ſerah, which z im mount Ephraim, * Chap: 


on the north- ſide of the hill of Gaatb. it = BE 
31 And * Ifraei ſerved the LORD all the days of Tjud.es 


Joſhua, and all the days of the elders that + over-lived f Ae:pro. 
Joſhua, and which had known all the works of the longed 
LORD, that he had done for Iſrael, pranks 
And* 8 ; after Je» 

32 T And* the bones of Joſeph, which the children 9... 
of {ſrael brought up out of Egypr, buried they in She- * Gen:se, 
chem x, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of * 25: 
the ſons of Hamor the father of Shechem, * for an hun- _ [37 
dred || pieces of lilver, and it became the inheritance of -Ge. ” 
che children of Iſrael. 19. 

x Nct in the city of Shechem, but in a Field near; and belonging || Or, 
'O 1f, as appears from the following words, and from Gen: 33* 18. Lambs. 
and from the ancient cuſtom of the J/-aclites to have their Burying 
places withour Cities, in Fieli's or Gardens. 

33 And Eleazar the fon of Aaron died, and they 
buried him in a hill zhar pertained to Phinehas his ſon, 
which was given him y in mount Ephraim. 

y By ſpecial favour, and for his better conveniency in attending 
pen the Ark, which then was, and for a long time was to be in 
Swiioh, which was near to this place ; whereas the Cities which 
were given to the Prieſts, were in Judah,Benjamin and Simeon, which 
were remore from Shiloh, tho' near to the place where the Ark was 


to have its ſettled abode, to wit, to Jeruſalem. 


RD) G&G E S | 


"T 


The ARGUMENT. 
HE Author of this Book 38 not certainly known ; whether it was Samuel, or Ezra, or ſome other Prophet: wor is it mas 


terial toe know. 


1. It matters not who as the Kings Secretary, or with what Pen it was written, if it be once 


knows that it was the King that made the Order or Deeree: It x ſufjiciens, that unto the Fews were committed the Oracles 
of GOD, Rem. 3+ 2. 1.0. the Holy Scriptures of the Old Tefiamens, one part of 2which this was, by confeſſion af all : and that 
the Fes did nat falſify their truſs therein, but kept thoſe Holy Books themſelves, and delivered them to the World extire, with 
out addition or diminutios:for neither Chri}t nor his Hpuſtles, who ſeverely rebuke them for their miſtakes and miſunderflandings 


of ſome paſſages of Scripture, ever charge them 22” 
5s called the Book of Judges, becauſe it rreats o/ 


Fudges, excep 
ment, ere omitted in . 
mor impoſe any Tributes, but were the [ip 


CHAP.IL 

The Tribe of Judah by God's Command begin fo make Wir againſt the Ca 
NAANItes, 1 === 4o Adonibezek juſtly requited, 5 7 They Fake 
Jeruſalem. 8. And Hebrots ANAR 5 S915 [lain 1 ©. Othmel ſubaueth 
Debir, and ſo obtained Caleo's Daughtcr 30 ifey I1=— IF Tie 
Kenites dwell in Judah, 16. $:v:007 ſubdueth Zephath, 7 And Judah 
divers Cities of the Philiſiins, 18: 20. Toe Sebuſfres dwell with 
Benjamin, 21. Tvey of the heuſe of Joſep ſubdue Bethacl, 22-26. Mi 
naſſeh,' Eprraim, Zebulm, Aber Napntets, Dan, arive 07 our the 
Canaanites; for which they are vexed by 5,:m, anc are lej; ro awell one 

among another, 26 ——— 27- : 
Ow after the death of. Joſhua a, it came to 
aſs. that the children of Ifrael asked the 

> - A » © < 

LORD6,faving, Who ſhal goup tor usagainſt 


- 


che Canaanites firſt c, to fight againſt them 2 
s Not long after ir, becauſe Otnic!, the firſt judge, lived in 
Joſbus's time. 6 Being aſſembled rtogetiter at S$2ilh, they enquired 
of the High Prieſt Ly the Urim and Timm, Sze Numb. 27; 21, 
Judg. 20. 18, I Sam. 23.9. C Being ſen{ible that the Canaanites are 

d expeQtd great advantage agaiaſt them by 
thzir heedleſs condicion, and finding their People to encreaſe and 
multiply exczedingly, and conſequently the neceflity of eplarging 
their Quarters, they renew the War. T hey do not enquire who 
ſhal be the Captain General to all the Tribes; bur ( as appears by 
the anſwer ) What Tribe fhal firit undertake rhe Expedition,that by 
their ſuccceſs the cther Tribes may be encouraged to make the like 
ettempt upon the Canann:tes 1h ctr {zveral Lots. 


2 And the LORD ſaid, Judah d ſhall go up: behold, 


T have delivered the land into his hand. 

d Not a perſon ſo called, but the Tribe of Judah, as is manifeſt 
from wv. 3. 4, 8, 9- which is*choſen ſor the firſt entcrpriſe, becauſe 
they weie both moſt populous, and 19 moſt needing enlargement ; 
and withal moſt Valiant, and theretoze molt likely to ſucceed : for 
God chuſeth fir means for the work which ae deligns ; and becauſe 
the Canaanites were numerous and ſtrong in tiole parts,and therefore 


were in time to be ſuppreſſed, before they grew too ſtrong for them. 


2 And Judah ſaid unto Simeon his brother e, Comeup 
with me into my lot, that we may fight againſt the Ca_ 


3th any perfidionſneſs about the Eanon or Books of the Scripture. This Book 
' the Tuages, or of the ſlate of the Commonwealth of Iſrael ander all the 
: Eli 2nd Samuel, who being rbelaſt of rhe Fuages, and tbe occoſions or inſtruments of the change of this Govern- 
this Beok. The Fuges were a ſort of Magiftrats infericur to Kings, and could neither make new Laws, 
preme Executors of Gods Laws and Commands, and the Generals of their Armies. 


naanites f, and I likeways will go with thee into thy 
lot. So Simeon went with him. 

e As neareſt to him both by relation, being his Brother by both 
Parents, which few of them were; and by habitation, as appears 
from Jel. 19. 1, 2+ f Specially ſo called,becauſc they are diſtinguiſh= 
ed fron the Perizzite, ve 4+ 

4 And Judah wentup, and the LORD delivered the 
Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they 


flew of them in Bezek g ten thouſand men. 

g Nor in the City, for that was not yet taken, v. 5. but in the 
Territory of it, or neartoit; as i Her is taken, Numb. 33.37. And 
in Fericho, Joſe 5. 13+ 

5 And they found Adoni-bezek þ in Bezek 5 ; and 
they fought againſt him &,and they ſlew the Canaanites, 
and the Perizzites. | 

h The Lord or King of Beze#; as his Name ſignifies. 5 Whither 
he fled, when he had loſt the Field. &k 7. e. Againſt the Ciry 
wherein he had Encamped himſelf, and the reſt of his Army. 

6 Bur Agoni-bezek fled,and they purſued after him,and 


caught hira, and cutoff his thumbs, and his great toes /. 
! Phat he might be diſenabled ro fight with his Hands, or to run 
away upon his Feet. An this they did,either by the ſecret inftin& 
and direCtion of God, or upon notice of his former Tyranny and 
Cruclty expreſicd upon others, in this manner, as it follows : either 
way it wes a juit 1£quital. 
7 And Adoni-bezek ſaid, Threeſcore and ten kings 
7m having + their taumbs * and their great toes cut off, [| + 7744: The 
athered 7209r meat under my table z: as I have done, thumbsof 
lo God hath requited me 9: and they brought him p to their 
Jeruſalem 9, and there he died. ery wn 
1m Which is notitcange in thoſe times : aces: hike OED 
ra bi a 0h a time and Places: for theſe might o-,gleans 
e either, Þillt, £335 tucceſſively, and ſo there mighr be givers of q 
thoſe Kings iN ONC place, and 10 ia others: Or, Secondly, Co- _ 
temporary Kings. For it is well known, that anciently each Ruler of 
a City,or great'i OWN, Was called a King,and bad Kingly Power in that 
place;. and many inch Kings we meet with in Cana: and it is pro- 
bable, taat ſome years before, Kings were morc numerous there, till 
the greater devcured many cf the leſs, * That fo their hangs might 


be 


| 


Chap 


| Or, h 
Polleſiec 
themon: 
Mills 


+ UV D 
. : hu- 
ble to manage weapons of War. » An af of Barbarous In 
OG thus to I _ the miſerable, joined with abominable 
Luxury. o He acknowledgeth the providence and vindiCive Juftice 
of God which alſo Pharaoh did, and others toc, without any true 
ſenſe of Pity. p They carried him in triumph as a monument © 
Gods righteous Vengeance. 9 It being the Merrepolisof the nat191.. 
3 ( Now the children of Judah had fought againſt 
Jeruſalem, and had taken it r, and ſmitten it with the 
edge of the ſword, and ſet the city on fire ) 


| wit, in Joſhvas time ; which tho' done before, may be here 
= to no why they brought Aaoni-bezek to leruſalem, be- 
cauſe that City was in their hands. having been taken before, as 
may be gathered from Joſ- 15. 63- And thetaking of this City may 
be aſcribed to rhe children of Judah, rather than to Joſhua, becaule 
the City was not taken by Jojhua, and the whole Body of the Army 
in that time when ſo many Kings weredeſtroyed, Joſ. 10: and 12. 
( for there is ment1on made of the deſtroying of the King of Jeruſa- 
lem Joſe 10. 23: and 12+ 19 But not aword of the tiking of Jeruſa- 
lem, as there is of the raking of Makkedah, and Livnah, and other 
Cities belonging to the Kings there mentioned Joſe 10, 28- ©. ) but 


Chap. I: 


G E 8: Chap. IT. | 
| mbabitants of the motintain,but could not b drive ovt the Ul | 
inhabitants ofthe valley,becaule theyhad chariots of iron 
b Becauſe of their unhelieb whereby they doubred and diſtruſted 
Gods power to deſtroy thoſe who had Chariots of Iron, and fo gave 
way to their own fear and ſloth, whereby God was provokes to 
withdraw his helping hand from them, and ſo they were really 
made jmporent, as they were unw1illinge See Jo/. 17. 16. 
' 20 * And they gave Hebron unto. Caleb, as Moſes * Numb. 
ſaid,and he expelled chence the three ſons of Anak c, 14: 24: 
c Abovementioned, wv. 10s Joſh: 14: 
21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the 7 gs 
Jebuſires that inhabiredJeruſalem:but the Jebulires dwell} ?* 
with the childrenofBenjamindinJeruſalem unto thisday 
d See on Joſ. i 5+ 36+ E 
22 T And the houſe of Joſeph e, they allo went up 
againſt Becth-el: and the LORD was with them. 


e {i.e.) The Tribe of Ephraim, as appears from their oppoſition 
to the Tribe of Manaſſehy we 27 


by the children of Judah after they had received their Lot. when at 
the deſire, and with the conſent of the Benjamites in whoſe LorJe- 
reſalem fell. Joſe 18. 283 they aſſaulted and took ity and thereby, as 
it ſeems, acquired the right of Copartnerſhip with the Benjamres 1n 
the poſleflion of that City ; Tho' ſome think Jeryſalem was twice 
taken once in Joſhuas Lite-time ; and being afterwards recovered 
by the Canaanites, was now retaken by the Cluldrenof Judah 
+ JoſhoTo: 9 T And afrerwaid-the children of Judah went down 
5and11: to fight againſt the Canaanites,that dwelt in themoun- 
1andls: tain, and in the ſouth, and in the || valley. 
ny And Judah went againſt theCanaanicesr that dwelt 
ior, low T2 AA - ng 
Cunceey inHlebron,(now the name ofHebronbefore .5*Kirjath- 
+Joh: arba ) and they ſlew Sheſhai, and Ahiman, and Talmai. 
I5: 153 y Under the Condu& of Caleb, as it 15 recorded, Jof. 15. 143 © for 
thar relation, and this here fo!l-wing,zre doubtlet: one and the ſame 
Expedition and war, as appears by all the circunftances; and it is 
mentioned either there by anticipetion, or here by repetion. Of 
this and the following Verles, 1ſce rhe Nores there. 

11 And from thence he went againſt the inhabitants of 
Debir:(8 the name of Debir before wwas Ki:jarh-lepher) 

12And Caleb ſaid, He that ſmitteth Kirjath-ſepher,and 
taketh it, cohim will I give Achſah my daughter to wife 
13 And Othniel the {on of Kenaz,*Calebs younger bro- 
ther,took it: & he gave himAchſah his daughter to wife. 

14 And ir carne to paſs when ſhe came to him, that ſhe 
moved him to ask of her father a fi-!9:8 ſhe lighted from 
off her aſs, and Caleb ſaid unto her, What wilt thou ? 
15And ſhe ſaid unto him,give me a blefling. for thou haſt 
2iven me a ſouth land,give me alſo ſprings of watsr. And 
Caleb gave ber the upper ſprings, & the nether ſprings. 

I6 % And the Cinidren ot the Kenite, Moſes faither 
in law-/, went up out of the city of palm-trees r, with 
the children of Judah, into tne wilderneſs of Judah, 
which Zeth in the ſouth of Arad », and they x went 
and dwelt among the people y. 

7. 6 Of Jethz8, fo called from the p2ople from whom he defcen= 
ded, Nums 4 21, 22+ And, whatſoever he did, it is evident, that his 
Poſterity came into Canaan with the J/raelites, and were there ſeated 
wich them. See Judge 4. 11, 17. and 5. 24+ 1 Sam. 15. 6, 1 Chron. 2. 
55: #t # e. From ſericho fo called, Deut, 34+ 3» nor the City, which 
was utterly deſtroyed ; but che Territory belonging toir, where it 
{ſeems they were ſeated as in a moſt pleaſanr, and fruitful, and ſafe 
Place, according to the promite made by Moſes to their Father, Numb. 
10. 3t, 32, and whence they might remove,cither to avoid the Socie- 
ty or Moleſtation ofthe neighbouring Canaanites ; or out cf love to 
the children of Judah, whom rhey wentto; or toavoid temptations 
ro Luxury, and exerciſe themſelves in ſelf-denial, and contempt of 
che preſent evil World, and the luſts thereof; as may be thought 
from Jer. 35, 6, & Or for ſome other cauie unkrown to usat this 
diſtances « In the Southern part of the Land ot Canaar, where Arad 
was, Numb. 21+ I: x ( i;e: Some of them, for others of them dwelt 
in the contrary quarter, in the moſt Northern part of the Land. ».* 
Heb that people, ro wit, thoſe children of Judah that lived theres 
17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother y, and they 
ſlew theCanaanites that inhabitedZepharh,8 utterly de- 


ſtroyed it,(& thename of the city wes called Hormah)x 
'y According ro his Promile, v.3.and the Laws of juſtice and gra- ; 
titude. z Either, 1. The ſame place fo deſtroyed and called, N:mb. 


* Chap. 


21. 3- and fo what was there Vowed, 1s here execured: Or, 2+ Some | { 


other place called by the ſame name upon the like occaſion, which 
was frequent among the Heorews, This ſeems more probable, xr. Be- | 
cauſe this was bur ons City; that, divers Cities, Numb. 21% 2, 3. 2. Be- 
Cauſe thit ſcems to have been done in Miſes his time, tho' Interpre- 
ters generally think otherwiſe; of which ſ:. my Notes there. 

'- 18 Alfo Judah took Gaza with the coaſt thereof, 


and Askelon with the coaſt thereof, and Ekron with 
the caſt thereof 4. 


a The principal Cities of che P//litines. 2u, Flow could this be, 
when among tie people left to try J1ſracl,aie the five lords of the 
Philiftines Jud. 3. 3.7 nf. It is only ſaid that they took rhe Cities, and 
probably contented rhemſclves with making them Triburary ; bur ir 
1s not faid that they ſ1:w the p:ople, as they oughtro have done ; and 
251tis ſaid of the orher Citics here v. 5. 8, 17, 25. Andthe people be- 
ing thus ſpareey did by Gods juſt jJudgmenr, recover their ſtrengrh, 
indexpel the. Jews our of their Cities, as we find afterwards : It is 
further obſervabie, that Eko here taken, was one of Pans Cities, Jof. 
Or, he 19+ 42. and it was attempred and taken here by Jrudaz#and Simeon, 
Poſleſled Partly, ont of love to theur BrotherDan,and partly to 1:care their new 
mnemoune conqueſts, & other adjoining rerritories,trom ſuch porent neizhbows 


23 T And the houſe of Joſeph ſent to defcry Beth-el, 
C now the name ot the city before was * Luz. ) " "Sa 
24 And the ſpies ſaw a man come forth our of the city, 19: 
and they faid unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the en- , 
crance into the city f, and * we will ſhew thee mercy. fol F 
f On which ſide it 15 weakeſtzthat we may beſt invade and take it mY uf 
25 And when he ſhewed them the entrance into the 
city, they ſmote the city with the edge of the ſword: 
but they let the man go and all his family g. 
g Together with his Eſtatey as the following Verte manifeſts. 
26 And the man went into the land of the Hitrites 
b, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: 
which 7s the name thereof unto this day. 
h Where the Hittites ſeated themſelves afcer they were driven 


eut of Canaan, which ſeems to be Northward from Canrany and 
Rear unto it. See 1 King. Ie I- 1 Chron, 1.17. 


27 \ * Nicher did Manatleh 7 drive out the inhabi- * Joh, 15; 
rants of Beth-fhean &, and her | towns, nor Taanach 1, u. 12, 13: 
and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor »2, and her t #%: 
towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam, and her towns, Gvghters 
nor the inhabirants of Megiddo », and her towns : but 
the Canaanites would dwell in that land. 

i (ie) That half of this Tribe which dwelt in Canaan k A place 
near Jordan, Joſe 17. 11. 1 Of which ſee 7of. 12.21. and 17. 11+ »» 

A great City with large Territories, See Joſe 11. 2. and 12: 23, and 
17» It 7% A RoyalCity. See Joſ. 12. 21. and 17. 11+ 

28 And it cameto paſs when Iſrael was ſtrong, that 
they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly 
drive them out. | 

29 { * Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaa- + Joſh, 
nites, that dweit in Gezer : but the Canaanites dwelt ;& x0: 
in Gezer 8 among them. 

0 Which they paſicfſed till Solomons time, 1 Kings 9. 16. | 

20 C Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitantsof 
Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol : but the Canaa- 
nites dwelt among them, and became tributaries. 

21 A Neither did Aſher drive out the inhabitants of 
Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Achlab, 
nor Achzib, por telbah, * nor Aphik, nor of Rehob : 

32 Burt the Atherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the 
ichabicants of the land : for they did not drivethem out 

22 A Neicher did Naphrali drive out the inhabitants 
of Beth-ſhezmeih, nor the inhabicants of Beth-anath, bur 
he dwelt among the Canaanites the inhabirants of the 
land : nevertheleſs, the inhabitants of Beth-ſhemeſh p, 
and of Beth-anath, became tributaries unto them. 

p A piace differing from that Bethſhemeſh, Joſ. 15, 10. | 

24 And the Amorites forced the children of Dan in- 
to the mountain : for they would not ſuffer them to 
come down to the valley q. | | 


q (4.e.) Inco the plain Countrey ; which was the occaſion of 
that Expedition forthe getting cf new quarters: of which we read 
Joſh, 19. anu Juage 18+ _ 

35 But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in 
Ajaton & in Shaaibim 2 yet the hand ot the houſe of Jo- 


ph r + prevailed, fo thatthey became tributaries + md 
+ ( z.e. ) Of the Ephraimltes, who heip:d their Brethren the Da» 0. Was 


nites againtt the — rhat with good Succeſs, heavy 
v4 hes a EE . 
26 And the coalt of the Amoricteswas from || the ging + o,, Ma- 


up oo Akrabbimſ, from the rock and upward. alcakra- 
/ Which was in the Sourhern part of Canaan, Joſh. I5- 24 9. from bim. 

whence it went up towards the Nowra, Tuais is added to ſhew the 

great power and large extent of tizis people. 
C31 A P. Ik. 

An Angel reproveth Iſrael at Bochim ; They bews:! 1h-ir ſans, I — x. The 
wicksane/s of the new generation afzer Foſtua ; Their frequent Idolatry, 
6=—=—13- for which they ave often puniſhed of God ty the Enemy ; and 
bring delivered by the Jucdge:, grow worſe, 14q*== ig. I/icrifors Gol 
will leaverhe Connanites to prove and vex them, 2023, 

AN an|| angel of the LORD @ came up from Gilgal Or MeL. 

to Bochim 65, and faid, I m2de you to go up Out gage; 

of Egypt, and have brought you untothe land which I 

{ware unto your fathers,and L {aid s, I will never break _ = 

iny covenant with you. 


wr 19 And'the Lord was with Judah, andj!he diaye our rhe 


3 Ficher, Firſt, a created Ange!. Or, Second'y, 2 Prophet or man of 
a UV. 3 God? 


| ; 
{ Chap. IT. 
| God, for ſach are ſometimes called Argels, which ſignifies onely 
Meſſengers of God; and then the following wordsare ſpoken by him 
in the Wo of Ged, as may eafily be underſtood. Or, Thirdly, Chriſt 
the Angel of the Covenant, who is off called :he Angel of the Lord, as 
we have formerly ſeen, ro whom the condu@ of Iſrael out of Egypt, 
and through the Wilderneſs, and into Canaan, here ſpoken of, 1s tre- 
quently aſcrived, as Exod. 14+ 19» and 23+ 20. and 33. 14. Joſh. 5. 
13, 14+ Judges 6. 12. and i3 3- Who alcneof all the Angels could 
ſpeak the following words in his own name and Perſon; whereas 
created Angels and prophets do univerſzily uſher in their Divine 
Mcſſages with,Thus ſa:th the Lord, or ſome equivalent Exprefſion. And 
this Angel haviog aſſumed the outward thape of a Man, 1t 15 nor 
rrange | hat he imitates the Jocal motion of aman, & comes as1it Were 
from Gilgal to the plzce where now they were : by which motion he 
ſignified, that he was the perſon that brought them to Gilgal, the 
firſt plzce where they reſted in Canaan, and there renewed Covenant 
with them, and prote&ed rhem rhere ſo long, and from thence went 
our with them to Battel and gave them ſucceſs. b A place ſo called 
here by Anticipation, for the reaſon exprefſ-d here, v. 5. Andit 
ſeems t6 be no other than Shiloh, where it ſeems probable, that the 
people were met togerherupon ſome ſolemn Feſtival. And this was 
the proper and uſval place offacrificing. v. 5. c (4, e. ) 1 promiſed, 
upon condition of your ke-ping Covenant with mes . 

2 And * ye ſhall make noleague with the inhabitants 


of this land, * you ſhall throw down their altars: but ye 


l 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


f 


* Dzut. 
. 2o 


Deut. have not obeyed my voice: Why have ye done this 4? 
a d (5. e.) Diſobeyed theſe expreſs Commands of mine ? 
2 Wherefore I alſo ſaid e, I will not drive them out 
from before you : but they ſhall be as horns im your 
* Fxog. ſides f, and their gocs ſhall be a * ſnare unto you. 
23: 33- e With my ſelf Ihavz now taken up this peremtory reſvJution. 


& 34: I2, f Sec on Numb. 33. 55+ Jof. 23. 13+ 
| Andit came to paſs, when the angel of the LORD 
ſpake theſe words unto all the children of Iſrael, thar 
the people lift up their voice, and wept'g : 

g Some of them from a true ſenſe oftheir ſins ; but moſt of them 
from a juft apprehenſion of their danger and app-oaching nifery 
from the Canaanites growing power, and (xods {orſaking of them ; 

_ as the following Hiltory makes moſt probable. 
[| Thatis < And they called the name of thar place || Bochim: 
WEePerS and they ſacrificed þ there unto the LORD. 

þ For the expiation of their fins, by which rhey had provcked 
GoJ ro this reſolution ; and for the regaining of Gods favour, 

6 © And when * Jofhua had ler the people go z, the 
children of Iſrael went every man unto his inheritance 
to poſleſsthe land. 

; When he had diſtributed their Inheritances, and dimiſſed th-m 
ſeverally to take Poſſeſſion of them. This was done before this 
time, whilſt Joſhus lived ; but it is now repeated in orcer to the 
diſcovery ofthe time, and cauſe, or occaſion of the peoples acteQi- 
on from God, and of Gods deſertion of them. 


7 And the people ſerved the LORD al! the days of 
+£.pro- Joſhua, and all the days of the elders that F out-lived 
longed Joſhua, who had ſeen all the great works of the LORD 
days after that he did for Ifrael. 


| * Toſh. 24- 
28. 


* Joſh. 8 And * Joſbua the ſon of Nun, the ſervant of the 
= "LORD died, being an hundred and tea yeats old. 


9 And they buried him in the border of his inheri- 
tance in Timnath-heres.&, in the mount of Ephraim, 
on the north- ſide of the hill Gaaſh. 

k Called Timnath-Sera, Jojb. 19, 50. and 24+ JO» 

xo And alſo all rat generation were gathered unto 
their fathers : and there arcſe another generation after 
them; which knew not / the LORD, nor yet the works 
which he had done for 1fſrae). 

{ Which had no experimental, nor ferious and affeRionate know- 
ledge. of God, nor of his works. : = : 

+11 And the children of Iſrael did evilin the ſight of 
the LORD m,, and ſerved Baalim ». 

1m Whiclr nores the haineuineſs and the impudence of their ſins, 
above other peoples fins ; becauſe Gods preſence was with them, 
and hiseye upon them in a peculiar manner, and he did narrowly 
obſerve all their aQions, which alſo they were not 1gnorant of, and 
therefore were guilty cf more contempt of God than other people. 
n ( i.e. ) Falſe gods. He uſcth the Plural number, becauſe the gods 
of the Canaanites, and adjoining Nations, which I/rae! Worſhipped, 
were givers, and moſt of them called by the name of Bazl. 

12 And they forſook the Lord GOD of their fathers, 
which brought them our of the land of Egypt, and fol- 
lowed other gods, of the gods of the people that ere 
round about them, and bowed themſelves unto them, 
and provoked the LORD to anger. 

13 And they forſook the LORD, and ſerved Baal 
and Aſhcaroth ». 


» (i.e. ) The Sun and the Moon, whom many Heathens Wor- 
ſhiped tho' under divers names ; and ſo they ran 1nio that Error 
which God had ſo expreſly warned rhem againſt. Deur. 4.19. 

14 { And the anger ofthe LORD was hot againſt 
Iſrael, and he delivered them into the hand of ſpoilers, 
that ſpoiled them, and Þ fold them o into the hand of 
their enemies round about, ſo that they could not any 


longer ſtand before their Enemies. | 
o (7. 6. ) Deliver-d them up, as the ſeller doth his Commodities, 
unto the buyer. Thus the 1ame Pbrale is uſed, Judges 3- 8. and 4. 
9 Compare with wv. 14- Pſal. 44+ 13+ 
15 Whitherſoever chey went our p, the hand of the 
LORD was againſt them for eyil ; as the LORD had 


+ Pal. 


44+ 12+) 
Ifa, 50: I. 


SD) DCGES 


| 


———_——— — 


Chap. 11, 


ſaid, and F as the LORD had {worn unto them : and t Lev. 2; 
they were preatly diſtreſſed. Deut. ag 

p(#.e. ) Whatſoever expedition or buſineſs they undertook ; 
which 1s uſually ſignified by going out, and coming in. 

16 Nevertheleſs, the LORD raiſed up 9 judges r, 
which + delivered them out of the hand of thoſe that + x. 
{poiled them. faved. 

9 By inward Inſpiration and Excitation of their minds and hearts, 
and by outward Dcſignation teſtified by ſome heroical and extraors 
dinary Ation- » Supreme Magiſtrates, whoſe cffice it was, under 
God, and by his particular dire&ion, to govern the Commonwealth 
of Iſrael by Gods Laws, and to prore& and ſave them from their 
Enemies ; to preſerve and purge Religion ; to maintain the Liber- 
cies of the people againſt a}] Oppreſſors. See Jusg?s 3. 9, 19,15, Oc. 
and 4; 4; and 6. :5, 26.and 8. 23. 

17 And yet they would not hearken untotheir Judges-, 
but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed 
themſelves unto them : they turned quickly out of the 
way which their fathers walked in, obeying the com- 
mandments of the LORD : but they didnot ſo, 

s Who admoniſhed them of their ſin and folly, and of the dan- 
ger and miſery which would cerainly befall them. 

18 And when the LORD raiſed themup judges,thenthe 
LORD was with the judge,and delivered them out of the 
hand of their enemies alli the days of the judge : ( forit 
repented the LORD z, becauſe of their groanings, by 


reaſon of them that vexed them, and oppreſſed them: ) 
t (7.e.) The Lord changed his courſe and dealings with them, 
as penitent Men uſe ro do ; removed his Judgments, and retur- 
ned to them in mercy, Gen, 6. 6. 
19 And it came to paſs + when the judge was dead, + Chap; 
that they returned &, aud || corrupted themſelves more 3: 12. 


than theirfathers x, in following other gods.toſervethem, cavkwrg 
pt. 


and to bow down unto them ; Þ they ceaſed nor from HH. 
their own doings y, nor from their tubborn way z. ler no. 

u To their formers and uſual. and natural, tho? interrupted thing fall 
courſe. x In Ezypt, or in the Wilderneſs. y ( 7. e. ) From their evil of their 
prattices, which he calls their own,partly becauſe they were agree- 
able to their own natures, which in all mankind are deep'y and uni- 
verially corrupted, Gen 6. 5. and 8. 21. and partly,becautc they were 
familiar and cuſtomary to them. Compare 1/3. 58, 13. and 66. Jo 
Ezek. 36. 32. AF. 14+ 16. Jude. 16 % Heb. hard way: ſo hecalls their 
way of wickedneſs, cither becauſe it proceeded from an hard heart, 
and was managed with an hard and ſtiff n<ck : or to ſignifie, that 
al:ho' ir ſeemed at firft very ſoft, and eaſie, and pleaſant, yer they 
would certainly, and did conſtantly find, that it was hard, and diffi= 
cult, and troubleſome to them, as an hard way is to the Travellere 

a0 T And the anger of the LORD was hot againſt 
Ifrael, and he ſaid, Becauſe that this people hath tranſ- 
greſſed my Covenant, which I commanded their fa- 
thers, and have not hearkened unto my voice : 
2T *I alſo will not henceforth drive out any from be- 

tore them of the rations which Joſbua left when he died: 

22 Thatthrough them I may prove Iſrael ||, whether 
they will keep the way of the LORD,to walk therein, 
as their fathers did keep 3r, or not. 

| Either, Firſt, that I may try, and ſee whether 1ſ-ael will be 
frue and faithful to me, or whether they will ſuffer themſelves ro 
be corrupted by the evil counſels and examples of their bad neigh- 
bours, whom I will leave among them for their tryal and Exerciſe. 
Or, Secondly, that by rhem 1 may :Mi& and puniſh 1ael; for 
afMiftions are commenly and juſtly called trials. But the former 
ſcofe ſuits betrer with the following words. 

23 Therefore the LORD || left thoſe narions, with- pos, fil 
out driving them out haſtily F, neither delivered he fered. 


them into the hand of Joſhua, 
T Or, ſpeedily, when the Iſraelites deſired it, and needed it- 
CH AP. HE 
The Nations left to prove Iſrael mentioned, 1 4. The Iſraelites mar« 
rying their Daughters, and ſerving their gods, they are delivered wp to 
the King of Meſoputamia : are reſcued by Othniel, 5<=—-11, Continuing 
to do Evil, they are again puniſhed and oppreſſed by the King of the Moabi= 

res 5 are reſcued hy Ehud : Tenthouſand Moabites are ſlain, 12 === 30 

They are afterwards delivired from the Philiſtines by Samgar, 7 1. S 

Ow theſe are the nations which the LORD lef: to 
prove Iſrael by them, ( even as many of Iſrael as 
had not known all the wars of Canaan a * 

a (7. e. ) Such who had no experience of thoſe Wars, nor of Gods 
extraordinary Power and providence manifeſted in them. | 

2 Only that the generations of the children of Iſrael 
might know to teach them war b, at the leaſt ſuch as be- 
fore knew noching thereof. ) 

6 That by the Neighbourhood of ſuch Warlike and potent Ene- 
mies, they might be purged from Sloth and Security, and oblidged 
to inurethemlſelves to martial Exerciſes, and to ſtand continually 
upon their guard, and conſequently to keep cloſe to that God 
whoſe Ailiſtance they had fo great and conſtant need of. 

3 Namely, * five lords of the Philiſtines c, and all * Joſh. 
. a Fe 3 . #® . 
the Canaanites 4 and the Zidonians e, and the Hivites 13 3 
that dwelt 1n mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-her- 


mon f, unto the entring in of Hamath. 

c Whereof three had been in ſome ſorr ſubdueds Juds. 1. 18. But 
afterwards reſcued themſelves, and recovered their former ſtrength. 
Sec on Juages 1, 18. d Properly ſo cail:d, who. were very nume- 
rous, and diſperſed through ſeveral parts of the Land, whence they 
gave denomination to all the zcit of the People, e The people 1i- 

ving 


* Toſh, 
23+ 13, 


*[x01. 
a4 16+ 


Neute 7: 


"Hib.3: 
f Hebs 
Aram- 
nakarall 


| +Hv, 


Gxv1Ours 
Ch.1v1 


FOze Nu? 
1": 16s 
+ Heb:W3 
| Heb. 
Aim 


| i III. 7 DU DG BS | Chap. IIT, 
up VINg riear Zinn, and ſubje& to its Juriſdiction. F Which Was the I4 So the children of Iſrael ſerved Fglon the king 
Ill Faftern part of mount L:hanon: See Dent. 3: 8, 9 of Moab eizhteen years. | 
: 4 And they were to prove Iſrael ty them, to know I5 But when the children of Tſrael cried unto the 


26, g whether they would heaken unto the commandments LORD, the LORD raifed them up a + deliverer, Ehud + 5. a 
os of the LORD, which he commanded their fathers Dy | the ſon of Gera |, a Benjamite r, a nian + left handed Savicur. 


the hand of Moſes. 7 s, and by him the children'of Iſrael ſent a preſent un- £05 O90 
g (i.e. ) Thar they and others might know by experience. to Eglon the king of Moab. 


; £ : Jemini. 
5 © And the children of Hrael dwelt among the Ca » Heb. the ſor of Jemini, who was of the Tribe of Benjamin, 2 Sam: + 124 ſhut 
naanites, Hitrites, and Amorites, and Per1zzites, and 16. tx. and 19. 17. 1 Kings 2. 8. This Tribe was next to him, and of his 


a buſites. doubrleſs moſt aflifted by him ; and hence God raiſeth a D-liverer, righe 
rxol RS Fg cook their daughters to be their wives, | * W hich is here noted, partly, as a mark Of his Courage, & Strength, hand. 
3 x0: , 4 


£ - - | and AQtivity : See Jud. 20: 16. and principally, as a conſiderable 
4:16 and gav? their daughters to their ſons, and ſerved ther | j.cunAance in the following Story, whereby. he might more ad- 


Jute 7'3* pgds b. vantagiouſly and unſuſpe&edly give the deadly blow. 
þ Were drawn to Idolatry by the perſwaſions and examples of 16 But Ehud made him a dagger ( which had two 


their Yoke-fellows, through the juſt judgment of God, puniſhing edges ) of a cubit length r, 'and he did gird it under 
their ſinfal Marriages by giving them up to 1dolatry-. 


7 And the children of Iſrael did evil in the ſight of the his raiment, upon his right thigh . 


. # Long enough for his deſign, and not too long for carriage and 
LORD, and forgat the LORD their God, and fer ved | concealment. # Which was moſt convenient both for the ule of his 


Baalim and the groves 7z. left hand, and for the avoiding of ſuſpicion. : 


# (#. e.) In the Groves, in which the Heathens uſually Worſhip- 17 And he brought the preſent x unto Eglon king of 
ped their Baalims or Ido)s. Or, the Groves are here put Meronymi- Mogh: gnd Eglon was a very fat man y. 
cally for the Idols of the Groves, which are diſtinguiſhed here from | 174i oh ue robe paid to him as a part of his Tribute. y And 
their Baalm, which ſeem to have been worſhipped in other places, | 1. .cre more unweildly and unable to ward off Ehuds blow. 
as the prophets of Baal are diſtinguiſhed from the prophets of the Groves, 13 And when he had made an end to offer the pre- 
: $4 ThZefor e the anger of the LORD was hot a- ſent,he ſentaway the people that bare the preſent z. 
116.3.7- gainſt Iſrael, and he fold them into the hand of *Chu- | , He accompanies. Sn Anes of the way, and then | cilmated 


M , : : : them, and returned to Eglon alone, that ſo he might have more 
tb {han-rifhathaim king of F Meſoptamia : and the children | eafie acceſs to him, and privacy with him ; that he might the bet- 


Am of Iſrael ſerved Chulhan-riſhathaim & eight years. ter make his eſcape. : 

hare , C, , ) Were made ſubjeCt and tributary to him- 19 Bur he himſelf turned again a from the [| quarries [or, gra= 
9 And when the children of 1ſrael cried / unto the | þ that ere by Gilgal, and faid, I have a ſecret errand ven umas 

LORD, the LORD raiſed up a Þ deliverer to the | unto thee, O king : who ſaid, Keep filencc- And ges- 

gs | t#. children of Ifrae], ever * Othniel the ſon of Kenaz, | all that ſtood by him went ou: from him. 


C— 


gore C2lebs younger brother ms. a As if he had forgot and negle&ted ſome importunat buſineſs. 
vere | *Ch.tv13e © ( 5. , 3 Pr Wed fervently for deliverance. » Of which ſee on | 5 Either, Firſt, Whence they bewed ſtones: Or, Secondly, The 
pt. Judges 1: 13. ; Twelve ſtones which 7oſhuaſet up there ; by the ſight whereofhe was 
they 


*5 IT - animated ro his Work. Or, Thirdly, The ldols, as the Word alfo 
TO? 19 —_- _—_ i ON ns hy _ ſignifies, which thar Heathen King might place there, either in 
fall 2”; 109» 7, al: 1 5 3 


6 x 8 : ſpvight and contempt to the 1/rae/ites who had that place in great Ve. 
4 ag the LORD delivered Chuſhan-riſhathaim king of Þ | neration: or, that he mighr aſcribe his Conqueſt of the Land to his 
Heb. 


Meſopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed | Idols, as the 1razlites did to the true God, by ſetting up this Mo- 
_— againlt Chuſhan-riſhathaim. - nument in the entrance or beginning of it. c Till my Servants be 
n With extraordinary Influences, indowing him with ſingular Bear ww _oaoinces with a buſineſs which 
witdom, and courage, and reſolution ; and ſtirring him up to this | ** en" Eh q Zreat and £10 CO OED Og 7 
great undertaking, Compare Juag. 6. 34. and 11. 29. 0 (4. e, ) Plea- oO 41N ud came unto nim, and ne was fitting 1n 
ded and avenged the cauſe of Jae! againſt their oppreſſours; as | | a ſummer-parlour 4, which he had for himſelfalone 
that Phraſe is ofc uſed, as Deut. 32. 36+ Z/al. 10. 18, and 43- 1- © |e 3 and Ehud faid, IT havea meſſage ffrom God g, un- + xs. a 
11 And the land had reſt forty years p, and Othni- | to thee. And he aroſe out of his feat b, parlourof 


el the ſon of Kenaz died. d They had divefs Houſes and Chambers, ſome for Winter, others cooling. 
p Either Firſt, is reſted about fourty Years, or the greateſt part of for Summer. See fer. 36. 22. Amos 3.15. e Into which heuſed to re- 
Forty Years ; it being moſt frequent in Scripture to ule Numbers in | tire himſelf from company : which is mentioned as the reaſon why 
ſuch a Latitude, Thus the 1/raelires are ſaid to bear their iniquities his Servants waited ſo long ere they went in to him, v. 25. f To 
forty years in the wilderneſs, Numb. 14: 33: when there wanted near | be deliverd not in Words, but by Attions : Heb. a Word,or Thing, or 
two yearsof that number ; and ro dwel in Egypt 430 years, when there Buſmeſs. So that there is noneed to charge Ehud with a Lye, as tome 
wanted many years of that number. Thus Joſephs kindred ſent for, and | do. g This he faith to Amuſe him, by raifiag his expeQatien and 
calted by him into Egypr, are numbred Seventy five Souls, 4#s 7: | wonder, to divert him from any apprehenſion of his Danger, and 
14: although they were bur Sev-nty, as is affirmed, Gen- 46: 27: | to oblidge him to riſe our of his Sear, which he knew he would do 
Exod, 1: 5: So here the land is fad to reſt forty years, although they | frem the common practice of the heathens in their intercourſes with 
were in ſervitude Erght of tho'e Years, v. 8: And in hike manner | God. And he delignedly uſerh the name Elobim, which was com- 
the land is ſaid to have reſt eighty years, though Eighteen of them they | mon to the true God, and falſe cones ; and not Jehovah, which was 
ſerved the King cf Moab, v. 18:: And fo in ſome other inſtances. | peculiar to the true God ; becauſe Ehud not knowing whether the 
Nor isit ſtrange and unuſual either in Scripture; or in other Au- Mceflzge came not from his own falſe god, he would more certain« 
thors, for things to be denominated from the greater part, as here | ly riſe, and thereby give Ed more advantage for his blow : where. 
it was; eſpecially, when they did enjoy ſome degrees of reſt and | as he would poſſibly ſhew his Contempt of the God of J/rael by 
peace even 3n their times of flavery, which here they did: Or, Se- ſitring ſtillro hear his Meſſage. + In roken of humble ſubje&ion 
cond y, it reſted, ( 7, e.) began to reſt, or recovered its interrup- | and reverence to God. See Numb. 23.18. 2 Kings 23. 3. which 
red reſt, in the fourtiethyear, either after Joſhuas Death, or afterthat | condemns thoſe Chriſtians that behave themſelves irreverently in 
ſob firſt and famous Reſt procured for them by Joſhxa, as isnored, Heb. 4; | rhe preſence and Service of the rrue God. 


9: when he deſtroyed 5nd ſubdued the Cannanites, and gave them 21 And Ehud put forth his lefc hand, and took the 
quiet p«{ſcfſion of the Land ; and-7he land had reſt from war, as is ſaid, 


SpA dagger from his right thigh, and thruſt it into his belly. == 
of. t1: 23: and 14: 15: Sothere is this difference between the years ; "*"7 poli 2 | 
Joſe 87 3346 and Opprefſion, and thoſe of Reſt, that in the Promo he 22 And the haft went in after the # blade:and the far 
tells us how long it Jaſted ; in the Jatter, when ir began ; by which cloſed upon the blade, # fo that he could not draw the + Heb, 
compared with the other years, 1t was eaſie alſo to know how long dagger out of his belly, and [ che dirt came out fo flame, fo 
the Reſt laſted. To ſtrengthen this Interpretation, two things muſt } 7 (5. e.) His Excrements came forth, not at the Wound, which Gr-fee Ges. 
be noted : I- Thar reſting is here put for the beginning to Reſt, as | cloſed up, but at the Fundamenr, as is uſual when perſons die ej-.3* 24 
zo beget is put for beginning to beget, Gen. 5.32. and 11. 26, andto | ther a natural or violent Death. * = 'F Heb. be- 
2ign, ſor to begin to Reign, 2 Sam. 2: 16.and to build, 1 Kings 6.15, 23 Then Ehud went forth & through the porch, ang <2u{* he 


36. for to begin to build, 2 Chron. ; ps. That forty Vears 15 put for . drew nor. 
the fourticth year ;, the Cardinal Number for the Ordinal, which iS ſhut che doors of the parlour upon him /, and locked 


So Gr. 
common both in the holy Scripture, as Gen. r. 5. and 2. 11. Exod- chem mM. | Or, it 
12. 2. Ha. 1. 1. Mark 16: 1. and in other Authors. & With a compoſed Countenance and Gate, without any fear ; came our 


12 4 And thechildren of Iſrael did evil again in the being well aſſured, rhat God who by his extrordinary Call had pur at rhe 
ſight of the LORD, and the LORD ſtrengthened him upon that enterpriſe, would by his ſpecial Providence preſerve funda» 


] : 4 him, and carry him through it. / Either upon the King, or upon or ment. 
13am. * Eglon p the king of Moab againſt Iſrael, becauſe they | after himſelf. » Either by pullingir cloſe after him, as we _ when 
12:9 had done evil in the ſight of the LORD. Doors have Spring-locks ; or by taking the Key with him for more 

Þ By giving him Courage, and Power, and Sncceſs againſt. them, | c2uton ; and this he did, thar rhey ſuppoſing the King to be re- 


13 And he gathered unto him the children of Am- | **<4 might watt rillhe was gone. | 
| mon, and Amalek, and went and ſmore Iſrael, and | 24 Vn. he was gone our, his ſervants came, and 
poſſeſſed the city, of palm-trees q: : 3 when they ſaw, that behold the doors of the parlour 


qt. e. Jericho, 85 may be gathered from Deur. 34: 3: Jude. 1: 16. | 27 locked, they faid, Surely he || covereth his feet » | Or, deth 
| e Chron. .8:'15: Not the City which was Demolithed, but the Ter- | his Summer-chamber. his eaſe> 
ritory belonging toit. Here he fixed his Camp, partly for the ad- » This Phraſe 1s uſed only here, and 1 Sm. 24. 3. It is commonly men. 
mirable Fertiliry of that So1l ; and partly, becauſe of irs nearneſs to | underſtood in borh places, of eating Nature ; becauſe the Men not 
| the paſſage over Jordan, which was commodious both for the con- | then wearing Breechs as we do, bur long Coats, they did in that 
| junttion ct hisown Forces which Jay on both ſides of Jordan; and | a& cover their Feet, as Women do : But a late judicious Interpre- 
| to prevent the conjunCtion of the 1/rae/:rgs in Canaan with their Bre- | tzr expounds it, of compoſing himſelf ro take a little Sleep or Reft, 
thren beyond Jordan; and to ſecure his Retreat into his own Coun- | as was very uſual to doin the day-time in thoſe hot Countreys, 2: 
ty, waich therefore the 1-ae/ites prevented, v. 28. Sam. 4+ 5.and 11, 12, And when they did {ſo in cool places, tuch 
; 2 Ox | as. 

2 5, 


N 


E Chap. IV: 


+ Heb. ſa: thouſand men, all + luſty, and all men of valour, and 


_—_ I 46: 4h 


} Heb. 
ſaved. 


a - pw -s. > = 
: 
, 
v7 — 14% a#t 
Atac—- Chxp 4 I - 


— 


F 1 Sam. 
t2 9. 


+ Hob. a 


weman, 4 


Propheteſs. 


3 UV D 


as this. Summer-parlour unqueſtionably was, they uſed to one 
taeir feet, is appears from Ruth 3. 7. And this may ſeem to be th 
both becauſe the Summer-parlour was more _ 
15 ut : T 3 ANC ſe this was a more like- 
for this uſe than for the former ; and becau 
jr of their long waiting at his Door, leſt they ator gon 
his Repole. And this ſenſe beſt agrees with Sauls caſe 1a the ns 
wien being aſteep David could more ſecurely cut cff the Jap oz his 
Garment, 1 Sam. 24. 3- where ſee my Annotations: > LOWE" 
25 And they tarried till they were aſhame Ne: = 
behold he opened not the doors of the I ono {Fear 
fore they took a key p, and opened hem : and bchoid, 
their lo:d as fallen downdead on the part. 
o Or, confounded, not knowing what to ſay or thiol ; {op oy 
ſhould eirber diſturb him, or be guilty of neglect rowa! os 
p Another Key, it being ulual in princes Courtsto have divers keys 
for the ſame door- | PEI 
26 And Ehud eſcaped while they tarricd : _ paſled 
beyond the quarries, and eſcaped unto Seiratn. ip 
27 And it came to paſs when he was come, tnat ne 


more Probavie, 


blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim ; and the 


children of Iſrael q went down with him from the 


z0unt, and he before them. It 
_ Wham doubtleſs he had Fepared, and by his Emiſſaries ga- 
d ther in conſiderable numbers. : 
— And he (aid unto- them, Follow after me, for 
the LORD hath delivered your enemies the Moabites 
into your hand. And they went down after him, and 
took the foords of Jordan r, toward Moab, and ſuffered 


not a man to pals over. : | 
» Where they paſſed over Jordan, that neither the Moabites that 
were got into Canaan, might eſcape, nor any more Moavirer come 


over Jordan to their {UCCcour. ; | 
29 And they flew of Moab at that time abour ten 


{caped not one man. 
T— Lb was ſubdued that day under the hand 


of Iſrael, and the land had reſt fouricore years /. _ 
\ How theſe are to be underſtood, fee on v. 11. in ſtead of erg") 


ſome Copi:s read e/ght years. 
I 4 And after him was Shamgar the fon of Anath, 


which ſlew of the Philiſtines ſix hundred men with an 


ox-goad t, and he alſo 7 delivered [frael. 

t As Sampſon did a thouſand with the Jaw-bone of an Aſs; both 
being miraculous Attions, andnot at all incredible to bum that be- 
lieves a God, who could eatily give ſtrength both ro the perſons and 


thei nsto effc& rhis. 
ET" CH IP. IV. 


el: his Captain General was Siſera, 1— }. The 

if + 95> fy aa the ind commanas Barak to go out againſt him 

promsſeth Vittory : ſhe her ſelf marcheth with him. 4*==- 14, S feras Hoſt 

is beaten: he flees. Jael hides him in her Tent, and while he fleeps ſhe 
kills him, 15 —— 23, K. Jabin is defroyed. ; 20 

Nd the children of Ifrael again did evil 1n the 

ſight of the LORD, when Ehud was dead. | 

2 And the LORD ſoid them into the hand of Jabin 

king of Canaan s, that reigned in Hazor 6, the cap- 

tain of whole hoſt was * Silera, which dwelt in Haro- 


h of the Gentiles c. | 
_ e. Of the Land where the moſt of the Canaanites, ſtrictly ſo 
called, now dwelt, which ſeems to be 1n the Northern part of Caz 
aan. This ſcems to be of the Poſteriry of thar Jab:z, whom Jojbua 
flew, Joſb. 11. 11. who watched all opportunities to recover his an- 
cient Poſſeſſions, and ro revenge hisown and Fathers Quarre] upon 
the Iſraelites. b Either 1. In the City of Hazor, which though taken 
and burnt by Jeſbua, Chap. 11+ 11. yet mighr be reraken and rebuilc 


by the Canganites : Or 2. In the Terricory or Kingdom of Hazor, 
which might now b-= reſtored to its former largnels and power, J:/- 
LI. 10» the names of Cites being cf: pur for their Territories, as | 
Zorah, aCity, Joſh» 15+ 33* 1s put for the Fields belonging to it, ; 
Judges 13+ 2. in which Sampſons Parents lived, indg. 13. 25. and 16. ; 
31. and 18. 2, c So called, becauſe it was much frequented and in- 
habired by the Gentiles, either Ly the Canaanitcs, wo being beaten | 
out of their former Pcſſefſions, ſeared rhemielves in thoſe Northern 
parts ; or by other Nations coming there for Traffick, or upon 
other occaſions, as S:rabo notes of _ parts ; whence Galilee, where 
this was, is called Galilee of the Gent/les, 

2 And the children of Iſrael cried unto the LORD: 
for he had nine hundred chatiots of iron, and twenty 
years he mightily oppreſſed d the children of Hrae]. 

d More than the former Tyrants ; partly from tis malice and 
hatred againſt the J7aeztes ; and principally from Gods juſt Judg- 
ment, the growing puniſhment being moſt ſuitable to their aggra- 
vated Wickendeſs. 

4 © And Deborah Þ a propheteſs e, the wife of La- 


pidoth f, ſhe judged Iſrael g art that time. 

e As there were M-n-prophets, ſo there were alſo Women-pro- 
pheteſſes, as Miriam, Exod. 15. 20. Huldah, 2 King. 22. iq- and divers 
others ; but the word Prophets or Prophereſſes is very ambiguous inboth 
Teſtaments ; ſometimes being uſed of perſons extraordinarily ir- 
ſpired by God, and endowed with a power of working Miracles, 
and foretelling things to come ; and ſomerimes of perſons endowed 
with ſpecial, though not miracu'ous gifts or graces, for the better 
underſtanding of, and diſcourling about the Word and Mind of 
God, for prailing of God, or the like; of which ſee 1 Chron. 25. 1. 
x Cor. 11+ 5+ and 14. 1, 3, 4 ©. And of this fort were the Sons 
of the Prophets, or tuch who were bred in the Scheols of the Pre- 
phers, who are oft called Prophets, as 1 Sam, 12. 5, 10, 11, 12. See 
alſo 1 King. 18. 4+ and 19. 10. And becauſe we read nothing of 
Deborahs miraculous ations, peradventure {he was only a Woman of | 


eminent holineſs and prudence, & knowledge of the holy Scriptures, | 
by which the was ſingularly qualified forthe Judging of the pc ople | 
according to the Jaws of Ged. If itbe alledged, thar the foreſaw and 
foretold the following ViEory;ſo did all rheSons of theProphers fore- | 
tee and foretel Elijahs tranſl>tion, 2 King 2. 3. 5. which yet were not | 
extraordinary Prophets. f Or, a Woman of Lapidoth , :nd fo Lapidorh is | 
not the name of a man,bur of the placeof herBirth or Abode. g( i.e. ) 

erermined Cauſes ard Controverſies ariſing among the 1ra-ltes, as 
is Implied, v 5. And this Jabin might ſuffer ro be done, eſpecially | 
by a Woman ; and the frequent diſcharge of this part ofrhe Judges 
Othice, whereby ſhe gained great power and Autliority with the peo. 
ple, did notably ( though not obſerved by the Tyrant) prepare the 
way for her {liding into the other part of her Office, which was to 
defend and reſcue the people from their Enemies. 

5 Andſhe dwelt under the palm-tree of Deborah, be- 
tween Ramah and Beth-el in mount Ephraim: and the 
children of I{rael came up to her for Judgment h. 

> To have their Suits and Cauſes determined by her Sentence. ; 

6 And ſheſent ant called ; * Barak the ſon of Abi- 
noam out of Kedeſh Naphtalz &, and ſaid unto bim, F gy 
Hath not the Lord GOD of Mael commanded 1, (ay- *'** 
gs Go, and draw toward mount Tabor », and take 
with thee ten thouſand men of the children of Naph- 
tali, and of the children of Zebulun 0, 

z; By vertue of that power which . God had given her, and the 
people owned in her. & So called, to diſtinguiſh it from other pla- 
ces of that name, one in Judah, Joſe 15. 23. and another in 1ſachar, 

1 Chron. 6. 72. I (7, e.) Afſuredly God hath commanded thee ; this 
is not the fancy of a weak Woman, which peradventure thou maiſt 
deſpiſe ; bur che Command of the great God by my mouth: Which 
Command of God, and the following aſſurance of Succeſs, ſhe might 
either gather from the genera] rules of Scripture, and the common 
courte of Gods gracious Providence, which was always ready to 
ſuccour them when they cryed to God ; or receive by inſtin& or 
direction from Ged. »2 Or, zo; for ſo this word is oft uſed, as Gen. 
37- 28. Juag. 20, 37. Job 21.33. Heb. draw, to wit, thy ſelf, or 
thy feet. » A place moſt fit for his purpoſe, as being in the borders 
of divers Tribes, and having alarge Plain at the top of it, where he 
might conveniently marſhal and diſcipline his Army. 0 Theſe ſhe 
names, partly becauſe they were neareft and beſt known to Barak, 
and therefore ſooneſt brought together ; partly, becauſe they were 
neareit to the Enemy, and therefore muſt ſpeedily be afſembled, or 
e'ſe they were likely to be hindred in their Deſign, whilſt the other 
Fribes, being at more diſtance, had better opportunity of gathe- 
ring Forces for their ſuccour ; and partly, becauſe theſe had moſt 
imarted under this Opprefſor, who was 1n the heart of their Coun- 
trey, and therefore were moſt forward in the preſent Service ; but - 
theſe are not named excluſively, as appears by the councurrence 
of ſome other Tribes, as is related, Jud. 5. 

7 And Iwill draw unto thee p to the * river Kiſhon, 
Siſera the captain of Jabins army, with his chariots, and 
his multitude, and 1 will deliver him into thine hand. 

þ By my ſecret and powerful providence, ordering and over-ru- 
ling his inclivations that way. 

8s And Barak ſaid untoher, If thou wilt go with me, 
then I will go : but ifthou wilt not go with me, 7her I 
will not £0 g. 

q His cffer ro go with her, ſhews the truth of his Faith, for 
which he is praiſed, Heb. 31. 32. bur his refuſal to go withour her, 
{rews the weakneſs of his Faith, thar he could not truſt Gods bare 
word, as he cughtro have done, without the Pledge of the preſence 
of his Propheteſi, whom he thought God would preſerve and deli- 
ver, and 6imiclf for her ſake. 

9 And the ſaid, I will fureiy go with thee : notwith- 
ſtanding the journey r that thou takeſt ſhall not be for 
thine honour : for the LORD fhall ſell Siſera into the 
hand of awoman/ And Deborah aroſe and went 
with Barak to Kedeth. / 

r Heb. the way, ( 7. e. ) the courſe or prattice; as the way is taken, 
Numb, 22. 32. { Eicher 1. Jael, or rather 2. Deborah, who being, 
as It were, the Judge and chief Commandreſs of the Army, the 
Honour cf the Viftory would be aſcribed ro her : But for Jael, her 
Fatt would have veen the ſame, though Barak had gone into the 


T Pal. 8; 


9, I& 


; Field withour Deborah. 


io CE And Barak called Zebulun and N aphtali to 
Kedeſh, and he went up with ten thouſand men at his 
feet 7 : and Deborah went up with him. 

t (7. e.) Who followed him or his Foot-ſteps ; poſſibly he inti- 
mates that rhey were all Foot-men, the 1ſ-aelites neither now ha- 
ving, nor otherwitc allowed to have a multitude of Horſes; and ſo 
thisjs emphatically added, to ſignify by what contemptible means 
(rod overthrew Siſcras great Hoſt, wherein there were ten Thouſand 
Horſe, as Joſephus reports. 

11 Now Heber « the Kenite x, which was of the chil- 
dren of Hobab y thefatherin law of Moſes, had ſevered 
himſelf from the Kenites z, and pitched his tent « unto 
the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedeſh. 

# The Hustand of Zael, v. 17. x Of whom ſee Numb. 24. 27, 
22. Judges I. 16. y Called alfo Jethro, ſee Numb. 10. 29, z From the 
reſt cf his Brethren, who lived in the Wilderneſs of Judah, Judges 
1. 16. which remoyal is here mentioned, left any ſhuuld wonder 
to find the Kenites in this place. a (7.e. ) His dwelling, which 
probably was 1g Tents, as Shepherds uſed. 

12 And they fhewed b Sjſzra that Barak the ſon of 
Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor. 

b They ( i.e.) his people dwelling there, or his Spies; or, he was 
told, this being an imperſonal Speech. 

13 And Siſera + gathered together all his chariots, + Heb.g4 
even nine hundred Chariots of iron, and all the people thered #) 


that 0) 7 


—_ 


6lamghiih: * 


*Pſa] 


+ He! 


6179 0 


Chap. 1V- 
tat ere with him, from Haroſheth of the Gentiles, | 
unto the river of Kiſhon. ” 

14 And Deborah ſaid unto Barak, Up c, for this zs 

the day in which the LORD hath delivered Siſera into 

thine hand : Is not the LORD gone out before thee d: 

' & Barak went down from mount Tabor e, and ten 
thouſand men after him. _ 

© Heb. aviſe, delay not, fall to thy work. d To wit, as General 
of thine Army. to fight for thee ; ſee Judg. 5. 20. and 2 5am. 5» 
24. e He doth not make uſe of the advantage which he had of 
the il, where he might have been our of the reach of his Iron 
Chariots, Jeſb. 17+ 16. but boldly marcheth down into the Valley, 
to give Siſcra the opportunity ofuling all his Horſes and Chariots. 
that ſo the V:&tory might be more glorious and wenderful. | 

15 And * the LORD diſcomfited f Siſera and all his 
chariots, and all his hoſt with the edge of the ſword g, 
' before Barak ; ſo that Siſera lighted down off his cha- 

riot. and fled away on his feet þ. 5 

f With great Terror and Noiſe, as the word ſignahes, Exod. . 14. 
' 24. Jof. 10. 10 1 Sam. 10. moſt probably with Thunder and Light- 

ning, and Hail-ſtones, or other ſuch Inſtruments of Deſtrutt'- 
on pouredupon them from Heaven, as 1s ſufficiently implied, Juag» 
5. 20. g (i.e. ) By the Sword of Barak and his Army, whoſe Mi- 
riſtry Ged uſed ; bur fo, chat they had littleelſe to dog butto kijl 
thoſe whom God by more powerful Arms had put to flight. þ That 
he might flee away more ſecretly and ſecurely in the quality of 2 
common Souldier, whereas his Chariot would have expoſed him ro 
more obſervation and hazard. : 

16 But Barak purſued after the chariots, and after 
the hoſt unto Haroſheth of the Gentiles, and all the 
hoſt of Siſera fell upon the edge of the ſword, and there 
was not + a man left z. 

; To wit, in the Field ; for there were ſome who fled away, as 
Siſera did. ro : 

17 Howbeit Siſera fled away on his feet to the tenc 
of Jael & the wife of Heber the Kenite, for there was 
peace / between Jabin the king of Hazor, and the 
houſe of Heber the Kenite. 

þ For Women had th=ir Tents apart from their Husbands, Ger. 
24. 67. and 31- 33: And here he thoughr to lurk more ;ecurely than 
in her Husbands Tent. / Not a Leagueor Covenant of Friendſhip, 
which they were forbidden to make wth that curied people, but on- 
ly a Ceſſation of Hoſtilities, which be afforded them becauſethey were 
a peaceable peop'e, abhorring War, and wholly minding paſturage, 
and were not 1ſraelites, wich whom his principal Quarrel was ; and 
eſpecially by Gods over-rvling d1ipoſal of his heart ro favour them 
who were careful to keep themſelves uncorrupted with Jraels Sins, 
and therefore are pielerved from their Plagues. 

18 © Ard Jaei went out to meet Siſera, and ſaid un- 
to him, Turn in my lord, turn in to me, fear not . 
And when he had turned in uno her, into the tent, 
| Or, yg (he covered him with a || mantle. 
or blanket, 1 This was 2 promiſe of S=curiry, ard therefore ſhe cannot be 

excuſed from Diſſimu/ation and Treachery in the manner, though 
the ſubſtance of her a& was lawful! and worthy. 
19 And he ſaid unto her, Give me, | pray thee, a little 

* Chap. Water to drink, for I am thirſty. And jhe opened *a bot- 

5. 25, tle of milk, and gave him drink», and covered him 0. 

n Either becauſe ſhe had not water in her Tent, and prerended fe-r 
of Diſcovery, or ſome inconveniencie ifſhe went out to fetch ir ; or, 
as a ſtymificaticn of grearer reſpeCt ; or as a likely mean to caſt him 
into a ſleep, which ſhe deſired and deſigned; ro which end, pc fſi- 
bly ſhe might mix ſomething with it to cauſe ſleep, which ſhe could 
not ſo conveniently have done with water. o Upon pretence of 
hiding him, but really to diſpoſe him to ſleep. 

20 Again he ſaid unto her, Stand in the door of the 
tent, and it ſhall be when any man doth come, and 
enquire of thee, and fay, Is there any man here? that 

- thou ſhalt ſay, No. 

þ He ſpeaks imperiouſly to her ; bur it is obſervable, that ſhe 
gives him "y promiſe to do fo, nor makes himany Anſwer; pofſi- 
tly becauſe though ſhe knew her deſign upon him was warrantable IP * 
yet ſhe had proceeded too far inuling Diilimulation therein. - Keys ma. —_ who _ wr Pies OS 0, for ra- 

21 Then Jae, Hebers wife, took anail of he reneg, | Ek Verree wit uprovis and they Eres þ fad, 

{Heb-pur and | took an hammer in her hand, and went ſoftly : 'eq by them to 17a:l- d Chiefly Zebulun and Naphrali, below, Verſe 
unro him, and {mote the nail into his tempies y, and . 18: and 4: 6: and 6thers hereafter mentioned. e When neither De- 

faſtened ir into the ground: ( for he was fait aſleep, : 9” —_ - | oogghes compel them. 

and weary ) fo he dieds 3 Licar, WYCKINSS, give car, O ye princes f* Il 

q Wherewith they uſed to faten the Tent, which conſequently | ©V*7 I will fing 'uato the LORD, I will ling praiſe to 
was long and ſharp, being headed with Iron; Theſe Weapons ſhe | the Lord GOD of {ſrae] F- I 
chuſeth, either, 1 Becauſe ſhe had no vecrer Weapens at hand, this; f You eſpecially that live nearto 7-ae!, and have evil minds 2nd 
being only the Womans Tent, where Arms ute nor (© be kepr, 2nd ; defigns againſt Jael, know this for your inſtruftion, and caution, 
theſe peop'e beiug wholly ven ro Peace, and negiigent of War; ; and terror too, if you ſhall preijume to moleſt chem. s Who, as 
Or Siſera havin; difarmed them b<fore this time. Or, \>. Bucauls ! you lee by this plain Inſtance, is both able and 5efolved ro defend 
ſhe bad mo's $Kiil 1n the hana!ing ofrheſe, than crher Weipons, | them from all their Enemies. 

_ won accuſtomed tov faitcu the Tens herewith. Or, 3. Be- 4 LORD, * when thou wenteſt out of Seir, when 

cauſe this was very proper for his pretent poſtur:, and which the A. : * . 

knew would be <ffe&:a'. r Weg che 1ofreft part of the Sku!l, thou —_— chedit our of che held of Edom þ, * the earth * Det. 

and ſooneſt peirced. This mighr ſcem avery bolu art-mp:r ; but it | * rrembied, and the heavens dropped ; the clouds allo 2J- 2 

dropped watter &. 


mult be confidered, that ſhe was encouraged to it, purt'y by obler- 4 *PC 03.8. 
h Seir and Edom are the ſame plac? ; and theſe two exprefſions note 


_—_ _ BY a w__ V F _— ; 
IV, rahs Song, Judges 57 24, &c: And ſome who moke it their buſi- | 
neſs to pick quarrels with the Holy Scripture, from hence tzke oc- 
caſion to queition and rejett their Divine Authority, for this very 
paſſ+ge, becauſe it commends an a& ſo contrary to all Humanity, 
and fo great a breach of Faith: And whereas all the pretence of 
cheir Infidelity is taken from the following Song, and not from 
this Hiſtory, wherein the FaQt is barely related, without any re- 
fleftion upon it ; there are many Anſwers given ro that Argument, 
as, 1. That there was no League of Friendihip between 7ael and 
Siſcra, But only a Ceſſation of AQs of Hoftility ; of which ſee the 
Notes on v. 17. 2. That Deborah doth not commend Jaels words, 
wv. 18. Turn in my lord, fear wt ; in which the great firength of this 
ObjeCtion lies ; but on'y her ation, and thr Artifice, that he acked 
water, and fhe gave h\m milk; which if impartially examined, will 
be found to differ but little trom that of wzriike Stratagems, where- 
in a man lays a Snare for his Enemy, and decives him with pre- 
tences of doing ſomething which he never intends. And $iſ:ra, 
though for the time he pretended to be 2 Friend, yet was in truth 
a bitter and implacable Enemy unto (zcd and all his people, and 
conſequently to Jael her ſe]f, But theſe and ether Anſwers may be 
omitted, and this one conſideration following may abundantly tuf- 
fice to ſtop the mouths of theſe men :; Ir cannor be denjed, that 
every word, or paſſage, or diſcourſe which is recorded in Scrip- 
ture, is not Divineiy inſpired, becauſe ſome of them were uttered 
by the devil, and others by Holy men of God, but miſtaken, ( the 
prophets themſelves not always ſpeaking by Inſpiration ) ſuch as. 
the diſcourſe of Nathan to Dav'd: 2 Sam. 7. 3- which God prefent- 
ly contradifted, wv. 4, 5, ©c. and ſeveral diſcourſes of Jobs three 
Friends, which were ſo far from being Divinely intpired, that chey 
were in a great degree unſoutid, as God himſelf tells them, Job 
47. 7+ Ye have not ſpoken of me the thing that is right, as my ſervant Job 
hath ; this being to, the worſt that any malicious mind can infer 
from this place :s, Phat this Song, though indited by a good min 
or woman, was not Divinely inſpired, but only compoſed by a 
perſon piouſly minded, and tranſported with joy for the Delive- 
rance of Geds people, bur ſubje& to miſtake ; who therefere, out 
of zeal to commend the happy Inftrumenz of ſo great a Dzlive- 
rance, might eaſily overlook the indireQaeſs of the mens by which 
it was accompliſhed. and commend that which ſhould have been 
diſliked, And if they further obje&, rhar ir ws compoſed by a 
Propheteſs, Deborah, and therefore muſt be Divinely inſpired ; it 
may bereplied, 1. Thatit is not certain what kind of Propheteſs 
Deborah was,whe ther extraordinary and infs]lib!e, or ordinary, and 
ſo liable co miſtakes ; for there were prophets of both kinds, as 
hath been proved above on ver. 4. 2+» Thar every expreflion of a 
true and ex'raordinary Prephet was not Divinely inſpired ; as is 
evident from Nathans miſtake above-mentioned, and from Smucls 
miſtake concerning Eliab, whom he thought to be the Lords 4n0in 
ted, 1 Sam. 16. 6. 


22 And behold, as Barak purſued Siſera, Jael came 
out to meet him, and ſaidunto him, Come, and I will 
ſhew thee the man whom thou ſeekeſt. And when he 
came intoher tent, behold Siſera was dead, and the nail 
was in his temples. 

23 So God ſubdued on that day Jabin the king of 
Canaan, before the children of Iſrael. | 
24 And the-hand of the children of Iſrael + profpe- + Heb 
red, and prevailed againſt Jabin the king of Canaan, a were 
until they had deſtroyed Jabin king of Canaap. 


*P(al. 83+ 
g, 19 


+ Heb. 


6170 07te 


Ana was 
hard. 
EHAF V. 


Deborah exhorts to praiſe : ſhe begins 8 recounts the former wonders and Mer 
cies of God to his people, t— ——5. From the miſeries of former times glo= 
ries 1n their preſent ſlate, 6 -— 9g. Excites the Governours, 8c. to praiſe 
the Lord, 10 —-: 13, Commenas the chief of the Tribes who went forth 
willingly ro this Battel, and checks the unw: ling who tarried at home, 
14— 18. Deſcribes the ViFery in all ts Circumſtances, 20 — 22. Cur 
ſeth Meroz for not coming to their aſſiſtance, 23. Extols Jael and her AF, 
24— 27. Derideth S.ſeras Gourt Lad:es, 28 39. Prays for like 
Judgment on their Enemies, and proſperity to God's people, 7 1, 


"Jon ſang Deborah « and Barak the ſon of Abi- 
noam on that day, ſaying, 
a The Compoſer of this Song, as may be gathered from wer. 7. 
2 Praite ye the LORD 6 tor the avenging of Iſrael c, 
when the people 4d willingly offered themſelves e. 


ving that the Heavens and a'l the Etemer ts conſpired agair:{t him, Iſa 6g. 7 


as againſt one devot:dro D: ſtruction ; parily, by che fair opportu- 
nity which Gods providence put into er wands; ard prirc:ipajly, 
by the fecrerc 1nitinCt of God inc'ting her 7017, ard aff: ring ner of 
Sncceſs in it» 2%. Whar ſha'l we judge of this fat of Jatls ? Iris 
a difficulrqueſticn, avd neceſſary io be determines, becauſe 1n the 
one hand riere feemsro be gro1s p<rtidioutneſs, end an horrid vio- 
lation of all rhe Laws cf tolptraiity and Friendſhip, and of the 


4,3 Peace which was eftab'iſhed berween Siſera aud her ; and on the 
other fide, this tact of hers ts applauded and cemmended in 2:69, 


the fame thing, even Gods marching in the head of his peo l2, # ab. 
from Scir Gr Egvem. towarcs rhe Laing of Canaan: Whileſt the 17a 
lites were enc: mpaiſi!-g Mount Seir, there were none of rhe to]- 
lowing effects; but wh-1 once they had done that, and got Erom 
on their backs, then they marched dire&'y forwards towards the 
Land of Canzmm. The prophereſs being ro praiſe God tor the pre- 
tent Mercy, rak2s her riſe Prghery «ny begins her S-ng wir the 
Commemoration of tae former and ancient Deliverances afforied 


"We - by 


3-1 S> 


ol . 


by did upon a like manifeſtation of thy elf; ſo there 1s only 


= 


by God to his people, the rather becauſe of the great reſemblance 
tlis had with them, in the extraordinary and miraculous manner 
ofthem. 7 Either, 1- The Inhabitants of the Farth or Land; or, 
2» The Earth, properly taken, as the following paſſages are; God 
prepared the way for his pezop!e, and ſtruck 2 dread into their Ene- 
miesz by Earthquakes, as well as by other terrible Signs, k (7e.) 
Thon &i6ſt ſend moſt dreadful Showers of rain,Storms andTem peſts, 
Thunder and Lightning, and other tokens of thy diſpleaſure upon 


thine Enemies: as may appear by comparing this with other pa- 
_ ralle] T'-xts 
*Pſ.97.59 F * The mountains + melted I from before the 


tHeb> LORD, eves * that Sinai m, from before the LORD 


Famed. GOD of Iſrael. 
"B68 8. I Or, flowed, with Floods of W 
them, and from them flowing d 


Jower grounds, and carrying down of th ; 
It, as S aſual in exceffive Showers m7 She ſlides into the mention 


of another, and a more ancient appearance of God for his people, to 
; wit, in Sina ; it being uſual in Scripture Repetitions of former 
.. A&ions, to put divers rogether into anarrow compals, and in few 


- Words. The Scnſe is, No wonder that the Mountains of the 4m0- 
- rites and Canaanires melred and 


trembl:d when thou didft Jead thy 
people towardsrhem ; for even Sinai it ſelf could not bear thy Pre- 
' fence, but melted in like manner before thee. 


ater poured out ofthe Clouds vpen 
own in a mighty Stream upon the 
ſome part of the Mountain with 


Or, as that Sina: 


a Defe&t 
fthe Particle as, which I have ſhewed to be frequent» _ 

| : s 6 Inthe days of Shamgar w the ſon of Anath, inthe 

*Ch.4-18- days of * Jael o, the high ways were unoccupied, and 

cus + travellers walked through || by-ways p. 


_ & » Whileſt Shamgar lived, who was if not a Judge, yet aneminent 
+ Heb. perſon for Strength and Valour, Judg. 30 33-199 Fae,though an 1lluſt- 
cooked Tous Woman,and of great authority and Izflyence upon the pople, 
ha did effe& nothing for the deliverance of Gods people, till God raiſzd 
_ * me up, &s- p Partly becauſe of the Canaanites, who beſides the pub- 
lick Burdens and Tributes which they laid upon them, waited for 

all opportunities of doing them Mitchief ſecretly ; their Souldiers 

watching for Travellers in common Roads, as 15 uſual with ſuch 

'jn times of War ; and partly, becauſe of the Robbers even of their 
4 own people, who having caſt offthe Fear and Worſhip of God, and 
J "there being no King or Ruler in 1/72el to reſtrain or puniſh them, 
and being alſo many of them reduced to great want, through the 
Oppreſſion of the Canaanites, it is not ſtrange, if in thoſe times of 


publick Diſorder and ataxy, divers of rhe Iſraelites themſelves did 
break forth into a&s of Injuſtice and Violence, even againſt their 
own Brethren, whom they could meer with in convenient places, 

| which made Travellers ſeek for By-peths. 
7 The inhabitants of the villages ceaſedq, they ceaſed 


*Ifz. 49- in Ifracl, until that I Deborali aroſe, that I aroſe a * 


23s mother r in Iſrae]. : 

| The people forſock all their unfortified Towns, as not being 
able to proteft them from Military 1nſolence. r (7. e.) To he to 
them as a M-.ther, to Inſtru&, and Ru'e, and Preteft them, which 
Duties a Mother oweth to her Children, as far as ſhe 1s able, 

8 They choſe /new gods zt; then as war in the 


-pates u; * was there a ſhield or ſpear ſeen among forty 


g 

thouſand in Ifracl ? 

” { They did not only ſubmit to Idolatry when they were forced 
toit by Tyrants, but they freely choſe it. 7 New to them, and un- 
"known to their Fathers, and New in compariſon of the true and 
everlsſting Gcd of Jſrael, being but up=ſtarts, and of yeſterday. 
u (ie) In their Walled Cities, which have Gates and Bars; Gates 
are oft put for Cities, as Ger. 42- 17. Deut. 17. 2. Obad. v. 11. 
Then their ſtrongeſt Holds fell inte the hands of their Enemies. 
x (i.e. ) There was not ; the meaning 15 not, that all the !ſraelites 
had no Arms for here 1s mention made only of Shields or Spears, fo 
they might have Swords, and Bows and Arrows, to offend their 
Enemies; bur, either that they had but few Arms among them, 
being many Thouſands of them diſarmed by the Canganites ; or that 
they generally negleC&ted the uſe of Arms as being utterly dif- 
ſpirited, and without all hope of recovering their loft Liberty ; and 
being neceſlitated to other employmenrs for Subſiſtanice. 

9 My heart 1s roward the governours ot Iſrael y that 
offered themſelves willingly among the people ; Bleſs 
ye the LORD x: ; : 

3 I greatly benour and love thoſe, who being the chief of the 
people in Wealth and Dignity, did not withdraw themſelves from 
the Work, as ſuch uſually do ; bur did exp»ſc themſelves ro the ſame 
hazards, and joined with their mcaner Brethren in this noble bur 
dangerous ArcerPt ; and by their Exampies and Countenance en- 
gaged others in it = Who inclined rheir Hearts ro this Undertak- 
incy and gave them Succeſs 1n 1t. As ſhe gives Inſtrumenrs their 
due, ſo ſhe is careful the Sovereign Cauſe, and Lord of all, loſe 


not his Glory. | : : 
10 || Speak « ye that ride on white afles þ, ye that ſit 


in judgment, and ye that walk by the way c. 

; Celebrate the Praiſes of our mighty God, whoſe hand hath 
Jone this 6b { i.e. ) Magiſtrates and Notles, who uſcd ro do fo, 
Judg. 10. 4. and 12: 14. Hor ſes being in a manner forbidden there, 
Daut. 17.16. c ( 5.6.) You that now can ſafely travel about your 
butineſs in thoſe Higk-ways, which before you durſt neither ride 
nor walk in: So great and mean perſons are. jointly excited to 


Praiſe God. 
11 They that are delivered from the noiſe of archers 4 


in the places of drawing water e, there ſhall they re- 

 hearſe the + righteous as of the LORD f, even the 

Sod righteous acts towards the inhabitants of his villages gin 

"neſs of the Iraels then fhall the people of the LORD go down to 
LORD. * the gates 6. 

4 Either 1. From the noiſc or ſound, and conſequently the force of 

' thoſe Arrows which are ſhort at them ; bur ſhe names the noile, be- 

cauſe this Ephithere 1s frequently given to Bows and Arrows in Poe- 


' tical Writings : Or, 2. ay . 
Archers, rejoycing when they mzer wit their prey« e Ar thoſe 


> 


P 1 Sam. 


13: 19,22, 


[| Or, Wg* 
Aitate. 


From the Triumphant Noiſe and Shout of | 


G E S. __ Chap y* 
Pits or Springs of Water, which were Tearee ghd pretions in thoſe | 
het Countreys, to which the peoples Neceſſities forced them oft - 
reſort, and nighunto which the Archers did uſually lurk in Woods, 
or Thickets, or Hedges, that from thence they might ſheor ar 
them, and kill and ſpoil them. f When they come to thoſe places | 
with freedom and ſafety, which before they cculd nor, they ſhall 
with thankfu'/neſs rehearſe this Righteous, and Faithful, and Gra. 
cious work of God, in reſcuing his peoplez and puniſhing hig 
Enemies. g Whcm he mentions, becauſe as their Danger was greg» 
ter. ve 7. lo was their Deliverance, and their Obligation to praiſe 
God. + To wit, of their Cities, which were the chief places to 
which both City and Countrey reſorted for publick Buſineſs ang: 
matters of Juſtice, from which they had been debarred by their 
Oppreflors; but now they had free acceſs and paſlage, either in or 
our of the Gates, as their occaſions required ; and they who had 
been driven from their Cities, now returned to them in peace and 
Triumph ; ſo the Citizens Deliverance is celebrated here, as the 
Countrey-mens is in-the foregoing words. | 

12 Awake, awake ; Deborah: awake, awake, utter 
a ſong : ariſe Barak, and lead thy captivity captive k, 
thou fon of Abinoam. 
c Stir up thy ſelf and all that is within thee, to admire and 
| Praiſe the Lord. k How could this be done, when there was none 
of them lefc ? Judg. 4. 16. Anſwer, 1. None were left to make head 
againſt them. 2. None is oft put for few, and theſe few might be 
taken after the Batte1,a::d carried Captive, and Iced in Triumph,and 
afterward ſlain. 

13 Then he made him that remaineth have dominion 
over the nobles among the people /: the LORD made 
me »» have dominion over the mighty. 

{ Thus God did not only preſerve the poor and deſpiſed Rem- 
nant of his people, from the Fury of the Oppreſſor before this War, 
and from the Deſtruftion which Siſera deſigned and promiſed him- 
ſelf to bring upon them by this War; but alſo gave them' the 
Viftory, and thereby the Dominion over the Princes and Nobles 
of Canaan, who were combined againſt them. m Though but a 
weak Woman. 

14 Out of Ephraim » was there a root of them o a- 
gainit Amalek p, after thee Benjamin q, among thy peo- 
pler: out of Machir /came down governours z, and out 
of Zebulun they that + handle the pen of the writer «. 

» New the relates the carriage and miſcarriage of the ſeveral + Heb: 

Tribes in this Expedition; and the begins with Ep:raim o Either Draw wi 
Firſt, of the Ephraimite- : Or Secondly, of them thar came forth to the pm 
this Expedition. By root ſhe ſeems ro mean 3 branch, as that word is | 
lomer:mes uſed, as 1s. 11. 20. and 53. 2+ By which alſo ſhe may 
note the fewneſs of thoſe that came our of Ephraim; that Jruitful bough 
conliſting of many branches, Gen. 49. 22+ yielding but one Branch 
or an handful of men to this ſervice. p The conſtant and ſworn E. 
nemy of the 1/-aelites, who were confederate with their laſt Oppreſ. 
ſors the Meabires, Judg 3. 13. and in all probability took their ad= 
vantage now againſt the Jraelites in the Southern or middle parts of 
Canaan, Wh:1:ſt their main Forces was drawn Northward againſt 
Jabin and Siſra, Againſt .heſe therefore Ephraim ſent forth a party, 
and 10 dig Benjamin, as 1t here follows; and theſe hindred their 
conjunQiion wich jabins Forces, and gave their Brerhren the advan- 
tage of ighti:.g with Sera alone. q Benjamin followed Ephraims 
examp's. Or, frer thee, O Benjamin ; and thus the Pre-eminence 
iS heregiven ro B:njamin 1n two reſpeAs ; Firſt, that he was firſt in 
his Expeciricn, as indeed he lay nearer the Amalekits, and by his 
Example enc: ur»ged the Ephraimites. Secondly, That the whole 
Tribe of Benjamin, though now bur ſmall, came forth to this War 
when the numerous Tribe of Ephraim tent only an handful to it. 
r Either Firſt, among the people of Benjamin, with whom thoſe few 
Eptraimites united themſelves in this expedition. Or, Secondly 
among the people or Tribes Of /ſrael; to wit, thoſe who engaped 
themlelves jn this War. ſ (4. c. ) Out ofthe Tribe of Manaſeh 
which are elſewhere called by rhe name of Machir, as 7oſ. I3. 3I. to 
wit, cut of the half Trike which was within Jordan; for of the 
otter the ſpeaks, v. I7. t Either Civil Governours, the Princes 
and great perſens, who were as ready to hazard themſelves, and 
their ampie Eſtates. as the meaneſt : Or Military Officers, valiant 
and expert Commanders, ſuchas ſome of Machirs poſterity are noted 
to have been. « ( #. e. ) Eventhe Scribes, who gave themſelves to 
Study and Writing, whereby they were exempted from Military 
Service, did voluntarily enter into this Service. Or, they that drew, 
to wir, the people after them, as that Verb is uſed, Judg. 4. 6. 
With the pen of the ſcribe or writer. (i, e. ) Who did not only go 
themſelves, but by their Letters invited and engaged others to go 
with them to the Battel. 

Is And the princes of Ifſachar »ere with Deborah x: 
even Iflachar y, and alſo *Barak z, he was ſent on # foot 
into the valley, ||for the diviſions « of Reuben there * Chap: 
were ”_ + choughts 6 of heart, +ab! 

x (7.6, ) Ready to aſſiſt her. y Heb. And Iſachor, (i.e.) the ;.. c.. 

Tribe or people of 1/zchar, following the Court and Cane ) the bi fot 
their Princes, and being now at their Commandments, as they _ 
were afterwards upon another occaſion: 1 Chron. 12, 324 z Or,even \ . 6 
as Barak, (1.e.) They were as hearty and valiant as Barak their 2 1cbiime 
General ; and as he marched on foot here and Judg. 4: 10. again Fm ; 
their Enemies Horſes and Chariots, and that into the Yalley, where? —_ 
the main uſe of Horſes and Chariots lies; ſo did they with no leſs 
Courage and Reſolution. s Or, Separar:ons, whereby they were di- 
videdor ſeparated, notſo much one trom another in their Thoughts 
Counſels, «n1 Carriage in this War, ( for they ſeem to be all too 
well agreed in abiding at home with their Sheep, as it follows ) as 
all trom their Brethren, from whom they were divided no leſs in 
their Deſigns and Aﬀe&ions, than in their Situation by the River 
Jordan : and they would nor joyn their Intereſts and Forces with 
them in this cemmon Cauſe, 6 Or, great ſearchings, as it is v. 16. 
Great and ſad Thoughts, and Debates, and perplexities of Mind 
among the J1/rael:tes, to ſee themſelves deſerted by ſo grear and pc= 
tent a Tribe as Reuben was, 

16 Why abodeſt thou among the ſheep folds, to hear 

the 


L 


Ch: 


WP pete; OI 


j Or 


| Or 
Or 


Ch. 
+ He 
poſed 
proge 


tH 


fail 


with 


, 7 Fch:p. V, 


i Or, + the bleatings of the Flocks c? || for the diviſions of 


Reuben there were great ſearchings of heart. | 

© Why waft then ſo unworthy and cowardly,fo void of all Zeal 
tor God, and Compaſſion towards thy Brethren, and Care for the 
Recovery of thy own Liberties and Priviledges, that thou wouldeſt 
not engage thy ſelf in {o juſt, ſo neceſſary, and ſo noble a Cauſe, 
bur didfſt prefer the care of thy Sheep, and thy own preſent Eaſe 
and Safety, before this gener2us Undertaking ? Reuben thought 
Neutrality their wiſeſt courſe ; being very rich in Cattel, Numb. 
32. 1. They were loth to run the hazard of ſo great a Loſs, by 
taking vp Arms againſt ſo potent an enemy as Jabin was: and the 
b e2tines of their Sheep were fo loud in their ears, that they could 
nct hear the Call of Deb:rah and Barak to this Expedition- : 

1- Gilead d abode beyond Jordan e: and why did 
Dan remain in ſhips f? Aſher continued on the fea 


| Or, parte || ſhore g. and abode in his || breaches h. 

\Or,cr.eks. d Gilead is ſometimes taken more largely, for all the Land of the 
Iſraelttes beyond Jeraan, as Numb. 32. C8, 26,.29. So 1t 15 not here 
taken, becauſe Gilead is here diſtinguiſhed fiom Reuben and his 
Land : ſometimes it is taken more ſtrictly for that part of rhe Land 
beyond Jordan which fell to the half-tribe of Manaſſeh, as Num. 32, 
39, 40. Deut. 3« 15+ Joſh 17+ 1» And ſometimes both for that part 
of Manaſſehs, and for Gads portion, as Jeſh. 13+ 24, 25, 29> 39) 3I» 
And ſo it ſeems to be underſtood here ; and the Land Gilead 15 here 
put for the peopleor Inhabitants of it, Gad and Manaſſeh. e In their 
own Portionss and did not come over Jordan ro the help of the 
Lord, and of his people, as th:y ought to have done. f Dan, whoſe 
Coaſt was near the Sea, was wholly intent upon his Merchandite, 
and Shipping, as the great Inſtrument both of his Riches and Safe- 
ry; and therefore would not joyn in this Land-Expedi.1on. 
g Where their Lot lay. h Either, Firſt, in the creeks ot the Sea, 
whether in deſign to ſave themſelves by Ships in caſe of danger, 
as Dan allo intended ; or upon pretence of repairing the Breaches 
made by the Sea into their Countrey. Or, Secondly, in their 
broken and craggy Rocks and Caves therein, in which they thought 
ro ſecure themieIves. : 

Sh tes. * Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that Þ jeo- 

+ Heb. ex. Parded z their lives unto the death, in the high places 

poſed to re= of the field &. ; 

proache i Heb. deſpiſed, or reproachel, or contemnedy comparatively ; they 
choſe rather ro venture upon a generous and honourable Death, 
than to enjoy a ſhameful and ferviie Life. & (7.e. ) Upon that 
large and eminent Plain in the top cf Mount Tabor, where they put 
themſelves in Battel Array, and expeted th: Enemy ; though 
when they faw he did. not come up to them, they marched down 
to meet ani fight him. 

19 The kings / came and fought: then fought the 
kings of Canaan in Taanach, by the waters of Megid- 
do /: they took no gain of mony m. 

I Either confederate with him, or ſubjeC& ro him ; for it is known, 
Thar there were divers petty Kings in thoſe parts ; which alſo ofc- 
times were ſubject to ene gre-te: and more purear King ; and par- 
ticu/arly, this Hoz'r, where this Jabin row Reigned, Judg. 4. 2- Was 
beforet/me the head of divers petty Kingdoms, Joſb 11. ro» 1 Taanah 
aid Mcgiddo wererwo eminent Cities, belonging 1ndeed to Manaſſeh, 
Judge 1. 27, but ſeatedin the Tribe of 1ſachar, Joſ 17. 11+ not far 
from Mount Taber, Joſ. 17. i0. Juag. i. 27. nor from the River 
Kiſhon. m Either Firit, from Siſera. They fought without Pay, 
whether trom meer hatred of the 1ſraelites, and a deſire to be reven- 
ged upon them : or from a full hope and confidence of paying 
themtzlves abundantly out of 1ſ-aels Spoils. Or, Secondly, From 
the Iſraclites; fo the ſenſe is, They fell, loſt all their hopes of Mo- 
ney, and rich Spoils and Booty, which they aſſured theintelves of; 
initead of gaining a prey, they loſt Themſe]ves. 


20 They fought from heaven » ; the ſtars o in their 
+ courſes p fought againſt Siſera. 

n Or, they jrom heaven, or the heavenly Hoſt fought, by Thunder, 
and Lightning, and Hail-ſtones, poſſibly mingled with Fire. Com- 
pare Jeſ. 10. 11. and 1 Sam 7. 1c. 0 Which raiſed tkeſe Storms by 
their Influences, which they do naturally and ordinarly, but now 
far more, when God ſharpened rheir Influences, and diſpoted the 
Air to receive and improve their imprefſions. p Or, from their paths, 
or ſtations, or high-places. As Soldiers fight in their Ranksand places 
aſſigned them, 1" did theſey and that with advantage, as thoſe Ene- 
mies do, which fight from the higher ground. 


t Heb, 


[8/18 


21 The River of Kiſhon q ſwept them away ; that 


JUDGE $ 


| 


ancient River q the River Kilhon. O my ſoul, thou 
haſt tredden down ftrength r. 

q Which, though not great in it felf, and therefore fordable, was 
new much ſwelled and encreaſed by the foregoing Srorm and Rain, 
as Joſephus afhiems ; and therefore drowned thoſe who b:ing purſued 
by rne hand of God, and by the 1azlites, were forced into it, and 
thought to paſs over it, as they did before. q So called, either, 
Firſt in oppcſiricn to | hofe Rivers which are of a later Date, be- 


ing made by the ha”d ana Art of Man. Or, Secondly, becauſe ir 
was a River anciently famous for ſume remarkavie Exploits, for 
which it was celebrated by the 2ntient Poets or Writers, though 
nor ii-re mentioned. #7 (7z.e.) Thru, O Deborah, though bur a 
we:zk Woman, haſt by Gcds Atliſtance and Blefling upon thy Coun- 
ſels and Prayers, tubdued a poterr Enemy. Such Apoſtrophes and 
abrupt Speeches are frequent in Poetical Scriprures. 


22 Then were the hoiſe hoofs broken { by the 


means of the || pranfiugs 7, rhe pranſings of their migh- 
ty ONEs #» 


ſ Their Horſes, in which they put moſt confidence, had their 
Hoofs, whico 15s their ſupport and ftrengthy broken, either by 
dreadful Huil- ſtones, Or rather, by cheir {witt and vio'ent running 
over tie ſtony grounds, When They fled away witn all potſible ipeed 


L Or, tram 
P:ings, or 
Mungings, 


from God and from 1ſrael. t Or, becauſe of their fierce or ſwift courſes. 
# Either, Firſt, of their ſtrong and vaiianc Riders, who forced their 


Horles to run away as faſt as they could. Or, $zcondly, Of their 


= 


-- 


Horſes, as this word ſignifies, Jer. $. 16. and. 47. 3. and 50. 42+ 
( z. e. ) of themſelves ; the Antecedent for the Relative. 

23 Curle ye Meroz x, (ſaid the angel of the LORD y ) 
curſe ye bitterly the inhabirants thereof ; becauſe they 
came not to the help of the LORD 2, co the help of 
the LORD againſt the mighty. 

x A placethen, no doubt, eminent and conſiderable, though now 
there be no remembrance of it lefr, which poſſibly might be the 
effeCt of this bitrer Curſe ; as God curſeth Amalek in this manner, 
that he would utterly blot out their remembrance, &c, Exod. 17. 14+ 
Deut. 25. 19. And this place above all others may be thus ſeverely 
curſed ; either becauſe ir was near the place of the Fights and 
therefore had rhe greateſt opportunity and obligation to engage 
with, and to afſiſt their Brethren ; and their denying their help) 
was a great diſcouragement to all their Brethren, whoſe hearts, no 
doubt, were greatly afflited, and might have utterly fainted at 
this great Miſcarriage, and ſcandalous Example; or for ſome other 
great Aggravation of their Cowardiſe and Treachery. which may 
eaſily be imagined, though it be not here expreſſed. y She ſignifies, 
that thisCurſe proceeded not from her ſpleen or ill will cowards thar 
place, nor from her own private opinion or ffeCtion, but from Di- 
vine inſpiration; and that ifall the reſt of the Song ſhould be ta- 
ken but for the Breathings and Expreſſions of a pious and devour 
Soul, bur liable to miſtake, yer this Branch of it was immediately 
dictated to her by the Lord, by the Miniſtry of an Angel : other- 
wiſe ſhe neither would nor durſt have uttered ſo bitter a Curſe a- - 
gainſt them. z Either, Firſt, Of the Lords people: for God rakes 
what is done for, oragainſt his people, as if it was done to himſelf, 
See lſa. 63+ 9. Zech. 2.8. Matth. 25- 45. Or, Secondly, Ofthe Lord 
himſelf, who though he did not need, yer did require and expe& 
their help and concurrence: and he expreſſ=th it thus, to ſhew the 
ſinfalneſs and unreaſonableneſs of therr cowardly deſertion of this 
Cauſe, becauſe it was the Cauſe of God, and they had the Call of 
God toir, whom they knew to be able eaſily to cruſh thatEnemy 
whom they dreaded, and who had promiſed to do it- 

24 Bleſſed above women. s, ſhall * Jae] the wife of * Chap: 
Heber the Kenite be ; bleſled ſhall ſhe be above wo- 4 17. 
men in the tent ho 


a Celebrated, and praiſed, and endowed with all ſorts of Bleflings 
more than they. Bur of this fa&t of 7aels, ſee the Nores on Judg. 4+ 
21. 6b In her Tent or Habitatien, in her Houſe and Family, and all 
her Afﬀairs : for ſhe and hers dwelt in Tents. The Tent is here men- 
tioned in Allufion to the place where this Fa& was done. 

25 He asked water, and ſhe gave him milk ; ſhe jos, 
brought forth || butter c in a lordly diſh 4. 

c Or, Cream, (7. e. ) ThechoiceſFof her Milk; ſo the ſame thing is 
repeated in differing words. d Which you are not to endertions of 
ſuch a ſtately and coſtly Diſh as the Luxury of after Ages brought 
in. which 15not agreeable tothe fimplicity either of this Family, or 
of thoſe ancient "Times ; but of a comely and convenient Diſh, the 
beſt which ſhe had, and ſuch as the berter ſorr of perſons then uſed. 

26 She put her hand e tothe nail, and her right hand 
co the workmans hammer : and with the hammer ſhe 
+ ſmote Siſera, ſhe ſmote off F his head, when ſhe had 
peirced g and ſtricken through his temples. 

e (7. e.) Her left hand, as appears from the nature of the thing ; 
and from the right hand, which 1s oppoſed to it. f Or, fruck through, 
2s the LXX and Syriack render it : or brake, as the Chaldee hath it. 
g Heb. ans ſhepierced : or, and the Nail pierced. 

27 f Acher fteethe bowed, he fell, and lay down þ : + Heb: 
at her feet he bowed, hefell ; where he bowed, there between. 
he fell down T dead. " ws 


þ Here is alively Repreſentation of the thing done. Ar the firſt deftr oye#. 
blow or wound he was awakened, and made ſome attempr to riſe; 
bur being aſtoniſhed and very weak, ſhe alſo following her firſt 
blow with others, he found iimfſclf impotent, and fell eown dead; 
and then ſh:ſtruck the Nail quite through his head into the ground, 
as isfaid, Judg. 4. 21- 
28 The mother of Siſera looked out at a window 3, 
and cried through the latteſs, Why zs his chariot ſo long 
in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots ? 
; Expetting to fee him returning : for the concluded, that he 
went forth nor fo much to Fight, as to take the Spoil 
29 Her wile ladies anſwered her, yea, the returned + Heb- 
t anſwer to her ſelf, ber _ 
39 * Have they not ſped? have they not divided the , _ ; 
prey &, | toevery man adamſfel or two ? To Siſera a + Heb. #» 
prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of nee- the head of 
le-work, of divers colours of needle-work on both * 9" 


ſides, meet for | che necks of them that take the {ſpoil J. 7 
k (7.e.) Ir is cerrain they have got the prey, only they tarry jecks of the 


to view it and diſtribute it, according to every Mans quality and ſpoil, 
merite / Heb. of the prey; the prey pur for the men of prey, thoſe, or 
who take the prey ; as k:nared is put for a man of kindred, or a kinſ- 
man, Ruth 3. 2 and B:lial, for 2 man of Bel:al, - 2 Sam. 16. 7. And 
days, for a man of days or an old man, 5: 32, 


7. 
21 So mletall thine enemies periſh, O LORD: 
but Jet them that love him, be as * the ſun when he go- * 2 Sams 


eth forth in his might ». And the land had reſt forty 3* + 
years 0. 
m ( i.e. ) So ſuddenly, ſo ſurely, ſo effeQually and irrecoverably. 
n Wheahe firſt riſeth, and ſo goeth on in his courſe, which he doth 
with great might, even as a ſtrong man that runneth a race, Pſal. 19. 5- 
and fo as no creature can ſtop, or hinder him; even ſo irreſiſtible let 
the People be. o How to be computed, ſee before on Judg. 3. 11. 
CHAP. VL 
The Midianites opdreſs Iſrael, 1 6. A prophet raiſed rebukes them, 
7 «== An Angel calls Gideon 16 Iſraels deliverance, 1116+ Con« 
firms him by a mitacle, 11 — 21+ He builds an altar: calls it Fehavs 
Shalom ; and offer::h there. By Gods command he break; dawn ths Altar 
27 3 | 0 


YEA: 


f Heb, 


hammered. 


Chap. VI. 


[ 


SI = = — 


————————— 


n 
| 


pr e—_—_—_— EG NS 


— 
= n——— 


> —_— 


——————————_—_—_— 


i” _ 
ee oo nora norm en 


,? | on VI. 
Baal: His name Jerub-baal,"22 "32+ The Midianites gather t0- 
fron to frahe And Gideon prepares agatnſt them : God flrengthens and | 
NF cnfirms him by a miracle, 32 ———-40 We | 
[| Nd the children of Iſrael did evil in the ſight of the 
| LORD : and the LORD deliver2d them 1nto 
PHab.3:5: the hand * of Midian « ſeven years. 
|| s For alchough-the generality of the Mizianites had been cut off 
4 by Moſes abr ut 200 years ago, yet many of them doubtleſs fled into 
| the neighbouring Countries, whence afterwards they returned 1n- 


:r own Land, and in that time mig{tt caſily grow tobe a very 
_— when God furthered rheir increaſe, 
people 1/rae! when they 


F reat Number ; eſpecially, 
1 or they might be a fir icourge for his 


| ſpreſſed. : ; 
[+ Heb. was TO yo nd the hand of Midian Þ prevailed againſt Ifra- 


£ Eel, and becauſe of the Midiavites che children of Ifrael 
made them the dens which are in che mountains, and 

caves b, and ſtrong holds. _ | 
þ In which they might ſecure their perſons and proviſions from 


the hands of che Midianites. : 
'2 And fo it was when Iſrael had ſown, that the Mi- 


3 UDGES 


be with thee, and thou ſhalt ſmite the Midianites as 
one man #. 

t Aseaſily, as if they were all but one Man; or, thou fhalt de. 
ſtroy them to a Man, as he did, Judges 8. 

17 And he ſaid unto him, If now T have found 
grace in thy ſight, then ſhew me a ſign, that thou 


calkeſt with me #. 

u That it is chou, to wit, an Angel or Meſſenger ſent from Ged, 
that appears to me, and diſcourſes with me; and not a Phancy or 
Deluſion ; that thou art in- truth what thou ſeerreſt and pretendeſt 
to be, ve 12. Or. a ſign of that which thou talkeſt with me; ( i.e.) 
That thou wilteſt by me ſmite the Miarzanites, 

18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto 
thee,and bring forth my || preſent x,8 ſet ir before thee y. | Or;nea 
And he faid, I will tarry until thou come again. Jerng. 

x Not a Sacrifice, becauſe neither was Gideon a prieſt, nor was 
this the place of Sacrifice, nor was any Altar here, nor was there 
any ſuch Sacrifice as here follows appointed by God; Lut arepaſt, 
or ſome food for the Angel, which he thoughr to be a man, as ap- 
pears by wv. 22. Compare Judz. 13. 15. and Gen 18. 5+ y That 
thou maiſt eat and refreſh thy ſelf. 


dianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children 


c (4. e. } The Arabianc, who are commonly called the children of 
the Eaſt, as Gen. 29+ 1. Judg. 8+ 10, IT. Jeb 1. 3+ Exek, 25, 4. Nor 
all the rab:ans, tor in that Were many, and divers people ; but in 


the Eaftcr., part of Arabia. 
4 And they encamped againſt them, and deſtroyed 


the increaſe of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza 4, 
and left no ſuſtenance for Iſrael, neither || ſheep, nor 
7 oo”; ) -Þ the Eaſt, on which ſide they entred, to the Weſt, 
where Gaza was near the Sea : ſo they deſtroyed the whole Land. 

5 For they came up withtheir cartel, and their tents, 
and they came as graſhoppers for mulritude ; for both 
they and their camels were without number e: and 

they entred into the land to deſtroy it. 

e ( i. e:) So many that it was not eaſte to number them. Ir is 


Hyperbole. 
ry 6 And Iſrael was greatly. impoveriſhed becauſe of 


the Midianites, and the children of 1frael cried unto 
the LORD. i 

7 © And it came to paſs when the children of Ifrae] 
cried unto the LORD, becauſe of the Midianites, 

3- That the LORD ſent + a prophet unto the chidren 
of Iſrael, which {aid unto them, Thus faith. the Loid 
GOD of Ifrae), I brought you up from Egypr, and 
brought you forth from the houſe of bondage : 

9 And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyp- 
tians, and out of the hand of all that oppreited you, 
and drave them out from b<fore you, and gave you 
their land: | 

' xo AndI faid unto your I am the LORD your God, 
* > King. * fear not f the gods of the Amorites, in whole land ye 
17-35-38.» dwell : but ye have not obeyed my voICe. : 
EI» 10-22 F(; e.) Do not ſerve or Worlbip them. 

11 © And there came an angel of the LORD, and 
| ſat under an oak which was in Ophrah g, that pertained 

FHeb. r:. unto Joaſh the Abi-ezrite b: and his fon * Gideon 
3:.c-l:4 threſhed wheat 3 by the winepreſs &, | to hide zx from 
4704 ,, the Midianites. =p 

: To wit, in Manaſſeh * for there was another Ophrah in Benjamin, 
cauſe it to To 18. 23. h Of the Poſterity of Abiezer, of whom, ſee Joſ. 17. 2. 
flee, 1 Chron 7. 18. See Judg. 8, 27, 32. 7 Nor with Oxen, as the.man- 


ner was Deut. 25. 4. but with a Staff ro prevent diſcovery. & Jn 
the place where the Winez-preſs ſtood, notin the common Fleor. 

12 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him 
and ſaid unto him, The LORD z: with thee /, thou 
mighty man of valour | | 

I (5. ) Will afliſt thee againſt thine and mine Enemies. m To 
whom I have given Strength and Courage for this end. ; 

12 And Gideon ſaid unto nim, Oh my lord, if the 
LORD be with us, why then is all this befallen us ? 
and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us 
of, ſaying, Did not the LORD bring us up from E- 
gypt ? but now the LORD hath forſaken us, and de- 
livered us into the hand of the Midianites. 

14 And the LORD looked upon him », and faid, 
* Go in this thy might 0: and chou ſhalt ſave Irael 
from the hand of the Midianites; have not 1 lent 
thee p ? F 

n Witlr a ſetied and pleaſ:znt Countenance, as a teſtimony of his 
- favour to him, and of his readineſs to he]p him. o Or, go now, or at 
this time #n thy might : the ſtrength which chou haſt already received, 
and doſt.now further receive from me, 1s ſufficient with my help, 
p I do hereby give thee Command and Commiſſion for this Work, 
and therefore am oblidged in Honour to affiſt thee in it. 
15 And he ſaid unto him, Oh my lord, wherewith 
+ Heb. my ſhall Ifave Iſrael? behold + my family 9 is poor 7 in Ma- 
ghouſand is yafſeh, and I am the leaſt 5 in my fathers houſe. | 
the menn- q Heb. my thouſand : for the Tribes were diſtributed into ſeveral 
eff. thouſands, whereof each thouſand had his peculiar Governour. 
y ( i» e, ) Weak and contemprible. S Either tor Ages or for wiſ- 


[ Or, 
£0#lge 


+ Heb 
M4n, a pro- 


phct. 


* 1 Sam. 
T' 2. I Fo 
Heb. II: 
32s 


of the caſt c, even they came up a4.ainlt them. 


\and ficneſs for ſo great a Work. ; 
TT "And the LORD faid unto him, Surely I will 


=” 


19 © And Gideon went in, and made ready Þ a kid, + Heb. ; 
and unleavened cakes of an Ephah of flour 2: the fleſh 4 of the 
he put in a bisket, and he put the broth in a por, ©: 
and brought it unto him under the oak, and preſen- 
ted z7. 

z Towit, out of the choiceſt part of a whole Ephah ; as alſo he 
broughr ro him the beſt part of a Kid dreſſed ; for a whole Ephah, 
and a whole Kid had been very ſuperfluous, and improper to pro- 
vide for, and ſer b:fore one Man. 

20 And the angel of God ſaid unto him, Take the 
fleſh, andthe unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this 
rock, and pour out the broth. And he did ſo. 

21 Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end 
of the ſtaff that was in his hand, and couched the fleſh, 
and the unleavened cakes, and * there roſe up fire out * Lev;z 
of the rock, and conſumed the fleſh, and the unleave- 9- 24: 
ned cakes a; then the angel of the LORD departed 
our of his ſight. 

a By which, he ſhews himſelf to be no Man that needed ſuch 
proviſions, but a true Angel of God, or the Son of God ; and by 
this inſtance of his Omniporency, gave him aſſurance, that he both 
couid, and would conſume the Midianites. 

22 And when Gideon perceived that he was an an- 
gel of the LORD, Gideon ſaid, Alas b, O Lord God : 

* for becauſe c I have ſeen an angel of the LORD face * F*od 
ro face. * Hou 

6 I am an undone Man ; I muſt die, and that ſpeedily ; for that Ms P 
he feared, v. 23. according to the common opir.ion in that caſe; of © * 
which ſee Gen. 16, 13. and 32+ 30+ Exod. 33. 20. Deute. 5. 25, 26, 

c Or, for therefore, &c. (i.e. ) Therefore God hath ſhewed me this 
ſight as a prelage of my Death. 

23 And the LORD ſaid unto him 4d, Peace be unto 
thee.e; fear not, thou ſhalt not die. 

d By inward ſuggeſtion, rather than in a viſible Apparition, 
e Thou ſhalt receive no hurt by this Viſion, as thou feareſt ; bur 
only peace, 1. e. all the bleſſings needful for thy own happineſs, and 
for the-preſent work ; for this is a very comprehenſive Phraſe a 
mong the Hebrews. 

24 Then Gideon bailt an altar there F unto the 
LORD, and called ic || Jehovah-ſhalom g: unto this [har is 


day, it 7s yet in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites the Lond 
f To wit. en the top ofthe Rock, as is evident from wv. 20, ang ſend pra 
eſpecially from v- 26. where that which is here expreſſed only in 
general, and by anticipation, is more particularly deſcribed, ac- 
cording to the uſage of the Scripture. g 7. e. The Lords peace; the 
ſign or witneſs of Gods ſpeaking Peace to me, 2nd to his people: 
or the place where he ſpake Peace to me, when I expe&ed nothing 
but DeſtruQtion. 
25 T And it came to paſs the ſame night, that the 
LORD faid unto him, Take thy fathers young bul- 
lock, -|| even the ſecond bulleck h, of ſeven years 01, 1] Or, and 
and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath * xo. 
z, and cut down the grove that 7s by it & : 34: 13; 
þ Thus there was but one Bullock, which was young, to wit, com. Dceut-715i 
paratively, but nor ſimply, for it was ſeven years old ; and of ſuch 
this Hebrew word is utied, Job 21, 10» For theſe Creatures are 
fruitful above ſeven years. Or thus, thy Fathers young Bullock, and 
the ſecond Bullock: ſo there were two Bullocks. Bur becauſe ther is 
bur one of them mentioned both in the next verſe, and in the exe. 
cution of this Command, wv. 28. it is probable it was but one; and the 
Hebrew Particle, vau, and, 1s put exegetically for even, or, to wit, as 
is very uſual. And this he cails his Fathers young Buleck, both becauſe 
his Father was the owner of ir, and becauſe his Father kept and fed 
it for a Sacrifice to Beal, But becauſe ir is likely his Father kept 
divers of theſe Carre} of differing Ages and Scatures for that uſe, 
either at his own, or ar the pzoples charge; therefore he adds by 
way of Jimitation, that he ſhould nor take the eldeſt and the grea- 
teſt, Lut the ſecond ; to wit, in Ape, or Stature, or Good!ineſs, or 
in the order of Sacrifice, that which was to have been ſacrificed to 
Baal in thefecond place. And this he ſingled cut becauſe of its age; 
for being ſeven years old, it began with the Midranitiſh Calamity and 
being now to be ſacrificed, dig fitly ſignificy that the Period of that 
Miſery was now come* #5 Which thy lather built in his own 
Graund, though for the common uſe of the whole City,w. 28. 29, 
30. k Planted by the Altar for Idolatrous or im pure Utes, as rhe 
manner of Idolaters Was» See Jud, 3+ 7, This Aftion might ſeem 
1njurious to his Fathers Rights and Auchority ; but Gcds Command 
was ſullicient warrand, and Gideon was now Called to be the Supreme 
Magiſtrate 


—— 


Chap. V1, © 


; *t Bc 


t He 
ring 
i Or. 
paerl 
mann 


- | Heb 


loathe, 
* Nun 
20. 3 
Chap. 
2% 

t Heb 
called a 
bim. 


Mor: _ H__ 7 UC YU Ps | Chap.. VIL 


Magiſtrate, whereby he was made his Father's Superiour, and was ſengers unto Aſher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naph- 


impowered, and authorizedy and enjoy ned to root out all Idolatry eali 1 3 thew-© 
aud Superſtition, and the Inſtruments thereof. y. Ga y came up to meet them. 


c On both ſides of Jordan. & Becauſe theſe Tribes were neareſt to 
26 And build an altar unto the LORD thy God, UP- | him, and ſo could ſ-oneſt jiyn with him; and were neareſt the 


cb on the top of this T rock { [ in the ordered place mM, } Enemy aifo, v. 33+ and therefore were moſt ſenſible of the Calami- 
= ;lace. and take the ſecond bullock, and offer a burnt-ſacrifice 'Y, and would in all reaſon be moſt forward to reſcue themſelves 
"Or. 852.332 With the wood of the grove which thou ſhalr cur | 77992 It . : 
7 Bo 5 36 © And Gideon ſaid unto GOD e, If thou wilt ſave 
manners 1 Of which v. 20.21. Heb. of this ftrong hold: for in that Cala- Iſrael by mine hand, as thou haſt {ai 5 SD 
mitous time the 1/-ae[/tes retreated to ſuch Rocks,ard hid and forti- | , .* In way of humble Supplication, part'y for the {trengthning of 
fred themſelves in them. m i- & In a p'ain and ſmoorh part of the his own Faith, and partly for the greater encouragement of his Sol= 
Rock, where an A!rar may be conveniently built. Or, in erder, i. c. diers in this great and ſtrange Attempt. NT 
in ſuch miner as T have apppoinred ; for God had given Rules a- 37 Behoid,I will pur A fleece of wool in the floor z 
bour the bui'ding cf Altars. 1 Gideon was no Prieſt, nor was this | and if the dew be on rhe fleece only,and it be dry upon 


the avpointed pl:ce of Sacrifice ; bur God can diſpente with h15own | 411 44 4 1 Wi 
Inſtitutions, thouga we may nt; and his call gave Gideon ſufficient he _carth beſide # 4 then ſhall I Know chaz thos wile 


Authorir ys fave Iſrael by mine hand, as thou haſt ſaid. 

27 Then Gideon took ten men of his ſervants o, and, IT L bo g's —— {por of ground which adjoyneth to, and en« 
did as the LORD had ſaid unto him : and /o it was, 18 g ww rh —_ ones ed ent tes 
becauſe he feared p his fathers houſho!d, and the men of | 7, 0 1 Heece © para po egy rd 
the city, that he could nor do zr by day, that he did # |, q Cad - Mn | full of W 5 - 
by night G — our of the fleece, a bowl full of Water. _ 

o Whom doubtleſs he had xcquainred wirh his deſign, and the af- 39 b 9 Gideon faid unto GOD, Let not thine * Gens 
ſuravce of Succeſs in ity where: y rhey were eaſily induced to affiti anger D*© not againſt me, andTI will ſpeak but this ONCE 2 18. 32» 
him, if not ſincerely, yer foi t. e expettarion of advantage *o them- [er me prove,l pray thee, bur this once with the fleece. 
ſelves by it. p Not fo much, 1zſt he ſh-uld ſuffer For it,fr he knew | Let jt now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the 
very well th: doing it by night with fo many ha«.ds OE ny zround let there be dew g , 

- : La. enti q; . 1 : - $ 

the diſcovery, and conteq.entiy the puntihment of ir; bur leit he s Which was wr 204 prevernarenel than theta 


ſhould be prevented from doing 1t. hs | - : 
; . ::{tamce, b cauſe if th:re be any moitture, ſuch bedics as fleeces of 
28 E And when the men of the ity aroſe early inthe | yr,.n nu on hkely-eorduink 4 aw -- ; : 


morning,beho!d,chs altar of Baal was caſt down, andthe] 15 Anq God did fo that night : for it was dry upon 
grove was cut down that was by it, and the ſecond bul- | the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground. 
lock was offercd upon the altar that was built q CAP VI. 

q Not upon Baal's A't r, for which it was deiigned ; but upon an | G;,1,9y with two and thirty thouſand Men encamps againft the Midianites$ 


Altar ereC&t-d in cont. mpt uf Baal. they, by GOO'S C d and ; : 
m , by ommand and Token are leſſened to 200, 1===8, He i en- 
29 And they {aid one to another, Who hath done } c:uraged by a Dream, and ts Interpretations 9 =1 54 Dividerh his Army 


this thing ? And when tie enquired, and asked, they. no 3 Companres : who all with one accord blow the Trumpets : and break 
ſaid, Gideon the for: of Joaſh hath doue this thing r. the Pitchers, wherein the Lamps were, in pieces 16 ——- 20, The Midi= 


: : . . | . anites are terrified, fly and doftroy one another, 21, 22 The next adjoyning 
3 Then the men of che cicy ſaid unto Joath, Bring Iſraelites purſue them to ſtop therr paſſage over Jordan. Two Princes of 


out thy ſon, tha: he may die : becauſe he hath caſt | 7c Midianires are taken by the Ephraimues, 23 —- - 25- 
down the aitar of Pa:l,and becauſe he hath cut down Hen Jerubbaal ( who is Gideon ) and all the Peo- 
the grove that as b it. ple that were with him, roſe up early,and pitched 


r Which they might ea i y conjefture, part'y by his known aver- | beſide the well of Harod : ſo that the hoſt of the Midi- 


ſion from the worſhip of Baa!, and part y becaute no other Perſo! . , 
durſt preſume to vo ſuch athing ; but they niight more certainly anites were on the north-fide of them, by the hill of 


l-arn jr from ſome «f the Perſons imployed in ir,who through fer | Moreh, it the valley. A 

or fivour might info;m rhems ; : 2 And the LORD faid unto Gideon, The people 
31 And Joaſh faid unto all that ſtood againſt him, | chat are with thee are too many for me 6 to give the 

Will ye piead for Baal s? will ye fave him ? he that will Midianites into their hand, leſt Iſrael vaunt themſelves 

plead for him, let him be put to death r, whileſt it z- yer | againſt me, ſaying, Mine own hand hath ſaved me. 

morning « : if he be a god, let him plead for himfſeit x, | # i. ee For my purpoſe; which is, ſo ro deliver Jrarl, that it may 

becauſe one hath calt down his altar. appear tobe my own miraculous att, that ſo. I may have all the Glory 

s Why are you ſo zealous in pleading for that Baah for the wor- of it,and they may te more ſtrongly obliged ro Jove and ſerve me. 

Dip whereof you ſuffer tuch grievous Caiamiries at this day,and from 5 Now therefore g0to, prociarm in the ears of the 

whom you have no help? Ic is plain, thar 50ajb aad been a worſhipper | People, ſaying, * Whoſoever is fearful and afraid, let, ” 

of Baal : either theretore he WiS DW consinced by Gideon $ Infor- lym return and depart early from mount Gilead FS. and S 


mation and Action, or he makes uſ- cf rn:s Pretence to preſzrve his : . 
Son, being indeed 1ndifferent in m-tters of Religion ; ard therefore chere returned of the People twenty and two cheuſand 


as he did worſhip Baal to comply with his Neighbours, ſo now he d, and there remained cen thouſand. : oe 
deſerts him; to rs{cue his So. # He char thal further plead for fuch | © Not that f:mous _ rater: beyond Jordan ; for it 
2 god as this, deſerves to die for h:s foily and impicty. Ir is no: | 'S apparent that both the Camps of the I/raelites and of the Midianites 
Seaketdls that this was all which he aid for his Shs a or | were on ti:1s ſide Jordan: bur another Mount Gilead in the Tribe of 
that he would n-gle& to mention the Ca'l his Son bad from GOD Manaſſeh ; which might be fo called, cither for ſome reſemblance it 
ro it, the Appariri n of an Angel, the Promiſe of D-I:verance : bur _ kg ay _ —_— ry in worn gria of their Father 
it is uſual in Scripture to give on'y ſome ſhort hinrs of thoſe Thing. | Gilead; or, that this migh: be a Memorial ef their nezr R-lation to 
which were more Jargely diſcouried. « i. e. Inſtantly, without de- | cheir Brethen, notwirhſtanding their being divid:d one from another 
lay ; for it was now Morning time, as appears from wv. 28, &c. x As | oy Jordan; or, for ſome other __ now — at this diſtance of 
the God of 1a! hath oftea done when any Indigniry or Injury | Time and Piace. O-, tre words may be rendred towards Munt Gi- 
hath been done to him. But Baal hath now ſhewel, that he is n«c1- |/cad; for rhe H:orew Particle ming or mn, is fomet:mcs rendred to. 
ther ab'e to he!p you, no: himſcIf; and checefore is not worthy wards, cf wh.ch fee Gen. 11. 2. and 13+ It. Deut 32. 2. 2 Sam. 6. 2. 
to be ſerved any longer. This curzgious and reſolute Arſwer was | And fo it may be underſtood uf the famous Mount Gilead, beyond 
nec ſſary to {t p the torrent of tne Peop'e+ bury ; and ir was drawn | Jordan, which he may m-nrion here, either, 1. Becauſe maiiy of 
from him, partly by the Senſe of his Son's extreme Danger ; and | his Soldiers were of that half Trib? of Maſh which dwelt there, 
parily by tae Confidence hz had, thar GOD wuu'd plead bis Son's | and ſo it was moſt proper for rbem to return thither; Or, 2. Bz- 
Cauſe, and uſe him fur the Reicue of his P. op'r, cauſe that was their {.feſt courſe to ger furrheſt from the danger 
32 There'ore on that day he calied lim y Jerub-baal, haps nc feared Sos fr m—_— _— wi omg fa wee 109% 
2 the 26; SO. . *” com danger, yet he would not have them: diſpe:f:d, but kept 
ſaying, Lec Baal plead againſt him, becauſe he hath rog2ther in a Boiy about Mount Gilead; k..owing tnat they who had. 
thrown down his | altar, ; \ | 10r Courage enough to fight their En mics, might have Valour e- 
7 1. e. Foaſb called Gideon 15, Judges 7.1. 1n remembrance of this | zough to purſue rnem, when they were beaten by others; and ſu« 
noble Exploit, and top:ta bran up Baal. : ſpeQing, that the Mdiamres, if beaten, would probably flee that 
23 4 Thenall the Midiaices, and the Amalekites. |away. 4 Who finding their whole Army to b= very ſinall, in com= 
and che children of the eaſt were gathered together anc _— ry ap who mais 2p ds 3 ay 
OY WW . 1 and, Judges 8.10. and they, no doubr well Armed and D-ſcipiined, 
—— and ptqgcenes _ valley of Jacvecd S [and encouragedby long Sicceſs; whereas the 1rael.res were d:ſ-{pi- 
Ra 5b at on pr Fanart JERILY Jo). = ED another in cired with long Servitude, ard many of them u- f.rathed wrh 
the Boiders of Man'ſ:þ an jachar, Jo). 17-16. aid 9 18. which | A;ms and Proviſions; loft the Courage which ia the beginning they 
was nut far diſtant frem O0/va/, whe:i- Gizcon dwe t,und now wass ſezmed 0 have. x 


- + Heb: - _— aig ot the _— TR rr Gide- 4 And the LORD ſaid unto Gideon, The people 
coathed, 4, a5 NC" D.CW A tFUMPET, and ADICZer Þ T Was ga-| re yer too many : bring them down unto the water e, 


* Numb. — 1969 A a 4 and I will iry them for thee f there, and it ſhal be, that 
20. Jo rl 1M with extraorainary W .idom, and Cour-ge an | 1 : 1 

Chap. 3- Zxal to vindicate GOD'S H+nour, and his Coun r.v's Liberty.Com- of whom I lay I chee, This thal 80 wich thee, the. 
27 pare 1 C/r07. 12. 18. and 24+ 22+ b i.e, The Atezrites,his Kindred, ſame ſhal 80 with thee : and of whomfoever I ſay unto 
f Heb. wes and their Szrv ants, and oth«rs; who finding no barm coming to h'\m thee, This lhal nor g0 with thee, 'the ſame ſhal not go 
caled after tor the deſt:oying of Baal, buc rather a blefſi:g f om God, in giving ap» ; 


bi, _ ce _ HI. _— ry and d ng--ous an Attempr, | *, pither that which ran from the Wellof Harsd, mentioned wv. 1- 
changed their ALNGS, and 10:10Wed bm as the Peiton by whoſe |. ſome other Brook. f Becaute thy Proctamarion hath nor ſuffici« 
hands God wou'd deliver them. | "ek acted aa ho ard foarfirl todo with wes 
; ] he | lenoers t] Il M eh -ntly tried them ; for many Wo arc tearmi indeed, Will put | 
3ſ And he lent meilengers nrougnout all MAnanlen :ce, and defire the opinion of bcing Valiant Pecfons; I will t:ke 
c, who aiſo' was gathered aticr him ; and he ſent mel- Jaacrhes courſes 


20s. 8. 


S--'3:- 5 5a 


' Chap. VIL. 'FVD 
So he brought down the people unto the water: 
and the LORD faid unto Gideon, Every one that lap- 
;eth of the water with his tongue as a dog lappeth,him 
ſhale thou ſet by himſelf ; likeways every one that bow- 
eth down upon his knees to drink g., 
g It is true, there may be natural reaſons given, why ſome did 
only Lap of the Water, when orhers bowed down te drink; from 
the Temperance,or Fortitude, or Patience,or Strengti,or Diligence 
of the one; and the Intemperance or Cowardice, or Impatiencey or 
Weakneſs, or Slothfuineſs of the other; bur theſe ſeem to be meer 
conjeftures : The truc reaſon and deſign of this courſe, ſeems to be 
only this, That God wouid reduce them to a very ſmall number, 
which was likely to be done by this means; for the Seaton of the 
Year being hor, and the generality of the Soldiers weary, and 
thirity, and faint, they would moſt probably bow down upon their 
Kn:es, that they might more fully refreſh themſelves by a libe- 
ral draught, as indeed they did; and it could be expected thar 
there would bz bur few, who either could or would deny th=mſelves 
in this matter; eſpecially, when God concurred in the work, and 
ſo diſpoſed of the Minds and Bodies of them) that all, except Three 
Hundred, ſhould lie down to drink. : 
6 And the number of them that lapped, putting thei, 
hand to their mouth þ, were three hundred Men : but 
all the reſt of the People bowed down upon their knees 


to drink water. : : : 
þ Taking up alittle water in the Palm of their Hands to put in- 


to their mouths: 


2 And the LORD faid unto Gideon, By the three 
Hundred men that lapped, will I fave you, and delgye: 
the Midianites into thine hand : and ler all the ocher 
people go every man unto his place z. 

7 i.e. To his own home, as Numb. 24. 11. 

8 So the people took victuals in their hand, and 
their trumpets & : and he ſent all rhe reft of Ifrael, eveiy 
man unto his tent, and retained thoſe three hundied 
men: and the hoſt of Midian was beneath him in the 


valley. | 
-þ i.e. The Trumpets belonging ro the whole Army.even to thoſe 


who were gone away, which he retained for the utc here tollowing. 


See wv. 16. ; 
C And it came to paſs the ſame night / that the 


LOR D ſaid unto him m,, Ariſe, get thee down unto the 
hoſt, for I have delivered it into thine hand. 
1 Aﬀeer he had diſmiſſed all but the Three Hundred. 2 In a Dream 
or Viſion of the Night. 
10 But if thou fear to go down », go thou with Phu 
rah thy ſervant down to the hoſt, 
» To wit, withour ſome farther aſſurance of thy Succeſs, I wil] 
condeſcend ſo far to thee as ro give thee another Sign. 
It And thou ſhalt hear what they ſay, and afrerward 
ſhall thine hands be ſtrengthned o to go down unto the 

: hoſt, Then went he down with Phurah his ſervant 
I Or, of unto the out-ſide || of the armed men that were in the 
ranks by hoſt. ; 

Foe. o Thou wilt be encouraged to proceed, notwithſtanding the ſmall- 
neſs of thy number, which may deterr thee. 

'-22 Andthe Midianites, and the Amalekites, and * all 
the children of the eaſt,lay along in the Valley like grat- 
hoppers for multitude, and their camels vere without 
' number, as the ſand by the ſea-ſide for multitude. 

1» And. when Gideon was come, behold, there vas 

2 man that told a dream unto his fellow, and ſaid, Be- 

hold, I dreamed a dream, and Io, a cake of barley 

bread p tumbled into the hoſt ot Midian, and came un- 
to atent, and {mote it thac ir fell, and overturned it, that 


the tent lay all along. | = 
p A weak and contemptible thing; and 1a it ſe]fas unable to o- 


verthrow a Tent, as to remove a Mountain; bur being thrown by 
2a Divine hand, bore down all before it; whica fitly reſembied Gide- 
or's caſe, which was mean and deſpicable, as himlelf faith, Judges 
6, 15. yet he was Mighty, chrough GOD, to deſtroy the M:aian- 


tes. 


* Chap. 6 
5, 33- and 
$., 10» 


And his fellow anſwered and faid, This nothing 


a 
aſe fave the {word of Gideon the ſon of Joaſh,a man of 
Irael q: for into his hand hath GOD delivered Midi- 


an and all his hoſt. | 
g As there are many examples of ſignificant Dreams, given by 
GOD to Heathens, as Gen: 41. Dan. 2. and 4- ſo ſome of them had 
the gift of interpreting Dreams; which they ſometimes did by 
Stuoy and Arr, and ſometimes by Divine direthion as in this caſe. 
+ Heb. che , *$ And it was ſo, when Gideon heard the telling of 
breaking "the dream r, and 7 the interpretation thereof, that he 
thereof. worſhipped /;, and returned into the hoſt of Iſrael, and 
ſaid, Ariſe, for the LORD hath delivered into your 


hand the hoſt of Midian. 

+ Which he underſtood, though ſpoken in the Midienitiſh Lan- 
guage; either, becauſe it was near a kin to the Hebrew, being only 
a diff:zring Dale&t of it; or, becauſe rhe /[raclites had now been ac- 
cuſtomed to rhe Midianites Company ad D.ſcourſe tor feven years. 
{ He praiſed God for this miraculous Work and ſpecial eacourage- 

ment, whereby he was confirmed in his enterpriſe. ; : 
of all of 16 And he divided the three hundred men into three 


them- companies 7, and he put * a trumpet 1n every mans 
| Or fre- hand with empty picchers, and || lamps « within the 


aocher> n= pitchets *, 


* Heb. 


efs 
in the han 


G ES. 


# To make a ſhew ofa vaſt Army encompaſſing them. » Or 
Torches made of ſuch materials as would quickly take Fire, and keep 
it for ſome time. « Partly to preſerve the Flame from the violence 
of Wind and Weather; and partly to conceal it, and ſurpriſe their 
Enemy with ſudden and unexpetted Flaſhes of Light. 

| 17 And he ſaid unto them, Look on me, and do 
likewiſe » ; and behold, when I come to the out-{ide 
of the camp, it ſhall be, zhar as I do, ſo (ball ye do. 

y For though 200 of his men were placed on other ſides of the 
Camp; yet they were ſo diſpoſed, that ſome perſonor perſons, ſet as 
Watch-men, might ſee what was done, and give notice to the reſt to 
follow the Example. 

18 When I blow with a trumpet, I, and all that are 
with me, then blow ye the trumpets alſo on every ſide 
of all che camp, and ſay, The ſword * of the LORD, _ 

wy eb fip 


and of Gideon 2» by 

z He mentions his own Name, together with Gods, not out of woos 
vain oftentation or arrogance, as if he would equal himſelf with © _ 
God ; for he mentions God in the firſt and chief place, and himſelf 
only as his Miniſter ; bur from prudent Policy, becauſe his Name 
was grown formidable to them, and ſo was likely to further his 
Deſiyn, and their Flight, as it did. 

' 19 JF So Gideon,and the hundred men that were with 
11m, came unto the outſide of the camp, in the begin+ 
ning of the middle watch «, and they had but newly ſet 
tne watch, and they blew the trumpets, and brake the 
Dutchers that were in their hands. 

2 i.e. Of the ſecond Watch; for though afrerwards the night 
w.s divided into four Watches by the Romans, Mat: t4; 25. yet in 
me ancient times, and in the Eaſtern parts, it was divided into 
tiree? He coſe the dark and: dead of the night, to increaſe their 
Terror by the Trumpers, whoſe found wou'd then be loudeſt and 
beſt heard, and the Lamps» whoſe light would then ſhine moſt 
brightly, and ſeem bigg-ſt, ro ſurpriſe them at diſadvantage,and to 
concea}] the ſinalineſs of their numbers. 

20 And the three companies blew the trumpets,and 
and brake the pitchers, and held their lamps in their left 
hands 6b, and their trumpets in their right hands to blow 
ithall, and they cried, The ſword of the LORD, and 


of Gideon, 
b Thar they might be thought to be a mighty Hoſt, having as 
many Troops or Companies, as there were Trumpets and Lights. 

21 And they ſtood every man in his place c, round a- 
bout the camp ; and all the hoſt ran,and cried and fled. 

c As if they had only been Torch-bearers to the ſevera! Compa- 
AICS. 
22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and 
* the LORD let every mans ſword againft his fellow 4, x 1; . 
cven throughout ail the hoſt : and the hoſt fled to Beth- | 
hroughout ail ſt t was 
thittah [| iu Zererath, and to the + border of Abel-me- || Or, «. 
holah e, unto Tabbath. Wards, 
a They flew one another, either becauſe they ſuſpe&ed Treachery, | Heb, 
aid ſo fell upon thoſe they firſt mer with 3 which they might more 
"afily do, becauſe they conſiſted of ſeveral Nations, as may be ga- 
tiered from Judges 6: 3. and Joſephus affirms 3 or becauſe the dark- 
eſs of rhz night made them unable to diſtinguiſh Friends from Foes; 
or, becauſe rhe ſuddeneſs of the thing ſtruck them with Horror,and 
Amazem<cnt; or, becauſe God infatuated them, as he hath done 
many others. Compare 1 S$am- 145 20. 2 Chron: 20: 23. e Of which 
ive I Kings 4: 12. and 198 16. 

23 And the men of Iſrael gathered themſelves toge= 
cher out of Naphtali, and out of Aſher, and out of all 
Manaſſeh, and purſued after the Midianites, 

24 T And Gideon ſent meſſengers throughout all 
mount Ephraim, ſaying, Come down againſt the Midi- 
anites,and take before them the waters unto Beth-barah 
f, and Jordan g. Then all the men of Ephraim gathe- 
red themſelves together, and took the waters unto Beth- 
barah and Jordan. 

f i, e- The paſſes over thoſe Waters to which they are like to come. 
g The Foords of Jordan, which River they muſt paſs over into their 
own  Countrey. 

25 And they took * two princes of the Midianites, , Pla 
Oreb and Zeeb : and they ſlew Oreb upon the rock 82. a 
Oreb, and Zzeb they flew at the wine-preſs of Zeeb, Iz 10%, 
and purſued Midian,and brought the heads of Oreb and 


Leeb to Gideon on the other ſide Jordan h. 


h For Gideon in the purſuit had paſſed over Jordan, as we read 
Judges 8: 4. which though mentiened after this; may ſeem to have 
been done before it, ſuch tranſpoſitions being frequent in Sacred 
Story. Or, on this ſide Jordan, for the Hebrew word is indifferent to 
both ſides, fee Gen: 50: 10. And fo this is oppoſed to what follows 
of _ paſſing over Jordan, Judges 8:4-And then there is no anticipatie 
on here. 


CHAP. VIIL 


The Epraimites are diſpleaſed with Gideon: He ſatisfies them, 1 === 3: He 
purſuerh two Kings of the Midianites beyond Jordans Where Succoth and 
Penuel refuſe to relieve Gideon's Army : The King being taken by Him: In 
his Return he puniſheth theſe of Succoth and Penuel, 43 17, He revengeth 
his Brethrens Death on the two Kings, 18 —— 21. He refuſech Govern» 
ment, 22, 23. Demandeth a preſent of the Spoil, and thereof makes an 
Ephed : Places it in Ophrah% It is 4 caule of Idolatry, 2 4 —-—= 27. Gi- 
deon's Children, Wives, Death, and Burial, 30 32» Iſrael revalts 
zo Idolatry © 1s wngrateful t0 Gideon's Family, 35 —a= 35. 

And 


: 


Chap. Viu, 


ſpirit 


* fee 
1 Sam 
25+ I 


7 Hel 


threſh, 


|: Or, 
bundred 
and twe 
thouſan, 
every on 
drawiny 


ſword, 


* Pal: 
$3: ty; 
7 Heb: 
Th "1h, ? a, 


7 {[cb, 


Wit, 


fo 
) 


2 lih, 


+020 


Nd the men of Ephraim ſaid unto him, * Why haſt 

thou ſerved us thus, that thou calledſt us not 

s when thou weateſt to fight with the Midianites? and 
they did chide with him # ſharply. : 

a Why haſt thou negle&ed anddeſpiſed us, in not calling us 1n to 
thy help, as thou didſt other Tribes? Theſ? were a proud People, Iſa: 
1': 13- puff:d up with a conceit of their Number and Strength, and 
the preference which Jacob by Divine direQion gave them above 
Manaſſ:h, Gen: 48: 19, 20+ of which Tribe Gideon was, who by this 
a& had ſeemed to advance his own Tribe, and to depreſs theirs. 

2 And he ſaid unto them, What have I done now 1n 
compariſon of you b ? is not the gleaning of the grapes 
of Ephraim « better than the vintage of Abiezer 4? _ 

b What was done, was done by God's immediate hand, making 
them one to kill another; what I have done in cutting off ſome of 
the Fugitive common Soldiers, is not to be compared with your 
Exploit in deſtroying their Princes; I began the War, but you have 
finiſhed. c What you have gleaned or done after me, d i- e. Of 
the Abiezrites, to whom he modeſtly communicateth the honour of 
the Victory, and doth not arrogate it 2 himſelf, as Generals com- 
monly do. . ; : 

God hath delivered into your hand the princes of 
Midian,Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do 1n 
compariſon of you? then their + anger was abated to- 
ward him, when he had ſaid thar e. 

e His ſofc and humble Anſwer allayed their Rage and Envy 3 ſee 
Prov: 157 Ie and 25:15» 

4 4 And Gideon came to Jordan, nd paſſed over f, 
he, and the three hundred men that were with him, 
faint, yet purſuing them. 

f Or, had paſſed over. When he paſſed over ; ſee on Judg: 7: 25. 

5 And he ſent unto the men of Succorh g, Give, I 
pray vou, loaves of bread unco the people that follow 
me, for they be faint, and I am purſuing after Zeba 
and Zalmunna, kings of Midian 4, 

g A place beyond Jordan, Gen: 33; 17» Joſe 13: 27. Pſal. 60; 8* 
bh Where before this tune were five Kings at once, N:mb: 31: 8. who 
eicher Reigned ſeparately in divers parts of the Land; or Governed 
by common Couilſel and Conſent ; as ſometunes there were two or 
three Roman Emperors togethers 


6 © And the princesot Succorh ſaid, Are the hands 
of Zeba and Zalmunna row in thine hand 2, that * we 
ſhould give bread unco thine army ? 


; Art thou ſo foolith, to think with thy 309 feint and weary, 
Soldiers, to conquer and deſtroy an Hoſt of r;000 Men? 


7 And Gideon ſaid, Therefore when tne LORD hath 
delivered Zeba and Zalmunna into mine banda, I will 
+ tear your fleſh with the thorns of the Wildernels &, 


* Heb. 
what thing 
is this £{0% 
hoft done 
unt2 Hs. 

+ Heb. 
fronglys 


+ Heb; 
iris n 


* See 
1 Sam: 
255 10» 


T Heb: 


threſh, 


Juſtice; partly, that the Death of thoſe miſchievous perſons mighe 


G84: 
JS He told him their Names and Qualities. | 
15 And hecame unto the men of Succoth, and faid, 
Behold Zeba and Zalmunna, with whom ye did up- 
braid me, ſaying, Are the-hands of Zeba and Zalmun- 


na now in thine hand, that we ſhould give bread unto 
thy men that are weary ? ES hy 


16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of 
the wilderneſs, and briers, and with them he + taught + Heb: 
the men of Succoth xz. | made to 

t By that ſevere puniſhment, ( of which wv. 7. ) he made the men ©10W- 
1» e. the Elders of Succo;h, to know their Sin and Folly,though it was 


too late for their good, but not for the inſtruftion and warning of 
others. 


17 4 And he beat down the tower of * Penuel, and 
ſlew the men of the city- | | 

18 Then ſaid he unto Zeba and Zalmunna, What 
manner of men « were they whom ye ſlew at Tabor x? if 
And they anſwered, As thou art, fo were they ; each _ | 
one 7} reſembled the children of a king y. | + Heb: ac= || 

# 1. e. Foroutward ſhape and quality. x Whither he underftood cording 0 
they fled for ſhelter, vpon the approach of the Mid:anites; and where the form, 
he jearnt that ſome were ſlain, which he ſuſpe&ed mighs be they. &c- | 
y Not for their Garb, or outward Splendor, for the Family was but | 
mean 5 bur for the Majeſty of their looks : By which com- 
mendation they thought co ingratiate themſelves with their Con- | 
queror, 

19 And he ſaid, They were my brethren, even the | 
fons of my mother : as the LORD liveth, if ye had | 
faved them alive, I would not ſly you z. | 


z For being not Canaanites, he was nor obliged ro kill them ; but 
they having killed his Brethren, and that in cool blood, he was by 
Law the avenger of their Blood. 


20 And hefaid unto Jether his firſt-born, Up, and flay 
them #4 2 but the youth drew not his {word: for he 
feared, becauſe he was yet a youth. 


a Partly, that he might animate him to the uſe of Arms for his 
GOD and Countrey, againſt their Enemies and to the Exerciſe of 


OS — — 


Chap. VIII 


- : Kings 


I2: 25» 


$ 36 
vt 


: ; 
: 
' : 
; 


be more thameful and painful; and partly, that he might have ſome 
ſhare in the honour of the Vittory. 


21 Then Zeba and Zalmunna ſaid, Riſe thou and 
fall upon us: for as-the man , ſo is his ſtrength b. And 
Gideon aroſe, and flew Zeba and Zalmunna, and took 


away the || ornaments that were on their camels necks. |} Or, orna- 
 b Thou excelleſt him, as in Age and Staturey ſo in Strength ; and ments like 
1t 15 more honourable, as well as caſfie, to die by the hands ofa vali- the 100 
ant man. 


22 © Thenthe men of Iſrael ſaid unto Gideon, Rule 


and with briers, : | 
k Which grow abundantly in the neighbouring Wilderneſs; I ; 
will chaſtiſe or bear your naked Bodies with Thorny Roos,2venunto 

Death: Or, I will lay you down upon Thorns, on the ground; and | 

bring the Cart-wheel upon you, which w1ill both rear your fleſh, | 

and bruiſe you to death. | 
8 © And he went up thence to Penuel /, and ſpake 
unto them likewiſe : and the men of Penuel anſwered 
him as the men of Succoth had an{wered +4im, | 
I Another City beyond Jordan ; of which ſee Gen 32: 30, ' I Kings 

I2; 25» ; 

9 And he ſpake alſo unto the men of Penuel, ſaying, 
When I come again in peace, I will break down this 
tower 2. 

m Your confidence in which, makes you thus Proud and Pre- 
ſumptuous. He implies that he would afcerwards deſtroy their 
P:rions, 2s is expreſſed, v. 17+ ; 

io T Now Zeba and Ralmunna were in Karkor,and 

their hoſts with chem, about fifreen chouſand mer, all 

that were lefc of all the hoſts of che children of the eaſt: 

| Or, = for there fell |} an hundred and twenty thouſand men 


| 


hinted that drew {word = 
and twenty ,, 5 e. Perſons expert and exerciſed in War, beſide the retainers 
thouſand, to them, Tudges Ft E, 
Seine « ir T And Gideon went up by the way of them that 
ſard,* dweltin terits 0, on the eaſt of Nobah and Jogbehah p, 
and {mote the tzoſt : for the tiolt was ſecure g. 
0 i. e. Of the Arabians, fo ferching a compaſs, and falling upon 
them where they leaſt expeQed it. p Of which Cities ſee Numb: 32, 
35> 42. q Being now got late over Jordan, and a great way from 
the place of Battel ; and probably, tuppoſiag Gideon's Men to be ſo 
tired with their hard Service, and the great Slaughter which they 
had made, that they would have neither Strength nor Will to pur- 
ſue them ſo far. 
12 And when Z<cba and Zalmunna fled, he purſued 
* Pal: after them,and * took the two kings of Midian,Zeba 
8:1; and Zalmunna, and F diſcomficed chem. | 
ay 13 5 And Gideon the ſon of Joaſh returned from bat-! 


tel betore the fun was up r. 
ry By which it may be gathered, that tte came upon them in the 
Night, which was moſt convenient for him who had ſo ſmall a 
number with him; and moſt likeiy both to {urpriſe and terrific them 
by the remembrance of the laſt Nights ſad work, and the expeQati- 
on of another like 2t. . | 
14 And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, 
and.enquired of him : and ic + deſcribed unto him the 
princes of Suecoth /, andri-< viders thereof, even three-! 
{core and ſeventeen men. 


T fb, 


Wit, 


ly. 


you f, neither ſhal my ſon rule over you ; the LORD 


 ſhal ruleover you g. 


| man the ear-rings of his prey. 


, uſe; bur of part of it, the reſt being probably employed about 


; gious ule, for which alone the Ephod was appointed. The caſe 


. time and occaſicn,thought it nuchrt be centinued fer ordinary ule ; 


thou over us c, both thou, and thy ſon, and thy ſons 
{on alſo 4: for thou haſt delivered us from the hands ef 
Midian e. 

c Not as a Judge, for that he was already made by God ; but as 3 
King. d Let the Kingdom be Hereditary to thee, and ro thy Fami. 


e This miraculous and glorious deliveranc2 by thy hands des 
ſerves no leſs from us. 


23 And Gideon ſaid unto them, I will not rule over 


f To wit, as a King, which you deſire. g In a ſpecial manner, 
as he hath hitherto done, by Judges, whom God did particularly 
appoint and dirett, even by Ur:m and Thunmmim, and aſſiſt upon all oc- 
caſtons; whereas Kings had a greater Power, and only a general de- 
pendance upon God, as other Kings had. Compare 1 Sam: 8: 6, 7. 

24 T And Gideon faid unto them, I would deſire a 
requeſt of yon, That ye would give me every man the 
ear-rings of his prey, ( for they had golden ear-rings, 
becauſe they were Ihmaelites h. ) 

h Obj. They are called Mi4:amites before. Avſe Here ſeems to 
have been a mixture of People, Judg: 6* 3. which are all called by 
one general name, 1hmaelites, or Arabians, who uſed to wear Ear-' 


rings, Gen: 35: 4. but the greateſt, and the ruling part of them 
were Midianites. 


25 And they anſwered, We will willingly give thenss 
And they ſpread a garment, and did caſt therein, every 


26 And the weight of the golden ear-rings that he 
requeſted, as a thouſand and ſeven hundred ſkekels of 
gold, beſide ornaments,and || collars,and purple raiment 
that yas on the kings of Midian, and beſide the chains 
that vers about their camels necks. 

27 And Gideon made an ephod thereof z, and put it 
in his city &, eves in Ophrah : and all Ifrael went thith:c 
a whoring after it /; which thing became a ſnare m un- 
to Gideon, and to his houſe. 

;# Nor of all of it; for then it would have been too heavy for 


Or, ſwee: 
Jewels. , 


other tings agreeable and appertaining to it ; which elewhere 
are comprehended under the name of the Epbod, as Judges 17. 5. 
and 18. 14, 18. Hoeſ: 3: 44 & Notas a Monument of the Victory, 
for ſuch Monuments were neither.proper nor uſual ; bur for Reli- 


ſeems to be this, G/deen having by Ged's command eretted an Al- 
tar in his own City, Ophrah, ſudg: 6: 26. for an extr2ordinary 


and theretore as he intended ro procure 2?:ielts, fo he defigoed to 
make 


x 3 UV D 


:eftly Garments, and eſpecially an Ephod, which was the 

Def rp coſtly ; which belides its uſe in ſacred miniſtrations, 
Iras allo the inſtrument by which the mind of God was enquired and 
diſcovered, 1 Sam: 26: 6, 9. and 3c? 7. which might ſeem neccſa- 
ry for the Judge to have ar hand, that he might conſult with God 
upon all occaſions. 1 Commirting Superſtition or Idolatry with it ; 
er going thicher ro enquire the will of God ; whereby rhey were 
drawn from the truc Ephod, intituted by God fer this end, which 
was to be worn by the High Prieſt only. »» An occaſion of Sin, 

and Ruine to him and his, as the nexr Chapter ſhewerh. Though 
Gidetn was 2 good man, and did this with an honeſt mind, and a de- 

fire to ſet up Religion in his own Ciry and Family ; yet here ſeems 
to be many Sis in ir; 1. Superſtition and Will-worthip, Worſhip- 
; ping GOD by a device of his own, which was frequently and ex-: 
preſly forb'dden. 2: Pr:ſumption, in wearing, or cauſing other 
L Prietts to wear this kind of Ephod, which was peculiar to the High- 
Prieſt. 3. Tranſgreſſion of a plain Command, cf Worſhipping | 
GOD ordinatly but at one place, and one A'tar, Deur: 1275, I1y 14. 
and withdrawing people from that placey to his. 4+ Makiog « fear- 

ful Schiſm or Diviticn among the People. 5. Laying a Stum 
bling-block, or an __—_— of Superſtition or 1dolatry before that 
eople, whom he knew to be too prone to 1t. 

g 28 C Thus was Midian ſubdued before the children 
of Iſrael,ſo that they lifred up their head no more ».and 


thecountrey was in quietnels fourty years o in the days 
of Giedeon p. 
Ni. 0 ——m" AP not their former Strength or Courage, ſo as to 
Conquer or Oppreſs others, as they had done. » z e To the four- 
tieth year, from the beginning of the Midianitiſh Oppreſlion ; ſee on 
Judges 3: 11. 4.6. As long as Gidemn lived. : 
29 4 And Jerubbaal the of Joaſh went and dwelt in 
his own houſe 9. | | 
q Not in bis Fathers Houſe, as he did before z nor yet IN a Court 
liks a King, as the Peopie defired ; bur ina middle ſtare, as a Judge 
for the preſervation and maintenance of their Religion and Liber- 
ries. : 
30 And Gideon had threeſcore and ten ſons | of his 
FHeb. go- body begotten : for he had many waves. 
=_— of 1 Azd his Concubine that was in Shechem r, ſhe 
+ Het. ſz, Alſo bare hima ſon,whoſe name he fcalled Abimelech /. 
eJE*  » She dwelt there, and he oft came thither, eirher ro execute 
Judgement, or upon other occzſions. ſ i. e» My Father the King ; ſo 
he called him, pr-bably, to gratific his Concubiue, who deſired it 
either our of P:1de, or D-ſign. 2 2 
22 And Gideon the fon of Joaſh died in a good old 
age 7, and was buried in the ſepulchre of Joath his fa- 
ther, in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrite. ; 
; His long Life being Crowned with the continuance of his Ho- 
nour, Tranquility and HappineſSe ; 
Andit came to paſs,as ſoon as Gideon was dead, 
that the children of Ifrael turned again #, and went a 
whoring after Baalim x, and made Baal-berith y their 


od. 
G u Whereby we ſee the wicked Temper of this people, who did no 


i 5 $8 

3 And his mothers brethren «© ſpake of him in the 
ears of all the men of Shechem all theſe words,and their 
hearts inclined + to follow Abimelech : for they ſaid, F Het, 
He z our brother d. | after, 

c ti.e. Kinſmen, as that word is oft uſed, as Ger: 142 16. and 294 
12. d They were eaſily perſuaded to believe and follow what ſcr- 
ved their own Intereſt. 

4 And they gave him threeſcore and ten e pi:ces of 
filver f out of the houſe of Baal-berith g, wherewith 
Abimelech hired * vain and light perſons þ which fol-, 
lowed him. Chap, 

e Agreeably to the number of his Enemies, Gideon's 70 Sons. f Not he. 
Sheke!s,as ſome fanſie, which were too ſmall a Sum for this purpoſe ; 
bur far larger Pieces the exa&t worth whereof it is neither poſſible 
nor needful for us now to know. g Out of his ſacred Treaſury ; 
for even they who were very parcimonious and baſe in their Expen- 
ces about Gods ſervice, were liberal in their contributions to Idols : 
having ſince Gid:on's death, built this Temple ( which he would 
never have ſuffered whilſt he lived) and endowed it with conſider. 
able Revenues. h Unſettled, idle and neceſflitous Perſons, the moſt 
proper Inſtruments for Tyranny and Cruelty. 

5 And he went unto his fathers houſe at Ophrah,and 
flew his brethren the ſons of Jerubbaal 3, beizg three- 
ſcore and ten perſons &, upon one ſtone ! : notwith- 
ſtanding, yet Jotham the youngeſt ſon of Jerubbaal was 
lefr, for he hid himſelf. 


_7 The only Perſons who were likely to hinder him in eſtabliſhing 
his Tyraray. &k Wanting cone, who is here expreſſed ; and thelc 
Synecdochical Expreſſions are frequent in Scripture; ſee Genz 3<e 
26e and 42: 13- Numb: Wq3 32, 33» Joh: 20: 24. 1 Cir: 158 F_ 
{ Whereby he wovld ſignifie, that this was either, r. An a& of 
Juſtice, n cutting them all off in an orderlymanner,forſome ſuppoſed 
Crime, probably, as defignjng Sedition and Rebellion: Or, 2. An 
att of Religioa in avenging the D:ſhonour and Injury done to Baal 
by Gideon, Judg: 6: :7, 2% upon his Children, whom he offered up 
as ſo many $:crifices to Baal upon this Stone, which ſerved for an 
Alrar; and for rhis reaſon ir ſeems the Money was taken out of Ba. 
al's houſe, becauſe it was to be laid our in his ſervice. 

s And all the men of Shechem gathered together, 

and all the houſe of Millo , and went and made Abi- 
melech king », || by the plain of the pillar o that ws in ; Or, 51 
Shechem. oak of the 
| m Of a Place or Perſon ſo called ; ſome eminent and potent Fa. f'llar, 5 
mily living in Shechem, or near to ir, either the Family of Abimelech's Jolh, 24, 
Mother, or ſome others ; or, and all Beth-millo; ſo Beth is not an Houſe, 26. 
but a part of the name of the place. n To wit, over all Iſrael, wv. 22. 
which was aſtrange Preſumption for the Inhabitants of ene City ta 
undertake; but they had many advantages and encouragements for 
It; as the eager, and general, and conſtant inclination of the 1/-9- | 
elites to kingly government ; 4bimelech's being the ſon of Gideon, to 
whom, and ro his Sons, they offered the Kingdcmg Judges 8: 12, 
And though the Father could, and did refuſe it for himſelf; yet 
they might imagine, that he could not give away his Son's Right 
conveyed to them by the 1/raelites, in their offer ; the univerſal de. 
feCticn of the 7raclires from GOD to Baal, whoſe great Patron and 


longer cleave to God, than they were 11 a manner conſtrained to ity 
by th- Preſence and Autbority of their Judges, x This was the 
genera] name including all their Idols, whereof one kere follows. 


Champion Abimelech pretended to be ; the-power and prevalency of 
the Tribe of Ephraim, in which Shechem was, Joſt $0; 75, whoſe proud 


9 7. e. The ORD of rhe Covenant, ſo called, either from the Covenant 
wherew:t | 
tain his Worſhip, or to defend one another therein ; or rather, bes. : 
cauſe he was reputed the God and Jud; e of all Covenants, and Pro- 
miſes, and Contra&s, to whom it velonged ro maintain them, and 
to puniſh the violaters of them; and ſuch a God both the Greciaxs 


h had. 
m_ "And the children of Iſrael remembred not the 


LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the 


| hand of all their enemies on every ſide: 
25 Neither thewed they kindneſs to the houſe of Je- 


rubbaal, »amely Gideon, according to all the goodneſs | 
which he had thewed unto Iſrael. 


, CHAP. IX. 

Abimelech Gideon's ſon by conſpiracy with the Shechemites ; and the murther 
of his brethren, Jotham the younge# eſcaping, is made king, 1 ==6, Jotham 
by a parable rebuketh them and forerellet? their ruine: He flees and awells | 
at Beer, 7—— 2 1. The Shechemites con[pire againſt Abimelech, 22. Gaal | 
joyns himſelf to the Shechemires, 29. Zebul relveals it, 30 — 33. Berray- 
th Geal,z4— 38. Abimelech overcome-th them 3 And ſoweth the city with 
ſalt,z9 =—45+ Sets the toner on fire: Alſo the hold of the god Berith, 
46 wma 49. He ſubdues Thebez'$ Going near to the tower to burn it % A wo- 
man cafis down a piece of a milſtone on his head, breaks his shu!l, 
FO 2% bs flea his Armour-bearer to thruſt him through, 
« Jotham's cuyſe is fulfilled, 56+ 57. 

Wo Abimelech the ſon of Jerubbaal went to She- 


_- 


* Chap. chem, unto his * morhers brethren,and commun- 

8:31 ed with them, and with all the family ut che houſe of 
his mothers father, ſaying, 

2 Speak,lI pray you.in the ears of all the men of She- 

chem, + Whether is better for you, either that all the 

+ What is (ons of Jerubbaal ( which are threeſcore and ten perſons ) 


2 = « \ \ 
good? whe reign over you 4, or that one reign over you? Remem- 


Ms ber alſo, that I am your bone and your fleſh 6 ? 
a He ſuppo'eth that they would take that Government which their 
Father modeſtly refuſed ; and that the mutitade of his S»ns would 
occaſion horrivle diviſions, and Confuſions, and Conrelts abour the 
Soveraign Power; all which they mighr avoid, by chuling him King; 
and ſo they might enjoy che Mo.arciy which chey hid long and otr 
defirzd. 6b Your Kinimzn, of rhe fame Tribe and City wich you ; 


which will be no {inall Honour and Advantage to you: p 
| $ 


and imperious Spirit, manifeſted Judges 8: 1. ard 12: 1. would make 


h the Worſhippers cf this God bound themſelves to main=- jthem readily cloſe with a King of their own Brethren ; and Abime- 


lech's getting the ſtart-of all orhers, having the Crown aQually pur 
upon his Head. and an Army already raiſed ro maintain his Tyranny. 
o Or, by the Oak of the Pillar, i» e. By the Oak, where 7oſhua ercted a 
Pillar as a Witneſs of the Covenant renewed between GOD and 
Iſrael, Joſs 243 26. This Place they choſe.to ſignifie that rhey till 
owned God, and their coveniat with him ; and did not worſhip 
Bal in oppoſition to GOD, but in ccnjun&tion with him, or in ſub- 
ordination to hime 

7 T' And when they told it to Jotham, he went and 
ſtood in the top of mount Gerizim p, and lift up his 
voice, and cried 9, and faid unto them, Hearken unto 
me, ye men of Shechem r, that God may hearken un- 
to you /. . 

p Which lay near Shechem, and near Mount Ebal. The Valley be. | 
tween theſe two Mountains of Gerizim and Ebal, was a famous Places 
employed for a Religious Uſe, even for the ſolemn reading of the 
Law,and its Bleflings and Curſes, Deut: 11: 29: and 27: 12. Jof: 8: 33. 
and therefore it is probable it was ſtill uſed, even by the Superſtici- 
ous and IdolJatrovs 1/raelites for ſuch like occaſions, who delighted 
to uſe the ſame Places which their Religious Anceſtors had conſe- 
crated and uſed. 9 $o as they that ſtocd in the Valley might hear 
him, though not ſuddenly come at him to take him. » Who are 
here met rogether upon a ſolemn occaſion, as Joſephus nores, 4b;- 
melech being abſent. { When youcry unto him for Mercy ; ſo he 
conjures and perſuades to givehim patient Audience, as they did. 

8 Lhe trees went forth on a time 7 to anoint a king 
over them, and they ſaid unto the oliv-tree x, Reign 


thou over us. 
z A Parabolical Diſcourſe, uſual among the Ancients,eſpecially in 
the Eaſtern parts ; wherein, under the names of Trees, Men are re- 


Chad. 1x, | 


preſented. u i.e. To make a King, which was oft done among the 
Iſrachtes, and ſome others, with the Ceremony of Anointing. » By 
which he underſtands Gideon: 

9 But the olive-tiee ſaid unto them, Should I leave 
my fatneſs * wherewich by me they honour God 7 and * Pla 


man z, and || go to be promoted 4 over the trees ? : We 
2 In whoſe worithip and ſervice Oy] was vſed for divers things; " a] doo 


2Sz about the Lamps, Exod: 353 14. and Offerings, Lev: 226, 7. an: 


CES =—_ 6 *, tay Od 
for the anointing of Sacred Perſons and Things. z For Oy1 was uicd —_ 


in the Conſtitution of Kings, and Prieſts, and Prophets, and fer 3 , 
Prefent to great Perſons, and to anoint the Head and Face, &e 
a Heb. 70 move hither and thither, ro wander to and fro, to ex- 
change 54 


bis 


IX 


W Chap. IX: 


f Or, 
thifile, 


* Excd. 
9323s 


f Heb: caft 


bis ſoul, 


change my {weet Tranquillity, for unceſant Cares and Travels for 
th: good of others, as a King ought te do. 

12 Ani the trees ſaid unto the fhg-tree þ,Come thou, 
and reign Over Us. 2 E 

b This, as alſo the Vine, wv. 12» ſignifies the fame thing with the 
Olive-rree, but hor2 are various Expreſſions uſed, either for the de- 
c<encv of the Parable ; or, bzcauſe Gid:zen refuſed this Honour, both 
for hin{c'f, and for his Sons; or, to ſignifie that the Sons of Grdeen, 
whom Ab/melcc rad fo cruely laing upon pretence of their affefting 
the Kingdom, were as far from ſuch 'Thoughts as their Father; and 
tac:cfore were nnjultly and wickedly murdered. 

17 But the fhg-rrce ſaid unto them, Should I forſake 
my ſweetneſs c, and my good fruit,and go to be pro- 
moted over the trees ? | 

© For which that Fruit is particularly commended. 

12 Then faid the trees unto the vine, Come thou, 
and TCigit OVET Us. 

13 And the vine ſaid unto them, Should I leave my 
wine, which cheareth God 4 and man e, and go to be 
promoted over the trees ? : 

a Wherewith God is well pleaſed, becauſe it was offered to God, 
Iumb. 15: 5,7, 10. e Sec Pſals log: 15. Prov: 31: 6. 

14 Then ſaid all the trees unto the }j| bramble f, 
Come thou, and reign over Us. 

Or, Thorn, a mean, and barren, and hurtful Tree, fitly repreſent- 
ing Ab:melech, the Son of a Concubine, and a Perſcn of ſmall Uſe,and 
creat Cruelty. ; : 

E 15 And the bramble ſaid unto the trees, If in truth 
ye ancint me king over you g, then come, and put 
your truſt in my ſhadow þ: and if not, * let fire 
come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Leba- 
NON Z. . A « P 

g If you deal truly and juſtly in making me King. + Then you 
may expeC& ProteCttion under my Government. # Inſtead of Pro- 
te&ion, y ou ſhal receive DeſtruCtion by me ; eſpecially you Cedars, 
7. e. Nobles, ſuch as the Houſe of Milo, who have been moſtforward 
in this work. : 

16 Now therefore,if ye have done truely and ſincere- 
ly, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have 
dealt well with Jerubbaal and his houſe, and have done 
unto him according ro ihe deſerving of his hands: 

17 ( For my father fought for you, and Þ andven- 
tured his life far &, and delivered you out of the hand 
of Midian : : : 

k Heb: Caſt away his Soul or Life far off, out of his reach or power to 

recover it, 7. e. Expoſed himſelf to utmoſt hazard for your ſakes: 

IS 
day, and have lain / his ſons, threeſcore and ten per- 
{ons, upon one ſtone, and have made Abimelech the 
ſon of his maid-ſervant #» king over the men of She- 
chem n, becauſe he is your brothers ) | 

I Abimelech's Fatt is juſtly charged upon them, as done by their 
content, approbarion and afliſtance. »» His Concubine, whom he 
ſo cails by way of reproach, becauſe Maid-Jervants were ofc made 
Co;:curines, Exod: 2... 7, 8, 9, 10. 1» By which limitation of their 
Powe:, and his Kingdom, he refle&s Contempt upon himy and charg- 
eth them with Pretumpriong That having oniy power over their own 
City, they durſt impoſe a King upon all Jrael. : 

19 If yethen have dealr truely and ſincerely with Je- 
rubbaal, and with his houſe this day, then rejoyce ye in 
Abimelech, and let him alſo rejoyce in you. 

25 Burt if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and 
devour the men of Shechem, and the houſe of Millo : 
and let fire come out trom the men of Shechem, and 
from the houſe of Millo, and devour Abimelech 0. _ 

o This is not a Prediction, but an Imprecation or Curſe, as 1t 1 
calledy v. 57. which, being grounded upon juſt cauſe, and b=ing 
the only way by wbich Jotham could perform the Duty of the avenger 
of his Brethrens Blood, which was incumbenr upon him ; had its eff Ct. 
as others in the like caſe had, as Jo. 6: 26: compared with 1 Kings 
16; 34+ and 2 Kings 2: 24- 

21 And Jotham ran away, and fled p, and went to 
Beer 9, and dwelt there, for tear of Abimelech his bro- 
ther. | Z 

p Which he might eaſily do, having the' advantage of the Hiil, 
and other accommodations for flight, and becauſe the People were 
not forward to purſue a Man whom they knew to have tuch juſt 
Cauſe. and great Provocation to ſpeak, and ſo little Power to do :h-m 
any hurt q A place remote from Shechem, and out cf Abimelech's 
reach: There were divers Places of that name. 

22 T When Abimelech had reigned three years over 
Irae) r:; 

r For though the Men of Shechem were the firſt Authors of Abr- 
melech's advancement, it's more than probable, thar the reſt of the 
People eafily conſented to that form of Goverment which they ſo 
much ceſired ; or, at leaft, made no reſiſtance again{t ir. - 

23 Then Gold ſent an evil ſpirit / between Abimelech, 
and the men of Shechem: and the men of Shechem 
dealt treacherouſly with Abimelech. 

ſ GOD gave the Devi] Commiſſion to enter into, or work upon 
their minds and hearts 3 knowing that he of himſeIf,and by his own 
inclination weuld fill them with miſtakes and jealouſies, and difſens 
tions, and heart-burnings, which would end in civil Warszand mu» 
tual Ruine. 

24 That the cruelty t done to the threeſcore and ten 


fons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid 


» 


7 V DÞ @T =&Y 


And ye are riſen up againſt my fathers heuſe this 


| upon Abimelech their brother, which flew them, and 


Ehap. | 


iq 


| 
4 


| 


upon the men of Shechem, which + aided him in the + Heb.| 


killing of his brethren. 
#1. e. The puniſhwent of che Crelty. | 
25 And the men of Shechem {et liers in waitfor him 
# 1n the tops of the mountains, and they robbed all that 


came along that way by them x : and it was told Abi- 
melech y. 


# To ſeizs his Perſon. « To wit, ſuch as favoured or ſerved Abi- 
melcch ; for to fuch only their Commiſſion reached, though it may 
be they wept beyond their Bounds, and by Military Licence robbed 
all Paſſengers promiſcuouſly. 7 Who, a5 it is here implied, exer- 
ciſed Hoſtiiity rowards the Men of Shecher, 


thren, and went over co Shechem a : and the men of 


Shechem put their confidencein him. 

= Itis not known who, or of what 'Tribe he was ; but it is evident; 
that he was a Man very conſiderable for Wealth, and Strength, and 
Counſ:], and Intereſt ; and ill pleafed with Abimelerh's Power. a By 
_ Preſence and Counſel to animate and aſliſt them againſt Abime* 
ech. 

27 And they went out into the fields b, and gathered 
their vineyards, and trod the grapes, and made || merry c, 
and went into the houſe of their gods 4d, and did eat and 
drink e, and curſed Abimelech f. 

6 Which, till his coming they durſt not do, for fear of Abimelech; 
but now took confidence to do ſo, in contempt of him. c Partly, 
from the Cuſtom of rejoycing, and ſinging Songs in Vintage-time, 
Levit 198 24+ 1a: 16: 10. Jer: 25330, and partly, for the hopes of 
their Redemprion from Abimelech's Tyiany. d Baal-berith, wv. 4. 
either to beg his help againſt Abimelech, or to give him thanks,either 
for the Fruits of the Earth now received, or for the Hopes of reco- 
vering their formery and loſt Liberty. o To the honour of their 
Idols, and out of the Oblations made to them, as they uſed to do 
to the Honour of JEHOVAH, and out of his Sacrifices. f Either 
by reviling and reproaching him after their manner; or, rather in a 
more folemn and Religious manner, curſing him by their god, as 
Goliah did Dawidy 1 Sam: 17: 43- Or, calling upon their god to ra« 
tifie their Curſes pronounced againſt him, 

28 And Gaal the fon of Ebed ſaid, Who is Abime- 
lech g, and who is Shechem þ that we ſhould ſerve 
him ? zs not he the ſon of Jerubbaal 32 And Zebul his 
officer &? ſerve the men of Hamor the father of She-» 
chem /: for why ſhould we ſerve him ? | 

g What is he but a baſe-born Perſon, an ambitious, imperious 
and cruel Tyrrant, and one every way unfir and unworthy to go- 
vern you? h Shechem is here the name, either, 1+ Of the Place or 
City of Shechem ; and ſo the Hebrew Particle mi, who, is put for mah, 
what, as it is Judges 13+ 17. and then the ſenſe of the plzce 5s this; 
Conſider how obſcure and unwortky a perſon Abimelech is, and what 
a Potent and Honourable City Shechem is ; and judge you whether 
it be fic that ſuch a City ſhould be ſubje& to ſuch a Perſon : Or, ra- 
ther, 2. Of a Perſon, even of Abimelech, named in rhe foregoing 
words, and deſcribed in thoſe which follow, the ſon of Jerubbaal, be= 
tween which Shechem js hemmed in, and therefore cannot cunveni- 
entiy belong to any other. He is called Shechem for the Shechemize, 
by a metonymie «<f the Subje&, whereby the Place is put for the 
Perſon contained in it, and belonging ro it ; as Egypt,ZEthiupia, S:hay 
Jrdea, Macedenia, and Achaia, &c. are put for the People of thoſe 
Counrries, Job 1. 15. and 6. 19. Pſal: 68: 31. and 105: 38. 1ſs: 43t 3. 
Mats 3s 5. Rom: 15: 26. Thus mi is taken properly, and the Senle is, 
Who is this Shechemite? For ſo he was by the Mothers ſide, born cf a 
Woman of your City, and the but his Concubine and Servant; why 
'hould you tubmit to one ſo baſely deſcended? 7 i. ee Of Gid*on, a 
Perſon obſcure by his own confeſſion, Judges 6: 15. and famous only 
by his boldneſs & fierceneſs againſt thar Bas! which you juſtly konour 
and reverence, whoſe Altar he overthrew, and whoſe Wor ſhip he en- 
Jeavoured ro ?boliſh. k And you are fo unworthy and mean-{prrited, 
that you do not only ſubmit to him, bur ſuffer his very Servants to 
bear rule over you,and enflave you;and particular'y.this 1gnoble and 
hareful Perſon Zebul | It you love Bondage, call in the o'd Maſter 
and Lord of the Place; chuſe not an Upſtart, as 4bimelech is ; but 
rather take one & the old Stock, one dcſcended from Hamer, Gen:' 
34; 2» Who did not carry hunſelf like a Tyrant, as Abimelech did, 
bur likea Father @f his City of Shecbem, this he miSkt ſpeak, either, 
r. Sincerely, as being himſelfa Canaanite and a Shechemite, and poſ- 
fibly comefrom one of thoſe little ones whom. Simeon and Levi ſpared 
when they flew all the grown Males, Ger: 343 29. And it may be 

hart he was one of the Royal Blood, a deſcendant of Hamor, who 
hereby ſoughr to 1:{inuate himſelfinto their Minds and Government 
a+ i: follows, v. 29. Would to God this people were under my hand ; whicls 
he might judge the People more likely to do, both becauſe they 
were now united with the Canaarites in Religion; and becauſe their 
preſent Diſtreſs might oblige them to put themſelves under him, 
who ſeemed or prerended co be a valiant and expert Commander.Or, 
2. In way of Deriſion, he being an 1a:1/:e; if you are fo ſervile, 
ſerve ſome of the Children of Hemor; which becauſe you rightly 
judge to be ab(urd and diſhonourable, do nor now ſubmit to a far 
aſer Perſon ; bur caſt off his Yoak, and recover your loſt Liberties 

29 And wouid to God this pzople were under my 
hand »,then would I remove Abimelech ». And he ſaid 
to Abimelech o, Increaſe thine army, and come our p. 

m i. e Under my Command; I with yon would unanimouſly 
ſubmar to me, as your Captain 2nd Governeur ; for he fortnd them 
divided; and ſome of them hearkening after Ab:melech, whom they 
had lately rejeQed, according to the levity of the popular Humour. 
n As you bave driven him our of your City, I would drive him out 
of your Countrey: o He ſent this Meſſige or challenge to thim. p I| 
deſire not to ſurpriſe thee at any diſadvantage ; itrengthen thy ſel 
as muchas thou canſt, and come out into the open Field, that thou 
and [ may decide it by our Arins. | 

2 Q 30 T And 


26 And Gaal the ſon of Ebed z came with his bre- - 


[| Or; 
Songs, 


frength | 


ed hrs bual 


co kil, 


ap. IX. ; | 
| '} $0 C And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard 
tr; tor. the words of Gaal the ſon of Ebed,his anger was [| kind- 


| led 9. Et 
[| e had temporized and complied with the Peoples Hu- 
Mb pe againſt Aimelech, either 1n Diſhmulation and Driign, 
and by Abimelech's Connivence or Advice; or, really 3 but __ e 
heard Gaal's words, and himſelf tradncedy and ſtruck at by ys 
he changed his mind, repented of his defettion from Abrmelech, my 
iatended to return cn, _ to bring the People again to the O- 
bedience of their Lord and King. : F 
1 And ihe ſent meſſengers unto Abimelech 7 pri- 


3 . 
: =: hold, Gaal the ſon of Ebed, and his 
TK, Bene behold, they forti- 


Heb. 
Mafrilys 
W, ze Tor* brethren be come to "4/2004 1 and 
| fie the city againſt thee /. : | | 
r SOas x = his Confederates might not know it. Or, _ 
»mah : or. who was in Thormah; for ſome make it the name of the 
place where Abimelech was, which is called with ſome variation, 4- 
rumah, v.4t. | They Beliege or Guard the ny of Sh:chem, 1o as 

none may £0 out to thee, nor COME IN from thee. 
32 Now therefore, up by night, thou and the people 


that & with thee, and lie in wait in the field. 

22 And it ſhal be, #hat in che morning as ſoon as the 
ſun is up, thou ſhalt riſe early, and fer upon the city : 
and behold, when he :, and the people that zz with 
him come out againſt thee, then mayelt thoudo to them 


Heb: «- Þ as thou ſhalt find | p=pooaggd 

al fue. 1 CAnd Abimelech roſe up, and all the people 

that were with him, by night, and they laid wait againſt 
hem in four companies. 

m 5d) Gaal the ſon of Ebed went out, and ſtood 


in the entring of the gate of the city « ; and Abime- 
lech roſe up, and the people that vere with him, from 
lving in wait. | 
my Po put his Army in order, and to ___ them againſt 45ime- 
ch, whom he ſuppoſed to be at a great diltance. | 

30 And when Gaal ſaw the people, he ſaid to Zebul 


x, Behold, there come peopledownfrom the top of the 
mountains. And Zebul faid unto him, Thou ſcelſt the 


ſhadow of the mountains, as if they were men y. 

x Who concealed the anger which he had conceived, v. 30. and 
pretended compliance wich him 1 this Excdition, that he migh. 
draw him forth into the Field where Abimelech might have the opp.r- 
runity of Fighting with him, and overthrowing him- y For in the 
Morning, as this was, and in the Evening, the ſhadows are longeſt, 
and move moſt quickly. He intimates, that he was afraid of 
ſhadows. . : 

37 And Gaalſpake again, and faid, See, there come 


people down by the + middle of the land z, and ano- 


ther company come along by the plain of || Meonenim. 

z Heb. By the navel of thy Land. So he calles, either Firſt, the 
middle of ir, as the middle part of Greece and of Sicily are called the 
navel of them, by the Roman Writers, becauſe the Navel is in the 
midſt of Man's Body : Or, Secondly» The higher part of it, cai- 
led the Mountains, v. 36- and here the navel, becauſe it was raiſed 
above the other Ground, as the Navel is above the reſt of the Body. 


38 Then ſaid Zebul unto him, Where js now thy 
mouth P4 wherewith thou faidſt 5 Who 7zs Abimelech 
that we ſbould ſerve him ? 3s not this the people that 
thou haſt deſpiſed? Go out, I pray now, and fight 
-— Now thou betrayeſt thy fears, and therefore 


w thy ſelf a man, and fight valiantly for thy elf and peopl-. 
ates nd Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, 


ht with Abimelech. 
I Abimelech chaſed him, and he fled before 


him b, and many were overthrown and wounded c, 


» unto the entring of the gate. *” 
my Being ſurprized by the unexpected coming of 4imelech, and 
poſſibly not fully prepared for the encounter. c Being purſued and 


overtaken by Abimelech. 


41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah 4; and Zebul 
thruſt out Gaal and his brethren e, that they ſhould noc 


dwell in Shechem. ; 

4 He did not proſecute his Viftory, but retreated to Arumah, partly 
to ſeethe effeQ of this Fight, and whether the Shechemites would not 
of themſelves return to his Government, being either perſwaded by 
Z+bul upon this occaſion, or terrified by his ſtrengrh and valour, or 
new by his clemency in proceeding no further againſt them # and 
partly, that being hereby grown more ſecure, he might have the 
greater advantage againſt them, which accordingly he here makes 
uſe of, e Which he was inabled to do, becauſe the Mulritude,which 
is generally light and unſtable, and judgerh of all things by Events, 
were now enraged againſt Gaal, ſuſpeQing him guilty either of 
Treachery or Cowardize, or ill Condu& : and beſides, they thought 
the expulſion of Gaal would ſweeten and fatisfie Abimelech, and make 
him give over the War againſt theme But though they were offen- 
ded with Gaal, yet Zebu!'s intereſt was nor ſo conſiderable with 
them, that be could prevail with thzm either te kill Gaal and his 
Brethren, or to yield themſelves to Abimelech - and therefore he ill 
complies with the People, and waits for a fairer opportunity,though 


In Vain. 
>» And it came to pals on the morrow, that the 


Tegaraers 
of timess 


lech, 


 UDGES 


people went out into the field f, and they told Abime- | 


q 


Either, Firſt, to retew the Fight; and avenge themſelves for their 
laſt loſs, the great GOD hardening their hearts to their Deſtru&jon. 
and the accompliſhment of his Word delivered to them by Jor/-:1. 
But here is nor one word about the Peoples arming, or Reſiſting, 
or Fighting, as there was beforey ve 39. but only of their Slaughter, 
V- 43-44+ Or, Secondly, to their uſual, and then proper Imploy- 
ments about their Lands : for though their Vintage was paſt, the 
Seed-time was now come, ard other things were to be done in th: 
Fields. Or, Thirdly, upon ſome ſolemn occaſion, not here expreſ- 
fed; poſſibly ro make a tolemn Proceſſion, or perform ſome orher 
Rites 1n the Fields, to the honour of their god Baal-berith-as the man- 
ner of the Heathen was, ro make ſupplication to him for his help, 
and for better ſucceſs ; or only to go for that end to the houſe of 
their god Baal-berith, which is chought to have been in rhe Fields; 
as may ſeem from wv, 27, 46- on a Mountain upon the Eaſt ſide of 
the City. 


43 And he took the people, and divided them into 
three companies g,and laid wait in the field,and looked, 
and behold, the people were come forth out of the 
city, and he role up againſt them and ſmote them. 


g Whereof he kepr one with himſclf, v. 44. and put the reſt un- 
der other Commanders. 


44 And Abimelech, and the company that was with 
Aim, ruſhed forward, and ſtood in the entring of 
the gate of the city þ, and the two other companies ran 
upon-all the people that were in the fields, and ſlew them. 


h To prevent their Retreat into the City, and give the other two 
Companies opportunity to cut them off. 


45 And Abimelech fought againſt the city all that 
day, and he took the city, and ſlew the people that 


was therein, and beat down the city, and ſowed it a 


with fale z. 

; Not to make the place barrengas Alt will do, for then he would 
have ſowed the Fields, not the Ciry ; but in token of his deteftati- 
on and deſire of their utter and irrecoverable DeſtruQion : for Salt 
is the ſymboleor fign of Perpetuity; Compare Numb: 18: 19, Deut. 
298 23. 2 Chron: +33 5+ Zeph; 2: 9. 

46 4 And when all the men of the tower of She- 
chem k heard har, they entred into an hold of the 
houſe*of the god of Berith 7. 

k A ſtrong place belonging to the City of Shechem, and made for 
its Dcf-nce or Security, bur wirchout the City. Ir js rhought, this 
was that Milo which was confederate with Shechem in their deſign 
againſt Abimelech, v, 6. which alſo Jotham Curſed with Shechem, 
v. 20» and that Curſe is noted to have its Effe&, wv. 575. And this 
piace may be called the Tower of Shechem ; either becauſe thoſe who 
poſſeſſed and defended it, were ſent from Shechem 3 Or, becauſe it 
was built and kept for the ſafe guard of Shechew. 1 Or, Baal-berithz 
v- 4+ Hither they fled our of the Town belonging to it, fearing 
the 1ame event with Shechem; and here they thought to be ſecure ; 
partly b! ſtrength of the place, as the temples of idols are oft- 
times built in\the higheſt and ſtrongeſt Places, as the Capitol at 
Rome, and the Temple at Jeruſalem; and ſuch this place ſeems to 
have been, becauſe rhey laid cheir Treaſure here, w. 4. Partly by 
the Religion of it, thinking thar either their god would Prote& them 
there, or that Abimelech would ſpare them tierce, if not out of plety 
to that god, yet out of thankfulneſs for the beneſite which he re- 
ceived thence, v. 4+ | 


47 Andit was told Abimelech, that all the men of 
che tower of Shechem were gathered together, into 
that place. 
48 And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon », 
he, and all the people that were wich him, and Abi- 
melech took an ax 1n his hand, and cut down a bough 
from the trees, and took it, and laid t on his ſhoulder, 
and faid unto the people that were with him, What 
ye have ſeen + me do, make haſte, and do as I have , pc: 1 
done. havyc ant, 
m A place ſo called from its ſhadineſs, becauſe there were many 
Trees there. 
49 Andall the people likewiſe cut down every man 
his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put hem to 
the hold, and ſet the hold on fire upon them: ſo that 
all the men of the tower of Shechem died alio, about a 
thouſand men and women. 
po © Then went Abimelech to Thebez », and en- 
camped againſt 'Thebez, and took it. 
» Another Town nearto Shechem ; and, as it ſeems, within its 
Territory. 
51 But there was aſtrong tower within the city, and 
thirher fledall the men, and women o, and all they of 
the city, and ſhut it to them, and gat them vp to the 
top of the tower p. 
o All that were nor ſlain in taking of the Town : or they all for- 
ſook the Town, and retired to their ſtrong Hold. Þ Which was 
flat and plain, after their manner of Building. 
52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought 
againſt it, and went hard unto the door of the tower, to 
burn it with fires 
53 Anda certain woman * caſt a piece of a mil-ſtone + , e,; 
q upon Abimelech's head, and all to break his skull. 
| 9 Such great ſtones no doubt they carried up with them, whereby 
they might defend themſelves, or offend thoſe wko Afſſaulted 
- them. Here ghe Juſtice of GOD is remarkable in ſuiting the Pu- 
aifhment 


11s 21s 


Chap.. -IX.. 


LTH 


bo,” 
. 


J 


[Or, 


vilage 
J alry 


_ 


® r Sat 
12: 9, 


f Heb 
eruſbed, 


or '7 


> * 
Be” - - 
; X 
- . . 
7 W: vy > y A eo « 
kb bo 
Logs . 


TIE) REP Eon 


MH, 


1s 
[4 


niſhment to his Sin. He flew his Brethren upen a ſtone, v; 5- an 
he loſerh his own life by a ſtone. : 

54 Then * he called haſtily unto the young man his 
armour-bearer, and ſaid unto him, Draw thy {word, 
and ſlay me, that m2n ſay not of me, A woman flew 
him r : and his young man thruſt him through, and he 
diced. 

r Which was eſteemed a matter of diſgrace. ; 

55 And when the men of Ifrael ſaw that Abimelech 
was dead, they departed every man unto his place. 


56 © Thus GOD rendred the wickedneſs of Abime- 
1Judg:935* lech which he did unto * his father s, in ſlaying his {e- 
Ruth 4:1 Yenty brethren. 
5 In rooting out, as far as he could, the name, and memory and 
remainders of his Father . 
57 And allthe evil of the men of Shechem did GOD 
render upon their heads : and upon them came the curle 
of Jotham, the ſon of Jerubbaal: 


CHAP. X. 
Tola judgeth Iſrael: and Jair: Whoſe 30 Sons had 3o Cities, FS 
The Peoples Idolatry, 6: The Philiftines and Ammonites oppreſs them, 
7 —— 9. They cry to GOD whe ſendeth them to their falſe god: : Br 
71pou their Repentance pitieth them, 10 ——— 16. The Ammonites and 


Jjraelites encamp ene againſt another, i7, 18. 


| Nd after Abimelech, there aroſe 2 to ||} defend Iſra- 
['Or, deli. elb, Tola the ſon of Puah, the ſon of Dodo,x man 
+ Heb: of Iſlachar, and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephra- 
(ave. IM c. | 
a Not of himſelf, but either choſen by the People; or rather, 
raiſed by GOD, asthe other Judges were. + Or, #0 ſave, which he 
did not by fighting againſt, and overthrowing their Enemies, but 
by a prudent and pious Government of them, whereby he kept chem 
from Sedition and Oppreflion, and Tyranny, 2s alfo from Idolatry ; 
as may be gathered from wv: 6. which if not reſtrained and purged 
out, would have broughr certain Ruine upon them. c Which was 
inthe very heart and midſt of the Land, 


2 And he judged Iſrael twenty and three years, and 
dyed, and was buried in Shamir. : 
2 © And afterhim aroſe Jair a Gileadite 4, and judg- 


ed Iſrael twenty and two years. 
d Of Gilead beyond Jordan.” 


4 And he had thirty ſons that rode on thirty als-colts 
10r,c; © and they had thirty cities, which are called || Havoth- 
wilage; of Jair f, unto this day, which are 1n the land of Gilcad. 
airy e Becauſe Horſes were ſcarce there, and were not to be multiplied 

by the King himſelf, Deut: 17: 16. Hence their Kings and Kings 
children uſed to ride upon Mules, 2 Sam: 133 29» and 18: 9. 1 Kings 
1: 33s 38, 44+ Compare Judges 5: io. and 123 14+ f Obje#. Theſe 
Villages were called fo before this time from another Fair; And 
Numb* 32: 41» Deut? 3: 14+ nſw. They are not ſaid to be now firſt 
called by thatName;but co be {till fo called, becauſe the old name was 
revived and confirmed upon this occaſion. As Sheba is ſaid to be 
called Beerſheba, upon an occaſion, mentioned Gen? 26: 33. though it 
was ſo calied before upon a more anciznt occaſion, Gen; 21: 33. Poſe 
ſibly this Jair had enlarged or fortified theſe Towns, and fo they 
were juitly denominated from him, noleſs than from the former. 


5 And Jair died, and was buried in Camon. 
: 6 4 And * the children of Ifrael did evil again in 

ChaP: 2: the ſight of the LORD, and ſerved Baalim, and + Ajh- 

11: and 3+ x , 

1:ax 4; 1. earoth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, 
aud 6, 1. and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of 
ad 13* 1 Ammon, and the gods of the Philiſtines, and fofook the 
—_ 2 LORD, and ſerved not him g. 

3" He ſhews how they grew worſe and worſe, and fo rip=-ned them- 
ſc]ves for the Ruine which afrerward came upon them. Before they 
Worſhipped GOD ard Idols tegether : now they utterly forſake 
GOD, and wholly cleave to [dols. 

7 And the anger of the LORD was hot againſt Iſra- 


*, Ha and he * ſold them into the hands of the Philiſtines. 
© andinto the hands ofthe children ef Ammon þ. 


*50 1 94M 
36: 4- 


12: 9s 
; þ The one on the Weſt, the other on the Eaſt; fo they were 
moleſted on both ſides. 
+ Heb: 8 And that year they vexed and Þ oppreſſed the 
het, children of Iſrael eighteen years i, all the children or 


Iſrael that were on the other tide Jordan, in the land of 
the Amorites which zs in Gilead. 

3 Or, That year they had wexed and oppreſſed the children of Iſrael 
vighteen years, Or, They wexed them in that year, that was the e:gh 
teenth yeay ; to wit, of that Vexation. Tius was the eightceat, 
year from the beginning of that Oppreſſion. And theſe ciyhreen 
years are notto be reckoned from Fair's Death, becauſe thar would 
enlarge the time of the Judges beyond the juſt bounds ; as may ap- 
pear from 1 Kings 6: 1. Nor from Fephthah's beginning to Reign 
becauſe heReigned bur ſix yezrs,and in the beginning rher-of pur an 
end to this Perſecution, bur from the tourth year of Jair's Reign : 
ſo that the greateſt part of Jair's Reign was contemporary with this 
AfﬀiQion. And although this Oppreflion of the Ammonites and Phi- 
liſtines, and the cauſe of it, the I:!o!arry of the Iſraelites, be rot men- 
tioned till after 7air's death, becauſe the Sacred Pen-man would de- 
liver the whole Hiſtory of this Calamity eatirely and together; yer 
they both hapened before it ; and Jair's death is mentioned before 
that, only by a Pro/epſis or Anticipation, than which, nothing 1s 
more frequent in Scripture» The cafe of Jair and Samſon ſeem to 


* UV DGES 


Chap. 
be much alike. For as it is ſaid of Samſon, that be judged i/rael in the 
day: of the Tyranny of the Philiſtines, twenty years, Judges | 5: 20. by 
which it is evedenr, that his Judicature, and their Dominion, were 
Contemporary 3 the like is to be conceived of Jair, that he b:gan to 
judge J-ael, and endeavoured to referm Re!igion, and purge out all 
abuſes ; but being unable to effe& this through the backwardneſs 
and baſeneſs of the People, GOD wou!d not inable him to deliver 
the People, but gave them up to this ſad Oppreſſion; ſo that Jair 
could only perform one half of his Office, which was to derer- 
mine Differences amongſt the 1/aelites, but could not deliver them 
from their Enemies, : 
9 Moreover, the children of Ammon paſſed over 

Jordan,to fight alfo againſt Judah,and againſt Benjamin, 
and againſt the houſe of Ephraim : fo that Iſrael was 
ſore Giſtreſſed. | 

10 © And thechildren of Ifrael cried unto the LORD, 
{-ying, We have ſinned 2gainſt thee, both becauſe we 
have forſaken our GOD, and alſo ſerved Baalim &. 

& B:cauſe not contented to add Idols to thee, we have preferred 
Ts befure thee , and rejeted thee to receive and worſhip 
them, 


11 And the LORD faid } unto the children of Iſrael, 
Dud not 1 deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the 


Amcrites m, from the children of Ammon », and from 
the Philiftines » 2 ; 


{ Either by himſelf, the Son of God appearing in a viſib'e ſhape, 
which then was uſual ; or by ſome Prophet whom heraiſed and ſent 
to this purpoſe: or by the High-Prieſt, who was conſulted in the 
caſe. m Both $S:hon and Og, and their people, Numb: 21. and other 
Kings of the Amorites within Jcrdan, Joſhs 103 5” nu Wha were con« 
federate with the Meabites, Judges 33 13,14. o See Judges 3: 31. 

t2 The Zidonians p alſo, and the Amalekites q, and 
Maonites r did oppreſs you, and ye cried to me, and I 
delivered you out of their hand. 

p For theugh we do not read of any cpprefſion of 1/-ael, particu= 
larly, by the Sidomans ; yet there might be ſuch a thing : as many 
things were ſaid and done, both in the Old and New Teftament, 
which are net Recorded there: Or, they might joyn their Forces 
with the King of Meſoporamia, Judg; 33 8- Or with ſome other of 
their Oppreſſors : for it is certain, tieſe were left among others t9 
prove Iſrael, Judg: 33 1, 2. 3- q Of whom, ſee Jadgs 3: T3» and 6; 
3. 7 Either Furſty thoſe who lived in, or near the Wilderneſs of 
Maon, in the South of Judah, 1 Sam: 233 25, and 25: 2. whether 
Edomites or ethers. Or, Seconcly, the Mehunims, a People living 
near the Arabians, of whumy 2 Chr 26: 7. For in the Hebrew, the 
Letters of both Names are the ſame, only the one is the Singular, 
the other the Pjural Number. Or, Thirdly, The Midianites, whoſe 
Oppreſhion he would not omit ; it being uſual for one and the ſame 
Perion or Perſons to have two Names: although the M:dianites may 
be comprehended under the Amalckites, with whom they were 
joyned, Judges 6: 3, 33- Or Fourthly, Some other People now 
unknown, and not expreſſed elſewhere in Scripture; 

13 * Yet ye have forfaken me,and ſerved other gods: 
wherefore I will deliver you no more s. 

s To wit, except you Repent in another manner than you yet 
have done 3 which when they performed,God ſuſpends the executi- 
on of this Threatn:ng, Compare Jer: 18: 7. 

14 Go and * cry unto the gods which ye have cho- 
ſen ?, let them deliver you in the time of your tribula- 
t10Nn. 

t You have not been forced to worſhip thoſe gods by your 
Oppreffors and Tyrants 3 bur you have treely chojen theſe gods 
before me. ; 

15 & And thechildren of Iſrael ſaid unto the LORD, 
We have ſinned, do thou unto us whatlover + ſeem- 
eth good unto thee «; deliver us only, we pray thee 
this day. 

« Do not give us up into the hands of theſe cruel Men, bur do 
thou chaſtiſe us with thine own hand as much as thou pleaſcſt ; to 
wit, if we be not more fairhful and conſtant to thee, than we have 
hirherto been. 

16 And they put away the + ſtrange gods from a- 
mong them x, and ferved the LORD : 


+ was grieved y for the miſery of Ifrael. Ifa; 63:9. 
x This was an evidence of the ſincerity of their ſorrow, that they tf H=b: was 
jd no: only confeſs and bewail their Sins,but alſo forſake them,and/” meds 
ioath theintelves for them. y Not propcrly, or as to inward affe. 
tion; for God being infinitely happy, is not capable of grieving: 
but figuratively, and as to outward expreſſions He a&ed towards 
chem, Ike one that felr their Sufferings ; he had pity upor them, 
-epented of bis ſevere Procezdings againſt them, and quite changed 
his carriage towards taem.and puniihed their Enemies as ſorely as if 
chey bad g-ieved :nJ injured his own Perſon. 

17 Then the children of Ammon were F gathered 
together, and encamped in Gilead: and the children of 
Hrael aflembled chemſelves together, and encamped in 
Mizpeh 2. 

z That Mizpeh which was beyond Jordan in Gad or Manaſſth; of 
which ſee Gen: 317 49+ Joſh: 18; 26. Judg, 10: 17. and 11: 11, 29, 34» 

T here were other Ciries of that name 1n Scripture. 

18 Ard the peopje «xd princes of Gilead faid one to 
another, What man: he that will begin to fight againſt 
the children of Ammon ? he ſhal * be head over all the » Chap: 
inhabicants of Gilead. 

CHAP. XL 

Jephthah dwells in the Land of Tob, 1===3. Is called by the Elders of Gilead 
t9 commanid in chief againſt the Ammonites, 4,— 6. He demanas to be 

_ emmtinued Hend oficr the War ſhould ceaſe, they ſwear it jball be ſos, 

| 2+ WV 3 7. 11s He 


x Deurt: 
28: 20, 


*Deut:32, 
37, 38. 
Jer: 23 28. 


t Heb: is 
2 good in 
thine eye. 


l T Heb: goxs 
and * his ſoul rangers. 


THebtcricd 
togethere 


II; 8» 


| 


I 


Kt] 


f 
: 
Wu 
\n 


Jer; 23 24. | 


| |» Heb: 11: 
= 22 called 
| Jepthe. 


* barlot. 


$ F 


the face. 


+ Heb: 
after days 


© Gens 
263 27» 


 +Heb;be 
the bearer 
between us. 


hap. XI. 


| {Heb: frem 


*Judg:9:4: 
1 Sa; 2232. 


— 1 1, He ſendeth twice Meſſengers to the King of the Avimonites to treat 
of Peace, __ gain, 12 -——- 28, Jephthah marcheth again#t him : 


Maketh a wow : Smiteth the Ammonites : Performeth his Vow on his Daugh= 


7 Ow * Jephthah the Gileadite « was a mighty man 


of valour, and he was the ſon of F an harlot 5 : 

and Gilead c begat Jephthah. Fx 
2 And Gileads wife bare him ſons, and his wives 
ſons grew up, and they thruſt out Jephthah, and ſaid 
unto him, Thou ſhalt not inherit in our fathers houſe, 


for thou «rt the ſon of a ftrange woman. 

#s So called, either from his Father G:lead, Joſh: 17: 1, 2. or from 
the Mountain, or City of Gilead, the place of his birth or abode. 
b i.e. A Baſtard; for though ſuch were not ordinarily #0 enter :nt0 
the Congregation of the LORD, Deut: 23: 2 Yet GOD can diſpenſe 
with his own Laws, and hath ſometimes done honour to baſe-born 
perſons ſo far, that ſome of them were admitted to be the Proge- 
nitors of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. «c One of the Children of 
that Ancienter Gilead, Numb: 327 1+ Joſh: 17: Is 

2 Then Jephthah fled + from his brethren,and dwelt 


in the land of Tob 4: and there were gathered vain 


men e to Jephthah, and went out with him f. . 

c The name either of the Land or Territory, or of the Man who 
was the Owner or Ruler of it. 4 This place was in, or near G/lead, 
as appears by the ſpeedy intercourſe which here was between Jeph- 
thah and the Iſraelites. e Idle perſons, who deſire to get their hiving 
rather by Spoil and Rapine, than by honeſt and diligent Labour. 
Theſe evil-minded pertons Jeph:hah managed well, empleying them 
againſt the Enemies of GOD, and of Jjrael, that bordered upon them; 
and particularly, upon parties of the Ammonites, which made rhe 
Iſraelites more forward to chuſe him for theirCheiftain in this War: 
f When he made excurſions and attempts upon his and their Ene- 
mes. : - 

C And it came to paſs Þ in proceſs of time g, that 
the children of Ammon made war againſt Iſrael. 

g Heb. after ſome days : or, aftcr a year, days being oft put for a 
year, as hath been fhewed, after that year mentionedy Judges 10. 8. ; 
The Ammonites had vexed and oppreſſed them eighteen Years, and 
now that the 17aelites begin to make Oppoſition, they commence a 
War againſt them. ' Or ſome time after Jephthah had been baniſh'd, 
and after ke had taken up Arms, and given them ſome diſturbance. 
Or, after the {raelices afſembled together, as 1s faid, Judges 1018. 


G E Ss, 
and Jephthah uttered all his words þ before the LORD 
q in Mizpeh. 

p ObjcQtively fo called, te. All that was ſpoken, not only by 
him, but alſo by the Elders of Gilead, concerning him, and concern 
ning this whole TranſaCtion, and the conditions of it ; or, al! hi; 
matters, the whole buſineſs. 9 i. e. Before the publick Congre gatie 
on, wherewith God was uſually, and then eſpecially preſent ; ſee 
Exod. 20. 24+ Deut. 6, 25. Maithe 18- 10. Or, 'before the Altar 
which poſſibly they did ere& upon this ſpecial occafion, by God's 
permiſtion { Or, in God's preſence, calling him to be preſent, as a 
Witneſs and Judge between theme 

12 4 Andjephthah ſent meſſengers r unto the king 
of the children of Ammon, ſaying, What haſt thou to 
do with me, that thou art come againſt me, to fight 
in my land 7 ? 

7 1. e- Ambaſſadors, to prevent Blood-ſhed, and make peace, as far 
as 1n him lay ; that ſo the J/raelites might be acquitted before God 
and men, from all the ſad conſequences of this War; Herein he 
ſhewed great Prudence,and no leſs Piety. / What pretence,or reaſon« 
able cauſe haſt thou for this Invaſion? # He ſpeaks this in the name 
of all the People, whoſe the Land was. 

13 And the king of the children of Ammon an- 
{wered unto the meſſengers of Jephthah, * Becauſe IC. « Num 
rae] took away my land «, when they came up out of E- 21; 13, 
gypt,from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: 
now therefore reſtore thoſe /ands again peaceably. 

%« 1.e This Land of Gilead, which was mine, bur unjuſtly taken 
from me, by Sihon and Og, the Kings of the Ammorites; and the ins 
jury perpetuared by 1/rae!'s detaining it from m2. This Land, be« 
tore the Conqueſts of $40n and Og, belonged partly to the Ammonites, 
as 1S affirmed, Joſh 13. 25. and partly, and principally, to the Moabites, 
as appears from Numb. 21. 24, 26. Deut. 3- 11: And indeed, Moab 
and Ammon did for the moſt part joyn their Intereſts and their Forces, 
as appears from Scripture-Story ; and as Balak the King of the Moa- 
bites ated for the Anmmonites, ſo now the King of Ammon ſeems to aCt 
for the Moabites, either as being now his Subje&s ; or, as his Con. 
federates; whence it comes to paſs that Moab and Ammon are here 
promiicuouſly mentiened, as wv. 15. 17, 18, 25. and Chemeſh the 
known god of the Moabites, Numb. 21. 29s 1 Kings 11. 33. 2 Kings 
23. 13. Jer.48. 13, 46. is here called the god of the Ammovites, 5 
24. though to ſpeak ſtritly, Moloch or Milchom was their gad, x Kings 
Ile 5, 7, 33. and 2 Kings 23« 13: 


5 And it was ſo, that when the children of Ammon 
made war againſt Iſrael, the elders of Gilead went to | 


fetch Jephthah 5 out of the land of Tob. 

h By direCion or inſtin& from God, who both qualified him for, | 
and called him to the office of a Judge. 
32. Otherwiſe they might not have choſen a Baſtard,Deut.3 2. 2. Un- 
Jeſs we will ſay, that their being no other Perſon among them fit 
for, and willing to this Work, neceſſity diſpenſed with this Law, 
as it did with other poſitive Laws, as thoſe of the Sabbath and Sacri- 
fices- 


6 And they ſaid unto Jephthah, Come and be our 
Captain 3, that we may fight. with the children of Am- 


NION « : = 27 
£ They ſay not, eur King 3 for the experience of Ab:melech's king-; 


ſhip had cooled their Appetite in that particular ; but our Captain. ' 


7 And Jephthah ſaid unto the elders of Gilead, 
* Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my fathers 
houſe k,? and why are ye come unto me now, when ye 


are in diſtreſs ? | 

k And deprive me of all ſhare in my Father's Goods, which, , 
though a Baſtard, was due ro me. This expulſion of him was the 
a& of his Brethren ; bur he kere aſcribes it to the Elders of G:lead ; 
either becauſe ſome of them were a8mong theſe Elders, as 1s very 
probable from the dignity of this Family ; or becauſe this a&t,though 
deſired and promoted by his Brethren, was executed by the decree 
of the Elders, to whom the determination of all Controverſies about 
Inheritances belonged; and therefore it was the'r fault that they did 
not prote& him fiom the Injuries of his Brethren, as their dury 


WAS» 

$ And the Elders of Gilead ſaid unto Jephthah, 
Therefore we turn again to thee now /, that thou 
mayeſt go with us, and fight againſt the children of 
Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of 
Gilead. 


{ Being ſenſible that we have done thee Injury, we come now to 
make thee full Reparations. 


9 © And Jephthahſaid unto the elders of Gilead, If 
ye bring me home again »» to fight againſt the children 
of Ammon, and the LORD deliver them before me, 
ſhall I be your head » ? 


92 If you recall me from this place where T am now ſettled, to the 
lace whence I was expelled. » Will you really make good this pro» 
miſe? Jephthah was ſo ſollicitous in this caſe, either from his zeal 
for the publick Good, which required that he ſhould beſo; or from 
the Law of Self-preſervation, that he might ſecure himſelf from his 
Brethren ; whoſe ill-will he had experienced, and whoſe injuries he 
could not prevent, if, after he had ſerved their ends, he had been re- 
duced to his private Capacity ; ory there might be ſome Tin&ure of 
Ambition in him ; for which God therefore ſeverely, theugh pater- 
nally, chaſtiſerh him, as we ſee afterwards. 


See Judges 12. 7. Heb. 11. | 
| 
| x 


Jer. 15. 13. and 


14 And Jephthah ſent meſſengers again unto the king 
of the childrenof Ammon. | 

15 And ſaid unto him, Thus ſaith Jephthah, * Iſrael 
took not away the land of Mpab, nor the land of the *Deutizy 
children of Ammon, 

16 But when Iſrael came up from Egype, and 
walked through the wilderneſs unto the red-1ea x,and + Numb: 
came to Kadehſh : I 4: 25, 
x Unco which they came three times ; once, Exed. 13-18. again * Numb 
a little after their paſſage over ir, Exod. 15. 22. and a third time, 208 Io 
long after, when they came to Ezion-Gaber. Numb. 33. 35+ Dent. 2.8, | 
which was upon the Shoar of the Red-lea,r Kings 9..6: 2 Chron.8.17, 


from whence they went to Kad b. 20. TIS 
_ ence they o Kadeſh, Numb. 20. of this time he ſpeaks 


17 Then * Ifrael ſene Meſſengers to the king of E- 
dom, ſaying, Let me, I pray thee, paſs through thy 
land : but the king of Edom would not hearken thre- 
fo: andin like manner they ſent unto the king of 
Moab : but he would not conſent and Iſrael abode in 
Kadeſh y. 


y Peaceably, and did not revenge their tinkindneſs and ; | . 
ty, as they could haye done. dinhumanie 


18 Then chey went along through the wild 5 
and * compaſſed the land of Fg the land _ 
ab, and came by the eaſt-ſide of the land of 
pitched on the other ſide of Arnon, 
within the border of Moab : for 
der of Moab. 


* Numb: 


20714, 


* Numb! 
Moab,and 2: y 


X* 
but came not 1.4, 
Arnon Was the bor- 217 13+ 


Chap.. *_ ; 


and 21:6 
19 And * [Iſrael ſent meſſengers unto Sihon king of x 
the Amorites, the king of Helthbon, and” Iſrael {aid 
unto him. Let us paſs, we pray 
unto my place z. 

z 1-e Unto the Land of Canaan, 

> _ _ truſted not 
coalt * but Sihon gathered all his people tovether. : 
pitched in Jahaz, and fought with ICacl Ag ns 


# So Sihon was the aggreſſor or beginner of th 
. : e War; p 
raelites were forced to it for their own Defence. þ an he 3+ 


21 And the LORD God of Iſrael delivered Sihon: 
and all his people into the hand of Iſrael, and they 
{mote them: fo Iſrael poſſeſſed all the land of the A- 
morites, the inh2bitants of that countrey. 


* Deut; 
25 26! 


chee, through thy lang © 


which God hath given to me. 


Iſrael to paſs through his 


. 22 And they poſſeſſed * all the coaſts b of the Amo. 
rites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wil- * Det 
derneſs c even unto Jordan. 2: 36! 


b Or Borders; together with all the Land included withi 
Borders ; for ſo that word is oft uſed, as Exod, 8. bo — pans 
17. 3+ c To wit, the Deſart of A4ratia. EN 


xo © And the elders of Gilead ſaid unto Jephthah, 
The LORD + be witneſs between us o, if we do not 


ſo according to thy words. 
o They confirm their Promilſe by a Solemn and Sacred Oath, 


11 Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, 


This he adds, as a further and convincing reaſon; becauſe other 


23 SO now the LORD God of Iſrael hath diſpoſleſ- 


{ed the Amorites d from before hi | 
ſhouldeſt thou poſſeſs it ? is people Iſrael, and 


_ 4 God, the Soveraign Lord of all Lands, hath given us this Land: 


and the people made him head and captain over them ; 


wile 1& might have been alledged againſt the former Argument, 


thay 


*Ch 


3: Ic 


F Hel 
that w 
cometh 
forth, 
ſhall c 
forth, 

| Or, 

will of 
ir, &c 


[Or, 


| Or, 
had n0 
his owr, 
either 
&+ Dat 
fer. 

f Heb 
bimſel] 


"79 


'Y 


ent? 


: lj Chap. XI, 


F Numb. 
42+» 2. 
Deut- 


23. 4- 
Joſh 24-9 


+ Heb. 
doughttrs- 
+ Heb 
daughterse 


that they ceuld gain to more Right to that Lahd from Sihon, than 
Sikon himſelf had ; and he had butan unjuſt Claim to it. 

24 Wilt not thou polleſs that which Chemeſh thy 
ood giveth thee to poſleſs e? ſo whomſoever the LORD 
our God ſball drive out from before us, them will we 


poſleſs. , 

e He ſpeaks according to their fond and abſurd Opinion : The Am- 
moitesand Moabites got their Land by right of War, and Conaueſt 
of the old Inhabitants, whom they caſt out; and this Succels, 
though given them by the true God, for Lots ſake, Dent 2. 9, 19- 
they impiouſly and ridiculouſly aſcribe to their god Chemoſh, whole 
Gifc they owned to be a firm and ſufficient Title. 

25 X And now art thou any thing better than Ba- 
lak f; the fon of Zippor king of Moab # Did he ever 
ſtrive againſt Iſrael, or did he ever fight againft them: 

f Art thou wiſer than he ? or haſt thou more right chan he had? 
Balak, though ke plotted againſt 1/-ae!, in defence of his own Land, 
which he feared they would Invade and Conquer, Numb. 22.4. yer 
he never contended with them about the Reſtitution of thoſe Lands 
which Sh: took from him or his Predeceſſors, afcer the 1ſraehte; 
had Conquered them : 

26 While Iſrael dwelt in Heſhbon, and her towns, 
and in Aroer, and her | towns, andin all the ct- 
ties that be along by the coaſts of Arnon, three hun- 
dred years g ? why therefore did ye not recover hem 


within that time £ _——_ : 

g Nor preciſely, but about that time, either from their coming out 
of Egypt ; or, from their firſt Conqueſt of thoſe Lands; and thus 
numbers are oft expreſſed, ſee Numb. © 46: and 2. 32. and 11+ 21. 
Judg. ' 0. 46, He urgeth Preſcription, Which is by all men reckoned 
2 juſt Title, and it is fit ir ſhould be ſo for the good of the World, 
becauſe otherwiſe the Door would be opened both ro Kings, and to 
private perſons, for infinite Contentions and Confuſtons. 

27 Wherefore I have not ſinned againſt thee h ; but 
thou doeſt me wrong to war againſt me : the LORD 
the judge, be judge this day i between the chiidren of 
Iſraei, and the children of Ammon. : 

þ T have done thee no wrong. 2» Let him determine this Con- 


* treverlie by the Succels of this day 'and War. 


c Heb, 

that which 
cometh 
forth, which 
ſhall com? 
forth. 

|| Or, or I 
will offer 
it, KC. 


[|Or, Abel. 


| Or, he 
bad not of 
his own 
either ſon 
0& Daugh= 
fer. 

F Heb, of 
himſelf. 


28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon 
hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he 
ſent him. 

29 CT Then the * Spirit of the LORD came upon 
Jephthah &, and he paſled over Gilead and Manaſleh 7, 
and pailed over Mizpeh of Gilead »», and from Mizpeh 
of Gilead he paſſed over «nto the children of Ammon. 

k Indued him with a more than ordinary Courage ard Refoluri- 
One 1 ( 5. e. ) Baſhany which the half Tribe of Manaſſch, b:zy nd 
Jordan, inhabited, Joſh. 20. 8. and 21» 6. » So calledy to diſtin- 
guiſh it from other Cities of that name ; Having gathered whar 
Forces he tuddenly could, he came hither to the borders of the 
Ammonites. 

20 And Jephthah vowed a vow » unto the LORD, 
and faid, If tnou ſhalt withour fail deliver the children 
of Ammon into mine hand: 

z Of this and the following Verſe ſee the Notes on ver 39. 

31 Then it ſhall be, thac F whatſoever cometh forth 
of the doors of my houſe, to meet me, when 1 recurn 
in peace from the chiidren of Ammon, ſhall ſurely be 
the LORDS, || and 1 will offer it up for a burnt-offer- 
ing. 
22 © So Jephthah paſſed over unto the children of 
Ammon, tc ttght againſt them, and the LORD delive- 
red them into his hand. 

33 And he ſmote them from Aroer, even till thou 
come to Minnith #, even twenty Cities ; and unto the 
[|. plain of the vineyards, with a very great ſlaughter 2 
thus the children of Ammon were ſubdued betore the 
children of Iſrael. 

o A place not far from Rabbah, the chief City of the Ammo- 
mites , 

24 T And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his houſe 
and behold his daughter came out ro meet him, with 
timbrels and with darces p, and ſhe was his only chiid : 
[]. + beſide her q he had neither ſon nor daughter, 

þ In Conſort with other Virgins, as the manner was, See Exods 
15: 20: I Sam. 18: 6: q Heb. of himſelf, ( i. e ) Proceeding fr 
his own Body ; which may imply, that he had other Children, 


either by Adoption. or in righs of his Wife, who had them by a 
former Hus-and- 


25 And iccameto paſs when he ſaw her, that he rent 
his clothes, and faid, Alas, my daughter, thou haſt 
brought me very low, and thou art one of them char 
trouble me 7 : for I have. opened my mouth / unto the 
LORD. and I cannot go back z. 

ry Before this, I was troubled by my Brethren ; and ſince, by 
the Ammonites ; and now moſt »f all, though but occaſionaily, by 
thee. / ( 73 e ) I have Vowed, which was done by Words, Numb: 
30. 2,6. # (7.e. ) Not retralt my Vow; I am indiſpenſubly 
obliged to perform it. 

36. And ſhe, ſaid unto him, My father, ;f thou haſt 
opened thy mouth unto the LORD, do to me accor- 
ding to that which hath proceeded out of thy moutt) 


vs foraſmugh as the LORD hath taken vengeance for 


5 VDOUOUnk Chap. XH 


thee of thine enemies x, ever of the children of Am- 
mon. | 

% Do not for my ſake make thy ſ-1f x Travſgreffor ; I freely give 
my conſent to thy Vow ; wherewith, and with the Succeſs of his 
Arms he had now acquainted ber, though it le nor here expreſſed. 
x I am willing to bear my Burthen ; being *bundantly ſatisfied 
with the great Deliverance which God hath 


91 hi 
Ho ven to his people by | 


37 And ſhe ſaid unto her father, Let this thing be || 
done for me: let me alone ewo months, that I may || 


1 go up and down upon the mountains y, and bewail + Heb, c>* 
my virginity 2, I, and my fellows. and go | 

y Which ſhe choſe as a ſolitary place, and therefore fi-teſt both #09% | 
for Lamentations, and for her preparatien ſor her approaching Cz. || 
lamity. z That I ſhall die Childiefs, which was etteemed beth 2 
Curſe and a Diſgrace for the 1ſ-aelites, Gen. 30: 23: 1 Sam. 1: 6 7. 
Ia. 4+ 1. Becauſe ſuch were excludea from that great priviledge of 
increaſing the Holy Seed, and contributing ro the Birth of the 
M-ſſiah, who was to be born of an 1ſaelitiſh Womens 

33 And he ſaid, Go, And he ſent her away for 
two months, and the went with her companions, and 
bewailed her virginity upon. the mountains. 

39 And it came to paſs at the end of two months, 
that ſhe returned unto her father, who did with her ac- 
cording to his vow which he had vowed & : and ſie 
knew no man 6b: and it was a || cuſtom in Iſrael. || Or, Or- 

a Bu. What was it which Fephthah Vowed and performed con- CIS, 
cerning his Daughter ? Anſw, Many, eſpecially of Morzern Writ- 
ters, conceive, that Jephthah's Daughter was not Sacrificed, but ons 
ly devoted to perpetual Virginity. which then was eſt-emed a great 
Curſe and Reproach: "This they gather, r. From wv. 37: 38: where 
we read, that ſhe bewailed not her Death, which had b=-5 the chicE 
cauſe of Lamentation if that had been Vowed, but her Virginity 3 
2+ From this, v. 39. where, after he had ſaid, chat he did with ber 
according to his Yow ; he adds, by way of declaration of the matter 
of that Vow, and ſhe knew no man, But for the firſt there may be 
a fair rez/on given, That ſhe cou!d not with Honour bewail her 
Death. which ſhe had fo generouſly and chearfu)ly accepted of; 
be auſe it was attended with, and occaſioned by the publick Good, 
and her Fathers Honour and Happineis, v. 36. and was a kind of 
Martyrdor ; and moreover, an a& of Religion, the payment of a 
Vow, which ought to be done chearfully ; bur only bewailed the 
circumſtance of her Death, that is was in -me ſort zecurſed and 
opprobrious ; ſhe having had no Husband ro take away h=r Iee 
proach, as rhey ſpeak, 7a. 4 1. and leaving no Poſterity to her 
Fathers Comfort, and the Increaſe of Gods people : And for. the. 
ſecond, thar Clauſe, and ſhe knew 10 man, is plainly diſtinguiſhed 
from the Execution of his Vow,which is here mentioned before;and 


this1s added,.not as an Explication of tke V 


; - l ow, bur as an aggra- , 
vVaring Circumſtance, that this was executed when the had not yet 


known any man. Beſides, this Opinion ſeems 1; 

Objetions; x There is no "Sx. in all rhe prot 

Woman that was obliged ro perpetual Virginity by. any Vow of 

her own, muchleſs by the Vow of her Parents 3 nor have Parents 

any ſich power over their Chilorcn, either by che Law of Narure, 

or by t:e Holy Scripture. 2. The expreſs words of the Vow. ». 

3! mention nothing of her Vi-ginity, but only, that ſhe ſhould ſure 

ly be the Lords ; ( 1- e.) Devoted to the Service of the Lord, whick 

might be without any obligation to perpetual Virginity ; for even 

Samuel, who was as fully devoted to the Lord by his Paretits; as 

ſhe c:-uld be, 1 Sam. 1: ri: and Samſon. who was Devored not one 

ly by his Parents, bur by God himfeif, and thar in the higheſt de- 

gree, even to be a perpetual Nazarite, Judg. 13: 5, 75: yer were not* 

prohibired Marriage ; nor were any of the moſt Sacred Perſons, / 

Levites, or Pri:ſts, or high Prieſts, though they were the Lords in” 

a fi.gular manner, obliged to perpetual Virginity ; and therefore * 

it ſhe was not cffercd up for a Burnt-cff:ring, as the Authors of' 

this Opinion ſay, but only was Conſecrated to God, there was ne' 

occaſion to bewail her Virginity, which, for any thing that aps: 

pe-rs, the was not tied to. 3+ If this wereall, here was no ſufficient” 

cau::-. why fo wiſe and valiant a man as Jephthah ſhould to birterly 

and paſſina'<ly lament over himſelf or his D:ughter; And there- Co] 

for ' may ſeem moſt probable, that Fephthah did indeed Sacrifice: 

bis DNaug+rer, as he had Vowed to do; which was the Opinion of 

Toſep:u: the Few, and of the Chaldee Paraphraſt, and of divers of the 

fewiſh DoGors, and almoſt all the Ancient Fathers, and many 

<minen” Writers; and ri is beft agrees with the' words of the Vow 

\ © 1vered v. 3* whatſoever cometh forth of the doors of my houſe to meek : 

me ——- ſhall ſurely be the Lords, and 1 will offer it for a Burnt-offering > 

Nor 1« there one word in all the following Vertes, which denies 

t at ſhe was thus eff-red ; only the Executien of the Vow is de-- 

livered in more ambiguous and feneral terms, werſe 39, which 

'n all reaſon and by rhe Laws of good Interpretation, ought to 

be Iimired and exptained by the more plain and particular de= 

cription of it ; Ir 1s rrve, thoſe words may ſeem capable bf ano-- 

ttier Interpretation ; the conjunGtive Particle, and, may be here 

pur for the disjun@ive, or, as it often is, as Exod: 41: I6, F7. 

Levit. 6. 3,5. 2 Sam. 2 Ig, ©c. and fo the meaning is that 

what I firſt meer ſha# ſurely be the Loras, or, I will offer it up far a Burnt 

offering ; to wit, if ir be a Crea:ure fir ro be offered : Orhers 

wiſe, ſay they, if a Dog or an Aſs ſhould have met him firſt,. he 

{h-uid have been ' bliged to offer them, which Was againſt the' 

Law : Bur it is ſufficiently evident, that he ſpeaks of an Humane ' 

pe: ſon, from the very Phraſe of coming forth to meet him at his res 

curn ; which plainly argues a deſign to meer him, purpolcly ra; 

Congratulate his Return ; this phraſe of going to meer a perſore 

coming, belug very oft uſed in Scripture, and conſtantly of one 

perſ.'n meet1'g another, as Gen. 14. 17. and 18: 2: and 24: 17, Oc 

And never of any brute Crearure : And although and is ſometimes 

put for or, yet it is not to be ſoufed without neceſſity, which 

f{ecms nor to be in this place ; nor is it very proper to difſtin- 

guifh rwo Sentences in this manner, where the one is more generals 

and the other Leing more ſpecta!, is comprehended within it, 

which 1s the cafe here; for it ſha! ſurely be the Lords, 1 the genera]; 

and 1ts being offered up for a burni-effering, is the particular way or 
2 Q 3 Mainmy rn 


L \ 


+ Heb. 

| from days 
to days. 

|| Or, zo 
falk with, 


+ Heb! 


were 
falled, 


hap. ATE. 


TO - 4a ——-, = - geen 


manner how it was to be the Lords ; as it were very improper to 
fay, This is either a man, or it is my ſervant Jehn ; becauſe the 
Latrer branch is contained in the former: and theretore 1n all the 
alledged inſtances where and is put for or, they are two diſtintt per- 
ſons or things, and not one comprehended within another, as Exod. 
21. 17. Feather or Mother, 2 Sam. 2- 19- right hand or left. But the great 
Obje&ion againſt this Opinion 1s this, Thar it ſeems a moſt horrid 
AR, dire&ly contrary to the Law of Narure, and to plain Scrip- 
ture, thus to Sacrifice his own Daughter ; and that it ſeems alto- 
gether incredible, eirher that ſuch a man as Jeprhahy ſo eminent for 
Piety, and Wiſdom, and Zeal, and Faith, ſhould either make ſo 
Barbarous a Vow,or purſue it for above two Months ſpace; and that 
none of the Prieſts of that time ſhould inform him of the unlawful- 


- neſs ofexecuting ſo wicked a Vow, and of the liberty he had to re- 


deem ſuch a Vow, by vertue of Levit. 27+ 2, 3, &c. or that Jeph- 
thah would not willingly receive information, eſpecially where it 
was ſo agreeable to his ewn intereſt and natural affeQion; or, that 
the Priefts and people would ſuffer him to execute his own Daugh- 
ter, and not rather hinder him by force, as they afterward did S2ul, 
when he had ſworn the death of Jerethan. Theſe and other ſuch 
difficulties I confeſs there are in the caſe; but ſomething may be 
truly and fairly ſaid to allay the ſeeming Monſtrouſneſs of this fact. 
1. Theſe were times of great and general ignorance and corruption 
of Religion? wherein the 1r«elites had Apoſtatized from God, and 
learnt and followed the praftices and worſhips of the Heathen Na- 
tions, Jadg 10. 6. whereof this was one, tooffer up Humane Sa- 
crifices to Molech ; and although they ſeem now to have repented 
and forſaken their Idols, Judg. Io. I6. yet they ſeem ſtill ro have 
retained part of the old Leaven, and this among the reſt, That 
they might offer Humane Sacrifices, not to Moloch, as they had 
done but unto the Lord. And whereas ſome of the Jewiſh Writ- 
ters pretend that Phinehas was alive zt this time ; and tell a fine 
Story concerning him and Jephrhah, That both ſtood upon their 
Terms, and neither would goto the other to adviſe about the mat- 
ter ; yet ir is more than probable that Phinehas was dead long be- 
fore this time; and whoſoever was the Hi gh-prieſt then, he ſeems 
fo be guilty either of groſs ignorance or negligence ; ſo that a Jete 
Learned Writer conceives, that this was the reaſon why the Priefſt- 
hood was taken from him, and from that line, and tranſlated to the 
line of :hamar, which was done in the time of the Judges, as may 
be gathered from 1 Sam. 2+ 35 36. Moreover Jephthah, though now 
a go0d Many may ſeem to have had but arude and barbarous E- 
ducation; having been baniſhed from his Fathers Houſe, and forced 
to wander and diſpoſe himſelf in the uttermoſt Borders of the Land 
of Gilead, beyond Jordan, at a great diftance from the place of 
Worſhip and Inftru&ion ; Nor 1s it ſtrange, That the Prieſts and 
people did not reſiſt Jephrbab in this Enterpriſe; partly, becauſe 
many of chem might lie under the ſame 1gnorance and miſtake that 
Jephthah did ; and partly becauſe they knew Jephthah to be a ſtouty 
and reſolute, and boiſterous Man, and were afraid to oppoſe him 
ih a matter wherein he ſeemed to be ſo peremptory, and their per- 
ſons and Families were not much concerned. 2. This miſtake of 
Jephthah's, and of the reſt of that Age was not without ſome plau- 
ſible appearance of Warrant from the Holy Text, even from Levrr. 
27s 2s, 29 wherein it is exprefly provided, That no Devoted thing 
whether Man or bea#, ſhould be redeemed, but ſhould ſurely be put to Death ; 
a place, which it is nor ſtrange that a Soldier in ſo ignorantan Ase 
ſhould miſtake, ſcing even ſome Learned Divines, in this know- 
ing Age, and Capelus, amongſt the reſt, have fallen into the ſame 
error, and juſtified Jephrhab's Attion from that plzce; and though 
I doubt not they run into the nther extream, as Men commonly 
do, thoſe words being ro be otherwiſe underſtood than they take 
them ( of which ſee my Notes on that place) yet muſt ir muſt be 
granted that place gave fephthah a very cclourable pretext for the 
Aion ; and being puſhed on by Zeal for God, and the Conſcience 
of his Vow, he might eaſily be influced to it ; andthough this was 
a-Sin in him, yet it was. but a Sin of Ignorance ; which therefore 
was overlooked by a gracious God, and not reproved by any Holy 
men of God. Ir is probab'y conceived, that the Greeks, who ufed 
to ſteal ſacred Hiſtories, and turn them into Fables, had from 
this Hiſtory their relation of Iphigines ( which may be put for Feph- 
tigenis ) Sacrificed by her Father Agamemnon, which 1s deſcribed by 
many of the ſame. circumſtances wherewith this is accompanied. 
b.To wit, carnally ; ſhe died a Virgin- 


| 40 That the daughters of Iſrael went T yearly «|| to 
lament the daughter of Jephthah 4 the Gileadite four 
days in a year. : 

*c To a place appointed for their meeting to this end, poſſibly to 
the place where the was Sacrificed. 4 To expreſs their Sorrow 
for her loſs, according to the manner. Or, #» diſcourſe of ( ſo the 
Hebrew Lamed is ſometimes uſed ) che Daughter of Jephthah, to cele- 
=þ1/ Fo praiſes, who had ſo willingly yielded up her ſelf for a 
Sacrifice. 


CHAP. XIL 


The Ephraimites wage War againſt Jephthah : Are ſmitten by the Gileadites: 
Aud being diſcerned by Shibboleth, are flain to the number of two and 
forty thouſand, 1 — 6, Fephthah dies, 7. After him Ibzan, 8 — 10. 

. Elon, 18, 12+ Abdon, 13— —15. Were Judges over Iſrael. 
A- Nd the men of Ephraim + gathered themſelves to- 
£ A. pether, and went. northward «, and faid unto 
Jephthah 6, Wherefore paſſedſt thou over « to fight 
againſt the children of Ammon, and didſt not call us 


to po'with thee 2 We will burn thine houſe upon thee 
with bre. 

:-z "Over Jorden, ſo Northwards towards Mizpeh, where Jephrhah 
was, Judg- 11+ 34+ and which was in the Northern part of the Land 
beyond Jordan. þ Through Pride and Envy, contending with him 
25 they did before with Gideon, Judz. 8. 1. c Not over Jordan, for 
there he was already ; but over the Borders of the Iſraelites Land 
beyond Jordan, as appears, by comparing this with Judg. 11. 29, 
where the ſame Phraſe is uſed. 

'-2 And Jephthah ſaid unto them, T and my people 
were at great ſtrife with the children of Ammon ; and 


aut vU D@QE-& 


_ 


a6 I called you d, ye delivered me not out of their 
and. 


d Hence it appears, that he craved their a hi 
denied; though that be not elſewhere bead ON OI 
3 And when I ſaw that ye delivered »e not, I put 
my life in my hand e, and paſſed over againit the chil- 
dren of Ammon, and the LORD delivered them into 
my hand. Wherefore then are ye come up unto me 
this day to fight againſt me f? 
el 7.6.) T expoſed my ſelf to utmoſt danger ; as a man that car- 
ries a brittle and precious thing in his hand, which may eaſily either 
fall ro the ground, or be ſnatched from him. The fame Phraſe is 
uſed 1 Same 19. 5. and 28. 21. Job 15. 14. Pſal. 119+ 109. f Why 
do you thus requite my kindneis in running into ſuch hazard to 
preſerve you and yours ? 

4 Then Jephthah gathered together all the men cf 
Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of 
Gilead ſmote Ephraim, becauſe they ſaid, Ye Gilea- 
dites are fugitives of Ephraim, among the Ephraimites, 
and among the Manaſlites g. | 

g According to this Tranſlation, theſe words are a ſcoffing »nd 
contemptuous expreſſion of the Ephraimites concerning the G:l:a- 
aites, whom they call Fugitives of Ephraim ; the word Ephraim be- 
ing here taken largely, as it is elſewhere, as 1ſa. 7: 2. 5, fo as it 
comprehends the other Neighbouring Tribes, of which Ephraim 
was 1n ſome ſort the head or chief ; and eſpeciaily their Brethr-nof 
Manaſſtch, who lived next to them, and were delcended from the 
ſame Father, Joſzph ; by reaſon whereof, both theſe Tribes are 
ſometimes reckoned for one, and called by the name of che Tribe of 
Joſeph. And this large ſignification of Ephraim may ſeem probable 
from the following words, where, inftead of Ephraim is put the Ee 
proraimites, and the Manaſſites. By Gileadites here they ſeem princi- 
pally to mean the Monaſſites beyond Jordan, who dwelt in Gilead, as 
appears from Deuts 3: 13+ Joſh. 17: 1, 5,6. And although other 
Gileaaites were joyned with them, yet they vent their paſſicn againſt 
theſe ; principally, becauſe they envied them moſt ; partly, be. 
cauſe, they ſeemed to have had a chief hand in the V ictory TJudg. 
11. 29. And partly, becauſe they were mere nearly related to them 
and therefore more obliged to deſire their Conjun&ion with them in 
the War. Theſe they here opprobriouſly call Fugitives, 7. e. ſuch 
as had deſerted their Brethren of Ephraim and Manaſſeh and for ſome 
worldly advantage planted themſelves beyond Jordan, at a diſtance 
from their Brethren. and were alienated in Aﬀe&ion from them 
and carried on a diſtin& and ſeparate Intereſt ef their own; as a s 
pears by their Monopolizing the glory of this Sncceſs to thomlotves 
and excluding their Brethren from it. According to the Hebrew, the 
words lie, and may be rendred thus, Therefore ( fo Chi is oft rendred ) 
they ſaid, Fugitives of Ephraim are ye; (i, &« ) Ye Ephraimites are meer 
run-aways: for the words next foregoing are, The Men of Gilead 
{mote Ephraim. And having told you what they ſzid, becauſe the 
Pronoun they was ambiguous, he adds by way of Explication ) who 
ſaidit, even the Gileadites ( and they ſaid it when they had got the 
advantage over them, and got between them and heme, as the next 
verſe ſhews ) being berween Ephraim and Manafſeh ; ( 6) Havin 
taken the paſſages of J:rdan, as it foliows, which lay between Fo 
phraim and that part of Manaſſeh which was beyond Jordan. Or theſe 
latter words may be rendred thus, Ard tte Gileadites were berween 
Ephraim and Manaſſch. So there is only an Elipſes of two ſmall words 
which are oft defeCtive, and tobe underſtoad in Scripture. Or thus. 
And the Gli/eadites were in the midſt of the Eiboaimerer and in the 
midſt of rhe Manaſizes, to wity thole Manaſſites who ordinarily lived 
within Jordan,who poſſibly were confederate with the Ephraimites in 
this quarrel. And fo tie meaning is, they followed cloſe afte 
rs, _ — them and fell upon the midſt of them od 

mote them ; and they ſent a party to i 2 : 
ſages of Jorden, as it hos Sk amg OT IT nn "ie he po 
5 Andthe Gileadites took the paſſages of Jordan be- 
fore the Ephraimites: and it was ſo, rhat when thoſe 
Ephraimites which were eſcaped h, ſaid, Let me £0 
over, that the men of Gilead ſaid unto him, Art thou 
an Ephraimite ? Ifhe ſaid, Nay 
eb. The fugitives of Ephraim, as before ; for the 
are the ſame: Which may make the latter | Har Ons 
going words more probabley to wity that it is not the Gileadites, bur 
the Ephraimites who are thereas well as here ſo called, becauſe they 
_ rey eng Jephthah, and fled from him. i Ts avoid the 
6 Then faid they unto him, Say now Shibb 
n fa SP1bboleth & ; 
and he faid Sibboleth 7: for he could not frame to ie, 
nounce zt right ws. Then they took him, and flew 
him at the paſſages of Jordan: and there fell at that 
time » of the Ephraimites forty and two thouſand. 

& Which fignifies a Stream or River, which they defired to naſg 
over: ſo it was a word proper for the occaſion, aud gave ws 
cauſe to ſuſpe& the Deſign, becauſe they were required only to ug 
preſs their Defire, to go over the. Shibboleth or River. 1 I is wm 
known, that notonly divers Narions, but divers Provinces, or = 
of the ſame Nation who uſe the ſame Language, differ mea ln 
left and manner of pronounciation. m Or rather he did not "Sug 
or dire& himſelf to ſpezk ſo, or, to ſpeak right; £71 e. ) Go 2s bh 
was Required to doit. The Hebrew Text doth not fav that h 
could not do it, bur that he did it not, becauſe he ſuf, pettin _ 
the Deſign of it, uttered it ſpeedily according to his or of 
wu 2 op” . Not in that place, at the paſſuges of Jordzr, but in 
* ru ition, being ſlaincither in the Batce] 2 Or inthe Purſuit,or 


J 7 _ Fagan Judged Iſrael ſix years: then died 
ephthan the Gileadite, and was buried in 0 
Cities o of Gilead, : - Air 
0 Heb. In the Cities, The Plural Number put for the Sinou!: 
Gen. 19; 29. where Lo? is ſaid to dwellin the Cirier, (i. . Nome ofthe 
; Cities ; 


Chap. X1t: (a 


f He 
Saw ſc 
* Ch: 
5- 10 
and 1 


—— 
ee es ns 


' +feb 
added t 
commit 
* Cha 


' $Teb. 
#1 nge! 


7 Num 
66 2 J 


* Nun 
6. Ts 
I Sam. 
UG Ih 


> e 4 
FR * -» 


- 4 . : x... Wirr: 
__ _ < > 0901 J (0) D (E; E $, Cuap. X11: 
ge 1 bY . EIS ' ey TRY; * bn, = 
" th Cities: And 1 Sam. 18. 21 the twain 1s pat for one of the twain . | -m A prophet. or facred perſon, ſent with a Mcfſage from God, 
and Jude. 18» 14+ kouſes for houſe : and Jonah 1+ 5+ the ſides, for one | # Or, venerable, or ax>tu!, full of Majefty. | 
pe"57 ty, 7 ; p 7 Buthe faid utito me, Behold, chou ſhalt conceive, 
$ 4 And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem p judged It- | and bear a ſon: and now drink no wine, nor ſtrong 
rael. : _-,", | drink, neither eat any T nnclean 257g: for the child x pr.1, 
» Either that in Judah, of which Match, 2+ 6, Or that in Zcbuimn, | ſhaj} be a Nazarite to God From the womb, to the day w:cancef. 
oſhe 19+ I'5. : of his death, | | 
ET pe i d thirty daughters g 5 | : 
9 And he had thirty fons, and thurty by h- | _8 9 Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and faid, 
hom lie had ſent abroad; and took q 1n thirty daugh- | - LORD. 1- food” whia ud, 
, \broad for his ſons. And he judged IHrael | p; WY *- » Jet the man ot God, which thou didft 
oy from abroad for Nis ions. Jug lend, come again vnto us, and teach us what we ſhall 
even years. FOG; : do unto the chil {ball be born. 
a ( Ee” Tock them home for Wives to his Sons. See Gan. 24+ _ Ow child that Jha _ 
63. and 31 50. Deotit, 21. 12+ 2 SAMs IT. 27« 9 And God hearkened to the voice of Manaoh: and 
37+" 0D "=O . Chis WY. _ 4, E F 
1c Then dicd Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem. the angel of God came again unto the woman as ſhe 
ix And afcer him, Elon a Zebulonite judged Urae]; ſace in the field : bur Manach her husband was nor 


and he judged [rael ten yeats, with her. | DE OE 
12 And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried ro And the wontan made haſte, 2nd ran.and ſhewed 
in Ajalen, in the countrey of Z.ebulun 7. her hu:bard, and ſid unto him, Behold, the man hath 


 'This is added to diſtinguiſh ic from other 4jalons, of which | appeared unto me, that came unto re the erher day. 
ſee Judg. 1. 35+ 1 Chron. 6-69. and 8. 13, 11 And Manoah aroſe, and went after his wife, and 
13 KC And after him, Abdon the ſon of Hillel a Pi- ; D 


. came to the man, and ſaid unto him, Art thou the man 
rathonite judged Urael. 


that ſpakeſt unto the woman ? and he ſaid, I am. 
14 And he had forty ſons, and thirty 7 Nephews, 12 And Manaoh faid, Now let thy words come to ; 
w_ that * _— I ro ememngy and ten aſs-colts, and he paſs 0: + how ſhall we order the child p ? and || + how + Heh: - 
1% udged IHrael eight years. 
Juoge -C 


hall we dounto him 2? x —_ ſhalt 
15 And Abdon the ſon of Hillel the Pirathonit® | , g,, ;3y word: ſhall come to paſs * 1 Snuly Keliere has hs eth:man= 


: ” we - ner of the 
110-4 died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of E- _—_ ſhall be fulfilled. p What Rules ſhall we obſerve abour his rok : 
- - : ; Education : Or. mie 

hraim. in the mount of the Amalekites s. | + Or, whe 
P s So called from ſome remarable Exploit, done eirher by, or upon 12 And the angel of the LORD ſaid unto Mano- ſha! he do ? 


the Amalekites in that plece- ah, Of all that I faid unto the woman, let her be- t He's 
| > A P. XIIL + | ware q. mo _ 
The Philiftines again oppreſs Iſracl, 1. An angel appcareth to ManoeÞ Sy} 9 Whilſt the Child isin her Womb, and after the Child is born, NO INN 
wife : proniſmg her a ſon that ſhould be a Nazarite* ana deliver Iſrael, I«t him obſerve the ſame Orders. h 


2 ——>—— 6. She 0968s her husband __ : ce aa £ _ — I4. She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the 
turn of tie angcly 7 — I 4» Manoah 1s aeſirous to previae . . . . 4 
A nd rt th afie-Jb ns iy } 18. He. ſacrificerh ro | ies neither let her drink wine, nor ſtrong drink, 


the Lord ; and the angel aſcendeth to heaven in the flame of the burnt= neither eat any T uncicanthing : allthac] commanded + Heb. : 


offering, ig = 21, hereat Manoah is affrighted ; but comforted by his her, let her obſerve. un-leane 
wife ; who bearerh him a ſon ; his name Samſon : in whom is the Spirit 15 (| And Manoah ſaid unto the an gel of the LORD, neſs. 
of the Lord, 22--*- 


Nd the EF ah of Iſrael + * did evil « again in { ay _ y —_— thee until we ſhall A+” Ib 
+} Heb. the ſight of the LORD, and the LORD deli- eady a kid T for thee r, | | Heb. . 


| ; ao oocys r Suppoſing him to be a Man and aProphet, to whom he would fire thees 
| _ vered them inro the hand of the Philiſtines fourty | in +his manner expreſs his Reſp<&, as was uſual to ſtrangers. See 
Ed 4 » 18: 5: Fudg. 6: I8: 
* Chap. YEITS Y. Gen. 18: 5: Ju | 
: MP * a (i.e } Fell into Idelatry, &'« Not now after the death of | 16 And the angel of the LORD faid unto Manoak; 


2d 41-7 <b4on the laſt Judge but un. the days of che former Judges. b To Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread [: 
md4. 1. be computed, not from Abaor's death, bur before char t:me, as 1: 


and 6, 7, Evident borh from wv «5- where 1t 35 declared, that Jrael was unde! ne if thou — - —_— thou muſt 
2nd ic, 6. the power of the Phliftine: s and from Judges 15. 20 where on); Þ '? er 1t unto The Dt; IOr Manoah knew not that 
twenty of theſe Years +1e taid t be in Samſons days. And it 1: j 1C was an angel of the LORD. | | 
probably conceived, thar that gre.t {laughter of tne Ephra mitesmad | { (i: e. ) Mat, as Bread iscommonly taken in Sc: ipture- 8 Not 
by Jephthai, did oreatly enconrige the Phalifrines 5 rite again? 7. nto a man, a» n W thou apprehendeſt me ro be; bur unto cke Lord, 
rael, when one of their chief Bula arks wasſo much weakened ; and | 4 rhou wiltſt by and by perceive we © be. | 


therefore -har the Philiſtines began to domineer over them ror 17 And Manoah ſaid unto the angel of the LORD 
long after Jephthah's death. | 4 


94 2 : - . 

2 C And there was a Certain man of Zorah c, of thc - _ - oo " — actonp oy fayings come to 
EY x : . ' mogey M _— PA S, y 0 uu: | 
family 4 of the Danites, whole namewas Manoa » ANC « Either by mak:ig honourable mention of thee, or by perform- 
his wife was barren, and bare not e, ing r-{pect and ſervice to thee, by a preſent, which 

c A City, of which fee Joſb, 15: 33: and 19: 41. d (1i:e:) Ot} ave to prophets, 1 Sam. 9.7, $- IX King. 14+ 3. 
the Trib: or people, as family ſomerimes ſign'fies, Foſh. 9: 17: Jer. 18 Ai:d the angel of the LORD ſaid unto him. 
8: 3; and 19: 25: Amos 3: I: Mich. 2: 3: Zach. 14: 18» e An e- Vhy * askeſt thou after my name, ſeing it 3s || ©: 


Phatical reperirion of the fame thing in divers words, which is an Þ _.. * Gen. 
ulual Elegancy both :s. Scriptvre and oiher Authors. wi wg pr ten f —_.. Ts | 32..29- .- 
| Fleb. 2 Andy the angel of the LORD f appeared untc | * = Ce ER nT or onderful, ſuch as thou canſt i Or, worts 


RY, hend : my Natvre and Eſſe :hich 5 _ 
«og the woman, and ſaid unto her, Behoid now, thou ar: CNY J re and Eſſence ( which is oft ſign-fied by derfuls 


-ame in Scripture ) is incomprehenſible, This ſhews, thae this 
barren, and bareft nor: bur thou ſhalt CONCeIVEC, anc } vas the Angel of the Covenant, the Son of God. : 


bear a ſon. 19 So Manoah took a kid, with a meat-cff-rin ”, 
f AIG Son of God off ſo Gy oi ern heat pace as may be | 4rd offered #t upon a rock z to the LORD ; and the 
þ athered from wv. 18: yet diſtinguiſhed from the Lord, becauſe h: «4 pe . 5 
| ns od here a2 ie wire: ir the terms of x Bevrame, as 6 MANI angel did wondrouſly, and Manoah and his wife look- 


ſent from God, and was really a diſtin& Perion from God the Fa- ed on. . ; ; : 
_ ; d l mak: y Which were pn joyned with the chief Sacrifices. - z The 
: K . Ange!s preſence and Command b-ing a ſufficienr Warrant for th 
' Numb. 4 Now therefore, beware [ a” thee EE and dr Ink offering of Sacrifice by a perſon who was no prieſt, and in a ages 
6-2, 3} Not wine, nor ſtrong drink h, and eat not any unciean | ,trerv te forbidden. 
thing is 20 For it came to paſs when the flame a went un 
: ; G | u 
g Becauſe the Child was to be a Nazarite from the Womb, v. 5 roward heaven from ot the altar b, that the anose! + 
ani! fromthe Conception ; and becauſe the Mothers pollution ex- he LORD aſcended in the fl : 5 
tends ro the Child, the is enjoyned from this time to obſerve the CEN , OTIS 0 CHE CE or rhe altar ; and 
following Rules belonging ro rhe Nazarires. h Under which by a Manoah and his wife looked on zt, and fell on their 
Synecdoche are compreterided the other particulars mentioned, | faces d to the ground. : | 
Numb. 6; 2, }, 4: as is implied ve 149: # Any of thoſe meats for-| 4 Either ariſing from the Fire which Manoah brought for the Off=r- 
wenn Levit, 11: which were forbidden to all, bur eſpecially ro| ing: or produced by the Ang-1 out of the R=ck in a miracalous 
the Nazarztes. ' 


ann : mannere 6b ( i- «-) From thar part of the Rock which ſerved in- 
5 For lo, thou ſhalt conceive and bear a ſon; and | ſtead -fan Altar» upon which tie Sacrifice was laid. c To mani- 


6, * * no rafor ſhall come on bis head: for the child ſhall | {ſt his Natwe and Epos! » be Spiritual, becauſe not capable of 
| 1 Sk, be a Nazarice & unte God from the womb: and te hurt by the Fire ; and Celeſtial. &@ Partly in revexence to that glo- 


. T r-ous Preſence manifeſted in ſo wenderful a manner : and part - 
t 11s R_ to deliver Iſrael 7 out of the hand of the | gut of a religious Horror ar d Fear of Death h——_ this — _ wy 
iliſtines. 5 


: is exprefſed ve 22 for the prevention whereof they fell down in 
k A perſon ſeparated from others, and conſecrated to Gods Ser- | way of Supplication ro Gog 


vice. | And the deliverance ſhall be cairied on and perfefcd by 21. ( But the angel cf the LORD Eid no more an- 
others, as IT Was 1n part by El, and Samuel, and Saul; bur efpeci-| pear to Manoah and to his wife : ) then Manoah knew 


ally by David. 


| | that he was an angel of the LORD. | | Pond: 
F 6 C "_ the m_ came, and told her husband,} _, And Manoah ſaid unto his wife, * We ſhall ſure- 23. r= 
aying, A man of God »» came unco me, and his coun: ly die, becauſe we have ſeen God. * Deur, 
tenance was like the countenance of an argel of God, | 25: Bue his ES ano him If 4; LORD. were © 20; 26; 
5 very terrible » : but 1 asked him not whence he was 1 + d to kil , | TONE SIE | Chap. 
"1 .D&ither told he me his name: 2 P (- ( [C#] 1 l Us, he WOuid 11OT have received a burn - 6; 22; 


Os 2 Q 4 oftering, 
Ir 


JUDGES. * * Chap, We 


of the Lion, which by its ſtrong ſmell is offenfive to, and avoided 


| Chap. AIV, 
| offering, 
would he 
at this time e have told us | "IS 
e Or, at this time : The Particle, ary noting here, not Iikene S, 
but the truth and reality of the thing, as it doth Numb. 11 1. _ 
y- 10- and elſewhere. This Expreſſion ſeems to have ſome x m- 
phaſis in it, to enhance Gods mercy to them, as being afforded them 
in a time of ſuch publick and grievous Calamity 3 and in a time 
when the Word of the Lord was precious aid there was Ro open 
Viſion. as it was afterwards, 1 Sam. 3+ 1. ; 
24 © And the woman bare a ſon, and _ 
name * Samſon: and the child grew, and the LO 


bleſſed him f. | 
F(#. e. _- him with all thoſe Graces and gifts of Mind and 


Body which were neceſſary for the Work he was deſigned for. 


25 And the Spirit of the LORD began to move 
him at times g, in the camp of Dan b, berween Zorah 


and Fſhtaol. 


7. Toftir himup to Heroical Deſigns; to ſhew forth irs power 

'S, +50 er frame + his Mind, and in the ſtrength of his Body, 

diſcovered to his Neighbours in extraordinary aCtions ; to -7 op 

his heart to great Attemprs to the help and deliverznce of -_ : 
people, and to give ſome Effaysof it to his Brethren, and to ſee - 

Opportunities for it, as he did in the nex: Chapter. + A place io 

called, either from the Expzdition of the Daniros, Tudg. 18. Io, Fa. 

which though placed after this Hiſtory, was done before it LE 
from ſome other Camp which the D2nitcs had formed there at this 
time, to give ſome Check to the Incurfions of the Philiſtines. 

Samſon deſires to wife a daughter af the Philiſiines of Timnath __ 
of the Lord for an occaſion againit them, 1 == 4+ His parents go me 
with him to Timnath: & young liou meets him : he kills it, 5— 7+ 4 
his return he findeth honey in the carcaſe, 8. 9. _ 
feaſt : hath thirty companions adjoyned to him: #0 whom he propoun es 
a riddle: with promiſe of a preſent, 10— —15+ His wife extorts from 
him the explicaticon : and d:ſcovereth it, 16, —— 1 8. He ſlayeth _ 
ty Phil:fines of Arkelon 3 and therewith payeth his preſent, 19. #415 
wife is oiven to another, 20s : 

Nd Samſon went down « to Timnath b and ſaw 
2 woman in Timnath, of the daughters of the 

Philiſtines. | 

s After he was come to mature Age: b A place not far from 


the Sea; of which ſee Gen. 38. 12. Foſbe 15. 57. and 19+ 43+ 
2 And he came up, and told his father and his mo- 


ther, and ſaid, I have ſeen a woman in Timnath, of 
the daughters of thePhiliſtines ; now therefore get her 
for me to wife. : . 

3 Then his father and his mother ſaid unto him, 1s 
there never a woman among the daughters of thy bre- 
thren, or among all my people, that thou goeſt to 
take a wife of the uncircumciſed Philiſtines c ? and 
Samſon ſaid unto his father, Get her for me d; for 


Heb. :e | the pleaſeth mie well e. 
7 f c With whom the 1/raelites were forbidden to Marry, Exod. 34. 
12, ©&c. And although the Philiſlines were not Canaamres 1n their 
Original, Gen. 16, 14+ Deut. 2+ 23. yet they were fo in their habira- 


2nd a meat-offering at our hznds, neither 
have thewed us all theſe :hjngs, nor would as 
uch things as thele. 


* Heb. 


II. Z2. 


is rigrtt in 
mine Eyes, 


Keepeth a marriage. 


by Bees, was wholly conſumed, and nothing was left but the Bon: 

7 Not generated of the dead Lions Body, but elſewhere, nd Grking 

themſelves there, as they have ſometimes done in a Mans Sku} 

and 1n a Sepulchre, and 1uch Jike places. 4 
9 And he took thereof in his hands o, and went on 

eating, and came to his father and mother p, and he 

gave them, and they did eat : but he told not them that 


he had taken the honey out of the carcaſe of the lion. 

0 Out of the Lions Carcaſe. Queſ?. Did not Samſon tranſgreſs in 
touching a Carcaſe ? Anſwer, It was in it ſelf a legal pollution : bur 
ſome ſuch pollutions were involuntary and unavoidable, as in one 
tat hath an Ifſue running in his fleep ; and ſome were neceſſary 
Duttes,as in thoſe who were to attend upon a Woman in her Month 
or upon the burial of a dead Body. And ſuch was this pollution, 
being contrafted by Divine Inſtin& and DireQion, and in order to 
Gods honour, and therefore diſpenſed with by the Author of that 
Law, and required by him for his Services p From whom he had 
turned aſide tor a ſeaſon, v. 8. upon ſome pretence or other. 

10 Q So his father went down unto the woman, 
and Samſon made there a feaſt ; for fo uſed the young 
men to do. 

ir And itcame to paſs when they ſaw him 9, that 
they brought thirty companions to be with him 7. 

q Or, obſerved or conſidered b/m, his Stature , and Strength, and 
Countenance.and Carriage, which were extraordinary. »r Partly in 
compliance with the Cuſtom cf having Bride-men ; of which ſee 
Matth, g. 15+ Mark 2, 19. Joh. 3. 29. though they were not ſo nu- 
merous ; and principally by way of Caution, and as a Guard put 
upon him under a pretence of Reſpe& and AﬀeCtion. 

12 & And Samſon ſaid unto them, I will now put 
forth a riddle s unto you : if ye can certainly declare 
it me within the ſeven days of the feaſt :, and find i: 
out, then I will give you thirty || 
change of garments x. 

5 (7.6. ) An obſcure Sentence for you to reſolve and explain. 

# For ſo long Marriage-Feaſts laſted. See Gen. 29. 27, « Fine 
Linen-Cioathes, which were uſed for many purpoſes 1n thoſe parts; 
See Matth, 27. 59. Mark 14. 51. x (i.e. ) Changeable Suits of Ap- 
parel, as below, ws 19, and Gen. 45. 22, 

13 Butif ye cannet declare i: me, then ſhall ye give 
me thirty ſheets, and thirty change of garments. And 


they ſaid unto him, Put forth thy riddle that we may 
hear it. 

14 And he ſaid unto them, Out of the eater came 
forth meat, and out of the ſtrong came forth ſweet- 
_ Y. And they could net in theſe days expound the 
riddle. 


/ 7: e- Out of that ſtrong and devouring Creature, the Lion, came 
forth ſweer Meat ; to wit, Honey ; withal it is covertly implied, 
thar the Philiſtines, though now they had Strength on their ſide, 
and Cominion over 1rael, whom they did devour upon all occaſions, 
yer at laſt they ſhould become Meat to the 1/raelites. 

Is And it came to paſs on the ſeventh day z, that 
they ſaid unto Samſons wife, Entice thy husband, that 


he may declare unto us the riddle, leſt we burn thee 


ſheets #, and thirty |Or, fi 


tion, - and concurrence with them in Wickednels, and therefore 
weie liable-to the fame Cenſures and Judgments with them. 4 This 
ation of Samſons, though againſt common Rules, ſeems to be war- 
ranted partly by the greatneſsand goodneſs of his Deſign in it; and 
principally by the inſtin& and dire&ion of God, which is mentio- 
ned in the following words, which was known to Samſon, but not 
to his Parents. e Not fo much for her Beauty, as for the Deſign 
mentioned in the next Verſe. _ 
* 1 Kino But his father and his mother * knew not that ;: 
12.15. © was of the LORD, that he ſought an occaſion againſt 
2 Chron. the Philiſtines f : for at thar time the Philiſtines had 
10:15: dominion Over [frac]. | 
and 22.7. f Which he knew by very probable ConjcEure, if not by particu- 
and2$5-22e 1, Inſpiration, thar Marriage would give him many Way. : 
5 Then went Samſon down, and his father and his 
mother s to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of 
+ Heb: i» Timnath b: and behold, a young lion roared Ffagainſt 
meeting him. R 
_ g Who accompanied him, either becauſe they were now ac- 
quainted with his Dcſign ; or, to order the Circumſtances of that 
Atticn which they ſaw he was fet upon : or, to watch if they could 
find any. occaſion to take him off from his intention. þ Whither 
he had turned alide either by a Divine impulſe, or upon ſome real 
or pretended Occaſion. By 
6 And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon 
him z, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid &, 
and he had nothing in his hand : but he tald not his fa- 
ther or his mother what he had done /. 
i Stirred up and increaſed his Courage and bodily Strength. k As 
ſoon and as tafely. / Leſt by their means it ſhould be publickly 
known; for he wiſely conſidered, thar it was not yet a fit time to 
awaken the Jealouſies and Fears of the Philiſtines concerning bim, 
as this would have done. ; 
7 And he went down, and talked with the woman, 


and ſhe pleaſed Samſon well. 
8 © And after atime » he returned to take her: 
and he turned aſide to ſee the carcaſe of the lion, and 


and thy fathers houſe with fire : Have ye called us ++He; 

to take that we have a? 3s it not ſo? poſe u; 
= They had doubtleſs ſpoken to her before this time, but with 9 #tin 

ſome remiſneſs, ſuppofing that they fhoule find ir out ; but now Wil 

their time being nigh flipped, they preſs her with more vehemency, 

_ put = _—_ a neceſſity of ſearching it out. a(7.e.) To 

rip uz of our Garments: and fo your Civility will 7 

Unkindnets and Injuſtice. : ME Oe 9M proſe 

16 And Samfons wife wept before him, and ſaid 
Thou doſt but hate me, end loveſt me not: thou haſt 
pur forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and 
haſt not told ix me. And he faid unto her, Behold, I 
have not told ir my father, nor my mother 6, and ſhall 
I tell ;t thee ? : 

b Though I have had much more Experience 
and 'Taciturnity, than of thine, 

17 Andſhewept before him || the ſeven days, while the ſ Or, h 
feaſt laſted & : and it came to paſs on the ſeventh day, ri 
that he told her, becauſe ſhe lay ſore upon him: and", 
ſhe told the riddle tothe children of her people. __ 

e (7. e- ) On therelidue of the ſeven days; towity after thethird 
day. Iris a familiar Synecdoche. Or, on the ſeventh of 1he days, on 
which the Faſt was: And then the following Clauſe, on the ſeventh 
day, is only the Noun repeated for the Pronoun, on that day ; as is 
moſt frequent, as 1 King. 8. 1. Solomen aſſembled unto Solomon 
7, e. unto himſelf. f 

18 And the men of the city ſaid unto him on the 
ſeventh day before the ſun went down, What is ſweeter 
than honey, and what 3s ſtronger than a lion ? And 
he ſaid unto them, If ye had not plowed with my hei- | 
fer 4, ye had not found out my riddle, ] 

a If you had not employed my Wife to find it out, as Men 
plough up the ground with an Heiter, thereby diſcovering its hid- 
den parts ; he calls her Heifer, either, becauſe he now ſuſpeRed her 
wantonneſs and too much familiarity with that Friend which ſhe | 
afterwards married ; or, becauſe ſhe was joyned with him in the 
ſame Yoke; or, rather, becauſe they uſed ſuch in Ploughing. 


of their Fidelity 


beho!d, ns was a\ſwarm of bees », and honey in the} 19 <4 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon 

carcaſe of the lion. him e, and he went down to Aſh "I | 
1 Heb. after days; i. e. Either afrer ſome days: or, rather, after ty men of them, a nd EE { _w_ _—_ thir 1 Os; 

a year, as that word off ſignifies ; as Exod. 13. 16, Levite 25. 29. | 9 IF jj POV, and gave appart, | 


change 


Numb. 9. 22. Judg, 17. 10, I Sams Is 3. and 27. 7. when the Fleſh 


"Chap. XV. : 
change of garments g unto them which expounded the 
riddle, and his anger was kindled þ, and he went up # 


to bis fathers houſe. : | 
e Though he had a conſtant habit of eminent Strength and Cou- 
rage; yer that was exceedingly increaſed upon ſpecial occaſions, by 
the extraordinary influences of Gods Spirit. f Either to the Ter- 
ritory, which oft comes under the name of rhe City ; Or to the 
Ciry it ſelf, where he had both Strength and Courage enough to 
attempt what here follows ; and upon the doing hereof they were 
doubtleſs firuck with ſuch a Terrour, that every one fought only 
to preſerve himſelf, and none durſt:oppoſe or purſue him. g To- 
gether with their Sheers or Shirts, which it ſufficed to imply here, 
bing expreſſed above. v. 13- b For the Treachery of his Wife 
and Companions. # To wit, alone, or without his Wife. 
20 But Samfſons wife was gives & to his companion, 


whom he had uſed as his friend 7. 

k By her father. / (1.e.) To the chief of the Bride-men, to 

avhom he had ſhewed moſt Reſpe& and Kindneſs. 
Ci AF. a6 
Samſon deſireth to wifi: his wife : is denied her : wherefore he tieth fire- 

brands to three hundred foxes tails, and ſets the corn-on fire, I — 5. 

For which they burn his wife and her father, 6. Samſons revenge, 7, 8- 

The Philiſtines pitch in Judah and demand Samſon ; the men of Judah 

bind and deliver him, 9 ——= 13. He breaketh his bonds and fayeth 

one thouſand Philiftines with the jaw-bone of an aſs, 14 —==17, He? is 

# thirft : prays: obtains water out of it, 18 —=-20, _ ; 

Ur it came to paſs within a while atter, in the time 

of wheat harveſt a, that Samſon viſited his wife 

with a kid : and he ſaid, T will goin to my wife into 

the chamber b. But her father would not ſuffer him 
to go 1n. 

s Which Circumſtance is noted as the proper ſeaſon for the fol- 
lowing Exploit. 6 Jato her proper Chamber, which Womea had 
diſtin& and ſeparate from the Mens. _ : 

2 And her father faid, I verily thought that thou 
hadſt utterly hated her c, therefore I gave her to thy 
companion : « not her younger ſiſter fairer than ſhe ? 
+ take her, I pray thee, inſtead of her, 

c Becauſe thou didſt deſert her in great Wrath : But this was not 
ſafficienc cauſe; for he ſhou!d have endeavoured a reconciliation, 
or waited for it: and not have diſpoſed of another Mans Wite 
withour his conſent : which is not only againſt the Law of God, 


but of Natur - alſo. : - 
«4 And Samſon ſaid concerning them, || Now ſhall 


T be more blameleſs than the Philiſtines, though I do 
them a diſpleaſure d, : 

d Becauſe they have firſt provoked me by an irreparable Injury: 
Bur although this may look like an aft of private Revenge ; yer it 1s 
plain enough, that Samſon ated as3 judge (for ſo he was) and as an 
Avenger of the publick Injuries and Oppreffions of his people ; as 
plainiy appears from hence, that Samſon deſigned this very thing 
before he had received any perſonal Injury, Judg 14: 4+ 

4 And Samſon went and caught chree hundred foxes 
e, and took || fire-brands f, and turned tail to tail, and 

ut a fire-brand in the midſt between two tails g. 

e Of which cthzre were great numbers in Canaav, as appears from 
Neb 4: 3s Pal. 62: 11; Cant. 2: 15: Lam, 5; 18: Ezek. 13: 4+ Sothat 
divers places there h:ve their Names from the Foxes which aboun- 
ded there ; as Joſh. 15: 28: and 19; 42: 1 Sam. 13: 17. Add to 
this, that ſome learned Men conceive rhat rhe Hebrew Name Schual 
is more general, and containsnot only the Foxes, but another ſort 
of Crearure very like to them, cailed Thoes, whereof there were ſo 
many tnece,thac ſomerimes 209 of them have been met together in 
one Company ; as ſome who have lived in thoſe parts have lefr up- 
onRecord: Bur Infidels are much ſcandalized at this Hiſtory, and 
pretend it incredible that Samſon ſhould catch ſo many Foxes t1= 
gether; ſo nice and delicate is the Faith of theſe Men in rhings 
concerning God and Scriprure, that can devour. things ten t:mes 
more difficulr and ab'urd, concerning the produGtionof the World, 
and of M-n, ©&«c. Bur there is no cauſe of wonder here, f:r any 
Man thar is coilerabiy wiſe ; for it is .not ſaid thar Samſon caught 

' them all, eitherar one time, or by his own hands : for veing fo E- 


Ir, ſrt 


+ Hebs 
Lit her be 
thine, 


f Or, Now 
ſoall I be 
blameleſs, 
from the 
Philiſtines, 
though,&C 


| Or, 


Torchese 


He 
ſe] w; 
WALL 
ri 


of as many perſons as he pleaſed, and all his people would readily 
aſſiſt him; nor can it at all perplex any M ns Reaſon or Faitk, if it be 
allowed, that the God who made the World, and by his ſingular 
provid-nce watched over 1/rael, and intended them deliverance at 
this time, could eaſily diſpoſe things ſo that they might be taken. 
He choſe t» do this Exp'oit, not by his Brethren, whom he would 
preſerve from the Envy, and Hatred, and Miſchief which thar 
might have occaſioned to them, but ly bruit Creatures, thereby to 
add ſcorn and contempt to their Calamity, and particularly by 
Foxes ; partly, bzcau'e they were ficteſt for rhe purpoſe, being 
Creatures very fearful of Fire; and having ſuch Tails as the Fire= 
brands might moſt conveniently be ried ro ; and not going direQly 
forward but crooked!y and invulvedly, whereby the Fire was 
likely to be diſpzrſed in more places. f Made of ſuch matter as 
would quickly take Fire, and ke.p it for a Jong time; which was 
eaſte to procure. g That the Foxes might not maketoo much 
haſte,nor run int» their holes, but one of them might delay and ſtop' 
| another in his courſe, and ſo continue longer in the places wheie 
] | they were to do Execution. 


5 And when he had ſet the brands on fire, he let 


| Or, th 
uf of tit 
ſeven 
lays} 


burnt up both the ſhocks, and aifo the ſtanding corn, 
with the vineyards axd olives 

h To wit, fucceſlivei 
great care and diſcretion, ſo as they might aot hinder one another, 
nor all run into the tame Field; vuc being diſpes ſed in all parts, 
might ſpread the plague fart1er; and wiraal might be kept at a 
diſtance from the Fields and Vineyards of tie Iſraelites. It is not 
worthy of our enquiry what became of theſe Foxes afterward, whes 


|| Or; | 


apart, | 


FJ UDUNES 


minent a perſon, and the judge of 1/rael, he might require «fliſtance 


them go b into the ſtanding corn of the Philiſtines, and | 


y at levera] times ; and indivers places, with' | 


ag 

Rn Chap. X 
ther they were burnt by the Fire-brands; or run int Holes, or 
were taken 2nd killed by the Philifines. The truth of this Hiſtory 1s 
notably atteſted by a Cuſtom of the Romans, which - it is very vpro« 
bable they had from the Phanicians, upon this occaſion; for every 
yezr they had a Solemanity in April, the very time of Canaans W heat- 


harveſt, wherein Foxes were let Jooſe with burning Torches faft- 
ned to their Back-fides, &«. 


6 T Then the Philiftines ſaid, Who hath done this ? 
and they anſwered, Samſon the ſon in law of the Tim- 
nite, becauſe he had taken his wife, and given her to 
his companion. And the Philiftines came up and burnt 
her z and her father with fire: ES 

; Partly, for her Adultery, which divers Heathens puniſhed with / 
Death; and partly, for that miſchief which ſhe had occaſioned to 


chem ; thus ſhe brought upon her ſelf that miſchjef which ſhe ſtudied 
to avoid, Judges 14. 1 6 as wicked perſons oft do; Pro. 10. 24: 

7 T And Samſon ſaid unto them, Though ye have 
done this, yet will I be avenged of you k, and after 
.that T will ceaſe. | | 

k Whereby it appzars, that it was not his private Injuries, but 
| the publick, which he did revenge. | 

s And he {more them hip and thigh / with a great 
ſlaughter 2 ; and he went down and dwelt in the top 
of the rock Etamn. _ KEE fe 
' [ Upontheir Hips and Thighs, peradventure not deſigning to kill 
them, but to make them uncapable of Military employment; or, of 
doing hurt to the Iſraelites. Or, He ſmore them with his Leg upon their 
Thigh ; (i. e.) without any other Weapon but his Leg and Foot he 
kicked them, and made them lameand uſeleſs for War. » Heb. with 
a great firoke ; for ſo it was, even to them whom it did nor kill. 
» Partly, becauſe there he could better defend himſelf from his E- 
nemies; and partly, becauſe he would not involve his Brethren in 


the ſame danger with himſelf, bur like a worthy Magiſtrate, would 
ſecure them even with his own greater hazard. 


9 © Then the Philiftines went- up, and pitched in 
Judah os, and ſpread themſelves p in Lehi g. | 
o Where the Rock Eram was, ſee 1 Chron. 4: 323 2 Chron. 11: 5, 6. 


Þ As coming in great Numbers with a powerful Hoſt. q A place 
ſo called by Anticipation, wv. 17. 


10 And the men of Judah faid, Why are ye come 
up againſt us? And they anſwered, To. bind Samſon 
are we come up, to dotohim, as he hath done to us. | 

11 Then three thouſand men of Judah + wenr to + Heb- 
the top of the rock Etam, and ſaid toSamſon, Knoweſt wen diwi.| 
thou not that the Philiſtines are rulers over us ? what & © 
this #bat thou haſt done unto us r? And he faid unto 
them, As they did unto me, ſo have I done unto them. 


r Thou haſt by theſe Aftions puniſhed not them, as thou in- 


tendedſt ; but, us, who, being under their Dominion, are ſure to 
{marr for it- 


12 And they ſaid unto him, We-are come down to 
bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of 
the Philiſftines, And Samſon ſaid unto them, Swear | 
unto me, that ye will not fall upon me your ſelves /. '| 

JS Not that he feared chem, or could not as eafily have conquered | 
them, as he did the whole Hoſt of the Philif#:nes; but becauſe he would 


be free from all Obligation or Temptation of doing rhem any harmi, 
though it were in his own juſt and necefliry defence. 


13 And they ſpake unto him, ſaying, No, but we 
will bind thee faſt, and deliver thee inco their hand : 
but furely we wiil not kill thee. And they bound 
him with two new cords, and brought him up froni 
the rock #. 


t ( i. e. ) From the Cave or Hole in the Rock, in which he bad 
ſecured himſelf, out of which he was firſt brought up, and then 
; carried down from the Rock to the Plain. 


14 C And when he came unto Lehi, the Philiſtines 
ſhoured againſt him «, and the Spirit of the LORD 
; came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon 
; his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and 


' his bands + looſed x from off his hands. 


”- . 
5 
[i 


% 


+eb. 
s For joy and Triumphs becauſe they had now their great Ene- were me 

my, aS they ſuppoſed, in their hands. x Heb. were melted; i. e. were #44. 
+ diſolved, as tumngs are which are melted in the Fire. | 
[ I, And he found a + new y jaw-bone of an afs, and + Heb; 
{ put forth his hand, and took it, and ſlew a thouſand mf 
' men therewith, | 
i » And therefore more tough and ſtrong. - 
i; 16 And Samſon faid, With the jaw-bone of an aſs, © 
| | heaps upon heaps, with che jaw-bone of an aſs have + Heb2 
I ſlain a thouſand men s. | an heap 

z This, chough it might ſeem difficules yet is not at all impoſſi. #99 #49972 
ble or incredible ; eſpecially ſeing the Learned afficm of the Aﬀes | 
of Syria, that they were larger and ſtronger than ours, arid ſo cons 
ſequently were their Bones: And withal, it muſt beacknowledged, 
tht rhere was ſomething extraordinary and miraculous in this, as 
there was unqueſtionably in Samſoxs ſtrengths. and fo all the diffi- 
cuky vaniſheth. 

i7 And it came to paſs, when he had made an end 

of ſpeaking, that he caſt away the jaw-bone our of his 
| hand, and called that place || Ramath-Lehi #. 
a And by comtraftion, Leh; v. 14 it being uſual ſo to contra 


proper Names; as Salem is/ put for Jeruſalem, P/a!s 76. 3. Shebs for ;\./ 
Beerſheba, Joſh. 19. 2+ and many other. 7: _ 
7 


, 


| That is; 
the lifting 
up of the 


18 © And' he was ſore a thirſt þ, and called' ori the ——— 
| 2 R LORD, jawbone: 


my 


, = 


W Thar is, wherefore he called the name thereof | En-hakkore f, 


h p. XV. 


| 
ſ 


pled, or, 1; 
ea, 


+ Heb. 
a woman 
47 harlot. 


5 UV D 


| 7 i is li- 
LORD, and faid, Thou haſt given this pe; = : 
verance into the hand of thy ſervant : and now | 
die for thirſt, and fall into the hand of the uncircuni- 
Ciled c ? k. | ETSY 

b. So as he was ready to faint and die with Thirſt ; _—_ _ 
partly natural, from his exceſſive toil and heat ; partly, _ dy 
God, that by the experience of his own Impotency, he _—y " 
forced to aſcribe the Victory to God only, and not to _— ; 
c Wilrrhou not finiſh what thou haft begun ? Wilt thou undo wha 
thou haſt done ? 


| Ir, - 19" But God clave an hollow place 4 that was in || 


the Jaw e, and there came water thereout, and hs 
he haddrunk, his ſpirit came again, 'and he revived : 


well of @hich, is in Lehi unto this day g. | 
ow r* eavi it hollow ; an expreſſion like 
PE OC etmk WA Ovid = into Meal ; _— _ 
IL, 54-1; thou ditift cleave the fountain ; (7 e. ) cleave the ROCK 10 
nn al igh SES init e In the Jaw-bone which he had _— 
which God couldeaſily effe&, <ither by cauſing the Jaw-bone to -4 
forth Water, as the Rock formerly did, the Miracle being in . c : 
the ſame, though in a differing ſubjctt, cauſing a Spring to rea 
forth in Lek: ; or, in that Lehi mentioned before, v. 14. for. Leh: s 
both the name of 2 place, and ſignifies a Jaw-bone. FL 4 ho 
Fountain of himthat cricd for Thirſt ; or, that called upon God ws &= 
fiverante; (is e. ) the Fountain or Well which was given in anlwer 
to my Prayer. g According to this Tranſlation, Lehi is the name of 
2 Place | and not a Jaw-bone, becauſe 1t ſcems improbable that a Jaw- 
bone ſhould continue there ſo long, which every Traveller might 
takeaway, and would be forward enough to carry a Fountain with 
them in thoſe hot Countries; although ir is not incredible that 
Paſſengers would generally forbear to meddle with, or remove fo 
reat a Monument of Gods power and goodnefs ; or, that the ſame 
God who made itinſtrumental to ſo great a wonder, ſhould add one 
Circumſtance more ; to wit, fix it in the Earth, as a Teſtimony to 
poſterity of the Truth of rhis glorious work : Burt theſe words may 
be otherwiſe rendred thus, which Fountain was in that Faw-bone ; and 
forthe following words, unto :his day; they may not be joined with 
the words next and immediatly foregoing, as if che Founrain was 
there to this day ; bur with the former words, he called, &c. And 
ſo the Senſe may be this, That it was ſo called unto this day ; and 
the place may be thus read, he called the name thereof; or, the name 
thereof was called ( ſach aQtive Verbs being frequently pur paſſively 
and imperſonally, ) The — ' Fountain of him that called or cried 
which was in Lebi) unto this aay. = j-- 
; 20 And he judged Iſrael b in the days of the Phili- 


ftines # twenty years. | 
h (i. e. ) He exded their Cauſe, and avenged them againſt the 

Philiſtines. 7 (i. e.) Whilſt the Philiftines had the power and Domi- 

nion, from which he was not fully to deliver, but only ro begin 70, 

deliver them, as it was foretold, Judz. 13+ 5+ From this place it is 

manifeſt, that in the computation of the tzmes of the Judyes, the 

years of Servitude or Oppreſlion are not to be ſeparated from the 

years of the Judges, and added to themy but are comprehended 
within them ; which Propoſition is of great 1mportance for clear- 

ing this difficult part of - +>, = (PW and for juſtifying 
hat account of tim*?s given 1 King. 6. 1. 

; CH AP. XVI. 

Samſom goeth in to an harlot : is hem'd in ; riſeth at midnight : tateth the 
city-gates, pofts and barrs on his ſbwulders : and carriet3 thend up into a 
mountain, 3, Is in love with Delilah : fhe enticeth him t0 diſcover 
wherein his ſtrength lay: is thrice deceived : at laſt ſe 0-Vercomes kim, 
4, —20. They put out his eyes and caft him into priſon, 21. His hair 
grows again, 22+. The lords of the Philiſtines and the people gather toge- 
ther to make ſport with him to the honour of their Idols : and ſacrifice, 
23, — 25. Samſon getteth them to place his hands on the rw pillars of 
the houſe : he prays to God : pulls down the houſe ; and dieth : but more 

[tain at his death than in his life, 26, 30. He is buried, 3. 
Hen Samſon went to Gaza 4a, and ſaw there | an 


harlot b, and went in unto her. 7 
a A chief City, to make ſome new attempt upon the Philiſtines, 
whom he feared not either in their Cities or in their. Camps, having 
had ſuch large experience of his own Strength, and of Gods Afſi- | 
Nance ; poſſibly he came in thicher by Night, unknown and un- 
obſerved till afterwards. b Going into an houſe of publick En- 
tertainment to refreſh himſelf, as the manner was, Joſh. 200 To He 
there ſaw this Harlot ; which implies, that he did not go thither 
upon ſo evil a Deſign, but accidentally ſaw her there, and by gi- 
ving way to laſtful Looks upon her, was enſnared by her. : 
2 And it was told the Gazites, ſaying, Samſon is 
come hither. And they compaſſed him in, and laid 
wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and 
were þ quiet all night, ſaying, In the morning, when 
it is day, we ſhall kill him c. : $29 
c This they choſe to do, rather than toſeize upon him in his Houfe 
nd bed by Night ; either becaufe they knew not certainly in whar 
Houſe or place he was; or, becauſe they thought that might cauſe 
great Terror, and Confuſion, and Miſchief among their own peo- 
ple ; whereas in the day-time they might more fully diſcover him, 
' and more unexpeRedly ſurprize him,and more certainly dire& their 
Blows, and uſe their Weapons againſt him- = 
And Samſon lay till midnight,and aroſe at midnight 
d, and took the doors of the gate of the city e, and the 
two poſts, and went away with them f, Þ bar and all, 
and put rhe upon his ſhoulders, and carried them up 
to the top of an hill that « before Hebron g. 
4 Being either ſmitten in Conſcience for his Sin, when he firſt 
© awaked, and rhence fearing Danger, as he had juſt cauſe to do; or 
* > being ſecretly warned by God in a Dream ; or, by an inward im- 
+ KE pulſe, for the prevention of his deſigned Deſtruticn. e Nor the 
"I reat Gates, but leſſer Doors made in them, and ſtrengthened with 
Sina poſts and bars. f The Watch-men not expeCGting him till 


at Iſa, 47. 2+grind meal, (:. 


© 2 8 > 


opper part of the Gate- houſe, as the manner new is, to get ſomereſt, 
whereby to fit themſelves for their hard Service intended in the 
morning ; or, if ſome of them were in his way, he could eaſtly and 
ſpeedily ſtrike them dead, and break the Door, whilſt the reſt were 
partly aſtoniſhed with the ſurpriſe ; and partly, preparing them- 
ielves for refiſtance : Nor durſt they purſue him. whom they new 
again perceived to have ſuch prodigious Strength and Courage ; 
and to be ſo much above the fear of them, that he did not run away 
with all ſpeed, but went leiſurely, having ſo great a weight on his 
Shoulders, wherewith they knew he could both defend himſe]fand 
offend them. g Either, 1. To an Hill near Hebron, which was above 
twenty miles trom Gazs; or, 2. To the top of an high Hill not far 
from Gaza, which looked towards Hebron, which alſo ſtood upon 
another high Hill, and might be ſeen frem this place, theugh it 
was at a great diſtance from it. And Samſon did this not cut of 
vain Oftentation, bur as an evidence of his great Strength for the 
-Encouragement of his people to join with him more vigorouſly 
for their own Deliverance, than yet they had done, or durſt do 5 
and for the greater terror and contempt of the Philiſtines. Ir ma 
{ſeem ſtrange that Samſon immediately after ſo foul a Sin ſhould have 
the Courage in himſelf, and the Strength from Ged, for ſo greay 
a work. Bur firſt, it is probable, that Samſon had in ſeme meaſure 
repented of his Sin, and begged of Ged pardon and Affiſtance, which 
alſo he perceived by Inſtin&, that God would afford him. 2. This 
ſingular Strength and Conrage was not in it ſelf a Grace, but a 
Gifr, which might have been in a graceleſs perſon, and therefore 
might continue in a good Man, notwithſtanding an hainous at of 
Sin: and it was ſuch a.gift as did not depend upon the diſpoſition 
of his Mind, but upon the right ordering of his Body, by the 
Rule given to him, and others of that Order. h 
4 4 And it came topaſs afterwards, that he loved a 
woman b || in the valley of Sorek, whoſe name was || Or, 
Delilah. Fe. bruk. 


h Either firſt, with Conjugal Love, ſo as to Marry her, as divers 
both Jews and Chriſtians have thought. Or, Secondly, with Luſt. 
ful Love, as#an Harlot: which though not certain, becauſe the 
Phraſe is here ambiguous, ſhe being neither called an Harlot : as ſhe 
of Gaza was, v. 1+ nor yet his Wife, as ſhe of Timnath was, Judge 
14: 2, 3, 20: yet it may ſeem more probable; partly, becauſe the 
dreadful puniſhment now inflifted upon Samſon for this Sin, whom 
God ſpared for the firſt Offence, is an intimation, that this Sin was 
not inferior tothe former ; partly, becauſe the Cofidence which the 
Philiſtine lords had in her, and their bold and frequent Treating 
with her, and the whole courſe of her Carriage tuwards Samſon, 
ſhew her to be a mercenary and perfidious Harlot, and rot a Wife; 
whoſe 2fﬀecCtion and Intereſt wou]d have obliged her to beter things 
and partly, becauſe Smſon did not carry her home to his Houle, as 
Husbands uſe to do their Wives; but lodged in her Houſe : as 
appears from the whole Story. ; 

5 And the lerds of the Philiſtines 5 came up unto 
her, and ſaid unto her, Entice him, and ſee wherein 
his great ſtrength lieth, and by what means we may 
prevail againſt him, chat we may bind him to || afic | Or, 
him & ; and we will give thee every one of us eleven ##n6le 
hundred pieces of filver /. 

; The lords of their five principal Cities, who ſeem to have 
been united together at this timein one Ariſtocratical Government; 
or at leaſt were leagued together againft him as their common E- 
nemy. k To chaſtite him for his Injuries done to us. They mean 
to pryniſh him ſeverely, as they did ; but they expreſs it in mild 
words, leſt the horror of it mightmove her ro pity him. 1 ( i.e.) 
Shekels, as rhat Phraſe is commonly uſed.as Numb,7: 13, $5. 2 Sam. 
18: 12. 2 King. 6: 25» 

6 © And Delilah faid ro Samſon, Tell me, I pray 
thee, wherein thy great ſtrength /ieth m, and where- 
with thou mighteſt be bound, to affli& thee ? 

_ m What is the cauſe of this prodigious Strength, or wherein doth 
ir conſiſt ? She ſeems to ask meerly our of curioſity, to underſtand 
the ſtate of a perſon whom fhe ſo highly values. 


7 And Samſon ſaid unto her, If they bind me with | | 
ſeven ||f green withs, that were never dried 2, then |: = = 
; COFAsS. 


ſhall I be weak, and be as + another man. + Heb. 

n» Samſen is guilty both of the Sin of Lying, though hedreſs up ,,, P. 
the Lye in ſuch Circumſtances as might make ir moſt probable ; + Heb, 
and of great Folly in encouraging her Enquiries, which he ſhoulg one of men. 
at firſt have check'd: bur as he had forſaken God, ſo God had row $9 Gr 
forſaken him, and deprived him of common Prudence ; otherwiſe ? 
the frequent repetition and vehement urging of this Queſtion mighr 
ealtly have raiſed Suſpicion in him. 

8 'Then the lords of the Philiſtines brought up to 
her ſeven green withs, which had not been dried, and 
jhe bound him with them. 


9 ( Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with 
her in the chamber 0) and ſhe {ſaid unto him, The 
Philiſtines be upon thee, Samſon. And he brake the 
withs as a threed of tow is broken, . when it + toucheth + Heb: 
the fire; ſo his ſtrength was not known. ſmelleths 
o With her; (i. e- ) In the ſame Houſe, in aChamber : (i.e ) In 
aſecret Chamber within her call. Nor is it ſtrange thar they did not 
fall upon him 1n his ſleep: partly, becauſe they feared to awake 2 
ſleeping Lion; and partly, becauſe they expe& an opportunity for 
doing their work more certainly, and with leſs danger. 

- 10 And Delilah faid unto Samſon, Behold, thou Ib 
haſt mocked me, and told me lyes : now tell me, I an 
pray thee, wherewith thou mighteſt be bound ? work batt 

11 And he ſaid unto her, If they bind me faſt with ns 5 
new ropes 7 that never were occupied, then ſhall I be © 


= 
weak, and be as | another man. Tut 


12 Dg- ver. 7» 


Chap. XVLI ; 


| morning, and therefore being now retired into theſides, or 


17 cw” 


f Hi 


borea 


WE” 


"Mop. xvi. 


+ Heb. 
(brtned, 


® Numbe 
6, 3, 


| Heb, 
bored out, 


12 Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound 
bim therewith, and ſaid unto him, 'The Philiſtines be 
upon thee, Samſon. ( And there were liers 1n wait 
abiding in the chamber. ) And he brake them from off 
his arms like a thread. | ; 

12 And Delilah ſaid unto Samſon, Hitherto thou 
haſt mocked me, and told me lies: cell me where- 
with thou mighteſt be bound. And he ſaid unto her, 
Tf thou weaveſt the ſeven locks of my head with the 
web p. : 

p Or, thread which is woven abouta Weavers Loom ; or, with a 
IWeevers beem., If my Hair, which is all divided into ſeven Locks, 
be faſtned about a Weavers Beam ; or interwoven with Weavers 
Threads : underſtand out of the foregoing Verſes ; then I ſhall be 
weak as another Man. : : 

14 And ſhe faſtned it with the pin q, and ſaid unto 
him, The Philiſtines be upon thee, Samſon. And he 
awaked out of his ſleep, and went away with the pin 


U DD O'E Ss 


of the beam, and with the web. : | 
4 Having done what Samſon dire&ted, ſhe adds this for ſureneſs 
ſake, ſhe faſtned the Hair thus woven with a pin. 


15 { And ſhe ſaid unto him, How canſt thou ſay, [ 


love thee, when thine heart # not with me 7? thou haſt 
mocked me theſe three times, and haft not told me 
wherein thy great ſtrength /eth ? : 

» When thy Love conliſts only in cutward Expreſſion, not 1n 
AﬀeStion, and thou wiltſt not open thy Heart to meg as One true 
Friend dorh to another. ? : 

16 And it came to paſs, when ſhe preſſed him daily 
with her words, and urged him, /o that his foul was 
t vexed unto death s. 

5 Being tormented hy two contrary and violent Paſſions, deſire 
to gratific her whom he ſo much doted upon, and fezr of betraying 
himſelf to urmoſt bazards But bing deſerted by God, it 15 no 
wonder that he chuſeth the worſe part. . 

17 That he told herall his heart, and faid unto her, 
* There hath not come a raſor upon mine head: for 1 
have been a Nazarite unto God from my mothers womb: 
Tf I be ſhaven, then my ſtrength will go fromme7z, and 
TL ſhall become weak, and be like any ether man. 

t Not that his Hair was in it ſelf the S-ator cauſe of his Strength, 
but becaule it was the chief Condition of that Vow or Covenant, 
whereby as he ſtood obliged to him, ſn God was pleaſed graciouſly 
to ingage himſelf to fit him for, and «fſiit him in that great work to 
which he called hims but upon his violation of his Condition, 
God juſtly withdraws bis Help, and leaves him to himſelf, 

18 And when Delilah faw that he had coid her all 
his heart «, ſhe ſent and called for the lords of the Phi- 
liſtines, ſaying, Come up this once, for he hath ſhew- 
ed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philiſtines 
came up to her, and brought money in their hand. 

# Which it was not hard for her to diſco: er, by the change of his 
Countenance, and the matter of his Diſcumſe, and ti;e whole car- 
riage of the Buſineſs. . 

19 And ſhe made him ſleep x upon her knees y, and 
ſhe calledfor a man, and ſhe cauſed him to ſhave off z 
the ſeven locks of his head, and ſbe began to afflict 
him -, and his ſtrength went from him #. 

x By ſomeſleepy portion, which it is like ſhe gave him upon other 
Pretences, agreeable enough to his preſent and vitiated inclination. 
9 Reſting his head upon her Knees. x With a gentle hard, as if 
ſhe her {elf had bur been ſporting with him. She did this more 
ſecurely ; partly, becauſe the had caſt him into a deep ſleep ; ard 
partly, becauſe if he had diſcovered it before ir was finiſhed, ſhe 
would have faid, It was only an innocent Intention to rry the ſin- 
cerity of his AﬀeCtion to her, and rhe truch of this lat zelarion, 
which ſhe had fo juſt reaſon ro doubt of, from his frequenr difliinu- 
lation and lyes. @ (7. e.) To difturb, and awake, and attright 
him, as by other ways, fo particularly by crying out in a terrible 
manner, The Philifines are upon thee, as ſhe hd done before, and as 


it follows v. 20. 6 Which, as is here implied, ſhe perceived, bes- ! 
cauſe he could nor now ſhake himſelf as he did before; (+ e ) 


With equal vigour and might, as is intimated in the next Verſe: 
or, becauſe ſhe had bound him, though it be not here expreſled, 
and found him unable to break his Bonds. 

20 And ſhe ſaid, The Philiſtines be upon thee Sam- 
fon. And he awoke out of his ſleep, and ſaid c, I 
will go out as at other times before, and thake my 
ſelf d. And he wiſt not ethat the LORD was departed 


from him f. 


c Within himſelf ; (7. e. ) he purpoſed and attempted ir. d (5. e.) 
Put forth my Strength tocruſh them, and ro deliver my ſcit. e Be- 
ing not yet well awake, and not diſtin&'y feeling the loſs of his 

air, or not duely conſidering what would follow upon it. f In 
reſpett of the Strength and help he had formerly given him. 

21 C But the Philiſtines took him g, and + put out 
his eyes h, and brought him down to Gaza 3, and bourid 


him with fetters of braſs, and he did grind in the Pri- 
ſon-houſle &. 


gs Who now durſt apprehend him, becauſe they reſted in the Al. 
ſurance which Delilah had given them, that now «!l was diſcovered 
anddone. þ Which was doneby them our of Revenge and policy, 
to diſcnable him from doing them much harm, in calc he ſhould re- 
cover his Strength ; but not withour Gods providence, puniihing 
him in that part which had been greatly inſtrumental to bis tinfull 

ufts. : Becauſe this was a great and ſtrong Ciry, where he wouid be 
kept ſafely ; and upoathe Sea-coaft,at ſufficient diſtance from Sammons 


oy ——— ono 


\ 
y 
10 
- 
x 


! 
; 
: 


people ; and to repair the Honour of that place, vpon which he had 
faſtened ſo great a ſcorn, Juag. 16. 3. God alfo ordering things thus, 
that where he firſt ſinned, Judg. 16. 1. there he ſhould receive his 
puniſhment. k As Captives and Slaves uſe to da : See Exod. 11 5. 
Iſa. 47: 2: Matth, 24: 41: He made himſelf a Slave to vile Luſts and 
Harlots, and row God ſuffers men to uſe him like a Slave. 

22 Howbeit, the hair of his head began to grow a- 
gain / || after he was ſhaven. 

{ T his Circumſtance, thoughin it ſelf inconrfiderable, is noted as 
a ſign of the recovery of Gods favour, and his former Strength, in 
ſome good degrees upon his bitter Repentance, and his renewing 
of his Vow with God, which was allowed for Nazarites to do, Numb. 
6. 9, &. And which is here ſuppoſed he did, and by the EfeRs 
proved. NR; 

23 Then the. lords of the Philiſtines gathered them 


together w, for to offer a great ſacrifice unto Dagon * 


their god, and torejoyce : for they ſaid, Our god hath 


delivered Samſon our enemy into our hand. 

1 Either upon ſome annual or cuſtomary Solemnity : or, rather, 
upon this ſpecial occaſion, to praiſe Dagor for this fingular Favour, 
And they did not appoint this ſolema Service as ſoon as Samſon was 
taken, but ſome conſiderable time after, as appears by the growth 
of Samſons Hair in the mean time, becauſe they would give ſufficient 


time and warning for all their Friends and Allies to come thither; 


and for the making of all neceſſary voreparations for ſo greatan Oc- 
caſion. » Which is by moit ſuppoſed to be an Ido], whoſe upper 
part was like a Man, and whoſe lower part was like a Fiſh ; whence 
there is mention of Dagons hands, but not of his feer, in 1 Sam. 5. 4+ 
And this place being near Egypr, where ſome of their gods were 
worſhipped in the form of Fiſhes ; and being near the Sea, it ſeems 
moſt probable, that it was one of the Sea-gods cf the Heathens ; and 
that it had in ſomepart the reſemblance of a Fiſh. 

24 And when the peopleſaw him, they praiſed their 
god : for they ſaid, Our god hath delivered into our 
hands our enemy, and the defiroyer of our countrey, 
+ which ſlew many of us. 


25 And it came to paſs when their hearts were mer- 
ry, that they ſaid, Call for Samſon, that he may make 
us ſport. And they called for Samſon out of the pri- 


ſon-houſe, and he made | them ſpore », and they {et + Heb; 


him between the pillars, 


1: Eeither firſt, paſſively, being madeby them the marter oftheir 
Sport andDeriſion; and of many birter Scoffs, and other Indignities 
or Injuries: Orz Secondly, Attively, by tome ridiculous Aﬀionsy 
or ſome proofs of more than ordinary Strength yer remaining in 
him, like the ruins of a great and goodly Building ; whereby he 
lull'd them afleep in ſecurity, unril by this ſeeming Complaiſance 
he prepared the way for that which he deſigned ; otherwiſe his 
generous Soul would never have been forced to make them 
Sport, fave in order to their Deſtruttion. 


26 And Samſon faid unto the lad that held him by 
the hand, Suffer me, that I may feel the pillars where- 
upon the houſe ſtandeth, that I may lean upon them. 

27 Now the houſe was full of men and women, and 
all the lords of the Philiſtines were there : andrhere were 
upon the roof s about three thouſand men and women, 
that beheld while Samſon made ſport. 


o Which after the manner was flat, and had Windows thrcugh 


which they might ſee what was done in the lower parts of the 
Houſe. 


28 And Samſon called unto the LORD, and ſaid, 
O Lord GOD, remember me, I pray thee, and 
firengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, 
chat I may be at once avenged of the Philiſtines for my 
TWO eyes p. 

p This prayer was not an a&t of Malice and Revenge, but of 
Faith and Zeal for Gad, who was there publickly diſhonoured ; and 


* Juſtice, in puniſhing their inſolencies and vindicating the whole 


Common-wealrh of Iſrael, which was his Duty, as he was Judge; 
to do. And this 1s manifeſt from hence, becauſe God who heareth 
not Sinners, and would never uſe his Omniportency to gratifie any 
Mans impotent Malice, did manifeſt by the Effe&, that he ac- 
cepted and owned his prayer as the diQtare of his own Spirit. And 
that in this prayer he mentions only his Perſonal Injurie, theloſs of 
his Eyes, and not their Indignities to God and his people, muſt be 
aſcribed to that prudent Care which he had, and declared upon 
former eccaſions, of deriving the Rage and Hatred of the Phil:ftines 
upon himſelf alone, and diverting it from the people, For which 
end I conceive this prayer was made with an audible Voice, 
though he knew they would entertain it with Scorn and Lavghter, 
which alſo he knew would quickly be turned into Mourning. 


29 And Samſon took hold of the two middle pillars, 
upon which the houſe ſtood, and || on which it was 


born up, ef the one with his right hand, and of the #e leaned 
on themes 


other with his left gq. 

30 And Samſon faid, Let + me die with the Phili- 
ſtines r: and he bowed himſelf with al bis mights and 
the houſe fell upon the lords, and upon all the people 
that were therein; ſo the dead which he flew at his 
death, were more than they which he ſlew in his life. 

9 Wu. tow could ſo great a Building, containing ſo many thou- 
ſands of people, reſt upon two pillars ſo near placed together ? Here 
Infidels rriumph, as if they had got an unan{werable Argument a- 
gainſ? the truth ofthe Scriptures. But ir is a far more incredible 
and ridiculous thing to imagine, that the Pen-man of this Book 
ſhould feign ſuch a Circumſtance as this, if ir had been talſe, 
whereby he would have utterly overthrown the Credit of the whole 
Book; and that he ſhould do this before a people that cenld exfily 


2 R 2 have 


Chap. XVI: q 


|| Or, as 


when he i 
was ſhaven. il 


T Heb. 
and who 
multiplied 
our ſlain. 


before 


them, 


| Or; 


F Heb. 
my ſoul 


jog 
| Mk 


+ Heb. 
 Micajah. 


XVI. 


_ credible of them, 


him ; and that people ſhonld have ſo high a Venera- 
—_ ry in which they knew ſo notorious a falſhoed cage 
theſe things, I fay, are far more abſurd to believe, than the _ O 
this Relation. Bur to this I ſhall add two Anſwers. Firſt, = iS _- 
ſufficient Argument te prove, that this was nottrue, becauſe we do 
not at this day underſtand how it was done. There were many mw 
Works, and excellent pieces of Art, ſome footſteps whereofare le - 
in ancient Writers ; but the exa& way and particular —_ % 
them, is wholly, or in a great meaſure unknown and loſt : - ara 
Pancirollus hath written a whole Book of ſuch things. guts = bely, 
the old way of Architefture is much in the dark, as is confe 8 <a 
the Learned. It may be pretended, That though there mig - - 
curious Arts of Building in the Learned and Ingenious part - : e 
World, it is not probable they were among ſuch a rude and bar- 
barous people as the Philiſtines. But this 1s certainly a very ns 
miſtake ; for theſe people were either a part of, or very near Neig 
bours to the Phenicians, from whom it is confeſſed the Arts came 
©o the Grecians, And foraſmuch as many things which you _ 
cluded by the Ancients to be impoſſible, are by the wit and indu ry 
of later Ages found to be poſſible, and certainly true ; it _ . 
ftrange if ſome things now ſeem impoſſible to ſome Men, w _ 
were then known to be praCticable. And he that will venture his 
Faith and Salvation upon this Propoſition, That ſuch a —_— as 
this was ſimply impoſſible, becaule he doth not ſee the _ 1 y 
of it; or, which is all one, That no Man underſtands more than - 
doth ; will find few admirers of his Wiſdom: And to queſtion t . 
Truth and Divinity of the Holy Scriptures, which 1s fo fully ani 
clearly proved by ſundry Arguments, vpon ſuch a nicety as this, 1s 
but a more learned kind of Doting- Anſw. 2. Inſtances are __ 
wanting of far more large and capacious Buildings than this. t ws 
have been ſupported only by one pillar. Particularly, Pliny in the 
15th. Chapter of the 36th. Book of his Natural Hiſtory, mentions = 
Theaters built by one C. Curio, who lived in Julius Ceſars time ; aw 
of which was ſupported by one Pillar, or Pin, or Hinge, ous 
very many thouſands of people did tit 1n 1t together. And muc 
more mighttwo pillars ſuffice ro uphold a Building large enough to 
contain three Thouſand p*rions, which 1s the numb-r mentioned, 
w. 17. Or, the pillars might be made Twoin the lower partmeerly 
for Ornament-ſ:ke, which might eaſily be ſo ordered as to ſupport 
a Third and Main pillar in the middle, which upheld the whole 
Fabrick. r ( z-e-) I am contented to die, ſo I can but therewith 
contribute any thing to the Vindication of Gods glory, here trampled 
upon, and to the Deliverance of Gods people. This is no Example 
nor Encourayement to thoſe that wickedly Mu:der themſelves: for 
Samſon d1d not deſire, nor procure his own Death voluntarily, bur 
only hy meer force and neceflity ; becauſe he did deſire, and by 
bis Office was obliged to ſeek the deſtruEion ef rhete Enemies and 
Blaſpnemers of God, and Oppreflors of his people ; which intheſe 
Circumſtances he could nor effe& without h1s ow nDeath; & his Caſe 
was nos much unlike theirs. that in the hear of Batte] run upon 
the very n.outh of the C:nnon, or other evident and certain dan- 
ger of Death, to execure a Deſign upon the Enemy ; or theirs, who 
£0 into a Fire-ſbip to deſtroy the Enemies beſt Ships, though they 
2re ſure to periſh in the Enterprize. Moreover, Samſon did this by 
Divine Inftin& and Approbation, as Gods anſ' wer to his prayer mani- 
feſts, and that he might be a Typeof Chriſt, who by voluntarily un* 
dergoing death, deſtroyed the enemies of God, and of Þ 3 people, 
Then his brethren 5, and all the houſe of his fa. 


down, and took him, and brought him up, 
wer backed him t between Zorah and Eſktaol, in the 


burying-place of Manoah his father : and he judged 


-ael twenc 7CATS 7, : s 
- Either, Fire, Largely ſo called, his Kinſmen. Or, Secondly, 


T fIed ; Samſms Parents having had other Children after 
27 Spas uſual w_ God when he gave an extraordinary and 
unexp:&ed power of procreating a Child, to continue that ſtrength 
for the Generation or Conception of more Children, as in the eaſe 
of Abraham, Gen. 25- 1. 2: and Anna, 1 Sam: 2, 21. t Which they 
adveritured ro do; partly, becauſe rhe moſt barbarous Nations al- 
Jowed Burialeven torheir Enemies, and would permit thisofr-times 
to be done by rheir Friends: partly, becauſe Samſon had taken the 


blame of this Aftion wholly to him{-I1f, for which his innocent Re. 


j uld nor upon any pretence be puniſhed: and principally, 
ED hey oing; orien ſuch grief, and perplexity, and conſter- 


nation for the common Calamity, that they had neither heart, nor | 


i veng: themſelves of the 7ſraelites, but for their own ſakes 
+ on: bird 4.0 ro diſquiet or offendthem ; at leaſt, till they were 
5n 2 bertet poſture to refiſt them. u This was ſaid before, Judg 15, 
20. toexplain it ; and w ſhew _ theſe Twenty years ended, 

13 death, as 1s here noted. 
_ CHAP. XVI. | 

l-th money of his mother : then confeſſeth and re oreth its She 
23 "amen it to m___ « maketh images ; he ſets them up in the houſe of 

his gods : ana conſecrates one of his ſons for his prieſt : there being then 

no magiſtrates in Iſrael, 1, — 6, 8 Levite travelling that way he 
hireth and conſecrateth him to be his prieff, 7, w—=—_—— I cmfident 
that God would therefore favour and bleſs him, 13. ; 

Nd there was a man & of mount Ephraim, whoſe 


name was | Micah. j ; | 

n The things mentioned here, and in the following Chapters, did 

not happen in the order in whuch they are put ; but much ſooner, 

even preſently after the death of the Elders that over-lived Foſhus, 

Judg 2+ 7, as appears by divers Paſſages ; as firſt, becauſe the place 

called Mahaneh-Dan, or the camp of Dan, Judg. 13. 25. was ſo called 

from that which was done, Judg. 18: 12+ Secondly, Becauſe the 

Danites had not yet got all their Inheritance, Judg. 18. 1. which is nox 

above me __ after m— cope Wipro 

101 e Son of Eleazer was prieſt at this time, Judges 

pornte <a? + whe been about 350 years old, if this had been 
Seas afrer Samſon; dearh, which is more than improbable. 

> And he ſaid unto his mother, The eleven hundred 


lverthat were taken from thee, about which 
0K 6, and ſpakeſt of alſo in mine ears, be. 
hold. the filver s with me, I took zt c. And his mo- 
ther ſaid, Bleſſed be-rhou of the LORD #, my ſon, 


$UDGE s8: Chap. wy 


b (7.e.) Didt Curſe the Perfon who had taken them away, and 
thatin my hearing, as it follows« c The fear of thy Curſe makes 
me acknowledge mine Offence, and beg thy Pardon. & Þ willing. 
ly conſent" to, and beg from God the removal of the Curſe, and 2 
Bleſſing inſtead of it. Be thou free from my Curſe, becauſe tho 
haſt ſo honeſtly reſtored it. 

3 And when he had reſtored the eleven hundred 
ſnekels of ſilver to his mother, his mother ſaid, I had 
wholly + dedicated che filver into the LORD e, from + Bey; 
my hand, for my fon fto make a graven image, and /:# ju, 
a molten imageg : now therefore 1 will reſtore it un- 
co thee h. 

e In the Hebrew itis, Jehovoh, the incommunicable Name of God, 
Whereby it is apparent, that neither ſhe, nor her Son, intended to 
forſake the true God or his worſhip ; as appears from his rejoycing 
when he had got a Prieſt of the Lords appointment, of the Tribes 
of Levi, Judg. 17. 13. but only to worſhip God by animzge; which 
alſo it is apparent, that both the 1/raelites Exod. 52: 1, & And 5e- 
r050am afterwards deſigned tv do» f Fither. Firſt, for the hon-vr 
and benefit of thy ſe]fand Family; that you need not be continua!. 
ly going to Shiloh to worſhip, butmay do it as well at home by theſe 
Images. Or, Secondly, that thou maiſt cauſe theſe things to be 
made ; to which end, ſhe reſtored all the Money to him, as i: 
here follows. g Many think this was bur one Image, partly gra- 
ven, and partly Molten. But it ſeems more probable, that they 
were two diſtin& Images, becauſe they are ſo plainly diſtinguiſhed, 
Judg. i8: 17, 18. where alſo ſome other words come between them. 
It 1s true, the graven image alone is mentioned, Judg 18: 20, JO, Jt. 
not excluſively to the other, as appears from what is ſaid ju$ 1 ©. 
fore ; but by a common Synecdoche, whereby one is put for all ; 
Ay. where that one is eſteemed the chief. þ To diſpoſe of, 
as I ſay. 

' 4 Yet he reſtored the money unto his mother 5, and 
his mother took two hundred ſhcels of filver &, and 
gave them to the founder, who made,thereof / a graven 
1mage, and a molten image, and they were in the 
houſe of Micah. 


; Though his Mother allowed him to keep it, yet he perſiſted in 
his reſolution to reſtore it,that ſhe mighr diſpoſe of it as ſhe pleaſed ; 
and did aQtually reſtore it, as was ſaid before; and now confirms the 
former Reſtitution, and therefore is twice ſaid to reſtore it, k Re« 
ſerving goo Shekets, either for the Ephod and Teraphim, or for other 
things relating tothis Worſhip ; or for her own private uſe; being, 
it ſeems, cooled in her firſt Zea!, and willing to have as cheap a Re- 
Iigion as ſhe could, as alſo her Son Micah was, Judg. 17: 10. | Made 
them, either, Firſt, of that Mattcr : Or, Secondly, for that money. 
5 Andthe man Micah had an houſe of gods »», and 
made an f ephod » and * teraphim o,- and + conſecra- * 6s. 
ted one of his ſons, who became his prieſt p. Boe? 
2 ( 7.e.) An Houſe or Place conſecrated for the Service of God in - ek 
this manner. » An eminent part of the Prieſtly Garments, Exod. - , fi 
28: 4: which, ſome think, is here put for all of theme o Some ſort *** 9% 
of Images ſo called, of which ſec Gen. 3 i: 19; Hſe 3: 4+ þ Becauſe 
the Zevzres in that corrupt Eſtate of the Church, negl-&ed the Exer- 
ciſe of their Office, and therefore were negle&ed by the pcople, 
and others put into their Employment. Bur his kind of Prieſthood 
was condemned, Namb. 16: 40: and 18: 2, 7. 
6 * In thole days there was no. Ring 9 in Irael, and Chy, 
every man did that which was right in his own eyes x, 18: 1: 
q ( fee.) No Judge to Govern and Controul them. The word King Ge 21: 25; 
being here uſed largely for a Supreme Magiſtrate; as Ger. 36« 31s 
Deut 33« 5. God raiſed up Judges to Rule and Deliver the people, 
when he ſaw fit; and at other times for their Sins he ſuffered them 
to be without them, and ſuch a time this was; and therefcre they 
ran into that Idolarry, from which the /udges uſually kept them ; 
as appears by that ſolemn and oft-repeated Paſſage in this Book, 
thatafter the death of ſuch or ſuch a Judge the people forſook the 
Lord, and turned te Idols. r ( z. e, ) Not what pleaſed God, but 
what beſt ſuited their own Fancy er Lufts. 
7 © And there. was a young man out of Bethlchem- 
Judah s, of the family of Judah 7, who was a Levite, 
and he 1{ojourned there . 
s Or. of Bethlehem-Judah; ſo called here, as Matth, 2« 1, 5. to 
difference it from Bethlehem in Zebulun, Joſh. 19. 15. There he was 
born and bred. # (ee. ) Of, or belonging to the Tribe of Judah; 
not by Birth, for he was a Levire; nor by his Mother, for though 
that might be true, the Mother-ſide is not regarded in Genezlogies; 
but by his Habitation and Miniſtration. For the Lovites, eſpecial- 
ly in times of Confuſion and Irreligion, were diſperſed among all 
the Tribes; and this Mans Lot fell into the Tribe of Judah : which 
ſeems to be here noted by way of refle&ion upon that Tribe, and 
as an evidence of the general DefeQion, rhat a Levite could not find 
entertainment 1n that great and famous Tribe, which God bad put 
ſo much Honour upon, Gen. 49. 8, 9, 10, 11. and therefore was 
forced to wander and ſeek for ſubſiſterce elſewhere. u So he ex- 
prefſeth it, becauſe this was not the proper, nor uſual Place of his 
abcde, this being no Levitical City. 
8 And the man departed out of the city from Beth- 
lehem-Judah, to fojourn where he could find a place x, 


and he came to mount Ephraim, to the houſe of Mi- 


cah Þ as he journeyed. t m_ 
x For employment and a livelihood ; for the Tithes and Offer- bi wats 


ings, which were their maintenance, not being brought in to the 
Houſe of God, the Levites and Prieſts muſt needs be reduced to 
great ſtraits. 

9 And Micah ſaid unto him, Whence comeſt thou ? 
and he ſaid unto him, I am a Levite of Bechlehem-Ju- || Or, ® | 
dah, and I go to ſojourn where I may find a place. guible ſu 

ro And Micah faid unto him, Dwell with me, and &*: Ss 
be unto me a father and a prieſt y, and I will give thee f = f 

- oraer 0 
ten ſhekels of filver by the year, and || + a ſuit of ap- garments 


parel, and thy viqtuals, Se the Levite went in, y Fc c 


===> 


fH 
ſm, 


13Ps 
I, 


1: 25; 


Jobs . 
makin 
 WA}\ 


Or, « . 
wble juhs 
Heb. a0 


der of 
rr ments 


T Chap: XVII. 


' Chaps 


3 UV D 


For, 4 Fathers that is, a Prieſt, a Spiritual Father, a Teacher 
or Inſtrufter, for ſuch are called Fathers; fee 2 Kings 6: 21. and 
8: giand 13: 14. Iſa: 22: 21. He pretends Reverence and Submiſ- 
ſion to him; and what is wanting in his Wages, he pays him in 
empty Titles. : 

ry; And the Letive was content s to dwell with the 
man, and the young man was unto him as one Of his 


ſons 4. : 

z Being conſtrained by neceſſity, and infeed with the common 
Contagion of the Superſtition and Idolatry of the Times. 4 1+ &- 
Treated with the ſame degree of Kindreſs and Aﬀe@ton, 

1» And Micah conſecrated the 'Levite b, and the 
young man became his prieſt c, and was in the houſe 
of Micah. 

b Tobe a Prieſt, for which ke thought a Conſecration neceſſary, 
as knowing that the Levites were no leſs excluded from the Prieſts 
Office than the People. « Inſtead of his Son, whom he had conſe- 
crated for want of a fitter, v: 6. bur now ſeems to reſtrain him from 
the exerciſe of that Otfice, and to devolve it wholly upon the Lewte, 
who was nearer akin to it. 

13 Then faid Micah, Now know I that the LORD 
will do me good d, ſeing I have a Levite to my prieft; 

d Tam aſſured God will bleſs me. So blind and groſly partial 
he was in his judgement,to think that one right Circumſtance would 
anſwer for all his ſubſtantial Errors,in making and worſhipping I- 
mages againſt GOD'S expreſs Command, in worſhipping GOD in a 
forbidden place ; and in that he being an Ephraimitepretumed to make 


a Prieſt, &c. | 
C H A P. XVIIL 

Thoſe the Tribe of Dan, harving not ſufficient inheritance, ſend forth frue men 
zo ſpy out a place : they come to the houſe of Micah, and deſire the Levite 
ask counſel of GOD touching their journey, 1 5. He encouraging em: 
zhey ſpy out the City Laiſh: and at their return infligate their Brethren to 
ſet wpn the City, G=nmmmio. 600 ge forth armed s in their march 
they. ſeize upon Micahs prieft and idols ; which he in vain demanatth a= 
gain, 11 ———25. They pull down Laiſh ; build it agains inhabit it * 
and call it Dan, 26—— 29+ Conſecrate their prieſt and [et up Micahs 

images, JO, 3l- : ; 
N * thoſe days there wa no king in Iſrael #: and in 
thoſe days the * tribe of the Danites þ ſought them 


7; 6 97 n inheritance to dwell in,for unto that day all cheir in- 


2b; 25s 
* Joſh: 
I9: 47+ 


f Heb: 
ſme, 


heritance had not fallen unto them c among the tribes 
of Iſrael- 

a Not long after Jeſbua's death, of which ſee on Judges 192 6. b1.E. 
A part or branch of that Tribe,conſiſt:ng ovly of 600 Men of Warz 
v; 16. with their Families, v: 21. or, # Family »f the Danites ; for the 


word. Schebet, which properly ſignifies a 7rr:bs, is ſomerimes taken : 


for a Family, as Juage: 20312. «s elſewhere Family is put for a Tribez 
as Zech: 12: 13z c The Lot had fallen to them before this time, 
Joſh: 19: 4, &c. but not th: aQtual poſſefiion of their Lot, becauſe 
cherein the Philiſtines and Amorites oppoled them, not without ſuc- 
ceſs. Joſh; 19: 40. Judges 1: 34+ ; | 

2 And the chiidren of Dan ſent of their family d 
five men from their coafts, F men of vailour,from Zo- 


rah, and from Eſhtaol e, to ſpy out the larid, and to 


ſearch it, and they ſaid unto them, Go,ſfearch che land : 
who when they came to mount Ephraim to the houſe 
of Micah, they lodged there f. | 

a Which ſhews that it was but one, thovgh a krge Family,which 
was engaged in this Expedition. e Of whici ſee Joſh: 19: 41. Judges 
13: 2, 25. f Not in the ſame Houſezbut near 1t,as appears from the 
next Verſe, in a neighbouring place. . 

. 3 When they were by the houſe of Micah, they knew 
the voice of the young man the Levite g: and they 
eurned in thither, and ſaid unto him, Who brought 
thee thither ? and what makeſt chou in this place b? and 
what haft thou here 2? 

g Either, r. By bis manner of pronounciation, which was differing 
and diſtinguiſhable io ſeveral Tribes, as appears from ?»dges 12: 6. 
Mark 14: 70, Or, 2. By the &&iebration of ſome part of his Office, 
which they then lodging in the ne!ghbourhood, might be invited 
to. Or rather, 3.By ſom< acquaintance which ſome of them former- 
ly had with him. which chey might have upon many occaſions. 
b This being not thy uſual Place, nor proper for tay Employment. 

4 And he ſaid unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Mi- 
cah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his prieſt. 

5 And they ſaid unto him, Ask counſel,we pray thee, 
of God z, that we may know whether our way which 
we £0 ſhall be proſperous. | 

i To wit, by thine Ephoa, or Teraphim, or Images,which they knew 
he had, v: 14. ; : 

6 And the prieſt {aid unto them, Go in peace: be- 
fore the LORD 3s your way k wherein ye go. 

k i.e. Your Journey or Deſign is under the Eye of GOD; i. e. 
under his Care and ProteQtion, and Dire&iony which the Eye of GOD 
being »pon a perſon, commonly notes in Scripture, as Pſal: 32: 8. and 
34: 15+ Compare Fer: 39: 12. and 403: 4. So the Paraſe is here 
taken in a reſtrained ſenſe, which is elſewhere taken more largely, 
as Prov? 5: 21. This Anſwer he either feigns to gratifie their Hu- 
mour; Or, did indeed receive from the Devil. who transformed him- 
ſelf into an Angel of Light, and in GOD'S Name gave them An: 
ſwers, and thoſe nor ſeldom very true.which GOD ſuffered for the 
trial of his People : See Deut: 13: 1, 2, 3. But it is obſervable,thac 
his Anſwer was,as the Devil's Oracle: uſually were, ambiguous, and 
ſuch as might have been interpreted either way as they had ſuccefs 
or diſappointment. 

7 «4 Then the five men departed, and came to Laiſh 
Land ſaw the people that were therein, how rhey dwelt 


careleſs, after the manner of the Zidonians m, quier, 


0 EX 


were far from the Zidonians o, and had no bufineſs 
with «ny man p. 

I Called alſo Leſhem, Jejh: 19: 47- 
Place, and abounding in Wealth, and undeiſtanding that they were 
not a part of that Land which GOD gavetoh's People; and percei« 
ving that the Jſraelites never attempted any thing againſt them, were 
grown ſecure and careleſs » Or, that might rebuke or pumjh any 
thing ; 1. e. any Crime; Heb: that might put any thing to ſhame, or, 
make any thing ſLameful. Putting to fbame ſeems to be uſed Meto« 
nymically for inflicting Civil Puniſhment, becauſe ſhame is general 
Iy the adjuatt or effe&t of it, o Who otherwiſe could have tuccour- 
ed them, and would have been ready to do it. p No League or 
Confederacy, nor much Converſe wich other Cities, »r being ina 
pleaſant and plentiful Soil, between the tx oRivo/ers of Jor and Dan, 
not needing Supplies from others, and therefore mindirgg only their 
own Eale and Pleaſure. : 

8 And they camejunto their brethren to Zorah, and 
Eſhtaol, and their brethren faid unto them, What ſay 
ye ? on 

9 And they ſaid, Atiſe, that we may go up againſt 
them : for we have ſeen the land, and behold, it is ve- 
ry good 3 and are ye ſtill q? Be not flothful to go, nd 
to enter to poſſeſs the land. | 

9 Heb: ſilent ? Silence is oft put for fileſs or ceſſation from ation or 
motion, as Exed: 147 14. Iſa: 62: 1. Lament: 2: 18 For they do 
not accuſe rhem for want of ſpeaking, for that they did ; but 
for want ofdoing, and puting their words and reſolves into exes 
CUTIONe 

Io When ye go, ye fha)l come unto a people ſecure, 
and to a large land : for God hath given it unto your 
hand r : a place where there is no want ot any thing, 
that is 1n the earth, 

y This they gather partly from GOD'S Word or Promiſe, which 
they ſuppoſed they had from the Levices Mouth ; and partly from his 
Providence, which hath ſo diſpoſed them, that they will-be an eaſy 
Prey to you. 

Ir 9 And there went from thence of che family [ 
of the Danites out of Zorah, and out of Eſhtaol fix 


hundred men, f appointed with weapons of war. 


Family. 

12 Andthey went up and pitched in Kirjath-jearin 
t in Judah : wherefore they called that place Mahaneh- 
dan, unto this day ; behold it x behind Kirjath-jeas 
rim «, 


t Called Kirjath-baaly Joſh, 15. Gor a City lying in the Northern 
Parts of Judah in the Road to Laiſh; yet not in the City, bur in 
the Fields belonging to it, as the following words evince, « i. e. 


. Weſt-ward from it, as the Weſtern Sea is called the hindermo# Sem, 


Deut, 11. 24+ and as on the contrary, the Eaſt 1s called Kedem, which 
ſignifies rhe fore-part. 


13 And they paſled thence untomount Ephraim,and 


' they came unto the houle of Micah x. 


* i.e. To the Town in which his houſe was, for they Were not 
yetentred into it. 


14 © Then anſwered 'y the five men that went to 


' ſpy out the countrey of Laiſh, and ſaid unto their bre- 


thren, Do ye know that there is in thoſe houſes z an 
ephod, and teraphim, and a graven infage, and a mo!- 
ten image 2 Now therefore conſider what 'ye have to 
do 4. 

y i.e. Spake. the wofd anſwering being oft uſed in Scripture of 
the firſt Speaker, as 1 Kings 1. 28. and 13. 7. Ezra 10. 2. Iſa. 14 iO. 
Z 1. e« In one of theſe Houſes, the P:ural Number for the Singular, 
as Judges 12.7, # Whether it be nor expedient ; either, 1. Ts 
conſult them again for your ewn ſatisfation ; or, rather, 2. Torake 


them away for your further uſe, as you ſhal have occaſion 35 for their 
Attion is the beſt Comment upon their words. 


I ; And they turned thitherward, and came to the 
houſe of the young man the Levite, even unto the houſe 
of Micah, and Þ ſaluted him 6. 


commonly put for Health and Proſperity. 

16 And the fix hundred men-appointed with their 
weapons of war, which were of the children of Dan, 
{tood by the entring of the gare. ; 

17 And the five men that went to ſpy out the land 
went up, «nd came in thither c, and took the graveri 
image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the mol- 
ren image, and the prieft ſtood in the entring of the 


gate d with the fix hundred men 7hat' were appointed ' 


with weapons of war. 


c To wit, into the Houſe, and that part of it, where thoſe things 


were. 4 Whether they had drawn him forth, that they might with= 
out noiſe or hindrance take them away, 


18 And theſe e went into Micahs houſe: and fetch- 
ed the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim,an# 
the molteri image ; then ſaid the prieſt unto them, 
What do ye f 7 | 
_ e To wit, the five mentioned, v. 17. f Whatdo you mean to do? 
I hope you will net do ſo Impious and Injurious an Aion. 

i9 And they faid unto him, Hold thy peace, lay 
thy hagd upog thy on £, and go with us, and be 

2 3 t& 


Chap. XVII 
and ſecure, and there 45 no + magiſtrate in the land t Heb? F 
that might put them to ſhame in any thing =, and they oY 
ſtrains, | 
; 1 Sam; | 
2 Who living in a very ſtrong 9g: 174 


+ Heb: 
ſ By which it again appezrs, That the 7ribe, v3 r. is put for girded, 


t Heb? | 
b Heb. asked him of Peace; i. e. if he were in Peacey Peace being acked him 
of peace - 


pra rE EIT ET * EPL; CVDRS—c 
re eng ted = 
rr I ena rar tt re WO EI eee 


Hf Heb. 


that thou 


| 


| + Heb. 
bitter of 
{ſoel. 


* Toſh. 
19. 47» 


ap. XVIII. 


though placed before this, 


2) D 
to us a father, and a prieſt hb: Is it better for thee to be 


a prieſt unto the houſe of one man, or that thou be a 


, —P 4 
: ft unto a tribe, and a family 7 in Iſrael ? | 
_ Be ſilent, as this Phraſe 1s uſed, Job 21+ 5- and 29! 9: —_ 
0: 4+ Prov. 30: 32. The ſame thing repeated 1n other mou P - 
*”_ Judges 17. 10+ 7 To wit, a tribe, that is, ( and being oft pur ” 
that is ) # family. For it is certain this was not an 5; nog 1a n - 
whole Tribe, which numbred 64000 Men, Numb. 26. 43: args ly 
of one Family, which it ſeems were more vexed with the P/t os 
or Amorites, and therefore reſolved to ſcek new pon: of a £ _ 
diſtance from them. And after this time we tind the Body nk , 
Danites in their od and proper Portions in Samſor's times Which, 
was long after 1t. 
20 And the prieſts heart was glad &, and he took the 
ephod, and the. teraphim, and the graven image, and 


t in the midft of the people /. | | 
"© Doing wholly governed by his own Intereſt, and making all his 


igati uſtice and Gratitude give place to it. Butir 15 not 
ee — was before perfidious to God, ſhould prove ah 
Mcn. 1 i. e. Among the People : or properly in the midſt,both # 
the greater ſecurity of ſuch precious things, and that Micah mig _ 
nct be able to come at him, either to injure or upbraid jm; and, 
it may be, becauſe that was the place where the Ark uſed to be car- 


ed, ; 
"mi So they turned and departed,and pur the little ones, 


and the catrel, and the carriage before them . 

2 For theis greater ſecurity, if M:caþ ſhould purſue them. 

22 4 And when they were a good way from the houſe 
of Micah the men that were in the houſes near to M1- 
cahs houſe, were gathered together, and overtock the 

ildren of Dan. 

— And they cried unto thechildren of Dan:and they 

turned their faces, and ſaid unto Micah, What ails thee, 

+ that thou comeſt with fuch a company ? S 
24 And heſaid,Ye have taken away my gods, which 


gather- T made », and the prieſt, and ye are gone away: and 
ea rogerbere i, hit have ] more 0? 


and what # this that ye fay unto 


e, What aileth thee ? 
ks far was he beſotted with Superſtition and Idolatry, that he 
eſtecmed thoſe gods, which were Man's work» But he could oo 
be ſo ſtupid, as to think theſe were 1nleed the Grear FEHOYAH that 
maie H-aven and Earth ; but only a lower ſort of gods, by whom, 
as Mcdiaters, he off:red his worth-p unro the true GOD, as 1t1s 
man. felt. divers of the Heathens did. # 1 value nothing I have In 
c mpariſo of what you have taken away. Which zeal for ons 
triſh may ſhame mujtirudes rhat call themſclves Chriſtians, io yer 
appareirly value their worldly Conveniencies more than all the 
Concerns even of the rrue Religion, and of their own Salvation. 

25 © Ard the children of Dan faid unto him, oo 
not thy voice p be heard among us: leſt + angry tel- 
lows q run upon thee, and thou loſe thy life 7, with che. 


lives of thy :10uſhold. . 
2 Thy liars and Reproaches. 9q The Soldiers who are in 
themſelves ſha;p and fierce, and wiil ſoon be enflamed by thy _ 
voking words. r Which, no: withſtan.4ing all thy Pretences, ! ”y 
d:f value m re than thy Images, as indeed appeared from his tol- 
lowing praCtice- +1 : py 

26 And the children of Dan went their way: and 
when Micah ſaw that they were too ſtrong for him, he 
eurned, ar:d went back unto his houſe. 

27 And thef took zhe rbings which Micah had made, 
and the prieſt which he had, and came unto Laith, unto 
a peopie that were at quiet, and lecure, and they {mote 
them with the edge of the ſword, and burnt the city 
wich fire /. | 

{ Nor who'ly, but in great meaſure, to ſtrike the greater terror 
*nto the Inhabitants, and to make their Conquelt of the Place more 


caſte. . R f 
28 And there was no deliverer, becauſe it was far from 


" Zidon, and they had no buſineſs with any man : and it 


was in the valley that /i&th by Beth-rehob z, and they 


buiit a city, and dwelt thereins q 
r A place near Libanus and Hamath; of which ſee Numb: 13: 21. 
oſþ 19: 28 and 21+ 31+» Jucges Is 3l . 
p 29 And they called the name of the * city Dan, af- 
ter the name of Dan their father «, who was born un- 


to Iſrael » howbeit, the name of the city was Laiſh at 
the firft. 


u that it might be manifeſt, that they belonged to the Tribe of 
Dan, though they were ſeated at a great diſtance from them,even in 
the moſt Northeriy part of rhe Land : whereas the Lot of theic Tribe 
was in the Southern part of Cans an. 

'20 © And the children of Dan fet them up the 
graven image * : and Jonathan the ſon of Gerihom, 
the ſon of Manaſleh, he, and his ſons were priefts to 


the tribe of Dan, until the day of the captivicy of the 


and y. | 
. Xx Having ſucceeded in their Expedition according to the predi- 
Qion which, as thy ſuppoſed, they had from this Image, they had 
2 great veneration for its y Either 1. When the Ark and the 1/ra- 
elites were taken Captives by the Philiftmes, 1 Sams 4: 10, IIs Though 
there is no mention of any who were then taken Captives, or that 
the Philiſtines did purſue the Victory, and Conquer the Land at that 
time, for their Victory was quickly damped, and rurned to Mourn- 
ingy 1 $4 5: Or, 2. Afrer that time, when the Phil:ftines flew 
Saul and Jonathan and diſcomfired the whole Hoſt of Jrae!, and 
made the reſt of the People flec out of their Cites, and took Poſſcl- 


= = 3 
ſion of their Cities and Land. Or, 3. When the whole Land of the 


ten Tribes, whereof Dan was one, was Conquered, and the People 
carried Captive by the 4ſjrian, 2 Kings 17,6, 23. which is called by 
way of Eminency, the Captivity, x Chron. 5. 22. But againſt this it 
:s objetted, That it 1s not probable that this Idolatry ſhou!d con- 
tinue ſo long in ſuch a publick place and manner * or that Day: 7 
and Solomon would ſuffer is 4}. It is not ſaid, that the graven 7 
mage was there 1o long, for that is reſtrained to a ſhorter date, even 
to the continuance of the Ark in Shiloh, v. 31. which was removed 
thence, 1 $2». 4. But only that Jonathan's Poſterity were Priefts 
to this Tribe or Family of Dan, which they might be under all the 
changes, even till the 4ſjrian Captivity, ſometimes more openly and 
allowedly, ſometimes more cunningly, ſometimes more ſecretly, 
ſometimes in one way of Superſticion or Idolatry, and ſometimes 
in another ; and, in and after Jer:boaw's time, in the Worſhip of the 
Cilves, for which ſervice, though he did make Prieſts cf the mean- 
eſt of the People, 1 Kings 128 31+ yet that was not by choice, but our 
of necefſity, becauſe the Prieſts and Levites generally forſook him, 
2 Chron: 11: 13, I4+ and therefore when he could engage any of the 
Prieſts or Levites in that ſervice, he was doubt'eſs very glad of them 
to gain Reputation to his impious and abſurd Device. 

31 And they ſet up Micah's graven image, which 
he made, all the time that the houſe of God was in 
Shiloh, 


CHAP. XX 


A Levite's Coneubine runs from him to her Father's Houſe at Bethlehcm : 
He goeti to fetch her back # Is kindly entertained by her Father : He depart; 
and comes to Gibeah of Benjamin : Ani his Concubine with him, 1j=—=—=14. 
an old man of Mount Ephraim entertains them, x5 ==2xr. The men of the 
Ci y encompaſs the Houſe : to Debauch the Levite, who through ncceſſi: y 
delivers unto them his Concubine, m hows th:y Abuſe to Death, 22==28. 
He carrieth her Boay home : Divideth it into twelve Parts: Smaeth them 
into all the Coats of Iſrael, 29, 30. 


AN it came to paſs in thoſe days a * , when there 

was no king in Ifrael, that there was a certain 
Levite ſojourning on the fide þ of mount Ephraim, who 
rock to him F a cencubine c ouc of Bethlehem-Ju- 
dah. 


a Of which ſee on Judges 17. r: 
the ſides, as Verſe 18. c Heb. @ Wife, a Comcubine, i. e. ſuch a Con- 
Cubine as was alſo his Wife, as appears from we 3. 4, 5, 7, 9, 26, 27. 
and Judges 20; 4. See of theſe Gen? 223 24. and 25: 10 

2 And his concubine played the whore againſt him 
4, and went away from him e unto her fathers houſe 
to Bethlehem-Judah, and was there || + four whole mo- 
neths f. 

d 1.e. Againſt her Faith given to him, or to his wrong ; or, with 
him, 1.e. in his Houſe ; or whileſt ſhe lived with him, which IS OP- 
poſed to her going away, which here follows. e Either for fear of 
his ſevere Rebukes or Puniſhment ; or, becauſe her heart was alie- 
nated from him. f Heb. ſome days, to wity four moneths; or, a year 
( fo days commonly ſignifie ) and four moneths; wherein not only ſhe 
ſinned, but her Father by ſome indulgence and connivance at her 
Sin, and neglett of juſt endeavours for her recon:iliation to her Hul. 
band, the 1ll effets whereof he ſpeediiy felt, in the loſs of his 
Daughter iv fo dreadful a manner. 


3 And her husbandaroſe,and went after her to ſpeak 
+ friendly unto her g, and to bring her again 6, having 
his ſervant with him, and a couple of ajſes i : and ſhe 
brought him into her fathers houſe : and when the fa- 
ther of the damſel ſaw him, he rejoyced to meet him &. 
s Or, to ſpeak to her heart, 1. e. kindly and comfortably, as that 
Phrale is taken, Gen. 50. 2 1» Ho. 2. 14+ to offer her Pardon and 
Reconciliatton,and Reſtitution to her former State. h To wit,to his 
own Houſe. # Partly, for himſelf or his Wife to ride upon, as 
there was occaſion ; and partly, for carrying their Proviſion, as ap- 


pears from v. 19. & Hoping the breach would be made up by this 
MEANSe 


4 And his father in law, the damſels father, retain- 
ed him, and he abode with him three days : ſo they did 
eat and drink, and lodged there. 

5 C4 Andit came to paſs on the fourth day, when 
they aroſe early in the morning, that he roſe up to de- 
part : and the damfels father {aid unto his ſon in law, 
+ Comfort thy heart with a morſel of bread, and after- 
ward £0 your way. 

6 And they fate down and did eat and drink both of 
chem together : for the damſels father had ſaid unto the 
man, Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and 
let thine heart f be merry. 


law urged him : therefore he lodged there again. 
8 And he roſe early in the morning on the fifth day 
to depart, and the damſels father ſaid, Comfort thine 


and they did eat both of them. 

9 And when the man roſe up to depart, he, and his 
concubine, and his ſervant, his father in law, the dam- 
ſels father faid unto him,Behold, now the day F draw- 
eth towards evening, I pray you tarry all night : be- 


on your Way, that thou mayeft go + home: 

{ Heb. -F is the encamping time of the day, i. e. the Evening, when 
Armies having marched in the day, begin to pitch their Camp; 
or, when the Sun that makes the day, begias to 'encamp himſelf, ap 


g0 


6 Heb. in the ſides, i.e. in one of concubine, 


ftreng:uch 


; . + Heb 
7 And when the man roſe up to depart, his father in 4 ps” 


heart, I pray thee. And they tarried + until afternoon, + Heb. 
| the anj 
clineds | 


, is We. 
hold, + the day groweth to an end 1, lodge here that + Heb. | 
thine heart.may.be merry, and to morrow get ye carly i: rhe pit 
ing $11? 4 
the day? 


Chap. XIY, P 


* Chap; 
17. G. as 
18, T. aid 
21. 25, 
4 Hb, s 


woman, 4 


or, a wiſe a 
concubing, 


|| Or, 2 
year and 
fortr month; 
f Days fir 
0uthin 


T Heb. 


her hear; 


f Heb: 
Son» of 
LR 


Chap: 


f Heb. 


7 Heb» 


! 


f Heb. I] 
thy $61 


*Cenz 1 


'® JUDGES. 
$ (hiP- XIX. | 7 
v, 9 o 
\ ward reſt « fo it is 4 Poetical expreſſion taken from hence, That | wl rongh 
Es lic be ſers, ſcems to vulgar eyes to go to reſt. wicked deſign of knowing him Carnally. Compare Gen: 19: 5. where 
” wa But the man would not tarry than night, but he | the ſame Phraſe pier: that ſenſe upon a 1ik- occaſion. But though 
; nl : they name only the Man ; yet it is plain from the following re!a- 
Ltfeb: £0 roſe up, and departed, and came + over againſt Jebus |**Y J 5 | g 


, e il; tion, that their Deſign was principally upon the Woman, and there- 
jous fadled, his concubine alſo was with him, 


ſs) him. es I 
ir And when they were by Jebus, the day was far] ' 23 And * the man, the maſter of the houſe, went out TW <t1: 19 
{pent, and the ſervant ſaid unto his maſter, Come, I unto them, and ſaid unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, ,, 
pray thee, and let us turn in unto. this city of the Jebu- |1 pray you do not ſo wickedly, lcing that this man is 
fitzs, and lodge in it. come into mine houſe «, do not this folly. 
: po Rd his maſter {aid unto him.We will not turn a- |. - And therefore Iam obliged to prote& him by the Laws of Hos 
ys : . B. . ſpitaliry. Compare Ger? 19: 7, 8. 
i o the city of a ftranger mz that is nor of the |* ; 
rootrone of Iſrael : wa will call c0ce to Gibeah. 24 Behold, here 5s my daughter, a maiden, and his 
par e. Of a ftrange Nation : which the Cmmaanites poſleſs; for concubine, them I wall _ wn bs b, fone 17 com 
though the City Jeruſalem had been taken by Caleb, Judges 1. yet the [ye them, and co with them what cemet 8909 unto | 
ftrong Fort of Zim was {till in their hands, 2 Sam: 5: 6, 7» whence you : but unto this man do not | {o vile a thing. + Heb: zZe 
it is likely they did much moleſty and afrerwards by God's permiſ-| 5 He offers this to avoid a greater and more unnatural! Sin, which matter of 
Gon, and for the punithment of their Sin, drive out the Jraelites | he thought they deſigned ; but it ſeems they did not, their abuſe this foly, 
who dwelt there. being confined to the Woman, and not extended to the Man, who 


Chap. RX. 


what Perſon he had bronght among them, and yet carry on their 


aP 
» alk 
# ans 


7 

b. s 
,, 4 
In, 
Wiſe 4 


8 
N14 


r, 4 
and 
m0nghs, 
ay; fi 
hos 


eb. 


heart, 


12 And he faid unto his ſervant, Come, and letus 
draw near to one of theſe places to lodge all night, in 
Gibeah, or in Ramah »» | 

2 Both which places lay in Benjamin's Portion, a little North: 


ward from Jeru{alem, and in the Road from Bethlehem-Judah to Gi- 
beah. 


14 And they paſſed on, and went their way, andthe 
ſun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, 
which belongeth to Benjamin os 

o This is aided to difference it from another Gibeah in Judah, Fol: 


15:57. Poffibly this is that which was called Gibeah of Saul, 1 Sam: 
Il; 4+ 


down in a ſtreet of the city : for there was no man 
that took them into his houſe to lodging p. 

p Though they were ſoft and effeminate in other reſpeCts, yet 
they were hard=hearted towards Srrangers or indigent perſons E1- 
th2r thzre were no pub/ick Houſes to receive and entertain Travel- 
lers, as may be gathered from Gen: 28: and 42: and 45> and Joſh: 
9, ©c. or, if there were ſuch an one here, they might perceive it 
to be a very wicked Houſe. as being in ſo leud a place, and there- 
fore mighr decline it, and expe& that ſ-me private perſon would ex- 
erciſe Hoſpitality ro them, as perſons of any worth uſed to dog as 
Gen: 183 1, 2, 3, 4. and 1931, 2. Heb; 13: 2. F 

16 4 And behold, there came an old man from his 
work, out of the field at even,which was alſo of mount 
Ephraim q; and he ſojourned in Gibeah, but the men 
+Heb: Of Che place-were | Benjamites 7. 

Sim: of Je= q Whence alſo the L:wvite was, which obliged and enclined him 

milk. to ſhew rhe more kindnels to his Countrey-man. r This was in- 

Chap: 3:15, deed one of rhe Cities belonging to the Prieſts, Joſh: 21. x Chron. 6. 
bur you conſider that the Cities which were given to the Prieſts, 
and whereof they were Profeſſors and Owners, were not inhabited 
by the Prieſts or Lwwites only, eſpecially atriisrime when they were 
bur f w i number. bu- .y many otixcr p-rſo.:s - f differing Profel- 
ſions and Callin ys, which was neceflary for their conveniency. 

17 And when he had lift up his eyes, he ſaw a way- 
faring man in the ſtreet of the city : and the old man 
ſaid, Whither goeſt thou ? and whence comeſt thou ? 

18 And he faid unto him We are paſſing from Beth- 
lehem-Judah, rowa:d che ſide of mount Ephraim, from 
thence am I: and I went to Bethlehem-Judah, bur I am 
ow going to the houſe of the LORL /, and there 3s 

« no man that Þ receiveth me to houſe. 

ſ Which was in Sh:loh, Joſh: 18t r. and 222 12. Thither he wenr, 
either becauſe he !ived there, for that was in che Tribe of Ephraim ; 
ory rather, becauſe te would there offer Prayers and Praiſes, and 
Sacrifices unto GOD, for his M=-rcy in reco:cihng nimand his Wife 
together, and for his Bleſſing upon them again, and to maks atone- 
menc for his Wite. 

19 Yet there is both ſtraw and provender for our aſ- 
ſes, and there is bread and wine alſo for me, and for 
thy hand-maid, and for the young man which is with 
thy ſervants: zhere is no want of any thing. 

| 29 And the old man ſaid, Peace be with thee : how- 
*Genz19: Toever Ver all thy wants lie upon me 7, * only lodge not 
2, in the ſtreet. 

t It matrers not whether thou wanteſt nothing or every thing, I 
w1ll take care to ſupply all thy Wants. 

21 0 he brought him into his houſe, and gave pro- 
vender unto the aiſes: and they walhed their feer u,and 
did eat and drink. 


u As they uſed ro do to Travellers in thoſe hot Countries, Gen: 
18: 4+-and 19: 2. and 24: 32, Oc 

-22 © Now as they were making their hearts merry 
'Hof.g:g, *> Þ&hoId, the mey of the city, certain * ſons of Be- 
| euno;y, lial y, beſer the houſe round abour. and beat at the door, 
and ſpake to the maſter ot the houſe, the old man, ſay- 
ing, Bring forth the man that came into thine houle, 

that we may know him &. | 
x 1.e. Refr-ſhing themiclves with rhe Proviſions ſer before them. 
9 Wicked and Licentious Men; ſee Deur: 13:13, 2 Anambigucus 
expreſſion ; whereby they pretended only & delire to know and ſee 


alſo was in their power, if they had luſted afrer him. Bur this of. 
ter was ſinful, becauſe he offered thar which was nor in his, nor 1n 
the Man's power to diſpoſe of, even the Chaſtity of his Daughter, 
and the mans Wife; and becauſe no man muſt do any evil, though 
never ſo ſmall, for the prevention of any evi! of Sin or Miſery, or for 
the procuring of the greateſt good, Rom: 3- 8 though this Sin was 
much mirigated by his Ignorance, by his honeſt and generous In- 
tention of ProteCting a Stranger ; by the force which was in ſome 
ſort put upon him, and by the tuddenneſs and violence of the Tem- 
' PratiGNe ; | 

25 But the men would not hearken to him : ſo the 
'man took his concubine c, and brought her forth unto 


'them, and they knew her,and abuſed her all the nighe, 


[until che morning : and when the day began to ſpring, 
15 And they turned afide thither to go in, «nd to ; they let her go. | 


lodge in Gibeah : and when he went in, he fate him | 


c Being willing to expoſe her, rather. than the Daughter of his 
Hoſt, who had exprefſzd ſuch a ſingular care and affeftion for 
him. 


26 Then came the woman in the dawning of the 


day, and fell down 4 at the door of the mans houſe, 
where her lord e was, till ic was light. 

d To wit, dead, as the foilowing words ſhew, and asthe word is 
ofr uſed, as Exod: 19: 2:« Pſal: 823 7. and 91:7» Hoſe 5: 5. killed, 
partly with grief of heart, and partly with cxceffive abuſe of her 
Body, of which there have been divers inſtances. Thus the Sin ſhe 
formerly choſe; wv. 2, is. now her Deſtrutin; and though her 
husband pardoned her, God would pu-iſh er, at Jezſt as to this 
life. e Sy he is called. either becavſe he was her hunsband ; for 
which cauſe Sarah called Abravam lord, 1 Pet: 3: 6. or becauſe ſhe 
had been his maid-ſervant, as Cor.c.bines oftenrimes were ; as Gen. 
303 3» 9 | : 

; 27 And her lordrolſe up in the morning, and open- 
ed the doors of the houſe, and went out to go his way: 


_ and behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down 


at the door of the houſe, and her hands were upon the 
threjhoid f. | 


f The poilure either of one that had fallen down ; or of one 
that was laid down to fleep, her haiids or Arms ( for the Hebrew 
word ſignifies borh ) leaning upon the threſhld, and being pur 
under her head ; and therefore he thcught to awake ner, and raiſe 
her up. 

' 28 And he ſaid unto her, Up, and letgus be going. 
; Burt none anſwered g: then the man trookMer up upon 
an aſs, and the man roſe up, and gat him into his 
place. 

g For ſhe was dead, as is ſaid, Judges 20% 5. 

29 4 And when he was come into his houſe,he took 
a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided 
her, together with her bones h, into tweive pieces z, and 
ſent her into ail the coaſts of Iſrael &. 

h Or, according to her bonesy according to the joynts of her Body; 
for there 2e made tie diviſion. This might ſeem tobe a barbarous 
and inhuman Act in it ſelf; but may ſeem excuſable, if it be conſi- 
dercd, thar rhe ſadneſs of che SpeCtacle did highly contribure to 
ſtir up rhe Zeal of all the 1ſrael:tes ro avenge his Concubines death, 
aad to execute Juſtice upon \uch profligate Offenders; and was nes 
ceſlary, etpecially in this time of Anarchy and genera! Corruption, 
Judges 17; 6. to awaken them our of that Lethargy,' in which ail the 
T1ibes lay. # That one ptec: might be ſerit to every Tribe; where- 
of none to Levi, becauſe they would meet with it in every Tribe, 
being diſperted among them; but one ro Benjamin ; for he might 
well pretume, that rhey would :s much abhor fo villanous an Aﬀi- 
on, though done by ſome of their own Tribe, as any of the reſt. 
k By ſeveral meſſengers, by whom allo he ſent a particular Relati- 

: on of the Fatt. 2 | 
| 30 And it wasfſo, that all that faw it, ſaid, There 
was no ſuch deed / done nor ſeen from the day that 
'the children of Ifrael came up out of che land of E- 


gypt, unto this day x connder of it, take advice, and 

{peak your minds m. SEES | 
1 So wicked and abominable. mz Let us meer together, and feri- 

ouſly confiver,and every one freely ſpeak what is to be done in this 


Ccale- 

CHAP. XX. 

The Iſraslites aſſemble at Mizpeh : The Levite declares his wrong, f—8. 
Their azcree, 9 - --— I2. They require the Delinquents of the Benja= 
mites ts ao juſtice on them: They are denied 1 3mu——_s. Waereupor 
having conſulted God, they march to fight againſt them : Are twice 
foiled ; And loſe fourty thouſand men, 19 —— 26. Being humbledy 


2K 4 and 


- = 
—_— — ———— Om gen yn—nn—n—— - OO — = 


Þ 

| 
[| 
[ 


hap. X 


nad 


near Lebanon ; and Bee!ſbcba 


: 


4 Heb: the 


Corners. 


+ Heb: the 
man the 
Levitee 


+ Heb: 
humbled. 


on” | 7 U D 


by a ftratagem, deftroy 
) and burnt their 


d.6 
ceins! # Revelation from GOD, they, 
_— = Aag-tel —_ foT: ( who fled away, 
Ges 97 ales chi tb, andthe 
Hen all the childrenof Iſrael - went out 5, 
the congregation was gathered _— —_ 
man e, from Dan even to Beerſheba 4, wich the 1an 


of Giicad e, unto the LORD f, in Mizpeh g. 7 gs 
4 i. e. A great number,and peciaty rs a 677 ob od on = 5, 
« 1amin, Vi 3, 12+ b From their ileveral 214 JNS- C le &e 
Wah Oy A Dan was the Northern border of the "pa 
the Southern border, Gen: 21: 33+ om 
4 25. « Beyond Jordan, where Reuben, Gad, and ha | 
Manaſſeh were. f Asro the LORD'S Tribunal : for GOD prabpry 
only preſent in the place where the Ark and Tabernacle gw we” 
ſo in the Aſſemblies of the gods, or 24 gg By ior 5: Koquii 
places where God's name 15 recorded, FE >: $1 girl 
6 t rogether in his name, Mat. 18: 20, for his : 
fck for Counſel and Mercy from him : compare Juages 11: fy bs £ 
A place in the borders of Judah and Benjamin, and therefore a on c 
to both of them, Joſhi x5: 38+ and 18: a6 Eh they = va th Pn 
| d proper in many reſpects - Firity, as 2 place 
wag EN "> lt wr-s 096 «xt Judges Jos 17. m ey a 
. 6 and 10: 17- Secondly, For its convenie 
for all lhe Tribes - Foc py pramange' Iorolay. gage FH OY 
he -here the Fa& was done, that it mig 
———— and not far from Shiloh, where the Tabernacle 
was, whither they might go or ſer, if need were, 


the chief b of all the people, ever of all the 
aries FTE-ael, preſented themfelves in the aſſembly of 
the people of God, four hundred thouſand z foot-men 


t drew ſword. | 

” ok the corners, i. e. The Nobles and Rulers, which are ofc ſo 
called, becauſe like corner-ſtones they beth unite, and ſupport, and 
adorn the whole Building. # Or, and four hundred thouſand; It is an 
Eilipfis of the Particle [ and } of which Examples have been given 
beforetfor the chief of the People were not ſo many;burt the common 
Soldiers, and theſe were all Foot-men; whereas many of the _ 
rode pon Horſes,or Aſſes, Judges 5: 19. and 1074. and 12:14. The 
number is here ſet down, to ſhew both their Zeal and forwardneſs 
in puniſhing ſuch a Villany ; and the ſtrange blindneſs of the Ben- 
Tamites that durſt oppoſe 1o great and united Body ; and that the 
ſucceſs of Battels depends not upon great numbers, ſeing this 
great Hoſt was twice defeated by the Benjamites, but wholly upon 
GOD'S blefling. & For Horſe-men they had few or none in their 
Armies. 

2 (Now the children of Benjamin heard 7 that the 
Children of Iſrael were gone up to Mizpeh. ) Then 
{aid the children of Ifrael], Tell ws mm, how was this 
wickedneſs ? 

1 Like Perfops unconcerned and reſolved, they neither went nor 
ſent thither : partly from their own pride, and ſtubbornneſs, and 
ſelf-confidence: partly becauſe as they were loth to give up any of 
their Brethren to Juſtice, ſo they preſumed the other Tribes would 
never proceed to a War againſt them ; and partly from a Divine 
infatuation hardening that wicked Tribe to their own DeſtruQtion. 
» The Verb is of the Plural Number, becauſe they ſpeak ro the 
Levite and his Servant, and his Hoſt, who doubrieſs were preſent 
upon this occaſion. 

= And + the Levite n, the husband of the woman 
that was ſlain, anſwered and faid, I came into Gibzah 


that belongeth ro Benjamin, I and my concubine, to 


lodge. | 

» To whoſe Relation the other two gave their conſent. 

5 And Ws of Gibeah roſe up againſt me, and 
beſet the houſe round about upon me by night, and 
thought to have ſlain me 0: and my concubine have 
they Þ forced that ſhe is dead. | 

o Except I would either ſubmir to their unnatural Luſt, which 1 
was reſolved to withſtand even unro death; or deliver up my con- 
cubine ro them, which I was forced to do. © 0 

6 And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, 
and ſent her throughout all the countrey of the inheri- 
tance of Ifrael : for they have committed lewdneſs and 
folly p in lWrael. | 


? L ce. A lewd folly; moſt ignominious and impudent Wicked- 


pare 1 K'ngs 


_ Behold, ye are all children of Iſrael q, give here 


-our advice and counfkel. | 
? " The Sons of that Holy Man, who for one filthy Afton left an 
eternal brand npon one of his own Sons: a Pegplein Covenant with 
the Holy GOD, whoſe Honour you are obliged to vindicate, and 
who hath expreſly commanded you to puniſh all ſuch notorious 


Enormities. 


8 © And all the people aroſe as one man, ſaying, 
We will not any of «s go to his tent 7, neither will we 


any of us turn into his houſe: | | 
7 i. e. His habitation, to wit, until we have revenged this In- 


IS But now this ſhall be the thing which we will do 
to Gibeah, we will go xp by lot againſt it: 
to And we will take ten men of an hundred through- 
out all the tribes of Iſrael,and an hundred ot a chouſand, 
and a thouſand out of ten thouſand, to fetch vidual for 
the people, that they may do, when they come to Gi- 
beah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they 
have wrought /in Iſrael z. 


hat we may puniſh them as ſuch a, wickedneſs deſerves, e This 
25 ts: as an ctavetions that they ſhould do that in Iſrael, or a- 


G E S. 


mong GOD'S peculiar People, which was eſteemed abominable e. 
ven among the Heathen. 


11 SO all the menof Iſrael were gathered againſt the 
city, Þ knit together as one man. 

12 4 And the tribes of Iſrael ſent men through all ;; 
the tribe « of Benjamin, ſaying, What wickedneſs s 
this that 1s done among you ? 

« Hb. tribes : Either the Plural Number for the Singular : or ra. 
ther tribe is put for family, as was noted befare, as jamilies are elfe= 
where put for tribes. They take a wiſe and a juſt courſe, in ſending 
to all tic parts and families of the tribe, to ſeparate the Innocent 
tram the Guilty, and to give them a fair opportunity of preventing 
their ruine, by doing nothing but what their Duty, Honoury and 
Intereſt obliged them to; even by delivering up thoſe vile Male- 
factors, whom they could not keep without horrid guilt and ſhame 
and bringing the curſe of God upon themſelves. : 

13 Now therefore deliver the men, the children 
of Belial which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to 
death, and put away evil x from Iſrael : but the chil- 
dren of Benjamin would not hearken y to the voice of 
their brethren the children of Iſrael. 

x Both the Guilt and the Puniſment, wherein all Iſrael will be 
Involved, if they do not puniſh ir, y Partly from the pride of their 
Hearts, which made them ſcorn to ſubmit to their Brethren, or to 
ſuffer them to meddle in their Territory ; partly from a conceir of 
their own Valour and Military kill ; and partly from GOD'S juſt 
Judgement. : 

14 But the children of Benjamin gathered themſelves 
rogether out of che cities, unto Gibeah, to go out to 
battel againſt the children of Iſrael. 

15 And the children of Benjamin were numbred at 
that time our of the city, twenty and ſix thouſand men 
that drew {word ; beſide the inhabitants of . Gibeah, 
which were numbred ſeven hundred choſen men z. 

z Objc#, This agrees not with the following numbers: for all thar 
were ſlain of Benjamin were 25100 men, v. 35- and there were on. 
ly 600 thar ſurvived, v. 47. which make only 25700» Avſ, The 
other thouſand 'men were eirher left in ſome of their Cities, where 
they were ſlain, v. 48. or were cut off in the two firſt Battels, 
wherein it is unreaſonable to think they had an unbloody ViRtory: 
and as for theſe 25100 men, they were all flain in that day, i. e 
the day of the third Battel, as is affirmed wv. 35. : 

16 Among all this people, there were ſeven hundred 
choſen men * left-handed a,every one could ſling ſtones + 
at an hairs bregdtb, and not mils 6b. 

a Heb. ſbur up on their right hand, i. e. uſing their left hand inflead 
of their right. 4 An Hyperbolical expreſſion, ſignifying, that they 
could do this with great exa&neſs. There are many parallel] Inſtances 
in Hiſtorians, of Perſons that cc.uld throw Stones, or ſhoot Arrows 
with great certainty ſo as ſeldon1 or never to miſs Of which ſee 
my Latin Synopſis. And this was very confiderabley and one ground 
- the Berjamites confidence, becauſe in thoſe times they tad no 

uns. 

17 And the men of Iſrael c, beſide Benjamin, were 
numbred four hundred thouſand men that drew ſword, 
all theſe were men of war. 

c Towir, ſuchos were herepreſent, v. 2. for otherwiſe ic is moſt 
probable they had a far greater number of men, being 600000 bee 
foro their entrance into Canaan, Numb. I. 2. 

18 4 And the children of Iſrael 4 aroſe, and went 
up tothe houſe of God e, and * asked counſel of God, , Oar 
and ſaid, Which of us ſhal go up firſt to the battel f a- FP 
gainſt the children of Benjamin? Ard the LORD ſaid, 
Judah ſhall go up firſt. 

d 1. e- Some ſent in the name of all, e To wit, to $Shileh 
which was not far from Mizpeh, where they were. f This they ask 
to prevent Emulations.and contenricns ; but rhey do nor ask whether 6 
they ſhould go againſt them, or no, for that they knew they evght 
to do by the will of God already revealed : Nor yer do they {eck 
to GOD for his help by Prayer and Faſting, and Sacrifice. as in all 
reaſon they ought ro have done; but were confident of Succeſs,be- 
cauſe of their great Numbers, and Righteous Cauſe. 

19 And the children of Ifrael roſe up in the morn- 
ing, and encamped againſt Gibeah. 

20 And the men of Iſrael went out to battel againſt 
Benjamin, and the men of Ifrae] putthemſelves in aray 
to fight againſt them at Gibeah; 

21 And the children of Benjamin came forth out of 
Gibeah, and deſtroyed down to the ground of the Ifra- 
elites that day, twenty and two thouſand men Fg. 

g Queſt, Why would God ſuffer them to have ſo great a Joſs in ſo 
good a Cauſe ? 4vſ. Becauſe they had many and great Sins reigning 
amongſt themſelves, and they ſhould not þave come to fo great a 
work of God as this, with polluted hands, but ſhould have pulled 
the Beam our of their own Eye, before they attempred to tzke that 
out of their Brother Benjamin's Eye: which becauſe they did not, 
God doth it for them, meking them by this loſs more clearly to ſee 
their own fins, and their need of God's help, without which their 
great Numbers were inſignificant ; and bringing them through the 
Fire, that they might be purged from their Droſs; ir being probable 
that the great God who governs every ſtroke in Battels, did ſo order 
things, that their worſt and rotten Members ſhould be cut off, which 
was a great Bleſſing to the whole Common-wealth, 

22 And the people,the men of Hrael encouraged them- 
ſelves h, and ſer their battel again in aray, in the place 
where they putthemſelves in aray the firſt day 3, 

h Heb firengthned themſelves, partly by ſupporting themſelves 


lows, 


Chap: 
3:15: 


with the Conſcience of the Juſtice of their Cauſe, and the hopes 
© 


Chap. _ T 


T Heb, 


_— 
M4 + 


* Chap! 


> Yi TY _ y- way 


»S 4 {OY iy 


Chap: 
15. 


T Chap. XX. 


55 He BOTS 


of ſucceſs 3 and partly, by putting themſclves ia better order for 
defending themſelves, and annoying their Enemies. i Hereby ſhew- 
ing their freedom from that Heathniſh Superſtition, whereby they 
might have been apt to have rejefted that as an unlucky place- Com- 
are 1 Kings 20: 23z 28. - 
: 23 ( And the children of Ifrael went up and wept 
& before the LORD until even, and asked counſel of 
the LORD, ſaying, Shall I go up to barrel againſt the 
children of Benjamin my brother / 2 And the LORD 
ſaid, Go up againſt him ** .) f 

& Not ſo much for their Sins, as for their Defeat and Loſs, as ap- 
pears by the Sequel. / They impute their ill Succefs, nor to their 
own ſins, as they had great reaſon to do, but to their raking up Arms 
againſt their Brethren, the lawfulneſs whereof they now begin to 
doubt of- Bur ſtill rhey perſiſt in their former negle& of ſeeking 
GOD'S aſſiſtance in the way which he had appointed, as they them- 
ſelves acknowledge preſently, by doing thoſe very things which 
now they finfully negleCted, wv. 26. and therefore are again juſtly 
puniſhed, '.* God anſwers to their queſtion; but as they did nor 
deſire his aſſiſtance and ſucceſs, ſo he doth not promiſe it: | 

24 And the children of Iſrael came near againſt the 
children of Benjamin, the ſecond day. ; 

25 And Benjamin went forth againſt them out of Gi- 
beah the ſecond day, and deſtroyed down to the ground 
of the children of [Iſrael again, eighteen thouſand men, 
all theſe drew the ſword, 

26 C Then all the children of [frael, and all the 
people went up, and came unto the houſe of God, and 
wept, and fat there before the LORD, and faſted 
that day until even, and offered burnt-offerings », and 
peace-offerings o before the LORD. 

m Being new 1enſible of their former lightneſs, and not being 
trucly humbled for their Sins, which now they diſcover to be the 
true Cauſe of their ill ſucc<{s- » To make atonement to God for 
their own Sins« 0 Partly to bleſs God for ſparing fo many of them, 
whereas he might juitly have cut them off all of them when their 
Brethren were {l:in 3: and partly to implore his aſſiſtance for the fu- 
ture, and to give him Thanks for the Vi&ory, which new they 
were confident he would give them. 


27 And the children of Iſrael enquired of the LORD 
p, ( for the ark of the covenant of God was there q in 
thoſe days. 


2 To wit, by Urim and Thummim, Numb: 27: 2 q In Shiloh where 
they were now aſſ:mbled. 


28 And Phineas the ſon of Eleazar r the ſon of Aa- 
ron ſtood / before it t in thoſe days ) ſaying, Shall Iyer 
again gO out to batcel againſt the children of Benjamin 
my brother, or ſball I ceaſe « ? And the LORD faid, 


Go up, for to morrow I will deliver them into thine 
hand x. 


7 This is added to give us ſome light about the time of this Hiſtory, 
and to ſhew it was not dore 1n the order in whych it is here placed, 
afcer Samſon's Death, but long before. ſ i. e. Miniſtred, as the word 
fand ofc ſignifies, as Deut. 10, 8. and 18. 7. Prov. 22. 29. Jer. 
52. 12. Compare With 2 Kings 25.8, becauſe ſtanding is the uſual 
poſture of Servants. 7? 1. e. Before the Ark : or, before hts, 1. e. the 
Lord's face, or preſence 3 which ſhews thar he was the High-prieſh, 
for none elſe mighr appezr there. « Which, if thou requireſt, we 
are willing to do, notwithſtanding the provocation they have given 
vs, and :ur own inclinat;on to Revengee x Now when they had 
ſought Gd after the due order, and truely humbled themſelves for 
their Sins, he gives them a full and fatisfaftory Anſwer ro their 
Deſires: : ; ; | 

29 And Iſrael ſet liers in wait .*. round about Gi- 
beah y. 

.*. Though they 'were aſſared of the Succeſs, by a particular and 
abſolute promiſe, yet they do ror neglet& the uſe of means 3 as well 
knowing that the certainty of God's purpoſes or promiies doth not 
excuſe, but rather require Man's diligent uſe of a'l fir means for 
the accompliſhment cf them. y i. Ee. On ſeveral ſides of it, as may 
be gathered from the following Verſes. 

3o And the children of Iſrael z went up againſt the 
children of Benjamin on the third day #s, and put them- 

{elves in array againſt Gibeah, as at other times. 


z 1.e. A coliderable part of them, whe were ordered to give 
the firſt onſer,and then to counterfeit flight, to draw the Benjamites 
forth of their ſtrong hold. See v: 32. @ To wit, after the {ſecond 
Battel; for the firſt day after it, they ſpent in perplexing thoughts, 
and going up to the houſe of the Lord - the ſecond, in Faſting and 
Prayer there- and this third, in the Fight. Or, this is ſo called 
with reſpe& unto the two ſeveral foregoing days of Battel, and ſo 


this was the third day of Batrel. 
31 And the children of Benjamin went out againſt 
the people,and were drawn away from the city 6, and 
+ Heb: to they began + to ſmite of the people, and kill as at other 
ſmite of the t1Mmes c, in the high-ways, of which one goeth up to 
people [| the houſe of God,and the other to Gibeah in the field 


EN 4, about thirty men of Iſrael. 
; ! Oc, _ b By the difſembled Flight of the 1ſ-aelites. c With the ſame kind, 


thel, though not the ſame degree of Succeſs. 4 So called, ro difference 


it from this Gibeah, which was upon an Hill; wheref.re they are 
conFnny ſaid, to aſcend orgoup againſt it, as v. 23+ 30+ See Joſh. 18» 
243 209. : : 

32 And the children of Benjamin ſaid, They are 
{mitten down before us, as at the firſt : Bur the children 
of 1irael faid, Let us flee, and draw them from the city 
unto the high-ways. . 


3 UDGES 


Chap. X 
33 And all the men of I{rael roſe up out of their place | 
e,and put themſelves in aray at Baal-Tamar: and the 
liers in wait of Ifrael came forth out of their places 
f, cven out of the meadows of Gibeah. 

e Where they had diſpoſed themſelves. thar they might fall upon 
the B:njamites, when they were drawn forth to a ſufficient diſtance - 
from their Cityy and when they were purſuing that Party mention-= 
ed, v: 3o, f Toexecute what was agreed upon,even to take Gibeahy 
and burn it, as they :&ually did, v; 37+ 

34 And there came againſt Gibeah ten thouſand cho- 
{en men out of all Iſrael g, and the batrel was ſore: but 
they knew not that evil was near them 6. 

£ Sele&ed our of the main Body, which was at Baal. Tamar; and 
theſe were to march dire&ly to Gibeah one the one ſide, whilſt 
the liers in wait ſtormed it on the other fide, and whilit the great 
Bedy of the Army laboured to intereept theſe Benjamites, who ha- 
ving purſued the 1ſrzel;res that prerended to flee, now endeavoured 
to retreat to Gi5eah. þ They were ſo puffed up with their former 
Succefles, that they were inſenſible of their danger. 


35 And the LORD ſmorce Benjamin before Iſrael, 
and the children of Iſrael deſtroyed of the Benjamites 
that day twenty and five thouſand, andan hundred men 
i; all theſe drew the ſword. 

7 This 1s the total Sum, whereof the particulars are related, v:44; 
45+ and for the odd hundred nor there mentioned, they,were killed 
1n Other places not th-re expreſſed. 

36 So the children of Benjamin ſaw that they were 
{micten : for the men of If{rael gave place to che Benja- 
mites, becauſe they truſted unto the liers in wait, which 
they had ſet beſide Gibeah. 

37 And the liers in wait haſted, and ruſhed upon 
Gibeah, and the liers in wait || drew themſelves along &, || Or, ma, 
and ſmote all the city with the edge of the ſword s long 

k Or, extended themſelves ; i: e: whereas before they lay cloſe and found 
contratted into a narrow compals, now they ſpread themſelves, and with the) 
Marched in Rank and File as Armies do. Or, marched, or wens ; txUMPer. 
Heb: drew their Feet. So this Verb is ofc uſed, as Gen: 37: 28. Exod; 
12: 21. Judges 4: 6s Job 21: 33+ | 

38' Now there was an appointed || ſign between the || Or, im, 
men of [Iſrael F and the liers in wait, that they fhould T H=b+ | 
make a great # flame with ſmoke to rife up out of the + = | 
city, | elevations | 

39 And when the men of Iſrael retired in the battel, 
Benjamin began Þ to ſmite and kill of the men of Iſrael + Heb #0 
about thirty perſons ; for they ſaid, Surely they are mite the | 
{mitten down before w, as i» the firſt battel; — 


' 49 But when the flame began to riſe up out of the | 
city, with a pillar of ſmoke, the Benjamites looked be- 


hind them, and behold, the + flame of the city aſcen- + eb. ch | 
ded up to heaven. | whole cone 


41 And when the men of Iſrael turned again, the men/#»prion., 
of Benjamin were amazed /; for they ſaw what evil | + Heb: 
was come upon them. rotxched 


1 Becauſe of their great diſappointment, and the preſent danger ;hew: 
wherewith they were ſurrounded on every ſide. 


42 Therefore they rcurned their backs before the men 
of Iſrael, unto the way of the wilderneſs, but the bat- 
tel overtook them : and them which ceme out of the 


Cities, they deſtroyed in the midſt of them ». 

mM i: ez The men of Battel or War. The abſtratt for the concrete, 
as Poverty, 2 Kings 24: I4. Prids, Pſal: 36: 11. Decat, Provs 12: 25, 
Dreams, Jer: 25: 9. Elim, Rom. 11: 7. are put for Perſons that are 
Poor, Proud, LH Dreamers, Ele, n So the ſenſe may ſeem ro bs 
this, That the Iſraelites did not only kill the Inhabitants of Grbeah, 
and all the Binjamites that came into the Field againſt them, 600 
excepted ; but in the midſt of them, or together with them, they 
killed alſo the reſt of the Benjamites, who, when they ſaw their Ar- 
my was wholly deſtroyed, made haſte to flze out of their ſeveral 
Cities or Towns, that fo they might eſcape the Sword, which was 
coming towards them. Bur the words may be rendred thus: 4nd 
them who were of the other cities, to wit, of Benjamin, i: e: who abode 
in their own Cities, and did nor go up to G:beah, they deffroyed in the 
midſt of them, i- e: 1n their ſeveral Cities, or, in the midf of it, i. e. of 
every City : for ſo it is ſaid, vs 48: where it is ſaid That they 
ſmoze the men of every City. But this I ſubrit to the Lexrned. 

Thws they encloled the Benjamites round about, 
and chaſed them, and trode them down || with eaſe o, | Or;from 
+ over againſt Gibeah rowards the ſun-riſing. Manu» 

o Without great difficulty. Now that GOD gave chem his pre- chah, Ov. 
ſence and a. they eaſi'y did that which before they found Heb. 
too hard for them. Or, unto Mmuchsh, or, as far as Manuchah, a 9 v7 
place fo called. See 1 Chron: 2; 52. Jer: 51: 59. againſt, 

44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thouſand 
men p; all theſe were men ot valour, 

2 To wit, in the Field, or Bartel. 


45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderneſs, 


unto the rock of Rimmon3and they gleaned q of them 
in the high- ways five thouſand men ; and purſued hard 
after them unto Gidom, and flew two thouſand men of 
them. | 
q1.e. They cut off the remaigders of the purſuit, and ſpare 


none. A Mcraphor from thoſe who gather Grapes or Cora io clears 


VP and fully, that they leave no Relicks for thoſe who come afrex 
them. 


46 So that all which fell thac day of Benjamin, 


2 S Were 


XXb 


Hcb:were 
bid. 


were twenty and five thouſand » men that drew the 


. all theſe were men of valour. 
_ the odd hundred expreſſed verſe 35. but here _y = 
rear Number is <xpreſſed, the leis being omitted, as inconſi era G 
Ehich way of numbring is frequent in Scripture, as Judges 11: . C 
2 Seam: 5:5. and in oth-r Authors, and in vulgar uſe ; as _ tl cy 
are called, che 7» Int<rpret-rs, who in rruth and exa _ __ 
72. Here are alſ> a Thouſand more omitted, becau - cre he 
ſpeaks only of them who tell zz 5497 thi:d day of Bartel» See on v: 


ITys 


: 47 * But ſix hundred. men turned and fled to the 


| | 4:21:13. a 


- i 
is 
[ 


wilderneſs, unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the 
Rimmon four moneths. | 
» wy Cave wichin that Rock, where they Fortified themſclves, 


: I | ity ; which they could 
"rOhed in Proviſion as they had opportunity ; whic | 
— __ the heat of the Battcl was over, and the 1[raelites 


t ſolicitous to purſue them further. ; 
"48 And the men of Iſrael turned again upon the 


children of Benjamin #t, and ſmore them with the edge 
of the ſword, as well the men « of every city, as the 


| eb:wes beaſt, and all that | came to hand : alſo they ſet on 


211 tte cities that * they came to. 
_ od deſtroyed choſe that came to Gibeah, and into the field, 
now they follow them nome tv their ſeveral habirations. « Com- 
pichenſively t.ken, ſo as to inciude Women and Children. It this 
ieem harſh anc bloody, either it may be aſcribed ro Military Fury; 
or rather, it may be juſtified ; partly, from thar high guiir brought 
upon the wrole Tribe, 1 which it is no wonder if their Infanrs 
ſuffered, which was not uſual in ſuch caſes, as Numb; 31: 17. 1 Sam: 
15: 3- Iiſb; 7: 15- partly, from that Command of God in a Paral- 
Jcl caſe, D:ur. 13: 15. and partly from that ſolemn Oath by which 
they »ad Anathemariſed or devoted ro D-ath all that came not up 
to Mizpeh, Judges 21: 5+ which none of the Benjamires did ; for which 
c ute allo they deſtroyed all the Men, Women, and Children of 


Jabeſb-Gilead, Judges 21: 10. 


CHA P, XAL Lb 

1 the Deſolation of Benjamin, 1 ——— 7. Ihe Inhavirants 0 

..——- "Sug not 4 are « x rhis Battel, are all deflroyed ; Excepting 
400 Damſels: Weom the Iſraelites beftow for Wives on the remaining 

Benjemites,8 — 1 ceThey advile the reſt to ſeize 01 the dancing Maidens 

at the feaſt in Shi\ch. And to carry away as many as they had need of, 

16 — 21. The Anſwer wherewith they ſbould pacifie cheir Relations, 

2 _ ws - o 

Ow the men of Iſrael had ſworn « in Mizpeh,ſay- 
ing, There ſha! —_—_ of us give his daugh- 
ter unto Benjamin to wite 5. : 

s [n the Nig of this War, after the whole Tribe h:d eſpouſ- 
ed the quarre] of the Men of Gibeah, Judges 20; 13, 14- b They do 
nor ( as ſome ſuppoſe ) here ſwear the urter extirpation of rhe 
Tribe, which fell out beyond their expeQarion, Judges 21: 3, 6. 
bur only not to give their Daughters to thoſe Men who ſhould ſur- 
vive; juſtly eſteeming them for their barbarovs villany, to be as 
Þ:d as the worſt of Hecathens, with whom they were forbidden to 
Marry. In this Caſe the Benjamites might have Married among 
themſelves, if any of their Menand Women were lefr alive. 

2, And the people came to the houſe of God c, and 


abode there till even before God,and lift up their voices 


and wept ſore. - 
c Partly to mourn for the cn 1 PR : and partly, to ask coun- 
ſel from God ab ur the r-pairing of it- ; 
1 And faid, O LORD God of lfrael, Why is this 
come to paſs in Iſrael, that there ſhould be to day one 


tribe lacking in Ifrael d ? | 

d Why h  rhou given them up to ſuch wickedneſs, and us to 
ſuch rage, that the whele Tribe ſhould be in a manner loft ! Hence 
ir appear, thar th.y did nor ſwear to root them all our, as is fur- 
ther manifeſt from the d fferenr matrer and words of this Oath, 
werſe 1. which only denied them their Daughrers in Marriage ; and 
that conce.ning the pecp'e of other Trib-s who joyned not with 
them in this buſineſs, which was, that they ſhoul: be put to death, 
w:5 And thei: ſparing of thſe 600 Men »n tie Rock Rimmon, v. 
2,14. pliinly ob be - hat they were-not obliged by any Oath or 
Vow to ex*:rpate themes | 

4 And it came to paſs on the morrow, that the peo- 
pz roſe early, and builr there an altar e, and offered 


burnt-offerings, and peace-ofterings. 

e Not for a Monument of the Viftory, as ſome ſ:y, but for $a- 
erifices as the nexr words ſhew. Qu. What nced was there of this, 
when the ordinary A'tar was there, to which alſo they ſeem to be 
reſtrained, D-ut:16: 2? Anſw, They are not there reſtrained to one 
A'rar.but to one place of Worfhip, as1s expreſſed; and therefore 
there might be in that place more Altars than one, when the mul- 
titude of $:crifices ſo required, which was the caſey 1 Kings 8. 64, 
and probably at this rime, when all the Tribes being mer, they had 
many Sacrifices to ff-r, ſome in common for all, ard ſome peculiar 
to every Tribe. Nay, other Altars might be, and oft-times were 
Ereced in other, places, by q hry papa] +: Diſpenſation ; as 

wages 6: 24, 26. 1 Sam 79, 17. and 11315-and 16:21 5, 
, Y And the children of Iſrael ſaid, Who there among 


| all the tribes of Iſrael, that came not up with the con- 
gregation unto the LORD ? for they had made a great 
oath f concerning him that came not up to the 


LORD to Mizpeh, ſaying, He ſhall ſurely be put to 
— ſ-lemn Oath joyned with ſome terrible Execration a- 

lint the Off:nders h-rein. g Becauſe by refuſing to exccure the 
| xraltancld due to ſuch Maleta&ors, rhey were juſtly preſumed 
gvilry of the Crime, and theretore able ro the ſame Puniſhmeit, 
«s was the caſe of rhat City That would not deliver up an Idolater 


dwelling among them, to Juſtice- 


«4 


| 


WU'DGES 


6 And the children of Iſrael] repented them for Ben- 
jamin their brother þ, and ſaid, There is 'one tribe cut 
off from Iſrael this day : 


hþ Not forthe War which was juſt, and neceſſary, and gond ; bur 
for their immoderate ſeverity in the Execution of it, aud for the 


' dreadfu] conſequences of it. 


7 How hal we do for wives for them that remain, 
ſeing we have ſworn by the LORD that we will not 
give them of our daughters to wives ? 

8 And they ſaid, What one # there of the tribes of 
Iſrael,that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And 
behold, there came none to the camp from Jabeſh-gilead 
; to the aſſembly. 

i A City in Gilead, and in the Tribe of Mmzſeh ; of which ſee 
1 Sam: 11; 1y 3. 9, Oc. and 313 11, Oc. 

g For the peopie were numbred,and behold, there were 
none of the inhabitants of Jabeih-gilead there. 

io And the congregation ſent thither twelve thou- 
ſand men of the valianteſt, and commanded them, {ay- 
ing, Go, and mite the inhabitants of Jabeſh-gilead 
with the edge of the ſword, with the women and the 
cniidren &, 

k Who in ſuch publick and ſcandalous Crimes were for the greater 
Terror of ſuch Tranſgreſſors, and prevention of the like Sins, « fe 
involved in the ſame Puniſbent with the men, as Dew: 1 3: 15. Job: 
7: 24. Oc. 

11 And this z the thing that ye ſhal do,' * Ye ſhal * Numb 
utterly deltroy every maie, and every woman that Þ 313 17. 
hath lien by man /. 7 Heb, 

T Bur not the Virgins, as appears from the next Verſes. It is que= 
ſtionable, whether they were not obliged to deſtroy theſe allo by 
vertue of their Oath, acl of GOD'S expreſs Commind concerning 
Devored Perſons, ſuch as theſe certainly were, that they ſhould 
ſurely be put to death, Levit: 273 29. which was a'ſo particularly en. 
joyned and prattited in ſuch caſes, as Deur? 13. J:ſh: 7, &&c. But rhe 
natural and neceſſary duty of preſerving a Tribe from tors] Ruine, 
might ſeem to render the caſe difficult and Coubrful, ard incline 


knoweth the 
lying with 
1 Alle 


' their Opintens, as well as their Aﬀe&ions, to the more favour:ble 
ſide. 


And ir may be, the LORD, whem they were here conſuiting 
with upon all their occaſions, gave them a Diſpenſation thus to do, 
though that be nor expreſſed ; which is the caſe of many o her 
things which were done, though nor Recorded; as this \ ery Oath 
was onutted in its proper place, and had not been Recorded if this 
extra0:dinary occaſion had not been offered 

12 And they found among the inhabitants of Tabeſh- 
gilead, fourkundred + young vi-gins »» that had known + F-hs 
no man by lying with any male: and they brought ow 14 
them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of me: vir. 
Canaan. . 

m Not Married, yet marriageablet it is probable, there were 0- 
ther and younger Virgins; bur whether they were ſlain or ſpared, 
Scriprrire determines not, and the L:arned do nor ag-ee. But theſe 
could not ſerve the preſent and urgent occ tion, nd tie: efore he takes 
notice only of theſe 400 which were cf 1iper Age. 

13 Andthe whole congregation ſent ſome + to ſpeak 
to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock Rim- ſpate and 
mon, and to call || peaceably unto them. called. 

14 And Benjamin » came again at that time, and | Or mw 
they gave them wives which they had ſaved alive of the ©” 7: 
women ot Jabeſh-gilead : and yet ſo they ſufficed them 
nor. | 

» The poor remainders of the Tribe of Benjamin, | 

15 And ihe people repented them for Benjamin o, 
becauſe thar the LORD had made a breach p in the 
tribes of Iſrael, | | 

o Were yet more grieved upon this unhappy diſappointment, for 
they ſuppoi.d here would have been Wives 1ufficient for them. p The 
B-njamizes were the only Authors of the Sin, bur GOD was the chief 
Author of the Puniſhment, and the 1/-aelites were but his Exccuri. 
ONers. 

16 \ Then the elders of the congregation ſaid, How 
ſhal we do for wives for them that remain 9? ſeing the 
women are deſtroyed out of Benjamin : 

q For the 200 who are yet unprovided of Wives. 

17 And they faid, There mu#? be aninhericance for them 
that be efcaped out of Benjamin r, that a tribe be not 
deſtroyed out of Iſrael; 

7 The inheritance promiſed by Jacob and Moſer, and given by Jo- 
ſhua to the Tribe of Benjamin, doth all of it belong to thoſe few 
which remain of that Tiibe, and cannor be Poſſeſled by any other 
Tribe; and therefore we are obliged to procure Wives for rem all, 
thar they may make up this breach, and be capable of poſſeſſing and 
managiag all their Land 2 that this Tribe,and rheir Inheritance may 
not be confounded with, or ſwallowed up by any of the reſt. Heb: 
the Inheritance ( to wit, belonging to the whole Tribe of Benjamin ) 
is, Cr belongs to them that be eſcaped of Benjamin, 

18 Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daugh- 
ters ; for the children of Iſrael have {worn,ſaying, Cur- 
ſed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin s. 

5 1.6. To this Generation of Benjamites who have made themſelves 
guilty of this foul wickedneſs ; bur this Oath did not extend to 
their Poſterity. And ſ-me think it had another exception, to wit, 
= the ſurviving Benjamites could not otherwite be ſupplied with 

LIVES. 

19 Then they ſaid, Behold, there & a feaſt of the + Yeb: 


T Heb: and 


Chap.. XXI 


LORD in Shiloh T yearly z, in @ place which &s on #117 


the #1) year. 


| 


Jus 


he and 


and 


pro- 
, 
peates 


Chap: LF. 


Or, to- 
wards the 
ſun-riſin3» 
| Or, 97 


| 0 


the Three ſolemn Feaſts ; yer :t 1+ apparent, that the Women had 
liberty to go,and thoſe who were molt devout did uſually go,and c- 


from the place cf publick Worſhip, that they came thither in great 


K-:6 


the north-ſide of Beth-el », || on the eaſt-ſide || of the 
high-way that goeth from Beth-el to Shechem, and 0; 
e ſouth of Lebonah. . 
” On the three ſolemn Feaſts, in which they uſed ſome honeſt: 
and holy Recreations 5 amorg Which, Danceing was one, Exod 53 
20. 1 Sams 18; 6. and 2 $27. 6: 14. and probably it was the Fealt 


——— 


o 


of Tabernacles, which they did Celebrate wich more than ord:nary | þ 


o . Lo 
J Deut3 16; 13, 14, 15. # Heb: Which is on the north of Bets: 
AD goth not relate ro Shiloh, which was ſo known a place, t'at } 
it was frivolous to deſcribe ir by ſuch circumſtances, even by pl.c-s 
much lcſs known than it ſelf; bur to the Feaft, which as to that } 
part or exerciſe of the Feaſt here, eſpecially concerned and mention» ' 
ed, to wir, the Danceing of the Virgins, was net cel: brated an 
$hilob but in a Neighbouring place more convenient fur that pur-, 
ole. | 
. 20 Therefore they commanded the children of Ben- 
jamin, ſaying, Go, and lie in wait in the vineyards: | 
21 And ſee, and behold, if the daughters of Shiloh 

x Come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of 
the vineyards y, and catch ye every man his wife of 
the daughters'of Shiloh z, and go to the land of Benya- | 


min, , 
x By whom he may peſlibly underſtand,not thoſe only who were 
born or {cttled Inhabitanrs (here, ( as many conceive ) but all 
thoſe who were come thirt.er upon this cccalicn, and for a timeſo 
journed there : For although only the Males were obliged to go up to 


thers, upon ipecial reatons or occaſions; See 1 Sam: 1 7, 21y 22, 
24+ Luke 2: 22, 23, 4h 42» 43o Ad it may be juſtly preſumed, 
eſpecially concerning thoſe Women,thar lived at uo great diſtance 


Numbers. Moreover, the Daughters of Shiloh, ſtri&1v ſo called. are 


not only they that lived in tiiat Town or City, bur in the Countrey 
belonging to it, which oft comes under the name of the City to 
which it belongs. And theſe may be here parricularly named. be 
cauſe though orhers might come, yet they were under great vbl:. 
gations to come, becauſe of their nearn-ſs ro the place. y Which 
were near to their Danceing-place. z Take them au ay by force or 
violence: Which thev might the berrer do, becauſe nuxed Dances 
were not uſed by the P-opl- cf GOD in their Sol mniti*s, bur the 


Women danced by themſelves,and therefore were more liable to this | 
Rape. 


thren come uvto us tocomplain, that we wil! fay unto their Bui!dings as their number increafe 


: 
22 And it ſhal be when their fathers, or their bre- 


Wd 


| Or, Graa them, || Be favourable unto them @ for our ſakes : be- | 


Fhems 


forced t> this courſe; yet for our ſakes; and indeed tor your own 
ſakes ; for both you and we have done them a great injury in pro- 


a Paſs by their offence, if not for their ſakes, whom n« ceſſity 


ſ:cuting them with ſomuch fury ,as to endanger the urrer extin&ion 


PE 


* 


of the whole Tribe : and therefore this is the leaſt we can do by wa) 
of Reparation. b Either, Firſt, 


wherein they ſhould have taken care to reſerve a ſufficient Number, 
wh ch they might have done, by ſpareing, either ſo many of the 
Marr.ed Women as were neceſſary, who, their former Husbands 


Ca gry” 


23 And the children of Benjamin did ſo, and took 
them wives according to their number 4, of them that 
danced,whom they caught : and they went and rerurn- 
ed unto their inheritance e, and repaired the cities,and 
dwelt in them f. 

d ive. Each Man his Wife, as is ſaid, v. 22: By which we may 
ſeey they had no very favourable opinion of Poligamy, becauſ- they 
did nor allow it in this caſe, when 1r might ſeem moſt neceſſary for 
the Reparation of a loſt Tribe. e Which being very near the place, 
they could tpeedily do, before the Parents could obtain Reoreſs. 
f Not at that inſtant, which could not be ; but by degrees,lncreafipg 


24 And the children of Iſrael departed thence at that 


rife win cauſe we reſerved not to each man his wite in the war time, every man to his tribe, and to his family. and 
b: for ye did not give unto them at this time, hat ye 
Gould be guiity c. 


they went out from thence, every man to his inheri- 
tance | 


25 * In thoſe days there was no king in Ifrael ; every * Chap.1p] 
13) 


man did bat which was right in his own eyes. 


TL 


f Heb. 
juaged. 

* 2 Kings 
d I, 


F Heb. 


were: 
Numb. 
D- 20, 


R 77 


1 


The ARGUMENTKEG 


David ; and conſequently of Chriſt ; and the Rile of Cnriit 


His little Book, by whomſoever Written, wich is not material ro know, is annexed to the Book of Judges, and by ſome 
of the Hebrew Doctors made a part of ir. It is uſeful, as for many other points, ſo eſpecially to ſhew the Genealogy of 


[rem a Moabitilh Woman 3 2vhich was an uſeful document, 


and a great Encouragement to the Gentiles to believe in CHRIST, 


CHAT. Ib 


'A Famine in Canaan. 
and hu twe Sons, who Marry Orpah and Ruth ther: : And dye, 1 


- ©» 


Naomi returns to Judah : Her Daughters in luw accompany her on her way, ; of the other Ruth : 


G6 —— 13. Orpahreturns home to her People and goas : Rutn remains be-= 
ing Converted, 14 18. They come to Bethlehem, 1g = 22. 


Ow it came to paſs in the days when the judges | 

ruled «, that there was a * famine in the land 

b: and a certain man of Bethlehem Judah went to ſo- 

journ in the countrey of Moab c, he, and his wife, and 
his cwo ſons. 


a Which 1s noted as the cauſe of the following Famine, becauſe 
in much of that time they were guilty of great defe&ion from Ged. 
Bur under which of th: Judges this happened,Scripture being ſilent, 
it ſeems preſumpruous ro determine ; nor is ir neceffary ro know. 


What is ſaid about this matter, from the Genealogy mentioned, | 


Chap.4+18, Ofc. it will be moſt proper to conſider it there» b Or, 
in that land ; to wit, of Canaan. c A fruitful land, beyond Jordan 


Eaſtward. 


2 Aud the name of the man was Elimelech, and the 
name of his wife, Naomi, and the name of his two 
ſons, Mahlon, and Chilion, Ephrathites 4 of Bethle- 
hem-Judah e: and they came into the countrey of Mo- 
ab, and F continued there f. 

4 So called, becauſe rhis Bethlehem is otherwiſe called Ephrath or 
Ephraths, Gen. 35. 19+ Mich. 5 2. either from Caleb's Wite of rhar 
Dame, I Chron. 2-19. and 4.4 or from the fertitity of the Soyl a- 
bour it ; which Title may th.r-fore be uſed here, ro ſhew the great- 
neſs of the Famine, which aff-&cd even fertile parrs. e Sce the 
Notes en Judges 17+ 7y 11, 5. f To wity during the Famine« 


| 3 And Elimelech Naomies husband died, and ſhe 
was left, and her ewo 1ons. 


Elimelech removes to Moab: W th Naomi his ad 4 And they took them wives of the women of Mo- 


[1 
7 


abg: the name of the one w4s Orpah, and the name 
and they dwelt there about ten 
years þ. 

£ Either theſe were Proſelytes when they Married them, which 
may we}i be doubred, from wv. 15. or they ſinned in Marr: ing 
them, as appears from Deut. 7. 3- and 23.3 Ezra 9. I, 2. N-heme 
13- 23. and therefore were puniſhed with ſhort Life, and want of If 
ſue, wv. 5. 19, 21: h As long as the Famine laſted. 


5 And Mahlon, and Chilion died aifo both of chem, 


and the woman was lefc of her two ſons, and her huſ- 
: band. 


6 Then (he aroſe wich her daughters in law, that 


ſhe might return from the countrey of Mcabtfor ſhe had 
heard in the countrey of Moab, how that the LORD 
had viſited his people in giving them bread i. 


th i» e. Food ; ſo ſhe ſtayed no longer there than neceſſity forced 
er. 


7 Wherefore ſhe went forth out of the place where 
ſhe was, and her two daughters in law with her : and 


they. went on the way to return unto the land of Ju- 
dah. 


8 And Naomi ſaid unto her two daughters;in law, 


* Go, return each to her.mothers:houſe &:2 ,the LORD «+ 
deal kindly with yau, as ye have dealt with the dead 


/ and with me. 


k Not that they wanted Fathers, Ruth 2. 11. but becauſe Daugh- 
ters uſed to con-erfſe more frequently, with their Mothers, and to 
be moſt endeared to them, ard to dwell in the fame Apartments 
with them, which then were diſtin& from. thoſe parts of the Houſe 
where the Men dwelts / With my Sons, your Husbands, whileſt 


\ 


| they lived. 


Fx $9 The 


Chap. 1 


/ 


j 


I. and GeF | 


See Folks 


X10 


© The LORD grant you, that ye may find reſt », 
WA of you in the houſe of her husband ;_ Then ſhe 
kifſed them », and they lift up their voice and wept- 

\ 2 is e. A quiet and happy life, free from thoſe Cares, Vexations, 
Incumbrances, and Troubles which Widows are in a ſpecial man- 
ner expoſed unto. n As the manner there was when Friends 

parted : ] 
xo And they ſaid unto her, Surely we will return 
with thee unto thy people, 2: : 
it And Naomi faid, Turn again my daughters 3 


why will ye go with me ? are there yet any moe ſons in 


my womb, that they may be your husbands o ? 


+ According to the Ancient Cuſtom, Gen: 38. and the expreſs 
"Law of GOD, Deut: 25: 5- which doubtleſs ſhe had acquainted them 
with before, among other branches of the Jewiſh Religion, wherein 
the did-inſtru@ them. 2 
| x2 Tura again my daughters, go yowr way Þ, Lor 
1 T am too old to have an husband : if I ſhould fay, I 
J Ors 1 have hope, || if 1 ould have a husband alſo to night, 
p>7* 22 nd ſhould alſo bear ſons : | 
þ en buiband. ” 0, Why dorh ſhe diſwade them from this journey, and not 
| rather perſwade thom to go. wirh her, and to imbrace the Jewiſh 
"Religion? . ſw. 1. Poſhbly ſhe,ghoughr ſuch diflwaſion might 
'be the belt way to periwade them, as it oft happens 3 eſpecially in 
"that Sex. 2+ She would not have them raſhly and inconſiderately to 
embrace the Jewiſh Religion, in hopes of ſome advantage from ity 

which ſhe juſtly thought they would be diſeppointed of; and with- 
all expoſed ro many ftrairs and troubles, and on that occaſion re- 
volt from the True Religion, which would be far worſe than ne- 
"ver fo have embraced it. And therefore ſhe doth juſtly and wiſe- 
| Ty;and pivufly in repreſenting to them the Truth of the buſineſs, and 
the ourward incanveniences which would accompany the Change 
© of their Place, and Religion ; as alſo our blefled LORD CHRIST 
| did, Mat: $8: 20. : : 
+ Heb: ..- #3 Would ye Þ tarry for them till they were grown? 
| hopes ' would ye ſtay for them from having husbands o, nay, 


| + Heb; 7 my daughters : for Þ it grieveth me much for your 
| have much ſakes p, that * the hand of the LORD is gone out a- 
| qt painſt me. | 

* © 8 It is unreaſonable for me to expett it, or for you to perform it. 
Ep p Thar you are I:fe without the comfort of Husbands or Children ; 
- That I muſt part with ſuch dear and affeQionate Daughters; and 


. that my Circumſtances are ſuch, that I cannor invite, nor incourage 
you to go along with me. For her condition was fo mean ar this 
' Time, that Ruth, when ſhe came to her Mothers City, was forccd to 
_ Glean for a living, Chap: 2: 26] þ wp 
114 And they lift up their voice, and wept again : 
and Orpah kifled her mother in law q, but Ruth clave 
unto her. 
9 i. e. Departed from ker with a-kiſs, asthe manner was,Gene31:28. 
1 Kings ig; 20. : i ; 
| 15 And ſhe ſaid, Behold, thy ſiſter in law is gone 
* 5:e Joſ-- back unto her people, and unto her gods 73 * return 
. 247 15+ _ thou after thy fiſter in 1aw. | 
2 King-2:2, » Waich ſhe ſaith, partly to try Ruths ſincerity and conſtancy ; 
Luke 24+ partly, that by upbraiding Orpay with her Idolatryy ſhe might con- 
28, {:quently turn her from it ; an4 partly, that ſhe might intimate to 
her, that if ſhe went with her, ſhe muſt embrace the True GOD 


and Religions - ; 
| Or, b-. 16 And Ruth faid, || Intreat me not to leave thee, 


mt again® or to return from following after thee, for whither 
Mer - thou goeſt, I will go: and where thou lodgeſt, I will 
lodge : thy people fhail be my peeple, and thy God my 
God 5s: 

5s IT renounce thoſe Idols which my Siſter hath returned to, and 
T will wrſhip no other GOD bur thine, who 15 indeed the only 


GOD. 
herd Where thou dieſt, will I die, and there will I be 


buried : the LORD do ſo to me and mcre allo, if ought 
but death part thee and me: 
+ Heb: 38 When tbe ſaw that ſhe + was ſtedfaſtly minded to 
frengrhmed £0 With her, then the lefr ſpeaking unto her, 
her ſelf. 19 © So they two went until they came to Bethle- 
hem : and i: cameto paſs when they were come to beth- 
I| 7at is,- Jehem, that all the city was moved about them, and || 
the woman. they ſaid, Is this Naomi * ? 
e Is this ſhe that formerly lived in ſo much Plenty and Honour ? 
Oh how marvellouſly is her condition changed, that ſhe is returned 
, in this forloin and deſolate condition ! 

20 And ſhe ſaid unto them, Call me not Naomi z, 

call me || Mara xs for the Almighty hath dealt very bit- 
with me. 

: _ 216 Sara ienifies pleaſant, or chearſul, or amiable, x» Which ſig- 

bitter. nifies bitter or [orrowful. 

21 I went out full y, and the LORD hath brought 
me home again empty : why then call ye me Naomi, 
ſeing the LORD hath teſtified againſt me z, andthe 
Almighty hath afflicted me ? 

y With my Husband and Sons, and a plentiful Eſtate for our ſup- 

ort. Z i. c. Harh born witneſs, as it were in Judgement, and gi- 
ven Sentence againſt me, and declared my Sin by my Puniſhmenr, 

32 So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabiteſs her 
daughter in law with her, which returned out of the 
countrey of Moab, and they came to Bethlehem in the 


beginning of barley harvelt. 


ap. þ 


|| That is 


ar leaſt, that it became her modeſtiy and humbly to acknowledge 


: H. Chap.. IL 
CHAP. IL | 


Ruth gleaning in the fields of Boaz, her deceaſed Husband's mea Kinſman, Te 
tabeth knowledge of her, 1 - '7. He ſbeweth her great kinaneſs, 
and bleſſeth her, '$—— 16. That which ſhe got ſhe brings to Naomi ; 


and telleth her what had befallen her : She giveth GOD thanks, ons! 
exhorteth Ruth to continue in the field, 19 —— 23- 


Nd Naomi hada kin{man of her hasbands,a mighty 
man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and 
his name was Boaz. | 
2 And Ruth the Moabiteſs ſaid unto Naomi, Let me 
now go to the field and glean « ears of corn after him, 
in whoſe ſight I ſhall find grace b,And ſhe ſaid unto her, 
Go, my daughter, 

2 Which was permitted to the Poor, and the Stranger, Deur. 24: 
19. both which ſhe was; nor was ſhe aſhamed to confeſs her Pover. 
ty.nor would ſhe eat the bread of idleneſs: whereby {ke ſheweth her 
ſelf to be a prudent,and diligent,and vertuous Woman,as ſhe is cal- 
leds Ruth 3:11. b For though it was their duty to permit this, Lew; 
19: 9. and 23: 22+ yet either ſhe was ignorant thereof, or thought, 
that being a Stranger, it might be grudged, or demicd to ker; or 


their kindneſs herein. 

3 And ſhe went, and came, and gleaned in the field 
afrer the reapers : and her + hap was c to light on a f Het; 
part of the field belonging unto || Boaz, who was of the ppm, 


kindred of Elimelech. ns 
c Forit was indecd a chance in ref:rence to ſecond Cauſes, but or- "ty of 
dered and defigned by GOD'S Providence. F 


4 5 And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and 
ſaid unto the reapers, The LORD be with you: and 
they anſwered him, The LORD bleſs thee &. 

ad They exprefſ:d and profeſſed their Piery, even in their civil 
Converſation, and worldly TranſaQtions; which now ſo many are 
alhamed of, and call it Hypocriſie or vain Oſtentation thus to dos 

5 Then faid Boaz unto his ſervant that was ſet over 
the reapers, Whoſe damfel x this ? | 

6 And the ſervant that was ſet over the reapers 
anſwered and faid, It # the Moabitiſh damſel, that 
_— back with Naomi e out of the countrey of Mo- 
ab. | 

e 1.e. That came with Naomi when ſhe came back: for c- 


therwiſe, as Ruth did not go from thence, ſo ſhe could not properly 
be faid to come back. 


7 And ſhe ſaid, T pray you, let me glean f, and ga- 
ther after the reapers amongſt the || ſheaves : {olbe came || Org)ard 
and hath continued even from the morning until now fu. 
g, that ſhe tarried a little in the houſe h. 

f She did nor bo!dy intrude her ſelf, but modeſtly ask leave of 
us. g She 1s not retired through idlenefs, for ſhe hath been dilicenr 
and conſtant in her Jabours. þ Not in Naomies houſe, as many un- 
derſtand it, as may be gathered from w: 18: 19. but in the little 
Houſe or Tent, which was ſet up in the Fields at theſe times, and 
was neceflary in thoſe hot Countries, where the labourers or ethers 
might retire for a lictle repoſe or repaſt at fir times. Being weary 
with her continued labours, ſhe comes hicticc to take a lictie reſt. 

8 Then ſaid Boaz unto Ruth, Heareſt thou not, my 
daughter ? Go not to glean in another field, neither go 
from hence, bur abide here faſt by my maidens 5. 

; Not by the young men, to avoid both occaſion of ſin, and mat- 
ter of ſcandal. Herein he ſhews his Piety and Prudence. 


9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, 
and go thou after them : have I not charged the young 
men that they ſhall not touch thee &k, and when thou 
art athirſt, go unto the veſlels and drink of that which 
the young men have drawn. 

k So as to offer any incivility or injury te thee. Tenching is off 
taken for hurting, Gen: 26: 81, Pſal: 105: 15, | 

10 Then (be fell on her face !, and bowed her ſelf -=: 
to the ground, and faid unto him, Why have I found {:- 
grace 1n thine eyes, that thou ſhouldeſt take knowledge 
of me m, ſeing I am a ſtranger ? 

I This was the humbleſt Poſture of Reverence,either Civil wen 
performed to men, or Religions, when to GOD. See Ger: 18: 2. 
and 33: 3. and 42* 6. Matth; 24 11. and 8: 2. m ite. Shew any 
reſpect and kindneſs ro me. For words of knowledge in Scriptuc 
commonly include affeQion. 

1z And Boaz anſwered and ſaid unto her, It hath 
fully been ſhewed me, all that thou haſt done unto thy 
mother 1n law,ſfince the death of thine husband : and 
he thou haſt left thy father and thy mother, and the 
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which 
thou knewelt not » heretofore. 

» Of whom thou hadſt no experience : for otherwiſe in general 
the could not be ignorant of this People. 

12 The LORD recompenſe thy work, and a full 
reward be given thee of theLORD God of Iſrael,under 
whoſe wings o thou art come to truſt. 

0 i- &, ProteCtion and Care, as Deut: 327 11. Pſal: 19:8, and 36. 
7: and 94: 3- An Alluſion either to Hens,which prore& and cheriſh 


their young ones under their Wings; or to the Wings of the Che» 
rubims, between which GOD dweit. 


13 Then ſhe ſaid, || Let me find favonr in thy © 
ſight p, my lord, for that thou haſt comfortsd me}, Or") 
2nd ] 00% o 


=» wa _ - 


Who 


Tyland. 


Chap. III. —} R | 'O, 
+ Heb. toand for that thou haſt ſpoken 7 friendly unto thine 
te heart» hand-maid, though I be not like unto one of thy hand- 


maidens 9. 5 

p I humbly implore the continuance of thy goed Opinion of me, 
though I do not deſerve it. q A perſon more mean, and neceflitous, 
and obſcure, being a ſtranger, and one born of Heatheniſh Pa- 
rents, and not of the Holy and Honourable people of Iſrael, as 
they are. : | ; 

14 And Boaz ſaid unto her, At meal-time come thou 
hither, and eac of the bread 7, and dip thy morſel in 
the vinegar // And ſhe ſate beſide the reapers # : and 
he reached her parched corn «, and ſhe did eat, and was 
ſufficed, and left. 


r Which in thoſe ſimple and frugal times was the uſual Food of 
Servants and the meaner Sort, at leaſt when they were engaged in 
ſuch Works as this, which required ſpecd, and theref:re muſt be. 
quick in their eating, as well as in their Work. Or. Bread may 
be here put for any Food. at it oft is- / Eicher ſimple Vinegar, 
which the poorer ſort uſed to dip their Bread, and fo Eat it in hor 
Countries, as rhey did not only in Canaan, but afterwards in 1aly; 
it being very proper, eſpecially in thole Parts, for cooling them in 
thoſe hor Seaions, for ſtrengthning their Sinews, &c« Or Vinegar 
mixed with other things to make iome kind of Sauce. # Nor with 
or among them, but at ſome little diſtance from them, and as one 
infer:ourto them. as ſh> had acknow!edged before in Words,and now 
ſheweth it by her Adtions. « A Focd in fiequent uſe, and ſome 
eſteem with them. See 2 Sam. 17. 28» 

15 And when ſhe was riſen up to glean, Boaz com- 


manded his young men, ſaying, Let her glean among 


arr the ſheaves, and F reproach her not x, : 
4g : x As if ſhe were rude or impudent in ſo doing, as. otherwiſe 


they ſhou'd have th.ughr. Cnueft. Why did he not rather give her 
as much Corn as ſhe could carry, and fexid her away ? Auſw. Be- 
cauſe he would nut have ber to Ear the Bread of Idicneſs, bur hc- 
neſtly to get it with the Sweat of her Brows, according to her Duty 
and preſent Condirion, 


16 And let fall alſo ſomeof the handfu's, of purpoſe 
for her, and leave them, that ſhe may glean hem, and 
rebuke her not. 

17 So lhe gleaned in the field until Even, and beat 
out that ſhe had gleaned : and it was about an ephah 
4 of barley. | 

y Which is thought to contain about a Buſhel, See Exod. 16, 
36. Levit.5: I, ; : 

18 4 And ſhe took it up, and wentinto the city : and 
her mother in law ſaw what ſhe had gleaned : and ſhe 
brought forth, and gave to her that the had reſerved, 
and was ſufficed z. 

z Or, that which ſhe had left of her fulneſs, or after ſhe was ſatisfied 
She did Eat as much as ſhe defired of what ſhe had G'eaned, and 
her Mother, as I ſuppoſe, with hec, and the relidue the gave to her 
Mother, to lay up for furure uſc. : 

19 And her mother in law ſaid unto her, Where 
haſt thou gleaned to day ? and where wroughteſt thou? 
bleſſed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And (he 
ſhewed her mother in law with whom ſbe had wrought, 
and faid, The mans name with whom TI wrought to 
day, is Boaz. 

20 And Naomi faid unto her daughter in law, Bleſ- 
ſed be he of the LORD, who hath not icfr off his kind- 
nef> to the living * and to the dead a. And Naomitſfaid 

*25at unto her, The man # near of kin unto us, || one of 
ha” our next kinſmen 6b. 

a i.e. Waich he formerly ſhewed to thoſe who are now dead, to 
wit, my Husband and his Sons whilit they were living, and now 
continues to us, tieir Wives, who are now alive. b Hebs ne of our 
Redeeme's, or Avengers, t9 whom it b-iongs to Avenge our perlions, 
and to Redeem our Lands, and ro M-.rry thee, che Widow and Re- 
lIi& of his next kinſman, as is expreſſed, Ruth 3: 9: She ſaith, one of 
them, not that there were many who were immedi tely ſuch, bur 
that he was a very near Kinſman, and one ro wiaom that Office be- 
longed, in caſc of the r:tufal of cn? perſon, of whom ſhe cighcl, 
conjeftured that he would refuſe, as he did. 

21 And Ruth the Moabitels faid, He ſaid unto me 
alſo, Thou ſhalt keep faſt by my young men, until they 
have ended all my harveſt c. 

c Both Barley-harveſt, and Wheat-harveſt, as 1s ſaid, v. 23. 

22 And Naomi {aid unto Ruth her daughter in law, 
It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his mai- 
dens, and that they || meet thee not in any other heid 4. 

d Whereby thou wiltlt both expoſe thy ſelf to many inconvenien- 
cies, which thou may'ſt exp<& from Strangers ; and incur his diſ- 


pleaſure, as if thou didft either deſpiſe his pr.ffered kindneſs, or 
doubt of the ſincerity of his AﬀeCtion and Off-rs. 


23 So ſhe kept faſt by the maidens of Boaz to glean: 
unto the end of barley-harveſt, and of wheat-harveſt 
and dwelt e with her mother in jaw. 

e Heb. ſar, or continued at home, when ſhe had diſpatched her oc 


caſion> abroad, and did not wan4er or gad abroad, atter the manner 
of idle Perſons and Harlots, Prov; 7. 11, 12. 


CHAP. III. 

By Naomies Advice, Ruth lieth at Bos his fort, 5m —7, He awaking 
commenaeth what fhe had done, and acknow!ec or! the Right of a Kinſman. 
Tells her there was a nearer Kinſman, to whom he would offer her 
refuſmng, he would redeem her, 8x 13+ 
of Barley, 14, 18- 


right t0 r= 
deems 


[ Or, fall 


upon thee, 


w/1) 
Senas her away with 6 meaſures 


© - 

| bay” Naomi her mother in law ſaid unto her, My 
daughter, ſhall I nor ſzek reſt 2 for thee, that it 

may be well with thee ? 

a i, e. Alife ofReſt, and Comfort, and Safety, under the Care of 
a good Husband. The Dueſticn tuppoleth an Aﬀirmative Anſwer: 
I will ſeek it, as my Dury binds me. 

2 Andnow, #s not Boaz of our kindred, with whoſe 
maidens thou waſt ? Behoid, he winnoweth barley to 
night in the threſhing floor 6. 

b Which was in a place covered at the top, but open elſewhere, 
whither Ruth might eaſily come. And this work of winnowing 
Corn was uſuaily begun or ended with « Feaſr, as may be gathered 
both from wv. 7. and trom other Inſtances, wh: rein they uſ-d to do 
ſo upon !ike occations: and this work was to begin this Evening, and 
25 ſome chink, was done only in the Evenings, when the heat grew 
oſs, and the wind began ro blow. Sce Gen. 3+ 8. 

3 Waſh thy ſeit therefore, and anovint thee, and put 
thy raiment c upon thee, and get thee down to the 
toors bus make not thy ſelf known unco the man d, 
until he ſhall have done eating and drinking. : 

c To wit, thy beſt Raimenr. All rhis was done to render herſelf 
more Amiable inthe Eyes of Boaz. O%4j. Bur Boaz could not ſee her, 
the whole buſineſs being to be rranſatted by Night. Anſwe Firſt, Tt 
was begun in the beginning of the Night, as ſoon as Boaz had ſup- 
ped and compoſed himſelf to reſt ; as appears from wv. 4, 7 when 
there was ſo much Light left as might diſcover her to him: Se- 
cordly, There being a Solemn Feaft this Evening, as is very pro- 
bably cheughty and the Maſter of the Feaſt having Invired his La- 
bouring Peop'eto it, and Ruth among the reſt, it 1s likely that both 
ſhe and the reſt did put themſelves into their beſt Dreſs upon that 
occaſion, as the manner is even at this day ; and ſo he had oppor- 
tunity enough to ſee her. d To wit, not in fo familiar a way, as 
ſhe was appointed to do, fo as he might know her, in the ſeriſe 
in which that word is ſometimes uſed. 

4 Andit ſhall be, when he lieth down e, that thou 
(halt mark the place where he ball lie, and thou ſhalt 


g0 in f, and || uncover his feer g, and lay thee down, || Or, lift 
and he will tell thee what thou thalt do h. up the 


thoſe hot Counties. f Though Naomi and Ruth ſeem to be ver- 47? 97 his 
ruous and modeſt Women, and their intent was Lawful and Honeſt; fe*t- 
y<t there ſeems to be a manifold irregulariry in the manner of ir. ! Or, 700k 
Firſt, Ic ſeems to bz againſt thar Modefty, which ſhould be emi- #014 on» 
nent in thar Sex, and in unmarricd perſons. Secondiy, Agaioſt 
Honeſty, both becauſe it was an ivjury to ancther Perſon, who was 
nearer akin, whoſe right this was ; which Nami could not be Ig 
norant of: and becaule it was a Prepoſterovs and Precipitant Me- 
thod, not agreeabie either to che Rules of Scripture, or the Uſage 
of well-mannered N.tions, or that Decency which even Nature 
requires. Thirdly, Againſt Prudence ; for it might have proved 
the occaſion, as cf many Sins. ſo of great ſhame to all of them ;; 
and a means to Alienate his AﬀeC&ion from her, which ſhe ſought 
to engage. Ard though there be ſome Circumſtances which Al- 
leviite the FaQ, as the experience which Naomi had of che Wiſdom 
and Sobriety both of Boaz and of Ruth, y<t ſhe knew nor what the 
event would be ; and that there was ſfomerhing cf ſhame fulneſs in 
the thing, may be gathered both from Naom!”'s choice of the Night 
for it, as if it were a work of Darkneſs; and from Boaz his fear 
leaſt this ſhould be known, v. 14+ And it is an aggravation of it, 
thar this C-urſe was unneceſſary, and ſhe bad a plain and likely way, 
which was dire&!y to Addreſs her ſe}f to Boaz, or thenext Kinſman, 
and to require the Duty, which by G:ds Law he was bound to per- 
form, and this befere Wirn«fles, as Boaz did! Ard her Clande» 
ſtine proceeding ſeems to have ariſen from adiſtruſt of Gods pros 
vidence, to bring abour what ſhe deſired in the ordinary ways 
g Remove the Clothes which were upon his feet ; thereby to awaken 
bim. þ How thou ſhouli-it carry thy ſelf, or what courſe thou 
ſhalr tak-ro obrain tbar Marriage which belongs unto thee. Only 
there were ſome Ritestobe obſerved, and Circumſtznce«to be done, 
efore they came to the concluſtcn of the Marriage, about which 
Boaz wou'd inſtrutt her. 

5 And ſhe {aid unto her, All that thou ſaiſt unto me, 
T will do z. 

; The Confidence ſhe had in Naomi's Wiſdom and Piery, and 
-ru: Love to her, made her ready to f:'!low her Advice, wherein 
he was the more excuſable, becauſe ſhe did not underſtand the 
Laws and Cuitoms of the Ccuntry, as Nami did. 

64 And ſhe went down uncothe floor, and did ac- 
cording to all that her mother in law bade her. 

7 And when Boaz had eaten and drunk &, and his 
heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the 
heap of corn: and ſhe came ſoftly, and uncovered his 
feet, and laid her down. 

k& To wir, liberally, as the manner was upon thoſe occaſions. 
See Juag. 9. 27. Pſal. 4. 7 Iſa. 9. 3+ 


8 C And it came to paſs at midnight /, that the man - 
was afraid, and || curned himleif »z, and behold, awo- 
man lay at his feet ». 


I He did not diſcover her ſocner, though ſhe did uncover his Feet, 
beiny ir teems 1a a deep ſleep, as is uſual after Feaſts, and ſhe deg 
10 more than her Mctaer command-d ter, anduſing no words or 
geſtures which mighr provoke his Luſt « wherein ſhe ſhewed her 

ſemperance and Medetty, and that what ſh+ did was only by b<r 
Mo hers Inſtigation and advice, which p/«inly appeared from her de= 
11 exprelled, ve 9, which he knew, ſhe being a Stranger, was unac- 
quainr-d with And this was the reaſon why Boaz was not in the _ 
ei{t off-nded with her, but only commends her Vertuz, without 
any refl:&tion upon her for this Fatt. » From the place where he 
'ay, he raiſed and turned himſelf rowards the Feer, to learn who 
or what was there. Or, he was troubl:d, os afraid, or wondared, For 


the Hebrew word bring but once uſed, is diverſly rendred. 
| 2-32 a Whick 


Ld 


il 
Wl 
t 

i 


Clup m 


e To reſt or {leep, as upon ſuch occaſions they uſed to do in clothes thi * 


| | Chap. 


that hath 
r:ght to 
Yeacem. 


+} H«b. 


£3te. 


Or, apr0%. 


IV: 


Or> ane OVeETr 


I] Or, /h-er, 


s t of f 
1 might nhderſtand, either by ſome glimmerings © 
—_— 90. afcer midnight, which diſcovered her ; or —_— 
, wk voice, or out of her own nate being asked, told him 
much in general, before he made particular enquiry» 
- 9 And he ſaid, Who art thou? And ſhe anſwered, 
1 am Ruth thine hand-maid : ſpread therefore thy skirt 
thine hand-maid o, for thou art || a near kinſman« 
o (i. e. ) Take me to be thy Wife, and perform the Duty of by 
Husband to me. This phraſe is uſed in this ſenſe, Deur. 22. _ 
27 20, Exek, 16. 8. Either, Firſt, Becauſe the Wife is rp ey in- 
ro the ſame Bed with her Husband, and both are covered with one 
and the ſame covering. Or, Secondly, From an ancient _— 
of the Husbands throwing the Skirt of his Garment over her Head, 
in token borh of her ſubje&ion. 1 Cor, 11. 5, 6, 10- and approPria- 
tion to him, being hereby as it were kid from the Eyes of __ ; 
See Gen. "="; 6. and alſo of that proteQtion which he oweth to her; 
ſee Ruth 2: 12. | 


io And he ſaid, Bleſſed be thou of the LORD, my 
daughter : for thou haſt bewed more kindneſs p in the 
lacter end, than at the Ieguaning, in as much as _ 

llowedft not young men q, whether poor, Or ricn. 
= Both to thy A fe Hardand, the continuance of whoſe Name 
and Memory thou preferreſt before the ſatisfation ofthy own Luſt; 
and to thy Mother-in-law, whoſe Commands thou haſt punCtually 
obeyed, even with thy own hazard in to doubtful an Eaterprize. 
9 Toſeck thy Marriage either here, or in thy own Country as 
thou wouldeſt have done if thou hadſt not preferred Obcdience to 
Gods Command, before the pleaſing of thy 1elf. 

11 And now my daughter, fear not r, I will do to 
thee all that thou requireſt (: for all the + city of my 
people doth know, that thou art a vertuous woman. 

y Taink not that I deſpiſe and Reje&rhee, becautc I do not 1m- 
mediarely comply with thy Deſire. / (6. ) Marry thee, upon 
the Condition here following. : . 

12 And now it is true, that I am zby near kinſman: 
howbeic, there is a kin{man nearer than I. : 

12 Tarry this night, and it ſhall be in the morning, 
that if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinſ- 
man z, weli, let him do the kinſmans part : but if he 
wiil not-do the part of a kin{man to thee, then will I 
do the part of a kinſman to thee, as the LORD liveth: 
lie down until the morning. ' | . 

t (i. e.) Take thee to Wife, to raiſe up Seed to his Brother, as 
he ougkr ro do. ; { es 

14 And ſhe lay at his feet until the morning : 
and ſhe roſe up before one could know another x. And 
he ſaid, Let it not be known that a woman came into 
the floor x. 

u (7.6. } While it was yetſo dark that one perſon could not dif- 
cern another. Or, before one did know the other ; ( i.e. ) before they 
were carnal'y known to one another. x He takes care to preſerve 
not only his Conſcience cowards God, but his Reputation, and hers 
alio amorig Men. , j 

i5 Alito he ſaid, Bring the || veil y that thou haſt upon 
thee, and hold it. And when ſhe held it, he meaſured 
ſix meaſures & of barley, and laid i# on her : and ſhe 

crit into the City. 
af ir, the apron, = as Women ordinarily Wear. Z Known and 
ofh 1meaiue : Iris nor d:termined kow large thoſe Meaſures were, 
bur this *! e Na-ure of the thing ſhews» that they were no Jarger 
than one Woman could carry in her Ve1!, or Apron. | 

16 Ard when ſhe came to her mother in law, ſhe 
ſaid, Who art chou, my daughter *.'? and ſhe told her 
all that the man had done to her. 

** Eirher. Firſt, She did not diſtintly know who ſhe was, be- 
cauie it was dark, and ſo calls her Daughter only 1n genera], as elder 
Women call the younger. But ſhe could as eaſily have diſcerned 


ho ſb , as what her Age was. Or, Secondly, This is not a 
Queſtion of doubting, but of wonder, as if ſhe had ſaid Art thou 


' in very deed my D-ughter ? I can hardly believe it, How comeſt 


tn-u hither in his manner, and thus early ? 

1- And the ſaid, Theſe ſix meaſures of barley gave 
he me, for he ſaid to me, Go not empty to thy mother 
in law. | : 

18 "Then ſaid ſhe, Sit ſtill my daughter until thou 
know how the matter will fall: for the man will not 
be inreft, until he have finiſhed the thing this day. 

CR ADP. | IY. 
th up to the gate, calleth his kinſman 2 enquires whether he would re- 
1; 5 oginl I-94 eur 1 ——5. He refuſeth, 6,—8. Boaz, the people 
witneſſmg and congratulatingy buyeth the Inheritance and marrieth Ruth, 
I2. She beareth Obed the grand-father of David, 13, I7. 
The Genealogie from Pharez unto David, 18z 22% 


£ gran went Boaz up to the gate 4, and fate him 


down there: and behold, the kinſman of whom 
Boaz ſpake, came by, unto whom he ſaid, Ho, ſuch an 
one b, turn aſide, ſit down here c. And he turned 


aſide, and fate down. . 

s The place where Controverſies were decided, and the people 
aſſembled, and where they uſed to go out, and come into the Town; 
where he was moſt likely to find his K.nſman. 6 Doubtleſs Boaz 
beth knew his Name, and called himby it, but it is omitted by the 
holy Writer ; partly becauſe it was unneceſſary to know ir ; and 
principally in way of contempt, as 1s uſual, and asa juſt puniſhment 
up9n him, that he whbo would not preſerve his Brothers Name, 
might loſe his own, and lie buried in the Grave of perpetual Obl:- 
vioa. c I have ſome Buſineſs of importance with you. 

2 And he tuok ten men 4, of the elders of the 


ET 7A 


city, and faid, Sit ye down here, And they ſite 
down. | 

4 To be Umpires or Witneſſes between them ; for though two 
or three Witneſſes were ſufficient, yer in weightier Matters they 
uſed more. And tex was the uſual] Number among the Jews, in 
Cauſes of Matrimony and Divorce, and tranſlaticn of Inheritincec; 
who were both Judges of the Cauſes, and Witneſſes of the Fi, 
See 1 King, 21, 8: | 

3 And he faid unto the kinſman, Naomi e, that is 
comeagain out of the country of Moab, ſclleth a par- 
cel of land f, which was our brother Elimelechs. 

e Both Naom: and Ruth had an Intereſt in this Land during their 
Lives, but he mentions only Naom?, partly becauſe all was done by 
her dire&ion, to which Ruth wholly fubmitted her ſelf; and pirt= 
ly leſt the mention of Ruth ſhould raiſe a ſuſpicion of the neceſſity 
of his marrying Ruth, before he had given his Anſwer to the firit 
Propoſitions f Which ſhe might do becaule of her poverty, Levie. 
25+ 250 

4 And F I thought to advertiſe thee, ſaying, Buy i: t Heb. ; 

before the inhabitants, and before the eiders of my 1 il 

. 2 . - -  tNcover 

people g. If thou wilt redeem zr, redeem zr, but if thou :1;, ,, 

wilt not redeem z#, hex tel] me, that I may know ; for Rewaliy 

there is none to redeem #t belides thee, and I am after thine wr 
thee. And he ſaid, I will redeem #7. 

g Before this Aſſembly, that it may be Legally, and firmly made 
over to thee. 

5 Then ſaid Boaz, What day thou buyeſt the field 
of the hand of Naomi, thou muft buy it alſo of Ruth the 
Moabiteſs, the wife of the dead h, to raiſe up the name 
of the dead 3; upon his inheritance. 

_ þ According to the Law, Deut» 25: 5, ©'c. Matth. 22: 24, Ofc 
7 To revive his Name, which was Icſt and buried with his Body, by 
raiſing up a Seed ro him, to be called by his Name. 

6 CT Andche kinſman ſaid, 1 cannot redeem #t for 
my ſelf, leſt I mar mine own inheritance & ; redeem 
thou my right / to thy ſelf, for I cannot redeem 3:7. 

& Either, Firſt, Becauſe having no Childrenof his own, he might 
have one. and but one Son by Ruth; who, though he ſhould carry 
away his Inheritance yer ſhould nor bear his Name, bur the Name 
of Ruth's Husband ; and ſo by preſerving another Man's Name, he 
ſhould loſe his own: Or, Secondly, Becanſe as his Inheritance 
would be but very litr'e increaſed by this Marriage, ſo it might be 
much diminiſhed by being divided amongſt his many Children, 
which he poſſibly had already, and might probably have more by 
Ruch. I Which I freely renounce and reſign to thee. : 

7 * Now this was the manner in former time in Iſrael, * Deut 
concerning redeeming, and concerning changing, for 257% 
to confirm all things 2 ; a man plucked off his ſhoe, 
and gave 7 to his neighbour »z and this was a teſti- 
mony in [Iſrael o. 

m (1.e. ) Inall Alienation of Lands: So that it js no wonder ;jf 
this Ceremony differ a little from that Devur. 25: 9: becauſe that con- 
cerned only one Cafe, but this is more general. Beſides. he pleads 
not the Command of God, but only ancient cuſtom for rhi« p:attice. 

» He who relinquiſhed his Right ro another, plucked off his own 
Shoe and gaveit to him- This was Symbolicz', and a ſignificanc 
and convenient Ceremony, as if he ſaid, Take this Shoe wherewith 
I uſed togo and tread upon my Land, and inthat Shoe dothou en- 


ter upon it, and take poſſeſſion of it. o This was admitted for ſuf- 
ficient Edvidence 1n all ſuch caſes 


8 Therefore the kinſman ſaid unto Boaz, 
thee: ſo he drew off his ſhoe. 

9 \ And Boaz faid unto the elders, and unto all the 
people, Ye are witneſſes this day, that I have bought 
all that was Elimelechs, and all that was Chilions, And 
Mahlons, of the hand of Naomi. 

to Moreover, Ruth the Moabiteſs, the wife of Mah- 
lon have. I purchaſed to be my wife, to raiſe up the 
name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name 
of the dead be not cut cff from among his brethren, 
and from the gate of his place p : ye are witneſſes this 
days 

p (i e.) From among the Tnhabitants dwelling within the Gate 
of this Cuy, which was Bethlehem- Judah. 

11 Andall the people that were in the gate, and the 
elders ſaid, We are wirneſles: The LORD make the 
woman that is come into thine houſe, like Rachel, and 
like Leah q, which two did build the houſe r of Iſrae!: 
and || do thou worthily in Ephratah {; and + be famous lor, # 
1n Bethlehem s. thee rich 

94 Amiable and Fruitful. Thoſe two are ſingled out; partly be- or, f% | 
cauſe they were of a Foreign and Heathniſh Original. and yet in- FHeb.f 
grafced into Gods people, as Ruth alſo was: and partly, becauſe of claim 
that ſingular Fertility which Goa vouchſafed unt? them above their namt: 
predeceſſors, Sarah and Rebecca. Rachel is p'accd before Leah, be 
cauſe ſhe was his moſt Jawful, and only intended, and choſen, and 
beſt-beloved Wife. 7 i. e. Increaſe the poſterity. See Gen. 16. 2. 

Exod. 1: 21: 5 Two Names of one and the ſame place; of 
which fee on Ruth 1: 2. 

12 And let thy houſe be like the houſe of Pharez 1, _ 
(* whom Tamar bare unto Judah ) ot the ſeed which * we” 
the LORD ſhall give thee of this young woman. _ 
_ © As honourable and numerous as his Family was ; whom, though , 
he allo was born of a Stranger, God ſo.far blfſ-d,ri.ar bis Famuly 


Buy zt for 


: chro 


Chap. 1y, 


| 


hal 


He 
js 
eaſe { 
tht, 
[0t, 
redetr 


*i( 
6: 21 


> How _ Matel4 
was one of tne five Families to which all the Trib- of Judah belong- ; 
cd, and the progenicor of the Inhabitants of this City. ; 


13 © co 


d. Iy, 


Teh. ! 
a, Inil 
cover 
ne eay. 
veal in 
ne ear, 


Hebe 
led to 
(eaſe uni 
th:t. 

[ 0t, 
rear % 


t2 muriſÞ, 


* 1 $81 
1.8: 


o t Chro, 


* Deut. 
x6. 6. 

Tf Heb. 
from days 
to days. 


Lev. 2 5 : 


| hap. f 


C: 27, 34: 


1; © So Boaz took Ruth 4, and ſhe was his wife: 


and when he went in unto herx, the LORD gave her 


conception y, and in due time ſhe bare a ſon. _ 

4 Which he might do, though ſhe was a ADabite, becauie the Pro- 
kibition againſt marrying ſuch, 15 to be reſtrained to thoſe whocon- 
tinue in the Heatheniſh eſtate; as 15 evident from the reaton of it : 
Whereas Ruth was a ſincere Profelite and Convert to the God and 
Faith of Ifra:] (ze ) Had Conjugal Converſe with her. See 
Gen. 6. 4. y (i.e) Strength to Conceive and retain Seed. 

14 And the woman faid unto Naomi, Bleſſed be 
the LORD, which hath not Þ left thee this day with- 
out a || kinſman z, that his name may be famous in I 


el 4. 
_— Which is underſtood, Either, Firſt, Ofthe Son new born- Or, 
rather, Secondly, Of Boaz : For the Name of Goel, winch 1s tran- 
ſlated Kinſman or Redeemer, 1s never, that I know of, given to the 
Chi'd born, bur always tothe perſon begetting him of his Brothers 
or near Kinſmans Wife. And whereas it is obj=Ctcd, That there 
was no c-uſe for this Congratulation at this time in reference to 
Boaz, becauſe that was done divers Months before this time : It may 
be replied, that the Memory of that g:.nerous Aﬀtion was revived 
upon this occaſion, and therefore is fir1y mentioned as the Founda- 
tion of this Child's birth : and rhis happy Effe& juſtly leads them 
to the Cauſe and Original of it, which was this» That Boaz hd 
fhewed himſelf ro be a Kinſman or Redeemer, not only in Name and 
Tile, as the other Kinſman was, wv. 6. but in Truth and Reality. 
The words may be rendred, which hath not made, or ſuffered thy Kinſ. 
man to fail to thee; (i. e. ) To negle& or refuſe the performance of 
his Duty to thee and thine, as the other Kinſman did. 4 Heb. and 
bis ame ſhall be famous in Iſrael, for this Noble and Worthy ACtion, 
wherein he gave ſo great an Example of Piety, Charicy, Hunulity, 
and S:If-denial- ; 

15 And he ſhall be unto thee a reſtorer of thy life 6, 
and Þ a nouriſher of + thine old age : for thy daughter 


in law which loveth thee, which * is better to thee than 


tHeb-thy ſeven ſons, hath born him c. 
gr0y hairs. 


þ (i.e. ) Of the comfort of thy Life, which was1n a great mea- 
ſure dead and gone. c Towit, a Son: the Pronoun for the Neun, 
underſtood, which is frequent in the Hebrew Tongue. Or, hath 
born to him ;, ( i. e. ) tothy Kinſman, to wit, a Son, which is eaſily 
underſtood : and fo the Pronoun affix is put for the ſeparate ; of 
which there are Inſtances ; as Joſ. 15; 19: 1 King. 19: 21: Job 7 
37: Exek 29+ 3. 


: SANDER Chap. I: 


16 And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bo, 
ſom, and became nurſe untoitr. | | 

17 And the womengher neighbours gave it a name d, 
ſaying, There is a ſon born to Naomi, and they called 


115 name Obede : he is the father of Jeſſe, the father of . 
David. 


a (i.e. ) They gave her Advice at out the Name; for other- 
wiſe they had no Power or right to do fo. e A ſervair, to wir, to 
:hee, to nouriſh, and comfort, and aſliſt thee ; which Dury Chil- 
dren owe to their Progenitors. 


18 E Now theſe are the generations of Pharez: , | 
* Pharez begat Hezron, 1Chron- 


19 And Hezron begat Ram, and Rambegat Ammi- (2... 
nadab, 


20 And Amminadab begat Nahſhon, and Nahſhon 
begat || Salmon, || Orz 


21 And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed. Salma". 
22 And Obed begat Jeſſe, and Jefle begat David f. 


f How can this be a true Genealogy, ſeing by this means four 
Perſons take up three hundred and eighty Years, which were be- 
tween Salmon and David, and conſequentiy every one of them muſt 
beger a Son when he was very old ? Arſe. 1. It is not certain, that. 
each of theſe was the immediate Parent of him whom be is ſaid ro 
neget : for ſometimes Grand-fathers are ſaid in Scripture to beget 
their Grand-Children, to wit, by the intervention of their imme» 
diat- Sons; whereof Inſtances have been given. And ſometimes 
in Genealogies whole generations are omitted, as may appear by 
Ezra 7.2- compared with 1 Chron. 6. 3, and by Matth. 1. 8. which 
might be done here for divers reaſons now unknown. 2. There 
are many Examples even in prophane Writers, both Ancient and 
Modern, of perſons that have not only lived 120, and 430 years 
and upwards, but have been vigorous, and have begotten Children 
at above 100 years old ; and of Women that have conceived and 
born Childrenat the Age of 50, 60, yea, 70 years And therefore 
if it were fo in theſe more ancient Times, when men were longer- 
lived, and under the Law, when long Life was expreſly promiſed 
ro the obedient and in perſons of ſtrong Conſtitutions, and ſeber 
Converſations, ſuch as ſome of theſe are krown to have been, and 


che others may juſtly be preſumed to be ſuch, it is not ſtrange, nor 
in the leaſt incredible. 


2: Þt 


LE 


The ARGU 


'L SA Mun 


MEN T. 


T is not certainly known who was the Pen-man of this Book, or whether it was Written by one or more Hands ; noris it of 
any great Importance : For ſince there are ſufficient Evidences that God was the chief Author of it, it matters not who was 
the Infrument. As when it appears that ſuch a thing was really an fi of Parliament, or of the Council-Table, it is 

mot conſiderable 1vho was the Clerk, or which was the Pen that Wrote it. And this is the leſs material in ſuch Hiſtorical 
Books, wherein there is but little which concerns the Foundation of Faith and Good Life, and therefore it was not neceſſary to 
Name the Writer of them. It may abundantly ſuffice, that there were in theſe Times divers Prophets and Holy Men of God ; as 
Samuel, and Nathan, and Gad, and David himſelf, ho might each of them Irite ſome part of this and the following Book. | 
But if any Man will out of perverſneſs doubt or deny that theſe Frote it, yet this I ſuppoſe no diſcreet and impartial Man will 
deny, that it is wholly incredible that ſuch Books ſhould be Written in their Times, and recommended to the Church as aPart of 


the Holy Scriptures, aud (o received by the ſucceeding 
Autbority in the Church and Commonwealth of Iſrael. 


CH AP i 
Elkariah goeth yearly up to the feaft at Shiloh with his two wives: Hannah 
« barren ; Peninnah upbraideth her, 1, ==6. Hannah prayeth fervently 
fo the Lord for a ſen : promiſing to ſeparate him a Nazarite unto God, 
T,— 12+ Ely thinking her drunk rebuketh her ; upon her anſwer, ble- 
ſeth her, 13, —-18 She returneth home with Elkanah, and conceiveth; 
beareth Samuel : offereth her ſacrifice « performs her promiſe concerning 
him, 19y == 21» 
JOw there was acertain man of Ramathaim Zo- 
phim 4, of mount Ephraim, and his name was 
* Elkanah, the ſon of Jeroham, the ſon of Etihu, 
the ſon of Tohu, the ſon of Zuph, an Ephrathite 5: 
a Called Ram#h, v. 19. and here is the Dual Number Ramathaim; 
1- e. double Ramah, probatly becauſe it conſiſted of two parts, where 
of the one might be called the Old City, the other che New, bort: 
' being united into ene ; and the additional Title of Zophim, wich 
ſignifies Warch-Towers, or Watch-Men, may norte either the height of 
its ſicuation, which made it fit for that uſe ; or. that the Prophets, 
who are called Watch-men, as Ezeke 3, 17. had a School or Colledge 
there. b i.e. One of Bethlehem-Judah, Ruth, 1- 2 to wir, by his 
Birth and Habiration, though by his Or:ginal a Levites Thus divers 
Jews by Nation are called Medes, Elami es, Cretians, &c. Aﬀs 2 9, 
10, 11. becauſe they were born and bred there. 

2 And he hadtwo-wives c, the name of the one was 
Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah : and 
Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no chiidren. 

c As divers other good Men had-in thoſe Ages: And it is pro- 
bable that he took a ſecond Wife, to wit, Pen:nnah, becauſe Hannah, 
who being firſt named ſeems to have been his firſtWife, was barrren. 

3 And this man went up out of his city * t yearly d, 
to worſhip, and to ſacrifice e unto the LORD of hoſts 
in Shiloh f, and the two ſons of Eli, Hophni, and Phi- 
nehas, the prieſts of the LORD, were there g. 

d To wit, at one of the ſolemn Feaſts which probably was the 
Paſſover, when he not only went up hunſelf, but carried his Wife 
and Children with him. Compare v. 7. Or, at the appointed days or 
times ; Heb. from days 80 days ; or from time to time; i. e, at the three 


Generation, without their Approbation, who had ſo great a Power and 


ſolemn Feaſts, when he, together with all other Males were oblig. 
ed to go ro worſhip Gnd in the place appointed ; and at other 
r1mes, When he was a Levite, was to go thither in his courſe. e Not 
in his own perſon, which the Levites could not do bur by the Prieſts; 
in which ſenſe David, and Solomon, and Abſalom are ſaid to offer ſas 
crifices, 2 Same 5: 8; 1 King. 8: 63. I. Chron. 21: 26. f Where the 
[ abzrnacle had long been, and now was. See Jef. 18. 1. Fudg. 18. 
31: aNd 21: 19. g Or, were the priefts of the Lord there, to wir, undet 
their Father EZ, who is generally conceived to have been the High 
prieſt, but being very old and infirm, 1 Sam. 4+ 15- and unfit for 
'ervice, his Sons miniſtred in his ſtead, being as it were ſecond 
Prieſts. See 2 King. 25. 18. And this Clauie ſeems to be added, to 
'hew that this good Man did not run into that vulgar Error, of ne- 
l-ting his Dary of cffering ro God for the wickedneſs of the 
Pizeſts + Of which ſee Chap. 2. 17, 24+ 

4 T And when the time was that Elkanah offered, 
he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her fons and 
daughters, portions þ. 

h To wit, our of the Sacrifice of his peace-offerings, the greateſt 
part wher-of fell ro the Offerer. and was eaten by him, and his 
Fr-ends or Gueſts. before the Lord, Levit. 3 and 9. Dent. 12. 12. 
and 16: 11 and out of this he gave them all parts or portions, as 
che Malter of tae Feaſt uſed to do ro Gueits. 

5 But unto Hannah he gave || a worthy portion 7 : || Or, . 
( for he loved Hannah &, but the LORD had ſhut up s 4uble 
her womb. JT 
| # Or, an howurable or ſele& part. ſuch as the Maſter of the Feaft 
Uſually gave to rke perſon moſt reſpe&?d or beloved» See Gene 43. 


34. I Sam. 9.23, 24, k With alingulac ani eminent Love. Com- 
pare Gen. 29s Zo. 


6 And her adverfary 1 alſo + p:ovoked her ſore, for f Heb: | 
to make her fret m, becauſ2 the LORD had ſhut up 9n27e4 ber 
her womb. ) 


{ Or, her Troubler, or Vexer, er Enemy ; for ſo her Envy or Jealouſie 
made her, though ſo nearly related. Compare Gen. 29: 39. Levis. 
.18: 18+ # Agaipſt her Husband, or againſt Ged, or within her 


ſelf. 
4 $:4 7 And 


ee Ry 'L 
| Chap. I. 
. P 7 7 PP 4 {he 
| lid ſo » year by year o, || when 

Or, from And as he cl ] ng 
An time + 40 upto the houle of the LORD P, ſo ihe prov OKea 
that ſbe, |.» therefore ſhe wept, and did not cat $. MS 
+ 7 is e. Either as oft as he went and carried them with him m_— 
| = from ſhip : or, as Elkansh expreſſed, __ — _ = 19% 4 ireWghe 
FF TRE. '. e. ) Every year, at the days Or f1 hg : 
Ups ſaid, ye 23354 Calvo x noted, Firſt, As the occaſion of the 


Con! at ſuch times they were forced to more Socte- 


ontention, becauſe | ; ax pt eadene 
bo with one another, by the way, and in their Lodgings; where $ 


7 ight be 
e they had diſtin Appartments, where they M's 
I : tad hen her Huands extraordinary Love and ery 
was ſhewed to Hannah, whereby Peniunah was the er + As - 
ene Homes yp phos Cn, phe ee 
had done in vain; and this poſhivly _ 
condly, As the aggravation of her S1n, that m_ ar" m— cy -- 
ſhip God, and to offer Sacrifices when ſhe ſhould _ hc 
conciled even to her Enemies, Matth. Fo 2J, 24+ INC 4/6 — oy 
wirh ſo nezr a Relation. q Either little, or mags I Ar re 
as being overwhelmed with Grief, and therefore unfit to cat 


Sacred Foed, according to Deur. 12+ 7+ 


EF = MM VE - bs 


drunk neither wine nor ſtrong drink #1, but have pour- 
ed out my foul » before the LORD. 


punithed it with death. Therefore judge me not ſo ſeverely. 1 And 
therefore not I:kely to giveup my ſelf ro Drink and Jollity, and far 
from that merry Temper which Drunkards have: I am drunk with 
Affliction, not with wine, as is faid Ja. 51. 21, 9 Towit this 
day : Sze above, v. 7. 8. » Have been breathing forth the Criefs, 
and perplcxities, and deſires of my Soul, The like phraſe is Job 
30: 16: Pſal. 62:8: and 142: 2+ , 

16 Count not thine hand-maid for a daughter of 
Belial 0; for out of the abundance of my | 
and grief, have I ſpoken hitherto p 

s For ſuch a wicked Monſter, as a drunken Woman is. pþ The 
oppreſſion of my ſpirits hath forced me to ſpeak, and that ſo liberal. 
ly at this times for the eaſe of my finking Heart- 

17 Then Eli anſwered and ſaid, Goin peace q : and 
the God of Iſrael grant r thee thy petition that thou 
haſt asked of him. 


7 Hannah 
Then ſaid Eikanah her husband to her, : 
oo mr a thou ? and why eateft thou not? _ 
* Ruth why is thy heart grieved ? am not I * better to thee 


= 105 an ten ſons r ? | 
= Oughteſt thou not tovalue my hearty Love to yo; pear hon 
the having of as many Sons as Peninnah hath ? She would willingly 


Conditions with thee- . 
T3 &% MWohnah roſe up after they / had eaten 1n 


Shiloh, and after they had drunk : ( now Eli the prieſt 
ſat upon a leat * by 
LORD. ) 


ſ (5. e. ) Elkanah and his Company, except Hannah. Or, She: for. 


ſhe eat nothing, yer upon her Husband's invitation 
- iubntae ſhe mike eat afterwards : though tie former 
may ſeem more p:obable. t Or, Throne ; for it is maniteſt - was _ 
ſed higher than ordinary, chap. 4+ 18+ here he mighr ſit, either as the 
Judge; or rather as High-prieſty to hear and anſwer ſuch orgy to 
him for Advicey and to inſpe& and dire& the worſhip of 4 as 
need Was. # i. e. Of the Tabernacle, which is called the Tempe here, 
and chap. 3+ 3- and 2 Sam. 22. 7+ Pſal. 27, 6. as one the contrary, the 
Temple is called the Tabernacle, Jer. 10. 20. Lam. 2. 6. m_ —_— 
this Tabernacle was bur a Tent, yet 1t was PR by Boards 
and Poſts, and eſpecially at the Entrance, by which El fate, even 
by the Entrance into the - 1 age otherwiſe he could not 
ſeen Hannah. See more on c/ap- 3_ 15. 
+ Heb. bit= Te And ſhe was + in bitterneſs x of ſoul, and prayed 


ORD, and wept fore. : 
ter of ſoul, oy I - yon w"Þ with A as that Phraſe is uſed, Job 7. 11, 


and 10. 1. Ruth 15 20. 


N umb. 11 And ſhe vowed a vow y, and ſaid, O LORD of 
21.2+ hoſts, if thou wilt indeed look on = the attliftion @ of 
thine hand-maid, and remember me, and not forget 
thine hand-maid, bur wile give unto thine hand-maid 
+ Heb. Þ a man-child, then I will give him unto the LORD 
ſeedofmen. þ all the days of his life c, and * there ſhall no raſor 


* Numb. is head d. 

G. F. ——_ her Husband wou'd willingly conſent toit, other- 

Judg-13.5* i ſhe had not power to doit. z To wit, favourably, ſo as to re- 
moveit. # ( i. e. ) The Barrenneſs and Reproach which attends it. 
b (i. e.) Conſecrate him to God's Service in his Temple, as far as 
in me lies: for if he had any blemiſh, ſhe might notdo it- c Not on- 
ly from his 25th. to his 5oth. Year, as all the Levites, and ſo hehim- 
{elf, were obliged by God, Nwnb. 4; 2: and 8: 24. bur for his whole 
time. Which is ſti'l ro be underſtood with Aa reſervation of God's 
Right, which her Vew muſt give place to, as indeed it did ; for God 
vn pom to be a Prophet, and a General ofthe Army, and a Judge. 

' d(3i.e.) Hefhallbe a perpetual Nazarite ; for under this one Rule, 
as the Chief, all the reſt are contained; as elſewhere the whole 
Moſaical Law 1s underſtood, under the Title of Circumciſion. 

And it came to paſs, as ſhe F continued pray- 


Br bg 2 before the LORD, that Eli marked her 
zo prays = mouth f- 


e . multiplied to pray. By which it appears thatſhe ſaid much 
mars tet. And rhe like you are to judge of the 
Prayers and Sermons of other holy Perſons Recorded in Scriprure, 
which gives us only the Summ and ſubſtznce of rhem 
Conſideration may help us much in the underſtanding of ſome 
paſſages of the Bible. f ( 7. e, ) The motion of her lips, as it fol- 
Ts Now Hannah, ſhe ſpake in her heart, only her 
lips moved, but her voice was not heard g: therefore 


. :- Eli + thought ſhe had been drunken 6. 
| hw her aq * Sewy . avoid the ſuſpicion of vain-glory ; partly, becauſe 
for drunken fhe would not have others acquainted with her Barrenneſs, which 
So Gr. was matter of reproach : and partly, becauſe ſhe would not diſturb 
others, who at this ſolemn Feaſt were probably imployed there in 
the ſame work- h Becauſe of the multitude of her words, and 
thoſe uncourh Geſtures and Motions of her Face and Body, which 
the vehemency of her Paſſion, and her fervency in Prayer, cauſed in 
her, as it doth frequently in others ; and becauſe ſhe was but new- 
Iy come from a Feaſt, wherein the manner was to eat and drink 
liberally, ( though not to exceſs) which he knew very well, both 
from the general Cuſtom of thax Seaſon, and from the time of rhe 
T And Eli ſaid unto or, Hop Ps wilt thou be 
] ut away thy wine Irom thee z. 
—_— M ve hab © Lo in thy drunkenneſs, but go and ſleep 
it out, and repent ofthis :hy Sine 


15 And Hannah anſwered and ſaid, No, my lord, 


Heb. & + of a ſorrowtul ſpirit / ; I have | 


hard of T am a woman 
ſpirits > 


" 


Which 


q I recal my Cenſure, and give thee my Bleſſing, and wiſh thee 
Peace; (i.s.) Aquiet and compoſed Mind, free from whatſoever 


| It is that grieves and oppreſſes thee ; and withaly good Succeti and 


prolperity in what thou defireſt ; for Peace is a very comprehenſive 
word among the Hebrews. r Or, will grant : for it may be either 2 


' Prayer, or a prediCFtion, which he might deliver, eicher from the 


a poſt of the temple « ofthe | 


conſideration of Gou's known goodneſs and readineſs to hear Pray 
ers: or he might be directed to ſay ſo by aſpecial inftin& of God's 
Spirit, which tomet mes was given to tie High-prieſts, evzn when 
they were wicked Men, as John 11, 51. and much more when they 
were holy Men, as Eli was. And ſome add, that he was a Pro. 
phet, ; 

18 And ſhe ſaid, Let thine hand-maid find grace in 
thy ſighe/. So the woman went her way, and did eat, 
and her || countenance wasno more ſad ?. 


words, and eſpecially by Goc's Spirit ſetting them home vpon herg 
and afluring her thar both his and her prayers ſhcu!d be heard, it 
quickly appeared in her Cour:tenance. Heb. her indignation, or wexa. 
2:0n ( as the word Face 1s ſor etimes underſtood, as Gen» 32. 206 Pſsl. 
21. 9+ and 34. iG.) war 20 more; (i. e- ) it vaniſhed away, 

19 T And they roſe up in the morning early «, and 
worſhipped before the LORD, and returned, and came 
to their houſe to Ramah; and Elkanah knew Hannah 
his wife, and the LORD remembred her x. 

u Partly for their Journey, and partly for prayer, as it follows, 
for which this was a very fit and uſual time, Pſal. 5, 3+ IIY. 147» 
x {i e. ) Manifeſted his remembrance of her by the effe&. 


bare a ſon x, and called his name || Samuel, 
cauſe 1 haveasked him of the LORD. 


the Birth was paſt, ſhe brought forth her Son. 
Revolution, or Expiration of ſome Days, Hannah concerved, and in due 
tine bare aSon. So the meaning is, Thar although her Husband 
knew her Conjugally at his return, and God was mindful of her, 
and intended in his time to give her his Bleſſing, yer ſhe did not 
Conceive at firſt, but after ſome days, or time afterwards. 9» ie, 
She called, not doubting of her Husbands conſent to the Name. 
The Names of Children were given to them, ſometimes by their 
Fathers, and ſometimes by the Mothers. See Gen. 4+ I, 26; and 5, 
29: and 21 3. and 19. 37, 38, &c. 

21 And the man Elkanah, and all his houſe z, went 


up to offer unto the LORD the yearly ſacrifice 2, and 
his vow 6b. 


z ( 7. e. ) His Wife Penimah,and his Children. which are of-times 
Called a mans Houſe in Scripture, Hannah only and her Child ex- 
cepted, as it here follows. s That ſolemn Sacrifice which was of 
fercd up once every Year ; probably the Paſchal Lamb, which is 
oft called a Sacrifice, as Exod. 12. 29, and 34+ 25- 6 By which it 
appears, though it was not expreſſed before, that he beard and 
conſented to her Vow, which was neceſſary to make it Obligatory, 
Numb. 30. and that he added a Vow of his own, of ſome ſingular 
Sacrifice to be offered, if God anſwered his prayers. 


22 But Hannah went not up c, for ſhe ſaid unto her 


| 


husband, I will not go wp until the child be weaned g, 
and ther I will bring him, that he may appear before 
the LORD, and there abide for ever e. 


c To wit, at that ſacred Anniverſary-Feaft, to which ſhe went up 
before, but now did not, becauſe ſhe could not with fatisfaftion ro 
her Mind and Conſcience appear before the Lord Em pty, or with= 
our paying her Vow ; nor bring her Child thither to Gcd, and then 
carry him away from God to her own houſe. Nor did the fin by not 
going up ; for the Wemen were not obliged to go up atthe ſolemn 
Feaſts burthe Men only, Exod: 23. 17. d Not only from the Breaſt 
and the Milk, which was done within two or three Years at moſt, 
but allo from the Mothers Knee and Care, and from Childiſh Foed - 
ri]l che Child be ſomething grown up, and fit to do ſome Service n 
the Tabernacle : for it ſcems, that as ſoon as he was brought up, 
he worſhipped God, v. 28. and preſently afrer miniſtred tro Eli 
1 S479. 2 11. And this may ſurther appear from the very Nature of 
the Vow, which muſt needs deſign a Service and an Advantage ro 
the Tabernacle, and not a Burden and Encumbrance, as it would 
have been if a young Child had been brought up to it, and left up* 
on it. e That when oncehe is preſented to the Lord, he may con» 
tinue in his Service as long as he liveth, as is ſaid v, 28. 


23 And Elkanah her husband ſaid unto her. Do 
whar ſcemeth thee good;tarry untill theu have weaned 


him, only the LORD eltabliſh his word f': ſo the wo- 
man 


k In whom Drunkenneſs is moſt abominable; ſothat the Romans + 


x So the ſenſe is, When the uſual time from the Cencepticn ts fo 
Heb. In or after the G44 


Chap, [ Fol 


complaine || Or, m, 
Aitatim, 


[ Or, ba. 
J That favourable Opinion ai.d good Will and gracious prayer, vine: wg 
which thou haſt expreſſ:d on my behalf, be pleaſed to continue the 9 mt 


wards me. #t Hc&r heart being cheared by the Prieſts comfortable wy 
«Be 


20 Wherefore it came to paſs + when the time was + Hl, 
come about, after Hannah had conceived, that ſhe inthrn 


ſaying, be- prong 


Thats, 
f 


" 
1: 


Dr, mw, 
Fetin, 


Or, beg 
ineſs Va; 
0 More, 

ee Joby 
7+ Bleb. 


ap, 1 


Wohap. 1 


||Or; re- 
turned him 
whow I 
bave 0þ- 
tained by 
petition, to 
the LORD. 
| Or, he 
Wham 1 
have ob- 
tained by 
peti'7on, 
ſball be re= 
furneds 


FS: Luke 
1; 46:z&C. 


[ 
man abode, and gave her child Tuck until ſhe had wea- 


ed him. | 
f Either, Firſt, The word of God made known to them by El, 
above, v- 17. which being delivered by Goa's High-pricſt, and that 
in anſwer to his and his Wives prayers, he took to be a kind of 
Oracle ſent from God. But that word was already fulfii'ed in che 
Birth of a Son. Or, Seco:1dly, ſome other Word or Meſſuge from 
God to Elkanah or his Wife concerning Samuel ; for ſuch Revelati- 
ons were frequent in thoſe Ages of the Church, and were off vouch- 
ſafed by God, concerning ſuch Children as were extraordinary per- 
ſons, or in a ipecial manner devoted to God ; as Concerning Iſaac 
Gen. 18. and Samſon, Judg. 13: 3, 4+ and John Baptiſt, Luke Is 13, i45 
&c. and others* And ſo it might be here, though 1t were not 
mentioned before, there being many ſuch things in Scriprure omit- 
ted in their proper places, which afterwards ar- expreſſed or im- 
plied upon ks occaſions. Or rather, Thirdly, It may be renured 
þis matter or thing ; i. e« The buſineſs concerning the Chi!d that 
which thou haſt promiſed or Vowed concerning him, that he may 
grow up, and be accepted and employed by God in his Service ; 
and that he, when he is fully grown, may not break thy Vow, bur 
confirm 1t- | : 

24 4 And when ſhe had weaned him, ſhe took him 
up with her, with three bullocks g, and one ephah of 
flour h, and a bottle of wine i, and brought him unto 
the houſe of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child as 
young. 

Z Either, Firſt, One to be offered at that time : the other two 
preſented to the Prizſt. whether for his own uſe, or to be offered 
afrerwards, as he ſaw fir. Or, Secondly. One for a Burnt-offering, 
the Second for a Sin-cfferingy, the Third for a Peace-offering ; of 
which th:y might all Feaſt rogether ; for all theſe ſorts ſeem expe- 
dient for this work and time. + For the Meat-offerings bel-nging 
to the principal Sacrifices, which ro each Bullock were three tenth- 
deals, or thres tenth parts of an Ephah, as :ppears from Numb. «5, 
9. and 28. 12; and fo nine Homers, or nine parts of the Ephah were 
ſpent, and the tenth part was either a ſeparate Meat-offering, or 
given to the Pricſt- i For Drink-offerings, according to the man- 
NCT. 

25 And they ſlew a bullock &, and brought the child 
to Eli. 


& Either, Firſt, One of the three at preſent, reſerving the reſt for 
the future. Or, Secondly, The three Buliccks mentioned. v 22. 
to which the Article here added, inti.e Hebrew, ſeems manifeſt'y to 
relate; there being no one Bullock there, fingled our, to which it 
can belong: And ſoitis only an Enailage of the ſingular Number 
for the Plural, which is frequent. 

26 And ſhe ſaid, O my lord /, as thy ſoul liveth ms, 
my lord, I am the woman that ſtood by thee here, 
praying unto the LORD. 

I A Form of Speech to engage favourable Attention. m The uſual 
Form of an Oath, as Gen. 42: 15: 1Sam. 17; 55. and 20. 3- Asſure- 
ly as thou liveſt. Which Aſſeverations ſeem neceſſary, becaute 
this was ſome Years after it, and was quite forgorten by him. 


27 For this child I prayed, and the LORD hath gi- 
ven me my petition, which | asked of him: 

28 Therefore alſo I have || lent him to the LORD » 
as long as he liveth, || he ſhall be lent o co the LORD. 
And he p worlbippag_ the LORD there. 


» Or, given him. &c. RB. do now give or offer him : for ſhe did 
not lend him for a time, with a purpoſe or Right to R-quire him 
again. The words may be rendred thus: nd 1 alſo askea him or 
made my ſelf to ak him ( an uſual Hebraiſm ) for the Lyrd ; i. &. pray= 
ed for this Child, not only for my ſelf, znd ro take away my Re- 
proach, but eſpecially that I might have a Child ro ſerve and de- 
vote tothe Lord. And ſo the following words, as long as he liveth, 
are not to be joyned with the following Clauſe, but with rhoſe which 
come next after them ; and that whole Clauſe may be rhu+ rendred, 
as 2 conſequent upon the former : And, or therefore all the cays in 
which he 1s, or ſhall be, he is or ſhall be lent or given to the Lord; or, as 
one begged for the Lord, and for his Service, and therefore juſtly gi- 
ven to him» o Or renared, or uſed as one given in my prayer ; for this 
was the condition of my prayer. that he ſhould be :1e Lords. p Not 
Eli, who 1s not mentioned, but v. 25. and then only pallively, not 
as ſpeaking or doing any thing ; nor Elkanah, of w!.om here isno 
mention : but young Samuel, who is the tubjet& {poken of in this 
and the foregoing Verſe, and who was capable of worſhipping God 
in ſome ſort, at leaſt with External Adoration ; cf which 
ſee on v. 22. And ſo the Particle there is Empharical, ſignifying 
that hereby he entred himſelf into the worſhip and ſervice of God 


: L is 4 M DU aus 


H—— 


in that placey to which he was devoted by his Parents, and now did : 


devote himſelf, 


GH AF 


Hannah's ſong, 1, === Io. Samuel miniſters before the Lord, 14. Eli's 
ſons are wicked, 12 —=17. Hannah beareth more children, 20, 21. 


E7; reproves his ſons but mildly, 22, === 25. God by a prophet foretelleth 
the deſtruffion of Eli"s houſe, 27, ——36. 


ASL Hannah prayed ay and ſaid, * My heart re- 
A. joyceth b in the LORD 6c: mine horn is exalted 
d in the LORD : my mouth is enlarged e over mine e- 
nemies f, becauſe I rejoice in thy ſalvation g. 

s t e. Praiſed God ; which is a part of v ayer, Col, 4. 2: 1 7m. 
2, f, {o it isa Synecdochical Expreſſion. 5 Or, leaperh for joy : for 
the words note not only inward Joy, but alſo the outward Demon- 
ſtrations of it. c As the Author and the Maſter of my Joy, thar he 
hath heard my prayer, and accepted my Son for his Service. a My 
ſtrength and glory ( which are ot fignified by an Horn, as Pſal. 89. 
17, 24. and 92: Io. ) are advanced and manif-fted to my Vindica- 
tion,and the Confuſion of mine Enemies e 5. e. Opened wide to pour 
forth abundant praiſes ro God, and to give a fuii Anſwer to 21! cae 
Reproaches of mine Adyerſaries ; whereas, before it was ſhut 


through Grief and Confufiom: F ( 5. e.) More than theirs, or ſo 
as to get the Viftory over them, as ſhe ſaith afterwards. Here ſhe 
maniteſts her great Prudence, and piety, and Modeſty, that ſhe 
doth not name Penimah,but only herEnemies in the general. g Becauſe 
the marrer of my Joy 1s 80 trivial or worldly thing, but that 
ſtrange and gioricus Salvation or Deliverance which thou haſt giver 
me from my own oppreſfling Care and Grief, and from the infolen- 
cies and Reproaches of mine Enemies, in giving me a Son, and ſuch 
2 SON a5 this, who ſhall be ſerviceable to God and to his people, in 
helping them againſt their Enemies, which ſhe preſaged, as may be 
gueſſed from v. ro. 


Chap. 


2 * There is none holy as the LORD 5b: for there js * D*ut& 


none beſide thee z 3 
God &. 


h None ſo perfe&tly, unchangeably and conſtantly Holy, as God 
hath ſhewed himlelf ro bein this A& of Grace to me, whereby he 
hath borh checked the proud and mighty, and pleaded the Cauie of 
his aff Cted Servant thar truſted in him, and alſo fulfilled his Pro- 
miſe in giving me a Son, whom he hath ſanQified by his Grace to 
his Service; a'l which are the proper Effe&ts of God's Holineſs; 
; Not on!y none 15 ſo Holy as thou art, but in truth there 75 none ho- 
ly ( which word is eaſily underſtood out of the former Clauſe ) be= 
ſides thee ; to wit, intirely, or independently, but only by partici« 
pation from thee. Or, as none haye any Holineſs like thine, ſo none. 
have any Beeing beſides thee, unleſs by derivation from thees/ k 
Thou only art a ſure Defence and Refuge to all that flee to thee, 
and truſt in thee, as I have found by my Experience. 


3 Talk no more ſo exceeding proudly 1: * let not 


+ arrogancy ws come. outef your mouth : for the LORD * Mal 
« I'Js 
Heb. 
bard, 


is a God of knowledge », and by him a&ions are 
weighed o. 


' 1 Thou Peninnah, boaſt no more of thy numerous Off:ſpring, and 
ſpeak no more inſolently and ſcornfuliy of me, as thou haſt done. 
She ſpeaks of ker in the Plura] Number, becauſe ſhe would not ex. 
poſe her Name to Cenſure, but only inſtru& and reprove her for 
her good. wm Heb. hard Speeches, as thoſe are called, Fudge wv. 15. 
harſh, heavy, and not to be born. Or, the old Sayings, either the 
old Proverbs concerning barren Women, which thou appliedſt to 
me; or, the old R-proaches, to which for 2 long time thou baſt ac« 
cuſtomed thy ſelf. n» He knoweth thy Heart, and ail that Pride, 
and Envy, and Contempt of me, which thy own corſcience knows: 
and all thy perverſe Carriages towards me. o 7. e. He pondererh, 
or trieth a]] mens Thoughts and Ations, ( for the Hebrew word fig- 
.ifies both) as ajuſt Judge, to give to every one according to their 
Works ; and therefore he hath pitied my oppreſſed Innocency, and 
rebuked her Arrogancy. Or, by him Councels or Aftons, 01 Events, 
are diſpoſed ox ordered. and not by our ſelves; and therefore he 


brings many things to paſs contrary to Mens expeQations,as now he * | 


hath done ; he maketh one Barren, and another Fruitful, when, 
and how itpleaſeth him. In the Hebrew Text it is Lo the Adverb - 
and ſo the words may be rendred thus, his 4#ions are net, or cannot 
be direfied orreftified, or correffed by any others; nor can mend hig 
Work; he doth every ching beſt, and in the beſt ſeaſon, as now he 
hath done : Or weighed, or numbred, his ways are unſearchable: or 
thus, are not his works right and firaight ? who canblame his Aftions ® 
So Lois for halo, as it 1s 2 Sam. Is 20. 2 King. 5« 26 Job 2. 10. 

4 The bows pof the mighty men are broken, and 
they that ſtumbled q are girt with ſtrength #, 

p This notes, either, x. The ſtrength of which they boaſted 2 See 
Pſal « 44: 6; and 46: 9. Or, 2. Their malicious or miſchievous De= 
ſiens. See Pſal. 7: 123 and 11: 2:and 37: 14. Or, +. Their virulent 
Tong es, which are compared to bows that fhoor their Arrows, even 
bitter Words ; as it is ſaid, Pſal. 64: 3. Compare Jer. 9: 3: Or, 4. Their 
procresting Vertue, which may well be compared to a bow, both 
becauſe it is called a mans Frength, Gen. 49: 3; and becauſe Chil- 
dren, which are the EffeQs of it, and are as it were ſhot from that 
bow, are compared to arrows, Pal. 127: 4, 5. And this ſeems beft ts 
agree with the following Verſe. q Or, were weak, or feeble, in Body 
and Spirit, that had no ſtrength to conceive, which was once Sarahbs 
caſe, Heb 11; 11: Or, to bring forth, which was Iaels condition 


under Hezekiah, 2 King. 19: 3. r Are enabled both to conceive and 
to bring forth, as the Church was, 1a. '66. 9. 


9 
5 * They that were tull have hired themſelves out for * Phi. 
= 
15+« 19% 


bread s: and they that were hungry, ceaſed & : ſo that 
the barren hath born ſeven «, and * ſhe that hath ma- 
ny chi!dren x, 1s waxed feeble y. 


s Through extreme neceſſity, into which they are fallen from 
their greareſt plenty. Ir is the ſame thing which is expreſſed borh 
in div-rs Metaphors in the foregoing, and following Verſes, and 
properly in the latter branch of this Verſe. + 7. e. Ceaſed to be 
ſuch, to wit, hungry ; the hungry failed : there was none of them 
hungry or indigent. #7. & Many ; as feven is oft uſed. Ske ſpeaks 
in the P-opherick Style, the paſt time, for the future ; for though ſhe 
had aCttual'y born bur one, yet ſhe had a confident perſwaſten that 
the ſhou!d have mere, which was grounded either upon ſome parti- 
cuJar Aſſurance from God ; or rather upon the prayer or Pcediftion 
of Ei, which, though it be mentioned after rhis Song, v, 20. yet in 
all prob bility was ſpoken before ir, even upon the Parents preſen- 
tation of the Child to El, shap. 1. v. 25: it not being likely that ſhe 
would ſing this Song in E's preſence, or before he had given his 
Anſwer to her Speech delivered, ch. x wv. 26: 27, 28: there being no= 
thing more frequzat than ſuch tranſpoſitions in Scripture. And the 
experience ſhe had of the ſtrange and ſpeedy accompliſhment of 
his former Prophecy, made her confidently expe& the ſame Iflue 
from the latter. x ( 5. e, ) Peninnah. y Either becauſe ſhe was now 
paſt Child bearing, and impotent for Procreation : or, becauſe dis 
vers of her Children, which were her ftrengrth and her glory, were 
dead, as the Hebrew Doflors relate. 


6 * The LORD killeth, and maketh alive z, he * gee; 


bringeth down to Þ the grave, and bringeth up. 2 
= Either, r. Divers perſons : he killeth one, and maketh another f 

alive: Or, 2. Theſame perſon whom he firſt killeth, cr bringeth very 

nigh unto death; he afterwards raiſeth to life. Me, who was almoſt 


2 OY Cr- 


3 
& T 


neither 3s there any rock like our dfr1 86: 
& 389: 6, | 


Heb: rel. 


I 


| j * nt ery in facred Scripture,and prophane Writers, is oft given 


: 


El 
+1 . 


\ Vas epi 


| Pſc7 57. 


{\d 
WEPl. 


Fit T3. Ta 


Wo _ is uſed, 1 Kings 16+ 2. 


ap. II. 


1 atd conſumed with Grief, he hath revived. The name | 


to great Calamities ; as Iſa. 26+ 19» Exck. 37. 11. Rom. 8. 36+ 


> The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich ; * he 


ingeth low, and lifteth up. 
— X raiſeth up the poor out of the duſt b, and 
lifteth up the beggar from the dunghil c, to ſer them 
among Princes, and to make chem inherit d the _ 
of glory e: for the pillars f of the earth are the LORDS, 


hath ſet the world upon- them. 

my _ Our of their low and miierable Condition ; as th .- Hos 
Pſal. 1 13: 7- Compare Job 16: 15: Pſol. a 
and mean Eſtate. Compare 
11; Pſal. 7: 5 Which the poor are ſaid to 
d Not only ra - ge gry nt Ro 

] to their poſterity. as hath ofr happened n the : Or, 
uſes 24 i.e A locous Throne or Kingdom. f _— TE 
Foundations of the 7 ror joan goot 3 up n of Few» 
wherewith he ſuſtains the Earthy and A!l1ts 1 a proue 
i with pillars ; and therefore it is not ſtrange if he 
bac ooo => things therein as he pleaſeth. "ih qi 

rinces or governours of the Earth, which are called, the oo GY 
ST Hoace of a Land or people, Judg. 20; 2. 1 Sam. by = +3 
3. 6. and are fitly called pillars, becauſe they uphold the ws 
and keep it from ſinking into confuſion # See P/al. 74+ 2+ yo F, k 
Revel. 3.12. And theſe are here ſaid te be the Lords, by ago" 
and Conſtitution, becauſe he @ 1-47 xp by oinrempo _ 

in it, Prov. $. 15. 16- and puts the , 

| Pp =» grbay World, »pon them, as burdens upon their ſhoul- 


_ > oy keep the feet g of his ſaints, and the 


wicked (ball be * ſilent þ in darkneſs z ; for by ſtrength 


an prevail &. : | 
nn as _ or paths, their Counſels and AQtions ; he wall 
keep ; (i e. ) bcth uphole, that they way nor fall, at leaſt into _ 
chief or utter Ruine ; and dire& and preſerve from wandring, an 
from thoſe fatal Miſtakes and Errors that wicked Men daily run out 
tos: þ Shall be put to filence : they who uſed to open their _ - 
: wide againſt Heaven, and againſt the Saints, ſhall be ſo confoun ap 
" with the wnexpetted diſappointment of all their hopes, and on 1 
* Gods glorious appearance and operations for his people, 70 t rig 
ſhall have their Mouths quite ſtopped, and fir down in fi = - 
' mazement and Conſternation : See 1/#. 15. 1. Jer, 8. 4 - 47+ + 
6. 5 Both inward in their own Minds which are wholly in the 
dark, perplexed by their own Choice and Counſels, not knowing 
| what to ſay or do ; and outward, in a ſtate of deepeſt Diſtreſs and 
Miſery. k To wit, againft God, or againſt his Saints, as the Wic- 
ked were confident they ſhould do, becauſe of their great power, 
and wealth, and Numbers: Whereas Gods people were mean, and 
impotent, and helpleſs. And particularly, Peninnah ſhall not pre- 
vail againſt me by that ſtrength which ſhe hath, or thinks to have 
from her numerous Off-ſpring- Burt it is to be obſerved, that al- 
though Hannah takes the riſe of this Song from her own ——_— 
yet ſhe extends her Thoughts and Words further, even to the n ual 
Methods of Geds providence in the Government of the World. 


he adverſaries of the LORD / ſhall be broken ro 

Jeces oy : out of heaven » ſhall he thunder upon 
them o : the LORD ſhall judge p the ends of the earth 
9, and hefſhall give ſtrength unto his king 7, and * ex- 


orn 5 of his anointed r. 
— —_ his people ; eſpecially the Philifines, who at this time 
were the chief oppreſſors of Iſraz!. m Theſe and the following 
words are prophetical of what God was about to do: They who are 
now our lords, ſhall be ſubdued- #» 7. e- Out of the Clouds or Airs 
which is oft called Heaven. o As was done, 1 Sam 7. 10» Þ ze. 
Shall condemn and puniſh, as that Verb by a Synecdoche is oft 
uſed. 9 Or, of the land, to wit, the Philiſtines who dwelt in the ut- 
moſt Borders of Canaan, even upon the Sea-coaſte 7 Either, 1, Unto 
the Judge or Ruler whom he ſhall ſer up for the prote&tion and De- 
Jliverance of his people; the word King being elſewhere ſo taken. 
Or. 2. The King properly ſo called : and ſo the prophefieth, That 
Iſrael ſhould have a King, and that there ſhould be a great diffe- 
Tence between King and King ; between the peoples King, Sau!, 
whom they would obſtinately and paſſionately deſire ; by whom 
therefote they ſhould have bur little relief; and Gods King, David, 
whom Ged would chuſe as a Man after his own Heart, and whom 
he would ſtrengthen and affift ſo, as by his Hands to break all his 
Enemies to pieces. F #- e. Increaſe, or advance the ſtrength. 7? 1. e. 
Of his King. The ſame thing repeated in other words ; although 
it may have a Myſtical ſenſe and reſpett to Chriſt, the ſingular a- 
nointed one of God, and the ſpecial King of his people, whom al] 
their other Kings did Typifie and Repreſent, and from whom they 
received Authority and power. ; 
xx And Elkanah went to Ramah to his houſe, and 


the child did miniſter unto the LORD « before Eli the 


x. : | 
_ ſome way agreeable to his tender Years, as in ſinging, or 
playing, upon Inſtruments of Muſick, as they uſed then to do in 
Gods ſervice; or lighting the Lamps, or ſome other way: For, I 
ſuppoſe, Samuel was not broughr to the Tabernacle in ſuch tender 
years as ſomethink: of which, ſee on 1 Sams I. 22, 7 &, Under the 
Inſpe&ion, and by the DireCion and Inſtruftion of El:, 


12 © Now the ſons of Eli were ſons of Belial, they 


ew not x the LORD. 
-_ To oo edicaty ; ze. they did not ackdowledge, honour, 
= Sy Love, or ſerve God; for fo words of knowledge are Com- 
monly uſed in Scripture ; See Rom. I. 28, I Cor: 15. 34+ Tit. Is 16. 
* Chay.8. 213 And the prieſts * cuſtom with gee people, _, 
£ that when any man offered z ſacrifice, the prieſts ſer- 
g vant came, while the fleſh was in ſeething «, with a 


O . 
» To 


is Phraſe 


16. c From the moſt ſordid place, 
1 King: 16: 2: Joh. 36: 
embrace, Lamenti 4? 5+ 


* pſal: 
91. 11. 
* Pſal. 


94, 17s 


* Chap. 
7. 10% 


* ſal. 
$9. 244 


A SAMDURI 


fied: or grew great, famous and acceptable, as v. 26. 


2 7, e. Preſented it to the Lord, fo be offered by the Prieſt. » For 
as the Lord's part of the Peace-cfferings was burnt upon the AJ. ar, 
ſo the Prieſts and Offerers parts were to be ſodden. 

14 And he ſtrook it into the pan, or kettle, or ca1- 
dron, or pot: all that the fleſh-hook brought up, the 
prieſt took for himſelf b : ſo they did in Shiloh to ail 
the Ifraelites that came thither. 

6 Not contented with the Breaſt and Shoulder which were allotted 
them by Ged. Exod. 29. 28. Levit. 7. 31s they took alto part of the 
Offerers ſhare ; and beſides, they ſnatched their part betore it was 
heaved and weaved ; contrary to Levis. 7. 3 4« 

15 Alſo before they burnt the fat c, the prieſts ſer- 
Yant cams, and ſaid to the man that ſacrificed, Give 
fleſh to roſt for the prieſt : for he will not have ſodden 
fleſh of thee but raw. g 

c« And the other parts to be burnt with jt. See Levit. 3. 3, 4,9" 
and 7. 31. fothis was an additional Injury ; for, leſt the Fork ſhov]d 
miſtake and injure them, they took ſuch parts as they beſt liked 
whilſt it was raw, when it might be better diſcerned. 

16 And if any man faidunto him, Let them not fail 


{oul deſireth 4: 
thou ſhalt 
force. 


a We are content to Relinquiſh our parts to thee, only let not 
God be wronged of his due. 

17 Wherefore the ſin of the young men was very 
great e before the LORD f: for men abhorred the of- 
fering of the LORD g, 

e Becauſe they violently took away both mans and Gods dues, 
and this before their time, and that with manifeſt contempt of God 
and men; andall this meerly for the gratifying of their ſenſual Ap- 
petite. f i.e, Even in the place of Gods ſpecial preſence, where he 
ſaw and obſerved all their Miſcarriages ; which argves the height 
of Impiety and Imprudence. g They negle&ed and abhorred the 
prattiſe of carrying vp Sacrifices to be cffered, which they knew 
would be fo groſly abuſed ; and which, asthey might think; would 
be rejected and abhorred by God himſelf; and therefcre they would 
not contribute to the Prieſts Sing ard the corruption of Gods Wor- 
ſhip; bur judged it better to negle& the thing, than to <xpoſe it 
to the Pricſts depravation ; wherein yer they erred, as we ſee, 
Verſe 24. 

18 4 But Samuel miniftred hb before the LORD 3, 
being a child, * girded with a linen Ephod &. 

h 1. e. Performed his Miniſtratien careful'y and faithfully, not 28: 4. 
corrupting nor abuſing it, as E's Sons did. # In Gods Tabernacle: 
or as in Gods preſence, ſincerely and regularly, with Gcds appro= 
bation. Compare Gen. 17. 1. 2 Chron. 26, 44 & A garment uled in 
Gods ſervice, and all-wed not ofily ro the inferiour Prieſts and Le- 
vites, but alſo to eminent perſons cf the people ; as 2 Sam. 6 I4, 
and therefore co Samuel, who, though no Levite, was a Nazarite, 
and that fiom his Birth. 

19 Moreover, his mother made him a little coat A 
and broughr ir to him from year to year, when the came 
up with her husband, to offer the yearly ſacrifice. 

/ Suitable to his Age and Stature, to be worn ordinarly : for coats 
were their vſual Garments. See Gen. 3: 21: and 37: 3« 2 Sams 1 $. 328 
Cant. 5; 3: Dan. 2: 21: Luke 3:11: and 9g: 3. Knowing that he could 
not yet do much ſervice, ſhe would not have him too burdenſome 
to the Tabernacle, and therefore ſhe yearly provided him with a 
Coar, which was the chief and upper Garment; and under that 
his other Garments poſſibly are comprehended. 


20 T And Eli bleſſed Elkanah, and his wife », and 
ſaid, The LORD give thee ſeed » of this woman, for 


give #f me now: and if not, I will take it by day, 


God's Name, and they received his Bleſſing by Faith, which made © 
ir <ffeCtual, v. 21. 7 1. e, A Child, or rather Children, as the Event 
ſthewed. o Or, for the petition; i. e. the thing deſired, to wit, the 
Child; which ſhe, thy Wife, asked of the Lord ; or, fer the Lord: as 
chap. 1.28. to whom accordingly ſhe hath given them. And there. 
fore as ſhe asked kim not ſo much for her ſelf, for ſhe ſeldom ſees 
him, as forthe Lord, to whoſe ſervice ſhe hath wholly devored him; 
{ now I pray, that God would give you other Children for both 
your Comfort and Enjoyment. 


21 Andthe LORD viſited p Hannah, ſo that ſhe con- 
ceived and bare three ſons, and two daughters ; and 
the child Samuel grew q before the LORD r. 

p To wit, in Mercy, and with his Bl:ſling, as that word is uſed, 
Gen. 21e 1, Exod: r3, 19. Jer, Is. 15. not in anger, as it is taken 
Exod. 32. 34+ Levit. 26. 16. q Not only in Age and Stature; bur 
eſpecially in Wiſdom and Gnedneſs, as Luke 1. 15. Or, was magni. 
# Not only 
before Men, who might bedeceived, butin the preſence and Judg- 
ment of the All-ſeeing God. 


22 © Now Eli was very old s, and heard all that his 
ſons did unto all Iſrael s, and how they lay with the 


nacle of the congregation. bled if 


make a diligent inſpeRion into the Carriage of his Sons in Holy 7"® 
Adminiftrations ; which gave them opportunity for their Wicked- E** 3% 
neſs. : Whom they injured in their Off:rings, and alienated from N" 7 
the Service of God. u« Or warred : which expreſſion is nted of them, #19 *** 
either becauſe they came to the Service and Worſhip of God in the 
Tabernacle, which is often called a warfare ; or, becauſe they came 
in conſiderable numbers, and due order, like to an Army. x Tie 
place where all ghe people both Men and Women waited when 


fleſh-hook of three teeth in his hand, 


they 


the || loan which is lent to the LORD oe. And they |. Or, jr. 
went unto their own home. _ = 
m As their Superiour, and God's High-prieſt, he bleſſed them ky 2 


women that || aſſembled « at the door x of the taber- or, 


. - . #0"! of 
s Andtherefore unfit either to manage his Office himſelf, or to 797” ," || 


þ 


Chap. 11, © 


to burnthe fat F preſently, and zhen take as much as thy t Heb. * 
then he would anſwer him, Nay, but © # tle 


* Exod, 


: 


I | 
4 


BIS) 3 =o en owes oC SS 


\F STS WW 


» aw 1s 


'x0d. 


Or, jets 
00 which 
'e arkid, 
X Co 


' f, Y | 
| Or," 


bled by 

gro'ps, 0 
warn: 6 
= 0, : 
Ex 3% * 
Nu +* 
and $S: :4 


Chap. 1I- I. S 4 


they came up to the Service of Gods 1 Sam. I. 9, 12. Luke. 1: lo: 
becauſe they could not have admittance into the Tabernacle, and 
becauſe the Altar on which their Sacrifices were offered, was by 
the Door: Hence it ſeems probable, that theſe Women were not 
ſuch 2s devoted themſelves to the Service of God and of his Taber- 
nacle, either by Faſting and Prayer, &s. Orby Sowing, Spinning, 
&c. Which, if then there were any ſuch, had their Stations not 
at the Door, but in divers places allotted to them round about the 
Tabernacle ; but of ſuch as came up-to worſhip God at his Taber- 
nacle; as Women oft-times did, with their Husbands, as here Haz» 
nah did, and the bleſſed Virgin Mary, Luke 2. 42- or with their Pa- 


rents. And this Expoſition may receive ſtrength from Exod. 38- 8. | ' 


where the very ſame Phraſe is uſed, and that when the great Taber- 
racle was not yet built, and ſo there was no occaſion for any Wo- 

; men to come to the. other leſs Tabernacle then uſed, fave only to 
Pray or offer Sacrifices. 


And heſaid unto them, Why do ye ſuch things y? 
for [1 hear of your evil dealings by all this people z. 


3 As thoſe above mentioned, v- Iz: and Verſe 22: El:'s Sin in 
this matter was not only that he Reproved them too gently, and 
generallie, and ſparinglie; but eſpecially, that he contented him- 
ſelf with a Verbal Rebuke, and did not reſtrain them, as is ſaid chap. 


| O, 7hear 
evil words 


of y0u, 


3: 13. and inflidt thoſe puniſhments upon them, of putting them | 


out of their Prieſts office, and cutting them. off from Gods people; 


which ſuch high Crimes deſerved by Gods Law, and which he as 


Judge and High-prieſt ought to have done, withour all Reſpe& of 
perſons. = Thar dwell here, or come hither to worſhip. 


24 Nay, my ſons: for it « no good report a that I 


|Or, * hear, ye make the LORDS people [| to tranſgreſs 6. 

ery Outs # Words too mild for ſuch Diabolical A&ions. b Either, 1. The 
Women that by your Inſtigation were drawn to Folly. Or, 2. 
Others who are eaſily brought ro follow your pernicious Example. 
Or, 3- Other perſons of pious and honeſt Minds, whom therefore 
he calls the Lords People by way of diſtinQtion from the chilaren of Be- 
tial, who-were fo highly offended with the great diſhonour done ro 
God, and to his Worſhip, and with the horrible wickedneſs of the 
Prieſts, that upon that occaſion, they were hurried into the other 
Extreme, and lived in the negle& and contempr of their own indi(- 
pentible Duty of offering Sacrifices, becauſe they came through the 
Prieſts hands. : 

25 Ifoneman ſin againſt another c, F the judge ſhall 
judge him 4: but if a man fin againſt the LORDe, | 
js rey WRO ſhall intreat for him f? notwithſtanding, they 

-zy hearkened not unto the voice of their father, becauſe 
frhim to the LORD would ſlay them f. 

the LORD* «© By doing any Injurie. 4 The Magiſtrate ſhall by his Sentence 

#Heb. who end the difference, and both parties ſhall acquieſce in his Determi- 

make nation, and ſo the Breach ſhall be made up. The ſenſe is, It only 

himſelf ® Man be wronged, Man can right it, and Reconcile the perſons. 

Judge for e Towit, inſuch manner as you have done, d:.re&ly and immediate- 

tim? Iy, in the matters of his Worſhip and Service wilfully and pre- 

ſumptuouſly. f The Offence is of 1o high a Nature, that few or 

none will dare to intercede for him, but will leave him to the juſt 

Judgment of God. He ſpeaks after the manner of men, who do off 

intercede with the Prince, for ſuch as have injured any private per- 

ſon; but will not preſume to do ſo when the Injury is commirted 

againſt his own perſon. The words are, and may be thus rendred, 

IWho ſball judge for him 2 Who ſhall interpoſe himſelf as Umpire, or 

Arbitrator between God and him ? Who ſhall compound thar Dit- 

ference ? None can or dare do it, and therefore he muft be left 

ro the dreadful, but righreovs Judgment of God: which is your 

Caſe and Miſery. f z. e. Becauſe God had determined to deſtroy 

them for their many and great Sins; and therefore would not, and 

did not give them grace to hearken ro E's Counſel, and to repent 

of their Wickedneſs, but hardned their Hearts to their deſtruCti- 


+ Heb. 
God ſhall 
judge him, 


ON» 
*Pro.3:4 26 And the child Samuel grew on g, and was in*fa- 
Luke your both wich the LORD, and alſo with men. 


Age : g He grew better in bad Times, which is remembred to his Com- 
2: 47 mendation. | 

Rom- 27 And there came a man of God hþ unto Eli, and 
14: 18: (2jd unto him, Thus faith the LORD, || Did I plainly 
Or, in « 

avearing APPEAr 5 unto the houſe of thy father &, when they 
did I op» Were in Egypt, in Pharaohs houſe m ? | 
pears þ (3. e ) A prophet or Preacher ſent from God ; See t Tim. 6. 


Tl. 2 Tim, 3+ 17. 2 Pet» 1+. 21, Who this was is not revealed by 
God, and therefore it is vain to enquirey and impoſlible ro deter- 


mine. 7; Did I indeed ſhew ſuch a favour, and appear ſo evident- 


ly and gloriouſly to thee, and for thee, and is this thy r:quital ? 
k (i.e. } Unto Aaron the Chief of thy Fathers Houſe. / See Exod. 
4 27- 1m (1.e,) Either, 1. In Pharaohs Land ; the whole Kingdom 
being as it were one great Family, whereof Pharaoh was the Maſter. 
Or, 2. In Pharaohs Court, where Aaron might probably be at rhe 
time of this Revelation, either to anſwer tv ſome Accuſation againft 
him, or his Brethren, or to beg ſome Relaxation of the Rigour, or 
for ſome other occaſion. 


28 And did I chuſe him » out of all the tribes of If- 
rael, tobe my prieſt, to offer upon mine altar, to burn 
*Levit, Incenſe, to wear anephod o, before me ? and * did I 


10: 14 $g1VE unto the houſe of thy father all the offerings made 
= 54 by fire p of the children of Iſrael ? 


» Towit, Aaron thy Father ; whereby ne ſhews what he meant 
by his Fathers houſe. o That golden Ephod, which was peculiar to 


she High-prieſt. p (7. e.) Allthe prieſts part 5f the Off:rings. H 
only had the Office, and he had che whale benglle gs. te 


29 Wherefore kick ye at my ſacrifice 9, and at mine 
offering, which I have commanded is my habitation, 
and honoureſt thy ſons above me r, to make your ſelves 
fat s wich the chiefeſt of all the offerings c of Ifrael my 
people 2 


M OE L 


Chap. IT: 


9 Uſing them irreverently, contemptuouſly, and prophanely ; 
both by abuſing them to your own Luxury, and by cauſing the 
people to abhor and negle&t them, He chargeth £/ with his Sons 
Faults. » Permitting them ro difhonour and injure me, by tzking 
my part to themſelves; chuſing rather to off:nd- me by thy con- 
nivence at their Sin, than to diſpleaſe them by ſevere Rebukes, 
'and effeQtual Reſtraints,. and juſt puniſhment ; and ſo prefer their 
Will and Pleaſure, and Honour, befoxe mine. 5s To pamper your 
'{elves. This you did not out of any Nec<fliry, bur oyt of mere - 
\Luxury. £ Not contented with thoſe parts which Þ had alloted 
, you, you. invaded thaſe. choice Les which I, reſerved for my ſelf* 

' 30 Wherefore the Lord GOD of Iſrael ſzith, I ſaid 
indeed «, that thy houſe, and the houſe of thy father 
ſhould:walk before me x for ever y: but now the LORD 
faith, Be it far from me z3 forchem that honour me | 
8, I will honourk; and * they that deſpiſe me c, *Mal.2. 9. 
ſhall be lightly eſteemed. d. | 

# Burſt. Where, or when did God fay this ? Anſwer, Either, r, | 
When he made that promiſe for the perperuarion of the Prieſthood. 
in Aarons Family, Exod. 28; 43- and 29- 9. Objr#. Tf Eli and all his 
Family had been cut off, yet thar promiſe: had been. made good in 
Eleazar's Family-: how. rhen was that promiſe recalled/by this Sen-. 
tence againſh Br > Anſwer'It was Recalled and! made void, though 
not abſolutely and univerſally to alt Azron's Family ; yer reſpe&ti- 
vely to. Eli and his Family, which were wholly excluded fiom the 
benefit of it, wherein otherwiſe they ſhou!d have ſhared, Even as 
Gods keeping of the Iſraelites out of Canaan, and in the Wilderneſs 
for forty Years, and deſtroying them there, is called his breach of 
promiſe, Numb. 14. 34 although the promiſe of Canaan was not 
ſimply made void to all the !ſrae/ites, but only to that evil Genera- 
tion of them : Or, as Gods Covenant with David, and with his Seed, 
of which God faith, that it ſhould ſtand faſt, Pſal. 89. 28. and that 
he would nos break nor alter it, v. 34+ yet is ſaid to be made void, v- 
39. to wir, in regardof ſome particular Branches, or Members of 
that Family. Or, 2 To EU: himſelf, or to his Father, when che 
Prieſthood was tranſlated from Eleazars to Ithamars Family for ſome 
cavſe nor mentiened in Scripture. bur moſt probably for ſome great 
miſcarriage of ſome of them. If ir be ſais, That there 1s no ſuch 
promiſe recorded: in Scriptare; it may be fo replied, That there 
are many Sayings avd Doingsnored in Holy Scripture, which were 
not ſpoken of in their proper times and places as Gen. 24 51- and 
42. 21. Hoſ. 12. 4: Luks 11: 49: As 20. 25. So the ſenſe of the 
place may be this, That promiſe and priviledge of the perpetuati- 
on of the Pricſthood in Phinehas and his Family, made tc them, 
N:mb. 25. 12. namely upon condition of his and their Fairhfulneſs 
in their Office, which is plainly underſtood, -I now take away from 
that Family for their wickedneſs, and I rransfer it to thee and thine, 
and will fix it there upon the ſame condition. x i» e Miniſter ur = 
to me as High-prieft. Walking is oft put for Diſcharging cnes Of- 
fice ; before me, may ſignifie that he was the High.prieſt, whoſe ſole 
prerogative it was to miniſter before God, or before the Ark, in che 
moſt holy Place »y As long as the Mofaical Law and Worthip 

taſted, as that Phraſe is oft uſed. £ To wir, to fulfill my promiſe; 
which I repent of, and hereby rerraft, @ That Worſhip and ſerve 
me with Reverence and godly Fear, and according to my Will, 
which I eſteem as an Honour done to me» 6 I will advance 

them to Honour, and maintain them in it- c Not formally and di- 
re&ly ; for ſo E's Sons did not deſpiſe Gcd; but indireQly and by 
conſequence, by preſumpruous Diſovedience of my Commands ; by 
defiling and diſgracing my Worſhip and Ordinaces, either by 
tranſgrefſing the Rules I have given them therein, or by their un- 
godly and ſhameful Converſatien ; and by making my Service con- 
temptible and abominable to others through their Scandals ; all 
whichare manifeſt Arguments of contempt of God, and are ſocal- 
led, as Numb. th 20- 1 Sam. 12. 9, 10. Mal. 1: 8: and all which 
were eminently found in El:'s Sons. &d Both by God and men. 


31 Behold, * the days come, thatI will cut eff thine * 1 Kings 
arm e, and the arm of thy fathers houſe f, that there 2: 27 
ſhall not be an old man in thine houſe g. — Tack. 

e i. e I will take away thy ftrength, which is oft ſignified by the +5. 
arm, as Job 22. 8. Pſal. 37; 17: or all that in which thou placeſt 
thy Cenfidence and Security ; Either. 1. The Ark, which is called 
God's ſtrength Pſal. 78: 61« and was El's ſtrength, who therefore nd 22 
was not able to bear the very ridings of the loſs of it, chap. 4. 18. "2 Vc; 
Or, 2. His prieſtly Dignity or Employment, whence he had all his wks 
Honour and Subſtance. Or rather, 3. His Children. to whom the 
words following here, and in the ſucceeding Verſes, ſeem ro con- 
fine itz whoare the ſtrength ef Parents: See Ger. 49. 3. Dent. 21s 


IO, 

Chips 
4+ 11, 18, 
and I 4+ Jo 


17. Pſal. 127. 445+ f i-e. Thy Childrens Children, and all thy 
: Family: which was in great meaſure accomplifhed, 1 Sam. 22. 16, 
: &, g They ſhall generally be cur cur off by zn untimely death; 
{ before they be old. 
' 32 And thou ſhalt ſee||an enemy iz my habitation, 1 Or, the 
| in all :be wealrb which God (hall give Iſrael &, and there ofidion of 
{ ſhall not bean old * man in thine houſe for ever ; the Tabere 
hþ So the ſence is, Thou fbalr ſee, nct in thy perſon, but in thy Po- nacle, for 
ſterity ; ( ir being moſt frequent in Scripture to attribute thar to #7 *F* 
Parents, which properly belongs to the:r poſterity only ; as Gen, 929%#h _ 
17. 8: and 27: 29, 40.) an enemy; ive. Thy Competitor ar him who which God 
ſha)l poſſeſs thar place of high Truft and Honour which now thoy 9794/4 have 
enjoyeſt ; ( ſuch perſens being through Mans corrupt Nature eſtee- £/Y% Iſe 
med as a Mans worſt Enemy: ) in my habitation ; 7. e. in the San- 19% 
Qtuary. And then he adds by way of Aggravation, that this ſaq *S**Z*cÞ* 
Accident ſhould happen, iz al the wealth which God ſhall give Iſrael; 3: 4: 
(i e.-) in a time when God ſhou'd eminently bleſs 1-ae!, and 
make good all his promiſes to them, which was in Solomons days when 
Abiathar of Eli's Race was. put out of the High-prieſthood,and Zadok 
was pur in his place, 1 King. 2. 27, 35- when the Prieſthood was 
moſt glorious, and moſt profitable, and comfortable ; and there» 
fore the lols of it more deplorable. But the words may be other- 
wiſe rendred, as is noted in the Margent of our Engliſh Bibles ; Thou 
ſhalt ſee, to wit, in thy own perſon, zhe affi#:on, or oppreſſion, or 
Calamity of my havjtation; te. either of che Land of //ras/, where- 


2223 in 


+ Heb. 
ro worſhip 


kim. 


jon. 
i Or, ſome- 
what about 
' the Prieſt. 
hood, 


at the Alrar. 


x../ 


. . fF- 
the Sanftuary, called the habitation by way © 
minency Sree glory the Ark WasSy ! _—_ Ns ym 
ſe vently whoſe greateſt Calamity the loſs of rhe Ar "rank 
pena 2 of all that good wherewith God would have bleſſed Iſrael, 7s * 
pus to bleſs Ijrad ; gr ht Par up s young prophcr exit > wn 
thereby given good grounds of hope tha Ss which God 
if Thou and thy Sons had not hindred it L you - 5 1 \—rebrm 
was retolved ſeverely to puniſh. So this C myo NN Ani 
concerns El;'s perſon, as the following prprnict 1 : p Ny. 
this beſt agrees with the moſt proper and uſual ſig - + ae 
Thou ſhalt ſee. i ( i» e-) As long as the Prieſthood co 
= 0 Fanny ; _ long as the Levitical ht wy laſts. « off 
23 And the man of thine &, whom T:ſhall-not cu 


from mine autar , 
grieve thine heart m: and all the increaſe of thine houſe 


all die + in theflowerof their age 6. - 
” 9p —6 of thy axon þ f ( is <h _ pony ny pe 
ine Altar: Il not roy; but iu live, at 
A — fo Saorn, and oo ay us __ og _ 
lee it, it would grieve thee at the very heart, an 
_ onde ako thine Eyes with weeping for +07: Si gyro 
ties. So the phraie 1s Ma chaooy matt thr 47 4 yu Ea. 
his flain long after ber death. # ( 1. &- - 
; no +> unde tirtiech yele of their Age, when they _—_ 
ro be admitted to the plenary Adminiſtration of their Office, Numb. 
. 3+ then they ſhall dic. 
: 24 And this ſball be a ſign unto thee p, that ſhall come 


upon thy two ſons,on Hophni and Phinehas: in one day 
they ſhall die both ofthem 9. 


p To wit, of the certain truth of 

| | h : £ $ . 9 o 
Y 16 And 1oviil raiſe me up * a faithful prieſt r, that 
ſhall de according to that which # in my heart f, andin 
my mind, and I will build him a ſure houſe t, and he 


1] walk »bcfore mine anointed x for ever. 
_— of another Line, as is necefſarily implied by he i 
Removal of that Office from E!i's Line, betore threatned- - bs 
perion deſigned is Zadok, one eminent for is Faithfulneſs to, © A 
and to the King, who, when Abiather, the laſt of El: s$ Line, ” as 
depoſed by Selomon, was made High-prieſt in his ſtead, J Kings 2. 27, 
35- 1 Chron. 29. 224 And thall not diſhonour or ciſobey me, 
to gratific his Sons as thou haſt done. 7 ( i. e..) Give him anu 
merous poſterity, as that phraſe is uſed, Exod 1.21. 2 Sam. . x 
1 King. i1. 38. and confirm that fure Covenant of an everla ing 
Prieſthood made to Phinehas, of Eleazar's Line, Numb. 25: 13. an 
intecrupted for a little while by Eli, and his, of the Line of Itha- 
mar, unto himand his Children for ever. And this was manifeſt- 
ly verifi:d untjl the Babyloniſh Captivity, Ezek. 44. 15. and 7 
no reaſon to doubt of its continuance in the fame Line till Chr: 
came. u (4.e. ) Miniſter as High-prieſt. x Either, Firſt, Be- 
fore King Solomon, who was anointed King, 1 Kings 1. 39+ and be- 


in I dwell ; 


all thoſe ſad prediftions. 9 And 


' fore the ſucceeding Kings, who are common]y called anointed, or 


s anointed, as 1 Sam. 12» 3» 5. and 24-6, 10. Pſal. 89. 38, 
40 _ 4+ 10, Or, rather, Second'y, Before Jeſus Chriſt ; Firſt, 
Becauſe this Title of Anomted, or Chrift, er Meſſias, ( both which 
words ſignifi only the Anointed ) is moſt frequently and eminent- 
Iy aſcribed to Clriſts both in the Old and New Teftament, and there- 
fore it is moſt reaſonable to underſtand it of him, when there IS NO- 
thing in the Text or Context which determines it to any other, 
Secondly, Chriſt is the main Scop and Defign, not only of the New, 
but of the Old Teftamens, which in all its Types and Ceremonies re- 
preſented Chriſt; ang particularly, the High-prieſt was an eminent 
Type of Clyiſt, and did repreſent his Perſon, and att in his Name 
and ftead, and did meditately, what John Bapt:i/f did immediately, 
go before the face of the Lord Chriſt ; and when Chriſt did come, that 
Office and Officer was to ceaſe. Thirdly, The High-prieſt is ſel- 
dom or never iaid to Walk or Minifer before the Kings of 1rael or 7u- 
dah. but conſtantly before the Lord, and conſequently before 
Chriſt, who, as he was God bleſſed for ever, Rom. g. 5. was preſent 


' with and the Bujlder and Governour of the Ancient Church of 1. 


rael, as is manifeſt from As 7. 35. 1 Cor. 10» 1. Heb. 3, 3,4. 5, 
6. and many other places; and their Temple is particularly cailed 
his Temple, Mal. 3+ 4+ becauſe all the Temple-worthip was perfor- 
med in his preſence, and had a ſpecial Reſpe&t unto him, and 
therefore the High-prieſt is moſt properly ſaid to walk before him, 
36 And-it thall come to pals, that every one thar is 
left in thine houſe ſhall come Þ 4nd crouch to him y for 
a piece of ſilver, and a morſel of bread z, and ſhall ſay, 
+ Put me, I pray thee, into|| one of the prieſts offices .*., 
that I may eat apiece of bread. | 
7 In way of humble Supplication. See 1 Kings 2. 26. and 23. 9g, 
z Whereas before they were ſo nice and delicate, that my liberal 
Allowance could not fatisfiethem, but they muſt have their Meat 
Raw and fat, &c. Above wv 13, 14, 15» 16, ſo the puniſhment is 
ſuired to the nature of their Sin. .'. Inte the meaneſt Office be- 
longing to it- See Execk, 44: 10, 11, &c- Queff. How could they 
be reduced to fo great ſrraits, ſeing, though they Joſt the High- 
prieſthood, they ſtill were Inferior prieſts, and had a Right to thoſe 
plentiful proviſions which belonged to that Order? Anſwer, Firſt, 
They might be degraded not only from the Office of the High- 
prieſt, bur alſo from that of the inferiour prieſts, and conſequently 
might forfeit and loſe all the priviledges belonging to their Office. 
Secondly, This might be from the Tyranny and Violence of ſome 
of the ſucceeding prieſts of Eleazar 5 Line, towards that other Line 
which had long ſrood in competition with them, and had for a ſea- 
ſon got away the Prieſthood from them. For this Text only Ie- 
lates the matter of FaQ, but doth not expreſs an Approbation 


_ CHAP. II 


1m*s : he knows not Gods woice, but thinks it 

e Lord calleth Samuel three tim*s : he . 
go b be Eli who calls him runsto him, who inſtrus him, T, —9g. At 
- the fourth call he anſwers, 16. God acquainteth Samuel with the de- 
Fruion of Eli's houſe, 1114+ Samuel in the morning diſcovers it 


Y 
[1 


FZEAMOUEL 


4 


1 ſhall be to conſume thine eyes, and to. 


FPRoy 


to Bli at his requeſt * Eli's ſubmiſſion, 15, 18. All Irael acknowledgeth 
Samuel for a prophet, 19, 21. 


ND che child Samuel miniſtred unto the LORD 
before Eliz: and the word of the LORD b was 
precious c in thoſe days : there as no open vilion 4. 

a (7.e.) Under his Inſpe&ion and dire&ion, which being ſo 
young, he needed. +4 To wit, the word of Propheſie, or the Re- 
velation of Gods Will to and by the Prophets. « 3. e» Rare or 
ſcarce, ſuch things being moſt precious in Mens eſteem, whereas 
common things are generally deſpiſed. 4 Ged did not impart his 
Mind by way of Viſion or Revelation openly, or to any publick 
perſon, to whom others might reſort for ſarisf:&ion, though he 
pught or did privately revea] himſelf to ſome pious perſons for their 
particular Dire&ion. This. is bere premiſed, as areaſon why Sa« 
mucl underſtood not, when God called him cnce or twice. 

2 And it came to paſs at that time, when Eli was 
laid down in his place e, and his eyes began to wax 
dim, that he could not ſee f; 

e In the Court of the Tabernacle. f To wir, clearly and di. 
ſrinftly. This is added, as an Evidence ef his 01d Age; partly to 
ſhew Gods Contempt of him, notwithſtanding his venerable Age, 
and his preferring the Child Samvuel before him in this Viſion; and 
partly, as the reaſon why Samuel ſo readily ran to him upon the 
firſt, call, becauſe his great Age made him more to need his Ser- 
vants help. 

3 Andere the lamp of God went out g in the tem- 
ple þ ofthe LORD, where the ark of God was, and 
Samuel was laid down to fleep 5 : 

$ Before the Lights of the Galden Candleſtick were put ort ; 
(7. e. ) In the Night-ſeaſon, or before the Morning, when they 
were put out, as they were lighted in the Evening, Exod. 27. 213; 
Levit, 24: 3; 2 Chron. 13: 1: hþ (2.e.) In the Tabernacle, which 
1s ſometimes called the Temple, as being of the ſame uſe and ſigni- 


ficancy. # Not that this happened when he firſt Jay down, bur 
whilſt he was lying there. 


4 That the LORD called Sam 
Here am I. 

5 And he ran & unto Eli, an 
thou calledſt me. And he ſai called not ; lie down 
agatn. And he went and lay down. 


& Shewing his great Faithfulneſs and Diligence in the Service, 
either ofthe Lord, or of his Maſter El, 
And 


6 And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. 
Samuel aroſe, and wentto Eli, and ſ2id, Here am I, for 


chou didſt call me. And he anſwered, I called nor, my 
{on ; lie down again. 


I, and heanſwered, 


ſaid, Here am TI, for 


7 || Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD 1, nei- || Or, th 
yet revealed unto -" Samud 


ther was the word of the LOR D 
him. 

1 Either, Firſt, He was not acquainted with God in that Extrord;- 
nary or Prophetical way. Or, rather, Secondly, He did nor 
underſtand, any more than before, that it was nor El, 
who ſpake to him» 


ſign, that his ſimplicity mighr give El: the better aſſurance of th 
fruth of Gods Calland Meſſage to Samuel, 


8 And the LORD called Samuel again the third 
time» And he aroſe, and went to Eii m,, and ſaid, 
Here am I, for thou didft call me. And Eli perceived 
z that the LORD had called the child. 

» > perſiſts in the ſame readineſs to obey and ſerve him, and 
was not diſcouraged or driven from his Duty by his double miſtaks 
and diſappointment. x By the conſideration of Samuels piety,of the 
SanCtity of the place adjoyning, from whence God had oft-times 
ſpcken, and of the ſolitude of the place, where there was no hu«. 
mane perſon beſides himſelf, who could or would have called 
Samuel in that manner. 

9 Therefore Eli ſaid unto Samuel, Go, lie down: 
and it ſhall be,if he call thee, that thou ſhalt ſay, Speak 
LORD, for thy ſervant heareth o. So Samuel went, 
and lay down in his place. 


0 7. e, Tam ready to hear what thou ſpeakeſt, and to do what 
thou requireſt, 


10 And the LORD came p, and ſtood 9, and called 
as at other times r, Samuel, Samuel // Then Samuel 
anſwered, Speak, for thy ſervant heareth. 

p Before, he ſpake to him-'at a diſtance, even from the Holy 
Oracle between the Cherubims; and now, to prevent all further 
miſtakes, the Voice came near to him, as if the perſon ſpeaking had 
been preſent with him: 9 Before the Voice paſſed !, y him, now 
the Speaker fixeth his abode with him for a time, till he had uttered 
his whole Mind to him. r As he had done before. ſ His Name 
is here doubled, to engage him to the more ſpeedy and diligent 
attention. 


it T Andthe LORD ſaid to Samuel, Behold T will 


do a thing * in Iſrael, at which both the ears of every « 
one that heareth it, (hall tingle «. 


: Thoſe things which are related in the next Chapter, which s 
though done by the Philiftines, God here aſcribes to himſelf, becauſe 
he was the firſt and chief Cauſe of it, by withdrawing his helping 
Hand from 1/rae!, and by delivering the Ark, and E!:'s two Sons, 
and the reſt of the people,into his and their Enemies hands. u Which 
will be ſo terrible, that not only thoſe that fee] it ſhall groan under 
it, but thoſe that only hear the report of it, ſhall be {rruck with 
ſuch Amazement and Horror, which will make their Heads and 
Hearts Ake. A Metaphor from him, who being ſurprized with 
ſome great and hideous Noiſe, ſuch as Thunder or great Guns, his 
Head is much affeQed with it, and rhe ſound or tingling of it abides 
in his Ears a good while after itz This phraſe is uſed alſo, > Kings 
21: 12; Jere 198 3> 


12 In 


Chap. bite 


knew the 
LORD, and 
yet before the 
. but God, Word of the 
And this Ignorance of Samuels ſerved Gods De- LORDes 
e revealed 
unto him, 


efore he 


2 Kings 
T1; 13 


«a Ok v3» L CLLS 


—_m oy 2 WAS 


[UI, 


, thut 
Same! 
e he 
the 
.D, and 
e the 
( of the 
'Dwa 
aled 
him 


> King) 
«19% 


| chap. Ii & 


x I will + perform againſt Eli * all 


Heb: 12 In that day ; Ws 
fubliſh ebings which 1 have ſpoken y concerning his houſe : 
* Chap + when I begin, I will allo make an end 2. : 

Ag x In that time which I have appointed for this work, which was 
| Heb: abour Twenty or Thirty Years after this Threatning» So long 
beginning ſpace of Repenrance GOD allows to this wicked Generations ro 
and maine: make their Peace with GOD, and prevent the Execution, as others 
didin like Caſes. y By that Propher, Chap. 2. 27. Z Though this 
Vengeance may and ſhal be delayed for a ſza{ony to manifeſt my 
Patience, and incite them to Repentance; yet when onc? I begin to 
Infli&, I ſhal certainly go on with it, and not deſiſt till I have made 
a full end. 
\Or, od 13 || * For I have told him, that T will judge & his 
juil tl houſe b for ever c, for the iniquity which he knoweth 
_ d: becauſe his ſons made themlelves || vile e,and he T re- 

. 296 A ſtrained them not f. 

1 oc. a i. e. Condemn, and puniſh or o_— as the woes Op is "_ 
Ir. a6 uſed, as Gen. 15. 14. John 2, 18» and 16. 11- is Children, an 
4 Poſterity, as is manifeſt by the Story ; as the word Houſe is frequent- 
Heb: ly taken, as 2 Sam. 7. 11. I Kings 21» 29. <0 zhe Houſe: of Judah, of 


—_—_ wt Aaron, of David, are oft taken for their Poſterity. And to Build an 
WL them, Houſe in Scripture uſe, is to encreaſe their Poſterity, as Exod, 1. 21» 

Deute 25. 9. Ruth 4. 11. Compare Gen. 16. 2. and 30. 3» c Till 
they be utterly Rooted out : or, for a long time, as that Phraſe 1s 
oft uſed. d Either by the information or che Prophet, Chap. 2. v- 
27, &c. or by his own guilty and ſelf-accuſing Conſcience. But 
theſe, and the foregoing and foliowing words, may well be, andare 
rendred thus; fr this iniquity, becauſe he knew ( both by common 
Fame, and by his own Obſervation) zhat his ſms, 8&c. He cannot 
pretend ignorance, or want of proof of their wickedneſs, which ag- 
grares his ſin. e Notonly hateful to God, but contemptible to all 
the people, whereby they alſo brought their Sacred Office, and God's 
Holy Ordinances into contempr. Heb. Carſed themſelves,or made them- 
ſelves Execrable or Accurſed, both tt» GOD and Men : by their lewd 
and curſed praftices, they pur themſ?lves under the Curſe of GOD, 
by ſuch a groſs Vio'ation of GOD's Commends: Compare foſh. 6.18. 
and 7, 124 13- This -xprefſioa may be uſed by way of refle&tion 
upon their Father, b-cauſe he did not denounce the Curle of GOD 
againſt them, nor put them out of the Prieſthood, as accurſed Per- 
ſons, al:hough they were ſo Vile, that they had prevented their Fa- 
ther's Cenſure, and meritorioufly caſt themſe!ves out, and cut them” 
ſelves off from the Prieſthood and Congregation of the LORD which 


their Father ſhould have done ſudicially. f He contented himſelf 


with a cold and gentle Reproof, .and did not ſeverely Rebuke, and 
puniſh,and effeQually reſtrain them from their abominable Courſes, 
nor uſe that Authority which GOD had given him,as a Father, as an 
High-Prieſt, andas a Judlge,or Chief Magiſtrate, againſt them, as by 
the Law of GOD he was obliged to do. | 


14 And therefore I have ſworn g unto h the houſe 
of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's houſe ſhal not be pur- 
]ed with ſacrifice, nor offering for ever. 

gZ Which might bez done before, though it be mentioned here 
only. Or, I ao ſwear; the paſt Tenſe bing commonly put for the 
preſent in the Hebrew Tongue. h Or, concerning, as the Prafix La- 
med is ofc uſed, as Exod. 14+ 3. and 18. 7. 2 Sam 11.7. Pſal. gr. 1r. 
Compare wich Matth- 4.6. t 1+ e. The puniſhment threatned a- 
gainſt Eli and his Family, ſhal nor be prevented or hindred by all 
their Sacrifices, as they fondly imagine, but ſhal infallibly be exe- 
cuted. 


15 And Samuel lay until morning, and opened the 
doors of the houſe of the LORD &k: and Samuel feared 
to ſhew Eli the viſion 6. 

k Although the Tabernacle, whilſt it was to be removed from 
Place to place in the Wilderneſs, had no D»ors, but conſiſted only 
of Curtains, and had only Hangings b*fore rhe entrance, inſtead of 
Doars; yet when it was ſettled in one place, as now it was in Shi- 
Ioh, where it had been for a long time, it is more than probable, both 
from this pl-ce and by comparing 1 Sam. 1. 9. and 2 Sam. 6. 17. 
and from the Narure and Reaſon of the thing, that it was incloſed 
within ſome ſolid Building, which had Doors. and Poſts, and other 
parts belonging to it. / i.e. The matter of the Viſion or Revelari- 
on, partly from the Reverence and R-ſpect he bore to his Perſon, 
to whom he was loth to be a Meſſenger of ſuch ſad ridivgs; partly, 
leſt if he had b=en haſty ro utter it, £7 mighr think bim guilty of 
Arrogancy or ſecret Complacency in his Calamity, which was like 
to tend to Samuel's advancements And not being commanded by 
God to acquaint El herewith, he prudently ſuſpended the publicati- 
on of it till a fit occaſion were offered, which he might reaſonably 
expect in avery little time, knowing that Ez would be greedy to 
know the matter of that Revelation, the Preface whereof he was ac- 
quainted with ; and that it would be leſs offenſive, and therefore 
more uſeful ro E!;, when he ſaw that Sawuel was not puffed up with 
it, nor forward to vent it, until El: forced it from him. 


16 Then Eli called Samuel, and ſaid, Samuel, my 
fon. And he anſwered, Here am T. | 
I7 And he ſaid, What # the thing that the LORD 
hath ſaid unto thee ? TI pray thee, .hide i: not from 
+ Heb: me: God do fo to thee, and + more alſo , if 
þ odd. thou hide any || thing from me of all the things that he 
(Or, wrd. {25d unto thee. 


m God infli& the ſame evils upon thee, which I fuſpe& he hath 
pronounced againſt me, and greater evils roo. Or, God do ſo, i. e, 
Jer God deal with thee to ſeverely, as I cannor, or am loth to ex- 
Preſs. So it is a kind of Apoſiopeſis uſual in Oaths, and in Adju- 
rations The fame Phraſe is ia Ruth 1, 175, Thus he adjures him to 
utter the whole truth, as was uſual among the Hebrews, as 1 Kings 


22. 16, Matth. 26, 63. 


Heb: 18 And Samue] told him + every whit, and hid no- 
ko on thing from him. And he faid, It » the LORD x: 
& words, Let him do what feemeth him good: 


*S 41 MU BY 


= — 


» This ſevere Sentence 25 from the Soveraign LORD vf the 
Wo:1d,who hath an abfolute Power and Right ro diſpoſe of me and 
all his Crearures as he pleaſerhz to whyſe good pleaſure I therefore 
freely ſubmit : from Iſrael's GOD, who was known by this N2me of 
Jehovah, who is 1n a ſpecial manner the Ruler of the People of 1/rael, 
to whom it properly belongs to puniſh all mine offences; whoſe 
Chaſtiſement I therefore accepr. | 

19 T And Samuel grew o, and the LORD was with 
him, and did let none of his words * fall to the * 1 Kings 
ground p: | | 8: 56 

o As in Stature, ſo in Wiſdom and Piety, and GOD'S Favour, and 

Reputation with the People. p i» e. Want its effe& or ſucceſs : 
GOD made good all his Prediftions* A Mzeraphor from Precious 
Liquors, which when they are ſpilt upon tie Ground, are a'together 
uteleſs and ineffetual. This Phraſe is oft uſed, as Joſh. 21. 45; 
Eſther 6. 10, Oc. wo 

20 And all Iſrael, from Dan even to Beerſheba gq, 
knew 7 that Samuel was || eſtabliſhed to be a prophet of | Or, faith- 
the LORD, a 


q Through the whole Land, from tke Northern Bound-Dan; to 
the Southerny Beerſhebaz which was the whole lengtt, and largeſt 
extent of the Land. See Judges 20. 1, 2. 2 Sam 17. 11, r Both 
by Els Teſtimony, and particular Relation cf the foregoing Hiſtory g 
tc the People that came from all parts; and by ſucceeding Revela- 
tions made to him, whereof mention is made in the next Verſes 
which though placed after, might be done before. 

21 And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh : for 
the LORD revealed himſelf co Samuel / in Shiloh, by 
the word of the LORD *#, 


{ Or, did uſe to Reveal his mind to Samuel. *t i.e. By his word, 
the Noun for the Pronoun, which is frequent, as Levit 14+ 15, Oc. 
by his word of Command, which he choſe to deliver to 1/rael by his 
Mouth, as it here follows; or by his word of Propheſie concerning 


future events. 
EHAP, IV: 


The Iſraelites are ſmitten by the Philiſtines at Eben-ezer, 1==2, They fetch 
the Ark from Shilohs Receive it with a great Shout, to the Terrour of the 
Philiſtines, 3z==7, Who yet take Courage, and # ſued time beat the 
Iſraelites : The Ark is taken : The two Sons of El: are ſlain, $1 1, 
Which Eli hearing, fall:th backward from his ſeat, and breaketh his neck, 
12 w——_=). His Daughter in law falls in labour; Namath her Son Icha- 
bed s And dicth, 18 = == 22. 


A Nd the word of Samuel # || F came to all Iſrael, || Or, came 
Now lIirael went out againſt the Philiſtines þ to to paſ» 
battel, and pitched befide Eben-ezer c : and the Phili- 7 m— 
{tines pitched in Aphek d. = 
# i.co The word of the LORD revealed to Samuel, and by him 
to the People; Either, Firſt, The Prophetical Word mentioned be- 
fore, Chap: 3: 11, &'c. which is here faid to come, or to come to paſs; 
a5 it was foretold, to al Iſrael Burt the ſubje& of that Propheſie 
was not al 1ſrael, but Eli and his houſe, as is evident. Or rather, Se 
condly, A Word of Command, that all 1/ra«l ſhould go forth ro 
fight with the Phil:ftines, as the following words explain it, that ſo 
they might be ficſt humbled and puniſh-d for their ſins, and ſo 
prepared by degrees for their furure Deliverance. b Or, to meet 
rhe Philiſiines, who having by this time recruited themſelves after 
their great loſs by Samſon, Judges 16: 3o. and perceiving an eminent 
Prophet ariſingamong them, by whom they were likely to be Uni- 
ted, Counſelled, and Aﬀiſted, rhoughe fir ro Suppreſs them in the 
beginning of their Hopes and Deſigns of reſcu:ng themſelves from 
their power. c A place ſo cailed here (by Anticipation ) from a 
fol'owing event, Chap: 7: 12. d A City fſocalled in the Tribe of 
Judah, Joſh; 15: 53. upon the borders of the Philifines Countrey : 
not that Aphek in Aſher, Joſh; 19: 30. Judges 13 31. which was very res 
mote from them. 
2 And the Philiſtines put themſelves in aray againſt _. 
Iſrael: and when F. they joyned battel e, Iſrael was f Heb: rhe 
ſmicten before the Philiſtines : and they flew of + the 297, vs 


army in the field, about four thouſand men; Y _ the 
e H-b: When the Battel was ſpread, i. e. when the two Armies ars 
had drawn forth th:mſclves into Military Order, and put themſelves 
into the uſual poſture for Fighting, and began to fight in their ſe- 
veral places. | 

2 4 And when the fools were come into the 
camp, the elders of Ifrael faid, Wherefore hath 
the LORD {ſmicten us to day before the Philiſtines 
f2? Let us Þ fetch the ark of the covenant of the 41x66: rake 
LORD g out of Shiloh unto us, that when it cometh unto us. 


among us, it may fave us out ot the hand of our ene= 
mies, | 

f Seing our Cauſe is ſo juſt; our own juſt and neceffiry Defence 
from GOD'S and our Enemies, and we came nor forth to Barrel by 
our own motion, but by GOD'S Command delivered by Samuel. 
This was ſtrange blindneſs, that when there was ſo great a Cor- 
ruption in their Worſhip and Manners, Chap: 2. and ſuch a defe&i= 
on to Idolitrys Chap; 7: 3, Pſals 78: 58. they .could not ſee ſuf- 
ficient reaſon wky God ſhould ſuffer them rq fall by their Enemies. 
£ That great pledge of God's preſence and help, by whoſe Condu& 
our Anceſtors obtained ſucceſs, Numb: 10: 35. and 14: 44. Foſh: C: 
4: Inſtead of the performance of Moral Duties, humbl ng chem- 
ſelves deeply for, and purging tnemſelves ſpeccily and throughly 
from al) tne fins, for which God was diſpleaſed with them, and 
now had chaſtifed them, rhey rake an cafier and cheaper Courſe, 
and put their Truſt in their Ceremonial Obfervances, not doubting 
but the very preſence of the Ark would give them the Vittory. 


And therefore it is no wonder they meet with ſo fad a diſappoint- 
ment. 


4 SO the people ſent” to Shiloh, that they might 
bring from thence the ark + of the covenant of the 
LORD of hoſts, which dwelleth berzeen the * cheru- 

} os. bims : 


* Exod. 


25:18,22. 


Chap. IV: 


i 


| , 
ll hap IV. » . . 
il bims : and the two ſets of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas 
| were there 5 with the ark & of the covenant of God. | 
[|| þ Which it may ſeem they ſhould not have done without _ 
{|| Counſel of GOD, which they might eaſily have done by _ b 
I ; Either, Firſt, In the Camp. Or rather, Secendly, in Shiloh. 
h + Attending upon it, inftead of their Aged Father. _y 
[| 5 And when the ark of the covenant of the LOR 
[| came into the camp, all Iſrael ſhouted with a great ſhout 
: theearth rang again. 
+ mages their we hs. and confidence of ſucceſs ; and 
partly, in deſign to encourage themſelves, and terrific their Ene- 


mules. 


6 And when the Philiſtines heard the noiſe of the 
ſhout, they ſaid, What meanerh the noiſe of this great 
ſhout in the camp of the Hebrews ? And they under- 
ſtood » that the ark of the LORD was come into the 
goes by *nformation from the 1/7aelites, who would readily tell them 
of it ta affright them. 


| And the Philiſtines were afraid, for they ſaid, 
| God is come » into the camp. And they ſaid, Wo 
uhto us : for there hath not been ſuch a thing + here- 


"1 
fi 


| Heb: 
| day, tofore o. Ee. 
l <p » To wit, in and with his Ark: or, they give the Name of 


\ 077 : the Ark, before which he was Worſhipped, as they uſed 

_ —_ ay oo ene of their falſe gods. » Not to our knowledge, 

| or not in our times; for the forementioned removals of the Ark 
before it came to Shiloh. : 

"8 Wo unto us : Who ſhal deliver us out of the hand 


; of theſe mighty Gods p ? theſe are the Gods that 
ſmote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilder- 


nels 9. 
F2 They ſecretly confeſs the LORD to be Higher and Greater 
than'their gods, and-yer againſt their knowledge preſume to oppoſe 
him. 9 They mention the Wilderneſs, not as if all the Plagues 
of the Egyptians came upon them inthe Wilderneſs, but becauſe the 
laſt and foreſt of all, which is therefore put for all, to wit, the De- 
ſtrution of Pharaoh and all his Hoſt, happened in the Wilder- 
dets,. namely, in the Red-Sea, which having the Wilderneſs on 
both ſides of it, Exod 13: 18, 20+ and 14: 3, I, and 353 22, Oc. 
may well be ſaid to be in the Wilderneſs. Although ir is noc 
ſtrange if theſe Heathens did miſtake and miſreport tome Circum- 
ſtance, in a Relation of the 1ſraelitiſh Aﬀairs, eſpecially ſome hun- 
dreds of Years after they were done, ſuch miſtakes being frequent 
in divers Heathen Authors, treating of thoſe matters, as Juſtin, and 
Tacitizss and others: : ; 
9 Be ſtrong, and quit your ſelves like men r, O ye 
Philiſtines,that ye be not ſervants unto the Hebrews, 
If +Jud:13:1+* as they havebeen to you: Þ quit your ſelves like men, 
+ Heb: and fight. | 
| Ge men. r Since you can expeC& no Relief from your gods, who are not 
able to reſiſt theirs,it concerns you to put forth all your Scrength and 
Courage,and once for all to att like brave and valiant Men. 
* 10 4 And the Philiſtines fought, * and Iſrael was 
RIO. ſmitten, and they fled every man into his tent / and 
there was a very great ſlaughter, for there fell of Iſrael 


thirty thouſand 7 foormen #«. ; | 
ſ i. e- To his habiration, called by the Ancient Name of his Tent. 
# Before they loſt but 4000, now in the preſence of the Ark 
30000, tO reach them that the Ark and Ordinances of GOD, were 
never deſigned for SanQuaries or Refuges to impenitent Sinners, 
but only for the Comfort and Relief of thoſe that Repent. « Horſe- 
men are not mentioned ; Eeither Firſt, becauſe they had few or 
none, GOD having forbidden the multiplication of their Horſes, 
Deut: 17: 16. and the Philiftines, their lords and Oppre ſors, having 
taken away what they had. Or, Secondly, Becauſc they fled away, 
25 is uſual in ſuch Caſes, whilſt the Footmen were more eaſily 0- 
vertaken. 
1x And* the ark of God was taken x, and the two 
| ſons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas Þ were ſlain. 
x Which God juſtly and wiſely permitted ; partly, to puniſh the 
Iſraelites for thir Profanation of it : partly, that by raking away the 
pretences of their fooliſh and impious confidence, he might more 
deeply humble them, and bring them to true Repentance : partly, 
that the Philitines might by this means be more effeually con- 
vinced of GOD'S Aimighty Power, and of their own, and their 
gods impotency, and fo a ſtop might be put to their Triumphs 
and Inſu}rations, and to their Rage againſt the poor [raeliter, whom 
otherwiſe in human appearance they mightr eaſily have rooted out- 
Thus as God was no loſer by this event, ſo the Philiftines were no 
gainers by it; and Iſrael, all things conſidered, received more good 
than hurt by it, as we ſhal ſee. # i T0 
12 © And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the 


army, and came to Shiloh the ſame day, with his cloths 
rent, and with * earth upon his head y. 

3 The uſual Rites in great ſorrows ; See Genz 37: 29. Joſhs 7: 6, 
Ofc. 2 Sam: I; 2g Ine 


And when he came, lo, Eli ſat upon * a ſeat z by 
mala he w_y ſide, watching : for his heart trembled for the 
ark of God a And when the man came into the city, 


and told zt, all the city cried out. : : 
z Placed there on purpoſe for him, that he might ſoon receive 
the Tidings, which he longed for. # Whereby he diſcovered a 
publick and generous ſpirit, and a fervent Zeal for GOD, and for 
his Honour and Service, which he preferred before all his natural 
AﬀeRions and worldly Intereſts, not regaiding his awn Children 
in compariſon of the Ark, though otherwiſe he was a moſt Indul- 
p gent Father, and had reaſsn to believe chat they went out like Sheep 
for the ſlaughter, according to Sarwel's Prediction, 


*Job 2412. 


ER HH DEE 


14 And when Eli heard the noiſe of the crying, he 
ſaid, What weaneth the noiſe of this tumult 2 And the 
man came in haftily, and told Ehli- 

I5 New Eli was ninety and eight years old, and * his 
eyes | were dim, that he could not ſee. 


out of the army 5, and I fled to day out of the army, 
And he ſaid, What Þ is there done, my ſon ? 


b I ſpeak not what F have by uncertain Rumours, but what mine 
Eyes were witneſſes of. 


17 And the meſſenger anſwered and ſaid, Iſrael is 
fled before the Philiſtines, and there hath been alſo a 
great ſlaughter among the people, and thy. two ſons 
alſo, Hephni and Phinehas are dead, and theark of God 
is taken. 

18 Andit came to paſs when he made mention of the 
ark of God, that he'fell from off the ſeat backward c, 
by the ſide of the gate 4d, and his neck brake, and he 
died : for he was an old man, and heavy e, and he had 
judged Iſrael f fourty years. 

c Being. ſo oppreſſed with Grief and Aſtoniſhmenr, that he had 
ne'Strength lefc to ſupport him. d To wit, the Gate of the City, 
which was moſt convenient for the ſpeedy underſtanding of all 
Occurences. e Ola, and therefore weak and apt to fall ; Heavy, and 


therefore his fall more dangerous and pernicious. f He was their 
Supreme Governour, both in Civils and Spirituals. 


i9 E And his daughter in law, Phinechas wife, was 
with child, near || to be delivered : and when ſhe heard 
the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that 
her father in law, and her husband were dead, ſhe 
bowed her ſelf and travelled ; for her pains + came 
upon her g. 

g To wit, before her time, which is oft the effe& of great Ter- 
rours, both in Women, and in other Creatures, Pſal: 29: g. 

20 And about the time of her death, the women that 


ſtood by her, ſaid unto her, Fear not, for thou haſt 
born a ſon. But ſhe anſwered not, + neither did the 
regard it þ. 


þ Being overwhelmed. with Sorcow, and ſo uncapable of Com- 


21 And ſhe named the child {| Ichabod, ſay ing, 
[| * The glory 5 is depared from Iſrael. ( becauſe the ark 
of God was taken, and becauſe of her father in law, and 
her husband. ) 
| #1.c. The glorious Type and aſſurance of GOD'S preſence, the 
Ark, which is oft called GOD'S Glory, as Pſpl: 26: 8. and 78: 6r. 
' Ja: 645 11, and which was the great Safeguard and Ornament of 1j-4- 
el, which they could glory in above all other Nations. 
22 And ſheſaid, The glory is departed from Iſrael, 
for the ark of God is taken &. 
& This 15 repeated to ſhew her Piety, and that the Publick and 
Spiritual loſs lay heavier upon her ſpirit, than hex Perſonal or Do= 


meſtick Calamity. 

45 H A P, , # 

The Philiſtines place the Ark of GOD at 4ſhded in the Heuſe of Dagmn + Which 
falls down : once and again, 1 5. They of Aſbdod are ſmitten 
with Emerods : They ſend the Ark to Gath, 6=— $8. They are alſo 
Smitten with Emerods, and ſend the Avh 80 Ekron : They reſolve to veturn 
it back ro the Iſraclites, g — 12, 

Nd the Philiſtines took the ark of God a,and brought 
it from Eben-Ezer b unto Aſhdod c. 

# Queft. Why were not they immediately killed, who touched 
the Ark, as afterwards Uzz#h was? 2 Sam. 6: 7. Anſw. Firſt, Be- 
cauſe the Sin of the Philiſtines was not ſo great, becauſe the Law for- 

idding this, was nor given, or at leaſt was not known to them ; 
whereas Uzzas Falt was a Tranſgrefſion, and that of a known Laws 

Secondly, Becauſe God deſigned to reſerve the Philifines for a more 

publick and more ſhameful puniſhment, which had been prevent- 

ed by this. 5 Where they found it in the Camp of the 1/aelires, 

Chap: 4: 1. & Called alſo Azotus : whither they brought it, either 

becauſe it was the firſt City in their way, or rather becauſe it was a 

great and famous City, and moſt eminent for the worſhip of their 

great god Dagon. 


z When the Philiſtines took the ark of God, they 
brought it into the houſe of Dagon, and ſet it by Da- 
gon &d. 

d Either, Firſt, Out of reſpe& to it, that it might be worſhipped 
together with Dagon.Or rather,Secondly,by way of reproach and con= 
tempt of it,as a Spoil and Trophy ſer there to the honour of Dagon, 
to whom doubtleſs they aſcribed this ViRory, as they did a former, 
Judges 16: 23. And though they had ſome reverence for the Ark 
before, Chap: 45 7, fc. Yet that was certainly much diminiſhed by 


- 04g" apy againſt 7/rael, notwithſtanding the preſence and he! p of 
Ee I . 


3 4 And when they of Aſhdod « aroſe early on the 
morrow f, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to 
the earth, before the ark of the LORD : and they took 
Dagon, and ſet him in his place again g. 

e 1.e. The prieſts of Dagon. f Either to worſhip Dagon accor- 


ding to their manner: or being curious and greedy to know whe- 
ther the Nejghbourhood of the Ark to Dagon had made any altc- 


ration in either of them, that if Dagon had received any Damage, 


they might, if poſſibly they could, repair it, before it came to the 
Peoples knowledge, as indeed they did, to prevent their contempr 
of that 1del, by which the prieſts had all their Repuracion and 
advantage» g 9uppoling or pretending that his fall was wholly 


caſual» 
4 And 


Chap. Y, 


o Cha tao, 
T Heb: 
16 And the man faid unto Eli, I am he that came #4 


T Heb: «; 
the thing, 


[| Or, & 


cry 04t, 


+ Heb: 


Were turn, 


t Heb:ſ4 
not hm 
h:art. 


|| That is 
Where is 

the gluy? 
! Or, Th 
76 m0 glny, 
* Chi 14h 


== 


>) — 


bs 14% 


My. v. I 


And when they aroſe early on the morrow mor- 
ning. behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the 
ground, before the ark of the LORD, and the head of 
Dagon, and both the palms of his hands ere cut off 

1 Or, the þ upon the threſhold, only || the ſump of Dagon i was 
fſy pate lefe to him &. 

h The head is the Sear of Wiſdom ; the Hands, the Inftrumenrs of 
AQion : both are cut off, to ſhew that he had neither Wiſdom nor 
Strength to defznd himſelf, nor his worſhippers. Thus the Prieſts 
by concealing Dago?'s ſhame before, make 1t more evident and 1n- 
fimons. #5 Heb: Only Dagony i» e- that part of it from which it was 
called Dnzm, to wit, the Fiſhy part, for Dag in Hebrew ſignihes a 
Fiſh. Ard h-nce their Opinion ſeems moſt probable, that chis Idol 
o: Ingen had in its upper parts an human ſhape, and in its lower 
parts the form ofa Tiſh ; for ſuch was the form of divers of the Hes- 
then gods, and particularly of a godof the Phanicians ( under which 
Name the Philiſtines are comprehended ) as Diodorus Siculus, and 
Luciang both witneſs, though they call it by another Name. k Or, 
:;po1 it, 1. e- upon the Threſhold, there the Trunk abode in the place 
where it fell, but the Head and Hands being violently cut off, were 
flung to diftant and ſeveral places. _ 

5 Therefore neither the prieſts of Dagon, nor any 
that come into Dagon's houſe, tread on the threſhold 


+ ofthe + of | Dagon in Aſhdod unto this day m. 

Temple. 1 Out of a Religious Reverence, ſuppoſing this place to be San- 
ified by the rouch of their god, who firſt fell here, and being bro- 
ken here, touched it more throughly than he did other parts. This 
Superſtirion of theirs was Noted and Cenfured long after, Zephans Is 
g. Herein they manifeſted rheir ſtupendious Folly, both in making 
a perpetual Monument of their own and Idols ſhame, which 1n all 
reaſon they ſhould: rather have buried in eternal Oblivion ; and in 
turning a plain and certain Argument of Contempr, into an «ccaft- 
on of further V-n-ration- #2 When this Hiſtory was written, w hich 
if written by Samuel xowards the end of his Life, was a ſufficient 
ground for this expreſſion, this Superſtitious uſage having then 
contivued for many Years- 

6 But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them 
of Aſhdod », and he deſtroyed them o, and ſmote 

{Heb.'s them + with * emerods p, even Aiſhdod, and the 


the arr. coaſts thereof. 5 

_. 22 For their Incorrigibleneſs by the foregoing Documents. o Part- 
ly, by waſting their Land, Chap. 6. 5. and partly by killing many 
of their Perſons as is ſufficiently implied here, 4. 1o. p. A Difeale 
mentiuned only here, and Dent. 28. 27. it was in the hinder parts. 
Tr is needleſs to enquire into the Nature of it. It may ſuffice to 
know, that it was a very ſore Diſeaſe, and not cnly very Vexatious 
and Tormenting, but alſo Pernicious and Mortal. : 

7 And when the men of Aſhdod ſaw that it was ſo, 
they ſaid, The ark of the God of Iſrael fhal not abide 
with us: for his hand is ſore upon us, and upon Da- 
gon our god. | 

8 They ſent therefore, and gathered all the lords 
of the Philiſtines unto them, and ſaid, What ſhal we do 


with the ark of the God of Iſrael? And they anſwered, 


+ Plal. 7 8. 
66, 


Let the ark of the God of Ifrael be carried about unto 
Gath q: And they carried the ark of the God of Ifra- 
el about thither. | 
4 Suppoſing that this Plague was confined to 4404 for ſome par= 
ticular Reaſons, or that it came upon th:-m by Chance, or from 
ſome bad Influence of the Air, or of tae Stars, or for putting it in- 
to Dagon's Temple, which they reiclved they would not do. 
9 Andit was ſo, thar after they had carried it about, 
| Or,a very the hand of the LORD was againſt the city with || a 
great terror. yery great deſtruction: and he ſmore the men of the 
city, both ſmall and great, and they had emerods in 
their ſecret parts r 
y Or, in their hidden parts, to wit, in the, inwards of their hin- 
der parts. Which is the worſt kind of Emerods, as all Phyſicia''s 
acknowledge, buth becauſe its Pains are far more ſharp and keen 
than the other ; and becauſe the Malady is more out of the reach 
of Remedies. 


10 © Therefore they ſent the ark of God to Ekron : 
and it came to paſs, as the ark of God came to Ekron, 
that the Ekronires cried our aying, 1 hey have brought 
about the ark of the God of 1irael to us, to flay us ſand 
our people. 

Ff Not that they intended this, but becauſe this would be the event 
ot it. 

II So they ſent, and gathered together all the lords 
of the Philiſtines, and ſaid, Send away .he ark of the 
God of Iſrael, and let it go again to his own place, 
that it ſlay us not, and cur people : for there was a 
deadly deſtruction throughout all the &ty t : the hand 
of God was heavy there. 


_ t Towit, the City of Ekrov, during irs ſhort ſtay theres Or, in 
every City, towir, where rae Ark of GOD ca::ie : for it came aiſo to 
Gaza and Aikelon, and produced the ſame Effe&ts th: re, as may be 


gathered from Chap. 6. 4, 17, though ior brevity ſake it be here 
omitted. 


| 12 And the men thar died not «, were ſmitten with 
the emerods : and the cry of the ciry x went up to 
heaven. 

« Either of ſome other Plague, or Ulcer, as may be thoughtfrom 


v. 6. oref the Emerods, which Iafefted and Tormented even thoſe 
whom it did not kill. 


the Cty 1s pur for the People Lahabiting ity 


$S141NULYE 


' being pur potea.:a ly, as is not unuſual), They expreſs themſeives pronchfully. 


x Or, of that City where the Ark was z and | 


F Fg 
Ch. VI 
C H AP. VI. | 
The Phil:fines conſult with the Pri-fts how they ſhall return the Arts Thy | 
adviſe to ſend with it for a Treſpa(s offering, fue golden Emerads ana 
Mice : On a new Cart, which they do: The Kine tied to the Cart, g5 
firaight Way is Bet ':- ſhemeſh s Wriich was for a ſian to the Philiftines, 
T- — 12, They of Beth-ſhrmeſh rejoyce ; The Lovices offer Sacrifice 
for it, 13——— I5. The People are ſmitten far looking into the Ark ; 
And requeſ# them of Kirjath-5:arim to fetch it thence into their own Ciry, 
16 


21s 
Nd the ark of the LORD was in the countrey of 

the Philiſtines ſeven moneths 4. 

_ # Solong they kept ir, as loth to loſe ſo great a Prize, and wil- - 
ling to try all ways to keep ity and yet free themſelves from the 
Miſchicfs accompanying its preſence. 

2 And the Philiſtines called for the prieſts, and the 
diviners b, ſaying, What ſhal we do to the ark of the 
LORD |. Tell us wherewith c we (hal ſend it to his 
place ? 

b Whoſe Art was in great eſteem with Heathen Nations, and e- 
ſpecially with the Phili#ines and their Neighbours the Canaanites and 
Egyptlans. c In what manner, and with what Gifts ; for to ſend it, 
they had decreed before, Chap. 5. 11. 

3 And they ſaid, It ye reſolve to ſend away the ark 
of the God of Iſrael, fend it not empty 4d : but in any 
wiſe return him a treſpaſs offering e : then ye ſhal be 
healed, and it (hal be known co you f, why his hand | 
* 15 not removed from you. * Or, waz | 

d te. Withour a Preſent ; which they judged neceſſary, from | 

the common Opinion and Praftice both of Jews and Gentiles. 
e Thereby to acknowledge our Offence, and obtain his Pardons 
f You ſhall underſtand, what is hitherto doubtful, whether he was 
the Author of theſe Calamities, and why they continued ſo long 
upon you. Compare verſe 7.8, 9. | 

4 Then ſaid they, What ſhall be the treſpaſs-offering 
Z, Which we ſhal return to him ? They anſwered, 

Five golden emerods h4, and hve golden mice j, ac- 
cording to the number of the lords of the Philiſtines : 

, | ; 
og kind 0 plague 4s On T you all, and on your , xr, 

g They veſire particular Information, becauſe they were ignorant 
of the Nature anu Manner of the Worſhip of 1ſrae!'s GOD. and 
they might eaſily underſtand rhat there were ſome kinds cf Offerings 
which GOD would not accept, þ i. e. Figures of that part of the 
Body which was the ſeat of the Diſeaſe, which by »ts ſwelling, or 
ſome other way, Repreſented aiſo the Diſcale it ſelf. Which they 
offered not in con:empt of GOD, for they ſoughr ro gain his favour 
hereby ; bur in Teſtimony of their Humiliation, that by leaving 
this Monument of their own Shame and Miſery, they might obtain 
pity trom GOD, and freedom from their Diſcaſe- #5 Which mar- 
red their Land ( as it is related wv. 5.) by deftroying the Fruits 
thereof ; as the other Plague afflicted their Bodies. 

5 Wherefore ye ſhal make images of your emerods, 
and images of your mice, that * mar the land, and ye « 
ſhal give glory unto the God of Iſrael & : peradventure 
he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your 

ods 1, and from off your land. 

k The Glory of his Power in Conquering you, who ſeemed and 
pretended to have Conquered him ; of his Juſtice in puniſhing 
you, and of his Goodneſs if he ſhai Relieve you. 1 They ſo ſpeak, 
either becauſe not only Dagon, but their other gods alſo, were 
thrown down by the Ark, though that be nor related ; or becauſe 
the Plural Number in that caſe, was commonly uſed for the Sin- 
gular» | 35 

6 Wherefore then do ye harden »s your hearts, * as + Exod. 7: 
the Egyptians, and Pharaoh hardened their hearts » ? 13+ 9nd 8 


when he + had wrought || wonderfully among them, "5-9 4 


them, 


Cha. 5.6. | 


* did not they let F the people go, and they depart- tGr delids 
ed ? ed th:m. 


mm Or, ſhould ye harden, the Future Tenſe of the Indicative Mond || Or, re- 


thus, either becauſe rhey perceived that ſome oppoicd the Decree * Exod. 
of ſending home the Ark,though the moſt had cooſented to it; or 12- 21» 
becauſe th-y thought they would hardly ſend ir away in the man- F Heb. 
ner preſcribed, by giving glory to Ged, and taking ſhame ro them- them. 
ſelves» » Which they might eaſily learn, either by Tradition from 
their Anceitors, or by the Reports of the Hebrews, 

7 Now therefore make a new Cart s, and take two 
milch-kine, on which there hath come no yoke p, and 
tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home 


from them 4q. 

s As David did for the ſame uſe, 2 Sam: 6: 3. in Reverence to the 
Ark. p Partly, in reſpett to the Ark ; and partly, for the better 
Diſcovery, becauſe ſuch untamed Heifers are wanton, and apt to 
wander, and keep no certain and conſtant paths, as Oxen accu- 
ſt>med to che Yoke do, and therefore were moſt unlikely to keep 
the dire& Road to J/rael's Land. q Which would ſtir up Natural 
Aﬀe&tion in their Dams, and caule them rather to retura Home, 
than to go to a ſtrange Countrey. 


8 And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it upon 
the cart r, and put the jewels of gold, which ye return 
him fo a treſpaſs-otfering in a cotter by the ſide thereof 
/, and fend it away, that it may go. 

r Which God winked at in them, both becauſe they were igno- 
rant of God's law to the contrary, and betauſe they had no Levites 


to carry it upon their ſhoulders. { For they durſt not prelume to 
open the Ark, to put them within ir. 


9 And ſee, if it goeth up by the way of his own 
©: 


2 & 4 coaſt 


kap. VI. 


Or, it. coaſt s to Bethſhemeſ(Þ, then || hehath done us this great 


evil t: but if pot,then we ſhall know that z# 7s not his 


hand that ſmote us ; it wes a chance that hapned to _ U, 
s Or, Border, i. e. the way that leadeth to his Coaſt, or =_ bn, 
z- the Countrey to which it belongs» * Which they ang "_ 
conclude, if ſach Heifers ſhould againſt their vm—_—_y u - mw 
natural inſtin&. go into a ſtrange path» and regularly an _ —_ 
1y proceed in it, without any man's Condutt » This " _ 
to us from ſome Influences of the Stars, or other unknown Caules: 
Which was a weak and fooliſh Inference, depending upon a _ 
Contingency, it. being uncertain whether GOD would __m _ 
give them this Sign ; and probable, that he would my t, 
both to puniſh their Superſtirion, and to harden their hearts to their 
further and utter Deftru&tion. But wicked Men will ſooner believe 
the moſt uncertain and ridiculous things, than own the viſible De- 
monſtrations of GOD'S Power and Providence. 
10 | And the men did fo: and took two milch- 


kine, and tied them to the cart, and ſhut up their calves 


gi - Rs they laid the ark of the LORD upon the cart, 


| and the coffer with the mice of gold, and the images of 


their emerods. ; 

12 And the kine took the ſtraight way to the way 
of Bethshemesh x, and went along the high-way, low- 
ing as they went z, and turned nor aſide to the 
right hand, or to the left : and the lords of the Phili- 
fines went after them z unto the border of Beth- 


hemesh. ; 
p x i. e. Leading to Bethſbemeſb, a Ciry of the Prieſts, Joſh: 21: 16. 


who were by Office to take care of it» y Teſtifying at once both 
their natural and vehement Inclination to their Calves, and the ſu- 
pernatural and Divine Power which over-ruled them to a contrary 
Courſe. z Under pretence of an honourable diſmiſſhon of ic ; but 
in truth, to prevent all Impoſture, and to get aſſurance of the truth 
of the Event» All which Circumſtances tended ro their greater 
Confuſion, and Illuſtration of GOD'S Glory. 


12 Andrhey of Bethſhemeſh were reaping their wheat- 
harveft in the valley : and they lifted up their eyes,and 


ſaw the ark, and rejoyced ro ſee ir. 

14 And the cart came into the field of Joſhua a Beth- 
ſhemire, and ſtood there, where there was a great 
ſtone : and they 4 cave the wood of the cart, and 
offered the kine, a burnr-cffering unto the LORD 5. 

z Not the lords of the Philiſtmes, but the Berhjhemires, to wit, the 
Priefts that dwelt there. b There may ſ-em to be a double Errour 
in this AQ, Firſt, That they offered Females for a Burnt-offering, 
contrary to Levitz 1: 3- and 22: 19. Secondly, That they did it 
in a forbidden place, Deut: 12: 5, 6- into which they might eaſily 
be led by exceſs of Joy, and eager deſire of returning ro their long- 
interrupted courſe of Offering Sacrifices. And ſome think theſe 
Trregularities were partial Cauſes of the following Puniſhment. 
But this caſe being very extraordinary, may in ſome ſort excuſe it, 
if they did not proceed by ordinary Rules. As for the firſt, 
though they mighr not chuſe Females for that uſe, yet when GOD 
himſelf bad clioſen, ani in a manner Conſecrated them to his 
Service, and imployed them in ſo Sacred and Glorious a Work, 
it may ſeem tollerable ro off-r them to the LORD, as being his 
pecuiiar, and improper for any other uſe. And for the Jatrer, we 
have many Inſtances of Sacrifices offered to GOD by Prophets, 
and Holy Men, in other places, beſides the Tabernacle, vpon 
extraordinary occaſions, ſuch as this certainly was ; It being fit, 
that the Ark ſhould art its firſt return be received with Thankſgi- 
ving and Sacrifice ; and this. Place being SanQtified by the pre- 
ſence of the Ark, which was the very Soul of the Tabernacle, 
and that by which the Tabernacle it ſelf was San&tified, and for 
whoſe ſake the Sacrifices were offered at the door of rhe Taber- 


naclee 

15 And the Levites took down c the ark of the 
LORD, and the coffer that 2y45 with it, wherein 
the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great 
ſtone 8 and the men of Bethſhemeſh offered -burnt- 
offerings, and ſacrificed ſacrifices the fame day unto the 


LORD. 


c Or, Fir ths Levites had taken down: for this, though mentioned 
aftery was done before the Sacrifices were offered. 

16 And when thefive lords of the Philiſtines had ſeen 
it d, they returned to Ekron the ſame day. 

d To wit, that prodigious return of the Ark to its own Coun- 
trey, and the entertainment it found there. 

17 And theſe are the golden emerods which the Phi- 
liſtines returned for a treſpaſs-effering unto the LORD : 
for Aſhdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for 
Gath one, for Ekron one. 

18 And the golden mice according to the number of 
all the cities of the Philiſtines, belonging to the five 
lords : both of fenced cities, and of countrey villages 
e even unto the || great ſtone of Abel f, whereon they 


FT 1" Y DU E L 


ed, wv. 17. becauſe it thay ſeem, the Cities only; or princ; 
were peſtered with that Piſcaſ: 3 and the Mice _ | na ame 
according to the Number of all the Cities, as is here expreſſed ; the 
Word C:ty being taken generally ſo, as to include, not enly Fenced 
Cities, but alſo the Countrey Villages, as is here added, and the 
Fields belonging to them, theſe being the parts where the Mice did 
moſt Miſchief. f Which is mentioned as the utmoſt border of the 
Philiſiines Territory to which the Plague of Mice did extend. The 
word ſtone being eaſily underſtood out of v, 14. where this great ons 
is expreſly mentioned, as the glace on which the Ark was ſet, which 
1s alſo here repeated in the following words. Andthis place is here 
called 4bel, by anticipation from the great Mourning mentioned in 
the following Verſe. 

i9 4 And he ſmote the men of Bethſhemeſh,becauſe 
they had looked into the ark of the LORD g, even he 
{mote of the people h fifty thouſand and threeſcore ang 
ten men z: and the people lamented, becauſe the 
LORD had ſmitten 99any of the people with a great 
ſlaughter. 

g Having now an opportunity which they never yet had, nor 
were ever like to have, it is not ſtrange they had a vehement curi- 
olity and deſire to ſee the contents of the Ark : or whether the 
Philiflines had taken them away, and put other things in their place; 
and they thought they might now preſume the more, becauſe the 
Ark had bcen polluted by the Phrliſtines, and was now expoled to 
open view, and net yet put into that moſt holy Placey which they 
were forbidden to approach. þ i. e. Of the People living in, and 
near Bethſhemeſh, or coming thither from all parts upon this great 
glorious eccaſion. Heb. Andy or alſo he (mote of the people ; to wir, 
of or belonging to other places, though now here : So theſe are 
diſtinguiſhed from the men of Bethſhemeſh, of whom he ſpeaks only 
in general and indefinitely, he ſmote the men ; i. e. Some, or many 
of them, and then ſets down the Number of the Perſons ſmitteng 
or ſlain, either excluding the Be:hjh:wites, or including them. 
/ This may ſeem an incredible Relation, both becauſe that place 
could not afford fo great a Number, and becauſe it ſeems an a& of 
great rigour, that GOD ſhouid ſo ſeverely puniſh thoſe people who 
came with ſo much Zeal and Joy to Congratulare the return of the 
Ark, and that for ſo inconliderable an Errour, For the latter 
branch of the ObjeCtion, it may be ſaid, n. That GOD always 
uſed to be moſt ſevere jn puniſhing his own People, as Sinning a» 
gainft more knowledge and warning than others ; eſpecially, for 
ſuch ſins as immediately concern his ewn Worſhip and Service. 
2+ That men are very incompetent Judges of theſe Matters, be. 
cauſe they do not underſtand all the Reaſons and Cauſes of GOD'S 
Judgements. For although GOD tock this juſt occaſion ro puniſh 
them for that Crime, which was ſo ſeverely forbidden even to the 
common Levites under pain of Death ; of which ſee Numb: 4. 
18, 19, 20, Yetitis apparent, tht the People were at this cime 
guilty of many other, and greater Miſcarriages, for which GOD 
might juſtly infli& the preſent puniſhment upon them : and more. 
over there are many ſecret Sins which eſcape Man's Obſervation, 
but are ſezn by GOD, before whom, many Perſons may be deeply 
guilty, whom men eſteem innocent and vertuous, And therefore 
men ſhould take heed of Cenſuring the Judgements of GOD, of 
which it is moſt truely ſaid, that they are oft ſecret, but never un. 
righteous. And for the former branch of the ObjeQion, many 
things arey or may be ſaid ; 1- Thatthe Land of Iſ-ael was ſtrange. 
Iy populous, See 2 Sams 24: ge and 2 Chron: 13: 3. 2« That all 
theſe were not the ſetled Inhabitants cf this place, but moſt of them 
ſuch as did, and in all probability would reſort thither in great 
Numbers upon ſo illuſtricus an occafion. 43. That all theſe werenor 
ſtruck dead, in the very Fa&, and upon the place, which would 
have terrified others from following their Example 3 bur were ſe. 
cretly ſtruck with ſome Diſeaſe or Plague, which killed them in a 
little time. 4. That divers Learned Men Tranſlate,and underſtand 
the place otherwiſe, and make the Number much ſmaller. Joſephus 
the Jew, and the Hebrew Doftors, and many others contend, that 
only ſeventy Perſons were ſlain. Which though it ſeem but a ſmall 
Number, yet might juſtly be called # great ſlaughter, either for the 
quality of che Perſons ſlain, or for thegr:atneſs and extraordinarineſs 
of the Stroke; or becauſe it was a great Number, conſidering 
the ſmallneſs cf the Place, and the ſadneſs of the Occaſion. The 
words in the Hebrew are theſe, and thus placed, he ſmre of or ameng 
the people ſeventy men, fifty thouſand men 3 whereas. ſay they, The 
Words ſhould have been otherwiſe placed, and the freater Number 
put before the leſs, if this had been meant, that he ſmote 50 Thou- 
ſand and 70 Men. And one very Learned Man renders the Words 
thus, He ſmote of the People ſeventy men, even fifty of a thouſand, the 
Particle, Mem, of, being here underſtood, as it is very frequently, 
So the meaning is, That GOD ſmore every twentieth Man of the 
Tranſgreſſors, as the Romans uſed to cut off every tenth Man in caſe 
of the general guilt of an Army. Or the Words may be rendred 
thus, He ſmote of, or among the people, ſeventy men out of fifty thouſand 
men ; the Particle Mem, of, or out of, being underſtood before the 
Word fifty, which Bockare puts before a theuſand ; and it may be 
thus expreſſed, to ſhew, that GOD did temper his Severity with 
great Clemency ; And whereas there were many thouſands of 
Tranſgreſfors ( every one following his Brother's Example, as is 
uſual in ſuch caſes ) GOD only ſingled out 70 of the principal Of- 
fenders, who either ſinned moſt againſt their Light or Office ; or 
were the Ringleaders, or chief Encouragers of the reſt. To which 
may be added, that the ancient Tranſlators, the Syriack, and Arabick, 
Read the Place five thouſand and ſeventy men. being ſuppcſed to have 
Read in their Hebrew Copies, Chameſb, five, for Chomiſbim, fijty, 
which 1s no great Alteration in the Word. 


20 And the men of Bethſhemeſh ſaid, Who is able 


Chap. vi, F 


Orgs ſet down the ark of the LORD, which one remaineth to ſtand before 7 this holy LORD God &? and © + Hcb-h 


ones . . : whom ſball he go up fi 2 
unto this day in the field of Joſhua the Bethſbemire: | 975%, To minifer bitrn h2 k where the LORD fe orete £982" 
e This added for Explication of that foregoing Phraſe, all the | Since GOD is ſo ſevere to —_————— f : p ein bi x hs ent. 11,ly GOP: 
cities; either ro ſhew, that under the Name of the five Cities were | who js ſufficient and worthy to ſerve im ? an an ak = \ Hegneze 
comprehended all the Villages and Territories belonging to them, s e preſum 


come into his preſence ? It ſeems to be a Complaint »ftula= 

in whoſe Name, and a* whoſe _—_ op nay were made ; | rjon with GOD, concerning this laſt and 00a 7 _ 

or to expreſs the difference between this and the former Preſent, rity- ! Who will dare to receive the Ark with 1o much hazard to 
the Emerods being only five, according to the five Cities LE themſelves 2 | , 

| 21 T And 


& 


Jeb. Th 
RD, phi 
ly GOD. 


| Chap. VIE. l. | 
21 T And chey ſent meſſengers to the inhabicants of 
Kirjath-jearim m, ſaying, The Philiſtines have brought 
again the ark of the LORD : come ye down and ferch 
ic up to You. . 
mW hither they ſent, either becauſe the place was not far off 
from them, and ſo it might ſoon be removed, which they mainly 


S 4 M © 


' defired : or becauſe it was a place of Eminency and Strength, and 


-0 be better preſerved from any new attempts of the Phili- 
rr _ 0 be hoes attended by the 1/razlites, who would more. 
freely and fiequenrly come to it at ſuch a place, than in Bcthſbmeſh, | 
which was upon the border of their Enemies Land : or becauſe they 
thought they would gladly receive it, being a pious and zealous : 
pzop!e : or becauſe it was in the way to Szloh, its ancient Habirati- 
on; and whither they might ſuppoſe it was to be carried by de- 
grecs, and teveral Stages, whereof this was one. 


CHAP, VIL 


The Ark u placed in Kirjath-jearim:Eleazar Abinadat's ſon is ſanfified ty keep 
it, 1 === 2. Samuel exhorts them to Repent, anda put away their Idols, rhey 
obey him. A Faſt at Mizpeh, 3 — 6. The Philiſtines intend to ſet 
upon the Iſraelites, who are afraid, 7. Samutl offereth and prayeth far 
Iſrael. God hearcth: Terrifieth the Philiftines with Thunder, and they 
ave ſmitten * Are ſubdued ; And the Cities which they had taken from the 


Iſraelites are recovered, 8 ++ I4. Samuel wiſiteth all the Cities of 
Iſrael, and returns to Ramah : There builds an altar to the Lord, 


i 17s : : 

: ANd the men of * Kirjath-jearim came a and fetcht 
LI up b the ark of the LORD, and brought ir into 
Cs the houſe of * Abinadab in the hill c, and ſandtified 

d Eleazar his fon e, to keep the ark of the LORD f. 


a They gladly embrace the motion, as wiſely conſidering, that 
their great Calamity was not to be charged upon the Ark, but u- 
pon themſelves and their own careleſsneſs, irreverence, and pre- 
ſumption, inlocking into the Ark This place is elſewhere called 
Baalah, and Kiriath Baal, as is evident from Joſh? rs: 9, 60. and 
18: 14+ and 1 Chron: 13: 6, 7- 6 i» e. Cauſed it to be brought 
up ; to wit, by tie Prieſts appeinted to that work, whom they 
could eaſily procure, and undoubtedly would do it, eſpecially ha- 
ving been 1o !:tely warned of the great danger of violating God s 
Commands in thoſe matters. In Scripture-uſe, men are common- 
ly ſaid to do that which they order, or cauſe others to do» «c This 
place they choſe, becauſe it was both a ſtrong place, where 1t would 
be moſt falſe; and an high place, and therefore viſible at ſome di- 


ſtance, an41 ro many perſons, which was convenient for them, who 
were at that time to direCt their Prayers and Faces towards the 
Ark, 1 Kings 8: 29, 30g 35+ Pſal: 28: 2. and 138: 2. Dan: 6: 10, 
And for the ſame reaſon David afterwards placed it 1n the Hill of 
Sion. Some tranſlate the word, in Gibeah. But that was in the 
Tribe of B njamin, Joſh; 184 27+ Judges 19: 14. whereas this Kirjath- 
jearim was in the Tribe of Judah, 1 Chron: 13: 6, 7. d Not that they 
made him either Levite or Prieſt, as ſome would have it ; for in 
Iſ-ael perſor:'s were not madey but born ſuch ; and ſince the Inſtitu- 
tion of ' evites and Priefts, none were made ſuch, that were born of 
other Tribes, or Families ; but that they devoted, or ſet him apart 
( as this Verb ſometimes ſignifies) wholly to attend upon this 
Work. e Him rtiey chole rather than his Father, becauſe he was 
younger ana ſtron,er, and probably freed from Domeſtick Cares, 
which might diierr him from, or diſturb him in this Work; or 
becauſe be was more eminent for Prudence or Piety. f To keep 
the place where it was, clean and neat, and to guard it that none 
might approach or touch it, but ſuch as God required, or allowed 
to do fo, 
2 E And it came to paſs while the ark abode in 
Kirjath-jearim g, that the time was long : for it was 
t twenty years þ: and all the houſe of Iſrael lamented 
1 after the LORD 3. 
| g Where it conrinued, and was not carried to Shil»h its former 
Place, either becauſe thar place was deſtroyed by the Philiftinss when 
the Ark was taken, as may be gathered from tis Hiſtory, compa- 
red with Jer: 7: 2,14: and 26: 6,9. Or becauſe God would here- 
by punith the wi-kedneſs either of that particular place of Shiloh, or 
of the people of 1/-ae!, by keeping it ina private and obſcure place, 
and thar near to the Ph/liſtines, whither the generality of che people 
neither durſt, nor could ſafely come. h He faith nor, That this 
20 Years was all the time of the Arks abode there, for it continued 
there from E/:'s time, till David's Reign, 2 Sam: 6: 2. which was 
40 years, As 13: 21. but that it was fo long there e're the 1ſraelites 
were ſenſible of their fin and Miſery, e're they lamented, &c. as it 
follows. 7 te. They followed afcer God with Lamentation for his 
departure, and ſo long eſtrangemeat from them, and with prayers 
for his return. and favour to them, 
2 T And Samuel ſpake unto all the houſe of Iſrael 
k, fayipg, If ye do return unto the LORD / with all 
*Joſh:24: Your heart mn, then * put away the ſtrange gods », and 
14, 1,8 *X Aſhtaroth o from among you, and prepare your 
Jud 2"13- hearts p unto the LORD, and * ſerve him only ; 


* Deut: . . : "0 
24 and q he will deliver you out of che hand of the Phili- 
Mar: 4: 10. ſtines. 


&k To all the Rulers and Peop!e too, as he had occaſion in his 
Circuit, deſcribed below, wv: 16. mixing exhorrations ro Repen- 
rance, with his judicial Adminiſtrations. 1 If you do indeed what 
you profeſs, if you are reſolved ro go on in thar which you {cem to 
have begun. » Sincerely and in good earnefk. » Our of your 
houfes where ſome of you keep and worſhip them, and our of 
your Hearts and AﬀeRions, where they {till have an Intereſt in ma- 
ny of you. 0 And particularly or eſpecially, Aſbtaroth, which be 
mentions as a god, whom they, together with the neighbouring 
Nations, did more eminently worlhip. See Judges 2: 13. p By 
purging them from all ſin, and particularly from all inclinations 
ro other gods. Or, dire your hearts, having alienared your hearts 
from your !dols, turn them to God, and ner to other Idols or Va- 
nittes. 
pit, 


RS : 'r diſtant from the Phil:fines, where therefore it was | ; : 
ſo1meWhes Torrey ELIE j againſt the LORD. And Samuel judged the children 
of Iſrael « in Mizpeh. 


. Rivers of Water; ſuch deſcriptions of pevitential- ſorrow being 


4 Or. then, upon theſe conditions you may confidently ex- 


RE £ Chap. VII. | 
4 Then the children of Iſrael did put away * Baalim * Judges 
and Aſhtaroth, and ſerved the LORD only. 195 16» 


5 And Samuel faid, Gather all Iſrael to Mizpeh,and 

I will pray for you unto the LORD. 
6 And they gathered together to Mizpeh r, and 
drew water, and poured z# out s before the LORD x, 
and faſted on that day, and ſaid there, We have ſinned 


r Not thar beyond Jordan, of which Judges 11: 11, 29. but ano- 
ther in Canaan, where the Iſraelites uſed ro aſſemble, Judges 20; 1. 
1 Sam. 10: 17. 5 Which they did either, 1. Figurarively, they 
drew tears out of theirHearts,and poured out of their Eyes at ir were 


not unuſual : See Pſal: 6: 7. and 119: 136. Jer: 9: 1. Lam: 3: 48, 49- 
Or rather, 2. Properly, becauſe they are ſaid firſt to draw it, and 
then to poar it out. And this agrees well with rhe State of thoſe 
Times, wherein ſuch Rites as this were very cuſtomary. ; Now 
this courſe they ſeem ro have uſed, either, 1. As a mean or inſtru- 
ment of their Purification. So they waſhed themſelves in this Wa= 
ter,cthereby acknowledging their filthineſs, and cleanſing themſelves 
as the Law preſcribed. But this ſeems not probable; 7. Becauſe 
here is only mention of drawing and pouring forth this Water be« 
fore the Lord,bur not of any waſhing themſelves with it. 2.Becauſe 
this was no: a fit time and place to purifie themſelves in this great 
and genera] Aſſembly. Or, 2» As an External Sign, whereby they 
teſtified and profeſſed, both their own great filthineſs and need of 
waſhing by the grace and ſpirit of God, and blood of the Covenant, 
which are oft ſignified by Water, and their fincere deſire ro pour out 
their very Hearts before the Lord,in true Repentance, and to cleanſe 
themſelves from all filthineſs of fleſh and ſpirit. * i. e. In the 
publick Aſſembly, where God is in a ſpecial manner preſent, as hath 
been noted befcre» u 1- e. Governed them, reformed all Abuſes as 
gainſt God or man. took care that the Laws of God ſhould be ob« 
ſervedand executed, and wilful Tranſgrefſours puniſhed. 

7 And when the Philiſtines heard thar the children 
of Iſrael were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of 
the Philiſtines went up x againſt Iſrael : and when the 
children of Iſrael heard it, they were afraid y of the 
Philiſtines. 


x To wit, with an Army, ». 10. ſuſpe&ing the effeQs of their 
general Convention, and intending to nip them in the bud. » Be- 
ing a company of unarmed perſons, and ugfit for Battel. 


8 Andthe children of Iſrael ſaid to Samuel, + Ceaſe + Heb: 5; 
not to cry unto the LORD our God for us s, that he ,,; ens 
will ſave us out of the hand of the Philiſtines, from us . 
2 We are aſhamed and afraid to look God in the face, becauſe from cryivg. 
of our great wickedneſs this day remembred and acknowledged 3 
do thou therefore intercede for us, as Moſes did fer his Generati- 
Ne 
9 4 And Samuel took a ſucking lamb a, and offered 
it b for a burnt-offering wholly c unto the LORD : 
and * Samuel cried unto the LORD for I{rael, and the 
LORD |] heard him @. / gs 
a Which it might be, though it was more 4han eight days od; 1. wh 
and ſo that Law, Exod: 23: 19. was not violated. 6 Either himſelf/99*%- 
by Divine Inſtin&, which was a ſufficient Warrant ; or rather by 
a Prieſt, as Saul is afterwards faid to have offered, 1 Sam: 13: g. 
c Burning allthe partsof it, according to the Law of the Burnt-effe- 
rings ; whereas 1n other offerings ſome parts were reſerved. d As 
appears by the Effe&s, the following Thunder, and the overthrow 
of the Phtliſtines Hoſt. : | 
10 Andas Samuel was offering up the burnt-offering, 
the Philiſtines drew near to battel againſt Iſrael: bur _ 
che LORD thundred with a great F thunder on that + Heb: 
day upon the Philiſtines, and diſcomfited them, and vie 
they were ſmitten e before Iſrael, | 
e Either by the Lighrnings, or Thunderbolts, or other things 
which accompanied the cracks of Thunder : or by the !ſ-aclires, who 
perceiving them to be affrighted and flee aways purſued, and ſmote 
chem, as the next Verſe mentions. ; 
11 And the men of Iſrael went out of Mizpeh, and 
purſued the Philiſtines, and ſmote them f, uncil they 
came under Beth-car. 
f Qu. Whence had they Weapons wherewith to ſmite them? 
Anſw. Divers of them probably brought them to the Aſſembly, o-= 
thers borrowed them at Mizpeh, or the neighbouring places : And 
the reſt might be the Arms of the Philiſtines, which they threw away 
to haſten their flight, as is uſual in ſuch caſes. ; 
12 Then Samuel cook a ſtone g, and ſet it between 
Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name thereof _ 
[| Eben-ezer þ, faying, Hitherto hath the LORD i] That is ,- 
helped us z. the ſtone of 
z A rude unpoliſh'd ſtone, which was not prohibited by thar#*/Ps 
Law, Levitz 26: 1. there being no danger of Worſhipping tuch a 
Stone, and this being ſet up only as a Monunient of the Viftory. 
h By which, compared with Chap: 4: 1. it appears, that this Vifto- 
ry was gained in, or near the very ſame place where the Ir aelites 
receiveg their former fatal loſs. i He hath begun to help us in 
ſome meaſure, though not complearly to deliver us- By which 
wary Expreſſion, he exciteth both their thankfulneſs for their 
Mercy reccived, and their holy fear and care to pleaſe and ſerve the 
Lord, that he might proceed to help and deliver them more effe= 
ctually.. "= | 
13 4 So the Philiſtines were ſubdued, and they 
came no more into the coaſt of Iſrael &: and the hand - 
of the LORD was againſt the Philiſtines all che days of 


Samuel | | bL 
2 U & i.e- They 


* Pſal: 99:6- | 


* Deut. 
16+ 19. 


bap. VIIE 


2 . Di:pen{atione 
+ Heb. and 


be circutted. 


'Fide atter lucre, and * took bribes 4, and perverted 


L. 
cafne not with a great Hoſt, as now*they did, but | 


em with ſtragling Parties, or Gariſons; as 1 Sam. 


fp & EC. They 


d th | z 
pr_—_— thay came not, to wit, all the days of Samucl, as it fol- 


7 r; for in 

" e. while Samuel was their ſole Judge, or Ru'cr ; 

_ tha they did come, 1 Sam? 13: 5, 174 and 14+ 52+ and 17. 
7 fy And the cities which the Philiſtines had taken 
from Iſrael, | were reſtored to Ifrael 7, from Ekron 
even unto Gath, and the coaſts thereof did Hrael deli- 
yer out of the hand of the Philiſtines : and there was 


peace m between Iſrael and the Amorites 7, { "0h 
1 By the Philiſtines, who, ir ſeems, were frighted into this _ 
tution by their dread of Samuel, and of the Divine 74. ae M _ 
-5#. The Philiftines had Cries and Garifons 1n Iſrael s Land after this 
- Saws; 10: 5. and 13% 3- Anſw. Either therefore thoſe 


ime3 as 1 Anw. rt + or 
nr es were not any of theſe here mentioned 3 for it is not ſzid, I hat 


— Ciries were Reſtored, but only indefinitely, he Citres, and 
- —» —drouryaph certain Compals from Ekron to Gath ; or ge of 
the Cities now Reſtored by the Philſtines, were afterwards ral en 
by them. m An agreement for the Ceſſation of all Afts of Hoitl1- 
ty- n i. e» The Canaanites, off called Amorites, becauſe theſe une 
Getty the moſt Valiant and Terrible of all thoſe Nations, an 
the firſt Enemies whieh the Iſraelites met with, when they went to 
take Poſſeſſin of their Land. They made this Peace with the Ca- 
Haanites, thar they might be more at leiſure to oppoſe the Philiſliness 
now their moſt Potent Enemies. 


i5 And Samuel judged 
life 0. 


.'0 For thoug 
not then quite 


Ifrael all the days of his 


h Saul was King in Samuel's Iaſt days, yet Samuel did 
ceaſe to be a Judge, being 10 made by God's extra- 
ordinary Call, which Saul could not deſtroy ; And therefore Sam- 
vel did ſometimes, upon great occaſions, though not ordinarily, 
exerciſe the Office of a Judge aftcr the beginning of Saul's Reign ; 
as Chap: 11; 7+ and 15; 32, 33- And the years of the Rule of Saul 
and Sarnel are joyned togerher, Afts 13: 209 21. Q-e#. How doth 
the Office of a Judge agree with Hannahb's Vow, whereby ſhe deve- 
ted him to a perp<rual attendance upon the Lords ſervice ? Anſw, 
This was not inconſiſtent with her Vow, which conſiſted of two 
Branches, the one more general, that he ſhou!d be given, or lent 
to the Lord all his days, 1 Sam; 1; Is 28. which ſhe faithfully 
executed, leaving him wholly to the ſervice and diſpoſal of rhe 
Lord, who thought fic to employ him in this way ; and, if any 
thing therein was Contrary tO thar Vow, could undoubtedly dit- 
penſe with it, 2s being his own Right only ; the other more par- 
ticu'ar, th:t 70 Raſor ſbould come upon h1s Head ; nor doth it appear 
that ths part, was violat-d; or if it was, 1t was done by Divine 


he went from year to year Þ 1n circuit to 


_ and judged I{- 


Bethel p, _ Gilgal q, and Mizpeh 7, 
in thele places 5, 
_ __ a ef known by that name : or the houſe of God; to 
wit, Kirjath-jearim, where the Aik was 4q In the Eaſtern Border. 
+ Towards the Welt. 5 He went to thoſe ſeveral places, partly in 
compliance with the people, whoſe convenience and benefit he was 
willing to purchaſe with his own trouble, making himiclt an irine- 
rant Judge and Preacher for their ſakes; and pert]y, that by his 
preſence in ieveral parts, be might the better obſerve, and reCtifie al] 
forts of miſcarriages againſt God or men. ; 
17 And his return 2/45 tO Ramah : for there was his 


houſe, and there he judged Iſrael, and there he builr 


an altar unto the LOKD r. 

+ Thar by joyning Sacrifices with his Prayers, he might the ber- 
'ter obtain dircQion and afſittance from God upon all emergences. 
Objett. It was unlawful ro bui!d another Altar for Sacrifice beſides 
that before the Tabervaclez Deue. 12: 5, 13. Anſw. This was in part 
excuſed by the confuſion of thoſe times, wherein the Tabernacle and 
its Altar were Deſtroyed ; 25 15 moſt probable ; but moſt fully, be- 
cauſe this was done by Propherical Inſpiration, and Divine Diſpen- 
ſationy as appears by God's approbation and acceptance of the Sacri= 


fices offered upon 1t. 


CHAP. VIIL 


Samuel makes his ſons Judges over Ijrael : Their Names : And ill Govern- 
«ment, 1 ==}, The People ask a King : Samuel is grieveds Prays: 
4—— 6. God 1s diſpleaſed with the people : Bur commanas Samuel to 
bhearken to them, 7 —— 9 And to repreſent to them the Tyrannical Go- 
wernment of Kings, which he doth, to ==—1 8. The People continue in their 
Requeſt : Gd commandeth Samuel to yield to Fhem, 19==— 220 
A Nd it came to paſs when Samuel was old 4, that 

he made his ſons Judges þ over [ſrael. 

s And {ſo unable for his former Travels and Labours. 5 Not 
Supreme Judges, for ſuch there was to be bur oney and that of 
God's chuling ; and Samuel {till kept that Oftice in his own hands, 
Chap. 7: 15. bur his Vicegerents or Deputizs, who might go about 
and determine matters, but with reſervation of a Right of Appeals 
to himſelf. He advanceth his ſons to this place, not fo much cur 
of paternal Indulgence, the ſad effe&s whereof he had ſeen in E!; 


bur becauſe he had doub:leſs inſtru&ed them in a ſingular manner, ! ag 


-ed them for the higheſt Employments; and be hoped thar : 

-_ key he had fer +2 ard the Inſpection and Authority he 
fill had over them, w.uld have obliged them to diligence and faith- 
fulneſs in the execution of their Truſt. 

2 Now the name of che firſt-born was Joe!, and the 
name of his ſecoad Abiah : rhey were judges in Beer- 

ba c. 
_— In the ſouthern Border of the Land of Canaan, where he placed 
his ſons, becauſe theſe parts were very remote from his houſe at Ra- 
wah; where, and in the neighbouring places Samuel himſelt {ti1] 
excuted the Office of the Judge; ſending his ſons ro reſide and judge 
in diſtant places, for the calc and convenience of the people. 


And his ſons walked not in his ways, but turned a- 


# & £4 :& 


judgements 


a Opportunity and temptation drew forth and diſcovered that 
Corruption in them, which till now was hid from their Father,and 
ic may be, from themſelves. 


4 Then all the elders e of Iſrael gathered themſelves 
together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah: 

e Either for Age, or Dignity, and Power. 

5 And ſaid unto him, Behoid, thou art old, and thy 
ſons walk not in thy ways f: now * make us a king to 
judge us g, like all the nations þ. 


f They feared, that Samuel would not live long ; and that cirher Alt.1. 


he through infirmity and :ndulgence might leave the Governmenr 
in his ſons hands 3 or that they would invade and keep it, *fter their 
Father's Death ; and therefore they joyntly make their Complaints 
againſt them, and procure their removal from their places. Thus 
they are brought low, and cruſhed by thoſe very wicked ways by 
which they deligned to Advance and Eſtabliſh themſelves. So true 
IS it, That Honeſty is the beſt Policy, and Unrighreouſneſs the 
greateſt Folly. g Their concluſion out-run their Premiſes, and 
cheir Deſires excced their Reaſons or Arguments, which extended 
no turther than to the removal of Samu!'s ſons from their places, 
and the procuring ſome other juſt and prudent affiſtance ro S2:nue!'s 
Age. Nor was the grant of their Deſire a Remedy for their Diſeaſe, 
but rather an aggravation of it. For the ſons of their King mighr 

and were like!y to be as corrupt as Szmuel's ſons ; and if they were, 
would not be fo eaſily removed as theſe were. þ i- e. As melt of 
the Nations about us have. Bur there was not the like reaſon - be. 
cauſe God had ſeparated them from all other Nations, and cautioned 
them againſt the imiration of their Examples, and had taken them 
into his own immediate Care and Government ; which priviledoe 
other Nations had nor. ” 


© Hof, 


Chap. VII, T 


6 9 Bur the thing | diſpleaſed Samuel 5, when they + 11g, ,, 


ſaid, Give us a king to judge us; and Samuel prayed evil int 
eyes of Fi. 
as Muel, 


unco the LORD &. 


 # Nottheir Complaint of his Sons, but their deſire of a King, 
15 apparent trom the following Words, and from the whole courſe 
of the Story. Which was ſo grievous to him ; partly becauſe of 
their Injuſtice and Ingraticude to himſelf, whoſe Government,though 
it had been ſo ſweer and beneficial to them, they plainly ſhew them- 
ſelves weary of; and principally, becauſe God was hereby diſho- 
noured and provcked, by that dittruſt of God, and that vain-glory 
and ambition, and thar itch after Changes, which were the mani- 
feſt Cauſes of this Deſire ; and becaule of that great ſervitude and 
miſery, which he wiſely foreſaw tne People would hereby bring 
upn themſelves, as he particularly informs them, wv. 11, &c. k For 
the pardon of their ſin, and deſire of diceftion and help from God 
In ti:15 great affair; 


7 And the LORD ſaid unto Samuel, Hearken unto 
the voice of the people / in all that they ſay unto thee: 


for they have nor rejected thee mm, but * have rejected * Chuy 


me », thar I ſhould not reign over them 0. 
_ 1 God grants their deſire in anger, and for their puniſhment, as 
is atfimed, Hoſes 13. 11. Compare Numb: 22. 13, 20. Deut. 1. 22. 
P|al: 77:20. m 1.e, Net thee only, nor principally. Compare Gen. 
32+ 28, Exod: 16: 7. Heſ: 6: 6. Matth; 10: 20 n This injury and 
cuntumely, refletts cniefly upon me and my Government. o To 
wit, by my immediate and peculiar Government, which was the 
great honour, fafery, and happineſs of this People, if they had had 
wit to know it, or hearts ro prize it. And all the Infelicities of 7/- 
rael, under this kind of Government, did not proceed from the 
Narure of the Government, bur from the ungovernableneſs and 
wickednels of the People, which, they might be ſure, would pro- 
wuce the ſame or greater CaJamities under their Kingly Govern- 
ment. Queſt. Firſt, Did not God Reign over them when they had 
Kings? Anſw. Yes, in a general way, but not in ſuch a peculiar 
manner as he did by the Judges, who were generally raiſed and cal. 
led by Gods particular appointment, endowed and fantified by his 
Spirir, dire&ted and affiſted by his ſpecial providence upon all Emer- 
geacies ; whereas all things were for the moſt part contrary in 
their Kings. Queſt. Secondly, Was it ſimply unlawful for the Peo- 
ple ro defire a King ? Anſw. No, as appears from Deur. 17, 14. but 
herein was their fin, That they deſired it upon ſinful grounds, of 
which ſee on v. 7+ and in an impertuous manner, and at an unſeaſon= 
able time, and without asking leave or advice from God ; which in 
- weighty and difficulta Caſe rhey could nor negle& without great 
in. 

8 According to all the works which they have done 
ſince the day that I brought them up out of Egypr,even 
unto this day, wherewith they have forſaken me, and 


ſerved other gods: ſo do they alſo unto thee p. 
Þ Thou fareſt no worſe than my ſelf. This he ſpeaks for Sam's 
Comfort and Vindication, 


9 Now thers fore || hearken unto their voice s | 


beit, yer proteſt ſolemnly unto them 9, and ſhew |. _ T 
them the manner of the king r that ſhal reign over 3! _—_ 
them. hs hat 


in Scripture, as we ſhal ſee. 


io 4 And Samuel told all the words of the LORD 
unto the people, that asked of him a king. 


11 And he ſaid, This will be * the manner of the, 


1] Os 19, 


how- || Or, 4; 


q That, if it be poſſible, thou mayeſt yet prevent their ſin and ſolemnly 

iſery. 7 1. e. Of the Kings which they defire like the Kings of procefted 
other Nations. He ſpeaks nor of the juſt Authority, or the Right ganſt tis 
of their Kings, but of their PraCtice, as is evident from divers of the then thu | 
following particularss which areexpreſly forbidden aud condemned ſhalt bon, | 


&C& 


Chap! | 


king that ſhal reign over you : he * will cake your 14 5» 


{ons /, and appoint them for himſelf, for his chariots, 
and zo be his horſemen ft, and ſome ſhal run before his 
chariots» 

JS To wir, Injurioufly and by Violence, as this 1:brew word is off 
uſed, as Ger. 20. 3- and 27. 36. Job.5-5. and fo it mult be here; 
becaule otherwiſe the King would have no more priviledge than any 

O 


- 


Foes wb 


Il 


9Þ 
IO, 
13.21, 


eb. ws 
n the 
of $1 


th 


Jr, obj 
"Nr, 2 


thſlaws | 


7, wht 
1/4 ha 
omnly 
otefted © 
; uſ £18, 
en this 


C 


, Chap- IX. 


4 


; 


alt (bi, | 


I. 

1 jeQs ; | might take a Son with his own or 
—lanas.or _ for Fn Horſes, for ſo the Hebrew word 
Paraſh, ſomerimes ſignifies, as 1/a: 21+ 7» 9+ and 28; 28, to ride his 
Horſes. : 

i2 And he will appoint him « captains over thou- 
fands, and captains over fifties, and will ſer 1hem to 
ear his ground, and to reap his harveſt x, and to 


make his inſtruments of war, and inſtruments of his 
chariots 7. ; ; 

Heb: To, or for himſelf ; Emphatically, 1. e. for his own fancy, or 
glory, or conveniencys or evil deſign, and not only when the ne- 
ceſſities of the Kingdom or Common-wealth require it, as the 
Judges did. And though this might ſeem to be no incumbrance, 
AS it js here repreſented, but an honour and advantage to the Per- 
ſons ſo advanced, yet even in them that Honour was accompanied 
with great Dangers, and pernicious ſnares of many kinds, which 
thoſe faint ſhadows of Glory could not recompence ; and as to the 
publick, their Pomp and Power proved very Burthenſome and Op- 
preflive to the People, whoſe Lands and Fruits were taken from 
them, and beſtowed upon theſe, for the ſupport of their State, as 
it follows below, wv. 14, 15- x Ar his own pleaſure, and without 
their conſent, when poſſib!y their own Fields required all their time 
and pains» y He will preis them fer all forts of his work, and that 
upon his own terms» ; 

12 And he will take your daughters & 7o be confecti- 


oners, and ts be cooks, and to be bakers. 

z Which would be more grievous to their Parents, and more 
dangerous to themſelves, becauſe of the tenderneſs of that Sex, and 
liableneſs to many injuries. ; 

14 And * he will take your fields 4, and your vine- 
yards, and your oliveyards, ever the belt of :hem, and 
give them tO his ſervants 6. | 

a To wit, by fraud or force, as 4446 did from Naboth, b He 
will not only tak= tae Fruits of your Lands for his own uſe, but wil] 
take away your Poſſeſſions to give to his ſervants. . 

i5 And he will take the tenth c of your ſeed, and of 
your vinevards, and give to his f officers 4, and to his 
ſervants. ' | 

c B:ſides the ſeveral Tenths which God hath reſerved for his ſer- 
vice and ſervants, he will, when he pleaſeth, impoſe another Tenth 
upon you. d Heb? to his Eunuchs, which may be properly under- 
ſtood, and may imply a further injury, that he ſhould againſt the 
command of God, make ſome of his People Eunuchs ; and take thoſe 
inro his Court and Favour, which God would have caſt out of the 
Congregation. 

16 And he will take your men-ſervants, and your 
maid-ſervants, and your goodlicſt young men, and 
your aſſes, and pur them to his work e. 

e By conſtraint, and without ſufficient recompence. 

17 He will rake the tench of your ſheep, and ye ſhal 
be his ſervants f. 

f i. e. He ſhal uſe you like Slaves, and deprive you of that Liber- 
ty which you now enjoy. . 

18 And ye ſhal cry out in that day g, becauſe of the 
king which ye ſhal have choſen you : and the LORD 
will nor hear ycu in. that day þ. 

g Ye ſhal bitterly mourn for the ſad Effe&s of this inordinate de- 
ſire of a King. hþ Becauſe you will not hear bim,nor obey his Coun- 
ſel in this day, Cempare Prov: 1: 24, &c« Zech:. 7; 13. 

15 4 Nevertheleſs, the people refuſed co obey the 
voice of Samuel : and they'faid, Nay 3, but there ſhall 
be a king over us & : 

i i. e. Theſe things ſhal never be, theſe are but vain Suppoſitions 
to :fiight us from our purpoſe. Thus they are not aſhamed to give 
Samuel the lye, of whoſe Modeſty, Integrity, and Prophetical Spirir, 
they had ſo great aſſurance, as if he had feigned thole prerences 
meerly to keep the Power in his own and his Sons hands, k& We 
will izave a King wharfoever it coſt us, although all thy predi&ions 
ſhould be verihed. 

20 That we alſo may be like all che nations 7, and 


+ In times that our king may judge us F and go out before us t, 


* , Kings 
21 7» 


+ Heb: 


Eunuchss 


ef peace» and fight our batrels. | 

T Viz.in 1 Woful ſtupidity ! Whereas it was their Glory and Happineſs 
zimes of that they were un'ike all other Nations, Nums; 237 9. Deut: 33: 38, 
War, 45 as in other glorious priviledges, ſo eſpecialy in this, That the Lord 
_ _ I S2* yas their only and immediate King and Lawgiver. 


21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, 
and he rehearſed them in the ears of the LORD z. 


- He repeated them privately between God and himſelf; partly, 
for his own Vindication and Comfort: and partly, as a Founda- 
tion for his prayers to God, for direCtion and aſſiſtance in this diffi. 
cult caſe. : 

22 And the LORD faid to Samuel, Hearken unto 
their voice, and make them a king- And Samuel ſaid 
unto the men of Iſrael, Go ye every man into his ci- 
oy 7. 

# Betake your ſelves ro your ſeveral occaſions, till you hear 
more from me in this Matter. For God hath keard your words, 
and will give way to your Irregular and Obſtinate deſire; and ac- 
cording)y I will wait upon God for the derermination of the Per- 
ſon, which he hath wholly reſerved to himſelf, as for Judges, ſo 


for the King alſo,Dewt; 17: 15 and for the Regulation of all the Cir- 
cumſtances- | 


CH AP. IX. | 
The Genealogy of Kiſh. 1. Saul's Perſon. 2. He is ſent to ſeek his Far 
ther's Aſſes. 3- He Travels through the Countrey, and finas them not, 
Ss, By the Counſel of his ſarvant, 6 70. ud the otho 
reion of young Maidens, 11 =——=14« According to God's Revelation, 
15 ==_ 17. He cometh io Samuel, who meets him; Entertains:h 


S 4A M © 


BH | Chap. IX 
him at the Feaſt : Telltth him the Aſ.s were found, and he ſpould be 
King, 18-20. Saul's Amazement, 21. Samuel gives him the highs 
eft place: And a peculiar Diſh : Eats with him, 22 =--=24. Aﬀter 
ſecret Communicaticn leadeth him on the way ? The [ervant goes before 3 
S aul fiands ſtill with Samuel, 2 5 nma=— 7, 
Ow there. was a man of Benjamin, whoſe name _ 

Was * Kiſh a, the ſon of Abiel, the ſon of Ze-+ Ch.14:5 
ror, the ſon of Bechorath, the ſon of Aphiah, a [| Bens x Chron. 
jamite b, a mighty man of || power c. _ + FED 

'# Obje#, His Name was Ner, 1 Chron. 8: 33. and 9: 39. Anſw-+ || Or, the 
Either his Father had rwo Names, as was uſual among the Hebrews: J of s 
or Kiſh was really his Father that begot him ; and Ner, the Brother 29” of 
of Kiſh, 1 Sami. 14:51. 1 Chrom 93 36. is called his Father, becauſe *®MIN- , 
upon the Death of Kiſh, he took the care of his Education, and ", >”: Juba 
brought him up as his own ſon. b Heb: The ſon of # man of Jemini; funcee 
lo Eg Either of Benjamin : or of a Place, or of a Man called Jemini. 

c 1. & A man of great courage-and ſtrength ; which tends ro Saul's 

commendation: Otherwiſe, a Man of great wealth. Burt that ſeems 

confured by Saul's words below, v. 21. and the Peoples contempt 

of him, Chaps 10: 27. 
2 And he had a ſon whoſe name was Saul, þ a choice Bt: 

young man, and a goodly &d : and there was not a man 


of the children of Iſrael a goodlier perſon than he': 


— 


choice ant 
goodly- 


from his aoulders and upwaid, he was higher than any Gr. 5 men 
of the people e. | | | h rain 
a Heb: good, i. e. comely and perſonable, as that word is vhs OE it 

Gen: 6: 2, as evil is put for deformed, Gen: 41:19, e A tall ſtature 

was much valued in a King in ancient times, and in the Eaſtern | 

Countries. | i 
3 And the aſſes of Kiſh, Saul's father, were loſt: NE 

and Kiſh ſaid to Saul his Son, T ake now one of the ſer- "by. 


vants with thee, and ariſe, go ſeek the afles f. h 
f Which were there of great price and uſe, Judges 10: 4+ and 12: 
14. becauſe of the ſcarcity of Horſes, Deur: 14: 16. and therefore nor 
held unworthy of Saul's ſeeking, ar leaſt in thoſe ancient times, 
when ſimplicity, Humilicy, and Induſtry, were in faſhion among 
perſons of Quality. t: 
4 And he paſſed through mount Ephraim g, and 
paſſed through the land of Shaliſha, but they found 
them not : then they paſſed through the land of Shalim, 
and there they were not : and he pou through the 


land + of the Benjamites, but they found rhems nor. 5, 

Z A part of the Tribe of Ephraim, which bordered upon Benjamin; t Heb. 
and therefore they could ſoon paſs out of the one into the other, 09% 
and back again, as they ſaw cauſe. 


5 4nd when they were come to the land of Zuph 5, 
Saul ſaid ro his ſervant that was with him, Come, and 
let us return, leſt my father leave caring for the aſles, 
and take thought for us. 


b In which was Ramah, called alſo Rarah or Ramathaim Sophim, 
the place of Samuel's Birth and Habitation, x1 Sam: 1: 1: and 7: 


To ; 

6 And he ſaid unto him, Behold now, there is in this 
city a man of God 3, and he 5s an honourable man 
[.”. : all chat he ſaith, cometh ſurely to paſs &: now let 
us go thither ; peradventure he can ſhew us our way 
that we ſhould go 5. 
| # A Prophet as that praſe is uſed, 1 Sam: 2: 27. Joſh: 1426. Tuag: 

13: 6. +*. One of great Reputation for his skill and Faithfulneſs. 
k His Declaration of things ſecrer or future,are always certain and 
confirmed by the Event. / The Courſe we ſhauld take to find the AC 
ſes. He faith, peradventure, becauſe he doubred whether fo great a 
propbet would ſeek, or God would grant him a Revelation concers- 
ning ſuch mean matters : Although ſomerimes God was pleaſed 
herein to condeſcend ro his people, to-curt off all pretence or occa- 
ſioa of ſeeking to witches or heatheniſh divinations. See 1 Kings 
1412, 2 Kingf 1:3. 

7 Then faid Saul to his ſervant, But behold, if we ..._ . 
go, what ſhal we bring the man? for the bread Þ is f Heb is 
{pent in our veſſels m,and there x not a preſent to bring out of 

C. 


to che man of God » : What + have we ? + Heb: is 

»» This he faith, becauſe Bread was not unuſually given by way of Per gx. : 
preſent, as we ſee I Sam: 10: 3,4+ Or Bread is pur forall manner b 
ef Proviſions, as 1s frequent, and among theſe they might have ſome. 
thing not unfit, in theſe plain Times, to make a Preſent of, as Clu- 
ſters of Raiſins,or Cakes of Figs,ſuch as Abigail preſented ro David, x 
Sam: 25:18. Scealſe 1 Kings 14: 3..2 Kings 43 42. 3 Such Preſents 
were then made to the Prephets 1 Kings 14:2, 3. 2 Kings 4: 42. and 
8: 8. cither as a Teſtimony of Reſpe& ro him as their Superiour ; 
upon which account Subje&ts made Preſents to their Kings, 1 Sam: 
10. 27. And the Perſians never came to their King without ſome 
Gifr 3 or, as 2 grateful acknowledgement of his Þavour : or, for 
the ſupport of the Prophers themſelves : or, of the ſons ef the Pros. 
phets: or, of other perſons in want, known ro them. 

8 And the ſervant anſwered Saul again, and faid, 
Behold, ÞF I have here at hand che fourth part of a ſhe- -- - 
kel of filver o, that will I giveto the man of God to tell + Heb- 
us our Way. ee LENS there is... 

o Which was near a Groat. Which, though now it may ſeem FR or I. 
contemptible Gift, yet in thoſe ancient times it was certainly of far hand, 
more worth, and better accepted than now it would be, when the 
Covetouſnels, and Pride, and Luxury of men, hath raiſed their ex» 
peRations and deſires to far greater things. 


9 ( Before time in Iſrael, when a man went to en- 
quire of God p, thus he ſpake, Come, and let us go to : 
che Seer: for be that x now called a Prophet, was before 
tune called a Seer q« ) | 
2 U 2 p Or. 


þ Heb thy 
ord is 


7004s 


Heb. the 
ſcent of 


ig Heb: 
ts days 


F 


*Che r5:1 
AQ: 13:21 


evered the 
ear of Sa- 
muecl, 


+ Heb: re- 
Brain in, 
POT 


} Pe IK. 


+ Or feaft. © 


| ſome meaſure 


# Or, If 1 known to 
he did diſcer 4 could diſcover things ſecret and unknos 

no eng —_— neſs are the words, Either, F irſt, of ſome Jarer Sa- 
IT Wcieer, which, after Samuels death, inſerted this Verſe. Or, 


Of Samuel, who, being probably 50 or 60 Years old 


Secondly, Ot | : he it f things in 
at the Writing of this Book, and ſpeaking of = 125g —a Fg 


ays, might well call it before-rz72e. ( 
> ns Sp Seger might be now ſtricken in Years, =_ mi gat 
ſpeak this either by his knowledge of what was 1 his ra = ) _ | 
or upon the Information of his Father or Anceſtors, : _ : _— we 
fir Argument to perſwade Saz/ to ,go to the wan 0 in ,t uy M 
might ſhew them cheir way, and where the Aſs were, _ Ang 
was likely to inform them ; for the Prophers were —__ » - 
$eers, becauſe they knew and could reveal hidden pgs S is 
meaning is, that anciently they were not vulgarly calle rop me 
but Seers only ; whereas now, and afrerwards, they were calle 


Seers, yet they were more commonly called Prophets. 


to Then ſaid Saul to his ſervant, F Well ſaid, come 
let us go: ſo they went unto the city, where the man 


" Ty And as they wetit up Þ the hill to the city, they 


found young maidens going out r to draw water, and 


. - 

id unto them, Is the Seer here : | 
—_ Our of the Ciry.and dowa to the bottom of the Hill, where 
the Fountain or River was- | 

12 And they anſwered them, and ſaid, He is: be- 
hold. he is before you, make haſte now : for he came 

ity /; f ; acri f the 

o day to the city /; for there is a F facrifice z of t 
ſe « to day in the hign pace x. TS 

| The ſo i} SETS h this was his own conſtant habitation,be- 

cauſe he had. been travelling abroad, poſſibly in his Circuit, deſcri- 
bed 1 Sam: 72 16; 17. and was now returned to his own Houſe 1n 
Ramsh, as he uſcd to doy as ſo ſhe implies they come in a good and 

> time to meet with him. 
EE Dd of a Sacrifice. Firſt, Becauſe ſo 'he Hebrew word 
Gonifies moſt properly, and moſt frequently. Sco::d'y, Becauſe 
this Eating was in the High place, which was tae common place for 
S:crifices, but not for private Feaſts. Thirdly, Tae Prophets pre- 
ſence was not ſo neceflary for a Feaſt, as tor a Sacrifice, « So this 

acrifice is called, b<caulz this was a publick Solemnity, and p'{- 

fibly the New Moon, when the People brought ſeveral Sacrifices ; 
x Sy Peace-offeringss whereof part fe)] to the Offerer's ſhare; 
and of theſe parts united together, they here mace a common 
Fealt : not without Samu-!'s direction, who being forewarned the 
day before by God, of Saul's coniing, male this F eaſt more ſolemn 
for bis entertainment, v- 22 23, 24. x Uponthe Hill mentiored, 
9. +1, and near the Altar which Samue! built for this kind of uſe, 1 
Sam 7: 17. by Divine Diipenſarion, as was there Noted. Other- 
wiſe to ſacrifice in High places was forbidden by the Law, after the 
builing of the Tabernacle, _ ; ; 

T3 *Afioon as ye come into the city, ye ſhall ſtraight- 
way find him y before he go upto the high place.to eat 
z: for the peopie will nor eat until he come, becauſe 
he doth bleſs the ſacrifice a, and afterwards they eat 
that be bidden : Now therefore get ye up b, for about 

1is time ye ſhall find him.» 

i _ home ihe at leiſure. z The Relics of the Sacrifices, accor- 
ding ro the manner. #4 i. e. Either, Firit, The Meat left of the 
Sacrifice, which is the matter of the following Feaſt ; as this 1s 
commonly underſtood, Or rather, Secondly, The Sacriftce ic ſelf: 
For what reaſon is there to d-part from the proper ignification of 
the Word ? For that the Sacrifices under the Law were accompanied 
with Confeſſion, or Petition,or Thankſgiving,may be gathered from 
divers places of Scripture, as Levit: 53 5. and 16: 21. Numb: 5; 7. 
' Luke 1: 10+ And who ſo proper to perform this work, as Samuel, 
an eminent Propet? And the Bleſiing of this Sacrifice ſcems to have 
conſiſted both of Thankſgiving, this being a Thank-Offering, aopd 
of prayer to Ged tor his acceptance, Pſal: 20: 3. 6 With ſpeed, leſt 
| le be fat down before you come. ; 

14 And they went up into the city: nd when they 


were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out 


c againſt them, for to go up to the high place. 
'c Out of his own Houſe, juſt as they paſſed by. I 
, 15 < * Now the LORD had j told Samuel in his 


. car d, a day before Saul came e, ſaying, 


+ Heb: wn- di. e. Secretly, e That he might prepare himſclf for Saul's Re- 


ception. | : 
16 To morrow about this time I will ſend thes a 
man f out of the land of Benjamin, and thou ſhale a- 
noint him to be captain over my people Iſrael, that he 
my fave my people our of the hand of the\Philiſtines 
g: for I have looked upon my people b, be] auſe their 
; is COME unto me. | : 

OZ will by my ſecret Providence ſo diſpoſe of matters, and of the 
Hearts of $#:l and his Father, that Saul ſthal come to thee, though 
with another delign- g For though they were now moſt preſſ=<d 
with the Gmmmites, as we read Chap: 12; 12. yet they looked upon 
theſe as a Land-Flood, which they hoped would be foon up, and 
ſoon down again * but the Phil:fines, their conſtanty invererace, and j 
areſt Enemies, they moſt dreaded. And from theſe Saul did in' 
mas ſave themy and ſhould have ſaved them much more, 
ifhis and the Peoples manifold fins had not hindredit- þ To wir, 
with Compaſſion and Reſolution to help them. An uſual Synedg- 
che. i i.e» Their earneſt Prayers to me for help. 


P . 
17 And when Samuel ſaw Saul, the LORD ſaid nn- 
to him &, Behold the man whom 1 {pake to thee of; this 


all f reign over my people. _ | 
—_— , * Saha 15. by fecret inſtinQ, ſo as none but 


LL SA4MUE TI. 


4 man of Go, which ſignified the ſame thing. 9 Becauſe | 


£ Otherwiſe, F:aft . Bur it ſeems | 


he Gould hear Its 


fn 


18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate 7, 
and faid, Tell me, I pray thee, where the Seers 
houſe 75 BS Ty 

I The Gare, either Firft, Of Samue!'s Houſe. But he was Come 
out thence before, v. 14. Or rather, Secondly, Of the City, for 
the word Gate being put by its ſelf, according to reaſon and” com- 
mon uſe, muſt be underſtood of the moſt eminent in irs kind, 
which the Gare of the City is. And through this Gate Samuc! ſ:ems 
now to have been paſſing to go to the High-place, which probably 
was without the City : andthere he makes a ſtand, to hear what theſe 
Perſons now approaching to him were about ro ſpeak; 

19 And Samuel anſwered Saul, and ſaid, I am the 
Seer : Go up before me unto the high place, for ye 
ſhall eat with me to day, and to morrow I will ler 
thee go, and will tell thee all that 5s in thine 
hearc ”m; I | 

m Eitherall that thou deſiceſt to know, as concerning the Aſſes : 
or rather, the ſecret thoughts of thy hearr, or ſuch a&ions as none 
know but God and thy own heart; that ſo thou mayeſt be aſſured 
of the truth and certainty of that which I am to acquaint thee 
rae And this might be done, though it be not here particularly 
relared. 

'20 And as for thine aſſes that were loſt + three days 
ago, ſet not thy mind on them », for they are found: 
And F on whom 3s all the defire of Ifracl o ? 
on thee, and on all thy fathers houſe p ? 

» Trouble nor thy mind about them. 0 Who is he that ſhal be 


f Heb: 
day thre 


is it not days, 
T Gr: for 


whom are 


that thing or Perſon which all 1/-ael d:ſi-e to have, to wit, a King? the deſrabl 


Þ That Henour :s deſigned for thee, and after 
Family or Poſterity, if by thy ſin thou doft 
tail. 
 2t And Saulanſwered and ſaid, 4m not I a * Ben- 
jamute, of the ſmalleſt of the tribes of. Iſrael 9 } and 
my family the leaſt of all the families of the tribe of 
Benjamin r ? wherefore then ſpeakeſt thou + fo to 
me /? 

7 For ſo indeed this was, having been a!l cut off except 6ooy 
Juages 20. which Blow they never Recovered, and therefore they 
were ſcare reckcned as an intire Tribey but only as a Remnant or 
Fragment of a Tribe ; and being Ingrafted into Judah, in the diviſion 
berween the Ten Tnbes and the Two, they in ſome ſort loſt their 
Name, and th:y, together with Judah, were accounted but on Tribe, 
as 1 Kings 11; 32, +" 7 le. Que of the leaſt ; obſcure and incon- 
liderable, in compariſon of divers others. Whence it may ſeem 
that Saul's Family was not ſo Noble and Wealrhy, as ſome imagine. 
os on v: 1- { Why doſt thou feed me with vain hopes of che King« 

om ? 

22 AndSamuel took Saul and his ſervant s, and 
brought them into the parlour, and made them ſit in 
the Chicfeſt place « among them that were bidden, which 
were about thirty perſons. 

t Whom he honoured for Saul's ſake: thereby both giving all the 
Gueſts ccafion to think how great that perſon was, or ſhould be, 
whoſe very Servant was advanced above the Chief perfons of the 
City, who were doubrleſs preſent upon this occaſion ; and ſhewing 
how far himfelf was from envying Saul thar Honour and power, 
which was to be tranſlated from him to Saul. u Thereby to raiſe 
all their exp-Qation, and to prepare them for giving that Honour ts 
Saul, which his approaching Dignity required, : 

23 And Samuel faid unto the cook, Bring the porti- 
on which I gave thee x, of which I ſaid unto thee, Set 
it by thee. 


* Or, I appointed or diſpoſed to thee ; i. e«» which TI bad thee reſerve 
for this uſt. 


24 And the cook took up the ſhoulder y, and that 
which 5-45 upon it 2, and ſer it before Saul s and Samuel 
ſaid, Behold, that which is |}left «, ſer ir before thee 
and eat: for unto this time b hath it been kept for thee 
fence I faid c, I have invited the people d: ſo Saul did 
eat with Samuel that day. 

5 To wit, the left Shoulder, for the right Shoulder was the Priefts, 
Levi 7:32, 33. This he gives him, either, Firſt, As the beſt and no 
bleſt part of the remainders of the Sacrifice 5 the beſt paris being 
uſually given by the Maſter of the Feaſt ro ſuch Gueits as were molt 
honourable, or beſt beloved, as Gen: 43: 34 Or, Secondly, As a 
ſecret Symbol or Sign of that Burden which was to be laid Upon 
Saul, and of thar ſtrength which was neceſſary for the bearing of 
it; the Skoulder being torh the ſear of Burdens, and the ſubje& of 
{rrength. ' z Something which the Cook by Samne!'s order was to 
put upon it when it was dreſty either for Ornament, or in the na- 
rure of a Sauce. a To wit, left of the Sacrifice 3 bur ſo all,or moſt, 
of the reſt of their Proviſions were left: Or rather, reſerved, or laid 
by, by my order, for thy eating; when the reit of the Mezt was 
ſent up, 3nd diſpoſed of as the Cook pleaſed. b Till thou ſhouldſe 
come hicher and fir down here: whereby thou mayeſt know that 
thy coming hither was not unknown to me, and was deſigned by 
God for an higher purpoſe. c To wit, co the Cook, who was be- 
fore mentioned, as the perſon to whoſe Care this was committed. 
4 1.e. I have invited or deſigned ſome perſons, for whom I reſerve 
this part» For ſince the word People 15 not here taken properly, 
bur for ſome particular Perſons of the People, which were not in 
all above thirty, wv. 22. why may notthe ſame word be underſtood 
of two or three perſons whom Samuel ſj mes invited, to wit, Sel 
and his Servant ? So ſome Jearned Men underſtand this word 
People, of three Men, 2 Kings 18; 36. And they further nore, 
Thar in the Arabick, and ZErhepick, and Perſian Lingu: ges, C all 
which are near a kin, both to themſelves, aiid to the Hebrew, and 
do oft-times communicate their ſignificarion each to other 2 } 
the word that ſignifies People, is ofc uſed for ſome few particulas 
perſons. Or, if the word People be meant of the Chief of the Pecs 
ple, mentioned abovey ve 22» then Sarmyl was the principal _ 

ghos 


thy Dearth, tor thy 
not cut off the En- 


things, 


* Pfal: 
688 27, 


t Heb: « 


cording ts 
this ward, 


2 j] Or, t6 


2 ſerved. 


09 WOE nay 


THe 


theg 
Peacs 


2: Io 
reg 


- fr 


art 


frabl 


I: 
7 


2b: &þ 
2 th 
ord, 


Ir, te 
vel 


| 


Chap. 


þ Afr 
ot her diſe 
aſe. 


4 Heb. 
10 daye 


* Gen. 35. 
I9, 20» 


fHeb. the found ; and lo, thy father hath left + the care of the 


furs 


FHeb. ak 


theg of 
peace, 


N 


f this Sacrifice and Feaſt; and it was not a Sacrifice of the pes- | 
he gs it ' rendred v. 12. but a Sacrifice and Feaſt made by Sa- 
eel for the people, as it fhould be rendred there: and the fenle is, 
When I firit ſpake or ſent word to the Cook, thas I had invited | 
the people, firſt to joyn with me in my Sacrifice, and then to 
partake with me of the F eaſt, I then bad him reſerve this part for 
thy uſe. h | . 

25 © And when they were come down from the high 
place into the city, Samuel communed with Saul e upon 


the top of the houſe f. | 
" bag eraP on: the Kingdom defigned to him by God,and his Duty 
to 2xpc& it patiently, till God attually called himtoit ; and to ad- 
miniſter it Piouſly, and Juſtly, and Valiantly. f Which was flat 
after the manner, Deut. 22. 84 and ſo fit for walking, and for ſecret 
Prayers, Dan. 6+ 10+ Af 10. 9+ or any private and familiar Di'- 
courſes among Friends. : 
26 And they aroſe early : and it came to paſs about 


the ſpring of theday, that Samuel called Saul tothe top 
of = 4 Ae o, ſaying tf, Up, that I may fend thee a- 
way b: and Saul aroſe, and they went out both of 


them, he and Samuel abroad 5. . | 

A ſecond time, to impart ſomething more tohim. þ Prepare 
thy ſelf for thy Departure and Journey. # Samuel accompanying 
zaul part of his way. 
wy And as they were going down to the end of the 
city, Samuel ſaid to Saul, Bid the ſervant paſs on be- 
fore us k, ( and he pailed on ) bur ſtand thou ftilk | a 


while, that I may ſhew thee the word of God /, _ 

+ Thar thou and ] may ſpeak privately of the marterof the King- 
dom- Which Samuel hirherto endeavoured to concea), leſt he 
ſhould be thoughr now ro im1oſe a king upon them as before he 
denied one to ch-m ; and that it might appear by the Lot ment;o- 
ned in the next Chapter, that the Kingdom was given to Saul by 
Go3: Deſtination, and not by Samuels Contrivance, 1 (1- e.) A 
Meſſage delivered to me from God» which now I ſhall ;zmparc to 


__ CHAP. X. 


Samuel anointeth Saul, 1. Confirms him by predittion of three ſigns, 2, 8- 
Saul propheſies, g,— 13: He cometh to his uncle; telleth him what Sa- 
mucl had ſaid concerning the aſſes, but concealeth the matter of the king- 
dom, 14, -= 16. Samuel aſſembleth the people at Mizpeh, 17,— 20. 
Saul is choſen king by lot ; but hidetb himſelf ; is diſcovered by God. His 
ftaturey 21,-- — 23» Samuel preſents him to the people, who receive him 
with ſhoutingy 24+ Samuel writeth the manner of the king1om in a Book 
25. God inſpires the people with reverence cowards Saul . but the children 
of Belial deſpiſe him, 26, 27. : ; 

Hen Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured zt upon 
T his head #, and kiſſed him b, and ſaid, 1s it not be- 
cauſe the LORD hath anointed thee ro be captain over 
his inheritance c ? 

#s Which was the uſual Rite in the Deſignation, as of Prieſts and 
Prophets, ſo alſo of Kingss as 1 Sam. 16. I, 13. 1 Kings 1 39% 
2 King. 9* 1, 3, 6: whereby was ſignified the pouring forrh of the 
gif:s of Gods Spirit upon bim, to enable him for rhe Adminiſtation 
of his Office. which hem:g't expe, and ſhould receive upon the 
diſcharge of his Duty, b Partly in token of that Revereuce which 
he did owe, and thar ſubjeQion which he and all the pevple were 
ſhortly to perform to him, whereof Kiſſing was a ſigh, as Gen. 41» 
40. 1 King. ig. 18. ar:d partly, 2s a Teſt:imony of his ſincere Friend- 
ſhip and AﬀeCtion to him, and how far he was from envying his 
Succeſſor in the Supreme Dignicy. c i» e. Over his own peculiar 
people. Whereby he admoniſheth Saul, Thar this people were not 
ſo much his 2s Gods; and that he was not to Rule and manage 
them according to his own will and pleaſure, but according to the 
will and Mind of God. - 

2 When thou art departed from mie to day, then 
thou ſhalt find two men by * Rachels ſepulchre, in the 
borders of Benjamin d, at Zelzah: and they will fay 


unto thee, The aſſes which thou wenteft to ſeek, are 


aſſes, and ſorroweth for you, ſaying, What ſhall 1 do 
for my ſon ? 

d In the way to Bethlehem, Gen. 35: 19. which City was in Ju- 
dah; and her Sepulchre might be either in Judeh, or in Benjamin ; 
for the poſſeſſions of thoſe rwo Ti1ibes were bordering one upon a- 
nother, and oft intermixed tegether. See Joſh. 18: 11: 

3 Then fhalt thou go on forward from thence, and 
thou ſhalt come to the plain of Tabor e, and there 
(halt meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel f, 
one carrying three kids, and another carrying three 
loaves of bread g, and another carrying a bottle of 
wine bh, | 

e Not that at the foot of Mount Tabor, which was far from theſe 
parts; bur another belonging to ſome other place, or Man, called 
Tabor. f Properly fo called, which was in Ephraim, where there 
was a noted higi place, famous for Jacebs Viſion there, Gen. 28. 19. 
where it is provable they offered Sacrifices, in this confuſed ſlate of 
things, when the Ark was in one place 2nd the Tabernacle, if rot 
deſtroyed, in ariorhzr, Or, to the houſe of God ; i. e. to Kiriaths 
Jearim, where rhe Ark, the habitation of God, now was, 1 Sam. 7. 
8, 2, 16: g Which mighr be cffcred, either by themſclves, as 
Levit. 2. 4- or with oth r Szcrifices. þ Which was pourcd forth 
in Drink-cff:rings. See Levis. 23: 15: Numb. 15. 5. 

4 And they will + falute thee, and give thee two 
loaves of bread i, which thou ſhale receive of their 
hand. 


# Two of tho'e three deſigned for Sacrifice, ſuppoſing they could 
eaſily prccure atupply of uther Loaves at Bethel. Bur the more 


 S4AMUREK 


5 After that thou ſhalt come to the hill of God Z, 
where is the gariſon of the Philiſtines : and it ſhall come 
to paſs, when thou art come thither to the city 4, that 
thou ſhalt meet a company of prophets mw coming down 
from che high place », with a plaltery, and a tabrer, 


and a pipe, and a harp before them o, and they ſhall 
pt opheſhie p. ONE 

k an Hill near Gebs, or Gibeab of Binjamin, where a Gariſon of 
Philiftines was, 1 Sam- 13, 3» Called here che Hill of God, becauſe it 
was a place devcted to the Service of God ; either for Sacrifice, this 
being an high place, as it here follows; or, for a School or College 
of Prophets. ! Adjoyning to thar Hill. # By Prophets here, and 
in ſach like places, he underſtands Perſons that did wholly devote 
rhemſclves to Religious Studies and Exerciſes, ſuch as Preachings 
Praying, Praiſing of Ged, &:, For the term of propheſying isnor 
on:y given to the moſt eminent a& of ir, viz. Foretelling things 
to come ; but alſo to Preaching, as Rom. 12. 6. 1 Cor. 14: 31, 32+ 
t Theſ, 5: 20: and to the making or ſinging of Pſalms. or Songs of 
Praile to God as 1 Chron, 25: 1, 2, 3- And they that wholly at- 
repded upon theſe things, are oft called Sons of :he Prophets, which 
were commonly combined into Companies or Colledges, as 2 King. 
2: 3, 5- that they might more conveniently edifie and afſift one as 
nother in Gods work. Which Inſticution Gcd was pleaſed ſo far 
to honour and bleſs, that ſometimes he communicated unto thoſe 
perſons the knowledge of future things, as 2 Kings 2: 3, 5- # Wherey 
either, their habitation was, or they had now teen offering Sacri- 
fice. And althwugh they uſed to perform this following Exercile, 
either in their Colledge, er in the place of their Sacrificesz yet 
now they d1d it in the deſcent of the til], which probably was be- 
ſide their Cuſtom, and therefore more proper for a ſign ro Saul of 
a more than ordinary hard of God towards him. # Such Inſtru- 
ments of Muſick being then uſed by prophets and other perſons, for 
the exhilaration and excitaticn of their {pirits in Gods tervice. See 
_ 3* 15- p Either fing Gods praiſes, or ſpeak of the things 
of God. 

6 And the ſpirit of the LORD will come upon thee 


4, and thou ſhalt propheſie with them, and ſhalt be 
turned into another man 7. 


q Heb. wil leap or ruſb upon thee, to wit, for a ſeaſon. So it may 
be oppoied to the Spirits reſting upon a Man, as Numb. 11: 25+ Iſhe 
11: 2. Y 1.e. Thou ſhalt be ſuddenly endowed and ated with a» 
nother Spirit, filled with $kill of Divine things. with Courage, and 
Wiſdom, and Magnanimity ; and other qualificatioas befitting thy 
Digaity. 

7 AndFf let it be when theſe ſigns s are come unto 


God x with thee. 


Kingdom, becauſe they were all future Contingencies, which none 


which had been prepoſterous and dangerous; but that he ſhould 
diſpoſe his Mind to a readineſs of undertaking any publick ſervice 
wh<n neceſlity required it, and he ſhould be called to his Office. 


8 And thou ſbalt go down before me to Gilgal, and 
behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt- 
offerings, and to ſacrifice ſacrifices of peace-offerings : 


(hew thee what thou ſhalt do. 

s This, though now mentioned and commanded, yer was not im» 
mediately to be performed; as is evident, partly from the whole 
courſe ot the Story, which ſhews, That Saul and Samuel, and the 
people, firſt met at Mizpeh, v. 17, 8c. where Saul was choſen by 
God, and accepted by the people as King ; and afterwards went to 
Gilgal once before the time here ſpoken of, chap. 11. 14, 15; and 
partly, by comparing this place with chap. 13: 8, &c. where we find 
Saul charged with the violation of this Command, two years af 
rer the giving of it, as appears from chap. 13: 1, 2, Quef. How then 
is this ro be underſtood ? Anſwer, 1, This may be given as aſtand< 
ing Rule for Saul toobſerve while Samuel and he lived ; That in caſe 
of any great future Difficulties, as che Invaſion of Enemies, Saul 
ſhould reſort to Gilgal, and call : he people thither, and tarry there 
ſeven Days, which was bur a reaſonable and neceſſary time forthe 
gathering of the people, and for the coming of Samuel thither. For 
rhough this be relared but as once done, chap. 13 ye Joſephus af- 
firms, that it was-to be conſtanry praQtiſed upon all ſuch occaſions. 
And Gilgal was choſen for this purpoſe asa very fit place; partly, 
becauſe chit place was famous for the ſolemn renewing of the Co- 
venant between God and 1/rael, Joſh. 4. and for other eminent 
Inſtances of Gods Favour to tem, the remembrance whereof was 
a notable Confirmation of their Faith ; and partly; becauſe it was 
a very convenient place for the Tribes within and without Jordan 
ro aſſ:mble, and conſult, and unite their Forces rogether upon 
ſuch occaſions. If you ask, Why then Sau! did nor praQiſe this 
Precept upon the firſt Invaſion of the Ammonites? Fr may be an- 
ſwered, That this was a Rule for Szul, when he and Samul were 
aſunder, whereas they were together in that Expedition. Chap. t x- 
7 And further, That neceſhicy did excuſe the violation of this 
Precept then, becauſe Say! could not wait for Samuel, nor forbear 
his Aftion for ſeven Days, as is evident from chap. 11. 3, 9, 10. 
Or, 2. ( which I propoſe with ſubmiſſion to the Learned andJudict- 
ous) This may be here added as another ſign to confirm his Faith. 
which having ſtrengthened by three foregoing ſigns, he now forti- 


ry uſual for God to give Mea fig: 's to confirm their Faith from fu« 
ture Events; as Exod. 2: 12; 2 Kings 19: 29; Iſas 7: 13, 14+ 80 
che meaning may be this; Another ſign E will add to ſtrengthen 
thy Faith ; Too ſhale in due time, ar d upon a great occaſion which 
ſhail then bappen, go down before me to Gilgal, and there 1 will come 
down unto thre 10 offer mmwammms: Sacrifices, &c. Bur when thou 


ſtrange che preſent was, the more fit it was for a ſign of Gods ex- 
traordigary Providence 1n Sauls Aﬀaicrs, % 


, 
Fd 


2 U 3 comeſt 


fies it by another ſign which was to follow afterwards; it being ve«' 


| » if 
thee, | that thou do as occaſion ſhall ſerve thee x, for = | 
50 paſs chat 
s Which were certain Evidences of Gods calling of him to the ry theſe 
ns, 
but God could infall'/bly know or foretel. t H<b. do what thy hand tf Heb» do 
fmadeth todo; (i.e. ) As thou ſhalt have aCall and Opportunity. for thee #2 
He doth not intend that he ſhould take the Kingly Government vpon # 
him, before his Callto it was known to, and owned by the people, ſball finds 


* ſeven days ſhalt thou tarry till Icome tothee s, and * Chap. 


13: $3 


&c. 


A 


x. 


tt 


'thither, be ſure thou tarry there ſeven days, and then 1 will 
donenng ,2 hoon ſaid, and give thee neceſſary Inftructions and Af- 


fiftance, as the matter ſhall require. : 
CT And it was/o that when he hadturned his # back 


to go from Samuel, God | gave him another heart : * 


and all thoſe ſigns came to paſs that day. 

ro And when they came thither to the hill, behold, 
a company of prophets met him, and the ſpirit of God 
came upon him, and he prophefied among chem. : 

» Then the accompliſhment of the two former ſigns 15 ſuppoſed 
and this only of the third is expreſſed, becauſe this was more emi- 
nent and publick than the former ; the other were only tranſient 
Ads, which paſſed in oy between two or three perſons meet- 
ing together, and paſſing by one another ; but this was a more 
'permanent and more notorious ſign, done in 2 more ſolema man- 
ner, and before many, and very conſiderable Witneſſes. : 

it And it came to paſs, when all that knew him be- 


fore-time, ſaw, that behold, he propheſied among the 

+ Heb. prophets, then the people ſaid + one to another, What 
—_— # this rhat is come unto the 
&.., 2 alſo among the prophets ? 


Chap. 


+ Heb. 
ſhoulder. 
T Heb. 
turned. 
F See on 
V. 6G, 


>» 
_ y What means this ſtrange and prodigious Event? z A Man _ 
"*®.  jnftrufted, nor exerciſed in, nor inclinedto theſe matrers; a Man. 
ever thought firter to look to his Farher Aſſes, than to bear a part 
in the Sacred Exerciſes of the Prophets. IP 
+ Heb. 12 And one + oftheſame place a anſwered and laid, 
from But who « their father b 2 Therefore it became a pro- 
rhexce. yerb c, Is Saul alſo among the prophets ? 


a Heb. one from thence ; ( i. e. ) One of the company there pre- 
ſenr, or one pf haProphers there propheſying- b Who 1s ores a- 
ther F all theſe Prophers of whom you ſpeak, and among waom 
Saul now is one? Who is it that inſtrutts and inſpires them with 
this holy Art, but God ? They have ir not from their natural Pa- 
rents, nor from their civil Education, bur by Inſpiration from ___s 
wio, when he pleaſeth, can inſpire Sau!, or any other Man wit 
the ſame $kill. And therefore wonder not ar this matter, but 
give God the glory of it. Farher 1s here pur for Teacher, or In- 
ſitruQor, as it is uſed ; as Gen. 4+ 20, 21, Matth. 23+ 9. 1 Cor. 4+ 15» 
And hence the Schollarsare called ſons of the Prophets. c Ulſed when 
any ſtrange, unlikely, or unexpeRted thing happeneds Gi 

13 And when he had made anend of propheiying, 


he came to the high place 4. 

d Returning thither with the Prophets, there to praiſe God for 
theſe wonderful Favours, and to beg Counſel and He!p from God 
in this bigh Buſineſs. : ; 

' 14 © And Sauls uncle e ſaid unto him, and to his ſer- 
vant, Whither went ye? and he ſaid, To ſeek the 


aſſes : and when we ſaw that they were no where, WE 


came to Samuel. Wo 
e Being there preſent; and obſerving this great aireration 1n his 
Nephew. 
15 And Sauls uncle ſaid, Tell me, I pray thee, what 


\ Samuel ſaid unto you. . 
16 And Saul ſaid unto his uncle, He told us plainly 


" that the affſes were found. But of the matrer of the 


kingdom, whereof Samuel ſpake, he told him nor f. 
f Partly in obedience to Samuel, who obliged him to ſecrecy : 
partly, from an bumble Modeſty which appeared in him, v. 22. 
. . and partly, in Prudence, leſt by an unſcaſonable publiſhing of 1t, 
" he ſhould raiſe Envy in ſome, Dis»elief and Contempt in others, 
&c 
4 +17 © And Samuel called the people together unto the 
: LORD g to Mizpeh 6. | 
'# Toappear before the Lord. So ke ſpeaks, either, 1. Becauſe 
the Ark was carried thither upon this occaſion, Org 2+ Becauſe 
God is preſent in all the Aſſemblies of his people, whereof this was 
in eminent one: See 2 Chron 19. 6. Pſal. 82. 1. Or, 3. Becauſe 
they did in a manner ere@ a Tribunal for God; and intreated, and 
conſequently obtained his Preſence there to ſuperviſe and dirett the 
whole buſineſs by his Sentence, which allo he did, v. 19, &c. See 
of this Phraſe Judg. 11. 11. and 20. 1. hþ A City of Binjamimn Joſh. 
13. 26. where all 1facl had met before upon a publick and ſolemn 
occaſion, 1 Sam. 7e 5. 

18 And {aid unto the children of Iſrael, Thus ſaith 
the LORD God of Iſrael, I brought up Iſrael out of E- 
gypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyp- 
tians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms z, and of 
them that oppreſſed you. | 

' 5 To wit, the neighbouring Kingdoms, which moleſted you from 
time to times 

19 And ye have this day rejected your God &, who 
himſelf ſaved you 1 out of all your adverſities, and your 
tribulations : ,and ye have ſaid unto him 2, Nay, but 
ſer a king over us. Now therefore preſent your ſelves 
before the LORD by your tribes, and by your thou- 


ſands ». : 
k You this day declares That you perſiſt in your former a& of 


rejeting Gods Government: See on chap. 8.7. I Who by his own 
ſpecial Providence took Care to raiſe up Judges and Saviours for 
you, and to deliver you at all times, when you needed his help, 
and did not by your Sins obſtru& ir. » 1. e. Unto me his Propher 
and Ambaſſador ; and roam, 1 9rd unto the Lord whom I repre. 
ſented, and in whoſe Name I ſpake and ated. » For each Tribe 
was divided into Thouſands, Numb. 10. 36+ Derit, 33. 17. Foſhs 22, 
14421 Micah 5. 2+ AS in England, Counries are into Hundreds, 


20 And when Samuel had cauſed all the tribes of | 


LS 4 M OD E IL. 


ſon of Kiſhy ?' * is Saul | 


i 


Iſrael to come near o, the * tribe of Benjamin was 
taken |]. 75 14: 16, 

o Uaro the place appointed for the caſting of Lots. | Which 
Tribe was now preferred before Judah, becauſe the Kingdom was 
freely promiſed by God to Judah, and was to be given to him in 
love; wg Fg wn; wasSin a manner foiced from Ged, and 
given to them in apger, Hoſ. I3. 11e and theref ; 
ren HI ger, 3+ Ile an erefore conferred Upon 

21 When he had cauſed the tribe of Benjamin to 
come near by their families, the family of Matri was 
raken, and Saul the ſon of Kiſh was taken : and when 
they fought him, he could not be found. | 

22 Therefore they enquired of the LORD ?, fur. 
ther, if the man ſhould yer come thither s and the 
LORD anſwered, Behold, he hath hid himſelf among 
the ſtuft q. | 

Þ Either by Urim or Thummim, which was the uſual way of en. 
quiry, Numb. 27. 21. 1 Sam. 23.9. and 28. 6. Or by Samuel, who 
by his prayer procured an anſwer. q Among the Carriages or Bag- 
gage of the people there aſſembled.. This he mighr do, becauſe he 
either had,or at leaſt would be thought to have a modeſt ſenſe of his 
own opting which was a likely way to commend him to the 
people. 

23 And they ran and fetched him thence, and when 
he ſhood among the people, he was higher than any of 
the people, from his ſhoulders and upward. 

24 And Samuel faid to all the people, See ye him 
rv the patrons hath choſen, that there is none like 

1m among all the people »? and all the people ſhout- 
ed, and ſaid, + God fave the king s. hors 

r As to the height of his Bodily Stature which was in it ſelf Lin A | 
commendabie in a king, and ſome kind of indication of great En. I 
dow:n.ents of Mind. s Heb. Ler the king live ; to wit, long and pre. 
REAL for - OO Life is repured a kind of Death, and is 
ofr 10 cel'ed. Hereby they accept and own hi ir Ki 
promile SubjeCtion to bis. 4 ONION WOT and 

25 Then Samuel told the people the manner of the 
kingdom #, and wrote ;tin a book, and laid it up be- 
tore the LORD «, and Samuel ſent all the people away 
every man to his houſe. : 

; N-t the manner of rhe King, of which he had ſpoken before. | 
8. 11, &c. bur of the Kingdom ; to wit, the Laws and Rules Go wkik 
the Kingly Government was to be managed ; agreeable to thoſe 
mentioned Deut. 17. 16, &c. which peradventure Samuel did ex. 
pou':d, and apply to their particuler Caſe. » Before the Ark, or 
1n the SanCtuary, where it was kept ſafe from depravation. 

26 © And Saul alſo went home to Gibeah x, and 
there went with him y a band of men, whoſe hearts 
God had touched z. 

x Not being aQtually inaugurated into his Kingdom, he thoughr 
fir to retire to his former Habitation, and to live privately till he 
had an occeſicn to ſhew himſelf in a more publick and Illuftrious ; 
manner, which he ſpeedily obtained, y To give him ſafe and honou- 
rable Condu& to his Houle, shcuzh not to abide with him there, 
which did nor ſuit with his preſent Circumſtances. z i, e. Either 
r- Diſpoicd or inclined to this work. Or, 2. AﬀeCted or renewed 
by his Grace anc good Spirit, working upon their kearts ; thoſe thar | 
teared God, ana made cenſcience of their Duty : for they are op- | 
poſed to rhe children of Belial in the next Verſe. Theſe, though they | 
did not deſire aKing, as the generality of the people did ; yet when 
God had given them a King, they were moſt forward to pay him 
that Reverence and Obedience which they owed him : both which 
proceeded from the ſame Principle, that they were in both caſes 

prac by _ bas which was, _ they ſhould not deſire a 

ng In their Circumſtances; and yet, they ſhould obey him, v 
God had ſer a King over them. 3G COT wm | 

27 Bur the children of Belial ſaid, How ſhall thisman | 
a fave us? and they deſpiſed him, andbrought him no | 


preſents b : bur || he held his peace c. || Or,be 

4 SO mean a perſon, and of rhe weakeſt of all the Tribes, 6 As was # 
Subjetts in rhole times and places uſed to do to their King : See though i 
1 King. IO. 25. 2 Chron. 17, 5. Maith. 2.11. and as Sauls mean Con- had ia 
ditions wherewith they upbraided him, required. «c Thereby ma- deafe 
nifeſting his Prudence ad Clemency, which was of great uſe in the 
b:ginning of his Government. 

XI. 


C A FP. 


Nahaſb beſiegeth them of Jabeſb-Gilead: offereth them a reproackful condie 
tion ; they have ſeven days granted them to conſult and ſeek relief; they 
ſend meſſengers to Saul, 1, —- 5, He is provoked : ſends meſſengers to all 
the Iſraelites to come in to their help ; they come to the number of three 
hundred and thirty thouſand men, 6, — $8. He ſends word to the beſieged, 
who deceive Nahaſh : who with his army u ſlain, 9,—x114, The people | 
are ready t0 ſlay Sauls enemtes; in which he oppoſeih them ; he us inveſ- | 
ed in the kingdom at Gilgal, 12,-—15. | 

Hen a Nahaſh the Ammonite b came up c, and en- | 
b by wy againſt Jabeſh-Gilead d: and all the men | 
of Jabeſh {aid unto Nahaſh, Make a covenant with use, 


and we will ſerve thee f. 

a 1 e. About that time ; this Particle being uſed in ſome Latitude, 
as is frequent for that this happened before, and was the occaſion 
of their deſireof a King, may ſeem from chap. 12: 12, Although it + 
is poſſible. that Nahafb his preparation, and declared intention of 
Warring againſt them, might cauſe thar deſire, and that Ns+aſh did 
not attually come againſt them ( which is here related ) rill their 
King was choſen. 6 Either the ſame with him, 2 Same 10: 2:0r his 
Father and Predeceſſor- c To war, probably to revenge and to re- 
cover their former great Joſs by Zephthah, Judg. 11; 33. d Which 


* Joſh 


was beyond Jordan, and near the Ammoniter, who dwelt in part of 
Arabia. 


Chap. " Y 


Ieb, 
the 
7 livk 


* Chap 


| Or,bt: 
PAs A 
rbough bt 
bad bia 
deafe 


T. 


e To wit, upon good Conditions, ſoas we ſhall enjoy our 
Religicn and Properties. f In other things we will be thy SubjeQs 
and Tributaries. The occaſion of this offer was, that they ſaw no 
likeliho:d of relief from their Brethren the Jraebtesin Canaan, who 
were remote from them, and then weak and divided, and ſcarceable 
to defend them(elves from the Philiſiines. 

> And Nahath the Ammonite anſwered them, On 
f1-b.cut. this condition will I T make 4 covenant with you, that I 
$Exod- may thruſt out all your right eyes g, and lay it for are- 

23-32» proach upon all Ifrael. | 

Gen- g Partly for a Reproach,' as it here follows ; and partly, to diſa- 

15. 18 112 them from managing offenſive Weapons in Batrel ; fortheir letr 

or chiefly for Defence, being covered by thoſe 


XI. 


Ara bit. 


1.3415. 1:1 ſerved only, 
, Shields which then they uſed, and held 1n their lefr i and. 
He laves them one Eye, that they might be fit ro lerve him in any 

raean and baſe Othces : ; ; 

Heb 2 And the elders of Jabeſh ſaid unro him, # Give us 
rec »s. ſeven days reſpite b, thatwe may ſend meſlengers unto 
| all the coaſts of Iſrael: and then, if zhere be no man to 

ſave us, we will come out to. thee. 

h Which it is very probable, and Joſephus and others affirms That 
Nahaſb granted, out of a fooliſh ſelf-confidence, and contempt of 
the broken Condition of the Iſraelites, which he choughe utterly un- 
able to give them any relief ; ar leaſt, in a thort time. 

4 { Then came the meſſengers to Gibeah of Saul z, 
and told the ridings in the ears of the people : and all 
the people lift up their voices, and wept &, 

; Partly, becauſe it was not far from'them ; and partly, becauſe 
it belonged to the Benjamites, who had a ſpecial Obligation to rake 
more care of that place from whence they had their Wives, Judges 
21-10, &c- And partly, becauſe Saul, their new choſen King, 
was there. & Both in compaſſion towards them, and for fear of 
themſelves, 1c{ ir ſhould ſhortly be their own Lot. 

5 And behold. Saul came after the herd out of the 
field /, and Saul ſaid, Whar azlerh the people that they 
weep ? and they told him the tidings of the men of 
Jabelh. - Ou, 

1 For being only anointed King and not publ:ickly inaugurated, 
nor owned, nor preſented by the generality of the people, nor ha- 
ving yet had opportunity of doing any thing worthy of his place, 
he rhought fir to forbear all Royal State, and to retire to his former 
private, and Country Life, which, howſoever deſpiſed in theſe lat- 
rer, vain, ambirious, and flothful Ages of the World, was ancient- 
ly in great eſteem among the Greeks and Romans, whoſe princes and 
Generals did frequently exerciſe themſelves in it. Though ſome 
conceive that he now lived in ſome State, and that he had been in 
the fields only to recreate himſeif, and that his coming after the 
Herd was but accidental, and is mentioned only to uſher in what 
follows of the yoke of Oxen. 

6 And the Spiric of God came upon Saul 2, when 
he heard thoſe tidings, and his anger was kindled 
greatly 7. : : 

m Inſpiring him ſuddenly with more than ordinary Courage, and 
7Z:al, and Reſolution, to ingage himſelf and the p:ople fer: their 
Reſcue. Compare Juag, 3- 10. and 6. 34. and ti: 29. » Againſt 
Na+ajb. for ſo inſolent and barbarous a propoſition. 

7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in 
pieces. and ſent them throughout all the coaſts of 1f- 
rael o, by the hand of meſſengers, ſaving, Whoſvever 
cometh not forth after Saul, and after Samuel p, fo ſhall 
it be done unto his oxen: and the fear of the LORD 9 


+ Heb, fell on the people, and they came out F with one con- 
as one 10a ſeat. 

o Wiſely conſidering, that the fight of Mens Eyes do much more 
affe& their hearts,than what they on'y hear with their Ears. þ Whom 
he joyns with himſelf, both becauſe he was preſent wich him; as 
appears from v- 12. and that hereby he might gain the more Autho- 
rity to his Command.and ſtrike the greaterTerror into all Deſpiſers 
of it. q Either, 1. A great fear ; great things being oft thus ex- 
preſſed ; as Cedars of God, Mountains of God, &c. Or, 2. A ſear ſent 

2 - uponthem by God, as Ger, 35+ 5. that they ſhould not dare ro deny 
their help. 
8 And whenhe numbred them in Bezek, the chil- 
dren of [Iſrael were three hundred thouſand r, and the 
men of Judah thirty thouſand s. 


7 This great Terror drew ſo many forth : which is not ſo ſtrange 


to hm that knows what none deny, That the Land of Canaan con- 


rained vaſt numbers of people in a little compaſs. s Who are 
numbred apart totkeir honour, to ſhew how readily they, to whom 
the Kingdom was premiled, Ger. 49. 10. ſubmitted ro their King, 
though of another and far mezner Tribe ; and how willing they 
were to hazard themielves for their Brerthrens Reſcue, alchough 
they might have excuſed themſelves from the neceſlity of defend- 
Fr their own Country from their dang-rous Neighbours the Phil:- 
" ſt1nes, 
9 And they faid unto the meſſengers that came, 
Thus ſhall ye ſay unto the men of Jabeſh-gilead, To 
| Or, del;> MOTrOW #t by that time the ſun be hot, ye thall have 
verance, |[|help. And the meſſengers came, and ſhewed 3t, to the 
men of Jabeſh, and they were glad. aft, 

2 To wit, the day after your departure hence, or return home ; 
ſor It ſeems probable, that ſome few days had ben ſpene 1n the ga- 
thering and diſpoling of the Forces, and bringing chem towards 
thole parts. 


10 Therefore the men of Jabeſh ſaid, To morrow 


we will come out unto you, and ye ſhall do with us all 
tat ſeemeth good unto you #«. 


they did, and might reaſonably and. juſtly undertand their 
own Condition before propo:ed, wv. 3« if none came to fave them : 


S 4 M © E © 


| 


which they were not now oblidged to repeat, alchough they con. 
je&ured, that their Enemies would underitand it abſolutely, whote 
Error therein they were no more obliged ro Corre&, than ro pre- 
vent their DeſtruQion. Nor did they tell any lye herein, bur only 
concealed part of their Intentions, to render their Enemy more fſe- 
cure and fit for Ruine; which kind of Stratagems are Uiual, aid 
allowed by all perſons. Bag 

11 And it was ſo on the morrow, that Sau! put the 
people into three companies x, 2nd they came into the 
mid{t of the hoſt in the morning watch y, and flew the 
Ammonites, until the heat of the day : and it came to 
paſs, that they which remained were ſcattered, fo that 
ewo of them were nor left together. - : 

x That ſo Invading them on ſeveral ſides with a great Force, he 
might both ſtiike them with the greater Terror, and prevent thzir 
eſcape. y Having marciixd all the Day and Night before it. S 

12 © And the people faid unto Samuel, * Who # he * C 
that ſaid, Shall Saul reign over us 2? * brin 
that we may put them to death a. - 

z They did not ſay fo interms, as we may ſee. chap 10. wv 27. 
bur this was the Deſign and Conſequence of their Speech, as they 


rivhrly conſtrue it» 2 Which rill this rime they were not able ro 
do, becauſe thar Inf<C&tion was then a!moft univerſal. 


hap. 
g the men 10: 27: 
— * Luke 


19, 27+ 


death this day : for to day the LORD hath wrought 19. 22» 
ſalvation in Iſrael b, Ks 


b I will not deſtroy any of thoſe whom God hath ſo graciouſly 
preſerved ; nrr ſully che Mirth of this gloricus and comfortable 
Day with the {|:ughter of anyof my Subjects: and therefore I freely 
forgive them. Wherein Sau! ſhewed his Policy as well as his Clc- 
mency, this being the moſt likely way to gain his Enemies, and 
ſecure his Friends, and ſtabliſh his Throne in the Hearts cf his peo= 
ple: 


14 Then c ſaid Samuel to the people, Come, and let 
us goto Gilgal d, and renew the kingdom there e 

c Whilſt the people were together by Jabeh-Gilead, wherein 
Samuels great prudence and Fideliry to Saul is evident. He ſuſpen= 
ded the Contirmation of Saul at firſt, whilſt the generality of the 
people were diſaffe&ed and diſcontented at the meanneſs of his Per- 
ton: and now when he had given ſuch eminent proof ofhis Prince- 
ly Vertues, and when the peoples hearts were unanimouſly and 
eagerly ſer upon him, he rakes this as the firteſt ſeaſon for that 
work. & This place he choſe, both becauſe it was near, and, to 
moſt of them, in the way of their homes ; and becauſe rhither the 
Iſraelites on this ſidey and beyond Jordan, might more eaſily reſort ; 
and becauſe it was famous for publick Conventions there k+pt, and 
particularly, for the Covenant there renewed by Joſhus berween 
God and the people. e i. e. Confirm our former Choice, to pre- 


vent all ſuch Seditious Expreſſions and AQGtions as we had ex 
ence of at the former Ele&ion- 


15, Andall the people went to Gilgal, and there 
they made Saul king f before the LORD g in Gilgal : 
and there they ſacrificed facrifices of peace-offerings b, 
before the LORD : and there Saul and all the men of 
Ifrael rejoyced greatly. 


f ( i. e. ) They Recognized him, orowned and accepted him for 
their King by conſent; for to ſpeak proper'y, Saul was not made, 
or conſtituted King by the people, but by the Lords immediate 
Ac; ſee chap. 8. 9. and 10. 1: g Who was there preſent in a ſpe- 
cial- manner ; both becauſe the people of rhe Lord were there AL 
ſembled, and becauſe there was an Altar, as the following Sacrifices 
ſhew- The ſame Phraſe is uſed chap. 10. 17. and 14. 18. þ Partly 
to praiſe God for fo glorious a Viltory, and for the firm Settlement 
of the diſtraft-d Kingdom ; and partly, to implore the Preſence and 
Aſſitance of God to the King and Kingdom, in all their Afﬀairs 


and Exigencies. 

CH AP. XI, 

Samuel having appointed a king unto the people : reſtifizth his own Integrity, 
to which they witneſs, 1,——5. He ſetteth before them the ſens of their 
Anceſtors : and their own ſin in asking a king, 6z === 17, Comforts them 
if they will obey the Lord : threatens the diſobedient : terrifies them by 
thunder in harveſt : they confeſs their ſin, and deſire to be reconciled t9 
the Lord, 14,— 19. He comforts and exhorts them to fear and ſerve 
the Lird : promiſiug alſo to pray for them, 20, == 25. 


\ ND Samuel ſaid unto all Ifrael -, Beho!d, I have 
hearkened unto your voice in all that ye ſaid un- 
to-me, and have made a king over you. 

a Whilſt they were aſſembled rogerher in Gilzal. And this is 
another inſtance of Samuels great Wiſdom and Integrity. He 
would nor reprove the people for their Sin in deſiring aking, whilſt 
Saul was raw, and weak, a:.d unſettled in his Kingdom, and inthe 
peoples Hearts; left through their accuſtomed Leviry, they ſhould 
as haſtily caſt off their King, as they had paſſionately deſired him, 
and fo add one fin to another ;. and-thercfore he chuſeth rhis Seaſon 
for it; partly, becauſe Sauls Kingdom was now confirmed and i!- 
luſtrated by an eminent Victory, and to the danger of zejetting 
him was out of doors 3 which Circumſtance was alſo confiderable 
for Samuels Vincication, that it might appear, that his following 
Reprocf did not proceed from any felfith ReſpeQs or Defires, which 
he might be tupp»olcd to have of retaining the power in his own 
Hand , bur mecrly from the Conſcience of his Duty, and a fincerc 
Deſire of all raeir Good ; and partly, becauſe the people rejoyced 
greatly, as is ſaid in the next foregoing Verſe; and upon this oc- 
caſion applauded themſclves for their deſires of a King; and: inter- 
preted the Succeſs which God had now given them, -as a Divine 
Approbation of thoſe defies ; whereby they. were liketo be harde- 
ned in their Impenitency, and,.might bedrawn to many other'ins 
Cconveniencies : Samuel therefore thinks fir to ters per their exceſlive 
Joys, and to excite them to that Repenta' ce and Ho'y Fear, which 
he ſaw wanting in them,, and which he knew to be abſolutely ne- 
cellary, to, prevent the Curle of God upon their new Kings and the 


peri_ 


whole Kingdom. | NE ns 


Chap. X11. 


| 
i 


12 And Saul ſaid, * There ſhall not a man be put to* ., Sam; | 


hap. XII 


2 And now, beh 
and I am old and gray-headed c, 
are with you d: and I have walke 


1V childhood unto this day. : 
F Goerh out and cometh in before you ; (1. e- ) Ruleth over you, 
as that phraſe ſignifies, Numb. 27: 16: Dewt- 31: 2: 2 Chron+ 1: 12. To 
him I have fully reſigned all my Power and Authority, and do 
hereby renounce it, and own my ſelf for a private perton, and one 
of his Subje&s. c And therefore unable to bear the burden cf Go- 
vernment, and feel my ſelf greatly at eaſe to ſee ir caſt upon other 
Shoulders ; and therefore do not ſpeak what I am abour ro ſay, 
fromenvy of Sauls Advancement, or from diſcontent at the Dimr 
nution of my own Power. d Or, among you. inthe ſame ſtate and 
place, private perſons, as you are; if they have injured any of you 
in their Government, as you once complained, the Law is now oper 
againſt them ; any of you may accuſe them, your King can puuiſh 
them, I do not intercede ſor them, 1 have neither Power nor Will 
ro keep them from receiving the juſt Fruits of cheir Miſdemeanours- 
e i- e- Been your guide and Governour ; partly, as a Prophet; and 


partly, as a Judge. 


old, the king walketh before you 5: 
and behold, my ſons 
d before you e from 


2 Behold, here I am, witneſs againſt me f before the 
* Numb. 7 opD and before his anointed : * Whoſe ox have [' 
I 15* taken ? or whoſe aſs have I taken ? or' whom have | 
2 defrauded ? whom have I oppreſſed g? or of whole 
+ Heb- hand have I received any Þ bribe 5 [| ro blind mine eyes 
ge ; therewith i? and ] will _—_— you 5 K : 
ld bide 1 | here preſent my ſelf _— e: -: = c wy + __ 4 ing, 


being ready to give an accoun | 
wake ricQion for any Injuries that I have done. And this Pro- 


teſtation Sammel makes of his Integrity, not our of Oſtentation or 
Vain-glory ; but partly, for his own juſt Vindication, that the 
people might nor hereafcer for the Defence of their own Irregula- 
rities, reproach his Government ; partly, that being publickly ac- 
quirted from all Faults in his Goverrment, he might more freely 
and boldly reprove the ſins of the people, and particularly, that 
ſin of theirs in deſiring a King, when they had 10. lirtle reaſon for 
ir, and they had ſo jult a Governour, from whom they might have 
promiſed themſelves an eff-&ual Redreſs of his Sons male-admini- 
itrations, if they had acquainted him therewith ; and partly. thar 
by his Example he might tacitly admoniſh Sas! of bis Dury, and 
prevent his miſunderſtanding of what he had formerly laid, chap. 
8. v. 11, &c- and miſtake that for the Rule of his juſt Power, which 
was only a PrediCion of his evil prattices. g Whom have Iwrong- 
ed, cither by Fraud and falſe Accuſation, or by Might and Vio. 
Jence ? h Heb. Price of Redemption, given to Redeem an unjuſt and 
Joſt Cauſe or Perſon, from that Righreous Sentence which they de. 
ſerved. i Thar I ſhould not diſcern what was right and juſt, or 
diſſembleit as if I did nor ſee it» Or, that 1 ſhould hide or cover mine 
eyes ( ie e- wilfuliy wink at the plain truth ) forit; 3.e. for the 
Bribe ; or, for him ; i. e- for his ſake. & Or, and I will cover mine eyes 
for him; i. e. I will take ſhame to my ſelf, and cover my Face as 
one aſhamed to look upon him. 


4 And they ſaid, Thou hait not defrauded us, nor 
oppreſſed us, neither haſt chou raken ought of any mans 


hand. 
5 And he ſaid unto them, The LORD #s witneſs 


againſt you J, and his anointed # witneſs this day, that 
ve have not found ought mz in my hand : And they an- 


{wered », He is witnels. 

I Towit, if you ſhall at any time hereafter Reproach my Go- 
vernment or Memory. Or rather againſt you, that I gave you no 
Caule to be weary of Gods Government of you by Judges, or tode. 
fire a change of the Goverament ; and therefore the blame of it 
wholly reſts upon your ſelves. But this was only inſinuated, and 
therefore the people did not fully underſtand his drift in it. » 7. e. 
Any thing which I have gotten by Bribery or Opprefſion. # Heb. 
he anſwered ; i« e- the whole people, who are here ſpoken of as one 
Perſon, becauſe they anſwered thus with one Conſcnr. 


6 q And Samuel ſaid unto the people, 1 ;s the LORD 
[Or, ae. that || advanced Moſes and Aaron o, and that brought 
'your fathers up out of the land of Egypt. 

o Thar for your ſakes raiſed, conſtituted, and exalted Moſes and 
Aaron, to'that great Power and Reputation which they had, and 
uſed, to deliver you. : : 

Now therefore ſtand ſtill, that I may reaſon with 
you p before the LORD, of all the + righteous Acts 


q of the LORD, which he did # to you and your fa- 


thers. 

p Since God hath laid ſo great Obligations upon you, Jet us alit- 
tle conſider whether you have anſwered them. 9q Heb. the Rrghte- 
ouſneſſes ; i ee Mercies or Benefits ; for ſo that word is oft uſed, as 
Pſal. 24+ 5+ and 36. 10. Prov. 10. 2. and II. 4. and that is the chief 
Subje& of the following Diſccurſe; ſome of their Calamities being 
but briefly named, and that for the Illuſtration of Gods mercy in 
their Dehiverances. : 

8 * When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fa- 


thers * cried unto the LORD, then the LORD * ſent 
Moſes and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers 


out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place r. 

» In this Land : in which Moſes and Aaron are ſaid to ſertle them; 
3: 10: and partly, becauſ: they brought them into. and ſeated them in parr 
45 16: of it, to wir, that without Jordan ; partly, becauſe they were under 
God, the principal Authors of their entring into the Land of Canaan; 
inaſmuch as they brought them out of Egypr, condufted them 
thorough the Wilderneſs ; and there by their prayers to God, and 
Counſel to them, preſerved them from utter Ruine, and gave Com- 
mand and DireCion from God for the diſtribution of the Land a- 
mong them, and incouraged them to enter into it by promiſes and 
aNurances of Succeſs. And laſtly, Moſes ſubſtirured Joſhua in his 
ſtead, and commanded him to carry them thither, and feat them 


there, which alſo he did. 


mine eyes 
at hims 


+ Heb. 
Righteouſe 
ne ſſ:s or 
benefits. 

t Heb. 

; with, 


* Gen. 
46: 5, 6; 
* Exod- 
2: 23; 


* Exod- 


YL TS23MDETI 


—— — 


Chap. X11. | 
9 And when they forgat the LORD their God {, 

* heſold them into the hand of Siſera, captain of the * Judg; 

roit of Hazor, and into the hand * of the Philiſtines, * Jag 

and into the hand of the king * of Moab,and they fought Rs 

againſt them 7. * Judg. 
} i. e. They revolted from him, as it is explained wv. 10. and car- 3: 12: 

ried themfſclves as ungratefully and unworthily towards God, as if 

they had wholly forgotten his great and innumerable Favours, and 

their infinite Obligations to him. Forgetting of God, is oft pur for 

all manner of wickedneſs, whereof indeed that is the true cauſe. 

See J/a. 17. 10. Jer. 3. 21, Exek. 2% 12, This he faith, partly, to 

Anſwer an Obje&ion, That the reaſon why they deſired a King, was 

becauſe in the time of the Judges they were at great uncertain-= 

ties, and off-times exerciſ?zd with ſharp Aﬀfiiions : to which he 
Anſwereth by Conceſſion that they were ſo; but adds, by way of 

Retortion, that they themſelves were the cauſe cfir, by their for- 

gerring of God : So that it was not the fault of that kind of Govern= 

ment, bur their tranſgrefling the Rules of it ; and partly, to mind 

rhem, that this their ungrateful carriage towards God, was no new 

or ſtrange thing, bur an hereditary and inveterate Diſcaſe, that ſo 

they might more eaſily believe their own Guilt herein, and be more 

deeply humbled, both for their own, and for their Parents Suns. 

; To wit, with ſucceſs, and ſubdued them. 


io And they cried unto the LORD, and ſaid, We 
have ſinned, becauſe we have ferſaken the LORD, 
and have ſerved Baalim, and Aſhtaroth ; but now de- 
liver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will 
ſerve thee. 

11 And the LORD ſent * Jerubbaal, and Bedan «, 
and * Jephthah, and * Samuel x, and delivered you out 
of the hand of your enemies on every ſide, and ye 
dwelled fafe y. 


u This certainly is one of the Judges; and becaufe there is no 
Judge lo called in the Book of Fudges, it is reaſonably concluded, 
that this was one of the Judges there mentioned, having two Names, 
as was very frequent. And this was, either, Firſty Samſon, as moſt 
Interpreters believe, who is called Began ; i. e. in Dan, or of Das, 
or the Son Dan, one of that Tribe, to ſignifie that they had no 
reaſon rodiſtruſt th:t God, who could, and did raiſe ſo eminent a 
Saviour out of ſo obſcure a Tribez Or, Secondly, Fair the Gileadite 
of whom Juag. 10. 3. which may ſeem beſt to agree, Firſt, with | 
the rime and order of the Judges ; for Jair was before Jephthah, bur | 
Samſon was after him. Secondly, With other Scriptures : for among 
the Sons of a more ancient, and a famovs Jair, of whom ſee Numb. 
32. 41. we meet with cne called Bedan, x Chren. 7. 17, which Name 
ſeems h-re given to Jar the Judge, to diſtinguiſh him from that 
firſt Jair. Thirdly, With the following words, which ſhew that 
this Beaan was one of thoſe Judges who delivered them out of rhe hand 
of their Enemies on every ſide,and made them to dwell ſafely;which teems 
not ſo preper!y rc agree to Samſon, who did only begin to deliver Iſrael 
our of the hand of the Philiſtines ; as was foretold of him, juag. 13. 5. 
as toJair, who kept them in peace and ſafety, in the midſt of all 
their Enemies, as miy be gathered from Judg. 10. 3, 44 5, 6 And 
ſodid all the reſt of ke judges here mentioned, » He ſpeaks of 
himſelf in the Third Perſon, which is ficquent in the Hebrew Tongue, | 
as Gen. 4+ 23. Pſal. 132 1, 10, It. Dan. 1. 6. Iſa, tr. i, And he 
mentions himſcifnot through vain oftentation. bur for his own juſt 
and neceſſary Vin-ication, and for the juſtificar:on and inforcement 
of his following Reproof, to ſhew thar he had nor devenerated 
from his Predeceffors, nor bad been ſo inconſiderable ard unpro- 
firable to them, as to give them any occaſion to contrive or deſire 
this change of Government in his days, y So thar it was no Ne« 
ceſſity, but meer Wantonneſs, thar made you deſire a Change. 

i2 And when ye ſaw that Naſh the king of the chil- 
dren of Ammon came againſt you, * ye ſaid unto me, * chu 
Nay, but a king ſhall reign over us z, when the LORD 8: 19: 


your God was your king 4. 
_ = See the Notes on Chapter 11. 1. @ #. e. When God was your 
1mmediate King and Governour, who was both able and willingto 
deliver you, if you had cried ro him, whereof you and your An- 
ceſtors have had plentiful experience; ſo that you did not at all 
need any other King ; and your deſire of another, was a manifeſt | 
reproach againſt God, as if he were either grown Impotent, or Un« 
faithful. or Unmercitul ro you. 

I 2 Now therefore, behold the king whom ye have 
choſen b, and whom ye have deſired : and behold, the 


LORD hath ſer a king over you c. | 

| 6 Though God choſe him by Lot, yer the people are ſaid to chuſe 
him ; either generally, becauſe they choſe that Form of Govern- 
ment : or particularly, becauſe they approved of Gods choice, chap. 
10. 24+ and confirmed it, chap. 1. I5. c He hath yielded to your 
inordinate deſire. 

14 If ye will fear the LORD, and ſerve him, and 
obey his voice, and not rebel againſt the F command- t Heb. 
ment of the LORD, then ſhall both ye, and alſo the 
king that reigneth over you, | continue following the þ je; 


LORD a your God, be afie 
d Heb. Then ſhall Je=-m—=bes ( 1» & Walk, or go) after the 
Lord ; i, e, God ſhall ſhll go before you, 2s he hath hitherto done, as 
your Leader or Governour, to Dire&, Prote&, and Deliver you ; 
and he will not forſake you, as you have given him juſt cauſe ro 
do, Sometimes this phraſe of going after the Lord, ſignifies a Man's 
Obedience to God ; but here it is otherwiſe ro be underſtood ( as 
it 1s no new thing, for the ſame phraſe in ſeveral places, to be 
underſtood in quite different Senſes ;) and it notes not a Duty to be 
performed, bur a promiſe of a priviledge to be received.upon the 
performance of their Duty ; becauſe it is oppoſed to a threatning 
denounced in caſe of diſobedience, in the nexr Verſe. 
I5 But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, 
but rebel againſt the commandment of the LORD, 


thea 


* Juig, 
G: 14, 32; 
* Juds, 
11: 1: 

* Chap, 
7: 13: 


PIP "RATIO — hn a. 1 ——__ —_—_— 


UL, | Chap. XII. L 


hap. 
196 


Jeb. 
ith, 

Jeb 
afi 


EEE. ER PEIPIRTT _—_ 


. 


then ſhall the hand of the LORD be apainſt you, as it 


was againſt your fathers e. 

e Who lived. under the Judges; and. you ſhall have no advantage 
;n that point by the chang: of Government, 'nor ſhall your kings be 
able to prote& you againſt Gods diſpleaſure. ; 

16 © Now therefore ſtand f, and ſee this great thing 


which the LORD will do before your eyes. | 

# He intends nor the poſture of their Bodies, Bur the Conſiſtency 
of cheir minds, by ſerious ana fixed Conlideration- | 

17 I it not weat-harvelt to dayg? I will call unto 
the LORD, and he ſhall ſend + thunder, and rain #,: 
thar ye may perceive and fee that your wickedneſs is 
great, which ye have done in the fight ofthe LORD, 
in asking you a king. 

s Ar which time it was a rare thing in thoſe parts to have Thun- 
der or Rain, as the Scripture oft implies; and Ste erome affirms, 
who was an Eye-witneſs of it ; the Weather bemg more conſtant 
and certain in i's Seaſons there. and 1n divers other parts, than it 
is with us wholive in Iflands, as all Travellers inform us. h That 
by this unſcaſonable and pernicious Srorm you may underſtand 
that God is diſpleaſed with you ; and alſo how fooltſhly and wicked- 


+ Feb. 


05:6» 


Iy you havedonein rejeting the Government cf that God, at whoſe 


Command are all things both in Heaven and in earth. 


18 So Samuelcalled unto the LORD, and the LORD 
{ent thunder and rain that day : and all the peopie 
greatly feared the LORD, and Samuel z. 

3 Who had ſuch great power and favour with God. 

19 And all the people ſaid unto Samuel, Pray for 
thy ſervants k unto the LORD thy God }, that wedie 
not m: tor we have added unto all our fins, #zs evil, 


to ask us a king ». 

k For ſo we ſhall ſtill own our ſelves to be, though we have got 
another Maſter. 1 Whom thou haſt ſo great an Intereſt 1n, and 
canſt ſo eaſily prevail with for any Mercy, whiiſt we are aſhamed 
and afraid to call him our God, becauſe we have ſo highly offended 
him. »» That this terrible Storm may be taken . away, Jeſt our 
perſons and the Fruirs of the Earth be all deſtroyed. » So horribly 
were they biaſſed with their prejudices and p-fſionss that nothing 
bur a Miracle could convince them of this particular Sin. 

20 © And Samuel ſaid unto the people, Fear not »: 
( ye have done all this wickedneſs, yet turn not aſide 
from following the LORD, but ſerve the LORD with 
all your heart : : 

o To wit, with a ſervile and deſponding Fear, as if there were 
Ro Hope left for you. | 


2s And turn ye not aſide p, for then ſhould ye go q 


for they are vain- ) 

p To wit, after Idols ; as they had often done before ; and not- 
withſtanding rhis warning, did afterwards, q Or, fbould ye turn 
aſide ; which words are eaſily ro be underſtood our of the foregoing 
Branch, ſuch E!lipſes being moſt frequent in Scripture, as Deur. 1. 
4+ 1 King. 14. 14+ 2 Kings 9, 27. r So Idol: are called, Deut. 32, 
21. Jer. 2. 5+ and fo they are, being meer Nothings, 4 Cer. 8. 4- 
having no Divinity nor power inthem; no Influence upcn us, nor 
uſe or benefit to us. ſ 1. e. Which will not only be unprefitable, 
bur highly pernicious ro you ; the contrary Afﬀfirmative being un» 
derſtood under the Negative, as Exod. 20. 7. Numb. 21. 23. Deut* 
2. 30» 


E7 
*Plal. 22 * For the LORD will not forſake his people for 
94+ 14+ his great Names ſake s : becauſe it hath pleaſed the 
LORD to make you his people ?z. 
5 i: e. For his own Honour, which would ſeem to ſuffer much 
among Men,if he ſhould nor preſerve & deliver his people in eminent 
Dangers; as if he were grown feeble, or forgetful, or inconſtant, 
or unfaithful, or regardleſs of Humane ff1irs, or unkind :o thoſe 
who own and worſhip bim, »hen all. the reſt of the Wor'd forſake 
him Hence this Argument hath been oft pleaded with Gcd. not 
withour good ſucceſs. as Exod 32. 12. Numb. 14+ +3, &c. And this 
reaſon God here alledgeth to rake them off from all conceir of their 
own merit; and to afſure them, thar if rhey {id truly repent of 
all rheir ſins, and ſerved God withall their heart, which is here {up- 
poſed; yet even in that caſe their Saivation would not be due ro 
their Merits; but only the effe&t of Gods free mercy. 
out of his own free Grace, without anv deſert of yours, as he faith, 
Deut. 7: 7: and 9: 5: and therefore he will not eaſily forſake you, 
except youthruſt him away. 


| 23 Moreover, as for me, God forbid that T ſhould fin 
againſt the LORD, Þ in ceaſing to pray for you «: but 
I will teach you x the good and the right way. 

, Think not, that becauſe you have ſo highly diſobliged and re- 
je&ed me, that I will revenge my ſelf, by negleQing to pray for 
you, or by praying againſt you, as I have now done for your Con- 
victior. and Humiliarion, andſo for your Preſervar'on ; I am ſenſible 
It is my Duty,. as I am a Man, an J/-aelite, a M'n'iſter, a Prophet, 
fo pray for yon. x Heb. and I will, &c. i, e. I wil! not only pray 
for you, which is ene Branch of my Duty; but will alſo Teach 
and Inſtru& you, which i5 the other Branch of it. And though 
you have caſt me cff from being your Judge and Ru'er, yet I will 
not ceaſe ro be your Inſtruor and Monitor, to ke: p you irom Sin 


and deſtruQtion. 
24 Only fear the Lot, and ſerve him y in truth 


lor, what with all your heart : ' for confider || how great things he 
fo he hath done for youz. : 
6) +  y Otherwiſe neither my Prayer nor Counſels will ſtand you in 
any ſtead. z Or, among you, both at this time and formecly, 


25 But if yeYhall till do wickedly, ye ſhall becon- 
ſumed, both ye and your king. | . 


} Heb. 


from cege 
forge 


* 


S 4A M ©& 


after vain things r, which cannot profit nor deliver /, 


et Town, inir, Deut- J2z11; the Cup, for the Drink ir, Jer. 49. 12; x Cor. 10} 


| 16: 20: and 1n an Ancient Greek Poet: 


Chap. Xll 
C H A Þ. XIIL | 


Saul and Jonathans ſeleft band. Jonathan ſmiteth the gariſon of the Phi« 
lift:ines at Gibeah * the people are called together at Gilgaly 1 "vl 
The Philiflines great hoſt : the Iſraelites run 1110 CAaVes and tremble, 
5, 7. Saul offereth befcre Samuel cometh to him : he reproves him 
for it 8 foretelleth him that his kingdom ſhoul not laſt long, 8, ---—= 14 
Three c-ompanies of the Philiftines invade the land : they had no ſmith to 
make them ſwords, &c,. Nor had any of the Iſraelites, ſave Saul and 
Jonathan, ſword or ſpear, I 5, 25. 


__ 1-reigned one year 4, and when he had reigned 
\J twoyears over Iſrael, the ſon 

2 1. e. Had now reigned one Year, from his firſt Ele&ion at 97 year 
Mizpeh, in which time theſe things were d: ne, which are recorded pis peioy 
chep. I1- and 12+ to wit, Peaceably, or Righteouſly. Compare 2 jug, © 
Als 2+. IO» . 

2 Saul choſe b him three thouſand men of Iſrael c : 
whereof two thouſand were with Saul in Michmaſh d, 
and in mount Bethel, and a thouſand were with Juna- 
than in Gibeah of Benjamin : and che reſt of the peo- 


ple he ſent every man to his tent 

b Heb. And (1. e. ) Then, asthar Adverb is oft uſed, as Gen. 3. 
5-and 18. ©, &c, ) Saul choſe. c Which he thought jufficienr for 
conſtant Atrendance and Service, intending to ſummon the reſt 
when need ſhould be. 6 A Tratqt of Ground near Ramah and Bethe 
el, in the Border ot Benjamin, and near to the Philiſtines. 


3 And Jonathan {mote the * garifon of the Phili- * Chap 
ſtines e that was || in Geba f, and the Philiſtines heard '%:, 5: 
of it : and Saul blew the trumpet throughout ali the ball 
land, ſaying, Let the Hebrews hear g 

e The firſt Deſign of Saul and Jenathan, was to free their Land 
from the Gariſons which the Phil:fies had in i: 3 and they firſt be- 
gin toclear tf eir own Counrry ot Benjamin. f Not the ſame place 
called Gibeah, wv. 2. { for if the place were rhe lame, why ſhould 
he vary the Name of ir in the fame Story, and in the next Verſe ? 
Nor 1s it like y that Jonathan wouid chule that place for his Camp, 
where the Phil:Fines had a Gariſon: ) but ancther place in the ſame 
Trike, in which there were two diſtin& places, Geba and Gibeah, 
Joſh, 18. 24, 28. g is &» He ſent Mefſengers to tell them all whar 
Jonathan had done, and how rhe Philiſtines were enraged at it, and 
made great preparations for War ; and therefore w hat neceflity 


there was of gathering themſelves together, and coming to him, 
for his and their own Defence. 


4 And all Iſrael heard ſay, that Saul b had ſmitten a 
gariſon of the Philiſtines, and that Iſrael aiſo + was had + Heb: 
in abomination with the Philiſtines : and the people ad fi 
were called together after Saui 10 Gilgal 5z. | 

h ( i. e. ) Jonathan by Sauls Dire&ion and Encouragement. The 


AQions of an Army are commonly atcribed to taeir General. 5 The 
place before appointed by Samuel, chap. 10+ 8. 


5 T And the Philiſtines gathered themſelves toge- 
ther to fight wit erfirael, thirty thouſand chariots &, 
and fix thouſand, men, and people as the ſand which 
s On the ſea-ſhore in multicude, and they came up 
and pitched in Michmaſh, eaſtward from * Beth-aven. + 5,q,, 
& T his number ſeems incredible co Infidels. To whom it may ,* and 
be ſufficient ro repiy, Thar it 1s far more rational to acknowledge 2, 13+ 
a miſtake in him chart copicd our the facred Text in ſuch Numeral 
or Hiſtorical paſſages, w: erein the Do&rine of Faith and good Life 
is not direttly concerned, than up»n ſuch a pretence to queſtion 
the Trurh and Divinity of rhe Holy Scr:ptures, which are fo fully 
Atteſted. and evident'y Demonſrared And the miſtake is not 
great in the Hebrew, Schaloſb for Scheliſhim; and to indeed thoſe two 
Ancient Tranſlators, the Syriack and Arabick tranſlate ir, and are 
ſuppoſed to have read in their Hebrew Copies Thre thouſand Norig 
it «eceſſary that all theſe ſhould be Mil:tary Chariors, bur many of 
| them m:gh* befer Carriage cf things belonging to ſo greatan Army; 
for ſuch a diſtin&tion of Chariots we find, Exod. 14: 7. Bur there is 
no need of this Reply. Chariots here may very well beput for the 
| Men that rode upon them, and fought our of them, by a Figure 
| called a Metonymy, of the Subje& for the Adjun&; or the thing con= 
: taining, for the thing contained inzit, rhan which none more fre» 
: quent- In the very ſame manner, and by the very ſame Figure, the 
: Basker 1s put for the Mar in ic, Deut. 28: 5, 17: the Wilderneſs for 
' wild Beaſts of the Wi'derneſs, Pſal. 29: 8:. the Neſt, for the Birds 


+ Heb. 


. 
o 


:1- And tocome more cloſely ro tie point, 2n Horſe is put foran 
Hortſe-load of Wares laid upon it, 1 Kings 10: 28: and an Aſſe of Bread, 
is put for an Aſle load of Bread, both in the Hebrew Texr of 1 Sam. 


, 
. 


And, y t nearer, the word 
Chariots, is manifeſtly pur, eirher for the Hort: belonging rothem; 
or rather, for the M-n that fought out of them, as 2 Sam 10: 18: 
where it is ſaid in the Hebrew, Thet David {1-w ſeven hundred Cha- 
riots ; that is, ſeven th: uſund Men, which fought in Chariors. as 
it 15 explained, 1 Chron. 19: 18; and 1 King. 20: 21: where Ahab is 
ſaid to {mite Horſes and Chariors ; and 1 Chron 18: 4. and Pſabns 
76. 6. where the Charior and Horſe ( i. e. rbe Men that ride and 
fight in Chariots, or upon Horſes ) are ſaid to be cſt into # dead 
ſeep : and Exek. 39, 20. where it is ſaid, ye ſha! be filled at my Table 
with Horſes and Chatiets, ( i e. with Men beionging 10 the Crariots, 
for ſuce!y the Chariots of Tron had been v+ry improper Food ) with 
mighty Men, &c. And ler any caviiing Infidel produce a wife Rea- 
ſon, why it may not, andought nct to be 16 underſtood here alſo? 
Add to all this, that the Phil;fines were nor alone in this Expediti- 
on, but had the help of the Canaanites. and the Tyrians as 18 very 
credible, both from Eccleſiaſtes 46. 18. and from rhe Natvre of the 
thing. If it be further enquired, Why the Philzfines ſhould raiſe fa 
greatan Army at this time? The Anſwer is obvious ; That nor on« 
ly their Old and Formidable Enemy S4m9wel was yer alive. but a New 
Enemy was rifen, even king S#u/, who was /are'y confirmed in his 
Kingdom,and had been fluſh?d with his good Succeſs againlt the. 47- 


monites, and was likely to grow more and more Potent, if not timely 
2 X prevented ; 


| 


Heb. 
nble 
er hime 


Chap. 
be- $; 


Heb. 
leſs him 


+ Heb. 
i#nireared 


the face. 


p. XIII. 


prevented; and they thought that now the !/racl:tiſh Aﬀairs were | 
7 


. . « bolt" 
, being put into the hands of a King ; an 

cherefe + — voto once forall to put forth all their Srreogen 

a fopperks the 17aelites, and to prevent that Ruine which otherwiſe 


hem- : 
ny the men of Iſrael ſaw that they were 1n a 


ſtrait 7: ( for the people were diſtreiſed »: ) then the 
eople did * hide themſelves in caves», andin thickets, 
in rocks, andin high places, and 1n pits. 
EC dion their former Preſum ptiony That if they _ 
a King, they ſhould be free fromallſuch ſtraits. And hereby Go 
intended to teach them the TRY of ”= pur | 7 onal pee ang: 
hey did not one jot leſs need the help and 1a 
ootqurac hey did before, __ « 6a. no King. » = a wa = 
not miſtaken in their apprehenſions of Danger, as m 16 wet eery 
Uy in great Danger, their Enemies Hoſt far ex 
==. ut both in Number and Ocder, and Courage, and Arms. 
[/ Whereof there were divers 1n _ parts for this very uſe, as we 
hus, andin the Holy Scripture. 
——_ ds of the Hebrews went over Jordan, to 
the land of Gad and Gilead : as for Saul, he was yet in 
Gilzal. and all the people o | followed him trembling. 
0 wie, his whole Army, oppoled to the common people, 
ſe 6. : bs 
x * And he tarried ſeven days p, according 
the ſer time that Samuel bad appointed : but Samue 
came not to Gilgal, and the people were ſcattered from 


him- 


p Not ſeven compleat Days ; for that the laſt Day was not fint- 


appcars from Samuels reproof, which had then been 
wt ard and he had faiſly charged Seul with 6 40m 
ing Gods Command thereing v. 13- And as Samuel _ —_ e 
ſeveath Day and that with intent to Sacrifice ; ſo doubt - 1e 
camein due time, for that work which was to be done 1-9 wag un- 
ſerting» Exod. 29. 38, 39+ So Saul waited only ſix cnn a5, 
and part of the ſeventh, which is here called ſeven Days: for _ 
werd Day is oft uſed for a part of the Day, as among 2p rp as 
alſo in Sacred Scripture, as Matth. 12. 40. where Chriſt is ſai a bs 
in the heert of the Earth three days and three nights 3 (1. e. ) one w ws 
day, and part of th- other two days: Moreover this place may - 
thus rendred: He tarried until the ſeventh day, ( as this ſame hom e 
is uſed, Gen. 7. 10. Heb. until the ſeventh of the aays ) as the Hebrew 
Lamed is of taken ) the ſet time that Samuel had appointed. 


9 And Saul ſaid, bring hither a burnt-offering to 
me, and peace- offerings. And he oftered the burnt- 
otterin : 

q Eirker hicaſelf - or rather by the Prieſt, 
fer, 1 King. 3. 4. Compare 1 Sam. I. 3» 

a6 find & came to paſs, that as ſoon as he had made 
an end of cffering the burnt-offering, behold, Samuel 
came » ; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might 
ſalute him /. | | 
y LY WÞ.- ll Saul, Behold Samuel 1s coming. ſe 1. e- Cons 
gratulate his coming. This he did, partly out of Cuſtom ; and 
partly, thar by this Teſtimony of his Aﬀettion and Reſpe&t to $S4- 
muel, he migar prevent that Rebuke which his guilry Conſcience 
ade bim expeQt. 
ws 11 < And Samuel ſaid, What haſt thou done # ? 
And Sau; ſaid, Becauſe I ſaw that the people were ſcat- 
tered from me, and zhat thou cameſt not within the 
days zppointed «, and that the Philiſtines gathered 
themfſcives together ro Michmaſh : _ 3 
+ He fuſpeRed that Saul had tranſgrefſed ; either by his deje&ed 


as Solomon 15 ſaid to of 


 Countenance, os ſome words utcered by him, though not here ex- 


prefſ-d . but h< asks him, that he might be more fully and certain- 
Iy -nformec, and thar Saul might be brought to an ingenuous Con- 
feſlion of his Sin, and true Repenrance for it. « 1, e. When the 
ſev-nth day was come, and a good part of it paſt, whence I con- 
cludes thou wouldſt not come that day, and that thou hadſt forgot- 
ten thy Appointment, or been hindred by ſome extrordinary Oc- 

fon. . "TY : 
"12 Therefore ſaid I, The Philiſtines will come down 
now upon meta Gilgal, and I have not f made ſuppli- 
cation unto the LORD =; I forced my ſelf therefore 
and offered a burnt- offering y. Sl 

x Hence it appears, that Sacrifices were accompanied with ſo- 
Jemn Prayers. y 1 did it againſt my own mind and Inclination, 
My Conſcience told me [I ſhould forbear it, and punftually obey 
Gods Command delivered to me by Samuel, but my neceſlity urged 
me to make hafte, : : 
13 AndSamuelfaid to Saul, Thou haſt done fooliſh- 
ly z: thou haft not kept the commandment of the 


LORD thy God a, which he commanded thee : for | 


now would the LORD have eſtabliſhed thy kingdom 


n Iſrael for ever 6. | 
IT In that very thing wherein thou thinkeſt thou haſt done wiſe- 
ly and polirickly, in diſobeying my expreſs Command upon a pre- 
tended neceſſity, or reaſon of State. s Not only upon common 
grounds, as thou art his Creature, and one ef his people; but in a 
ſpecial manner, who hath conferred peculiar Favours and Honours 
upon thee : which is an Aggravation of thy ſin.' b Queff. How 
could this be true, when the Kingdom was promiſed to Judah, Gen. 
49- 10: and conſequently muſt neceſfarily be taken away from Saul, 
and from his Tribe ? Anfw. Firſt, The Phraſe, for ever, in Scripture 
uſe, oft-times ſignifies only a long time, as Gene 43- 9. Exods 2I.6. 
1 Sam. 28: 2- So this had been abundantly verifi:d, if the King- 
dom had been enjoyed by $Sa#l, and by his Son, and by his Sons 
Son ; after whom the Kingdom might have come to Judah. Se- 
condly, Though the Kingdom had been promifed to Sau, and to 
his Poſterity for ever un a larger ſenſe, yet that was upon condition 


a 


gm S414 M DE £ 


— 


of his Obedience. And therefore God might weſl promiſe the 
Kingdom to Judah, becauſe at that time, and before, he foreſaw 
that Saul would by his Diſobedience forfeit that promiſe, and that 
he would rake the forfeiture, and transfer theKingdom to Judah. 


ver his people, becauſe thou haft not kept thar which 
the LORD commanded thee f. | 

c (i. e- ) Hath found or diſcovered, as Men do by ſeeking» An 
Anthropopathy« @ ( i. e- ) Such a Man as he defires, one who will 
fulfill all the deſires of his Heart, and not oppoſe them, as thou 
doſt, e (i.e. } Hath appointed or decreed, as the word Command 
is ſometimes uſed : for it was nor yer aftually done. f DLueſt. Firſt, 
What was Sauls ſin ? Anſw. Either, Firſt, That Saul invaded the 
Prieſts Office, and offered the Sacrifice himſelf: which is nor Pro= 
bable, both becauſe he had Prieſts with him, and among others an 
eminent one, Afiah, chap. 14: 3: and therefore had no occaſion nor 
pretence for that preſumption. Or rather, Secondly, That Saul 
did not wait the full time for Samuels coming ; for that is the thing 
which God commanded, chap. 10: 8: and the breach of this Com. 
mand is the only thing for which Saw! makes an Apology, v. 11; 12. 
Quefi.Secondly, Why did God ſo ſeverely puniſh Saul for ſo ſmall an 
Offence, and that occaſioned by great neceſlity,and done with an ho- 
neſt Intention ? Avyſw. Firſt, Men are very incompetent Judges 
of Gods Judgments, becauſe they ſee bur very little, either of the 
Majeſty of the offended God, or of the hainous Nature and Ag- 
gravations of the Offence. For inſtance, Men ſee nothing but Sauls 
outward at&t, which ſeems ſmall ; but God ſaw with how wicked 
a Mind and Heart he did this, with what Rebellion againſt the 
Light|of his own Conſcience, as his own words imply ; with what 
groſs infidelity and diſtuſt of Gods providence ; with what con« 
tempt of Gods Authority, and Juſtice, and many other wicked 
Principles and Motions of his Heart, unknown ro Men. Beſides, 
God clearly ſaw all that wickedneſs that yet Jay hid in his Hearr, 
and foreſaw a)l his other Crimes ; and therefore had far more 
grounds for his Sentence againft him, than we can imagine. Se 
condly, God doth ſometimes puniſh ſmall fins ſeverely, and that 
for divers weighty reaſons, as that all men may ſee what the leaſt 
ſin deſerves, and how much they owe to Gods free and rich mercy, 
for paſſing by rheir great Offences ; and what need they have nor 
to indulge themſelves in any ſmall ſin, as Men are very prone to 
do, upon vain preſumptions of Gods mercy, whereby they are 
eaſily and commonly drawn on to hainous Crimes; and for many 
other Reaſons : ſo that ſome ſuch inſtances of Gods ſeverity, are 
neceſſary Diſcipline and Caution to all Markind in the preſent arid 
future Ages; and therefore there is far more of Merey and kind- 
neſs in ſuch ARtions, than of Rigour and Harſhneſs, fince this is 
but particular to one Perſon, and the other is an univerſal Good. 
Thirdly, It muſt be remembred, that the Kingdom of Saul, and of 
Iſrael, was now in its Infancy; and that this was the firſt Command 
which he received from God. And it hath been ever held a plece 
of Wiſdom in all Law-givers, ſeverely to punifh the firſt Violati< 
ons of their Laws, to ſecure their honour and Obedience, and to 
affright and caution Offenders for the future. And according] 
God dealt with Cain the firſt Murderer; with 1ſ-ael for their fir 
Icolatry with the Calf ; with the firſt miſcarriage of the Prieſts, 
Levi. 10. 1- with the firſt prophaner of the Sabbath, Numb. I5. 20. 
with the firſt groſs Hypocrites in the Chriſtian Church, 48s 5. Fa 
10. And therefore it is neither ſtrange nor unjuſt, if he deal with 
Saul after the ſame manner, and upon the ſame grounds. Fourthly, 
Though God threaten Sau! with the loſs of his Kingdom for this 
fin; yet ir is not improbable, that there was a tacit condition im= 
plied, as 1s uſual 1n ſuch caſes, as Jonah 3. 4. to wit, if he did not 
heartily repent of this and of all his ſins; for the full, and final, 
and peremptory Sentence of Sauls reje&ion, Is plainly aſcribed to 
another Cauie, chap. 15+ 11, 23, 26, 28, 29. and till that ſecond OFf- 
fence, neither the Spirit of the Lord departed from him, nor was 
David anointed in his ſtead, chap. 16.1.3, 14: 

15 AndSamuel aroſe, and gat him up from Gilgal, 
unto Gibeah of Benjamin g. And Saul numbred the 
people that were | 
dred men. 


g Whither Saul alſo followed him; as appears from the next 
Verſe: either, becauſe it was better fortified than Gilgal : or, be. 
cauſe he expeQed a greater increaſe of his Army there, it being in 
his own Tribe, and nearer the heart of his Kingdom: or, becauſe he 
hoped for Samuels Aſſiſtance there. 


16 And Saul, and Jonathan his ſon, and the people 
that ere preſent with them, abode in Gibeah of Ben- 
jamin : but the Philiſtines encamped in Michmaſh. 

17 And the ſpoilers came out of the camp of the 
Philiſtines in three companies þ; one company turned 
vw way that leadeth te Ophrah 3, unto the land-of 
Shual. 

h That they might march ſeveral ways, 
ofthe Country. 5 A City of Benjamin, Joſh. 
Michmafb. 

18 And another company turned the way to Beth- 
horon & ; and another company turned to the way of 
the border that looketh to the valley. of Zeboim toward 
the wilderneſs /, _ 

k A City of Ephraim, Joſh, 16. 3. Northweſt from Michmaſh, I i & 
The Wilderneſs of Jordan, Eaſtward. -. 


19 © Now there was no 


and ſo waſte ſeveral parts 
I8. 23+ South-weſt frony 


ſmith found throughout all 


Hebrews make them ſwords or ſpears. ) 

mM 'This was a rome courſe of the Philiſtines, 
Nations have uſed. So the Chaldeays took away their Smiths, 
2 King. 24+ 14 Jer, 24. I. and 29. 2 And Porſerna obliged the 
Romans by Covenant, That they ſhould uſe no Icon bur in the Tit 


lage of their Lands, 
20 But 


14 But now thy kingdom ſhall not continue :* the * Pa! 
LORD hath ſought c him a man after his own heart d, y 20. 
and the LORD hath commanded e him to be captein 0- 4g ny 


-. - * Heb, 
preſent with him, * about ſix hun- | ba 


* Chap 


I & 2s 


the land of Iſrael »» : ( for the Philiſtines ſaid, { Leſt the 4 we mu 


take thm 
which alſo other 999 


Chap. XI} ? 


J 


[0 


Js 


| Chap. NIV. | Y 
—__ . ! ND . iſt; 

)» Bic all the Ifraelites went downto the Philiſtines 

# to ſharpen every man his ſhare, and his coulter, and 


his axe, and his mattock. = | 
7 Not to the Land of the Phil:ſtmes, for it 18 not ſaid ſos and 
that was too remote ; but to the Stations and Garriſons which the 
Philiſiines yet retained in ſeveral parts of Iſraels Land, though Samu- 
els Authority had ſo far over-awed them, that they durſt not give 
the 7{-nclices much diſturbance. In theſe therefore the Ph:liftnes 
kept "all the Smiths ; and here they allowed them the exerciſe of 

their Art for the uſes here following. 
Heb 21 Yet they had Þ a file for the mattocks, and for the 
eV- 

þ fie with coulters, andfor the forks, and for the axes o, and Tto 


mouth!» ſharpen the goads. | 
+ Hcebe 0 the ens is, They allowed them ſome ſmall helps to make 
zo Jes their Matrocks, 2nd in ſome fort to ſerve their preſent uſes —_ 
| thele words may be otherwiſe tranflated,and are {0 by ſome S_ ; 
both Ancient and Modern Tranſlators s Thus, Therefore the mouths or 
edges of the mattocks and coulters, &c. were dull or blunt. Or ___ 
thus, When ( Heb. and put for when, as the Particle and, 15s - wh 
times rendied, as Mark 15.25. ) the mouths or edges of the mattocks, &XCs 
were blunts So this paſſage very well agrees both with the WR 
and fojlowing words; and the whole ſenſe of the place 1s —_ 
thus, They went to the Philiſlines ro ſharpen their ſhares, and ma:tocks, 
and coulters, and ae:, when they were blunt, and ( which was my 
ſtrange, They were forced to go to them even ) to ſharpen their goaas. 
22 Soit came to pals in the day of battel, chat there 
was neither ſword nor ſpear found in the hand of any 
of the people, that were with Saul and Janathan p, but 
with Saul and with Jonathan his ſon was there found. 
? Qu. How could the 7ſraelites ſmite either the Gariſon of the 
Phil:#;mes above, wv. 3, or the Hoſt of the Ammonites, chap Is be 
without Arms? And when they had conquered them, Why + k 
they not take away their Arms, and reſerve them to their ownu ct 
Anſw. 1. This want of Swords and Spears 1s nor affirmed inns 
ing ll Iſr1el, but is reſtrained unto ti.ole 6008 who were Wit _ 
and Jonathan? whom God by his providence might ſuffer to " 
with.ut thoſe Arms, that the glory of the following Vittory mig 2 
be wholly afcribed to God ; as for the very ſame reaſon God wou ; 
have but 3o0o Men left with Gideon, and thoſe armed only = 
Trumpets. and Pitchers, avd Lamps, Judge 7. There were no -_ 
a confiaerable number of Swords and Spears among the Iſraelites, 
bur they generally hid them, as now they did their pertons, from 
the Phil:tine And the Philiſtines had nor yet attained ro fo ens 
power over them as wholly to diſarm them. but thc ughr it lufh- 
cient to prevent the making of new Arms; knowing thar tie wy 
vnes wouid ſhortly be decayed, and uſeleſs. 2. There were or " 
Arms more commecn in thoſe times and places, than Swords al 
Spears; to wit, Bows and Arrows, and Slings and Stones; oY 
pears from Judg. 20. 16. 2 Sam I. 18, 22. 2 Kg. 3+ 25: 1 Chron. 
12. 1, 2. b:fides C!ubs, and Inſtruments of Agriculture, which might 
eaſily be rur: ed into weap2ns of War. 3, God ſo governed the At- 
fairs of the Iſraelites, that they had no great num ber of Sword+, or 
Sp-ars, Judg. 5. 8. that ſo they might bekepr in more depettdence 
upon, ard ſubje&tion unto Grd, wherein their ſafety and happinels 
conſiſted, And therefore, thar famous ViRory obtained againft 


bur only by Thunder from Heaven chap. 7. 10s 
[Or, fond» 23. And the || garifon of che Philiſtines went out to 
| inCanp. the pailage of Michmaſh 9. | 
| q A place ſo called, becauſe it wasnear Michmaſh, and I:d towards 


Gibeah, which it ſeems, they deſigned to beſiege ; and ia the mean 
time, to waſte the adjoyning Country. 


G- 0 A F. AF. 


Jonathan and his armour-bearer ſecretly ſmiteth the Phil.ſtines army : they 
ſlay one a»0ther, , -—- 15. Which being perceived 16, 17 Saul purſue: h 
the Phil fines : the captivat-d and hidden Iſraelites joyning in the pur- 
ſuit, 18, 23- Sul adjurerh rhe people not to eat any thing till 
evening : Jonathaneateth honey the Philiſtines «r- ſmitten, 24, JL 
The people eat fleſb with the blood ; Saul reftrameth them . and buildeth 
an altar, :2,—- — 35- Deſigning to purſue the Phil tines by night : 


Tonathan is taken Saul dooms him to dle © the people reſcue h. ms 
36, ——=— 45+ Sauls wars, ſons, Aanghters, wife, &c. 45, — 52. 


| OW || it came to paſs upon a day, that Jonathan 
the ſon of Saul ſaid unto the young man that 
bare his armour, Come, and let us go over ro the Phi- 


liſtines gariſon #, that 5s on the other fide þ: but he coid 
not his father c. 

a This was a raſh and foolih Attempt, if it be examined by 
common Rules ; bur not ſoy if we conſider the ſingular -Promites 
made to the Iſraelites, That one ſhoula chaſe a thou)and, &c. and cipe= 
cially the heroical and extraordinary Motions whicl. were then fre- 
quently put into the Minds of gal'ant Men by Gods Spirit, where- 
by they undertook and accompliſhed noble and woriderfi! ri ings 3 
as did Samſon, and David, and his Worthies. 6b Bey-nd :har Rocky 
Paſſeige deſcribed below, wv. 4, 13- which he pointed ar with his 
hand. © Leſt he ſhould hindzr him in fo improbable an Enterprize. 
Nor was it neceſſary he ſhould infi rm him of it, becaute he bad a 
Commiſſion from his Father, to fighr when he ſaw occaſich; as he 
had done without his Farhers privity, chap. 13. 3. 


2 And Saul tarried in theattermoſt part of Gibeah d. 
-. Under a pomegranate tree, which 5s in Migron e : and 


[| Or, there 
Bs: 4 day. 


*Chap. the people that were with him, were * about tix hun- 
13-15, dred mens 
d In the OQutworks of the City where he had inttench«d him- 
\ ſelf co 


cbſerve the Mnrion of the Phil ines. 
Hebrew Beth is of- we ) Migron, 
Near Gibeah; See 1/a. 12. 28. | 

3 And Ahiaa the fon of Ahitub f, * Ichabods bro- 
ther, the ſon of Phinchas, the fon of Eli, the LORDS 


2 Or, towards ( a tne 

waca was anoth-r place, bur 
Fehap, 
& Uy 


S 4 M 0 


the Philiſtines in Samuels days, was not gor by the Sword of Meng 


conſults God : who anſwers not : Sanl caſts a lot to find «ut th cauſe: * 


=” 
Chap. XIV 
| prieſt in Shiloh, wearing an ephod g : and the pzople j 
knew not that Jonathan was gone. | | 
f The ſame who is called Abimelech, x Sam. 22: 9, 'I, 20. the 
High-prieſt, who was here to attend upon the Ark which was 
brought hithery v. 18. g To wit, the Higu-pricſts Ephod, where- 
in the Urim and Thummim was. 

4 T And berween the paſſages b, by which Jona- 
than ſought to go over unto the Philiſtines gariſon,cbere 
as 7 a tharp rock onthe one ſide, and a ſharp rock on 
the other ſide zz and the name of the one was Bozez. 
and the name of the other Seneh. | 

h So theſe might be two known and common paſſages, bnth 39. 28- 
v-hich Jonathan muſt croſs, or paſs over to go to the Philifines, b | 
eween which the following Recks lay. But the words may be 
rendred thus, In the middle ( for ſo the Hebrew particle Ben,ſicn fies, 
as 1Ja. 44+ 4+ and beth, in, is underſtood by a very frequen+ E] ips 
ſis ) of the paſſage ; the Plural Number being pur for the $ ngular, 
as is frequent. 3 Which is not fo to be underſtood, as if in this 
paſſage one Rock was on the right hand, and the other on the left; 
tr to he ſhould have gone be:ween both : and there w.s n' n:<d 
of climbing up ro them, which is mentioned below, v. 3. But 
J the nieaning is, That zhe tooth ( or prominency ) of theone rock, ( as 

ir is in the Hebrew ) was on the one fide ; i, e. Northward, looking 
rowards Michmaſh ( the Garifon of the Philiſtines ) and the tooth of the 
other rock was on the 0rher ſide ; i. e. Southward Jooking rowards Gis 
beah ( where Saul's Camp lay ) as the next Verſe informs vs: and 
Jonathan was forced to cumb over theſe two Rocks, becauſe the o+- 
ther and common ways from one Town to the other, might now 
be obſtrutted, or were not to fit for his preſent D: ſign, oY 

5 The F forefront of the one was ſituate northward t Tom | 
over againſt Michmaſh, and the other ſouthward o- **** 
ver againſt Gibeah. 

6 And Jonathan ſaid to the young man thatbare his 
armour, Come, and let us go over uito the gariſon of 
theſe uncircumciſed &, it may be | that the LORD will 
work m1 for us : for there is no reſtraint to the LORD + , cho 
* ro ſave by many, or by few. 

k So he calls them, partly in Contempt and principally to 
ſtrengthen his Faith by this Cor ſideration, That his | Kin were 
Enemies to God, and withour any hope in God, or help from him; 
whereas he was Circumciſed and therefore in Covenant with Ged, 
who was both able, and engaged to afliſt | is per ple. 1 He ſpeaks 
doubrfully : for though he found and felt himieit Nirred vp by God 
ro this Exploit, and was affured thar God would 4: liver his people; 
yet he was not certain that he would doir at this timey and in (his 
way. 22 Towit, greatand worderful things. n There is no P<r= 
(on nor Thing whichcan hinder God from thus doing. 

7 And his armour-bearer ſaid unto kim, Do all that 
# 1n thine heart : turn thee 0: behold, 1 am with thee 
according to thy hearts 

o March on to the Enemies. 


8 Then faid Jonathan, Behold, we will paſs over 


unto theſe men; and we will diſcover our ſelves unto 
them. 


9 If they ſaythus unto us, F Tarry until we come to + Heb: 
you : then we willſtand ftill in our place, and will nor %#i&- 
20 up unco them, 


Io But if they fay thus, Come upunto us : then we 
wiil go up: for the LORD hath delivered them into 
our hand : and this ſhall be a ſign unto us p. 

þ Jonathan riot being aſſured of the Succeis of th $ preſent Exp'oit, * 
deliies a ſign; and by the inſtin of Gods Spirir as the Succeſs 
thews, pitcheth upon this. Divers juch beroical Moricns and ex« 
ftraordinary Impulles there were among great and gocd Men in an= 
ci:nt Times; as Gen. 24+ 13. Judg, 6. 37. which are nor precedent 
to us- 

11 And both of them diſcovered themſelves unto the 
gariſon of the Philiſtines : and the Philiſtines {aid, Be- 
hold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes q, where 
they had hid themſelves. 


| 494 Therefore Jonathan choſe that rocky and unuſual way, that the 
' Philifines might tuppoſe they did not come from Saul's Campta 
fight with them, but rather our of the Caves, and holes ofthe Rocks, 
fiom which their neceſſi. y had now driven them. 
12 And the men of the gariſon anſwered Jonathan 
i and his armour- bearer, and faid, Come upto us, and 
we will ſhew you a thing r. ' And Jonathan ſaid unto 
his armour: bearer, Come up after me, for the LORD 
| hath detivered them s into the hand of Iſrael. bh 
| # *e having ſomething 0: Importance to communicate to you. 
| A ſp<ech of Contempt and Derifion, 5 He piouſly and modeſtly 
aicrives te Succe's which he now foreſees, to God on'y. 
13 And Jouathan climbed up upon his hands, and 
upon his teer, and his armour-bearer after him t: and 


they fell before Jonathan, and his armour-bearer flew 
after him s. 


t The Philiſlines could eaſily have hindred their Aſcent, bue © 
thought {corn to doit, not queſtioning but they cou'd cut them off 
in 2 moment whenthey were come up to them according to their 
Invitat-on. # For being endowed with extraordinary Strergthand 
Cou:'ge and having with incredible boldnels killed the firlt they 
mer wth, and lo proceeding with ſucceſs, it is nor ſtrange if the 
Phil:fines were both aſroniſhed arid intimidated ; God alſo ſtruck 
chem with a Panick Terror; and withal, Infatuated their Minds, 
aud poſſivly, pur an Evil Spirir among them, which in this uni- 

verſa] Contuſion made them conceive that there was Treachery a» 
monglt themlieives, and therefore cauſed them ro ſheath their 
Swords in one anothers Bowels : as appears from v. B86. 29. 


2 2 14 And 


Cm 


14: 18: 


SY 


DO 


Dr, half 


acre of 
nd, 


Heb. 4 
embling 
God. 


if Gen» 
95- 5 


| Or, t«- 
mult, 


+ Heb- 
were cried 
rogether. 
T Judg. 
7 Vs 

2 Chron. 
"$0.23. 


FCh-13. 6. 


ap. XIV. 


furrow of 


Hoſt which was there in the Field. 


Ti 


ct flaughter which Jonathan and his! 
de, was about twenty men, within 
& of oxen 


14 And that fi 
armour-bearer ma 
4s it were || an half acre of land, which a yok 


might plow. | 
: 5 And there was trembling x in the hoſt, in the 


field y, abd among all the people 2 : the gariſon, and 
the ſpoilers, they alſo trembled, and the earth quaked a: 


ſo it was Þ* a very great trembling. 
x A great Conſternation; partly from this vnexpeQted and pro- 
digious Slaughter, which madethem ſuſpe&, there was more than 
Man in the Caſe ; and that the Lord ( of whoſe infinite power they | 
had had former experience ) was come forth to ftighr againſt them; 
and partly from the Lord , who took away cheir Spirits and Strength, 


and {truck them with Fear and Amazement. y i.e In the whole 
z i. e. Among all the reſt of 


ſon, ( as it is here explained 


their Forces, as well thoſe in the Gari : 
as the Spoilers, mentioned 


in the following words ) at Michmaſb, pol 
chape 13- 17+ the report of this Prodigy, and with it the Terrour of 
God ſpeed-ly paſſing from one ro anorher. 4 Either, I» Metaph: - 
rically and Hyperbolically, the whole Land ; i. e. The Inhabitants 
of the Land ; to wit, of the Ph:lifines trembled Or rather, 2 P1o- 
perly, God ſent an Earthquake among them, which prob.bly over- 
threw their Tents and Chariots» and deſtroyed wary of their per- 
ſons, and ſcattered the whole Hoſt, making them to flee away for 


heir lives. 
: «And the warch-men of Saul in Gibeah & of Ben- 
melted 


jamin looked : and behold, the multitude c 


away d, and they went on beating down one another e. 

b Or, in the hill, as the very ſame word 1s rendied chap. 13. 16. 
and that was the fitteſt place for Watch-memz c To wit, of thar 
numerous Hoſt of the Philiſtines. d i e. Were ſtrangely and ſud- 
denly diſperſed, and put to flight. e Either, x. Accidentally 
through haſty Flighr- Or, 2. With deſign to deſtroy one another 
as the Authors or Abettcrs of tke preſent Calamity. Poiſbly Ge d 
blinded their Eyes orthe:r Minds, that they cculd not d:\tingu-ſh 
Friends frem Foes. Compare Juag. 7: 22+ 2 King. 6: 18, & Cc. 2 Chron. 


pat + Then ſaid Saul unto the people that were with 


17 
him, Number now, and ſee who 1s pI from us f. And 
Jonathan and his 


when they had numbred, behol 


armour-bearer were not there. 

f For he probably ſuppoſed, that not enly Jonathan, but alſo ſome 
conſiderable number of his Army was gone, and thar by them that 
Slaughter was made. 


is And Saul ſaid unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark 
of God g. ( for the ark of God was at that time with 


the children of Iſrael 6. ) | | 
g That the Prieſt may put on the Ephod, and may enquire of 
the Lord before the Ark what the occaſion of this Tumult ameng 
our Enemies is, and what we ſhall do. þ To wits in the Camp, 
whither ſometimes it was brought ; as I Sam. 4+ 5+ And now'the 
rather, partly becauſe it was now In an unſertled conditien, and 
without the Tabernacle, and therefore eaſily removed from place 
to place: and partly, becauſe Saul rhought to compenſate Samnels 
abſcnſe with the prefence of the Ark. 
19 4 And itcame to paſs while Saul talked unto the 


prieſt, thar the || noiſe that was in the hoſt of the Phili- 
{tines went on and increaſed : and Saul faid unto the 


prieſt, Withdraw thine hand 2. 

; Trouble not thy ſelf in putting on the Breaſt-plate, with the 
Ephod, to enquire of God; for I now phanly diſcern the matter, 
the buſineſs cails not for Prayer, bur for Aﬀtion. Bur ifir did ſo, 
there was the more need of Gods dire&ion and bleſſing, that they 
might a& with more Succeſs. Herein therefore kh: ſhews his In:- 


patience in waiting upon God ; his Hypocriſi-: in pretending to Re- 


| Tigion ; and yet his Prophannels in negleCting an deſpiſing ite 


20 And Saul and all the people that were with him, 
+ aſſembled themſelves, and they came to the barrel, 
and behold, * every mans ſword was againſt his fel- 
low k, and there was a very great diſcomfiture. 

k& The Philiftines ſlew one another ; which might come, either 
from miſtake ; of which, ſee on v. 16- Or from mutual Jealoulies 
and Paſſions, to which God couid eaſily diſpoſe them. 

21 Moreover, the Hebrews hat were with the Phi- 
liſtines before that time, which went up with them in- 
to the camp 1, from the country round about, even they 
alſo turned to be with the Iſraelites thac were with Saul 
and Jonathan. 

1 Either by conſtraint, as Servants ; or in policy, to gain their 
favour and proteCtion- 

22 Likewiſe all the men of Iſrael, which * had hid 
chemſetves in mount Ephraim, whes they heard that 
the Philiſtines fled, even they alſo followed hard after 
them in the battel. 

23 So the LORD faved Ifrael that day : and thebat- 
tel ; paſſed over unto Beth-aven. 

m j- e, The Warriers who were engaged in the BatteT, and were 
purſuing and fighting with the Phili#ines. 

24 © And the men of Iſrael were diſtreſſed » that 
day ; for Saul had adjured the people, faying, Curſed 
be the man that eateth any food umil evening, that I 
may be avenged on mine enemies s : 1o none of the 
people taſted any food p. 

» With Hunger, and Weakneſs, and Faintneſs, thence ariſing 3 
and all by reaſon of the following Oath. o As Sauls intertion was 
good ; namely, to execute Vengeance upon Gods and his Enemies: 


SHMNDEL 


fo the matrer of the Ol ligation was not ſimply and in it ſe! 
lawful, if it had not been ſo rigorous in tine all Food, fog 
out any exception of Cafes of Neceſſity ; and in obliging the Peo= 
ple to ir under pain of a Curſe. and an accurſed Death; w&, .g 
39, 44, which was a pur1ſhment far exceeding the Fau!r. þ * Hg 
"bh edience to the Kings Command; and partly for fear of the 

25 And all zhey of the land q came to a wood, and 

there was honey upon the grounds 

R _ _ the land, 1. : Fs people of the Land ; as it is ex. 
Plained below, wv. zo. and ſo the word is taken, Gen. 41. 57. 
the 1/raelizes who were with Saul, We 

26 And when the people were come into the wood, 
behold, the honey dropped r, but no man put his han 
to his mouth : for the people feared the oath. 

r Ir hath been obſerved by many Travellers, and Writers, That 
Bees do oftstimes ſetcle themſelves, and make their Hives, and Ho. 
aey, inthe Trunks of Trees. or Clefts of Rocks, or holes of the 
Earth ; and this in divers Countries, but eminently in rt1s of Ca. 
Naan; as may be gathered from Deut. 32. 1.3. Pſal. $1. 16. whence 
it was called a land flowing with milk aud honey, 

27 But Jonathan heard not 5, when his father char- 
ged che people with the, oath: wherefore he put forth 
the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipt it in 
an honey comb, and put his hand to his mouth, and 
his eyes were enlightned 2. 

5s Being then abſent, and inpurſuit of the Philiſtines, divers of the 
Iſraelites having joyned themſelves with him, v. 21. t He was re. 
freſhed, 2nd recovered his loſt Spirits, whereof part went into his 
Oprick Nerves, and ſo cleared his fight, which was much darkned 
by Famine, as is uſual. 


28 Then anſwered one of the people «, and ſaid 
Thy father ſtraitly charged the people with an oath, 
ſaying, Curſed be the man that eateth any food thisdays 
And che people were || faint, 


- 


u Who came along with Saul, whoſe Forces were now united 


with 7Jonathans. 


29 Then faid Jonathan, My father hath troubled 
the land x: ſee, I pray you, how mine eyes have been 
——_—_— becauſe I taſted a little of this honey. 

X lt. E e People of the Land, the whole Army. whom by th; 
raſh Oath he hath greatly injured. The Zeal of = vaaniy tbhrvg 
A _ __ _ into _ oo Extream of accufing his Father, and 
that before the people, whom b 1 T:4; : 
—_ TY Pp m by this means he might have fliried 

zo How much more, if happily the people had eaten 
freely to day of the ſpoil of their enemies which they 
found ? for had there not been now a much greater 
ſlaughter among the Philiſtines ? 

31 And they {mote rhe Philiſtines that 
Michmaſh to Ajalon y : 
fainr. 

» Either that in Dan Joſh. 19. 42. 
2 Chron. 11. 16. 


32 And the people flew upon the ſpoil z, and took 
ſheep and oxen, and calves, and ſlew them on the 


.day from 
and the people were very 


Or rather, that in Judah, 


ground, and the people did eat 5hew * with the * roy 


vO 26. and 
: when the time prefixed by Saul was ex. 19 26 
a Not having patrence to tarry 11] che blood was perfectly Devut.- 


blood 2. 

2 To wit at Fvening, 
pired. 
gone cur efthem, as they ſhould have done. See Gen 

: : - 9. 4+. Levit. 
(7. 14+ Deut. 12. 16. Sothey who ſeemed to make Bl cence of 
the Kings © ommandment for fear of the Curſe, 
tranigreſſing Gods Cemmand, 


33 CT Then they told Saul, ſaying, behold the peo- 
ple ſin agair:ſt the LORD, in that they eat with he 
blood. And he faid, Ye have || tranſgrefſed b: roll a 
_ ſtone unto me ec this day. 

_ 6 Heſeestheir fault, bur not his own, in givi 

19. c That rhe cattel might be all + oHr, wy Noor _— 9 
inſpettion of Saul, or ſome orher appointed by him for that work : 
and upon the ſtone, that the bloud may ſooner and better low 


out. 

34 And Saul faid, Diſperſe your ſelves 
people, and ſay untochem, Bring me hither 
his ox, and every man his ſheep, 
and cat, and in not againſt the LO 
the blood. And all the people 
his ox, 4 F with him that 
there. 

4 And his ſheep, 


words. 


35 And Saul built an altar unto the LORD e 


_ DF the firſt altar that he built un 


among the 
every man 
and ſlay them here, 
RD in eating with 
brought every man 


which is to be underſtood out of the foregoing 


: | the 
to 


ic oft ere this time. So this is noted as another Eviden I 
. ce of his 
negl& of God and his worſhip. Ir is true, Saul ſacrificed before 


h: b ! T 4 
: mein G:/zal; bur that was upon an old Altar, EreQted by 


35 5 And Saul faid, Let us go down after ths 
Philiſtines by night, and ſpoil chem until the morn- 
ning light, and let us not leave a man. of them, And 


they 


Chap. XIV, 


make no ſcrupleof 


['Or, dut 
treachts 


rouſly, 


night, and flew zhom 4 pxeb.i 
his ha, 


Heb mW 
the Lhd 
X gani 

e Eithir for a Monument of the Viftory * or rather, for Sacri- rh 
fie, as the next words imply. f Though he had occaſion to do LON? = 


[Or 1weary, 


12: 16, 


IV, 


weary, 


r, dub 


cht« 


y, 


XIV- [. 
they ſaid, Do whatſoever ſeemeth good unto thee. 


Then ſaid the Prieſt g, Let us draw near hither þ un- 
co God- 


bring Sau?'s Contempt of God's Ordinance the laſt time, 
£5 _ ——p <a pm of itz and perceiving Sau! ready to run 
-1ro the ſame Errour again, even though he had not now the ſame 
Dretence of the neceflity of haſte as before, and that the people were 
Mward to comply with the motion ; he gives them this pious and 
pad ws Advice. + To wit, to the Ark, as above, v. 18. 
: And Saul asked counſel of God, Shall I go 
down after the Philiſtines 2 Wilt thou deliver them 


:nto the hand of Iſrael ? but he anſwered him not thar 
_— r. Becauſe he was diſpleaſed with Sau! for his former 
negle&, v. 18, 19. where he began to ask advice of God, but was 
ſo rude and impious, as not to tarry for an Anſwer - and therefore 
;r was but a juſt Retaliation, if when Saul did ask, God would not 
vouchſafe him an Anſwer. Or, 2. To manifeſt his diſlike of the 
violation of Oaths. For although Jonathan might have a fair excuſe 
from his invincible Ignorance, and urgent Neceflity ; and though 
Sau! had done fooliſhly in making this Oath ( which alſo God 
would this way diſcover, ) yet, when once it was made, God 
would hereby teach them, that it ſhould be obſerved ; and that they 
ſhould abſtain, even from all appearance of the Breach of it. 


38 And Saul ſaid, Draw ye near hither all the 


(hap 


{Hb Þ chief of the people E: and know and ſee wherein this 
amr fin hath been this day. 
Judg-20+2* þ Jn the Name of all the People, that you may be Witneſſes, and 


may ſee where the Fault lies. ; ; 

39 For as the. LORD liveth which ſaveth Ifrae], 
though it be in Jonathan my ſon, he ſhall ſurely die. 
But there was not a man among all the people that an- 
ſwered him /. | | 

1 None of thoſe who either ſaw Jonathan Eating, or heard of it, 
informed againſt him ; partly, becauſe th:y were ſatisfied, that his 
Tenorance excuſed him, and that there was ſome other reaſon of 
God's not anſwering : and partly, from their great Loye to Jona- 
than, whom they would not expoſe to Death tor ſo ſmall an Of 
fence. 

40 Then ſaid he unto all Iſrael, Be ye on one fide, 
and I and Jonathan my ſon will be on the other {ide z 
and the people ſaid unto Saul, Do what feemeth good 
unto thee. : | 

41 Therefore Saul ſaid unto the LORD God of If- 


HHeb:Give Tal, T [| Give a perfect /ot zz. And Saul and Jonathan 
Aummim were taken : but the people 7 eſcaped ». 

Deut.33.8- m Or, declare ( for giving, is oft put for declaring, or pronouncing, 
| Or,hew as Deut. 11. 29. and 13. 1, 2. Prov. g. g. ) the perfe#, or guiltle(s Per- 
the innocent. ſon. 3. e. O Lord, ſo guide the Lor, that it may diicover who is 
f Heb. Guilty in this Matter, and thar it may clear the Innocent. n To 
vent forths wit, the Danger, they were pronounccd Guiltleſs. 

42 And Saul ſaid, Caſt Jors beeween me and Jona- 


than my ſon : and Jonathan was taken . 


m God ſo ordered the Lot ; not rhat he approved Sauls Execrati- 
on, v. 24. or his Oath-that the Tranſgretlor ſhould die, v. 39. nor 
that he would expoſe Jonathen to Death ( for he deligned 1o to rule 
the hearts of the People, and of Sazl alſo, that Jonarhan ſhould not 
die; ) but becauſe he would have the whole matter broughr to light; 
partly, that Saul's Folly might be chaſtiſed, when he ſaw what Dan. 
ger it had brought upon his Eldeſt and "Excellent Son ; partly, thar 
7onathan's Innocency might be cleared ; and partly, ro ſtabjith the 
Authority of Kings and Rulers, and the Obedience which Subje&s 
owe to all their lawful Commands. 


43 Then Saul ſaid to Jonathan, Teil mg what thou 
haſt done. And Jonathan told him, and ſaid, 1 did 
but tafte a little honey with the end of the rod that was 
in mine hand, and lo, I muſt die ». 

, n I am Sentenced to Death for it ; which is hard meaſure. He 
bad another Anſwer, That he knew not of his Father's Command : 
but that being ſaid. before, v. 27. it was needleſs here to repeat 


It. . 

44 And Saul anſwered, - God do ſo, and more al- 
ſo o : for thou ſhalt ſurely die p, Jonathan, 

o From this, and other like expreflions of Sau!s, ſome gather that 
he was exceeding prone to the vice of Swearing and Curſing. 
p Strange perverſenets! He who was ſo indulgent, as to pare WiC- 
ked 4gag, Chap. 15. is now ſo ſevere as to deſtroy his own worthy 
Son : he that could ealily diſpenſe wich Goa's Righreous and Rea- 
ſonable Command, will not bear the violation of his own raſh and 
fooliſh Command ; becauſe his own Authority and Power is concer- 
ned in this, and only God's in the other. 


45 And the people ſaid unto Saul, Shall Jonathan 
die, who hath wrought this great ſalvation in Iſrael ? 
God forbid : * as the LORD liveth, there ſhal not one 
hair of his head fall to the ground : for he hath wroughr 


with God 4 this day. $0 the people reſcued Jonathan, 
that he died not. 

q 7.e. In concurrence with God,or by God's he'p he had wrought 
this Salvation. God is fo far from being offended with Jonathan, as 


thou apprehendeſt, that he hath graciouſly owned and afliſted him 
in the great ſervice of this day. | 


46 Then Saul went up from following the Phili- 
ſtines » ; and the Philiſtines went to their own 
place. | 

r Partly,becauſe he was diſcouraged by God's refuſing to Anſwer 


him, and partly, becauſe þis deliys had given them occalion to ſe- 
cure themſclves. 


F 2 Sam. 
14. I 4» 
I Kings 
LF. 52. 


S4MUELKE 


| Tranſlate theſe words, Exod. 17. 16. whilſt they ſtruck at that Peg 


| | Chap. XV 
47 4 So Saul took the kingdom /over Iſrael, and 
ought againſt all his enemies on every ſide, againſt 
Moab, and againſt the children * of Ammon, and a-* Chap. 
gainft Edom, and againſt the kings of Zobah z, and 1 1b 
againſt the Philiſtines : and whitherſoever he turned 
himſelf, he vexed them w. | 
J 7.e. Recovered it, and reſumed the adminifiration of it, afrer 
he had in a manner loſt it ; partly, by Samuel's Sentence, Chap. 13. 
14. and partly, by the Phil;fines, who had almoſt turned him our 
of it.. Bur now being encouraged by this Succeſs, he returns to the 
exerciſe of his Kingly Office, * Which lay not far from Damaſ- 
cus, See 2 Sam. $8.5, u Heb. He condemned them, he treated them 
Iike wicked People, and Enemies to God and his People : or, he Pun 
niſbed them. _ | 
48 And heſ] gathered an hoſt, and * ſmote the A- 


þ - Or, 
malekites x,and delivezed Iſrael out of the hand of them Hos 
that ſpoiled themy mightily... 
x Which is here mentioned only in the genera), but is particular. * C115 94 
ly deſcribed in the nexs Chapter. 


49 Now the ſons of Saul were Jonathan, and Tſhui 

), and Melchiſhua : and the names of his two daugh- 

cers were theſe ; the name of the firſt-born, Merab, and 

the name of the younger, Michal. 

y Called alſo 4binadab, Chap. 31. 2. and 1 Chron. 8. 33. I1ſbb:ſbeth, 
Saul's other Son, is here omitted, becauſe he intended ro mention 
only thoſe of his Sons who went with him into the Battels here men- 
tioned, and who were afterwards ſlain with him. 

Fo And the name of Saul's wife as Ahinoam, the 
daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name of the captain of 
his hoſt was Abner, the ſon of Ner, Sauls uncle. 

51 And Kiſh was the father of Saul, and Ner the fa- 
ther of Abner was the fon of * Abjel. - Chad 

52 And there was ſore war apainſt the Philiſtines al! 
the days of Saul : and when Saul ſaw any ſtrong man, 
or any valiant man, * he took himunto him.s. 

& Into his Service, or Army. 

Af WAP. XY. 

Samuel [eirneth Saul to deftroy the Amalekites : His Army, t——, He fa 
vourerh the Kenites : Spareth Jgag, and the beft of the Spoil : God rejets 
Saul from being King, 6——11. This Samuel de(lares to Saul : He com- 
menaeth, excuje5h, at laſt humbleth himſelf, x2 25. Samuel is un+ 
moved herewith : His Mantle Rent is a ſign to Saul ef his Ruine, Gad cannot 
lye, 26 29. Samuel killeth Agag : Goeth from Saul, and mourne:h 
flr him, 30 35. | 

Amuel alſo ſaid unto Saul, * The LORD ſent me to 

anoint thee zo be king over his people a, over Iſra- 


* Cha. $8.1 bo 


* Cha. 916, 


*E cr .8. 
el : now therefore hearken b thou unto the voice of the Wa 
LORD chy God. | 20+ 


s The Lord made thee King, and therefore thou art highly obli- 
ged :o ſerve and obey him. þ Thou haſt committed one Errour al- 
r-ady, for which God hath ſeverely rebuked and threatned : now 
rh:refore make amends for thy former Errour, and regain God's Fa- 
vour by thy exa& Obedience to what he now commands. | 

2 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, I remember :h 
which Amaiek did to Iſrael e, * how he laid waic for 


him in the way when he came up from Egypt 4. 

c I ſcem to kave forgotten, but now I will ſhew that I remem- 
ber, and now will revenge thoſe old Injuries done 400 years ago, 
which ngw I will puniſh in their Children : which was the more 
juſt, becauſe they continued in their Parents-cruel Praftices ; below, 
V. 33. 4 When he was newly come our of cruel and long Bondage, 
and wasnow weak, and weary, and faint, and hungry, Deus. 25. 18. 
and therefore it was Barbarous and Inhuman, inſtead of char pity 
whicheven Nature prompred them to afford, to add affliction to the 
afflicted; it was alto horrid Impiety to fight againſt God himſe!F, 
and to I:fr up heir Hand 1n a manner againſt the Lord's Throne, as forme 


ple which God had brought forth in ſo ſtupend:ious and miraculous 
a way. : 

3 Now go and ſmite Amalek, and utterly deſtroy 
all that they have e, and ſpare them not f ; bur ſlay 
both man and woman, infant and ſuckling g, ox and 
beep, camel and aſs þ. | | 

e Both Perſons and Goods, kill all thatlive, and conſume all things 
withour life, for I will have no Name nor Remnant of that People 
whom long ſince I have Curſed and Devoted to utter Deſtruftion. 
f Shew no Compaſſion or Favour to any of them. The fame thing 
repeated to prevent miſtake, and oblige Sau! to the exa& perfor- 
mance hereof ; or to leave him without excuſe, in caſe of neglect. 
g For their Parents Crime and Puniſhment: which was not unjuſt. 
becauſe God is rhe Supreme Lord and Giver of Life, and can require 
his own when he pleaſeth ; Infants alſo are born in fin, Pſal. 51. 5. 
and therefore liable to God's Wrath, Eph. 2. 3. and to Death, Roz. 
5.12, 14. Their Death alſo was rather a Mercy than a Curſe ro 
them, as being the occation of preventing the vaſt increaſe of their 
Sin and Puniſhment. þ Which being all made for Man's Benefit, ir 
is not ſtrange nor unjuſt, if they ſuffer with him, and for him, and 
for the inſtruttien of Mankind. _. 

4 And Saul called che people together, and num- 
bred them in Telaim, twe hundred chouſand foortmen, 
and ten thouſand men of ſudah &. | 

k Whoare particularly Noted here, as alſo Chat, 11. 8. either as 
Sele& Perſons of extraordinary Strength and Courage : or to com- 
mend that Tribe, which though the Kingdom had ben promiſed 
to their own Tribe, yet were forward in ſerving and obeying aKing 
of another, and that a far meaner Tribe. : . ; 

5 And Saul came to a city of Amalek 7, and || Iaidyg, g,... 


__ zz in the valley. 


| 


ir Ki 1 ble from 
where their King was, a5 is proba 
' by 10me pre- 
| Jing to draw them forth cf their Ciry by 
AY Nike at of Foſbus, Foſh 7- and bn L - grow. ef to an 
| io their City : which hapily they d1d, rnuug 
ET anted, it +0 not worth whale to mention all the minute 


--cunttances of ſuch marters. 4. 
> And Saul ſaid unto the Kenites #, Go, depart, 


7 ft I de- 
2t ye down from among the Amalckires, Ic 
Tp you with them : for ye ſhewed kindneſs p to all 
the children of Iſrael , when they came up - a 
Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Ama- 


lekites. 
n A people deſcending from, or nearly related unto Jethro, why 
anciently dwelt in Rocks near the Amalekites, Numb: 24% 21» an 
afterwards ſome of them dwelt in Judah, Juages 1: 16. mar Fo is 
probable they removed, ( which dwelling in Tents they wa _ 
fily do) and retired to their old habiratio:;, becauſe of the Wars anc 
Troubles wherewith Judah was annoyed. p Some of your as. 1” 
tors did ſo, Exod: 18: 12. Numb: 10: 3I- and for their ſakes all - 
you ſhal fare the better. T7 were not Guilty of that fin for whic 
alk is now to be deſtroyed. : ; 
'S And Saul ſmote the Amalekites from Havilah «nz# 


Chap. RV. 


i Their chief City, 


F311 MM Oo 


f| God only was concerned. g 


|; 


_ 


FL, 
of the ſheep, ard of the oxen, to ſacrifice unto the 
LORD g thy God h, and the reſt we have utterly de. 
{ſtroyed. 
f 1. e- The People. Thus, af-er the manner of all Hypocritec 
he excuſeth himſelf, and lays the blame upon the P. Na, 
they could not do it without his privity and conſent ; and he ſhou!d 
have uſed his Power and Authority to over-rule them for Gog's {:ke 

as he had done formerly for his own ſake. But the truth is, he was 
zealous for his own Honour and Intereſt, but 1: ke. warm where 
It is not likely that this was his «ng 
the peoples Deſign;bur this henow pretends,and aſcribes tha to hig 
piety, which was indeed the effe& of his Impiety and Avzrice; 
h wW hom thou loveſt and ſervefſt. and therefore muſt needs be pleaied 
with our pious reſpe&s to him and his ſervice. 

16 Then Samuelfſaid unto Saul, Stay, and I will tel} 
thee what the LORD hath ſaid unto me this night 
And he ſaid unto him, Say on. 

17 And Samuel ſaid, When thou waft little in thine 
own ſight 7, waſff thou not made the head of the tribes 
of — and the LORD anointed thee king over If- 
raclt 

z 1. e, Modeſt, humble, and ſubmiſſive, as r Sam: 9: 21. and 10: 


thou comeſt to * Shur q, that « over againſt Egypt: 
:. e. From one end of their Countrey to the other ; he ſmote all 
he met with : but a great number of th:m fled away upon the 
noiſe of his coming, as is uſual 1n ſuch caſes, and ſecured themſelves 
in other places, until the Storm was over, when they returned a= 
gain: of whom we read beforey Chap: 133 6s and 14:2% _ 
8 And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites a- 
» Se: Chap: live r, and * utterly deſtroyed all the people / with the 
edge of the ſword. Þ: : 

» Whom Sau! ſpared, either out of fooliſh pity for the goodlineſs 
of his perſon, which Joſephus Notes: ory for his reſpe& to his Roy- 
al Majeſty, in the preſervation of which he thought himſelf concer- 
ned : or, for the Glory of his Triumph : Compare v. 12. To 
wit, the Body of the People, but not every individual Perſon, as 
hath been ſhewed. Univerſzl Particles are commonly thus under- 
ſtood, as is confeſſed. 

9 "But Saul and the people # ſpared Agag,and the beſt 
of the ſheep, and of the oxen, and || of the fatlings, and 
the lambs, and all that 2y8s good #, and would not ut- 
terly deſtroy them : but every thing :hat was vile, and 
refuſe, that they deſtroyed utterly x, 

+ The one propoſed to do fo, and the other conſented to it, and 
ſo both were guilty. s Which. it is more than probable they re. 
ſerved for their own uſe, rather than for Sacrifice ; becauſe they 
knew God would not accept a Sacrifice contrary to his own com- 
mand. x Thus they obeyed God only ſo faras they could withour 
inconvenience to themſelves ; they deſtroyed only whar was nor 
worth keeping, nor fit for their uſe. 

10 © Thencame the word of the LORD unto Samu- 
el, ſaying, 

11 It © repenteth me y that I have ſet up Saul 7o be 
king : for he is turned back from following me, and 
harh not + performed my commandments. And it 
grieved Samuel, and he cried unto the LORD all 


night 2. 


* Gen: 
IG; 7. q 
that 


39- I» 


[| Or,of 752 
ſecond ſort. 


F 2 Sam: 
24: 16, 
Tt Heb: 
confirmed. 


Counſels, and therefore cannot be in God who is unchangeable, 
moſt Wile, and molt Bleſſed; bur it isaſcr1bed to God in ſuch caſes, 
when men give God cauſe to repent,and when God alters his courſe 
and-method of dealing, and tiears a perſon as if he did indeed re- 
ent of all the kindneſs he had ſhewed to him. z To implore his 
pardoning mercy for Saul, and for the People - ſo far was he from 
rejoycing in their Calamiries, as an envious and ſelf-ſecking perſon 
would have done. : 
1> And when Samuel roſe early to meet Saul in the 
morning, it was told Samuel, ſaying, Saul came to 
Carmel a, and behold, he fer him up @ Þ place 6, 


and is gone about, and paſſed on, and gone down to 
Gilgal. 1 HD 

s Not mount Carmel, of which Joſb. 12: 22. but another Moun- 
tain or Town in the Tribe of Judah; of which ſee Joſh: 15: 55, 
þ ji, e. A Monument or Trophy of his Viftory, as the ſame Hebrew 
word is uſed, 2 Sam: 183 18. And this may be here Noted by way 
of Cenſure, That he ſex ir up not to God's honour, but #o himſelf, 
je &, to his own praiſe; which he minded in the firſt place, and 
afrerwards went to Gilgal, as it here follows, to offer ſacrifice ro 
God. 

12 And Samuel came unto Saul, and Saul ſaid unto 
him, Bleſſed be thou of the LORD c; TI have ÞF per- 
formed the commandment of the LORD 9. 

c I thank thee, and I beg that God would bleſs thee, for ſend- 
ing me upon this Employment, and giving me this opportunity of 
manifeſting my obedience ro God. 4 To wit, for the main and 
ſubſtance of it, to wir, the Exrirparion of that wicked People: for 
be rhought rhe ſparing of 4gag and the Cattel very inconfiderable in 
the caſe; though indeed ic was expreſly contrary ro God's com- 
mand : but Self-inrereſt made him exceeding partial in his own 
Cauſe : or clſe like a bold Hypocrite, he prerends that for his part 
he had obeyed God ; reſolving, it ſeems, ro caſt the blame upon the 
People, as he did. ; 

14 And Samuel ſaid, What meaneth then this bleat- 


ing of the {beep in mine ears, and the lowing of the 
oxen which I hear e ? 

e How can this Evidence of Guilt conſiſt with the profeſſion of 
thy Innocency- : 

' 15 And Saul faid, They f have brought them 
from the Amalekirtes : 


4+ Heb: 
hand. 


T Heb: 


confirmed, 


Repentance properly Notes grief of heart, and change of 


for che people ſpared che belt | 


22. Whereby he implies, thatnow he was grown proud, and ſtubs 
born, and impudent, borh re commit fin, and juſtific it. | 


18 And the LORD ſent thee on a journey, and 
ſaid, Go, and utterly deſtroy the ſinners & the Ama- 
_ and fight againſt them, 
UImeo, 


k So called by way of Eminency,as that word is uſed,Gen: 13:13, 
Matthz 9: 10. Fibn 9: 24, 31. 


the LORD, but di1ſt flye upon the ſpoil, and didfſt e. 
vil in the fight of the LORD /? 


Prey for thy elf. 
20 AndSaul ſaid unto Samuel, 


| king of Amalek », and have utterly deſtroyed tize Ama» 
lekites, | 

m Hz addeth Obſtinacy and Impenitency to his Crime, and 
{tities his Fa&, though he hath nothing of any Moment 
wht he {aid vefore. 


God pleaferh, and as thou thinkeſt fir. 


en, the chick of che things which ſhould have been 
uccerly deſtroyed o, 
Gcd in Gilgal. 

0 Hev: The chief of the devoted things: which being devoted to Des 
ſtcuttion, I choughr 1t moſt proper to deſtroy them by Way of Sas 
crifice to God. Bur God hath commanded Saul himſeif ro ſmite and 
ſlay all upon che place, above, werſe 3 


. 


22 And Samuel faid, * Hath the LORD as great de- 
light 1n burnt-offerings and ſacrifices, as in obeying 
the voice of the LORD ? Behold, * to obey is bet- 


| rams 7, 

.> Becauſe Obedience to God is a Moral Duty, conſtantly and in- 
| ditp-nſavly neccflary ; but Sacr:ifi.e is but a Ce:emonial Inſtitution, 
| ſometimes unncelfary, as it was in the Wilderneſs ; and tometimes 
| finful, wh-n it is offered by a. p>llutred hand, or in an nreguſar 

manner. Therefore thy grois Ditcb:dience 10 God's ex preſs Cons 
mand, 1s not to be compenſated with Sacrifice. 9 i. e. To obcy 
as hearing 1t ofc uied in Scripture. » Than the choice part cf all 
; The Sacrifice, ro wit, the Fat, which was appropriated to Gcd, 


It. 
23 For rebellion / as the ſin of + witchcraft z, and 
ſtubborpnelſs « # as * iniquity and idolatry x : becauſe 
thou haſt rejected the word of the LORD, he hath alſo 
{ rejected thee from being king y. 
J i» e. Ditobedience to God's expreſs Precept, which was Sau!'s 
caſe fr Is, though not ſo great, yet as inexculcable and impud<cnt 
; a fin, as Witchcraft; as plainly Condemned, and as certainly De« 
; ſtruQive and Damnable. &« Either, wilful and preſumptuous ſin 
! whereby a man violently breaks looſe from God's Command, and res 
ſiſts his Authority : Or rather, Perſeverance or Contumacy in ſin 
juſtifying it, and pleading for it, which was Sau!'s preſent Crime: 
, x Or, the Iniquity of Idolatry; this being an Hendiadis ; as Tuagement 
and Juſtice, Dent. 16; 18. is put for the Judgement of Juſtice, or Juſt Judges 
vient, Or, Idolatry ( for fo the Hebrew word ven ſignifies, as Jer: 
107 15. Hoſe 48 153 and 1045, Compare with 1 Kings 12: 29. ) even 
the Teraphim, which is here mentioned as one of the worſt kinds of 
IdolJatry. y t e. Hath pronounced the Sentence of RejeCtion : for 
that he was not attually Rejefted or Depoſed by God, plainly ap« 
pears, becauſe not only the People, but even David, after this 
owned him as King 3 and Samuel, at Saul's deſire, did honour him; 
i- e own him as King, before the People, wv. 3o. * y 
| 24 4 And Saul faid unto Samuel, T have finned z: 
for I have tranſgreſſed thecommandment of the LORD, 


and thy words « ; becauſe I feared the people 5, and 
| obeyed their voice. 
z Which confeſſion proceeded not from true Repentance, but 
from the ſence of his great Danger, and from a deſire of recalling 
that dreadful Senrence denounced againſt him. # i. e. The Com= 
mandmens of the Lord delivercd ro me by thy words. Another 
HendiA8ive 


19 Wherefore then didſt thou not obey the voice of 


{ Who cannot be deceived by thy fair profeſſions of Religion, bue 
knows very well, that thou didit not ſeck Sacrifices for God, but 


Yea, I have obeyed 
the voice of the LORD », and have gone the way 
which the LORD ſent me, and have brought Agag the 


JU 
| to ſay, but 
| So he gives Samucl the Jye, and refl:&s upon 
him, as one that aad fiſly Accuſed him. » To be dealt with as 


21 But the peopie rook of the ſpoil, ſheep and ox- 


to ſacritice unto the LORD thy 


|ter than facritice p: and to hearken 9, than the fac of 


; Levis; 3: 16, Whereas the Offcrer might partake of other parts of 


until + they be col 4p... 


£07Jumg 


them, 


*Pfal:06 


9-Ifa; 1:1 
Feel. 54 
Hoſ. 66 
Marz$% 
and Q/ 1] 
and 1. |, 


f Heb! 
aivinatith 
* Selb 


Chap, Xy | (hp 


*1] 
11. 30 
*Ch.28 
1 King 
JI, 


} Hel 
Amgl, 


 *®Nu 
T4, 4 


Teb:tl 
Jung 


(al: tact 
[ru 
Eccl. $4, 
of. 6.6 
[ats$:1h 
1 0! I} 
1d 13. 4, 


Heb! 
wingtin 
Sie I 
G 3 , Hil 


xy (Chap. XV- 


. 


T4 1 Kins 
II. JO» 
*Ch.28.17. 
1 King-11, 
JI, 


| Or, eter« 


| mty, ory 


| 


| vittory. 
| Num-23- 


| 19.2 Tim» 


: 
: 


2: 13 
Titi I 2» 


| as he might vaivly imagine, becauſe he had ſaved them from their 


} Heb, of gag the king | of the Amalekites: and Agag came unto 
Anal him delicately o. 


| * Numb, 
14, 45, 


fore many Princes have uſed * for this very reaſon. But, faith hey 
God needs no ſuch Artifices ; he can do whatſoever he pleaſeth by 
his Abſolute Power, and harn no need to uſe lyes to accompliſh his 


I. 


yr pe have broken forth into a Mutiny or Rebellion, had 
1 done otherwiſe. Burt how little he feared the people, may be ſeen 
by 1 Sam: 11:7. and 14: 24+ But this was a falſe Cauſe © nor doth 
he acknowedge the true Cauſe, which was his Covetoulneſs, and be- 
cauſe he did not fear God. 


25 Now therefore, T pray thee, pardon my ſin bt 


and turn again with me 4, that I may worſhip the 


RD e. 

I thy great Intereſt with God to obtain the pardon of my lin. 
Or, do thou pardon my fin againſt thee : -for he had ſinned not | 
only againſt God, but againſt Samuel alſo, as Gods prophet 3 and 
therefore needed a pardon beth from God and man. «d To Gilgal, | 
whence Saul was gone forth to meet Samuel ; and Samuel is here faid 
to turn again to Gilgal : not properly, for he had not now been 
there 2 bur by way of Concomitancy, becauſe he accompanied Saul, 
who was come thence, and returned thicher : See the like Expreſſi- 
on, Ruth 1: 10, 22. and 2:6. e That I may offer further Sacrifices 
to God ; partly, to praiſe him for the paſt Vittory; and partly, 
ro implore his Mercy, and the t-king off of my ſinand puniſhment, 
This was 2 politick device of Sauls ; ThatSamuel might at leaſt ſeem 
to countenance his Deſign, in reſerving the Catrel for ſacrifice: 
which Samuzsl ſeeing, refuled to do ite Heb: and 1 will worſhip the Lord, 
i. e. I will ſeek his Pardon and Favour. 


26 And Samuel ſaid unto Saul,I will not return with 
thee f-: for thou haſt reje&ted the word of the LORD, 
and the LORD hath reje&ed thee from being king over 
Iſrael. 


f This was no lye, though he afrerwards returned, becauſe he 
ſpoke what he meant ; lis words and intentions agreed together, 
though afterwards he ſaw reaſon to change his Intentions Com- 
pare Gen? 19: 24 3- Which may relieve many perplexcd Corſciences, 
who think themſelves obliged to do,whar they have ſaid they would 
do, though they ſee juit cauſe to change their minds. ; 

27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, * he laid 
hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent. 

28 And Samuel faid unto him, * The LORD hath 
rent the kingdom of Iſrael from thee g this day,and hath 
given it to a neighbour of thine þb, that js better than 


thou. 

g Samuel makes uſe of the emergent occaſion, as a ſign, to figni- 
fie and confirm his former Predition. þ Either, another Man : or 
another 1/raelite: for the word Neighbour is uſed both ways; or 
rather, one of the Neighbouring Tribe, even Judah, whoſe Inheri- 
tance did oot only joyn to that of Benjamin, but was partly mixed 
with 1t- ; 

29 And alſo the || ſtrength of Iſrael 5 * will not 
lie k, nor repent /: for he 5s not a man that he ſhould 
repent. | 

: So he calls God here; partly, to ſhew the reaſon why God nei- 
ther will nor can lye; becauſe lying is a weakneſs,and proceeds from 
the ſence of a Mans weakneſs, becauſe he cannot many times ac- 
compliſh bis Deſign wichour Lying and Diſſfimulation ; which there- 


Will « partly, to ſhew that Iſrael ſhould be no loſer by Sauls Toſs, 


Enemics on every ſide, Chap: 14: 47. For nor Saul, but God, was 
the Strength and Prote&or of 1ſrae/, and he would continue to ſave 
them when Saul was loſt and gone; and partly, to aſſure Saul that 


S 4 MDVU-E I. 


4 Who, as thou knoweſt, are ſet upon miſchief, and vindication of Gods juſtice, and to ſhew, that although God did at 


God would execute this Threatning,becaute he wanted not ſtrength 
to doit, and none could hinder him in it. 1 1.e. Nor change his 
Counſel; which alſo is an effe(t of weakneſs and imperfeGion, ei- 
ther of Wiſdom or Power. 
30 Then he faid,T have ſinned ; yet honour. me now, 
T pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before 
Iſrael »», and turn again with me, that I may worſhip 
the LORD thy God. | 
m Here he plainly diſcovers his Hypocriſie, and the thue motive 
of this and his former Confeſſion ; he was not ſolicitous for the Fa- 
your of God, but for his Honour and Power with 1rael. 
x So Samuel turned again after Saul », and Saul 
worſhipped the LORD. 
n Not to Worſhip the Lord with him, for that he did not ; and 
therefore it is here mentioned that Saul only MWorſbipped the Lord ; but 
. for two other reaſons ; Firſt, That the People might not upon pre- 
tence of this Sentence of Rejection, immediately withdraw all Re- 
ſpe& and Obedience tro their Sovereignz whereby they would both 
have ſinned againſt God, and have been as Sheep without a Shep- 
herd. Secondly, That he might reftific Sauls Errour, and execute 
Gods Judgement upon gag. 


32 I Then ſaid Samuel, Bring ye hither to me' A- 


And Agag ſaid p, Surely the bitter- 
neſs of death is paſt 9. 

o Or, in Delights ; or, in his Ornaments ; 1. e. He came not like an 
Offender, expeCting the Senrence of Death ; but in that Garb and 
Geſture which became his Quality. p Or, for Agag ſaid: This be- 
ing the reaſon why he came ſo» q I who have eſcaped Death from 
the hands of a Warlike Prince in the fury of Battel, ſhal certainly 
never ſuffer Death from an old Prophet in time of Peace. 


33 And Samuel faid, * As thy ſword hath made 
women childleſs r, ſo ſhal thy mother be childleſs a- 
mong women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces / be- 
fore the LORD * in Gilgal. 


y Whereby it appears ; that he was a cruel Tyrant, and guilty 
ghir 


be not related elſewhere» And this ſeems to be added for the fuller 


of many bloody Actions, and that towards Gods peeple, thou 


Chap. XVI. | 


this time remember and revenge a Crime committed by this Mans 
Anceſtors 400 years ago, yet he did not puniſh” an Innccent Son 
for his Fathers Crimes, but one that allowed and perſiſted in the 
ſame evil Courſes. { This he did by divine Inſtin&, and in purſa- 
ance of Gods expreſs and particular Comma':d, above, v. 3. which 
being ſinfully neglefted by Saul, is now executed by Samuel. See the 
like Example, 1 Kings 18; 40- But theſe are no Precedents for pri- 
vate Perſons to t:ke the Sword of Juſtice into their hands. For we 
muſt live by the Laws of God, and not by extraordinary Exam- 
ples. # Either, before the Ark, which, it ſeems, Saul carried with 
him in this, as he did, in his former Expedition, Chap: 14: 18. or, 
before Gods Altar : or in the publick Afembly. 
34 4 Then Samuel went to Ramah, and Saul went 
up to his houſe to * Gibeah of Saul.  *Chanrr.g 
35 And Samuel came no more to ſee Saul « until the 
day of his death : nevertheleſs, Samuel mourned for 
Saul x: and the LORD repented that he had made Saul 
king over Iſrael. | 
% 1. &« To vifit him, either in token of Reſpe& or Friendſhip 2 
or to ſeek Counſel from God for him, or to give Counſel to him» 
Seeing 1s put for Y:ſiting here, and 2 Kings 8: 29. Otherwiſe he did 
ſee h:m afterwards, Chap? 19: 24. Though indeed it was nor Samuel 
thar came thither with deſign to ſee Sauly which is implied in the 
Phraſe here ; but Saul went hither ro ſee Samuel. and taat acciden= | 
tally. » Partly for Suls fake, whoſe ſad condition he lamented :? "| 
and partly for Jſraels ſake,whoſe Eſtate he feared might by this means 
be doubrful and dangerous. _ 
CHA ÞP, XVI. 
Samuel is (ent by God ; who, under pretente of a Sacrifice for fear of Saul, 
cometh to Bethlehem : ſantifieth Feſſe and his ſons, 1 -——— 5, His 
humane Judgement in chooſing El:ab the eldeſt ſon is reprovea, 6, 7. 
God had choſen David the youngeſt to be King in Sauls place, 8 12» 
Samuel anoint:th himy and the ſpirit of God cometh upon him 3 But de= 
parteth from Saul: And an evil ſpirit cometh upon him, 13, 14. He 
Jends for David to quiet it : His Praiſe : Saul loweth him, and maketh 
him his Armour-Bearer 3 He playeth before Saul when the evil ſpirit diſe 
quieted him, 15 —_ 
Nd che LORD faid unto Samuel, How long wilt 
thou mourn for Saul «, ſeing I have rejeted him 
from reigning over lfrael b ? Fill thine horn with . 
oylc, and go, I will ſend chee to Jeile the Bethiche- 
mite : for I have provided me + a King 4 among his fHeb- 
ſons. lhanen 
s And pray for his Reſtitution, which the following words im- 
ply thar he did. 6 The manifeſtation of my peremprory wi'lſhould 
make thee ſubmit ro my pleaſure. c Which was uſcd in the Liau- 
guration of Kings, as Chap: 10: 1» and 1 Kings 1; 39. But bers it is 
uſed in rhe Deſignation of a King, though David was not aQtua'ly 
made King by it, bur ſtill remained a Subje&, as is evident from 
Chap: 24: 6. And the reafon of this Anticipation was, partly the 
comfort of Samuel, and other good Men, againſt their great fears 
in caſe of Sauls Death, of which they expetted every day to hear : 
and partly the aſſurance of Davids Title, which othe: wiſe would 
have been very doubtful. For the prevention of which dcubrs, it 
was very meet, that the ſame Perſon and Prophet w ho had Ano:n= 
red Saul, might now upon Gods rejeftion cf Saul, Anoiut David te 
ſucceed him upon his Death 3; and becauſe Samuel! was now nor far 
frum his Death, and was to die before Saul, it was fi: that Davids 
Anointing itould be haſtned and done before irs proper time. d This 
Phraſe is very Emphatical, and implies the difference bet een ti:is 
and the former King. Saul was a King of the Peoples providine,- * 
he was the produRt of their inordinate and ſinful deſices; rhey deſired 
him for themſelves, and for their own glory and ſafety, as they ſap= 
poſed : bur this is a King of my own providing, one that I have ſpied 
out, one of that Tribe to which I have allotted the Kingdomy Gen: 
49: 10. A King for me; not one to gratifie the Peoples ceſires, but 
to fulfil all my Will, as is ſaid, Aﬀs 13; 22. and to ſerve my Glory. 
Or, my King 3 the Hebr.w Phraſe, #0 me, or for me, beitig commonly 
uſed for the word mine. 


2 And Samuel faid, How canT go e ? if Saul hear zr, 
he will kill me. And the LORD faid, Take an heifer 


+ with thee, and ſay, I am come to ſacrifice ts the 
LORD f. | 


e To wit, Safely ? A Queſtion which ſeems to ſavour of Hu- 
man frailty ; for he ſhould have ſtrongly believed that God who 
had ſet him upon the Work,would carry him through ir. f Which 
he uſed ofc to do, ſometimes in one place, and ſometimes in a« 
nother, that ſo he might encourage and keep up the Worſhip of 
God in all of them. This was one cauſe, though not the only 
cauſe of his coming : nor was he obliged to declare all the cauſes 
of 


+ Heb. is 
thine hand. 


it. ; 

2 And call Jeſſe to the ſacrifice g, and I will ſhew 
thee what thou ſhalt do: and thou ſhalt anoint unco 
me 4im whom I name & unto thee. | 

g i. e Invite him to the Feaſt, which after the manner, was made 
of the Fleſh of the Sacrifice: and it belonged to Samuel, as the Ofs 


ferer of the Sacrifice, to invite whom he pleaſed. þ i. e. Whom 1 
{hal deſcribe, as it were by name. 


4 And Samuel did that which the LORD ſpake,and 
came to Bethlehem : and the elders of the town trem- 


bled at his F coming 3, and faid, Comeſt thou peace- 
ably k ? 

5 Partly, becauſe it was ſtrange and unexpeRed to them, this 
being but an obſcure Town, Mic ak 5« 2. and remote from Samuel, 
and therefore they juſtly thought there was ſome extraordinary rea- 
ſon for it ; and their guilty Conſciences made them fear that he 
came to denounce ſome dreadful and particular Judgment of God - 
upon them : and partly, leſt Saul, whoſe heart was eſtranged from, 
and incenſed againſt Samuel, ſhould upon this occafion conceive a 


tHeb. * 


iealouſie of chem, and a diſpleaſure againſt chem. k Heb- inor 
| 2 4A with 


ES 


| Chap he | t to thy ſelf. Comeſt th luntarily, or | 
WH! virh peace; either firſt, tot elf. Comeſt thou vo , 
; "ih bonne _ Rave of Soul? Or, Secondly to us. m__ _ 
Bt. with no Evil Tidings ro us, either from God, er from Sau ” < 
WH Hebrew Phraſe, comef? thou in Peace, being as much as to ſay ( in our 
| [48 Phraſe) « al well ? 
| lj And he faid, Peaceably 
{1408 unto the LORD : fſand&ifie your ſelves }, and come 
Wl with me to the ſacrifice »: and he ſanctified Jeſſe and 


his ſons, and called them to the facrifice ». 

1 Prepare your ſelves in the manner ex;refſed, Exod: - Bu I 5; 
# Hebt tn the ſacrifice 3 is e. joyn with me in this att of \ - ip 
ping God, and off:ring this ſacrifice, rhereby to give jar $ 4: 
the Bleſſings you have received from him, aid to pray for what *s 
want. » It ſeems evident, that there was ſomething ey = 
in Jeſſe's Invitation. For Firſt, Both he and his ſons were oor 
whereas the others are only.Inviced for their own Perſons. Rn - 
ly, The different pbraſe here uſed, that he ſanFified theſe, when : 
only bad the other ſan#ify themſelves; argues 4 ſingular cage -_ 
agency of Samuel in their ſanRificarion : ( unleſs we ſhould as 
He ſanftified them, 15 no moro but that he cauſed them to be ſanfifie n 
that is, theſe in particular amongſt others: ) Whuch makes it pro- 
bable, that the reſt were only co joyn with him 1n the a& of _ 
ficing ; bur theſe, and only theſe, were Invited to Feaſt upon the 
Remainders of the ſacrifice ; | which Feaſt is here called a [acrifices 
As it is above werſe 3- And the only inconvenience of this Inter- 
pretation is, that the word ſacrifice 15 taken 1n different ſenſes in the 
ſame Verſe, which is no -unutual thing. See Mazthi 8: 22. And 
this difference may poſlibly be intimated by the differing prepoſiti- 
ons prefixed to the fame word, the firlt being Bazzabach, avd the 
latter Lazz«bach. Howſoever, that on'y Jeſſe and his 10ns were pre- 
ſent at the Feaſt, may ſeem probable, trom Samuel's delign of Pri- 
vacy, and from the following Relation. 

6 4 Andit came to paſs, when they were come o, 


* . Chron, that he looked on * Eliab, and ſaid, Surely the LORDS 


27:18. anointed 5s before him p. : 

hu, o When the moſt of Feſ7's ſons were come, either to the place of 
the Feaſt, or to ſame other place near it, appointed for this private 
Diſcourſe, whither they were to come before they went to the Feaſt. 
It muſt allo be underitood, that S-mrel had acquainted Jeſſe with his 
Defign, which is eaſily gathered our of th= Context, and needed not 
be expreſſed. p i. e. Is in this place where God is now preſent. 
Forit is obſervable, that not only the ſacrifice is ſaid ro be offered, 
but even the Feaſt upon the remainders of it is ſaid to be earen be- 
fore the Lord, Deut: 12: 7. 1. e- before or near his altar, where God 
-wasprefent in a ſpecial manner. ind « 
ſeems to be this, That 7eſe brought nor all his ſons together, but 
made one after another to come to the place, and to paſs before 
Samuel, who ſtood before the Lord, in ſome place near che Alrar, 
-that-this great buſineſs might be managed with more ſolemnity. 
Arid Eliab being the Perſon now before Samuel, is ſaid to be now be- 
Firs the.Lord, But whatſoever the ground of this Phraſe 1s, this is 
'certain.and confeſſed, that this is his meaning, This I take t» be 
the Perſon whom I am ſent to Anoint : wherein yet he was greatiy 
miſtaken, as other Prophets ſometimes were,whey they haſtily ſpake 
their own thoughts, before they had conſulted God in the cale, as 
's Sam! 7: 3. ; ARS 
- But the LORD faid q unto Samuel, Look not on 
is countenance, or on the height of his ſtature r, be- 
'cauſe I have refuſed him:for 1he LORD ſeeth not as man 
F Heb: Ze: ſeeth ; For man looketh on the | outward appearance 
-,*bur-the LORD looketh on the * hearr e. 
* r Chron.”,,, py ſecret Inſpiration: r Whereby thou waſt once deceived in 
28:9. Pſal:, c..1, Chap: 10:23, 24. and therefore ſhouldeit not now be deceived 
7* 9. JEr: o ſeeond time- f M<n value Men by their outlides. # God efteems 
In: 20. #nd.gf rien by the goodneſs of their hearts, and hath now proceeded by 

men by the B 
17:10. and;yht Rule in the choice of a King, and would have done ſo before, 
207 12+ :"5Fthe"' People's finful deſires had not provoked him to give them a 
"bad King: 
+ :8:/Then Jeſſe called * Abinadab, and made him paſs 
before Samuel: and he ſaid, Neither hath the LORD 
choſen this.: © 
29, Then Jefle made Shammah « to paſs by : and he 
: ;faid,; Neither :hath the LORD choſen this. 
: u Called alſo Shimeah, 2 Sm: 13: 3. and Shimmah, 1 Chron: 2: 136 
\-:x0 Again Jeſſe: made ſeven of his ſons * to paſs be- 

"fore Samuel ; and.Samuel faid unto Jefle, The LORD 
{hath not choſen + theſes 7 
-: 5 3.6; The reſt of his ſens, which-were ſeven, beſides David ; 
*F6x in all he bad eight, 1 Sam: +7: 12. Tr 15 true, there are bur ſe- 
'ven of them named, 21 Chren: 2: 13, I45 . 
one of them was-either born vfa Concubine; or an obſcure Perſon: 
or, .one thardicd immediately after this time, 


xx AndSamuel ſaid unto Jeffe, Are here all :byehil- 
"dren ? And he ſaid, There remaineth yet the youngeſt, 
and behold, he keepeth the ſheep y. And Samuel ſai 
unte Jefle, * Send and fetch him : for we wall not fi 


* , Gam | down = till he come hither. - | . 
> Pſa) y And conſequently is the moſt unfit of all my ſons for that high ' 

caty's ”, Employment. Either therefore he did not throughly underſtand 
7 Hiv: David's great Wiſdom and Valour, or he judgeth him unfir, by ' 
Hor * ” reaſon of his mean Education» And God fo ordered ir by his pro-. 
* . - vidence, that David's choieemight plainly appear to be God's work, 
and not Samuel's, or Jeſ#F Defign. z To wit, to the Feaſt. Queſt. ' 
How could David be;admirted ro this Feaft, being, as it ſeems, not 
ſanKified with the reſt of his brethren? ſw. 1.Kcis not ſtrange; if 
_ the prophet by Gods diceCtion, diſpenſed with the ordinary Rulegin 
- a Perſon fo extraordinary, both for his Piety. and the Dignity to 
which he was.choſen. 2+ It is not affirmed. that David did fit down 
with them zo%he Feaſt ; but only, that they would not de fo rill be 
#4 hen he wzs come, and Samuel! had dane what he in- 


: T am come to ſacrifice 


EE 


— CERES EE == EDS E————_—_ 


= 


CODE IS 
Hy ns ts EY 


——  __— IRE tne 6 ns. ge Bw 
o #—20-rne> 29ons DLAI rrs.o9 
. - ne ene 0 Rn 
ed IE 


— — > —_—— p 


* Chapt 
F7: 13s 


+ Heb: 
#1) ofs 


 $ 4-M-U 


reſt ſit down to the Feaſts For David was not now aQtual'y rai ed 


And the ground of this Expreſſion |P 


15- but that may be, becauſe |. 


ybim, D#vid, for ought we know, might departy andthe 


B L 
to any higher degree, but 
we read below, v. 19. 


12 And he ſent, and brought him in : now he w.» 


returned to his former employment ; as 


goodly to look þ to, and the LORD ſaid, Ariſe, anoint 
him : for this & he. 
#s Which may be referred either to the colour of his hair ; or ra- 


ther, to the complexion of his Face. b Of a comely, but Maſculiue 
and Majeſtick AſpeR. - 


I3 Then Samuel took the horn of oyl, and * 
anointed him in the midſt of his brethren c : and 
* the ſpirit- of the LORD came upon David from 
-_ Gy forward 4. So Samuel roſe up and went to 

amane. -Y 


s According to this Tranſlation, his Brethren were preſent at this 
AQ, and knew that David was Anointed King. But this ſeems to 
ſome, neither conſiſtent with Samuz!'s deſign of fecrefie ; nor txith 
Eliab's ſcornful'words concerning him after this, Chap: 19: 28. 
Bur to tbis, others Reply, Thar David's Brethren ſaw Davia's Un- 
Ction, bur did nor particularly underſtand, that he was Ancinted 
to the Kingdom ; but were only told by S-mucl, that he was A. 
nointed to ſome great Service, which heceafter rhey ſhould know, 
bur at preſent it was fir to be concealed 3 Thus Jeſt only, and 
David, underſtood the whole Buſineſs, and his Brethren: were able 
to atteſr to that Att of Samuels Anointing him, which, with other 
collateral Evidences, was abundantly. tufficiert to prove David's 
Right to theKingdom, if nced ſhould be. And this ſeems fairly to 
accord, and explain the matrer : But the words may be otherwiſe 
Tranſlated our of the Hebrew, That he Anointed him our of the miaft 
of his Brethren ; i» e. He ſeleQted him from amongſt the reſt of his 
Brethren to be King, As Chriſt is ſaid to be raiſed from midſt of his 
Brethren, And whereas, the Hebrew Word is Bekereb, in the midF ; 
not Mikkereb, out of the mid; it is confeſſed, that the Prepoſition 
beth, in, 1s oft uſed for min, of, or out of, as hath been former'y 
ſhewed by many Inſtances; and fo it may be here» And fur. 
ther, the place may be thus Rendred ; that Samuel Anormnted him, 


being taken or of the midſt of his Brethren : And ſo theſe Werds 


may be added, to ſfignifie, That Samuel took him out from the reſt 
of the Company, and privately Anointed him ; 5-ſ? only being 
preſent at the Aftion. And thus there is an Fllipſis of a Verb or 
Particle, which is frequent ; as Gen: 12: 15, The Woman was taken 
(i.e, was taken and carried) 1mts Pharaohs houſe ; and many ſuch 
I2ces. 4 i. e He was immediarely endowed with extraordiary 
Gifrs of GODS Spirit, as ſtrength, and Courage, and Wiſdom, 
and Magnanimity,and other excellentQualicies which fitted kim for, 
and put him vpon Noble Attempts ; for whichy he preſencly grew 
Famous, _ whilſt he lived a private Life : Sce below wv. 18: aud 
17, 34» Oc 
14 © But the ſpirit of the LORD departed f-om Saul 
e, and an * evil ipirit f from the LORD g || 
him 4. | 
e God took away that prudence, and courage, 
_ page _ afſiſtances of _— Spirit, 
ed him for the managment of his publick Employment. = 
ly ſo called: for what need is rg of Gefakng the LEE 
fication of the Word ?. It is evident both from Scripture, and Ex. 
perience, that Gqd kath permitted Tome men to be really ated, and 
diſquieted by the Devil : 'and why not Saul es well as others 2 
£ i.e. By God's permiſſion or judgement, delivering him up to Sa. 
tan. h Stirred up in him unruly and'tormenting paſſions ; as En- 
vy, Rage, Fear, Deſpair, and tte like, 
15 And Saul's feryant faid unto him, 
evil ſpirit F from God troubleth thee. 
16 Let our lord now command thy 
which are before thee, to ſeck out a man, who 5 


a cunning player on an harp, and it ſhall come to 
paſs, when the evil ſpirit from God is upon thee 
that he ſhall play "wich his hand, ' and thou ſhalt be 


well z. 

; And the ſucceſs confirms their Opinion. 
ſick cannot direQaly have any influence upon an Evil ſpirit to drive 
him away ; yet, becauſe the Devil as it ſeems, had not Poſſefſion 
of him, bur only made uſe of the Paſſions of his Mind, and il 
humours of his Body to moleſt him : 
_ ang hath a mighty power 
and to make a man ſedate and chearful, as is evident b :0anie 
mous conſent of Learned Writers, COT OE woank 
is not ſtrange, 


wherewith he had quali- 


Behold now,an 


For although Mys 


i] had leſs power over Lunaticks in the q { . 
e of the Moon : Marth: 14: 15, ecreale, than in the 


viſ ſpirit? And why might not the chearing of his Hearty 
vil, which were fed by. his Melancholick —Sobonsy COR 

17 And Saul ſaid unto his ſervants, Provide me now 
a man that can play well, and bring him to me. © 

18 Then anſwered one of the ſervants, and ſaid, Be- 
hold, I have ſeen a'fon of Jeſſe the Bethlehemite, 
that is cunning in playing, and a mi hty valiant man, 
and a man of war, and prudent in | | 
a comely perſon, and the LORD & with him 

k Wonder not, that David was fo ſuddenly advanced, from a 
poor contemptible ſhepherd,to ſo grear Reputation ; for theſe were 
the EffeQs of that Spirit of the Lord which he received when he 
was Anointed, Though ſome would hence inferr, thar. the rhings 
related in rhis Chapter, bappened after the Hiſtory of Chaprer - 7+ 
though it be placed before, ſuch Tranſpoſitions being not unuſus! 
in 


troubled * Cul 
and alacrity, and ft 


ſervants he 


matters &, and [Orfw 


ruddy 4, and withal, # of a beautiful countenance, arid +1 Teh. 6, 
of ©Yer 


* P(al; 
89: 20, 
* Yee Nut 
27: 18, 


Or, im 


f Heb. 
of G19, 


7 Joſhs 
15, 35e 
[| Or, the 
coaſt of 


Dammin, 


f Heb. 
ranged the 
battel, 


© Heb. a 
middle ma 
u a man b 
tween two. 


f Heb, 
fthed, 


=> 
=- 


I; 


jy 


jo 


7 Joſhe 
15, 35r 


| - Ws Shocho and Azekah in || Epheſdammin. 


coaſt 
Dammin, 


f Heb. 


battel. 


& Heb. 
middle man, 
u 4 man be- 
Tween 1W0s 


ized the battel in aray againſt the Philiſtines. 


19S, ' 
19 q Wherefore Saul ſent meſſengers unto Jelle, 


and ſaid, Send me David thy fon, which # with the 
ſheep. : 

2 And Jeſſe took an afs zen with bread, and a 
bottle of wine, and a kid, and ſent tbem by David his 


ſon unto Saul m. : ER : 

m This Preſent, though in our Times it would ſeem contempri- 
ble, yet was very agreeable to the utige of thoſe Times, and to the 
condition of Jef, which was bur mean in the World. And it 
ſzems to have been the Cuſtom of thoſe Times, as it 1s yet 1n the 
Eaſtern Countries ( when they made rheir appearance before Prin 
ces, or great Perſons, to bring a Preſent ; See Gen. 32.20. Gente 43: 
26, 26. and elſewheres) To whica civil Cuſtom, that Religious 
Precept ſeems conſonant, Exod. 23. 15. Deut. 16+ 16+ Non? Jhall ap- 
pear before me empty. And he might ſend it; partly; as a Teſtimor 
;1y of his r-ſpett ro his Sovereign; and partly, to gain David favour 
and acceptance with him ; being ſenſible, that he was going to a 
placeand tate of hazard ; but kaowing Saul's furious Femper, he 
durſt not refuſe to ſend him; and he ſent him the more willingly, 
becauſe this ſeemed a molt likely means to accompliſh GOD'S Pro- 
miſe cf rhe Kingdom, and to prepare him for it. . 

21 And David came to Saul, and ſtood before him 
zz: and he loved him great!y,and he became his armour- 
bearer 0- | 

1 i.e, Miniſtred unto him or, (as weuſe to ſpeak) waited up- 
on him, as that Phraſe oft tignifies; as Deut. 1+ 38 and 10+ 8, 
o He had thit Place conferred upon him, rhough we do not read 
that he ever exerciſed it ; for it ſeems he was gone back to his Fa- 
ther upon ſome occaſion nor related; and had abode with him 
ſome conliderable time before the War deſcribed, Chap. 17. hap- 

ened. 

"22 And Saul ſent to Jeſſe, faying, Let David, I 
pray thee, ſtand before me : for he hach tound favour 
in my fight. 

23 And it came to paſs, when the evil ſpiric F from 
God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and 
played with his hand : ſo Saul was refreſhed, and was 
well, and the evil ſpiric departed from him p. 

p To wit, for a ſeaſon. - And the reaſon of this Succeſs, may be, 
partly natural and common ; of which, ſee on v. 16. and partly, 
{upernatural and ſpecial, reſpetting David; whom God deſigned by 
this means, to bring into favour with the King and his Court, and 
ſo to ſmooth the way for his Advancement. 


CHAP. XVIL 


The Armies of the Iſraelites and Philiſtines ready for Battel : Goliah terrifieth 
the Iſraelites with his Stature, Armour and Challenge, 1 11, David 
ſent by his Father to viſit hs Brethren ; is willing to Encounter with him, 

12———27. For which Eliab chideth him : He is brought :0 Saul, and 
ſheweth the reaſon of h1s Confidence, 2.8 37. He taketh a Staff : And 
Sling, with feos Stones, 3® 40. Goliah curſeth and threatneth him, 
41——44. Davids Faith : He ſlayeth him, 45 50. The Phili- 


flines fly: Are ſmitten and plunder'd, 51 54+ Saul taketh notice of 
David, 5 5———=58. 


Wo the Philiſtines gathered together their armies 
to. battel a, and were gathered together at * Sho- 
cho, which bel9ygeth to Judah, and pitched between 


a To revenge their former great and ſhameful Defeat, Chap. 14. 
2 And Saul and the men of 1ſrael were gathered to- 


gether, and pitched by-the valley of Elah, and Þ ſet the 


3 And the Philiſtines ſtood on a mountain on the one 
ſide, and [iſrael ſtood on a mountain on the other ſide 
b: and there was a valley between them. 

b Where they had diſpoled and fortified their Camps, thar if the 
one ſhould Aſſault the other, the Afailant ſhould have the diſadvan- 
tage, and be obliged te fight from a lower place. | 

4 4 And there went out + a champion « cut of the 
camp of che Philiſtines, named Goliah, of Gath, whole 
height was fix cubits and a ſpan &. | | 

c Heb. a man between two ; either becauſe he uſed tocome forth, 
and ſtand between the two Armies ; or, becauſe he moved thar the | 
Buſineſs ſhould be decided between two, whereof he would be one. 
a Which is nor ſtrange, for beſides the Giants mentioned,in Scrip= 
ture, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and Pliny, and others, make men- 


tion of Perſons ſeven Cubirs high ; which is near double to an or- 
dinary mans height. 


i $4 v 


his fathers ſheep at Bethlehem.” 


them, or to expoſe them ro urmoſt hazards. 0 ze. Bring me ſome 


Þ TIT: = Chap. KVIEM 
Arhanatus did manage; of whom P{/ny relates, That he faw him : 1 
come inro the Theatre with Arms weighing 12000 Ounces. 

8 And he ſtood and cryed unto the armies of Iſrael, 
and ſaid unto them, Why are ye come out to ſet your 
battel in aray ? am norl a Philiſtine, and ye ſervants 
to Saul ? chooſe ve a man for you, and let him come 
down to me g, . | pF 

gs That the Battel may be decided by us Two alone. Such ofFers 
were frequent in thoſe Times. And poſſibly he thought the Valiai.t 
Jonathan, who had Afſaulted an whole Army, would never have re- 
fuſed rhis Challenge. Bur God fo ordered the matter, that none 
ſhou!d accepr it, becauſe he would reſerve this Honour tor Daw:4, as 
a ſtep ro his Kingdom. _ | Cn I Der i OS 

9 It he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, 
then wiil we be your ſervants: but if I prevail againſt 
him, and kill him, chen (ball ye be our ſervants, and 
{eive us. 

10 And the Philiſtine ſaid, 
Irael this day 
gether. 


11 When Saul and all Ifrael heard thoſe words 
of the Philiftize, they were diſmayed, and greatly a- 
fraid þ h 

þ Which may ſeem ſtrange, conſidering the glorious Promiſes, 
and th:ir late Experiences of Divine Aſſiſtance. Bur the truth is, 
all Men do ſo iacirely depend upon God in all things; that when he 
withdraws his kelp, the moſt Valiant and Reſolute Perſons cannor 
find their Hearts nor Hands, as daily Experience ſhews. WED 
12 4 Now David was * the fon of that * Ephrathite *cpa 16.17 
; of Bethlehem-Judah, whoſe name as Jeſle, and he *Gen. 35, 
had eight ſons &: and the man went among men for an '9- = 
old man in the days of Saul. — | 

; i.e, Oftche Man of Ephrathah, or Bethlehem, Gm. 35. 19. k See 
on Chap. 16. 10. . 

13 And the three eldeſt ſons of Jefſle went, and 
followed Saul to the battel : and the names of his 
three ſons that went to the battel, were Eliab the firſt= 
born,and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Sham= 
mah. | 

14 And David was the youngeſt, and the three eldeſt 
followed Saul. | 


15 But David went and returned from Saul / to feed 


I defie the armies of 
give me a man that we may fight to- 


= 


[ Either, 1. From Saul's Court : where having been entertained 
by Saul, to relieve him in his Melancholy Fits, he was permitted to 
go to his Father's Houſe, to be ſent for again upon occaſion. Or, 2. 
From Sau!'s Camp, whither he uſed to come to viſit his Brethren; 
as appears from v. 17. 


7 | 

16 And the Philiſtine drew near morning and eve- 

ning, and preſented himſelf fourty days. $ors 
17 And Jeſſe ſaid unto David his ſon, Take now 

for thy brethren an Ephah of this parched torn m, 

and theſe ten loaves, and Þ run to the camp to thy bre- 4 rxey* 

thren. 

m A Food then much in uſe, which 
ter, or Milk, or Oyl;'&c. $-56:55Þ] BE 
18 And carry theſe ten | cheeſes unto the captain of + Heb. 
their thouſand », and look how thy brethren fare, and cbe(es of. 

take their pledge 0. VET Wes. | " milk, 


» In whoſe Power jt was in a great meaſure, either to. preſerys 


3. 


' carrythers 
they uſed to mix with Was ruming. 


t Heb. . 
captain of 4 
token of their welfare from them. thouſand. 

19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of If. 
rael were in the valley of Elah; fighting with the Phili- 
{tines p. 

p 7. e. In a poſture and readineſs to fight with them; as it is ex- 
plained, v.20, 21, Menare oft ſaid in Scripture, to do whar they 
intend, and arc prepared to do;z as;bath been thewed formerly by in« 
ſtances. Wa. ys are; 

20 And David roſe up early inthe morning, and oye 
the ſheep with a keeper, and took, and wenr as Jeſſe 
had commanded-him : - and he came to the || trench 
9 as the hoſt was going forth co the || fight, and ſhaue-7F ;6; care 
ed r for the battel, : | 3 2 riage. 

q i.e, To the Camp or Army which was there Latrenghed. Ref In bat- 
the marmer was, both to animate themſelves, and to terrifie- their tel: ray, or 


{! Or, place 


Enemies» 


p= lace 0 
5 And he had an helmet of braſs'upon his head; | 21 For Ifraeland the Philiſtines had put the batel in fete. F 
Lg and he was f armed with a coat of mail: .and che faray, army againſt army- Bf ES: 
ditbed, weight ' of -the coat was five thoutand* fhehkels e af. , 22 'And David left his F carriage s'in the hand of the + Heb. he 
| braſs» Hf: | | {keeper of the carriage, and ran into the army, and came veſſels from 
a rt goat Sept rf Dues nl} ured hiabrgkeen, 1} FR 
Pounds. Which weight is not unſuitable #55 of fiich vatt|= f gf fee Ga el p ad bronghes ph Ayn _ avked his 
greatnels and ſtrength as his Height ſpeaks hitn ro be.” © 14 fo Pas _—_ Aria ix ky, y Fo Cm; Co FTE: CUM brethren of, , 
6 And he had greaves of brafs upon Riglegs : and a; %P the ON { the Philif ige. of Gath, Goliah by peace,” * 
1 Hb, || target af brals berween his ſhoulders. Fees ) our of cl; : frmies of he'P biliſtines, and fpake 
gdrxce. 7 And the ſtaff of his ſpear was like a weavers | according tothe fame words : abt David heard thew. 
T Heb beam F, and his ſpears! # head weighed ſix hundred | 24 And all the men of Hraghwhen they ſaw the man, 
_ Jhekels of iron, and one bearing a' ſhield wept before D897, ram bm, and were lore afraid. . tHebfrom 
Bb. * 11, DIM. . Tas CIT Bfy 1 A DU0N {BF the-men :ot {{rael faid, Have ye ſzen this his faces 


f On which the! Weavers fiſten their Web, ! fe vvas like: this for 
thickae(s ; and for lengrh, that tzezomirs,” as eaile to be colle&ted by 
Proportion. tg rh; reſt; And: though the whale weight' of Goliab's 


man that'is come up #: - fyrely* to defie Tirael is he come 
up 3 "and it fhaft be that the man who' killech him, the | 


Armour may icem prodigious; yer it is not ſo much by far, as one 


King will: engich him * wigh great riches, and * will * Joſh, 
5, | *+-Y | -PIVE IS. 16. 


Chap. 


th 
i140 


+ Heb. 
zook him. 


Fd 


+ Heb: 


with his 
clothens 


XVIE 


4m Iſrael. 


' and ſign of the departure 0 


x} nh 


've him his daughter, and make his fathers houſe free 


ble, that Saulin his great Diſtreſs, doth not encou- 
od i ent in God, nor ſeek his counſel or favour by Prayers and 


Relief from Men only. This was one effe&t 
ls yn ore deny f God's Spirit _ him; #« Free from all 


thoſe Tributes and Charges which ether the Court or the Camp 1e- 
quired. 


26 And David ſpake to the men that ſtood by him, 
ſaying, What (hall be done to the man that killeth this 
Philiſtine, and taketh away the reproach from Ifrae]: 
for who & this uncircumciſed Philiſtine, that he ſhould 
defie the armies of the living God x ? ; 

& Why ſhould you all be thus diſmayed at him ? he is but a Man, 


F an accurſed Race, 2 Stranger and Enemy to GOD, and 
| - fand before them who have the Living and Almigh- 


© "ry GOD for their Strength and Refuge ? 


And the people anſwered him after this manner, 
Ging: SO ſball it be done unto the man that killeth 


— q And Eliab his eldeſt brother heard when he 
ſpake unto the men, and Eliab's anger was kindled a- 
oainſt David y, and he {aid, Why cameſt thou down 
kither? and with whom haſt thou left thoſe few ſheep 
in the wilderneſs 2? I know thy pride, and the naugh- 
tineſs of thine heart # ; for thou art come down that 


thou mighteſt ſes the batte]l. | | | 

y Either becauſe he thought him guilty of intollerable Folly, and 
Pride, and Prefumption, in pretending toſuch an Attempt: or be. 
cauſe he feared and concluded he would be certainly Ruined in the 
Enterprize 2 or rather, becauſe he envied him the glory of ſo great 
an Undertaking; and rook this proffer of David's to be, what indeed 
it was, a Reproach to himſelf, and ro all the reſt, that having the 
great God on their ſide, had not the Faith or Courage to fight with 
him. 2 Thou art much fitcer to tend Sheep, than to appear in an 
Army) or to fight with a Giant. Thy ſelf-confidence, and vain- 

lory, and curioſity. __ 

y is And David ſaid, What have I now done ? 7s there 


not a cauſe b ? 

b Either, 1. Of my coming : My Father ſent me on an Errand. 
Or rather, 2. Of my thus ſpeaking : Is there not Reaſon in whar I 
ſay? Is this Giant Invincible ? is our God unable to Oppoſe him, 
and Subdue .him ? : 

'-20 © And he turned from him towards another,and 
ſpake after the ſame F manner c: and the people an- 
wered him again after the former manner. 

c For being ſecretly moved by God's Spirit to undertake the 
.Combar, he ſpeaks with divers Perſons about it, that ſo it might 
"come to the Kivg's ear» . ; 

.---2x And when the. words were heard which David 
ſpake, they rehearſed hem before Saul: and he t ſent 


32 © And David ſaid to Saul, Let no mans heart fail 


_- 


"begs c of him: thy ſervant will go and fight with this 


\ Philiſtine. 


1343: And Saul ſaid to. David, Thou art not able to 


£0 againſt this Philiſtine co fight with him : for thou 


art but a youth 4, and he a man of war from his 


uth. 
4 Either, 1. For Age, to wit, comparatively to Geliah, being 


- now not much above 20 years old, as is ſuppoſed. Or rarher, 2.For 
- Military $kill, as che words following explainit ; as if he ſhould ſay, 


Thou art but a Novicey a raw and unexperienced Soldier, and 


- therefore unable to Fight with him- 


' 24 And David faid to Saul, Thy ſervant kept his fa- 
ther's ſheep, and there came a lion and a bear e, and 
took a {|:lamb out of the flock : 


I Or, kid. | e Nor both together, but one after another, at ſeveral times. 


25 And 1 went out after him, and {mote him f, and 
delivered 5: out of his mouth : and when he aroſe againſt 


_ me, Teaught bem by his beard,and ſmote him, and ſlew 


"him. 
'f To wit, the Lyon, as appears by his Beard : which having 


- F$&ticularly mentioned, -it was eaſily underſtoed,-and believed, thar 


e did the ſame to the Bear ; which therefore it was needleſs to ex- 


26. Thy ſervant ſlew both the lion and the bear g : 


and this uncircumciſed Philiſtine ſhall' be as one of 


them,- ſeing. he hath defied the armies of the living 
God: 


.g This he is probably thought to have done after he was Anointed;-|- 
when he was endowed with ſingular gifts of God's Spirit 2 and . 


among others, with extraordinary courage of Heart, and ſtrength of 


Body. 
: "7 David ſaid moreover, The LORD that delivered 


me out of the + paw of the lion, and out of the + paw 


SH of the bear, he will deliver me-out of the hand of this 
9:29 Philiſtine b And Saul ſaid unto David, Go 3, andthe 


LORD be with chee. . 

+ His Good-will is the ſame 'to me, that it then was, and his 
Power is not diminiſhed. # Ir is nbr ſtrange, that Sau! conſents to 
the Combat, conſidering David's pious 'and convincing Diſcourſe, 

rounded upon ſenſible Experience ; and withal; the dangeous con- 
, 5a of the 1raditiſþ Afﬀairs, and the abſolute refuſal of all other 


clothed,&C. Perſons 


38 © And Saul + armed David with his armoug &, | 


+ Battel ; which ſeems not to agree with the extraordinary height of 


I, S 4 M- O E | Spies Chap. Xvr, 


and he put an helmet of braſs upon his head, alſo he 
armed him with a coat of mail, 
& Either, 1. With $au/'s own Armour which he uſed to wear in 


Saul's Stature, 1 Sam 10, 23- Noris it like that Saul would dij- 
arm himſelf, when he was going forth to the Battel, v. 20, 2i. Or 
2. With Armour taken out of his Armoury, Not that the whoic 
Army of Sau! was brought into the Field; but that ſome choſen 
Arms were taken out thence, and brought for any emergent occaſi. 
on. Or rather, 3. With his Peſtments, or Garments, For 1. Sothe 
Hebrew Word properly and uſually ſignifies ; and fo this ſame 
Word is Tranſlated, 1 Sam: 18: 4 2. His Armour is diſtin. 
guiſhed from this, and is particvlarly deſcribed in the following 
words. He ſeems therefore to ſpeak of ſome Military Veſtmenrs 
which were then uſed in War, and were contrived for defence; ſuch 
as Buff-coats now are» 

39 And David girded his ſword upon his armour, 
and he afſayed to go, for he had not proved i: : and 
David ſaid unto Saul, I cannot go with theſe : for 
I have not proved them 1} And David put them off 
him. 

Fg I have no $kill nor experience in the managment of this kind of 
rms. 

40 And he took his ſtaff ms in his hand and choſe him 
five » ſmooth ſtones o out of the || brook, and put them ||Oc 7, 
in a ſhepherds + b hich he had 7 Cri *s 

1 4 Inepherds | bag which he had, even in a ſcrip, and * Heb: 
his ſling was 1n his hand p, and hedrew near tothe Phi. 
liſtine. 

_ m His Shepherds Staff. Theſe Arms were in themſelves contemp= 
tible, yet choſen by David; partly, b-cauſe he had no 5$kill to uſe 
other Arms; partly, becauſe he had inward aſſurance of the Vito. 
ry, even by theſe Weapons; and partly, becauſe ſuch a Conqueſt 
would be moſt honourable to Ged, and moſt ſhameful, and diſcon. 
raging ro the Philiſiines. » That if one ſhould fail him, he might 
make uſe of another. o Becauſe ſuch Stones would go moſt freely 
out of the Sling ; and conſequently, with more force and certain. 
ty, direttly to the Mark which he aimed at. p This ſort of Wea. 
pons was not unuſual in the Fights of ancient Times ; and many are 
rived at great dexterity in ſlinging Stones with great certainty ; 
of v hich we have inſtances both in Scripture, as Judges 20: 16. and 
in Dioaorus Siculus, and Livy, and other Authors. ; 

41 And the Phililitine came on, and drew near un- 
. David, and the man that bare the ſhield went before 

1M. . | 
42 And when the Philiſtine looked about, and faw 
David, he diſdained him : for he was but a youth, and 
ruddy, and of a fair countenance g. 

q Not having ſo much as the countenance of a Martial Perſon; 

43 And the Philiſtine ſaid unto David, Am TI a dog, 
that thou comeſt to me with ſtaves 7? and the Philiſtine 
curſed David by his gods s. 

- r 1.C. WI a _— ug chr Number for the Singular ; as 
en: 21: 7. and 4637. Fs He prayed that his god D F - 
roth, &c. .would deſtroy hite. p : nog 

44 And the Philiſtine faid to David, Come to me, 
and I will give thy fleſh to the fowls of the air, and to 
the beaſts of the field. 


Chap- 


45 Then faid David to the Philiſtine, Thou comeſt 
to me with a ſword, and with a ſpear,and with a ſhield: 
but I come to thee in the name ks LORD of hoſts } 
-a God of the armies of Iſrael whom thou haſt de: 

ed «u, 


# 1. e. By a Commiſſion from him, with confidence in hi 
aſſurance of his Help, and for the Vindication of his _ 
- In defying that Army and People whereof he is the LORD and 

roreEctors : 


46 This day will the LORD Þ deliver thee into mine 
hand, and I will ſmite thee, and take thine head from t Heb-ſv 
thee, and I will give the carcaſes of the hot of the Phi. !** *: 
liſtines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the 
wild beaſts of the earth, that all the earth may know 
that * there is a God in Ifrael x. * » King 

x Heb. That God, the only true God, is ; , 
a ee ce AY COS 2s Gat or en Bore 1 


one who is able to help them ; and not ſuch an impotent Idol as 
you ſerve. 


47 And all thisaſſembly ſhall know, that the LORD 
ſaveth not with ſword and ſpear y, ( for the bat- 
tel s the LORD'S xz, ) and he will give you into 
our hands 4. 

y i. 6. That he can ſave without theſe Arms, and with the moſt 
contemptible Weapons, ſuch as mine ſeem to thee. z i. e. The 
Events of War are wholly in his Power, to give Succeſs to whom 
and by what means he pleaſeth. a David ſpeaks thus confidently, 
becauſe he was aſſured of it by a particular Inſpiration from God. 


48 And it came to paſs, when the Philiſtine a- 
roſe, and:came, and drew nigh to meet David, that 
David haſted, and ran toward the army to meet the 
Philiſtine. it; 

49 'And David put his hand in his bag, and took 
thence a ſtone, and ſlang ir, and ſmote the Philiſtine 
in his fore-head,that the ſtone ſunk into his fore-head 
b, and he fell upon his face tothe earth. 

b Either, 1- The Stone pierced through his Helmet ; which ſuch 
Stones being {ſlung would not ſeldom do; as even Dijonorys Siculus 

relares. 


F Heb; 
bound up in, 
En.44. 30, 


1 $ 4 
relates. Or 2. The Stone might get in through one of thoſe holes 
which are left in Helmets, that he that wears It may ſee his way, 
and how to dire& his blows. Or rather,z.T ne proud Giant had lift 
up that part of his Helmet which covered his Fore-head ; and that 
in cowtemprt of _ and his Weapons, and by theſingular direCti- 
24's Providence. : 
> So David prevailed over the Philiſtine, with'a 
fling, and with a ſtone, and ſmote the Philiftine, and 
New him ; but here was no ſword inthe hand of David. 
51 Therefore David ran and ſtood upon the Phi- 
liſtine, and took his ſword c, and drew it out of the 
ſheath thereof, and ſlew him d, and cut off his head 
therewith. And when the Philiſtines ſaw their cham- 


pion was dead, they fled. : 

c Hence it appears, that David was not a little Man, as many fan- 
cy; but a M-n of conſiderable bulk and ſtrength,becaule he was able 
to manave a Giant's Sword ; which alſo he did, both here and be- 
low, Chap. 2+. 9. 4 Qu. How could this be, wiren he flew him be- 
fore with the Scone, v. 50? Anſw., There he gives a general ac- 
count of the Event of the Bartel; and of the Giant's Death : but 
here be gives a particu/ar Relation of the manner and inſtrument of 
his Deato. The Stone threw him down to the Earth, and bereaved 
him of the viſe of his Senſ: and Motion ; but there remained ſome 
Lifz in him; ( as frequenrly doth in ſuch caſes) which the Sword 
took away, and ſo compleated the Work. 

52 And the men of Ifrael and of Judah aroſe, and 
ſhouted, and purſued the Philiſtines, until thou come 
to the valley, and to the gatesof Ekrons and the woun- 
ded of the Philiſtines fell down by the way to Shaarim, 
even unto Gath; and unto Ekron. 

3 And the children of Iſrael returned from chaſing 


after the Philiſtines, and they ſpoiled their tents e. 

e Heb. Their Camps i. e. Their Camp : but he ſpeaks of it in the 
Plural Number, becauſe of the great extent, and various quarters of 
their Camp. ; WE EY 

4 And David took the head of the Philiſtine, and 
brought it to Jeruſalem f ; but he put his armour in his 
tentg. = Wee, © 

F Either, to terrific the Jebuſitrs, who yet held the Fort of Zn, 
2 Sam. 5. 7. or, for ſome other reaton not Recorded, nor now 
known. g 5 e. In the Tenr which was ere&ed for him in rhe Camp, 
upon this occaſiun. There it was kept for the preſent; though af- 
terwards ir ſeems ro have been tranſlated ro the Tabernacle ; where 
we fir:d his Sword, Chap. 21. and it is not unlikely the reſt of bis 
Armoar was there alſo» ; ESE 

55 And when Saul ſaw David go forth againſt the 
Philiſtine, he ſaid unto Abner the captain of the hoſt, 
Abner, whoſe ſon is this youth 4? and Abner ſaid, As 
thy foul hveth, O king, I cannotrell z? 

þ Queft. How could David be unknown to Saul,with whom he had 
lived, Chap. 16. 21? Anſw, That might well be, for divers reaſons, 
becauſe David was not conſtantly with him; nor, as it feems, uſed 


\ . by him, but upon extraordinary occations, and deſperate fits of Me- 


F} Heb; 


Vound up in, 
TEn.4463 0, 


lancholy ; from which, poſſibly he had been free for a good while, 
by God's ſpecial Providence and Care for his People Jrael, that fo 
he might be capable of Governing and ProteQing them againſt the 
Philiftines, who watched all opportunities againſt them, and at laſt 
broke forth into an open War. Thus David had been for ſome con- 
{fiderable rime diſmiſſed from SauPs Court, and was returned home. 
And therefore it is not ſtrange, if Saul had for the preſent forgotten 
David. For Kings, becauſe of the Incumbrance of Publick Buſineſs, 
and the mulritude of Perſons who come to them on ſeveral occaſi- 
ons, may eaſily torget ſome Perſons ; yea, ſuch as have frequently 
been with them, eſpecially their Servants whom they do not uſe to 
obſerve with ſo much attention and care as they do others. Add to 
this, that the diſtemper of Saul's mind might make him forgetful 3 
and that David might now be much changed, both in his counte- 
nance and in his habir, from what he bad before; and it is appa- 
xent,that the change of habirs makes ſo great a difference, that it oft 
keeps us from the knowedge of thoſe Perſons whom in other habits 
we very well know. Some give this Anſwer, Thar rhis was the firſt 
time that Saul had ſeen David; and that David's exploit here Re- 
corded, was performed before that which is Recorded Chap. 17. 15, 
&c. though it be placed after it : Bur that is confuted vy com- 
paring Chap. 18- 1, 2, 3. # Which is nor ſtrange, becauſe Abner's 
converſation and employment was generally in the Camp, waen 
David was at the Court ; and when Abner was there, he took little 
notice of a Perſon ſo much inferiour to him as David was. 


56 And the king ſaid, Inquire thou whoſe ſon the 
ftripling is. ; 

57 And as David returned from the ſlaughter of the 
Philiſtine, Abner cook him, and brought him before 
Saul, with the head of the Philiſtine in his hand. 

58 Aad Saul ſaid to him, Whoſe fon art thou, hon 


' young man ? and David anſwered, I am che {on of thy 
| ſervanc Jelile, the Betblehemite 


| CHAP. XVII. 

Jonathan levverh David. They Covenant together, 1 4+ Saul envieth Das. 
wid's praiſe : In his fury (ecketh to kill him, « 11. 1s afraid cf him: 
And removeth him ; He is loved by the People, 12————16. Saul offer- 
&th David his Daughters, firſt. Merab who is gien to Aaricl ; then Michal 
who Ieveth David, 17 20, Saul demandeth 100 foreckins of the 
Philiftines for a Dowry : David promiſeth ; Delivereth double the number: 
Obtaineth Michal, 21 27. Saul's fear and hatred ; And Davis's 
Glory increajeth, 28 30, 

ND' 
ſpeaking unto >aul, rhar the ſoul of Jonathan was 

T knit with the ſoul of David, and Jonachan loved him 

as his own ſoul s, 


% : : ? - F< 7 « "x | 
M UD E EL, | Chap. XVII? 
s Partly, for his excellent Vertues and Endowments,which ſhone | 
forth both in his Speeches and AQtions ; partly, for the grear and 
good Service which he had done ro GOD and tohis People;and parts 
ly, for the ſfimilitude of their Age and Qualities. | 
.,2 And Saul took him that day, and would let him 
g0no more home to his fathers houſe 6. | | 

b By which it appears, that before-time David had nor his cone 
ſtant Reſidence at Court, but did return to his Father's Houſe, and 
thence again tothe Courr, as occaſion required. 

3 Then Jonathan and David made a covenant c, be- 
cauſe he loved him as his own ſoul. - '. 

E, 7.e. An agreement of {incere and perpetual Friendſhip betweert 
caem, ; 

4 And Jonathan ſtripe - himſelf of che robe that 
was upon him, and gave it to David, and his gar- 
ments, even to his ſword, and to his bow, and to his 
girdle 4, ; 

a Partly, as a pledge of his great reſpe& and affeion to him: 
and partly, to vindicace Dav a from that contempt. which might 
Cleave to him for his former Paſtoral habirc and condition, and ro 


p't him into an habit ſuirable to his preſent Greatneſs and Glo 
I 


4 —— — 
— 
Dy A ACID IE 


T©T©T©])TP?ee CT EE ——_—_ 


F T Ard David went out e whitherſoever Saul ſent 
him, end || behaved himſelf wiſely : and Saul ſer him 1 Or; 
over the men of war f, and he was accepted in the g;,fered 

. : 3p proſpered, 
ſight of all che people, and alfo in the light of Sauis ſer= 
vants. | 


e Upon Military Expeditions, of which that word is oft uſed. 
f Gave him ſome coniiderable Command ia his Army, though not 
the Supreme. 


6 And it came to paſs, as they came when David 
was returned from the laughter of the || Philiſtine g, j| Or, Phi« 
that the women came out of all the cities of Iſrael þ, lifines, 
ſinging, and dancing z, to meet king Saul, wich tabrets, 

with joy, and with Þf inſtruments of muſick. + He: 


£ Either, Firſt, From ſome eminent Victory obtained by him a- three ſtrings 
gainſt the Phil:ſtines, though not particularly related, wherein alſo 04 #nſir#* 


1c came to paſs, when he had made an end of 


Saul might be preſent and concerned. Or rather, Secondly From ment Se 
the flaughrer of Goliah, and the other Philiflines with him. Againſt 
this it is ObjeCted, That this Song was ſung eitier after David was 
advanc:d and employed, as is iclated v. 5. and therefore not im. 
mediately after that great Victory; or, before ue was ſo advanced 
and then 1t would have raiſed Sa#!'s Jealoulic and Envy; and conſe- 
quently hindred David's Advancement. Burt it may be replied, 
That this Song, though placed afterwards, was ſung before Davia's 
advancement; relared v. 5. And that this did not hinder David's 
Preferment, muſt be atcribed, partly, to Saal's Policy, who, though 
he had an Eye upon David, and dcſigned ro cruſh him upon a fit 
occaſion; yer faw it neceſſary for his own Reputation, and the en- 
cour:gerneit of other Mens Valour, and for the ſatisfation of 
Jona1.o's paſſionate Deſire, and the juſt and general Expe&aricn of 
the whole Army and People, to give him tome conſiderable Prefers 
ment for the preſent; and principally, ro GOD'S Providence over- 
ruling Saul, againſt his own Inclination, and bis miſtaken Intereſts 
h 7. e. Our of all the neighbouring Cities, by, or through which 
the Viftorious Army marched. # According to the Cuſtom of thoſe 
times and places: Of which ſee Exod. 15. 20, Judges 11, 34» 

7 And the women anſwered one another k as thei 
played, and ſaid, * Saul hath ſlain his thouſands, and * Chap! 
David his ten thouſands U. = 21. It. 

k Singing by parts alternately. ! So they ſaid;becauſe David killed & 29+ 54 
Gelish, which was the principal cauſe of all the following ſlaughter 
of the Philiſtines. | | 

8 CT And Saul was very wroth, and the faying F dif. f Heb: _ 
pleaſed him, and he ſaid, They have aſcribed unto w ons 2 
David ten thouſands, and to me they have aſcribed bus ** 7 
thouſands ; and what can he have more, but the king- 
dom m ? 

m What greater honour can they give himy but that of the King« 
dom? Or thus: And merevver, this will not reſt here, they will cera 
ta.nly give him the Kingdom : they will tranſlate rhe Crown from me 
to him. Or thus : And moreover, the Kingdom tertainly belongs to him; 

i.e, I now perceive that this is the Favourite of God, and cf rie 
Peoplez tits is that Man afcer God's own Heait, to whom Samael 
told me tha: God would rranster my Kingdom. 

9 And Saul eyed David » from that day and for- 
ward. | 

» i. 6. Narrowly obſerved all his Counſels and ARions, that he 
might underſtand whether he had any Deſign upon the Kingdom or 
ages that he might find ſome colourable ; 0 of putting him 
to death, 

10 T And it came to paſs on the morrow, that the 
* evil ſpiric from God came upon Saul s, and he pro-* Chap: 
phelied p in the midſt of the houſe : and David played-16. 14« 
with his hand as at other times: and rhere was a javelin 
in Sauls hand 9. | | 

o Saul's Envy, and Jealouſie, and Diſcontent revived his Melan- 

' cholick D-ſtemper, which the Devil, according to his wont,ftruck in 
; With. Þ Or, he feigned himſelf to be # Prophet, for ſo Hebrew Verbs in 
; Hichpahel oft ſignific z 4.e. he uſethuncouth Geſtures, and Signs, and 
Speeches, as the Prophets, or Sons of the Prophets uſed ro do : for 
which they were by the ignorant and ungodly ſort repured mad 
Men, 2 Kings 9-11. And it may ſeem probable, that Saul did now 
ſpeak of Divine Things politickly;that thereby he might Jull David 


aſleep, and kill him, betore he ſuipe&ed any Danger. 9 Which ks 
kept there for the following purpoſe. 


11 And Saul caſt the javelin ; for he ſaid, I will ſmits 
David even to the wail with is ; and David avoided ous 
of his prelence twice r, i 

2 Y 2 


x Once 


hap. 


! 


17 
1 
' 


; 
RV Or. 2r 


pered, 


| 


V 


f Heb. 


© yerſe 


1 +Heb.s ſon 
8! of walour. 


was right in - 
in his eyes. C 


XVI i. 
» Once at this time, ard andther tim® upon a like occaſion, Chap. 


_ 24 And Saul was afraid of David /;, becauſe the 


-I2 
; : - and was departed from Saul. 
LORD was with him, P of all the People, 


{Left as he hat gotten the rec of God, and 
be thould alſo rake away his Kingdom. — 

12 Thereiore Saul removed him from him 7, and 

made him his captain over a thouſand, and he went out, 


and came in # before the people. ——— 
" From his Preſence and Court ; which he did, partly; bo wt 
feared leſt Dwvid thould watch and find an opportunity tO &1 _ 
as he had deſigned to kill David ; partly, becauſe he b as : g mw 
Eye-ſore, and his preſence now made him more ſad _ oben 
Muſick had made hum chearful:and principally that here y o em 
expoſe him to tie grearelt hazards and in fome ſort aw g4 tar 
to the hands of the Philifines, u He led his Soldiers fout » P 
and brought them back again wirh ſafery. Compare 2 an FH Het 
Or elſe the Phraſe of coming in, and going out, may be underitoo oo 
elſe where ) for converting Soy (as we uſe to ſay ) going *o an 
abour buſineſs ; as Chap. 29+ O- | [ : 
' 14 And David || behaved ome wiſely in all his 
nd the LORD was with him . 
T9 ona he had great Prudence in his ConduQ and [0 ; AMY 
ſucceſs fo!lowing his Deſigns: which are cwo principal _ oy 2 
ons of a G-nera', +a OT. [0 God tuined all Sz 
vices upon h:miclf and ro David's Advantage. ; 
TR Wherefore when Saul ſaw that he behaved him- 


ſelf wiſ:ly, he was atraid of him. _ 
; tte all Hrael and Judah loved David, becauſe he 


went out and came in before chem. 
17 4 And Saul faid to David, _—_ my ou 
s f . . Fe a. he; . on y 
daughter Merab, her will I give thee co wite | 
be « 6 + valiant for me, and fight the LOR L > bartels: 
for Saul ſaid, Let not mine hard be upon him, bur ler 
tlie hand of ctie Phi:iitines be upon iym & | 
3 This was no more than Saul was obliged ro do by his former promiſe, 
Chap 17. 25. which here he renews and pretenes to perform, 
though he intended nothing lets, 2s the Sequel thews. Whercby 
he makes himlſclf guilry of Jagratitude, Injuſticcs and breach of 
Truſt, and withal of groſs Hy pocrifie. 2 He ilfought ſo great art of- 
fer wou'd oblige him, who was of himſelt Valiant enough, to give 
proofs of more than common Valour, and to venture upon the moit 
dngerous Enterprizes .. | 
5 And David faid tints' Saul, Whom? and what 
& my life a, or my f:thers family in lrael,that Ithould 
be ſon in law to tbe king ?. , 99 | Ws 
a i.e. My manner of livmg ! How obſcure is that condirion in 


= 


born and hive been bred.! Or rather thus : How lictle | 
_ life Crk; that by the expoſing of that ro ſome hezard | 
( whicky Saul required of him } Ffhould purchaſe a King's Daugh- | 


ter! In theſe Expreflions David ſheweth nor only his Hunulicy, bur 
ſo his Wiſiom, in diſcovering fo deep a ſenſe of tis own mean» 
neſs, that Saul might ſce hew far he was trom afpiring at the King= 
dom, and-u-ght have no occaſion to fitlpe& that he was alreadly a> 
cinted thereto. n | 

: vg Bur ic came to Paſs at the time when Merab 
Sauls daughter ſhouid have been given to David 5, 
that ibe was given unto Adriel the Meholathite c to 
wife. | OE BY ROY 

6 When the Marriage was even ready to be ſolemnized. c The 

Son of Barz:Uai, as he 1s called 2 Sam. 21. 8. "This was an at of 
grear Tyjuſtice and Pertidiouſneſs ;* and accordingly this M arriage 
Was accurſed by G-d, and the C hildrea begorten 1a 1t, were by God's 
poLAtIMent cur off, 2 Sam. 21s | : 
—_ And Michal Sauls .daughter loved David :; and 

| rhey told Saul, and che thing Þ pleaſed him 4. 

d Not for any RefpeQ' he had ro David ; bur for hisown mali- 
'043 and wicked Ends, that he might make uſe of her love to Dawd, 
to enſaare and ruine himy- which, ae though might be done many 

ways, whereof one 1s here expreit:d. EE : | 
21 And Sau! {aid, I will give him her, that ſhe may 
be a ſnare to him, and char che hand of the Philiſtines 
*may be* againft him, Wherefore Saul ſaid co David, 
:6 Thou ſhalt * this day e be my fon in law, in 1he one of 
e twain f. | | CCS 
bac i. & Fl within a time which probably $au! prefixed. 
F Whereas I have only two Daughters, and chou was diſappointed of 
thy expeQtarion in the one »y an unexpeRed accident thou thalt cer- 
tiny have the other, which is the tame thing, Heb. in the Wain. 
Thus the Cities of Gilead is pur for one of them, Judges I2.7% And 
the ſides of the Ship for one of the ſides, Jonah 1. 5. Or, be aith, in 
the twain, or*in butch, becaufe he was int effe& b<rrothed to the one, 
and ſhould be marricd to the other, and fo was his Son imrlaw upon 
# double account- . : : 

\ 22. © And Saul commanded his ſervants, /aying,Com- 
mune with David g ſecretly, and ſay, Behold, the king 
barkdelight in thee, and all his ſervants love thee ; now 
therefore be the kings lon in law _ 

 g Whom having ſoJarely and groly deceived,he found backward 
to embrace his motiong-and theretoie ters others on work to perſwade 


him. 

©. 23 And Sauls ſervants. ſpake thoſe words in' the ears 
of David : and David aid, Seemeth It to you &@ lipghe 
thing to be a: kings fon in law, teing that I am a poor 
man, and lightly eſteemed 5: 14 

" þ And therefore neither have Eſtate nor Credit to give ( accord- 
ing to the manner, Ga, 34-42 Ex0d. 22,16, 17; )* a Lowry ſuitable 


* 4 MU ÞB LI 


and Fonathan told David, ſaying, Saul my father ſeek- 


_ Chap. X1R, 

24 And the ſervants of Saul told hini, ſaying, F On + Heb. 
chis manner ſpake David. OO #cooraiy 

25 And Saul faid, Thus ſhal ye ſay to David, The ing 
king defireth not any dowry.but an hundred fore-skins ; 
of the Philiſtines, co be avenged cf the kings enemies. 
But Saul thought co make David fall by the hand of the 
Philiſtines. | 

; Theſe he deſires rather than their Heads; partly ,for the great:r 
convenicnce of bringing them, and preſenting them betore bim ; 
part!y, to cover his Malice againſt David with a prerence of zeal for 
God, and for his People, and for rhe Covenant of Circumciſion ; 
and partly, that the Philiſtines might be the more enraged againſt 
David tor this reproachful and barbarous uſage of them, and might 
therefore watch all opportunities ro deſtroy him. 

26 And when his ſervants told David theſe words, it 
pleaſed David well to be the kings fon in law &: and 
the days / were not f expired. 4 

& As for other Reaſons,fſo eſpecially becauſe this apened the Door ,Hlebs 
to the Kingdom which Got kad promiſed him, 1 5 e. The time al- /*/flea, 
lowed by Saul to David for the Execution of this Exploit. 

27 Wherefore David aroſe, he, and his men, and 
ſlew of the Philiſtines ewo hundred men, and David 
brought their fore-skins, and they gave them in. full tale 
to the King », that he might be the kings ſon in law x 
and Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. 

m He doubled the number required ; partly, to oblige Saul the 
more to tae performance of his Promite z and partly, to ſhew his 
great Reſpect and AﬀeCtion toSaul's Daughter. 


28 4 And Saul ſaw and knew that the LORD was 
with David,and that Michal Sauls daughter loved him. 

29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of David », and 
Saul became Davids enemy continually. 

» Becauſc he both loſt his Deſign againſt Davis's life, and had 
now paved a way for him to the Throne. 

30 Lhen the princes of the Philiſtines went forth o: 
and it came to paſs after they went forth, hat David 
behaved binſz1f more wiſely than all the ſervants of 
Saul, ſo that his name was mach + ſet by. 

0 Towir, to war againſt the J/raelizes, being provoked both by T Heli 


their former loſſes, and elpecially by that a& of David's, related as 2!6ciod 
bove, Ve. 27» 


' « SF OO. " C H A P. XIN 

Saul purpoſeth te kill David: Jonathan diſclſeth it ſpeaketh in his behalf ts. 
Saul : who ſ[weareth not to kill him : he returneth to Court, 1 7. By 

reaſon of his ſucceſs in a new War, Saul again ſecketh ro kill him : Michal 
acquainteth him with it © he flyeth : ſhe detuiveth her father, $ 17s 
David comirh to Samuel at Ramah : Saul ſ[endeth meſſengers twice to afi« 
prehevwd him: they both propheſie, 18. 21. He geeth himfclf thithes . 
and propheſieth likewiſe, 22 —— 24. 

AX Saul ſpake to Jonathan his ſon 8. \ and to all 

. his ſervants b, that they ſhould kill David. | 

s Whom. though lately engaged in a League of Friendſhip with ' 

David, he thought ro oblige to it by ſenſe of his own Intereſt,as be« 

ing the next Heir of the Crown, and likely to ſuffer moſt by David's 

advancement. b Whar before he ſecretly deſigned, now he openly 

and impudently avowed. 


2 Burt Jonathan Sanls ſon, delighted much in Davids 


eth to kiil thee : now therefore, I pray thee, take heed 
to thy ſelf uncil the morning c, and abide in a fecret 
place, and hide thy ſelf. | 2H 

c Leſt he kill thee before I diſcourſe with him, and endeayous 
to reconcile him to thee; which I think nor fit ro attempr as yerg 
whilſt he is in the fir of Rage againſt thee;but I intend to do it in 
morning, when niay hope to find him in a better Temper. . 

3 And [I will go out and ſtand by my father in the 

held, where thou arr 4, and I will commune with my 
facher of thee, and what I fee, that I will tell thee. 

4 In the Ficld where my Father ufeth ro walk, where alſo T would 
have thee ro hide thy ſelf, that I niay know where to find thee ag 
hand, to acquaint thee with the ſucceſs of my Endeaveurs, that thou 
mayeft accordingly either return to Court, or ſpeedily depart. | 

4 Y And Jonathan ſpake good of David unto Saul 2. 
his father e, and faid unto him, Let not the king ſim 
againſt his ſervant, againſt David : becauſe he hath nor " 
finned againſt thee, and becauſe his works have bees t@ - © 
thee-ward very good. Sen T7 

e Which he could nor do without hazard to himſelf. Hereig 
cherefore he performed the Duty of a true Friend, and of a valiant 
Man. | 


5 For he did pat his * life in hi hand f,and flew the « Judgs 


Cup. 


| Heb. 
1feraa) 
ehira da; 


4 Heb. 
hi; face. 
t Chap- 
16, 14+ 
& 18. 1 
+ Heb. « 
the Lord. 


G Pal. 
i9- title. 


Philiſtine,and the LORD wroughe a great ſalvation for 9. 17. ad 
all Iſracl 3 chou ſaweſt ir, and didft rejoyce:: where- 12. 3. | 
fore then wilt thou fin againſt innocent blood, to flay Ct. 25% 
David without a caule ? dat Sms 
F i. e He expoſed his life ro eminent hazard. See the Nates on "Ou 
Fuages 12+ 3. : | 

6 And Saul hearkned unto the yoice of Jonathan, 
and Saul fware,.4s the LORD liveth, he ſhall not be | 
- RR, x 

g This great change 1s not to be aſcribed to any true Repentarcg 
for his fin againſt David, er any better aff<ion- which he now had 
ro liim; bur meerly ro his own worldly Intereſt; becauſe he way 
convinced by Jor:athen's diſcourſe, that he could nor kill him, wich 
Ut great inconvenience and ſhame t@ kinfel£, 


7 And 


to her Qualicy- | 


F Heb. 


| ferd9) 


Lid day: 
th eb. 
bis face. 
* Chap- 
16, 14- 
& 18. 10: 
+Heb. 9 
the Lord. 


; Pl. 
j9- title. 


Chup- XIX. 


G \ 
| EL #- 4 
. | 
7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan ſhew- 
ed him all choſe things: and Jonathan broughr David 
to Saul, and he was In his preſence as F in times paſt. 

$ CE And there was war again: and David went 

our, and fought wich the Philiſtines, and flew them 
with a great ſlaughter, and they fled from Þ him. 

9 And *che evil ſpirit F ſrom the LORD was upon 
Saul h, as he far in his houſe with his javelin in bis hand: 
and David played with his hand. | 

þ Davids Succeſſes againſt the Philiſtines , which ſhould have cheer- 
ed his hearr, made him ſad, and the Devil warched the cpportuni- 
ty £o improve his Melancholy, as before he had dene. | 

10 And Saul ſought to ſmite David even to the wall 
with the javelin : but he flipt away out of Sauls pre- 
ſence ; and ize ſmore the javelin into the wall: and Da- 
vid fled, and eſcaped that night, : 

11 * Saul alſo ſent meſſengers unto Davids houſe to 
watch him, and to ſlay bim in the morning 5 : and 
Michal Davids wife told him, ſaying, If thou fave noc 
thy life to night, 'to morrow thou ſbalt be ſlain & 

; Why not in the Night? Anſw. Partly, becauſe it would have 
been barbarous, and moſt diſhonourable to Saul, ro break into Da- 
wias Houſe by Night, and kill him in his own Houſe and Bed ; and 
it ſeemed more expedient to kill him as he came out of his Houſe 
in the Morning : partly, becauſethe Night might give David lome 
opportunity of eſcaping, which the Day-light would prevent: and 
principally, by Gods ſingular providence, infatuating Sauls Mind to 
take the worſt courſe, that David might be delivered from him. 
& Which ſhe migar learn, eicher by information from Jonathan, or 
ſome other Courrier that was privy to the D-ſign: or trom her own 
obſervation of tome fuſpicious or dangerous Perſons hovering about 
the Houſe. - 2 s : AED, ; ”y : 

12 © So Michal let David down thorow a windcw }: 
and he wentand fled, and eſcaped. _ 

1 Becauſe they Jay in wait for him at the Doors of the Houſe, 
whenloever he ſhould come forth there, LESS 

12 And Michal took 7 an image #, and laid it in 
the bed, and puta pillow of goats hair for his bolſter », 
and covered it with a cloth os | PT | 

m Heb. Teraphim, which was an Image made in hiimane ſhape : 
which ſhe might keep ſecretly, either out of a ſuperſtitious regard 
to it, or out of meer curiofity. 'Lhis ſtratagemi ſhe uſed, becauſe 
knowing her Fathers unquier, and jealous, and furiovs Temper; 
the ſuſpeCted he might come or ſend, roſee wherher David was there 
ot no» n Or, put great Goats hair updn his bolftey ; 7. e. Upon the 
head and face of the Image, which lay upon his Boliter, that it 
might have ſome kind of reſemblance Of Davids head and hair, at 
leaſt in aſick mans Bed; where there uſeth ro be but a glimmering 
light. Goats 1s here put for Goats hair, as it manifeſtly 1s, Exod. 25. 
4. and 26. 7. and 35+ 26. Ir is acknowledged by learned Writers, 


that in thoſe Eaſtern Countries, Goats had much longer hair than | 


ours have, and were fhorn like Sheep, and that their hair was not 
unlike to a Mans or Womans hair ; as may alſo be gathered from 
Cant. 4. I. thy hair is as @ flock of Goats ; i. e. As the hair of a flock 
of Goats. And as there was Goats hair of ſeveral colours, ( as the 
Wooi of Sheep in divers parts isof very differing colours, as white, 
or black, or yellow, &. ) ſo it is moſt probable ſhe took that co> 
Jour which was likeſt the colour of Davias Hair And ſhe, rook this 
rather than the hair of another Man, becauſe the procuring and or- 
dering. of that would have taken up ſeme time ; whereas ſhe had 
Goats hair of all ſorts at hand, as being uſed in Spinning or Wea- 
ving, &c. Or, the fenſe may be this, according to our Tranſlati- 
on, Thar ſhe put a Pillow of the lotteſt part of Goats hair under 
the Head of the Image, as they uſed to pur under the Heads of fick 
Men ; whereby alſo the head of the Image fiaking into the Pillow, 
might be leſs diſcerned, eſpecially when it was either, wholly or 
In part covered with a Cloth. And all this Art was uſed, that Da- 
vid being ſuppoſed, ind by ſome perſons who were ſent roenquire, 
perceived, as they thought, to be in the Bed, Sau! might be hindred 
rom purſuing and overtaking him before he had got into ſome 
ſecure place. 0 Upon pretence of his being ſick, and needing ſome 
ſuch covering, bur reaily in deſign to prevent the diſcovery of her 
Deceit, | 
14 And when Saul ſent meflengers p to take David, 
ſhe ſaid, He 3s ſick. : 

> To wit, other Meſſzngers in the morning, ſuppoſing the for- 
mer to be either flow o' perfidions. | : 

15 And Saul ſent the meſſengers again to ſee David 9; 


MEYINSs Bririg him up to me in the bed, that I may flay 
1M 


. 9 Or only, to ſee David, which they did not before, but went a- 
way ſatisfied ( as it was fit they ſhould ) with her Report and Teſti- 
mony of his Sickneſs, | 


16 And when the meſſengers were come in, behold, 


there was an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats | 


bair for his bolſter. | 
17 And Saul ſaid unto Michal, Why haft thou decei- 


yed me 1o, and ſent away mine enemy, that he is eſca- | 
ped? And Michal antwered Saul, He faid unro me; | 


Ler me go : Why ſhould I kill thee r ? 
« r If thou doſt not permit me to — 
c 


be forced for my own defence to kill thee. Though it is moſt lke- 
ly, this was a Lye, and a Fiftiorf of her own. 


18 © .So David fled, and eſcaped, and came to 
Samuel ro Ramah /; and told him all that Saul had 
oo to him; and he and Samuel went and dwelt in 

aioth. 


# Parly, fox Comfort and DireQion in his great Diſttsſs; and 


r 


ky 


( 
nw 


. without diſcovery, I fhall | 


M TE: O 
partly, for ſafety, tupp: ſing that Saul would be aſhrmed to execute 
his bloody Deligoas in the' preſence of ſo venerable a Per{cn 3s Samus 
l, who had laid ſo great Obligations upen Saul, and had {uch great 
and juſt Reputarion with the people. ; 

19 And it was told Saul, faying, Behold, David « 
at Naioth in Ramah z. 

t Or, near Ramabh : the Hebrew prepcſition beth, in, being ofr puc 
for near, as it 1s apparently uſed, Numb, 33. 37, 38 Job. 5+ 13. Jer, 
20. 2. and 32. 7. Naioth was either an Houſe or Coll dge in the 
Town of Ramoyv, ora Village in the Territory cf Ramah, or near 
ro the Town of Roman; in which there was a Colledye of the Pre» 
phers, amecngit whom Samucl thought David might be ſecure. _ 

20 And Saul ſent meſtengers to take David «: and 
when they ſaw the company of the prophets prophe= 
ſying x, and Samuel ſtanding as appointed over them y, 
the ſpirit of God was upon the meilengers ot Saul, and 
they allo propheſied % _. TEES 

#« Thus Sauls Wickedneſs and fury increaſed ; and he that at firſt 
uſed only ſecret PraCtices againſt David,. now breaks forth into oper 
ard impudent Hoſtil:ties ; plainly declaring, that he neither feared 
God, nor reverenced man. He would have puniſhed Samuel, as 
afterwards he did Ahimelech, for giving David Entertainment, bur 
that be feared the p:ople, who had ſo gicat and unanimous a Vene= 
ration for him. x #z.e. Speaking of God, or cf the things of God 
by Divine Inſpiration ; either praiſing God, or inſtructing Men.” 
Compare Nrewnb, Ie 25, I Sam. 10. go J To.inftru&, moderate and 
dire& them in thoſe Holy Exerciſes. For though they propheſjed 
by Divine Inſpiration, w hich Samuel could nor govern; yer they 
were both to prepare and dilpoic themſelves for it before-hand, and 
to make gocd impiovement of it afterwards, in both which they 
needed Samuels Counſel and Afiſtance. And whereas ſome might 
falfly pretend ro thoſe Raptures; or the Devil mighr transform 
himſelfinto an Angel of Light, and convey ſome evil or fa.ſ: Sug- 
geſtions into ſome of their Minds, Samuels Preſence and Judymentr 
was neceſſary ro prevent and.to dere& ſuch Impoſtures. Beſides, 
Samuel would by his preſent ConjunQtion with them in thoſe Holy 
Exerciſes, encourage them, and ſtir up ethers to rhe coveting of 
thoſe Gifts, and the performance of ſuch Religious Duties. z Bes 
ing inſpired by God to do ſo, as wicked Balszmalſo was ; that being 
wrapt vp into ſuch Extafie, their Minds might be wholly taken up 
with thoſe matters, and quite taken off from their D:fign of ſeiz- 
ing David. 2 ; 

21 And when it was told Saul, he ſent other meC{- 
ſengers, and they prophelied likewiſe: and Saul ſent 
meſſengers again the third time; ant] they propheſied 
alſo. | | | 

22 Then went he alſo to Ramah, and came to a 
great well that i: in Sechu: and he asked, and faid,; 
Where are Samuel and David 4? And one ſaid, Behold, 
they be at Naioth in Ramah. _ BE 

a For, his Mcfſengers nor returning, he knew notexaQly where 
they were. ER | = 

23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ramiah » and 
the ſpirit of God was upon him alſo b, and he wenton, 
and propheſied until ke came to Naioth in Ramah : 

. b It came upon him in the way ; whereas it Came-not upon his 
Meſſengers till chey came to the place. hereby God would con- 
vince Saul of the Vanity of all his Deſigns agaifiſt David; and that in 
them he fought againſt God - gray ; - 

24 And he ftript off his clothes c alfo 4, and pro- 


down 


phets & ? ; 

c To wit, his Military or Royal Garments : which he did; either 
that be might ſuir himfelf and his habit to the reſt of the company; 
or, becauſe his mind being altogerher raken up with Divine things, 
he did not underſtand nor heed what he did. d This implies, that 
the Meſſengers which he ſent, who probably were Military Per« 
{ons, had done ſo before him. e This doth not contradi& 1 Sam. 
I5. 35. where it is faid, that Samuel came no more t0 ſee Saul : fo! here 


ſurprize David. f As the reſt of the Prophets rhere did. g Heb. 
felt, to wit, down upon tre Earth; for bis Mind being in an Extaſie, 
he had not the uſe of his Senſes or Motion, as he, Numb. 24. 4. 
Godſo ordering it, that David might have an opportunity toeſcape. 
h i. e. Stript off his upp:r Garments, as was faid b:fore, and as the 
| word Naked is ofc uſed, as Iſa, 20, 2. Mich. 1. 8. See allo 2 Sem. 6. 
20, Joh, 2t.7, Andit is here repeated to ſignifie how long he lay 
in that poſture. + Se God kept him as it were with Chains, till Da- 
vid was got out of his reach. k The ſame Proverb which was takers 
up upon a like occaſion, 1 Saw. Io. 82. is here remembred and re- 
v»ved upon this new occaſion, as an Evidence of Gods wonderful 
care over David ; he made him! in ſome fort a Prophet, that he mighe 


anake David a King. : 

| CH AP. XX. 

David complain:th to Jonathan of Saul : he comfortath hint: can hardly be+s 
lieve what David ſaith of his father : promiſeth to giv+ him notice how 
his abſence was takan : they renew a covenant of friendſhip, and (wear to 
each ether, 1, 17: Their ſign, 18, 23. Saul acketh for David 
at the fealt of the new minon, 24,—27: Jonathan excufeth David : 
Saul incenſed kereat revil:th Jonathan, and aketh to kill him, 28 ,- 34- 


Jonachan advertiſeth David, 35,——40, They part with tears, 41, 42. 
| ND David fied 2 from Naioth in Ramah 4, and 
| came and faid before Jonathan, What have I 
done? what is mine iniquity ? and what js my fin ber 
fore thy father c, that he ſeeketh my Þ life 4? 


—— 


[ 


' was, taking the opportunity of Savls abſence. e What is it which 
thus incealſcth thy rather againſt me.? Whars Crims doh he chargs 
"= ms 


Chap. XR; | 


pheſied before Samuel e in like manner f, and + lay + Heb! 

7 pr þ all rhat day, and all that night ; :#*0. 
wherefore they fay, * Is Saul allo among the pro- Nun. 
4. 


4+ 


* Chap. 


10, IT, 


Saul goes to Samuel, and thar not with deſign to ſee him, bur to ' 


+ Heb. 
a Whilſt Sal Jay in an Extaſie. 5 To Gibeah where Jonathan ſul. 


thap. XX. | 
| m2 wich? &@ To wir, to deſtroy it, | pay Phraſe is of uſed, as 
chap. 22. 23. Pal. 38. 12. and 54. 3. and 63. 9+ | | 

. 'And he fair unto him, God forbid ; thou ſhalt not 
lþ- die e: behold, my father will do nothing either - ib 
Wt: ſmall, but that he will | ſhew it me: and why thoul 


CO Ver = 1? . ” ? it is nort {0. 
Wh ither hide this thing IrTom Me: 1 | 
_— facl Intereſt with my Father ; ner doth he 


*311] ſecure thee by my | do 
Fhhgk —_ rhee; £4 c Hem he doth in his frantick ORONT ro 
be impured to him ; and when he comes to himſelf, I doubt nor 


ro reconcile thee to him. For Jonathan gave credit to 18 ry per 
Oath, chap. 19. 6. and the worthieſt Minds are leaſt ſuſpicious, an 
as | . . . 


moſt charitable in their Opinions of others. : ie 
2 And David ſware f moreover, and ſaid, Thy fa- 
ther certainly knoweth that I have found _ grace 16 


. and he ſaid, Let not Jonathan know this. 
ſt he WE tevad | but truly as the LORD liveth, and 
2 thy ſoul liverh, here 15 but a ſtep berween me and 


death. 
f The matter being of great moment, and Jonathan doubtingthe 


[ 
| 
{2 1 
i 
[ 


EIS HH U E L£. 
 morrow any time, c« the third dey, and behold, 3f there 
+ Heb. 


& : UNco 
a Do tihcu hear and jndge between us. Tt 1s an abrupt Speech, ;;, 


be good toward David, and I then ſer:d not unto thee 
and } ſhew it thee ; 


which 15 uiual in great Paſſions, 

13 The LORD do fo, and much more to Jonathan: 
but if it plezſe my ſather to do thee evil, then I will 
ſhew it thee, and ſend thee away, that thou mayeſt go 
in peace; and the LORD be with thee, as he hath 
been with my father b. 

b TheLord give thee that Honour and Snccefs in all thy Aﬀairs 
which he hath given to my Father. J-nathan undoubredly knew 
ot Samuels final and irrevocable Sentence of Sauls RejeCtion from the 
Kingdom, and of the Subſtitution of ſome other Perſon afrer God's 
own Heart in his flead; and that David was this Perſon, h« might 
frongly ſuſpc& ( thar which even Saul ſuſpe&ed ) both from his 
<m1cnt Piety, and Wiſdom, and Valour, and univerſal Worth, 
and from the great things which God had done, both by him, and 
for him, in preſerving and advanced him by ſuch unuſual Methods; 
and .it is moſt likely that Jonathan did ask David abour it, and that 


hich follows In 
ir, he confirms bis word with an Oath, w 
ed oe Ph Verſe. On'y heinterpoſceth a reaſon why Saul con- 


ccaled it from Jonathan. | 
[ft or, ſay og” Then ſaid Jonathan unto David, || Whatſoever 


| 1 7 hee. 
FEhat isth» thy ſoul + deſireth ge, I will even do it for t 
mind, and 4 To _ for the diſcevery of the truth, and for the preſervati- 
{wil do,S&c. on of thy life. 

T Speaketh, © And David ſaid unto Jonathan, Beho!d, to mor- 
| or thinketh, C0, :; the new moon þ, and I ſhould nor tail to fit 
| with the king atmeat i: bur let me go, that I may hide 


7 ird day k at even. 
my ſzIf in the fields, unto the third day 

4 Which was a Golan 2nd Feſtival time, as among the —_ 
ind other Heathens, ſo alſo with the Hebrews, who folemnizcd 1t 
with offering Peace-offeripgs to Ged, and Feaſting together __ 
the remainders of it. after the manner- See Numb, 10. 10. and ; 
18. Pſal. 81.3. i Thenheuſethto expe& my company aboveorner 
times. & i. e. Unto the next day bur one after the new m_—__ 
as appears by comparing V. 19. 27- 35- His meaning 1s not, that 1c 
ſhould hide himſelf in any certain place all the three Days, bur that 
he ſhould ſecure himſelf eicher at Berklehom with his Friends, or 1 
any other place till the third Day. 5% 

6 If thy father at all mils me 7, then ſay, David ear- 
neſtly asked leave of me m, that he might run to Beth- 
| FOr, feaſt. lehem his city », for there 55 4 yearly || ſacrifice o there 
for all the family ® _ TR 

1 Oueſt. How could David imagine that Saul would expe&t his 
Company, whom he had once and again endeavoured to kill? An). 
Firſt, He might ſuppoſe that David would aſcribe al] that to his 
Madueſs and frantick Fits, which being over, .he would promiſe 


think that Saul would indeed exp=& him to Fraſt with him, con- 
lidering his late and great danger from Saul; bur that Saul would 
mzke uſe of this prete<nce, and require his preſence, thar he mighr 
lay hoid upoa him ; and therefore he deſired to try the Experiment. 
» Who being the Kings Son and Deputy, uſed to give Licence to 
Military Men to depart for a ſeaſon upon juſt occaſions. mn i.e. The 


was offered up in ſome high place there yearly; upon iome ſpecial 
ccczfion nor mentioned in Scripture, which was accompanied with 
a Feaſt : or, a yearly ; 
p Whercin all the Members rf our Family uſed to meet frogerher, 
when they will earneſtly expe& me above others, and w:1! charge 
me with Pride and Unnaturaineſs, if I negle& their Invitation. 


7 If he ſay thus, I: 3s well, thy ſervant ſhall have 


peace : but if he be verywroth hen be ſure q that evil 
is determined by him. 

Heb. know thou : For indeed David knew well enongh that Saul 
defigned ro kill him ; but he uſeth this courſe for Jenarhans Informa- 
tion and Satisfaftion, and for his own greater Vindication, if he did 
wholly withdraw himſelf from Sau; and from his Wife ; which he 
forelaw he ſhould be forced ro do. } WET 

8 Therefore thou ſhalt deal kindly with thy ſervant r: 


* Chap. for * thou haft brought thy ſervant into a covenant of 
18.3:& the LORD [with thee: notwithſtanding, if there be 
23- +8. in me iniquity, flay me thy ſelf :: for why ſhouldeſt 
thou bring me to thy father « ? 


7 In giviig metimely notice, and a true 2ccotint of Saul; Diſpo- 
ſition and Intention rowards mes ſ i.e. A ſolemn Covenant, not 


[ 


himſelf ſfery in the Kings preſcnce. Second'y, David might nor | comprehending their Poſterity. And therefore as Jonathan ſpeaks 


place of his Birth ard Education, Jon 7.4%. 0 A Sacrifice which ; 


Feaft, as the Hebrew word 1s ſometimes uſed. |. 


David did faithfully inform him of the whole Truth, as may be 
g-ti.ered both from the. words here following, and from chap. 23. 
17. And that thek;.owledge hereof did not raife Jealouſie, and En« 
vy, and Rage in him, who was the next Heir of the Crown, as it 
did in his Father, muſt be aſcribed ro Jonathars Piery towards 
God, to whoſe diſpoſal he chearfully ſubmitted himſelf, and to his 
lincere Friensſhip to David, in whole happineſs he rejoyced as in his 
own. 

14 And thou ſhalt not only while yetT live, ſhew me 


the kindneſs of the LORD c, that T die not d; 
c Or, Aud wiltſt ch mt, if T ſhall then be alive, ( to wit, when he 
Lerd ſball be with thee, as he hath been wiih my Father, as he now ſaid; 


him : ) yea, wil:ſt thou not ( the ſame Particle twice repeated for af< 
ſeveration ; i. e. Tam well afſured thar thou wiltſt ) ſhew me 1he kinds 
neſs of the Lord ; 1. e. either ſuch kindneſs as the Lord hath ſhewed 
to thee in/preſerving thy Life in the midſt of ſo many, and ſuch 
great Dangers : or, that kindneſs ro which thou haſt engaged thy 
ſe'f, in the Covenant Sworn between thce and me in Gods preſence. 
d That thou do nor kill me or mine, as Princes of anctker Line uſe 
to kill the neareſt Relations of the former Lint from whom the 
Kingdom was tranſlated ro them; which they de either by way of 


Revenge, or in Policy,and reaſon of State, to ſecure the Kingdom to 
themſelves. 


hath cut off the enemies of David, every one from the 
face of the earth f. 


e Heſaith not, 'the kindngſs ef the Lord, as before, becauſe the Co. 
venant b<tween them ſeems to have been only Perſona), and nor 


cenfidently of his own preſcrvation by virtue of that Covenant - ſo 
te here lays this acdiriona] Obligation upon David, That he would 
extend his kindneſs to all his Progeny. f Which he will certainly 
do without exception of Saul my Father, and thoſe of his Children 
who have joyned, or ſhall joyn with him in his Hoſtilities and 
Cruelties againſt Davida. And by this word, Enemies, he implies 
tie realonableneſs of his Requeſt, becauſe Jonathan was none of thax 
number, and therefore not to ke treated as ſuch. 


16 So Jonathan f made a ceverant with the houſe of 
David g, ſayirg, Let the LORD even require jt at the 
hand of Davids enemies h. 
£ The Cevenant which before was Perſonal, he now e 

the whole Houſe cf David, expeCting a reciprocal "hs ams of 
it on Davids ſide, which dcubtleſs he obrained. þ Iteither I or any 
of my Houſe ſhall break this Covenant, and fhall prove Ene« 
mies to David or to his Houſe, let the Lord, the Witneſs ofthis Co. 
venant, ſeverely puniſh the Violators of it, whoever they are. O= 
thers thus : Let the Lord require and puniſh the breach of this Coe 
venant in Dav.d. if he break ir, But becauſe ir was emnious and 
reproackful ro ſuppoſe ſuch a thing of David, by a Figure called 


| Euphemiſmus , he names Davids Enemies for David ; as they alſo ex« 


pound 1 S477. 25. 22. But the former ſenſe ſeems more probable, 


' becauſe this Verſe contains only Jenathans Stipulation or Covenanz 


withDavid and hisHouſe,which being exprefled in the former part of 
it, 1s in this Jatter part confirmed by the uſual form of Imprecati« 
on ; and the Reſtipulation cr Coverant of David to Jonathan and his 
Houſe, is mentioned in the next Verſe, Yet may that other ſenſe 
ſtand well enough ; taking theſe words for Jonathan; Adjuration of 
David to be kind to him, cenfirmed with an Imprecation in caſe ke 


lightly undertaken, bur ſeriouſly entred into, in the name and fear 


breaks it. #t IT am contented thou ſhouldeſt kill me. « Why ſhoul- 
d-{t rhou betray me to thy Father, by concealing his evil intenti- 
ons from me ?. | 

9 And Jonathan faid, Far be it from thee x * for if | 
I knew certainly, that evil were determined by my fa- 
ther to come upon thee, then would not [ tell itthee ? | 

x I abhor the thoughts of either killing thee my ſe)}f, or giving | 
thee up to my Father ro ſlay thee. | 

10 Thenſaid David to Jonathan, Who ſhall tell me? 
or what if thy father anſwer thee roughly ? 

y By what means or Meſſenger ſhall I underitand rhis? for perad- 
venture thou wilt not be able ro come to me thy {c]F. 

1: J And Jonathan ſaid unto David. Come, and 
let us goout intOthe fieid z, And they went out both 
of them into the field. 


z Leſt we be over-heard. 


+ Heb, $12 And Jonathan ſaid unto David, O Lord GOD of 
Jearchet, Iſrael a, when I have | founded my facher, about to 


of God, and in his preſence, calling him ro be the Wirneſs of our 
Sincerity therein, and the Avenger of Perfidiouſneſs in him that | 


do otherwiſe. As if he ſhould ſay, I Adjure thee, as thou ho 
eſcape ſuch a Miſchief ( which Thad rather might befall + oof" 
nemies than thee ) that thou deal not ſo ungratefully with me or 
my Houſe. Which Adjuration of Jonathan, David ſeconds With an 
Oath in the next Verſe, at the requ«ſt of Fenarhan, 


17 And Jonathan cauſed David to ſwear again 3 [|be- | 
cauſe he loved him k ; for he loved him = he {ono [Or 
his own ſoul. * ward: bitte 


i Hebe. And Jonathan added or proceeded to make David Swear - 1. ej 
Having himſelf Sworn to David, or Adjured David, in the fore. 
going Verſe, he here requires Davids Oath to him, by way of Re. 
ftipulation or Confirmation. k. Becauſe he had a true Friendſhj p for 


4 


David, he deſired that the Covenant might be inviolab] 
through all cheir G2nerations. - ably obleryed 


18 Then Jonathan ſaid to David, To morrow ;; the 


new moon : and thou ſhalt be miſſed, becauſe thy ſeat / 
will be + empty. 


UY* N5o 


I9 And wc thou haſt ſtayed three days mn, then 
| thou 


Chap. X&x, 


I- & when God ſhall have advanced thee ro the Kingcomy, as he did 


I5 But alſo thou ſhalt not cut off * thy kindneſs e * , 5x 
from my houſe for ever : no not when the LORD "Iv 


{ i.e, The place where David uſed to ſit at Meals with Srl, See rr 


Chap. 


| Or, 
diligently 
f Hezb» 
eatlyi 
q He b . 71 
the day of 
thebſineſ 
Gr- in the 
working 
day. 
| Or, tha? 
ſheweth 
the 82s 


F Heb. 901 
ay thing. 


Verſe 
4 Te 


\ witneſs. 


; *. 1 [. 
Chap. XY. : 
10r, thou ſhait go down [| + quickly, and come to the 
diligently» place where thou didit hide thy ſelf, + when the 
t Heb» hyfineſs was in hand n, and ſhalt remain by the ſtone | 
eotlyv. Ezel 4 
| ga; m Either at Bethlehem with thy Friends, v. 6. or elſewhere, as 
. _ th thou ſhalt ſee fit. 7 Heb. in the 4ay of buſineſs : or, of che buſineſs. And 
m mw theſe words are tobe joyned, cither, 1. with the words next fore- 
ay going ; and fo they note the time when David hid himſelf there ; 
mY which was, when t/-'s tame buſmeſs which now they were treating 
T that about, was in agitation formerly ; to wit, to diſcover Sauls Mind 
Adr and Parpoie towards him ; chap. 19. 2, 3- Or, 2. With the mcre 
Pp , remote words ; and fo they note the time when David ſhould come 
is to the place appointed, and formerly uſed ro hide himſelf in, upon 
a like occaſion ; to wit, in the day when the buſineſs here ſpoken of 
was to be dune ; 7. e. when the diſcovery of Sauls Mind was to be 
made. o Qr, bythe fone of going, or travelling ; i. e. By that Stone 
which dire&ts Travellers in the way; to wit, inſome Cave, or con- 
venient place, which was near that Stone. 

20 And [ wi'l ſhoot three arrows on the ſide thereof, 
as though I ſhot at a mark p- 

p He choſe this way to avoid Suls ſuſpicion, becauſe Bows and 
Arrows were the principal Arms of thoſe times; and Jonathan, as 
well as others, did off go forth to Exerciſe himſelf with them, both 
for Recreation, and Improvement of his Skill in that Art. Beſides, 
he knew rot that he ſhou'd have 2ny opportunity of private Con- 
verſe with Davidy by reaſon of P:f[:ngers, though the Event pro- 
ved better than he expected. . 

2t And behold, I] will ſend alad, ſaying, Go, find 
out the arrows 9. If | expreſly ſay unto the lad, Be- 
hold, the arrows are On this ſide of thee, take them ; 

+Heb. not then come thou, for there is peace to thee, and f no 
ay #ing- hart, as the LORD liveth. 

q 1 will ſend him out before T ſhoot, to find out, and take up 
the Arrows which I ſhall ſhoot. And I ſhall ſhoot them either 
ſhort of him, or beyond him, as I ſhall tee occaſion. 

22 But if I ſay thus unco the young man, Behold the 
arrows are beyond thee : go thy way, for the LORD 
bath ſent thee away r. | 

+ Take this for an Intimation of Gods providence, that thuu 
ſhouldeſt keep away from the Courr. 

t Verſe 23 And as touching * the matter which thou and I 
5. have ſpoken of, behold, the LORD be tf between thee 
tains 1nd me for ever. 

24 © So David hid himſelf in the field s : and when 
the new moon was come, the king ſat him down to 
eat meat. 

s To wit, at the time appointed : for 1t ſeems probable, that he 
wenr firſt to Bethlehem, as he bad Jonathan tell his Father, wv. 6. and 
thence returned to the Field, when the occaſion required : elſe we 
muſt charge bim with a downright Lye, which ought not to be 
imagined ( without any app:rent cauſe ) concerning ſo good a 
Man ; eſpecially, in ſo diſtreſſed and dangerous a Condition And 
why ſhouid he hide himſelf there ſo long before the time, when Jo- 

"nathan was to come thither to inform him ? Nor were there any 
© need of appointing a certain time to meet, if David were there all 
the while. : . 

25 And the king fat upon his ſeat as at other times, 
even upon a ſeat by the wall : and Jonathan aroſe :, 
and Abner fat by Sauls ſide, and Davids place « was 
empty. 

' t To wit, from his Seat where he was ſet next to the King, 
when he aroſe, and ſtood up at Abners coming, to. do Honour to 
him, who was his Fathers Couſin, and the General of the Army. 
# Which ſeems to have been next to Abner on the ſame ſide with 
; him- 

' 26 Nevertheleſs, Saul ipake not any thing that day : 
for he thought, ſomething hath befallen him x, he 5s 
not clean, ſurely he 7s not clean, 

x Some Accident which hath rendred him unclean, and ſo un- 


bt 4H#VEL 


fit to parr2ke of rhis Feaſt, which conſiſted in part of the remainders | 
of rheſe Peace-off-rings, according to the Law, Lewit. 5. 200 Un- 
firalſo to come into any company, much more, into the King's 
company; leſt he ſhould pollute them alſs. See above, on v. 5. See 
alſo, Levit. 11! and 15+ | Y 
27 And it came to paſs on the morrow, which was 
the ſecond day of the moneth y, that Davids place was 
- empty : and Saul faid unto Jonathan his ſon z, Where- 
fore cometh not the ſon of Jeſſe 2 to meat, neither 
yeſterday, nor to Day 6 ? 
y Or, on the morrow of the new mon, being the ſecord day : Either, 
x. Of the three Days appointed, v. 5 19- Or, 2. Of the Fealt. 
Or, 3. Of the Month. z Who was Davids Friend, and beſt knew 
his mind, and his ways. # So he calls him in Scorn and Contempr, 
to note the meanneſs of his Original; and as nor deigning to call 
r him by his proper Name : See below, chap. 22. 9. and 25. 16. b For 
* the Uncleanneſs which came by ſome chance, uſually laſted but for 
one Day.. See Levit. 1.1- | 
28 And Jonathan anſwered Saul, David earneſtly 
asked /eave of me to go to Bethlehem, 

.. . 29 And he faid, Letme go, I pray thee, for our fa- 
mily hath a facritice in the City, ard iny brother, he 
harh commanded mse 70 be there c: and now, if I have 
found favour in thine eyes, ler me ger away, I pray 


thee, and ſee my brethren: therefore he cometh not | 


to the kings table. 


e Either in his Fathers Name, or in the Right of the firft-born; 
one Branch of which was Authority over his Brethren in all the 
Concerns of the Family ; whereof this was one.. 


39 Then Sauls anger was kindied againſt Jona- 


than, and he faid unto him, || + Thou ſon of the | Or, *hoe 1 | 
perverſe rebellious woman 4, do not I know that 7" 
thou haſt choſen the ſon of Jefie to thine own con- + 14 


t Heb. 
fuſion e, and unto the confuſion of thy mothers tnaked- ſor of per- | 
nels f ? werle rebels ; 

4 This baſe Temper of thine, thou hadſtnot from me, but from #9 
thy Mother; of whoſe perverſneſs I have had ſo much experience, 
Or, thou ſon of perverſe rebellion ; 1, e. Thou perverſe and rebellious Son: 
Or, thou moſt perverſe rebel, For in the H:brew Language, the word 
Son, thus uſed, is an aggravation of a Mans Crime ; and notes one 
who is extraordinarily addicted to it- Thus he calls him, becauſe 
he hid and preſerved that Man whom the King had commanded to 
be brought forth, that he might be ſlain. e For ir will be a hor- 
rible ſhame and reproach unto thee, that David by his crafty infinuas 
tions, and fair Pretences, ſhould Cheat thee of thy Kingdom. f Men 
will conclude, That thy Mother was a Whore, and thou a Baſtard: 
and that chou haſt no Royal Blood in thy Veins,that canſt ſo tamely 
give up thy Crown to ſo contemprible a Perſon, 


31 For as long as the ſon of Jeſſe liveth upon the 
ground, thou ſhalt notbe ſtabliſhed, nocthy my g: 


wherefore now ſend and fetch him unto me, for he + t pray? 
ſhall ſurely die. of deaths 


Z Thus he grofly miſtakes the cauſe of Jonathans loſs of the King- 
dom, which was not Davids Arr, but Sauls fin ; and vainly endea- 
vours to prevent Gods irrevocable Sentence. 


32 And Jonathan anſwered Saul his father, and faid 


unco him, Wherefore ſhall he be ſlain ? what hath he 
done ? . 


33 And Saul caſt a javelin at him to ſmite him þ, 
whereby Jonathan knew that ic was determined of his 
father to ſlay David. 


h i, e. To wound him, though not to ſmite him even to the wall ; 
as he deſigned to doto David, chap. 19. io. 


34 So Jonathan groſe from the table in fierce anger, * 
and did eat no meat the ſecond day of the moath : for 

he was grieved for David, becauſe # his father had done 
him ſhame. 


z: Or, and becauſe: for this is a ſecond cauſe of his Grief The 
ConjuntEtion #nd is oft-times omitted, and to be ſupplied ; as Pſalns 
33+ 2+ and 144. 9, Hab. 3. 11. 

35 T Anditcame to paſs in the morning k, that Jo- 
nathan went out into the field, at the time appointed 
with David, and a little lad with him. 

k To wit, of the third day appointed for this work, v. 5. 

35 And he faid unto his lad, Run, find out now the 
arrows which I ſhoot. And as the lad ran, he ſhot an 
arrow | beyond him. + Heb. 


37 And when the lad was come to the place I ofthe #* 24s 
arrow which Jonathan had ſhot, Jonathan cried after *%* 5: 
the lad, and ſaid, Is not the arrow beyond thee ? 

! (i.e ) Near to the place. Or, and che Lad went, or was going 
01 t0 che place : For rhe words following ſhew, thar he was nor yer 
come thither. The Hebrew Verb, bo, which properly ſignifies #0 
come, ſometimes ſignifi:s to go; as here, and Ruth 3. 7 and fonah 
$$. 

28 And Jonathan cried afcer the lad, Make ſpeed, 
haſte, ſtay not wy. And Jonathans lad gathered up the 
arrows, and came to his maſter. 

17 So he bids him, becauſe finding the Coaſt clear, he made haſteto 
take the opportunity to ſpeak with his dearly beloved David. 


29 Bur the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan 
and David knew the matter. 


40 And Jonathan gave his Þ artillery » unto + his 4 Heb 
lad, and faid unto him, Go, carry them to the city. inſlru- 
» His Bow, and Arrows, and Quiver. ments- 


IE Es + Hebs 
4) QA 4:4 as ſoon as the lad was gone, David aroſe cha: was 


out of & place toward the ſouth o, and fell on his face to #*. 
the ground, and bowed himſelf three times : and they 
kiſſed one another, and wept one with another, until 
David exceeded p. k | 

o In reſpe& of the Stone where David by appointment hid him- 
ſelf p As we!) he might, becauſe he was driven away, not only 
from bis dear Friend Jonathan, but lio from his Wife, and all his 
Relations, and from the Commonwealth of Iſrael, and fromthe ſer- 
vice of God; as he complains below, Chap. 26. 19. 


42 And Jonathan faid to David, Go in peace, || for” j or. ;16 
aſmuch as we have ſworn both of us in the Name of 70rd be 
the LORD, faying, The L ORD be between me wines 
and thee, and between my ſeed and thy ſeed for ever 9. of = &c: 
And he aroſe and departed : and Jonathan went into 
the city. | 
q Therefore doubt not bur I will ever love thee, and faithfully 


ſerve thee ; and the like I affure my ſelf from thee ; and this muſt 
be our comfort in our State of Separation. 


C H A P. XXL 


David cometh to Nob to Ahimelech the prieft : pretendeth ſecret buſineſs from 
Saul ; asketh bread : Abimelech giveth him the ſhew-bread, 1,——6. 
Doeg ſeeth this, 7. David atketh arms: Ahimeleeh giveth him Goliahs 
ſword, 8. 9. David cometh to Achiſh : is known : and afraid: fergneth 
himſelf mad, 10,—13. Achiſh is angry with his ſervants for bring- 
ing hin, I4, I5. ; led Abian 

Hen carne David to Nob a to Ahimelech the, _ 
prieſt b, and * Ahimelech was afraid at the meer- ,, 5, 
S 2X 4 ing 


* Ah cate 


| 
4 


| 
| 


+ Hebs 


U Plone al- 
 2n077, that 
U is, ſuch 
aA Mn, 


| Rath. I. 


f-and. 


* Exod. 
25. JO. 
Lev. 24- 5- 
* Matth. 
12+ 4» 


li Or, eſpe- 
cally when 
#his day 
there 35 
other ſaw 
&ifet 
brea3. 


thap. XXI. 


_ whereabout I 


| the vlace of 


* me five loaves of bread in mine nand, or what Þ there 


afierwards'it is eaten by che Prieſt, and by his whole Family, as 
their:common Food ; andfſo it maybe by us, in our circumſtances. 


[4 4MUE I 


h | alone, 

ins of David c, and ſ:id unto him, Why art thou a - 

is 
<2 . - 
and no man with thee d 3 | x (te 
ſ Fa Ciry of Prieſts, as it is called Chap. 22. 19. 44 nl? 
cauſe ir was aſſigned to the Prieſts. go though 'S abokr be one 
fed by this Name among their Cities, Joſh. 21. yet 1 which Name 
of thoſe Cities there named by ſome other ay h the old for 
might be changed ; or another new Name adde the Hebrew! : 
ſome reaſon now unknown, a5 wan ers inhabited by the 
K 1t wa 
"umpare 1 Chron. 6. Or, 2. Becaule 1 : ac h:re; 2s 
Kut 5 for the ſervice of the Tabernacle, which now ___ d irs 
appears from wv, 7, 9- For as the Kings of 1ſrae! were of: — og: 
ods Oracle in all their weighty Affairs; ſo they 7 "firſ carried 
have it in, or near theix qwn Habitations. Hence it PT LE Dvs 
by Joſhua to Shiloh in his Tribe of Ephraim ; _ TE by —_ 
> Gp t ſeems 
;nto his Tribe and City ; and now, as 1t Teems, rto 
Carried ro Nob, a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, Neb. 11. 32. N63 


Hnatheth, 1 King. 2. 26. Hither David reſorted, partly for 2 ſupply 


{ : : Kg icht receive here, witt- 
cf his Neceſſities, which he ſuppoſed he mig ah otincipally, that 


ayed into Sauls hands: ar 
"ns fn his R:ſolurion of going eut of the Ring: 
d& s might ſcek and receive Comfort and Counſel from the 
tank e* To wit, the chief prieſt, Brother to that 66] nt is 
3 and he being now _ oem > pie ding 
b of Ahicub, t Sam. 14. 3.and 22. I. g 
a 5 rr cauſe of his coming in ſuch a 37 60 {Hgens way 
ing the worſt, as Men uſually do in ſuch caſes. 4 oy FROVE * 
©id had ſome Servants and Companions, as 15 mani w _ 4: 
5. and from Matth. 12. 2, 4. whom Jonathan prob:bly lk hd 
a place appointed to ſerve and guard him; yet they were Je 4 af 
nother place : as David himſelf affirmeth, v. 2. And Dav: 
now alcne, as alſo he was when he fled to Achijb, v. 10. F . 
2 And David ſaid unto Ahimelech the prielt, The 
king hath commanded me a bulinels e, = —_— 
unto me, Let no man know any thing O the buſineſs 


ſend thee, and what I have' commanded 
thee : and I have axpointed my ſervants | to fuch and 
ſuch a place f. 


+ This ſeems to be a plain Lye extorted from him, by Fear and 
Neceflity But as it was officious for himſelf, ſo ic was pernicicus 
to all the Prieſts there, Whence David afterwards declares his Re- 
peEntance fr this ſin of Lying, Pſalm I1y. 29. 7 To 3 Ccrtain plac? 
which isnot materia] nor convenient NOW TO mention; becaute the 
whole buſineſs requires concealment. | : 

Now theiefore whar is under thine hand g ? give 


is + preſent. 
£ Fo wit, in thy Power, and 
ak nd ezr. : / 5 : 
|: TY ho prieft anſwered David, and ſaid, There is 
no common bread under mine hand h, but there is * 
hallowed bread 3, if the young men have kept them- 


el aſt from women Ke | 

rt de iog a in the Tabernacle: though doubtleſs he had 
enough of that, and of cther Proviſicnsin his Houſe; but David was 
in great haſte, and in fear of Dog whom he ſaw, and knew there. 
chap. 22. 22. and therefore would not ſtay till any thing could be 
ferchea thence. #{ The Shew-bread, which was appropriated tothe 
Prieſt ; of which fee Exod. 25. 39. Levit. 24. 5. k Either from un- 
cleanneſs by Women, which might be divers ways contrattec : or 
from Conjugal converſe with their Wives ; which though it did 
not defile rhem, yet be thought might debar then from the parti- 
cipation of ſuch very Sacred things; which he gathered by the 
Analogy of that Prec-pr, Exed. 19. 15. There was a double impe- 
diment to the giving of this Bread to chem ; 1. Its Sacredneſs in its 
ſelf : which the Prieſt implies, and David Anſwers wv. 5. and the 
Prieſt was ſatisfied therein by Davids extraordinary Occafions, and 
great Neceſſities. 2. The Purity and Abſtinence from all Women, 
which he ſuppoſeth ſhould be 1n thoſe that uſe It; concerning 
which he now enquires. And though he mention this only con- 
cerning Davids young Men, and out of Modeſty and Reverence to 
David, farbears toname him ; yet heis alio incluied in the number, 
as Davids anſwer ſhews. 


ready for thee to give, and forme 


5 And David anſwered the prieft, and faid unto| 


him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about 
theſe three days /, fince 1 came out », and the veſlels x 
of the voung men are holy, and the bread is in aman- 
ner common o: || yea, though ir were ſanRified this 


day in the veſlel p. 4 

Tiks long as the 1 os required, Exod. W9.15. And fo long Da- 
wid and his men bad, it ſeems, hid themſelves for fear of Saul jn 
ſome of thoſe Caves, whereof there were many in thoſe parts ; 
whereby they were kept both from'all Converſe with any other per- 
ſons beſides themſelves, and conſequently from Women: and with- 
al, from Food convenient for them. wm From the place where Jona- 
wc 2nd David met. . nz. e, Either, 1. Their Garments, or other 
Utenſils for their Journey. Or, 2. Their Bodies, for of them the 
Queſtion was, v. 4. and having now ſaid, that Women had been 
kept from them, he infers, that therefore their Bodies were Holy; 
their Members wer undefiled. Thus the word v:ſ{/ is uſed, 1 Theſ. 
4.4: andin other Aurhors, both Greek and Latin. o Heb.” and this 
( to wit, the Bread; which.is eaſily fupplied out of the former 
Verſe, becauſe that wasthe.thing about which the preſent diſcourſe 
was, and againſt the giving whercof the Prieſt ſtarted an Objc&i- 
ON, w- 4+ to which, David here giveth an Anſwer ) is in a manner, 
or, ajter & ſort common : 4+ e. Conſidering the time, and our neceſſity, 
this may be agked in a'manner, like common. Bread, and ſo 1s uſed 

-others. For though for a ſealon whileſt it is to ſtand before the 
Lord, it be ſo Holy, that the Prieſt- himſelf mighr nor cart it; yer 


_ 


If it were bur newly put into the Veſle}, 1t- muſt give place to. 
Hr great Law of Neceiſiy, and Charity ; becauſe God will have | 


rather becauſe thes day there is other ( 7. e. new Bread ) jan@ifed 7; 
th: viſcel; 7. e put into the Veſſel which was made to receive this 

Bread, Exod. 25. 29. and thereby SanGified, or Conſecrated to God: 

and therefore the former Shew-bread 15 now to be removed, andem- 

ployed for the common uſe of the Prieſt and his Family. 

6 Sothe prieſt * gave him hallowed bread, for there x jy; 
was no bread there p, but the ſhew-bread that was ta- 2. 26, 
ken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the 9 
day when ie was taken away 9g. EP 

p Towit, in the Tabernacle, where David and the Prieſt now 
were. q Which was done upon the Sabbath-day, Levzz. 24. 8. For 
though they might nor then kindle a Fire ro heat the Bread in, yer 
they might, and did keep it hotin an Oven that had been heated be- 


a. fore the Sabbath. 


7 ( Now acertain man of the ſervants of Saul was 
there that day detained 7 before the LORD s, and his 
name was * Doegan Edomits tz the chiefeſt of the herd- 
men that belonged to Saul. 

7 Not by force from others, but by hisown choice ; he fixed his 
abode there for thar day ; either becauſe ir was the Sabbath-day ; on 
which he might not proceed in his Journey, or other Buſinels : or 
for the diſcharge of ſeme Vow : or to beg diretionand help from 
God in ſome great Buſineſs. - 7, e. At the Tabernacle. 7 Either, 
r. By his Habiration. and Converſation among thoſe People for 
ſome conſiderable time, as, for the ſame reaſon Uriah is called 
the Hittite; and Obed-Edomn the Girtite : Or rather, 2. By his Birth, 
and Nation : but he was proſelited ro the Fewiſb Religion : or took 
It up for ſiniſter Ends, being 2dvanccd, as here we read, toa place 
of Truſt and Pr-:f:rment, poſſibly upon this occaſion. 

$ 4 And David faid unto Ahimelech, And is there not 
here under thine hand ſpear or ſword ? for I have nei- 
ther brought my ſword, nor my weapons with me s, 
becauſe the kings bufineſs required haſte ». 

u Theſe he left behind him, that he might wich leſs ſuſpicion re« 
move from placeto place, and hide himſelf from Saul and his Spies. 
x The Meſſage came to me, when I was unarmed, and the buſineſs 


required-ſo great expedition that I could not go home to fetch my 
Weapons. 


9 And the prieſt ſaid, The ſword of Goliah the 
Philiſtine, whom thou fleweſt in * the valley of Elah, 
behold, it is here wrapt in a cloth behind the ephod y: 
if thou wilt take that, take it, for here is none other 
fave that, here, And David ſaid, There is none like 
that z, give it me. 


) 7. e. Behind that Holy place allotted for the keeping of the Sa- 
cred, or Prieſtly Garments ; all which are here comprehended un« 
der the Ephod ; which, as the chief of the kind, is put for all rhe reſt. 
Here it was Jaid up as .a Sacred Monument of Gods power and 
goodneſs, and that famous ViQory, related chap. 179. z Becauſe 
ic not only ſerved him for his uie, for, he was a ſtrong and tall 
Man, and one that could weild that Sword, as we ſaw, chap. 17, 


but wasalſo a Pledge of Gods favour to him, and a great Encous« 
ragement to his Faith. 


Io © And David aroſe, and fled that day for fear of __ 
= | »* 

Saul, and went to * Achiſh the king of Gath a : 
' & A ſtrange Aftion : but it muſt ke conſidered, 1. That Saul; 
Rage was 1o great and implacable, his Power alſo, and Diligence 
in bunting after him ſo great, that he deſpaired of eſcaping him 
any other way: and it is not ſtrange if a deſperate Diſeaſe, produ- 
ceth adeſperate Remedy. 2. David might reaſonably think, that 
being perlecuted, and baniſhed by Sal, and the Iſraelites under his 
Command, he ſhould be welcome to the Phili#ines ; who would be 
glad, not only to be freed from all thoſe Evils which he had from 
time to time done, and was likely further to doto them, but alſo 
to make him their Friend, and oblige him by their Kindneſs; and 
to make him the more odious and irreconcuable to Saul and the 7. 
raelites. Dueff. Bur why dic he go to theſe, and not rather toſome 
other nezghbour Nations? Arſw. Becauſe they were all at Peace 
with Saul;” and therefore would certainly have delivered him up 
upon Sauls Demands. 


i: And the ſervants of Achiſh ſaid unto him, 1: 
not this David the king of the land 3? did they 
not ſing one to another of him in dances, ſaying, 
* Saul hath ſlain his thouſands, and David his ten thou- 
ſands c. 

b Or, of this land; i.e. Of the Land of Canaan. They call him 


*Plal. gs; 


title, 


* Chap 


Pal. 344 
ei3le. 


* Chayy 
18. 7+ 


King, either mote generally for the Goyernoux, as that word is 


uſed, Deut. 33. 5. for the moſt eminent Captain and Commander, 
and, as it were the King of the I/raelitiſh Armies : or, rather more 
ſpecially, the King ; to wit, the King ele, the Perſon deſigned to 
be King : for, by this time, the Fame of Sauls Reje&tion, and Da- 
vids Deſtination to the Kipgdom, was got abroad among the 1a 
elites, and from.them, probably to the Phili#iner,Ears. c And there- 
fore conſider what to do ; and now-thine, and our great Enemy iis 
ia thy hand, be ſure thou never let.him go alive. 


12 And David laid up theſe words in hisheart, and 
was ſore afraid c of Achiſh the king of Gath: _ ... 


c Leſt cither their Revenge or Policy ſhould prompt them to kill 
him. fn, 


13 And * he changed-his behaviour 4 before them, s pg, 34 
and feigned himſelf mad e in their hands f, and || ſcrab- ;;t1. = 
bled on the doors of the gate, and {kt his fpittle fall Or," 
down upon his beard. EEE ure: 

4 His Speech and Geſture; ang jt may . Fe, his ;Habit alſo. 
e Which they might the more eaſily believe ; partly, becauſe pf 
the diſappointment of his great hopes, and bis extream dar ger and 
trouble from Saul, which might well make him mad : an partly, 


| 


Chap. XXT. " bhp, 


| Or, | 
playc7.9 7 


. ET/R174 


*Pſal. 57 
title, and 
142+ title 


tHeb. h: 
acreditor, 
tHeb bi 
trr of ſoul. 


beoauſe he had pur himſelf into their hands; which they ſuppoſed, 


mercy preterred before Sacrifice, Or thus, Eſpecially, when, os, Tie 


none but a Fool, or a mad Man would have done, 
| COUNTCrs 


And David 


* 2 Sam. 


24. IIs 


I Chron, 


21, 9. 
2 Chron, 


29, 25, 


*Pal. 57. 
title, and 
142» title 


Chap. X XI. 


counter{cited this Madneſs, that he might procure, both their Pity, 
and their Contempt; that they being freed trom jealouſies and fears 
of future Miſchicf from David, and from his wife Conduft, of 
which chey had ſad experienc?, might be ſecure of him, and ſo 
ſpare him. f i. & Whilſt he was in their power, and before 
TaENL, 

14 Then ſaid Achiſh unto his ſervants, Lo, ye ſee 
the man || is mad g 5 wherefore then have ye brought 
him. to me h 2? | 

o And fowere 4chiſh and his Men too, to be ſo ſoon cheated. But 
this muſt be aſcribed to the Wiſe and Powerful Providence of God ; 
who, in anſwer to Davids prayer now made, which is Recorded, 
Pſalm 34. #n4 56. did infatuate them, as he hath done many others 
in I:ke caſes h What Service can I expe& from him? Or, What 
cauſe have I to fear him ? R 

15 Have I need ofmad men 3, that ye have brought 
this felt to play the mad man in my preſence 2? ſhall 
this fellow come into mine houle & ? £ 

j | need wiſe Men, not luch fools, or mad Men, as this is. & Iwill 
nct have my Court diſgraced with entertaining fuch Fellows. 

CC i A FP. 200 

David cometh to Adullam, where companies reſort to him, 1, 2. He goeth 
to Mizpeh and commendeth his parents to the King of Moab, 3, 4. Adme- 
niſbed by Gad he returneth #0 Judah : Saul purſu:th him : complaineth 
of his ſcrvants unfaithfulneſs, 5, 8. Doeg accuſeth Ahimelech : Saul 
ſentenceth him, the high prieſt, and the reſt of the prieſts, to die : Doeg 
ſlayeth 85 prieſts : the city Neb ard all in it is laid waſte : only Abiathar 
the prieſt remained alive flying to David, 9g, 20, David acknow- 

ledgeth himſelf to be the cauſe hererf, 22, 23. 

Avid therefore departed thence, and * eſcaped to 
the cave of Adullam « : and when his brethren, 
and all his fathers houſe heard iz, they went down thi- 


ther to him 6b. 

a A v'ac? of conſiderable ſtrength, 2 Sam. 23. 13. 1 Chron. 11. 
15; in the Land of Judah, Joſh. 15. 21, 35: which being his own 
Tribe, and the Tribe to which God had firſt promiled the King- 
dm, Gen. 49. 10. he hop?d for ſome Protection andAſſiſtance there. 
b Partly to comfort and :fſiſt him; partly, to ſecure themſelves at 
the preſent from Sauls R:ge, which they k:i.ew to te Fierce and 
Crue}, and :choughnt he might extend it to Davias Friends ; eſpeci- 
al'y, becauſe they had ſo lately enterrain-d him, chap. 209. 6, 29. 
And partly, thac they might ſhare with David in his Honour and 
Advancemeat ; which they now concluded certain, and near, taough 
it wa> interrupted with ſome difficulties. : 

2 And every one that was in diſtreſs c, and every 


- 


H:b. had one that | was in debt d, and every one rhat was Þ dil- 


acreditor. 
tHeb bite 
ter of ſoul. 


contented e, gathered themſelves unto him, and he be- 
came a captain over them f: and there were with him 
about four hundred men- 

c Through Want, or Oppreflion, or otherwiſe. 4 How could 
David rec:1ve, and co'ntenance ſuch Perſons to the wrong of their 
Creditors ? 4nſ[w. 1. David might be ignorant of their Debts ; and 
it is moſt likely they concealed that, aud pretended other Cauies of 
their coming '0 him, as the Pxo'<Qtion ofthe Innocent, and the De- 
fence of his juſt Rights, &c. 2. T';ey might be, and probably 
were, poor D »t>rs ; whom their Creditors were obliged ro ſpare, 
and favour, Ex'd. 22. 25. And though rheir perſons were with Da- 
wid, yet their Lands and Goods were liable to their Creditors. e Or, 
bitter in ſoul; 1. e. In an affl:&e4 and calar.itous Condition. f He 
did not juſtific, nor maintain any Injuſtice or Wickedneſs, which 
ſom: of them poſſibly might be guiity of; bur on the contrary, he 
initructed, and ob.1ged taem to the prattice of all Juſtice and Ho- 
neſty ; as appears from chap. 25. 15, And he on!y uſed them for 
his juſt Defence. ; 

3 © And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab g, 
and he ſaid unto the king of Moab þ, Let my father 
and my mother z, I pray thee, come forth, ans be with 
you, till I know what God will do for me &. 

g Socalled, to diſtinguiſh it from that M:zpeh, 1 Sam. 7.5. hPart- 
Iy, becauſe he was related to, and delcended from one of his peo» 
ple, Ruth 4. 10. And parcly, becauſe he was Sauls Enemy, 1 Sam. 
14. 47. and therefore more like!y ro be Davids Friend. i Who be- 
ing very aged, were not able to endure thoſe Journeys and Hard- 
ſhips which David foreſaw that he was likely to be expoſed to. k Till 
I fce the accompliſhment of Gods promiſe made to me. 


4 And he brought them before the king of Moab /, 


and they dwelt with him all the while that David was 


in the hold . 

1 Tnto his Preſence that he might ſee them, and give them leave 
to dwell in his Dominion. m2 Either, 1. In Mizpeh of Moab, which 
was a very ſtrong Hold. Burt it is apparent, he ſpeaks of ſome 
Hold, where his Father and Mother were expoſed to fear and dan- 
ger from Saul ; which thcy were not in the King of Moabs Royal 
City. Or, 2. In the Cave of Adulam ; mentioned above, v. .. Or, 
3. In Holes ; the Singular Number bei:g pur for the P:ural ; as is 
frequent ; z, e. as long as David was forced to goſrom place to place, 
and from Hold to Hoid, to tecure himicif : for it concerned Da- 
v:d to ſecure his Farher, and he did doubtleſs ſecure him for all thar 
time ; and nor only whilſt he was in the Hold of M:zpeh, or of 
Azulla; n, which was but a little while. 

5 'T And the prophet * Gad ſaid unto David, Abide 
notin the hold ; depart, and pet thee into the land 


of Jizdah o. Then David departed and came into the 
forr eſt of. Hareth p. 


» Donot thut up thy ſelf in Holes, and Holds. + Go and ſhew 
thy 1elf in the Landrt Judah, that thou maiſt publickly pur in thy 
Cl: 3m to the Kingdum after Sauls Death ; and rhar thy Friends may 
be invited and enconraged to appear on thy b:zhalf. Hereby alſo 


G od would exercite.Davias Fiith, and Wiſtom, and Courage ; and. 
ſr prepare him for the Kingdom, 2nd uphold, aid increaſ: his Re»?! 


J] aration among tlie peop:e. p Where there were many Caves and 
} arking Places. 


i S4MUOEL 


4 | Chap. XXIN 

| 6 © When Saul heard that David was diſcovered, i [|| 
and the men that were with him: (now Saul abode in 
Gibeah under a |] tree in Ramah 9g, having his ſpear in 
his hand ”, and all his ſervants were ſtanding about 
him. ) 

g i.e. In the Territory of Gib:ah, in, or near ( for ſo the Hebrew 
Particle is oft vſzd ; as hath b:en ſh:-wed ) Ramah. Or, in the 
Town of Gibeah nan high place ; for ſo the word Rameh unque- 
ſtionably ſignifies ; ard fo it is here rendred by ſome, both Ancient 
and Modern Interpreters. r Either as an Enſign cf Majeſty, for in 
old times Kings carried a Spear inſtead of a Scepter ; as Juſtin and 


others note ; cr, as an Inſtrument of Self-defence or Cruelty, as 
occaſion required. 


7 Then Saul faid unto his ſcrvants that ſtood about Wl 
him, Hear now, ye. f Benjamites s, will the ſon of + Heb: | 
Jeſſe give every one of you fields, and vineyards, and /o"s of 7 of 
make you all captains of thouſands, and captains of 7” 
hundreds z : | : Pt. 

s You that are of my own Tribe and Kindred; from whom Da- 


[| or, 
a" 


i 
n 
f 


| the ſon of Ahitub, and all his fathers houſe a, the prieſts 


vid deſigns to tranſlate the Kingdom to another Tribe, £ Will he 
diſtribure Profits and Preferments amongſt you Benjamites, as T have 
done, and inrend ſtill to do? will he nct rather prefer thoſe of his 
own Tribe before you ? | 

8 That all of you have conſpired againſt me, and 
there is none that Þ ſheweth me that my ſon hath made 
a league with the ſon of Jefle u, and there is none of you 
that 1s ſorry for me, or ſheweth unto me, that my ſon 


hath ſtirred up my ſervant againſt me to lie in wait, 
as at this day 2 | 

u Thus he ſuſpefted, partly, from Jonathans paſſionate Love 
for David, which he had formerly, and conſtantly declared; and 
from his ate diſcontent and departure from! his Father, mentioned, 
chap. 20. 33- and partly, from Davids Confidence, in Invading rhe 
Land with four Hundred Mer, which he theught he wouldnever 
preſume to do, without iome Encouragement or promitle bf Afſſiſt- 
ance from Jonathan, » i. e. ToDelſign againſt my Crowngand Life; 
( which will appear to be a moſt groundleſs Suſpicion, and falſe 


Acculation. ) | 8 
ſwered * Doeg the Edomite (which * Pſal- 


+ Heb: | | 


uncoverethi 
mine ear. 


9 © Then an | 
was ſet over the ſervants of Saul ) and faid, I faw the 5* 


ſon of Jefſe coming to Nob y, to Ahimelech the ſon'of . 


* Ahitub. 
y See on Chap. 21. 7. 


10 And he enquired of the LORD for him z, and | 
* eavehim victuals, and gave him the ſword of Goliah © Chp- | 
the Philiſtine. - 


z This is not Recorded, Chap. 21. and therefore ſome thigk, | 
that Doeg to curry favour with Saul, feigned this; for it i; certain, | 
David chargeth him with the Sin of Lying, Pſa-m 52. 3. though ir | 
is not improbable, that he ro}d other Lyes alſo, nor here expreſſed ; | 
and withal, he was guilty af concealing parc of the Trurh, which 
in this caſe he was cblidged to declare for 4himelechs juſt Defence; 
co wit, the cunning Pretence and Artifice whereby David circum- 
vented Alimelech. Others think this was rrue, becauſe; 4himelech 
ſeems to confels it, v./15- though that may be ſpoken by way of 
conceſſion. If it were ſo as Doeg declares, rhis was no new thing. 
Then he might add, that it was not fo ; though this be not here 
mentioned : for it is evident, That all his Anſwer or Apology, -is 
not here expreſſed; tor here is not a word of the Vittuals or Sword 
which he gave him. 


11 Then the king ſent to call. Ahimelech the prieſt 


| 
| 
| 
; 
! 
| 


that were in Nob: and they came all of them to the 
king. 
2 Of the Houſe of Eli, which God had threatned to'curt eff, chap, | 
24 3b | 
12 And Saul faid, hear now, thou ſon of Ahitub 5: 
and he anſwered, f Here I am my lords + Heb: 
b He ſhews his Contempt and Anger, that he would not vouch- behold me | 
ſafe ro name him : See before, on chap. 20. 27. 


13 And Saul faid unto him, Why have ye conſpired 


agaiiiſt me, thou, and the ſon of Jeſſe, in that chou 
haſt given him bread, and a ſword, and haſt enquired 
; of God for him, that he ſhould riſe againſt me to lie in 
| wait, as at this day ? 

| 14 Then Ahimelech anſwered the king, and ſaid, 
And who & ſo faithful among all thy ſervants, as Da- 
'vid c, which is the kings ſon in law, and goeth at thy 
bidding, and is hondOurable in thine houſe. 

c H-: derh not determine the Differences between Sau! and Da- 
vid ; nor affirm, what David now was : but only declared whar 
David had formerly been, both really, and in publick Fame and O« 
piniong 

15 DidI then begin to enquire of God for him ? be 
it far from me: let not the king impute any thing 4 unto 
his ſervant, mor to all the houſe of my father : for thy 
ſervant knew nothing of all this e, + leſs or more. + Heb. 


 d Or, this thing; to wit, which thou now chargeſt me with, 1;::le 
That I ſhould affift David in any evil Deſign axainit eros e Or, Ps 
of thy Suſpicion concerning him. For as for Sauls Atremprs upon 
| David, well might Abimelech impute them wholly to the Violence 

! of Sauls Paſſion and Diſcale, leing even Jonathan did ſo, as may be 

' gathered from 1 Sam. 20. 2: 


76 And the king ſaid, Thou ſhalt ſurely die, Ahi- 
[R_—_ thou and all thy fathers houſe. 
2 £4 


i177 And 


S my 


an 


VE. 


: POT COSEES 3 A 


ap. XXII. 


" own hand : which was not 


- niſter to the Lord in a linen Ephed, which Prieſts and Levites uſed 


17 C And the king ſaid unto the [| Porpnen. woo 
ſtood about him, Turn, and ſlay the prieſts _ ar: 
LORD, becauſe their hand x with David, and 4 e 
they knew when he fled, and did not ſhew it _ _ 
the ſervants ofthe king would not put forth their han 
co fall upon the prieſtsof the LORD f. | POP 
- f Chuſing rather to offend the king, by diſobeying h1s ak wy e 
bloody Command, apts iy 4 cy God, by ſhedding © 

ent and Sacr2d Ferions. 2 
wg "And the king ſaid to Doeg, Turn thou g, and 
fall upon the prieſts. And Doeg the Edomite þ poop: 
ed, and he fell upon theprieſts, and * flew on that day 
fourſcore and five perſons 5 that did wear alinen & 
Po 7 '1 Man, till thou haſt killed 
all: - © Groetey el o_ DE the hain of this Butchery m 
the Jraelitiſþ Nation, and to thew, why he was ſo ready oy O x : 
becauſe he was one of that Nation which had an implacable hatr 


: nol; :nſt the prieſts of the Lord. - With bis 
againſt all 1/-aelites, and oats” ook if when no reſiſtance was made. 


+ Not at that time, as ſome fanſie, but uſually ; ſpch as uſed to mi- 


1 $AMDOE.L 


6 And it came to paſs when Abiathar the ſon of A- 
himelech * fled to David to Keilah, that he came down 


with an ephod k in his hand. 


k Or, with the Ephod, to wit, the High-prieſts Ephod, in which 
werethe Urim and the Thummim, Exod. 28. 30. which, when Ahimees 
lech and the reſt of the Prieſts went to Saul, were probably left in 
his hand, and to his care ; which gave him the opportunity both 
of eſcaping, whilſt Doeg the Butcher was killing his Brethren, and 
of bringing away the Ephod, which Saul had oft groſly negleQed, 
and now was juſtly deprived of it. 

7 CE And it was told Saul that David was come to 


chat bath gates and bars mr. 


perience had oft ſhewed him how ſtrangely God had delivered him 
out of his hands, and whar aſfingular Care God had over him. nz So 
that which he choſe for his Safety, will be his certain Ruine. 


8 And Saul called all the people together, to war, to 
go down to Keilah, to beſfiege David and his men. 
9 T And David knew that Saul ſecretly practifed », 


prieſt, Bring hither the ephod 0. 


miſchief againſt him, and * he faid to Abiathar the + 


- Aﬀiftance to David. 

- 6f Ahitub, named Abiathar m, 
Davids: ; : 

Va Who by his Fathers death was now High-prieſt. 
 cb7þ-,2Z-, 6, | 


the LORDS prieſts. 


- he hath promiſed : 


* David enquiring 


poſe us: 


04. 28. 4o, &c. I Sam. 2. 18. . 
j: bs And Nob the city of the prieſts ſmote he / with 


- the edge ofthe ſword, both men and women, children 
' and ſucklings, and oxen, 
edge of the ſword, 


and aſſes, and ſheep, with the 


1 Either Sul, or Doeg, with the help of ſome others whom Saul 


. -appommted to that work. By this barbarous and bloody Fatt Saul 


theught to affright all his SubjeQs from giving any Countenance or 


| of the ſons of Abimelech, the ſon 
OE nN Abinchar, eſcaped and fled after 


a To Keilab, 
ed Abiachar-ſhewed David, that Saul had ſlain 


faid unto Abiathar, IT knew it o that 


+ And David 
On was there, that he would 


day, 'when Doeg the Edomite 


* ſurely tell Saul : I have occaſioned rhe death of all the 


erſons of thy fathers houſe. : 
E o His Malice fr Ambition made me ſuſpe& that he would do it. 


- 24 'Abide thou wich me, fear not : for he that ſeck- 
eth-my life, ſeeketh thy life : but with me'thou ſhalt be 


in ſafeguard p+ | 
| Ty; Beczuſe Ga will certainly preſerve meto the Kingdom which 
and I by his help will prote& thee. 

C H A P. XXIIL 

f the Lord by Abiathar, reſcueth Kcilah, and goeth into 
it, 1,,——6. God ſbewing him the coming of Saul, and treachery of the 
Keilites, 5,—12. He flicth thence to the wilderneſs of Ziph wih his 
600 men, 13,—15. Here Jonathan cometh to him and reneweth the 
covenant of friendſhip with him, 16,——18. The Ziphites diſcover him 
#0 Saul, 19,——23. Who purſuerh him into the wilderneſs of Maon, 
24,—-26, He is called away by a meſſage that the Philiſlines had in-« 
waded the land, 27, 28. David awclleth at En-geat, 29. : 
"Hen they told David a, faying, Behold, the Phi- 


liſtines fight againſt Keilah 6b, and they rob the 


threſhing-floors c. 

s Or, A they had told David, to wit, before he heard of the ſlaugh- 
ter of the Prieſts. b A City in the Tribe of Judah, Joſb. I5. 44. not 
far from the Forreſt of Hareth, where David now was, chap. 22. 5. 
c Which uſvally nes eps wap in places open to the 
Wind. See Judg. 6. 11+ Ruth 2- 3, &C. 

2 Therefore David enquired of the LORD 4, ſay- 
ing, Shall I go and {mite theſe Philiſtines e? And the 


LORD faid unto David, Go, and ſmite the Philiſtines, 


andſaveKeilah. 
d Either by Abiathar; or rather, by Gad, who was a Propher, 


| 2 Sam. 24. 11, and Davids Seer, 1 Chron. 21. 9. and was now with 
' David, chap. 22. 5. for Abiathar was not yet come to him, v. 6. 


e For the caſe was both deubtful and new, he having nor yer made 
any Attempt upon the Philiſtines, but by Sauls Commiſſion ; and 
dangerous, becauſe of the ſmall] number of his Forces. 

And Davids men faid unto him, Behold, we be a- 
fraid here in Judah f 3 how much more thenif we come 
to Keilah againſtthe armies of che Philiſtines g ? 

F i. e. In this part of Judah, whereas yer we have no Army to op- 
for elſe Keilah alſo was in Judah. g When we ſhall have 
a potent Enemy before us, the Philiflines, and, it may be, another 
behind, us, even Saul, who probably will come forth, either tore- 
ſiſt the Philiflines, or to intercept us. 

4 Then David enquired of the LORD yet again 4: 
And the LORD anſwered him, and faid, Ariſe, go 
down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philiſtines into 
thine hand. : : =0 8 

b Not for his own, but for his Souldiers ſatisfa&tion and Encou- 
ragement ; as Gideon did, Judg. 7. 

So David and his men went to Keilah, and foughe 
with the Philiſtines, and brought away their cartel z, 
and ſmore them with a grear ſlaughter : ſo David ſaved 


»habitants of Keilab. 
heck the Philiffines had either brought out of their Land, or 
had taken from the Iraclires in their march, for the Suſtenance of 


q 


do in that caſe. 


the top of the mountain where he was. 


» Whereby it may ſeem he pretended that he raiſed this Army 


to defend Keilah and his Country from the Phil: Fines, and kept his 


Intention againſt David in his own Breaſt. Or, deſigned, or deviſed: 
for ſo the word ſignifies ; and fo it is here trapſlated by mary, and 


it ſeems both from wv, 8.and trom His publickly avowed jealouſie of 


and rage againſt David, that he declared his deſign to be againſt 
him, as a Traitor to his Crown and Dignity. © And put it upon 


thee, that thou maiſt ask Counſel of Ged for me. 


10 Then faid David p, O Lord GOD of Iſrael, thy 
ſervant hath certainly heard that Saul ſeeketh to come 


to Keilah, to deſtroy the city for my ſake. 


p To wir, by the Prieſt, for he was to make the enquiry of Ged, 
Numb, 27. 21, and David puts the words into his Mouth. 

11 Wil! the men of Keilah deliver me up into his 
hand q ? Will Saul comedownas thy ſervant hath heard? 
O Lord GOD of Iſrael, I beſeech thee tell thy ſervant. 
And the LORD faid 7, He will come down /. | 

q To wir, if I continue in their City: and if Saul come downe 
r From this place it may appear thar Gods anſwer by Urim and 
Thummim, was not by any change in the colour or ſituation cf the 
precious Stones in the Breaſt plate ofthe Ephod, but by a Voice or 
Suggeſtion from God to the High-prieſt.. ſi. e. He purpoteth to 
come, if thou continueſt here, Fof! ſt1]Il as Davids queſtion, ſo Gods 
anſwer, is upon ſuppeſition, as is bere ſufficiently implied. 


12 Then ſaid David, Will the men of Keilah + de- 


Chap. XX ' 


Keilah : and Saul ſaid, God hath F delivered him into + Heb: 


mine hand /: for he is ſhut in, by entring into a town alienated 
him, Gr, 


{ He eaſily believed what he greedily deſired, though his own Ex- fold kim, 


Nutnb! 


27. 2h, 


+ Heb, 


liver me .and my wen into the hand of Saul ? and the ſpur up 


EORD ſaid, They will deliver thee up r. 


t Towir. ifthcuabideſt there. For Gcd iaw their hearts their 


purpcfſes, and paſſions, and their averſion from David, and their af. 


fetions to Saul, and knew better than themſelves what they would 


12 C Then David and his men, which were about ſx 
hundred #, aroſe, and departed out of Keilah, and 
went whitherſoever they could go x: and it was told 
Saul that David was eſcaped from Keilah, and he for- 


| bare to go forth. 


u Two hundred being added to his former number, chap. 22 20 
upon his laſt and great Succeſs againſt the Phil:Fines. x Hither or 
thicher, where they ceuld find refuge, or an hiding place. 


14 And David abode in the wilderneſs in ſtron 
holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderneſs 
of Ziph : and Saul ſought him every day, but God dey 
livered him not into his hand y. : 

3 As Saul fondly perſwaded himſelf, he intended, wv. 7. 

15 And David faw & that Saul was come out to ſeek 
his = : and David was in the wilderneſs of Ziphin a 
wood. 


z Either by Information from his Spies : or, by proſpe@& from 


16 © And Jonathan Sauls ſon aroſe, and went to 


David in the wood a, and ſtrengthened his hand in 


God b, 

a Where David had appointed to meet him at that time. 5 He 
comforted and ſupported, him againſt all his fears, by minding him 
of Gods infallible promiſes made to him, and his ſirgular Providence 
which hitherto had and ſtill wou'id be with him, 

17 And he faidunto him, Fear not, for the hand of 
Saul my father ſhall not find thee, and thou ſhalt be king 
over Iſrael, and I ſhall be next unto thee: *,* and * that 
alſo Sol my father knoweth 

” ich he gathered either from Davids Generoſit , Ingenvity 
and true Friendſhip to him; or from ſome — to th 
by David concerning it. Or, the meaning of the words next wnra 
thee, may beas much as to ſay, I ſhall be under thee, afrer thee, 
or inferior to thee, as the Phraſe tibi ſecundus oft ſignifies So that 
the whole imports thus much ; I do not look to be King my ſelf, 
( as by my Birth T migh expe&, ) but that thou ſhalt be Kings 
( God having ſo appointed ) and I but in a Secondary place jnferi- 
or — ——_ c Byſtrong and well-grounded Conje&ures as bath been 
no e . 

18 And they two made a covenant d befo 

re the 
LORD e: and David abode in 


than went to his houſe. | 
a +» & Renewced their former Covenant, e & e, Setting thems. 


their ArmY- | 


ſely vs 


* Chap. 
24+ 2% 


the wood, and Joma- | 


q 


Chap- 


* Pal. 5: 
title. 


4 Heb. 
on the 11S 
han. 

|Or, FE 
wilgerne/ 


{ Heb: 
frrend 

themſel 
wp0n, & 


[That 
the rock 
diviſen, 


F ctup. 


* Pal. 54+ 
title. 


4 Heb. 
on the 1159” 
han. : 

[| Or, Fe 
wilgerneſ*- 


+ ile 


, '7 
fat ſpall 05» 
/ 


{ Heb: 
ſpread 
themſelves 
upon, &C+ 


the rock of 
diviſens, 


f Heb; 


aſter, 


F!Jeb; 
the faco 


of, &c. 


Y XIV. 


A 


LW 
ſzlves as in Cod's preſence, and calling upon him to be witned, be- | 


tween them, +8 
the * Ziphites f to Saul to G1- 


19 { Then came up Ziphites f to Saul ] 
th not David hide himſelf with us 1n 
mn Bre re Sree in the hill of Hachilah, 


ſtrong holds in the woods, 1n . 

which # + on the ſouth of [|Jeſhimon 7 
f Who were of Davids own Tribe, though fer this their unnatura 

and ſtrange carriage to him, he calls them ſ{rangers, Pſal 54-3: 

20 Now therefore, O king, come down according 
to all the deſire of thy ſoul to come down, and our 
part ſhall be g to deliver him into the kings hand- 

£ It ſhall be our Care and Buſineſs to mn —_— of wy ag 
Or, we will undertake to deliver him, or betray hum © thee. 

2x And Saul faid, Bleſſed be ye of the LORD, for 
ve have compaſiion on me h. : : = 
" þ Whilſt others harden their Hearts againſt me, and joyn mA 
Devid in his treaſonable Conſpiracy. you ſhew ycur pity to Me BY 
your readineſs to help me. | 
" 22 Go, I pray you, prepare yet 5, and know, and 


ſee his place where his + haunt is &, and who hath _— 
him there : for it is told me that he dealeth very lub- 
cilly. : 

r F wit, the matter, inform your ſelves certainly of things, a 
diſpoſe them ſo that we may not be fruſtrared in our Attempr. & 1n 
what Cave, or Wood, or Mountain he is moſt frequent)y. 


23 See therefore, and take knowledge of all the 
Jurking places where he hideth himſelf, and come ye 
again to me with the certainty, and I will go with you: 
and it ſhall come to paſs, if he be in the land, that 1 
will ſearch him out throughout all the thouſands of Ju- 
dah I. E 1; 

1 i. e- Through all the parts of that T'ribe. Every Tribe was dt- 
vided into Thouſands, as Counties are now with us intc Hundreds, 
Sce Jr. 6. 15. Or, with all the Thouſands of Judah ; 1. &- I will 
raiſe againſt him all tre Forces of that Tribe in which he truſteth 
and hid-th bimſe]f. This he ſaith to animate them to the more Vi- 
gorous Proſecution of bums 


24 And they aroſe, and went to Ziph before Saul m: 
but David and his men were in the wilderheſs of Ma- 
on z, in the plain on the ſouth ot Jeſhimon. ; 

» To prepare things for Saul, who marched after chem. » Whi- 


ther be went from the wilderneſs of Ziph, upon ſuſpicion or infor= 
mation that Sau! was coming thither. 


25 Saul alſo and his men went to ſeek him, and 
they told David : wherefore he came downinto a rock 6, 
and abode in the wiiderneſs of Maon : and when Saul 
heard zhat, he purſued after David in the wilderneſs of 
Maon. SE 

0 i, e. Into a Cave which was in the Rock; or, which might be 
called a Rock, not fer the height, but the ſtrength ef its ſituation : 
where at firſt he might think to hide himſelf, bur upon further in- 
tilligence or conſiderati:n he removed from thence upon Sauls ap- 
proach. Or, he came down from. iheRock, 1. e- Either, Firſt, from 
the Mountain menricned in the next Verſe, whence he camedown, 
that ſo he might ger out of Sauls {igit and reach, Or, Secondly, 
From the Hill of Hachilah, wheres David hid himſelf, which is ſaid 
to be on the Seth of Jeſh:mon, v. 9g. as this place where he now 
was, is alſo deſcribed, wer. 24. only rhat ſpeaks of the Plain, and 
this of the Rock or Hill adjoyning to it, or in the midſt of it- Or, 
he came down ts Selah, as the Syriack and Arabick tranſlate it ; a place 
ſo called from the many Rocks or Stones which were in it, or near 
It. 

26 And Saul went on this ſide of the mountain, and 
David and his men on that ſide of the mountain: and 
David made haſte to get away for fear of Saul: forSaul 
and his men compailed David and his men round about 
p to'take them, LS] 

p Dividing themſelves inte ſeveral Parties, each marching a ſe- 
veral way after him. 

27 ©{ Butthere came a meſſenger unto Saul, ſaying, 
Haſte thee, and come : for the Philiſtines have Þ| in- 
vaded the land q- 

q God ſtirring them up by his all-diſpoſing Providence to do it 
&t this time for Davids reſcue. Compare 2 Kings 19. 9. 

28 Wherefore Saul returned from purſuing after Da- 


{ible places» 


2 And he came to the ſheep-coats b by the way, 


and * David and his men remained in the ſides of the 
cave d: 


bþ Which ſome think to have been Caves into which they uſed to 
drive their Sheep for fhelter in tempeſtuous Weather. c i. e. To 
eaſe his Belly, as this Phraſe is thought to be uſed, Zudg, 3. 24, 
The reaſon whereof is, becauſe the Eaſtern and ſome other Nations 
of o1d wore no Breeckes, bur looſe and long Coats or Gowns, like 
choſe which Women with us wear ; but ſhorter, whence their Feet 
and Legs were in a great.part uncovered; and ſometimes other 
parts, which alſo in Scripture are deſigned by the name of the Fees, 
( of which ſee cn Gene. 49. Ios Deut. 28. 57. 2 King. 18. 29. Iſa, 7+ 
20. ) were expoſed to view. But when they went to perform this 
office of Nature, which oblidged them firſt ro life up their Garments, 
they afterwards diſpoſed rhem ſo decently, that all rhoſe parts might 
be covered and kept out of the ſight of others. Bur poflibly the 
words may have 2nother meaning, and it is not to bedeſpifed, that 
thoſe ancient and venerable Interpreters, the $yriack and 4rabick, 
interpret this place and Phraſe quite otherwite, that Saul went :n to 
ſleep there : which was no unquoth thing to Saul, who being a Mi- 
litary Man, uſed to ſleep with his Souldiers upon the bare Ground, 
25 he did chap. 26. 7. And it is not improbable that Saul being ex- 
ceeding weary with hiseager and almoſt inceſſant purſuit, firſt of 
Dxvid, then of the Phil:Fines, an! now of David again, both need- 
ed and deſired ſome ſle:p, God alſo diſpoſing him rhereunto, that 
David might have this eminent occaſion ro demonſtrate his integri- 
ty to Saul, and to all 1rael; and, the ſeaſon poſſibly being hor, he 
might chuſeto ſleep in the Cave, for the benefit ot the ſhade. But 
all the queſtion is, how it may appear that this is the meaning of 
this Phraſe, and whar is the reaſon and ground ofit? Te which 
many things may be ſaid. Firſt, -That this Phraſe is buttwiceuſed 
in Scripture, as far as I remember, here, and Judg. 3. 24. and this 
ſenſe may conveniently enough agree to both of rhem;nay, this ſenſe 
may ſcem betrer to agree with that place, Judg, 3. for that Suwmer 
Parlour, or Summer Chamber ( for both ſeem to be the ſame place, 
and were apparently for the ſame uſe. v. 24. 25. ) ſeems to be a 
place far more convenient for ſleeping, than for eaſing of Nature. 
And the Servants long ſtay and waiting for their lord, ſeems toim= 
ply that they judged him gone to ſleep, ( which might rake up a 
conſiderable tire ) rather than to that other work which requires 
but a little time, See my Notes on Judg. 3. 24 Secondly, That 
there are many Hebrew Phraſes, which do confeſſedly ſignifie ſeveral 
things, albeit, the reaſon of ſuch ſignifications be now utterly ug-= 
known tous theugh it was doubtleſs known to the ancient Hebrews, 
Nor need I inſtance in particulars, ſeing it is ſo in all Languages, 


of many Proverbs and Phraſes is well underſtood, though the reaſon 
of them be now loſt. Which if our modern fidels, who ſcoff at 
ſome paſſages of Scripture, which they either do not, or will not 
underſtand, would conſider, they would loſs much of their ſporr. 
Thirdly, Although there be not chat clear and full proof of this 
ſenſe which ſome may require ( though indeed it cannor be reaſo- 
nably expeRed in a thing ſo ancient, and in a Phraſe of fo conciſe 
and narrow a Language as the Hebrew is, and inan expreſſion fo rare- 
ly uſed in Scripture, ) yer there are ſome intimations in Scripture 
which may ſcem to favour this Interpretation. For perſons com= 
poſing themſelves toſleep in this manner, are not oniy notedin the 
general to have been covered with 3 Mantle, as is ſaid of Siſers, Judge 
4+ 18, 19» but particularly they are ſaid to have their Feet covered,as is 
expreſly obſerved concerning Boaz when he lay down toſleep in the 
threſh-1ng floor,R#th 3. 4, 7+The reaſon whereof may poſlibly be this, 
That when they lay down to ſleep in their Garments, they were ſe. 
cured as tothe other partsof their Body, only their Feet were open 
and viſible; and therefore it was convenient to Cover their Feer ; 
part!y, to prevent the inconveniencies of Cold, ( for which reaſon we 
here take ſpecia] care to coverour Feer in ſuch caſes; ) and partly, 
for decency ſake, leſt their Garments being looſe and large below, 
ſhould be diſordered, and ſo their Nakedneſs ſhould appear, as it 
happened to Noah, Gen. g. 21, Compare Exod. 20. 26. And there- 
fore it cannot ſeem ſtrange or forced, if in this place Sauls covering 
of his Feet, deſign his compoſing himſelf to his reſt. And if this 
be ſo, then the following 9ifficulries of this Hiſtory will appear to 
be plain and eaſie. For if Sal. were faſt aſſeep, which mighr eaſily 
be perceived by David and his Men within; then it is nor ſtrange thar 
Saul neither heard David and his men talking of him, nor felt Da- 


vid, and went againſt the Philiſtines : therefore they 


{That is, called that place || Sela-hammahlekoth 7. 


# 1. @. The Rock of diviſions, becauſe there Saul was ſeparated, and 
in a manner pulled aſunder from David, who was now almoſt with- 
in his reach 

29 T And David went up from thence,and dwelt in 
ſtrong holds at En-gedi. 
XXIV. 


GC H A Þ. 

Saul purſueth David to En-gedi ; Cometh into a Cave in which was David 
with his men : who cutteth off the 5kirt of Sauls Mantle, but will net kill 
bim, 1, 7. He communeth with San!, and hereby evidenceth his In- 
nocency towards him, $, I5. Saul acknowledgeth his fault, taketh 

| an Oath of David, and. departeth, 16, 23. | 
AY it came to paſs when Saul was returned from + 
- following the Philiſtines, that it was told him, 


ſaying, Behold, David is in the wilderneſs of En«/ 


]edi. 
2. Then Saul took three thouſand choſen men out of 


All Iſrael, and went to ſeek David and his men upon 
7 the rocks of the wild goats #, 


vid when he came to cut off his lap. &d For that there were vaſt 
; Caves in thoſe parts is ffirmed nor enly by Joſephus but alſo by 


| Heathen Authors; and Serabo in his 16:h Book writes of one which 


could receive four thouſand Men. 


4 And the men of David ſaid unto him e, Behold, 
the day of which the LORD ſaid unto thee, Behold, 
E will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou 
| mayeſt do to him, as it ſhall ſeem good unto thee f. 
Then David aroſe and cut off the skirt of + Sauls robe 
privily g. 

e Buef. How came it to paſs that Saul did not hear the Debates 
of David and his Men? Arſw. Firſt, The greater noiſe of Sar!s 
Menand Horſes juſt by the Caves mouth, might eaſily drown the 
leſſer. Secondly, Fhere were in theſe large and capacious Caves, 
ſeveral Cells or Parts, whereof ſome were more inward and remote 
from the Caves mouth, in which they might freely converſe and 
diſcourſe, and yer neither be heard nor ſeer: by Sas!, though they 
could eaſily ſee him, and obſerve all his poſtures and 2&iens, be- 
cauſe he was in the mouth of the Cave. Thirdly, Saul might be 
| aſleep, as hath been diſcourſed. # Nor that cither God faid theſe 

| S & & vor ds 


where was a cave, and * Saul went in to cover his feet c: * Pla!.57.\ 
title, and | 
I4 


and particularly in the Engl:ſþ Tongue at this day, in which the uſe _ 


@ ©, #2 


2 tisie, 


p Heb. the 
robs which 
was Savls. 


Chap. XXIV. I. S 4 


Je any ſuch particular promiſe, as ſome apprehend ; | 
| vor - Hoyer DT abedioa upon thoſe confeſſed and known Pro- 
| miſes which God had made to him, of delivering ham from all x 
Enemies, and carrying him through all hinderances and va me 
| ties to the Throne and Kingdom: Which promiſe they conceivec 
| put him under an Obligation of watching and taking all __— 
| ties which God by his providence ſhould pur into his hand fort - 
accompliſhment, whereaf this was an eminent Inftance. g _ 
How could David do thus, and Saul not perceive it ? ſw. Eult, 
This might be ſome looſe and upper Garment, which Sau! might 
then Jay at ſome diſtance from him, as we oft do on the ſame OC- 
liq caſion. Secondly, In thoſe vaſt Caves there were divers particular 
"| Cells and Rooms which were diſtin& one from another, yet ſo as 
if there were ſecrer paſſzges from one to anorher, as may be _ 
red from the relations of Hiſtorians and Travellers. Atthe —_— 
of one of theſe, Saul might lay his upper Garment : which Dav: 
perceiving, and very well knowing all the Cells and paſſages of _ 
Cave, might go ſome ſecret way to its and cut off a little part © 
It. Thiidiy, The noiſe which Davidsmotion might be tuppoted ro 
make, was but ſmall, and that he well knew would be perfeQly 
drowned with the far greater noiſe of Sauls Army, which lay at rhe 
mouth of the Cave. Fourthly, The Heroical Attions of great Men 
in Scripture are not to be meaſured by cominon Rules. And as di- 
vers of the Prophets and Saints of old were in ſome of their Ati- 
ons, ſo David might be 1n this, moved to it by a ſecret and divine 
impulſe, which alſo gave bim confidence of Gods afliſtance therein, 
and of the ſucceſs of his Enterprize. Fifthly, This difficulty dorh 
perfely vaniſh, if Saul was now afleep. And as no man can prove 
that he was not ; ſo that he was, may ſeem probable from what 1s 
| ſaid on v. 3. 

* , Sam. F And it came to paſs afrerwards, that * Davids heart 
| 24-10 ſmote him, becauſe he had cut off Sauls ski:t 6. 
| ; þ Not only becauſe it was injurious, and reproachful, and dan- 
gerous to the King ; bur poſſibly becauſe he had ſome ſecret chought 
of doing more to him, though he ſuppreſſed and overcame it ; for 
he art:mpred this in purſuance of his Souldiers ſuggeſtion, v, 4. 
which if followed would have carried him to further ACtion. 


6 And he ſaid unto his men z, The LORD forbid 


that I ſhould do this thing k unto my malter / the 
LORDS anointed, to ſtretch forth mine hand againſt 
him »», ſeing he is the anointed of the LORD ». 

; Either, Firſt, Before he cut off 5auls lap. Or rather, Second- 
ly, Afterwards, when he returned with Sauls lap in his hand, and 
his Souldiers were enraged that he had not alled him. k Which you 
Perſwade me to do, even cut off Saul. I Whom 1 muſt ſtill own 
for my Sovereign Lord and King, to whom I owe Allegiance whilſt 
he lives, although sfter his death the right of the Kingdom be mine. 
m Towit, to kill-him. A Synecdochical expreſſion. See Gen. 37. 22. 
x. i» e Anointed by God to the K-ngdom ; by which UnQtion his 
Perſon was made Sacred and Invioiable,and is fo to be accounted by 
me, and youz and all hisSubje&s. And 2s God only Exalted him, 
and God only could pronounce a Sentence of Deprivation ef his 
Kingdom againſt him ; ſo it beiongsto God only to execute hisown 
Sentence, and aQually to Depoſe 1m. ; 

+ Heb 7 So David © ſtayed o his ſervants with theſe words, 
cur of and ſuffered them not to riſe againſt Saul : but Saul 
roſe up out of the Cave, and went on his way. 

0 Heb. cut, or clave, or divided, or cut them of The word notes 
borh the eagerneſs and violence of Davias Men in proſecuting their 
Defire, and Davids reſoluteneſs in oppoſing them, as it were, b 
force. Whercin he ſhews great Piety, and Generoſity, and Loyalty 
to Saul. 

$ David alſo aroſe afterward, and went out of the 
cave, and cried after Saul, ſaying, My lord the king, 
And when Saul looked behind him, David ſtooped with 
i his tace tothe earth, and bowed himſelf. 
U * Pl: 9 4 And David faid unto Saul, * Wherefore hear- 
141.6. eſt thou mens words p, ſaying, Behold, David ſceketh 
thy hurt ? 
þ He prudently and modeſtly tranſlates the fault from Saul to his 
followers, and evil Counſellors. 

10 Behold, this day thine eyes have ſeen, how that 

the LORD hath delivered thee to day into mine hand 

* 2 Sam. jn the cave: and ſome bade me kill thee, but * mine eye 
13-139.  q ſpared thee, and I aid, I will nor put forth mine 
* *-* hand againſt my lord, for he is the LORDS anoin- 


ted. 
g Which words are eaſily underſtood both from the nature of 


the thing, and from the uſe of this Phraſe in other Scriptures, as 
Deut. 7. 16. and 13- 8+ The Eye is ſaid to ſpare, becaule it affeQs the 
Heart with pity, and moves a Man to ſpare. | 

1x Moreover, my father r, See, yea, ſee the $kirt 
of thy robe in my hand : for in that I cut off the $kirt 
of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and ſee, 
that thereis neither evil nor tranſgreflion in mine hand /. 
and I have nor ſinned againſt thee ; yet thou hunteſt 


my ſoul to take it. ; 

» So he calls him; partly, becauſe he was his Father-in-law ; 
partly, in teſtimony of kis reſpe& and ſubjeQtion to him as to a Fa- 
ther ; and partly, that by ſo amiable a compellation he m»ght both 
inſinyate himſe}finto his favour, and mind him ofthat Duty which 
2s a Father he owed to David. I neither deſign Miſchief againſt 
thee with my heart, nor will I execute it with my hand, which my 
falſe accuſers told thee I would do, ifthou didſt atany time fall in- 
to my hand- 


12 The LORD judge | between me and thee, and 


: 
; 
"A 
1. 
| 


+ Or, wil 
| Judge. 
| not be upon thee #. q þ | | 

et Or, will avenge me of thee, to wity if thou doſt perſiſt in thy in- 
5 urious and cruel defigns againſt me. «s 1 will nog execute Vepge- 


the LORD avenge me of thee z : but mine hand fhall 


M U E L. 2 
12 As ſaith the proverb of the ancierits, Wickedneſ 
proceedeth from the wicked x: but mine hand ſhall 
not be upon thee. 
x 1 e. Wicked men will do wicked Alﬀions, among which this 
is cne, to kill their Sovereign Lord and King ; as David implied a« 
bove, v. 6. and more fully expreſleth, chap. 26. 9. And therefore 
if I were ſo wicked and vile a perſon as thy Courtiers repreſent me 
to thee, I ſhould make no conſcience of laying wicked and violen$ 
hands upon thee, but ſhould Afſ:ſlinate thee when T had opportunie 
ty. Which becauſe I have now negle&ed and refuſed to do, though 
moved to it by ſome of my wicked Souldiers ; know therefore that 
I 2m not guilty of any wicked D-figns againſt thee, bur am juſt 
and innocent towards thee. Or thus: wicked aQtions ( ſuch as thar 
would have been if I had killed thee) proceed only from the wic- 
ked, of which number I am none, and therefore my hand ſhallnorx 
be upon thee. 
14 After whom is the king of Iſrael come out ? after 
whom doſt thou purſue ? After a dead dog, after * a * Chay, 
flea y. 26. 20, 
y After a worthleſs, contemptible, and impotent- perſon, ſuch 
as Iam. Thou diſparageſt thy ſelf in contending with ſuch a per- 
_ z andeven thy conqueſt of me will be inglorious and ſhame« 
all. 
i5 The LORD therefore be judge, and judge be- 
tween me and thee, and fee, and plead my caule, and 
7 deliver me out of thine hand. + Heb: 

16 © And itcameto paſs when David had made an ju 
end of ſpeaking theſe words unto Saul, that Saul ſaid, 2 Sm 
Is rhis thy voice, my ſon David z? And Saul lift uphis **'9- 
voice, and wept 4. 

z He knew his voice, though being at a great diſtance from him, 
he could not diſcern his face. a Partly, from the ſenſe of his Sin 
againſt God, and of his wicked and baſe carriage to David, ( for 
there are ſome ſuch Temporary Paſſions ofc-times in Hypocrites and 
ur.godly Men ) and principally ficm the remembrance of ſo great 
and fo Jare a dar g:r as he had ncw eſcaped; which commonly pro« 
diicerh Grief and Tears; as 2 Sam. 13. 36. Yet theſe may be tears 
of affeCtion or tenderneſs ( upon the ſenſe of Davids kindneſs ) ra- 
cher than of grief. 

17 And he ſaid to David, Thou art more righteous 

than I: for thou haſt rewarded me good b, whereas [ 
have rewarded thee evil c. 

b For the evil that I have deſigned and done to thee, c For thy 
gocd will to me. 

18 And thou haſt ſhewed this day how that thou 

haſt deale well with me : foraſmuch as when the LORD 


had F delivered me into thine hand, thou killedſt me + Heb! 

not. {- ſhut up, 
i9 For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go 

well away 4? wherefore the LORD reward thee good, 

for that thou haſt done unto me this day. 

. 4 1. e. He will certainly deſtroy him. And therefore thou haſt 

not deaJt with me after the manner of Men, but haſt imitated the 

clemency of God in this a&. | 
20 And now behold, * T know well e that thon * Cp: 

ſhale be ſurely king, and that the kingdom of Iſrael 3 7: 

ſhall be eftabliſhed in thine hand. 

e Or, am convinced, not only by the fame of Samuels Anointing 

= m_ o Gods = gular Providence watching over thee ; and by 

that good Spirit, and thoſe great and princely Virtues 

God hath endowed thee. . 4 hs OPER 

21 Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD} 

that thou wilt not cut off my ſeed after me f, and 

that thou wilt not deſtroy my name g out of my fathers 

houſe. 

f His Princes uſe to deſtroy their Competitors, and thoſe that 

have any hopes of, orpretence to their. Crown ; and Saul had en« 

deavoured to deſtroy David for the ſame reaion,- ard therefore he 

feared a retaliation. g To wit, by cutting off my Seed. So it is 

the ſame thing repeared in other words, as is uſual in Scripture. 

22 And David ſware unto Saul h : and Saul went 


home ; but David and his men gat them up unto the 
hold :z. 
h Queſt. How then could David deftroy ſo many of Sau! Sons, 


2 Sam. 21. 8? Anſw. David could bind bimſelf by his Oaths, bur 
he could not bind God, to whoſe good pleaſure aj Promiſes, Vows 
and Oaths, muft in all reaſon be tubmirred; and that was done by 
Gods Command, and God was well pleaſed with it, 2 Sam. 21. 14. 
Nor is it to be ſuppoſed that David ſware not to deſtroy any of 
chem in cafe God ſhould ſpeciaily Commard it, or that ſhould by 
miſcarriage render themſeives obnoxious to the Sword of Juſtice : 
bur only that he would not do it barely on his own private account, 
nor ſeek occaſions of ſo doing. i: To wit,of En-ged;, v. r. For having 
had ſo great and frequent experience of Sauls Inconſtancy, and Ma« 
lice, and Perfidioufneſs, he would truſt him no more. 


CHAT xv. ; 
Samuel adieth :. David goeth to the wilderneſs of Paran, 1. Nabals Riches, 
2, His and ns Wife Abigails Nature and Condition, 3. David requeſteth 
of Nabal ſome Relief for his Camp : He entreateth Davids Meſſengers ſcorn= 
fully. David is provoked. and mindeth to deſtroy him, 4, 13 Abi= 
gail underſiands it, 14, (7. Taketh @ Preſent 18,——22, And 
by her wiſdom, 23-——31, Pacifieth David, 3 2, 35. Nabal hear 
ing of this, dyeth, 36-——38. David taketh Abigail and Abinvam to 
be his Wives, 39 43- Sau} had given Michal to Phalti. 44. 
Nd * Samuel died, and all the Iiraclites were ga- ES 
.£ X | thered together, and lamented him, and buried Chit 
him 1n his houſe a at Ramah: And David aroſe, and © * 


went down to the wildernels of Paran 6, 


ance on thee, but will leave it wholly to God, 4 


s According | 


Chap. xxV: Chap: ? 


| Or, bu- 


I 


Heb. as% 
him 18 my 
none of 
peace, 

+ Heb. be 
7m peace, 
gud thine 
hue peace, 


+ Heb, | 
ſumed, 1 


} Heb. 
refed, 


RL l. | 
a Acc>rdiog to the manner of thoſe Times. See Gen. 23 9. and 
go. 5. Matth. 27,60, b In the Southern Borders of the Land of Ju 
dab, rhac ſo when occalivn lerved, he might. retire out of Saul's 
Donminions. : ; 
2 And there was a man in Maon c, whoſ: || poiſeflions 
were in Carmel 4, and the man was very great, and he 
had chree thouſand ſheep, and a thouſand goats : and he 
vas (hearing his ſheep in Carmel. | 
c A place in or near to the Wilderneſs of Paran. See Chap. 23.24. 
2 Not that Carmel in Iſachar ; of which ſee Chap. 15+ 12. and 1 Kings 
18. 19- but another in the Tipe of Judah, near unto Man, as ap- 
pears from Foſhe 15. SS. 

3 Now the name of the man was Nabal, and the 
name of his wife Abigail: and ſhe was a woman of 
good underſtanding, and of a beautiful countenance : 
but the man was churliſh, and evil in his doings, and he 
ir. « was | of the houſe of Caleb e, 


; j Or, bu- 
| ſs 


Cock, £ This is added ro aggravite his Crime, that he was a degene- 
rate Branch of that Noble Stock of Caleb, and conlequently of the 
Tribe of Judah, as David was. | 
4 © And David heard in the wilderneſs, that Nabal 
did ſhear his ſheep f _ _. | 
f Which Times were celebrated: with Feaſting and Jollity. See 
2 Sam, 13+ 23, 24 : 
5 And David ſent out ten young. men, and David 
f:id unco the young men, Get ye up to Carmel, and 
4b ack $2 £0 Naba), and j greet him in my name. ; 
is 6 And thus ſhall ye ſay to him that liverh 5» proſperity 
ef g, + Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine houls 
ww þ, and peace be unto ali that thou haſt 5. 
+ Heb. be g Heb. To him that Iwveth. Life is oft put for a proſperous and 
mo hapyy life, as in that Prayer, Lt the King live, 1 Sam. 10, 24+ 1 K7gs 
$14 711 


- 1. 25- and in other paſſages of Scripture, and other Aurhors 3 for 
byepeace. 1 Alifted ard calamitous life is unworthy of the name of life, and 
is eſteemed a kind of dearh, and oft ſo called, as 2 Cor. 1. 10. and 
11. 23. By this expreſſion David both congratulates Nabal's fzlicity, 
and racicly minds hum of the penury and diſtreſs in which David and 
his Men now were. h i.e, To all thy Family. s To all thy 
Goods. So David's Prayer 1s very comprehenſive, reaching to his 
Soul, and Body, and Wife, and Children, and Servants, and all 
his Eſtate. 

7 And now I have heard that thou haſt ſhearers : now 
thy ſhepherds which were wich us, we 7 hurt them nor, 
neither was there ought miſſing unto them, all the while 
they were in Carmel &. \ | 

k& Which, conſidering the licentiouſneſs of Soldiers, and the ne- 
ceſſities which David and his Men were oft expoſed to, was no ſmall 
favour and priviledge, which Nabal was bound both in juſtice, an 
gratitudey and prudence to requite- > 

8 Ask thy young men, and they will ſhew thee : 
wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: 
( for we come in a good day / ) give I pray thee, what- 
ſoever cometh to thine hand, unto thy ſervants mm, and 
to thy ſon » David 

Ll i.e Tn a day of Feaſting and Rejoycing ; 'when Men are moſt 
Chearful and liberal; when thou mayeſt relieve us out of thy abun*- 
dance withont damage to thy ſelf; when thou art receiving the 
Mercies of God, and therefore obliged to pity and relieve diſtreſſed 
and indigent Perſons, Dcut. 12+12. and 14 26, 29. and 15.7. m To 
us who have been, and ſtill are ready to ſerve, and guard thee and, 
thine. Or, the word Servants may be only uſed as a wo:d of reſpe& 
frequently uſed in Scripture, where Inferiors ſpeak to Super:ors, 
eſpecially when they be ſuppliants, and beg ſome favour. » So he 
calls himſelf,to ſhew that reſpe& & affeftion which he bore to Nabal, 
as being elder and wealthier than himſelf, and of rhe ſame Tribe 
with himſelf, and a Branch of fo worthy a Family as Nabal's 
was. | | 

9 And when David's young men came, they ſpake 
to Nabal according to all thoſe words in the name of 
David, and Þ ceaſed, 

. 10 4 And Nabal anſwered David's ſervants, and 
fatd, Who is David 0? and who 5s the ſon of ſeſle ? 
There be many ſervants now a days that break away, 
every man from his maſter p = 

o What relation or obligation have I to David? p Hereby he 
taxeth boch David, as one revolted from, and riſen up againſt Saul his 
Lord aud Maſter; and his Soidiers as Runagares from their Maſters 
and Creditors, &c. See Chap. 22+ 2+ | 

1x Shall I then take my bread, and my water q, and 
+Heb, MY Þ fleſh that I have killed ior my ſhearers, and give 
faghiry, 1t unto men whom I know not whence they be ? 

q He ſpeaketh thus, either becauſe in thoſe hot and dry Parts 
Water was ſcarce and precious: or, Water is here put for any kind 
of Drink, as Bread is oc taken for all ſorts of Mear, | 

iz v0 David's young men rurned their way , 
and went again, and came and told him all thoſe ſay- 
ings. 

F-| | 13 And David faid unto his men, Gird ye on every 
| man his wo;d r. And they girded on every man his 

{word, and David alſo girded on his ſword : and there 
went up after David abour four hundred men, and two 
hundred abode by the ſtuff /. 


r Having reſelvyed and ſwornto revenge himſelf of Nabal, aS1S CX= 
preſſed wer. 2r, 22. / See Chap. 17+ 24. and 39» 24. 


I4. c But one of the young men told Abigail : Na- 
bale wife, faying, Behold, David fent meilengers out 


+ Heb, 
ſums, 


S 1m. 


| | _—_—_—_ 
of the wilderneſs to ſalute our maſter ; and he Þ railed f Hb. few 
on them. #pon them, 


: Wiſely conſidering the miſchievous effeQs likely to follow ſo 
churliſh a meſlage. | 


15 But the men were very good unto us, and we 
were not F hurt, neither miſſed we any thing as long + Heb. © 
as we were converlant with them, when we were in/bamed. 
the helds, | | 

16 They were a wall # unto us both by night 
__ day, all che while we were with them keeping the 

cep. | I. ne 6 
u 2 e. A Defence againſt wild Beaſts, and Robbers, and Ene- 
MmI1Es» ; 

17 Now therefore know, and conſider what thou 
wilt do: for evil is determined againſt our maſter, and 
againſt all his houſhold x : for he # /«ch a ſon of Belial, 
that a man cannot ſpeak to him y. | 

x Which ir was eafie to gueſs; either from ſome threatning EX 
prefſions which David's Men uſed; or from the conſideration of 
David's great Power, and that rage which ſo high a provocation 
was likely to produce in Military Perſons. y To wir, without ha- 


zard to himſelf, and therefore I acquaint thee, rather than himywith 
this matter. 


18 T Then Abigail made haſt2, and took two hun- 
dred loaves z, and two bottles of wine, and five beep 
ready dreſſed, and five meaſures of parched corn, and 
an hundred Þ cluſters of raiſins, and two hundred cakes 
of tigs, and laid hems on aſſes. Fe 

z Which ſhe did without his leave, and againſt his mind, be= 


cauſe it was a caſe of apparent neceſlicy, for the preſervation of her 
ſelf, and Husband, and all the Family from imminent ruin. And 


ſurely, thar real and urgent neceſliry which diſpenſeth with God's 
poſitive Commands, might well diſpenſe with the Husband's right 
in this caſe. | 

19 And ſhe faid unto her ſervants, Go on before me 
behold, I come after you @ 2 bur the told nor her huf- 
band Nabal. 

# For ſhe knew ſhe could quickly overtake them. 

20 And it was ſo, a ſhe rode on the aſs, that ſhe 
canie down by the covert of the hill b, and behold, Da- 
vid and his mien came down «© againſt her, and the 
mer them. CS : h 

b In the lower part, and under the ſhadow of the Hill, or of the 
Trees that grew upon it; ſo that David did nor ſee her till ſhe mer 
him- c To wit, trom another oppoſice Hill. 

21 ( Now David had faid &, Surely in vain haveT 
kept all that this fe/l9w e hath in the wilderneſs, ſo that 
nothing was mitled of all, that pertained unco him, and 
he hath requited me evil for good. - 
d Either in.his Jourvey, or as ſoon as he heard that reproachfu 

anſwer.. e Whom he thought unworthy to be named, for his bar- 
barous Ingratitude and Churlifhnets. | 

22 So, and_ more alſo do God unto the enemies of 
David f, if I leave of all that pertain. unto him by the 
morning light, any that piſfech againſt the walig.) 

f 7. e. Unto David himſelf. , But becauſe it might ſeem ominous 
and unnatural to Curſe himſelf, therefore by a Figure called Euphe= 
miſmus, inſtead of David, he mentions David's Enemies. See 1 Sam, 
20.16. The words may be thus rendered : $4 and more alſo let Grd do for 
( the Hebrew Lamed being very oft ſo uſed ) the Enemies of David, 
i. e Ler God work for them, and give them as mucn Proſperity and 


| 


Succeſs as Nabal hath hitherro had. Or, ler, God utterly deſtroy 
their Enemies ; and eſpecially, . my ſelf the chief of them, ifI do 
not deſtroy this Man. £ *. e. Any of the Males, for they only do 
ſo ; and of them this Phraſe is manifeſtly underſtood ; 1 Kings 14. 
10. and 21- 21. and 2 Kings 9, 8. And Men ror wholly babarous 
have generally ſpared Womenin ſuch caſes. Duef. Why then was 
Abigail ſo much concerned and afraid ? Anſw.. Partly from Huma- 
nity, and the horrourof ſo general 2nd dreadfula Slaughter of her 
Family and neareſt Relations : arid partly, becauſe when the Sword 
was once drawn, ſhe knew not where it would reſts nor whether ſhe 
ſhould eſcape : for ſhe knew. nething of this limitation of David's 
cthreatning, till ſhe came to him. 


23 And when Abigail ſaw David, ſhe haſted andq 
lighted off the aſs, and fell before - David on her face a 
and bowed her ſelf to the ground' þ. 7 2 I 

h Not only in token of deep Reverence, but as a moſt humble 
ſuppliant ; as 2 Kings 4» 27. Ds 

24 And fell ar his feet, and faid, Upon me, m 
lord, «pon me let his iniquity be b, and let thine hand- 
maid, 


pray thee, ſpeak in thine F audience, and f Heb.eer: 


hear the words of thine handmaid. 


h Tmpute Na#a!'s Sin to me, and if thou pleaſeſt, puniſk it in m. 
who here offer my ſelf as a Sacrifice to thy juſt Iniiznation. The, 
whole Speech of Abigail 1s uone with great artifice ; and ſhe doth 
here, by an abſolute ſubmitting to Mercy, without any pretencs of 
juſtification of whac way done, ( but rather with aggravation of it } 
endeavour to work upon David's Generoſfity, and good nature, to 
Pardon it. And, with great Art, firſt would divert the Puniſhmene 
from her Husband ta_ her ſclf, becauſe-ſhe had then much more to 
fay, why David ſhould ſpare her, then why he ſhould ſpare Nadal. 
And there was hardly any head of Argument, whence the greateſt 
Oraror might. argue in this caſe, which ſhe doth,nor manage to 
the beſt adyamage, and moſt plauſible infinuations for ſuch an ext- 
gent. 


25 Let not my lord, F pray thee, + regard / this f Heb 


lay 
2 & 3 Man ,,,. 


is. 


tOr.lumps. | 


ir > 


- q 
«7 1 4 


| | 
vi'1 
l 


Wt! | 


NF : 
: 
! : 
Ir 


it 


— 


da —_— — _ — — nn rn ———— -——EDY == - _ 
- os WT IRON _ G _— _—_— , : = _ hs : = 
et mane 
x EI SPELLS 0 Wn I We er IEEE PEEL EL 2 La Oe II > I RD I” ER 
OI == oe ms LIES EAA FE CEE EE 


CE NNN NN 


hap. XXV. "1 + 
man of Belial #s, even Nabal: for as his name zs, ſo #5 | 
he: Nabal is his name, and folly 5s with him » 3 but I 
thine hand-maid ſaw not the young men of my lord, 


WH whom thou didit ſend 0. 
ll- 7 His Perſon and Words deſerve thy contempt, but not thy re- 
m For ſuch he hath ſhewed himſelf to be by this wicked 
214 abominable carriage towards thee. » His noted folly and _ 
pidity is a more proper Objc for thy pity than anger» Ihs ſordi 
Anſwer to thy Servants did not proceed from any ill deſign, or 
but from brutiſh Sottiſheneſs, and want of the under- 
' Nagding of a Manin him. Ir may be thought a great Crime, __ 
ſhe traduceth her Husband in this manner- But this may be fai 
for her, That ſhe told them nothing but what they all knew COn- | 
cerning him, and that ſhe only ſeemed to rake away that which he | 
never had indeed, to wit, his good Name. that ſhe might preſerve , 
that which he had, and which was more dear and important to him, . 
even his Life and Soul. o Though I freely ſubmit my ſelf ro the 
Puniſhment in my Husband's ſtead, yer I was innocent of the 


Crime. : 
"AG Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, 


and as thy ſoul liveth,ſeing the LORD hath withholden 
Heb, thee from coming to ſhed blood p, and from | avenging 
; ;by thy ſelf with thine own hand ; now let thine enenues, 


avin 
Gi fe and they that ſeek evil to my lord be as Nabal 9. 

p Seing God hath fo ordered this buſineſs by his wiſe and won- 
derful Providence, that I ſhould accidentally, and unexpe&edly come 
to the knowledge of my Husband's vile and ſordid Carriage ; and 
that I ſhould come to meet theezand find thee ſo gracious, as tO gLve 
a favourable Audience ; and all this, that hereby he might with- 
hoid thee from the Sin of Blood-guiltinefs. q Let them be as con- 
remptivle and hateful as Nabal is, and will be for this odious AQion; 
Jet them be as unable to do thee any hurt as he is;let them be forced 
to yield to thee, and implore thy Pardon and Favour, as Nabal now 
doth by my mouth : Jer the Vengeance thou didft deſign upon 
Natal and his Family, fall upon their heads, who, by their conſtant 
and inveterate Malice againſt thee, do more deſerve it than this fil- 
1y. Fool for this one miſcarriage; and much more than all the reſt 
of our Family, who, as they are none of thine Enenues, nor ſuch as 
ſeek thee evil, ſo they were no way guilty of this wicked Attion- 
And therefore ſpare theſe, and execute tay Vengeance upon more 
proper Objects. j : : 

27 And now this || blefling r which thine hand-maid 
harch brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto 


the young men that 7 follow my lord 5. 

r So 2 Gift or Preſent is called here, and Ger. 33. 11. and elſe- 
where ; not enly b<cauſe the matter of it comes from God's bleſſing; 
but alſo becauſe it is given with a Bleſſing,or with a good Will. 5 As 
being unworthy of thune acceptance Or ule. 

28 I pray thee, forgive the treſpaſs of thine hand- 


maid r: for the LORD will certainly make my lord a 
ſure houſe «, becauſe my lord fighteth che bactels of 


the LOKD x, and evil hath not been found in thee, af 
thy gays ).- TE 
: 7. e WhichT have taken upon my ſelf, v. 24. and which, if it 
be nor Pardoned, bur Puniſhed, che Puniſhment will reach to me. 
% i.e. Will give the Kingdom to thee, and to thy Houſe for ever, 
as he hath promiſed thee. And therefore let God's great kindneſs 
to thee, make thee gentle and mercitul to others; do not ſully thy 
approaching Glory with the ſtain of Innocent Blood; but conſider, 
that it 1s the Glory of a King ( which thou art by God's appoint- 
menr, and ſal e're long aQually be) to paſs by Offences; aad that 
it will be thy loſs to cut off ſuch as will ſhortly be thy Subje&ts. 
x 5. e. For the Lord, and for the People of the Lord againſt their 
Enemies; eſpecially, the Philiſtines, And as that this is thy proper 
Work, and therein thou mayeſt expeQt God's blefling and help; toir 
is not thy work to draw thy Sword in thy own private quarrel a- 
gainſt any of the people of the Lord ; and God will not bleſs thee 
in it. y Though thou haſt been ofc aſperſed, and charged with ma- 
ny Crimes, by Seu! and others ; yet thy Innocency hath been, and 
5s evident to all Men: Do not therefore now by this cruel a& of 
Vengeance juſtific thine Enemies Reproaches, nor blemiſh thy great 
+ and juſt Reputarion. ' | : | 
' 29 Yeta man &is riſen to purſue thee, and to ſeek 
thy ſoul a: but the ſoul of my lord ſhall be boundin the 
bundle of life þ with the LORD thy God c, and the 
ſoulsof thine enemies, them ſhall he ſling out, + 5s our 


of the middle of a ling 4, | 
z To wit, Saul, though no way injured nor juſtly provoked by 
thee. « i.e. To take away thy Life. 6 Or, zn the bundle; i.e. In 
the Society, or Congregation of zhe living; out of which, men are 
taken, and cut off by Death. The Phraſe is taken from the com. 
- mon uſage of Men, who bind thoſe things in bundles, which 
they are afraid to loſe, becauſe things that are ſolitary and unbound, 
are ſoon loſt. The meaning of the place is, God will preſerve thy 
Life ; and therefore it becomes not thee, unjuſtly and unneceſſarily 
to take away the Lives of any ; eſpecially of the People of thy God 
and Saviour Cc 5.e. In the hand and cuſtody of God, who, by his 
watchful Providence, - preſerves this Bundle, and all that are in it; 
and thee in a particular and ſingular manner, as being thy God in a 
peculiar way, and ſpecial Covenant. God himſelf will hide, and 
| 0m theein the ſecret of his Preſence. Pſal. 31. 20. where no hand 
of violence can reach thee. And therefore all the Attempts of Sul, 
'or others againſt thee, are vain and ridiculous. For who can de- 
froy whom God will keep? &« God himſelf will cut them off 
Fuddenly, violently, and irreſiſtibly ; and caſt them far away ; 
both from his Preſence, and from thy Neighbourhood, and from 
all capacity of doing thee any hurt. 


20 And it ſhall come to paſs, when the LORD ſhal 
have done to my lord, according to all the good that 
he hath ſpoken concerning thee, and ſhall haye ap- 
pointed thee ruler over Urasl; 


| 
| 
1 


ard. 


et * deep Malice, 


© Nl Or, pre- 
| uy pre 
+ Heb. 


walk at the 


feer of, &c. 


+ Heb. in 
the mid of 
the bought 


of a ſling« 


| 


TM O 


E 


en_d I 


L. 


31 That this ſhall be { no gricf unto thee, nor of. + Bag " 
fence of heart.unto my lord e, either that thou hajt ſhed /22gwring 
blood cauſcleſs f, or that my lerd + hath avenged him- 2. Sum. 

« « S9lins 
{elf g : but when the LORD ſhall have dealt well with + ; 
my lord, then remember thine hand-maid 5, faved Lin 

e Thy Mind and Conſcience will be free from all the Torment /./f, v. 1G, 

which the guilt and ſhame of ſuch an Afion would cauſe in thee. | 
By which, ſhe cunning]ly infinuates, what a blemiſh this would be 
to his Glory, what a diſturbance to his Peace anc Felicity, if he Pro- 
ceedcd to execute his Purpoſe : and withal implics, hov ſweer and 
comfortable it would be to him ro remember, that he had for con« 
ſcience to God denied himſelf, and reftrained his Pafſtions. 7 Which 
ſhe ſignifies would be done if he ſhould go on. For though Nabs? 
had been guilty of abominable Rudeneſs, Uncharitablencis, and 
Ingratitude ; yet he had done nothing worthy of Deaths by the 
Laws of GOD or of Man. And whatſoever he had done,the rcſt oF 
his Family were Innocent. g Which is dire&ly contrary to 
GOD'S Law, Levit. 19. 18, Deut. 32. 35. Compare with Rom. 
12. 19. h When GOD ſhal make thee King, and I ſhal have oc- 
caſion to apply my ſclIf to thee for Juſtice, or Relief, let me find 
Grace in thy ſighr, and ſo let me do at this time. Or, ond the 
Lord will bleſs my lord, and recompenſe thee for this Mortification 
of thy Paſſion, and thou nilt remember thine handmaid : 5. e. Thou 
wileſt rewember my Counſel-with ſatisfaCtion to thy ſelf, and thank. 
fulneſs to me. 

32 4 And David faid unto Abigail, Bleſſed be the 
LORD God of [frac}, which ſent thee 5 this day to meer 
me: 

# Which by his gracious and ſingular Providence ſo diſpeſed Mat. 
ters, that thou ſhouldeſt come to me : He rightly begins at the 
Fountain of this Deliverance, which was God; avd then procceds 
to the Inſtruments. 

33 And bleſſed be thy advice, and bleſſed be thorn 
k, which haſt kept me this day from coming to ſhed 
_ ;, and from avenging my ſelf with mine own 

14nd. 

k i.e. The Lord bleſs and recompenſe thee, for this thy g00d 
Advice. 1 Which I had ſworn to do. Hereby it plainly 5.5. coy 
That Oaths whereby Men bind themſelves to any Sin,are Null and 
Void : and as it was a Sin to make them; ſo it is adding fin to 
{1a ro perform them, 

34 For in very deed, as the Tord God of Iirael li- 
veth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee m, 
except theu hadfr halted and come to meer me, ſurely :. 
there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning — *% 
light, any that piſſeth againſt the wall. : 

7m Not that he intended to Kill her, bur the Males only ; as was 
Noted on v. 22. But their Deſtru&ion was a dreadful AfMiQion and 
Damage to her. | e 

35 So David received of herhand zbat which ſhe had 
brought him, and ſaid unto her, Go up in peace to thine 
houſe : ſee, I have kearkned to thy voice, and have 
accepted thy perſon ». 

» i, Shewed my Acceptance of thy Perſon, by my 
Requeſt : See Gen. 19. 21. 4 CO WORE 

36 \ And Abigail came to Nabal,and behold he held 
a feaſt in his houle like the feaſt of a king o, and Nabals 
heart as merry within him, for he was very drunken t 
wherefore ſhe told him nothing p, le or more, until 
the morning light. 

o As the manner was upon thoſe ſolemn Occaſions: Sordid Co- 
vetouſneſs, and vain Prodigality were met together in him. p He 
being then uncapable of Admonition, his Reaſon and Conſcience 
being both aſleep. 

[37 Butir came to pals in the morning, when the 
wine was gone out- of Nabal,and his wife had told him 
theſe things that his heart died within him, and he be- 
came as a ſtone q. | 

q He was oppreſled with Grief, and fainted 
fear and horror of ſo great a Miſchicf, though ir 
who having in the Night galloped over a narrow 
broken Bridge, over a deep River; when in the 
to review it, was ſtruck dead with the horror of 
in. 

33 And it came to paſs about ten days after, that the 
LORD iſmote Nabal, that he died -, : 

1 God either inflited ſome other ſtroke or Diſeaſe v I 
increaſed his Grief and Fear to ſuch an height, as killed > - 

39 4 And when David heard that Nabal was dead, 
he ſaid, Bleſſed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the 
cauſe of my repreach from the hand of Nabal s, and 
hath kept his ſervant from evil 2s for the LORD hath 
returned the wickedneſs of Nabal upon his own head. 
And David ſent « and communed with Abigail, to take 
her to him to wife, 

s How could David rejoyce at the Death of his Enemy > Avſio: 
Alchough it may be ſaid, that he rejoyced not in Nabat”, ho ag 
ſuch, bur only in the declaration of God's Juſtice in Punithing 10 
great a Wickedneſs; which was an honour to God, and-a docus« 
ment, and therefore a Benefit to Mankind, and fo a Publick Good, 
and cauſe of Joy: Yer the Matter is not weighty, if we confeſs, 
that this was another Inſtance of Humane Infirmity in David, and 
that it is not propoſed for our Imitation, but tor our Caution. Yes 
it may be turther ſaid, That this was nor purely an Att of private 
Revenge, becauſe David was a publick Perton, and Ancinted King ; 
and therefore Nabal's Repreach caſt upon David above, w. 10, It. 
was a Contempr of God, and of his Ordinances and Appointment ; 


which waz vindicated by chis xemarkable Judgement, 5 5-6, From 
| , cas 


away through the 
was paſt. Asone, 
Plank, Jaid upon a 
Morning he came 
the danger he was 


Chan. XXy, hap. 


+ Heb. 


a; [he 


FT:ſh. 
15. 56. 
als | £m, 
+ 14y 15» 


{ 
| 


«Chap. 14. 
fo, [7, Foo 
|Or midf 


of Vis cars 
rages, 


| 


Mn M ford ta 


f'9 


+ Heb. 


g; hho 


F]:ſh. 
15. 56, 
ll F£3m, 
4 14y 15» 


bg Chaps 
3. 19 
Pal. 54. 
title, 


Fo, 17 


of his cars 
rages, 


Bp. XXv1. 


pn 
[Or -id# pitched round about him. 


the fin of Blaodſhed and SelErevenge, V. 33- mt To wit, Meſſen- 
cers ; Which he thought firrer than ro gO himſelf; partly, becauſe 
it he had met with a Repulſe, it had beer leſs Ignominious 3 and 
,art'y, becauſe he would leave her to her freedom and choice, and 
would not ſo much 2s ſeem to take her by violence. But this doubt- 
}-fs was not done immediately afrer Naba!'s Death, bur in fome 
convenient ſpace of rime after it ; though ſuch Circumſtances be 
commonly omitted in the S:cred Hiſtory; which gives only the 
H:ads, and moſt important Paſſages of things | 

o And when the ſervants of David were come to 
Abigail ro Carmel, they ſpakeunto her, ſaying, David 
2nT us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife. | 

41 And ſhe aroſe, and bowed her felt on her face to 
the earth, and ſaid x, Behold, /et thine hand-maid ve a 
ſervant to waſh the feet of the ſervants of my lord. 

x She ſhewed. this Reverence, and ſpake thus te them, as repre- 
ſenting Davia's Perſons | | | EE | 
. 42 And Abigail haſted, and aroſe and rode upon an 
aſs with five damſels of hers that went after her : and 
ſhe went after the meſſengers of David y, and became 
his wife. BEE | 

y Not immediately, but ſome competent time after they were 
gone. She copſidered not David's preſent ſtraits and penury, which 
ſhe thought her plentiful Eſtate might ſupply ; nor his danger from 
Saul; but by a trve and ſtrong Faith, reſted upon God's Promiſe 
made to David, not doubring bur God would perform 1t-. | 

42 David alſo took Ahinoam * of Jezreel, and they 
were aiſo both of chem his wives. 

44 | Bur & Saul had given * Michal his daughter, 
Davids wite, to Phalti the ſon of Laiſh, which was of 
Gallim. | 

2 Or, For, as the Hebrew 7a is oft-times uſed. For this ſeems to 
be added, as a reaſon why David took other Wives, becauſe Sau! had 
give his former Wife to another Man, that he might as far as he 
could extinguiſh all Relation and Kindred to him, whom he i ated; 
and withal, cut off his Hopes and Pretence to the Crown upon that 
account. 


: CHAP, XXVLI. 

Sar by the diſcovery of the Ziphites cometh to Hachil ah againſt David,t===3. 
Whn cometh with Abiſha: ro Saul's Camp; fAayeth him from killing Sail, 
but taketh his Spear and Cruſe, 4 12. He upbraideth Abner, 

'7. Exhorteth Saul, 18 20, Who acknowleageth his ſin, 


T3 
21 


25, : 
P. wo the Ziphires came unto Saul s to Gibeah,ſaying, 

* Doth not David hide himſelf in the hill of Ha- 
chilah, which is before Jeſhimon 6b? 

a Having once betrayed him before, they thought their Caſe de- 
ſperate with Dav'd; and therefore did more ſtrenuouſly affiſt Saul in 
diſcovering him, in order to his Ruine. 6 He is returned to his 
former hmnt : of which ſee Chap.23-19+ This place mighr be conve- 
nient for him, either for its nearneſs to A4bigail's Eſtate : or becauſe 
he mighr think, that Sau! was mollified, and the Zriphites cautioned 
by the unſucceſsfulneſs of rheir former Atrempt 3 or becauſe he 
could from thence, make good his Retreat into other places, if need 
Were. 


2 Then Saul aroſe, and went down to the wil- 
derne\s of Ziph, having three thouſand choſen men of 
Iſrael with him, to ſeek David in the wilderneſs of 
Ziph. 

: And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah which 7s 
before Jeihimon by the way : but David abode in the 
wilderneis, and he ſaw c that Saul came after him into 
the wildernels, 


c i,6. He unserſtood by Information, probably, from his dear 
friend Jonathan. 


4 David therefore ſent out ſpies, and underſtood that 


' Saul was come in very deed. 


4 And David aroſe, and came to the place where 
Saul had pitched 4: and David beheld the place where 
Saul lay, and * Abner the ſon of Ner the captain of his 
hoſt : and Savl lay in che || crench e, and the people 


d Came near to the skirts of Saws Camp ; which he might eaſily 
diſcover from loine neighbouring Hill, or Wood; and yet, not be 
diſcerned himielf. And it is probable, he came rthitier diſguiſed, 
and rowards Night. e Encompaſſcd with his Carriages for better 


ſecurity. Compare, 1 Sam. 17. 20. 


'6 Then anſwered David, and faid to Ahimelech the 
Hitrite f,and ro Abiſhai the ſon of Zeruiah g,brother to 
Joab, ſaying, Who will go down with me to Saul 
ro the carnp ? And Abiſhai ſaid, I will go down with 
thees 

f So called, either becauſe he was one of that Nation, but Con- 
verted to the Jewiſh Religion: Compare 2 Sam. It. 3. and 15. 18. 
Or, from his Habiration amongſt, or ſome Relation to ſome of that 
People. g David's Siſter : See 1 Chren. 2. 16. His Father is not 
named ; either becauſe he was now dead; or becauſe he was an ob- 
{cure Perſon. 

7 So David and Abiſhai came to the people h by 
night, and behold, Saul lay ſleeping within the trench, 
and his ſpear ſtuck in the ground at his bolſter ; bur Ab- 
ner and the people lay round about him, 

 h 3.e, To Saul's Hoſt and Camp. Ir might ſeem a bold and 
ſtrange Attempt ; but many things are to be conſidered: 1. hat 
Heroical Perſons have oft artempred things of no leſs difficulty and 
danger than this was ; as many credible Hiſtorians relate. 2. That 
David did; and might cafily perceive, that they were all faſt aſleep. 


$8 4 SES 


Chap. 


3- That David had a particular Aſſurance thar Grd wovld preſerve 
him to the Kingdom- 4- That he had a ſpecial Inftin& fiem God 

tothis Work ; and pofſibly God might inform him, that he had caſt 
| them into a dead ro that he might have this ſecond epportunity 
of manifeſting his Innocency towards Savl, and the Juſtice of his 
Cauſe. "Os | | 


8 Then faid Abiſhai to David, God hath + delivered + Heb: 
thine enemy into thine hand this day : now therefore 7+ 
let me ſmite him, I pray thee, with the ſpear, even to 
the earth at once, and I will not /wite him the ſecond 
time 2» | 

;i T'will Nail him to the Ground at one blow, that Tſhall not need 
a ſecond ſtroke. 


9 And David faid to Abiihai, Deſtroy him not : for 
who can ſtretch forth his hand againſt the LORDS a- 
nointed, and be guiltleſs & ? ... h 

k Though Saul be a cruel Tyrant, and rejefted: by God, yet he 
is our ſovereign lord and king ;. and Is though deſigned King, as 
yet am bur a private Perſon, and his Subje& ; and therefore can» 
not kill him without Sin, nor will I conſent that thou ſhould'ſt do 
Its . 

Io David faid furthermore, 4s the LORD liveth, 
the LORD ſhall {mite him /, or his day ſhall come to 
die #9, or he ſha!l deſcend into battel and periſh. 


1 By ſome ſudden and mortal Stroke.  Accordivg to the courſe 
of Nature. - | | 


11: The LORD forbid that I ſhould ſtretch forth mine 
hand againſt the LORD'S anointed 2 but, I pray thee, 
take thou now the ſpear that is at his bolſter »,and the 
cruſe of water os, and let us go. | 

3 Which will ſhew where we have bzen, and what we could have 
done. e Which might be pur there, either to waſh himſelf in caſes 
of any accidental Pollution, which oft happened in the Night:. or 


to refreſh himy and quench his thirſt in that hot Climate and Seaſon; 
or for divers other uſes. 


12 So David took the ſpear, and the cruſe. of water 

from Sauls bolſter, and they gat them away, and no 
man ſaw i#, neither awaked z for they were all aſleep, mY,” 
becauſe a deep ſlzep f for the LORD p was fallen upon + Heb. 
them. . x | the LORD. 
? Sent upon them by the Lord, for David's advantage« 
12 T Then David went over to the other fide, and 
ſtood on the cop of an hill afar q off ( a great ſpace be- 
ing between them. ) 


7 Thar his Perſon might be out of their reach, and yet his Voice 
might be heard; which in a clear Air, and in the ſilence of the 
Night might be heard at a great diſtance. 

14 And David cried to the people, and to Abner the 
ſon of Ner, ſaying, Anſwereſt thou not, Abner ? Then 
Abner anſwered and ſaid, Who art thou that crieſt to 
the king r ?. 


. 


ry Or, with or beſide the king, 3. e« So near to him) ſo as to diſturb 
the King. | | 

15 And David ſaid to Abner, Art not thou + a 
valiant man 2 and who 5zs like to thee / in Iſrael ? 
Wherefore then haſt rhou not kept thy lord the king ? 
for there came one of the people in to deſtroy the king 
thy lord. 


ſ For Courage and ConduQ: and therefore thy fault herein is 
the greater. | 


16 This thing is not good # that thou haſt done: & 
the LORD liveth, ye are + worthy to die, becauſe ye + x06. ſons 
have not kept your maſter the LORD'S anointed. And of 44h. . 
now ſee where the kings ſpear js, and the cruſe of wa- 
ter that was at his bolſter. - 
t 1.e. It is very bad, a great Crime. 
Prov. 18. 5-and 19. 2+ 
17 And Saul knew Davids voice,and faid, 7: this thy 
voice, my ſon « David? And David faid,Þ js my voice, 
my lord, O king. ha 
u As thou waſt my Son by Marriage, ſo thou haſt expreſſed the 
care and affeCtion of a Son ro me now a ſecond time- LN 
18 And he ſaid, Wherefore doth my lord purſue thus 
afcer his Servant ? for what have I done ? or what evil 
# in mire hand? 


19 Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king 
hear che words of his ſervant. If the LORD have ftir- 
red thee up againſt me x, let him + accept an offering ; 
y: burif 5hey be the children of men z, curſed be they _—__ 
before the LORD: for they have driven me out this 


day from Þ abiding in the inheritance of the LORD -., + xe, 
ſaying, Go, ſerve other gods 4. _ , leaving. 

x If the Lord hath by the evil Spirit which he hath ſent,or by 
his ſecret Providence, direed thy Rage againſt me for the Puniſh- 
ment of thine, or my fins. y Let us, offer up a Sacrifice to God 
to appeaſe his Wrath againſt us. z Who by their crafty Inſinuati- 
ons, and Calumnies, have incenſed thee againſt me. He ſhewerh 
his Prudence, and Reverence, and Meekneſs ; thar he accuſeth noc 
the King, but tranſlateth the faulr wholly upen his Evil Miniſters ; 
as the J/raelites do in the like Caſe, Exod+ 5. 16. .*. From the Land 
which God hath given to his People for their Inheritance, and 
where he harh eſtabliſhed his Preſence and Worſhip. # This was 
the Language of their Aftions. For by driving him from God's 
Land, and the place of his Worſhip, into Foreign and Idolarrcus 


| 2 Z 4 Lands, 


A Figure called Meioſis, as 


: 
: 


XXVI li | 


4 


> "y = 


hap. XXVIT. LISA M cn - L wb Chap. XXY10, FChap: 

A «» exnoſed him to the peril of being either enſnared by ' By which it is implied, That he would have gone on in Perſe, 

1427 Sant og a7 Som rh or forced by their threats and power | cuting David, if he had continued in his D-minions. , 

ts workip Idols- 5 4 And David faid unto Achiſh, If I have now 

20 Now therefore ket not my blood fall to the earth | found grace 1n thine eyes, let them give me a place in 

| B before the face of the LORD c: for the king of Iſrael | ſome crown in the countrey, that I may dwell there e: 

[* Chap. is come out to ſeek * a flea d, as when one doth hunt | for why ſhould thy ſervant dwell in the royal city with 
{24-74 a partridge in the mountains #4. | thee f ? 

| b Do not attempt to ſpill my Innocent Blood like Water up- | e A prudent deſire. Hereby David deſigned, 1. To preſerve his 

on the ground. c Remember, it thou doeft it, GOD the Judge of | People, borh from the Idolatry, and other Vices, which converſi- 

all Men feeth it, and will avenge it of thee ; though I will not a- tion with che Philiſtines would have expoſed them to : and from thar 

venge my ſelf. d Hard ro be taken, and not worth catching; @f Envy, and Malice, and Miſchief, which diverlity of Religion, or 

mean and contemptible. Perſon. d Where bis advantage doth no | other Prejudices, might have cauſed. 2. That he might have OP= 

way compenſate his Labour. portunity of enterprizing ſomething againſt God's Enemies, withour 

2x C Then ſaid Saul, I have ſinned. Return, my | the knowledge or obſervation of the Philiſtines. f Which is too creat 

ſon David, for 1 will no more do thee harm, becauſe | 22 honour for me, and roo burdenſome to thee, and may be an oc- 

3 


. . caſion of ſuſpicion and offence to th = 
my ſoul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, 1 1199 FRA offence to thy People, and of many other in 


have played the fool, and have erred exccedingly e. 6 Then Achiſh gavehim Ziklag g that day: where- 


| is faulty becauſe his . - 
e He not only confeſſerh, but aggravateth his faulty | fore Ziklap pertaineth unto os of 
Conſcience was fully convinced, though his Heart was not chang hate day _ P g Judah hb unto 


eo 22 And David anſwered and ſaid, Behold the kings Nor only to Inhabir, but to Poſſeſs it as his own. Which he did, 
f the young men come over and to Jay the greater obligations upon David, whom he knew ſo able to 

ſpear, and let one or the young | ferve him. + It was givento the Tribe of Judah before, Joſh. 15. 31. 
fetch it. XA and afcerwards ro the Tribe of S:meon, Joſh. 19. 5. whoſe inheritance 
22 The LORD render to every man his righteouſ- was given them within rhe inheritance of che children of Judah, Chap. 19. 
neſs and his faithfulneſs f : for the LORD delivered | 7. , But the Philifiines kept the Poleſſion of it till this time, arid were 


a +þ | hitherto permitted to do ſo. And being now given by them to Dae 
thee into wy hand to day, but I would not ſtretch forth vid, 1t now belonged not to the Peop!e of the Tribs of Judah, to 


mine hand a ain{t the LORD'S anointed. whom it was allotted before; but to rhe King of Judah, David and 
f I deſire, i God would deal no otherwiſe with me, than I have | his Heirs for ever. #i This, and ſome ſuch Clauſes ſeem = —_ 
Real with thee. ; been added by ſome Sacred Writers, after the wain Subſtance of the 
24 And behold, as thy life was much ſet by this day | ſeveral Books was written, (Cha 25 

in mineeyes, ſo let my life be much ſer by inthe eyes of 7 And | che time that David dwelc in the countrey 
the LORD, and let him deliver me out of all cribulati- | of the Philiſtines, was F a fuil year and four months &. tHe. u; 
on D | k Heb. days and four monerhs ; days being put for a year; as Levit. nimbersf 


« . , 25, 29. Or, tome aays and four moneths ; i.e. Some days above four days. 
25 Then Saul ſaid to David, Bleſſed be thou, my ſon | \10,QQh, Oo, fune dye ant-C lit; an0%. ave char ts 1 Conjuntts yl 


+ Heb. in "David : thou ſhalt both T do great things, and _ _ on, and, being oft uſed, as hath been proved above) four moneth;, Year of 
" _—_ {till _ : eg went On _ Way g, and oau FP I _— _ his men went up, and invaded aays. 
or wu . leg roars unſtable and deceitful Heart, he would not wg i es the || ro ro © and. che Amalekites ; 
28, 32. bs, 5 to any of, his Profefions, or P:oiniſes, bur kept our of his |. * nations were | of old the inhabitants of Girzites, 
os the land, as thou goeſt co Shur, even unto the land of f Heb. 


_ Egypr. f Bengt 
C H A P. XXVII. { Who were anciently ſeated in other places, Joſh. 12. 12. ang *! Mic, 
Goo Men, and all his Family, gocth to K. Achijh: And a- I6. 3. but for ſome reaſons not now known, they changed their ?' _ 


wid with his 

wore there @ while ; Saul purſueth ns more af:er him, 1 +. He | Seats, as was then very uſual, and ſeated themſelves and had for 
obraineth Ziklag of Achiſb to dwell in, 5 He invadeth neighbour ſonie conliderable time Jived near the Amalekites. m The remnant ge 
Nations : Leaves no man alive to complain : Perſwadeth Achiſh, he fought thoſe whom Saul deſtroyed, 1 Sam. 15: who fled from his Sword,and 
agoint Judah, 8 am * retired into remote and deſert places. 


S 248 Ee en And David {mote the land, and left neit] 
id ſaid in his heart, I ſhal now Þ periſh one 9 : l, t neither man 
A Pr hand of Saul a 2 there 5s nothing ber- [227 Woman alive », and rook away the ſheep, and the 


ter ſor me, than that I ſhould ſpeedily eſcape into the oxen, and the alles, and the camels, and the apparel, 


Nan | : and returned, and came to Achiſh. 
land of the Philiſiines 6, and Saul ſhal deſpair of me,to » To wit,in that pare where he came : but there were more of the 


ſeek me any more in any coaſt of Ifrael, ſo ſhal I elcape Amalekites yet left in another part of that land, Chap. 30. I. 


out of his hand. : 7) SRO 10 And Achijh faid, || Whither have ye made a rode 
'  s I ſee by this late experience his reſtleſs and implacable hatred | tg day ? And David faid, Againſt the ſouth of Judah o : 
againſt me and how little heed is to be given to all his pretences and p avainſt the ſouth of i] h A 3 ye not md 
of Repentance or Friendſhip. 5 Bur this was certainly a very great P 48 1 OL NE Jerahmeelices q, and a- ar, &. 
miſtake and fauit in David : For 1. This proceeded from groſs gainſt the ſouth of the Kenites 7. 
diſtruſt of GOD'S Promile and Providence ; and that after ſuch 0 Theſe and the following Words are ambiguous:for they may be 
 repeared demonſtrations of Gods pecul:ar care over him, which underſtood, either of the Southern parts cf Judah, &c. which he 
ave him cauſe to conclude, quite contrary to what is here ſaid. 2. | would have"Fchiſb underſtand : or, of another Countrey lying South- 
Heforfokes the place where God had ſ:ttled him, Chap. 22. 5. and | ward from Judah, &c. which David nieanr, and which was the 
ven him both aſſurance and experience of his ProteCtion there. 3. | ruth. So though it vas nota downright Iye: yet it wasan Equivo= 
e voluntarily runs upon that Rock, which he curſed his Enemies | cation, with an intention to deceive, which is the formality of a 
for throwing him upon, Chap. 26. 19. and upon many other Snares Ly e,and was COntrary to that ſimplicity which becathe David,both 2s 
and Dangers, as the following Hiſtory will thew ; and witha], de. | a Prince, and as an eminent Prefeffor of the true Religion. p For 
'prives the cople of the Lord of thoſe ſuccours which he might | hat is; tor in the following words, he particularly expreſſed har 
ha rhe, in caſe of a Batrel Bur :t pleaſed God to leave ; of the South of Judah he went againſt, even thar which was Inha- 
David to himſelf in this, as well as in other particulars, that theſe ! bited by the Jerahmeelites, and by the Kenites. q The Poſterity of 
might be ſenſible demonſtrations gn the gone FR Fo h bop beſt --3einj 6 En _ = __ er wp ng 2. 9,25. 7 The Poſterity of 
- and of the neceſſity of God's Grace, and daily direCtion and | Jethro, which Choſe to dwell in the South of Judah, Jud 16, 
nd of che ua b and riches of wan 7 -rcy,in paſſing by ; See Numb. 24. 21. Ty CTY. 
Fences. And belides,God her:by deſigned ro accompliſh FF, p : : 
__ hes withdraw David trom the Jjrae/ites,that Saul and 4 Es And David ſaved neither man nor woman alive, 
they might fall by the hand of the Philifines, without any reproach ; ©© bring tidings to Gath, ſaying, Leſt they ſhculd tell cn 
or inconvenience to David, whom God had pur into a fate place. [us /, faying, {o did David, and ſo 4 be his manner 
> And David aroſe, and he paſſed over with the fix - the while he dwelleth in the countrey of the Phili- 
K . - ; es 
n that were with him, unto Achiſh the ſon ; T1NES. OD : : | 
VE Maodh, king of Gath c./ in Ther chekllame tf this Alien again the People ( who were 
c It might ſeem a bold adventure: but 1. He thought himſelf eee IS mee -—ncattel — pda Ach.ſb) might 
forced to it by SauP's inveterate Rage, and continued retolutions to poke che 6 hide y OI OR TREE which he 
. 1 | , | gat the rather promiſe himſe!f, becauſe Achiſh and all his M:n 
Perſecute him. 2. It is probable,he had ſcent ſome Perſons to Treat 2. now bully imployed in their Warlke P . - 
with him, and had agreed upon Conditions ; and received aſſurance Suelber; and 7 i P Avin r11XC "ge are againſt the 
of his fafe and peaceable abode with him. 3. David reaſonably 5... o? = _ "yu 4 ny any "agg nor, Ho phoUTHe Arms 
thought that Achijb would gladly receive him. as indeed he did; = wed ace ah = G Ka ns by CORE = it. Beiides 
party, becauſe he ſaw 4s no gy __ ; aq oy part'y, he had now deſtroyed, and of God's partic _ Mt "6 gon 
becauſe by this means he hou reed irom the mon tOrmiCable pim.and of his ſpecial Providence which he conſtantly expericnced 
Enemy which he had in all Iſrael, who might do him moſt miſchief watching over him, made him more ſecure and online io aloe nd 
in the Bartel ; which it ſeems at this time he deſigned : and partly, Pn hazardous attempt | 
becauſe he came not now alone, as he did before, bur brought with Y ro. 0b 


him ſufficient Pledges of his Fideliry ro Xbijb; namely, all his Sol-| 12 And Achith believed David, #, fay in g& He hath 

diers, and his and their Wives, v. 3. \made his people Iſrael F utterly to abhor him 3 there- 4 Heb 
3 And David dwelt with Achiſh at Gath, he and his |fore he ſhal be my ſervant for ever, go ſinks 

mens every man with his heulhold even David with his | e Partly, becauſe of his confidence in David's Authority and Fide- 


. 5noar recliteſs, and Abigail the | ty * partly, becauſe moſt Men eaſily believe what they heartily . 
TWO wives, mars yup = J FREGEA of 5 . with to be true: And partly, from God's Providence, he blindel 
Carmeiiteſs, Nabals write. 8 himin this,and in divers other particulars relating to David's coming 
| And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath, | kirher, and abidipg heic. | 


and he ſought no more again for him 4, | CHAP. 


+ Heb. be 


conſumed, 


[] Or, 4d 


t Fehap. XXVII. 


*Cha 25.1. 


C H A P. XXVIIL | 
OS , ; ; PR 
Achiſh intending War again# Iſrael, reliech on David, 1,—— 2. 

——- deſtroyed the Witches, yet Samuel being dead, in his fear, for- 

ſaken of God, ſeeketh to a Witch, 3, 8. She, encouraged by Saul, 

- raiſeth Samuel : of whom hearing his approaching ruine,he fainreth,g--20. 
The Woman, with his Servants, refreſh him with Meat, 21,v--25* _ 

AN D it came to paſs in thoſe days, that the Phi- 

liſtines gathered their armies together for war- 

fare to fight with Ifrael a: And Achith faid unto Da- 

vid, Know thou afſuredly, that thou ſhalc go out with 


me to battel b, thou and thy men. 

a Encouraged thereunto by Samuel's death, and Sauls degene- 
ration, and David's preſence with A4hiſh. b This he faith, partly, 
to try his Sincerity ; and partly,in confidence of Davis s Fulclity. 

2 Ard David {aid to Achith, Surely thou ſhalt know 
what thy ſervant can do c. And Achith faid ro David, 
Therefore 4 will I make thee keeper of mine heade for 
CVer. 

c He ſpeaks ambiguouſly, as he did before, that Ackiſh might 
underſtand him, as he did, of his ating for him againſt the Ijra- 
clites ; whereas he meant it of his aCting tor the 1/-ael:tes againſt the 
Phil flines, to which he was obliged both by Gods expreſs Com- 
mand, and by his indelible and manifold Obligations to God,and 
to God's People ; and by his own manifeſt intereſt. Though it 1s 
likely he would have managed his Affairs with all poſſible regard 
and care of Achiſh's Perſon, to whom alone, upon the matter,David 
ſtood obliged, and not to the reſt of the Philiſtines, who had an 
ill opinion of him, as we ſhall ſee. & For that Valour which I 
doubr not thou wiltſt ſhew on my behalf. e 7. e. Of my Body 
and Life, the Captain of my Life-Guard. 

3 4 Now * Samuel was dead .*. and all Iſrael had la- 
mented him,and buried him in Ramah,even in his own 
City f: and Saul had put away thoſe that had familiar 
ſpirits, and the wizards g out of the land b. | 

.'. This is mentioned here as the reaſon why Saul did not en- 
quire of Samuel ; which, if he had now been alive, he would have 
done. f Where he had his Birth and Education, and moſt ſettled 
Habitation, 4 Sa: 19: 18, g According to God's Command, Lev: 
19. 31. and 20. 6,.27. Dent, 18. 1. This he did;either by Samuel's 
Inſtigation : or from a conceit that the evil Spirit came upon him 
by ſome of their means : or, that he might gain the repute of a 
Religious Prince, which was very uſeful to him : or, that he 
might quiet his troubled Conſcience, and pleaſe God, as far as his 
Intereſt would give him leave. And this is here related, partly, 
to ſhew that an Hypocrite, and wicked Man, may obey ſome of 
God's Commands : and principally to bring in the following 
Hiftory. þ Of Jſrael. 

4 YT And che Philiſtines gathered themſelves to- 
gether, and came and pitched in Shunem z : and Saul 
gathered all Ifrael together, and they pitched in Gil- 
boa &, | 

i A Town in the Tribe of 1/achar, Joſ. 19. 18» k A mountain 
not far from the Valley of Jezrea, where the Battel was fought, 
chap: 31. 1: 2 Sam- 1: 21, So the two Armies ſeem to be placed in 
the ſame manner as they were chap? 17: each upon an Hill, and a 
Valley between them. Es 

5 And when Saul ſaw the hoſt of the Philiſtines 1, 
he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled -. 

I From mount Gilboa, chap. 31 1» m Partly, from the greatneſs 
and refolurtne(s of rhe Holt of the Philiſtines, who were the agrel- 
ſors : partly,from the loſs of Dawid,who might have been of great 
uſe to him ar this time : partiy, from the Conlcience of his own 
manifelt Guilt,and juſt expettation of Divine Vengeance ofr threat- 
ned, and now in all likchhood to be inflicted upon him« 

6 And when Saul enquired of the LORD », the 
LORD aniwered him not o, neither by dreams, nor 
by Urim, nor by Prophets p. 

2 In his ſlight and pertun&ory way, as c*ap. 14+ 19+ as appears 
from hence, thar when God did not ſpeedily antwer him, he goes 
ro the Devil for an anſwer, v 7. For which reaſon he 1s ſaid, 70: 


to have enquzred of the Lord, 1 Chron: 10: 14. #. e. not ſeriouſly, and : 
after the right order- Poſſibly he enquired by ſome Propher then | 


with him, or by the Prieſt before the Ark. o Becauſe he ſought 
him not in due order ; not by the Urim and Thummim which were 
in the Ephod,which he by his cruelty to the Prieſts had loſt, chop. 
23: 6. and becauſe he did not truly repent of, nor put away his 
ſins, which provoked God, and kept him from anſwering ; as 
Saul well knew by his own conſcience and experience, chap: 14: 37, 
38, 39. Þ z. e. Neither by ordinary means, nor extraordinary. 

7 4 Then faid Saul unto his ſervants, Seck me a 
woman q that hath a familiar ſpirit 7, that I may go 
to her, and enquire of her, And his ſervants faid to 
im /, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar 
{pirit at Endor #. 

9 Rather than a mar ; for he thought that Sex moſt likely to be 
given to thoſe wicked Arts, as being the weaker Sex,and ſo apteit 
ro be deceived, and moſt prone to Superſtition, and oft-times moſt 
malicious and revengeful. r One that converſeth with the Devil, 
and dead Men's Gholts, and by them can diſcover future things. 
SCc Iſa 8: 19. | luiſteail of diiſwading him from this wicked and 
diſtruCtive prattice, which they ſhould and would have done, if 
they had cither loved God or their King, they further him in ir. 
; A place in the Tribe of Myr2aſth, within Jordan, not very far 
b:om the place where rhe Ainucs: were encamped. 

8 And Saul diſguifed kimfe!f u, and put on other 
*a1Ment, ang he went, and rwo men with him, and 
they Came to the woman hy night, and he faid, I pray 
:ches divine unto me by ths famitiar ſpirit, and bring 
we 4im up whom I thill nan unto 


"Y 2,4 
dil Ws 


L S 4 TH 4 


% Both becauſe he was aſhamed to be known, or thought guilty 
of this praCtice ; and becauſe he ſuſpe&ed that the Woman, had ſhe 
known him, would not prattice her Art before him- 

9 And the woman faid unto him, Behold, thou 
knoweſt x what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off 
thoſe that have familiar ſpirits, and the wizards out of 
the land : wherefore then layeſt thou a ſnare for my 
life, to cauſe me to die y ? | 

x For his Specch and Garb diſcovered him to be an If-aclite,and 
therefore acquainted with theſe matters. y By accuſing me to Saul 


as guilty of a capital Crime. 

10 And Saul {ware to her by the LO RD, ſaying, 
As the LORD liveth, there thail no + puniſhment hap- 
pen to thee for this thing. 

1x Then faid the woman, Whom fjhall I bring up 
unto thee 2 And he ſaid, Bring me up Samuel z. 

z Whoſe kindneſs and compaſſion to him, as he had formerly 
experienced, ſo now he expected it in his deep diſtreſs. This 
praQtice of divination by the dead, or by the Ghoſts or Sonls of 
dead Perſons, called up by Magical Art, was very uſual among all 
Nations, and from them Sav! learned it. : 

12 And when the woman faw Samuel ſhe cryed with 
a loud voice a : and the woman ſpake to Saul, ſaying, 


Why haſt chou deceived me ? for rhou art Saul 6. 

a For fear of her life, Saul himſelf being Witneſs of her Crime. 
o This ſhe knew, either by ſome geſture of Reverence,which this 
ſuppoſed Samael might thew to Saul as to the King : or, by infor- 
marion from this Ghoſt, or from the Spirit by whoſe help ſhe had 
raiſed him. 

13 And the king ſaid unto her, Be not afraid : for 
what ſaweſt thou? And the woman ſaid unto Saul, I 
{aw || gods c aſcending out of rhe earth 4. 

c i»e. A god, a divine Perſon, glorious, and full of majeſty and 
ſplendor, exceeding not only mortal Men, but common Ghoſts. 
She uſeth the Plural Number, gods, either after the manner of the 
Hebrew Language,which commonly uſeth that word of one Perſon: 
or, after the Language and Cuſtom of the Heathens, Bur the 
whole Coherence ſhows that it was but one. For Saul deſired bur 
one, v. 11. and he enquires, and the Woman anſwers only of one, 
V. 14. d As it it came from the place of the dead. 


14 And he faid unto her, F What form 3s he of ? f Heb. 


what is his 


And ſhe ſaid, An old man cometh up, and he is cover- 
ed with a mantle e. And Saul perceived that it as Sa- 
muel f, and he ſtooped with his face to the ground,and 
bowed himfelf, | 
e The uſual Habir of Prophets, 2 Kings 2-8, rz. Zech; 13: 4: and 
particularly of Samuel, 1 Sam, 15. 27, f The Woman pretended, 
and Saul upon her Suggeſtion believed that ir was Sarmnel indeed; 
and fo many Popiſh, and fome other Writers conceived, Bur thar 
it was not Samuel, but the Devil repreſenting Samuel, is ſufficient- 
ly evident. For, Firſt, It is moſt incredible, that God, who had 
juſt now refuſed to an{wer Saul by the means which himſelf ap- 
pointed, and uſed in that cafe, would anſwer him, or ſuffer Same! 
ro anſwer him in that way,and upon th2 ufe of thoſe mcans which 
God dereſted and contemned : which would have given grear 
countenance and encouragement to Saul aud the Witch, and, all 
Profeilors and Conſulters of thoſe Devilliſth Arts. Secondly, There 
are divers paſſages in this Relation which plainly diſcover that this 
was no gcod, but an evil Spirit : As firft, That he receives that 
Worſhip trom $24/, v. 14 which good Spirits wou!d nor ſuffer, 
Revel. 19: 10. and 22, 8, 9. Secondly, Thar amongſt his other fins. 
for which he condemneth him, he omitreth this of askmg Counſel 
of one that had a ſamil:ar Spirit, ro enquire of it ; for which tranſereſſion, 
with others, he is exprefly faid ro have ded 1 Chron. 10. 13. 
Which the true Samuzl, who was ſo zealous for God's Honour, 
and ſo faithtul a Reprover, would never have negleQed, eſpecially 
now, when he takcs S2ul in the very Fat. Thirdly, Thar he pre- 
rends himſelf ro be diſquieted, and brought up, w. 15. by Saul's In- 
{rigation, and the Witches Art ; which is moſt falte, and impious, 
and abſurd ro imagine, concerning thoſe blefled Souls who are re- 
turned to their God, Eccleſ. 12. 7: and entred into peace and reſt, 1/a. 
57. 2. and lodged in Abraham's bolom, Luk: 16. 22+ and reſt from 
their labours, Revel. 14. 13. The only Argument of any colour to 
the contrary, is only this, That the Devil could not lo particularly 
and punEtually diſcover S's future Events, as this Samuel doth, 
V, 19. But this alſo hath lictle weight in it; it being confeſſed and 
notoriouſly known, that evil Spirits both in the Oracles of the Hea- 
then, and otherwiſe, have oft-times foretold furure contingencies; 
God being pleafed to Reveal ſuch things to them, and to permir 
them to be the Inſtruments ofRevealing them to Men,for the trial 
of ſome, and for the terror and puniſhment of others. Beſides, 
the Devil might foreſee this by ſtrong conjeQures, as by the nu- 
merouſneſs, ttrength, courage, and reſoluteneſs of the Philiſtine 
Hoſt, and the quite contrary condition of the Iſraelites,and by di- 


vers other ſymproms far above the reach of mortal Men,bur ſuch as | 


he by his great Sagaciry could eaſily diſcern. And for that expreſs 
determination of the time, to merrow, wv. 19. that word may be un- 
derſtood nor of the very next day, bur indefinitely of ſome ſhort 
time after this, as it is taken, Exod. 13. 14. Deut. 6. 20. Joſ.q 6,21. 
And then it was eafie to gather from the preſent poſture of the rwoa 
Armies, that the Fight and the Ruine of the Iſ-aelites was very near. 
And that it was nor the very next day, bur ſome days after this, is 
evident from the courſe of the Story, and hath been proved by a 
late Learned Writer. See my Latin S;nopſ; on this place. 

i5 T And Samuel faid to Saui, Why haſt thou dif- 
quieted me to bring meupg ? And Saul anſwered, I 
am {ore diſtreſſed ; for the Phiiiſtines make war a- 
gainſt me, and God is departed from me, and anſwer- 
eth me no more,neither + by prophets,nor by dreams4: 
therefore I have called the, that thou my cft make 
known unto me what 1 jtall do. 

3 A 


g As 


Chap. XXV1illil 


: 
: 


: 


T Heb. 
mmquity. 
Yo Gr, 


| 


|: Or,ag94- | 


1 


ag ty +I TIRES FS CURB ARC IIIE Pr GIEG A, MOI I. In OI APE 
———_— - —_ 


lf 
lj 
þ| 
j 
[ 
F| 
[| 


i 


orm ? | 
a 
-— cm 


[| 
'F 
| 


# 
[| 
| 
| 


+ Heb. by 
the hand of | 
prophets, 


F Or, for 
W bimſclf. 

* Chap. 
Bis 28. 
[4 + Heb. 


| mine hand. 


FE” \Cha 31. 
I7. 


| + Heb.- 


£nc fe ? 
Wzli ihe 


fulneſs of 


| nap. % 


his ſtature. 


xI% 1 $4 
g As the Devil appeared in Samnel's Shape and Garb, ſo alſo he 


ſpeaketh in his Perſon, that he might enſnare Saul, and encourage. 
others to ſeek to him in this wicked way. And God permirs him 
to do ſo for Saul's greater condemnation and puniſhment; þ He 
omitteth the Urim here, becauſe he neither did nor could enquire 


by thar, becauſe Abiathar had carried it away ro David, and ſo he. 


expe&ed no anſwer that way. | 
16 Then ſaid Samuei, Wherefore then doſt thou ask 


of me, ſeing the LORD is departed from thee, and 


is become thine enemy ? 


17 And the LORD hath done || to him 3, * as he 


Tpake by + me & : for the LORD hath rent the kingdom 


out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, ever 


to David : ; 

7 i. e. To David, as it is explained in the following words. The 
Pronoun Relative put before the Noun to which it belongs, as 15 
uſual in the Hebrew Text, as Pſal, 87. 1. and 105+ 19. Prov. 7. 7, 8+ 
Jer. 40: 5. Otherwiſe, to him, is put for zo thee; ſuch changes of 
Perſons being frequent among the Hebrews, Orhe: wile, for himſelf, 
7. e. for the accompliſhment of his Counſel, and Predi@tion. and 
Oath, and for the Glory of his Juſtice 2nd holineſs. k Still he nou- 
riſheth this perſwaſion in Saul, that it was the truc S27zue! that ipake 
to him. | 

18 * Becauſe thou obeyedſt not the voice of the 


LORD, nor executedſt his fierce wrath upon Ama- 
lek 1, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto 


thee this day. 


1 He mentions this as an eminent inſtance of his diſobedience. 

19 Moreover, the LORD will aiſo deliver * tral 
with thee, into the hand of the Philiſtines : and to 
morrow. ſhalt thou ard thy ſons be with me m : the 
LORD ſhall deliver the hoſt of Iſrael into the hand cf 
the Philiſtines. 


2 i: e. In the ſtate of the dead ; and fo it was true both of Sau! 
and Jonathan, Or, in the ſtate of reſt : For though thou ſhalt 
ſuffer here for thy ſin,yet after death thou ſhalt be happy, as dying 
in the Lord's Quarrel ſo the Devil's deſign mighr be to tlatter 
Saul into an opinion of his own furure happinefs, and to take him 
off from all {crious thoughts and cares about ar. 
obſervable Thar as it was the manner of the Heathen Oracles to an- 
ſwer ambiguouſly, the better to fave his credit in caſe of miſtake, 
(the Devil himſelf nor being certain of future events, but only con- 
jeQuring at what was moſt likely) : ſo doth this counterfeit Samue! 
here. For, as concerning the time, he 1ays to morrow : whach he 
underſtood indifferently for the very next day, or tor ſome ſhort 
time after. And, as concerning the condition, thou ſhalt be with 
me ; Which may be underſtood either of a good condition, if un- 
derſtood as ſpoken in the Perſon of Samuel ; or, of a bad condi- 
tion, if underſtood as ſpoken by an evil Spirit ; or, at leaſt inde 

| finitly of a dead 'condition,be ir good or evil : which laſt he fore- 
ſaw by circumſtances to be very like)y. 


20 Then Saul 7 fell ſtraighrway all along on the 


| mace Fa#t exrth », and was ſore afraid, becauſe of the words of 


Samuel, and there was no ſtrength in him : for-he had 
caten no bread all the day. nor all the night. 

» Being quite diſ-ſpirited with theſe {ad and ſurprizing ridings, 
and ſo unable to ſtand. 

21 T And the woman came unto Saul s, and ſaw 
that he was ſore troubled, and ſaid unto him, Behold, 
thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put 
my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy 
words which thou ſpakeſt unto me. 

o From whom ſhe departed, whea ſhe had brought him and $Sa- 
muel together, that they might more freely converſe together, as 
being alone. 

22 Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou alſo 
unto the voice of thine hand-maid p, and Jet me ſet a 
morſel of bread before thee 3 and eat, that thou may- 
eſ{t have ſtrength when thou goeſt on thy way. 

Þ This earneſtneſs did not come meerly from her humanity and 
reſpe& to Saul, but from a prudent and neceffary care of her ſelf, 
becauſe if Saul! had died in her Houſe, his Blood would have been 
charged upon her. 

23 Bur he refuſed, and faid I will not eat, Bur his 
ſervants, together w.th che woman, compelled him q, 
and he hearkened unto their voice : ſo he aroſe from 
the earth, and ſat upon the bed. 

. 9 4. e. Did over-periwade him,by importunate intreaties,as the 
next words ſhew. 

24 And the woman had a fart calf in the houſe, and 
ſhe haſted, and killed ic, and took flour, and kneaded 
zt, and did bake unleavened bread r thereof. 

7 Not haviog time to Leaven it. - 

25 And ihe brought i: before Saul, and before his 
ſervants, and they did- cat: then they roſe up, and 
went away that night /. 

J 3. e. Before Morning. For he came by Night,v 8. and went 


away before Day ; not willing to have ir diſcovered that he had 
conſulted with a Witch. "I | 
CH A P. XXIX. 
David marching with the Philiſtines : Is diſallowed by their Princes : 
 Achiſb pleadeth for him, and. againft his Will, diſmiſſith him, 1==7, 
He expoſtulateth with Achiſb, 8, His Anſwer, 9, 10. David de- 
parteth 11. 
OW the Philiſtines gathered together all their 
armies to Aphek # : and thg Iſraelites pitched by 
a fountain which #z- in Jezreel. 


And it is here | 


M QD E LT. 


a Fither, that in the Tribe of 4ſher, 7of. 19. 24+ or rather ano- 
ther Town of that Name of 1/achar, though not mentioned elfſe- 
where in Scripture ; this being the caſe of many places,to be but 
once named. ORs | 

2 And the lords of the Philiſtines paſſed on by hun- 
dreds, and by thouſands : but David, and his men paſ- 
{ed on the rereward with Achiſh b. 

b i. e. As the Life-guard of Ach.ſb, as he had promiſed,chap,2$.2, 
Ach;ſh being, aL ir ſcems, the General of the Army. 

3 Then ſaid the princes of the Philiſtines c, What 
do theſe Hebrews here ? And Achiſh ſaid unto the 
princes of the Philiſtines, 7s not*this David the ſervant 
of Saul the king of Iſrael, which hath been with me 


no fault in him, ſince he fell wnts me 
day. 


ES | 


were confederate with him in this expedition. 4 Q. d. did I fay 
Days ? I might have faid Nears ; either becauſe he hath now been 
with me # full Year and four Months. 27: 7: or becauſe he was with 
me ſome Years ago, 1 Sam; 21: 10. and fince that time hath been 
known to me- And it 1s not improbable, but David, after his 
eſcape from thence, might hold ſome correſpondency with Achiſb, 
as finding him to be a Man of more generous Temper than the 
reſt of the Philiſtines, and ſuppoſing that he might have need of 
him for a Refuge in cafe Saul continued to ſeek his Life. .". 7. e. 
Since he revolted, or lefr his own King to turn to me. For that 
ſenſe Achiſb put upon this eſcape of David ( as it is called chap. 
27. 1. ) and fo is the Phraſe of falling to a party, elſewhere uſed, 
W437. 43, bt: : 1*N* . 

4 And the princes of the Philiſtines were wroth with 
him e, and the princes of the Philiſtines ſaid unto him, 
* Make this feliow return, that he may go again to his 
place which thou haſt appointed -him f, and let him 
not go down with us to batrel, leſt in the battel he be 
an adveriary to us : for wherewith ſhould he reconcile 
n1mfeilf unto his maſter ? ſhow/d it not be with the heads 
of theſe men g ? 

e Were uniatisfied and offended with Ach:ſb for this Intention and 
Declaration. f Herein the wiſe and gracious Providence of God 
appeared, both in helping him out of thoſe Snares and Difficulties, 
our of which no humane wit cauld have extricated him,bur he muſt 
either have been,or have been thought to be a T raitor,and an un=- 
greatful unworthy Perſon, either to the one or to the other ſide ; 
and moreover in giving him the happy opportunity of recovering 
his own, and his All frem the Amalckites, which had been irreco- 
verably loſt, if he had gone into this Battle. And the Kindneſs of 
God to David was the greater, becauſe it had been moſt juſt for 
God to have left David in all thoſe Diſtreſſes into which his own 
ſinful Counſel and Courſe had brought him. g z. e. Of theſe our 
Soldiers ? They ſpeak according to the Rules of Reaſon and 
true Policy ; for by this very Courſe, great Enemies have ſome- 
times been reconciled together. h 

5 1s not this David, of whom they ſang one to ane- 

ther in dances, ſayirg, * Saul flew his thouſands, and 
David his ten thouſands ? 
6 © Then Achith called David, and ſaid unto him, 
Surely, as the LORD liveth þ, thou haſt been upright, 
and thy going out, and thy coming in with me z in the 
hoſt zs good in my fight ; for I have not found evil in 
thee, ſince the day of thy coming unto me &, unto this 
day : nevertheleſs F the lords favour thee not. 

bh He ſwears by Jehovah ; either, becauſe he did acknowledge 
their Jehovah to be a God, being, it may be, convinced and in- 
{trufted therein by David, though he did Worſhip Dagon with him, 
and above him : or, becauſe this was David's God,and therefore he 
ſwore by him ; partly, our of complaiſance with David, that he 
might reccive his unwelcome Metlage to him with leſs offence; agd 
partly, that this Oath might gain more Credit to his words with 
David. 4 i. e. Thy whole Converlation with me. See chap. 18:13; 
and many other places where that phraiſe is uſed. k Though be- 
fore that time there was Evil in thee towards me and my Peo-« 
ple. 

7 Wherefore now return and go in peace, that theu 
f'diſpleaſe nor the lords of the Philiſtines. 

8 * And David faid unto Achiſh, But what have 
I done ? and what haſt thou found in thy ſervant ſo 
long as I have been F with thee unto this day, that I 
may not go to fight againſt the enemies of my lord the 
king / ? 

} "This was deep difſſimulation and flattery, but he apprehended 
it neceflary,leſt he thould racitly confeſs himielf guilty of that where- 
of they accuſed him, and thereby expoſe himſcif to the utmoſt ha- 
zards, Thefe perplexities he brought himiclf into by his irregular 
courſe, in forſaking the Land of Judah, where God had placed 
him, chap. 22. 5+ and promiſed him ProteQtion, and putting himſelf 
into the hands of the Ph:liſtines, 


9 And Achiſh anſwered and ſaid to David, I know 
thou art good in my ſight, as an angel of God »: not- 
withſtanding the princes of the Philiſtines have ſaid, 
He ſhall not go up with us to the battel. 

m In whom nothing is blame-worthy. Or, it may be uſed to 
expreſs David's great Wiſdom ; (as well as Integrity ) as 2 Sam-14:17. 
and 2 Sam:19: 27. The Heathens acknowledged good Spirits, which 


alſo they worſhipped as an inferior ſort of Deities, who were Mcſ- 
ſengers and Miniiters to the Supreme God ; only 4chijþ had learned 


the Title of Angels,from the I/raelites his Neighbours,and eſpecially 
from Davyia's Converſation, | 


abs 


30 Where- 


theſe days, or theſe years d, and I have f found + jq 

unto this nothing 'n 
kim, John 

c The Lords of the other eminent Cities and Territories, who 74+: 39 


* Chap: 
18. 7.& 
21. 11, 


FT Heb: 
hou artmt 
good inthe 
eyes of the 
* ned 


+ Heb. 


wot evilin 


the eyes 07 
the lords 
+ Heb. 


before thee, 


Chap. Xx1x Fehap- ? 


+ Heb, 
bitter. 


I hap. KXR- 


+ Heb, 
bitter, 


LE A 


ro Wherefore now riſe up early in the morning,with 
thy maſters ſervants » that are come With thee : and as 
ſoon as ye be upearly in the morning,, and have light, 


depart 0. | = 
n He intimates the ground of the Philiftines Jealouſie concerning 


id and his Men, that they were all Servants of Saz/, and there- 
wo _ an Obligation, and Su ſuſpeCted to have an AfﬀeCtion to 
their od Lord an. Maſter, againſt whom even David himſelf could 
not make them fight, eſpecially with, and fo! the Philiftines, 0 Be- 
fore the Battel begin, leſt, if you delay, the Lords of the Philiſtines 
fall upon you, an deſtroy you. : 

11 So David and his men roſe up early to depart in 


the morning, to return into the land of the Philiſtines, 


and the Philiſtines went up to Jezreel. 
CHA P. XXX 


The Amalckites in Davids abſence ſpoil Ziklag : and carry away the people” 


and his two wives captives, 1---6. David asking counſel is encouraged by 
God topurſue them, 1---10. By the means of an Egyptian, who was left 
behind, he is brought to the enemies, and recovereth all the ſpoil: and 
ſpoileth them, ' 1---22. Makes an order for the dividing the prey,23==25. 
Sendeth preſents :o his friends, 26---3 1. : 

ND it came to paſs, when David and his men 


were come to Ziklag on the third day a, that 
the Amalekites 6 had invaded the ſouth c, and Ziklag, 


and ſmitten Ziklag d, and burnt it with hre : 

2 To wit, after David's departure from Achiſh, for Ziklag was at a 
great diſtance from the Camp and place of Fight, as appears from 
2 Sam. 1.2. and 2avid's Men being all Foot-men, could make but 
ſlow Marches. b The remainders of that People who lived near 
thoſe Parts where David had deſtroyed rhcir Brethren, chap. 27 8,9. 
c To wit, the Southern part of Judah, and the adjacent parts : See 
below, wv. 14. 4 1.e. Sacked and ſpoiled ir. 

2 And had taken the women captives that were there- 
in : they ſlew not any e, either great or {mall,buc carri- 


ed thew away, and went on their way. 
 e Which was ſtrange, conſidering how David dt*alt with them, 
chap. 27. 9. But this muſt be aſcribed partly to their ſelfiſh or 
fleſhly Intereſt : for they might reſerve them, either ro make ſale 
of them for their Profit, or to abuſe them for their Luſt ; or, ir 
may be, torevenge themſelves upon David and his Mer, by reſer- 
ving them to e traordinary, ans lingring, and repeated Punith- 
ments; but principally, to God's over-ruling and wonderful Pro- 
vidence, who ſer theſe Bounds totheir Rage ; and though he de- 
ſigned to chaſtiſe David's Sin and Folly, yet would not deliver him 
nor his up to death. : 
q So David and his men came to the city, and be- 


hold, it wes burnt with fire, and their wives, andtheir 
ſons, and their daughters were taken captives. 
4 Then David and the people that were with him, lift 


- Up their voice and wept, until they had no more power 


to weep f. 
f Till either the Humour was wholly ſpent,or the Conſideration 
of their Calamity had made them ſtupid. 
5 And Daridstwo wives were taken captives, Ahino- 
am the Jezreeliteſs, and Abigail the wife of Nabal, the 


Carmelite. 

6 And David was greatly diſtreſſed : for the people 
ſpake of ſtoninghim g, becauſe the ſoul of all the peo- 
ple was Þ grieved, every man for his ſons, and for his 
daughters: but David encouraged himſelfin the LORD 
his God þ. : 

g As the Author of their Miſeries, by coming to Zikag at firſt, 
y provoking the Amalekites to this Cruelty, by his forwardneſs in 
marching away with A4chiſb, and leaving their Wives and Child:en 
unguarded. hz. e. In this that the All-wiſe, and All-powerful Lord, 
was his God by Covenant-relation,and ſpecial Promiſe,and true and 
fatherly AieQion, as he had thewed himſelf ro be in the whole 


courſe of his Providence towards him. 

7 And David faidto Abiathar the prieſt, Ahimelechs 
ſon, I pray thee bring me hither the ephod ;: and Abi- 
athar brought chither the ephod ro David. 

; And pur it upon thy ſelf, that thou maiſt enquire of God, ac- 
cording to his Ordinance, Numb.27.21. See above, chap. 23. 9. Da- 
wid was ſenſible of his former Erro: in negleQing to ask Counſel of 
God by the Ephod,when he came to Achifh, and when he went out 
with Achiſb to the Battel ; and his Neceflity now brings him to his 
Duty, and his Duty mects with Succeſs 

8 And David enquired at the LORD, ſaying, ſhal 1 
purſue after this troop ? ſhall I overtake them ? And he 
anſwered him, Purſue, for thou ſhalt ſurely overtake 
zbem, and without fail recover all &. 

k Before, God anſwered more ſlowly and gradually, chap. 23. 17, 
12. but now he anſwers ſpecdily,and fully at once,becauſe the bu- 
ſineſs here required more haſte. Sv gracious is our God, that he 


conſiders even the degree of our Neceflities,and accommodates him- 
ſclf to them. 


9 So David went, he and the fix hundred men that 
were with him, and came to the brook Beſor, where 
thoſe that were left behind, ſtayed. 

io But David purſued, he and four hundred men I : 
( for. two hundred abode behind, which were ſo faint, 
that they could not go over the brook Beſor. ) 

_ 7 Aſmall number for ſuch an Artempr: but David was ſtrong in 
Faith, giving God the Glory of his Power and Faithfulneſs. 

Ix Y And they found an Egyprianin thetield »,, and 
brought him to David, and gave him bread, and hg did 
gat, and they made him drink water », | 


a U 5 i Chap. XX ji 
v Whom by his Habit they gueſſed to be a Soldier that had been W| 
engaged in that Expedition. » Partly, out of humanity and com- il 
pray to a periſhing Creature : and partly, in Prudence, that by Mt 
im they might learn the true ſtate of their Enemies. i; | 
12 And they gave him a piece ofa cake of figs, and | i 
two cluſters of raiſins : and * when he had eaten, his *$See Jud 
ſpiric came again to him : for he had eaten no bread, 15-19. |ij 


nor drank ay water, three days, ard three nights 6. * 14-M 

o Which is to be underſtood Synecdochically of one whole day 
and part of two others, as the fame Phraſe is taken. Matth. 12. 46. 
a+ appears from: the next Verſe, where he ſaith, three days agone I 
fell jick, but in the Hebrew it is, this is the third day ſince I fell (ich. 


13 And David ſaid unto him, To whom belongeft 
thou ? and whence art thou ? And he ſaid, I am a 
young man of Egypt p, ſervant to an Amalekite, and 
my maſter left me q, becauſe three days agone I fell 
I1ck. 

þ God by his Providence ſo ordering it, that he was not one of 

that curſed Race of the Amalekites,wlio were to be utterly deſt: oyed,; 
but an Egyptian, who might b- ſpared. q In this Place 4i.d Condi- 
tion: which was barbar: us inhumanity: for he oi.ght, and calily 
might have carried him away with the Prey  hic: they had taken. 
Bur he paid dear for this Cruelty, for this was the occaſion o! the 
ruine of him and of all their Company. And Goc by his ſecret Pro 
vidence ordered the matter thus for that very end $0 that there 
15 no fighting againſt God, who can make the ſmalleſt Accidents 
ſerviceable to the produQtion of the greateſt Efte&s. 

14 We madean invaſion upon the ſouth of the Che- 
rethires 7, arid upon the coaſt which belongerh ro Judah, 
and upon the ſouth of Caleb s, and we burnt Ziklag 

r 7. e. The Philifines, as is manifeſt from v. 16. who are ſo cal: 
led Zeph. 2. 5. ſ This is added by way of Explication : 9. 4. that 
part of the South of Judah which belongs to Caleb's Poſterity, Joſ. 

14. 13. 

15 And David ſaidto bim,Canſt thou bring me down 
to this company ? Andhe ſaid, Swear unto me by God, 
that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the 
hands of my maſter, and I will bring thee down to this 
company z. | 
| 7 For his Maſter had told him whither they intended to go, that 
he might come after them, as toon as he could. 

16 4 And when he had brought him down, behold; 
they were ſpread abroad upon all the-earth «, eating and 
drinking, and dancing, becauſe of all the great ſpoil 
chat chey had taken our of the land of the Philiſtines, 
and out of the landof Ju.ah. | 

« Secure and careleſs, becauſe they were now come almoſt to the 
Borders of their own Country, and the Philiftines and Iſraelites both 
were otherwiſe engaged, and David, as th:y believed, with them. 

So they had no viſible cauſe of danger ; and yet then they  wers 
neareſt to their deſtruction. 

17 And David itmore them from the twilight *, even _ 
unto the evening of the f next day : and there eſcaped f Heb: 
not a man of them, ſave four hundred young men 72 mrs 
which rode upon camels, and fled. SE FRY 

* The word ſignifies both the Morning and Evening Twi-l'ght, 

But the latter ſeems here intended, partly becauſe their Eating,an 

Drinking, and Dancing, was ,more cuſtomary and proper work 
'or the Evening, than for the Morning ; and partly, becauſe the 
Evening was m. re convenient for David, that the fewneſs of his 
Forces might not be ditcover<cd by the Day-light. Obje#. It is not 
I''--ly that David would fall upon the Amalekites before his Men, 
who had been tired with a leng and haſty March, were refreſhed. 
4njw. Nor is it ſaid thar he did. It is probable, that whet: he 
came near them, he repoſed himſelf, and his Army, in ſome ſecret 
Place, wherecf there were many in ti ofe Parts, for a convenient 
Seaſon ; and then march on ſo as to come to them at the Evening 
rime. | | | 

18 And David recovered all that the Amalekites had 
carried away : and David reſcued his two wives. 

I9 Andthere was nothing lacking to them, neither 
ſmall nor great, neither ſons nor daughters, neither 
ſpoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them ; Das 
vid recovered all. £ | $6 

20 And David took all the flocks, and the kerds x : 
which they drave before thoſe other cattel y; and faid; 
This zs Davids ſpoil z. 

x To wit, which the 'malekites had taken from the Philiftines or 
others. » Before thoſe who belonged to Ziklag. x i.e. The Sol 
diers, who lately were ſo incenſed againſt David, that they ſpake 
of Stoning him : now upon this Succeſs magnifie him, and Triums 
phantly celebrate his Praiſe ; and ſay concerning this Spoil, David 
purchaſed it by his Valour and Condu, and he may diſpoſe of is 
as he pleaſerh. | 

21 CG:And David came to the two hundred men, F 
which were ſo faint that they could not follow David, 
whom they had made alſo to abide at the brook Beſor : 
and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the 
people that were with him 2 ; and when David came 


near to the peeple, he || ſalured them 6b. 

a To congratulate the Victory; which, it is probable, David 
had ſent a Meſſenger to acquaint theni with. 5 He ſp-aks kindly 
- them,and did nor blame them becauſe they went no further with 
them. 


22 Then c anſwered all the wicked men;and men of 


['Or, arkodt 
them how 


they dide © 


3 A 2 Belial 


Be Num. 
> 27. 


pard. 


* r Sam. 
309. I7. 


p. ). 
Belial 4 of + thoſe that went with David, and ſaid, Be- 


oſhe 19. 


cauſe they went not with us e, we will not give them 
oght of the ſpoil that we have recovered, fave to every 
man his wife, and his children, that they may lead#hber 


away, and depart. : 

cWhen thoſe 200 Men required,or expeCted a part of the ſpoil ; 
and they gathered from Davia's words and carriage,that he intend- 
ed togive it to them. So he calls them for theirCoverouſneſs,and 
Injuſtice, and Churlifhneſs to their Brethren. By which expreſſi- 
ons we may judge, how hainous and odious thoſe fins are 1n God's 
ſight. eWhich was from their impotency ; not by choice, or de- 
ſign. Herein therefore was their Iniquity and Unreaſonableneſs , 
they would puniſh them for no fault. | 

23 Thenſaid David, Ye ſhal not do ſo,my brethren f, 
with that which the LORD hath given us g, who hath 
preſerved us, and delivered the company that came a- 


gainſt us, into our hand. | 

f He uſeth his Power and Authority to over-rule them ; but ma- 
nageth it with all ſweerneſs,calling them Brethren ; not only as of 
the ſame Nation and Religion with him, bur as his Fellow-Soldiers. 
£ What he hath freely imparted to us,we ſhould not unkindly and 
injuriouſly with-hold from our Brethren. _ 

24 For who will hearken unto you in this matter + ? 
but * as his part js that goeth down to the battel, fo 
ſhall his part be that tarricth by the ſtuff: they ſhal part 
alike 2. 

{EM wiſe or juſt Man will be of your Opinion in this matter? 
; A prudent and equitable Conſtitution, and therefore praQtiſed by 
the Romans, as Polybius and others note. The Reaſon of it 1s mani- 
feſt ; becauſe they were expoſed to hazards, as well as their Bre- 
thren : and were a Reſerve to whom they might retreat in caſe of 


n. SAMOUE L. 


a Defeat; and they were now in aftual Service, and in the ſtation | 


in which their General had placed them. 


ſtatute, and an ordinance for Iſrael unto this day. 


Heb.ord 25 And it was ſe from that day + that he made it a 


26 E And when David came to Ziklag, he ſent of | 


the ſpoil unto the elders of Judah &, ever to his friends 


(ſaying, Behold, a ÞF preſent for you of the ſpoil of the, 


enemies of the LORD U.) 


© & Partly in gratitude for their former favour to him : and partly, 


in Policy, to engage their Aﬀe&ions to him now, when he appre-- 
hended Saul's death near. [He intimates, that though he was fled: 


to the Phil:fines,yet he imployed not hisForces againſt the 7/-aelites, 
as, no doubt,Saul's Courtiers and Soldiers reported that he deſigned; 
but only againſt God's Enenues. 


27 To them which were in Bethel #7, and to thew' 


which were in * ſouth Ramoth », and to them which were 
in Jatter o, | 

m In Kiriath-jearim, where the Ark was, 1 Sam. 10. 3. n A City 
in the Tribe of Simeon, Joſ. 19. 8. ſo called by way of diſtintion, 
from Ramoth in Gilead, a3 4 was more Northward, 1, Kings 22.12. 
o Of which, ſee Joſh. 15. 48. : 

'28 And to them which were in Aroer p, and to them 


- which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eſh- 


temoa, | 
' p Not that beyond Jordan, Numb. 32. 34. as many think; which 
was too remote from David: but another Place of that Name in 
Judah, where the reſt of the Places here named were : This being 
one of thoſe Places where David and his men were wont to haunt, as 1s 
e>preſled v. 31. l ; 

29 And to them which were in Rachal, and to ther 
which were in the cities of the Jerahmeeclites, and to 
them which werein the cities of the Kenites, 

20 And to them which were in Hormah, and to them 


which were in Chor-aſhan, and to them which were in 


Athach, | ; 

21 And tothem which were 1n Hebron, and to all 
the places where David himſelf, and his men were wont 
to haunt 9g. | 

q Or, rogo. Whither they uſed to reſort in the time of Saul's Per- 
ſecution, either ro hide themſelves in ſome of their Territories ; 
or, to get Proviſion A: thence. 


H A P. XXXI. 


The Iſraelites are ſmitten by the Philiftines. Saul's ſons are ſlain : Saul is 


wounded : be falleth on his own ſword: as doth his armour-bearer, 
J-====5, Thereft flee : and the Philifines poſſeſs their rowns, and triumph 
over the dead carcaſſes, 6-10. They of Fabefb-Gilead by night take 
down the bodies of Saul and of his ſons and burn them : and mournfully 
bury their bones, 11====13. 


| 


mn. 


Chap. 1. 


OW * the Philiſtines fought againſt Iſrael 2: and. "0 
the men of Iſrael fledfrom beforethe Philiſtines, ,! Chron 
and fell down || ſlain in mount Gijboa. || Or. 
a Whilſt David was engaged againſt the Amalekites, So he returns wounded 
to the Hiſtory, which had been interrupted, to give an account of ; 
David's concerns. 


2 And the Philiſtines followed hard upCn Saul, and 
upon his ſons ; and the Philiſtines flew * Jonathan 5, « Ch 
and Abinadab c, and Malchiſhua, Sauls ſons, 8. Rage 


b David's dear Friend ; God ſo ordering it for the further exerciſe 
of David's Faith and Patience ; and that David might depend upon 
God alone for his Crown, and reccivs it ſolely from him, and nor 
from Jonathan ; who doubtleſs, had he lived, would have i; peedily 
ſettled the Crown upon David's Head, which would have in ſome 
ſort eclipſed the Glory of God's Grace and Power in this Work. 
There was alſo a ſpecial Providence of God, in taking away Jon a- 
than, ( who of all Saul's Sons, ſeems to have been the faireſt for the 
Crown)for the preventing Diviſions,which have happened amengſt 
the People concerning the Succeſſor : David's way to the Crown 
being by this means made the more clear. c Called alſo 1hui, x 
Sam. 14.49. Tſbboſhzth was not here, being poſſibly at home for the 
management of publick Afairs there. 

3 And the battel went fore againſt Saul, and the 
7 archers | hit him, and he was fore wounded of the ; 11, 
archers, ſhooters, 

4 Then ſaid Saul unto his armour- bearer, Draw thy menwith 
ſword, and thruft methrough therewith, leſt theſe un- _ 
circumciſed come, and thruſt me through, and || abuſe þ ow him 
me 4. But his armour-bearer would. not, for he was ſore || Or, 
afraid : therefore Saul took a ſword and fell upon it e. 


_ dLeft they take me,and put me ta ſome ſhameful and cruel death. 
e And died of the Wound, as it follows. 


5 And when his armour-bearer ſaw that Saul was 

ood, he fell likewiſe upon his ſword, and died with 
im. | 

6 So Saul died with his three ſons, and his armour- 
bearer, andall his men that fame day together. 
7 © And when themen of Iſrael that were on the 
other ſide of the valley f, and they that were on the 
other fide Jordan g, ſaw that the men of Iſrael fled, 
and that Saul and his ſons were dead, they forſook the 
= and fled, and the Philiſtines came and dwelt in 
them. 


f To wit, the Valley of Jezred, where the Battel was fought. 
g Or rather, on this ſide Jordan; for theſe were in the moſt danger : 
and the Hebrew Prepoſition is indifferently uſed for oz this ſide, or 
for beyond. 


8 And it came to paſs on the morrow, when the 
Philiftines came to ſtrip the flain, that they found Saul 
and his three ſons fallen in mount Gilboa. 

9 And they cut oft his head b, and ſtripped off his ar- 
mour, and ſent into theland of the Philiſtines round a- 
bout, to publiſh zt iz the houſe of their idols 5, and a- 
mong the people. 

h As the 1/raelites did by Goliah, i To give them the glory of this 
Vittory. 

10 And they put his armour in the houſe of Aſhta- 
roth 8 and they faſtned his body to the wall of Beth-ſhan. 

ir © And when the inhabitants of Jabeſh-Gilead & || Or, as 
heard || of that which the Philiſtines had done to Saul ; cerning 


k Which was beyond Jordan: for the People on this fide Jordan #'”- 
were fled from their Cities, as was now ſaid. 


12 All the valiant men aroſe, and went all night, 
and took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his ſons, 
from the walls of Beth-ſban, and came to Jabeſh, and 
* burnt them there 7. 

I Burnt their Fleſh, after the manner. 


13 And they took their bones, and * buried them un- * 2 Sam: 

der a tree at Jabeth, and faſted ſeven days x. 4 5. 40 

mm To teſtific their Sorrow for the publick loſs of Saul, and of the *** 12,15 
People of God ; and to intreat God's Favour to prevent the utter 
Extin&ion of his People. But you muſt not underſtand this word 
of faſting itrialy, as if they eat nothing for ſeven whole. Days ; 
but in a more large any general ſenſe, as it is uſed both in Sa- 
cred and Prophane Writers; that they did eat but little, and that 
ſeldom ; and that but mean Food, and drunk only Water for that 
time. 


*Jer. 345 


IL SAMUEL 


CHAP.jL 


David being at Ziklag receiveth tidings by an Amalekite of Saul and 7e- 


nathan's death : the meſſenger pretendeth bimſelf to have killed Saul, 
I=--12, David cauſeth himtobe put to death, 13===16, Lamenteth Saul 
and Jonathan with a ſong, 19-==27, 
Ow it came to paſs after the death of Saul, 
N when David was returned from * the ſlaughter 
of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in 
a Which though burnt, yet was not ſo conſumed by the Fire, 
#hat David and his Men could not lodge in It. 
2 It came even co paſs on the third day b, that be- 


he!d a man came out of the camp from Saul, with his 
clothes rent, and earth upon his headc: and ſo it was 
when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and 
did obeifance. 

6 From David's return to Ziklag, as the foregoing words manifeſt- 


e Pretending ſorrow for the loſs of God's People, in complyance 
with Da4id's humour. 


3 And David ſaid unto him, From whence comeſt 
thou ?And hefſaid unte him, Out of the camp of Ifra- | 
el am I eſcaped. | u _ 
4 And David ſaid unto him, + How went the mat- ,, | 
cer ? 


fHeb 114: 
fers : Or 
captains 0) 
the horſe= 
men. 


+ Heb: 


behold me - 


|Or, 77? 
(08 0 
mail; (or 
embro: 
fred coat 
kindereth 
Me, thas 
mj, &C. 


"Chap. 
JI, and 
13, 3 I, 


*Plal.10' 
Is, 


"Joſh. 1: 


13, 
lOr, of t 
#pright. 


| b, I. If. 3 A 
- ter? I pray thee tell me. And he anſwered, That the 
people are fled from the battzl, and many of the peoplc 
alſo are fallen and dead, and Saul and Jonathan his ſon 


d are dead alſo. 
d He mentions only theſe two, as thoſe who ſeemed moſt to ob- 
ſtru& David's coming to the Crown. : 
5s And David ſaid nnto the young man that told him, 
How knoweſt thou that Saul and Jonathan his ſon bc 
dead e ? —— , 

e For the knowledge of this did moſt concern both David and 
the whole Common-wealth of Iſrael. : ; 

6 And the young men that told him, ſaid, As T hap: 
feb 9- nened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Sau} 
fer ww leaned upon his ſpear: and1o, the chariots and | horle- 
—_— followed hard after him. 


the horje= men : 
met And when he looked behind him, he ſaw me, and 


j Heb: called unto me : and I anſwered, | Here aw I. 

klola'm?.! & And he ſaid unto me, Who art thou ? andI an- 
ſwered him, I am an Amalckite. 

10, © He ſaid unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon 

"of me f, and flayme: for || anguiſh is come upon me g, 

"il; (or, becauſe my life 5s yet whole within me þ. 

mp embroi= F (j.e.) Lean upon me with thy weight and force, that the Spear 


red coat ) may come through me: Or, ſtay by me; (i. e.) Stop thy flight, and 
hindereth tarry ſo long with me till thou haſt killed me. g (1.e.) Iamin 
me, thi® great pain of Body, and anguiſh ofMind. Or thus, »:y coat of Mail, 
nj, &c- Or, embroydered coat, hath hindered me, that the Spear could not pierce 
into me. © Thus divers both Hebrew and other Learned Expoſitors 
underſtand it. þ T am heart-whole, andnot likely to die, as well 

as not willing to live. : The 

10: So | ſtood upon him, and ſlew him 7, Becauſe I 


was ſure that he could not live after that he was fallen 
& : and I took the crown that 4s upon his head /, and 
the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them 


hither unto my Lord m. 

k Ir is moſt probable this was alye,deviſed to gain Davia'sFavour, 
as he ſuppoſed. For, 1. Saul was not killed by a Sp-ar, ashe pre- 
tends, bur by his Sword, 1 Sam. 31.4. 2. It is expreſly ſaid, That 
Saul's Armour-bearer being yet living, ſaw that Sarl was dead, 1 Sam. 
31. 5- which doubtleſs he would very throughly examine and know, 
before he would kill himſelf upon that account, as he did. 3. Saul's 
death is manifeſtly aſcribed to his own Attion, even to his falling 
upon his Sword, verſes 4, 5. k This he addeth by way of Caution 
and Excuſe, that ir might be thought an att of neceſſity and kind- 
neſs, and not of choice or 1ll-will that he killed $au!. Burt here al- 
ſo he betrays himſelf: For how could this be true, when Sau!'s life 
was whole within him, as he had now ſaid, verſeg? U Not that 
he then wore it; which would have expoſed him too much, and 
that unneceſſarily, to the rage ofthe Philiines ; but that he uſed to 
wear it. Ir is nor likely that he found it now _— upon Saul's 
head, bur that he mer with it in ſome part of the Camp, whither 
Saul had brougkt it to wear it when he ſaw fit. »» Unto thee, whom, 
now Saul is dead, I own for my Lord and King. 

ir Then David took hold on his clothes, and * rent 
them, and likewiſe all the men that ere with him. 

12 And they mourned and wept, and faſted unti: 
even, for Saul and for Jonathan his ſon, and for the 
people of the LORD, and for the houſe of Iſrael, be- 
6aule they were fallen by the ſword. | 


13 © And David ſaid unto the young man that told 


"Chap. 3. 
31, and 
13. 31, 


him, Whence art thou «? And he anſwered, I am the. 


ſon of a ſtranger, an Amalekite. 
n# David heard and knew before what he was, but he asked it a- 
gain judicially, in order to his Trial and Puniſhment. 
14 And David ſaid unto him, * How waſt thou not 
afraid to ſtretch forth thine hand to deſtroy the LORD*s 


anointed 0? 

o Why didſt not thou refuſe to kill him, as his Armour-bearer 
had done ? For notwirhſtanding his great danger, ſomething might 
have fallen out through God's All-diſpoſing Providence, whereby 
his life might have been preſerved. 

15 And David called one of the young men, and 
ſaid, Go near and fall upon him. And he ſmorethim 
that he died» 2 

16 And David ſaid unto him, Thy blood be upon 
thy head p: for thy mouth hath teſtified againſt thee, 
ſaying, I have ſlain the LORD's anointed 9. 

p The guilt of thy blood-ſhed or death lies upon thy ſelf, not 
upon me. 9 Thy free and voluntary Confeſhon is ſufficient proof 
of thy guilt in killing the King, : 

17 C And David lamented with this lamentation o- 
ver Saul, and over Jonathan his Son: 

18 T(Alfor he made them s, teach the children of 
Judah * rhe »ſe of the bow « ; behold, zt is wricten x * in 
the book || of Jaſher. ) 

r Having mentioned David's Lamentation in general, before he 
comes to the particular deſcription of it, he interpoſeth this Verſe 
by way of Parentheſis; To ſignifie, That David did nor ſo give up 
himſelf to Lamencation,as to negle& his great buſineſs,the care of the 
Common-wealth, which now lay upon him; bur took particular care 
to fortifie them againſt ſuch further Loſſes and Calamities as he be- 
wails in the following Song ; And by his Example, and this Counſel, 
to inſtrutt the people, that they ſhould not giveup themſelves toSor- 
row and Diſpondency for their great and general Loſs ; But ſhould 
raiſe up their Spirits, and betake themſelves ry Aﬀion. 5s David 
being now aGually King upon Saut's death, rakes his Power upon 


*Plalios. 
Is, 


"Joſh, T0, 


3, 
IOr » of the 
wright. 


« 


WOE Chap. lll 


bim, and gives forth his Commands. # Theſe he more particular- 
y teacheth, becauſe they were the Chief, and now the Reyal 
Tribe, and likely to be the great Bulwark to all Jrael againſt the 
Philiſtines, upon whoſe Land they bordered; And withal, to 
be the molt friendly and true to him, and to his Intereſt. « (i. e.) 
The uſe of their Arms, which are all Synecdochically expreſſed, 
under the name of the bow, which then was one of the chief Wea- 
pons; and for the dextrous uſe whereof, Jonathan is commended 
in the following Song: Which may be one reaſon, why he now 
gives forth this Order, that ſo they might ſtrive to imitate Jonathan 
in the Military Skill, and to excell in it, as he did. » Not the fol- 
lowing Song, as many think, for thar is written here, and there- 
fore it was needleſs to refer us to another Book for it ; but this fore- 
:oing counſel and courſe which David took to repair the laſt Loſs, 
which 1s here mentioned but briefly, and in general terms ; Bur, 
as it ſeems, more largely and particularly deſcribed in the Book of Ja= 
jher : Of which, ſee on Joſh. 10. 13. 

19 The beauty of Iſrael y is ſlain upon the high 
places 2: how are the mighty tallen 4! 

y Their Flower and Glory, Saul and Jonathan, and their Army, 
conſiſting of young and valiant Men. # Heb. pon thy high places ; 
(i.e.) Thoſe which belong to thee, O Land of 1/-ae/. a How ſtrange« 
ly ! how ſuddenly ! how dreadfully and univerſally ! 

20 * Tell it not in Gach b, publiſh * not in the 
ſtreets of Askelon : left the daughters c of the Phili- 
ſtines rejoyce ; leſt the daughters of the uncircumciſed 
triumph, 

b This is not a Precept, but a Poetical wiſh ; whereby he doth 
not ſo much deſire, that this might not be done, which he knew to 
be vain and impoſlible ; As, expreſs his great ſorrow, becauſe it 
was, and would be done, to the great diſhonour of God. and of 
his People c He mentions theſe, becauſe it was the cuſtom of wo- 
men in thoſe Times and Places ro celebrate thoſe Victories which 
their men obtained, with Triumphant Songs and Dances; as Exod. 
IF. Judges 11. 34. 1Sam. 18.6. 

21 Ye mountains of Gilboa, Jet there be no dew. nei- 
cher Jet there be rain upon you 4, nor fields of + off-r- ,,.... 
ings e: for there the ſhield of the mighty f F is vileiy g ofermgs. 
caft away h ; the ſhield of Saul, as r1hongh be had not been t Heb wi | 
anointed with oil 4. louched : 

d This is no proper Imprecation ; which he had no reaſon to in- Gr. j 
fli&t upon thoſe harmleſs Mountains ; But only a paffionate repre- 
ſenrarion of the Horror which he conceived at this publick Loſs - 
Which was ſuch, as if he thought every Perſon or Tiing which 
contributed to it, were fit to bear the Tokens of Divine Diipleaſure, 
ſuch as thisis, when the Larth wants the bleſſed and neceflary In- 
fluences of Dew and Rain. e (i.e. ) Fruitful Fields, which may 
produce fair and goodly Fruits fit to be offered unto God. f The 
Shields of the valiant Men of 7ſrael. g Diſhonourably : For it was 
a great Reproach to any Soldier, to caſt away or loſe his Shield. 
h To wit, by themſelves, that they might flee more ſwiftly away, 
as the Iſraelites did, and Saul with rhe reſt ; as is ſaid, r Sam. 31. 
1, 2. 7 Asif he had been no more, nor better than a common Sol- 
dier: He was expoſed to the ſame kind of Death and Reproach as 
they were. | 

22 From the blood of the ſlain, from the far of the 
mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back &, and 
the ſwordof Saul returned not empty /U. 

k To wit, without effe& : Compare 1/a. 45. 23. and 55. r1. Their 
Arrows ſhor from their Bows, and their Swords did ſeldom mils, 
and commonly pierced Far, and Fleſh, and Blood, and reached even | 
ro the Heart and Bowels. 1 (i e.) Not filled and glutted with Blood: | 
for the Sword is Mctaphorically ſaid to have a mouth, which we _ 
tranſlate an edge ; and to devour, 2 Sam. 2. 26. and 11 25. Jer. 2. 30, 
and 46. 10. And this their former Succeſsfulneſs is here mention- | b 
ed asan aggravation of their laſt Infelicity. 

23 Sau! and Jonathan were lovely, and || pleaſant » jg; ſweel 
in their lives », and in their death they were not di- © | 
vided 0: they were ſ{wifter than eagles p, they were | 
ftronger than lions 9q. | 

m Amiable, and obliging in their Carriage and Converſation, 
both towards one another, and towards their People : For, as for 
Saul's fierce behaviour towards Jonathan, it was only a ſudden paſ- 
tion, by which his ordinary Temper was not to be meaſured ; and 
for his carriage towards David, 1 Sam. 20. 30, 33. that was from 
that Jealouſie and Reaſon of State which uſually engageth even 
good-natured and well-natured Princes, to the ſame Hofſtilitiesin 
hike Caſes. But it 1s obſervable, Thar David ſpeaks not a word 
here of his Piety and other Virtues; but only commends him for 
thoſe things which were truely in him, A fit Pattern for all Preach= 
ersin their Funeral Commendations. , * Jonathan was not falſe to 
his Father, as was reported ; but ſtuck cloſe to him. » And as he 
lives, ſo he died with him, at the ſame time, and in the ſame com- 
mon and good Cauſe, p Expeditious and nimble in purſuing their 
Enemies, and executing their Deſigns ; which is a great Commen< 
dation in a Prince, andin a Soldjer. 9 In regard of their bodily 
| Strength, and the Courage of their Minds. 

24 Ye daughters of iſrael » weep over Saul, who 
clothed you in ſcarlet s, ih ether delights ; who put 
on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. | 

7 Theſe he mentions ; Partly, becauſe the women then uſed to 
make Songs both of Triumph, and of Lamentation, as occaſion re- 
quired : And partly, becauſe they uſually are moſt delighted with 
the O:naments of the Body here following. 5 This he did, partly, 
becauſe he procured them ſo much Peace as gave them opportuni- 
ty of enrichirg themſelves: And partly, becauſe he took theſe 
things as ſpoils from the Efiemies, and clothed his own People 
with them. Compare Pſal. 68. 12. | , 
2 5 How are the mighty fallen in the midſt of the battelF 

O Jonathan, thos wa#f ſlain in thine high places r. . 

£ Which were in thy Country, and (had not thy Father dilinhe- 
rited thee by his fins) in thy Dominions. bend. | _ 

; 3 A 2 w_ 


- 4 


* Mic. || 
I, 8 


f 


tt 


ly 


*, Mac. 


2. 57.) - 
* x Sam. 


ZI. 13+ 


+ Or, be- 
cauſe. 


+ Hebr. 
be ye the 


for your 
that. 
| beſt which 


was Sauls. 


33+ 


p. IL 


| Or, -Eſb- 
Gaal. 
x Chr. 8. 


| nN S$ 4 
26 I am diſtreſſed for thee s,” my brother Jonathan, 


very pleaſant haſt thou been unto me: thy love to me 


was wonderful, paſling the love of women x. 

u (i.c.) For the loſs of thee. For, beſides the loſs ofa true Friend, 
and all the comfort of Friendſhip, which is incſtimable ; he loſt 
him who both could,and undoubtedly would have given him a ſpee- 
dy, and quiet, and ſue Poſſeſſion of the Kingdom : Whereas now, 
he met with long and troubleſome Interruptions. # (i.e-) That Love 
wherewith they love theiriHusbands, or Children; For their affeCti- 
ons are uſually more vehement and ardent than Men's. 

| 27 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of 
war y periſhed ? '4. 

y Either, x. Metaphorically ſo called ; to wit, Sau! and Jona- 
than, and the brave Commanders and Soldiers of rae!; who might 
have been called, the chariots of Iſrael, and the horſemen thereof. Or, 
rather, 2. Properly ; for, together with the Men, their Arms were 
loſt, which was a very great aggravation of their loſs, and that loſs 
ſeems to be at this time more irrecoverable and dangerous, than the 


loſs of their Men. 
CHAP. IL 

David by Ged's dire#ion with his company goeth up to Hebron, where he 
is made King of Judah, 1=—4. He commendeth them of Jabeſh-Gile- 
ad for burying of Saul, 5 7. Abner maketh Iſhboſheth 
Iſracl, 8-—11. 4 mortal fight between twelve of Abner's and twelve 
of Joab's men 12 —— 17. Aſahel purſueth Abner, and is ſlain by 
him, :8 -— 24. At Abner's motion Joab ſoundeth a Retreat, 25» ZI. 
Aſahel's burial, 32. | ; | 

AND it came to paſs after this, that David enquired 


of the LORD #, ſaying, Shall I go up into any 
of the cities of Judah 5: And the LORD ſaid unto him, 
Go up. And David ſaid, Whither ſhall I go up? And 


he ſaid, Unto Hebron. | | 
a By Urim, as 1 Sam. 23. 6, 9. and 30. 7, 8. Thus David be- 
gins at the right end, and lays his Foundation in God's Counſel and 
Aſſiſtance, which now he ſeeks. b He asketh nor whether he ſhould 
Take the Kingdom ; for that was appointed and known before ; and 
he would not offend God, nor diſhonour his Ordinance with frivo- 
Jous and unneceſſary enquiries; bur only where he ſhould enter 
upon it; Whether in 7uaah, as he ſuppoſed, becauſe of his Rela- 
tion to that Tribe, and his intereſt init; Or, whether in ſome 0- 
ther Tribe: For he doth nor limit God, but reſolves exattly to 
follow his Counſels, c Which was next to Jeruſalem (part where- 
of the Jebuſtes now poſſeſſed ) the chief City of that Tribe, and a 
City of the Prieſts, Joſh. 21. 10, &c. And in the very center or 
middle of that Tribe, to which the whole Tribe might ſpeedily 
reſort, when need required. _ VA . 
2 So David went up thither, and his two wives al- 


ſo, Ahinoam 'the Jezrecliteſs, and Abigail Nabals wife 


the Carmelite. | PER 
3 And his men that ere with him, did David bring 
up, every man with his houſhold : and they dweltin the 


Cities of Hebron 4. 

d (i. e. ) The Cities or Towns belonging and ſubje& to He- 
bron, which was the Metropolis, Joſb, 21. 11, 12. , 
ſelf there was not ſpace for them all, becauſe it was filled with 
Prieſts, and with David's Court. 

4 And * the men of Judah came, and there they a- 


nointed. David king over the houſe of Judah : and they 
told David, ſaying, That * the men of Jabeſh-Gilead 


were they that buried Saul. 

e This they did upon moſt juſt Grounds, becauſe not only the 
Kingdom was promiſed to that Tribe, Gen. 49. 10. but David was 
deſigned and anointed by God, whoſe Will both they and all 7- 
7ael were obliged to obſerve and obey» And they Piouſly reſolv- 
ed not to negle& their Duty, though they ſaw the other Tribes 
would. Yet their prudent Caution and Modeſty is obſervable, 
That they make him King of Judah only, and not of all /rae!. And 
therefore there was'need of a Third Anointing to the Kingdom 
over all Iſrael, which he had Chapter 5. 3. Burt as for that Firſt 
Anointing, 1 Samuel 16. 13. it was only a Deſignation of the Per- 

ſon who ſhould be King, but not an aQual Inauguration of him to 
the Kingdom. 

5 © And Darid ſent meflengers unto the men of Ja- 
beſh-Gilead, and ſaid unto them, Bleited be ye of the 
LORD, that + ye have ſhewed this kindneſs f, unto 

our lord, ever unto Saul, and have buried him. 
f This Reſpe& and AﬀeQtion to procure him Burial. For as it 


' 3s, and ever was eſteemed an aCt of Inhumanity to deny Burial ro 
' the Dead; So it is an AQ of Mercy and Kindneſs to bury them. 


6 And now the LORD ſhew kindneſs and truth 


becauſe ye have done this thing. / 

g (i. e.) True and real Kindneſs; not in werds only, but alſo in 
aftions, as you have now done to your King, the Lords anointed. 
h So far am from being offended with you for this Kindneſs to my 

. late enemy, that I will requite it. 
7 Therefore now let your hands be ſtrengthned, 


and + be ye valiant ;: For your maſter Saul is dead &, 


> v4" and alſo + the houſe of Judah have anointed me king 
' $*bmow this over them. 


i; Be not afraid leſt the Philiftines ſhould puniſh you for this FaQ, 
but take good Courage, I will defend you. k Or, though your Maſter 
Saul be dead, and ſo your Hearts may faint within you, -as if you 


+ Heb. the were now Sheep withour a Shepherd. 


8 © But Abner the ſon of Ner 1, captain of + Saul*s 
hoſt, took [| Iſhboſberh- »» the ſon of Saul, and brought 
him over to Mahanaim ». 

I Partly, out of envy and malice againſt David; And partly, out 


* of his own ambition and deſire of rule, becauſe he knew that 1þs 


King of 


For in Hebron 1t. 


M D E LI, 
boſherch would have only the name of King, whilſt he had the Power. 
m Called alſo Eſbbaal, i Chron. 8. 34. and 9. 39. It being uſual with 
the Hebrews, in ſtead of Baal, the name of falſe gods, to put Boſherh 
which ſignifies ſhame, or confuſion, or a ſhameful thing; as appeareth 
by comparing Judges 9.53. with 2 Sam. 11. 21. and 2 Samyel 4. FY 
with 1 Chron. 8, $34. and from Jerem. 3. 24.  Hoſ. 9. 10. n A place 
beyond Jordan, whither he carried him; Partly to ſecure thoſe 
brave and valiant Men of 7abeſh-Gilead to himſelf; And principal- 
Iy becauſe this place was moſt remote from David and from the 
Philiftines too ; And therefore here he might recruit his Forces with 
leſs diſturbance than in other places. 

9 And he made him King over Gilead o,- and over 
the Aſhurites p, and over Jezreel 9, and over Ephraim 
and over Benjamin, and over all f Iſrael r. 
| 0 Largely fo taken for all the Land of 1/-ae! beyond Jordan, as it 
1S Joſh. 22. g. Judges 10. 8. þp (i. e-) The Tribe of Aſher, as the Chal- 
ace Paraphraſt and others underſtand it. 9 A large and rich Val- 
ley ſituate in the Borders of the Tribes of Zebulun, Iſſachar, and 
Napthali, and ſo put Synecdochically for them all. » Except 7u- 
aah, as it follows. 

10 Iſhboſheth Saul's ſon wes forty years old when he 


began to reign Over Iſrael, and reigned two years /* but 
che houſe of Judah followed David. 

ſ To wit, before the following War broke forth. Compare 1 Som. 
13. 1. For that he reigned longer, may appear both from the fol- 
lowing verſe, and from chapter 3. r. and from the following Hiſto- 
ry. Though ſome think he reigned only two years, and that the 
reſt of David's ſeven years the Iſraelites by Abner's inſtigation ſtuck 
to the Houſe of Saul, but were in ſuſpence whether they ſhould 
confer the Crown upon Mephibeſbeth the right Heir, but a Child ; or 
upon J/bvoſbeth a grown Man, whom with ſome difficulty,and after 
long debates amongſt themſelves, they preferred- 

11 ('And the f time that David was King in He- 
bron over the houſe of Judah, was ſeven years and ſix 
months.) 

I2 © And Abner the ſon of Ner, and the ſervants, 
of Iſhboſheth the ſon of Saul, went out from Mahana- 
im to Gibeon «. 

t (i. e.) His Officers, and Commanders, and their Army. » In 
the Country of Benjamin, Joſhua 18. 25. near Judah, to fight with 
wm s Army, and to bring back the reſt of the Kingdom to Saul's 

ouſe. 

13 And Joab the ſon of Zeruiah, and the ſervants 
of David, went out x, and met together y by the 
* # e+ | 

pool of Gibeon : -and they fat down, the one on the 
one ſide of the pool, and the other on the other ſide of 
the pool. 

x To Battel. Queff. How could or durſt this one Tribe oppoſe 
all the reſt. ſw. Firſt, This Tribe was very numerous and vali- 
ant of themſelves, and they had a King of extraordinary Courage, 
and Condu&, and Succeſs. Secondly, There were great numbers 
of the otheg, Tribes which favoured them , as appears from 
1 Chron. 12. hirdly, They had the Encouragement of ſpecial 
Promiſes of God, made both to their Tribe, and to David. ) 1. C. 
_ Un oppoſite Army, and put themſelves into a Poſture for 

attel. 

14 And Abner ſaid to Joab z, Let the young men 
now ariſe, and play « before us : and Joab ſaid, Let 


them arile. | 

z Abner truſting to his greater numbers, offers Battel: # 7. e. Shew 
their Proweſs and Dexterity in managing their Weapons, and Fight- 
; Ing together. He ſpeaks like a vain-glorious and cruel Man, and a 
Soldier of Fortune, that cſteemed it a ſport to ſee Men wounding 
and killing one another. So this he deſigned, partly for their mu- 
rual Recreation, and trial of Skill and Valour ; and partly, that by 
this occaſion they might be engaged in a Bartel. 

15 Then there aroſe and went over by number twelve 
_ of Benjamin b, which pertained to Iſhboſbeth the ſon of 

Saul, and twelve of the ſervants of David. 

b He ſeleRed all his Combatants out of that Tribe, both becauſe 
that was a warlike and valiant Tribe ; and that he might give the 
more honour to his own Tribe. 


16 And they caughtevery one his fellow by the head 


kath-hazzurim d, which 7s in Gibeon, 

c By the Hair of the Head, which after their manner, was of a 
conſiderable length, and therefore gave their Enemy advantage ; 
Which every one of them endeavoured to get, and to improve a- 


| ; we 3 Þ gainſt the other. d Or, the field of Rocks; (i. e.) of | 
unto you : and I alſo will requite you this kindneſs b, ore pene r, the field of Rocks ; (1. e.) of Men who ſtood 


like Rocks unmoveable, each one dying upon the Spot where he 
fought. 

17 And there was a very fore battel that day: and 
Abner was beaten, and the men of Iſrael, before the 
ſervants of David. | 

18 © And there were three ſons of Zeruiah there, 


+ of foor Þ as a wild roe. 

19 And Afahel purſued after Abner, and in going 
down he turned not to the right hand, not to the left, 
from + following Abner. 


thou Aſahel ? And he anſwered, I am. 
2: And Abner ſaid to him, Turn thee aſide to thy * 

right hand, or to the left, and lay thee hold on one of | 

the young men, and take thee his || armour e. But Aſa- 


hel would not turn aſide from following of him. c 
ie 


Cha 


c, and thruff his ſword in his fellows ſide ; fo they fell | That is, 
down together : wherefore that place was called || Hel- fe fly 

Yong mm, 
or,of 1, 


Joab, and Abiſhai, and Aſahel : and Aſahel was as light + Kt. 

of his {fed 
y op 
one of tht 
roes that i 
in the felt 
20 Then Abner looked behind him, and ſaid, Arc j _ 


abner. 


7 
$/ T) 4 
7: rei eſt of, 
. 


t Heb. 
number of 
aay:, 


f Heb, 
them Higte 
ther 


*Jer. 41, 
12, 


Or,/p4i, 


p- 1, Bp. 1 


ft > & ms. 


t Heb: 
fmthe |, 
mmnng. | 
[Or, gone 
890}, 


Lap. 


"Chap; 


x6 103 


Heb: 
frm the 
mining. 
[Or, gon 
800}, 


en, 


II. IL g A 
e If thou art ambitious to get a Trophy or Mark of thy Valour, 


deſiſt from me who am an oid and experienced Captain, and goto 
ſeme young and raw Soldier; tryithy Skill upon hun, and take away 
his Arms from him. 

22 And Abner ſaid again to Aſahel, Turn thee aſide 
from following of me: Wherefore ſhould I fmice the 
to the ground ? how then ſhould I hold my face co 
Joab thy hrother f ? 

f He was loath to enrage Joab too much againſt him, becauſe his 
ouilty Conſcience told him that his Cauſe was bad and th-refore he 
preſaged ill ſucceſs, and that he mightneed ſuch a Friend as Joab, 
to make his peace with David, - 

23 Howhbeit, he refuſed to turn aſide : Wherefore 
Abner with the hinder end of the ſpear g, ſmote him 
* under the ſifth rib þ, that the ſpear came out betind 
him, and he fell down there, and died in the ſame place 
;: andit came to pals, that as many as came to the place 
where Afſahel fell down and died, ſtood ſtil}. 


g Which was ſharp pointed after the manner. þ The ſcat of the 
Liver and Bowels, where Wounds are mortal. ; Upon the Spor, 
not being able ro go one ſtep further. 


24 Joab alſo and Abiſhai perſued after Abner : and 
the ſun went down when they were come to the hill 
of Ammah, that Jieth before Giah, by the way of the 
wi.derneſs of Gibeon. 

25 TC And the children of Benjamin gathered them- 
ſelves :ogether after Abner, and became one croop, and 
ftood on the top of an hill k. 

k& Where, being upon the upper Ground, they might better 
defend themſelves. | 

26 Then Abner called to Joab, and ſaid, Shall the 
{word devour for ever 2 Knoweſt thou not chat ic will 
be bitterneſs in the latter end / ? How long ſhall it be 
then, ere thou bid the people return from following 
their brethren m2 ? 

It will produce dreadful Effe&s, and many bloody Slaughters, 
if by a further proſecution thou makeſt them deſperate : which is 
againit ail the Rules of Policy m By Nation and Religion ;: whom 
therefore they ſhould not purſue with ſo fierce a Rage, as if they 
were purſuing the Philifines. Dy | 

27 And joab ſaid, As God liveth, unleſs :hou hadſt 
ſpoken », ſurely then + in the morning, the people had 
[| zone up every one from following his brother. 

£ #®% Unleſs thou hadſt madethe motion that they might fight, v. 14. 
It was thou, nor I, that gave the firſt occaſion ofthis Fight. Wirhal, 
he intimates, That Abner was the ſole cauſe of this W ar ; and thar 
if he had not given Commiſſion and Command. the War had never 
been undertaken, but all things had been ended by an amicable 
Agreement: wh.ch might have been made that very morning, ifhe 
had ſo pleaſed. 

28 So Joab blew a trumpet, andall the people ſtood 


ſtill, and purſued after Iſrael no more, neither fought - 
. they any more 0, 


o Either, Firſt, Ar that time. Or rather, Secondly, In any pitch'd 
Battel. | 


29 And Abner and his men walked all that night 
through the plain, and paſled over Jordan, and went 
through all Bithron p, and they came to Mahanaini. 

p Otherwiſe called, the Mountains of Bether, Cant, 2. i797. which 


were beyond Jordan. Or,ſforne ether Countrey, now not known by 
that name : which 1s the caſe of hundreds of places. 


20 And foab returned from following Abner : and 
when he had gathered all the people together, chere 
lacked of Davids ſervants nineteen men, and Afſahel. 

21 Bur the ſervants of David had ſmitten of Benja- 
min and of Abners men, /o that three hundred and 
threeſcore men died. 

32 4 And they took up Aſahel, and buried him in 
the {-pulchre of his fathzr, which was in Bethlehem : 
and Joab and his men went all night, and they came 
co Hebron at break of day. | 

CHAP. 4 
Tie war between the houſe of David and the houſe of Saul. Six ſons born to 

David in Hebron, 1, --- 5+ Abner diſpleaſed with Iſbboſbeth 6,—— 11. 

Revoltethro David ; who requireth of him that he bring with him Michal : 

wich he does and communes with the elders of Iſrael : is feaſted by David 

and diſmiſſed, 12, -—-- 21. Joab r turning ffom battel is d ſpleaſed 
w:th the King, and treacherouſly Murderet - Almer, 22,-—23; David 
curſetl Foab, 28, = =30, Mourneth over Abner, 3, —— 
MN there was long war @ between the houſe of 
Saul, and the houſe of David : but David waxed 
ſironger and ſtronger, and the houſe of Saul waxed 
weaker and weaker, 

a For five Years longer : for it is probable that 1ſhb:ſheth was 
made King preſeatly upon Saul's death, ro give them countenance 
tor their Rebellion againſt David ; and the other Tribes did not 
fubmir ro David before ſeven years were expired. 


2 © And * unto David were ſons born in Hebron : 
and his firſt-born was Ammon, of Ahineam the Jez- 
reeliteſs : | 

3 And his ſecond Chileab 5, of Abigail + the wife of 
Nabal te Catmetice : and the third Abſaiom, the ſon of 
Maacah, the daughter of Ta.mai king of Gelhur c : 

* b Calied alto Daniel « Chron: 3: 1. c A part of Syria, North- 
Ward from the Land of Jrael, Deut: 33 14: Foſs 12:5, See 2 Sam 


M--0--B £ 


Chap. IIt 
| 13: 37: and 74: 13: and 15: 8. Her he married, as it may ſeem, * 
in Policy, that he might have a powerful Friend and Allie to affift 
him againſt Zbbojherh's Party in the North, whilſt himſelf oppoſed 
him in the Southern parts. Burt he paid dear for making Piety 
give place to Policy herein, as the Hiſtory of 45/a/om ſhewerh There 
were other Geſhurites Southward from Canzan, whom David invaded, 
1 Sam: 27: 8: and it is not impoſſible bur they were a Colony of 
rhoſe in the North. - EY 

4 And the fourth, Adonijjah the ſon of Haggith : 
and the fifth, Shephatiah the ſon of Abiral : 

5 And the ſixth, Ithream by Eglah Davids wife & : 
theſe were born to. David in Hebron. 

d This is added, either becauſe ſhe was of obſcure Parentage, 
and was known by no other Title but her relation to David : or, 
ro diſtinguiſh her from tome other Perfon of rhat name, who poſs 
bly might be of no good fame : or, becauſe this was his firſt ard 
mult proper Wife, beſt known by her other name of Michal, who, 
though ſhe had no Child by David afrer ſhe ſcofted ar him for dan- 
cing before the Ark. Chap: 6: 23; yer might have one before thar 
time. And ſhe might be named the laſt of rheſe here, becauſe the 
was given away from David, and marricd to another Man, when 
David took the other Wives, and therefore though ſhe had been 
firſt, yet now ſhe was become rhe laſt of them. Or, this Title, being 
put un the laſt place, may belong to all the reſt of the Women 
abovementioned, Ly a Figure called Zeugma, to diſtinguiſh them 
from his Concubines, 2 Sam: 5: 13- 1 whron; 3: 9. 

6 © Andit came to pals while there was war between 
che houſe of Saul, and the houſe of David, that Abner 
made himſelf ſtr:-ng for the houſe of Saul e. 

e He uſed all his endeavours to ſupport Saul's Houſe. Which is 
mentioned, to ſhew the reaſon ofthis deep Reſentment of the follow- 
ing Aſperſion. Or, He ftrenzthned himſelf in the Houſe of Saul ; i. e. he 
ſo managed all Afﬀairs, as to get all the Riches and Power into his 
own hands ; which made 1ſb4oſberh ſuſpe& that he aimed at rhe 
Kingdom, and ſought to Marry the King's Concubine in order to it, 
as the manner was. See 2 Sam; 123 8:and 16 21:and I Kings »: 17. 

7 And Saul had a concubine whoſe name as * Riz- 
pah the daughter of Aiah : and Iſhbeſheth ſaid to 
Abner, Wherefore haſt chou gone in unco my fathers 
concubine f. 

f Either, Firſt, To ſatisfie thy own Luſt. Or rather, Secondly, 
By that pretence to take away my Crown firſt: For this was that 
which ſtirred up his Jcalouſie and Rage, and cauſed him to ſpeak 
that to 4bner which oth-rwiſe he neither would nor durſt. But 
whether Abner were guilty or no, it is notevident from the follow- 
ing words ; for if it were true, great Men cannot endure to be 
told of their Faulrs, though they be true and great. 

8 Then was Abner very wroth for the words of 
Iſhboſheth, and ſaid, Am I a dogs head g, which againſt 
h Judah do ſhew kindneſs this day unto the houſe of 
Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, 
and have not delivered thee into the hand of David s, 
that thou chargeſt me to day with a fault concerning 
this woman &. 

g i.e. A vileand contemptible Creature, as a Dog was. See 
Deut: 23: 18: 1 Sam; 24; 14% 2 Sam: 9:8: and 16: 9: Job: 30: 1: Eccleſ: 
9:4: And a Dogs head is put for a Dog by a Synecdoche, utuil both 
in the Hebrew and in other Languages, as the Head 1s ofr put for the 
whole Mr in the Latin Tongue. + So the Particle Lamed is well 
rendred, as el which among the Hebrews is contetſed!ly of the ſame 
nature and uſe, is ufe4 Eccl ſs 9: 14: Jer: 34:7: Exzk: 13: 9, 205 
Amos 7: 15 . + Which | couldotr and eally have done. & Either 
that thou accuſeſt me falſly concerning this matter : or, that thou 
canſt not wink ar ſo ſmall a Fault ( for fo he eltcecmed it) as Cons 
verſation with this Woman, who, whatſoever ſhe formerly was, 1s 
now ſo impotent and inconſtderable,thar the can do thee ao ſervices 
as I have done- 

9 * So do God to Abner, and morealſo, except as the 
LORD hath ſworn to David 1, even foldo to him : 

{ Whence it appears that this wicked Wretch did all this while 
fight againſt his own Knowledge and Conlcience, and againſt God 
himfelt. 

10 To tranſlate the kingdom from the houſe of Saul, 
andto ſer up the throne of David over Iſrael, and over 
Judah, from Dan even to Beerſheba. 

11 Ard hecould not anſwer Abner a word again wm, 
becauſe he feared him s. 

m Becauſe he durſt not provoke Abner further, leſt he ſhould 
really execute what he ſuppoſed as yer he only threatned. » As 
having a greater Interelt in, and power with both the Army and 
the reſt of the People, than himtelt had. : 

12 Y And Abner ſent meſteugers to David on his 
behalf o, ſaying, Whole is the land p? ſaying aljo, Make 
thy league with me 4,and behoid my hand ſha# be with 
thee, to bring abour ail Iirael unto chee. © 

o Who in his name and ſtead might treat with Pavid concerning 
his Reconciliation with hin. "Thus God over-rules the Lu:tts and 
Paſſions of wicked Men, ro accomplith his own wite and ho!y Purs. 
poſes. And who then dare courens with rhar God who mixes even. 
his Enemics to do his work, aad deltroy themtelves ? p.To whom 
doth this whole Land belong, bur to thee ? Is it not thine by 
Divine Right *? 5a#!'s Son is bur an Uſurper, thou only art the rightful 
owner. q Thatthou wiitſt pardon a1} pait Offences ro me, and to 
all Iſrael, and thou wiltſt receive me into thy Grace and Favour, 

13 4 And he faid, Well, I will make a league with 
thee 7: bur one thing I require of thee, F that 1s, Thou z xy. 
ſhalc not fee my face, except thou fiſt bring Michal ſg. 
Sau!s daughter, when thou comeit to fee my face. 

r To wit, upon thy terms : which all Circumftances conhdered, 


* Chap: 


21; 19; 


* Ruth 


I: 175 


ſeem to be Jawkul, ts preveat the grear effulion of ir 2:1;2;Þ Blood, 
"ny 0" waich 


a; 7's 


Chap. WI. ? 


IT. 


| x hich otherwiſe would certainly have been ſpilt. And althoug] 
le principle of this ation of Abuer's was baſe and wicked, yet thc 
aGion it ſeif was Lawful and Commendable, and no more than his 
Duty to God and David obliged himto ; and therefore David might 
well perſsade and induce him to it. 


14 And David ſent meſſengers to Iſhboſheth Sauls 
ſon /, ſaying, Deliver me my wite Michal 7, which I 


*:Sam. eſpouſed to me * for an hundred fore-skins of the Phi- 
x8.25, 27. 1iſtines. 
F Whoſe Conſent was neceffary, both to take her away from her 
preſent Husband, and ro perſwade her to return ro Pavid, Hereby 
David cpencd to him alſo a door of hope for his Reconciliation, 
leſt being deſperate he ſhould hinder 46zer in his preſent Defign- 
t Who, thouch the was taken from me by forces and con'trained 
ro marry another. x $22 25. 44+ yet is indeed my rightful Wite. 
Her David demands, partly, for the affeftion he formerly had, and 
{till retained to her ; partly, to deliver her from the Sin and 
Reproach of Adultery with another Man, who was not in truth 
and juftice her Husband, though he was ſo called and accounted : 
and partly, upon a politick Contideration,that ſhe might ſRrengrhen 
his Right and Title to the Kingdom. | 
15 And I{hboſheth ſent and took her from her hul- 
* mas * Dias : 
1Sam. band «, even from * Phaitiel the fon of Laiſh. 
25. 444 u For, bcing forſaken by A4bzzr, he durſt not deny David, into 
Phaliis, whoſe Power he ſaw ho muſt unavoidably come; and befites, he 
ſuppoſed that ſhe might be an effettual Initrument ro make his Peace 
with David. : 
+ Heb: 16 And her husband went with her F along weeping 
going and behind her to Bahurim x : then ſaid Abner unto him, 
weeping. Go, return. And he returned. | 
x A City of Benjamin, upon the Borders of Judzh. Sec 2 Sam. 
19. 16. 1 Kings 2. 8. ; 
17 4 And Abner had communication with the el- 
Heb: ders of Iſrael, ſaying, Ye fought for David Þ in times 
tit: yeſter paſt to be king over you y. 
day andthe *\ y Even in Sau!'s time you highly honoured him, and prized his 
third day. QonduRt, and wiſhed that the Power were in his hands ; and great 
"JEMEY mbers of you went to him, when he was in the Hold, 1 Chroz.12, 


nd after Saul's death you would gladly have advanced him to the 
rown, if your reſpe& to Saul's Famuly, together with my Authority 
and Influence, had nor diverted you. 


138 Now then do# z ; for the LORD hath ſpoken of 
David #, ſaying, By the hand of my fervant David, I 


 - will ſave my people Iſrael out of the hand of the Phili- 


ſtines, and out of the hand of all their enemies 5. 

z You ſhall have my free Conſent and utmoſt Aﬀiſtance in procu- 
ring it. & He wickedly pretends Religion, when he intended no- 
thing bur the ſatisfaQtion cf his own Pride, and Malice, and Fury 
againſt Iſbboſhech. 6 It is very probable God ſpake rheſe words but 
undoubtedly he ſpake the ſame fenſe by Samuel, though it be not 
expreſſed before. ; ; 

19 And Abner alfo ſpake in the ears of Benjamin c : 
and Abner went alſo to ſpeak in the cars of David in 
Hebron, all that ſeemed good to Ifrael, and that fcem- 
ed good to the whole houſe of Benjamin. 

c Torheſec he particularly applies himſelf, becauſe they might be 
thought moſt kind to Saul and his Houſe,and moſt loath to ler the 
Kingdom go out of their own Tribe ; and therefore it was necctla- 
ry that he thould uſe all his Art and Power with them, to perſuade 
them to a compliance with his Deſign ; and beſides, they were a 
valiant Tribe,and bordering upon 5«dah. and ficuate becween them 
and the other Tribes ; and the:etore the winning of them, would 
be of mighty concernment to bring in all the reſt. 

20 S0 Abner cameto David to Hebron, and twenty 
men with him : and David made Abner, and the men 
that ere with him, a fealt «. 

d Which in thoſe times was cuſtomary when Perſons entred into 
Covenant. See Gen. 26. 30. and 31.,44, 46: 


21 And Abner faid unto David, I will arife, and go, 
and will gather all Iſrael e unco my lord the king, that 
they may make a league with thee, and thatthou mayeſt 
rCcign over all that thy heart defireth. And David ſent 
Abner away, and he went in peace. ' 

e 3, e. The Elders and Chieftains of all 1jrael, Repreſenting and 
Ruling all the reft. 

22 © And behold, the ſervants of David, and Joab, 
came from purſuivg a troop f, and brought in a great 
{poil with them : ( but Abner 42s nct with David in 
Hebron, forhe had ſeat him away, and he was gone in 
peace. ) 

f Of Robbers, either Ph1if:nes, or Edomites, or ſome others. who 
taking advantage of the Diſcord between the Houſes of Saul and 
David, made inroads into Judah, as they had occalion. 

23 When Joab and all the hoſt that as with him, 
were come, they told Joab, ſaying, Abner the ſon of 
Ner came to the king, and he hath ſent him away, and 
he is gone in peace. | 

24 Then Joab came to the king, and ſaid, Whar haſt 
thou done g* behold, Abner came unto thee : why is it 
that thou haſt ſenthim away, and heis quite gone ? 

£ Thou haſt commurred a great over-ſight, to diſmiſs ſo dangerous 
and miſchievous.a Perſon, when he was in thy hands. 

25 Thou knowelt Abner the ſon of Ner, that he 
came to deccive thee, and to know thy going our, and 
thy coming in b, and to know all that chou doit. 


h To fearch our thy Counſels and ſecret Defigns, and to make 
ule of them againſt thee, 


Ti MH UE 4. 


26 And when Joab was come out from David, he 
ſent meſſengers after Abner i, which brought him again 
from the well of Sirah : but David knew zt nor. 

i In the King's Name, and upon pretence of ſome further Com- 


munication with him. 
27 And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab 


* rook him afide in the gate &, to ſpeak with him [| * 1 King 
quietly 7 : and ſmote him there under the fifth 746 w;, 10 
chat he died, for the blood of * Aſahel his brother ». 

þ In the entrance into the Ciry before he came to the King ; and 
in the place where Confcrences uſed to be. / With appearance of 
great Civiliry and Kindneſs. Or, ſecretly, as having ſome matter of 
great importance to utter, which none but himſelf muſt hear. m 
As he did A4ſabel, Chap. 2. 23. # To revenge the death of ſave]; 
and withal ( though that be not here mentioned ) to ſecure his 
own ſtanding, and rid his hands ufo great and powerful a Compe. 
titor. And this was Joab's Deſign ; bur God had other Deſigns in 
it, both to puniſh Abucr's manifold Wickednefs, and particularly his 
Rebcllion againſt David, and againſt God and his own Conſcience 
therein : and that David might not owe his Kingdom to Abner, and 
to his Revenge and Treachery, but wholly to God's wiſe and pow. 
erfu] Providence. 

28 4 Andafterward when David heard it, he ſaid «, 
I and my kingdom are guiltleſs before the LORD p for 
ever, from the + blood of Abner the fon of Ner : F Heb: 
o Publickly before his Courtiers and People ; and ſeriouſly as in tlud: 

God's preſence. p I call the Lord to Witnets,that this was not done 
by my Inſtigation or Authority, or by any publick Counſel, but 
only by Joab's Malice ; and therefore I truſt that Cod will not 
puniſh me nor my Kingdom, but Joab only. 

29 Let it q reſt on the head of Joab, and on all his 
fathers houſe r, and let there not Þ fail from the houſe 
of Joab one that hath an iſſue /, or that is aleper, or 
that leancth on a ſtaff's, or that fallecth on the ſword, 


or that lacketh bread. 
9 7. e. This Blood, the guilt and puniſhment of it. » But Chil. 
dren were not to ſuffer for their Parents ſin, Deut. 24. 16. And 
therefore either this was only a PrediQion ; or, if it were an Im- 
precation, David may ſeem to havetranſgreſſed his Bounds,and min- 
gled his Paſſion with his Zeal, that fo he might expreſs his utter de- 
teſtation of this horrid Murder.and how far he was from having any 
hand in it, ſ Which was not only a troubleſome and ſhameful Diſ- 
caſe, bur alſo infe&ious, both to him that had it, and to all that 
touched him ; ſo that, whilſt it was upon a Man, he was cut off in 
a great part from Converſe either with God or Men, # Through 
crazinels, or feebleneſs, or lameneſs, whereby he is rendred unar 
for Aftion and publick Service. 

30 So Joab and Abiſhai « his brother ſlew Abner, 
becauſe he had ſlain their brother * Afahel at Gibeon in 


the battel x. 

u For though Joab only committed the Murder, yet Abifhai was 
guilty of it, becauſe ir was done with his Conſent, and Counſel,and 
Help,and Approbation : for by theſe and ſuch like ations Men are 
involved in the guilt of other mens Sins, at leaſt in God's Judg- 
ment. « Which he did in the fury of Battel, and for his own ne- 
ceflary defence ; and therefore it was no juſtification of this unne= 
cellary and treacherous Murder in a time of Peace. 

21 4 And David faid to Joab y, and to all the peo- 
ple that were with him, * Rent your clothes, and giid * Jok. 
you with ſackcloth, and mourn before Abner z. And 7: of ; 
king David himſelf followed the Þ bier a. TH 

7, Him he eſpecially obliged to ir ; partly, to bring him to Re- 
pentance for his Sin: partly, ro expoſe him to publick ſhame, and 
to the contempt and hatred of all the People, with whom he had 
roo great an Intereit, which hereby Dav:d deſigned to diminiſh. 
z 2.0. Attending upon his Corps, and paying kim thatReſpe&t and 
Honour which was due to his Quality. a Which was againſt the 
uſage of Kings, and might ſeem below David's Dignity ; bur it was 
now expedient to vindicate himſelf from all ſuſpicion and contri- 
Vance or concurrence in this ACtion. 

22 And they buried Abner in Hebron, and the king 
life up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner, and 
all che people wepr. 

23 And the king lamented over Abner, and faid, 
Died Abner as Þ a fool dieth b ? | 

b i.e. Asa wicked Man, for ſuch are oft called Fools in Scripture. 
Was he cut off by the hands of Juſtice for his Crimes ? Nothing leſs; 
bur by Jeab's Malice and Treachery. Or, did he die by his own 
Folly, becauſe he had nor Wiſdom or Courage to defend himſelf? 

h no. The words may be thus rendred : ſba# or ſhould Abner ie 
like a Fool, or a vile contemptible Perſon ? 1.e. unregarded, unpiried, 
unrevenged ; as Fools or vile Perſons die,for whoſe death none are 
concerned. Or, How is Abner dead like a Fool | pitying his miſe 
chance. Ir being honourable for a great Man and Soldier to fight, 
if met with by an Enemy, and not ( having his Arms at liberty) ttand 
ſtill like a Fool to be killed, without making any reſiſtance or de= 
fence ; which, by this treachery of Joab, happened to be his caſc. 


34 Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put 1nt0 
fetrers c: as a man falleth before + wicked men 4, fo News 
fe}leſt thou. And all the people wept again over him. pap 

c Thou didſt not tamely yield up thy ſelf to Joab, as his Priſoner 
to be bound hand and foor ar his pleaſure. Feab did not OVErcome 
thee generouſly and honeurably in an equal Combar, nor durſt he 
attempt thee 1n that way, as a General or Soldier of any worth 
would have done. d Or, before ; 4. e. in the preſence, or by the 
hands of foward, or perverſe, or crooked men, by Hypocriſie and Per- 


- 23, 


t Heb, 


be cut of, 


* Chap, 


2, 23. 


Chap. 1i I # 


ndiouſneſs, whereby the vileſt Coward may kill the moſt valiant 
Peiſon: Thus he reproached Jeab to his very Face,before all the Peo- 
ple: which was a great Evidence of his own Innocency herein ; be- 


cauſe otherwiſe Jeab,being ſo powerful, and proud, and as 
| $ 


feb: 
*RArT. | 


* Chap. | 
Ig: 7: 
"7 Chap: 


20.10. 
iKing:2: - 
$,6,33534* 


a” MA A _ A._ ec ec oa co om Ax. a. a E 


I Heb: 
Jecnd, 


T The 
ſaughtey of 


il Fehape 1V- = 


feb: 
#R4er. 

* Chap. 
19: 7: 

rf hap: 
20.10. 
1King:2: 
$6,33534- 


f Heb: 
Jecind, 


f The 


his Soveraign, would never have taken the ſhame and blame of it 
wholly to himſelf as he did. : 
25 And when all the people came to cauſe David 
to eat meat e, while it was yet day, David ſware, fay- 
ing, So do God to me, and more alſo, if I taſte bread, 


or ought elſe, till the ſun be down e. 

4 To refreſh and chear up his depreſſed Spirits ; as they uſed to 
do at Funerals. See Jer. 16. 5- Exzek. 24.17. ez, e. Till Evening, 
for then Faſting Days ended of courſe. 

26 And all the people took notice of it f, and it 
+ pleaſed them g : as whatſoever the king did 4 pleaſed 


all the people. . 

f Obſerved what the King faid and did. g They were ſatisfied 
concerning David's Integrity,and the method he uſed here for his 
own juſt Vindication. +þ Either in this matter : or rather, in all 
things following this Aion. The meaning 1s,By his carriage here- 
in he gained ſo great an Intcreſt in the hearts of his People, that 
they judged moſt favourably of,and pur the beſt conſtruftion upon 
all his words and ations ; as, on the contrary, when People have a 
prejudice againſt, or an ill will rowards their Prince, they are apt 
to judge moſt harſhly of all his Counſels and doings. 

37 For all the people, and all Ifrael underſtood thar 
day,that it was not of the king h to flay Abner the fon 
of Ner. 


hþ Not done by his deſign or good will. 

28 And the king ſaid unto bis ſervants, Know ye not 
that there is a prince, and a great man z fallen this day 
in Irael ? 

7 Both for his illuſtrious Quality, and for his high Courage and 
wiſe Condu&t; and eſpecially,now for his great utefulneſs and ſer- 
viccableneſs ro me in giving methe intire and peaceable Pofleſſion 
of all 1/rael. Bur till obſerve David's Prudence and Piety that he 
doth not commend him for his Vertues and Graces, as Men of ven- 
dible Conſciences and Tongues uſe to do. upon Funeral-occaſions; 
but only for that kind of worth which was really in him. Com- 
pare 2 Sam. 1. 23. : 

29 And I am this day + weak &, though anointed 
king ; and theſe men the ſons of Zeruiah 7 be * roo 
hard for me m2: * the LORD jhali reward the doer of 
evil according to his wickedneſs. 

k Or, tender, in the infancy of my Kingdomznot well rooted and 
ſerrled in it. The avon is taken trom a young and tender 
Child or Plant. 1 Joab and Abiſhai, the Sons of my Siſter Zeruiah. 
m i e Too powerful. They have 1o great a Command over all the 
Soldiers, and ſo great Favour with thc People;thar I cannot Puniſh 

them without apparent hazard to my Perion and Kingdom ; eſpe- 
cially, now when all the Tribes, except 7:4ah are yet in a ſtate of 
Oppoſition againſt me. But this, aithough it mighr give ſome co- 
lour to the delay of their Puniſhment for a ſeaſon, yet it may ſeem 
to have been one of David's Infirmities, that he did not do it within 
ſome reaſonab'etime,both becauſe this indulgence proceed:d from 
a diſtruſt of God's Power and Faithfulneſs ; as if God could nor, 
or would not make good his Promiſe of the Kingdom to him,with- 
out. and againſt Joab and all his Confederates; and becauſe it was 
contrary to God's Law, which ſeverely requires the Punithment 
of wi:ful Murderers, Gen 9- 6. Exod: 21, 14- Numb. 35. 21. which 
David had no power to diſpenſe with. 'And David might, and 
lhould have remembred, how dear Sal paid for this very thing, 
that he diſpenſed with God's Command, and ſpared thofe whom 
God cor manded him to flay,: Szm15. And it ſeems David's Con- 
ſcience oft ſmore him tor this : which made him watch for a fit 
opportunity to remove,and then puniſh him,and having negle&ed 
it till death, he declareth his Sorrow for that negle&, by giving 
Soiurzon a Charge to execute 1t after his death, 1 Kings 2: 5, 6, 34- 
A AF 9, 

Tſhboſheth and bis party are aſtoniſhed at Abner's death, 1, Two captains 
murther iſboſheFy, and bring his head to David, 2,---8. Who cauſed 
them to be put to death aud hanged up : and Iſbboſheth's head to be 
buried, 9,--- 12, 

ND when Sauls fon heard that Abner was dead 
in Hebron, his hands were fceble s, and all the 

Iſraelites were troubled 6. 

a His Spirit, and Courage, and ſtrength failed him. This Phraſe 
is uſed in the ſame ſence, Ezra 4: 4; Neh: 6:9: Iſa: 13: 7; and 35+ 3- 
b Becauſe now they were unable to oppoſe David,and doubtful of 
obtaining his Favour, now Abner their Peace-maker was dead. 

2 And Sauls fon had two men that were captains of 
bands, the name of the one was Baanah, and the name 
of the + other Rechab, the ſons of Rimmon, a Beero- 
thite, of the children of Benjamin c : ( for Beeroth 
allo was reckoned to Benjamin 4. 

c Of 1bboſherh's own tribe, whom therefore he truſted the more; 
and this gave them opportunity to execute their wicked deſign« 
d This is addcd as the reaſon why he calleth them Beerorhites, be- 
cauſe though Beereth was now in the Hands and Poileſſion of the 
Philiſtines, 1 Sam: 31: 7. yet of right it belonged to the Benjamites, 
Goſh; 18: 25, 

3 Ande the Becrothices fled to Gittaim, and were 
ſojourners there until this day. ) 

e Or, Nt, or But. For this comes in to anticipat an Objef&ion 
againſt what he had now ſaid. Ir is true, ſaith he, che Beerothites 
fled, as others did, upon the overthrow of Saul and his Army, 
1 Sam: 31: 7: tO a place called Girraim, 2 Sam: 4: 3: not that in 
Benjamin, Neem: 11 33- but ſome other place of that name more 
remote from che -Phul:ſtines, and 1o they were Gittarmites by their 
preitent Habitation ; but Beerothices by their Original,and plice of 
their Birth. 

4 And Jonathan Sauls ſon had a ſon 1bat was lame 
of bis feer f, aud was tive years old when the tidings 


/axzhrer fame of + Saul and Jonathan our of Jeczreel g, and his 


M U E LI. Chap. V. 


nurſe took him up, and fled, and it came to paſs as ſhe 
made haſte to flee, that he fell.and became lame ; and 
his name was || Mephiboſheth þ. || Merib- 
F This Hiſtory is inſerted as that which encourageth theſe Men 6a. 

to this wicked Murder, becauſe Sau!'s Family was now reduced to 1 Chron: 
a low ebb ; and if 1/bboſbeth was diſpatched, there would be none 8: 34: & 
lefr, bur a lame Chi!d, who was altogether unfit ro manage the 9: 49; 
Kingdom, eſpecially in ſo troubleſome a time as this was ; and 
therefore the Crown muit neceſſarily come to David by their at and 
deed ; for which they promiſed themſelves no ſmall recompence. 
£ The place of thar laſt and fatal Fight, 1 Sam: 29- 11. þ Called alſo 
Merib-baal, 1 Chrons 8: 34. See the Notes on chap 2: 8. 

5 And the fons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab 
and Baanah, went and came about the heat of the day 


to the houſe of Iſhboſheth, who lay on a bed at noon. 

z Either from diſcontent of Mind, as Ahab did, 1 King. 21. 4, or 

from ſloth and ſenſuality,as David ſeems to have done, chap. 11. 2. 

6 And they came thither into the midſt of the 
houſe &, as though they would have fetched wheat 1 ; 
and they {more him under the fifth rib ; and Rechab 
and Baanah his brother eſcaped ». 

k Or,into the horſe : for the midſt is not always taken exaQtly,and 
Mathemarically,burt for any part within,as Gen: 48; 16. Exod: 8: 22: 
Joſb: 3. 17. { Which was laid up in publick Granaries in the King's 
Houſe,and was fetched thence by theC3ptains and Commanders of 
the Ariny for the Pay of their Soidiers,who,in thoſe ancient Times 
were not payed in Money,but in Corn,as is well known.Upon this 


| Pretence they were admitted into the Houſe, and ſo went from 


Room to Room,ro the place where the King lay. » Which was not 
difhcult to do,when the king was left alone;cither becauſe he deſired 
to cqmpole himiclf to reſt or ſleep : or, becauſe his Guards, if he 
had any, were very ſmall, and negligent,now at leaſt,in his declin- 
ing and forlorn Condition. 
7 For when they came into the houſe, he lay on his 


bed in his bed-chamber : and they ſmote him and ſlew 


, him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat 


them away through the plain » all night. 
z i: e In the way from Mahanaim to Hebron; which for the moſt 
part was a plain Country. 


8 And they brought the head of Tſhboſheth unto 
David to Hebron,and faid to the king, Behold,the head 
of Iihboſheth the ſon of Saul,thine enemy, which ſought 
thy life 0 ; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the 
king this day of Saul and of his ſeed p. - 

o z.e. To deſtroy it.or take it away ; as this Phraſe is uſed,1 Sam: 
20: 1: and 23: 15. and elſewhere. p They thought their Aion 
not only blameleſs,but Meritorious ; becauſe they had but executed 
Juitice upon Sau!'s Houſe, and David's Enemies, and made way for 
David's obtaining of his Rights. It may ſeem ſtrange, they were 
not diſcouraged by David's puniſhing of the Amalekite for killing 
Saul, 2 Sam. 1. and by his Sharp Reproof of Joab for Murdering 
Abn:r ;, but they thought the firſt Caſe much differing from theirs, 


| becauſe Sauf was anointed King by God : whereas Iſbbofheth was 


not, but was a' meer Uſurper : and for the latter,they thought that 
David's ſharp words proceeded rather from Art and Policy, than 
from any real diſlike of the thing; which they judged, becauſe Da- 
vid contented himſelf with words, and Feab did not only go uns 
puniſhed, bur continued in his former Place and Power. 

9 4 And David anſwered Rechab, and Baanah his - 
brother, the ſons of Rimmon the Bzerothire, and laid 
unto them, 4s the LORD livech, who hath redeemed 
my ſoul our of all adverſity 4. | | 

q Who hath hitherto delivered, and will deliver me from all 
mine enemies. So that I needed not your wicked help in this 
way. 

10 When * one told me, ſaying, Behold Saul is * Chap: 
dead, ( Þ thinking co have brought good ridings ) I 14, 15: 
cook hold of him,and flew him in Ziklak,||who thoughe T wes 
that I would have given him a reward tor his tidings. {,,.; - 

ir How much more when wicked men have flain , 5:;»ge. 
a righteous perſon 7 in his own houſe, upon his bed? &. 
Shall L nor therefore now require his blood of your |95,95< 
hand, and take you away from the earth ? —— 

7 For fo he was comparatively, and in reſpett of theſe Men,ha» ,,.,. þim 
ving nor deſerved dearh ar their hands. for his ti= 
12 And David commanded his young men /, and gs: or, 
they ilew them,and cut oft cheir hands and their feet #, fo whom I 
and hanged hem up over the pool in Hebron « ; but 79792ve 


chey took the head of lihbotherh, and buried it in the AS 
* ſepulchre of Abner in Hebron. dings [oGr. 


J Thoſe of his Guard, wio utecd ro execute Juſtice upon Male- * Chap, 
faQors at the Kings Command 7 Which had been mott inttrumental 3; 32. 
in their Villany ; their hands ro cur of his Head, and their Feet 
to carry them away, and his Head with them. « As Monuments 
of their Villany, and of David's Abhorrency of ir. 

HA P. VY. 
The tribes come to Hebron to aneint David king over all ljrael : the years 

of his reign in Hebron and Feruſalem : his age, 1,---5, He taketh the 

frong hold of Zion from the Febuſites and dwelleth there, 6, —— $0. 

Hiram maketh a league with David, and ſendeth wood and work-men 

ro build an houſe, 11, 12, Ho taketh more wives, and eleven ſons are 

born to him at Jeruſakm, 13, 16. David direfed by God ſmiretn 

the Philiſitnes at Baal-Perazim, 17, + 21. And again at-the Mule 

berry-trees, 2225, 

Hen * came all the tribes of Iſrael - to David un- * xChron: 
to Hebron, and ſpake, ſaying, Behold, we are 1s 1. 


thy bone, and thy fleſh 5. 


s To wit, by their Ambaſſadors, 1Þboſheh and 4bner being now 
3 B dead ;, 


II. 


Cha V. 


$S4 MD E LI. 


dead ; and that without David's concurrance. 67. e,Thy Brethren, | Conditional Offers, ſach as this was. # 7. e. Whence it became a 


or Kin{men, of the ſame Nation and Parent:ge,:though not of the | 
ſame Tribe; and therefore, as God's Law,Deur. 17.15. permits Us, 
ſo our own re/ation and affe&icn inclines us to chuſe thee for our | 
King ; and we doubt not thou wilt receive us for thy Subjects 
> and People, and Pardon our Offences againſt thee. 
2 Alſo in time paſt, when Saul was king over us, 
*1 Sam. * thou wa#t he that leddetit out,and broughteſtin Hrael c: 
13.5 and the LORD faid ro thee 4, * Thou (halt feed my 
-8-71, People Iſrael e,and thou ſhalr be a captain over Iſrael. 
EW £ Thou waſt our chief Commander in our Expcditions againſt 
the Philiſtines,and therefore art moſt fit to be King over us. d To 
wit, by Ssmzel,1 Sam. 16: 11,12, 13. for though the words vary, yet 
the ſence is the ſame. e # e. Rule them, and take care of them, 
as a Shepherd doth of his Sheep, Pſal. 78. 70, 71. This Exprefli- 
on he uſeth to admonish David, that he was not made a King to ad- 
vance his own Glory and Intereſt, but for the good and benefit of 
his People ; and that he o-ght to Rule rhem with all rendernels, 
and to watch over them with all diligence. 
So all the elders of ifrael came to the king to 


Hebron, and king David made a leggue with them 
fin Hebron befo:e the LORD g : and they anointed 


David b king over Iſrael. h 

f Whereby David obliged himſelf to rule them according to 
God's Laws ; and the People promiſed Fideiity and Obcdience to 
him g Either. 1. Before the Ark, which might be here,though thar 
be nor mentioned in this place Or,2.Before the Prieſt ciothcd with 
the Ephod ; whcreby he was in a manner pur into God's Prelence. 
Or rather, 3. In the congregation of rhe mighty, or Magiſtrates, where 
God uſed to be preſent, Pſal. 82. '. in the Publick afſembly now 
met together in God's name and fear.and as in his Preſence to call 
upon him, to appeal ro him as the Witneſs end Judge of their 
Tranſa&ions. Compare Juag: 11: u. 1 Sam: 23, +18. + Either 
by a prophet or the Prieſt, to whom this Office belonged. See 
2 Sam; 2: 4. : : 

4 { David was thirty years old when he began to 
reign, und he reigned forty years z. 

5 And ſome odd Months, as it follows. 

5 In Hebron he reigned over Judah * ſeven years 
and fix moneths : and in Jeruſalem he reigned thirty 
and three years over all Iſrael and Judah. 

6 4 And the king and his men went & to Jeruſalen; 
-— JIunto the Jebuſites m, the inhabitants of the land, 
[ or, ex- Which ſpake unto David, ſaying, || Except thou take 
cept one. away the blind and the lame, thou ihait not come in 


hither =: [|thinking, David cannot come in hither o. 

" &+& Having the advantage of fo great a confluence of his People 
to make him King, he thought fit to begin his Reign with tome 
eminent A&jion,and to lead them forth in this Expedition. Where- 
3n doubtleſs he asked A-'vice from God, and the confent of the 
Elders now preſent. 1 As the place which God had deſigned for 
his Worſhip ; and in the center and heart of his Kingdom, and 
therefore fitteſt for his Koya! City- mm Who continued ro dwel} 
there in ſpight of the Berj.mites,to whoſe lot it fell. Sce Joſh. 15: 
63 Tudg: 1:21: and 19:10, 1. »# Or, ther ſhals not come in hither, but 
the blind and the lame ſball remove or hinder thee. By the blind and 
the lame they underſtand, either, 1. Their own Pcople ; and to 
they imply.that the Place was fo Impregnable,that a few blind and 
lame Men were able to defend it againſt all David's Affaults. And 
theſe may be called. and were the hated of David's ſorl, verſe 8. 
Not becauſe they were Biind and Lame, but becauſe they were 
Febaſites, a People hated and accurſed by Ged : and the J-buſites of 
this place were more hateful to him, than the reit of that Nation; 
partly, becauſe they poſlefſed this Place, which David knew was 
deſigned for the one and only place of God's foilemn Worſhip; and 
partiy,becau'e they did fo wickedly and infolently defie the Armies 
of Jſrael, and coniequently, the 7-od of I;rael. Or 2. Their gods 
or images ; which, after the manner of the H: athens,they worthip- 
ped as their tutclary gods, and placed in their Gates or Waljs. 
Theſe they call b/.-d and lame ſarcaſtically, and with reſpe& to 
David's Opinion ; as if they ſaid, Theſe gods of ours, whom you 
Ijraelites Reproach, as Blind and I ame,. Pal: 115. 5, 6: and to un- 
able to dire& and prote& us,they will defend us againſt you 3 and 
you will. find, they are neither Blind nor lame, but have Eyes to 
watch for us, and Hands to fight againſt you ; and you mutt Con- 
quer them before you can take our City. And thele may well be 
called, the hated of David's ſoul. Bur I preferr the former ſence, 
as being moſt eaſte, and natural, and proper ; whereas, the latter 
is Meraphorica), and ſeems doubrful and forced. o Concluding 
their Fort to be Impregnable. 

7 Nevertheleſs, Lavid took the ſtrong hold of Zion o: 

+ Now cal- the ſame 3s þ the city of David. 

led. o Either, 1. A very ſtrong Fort which they had builr upon 
| Mount $07 ; which being taken, the Ciry quick'y yielded. Or, 

2- The City of Ze, which was very ſtrongly Foitiicd. 

8 And David {aid on thu day, Wholoever getteth 
up to the gutter p,and {mitteth theJebuſites,8& che lame, 

*iChron and the blind q. 75s! are hated of David's foul 7,* be ſhall 


© Cha. 2.11. 


T1. 9 be chief and captain 5 : || wherefore they ſaid, The blind 
vor, wag and the lame ſhall not come into the houſe 7. 

hai ſaid p # e. Wholoever ſcaleth the Forr, or getteth up to the top of it, 
even t "Ag where the Gutter was 9g Oc even, Or eſpecially ( for the Hebrew 
Ebrd ond Particle Yau, ſignifies both ways ) the lame and the blmd: i. e. Thoſe 
the lame, of them who are 1crt to defend that Place ; who, as they pretend, 
be ſhall not ſhould be only the Lame and the Blind. Orhers underſtand it, of 
Levee inmro Their Idols, or images. Bur they could not properly be ſaid to 
che houſe. be ſmitten, i.e Killed ; as that Word is uſed here, and eli{ewhere. 


7 This belongs to the Jebuſite, and the Iame and the blind; and it is 
Explained in v 6. 5 Theſe words are fitly ſupplied out of 1 Chron: 
{, :: 6. where they are expreiled ; and they muſt needs be under- 
+ Ttood to make the feace compicar. 
ofa part of, the Sentence are ulual in Promiles and Oaths, and 


And tuch Ellipics or Dete&ts * 


Proverb,or a common ſaying, uſed by Dawid,and others,upon this 
occaſion : or otherwiſe, The blind ana the lame Jebuſites were ſet to 
keep the Houſe, 7. e. The Fort of Zion ; and to keep others from 
coming into it ; but now they are ſhut out of it, and none of 
them, to wit, either, 1. Of the Jebuſtes ; or,2. Of blind and lame 
Perſons, ſhall be admitted to come into it again: Which David 
mighr reſolve, and ordain, and keep up the memory of this great 
Exploit, and of the Inſolent Carriage of the Jebuſttes. and their un- 
happy Succeſs. Or, the blind and the lame ſhat nor come into my houſe : 
to wit, Into the King's Palace. And although this might be a ge- 
neral Rule and Decree of David's, yer he might diſpenſe with it 
in ſome ſpecial caſes, as in that of Mephibofheth. Bur it is nor 
neceffary, that this ſhould be a Proverb; for the Words may 
be thus rendred as it is in the Margent of our Bible,becauſe they had 
aid, even the blind and the lame, he (i. e. David ) ſhall not come into the 
houſe : or, becauſe they (1 e. the Jebuſites) had ſaid, the blind and the 
lame ſhall hinder him , ( which words are eaſily. ſupplied out of 
v.6. where having ſpoken of this more largely, it was ſufficient 
here to mention the moſt emphatical Words, as is uſual in ſuch 
caſes; ) He ſhall not come into the houſe,or hither ; as they ſay, wv. 6. ie. 
Into the Forr : for the Word houſe is uſed very largely and gener- 
ally in the Hebrew Language, for any place ; as Juag: 16: 21. 

9 S0 David dwelt in the fort, and called it, The 
city of Dav:d : and David built round about from 
Mil'o «, and inward. 

u Which ſeems ro have been ſome large and well fortified Buil- 
ding, Juag 9: 6: 2 Chron: 3:5. adjoyning, or near to the wall of the 
City of Zion. 

10 4 And David f went on, and grew great x, and 
the LORD God of hoſts was with him, 

x In Reputation and Power. 

11 Ard * Hiram king of Tyre ſent meſſengers to 
David, and cedar-tiees y, and carpenters, and f ma- 
{ons z, and they built. David an houſe. 

y For Lebanon, which was famous for its Cedars, was, a great 


part of it in his Dominion. z For. the Tyrians were excellent 
Artiſts and Workmen 3 as both Sacred and Profane Writers 
agree, 

12 And David perceived a, that the LOR D had 
eſtabliſhed him king over Hrael, and that he had ex- 
alted his kingdom for his people Ifraels ſake. 

a By refleQing upon the Promites which Ged had made him 
and the conſtant courte of God's Providence favouring him. 

13 © Ard * David took him moe concubines and 
wives b out of Jeruſalem, after he was come frem He- 
bron, and theie were yet ſons ard daughters born to 
David. : 

b This may well be reckon'd among Pavid's Miſcarriages, the 
multiplication of Wives being expriefly forbidden to the King, 
Deut; 17: 17. The ule of it icems to have been his pollicy, that 
hereby he might enlarge his Family, and ſtrengthen his Intereſt by 
Alliances with ſo meny- conſiderable tamilies. And the number 
of Wives being not limited, Deut; 19. he might conceive this was 
no Tranſgrefſion of that Law. 


14 And * theſe be the names of thoſe that were born 
unto him in Jeruſalem : || Shammua, and Shobab, and 
Nathan, and Solomon. 

15 Ibhar alſo, and || Eliſhua, and Nepheg, and 
Japbiah : _ 

16 Ard Eliiſhama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet. 

17 © * But when the Philiſtnes heard that they had 
arointed Lavid king over Iſrael c, all the Philiſtines 
came up to ſeek Dovid 4, and David heard of it, and 
went down to the hold e. , 

c Whilft the Civil War laſted between the Houſes of Saul and 
David, they wiſely forbore all Hoſtilities, and left them to tear 
out one anothers Bowels, that afterwards they might make a more 
caſjie Conqueſt of borh. But that being ended, and all united un- 
der Dewi, they beſtir themſelves. a To find him out, and fight 
againſt h\m. and cut him off now in the Infancy of his Kingdom. 
Whereby they give David a juſt occaſion to fight againſt them for 
his own neceffary Defence,and acquit him from any note of Ingra- 
titude, in oppoſing them who had formerly exercited kindneſs and 
hoſpitality to him. Though indeed Davia's Obligations were in a 
manner Wholly to Achiſh, who ſeems to be dead at this time, there 
being no mention of him. e To ſome fortified place to wkich his 
People might conventently reſort from all places, and where he 
might intrench his Army, and which lay towards the Phil:ſtines. 


18 The Philiſtines alſo came and ſpread themſelves 
in the valley of Rephaim f. 

f Or, of the Giants : which lay Weſtward from Jeruſalem, and 
ſo was the ready way to Jeruſalem, which it ſeems they deſigned 
to take. 


19. And David enquired of the LORD, ſaying,Shall 
I go up to the Philiſtines ? wilt thou deliver them into 
mine hand ? and the LORD ſaid unto David, Go up: 
for I will doubtleſs deliver thee Philiſtines into thine 
hand. 

20 And David came to * Baal-perazim g, and Da- 
vid ſmote them there, and faid, The LORD hath 
broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the 
breach of waters h. 
that place || Baal-perazim. 


g Whither the Philiſtines were come from the Valley of Rephaim, 
1 Chron. 14- 11. hþ As Floods or Rivers of Waters, which break 
the Banks, aud overflow a Land, and overtyra all that ſtands in 
their way, 


T Heb, 
Went going 
and grow. 
ing, 

YI Kings 
$..% 
1 


Chron! 
I4-1, 
T Hebs 
hewers of 
the ſfimeif 


the wal, 


F 1Chr, 
3- 9+ and 
14: Js 


*1 Chron, 
Tl 
|| Or, Shis 
mea. 

[| Or, Els 
ſhama, 


*;Chron, 
T1. 16, 
and 14.8. 


ow Iſa,28. 


Therefore he called the name of | 717 40 


the plaind 
breach 


21 7 And 


Chap. v. F Char 


Chron. 
14- I 2. 
| 07, tcok 


eocnn 0 ay” 


*\ Chron 
13: F, 6. 
| Or, on 
w/c the 
nme,evei 
the name 
of the 

LORD 6 
beſis was 
calltd upo 


FF chap. vi. 


Chron. 


7 
, 10, tcok 


ron Ay. 


II. 


21 C And there they left their images z, and David 
and his men * [| burnt them &. | 

; Which they ſeem to have brought into the Field to Fight for 
them, 25 the 1jraelites had formerly done the Ark. k As God had 
commanded, Deut. 7. 5. 

22 And the Philiſtines came up yet again /, and 
ſpread themſelves in the valley of Rephaim. 

k Doubtleſs with greater Force, as thoſe that faw their All lay 
ar ſtake. oY 
23 And when David enquired of the L O R D, he 
ſ:id, Thou ſhalt not go up > : but fetch a compals be- 
hind them, and come upon them over againſt the mul- 


, bery-trees ». 


*, Chron: 
13: F, 6. 
| Or, or! 
#/:1< the 
mme,even 
the name 
of the 


m To wit, dire&ly againſt them,as the following words explain 
it. » Where they lealt expe@ thee ; God's Purpoites and Pronules 
do not exclude Mens juſt endeavours, but require them. 

25 And let ic be when thou heareſt the ſound of a 
going 0 in the tops of the muibery-trees, that then thou 
thalt beſtir thy telf p: for then ſhall the LORD go our 


before thee, to {mire the hoſt of the Philiſtines. 

o A noiſe as it were of Perſons walking upon the tops of them, 
which I ſhall cauſe ; and by this ſign, both thou ſhalr be aſſured 
that I am coming to help thee ; and the Philifines ſhall be affright- 
<d and amuſed, and nor perceive the noiſe of thy Army,untilthou 
arr upon them. p Do thor: fall upon them. 

25 And David did fo, as the LORD bad comman- 
ded him, and ſmote the Philiſtines from Geba, until 
thou come to Gazer 9g. | 

q They followed their Vi&ory,and purſued them to their own 
Borders, in which Gazer was, as Joſephus relates. 

CHAP V4 
David fercheth the Ark with much People, and great joy out of the Houle 
of Abina«ab, 1,»—-— $5. Uzxa laying hold of the Ark is ſlain of 

God : David is grieved : Carries the Ark imo the Ho::ſe of Obed-Edom, 

whom God bl: ſeth for its ſake, 6, --—-— 11. Davvid bringeth the Ark 

into Zim with Sacrifices : Danceth before it : For which Michal diſpiſ- 
eth him, 12, -—-— 16. They place it in a Tabernacle : He offereth 

to God ; Bleſſith the Pevple : Giveth them Preſents, 19,+—— 19. 

Michal repr'ving David : He anſwereth her ; She is Childleſs ro her 

Death, 29 -==-23. 

Gain David gathered together all :he choſen mer 
of Trae! a, thirty thouſand, 


a The ſtouteſt,and valianteſt Men in his Army and Land;leſt the- 


Philiſlines ſhould atrempr to diſturb them in this work 

2 And * David aroſe, and went with all the people 
that were with him 6b, from Baale of Judah c, to bring 
up from thence the Ark of God 4, || whoſe name is cal- 
led by the name of the LORD of hoſts e, that dwelleth 
berween the cherubims. 

þ With the whoie body of the People : for theſe ſeem to be a 


LOAD of differing Party from the z3cooo now mentioned. See 1 Chron. I3: 


beſts was 
called upon 


i Oeb. 
maze to 
r.a?. 

* Fee 
1Sam:6 7. 
| Ur, the 
h:l} 

| Or, his 
broth. x. 

9 Gr. 


1,2. c Nu. How from it, when they went to it ; as is evident, 
both from 1 Chron. 13. 6. and becauſe the Ark was there,and to be 
ferched thence ? Anſw. Some afhrm, That the Hebrew Prepoſition 
Mem, ſometimes figiiſies 38, as Ger. 13. 1. But there is no need 
of that : for, 1 Chren. 13. 6. mentions their going to Baalah ; and 
this place mentions their going from .1t ;and the one of theſe doth 
manifeſtly ſuppoſe the orher : for they went thither, that they 
might return thence. So the ſence is plain, They went from Baal:h 
of judah, ro bring ( or rathcc ro carry ; for the Word ſignifies 
either ) up from thence the ark, Whereby it is ſuppoſed, that 
they firſt went thither, which 1s related, 1 Chron. 13: 6. More- 
over, this place 1s commonly called Kiriath jearim, 1 Sam. 7. 1. 
and 1 Chris. 13: 5- and formerly, Kiriath-baal, Joſh. 15- 6o. and 
Baalah, 7oſh 15. 9. and here Bazle of Judah, fo called, becauſe it 
was in the Tribe of Ju1ak, as is evident from Jeſh 15. 1, &c. 
da Unto 7eriſaltem, «hich, in many reſpect;, was fitter for it than 
Baalai; becauſe this was a more publick place, where it would be 
more obierved and regardcd ; and in the Center of the Kingdom, 
to which racy might more eaftiy come from all Parts ; and the 
Royai City, where ir might be always at hand for Dav.d to enquire 
at, as occaſion requied ; and the place which God had allorred 
for it. e Thus,whoje, belongs not to the 4k, but to God: for what 
follows 1s not the name-ot the Ark, bur of God. The place may 
well be, and 1s by fome rendred thus, Upen ( or 4, or Beſide, or 
Before, ) which ( Ark ) the name, even the name of the Lord of hoſts, 
that awelleth between the Cherubims is called upon : i. e. By, or before 
which,they were to preſent their Prayers ro God for Counſel and 
Succour upon all occalions. And this is mentioned here as the 
reaſon why David put himfielf and his People to fo great trouble 
and charge, becaule it was to fetch vp the choiceſt Trealure which 
they had, and ſo the benefit wouid abundantly recompenle the 
INCONVENIENCE. 

3 And they Þ ſet the ark of God * upon a new cart f, 
and brought it out of the houſe of Abinadab that was 
in |] Gibeahg : and Uzzah and || Ahio the fons of Abi- 
nadab h, drave the new cart. | 

f Being tanghr, azd encouraged to do fo,by the Example of the 
Poil:imes, who did {0 withour any roken of God's diſpleature upon 
them for lo doing. But they did not tufficicntly conſider, that 
God might wink at the Poliftnes, becauſe they were ignorant of 
God's Laws ; and yer be angry with them for the fame thing,be- 
cauſe they knew, or might, and thould have known the Law of 
God, whica commanded the Prictts to bear it upon their Shoulders, 
Numb. 4. 14, 15. and 7. 9, But their preſent tranſports of Joy at 


the happy change of their Affairs, and their greedy deſire of hav- | 


ing the Ark removed, made them haſty and inconiiderate. g Or, 
9 the h.ll, as 1 Sam. 7. 1. h For 46 nadab himlieif ſeems now to 

FM» 24234% J 4 4 . p _ > . . 
have been dead ; or at leaſt, derained ar home through infirmity 
or indiipeniavic occations. 


4 And they brought it out of * the houſe of Abina- 


S4HUER 


| 
| 
[ 


! 


| Chap. 
dab whlch as at Gibeah, accompanying the Ark of 
God, and Ahio went before the ark 5. 

; To [lead the Oxen that drew it- 

5 And David and all the liouſe of Iſrael played be- 
fore the LORD, on all manner of I=#-uments made of 
fir-wood, even on harps, and on pſalteries, and on 
timbrels, and on corners, and on cymballs, 


6 © And * when they came to Nachons & threſh- *: Chron. i 
ing floor, Uzz3h * put forth his hand to the ark of God, ; 


and took ho!d of ir, for the oxen || thook it 1. 


& Otherwiſe called Caidm, 1 Chron. 13. 9. 1 For they ſtambled, | Or pum. þ 
1 Chron. 13. 9. : - - bled, or, \\f 
7 And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt ;z-ew ir 


VI. 


3: 9. 
See 


Num:4:15 | 


Uzzah, and God {mote him m there for his || error x, down ; 


and there he died o by the ark of God. 2 


Kings 9. 


m With ſome deadly Diſeaſe or Stroke, as it follows; = Either, ? Oc, raſh= 


1. For his touching the Ark, when he was no Levite, as Joſephus 
reports ; nor indeed was Kiriath-jearim a. Levitical City : or, that 
being bur a Levite, he touched the bare Ark,which only the Prieſts 
might do, Numb. 5: 15.and 18.3. And though the Ark was ordi- 
narily covered, yet it 1s not impoſſible bur the covering might be 
either looſe,and ſo blown aſide by the Wind ; or worn out, and ſo 
he might touch the Ark it ſelf. Or, 2. Becauſe he put the Ark into 
a Carr, and thereby expoſed it to the danger of falling, which 
would have been a great diſcouragement ro the ſraelitzs, and a 
reproach to the Ark. And though 40 alſo might have an hand 
in puting it into the Cart, yet Uzzah only is ſmitten ; either, be- 
cauſe he was the Elder Brother, and the Perſon to whole care the 
Ark was more eſpecially committed ; or, becauſe he was the chief 
Author of this Counſel of putting it into a Cart ; or, becauſe he 
added a new fault of touching the Ark, and that our of diftruſt of 
God's care over it. 0 This may ſeem very ſevere,contidering that 
his Intention was Pious, and his Tranſgrefſion not great, Bur, be- 
ſides that, Men are very improper Judges of the Actions of God ; 
and that God's Judgments are always juſt, though tometimes-ob- 
{cure: There are many things to be ſaid of this,and ſuch like caſes. 

1- Thar it is fit and reaſonable, that God ſhould make ſome Perſons 
Examples of his juſt and high Diſpleaſure againſt Sins, ſeemingly 
ſmall ; partly, for the demonſtration of his own exaQ and impartial 
Holineis ; partly, for the eſtabliſhment of Diſcipline, (for which 
very reaſon, even earthly Princes have oft-times Inflifted great 
Puniſhments for ſmall Offences ; )) and for the greater Terror and 
Caution of Mankind, who are very prone to have flight thoughts 
of Sin, and to give way to ſmall Sins, and thereby to be led on 
to greater ; all which is, or may be prevented by fuch inſtances 
of Severity : and conſequently, there 15 more of God's Mercy, 
than of his Juſtice, in ſuch A@ions, becauſe the Juſtice is confined 
ro one particular Perſon, but the Mercy and Benefit of it publick 
and common to Mankind of that, and all future Ages. 2. That 
God is juſtly moſt ſevere in thoſe things which immediatly cons 

cern his Worſhip and Service; and againſt thoſe perſons who have 

the neareſt Relation to him, and rhe greateſt opportunities of 
Knowing, aad the higheſt obligations ot careful Prattiſing thoſe 
Duties which they negie& : See L:wvir; 10: g,, 3- That this Punith- 

ment poſlibly was nor 16 great as it maſggfeem to be ; for as. for 

his Body, the Diſeaſe, though dangerous, might not be exceedirffy- 

ly paintul ; and for his Soul, the 1troke probably was.not-ſo fud- 

den, as not to give him ſpace of Repeatance. 

8 And David was difplealed p, becauſe the LORD 
had + made a breach upon Uzzah : And he called the 
name of the place || Perez Uzzah to this day. 

p Or, grieved, both for the fin, which he acknowledgeth,1 Chron: 
15 2, 13. and for God's heavy Judgment ; whereby their hopes 
were dathed, and their joys inrerrupted,and a good Subjett ſtruck 
dead for the circumſtanrial error ot a P1ous Mind,which he might 
poſſi>!y think harſh and very ſevere, and therefore be diſpleated 
or offended at this ſharp Providence. 

9 And David was afraid of the LORD q that day, 
and 1faid, How ſhall the ark of the LORD come unco 
me 7: | : 

9 Either, that God was diſpleaſed with him for removing the 
Ark, and bringeth it to his City : or leſt-God ſhould proceed 
further in the way of his Judgments upon him and his People: or, 
leſt the Ark being brought to his Houſe, might be the occaſion of 
Inconveniences and great Calamities, for ſome Negle&s or Errors 
which they might eafily and frequently commit. +» How may LI 
preſume, or how ſhall I dare do it, when God hath ſhewed his 
diſpleaſure for my attempting it? I will therefore wait further 
upon God for his dire&tion in the caſe, and at preſent forbear. 
Burt why did not David conſult God preſently by the Urim, as he 
ulcd to do ? This therefore ſeems to have been his infirmiry and 
neglect. 

10 So David would not remove the ark of the 
LORD unto him into the city of David : but Da- 
vid carricd it alide into the houſe of Obed-Edom / the 
* Gitrite f, & | 

/ Which doubtleſs was done by the conſent and defire of rhe 
owner of it, who tor the enjoyment of to great a Priviledge, was 
wiliing to expoſe himle}F to lome hazard ; and witely contidered, 
that the Jate Judgment was not to be imputed to the Ark, bur ro 
Uzz44's Careicinets in managing it. #5 He was certainly a Levite, 
1: Chron, 15. 18, 21, 24. and 16, 5. and 26. 4. and here called a 
G:ttire, either, Firſt, From G2:h of the Philif#ines, where he or his 
Farther might be born or have Sojourned, which might be upon 
divers oCccaitons : Or, Sccondly, From Gath-rimmon, which was a 
Lev:tical City, Joſe 21. 24, 25. 

11 And the ark of the LOR D continued in the . 
houſe of Obed-Edom the Gittite three moneths : 
and the LORD bleſſed Gbed-Edom, and all his 
houſhold . h, © 
# With happy Succeſs in all their affairs and Actions. 

2B2 i2 T And 


+ Heb. 

had broken. 
|| That is, 
the breach 
of Uzzah. 


* Joſh:21: - 


24 1Chr: 


13:13. 


i 
11 


A 


Chap. VI. I. 
12 © And it was told king David, ſaying, The 
L OR D hath bleſſed the houſe of Obed-Edom, and 
W. all that pertaineth unto him, becauſe of the Ark of God. 
| +, Chron. * So David went and brought up the ark of God x 
| 154255 from the houſe of Obed-Edom y, into the city of Da- 
| vid, with gladnels. | 

x Underſtanding that the Ark was entertained without danger 
or inconvenience, and with great advantage, he apprehended his 
former miſtake, and brought ir to himſelf. y which is thought 
to have been either in Jerujalem, or very near it. 

13 And it was ſo, that when they that bare the a1k 
of the LORD, had gone fix paces z, he facriticed 
I *See r1Chre * oxen and fatlings 4. 

35+. 26. z With ſefety and comfort. # Upon an Altar ſuddenly crefed, 
| as was uſual in ſuch caſes. See Exod: 20: 24. This he did,cither, 
þ roappeaſe God for the former miſcarriage: or, to praiſe him for his 
LS preient Mercy, that he had not made another breach upon them: 
or, to implore his favour and gracious prelence with them in this 

reat Aﬀeair. 

: 14 And David danced before the LORD 6 with all 
his might, and David »«: girded with a linen ephod c. 

b Toexpreſs his inward joy and thankfulneſs to God by his out- 
ward carriage, according to the manner of thoſe Times. See 
Exed. 15: 20. Judg: 11: 34. and 21. 21. 1 Sam. 18» 6. Pſal. 149. 3. 
and 150: 4. © The uſual Habir of the Prieſts and Levites, in their 
Sacred minifſtrations, yet ſometimes worn by others, as it was by 
the young Child Samuel, 1 Sam. 2. 18. before he was come to thoſe 
years in which the Levites were allowed to Miniſter ; and fo hereby 
David, who laid by his Royal Robes, and put on this Robe to ſty- 
nifie and declare, that although he was King of J/rael, yer he wil- 
ingly owned himſclf to be the Lord's Miniiter and Servant. 

15 So David and all the houſe of Ifrae] brought up 
the ark of the LORD with ſhouting, and with the 
ſound of the trumpet. 

16 And as the ark of the LORD came into tke city 
of David, Michal Sauls daughter looked through a 
window, and ſaw king David leaping and dancing be- 
fore the LORD,and the diſpiſed him in her hearc 4. 

d As one of a baſe and mean fpirit,that knew not how to carry 
himſelf with that Majeſty which became his place, but behaved 
himſelf like one of the Fools or vain Perſons in 1/-2el. 

17 T And *® they brought in the ark of the LORD. 
and ſet it in his place, in the midſt of the tabernacle 
that David had + pitched for it e: and David offerec 
burnt-offerings,and peace-offerings before the LORD. 

e For Moſes his Tabernacle was ſtill at Gibeon, 1 Chron: 16. 39. 
and 21+ 29+ and 2 Chron: 1: 3. which David left there, becauſe hc 
deſigned to build a Temple at Jeruſalem with all ſpecd, though hc 
was countermanded therein by God himſelf. 

18 And afloon as David had made an end of offering 
*:Chron. burnt-offerings, and peace offerings, * he bleſſed the 
x6. 22 peoplefin the name of the LORD of hoſts. 

Fi. e. He heartily and ſolemnly prayed to God for his Bleſſing 
upon them : which he did both as Prophet, and as their King, 
to whom by office ir belongs, by all means, to ſeek his Peoples 
welfare. 

19 And he dealt among all the people, even among 
the whole multitude of Iſrael, as well to the women as 
men, to. every one a Cake of bread, and a good piece 


of fleſh, and a tlagon of wine : ſo all the people departed 
every one to his houſe. 
20 © Then David returned to blefs his houſehold ; 
and Michal the Daughter of Saul came out to meet Da- 
vid, and ſaid, How glorious was the king of Ifrael to 
day, who uncovered himſelf g to day in the eyes of the 
handmaids of his ſervants þ, as one of the vain fellows 
;|| ſhamefully uncovereth himſelf : 
g Either, Firſt, By ſtripping himſelf of his Royal Robes,that he 
might put on a Levitical Ephod : or, by diicovering ſome part of 
his Thighs or Legs, as might poſlibly happen whillt he danced with 
all his might, as 1s ſaid above, ver. ig. coniidering that the men 
did then wear looſe Garments. Or, ſhe ſpeaks thus, not that he 
did fo, but only by way of aggravation of his fault, and to vilifie 
him the more, as is uſual with Perſons in ſuch caſes. þ. Who either 
bare a part in the Solemnity, as Women ſcmctimes did, Exod. 15.20 


or, at leaſt were ſpe&ators of it, and ot David's Carriage in it. 
; As idle and light Perſons uſe to do. 


21 And David {aid unco Michal, 1: was before the 
LORD &, which choſe me before thy father, and be- 


*:.Chron. 
1G I. 

f Heb. 
firetched. 


| Or, 
openly. ? 


tore the LORD. 


TT MM DE £. 


fore all his houſe /, to appoint me ruler over the peo- 
ple of the LORD, over l1frael : therfore will I play be- 


& In his Preſence and ſervice, which though contemptible to 

r thee, is, and ever ſha!l be honourable in mine eyes. 1 Which took 
; away the honour from him and his, and transferred it upon me, 
whereby he hath obliged me to Love and Serve him with all my 


child p until the day of her death 9. 
0 Not becauſe of David's words to her, which have rothing in 
them to this purpoſe ; but becauſe of her proud, and petulanr,and 
ungodly ſpeech and carriage to David, which God juſtly puniſhed 
with fcerility. p To wit, by David, and after this time, which 
theſe words evidently reſpe&. Which was true,although thoſe five 
Children aſcribed to Michal, 2 Sam. 21; 8. were hers by Birth, and 
not by Adoption only. 9 2. e. Never : for if ſhe ever had any, it 
muſt be before her death. Compare 1 Sam; 15435: Matth: 1: 25. 
CHAT V 
David leing at veſt, deſires to build God an Houſe : Which Nathan at 
firſt approves of : Afterwards in obedience to the Word of God forbiddeth 
him, 1, - 11.4 He promiſeth him benefits and Bleſſings in his Seed, 
Solomon and the Meſſiah who ſhould build the houſe of God, 12=—=17, 
David's Prayer and thankſgiving, 18,-=-29, 

N D it came to paſs, * when the king ſat in his 
A houſe a, and the LORD head given him reſt 


round about from all his enemies 6: 
a i. e. Was ſetled and Warm in the Houſe which Hiram's Men 
built for him, chap: 5; 11. then he refle&ed upon the unhandfome 
and unſertled ſtate of the Ark. 6 Philiſtines, Moabites, and others, 
ſo that they durſt nor invade his Land, as they had formerly done. 
For though you read of David's Wars with them, chap: 8. yet in 
them David was the Aggreflor, and entered their Lands. 
2 That the king ſaid unto Nathan the prophet, See 
now, I dwell in an houſe of Cedar, but the ark of God 
dwelleth within curtains c. 
c 7, e. In a Tent or Tabernacle, v: 6 Compoſed of ſeveral Cur. 
tains, Exod. 26; 1,&C. ; 
3 And Nathan faid to the king, Go, do all that is 
in thine heart 4: for the LORD #s with thee. 
4 Purſue thy Intentions, and build an Houſe for the Ark. The 
deſign being Yious, and the thing not forbidden by God, Nathan 
haſtily approves it, before he had either ſeriouſly conſidered it in 
his own mired, or conſulted God about it, as both he and David 
certainly ought to have done 1n a matter of ſo great moment. And 
therefore Nathan meets with this rebuke, that he is forced to ac- 
knowledge his error, and recant it. For the Holy Prophets did 
not ſpeak all things by Propherical Inſpiration, bur ſome things by 
an humane $pirit,and Prudent conjefture; and therefore they were 
ignorant and miſtaken in ſome matters, as 1 Sam; 16. 6. 2 Kings 
4- 27. 

4 4 Andit came to paſs that night e, that the word 
of the LORD came unto Nathan f, ſaying, 
e Becauſe David's miſtake was Pious, and from an honeſt Mind, 
God would not ſuffer him to ly long in his miſtake,nor to diſquiet 
his Mind, or run himlelf into inconveniences, in order to the 
Work, before he gave a ſtop toit. f That the ſame Perſon who 
had confirmed David in his miſtake, might now reCifie ir. 


5 Goand tell | my ſervant David, "Thus faith the 415 5 
LORD, * Shalt thou build g me an houſe for me to mſrur, 


a Chron: 
17: 


dwell 1n ? to David 
Z i. e. Thou ſhalt not. Or, wiltf thou b+ild, &c ? Doſt thou ,** 

purpole it ? wc 

6 Whereas T have nct dwelt in any houſe, * ſince \.* 

. . 3 $ and?8.; 

the time that I brought up the children of Iſrael out *' king 


of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent, 8. 16. 
and 1n a tabernacle þ. 

þ T heſe two ſeem thus ro be diſtinguiſhed, the one may note 
the Curtains and Hangings within, the other the Frame of Boards, 
and: Coverings upon It. 

7 In all che places wherein I have walked with all the 
children of Iirael, ſpake 1 a word 5 with || any of the 
tribes & of Uirael, whom I commanded to feed my peo- 
ple Iſrael, ſaying, Why buiid ye not me an houle of 
cedar * 

; Did Tever give any Command about it, without which neither 
they did; nor thou ſhouldſt artempt it? &.In 1 Chren. 17: 6. it is 
of the Judges, and to them, not to the tribes, the following words 
agree, whcm I commanded to feed my People Iſrael. Either therefore 
the Tribes are here put Synecdochically for the Rulers of the Tribes, 
as the word Church is ſometimes uſed for the Governours of it: or, 
the word here rendred Tribes, may be rendred Scepters, as it is uſed 
Ges. 49: 10. and Scepters put for Scepter-bearers or Rulers, as is 
very frequent. 

S Now therefore, ſo ſhalt thou ſay unto my ſervant 
Pavid /: Thus faith the LORD of hcſts, * I took thee +, $,n. 
from the theep-cote, | from following the ſheep, to be 16. 1 
ruler over my people, over Iſrael . Pf4.78:71 

[ Leſt David ſhould be too much diſcouraged, or judge bimſelf T Heb: 
neg!ctted and forſaken of God, as one thought unworthy of ſo from aftt 
great an honour, God here gives him the honourable title of his 
Servant, thereby ſignifying that he accepted of his Service, and 
of his good Intentions, which alſo was expreſſed at this time.as it 
may ſeem ficm 1 Kings 8: 18: though nor in this place, 91 ad- 
vanced thee, and I do nor repent of it. 

9 Ard 1 was with thee whitherſoever thou wenteſt, 
and have cut off all the enemies + out of thy ſight, and + Heb. 
have made thee a great name, like unto the name of f9. 


[| »Chror: 
17.6. an) 
of the 
Tuages: 


Mighr. 


. 


of my ſer- 
7. 
cn — 


thee by my lukewarmneſs in God's ſervice. 


23 Therefore o Michal 


22 AndI will yet be more vile than thus, and will 
| Or,f the be baſe in my own ſight: ard || of the maidſervants 
hanamaids which thou haſt ſpoken of, of them ſhall I be had in 


I 2» I will always be ready to hrmble and abaſe my ſelf before 
Ks God. » I ſhall 1ather chute to ger Honour from the meaneſt of 
my People, 16 ſerving and praifing Ged, than to gain eſteem from 


the great mer that are in the earth, tg 
10 ( Moreover, I will appoint a place » for my peo- 

ple Ifrael o, and will plant them, that they may dwell 

in a place of their own p, and move no more : neither 

ſhall the children of wickedxets afflit them any more, 

as before-time 9. 


2 i.e. I will make rocm for them, whereas hitherto they have 
been much conitrained and diſtrefiec by their Enemies. Or, 1will 
efablijh (»tor io that Verb 1cmctimes tignifics ) a place for them, 
"N f, 


woo » [OE D— 


4 ad — — » w 


the daughter of Saul had no 


am. 


—— 


{ Chap. VI, | (fir. 


[4 


 Ww - i | "I 


—” WW kr OILY I Tr nn Ae 2x WTF 


[Or, 7 
pil cavl: e 
5 Gro | 


"1 King: 


& 29, 


* 1 Ring 
F.F. an 
6. 12. 

1Chron 
22, 19, 


| F eter. vil. 


- Sa 
> 


[ Or, 7 
pil cavle. 
$ GI 


*1 Kings 


& 29, 


* 1 Rings 
F. 5. and 
. 12, 
Chron, 
22, 19, 


i, e. I will eftabliſh them in their Place or Land, Some Learned | 
Men render the Verſe thus and the Hebrew words will bear it :| 
And I have appointed ( or, afizned, or, gtven ) 8 place for my people Iſrael 
( to wr, the Land of Canann ) and have planted them in it, that they 
mny dwell in ther own place, and ve no more driven to and fro : or ra- 
ther, and they ſhall awe! in th:ir own place, &Cc. i, e. As I did long 
ago appoint it to them, and afterwards planted them, or put them 
mro actual policſſion, to now they thall continue or Uuwellin it in 
ſpizht ofall their Enemies. o Among the favours which God had 
voichafed, and would vouchafe to David, he reckons his Bleſſings 
to the People of Ijracl, becauſe they were great Bleflings to Davis ; 
partly, becauſe the ſtrength and happineſs of a King conſiſts in 
gicar part in the multitude and happineſs of his People ; ani 
partly, becauſe David was a Man of a pious and publick Spirit, 
and therefore no Jets atte&ed with 1rae!'s feliciry than with his 
own. Þ 7.e. In their own Land, not in ſtrange Lands, nor mixed 
with other People. 9q Either. Firſt, As in the Land cf Egypt, and 
fo he goes downward to the Ju.'ges. Or, Secondly, As in Saul's 
Time ; and fo he aſcends to the Judges. 

1x And as fince the time that I commanded judges 
to be over my people l[frael r, and || have cauſed thee to 
reft from all thine enemies /. ) Alſo the LORD celieth 
thee, That he will make thee an houſe x. 

» Nor as they did under the Judges, neither fo oft, nor ſo long: 
But all this 1s to be underſtood with a condition, except they 
ſhould notoriouſly foriake God, or rebel againſt him ; which being 
fo oft declared by God in other places, ir was needleſs tro mention 
it here® Or, this may relate to the latter Ages of the Wor!id, when 
the People of Iſrael ſhall be converted to Chriſt, and recalled out 
of Captivity, and planted in their own place ; when they ſhall 
enjoy a far greater degree of Tranquillity than ever they did 
before. And this agrees beſt with the Future Tenſe, I wih 
appoint and will plant them, &c. otherwile the work was 
already done God had already appointed this Land for them, and 
aftually planted them in it {[ 7. e. And until this time in which 
I have given thee reſt. But theſe words, though according to our 
Tranſlation they be incloſed in the ſame Parentheſis with the fore- 
going Clauſes, may ſeem to be better put without it, and to be taken 
by themlelves. For the foregoing words in this Verſe, and inv. 10. 
do all concern the People of 1ſrae! ; but thele words ſeem to con- 
cern David alone, to whom the Speech returns after a ſhort digreſ- 
fion concerning the People of 1/rae/. And they may be rendred 
either thus, And I have cauſed thee to reff, &c. or, And I will cauſe 
thee ro reſt, &c to wit, more fully and perfeQly than yer thou doſt. 
t For thy good Intentions to make him an Houſe, he w: make thee 
an Houſe, to wit, a ſure Heuje, as is expreſſed, 1 Kings 11. 38. #. e 
he will encreaſc ar.d uphold thy Poſterity, and continue thy King- 
dom in thy i amiiy. 

i2 4 And * when thy days be fulfilled s, and thou 
ſhalt ſleep with thy fathers, I will ſer up thy ſeed after 
thee x, which ſhall proceed: out of thy bowels y, and 
I will eſtabliſh his kingdom. 

u When the time of thy life ſhall expire. This Phraſe implies, 
that his days ſhall be compleated and prolonged to the uſual courte 
and ſtint of Nature, and nor cut off in the midſt, by any violent 
or untimely death. x I will ſer up in thy ſtead and Throne, thy 
Poſteriry, firſt So/cmom, and then others tucceſhively, and ar laſt the 
Mcſſias. So the following words may be underſtood diverſiy, part 
of his Poſterity in general or indefinitely taken ; part of Solomon, 
and part of Chriſt only, according to the ditfering nature of rhe 
teveral paſſages. y Our of rhy inward parrs, or from thy Loins ; 
who thal] be begotten by thee. 

12 * He ſhall build an houſe z for my Name «, and 
I will ſftabliſh che chrone of his kingdom b for ever. 

z This is meant lirerally and immediately of Solomon, who alone 
did build the material Houte or Temple ; bur myitically and ulti- 
mately of Chritt, who is the Builder of God's Spiritual Houſe or 
Temple Heb. 3:3, 6: 1Pet:2: 5: ate tor my Service,and Worlhip 
and Glory. 6 This is not mcant of S»lomon, for his Kingdom was 
not f-» ever, And though the Phrate for ever is fomerimes uſed of 
the time of a Man's Life, yet ir cannot be fo underſtood here. 
becauſe the Mercy here promited tro David's Son is of another 
nature, and of tar longer continuance, than that which was giver 
to Saul. v. 15. who yet enjoyed the Kingdom as long as he lived, 
Bur it 1s to be unceritood of David's Poſterity in general, but with 
ſpecial reſpe& to Chriſt, in whoſe Perſon the Kingdom was to be 
lodged for ever, Iſa: g: 7: Dan: 2: 44: Luke I; 32: 33. 

14 * I will be his father, and he ſhall be my ſon c : 
* if he commit iniquity 4d, I will chaſten him with the 
rod of men .*., and with the ſtripes of the children of 
men : : 

c I will carry my ſelf towards him as becomes a Father,” with 
all affetion and tenderneſs, and I will owne him as my Son- Thi 
iS 1:rended both of Solomen, as a Type of Chriſt ; and of Chriit 
himſelf, as is evident from Heb: 1: 5. &d This agrees only to Sols- 
mon and ſome others of David's Poſterity 3 bur nor tro Chriſt, who 
never committed Iniquity, as Solomon did, who thercin was no 
Type of Chriſt, and therefore this branch is terminated in Solc- 
men ; whereas in thole things wherein Solomon was: a Type ot 
Chrit, the ſenſe paſlerh through Solomon unto Chrilt. Either, 
Firſt, With ſuch Rods as Men ule to corre& their Sons, or to 
bear other Men : which are here oppoicd to the Rods or Strokes 
which an angry God inflits. See Fob 23: 6: Pſal: 39: 11. Iſa; 47:3; 
Rom 9: 22: Heb 109 31: and 12: 299 Or, Secondly, With tuch 
Rods as are gentle and moderate, and ſuited ro Man's weakneis ; 
as a tolerable and retiitible rempration is called humane, or common to 
men, 1 Cor. 1o. 13. 

I5 Burt my mercy e ſhall not depart away from him, 
as 1 took ir from Saul f, whom I put away before 
thee. 


'e7, e, Or my kinaneſs, i. e. the Kingdom which I have mer- 
citully and kindly promiſed to thee and thine. f In regard of 
_ Foſterity, for the Kingdom was contiued to his Perſon during 
ute. 


I + 4 MM On © 


1s rightly ſaid to be before him. 


16 And thine houſe, and thy kingdom ſhall be 
eſtabliſhed for ever * before thee g: thy throne ſhall 
be eſtabliſhed for ever. 


'£ Thine Eyes in ſome ſort beholding it : for he lived to ſee 
his Wiſe and Godly Son Solomon aQtually placed in the Throne, 
with great reputation and general applauſe, 1 Kngs 1. 39, 40» 
which was 1n it {cif a good prefage of 'the continuance of the 
Kingdom 1n his Family ; and being conſidered, rogether with the 
:ntajhble certainty of God's Promite to him and his for ever, of 
che accompliſhment whereof, this was an earneſt, gave him good 
aſſurance thereof ; eſpecially conſidering that he had his Eyes and 
Thoughts upon the Mefliah, Pſal: r 10; i, &c. whote day he ſaw by 
Faith, as Abraham did, Jebn 8: 56: and whom he knew chat &od 
would raiſe out of the fruit of his Loins, to fit on 1s Throne, as is affirmed, 
Afts 2. 30. and that for ever : and 1o the Eterniry of his Kingdom 
[The LXX and Syrack read before 
me, Which is an uſual Phraſe, which makes no great variation 1n 
the Hebrew Text. 

17 According to all theſe words, and according to 
all this viſion, fo did Nathan ſpeak unto David þ. 

hþ Although it was contrary to his own Opinion, and an evi- 
dence of his Raſhneſs :n1 Folly. This therefore is here mention= 
<d as an evidence of his Fidehty and Impartiality in relating the 
whole Mind of God herein, and of his Modeſty in taking Shame 
ro himſelf. 

18 C Then wene king David in, and fat 3 before 
:he LORD, and ſaid, Who aml, O LOR D God ? 


nd what is my houſe, that thou haſt brought me 
utherto & ? | 

# This word may note either, firſt, his Bodily geſture : for there 
'S No certain geſture-to which Prayer is limited ; and we have 
-xamples of Saints Praying in that poſture, Exod; 17; 12: « Kings 
19: 4: or, he might fir for a ſeaſon whilſt he was Meditating upon 
cheſe things, and then alter his Poſture, ( though it be not here ex- 
prefled ) and betake himſelf to Prayer. Or rather, Secondly, His 
:ontinuance there, as this Hebrew word is oft uſed, as Gen: 27: 44; 
Levit: 14:8: 1 Sam: 1: 22: and 20: 19: that he did nor barely pre- 
ſent himſelf before God, bur abode there for ſome competent time, 
chat he might with God's leave pour out his Soul freely before. 
him. For howſoever one may in 1lome caſes pray fitting, yer it is 
noſt probable that David would in this Holy Place, and upon this 
occaſion, uſe a more humble and reverent Geſture, ſuch as kneeling 
is, which therefore David preſcribeth or adviſeth, Pſal. g5: 6: and 
Solomon accordingly prattifeth. 1 Kings 8: 54: 2 Chron: 6:13, kHow 
infinitely unworthy am I and my Family of this great honour and 
happineſs |! : 
19 And this / was yet a ſmall thing in thy ſight, 
O LORD God »- : but thou haſt ſpoken alſo of thy 
{ervants houſe for « great while to come » : and 5s this 


the F manner of man, O LORD God o? 


I To wit, which thou haſt already done for me, as he now ſaid, 
That thou haſt brought me hitherto, 1. e. to that pitch of Honour, and 
Peace, and Proftperity, in which through thy favour I now ſtand. 
-m Though it was more than I deſerved, or could expe&, yet thou 
didſt not think it enough for thee to give to me. » For man 
future Ages, and indeed to all Erernity. o Do Men uſe to deal 
ſo freely and kindly with their Inferiors, as thou haſt done with 
me ? No : this is the Prerogative of Divine Grace, to give ſuch 
Promiſes and Largeſles as this. So thele are words of admiration : 
which very well ſuit with the foregoing and following words. Or, 
And is this the Manner, or Law, or Cuſtom of mean or obſcure ten, &C. 
as the Hebrew Adam is confeiled ſomerimes to ſignifie, as Pſal: 49: 2: 
and 62; 9; [a;2: 9. :. e Is this the manner of Mens dealing with 
mean and obſcure Perſons, ſuch as I am ? So the Hebrew haadam, 
is the Genitive Caſe of the ObjeA, which is frequent in the Hebrew 
and other Languages And this ſe:zms more probable, becauſe it 
exatly agrees with the parallel place, 1 Chron: 17; 17: where the 
words are, Thou haſt regarded me according tothe eftate of a Mam of high 
degree, i. e. thou haſt dealt with mc as if I had been nor a poor 
mean Shepherd, bur the Son of ſome great Monarch, ro whom 
ſuch honours bett agree. 

20 And what can David fay more unto thee p? for 
|| thou LOR D God, knoweit thy ſervant g. 


p Eicher, Firſt, In way of gratitude and praiſe to thee, words 
cannot expreſs my Obligations to thee nor my ſenſe of theſe Ob- 
ligations. Or rather, Secondly, In way of Prayer, as appcars by 
the parallel place, 1 Chron: 17: 17: What can I ask or delire of 
thee more than thou haſt freely done ? q Thou knowelt, Either, 
- irſt, My deep fence of thy favours, and my obligations to thee. 
Or rather, Second'y, 
nay need hereafrer ; and as thou knowelt this, ſo I doubt not 
thou wilt be ready to ſupply me accordingly. Compare Ma:th: 
6; 8, 3 2# 

21 For thy words ſake r, and according to thine 
2wn heart / haſt thou done all | theſe great things, to 
make thy ſervant know them x. 

y That thou mighreſt fulfil chy Promiſes made to me, by Samuet! 
and Nathan, and thereby demonltrate thy Faithfulneſs. /'; e: OF 
thine own meer libzralty and good pleaſure, without any deſert 
of mine. So far was David, though now a very gracious Man, 
Tom thinking his ations Meritorious. #2. e: That thy graciousand 
wonderful purpoles of Mercy rowards me, which lay hid in thine 
»wn heart, might be manifetted unto me and others, by thy moſt 
kind words and actions. So it agrees with r Chron: 17: 19. 


22 Wherefore thou art great «,, O LORD God: for 
* there is none like thee, neither zs there any God beſide 
thee, according to all that we.have heard with our ears x. 
u Boch in Power and in Goodneſs, as appears by the great and 
good things which thou haſt done for me. x What we have heard 


irom our Yarents, or out of thy word concerning the incomparable 
excellency of thy Majetty, and of thy Works ; ofthat I have this 


day enunent experience. 
3B 3 


Chap. Vil. 


My condition and neceffities, whar I do or : 


greatneſs: 


23 And 


* 1 King 
r, 48. 


CE rr ey ONE rEOOY — __ 
u—— —— RX = _—_ 


| Ire ye Ire IIS Gr me 
_— = 


THeb.lay : l | 


|| Or, but. 


+ Heb. this 


* Deur. 3- 
24, & 4+ 
35. & Z2. 
39- 

1 SaM.2.22 
Ifa. 45*5» 


a y* 
, «<< 


WM Deut. E 
We 7. 32. P-OPe, eve 
Wand 33- for 4 people to 


8 29. 
LE Pral. 147- 
20. 


| | 
' y 
y | . 
, 
| + 


"7: this goodneſs unto thy ſervant : ) 
f Thar God who haſt declared thy ſelf ro be 7-aes God, and 
in particular my God. 
f Heb: lb 29 Therefore now + let it pleaſe thee to bleſs the 
of wo houſe of thy ſervant, that it may continue for ever 
bis, before thee: for thou, O LOR D God haſt ſpoken 
| it g, and with thy biefling let the houſe of thy ſervant 
be biefſed for ever. 
£ And therefore wiltſt certainly do ir, for thy words never fail. 
HA P43 YVIIL 

David ſubducth the Philiſtines and the M:abites ; Smiteth the K.ng of Zoba ; 
And the Syrians : Placeth a Gariſon in Damaſcus, 1,----8 Tv ſendeth 
Foram with Preſents to bleſs him : Which, with the ſpoil, he dedicateth to 
God. 9g, — 13. Smitcth the Eaonaites, and placeth a Gartjon in the:r 

Land, 14. David's Government and Officers, 15, ——18. 
N D after this it came to paſs, that David ſmote 
the Philiftines, and ſubdued them : and David 
took || Meth?g-Ammah & out, of the hand 'of the 

2 + Philiſtines. 
__ | d hr T, It 1 fſed in the parallel p] 

damab. a 1. e. Gath and hcr Towns, as it 1s expreſled 11 the parallel! place, 


hap, VINL. 84 


>» And * what one nation in the earth zs like thy | 
even like Iſcaei, whom God went y to redeem 
himſelf, and ro make him a name z, 
and to do for you great things, and terrible, for thy 
Jand, before thy people which thou redeemedlt to thee 
from Egypt, frem the nations and their gods ? 

y To wit, into Fzypt-An expreſſion of God after the manner of 
Men. & To advance the Glory of his Power and Goodneſs, and 
other Perfe&ions. Compare Exo2..g. 16. 

24 For thou haſt confirmed to thy ſelf « thy people 
Iſrael ro be a people unto thee for ever : and thou, 
LORD, art become their God 6. 

a Partly, by thy Promiſes, and that ſure Covenant which thou 
haſt made with them: and partly, by thy Glorious Works wrought 


on their behalf, as it appears this day. & In a peculiar manner, 
and by ſpecial Relation and Covenant : for otherwiſe he 1s the Goa 


and Father of all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. 

25 And now, O. LORD God, the word that thou haſt 
ſpoken concerning thy ſervant,and concerning his houle, 
eſtabliſh i: for ever, and do as thou haſt ſaid. 

26 And let thy name be magnified for ever, faving, 
The LOR D of hoſts z« the God over Ifrael c : and let 
the houſe of thy ſervant David be eſtabliſhed before 
thee. 

c i. e. Do thou never ceaſe to manifeſt thy {elf to be the God 
and Governour of Iſrael. 


27 For thon, O LORD of hoſts, God of Iſrael, 


[nonogY haft + revealed to thy ſervant, ſaying, I will build 
day thee an houſe : therefore 4 hath thy ſervant found in 


his heart e to pray this prayer unto thee, 

d Becaufe thy P omiſe hath given me encouragement to Pray. 
and aſſurance of Anſwer. e Or, found his hear!, i.e. taken Cqurage ; 
asa Man is f1id to loſe his Heart when he wants Courage. 


28 And now, O LORD God, ( thou ar: that God 
*,onn:17:f, and * thy words be true, and thou haſt promiſed 


3 Chron. 18. 1. which are called Metheg-Ammah, or the Bridle of 
Ammah, becauſe Gath was ſituate in the Mountain of Ammah ; and 
becaule this being the chief Ciry of the Phil: fines, and having a 
King, which none of the reſt had, was the Bridle which had hither- 
ro ws the Iſraelites in ſubje&ion, but now was taken out of their 


-MOUTNS* 
2 And he ſmote Moab b, and meaſured them with 


a line e, catting them down to the ground d: even 
with twolinesmcaſured he to put to deathe , and with 
one full line to keep ative: and /s the Moabites became 
Davids ſervants, and brought gifts. 


bþ For although the King of Moab, out of hatred to Saul, preten- 
ded ſome kindneſs ro David, and gave protection to his Farents, 
T Sam. 22 3, 4 Yet the Moabites were perpetual and ſworn Enemies 
to the Iſraelites, who therefore were for bidden to admit them into 
the Congregation of the Lord, and to ſeek their Peace and Proſperity, Deurt. 
23.6. And though God commanded them in their March to Canaan, 
to ſpare the Moabites, Deut. 2. g, 19. .yet afterwards they proved 
unthankful, and inſolent, and fierce Encmies to God and his Pcople, 
Nume 22.2, Oc. and 24. 17. and 26+ 17, 18. Judges 3. 14, &c. 18am. 
14. 47, ©c.and thereby provoked God to alter his courſe: and carriage 
rowards them, c7.e. As with Line, the Particle as being oft under- 
food, as Pſal. 11. 1. and 22-6» and 45+ 1+ The ſenſe is, Having 
Conquered the Land, he made an eſtimate of it, and, as it follows, 
diſtributed the Towns and People into three parts. 4-7. e. Over- 
throwing their Towns, and utterly deſtroying their People in man- 
ner following, e Which ſeverity was necctlary for his own and 
his Peoples 1ecurity, becauſe they were numer: us and potent, and 
bordering upon Canaan, and very vexatious and miſchievous to the 
Iſraelites. And now that Prophecy Numb. 24. 17. was accomplithed, 

3 © David {mote alſo Hadadezer f the {on of Rehob, 
king of *Zobah g, as he þ went to recover his border 


* P41. Go. AC the river Euphrates. 
Etle. * F Called Hadarezer, 1 Chror. 18: 3. the Hebrew Letters Daleth and 
Reſch being alike, and ſo oft interchanged. g A part of Syria, 
lying North-Eaſt from Canaan, towards Hemath, 1 Chron. 18. 3. 
See 1 Same 14. 47- þ Queft. Who ? Anſv. Either, Firſt, Hadarezer : 
who being already very potent, and going to enlarge his Dominion 
further, David thought fit ro oppoſe him. Or, Secondly, David 
who remembring the grant which God had made to his Feople of 
all the Land as far as Euphrates, and having ſubdued his Neighbour- 
ing Fnemies, went to recover his Rights, and itablith his Dominion 
as far as Euphrates. . 4 


4 


"  * 2 2 ® 


Ciap. VIIL 


4. And David took [|from him a thouſand |} chariots 3, po. fl 
and feven hundred horſemen &, and twenty thouſand |\4 ; (4, 
footmen : and David houghed / all the chariot horſes m, ; 
bur reſerved of them for an hundred chariots. 

; Which word is firly ſupplied out of 1 Chron 18. 4. ſuch Sub. 
fantives being oft underſto::d in the Hebrew Language, as Gen. 26. 
30, 2 Sam,21. 6. k Or, ſeven hundred Companies of Hoyſemen,z. e. in 
all ſeven thouſand; as it is 1 Chron, 18. 4. thee being ten in each 
Company, and each ten having a Ruler or Captain, Exod. 18. 21. 
Deut. 3 15. Or, theſe ſeven hunared were the Chief and the Rulers of 
the reſt, and the remaining 6300 were the common Horſemen, 
ſubje& to rheir Commanders. /7.e. Cut the ſinews of their Legs, 
that they might be uſeleſs for War Compare Jo. 11. 6. m Except 
the following reſerve. Chariots are here put for Char:ot-Horſes, as they 
are 1 Sam. 13. 5. 2 Sam, 10. 18. Pjal. 76. 6. David did this, becaule 
he could not keep them for his own uſe, Dez. 17. 16. 

5 And when the Syrians of Damaſcus .*. came to 
ſuccour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David flew of the 
Syrians two and twenty thouſand men. 

.*. 7 e Who were ſubje& to Damaſcus, the chief City of Syria. 

6 Then David put gariſons in Syria of Damaſcus, 
and the Syrians became ſervants to David, and brought 
gifts » : and the LORD preſerved David whither- 
loever he went. 

2 To purchaſe their Peace, and acknowledge their SubjeQion 
him- 

7 And David took the ſhields of gold that were 
on the ſervants o of Hadadezer, and brought them to 


Jeruſalem. 

o Or rather, which were with the ſervants, i.e. committed to their 
Cuſtody, as being kept in the King's Armoury : for it is not pro- 
bable they carried them into the held. 

8 And from Beta, and from Berothai p, cities of 
Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brals. 

? In 1 Chr». 18.8. it is, om Tibhath, and from Chun Fither there- 
fore the ſame Cities were called by ſeveral names, as is uſual, the 
one by the Hebrews, the other by the Syrians; or thoſe were two other 
Cities, and ſo the Braſs was taken out of theſe four Cities. 


9 4 When Toi king of Hamath q heard that David 
had ſmitten all the hoſt of Hadadezer, 


q Another eminent City of Syria. 

10 Then Toi ſent Joram r his ſon unto king David, 

co Þf ſalute him, and to bleſs him, becauſe he had T Heb: 
fought 2gainſt Hadadezer, and ſmitten him : ( for #* #1 
Hadadezer + had wars / with Toi ) and Foram t Hb. 
brought with him veſſels of ſilver, and veſlels of gold, ws «nn 


18; 4; 


ro 


and veilels of braſs ; of War 
r Here alſo the Names differ from 1 Chron. 18. 9, 10: where it is with, Ge, 
Tou and Hadoram. ſ Heb. was a man of Wars, i.e. was exerciſed , a9 in 
8 11angs 


with continual Wars. Compare Gen. 9: 20, &c. 
11 Which alſo king David * did dedicate unto the *”* 
LORD 2z, with the ſilver and gold that he had dedicate +, hor 
of all nations which he ſubdued : 18; 11:& 
t To the building of God's Temple. 26. 26: 
to God and his Houſe, in preparing for it, 
permitted to build it» 

i2 Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of 
Ammon, and of the Philiitines, and of Amalek, and 
of the ſpoil of Hadadezer ſon of Rehob, king of 
Z.obah. 

13 And David gat bim a name « when he returned 
from + ſmiting of the Syrians x in the valley of ſalt y, * f Heb: 


being eighteen thouſar.d men ps 
# i.e. Much increaſed his Reputations x Or, Edomites, as they 4 uhh 
are ſaid to be, 1 Chron. 18. 12 It js likely thele two People were © © 
Confederates, and that divers of the Syrians whom David had de- 
feared in Syria, fled to Edom, and there joyned with them againſt 
their common Enemy, and made up together a very great Army 
( as the number of the Men lain in it ſheweth ) conſfiiting of the 
veterane Soldiers of both Countries. Although the ſlaughter here 
following may ſeem not to have been of the Syrians, as the words 
at firſt reading ſeem to intimate, bur of the Edomites; ( it not be- 
ing probable thar the Syrians would come ſo far from their own 
Countrey, as to the Valley of Salt, to fight ) and this Verſe may be 
read thus, and that very agreeably to the Hebrew ; And David gat 
him a name when he returned from ſmiting of the Syrians, in ſiniting 
( which is eaſily repeated out of the laſt Clauſe, according to the 
common uſage of Scripture ) in the Valley of Salt eighteen thouſand 
Men, who were Ed»mites, as is ſufficiently implied here in the next 
Verſe, and exprefled 1 Chron. 18, 12. y A place in Edom ſo calledy 
either from its Neighbourhood to the Salt Sea, or for ſome other 
cauſe now unknown. 2 As it is alſo 1 Chron. 18. 12, where alſo 
they are ſaid to be ſmitten by Abiſhai ; becauſe he was then achief 
Commander of the Army under Dav:d, and, it may be, began the 
fight; as, -for the like reaſon, they are ſaid to be ſmitten by Joab, 
Pal. 60. title, where alſo there are only 120co mentioned ; which 
place, if it ſpeak of this Bartel, the ſtate of it was this : Abiſhai 
begins the Combar, and kills 6000. after him comes in Joab and kills 
12000 More, which makes up this 18000. But why may not that 
be another Hiſtory in Batrel ? So the Edomites and Syrians together 
did firft tight with Abiſhai, and loſt 18002 Men, and afterwards 
recruited their Forces and fought with Joab, and loſt other 12000 
Men. Nor 1s it ſtrange if two Battels were fought in one place 7 
of which there are divers inſtances in Hiſtorians. 


14 T And he put gariſons in Edom ; throughout 
all Edom-put he gariſons, and all * they of Edom *Numb: 
became Davids ſervants : and the LOR D 
David whitherſoever he went, , 


So he ſhewed his Aﬀe&ion 


when he was not 


WV. 


Rea om 


_— 


Is And 


preſerved 24 15 / | 


| Or. 7e- 


memoran 
cer 01 7 
ter 0; Ci: ( 
Wiles. 


+,Chror 


24 3, 4+ 
| Or 85- 


(64ary- 


*:Chror 
16 17. 

| Or, 
Princes. 


* Chap, 
16: 1.an 
lg. 29, 


p Chap. 
4 4. 


 _ 


—D 
* > 


" Chap. IX: 


| Or. 7e- 


memoratle' 
er.cr W71- 
per 0j C210: 
Micles. 


x,Chcon. 
24 3, + 

| Or $5- 
06aTY- 


*;Chron. 
16- 17, 

| Or, 
Princes. 


* Chap, 


IL. 
15 And David reigned over all Ifrae], and David 
executed judgment and juſtice 4 upon all his people. 

2 i.e. Juſt Judgment, as Deut: 16; 46; A Figure called Hendiad's ; 
as in Gen: 3.16: Matth: 4: 16. 

16 And Joab: the ſon of Zeruiah as over the 
hoſt 5; and Jchoſhaphat the fon of Ahilud was 
[| recorder e. | 
| b Who having covbrleſs declared his Repentance for his former 
Crimes, and having done eminent ſervice for his Countrey and 
having received the chief Cemmand by vertue of David's Promiſe 
1nd Contra, 2 Sam: £:8: was ſtill eontinued in his place, c Either, 
Firſt, The writer cf Chronicles. Bur it is not likely he would 
have been put among the great Officers of State and Church. Or, 
Sccindiy, The Treaturer, whocxamine? all the Accounts, and kept 
Records cf them. Or, Thirdly, The Kings Couniſcllor, as 4h:tophe! 
is called, 2 Sam. 15, 12. 1 Chron. 27.33. who was to bring things 
of moment to the King's Mind and Remembrance, and to admonith 
himfiom time to time of t..ings fit ro be done. See 1 Kings 4. 3. 
2nd 2 Kings i8. 18 

17 And * Zadok the ſon of Ahitub 4, and Ahi- 
melech the ſon of Abiarchar e, were the prieſts f ; and 
Seraitah was the || Scribe ; 

4 Not of that Abitub, 1 Sam. 4. for that was of Ithamar's Race. 
but this of Eleazar. e So Abiathar called his Son by the name of 
his Father, 1 Sam. 22e 20. f7z.e. The Chief Prieſt next under 
Abiathar, who fled to David, 1 Sam. 22. 20. and now was High 
Pricſt, as may be gathered from 2 Sam. 15» 35. and 1 Kings 2. 27, 
35. under him theſe two were the next Chief Prieſts, or the Se- 
cond Prielts, each one being Chief of the Houſe of his Father, 
Zadok of Eleazar, and Abimelech of Trhamar. See Numb. 3. 32. 
1 Chroy. 24. 3, 4+ - Or, theſe two are here mentioned, becauſe they 
conſtant!y attended upon the King, that he might conſult with them 
in the matters of the Lord, as need required. 

18 * And Benaiah the fon of Jehoiada 4s over pg 
both the Cherethites and the Pelethites 4 : and Davids 
{ons were || chiet rulers 5. 

g Theſe words are ſupplied out of the parallel place, x Chron. 
18. 17 and out of 2 Sam 20. 23- where they are expreſſed. þ The 
Chereth:ces and Pelethites were undoubtedly Soldiers, and ſuch as 
were eminent for their Valour and Fidelity to the King, as is evident 
trom 2 Sam: 15: 18: and 20: 7: and 1 Kings 1:38, 44. and moſt pro- 
bably they were the Kings Guards, which conſiſted of theſe two 
Bands, who might be diſtinguiſhed either by their ſeveral Weapons, 
or by the differing time or manner of their ſervice. They are 
ſuppoſed to be thus called, either, firſt, from their Office, which 
was upon the King's Command to cut off or puniſh offenders, 


and to preſerve the King's Perilon, as their names in the Hebrew 


Tongue may ſeem tq imply. Or, Secondly, From ſome Country, 
or place to which they had relation. As for the Cherethites, it is 
certain they were either a Branch of the Philiftines, or a People 
neighbouring to them, and confederate with them, as is manifeſt 
from 1 Sam: 30: 14: Ezek: 25: 16: Zeph: 2: 4, 5. And ſo might the 
Pele: hites be too, though that be nor related in Scripture. And 
theſe 1/raelites and Soldiers of David might be fo called. either, 
becauſe they went and lived with David when he dwelt in thoſe 
parts : or, from {ome notable Exploit againſt, or Vi&ory over 
theſe People ; as among the Romans the names of Aſtaticus, Afri- 
canus, &c. were given for the ſame reaſon. One of their Exploits 
againlt the Cherethites 1s 1n part related, 1 Sam: 30; 14. And it is 
likely they did many other againſt them, and againſt other People, 
amongſt which the Pelerhites might be one. # Had the places of 
greateit Authority and Dignity conterred upon them. 


CGHAFT. I% 

David, fir fonathan's ſake. fendeth for his Son Mephiboſheth, t, 6. 
Entertaintth him at his Table : Ana-reſtoreth him all that was Saul's ; 
Appointeth Ziba to be his Servant, 7, —>—— 13, 

N D David ſaid a, Ls there yet any that is left 

: of the houſe of Saul b, that I may ſhew him 

kindneſs for Jonathans ſake 2 
a David's Wars being ended, he ſets: himſelf to the Adminiſtra- 

tion of Jultice to all lis People, Chap: 8:15. And amongſt others 

he minds his juſt debr and obligation to Jonathan and his Family- 

b He laith not of the Houſe of Jonathan, for he knew nor of any Son 

which he had Icfr and therefore thought his kindneſs and obli- 

gation Was to Pals to the next of his Kindred. As ſor Mephib:ſbeth, 
he was yery young and obſcure, and poflibly concealed by his 

Friends, left David ſhould cut him off trom Jealouſie of State, as 

hath been uſual among Princes in like caſe, and therefore was un- 

known to David, as well hemighr be, eſpecially when David's head 
and hands were full of War with divers and Potent Enemies, as 
they had hitherto been, | 

2 And there was of the houſe of Saul a ſervant c 


whoſe name was * Ziba : and when they had called 


6, Pp him unto David, the King faid unto him, Arr thou 


lg. 29, 


Y Chap. 
4 4. 


Ziba 2 And he ſaid, Thy ſervant is he. 

c One who had been a Servant, and, as it may ſeem, a Steward 
to Saul, Sce below, wv, 10. 

3 And the king ſaid, Is there not yet any of the 
houſe of Saul, that I may ſhew the kindneſs of God 4 
unto him 7 And Ziba ſaid unto the king, Jonathan 
hath yeta fon, which is * lame on his feer. 

d Eicher, Firſt, That kindneſs which Lowe him for God's ſake, 
and by vertue of my Oath given to him abour ir, 1 Sam: 20:14, 15+ 
Bur that Oath icems only to oblige him to Jonathan's Poſterity, and 
not to any other of Saui's Houte. Or, Secondiy, Greatand eminent 
kindneſs. }. : 

4 And the king ſaid unto him, Where is he ? And 
Ziba ſaid unto the king, Behold, he 5s in the houſe of 
Machir, the ſon of Ammicl, in Lodebar e. 

e Ina place beyond Jordan, Chap: 17: 27: where his Friends 
thought bac might be kept our of David's fight, 


S 4M URKE 


C 5 Then king David ſent, and fet him out of che 
houſe of Machir the ſon of Ammiel, from Lodebar. 

6 Now when Mephiboſheth the ſon of Jonathan, 
the ſon of Sau], was come unto David, he fe!l on his 
face, and did reverence : And Devid ſaid, Mephibo- 
ſheth. And he anſwered, Behold thy ſervant. 

7 © And David ſaid unto him, Fear not ; for I will 

ſurely ſhew thee kindneſs for Jonathan thy fathers 
ſake, and will reſtore thee all the land of Saul thy 
father f, and thoa ſhalt eat bread at my table con- 
tinually. 
- f Whichare now ſeized and poſſefſed by David, as due to him, 
either, in right of his Wife, to whomrhe Inheritance was devolved, 
Saul's Sons by his Wives being all dead. See Numb. 27.8. or, by 
Divine Donation, as belonging to the Crown which God had now 
given him : or, by forfeiture, becauſe of 1bboſbeth's Rebellion 
againft his Lord and King. 


8 And he bowed himſelf, and faid, What zs thy 
(eryant, that thou ſhouldeft look upon fuch a * dead 
dog as lamg? - 

Z So contemptible in my Perſon and Condition. 

9 T Then the king called ro Ziba Sauls ſervant, 
ind ſaid unto him, * I have given unto thy maſters 
{on all that pertained to Saul, anc co all his houſe. 

10 Thou therefore, 'and chy ſons, and thy ſervants 
ihall cill the land for him, and thou ſhalt bring in che 
fruits, that thy maſters ſon may have food to eat þ : but 
Mephiboſheth thy maſters ſon ſhall eat bread alway at 
my table. Now Ziba had fifreen ſons, and twenty 


{ervants 5. 


h i; e. That he may have wherewith to buy Food for alt his Fa- 
mily, and all manner of Proviſions ( which oft come under the title 
of Food and Bread ) neceflary for himſelf and them. 7 For it is 
probable he had been the chief Steward to manage Saul's Lands :. 
whereby he had great opportunities to inrich himſelf, which alſo 
he was very intent and reſolved upon, either dire&ly, or indirealy,. 
as the following Hiſtory othim ſhews ; and therefore it is not ſtrange 
chat he was fo rich. . 

11 Then faid Ziba unto the king, According to all 
that my lord the king hath commanded his ſervant, fo 
ſhall thy ſervant do. As for Mephiboſheth, ſaid the king, 
he ſhall eat at my table, as one of the kings ſons k. 

k Theſe are the words. Either, Firſt, Of David ; the words, 
ſaid he, or ſaid the King, being ſupplied out of the former and fol- 
lowing Verſes: Or, Secondly, Of Z:bs, being thus rendred and 
underitood, 4!ſo Mephibeſheth if the King ſo pleaſe, ſhall eat ar my table, 
and ſhall be treated there according to his Quality, as one of thy Sons, 
as thou deſireſt : for the Eftate will ſuffice for that alſo. 

12 And Mephiboſhech had a young ſon 1, whoſe 
name was Micha m: and all that dwelt in the houſe 
of Ziba were ſervants unto Mephiboſheth. 

I Either, Firſt, Before he was diſcovered and brought to the 
King ; and then David ſeems guilty of a great error in forgetting 
his dear Jonathan fo long ; although his long and continued Wars 
both Civil and Foreign, might afford him ſome excuſe, as filling his 
mind and time with bulinets of another nature, Or, - Secondly, 
After that time : for there 1s nothing here which determines when 
this Son was Born: »» Who alfo had other Children and Grand- 
Children, to keep up the name and memory of worthy and famous 
Jmathan, See 1 Chron. 8. 34, 35- andg. 49, 41. : 

13 So Mephiboſjherh dwelt in Jeruſalem : for he did 


eat continually at the kings table ; and was lame on 


both his feet. 
CHAP X 


David ſendeth M-fſengers td comfort the King of the Ammonites ; He abuſeth 
them 1 —— 5. The Ammonlres and Syrians prepare to fight againſt the 
Iſraelites : And are overcome by Joab and Abiſhai, 6, I4. They 
renewing their Forces, are again Conquered by David, 15, —=19. 

A N D itcame to pals after this, that the * king of 

the children of Ammon &« died, and Hanun his 
ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

4 Nohajb, v. 2. probably the ſame whoſe Army Saul defeated and 
deſtroyed, 1 Sam. 11. who out of enmity to Saul ſkewed kind- 
neſs to David, as it follows; hoping alſo by fomenting the diffe- 
 rences between Saul and David, to make way for his future Con- 
queſts. : : | res 

2 Then ſaid David, I will ſhew kindneſs unto 
Hanun the ſon of Nahaſh 5, as his tather ſhewed 
kindneſs unto me c. And David ſent to comfort bim 
by the hand of his ſervants, for + his father : and David's 


Ammon. 
b Therefore there had hitherto been Peace and Friendſhip be+ 


Ammon are mentioned, Chap. 8. 12. by way of anticipation, and 
with reſpeC& to the ſtory here following. c Which he might do, 
either, by offering him his help, if he neededir ; or, by ſupplying 
him with Military or other Proviſtoas upon occalion, or many 
other ways. 


3 And the princes of the children of Ammon ſaid 
unto Hanun their lord, + Thinkeſt thou that David 
Joth honour thy father, that he hath ſent comforters 

'4nto thee 2? 


co OYerthrow 4t 2 - 


3B 4 


Chap. X. 


lervants came into the land of the children of 


* See Cha 


19. 29, 


* 1 Chroa, 
19. 1. 


+ the boſs of 


tween David and him ; and therefore the ſpoils of the children of 


f Heb. tt 
thin: eyes 


Hath nor David rather ſent his ſervants doh David 
unto thee, to ſearch the cicy, and to ſpic it out d, and. 


4 T's 


Chap. X, Il. 


d To obſerve where theCity is weakeſt,and may ſooneſt be taken. 
The ground of this ſuſpicion was, partly, tke Conſcience of their 
311 deſerts and carriage towards the J/raelires, whoſe quarrel David 
had eſpouſed : partly, the opinion they had of David's Policy : 
and partly, the ſeverity of God's Law, particularly againſt them, 
Deut 23. 6. which might'cafily come to their ears: And they knew 
David was a zealous aflerter of God's Law. 

4 Wherefore Hanun took Davids ſervants, and 
ſhaved off the one half of their beards e, and cut off 
their garments in the middle, ever to their buttocks f, 
and ſent them away. | 5 

e Partly, that he might compel them to bear a part in ther 
Mourning, and that jn ſuch a way as was uſual with them, bur 
forbidden to the 1ſraelires Lev. 19 27- Deure 14. 1. which probably 
was not unknown to them ; And Partly, to faſten this as a reproch 
upon them, and to make them ridiculous and contemprible. Com- 

are Iſa. 20. 4- and 47. 2+ and 50- 6: f This was worle than the 
ormer, becauſe the 1/raeh:tes wore no Brecches, and ſo their naked- 
neſs was hereby uncovered. Compare 1/3. 20. 4- 

5 © When they told it unto David, He ſent to meet 
them g, becauſe the men were gieatiy aſhamed : and 
the king ſaid, Tarry at Jericho þ until your beards be- 


grown 2, and they return. 

g He ſent them Clothes and other neceſfaries. hþ Both becauſe 
this was one of the firſt places which they came to in Canaan : and 
becauſe it was now a very obſcure Village, and therefore titteſt for 
them in their circumitances : for it was not builtas a City till after 
this time, 1 Kings 16. 34. # For the waat or loſs of Beards was 
eſteemed a reproach among the Iſraelites, 

6 © And when the children of Ammon ſaw that they 
ſtank before David, the children of Ammon ſent and 
hired the Syrians of Beth-Rehob &, and the Syrians of 
Zobal, twenty thouſand footmen, and of king Maacah 
» a thouſand men, and of Iſhtob » twelve thouſand 


men. 

&k Near Hamath, Numb. 13- 21. 1 Of which ſee 1. Same 14. 47. 
and 2 Sam. 8, 3. m 7. e. Of that part of Syria which was under 
King Maachah : for $jria wasa large Countrey, and there were di- 
vers Kings in the ſeveral parts of it. This part was near Gilead. See 
Deut. 3. 14. n Or, of the men of Tob, the Countrey where Jephrhah 
dwelt, Judges 11. 3. Beſides theſe, they hired others out of 4ram 
Naharaim, or Meſopotamia, as appears from 1 Chron. «9 6. and P/al. 
60. title. And all theſe were forward enough to Combine again{t 
David, both to revenge their former loſſ:s and reproaches, and to 
give check to his growing Greatneſs. 

7 And when David heard of it, he ſent Joab, and all 
the hoſt of the mighty men 0. 

o Chuſing wiſely to carry the War into their Countrey, rather 
than to expe it in their own, 

8 And the children of Ammon came out, and put 
the battel in aray at the entring in of the gate p: and 
the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Iſhtob, and 
Maacah, were by themſetves in the field 9. 

p To wit, of Medeba, asit is expreſſed, 1 Chron. 19.7. which was 
a frontier City. See Numb. 21 30. This place they choſe for the 
Fight, that they might both defend that City and. their Countrey, 
ws that was the entrance, and, if need were, might retreat 
" Into it- 9 That by their numerous Forces they might fall upon the 
Iſraelites on the other ſide. 

9 When Joab ſaw that the front of the battel was 
againſt him bcfore and behind, he choſe of all the 
choice men of Iſrael, and put them in aray againſt the 
Syrians r, 

» Which were the moſt valiant and expert Soldiers. | 

Io And the reſt of the people he delivered into the 


hand of Abiſhai his brother, that he might put them in | 


aray againſtthe children of Ammon. 

11 And he ſaid if the Syrians be too itrong for me, 
then thou ſhalt help me : bur if the children of Ammon 
be roo ſtrong for thee, then I will come and help 
thee, 

12 Be of good courage, and let us play the men for 
our people /, and for the cities of our Gods : agd the 
LORD do that which ſeemeth him good z. 

ſ For the preſervation of our ſelves and all our Brethren from 
that utter. ruine which our Enemies deſign for us. Our War is 
not vainly undertaken to enlarge our Empire or Glory, but for our 
own juſt and neceſlary defence : and therefore we may hope for 
God's Bleſſing and affiſtance in'it. s Which are devored to his 
Worſhip and Service, and therefore he will plead their Cauſe a- 
gainſt his Enemies. # Let us do our parts, and quietly referr our 
ſelves and the event to God's good Pleaſure, which we have no 
reaſon to diſtruſt. : 

13 And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were 
with him, unto the battel againſt the Syrians « : and 
they fled before him. 

, He prudently falls upon them fir}, becauſe they were but 
Mercenaries, and not concerned ſo much in the Succeſs as the 
Ammonites were, all whoſe Interelt lay ar ſtake ; and therefore not 
likely to venture too far in their defence. 8 | 

14 And when the children of Ammon ſaw that the 
Syrians were fled x, then fled they alſo before Abiſhai, 
and entred into the city : fo Joab returned from the 
children of Ammon y, and came to Jeruſalem. 

x In whoſe numbers and proweſs they had the moſt confidence. 
4 Nor judging it convenient or ſafe to purſue them ; becauſe the 
Forces. were not urterly ruined, but only diſperſed and pur to 


S 4M DE £ 


15 © And when the Syrians ſaw that they were 
{mitten before Iſrael, they gathered themſelves to- 
gether L. : : 
z Partly, to wipe out the ſtain of Cowardize which they had 
now contra&ed : partly, to prevent that Vengeance which they 
ſuppoſed David would execute upon them for their laſt atrempr : 
and partly, to ſhake off the Yoke that David had lately pur upon 
them. ; 
16 Ard Hadarezer a ſent, and brought out the 
Syrians that were beyond the river b: and they came 
to Helam ; and Shobach «© the captain of the hoſt of 
Hadarezer went before them. | 
a The ſame with Hadadezer, Chap. 8. 3» 6 Who having engaged 
themſelves in the former expedition, as was noted before, were 
now obliged to proceed in their own defence, being alſo perſwa- 
ded and hired to this ſecond Expedition, wv. 19. «c Or, Shophack, 
1 Chron, 19. 16. 
17. And when it was told David, he gathered all 
Iſrael 4 together, and pafled over Jordan, and came 
tro Helam : and the Syrians ſet themſelves in aray 
againſt David, and fought with him. 
d i. e. The Choſen and Valiant Men pick'd out of all 1/-ael: 
18 And the Syrians fled before Iſrael, and David 
flew the men of ſeven hundred chariots e of the Syrians, 
and fourty thouſand horſemen f, and ſmore Shobach 
the captain of their hoſt, who died there. 
e Heb- Seven hunared chariots : is e, The Men belonging to them, 
that foughr in, or with them ; as plainly appears, 1. Becauſe the 
Men only, and not the Chariots were capable of being killed, as 
theſe are faid to have been. 2. Becauſe it is thus explained in the 
Book of Chronicles, which was written after this Book, for this end, 
to explain what was dark or doubtful, and ro ſupply what was 
omitted here ; where, inſtead of theſe Words, are ſeven thouſand 
men Which fought in Chariots, 1 Chron. 19. 18. And this is a very 
common Metonymy ; of which. See above Chap. 8. 4. and the 
Notes on 1 Sam. 13- 5. Although there might be 7000 Chariots 
in all, whereof 7500 were cheſen ones ; according to the diſtinftion 
made Exod. 14. 7. f Forwhich in 1 Chron. 190 18. is fourty thouſand 
Footmen. Which may be reconciled divers ways. 1. Both theſe ma 
be true, that he flew 40000 Horſemen, which being the ad 
conſiderable part and ſtrength of the Army, it might ſeem ſufficient 
ro name them, and every one could ealily underſtand, that the 
Footmen in that caſe were certainly cut off; and that he flew alſo 
40000 Footmen, as is ſaid 1 Chron. where he mentions them only, 
becauſe they were omitted in 2 Sam. and the Horſemen being ex- 
preſſed here, it was needleſs to repeat them in 1 Chron, 2. The 
Horſemen may be here called Formen, in oppoſition to thoſe that 
fought in Chariots ; becauſe they ſometimes fought on Horſeback, 
and ſometimes came down from their Horſes, and fought on Foor, 
when the place of the Batte] was more commodious for Footmen 
than for Horſemen ; which it is not improbable was their Caſe 
here ; for David being a Soldier of great Prudence and Experience, 
and underſtanding the great Numbers of the Syrian Horſemen ; 
whereas the /raelites had but very few, Deus. 17. 16+ would doubtleſs 
endeavour to Chuſe a place as inconvenient for their Horſemen as 
he could. 3. Peradventure the Syrians deſigned to bring the War 
into David's Countrey, and therefore haftned their March and for 
that end put their Footmen on Horſeback, ( as hath been frequently 
done in like Caſes ) who, when they came to the place of Batrel, 
came down from their Horſes and fought on Foot. So there is 
no need of acknowledging an error of the Scribe in the Sacred 
Texr ; which, yer if it were granted in ſuch Hiſtorical Paſſages 
of no moment to the Do&rine of Faith and good Life, it would 
not thake the Foundation of our Faith in matters of great Impor- 
rance, Which it might reaſonably be preſumed the Providence of 
od would more watchſully preſerve from all depravation or 
corruption. 

i9 And when all the kings that were ſervants to 
Hadarezer f ſaw that they were ſmitten before Iſrael, 
they made peace with Iſrael, and ſerved them : So 


the Sy rians feared to help the children of Ammon any 
more. 


f To wit, for that time, or in that Expedition to which he hired 


theme 
HAST AL 
Wilt Joab beſieged Rabbah David committeth Adultery with Bath-ſheba, 
1 -——- 4+ Aud hearing that ſhe was big with Child he ſendeth for 
Uriah her Hi:sband out of the Camp, to cover his ſhame, He will not go 
to his own Houſe, weither ſober nor drunk, F, I3. David ſendeth 
him again into the Camp with @ Letter to Jeab to expoſe him to Death, 


145 17. The news of which Joab ſendeth ro David : He marrieth 
Bathſheba, 18, == 27, 


battel c that * David ſent Joab and his ſervants with him, 
and all Iſrael ; and they deſtroyed the children of 
Ammon, and beſieged Rabbah 4, but David tarried ſtill 
at Jeruſalem, 

a When that Year ended, and the next begun, which was in 
the Spring-rime, Exod. 12. 2, 6 Which is, when the ground is fit 
for the March of Soldiers, and brings forth Proviſion for Man and 
Beaſt. c Theſe words are to be underſtood here, as Gen. 10. 11. 
and 14+ 8. & The Chicf and Royal City of the Ammonites, Deus. 
6.83 | 
2 4 And it came to paſs in anevening-tide, that 
David aroſe from off his bed e, and walked upon the 
roof f of the kings houſe : and from the roof he ſaw 


a woman waſhing her ſelf g : and the woman was very 
beautiful to look upon. 


flight, and ſo might caſily rally rogether. 


e Where he had lain, and ſlept{for ſome time zabcipg poſſibly _ 
poſc 


Chap. XI, 


A N D it came to paſs, that Þ after the year was + Heb.# 
expired #, at the time when kings go forth & to there 


* ; Chrol 


*Pſal. 5 
title. 
tHeb- - 
ſte was {f 
rifjing 
nd 
mncleanne; 
KY) Gr » 

: Lev. I 
19. and 
18, 19, 


f Heb. 0) 
. the peace 0 
C, 


}Heb. 
vent out a 
ter them.s 


F Chap. 
29. 6, 


SAY. 


"Fchap. XL] 


*7al. 51 The came in unto him -, and he * lay with her ( Þ for 
zl, the was purified from her uncleanneſs ) » and ſhe re- 
tHeb- 974 turned unto her houſe. 
ſn was - { From her own Houſe into his Palace, not by force, but by per- 
rijing mi ſwaſion, as deſiring to ſpeak with her, Into his Palace and 
if from 2@r Chamber, as he detired. » To wit, from her menſtruous Pollution, 
mcleameſs. according to the Law, Levit, 18. 19. which is here noted, as the | 
» Gr, reaſon, either why David purſued his luſtful deſire ; or why ſhe 
Lev 15. ſo eaſily yielded to it, becauſe ſhe was nor under that Pollution 
19- and which might - alienat her from it; or rather, why ſhe ſo readily 
18. 19, conceived, that time being obſerved by Ariftorle and others, to be 
the moſt likely time for Conception. 
5 And t''e woman conceived, and ſent, and told 
David, and ſaid I am with Child 0. 

0 Conſider therefore what to do for thy own Honour, and for 
my ſafety, whom thou haſt brought into a moſt ſhameful and dan- 
gerous condition» : 

6 And David ſent to Joab, ſaying, Send me Uriah 
the Hittite : And Joab ſent Uriah to David. 

. 7 And when Uriah was come unto him, David de- 
P . of manded of him + how Joab did, and how the People 
. the peace of, +. q 5 
& did, and: how the war proſpered p* 


|} Heb. 
vent out af< 
te them.s 


F Chap. 
29. 6, 


HH & 4 


poſed to ſleep after Dinner, by reaſon of ſome Exceſs committe 


in eating or drinking ; and indulging himſelf1in his Lazy Humour, 
which may ſeem very improper for ſo great a Prince and Captain, 
who had 1ſo many and great Burdens upon his Shoulders, eſpeci- 
ally in a time ot War; and therefore ſuch Pra&ices have been con- 
demned by Heathens : And Homer will not allow a General and great 


Counſellor to ſleep all the Night, much leſs to take anypart of th 
Day for it. And therefore th 


open, and ſhe careleſs, David might eſpie her. 


3 And David ſent and enquired after the woman þ: 
and one ſaid, Is not this Bathſheba # the daughter of 


Eliam, the wife ot Uriah the Hittite & ? 


5 Inſtead of ſuppreſſing that luſt which the ſight of his Eyes 
had kindled, he ſeeks rather to feed it ; and firſt enquires who ſhe 


was ; that, if the were unmarried, he might make her either his 
Wife or his Concubine. # Called alſo Bathjbua, 1 Chron_ 3. 5. where 
alſo Eliam is called Ammiel, k So called, either, 1, By his Origi- 
nal, being born either of that Race, bur become a zealous Profe- 
lite; or, atleaſt, among that People. Or, 2. By his Habitation 
among them. Or, 3. For ſome notable exploit of his againſt thar 
People : See 1 Sam, 26. 6. and the notes on 2 Sam. 8. 18, 


4 And David ſent Meſfengers and took her /, and 


p. Frivolous Queſtions whichany common Meſſenger could have 
anſwered : which probably made Uriah ſuſpe& that there was ſome 
other ſecret cauſe why he was ſent for. And he might underſtand 
ſomething, either by David's Meſſengers, wv. 4+ or by* ſome of his 
own Family, concerning her being tent for to the Court; which, 
together with other Circumitances might give him cauſe of further 
ſujpicion. Yet ſuch might be the Queſtions, ( though not here 
particularly mentioned ) concerning thoſe Heads, as every pri- 
vate Perſon might not be acquainted with, nor able to reſolve, but 
ſuch only:as were acquainted with the Counſel of War. 

8 And David faid to Uriah, Go down to thy houſe 
9, and waſh thy feet r, And Uriah departed out of 
the kings houſe, and there + followed him a mels of meas 
from the king 5. 

9 Not doubting bur he would there converſe with his Wife, 
and fo cover their Sin and Shame. r As Travellers there uſed ro 
do. 5 Seemingly as a Tettimony of David's Reipe& and Aﬀettion 
to him; bur really to cheer up his Spirits, and diſpoſe himto de- 
firchis Wife's company. 

'9 Bur Uriah flepe at the door of the kings houſe 
with all the Servants of his lord 5 , and went not down 
to his houſe. 

_* with the King's Guard. This he did, either upon ſome ſuſpi- 
cion of the matter, See v. 7. Or, by the ſecret dire&ion of God's 
ke and irrefiſtable Providence, who would bring David's Sin to 
ight. 

io And when they had told David, ſaying, Uriah 

went not down unto his houſe, David ſaid unto Uriah, 
Cameſt thou not from thy journey «? why then didſt 
thou not go down unto thine houſe ? 
_ * Whether of their own accord, or being firſt asked by David, 
1t doth not appear. « Wearied with hard Service and Travel, and 
therefore didti need refreſhment ; nor did I expect or defire that 
thou ſhouldeſt now attend upon my Perſon, or keep the Watch. 

11 And Uriah ſaid unto David, The ark x, and 
Iirael, and Judah abide in tents, and * my lord Joab, 
and the fervants of my Jord are encamped in the open 
fields ) ; ſhall I then go into mine houſe to ear, and 
ro drink, and to ly with my wife 2? As thou liveſt, 
and 4s thy foul liveth, I will notdo this thing. 

x Which it ſeems, was now carried with them for their encou- 
ragement and dire&ion, as was uſual : See Numb. 10. 35. 1 Sam 
4 4 y Towit, in Tears which are in the Fields. z He might poſ- 
fibly add theſe words, to intinuar his apprehenſion of the King's 


is 1s thought to be Davia's firſt Er- 
ror, and the occaſion of his following fall. f which was plain 
after the manner, Deur. 22. 8. g To wit, in a Bath, which pol- 
ſibly was in her Garden, or in ſome room near to the King's Pa- 
lace, where ſhe might waſh her ſelf divers ways, and for diffe- 
rent ends; either for health, or coolneſs, or to cleanſe her ſelf from 
ſome kind of legal Impurity : where alſo, the Windows being 


Mi 


M TU E EE: 


d | full and injurious pleaſures. But David's Far was now deaf, his 


c| 13 And when David had called him .*., he did eat 
and drink before him, and he made him drunk «: and 
ar even he went out to lie on his bed b with the ſer- 
vants of his Lord c, but wentnot down to his houſe, 

.. i.e. Being invited by David. a Or he made him merry,as the word 
oft ſignifies. He cauſed him to drink more than was convenient. 
6 which ir doth not appear, that he did the night before ; bur 
now his Exceſs in eating and drinking, might make it more ne- 
ceſfary for him. «c #. e. In ſome Chamber in rae King's Court, 
where the King's Servants uſed to take their repoſe. 


14 And ic came to pals in the morning, that Da- 
vid wrote a letter to Joab, and ſent it by the hand of 
Uriah, POE 
Is And he wrote in the letter, ſaying, Set ye Uriah 
in the forefront of the f hotteſt battel, and retice ye 
t from him, that he may be ſmitten and die &. 
d So far is David from Repenting upon theſe juſt and great Oc-? Heb. 
caſions, that he ſeeks to cover one Sin: with another ; and to hide "9% 


his Adultery with Murther, even the Murther of a moſt excellenr oo i 
Perſon, and that in a moſt malicious and perfidious manner. from ajter | 


16 And it came to paſs when Joab obſerved the ci- #”: 
ty, that heafligned Uriah unto a place where he knew 
that valiant men were e. 


e Placed there to defend it, becanſe that part ofthe City was ſup- 
poſed either the weakeſt, or the place deſigned for the Afſſaule. 
Joab having formerly commitred a baſe Murther upon Abner, was 
ready to execute this wicked Command. of the King ; that fo he 
being involved in the ſame Guilt with him, might the more wil- 
lingly receive him into Favour. 


17 And the men of che City went out and fought 
with Joab : and there fell ſome of the people of the 
ſervants of David, and Uriah the Hittite died alſo. 
18 Then Joab ſent, and told David all the things 
concerning the war. 
19 And charged the Meſſenger, ſaying, when thou 
, haſt made an end of telling the matters of the war 
! Unto the _ ; 
20 And if ſo be that the kings wrath ariſe, and he 
'fay unto thee, Wherefore approached ye fo nigh unto 
' the city, when ye did fight? knew ye not that they 
; would ſhoot from the wall ? | 
21 Nho ſmote * Abimelech the ſon of Jerubbe- * Judg.s. 
ſheth? .*. did not a woman caſt a piece of a milſtone 53+ 
upon him from the wall, chat he diedin Thebez'? why 
went ye nigh the wall ? chen fay thou, Thy ſervanc 


Uriah the Hittite is dead alſo f. 

_*- Called alſo Jernubbaal, Judg. g. 1. See the Note on 2 Sam. 2.8. . 

f which he knew would be acceptable News to the King, and 
therefore allay his Wrath. This indeed might make the Meſſen- 
ger ſuſpe& that David had an hand in Uriah's Death ; and poſſibly 
Joab might ſay ſo for that very reaſon, that theſe matters by de- 
orees being known, David might be hardned in Sin, and ſo Jeab 
might have the grearer Intereſt in hmm, 
22 So the Meſſenger went and came, and ſhewed 
' David all that Joab had ſent him for. : 

'223 And the Meſſenger ſaid unto David, ſurely the 
men prevailed againſt us, and came our unto us into 
the field, and we were upon them even unto the en- 
tring of che gate g. * 

g We beat them back, and purſued them even to the gate. 

24 And the ſhooters ſhot from off the wall upon 
thy ſervants, and ſome of the kings ſervants be dead, 
and thy ſervant Uriah the Hittite 1s dead alfo. 

25 Then David ſaid unto the Meſſenger, T hus 
ſhalt thouſay unto Joab, Ler nor this thing Þ dilpleaſe , 1, 
thee b : for the {word devoureth f one as well as ano- þ, el in 
ther : make thy battel more ſtrong againſt the City, thine eyes. 
and overthrow it : and encourage thou him 2. t Heb 

þ Be not deje&ed or diſcouraged by this fad occaſion. 73. e. Joab So 
to proceed in the Siege, : 

'26 And when the Wife of Uriah heard that U- 
riah her husband was dead, ſhe mourned for her huf- 
band. 

275 And when the mourning was paſt k, David ſent 
and fer her co his houſe, and the became his wife, and 
bare him a ſon /: bur the thing thar David had done 
m, + diſpleafed the LOR D. 


k& Which was ſeven days, Gen. 50- ro. 1 Sam. 31+ 13. Nor could 
the nature of the thing admit of longer delay, leaſt the roo carly 
birth of the Child might diſcover David's Sin. 1 By which itap- 
pears, That David continued in the ſtare of Impenitency for divers 
Months together ; and this notwithſtanding his frequent attendance 
upon God's Ordinances. Which is an eminent Inſtance of the Cor- 


and ſuch 


+ Heb. 
was evil in 


the eyes of. 


Deltgn, and to awaken his Conſcicnce to the conſideration of his 
Sin, and of the Injury which he had done him. His meaning is 
Now when God's People are in a doubrful and dangerous Condi- 
ton, it becomes me to Sympathize with them, and to abſtain even 
rom Jas ful Delights Whereby he might poſſibly intimate, how 
unworthy it was for Davidin ſuch a ſealon to indulge himicitin tin- 


ruption of Mau's Nature, which is even in the beſt ; and withour- 
Divine Afiſtance, is roo ſtrong for them ; of the deceitfulneſs of 
Sin, and of the tremendous Judgement of God in puniſhing one 
Sin, by delivering a Man up to another. m 7 e. His Adultery 
and Murther, as 1s evident from the next Chaptcr:; 


py S CHAP 


I 


? 


| 


j 


FI. 


4 Heb. 


ar , XII. 


Nathan by a parable reproveth, and threatneth David, 1. 


There were two men in onecity b ; the one rich and 


us Jo +b This ſeems to be more than the Faft deſerved, or than he had 
die. Commiſſion to infli& for it, Exod. 22. 1. But it is obſervable, 
t Heb... That David now when he was moſt indulgent to himſelf, and ro 
g—ſ ſen his own Sin, was moſt ſevere to others; as appears by this Paſſage, 
of death and the following Relation, v. 31. which was done in the time of 
* David's impenitent continuance in his Sin- | 

* Exod. 6 And he ſhall reſtore the lamb * fourfo!d, becauſe 
22. 4 hedidthis thing, and becauſe he had no pity, 

- + And Nathan ſaid to David, Thou #r: the man #7. 
*, &m. Thus faith the LORD God of iſrael, * I anointed 
16. 13, thee King over Iſrael, and1 delivered thee our of the 


Il. 
CHAP: XII. 


=== 12. He c02- 
feſſeth his ſm and is pardoned, 13+ i4- But the child muſt die: David 
mourneth and prayath fr it whilf life was in it, after is ſatisfied and 
cheared : the reaſon, 15, --- 23. He goeth in to Bathſheba : Solomon 3s 
born of her: and is called Jedidiah, 24, 25, David taketh Rabbah and 

rortureth the people thereof, 26, = = 31. ; 
ND che LORD fent Nathan #4 unto David: 
and * he came unto him, and faid unto' him, 


the other poor : 

a The Prophet, chap. 7. 2. 1 King. 1. 8. When the ordinary 
means did not awaken David to Repentance, God uſeth an extra- 
ordinary Courſe. Thus the Merciful God pities and prevents him 
who had ſo horribly forſaken and forgotten God. 6 He prudently 
uſhereth in his Reproof with a Parable, after the manner of the 
Eaſtern Nations, and ancient times, that ſo he might ſurprize Ds- 
wid, and cauſe him unawares to give Sentence againſt himſelf. He 
manageth his Relation as if it-had been a real thing ; and demands 
the King's JuſKce in the caſe. Though the application of this Pa- 
rable to David be eaſie and obvious, yer it matters not, if ſome Cir- 
cumſtances be not ſo applicable ; becauſe it was fit to put in ſome 
ſuch Clauſes, either for the decency of the Parable, or that David 
might not too early diſcover his Deſign. 

2 The rich men had exceeding many flocks and 


herds c. 


c Noting David's many Wives and Concubanes. 

But the poor mn had nothing ſave one little ew- 
lamb 4, which he had bought e and nouriſhed up: and 
it grew up together with him, and with his children, 
it did eat of his own F meat, and drank of his own 
cup, and lay in his boſom f, and was unto him as a 


davghter. 

_ d Deſigning Uriah, with his own and only Wife. e As Men then 
uſed to buy their Wives ; or, had procured. f which David might 
take for Hyperbolical Expreſſions of his tender care of, and At- 
fetion to it. Although there want not Inſtances of ſome who have 
treated ſuch Brute-Creatures in this manner. ; 

4 And there came a traveller g unto the rich man, 


and he ſpared to take of his own tlock, and of his own 
herd, to dreſs for the wayfaring Man that was come 
unto him, buttook the poor mans lamb, and dreiled it 


for the man thar was come to him. | | 
£ This ſome make to be the Devil, whom David gratified by his 
Sin ; but it rather ſeems added for the decency of the Parable. 
| F And Davids anger was kindled greatly againſt the 
man, and he ſaid co Nathan, As the LORD liverh, 


the man that hath done this thing, || | ſhall ſurely die þ. 


hand of Saul : | 
# Thou haſt committed this Crime with great Aggravati@ns; 
and out of thine own Mouth thy Sentence hath proceeded, and 
thou art worthy of Death. 
8 And 1 gave thee thy maſters houſe, and thy ma- 
ſters wives & into thy boſom, and gave thee the houſe 
of Iſrael and of Judah, and if thar bad been roo little, 
I- would moreover have given unto* thee ſuch and ſuch 
things /. 
k Or, Women, as that word is elſewhere uſcd ; as Numb. 31. 18. 
An41 though we read not a word of God's giving, or of David s ta- 
king any of Saul's Wives into his Boſom ; or, which is all one, into 
his Bed; yer ( which I think to be aimed at here ) ir might be 
according to the manner of that time, that the Wives and Concu- 
bines of the Precedent King, belonged to the Succeſlor, to be at leaſt 
at his diſpoſe. And to pretend to them, was interpreted little leſs 
than pretending to the Crown, Which made it fatal ro Adonijah to 
ask Abiſhag, 1 Kings 2. 23+ And to Abner to be ſuſpeRed for Riſpah, 
2 Sam. 3. 8, And Abſalom, uſurping the Crown, uſurped the Con- 
cubines alſo; which is looked on as a Crime unpardonable, *2 8am. 
16. 21. nor would this have been reckoned amongſt the Mercies 
and Bleſſings which God hereis ſaid to give him, and which are op- 
poſed to that which he ſinfully took : bur we do read, That Merab 
Saul's Daughter, was given to him for his Wife by Saz/'s promile, 
and conſequently by God's grant ; though afterwards Sau! perfidi- 
,ouſly gave her to another Man; and that Michal, the other Daugh- 
ter, was attually given to him, 1 Sam. 18. And it 15 very poflible, 
that ſome other of David's Wives were nearly related to the houſe 
of Saul ; whereby David might deſign to enlarge and ſtrengthen 
his Intereſt in the Kingdom. Although there is no abſolute Ne- 
ceſlity of reſtraining this to Saul, ſeing the word is plural, Maſters ; 
and may belong to others alſo, who ſometimes were owned by 
David as his Maſters, Lords, or Superiors, ſuch as Naba! was, and 
ſome others not elſewhere named might be, whoſe Houſes and Wives, 
or, at leaſt, Women, God might give to David, I Such other things 
as thou hadſt wanted, or 1n reaſon deſired 


Wherefore haſt thou diſpiſed the commandment 
ofthe LORD », to do evil in his ſight? thou haſt 
killed Uriah the Hittite », with the Sword, and haſt 


taken his wife to be thy Wife o, and halt ſlain him with 


7 KI Þ as 


m i, e. Thoſe Laws of God which forbad thee to do this thing, 
by not giving them that reſpe& and obſervance whict they deſer-= 
ved. nu Thar Valiant, and Generous, and Noble Perſon. o [his he 
mentions amonglt his other Sins ; partly, becauſe he had rewarded 
her, who by God's Law ſhould have been ſeverely puniſhed : part- 
ly, becauſe he compaſled this Marriage by wicked PraQtices, even by 
Uriah's Murther, and for ſinful Ends, even for the gratification of 
his inordinate and ſenſual Luſts, and for the concealment of thar 
Sin which he was obliged to confeſs and lament. p Thoſe curſed 
Enemies of God, and of his People, whom thou haſt encouraged 
and hardned in their Idolatry, by giving up him, and others of God's 
People into their hands. And note here, That although Dawid did 
not kill Uriah himſelf, nor command any to doit; but only that 
he ſhould be pur upon dangerous Service, ( which a General of an 
Army oft doth to Soldiers under him, on juſtifiable accounts, with» 
out being therefore legally chargeable with Murther, though the 
Perſon ſo employed die in the Services ) yet in Gods account, who 
judged of David's Deſign therein, it is juſtly ſo reputed. And 
therefore, though the Ammonites ſlew Uriah, yet David is ſaid to have 
killed him with their Sword. 
10 Now thetefore the {word ſhall never depart from 
thine houſe q, becauſe thou haſt deſpiſed me, and haſt 
caken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. 
Ne 4 Du:ing the reſidue of thy Life ; as appears from the following 
iſtory. 
11 Thus faith the LORD, behold, I will raiſe up 


evil r againft thee out of thine own houſe s, and I will 


the ſight ot the ſun y. 

r To wit, the evil of Puniſhment. 5 From thy own Children and 
Ly. t 7. e. Openly, ſo as thou ſhalt know it as certainly as if 
thou didit fee it, and yet not be able to hinder ir. « 5. e. I ſhall by 
my Providence, give him Power over them, which I know he wilt 
abuſe ; and I ſhall not reſtrain him from ſo doing, either by my 
Grace or Providence. x To one w ho is very near to thee, even thy 
beloved Son Ab/a/om. But God expreſſeth this here darkly and 
doubttully, that the accompliſhment of it might not be hindred. 
y In the open day, and ina publick place. The accompliſhment 
hereof, ſee chap. i6. 22, 

12 For thou didſt is ſecretly : but T will do this 
thing z before all Iſrael, and before the ſun. 

z 7. e. I will execute this Judgement. This God did by inclining 
David's Heart to leave his Concubines, to keep his Houſe, and to to 


nal Policy, which readily ſuggeſted ro him that wicked and deſpe- 
rate Counſel ; and by cn Abſalom to theſe Temptations, and 
Jeaving him to his own vicious Inclinations, which God certainly 
knew would in ſuch Circumſtances produce that Effe&. So the Sin 
was wholly from Men ; but the ordering and over-ruling their Mi- 
ſtakes and Miſcarriages to this end, was from God. 
I3 And David ſaid unto Nathan, * I. have ſinned 
againſt the LORD@a, And Nathan faid unto Da- 
vid, The LORD alſo hath putaway thy ſin b, thou 
{halt nor die c. wp 
a I now freely confeſs, that Sin which TI have hitherto ſo wicked- 
ly ſmothered ; and 1 have deſerved all theſe, and far heavier Judg- 
ments for it ; and I am more troubled for my Sin againſt my Sove- 
reign Lord and gracious God, than for the ſhame and puniſhment 
that follow it. How ſerious and pathetical thisConfefſion was, we 
may ſee, Pſal. 51. b i« e. So far as concerns thy own Life and E- 
ternal Salvation : both which were forfeited by this Sin. c As by 
thy own Sentence wv. 5. thou didit deſerve, and as thou mighteſt 
expett ro do by my immediate ſtroke ; though poſſibly thou might- 
eſt elude the Law, before a humane Judicature ; or there be no Su- 
perior to execute the Law upon thee. 
14 Howbeit, becauſe by this deed thou haſt given 
great Occaſion to the enemies of the LORD to blaſ- 
pheme &, the child alſo rhat. is born unto thee ſhall 
ſureiy die e. 
4 7,e. To reproach both God and his People, and the true Reli- 
gion. For though theſe were not concerned in David's Sin, the 
blame and ſhame of which ſhould have been appropriated to him; 
yet Heathens and wicked Men would, according to their own evil 
Minds and malicious Hearts, faſten the Reproach of this upon God 
and Religion ; as if God were unholy, becauſe the Man after God's 
own Heart was ſo ; and partial, in conniving at ſo great a Crime, 
when Saul was caſt off for afar leſs ſin : and negligent in the Go- 
vernment of the World, and of his Church in ſuffering ſuch a 
Wickedneſs, as even Heathens have abhorred to go unpuniſhed, and 
as if all Religion were but Hypocriſic and Impoſture, and a pre- 
rence for Villanies. Belides, the Ammonites upon their ſucceſs againſt 
Uriah and his Party, did doubtleſs magnifie and praiſe their Idols, 
and blaſpheme the God of 1ſ-ae!. e Which, conſidering his Af- 
feCtion to it, and the Puniſhment threatened to the poor innocent 
Infant for his ſake, muſt needs be grievous ro him- 
15 And Nathan departed unto his houſe : and the 
L ORD ftrook the child f that Uriahs Wife bare unto 
David, and it was very ſick. 
f With ſome ſudden and dangerous Diſtemper. 

16 David therefore beſought God for the child g, 


upon the earth. 


execution of it prevented by Prayer, þ To wit, into his Cloſer, 
as Marth, 6. 6. to pray ſolitarly and earneſtly as he had done with 
others. Or this word may only note his progreſs and continuance 
in the Attions here expreſſed. 

17 Andthe Elders of his houſe ; aroſe, and went to 


him, to raiſe him up from the earth : but he would 


the {word of the Children of Ammon p. 


nor, - neither aid he eat bread with them &, v1 
; The 


and David Þ fafted, and went in h, and lay all night | 
AStt 


Chap. XII _ 


* take thy wives before thine eyes 7, and give them 4 un- « p,,. 


cothy neighbour x, and he (hall lie with thy wives in 28. 3s. 
Ch,16,22, 


come into Ab/alom's Power, by giving up Achitepbel to his own Car- - 


* Pal. 
32.5. & 
51. 4 


eb. 
W 


g Suppoſing the Threatning might be conditional, and ſo the 197 


'* Fee 
38A 
00, 3, 


*Matt.1 
* iChr 
22, 9. 


| That | 
beloved n 
the LOR. 


T Heb. »: 
Wamebeca 
led upon i; 


\ PFewo. X11. 


The chief Officers of his Kingdom aud Houſhold who were 
there preſent. & This excefſive Mourning did not proceed ſimply 
from the fear of the loſs of the Child ; bur from a deep ſenſe of 
his Sin, and from the Divine Diſpleaſure manifeſted herein ; and 
particularly from a juſt apprehenſion of the Injury which he bad 
done to the Child by his Sin, which Juſtice obliged him to do 
his utmoſt to repair by Prayer, or other means. 


18 And it came to paſs onthe ſeventh day 1, that the 
child died : and the ſervants of David feared to tell him 
that the Child was dead: for they ſaid my, Behold, while 
the Child was yet alive, we ſpake unto him, and he 
would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then 

{ Heb. do | vex himſelf, if we tell him that the child is dead? 

kurt. I Either, i. From the beginning of the Diſtemper. Or, rather, 
2. From the day of his Birth, which is the moſt uſual way of com- 
putation of Mens days or Years : for it is apparent, that this hap- 
pencd during the time of David's faſting, and lying upon the Earth, 
v. 20, whichit isnot probable that it laſted for ſeven days. wWhiſ- 
pering among themſelves, v. 19» 

19. But when David ſaw that his ſervants whiſper- 
ed, David perceived that the child was dead : therefore 
David ſaid unto his ſervants. Is the child dead ? And 
they ſaid, He is dead. 

20 Then David aroſe from the earth, and walbed, 
and anointed bimſelf, and changed his apparel, and 
came into the houſe of the LORD #, and worlhipped : 
then he came to his own houſe, and when he requir- 
ed, they ſer bread before him, and he did ear. 


I S A M Q E TL. 


Chap. Xull 


: 


" 


29 And David gathered all the people together 6 : 
and went to Rabbah : and fought againſt it, and took 
it. 
b Either becauſe Joab needed more help for the ſtorming of the 
City : or, at leaſt, for the Proſecution of the Victory, and Execu* 
tion of Juſtice upon the whole Land : or becauſe he would have 
them all to partake of the ſpoil of the City, which was there in great a= 
bundarce,v.zo. the rather becauſe they were allexpoſed to the hazard 5 
of utter Ruine, in caſe the Ammonices had prevailed againſtthem. + 1 Chrogdll 
39 * And he took their Kings Crown trom off his , OP 
head, ( the weight whereof was a talentof gold c, with 
the precious ftones ) and it was /es on Davids head : A 
and he brought forth the ſpoil of the city | in great f Heb. wes 


abundance. ry great, 

c Or rather, the price whereof, &c. For as the Hebrew Shekel fig. 
nifies both a Weighr, and a piece of Money of a certain price ; 10 
alſo may miſbkal, as proceeding from the ſame Roor. And in $ene- 
ral, the ſame words both in Hebrew, Greek and Latmm, are promiſcu« 
ouſly uſed, to ſignifie either Weight, or Price ; as is wellknownto 
the Learned. Andthe addition of precious fonesr, which are never 
valued by the Weight of Gold, makes this ſignification here moſt 
proper, and probable. Moreover, the Weight mightſeem too great 
either for the King of Ammon, or for David to wear it upon his 
Head. Although, if this were meant of the Weight, it might be 
ſaid, that this was not a Crown to be worn ordinarily, but meerly 
to be put on upon the King's Head at his Coronaticn, or upon to- 
lemn Occaſions, as here where this -was done, in token of the 
Tranſlation of this Kinzdomto David: and, it may be, it was held 
up, orſupported by rwo Officers of State, that ir might nor be 
too burdenſom to him, and after a little while taken off. 


[| 
| 
I! 
| 
l 
0! 
Il 
| 


A 


—_ << t- 


— —_ PC ___ 


214,e Tothe Tabernacle, to cenfeſs his Sin before the Lord, and 
to owne his Juſtice in this ſtroke,and the other Threatnings, and ro 
deprecat his great and juſt Diſpleaſure, and to acknowledge God's 
rich Mercy, in ſparing his own Life ; and to offer ſuch Sacrifices , 
as were Proper and required in ſuch Caſes. Nor did Davida tranſ- | 
greſs that Law, Numb. 19. 14. in going thither before the ſeven days 
were expired. For neither is there the ſame Reaſon of a Tent, 
and of a Dwelling-Houſe, where the ſeveral Rooms of the Houſe ; 
are as diſtin as teveral Tents ; nor is it here ſaid, that David was | 
in the ſame Room, or in the ſame Houſe where the Child died. 

21. Then faid his ſervants unco him, what thing is: 
this that thou haſt done ? thou gidft faſt and weep for 
the child while it wasalive, but when the child was 
dead, thou didſt riſe and eat bread. * 

| 22 And he ſaid, while the child was yet alive, I fa- 
*Se Tfa. fted and wept : * for I ſaid, whe can tell whether God 


Þ !.* will be gracious to me, that the child may live o ? 
WM 3: 9-. , For God's threatning of the Childs death might be conditio- 
nal, as that was of Ninevehs deſtruttion, Jonah 3. 4. 

23 But now ke is dead, wherefore ſhould I faft p? 


can I bring bim back again? I ſhall go to him q, but 


he ſhall not return to me. 

p Secing Fa%ing and Prayer cannot now prevail with God for 
his Life. 9 Iato the State of the Dead, in which he is, and into 
Heaven, where I doubt not I ſhall find him. 

24 And David comforted Bathſheba his wife r, and 


went in unto ner s, and lay with her : and * ſhe bare 
a ſon, and *© he called his name Solomon ; and the 
LORD loved him ez. 


r Who was now much deje&ed, both for her former Sin, which 
: ſhe truely repented of, as may be gatheret from Prov. 31. 1, 2. 3, , 
&c. and for the loſs of that Child which was very dear to her; and : 
which might ſeem to be the only tie of Davia's AﬀeQtion to her; 
which being now dead, ſhe might think that David would utterly | 
caſt her off, 'and leave her to that Shame and Puniſhment which 
ſhe had deſerved. s To wit, into her Chamber or Bed. *# z. e. 
The Lord declared to David, that he loved his Son, notwithſtan- 
ding the juii cauſe which David had given to God to alienat his 


AfﬀeCGtions from him. 
25 And he ſent by the hand of Nathan the Pro- 


phet ; and he called his name || Jedidiah, becauſe of the 
ORD «. 


# Either, becauſe of the Lord's Love to him, as the Name figni- 
flies: or becauſe the Lord commanded him to do fo. 


26 And Joab fought againſt Rabbah of the children 


of Ammon, and took the royal city x. 

x 7. e. That part of the City. where was the King's Palace, where 
he ordinarily reſided ; though now it ſeems he was retired to 
a ſtrong Forr. : 

27 And Jo«b ſent Meſſengers to David and ſaid, I 
have fought againſtRabbah,. and have taken the city of 


waters , 

3 The fame Royal Ciry ſo called, becauſe it either flood befde 
the River, or was encompatſcd with Water, both for defence and 
delighr. Although the words are by ifome learned Men rendred 
thus, 1 have taken, or intercepted, or cut off Water from the City. which 
well agrees, both with the Words, «th being here put for meeth, 
which is frequent ; as Gen. 4. 1 aud 44+ 4. Exod. 9. 29, &Cc. and 
with the RcJarion of 7oſ: phus the Few who ſaith, rhe Conduits of Wa- 
ter Were cur oft, and to the City was taken: And witha Relation of 
Pclybiis' coaccrning the tame Ciry, which was takerFafrerwards by 
Anticchus in the tame manner, by cutting off Warer from the City. 

28 Now therefore, gather the reit of che people to- 


gerher, andencamp againſt the cicy, and rake it 2: leſt 


, 
. 
. 


{ 
} 


*Matt.1.6. 
* iChron. 


22, 9. 


| That 1s, 
beloved » of 
the LORD, 


.in 4d, and put thcm under ſaws e, and under harrows 


: Cities of the children of Ammon. 


21 And he brought forth the people that were there- 


of iron, and under axes of iron f, and made them paſs 
through the brick-kiln g : and thus did he unto all the 
So David and all the 


peopie returned unto Jeruſalem. 

d The words are indefinit, and therefore not neceſſarily to be 
underitood of all the People ; for it had been barbareus to uſe Wo- 
men and Children thus ; but of the Men of War, and eſpecially, 
of thoſe who had been the chief Agors or Abbettors of that V1l- 
lainous AQtion againſt Davia's Ambaſſadors, ( which was contrary 
to the Law of Nature, and of Nations, and of a!l Humanity, ) and 
of the dreadful War enſuing upon it ; for + hich, they might ſeem 
to deſerve the ſevereſt Puniſhments. Although indeed there ſeems 
to have been roo much Rigour uled ; eſpecially, becauſe theſe drezd- 


' ful Deaths were inflicted not only upon thoſe great Counſellors, 


who were the only Authors of that vile Uſage of the Ambaſſadors ; 
bur upon a great number of the People who were innocent from 
that Crime. And therefore it is probably conceived, that David ex- 
erciſed this Cruelty whilſt his Heart was hardned, and impenitent ; 
and when he was bereaved of that free and good Spirit of God, 
which would have taught him more Mercy and Moderation. e He 
ſawed them to Death : of which Puniſhment we have Examples, 
both in Scripture, Heb. 11. 37. and in other Authors. f He cauſed 
them to be laid down upon the Ground, 'and torn by ſharp Iron 
Harrows drawn over them, and hewed in picces by keen Axes. g z.e. 
'To be burnt in Brick-kilns. Or, -2ade them to paſs through the furnace 
of Malchen: i. e. of Moloch, called alſo M:ilchom, and here Mal- 
chen ; Puniſhing them with their own Sin, and with the ſame 
kind of Puniſhment which they inflifted upon their own Chil- 
dren : See 2 Kings 16. 3. and 23- 19, and Levit. 38, 24. and 20, 
2: and Deut, 18. 10. ; 


CH A ÞP. XIIL 
Ammon loveth his ſiſter Tamar : raviſbeth her : then hateth and ariveth her 
away, 1, ---=19 Ab(alom entertaineth and revengeth her with 4mnon's 
death, 20 --=-- 29. David is grieved; Abſolom fleeth to Geſur : 30. 3g. 
N D it came to paſs after this, that Abſolom the 
A ſon of David had a fair ſiſter a, whoſe name was 
Tamar: atid Amnon the ſon .of David loved her. 
s His Siſter by Father and Mother : See 2 Sam. 3. 3. 
2 And Amnon was {o vexed, that he felllick b for his | 
ſiſter Tamar, for ſhe was a virgin c, and F Amnon + Heb. « 
chought it hard for him to do any thing to her. WAS MAr- 
b The Paſſion of his Mind diſturbed his Body, as is uſual. c. And wellous, or 
therefore diligently kept, fo as he could not get private Converſe hidden in 
with her ; and withal Modeſt, and abhorring any compliance with the eyes of 
his Lufſtful Deſires, both from her Inclination and Intereſt, Amnon, 
2 But Amnon had a friend whoſe name was Jona- 
dab, the ſon of Shimeah 4d, Davids brother: and Jona- 


dab was a very | ſubtil man. 
4 Called alſo Shammah, 1 Sam. 16. 9. 
4 Aad he ſaid unto him, Why art thou, being the 


F Heb. 


w:je, 


t Heb. 
morning by 
morning. 


celimef? And Amnon ſaid unto tim, I love Tamar 
my Brother Abſaioms ſiſter. 

e Heb. from morning to morning : for, whereas in the Day he had 
many Diverſions, and Refreſhments; in the Night he was peſter'd 
with tormenting Thoughts and Paſſions ; the Effe&Ets whereof ap- 

eared in his Countenance in the Morning. . f Thy fure Friend 
and faithful Servant, who am ready to adviſe and afliit thee. 

5 And Jonadab ſaid unto him, lay thee down on 
thy bed, and make thy ſelf fick : and when thy facher 
cometh co ſ-e thee, ſay unto him, I pray thee, let my 
ſiſter g Tamar come, and give me mear, and dreſs the 


T Heb. my I take the city, and Þ it be called after my name 6. 

Yamebeca. 2 For having taken one part of the City, he concluded the re- 

ea upon 73. maining part of it could nor long ttand our # Leſt I have the 
Honour of raking it. Thus he ſeeks to ingiafiate himlelf with the 
King, by pretending great care for ius taonour and /ntereſt! 


mear in my fight, that I may ſce it, and cat #t at her 
hand þ. 


£ So he calls her, to prevent the ſuſpicion ofany diſhoneſt Deſign 


uponſo near a Relation, whom neither Nature, ner RefpeCtand At- 
3C3 teftion 


| 


9 = TIDAT®"-xE> 17! 


_ 
OOO"— — —— 


OL rn iS or On Fn WW en ner EB In S r ID ES De SELIG Do Pe CIWS Hin tc nn eng nn ——_ 


kings ſon, +lean + from day to day e ? wilt thou nor FHeb.rhin. 


/ 
F 
' 
| 
i 
[ 
7 
: 
| 


| 
| 


vwyop XIII. IE. 

; it hi vitiate. þ Pretending, that his Sto-! 
—— eſt eat nothing but ike he ſaw dreſ- 
ſed, and that by a Perſon whom he much affeRed. 

6 So Amnon lay down, and made himſelf ſick : and 
when the king was come to ſee him, Amnonſaid unto 
the king, I pray thee, ler Tamar my ſiſter come, and 
make me a couple of cakes in my ſight, that I may eat 


at her hand. : 

7 Then David ſent down to Tamar, ſaying, Go 

now to thy Brother Amnons houſe, and dreſs him 
meat z. 57 

| 7 It is ſtrange, that ſo wiſe and ſagacious a Pecſon as Davis, did 

bes: not ſee through ſo vain a Pretence : ' but that muſt be aſcribed part- 

ly to the Inſtin&s of Nature, which generally preſerve near Rela- 

tions from fuch monſtrous Attions ; and partly to God's Provi- 

dence, which blinded David's Mind, that he might bring upon him 

the deſigned and threatned Judgements. 

— - Tamar went to her Brother Amnons houſe, 

7,9 ( and he was laid down & ) and be took || flour, and 

kneaded jr, and made cakes in his ſight, and did bake 


| the cakes. 

* k Upon his Bed, or rather his Couch. 

WI 9. And ſhe took a pan, and poured them out / before 
him, but he refuſed to cat. And Amnon ſaid, Have 
out all men from me : and they went out every man 


from him. 
1 Out ofthe Frying-pan into the Diſh. 
10 And Amnon ſaid unto Tamar, Bring the meat 


into the chamber », that I may eat of thine hand. 
And Tamar took the cakes which ſhe had made, and 


!,, * brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother. 
o, m An inner Chamber : either, 1. That wherein he lay ſick upon 
his Bed, where alſo Tamar made the Cakes in his ſight, who then 
carried them out into the next Room, to bring them in again when 
he called for them Or rather, 2. Another Chamber. 4mn0n lying 
upon his Couch in one Chamber where the Company were with 
him, where alſo ſhe made the Cakes before him, firſt ſendeth all out 
of that Rom, and then riſeth from his Couch, and, upon ſome pre- 


better opportunity for his intended wickedneſs. 

II And when the had brought them unto him to eat, 
; he took hold of her, and ſaid unto her, Come lie with 
| -— me, my ſiſter. 
8 12 And ſhe anſwered him, Nay, my brother », dc 
& f Heb. not fforce meo: for * | noſuch thing ought to be done 
| bumble me. 50 T{rael p ; do not thou this folly. 


Lev. » Whom Nature both teacheth ro abhor ſuch Thoughts, and 
83 obligeth rodefend me from ſuch a Miſchief with thy utmoſt hazard, 
s if another ſhould attemp it. o Thou ſhould} abhor it. if I were 


4 _ 7% willing ; bur to add Violence to thy Filthineſs, is Abominable 
q ſo be ame. ? Among God's People who are taught better things + who alic 
will be infinitly reproached for ſuch 2 baſe Aftion. : 

13 And1, whither ſhall I cauſe my ſhame to go q* 
And as for thee, thou ſhalt be as one of the Fools ir 
Ifraelr : now therefore pray thee, ſpeak unto the king 


for he will not withold me from thee /. 

gq How can Icither endure or avoid the ſhame and reproach o: 
" it ? 77, e. Loathſom and contemptible to all the People, wherea 
now thou artin great Reputation, and Heir apparent ot the Crown 
JS This the ſpake, either beeauſe ſhe did not underſtand, or not re- 
member that the Law of God prohibited ſuch Marriages bet veen 
Brother and his half-Siſter ; or, becauſe ſhe thought her Royal Fa 
ther could or would diſpenſe with it, upon this extra»rdinary oc 
caſion, ro ſave his firſt-born Son's Life: or, that by this pretenc. 
ſhe might free her ſelf from her preſent and moſt urgent dan- 
ger, knowing ſhe ſhould have opportunity enough to preven: 
other miſchiefs. ; 


o<orhyxic” 
- $$ 
by 4 


+ Heb. 


with grear, 24 Howbeit, he would not hearken unto her voice 
Latred but being ſtronger than ſhe, forced her, and lay with he: 
greatly 15T Then Amnon hated her | exceedingly s, fo tha: 


the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the 
love wherewith he had loyed her : and Amnon f{aic 


| unto her, Ariſe, be gone, 

I s Partly, becauſe his Luft being now ſatisfi?d, his mind and Con 

ſcience had a true and clear proſpeR, an1 deep ſenſe of the narura! 

turpitude and baſeneſs of the Attion, and of that ſhame, and con- 

| tempt, and loſs, and miſchief, which was 1:kely to follow it and con- 

ry ſequently an utter Averſion from her who had been the Inftrum-nr 
and occaſion of his Sin ; and principally, by the juſt Judgment o- 
God both upon Azmon and David, that fo the f11 might be madepu - 
lick, and way made for the ſucceeding Tragedies: for otherwiſe it 
wou'd probably produce Loveand Kindneſs ro her, as it didin ano- 
ther, Gen. 34. 2, 3. eſpecially in him, whom both Nature and In 
tereſt, and even luſt itſelf, obliged to allay her grief and ſhame, by 
all poſſible Demonſtrations of Kindneſs. 

16 And he ſaid unto him, There 3s no cauſe .*. « this 

evil in ſending me away, is greater than the other 7 that 
chou didſt unto me : but he would not hearken unto 


her. 


.. To wit, given theeby me. # This ſhe might truely ſay, becauſe 
though the other was in it ſeIfa greater ſin,yet this was an A of 
greater inhumanity and barbarous Cruelty, & a greater wrong and 
Calamity ro her ( which ſhe means by evil ) becauſe it expoſed her 
eo publick infamy and contempt, as if ſhe had been an impudent 
Strumpet- and had either enticed him t2 the fin, or at leaſt con- 
ſented roit ; and beſides, it turned a privat offence into a publick 

ſcandal, to the great diſhonour of God and of his people Jrae!. 
_ and eſpecially of all the Royal Family, and was likely to cauſe gire- 
* Ful Paſſions, and Breaches, and Milchicfs among them, : 


$S 4 MU EL. 


tence, goes into another ſecret Chamber, where he might have the' 


17 Then he called his ſervant that miniſtred unto 

him, and ſaid, pe now this woman out from me, and 
bolt the door after her. ; . 
18 Andſhe had a Garment of divers colours « upon 
her : for with ſuch robes were che kings Daughters that 
were Virgins apparrelled. Then his ſervant brought 
hec out, and bolted the door after her. 

z Of Embroidered work. Compare Gen. 37, 3» | 

19 4 And Tamar put aſhes on her head, andrene 
her garmept x of divers colours that was on her, and 
laid her hand on her head, and went on, crying z. 

x To ſignifie her grief for ſome CaJamity which had befallen her 
and what that was, concurring circumſtances did ealily diſcover. 
» Intoken of grief and ſhame. as if ſhe were unable and athamed to 
ſhew her face. See Jer. 2. 37. z To manifeſt her abhorrency of the 
Fa, and that it was not done by her conſent. 

20 And Abſalom her brother {aid unto her, Hath 
Amnon thy brother been with thee a? but hold now 
thy peace, my ſiſter : he js thy Brother b, | regardnot 
this thing c. So Tamar remained Þ deſolate d in her,,,,", 


brother Abſalems houſe. + Heb, 
2 i, e. Lien with thee. Behold and imitate the modeſty of Scrip- and was de. 
ture expreſſions. b Therefore thou muſt forgive and forget the Inju- ſo/ate, 
ry ; therefore thy diſgracing of him will be a blot to us all: there- 
fore thou wilrſt not get right fiomDavid againſt him, becauſe he is 
asnear and dear to him as thou : therefore thy diſhonour is the leſs, 
becaule thou waſt not abuſed by any mean Ferſon, bur by a King's 
Son : therefore this cvil muſt be born, becauſe it cannot be tevenged. 
And thus he covers his deſign of taking vengeance upon him ar the 
firſt opportunity c So as to torment thy 1elf 4 NegleQted and forſaken 
by others, none now ſeeking herin Marriage ; and through thame 
and dejettion of Mind giving her ſelf up to ſolitude and retirement. 
21 © But when king David heard of all theſe things, 
he was very wroth e. 
e To wit, with Amon : whom yet he did not puniſh, at leaſt ſo 
ſeverely as he ſhould: either from the conſcience of his own guilt in 
the like kind; or, from thar foolith Indulgence which he efr thewed 
to his Children : or becaule the caſe was perplexcd : for if he had 
been pur to death for the Fa&, by vertve of that Law, Deut. 22 23. 
24, ſhe alſo, who was innocent muſt have died with him, becauſe 
ſhe did not cry out: although indeed that Law did nor reach the 
preſent caſe Tamargnot being betrothed to an Husband ; and torthe 
tollowing Law conCerning a Virgin nct betrothed. that could have 
no place here: he could not force Amnon to marry Tamar, becauſe 
chat Marriage had been inceſtuous. oh 
22 And Abſalom ſpake unto his brother Amnon nei- 


ther good nor bad f : for g Abſalom hated Amnon, 
becauſe he had forced his ſiſter Tamar. 


f i. e. He ſaid nothing at all to him ; to wit, about that buſineſs 
[t 1s a ſynecdochical Expreſſion, uſcd in like manner, Gen 3 1. 24. He 
1either debated it with him, nor threatned him for it; bur ſeemed 
willing to cover it and paſs it by with Brotherly kindneſs. For if 
ne had wholly forborn all diſcourſe and converſe with him, it 
would have raiſed great jealouſfies in Amnon and David, and hindred 
aim in his intendsd and deſired revenge. Or rather, but, or 
*h:ugh, as the Hebrew Particle, Chi, commoniy ſignifte- ; for the fol- 
iowing Clauſe is not added as a Reaſon of the former, but by way 
of exception or oppoſition. Though he outwardly expreſſed no 
diſlike of the Fat, yer he inward!y hated him. 

23 T And it came to paſs after rwo full years .*., 
chat Abſaiom * had ſheep-ſhearers þ in Baal-Hazor, , |c. 
which zs belides Ephraim z 3: And Abſalom invited all z;.,, 
che kings ſons. 

.*. This circumſtance of time is noted. partly as an aggravation 
»F Abſalom's malice, which was ſo inveterate and imp!acable + and 

artly as an a& of 4ſaloms Policy, that both Ammon and David 
11.ht more ſecurely comply with his detires, as being now free 
om all ſuſpicion of revenge. h According to the manner of thoſe 
ancient times, when Princes did not give themſelves up to ſloth 
ind Juxury, bur ſpent theirtime and pains in ſome honeit employ- 
ment. z Either, Firſt, The Ciry cailed Ephraim, or Ephrem, John 
I. 54. Or, Secondly, The Tribe of Ephraim, towards or nigh 
into which this place was fituzte. 

24 And Ablalom c :me tothe king, and ſaid, Behold, 
10w, thy ſervant hath ſheep-ſhearers, Let the king, I 

eſeech thee, and his ſervants go with thy ſervant &. 

k To the Feaſt, which was uſual upon thoſe occaſions. See 
Gen. 38. 12 1 Sam. 25. 7, Its 

25 And the king {aid to Abſalom, Nay, my ſon, let 
15 not all now go, leſt we bs chargeable unto thee. 
And he preſſed him /: howbeic he would not go, but 

bleſſed him m. 

I Pretending great deſire of his preſence there, to prevent any 
jexlouſtes. which otherways he thought would ariſe in the breaſt of a 
King ſo wiſe and experienced, and under the expeQation of God's 
dicadful judgements to be inflifted upon his Family. #: Diſmiiſed 
him with thanks for his kindneſs, and with his Fatherly Bleſſing- 


26 Then faid Abſalom, if not, I pray thee, let my 
brother Amnon go with us ». And the King ſaid unto 
him, Why ihould he go with thee? 

n For theKing deſigned ( as thefollowing words ſhew ) to kecp 
himat home with him as being his eldeſt Son, and Heir of his King- 
dom: otherways Abſalom would never have made particular mentt- 


f Heb. ws 


on of him ; which now he was forced to do. Nordid this deſire of 
Annm's preſence want ſpecious Pretences, as that ſeing the King 
vw ould not. he who was next to him, might honour. him with his 
Company ; and that this might be a manifeſt and publick token 
of that Love and triendſhip which was between him and his Bro« 
ther, notwithſtanding the tormer occaſion of differences oO 
238, But 


Chap. Xl T C 


10, 
ent, 
1 have 
mandec 
+ Heb 
of wala 


+ Heb 
rode. 


+ Heb. 
wut. 


| Or,ſet 


{ Heb. 

according 
the wora 
thy ſerwus 


f Hebs 
With a 
Preat we 
ing great 
| Or, 4 
mhur, 


*1Sam 
24. 10! 
Pfal; 16: 
h Or, W, 
emſumed, 


T! 


LF Chap. x11, 


Or wil 


i. a 


27 But Abſalom preſſed him, that he let Amnon and 
all the kings ſons go with him 0. 

0 Tr is frange that his urgent defire of 4907's company raiſed 
no ſuſpicion in ſo wiſe a King ; but God blinded hisMind that he 
might execute his judgements upon David, and bring upon 4- 
2m the juſt puniſhment of his lewdnels. : 

28 © Now Abſalom had commanded his fervants. 
ſaying, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry 
wich winep, and when I ſay unto you, Smite Amnon, 
then kill bim, fear not: || have not I commanded you 


_ ſce q ? be couragious, and be Þ valiante 


Jhove cn 1 
manded you? evil: 


2 When he leaſt ſuſpeRs, and will be moſt unable to prevent the 
q I who am the King's Son, and, when Armor is gone, his 


+ Heb-/ons Heir : who therefore ſhall cafily obtain pardon for you, and will - 


of valour. 


+ Heb, 
rode. 


Heb. 
(. 


| Or,ſetled. 


{ Heb. 


according to 


the word of 
thy ſervant. 


f Heb» 
With a 
great weep. 
ng greatly 


| Or, 4%. mourned for his ſon every day. 


muy, 


* 1 Sam, 
24. 10! 


Pal; 16; 2:NON, ſeeing he was dead. 


Or, was 
emſumed, 


berally reward you. : 

29 And the ſervants of Abſalom did unto Amnon as 

Abſalom had commanded : then all the. kings fonsa- 
roſe, and every man Þ gat him up upoi his mule 7,and 
fled. 

» Which were in uſe amongſt the Iſraelites See 1 King. 23. 33- 
For though they might not promote ſuch mixed kinds of procrea- 
ation, Levit. 19. 19. yet they might uſe creatures ſo engendred. 

30 T Anditcame to paſs, while they were 1a the way, 
that tidings came to David, ſaying, Abſalom hath ſlain 
all the kings ſons /, and there is not one of them left. 

Which was not improbable, when the Sword was once drawn 
among them, and one of them killed, which might provoke thereſt 
to draw their Swords , both to defend themſelves, and to revenge 
their Brother's death, and thereby occaſion the death of all. And 
God ſuffered this falſe report to be ſpread for David s greater ter- 
ror and humiliation.that he who had formerly rejoyced in the tid- 
ings of Uriah's death might now be tormented with the report of 
the death of all his Sons. ; 

31 Then the king aroſe, and tare his garments, and 
lay on the earth, and all his ſervants ſtood by with their 
clothes rent. 

22 And Jonadab the ſon of Shimeah, Davids bro- 
ther ?, anſwered and ſaid, Let not my lord ſuppoſe 
that they have ſlain all the young men the kings {ons : 
for Amnon only is dead. for by the j appointment « 
of Aoſalom this hath been || determined; from the day 
that he forced his ſiſter Tamar. 

t A Man of great eraft and ſubtilty, and one that had exattknow- 
ledge of 4mnon's Fa&, and of Abſalom's Temper: » Or, by the com- 
mand ; Heb. mouth, put for command, Numb 3-16, x It was reſolved 
from that time 1n his Breaſt * but the word of command was not 
then given to others ; forthet would probably have hindred his de- 
ſign. But all this he ſeems to have ſpoken fioma probable conjec- 
ture rather than of certain knowledge, as appears by the ſequel, 

33 Now therefore let not my lord the king take the 
thing to heart, to think tnat all the kings 10ns are dead: 
for Ammon only is dead. | 

24 But Abſalom fled y» And the young man that” 
kept the watch lift up hiseyes, and looked,and behold, 
there came much people by che way of the hill-fide be- 
hind him &. 

}He v ho had undertaken todefend hisServants flies for his own 
life. 2 Behind the Watchman : for it ſcems they did nor come 1n 
the diretRod. where the Watchman looked for them, but ( for 
ſome reaſon or fanſie th-y had ) ferched a compaſs, and came that 
way which heleaſt expected them. : 

25 And Jonadab ſaid unto the King, Behold the 
Kings ſons come: Þ as thy ſervant ſaid, 1o it is. 

35 Andirt came to paſs as ſoon as he had made an 
end of ſpeaking, that behold, the kings ſons came,and 
lifr up their voice and wept: and the king alſo and 
his ſervants wept Þ very fore. 

37 C Bur Abſalom fled, and went to Talmai, the 
ſon of || Ammihud King of Geſhur *, : and David 


©. His Mothers Father, 2 Sam. 2. 3, that he might have preſent 
proteCtion and ſuſtenance from him ; and that by his mediation he 
might obtajn his Father's pardon and favour. 

28 So Abſalom tled, and went co Gefbur, and was 
there three years. 

39 And * the ſcul of king David ||longed to go forth 
unto Abſalom #: for he was comforted concerning Am- 


a To wit,to viſit him, or to ſend for him. And thus this word, 
the Soul,is here underſtood partly, from the Hebrew Verb, which be- 
ing of the Feminine Gender; agiecs not with David, but with David's 
Soul ; and partly, by comparing this with other places, where the 
ſame verb 1s uſed, and the Soul exprefſed, as Pſal 8 ..3. and 119 81: 
But as thisSupplement may ſecm. too bold, ſo this Vertion ſeems not 
ſo well to agree with thar Phraſe of going out to Abſalom ; for David 
neither deſired nor intended to go out to Abſalom, but that Abſalom 
ſhould come home to him And theſe words may began are other- 
wiſe rendred, by the moſt ancient and rcmarkab e Interpreters to| 
this purpoſe, And King David made an end of going out ( to wit,in an 
Hoſtile manner, as tha: Verb is oft uſed, Gen 14. 18. 2 Sam. 11,1 
#zainff ( for ſo the Hebrew Particle, E!, is oft uſed, as Fer. 34; 7: Ez. 
T3. 9.20. Ames 7. 15: ) Abſalom; i. e having uſcd ſome, though it 
1s probable, bur cold and remits endeavours to pur'ue after Abſalom 


and to fetch him from his Grand-tathers to receive condign Puniſh- 
ment, he now gave over thoughts of it. 
that in the ſame conjugation,is uſed in the ſame manner, King.3. 
I. he made an end of tuilding. It is to be objefted, That the Hebrew 


% 


Thus the tame Verb,and;- £ 
the LORD thy God p, Þ that thou wouldlt not futfer 


MU E £. 


Verb is ofthe Feminine Gender. and therefore doth not agreewith 

King D2vid, which is Maſculine. It may beanſwered, T! at Enallge 

of Genders is a moſt frequent figure; and as the Maſculine Gender 

is ſometimes applied to Women when they do ſome manly and gal- 

lant Action, Exod.1.21. fo the Feminine Genrer is ſometimes uled, 

of men when they ſhew an effeminate tenderneſs in their diſpoſition 

which 1s the caſe here, as ſome learned Hebricians have noted, 

ft C H A P, X I , 

Joab ſuborning a widew of Tekoah by a parable to mcline the King's heart 
ro fetch home Abſalom, bringeth him to jeruſalem but not into Darvids 
fight, 1, — 24. Abſalom's beauty, hair, and chilaren,25,— 27. After 

two years Joab bringeth him imto the kings preſence, 28,—3 3, 

N Ow Joab the ſon of Zeruiah, perceived that the 
' kings heart was toward Abſalom a. 

a He deſired to ſee him, but was aſhamed to ſhow kindneſs to 
one whom God's Law and his own Conſcience obliged him to pu- 
niſh and wanted a fair pretence, which therefore 7025 gave him 

2 And Joab ſent to Tckoah b, and fercht thence 
a wiſe woman c, and ſaid unto her I pray thee, feign 
thy ſelf to be a mourner, and put on now mourning 
| apparel, and anoint not thy ſelf with oil 4, but be as 
a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead : 

6 ACity of Judah, 2 Chron. 11. 5, 6. - One of Jeruſalem was not 
convenient, I:{t the King might know the perſon or ſearch our the 
buſineſs. And beſides, this women ſeems to be of great emin«ncy 
for her wiſdom, as the following diſcourſe manifeirs c Rather than 
a Man, becauſe women can more ea'ily expreſs their Paſſions, and 
do ſooner procure pity in their miſeries,and an anſwer to their Re 
queſts. d As they uſed to do when they were out of a mourning 
itate. See Ruth 3« 3: Matth. 6. 17. 

3 And come to the King, and ſpeak on this manner 
unto him: ſo Joab put the words in her mouth. 

4 T And when the woman of Tekoah ſpake to. the 
king, ſhe fell on her face to the ground, and did obei- 
fance, and ſaid, + Help, O King- 

5 And the king ſaid unto her, What aileth thee ? 
And the an{wered, I amsindeed a widow-woman e, and 
mine husband is dead. 

e One of them who moſtneed thy compaſſion and afliſtance, and ' 
whom thou art by God's Law obliged in a ſingular manner to pro- 
tett and relieve. | 


6 And thy handmaid had two ſons, and they two 
rove together in the field, and there was F none to part 


them f, butthe one {mote the other, and flew him g. 

f And therefore there is no witneſs, either that he killed him or 
how he killed him, whether from ſome ſudden alfion and great 
provocation, orin his own neceflary defence, cr otherwiſe. g As 
the avengers of Blood report. . 

7 And behold, the whole family is riſen againſt 
thine handmaid, and they ſaid, Deliver him chat note 
hi> brother, that we may kill him h, for tbe life of his 
brother whom he flew, and we will deſtroy the heir 
allo i: and fo they ſhall quench my coal which is left. 
and ſhall not leave to my husband / zcicher name nor 
remainder f upon the earth. 

hþ According to the Law, Numb. 

plainly diſcover,that their proſecution of him was not ſo much from earth; 
love of Juſtice, as from a « ovetous deſire ro deprive hi'n of the In- 
heritance,and to transfer it to themſelves ; which ſelf-intereſt might 
juirly render their Teſtimony ſuſpetted. Or, perhap» theſe words 
are not ſpoken as the exp:efſs words of the proſecutors ( who can 
hardly be thought ſo dire&ly to exp: eſs a finiſter deſign ) bur as 
the Womans Inference or Comment upon what they were doing: 
( for this would be indeed the reſwr of it,though t: ey did norſfay 
ſo in expreſs words) thereby to repreſent her caſe as the more de- 
icrving pity k The poo: remainder of my light an4 comfort, by 
whom alone my hopes may be revived and repaired. / She names 
him rather thaa her ſelf, becauſe children bear the Names of their 
Fathers, not of their Mothers. 

8 And the king faid unto the woman, Go to thine 
nouſe, ar.d I wil; give charge concerning thee m. 

m That thy Cauſe may bejuſtly and truely examined,and thy Son 
preſerved from their unjuſt and malicious proceedings. 

9 And the woman of Tckoah faid untv the king, 

My lord,O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my fa- 
thers houſe: and the king and his throne be guiltleſs », 

» The ſenſe 1s,cither,firſt,this, If I do not inform thee aright and 
thou thereby beeſt drawn to give an unriyhteous Sentence on my 
bchalf. 1 am willing to bear the whole blame of it before God and 
Men ; I acknowledge thou art wholly innocent 1n the caſe, Come 
pare Gen.27.13. Or, ſecondly, this. If through thy forgerfulneſs or 
negle& of this my juſt cauſe, my Adverſaries prevail and deſtroy my 
Son, my deſire is,that God would not Jay itto the King's charge, 
but rather to me and mine, ſo the King may be exempted thereby. 

W hereby ſhe both infinuates her great eſteem of,and atteQtion for the - 
King,thereby winning upon him to compaſs her deſign ; and withal 
implies,that ſuch an omiſſion of the King's will bring guilt upon 
him; and yet moſt prudently and decently orders her phraſe fo as 
not to ſeem to blame or threaten the King. Compare Exod. 5. 16. 

2 Sam. 20, 16. This ſenſe ſeems beſt to agree with David's anſwer, 
which ſhews that ſhe deſired ſome further affurance of the King's 
Care and Juſtice in her concern | 


io And the king faid, Whoſoever faith ought unto 
thee, bring him to me, and he ſhall not touch thee 8 


+ Heb: 


T'Heb, 


any more. 


0. 7: e; So as to hurt or moleſt thee: by purſuing thy Son: 
11 Then ſaid lhe, I pray thee, let the king remember 


3 © 3 ths 


#pon the 
35- 79. Deut I9. I2+ 1 So they face of cha 


tHeb:ſave 


no deliverer 
betweenthem 


Chap. XIV, || 


% 
—— SES Boo and HS <<. w utes” Fs 


4% WH a 


> ee 


PEE ewe een Eee ren o_ 


| { Or, be? 
| cauſe God 


hath net 


his bfe, 


j| Chap. 


takes awsy J;e all of us, both thou, O King,who therefore art obliged to take | 
bsth alſo (i 


the revengers of blood to deſtroy any more q,leſt they 
deſtroy my ſon r, And he ſaid, 4s the LORD hiverh, 
there ihallnor one hair of thy ſon fall to the earth /. 

p The ſenſe is,cither, firſt, Make mention (as this Hebrew Verb 1s 
oft rendered) of the name of the Lord thy God,to wit,in an Oath ; 
i.e. ſwear to me by God, Thatthou wilt prote& me and my Son a- 
gain{ rhe Revenger of Blood. For ſo David did in compliance with 
This deſire of hers. Only ſhe was forced to expreſs her Mind 1n 
more general and ambiguous terms, becauſe it had been preſump- 
tion and 1ud-neſs for her in plain terms to deſire the King's Oath, 
as if ſhe durſt not truſt his word; yet withal ſhe inſinuares her 
meaning ſo plain y,tha- the King underſtood ir;and yer ſo handſom- 
ly and eleg:ntly,rhat the King was much pleaſed with her Wiſdom, 
and thereby inclined ro grant her requeſt» Or, ſecondly. this. Re- 
member th: gracious Nature of rhy'God,who is not too ſevere and 
rigorous to mark at all that is amiſs, nor doth cut of every man- 
ſlayer, as appears from Numb. 35. and from the example of Ca/n,and 
from thy ſelf, O King ; though this fhe exprelieth :.ot, bur on!y 
uſeth ſuch words which ſhe knew would give ſo wiſe and good a 
King occaſion ro refl:& upon himſelf, and upon t'\e go-dneſs of 
Go4 in ſparing him, though a willful Murtherer, that the. eby he 
might be obliged to imitateGod,in ſparing tae perion whom ſhe de- 
ſigned. Or, YThirdly, this, Remember the Lord,in wheſe preſence 
thou haſt made me this promiſe, and who will be a witneſs againſt 
thee,if thou breakeſt it. q Heb. leſt rhe avenger of blood multiply to de- 
froy; 4.2. le? they cauſe one deſtruftion to another,and add my tur- | 
viving Son tohim who is flain already. Or, leſt :hou doſt mult: ply a- 
wengers of blood to deftroy ; i. e. leſt by thy connivance «rt their cruel 
and malicious proceedings againit my Son, thor: doſt encourage A- 
vengzrs of blood to the like furious P:attices,and thereby increaſe | 
the zumber of that ſort of Men, and upon that pretence occaſion . 
multitudes of Murthers » Or, and let them not deſtroy my Son ; the 
Future Tenſe, being put for t:eImperative Mood, as 1s frequent. 
7. e. He ſhal nor ſutfer the leaſt damage. We have the ſame Phraſe 
uſed 1 Sam. 14.45. 1 King. 1. 52, Af. 27. 34. Compare Mat, 10. 30. 
> 12 Then the woman ſaid re, Let thine handmaid, 1 
pray thee, ſpeak oe word unto my lord the King, And 
he ſaid, Say on: | 

t Having oblidged the King by his Oath in her ſuppoſed caſe, 
ſhe now throws off the Veil, and begins to apply this Parable to 
the Kings and Kingdoms preſent caſe. 

12 And the woman faid, Wherefore then haſt thou 
thoughe ſuch athing againſt the people of God « ? foi 
the king doth ſpeak this thing as one which is faulty , 
in that the King doth not fetch home again his ba- 
niſhed y. 

« If thou wouldſt not permit the Avengers of Blood to moleſt 
me, or to deſtroy my Son, who ate but two perſons ; how unreaſo- 
nable is it that thou thouldeſt proceed in thy endeavours to avenge 
Amnon's Blood upon 4bſalom, whoſe death would be highly injurious 
and grievous to the whole Commonwealth of [/rach;ail whoſe Eyes 
are upon him as the Heir of the crown, and a wiſe,and valiant,and 
amiable Perſon, unhappy only in this one aft of killing 4mnon, 
which was done upon an high and hainous provccation,& whereof 
thou thy ſelfdid{t give the occaſion by permitring 4mnen to goun- 
punifhed? x By thy Word, and promiſe,and Oath given to me for 
my Son,thou condemneſt thy ſelffor not allowing the ſame Equity 
towards thy own Son y To wit, Atſalom, from that Heathenith 
Country were heis in evident danger of being infected with their 
Idolatry and other Vices : whichis likely tobe a great and publick 
Miſchief to all thy people, if he come to reign in thy ſtead, which 
he is very likely to do, Ir is true,there was a conſiderable diſparity 
between her So:is, ind 4bſalom's caſe,the one being a raſh and ſud- 
den Aion, the other a deliberate and premeditated Murther ; but 
that may ſeem to be balanced in ſome meaſure; partly, by A4nmor's 
great and Jaſting provocation; and principally, by the vaſt differ- 
ence between a private Injury, which was her cafe, and a publick 
calamity and grievance,which ſhe aftirmed,and the King eaſily bc- 
lieved was 4blalen's caſe : and what David ſaid in the caſe of Jeab's 
Murther of Abzer, That he could not revenge it, becauſe the ſons of 
Zeruiah were too hard for him, 2 Sam. 3. 39. the like paradventure 
might have been ſaid in this caſe, where the peoples hearts may 
ſeem to have been univerſally and vehemently ſ-r upon Abſalom 
the rather, becauſe/his long baniſhment moved their pity, and 
abſence made him more detireable, as it frequently happens among 
people ; and therefore it might really be out ofthe King's power 
to puniſh him ; and ſo he might ſeem to be obliged to ſpare him 
for the common ſafety of his whole Kingdom. 

' 14 For we mult needs die z, and «reas water ſpilt 
on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again s: 


|| neither doth God refpe& «ry perſon b, yet doth he de- 


. ſuffer his brethren to kill him, as in reaſon might have been expe&- 
. ed; nor hath Godl himſelf yetcut him off for tis Murther, as he 


, invarie the Land, and endeavcur by force to re-gain and ſecure his 


XIV. I. SY AZM Q” E L. Chap. XIV, ? 


is in many other places,and as being eaſily ſupplied out of the con- 
text. So the ſenſe is, God hath hitherto ſpared him, and did not 


oft doth with Perſons who are out of the Magiſtrates reach ; but 
hath hitherto preſerved him evenina Heatheniſh Land. All which 
are intimations that God would have him ſpared. c Or, but hath 
deviſed means, &Cc. i. e. hath given Laws to this purpoſe, That the 
man-ſlayer who is baniſhed ſhould not always continue in baniſh 
ment, but upon the high-Prieſts death return to his own City. 
W kereby he hath ſhewed his pleaſure, that the Avenger of Blood 
ſhould not implacably peiſiſt in ſeeking reverge, and that the man= 
ſlayer ſhould be ſpared Or rather, thus, bur :hinketh thoughts, or but 
hath deſimed, or, therefore he intendeth that he who is bamſhea ( to wit, 
Abſalom) be not ( always ) expelled or baniſh-a from him ; 1. e. from 
God and from his People, and from the place of his worſhip, but 
that he ſhould return home to him. $0 the ſcnſe is, That God ty 
ſparing Abſalon''s life in the midſt of dangers,did ſufficiently intim« 
ate,that he would in due time bring him back to his Land &people. 

16 Now therefore that I am come to ſpeak of this 
thing unco my lord the King, #t is becaule the people 
hare made me afraid 4: and thy handmaeid ſaid e. I 
will now ſpeak unto the King ; it may be that the king 
will perform the requeſt of his handmaid. 

d The truth is, I was even forced to this bold Addreſs to thee, 
by the diſpoſition and condition of thy people, who are diſconten- 
ted at 4b/alom's perpetual baniſhment, and tull of fears ; either leſt, 
upon thy death, which none knoweth how ſoon it may happen, 
they ſhould be involved in a Civil War at out thy Succeſſour ; or 
leſt, in the mean time, if Abſalom by his Father-in-laws aſſiſtance 


Righr t- the Succeſſion, the people, who have a great opinion of 
him, and kindneſs for him,and think he is very hardly uted,ſhould 
take up arms for him ; or Jeſt he who is thy Heir and Succeſſor 
ſhould by continual and familiar converſation with Heathens,be in« 
ſcared in their Errors, or alierated frem the true Religion, and 
from God's Worlkip, from which he is now utterly excjuced.s Or, 
therefore thy hanamaid ſaid, either, within my ſelf, 5. e, I intended 
or, to th- people, ro quiet them, 

16 For the king will hear f, to deliver his handmaid 
out of the hand of che man g that would deſtroy me and 
my ſon h together out of the inheritance of God 3: 

f For I know the King is ſo wiſe and juſt, thatI aſſure my ſelf of 
Audience and Acceptation. Which expeCQtation ofhers is cunning- 
ly inſinuated here,that the King might conceive himſelf oblidged to 
anſwer it, and not to diſappoint her hope, nor to forfeit that good 
opinion which his Subje&s now had of him. g To graut my requeſt 
concerning my ſon,and conſequently the peoples Petition concern«= 
ing. Abſalom. h Implying that her life was beund up in the life of her 
Son, and that ſhe could not out-live his death ; and ſuppoſirg, it 
is like,thar it might be David's caſe alſo,and would therefore touch 
him in a tender part,though it were not proper to ſay it expreſly:) 
and thereby ſuggeiting, that the tranquillity, ſafety, and comfort 
of the people of 1ſ-ael, depending upon Abſalom's Reſtitution, and 
the ſettlement of the Succeſſion in him. z. #.e. Out of that Inheri- 
tance which God hath given to me and mine 2 or, out of that 
Land which God gave to his people to be their inheritance and 
Poſſeſſion, and in which alone Sod hath ſertled. the place ofhis 
Preſence and Worſhip. Whereby ſhe intimates the danger of 46- 
ſalom's living in a ſtate of ſeparation fiom God, and his houſe, and 
2amonglt IdolJaters. 

17 Then thine handmaid faid, The word of my lord + 11, 
the king ſhall now be + comfortable &: for as an angel fir rf. 
of God /,ſo is my lord the king Þ to diſcern good and t Heb. 
bad mz: therefore » the LORD thy God will be with # #7 
thee o. 

k T doubt not the king will givea gracious and ſatisfaftory An« 
ſwer ro my Petition. 1 To wit, in witdom and Juſtice, and Good= 
neſs. 2 To hear and judge of Cauſes and Requeſts, whether they 
be juſt, an4 good, and fit to be granted,as mine is; or unrighteous, 
and unreaſonable, and fit to be reje&ed. So ſhe intimates her con- 
fidence in the juſtice of her Cauſe, and thereby confirms the King 
in his purpoſe and promiſe to grant her requeſt, and withal arms the 
King againſt the ſuggeſtions of them- who ſhould adviſe him to a 
rigorous execution of Gads Laws againſt 4bſalom, and be ready to 
centure him for reſtoring Abſalom, and this for want of that Angeli- 
calWiſdom which the King had, who wiſely conſidered many things 
far above their reach. # Becauſe thou art ſo wiſe, and juſt, and 
pitiful, and gracious to rhoſe who in ſtri& Juſtice deſerve puniſh- 
ment- 0 Goa will owne and ſtand by thee in this thy a& ofGrace: 
or, God will proſper thee 1n thy enterprizes: or, at leaſt, not be 


viſe means, that his baniſhed be nor expelled from 
him c. 
z Heb. Þ dying we ſþall die; i, e, we ſhall certainly and ſuddenly | 


due care of thy Succeſſor, who is Ab/alom ; and A4*ſalom, who, if he. 
do not die by the hand of Juſtice, muſt ſhortly die by theneceſlity | 


of Nature : and 4Amn:n too muſt have died in the common way of | 


means, GC 11 fleſh, if 4bſam had not cur him pf, Therefore, O King,benor | 


imphcable towards 4-ſalom for nipping a Flower a little before its 
time of fading, and reſtore him to us all before he die in a ſtrange 
Land. # Which is quick'y drunk up and buried-in the earth, and | 
cannot be recovered. b To wit, ſo far as to exempt him from this 

common Law ofdying Bur this Veiſton ſeems not to agree with 
the Scripture-Phraſe: tor the accepting of a perſon is neverto my know. 
ledge expreſſed in Hebrew by Naſa Neph:ſb, which is the Phraſe here, 
but by Naſa Panim, every where. The words therefore may be 
rendred either thus: yer God will not take away, or deth not uſe to take 


ſerve ) the ſou/. or ſouls, or lives of Men, to wit, by violence. 
God doth not ſeverely and inftantly cur off Offenders, bur ſuffers 


them to live till they die by the courſe of Nature ; and therefore | of them, bur not as to all the expreſſions which ſhe uſed, for theſe 


ſo ſhouldſt thou do roo, Or, rather thus : yet God hath not taken a- 
way his ſoul or life ; the Pronoun, ki, being underſtood here as it 


: , F any turnings or windings to the right or left hand, bur he quickly 
away (the Future Tenſe oft noting a continued a&t, as Hebricians ob- |ſearcheth our thetruth in every thing : ſo (it is a folly to diſſemble, 


offended with thee, 

18 Then the King anſwered and ſaid unto the We- 
man, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I 
(hall ask thee. And the woman ſaid, Let my lord the 
king now ſpezk, 

i9 And the king faid, Is not the hand of Joab with 
thee in all this p? And the woman anſwered, and ſaid, 
As thy foul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to 
che right hand, orto the left, from ought that my lord 
the king, hath ſpoken 9q: for thy ſervant Joab he bade 
me, and he pur all theſe words in the mouth of thine 
handmaid r: | ; 


2 Haſt thou not ſaid and done this by Joat's direQion and con- 
trivance? 9g As the King is fo wiſe that no man can deceive him by 


or £0 about to conceal it ) it 15 even ſo, thou haſt now diſcovered 
the truth of this buſineſs. r To wit, for the ſcope and ſubſtance 


wereto be varied as the King's anſwer gave occaſion, which allo 
ſhe did with ſingular prudence. 
20 To 


"ha 


| Heb. 
Keſd. 


| Or, tþ 


t Heb. 
and as 7 
ſalom thy 
Was 70t 
beautiſu 
man in 
Jrael to 
priſe 
geatly, 


? Heb. 
ſme, 


Chap. XIV. IL SE IR. | 
20 To fetch about this form of ſpeech { hath thy the King, bur alſo attempt high things, not without danger to the 


ſervant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wife, ac- %ing and Kingdom, as it happened. 


cording to the wiſdom of an angel of God, to knowall | _ 32. Therefor e he ſaid unto his Servants, See, Joabs 
1b5ugs that are in the earth 7. field is Fnear mine, and he hath barley there ; {go and T 


ſt. e. To propoſe mine, and his, and the Peoples deſire of A4bſa- ſer it on fire g: and Abſaloms ſervants ſet the field on 
lo''s reſtitution in this parabolical manner, in mine, and my Sons | fire, | at 4 
Perſon. r Or. inthis Land, in all thy Kingdom ; all the Counſels' & That 7oab may be forced to come to me to complain of, and 


and Devices of thy Subje&s,which have any relation to thee or thy demand reparations for his Injury. 
Athirs. 3I Then Joab aroſe and came to Abſalom unto his 


21 And "the king {aid unto Joab, Behold now, houſe, and ſaid unto him, Wherefore have thy ſervants 
T have done this thing «: go therefore, bring the young - ſer my field on fire ? | 
man x Abſalom again. J 
« In compliance with thy deſire : although in truth it was ac- FR. -- = A_ -- pag "_ —_— Iſent unto 
cording to his own deſire. He overlooks the woman in this grant, ,. aying, Come hither that 1 may lend thee to the 
becauſe ſhe was but Jeab's Inftrument in it. x By which expreſſion king, co ſay, Wherefore am I come from Geſhur? 
he mitigates his Crime, as being an a& of youthful hear, and folly 4ad been good for me to beve been there ſtill 6: now 
therefore let me ſee the kings face : and if there be any 


and raſhneſs. : 
22 And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and. iniquity in me, let him kill me 5. 
+ rather than here,becauſe my eſtrangement from himnow when 


| Clap. XV. 


Heb. bowed himſelf, and + thanked the King : And Joab |; 
Kid. aid, To day thy ſervant knoweth that I ;have found Iam ſonear to him,is both more grievous and more ſhameful to me. 
grace in thy ſight, My Lord, O King, in that the king | Burt the truth of the buſineſs was this, Ab/alem ſaw that his Father 
1Or, thy: hath fulfilled the re queſt of | his ſervant P ; Oo accmae his deſign n bringing him thither,having farisfied 
) 7. e. Reſtored Abſalom at my requeſt. Whereby Joab thought - = _ own natural affection, and his peoples deſire of A4bſalom's 
to eſtabliſh himſelf for ever,and that he ſhould be both the Father's ras. | Ks; baniſhment ; bur that he could nor without reſtirurion 
and the Son's favourite. Queſt. Whether David did wellin grant-/ _ E a. preſence and favour iran his deſign; z. e confirm 
ing his requeſt ? 4,Although there be ſome Circumſtances which | ; For it = om LO which he ſaw he ha "top the peoples hearts, 
in part extenuate David's fault herein, as Ammon's high provocation | wn "F etter for me to die, than to want the fight and favour of 
of Abſalom; Abſalom's being out of the reach of David's Juſtice' ry 4 won _ Thus he infinuares himſelf into his Farher's af- 
where alſo he could and would have kept himlelf, if David had nor Dr wr y ror: ſuch Reſpett and —_ oo him. Tr ſcems that 
promiſed him impunity ; the extream danger of Abſalom's infeftion oF b. ——E _ joe having fo farr tl 4 - - Tp s favour, as 
by Heatheniſh Principles and PraQtices ; the ſafety of David's king- | £ 1 8 = ee... wok avring by 24. um, and take fo much con= 
dom, which ſeemed to depend upon the Eſtabliſhment of the Suc- ray" cas [rand Upon his own juirification,as if what he had done, 
ceſſion, and that u-on 4b/alom, to whom the hearts of the People | þ thi 'S: ns at leaſt not ſuch as to deſerve death. For ſo 
were ſo univerſally and vehemently inclined,if the matter was real- " &< PeECHh intimates. =P : 
ly ſo, and not pretended or magnified by the Art of this ſubril 33 0 Joab came to the king, and told him: and 
Woman ; yet it ſeems moſt probable that D#vid was faulty herein, | When he had called for Abſalom, he came to the king 
becauſe thjs ation was dire&ly contrary to the expreſs Laws of God | and bowed himſelf on his face to the ground before the 
which ſtritly- command the Supreme Magiſtrate ro execute Juſtice king: and the king kiſſed Abſalom & 
upon all willful Murtherers, without any reſervation, Gen.g.6 Num. t1 g ſ; , 5 X —— om ane E SIND 
3Þ's 2.31. And David had no power to diſpenſe with God's Laws, aj _ ” x yon. of his thorough Reconciliation to him Which 
nor to ſpare any whom God commanded him to deſtroy : for the atom 41d very ill requite, as the next Chapter manifeſteth, 
Laws of God did bind the Kings and Rulers,as wellas the people of GEHAET. AV. 
Tſ-ael, to obſerve and obey them,as is moſt evident from Dex#. 17. Abſalom ftealeth the hearts of Iſrael, 1---6. Under pretence of a wow 
18, 19. and from Joſ. : 8. and many other places. And indeed we ob:ajnerh leave to go to Hebron : there with Ahitophel's aid he con«- 
may read David's Sin in theGlaſs of thole tremendous Judgements Jpires to be king, 5-12, David fiyeth from Jeruſalem with all his men: 
of God which befel him,by means of his indulgence to 4b/alom.,For leaveth ten of his concubines, 13:=-37. | —_ 
although God's Providences be in themſelves no Rule to judge of A Nd it came ro pals after this, that Abſalom * pre- * r Kings || 
the good or evil of Mens aftions; yer where they comply with | ©*% 1.229 him chariots, and horſes, and fifty men te 7: 5: | 
God's Word, and accompliſh his Threatnings, as here they did, run before h; 9 4 | | 
they are to be taken for the tokens of God's Diſpleaſure. pn Tn D pros bo i now rams wi; co 
\ ing's eldeſt Son, ; for Chi. 
AbL - o Joab ar ole and went to Geſhur, and brought leab, who was his eldeſt Brother, 2 Sam. 3. 3. was either dead, or 
alom to Jer ulalem. : . : manifeſtly uncapable of the Government. And this courſe he knew 
24 And the King ſaid, Let him turn to his own | would draw the Eyes and Minds of People to him,and make them 
houſe, and let him not ſee my face z. So Abſalom re- | conclude that David intended him for his Succeſlor. | 
turned tohis own houſe, and ſaw nat the kings face. 2 And Abſalom roſe up carly b, and ſtood beſide the 
z Leſt whilſt he ſhewed ſome mercy to 4tſalom, he ſhould ſeem | WAY of the gate c: and it was ſo, that when any man 
to approve of his Sin.and thereby wound his own Conſcience, and | that had a controverſie, | came to the king for judge- f Heb) 
loſe his Honour, and encourage him and others, to fuch like Ar- ment, then Abſalem called unto him 4, and ſaid, Of *9 come. 
rempts; and that by this means 4b/alow might be drawn to a whar ci h ? And he ſaid. Thy { :s of 
more thorough Humiliation and true Repenrance. at cit art t oue? An e laid, y lervant zs © 
+ Heb, 25 Q + But in all Iſrael there was none to be ſo | 9fC of the tr ibes of Ifrael f. | __ BY 
md as 44. MUCh praiſed as Abſalom for his beauty «: from the 6 Thereby making a ſhew of ſ{elf-denial, and diligence,and ſolici> 
Jam there ſole of his foot even to the crown of his head,there was tude forthe good Nd of eveey pore FREE 
A PS: BROS. © — had opportunity. c Either, Firſr, Ofthe King's Palace. Or rather, 
beau] no blemiſh in him. OR Secondly,Of the City,for that was the place of Judicature or Judge= 
pa ns y 4 This is here noted as the occaſion of his pride and Inſolency, ment, for which theſe Men came- d Preventing him with the offers 
fad Þ and of the Peoples AﬀeCtions to him, and conſequently of the fol- | of his aſſiſtance e As if he were ready to make particular enquiry 
nth lowing Rebellion. : into the ſtate of his cauſe. f Or rather, of one City ( which word 
peatly, 26 And when he polled his head, ( for it was at e-| is eaſily underſtood our of the foregoing queſtion ) of the tribes of 
very years end that he polled it : becauſe the hair was -—_ ER of an Iracliriſþ City, cirher this, or that ; ofſuch or 
heavy onhim, therefore he polled ic ) he _ che "0 as i Abſalom ſaid unto him, See, thy matters are 
. . : . 3 3 
_— —_ - head attwo hundred ſhekels b, atter the kings good and rightg: bur || there 55 no man deputed of the || O, ,us 
ed, : | rs : . king to hear thee þh. will hear 
fe, b Whereas ordinarly the hair ofa Man's head which grows in a s Upon ſome very flight hearing of their Caſe, he approved it, thee from 


years ipace, comes not to half ſomuch. But ſome Mens hair grows 
much faſter, and is much heavier than others. Bur others under- 
ſtrand this not of the weight, but of the price of his hair, which was 
{old by him that Polled it at that rate. 

27 And unto Abſalom there were born three ſons c 


and one daughter whoſe name was Tamar 4: ſhe was 


a woman of a fair countenance- 
c All which died not long after they were born, as may be ga- 


and ſwayed by favour or bribes ; or,at leaſt not careful and diligent 
as they ſhould be: and my Father being grown inyears,is negligent 

of publick Afﬀairs, leaving them wholly to their Condu&. 

4 Abſalom {aid moreover, O that I were made judge 


in the land ;, that every man & which hath any luit- 


thered from chap. 18. 18. where itis ſaid, that 4b/alow had ne | on. 
d So called from her Aunt, chap-13. 1. : 
28 © & Abſalom dwelt two full years in Jeruſalem, 


and ſaw not the kings face. 

29 Therefore Abſalom ſent for Joab, to have ſent 
him to the king e, but he would nor come to him: 
and when he ſent again the ſecond time, he would not 


come f. 

e Thar by his mediation he might be addmirred into the King's 
favour and preſence. f Partly,becauſe perceiving David's afteQtions 
to becold ro Abſalom, he would not venture his own intereſt for 
him, eſpecially in deſiring that which he feared he ſhould be de- 
nicd; partly, leſt by interceeding further. tor Ab/alom,he thould re- 
vive the remembrance of his former Murther, and meet with the 
reproach of one Murtherers interceeding for another ; and partly, 
becauſe by converſe with Abſalom, he oblerved his temper to be 
ſuch, thar if once he were fully reſtored to the King's favour, he 
would not only eclipſe and oppoſe Joe s Intereſt and power with | 


or _—— might come unto me, and I would do him 
u 1CC» : 
: For the King had only reſtored 4bſalom to favour, but thought 
not fit ro put him into any place of Power and Truſt. & I fhould 
refuſe no Man, and decline no Pains to do any Man good. So he 
pretends to a very publick Spirit. 
5 And it was ſo, that when any man came nigh 7o 
him, to do him obeiſance, he put forth his hand, and 


took him and kiſſed him /. 

{ Putting on the Garb of ſingular humanity and good will to all 
Men, For that ſeems to have been a Ceremony, in frequent uſe 1n 
thoſe times. of ſhewing reſpe&, as pulling off the Hat, and bow» 
ing, or imbracing, 1s at this day with us. | 


6 And on this manner did Abſalom to all Iſrael, that 


'came to the king for judgment : ſo abſalom ſtole the 


hearts of the men of Iſrael »», 

» i.e. He ſecretly and ſubtilly undermined his Father, and rob- . 
bed his Father of the good Opinions and AﬀeCtions of + 
3 C 4 that 


that he might oblige all. þ To wit, none ſuch as will do thee Ju- the king 
{tice- The other Sons and Relations of rhe King, and the reſt of down- 
the Judges and Rulers under him and them,are wholly? corrupted, ward. 


va. 


'he did ſo humble and aflidt himſelf, as it is apparent he did, v 30. 


' pleaſe his Father, and eaſily procure his conſ:nt. p Which is men- 


' that his Father could not ſuddenly reach him. 


L- 


| Chap. XV. Sa MMDEL 


that he might gain them to himſelf, by ſuch inſinuations into their 
AﬀeSicns, by his plautible and over-civil Carriage. 

- CE And it came to pals after fourty years », that 
Abſalom ſaid unco the king, I pray thee, let me go, 
and pay my Yow 0 which I have vowed unto the Lord 


in Hebron p. | 

n 2zeft. Whence are theſe to be computed? Af. Not from 4bſa- 
lm's Birth ; for he was born in Hebron tome conſicerable time after 
David had begun his reign, 2 Sam.3.3. muci leſs from the time of 
his vow male, or of his return fcom Baniſhment : bur, either, firſt, 
fiom the rime of David's eleftion or deſignation to the Kinguom, 
1 Sam. 16. 13. Or, ſecondly, From the beginning of Saul's keign 
which being a ſolemn time, and obſerveable for the change of rhe 
Sovernmentr in 1jreel, might very fitly be made an Epocha, from 
whicht-e compuration or account of Times begin ; as the Greeks 
and Romans began their accounts in the ſame manner, and upon the 
ſame-ground. Or rather, Thirdly, From the beginning of David's 
Reign, who reigned qo Years; and io the words may be rendred, 
abou or towards the end of forty years ; i.e. in the beginning of the 
fortieth Yezr, And ſo this very Phraſe is uſed, Deut. 15: 1: At the 
end of every [even years ; i.e. in the ſeventh Year, even from the 
begianiog of it,as is manifeſted and confeſlcd. So in a like expretli- 
on, 4fter three days will I riſe again, Mark 8; 31: 4. e. onthe begin- 
ning of the third Day, when Chriſt did riſe ; the number of three 
Days being then compleated when the third Day is begun. And 
the 4o Years are here expreſſe.. as one motive or inducement to 
Abſalom to rebel, becauſe now his Father's end grew near; and one 
of the Hebrew Doors affirms, That there was a Tradition, or Ru- 
mour or Prediction,that David ſhould Reign but 40 Years And 4b- 
ſalom might eaſily underſtand that David inrended to decline him, 
and to make Solomon his Succeſſor, as well by the conſcience of his 
own wickedneſs and vnfitneſs for fo great a truſt, as by that eminent 
Wiſdom and Piety which appeared in So/:mon in his tender Years, 
and that great Reſpe& and Ate&ion which his Father mutt needs 
have and manifeſt ro him upon this account,and by thar Promiſe & 
Oath given to Bashſbeba concerning his Succeſſion mentioned, 1 King. 
1. 30. but made before that time, which alſo might come to 4b- 
ſalow's ear. Againſt this Opinion two things are objected: Firſt, That 
David was in the time of this Rebellion a ſtrong Man,for he march- 
ed on Feot, v. 39. whereas in his laſt Year he was very infirm and 
bed-rid. Secondly, Thar after this Rebellion was ended, divers o- 
ther things happened, as the three years Famine, 2 Sam. 21. 1,and 
other things following in the Hiſtory. Burt it may be anſwered to 
the firſt, T hat David might in the beginning of his lalſt Year, have 
ſo much ſtrength & vigour left as tomarch on Foot,efpecially when 


and yet through his tedious Marches, and the tormenting Cares, 
Fears, and Griefs ofhis Soul fer 4:jalow might be ſo ſtrangely and 
ſuddenly impaired, as in the end of the ſame Year to be very fee- 
ble and bed-rid, it beinga very common accideot,eſpecially in old 
Men,and upon extraordinary occaſions, to languith and decline ex-. 
cecedingly, and to fall from ſome competent degree of health and 
vigour, to be very infirm and bed-rid,and that in the ſpace of a few 
months. And to tic ſecond Objettion, That thoſe Hiſtories related 
chap. 21, &c. though they be placed after this Rebellion,yer indeed 
were done before it; the proof of which ſee on chap. 2 '« 1. For it 
is ſo confeſſed and evident,that things are not always placed in the 
ſame order in which they were done, that it isa Rule of the He- 
brews, and approved by other learned men, Non datur prius & prſte- 
rius in Sacris literis ; that is, There is no firſt and laft in the order of 
Scripture-relatims. And here is a plain reaſon for this tranſplacing 
of this Hiſtory,which is allowed in other like cafes, That when once 
the Hiſtory of Tamar's Rapz had been mentioned, it was very fit 
to ſubjoin the Relation of all the Miſchiefs which followed upon 
that occaſion. Ifany Infidel will yet cavil with this Text and num- 
ber of years, let him know, . that inſtead of forty, the Swiack, and 
Arabick, and Joſephus the Few, read four years ; and that it is much 
more rational to acknowledge an Error of the Scribe, who copied 
out the Sacred Text, than upon ſo frivolous a g:ound to queition 


ſucceſs. 5 Which I ſhall take care to have ſounded in ſeveral parts 
by other perſons ; and when that is done, you ſhall inform them 
of the reaſon of it. Or, as ſoon a: you underitand that the Trum- 
pet was ſounded at Hebron; partly, to call the People together for 
my aſſiſtance ; and partly to celebrate my Inauguration to the King- 
dom,which you ſhal ſpeedily know by Meſlengers whom 7 ſhal ſend 
to you to that end. 

11 And with Abſalom went two hundred men out of 
Jeruſalem, that were called u, and they went in their 


Implicity, and they knew not any thing x. 

« Such as Abſalom had pick'd out as fit for his purpoſe ; ſuch as 
were of ſome quality and reputation with the Ki..g and People, 
which would give a great countenance to his undertaking,and give 
occaſion to p:ople at firſt to think thar this was done by his Father's 
content or connivance, as being now aged, and infirm,and willing 
to reſign the Kingdom to him.as his eldeſt Son,and the Nobleſt too, 
as being deſcended ſrom a King vy both Parents ; and ſuch as by 
their Wiſdom and Intereſt in the people, might have done David 
much ſervice in this needful time ; yet ſuch as were not very marti- 
al Men, nor likely with violence to oppoſe his proceedings. xCon- 
cerning Mbſalom's deſign, 

| 12 And Abſajum ſent for Ahichophel the Gilo- 
aite, y Davids Counſelior, from his city,even from Gi- 
loh, while he offered ſacrifices z, and the conſpiracy 
was ſtrang, for the people increaſed continually with 


Abſalom. J 


» Whois thought to have been the Author,or,at leaſt, the fomen- 
ter of rhis Rebellion ; either, becauſe he was diſcontented with Da- 
via, tor which there might be many reaſons; or, becauſe he ſaw 
the Father was old and nigh his end,and he thoughtir beſt policy to 
worthip the riſing Sun, and to follow the young Princ:,whom he 
obſerved to have fo great an intereft in the Hearts of the People, 
and whom he ſuppoſed he could «afily manage as be pleaſed, which 
he could not do with David. z Which he did not in Devotion to 
God,for he neither feared God, nor reverenced Man; nor to im« 
plore God's favour an# aſſiſtance againſt his Father, which he knew 
was a vainthing to expe&; but meerly that upon this pretence he 
might call great numbers of the People together, whereof many 
would come to join with him in the worſhip of God, and moſt ta 
partake of che Feaſts which were made of the remainders of the 
Sacrifices, according to the manner« 

13 4 And there came a meſſenger to David, ſaying, 


The hearts of themen of Iſrael are afcer Abſalom 4. 

2 The generality of the peopleare for him. Which is nor ſtrange, 
conſidering, either, firſt, David, whoſe many miſcarriages had 
greatly lolt him in the hearts of his people. Or. Secondly, The 
People, whoſe Temper is generally unſtable,weary of old rthings,and 
defirous of changes, and apt to expett great benefits thereby, Or, 
Thirdly, 44ſalom, whoſe noble Birth,and ſingular Beauty, and moſt 
otliging Carriage-and ample Promiſes, had won the peoples hearts, 
conlidering alſo that he was David's firſt-born, to whom the King- 
dom of right belonged, and yer that David intended to give away 
his right ro $9/om0n, which the People thought might prove the oc- 
caſfion of a civil»nd dreadful War, which hereby they deſigned to 
prevent. Or, Fourthly, The Juſt and holy God, who ordered and 
over-ruled all theſe things for David's chaſtiſement, and the in- 
trution and terror of Sinners in all future Ages. 

14 And David faid unto all his ſervants, that were 
with him at Feruſalem, Ariſe, and ler us flee 6b: for 
we (hall not elſe eſcape from Abſalom: make ſpeed to , yq,s, 
depart,leſt he overtake us ſuddenly, and Þ bring evii u- :hruf. 
pon us, and ſmite the city with the edge of the ſword. 

b For though the Fort of Zion was ſtrong and impregnable, and 
he might have defended himſelfthere; yet he had not laid in Pro- 
viſions for a long Siege; and, if he had been once beſieged there ; 
Abſalom would have got ſpeedy and quiet poſſeſſion of his whole 
Kingdom ; whereas if he marched abroad, he might raiſe a conſi- 


the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures. And that ſome Men 
chuſe the latter way rather than the former, is an evidence that | 
they are Infidels by the choice of the'r wills, more than by the | 
ſtrength of their reaſons. o He pretends Piety,which he knew would 


tioned as the place, not where the Vow was made, for that was at 
Geſbur, vv. 8: but where he intended to perform ir. The pretence 
for which was, That he was born in this place, 2 Sam;3;:3: and that 
here was a famous high-place ; and,till the temple was built, it was 
permitted to ſacrifice uponthe high-places. | 

8 For thy ſervant vowed a vow while I abode at 
Geſhur in Syria, ſaying, If the LOR D ſhall bring 
me again indeed to Jeruſalem, then I will ſerve the 
LORD 9. 

q i. e. Worſhip him by the offering of Sacrifices of Thankſgiving 
to God, for reſtoring me to the place of his preſence and ſervice, & 
to my Father's favour. But why ſhould not this ſervice have been 
performed at Sion. or at Gibeon? Here was ſome ground of ſuſpicion; 
but God blinded Davia'sEyes. that he might bring upon David and 
upon 4bſalomthe judgements which they ceſerved, and he deſigned. 

9 And the king faid unto him, GO in peace. So he 


aroſe, and went to Hebron r. 
e This place he choſe as being an eminent City,and next to Jery- 


[alem, the chiefof the Tribe of Judah, and thz place of his birth, 
and the place 'where his father began his Kingdom, which he took 
for a goed Omen,and where it is probable that he had ſecured many 
Friends, and' which was at ſ{>me convenient diſtance from Jeruſalem, 


xo { But Abfalem ſent / ſpies throughout all the 
Tribes of Iſrael, ſaying, As ſoon as ye hear the ſound 
of the trumpet ?, then ye ſhall ſay, Abſalom reigneth 
in Hebron. 


{ From Hebron. Or, had ſent from Jeruſa'em, that when he went 
to Hebron, they ſhould go into the ſeveral Tribes to ſift the people, , 
and to diſpoſe them to Abſalom's Party, and acquaint them with his | 


derable Army for his defence and the ſuppreſſion of the Rebels. Be- 
ſides, the greateſt part of Jeruſalem could not be well defended a- 


' gainſt him. And he ſuſpeRted that a =”-_ number of the Citizens 
:; might take part with Ab/alom, and po 


tbly deliver him up into Abſa- 
lom,s hands: Beſides, if he had made that the Seat of the War, he 
feared the deſtruQon of that City, which he vehemently deſired to 
preſerve, becauſe ir was the Chief and Royal City, and the place in 
which God had appointed to put his Name and Worſhip. More- 
over, when David conſidered, that God's hand was now againſt him, 
and that he was now bringing evil upon him out of his own houſe, as 
he had threatned, _ 12. II. it 1s no wonder if he was intimida- 
ted and diſpoſed to flee. . EE 

15 And the kings ſervants ſaid unto the King, Be- 


hold, thy ſervants are ready to do whatſoever my lord + Heb. 

the king ſhall Þ appoint. chiſe. 
16 And * the king went forth, and all his houſhold * Pfal: 3: 

+ after him c : and the king left. ten women which were gx 


concubines «, to keep the houſe. "bir for 
c Or, on foot, by comparing v. 3o: which the King choſe to do, | 
rather than to ride ; partly, to humble himſelf under the hand of 
God ; partly, to encourage his Companions in this hard and com- 
fortleſs March ; and partly, to move Compaſſion in his people to- 
wards him. &@ For he ſuppoſed that their Sex would prote& them 
even among Barbarians and their relation to David would gain them 
ſome reſpect, and, ar leaſt, ſafety fiom his Son. But it ſeems he 
did not now aQtually conſider that Clauſe of the threatning con« 
cerning his Wives, ( God diverting his Mind toother things ) or 
he thought that would be accompliſhed ſome other way, con- 
ceiving that 4b[alom would abhor the thoughts of ſuch inceſtuous 
Converſe, eſpecially with Perſons which were now grown 1n 
Years: 
17 And the king went forth, and all the people af. 
ter him, and tarried e in a place that was far off f+ 
e Either to reſt and refreſh themſelves a little : or rather in ex- 


pettation of others who ſhould or would come after him, that my 
migh 


Chap. Xy. ; 


PC: 


i He 
makes 
wande 
going 
f Hel 
* Ch: 


Cedro! 


JE” 


f Heb. 
make thee 
wander 11 
going 


| Called, 


Cedron. 


RV. 


f Heb.1go. þ a : 
* Cha, 2.6 fi/þ Soldiers which went with David to Gath, and came up with 


II. 


might March away in a conſiderable Body, which might both de- 
fend the King, and invite others to come into their aſlitance. f At 
ſome convenient diſtance, bur not very far. 


13 And all his ſervants paſied on befide him : and 
all che, Cherethices,and all the Pelethices g, and all the 
Gittites þ, ſix hundred men, which came. after him 


from Gath, pailed on before the king, 

z Of whom ſce the notes on chap. 8. 18. h Who were either,firſ?, 
Iſraelites by Birth, called Gittites, becauſe th:y went with him to 
Gath. and abode with him in that Country. Or rather, Secondly, 
Strangers, as Ittai their head is called, wv. 19. and they are called 
his Brethren, v 20. and probably they were Philiſiines by Birth, born 
in the City or Territory of Gath, as the following words imply, 
who by David's Counſel, and Example, and the ſucceſs of his Arms, 
were won to embrace and profeſsthe true Religion, and had given 
good proof of their Military Skill,and Valour, and Fidelity to the 


King. | 
"5" ©. Then ſaid the king to Ittai the Girtite,Where- 


fore goeſt thou alſo with us? return to thy place z, and. 


& abide with the king /: for thou arr a ſtranger, and 


alſo an exile -. | 
7 Either, Firſt, To thy native Countrey of Gath,where thou wiltſt 


be remote from our broils. Or, Secondly, to Jeruſalem, where thy. 


ſettled abode now is. k Or, or ; for he could not bath go to Gath, 
and tarry in Jeruſalem with Abſalom. Although this part of theVerſe 
lies otherwiſe in the Hebrew Text, and may be rendred thus, Return 
( to wit, to Feruſalcm ) and abide with the King ( there; ) for thou art 
a ſtranger and exile from thy own place ; or, in reſpe#t of thy own place, or, 
as concerning thy place, i. e. in regaird of the place of thy birth and 
former habitation. ! With Abſalom, who is now made King by the 
choice of the People, and therefore is able to give thee that pro- 
teftion and encouragement which thou deſerveſt ; whereas IT am in 
a manner depoſed and unable to do for thee what I defired and in- 
tended. m2 Not much concerned in our affairs, and therefore not 
fit to be involved in our troubles. 

20 Whereas thou cameſt but yeſterday », ſhould I 
this day + make thee go up and down with us? feing 
I go whither + I may 0, return thou, and take back thy 
brethren » : * metcy and truth be with thee 9. 

» By which it may be gathered, that theſe were not the 7/raeli- 


him from thence to Hebron, which was above thirty Years before 
this time, but ſome Proſelytes which came from thence more latcly. 
For though this word yeſterday be ſometimes uſed ofa time long be- 
fore paſt, as 2 Kings 9- 26. Job 8. 9. 1/a 30. 33. yet itſeemsto be 
here reſtrained to a ſhorter compals by the fol'owing words, and 
by the argument here uſed. o I know not whither; having now no 
certain dwelling place. p Thy Countrymen and Soldiers the G:- 


SAMOE DL. 


me both it, and his habitation þb. 


a Partly, out of Care and Reverence to the Ark, which though 


ſometimes it was, and might be carried out to a ce: tain place; yet 


he might juſtly think unhr to carry it from place to place he knew 


not whither, and toexpole it to all the hazards and inconveniences 
to which he himſelfwas likely to be expoſed : partly,out of reſpe& 
to the Prieſts, whom, by this means, he thought !:e ſhould expoſe 
to the Rage of 4bſalom, as he had before expoſed tem to Saris F ury 
on another occaſion, 1 Sam 22, And putly, that by this means 
he might have the better opportunity to ſearch out, znd to Coun« 
ter-work Abſalom's. Plots; which. was ſo neceſſary, not only for 
himſelf, but for the defence and maintenance of tlie Ark, ind all 
God's Ordinances, and of the true Religion. be, The Tabernacle 
which David had lately built for 1',Chap. 6. 17- in which the Ark 
and God, by means thereof, o:dinzrly dvelt. And he:eby keinſie 
nuates another reaſon of his returning the Aik to Fersſal:m, becauſe 
there was the Tabernacle mace for the receipt of it 


26 But if he thus ſay, I have no delight in thee c: be- 
hold, here am I, 4let him do to me as ſeemeth good 
unts him, 

c TI will not receive thee into my Favour, nor reſtore thee to 
thy Throne and City, and to the enjoyment of my Ark and Ordi- 


nances, d Ready to obey him, and to ſubmit to his Will and 
Pleaſure concerning me« 


. 27 Theking faid alſo unto Zadok the Prieſt e, * Ars 
not thou a ſeer f? return into the City in peace. g, and 
*your ewo ſons with you, Ahimaaz thy voy and Jona. 
than the ſon of. Abjathar. 

e Either becauſe Abiathar was gone from him, wv. 24. and not 
yet returned: or becauſe David put more confidence in Zadek fie 
Either, 1+ A Prophet, for ſuch were called Secrs,1 Sam. g. 9. 2 Sas 
24. 11. Amos 7, 12+ And ſuch he may be galled, either becauſe he 
really had the gift of Prophecy : or,becauſe as the name of Prophets 
is ſometimes given to thoſe who had not Prophetical Gifts but 
were only Officers and Miniſters devoted to,and employed in God's 
Worſhip and Service,as 1 Sem. 10. 5. Os, Kings 18. 4, 13. Com- 
pare I Chron. 25. 1,2, 3, Soitis reaſonable, That the name of 
Seers be extended to the ſame Latirude; and therefore he ma 
properly and fitly be called a Ser, as he was with, and under 48; 
athar the Chief Governour of the Houſe and Worlhip of God ; 
who, by his Office, wes to inftrutt an dire& the Pecple in th: ſs 
matters, whereby he had many opportunities both of ſiftins out 
AvoJalom's Counſels, and of minding the Peop'e of th-ir Duty to 


' David, as he ſaw opportunity. Which ſence ſuits well with Davia's 


' Scope aud Deſign. Or, 2, 4 ſeeing, or diſcerning, or o5ſerving Man: 


| David's Mind : Thou art a wiſe Man, and therefore fit to 


zites, wv. 18. q Since Iam now unable to recompenſe thy kindneſs | 


and fidelicy to me, My hearty Prayer to God is, That he would 
ſhew to thee his Mercy, in Bleſſing thee with all ſorts of Bleſſings, 


and his Faithfulneſs in miking goodall thoſe Promiſes which he hath : 


made, not to 1ſraelites only, but in, and with them to all true-hear- 
ted Profelytes, ſuch as thou art. 


21 And Ittai anſwered the king, and faid, 4s the 


: 


| 


for 1o the Hebrew Verb raah is oft uſed. And this ſuits well with 


this great buſineſs, which requires Prudence and Sorralie” & 3s 


Men of Peace, giving over all thoughts of War,and devoti 
ſclves entirely to God's Service. an, ae 


28 See. I will tarry in the plaitr of the wilderneſs, 
until there come word from you to certifie me. 
29 Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of 


LORD liveth, and a: my lord the king liveth.ſurely in , God again to Jeruſalem ; and they tarried there. 


what place my lord the king ſhall be, whether in 
death or life. even there alſo will thy ſervant be. 

22 And David ſaid to Itrai, Go and paſs over. 
And Ittai the Gittite paſſed over, and all his men, and 
all the little ones that were with him ». 

r For being ſo deeply engaged for David, he durſt not Jeave his 
little ones to Abſalom's Mercy. 

23 And all the countrey / wept with a loud voice, 


and all the people paiſed overs the king alſo himſelf ' 


paſſed over the brook || Kidron s, and all the people 


John 18.1. paſfed over toward the way of the wilderneſs #. 
{ i.e. The generality of the People by whom they paſſed : for it ; m 


muſt be conſidered,that A4b/alom's Friends and Partizans were gone | - 
to im to Hebron, and the reſt of the Peop e thereabours were either | jn1ro fooliſhneſs + - 


well-willers ro David, or at leaſt moved with compaſſion at the ſad 


30 And David went up by the aſcent of meunt Olivet, 
+ and weptas he went up, and hadhis head covered,and 


he went bare foot 5: and all the people that was with f HeÞ- 


him, covered every man bis head, and they went up _ K+ 


img. 


weeping, as they went up. 

h Jn Teſtimony of t.is deep Sorrow,and Humiliation anq Shame 
for his Sins, whereby he had procured this Evil to himſelf: for 
theſe were the Habits of Mu:ners, 2 Sam. 19. 4. Ejth. PREY Iſa. 


20. 3, 4 Jer. 14. 3,4 and rotake an Holy Revenge upon himſelf 
for his former De'icacy and Luxury. 


31 And|| one told David z, ſaying, Ahitophel is a- | Or, D, 
ong the conſpirators with Abſalom. And David ſaid, wid mld. 


O LORD, I pray thee, turn the counſel of Ahitophel 


; Or, David told ; 1. e. David being hereof informed, acquaiints 


an.| ſudden change of ſo great and good a King, which was able to | hj; Friends and Followers with ir,to {tir them up to jcyn with him, 


affe& an heart of Stone. t: Which was near Jeruſalem, See Matrh. 
26. 36. John 18, 1. u Which was between Jerulalem and Jericho. 


with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God x, 


{ In the tollowing Prayer againſt him, & Either infatuate him, that 
: ) ; he may give fooliſh Counſel ; or Jet his Counſel b 
24 Y And lo, Zadok alfo, and all the Levites ere | fouliſh, or ſpoiled by the fooliſh execution of it. 


e rejected as 


22Andit came to paſs that bes David was come to 


and they ſat down the ark of Ged y: and Abiathar | the top of the mount where he worſhipped God /,behold, 


Went up Z, until all the people had done paſling out of 
the City. | 

x As apledge of God's preſence and aſſiſtance, and that David 
might enquire at it upon occaſion. y Either 1n expettation of 
drawing forth more People to David's Party, if not fromtheir Loy- 
alry to their Lawfu! King, yet fiom their Pity and Reverence ro 
the Ark; or, that all the People might paſs along, and the Ark 


. might come in the rear of them for their ſafe ;uard and encourage- 


ment. & Either, 1. From the Ark which now was in the low 
ground, being near the Brook Cedron, to the top of the Mount of 
Olives, whence he had the prcoſpett of the City and Temp'e ; as ap- 
pears from Mark 13. 3. where he could Ciſcern when the People 
ceaſed to'come out of the City after David, which when they did, 
he gave notice to David, that he ſhould waitno longer, but march 
away and carry the Ark with him. Or, 7. F:om the Ark to the 
City; which was in an higher ground, that ſ© he being High-Prief, 
might uſe his Autho-iry and Intereſt with the People, to perſwade 
them to do r'eir duty,in going forth to d-fend and help their King 
againſt his Rebellious Son ; and t::ere ht ſaid until all rnoſe whom 
ke could perſwade were gone forth. 5 


25 And the king aid unto Zadok, Carry back the 


Ark of God into the City # : if1 hall find fayqurin the | vice to a good End, 


rent, and aſhes upon his head : 


I Looking towards Jeruſalem where the Ark and Tabernacle was, as 
Compare 1 Kings 8. 44, 48. Dan. 6. 10. 


Hufhai * the Archite came to meet him, with hi coat 


33 Unto whom David ſaid, It thou paſſeſt on with 


me, then thou ſhalt be a burden unto me ms. 


m Increaſing my Charge,and Care,and Sorrow, for what may be- 


fall thee ; and being bur of little uſe to me': for it may ſeem he 
was an Old Man, and fitter for Counſel than for War. 


But if thou return to the City, and ſay unto Ab- 


falem, I will be thy ſervant, O king: as I bave beer chy 
fathers ſervant || hitherto, ſowiÞ I now alſo be thy ſer- 


vant » ; then mayelt thou for me defeat the cour.ſel of | Or,berea 
tofore. 


Abitophel. 

» i, e. As faithful to thee, as I have been to thy Father ; which 
he neither was, nor ought to be. Ard therefore, the Profeſſion 
of this was greatdifſimulation: And David's ſuggetting this crafty 
Counſel. may be reckoned among his Errors: which, proceeding 
from a violent Tempration, and his preſent and prefling Straits, 
God was pleaſed mercifully to pardon and to direct this Evil Ad- 


3. D 25-And 


! E 
1 


rv 

[i 

8 

+ 

' 

} 
4 
IN 
bl 
4. 
IN| 


Chap. 
eyes cf the LORD, he will bring me again, 2nd ſhew 


2; Joſh. 16, 


' 
| 
: 
| 
| 


» XVI. 


25 And haſt thou not there with thee Zadok, and A- 
biathar the prieſts? therefore it ſhall be,that what thing 
ſoever thou ſhalt hear out of the kings houſe, thou ſhalc | 
tell ;z to Zadok and Abiathar the prieſts. : 

236 Behold, they have there * with them o their two 
ſons, Ahimaaz Zadoks ſe», and Jonathan Abiathars ſon? 
and by them ye ſhall ſend unto me every thing that ye 
can hear. 

o Not in Jeruſalem, but in a place near to it, to which they 


could cafily ſend upon occaſion. See Chap. 17. 17- 
27 So Huſhai Davids friend came unto the city, 


Abſalom came into Jeruſalem. 
7iba by Preſents and falſe Suggeſtions, obtaineth of David his Maſter s Inhe- 
_— pr > hy revileth and curſeth David ; Who reſtraineth 
Abiſhai from revenging it, 5,-----14. Abſalom cometh with Ahitophel to 
Feruſalem : lieth with his Father's Concubines in the fight of all Iſrael, 
according te the Counſel of Ahitophel who was eſteemed ar an Oracle, 
I 5,--=-=23, ; 
'N D when David was a little paſt the top of * the 
9 bit, behold,* Ziba a the ſervant of Mephiboſheth 
'” methim with a couple of aſſes ſadled , and upon them 
two hundred loaves of bread , and an hundred bunches 
of raiſins, and an hundred of ſummer fruits and a bottle 
b of wine. | 
s A Crafty Man ; who being perſwaded, that God would in due 
time appear for the Righteous Cauſe of ſo good a King, and ſcatter 
the Cloud which was now upon him, takes this occaſion to make 
way for hisfurure Advancement; 6 A large Bottle, or Veſlel pro- 
portionable tothe other Proviſions: 


2 And the king ſaid unto Ziba, What meaneſt thou 
by theſe ? And Ziba ſaid, The aſſes be for the kings 
houſkold to ride on c, and the bread and ſummer fruir 
for the young men to eat, and the wine, that fuch as 


be faint in the wilderneſs may drink. 

c For the King, and his Wives and Children were all on Foot ; 
not that he had not,or could n-t procure Afſes for them at Jeruſalem; 
bur becauſe he choſe it as beſt becoming that State of Penitence and 
Humiliation in which they were. 

2 And the king ſaid, And where is thy maſters ſon? 
And Ziba ſaid unto the king, Behold, he abideth at 

Jeruſalem : for he ſaid,To day ſhall the houſe of Ifracl 
reſtore me the kingdom of my father 4. 

a Which though it might ſeem a very unlikely ring, yet ſuch 
vain ExpeQations do often get into the Minds of Merr; nor was 1t 
impoſſible, that when. David's Family was thus divided, and one 
part ingaged again? another, th-y might deſtroy themſelves by mu- 
tual Wounds ; and the Feople being tired out with Civil Wars, 
might reſtore the Kingdom to the Family of Sau! their o1d Maſter, 
whereof this was the rop-branch. 4nd this was atime of general 
Defe&ion of many whom the King had greatly obliged, witneſs 

 Hhitophel. And Mephiboſbeth's abſence made the Calumny more prob+ 
able. | 

4 Then ſaid the king to Ziba, Bebold, thine are all 

that pertained unto Mephiboſheth-e. And Ziba ſaid, 
Heb. 149 + T humbly beſeech thee :has I may find grace in th 

y_ ſight, my lord, O King f. | 

e A raſh Sentence, and unrighteous, to condemn a Man unheard, 
upon the ſingle Teſtimony of his Accuſer,and Servant. But David's 
Mind was both clouded by the deep ſenſe of his Calamity, and 
byailed by Ziba's great and ſeaſonable kindneſs. And he might 
think, that Ziba would not dare to accuſe his Maſter of fo great a 
Crime. whichy if falſe, migtt ſo cafily be diſproved. f Thy fa- 
vour is more to me, than this gift ; which, as a token of thy fa- 
vour, I accept with all thaokfulneis. 


5. And when king David came to Bahurim g,beho!d, 
thence came outa man of the family of the houſe of 
Or, &« Saul, whoſe name was Shimei the ſon of Gera : || he 
#ill came came forth, and curſed ſtill as he came. 
g A City in Benjamin, Chap. 3+ 16. and 19. 16. 7. e. To the Ter- 
ritory of ir, for to the Ciry he came not till v. 14. 

6 And he caft ſtones k at David, and at all the ſer- 
vants of king David : And all the people, and all the 
mighty men were on his right-hand,and on his left z. 

h Not ſo much to hurt them, as to ſhew his Contempt of them. 
; Whic is noted to ſhew the Prodigious Madneſs of the Man : 
though Rage, ( whichis truly ſaid to be a ſbort madneſs) and the 
height of Malice hath oft tranſported Men to the moſt hazardous 
and deſperate Speeches and Attions. 

7 Andthus {aid Shimiei when he curſed, Come out 
FHcb.mmar #, come out thou Þ bloody man, and thou man of Be- 
of blood, Jial : 

k Or rather, goout,as the Word properly ſignifies. Be gone out 
of thy Kingdom, as thou deſerveſt. 

8The LORD hath returned upon thee all the blood 
of the houſe of Saul 7, in whoſe ſtead thou haſt reigned, 
and the LORD hath delivered the kindom into the 
+oenagh hand of Abſalom thy fon: and +} behold, thou «rt 
in thy evil, 1aken in thy miſchief »:. becauſe thou art a bloody 

man. 


1 Either, 1, The Blood of Abner and Iſbboſheth ; which he malici- 
ouſly imputes to David, as if they had been killed by David's Con- 
trivance : eſpecially the former, becauſe David did only give Joab 
hard Words, as in Policy he was oblidged to do ; but in ſtead of 
Puniſhing him,did Reward and Preferr him. Or, 2. The Death of 


27. 


and 


0; Is, 


1. SAMUEL. 


' ſeems to have been done before : Of which, ſee the Notes on Chap. 
| I5. 7. m The ſame Miſchief thou didſt bring upon others, is now 


God commanded it by his Word ; for that ſeverely forbids it, Exod. 


returned upon thy own head. Or, Thy Sin hath found thee out, 
and thou art now receiving the juſt Puniſhment of ir. 


9 Then ſaid Abiſhai the ſon of Zeruiah unto the 
king, Why ſhould this*dead dog curſe my lord the king? =; Say; 
let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head. 24. 14, 
10 And the king ſaid, What haveT to do with you », Chap,z g. 
ye ſons of Zeruiah ? ſo let him curſe, becauſe the 
LORD hath ſaid unto him +, Curſe David. Who ſhal 
then ſay p, Wherefore haft thou done || ſo ? 


7 To wir, in this Matter I ask not your Advice, nor will Ifo!. 
low it. ; nor do Idefire you ſhould at ail concern your ſelves in it, 
but whol'y leave it tome, todo what I think fit. o Not thar 


| Or, aoeft 
thou, 


22: 28, or moved him to it by his Spirit; for neither was that 
neceſſary, nor poſſible, becauſe God tempterh no man, Jam. 1. 13. 
but that the ſecret Providence of God did order and over-rule him 
in it- God did not put any Wickedneſs into Shime;'s Heart, for he 
had of himſelf an heart full of Malignity and VenomeagainſtDavis; 
but only left him to his own Wickedneſs; took away that common 
Prudence which would have kept him from ſo fooliſh and dangerous 
an Attion ; direQed his Malice that it ſhould be exerciſed againſt 
David, rather than another Man ; as when God gives up one Tras 
veller into the hands of a Robber, rather than another ; inclined 
him to be at home, and then to come out of his doors at that time 
when Dawid paſſed by him ; and brought David into ſo diſtreſſed a 
condition, that he might ſeem a Proper Obje& of his Scorn and 
Contempt. And this is ground enough for this Expreſfſion,the Lord 
Jaid, not by the Word of bis Precepr, but by the Word of his Pro- 
vidence, in reſpe& whereof he is faid to command the Ravens,1 Kings 
17. 4 and to ſend forth his Word and Commandment to ſenſeleſs Crea- 
tures, Pſal. 147: 16, 18. p Not unto Shimei, for it was juſt'y ſaid 
ſo to him afterwards, 1 Kings 2.9. but unto the Lord : wi:o ſhall re- 
proach God's Providence for permitting this? Or, who ſhall b 
Words or Attions reſtrain him from executing God's juſtJudgment 
againſt me ? 

11 And David ſaid to Abiſbai,and to all his ſervants, 
Bebold, my ſon,which came forth of my bowels,ſeeketh 
my life q : how much more now may this Benjamite | 
[| do it > let him alone, and let bim curſe r : for the 
LORD hath bidden him, 

@ Which isa greater Milchief,than to Reproach me with Words 
| Of that Tribe and Family from which God hath taken away the 
Kingdom, and given it to me; which was likely to ſtir up his Rage 
and Hatred againſt me. r Do not now hinder him violently from it, 
nor puniſh him for it. Tt is meet I ſhovid bear the Indignation of 
the Lord manifeſted herein, and ſubmir to his Pleaſure, and poſſeſs 
my Soul with Patience ; and by bearing theſe leſſer Evils, prepare 
my ſelf for greater, which are coming towards me. 

12 It may be that the LORD will look on mine 
[| + aflition z, and that the LORD will requite me po: 43 
good for his curſing this day. + Heb.m, 

5 He ſpeaks doubtfully,becauſe he was conſcious.that by his Sins 
he had forfcited all his Claim to God's Promiſes. : With an Eye of 
Commiſeration. 

13 Andas David and his men went by the way, 
Shimei went along on the hills ſide over againſt him, and 
curſed as he went, and threw ſtones athim, and + caft 
duſt ». 

u Not that he could reach, or hurt him with it ; but only as an 
expreſſhon of Contempt. And the like is to be thought concerning 
the Stones, wherewith he could not thu.kto reach David, when he 
was Encamped with his Men on every ſide. 


' 14 And the king, and all the people that were with 
him, came x weary, and refreſhed themſelves there. 

x Tothe City of Bahwrim, wv. 5. 

15 AndAbſalom and all the people the men of Iſrael 
came to Jeruſalem, and Ahitophel with them, 

16 And it came to paſs when Huſhai the Archite, 
Davids friend, was come unto Abſalom, that Huſhat 
ſaid unto Abſalom, F God ſave the king y, God ſave the 
king. 

y Towit, 4ſalm, whom he pretends to own for his King and 
Liege Lord. : 

17 And Abſalom faid to Huſhai; 1: this thy kindneſs 
to thy friendz? why wenteſt thou not with thy 
friend? 

z Doth this Aion anſwer that Profeſſion of greateſt Friendſhip 
which thou haſt hitherto made ro him ? Doſt thou thus requite his 
Fovourand true Friend{hip to thee ? He ſpeaksthus only to try him. 
And he ſaith, thy Friend, by way of RefleQion upon David ; as one 
who was a Friend to Huſbar, and to Strangers, but not to his own 
Son, whom, by his Severity and Deſign to give away his Right 
to Solomon, he provoked to this Courſe ; and therefore he doth not 
vouchſafe to call him his Father. 

18 And Hulhai faid unto Abſalom, Nay, but whom 
the LORD, and this people, and all the men of Iſrael 


chuſe «, his will I be, and with him will T abide. 


# Though as a private Perſon, I owed and payed Friendſhip to 
David whilſt he was King ; yet I muſt make all my obligations give 
place to the Authority of God, who putteth down, and ſetteth up 
Kings at his pleaſure; and to the common Sence and decree of the 
whole Body of the Natien. But Huſhai exprefſeth himſelf very caue 


} Heb! 
dufed him 
with duſts 


+ Heb. 
Lei the 
King live 


Sault ſeven Sons, Chap. 21. 8. which, though related after this, |, 
j 


: tiouſly; for though he would be thought to underſtand 4b/alow, 


yetin truth this CharaQter did not agree to him, whom neither God, 
nor all the People had choſen, but only a part, and that the worlt | 


Chap. XV, 


*Cha 


J2, 1 


F Heb, 


word, 


f Heb, 
as right 


his Mugh, 


part of them, 
19 And again, whom ſhould I ſerve? 5bould I not ſerve , | 
| in | 


— ——— ——— 


, 


Chap. % VI. 


| father, 


4 


41s 


I 


in the procferce of his for 52 as T have ſerved in thy fa- 
thers preſence, fo will I bein thy preſence. 

Thou art his Son, and Heir, and Succeſſor, and now in his 
place and ſtead : whereby my Friendſh:p which was due to him, 1s 
devolved upon thee by Right of Inh:ricance;and I reckon, that my 
Friendſhip is not wholly alienated from him, when it is transferred 
upon one that came out of his Bowels. : 

26 Then faid Abſalom to Ahitophel, Give counſe] 
among you what we ſhall do. 

21: And Ahitophel ſaid unto Abſalom, Go in unto 
thy fathers concubines c, which he hath leic to keep 
the houſe, and all Iſrael ſhall hear that thou Þ art ab- 
horredof thy father d, then ſhall the hands of all that 
are with thee be ſtrong e. 

c This Counſel he gave, partly to Revenge the Injury done to 

| Bathjbeba, who was the Daughter of Elam, 2 Sam, 11. 3. who was 
the ſon of Ahitophel, Chap. 23. 34s and principally for his own, and 
the People's ſafery,that the Breach berween David and Abſalom might 
be made wide, and irreparable by ſo Vile an Aion, which muſt 
necds provoke David in the higheſt Degree, both for the Sin, and 
ſhame of it: as the like Aion had done Jacob, Gew, 49. 3, 4. and 
cut off all hopes of Reconciliation, which otherwiſe mighr have 
been expected by ſome Treaty berween AbJalom and his tender- 
hearted Father; in which Cate his Followers, and eſpecially Ahito- 
phil himſelf, had been left to David's Mercy. d And therefore 0- 
bliged by thy own Intereſt to proſecute the War with all poſſible 
Vigour, and to abandon a'l thoughts of Peace: as knowing that his 
Father, though he might diſſemble,yer would never forgive ſo foul 
and ſcandalous a Crime. e They will fight with grzater Courage 
and Reſolution, when they are freed from the fear of thy Recon- 
ciliation, which other wiſe would make their Hearts faint,and Hands 
ſlack in thy Cauſe. Burt by this we may ſee the Charatter of Abſa- 
loms's Party, and how abominably wicked they were, whom ſucha 
loathſomeand ſcandalous Aion tied the faſter to him, whom for 
that very reaſon they ſhould have deſerted and abhorred. And we 


a4 
fa 


+ Heb. 
finke(s 
with #1} 


S 4 T6 


may further learn, how corrupt and filthy the Body of the People | 


was, and how ripe for that ſevere Judgment which is now haſtening 


to them. 

22 So they ſpread Abſalom a tent upon the top of the 
houſe f, and Abſalom * went in unto his fathers con- 
cubines g. in the fight of all Iſrael 5 

f To wit, of the King's Palace, the very place from whence Da- 
wid had ſpied and gazed upon Bathſbeba, Chap. 11. 2. So that his 
Sin was legible in the very place of his Puniſhment. g 7- e. To 
one, or ſome of them. And by ſo doing did further make Claim 

| to: the Kingdom as his own; and, as it were, take Poſſeſſion of ir. 


* Chap, 


J2, II, 


OS - — 
n 


It being uſual in the Eaſtern Countries to account the Wives and ' 


Concubines of the late King to belong ofright to the Succeſſor; See 
the note on Chap. i2. 8. þ Who ſaw him gointo the Tent;and thence 
concluded, Thar be lay with them, as he had deſigned to do. 


23 And the counſei of Ahicophel which he counſel- ' ly 
' teſt of our Men with dread, even 4þ:tepke! himſelf, if he ſhould go 


led in thoſe days, was as if a man had enquired at the 
+ oracle of God3: ſo as all the counſel of Ahitophe), 
both with David &. and with Abſalom. 

; It was received by the People witt: equal Authority andVene- 
ration, and was uſually attended with as certain Succeſs. Which 
is mentioned as the reaſon why a Counſe! which had ſo ill a face, 
ſhould meet with ſuch general approbation. & To whoſe Pious 
Diſpoſition he accommodated himſclf, as Policy oblidged him;but 
being weary of it, he takes this firſt occaſion to diſcover him- 
ſelf, and execure that Wickedneſs which before Jay in 'his 


Heart. 
CHAP. XVII | 
Huſhai, David's Friend, being, by David's Order, gone over to Abſalom, 
by God's appomntment, overthroweth Ahitophel”s Counſel, 1---=-==14. Hu 
ſhai certifieth David thereef, and adwviſeth him forthwith zo march on, 
15=-=--21. David paſſeth over Fordan, 22. Achitophel hangeth h:mſelf, 23. 
David cometh to Mahanaim : Abſalom paſſeth over Jordan, making A.- 
maſa the Captain of his Hoft, 24----26 David i there furniſhed with 
Proviſions by his Friends, 27-----29 
IY Oreover, Ahitophel ſaid unto Abſalom, Let me 
now chuſe out twelve thouſand men,and 1] will 
ariſe and purſue « after David this night : 
a lam ſo well aſſured of the goodneſs of this Counſel, that I 


will venture my own Perſon and Life in the execution of it. 


2 And1I will come upen him while he is weary and 
weak-handed 6b, and will make him afraid : and all the 
people that are with him ſhall flee, and I will ſmite the 
king only. 

b Tired with a tedious March on Foot, and deſtitute of Men, 
and Military Proviſions; and diſheartned by his own ſmall Num- 
bers, and by the general defe&ion of his SubjeRts. 

3 And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the 
man whom thou ſeekeſt is as if all returned c: /o all the 
people ſhall be in peace. 

c 71 6. The Death of that Man whom thou ſeekeſt to deſtroy, is 
no leis conſiderable to thee, than if all the Peop!e that follow him 
ſhould defert him,and return unto thee. 

4 And the ſaying + pleaſed Abſalom well, and all 
the Elders ot Iſrael. 


5 Then faid Abſalom, Call now Huſhai the Archite 
alſo, and let us hear likewiſe + what he ſaith d. 
. 4 A wonderful Effe& of Divine Providence, blinding his Mind, 
and influencing his Heart, that he could not reſt in Ahitophel's Coun- 
ſel, though ir was ſo evidently Wite, and Good, and approved by 
the general conſent of his whole Party ; and that he ſhould defire 
Hufba:'s Advice, though neither his Reputation for Wiſdom was 
- equal to Ahrrophel's, nor had he yer given any one proof of his Fi- 
delity ro Abſalom, as Ahitophel had done ; nor was he fo fixed by his 
Intereſt to him, as 4hirophel was ; and though there wanted not juſt 


7 Heb, 


ward, 


f Heb. 
Was right 
in the eyes 
of , &c. 
t Heb, 
what is in 
his moughs 


h - _ will propagare it, and ſtrike terror with it into thereſt of 
; ThE 


L, Chap. XV! 
cauſe to ſuſpe® him, and his Counſel too. But there 1s no conten- © | 
ding with that God who can Arm a Man againſt himſelf, and de- | 
ftroy him by his own Miſtakes and Faffions, without any other help. | 
6 And when Hufbai was come to Abſalom, Abſalom | 
ſpake unto him, ſaying, Ahirophel hath ſpoken afcer | 
this manner : Shall we do after his + ſaying ? if not f Hebj| 
| 


\ 
f 
} 
' 
) 
; 
i 
| 
1 
| 
! 


| . 
} - 


{peak thou. "wy 
7 And Huſhai ſaid unto Abſalom, The counſel that 
Ahicthophel hath + given, 7s not good at this time e. + Heb. 
e Thongh at other times he generally gives moſt wiſe and ad» counſellei1l 
mirable Countel ; yer, as he is a Man, he ſeems now to be under i 
a miſtake, and nor ſufficiently to conlider all the preſent Circum- it 
ftaaces of rhis Buſineſs. bl 
8 For( ſaid Hufhai ) thou knoweft thy father and his 
men, that they be mighty men f, and they be chaſed in + Heb 5; 
their minds g, as *a bear robbed of her whelps in EY 
the field : and thy father js a man of war þ, and will ©* "I 
not lodge with the people. \ 
f Of approved Courage and Strength, therefore not ſo ſoon van-= 
quiſhed as Ahitophel ſuppoſeth. g Heb. bitter of ſoul, inflamed with 
Rage ; deſperate, and therefore reſolved to ſel] their Lives at a dear 
rate. þ A wile Prince and General ; who knowing of what Im. 
portanceit 15 to ſecure his own Perſon, and that your great De- 
gn 1s againſt his Life ; will doubtleſs uſe extraordinary care to 
keep out of your reach, which he may eaſily do. 
9 Behold, he is hid now in ſome pit, or in ſome - 
ther place ;: and it will come to paſs, when ſome of | 
them & be + overthrown at the firſt /, that whoſoever + Heb. || 
heareth ir, will ſay m, There is a ſlaughter among the f#!. | 
people that followeth Abſalom. 
: Having been oft accuſtomed to that courſe,and well acquainted 
with all hiding-places from Saul's time. In one of them, unknown 
to us, he will lurk with ſome of his choſen Men, and lie in Am- 
buth for us ; and, when they ſee a fit opportunity, they will ſud 
denly come forth and ſurprize ſome of our Men, when they leaſt 
expett ic, and fall upon them with great fury, and probably willat 
firſt put chem ro flight. k To wit, of 4bſalom's Men ſent againſt 
Davia«. 1 Implying, that their good ſucceſs at firſt would mightily 
animate Pavid's Men to proceed vigorouſly in the fight,and inti- 
midate A4bſalom's Army, -and conſequently would be both a preſage 
and an occaſion of their total defeat» » They who firſt hear theſe 


i 


) 


rmy. 
io And he aiſo that is valiant, whoſe heart 5s as the 
heart of a lion, ſhall utterly melt : for all Iſrael know- 


eth that thy father is a mighty man, and they which be 
with him «re valiant men », | 

» The known fame of the prodigious Valeur of David and his 
followers will eaſily gain credir to that report, and ſtrike the fNou- 


with them, 

11 Therefore I counſel, that all Iſrael be generally 
gathered unto thee o, from Dan evento Beertheba, as 
che ſand that zs by the ſea for multicude, and + that + Heb 
thou go to batrel in thine own perſon p. that thy 

o Hispretence was, that they might have a far greater Army, face, or 
and make ſure, though flow work : his deſign” was to gain David preſence 20, 
moretime, that he might increaſe his Army, and make better pro- &c ? 
viſions for the Bartel ; and that the preſent heat of the People | 
might be cooled, and they mighr at !aſt berhink t:;emſelves of their | 
duty to David, and return to their former Allegiance. p For thy 
prelence will put more Life and Courage into all thy Soldiers, who 
wil be ambitious to ſhew their utmoſt Skill and Courage in defen-= 
ding thy Perſon and Cauſe, when tney know thar all their Aions 
are obſerved by him who hath the diftribution of Rewards and Pu- 
niſhments in his hands. So mayeſt thou alſo give Counſel as occa- 
ſion offers and encourage thy men to kill David, which otherwiſe 
they may poſſibly be afraid ro do. Beſides, the glory of the Vifte- 
ry hy be wholly thine, which now 4hitophel ſeeks to get to him- 
ſelf. 

12 Solhall we come upon him in ſome place where 
he ſhall be found, and we will light upon him as the 
dew fallech on the ground 9: and of him, and ofall the 
men that are with him, there ſhall not be left ſo much 
as Ones | 

q i.e. Plenteoully, ſuddenly, irrefiſtibly, and on all fides ; forſo 
the Dew fails. 

13 Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then ſhall 
all Iſrael bring ropes to thar eity r, and we will draw 
it into the river /, until there be not one ſmall ftone 
found there. 

y Not that they ſhould do fo, or that it was the Cuſtom tb do ſo; 
bur it is an Hyperbolical and Thraſonical Expreſſion. ſuited to the 
vain-glorious temper of this infolent young Man ; and therefore 
moſt likely ro prevail with him : implying, that they would do ſo 
if they could not diſcover and deſtroy him another way : ory that 
they ſhou'd be enough to doo, if there were occaſion. # Adjoyn- 
ing to the City ; it being uſual ro build Ciries near ſome River,both 
for defence, and for other accommodations. 

14And Abſalom and all the men of Iſrael ſaid r,Lhe 
counſel of Huſhai the Archite 5s better than the counſel 
of Ahithophel : for the LORD bad + appointed to de- 
feat the good counſel « of Ahithophel,to the intent that 
the LORD might bring evil upon Abſalom. 

s Being infatuated by a Divine Power, and given up to believe 
Lyes and Miſtakes. » So it was, politically conſidered ; being the 

wiſeſt and moſt effetual courte to accomplith 4i/alom's end. ; 

15 4 Then faid Huſhai unto Zadok, and to Abia. 

2 D 2 thir 


+ Heb c:m- 
manned, 


ap. XVII.- Il. 


thar the prieſts, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counſel 
Abſalom and the ;elders of Iſrael : and thus and thus 
have I counſelled.. . 

16 Now therefore ſend quickly, and tell David,ſay- 
ing, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilder- 
nefs x, but ſpeedily paſs over, leſt the king be ſwallow- 


ed up, and all the people that are with him. 

x Leſt the King's and People's Minds change, and Ahithophel, by 
his deep wit and great intereſt, perſwade the King to follow his for- 
mer advice, and to purſue you ſpeedily. - 

17 Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz ſtayed by Earo- 
gel 3: ( for they mighe not be ſeen to come into the 
city ) and a wench z went and told them : and they 


went and told king David. 
y Or, the Fullers wel. A place near Jeruſalem, Joſ. 15. 7. and 18. 
16. z Pretending to go thither to waſh ſome Clothes. 
18 Nevertheleſs, a lad ſaw them a, and told Abſa- 


lom, but they went both of them away quickly 6, and 
came to a mans houſe in Bahurim, which had a well in 


his court, whither they went down c. 

#3 Who knew them to be favourens of David,and obſerved them 
to wait there upon deſign, and to gain intelligence, and poſſibly 
ſaw the Wench ſpeaking privately to them. 6 Suſpe&ting by this 
Lads obſervation and Carriage, that they were diſcovered. c E1- 
ther to ſome hole in the ſide of the Pit : or, to the bottom of the 
Pir, it being then dry, as Pits often were in thoſe hot Countries. 
And this being in ſo open a place, they concluded none would 
imagine them to be hid there.And beſides, they relied upon God's 
good Providence, which they knew watched over David, and them 

* for his ſake. : 

19 And the woman took and ſpread a covering over 

the wells mouth, and ſpread ground corn thereon ..., 


and the thing was not known. 
*. Under pretence of drying it by the Sun: which ſhews it was 
Summer-time, 

20 And when Abſaloms ſervants came to the woman 
to the houſe, they ſaid, Where is Ahimaaz andJonathan? 
And the woman ſaid unto them, They be gone 
over the brook of water d. And when they had ſought, 
and could not find thew, they returned to Jeruſa- 


jem. | 


was ſpoken for no hurt, but good only, many Perſons in thoſe 
times conceived ſuch Lyes to be lawful Compare Exod. 1. 19. Jol. 
2. 4, 5. Burt although God was pleaſed to overlook and pardon 


panied them ; yet it 15 certain that all kinds of Lyes are moral E- 
vils, and condemned by plain Scriptures, and that we 7uit not do 
evil that good may com?, nor tell a lye for Gods Glory, Rom. 3. 7, 8- 


that they came up out of the well, and went and told 
king David, and ſaid unto David, Ariſe, and paſs 
rp over the water: for thus hath Ahichophel coun- 


elled agzinſt you. | 
22 Then David aroſe, and all the people that were 


with Him, and they paſſed over Jordan e : by the morn- 
ing-light, there lacked not one of them that was not 


gone over Jordan. 

e Either at the Ford, or in Boats. | 
| 23 © And when Ahithophel ſaw that his counſel was 
+ Heb, Wasnot | followed, he ſadled bis afſe, and aroſe, and 
| done. pare him home to his houſe, to his city, and F put his 
[+ Heb. ouſhold in order f, and hanged himſelf g, and died, 
| gavecherge 1nd was buried in the ſepulchre of his father: 
| concerni?3 _ f Diſpoſed of his Eſtate by Will Compare 7a. 38. r. g Partly, 
his houſe. becauſe he could nor indure to outlive his diſgrace, and the re- 
| jeftien of his Counſel : and partly, becauſe he foreſaw by this 
means David would gain time and ftrength, and inal! probability 
be Vi&orious,and then the ſtorm would fall moſt heavily upon his 
head, as the main Author and Pillarof the Rebellion, and the con- 
triver of thoſe two pernicious Counſels above: mentioned. 


| 24 Then David came to Mahanaim 4: and Abſalom 


q paſſed over Jordan #, and all the men of Iſrael with 

| him. | 

l h A place in the Country of Gilead, bordering upon the Land of 
LS the Ammonites, v. 27. See Gen, 32. 2. and 2 Sam. 2. 8. #7 Not 

ſpeedily, but when al the men of Irael were gathered together ac- 
cording to H«ſbai”s Counſel, who are ſaid to be with him here, as it 


follows. | 
25 © And Abſalom made Amaſa captain ofthe hoſt 


| inſtead of Joab : which Amaſa was a mans ſon whoſe 
' name was Ithra, an Ifraelite &, that went in to Abigail 
I the daughter of Nahaſh -»,fiſfter to Zeruiah, Joabs mo- 


ther. 

& 0bj. He was an /ſbmaelite, 1 Chron. 2. 179- Anſ, Not Amaſs ; 
bur Thra, or Jether, Amaſa's Father, is there ſo called, becauſe he 
was ſuch, either by his Birth from ſuch parents, or by his long 
habitation among them, or for ſome other reaſon now unknown. 
Compare 2 Sam. 15. 18. And Amaſs is here called an I1[raelite, ei- 

' ther, becauſe he was a Proſelyte : or, in oppoſition to Joab, who 
was of the Tribe of Judah, as 4ſama was of one of the ten Tribes: 
or rather, to intimate, that although he or his Parents were called 
Iſhmaelires for ſome reaſon, yer as to their extraftion they were in- 
deed Iſraelites Which if Amaſs had not been, it is not probable 
that he could have had ſo powerful an influence upon the Tribe of 
Judah, as he had, chap. 19. 14. (7. e. Lay with her, whether be- 


& 
l 
i 
f 
| 


i 
} 


-— 


the fin, and graciouſly to reward the good intention which accom- | 


21 And it came to paſs, after they were departed, 


SAMUEL. 


di. e. Over Jordan. This was a manifeſt Lye ; but becauſe it . 
: part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite : and the king 


EE EY 


n_— 


A... 8, _ Py 


Chap. XVIII, 


ing firſt Married to her, or not, is uncertain; » Nabaſh is either 
another name of Jeſ? : or rather, the name of Zefe's Wife.by whom 
he had this Abigail, as he had Zeruiah by another Wife ; ſo they 
were ſiſters by the Father, but not by the Mother ; and Nahaſh is 
here named to ſignifie ſo much. : 

26 SO Iſrael and Abſalom pitched in the land of Gi- 
lead. 

27 T Andit came to paſs when David was come to 
Mahanaim, that Shobi the fon of Nahaſh of Rabbah of 
the children of Ammon », and * Machir the ſon of {Cha,g , 
Ammiel of Lodebar o,and * Barzillai the Gileadite, of . Chap, 
Rogelim, Ee 

, Who, as it may ſeem, diſliked and diſowned that barbarous 
ation to the Embaſſadors ; and therefore, when the reſt were d:- 
ſtroyed, was left King or Governour of the reſidue of the Ammo. 
nitef* 0 See above chap. 9. 4. 

28 Brough beds, and[| baſins p, andearthen veſſels, , 
and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched cory, 
and beans, and lentiles, and parched pul/e. 

f 7.e, All ſorts of Houſhold-ſtuff, as well as other proviſions, all 
which David now wanted. 

29 And honey, and butter, and ſheep, and cheeſe 
of kine for David,and for thepeople that were with him, 
to eat: for they ſaid, The people is hungry,and weary, 
and thirſty in the wilderneſs 9. 

q i. e, Having been in the wilderneſs, Which is an eafie and com- 
mon Ellipſis. Or, becauſe of ( ſo the Hebrew Particle beth is oftuſed ) 
the Wilderneſs, which they have paſſed through, in which Proviſions 


are very ſcarce. 
: CHAP. XVIII 
David viewing the Armies in their March, giueth them charge of Abſalom, 


I====5, Whoſe Men are ſmitten ; He hanging by his Hair on an Oak 
is flain by foab, and caſt into a Pit: Hu Pillor and Monument, 
G = 18, David hearing hereof, 19 ==—_— 2, Mourneth for Ab- 
ſalom, 33. 
N D David numbred the people that ere with 
A him #, and ſer captaines of thouſands, and cap- 
tains of hundreds over them. 


Fi Which flocked to him thither, ſo as to make up a ſmall 
r 


I Kin.2, 


my. 

2 And David ſent forth a third part of the people un- 
der the hand of Joab b,and a third pait under the hand 
of Abilhai the ſon of Zeruiah Joabs brother, and a third 


faid unto the people, I will ſurely go forth with you 
my ſelfalſo c, 

b Towit,for his eſpecial condu& and management in the Battel: 
otherwiſe Joab was the General of all the Forces ; nor had David 
yet taken away that Power from him, nor was thisa time ro do it. 
Bur ſuch diſtriburions of Forces are uſual in Batrels. c That by 
my preſence 1 may put life and courzge into my Soldiers ; and be« 
caule It is fit T ſhould run the ſame hazards with you, which you 
do for my ſake. : 

3 Bur *the people anſwered, Thou ſhall not go forth 


d : for if we flee away, they will not F care for us ; : 
neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but 3 Heb. 


now thou art | worth ten thouſand of use : therefore ſ their 
_=_ zt is better that thou F ſuccour us out of the ci- 54a 
ty f eb, 
d For thiswas Abſalows great error, into which he wasdrawn by - aw 
a Divine infatuation, and by Heſhai's craft to go to Battel in his + Heb. bs 
own Perſon, which was the utter ruin of him and of his Cauſe. þ ſuccour 
e Not only for the Dignity of thy Perfon, bur alſo for the impor- * x 
tance of our common cauſe and concern, which, if thou art ſlain, 
1s 1recoverably loſt. f By ſending us Supplics of Men, and Pro- 
viſions of all ſorts, as we have occation ; and by ſecuring our re- 
treat, if we be defeated Or thus : not go along to the Batrel with 
us, but only goout with us, or accompany us out of the City ( to 
encourage the Company ) and then retire for thy own ſafety. And 
ſoir ſeems by the next Verſe. 
4 And the king ſaid unto them, What ſeemeth you 
beſt, I will do. And the king ſtood by the gate-ſide 
g, andall the people came out by hundreds, and . by 


thouſands. 
g i. e. Between the two Gates of the City, as it is expreſſed below; 


V. 24 

5 And the king commanded Joab, and Abiſhai, and 
Ittai, ſaying, Deal gently for my ſake with the young 
man, even with Abſalom bh. And all the people i heard 
when the king gave all the captains charge concerning 


Abſalom. 


kh If you Conquer ( which he preſaged they would byGod's gra- 
cious Anſwer to his Prayer for the turning of Ahithophe!'s Counſel 
into fooliſhneſs, ) take tim Priſoner, but do not kill him. Which 
deſire proceeded, partly, from his great Indulgence towards his 
Children : partly, from Davids Conſciouſneſs that he himſelf was 
the meritorious and procuring cauſe of this Rebellion, £4/alom being 
given up to it for the puniſhment of David's ſins; and therefore did 
indeed deſerve ſome pity from him : partly, from the conſideration 
of his Youth, which commonly makes Men fooliſh,and heady, 2nd 
violent, and ſubje& to i]] Counſels: And partly, from his Piety, 
being loath that he ſhould be cur off in the a& of his ſin withour any 
ſpace, or means for repentance, whereby both his Soul and Body 
would be in danger to periſh for ever. i To wit, the Citizensand 
others who ſtood with the King in the Gate when the Army 
marched forth. 
6 © So thepeople went out into the field againſt {- 


rael : and the batrel was in the wood of Ephraim G. 
k So 


"a, 15-1 
+ Heb. 

multiplied 
ty dev2urs 


f Heb, 
weigh up0 
mine hang 
t Heb, 
Beware 
whoſoever 


ye be, of, 
&Cs 


F Heb, 
before th 


f Heb, 


heart, 


II 


4 


"a. 15-9 
+ Heb. 
multidlie 

h dru3re 


f Heb, 
weigh upon 
mine hand. 
t Heb. 
Beware 
whoſoever 


ye be, of, 
&cs 


It. 


+ So called, not from its ſiruation in the Tribe of Ephraim, 
which was on the other fide Jordan, as is evident ; but from ſome 
memorable aCtion or occurent of the Ephraimites beyond Jordan ; 
whether it was their killing of Orcb and Zeeb there, Juag. 7. 25. and 
$. 3, or, their flaughter by jephthab, Judg. -I2. 5, 6. or, ſome other 
not mentioned in Sacred Scripture. 

7 Where thepeople of Iirael / were ſlain before the 
ſervants of David, and there was there a great ſlaugh- 
ter that day of twenty thouſand men. 

1 3. e. The Soldiers of Abſalom ; ſo called, partly, to note that all 
Irzel (ſome few excepted) were engaged in this Rebellion, which 
made David's deliverance more glorious and remarkable ; and part- 
ly, in oppoſition to David's Men, who, as to the main Body, or 
moſt ccntiderable part, were of the Tribe of Judah, or had follow- 
ed him from Judah. 

8 For the battel was there ſcattered #2 over the face 
of all the country: and the * wood 7 devoured more 
people » than the {word devoured 0. 

m i.e. The Warriers being beaten in the fight, fled and were 
diſperſed : The abſtraft being pur for the concrete, as poverry 1s 
pur for poor men, 2 Kings 24.14. and deceit for the deceiver, and dreams 
tor arean.ers, Prov. 12. 24. and 13+6. »n i.e. More People died 


in the Wood,either through hunger, and thirſt, and wearineſs: Or, |. 


by the wild Beaſts, whereof great numbers. were there, which, 
though they were driven away by noiſe and clamourfrom the place 
of rhe main Battel, yet might eaſily meet with them when they fled 
ſeveral ways, which alſo might be direCted and ſent to them by 
God's Providence, and juſt Judgement to puniſh them for their 
Rebellion: Or, by falling into ditches and pits, which were in that 
place, verſe 17. and probably were covered with Graſs or Wood, 
ſo as they could not ſee them till they fell into them : Or, by be- 
ing hanged in Trees, as Abſalom was, verſe g. and eſpecially by Dae 
via's Men, who purſued them, and killed them in the Wood: And 


_ the Modis rightly ſaid to have devoured them, becauſe 1t gave the 


occaſion to their deftru&tion, inaſmuch as the Trees, and Ditches, 
and Pits ,entangled them, and ſtopped their flight, and made them 
an caſie Prey to David's Men, who followed them, and flew them 
in the purſuit, being therein dire&ed and aſſiſted bythe People of 
that Country, who, after the manner, fell in with the victorious 
ſide. o To wit, In the main Battel : The Sword being put for the 
Battel, by a common Metonymy. 

9 T And Abſalom met the ſervants of David p ; 
and Abſalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went 
under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head 
caught hold of the oak q, and he was takenup between 
the heaven and the earth, and the mule that was under 


him went away r. | 

pþ Who according to David's Command, ſpared him, and gave 
him an opportunity to eſcape. 9 In which probably he was en- 
tangled by the hair of the head, which being very long and thick, 
might eaſily catch hold of a Bough,eſpecially when the great God 
dire&ed it. Eicher he wore no Helmet, or his Helmet was ſuch 
as lefr much of his Hair viſible; Or he had thrown away his Hel- 
met as well as his other Arms, to haſten his flight, or becauſe of 
the heat of the ſeaſon. Thus the matter of his Pride was the in- 
ſtrument of his Ruine, as alſo Aſabe!'s ſifrneſs, Chapter 2. 18, and 
Abithophei's Policy, Chapter 17. 23. were the occaſions of their de- 
ſtruction. r Which might eaſily happen, becaule being in flight 
the Mule paſſed along very ſwiftly. | 

to And a certain man ſaw 3t, and told Joab, and 
ſaid, Behold, I ſaw Abſalom hanged in an oak. 

11 And Joab ſaid unto the man that told him, And 

behold thou ſaweſt biz, and why didft chou not ſmite 
him there to the ground /, and I would have given 


the ten ſhekels of ſilver, anda girdle s ? 

ſ Why didſt thou not ſmite him down from the Oak, and with 
thy Spear nail him to the ground? 5 A Military Belt of more 
than ordinary price, as a teitimony of thy Valour and good Ser- 
Vice. See ON i Sam. 18. 4. 

12 And the man ſaid unto Joab, Though I jhould 
+ receive a thouſand 5hzkets of tilver in mine hand, 
yet would nor I put forth mine hand againſt the Kings 
fon : For in our hearing the King charged thee, and 
Abiſhai, and Ittai, ſaying, F Beware that none zeuch 


. the young man || Abſalom. 

+ || Or, take heed what ( for ſo the Hebrew Pronoun m7, is ſome- 
times uſed, as Fudg. 13.17.) ye do with the young man, He expreſ- 
ſeth David's ſenſe, though not his words. 

12 Otherwiſe I thould have wrought falſhood a- 
gainſt mine own life 7 : for there is no matter hid from 
the King «, and thou thy ſelf wouldeſt have ſer thy 
ſelf againſt me x. 

z Either, Firſt, I ſhould have been guilty of falſe and perfidious 
dealing againſt the King's expreſs Injun&ion, and that with the 
manifeſt hazard of my own Lite. Or, Secondly, I ſhouid have be- 
tray'd my own Life. I ſhould not only have deceived my ſeifwith 
falſe hopes, either of concealing my fa& from the King, or of 
obtaining a Reward; Yea, or a Fardon, from him or thee for it, 
but alſo have deſtroyed my ſelf thereby, and laid a plot againſt my 
own Life. % This, as all other things, would certainly come to the 
King's ear. x Thou wouldſt have been my Adverſary and Accut- 
er; Partly, becauſe it was thy duty to be to And partly, to vin- 
dicate thy ſelf by cafting the blame upon another. Or. thou 
would have ſtood afar off, as this Phraſe is uſcd, Pſal 38. 11. Thou 
wouldſt not have itood to me to intercede for my Life or Reward. 
but wouldſt keep at a diſtance from me. | 

14 Then laid Joab, L may nor carry thus F with thee 

. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrufli 
them through the heart &z of Abſalom, while he was yer 
alive 4 in the + midſt of the oak. 


i 


S$S 4 MU BE EL _ 


_ Heart was reconcilable to Abſalom notwithſtanding his abominable 


| determine. 


1 ſon is dead &. 


_ Chap. XVIII | 

? I muſt not loſe time in contending with thee till I let the oc- 
cafton flip- 2 Not properly fo called, for he was yet alive after 
theſe wounds, and was ſlain, verſe 15. but through his middle, as 
the word heart is oft uſed, as Pſal: 46. 2. and that too, not _ 
attly, but more largely underſtood, as Deur. &.-8, Ezek: 27. 4. 
Matth: 12. 49. or through his Boly : Which might be, and yer the 
wounds not mortal. a Or, yer he continued alive. 1 e. the Darrs did 
not diſpatch him, and therefore they ſmite him again, and kill 
him, verſe 15. gy 

i5 And ten young men that bare Joabs armour, 
compatlled about, and ſmote Abſalom, and flew him 6. 

6 Judging rhat there could be no ſafery to the King, nor peace 
to the Kin gdom, nor ſecurity to himſelf, and all David's Friends 
and Loyal Subje&s, and good Men, if Abſalom had lived, as may ſeem 
probable from Chapter 19. 10, and yet perceiving that the King's 


Crimes of lying with his Father's Concubines, and of horrid and 
unnatural Rebellion; both which were capital Crimes by the Law 
of God ; he adventured to fave David's Life againſt his Will. © But 
whether Joab did well in this, all things conſidered, I ſhall not here 


16 And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people 
turned from purſuing after Iſrael; for Joab held back 
the peopie c. | 

c Whootherwiſe were highly incenſed againſt the Rebels, and 
DOUty: penny _ _ the head | of the Rebellion being cur 

4 e dan 
xe) ger t _- y paſt, he puts a ſtop to the effuſion of 

17 And they took Abſalom, and caft him into a 
great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of 


ſtones upon him 4 : and all Iſrael fled every oneto his 
rent e, 


d As a laſting monument of Abſalom's ſin and ſha 
the Righteous Judgement of God pon him. cus - 
and 8. 29. and 10. 27, He was firſt hanged. after a ſort; which 
was an accuried death, Deur. 21. 23. and then thruſt through with 
Darts and Swords; And, after all, in a manner ſtoned, which was 
are eu RR — of a Rebellious Son, Deut. 21. 21. e To 

eir houſes and dwellings, t iſh | 
Oo Oo gs, to avoid the ſhame and puniſhment of 

180N ow Abſalom inbis lifetime had taken and rear- 
ed up for himſelf a pillar f, which jsin the Kings dale 
g : for he faid, I have no fon to keep my name in re- 
membrance bh: and he called the pillar after his own 
name, and it is called to this day Abſaloms place 3. 

f To preſerve his name in memory ; whereas it had been more 
for his honour if his name had been buried in perpetual oblivion; 
But this was the effe& of his pride and vain-glory. g A place near 
Jeruſalem ſo called, Geneſis 14+ 17. h Objet, He had three ſons 
Chapter 14+ 27: Arſw. Either they wereall now dead; Or, if one of 
them was left alive, he thought him unfit and unworthy to keep 
up his name and honour; Or. he ereQed this Pillar before his Sons 
were born.. Burt the firſt opinion ſeems-motit probable : and it was 
a remarkable Judgment of God, that he who ſtruck at his Father's 
life, ſhould be puniſhed with the death of all his Sons. - Heb? Ab- 
ſalom's hand, i. e. his work, made, though not by his hand, yet for 
him and his glory, and by his procurement. 

i9 \ Then faid Ahimaaz the ſon ef Zadek, Let me 
now run, and bear the King tidings, how that the 
LORD hath + avenged himſelf of his enemies. : , 

20 And Joab ſaid unto him, Thou ſhalt not + bear 2%," | 
ridings this day, but thou ſhalt bear ridings another day : handef,&c. | 
but this day thou ſhalt bearno tidings, becauſe the Kings t Heb: #e 

a man 0 


ridings, 


I7. it 


+ Heb: 


k And thou ſhalt not be a Meſſenger of evil tidings,which will 
be unwelcome to him; and prejudicial to thee: 


21 Then faid Joab to Cuſhi / Go tell the King 
what thou haſt ſeen. And Cuſhi bewed himſelf unts 
Joab, and ran. 

I to an Ethiopian ; 1 I 0 
BR ug i _— pian ; ſo he might be by birth, and yet by Pro- 

22 Thenſaid Ahimaaz the ſon of Zadok yet again 
to Joab, But + howſoever, let me, I pray thee, alſo run +1yeb; 5s 
after Cuſhi. And Joab ſaid, Wherefore wilt thou ruti, whar may. 
my ſon , ſeing that thou haſt no tidings|| ready ? 

m So he calls him with reſpe& both to his younger yeats, and 
to that true and render affe&tion which he had for him. 

23 But howſoever ( ſaid he) let me run. And he 
ſaid unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way 
of the plain %, and over-ran Cuſki. 

n ich was the ſmoother and eaſier, though the longer way. 

24 And David fat between the rwo gates 0: "and 
the warchman went up to the roof over the gate unto 
thee wall p, and lift up his eyes, and looked, and be- 
hold, a my running alone. | : 

s For the Gates of the Cities then were, w they 
and thick; and for the greater —roaPny hod-iws yon om —_ 
outward, the other inward. Here he ſar, that he might hear 
ridings when any came into the Ciry. p Unto the top of the Wall 


or Tower upon the Gate, wh:re watchmen uſed ro watch: Come 
pare 2 Kings g. 17. Ezek 33. 2. 


25 And the watchman cried, and told the King. 
And the King faid, if he be alone here 5s tidings in his 
mouth 9. And he came apace, and drew near. 

q He is ſent with fome ſpecial Meſſage ; Which was a very pro- 


! Or, con- 
pmomigys 
ufficient, 

Numb:1t. 


22, 


bable conjeQure; for if he had run or fled from the Enemy, ma- 
ny others would have followed him: ATR 
3D 3 26 And 


Chap. XIX. * Ed 


26 And the watchman ſaw another man running» 
and the watchman called unto the porter, and laid, 
Behold, another man running alone. And the King 
faid, He alfo bringeth tidings. | 
| + Heb: 27 And the watchman ſaid, + Methinketh the run- 
| 1 ſee thee ning of the foremoſt, is like the running of Ahimaaz 
| ruming» the fon of Zadock. And the King ſaid, He is a good 
| man, and cometh with good tidings r. : 

r He loves me well, and therefore would not afflict me with 
evil ridings. : 

28 And Ahimaaz called and ſaid unto the King, 
| + All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his 
face before the King, and ſaid, Blefſed be the LORD 
thy God, which hath + delivered up /the men cha lifr 
up their hand againſt my lord the King. 

ſ Into thy hand and power; Or, to deſtruQtion. 
1 8am: 24. 19. and 26. & _ 

29 And the King ſaid, + Is the young man Abſa- 
lom ſafe? And Ahimaaz anſwered, When Joab ſent 
the Kings fervant s, and me thy ſervant, I ſaw a great 
tumule, but IT knew not what it wes ?. 

s Cuſbi, t Be ſeems to tell an untruth, as is evident from verſe 
20, becauſe he now plainly perceived what Joab foretold him, 
that ſuch things would be very unwelcome to David. But he 
made a bad choice, to offend God with a lyec, rather than to diſ- 
pleaſe the King with a truth. Yet thus far it might be true ; that 
though he had reaſon to think Abſalom was dead, | Fr was not able 
to give account of the particulars which concerned it, wherewith 
Coſi was intruſted. 

30 And the King faid unto him, Turn aſide, «nd 
Rand here. And he turned aſide, and ſtood fill. _ 

2x And behold, Cuſhicame, and Cuſhi ſaid, + Tid- 
ings my lord the King: for the LORD hath avenged 
thee this day of all them that roſe up againſt thee. 

32 And the King faid unto Cuſhi, Is the young man 
Abſalom fafe? And Cuſhi anſwered, The enemies of 
my lord the King, and all that riſe up againſt thee to 
do thee hurt, be as that young man 5s #. 

x May they periſh and be cur off, as he is. 

23 7 And the King was much moved, and went up 
to the chamber over the gate x, and wept; and as he 
went, thus he ſaid, O my ſon Abſalom, my ſon, my 
ſou Abſalom : bat 7 God. I had died for thee, O Abſa- 

on, my lon y- 
fon , wy je himſe Goa, al Men and Buſineſs, that he might 
wholly give up himſelf to lamentation. 4 This he might ſpeak 
from a deep ſenſe of his Eternal State, becauſe he died in his fins, 
without the, leaſt teſtimony of Repentance, and becauſe David 
himſelfhad by his own fins been the unbappy inſtrument and oc- 
caſon of his Son's death. 

H A P.. XIX. 


Toab by hard words moveth the King to ceaſe his mourning, and ſhew himſelf 
to che People, 1-=-8. The King u brought back by the men of Judah : 
And Amaſa put in Joab's place, g=--=15. Shimei ſueth for mercy, and 
obtaineth it, 16----23. Mephiboſheth meeting che King, recovers 
half his Eſtate, 24----30. Barzillai s diſmiſſed: Chimham his Son 
is taken into the King's Family, 31-:-40. The Iſraclites expotulate with 
Judah for bringizg home the King without them, 41---43- 

ANY it was told Joab «, Behold, the King weeperh 
A and meurneth for Abſalom. 

a By his Meſſengers, upon their return- 

2 And the } victory that day wes turned into mourn- 
ing, unto all the people : for the peeple heard ſay that 
day, how the King was grieved for his ſon. | 2 

3 And the people gat them by ſtexlth that day into 
the city b, as people being aſhamed ſteal away when 
they flec in bactel. | : 

b Not openly, and orderly, and triumphantly, as Conquerors 
uſe to-do; bur ſecretly, and diſorderly, and aſunder, as if they 
were afraid and aſhamed, leſt Davidſhould ſee them, and Jook u- 

n them with ,an evil eye, as thoſe that had an hand in the kil- 
| of his dearly beloved Son. : 'z 

. 4 Bur the King covered his face c, andthe King 
cried with a loud voice, O my ſon Abſalom, O Abſa- 
lom, my ſon, my ſon. 

c As a deep MOPrAETs as one 
be ſeen by any others. 

5 And Joab came into the houſe 7 to the King, and 
ſaid, Thou haſt ſhamed this day the faces of all thy ſer-- 
yants e, Which this day have faved thy life, and the 


[|Or, Peace 
be to thee, 
T Heb; 
Peace. 

T Heb 
ſhut up. 


T Heb: 
Is there 
Peace ? 


Compare 


| + Heb: 
| Tidings is 
WW Grought. 


| THeb: ſal 
| Vation, Or, 
|| deliverance 


that deſired neither to ſee, nor to 


T8584 40D EL 


lives of thy ſons, and of thy daughters, andthe lives of 


thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines f, : 

2 Either the Gate-bouſe : Or, his now dwelling-heuſe in the City: 
To which he was retired, that he might more freely indulge himſelf 
in the expreſſions of his Grief. e By diſappointing their juſt hopes 
of Praiſes and Rewards, and by requiting them:with Contempt and 
tacit rebukes, f All which 4/glom: ſtruck ar, and had ſooner or later 
aQtually taken Por. qt he __ not been _y of 7 ſuch OO 
| i ing t nowledge or conſent: And the 
| Heb: by _—_— _— ned that 06. faved the lives of thee and thine, 
| Heb bat with the utmoſt hazard of their own,is highly unjuſt and ungrateful. 
| = thou loveſt thine enemies, and hateſt 


nces, Or, 
Jeruants , th . 
are ot £9 rexardeſt neither princes, nor {ſervants ; for this day I 


ts L 
: 
: 


nee, 


; 
[f 
44 f 

4 


perceive, that if Abſalom had lived, and all we had 
died this day, then it had pleaſed thee well g. 

£ This 1s not to be underſtood as exa&ly true in the rigour of it; 
bur only comparatively and hyperbolically ſpoken.For David deſired 
their preſervation and Absalom's too : Butir muſt be conſidered,that 
Joab was now in an high tranſport of Paſſion, which might eaſily hyx- 
ry him into indecent expreſſions; and that David's carriage gave too 
much colour to ſucha ſuggeſtion; and that ſuch ſharpnels of ſpeech 
was In a manner neceſſary to awaken the King out of his Lethargy, 
and to preſerve him from the impendent Milchiefs. 

7 Now therefore ariſe, go forth, and ſpeak + com- 
fortably unto thy ſervants : for I ſwear by the LORD ths 
hb, if thou go not forth i, there will not tarry one thyſm; 
with thee this nighe&, and that will be worſe unto 
thee than all the evil that befel thee from thy youth 
until now. 

bh This Oath was either afſertory of what he believed mighr in 
reaſon be expetted, as likely in great meaſure to come to pals ; Or 
elſe Promiflory ; or rather, minatory of what he by his influence 
could and would effe&t; And if ſo, it was much more than became 
him to ſay to his Sovereign, and could only be excuſed by the cir- 
cumſtances which at this time might make it ſeem neceſlary ; For 
David was indeed to blame in taking no more notice of their good 
ſervice (however Joab might te faulty alſoin diſobeying the King's 
expreſs Command as to Ab/aloms perſon; ) And great reaſcn rhere 
was that David, [as Joab did now adviſe, ſhould thew himſelf Jeſs 
diſpleaſed to the People, who had expoſed their Lives to preſerve 
him and his. 3 To the Gate, to ſhew thy ſelf to thy People, and 
kindly and thankfully to acknowledge the good ſervice that they 
have now done thee. k The hearts of all thy People will forthwith 
be irrecoverably alienated from thee, and they will look out for 
ſome other Perſon on whom they may ſet the Crown. 

8 Then the King aroſe, and fate in the gate 7, 
and they told unto all the people, ſaying, Behold, 
the King dcth fit in the gate : and all the people 
came before the King: for Iſrael had fled every man 
to his tent. 

{ He was come forth out of his retirement, and appeared in pub- 
lick on the Seat ef Judgement, at the Gate of the City, to receive 
the Addreſſes of his People, and mind the Afﬀairs of the Kingdom. 

mm To congratulate him Br the Vittory, and to profeſs their ſub. 


T Heb; 7, 


jeQion to him. So Joab's Speech, though very ſevere and pre- 


ſumptuous, was, it ſeems, a word in ſeaſon, and had that good 
effect which he deſigned. 


9 T And all the people were at ſtrife » throughout 
all che tribes of Iſrael, ſaying o, The Kipg ſaved us 
out of the hand of our enemies,and he delivered us out 
of the hand of the Philiſtines, and now he is fled out 
of the land for Abſalom p. 


z Quarrelling one with another as the Authors or Abettors of 
this ſhameful and curſed Rebellion. o Diſcourſing privately and 
publickly of David's high Merits, which God, being now reconciled 
to David, brings afreſh to their Memories, and reneweth the ſenſe 
of their obligationsto their King, which they had lately ſhaken off. 
Thus the Crowns of Kings fit faſter or looſer upon their heads, as 
God is pleaſed todiſpoſe of the Thoughts and Hearts of their Peo- 
ple, which he can turn in an inſtant which way he will, p Now 
we come to refle& upon our own Ations, we are ſenſible of our 
folly and unworthinels in adhering to Abjalom, and thereby forcing 
David to fly out of the Land of Canaan, to the parts beyond 50-- 


dan for his Ty; 
10 And Abſalom whom we anointed q over us, is —_ 


dead in battel » ; now therefore why Þ ſpeak ye not a /* 
word / of bringing the King back ? 

q 1.e. Cauſed tobe annointed by Zarok, or Abiathar, or ſome 9- 
ther of the Prieſts, whom they perſwaded or conſtrained to do this 
office: For this being a Sacred Ceremony, of a great Repuration, 
and a likely means to gain the more authority and veneration from 
the People ro Abſalom, as one whom God by his Vicegerent had con- 
ſtiruted and ſer up; andthis Rite being uſualupon all tranſlations of 
the Government from one Perſon to another in an extraordinary 
way, as this confeſſedly was, itis not likely that they would now 
omitit: Though orherwiſe Anoinzing is frequently pur for deſigning 
or conſtituting. r And therefore we have no obligation ro him, 
and no hope ofany thing from him. { The People of 1ſ-ael ſpeak 
thus to the E!ders of 7/rael, as appears by comparing this verſe with | 
the next. Seeing their deſigns tor Abſalom diſappointed, they now : 
repented of that undertaking, and were willing to teſtifie ſo much 
by their forwardneſs to bring back David, and re-eſtabliſh him. 

it © And king David ſent to Zadok, and to Abi- 
athar the prieſts, ſaying, Speak unto the elders of Ju- 
dah z, ſaying, Why are ye the laſt to bring the King 
back to his houſe «? (ſeeing the ſpeech of all Iſrael is 
come to the King, eves to his houſe x ) 

: Who being the fiiſt and chief Abettors of Ab[alom's Rebellion, 
deſpaired of ever obtaining the King's Graceand Pardon,andthere- 
fore were backward to promote the King's Reſtauration. « To his 
Royal Palace at Jeruſalem. x i. e, Even to Mahanaim, where now 
the King's Houſe and Family is. Thus ſometimes one word is 
taken in divers ſenſes in the ſame Verſe, as Matth: 8.22, Or ra- 
ther thus: About bringing the King back to his houſe : For, Firſt, 
Thoſe words are very fitly and eaſily underſtood here, out of 
the foregoing member of the Verſe ; ſuch defe&s being uſual in 
the Hebrew, which is a very conciſe or ſhort Language, So it is 
Exodus 22, 15. and Deut: 1, 4, &, Secondly, It ſeems moſt rea- 
ſonable to underſtand the fame Phraſe, to his houſe, being twice 
here uſed in the ſame ſenſe in both places, To wir, of his Houſe in 
Jeruſelew: And this is moſt agreeable to rule, and to Scripture- 
uſage Thirdly, Thus the words have more Emphaſis than the 
other way: For if the Speech came to the King ar Mabanaim, it 
matters not whether it found him in his Houſe there, or ” the 

atCca 


Chap. xxf 


"Chap. 
". 5? 
1 King, 2: 
y! 


*chap? 
16, 1+ 


fHeb. i 
gud in | 


hes. 


*Chap 
16: 54 


Heb, h 
'e heart of 
pc Moan 


«ap?17 
if 


t 


"ad. 20 
i? 


"Chap, 
"6. 5? 


*Chap? 
16, 1, 


fHeb. the 
md in his 
er. 


*Chap! 
6: 5, 


L XIX. 
p. Ny 


te-houſe, or in the Field. Fourthly, David had no Houſe in 
Ck, which could properly be called his houſe ; as he had in 
Jeruſalem. And then the Parentheſis ſhould cloſe before thoſe laſt 
words, even ro hu houſe, or, even to h1s 0wn houfe, to wit, that at Je» 
ruſalcm. 


i2 Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my 


fleſh y: wherefore then are ye the laſt ro bring back. 


the King z2* ” 

y Of the ſame Tribe,and ſome of you of the ſame Family with 
my ſelf; and therefore ifI ſhould revenge my {cIf of you, which 
perhaps you may fear I will do when I have fully regained my pow- 

er, I ſhould bur tear my own Fleſh in pieces, and hare my own 

Body, which Nature and Intereſt obligeth every Man to preſerve. 

2 This delay doth nor ſuit with the relation you have, and the at- 
fetion you owe to me. 

13 And ſay ye to Amaſa #, Art thou not * of my 
. bone, and of my fleſh b? God do fo to me, and more 
' alſo, if thou be not captain of the hoſt before me c 


continually, in the room of Joab d. 

a 4b(a/mm's late General ; who judging his caſe,above all others, 
deſperate, might be ready. to uſe all his Intereſt with that Trive, 
to delay or hinder the King's return. 6 1.e. My near Kinſman, 
my Nephew- See 1 Chron: 2; 6,17. & le E. In my preſence; or, 
now whilſtI live; le{t he ſh. uld think he promiſed him only the 
reverſion of it. d Who, beſides his other Crimes, had lately ex+ 
aſperated the King by his wilful mu-ther of Abſalom, contrary to 
David's expreſs Command ; and by his infolent Carriage towards 


him. An therefore the King having now the opportunity of a- ' 


nother Perſon who had a greater Intereſt both in Judah and 1rael 
than Joab, he gladiy complies with ir, that ſo he might both cha- 
ſtiſe Joab for his fauits, and reſcue himſelf from the Bondage in 
which Joab had hitherto h<1d him. Yet it is not neceſſary, from 
thoſe words in the room of Joab, to conclude that Joab was to be dit- 
placed to make room for Amaſa; but that he might be in like con- 
dition with joab : Bur, whar follows in the next Chapter, makes 
very probable that he was indeed di:placed, and maſa put in his 
place. ; 
14 And he e bowed.the heart of all the men of 
Judah, * even as rhe beart of one man, fo that they 
: ſent this word unto the King, Return thou and all thy 


ſervants. 

e Either, Firſt, Amala by his great influence upon them. Or, 
rather, Secondly, David by this prudent and kind Meflage, and 
his free offer of Pardon and Favour to them, as if they had ne- 
ver offended 

t5 So the King returned, and came to Jordan: and 
Judah came to Gilgal, to go ro meetthe King, to con- 
duct the King over Jordan f. 
. f To atrend upon the King in his paſſage over Jordan, and to 
furniſh him with convenicacics for his paflage and journey. See 
below, Yerſes 41, 4 EE 

16 4 Ana * Shimei, the ſon of Gera, a Benjamite. 
which was of Bahurim, haſted and came down witn 


_ 2? the men of Judah, to meer king David. 


17 And there were a thouſand men of Benjamin with 
him g, and * Ziba the ſervant of che houſe of Saul b. 
and his fifteen ſons, and bis twenty ſervants with him, 
and they went over Jordan before the Kirg 5. 

g Whom he brought, partly to ſhew his power and intereſt "in 
the People, whereby he was able to do David either great ſervice, 
or great diſſervice; And part'y, as Interceſſors on his behalf, and as 
witneſſes of David's clemenency or .everity,that-in him they might 
ſee whar the reſt of them might exp: & +. Who, being conſci- 
ous of his former abuſe of David, ans of his Maſter Mephib»ſhe:h, 
which he knew the King would underſtand, deſigned to {weeten 
David's Spirit towards him, by his great officiouineis and forward- 
neſs in meeting him, and congratulating his return. # They did 
Not tar'y on this ſide Jordan waiting ti:] the King came ove”, as 
the moſt of the men of Judah did ; but went over Jjurdan to pay 
their reſpeQs and duty to rhe King there, to expreſs their eager and 
impatienr deſire to ice the King. 

18 And there went over a ferry-boart & to carry the 
Kings houſhold, and to do f what he thougi:t good : 
ang Shimei the ſon of Gera fell down befoie the King 
as he was come over Jordan / ; 

k Made by the men of Judah for the King's proper uſe ; beſides 
which there were doubtleſs many Boats ready tor the uſeof others. 
I Or rather, as he was paſſmg, or about to paſs over Jordan ; But this 
was beyond Jordan, for as he went over Jordan to the K ng, verſe 
17. ſo doubtleſs he fell down before him at his firit coming into 
his preſence there. ; : 

19 And faid unto the King, Let not my lord im- 
pute iniquity unto me, neicher do thou remember * 
that which thy ſervant did perverſely the day thag my 
lord the King went out of Jeruſalem, that the King 
ſhould take it to his heart m. 

m 1.e. Be affeQed with it, or excited to revenge it. 

20 For thy ſervant doth know that I have ſinned »: 
therefore behold, I am come the firſt s this day of ail 
the houſe of Joſeph p, ro go down to meet my lord the 
King, 

z I do not excuſe my Sin, but with griefand ſhame confeſs it ; 
in which cafe the Lord thy God is ready to pardon Offenders, and 
' fol truſt wilt thou be. o The ſenſe of my former fin now hath, 
and whilſt I live, will make me the firſt and moſt forward in a!] 
Ads of Duty and Service to thy Majeſty. p Obje#. He was a Ben- 
jamite, Chap« 16. 5, How then doth he make himielf one of the 
houfe of Joſeph? Anſw. The houſe of Joſeph is here pur, citker, 1. For 
kheten Tribes, which are oft diſtinguiſhed from Judah, and then 


I. SAMUEL. 


umm... 


they are called th» honiſz of Foſeph; as Zech. 1o. 6. But this dis 
ſtinQtion was not made before the diviſion of the People into two 
Kingdoms : And even after thar Divition, Benjamin was conf antly 
reckoned with Judah, and not with Joſeph cr Exiraim. Or, 2. For 
all the Tribes of J-ae', who are all called the chi/dren of Joſeph,P[al.77, 
I5. Compare Pſat: 80. r. and $1. 5. as well they mighr, not only 
becauſe of Joſeph's Eminency, ( the moit Eminent Perions and 
Things being oft put for the reſt of the kind) and becauſe the 
rig..ts of Primogeniture were in a great part devolved upon him, 
1 Chron: 5. 1 bur alſo becauſe Joſep had been as a Father ro them, 
and had nouriſhed them all like Children; as is exprefſed in the 
Hebrew Text, Gen; 47. 12. But 1n this ſenſe this was not true, for 
the Houſe of Judab came before him, verie-15. Or rather, 3. For 
all the Tribes, except Judah, which are conveniently called he 
houſe of Joſeph, for the reaſons now mentioned, 2nd are fitly diſtin= 
guiſhed from Judah, becauſe the Rights of the Fiiſt-born were di. 
vided between Judah and Joſeph, 1 Chron: 5. 2. And though Benja« 
min, after the Diviſion of the Kingdoms was fitly joyned with Ju. 
4ah, becauſe then they adhered ro that Tribe ; Yet before that time 
it was more conveatently joyned with Joſeph, becauſe they march« 
ed under the Standard of the Houſe of Joſeph, or of Ephraim, Numb; 
10, 22, 23, 24, Whenceit is, that Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manaſſeh, 
are put together, Pjal 80» 2. | 

21 But Abiſhai the ſon of Zeruiah anſwered -and 


ſaid, Shall nor Shimei be put to death for this, becauſe 


. he curſed the LORD's anointed q ? 


q 1.e. The King. By this Expreſſion, he minds David of his 


_ former Zeal againſt thoſe who offered any injury to Sau!, becauſe 


he was the Lord's anoin'ed, 1 Sam: 24. 6. and 26. 9. and there- 
fore demands the ſame Juice againſt Shim-3 for his curſing of the 
King, which was ſo expreſly forbidden, Exod: 22. 28. and by the 
prone i of that Law, Exod: 21, 17. might ſcem puniſhable with 
cath. 

22 And David ſaid, What haveI to do with you r, 
ye ſons of Zeruiah s, that ye ſhould this day be adver- 
faries unto me 5? * Shall there any man be put to 
death this day in Iſrael? for do not I know, that I ors 
chis day king over Iſrael « ? 

r I do nor ask, neither will I take your Advice in this Matter. 
s implying, that Joab's hand was in this Contrivance, or that he 
ſuſp:Eted it. # 1. e. That you put me upon things unfit for me to 
do, and contrary to my p eſent Intereit; for it was David's In- 
tereſt at this time to »ppeaſe the People, and reconcile them to 
him, and not now to give them any new diſtaſte by As of Se- 
veuity : For this wouid make othe's jealous, that David will not 
forgive them neithcr, bur would watch an opportunity to be Re- 
venged on them. You pretend Friendſhip uerein, and would 
have me take it for an effe& of your Zeal tor my Service ; but in 
truth you give me ſuch Countel as my Enemies would with me 
to follow, that the:zeby T might awaken the fears and jealouſies 
of my P.ople which are now aſleep, and caſt them into a ſecond 
Rebellion : Which either Foab and Abijbai really deſigned by this 
Advice, that ſo Joab might recover his Place again, and be made 
neceflary for the King's Service ; or David ſuſpe&ed that they did 
ſo. « Is not my Kingdom, which for my Sins was in a manner 
wholly loſt, juſt now re%ored and aſſured to me ? And when God 
hach been ſo merciful to me in forviving my Sin, ſhall I now 
ſhew my ſelf Revengful to Shimei? Shall I fully the publick Joy 
and Glory of this Day, with an a& of ſuch ſeverity ? Or, ſhall I 
alienate the Hearts of my People from me, now when they are re- 
turning to me ? 

23 Therefore * the King ſaid unto Shimei, Thou 
(balt not die x; and the King ſware unto him y. 

x To wit, this day, as Abijhai defirerh ; nor whilk TT live, nor 
by my Hands, as it i« repeated and explained, 1 Kings 2. 8. nor for 
this Cauſe alone, . For theugh David gave order to Solomon for his 
Puniſhment after his Death; Nor was it fit !or the puilick Good, 
that iuch a horrid Crime ſhould go unpuniſhed ;, Yer he would 
nor have him puniſhed for this Fault alone, but for ſome other 
apital Crime, which he preſumed Shimaei's Temper would e-fily 
betr:y himto ; Ai.d Sol-mon's deep Witdom would calily find our, 
1 Kings 2.9, y That he would not put him to death with the Sword, 
as it is expreſſed 1 Kngs 2. 8. 

24 Y And Mecpnibotheth the ſon z of Saul came 
down to meet the King, and had neither drefſed his 
feer a, nor trimed his beard b, nor waſhed his 


clothes c, from the day the King departed, until the 
day he came again in [Ceace. EE 

Z1,e, The Grind-ſon, 2 Sam: 6. 3, 6. @ By cutting his Nails; 
and by waſhing his Feet, which was uſual in thoſe hot Climates 
and very refreſhing ; And therefore now negle&t:d , as becoming 
a Mourner. 6 Bur ſuffered it to grow. very long, and diſorderly, 
as was uſual with many Perſons in a forlorn, or mournful State. 
c His L:innen Clothes. This and the former were ſigns, that h+ 
was a true and obltinate Mourner, that laid afide his uiual Refreth- 
ments: And they are here mentioned as Evilences of the Falſhoo1 
of Ziba's former Relation concerning him, Chaptey 16. 3. 

25 And it Came to paſs when hte was come to 
Jeruſalem 4 to meet the King, that che King ſaid 


unto him, Wherefore wenteſt not thcu with me &, 
Mephiboſheth ? SES 
d So it is ſuppoſed, That Mephiboſheth, though he went to mett 
the King, wanted either Courage, or fir Gpportunity to 1peak to 
the King till he came to Jerujalem, becauie of the great Multi- 
rudes that Addreſſed themſelves ro the King by the way. Though 
it might more reaſonably be thought, that he could not go from 
Jeruſalem to meet the King, as others did, becauſe he wanted con- 
veniencies for his Journey ; For Z:ba had gotten a'l his Lands and 
Goods, Chap; 16. 4. and it is not likely that he, who would net 
provide him an Aſs to ride on, or to accompany the King at his 


departure, would now be haſty to furniſh him with one ro meet 
che King, to whom he knew he would complain of him, But tie 
3D4 Words 


Chap. XIX. 


* I Sam. - 


II: 33. 


* i Kings 
2: 37, 46. 


| 


}| 


| 


f 


Chap, X1X. Yn SS 41 M 


Words may ſeem to be better rendred thus, when he went ( for ſo 
the Hebrew Veib ſignifies, Ruth 3. 7. Jonah 1.3.) from ( which 
Prepoſition is oft underſtood ) Feruſalem. For there he was, 
Chap. 16. 3. and having continued there, as probably he did, (be- 
cauſe he wanted an Aſs to convey him elſe-where, and knew not 
where to be with more ſafety ) he could not properly nor truely 
be ſaid to have come thither to meet the King. e As Juſtice and 
Gratitude obliged thee to do. 


26. And he anfwered, My Lord, O King, my ſer- 
vant deecived me f ; for thy ſervant ſaid, 1 will ſaddle 
me an aſs, that I may ride thereon, and go to the King, 
becauſe thy ſervant is lame: : | 

f By carrying away the Aſs which I bid him ſaddle for me. 
* Chap. 27 And * he hath flandered thy ſervant unto my 
16. 3. lord the King ; but my lord the King is as an angel of 


God pg: do therefore what is good in thine eyes. 
's To diſtinguiſh between true Reports and Calumnies ; Sec 
on Chap. 14. 20. 


- + Heb. 28 For all'sf my fathers houſe, were but + dead 


"ee Yf men before my lord the King h: yer * didft thou ſer 
*Chia 9.7- thy ſervant among them that did cat at thine own 


table: what right therefore have I yet ro cry any 


more untothe King 7? 

h i.e. Before thy Tribunzl: we were all at thy Mercy; not 
my Eſtate only ( which thou haſt now- granted to Ziba ) but my 
Life alſo was in thy Power, if thou hadiſt dealrc with Rigour, and 
as Earthly Kings uſe to do with their Predeceſſors and Enemies 
Children; For otherwiſe by the Law of God Sau! himſelf had not 
deſerved to die by David's hands, as David himſelf confefled : 
Much leſs his Children, who were not to dye for their Father's 
Sins, Deut« 24. 16. But Mephiboſbeth ſpeaks like a Courtier, and Ike 
an Orator, aggravating Matters againſt himſelf, that he might 
ſeem to juſtifie rhe King's Sentence, and to ſubmit to it; and ſo 
inſinuate himſelf intothe King's favour. # To wit, for the Vindi- 
cation of mine Honour, and the Reſtitution of my Eſtate. 

29 And the King faid unto him, Why ſpeakeſt thou 
any more of thy matters & ? I have ſaid /, Thou and 


Ziba divide the Land . 

k For as Ziba was preſent, ſo doubtleſs he was not ſilent, bur 
ſaid and did what he could to make good his former Charge ; wh ich 
muſt needs occaſion many Words before the King, And the King 
was not now atleiſure for long Debates, and therefore makes an 
end of the Matter. 1 To wit, within my ſelf; I have contidered 
the Matter as far as now I can, and upon the whole am come to 
this Reſolution, whercin I expett that thou and he do both ac- 
quieſce.. Or, 1 do now ſay, T pronounce this Sentence in the Caule. 
-» The meaning is either, 1. The Land ſhall be divided between 
thee and him, as it was by my firſt Order, Chap: 9. 10. He and his 
Sons managing it, and ſupporting themſelves out of ir, as they did 
before, and giving the reſt of the Profits thereof to thee. And to 
this the following words may well enough be accomodated ; Yea, ler 
him take all; To wit, to his own ſole uſe, Or, 2. The Right and 
Profits of the Land thall beequally divided between you. It ſeems 
a very raſh and harſh Sentence, and very unbecoming Dv:a's 
Wiſdom, and Juſtice, and Gratitude to Jonathan ; and Z:ba ſeems 
to have deſerved Death for falſly accuſing his Maſter of Treaſon, 
wather than a Recompence. But the whole Tranſattion of the 
Matter is not here ſet down» Poſſibly Z:ba might bring plauſible 
Pretences to juſtifie his Accuſation ; and it might be pretended, 
That Mephiboſbeth negle&ed the trimming and dreſſing himſelf only 
in Policy, and that for a ſeaſon, cill David and his Family had de- 
ſtroyed one another by their civil Wars, and giving him a fit op- 
portunity to take the Crown. So that David might really be at a 
Joſs what to determine. And Ziba had given proof of his AﬀeCGions 
to David by an A& of Kindneſs which could not be without ha- 
zard to himſelf, Chap. 16. 1, 2» which Mephiboſheth had not done 
And poſlibly, this was only a preſent Setence, and David reſolved 
to examine things more throughly when he had more leiſure, and 
then to make a more full and final Determination of the Buſineſs ; 
which alſo he might do, though it be not here Recorded. For 
we muſt not think, that nothing was done and ſaid abour ſuch 
things, but what is mentioned in Scripture. Beſides, Ziba being a 
powerful Man, and the Crown not yet firmly fixed upon the King's 
head, David might think fit to ſuſpend his final Sentence till a 
more convenient ſeaſon, and not now to provoke him too much 
by taking away all his Eſtate from him at once, but to proceed a- 
gainſt him by degrees: Howſoever, this 1s certain, we cannot 
paſs a rightJudgement upon this Aﬀtion of David's, unleſs we un- 
derſtood all the Circumſtances of it, which we cannot pretend to 
doe. 

20 And Mephiboſheth ſaid unto the King, Yea, let 
him take all, foraſmuch as my lord the King is come 
again in peace unto his own houſe ». 

n I am contented to loſe all, being fully ſatisfied with the hap- 
pineſs of ſeeing my dear and dread Sovereign reſtored to his 
Crown, and Truth and Peace returned to his Kingdom, 


* rKings 21 4 And* Barzillai the Gileadite came down from 
2: 7. Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the King, to con- 
du& him over Jordan 0o. 
o And thento croſs Jordan again, and ſo return to his Native 
Land. | 
22 Now Barzillai was a very aged man, ever four- 
ſcore years old, and * he.had provided the King of ſu- 
*Chap. 17. ftenance while he lay at Mahanaim : for hes: a very 
my great man. 
23 And the King ſaid unto Barzillai, Come thou 
over with me, and 1 will feed thee with me in Jeru- 
#Heb. how falem. 7 LOOKS ph | 
many days 234 And Barzillaifaid unto the King, + How long 
are the. haye I to live, that I ſhould go up with the King unto 
4:91 1" Jeruſalem, 


U E LI. Chap. wy ſCbep: 


p Seing my time of continuance in this World is but ſhort, it 
is not advifavle to change my Habitation, or to gi:e thee or my 
ſelfany further trouble. 

35 I «nr: this day fourſcore years old : and can I dif. 
cern between good and evil? can thy fcrvant tafte 
what I eat or what I drink? c#nl hear any more the 
voice of ſinging-men, and ſinging-women a ? where. 
fore then ſhould thy ſervant be yer a burden unto my 
lord the King r ? 


q My Senſes are grown dull, and uncapable{of reliſhing the De. 
lights of the Court. Iam paſt taking Pleature in delicious Taſtes, 
or ſweet Muſick, and other ſuch Delights of the Court. r I am 
through Age both uſeleſs and burthenſome to others, and there. 
fore moſt improper for a Court-life. 

35 Thy ſervant will go a little way over Jordan / 
with the King :. and why ſhould the King recompenſsg 
it me # with ſuch a reward ? 

S A little onward in thy way to Jeruſalem, and then return, 
£ Or, recompence me, to wit, for my ſmall kindneſs to thee at Maha. 
naim, Which was but a part of my Duty to thee. 

37 Let thy ſervant, LI pray thee, turn back again, 
that-I may die in mine own City, and be buried by the 
grave of my father, and of my mother : but behold thy 
ſervant Chimham #s, let him go over with my lord tha 
King, and do to him what ſhall ſcem good unte thee. 

u Barzillai's Son, I Kings 2, 7. 

38 And the King anſwered, Chimham ſhall go over + Ha 
with me: and I will:ds to him that which hall ſeem yu, 
good unto thee : and whatſoever thou ſhalt + require 
of me, that will I do for thee. 

29 And all the people went over Jordan : and when 
the King was come over, the King kiſſed Barzillai, and 
bleſſed him, and he returned unto his own place. 

40 Then the King went on to Gilga)l, and Chimhan 
went on with him, and all the people of Judah conduc- 
ed the King x, andalſo half the people of Iſrael y. 


x Attended upon him on his Journey towards Jeruſalem. y Where. 
as the Men of Judah came intirely and unanimouſly to the King, as 
is noted here, and above, verſe - 4+ the 1ſraelites of the other Tribes 
came in but ſlowly, and by halves, as being no leſs guilty of the 
Rebellion, than the Tribe of Judah ; but not encouraged and invit- 
edto come in by ſuch a particular and gracious Meilage as they 
were. And this is here mentioned as the occaſion both of the 
contention here following, and of the Sedition, Chapter 20. | 

41 4 And behold, all the men of Iſrael z came to 
the King, and ſaid unto the King, Why have our bre- 
thren the men of Judah ſtolen thee away 4, and have 
brought the King and his houſhold, and all Davids men 
b with him over Jordan ? 

z To wit, ſuchas were preſent, 4 1. e. Conveyed thee over Jer- 
aan haſtily and privily, not expeCing nor deſiring our Conſent and 
Concurrence in the Buſineſs, which we were no leſs ready to afford 
than they, Tr is alſo a ſecret Refleftion upon the King, for per- 
micting this Precipitation. 6 1. e. All thy Men; ſuch changes of 
Perſons being moit frequent in the Hebrew Language ; thine Offi- 
cers, and Guards, and Soldiers. "This is mentioned as an aggrava- 
tion of their Faulr, That rhey did nor only carry the King over 
Jordan, bur all his Men too, withour asking their Advice. 

- 42vAnd all the men of Judah anſwered the men of 
Iſrael, Becauſe the King is near of kin to us c : where- 
fore thea be ye angry for this matter? have we eatenat 
all of the Kings ce/#? or hath he given us any gifts «? 

c Of the ſame Tribe with us,and therefore both owerh the more 
reſpe& ro u+, and might expet and challenge more reſpe& from 
us. 4 We have neither tought nor gained any advantage to our ſelves 
hereby,but only diſcharged our duty to the King, and uſed all Ex- 
p-dition in bringing him back, which you alſo ſhould have done, 
and not have come in by halves, and fo coldly as you bave done; 
See v. 40: 

43 And the men of Ifrael anſwered the men of Ju- 
dah, and ſaid, We have ten parts e in the King f, and 


we have alſo more right in David than ye g: Why then ? Hob. 
did ye + deſpiſe us, that our advice ſhould not be firſt * * 
had in bringing back our King h? And the words of che 
«>; ang were fiereer # than the words of the mea 

of Itrael. 


e They ſay but ten, though ftriftly there were Eleven ; Either, 
becauſe they accounted Joſeph ( which comprehends both Ephraim 
and Manaſſch under it) for one Tribe, as it is ſometimes reckoned 5 
Or becauſe S:meon, whoſe Lot lay within the Tribe of Judah, were 
joyngd with them in this Action. F 1.e. In the Kingdom, and the 
management of the Aﬀeairs of it; the word King being put for King- 
dom, asSit 1s 2 Chron: 23. 26, and Iſa: 25+ 15, Dan: 7+ 17» Hoſ: 10.15. 
Or, in the King'sPerſon, and the diſpoſal thereof: g As in the ge- 
neral we have more right inthe King and Kingdom ; ſo particular- 
ly,we have more rightin David than you, becauſe you were the firſt 
beginners, and the moſt zealous promoters of this Rebellion ; And 
as David is nearneſt of kin to you, ſo he hath been moſt injured by 
you ; Howſoever, as he is King, we juſtly claim a greater Intereſt 
in him, than you; inaſmuch as we are the far greateſt part of his 
Subje&s. h That we being the far greater Number, {ſhould nor 
have the firſt and chiefeſt Vote in this Attion. But the words are 
by ſome, and may well be rendred interrogatively, And was nt my 
word firſt about . bringing the King back > Did not we make the firſt 


mention of it, before you could be drawen toit? For ſo indeed 
they did, verſet1, And therefore the negle& of their Advice here= 
in might ſeem more inexcuſable. i In ſtead of mollifying them with 
gentle words, they anſwered them with greater fierceneſs and in!0- 
lency ; ſo that David durſt not intcrpoſe himſelf in tho matter. 


CHAP, 


{ *; King- 


12. 16. 


* Chap. 
15. 16. 
and 16.2 
t Reb. 
8 houſe 
ward. 

+ Heb. 
tumd. 

+ Heb. 


wdowhi 


of life. 


f Heb, 
Cath 


* Cha 
1: 1 
THeb 


liver | 


ſelf iro 


dur ey! 


* Ch: 
8.18 


T Ht 
gal, 
bel: 
{worg 


b, ſo 
ligh, 


k Chap: KX. 


{ *; King- 


12, 16. 


* Chap. 
15. 16. 
and 16.2 2+ 
t Reb. 

s houſe of 
ward. 

t Heb. 
lumd. 

+ Heb. in 
warwhood 


ef life. 


f Heb, 
Cal 


* Chap. 

11: 1 
THeb.de 
liver him= 
ſelf from 


dur eyes. 


* Chap. 
8.18, 


7 Heb 


girdle 5 or, 


bel: of a 
ſword 


II. 


CHAP. XX 
By occaſion of this quarrel Sheba ſtirreth up Iſracl 1 ſedition, 1, 2. Da- | 
wia's teu concubines are ſhut up in perpetual priſon, 3- Amaſa is ſlain 

by Toab, 4 10. He and Aiſhai pirſueth Sheba unto Abel, 11---15. 

The citizens by the advice of a wiſe woman cut off his head and caſt it 

over the wall to Joab, 16 -22- David's officers, 23 26. 

N D there happened # to be there a man of Be- 
A lial 4, whoſe name wss Sheba the ſon of Bichri, 
a Benjamite c,and he blew a trumpet, and faid,* We have 
no part in David 4, neither have we inheritance in the 
ſon of Jeſſe e: every man to his tents f, O Iſrael. 

a His preſence was caſual in it ſelf, though certain,and ordered | 
by God's Providence. 6b A lawleſs Perſon. one that attempted to | 
ſhake off the Yoke of Civil Authority: See Deut.13:13. c And grie- 
ved at the tranſlation of the Kingdom from Saul, and that Tribe, ' 
to David. d The Tribe of Judah have way we gy the King to 
themſelves, and will not allow us any ſhare in him ; let them there- | 
fore enjoy him alone, and let us ſeek out a new King. e An ex- 
preſſion ofContempr,implying their reje&tion of him,that he was no 
more to be owned as their King, bur as a private Perſon,as the Son 
of Jeſſe, f Let us all deſiſt from this unthankful Office, of bring- 
ing the King back,and go each to our homes,that we may confider, 
and then meet together to chuſe a new King» 

2 So every man of Iſrael .*. went up from after Da- 
vid,and followed Sheba the ſon of Bichri : but the men 
of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to 
Jeruſalem. 

-. 4. e. The generality of thoſe J/raelites who were preſent. 

2 © And David came to his houſe at Jeruſalem, and 
the king took the ten women his * concubines, whom 
he had left to keep the houſe,and put them in + ward g, 
and fed them, but went nor in unto them : ſo they 
were t ſhut up unto the day of their death, Þ living in 
widowhood. 

g Partly becauſe they had not vigorouſly oppoſed 4bſalom's luſtful 
Deſire, as they ſhould have done, even with the hazard of their 
Lives : and partly,leſt the ſight of them ſhould renew the Memory 
of Abſalom's Filthineſs, and of their own and Dawid's Reproach, 
which it was fit to bury in perpetual Oblivion : and partly, becauſe 
it might appear Inceſtuous to have to do with thoſe who had been 
defiled by his own Son : and partly,becauſe as David would not,ſo 
ir was not now convenient that any other Man fhould have any 


conjugal Converſation with them- | 
C Then faid the king to Amaſa, + Aſſemble me 


the men of Judah þ, within three days z, and be thou 
here preſent &. > 
h And march in the Head of them as their General,as I have pro- 
miſed thee, chap. 19. 13. © Which he ſupoſed 4mala, having been 
their lare General,could eaſily do : and the buſineſs required haſte. 
k Within thar time ro receive Orders and Inſtruftions from me. 
5 So Amala went to aſſemble the en of Judah ; but 
he tarried longer than the ſer time } which: he had ap- 
-pointed him. | 
[ Either, becauſe the People being wearied out by the late Civil 
War, were not forward to engage in another : or, becauſe the Sol- 
diers had more AﬀeCGtion to Job, than to their new General ; to 
whoſe ill Condutt poſſibly they might impure their uniucceſsful- 
neſs in the Jait Battel: Or,becauſe Amaſa for his own Intereſt might 
ſeek delays,to render himſelf more neceffary and uſeful to the King, 
and to keep up his honourable and profitable Employment, which 
is the common Policy of ſuch Men. 


6 And David ſaid co Abiſhai m, Now ſhall Sheba the 
ſon of Bichri do us more harm than did Abſatom : take 
thou * thy lords ſervants », and perſue after him, left 
he get him fenced cities, and + eſcape us. 

»m Not to Joab ; leſt by this means he ſhould recover his Place, 
and .4maſa be diſcontented,and David's F idelity in making good his 
Promiſe to Amaſa be queſtioned. n i. ee My Guards that attend 
upon my Perſon,and the other Soldiers who are now preſent with 
me. He ſpeaks of himſelf in the Third Perſon,as is very frequent. 
For it is not probable he wou!d now call Joab his lord, whom he 
had latcly depoſed ; nor Amaſa, who had not yet taken aC&tual Poi- 
{ſeſſion of his Place,nor had the Command over the King's Guards» 

7 And there went out after him Joabs men o, and 
the * Chezethires, and the Pelethites p, and all the 


mighty men : and they went out of Jeruſalem to pur- 
ſue afrer Sheba the ſon of Bichri. 

o The remainders of Joab's Army who were there preſent, with 
whom alſo Joab might go asa Reformade, watching an opportunity 
to do what he deligned. p Of whom, ſee on chap: 8:18. 

8 When they were at the great itone which 5s in 
Gibeon, Amaſa went before them q ; and Joabs gar- 
ment that he had put on, was girded unto him r, and 
upon it a F girdle with a ſword taſtned upon his loins in 
che jheath thereof,and as he went forth -s ic fell our x. 

q ilaving gathered tome forces,and given due Orders for the reſt 
to follow him, he returned ro Ferulalem, and by the King's Com- 
mand went after thoſe mentioned ver 7. and being come up to 
rhem 2t the place where they waited for him, he pur himſclt into 
the Head of 5025's Men,and the Cherethifes and the Pelethites,and ſuch 
as he had brought along with him, and marched before them as 
their Chief and Genera). r After the manner of Travellers and 
Soldiers. 5s To meet and falute 4Amaſa, who was coming towards 
him to do him Honour. t Things having ( it is likely ) been ſo 
contrived by Joab, that upon the leaſt motion of his Body, his 


Sword ſhould drop out, and he might take ir up without caiſing 
Amaſa $ Sutpicion- 


S A MWUE 0 


| f 
Chap. XX. 
the right hand to kiſs him. be 


z As the manner of Ancient Times was, when they kifſed and 
falured one another. 


Io Bur Amaſa rook no heed to the ſword that wes 
in Joabs hand « : ſo he {mote him therewith in the ffth 
rib y, and thed out his bowels to the ground,and t ſtrook re = 
him not again z, and he died : fo Joab a and Abiſhai Pe Sr it 
his brother purſued after Sheba the fon of Bichri. ' | 
* Which falling ourt,as it ſeemed, caſually,he ſuppoſed that Joab 


intended only to pur it into its Scabbard, and therefore took no 
care to defend himſelf againſt the ſtroke. »y See on chap. 2: 23. 


'2z He diſpatched him at one ftroke ; or,gave him his Deaths Wound 


at the firſt blow, and needed not ro ſmite him again. # Who now 


| boldly reſumed his former Place, and marched in the head of the 


Army. Ir is not ſtrange, that Amaſa's Soldiers did not fight to re 
venge his Death; partly, becauſe not many of them were yer come 
up, but came by degrees,as the following Verſes ſhews;and partly, 
becauſe Joadb's Tavond and Authority with the Military-men was 
very great ; eſpecially, with David's Guards, who were here pre- 
ſent,and who had no kindneſs for 4maſa, as having been the Gene. 
ral of the Rebellious Army ; and,as they mighr think, was nor fit 
to be pur into a Place of fo great Power and Truſt. 


11 And one of Joabs men 6 ſtood by him, and ſaid, 


He that favoureth Joab c, and he that 5s for David d, 
let him go after Joab. 

b Left there on purpoſe to deliver the following Meſſage. c He 
thar would have Joab to be General, rather than ſuch a perfidious 
Rebel and Traytor as Amaſa. d He that wiſherth David good ſucceſs 
againſt Shebs, and againſt all Rebels. Whereby he implies, that 
though this fatt of his was done againſt the King's Command, yet 
it was for his Intereſt and Defence, 

12 AndAmaſa wallowed e in blood f in the midſt of 
the high way : and when the man ſaw that all the peo- 
ple g ſtood itill 4, he removed Amaſa out of the high 
way into the field z, and caſt a cloth upon him, when 
he ſaw thar every one that came by him ſtood ftill. 

e Heb. rolled himſelf, being in the Pangs of Death ; yer having 
ſo much life left, as to move himſelf a little, though not to raiſe 
himſelf up from his place. f In his own Blood, which was ſhed 
there. g To wit, the Soldiers which were upon their march. 
þ Wondering at the SpeQacle,and enquiring into the Author and 
Occaſion of it. : Perceiving,thar it both incenſed them again{Joab, 
and hindred, the King's Preſent Service. 

13 When he was removed out of che high way, all 


the peopie went on afcer Joab, to purſue after Sheba 
the ſon of Bichri, | 


14 4 And he & went through all the tribes of Ifrael 
unto Abel, and to Beth-maachah 1, and all the Be- 


rites 3 : and they n were gathered together, and went 
allo after him o. | 

& Either, 1. Joab, who purſued Sh:ba throngh all the Tribes as 
far as Ab:l, Or rather, 2. Sheba, who+was lait mentioned, who 
marched from Tribe to Tribe to ſtir them up to Sedition;and to 
him the following words tcem beſt ro agree. 1 Or rather, to Abel, 
even to Beth-maachah ; i.e, unto Abe!-beth-maachah, as this place is 
called here in the Horew Text, wers 15: and 1 King: 15: 20, 2 King, 
x5: 29. to diſtinguiſh it from other Abels ; and to fignifie, that this 
was that Abel which was in the Tribe of Napthali in the Northern 
border of Canaan towards that part of Syria called Maachah, 2 Sam: 
10. 8. m Such as lived in the City, or Territory of Beeroth of Ben- 
jamin, Joſb. 18. 25. who being of the ſame Tribe, if not City with 
Shebs and his greateit' Acquaintance and Friends : or, being moſt 
implacable againſt Dawid, adhered to Sheba, and followed him 
through all rhe Tribes of Jrael. n= To wit, the Tribes of Iſrael ; 
7. e. a conſiderable Number of them ; as might well be expe&ed, 
when the Dilconrents were ſo high and general, 0 7. e. After $h2ba. 
is And they p came and beiieged him in Abel of 
Berh-maachah, and they caſt up a bank againſt the 


city q, and || it ſtood in the crench r : and all the peo- | Or, i 


ple that were with Joab, f battered the wall to throw 3: tp 


down : outmoſ? 
p 7. e. Joab and his Army, which is eaſily underſtood, both from wa. 

the foregoing and following Verſes q From whence they might f Heb. 

either batrer the Wall, or ihoot ar rhote who defended it againſt marred to 

them, who ſhould affaulr ir. See 2 King. 19. 32. Jer. 32. 24» and throw 

33+ 4. Otherwiſe, they chrew down the bank of the City, which they down, 

had raiſed up to defend the City on the weakeit fide. » 7. e The 

Bank irood in, or near to the Trench, or the Wall of the Ciry ; 

ſo that the Ciry was in great danger of being rakza. Orherwite, 

the City ſrood within the Trench,or Wall, being defended only by 

a ſingle Trench, or a weak Wal} ; the Bank which was raifed up 

there to defend ir, being chrown down. 


16 CE Then cryed a wiſe woman out of the city, 
Hear, hear, ſay, 1 pray you, unto Joab, Come near hi- 
ther, thac [ may ſpeak with rnee. 
17 And when he was come near unto her, the wo- 
man faid, Art thou Jozb 2 And he anſwered, T am be: 
Then the ſaid unto him, Hear the words of thine 
handmaid. And he an{wered, I do hear. ES 
18 Then ſhe ſpake, ſaying, || They were wont to on "Y 
ſpeak in old time,faving, || Lhey ſhall ſurely ask counſel ſpeak inthe 
ac Abel : and fo they ended rhe matter beginning 


s According to this Tranſlation the fence is, This Ciry which thou Jaying, 
art about ro deſtroy, is no mean and contemprible one, but ſo ho- Surely they 
nourable and conſiderable for its Wildom, and the wiſe People in vill ak of 
it, that when any Differences did ariſe among any of the Nergh- Abel, and 
bours, they uſed Proverbialiy ro fay, We wil ack the Opinton: and J0 make 


9 And Joab faid to Amaſa, 4rt thou in health, my 
brother ? And joab took Amaſa by the beard « with 


Advice of the Men of Abel about 15,aud we will fand to their Arbitrati. #8, 014. 
on ; and ſo all Parties were ſatisfied, and Diſputes ended. But there is 
3 E another” 


+ Heb. 
were [cate 
tered. 


|| Or, 
remems= 
brancer. 


!! Or, 


a prinee. 


hap. XX, = 3 | 


another Tranſlation in the Margent,embraced afo by ſome others, 
which ſeems to be the beſt ; They (7.'e the Citizens of this City ) 
plammly ( or, commonly ) ſpake ( among themſelves ) in the beginn/ng 
(to wit, when Sh:ba and his Men firſt came into the City, and 
they were informed, That Joab was purſuing him ) Jaying, Surely 
they will ask of Abel, and ſo make an end : They will peaccably Ex- 
poſtulate the buſineſs with us, and enquire,why we received Sheba 


into our City ? And whether we would deliver him up into thear | 
hands, and would inform us of the reaſon of their Holtile At- |, 


remprt upon us,and offer to us Conditions of Peace,which by Goa's 
Law, Deat. 20. 10. they were to do even to ſtrange, and much 
more to Jſraelit:ſþ Cities. So ſhe doth both modeſtly reprove Joas 
for the negle& of his Duty, and oblige him to the Performance 
of it. 

I9 I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in 


Iſrael z : thou feekeſt to deſtroy a city, and a mother « 
in Iſrael : why wilt thou ſwallow up the inheritance 


of the LORD x? 

z Or, I ( to wit, the City of Abel.in whoſe Name and Perſt on ſhe 
ſpeaks this ) am one of the peaceable and faithful Cities of Jſrael. 
Whatſoever $h;ha may deſign, whom we have innocently received 
into our City, before we well underſtood the matter : we of this 
City abhor the thoughts.of Warcing, and Rebelling againſt the 
King, as having had no hand in 4> aom”s late Rebelliorr: which is 
probable enough, conſideriag both their Situation in the ourm-1ſt 
Borders of the { and, very remote from the Seat of that Civil War; 
and their open ProfeHon of their Peaceableneſs, and Fidelity, or 
Loyalty to the King ; wich had been impudent if they haz been 
ſo lately involved in the laſt War an! R-bellion. u z. e. A Mo- 
ther : tor great Cities are commonly cajle. Morhers ; as leſſer Towns 
or Villages ſubje& to them, and depending upoa them, tor Di- 
reQtion and Defence, are called their Daug#ters, as Exek: 16: 27, 

6. x 7.e. A confiderable part of that Land which God hath 
choſen for his peculiar Pofſcfſion. The Deſtruction which thou 
art about to bring upon us, is an Injury alſo to Jrae/, and to the 
God of Iſrael. . ; 

20 And Joab anſwered and ſaid, Far be it, far be ir 


| from me, that I ſhould ſwallow up, or deſtroy. 


21 The matter is not {ſo : but a man of mount E- 


+ Heb. zy phraim y ( Sheba the ſon of Bichri + by name ) hath 
his name. lift up his hand z againſt the king, even againſt David : 


deliver him only,and I will depait from the city. Aud 
the woman ſaid unto Joab, Behold, his head thall be 


thrown tc thee over the wall 2. 

y Queſt, How can this be fo, when he is called a Benjamite? ver:1: 
Anſ. Either he was a Benjamite by Birth, but dwelt in the Tribe of 
Ephraim,as many did upon feveral occaſions dwell out of their own 
Tribes: or, mount Ephraim was a place 1n B-njamin,which might be 
ſo called, cither becauſe it was upon the Borders of Epiraim, and 
Jooked towards it; or from ſome notable Altion or Event of the 
Ephraimites in that place. Compare chap: 187 6. & 2. e. Taken up 
Arms, or raiſed Rebellion. s Which the undertook, becauſe the 
knew the preſent Temper, and great Fears of the citizens, and 
Soldiers too; and that conſidering their evident and extream Dar.- 
ger, they were generally deſirous of Peace, from which they weic 
reſtrained only by Shebs's Authority and Intereſt ; and therefore 
did not doubt by God's Blefling upon her wiſe Counſcl to effet ir, 
as indeed ſhe did. And it is not unlikely, that this Woman might 
be a Governeſs in tliat City. For though this office was commonly 

erformed by Men; yet were not the Women wholly excluded, 
96-4 ſomerimes imployed in tke Government: As we ſce in Deborah, 
who judged Jrael, Juag: 4; 4. And Quecn 4chalia, 2 Kirg: 11. | 
22 Then the woman went unto ail the people in 
her wiſdom b, and they cut off the head of Sheba the 
ſon of Bichri, and caft it out to Joab : and he blew a 
trumpet,and they ct retiied from the city,every man to 
his tent : ajid Joab returned to Jeruſalem unto the king. 
bPrudently treated with them abour it, either ſeverally or joyni- 
ly, as ſhe ſaw fit ; repreſenting to them the certainry and ncar- 
neſs of all their Ruine, if they did not ſpeedily comply with her 
Deſires, and certain Deliverance if they did. © Foub and his Army 
which beſieged them. 
23. © Now * Joab as over all the hoſt of Iſrael 4 : 


and Benaiah the lon of Jehoiada was over the Chere- 


thites, and over the Pelerhices. 

d The good ſucceſs of this and of the former Expedition,under 
the Condut of Joab, had ſo fixed his Intereſt in the Army, and 
others of David's faſteit Friends, that the King could not without 
danger to the Publick Weal diſplace him. 

24 And Adoram was over the tritut2 e : and Jeho- 


ſhapiat the ſon of Ahilud was || recorder f : 
 e The receiver and manager of the Kings Publick Revenue, Sce 
on 1 King. 4. 6. f Sce 2 Sam. 8. 16. 
25 And Sheba was {cribe, and Zadok and Abjathar 
were the prieſts g: 
g See 2 Sam. 8.17.and Is. 3s. 
26 And Ira alſo the fairite b was || a chief ruler 5 


about David. 

h So called from his birth or dwelling in the Country of 7air in 
Gilead, Numb. 32. 41. Judg. 10: 4. i Either the Preſident of the 
Kings Council : or, his Chief Miniſter ( as the Hebrew word Cohen 
ſigmfies ) of State,inſtead of Ah:thephel: or in ſome other very high 

lace near the King's Perion. Compare 2 Sam. 8. 18. where this 
Fire 1s given to David's Sons, the Chief of which were now cur 
off, And theſe things are here repeated with ſome alteration, to 
(hew that David was now fully re-eſtabliſhed in his former Eſtate. 


CH AP. XXL 


OR * . A three years famine declared by God to be for the Gibeonites ſale ceaſe: 
"ThSy 54 


by their hanging ſeven of Saul's ſons, 19. R:2pah preſerveth the 


dead bodies, io, 11. David buricth the bones of Saul and Jonathan, 
.as alſo of them that were hung up in his father's ſepulchre, 12<==-14. 


= V0. E L 


Four battels again the Philiſlines wherein fuur valiants of David /lay 
four giants, 15 22, 
- þ Hen @ there was a famine in the days of David 
three years, year after year ; and David + enqui- + 13 
red of the LORD b. And the LORD anſwered, 7: fog ,, 
is for Saul, and for his bloody houſe, becauſe he flew /**f,8. 
the Gibeonites c. | 
_ s When ? Either, Firſt, After 4bſalem's and Sheba's Rebellion,as 
It 1s here related. Or rather, Secondly, In ſome other time before. 
It is well known and confeſſed,that the Particle, then,doth nor al. | 
ways note that the thing was done in that order in which it is mens | 
rioacd ; but is oft of an indefinite fignification ; as alſo that the | 
SCripture in its Hiſtories and Relations,doth not always obſerve the | 
order of time, but the order of things, puting that after, which, 
was done bezore, as occaſion requires. And 1o it ſeems to be here. | 
The things related here and chap;24.are by the moſt and beſt Inter- ' 
prerers conceived to have been done long before Abſalom's Rebel- 
hon. And this Opinion is not without ſufficient grounds: Firſt, 
This Particle, then, is here explained, in the days, 7. e. during the 
Life and Reign of David :which general and indefinite words ſeem | 
to be added as an Intimation that theſe things were not done after 
the next foregoing Paſſages, for then the Sacred Writer would ra- 
ther have added, after theſs things, or ſome ſuch expreſſion, as it is 
2 Chron. 32,1. and /in many other places, Secondly,Here are devers 
Pafſages which it ſeems very improbable to aſcribe to the laſt Years 
of David's Reign : Such as theſe, Firſt, That Sau!'s Sin againſt the 
Gibeonites ſhould ſo long remain unpuniſhed. And indeed that this 
was done, and Sau!'s ſeven Sons hanged by David's order before 
that time, ſeemsplainly to be intimated by that paſſage 2 Sam. 16-8, 
where he is charged with the blood of the houſe of Saul : for which 
there was not the leaſt colour till this time. Secondly, That David 
ſhould not remove the Bones of Saul and Jonathan to their proper 
Piace, here v» 12. 13, $4. till thar time, Thirdly, That the Ph:1:- 
Sines ſhould wage-War with David again and again, wv. i 5, &c. ſo 
long after he had fully ſubdued them,chap- 8. 1. and that David in 
his old Age ſhould attempc ro fight with a Phil:ft;ne Giant, or that 
his People ſhould ſuffer him todo fo. Fourthly, That David ſhould 
then have ſo vehement a deſire ro number his People,chap:24.1,&C. 
which being. an a& of yourhful hear and vanity,ſeems nor at all to 
agree with his old age,nor with that fate of deep humiliarion,and 
great offliction in which he then was. And the reaſon why theſe 
matters are put here out of their proper order, is plainly this, be- 
cauſe David's Sin being once related, it was very convenient that 
David's Puniinments inflifted for it ſhould immediatly ſucceed:this 
being very frequent in Scripture-ſtory, to put thoſe things toge= 
ther which belong ro one matter, though they happened ar ſeveral 
times. And this is the more conſiderable, becaule it tends to the 
Clearing of that great difficulry, 2 Sam. 15: 7, b Concerning the 
reaſon of his Dijpleaſure, and this Judgment. e Which was not 
only an att of Cruelty, bur alſo of Perhdiouſneſs and Perjury, be 
caute it was a dire@ and publick violation of that Solemn Oath gi- 
ven to them for their ſecurity by Jeſhua and the Princes, in the 
name of all the 1raelires, of that, and of ſucceeding Generations, 
and conſequently a great ſcandal to the true Religion,and the Proe 
teſſors of it, and a mean to diſcourage others from embracing it, 
as the Gibeonires had done. Queffs Why did not God puniſh Saul 
whilſt he was alive for this fault, but his innocent Children, and 
David and the Iſraelites of this Age ? Anſw. Firſt,God did ſeverely 
puniſh Saul for this and his other Sins, Secondly, As God may 
juitly inflict Temporal puniſhments upon' any Offender, either in 
his perfon or in his Poſterity, when he pleaſeth ; ſo it is meer he 
thould rake his own time for it; and it 1s folly and wickedneſs in 
us to quarrel with God for ſo doing. Thirdly, The Iraelites might 
ſundry ways make themſelves guilty of Saul's ſin,though it be nor 
particularly mentioned in Scripture, adviſing or encouraging him 
ro It 3 or, by afſi{tiog him in the execution of it 3 or,by conniving 
ar it ; or, by rejoycang in it, for ſome wordly advantage which 
they reccived, or expected from it; or, by not repairing the Inju- 
ries which Sau! had done them,as far as they might. And ſome of 
theſe ways David himſelf might be involved in the guilt: although 
indeed this evil fell principally upon the People. And whereas 
many of the People probably were innocent of that Crime, yet 
they alſo were guilty of many other Sins,for which God might pu- 
niſh them, though he took this occaſion for it. And it may be 
further obſerved, That God is pleaſed many times ſeverely to puniſh 
lefler Delinquents, and to ſuffer the greater for the preſent to go 
unpuniſhed;and that not only to maniteſt his own Soveraign Power 
and Liberty, but alſo to give the World thereby aſſurance of 3 
future Judgment, and Puniſhments reſerved for the next lite. - 
2 And the king called the Gibeonites, and faid un- 
to them, ( now the Gibeonites wer: not of the children 
of Iſrael, but * of the remnant of the Amorites, and *Tolkg3, 
the children of Iſrael had ſworn unto them : and Saul i6, 17. 
{ought to ſlay them 4, in his zeal to the Children of Ife 
rael and Judah e, ) | 
d i, e. He ſought occaſions and pretences how he might cut them 
off with ſome colour of Law or Juſtice, diligently ſearching out and 
aggravating their Faults, and puniſhing them worſe than they de- 
lerved ; oppreſſing them with exceflive Labours, and openly kil- 
ling tome of them, and intending by degrees to wear them our. 
e Conceiving, or rather,pretending that it was not for the honour, 
nor comfort, nor advantage of God's People;to nouriſh any of thar 
vipcrous Brood in their Boſoms;and that howſoever Joſhua and the 
Princes which then were, had by their Fraud been drawn into 
an Oath to preſerve them, Joſh, g. 15. yet in truth that Oath was 
contrary to God's Command, Exod: 23: 32, Deut; 7: 2. and there= 
fore (as he thought ) nor to be obſerved. This was his pretence : 
bur how little Zeal he had for God, or for the publick good of his 
People, is evident by the whole courſe of his life : and therefore it 
; 1s more than probable he had ſome particular motive or deſign in 
tne caſe : cither, becauſe ſome of them had highly provoked him, 
' for whoſe ſake he would be revenged of the whole Race : or be- 
cauſe they being cut off, their Elitates might be forfeited to the 
' Crown : or, for ſome other rcaſon now unknown. oh. ; 
| 3 Wheretore David faid unto the Gibeonites f, ' 
What 


— 


- 


Chap. x | E: 


[Or 


ll 0 
LOR 


*: Sar 
18. 3 
20. 8 
and 2 


|Or. 
thal"s 
fer, v 
f He 
bare t 
Aoviel 


«9 


4 


FCha7 


| Or. it 15 
ot vcr 
an gol 
that we 
ſave to a 
with Sat 
or buhouſe; 
neither 


X* XI. 


\\:at ſhall T do for you g? and wherewith ſhall I make 

« itonement, that ye may bleſs the inheritance of the 
LORDb? ; 

io ſome of the chief of them, who were to impart 1t to the 

' - What fatisfattion do you expett or require for the Injuries 
{-:merly done to you ? þ That by your acknowledgment of ſatil- 
fa&ion received, the guilt and curſe may be removed from the 
Land and People of Cod,and by this means,as alſo by your Prayers, 
God may be reconciled, and may reſtore has Bleſſing of Plenty 
to us, which hitherto he hath denied us. _ ; 

+ And the Gibeonires ſaid unto him, ||We will have 
no ſilver or gold of Saul, nor of his houſe, neither for 
us ſhalt thou kill any man in Ifrael i. And he faid, 
What you ſhall ſay &, that will I do for you. 

; Except Sau!'s Family, as it here follows. k To wit, in any 
reaſon, and as far as God's Law will permit. 

And they an{wered the king, The man that con- 


pertainSit ©0324 us,and that || deviſed againſt us,zhat we ſhould be 


go us 80 

þll, &C. 
| Or, | 
as 15 of, 


ſOr, c0= 
ſn of the 
LORD. 


*:$am. 
18. 3.an 
20. 8, 42. 
and 23 118, 


| Or. M;- 
thal"s ſin 
fer, v.1 9 
f Heb. 
bare to 
Adviel. 


: Johh. 


Io, 26: 


deſtroyed from remaining in any of the coaſts of Iſrael, 

] That we ſhould be either killed, or baniſhed from the Land 
of Iſrael ; which is as bad as death to us, becauſe here, and here 
only God is truly worshiped and enjoyed. Whereby it ſeems dt- 
vers of them were hearty Proſelites, and godly perſons ; and 
therefore God is more ſevere in puniſhing the Injuries done to 
them. Compare 1 Sam; 26: 19- : 

6 Let ſeven men of his ſons be dzlivered unto us, 
and we will hang them up unto the LORD m in 
Gibeah of Saul » || Whom the LORD did chuſe »o. And 
the king ſaid, I will give them p. 

m To vindicat his Honour, which was injured by Saul's viola- 
tion of the Cath and Covenant of God, and to appeaſe his wrath. 
n Saul's Country,1 Sam. 0: 26; and 11: 4. for their greater ſhame. 
o This is added to aggravate Saul's Offence, that it was commitred 
not only againſt them, bur alſo againſt the Lord who had choſen 
and advanced him,and therefore did little deſerve this from Saul's 
hand, to have his Laws broken,and his Name dishonoured by per- 
jury. p Having doubricſs confulred God in the matter ; who as he 
had before declared S2:!'s Bloody Houle to be the cauſes of this 
Judgmenr,ſo now commanded that Juſtice should be done upon it, 
and that the remaining Branches of it shouid be cut off; as ſuffi- 
ciently appears from hence, that God was ſatisfied and well pleaſed 
with the A&tion ; which he would nor have been, if David had done 
it without his command ; for then it had been a tinful a&ion of 
David's, and contrary to a double Law of God, Dent: 21: 23: and 24: 
16. which none' but God himſelf could diſpenſe with. 


7 But the king ſpared Mephiboſheth q the ſon of 
Jonathan .*., ghe ſon of Saul, becauſe of * che LORD's 
oath that was berween them, berween David and Jo- 
nathan the ſon of Saul. 

g For the Gibeonites deſiring only ſuch a number, without deſfign= 
ing the perſons, it was at David's choice whom to ſpare. Or, he 
prevailed with the Gibeonires that they did not demand him ; and 
with the Lord, that he might nor be one of thoſe who were de- 
voted to deſtruftion. .*. This is expreſly added, to diſtinguish 
him from the other Mephiboſbeth. wv. 8. ; 

8 kurt the King took the two ſons of Rizpah », the 
daughter of Ajah, whom ſhe bare unto Saul, ArmGni, 
and Mephiboſhech, and the hve ſons of || Michal / the 
daughter of Saul, whom ſhe | brought up : for Adriel 
the ſon of Barziilai the Meholathite «, 


r Saul's Concubine, v. 11. and chap. 3- 7. ſ Or, of Mcichals Siſter 
to wit, Merob . for M: hal had no Chiidren, 2 Sam. 6: 23. NOr was 


1 Sam: 25.44 and 2$4m, 3-15. and Merob her Siſter was married to 
this very Aadriel the Meholathite, 1 Sam. 18. 19. And it mult be 
remembied, that the Hebrew Language is very $hort, and full of 
Elipſes or detetts of words, which yet may be catily underſtood from 
the ſenſe. particularly,relative « ords are oft lacking,and to be ſup- 
plied, as Golzah is pur for Goliahs brother, here v. 19. and Unicle for 
Uncles ſon, Jer: 32 7, 12. Or, the Sons' of Merob are called the 
ſons of Michal, to wir, by adoption ; or, the near Kindred and next 
Heirs of Michal, and brought up by her. For upon that and ſuch 
like accounts the Title of Sn is oft given in Scripture,asGen. 48. 5. 
Excd 2. 10. Deus. 25. 5 6. Ruth. 1. 11, 12. and 4.17. Queff. But 
why then are not theſe called the ſons of Merob ? Anſ. Becauſe they 
vere better known by their Relation to Michal, who was Davias 
Wife, and, it may be alive at this time, and having no Children of 
her own, took theie and bred them up as her own ; when Merob 
was now a more obicure perſon, and pothibly dead many Years be- 
tore this. # For fo this Hebrew Verb,which primarily and proper- 
ly fignitics ro bear,is ſometimes uſed, as Gen. 50:23. Ruth 4: £7 bes 
caute the Education of Children is a kind of bearing of them, as 
requiring frequently no leſs care and pains than the bearing doth; 
whence 1t 15 that Nurſes are reputed as Mothers,and ſometimes go 
under that Name borh in Sacred and prophane Writers. Sce Ruth 4. 
15,17. and compare Gen: 16. 2: and zo: 3- Num 11:12. Gal: 4:19. u Of 
Foei-meholah in the Tribe of Benjamin, Fudg. 7. 22. So he is here 
calicd by way of diftinttion from Barz://ai the Gileadite, chap 19. 31. 

9. And he delivered them into the hand of the Gi- 
beorites x and they * hanged them in the hill y before 
the LORD z : and they fell «ll ſeven together, and 
were put ro death in the days of harveſt, in the firſt 
4ays, in the beginning of barley harveſt 6. 

x Que}. How could David do this, when he had Sworn that he 
would nor cut off Saul s Seed, 1 Sam. 24+ 21, 22. Anſw. B=cauſe he 
had ipecia] warrant and direttion from God about it, who, as all 
Co::rcls, Can diſpenſe with Mens Oaths, and with his own Laws 
when he ices tc. And that he did lo here, 1s manifeſt, becauſe God 
was picated with it, and removed rhe Judgment upon it, whereas 
otherwiſe David had been guilty of che fame Sin with $Sa%l.ro wir 
of the breach of his Oath and Covenant, for which this famine 


n S$S4KHURL 


was inflifted. See the Note on r Sam. 24. 22. y Or, in an hill, in 
or near Gibeah; in a conſpicuous place for their greater infamy,and 
for the caution and terror of others who ſhould make any attempr 
upon the Gibeonites for the furure. z As a Sacrifice offered up to 
God to appeaſe his Wrath : or, unto the Lord, as was faid v. 6+ 
a 7. e Died: for ſo the word, rofal, is oft uſed, as Exod. 19. 21. 
1 Chron. 21. 14. Pſal-g1. 7+ Jer. 39. laſt. Hiſ. 5: 5. or, were executeds 
b Which was before the Wheat-harveſt. ; 
io © And * Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took ſack- 
cloth, and ſpread it for her c upon the rock d, from 
che beginning of harveſt, until water dropped upon 


them our of heaven e, and + ſuffered neicher the birds 


the field g by night. 


c As a Tent to dwell in? being informed that their Bodies were 
not to be taken away ſpeedily, as the courſe of the Law was in 
other and ordinary caſes, Deut: 21: 23+ but were to continue there 
until God was intreated, and did remove the preſent Judgment. 
And God was herein pleaſed to diſpenſe with his own Law,that it 
might plainly appear that theſe were nor put to death by David for 
politick Realons, as that he and his Sons might be fred from Com- 
petitors, which doubtleſs David's Enemies were ready to ſuggeſt ; 
but by God's ſpecial Command, who was pleaſed to execute this 
Judgment upon them,as partly and principally for the punithmenr 
of Saul's Sin fo ſecondarily tor the ſtabliſhing of David's Throne 
ro himſelf and to his Seed for ever, as he had promiſed. 4 In ſome 
convenient place in a Rock, near adjoyning. e :.e. Until they were 


a fign of his Favour,and a mean to remove the Famine,which was 
cauſed by the want of it. f z. e. On their Carcaſſes. g From which 
ſhe might preſerve her ſelf and them by divers methods. 

i: Andit was told Davidh what Rizpah the daugh- 
ter of Aiah the concubine of Saul had done. 

hþ Who heard it with ſo much approbation, that he thought fit 
to imitate her Piety, being by her Example provoked ro do what 
hitherto he had negleSed.to beſtow an honourable Interment upen 
the remains of Saul and Jonathan, and, with them. upon thoſe that 
were now put to death,that the honour done to them herein,might 
be ſome comtort to this dejeted and diſconſolate Widow. 

12 CT And David went and cook the bones of Saul, 
and the bones of Jonathan his ſon, from the men of 
Jabeſh-Gilead, which had ſtollen them from the ſtreec 


of Beth-ſhan,where the * Philiſtines had hanged them, 


when the Philiſtines had ſlain Saul in Gilboa : 


13 And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul, 
and the bones of Jonathan his fon, and they gathered 
the bones i of them that were hanged. 

3 Having firſt burnt off the Fleſh which remained upon them 
when they were taken down. Compare 1 Sam: 31:10, &c. 

14 And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his ſon, bu- 
ried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah &, in 
the ſepulchre of Kith his father : and they performed 
all that the king commanded : and after that I God 
was intrearted for the land. 

k A place in Benjamin, mentioned Joſh. 18. 28, 1 Aﬀeer thoſe 
things were done which were before related ; 7. e. after they were 
hanged up : for by that God was pacified, and not by their burial. 
So the relative belongs ro the remorer antecedent. Or, if this re- 
late ro what was Jalt mentioned, the meaning is, that God was 


pleaſed to reſtore the Bleſling of Plenty ro the Land. 


15 Moreover, the Philiſtines had yet a war again 


' with Iſrael ms, and David went down, and his ſervants 
She married ro this Aariel, but to Phalti or Phaltiel the ſon of Laiſh, | 


with him, and fought againſt the Philiſtines, and Da- 
vid waxed faint. 


m Theſe Wars though here related, were tranſa&ed long before 
this time : of which ſee the Notes onv. r. For it is no way proba- 
ble, cither, thar the Pil;f/nes being fo fully and perfectly ſub- 
dued by David, cp. 8: 1. ſhould in his days be in a capacity of 
waging War with the 1ſraelites : or,that Dawid in his old age would 
undertake to fight with a Giant, or that his People would permit 
him to do 1ſo. [ 

16 And Iſhbi-benob, which as of the ſons of || the 
grant », ( the weight of whole + ſpear weighed three 
hundred ſheke/s o of braſs in weight ) he being girded 
with a new ſword p, thought to have ſlain David. 

n So called by way of eminency. Or, of Rapha,a Giant ſo called. 
o Sec 1 £272. 17: 5. fp Or rather, with a new Girdle or Belt : For, 
Firſt, 'This was the uſual habit of Souldiers, 1 Sam: 18: 4. 2 Sam, 
18. 11+ and 20. 8. 1 Kings 2: 5. Iſa: 5. 27. and, when it was of an 
extraordinary faſhion and price, and Enlign of Dignity and Com- 
mand in the Army, Ezck. 23: 15. So this may be mentioned to 
norc, that this was the firſt rime either of his going our ro fight, o1 
ofhis advancement to ſome eminent place in the Army: which made 
him deſirous to ſignalize himfelf with ſome great Ation. Second- 
ly, This Supplement is more natural and uſual, the word girdle be- 
ing cate ſupplied from the word being girded ; ſuch Elliptes of 
conjugate words being frequent in the Hebrew Tongue, as Nuzn: 
11; 14, Pjal- 76: 12. Math. 29: 12. Thirdly, The newnels of the 
Sword ſcems to have no emphaſts nor ſignificancy for the preſent 
purpoſe ; ſeing an old and tried Sword would teem more confi- 
derable for his encouragement, than one new and unproved. 


17 But Abiſhai the fon of Zeruiah ſuccoured him, 


and {mote the Philiſtine, and killed him. Then * the + 


men of David {ware unto him, ſaying, Thou ſhalt go 


no more out with us to battel, that thou quench not 
the T light of Iſrael q. 

9 Leſt chou be flain, and thereby thy People be ruined. Good 
Kings are in Scripture juſtly called the Lrght of their People, as 
i King, 1. 36, 2and4 15. 4. Pjal. 132. 17. becauſe rhe beaury and 

: 7B 2 glory 


Chap. XX 


of the air to reſt on them by day f, nor the beaſts of g; 


taken down: which was not to be done till God had given Rain as - 


f Heb. 


caudle, or, 


" 
h, 

i} 
Þ>, | 
8 


2 


4 
t 
1 
1 $ 
i [ 
it; 
is 


* Chap: 
3+ 9- 


+ Heb. | 


ve nod. 


* 1 Sari, 
31. 10. 


|| Or, Ra- 
pha.:- - 
+ Heb. 
the ſtaff, 


Or, the 
heads 


Chap- 
18: 3. 


lamp. 


Chap. 


*, Chron. 
20 4. 


| Or, 
Raphs. 


"M0 
x- Chron. 
20. 5. 


If Or , 
Raphs. 


{| Or, 
reproached, 


* 1 Sam. 


16. Ye 


* Pfal: 


T Heb. 
Belial. 


4 Heb, by » 


18. 2,&c; 


[| Or,panegs. 


j] Or,cord-. 


XXL. 


_—_x.MDRKA 


glory,the condutt and dire&ion,the comfort and ſafety, and welfare 


of a People depends upon them, and comes from them. 


again a battel wirh the Philiſtines at Gob /: then Sib- 
bechai the Huſhathite : flew * Saph, which as of the 
ſons of || the giant. 3 

r After the Bartel laſt mentioned. ſ Or, i Gezer,as it 1s 1 Chron. 
20: 4. Whereby it ſeems Gob and Gezer were neighbouring Places, 
and. the Battel fought in the. Confines 6f both, £ One of David s 
worthies, 1 Chron. 11. 29- ; ; : 

19. And there was again a bartel in Gob, with the 
Philiſtines, where Elhanan #, the ſon of Jaare-oregim, 
-a Bethlehemite,flew * the brother of Goliah the Gictite x, 
the ſtaff of whole ſpear was like a weavers beam y» 

«Another of David's worthy and valiant Commanders. x The 
relative word Brother, is*not in the Hebrew Text, bur is fitly fup- 
-Plicd our of the parrallel place, 1 Chron. 20. 5- where It 1s expreſ- 
1ed And ſuch defe&ts of relatives are not unuſual in Scripture. 
"Thus the word Wife is underſtood, Marth: 1.6: Jeh: 19: 25: and 
Father or Mother, Mar. 15: 40, 47. Compare with Mar: 16: 1: and 
- Lacke 24 10, and Sor, Matth: 4: 21: Mar. 2. 14. Joh. 21. 15. and Bro- 
_ther, Luke 6. 46. Compare with Jud. v. 1. And. ſuch Ellipies do 
alſo frequently occur in prophane Authors. Aithough the place 
- may bez and is otherwiſe rendered Elhanan the ſon of Jaare-oregim, 
ſlew Berh-halachmi or Lachmi, ( as he is called by way of abbrevia- 

tion. 1 Chron; 20.5. which is very frequent in the Hebrew Tongue,) 
who was ( which words are frequently unde: ſtood in the Hebrew 
Text } with ( ſo eth is often rendred,as hath been noted before) Ge- 
liath the Gittite 5 i. e. in his Company, bred up with him to rhe 
War, and related to him as his Brother. Or, he /ew Beth-halachm: 
a Goliath ( or, another Gel/ath ) of Gath, or the Gittite. So the 
name of the Giant was Beth-halachmi, who may be here called Go- 
liath, not'only for his near relation ro him, being his Brother, bur 
for his exa@ reſemblance of him in Feature, or in Stature and 
Strength, or in Courage and Military Skill ; as John the Baptiſt was 
called Elias, .for the like reaſon. Peradventure alſo, after the dearh 
of the firſt and famous Goliath the Gitite, 18am. 17. that name wa 
"either given to him by others,or taken by himſelf. » In thickneſs. 
" See 1 Same 17, 7+ : 

20 And there was yet a battel in Gath z, where 

was a man of great {tature .*., that had on every hand 


fix fingers, and on every foot ſix toes, four and twenty 


in number, and he alſo was born to||che giant. 

z 7, 6. In the Territory of the City of Gath. Which circumſtance 
intimates, that this, and conſequently the other Battels here de-" 
ſcribed, were fought before Dav.d had taken Gath our of the hand: 
of the Philiſtines, which he did 2 Sam. 8. 1. compare with 1 Chron. 
18. 1. and therefore not in the laſt.days of Dawvig,as ſome conceive 
from their mention in this place. 7. Or, a man of Middin or Madon,' 

the LXX render it, fo called from the place of his birth, as Ge- 

'Frath is ſaid to be of Gath for the ſame reaſon. 


21 And when he || defied Ifrael, Jonathan the ſon 
of * Shimea, the brother of David, flew him. 

22 Theſe four were born to the giant in Gath, and 
fell by the hand of David «, and by the hand of his 
ſervants. 


# Either, becauſe they were ſlain by his ConduR,and Counſel,or 
Concurrance ; for he contributed by his hand to the death of one 
of them, whilſt maintaining a fight with him, he gave Abijhai the 
eaſier opportunity of killing him, wer. 16. 17. or becauſe whar is 

- done by the inferior Commanders, is commonly aſcribed to the 
General, both in Sacred and Prophane Writers, | 


CHAP. XXII. 


A Pſalm of thankſgiving for God's Powerful deliverance and manifold 
bleſſmz, 1 —— 51; 


This Chapter is in a manner wholly the [ame with Pſalm 


18. and therefore I ſhall adjourn ihe Expcſition of it to that 
place. | 


* wp D David ſpake unto the LORD the words of 
| this ſong, in the day that the LORD had deli- 
vered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out 
of the hand of Saul, 

2 And he ſaid, * The LORD is my rock, and my 
fortreſs, and my deliverer : 

3 The God of my rock, in him will I cruſt : he 5s 
my ſhield, ard the horn of my falvation, my high 
tower, and my refuge, my ſaviour ; thou ſaveſt me 
from violence. 

4 © will call on the LORD, who is worthy to be 
 praiſed-: ſo ſhall I be ſaved from mine enemies. 

5 When the || waves of death compaſſed me ; the 
floods of + ungodly men made me afraid ; ; 

6 The || ſorrows of heil compaſſed me about : the 
ſnares of death prevented me ; 

7 In my diſtreſs I called upon the LORD, and cried 
to my God : and he did hear my voice out of his tem- 
ple, and my cry 4id enter into his ears, 

8 Then the earth ſhook and trembled : the foun- 
dations- of heaven moved and ſhook, becauſe he was 
wroth. 

9 There went up a ſmoke + out of his noſtrils, and 
u out of his mouch devoured : coals were. kindled 

y It. 

io He bowed the heavens alſo, and came down : 

and darkneſs was under his feer. 


11 And he rode upon a cherub, and did flee : and 


| he was ſeen upon the wings of the wind. 
18 * And it came to paſs after this r, that there was 


12 And he made darkneſs paviilions round about 
him, F dark waters, «24 thick clouds of the skies. + Heb 

13 Through the brightneſs before him were coals of %iy 
fire kindled, waters, 

14 The LORD thundred from heaven, and the 
moſt High uttered his voice. 

15 And he ſent out arrows, and ſcattered them : 
lightening, and diſcomfited them. 

16 And the chanels of the ſea appeared, the foun- 
dations of the world were diſcovered, at the Rebuking 
of the LORD, at the blaſt of the breath of his noſtrils, 

17 He ſent from above, he took me, he drew me 
out of || many waters. ; 

18 He delivered me from my ftrong enemy, and 
from them that hated me : for they were too ſtrong 
for me. 

19 They prevented me in the day of my calamity : 
but the LORD was my ſtay. 

20 He brought me forth alfo into a large place : he 
delivered me, becauſe he delighted in me. 

21 The LORD rewarded me according to my 
righteouſneſs : according to the cleanneſs of my hands 
hath he recompenſed me. 

22 For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and 
have not wickedly departed from my God. 

23 For all his judgments were before me : and as for 
his ſtatutes, I did not depart from themes 

24 I was allo|| upright f before him,and have kept 
my ſelf from mine Iniquity. | 

25 Therefore the LORD hath recompenſed me ac- 
cording to my: righteoutneſs : according to my clean- 
neſs f in his eye-fighr. + Heb. te 

25 With the merciful thou wilt ſhew thy ſelf mer- forehig, 
ciful, ad with the upright man thou wilt ſhew thy lelf 
ap1ight, 

27 With the pure thou wilt ſhew thy ſelf pure : and 
with the forward thou wilt ||ſhew thy felt unſavoury. || Or, 

28 And the afflicted pe. ple thou wilt || ſave : but nn 
chine eyes are upon the haughty,that thou mayeſt bring bs 
them down. | 

29 For thou art my || lamp, O LORD : and the || Or, 
LORD will lighten my darkneſs. candle. 

30 For by thee I hare || run through a troop : by ann 
my God have leaped over a wall. ele 

31 As for God, his way is perfect ; the word of the 
LORD is |] tried : he is a buckler to all them that truſt |or,rfud 
in. him. 


32 For who is God fave the LORD ? and who 3s 
a rock, ſave our God ? 


33 God is my ſtrength and power : and he F maketh + He. 
my way perfec. 
34 He + maketh my feet like hinds feet : and ſetteth 5; 
me upon my high places. 7 

25 He teacheth my hands Þ to war : fo that a bow # Hb 
of jicel is broken by mine arms, for thewn 
36 Thou haſt alſo given me the ſhield of thy ſalva- 
tion, and Þ thy gentleneſs hath F made me great. + Heb.th 
37 Thou haſt enlarged my ſteps under me : ſo that j,urkmiy 
my Þ+ feet did nor lip. to me. 


38 I have purſued mine enemies, and deſtroyed = 
them, and turned nor again until Ihad conſumed them. | |; 
39 And I have conſumed them, and wounded them, ,,.. 
that chey could not ariſe : yea, they are fallen under Þ Heb. 
my feet. Ci 
40 For thou haſt girded me with ſtrength to battel: 
them that roſe up againft me, haſt chou + ſubdued un- 4 He. 
der me. cau'ed tt 
41 Thou haſt alſo given me the necks of mine ene- 
mics, that I might deſtroy them that hate me. 
42 They looked, but there was none to ſave : even 
unto the LORD, but he anſwered them not. 
43 Then did I beat them as ſmall as the duſt of the 
earth, 'I &id ſtamp them as the mire of the ſtreet, and 
did ſpread them abroad. 
44 Thou alſo haſt delivered me from the ſtrivings 
of my people,thou haſt keept me 70 be head of the hea- 
then : a people which I knew not, ſhall ſerve me. + Hzb. 
45 + Strangers thall [| ſubmit themſelves unto me : Jor- Fe 
as foon as they hear, they ſhall be obedient unto me. gt 
46 + Strangers ſhall fade away, and they ſhall be a- {jm 
fraid out of their cloſe places. obedient: 
47 The LORD liveth, and bleſſed be my rock, and t He>* 
exalted be the God of the rock of my ſalvation. 


|Or,gr2a, 


|| Or, 
perfets, 
t Heb. 


i0 hum. 


looſeth, 


ili 


+ Heb 


419 th fe. 


; _ 4 : gt 
48 Ir is God thar + avengeth me, and bat bringeth 5g | 
down the people under me; 


for me 
£ J A I} d 


riddeti, or | 


7.” Chap. XY} Chap. 


' Rom» 
15: 9: 


* Chap: 


12: 


LA 
j? 


* Deut 


322 4: 
| Or. 7 


thou rul 


6 


or 


"Jhhap. X11. 


* Deut: 


z2: 4: 
| Or. Be 


tiou ruler, 


1 S$S4MMUTEM 


9 And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies : Pious,and Merciful,and an unſpeakable Blefling to David himſelf, and 
thou alſo haſt lifted me up ON high above them that | *2 all his Family and People,and to the whole World, even the great 


role up againft me : thou haſt delivered me from the 
violent man. 

go Therefore IT will give thanks unto thee, C 
LORD, among * the heathen, and I will ſing praiſes 
unto thy name. 

51 He 3s the tower of ſalvation for his king : and 
ſheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and * «c 
his ſeed for evermore. | 

CHAP. XAFEE 
David's laſt words ; a charafter of himſelf ; of a good ruler, and his 
uſefulneſs, 1,— - 4. His faithon God's coverant with him, 5. Deſtruf.on 
fo the wicked, 6, 7. David's worthies amd their waliant atts, 


8. 39+ 
OW thele be the laſt words of Davids : David 
the ſon of Jeſſe ſaid, and the man who 24s raiſed 
up on high b, the anointed of the God of Jacobec, and 
the ſweet Pfalmiſt of Iſrael 4 ſaid, 


a Not ſimply the laſt that he ſpoke, but ſome of the laſt uttered 
in his laſt days upon the approach of his death: or, the laſt which he 
ſpake by the Spirit of God, afliſting and direQing him in an extra- 
ordinary manner. + Advanced from an obſcure Family and Eftate, 
to the Kingdom. c Whem, though deſpiſed by Men,and rejected by 
his own Brethren, God himſelf ſingled out from all his Fathers Houle, 
and out of all the Families aad Tribes of Iſrael, and anvinted to be 
King» 4 Or, ſw-et, or delightful, or amiable in the Songs of Iſrael | 
Either, Firſt, As the obje& of them : he whom the People of 1/rae! 
mentioned in their Songs with Joy and Praiſe, as when they ſung, 
Saul hath flain hu thouſands, and David his ten thouſands; and many 
others which doubrleſs they made and ſung concerning him. upon 
the occaſion of his eminent Vi&ories, and the Bleſſings of his wiſe 
and righteous Government ; ſome whereof we have in the Book 
of Pſalms. Or, 2dly, As the Author of them : he who was eminent 
and famous among the People of God, for the compoſing of tweet 
and holy Songs to the Praiſc of God, anor the uſe of his Church in 
after Ages : tor he did not only indite moſt of the Book of Pſalms, by 
the direftion of God's Spirit; but alſo invented the Tunes, or 
appointed Tunes to which they were to be ſung and the Inſtrument: 
of Muſick which were uſed in and with thoſe Holy Songs, 1 Chron. 25. 
2, 6: Amos 6. 5, Itthe expreſſions here uſed ſeem arrogant, and not 
fit to beſaid by David in his own Praiſe ; let it be confidered, Firſt, 
Thar holy Men ſpake by Inſpiration from God ; and theretore muſl 
follow his ſuggeſtions impartially,as indeed they do,ſometimesin the 
publiſhing their own praites ; which yer is never done unneceſſarily, 
and always moderately ; and ſomerimes in the publiſhing of their 


own infirmities and ſhame, as they are moved thereunto, and as the 


Edification of the Church requires Secondly, That thete ſeem 
not to be the words of David, but of the Sacred Pen-man of this 


Bock, to make for, and gain the greater attention and reipet&t unto 


David's following words. 

2 The ſpiricof the LORD fpake by me, and his 
word 244 11 my tongues : 

e The following words, and conſequently the other words and 
Pſalms compoſed and uttered by me upon the like ſolemn occaſions, 
are not to be looked upon as my private Eancies or humane Inventi- 
ons, but both the marter and the words of them are ſuggeſted and go- 
verned by God's Spirit, which is the great Teacher ot the Church. 

3 The God of Ifrael ſaid, * The rock of Iſrael f 
ſpake re me g : || He that ruleth over men muſt be juſt, 
ruling in the fear of God þh: | 

f He who 1s the ſtrength,and defence,and proteQor of his People ; 
which he here manifeſts by ebliging and direQting Kings and Rulers 
ſo ro manage their Power and Authority as may molt conduce to 
their comfort and benefir. g By way of command. Or, of me, by 
way of Prediction and Promite concerning me and my Houſe and 
the Methas who 15 to come out of my Loins. þ Tiws it is a Precept 
or D<claration of the Duty of Kings, and particularly of So/omon his 
Son ( to whom as a dying Man he gives this Advice ) and of his 
Succellors theKings of God's /ſrael,for whole Inftru&ion he gives this 
Rule. And {ſo here are the two principal parts of a King's Duty 
anſwerable to the two Tables of God's Law, Juſtice towards Mcn, 
and Picty towards God, both which he is to maintain and promote, 
among his People. To which if you add Benigniry and Clemency. 
whereby a King renders his Government nor ftrightful and burden 
jom, but acceptable and amiable to his People, which poliibly may 
be meant by the following Simylitudes, here is a compleat Charadter 
ot an excellent Prince or Governour- Others make it a Prophecy 
of Chriſt, and then the words arc or may be thus rendred, Tere 
ſhall be a Ruler over Men { or rather, ameng Men, as the 'Hebrew word 
properly ſignifies, to wit, the Mefſſias, who, though he be the Ererna! 

and Inviſible God, yer ſhall viſibly appear and rule ameng Men) - 
ju or righteous one ( a Title oft given to Chriſt as 1a: 53: 11. Jer: 
23: 5,6 and 33: 15; Zech; 9: 9 ) ruling in the fear of the Lird, ma- 
king it his great buſineſs to advance the Service and Worſhip, and 
Glory of the Lord: or, as itis in the Hebrew, ruling the fear of rhe 
Lord; i: e. Governing and ordering the Worthip of God, which 1; 
oft called, the fear of God, And to this Clauſe is added to prevent o1 
remove ſcandals and offences which mighr be taken art the Metſias 
when he ſhould come, becauſe of his changing and abrogating the 
Ceremonial Law; and ro in{inuate that he thould have no leſs power 
in the governing of God's Houſe and Worſhip, than Moſes had ; and 
that he might make fuch Laws as he thought meer. And if this be 
the meaning of the place, then as Jaceb, being greatly afflicted with 
the troubles which he by the Spiricof Prophecy toreſaw were coming 
upon his Poſterity,comtorts himſelf with the thoughts of that great 
and glorious Salvation of God, which he alſo forcſaw and waitec 
for, Gen:49' 18, So David refle&ting upon the great Diſorders, and 
Miſcarriages, and Calamities which had already ariten in his Houle ; 
and either, wiſely prelaging, or torcſceing by the Spirit of the Lord, 
werſe 2. that the ſame fins and miſcries ſhould befal his Poſterity and 
Succeflors ; he ſupports and cemtorts himſelf with this Confidera- 
tion, "That one of them thuuld be a moſt excellent Pe fon ; Juſt and 


Mecſſias, who was undoubtedly revealed ro,and expeRed by David, as 
ap DCcars By many paſſages of the Pſalms, and by other Scriptures. 

4 And * be ſhall be 5 as the ligtic of the morning. 
when the ſun riſeth, even a morning without clouds ; as 


the tender graſs /pringing out of che earth by clear prov:s: 8: 


{hining after rain. 
_ 7 Theſe words are either, r- A further Deſcription of the King's 
iJuty. which is not only to rule with cxatt Juſtice and Piery, bur al- 
ſo with ſweetneſs, and gentleneſs, and condeſcention to the Infirmi- 
ties of his People ; to render his Government as pleaſant and ac- 
ceptable to them, as 1s the Sun-ſhine in a clear Morning, or the 
tender Graſs which ſprings out of the Earth by the warm and refreſh- 
ing Beams of the Sun after the Rain, which hath a peculiar ki d of 
ſweetneſs and fragrancy in it. Orrather. 2, A PrediC&ion or Decla- 
ration of the ſweet and bleſſed Effe&ts of ſuch a Government, both 
to the Governour himſelf,in that Peace,and Proſperity, and Glory, 
and Happinneſs which it brings to him, and to his People ; to whom 
it is no leſs grateful, and comfortable, and beneficial, than thoſe 
great and publick Bleſſings of Sun-thine and Rain, and the Fruits 
v'hich they produce : Which is true ofevery good King or Gover- 
nour ; but moſt eminently of the Meſſias. 

5 Although my houle be not fo with God & ; yet he 
hath made with me an everlaſting covenant /, ordered 
in all :hings m and ſure »: for o this 5s p all my falva- 


tion q, and all my deſire r, although he make is s not to 
grow, 


k Although God knows that neither I, nor my Children have Li- 
ved and Ruled as we ſhould have cone, ſo juſtly, and in the fear of 
the Lord ; and therefore have not enjoyed that uninterrupted Pro- 
ſperity which we might have enjoyed : but our Morning-light, or, 
the beginning of thar Kingdom promiſed to me and mine for ever, 
hath been over-caſt with many black and diſmal Clouds, and my 
hildren have not hitherto been like the tender Grafs ſpringing out 
of the Earth, and thriving by the Influences of the Sun and Rain ; 
but rather like the Graſs that withereth away, or is cut off before 
irs due time. 1 Notwithſtanding all our Tranſgrefſions whereby 
we have broken Covenant with. God, and the Confuſions and Civil 
Wars which have threatned our Diffiparion and utrer Deftruion ; 
yer TI comfort my {ſelf with this, That God, to whom all my Sins 
were fore-known before I committed them, was graciouſly pleated 
to. make a fure Covenant,to give and continue the Kingdom to me, 
and to my Seed for ever, chap:7: 16: until the coming ofthe M:fias ; 
who 1s to be my Son and Succeflor, and whote Kingdom ſhall have 
no End. m» Ordained in all points by God's Erernal and Unchange- 
able Counſel ; and difpoſed by his wiſe and powerful Providence, 
which doth and will over-ruleail things,even rhe Sins and Sufferings 
of my Houle ſo far, that although he would puniſh them for their 
Sins, yet he will not utterly root them out. nor break his Covenant 
made with me and mine ; as is ſaid, P/al: 89: 31, 32, 33, 34. » Or, 
pre erved. or obſerved, or kept ; to wit, on God's part or by God's 
Power and Faithfulneſs in the midſt of all the Oppoſitions and 
Uncertainties to which it ſeems to be expoſed on our part : Compare 
Rom: 3: 3: and -2 Tim: 2; 13. o Or therefore, as the Hebrew Particle, 
chi, oft ſignifies ; therefore 2. e. becauſe God hath made ſuch a Co- 
veaant, p Or, hes, he who hath made this Covenant ; or,in this #s, 
7. e. it conſiſts in, and depends upon this Covenant, q Both my 
own Eternal Salvation, and the Temporal Salvation,or the Preſerva- 
tion of the Kingdom ro me and mine. r Or, every deſirable thing ; 
the word deſire bcing oft put for deſired, or a defirable Thing ; as 
Pſal. 21:2: and 78: 29, 30: Ezek. 24+ 16. David being deeply ſen- 
ſible, and having had large experience of the vanity and uncer= 
tainty ofall Earthly things, here declares. That the Covenant made 
by God with himzind his in the Meſias,is the only happineſs which 
he prizeth aud detireth, in which he doth fully acquicice. 57. e. My 
Houſe, mentioned before» So the tence is, Although God as yer 
hath not made my Houſe or Family to grow ; 7z.e. toincreaſe, or to 
flonriſh with worldly Glory and Proſperity, as I expeQed; but hath 
for my Sins cur off divers of my moſt eminent Branches and ſorely 
aflicted my perton and Family ; and although he may for the fu- 
ture deal in like manner with my Sons and Succeflors for the like 
miſcarriages, which it is probable they may commit: yer this is my 
great ſupport and comfort, that God will conſtaatly and inviolably 
kecp this Covenant ; and therefore, in the midſt of all rhe ſhakinzs, 
and confuſions, and interruptions, which may happen in my Houſe, 
and Kingdom, will preferve my Line and Family until the coming 
ot the Meſfah out ot my Loins, whoſe Kingdom is an Everlaſting 
Kingdom ; who, as he is the defire of all Nations, Hag.2.7. ſoin 2 
ipecial manner is my delire, and the Author ofall my Salvation. 


6 4 But che tons of Belial # ſhall be all of them as 


thor:zs thruſt away «, becauſe they cannot be taken 
with hands. : {= 

£ Or, the Men of Belial, as it is expreſſed 2 Sam. 16 7. andelſc- 
why. Having in the foregoing Verſes deſcribed the nature, and 
fe!iCiry, and ſtabiliry of that Kingdom which God himſelf had by a 
ſur. nd everlaſting Covenaar ſettled upon him and his Seed ; and 
clp.cially, upon the Miz, who was to be one ofhis Poſterity ; 
1: now deſcribes the quality, the miſchievous nature,the hazardous 
and miſerable conditioa,of all the Enemies of this Holy and Bleſſed 
Kingdom, whom he juſtly calleth ſons of Bel.al, becaute they rebel- 
ied againſt God's appointment, and againſt the King whom God 
had tet over them: for which reaton others are ſo calied, 1 Sam. 
10. 27. 2 Chron. 13.7. u Which Men do not uſe to handle, as they 
do other Trees, bur thruſt them away from themſelves, by ſome 
Inſtrumeat choſen for that purpoſe. And ſo will God remove, or 
thruſt away from himſelf, and from his People, and Kingdom, all 
thoſe who ſhall either ſecretly or openly ſer themſelves againſt it. 
And this may be here added, either, 1- By way of Preſcription to 
Rulers, whom,as betore, hz admoniſhed to be jutf and kind ro their 
People, verſe 3, 4. So here he requires them to be ſevere in Puniih- 
ing. and purging away wicked and incorrigible Men from about his 
Throne, and from among |!is people ; the Encouraging of the good, 
and the puniſhing of the bad, being the rwo chicf Works of cvery 


good Magiſtrate, and the,two Pil'ars oiall Goverament. Or, 2. By 
> way 


Chap. XX1IL 


| 
li 
\ 


l 


* Judg: 
C2 38; 
Pal: 89; 


Hof: 6; 5: 


_——— ————————C cz 


_—— 


— CI EE nts 2. © reed 


Coap. 


+ Heb: 
Hed. 
lf 


I! Or 7 Jo- 
-ſhebbaſſebet 
the Tach= 


monite, 


head of the 
three, &Cc: 


[| See 


1 Chron: 


J1: 11: 
827: 2: 
t Hc<b, 

ſlain. 


x, Chron: 


XXfITr. 


way of caution ; to ſhew, That notwithſtanding the holineſs, and 
happineſs, and iarcacts of this Kingdom: yer there would be ſons of 
Belial in it, who would endcavour to diſturb, and overthrow it, but 
to no purpoſe ; for all their Projef&ts againit ir ſhould be vain 
and fall upon their own Heads. 

7 But the man that ſhalltouck them, mutt be + fenced 
with iron, and || the ſtaff of a ſpear x, aud y they ſhall 
be utterly burnt with fire in the ſame place z. 

x So the meaning is, He mu{t fill his Hand, or Arm himfelfw:h 
ſome Iron Weapon, whereby he may cut them down ; or, w/t/; 792 
ftaff of a fpear, or ſome ſuch like thing, whereby he may thruſt them 
away from himſelf, that they do him no hurt. Or thus, he w:ll be 
filled, or will fill himſelf; i. e. his Hand, wherewith he artempted to 
touch, and take them with Thorns, as with Jron and the ſtaff of a 
ſpear. i: e: He will be as ſurely and ſorely wounded, as if one ſhould 
run the Iron-head, * and part of the Wood of a Spear, into his 
Hand. y Or, therefore, becauſe Men cannot ſafely touch them, 
therefore they will burn them up. Or, or, z: e: If they do not cut 
them down with Iron, or thruſt them away with the Staff of a Spear, 
they will burn and conſume them. ' z Or, i» their place, where 
they grow or ſtand ; and they will not trouble or hazard them- 
ſelves to remove them. Withal, it may imply. thar they ſhall be 
deſtroyed. when, and where they thought themiclves moſt ſecure, 
even in their;own place. And, it may poſſibly intimate, That rhoſe 
Children of Bel/al, the wicked and unbelieving Jews, who reje&ted 
and rebelled againſt the Meſia/, David's Succeſſor and their lawful 
King, ſhould bedeſtroycd in their great, and ſtrong, and Holy City 
j ran ng where the greateſt part of that People were gathered 
together as Fewel for the Fire, and were deſtroyed rogether by the 
Romans under Titus, where alſo their wicked Predecetiors had been 
deſtroyed by Nebuchadnezzar in former timese 

8 4 Theſe be the names of the mighty men whom 
David had «; || The Tachmonite b that fate in the 
ſeat, chief among the captains ( the ſame was Adino c 
the Eznite d ) || he life up his ſpear e againit eight hun: 
dred f, whom he ilew at one time f. 

. a 4, e. Of his chiefand moſt valiant Commanders. And as 1t was 
noted upon chap: 21; 1, that the things related in that Chaprer were 
done betore 4bſal:m's and Sheba's Rebellion though they be men- 
tioned afrer them ; ſo that Opinion 1s confirm d by this Catalogue, 
which though Placed here, was taken long before, as is manifeſt 
from hence, that 4{zhel! and Uriah are named here. And whercas 
there are ſome differences between this Liſt, and that, r Chron: x1: 
moſt of them are eafily reconciled by theſe rwo Confidcrations ; 
1. That nothing is more common than for one Perion to have di- 
vers Names. 2. That as fome ofthe Worthies died, and others 
came in their ſteads ; 1o this muſt needs cauſe ſome alteration in the 
latter Catalogue, 1 Chron 11: trom this which was the former. 6 Or, 
Hachmonite, called Jaſhobeam, 1 Chron: 11: 11: from his place ; - or, 
as here, Jojbeb-basſbeberh ; ::; e; as we render it, that ſate in the ſcar ; 
#: e:Was, under Jeav, Chief, or Preſident of the Council of War, or 
Lieutenant ( /ocum tenens. ) c This was his proper Name. 4 So 
called, either from his Family, or trom the place of his Birth or 
Education. e Which words are fitly ſupplicd out of ; Ghron: 11: 11: 
where they are expreſſed. Or thus, he was above 800 ; ;: e. He 
conquered them. Sothere 1sonly an Ellipfts of the Verb ſubſtan- 
tive, which is moſt frequent. fIn one Bartel. which though it be 
ſtrange, yet cannot ſeem incredible,ſuppoſing him ro be a Perſon of 
extraordinary ſtrength and activity, and his Enemies to be weak, or 
diſcouraged, and fleeing away ; and efpecia/ly, God's lingular Blej- 
ſing, and Aſſiſtance : all which may very reaſfonabiy be tuppoled. 
Obj. But this Man is ſaid ro have flain only 3oo in 1 Chron, 11. 11. 
Anſw. 1. Poſhb'y he flew 800 at one time, and 300 at another : 
whereof the former is related here,as being moſt conliderable ; and 
the latter in the Book of Chronicles, which ſupplies many Paſſages 
omitted in the former Writings. 2. He flew 3oo with his own 
Hands, and the other 500, though killed by his Men, are ſaid to be 
flain by him, becauſe he was the chicf Caule of all their deaths ; 
for he by his undaunted Comage killing 300, put the rett to flighr, 
who were eaſily flain by his Soldiers, inthe Purſuit. 3. Some of the 
Hebrew Writers aftirm, That theſe were two diſtin Perſons, being 
called by differing Names ; the one the Eather, and the uther the 
Son , wao ſucceeded his Father, as in Strength and Valour, fo alſo 
in his place of Honour and Truſt. 

9 And after him was * Eleazar the ſon of Dodo the 


11: 12: & Ahohite g, one of the three þ mighty men with David 


27: 4+ 


*; Chron; * 


IT: 27: 
' O., for 


for 13747, 


;, when they defied the Philiſtines & that were there 
gathered together to batre), and the men of Iſrael were 


gone away ! ; 

g Of the Children of A4hoah, 1 Chrin: 8:4; h 7. e. One of the 
firſt Three, ver. 19, 5; Who were with David at this time; or, who 
uſually attended upon David. k When he cither in the name of all 
the 1ſraelites or with the countenance and help of ſome of them, 
challenged the Ph:l:i;nes to fight. Or, when ſome of, or among the 
Philiſtines defied them : 7. e. The Iſraelites, according totheir manner, 
and the example of their great Goliath, 1 Sam. 17. 25, 36. Or, in 
Horpam (for tome make ita proper name of aPlace) among the Phil. 
Fines, 1 1. e. Fled away, 1 Chron. 11. 13. being diſmayed at the 
approach of their Enemies. Heb. aſcended, i.e. Vaniſhed away like 
Smoke which aſcends, and ſo diſappears, as that Verb is oftuitd. 

1o He arole mz, and {mote the Philiftines until his 
hand was weary, <nd his hand clave untothe {word » : 
and the L O R D wrought a great victory that day :; 
and the people returned after him only to ſpoil -. . 

”n i.e, He undertook the work, as that word ſometimes is uſed. 
Or, he food, ( as it ſometimes fignifics ) when the reſt fled. nr Ei- 
ther through Swear or Blood, or by a contrattion of the Sinews. Or 
thus, jet aid his hand cleave to hu ſword; i. e. Though he was weary, 
he di notdefiſt, but continued bghring. .. 7, e. Lo purſue the Enc- 
3y whom he had diſcomfired, and to take their Spoil 


1x Andafter himwas * Shammalithe forof Agcethe 
Hararite : and the Philiſtines were gathered together {| 
into 2 troop, Wi1ere was 2 picce of grcund iull of ientiles 


mn SA MODE LZ. 


a——_— 


» : and the people fled from the Philiſtines. 

o Or Barlcy, as it is 1Chron 11: 13 For bcth might very well 
grow in the lame Field, in divers parts of it And this faCt is aſcribed 
ro Eleazar, 1 Chron. 11.12. but ſo as itisimplied, that he had ſome 
*artner or Partners in 1t ; for it is there faid; v. 14. They ſet themſelves, 
&c. So Eleaxer might and and fight in that part where the Barley 
was; and Shammah there were the Lentiles were. 

12 But he ſtood in the midft of the ground ard de. 
fended it p, and ſlew the Philiſtines : and the LORD 
wrought a great victory. 
 Þ That the Philifines could neither burn, nor tread it down, and 
{ſpoil it, nor carry it away. 

12 || And three of the thirty q chief went down ard 


came to David, in the harveſt-time, unto the cave of ,, ” 
JIE 


JS Either, 1. The Three already named, as is generally ſuppoſed, 
becauſe is is ſaid of them in the cloſc ofthis Hiſtory, 1 Chron. 1. 19, 
Theſe things did thoſe three mightieſt. But in the Hebrew it is only, 
theſe three mighty men, as the ſame words are rendred here, wer, 17, 
Or rather, 2. The following zhree; for it 1s expreſly ſaid, both 
here, werſe 16 and 1 Chron 11 20. That Abijbai was chief, and 
therefore one of the three : and this Three are plainly diſtinguiſhet 
from the firſt Three, verſe 19: and 1 Chron, 11. 2<. © Which was a 
ſtrong Place where David had been before,. s Sam: 22: 1, &Cc. and 
where he had now again fortined himſelf in the beginning of his 
Reign, when the Phil:/tines were too ſtrong for him. 5s Of which 
ſee above, Chap: 5- 18. 

14 And David was then in an hold, and the gariſon 
of the Philiſtines was then in Berhlehem. 

' I5 And David longed, and ſaid, O that one would 
give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem e, 


which z by the gate ! 

z Being hot and thirſty, he expreſſeth how acceptable a draught 
of that warer would be to him; as is uſual with Men to doin ſuch 
calcs : but was far from deſiring, or expeCting that any of his Men 
ſhould hazard their Lives to procure it, as appears from verſe 17. 

16 Andthe three mighty men brake through the hoſt 
of the Philiftines «, and drew water out of the well of 
Bethlchem, that was by the gate, and took #7, and 
brought ix to David : nevertheleſs he would not drink 


thereof x, but poured it our unto the LORD jy. 

« Which was in the Valley of Rephaim, werſe 13: and in the way 
to Bethlehem, x Leſt by gratifying himſelfupon ſuch terms,he thould 
ſeem either to ſet roo high a Price upon the ſatisfaftion of bis Ap= 
petite: or too low a Price upon the Lives of his Soldiers,or ſhould 
encourage others to the like vain-g!orious and fooiiſh Atremprts; 
) As a kind of Drink-offeringy and ackaowledgment of God's Good- 
neſs in preſerving the Lives of his Captains in fo dangerous an En- 
rerprize ; and to ſhew, that he etteemed it as a Sacred thing, which 
conſidering all things, it was not fit for him to drink it. 

17 And he ſaid, Beit far from me, O LORD, 
that IT ſhould do this : « not#this the blood of the men 
z that went in Jeopardy of their lives ? therefore he 
would not drink it. Theſe things did theſe three 


mighty men 4. 

Z 7, e. The Price of their Blood or Lives, which they rafhly ex- 
poſed ro manifeſt h:zard. # Either one of theſe Three are here 
omitted, as one of the firſt Three is not named . 1 Chron; 11. Or 
Aviſbai, who tollows next, was one of theſe Three. 

18 And * Abiſnai the brother of joab the fon of +; (49 
Zeruiah, was chief among three, and - he lift up his 11: 2: 
{pear againſt three hundred, Þ and ſlew them b, and had © Heb. 

ſcam, 


te name among the three c. 
b He fought with, and killed 300 Men in one Battel: « 7; e: Was 
the molt famous and eminent among them, | 
19 Was he not moſt honourab:e of three ? therefore 
he was their captain : howbeit, he attained not unto 


the jr three 4d. 
da He fcll ſhort of them in Strength and Valour. 


20 And Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada, the ſon of a 
valiant man, of Kabzeel e, fF who had done many acts f, + Heb, 
he flew two flion-like men g of Moab:he went down alſo gr i 
and ſlew a lion in the midit of a pit & in time of ſnow 5. 

e A Place in Judah, Joſh. 15. 21. f This may belong either to Lins of 
Benaiah, or to his Father ; to note, thar Bena:zah was a Son becoming G j 
ſuch a Father. g For Courage and Strength. Or, Lions of God ; "m 
7. e. Great and ſtrong Loins. Or, two Gigantick Perſons ; and there- 
fore both ſo called, as being either equal in might, or Brethren by 
birth. + Wherehe put himſelfunder a neceflity, either of killing, 
or being killed. 5 When Lions are mol? fierce,both from the ſharp- f Heb: 
neſs of their Appetite in cold Seaſons, and from want of Proviſions, a! 


Cattel being then ſhut up, and fed at home. COuntenam: 
21 And he flew an Egyptian, + a goodly man & : and or feb 
ane 


the Egyptian hada ſpear in his hand ; but he went down +. 
co him with a ſtaff /, and plucked the ſpear out of the ;;; :;: 


Egyptians hand, and flew him with his own ſpear. a man if 
k For Stature, as it is expreſſed, 1 Chron. 11. 23, 1 Without a great /* 

Sword, or any warlike Weapon. ture. 
22 Thele things did Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada, and os, " 

had the name among three mighty men. —_ " 


23 He was ||inore honourable than the thirty, but ;;;-1. 
he attained not to rhe fir# three: and David ſet kim || Or, 
over his || Þ guard m. | —_— 
mm Hleb. over ( tor el is ſometimes put for al ) the Men ( which | Pont 
is 0ft underſiood, as hath been noted before ) of his command> $0 his = 


ae | al 
' his Guard 15 called, becauſe they were always at the King's hand, ® 


ready3 


—_ 


Chap. Xp 


i! , 
Of. ©, 


Adullam r : and a troop of the Philiſtines pitched in the ,,, *_ 
valley of Rephaim «. the thi: 


hap 


F; Chr 
11; 27 


f Or, 


vs bys - 


f Satan 
See 1C 
21; I: 


1 


Y 
kt 
Is” 
| 


iron: 


F ap. XXIV. 


#*; Chron: 
11; 27+ 


f Or, 


vs bys « 


| Satan: 


; I: 


See 1 Chr: 


II. 


ready to hear and receive the King's Commands, and to put them 
in execution. Over the Chererhites and Pelethites ; as appears by com- 
paring 2Samm, 8. 18. and 20+ 23. who were faithful and obedtent to 
him, when others revolted from him, Chap 15. 18. : 
24 * Aſahe) the brother of Joab was one of the thir- 


ty », Flhanan the ſon of Dodo of Bethlehem, | 
" 2 Heb. with, or among the thirty ; not only as one, but as the chief 
of them. : 

25 Shammah the Harodite s, Elika the Harodite, 

o In 1 Chron: 11: 27: Shammoth the Harorite Concerning which 
and ſuch like alterations, and other changes of the Names, which 
will be obſerved, by comparing this Catalogue with that, it will be 
ſufficient to ſuggeſt, 1. That the ſame Names of Perfons, or Places, 
are differently pronounced according to the different Dialetts uſed 
by Men of vivers Places or Ages. 2. That one Man had oft two 
Names. 3: That David had more Worthies than thoſe here men- 
tioned ; and as lome of theſe were ſlain in the former part of Da- 
vid's Rergn, as £Aſahel was ; ſoothers came up in their ſteads ; and 
ſome wete added to this Number, asappearsfrom 1 Chron; i 1: where 
they are named but not numbred, as they were here ; and where 
there is a greater Number than is here expreſſed. 

26 Helez the * Pailtice, Ira the ſon of Ikkeſh the 
Tekoite, ; 

27 Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Huſha- 
thite, : : | 

28 Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netopha- 
thite, : 

29 Heleb the ſon of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai 
the ſon of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of 
Benjamin, : 2 

20 Benaiah the Pirathonice, Hiddai of the || brooks 
of Gaaſh, | 

21 Abi-albon the Arbathice, Azmaveh the Barhu- 
mite, ; 

32 Eliahba the Shaalbonite ; of the ſons ,of Jaſhen, 
Jonathan, | 

23 Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the ſon of Sharar 
the Hararite, 

34 Eliphelet the fon of Ahazbai, the ſon of the 
Maachathite, Eliam the ſon of Ahichophel the Gilo- 
nite, : . 

35 Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite, 

36 Igalthe ſon of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 

27 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berorothite, 
armour bearer to joab the fon of Zeruiah, 

38 Ira an Ithiice, Gareb an Ithrite, 

29 U1ah the Hirtire ; thirty aria tfevenin all p. 

p Herc are but 36 named. Either therefore one muſt be tupplied 


whoije name 15 not expreiie | among the three ſecond Worthies : 
or, Jeab is coinprehended in the number, as being the Lord-General 


of all. 
CH AF XAT. 


David tempted by Satan forceth Joab to number the people © who are thirteen 
kunared rthouſan! fizhting Men, 1, — 9g. . David acknowleageth his ſen 
1 it ; having thre judgments propounded by God : he t5in great diſtreſs, 
ana chuſeth the peftilence : of which ſeventy thwuand men die, 10, - 15, 
Davia by his humiliat: ;n preventeth the deſtruftion of Jeruſalem, 16, 17. 
He by Gad's direfFimm and order from God purchaſeth Araunah's threſhng- 
floor to build an altar there : on which having ſacrificed, the plague 
fayeth, 18, ——— 25. 


Pf D again a the anger of the LORD was kindled 
| againſt Iſrael, and || he moved David 6 againſt 
them c, to ſay 4, Go numberiIfrael and Judah. 

a To wit, after the former tokens of his anger, ſuchas the three 
years Famine, Uhap; 21. 6b He; Who? Either, 1. Satan, as is 
expreſſed, 1-Chron: 21: x. Or, 2. God; who is faid, in like manner, 
to fir up Saul againit David, 1 Sam: 26; 19 and 'to turn the hearts 
of the Egyptians to hate his people, Pſal: 105. 25: and to make men to 
erre from hu ways, 1/a: 63:17: and to ſend ſtrong deluſims, &c. and to 
haraen their hearts, All which Expreflions are not ſo to be under- 
ſtood, as if God did work theiz ſintul Diſpoſitions ; which neither 
was neceſlary, becauſe they are naturally in every Man's heart, nor 
poſſi-le forthe Holy God to do; butbecauſe he permits them, and 
withdraws k1s Grace, and all reſt:aints and hindrances from them, 
and giveth occaſions and advantages to them ; and diects their 
Thoughts to ſuch Objects as may indeed be innocently thought of, 
which yet he knows they will wickedly abuſe, and givethem up to 
Satan, who. hekn-ws will deceive and entice them to ſuch and 
ſuch Sins; which, being tempted ro do by Satan, and being effe&ed 
by their own wicked Hearts, he ſo orders and over-rules, that they 
thall be Puniſhmenrs for thei former Sins. cz: e. For Iſraz!'s Pu- 
mſhmenrt, & Or, ſzying. For this may be referred, cither, 1. to 
God of whom the ſame Expreſſion is uted, Sam: 16: 10. The 
Lord ſaid to Sh'mei Curſ David, Which in both places is not to be 
ur.deritood of any command or impulſe of God, but of his ſecret 
Providence diſpoling things in manner here above expreſſed. Or 
2. To David : he moyed David to Jay, to wat, to Jeab, as he did, 
Perſe 2. 


2 For the king ſaid to Joab the captain of the hoſt, 
which 245 with him, || Go now through all the tribes 
of lfrael, from Dan even to Beerſheba, and number 
ye the peopie, that I may know the number of the 
people e. 

e Which Expreion points at David's Sin in this matter, that 
he numbred them, not by dire&ion from God, nor fr any impor- 
tant buſineſs of the Church or Kingdom; but out of meer curiolity, 
and pride, and vain-glory ; accompanied either with a ſecret d:- 
i:uct of God's Promulc ; or rather, with a cirnal conticence in the 


) 


$$ 45M YU 2 E 


Numbers of his People. All which were great Sins, and were ſo 
marifeſt, that not only God faw theay, and all the degrees and ag- 


gravations of them 1n David ; but eheryJea5 and the Captains of rhe 
Hoſt were very ſenſible of them, wcr. ..* / 


3 And Joab ſaid unto the h Now the LOR D 
thy God add nnto the people ( how many ocver they 
be ) an hundred fold, and that the eyes of my lod the 
king may fee it: but why doth my lord the king de- 
light in this thing f 2. 

f What reaſon or neceflity is there for this Aftion ? Isit tono 


purpoſe, and will be burdenſome to thy People, and may offend 
God. and produce ill Effe&s 


4 Notwithſtanding, the kings word prevailed againſt 


and the captains of the hoſt went out from the preſence 
of the king, to number the people, of Iſrael. | 


$S Joab perceiving the King bent upon*it, would not hazard the 
King's tavour, by further diſputing, or diſobeying his Command: 


5 © And they paſſed over Jordan 4, and pitched i in 

Aroer, on the right ſide of the city that lieth in the 
mid{t of the || river of Gad &4, and toward Jazer /. 
h They began their Computation in the Eafe. n part of David's 
Dominions, which were beyond Jor/an. i Or, encamped. For Joab 
carried with them divers of his Commanders, and others ; partly, 
t.r his honour, and the credit of the work : partly, to aſſiſt him in 
that troubleſome work : and partly, to overcome the People, in 
caſe they ſhould oppoſe ir as finful or burdenſome, or favouring of 
ſome evil Deſign which David might have upon them. &7z. e. Otthe 
River which lay in the Tribe of G34, or upoa the borders of Gal and 
Reuben, which was cailed Arnon, Deut. 2. 36. 1 Or, near Jazer, which 
allo was upon the River Arnon. | 


6 Then they came to Gilead m, and to the || land of 
Tahtim-hodſhin ; and they came to Dan-Jaan os, and 
about to Zidon 


m To Mouat G'lead, which lay Northward from Anon. n A place 
ſo called. Or, the lew-land lately gained; i. e nor given by Joſhuz, 
but taken lately from the Hagarens by Saul; which was near Gilead, 
1 Ehron:; 5' io. 0 4; e; Probably, the famous City of Dan, acit is 
called, Jyb: 19:47: Juag: 18; 7. for this was in the Northern Bor- 
der of the Land, and in the way from Gilead ro Zidon. p i:e: To 
the City and Territory of Zidon ; but not into it, becauſe it was not 
in the Power and Poſſeſhon of the 1/raelites ; and the like is to be 
thought concerning Tyre, and the Cities which the Hrivites and 
Canaanttes yet poſletſed inthe Neighbourhood of Tyre and S:idon. 


7 And came to the ſtrong hold of Tyre, and to all 
the cities of the Hivices, and of the Canaanites : and 
they went out to the ſouth of Judah, ever to Beer- 
{heba. | : 

8 So when they had gone through ail the land, they 


came to Jeruſalem at the end of nine months and 
twenty days. Wh 

9 And Joab gave up the ſum of the number of the 
people unto the king: znd there were in Irael eight 
hundred thouſand q valiant men that drew the ſword ; 
and the men of Judah 2w:re five hundred thouſand r 
men. 


q Obj-#. In 1 Chron. 21. 5- They are numbred 1100 thouſand. 
Anſw. The ſum here expretled, is only of ſuch as were nor in the 
ordinaty and ſettled Militia waiting upon theKing, which being 
24000 tor every Month, as 1s largely related, 1 Chron. 27. amounts 
to 288 thouſand, which either wr h their ſeveral Commanders, or 
with the Soldiers placed in 1everal Garitons, might very well make 
up 3oo Thouſand. Or, 288 Thouſand may pals in ſuch accounts 
for 300 Thouſand ; it being frequent in ſuch great Sums ro negle&t 
a ſmaller number, Bur 'n the Book of the Chron:cles, which was 
to gather up the Fragments omitred in the former Books both forts 
are put together, and fo they amount to 1:00 Thouland. r In 
1 Chren. 21. 5. but 470 Thoutand. 4vf. Either, 1. they were ex- 
at'y no more bur are called 5oo Thouſand in 3 round ſum, as 1s 
uſualin Scripture and other Authors, Or, 2. the Gariſon-Soldierss 
and ſuch as were imployed in other Services about the King are 
here included, which are there excluded. Or, 3. They were 500 
Thouſand when Joab gaveup the Numberrtothe King ; though pre- 
ſently after that they were bur 479 i houiand, 3-000 being tlain 
by rhe Plague, in the Tribe of ſudah ; which being David's &wn 
Tribe, it was bur juſt and fitir thould ſuffer more than the reft for, 
this Sin. And though it be rrue, that Joab gave up the Sum before 
the Plague begun, yet the tacred Pen-man of the Book cf Chronicles 
thought fit to inake a defalcation of them who had been ſwepr away 
by the Plague, thartthe Judgment of God therein might be obſerved. 
Or, 4. There are included herethe 300co which belonged ro rhe 
3o Colonels mentioned Chap. 23. who are excluded 1 Chron. 21. 
alrhough ic be queſtionavic, 
of j uaah. 

io 4 And Davids heart ſmote s him after that he had 
numbred the people : and David ſaid unto the LORD, 
I have ſinned greatly in char I have done : and now I 
beſeech thee, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy 
ervant ; for t I have done very fooliſhly. | 

s His Conſcience diſcerned his Sin, and he was heartily ſorry for 
it» And the occaſion of hisRepentance was, God's Metlage by the 
Prophet Gad, as it here follows, wer. 11+ Fir when, &Cc. as formerly. 
God's Meilage by Nathan had the ſame efledt, 2 Sam. 12. Both 
which Paſſages are noted, to ſhew how neceſſary the further and 
rpeated ſupplies of God's Grace, are even to the beſt of Men, to 
raiſe them when they fall into Sin. 7 Becauſe I am ſenſible of my- 
Sin and Folly, as it is more fully exprefſed, P/al. 51. 5S, 6. Or, 
alchxigh, as this Particle is ofr utcd. 


11 For when David wasup in the morning, the 


2 E 4 word 


———— 


Chap. 


XXIV. 


Joab g, and againſt tiie captains of the hoſt : and Joab * 


|| Or, 


Vane). 


!! Or, 
Netherland 
newly in- } 


hatited. 


wheth cr thoſe were all of the Tribe- 


: 


ap. XXIV. 


» 


word of the LOR D cate unto the prophet Gad,, 


2 Chron. Davids * ſeer x, ſaying, 


[ 19+ 25s 


LOr,9%y. hand of man. 


Tyr Sam. 
15; 11; 


2I: 


# So called, becauſe he was a Prophet ( for ſuch were called 
Seers, 1 $am. 9.9. ) now and at other times employed by God to 
reveal his Mind and Will to David. See 1 Sam. 22. 5+ 1 Ghron. 29. 29. 

12 Go, and ſay unto David, Thus faith the LORD, 
I offer thee three things ; chooſe thee one of them, 
that I inay do #t unto thee. : : 

12 So Gad came to David, and told him, and faid | 
unto him, Shall ſeven years of famine x come unto thee, 


in thy land ? or wilt thou flee three months before thine | 


enemies, while they purſue thee ? or that there be three 
days peſtilence in thy land ? now adviſe, and ſee what 


anſwer I ſhall return to him that ſent me, 

x Obje# In 1 Chron. 21. 12. it is only three years of famine. Anſw. 
1. Some conceive. that here was an Error in the Tranſcriber, and 
that the true Reading is, three years, as the LXX read it in this 
place, being ſuppoſed to have found it ſo in their Copies, and thar 
otherwiſe they durſt never have preſumed to make ſo great a change 
in the Text. 2. In Chron. he ſpeaks exatly of thole years of Fa- 
mine only which came for David's Sin : but here he ſpeaks more 
confuſedly and comprehenſively, including thoſe Three Years of 
Famine ſent for Saul,s Sin, Chap. 21» And this Sin of David's was 
committed in the Year nexr after them, which was in a manner a 
Year of Famine; either, becauſe it was the Sabbarical Year, wherein 
they might not Sow. nor Reap ; or rather, becauſe not being able 
to Sow in the Third Year, becauſe of the exceflive Drought, they 
were not capable of Reaping this Fourth Year. And Fhree Years 
more being added to theie Four, make up the Seven heie mentioned. 
So the meaning of the Words is this, As thou haſt already had 
Four Years of Famine, ſhall Three Yeats more come? And that- it 
is ſaid ofjtheſe Seven Years, that they ſba#come, it isa Synecdochica! 
Expreſſion frequent in Scripture, becauſe part of the Years were 
yet to come. Even as it is ſaid of the Iſraelites, that they ſhould 
wander in the Wilderneſs fourty Years, Numb. 14. 33. when part of thar 
time was already ſpent. ; : 

14 And David faid unto Gad, I am in a great ſtrair, 
let us fall now into the hand of the LO R*D y ( for 


his mercies «re || great z ) and let me not fall into the 


y To wit, his immediate Stroke, which is chiefly in the Peſti- 
lence : for though the Sword and Famine be alſo God's Hand, yer. 
there is alſo the hand of Man, or other Creatures in them- The 
reaſon of this choice. was partly his Experience of, and confidence 
in God's great goodneſs : partly, becauſe rhe ogher Judgments, 
eſpecially the Sword, had been more diſhonourabie,nort only to David, 
but alſo to God, and to his People, and to the True Religiin : and 
partly, becauſe he having ſinned himſelf, thought ir juſt and reaſona- 

le to chuſe ſuch a Plague to which he was as obnoxious as his Peo- 
ple ; whereas, he had berrcr fences for himieitagainit Sword and 
Famine than they had. z And therefore will not exceed meaſure 
in his Strokes, as Men will do- 

'I5 © So the LORD ſenta Peitilence upon Iſrael, 
from the morning even to the time appointed «: and 
there died of the people from Dan even to Beertheba, 


ſeventy thouſand men b. 

a Either, 1. From Morning to Evening, which is here called che 
#ime_appeinted ; or, the time of the convent:on, or, pubiick meet.ng, as 
this Hebrew Word oft ſignihes, 7. e. till the time of the Evening- 
Prayer and Sacrifice, when the People uſed more jolemn!y ro meet 
together. See P/al. 141. 2. 4s 3. 11 Thus God mitigated his 
Sentence, and turned three days into one ; it being a thing not vn- 
uſual with God, to qualifie his threatnings, and to take cif the evil 
threatned ſometimes wholly, as in Nineveh's Caſe, and ſometimes 
in part. And this God might do here upon the ſpeedy and ſerious 
Repentance of David and of his People. Or rather, 2. Fom the 
2norning, ( or rather, fom that marning ; for the Article ſeems to be 
Empharical, -and to denote, That very morning in which Gad came 
to David, ver. 11. and that the Plague did immediately enſue after 
Gad's offer, and David's choice ; ) even to the time appointed ; to wit, 
by God, 3. e. for Three Days, as God had fer the time, verſe 13. 
ObjeF. If it continued Three Days, how is it ſaid, That God re- 
pented him of the evil, and ſtopped the Angel in his courſe ? wer. 16 
nſw, This he did in the beginning of the Third Day, whereas 
otherwiſe it ſhould have gone on to the end of the Day. Or, it may 
ſignifie no more but this; At the end of the Third Day God gave 
over ſmiting :*' For then is God ſaid ( after the manner of Men ) 
to repent, when he ceaſeth to proceed as before he had done. 4 
So the number of his People, which was the marter of his pride and 
glorying was diminiſhed. 

16 And when the angel c ſtretched out his band upon 
Jeruſalem 4 to deſtroy it, the LOR D repented him 
of the evile, and faid co the angel that deſtroyed the 
people, Ir is enough : ſtay now thine hand. And the 


angel of the LORD was by the threſhing-place of 


© #, Chron: * Arauvah f the Jebuſice. 
21:18, 29, 


e Which appeared in-rhe ſhape of a Man with a Sword in his 

and, 1 Chron. 21, 16. to convince them more fully that this was 
nonatural nor common Plague, bur inflifted immediately by the hand 
of God. & Which he had begun to ſmite, and was proceeding to 
makea far greater flaughter. e i.e. He moderated»and in part recalled 
his Sentence of the Piagues continuance for three whole days, and 
this he did upon Dav:#'s Prayers and Sacrifices, as appears from 
Ve. 25. though theſe be mentioned afterward. f Called alſo 4ranjah 
in the Hebrew of v 18. and Ornan, 1 Chron, 21-21. 22- ſuch changes 
inthe pronunciation of the names being uſual in Scripture. 

' 17 And David ſpake unto the LORD, when he ſaw 
the angel that ſmore the people, and ſaid, Lo, I have 
ſinned, and I have done: wickedly : but thele ſheep, 
what have they done ? Let thine hand, I pray thee, be 


againſt me g, and againſt my fathers houſe 6, 


I s 4 M UTE LL. * 


people. 


g Wherein David ſhews his Juſtice. and Piety, and Fatherly 
care of his People, and that he was a Type of Chriſt, þh Again{t 
my neareſt relations, who probably either put David upon, or en- 
couraged him in this aC&ion, becauſe they were no leſs vain-glorious 
than David ; and the honour which they thought would come to 
David thereby. would alſo redound to them ; or, at leaſt they did 
not uſe their utmoſt endeavours io diſſuade David from it, as they 
ſhould have done, and therefore were involved in David's Guilt. 
Howſoever it was but fit and reaſonable that his Family which did 
partake of his honour and happineſs, ſhould alſo partake in his 
{uffering, rather than thoſe who were leſs refated to him. Nor 
doth Dawid abſolutely defire that they may ſuffer, bur only ſpeaks 
comparatively, and by way of ſuppolition, and with reference to 
God's good Pleaſure, 

18 4 And Gad came that day to David 5, and ſaid 
unto him, Go up &, rear an altar unto the LOR D in 


the threſhing-floor of Araunah the Jebuſitte /. 

i By command from God, wv. 19. 1 Chron. 21. 18, k To Mount 
Moriah. I Which place God appointed for this work, partly, in 
gracious condeſceniion to, and compliance with David's fear of 
going to Gibevn, which is expreſſed 1 Chron. 21. 29, 30. partly, be« 
cauſe this was the place where God by bis Angel appeared in a 
threatning poſture, where therefore ir was meet he thould be ap- 
peaſed : and partly, becauſe Gad would hereby ſignifie the tran- 
{lation of the Tabernacle from Gibeon kither, and the ere&tion of 
the Temple here. 2 Chron. 3. 1. 


i9 And David, according to the ſaying of Gad, 
went up, as the LOR D commanded. 

20 And Araunah looked, and ſaw the king, and 
his ſervants coming on toward him : and Araunah 
went out, and bowed himſceif before the king, on his 
face upon the ground. 

21 And Araunah ſaid, Wherefore is my lord the 
king come to his ſervant ? And David ſaid, To 
buy the threſhing-floor of thee, to build an altar unto 
che LORD, that F 


- Wherefore doth the King do me this honour, and give him- 
{elf the trouble of coming to me ? 


22 And Araunah laid unto David, Let my lord che 
king take and offer up what /eexzerh good unto him : 
Behold, h:re be oxen » for burnt-ſacrihice, and threſh- 
> 3 Qi, and other inftruments of the oxen for 
wood. 


» Which were employed by him in his prelent work, which 
was Threſhing, 1 Chron. 21; 20. See the notcs on Dent. 25. 4. 


23 All thefe things did Araunah, « a king o give 
unto che king : and Araunah faid unto the king, 
The LORD thy God accept thee 9g. 


o The Particle, &s, being underſtood, as it oft is in the Hebrew ; 
7. e. with a Royal Bounty. Or, Araunah the king ; as he might be 
called, either, becauſe he was King of the Jebuſites before David 
[took their Ciry : or,becauſe he was the Son and Heir of that King. 
p He not only offered, but aQtually gave them, z. e. he aQtually 
reſigned his right and property in them unto Davzd ; for ſo he did ; 
and David by his refutal returned it to Araunah again. q He was a 
'Febuſite by Nation, bur an hearty Proſelyte ; which made him ſo 
liberal in his offers to God's ſervice, and the common good of God's 
People. 

24 And the king ſaid unto Araunah, Nay, but I 
will ſurely buy zr of thee ar a price : neither will I 
offer burnt-offerings unto the LORD my God, of that 
which doth coſt me nothing r. So David bought the 
threſhing floor, and the oxen, for fifty ſhekels of 
ſilver /. 

r For this would be both diſhonovrable to God, as ifI thought 
him not worthy of a coſtly Sacrifice : and a diſparagement 'to my 
elf, as if I were unable and unwilling to offer a Sacrifice of my 

own Goods: and unſatisfafory ro the Command of God, which 
obligeth all offenders. and me in a particular manner, to offer Sa- 
cifice of their own Eſtate. f Obje#, In 1 Chron. 21. 25. he is ſaid to 
give for the place "fs hundred ſhekels of gold by weight. Anſw. Theſe 
two places may be fairly reconciled divers ways. Firit, Here he 
ſpeaks of the price paid for the threſhing-floor, and oxen, and Inſtru- 
ments; and there for the whole place adjoyning, on which the 
Temple and its Courts were built, which certainly was very much 
larger than this Threſhing-floor, and probably had Araunah's 
Houſe, if not ſome others, now builr upon it. Secondly, The 
Shekels here may be of Gold ; and in 1 Chron.21. of Silver; and fo 
the proportion of Gold to Silver being that of twelve to one, 
50 Shekels of Gold make 600 Shekels of Silver. And whereas it 
may be objetted, Thar on the contrary theſe 50 Shekels are ſaid to 
be of Silver, and the 600 of Gold . this they anſwer by another 
Tranſiation of the words. For they render this place, agreeably 
enough to the words and the order of the Hebrew Text, he bought 
them for ſilver, ( or, for mmey, as the Hebrew word Cheſeph, oft 
ſignifies, and particularly in this very Hiftory in the parallel p'ace, 
i Chron. 21. 24. Where David deſires to buy it, for the full price, or 
for full money, where in the Hebrew it is for full ſilver : ) even for 
fifty ſhekels, ro wit, of Gold, as it is expreſſed 1 Chron, 21. 25- 
44 BEN place they render thus, and that conſonantly ro the Hebrew, 
he gave ſhekels ef gold of the value ( for the Hebrew word Miſbk, 
ſignifies value as well as weight, as was before noted on 2 Sam. 12» 
30. ) of ſix hundred ſhekels, to wit, of Silver. And this may ſeem 
added in the Bookof the Chronicles, leſt it ſhould be thought that the 
50 Shekels here mentioned were bur common and filver Shekels. 
Thirdly, There 1s a conſiderable difference in the Phraſe in theſe 
two places, Here he mentions tor what David bought it, or what 
he was obliged to give fort ; and in Chronicles what he a&tually gave 
for it, to wat, of his Royal bounty, over and beſides rhe full price 


of it ; which was decent and convenient for ſo great a King, and 
a. Eſpecially 


the plague may be ft.yed from the # Strife 


may be of 
fered, md 


*; Chion: 
21; 25: 


Chap. Xp. ; E 


i. 
s 147 


4 Heb 


them | 
4 Hel 
4 dan 
'virg 
+ He 
g cher 


ww | 


rey 


& "I 
* 
« © 
S : 
F. / 
3 26+? . 
= 10 [) 
£2 


iS. 
s 147 
, CI 


feet 


| + 


+ Heb, 
« entred, 
into days, 


'} Heb. ler 
them ſeek. 
{ Heb. * 
a damſel, 
virgin. 
+ Heb be 
g cher: ſber 
wo hims 


L 


CE. © FF 


eſpecially upon ſo great an occaſion, and to him who had given 
him ſuch a noble example. 


25 And David built there an altar unto the LORD 
+, and offered burnt-offerings «, and peace-offerings*: 
ſo the LOR D was intreated for the land y, and the 


" 2 - . 
- \ © - _ N = 
£ ” . 
4 
; 
, » 


N G Ss. y L | Chap. T, 

£ Which he might well do,having God's command for it, and 
the place being SanQified by God's ſpecial preſence in'and by the 
Angel. - v To make atonement for his fins. x To praiſe God for 
his Gracious manifeſtation of himſelf. y As appeared both by fire 
from Heaven, which confumed the Sacrifices.as was uſual in fuch 


| caſes : and by the ſpeedy cellation of the Plague: 
| ed from Ifrael. | | 
plague was ſtyed | 


The ARGUMEN T. 


Heſe te Books called of the Kings, becauſe they treat of the Kirigs of Judali and HHrael,were written by the Prophet, 
'T cr Holy Men of God, living in or near their ſeveral times, and by ſome one of them digeſted into this order, But 
whoſoever was the Penman, that theſe are a part of ghefe Holy Scriptures which were Divinely inſpired, is ſufficiently evi- 
dent, Firſt, From the concurring Teſtimony of the whole Jewiſh Church in all Ages, to whom were committed the Oracles 
of God, Rom. 3.2. who alſo did faithfully diſcharge their duty in preſerving and delivering them entirely and truly to 
their poſterity from time t0 time, as plainly appears, becauſe Chrift and his Apoſtles who, reproved them freely for their 
feveral fins, never taxed them with this fault, of deprawing the Holy Scriptures of the Old Teſtament. Secondly, Be- 
cauſe this is manifeſt concerning divers parcels of them which were taken out of the Records of the Prophets Nathan, Ahi- 
jah and Iddo, 2 Chron. 9. 29. and out of the Propheſies of I{aiah and Jeremiah ; aud the reft doubtleſs were of the ſame 
nature. Thirdly, From the approbation of theſe Books by the New Teſtament, both generally, as 2 Tim. 3. 16. All 
Scripture is given by Inſpiration from God, &c. which 3s affirmed concerning all thoſe Holy Scriptures which Timo- 
thy had known from a child, wer. 15. and therefore muſt nece([arily be meant of all the Books of the Old Teſtament, 
which the Jews owned for Canonical Scripture ; and particularly Rom. 11. 2, 3, &'c. where @ paſcage out of theſe Books 


L KINGS | 


7s quoted and owned as a part of the Holy Scripture, called the Scripture by way of eminency. 


GCHAF £ 

"Abiſhag cheriſheth David in his extream Age, 1,anm— 4, Adonijah uſur- 
peth the Kingdom, «= 10. by the Counſel of Nathan to Bathſbebs, 
gnd their Petition to David, he reneweth his Oath of making Solomon 
King after him, 11 31. He, by David's appointment, is anointed 
King, the People Triumph, 32 ——40. Adonijah hearing ths, his GueSts 
fly, and himſelf flieth to the horns of the Altar : is pardoned by Solomon, 
and ſent to his own Houſe, 2153. 


N OW king David was old, and + ſtricken in years 4, 
| and they covered him with clothes, but he gat 
n 0 heat b. 

a Being in the end of his ſeventieth Year. 5 Which is not 
ſt range in a Perſon not only of ſo great an Age, but alſo who had 
b een exerciſcd with fo many hardthips- in War,and with ſuch tor- 
Tt 1enting cares, and fears, and ſorrows, for his own ſins L as divers 
of his Pſalms witneſs) and for the fins and miſeries of his Children 
a1 1d People. See Prov. 17. 22+ Beſides, this might be from the 
n;1ture of his Diſeaſe, or Bodily Diſtemper. 

2 Wherefore his ſervants e faid unto him, F Let 
thiere be ſought for my LORD the king fa young virgin 
d, and let her ſtand before the king e, and let her 
+ cheriſh him, and let her lie in thy boſom f, that my 
lord the king may get heat. 

c His Phyſicians. 4 Whoſe natural Heat is freſh and wholeſom, 
and not impaired with bearing or breeding of Children. The ſame 
counſel doth Galen give for the cure ot ſome cold and dry Di- 


not the ſame diſapointment and deſtruction which he brought up- 
on himſelf 


6 And his father had not diſpleaſed him + at any + Heb. 
time p, in ſaying, Why haſt thou done fo q? And he from his 
alſo r was a very goodly man ; and bis mother bare him 49* 
after Abſalom /. 


p This is noted as David's great error, and the occaſion of Ade- 
nijah's preſumption. . q, He neither reſtrained him from, nor re- 
proved him for his miſcarriages : which was a great fin againſt 
that plain Law, Levis. 19. 17. and ſeverely puniſhed in Ek, which 
David was not ignorant of, except Aadonijah's Errors were fmall 
or concealed from David. r This particle relates, either, Firſt; 
To Abſalom here following,who alſo 'vas a goodly Man. Or rather, 
Secondly, to What goes before, to fignifie that this was a ſecond 
ground of his confidence, becauſe his great comlineſs made him 
amiable in the People s Eyes, as his Fathers indulgence was the 
firſt ſi e. Next after Ab/alom was born of his Mother : See 
2 Sam. Je 3, 4+ ; 
7 Andf he conferred withJoab the ſon of Zeruiah, 
and with Abiathar the prieſt : and they + following + Heb 
Adonijah, heiped him 7. rey 
£ Either, becauſe they thought the right of the Crown: was his with Job, 
or rather, from ſecret grudges, becauſe they perceived themſelves + xg | 
neglected by David, and poilibly by Solomon too ; and from Carnal helped afs 
Policy, that they might ſecure and advance their own intereſt, :er Adoni= 
which they ſaw to be in manifeſt danger. jah. 


8 But Zadok the prieſt, and Benaiah the ſon of 


Jternpers. & 7. e. Miniſter unto him, or wait upon him, ( as this | 
IPhraie is oft uſed ) in his iickneſs, as eccaſion repuires, f As his 
Wife or Concubine . for that the was ſo, may appear by divers ar- . 
guments. Firſt, Otherwiſe this had þ-en a wicked counſel and } 
courſe ; which therefore neither his Sgrvants durſt have preſcribed, 
nor would David have uſed, eſpecially being now in a dying con- 
dition. And ſeing this was eatilyyprevented by his raking her 
fo r his Concubine, which then was eſteemed allowable ir is abſurd 
ro think that he wou!d not chuſe the ſafer way. Secondly, That ' 
p: ifſage, v. 4+ but the king knew her not. implies that the King might 
hi ive had carnal knowledge of her without fin or ſcandal. Thirdly, 
It appears from this Phraſe of lying in his boſym, which is every . 
w here in Scriprure 'mentioned as the priviledge of a Wife and - 
C oncubine, as Gen. 16, 5. Deut. 13. 6. 2 Sam. 12, $8. Mic. 7, 5, 
E ourthly, This made Adonijah's Crime in deſiring her to Wife, ſo | 
ts ainous in Solomon's account, becauſe he wiſely 1faw, that by Mar- 
r' jing the King's Wite he deſigned to revive his pretence to the 
K ingdom, at leaſt in caſe of Selomen's death ; which pretence had 
bt :en ridiculous, if.the had been only the King's handmaid. 

3 So they ſought for a fair damſel g throughout all 
tt 1e coaſts of Iſrael ; and found Abiſhag a Shunamite 6, 
a1 1d brought her to the king. 

g Whoſe beauty might engage his affeQtions,and refreſh his ſpi- 
Tf ts, and invite him to thoſe embraces which might communicate 
ſc me of her natural Heat to him,as was deſigned + Of the City 
Oo: | Shunem in Tſachar, Joſ- 19. 18. See 2 Kings 4: 8. 

4 And the damſel was very fair, and cheriſhed che 
k .ing, and miniftred unto him: but the king knew her 
1 10t z. 


— # Which is mentioned to note the continuance and progrefs of 
the King's Malady,and the ground of Aonijah's Rebellion, and of 
his following requeſt, Chap. 2. 17 | 

5 © Then &k Adonijjah the ſon of Haggith / exalted 
himſelf, ſaying, I will + be king = : and he prepared 
him chariots, and horſemen, and fifry men to run be- 
fore him o. 


k Upon notice of the deſperatneſs of the King's Diſcaſe, and* 
the approach of his dearth. ! See 2 Sam. 3 m Entertained 
high thuughts and deligns. » As the right of the Kingdom is 
mine) v. 6. io I will now take poſſeſſion of it, leſt Solomon attempt” 
to deprive meof it. o As 4{alom had done upon the like occati-* 
On. 2 Sam 15. 1. ſuch ill uſe did he make of thar example, that he 


| Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and * Shemei and 


; were not with Adonijah. 


* I; 7 
« His great and famous Commanders, and the Guards, and Sol- * 2 Sams 
! diers under them. 23:8. + 


: gel y, and called all his brethren the kings ſons z, and wels 


Rei, and * the mighty men which belonged to David #, * Chap, | 


9 And Adonijah ſlew ſheep and oxen, and fat cat- 2 
lel x, by the ſtone of Zoheleth, which 3s by || Enro- || Or, ths: 


all the men of Judah the kings ſervants 4. 

x Partly, for a Sacrifice ; and partly, for Feaſts, that he might 
engage God to be on his fide, and draw a multitude of people 
afrer him. y Or, the fountain of Rogel, or, of the Fuller : a place nigh 
to Feruſalem. See Joſs 5: 7; and 18: 16: 2 Sam; 17:17. x Either, 
becauſe he knew they envied,and were diſcontented with Solomon, 
and therefore would favour him, or that he might engage them ſo 
ro do. 4 Except theſe here excepted, wv: 10. 

10 But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the 


mighty men 6, and Solomon his brother he called 
nor. X 
b Becauſe he knew they favoured Solomon his Competitor. - x 
11: 4 Wherefore Nathan ſpake c unto Bathiheba the 44 
mother of Solomon 4, ſaying, Haſt thou not heard by 
that Adonijah the ſon of * Haggith doth reign, and , : 6," 
David our lord knoweth 3: not e? . _ ay y 
c Being prompted to it both by his Piery in fulfilling the will of © 
God declared to him, and by him to David concerning Solomems 
Succeſſion,. 2 Sam: 7: 13: 1 Chron; 22:8, 9. and by his prudence, 
as knowing that Adenijah hated him for being the principal inſtru- 
ment of S»#omons advancement, d Who being retired and private 
in her apartment, was yet ignorant of what was done dhroad and, 
who was likely ro be moſt zealous it: the cauſe,and moſt prevalenr 
| with David. e So far is he'from conſeriting ro it,#s thou may'ſt fear 
or others think, that they have not yer acquainted him with ir. 
12 Now therefore come, let me, T pray thee, give 
thee counſel, that thou mayeſt ſave thine own life, and 
the life of thy ſon Solomon f. 
_  f For he will never reckon himſelf fafe till 'hiis Competitor and 
his Friends be taken our'of the 'way. Hp 
12 Go, and get thee in unto king David, and'fay 


committed the fame wickedneſs which he had done, and yet feared 


unto him, Didft not thou, my lord, O king, ſwear g 
WS, unto 


| + Heb. 
ſhalt be ſo1= 


-- ers.” 


 {Heb- 

« Lething A 
donijah 
tive. 


A» 


®. ap» | L 
[+.Chron:” nnto thine hand-maid &, ſaying, * Afſuredly Solomon 
2. 9e 


thy {on ſhall reign after me,- and he ſhall ſit upon my 
throne i; > Why then doth Adonijah reign & ? 

g i. e- Thou didſt ſwear ; which David himſelf owneth, v: 30. 
which probably he did to fatisfie Bathſbeba's doubts and fears about 
it, and to oblige himſelf to a compliance with the Divine Will de- 
clared about it- See Chap; 2: 15: and 1 Chron: 28: 5. hþ So ſhecal 
leth her ſelf, to teſtifie her reverence and ſubjeQion to him, not 
only as her husband, but as her King. # Another expreſſion of the 
Game thing, to ſignifie David's ſincerity and fervency in his Swear- 
ing, which adds to his obligation. k How comes this to paſs? Or 
why doſt thou ſuffer it ? 


14 Behold, while thou yet talkeſt there with: the 


king, I will alſo come in after thee, and | confirm thy 
words. 


TT" NCS 


15 | And Bathſheba went in unto the king,into the 


chamber : and the king was very old, and Abiſhag the 


' Shunamite miniſtred unto the king. 


16 And Bathſheba bowed, and did obeiſance unto 
the king : and the king ſaid, F What wouldeſt thou ? 

17 And ſhe ſaid unto him, My lord, thou ſwareſt 
by the LORD thy God / unto thine handmaid, ſaying, 
Aſfuredly, Solomon thy ſon ſhall reign after me, and 
he ſhall fit upon my throne. 

1 To whom thou art highly obliged, whoſe name thou juſtly 
feareſt and honoureſt, and therefore thou wilr'ſt not pollute it by 
Perjury, but make Conſcience of thy Oath. 

18 And now behold, Adonijjah reigneth ; and now 


my lord the king, thou knowelt z: not m. 


m This fhe adds, part, leſt ſhe ſhould ſeem to accuſe the King 


of inconſtancy and perfidiouſneſs; and partly, to aggravate Adoni- 
jahs Crime, for that groſs negle& and contempt of the King, 
which did accompany it. 


19 And he hath ſlain oxen, and fat catrel, and 
ſheep in abundance, and hath called all the ſons of the 
king, and Abiathar the prieſt, and Joab the captain 
of the hoſt : but Solomon thy ſervant hath he not 


called. 


» Who is not ſo preſumpruousas Xdmijeh, uſurping the Throne 
before his time, but carries himſelf modeſtly and ſubmiſlively, as 
thy ſon and Servant, and Subje&. 

20 And thou,my lord,O king, the eyes of all Iſrael 
are upon thee o, that thou ſhouldeſt tell them who (ball 
fit upon the throne of my lord the king p after him g. 

0 The generality of the People are in ſuſpence, whether Adonijahs 
praQices be with thy conſent or no, and wait for thy Sentence, 
which they will readily embrace. p She ſpeaks only in general,as 
owning the Kings Prerogative to give the Crown to which of his 
Sons he pleaſed, if he had nor reſtrained himſelf by his Oath to 
Solomon. 4q i. e, Aﬀeer thy death. Whereby the taxeth Adonijahs 
Ambition, who uſurped the Crown whitleſt his Father lived. 

21 Otherwiſe ic ſhail come to paſs, when my lord 
the king ſhall ſleep with his fathers r, that I and my 
ſon Solomon ſhall be counted F offenders /. 

7 ic e, Die as his Fathers did. See Gen: 47: 30. { We ſhall be 
puniſhed with death as MalefaQors, as guilty of praGtiſing againſt 
the right Heir of the Crown, and transferring the Kingdom to Se- 
lomen, and covering our ambitious deſigns with a pretence of Re- 
ligion. 

22 T And lo, while ſhe yet talked with the king, 
Nathan the prophet alſo came in ?. 


t To diſcourſe with the King ; which made it fit for her to 
withdraw, as ſhe did, v. 28. 


23 And they told the king, ſaying, Behold, Nathan 
the prophet. And when he was come in before the 
king, he bowed himſelf before the king with his face 
to the ground. | | 

24 And Nathan ſaid, My lord, O king, haſt thou 


| aid u, Adonijah ſball reign after me, and he ſhall fic 


upan my throne ? 


u Is this done by thy conſent, without which it ſeems ſtrange 
that he .durſt attempt it ? 


25 For. he is gone down this day, and hath ſlain 


© oxen, and fat catrel, and ſheep in abundance, and hath 
- called all the kings ſons, and the captains of the hoſt, 


and Abiathar the prieſt ; and behold, they eat and 
drink before him, and fay, + God fave king Adonijah. 

26 Bur me, even me thy ſervant x, and Zadok the 
prieſt, and Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada, and thy ſer- 
vant Solomon hath he not called. 


x Whom he knew to be acquainted with thy mind,and with the 
mind of God in this mattter : And therefere his negle& of me 
herein gives me cauſe to ſuſpe& that this is done withour thy 
privity : which now I come to know. 


% 


\ 27 Is this thing done by my lord the king, and 


thou haft not ſhewed zt unto thy ſervant y, who 
ſhould ſit on the throne of my lord the king after 
him. 

y Who, having been an inſtrument in delivering Gods meſſage 
to thee conceraing thy Succeſſor, might reaſonably expect that if 
the king had changed his Mind,or God had fince made ſome reve- 
lation contrary to the former, thou wouldeſt have acquainted me 
with it, as being both a Prophet of the Lord, and one whom thou 
haſt always found Faithful to thee,and to whom thou haſt uſed to 
communacat thy ſecret counſels. 


. .- 


28 © Then king David anſwered and ſaid, Call me 
Bathſheba & : and ſhe came + into the kings preſence, T Heb, 
and ſtood before the king. 2 Fore th 

z Who, upon Nathans approach to the King had modeſtly with. 
drawn her ſelf, either in another Room, or into another part of 
this Room, more remote from the Bed upon which David lay. 

29 And the king ſware, and ſaid, As the LORD 
liveth, that hath redeemed my ſoul out of all diſtreſs, 

30 Even as I {ware unto thee by the LORD God 
of Iſrael, ſaying, Aſſuredly, Solomon thy ſon ſhall 
reign after me, and he (hall fit upon my throne in wy 
ſtead -; even ſo will I certainly do this day. 

31 'Then Bathſheba bowed with her face to the earth, 
and did reverence to the king, and faid, Let my lord 
king David live for ever. 

a i.e: For along time, as that word is oft uſed, as Chap? 2: 33; 
Dan: 2: 4 Though I deſire thy Oath may be kept, and the right 
of Succeſſion confirmed to my Son, yer I am tar from thirſting 
after thy death for his advancement, and ſhould rather rejoyce, 
1t were poſſible for thee to live and enjoy thy Crown for ever. 

32 © And king David ſaid,Call me Zadok the prieſt, 
and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the ſon of Je- 
hoiada. And they came before the king. 

33 The king alſo ſaid unto them, Take with you 
the ſervants of your lord b,and cauſe Solomon my ſon |, 


to ride upon F mine own mule c, and bring him down 7 Heb: 


k Which be. 
to Gihon d. vorad'os | 
b i: e, My publick Officers, and my Guards. c. As a token that we. 


the Royal Dignity 1s transferred upon Solomon, and that by my con- 

lent. Compare Ger: 41: 43. Eſth. 6. 8. A River near Jeruſalem, 

on the Welt ſide, as may be gathered from 2 Chron. 32; 30- as 

En-ragel, where Adonijah was inaugrated, was on' the Kaſt-ſide. 

This place David choſe, either, as remote from Adonijah and his 

company, that ſo the People might go thither,and. be there with- 

out tear of Tumults or Bloodſhed ; or to ſhew that Solomon wag 

choſen King in oppoſition to Adon;jah : or, becauſe this was a place 

of great retort, and fit to receive and diſplay that numerous com=- 

pany, which he knew would follow Solomon thither : or, that he 

might from thence return and make the more magnificent eit= 

trance into the City. | 
34 And let Zadok the prieſt, and Nathan the pro- a 

phet, aneint him there king e over Iſrael : and blow 


ye with the trumpet f, and ſay, God ſave king Solo- 
mon. 


e As they uſed to do where there was any thing new,or doubt- 
ful, or extraordinary in the Succeſſion, as 1 Sam. 10. 1. and 16: 12, 
13- x Kings 19. 15, i6. 2 Kings 9.3. And this unction ſignified 
both the deſignation of the Perſons to the Office, and the Gifts 
and Graces which were neceſſary for their office, and which, rhey 
ſeeking them ſincerely from God, might expect to receive. f To 
make the action more Solemn, and Glorious, and Publick. 

35 Then ye ſhall come up after him, that he may + 
come and fit upon my throne ; for he ſhall be king 1n 


. ; N | 
my ſtead g ; and I have + appointed 4 him to be ruler + Heb. 
over Iſrael, and over Judah 5. commaniul 

£ My Deputy and Vice-King Whilſt I live, and abſolutly King him.30 0r 
when I die. Or, if David and S»lomon were Joint-Kings, it is 10 
more than was afterwards frequent at Rome, where the Father and 
Son,or two other Perſons were not ſeldom Joint-Emperors. 4 And 
that by Divine direction. # This is added, partly, as being the 
moſt eminent and Royal Tribe, it being frequent, together with 
the general diſtinction, ro mention one of the moſt eminent parti- 
cles, as 1 Kings 11, 1, Pſal. 18. title. Mark 16. 7. and partly, leſt the 
men of Judah, who were in a ſpecial manner invited by Adon ijah 
v. 9. might think themſc]ves exempted from hisJuriſdiction. 

236 And Benaiah the fon of Jehoiada anſwered ithe 
king, and faid, Amen k: The LOR D God of imy 
lord the king ſay ſo zo I. , | 

k Which was both an approbation of the Kings Fact, and a pro- 
feſſon of his Allegiance to the new King, and a Petition ro God! to 
ratiffie and confirm it. / The Lord 1tablith Solumons Throne: in 
ſpight of Aaomijah, and all his other Enemies» | | 

37 As the LORD hath been with my lord the kitig, 
even ſo be he wich Solomon, and make his thrc-ne 
greater than the throne of my lord king David m». 

m Which Petition, albeit it might have offended an unwonthy, 
vain-glorious and envious Father,he knew would be welcome to 1o 


pious and generous a Man as David was, .and to one fo kind and 
indulgent to his Children. 


38 So Zadok the prieſt, and Nathan the propkiet, 
and Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, 
and the Pelethites went down, and cauſed Solomon to 
ride upon king Davids mule,and brought him to Gihcn. | 
39 And Zadok the prieſt » took an horn of * Gil *£x0d3* 
out of the tabernacle 6, and anointed Solomon : an d 23:253* 
they blew the trumpet, and all the people ſaid, God! 
ſave king Solomon. 


» For though he was not the High-Prieſt,he might do this office, 
eſpecially having the direction of the Prophet Nathan, wer, 34- 
o That which David had erected for the Ark, 2 Sam 6. 17. in whicks 
Oyl was kept for divers Sacred uſes . for Moſes his Tabernacle was at 
Gideon, 1 Chron: 16, 39. and 21: 29. which was too remote for the 
preſent occafion, which required all poſſible expedition. 


' 49 Andall the people came up after him ?, and the 
people piped with || pipes,and rejoyced with great JOy q,, jOr,fu, 
ſo that the earth rent r with the ſound of chem. 21M | 
p Whig) 


ing, 


Chap. 1, Chap. 


(Fee: 7 : 


ad 


39 
Fa 


"2! 


* 


» Which flocked thither in abundance, ſome our of curioſity to 
ſee ſo ſolemn an ation; others to do their Duty;and others in ex- 


peQarion of ſome advantage by their chearful attendance upon the 


King. Partly, becauſe this would certainly prevent Civ1) 
Wars, x what had ſo lately and ſo ſorely groaned, and 
which they had reafon to fear from Adonijah's pretence to the 
Crown, and the affiſtance he might have from the great and fa- 
mous Lord General Joab, and from Abiathar the High-prieſt, and 
from others who were or might eaſily be engaged for him, if Da- 
vid had not ended the Controverſie in. his life-time : and partly, 
becauſe of the ſingular wiſdont and virtue for which Solemm was 
even then famous. See chap. 2. 6, 9g. r An Hyperbolical Expreſ- 
ſion : yet even ſolid Bodies have been oft broken and rent by 
great ſounds. o 

4x 4 And Adonijah, and all the gueſts that were 
with him, heard ie, as they had made an end of eat- 
ing /-: and when Joab heard the ſound of the trumpet, 
he ſaid, Wherefore 7s chis noiſe of the city, being in 
an uproar ? 

ſ For Nathan having | ge wiſe Counſel,took all due care to ex- 

dite the execution of it, that it might not be ſpoiled by delays, 
as. frequently happens. . 

42 And while he yet ſpake, behold, Jonathan the 
ſon of Abiathar t the prieſt came, and Adonijah ſaid 
unto him, Come in, for thou art a valiant man «, and 
bringeſt good tidings- 

£ Who it ſeems was left at Jeruſalem for a Spy, as he had for- 
merly been under Abſalom. u Or, a man of wertue or worth, as this 
Hebrew word is uſed, Prov: 12: 4. and therefore an happy man 
and haſt good news for thy ſelfand us. - Compare 2 Sam: 18; 27. 

And Jonathan anſwered and ſaid to Adonijah, 
Verily x,our lord king David hath made Solomon king. 

n Or, but, or, nay but ; i, e. The matter is not as thou expetteſt, 
but quite contrary. : ; 

44 And the king hath ſent with him Zadok the 


prieſt, and Nathan che prophet,and Banaiah the ſon of 


Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and 
they have cauſed him to ride upon the kings mule. 
45 And Zadok the prieſt, and Nathan the prophet, 


have anointed him king in Gihon : and they are come 


up from thence rejoycing, ſo that the city rang again: 
this zs the noiſe that ye have heard. 


46 And alſo Solomon fittech on che throne y of the 


kingdom. | 
9 7.e. Is put into aCtual poſſeſſion of the Kingdom. 


47 And moreover the kings ſervants came to bleſs 
our lord king David z, ſaying, God make the name 
of Solomon better than thy name,and make his throne 


4 He owns Solomen as lus King, and himſelf-as-his Servant and W 
Subje& ; and being ſenſible of his grear guilt, and of the jealouſte K 
which Kings have of their Competitors,could nor be ſatisfied with- N 
out Solomons Oath. ; 

52, And Solomon faid, If he will ſhew himſelf lf 
fa worthy man e, * there ſhall nor an haic of him fall + 1.4, 5 4 


tothe earth f: but if wickedneſs ſhall be found in him fg, ſon of wire 
he ſhall die. tue, Or,u 
e Heb. a wan of ſtrength or courage © for it requires great ftrength lot. } 
of mind, and reſolution, to reſiſt all temptations of Vice, and'to 2 2:*14+ | 
do Virtuouſly. f Herein Solomon manifeſts his Clemency and Bro- 45: ? Sams | 
therly Aﬀe&ion, and withal his prudence in ſparing him, whom, '4* 7 Þ 
being his Brother, and his eldeſt Brother too, it would have been Acts 27* 
invidious to have ſlain. g Not only if he ſhall be guilty of ſome 3+: 
capital Crime,bur of any great wickedneſs or evil deſtgn. For as this 
pardon was Solomons free a, fo he might juſtly qualific it as he 
pleaſed. 
5350 king Solomon ſent,and they brought him down 
from the altar ; and he came and bowed himſelf. to 
king Solomon : and Solomon ſaid unto him, Go to 
thine houſe þh. 


þ Lead a private, or retired and quiet life, without noiſe and 
numerous attendants,and meddle not with the Afﬀairs of the Court 


and Kingdom. 
SAaAP. IL 
David lying on his bed, giveth charge to Solomon of a Relizious L5fey 
I 4- Of Joab : Barzillai and Shimei, 5 -— 9g he ditth ; Solo< 
mon ſucceedeth, 10 ——=12. Adonijah ſuing for Abiſhag, is put to 
Death, 13 ---*= 25. Abiathar is deprived of the Priefthood, 26, 
27. Joab flieth to the Horns of the Altar is ſlain there, 28 —— 34, 
Benaiah is put in foabs room, and Zadok in Abiathar's, 35. Shimei 
confined to Ferujalem, going thence to Gath tu put ts Death, 36w=46. 
| N OW the days of David drew nigh, that he 
ſhould die; and he charged Solomon his ſon, 
ſaying, 
2 1 go the way of all the earth a: be thou ſtrong 6 
therefore, and ſhew thy ſelf a man c. 
@ i« e. Of all men upon the Earth, Compare 7of. 23. 19. Heb. g. 
27. 6 For, to govern his People according to the Law of God,as 
it here follows, requires great fortitude or ſtrength. of. Mind, to 
arm himſelf againit the ſubril divices and evaſions of ſome ; againſt 
the flatteries and importunities of others againſt terrors and dan= 
gers from revengeful Men, and eſpecially againſt himſelf and his 
own weakneſs, partiality, through fear or favour ; and againſt all 
thoſe evil thoughts and paſſions to which the temptations of their 
great wealth and glory,and uncontrollable power naturally expoſe 
them. See Prov. 16. 32, c In manly Wiidom, and Courage, and 
Conſtancy, though thou art but young in years, 1 Chron, 22.5. 
3 And keep the charge of the LOR D thy God 4, 


to walk in his ways, to keep his ſtatutes, and his com- 


vreater than thy throne : And the king bowed himſeif | ma1ements, and his judgments, and his teftimonies, 


upon the bed a. 


z To praiſe and thank him for his great and good care,in-leaving | * || proſper f in all that thou doeſt, and whitherſoever , 
them in the hands of ſo excellent a Succetſor, under whom they 
might expe& Peace and all proſperity ; and to congratulate with 
him for God's great Mercy to him.in giving him ſuch a Son and 
Succeſſor, and that his Eyes had now feen the aQual accomplith- 
ment of Gods promiſe made to him concerning this thing. a A- 
doring God for this great Mercy,and thereby declaring his hearty 


approbation and conſent to this aftion» Compare Gen: 47. 31. 


48 And alſo thus faid the king, Bleited be the 
LORD God of Iſrael, which hath given one to ſit on 


my throne this day, mine eyes even ſeeing r. 


49 And all the gueſts that were with Adonijah,were | heed to their ways'b, to walk before me in truth & 


afraid, and roſe up, and went eveiy man his way b. 


b i.e, The way to his own Houſse,leſt they ſhould be diſcovered 


and taken. 


| Fo ©} And Adonijah feared, becauſe of Solomon. 
and aroſe, and went, and caught hold on the horns of | (pended being performed. þ x. e. Dillig 


the altar c. 


c Either, that which was at G/beon, as appears from + Chron: 16: 
39. 2 Chron: 1: 3: and was made with four Horns Exoa: 38: 2. tc 


as it is wfitten in the law of Moſes e, that thou mayeſt 


tou turneſt thy ſelf : "Deur:. 


d i. e: What God hath charged or commanded thee to do ; the Yo in. 
at being pur for the obje&, as is uſual. e Which the Prince was |, Or, do 
enjoyned to tranſcribe and read, Deut. 17. 18. that he might go- wiſely. 
vern his own and his Peoples actions by it. f Or, behave thy /elf- 
prudently : tor the word ſignifies both. Hereby he intimates, That 
Religion is the trueſt Reaſon of State, and that all true Wiſdom 
and good Succeſs depends upon Piety- 


4 That the LORD may confirm his word g which 

.| he ſpake concerning me, ſaying, * If thy children take « Proc: 
: 3 12- 
with all their heart, and with all their ſoul /, * there * 2 Sam. 
ſhall not Þ fail thee ( ſaid he ) a man on the throne of 7: EE 
Iſrael REES. 
g 5. e. Fulfil his promiſe, the condition upon which it was ſu- | 
ently obſcrve ail their Acti- 5 HPP 7 
ons, to order them according to God's Word. i To live as thoſe 
:hat have God before their eyes,and endeavour to approve them- 
\elves to him. & Nov only in pretence and ſhew,but truly and fin» 


which the Sacrifices were bound, Pſal 148: 27- Or rather, thar } <<rely+ 72 e: Univerially, freely, and fervently. m The Succefli- | 
which David had lately ſet up in the Thceſhing-floor of Araunah, | 9 ſhall be continued in thy Line without any interruptions 


which doubtleſs was made after the ſame Form as thar at G.beon ; 


5 Moreover, thou knoweſt aito what Joab the ſon 


For,Firſt, This was next at hand Secondly, The Altar only is men- | of Zeruiah did to me », «ud o, what he did to the bh. 


tioned here, whereas in Joab's caſe there is mention of the Taber- 
nacle and Altar both, Chap 2. 28, 29. which 1{cems ro be noted to 


two captains of the hoſts of Iſrael, unto * Abner, the * 2 Sam: 


ti * ; ; 
ditinguiſh the two Altars - for Adenjob being the Kings Son, he | 197 of Ner, and unto * Amaſa the fon of Jether, whom 3- 27: 


might ſafely go to Aranuabs Altarzand the People would nor be for- | he New, and Þ thed the blood of war in peace p, and 
ward to ſeize upon him, or bring kim to Juſtice : bur Joab truly 
thought it was not fafe for him to venture himſeif there,and therc- 
fore he flieth to Gibeon, as a place more remote from feruſalem. 
Hither he fled, either ro implore God's Mercy ; or rather, to a- 
void Solomon's Rage : ſuppoſing that his Reverence to that Sacred 
Place would notpermit him to pollute him with his Brothers blood ; 


Or that t 


2 Sam. 
20! 19s, 


put the biood of war upon his girdle that was about his + Heb-aus! 


loins, ar.d in his ſhoes chat were on his feer 4. | 
» i, e. Againſt me ; Either, Firſt, Directly and immediately.; 
how inſolently and imperiouſly he hath carricu him felf rowards we 
from time to time, trampling vpon my Authority and Commands 


he conſideration of Gods Grace and Mercy,which himſelf when they thwarted his hun.ou or intereſt, provoking my. {piric 


: - d actions. See 2 Sam. 3: 39. and 19, 7. Or,Seconds 
needed and begged of God, in pardoning his Offences, and ac- by 206 ER "3-000 2 IS yr 3: IA 
cepting the Sacrifices which he ſhould ofter there, would engage by. Incdy OO Iuate anc and coy ER 


and diſpoſe him to ſhew Mercy to his offending ard now penitent 


' Was a great 1njury to David, as it was a breach of his Laws.and 


Brother ; or, that his Piery would nor allow. him violently to pluck Peace ; 2 contempr of his Perſon and Government; x pernicious 


him as it were our of the 
ſelf. And for theſe or ſuch like reaſons the 
kind of SanCtuary or place of Refu 

but alſo amon g the Hebrews, thawed 


as may be gathered from Exod. 21. 14. 1 Kiags,2. 28. 


Fx And it was told Solomon, ſaying, Behold, Ado- | EI 


rms of God,into which he had put him- 
Altar was elteemed a 
e, nor only among the Genziles, | 
it be not called by that name, 


example to others of his Subjects upon the iike occaſions ; a great 
icandal and diſhonour ro him, as if Joab h:d been only David's 
inſtrument, to effect what he ſecretly defircd. and deſigned ; wheres 
by the hearts of his People either were,or might have been alicna- 
ted from: him, and inflamed againſt him, and rhe. wounds which 

. healed, ata-have been widened avain, and made 
to bleed afreth. o Or, even, the following branches being added as 


nijah feareth king Solomon : tor lo, he hath caught an explication of the foregoing, to ſhew whar and how he acted: to- 


hold on the horns of the altar, 


{eryant d with the ſword. 


faying, Let king, $010- 
mon {wear unto me to day, that he will nor tlay his 


wards.0r. againſt Davida. Or, and particularly; as his other mulCarri- 
ages, 1o,theſe eſpecially. p- He tlew thero-as if they had been in 

the ſtate and act of War, when there was not only aceſſation of 
of 3 F 2 Arms, 


Ladd —_— 


\®, P- Its I 
Arms, but alſo a treaty and agreement of Peace, of which alſo 
they were the great procurers and promoters. 9q This 1s added to 
note his Saad avon and impenitency, that although by his perfidi- 
ous manner of killing them when he pretended to imbrace them, 
he ſtained his own Garments with their Blood, yet he was not a- 
ſhamed of it, bur gloried in it, and marched boldly along with 
the Army, with the ſame Girdle and Shoes which were ſprinkled 
with their Blood. See 2 Sam: 20:10. | 

6 Do therefore according to thy wiſdom r, and let 


not his hoar head go down to | the grave in peace /. 

y 5. e. What in Reaſon and Juſtice thou ſeeſt fir. For tho' I was 
forced to forbear him when it was ina manner out of my power 
to puniſh him, yet I never forgave him ; and therefore do thou 
witely and ſeverely examine all his ARions, and particularly this 
laſt Rebellion,and puniſh him according to his demerits. / Though 
he be old, having been the General of the Army 40 Years, yet do 
not ſuffer him to die a natural death,bur cut him off by the Sword 


f Juſtice. es 
2 © But ſhew kindneſs unto the ſons of * Barzillai the 


Gileadite :, and let them be of thoſe that ear at thy 
table : for ſo « they x came to me when I fled becauſe 


of Abſalom thy brother. = F | 

£ Que Why doth he not require the like kindneſs to Mephi- 
boſherþ the Son of his dear Jonathan ? Anſ. Either he and his were 
now extin& ; or by their after miſcarriages had forfeited his fa- 
vour- u 1. e. With ſuch kindneſs either as I cannot expreſs ( as 
the Particle ſo is elſewhere uſed ) or,as I command thee to ſhew 
to them x 3. e. Barzillai and his Sons : for though Barzil/ai only 
be mentioned, 2 Sam- 17. 27* yet his Sons doubtleſs were inſtru- 
mental in the buſineſs, eſpecially Chimham, 2 Sam. 19: 37,38- 

$ And behold,ches boF with thee y * Shimei the ſon 
of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahuiim, which curſed me 
with a Þ grievous curſe z, in the day when I went to 
Mahanaim : but he came down to meet me at Jordan, 
and I ſware to him by the LORD, ſaying, * I will not 


put thee to death with the ſword a. 

9 5. e In thy power, as that Phraſe is oft uſed. z Or, reproach- 
ed me with bitter reproaches, 2 Sams 16. 7, 8: which David could not 
but deeply reſent from him, chough,as it was an affliction ſent from 
God, he patiently ſubmitted to it- - Queſt, How then could David 
lawfully c11gage So/omon to puniſh him for it; And did David upon 
his Death-bed bear malice againſt Shimei ? Anſ. Firſt, David was 
not a private Perſon which might remit ſuch Offences without any 
;nconvenience ; but a publick Magiſtrate, who for the bonour and 
mainrenance of Government was oblidged to puniſh ſuch inſolent 
and opprobrious Speeches, if the neceſſity of his Aﬀairs had not 
then engaged. him to paſs it by. Ottierwile it appears from divers 

aflages of the Pſaims, and of this Hiſtory, how free David was 
how a Tancorous and revengeful ſpirit even towards his Enemies. 
Secondly, The foilowing advice is not contrary to Dawvias Oath,both 
becauic that was only perſonal,that David would not kill him either 
at thar time, as Abiſhai deſired him, or whilſt he lived ; and did 
not oblidge his Succeilors ; »nd eſpecially,becauſe it was not Davids 
mind thar Shemei ſhould be pur to death for that fault ( as is evi- 
dent, for then there was no need of Solomons Wiſdom to find out 
an occaſion,but only of his Juſtice to puniſh him for the old crime) 
bur for ſome other competent crime, which Solomons Wiſdom nar- 
rowiy prying into all his ations, would eaſily fiad out. And if 
the condition which Solomon impoſed upon Shimei, v, 36, 37. ſeem 
hard. it muſt be remembred, that David only ſwore that he would 
Pardon him as to life, but not that he would exempt him from all 
puniſhment or confinement. =_ 
9 Now therefore hold him not guiltleſs b : for thou 
art a wiſe man c, and knoweſt what thou oughteſt to 
do unto him 4d, but his hoar head bring thou down to 


the grave with biood e. 

þ Though I have ſpared his life, do not treat him as an inno- 
cent Perſon, neither Jet him go wholly unpunithed, c And there. 
fore v iltſt eaſily find out juſr occaſions to chaſtiſe him, eſpecially 
conſidering his perverſe and wicked diſpoſition. 4 How to puniſh 
him, not withour juſt cauſe, and yet without any violation of my 
Oath, or refleftion upon me,or upon Religion tor my or thy ſake. 
e 7. e. With the effuiion of his blood ; with a bloody or violent 


. death. : 
*AQ-2.29 10 © So David ſlept with his fathers f, and was bu- 
#n413-36- ied in the city of David g. 
f See of this Phraſe Devz. 31.16 16. 1 Kings 1. 21- g 7. e. In that 
part of Jer«ſalem which was called by his name, becauſe he took it 
from the Jebuſires. See 2 Sam. 5.7. 1Chron. L1.5. 2Chron. 5. 2. 


*2S2ms- 12 And the days that David * reigned over Iſrael, 
4. 1Chro« ,yere forty years : ſeven years h reigned he in Hebron, 
29-26,27- rd thirty and three years reigned he in Jeruſalem. 

h More preciſely,7 Years and 6 Moneths,2 Sam: 5: 5: but ſmaller 

ſums are oft neg'ected in Scripture-computations. 

*, Chron: 12 © * Then fate Selomon upon' the throne of 
29 -3 © David his father, and his kingdom was eſtabliſhed 
2 Chr.#1- oreatly 5. 

# Being ſettled upon him with univerſal conſent and approba- 


tion, and with the hearty affections of his People, which all wiſe 
Men know to be a Prince's beſt and ſureſt Eſtabliſhmenr. 


13 And Adonijah the ſon of Haggith came to Bath- 
ſheba the mother of Solomon, and ſhe ſaid, Comeſt 
thou peaceabiy &? and he ſaid, peaceably. 

k Or, with ſome Evil deiign upon me or my Son ; which ſhe 
might well ſurmile,knowing his ambition and envy at Selowon, and 
his hatred againſt her, as the chief occaſion of his dejection. 

14 He ſaid moreover, I have ſomewhat to ſay unto 
thee. And ſhe ſaid, Say on. 

15 And he ſaid, Thou knoweft that the kingdom 
was mine /, and 7hat all Uragl fe theis faces on fas, 


| $Heb:hele 
So Gr. 


® 2 Sam- 
19. 31. 


® 2 Sam, 
16: 5. 

Tt Heb. 
frrong. 

T 2 Sam. 
19. 23. 


K 1 N G S. 


- Chap. tj 

that I ſhould reign m : howbeit, the kingdom is turned | 
about z, and is become my brothers : for * ic was his *iCh.;.... 
from the LORD e«. 9. andzs, 


7 Both by Birthright,and by actual Inauguration. Ir ſeems he 
could not yet, forget his pretence to the Crown,nor his ambition for 
it, but continues his claim: Which,it ſeems,Solomon did apprehend 
and reſent, though Bathſheba did not : the Wives and Concubines 
of the late King being reputed to appertain to the Succeſſor. See 
2 Sam. 12, 8 mm They looked upon me as their King, and Davids 
Succeſſor, expecting that David ſhould confirm my Election, 
2 Tranſlated trom me to him by the viciſſitude of human Affairs 
and the changeable humour of the People. o Either, Firſt, By 
God's Providence ſo diſpofing Davids Mind, and the Peoples 
Hearts. Or rather,Secondly,By God's appointment and particular 
deſignationzwherein he would ſeem to acquicſce. Which he men= 
tions, not that he made any Conſcience of it, or had any regard to 
it; but only that by this pretence he might deceive both her and 
Sol:mon,as if he were far from any deſign of uſurping the Kingdom, 

16 And now II ask one petition of thee ; |} deny me + Heb, 
not p. And ſhe ſaid unto him, Say on. FUr10 10t 

Þ Heb. do not turn away my face, i e, do not ſend me out of thy 7) ty 
preſence ſad or aſhamed. Compare 2 Chroz, 6. 42. Pſal. 132: 10. 1%: 

I7 And he ſaid, ſpeak, I pray thee, unto Solomon 
the king ( for he will nor | fay chee nay ) that he give +4 4,4, 
me Abiſhag the Shunamite to wife q. rury awoj 

q Which, though it was againſt a poſitive Law of God, Levit: 1 face, 
18: 7. yet either Adonijah might be ignorant of it, being a man 
more ſrudied in the Afﬀairs of the Court, than in the Book of God; 
or might think her not concerned in it, becauſe David knew her 
not, Chap. I. 4. 

18 And Bathſheba ſaid, Well, I will ſpeak for thee 


unto the king. 


19 © Bathſheba therefore went unto king Solomon 

co ſpeak unto him for Adonijah : and the king roſe up 
to meet her,and bowed himſelf unto her, and fat down 
on his throne, and cauſed a Þ ſeat ro be ſer for the q py, 
kings mother, and ſhe ſat on his right hand r. Time, 

r The moſt honourable Place next to the Kings ; See 2 Chrox. 18, So Gr, 
18. Neh: 8:4. Pſal. 45: 9. Mat: 20: 21. . 

20 Then ſhe faid, I defire one ſmall petition s of 
thee, 1 pray thee ſay me not nay : and the king ſaid un- 
to her, Ask on, my mother, for I will not ſay thee 
nay t. | 
| * So ſhe eſteemed it, becauſe ſhe did not perceive his Deſign in 
it ; and as for that Law, Levit: 18: 7. ſhe might apprehend, that 
becauſe David knew her not, it was only a Contract be Marriage, 
and therefore no impediment of her Marrriage to any other after 
his Death ; which alſo is the Opinion of ſome of the late Learned 


Hebrew Doctors. # Suppoling thy requeſt be but ſmall, as thou 
lay'ſtit is, and not unlawful, nor injurious to my ſelf, or others, 


21 And ſhe faid, Let Abiſhag the Shunamite be gi- 
ven to Adonijah thy brother « to wife. 


u By the Father's ſide, whom brotherly Aﬀection and Relation 
obligeth thee to gratific ; at leaſt, in ſmall things, 


22 And king Solomon anſwered and ſaid unto his 
mother, And why deſt thou ask Abiſbag the Shuna- 
mite for Adonijah ? ask for him the kingdom alſo x ; 
( for he is mine elder brother y ) even for him, and for 
Abiathar the prieſt, and for Joab the ſon of Zerujah z. 

x His deſign is not upon Abiſbag, but upon the Kingdom ; which 
by this means, he thinks to recover ; partly, becauie ſhe was the 
laſt kings Wife, Or Concubine, which might ſtrengthen his Pre- 
tence to the Crown ; See 2 Sam: 3:7. and 12: 8: and 16. 21: and 
partly, becauſe by her eminent Beauty,and near Relation to David, 
ſhe had a powerful Intereſt in the Court. Queſt. Was not this too 
harſh a Cenfſure, and the following Punifhment of it too ſevere ? 
Anſ. 1. That Adonijah had ſuch a Deſign, is very probable, both 
from his Temper, for he was an aſpiring and deligning Man, and 
highly diſcontented with Solomon's Government, and deſirous of a 
Change ; and from the nature of the thing, becauſe he would nor 
have made fo dacing and preſumptuous a Requeſt, if he had nor 
ſome great Deſign in it, 2. It is very likely from the following 
words, though nor exprefled, that he, and Jeab and 4biathar were 
engaged in {ome Deſign againſt Solemon, and that Solomon had got 
Intormation of it 3 and therefore he did, and might reaſonably rake 
this for an Indication, and the firſt covert act of his Treaſon. 
3. Solomon did not pardon Adonijah's Treaſon ſimply,and abſolutely, 
but upon condition that he carried himſelf worthily, Chap: 1: 52. 
and this being confefſedly a bold & unworthy Action,and arguing 
more confidence and preſumption than became him; and carrying 
in it the appearance and intention of an Inceſtuous Marriage, he 
might juſtly revive his Guilt, and take this occaſion to execute the 
Senrence which he formerly deſerved. Ifit be ſaid, That it is very 
improbable that Adenjah ſhould expect to get the Kingdom from 
Solemon, who was ſo firmly eſtabliſhed in it with univerſal Ap» 
plauſe 3 it may be anſwered, That Adonijah was not the only Man 
that hath fed himſelf with vain hopes and engaged himfB}f in high 
and treaſonable Deſigns, where, to other wite Men there was but 
little likelihood of Succeſs : and that he might now be only laying 
the foundation of what he further intended, when he ſaw a fit 
time, and getting a pretence for his future Attempts upon the 
Crown ; either, when S#lomon ſhould loſe the Peoples Aﬀections,as | 
David had done ; or when Sel:mon fhould die, which alſo A4domijab | 
might ſecretly procure and haſten ; and he had only Solomons young 
and tender Son to conteſt with. All which,and many other things, 
Solomen in his great. Wiſdom might eaſily diſcern ; yea, or have 
ſome ſecret Intelligence of,though it be not Recorded, y He looks 
upon the Kingdom as his, by nature and Birthrighr, and the Law 
of Nations and therefore he might ſeek to recover his own,and ta 
Caſt me our as an Uſurper. z Who have all an hand in the Plot, 
though he alone appears 4n it 3 which appears the more likely, be- 


Cal: 6 


+, $a 
33, 1 


F He 
gs ma 


death 
*1$: 


22: 2 


"19; 
31,3 


\ "Chap: II: 


- # Ruth 
1: 17: 


ev, Cam:7* 
33z 13: 


L © 3 


cauſe of Selomns proceeding againſt them all at the ſame time ; as 
appears in the following Verſes. 

23 Then king Solomon ſware by the LORD a, 
ſaying, * God do ſo to me, and more allo, if Adonijah 
have not ſpoken this word againſt his own life. 

a Once here. and again, v. 24. Which he did to oblige himſelf 
irrevocably to it, and to prevent all Interceſſions for his Life, it 
being of ſo great importance to him. : 

24 Now therefore, as the LORD liveth, which hath 
eſtabliſhed me, and ſet me on the throne of David my 
father b, and who hath made me an bouſe c as he * pro- 
miſed, Adonijah ſhall be put to death this day d. 

b Though Adonijah be my elder Brother, yet I have an undoubted 
Right and Title to the Crown, and that from the promiſe and ap- 

ointment of that God who diſpoſeth of all Kingdoms, and eſpeci- 
ally this of Jrael, ro whom he pleaſeth ; and therefore Adonijah in 
this, and his former attempt, is guilty of Treaſon againſt me, and 
of Rebellion againſt God, c Either, 1. who hath given me Poſterity, 
as that Phraſe is uſed, Exod. x 21» and elſewhere ; for Rehaboam 
moſt probably was born before this time 3 by comparing 1 Kings 14. 
21. Or rather, 2. who hath eſtabliſhed me in the Houſe and Throne 
of David - which he thus exprefſerh, to ſignifie, that God hath 
fulfilled in and to him that Promiſe which he made to David, in 
2 Sam. 7.11. where the ſame Phraſe is uſed, and where it doth 
not ſo much ſignifie the giving of David Poſterity, which he had 
ſufficiently before that time ; as the ſettlement of the Crown in him 
and his Seed. d For he knew delays were dangerous in matters of 
that Nature. 


25 And king Solomon ſent by the hand of Benaiah, 
the fon of Jehoiada e, and he fell upon him f that he 


N GC S. 


Benaiahs affirmation of it ; for why ſhould he tell a lye without a 
cauſe? and from his return to tke King for new orders upon Joabs 
Reſolution not to come thence. « For he {uppoſed, either, thar 
Solomon would not defile that place with his Blood : or, that he would 
ſpare him for his reſpe& to it, as he had done Adomjah : or, he had 
a ſuperſtitious conceit, that his dying there might give his guilty 
and miſerable Soul ſome advantage. 

'31 And the king ſaid unto him, Do as he hath 
ſaid x, and fall upon him, and bury him ; that thou 
mayſt cake away the innocent blood x which Joab ſhed 
from me, and from the houſe of my father, 

x Either, r. Kill him in that place : and for ſo doing, Solomon 
might ſeem to have warrant from God, Exod. 21. 14. and might 
further deſign by this juſt ſeverity, to deterr future Offenders, by 
Gewing, thar no place nor perſon ſhould prote& them from the 
ſtroke of Juſtice. Or rather, 2. Ler him Die as he is reſolved 
kill kim, though he be there ; take him by violence from that place, 
and then kill him : for Exod. 21. 14. doth not command the Ruler 
to killthe Murderer there, but to remove him thence. to rake him 
from the Altar, that he may die. And ſcing this might be done, why 
!hould Solomon unneceffarily ſtain the Altar with his Blood ? y 5. e. 
Both the Guilt of it, which would reſt upon my Fathers and my 
Family, if it went unpuniſhed ; and the ſcandal and reproach of ity 
that neither this, nor following Ages may imagine that it was done 
by Davids ſecret inſtigation, or with his conſent. 

32 And the LORD ſhall return his blood z upon his 
own head, who fell upon twomen more righteous and 
better than he «, and ſlew them with the ſword, my 


father David not knowing thereof, to wit, * Abner the fon 


Chap. 1 


[hank would not poljute the altar without neceſlity ; and from 


died. 


e For the Execution of Juſtice was not then committed to ob- 
ſcure Perſons, as now it is; but to Perſons of great Honour and 


of Ner, captain of the hoſt of Ifracl, and * Amaſa the * 2 Sam: 
{on ef Jether, captain of the hoſt of Judah. 3 =p 
zi e, The guilt of the Blood which he ſhed. a Of more in- _? 


FE 1 
az. - 


& Heb. 
s man of 
deaths 


* 1 Fam: 
22: 20; 


* Fam; 2; 
31, 35» 


bp 


\ 


Authority. See Judges 8; 21: 1 Sam; 22; 18: 2 Sam: 1: 15: and 4: 
12. f With a Sword, | or other Inſtrument of Death ; as below, 
Perſe 32, 34, 46- 

26 C And unto Abiathar the prieſt ſaid the king, 


Get thee to Anathoth g unto thine own fields b, for 
thou art | worthy of death : but I will notat this time z 
put thee to death, becauſe thou bareſt the ark of the 
LOR ÞD God before David my father &, and becauſe 
* thou haſt been afflicted in all wherein my father was 
afflicted I. | 

g A City of the Prieſts, Joſh; 21: 18: to lead a private Life there. 
þ Either that part of the Suburbs which fell ro his ſhare : or, other 
Land which he had purchaſed there. S ce Fer: 32:7. # He doth not 
fully pardon him, bur only forbears him, and reſerves to himſelfa 
liberty of puniſhing him afterwards, if he ſaw occaſion ; which 
he doth to keep him in awe, that he might. not dare to raiſe or 
foment Diſcontents or Tumults among the people, which otherwiſe 
he might be prone to do k When he thought fit to carry it out 
with him ; as 2 Sam: 15 :24, 29- I Chron: 15: 1i, 12. when he as High- 

rieſt wasto attend upon it. Thus Solomon ſheweth his reſpe& to 
bis Sacred Fun&ion. # Here he mixeth Mercy with Juſtice, and 
requites Abiathars former kindneſs to David; hereby teaching princes, 
that they ſhould not write Injuries in Marble, and Benefits un Sand 
or Water, as they have been too oft obſerved to do. 

27 So Solomon thruſt our Abiathar from being prieſt 
unto the LORD » ; chat he mighr *fulfil the word of 
the LORD », which he ſpake concerning the houſe of 
Eli o in Shiloh. 

m Either from his Office ; or, at leaſt, from the Execution of 
his Office For ſome think that he was thruit from his Office be- 
fore Davids Death, when Zadok was formerly made prieſt ; 1. e: 
High-prieſt in his ſtead, 1 Chrow 29: 22. Bur tharicems to be a 
miſtake : For although that paſſage immediately follows the Hiſtory 
of what was done in the time of Davids Life and Health, when he 
was in a capacity of going into the publick Congregation ; yet it 
manifeſtly belongs to another time, and was done afrer,it : bor he 
there ſpeaks of Sol:mons being made King the ſecond time, and he was 
made King but twice ; once undoubredly before this, 1 Chron 23: 1: 
and again, 4 Kings 1: 39. When David was Bedrid, and Adonijahs 
Uſurpation madea ſecond. .Un&ftion neceſſary. And therefore what 
is ſaid, 1 Ghrow: 29: 22: of Zadeks being made prieſt, was done, 
after Abiathars Depoſition, and upon that occaſion. » tor what 
hinders bur Solon might intend this not only as a puniſhment for 
his Treaſon, butalſo as a means to accompliſh Gods Word ? 0 i.e. 
Concerning the Tranſlation of the Prieſthood from the Houſe of 
Eli, and of thamar, unto that of Eleazar : which being threatned 80 
years ago, is now Executed. So Divine Vengeance, though ſome- 
Times it be flow, is always ſure. 

28 4 Then tidings p came to Joab, ( for Joab had 
turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Abſa- 
lom) and Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the LORD g, 
and caught hold on the horns of the altar r. 

Þ Concerning Adonijahs Death, and Abiathars Depoſition. q Which 
then was at Gibeon, 1 Kings; 3. 4. compared with 2 Chron, 1. 3. 5+ 
r Of which ſee before, Chap. 1. 50. 

29 And it was told King Solomon that Joab was fled 
unto the tabernacle of the LORD, and behold, 4e # 
by the altar : then Solomon ſent Benaiah the ſon of 
Jehoiada, ſaying, Go, fall upon kim 5. 

s To wit, ifhe will not come thence, as I foreſee he will not? 

39 And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the 
LORD, and ſaid unto him, Thus ſaith the king, Come 
forth 7. Andheſaid, Nay, but I will die here #. And 
Benaiah brought the king word again, ſ:ying, Thus ſaid 
Joab, and thus he anſwered me. 

_ + That the King gave him this Command, though it be riot men- 
tioned before, x5 evident, both from the nature of the thing ; for 


genuous and generous Tempers, abhorring from all ſuch Treache- 
rous praftices, and bothof them'then devored to, and employed 
in my Service. 


but upon David and upon his ſeed, and upon his houſe, 
and upon his throne, ſhall there be peace for ever from 
che LOR Dc. 


b Either as long as he ſhall have a Poſterity ; or, for a long time : 
as that phraſe is commonly uſed. c In, and by this Execution of 
Juſtice upon him, and ſuch Malefattors, my Throne ball be eſta= 
bliſhed, and God will bleſs me, and mine, with Peace and Pro- 
ſperity. | , 

34 So Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada went up, and fell 
upon him, and flew him, and he was buried in his own 
houſe in the wilderneſs d. p 

d Places which have but few Houſes and Inhabitants, are oft ſo 
called in Scripture 3 asz Iſa. 42.11. Jer. 25, 24. Exek. 34: 25. 

35 4 And the King put Benaiah che ſon of Jehoiada 
in his room over the hoſt, and Zadok the prieſt did che 
King put in the room of Abjathar e. 

e He now put him in the execution of that Office, to which he 
may ſeem to have been Anointed before, 1 Chron. 29. 22, But of 
that, ſee my Notes here on v. 27. 


36 q 


dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither f. 

f This Solomen ordered, partly, for his own ſecurity ; that being 
removed from that place where his Kindred, and Ettate, and In- 
tereſt lay, to a place where he was bur a ſtranger, and fufficiently 
odious for his former, and never-to-be-torgotten Inſolency towards 
his Lord and King, he might be uncapable of railuig any Tumults- 
and Seditions 3 partly, as a penalty for his former Wickedneſs 
wherein yet there was more Mercy than Juſtice, and from which 
David had not promiſed him any ſecurity, but only given him his 
Life3 and partly, Thar being in this publick Theatre, all his Words, 
and Attions might be nar; owly obſerved; which, conſidering his: 
buſie, and coverous, and wicked Temper, was likely to give Solomoz 
the advantage which he ſought for ; aad this very Prohibition would 
wap inflame his deſire of Tranſgrefling it, as the manner of : 
EN IS. 

37 For it ſhall be, that on the day thou goeſt out, 
and paſleſt over the * brook Kidron g, thou ſhalt know $ 
for certain, that thou fhalc ſurely die : thy biood (hall 
bs upon thine own head þ. * -#% 

g A Brook nigh unto Jeruſalem, of which ſee 2 Sam. 15. £3. 
2 Kings 23. 4. Which he particularly. names, becauſe that was 'the 
way to Baburim, his former and ſetried Habitation : bur this is nor 
to be underſtood excluſively to other ways and places; for the 
reſtraint was general. that he ſhould mot go forth thence any whither, 
v- 36. rowit, as far any other way as Cearon was ; which aiſoappears 
from the following Hiſtory 3 for when he went to Gath, he wehr 
not over Cedron, (. which lay. Eaitward from the City ) but Weſtz 
ward, as Gath lay. þ The blame and guilt of thy Blood ſhall he 
upon thy ſelf only. __ HEE 

38 And Shimei ſaid unto the King, The faying is 
good 3: as my lord the king hath ſaid, fo will thy fervant 
do k. And Shimei dwelt in Jeruſalem many days. 

i Thy Sentence is muck more merciful than I expe&ed, or de- 
ſerved. k And Shizzei did not only promilc it, but alſo fwore toirt ; 
being required by Solomon ta doo, as is manifeſt from were 42, 
43- Rh | : | 
39 And it came to paſs at the end of three years, 
thar ewoo the ſervants of Shimeiran away unro Achifh 
ſon of Maachah king of Gath /,' and chey told Shumei, 


faying, Beliold, thy ſervants be in Gath, 


\ — © nail 


z F14 I A 


33 Their blood therefore ſhall return * upen the * 2 Sam. 
head of Joab, and upon the head of his ſeed for ever b: 3. 29- 


nd the king ſent, and called for * Shimei, and * > Saw 
ſaid unto him, Build thee an houſe in Jeruſalem, and 36+ 5+ 


hap. IIL 


[. 


1 A King, but ſubje& and tributary, firſt to David and then to 
RY his els bh, either that Achiſh who ſhewed ſo much 
kindneſs to David, « Sam: 27: and 28. or his Son 5 who, in requital 
of this kindneſs was ſtill permitted to enjoy the Title and Honour 
ofa King, but not the- full Power ; whence it was, 
not, or durſt not keep theſe Servants, though they had fled to him 
for Prote&ion ; but ſuffered Shime: to take them away from hs 
Royal City. ; : 

49 And Shimei aroſe, and ſadled his aſs, and went 
to Gath m, to Achiſh, to ſeek his ſervants : and Shime1 
went and brought his ſervants from Gath. 

»» Which, though highly dangerous, he attempted, pry: be= 
cauſe he was blinded with Covetouſneſs and Rage againſt his Ser- 
vants, which two Luſts have done, and daily do engage Men to 
ſuch Courſes and A&ions as are no lefs dangerous to their lives 
than this is ; partly, becauſe he thought length of time had worn 
this out of Solomens mind, and other Mens thoughts : and that this 
being done ſecretly and ſpeedily, would never have come to Solo= 
mon. Ears ; or that Solomon would not be ſevere in this Caſe, where 
it was not wantonneſs nor contempt of his Authority, but the 


| neceflity of his H»uſhold=concerns, which put him upon it : And 


*, Coron: 


#- 


artly, becauſe God withdrew from him the light of common Pru- 
ence and wholly left him to his own Miſtakes, and Folly, and 
Luſfts; and withal, to the Inſtigation of the Devil, whoſe cunning 
and powerful Artiſices, and Infinuations he could not reſiſt, without 


Divine help? _ 
gong And it was told Solomon », that Shimei had 


gone from Jeruſalem to Gath, and was come back 
again. 

i Who doubtleſs had his Spies appointed, to obſerve him in all 
his Motions. 


42 And the king ſent and called for Shimei, and ſaid 
unto him, Did I not make thee to ſwear by the LORD, 
and proteſted unto thee, ſaying, Know for a cercain, 


that on the day thou goeſt out, and walkeſt abroad any. 


whither, that thou ſhalt ſurely die? And thou fſaidſt unto 
me, The word that I have heard zs good. 

Why then haſt thou not kept the oath of the 
LORD, and the commandment that 1 have charged 


thee with o ? | 

o He was guilty both of Rebellion againſt the expreſs, and juſt, 
and ( as himſelf called it} good Command of the King, and of 
Perjury againſt Gog,: which were two high and hainous Crimes. 
His Oath, he calls :h*Oath of the Lord, becauſe it wastaken in Gods 
Preſence, and he was called upon as witneſs of it, and as the A- 
venger of all Violations of it, and becauſe the Law of God obliged 
him to the performance of it. AY 

44 The king ſaid moreover to Shimei, Thou knoweſt 
all the wickedneſs which thine heart is privy to p, that 
thou Gidfſt to David my father : therefore the LORD 


ſhall return q tky wickedneſs upon thine own head. 

p For which thy own Conſcience accuſerh thee, and there is no 
need of other Witneſſes. 9q Heb. hath returned, which ſeems moſt 
proper- God hath puniſhed thee for thy former Wickednels, by 
{uffering thee to fall into further Crimes, and expole thy 1eltto thy 
deſerved Death. 


45 And king Solomon ſhall be bleſſed, and the throne 
of David r ſhall be eſtabliſhed s before the LORD * for 


EVCET. 

7 That Royal Power and Dignity conferred upon David to him 
and his Heirs for ever- 5 By the execution of ſuch Righteous 
Judgmenrs as this is. * In the preſence of that God, who is both 
an Obſerver and Rewarder of all ſuch Righteous AQions: or, under 
Gods inſpe&ion, and by his Bleſſing. ; 

46 So the king commanded Benaiah the ſon of Je- 
hoiadzh, which went out #, and fell upon him that he 
died: and the * kingdom was eſtabliſhed in the hand of 
Solomon x, 

Carrying Shimei along with him to the place of Execution, 
which was not fit to be 4in the Kings Preſence. x His ſecret and 
worſt Enemies being taken out of the way+ 


CIS AP. IL 


Solamon marrieth Pharaohs Daughter : High Places being in uſe, he goeth to 
Gibeon to Sacrifice, 1, - 4. There the Lord appeareth to him: 
Gives, -him a choice ; He preferreth Wiſdom : Obtaineth it, and alſo 

* Riches and Honour, 5, ——— 15. His Judgment between the two Harlots, 

> "16, — 28, | 

> N D * Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king 
A. of Egypt «4, and took Pharaohs daughter 6b, and 
bropght her into the city of David c, until he had 


made an end of building his own houſe, and the houſe 


_ of the LORD J, and the * wall of Jeruſalem round 
* about e. 


a As being a powerful neighbour. b5 Upon what conditions is 
not here. expreſſed : but it is probable, ſhe was firſt Inſtrufted in, 
and Profelyted to the Jewiſh Religion 3 as may-be gathered, 1. Be- 
cauſe he was not yet fallen from God, but loved the Lord, and 
walked. in the ſtatutes of David, v. 3. And therefore would never 
have married a groſs Idolater, which was ſo contrary to Gods Law, 
and ſo pernicious in its Conſequences. 2. Becauſe he is no where 
reproved for this FaQ, as he is for louing many other Frange women, 
z-Kings 11: 1.3. By comparing Pſal. 45. and the Book of Canticles : 
whereby it plainly appears, that this Aftion had ſomething extra- 
ordinary in it, and wes deſign'd by God to be a Type of Chriſt, 
calling his Church to himſelf, and to the true Religiog, not only 
out «f rhe Jews but even-our of the Gentile World: e Of which, 
ſee Chap. 24, ro Into Davids Palace there: &d 5 e. The Temple 
appropriated to the Worſhip and; Honour of God. e Which though 
in ſome fort bujltby David, 


K I N G S. 


that Achiſh could ' 


2. Sam. 5.9. yet Solomon 15 here ſaid to , 


Build, either becauſe he made it higher, and ſtronger, and more 
beautiful, and glorious 3 in which, or thelike ſenſe Nebuchadnezzar 
is faid to have built Babylon, Dan, 4. 30. or becauſe he built another 
Wall beſides the former, for greater ſecuriry ; for after this time 
Feruſalew was encompaſſed with more Walls than one. 


2 * Only -. the people ſacrificed in high places f, + 
becauſe there was no houſe g built unto the name of the ; 


LORD + until thoſe days. 


Wy This Particle is uſed here, and w« 3: asan Exception to Sole. 
mon $ Integrity and Glory, and as his infirmity, and a blemiſh to 
his Government, That. he himſelf both permitted and praQtiſed this 
which was expreſly forbidden, Levit. 17. 3, 4. Dewt. 12. 13, I4. Cx 
cept in ſome extraordinary caſes. Poſſibly he permitted it, becauſe 
he thought it better to allow an Error in a Circumſtance, than to 
occaſion a neglet of the Subſtance of God's Worſhip, which he 
apprehended would follow upon a ſevere Prohibition of thatpraQice 
becauſe the peoples Hearts were generally and conſtantly ſer upon 
theſe high Places, as appears from all the following Hiſtory ; and 
they were not willing to ſubmit to ſo much trouble and charge as 
the bringing of all their Sacrifices to one place would cauſe ; nor 
wowld yield to it uatil the Temple was built, which he knew 
would eaſily encline and oblige them to it ; and thar being ſpeedily 
to be done, he might think it more adviſeable, rather to delay the 
Execution of that Law of God for an approaching Seaſon, wherein 
he doubted not, they would be ſweetly and freely drawn to it than 
at preſent to drive them to it by force. Although theſe and all 
other prudential Conſiderations thould have given place to the Will 
and Wiſdom of God. f Which were Groves, or other convenient 
places upon Hills, in which the Patriarchs uſed to offer up their 
Worſhip and Sacrifices to God ; and from them this Cuſtom was 
derived both to the Gentiles and the Jews : and in them the Gentiles 
Sacrificed to Idols, Jer. 7.31. Ezck. 6; 3, 4. Hoſ. 10. 8: the Hebrews 
ro the True God, g Which reaſon was not ſufficient, for there 
was a Tabernacle, to which they were as much confined asto the 
Temple, Deur. 12, &c. k Either» 1. To the Lord, the Name of the 
Lord being oft put for the Lord himſelf, as Deue. 28. 58. Job 1, 21. 
Pſal. 7.17. and 116. 13 and 135. i. Or, 2. To the Honour and 
Praiſe, and Service of God; to the Glory ofhis Name ; #. e, of his 
-ah and all his PerfeQtions, which ſhall be adored and manifeſted 
there, 

3 And i Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the 
ſtatutes of David & his father ; only he ſacrificed and 
burnt incenſe in high places, 

; Or, yet, although he miſtook, and miſcarried himſelf in the 
matter of High Places, yetin the general, his Heart was right with 
God, and he both loved him with inward Aﬀection, and walked with 
him in outward Converſation and Worſhip. ki.e. According to 
the Statutes or Commands of God, which are here called the ftatutes 
of David; not only becauſe they were to freely choſen, and heartily 
loved, and diligently practited by David, bur alſo becauſe the 
obſervation of them was ſo earneſtly preſſed upon Solomon, and 
fortified with Davids Authority and Command. See 1 Kings 2.2, 3, 4» 
and 1 Chron. 28. 8,9. 

4 And the king went to Gibeon to ſacrifice there 
for that was the great high place / : a thouſand burnt- 
offerings did Solomon ofter upon that altar m. 

| The moſt eminent and frequented becauſe there was the Ta« 
bernacle, and the altar of M:ſes, 1 Chron. 16. 39. and 21 29. And 
2 Chron, 1.3, 5, 6. which poſſibly were placed upon an high or rai- 
ſed Ground, m Thereby ſbewing his ſpecial retpect to this above 
all other places; and by his Example teaching and inviting all his 
People to do ſos 


5 4 In Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solcmon in 
a dream z by night : and God faid o, Ask what 1 ſhall 
give thee. 

z Queſt. How could Solomon pray in his Dream, or that prayer be 
aCceptable ro God, as this was, v. 19 ? Anj. The Dreams of Men 
are not ſuch inſignificant things as many imagine. That good 
Dreams are oftentimes praiſe-worthy, and evil Dreams blame-wor= 
thy, is not only the opinion of the Jews and Chr:ians, but of dis 
vers of the wiſer and better Heathens; and the reaſon hereof is e= 
vident, becauſe Mens Dreams are commonly the Images of their 
Minds and Tempers, and do only reflect and repreſent, though but 
faintly and imperfectly, thoſe very things which are moſt imprinted 
upon their hearts by their waking Meditations, and daily Converſa« 
tion ; and therefore it is not unreaſonable, that eithey the ſinfub 
Dreams of evil-minded Men ſhould be imputed to them, and pu« 
niſhed in them, or the virtuous Dreams of good Men imputed to, 


-and Rewarded in them ; which was Selomons caſe : for his Heart 


having been daily and conſtantly imployed in paſſionate longings 
and prayers for the Wiſdom, which here he begs; it wasa natural 
and likely thing that his heart ſhould, as it did, work that way. 


.evenin his Dreams. Although, to ſpeak truly and ſtrictly, Solomons 


prayer made in his Dream, would have been no way pleating to 
God, nor profitable to himſelf, if it had not been the reſult ot his 


daily and moſt ſerious praftice 3 and though God ſignified his mind 
'in a Dream, yet it was Solomons waking Prayers ( which were 


. ſhadowed by this dark repreſentation ), which God accepted and 


requited 3 and this acceptance of God: was ſignified to him in-an 
extraordinary manner, and by a Divine Dream, which: was one of 
thoſe ways whereby God oft uſed to communicate his Will to his 
Prophets and People. So the whole buſineſs lies thus :. Solomon 
dreamed that God bid himask what he would, 1 Kings 3. 5. and that 
he did asck Wiſdom, wv. 6, &c. and that God accepted his deſire, 
V. 10s. and gave him that gracious anſwer, v.11, &c, Andallthis 
was done in a dream, but with. this difference ;. Solomons prayer 
was but imaginary, but Gods anſwer was real, though conveyed'in 
a dream, And when he awoke, he knew by divine Inſpiration that 
this was a dream ſent from God. to afſure him that he would give 
him Wiſdom, and Riches, and Honour, and this with reſpect unta 
his frequent, conſtant, and fervent waking deſires, which his dream 
of his Prayers did ſufhciently.intimate, See more on wv. 6. 07, 6 He 


+ dreamed that God ſaid fo. 


6 And Solomon faid p, Thou haſt ſhewed m_ 
ny, 


by Chrogs 
32 17, 


©, 


Chap. 111, 5 # hap 


f Hel 
many d 


f Hel 


tt hea 


ah 


ot 7 hy. -»hd 


F hap. Il: 


Or, 


hownt)e 


# 2 Chro; 


I, 10. 
{Heby 
heart . 


f Heb. 


many days. 


| Heb. 


tt hear, 


_ thy ſervant king inſtead of David my father : 


| all the*parts of my duty : for both theſe are ſpoken of in Scripture, 


E-* 6 # 
thy ſervant David my father great ||mercy, according as 
he walked before thee in truth q, and in righteouſneſs, 
and in uprightneſs of heart with thee r, and thou haſt 
kept / for him this great kindneſs, that thou haft given 
him a fon to ſit on his throne, as zt is this day, —__. 
? i- e» He dreamed that he ſaid. See on v. 5. Or, he really 
ſaid, For although the uſe of reaſon is ordinarly ſo dark and im- 
perfe& in Dreams, that ſuch aQings arenot human ations 3 yet 
in extraordinary and Divine Dreams it is but reaſonable to allow 
ſomething extraordinary. For who can doubt but God may ſo 
clear up and aſſiſt a Mans reaſon in his Dream, that he may have a 
true and ſtrong apprehenſion of fome things, which alſo may make 
a ſuitable impreſſion upon the will or affections 3 and conſequent!y 
ſuch a&s of the Soul may be moral a&s and regardable by God and 
Men ? And this might bea kind of extatical rapture, whereby his 


*Soul might be as it were carried out of his Body, as St. Pauls was, 


2 Cor. 12- 3. for a ſeaſon, in which caſe both his reaſon mighr 
clearly and diſtin&ly apprehend Gods mind, and his gracious offer ; 
and his Will might make a free choice of Wiſdom 3 which therefore 


.might be accepted and Rewarded by God. 9 Either, Firſt, Sincere- 


ly, and without diſfimulation. But that is more fully expretled 
in the following words, in uprightneſs of hear:. Or rather, Secondly, 
in the True Worſhip and Service of God, in the profeſſion, belief, 
praQiice and defence of the Truth, or of the true Religion, or of 
Gods Will or Word, which is called Truth, Prov: 23: 23: John 17:17: 
Gal: 3:1. So Truth here contains all his duties to God, as Righteouſ- 
neſs doth his duties ro Men, and Uprightneſs the right manner of 
performing both ſorrs of duties 7 i.e. In thy Judgment, ro whom 
alone his heart was known, and to whom he oft appealed as the 
wit:.eſs of his Integrity ; and with reſpe& to whom he performed 
all his duties, even to Men- / Or, reſerved ; that which thou didi} 
not reſerve for Saul, whoſe Poſterity thou didfſt cut off from the 
Kingdom. | 

7 And now, O LORD my God, thou haſt made 


and ] 
am but a little child s : I know not how to gorout or 
COmL 1n #. 

s So he was in Years : not as if he were now but twelve Years 
old, as many gather from this name of Child ; for that name is 
given to Iſhmael, when 18 Years old, Gen: 213 14, 15. and to 
Rehoboam 'when 41 Years old, 2 Chron: 13: 7: where the word is the 
fame in the Hebrew : and before this time David calls him a Wiſe 
Man, Chap; 2: 9: but he was now not above 20 Years old; and withal 
( which he principally intends ) _ he was raw and unexperienced, 
asa Child, in State Affairs, and alrogether unfit for ſo hard a task. 
t i.e To govern my People, and manage Affairs ; as that Phraſe 
ſignifies. Num: 27: 17; Dent: 31: 2 Joſ: 14; 17. | 

8 And thy ſervant # in the midſt of thy people « 
whieh thou haſt choſen x, a great people, that cannot 
be numbred, nor counted for multicude. 

% 1. e: Is ſet over them to rule and guide them, A Metaphor 
from the Overſeer of divers Workmen, who uſually is in the midſt 
of them, that he may the better obſerve how each of them diſ- 
chargeth his office. : Thy peculiar People, whom thou takeſt 
ſpecial care of, and therefore wiltſt expe&t a more punQual ac- 
count of my Government of them. 

9 * Give therefore thy ſervant an + underſtanding 


heart z to judge & thy people, that I may diſcern between 
good and bad « : for who is able þto judge this ſo great 
a p=ople ? | 

5 Whereby I may both clearly diſcern, and ffithfully perform 


as the effets of a good Underſitan:iling ; and he thar, lives in the 
negle& of his Duties, or the prattice of Wickedneſs, is called a F.ol, 
and one void of Underſtanding. 2 Or, govern, as that word is uſed, 
Judges 3: 10; and 4:4: Pſal: 7:8: and 67. 4: Iſa: 2: 4:and16.5. a To 
wit, in Cauſes and Controverſies among my people ; that I may nor 
through miſtakes, or prejudices, or paſſions, give wrong Sentences, 
and call evil good, or good evil. b Of himſelf, or withour thy graci- 
ous aſſiſtance. 

Io And the ſpeech pleaſed the LORDe, that Solomon 
had asked chis ching. 


c How ſuch adreaming Prayer could pleaſe God, ſee in the Notes 
en v. 5, and 6. 


11 And God faid unto him, Becauſe thou haſt asked 
this thing, and haſt not asked for thy ſelf + long life, 
neither haſt asked riches for thy ſelf, nor haſt asked the 
life of thine enemies «4, but haſt asked for thy fe! 
underſtanding Þ to diſcern judgment ; 


4 That God would take away their lives, or put them into thy 
power to deſtroy them. 


I2 Behold, I have done according tothy word e: lo, 
I have given thee a wiſe and an underſtanding heart f, 
ſo that there was none g like thee before thee, neither 
after thee ſhall any ariſe like unto thee .*.. 
e I have granted, and do at this preſent grant unto thee thy de- 
fire. And accordingly at this time God did infuſe into him a far 
higher degree, and greater meaſure of Wiſdom than he naturally 
had. F i.e. Wiſdom to govern thy people, to know and do thy ſe- 
veral Duties ; which was the thing that Solemon deſired, v- 7, 9. and 
the effets whereof here follow, v. 16, &c, and withal, all Divine and 
Humane Wiſdom, the Knowledge of all Things, of all the Arts and 
SCIENCES as may be gathered from 1 Kings 4. 29, &c. and that in a 
far greater proportion than by his years, and the time he could 
get for his ſtudy, could poſſibly produce. g Either, no King : or ra- 
ther, no Man : for he is herein preferred not only before all Kings, 
bur before al men, chap. 4. 31. nomeer Man lince the Fall equalled, 
im, to wit, in univerſal Knowledge, and eſpecially inthe Art of 
well-governing his People. .*. Que#. Did not the Apoſtles excel 
him? Ai. They did notin Natural and Political Knowledge, 
bur only in the Knowledge of the Myſteries of Faith, which were | 


. 


[30 : 


more freely and more fully imparted in thoſe Times ; the ignorance 
whereof was no diſparagement to Solomons Wiſdom, becauſe they 
were not diſcoverable by any Creature without Divine Revelation, 
which God ſaw fir not to afferd in Solomons time. I know no in= 
convenience in affirming that So/omons natural Capacities were higher 
than any of the Apoſtles ; and Sol:mon had a more comprehenſive 
Knowledge cf all things known in that Age, than the Apoſtles had 
in a!l the Diſcoveries of their Age. PEEL | 

13 And 1 have alſo * given þ thee thac which thou 
haſt not asked, both riches and henour, ſo that there 


[| (hall not be 3 any among the Kings like unto thee all 
thy days k. 

 hEirher, Firſt, I have granted and decreed to give: for words 
ſignifying ation, are oft pur only for the purpoſe of the ation. Or 
rather, Secondly, 1will give, as it is expretſcd in the Parallel place, 
2 Chron, 1. 12. 1 will as certainly give them, as if I had attually 
done it ;. for futuye certain things are oft exprefled in Scripture in 
the paſt time, as is well known to all. 7 Soit is true of all the ſuc« 
ceeding Kings of Iſrael, of whom he ſpeaks: Or hath not been, ay 
It 1s in the Hebrew : and ſo it may be true of all the Kings that then 
were or had been in the World, whereof none was like to himy 
to wit. 1n all the things here mentioned, and wherein he is compa« 
red with them, which isnot only in Riches, but alſo in Wiſdom, 
and in Honour or Renown. & To wit, of thy Life. Whereby he 
ſignifies, that theſe Gifts of God were not temporary and tranhenty 


" _y were 1n Saul, but ſuch as ſhould abide with him whilſt he 
ived. 


bs And if thou wilt walk in my ways 1, to keep 
my ſta 


David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days. 

{ This Caution God gives him, leſt his great Wiſdom ſhould make 
him proud, or careleſs, or preſumptuous, as if he were out of all 
danger; and tooblige him to more care and circumſpe&ion to avoid 
the ſnares and miſchiefs to which ſo much proſperity and glor 
would probably expoſe him ; and withal to juſtitie himſelf in caſe 
he ſhould afterwards alter the courſe of his Providence towards 
Solomon ; and that, when Men are ſurprized with Selomoas dread= 
ful fall, they might know, it was no ſurpriſal ro God , bur that he 
wr foreſce it, and would over-rule it to Lis own Glory one way or 
OTNETe ; 


I5 And Solomon awoke, and behold, is was a 
dream 2} and he came co Jeruſalem, and ſtood before 
the ark of the covenant of the LORD », and offered 
up burnt-offerings o, and offered peace-offeringsp, and 
made a feaſt to all his ſervants, | 


” i.e. He perceived that it was a Dream 3 not a vain Dream, 
wherewith Men are commonly detuded ; but a Divine Dream, af- 
{juring him of the thing : which he knew, partly, by a Divine Im- 
preſſion and Inſpiration thereof in his mind after he was awakened : 
and partly, by the vaſt alteration which he preſently found within 
himielf in point of Wiſdom 2nd Knowledge. » Which was there 
in the Ciry of David, 2 Sam.6. 17. before which he preſented him= 
ſelf in way of holy Miniftrationand Adoration, which may be noted 
by the word, ſt-0d. Or, that word may note his abode there for 
ſome conſiderable time,as the offering ot ſo many Sacrifices required. 
o Chiefly for the expiation of his and his peoples Sin, through the 
Blood of Chriſt; manifeſtly ſignified in theſe Sacrifhices. p Solemn« 
ly to praiſe God for all his Mercies, and eſpecially for giving him 
a quier and fixed poſſeſſion of the Kingdom, and for his glorious 
Appearance to himin a Dream, and for the great promiſe therein 
made to him, and the aCtual accompliſhment of it ſince wrought in 


him, 


16 © Then came there two women that were harlots 


4, unto the king r, and ſtood there before him 
q Or, Vifuallers : for the Hebrew word ſignifies both. See on 
Jeſþ. 2. i. And poſlibly they might be both, this by their open 
profeſſion, and the other by their ſecret praftice: not that they 
were common Harlots ; for neither would Solomon have tolerated 
ſuch ; nor durſt ſuch have preſented themſelves. before ſo wiſe and 
juſt a Ruler 3 nor do ſuch uſe either to bring forth Children, or ta 
have ſuch ,a tender care of, and affection to them as theſe expreſs. 
Yet that they were unmarried perſons,and ſo guilty of Fornication, 
ſeems moſt probable, both becauſe there is no mention of any Huſ- 
bands, whote office it was, if there were any ſuch, ro conteſt fot 
their Wives ; and becauſe they lived a ſolitary Life in one Houſe. 
r Haply they had preſented their Cauſe to the Inferior Courts who 
could not determine ; and therefore now they bring it to the King, 
as the Supreme Magiſtrate, and famous for his Wiſdom. { Deſiring 
and expecting his Sentence in the Caſe. 
17 And theone woman ſaid, O my lord, I and this 
woman dwell im one houſe, and I was delivered of 4 
child wich her in the houſe. | 
18 And it came to paſs the third day * after that F 
was delivered, that this woman was delivered alſo :and 
we were together ; there was no ſtranger with us in the 
houſe «, ſave we two in the houſe. pet | 
t So they could not be diſtinguiſhed by their Age, « Therefore 
no Witneis on either ſide: and although there might be ſome ſenſt- 
ble difference to an exact Obſerver berween the Features of the twa 
Children ; yer it is not probable that was much minded by the 
Neighbours: for though civil Women might affiſt them both in their 
Chi)d-births yet it is not likely they would afterwards converſe 
much with them, as being Perſons of ſuſpected Fame, and the 
Features of the children, eipecially for ſo few days, might eaſily be 
ſo like, that it was difficult to ditcern the one from the other. An 
the Teſtimonies of the Women were of equalcredit, z. e. of none 
at all. 

19 And this womans child died in the night, becauſe 
ſhe overlaid it x. So | 

x And ſo ſmothered it : which ſhe juſtly conjectures, becauſe 
there were evidences of thar kind of death, but no appearance of 


any other cauſe thereof. | ” 
3 F4 70 Ad 


PEE _— 


* Matth. | 


6.-33- [I 
|| Or, hath! 
net been; | 


Chap. 11 


tutes, and my commandments, * as thy father * Chap. 


gu 


# 
f 
g 
þ 
} 


hap. IV. I. 


209 And ſhe aroſe at midnight 5, and took my ſon 
from, beſide me z, while thine handmaid ſlept 4, and 
laid it in her boſome, and laid her dead child in my 
boſome. 

' 3 When I was aleep, as ſhe reaſonably and truly concluded- 
% Either, becauſe ſhe really deſired the comfort of a Child, ro be 
educated by her, and owned as hers: or, becauſe ſhe would not 
be.thought guilty of the Child's death, for whichſhe knew not how 
r ſeverely S%omon would puniſh her- + As ſhe might well know, 
becauſe had ſhe been awake, ſhe had diſcovered and prevented her 
d: deſign. : Oo * . of 

21 And whenlT roſe inthe morning to give my child 

" ſuck, behold it was dead : but when I had conſidered 
it in the morning, behold, it was not my ſon, which 1 
did bear. ; L; 

22 And the other woman ſaid, Nay, butthe living 
is myſon, and the dead 3s thy ſon : and this ſaid, No ; 


"they ſpake before the king 5. | 
v b Goth peremptorily and vehemently affirmed the ſame thing, oft 


ing the ſame words. 
O02 Than faidthe king, The one ſaith, This ;s my ſon 
that liveth, and thy ſon ;s the dead : and the other faith, 
Nay ; but thy ſons the dead, and my ſonisthe living. 
24 Andithe king ſaid, Bring me a ſword : and they 
brought a ſword before the-king. 'H * 
25 And the king ſaid c, Divide the living child in 
two, and give half tothe one, and half to the other. 
c With ſeeming ſincerity and earneſtly, though with a deſign far 
above the reach of the rwo Women,oc of the People preſent, who 
probably with admiration and horror expeCed the execution of 


* Hoſ. 
ns. 8. 
+f Heb. 


were hot, 


as, 'unto the king, ( for * her bowels + yerned upon 
ber ſon ) and ſhe Pad, O my lord, give her the living 
child, and in no wiſe ſlay it: but the other ſaid, Let 
it be neither mine nor thine, but divide 3. 

27 Then the king anſwered and ſaid, Give her the 
living child, and in no wiſe lay it : ſhe js the mother 
thereof 4. | 

d As is evident from her Natural and Motherly Aﬀe&tion to the 
Child, which ſhe had rather have alienated and given away from 
her, than deſtroyed. 


- 


28 And 1 Hae! beard of the judgment which the 


+ Heb. ſaw thatthe wiſdom of God e was | in him to do judg- 
inthemidſt ment f. | | 

of him, e Lither, great and eminent Wiſdom, as the Cedars or mountains of 
| ' _ Godare the higheſt and moſt eminent of the kind: or, Divine Wit 
dom, with which God had inſpired him for the bettesgovernment 


Determining the Cauſes and Controverſies of his People. 
CHA FT. IV. 


Solomons chief Princes, 1, 6. And Officers for proviſion, 7,— 19. The 
peace and largeneſs of his Kingdom, 20, 21. Hu daily proviſion for his 
Court, 22, 25. The ſtables for his Horſes, 26, 28. His 
wiſdom, 29, 34. 


CG O King Solomon was king over all Iſrael a. 


a This is ſpoken with reſpe& to his Succeſſors, who were 
Kingsonly overa part, and thatthe ſmalleſt part of it. Or, in refer- 
ence to the times of Diviſion and Rebellion under David ; when part 
went after David, and part after Iſbboſbeth ; or part after Abſalom or 

' Sheba, or Adonijah : but now all 1rael were united under Solomon, and 
adhered ro him. not only.a part ofthem ; eſpecially ſince the death 
of Adonijab and Joab ( who may be ſuſpeted to have watched an 
opportunity, of revolting, ) and the continement of Ab:athar, and of 
Shimei ( ifnot his deathalſo ) who could now have Jittle orno Intereſt 
or opportuniry ofſetting up a party againſt Solomon (their Principals 
being taken away, .to whom they were but Accellaries ; ) nor, in 
probability, , any Deſign to attempt it. - 

2 And theſe were the princes which he had b, Aza- 


{| Or, the riah the ſon c of Zadok 4, || the prieſt e. 
chief officer. þ.j. e.: The chief Rulers or Officers belonging to him. « Or, the 
Grand-ſon, by comparing this with 1 Chren. 6.8, 9. 4d Either Za- 
dok the Prieſt, x Chron. 6. 8, 9. or ſome other of that name. e So 
he was the ſecond Prieſt, or the Prieſt that attended upon Solomons 
Perſon in holy Offices and Adminiſtrations. But when this Sacred 
Writer profetleth to give an account of Selomons Princes, why ſhould 
he put the ſecond prieſt. or Solomons Domeſtick prieſt, in the firſt 
place ? Or, why ſhould he be mentioned diſtinaly from his Fa- 
ther, who was goneraly preſent with Solomon, and could eaſily, 
either by himſelf, or ſome other fit perſon or perſons appointed 
by him. manage all the King's Sacred Concerns? Or, why is he 
named before his Father ? Others therefore render this Hebrew word, 
Prince, as it is uſed, Gen. 41.45, and 47: 22, 26, Exod. 2. 16, 
2 Sam. 8. 18 So he was either the chiefin Dignity, the firſt prince, 
and the higheſt Officer in the State next to the King : or the chief 
Miniſter of State, by whom the great Affairs of State were managed 
and prepared for the King's Conſideration, &c. 

3 Elihoreph, and Ahiah the fon of Shiſha, || ſcribesf 


Jehoſhaphat, the ſon of Ahilud the || recorder g. 

i. e. Secretaries of State. He choſe rwo, whereas David had 
bur one: either, becauſe he obſerved ſome inconveniences intruſting 
all thoſe marrers in one hand : er, becauſe he had now much more 
employment than David had, this being a time of great peace and 
proſperity, and his Empire enlarged, and his Correſpondencies with 
Foreign princes more trequent. g Of which ſe on 2 Sam. 8, 16, 


þ Or, 
ſecretaries, 
|| Or, 
Yemen 
brancere 


\ 


EEXNQO Sx 


but the dead is thy ſon, and the living is my ſoa. Thus | 


x" 26 Then ſpake the woman whoſe the living child | 


king 'had judged, and they feared the king : for they | 


of his People. f To afliſt him in wiſely Examining and juſtly ' 


Chap. Ty: 
4 And Benaiah the ſon of Jehoiada, as over the 
hoſt : and Zadok and Abiathar were the prieſts h. 

h 1.e. The High-prieſts, to wit, ſucceſively, firſt 45:ather, and 
then Zadok. Queſt. Why is Ab:iathar named when he was depoſed ? 
Anſ. Firſt, Becauſe it is ordinary for perſons to retain the Names 
and Titles of thoſe places which in reality they have loſt. Seconds 
ly, Becauſe though bh was depoſed from the High-prieſthood, yer 
he was a prieſt, and the Chief of one of the Prieſtly Families : and 
as .Zaaok was jointly named with Abiathar when Abiathar alone was 
the High.prieſt, as 2 Saw. 8. 17. and 20. 25. '{o now Zadok and 
Abiathar are joined, although the High-prieſthood was reſted in 
Zadok alone. Thirdly, Poſſibly 4biathar» though he was depoſed from 
the Supreme Prieſthood, yet upon his ſerious Repentance and by 
the Intercefſion of his Friends was reſtored to the execution of the 
Prieſtly Othce, and put into that place which Zadok enjoyed when 
Abiathar was High-Prieſt. Fourthly, Some ſay that here is mention 
made of all Solomons Chief Officers, both ſuch as now were, and 
ſuch as had been, and ſuch as were afterwards, as they gather from 
v. I1. and 15. where two perſons are named who married two of 
Solomons Daughters, which could not be till many Years after this 
time. 

5 And Azariah the ſon of Nathan was over the of- 
ficersz : and Zabud the ſon of Nathan& was principal 


ofhcerl, and the kings friend m. 

s Or, Overſeers. or Surveyors, to wit, over thoſe twelve Officers 

named verſe 7, &c. where the Hebrew word is uſed, who were all 
ſubjeQ@, and to give up their Accomprs to him. Though the word 
fignifies any Governors or Commanders of the higher ſort, as 
1 Kings 5.16. 2 Chron. 8. 10, k The Prophet, who had been ſo high- 
ly inſtrumental in Selomons Eſtabliſhment in the Throne. 1 Poſlibly 
Freſident of the King's Council. The Hebrew word is Cohen, which, 
Verſe 2. is rendred Prieſt, whence ſome Read this place thus: Zabud 
the ſon of Nathan the Prieft, or the Miniſter ( as the word properly 
ſignifies, and that Title wellenough agrees toa Prophet, or the Prince: 
for the prophet Nathan was a Man conſiderable both for his 
Quality, and for his Honour and Eſteem with the King, ) was rhe 
Kings Friend, m Either his ſpecial Favourire, both for his Fathers 
ſake and for his own, having, it, ſeems, been, broughtup with him: 
or, his Confident, with whom he uſed to communicate his moſt 
ſecret Counlels. 

6 And Abiſhar was over the houſhold » : and * A- * Chi 
doniram the ſon of Abda was ever the || tribute 0. Fo 1h. 

2 Steward of the Kings Houſhold. o To wit, the perſonal Tri. [ Oc, 
bute, or the levy of Men, .as appears by comparing this with 
Chap. 5. 13, 14. it being very fit that there ſhould be ſome one 
| perſon to whom the chief Condu& or Inſpe&ion of that great 
buſineſs was committed. 

7 <4 And Solomon had twelve officers over all Iſrael, 
which provided victuals for the king and his houſhold ; 
each man his month ina year made proviſion. 

8 And theſe are their names: || the fon of Hur p in | 0: 
mount Ephraim, Ben-lur 

' This and others of them are denominated from their Fathers, 
becauſe they were known and famous in their Generation. 


*'9 || The ſon of Dekar in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, | 0;," 
and Bethſhemeſh, and Elon-Beth-hanan q. Ben-dckar: 
q Or, Elon, the houſe or dwelling-place of Hanan 3 and Hanan may 
be a-Mans Name, and this place may beſo differenced from other 
_ Or, che plain ( for 1o the Hebrew word ſignifies ) of Beth- 
anan: 
ro || The Ton of Heſed in Aruboth, to hiws pertained i Or, 
Sochoh 7, and all the land of Hepher /. Bene 
r There were two Sechohs,but both near together. See Joſh.15.35, 
48. j In Judah. See 1 Ghron. 4. 6+ 


Ix || The fon of Abinadab in all the region of Dor, | 9, 

which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife. Bzwn-ains 
5 In Manaſeh with Jordan, where alſo were Taanach, Megidao, and dab. 
Bethjhean, v. 12 ; 

12 Baanathe ſon of Ahilud, ro him pertained Taanach, 
and Megiddo, and all Beth-ſhean, which # by Zartanah 
beneath Jezreel z, from Beth-ſhean to Abel- Mcholah, 
even unto the place that is beyond Jockneam. 

t Which was in Iſachar. And this ſeems added to diſtinguiſh it 
from that Zartanah, Joſb. 3+ 16. - 

13 || The ſonot Geber in Ramoth-Gilead «, to him || Or, 
pertained the towns of Jair x the ſon of Manaſſeh, which B15 
are in Gilead : to him alſo pertained the region of Argob, 
which &« in Baſhan, threefcore great cities with walls 
and brazen bars y. 

% Ramoth in the Land of Gilead, Deut. 4. 43. Joſh. 20. 8. 1 Kings 
22. 3.10 called todifferenceir from Ramoeth in Iſachar, 1 Chron. 6.73. 
x In Manaſſeh beyond Jordans See Numb. 32. 41, Deut. 3. 14- 
y This is added by way of diſtintion from thoſe Towns of Jair. 


For being without Jordan they were lyable to the attempts of their 
Enemies. 
14 Ahinadab the ſon of Iddo had || Mahanaim z. | Or, » 
z The City and Territory of Mahanaim : of which ſee Gen. 32. 2: Mahana® 
Joſh. 13. 26. But this ſeems too narrow a compaſs for one of theſe 
great Officers, and unequal to the reſt : although theſe portions 
ſeem not to be diſtributed into equal portions of Land, but into 
larger or leſſer parts, according to their Fertility or Barrennels. 
And this ſeems to have been a very Fruitful place. See 2 Sam. 17- 
27. Or, to Mahanaim. So he may underſtand all the ſpace from 
the parts laſt mentioned to Mahanaim, which was in the Tribe of 
Gad, 
15 Ahimaaz was in Napthali :he alſo took Baſmath 
the daughter of Solomon to wife. 


16 Baanah the ſon of Huſhai was in Aſher, and in 


Aloth, 
| 17 Jehoſhaphat 


(hap» 


+ Heb. 
brad. 
q Heb. 


(0% 


+ Heb. 


anfidentlþ 
*Micz4-. 


*:Chrox 
Q 25, 


010 


ide 


0 
in 


(haps TV: 


+ Heb. 
bread, 
4 Heb. 


(IE) 


+ Heb. 
onfdently; 
*Mic:4-4. 


*2Chron: 
& 25, 


17 Jehoſhaphat the ſon of Paruah in Iflachar. 
18 Shemei the ſon of Elah «, in Benjamin, 
a3 Which he adds to diſtinguiſh him from that curſed and cur- 


Shimei, 2 Sam. 16. 5. : : 
m—_ "Geber the ſon of Uri was in the country of Gi- 
lead b, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, 
and of Og king of Baſhan : and be 4s the only officer 


which was in the land c. 
þ i.e. In the remaining part of that Land of Gilead, which was 
mentioned above, v. 19. c Or rather, in that Yand, for the Hebrew 
points intimate that the empharical Article 1s there underſtood,to 
wit, in all Gilead, excepting the parcels mentioned before,in all the 
Territories of S:hon and Og ; which becauſe they were of large ex- 
tent, and yer all committed to this one Man,it is here noted con- 
cerning him as his priviledge above the reſt, whoſe Juriſdictions 
ere of a narrower extent. : 
k 20 © Judah and [ſrael were many, as the ſand which 


; by the ſea in multitude, eating and drinking, and 
king merry. 

pas And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms, from 

the river d unto the land of the Philiſtines e, and unto 

the border of Egypt f: they brought preſents, and 


ſerved Solomen g all the days of his life. | 

d Euphrates : for ſo far David, having conquered the Syrians, ex- 
tended his Empire, which So/o0n alſo maintained in that extent. 
And ſo God's Promiſe concerning the giving of the whole Land,as 
far as Eupbrates, to the 1[raelites, was fulfilled. And, if the Iſras- 
lites had multiplied ſo much thar the Land of Canaan would not 
ſuffice them, having God's Grant ofall the Land as far as Euphrates 
they might have ſeized upon ir whenſoever occaſion required. 
e Which is to be underſtood incluſively ; for it is unreaſonable to 
think that the Phil;fines were not within Solomon's Dominion.f Un- 
to the River Sihor, which was the border between Egyp; and Canaan, 
Joſh 13. 3- Comp Gen. 15. 28. g By Tribute, or otherways,as he 
needed and required. 

22 © And Solomons # Proviſion for one day was 


thirty | meaſures þ of fine flower, and threeſcore mea- 


ſures of meal 5, 

h Heb- Cors : each of which contained ten Ephah's, Exod: 16.36. 
$9 this Proviſion was ſufficient for near three thouſand Perſons. 
; Of a courſer ſort for common uſe,and for the inferior ſort. 

23 Ten fat oxen &, and twenty oxen out of the pa- 
ſtures I, and an hundred Rong. beſides harts, and roe- 
bucks, and fallow-deer, and fatted fowl. 

k Fatted in ſtalls. / Well fleſhed, tender and good,though not 
ſo fat as the formers» . . 

24 For he had dominion over all tbe yegion on this 
ſide the river, from Tiphſah 2 even to Azzah,over all 
the kings on this lide the river » : and he had peace on 
all ſides round about him. 

- Either that Tiphſah, 2 King. 15. 16. which was in the Kingdom 
of Iſrael within Jordan : or, rather, another place of thar name up- 
on the Riwer now mentioned, to wit, Euphrates, even that eminent 
City which is mentioned by Ptolemy, and Strabo. and Pliny. called 
Fhapſarum. And this beſt aggrees with the following 4zzah,which 
was the border of Canaan in the South and Weſt, Gen 10: 19. Dent: 
2+ 23. as Tiphlah was in the North and Eaſt. And {ſo his Dominion 
is deſcribed by both its borders.» Who owned ſubje&ion,and payed 
Tribute to him. : 

25 And judah and Ifrael dwelt + fafeiy,* every mar 
under his vine, and under his fig-tree o,from Dan even 
to Beerſheba, all the days of Solomon. 

o Enjoying the Fruit of his own Labours with ſafety and com- 
fort. Under theſe two Trees, which were moſt uſed and culti- 
vated by the 1/raelites,he underſtands all other Fruit-bearing Trees, 
and all other comforts, by a Synecdoche. And they are brought 
In as fitting or dwellmg under thee Trees, partly for Recreation or 
Delight in the Shade ; and Parly, for the- Comfort or Advantage 
of the Fruit ; and withal, to note their great ſecurity,not only in 
their ſtrong Cities, but even in the Country, where the Vines and 
Fig-trees grew, which were moſt open to the incurſions of their 

NEmues. 

26 © And * Solomon had forty thouſand ſtalls of 
horſes p for his chariots q, and twelve thouſand horſe 
men 7. 
 Þ In 2 Chron: 9: 25. it is but four thouſand. Anſ. Firſt, Some ac- 
knowledge an error of the Tranſcriber, writing arbachim, forty,for 
arbah, four, which was an eaſfie miſtake. And ſuch miſtakes in ſome 
Copies, in thele leffer matters,God might permit, for the trial and 
exerciſe of our Faith, without any prejudice to the Authority of 
the Sacred Scriptures in the great DoEtrines of Faith and good life. 
Secondly,lIr is not exa&tly the ſame Hebrew word which is here and 
there, though we tranflate both ffals ; and therefore there may 
well be allowed ſome difference in the fignification, the one ſig- 
nifying properly ſtables, of which there were 4000, the other ſtalls 
or partitions for each Horſe, which were 40000. Which great num- 
ber ſeems direGly forbidden, Deuts 17. 16. except Solomon had ſome 
particular diſpenſation from God, which might be, though it be 
not recorded. q Both for his Military Chariots, which jecm to 
be thoſe 1400, 1 King. 10. 26. and for divers other uſes, as about 
his great and various Buildings, and Merchandiſes,and other occa- 
ſions, which might require ſome thouſands of other Chariots Ap- 


pointed partly for the defence and preſervation of his People 1n } 


peace ; and partly, for attendance upon his. Perſon, and tor the 
Splendor of his Government. Compare chap. 10. 26 Burt the 
words may be otherwiſe rendred, and 12000 horſes, for Paraſhmani- 
teſtly ſignifies borh an horſe and horſemen: And theſe might be a 
better ſort of Horſes than moſt of thoſe which were deſigned fo! 
the Chariors- Or thus, and for ( which Particle is eafily unde - 


itood and borrowed from the foregoing claule ) 12000 horſemen . | 


). KK 7 0 © £6 


and ſo he means that the 40000 Horſes were in part appointed for 
his Chariors, and in part for his 12000 Horſemen. ; 

27 And thoſe officers / provided vidual for king So- 
lomon,and for all that came unto king Solomons table, 
every man in his month : they lacked nothing s. 

J Named above, v. 7, &c. 5 Or rather, they ſuffered nothing to be 
lacking to any man that came thither, bur plenrifully provided all 
things neceflary. 

28 Barley alſo and ſtraw for the horſes, and || dro- IOr,nmuler, 
. medaries t, brought they unto the place where be of- or, ſwits 
 ficers were, every man according to his charge. beaſts, 

# Or, Mules, by comparing this with 2 Chron. g: 24 or, Poft- 

Horſes : which are particularly mentioned and diſtinguiſhed from 
; the other Horſes, becauſe they rook a more exa& and particular 

Care about them: How» ſoever, it is agreed, that theſe were ſwift 
| Beaſts, which is evident from Eſth. 8. 10,14. Mich, 1. 13. 

29 T And God gave Solomon wiſdom, and under- 
ſtanding, exceeding much, and largeneſs of heart s, 
even as the {and that is on the ſea ſhore x, 

u 3. e. Either, Firſt, Magnanimity,or generoſity and greatneſs of 
ſpirit, whereby he was diſpoted and emboldned to undertake great 
things. Bur this ſeems nor ſo well to ſuit with the following retem- 
blance, Or rather, Secondly, Vaſtneſs of underſtanding, a moſt 
comprehentive knowledge of all things both Divine and Humane: 
for this Wiſdom is the thing for which he is here commended, both 
in the foregoing and following words x Which cannot be num«- 
bred or meaſured ; and which, though it be ſo vaſt and compre=- 
henſive, yer conſiſts of the ſmalleſt parts, and ſo it may note that 
Solomon's Wiidom was both vaſt, reaching to all things; and moſt 
accurate, ſearching and diſcerning every imall thing. 

30 And Solomons wiſdom excelled the wiſdom of 
all che children of che eaſt country y, and all the wiſ- 
dom of Egypt z. 

3 The Chaldeans, Perſians, and Arabians, who all lay Eaſtward 
from Canaan, and who were famous in ancient times for their Wiſ- 
dom and Learning,as app-ars both from Sacred and Prophane Wri- 
ters. 2 #. e, The Egyptians, whoſe Fame was then great for their 
Skill in the Arts and Sciences, which made them deſpiſe the Grecians 
as Children in knowledge. See 48. 7. 22. 

31 For he was wiſer than all men 4 : than Ethan 
the Ezrahite, and Heman b, and Chalcol, and Darda c 
the ſons of Mahol 4 : and his fame was in all nations 
round about, 

a Either of his Nation, or, of his time ; or, of all Times and 
Nations, whether of the Eaſt or any other Country, excepting only 
the firſt and Second Adam. b Iſraelites of eminent Wiſdom, pro- 
bably the ſame mentioned, 1 Chroz. 2. 6. and 15. 19- and 25. 4. Pſal. 
88. zitle, and 89+ title, c Of whom ſee 1 Chron: 2:6. d O6j. All 
theſe four were the Sons of Zerah, 1 Chron: 2: 6+ or of Ezrah, as 0- 
thers call him. Anſ- Either, the ſame Man had two names, Zerah 
and Mahol, which was common amongſt the Jews ; and he mighr 
be called Maho! from his Office or Employment : for that fignities a 
. Dance, or @ Pipe ; and he was expert in Muſical Inſtruments, and ſo 
were his Sons, 1 Chron: 15: 17, 18, 19. who polibly may here be cal- 
led by a vulgar Ebraiſme, Sons of the muſical Inflrument, from their 
dexterity in handling it, as upon another account -we read of the 
daughters of muſick, Eccleſ 12. 4. | 

32 And he ſpake three thouſand proverbs e : and 
his ſongs were a chouſand and five. | | 

e 7. e; Short and deep, and uſeful Sentences,whereof a great and 
the bett part are contained in the Books of Proverbs and Eccles | 
fiaſtes. f Whereof the chief and moſr Divine are in the Canticles. 

33 And he ſpake of trees g, from the cedar-tree that 
is in Lebanon, even unto the hyfſop thar ſpringeth out 
of the wall þ, he ſpake alſo of beaſts, and of fowl, | 
and of creeping things, and of fiſhes. | 

Z 7. e. Of all plants, of their nature and qualities : all which Diſc 
courſes are loſt, without any impeachment of the Perfe&ion of the 
Holy Scriptures ; which were not inſpired and written to reach 
Men Philoſophy or Phyſick, but only to make Mea wiſe to Salva- 
tion. See John 20; Jl. 2 Tim: 3: 16, 17. h 4. e. From the greateſt 
to the leaſt. we 

34 And there came of all people to hear the wiſ- 
dom of Solomon, from all 5 kings of ths earth, which 
had heard of his wiſdom. 


i To wit,from all the neighbouring Kings ; univerſal Particles 
being frequently underſtood in a reſtrained ſenſe ; and ſuch re- 
ſtriftion is grounded upon the following words, where this is lis 
mired to ſuch as heard of Solomon's Wiſdom. 


CHAP V. | 
Hiram ſendeth to congratulate Solomon: who defereth of Hiram timber 10 build 
the temple, 1 - 6 Hiram bleſſeth God for Solomon ; and, for food for 
his family, ſendeth him trees, 7 — — 12. The number of labourers and 
workmen employed about the temple, 13 ——18. R | | 
| N D Hiram king of "L'yre fent his ſervants unto 
Solomon 4 : ( for he had heard that they had 
anointed him king in the room of his father ) for *Hi- _. 
ram was ever a lover of David. * 2.$.7207 
a To wit, as ſoon as he heard of his Succeſſion in the Throne,as 5* 1'- _ 
the following words ſhew, he ſent to congratulate with him,as the 7 #2707: 
manner of Princes is. SR) Þ-- - yn 
2 And * Solomon ſent to Hiram, ſaying, SO 
3 Thou knowelt b how that David my father could ,; ;.* 
not build an houſe unto the name of the LORD his 
; God c, * for the wars which were abouc him on every * Choc 
1ide d, until the LORD put them under the foles of _—-- 
his feet. ep = WA ERNn 
b By common Fame and by particutar Information. # 7: e: Ej- 
ther, Firſt, For the Worſhip and. Scrvice of God, 21 King: 3: 2+ Or, 
3 G Secondly 


Ul 


Chap. V | 


| 
"I 
'ﬀf 
4 


Chap. V. 


KING 8 


Second! 
- 2 rue he Lord hi 
of other et 4 7 Which as that Phr " 
, Aa Fa 1 . + 
of tar work 4 him. Rich noted is Carer and Thoughes | 
4g =p mple upo . ei.e. Mad od's deni and Tho :58. | barley 
5: 27 n them a ade them denial of ughts | of { , and 2 
th ſub the honour of ſev 0000 b 
at But now the L is pleaſure. 7 en him, - pag there _— _ of wine, Eitl 
| bigs very {ſide l/ ORD my G apare Pſal. 8: - here of wl at Solemen : 0 ſaid = ier therefor C y 
Heb Curre » fo that ag þ od OT : 6, [is her vhat Heirs ol 7 Gar Je mans ore, Firſt bap, Þ 
*2S "# 5 A 1d there is neithe ath g1Ven M Win e ſaid, Solo m accepted = it runs ay pr _ ſpeak p. V! Chap 
| am. n b r ad e reſt +. ad. mn ga d ; and a ; thus Ily,He $ q | 
: t e VET be 20 ve H, acco , 1 will gi pe 
22: aig: _—_ David the LORD == to build . , 5 pete henry kms Fog Os The  gaverfor = 
: 10. n aces ; ed, a h i.cioned ey 
and 17.12 et upo — fache od, *a ouſe u comple S ; that B , and the wh ear, and 2 Chron. 2. and 
412. houſc n thy tl r, ſayin s the LOR nto | y Fin eat the Hi ook of ole ſum the rwe 7. 2. mu 
e unto 1rone in 4) Thy {o D ſpak ither, Firſi iſtories of Chronicles bei mis tob ty meaſures it 
.6N my nam thy ro n whom oy wherein irf, for ſuſ he Henke oe wri e made up fic of 
ow &. om h {h I will the Ti they W uIltcnanc oks of S itten to 11 p from 
me c therefo , he ſhall bui | Oy e to th oo pore agrg— 
eda re com uild Hut, duck Oe oyed 1 & Workmen, LE En Chr 
fHeb./ ſhall b r-trees mand tl an | -& e, durin , Secondly N che cure; men, duri he Kings 
Ja). f e with F4 our of LL thou. th YON 2 g the ſaid ti y, For the ting down ing the Yea ; 4 1s 
or th thy ſe — tomy fs ry they Bee 2 GE deer ra Ms md hewing of 
. y {ery rvantsz . Nn h, and of f hew Kins? ers Paſl; m to favo nd thele upporr - ewing of 
point . fi ants k, 4C $: :& Unto my '' 4 ing $ H ages, nod 6 ur their Opj @ words bei of the Kio £ 
> cordi thee . ervant nor ouſe,the everal R PLNIO ems Ict wgs 
that or thou k 1ng 00 will I #1 5 Ccoget the other econ n,;that th T ett Our 1 : 
Can $k1 nowelt ch all that give hi was ſuiti It ; and thi ro the Lab 1PENCES eſe plac IC 1 t Hebs 
fi. ill co hew ti that there 5 thou | 5 Bray $ maneercs Ah this might bc ourers,alrhc opens, tener * th 
command 4 "Sub wy w timber, like a ap _—_ T ap- ps _ — in © be emired theres be Rr to the | 
Ti aTiſtance wh 2 wt ay 5,9 nc —_ 53A whany/ lf W in And cho _——_ ge Hoey —_ 
emple; ich th owin m the fi * 454 Saad ps id the LO ar ecnus. it 
hour e; was 1 T eſe Gentiles 4 oppoſitio oregoin | a miſled We: ORD gay ] ccaule it 
Chriſt be very 2} os of the call gaVc to the * on nn Leſyp nd Solom im,and th ave Solomo . 
ark" Spiritual rumental i ing of the G uwiding 1s me 2 tee F on, and Ere Was * n wiſdom &, * 
10% "0g and Aw er rO « bare okrils path and > a i mentioned, becaul b ” nt bn ES berweent * as *Ch 
ſome -u _ EE "nds "4 + oy? ny £ Ccontiruing * wh Hiram, ecauſe he ſhew rn _—_ gue roOge _ J: _ 
"pee: not a ſuffici 1s d , and d ich O '&d his Wi and more ther, * . 
part in 6 uthc ef1gn. urab ich for the! I s Wiſdom i ore : —— Udo: 
_ Hom w vl Jj cient numbers ny —_— At ang tha kin g In | OM in all I 1 2g 4: n. 
rea : L1CLLON £ IC . 3 1 O act1 
dy ; bu give hi : and th was eith procured |... Whij che | omon rai 10ns 
required A r only tha mM the Ced erefore h ener wholl par hich we; evy wa $ raiſed A 
p : 1 7 > "I { EY. IT O k emplo , ouſa d ut of p tH 
'TE1 Tr y . > e mol! N 4 tribat, 
althou = and Nan 4 all dire& ”” erſtood. 7 doing of ; ich pl eem fſtrans trangers, b Iſraelites ; b ple ; in man able and cafi Inen, 
_—— | qur———_ Hoa © 55, hay wing 6, ren gero any Man nic Bon Tar reaps expreſſed, 
Peo or their L 1S TELUTIL ands,and t e the Ced C EM- niidered t ſo ſmall an, thar ft g this with | 00 mentioned 
ple bei abour a eaſed him o tran{mi ars, bei far Ja TY . Brrrb: o many T 1 chap. 9- 2 ioned 
2 A Ha rf thr robe £6 | pe then New Buldng orke Temple "£7 oH 
7 A e, oO Hiram.a s : for the \ t. e. Pa » | Were, V adle, tha magine G , ts parts b 1 was; it Elle 
wow of - it Came to 4s ATC =o Sar hx _ b upted es 4. elſe _ were dump rs bing con®deredvas 
lefled Omon S wh | ca ON y them UTrSs a een ye b SAILCTI. L $ 
be: th , that he » when Hi bo Mita ay 7 3. Thatth oppreſſed y turns, as ge gy 
unto Dayi e LOR rejoycedg iram he bg fr" ent, war: Timber with hard 05, waa 
avid a wiſe D » thi greatl ard the e read of t alſo for $ , Not on] and Ston and uni vg 
2 Bein & wiſe ſo 15 day . y m7 and . taken of no oth olomon's y ( thou | e hewed a FI nter= 
ful Fr g an 1N n OVer thi 3 which 9 ſaid after th er Ley own Hoult gil princ1 nd carried 
end to genuous Pri 11S gre hath - b, preparat! the Build; y of Me ules, and Bui pally ) fi 
vour the q _ he wasS a ro his Hou _ of Excell P C. Ver implies gs" for | . 6 Temple, ff OF great care - ecauſe 
groſs Idolry which « ncre Profle, becu ns eh very Levy of Men was is wn Houſer procurement, o 
anly hav , ich b eople _ , cauſe h DS it be - | and H, p and $0l, 4 s made as done b S Or 1er Bui ty Or 
the Na e cffeQted ; y God's bl . nd the , e did no not m azor, and olomons h and empl efore ; uildings; 
ture ; yet | efſin extirpati TT OY Sally Bn Megidd ne ad 26h oyed for th nay, that this 
able tho and Excell 1e had ſuf 5 and Solom pation of thei y fatisfi 851aad, and G na Mille, a for the b | at this 
. E 2 - , a uildin 
'Y Sp oChia Ency of th cient ink ons help h r er I4 A e that ſcru exer, 1S CX nd the wall Z of the 
+6: 16. 1, AS ; e God Ormar e ml h nd ples preſſed _ of te 
LES n= be ſen hem Ts ea 
card. CO am eatnen ; ONOUuTr- ana t uries : O L 
and nſidered th ent o to SO nd, vo age be wo mon 5 : a MON ebanon, te 
nd c 1 ; 1E th th , ten 
5 Inns do all News, 4h vos PIETY, fayi " Levy. s at home : they were 1 thouſand a 
concerni thy deli 1 thou { ing, I h I5 And : and * Adoni in Leba 
ni . Ire CO Ee” ente ave ]*© nd S on non 
Ha ve - | 7 vgs of _ 5% rage for : cant ora had threel iram 2045 over Ch 
: ull : 2: ITo - : BY 5 c ; 
__ of C: Fad 6 molt buildings wang formerl _} l Either (9-0 "On me che _ ten thouſand ” 
dars, 1n 'edars, and t or pine-tree ers rende y was, and , are for the Ti imber uſand he 
dars, in Solomon” therefor ; To oth he oboe Bill is as or rather wers b 11k 
[| Or 9g My f s meſſage b _ On chers, it W ated} dutns 16 B pag of Stone 
AD ery 4 efore nder th was a parti rd, elide - $ : for Hi 
NG WE 5: ded 1 bring ther LLIEAR = _—— OR node 
-b. unto : and I wi er d Ce- e thre omo 
' Sug the pla will own f over e thouſ: ns offi 
a. C con ro the ula : ICers : 
_ chem: * mo tho Fate 1 them by "= 7p" gen TO I thar _— = "ne Ks OO were 
giving : and tho ged 7 thes t me /,a OS | an , each of theſ 5o of tl ver the 1 e work 
OO : u {h SS. 23 3 nd wW acco p thei > 1EMM,Aa FOOO, EC S 
q _—_ for my ho on Cen _o0y thou {hal ill = Me ein Pe A "Wins an the odd 300 expreſſe -"_— 
—_— 2 qprve? ea - © old « plith my deli 2d mes in are ſaid to _ from Spagy, of Ang jy he over hel ; 
y the he] tied rogeth Ir, Ships, re, in | 1. ke. reſerve e 3600. Anſ. Sap them, t a8 
es» Gent Shine +2 = Dollongy Wh ph by Death, ae Bak , ro ſupply th nſ: The 30 oat Rx: my Pagh ae 
a Tow as at nO gre or Ships, _ ater,aSs now c 1S thous! was ath, Or Sooke any of £64 ene places of o added 1n eh thele 
Ne whick i ance. 7 Which was? ris uſuatand fo = proden Proviſion Them ouldve rken oft NN yo, 
r. e. Either Fi wo La Kage 19: 46. _ "yy. - ſpp plac 4 nag} Yangon ow 10n,and not hes neceſlar off from the _ 
ag is Krtrkns My Rs eek they onoikgt of ' 2 Corn: 216 y irand why ro 2s commiſſioned forthe OST 5 which 
- 14- Zech: es uled ff m or Pe ied to . diſperſed rtrangers ether. $ 3 an therefl r the Work e caſes. A 
cauſe' the 4 12: 13- and or a Nation ople : for gether. « O; olds 2.2 » Which 1 ome learned ore both C rk, bur on] nd 
- + nhgrumny few 608] The reaſons | 1d} high bury qiuPanrphy mi ed Men add jomparacions u Aro 
Coma ple there bei onging to T e reaſon , AS Judg. 1 ouſe or | rul are here iſtin&n anifeſt from ; Thar thoſ y fair 
ry or rel eing ve D re and Sr of this d 3. 2. and * over to called. tr/ umber of M > Chron e 3600 we 
9: 7. Ezek c icf, 3 ry numer Sidon,wa elire is 2 Chro the work ; Fhe chief of ; en.and 5 2 2+ I7. And re 
deſire t x 27: T7 A : manifeſt fi ous, de > S VETY ba , be- W] . #: 2. iS. 1 men : wh dens - Ijracl:tes : Nl that 
o be fi . Andthi rom At pended rren,and uch m « is, th 1ETEAS, 7 officers, © ; who ther 
le at a reely gi is Rel 5 12. 2 upon Sol , 300 ay def at they all that 1 5 and ar FCTee 
reaſo given to bi ief or Provi i-2%. ( olomen's added j erve furtl y were 0 nat 1$ ſaid e ſaid to 
ervants em nable rate im, but oviſtions, Hi ompare E Moun in 2 Ch rther Conf verſeers to ſe of thoſe 
Thou ployed in thi © Nite rep ©, ws FrnaigenF 47 5 tures 707. WET ideratio © ok page's 3609 
gh div in the w us reports 1 to hi oth n r over ft , and the e overſeers n. Others |: ople a work 
that thi ers, both vork _ >; rts it- O m and hi ot | of th ome PartiC 1e reſt in : eers of the 7 ers 1ay, T 07K. 
ache wb Jewiſh and Chriſe OG EZ My fer fome Particur and more Cura places Trim Workmea 
ouſe enſe whi ring ACC 1an Inter p Y01.: 2: T > CUILOUS Aa I r tnat tl 5 62A $ 
and in : Giro materials whi | wor Se that her conceive zreat And che king nd” conſiderable part 
_— ard My R ws {om taken of chat here he ſpeaks | THe & ones, coſtly commanded 
rly is called ries My Royal ven to rip of his ar to his " I my ſtones 4 ed, and the 
ac + fan - pda - heat 77 an rs - xr) ax, Bt EO _ houſe « and hewed ſon brought 
bes 2 t . eir La- et rphi . ONE 
{THeb.cors. II dp * + 2004 Ba coeds z which molr Gee ans done OO Jung. Re other FLIER . I, to lay 
n ITE. T-t : as int 0 entio ward b E SOLCT | 
ſures of * many fo gave Hir rees,and fir-trees _— yy Janet - ky Flr fon a und herl _—_— 
meaſur » fo am tw | , od :-a5 bh o is the f yſti of Magni re that thi 
es of r food t , enty h - as he 1 the foundati cal fionifi xgnificence is 
year b pure oil” o his h thouſand is called, 1; tion of th cation of Except it 
y year u'x: th ouſhold 7 me 18 A , 116. 28 ie true T rhe Precio 
x Heb J- us gav , and a-]h nd Sol - 16. 1 Cor emple,the C 10Ut- 
thouſand «-Twenty C e Solom twen ew them emors bui . 3: 1. , e Church 
rs Cre Te mils the enty | rimber and Oe 
” Q which t in 2 Chro f He n ſton one-{( irams bui 
x mn. 2: H Es ne-1quarers 7 : S DUI . 
ls there adged 2: 10. it is? Gy "= Giblites = build the h rs: {o they lders did || Or 
av000 of _ %b. ht 83-7- Beek e Inhabirants ” . & an 2d ed Gibliw# 
2C -_13- $- - 27. 9. Gebel | mW 
reſt of Kiramn's ares are Rae famous for -"s - Place near 7id atk 
7% $ Eltjtacts, as e mentioned rtificers and ridon, 216 9 
mMment of LOT from | 
CHAP. 


2% R02 


4 
'4 


, (haps vi. 


The b 
wildi 
neſs . ng of h C 
it . wind ft P te H 
, Storage mpl, A 
16 mm_—_— , cham Ce 2: an P, I 
+, Chron: aoors -- 2 13. _ _ the tim VL, XX 
5 8 | ay 2. Th he cieti materi e th 7 
Jl, N as e <> eung teri / eve N 
E D 35; The plans and gen weve the ff G 
: O 1t mer : and r1177 "10. 09M : 
+ Heba *f © fourſcre yea —_ hor _ eons — it, as $ 
Fr bs rods i _ yo in Tune n The moe _ CEE : NP 
, 6 # ANNIE L s 1 - 
th ich 75 "ax rel nd of Boon Tens of bling yy = bread _— _ _ its b 
choul is —__— nana EE Tk 
. - . J (8) O » a 
be LO Chr the L mont[ Iſcael, i the Ifrael and o_ poBgrne Pct : = (bein Chron. 3 to 
pad Poon Yo OR 1 , in f w 4 pro 7 £ ies! r. 
d ff (c lo D 2 th Ou er A porti G IJ it 4. whi Or, i 
my tis porn pa ' at he 7 _ mo your lights nd for _— _ + engrh 86 ba Clap | 
P STE: I orro be erm egan _ Zif, 17 Narrow e houſe, h _ is height Gro; m wc . VL] 
| r rti ON CICr let vaſt uil 7; panes. wi ou , ne er as CO nd 1s : 
gf note ood 1 cular this them Ermin and com ild c rECCI ideni tward mad , each conv co 1 
their Spy Fn ary, wa” © anag- ro ned b com yr” is ning b rd, t ell wi of —_ 
bei IN as o | . 1 whe y U pre Lig] : and O w whi ntly 
_ prong c when 6 Bs Hfael 0 any OB. UnicdRea to n xſfag bu $ y ders ina ha indows of ch hal 
W « 4+ ; r 71 m1 C - 1 CA - '# 7 1 
wn crane (coming rich Come lt ne Th. = fr ard fo the Hi narrow | 
. nd iti 3» Wh ey b_ the Es of out of irude got is to ſu "8 mber agai cloſed t. O the H cies | Or 
i were iSn ben Iſt t in tl, ord the Wi Ezy 10 as Vario 4 ound s]r0 gainſt as to r, for ouſt of the as WH 
bs eneditio beta 9 Os +Fpucead Apig —_— a ab und th bf us terre w7 by 
pediti ut, & poſſb ame fi comm ce H rneſs t th Mnly nd 1 out ab e W Pp © & : 1ght be 1. withi oad 
twe 1110nN z XC,t ible 1 orth g forth ebrew $ 3 AS1 e tim ro k 1eE mM m.b Out all x ur We 1.e2.t etter ” 9in, & ll! 
Man « the out o wit 1t ma , &c. H out are 1s m e of Or ade , both » agai of cathe O gi arrow & | 
n obj Heb of E, Som y be eb f of E, not 4 anifeſ! were , upon 1 Tch of tl inſt the er,and ve with 
after objetds, his _— plea tw £Npt ſho, tee ny ol amb _s the ho pas 
- { s, hi r int ly : i nd the I 75 Ne W aſt - Or j er tem WW; uſe r Or, _ | 
whereas _ hinder ER "Ne erſood her '"g nd Pat ls belong For inc the wh _ _— —_ bui] T 91 | 
there are many © his ſe; or . cowrds the Joker | ly, nging o the A bn + Swag ha MH _ 
1VETS an of ' G - fo and oth th eend r the ply, gs I the yin I, b r th ut. 1e Or uſe 2: ly p39 
Tim of th y thi the en: r as B Beth rac diff of h y fo or tl 1, 2 A the P ur le e bea Traci n , Joj1:rg , 
dives as 1S E year ny ie Judge be hs eth ſig 2 wh ue eir | U re wer 1ere We 1 Chr ple, © rieſt aned gran af ie : + 's | 
of rs le evide s th ich es do O. Nu gnifie ch al e be- rward e ſon ere n 01. 2 r to s Gar pon the C Heb 
-" : — ene from © mentor OY = 13; — arora -_ vardl lrele paces 1 ag hp che Worlhip 7 CNN fr, ; 
1g" a ta ORR wr Arn 3 Of ich ) | } wall pal PACES - eG Wyn; of prominin 2 
a Iſri 2 an ger 2 el therei is di 'T th I th WO rt {id I Go r ribs 
_ — : —_ 2s wn ſever y os oh wer Sa aan; aifcutey _— pltages fo uld Avg Wind 5 —_ , 14 d, OT y 
iſt] ars 0 the li e W - s the | withi one a S I, ty, | Y h PPE or th whe ce ; ow it n m N cin ; 
I nike might = yer fa Thae | above, amber for th _— Do Dt 
ears ich , beſid not n I. che & iliſti the O ou e | com , and Def hish eſe s of x nd WA ann ing na rnat 
To t or th are es th eceſfari ſer Amm: ine T P r, as | V paſk clid ous wer the W yet S 3 a cr, 4. arrow 
the e li gen oc art] ved i 20n1t yrr preſſ1 cre ed all es th 1 He e onl all theſc nd e e.0 S 
reſt. 7 Heb ike ; erall e of W. to b in otl es ve any on necell. the C e fo eb. Ri Y 1 , whi e Li Xce n all 
fre , it th rew T ma y ren ar eu 1Er C xed tl , who 6&6 Car ham rme . Ribs ; 5 Cubi ich ights pr ſo 
que « fortie Le | y be dred 3 and nderſt ales 1em j 4 4 he y for ber EF 20 bl 7.C Its hi we m1 h me 
ceed ntly zeth and h thus , the ve « ood 2 2. T in nd th ne paſſa S, as r rath . Eith igh re ab g t be 
ſo s Te pur fo or 7 ad r rend land rvitud of _y e mi ther ge t the Ribs d page , and ove-ol 
tha n) ze =p Tay th reſt red rag nr 5. hs as | mid moſt o all age Ag" , oth the all 
RE Ju oe nes bm to TEE: ae houſe he cold Chambe ever Ch Galerie wh bers 
Zo 3 OY ago , ef] the ; ts. e m s b X — apo x A, >a 
, = Roos hel ue ar wh __ EEE __ mo f _ : _ wank Chambers. and ok 
; et Bots whos) 1 om er mb ed 1 . uld ITO 7 WI ad it 
whicl P 6+” >" ad reſt, at tim ong ti e rem e the ers b Ts + Tov no wed ith Sb 
fe . > NR ; ou 3 and TIO 
out-li e bad may Y the Pur y FA ty years gan. fog a pr EX- are ef Or. 1 n the i 1ſten p ro the w e thi 5 
the —_ ris ſett] ery pr and Go = lnial s for Lat Ho and top : 1 Ia arrow! inſide ed in und all of rd 
the _=_ of Jud, d the obab] Canaa afte 1N Ou inſta o the |; - only RN ba : AS , and b the abou che 
- 1 t ge 2: m 1 y b un, V I th - 'F $ nCce, . 1 cho ele ade im eſid W; A 
rin Rc 7 ITN tz Ana 4 Novowing our Duling the als of che £2 
Doan ear ; otami S: e ti : 4 2 OG f the C IS 1 tori gs to gs eri | E eb 
riet ed 'Y - mia. and tim eſt ; the gave NzoOr ipa ham SM OrIe were 1 m, the ies m 7 
got by D 8 yy eve "{ wg —_ ” AM s of =——Y bers —— Wa 8 =_— js the rea — of th == Houſe SN 
and ry reſt ter | I. A EMO Th ervi tion at ence tb all fi ambe eaſo owe the W ard E : 
certai orah. ca tha nd er th e a vitu af ro er or er all bei n of rthari a s th 
Wo in har Reſe gor & at Reſt whi de under A And VEE Ting nar bn 
rt e u S th ye - 33: £ ich in th O . occali g of r we ng eath 
magh : Opini way S mo E CO ar;t y Ehud F reſt Oth e ſo ne & ho 10n the ere m1 r,allo bread 
parts All ion "4 An ry fro mput o wit , Jud ed in th niel that , mad uſe were m ; a ight ugh th 
This rms Lu MEI of Year & 3. 30-and flops i ready ye __ "withour any & no hoes 
mT ges of idere u e m *eſt , arsS1 alt + He eard 1 SN . et AS 1 ny 1 h k5 
whereof, fer m) oþ Sacr red, 9. Lear oy mp9 Sores Rat 3. ewed rd 12 eithe Ore 1 in bui OY _—_ 
dic — ee m e co ed Sto will b ned a nſide eirs e plai 57s of the phony F the h r ha it W uildi Veni- 
ate elit y Lat: m ry,fi ev nd Pi rabl that n nveni rchi quar ou mm as n 
EY b _ es IE Work, and bt Bo le, while brought cher 
it tly, i eir 1 radj& E m1 co op of pa C arri O1 ed ex: it X ith 
jm ns Civil, Ry leve i&tory bd ave mop 0h ntain hs rtly, CM riage : t was xa] Was 1 p Wor a er: 
forts exp lr ok ca places cis, 1 orher Sr at of E090 a yoo ny —_— 
. aki 1aſt1 1 - Hi all ri , TO 1at 1 ruſal r - ion the » TOr , art] Z tO g 
be 37- — ing n tical C rs of hi atk by God's by parcel PRE” it is em : 1 of Ch gnific : Wo the M2. fo the di s. 
"te only : found 2 Chr eceſlar oncer 1isKin ree fi od's h , whi S | th ar as 1 the FF o thi rilt's _ rkmans Jonk the e: ireti- 
ginnin 7 "IP ation 07. y Pr ns c gdo rit Y elp bom. ere wor 1n it uty !S Ci hur A 5 Sk; ifice eaſe - 
n uilt : of 2.1. A epa ould m : wi ea in- tenti ith 1em of th rcum rch nd a ill a nce and 
2 A g of ;:- the h nd ratio hav 5 with rs bez tion perk he e bu ſta upo s thi nd dili of 
LO nd the A hus ouſe ſo i ns fi e an out eng and ff , or di ect S, to uild nce _— is T il rhe 
RD the io aCtiv was Ia It 1$ aps a, oa whicl pa or th diviſ1 peace rake ers an ignif rth,a 4 
and the th houſed we pri ng _—_ LO Cork oF E LH < Lacronn to pollenys Fi e's ay rap © was a 
th - ed zen, hs ned he 6 WA. nd m ar H er, th r vio! quiet that embet 6's the H a 
ans _— {fn inet jr aoke here below. = Heavenly Tem Sir _— Cots 
P thi [0 reof g % $2.3 erſto Loans + ed riti mpl -itual card 4 That E ur , 
ES Way ereof e olo _ od of ut ſid 00 in thi e,unl 1 Ston rar abr | tranf: ch, 
» F w y ſo cubi ew WAS mon : the ſta; euO r fo "ih F- leſs h & N at $ oile ated 
ſeem ro Eaſt | fo Eller : _ « chreecore "I 5 grinds — ep = ebe firſt i 
ant o belo, phy pony liſtinEt 5, Ee C the to the the le : a e ch wed, eg 
fo wary ; ong t to Weſl it ; from and ubit e 2. thi mid nd 1am ,and ſi ear a 
, = the P, of Iu the ; _ pon wir ny 9 the I: ns 6 By = _ dle cha they - ber z 2 quared 
peagin one arch w Singh ap _ js op Aaron ight CE ad ich tl rs Pahone + vas in : 
OR —— apc ce pt ne and and Bui 89. 1 es 1ey en 2, and Þ wi the ri 
ahe to by —_ ad ag en, 6. —_ _ _ — ng, the oe —_— ng HO _ _ out you Mage" ight 
half, - Fw - - ary _ ow Tov DI - _ ": Inot = OT rhe he 2 the nk tl -_ my 5 
"Wi S 3 e hei th to read er. * rOMs wit ubits 25 ma ; Tt. ons avens -rifin thor ere 1e mid 1e mid le | 
rl a. Wks the h th ) is rrip FEY of the Ho ay [ger bar x,and 0 hors ; bec and in the = Zeb 
Dy th _ Co 'Y o the Sue 5 ri arm So e ms ingt ere outh 0 whi ch is e auſe the Farunt ls ROY ſhould: p 
H nd nc ich re ) ple : on 1at @. | ME o the Was 1S ch M eſtee whe 2by 41 er irs 
: _ to Fifth. FE Ys Seq or as 3 t For 6c menrioned r=_— right mole d the ew Tex Inche 
86,0 we © By 'T fick ropo - qui: r as I: A O in c e ere on el OOrY © = and requ moſt 'O $ b alm 
R b nty the Ye, © ich thi com rLtion alter 2 TO "> nd g to Frag. 6. WW ut {id I the : Cn Glor) roward 
, read cubi por 5 that i erefi monl Q ep Or 0 + An Þ ris eg wall hich. e 2: left he y look 10UsS S 
9. th th Its w ch b r in M Ore y cal Wer! ne a d | tak . b wher rear , as M we thou - Or reby > for part 
ereof of th as th efor OT OO led, A ing row a no en to C the Buren any hi. eith gh for the N it 1S i diver 
"x bef, e ho e le e the is = a Te! - ha pt be > preſery all ning 4 ona cr, 1 bro! kl Spies, 
—_— Ore uſe ; ngth cemp + th,a he Garg = the Walls ; og omg ng ity fak ide, lead- 
Periſtili e Fr ther hoe A th ple ro gracef n | ſho ers ole W: wcl Wall « thin e ith ead- 
ing Ty - ont of hou ud ereof of th the E eful | W ald þ y» Vere Pap ny a}ls in 1 NAIT I ; nor the tben 
Ous from r Porte or E ſe. ten cu Ace e ho ar. | ue - made - It ak 1NtO 1Ure gc gt _——- thickn wm 
. 6 4 . ds ] - le els 
oft ) 6 | a toi : bits ordin uſe þ, |* ambe et Ns ſuch _ i Tos unb And jt ac AS TE £ 
NM {id al ein Wa 4 into rs too, O gre ay the £ broke , the nd- 
—_ is doudl age _ And th Gal ” e hou? cs IT. B—_ che ſeveral Or rathe "= DEER. chat the care was 
at of Or aS 2 the 1 a —_ At « 2 Chron: < ws ; amber Chamb: up £ Wirhe with: 1NCF the Be wr were 
che Houſe, 0 mo _—_ of t nd of the B SE — os A: ans ofthe 
nd. i ins : : k ] 1 
TE oroey cis were ings | 9. Sol a5 nevdtul coal x richer, cn all nd wire a 
>: hos ro th Arras hg 7 \- 9w=dnarh nr re which inhode the 
vill nds rn th uil $ ſuif VEN CR Ll "6 nid the the 
be thi eadth Jo eh ilt th ci Fyeeoay up i rds, ale y w 
to the L be th "2 " To honey | | +4 ho enr rey it \h 1NTo bl out prey enT 
tle et; | the it,th wit ule the oujd r_ dead or 
= of om top 1e Bulk 1 b 3 and uſe of o ſo of th middie 
the roy of 688 ke B nithed it ator 
5. ce Ho p th y and y ed - the C only . _ 
ven it ule : fo Bod boa itz ham! 127g 
e beams _ the of thi oy s of Hf. and gms 
and by tke 1$ e Houſc | edar coVe- 
? ( O of the Nn L £4: 7 k Or 
oe rand bo ee 
ult- Pipes bor- beams 
, and and pe 
cre ra: 


-2 


3Ga 
7 = 


the 6 
cieli 
ngs ; 
3 th 
E ar 

ched 

7 Be 
S Ai 
and Bo 
FE ard 
s wh 
ere . 
the 
OL - 
wit; 

is far 


VI. | 


the Houſe was covered, which was made of other Wood, which 
was more pliable than Cedar, and would: better endure bowing 
and bending ) with Cedars. 

10 And then he built chambers againſt all the houſe 3, 


five cubits high c : and they reſted 4 on the houſe 


with timber of cedar e. : 

6 Which Interpreters underſtand of thoſe Chambers deſcribed 
wer. 5, 6. But why ſhould that be repeated again,and that ſo darkly 
and confuſedly, after he had particularly and exa&tly treated of 
them ? ( unleſs to give an account of the height of each Chamber, 
or Story, which before was not done. ) And the Hebrew words may 
be truly and properly rendred thus, He built a roof, ( to wit, a 
flat and plain Roof, called Yatziah, becauſe of the cxat reſem- 
blance it hath with the Floor of an Houſe) over all the houſe, accord- 
ing to the manner of all the I/raeliriſh Buildings, which were flat 
at the top ; of which, ſee Deut. 22; 8. Joſh. 2:6. 2 Sam. 11:2. The 
inner Roof was arched, wer. 9. that it might be more beautiful 
and glorious to behold ; but the outward Roof was flat. c Above 
the Walls of the Temple ; which was neceſſary, that it might be a 
little higher than the arched Roof, which ir was deſigned to cover 
and ſecure, 4d Heb. it refed, to wit, the Roof : for the Hebrew 
Verb is of the ſinguiar Number. e Which reſted upon the top of 
the Wall, as the Chambers, wv. 5+ reſted upon the ſides of the 
Wall. Bur all this I ſubmit to the Learned and Judicious. 

ix © And che word of the LORD came unto So- 


lomon f, ſaying, ] | 
f Either by ſome Prophet, or rather in a Viſion or Dream, as it 
did before. k : ; i 
12 Concerning this houſe which thou art in building g, 
| * Chap. * jf thou wilt walk in my ſtatutes, and execute my 
39.4 judgments, and keep all my commandments to walk 
| in them, then will I perform my word with thee, 
| *2Sam. * which I ſpake unto David thy father. 
7- 13. g God ſpeaks thus, partly ro encourage him to proceed in his 
1 Chron, Work ; and partly,to purge out that Pride and Vain glory, ( which 
22.10, God, the ſearcher of hearts, ſaw either then did, oc would ariſe in 
Solomon's Mind, as being the Author and Builder of fo glorious a 
Work : ) and that Preſumption and Security which was very likely 
to grow, and God foreſaw would grow both in Solcmon,and in the 
People ; as if God was now 1n a manner engaged to continue his 
Preſence with them,and in his own Temple ; and that they had now 
no great reaſon to fear God s departure from them, though they 
ſhould provoke him- Therefore he exprefſeth the Condition upon 
which his Promiſe and Favour is ſuſpended : and by aſſuring him 
thereof in caſe of Obedience, he plainly intimates the contrary, 
upon his Diſobedience- ; 
13 AndI will * dwell among the children of Iſrael, 


and will not forſake my people lfrael. 

14 So Solomon built the houſe, and finiſhed it. 

15 And he built the walls of the houſe within with 
| Or,fr9m boards of cedar,|| both the floor þ of the houſe,and the 
the flor of jalls of the cieling i, and he covered them k on the in 


«aged ſide with wood /, and covered the floor of the houſe »; 


walls, &C. with planks of fir. 

and ſo h Or rather, from the floor, as it is in the Hebrew : for the floor it 

wer. 16, ſelf was not covered with Cedar, but with fir, as it here follows. 
i Or rather, as it is the Hebrew, unto the walls of the cieling, or of 
the roof ; i. e. unto the top of the Wall, which was even with the 
Roof : for the Root it ſelf was not of Stone, bur Wood. Or unto 
the walls of the cieling ; i. e. unto the Cieling itſelf ; which perform- 
ing the office of a Wall, may well be called by that name. For the 
name of a wall is not appropriated to Stone or Brick, becauſe we 
read of a brazen wall, Jer: 15: 20. and a wall of iron, Ezek: 4: 'Þ 
And that wall inte which Saul ſmote his javelin, 1 Sam. 19: 10. ſeems 
' more probably to be underſtood of Wood, than of Stone ; eſpeci- 
ally, conſidering that it was the Room where the King uſed ro dine. 
So by this Periphraſis, from the floor of the houſe, unto the walls of the 
cicling, he deſigns all the fide-walls of rhe houſe. & To wit, the 
ſide-walls of the Houſe,now mentioned. / 7. e. With other kind of 
Wood, even with Fir ; as appears from 2 Chron: 3: 35. wherewith 
the Floor is here ſaid to be covered. » This is here ſpoken only 
concerning the Floor, becauſe there was nothing. bur Planks of E Ir; 
whereas there was both Cedar and Fir in the tides of the Houſe, 
the Fir being either put above, or upon the Cedar ; or, intermixed 
with, or put between the Boards or Ribs of Cedar: as may be ga- 
thered from the ſaid Parallel place, 2 Chron. 3: 5. 


16 And he built twenty cubits on the ſides of the 
houſe » both the floor and the walls » with boards of 
cedar : he even built them for it within, ever for the 


+ Heb. Oracle, ever for the + moſt holy place p. 

Bolineſs of ,® #6: The moſt holy Place,which contained in the length of the 
holineſ; Houſe twenty Cubits, by comparing this with wer. 2, and wer. 17. 
" which may be faid to be o7 the ſides of the houſe, becauſe this part 
took off 20 Cubits in length from each fide of the Houſe, and was 
alto 20 Cubits from ſide to fide, ſo it was 20 Cubits every way ; or 
on the ſides, ( i« e. on all the ſides, as indeed it was ) of the houſe, or 
of that houſe ; to wit, The moſt holy place,as it here follows, Or, from 
the ſides of the houſe ; i. e. from one lide to the other. And ſo this is 
meant only of the Partition-Wall, which was between the holy and 
the moſt holy Place. o Or rather, as wer: 15. from the flooy to the 
wall, or ceiling, or roof. So it is not neceſlary, at leaſt by virtue of 
theſe words,to underſtand this,as they generally do, That the Flaor 
it {elf was built with Cedar ; but only all the ſides of it from the 
bottom 20 Cubits upward. IF it be ſaid, that the whole Houſe,and 
conſequently the moſt holy Place, was 3o Cubits high, wer. 2. it 
may be replied, either, That that is true only of the greater Houſe 
or the holy Place,which is called the houſe, wer: 17. and that the leſ- 
ſer,or that moſt holy Placegyas but 20 Cubits high,as divers think; 
or that the ren cubits at the top, were covered with ſome other 
Wood or thing ; or were left open, that it might thereby receive 
both Light from the Candleſticks,and Smoke from the Altar of In- 
cenſe, þ 7. e. That it might be the Oracle, or, the met holy place. 


| Chap. 


*Exod. 
25- 8. 


ET 41NG LS 


Chap. yy 
Or, on. the inner-ſide ( whereby he might imply, that the outſide of 

the Partition-Wall which looked towards the holy Place, was or 

ſo covered. ) Of ( for the Hebrew Lamed is very oft a note of the 

Genitive Caſe ) the Oracle, even of the moſt holy place: which laſt 

words are added, to explain what he means by the word Oracle, 

which he had not uſed before. 

17 And the houle q, that js, the temple 7, before its, 
was forty cubits long. | 

q ie e. The holy Place. r This is added, to reſtrain the ſignifica« 
tion of the word houſe, which otherwiſe notes the whole Building. 
5 z. e. Before the Oracle. Or, as it is in the Hebrew,before my face; 
7. e. before the place of my Preſence. Or, it may be ſaid to be 
before God, becauſe he being pleaſed to diſcribe himſelf as fitting 
upon the Cherubim, hath his face towards this houſe, where he 
beholds the ſervices of his People. So this part of the Houle di- 
ſtin& from the moſt Holy, hath its harmonious proportions alſo. 
The Length 45, to the Height 30, is Seſquiterian, or4q to; ; 
( which is that of a Fourth in Muſick : ) The Length to the 
breadth, 4o to 20; as 2 to 1 : The Height to the Breadth, 3o ta 
20, as 3 tO 2. 

18 And the cedar of the houſe within was carved 
with || knops, and | open flowers ; all was cedar rc, Or 
there was no ſtone ſeen. _ gourd; 

t 7. e. All the Houſe was covered with Cedar. Queff. How was 4 Heb, 
this rrue, when it was covered with Fir, 2 Chron: 3: 5 ? Anſ. 1+ It openings of 
was done with Cedar and Fir ; of which ſee on wer: 15. 2. Ir may flowers, 
be ſaid to be all cedar, becauſe the greateſt part was ſp, univerſal 
Particles being oft ſo uſed. 3. Cedar is here named, not to exclude 
all other Wood, but Stone only ; as the following words ſhew. 

4. Or, all wasof Cedar ; that is, all the Carving was of Cedar. 

19 And the oracle he prepared « in the houſe x 
within y, to fer there the ark of the covenant of the 
LORD. | 

4 i.e. Adorned and fitted it for the Receipt of the Ark. x Heb. 
in the miadle of the houſe, or building ; not the middle Mathematically 
or exattly, bur in general within the Houle, as that Phralc, :z: :he 
middle, ott ſignifies 3 as Deut: 4: 11. Joſh; 7: 21+ Dan. 3.26, y Or, 

2 the uttermoſt part of the Houle 3 for 1o this was, the entrance ins 
to the Houle being art the other end. 


20 And the oracle in the forepart z was twenty cu- 
bits in length, and twenty cubirs in breadth, and twen- 
ty cubits in the height thereof a: and he overlaid it 
with f pure gold,and fo þ covered the altar c which wes 4 11, 
of cedar d. fout vp, or 


z Or rather, which was in the inner part, to wit of the Houſe, cal- beatengili, 
ed here in Hebrew, the fore-part ; not becauſe a Man firſt enters there, 
but becauſe when a Man is entring, or newly entred into the 
ouſe, it 1s ſtill before hime Thus the ſame or the like word pro- 
ceeding from the ſame Root, is oft uſed, as Levis. 10. 18. 1 King. 
6 19, 29, 39, 36. 1 Chron. 28. 1, a Obje#- The gicat Houſe was 
39 Cubirs high, above wer. 2. Av. It is probably aiftirmed by di- 
vers, that the moſt holy Place was not 1c high as the holy Place, 
by ten Cubits z; which was no way inconvenient, nor againſt the 
Rules of Proportion obſerved in Buildings. And as the ſecond part 
of the Building was far lower than the tirſt, which was the Porch 
lo the third part might be conſiderably lower than the ſecond. And 
ir might be lower either, z. Outwardly, or in reſpe& of the Walls 
of it, which might be only 20 Cubirs high. and at that height co= 
vered with a flat Roof 3 1t being bur decent that that eminently 
holy Place ſhould be aiſtinguitned from the lets holy, even by 
its outward and viſible thape. Or 2. Inwardly, or within the 
Walls of that part. For although this part might be vaulted at the 
top, as the holy Place was, which vaulted Roof ſome think was 
ten Cubirs high 3 yet here might be the difference, That the vaulted 
Roof of the holy Place lay open to view ; whereas that of the 
moſt holy was covered with a flat Roof from Wall ro Wall, at the 
height of 20 Cubits. 6b 7«e. With Gold, chap. 7. 48. 1 Chron. 28. 
18+ c To wit, The Altar of Incenſe, which was pur next to the 
moſt holy Place, wer. 22. d ObjeF. This Altar was made of Shit= 
tim Wood, Exod, 3o. 1 Anſ. Either that was covered with Cedar. 
that it might be agreeable to the reſt, a being Cedar, as was laid, 
ver. 18; Or this was a new Altar which Selozon made by Divine 
Command and DireCion, delivered to him, either immedaatly, or 
by his Father : of which, ſee 1 Chron, 28. 12, &c. Burt this place 
may 1cem to be better tranſlated thus, and he covered the alrar with 
Cedar, either to make ir like the reſt ; or, becauſe this was a new 
Altar made of Stone, and therefore fit to be covered with Cedar, 
rhat it might better receive and retain the Gold wherewith this 
Cedar was over-laid, ver. 22. 


21 So Solomon overlaid the houſe e within with 
pure gold f : and he made a partition by the chains of 
gold g before the oracle hb,and he overlaid it i with gold: 

e Or, that« houſe, to wit, the Oracle. f Compare 2 Chron. 3. 8. 
g 3. e, He made a Veil,which was upon,or before the Partition ; or 
which was a further Partition berween the holy,and the moſt holy; 
which Veil did hang upon theſe golden Chains. Others render it 
thus, he cloſed or ſhut ( as the word ſignifies in the Chaldee DialeR, 
from which divers Hebrew words borrow their fignification ) it 
( 7. e, the Houſe now mentioned ; to wit, the Door of it ) with 
chains or bars of gold. þ i. e. In the outward part of the Wall, or 
Partition, which was ere@ed between the Oracle and the holy 
Piace, which is properly ſaid to be before the Oracle, which was 
the ſpace within, and beyond that Partition : for there the Veil 
was hung ; and there the Chains or Bars, or whatſoever is was 
which faſtned the Doors of the Oracle, were placed, i To wit, 
the Partition ; which he here diſtinguiſheth from the houſe or the 
main Walls of the Houſe, which he had in the former part of this 


Verſe told us were overlaid with Gold ; and now he affirms as much 
of the Partition. 


. 22 And the whole houſe & he overlaid with gold, 
until he had finiſhed all the houſe : alſo the whole at- 
tar that vas by the oracle /, he overlaid with gold mm. 


Not hs 7 


{ Oily. 
+ Hl 


trees 0j 


*.Px0 
25, 2 
| Or, 
Cherul 
fretch 
firth | 
Bings. 


+ Hel 
opening 
Amer 


| Or, 
futſq 


' [Or, 
leaves 
the doo 
f Hel 
opening 
fawers. 


| Or 5 

all the 
Purten 
thereo) 
Withg 
Ora:ng 
Fhereo 


Vy 


| Chup: VI: 


K-# 


[. 


even the Chambers belonging to it- # 7. e. The Altar of Incenſe, 
which was ſet in the Holy place cloſe by the Doors of the Oracle. 
x As before he overlaid it with Cedar : of which, ſee the Notes 
ON Vere 20, : 

23 4 And within the oracle he made two cheru- 
bims » of || + olive-tree s, each ten cubics high. 

1 Beſides thoſe rwo made by Moſer, Exod: 25: 18: which were of 
Gold, and far leſs than theſe, and fixed in another place and poſture. 
o Or, of oily trees, which ſometimes are diſtinguiſhed from the 
Olive-trees, as Iſo. 41. 19. 

24 And five cubits as the one wing of the cherub, 
and five cubits the other wing of the cherub : from the 
uttermoſt part of the one wing unto the uttermoſt part 
of the other, were ten cubits. 

25 And the other cherub was ten cubits : both the 
cherubims ere of one meaſure, and one iſe. 

26 The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and 
ſo was it of the other cherub. 

27 And he ſet the cherubims within the inner houſe ; 
and *|| they ſtretched forth the wings of the cherubims, 

ſo that the wing of the one touched the ene all, and 

}Or: /? the wing of the other cherub couched the other wall : 
_ " and their wings touched one another in the midit of 
{rh their the houſe. 


& Not only the Oracle, butall the Holy place ; and, as ſome add, | 


j Oily. 
+ Heb. 
irees of oil, 


*.Pxod- 


95, 20. 


ning 28 And he overlaid the cherubims with gold. 
29 And he carved all the walls of the houſe round 
about with carved figures of cherubims p, and palm-trees 
+Heb. 9, and f open flowers, within and witliour r. 
openings of þ As ſigns of the Preſence and ProteQion of the Angels vouch- 
Aowers, fafed by God to that Place. q Emblems of that Peace and Victory 


over their Enemies, which the 1ſraelites duely ſerving God in that 
place might expe&. r Within the Oracle and without it, in the 


Holy place. - 
30 And the floor ofthe houſe he overlaid with gold, 
within and without. 
31 T And for the entring of the oracle, he made 
10: doors of olive-tree : the lintel and ſide-poſts ere || a fifth 
Fu-quare, PATE of the wall /. 
ſ 7,e. Four Cubits in height or breadth, whereas the Wall was 
20 Cubits. Or, a ffth part of the Door now mentioned. Orrather 


froe-ſquare, having 5 Sides, and 5 Angles, which is not incongruous 
nor unuſual in Buildings. 


[Or 32 The two || doors alſo were of olive-tree, and he 
Loves of Carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm- 
tk or. trees, and f open flowers, and overlaid :bewe with go'd 


THeb. and ſpread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the 
epenings of 
fer, PAlM-rrees. 

33 Soalſo made he for the door of the temple, poſts 
lor, Of olive-trees || a fourth part of the wall s, | 
fur-ſquare 5 Or rather, four-ſquare. See on wer. 31. 

' Brek. 34 And the two doors were of fir-tree : the * two 
41.23, leaves of the one door were folding, and the twoleaves 


of the other door were folding. 
35 And he carved thereon cherubims, and palm-trees, 


and open flowers, and covered them with gold, fitted 
upon the carved work. 


36 And he built the inner court : with three rows 
of hewed ftone, and a row of cedar-beams «. 

# 1, e, The Prieſts Court, 2 Chron. 4.9. ſo called, becauſe it was 
next to the Temple which it did encompaſs. « Which is under- 
ſtood, either, 1. Of the thickneſs of the Wall, the three rows of 
Stones being one within anothcr, and the Cedar innermelt as a 
lining to the Wall. Or, 2, Of the height of the Wall, which was 
only 3 Cubits high, that the people might ſee the Prieſts Sacrificing 
upon the Altar, which was in their Court ; each row of Stones be- 
ing about acubir, and poſſibly of a diftering Colour from the reſt, 
and all covered with Cedar. Or rather, 3. Of ſo many Galleries, 
one on each ſide of the Temple, whereof the Three firſt were of 
Stone, and the Fourth of Cedar, all ſupported with rows of pillars: 
upon which there were many Chambers for the uſes of the Tem- 
ple, and of the Prieſts ; for it is hard to think, that only the ma- 
king of a low Wall about the Court would be called a Building of 
the Court. And thata great number of Buildings and Rooms were 
neceſlary for the various Offices and Works which were to be done; 
and the Treaſures of all ſorts which were to be laid up in the 
Temple largely fo called, is ſufficiently evident from the nature of 
the things, and divers paſſages in Scripture ; See among others, 
1 Chron: 28; 11, 12. 

37 © In the fourth year was the foundation of the 
houſe of the LORD laid, inthe month Zif. 


38 Andin the eleventh year,in the month Bul, ( which 


lOr, with 55 the exghth month ) was the houſe finiſhed ||throughour 


all the ap=- . : 
tenor, All the parts thereof, and according to all the faſhion of 
theref,and It : To was he ſeven years x in building it. 

wHthalthe x Compleat, and 6 Months, as appears by computation, Bur 


Tnances ſmaller Summs are uſually negle 


Gted, and ſwallowed up in the grea- 
hereof, ter, both in Scripture, as Juds - o 


; : 20; 46: 2Sam: 5: 5; 1 Kings 2: 11: 
and in other Authors. Is is nor ſtrange that this Work took up ſo 
much time: for, 1: The Temple properly ſo called, was for Quan- 


tity the leaft part of it, there being very many and great Buildings 
both above Ground in the ſeveral Courts, Cog ana only _ 
Court of the Prieſts be mentioned, yet it 15 thereby unplied, thar 
the ſame thing was proportionably done in the others ) and under 
Ground. 2. The great curiolity of Art which was uſed here, and 
the fewneſs of exquulite Artiſts, required the longer time for the 


1 


N G 8. Chap. VII 
doing of it. And if the Puilding of Diana's Temple did im ploy 
all ſia for 200 Years ; and the Building of one P;ramid employed 
360 Thou!and Men, for 20 Years together; both which, Pliny af- 


firms: no reaſonable Man can wonder that this Temple was 7 Years 
in Building. | 


aA P. VIL. 


The building of Solomon's houſe ; the houſe of Lebanon, 1,—— 5, The 
Porch of Pidars, and of judgment : the .houſe of Pharaoh's daughter, 
6, — 12, Hiram's work of the two pillars of braſs, 13,22, of 
the molten ſea, 23, -- 26. of the ten baſes of braſs, 27,-=-37. The 
ren brazen lavers : all theveſſels of braſs and gold, 38, —=—=—— 50, The 
cedicated things are brought into the Temple, 51. 


#* Chap: 


9: Io 


ROT Solomon was building his. own houſe #* thirteen 
years b, and he finiſhed all his houſe. 
a3 The Royal Palace for himſelf and for his Succefſſors. Or, his 
horſes, the Singular Number being put for the Plural. 5 Almoſt 
double time to that in which the Temple was built;becauſe neither 
were the Materials fo far provided and prepared for this, as they 
were for the Temple : nor did either he or his people ule the ſame 
alacrity and diligence in this, as in the other Work ; nor had they 
the ſame Obligations to this Work, as they had to that, to which 
they were quickned by God's expreſs Command ; and by the ne«- 
ceſlity of ſetting up God's Worſhip there, as the Foundation of all 
the hopes and happineſs both of King and People, whereas this 
Building was only for Solomon's greater conveniency, and he had 
already a Palace of David's Building. 
2 UC He built alſo the houſe of the foreit of Lebanon 
c, the length thereof d was a hu 1dred cubits, and the 
breadth thereof fifry cubits, and che height thereof 
thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar-pillars e, with 
cedar-beams upon the piilars fe 
c An Houſe ſo called. Either, birt, Becauſe it was builr in the 
Mountain and Foreſt of Lebanzn, for his Recreation there in Sum= 
mer-time- Burit is generally and more probabjy held, that it was 
in or near Jeruſalem, both becauſe there was the :hrone of jud:ment, 
v, 7. which was fitteſt ro be in the place of his conſtant and uſual 
Relidence : and becauſe there was the chief Magazin of Arms, 1/a: 
22; 8: and Solomon's Golden Shields were pur there, as is manifeſt 
from 1 Kings 10: 17: and 14; 25, 26, 28: which no wiſe prince 
would do ina place fo remote from his Royal City, . and in the ut= 
moſt Borders of his Kingdom, as this was. Or 1ather, Secondly, 
From ſome reſemblance it might have with that Place, for the plea- 
fant Shades and Groves which were abour it: nothing being more 
frequent both in Sacred and other Writers, than to transfer the 
names of Carmel, ot Tempe, or the like, to other Places of the ſame 
nature and quality with them. d To wit. of the principal Manſion ; 
ro which douttleſs other Buildings were adjoyned e Upon which 
the Houſe was Built, and between which there were four ſtately” 
Walks. f Which were laid for the Floor of the ſecond Story- 
And it was covered with cedar above upon the Þ + pep. 
beams that lay on forty five pillars, fifteenin a row g. 
g So in this ſecond Story were only three rows of pillars, which 
was ſufficient for the Ornament of the ſecond, and for the ſupport : 
of the third Story. ; £5 
4 And there was windows in three rows, and light , Heb! 
was apainſt light þ in three ranks 5. babe a= I 
h One direa!y oppoſite or anſwering to the other, as is uſual in gain# fight. | 
well-contrived Buildings z One exaGtly under another. | 
5 And ail the || doors and poſts were ſquare with the | Or.ſpaces | 
windows : and light was againſt light i» threeranks k. 5nd pillars 
k He ſpeaks, either, firſt, of rhe ſame Lights mentioned, wv. 4 it were {| 
being the manner of the Hebrews to repeat the ſame things. Or ſquare in. * 
rather, of the {malſer Windows or Lights, which were over the 1c- projþe#; 


ribs, 


* 


veral Doors, as the manner of many Buildings 15. 

6 4 And he made a porch of piitars / ; the length - 
thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty 
cubits : and the porch m was || before them : and the aber , | 
pillars, and the thick beam o were || before them. ou = 


[ 7. e. Supported by divers Pillars, for the more Magnificent ene ,,, 
trance into the Houle ; upon which alſo it is thoughr there were Oi 
other Rooms built, as in the Houſe. m: Now mentioned, which is ad 
ſaid to be before them, 3.e. before the pillars on which-che Houſe ,,.., * 
of Lebanon ſtood ; or. before the Doors and Potts mentioned-w. 5; * 
or, a porch ; i« e another and aleſſer Porch which was vefore them ; 7.8: 
before the pillars of the greater Porch now mentioned. » Or,:and 
pillars; 4. e. tewer and lefler pillars for the ſupport ofthe lefler Porctn 
» Which was laid upon theſe pillars, as the ofhers were, v. 2, - 

7 © Then he made a porch p for the throne q where 
he might Judge r, eves the porch of Judgment : and if 
was Covered with cedar f from one 1ide of the floor to + Heb, 


che other /. Be | - from flooy 

2 Another Porch or diſtin& Room without the Houſe, q Deſeri- #0 floor. 
bed chap. 10. 18: r The people thar brought their Cauſcs before 
him. / z. e, The whole Floor ; or fron floor 50 floor, i. e. from the 
lower Floor on the Ground, to the upper Floor which covered 


it, : ; 

8 © And his houſe where ke dwelt, bad another courc 
wichin the porch t, which was of the like work. Solomon 
made alſo an houſe for Pharaohs daugter »; ( * whom + Chap; 
he had taken zo wife ) like unto this porch x. 3 gs 18 

7 7. e. Between the Porch and the Houle, called therefore rhe 
middle Court, 2 Kings 20: 4 u Of which 1ce 1 Kings 3:1: and 
2 Chron: 8:11. x Not for Form or Quantity, but for the Materials, 
and Workmanſhip, the Rooms being covered with Cedar, and 


furniſhed with like Ornaments. | EE I ET 9 

9 Alt theſe y wer: of coſtly ſkonies according tp the 
meaſures of hewed ſtonesz, fawed with ſaws, within and 
without 4, even from the foundation wnto the coping b, 


and /o on the ongtlide toward the Freat Court c- 


3G 3 y Buildings 


s P- VII. 


F Heb. 
4 _ cubits high a piece p: andaline of twelve cubits did 


4: 


42, 


\ 


"= Gi» 


7 Buildings deſcribed here and in the former Chapter = Either, 
Eft, which were hewed in ſuch meaſure and proportion as exatt 
Workmen uſe to hew ordinary Stones. Or, Secondly, As large 

*ascommon hewed Stones, which arr oft very great, « Both on the 
aſide ofthe Buildings which were covered with Cedar, and on the 
outſide alſo. - 6 From the bottom to the top ofthe Building. c Not 
only on the outſide of the front of the Houſe, which being moſt 
viſible, Men are more careful to adorn ; but alſo of the other ſide 
of the Houſe, which looked towards the great Court belonging to 
the King's Houſe. | 

Io And the foundation wa of coſtly ſtones, ever 


vreat ſtones, ſtones of ten cubits d, and ſtones ot eight 


Cubits. 

d Not ſquare, which would have been both unneceſſary, and un- 
portable. and unmanageable ; but of ſolid meafure, by which Stones 
and Timber are uſually meaſured : aud ſo they were only two 
Cubits ſquare, but there were twenty ſolid Cubits contained in them. 


| And fo alfo the following eight Cubits are to be underſtood. 


11 And above e were coſtly ſtones ( after the mea- 


ſures of hewed ftones ) and cedars f. 
e i.e. In the Roof or upper part ; for this is oppoſed to the foun- 
dation. f Intermixed here the one, and there the other. : 
12 And the great court g round about, was with 


three rows of hewed ſtones, and a row of cedar-beams, 


hb, both for the inner court of the kouſe of the LORD 


z, and for the porch of the houſe k. 

g To wit, of S#lomon's Dwelling-Houſe, mentioned wey. 8. h Of 
which ſee the Norte on 1 Kings6. 36. i Or, as ( Heb, and, which 
is oft uſed in that Senſe for a Particle of compariſon or ſimilitude, 
as Prov. 11. 25. and 1y. 3. and 25. 23. ) for the inner conrt, GC. 1. e. 
as it wasin that inner Court, of which the very ſame thing is ſaid, 


' x Kings 6: 36. Otherwiſe it might ſeem very improper and 


impertinent to ſpeak ofthe Court of the Lord's Houſe here, where 
hes treating only of Solomon's Houſe. k Or, of this Houſe, to wat, 
of which I am here ſpeaking ;-+7z. e. Of the King's Houſe, the 
Porch whereof had pillars, werſe 6. and theſe both of Stone and 
Cedar, asmay ſeem moſt probable, becauſe the other pillars were 
ſuch. And whereas the Number and Quality of the pillars of the 
Porch was omitted, verſe 6. that defe&is here ſupplied, and we are 
implicitly acquainted with both of them! Butthis I ſpeak with 
Tubmiſſion. T: : 
E 13 4 And king Solomon ſent and fet Hiram out of 
YTrE. . - : 
14 He 2a } a widows ſon of the tribe of Naphttali 
I, and his father was a man of Tyre m, a worker in 
braſs: and he was filled with wiſdom and underſtand- 
ing, and cuning to work all works in braſs » : and he 


cameto king Solomon, and wrought all his work. 

I Obj. She was one of the daughters of Dan, 2 Chron: 2: 14. Al. 
So indeed Hiram King of Tyre there affirms ; but he might cafily 
miſtake or be miſinformed, eſpecially being no 1ſraelite, nor a Care- 
Ful Obſerver ofthe diſtin&ion of Tribes. Or, ſhe might be of Dar 


| by her Father, and of Naphthali by her Mother, or by her Huſ- 


band who was of that Tribe, and therefore ſhe was truly « widew 
of Naphthali, m Either by his deſcent, being a Tyrian by Birth : or, 
by Education and Habitartion, he or his Father being given to the 
Nudy of theſe Arts, and having planted themſelves at Tyre for their 
improvement therein. However that was, it was a ſingular Provi- 
dence of God that there was at that time ſo excellent a Work-man 
fit for ſo great and glorious Works. » And of gold, and ſtone, and 
purple, and blue, &c. asis affirmed 2 Chron: 2: 14. But only his skill 
in braſs is here mentioned, becauſe he ſpeaks only of the Braſen 
things which he made; 

15 For he Þ+ caft * two pillars of braſs o, of eighteen 


compals either of them about 9. 
_ o Of which ſee 2 Kings 258 16, 17; Jer! 52: 21. p Obj. They are 
ſaid to be 35 Cubits high, 2Ehron: 3- 15. Avſ. Thar place mani- 
feſtly ſpeaks of both the pillars ; and this of each, or one pillar, as 
It is in the Hebrew. Obj. But then it ſhould have been 36 Cubirs- 
Anſ.” Either the odd half Cubir is ſwallowed up either in the top of 
the Chapiter, or in the bottom of the Baſis of each pillar ; or, it is 
negleQed in the Account, as commonly ſmall Meaſures or Numbers 
are. 9 So the Diameter was four Cubirs, which, conſidering the cha- 
* piter oof five cubits added to the height of each pillar, 2 Chron. 3; 14. 
was,not unproportionable to the height. 

16 And he made two chapiters of molten brafs, to 
ſet upon the tops of the pillars : the height of the one 
chapiter as five cubits /, and the height of the other 
chapiter was five cubits. 

of 0bj. Ir is but three Cubits in 2 Kings. 25. 179. An. The word 
chapiter is taken diverſly, as hundreds of other words are, either 
more largely for the whole, ſoit is 5 Cubits; or, (more ſtrifly, ei- 
ther for the pommels, as they are called, 2 Chron; gt 12; or for the 
Cornice or Crown, andſo it was but three Cubits, to which the 
Pomegranates being added make it four cubits, as it is below, wer. 19. 
and the other work upon it took up one Cubirt more, which in all 
made five Cubitse 

17 And nets of checker-work, and wreathes of chain- 
work, for the Chapiters * which were upon the top of 
the pillars : ſeven for the one chapiter, and ſeven for 
the other chapiter. 

_ + Which thoſe Nets and Wreathes did encampaſs, either cover- 
ing, and as it were receiving and holding the Pomegranates,or being 
puxed with them. 

18-And he made « the pillars, and two rows x round 
about upon the net-work, to cover the chapiters that 
ere upon the top, with pomegranates ; and ſo did he 
for the other chapiter. 

« Or, ſe he maze, or framed, or perfeffed. = Either of Pome- 


N G 8S. 


ſo by comparing this with wer. 20: or of ſome other curious 
OTK. ; 

Ig And the chapiters that were upon the top of the 
pillars, were of lily-work y in the porch »,four cubits . 

y Made like the Leaves of Lilies, orſuch Flowers. & Or, as 
the porch, i. e. fuch Work as there wasin the Porch ofthe Temple, 
in which theſe Pillars were ſer, wer. 21, that ſo the work of the rops 
of theſe Pillars might agree with thar in the top of the Porch. So 
there is only an Ellipſis or defe& of the Particle as,which is frequent, 
as Gen. 49.9. Dent. 33: 22y Pal. 11: 1: Ja. 21; 8, a Of which ſee 
on ver. 16. 

20 And the chapiters upon the two pillars, had porre- 
granates alſo above, over againſt the belly 5, which a: 
by the net-work : and the pomegranates ere two hun- 


dred c, in rews round about upon the other chapiter. 

b So he calls the middle part of the Chapiter, and that which 
jetted furtheſt out. c Theſe Pomegranates are varioully accounted 
1n Scriptures. They are ſaid to be ninety and ſix on a ſide of # pillar ; 
z, & 1nN one Row, and in all an hwnared, Jer: 52: 23.. four great 
Pomegranates between the ſeveral Checker-works being added -to 
the firſt 96. Andit muſt needs be granted, that there were as many 
on the other ſide of the Pillar, or in the other Row, which makes 
them 200 upon a Pillar, as is here ſaid, and 400 upon both Pillars, 
as they are numbred, 2 Chron. 4. 13. 

21 * And he ſet up the pillars in the porch of the 
temple 4: and he ſet up the right pillar, and called the 
name thereof || Jachin e : and he ſet up the lefe pillar, 


and called the name thereof || Boaz. 

a Where they were placed for meer Ornament and Magnificence, 
for they ſupported nothing. e Fachin ſignifies he ; i:e: God ſball 
eftabliſh, to wit, his Temple, and Church, and People : and Boaz ſig- 
niftes, 71 it, or rather, in him ( to anſwer the he in the former name ) 
z ſtrength. So theſe Pillars being eminently ſtrong and ſtable, were 
in a manner Types or Documents of thar ſtrength which was in 
God, and would be put forth by God for the defending and eſta« 
bliſhing of his Temple and People, if they were careful to keep the 
Conditions required by God on their parts. 

22 And upon the top of the pillars ws lily-work ; 
{o was the work of the pillars finiſhed. 
23 CT And he made *a molten ſea f, ten cubits F 


from the one brim to the other ; it was round all abour 


did: compaſs it round about. 


for its vaſtneſs called a Sea, which name is given by the Hebrews to 
all great colleQions of Waters. The uſe of it was for the PrieFsto 
waſh their Hands and Feet,or other things as occaſion required, with 
the Water which they drew our of it. See 2 Chron; 4; 2. Compare 
Exod; 30: 19, 20: 

24 And under the brim of it round about, rhere were 


the ſea round about : 
rows k, when it was Caſt, 

g Or, carved or molten figures : for learned Hebricians note, that: 
this word ſignifies the Figures or PiQtures of all ſorts, as Flowers, 
Beaſts. &c. This general word is particularly explained of Oxer, 
2 Chron: 2:3: unleſs there were ſo many Figures, or Sculptures of 
Gourds, or other Flowers ; and in each of theſe alittle Ox's head; 
h So there were 3oo in all. : Together wirh the Sea, nor carved. 
k It ſeems doubtful whether the ſecond Row had ten in each Cubir, 
and ſo there were zoo more ; or, whether the ten were diſtributed 
into five in each Row. 

2 5 It ſtood upon twelve oxen J, three looking to- 
ward the north, and three looking toward the weſt, 
and three looking toward the ſouth, and three looking 
toward the eaſt y: and the ſea*was ſet above upon 


them, and all their hinder-parts ere inward. 

{ Of ſolid Braſs, which was neceſlary to bear ſo great a weight: 
it 15 probably conceived, that the Water was by Cocks drawn .out 
of the Mouths of theſe Oxen. m2 Party, for the more cqual and 
convenient ſupport of the Veſlel ; and partly, that divers perſons 
might draw Water our of it at the ſame rime, which was frequents 
ly neceflary, eſpecially in great Solemnities. 

26 And it was an hand-breadth thick, and the brim 
thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers 
of lilies: it contained ewo thouſand baths =. 

» Which amounts to 5oo Barrels, each Bath containing about 8 
Gallons ; the Bath being a meaſure of the ſame bignets with an 
Ephah, Ezek: 45: 1x. Obj, This Sea is ſaid to contain 3000 Baths, 
2 Chron: 4: 5. Anſ. Either there were two ſorts of Baths, as of Cu« 
bits, the 'one common, the other ſacred, and the ſacred held half as 
much more as the common : or rather, he here ſpeaks of what it 
did aCtually and uſually contain, to wir, 2000 Baths, which was 
ſufficient for uſe, and in 2 Ghron 4: 5: he ſpeaks of what it could 
contain if it were filled ro the brim, fs it 15 implied in the Hebrew 
words, which differ from theſe, and properly ſound thus, ſfrengthning 
zt ſelf ( to wit, to receive and hold as much as it could or being filled 
to its utmoſt capacity ) zt contained or could contain 3000 Baths. 

27 And he made ten baſes o of braſs : four cubits 
was the length of one baſe, and four cubits the breadth 


thereof, and three cubits the height of it. 

o Upon which ſtood the ten Lavers mentioned below, v: 38: 1 
which they waſhed the parts of the Sacrifices, 2 Chron; 4; 6. 

28 And the work of the baſes as on this »nanner * 
they had borders p, and the borders were between the 
ledges : 

phe brims, poſſibly for the more ſecure holding of the Lavers) 

29 And onthe borders that were between the ledges, 


were l10ns, OX6n, and cherubims 3 and upon the ledges 
#12076 


Chap. v1; 


*2Chrom 


(- I7: 
That is, 
he ſhalt 
eftabl;ſþ, 

|| That is, 
nit 1s 


firegth. 


: Jer, (2 


I 


7. 
3 
and his height was five cubits : and a line of thirty cubits | har 
brim ts © 
f He melted the Braſs, and caſt it into the form of a great Veſlel, his win. 


knops g compaſling it, ten in a cubit þ, * compaſling «, 
the knops were caſt 5 in two ,; .. 


> 


f He 
the b 


t He 


i He 
ſala 


t He 
upon ; 
face » 
Pillars 


| Chap. VII 


—_ 
ohere was a baſe Fr above: beneath the lions and oxen 
ere certain additions / made of thin work. 

r So he calls the uppermoſt part of the Baſe : for though it was * 
above, yet it was a Bale to the Laver, which ſtood upon it. 
ther as Baſes for the Feet of the ſaid Lions and Oxen : or, only as 
further Ornaments. 

20 C And every baſe had four brazen wheels z, and 
plates of braſs : and the four corneis thereof had under- 
ſetters « : under the laver were under-ſetters molten, 
at the ſide of every additien. 

t Whereby the Baſes and Lavers might be carried from place to 
place as need required. # Heb. Shoulders; fitly ſo called, becauſe 
they ſtrongly ſupported the Lavers. that they ſhould nor fall from 
their Baſes, when the Bales were removed together with the 
Lavers. ; ES: : 

31 And the mouth of it x within che chapiter y and 
above z w4s a Cubit 4: but the mouth thereof was round 
after the work of the baſe, a cubit and an half b : and 
alſo upon the mouth of it were gravings with their 
borders, four-{quare, not round c. 

x So hecalls that part in the ropofthe Baſe which was left hol- 
low, that the foot of the Laver might be ler into it, and faſtned in 
it. yz. e. Within the little Baſe, which he calls the chapiter, be- 
caule it roſe up from, and ſtood above the great Baſe, asthe Head 
doth above the reft of the Body. z Above the Chapiter ; for 
the Mouth went up. and grew wider like a Funnel. # Either in 
breadth : or rather in height: v: 35: whereof half a Cubir was above 
the Chapiter or little Baſc, asis faid v:25: and rhe other half 1s here 
implied to be within it, and below it. b'To wit, in compals. c $0 
the innermoſt part, called the Mouth, was round, but the ourword 
part was ſquare, as when a Circle is made within a Quadrangle. 


32 And under the borders were four wheels : and the 
+Heb. in axle»trees of the wheels were | joined to the baſe, and 
th boſe, the height of a wheel as a cubir and half a cubir. 
32 And the work of the wheels was like the work of 
a Chariot-wheel-: their axle-trees,arnd their naves, and 
their felloes, and their ſpokes w:re all molten 4. 

d And caſt rogether with the Baſes. 

34 And there were four under-ſetters to the four 
corners of one baſe : and the under-ſetters were of the 
very baſe itſelf e. 


e Not only of the ſame matter, but of the ſame piece, being 
caſt with it. 


25 And inthe top of the baſe 4 there a round 
compaſs of half a cubit high : and on the top of the 
baſe, the ledges thereof, and the borders thereof were 
of the ſame. 

36 For on the plates ofthe ledges thereof, and on the 
borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm- 

tHeb. trees, according to the | proportion f of every one, 
whareſs. and additions round abour. 

Ff Or, empty place, 1. e. aEcording to the bigneſs of the ſpaces 


which were left empty for them, implying that they were {ſmaller 
than thoſe above-mentioned. 


37 After this m«nner he made the ten baſes : all of 
them had one caſting, one meaſure, and one ſife. 
38 © Then made he ten lavers of braſs : one laver 
contained forty baths g: andevery laver was four cubits : 
' andupon every one of the ten baſes, one laver. 
g Ten Barrels ; of which ſee above on wer. 26. 
39 And he put five baſes on. the right Þ ſide þ of 
f Heb? - the houſe 3, and five on the left fide of the houſe & : 
fmilir. . and he ſet the ſea on the right ſide of the houſe ecaſt- 
'ward, over againft the ſouth 7. 
þ i. e. In the South-ſide, as is expreſſed in the end of the Verſe. 
and as the right ſide is uſed above 1 Kings 6: 8: and Pſal: Bg: 12. i Not 
. within the Houſe bur in the Prieſts Court, where they waſhed either 
their Hands or Feet, or the parts of the Sacrifices- k 7.e. On the 
North ſide; for this is here oppoſed to the right or South-fae. 17, e. 
In the South-Eaſt part, where the Offerings were prepared. 
40 CT And Hiram made the lavers, and the ſhovels, 
and the baſons :. So Hiram made an end of doing al! 
*the work that he made king Solomon, for the houſe of 
the LORD. 
-, 4r The two pillars, and the wo bowls of thechapiters 
that were On the top of the ewo pillars: and the two 
net-works to cover the two bowls of the chapiters, 
- which were on the top of the pillars : 
. 42 And four hundred pomegranates for the two 
1et-works, even two rows of pomegranates for one 
7, :  Net-work, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that 
t Heb. | were F upon the pillars : 


i. 


won the ; 43 And the ten baſes, and ten lavers on the baſes : 
A the 44 And one ſea, and twelve oxen under the ſea : 


45 And the pots ww, and the ſhovels, and the baſons : 
- and all theſe vefiels which Hiram made to king Solomon 
t Heb, for the houſe of the LORD, were of + bright braſs. 


made . m To ſeethe thoſe parts of the. Sacrifices which the Prieſts or, 
bright : or, Officers were to eat. -To theſe, fleſb-hooks are added, 2 Chron,+ 4. 16. 


Ig . In tne plain of Jordan did the king caſt them , 
the :3;k In the clay ground », between Succoth and Zarthan. 
eſe Y the Ke, Or, #n thick clay, fat, and tough, and tenacious, and therefore 


to be poured; 


teſt ro make Moylds ofall forts, into which the melted Brafs was | 


NG 8. 
47 And Solomon left all the veſſels unWeighed | 


weight of the braſs + found our. 
o Becauſe the weighing of them was very troubleſome, and to no #147. 
purpoſe : T Heb. 
48 And Solomon made all the veſſels that pertained [c97c<. 
unto the houſe of the LORD p : the altar of gold 4, 

and the table of gold, whereupon the * ſhew- bread * Exod: 
Was Y. Re: 
p Such as God by the Mouth of Moſes had commanded to be made 

for his Houſe and Service, and ſuch as Meſes had made, only theſc 

were larger, and richer, and more, according to the difference of 

the Temple, and Tabernacle, and Solomer's vaſt riches, and the 

poverty of Moſes and the Iſraelites at thar time. q To wit, of Tn- 

cenſe, as appears from 1 Chron; 28: 18: where this is mentioned 

amongſt the things for which David left Gold, and Solomon is hexe 

ſaid ro build it ; and therefore this cannor be that Altar made by 

Moſes, Exod: 25: 23, 24: ard 3e: 1, 3: whichalſo was of Shittim-Wood, 

whereas this was made of Cedar, and covered with Gold, r K:ngs 

6: 20. r Under which, by a Synedoche are comprehended both 

all the utenſils belonging to it, and the other ten Tables which he 

made together with it, 2 Chron: 4: 7,8. 

49 And the candleſticks / of pure gold z, five on 

the right /ide, and five on the lefc, before the oracle », 


with che flowers x, and the lamps, and the tongs of 

zold. 

J Which were ten, according to the number of the Tables,where- 

as Moſes made but one: whereby might be ſignified the progreſs of 

the Light of Sacred Truth, which was now grown clearer than it 

wasS1in Moſes his time, and ſhould ſhine brighter and brighter unril 

the perts& day of Goſpel-Light» £ Of maſlic and fine Gold. « In 

che Holy place. » Wrought upon the Candleſticks, as it had 
formerly been. Sce on Exod 25: 31. SD 7 

5o And the bowls, and the ſnuſfers, and the baſons, 

and the ſpoons, and the F cenfers of pure gold ; and + Heb, 
the hinges of gold, borh for the doors of the inner houſe, aſhpans. 
the moſt holy place, end for the doors of the houſe, 

to it, of the holy remple. 

51 So was ended all the work that king Solomon 

made for the houſe of the LORD : and Solomon 


brought in the f things * which David his father had + Heb. 


the LOR D. 


own charge.. Or, Secondly, So much of ir as was left. - x Thoſe 
which David had dedicated. and with them the Altar of Moſes, and 
ſome other of the old utenſils which were now laid aſide, far better - 


being pur in the room of them. 


| CHAP. VIIL 
The Feaft of the Dedication of the Temple ; The Ark of the Covenant with 
the Holy Inftruments are brought "into it ; The Lard giveth a token of his 
preſence, 1, 11+ Solomon's Bleſſmg and Thanksgivmg, 12, = =21. 
His Prayer, 22, Gi. Hrs Sacrifice of Peace-Offering 
62, = 66. 


Hen * Solomon affembled the elders of Iſrael s, 


7 


the fathers c of the children of Iſrael, unto king Solo- * Hebi 
mon 4in Jeruſalem e, that they mighe bring up the ark ,,;,z. 
f of the covenant of the LORD, out of the city of 
David g, which is Zion. : 

c The Senators, and Judges, and Rulers. 6 For each Tribe had a. 
peculiar Head or Governour. «c The chief Perſons of every grear 
Family in each Tribe. 4 Unto himſelf; the antecedent Noun be- 
ing put for the relative and reciprocal Pronoun, as is frequent with 
the Hebrews, e Where the Temple was built, and now finiſhed. 
f To the top of this high Hill of Miah, upon which it was builr ; 
whether they werenow to carry the Ark in a ſolemn pomp, that by 
this their attendance they might make a publick preteſſion of that 
ſervice and reſpe&, and obedience which they owed unto that God 
who was graciouſly and gloriouſly preſent in the Ark. g Where David 
had placed the Ark, 2 Sam: 6: 12, 179. Seeon 1 Kings 2:10; and 3:1. 
h Which 1s called Zion, becauſe it was built upon that Hill. 

2 And all the men. of 1frael ; aflembied themſelves 
unto king Solomon at the feaft &, in the month Etha- 
nim, which 7s the ſeventh month 1, _ Fey 5 

; Nor only the chief Men who were particularly invited, but a 
vaſt number of the common People, as being forward to ſee and ro 
joyn in this great and glorious Solemniry. k Underſtand either firſt, 
The Feaſt of Tabernacles, Or rather, Secondly, The Fealt of the 
Dedication; to which S:lomen had invited them, which was before 
thar Feaft : for that began on the 15th day of the 7:h month, Lev:23: 
34: but this began ar the leaſt 7 days before that Feaſt ; for Solomon 
and the People kept the Feaſt for 14 days. here v. 65. i.e. » days 
for the dedication of the Temple, and 7 orher days for that of 
Tabernacles ; and after both thele were finiſhed, he ſenr a!Ithe People 
ro their homes on the 23 day of the month. See 2 Chran: 7,9, 10, 
I Which time he choſe with common reſpe& to his Peoples conve- 
nience, becauſe now they had gathered wnralf their Fruits, and now 
they were come up to Jeruſalem, to Celebrate the Feaſt of Taber» 
nacles Queft. The Temple was nor finithtd rill the eighth month, 
1 Kings6: 38: how then could he invite themin the ſeventh month ? 
 Anſ. This wasthe ſeventh month of the next Year. For although 
the Houſe in al its parts was finiſhed the Year before, yet the ureniils 
of it deſcribed Chap; 7; were not then fully finiſhed, but rook up a 
conſiderable time afterward ; and many preparations were to be 
[made for this great and extraordinary occalion. 


3 And all the elders of Iliract came, and the prieſts 


Frook up the ark 1, 


3G 4 > Ecr 


Chap. VII 


; 
| 


0% + Heb. fol 
becauſe they were exceeding many : neither was the ;p. _ 


ing muliz| 


dedicated, eves the filver and the gold y, and the veſ- Holy chings 
ſels z did he put among the treaſurics of the houſe of Y — 


y Either, Firſt, All of it ; and ſo Solemon built it whally at his RES | 


and all the heads of che tribes b, the + chief of *2 Chron: ! 


| 
|; 


| 
' 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


ll | 


| 


ap. VIIL. x1 
» For although the Levites might do this, Numb; 4: 15: yet the 
Prieſts did it at this time, partly, for the greater honour of the 
Solemnity ; and partly, becauſe the Levites mightnor enter into the 
Holy place, much leſs into the Holy of Holies, where it was to be 
ntl into which the prieſts themſelves might not have entred 
if the High-Prieſt alone could have done it.  Obj. The Levites arc 
ſaid to have done this, 2 Chron: 5; 4. Arſe That is moſt true, be- 
cauſe all the Prieſts were Levites, though all the Lepites were not 
Prieſts. 


4 And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and 
the tabernacle of the congregation », and all the holy 
veſſels that were in the tabernacle, even thoſe did the 


prieſts and Levites o bring up. 

» That made by Moſes, which doubtleſs before this time had been 
tranſlated from G:#eon to Zion, and now together with other things, 
was put into the Treaſuries of the Lord's Houle, to prevent all the 
ſuperſtitious uſe and prophane abuſe of it, and to oblige the peo- 
ple to come up to Jeruſalem, as the only place where God would 
now be Worſhipped. o The Priefts carrying ſome, and the Levires 
others. | 

5 And king Solomon, and all the congregation of 
Iſrael, that were aſſembled unto him, were with him 
before the ark, ſacrificing ſheep and oxen p that could 


not be teld nor numbred for multitude. 

p Either, Firſt, In the way, as David did upon the like occa- 
ſion, 2 S#m: 6: 13, Or, Secondly, When the Ark was come into 
the Prieſts Court where the Altar ſtood, whence it was ſpeedily to 
be conveyed to that place where the People could never behold it 
more. Orrather, Thirdly, When the Ark was ſeated in its place : 
for although they might in the way or paſſage offer ſome Sacrifices, 
as David did ; -yet that was not a proper ſeaſon to offer ſo many 
Sacrifices as could nut be told nor numbred, as theſe are here ſaid to 
be ; which far berter agrees with what is more particularly related 
below. Yerſe 62, 63z 64 which is here ſignified in the general by 
way of anticipation, as is frequently done 1n the Scripture in like 
Caſes. 

6 And the prieſts brought in the ark of the covenant 


of the LORD unto his place, into the Oracle of the 
houſe q, to the moſt holy place, ever under the wings 


of the cherubims 7. 

q i, ee To that part of the Houſe which is called the Oracle. 
1 Kings 6. 5, 16, 19, 23. Or, as it here follows, the moſt Holy Place 
» To wit, of Solomem's new-made Cherubims, 1 Kings 6. 23, 24, 27. 
not of the Moſa:cal Cherubims, which were far leſs, and unmovably 
fixed to the Ark, Exod: 37 7, 8. and therefore together with the 
Ark, were put under the wings of theſe Cherubims. 


7 For the cherubims ſpread forth their two wings 
over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered 
the ark, and the ſtaves thereof above. 

8 And'they drew out the ftaves /; that the F ends of 
the ſtaves, were ſeen our in the || holy place t before the 
Oracle, and they were not ſeen without : and there they 


are unto this day. 
ſ Not wholly, which was expreſly forbidden, Exod: 25: 25; 

5.9. Numb: 4: 6: but in part. 7 Either, Firſt, Properly to called : which 
place was indeed before the Oracle, Bur how then could it be ſaid, 
that they were not ſeen without, to wit, in the Holy place ? For that 
they ſhould be ſeen withour, to wir, in the Court. was fo ridicu- 
Jous a conceit, that it had been abſurd to ſuppoſe it, or to ſay any 
thing ro prevent it. Nor is it much better what others ſay, that 
theie ends of the ſtaves did diſcover themſelves thorough the veil, 
which they rhurſt forward, though they did not pierce thorough 
it. For neither in that caſe had they been ſeen ; and beſides, there 
was a Wall as well as a Veil in that place. Orrather, Secondly, 
In the moſt Holy place, which is oft called by way of eminency, 
the Holy place, as Exod; 29: 30: and 39: 1; Levit: 6: 3o: and 10: 18: 
and 16. 2, 16, 17, 20. And the Hebrew words rendred before the 
Oracle, may be as well rendred, within che Oracle, the Phraſe, al pence, 
being ſo uſed, Gen. 1. 2. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the 
Waters, 1. e- in the Waters, or in that confuſed heap of Earth and 
Water, in which God was now working, that he might bring it into 
order and uſe ; and Gen. 1- 20. where it-1s well rendred, :» the open 
Firmament of Heaven, 1. e. of the Air. And thus the whole is molt 
true, They were ſeen out, to wit, without the Ark, and the Che- 
rubims which covered all the other parts, but they were not ſeen 
without the Oracle, to wit, in the Holy place, ſtrialy ſo called. 
For how could they be ſeen there, when there was both a Wall 
and a thick Veil between that place and the Oracle ? And theſe 
Staves were left in this poſture, that the High-Prieſt might hereby 

| be certainly guided to that very particular place where he was one 
day in a year to ſprinkle Bood, and to offer Incenſe before the Ark. 
which otherwiſe he might miſtake in that dark place, where the 
Ark was wholly covered with the Wings of the great Cheribims 
which ſtood between him and the Ark when he entred thither. 
Some conceive that the Door of the Oracle ſtood always open 
( which os very improbable ; ) and that they who were 
near the Door, might ſee the ends of the Staves. though, by reaſon 
ofthe darkneſs of the place they could ſee nothing elie there. 


'* Exod. * There was nothing in the ark «, fave the two 
' 25. 21, tables of ſtone, which * Moſes put there at Horeb, || 
| Deut 20+ when the LORD made @ covenant with the children 


$y of Iſrael, when they came out of the land of 
[Orwhere » Striftly and properly ; for in a more __ ſenſe, as in is oft 
: : taken for by or near, as is confeſſed, and hath been proved before ; 


ſo the pot of Manns, and Aaron's Red were alſo in it, Heb. 9.4 5. e. 
by it, to wit, in the moſt Holy place, before the Ark of the Teftimony, 
where God commanded Moſes to put them, as it is expreſſed, Exod. 
16. 33, 34. Numb. 17. 10. and not ſtriftly in it. But of this more, 
God afliſting, on Hebs 9. 4. 


Iv And it came to pals when the prieſts were __ 


N G S. Chap. Vit F 
out of the holy place x, that the cloud y * filled the , 
houſe of the LORD =. Exod. 


x Either, Firſt, The moſt Holy place, into which the Prieſts hag ©3935 
now entred to carry in the Ark. Or rather, Secondly, The Ho] 
place, where they might have food rv minifter, if the Cloud had 
not hindred them, as may. be gathered from the next Verſe. » 
The uſual token of God's glorious preſence. See Exod. 16. 10, and 
24. 15,16 Numb. 9g. 15. % Partly, in teſtimony of his gracious 
acceptance of this Work, and their Service ; and partly, ro beger 
an = pag reverence in them, and in all others, when they approach 
to God. ; 

11 v0 that the prieſts could not ſtand to miniſter, 
becauſe of the cloud & : for the glory of the LOR D 
had filled the houſe ot the LORD. 


a Becauſe the Cloud was either ſo bright that it dazled their 
eyes: or rather ſo dark, that it ſtruck them with horror aftid as 
mazment, as is implied in the next Verſe. 

12 { Then ſpake Solomon b, The LORD * ſaid c 
that he would dwell * in the thick darkneſs. - 

b Perceiving both Prieſts and People truck with horror and won- * Leyir 
der at this darkneſs, he minds them, that this was no ſign of God's 16, ,, © 
diſlike or disfavour, as ſome of them mighr poſlibly imagine ; buta  * 
token ofhis Approbation, and Grace, and ſpecial Preſence among 
them. c Not in expreſs words, but by plain conſequence, becauſe 
he hath declared both by his Words and Aftions, that he would 
manifeſt his prefence with, and dwelling among his People, by a 
dark Cloud, in which he would appear. See Exod, 13. 21, 22, and 
24. 16. and 40+ 35. Numb. 9,15. Deur. 4.11, and 5.22, Pſal. 18, 12. 
and 97. 2. 

12 I have ſurely built thee an houſe to dwell in 4, 

a ſettled place for thee to abide in for ever e. 

d T perceive by this thick darkneſs, that thou art coming amon 
us, and therefore make haſte and come, O thou Bleſſed Gueſt, 
into the dwelling-place which I have built by thy Command, and 
for thy Service. « Not a Tabernacle, which was made to be car-= 
ried from place to place z buta durable, and, I hope, perpetual 
Habiration. 

14 And the king turned his face about f, and bleſſed 
all the congregation of Iſrael g ; { and all the congrega- 
tion of Iſrael ftood h. ) 

f From the Temple, rowards which he was looking to obſerve 
that thick and extraordinary darkneſs, to the Body of the Congree 
gation. g Or, Bleſſed, ( ro wit, the Lord, which is cafily underſtood 
trom the following words; in which he only bleſſeth or praiſeth God, 
but doth nor bleſs the people at all ) with ( ſo the Hebrew eh is oft 
uſed, as hath been ſhewed before ) al the Congregation, Althougle 
he might do both, firſt bleſs the Congregation, which poſſibly he 
mighr do in that ſolemn and appointed Form, N»mb. 6. whicle 
therefore it was needleſs to repeat here ; and then bleſſed God. And 
indeed he doth both here below, where theſe ſame words are uſed, 
Verſe 55, 56, &c. h Partly, in way of Devotion to God, whom 
they adored : and partly, out of reſpe& tothe King. 

I5 And he ſaid, Blefſed be the LOR D God of 
Ifrael, which ſpake with his mouth unto David my 


father, and hath with his hand fulfilled ir 5, ſaying, 
i Praiſed be God both for his Grate in making ſuch a promiſe, 
and for his Goodneſs and Truth in fulfilling it. | 

16 Since the day that I brought forth my people 
Iſrael out of Egypr &, I choſe no city / our of all the 
tribes of Iſrcel to build an houſe, that my Name might 
be therein »s ; bur I choſe * David » to be over my * » Sy, 
people lfrael. 7.8 

k Until David's time ; for then he did chuſe Jeruſalem, 1 5. e. 
T did not declare my choice ofit : forſo chuſing is uſed for declaring 
or executing ones choice, as Deut. 12.1, 2 Chron. 6.5. Zech. 2. 12. 
and things are oft ſaid to be done when they are only manifeſted or 
declared to be ſuch ; in which ſenſe God is ſaid to be, jnſtified, 
Pſal. 51. 4. and Men to be guilty, Hoſ. 5: 15. Otherwiſe to ſpeak 
properly, whatſoever God chuſeth, he chuſerh from Eternity. 
-m That my preſence, and grace, and Worſhip, and Glory, might 
be there. » And in and with him the Tribe of Judah, of which he 
was, and Jeruſalem where he dwelt ; which is here implied by the 
oppoſition of this to the former part of the Verſe. 

17 And * it was in the heart of David my father o, *; Chron; 
to build an houſe for the Name of the LORD God of 15: 1. 
Iſrael. 

o In his deſire and purpoſe, as this or the like phraſe is uſed, 
1 Sam. 10. 7. and 14. 7. 2 $9m:7. 3, 

18 And the LORD faid unto David my father, 
Whereas it was in thine heart to build an houſe unto my 
Name, thou didit well that it was in thine heart p: 

> Thy intention and affeftion was well-pleaſing to me. 

19 Nevertheleſs, thou ſhalt not build che. houſe, but 
thy ſon that ſhall come forth out of thy /loins, he ſhall 
build the houſe unto my Name. 43 | h 

20 And the LORD hath Þ performed his word 1x6, 
that he ſpake, and I am riſen up' in the room of David ,gaii6 
my father, and fit on the throne of Iſrael, as the LORD 
promiſed, and have built an houſe for che Name of 
the LORD God of Iſrael. - 

21 And I have ſet there a place for the ark, wherein 
is the corenant of the LORD g, which he made with 
our fathers, when he brought them our of the land of 
Egypt. 

9 #.e: The Tables ofthe Covenant, by a Meronymy, wherein the 
Conditions of God's Covenant. with Jrael are written. ; 
22 4 And Solomon ſtood r before * the altar of the *2 Chr 


2Chron, 


LORD /, in the preſence of all the congregation of 6: 133 
Wi a9 Iraelt , 


'Ch 


*D 
12. 
|| C 
the 


35+ 


F Chap: VIII. [. 


K. i 


Iſrael t, and ſpread forth his hand towards heaven : 

» Upon a Scaffold ſet up for him in the Court of the People, 
2 Chron: 6. 13. { With his Face towards the Altar of Burnt-offer- 
ings. t Who ſtood round about the Scaffold, in the ſame Court 
with him. 


* Fxod 23 And he ſaid, LORD God of Iſrael, * There 5s 
15,11. No God like thee,in heaven above,or on earth beneath, 
2$4;7:22: who * keepeſt covenant and mercy with thy fervants 
*Dan-9 4 that walk before thee with all their heart : 
24 Who haſt kept with thy ſervant David my fa- 
ther that thou promiſedſt him «: thou ſpakeſt alſo with 
thy mouth, and haſt fulfilled zz with thine hand, as #7 
zs this day. | 
u That branch of thy Promiſe concerning the Building of this 
Houſe by David's Son- 
25 Therefore now, LOR D God of Iſrael, keep 
with thy ſervant David my father,that thou promiledft 
*Cha:2:4: him x, ſaying, * + There ſhall not fail thee a man in 
2$x7.12* my ſight to fit on the throne of Iſrael, | fo that tay 


+ Heb. ; Children take heed to their way, that they walk before 
_— me, as thou haſt walked before me. 

—_ x Make good the other branch of thy Promiſe, and do not loſe 
;h s the Glory of thy Faithfulneſs, which now thou haſt gor. 

mn foo 26 And now, O God of Iſrael, let thy word, I pray 
» /z- thee, be verified, which thou ſpeakeſt unto thy ſervant 
tHe. David my father. 

. FP 27 But * will God indeed dwell on the earth y * 
1.66. i. Behold, the heaven z, and heaven of heavens a, can- 


Jer:23:24 not * contain thee þ ; how much leſs this houſe chat I 

AQS7:49* have builded c ? | 

. AM:7:10, y Refle&ing upon God's performance of his promiſe concerning 
the building of the Temple,he breaks forth into admiration, Is it 
poſſible that the Great, and High, and Lofty God ſhould ſtoop fo 
low,as to take up his dwelling here amongſt Men? O, aſtoniſhing 
condeſcenſion ! z All this vaſt ſpace of the viſible Heaven- # The 
third and higheſt, and therefore the largeſt Heaven, called the hea- 
wen of heavens here, as alſo Deut. 10. 14+ Pſal. 148. 4. for its emi- 
nency and comprehenſiveneſs. b For thy Eſſence reacherh far be- 
yond them, being Omnipreſent. c This Houſe therefore was not 
built as if it were proportionable to thy greatneſs,or could contain 
thee, but only that therein we might terve and glorifie thee. 

28 Yet have thou reſpect unto the prayer of thy ſer- 
vant d, and to his ſupplication, O LORD my God, to 
hearken unto the cry, and to the prayer which thy 
ſervant prayeth before thee co day : 

d Though thou art not comprehended within this place, yet 
ſhew thy {elf to be graciouſly preſent here,by accepting and grant- 
ing my preſent Requeſts here rendred unto thee. 

29 That thine eyes may be open e toward this houſe 
night and day, eves towards the place of which thou 


Eo »9g | haſt ſaid, *My name f ſhall be there : that thou may- 


| Or > Eſt hearken unto the prayer which thy ſervant ſhall 
the place. make || towards this place g. 
e To behold, to wat, with an Eye of favour and compaſſion, 
So it is a Synecdochical Exprefſion;compare P/al. 33. 18.and 34.15. 
Zach. 12. 4+ f My Preſence, and Glory, and Grace. See above 
wer. 16, g This Temple, ro which Solomon did now look, and it 
may be, point ; and rowards which, the godly Iſraelites direQed 
their looks in their Prayers. See Dan. 6. 10. _ 
30 And hearken thou to the ſupplication of thy ſer- 


vant, and of thy people Iſrael, when they ſhall pray 


Oh i || towards this place : and hear thou in heaven thy dwel- 
| 0. 4, ing-place h, and when thou heareſt, || forgive 5. 
favourably, # Which he adds,that the People might nor Idolize the Temple, 
% Gr nor preſume upon it, as if God were now faſt tied xo them, as 
" having noother dwelling-place; and to dire& them in all their Ad- 
drefſes to God in this Temple, to lift up their eyes above it, even 
to Heaven, where God's moſt True, and moſt Glorious Dwelling- 
place is. i To wit, the Sins of thy people, praying, and even of 
their Prayers ; which, if not pardoned. will certainly hinder the 
Succeſs of all their Prayers, and the courſe of all thy Bleſſings 
 __ Upon them. Ne” ; 
+ Heb. 31 4 + If any man treſpaſs & againſt his neighbour, 
—_— } and an oath be laid upon him 5, to cauſe him to 
ple Ge, Iwear, and the oath come before thine altar in this 


THeb:and houſe »: 
be require K& 1, e. If he be accuſed of a Treſpaſs. 7 Either by the Judge, 
a oath of or by the Party accuſing him, or by the accuſed Perton himſelf: 


him, or, Which was uſual, when there were no Witneſfes. See Ezod. 22. 8, 
Fender an 11. 


0arhto him to as Witneſs, was eſpecially preſent. Hence the Heathens uſed 
to Swear at their Altars. 


32 Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge 
thy ſervants, condemning the wicked, to bring his 


way » upon his head, and juſtifying the righteous, to 
y FP b ) Yung 5 n | ſence, but he who hears the rod, who turneth unto him that ſmitteth 


give him according to his righteouſneſs 0. 

7 7. e. The juſt Recompence of his wicked Aﬀtion and Courſe. 
o Tovindicat him, and to manifeſt his Integrity- 

33 4 When * thy people Iſrael be ſmitten down 
Deu:zg, before the enemy, becauſe they have ſinned againſt 
25. thee, and * ſhall turn again to thee, and confels thy 
*Lev:26. Name p, and pray, and make ſupplication unto thee 
SP [| in this houſe : 
Fard. _ þ Give Glory to thy Name, by acknowledging their Sins and 
thy Juſtice ; and by accepting the puniſhment of their Iniquity 5 


and by truſting to thy power and Goodneſs alone, for their Des» 
liverance, 


| 


: 


N G 8. | Chap. Vil 
4 Then hear'thou in heaven, and forgive the ſin of 


thy people Ifrael, and bring them again 9 unto the 
'and, which thou gaveſt unto their fathers. 

q From the Land into which they are ſuppoſed to be carried 
by their Enemies, into Canaan. Queſt, If they were Baniſhed in- 
to a ſtrange Land, how could they pray in this houſe, as they are 
ſaid to do. wer. 33. Anſw 1. That may be rendred to, or, towards 
this heuſe, as jt 1s expreſſed, wer. 29, 3o. The Hebrew Prepoſetion 
Beth, in, being oft put for El, #0, or, cowards, 2, This may be 
underſtood of divers Perſons ; and ſo the ſence is this : when the 
People of Iſrael be defeated in Bartel, and many of chetc Brethren 
be taken Priſoners. and carried into Captivity ; if then their 
Brethren remaining in the Land, ſhall heartily pray for their Cap- 
tive Brethren, they ſhall be dehvercd. 5 } 

35 5 When * heaven r is ſhut up s, and there is no * Lev:all 
r:1n, becauſe they have ſinned againſt thee ; if they 19- Deulff 
pray towards this place, and confeſs thy Name, and ** ?3-| 


turn from their ſin, when thou afflicteſt them rt : 

r The lower Heaven in which the Clouds are ; as Deut. 11.17. 
Pſal. 147. 8. s The Heaven is compared to a great Srore-Houſe 
in God's keeping, our of which nothing can be had, fo long as it 
is cloſe ſhur up. t Do not reje& their Prayers, becauſe they are 
torced from them by their Afﬀfliftions, as thou may'ſt juſtly do. 

26 LIhen hear thou in heaven, and forgive the ſin 
of chy ſervants, and of thy people Iſrael, that thou 
teach thems the good way x wherein they ſhould walk, 
and give rain y upon thy land which thou haſt given 
co thy people for an inheritance. 

u That their Sin being Pardoned,and thou being Reconciled uns» 
to them, may'ſt vouchſate to teach them. Or rather,as our Tran« 
flators render the very ſame Words, 2 Chron: 6: 27 When thou ſhalt 
teach, or haſt taught them, not only by thy Word, for that was done 
before ; but by their AfﬀMflictions, which is one of God's Schools ; 
and elpecially, by thy Spirit, enlightning their minds, and enclin- 
ing their Hearts,that they may learn,and profit both by the Word; 
and by their Afﬀi&tions. And this is here fittly added,to ſhew,thar. 
he could not expe&, and did not deſire from God the Pardon of 
their Sins, but upon God's Terms,to wit,upon their True Repen= 
--NCC- & z.e. The way, or Will of God ; or the way of their 
Duty,as the following woxds explain it,which is moſt rightly called 
the good way here, and 1 Sam. 12. 23+. becauſe it is both Juſt and 
Holy, and therefore good in it ſelf ; and good, that is, both!De- 
I:ghtful and Profitable, to thoſe that walk in ir. The meaning: 
When thou haſt effeQtually taught them, and, they have through! 
learned how to pleaſe and ſerve thee acceptably, and to walk be- - 
fore thee in the way which thou haſt preſcribed them.. y The order 
of Solomon's Prayer is very obſervable ; firſt and chiefly, he prays 
for their Repentance and Forgiveneſs, which is the chief Blefling, 
and the only ſolid Foundation of all other Mercies : and then he 
prays for the Temporal Mercy : thereby teaching us what to mind 
and defire principally in our Prayers ; which alſo Chriſt hath 
taught us in his perfe@ Pattern and Form of Prayer ; wherein 
there is but one Petition for outward, and all the reft are for 
Spiritual Bicſhags. | | | 

37 | If © there be in the land famine, if there be * Ley. 
pelitilerce, blaſting, mildew, locuſt, or if there be ca- 16, 26. 
cerpiilar z: if cteir enemy beſiege them in the land of C—_ 
their || cities, whatſoever plague a, whadſoever ſickneſs ,g} 
there be ; || Or, 

z 7. e. The Plague or Locuſts, or Caterpillars, infeſting a Land riſdi#i 
by their great numbers, and venomous or noxious qualities : of f Heb: 
which ſce, Exod. 10. 4, 5. Dent. 28. 42. Pſal. 105. 34,35. s That gatss. 
chieily ſignifies, an extraordinary Judgment ſent from God. 

35 What prayer and ſupplication ſoever be made b 
any man, or by all thy people Iſrael, which ſhall know 
every wan the plague of his own heart 6, and ſpread 
forth his hands toward this houſe : 

b 7. e. Either, r. His Sin, which may be called zhe plague of his 
heart, in oppoſition to the other Plagues here mentioned, which 
afflit only the Body, or outward Man ; So the ſence is, Who, by 
their AfiQions are brought to a true and ſerious ſence of their 
worſe and inward plagues of their Sins,which are mot fitly calleq 
the plague of the heart, becauſe that is both the principal Sear of Sin, 
and the Fountain from whence all a&tual Sins flow. Matth: is: 19. 

Or rather, 2. His Afflition ; for ſo this is Explained in the paral- 
lel place, 2 Chron: 6; 29. ( which is the more conſiderable, becauſe 
this Book was written after this.to explain what was dark or doubt-. 
ful, and to ſupply what was lacking in this ) when every one ſhall 
know h15 own ſore, and his own grief ; which is not unfitly called, 
the plague of his heart, becauſe it was thar plague which his Hearr 
was moſt Afflited with, which pained him at the very heart ; as the 
Phraſe is, Fer 4: 19. compare Pſat; 55: 4- which cauſed him moſt 


Numb. 5. 12, 15, &c- m For here God, who was appealed | 


' more hope and confidence, becauſe I do nor deſire that thou wouldlr 


vexation or grief, which 1s a Paſſton of the Hearr : and fo the ſence 
is, who thall know, 2z. e. be du'y and deeply ſenſible of his AF- 
flition, and the haad of God in it ; and his Sin as the cauſe of it : 
for Words of Knewledze in Scriprure,do very frequently note ſuch a 
kind of Knowledge as affects and changeth the Hcarr, and reforms 
the whole courle of a Mans Life ; for which cautl:, Men of ungodly 
Lives are frequently ſaid in Scripture mor #0 know God, or Chrift, or 
his Word, ©c. And therefore no man hnows bis fore in a Scripture- 


him, and ſincerely ſecketh to the Lord for Rchliek. 


9 Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, 
and forgive, and do, and give to every man according 
to his ways c, whoſe heart thou knoweſt 4d, ( for thou, 
even thou only knoweſt the hearts of all the children 
of men. ) | | 

c According to his Repentance, or Impenitency. I pray with 


deliver tuch as are infenſible of thy Judgments, and their Sin 5 
bur only thoſe who truly know the Plague of their own Heart,in 
; H manner 


I ape VIII. I. 
manner before explained. d thou knoweft who are truly Peni- 
tent, and who are not ; and therefore the granting of my Requeſt 
will be no diſhonour to thy Government, nor injury to thy Holy 


Nature. | 
40 That * they may fear thee e all the days that 


they live in the land which thou gaveſt unto our fa- 
thers. 


e That when thou haſt firſt ſmitten them, and then ſo eminent- 
ly delivered them, and that in anſwer to their Prayer, they may 
hereby be taught to fear Thee, and thy Juſtice, and thy Good- 
neſs. 

41 Moreover concerning a ſtranger that zs not of 


thy people Iſrael, but cometh out of a far country for 


thy Names fake f; 

F This may note, either 1. The end of his coming, that he may 
Workkip,and Glorife thy Name : or rather, 2. The motive,or oc- 
caſion of his Coming, which was the fame of God's Greatneſs, and 
Power, and Kindneis to his People ; as the following words Ex- 
Plain it» 

\ 42 ( For they ſhall hear of thy great Name, and of 
thy ftrong hand, and of thy ſtretched-out arm ) when 


he ſhall come and pray towards this houſe. 

42 Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, and do 
according to all that the ſtranger calleth to thee for g : 
chat all people of the earth may know thy Name, to 
Fear thee, as do thy people Ifrael 5, and that they may 
know that + this houſe, which I have builded, is cal- 


led by thy Name z. | 

g To wit, Aggreeable to thy Will and Word : for he would not 
have-them heard, if they had prayed for any thing diſhonourable 
to God, or deſtruftive to his People. Ir is obſervable, That his 
prayer for the Strangers is more large, and comprehenſive, than 
for the [aelites ; that thereby he might both ſhew is Publick-ſpi- 
ritedneſs, and encourage Strangers to the Worſhip of the 'Truc 
God. + Whereby we ſee, how lincerely and heartily the ancient 
and godly Jews deſired the Converſion of the Gentiles ; whereas, 
the latter and degenerat Jews, in the days of Chriſt, and of the 
Apoſties, did Envy, Oppoſe it, and Fret at it. 7 z, e. Is owned, 
not only by us,burt by thy ſelf,as thy Houſe 3 the only place in the 
World to which thou would vouchlafe thy Preſence and ProteCti- 
On, and wherein thou wiltſt be Publickly and Solemnly ſerved. 


--'44 « if thy people go out to battel againſt their 
enemy, wg © vn thou ſhalt ſend*them &, and ſhall 
pray, unto the LORD 7+ toward the city which thou 

aſt choſen m, and zoord the houſe that I have built 


for thy Name »: 

& 7,-e. In a Juſt Cauſe, and by thy Warrant or Commiſſion. 
Whereby he implies, That it was unlawful for them to undertake 
any War mecrly for their own Glory,or Luft ; or to enlarge their 
Empire beyond its due bounds; and that they could not with fafe 

: Conſcience pray to God for his Bleſſing upon ſuch a War. /Where- 
by he inſtrudts them, That they ſhould not truſt, either to the 
Strength or Juſtice of their Arms, but only to God's Help and 
Blefling, which they were to pray for- = To wit, For thy Dwel- 
ling-place, and the Seat of thy Temple. » For to it they were to 
turn their Faces in Prayer ; partly, thereby to proteſs themſelves 
to be the Worſhippers of the true God,in oppoſition to Idols ; and 
that they ſought help from him,and fiom no other: and partly to 
ſrrengthen Faith in God's Promiſes and Covenant, the Tables 
whereof were contained in that Houſe. 


45 Then hear thou in heaven their pray Feonnd their 
ſupplication, and maintain their || c2uſe 0. 
o Declare: the Juſtice of their Cauſe, by giving them the Vi- 


Pal. 
©, 4 


Heb. 7 
Name ts 
led upon 


us hnuſe. 


Heb. 
way of 
city, 


Or,right. 
Heb. 
agment. & 
Chron. 
. 36. 
rov. 20 
. Eccl 
.20. Jam. 


26 1Joh. 


ory. ; 
46 If they ſin againſt thee, ( * for there is no man 

that ſinneth not p) and thou be angry with them, and 
* deliver them to the enemy, fo that they carry them 
away captives unto the * land of the enemy, far or 
near: 

p The univerſal Corruption of Man's whole Race and Nature, 
* makes me preſage, that they will fall into Sins; and withal,makes 
me to hope, that thou wiltſt not be ſevere to deal with them as 
their Sins deſerve. ; 

47 Tet if they ſhall + bethink themſelves q in the land 
whither they were carried captives, and repent, and 
make ſupplication unto thee, in the lard of them that 
carried them captives, ſaying r, We have ſinned, and 
have done pervesily ; we have committed wickedneſs ; 

q Heb- bring back their hearts ; to wit, their Sin ; Expreſſed ver. 
46. and implied in the following word, Repent. r Senfibly, and 
with an honeſt heart. 

48 And ſo return unto thee with all their heart, 
and with all their foul s, in the land of their enemies, 
which led them captive, and * pray unto thee 
toward their lanF*which thou gaveſt unto their fa- 
thers, the city which thou haſt choſen, and the houſe 
which I hare built for thy Name : 

_ . # & e+ Sincerely, Univerſally, and Stedfaſtly. : 

49 Then hear thou their prayer, and their ſuppli- 
cation in heaven thy dwelling-place, and maintain 
their || cauſe z. 

t Heb. their right, againſt their Invaders and Oppreſſors. For 
'W. they had forfeited all their Rights to God only, but nor to their 
Fnemies ; whom though God uſed as ſcourges to chaſtiſe his Peo- 

ples Sins, yer they had no pretence of Right to their Land, nor 

any regard to it ; but only minded the fatisfaCtion of their own 

' Luſts and Intereſts. See 1/#. 10. 5, G6 and 47. 6. Zech. 1. 15, 


ng back 
their 
earts. 


Dan6.10 


| Or,righte 
Heb. 


EF NGOS 


5o And forgive thy people that have ſinned againſt ; 
thee, and all their tranſgreflions wherein they have 
tranſgreſled againſt thee, and * give them compaſlion * Pr 
before them, who carried them away captive, that 166. as, 
they may have compaſſion on them z : 


u i, ee May gently uſe them whilſt they are there, and proclai 
Liberty to E $.. Captives, to go to their own Land. £ 1. 

ſx For they be thy own x, and thine inheritance, 
which thou broughteſt forth out of Egypt, from the 
* midſt of the furnace of iron y : 

x For howſoever they may ſin againſt thee,or ſuffer from Men; 
yet ſtill remember, that they are thy peculiar People, and there. 
fore do thou pity, and pardon, and lave them. » So called,cither 
from the Metal melted in it : or rather, from the Marter of which 
it coniiſted,an Iron Furnace being more hot and terrible, than one 
of Brick, or Stonee He underitands hereby, their cruel Bondage, 
and painful Labours. Sce on Deur. 4. 20. 

| F2 Thar thine eyes may be open unto the ſupplica- 

tion of thy ſervant, and unto the ſupplication of thy 
people Iſrael, to hearken unto them in all that they call 
for unto thee. 

53 For thou did(t ſeparate them from among all the 
people of the earth, zo be thine inheritance z, * as thou 
{pakeſt by the hand of Moſes thy ſervant, when thou 
broughteſt our fathers out of Egypt, O LORD GOD. 

z Thou haſt begun to build a Work of great and glorious Mercy 
to them ; do not give occaſion to thine Enemics to think, thou 


waſt unable to finith it ; or that thou art unſtable in thy ways 
and Counſels, or unkind to thine own Children. 


54 And it was /o, that when Solomon had made an 
end of praying all this prayer and ſupplication unto the 
LORD, he aroſe from before the altar of the LORD, 
from kneeling on his knees, with his hands ſpread up 
to heaven. 
55 And he ſtood and bleſſed all the congregation of 

[ſracl with a loud voice, ſaying, 

| 56 Blefled be the LORD, that hath given reſt unto 
his people Iſrael, according to all that he promiſed : 
* there hath nor 7 failed one word of all his good + pro- * De, 
miſe «, which he + promiſed by the hand of Moſcs his !2:19 


y Jer. U4 


* Exod: 
19. 5, 


ſervant. fue - 
a See the like, Joſh. 21: 45: and 23: 14. 2 Kings 10: 10, f Heb 


57 The LORD our God be with us b, as he was wo, 
with our fathers : let him not leave us, nor forſake at. 29:10 
us : " 

b By the preſence of his Grace and Mercy. Jpake, 

58 Thar he may incline our hearc unto him c, to 
walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, 
and his ſtatutes, and his judzments, which he com- 
manded our fathers. 


c That he may not only bleſs us with outward Proſperity,and 
Glory ; bur eſpecially,with Spiritual bleflings : and thar as he hath 
given us his Word and Starutes ro teach and dire& us,ſo he would 
by his Holy Spirit, effe&ually incline and engage our Hearts to 
keep and obey them. E ts 

59 And let theſe my words wherewith I have made 
{upplication before the LOR D,be nigh unto the LORD 
our God, day and night, that he + maintain the cauſc + Heb: 
of his ſervant 4,and the cauſe of his people Ifrael e | at 74 jus: 
ail times, as the matters ſhall require : + Heb4h 

4 1. e, Ot me, as ver. 28, 29, 30. their King,and conſequently of | ping of s 
all my Succeſfors. e According to mine, or cheir various necefſi- j,,*, ti; 
ties and exigencies. oy 

60 Thar all the people of the earth may know f that * 
* the LORD zs God, and that there is none elſe. 

F Both by our vertuous and holy Lives, to which thou inclineſt 
us by thy Grace ; and by the eminent manifeſtations-of thy Power 


and Goodneſs, in defending, and delivering us from all the afiaults 
and devices of our Enemies. 


61 Let your heart cherefore be perſe& g with the 
LORD our God, to walk in his ſtatutes, and to keep 
his commandments, as at this day. 

g 7. e. Sincere and ſerious in your purpoſes of Obedience ; for 
ſinleſs Perfection, he himſelf taught them was not to be expected 
here, Eccleſ. 9: 20. 

62 © And * the king, and all Iſrael with him, of- 
fered ſacrifice before the LORD. 

63 And Solomon offered a ſacrifice b of peace-offer- 
ings which he offered unto the LORD,two and twen- 
ty thouſand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thouſand 
ſheep z : ſo & the king and all che children of Ifrael 
dedicated the houſe of the LORD U. | 

h By the hands of the Prieſts. i Not all in one day, but in the 
7, or, it may be in the 14 days, mentioned wer. 65. k& i.e. By 
theſe Sacrifices,and Holy Exerciſcs. / 7. e, Began to ſet it apart for 
the Work and Service of God. 

64 The * ſame day did the king hallow the middle «, Chron 
E the court » that was before the houſe of the LORD: 7: 7: 

or there he offered burnt-offerings,and meat-offcrings, 
and the far of the peace-offerings, becaule * the brazen — 
altar that was before the LORD, was too little to re- * 
ceive the burnt-offerings, and meat- oiterings, and the 


* Deut. 4 
35, 39: 


*2 Chrott- 
7* 4e 


fat of the peace-offerings. 


x4 
MN. 1Q 


> 
naps 
— - 


| Or, 
thanked. 


*:Chro 


7:11; 


"Cha.zs 


4 


4 | Etap- IX, 


| 'Cha.$.29 


i © 11] 


m To wit, of the Prieſts Court, in which the great Altar was- 


This he Conſecrated as he did the great Altar, to wit,by Sacrifices; | 


but with this difference, That he Conſecrated Thar for laſting and 
particular uſe : but This only for the preſent time and occaſion, 


being warranted to do ſo both by the neceſſity of it for God's | 


Services and for the preſent Solemn Work, for which the Brazen 
Altar was not ſufficient, as it here follows ; and by the direction 
of God's Spirit, wherewith Selomon was endowed, as being a Pro- 
pher, as well as a King. Here therefore he ſuddenly reared up 
divers Altars, which after this Solemnity were demolithed. 

65 And ac that time Solomon held a feaft =, and all 
Tfrael with him, a great congregation, from the en- 
tring in of Hamath, unto the river of Egypt o, before 
the LORD p our God, ſeven days, and ſeven days 9, 
even fourteen days. | 

n i.e. Kept the Solemnity. o The uſual and known bounds of 
the Land, in the utmoſt length of it, of which, fee Numb. 34: 8. 
Joſh. 13. 5. Judg. 3: 3- Þ 4. e. Before the Temple, and as in God's 
Preſence. 9 Seven for the Dedication of the 'T'emple, or Altar 3 
and the other ſeven for the Feaſt of Tabernacles ; as may be ga- 
thered from 2 Chron. 7. 9. And it ſeems to be expreſſed in this 
manner, to intimate, that theſe 14 days of Rejoycing,were not all 
together, but thar there was ſome interval between them, which 
indeed was neceſſary, becauſe the Day of Atonement was on the 
Tenth Day of this Month, Levit: 23-'27. And becauſe theſe 14 
days ended on the Twenty-ſecond day, 2 Chron. 7.10. it may ſeem 
moſt probable, that the Feaſt of the Dedication was kept betore 
the Tenth day + and the Feaſt of Tabernacles ſome days after 1t. 

66 On the eighth day he ſent the people away r : 
and they || blefled the king s, and went unto their tents 
joyful and glad of heart, for all the goodneſs that the 
LORD had done for David # his ſervant,and ior Iſrael 
his people. 

r Solomon having joyned with the People in the Solemn Aſſembly 
which was kept on the Eighth day ; in the cloſe of that Day and 
Service, he took his ſolemn farewel, and diſmiſſed them with his 
Blefling ; and the next Morning the Heads and Elders who 
came to Solomon upon this ſpecial Jummons,above wer. 3. and with 
them divers of the People came tg take their leave of the King, he 
ſent them away. And lo this place agrees very well with 2 Ciron: 
7:9,10 # 7. e. They prayed to God to Bleſs him, according to 
their Duty and Cuſtom. Or, They praiſed him, for his great care 
and pains in Building of the Temple and ſetting up God's Wor- 
ſhip among them. 7 In giving him a ſure Houle, and a wiſe and 
rcligious Son, by whom he had now fulfilled the Promiſe made 
to David about the Building of the Temple, 


CHAF. ©. 


God's Covenant, in a ſecond Viſion, with Solomon, 1 9. The mu- 
tual Preſents of Solowon and Hiram, 10 -—— 14. Strong holds built 
by Solomon, 1 5 -———19. The Gentiles are Bond-men : The Iſraelites 
not ſo, 20 23: Pharaoh's Daughter removeth to her Houſe, 24 
Solommn's yearly folemm Sacriſices, 25- His Navy fercheth Gold from 
Ophir, 26 —-— 28, 

A N D * it came to paſs when Solomon had fini- 
A ſhed the buiiding of the houſe of the LORD, and 
the kings houſe, and all Solomons defire which he was 
pleaſed to do : 

2 That the LORD appeared to Solomon the ſecond 


time «, * as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon. 

a To wit, ina Dream or Viſion : for that which is mentioned, 
Chap. 6. 11. ſeems to have been imparted unto him by ſome Pro- 
pher or Meſſenger ſent from God, with that Errand. The time 
of this Revelation was. either 1. after all Solomon's Buildings, as 
the words, thus rendred plainly imply. And ifit ſcem ſtrange, 
that Goa ſhould not Reveal this purpoſe and tentence of his con 
cerning the Temple, till ſo many years after the finiſhing of it; at 
muſt be conſidered. 1- Thar as it is an a& of God's lingular Grace, 
when he doth thus Reveal himſelf to any Perton,to it 1s but meet, 
he ſhould chuſe his own time for it. 2. That God had preſently 

- after the finiſhing of the Temple, at the Feaſt of the Dedicarion of 
it, ſufficiently 1t»ewed his acceptance and approbation of it,by that 
glorious Cloud, Chap. 8. 10, 11. and therefore this Revelation was 
not then neceſſary. 3. That God might chuſe this as the titteit 
time for giving Solomon the following Admonition, when he per 

ceived that his heart began to be lifred up in Pride, for his ſumpru- 
ous and magnificent Buildings, &c. and that he was grown vain, 
and careleſs. and ſecure ; and therefore moſt needed ſuch an a- 
wakening Oracle, Or, 2. Preſently after the Building of the Tem- 
ple, as may be thought from the Matter of this Revelation,which 
ſeems beſt toſuit with that time when it was newlyBuilt,and when 
S-lomon's Prayer here mentioned was newly made - for feing the 
following word's contain God's Anſwer to that Prayer,it ſeems im- 
probable, that the Anſwer ſhould come ſo many Years after it- Bur 
then this ſecond Verſe, and the reſt even to wer. 11. are to be inclo- 
Ted with a Parentheſis ; and the place muſt be thus rendred ver 2. 
For ( ſo the Hebrew Yau is oft rendred ) the Lord appeared, or, had 
appeared to Svlomon, &Cc. vere 3" And the Lord had ſaid unto hmm, &c 

And this Parentheſis may ſeem to have a foundation in ver. 10 

where the firſt Verſe ( in ſubſtance, though not in the very ſame 
words ) is repeated, as is uſual after long digreſſions : and then he 
compleats the Sentence, wer. 12, &c. which till then had been ſu- 
ſpended. Nor are ſuch long Parentheſis without Example in Scri- 
prure ; See my Latin Synopſis, on Rem. 5. 12, &c, Eph. 3: i, &C- 
Revel. 22.7. 

3 And the LORD faid unto him, I have heard thy 
prayer, and my ſupplication that thou haſt made be- 
fore me : I have hallowed this houſe þ which thou hat 
buile, * ro put thy name there for ever c, and mine 
eyes d, and mine heart e, ſhall be there f perpetually. g. 

6 I have, by my glorious Preſence in the cloud, and by my ac- 
ceptation of thy Sacrifices, SanCtified it ro my proper utc and Sc1- 
Vice. 6 As lopg as the Mz/aical Diſpenſation lates ; whereas. hitherto 


N G 8. Chap. 1X 
my Name and Worſhip hath been ſucceſſively in ſeveral places 
d i, e. My watchful and gracious Providence. e My true and ten« 


der Aﬀe&ion, F Shall be rowards this Place and People. s U 
condition of your Obedience ; as it here Arn wo = a 


4 Andif thou wilt walk before me,as David thy fa- 
ther walked 5, in integrity of heart, and in upright- 
neſs, to do according to all that I have commanded 
thee, and will Keep my ſtatutes and my judgments : 


þ Who, though he miſcarried in ſome things,yer in tl Fl 
courſe of his Lite was Upright and Faithful DC OY Oe 


5 Then # I will eſtabliſh che Throne of thy king- 
dom upon Lfrael for ever, * as I promiſed ro David thy * 2 Sam. 


father, ſaying, There ſhall not fail thee a man upon 7: 1 _ |} 

the throne of [frael, COS | 
; Upon that condition 3 for my Promiſe to David was Con- LY 

ditional: | TOY 


6 But * if ye ſhall at all turn from following me &,ye + , $a. 


or your children, and will not keep my command.- 7.. 14- 


ments and my ſtatutes, which I have ſer before you, 
but go and ſerve other gods, and worſhip them : 

k Or rather, if ye ſball wholy turn, $&c. If you ſhall wilfully-and 
obſrinately depart from God, and violate his Laws,as the doubling 
of the Word implies. Whereby he alſo intimates, That he would 
not be ſo rigid and ſevere towards them, as to mark every thing 
that was amils ; but would bear with much, as he did in Devid,&Cc- 
only that he would not endure a total defe&ion from hime 

7 Then will I cut off Ifrael out of the land which 
: — them, and this houſe which I have hal- 
owed * for my name, will I caſt out of my fight 1, and g7x.. - -.: 
Iſrael ſhall be a proverb ws, and a gg..” — all Jer-7ris. 
people : 

] I will not regard it ; I will take away my Prote&ion and gras 
cious Preſence ſrom it. »» Their Miteries ſhall be named Provegs 
bially, to expreſs extream Calamities. See Deut. 28. 37. 


s And at this houſe which is high », every one that 
paſſeth by ir ſhall be aſtoniſhed o, and ſhall hiſs p; and 
they ſhall ſay, * Why hath the LORD done thus unto s «; ... 
this land, and to this houſe ? | , 

n i. e. Exalted in its Priviledges, Glorious, and Renouned. The Jer:228, 
Particle which 1s oft underſtood, and is here fitly ſupplied out, of © 
2 Chron. 7-21 where it is expreſſed. o At its unexpe&ed and won= 
derful Ruine. p By way of Contempt and Derifion. See Fer:19:8: 
and 49 17: and 50: 13, _ 

9 And they ſhall anſwer, Becauſe they forſook the 
LORD their God, who brought forth their fachers 
out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon 
other gods, and have worſhipped them, and ſerved 
them : therefore hath the LORD brought upon them 
all this evil. 


10 4 And * it came to paſs at the end of twenty 


years, * when Solomon had built the two houſes, the Mor 
houſe of the LORD, and the kings houſe. 37, 38. 


11 ( Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furniſhed nd 7: a; 
Solomon with cedar-trees, and fir-trees,and with gold, 
according to all his deſire ) that then king Solomon 
gave Hiram ewenty cities in the land of Galilee p. 

p Or, near ( as Beth off ſignifies, as hath been proved before ) 
the Land of Galilee bordering upon it; in thoſe parts which were 
near, and adjoyning to Hiram's Dominions; with the Cities,under- 
itans the Lands and Territories belonging to them. Queſt. How 
could Solomon give away any part of that Land wherein the People 
had a Righr by a Divine Lor, and God had a Right, as being the. 
only Proprietary ot it ; upon which ground the total Alienation of 
it, Or any part of it, was tor bidden. Levie. 25.23? Anſw. 1. it is not 
laid, that he gave them away wholly, and for ever ; but he mighr 
Aſhign them to him only for a time,until he was fully fatisfied tor 
his Debt. 2. If theſe Cities were pollefſed by 1/raelites, Solomon 
did nor give him their particular Poſſeffions, but only his own 
Royalties over them, and all the Profits he received from them: 
which were very conſiderable, as may be gathered from that paſ- 
lage, Chap» 12.4. 3. Thele Cities, though they were within thoſe 
large bounds which God fixed to the Land of Promiſe, Gen. 15: 18. 
10). 1. 4. yet were not within thoſe parts which were diſtributed 
by Lot in 7:jbus's Time ; nor belonging to the Tribe of her, ( as 
ſome ſuppoie ) as may be gathered both from ' Foſb. 19, ver. 27. 
where zheir border is 1aid to go out only to the Land of Cabul ; to 
wit, excluſively : and wer, 30. where all their Cities are ſaid to be 
bur Twenty ana rwo ; and from 2 Chron. 8. 2« where it is ſaid of thoſe. - 
Cities, when Hiram reſtored them, That Solomen built. them, and 
cauſea the children of Iſrael to dwell there. Which makes it more than 
probable, that theſe Cities were not Inhabited by 1ſ-aelires, but by 
Canaanites, or other Heathens ; who being Subdued, and Extirpated 
by David, or Silom, thole Cities became a part.of their Domini= 
ons, and at their Diſpoſal ; and afrerwardsHere reckoned a part 
of Galilee, as Joſephus nores. And may be one reaſon, why he gave 


rheſe, rather than other Cities, becauſe they were-in his power to 
give, when others were nor. 


12 And Hiram came out from Tyre to ſee the cities 
which Solomon had given him, and they + pleaſed: 
him not 9. Is, 

q He did not accept them for fatisfa&tion, becauſe the Cities obs = 


were out of repair, as appears from wer. 13, and the Soyl not good 


od ;.: 
in his Eyes, and therefore he refuſed them, 2 Chron. 8: 2. and ex- SO 


petted, and doubrlefs had fatisfattion ſome-other way'; as may be 
zathered from the following Story. 
13 And he ſaid, Whar cicies are theſe which thow- y -;,, -, 
haſt given me, my brother ? And he called them the a;jplea/ing 
- | pleaſmg, 
land of || Cabul r unto this day. i 


3Hz: 74 


+ Heb: 


Or, airty. 


IX. FA: LL EINGSE 


r. 7, 6. Of dirt, as moſt interpret it. Not that it was a barren 
Soil.as ſome imagine ; for they who deſcribe thoſe parts,commend 
them as Fruitful : nor would Solomon have made him ſo unworthy 
a return : but becauſe it was not pleaſant,nor aggreeable to his,nor 
to his Peoples Humour ; becauſe, though the Land was very good, 

et being a thick and ſtiff Clay,and thereforerequiring great pains 
to manure and Improve it, it was very unſuitable to the Diſpotition 
of the Tyrians, who were Delicat, and Lazy, and Luxurious, and 
wholly given to Merchandiſe. bh” 

14 And Hiram ſent s to the king ſixſcore talents of 


old. 

5 s Or rather, for Hiram had ſent. And this ſeems to be here ad- 
ded, both to declare the quantity of the Gold ſent, which had 
been only named before, wer, «1. and as the reaſon why he reſented 
Solomon's Aion ſo ill, becauſe ſo great a Sum required a better 
Recompence. | 

i5 4 And this is the reaſon of the levy which king 
Solomon raiſed ?, for to build the houſe of the LORD, 
and his own houſe, and Millo «, and the wall of Je- 
ruſalem, and Hazor x, and Megiddo z, and Gezer z. 

t Both the Levy of Men ; of which, Chap: 5: 13: and the Levy 
of Money upon his People and SubjeQs, which is ſufficiently evi- 
dent from many Scriptures. And this Sentence may look both 
backward and forward. He raiſed this Levy, both ro pay what he 
owed to Hiram,which is mentioned before ; and to Build the Works 
here following. « It ſeems to have been an eminent, and large, 
:and ſtrong Fort or Caſtle in Jeruſalem ; as may be gathered from 
1 Kings 11; 27. 2 Chrone 32: 5« x In Naphtali, See 7ojb. 11: 10: and 
19: 36. y In that part of the Tribe of Manaſeh within Jordan : of 
which ſee Joſh. 17: 15. » In Ephraim, Joſh: 21: 21. It now was 
and long had been in the poſſeſſion of the Canaanites, Joſh. 16; 10. 
Judg. 1+ 29- and permitted ſo to be by David, and: Solomon ; either 
by negle&, or becauſe they were buſted in greater and more necei- 
ſary Employments: ; 

; 16 For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and 
= Gezer a, and burnt it with fire, and {lain the 

anaanites that dwelt in the City, and given it for a 
preſent unto his daughter, Solomons wife. 

# Not now, but long before this time, and preſently after the 
Marriage of his Daughrter,as is moſt probable ; and it is here men= 
tioned only as the occaſion of Solomon's Building it. Poſſibly the 
Canaanites of this place had been guilty of ſome hainous Crime ; 
and becauſe Solemon thought not tit to deſtroy them himſelf, he 
defired Pharaoh to do it for him,or Pharaeh might offer his Service 
therein for his Daughter's advantage. 

17 And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon the 


nether b, 

b In Benjamin, Joſ. is. 13, 14+ and Bethoron the upper, which is 
added 2Chron.$. 5 a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, Joſh. 16. 5. poſ- 
ſiblie bordering upon Benjamin, and nigh unto the lower Bechoron ; 
which alone may be here mentioned, either, becauſe it was rhe 
more famous place : or, becauſe it needed more reparations. 

18 And Baalath c, and Tadmor 42, in the wilder- 


neſs, in the land e, 

c In the time of Dan, Joſ. 19. 40, 44. 4 Suppoſed to be called 
Tamar, Ezek. 47. 19- e This clauſe may belong either firſt, to all 
the places above-mentioned, which are here declared to be in the 
Land of Caxaan. Bur ſo that Clauſe may ſeem ſuperfluous ; for none 
would eaiily think that he would Build much out of his own Land 
Or rather, Secondly, To Tadmer, which otherwiſe being in thar 
Wilderneſs which was the border of the Land, might have been 
preſumed to have been our of the Land. 

19 And all the cities of ſtore f that Solomon had, 
and cities for' his chariots, and cities for his horſemen, 


and tf that which Solomon defired to build in Jeruſa- 


zhe defre lem, and in Lebanon g, and in all the land of his do- 


minion. 

f To lay up Arms and Ammonition for War,and Corn,or other 
Proviſions, againſt a time of ſcarcity, See Exod. 1: 11. 2 Either 
in the Mountain of Lebanon, which being the Border of his Land, 
he might Build ſome Forts, or a Frontier City in it. Or, in the 
Houſe of the Foreſt of Lebanon : of which ſee Chap. 7. 2. 

20 And all the people that were left of the Amorites 
Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebuſites, which ere 
not of the children of Iſrael, 

21 Their children * that were left after them in the 
land whom the children of Iſrael alſo were not able 
utterly to deſtroy, upon thoſe did Solomon levy a tri- 
bute of bond-ſervice b unto this day. 

h He uſed them as Bond-men, and impoſed Burdens and Bodily 
Labours upon them. See 2 Chron: 2: 18. Hence ſome think they are 
called Solomon's ſervants, Eara 2: 55, 58. Queſt, Why did not 
Solomon deſtroy them, as God had commanded, when now it was 
fully in his power to do ſo ? Anſ. Firſt, The command of deſtroy- 
ing them,Devr: 7. 2. did chiefly, if not only, concern that Genera- 
tion of Canaanites, who lived in or near the time of the Iſraelites en- 
tring into Canaan. Secondly, That Command ſeems not to be Ab- 
ſolure and Univerſal, but Conditional, and with ſome Exception 
for thoſe who ſhould ſubmir to them, and embrace the True Re- 
wg may be gathered both from Fo. r 1:19. and from the Hiſtory 
of the Gibeonites, Jo 9. whom Jeſbua did not fin in ſparing, when he 
had ſworn to do 1o ; and Sau! did fin in endeavouring to de- 
ftroy them- Bur if God's Command had been Abſolute,the Oaths 
of Jeſbus, and of the Princes, could not have obliged them, nor 
diſpenſed with ſuch a Command. 


22 But of the children of Iſrael did Solomon * make 
no bond-man : but chey were men of war, and his 
{rrants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers 
of his chariots, and his horſemen, 


23 Theſe 2 rechs chick of the officers that were over 


Solomons work, five hundred and fifty :, which bare 


rule over the people that wrought in the work. 

# Obj. They were only 250 in 2 C%r0n; 8: 10. Av. Firſt, Thoſe 
might be Officers of another ſort ; for they are not ſaid to be 
over the work, as theſe are, but only over the people. Secondly, The 
250 were Iſraelites, who are therefore diſtin&tly mentioned in thar 
Book, where many things are more exaftly noted than in the 
former ; and the orher zoo were ſtrangers, who therefore are neg. 
le&ed in that more accurate account. Or, Thirdly, There was bur 
250 at one time, which is noted there, and 250 at another time, 
( for itis apparent they did their work by turns ) and the other 50 
either were Superior to all the reſt ; or rather, were a reſerve to 
ſupply the place of any of the 500 when there was occafion, which 
might frequently happen. And ſo this was an a& not unbecom- 
ing Solomon's Witdom, to make proviſion for Emergencies. 


24 C Bur * Pharaohs daughter came up out of the *2 Chr 


city of David, unto * her houſe which Solomon had * 
built for her : then did he build Millo. 

25 T And three times in a year & did Solemon offer 
burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings, upon the altar 
which he built unto the LORD, and he burnt incenſe 
f upon the altar that was before the LORD : ſo he tini- + Heb;, 
ſhed the houſe 7. | "pon i, 


k i.e. At the three Solemn Feaſts. Which is not ſaid exclu-. 
ſively, as is evident both from 2 Chron, 8. 13. and from the expreſs 
and oft-repeated Commands of God to offer at other times, which 
it 1s abſurd to think that Selomon, not yet fallen into in, ſhould ſo 
wickedly and ſcandalouſly negleQ;bur becauſe then he did it more 
Solemnly,and more coſtlily,and more publickly : whereby it mighr 
be preſumed, that he did 1o at all other appointed times. / Or, ſo 
he perfected the hoſe, to wit, by applying it to the uſe for which 
it was made, in which the perfettion of ſuch things conſiſts. Or, 
the houſe may be put Metonymically for the Work or Service of the 
Houſe, as it is elſewhere commonly uſed for the things or perſons 
in the Houſe. Or, the words may be, and are rendred thus, After 
that ( for 1o the Hebrew Yau ofc ſignifies; as 1/a. 37. 9, 36. Hoſ-rerr, 
Zech. 12. 2.) he finiſhed the houſe ; 1. e. Frog the time of the finiſh- 
ing of the Houle. until this time, he continued to do ſo. 

26 © And * king Solomon made a navy of ſhips ms, 
in Ezion-Geber,which 5s beſide Eloth », on the ſhore | Choy 
of the red-ſea, in the land of Edom o. __ * 

- Not now in the order in which it is placed in the Hiſtory, but ERGY 
in the beginning of his Reign ; as appears, becauſe the Almug-trees 
which he uſed in this Work, were brought in this Navy from Ophir 
Chap: 10: 11:'12- 2 Chron; 9: 10, 11- which was a three Years Voy- 
age there, wer: 22. For Ophir and Tharſis were either the ſame 
place, or one near to another. r Or, Elath, as it is called 2 Kings 
14:22 See Dent, 2: 8. It is thought to be that famous Port on 
the Red Sea, which Ptolemy and Srtrabo ca] Elana, o Which David 
brought under his Dominion, and Solomon kept it. 

27 And Hir2m fent in the navy his ſervants, ſhip- 
men that had knowledge of the ſea p, with the ſer- 
vants of Solomon. 

p For which the Fyrians were famous. He ſent alſo Ships to 
joyn with Solomon's, 2 Chron; 8: 18: not from Tyre, the famous City 
ot Phenicia, which was in the Midland Sea, from whence he 
couid not Sail to the Red-ſea, withour ſetching a vait compaſs;but 
from an Ifland in the Red-ſea, called Tyre, becauſe it was a Colony 
of the Tyr:ans, as Strabo notes. 

28 And they came to Ophir q, and fet from thence 
gold, four hundred and twenty calents r, and brought 
it to king Solomon. | 

9g A place famous for the plenty and fineneſs of the Gold there; 
Ot which ſee Gen: 2: 11, 12. Job 22: 24; and 28: 16: Pſal. 45: 9. 
Iſa: 13- 12. It is manifeſt and agreed, that it was a part of the 
Eaſt-Ind'es. which though very remore from us, yet was far nearer 
ro the Red-ſea, from whence they might eaſily Sail ro it in theſe 
Ancient Times,becauſe they needed nor to go far fromthe/Coait ro 
come to it, becauſe they might ( according to the manner of theſe 
firit Ages ) Sail all along near the Coaſt, though the Voyage was 
thereby more tedious, which was the reaſon why three Years were 
ſpent in it. And here, and here only were to be had all the Com- 
modities which Solomon fetched from Ophir, 1 K:nzs: 10: 22. r In 
all there came to the King 450 Talents, whereof it ſeems 3o Talents 
were allowed by Solomon to Hiram and his Men for the Voyage, 
and ſo there were only 420 that came clearly into the Kings Trea- 


ſury. 
© = A» © 
The queen of Sheba cometh to Jeruſalem : admireth Solomon's W.ſom and 
Glory : Giveth God thanks, and Solomon Preſents, 1 10. His 
Riches, 11 = Is. Targets : Ivory Throne, Veſſels, 16 —>— 23. 
Preſents ; Chariats and Horſes, Tribute, 24—= 29. 


N D when the * queen of Sheba « heard of the *: ctr. gi 


Mat 12-4 


fame of Solomon, concerning the Name of 
- Luk.t1-3b 


the LORD 8, ſhe came to prove him wich hard que- 


{tions c. | 
a Either, Firſt, Of Z#thiopia, as that People by conſtant Tra- 
dition from their Anceſtors affirm, which alſo was truly in the ends 
of the earth, whence ſhe came, Mat. 12. 42. Or rather, Secondly, 
Of that part of Arabia, called Sabea,which was at a great diſtance 
from Jeruſalem, and really in the ends of the earth, and bordering 
upon the Southern Sea ; for there, much more than in Erh:0prs, 
were the Commodities which ſhe brought, v. 2, 10. Howſoevery 
this is here ſaid for her commendation, That being a Woman,and 
a Queen, and living at great eaſe, and in ſuch remote parts, ſhe 
was willing to take ſo long and chargeable a Journey ro improve 
her ſelf in knowledge, and that of Divine things, as is here un- 
plied. 6 5. e, Concerning the great Work which he had done for 
thy Name, i. e. the Honour, and Service, and Worſhip of the L74, 
as it is expreſſed Chap. 8- 17. and elſewhere. Or, concerning God; 
the Name of God being oft put for Go, as hath becn noted before 3 
concerning his deep knowledge in the things of Ged. For a , 
AHEIE 


Chap. x; | © 


FHel 
59 G: 


tHe 


gyrds 


Fa 


+ He 
anal 
| Or, 
butler 


f He 
wird. 
| Or, 
ſein; 


i He 
thou | 
added 
com a 
goodn: 
the fa 
&co 


00, 


T4 


Chap. 


Ul , 


IX: TL. 


very probable, that ſhe had, as alſo had divers other Heathens, ſome 
knowledce of the True God, and an earnelt defire to know more 
of the Becing,and Nature, and Worſhip of G OD, wherein the 


Heathens were generally at a great loſs, and which many of them | 


defiredand endeavoured ro underſtand. Or, concerning the great 
things which GOD had done for him, eſpecially in giving him 
ſuch incomparable Wiſdom, and that in an extraordinary manner. 
c Concerning Natural, and Cuvil, and efpecially, concerning Di- 
vine things, about which there are, and ever were the hardeſt 
queltions. ES : 
#Heb:boÞ- » And ſhe came to Jeruſalem with a very great Þ train, 
# G with camels that bare ſpices, and very much gold, and 
precious ſtones: and when ſhe was come to Solomon, 
ſhe communed with him of all thac was in her heart &. 
4 7. e. Ofall the doubts and difficulties wherewith her mind was 
perplexed. 

2 And Solomon told her all her F queſtions e : there 
was not any thing hid from the king, which he cold her 
| nor f. : 

A e Heb. all her matters; he ſatisfied her in all things ſhe deſired 
to know. f There was not any thing ſhe asked which Solomon did 
not both underſtand himſelf, and acquaint her with. 


4 And when the Queen of Sheba had ſeen all 
Solomons wiſdom, and the houſe g that he had built, 

z Or, The houſes, The Singular Number being put for the Plural, 
to wit, both the Temple and the King's Houſe, in both which there 
were evidences of ſingular Wiſdom. : OY 

5 And the meat of his table and the fitting of his 
ſervants b, and the þ attendance of his miniſters z, and 
their apparel &, and his || cup-bearers, and his aſcent by 
which he went up unto the houſe of the LORD 7 ; 
there was no more ſpirit in her mn. 

h i.e. The order and manner in which his Courtiers, or other 
Subje&s ( who all were þs ſervants in a general ſenſe ) far down ar 
Meals, at ſeveral Tabels in his Court. i To wit, upon the King. 
both ar his Table, and elſewhere in his Court ; and when he went 
abroad to the Temple or other places. k& Both the coſtlineſs of ir, 
and eſpecally the conveniency of it to their ſeveral Places and Ofh- 
ces. { From his own Palace. See 2 Kings 16. 18. But the Ancients, 
and ſome others, tranſlate the words thus, and the burnt-offerings 
which he offered up in the houſe of the Lord ; under which, as the chief, 
all other Sacrifices are underſtood ; when ſhe ſaw the manner of 
His offering Sacrifices tothe Lord, which doubtleſs the would nor 
negle& to lee ; and in the ordering of which ſhe might diſcern ma- 
ny Charatters of excellent Wiſdom, eſpecially when the had ſo ex- 
cellent an Interprster as Solomon was to inform her of the reaſons 
of all the circumitances of that Service. m2 She was aſtoniſhed, and 
wrapt up in a kind of extaſie, and could ſcarce derermine whether 
ſhe did really ſee thei: things, or whether it was not only a plea- 
fant Dream. 

6 And ſhe ſaid to the king, It was a true f report 


that I heard in my own land, of thy || a&s, and of thy 
wiſdom. 

7, Howbeit, I believed not the words», until I came, 
and mine eyes hath ſeen it : and behold, the half was 
tHeb. not told me : 7 thy wiſdom and proſperity o exceederh 
thu ha the fame which I heard. 
added wiſe © Which the reporters uſed concerning thee * or, the things re= 


_—_ ,, ported they ſeemed incredible, and above the perfeion of hu- 
ng Iv mane nature. o Or, happin?ſs or, vertue. Heb. gooaneſs. 


i jane, 8 Happy are thy men, tiappy are theſe thy ſervants, 
which irand continually before thee, and that hear thy 
wiſdom. 

9 Bleſſed be the LORD thy God p, which delight- 
ed in thee, toſet thee onthethrone of Iſrael q 4 becauſe 
the LORD loved Iſrael for ever, therefore made he 
thee king, to do judgment and juſtice 7. 

2 He deſerves all bleſſing and praiſe, for delighring to honour 
and advance ſo worthy a Perſon- q For' it was God's ſpecial a&t 
to make him King, rather than his elder Brother. r 7, e. To ex: 
ecute juſt Judgment among them, to govern them with Right and 
Equiry She tacitly admoniſheth Solomon, that he was not made 


King that he might live in Eaſe, and Pleaſure, and Splendor, but 
for the good of his People. 


1 And ſhe gave the king an hundred and twenty 
talents of goid, and of ſpices very great ſtore, anc 
precious ſtones': there came no more ſuch abundance 
of ſpices, as theſe which the Queen of Sheba gave to 
king Solomon. 

11 And the navy alſo of Hiram that brought gold 
from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of 
Almug-trees, and precious ſtones. 

12 And the king made of the Almug-trees /, || + 
Pillars z for + the houſe of the LORD,and for the kings 
+: houſe; harps alſo, and pſalteries for ſingers: there 
* Chior, Came no ſuch * Almug-trees, nor were ſeen unto this 
9 10: ay. 

J Called alfo ( by an inverſion of the Letters, which is uſual a- 
mong the Hebrews) Algum-trees, 2 Chron 2: 8: and 93 10: whereof 
there were ſome in Lebanen, 2 Chron: 23 83 bur the beſt ſort came 
from Ophir, as 1s here ſaid. * Or. ſupporters, either, for the Aſcent 
or Stairs, by which they went fromthe King's Houſe to the Templc. 


f Heb; 


puras > 


| Or, 
tutlers, 


f Heb. 
wird. 
| Or, 
ſcyinzs, 


[Or, rails, 


T Heb. 


| Heh, Ee 1 Chron 26. 16; and 2 Chron: g: 1 1; or, for divers parts both of 
Sccordin the LORDS, and of the Kings Houſe. 

"thekag 13 And king Solomon gave unto thequeen of Sheba 
of king all her defire whatſoever the asked, belides that which 


mes, Solomon gave herf of hisroyal bounty : ſo ſhe turned, 
and went to her own countrey, the and her ſervants. 


L.INnOY 


| kl 
14 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon it 
in-one year, was fix hundred threeſcore and fix talents 
of gold «, Pp | 
« Which amounts to about two Millions of our Money. And 
this Gold did not come from Oph:r in dia, or Tarſhiſh ; but from 
Arabia and Ethiopia, and other parts, which then were well reple- 
niſhed with Gold, though ſince exhauſted by the inſatiable Avarice 
of ſucceeding Ages. IE: 
I 5 Beſides hat be bad of the merchant-men x ; and 
of the traffick of the ſpice-merchants y, and of all the 
kings of Arabia =, and of the || governours of the || Or, 
countrey 4. | ; | COPE 
» Heb. of the ſearchers, or ſpies : i+ e. either Merchants, who uſe 
ro enquire and ſearch out Commodiries, and all advantages of 
Trade : or rather, the Publicans or garherers of the King's Revenues, 
who uſed to ſearch narrowly into all Wares and Dealings, that , 
the King might not be defrauded of his Rights.: y Or rather, of 
the merchants in general, as that word is oft uſed in Ezek 27. and 
elſewhere- So this: and the former particular contain both the - 
branches of the King's Revenue, what he had from the Land and 
Fruits thereof, and what he had from the Merchants and Traders in 
other Commodities. z To wit, of thoſe parts of Arabia which 
were next to Canaan, which were either conquered by David, or 
ſubmitted to pay Tribute to Solomon, Burt we muſt not think all 
theſe to be King's of large Dominions, but many of them only Go- 
vernours of Cities, and the Territories belonging to them, ſuch as 
were formerly in Canaan, and were anciently called Kings. a Or, 
of the land, or of that land, for there is an Article in the Hebrew, 
7, e. either of the Land of Canaan: or rather, of the Land of Arabis ; 
whereof ſome parts wereſo tar Conquered, that he had Governors 
of his own over them, who were each of them to take care of the 
King's Revenue in his Juriſdition ; and part only ſo far, that they 
{till had Kings of their own, but ſuch as were Tributaries to hime 


16 4 And King Solomon made two hundred * tar- + — 
gets of beaten gold 5 : fix hundred ſheke/s of gold went 1; Sz 
co One target, | 

b For pomp and Magnificence, and ( as may be thoughtfrom the 
uſe of the Brazen Shields, Chap: 14:27, 28: ) to He carried before 
him, by his Guard, when he.wenr abroad. | 

17 And he wade three hundred ſhields of beaten 
gold ; three pound e of gold went to one ſhield + and 
the king putthem in the * houſe of the foreſt of Leba- + chap: 
non. 

c Or, 300 ſhekels, as it is expreſſed, 2 Chron. g. 16. 

18 4 Moreover, the king made a great throne of 
ivory, and overlaid it 4 with the beſt gold. 

a Not wholly, but in part, here and there, which made it more 


beautifulto the eye. Probably the main ſubſtance of it was Ivory, 
bur ſome cavities were left init which were filled with Gold. 


19 The throne had ſix ſteps, and the top of the 
throne was round Þ behind e : and there were f ſtays on 


either fide on the place of the ſeat, and two lions f ;;, Lander | 
itood belide the ſtays. | 


; part there= | 
e Made like the half of a Circle. f Theſe and the following of. 


Lions ſeem added, to expreſs eirher the Tribe from which Solomon + Heb. 
ſprung, compared to a Lion, Gen. 49. 9. or rather, that Majeſty hands. 
and Power wherewith a Prince is adorned and armed, which his 
Subjects cannot reſiſt ; or. the Duty of a Prince in the execution 
of Judgment, which ought to be done with great Courage and 
Magnanimity. 

20 Arid twelve lions ſtood there on the one ſide, 


and on the other upon fix ſteps : there was not F the + Heb.ſo 
like made in any kingdom. 


21 4 And all king Solomons drinking-veſſels were of 
gold, and all the veitels of the houſe of the foreſt of 


Lebanon were of pure gold, || none were of ſilver ; it was | Jn 
nothing accounted of g in the days of Solomon. , was jo fol 


g Compararively, Such Hyperbolical expreſſions being frequent wer mthen 
both in Scriprure, and other Authors. 


22 For the king hadat Sea a navy of Tarſhiſhh, with 
the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy 


ot Tarihiſh, bringing gold and filver, || ivory, and apes, 1 Or 
and || peacocks, , 


| . | elephants. 
þ tither. firſt, The Ships of the Sea, which may ſeem to be zeerh. 


cailed Tarſbiſh. as Pſal. 48. 7. 1/2. 60. 9. from an eminent-part of j| Or, 
.he Sea near Judes, ſo called, Or rather, the Ships that weat to parrors. 
Tarſþ ſb. For Tarſbiſh was the name of a certain place upon the Sea, 
-amous for irs Trathck with Merchants, asit is maniteſt from 1/a. 
23. 6, 10. and 66. 19- Jer. 10. 9. Exzek. 27. 12. andit was a place 
very remote from Judea, as appears from the 3 Years uſually ſpent 
in that Voyage: But whether it was Spain, where in thole r:imes 
there was abundance of Gold and Silver, as Strabo and others affirm . 
or, {ome place 11 the nates, it is needleſs to determine. ; 


22 So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the 
earth in riches, and for wiſdom. 

24 \ And all che earth 5 + ſought to Solomon, to _ 
hear his wiſdom which Cod had pur in his bearr. + Heb? 


; i.e. All the Kings ofthe Earth, ( as it is expreſſed 2 Chron. gt 23- ) ſought the 


ro wir, of thoſe parts of the Earth ; which Synecdoche is very fre. faceof Sect 
quent- 


25 And they brought every man his preſent, veſlels , 6, 
of ſilver, and veſlelsof gold, and garments, and armour, :hing of # 
and ſpices, horſes and mules, + a rate year by year. Jear i its 

26 © * And Solomon gathered together chariots, J*4”> Exo- 
and horſemen & : and he had a thouſand and four :%.# 


7% 23 


- +. 
, 2Chro: 1; 
hundred Chariots 7, * and twelve chouſand horſemen, 14; $9; 2c: 
; H ; whom 


hap. XI. a 4 
whom he beſtowed in the cities for chariots, and with 


l the king at Jeruſalem. 

q & Like a wiſe Prince, in deep peace providing for War. | See 
| the Notes on 1 Kings 4-26. 

| + Heb ' 27. And the king + made filver to be in Jeruſalem as 
| "  Rones,; and cedars made he #9 be as the ſycomore-treesm 
{&IVEes 9 3 


| that are in the vale for abundance. 

| | m Which there were vile and common. See 1/a: 9: 16. 

[*2 Chron: 28 © * + And Solomon had horſes » brought out of 
| 7. 16. & Epypt, and linen yarn »: the kings merchants received 


2 Heb the liner yarn at a price 0. 

7 obs » The two chiefCommodities of Zgyp?t. See Prov.7. 16. Cant. 1. 
| going forth 9. Iſa. 3. 23, Exek. 27. 7. 0 Solomon received them from Pharaoh 
ll of the horſes 3 3 certain Price agreed between them, and gave this priviledge to 
| hich was £2S Merchants, for a Tribute to be paid to him our of it. 

Solomon's, 29 And a chariot p, 'came up, and went out of 
| Egypt for ſix hundred ſhekels of ſilver, and an horſe for 
an-hundred and fifty : and fo for all the kings of the 
| Hittites 9, and for the king of Syria, did they bring 
|+ Heb. by them out + by their means. 

[their hand. þp This is not be underſtood of the Chariots and Horſes them- 
| ſelves, ( for then all Horſes had been ſer at an equal price, which is 
| moſt abſurd ) but by a Metonymy, for the Lading of Chariots and 
Horſes, which conſiſting of fine Linen and Silk, &c. . were of great 
value ; and the King's Cuſtom, together with the Charges of the 
Journey, amounted to theſe ſums» q A people dwelling princi- 
pally in the Northern and Eaſtern parts of Canaan, Fſ: 1: 4: whom 
the Iſraelites, contrary to their Duty, ſpared, and tuffered to live 
among them, Juag. 3. 5. who afterwards, it ſeems, xrew numerous 
and potenr, and, it may be, they ſentout Colonies ( after the man- 
ner of the Ancient Times ) into ſome parts of Syria and Arabia ; 
and poſſibly, theſe Kings of the Hittites may be ſome of thoſe kings of 


Arabia, 1 Kings 10, 15. | 
s C H A P. X 8 
Solomon's Wites and Concubines which in his old Age ſeduce him to Idolatry, 
T, 8. God threatneth him, 9, - 13, Hu Adverſaries are 
Hadad, who flieth into Egypt, and ts entertained there, 14,— —22. Rezon 
who reigned in Damaſcus, 23 — 25. Jeroboam to whom Ahijah 
foretelleth that he fhall be king : Solomon ſabeth his life, 26, 40. 
. His afts, reign and death. Rehoboam ſucceedeth him, 41 umm; 


UT * king Solomon loved 4 * many ftrange women 
b ( || together with the daughter of Pharaoh : ) 
women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zido- 
nians, avd Hittites : 
s To wit, Inordinately and Luſtfully. 6 He ſinned againſt God's 
—_— Law, both in their number, Det. 17. 17. and in their qua- 
ity. | 
. 2 Ofthe nations concerning which the LO R D faid 
unto the children of Iſrael, * Ye ſhall not goin to 
them ce, neither ſhall they come in unto you ; for ſurely 
they will turn away your heart after their gods & : Solo- 
mon clave unto theſe in love. 
ci.e. M them. See onGenr. 6. 4- d Poflibly Solomcn might 
think himſelf roo Wiſe to be drawn to Idolatry by his Wives, and 
thereforeto be unconcerned in the reaſon of the Law ; and conle- 
quently free in ſome meaſure from the Obligation of the Law ; and 
1o, like our firſt Parents, truſting his own Fancy more than God's 
Word, he fell dreadfully. : 
And he had ſeven 


| 


| hundred wives, princeſles, and 
three bundred concubines e : and his wives turned away 


his heart. 

e Partly, for his Luſt , which being indulged, becomes infinite 
and unfatiable ; and partly from his Pride, accounting this a point 
of Honour and Magnificence. 

4. For it came to paſs, when Solomon was old f, that 


his wives turned away his heart. afrer other gods g : 
and * his heart was net perfe& with the LORD his 


God, as was the heart of David his father. 
f As having now reignednigh 3o Years, when it might have been 
_ expetted that Age ſhould haye cooled his Luſt,and Experience have 
made him wiſer and better, and when probably he was ſecure as to 
any ſuch miſcarriages : Then Gad permitted him to fall ſo ſhame- 
fully, that he might be to all ſucceeding Generations an example 
of God's Severity, and of the folly, and weakneſs,and wickedneſs of 
the wiſeſt and beſt Men, when left to themſelves. g Nor that they 
changed his Mind or Opinion about the True God, and Idols,which 
3s not credible ; but that they cooled his Zeal againſtthems obtained 
from him a publick Indulgence for their Worſhip, and Money for 
..., the making of Idols, and the ſupport of the Charges of their Prieſts 
- and Sacrifices,and poflibly perſwaded him ſometimes in complaiſance 
tojoyn with them inthe outward at of Idol-woerſhip ; or, at leaſt, 
in their Feaſts upon their Sacrifices, which was a participation of 

their Idolatry. See Pſal. 106. 28. 1 Cor. 10. 20. 

5 For Solomon went after þ * Aſhtaroth the goddeſs 
of the Zidonians, and afcer *Milcom 3 the abomina- 
tion of the Amorites.. 

- -þ- In manner explained in the former Vecſe. 
boch : of which ſee Lev. 18. 21. 2 Kings 23. 10. 

6. And Solomon did evil in the ſight of the LORD 

and f went not fully after the LORD &, as di4 David 


'* Chap: 
I5: 3; 


5 Called alſo Me- 


ts his Sacher. ++ © © 
7 er. k 5. e. Did notworſhip God wholly and ſolely, but joyned Idols 
| t: r: with him. WEED 8 
36: 7 Then did Solomon build } an high place »z for 


- * Chemoſh the abomination of Moab, in the hill thar 
& before Jeruſalem » ; and for Molech che abomination 


of the children of Ammon. 
l 3. ex Suffer to be builc, or gave Money for it. i.e, An Altar 


— 


N G &Sx. 


upon the high place, as the manner of the Heathens was, See N.mb. 
22. 41. and 23. 1. 7 7.6. In the Mount of Olives, which was nigh 
unto Jeraſalem, 2 Sam. 15. 309. and from this a& was called the 
mount of corruption, 2 Kings 237 13. Idolatry being often called and 
eſteemed a corruption: 


8 And likewiſe did he for all his ſtrange wives o, 
which burnt incenſe, and ſacrificed unto their gods. 


o Having once given way to ſome few of his moſt beloved Wives, 
he was forced to comply with the reſt. 

9 T And the LORD was angry with Solomon, be. 
cauſe.his heart was turned from the LOR D God of 
Iſrael p, * which had appeared unto him q twice, * Chap: 

Þ From the expreſs Command, and from the Worſhip of God ; 3* 5: and 
not that he wholly neglt&ed God, but becauſe God eſteems a}l the 9* 
Worſhip of Idols ( though it be nor excluſive of, but conjoyned 
with his own Worſhip ) to be a forſaking of, and departing from 
God, and ott-times ſo calls it. q To wit, inan extraordinary, and 
moſt gracious, and obliging manner, 

io And * had commanded him concerning this * Chay: 
thing, that he ſhould not go after other gods : but he © 
kept not that which the LORD commanded. 

Iz Wherefore the LORD ſaid unto Solomon r, 
Foraſmuch as this F is done of thee, and thou haſt not + yg, ; 
kept my covenant, and my ſtatutes which I have com- with the 
manded thee, * I-will ſurely rend / the kingdom from ' Ve: 31, 
thee, and will give it to thy ſervant er. Chap12, 
r Either by ſuggeſtion to his mind : or, by appearance to him in "0 
a terrible manner : or by the Prophet Ahijah, of whom wve#ſe 29. 


J 1 will violently take away- The word in the Hebrew is doublcd 


for the greater aſſurance of the thing. # To one of thy Servants 
and Subje&s ; which was Jerovoam, werſe 26, &Cc- 

12 Notwithſtanding, in thy days LI will not do it, 
for David thy fathers fake «: but I will rend it out of 


the hand of thy ſon. 

For the reſpeC& I bear to his Memoryy and for my promiſe ſake 
made to him. 2 Sam. 7. 

13 Howbeit, 1 will not rend away all the kingdom: 
but will give one tribe x to thy {on, for David my 
ſervants ſake, and for Jeruſalems ſake y, which I have 
choſen. 

x How but one, when he had both Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chron, 
TI. 12 ? Anſ. Either Benjamin is ſwallowed up in Judah, becaule it 
was comparatively very ſmalland their habitation much intermixed 
with that of Judah 2 or, one, to wit, of that Kingdom which he here 
threatens to rend away from him, z. e. Of the Kingdom of 1jreel ; 
and that was Benjamin : one beſide Judah, which was his own 
Tribe: or, but one, becauſe Benjamin was 'not entirely his, bur part 
of it adhered to Jeroboam, as Bethel, 1 Kings 12 29. and Hephron 
2 Chron. 13. 19+ both which were Towns of Benjamin, Joſh, 18. 22, 
Or, if God promiſed to give one, and gave him :wo, I ſuppole that 
was no great Injury to him. y Not, ſurely, for its merits ; bur 
becauſe he had choſen it, as it follows, to be the Seat of his Temple 
and Worſhip; it being God's uſual method to g:ve ro him that hath, 
and to continue and multiply favours to them whom he hath begun 
to favour, 

14 © And the LORD ſtirred up an adverſary unto 
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite, he 4s of the kings ſeed 

in Edom. | 
I5 * Forit came to paſs when David was in Edom * 2 Sit 
z, and Joab the captain of the hoſt was gone up to bury #1 
the ſlain @, *after he had ſmitten every male in Edoms. ,, ,, 

z To wit, by his Army, to War againſt ir. See 1 Chron, 18. 12, Peyt. 
13. # To wit, the I/raelites which were lain in the Battcl, 2 Sam. ,o, 13, 
8. 13z 14. Whom he honourably interred in ſome certain place, 
to which he is ſaid to go wp for that end. And this may be mentioned 
as that which gave Hadad the opportunity of making his elcape, 
whilſt Joab and his Men were employed in that Solemnity. 6 Ur, 
and he ſmote. &Cc. as it is in the Hebrew. Which is here noted as 
the cauſe of Hadad's flight ; he ſmote, &c. He underſtood what Joab 
had done in part, and intended further to do, even to kill all che 
Males, and therefore fled for his life- | | , 

16 ( For fix months did Joab remain there with all 
Iſrael, unti) he had cut off every male in Edom ) 

17 That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his 
fathers ſervants with him, to go into Egypt ; Hadad 
being yet a little child, 

18 And they aroſe out of Midian c, and came to 
Paran, and they took men with them out of Paran 4, 
and they came ro Egypt unto Pharaoh king of Fegypr, 
which gave him an houſe, and appointed him victuals, 
and gave him land e, 

c He fled at firſt with an intent to go into Egypt, as is ſaid, wer. 17+ 
but took M'dian, a neighbouring Countrey, in his way, and ftaid 
there a while, poſſibly till he had by ſome of his Servants tried 
Pharaoh's Mind, and prepared the way for his Reception. d Ano- 
ther Countrey in the Road from Edom to Egypt, where he hired Men. 
toattend him, that making his entrance there{omething like a Prince; 
he might find more favour and reſpe& from that King and People. 

e To ſupport himſelf and his Train out of the Profits of its 

19 And Hadad found great favour in the ſight of 
Pharaoh f, ſo that he gave him to wife the ſiſter of his 
own wife, the ſiſter of Tahpenes the Queen. 

f God ſo diſpoſing his Heart, that Hadad might be a'ſconrge to 
Solomon for his Impieties, which God foreſaw long: before they were 
done. | 


20 And the ſiſter of Tahpenes bare him Genubath 


his ſon, whom Talipenes weaned in Pharaohs houſe | 
| anc 


Chap. % | 4 


fHeb:: 


*, Fant 
8:3: & 
10; 18; 


"Chr: 
t;; 6; 


* Chap; 
Y 24: 

7 Heb. 
Ghſed, 

? Heb, 
aid work 


f Heb, 
burden, 


nd 


. . 


XI: [. 
and Genubath was in Pharaolis houſhold among the 
| ſons of Pharaoh. | 
1 And when Tadad heard in Egypt that David 
ſlept with his ſathers, and that Joab the captain of the 
hoſt g was dead, Hadad ſaid to Pharaoh, + Let me dc 


p_ art, that TI may go to mine own countrey &. 
_— gs Whom he feared as much as David himſelf. þ Whither accord- 


ingly he came 3 and was there, even from the beginning cf Solo. 
mor's Reign : where he either lived as a private perſon, yct iecretly 
working for the recovery of his Crown when an opportunity was 
offered ; or rather, by the near relation which was between his 
Wife and Solomer's : and, by Pharas?'+ intercefſion, he obtained his 
KingJom with condition of Subjcttion and Tribute t> be paid by 
him to Solcmon : which condition he kept till Sclomon tell from Goa, 
and then it ſeems he began tobe trouoleſome ro him,and dangerous 
to his Houſe and Kingdom. _ ; 
22 Then Pharaoh ſaid unto him, But what halt 
thou lacked with me, that behold thou ſeekeft ro go wo 
#Hcb:19- thine own countrev ? And he an{wered, + Nothing : 
Howbeit, let me go in any wile, 

23 T And God itrred vim up azother adverſary, 
Rezon, the fon of Eiiadal:, which fled from his lord 
Hadadezer i King of Zobah &. 

; When David had defeated him : See 2 Sam: 10: 10. &c. k A 
part of Syria. between Damaſcus and Evuplrates : of which ſee 1 Sam: 
14: 47: 2 Chron: 8; 3 Pſalm 60: 2. 


L 


24 And he gath.:ed* men unto him, and became 


: _ captain over a band /, * when David flew them of Zobah : 
yy and they 9 went to Damaſcus », and awelt therein, 


and reigned in Damaſcus. 

I To wit, of Soldiers, who fled and diſperſed themſelves upon 
thar Defcat, 2 Sam; 10: and others whe: readily joyned themſclves 
with them. and lived by Robery, as many Arabians did. m When 
they were i2c:caſed in numbcr aud ſtrength. » Aid rookit, whili: 
Solomen was wallowing in Luxury, and grown Effeminare. 

25 And he was an adv<riary to Iirac: 1/1 the days 
of Solomon o, beſide the miſchief that Haced did p : 
and he abhorred I{rael, and reigned over Syria 9. 

o He was a ſecret Enemy, watching all occaſions ro do chem mul- 
chief cunningly and privately all that time ; ai:d when Solomon had 
forſaken God, and was forſaken by God, he ſhewed himſeif more 
openly and maliciouſly. p So the ſenſe is, This infelicity was ad- 
ded to the former concerning Haddad, mentioned above, wer: 14, &c 
Whilit Hadad moleſted him in the South, Rezon threataed him 1n 
the North. But ſome underſtand this of Hadadezer, who is herc 
called Hadad, by way of abreviation, ( which is not unuſual in pro- 
per Hebrew Names, as is well known ) and that for, or becauſe of 
( for the Hebrew Particle eth, is iv metimes pur for el, which oft figni- 
fies for, or becauſe of, as Hebricians know ) the evil wh-cþ betel Hadad, 


even ſince the ſlaughter that joab made in Hadanezer's Array, where: 
of he was a member, altiiough he alſo took thar o<cation of making 
a defe&tion from his Maſter. 
his Empire more and more, and thereby laying a foundation tor 
much miſery to So/omin's Houſe and Kingdom. 


Chron: 26 4 And * Jeroboam the fon of Neb:r. an Ephra- 
i:6 thite of Zereda, Soiomuns ſervant, { vw1:vic mothers 
name was Zeruah a widow woman | cicn he lift up 

bis hand againlt the King r. 
r7, e, Rebelled againſt the King, not now and immediately in 


the Perſon of Solomon himieif, bur in his Son and Saccetlor Reho- 
biaam 


27 And this was the caufe that hs lift up bis hand 

* Chap; againſt the king : F Soiomor: built Mi:1o, nd | repaired 

Mo the breaches of the ciry of L avid his tather. 

fa, 28 And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of 

valour / : and Solomon ſeeing clic young man that he 

+ was indufirious s, he mace him ruler over all the 

: f charge 7 of the houſe of joſeph «. 

. ſ Or, a man of great firength of 5ody. or courage of Mind,or b«th. 
5 Ingenious, and diligent, and aCtive, and every way fit for bulinets 
and for command. # z. e. The Taxes and Tributes which were t. 
be gathered of the People by his Power and Avthority: « Eithic 
of Ephraim and Manaſſth, who were jointly comprchended under 
this name, Joſh. 17. 17. Or, of Ephrain only, who eiſewhere 

comes under that name, as 1 Chron: 5: 1; Pſalm 78; 67: Ezek: 579. 

- And it ſeems moſt probable, that each Tribe hau a ſeverai 

uler. 
29 Andit came to paſs at that time, when Jeroboam 
went out of Jeruſalem », that the propher Ai:ijah the 

Shilonite found him in the way, and he had ciad him- 


ſelf with a new garment ; and they two were alone in 


the field y. 


* Upon ſome occaſion, poſſibly to execute his Charge. y Having 
gone atide thither for ſome private conference ; for otherwiſe it i- 
moſt likely that he had Servanrs attending upon him, wh.: though 


of Jeroboam's Coat; and thus it came to Solomons Ears, who being 
ſoacute and wiſe, could eaſily underFand che thing by what he 
heard of the ation, eſpecially when. a Propher did it. 

30 And Ahijjah caught ch= new garment that as 
on him, and * rent it i» tweive pieces. 


31 And he ſaidtoJeroboam, Take thee ten pieces £: 


for * thus ſaith the LORD, the God ci !: -:2i, Behold, 


5 5 
See 


4 amdwill give ten tribes to thee : 


4 T z Whence the Kingdom of Jr: is oft called the Kingdom of the 


en Tribes . by which expreſſion it may ſect, that Davia's Pole- 


KK FO 


; rity ſhould have one Tribe reſerved out of the Kingdom of 1-ael, 


or Hadadezer ; i.e. he bore a grudge againſt the 1ſra-lites trom, and | 


q Over ali that part ot Syria cnlarging- 


they heard not the words. yet might ſee the aftion,and rhe :ending | 


' the book of the acts of Solomon » ? 


. [ will rend the kingdom our of the j.2ud of Solomon, | 


Chap. XF 


beſides that of Judah, which becauſe of its Greatneſs and Erainen- 
cy, is commonly diſtinguiſhed from Jac! and that nor only after 
the diviſion of the two Kingdoms,burteven before it, as 1 Sams:11:8: 
and 2 Som: 5: 5. | 

32 ( But he ſhall have one tribe a, for my ſervant 
"Y 3 Is: | . - 
Davids ſake, and for Jeruſalems ſake, the city which I 
have choſen out of all the crib. s of Ifracl ) 

a See the Notes above on Yere 13. 

23 Becauſe that they 6 have forſaken me, and have 
corſhipped Aſhtoreth the goddeſs of the Zidonians, 
_henioih the god of the Moabites, and Miicomthe god 
of the children of Ammon, and havenot waiked in my 
vays to do that which is right in mineeyes, and to keep my 
'rarutes, and my judgments, as did David his father. 

_ 61,e: The King, and his Concubines, and Pcople, who eaſily 
tollowed his example, but were not at all excuſed by it. 

34 Howbeir, I will not take the whole kingdom c out 
of his hand d: but I will make him prince all the days of 
his life, for David my ſervants ſake, whom I choſe, 


becauſe he kept mycommandments and my ttatutes e. 
c To wit, of Iſrael. that which I have deſigned for thee. Or ra- 
ther, 1 will not take any thingy or part of the K:ugdom, For the Hebrew 
Phraſe, /» col, which properly ſignifies not all, or not the whole, doth 
uſually ſignifie nor any thing, as Deut. 8: 9: thou ſhalt not want every 
thing : i. e. not any thing- SoalſoGen: 4: 15: and 23: 6:and 35: 23: 
Pſal: 49: :8: and 143, 2, &c. 4 He ſhall poſſes it whilft he lives, as it 
follows ; and therefore thou ſhalr not yer attempr to invade it. 
e Whereby he ſheweth, that he doth nor judge of Men by ſome 
particular aCts, but by their general purpoſe and courſe of lifes 
35 But * I will cake the kingdom out of his ſons * Chap; 
hand, and will give it unto thee, eves ten tribes. 12. Is. 
- 26 And unto his fon will I give one tribe, that * Da- A, Kings 
vid my ſervant may have a Þ light f alway before me g + Heb 
in Jeruſatem, the city which I have choſen me, to put amp, or 
my name riiere. candle. 
f i.e. A Son and Succeſſor, to preſerve his Name and Memory, 
and to give L:ght to the people in hisſtead Kings are ofr called 
Lights, partly, trom their grear 5plendor ; and partly, for the Coun= 
ſel and Con:fort which their People hare or ſhould have from them, 
Compare 2 Sam: 21: 17: 1 Kings 15: 4: Pſal: 132: 7"ﬀ( 2g In my 
pretence, which is in Jeruſalem, and under my favour and prote= 
tion. 
;7 AndI will take thee .*., and thou ſhalt reign ac- 
cording to all thatihy ſoul deſireth þ, and ſhalt be king 
over Itrae]. | 
'. And place thee in the Throne, as it follows. h He ſecretly 
taxeth him for his ambitious and aſpiring Mind, 
33 And it jhall be, if thou wi. hearken unto all that 
I command thee, and wilt waik in my ways, and do that 
is right in my ſight, to keep my ftacutes, and my com- 
mandments, as Dayid wy ſervant dic. ; that I will be 
with thee, and buiid thee a fure houſe z, as I built for 
David, and wili give Iſrael unto thee. 
; 1,e, Eirmly ſettle thee and thy Poſterity in the Throne, as this 
or the like Phrelc is uſed, 2 Sam: 7: 16, 27. but he doth not lay he 
would do this jor ever, as 1s there ſaid of Dav/a's Houſe, v: 16. _. 
29 And 1 will for this & aftii&t the ſeed of David, 
bur not for ever /. 
k For this cauſe, which I mentioned wer. 33. 1 There ſhall a 
time come when the Seed of David ſhall not be thus moleſted by.rhe 
Kingdom cf {ſrael, but thar Kingdom ſhall be deſtroyed, and the 
Kings of the Houſe of David ſhall be uppermoſt, as it was in the 
days '-t 4a, Hezekiah and Joſiah. And art laft the Mefiah ſhall come, 
who {hail unite together the broken ſticks of Judah and Joſeph, and 
rule over all the Jews and Gentiles too. 


4c Solomon »: ſought therefore to kill Jeroboam : 
aud Jeroboar 2: evd fied into Egypt, urito Shiſhak 
King of Egyp. -, aud was in Egypt until the death of 
$0,0mon. 

7 To whoſe Ears this might come, either, 1 By Jer,4:am him- 
c'7, who might jpcak of thus, either out of vain-gior y ar.d of enta» 
c1V;+30r, With aeiga to prepare the People tor his purpoie, Or, 

By the Servants. See; above on ver. -g. » Who was either, firſt, 
y:lemon's Brother-in-Jaw, who yet migar be jealovs of him, or alie- 
nated from him, becauſe henad taken ſo wanv other Wrves to his 
Siſter, as i$ here r.ored ver. 5 or, mignr caft a greedy Fyeupon the 
great riches and g!rious thizgs which $1929 had amailed toge- 
ther, and vpor. which, prelently atrer So/omn's death, he laid vio=- 
lent hands, » Chron, 12. 9g All this was known to Jerobram. who 
rherefore duri: put himicst into $4 ſho#'s prote&ion ; efpecially, ron- 
ſidering how little fuch Relations coinmonly fignifie in the Atfairs of 
Princes; and withal, being made contident by w0d's Promiſe of the 
Kingdom Or, 2+ UGiic © aaviher Line or tlorſe, to whom that 
Crown might deſcend tcr want of Iflue, 


41 © Ard the reſt of the || a&s of Sdlomon, and all 
that he did, and his wiſdom, are they not written *:. ' Or, - 
w0ras, Or 

0 In the publick Records, where rhe Livegand AQtions of Kings rhings. 
were Regiſtred from time to time. So this was oniy a Politica), bur 


not a Sacred Book. | | ; Hb. 
42 And the T7 time that Solomen reigned in Jeruſa- _ 
2 ron, 


lem over all lirae}, as * forty years. the 
43 And Solomon ilepe. with his itathers p, and was 7 Math. 
buried 1n the city of David his fathes,: and * Reheboam x. 7. 
his ſon reigned in his ſtead. ealod 
>» This expreflion is promiſcuoully uſed concerning good and bad pu Coam: 


3-14 4 an 


Chap. XII. 


* Chap: 


| (0 


7 Chap; 
4: 7: 


HH a”; 
and ſignifies only, That they died as their Fathers did But hence 


Interpreters queition, whether Solomon was ſaved, or damned ? That 
he was damned, ſome believe upon this only Argument, That he 
died without Repentance ; which they gather, 1x. Becauſe his Re- 
pentance is not mentioned in his Hiſtory. 2+ Becauſe if he had re- 
pented, he would have aboliſhed the Monuments of Idolatry which 
he had ereQed ; which that he did not, they gather from 2 Kings 
23: 13. Of which, ( God afliſting ) I ſhall ſpeak upon that place. 
But to the former, many things may be ſaid; x. We read nothing 
of the Repentance of Adam ; Neoeh, after his Drunkenneſs, Lot, Samp- 
ſon, Aſa, &c. ſhall we therefore conclude, they were all damned ? 
The ſilence ofthe Scripture is a very weak Argument in matters of 
Hiſtory, 2- If he did Repent, yet the filence of the Scripture abour 
it in this Hiſtory, was not without wiſe Reaſons ; as, among others, 
That his Eternal Condition being thus far left doubtful, his Example 
might have the greater influence for the Terror and Caution of fu- 
ture Offenders. 3. His Repenrtance is ſufficiently implied in this, (to 
omit divers other Paſſages ) Thar after Solomon's death the way of So- 
lomon is mentioned with Honour, and joyncd with the way of David, 
2 Chron: 11: 17. But it ſeems to be put out of diſpute by the 
Book of Ecclefiaftes; which ( by the general conſent both of Jewiſh 
and Chriſtian Interpreters ) was written by Solomon, and that after 
his Fall ; as is evident, not only from the unanimous Teſtimony of 
the Hebrew Writers, who thence concludeg/That he did Repent, and 
was ſaved ; but alſo, from the whole ſtraiff&f that Book, which was 
written long after he had finiſhed all his Works, and after he had li- 
berally drunk of all ſorts of ſenſual pleaſures, and ſadly experienced 
the bitter EffeQs of his love of Women, Eccleſ: 7: 17, &. Which 
makes it more than probable, that as David writ Pſal: 51: ſo Solomon 
wrote this Book as a publick Teſtimony and Profeſſion of his 
Repentance. And this Argument is ſo cogent, thatthoſe Interpreters 
who are of the other Opinion, confeſs it, if So/omon did write this 
Book after his Fall, which they pretend he wrote before it : but they 
offer not any Argument to prove it. And therefore we have reaſon 
to conclude, That Solomon did Repent, and was Saved. 


H- AJ P. 

The Iſraelites ſeek to Rehoboam for relaxation, 1, 5. He refuſing the 
old mens counſel, by the advice of the young men anſwereth them roughly, 
6, I5, For which ten tribes revolt ; kill Adoram : and make 
Rehoboam to flee, 16, — —21. Heraiſing an army # forbidden by Shemaiah, 
225 25. FJeroboam, king of Iſrael, ftrengtheneth himſelf by 
cities 3 and by the idolatry of the two calves, 25, 233. 

| N D * Rehoboam went to Shechem ; for all Iſrael 


were come to Shechem 4 to make him king 6. 

a Rehoboam did not call them thither, but went thither, becauſe 
the Iſraelites prevented him, and had generally pitched upon that 
place, rather .than upon Jeruſalem ; partly, becauſe it was moſt con- 
venient for all, as being in the Center of the whole Kingdom : part- 
ly, becauſe that being in the potent Tribe of Ephraim. they ſuppoſed 
there they might uſe thatfreedom of Speech, which they reſolved 
to uſe, to get their Grievances redreſfled : and partly, by the ſecret 
dire&ion of Jeroboam, or his Friends, who would not truſt them- 
ſelves in Jeruſalem ; and thought Shechem a fitter place to execute 
their Deſign. 6 To confirm him in the Kingdom, which they gene- 
rally intended to do ; he being the undoubred Heir of the Crown,and 
the only Son which Solemon had from ſo vaſt a number of Wives, 

2 And it came to paſs, when Jeroboam the ſon of 


Nebat, who was yet in * Egypt, heard of z# c, ( for he 
was fled from the preſence of king Solomon, and 


Jeroboam dwelr in Egypt. ) 


e In the Hebrew it is only heard, and may relate either to Solomon's 
Death, or to the meeting which all the Tribes had appointed at 


Shechem- ; 
3 That they ſent and called him 4: and Jeroboam, 


and all the congregation of Iſrael! came and ſpake unto 
Rehoboam, ſaying, 


d When the people ſent him word of Solomon's death, they alſo 
ſent a Summons for him to come to Shechem. Or, as foon as he 
had heard the tidings of Solomons death from others, or from com- 
mon Fame; preſenrly there came a ſolemn Meflage to him from 
the people, who deſired his preſence and afſiſtance, as it ſeems pro- 
bable from divers Motives ; ſome, that they might tranſlate the 
Kingdom from Rehoboam to him; and others only for this reaſon. 
That the preſence and Countenance of a Man of ſo grear Intereſt 
and Repuration, and one that had ſome Claim or Pretence upon the 
Kingdom, may lay the greater Obligation upon Rehoboarn to grant 
their deſires' of Eaſe and Relief. ; 

4 Thy father made our * yoke grievous e: now there- 
fore make thou the grievous ſervice of thy father, and 
his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we 


will ſerve thee. 

e By heavy Taxes and Impoſitions,not only for the Templeand 
his Magnificent Buildings, but for the Expences of his numerous 
Court, and of ſo many Wives and Concubines, whoſe Luxury and 
Tdolatry muſt deeds be very coſtly. And Solomon having ſo grofly 
forſaken God, itis no wonder if he oppreſſed the people, and made 
their Yoke moſt grievous, as they ſpeak- But here the peoples per- 
verſeneſs is very obſervable, both in this, that they mention and 
aggravate only the grievances of the Government, buttake no no- 
rice of the vaſt Benefits which they received from it; and in that, 
that they mind nothing but their outward preſſures, and have no 
regard unto that abominable Idolatry which he ſet up among them ; 
being, it ſeemed, Either leavened with it by his pernicious Example, 
or grown careleſs and negligent ofallthe concerns of Religion. By 
which, ſee how ripe they were all for thoſe dreadful Judgments of 
God which are now haſtening upon them. 


5 And he faid unto them, Depart yet for three days, 
then come again to me f. And the people departed. 
f Give me that time for deliberation and advice. 
6 © And king Rehoboam conſulted with the old 
men that ſtood before Solomon his father g, while he 
'yet lived, and ſaid, How do ye adviſe, that I may 


anſwer this people ? 


Judah, or intermixed with them. 


N GC S. 


g With Solomon's old Counſellors, whom Age and Exper: 

Men and Things, and converſe with ſuch a Kige, had pen ts nary 

7 And they ſpake unto him, ſaying, If thou wilt he 
a ſervant unto this people this day +, and wilt ſerve 
them, and ; anſwer them, and ſpeak good words to 
them, then they will be thy ſervants for ever. 

h By complying with their Deſires, and condeſcending to them 
for a ſeaſon, till the troubled Humours be quieted, and thc Oppor- 
tunity they now have, and ſome of them that ſeek, for Sedition, be 
gone, and thou beeſt better ſtabliſhed in thy Throne. They uſe this 
expreſſion, as fore-ſeeing that ſome would diſſwade him from this 
courſe, as ſervile or flaviſh, and below the Majeſty of a Prince. 
z; For, that # ; Thy Service, ſay they, is not hard it is only a few 
good words, which it is as eafic ro give as bad ones. . 

8 Buthe forſook the counſel of the old men & which 
they had given him, and conſulted with the youn 
men / chat were grown up with himm, «nd which ſtood 
before him. 

& Judging it unworthy of his Majeſty and Authority,and likely to 
encourage and increaſe the people in their infolent Demands. / $9 
called comparatively to the old Men; otherwiſe they were near 
40 years old, as the following words imply. m Which is added 
as the reaſon of his inclination to their Counſels, becauſe his daily 
converſe with them, and the likeneſs of their Age and Humour to 
his, had-ingaged his AﬀeCtions ro them, and that bribed his Judg. 
ment, as 1t commonly doth. : 


9 And he ſaid unto them, What counſel give ye, 
that we may anſwer this people, who have ſpoken to 
me, ſaying, Make the yoke which thy father did put 
upon us, lighter 2? 

' 10 And the young men that were grown up with 
him, ſpake unto him, ſaying, Thus ſhalt thou ſpeak 
unto this people that ſpake unto thee, ſaying, Thy 
facher made our yoke heavy, but make thou 5: lighter 
unto us ; thus ſhalt thou {iy unto them, My little frger 
ſhall be thicker » than my fathers loins. 

z Or rather « thicker, and therefore ſtronger, and more able to 
cruſh you, if you proceed in theſe Mutinous Demands,than hs loins, 
in which is the principal Seat of Strength. My Father was young 
and weak, and had many Enemies when he firſt took the Kingdom ; 
but I am the undoubted Heir ; and I find the Kingdom by his wiſe 
Care, far better ſettled and fortified againſt all Enemies, Foreign or 
Domeſtick, than he did: 

11 And now whereas my father did lade you with 
an heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke o : my father 
hath chaſtiſed you with whips, but I will chaſtiſe you 
with ſcorpions p. 

0 7. e. Make it heavier and ſtronger,both to puniſh your Petulancy, 
and to curb and reſtrain you from Seditious Attempts. pi.e. With 


ſuch Whips as will ſting you like Scorpions.: If you proceed in theſe 
courſes, 1 will moſt ſeverely puniſh you for it. 


12 4 So Jeroboam and all the people came te Re- 
hoboam the third day, as the king had appointed, 
ſaying, Come to me again the third day. 

13 And the king anſwered che people Þ roughly ; #86, 
and forſook the old mens counſel that they gave him : hr, 

14 And ſpake to them after the courſe of the young 
men, ſaying, My father made your yoke heavy, and 
[ will add to your yoke ; my father alſo chaſtifed you 
with whips, but I will chaſtiſe you with ſcorpions. 

15 Whereforethe king hearkned not unto the people, 
for * the + cauſe was from the LORD 9, that he might « Judg 
perform his ſaying, which the LORD * ſpake by Ahijah 14 «4 
che Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the ſon of Nebar. 2 Chrow 

q Who gave up Rehoboam to ſo fooliſh and fatal a miſtake, and aa 


alienated the peoples AﬀeCtions from him ; and ordered all Circum- & 26:1 
ſtances by his wiſe Providence to that end. + o k 
16 9 So when all Ifrael ſaw that the king hearkned ,,,;, 
not unto them, the people anſwerd the king, ſaying, * Chp 
What portion have we in David » ? neither have we 11: 31! 
inheritance in the ſon of Jeſſe 5s: to your tents, O If- 
rael t ; now ſee to thine own houſe, David «, So If- 


rae] departed unto their tents, 

r 7. e. In David's Family and Son ; we can expe&@ no benefit or 
relief from him, and therefore we renounce all Commerce with 
him, and SubjeCtion to him. See 2 Sam; 20: 1. They named David, 
rather than Rehob9am ; to ſignifie, That they did renounce, not | 
Rehoboam only, but all David's Family. s So they call Dawid in con- 
rempt ; q.d. Rehoboam hath no reaſon to carry himſelf with ſuch 
Pride and Contempt toward his People, for if we trace his Original, 


Chap. W 'c 


it waSas mean and obſcure as many of ours. And ſince he abuſeth 
his power, let usreduce him to his former Obſcurity. 7 7. e. Letus 
all ftorſake him, and go to our own homes, there to conſider, and 
then to meet,and conclude how to provide otherwiſe for our ſc!ves, 
47, e. Govern thy own Family; for thou ſhalt no longer Rule over 
us. Thus they brake out into aCtual Rehellion againſt him, whom 
God had made their Lawful Sovereign ; wherein, though they ful- 
filled God's Counſe], yet they violated his Authority and Command. 
And they do again make an opprobrious mention of David, whom 
they ſhould not have named without Honour. : 
17 But * & for the children of Iſrael which dwelt 11 * (bp 


the cities of Judah x, Rehoboam reigned over them. un 3 
» By which Phraſe he principally underſtands the Tribe of Juaah ; 

but withal, thoſe parts and parcels of the Tribes of Lev:, and Sr 

meon, and Benjamin, whoſe dwellings were within the Confines of 


18 Then king Rehoboam ſent Adoram, who _ 
OV 


| C 
jd 


*Cl 
TY 


Ct 


11, 31 


Chr 


tb 2, 


ks #4230 XII. 


Heb, 
ral, 


x Chip! 


11: 37 


—— e—— 


+ Heb. 


freng72ne a 


himſelf. 


|| Or, 
fi guaye 


*Chap. 
1. 13- 


f: Chron! 
11, 31, 


*,Chron. 


I. 


that he died : therefore king Rehoboam + made ſpeed 
to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jeruſalem z. 

y Him he ſent, either, r- To pacific the People, and promiſe 
them Relief, now when it was too late» But then he would not 
have ſent a Perſon to ungrateful to the People,as thar ſort of Men 
aſe to be. Or rather, 2. To purſue the Counſel which he had re- 
ſolved upon, and to execute his Office, and exa@t their Tribute 
with Rigour and Violence, if need were. z From Shechem, where 
it ſeems he yet ſtaid, and his Guards and Friends with him ; that 
being there in rhemidfr of his Kingdom, and among the Seditious 
Tribes, he might over-awe them by his Preſence, and repreſs any 
Tumults in their firſt riſe. 


19 So Iſrael || rebelled 4 againſt the houſe of David 


unto this day. 

a Their Revolt is called Rebellion, and therefore was ſinful, be- 
cauſe it was contrary to God's Authority, and Command of ſub- 
jeftion to David, and his Seed from ever 3 from whichthe People 
were not freed by God's Promiſe and Grant made to Jeroboam,which 
was but a ſecret 'TranſafQtion, not yet ſufficiently revealed to them, 
and was not a grant of preſent and aCtual Poſſefſion 3 but only a 
Promiſe, That God would give it to him in his own time,and way ; 
which might have been done, though neither Jeroboam, nor the 
People had uſed theſe indire& and evilCourſes to bring it about;as 
it befel David upon the ſame occation. Belides, the People did not 
this in compliance with God's Counſel, but to gratific their own 
Paſſions, and. get themſelves a little eaſe. 

20 And it came to paſs when all Iſrael heard that 
Jeroboam was come again 6, that they ſent e and cal- 
led him unto the congregation 4, and made him king 
over all Iſrael : there was none .*. that follewed the 
houſe of David, but the Tribe of Judah * only. 

b To wit, from Ezypt ; which was known before to the chief of 
the Tribes, and to them who met at Shechem, and now was more 
univerſally known by all the People. c To his Tent or Habitation, 
to which he had retired himſelf, as others alſo generally did ; ſee 
above, ver: 16, d Which was ſummoned by the Elders of the ſe- 
veral Tribes, to take advice.how to ſettle their Aﬀairs, which they 
ealily agreed to do, by conferring the Crown upon Jeroboam, ac- 
cording to God's Promiſe made to him. .'. z- e. No intire Tribe. 
See on chap: 11: 13, ZI, 32+ 

21 And * when Rehoboam was come to Jeruſalem, 
he aſſembled all the houſe of Judah, with the tribe of 
Benjamin e, an hundred and fourſcore thouſand choſen 
men,which were warriours, to fight againſt the houſe f 
of Iſrael, to bring the kingdom again co Rehoboam the 
ſon of Solomon. 

e 7, e. That part of it which was next to Judah,and joyned with 
them. See on Chap. 11; 13- fi. e. The Families or Tribes, ( for 
theſe words are promiſcuouſly uſed one for the other ) of 1rae!. 

22 But * the word of God came unto Shemaiah the 
man of God g, ſaying, 

g 1. e. The Prophet, ſo called ; partly, to diſtinguiſh him from 
others of that Name. See Nehem: 6: 19. Fer: 29: 31, And partly, 
to add-the more weight to his words. : 

23 Speak unto Rehoboam the ſon of Solomon king 
of Judah, and to all the houſe of Judah, and Benjamin 
and to the remnanc of the people ſaying, 

24 Thus faith the LORD, ye ſhall not go up nor 
fight againſt your brethren the children of Iſrael : re- 
turn every man to his own houſe, for this thing is from 
me he They hearkened therefore to tae word of the 


LORD 2, and returned to depart according to the 
word of the LORD. 


þ This event is from my Counſel and Providence,to punifh So- 
lomon's Apoſtacy. though they procured it by ſinful means : and 
therefore,if you proceed,you muſt fight with me,as well as them- 
; Either from conſcience of their Duty, or becaule they durſt not 
oppoſe ſo potent an adverſary. 5 | 

25 T Then jeroboam built Shechem & in mount 
Ephraim, and dwelt therein ; and went out from 
thence, and buiit Penuel Z, 

k i. e. He repaired, and enlarged, and fortified it ; for it had been 
ruined long ſince, Judg 9g. 45+ He might chuſe it as a place both 
auſpicious, becauſe here the Foundation of his Monarchy was laid; 
and commodious, as being near the Frontiers of his Kingdom, 
I A place beyond Jordan ; of which, ſee Gen: 32: 30. Juag. 8: 17. 
to ſecure that part of his Dominions. 

26 And Jeroboam ſaid in his heart #9,Now ſhall the 
kingdom return to the houſe of David : 

mM i, e. Reaſoned within himfelf The Phraſe diſcovers the Foun- 
tain of his Error, That he did not conſult with God, who had given 
him the Kingdom ; as in all Reaſon and Juſtice and Gratitude he 
ſhould have done ; nor believed God's Promiſe, Chap: 11: 38. but 
his own Imaginations, and carnal Policies. 


27 If theſe people go up to do ſacrifice in the houſe 


of the LORD at Jeruſalem, cchen ſhall the heart of this ' 


eople turn again unto their lord », even unto Re- | 
EDM 5 1 | on when they forſouk him, and went to Jjeruſal:m, 2 Chrm. 21.13, 


hoboam king of Judah, and they ſhall kill me, and 
g0 again to Rehoboam king of Judah. | 

z Which in it ſelf might ſeem a -prudent ConjeQure ; for this 
would give Rehoboam, and the Pri:ſts, and Levites, the ſure and 
faithful Friends of David's Houſe,many opportunities of alienating 
their Minds from him,and of reducing them to their former Alle- 
Siance, Bur conſidering God's Providence, by which the Hearts 
of all Men, and the affairs of all Kings and Kingdoms are gover- 
ned, and of which we had lately ſeen ſo eminent an Inftange, it 
Was a foolifb, as well as wicked courſe, 


XK FU. 


over the tribute 3,and all Iſrael ſtoned him with ſtones 


| Venerable, becauſe their Pious Anceſtors had ſerved God in them: g; 
and thercby Jeroboam might not ſeem to bring in a new Religion, ++ 7, *s 


4 


Chap. XII 

28 Whereupon the king took counſel,and made two [ 
calves of gold o, and faid unto them, Tt is too much | 
for you-p tO go up to Jeruſalem : * behold thy gods, O * Exod. . | 
{{rael, which brought thee up out of the land of Egyptgq. 3* $. 

0 In imitatio!: of Aaron's Golden Calf, and of the Egyptians from 
whom he was lately come. And this he the rather pretumed to do 
becauſe he knew the People of Iſrael were generally very prone to 
Superſtit:on, and Idolatry, as their whole Hiſtory ſheweth : and 
that Solomon's example and countenance given to falſe Worſhips 
had exceedingly ſtrengthned thoſe Inclinations ; and therefore they 
were in a great meaſure prepared for ſuch an Attempr ; eſpecially 
when his Propoſition tended to their own eaſe, and lafery,and Pro- 
fit, which he knew was much dearer to them, as well as to himielf, 
than theirReligion. p Too great a trouble and charge, and neither 
neceſlary, nor fate for them, as things now ſtood. 9q Nor as if 
he did himſclf believe, or thought to perſwade rhe People to be- 
lieve, That theſe Calves were properly, and truiy, that very God 
of 1/rael, who brought them our of Ezype ; ( which was to mon- 
ſtrouſly ablurd and ridiculous, that no 1/-aelite in his right wits 
could believe it ) and had been ſo far from attaining his end, and 
ſatisfying his People,that this would bave made him both hareful, 
and contemptible ro them ; bur his meaning was,that theſe Images 
were vilible Repreſentations, in, and by which he deſigned to wor- 
hip the True God of Iſrael, as appears, partly from that Parallel 
place. Exod. 32. 4. where ſee my Notes : partly, becauſe the Prieſts 
and Worſhippers of the Calves, are ſaid ro worſhip Jehovah ; and 
upon that account are diſtinguiſhed from thoſe belonging to Baal, 

t Kings 18 21. and 22. 6, 7. And partly, from ſJeroboam's deſign 
in this Work, which was to quiet the Peoples Minds,and remove 
their Scrupl:s about going to Jery/alem to worthip their God in that 
place, as they were commanded : which he doth,by ſignifying to 
them, That he did nor intend any alteration in the fubſtance of 
their Religion ; nor to draw them from the worſhip of the True 
God, to the worſhip of 4ſbtaroch, or Milcem, or any of thoſe Baals, 
which were ſet up by Solomon ; but to worſhip that ſe!f-ſame God 
whom they worthipped in Jern{alem, even the True God, and the 
God of their Fathers, who brought them our of Egypr ; bur only 
to vary a Circumſtance : and that as they worthipped God at J-= 
ruſalem by, and before one viſible Sign, even the Ark, and the Sa- 
cred Checubims there ; ſo his Subje&s ſhould worſhip God by 
another viſible Sign, even that of rhe Calves, in other places ; and 
as for the change of the place,he mighr ſuggeſt to them,rthat God 
was preſent in all places, where Men with honeſt Minds did call 
upon him ; that before the Temple was builr, the beſt of Kings, 
and Prophets, and People, did pray,and facrifice to God in divers 
high Places, without any ſcruple ; notwithſtanding that reſtraint 
of God to one Place, Deut. 12. 5, &. That God would diſpenſe 
with them alſo in that matter ; becauſe going to Jeruſalem was 
very dangerous to them at this time 3 and God would have Mer- 
cy, rather than Sacrifice 3 and God had been pleaſed to diſpenſe 
with his own Ordinances in caſesof neceſſity or great inconvenience, 
as he did with Circumciſion for 49 years in the Wilderneſs. 
29 And he fer the one in Bethel, and the other put 
he in Dan r. 2h 

r Which two Places he choſe for his Peoples conveniency ; Be- 
thel being in the Southern, and Dan in the Northern parts of his 
Kingdom. , : 

39 And this thing became a fin s : for the people 
went 7 #0 worſhip before the one, F even unto Dan «. 

s 5. e. A cauſe or occaſion of great wickedneſs among that Peo-= 
ple : not only of Idolatry,which is called $:» by way of Eniinency ; 
nor only of the worſhip of the Calves, wherein they pretended to 
worſhip the True God , but alſo of the worthip of Baal,and of the 
utter deſcrtion of the True God ; and of all ſorts of Impiery, and 
abominable Sins ; as is manifeſt from the Hittory of that Kingdom; 
in which, there was not one good King , and very few of the Peo= 
ple who were nor guilty of hainous- Crimes; as the Prophets wit- 
neſs. £ The King's Counſel and Example ſeduced them,though ir 
did not excule their Sin : and they willingly walked afrer this his 
wicked commandment, Hoſ. 5+ 11- # Which is not here mentioned 
excluſively, for that they went alſo ro Bechel is evident from wer. 
32, 33- but for other reaſons, either becauſe that of Dan was firſt 
made, or beſt frequented, the People in thoſe parts having been 
long leavened with Idolatry : SecJudg. 18: 30. or to ſhew the Peo- 
ples readineſs to comply with the King's Command,and their Zeal 
for Idols ; that thoſe who lived in, or near Bethel, had not patience 
to ſtay till that Cajf was finiſhed, but all of them were forward to 
go as far as Dan which was in the utmoſt borders of the Land, 
to worſhip an Idol there; when it was thought roo much for them 
to 20 to Jeruſalem to worlkip God. 

r And he made an houſe of high places x, and 
made prieſts of F the * loweſt of the people y, which 
were not of the ſons of Levi z. 

x Or, an hoxſe ( i .e. Houſes, or Chapels ) in the high places. Be- 
ſides the famous Houles, or Temples,which he built at Dan and B-- 
thel ; he built alſo for his Peoplics better accommodation, leffer 
Temples upon divers high Places, which were eſteemed Sacred and 


Heb. 
of the 
Calves. 


T Heb. 
the extree, 
mities. 
* Chap. 
13! 33s 
Izck, 


bur only to revive the old. y» Which he might do, either, 1. Be= 
cauſe the better ſcrr refuſed it, as an Office below their Quality : 
1, 2. Becaute ſuch would be ſatisfied with mean allowances ; and 
ſo he could put into his own Puzlſc a great part of the rich Poſ- 
ſeſſions and Revenues of the Levites, which doubriets he ſcized ups 


14. which alto was very neceflary for his preſent and prefſing Oc« 
caſions ; the rather. becauſe he durſt nor yet lay grievous Taxes 
upon that Pcople who had newly caſt off Rehoboam for that very 
Reaſon. Or, 3. Becauſe mean Pertons would depend upon his Fa- 
vour, and therefore be veiy piable ro his humour, and firm to 
his Interetr, and zealous to promote the worſhip of the Calves. 
But the words in the H-brew proper!y ſignitie, fr.7 the ends of the 
People ; which is, and may be tranflared rhus, tut of all rhe People ; 
promiſcuoully our of every Tribe. Which Expolition ſeems to be 
confirmed by the following 3 "Hy which are added to —_ 

3Z thele, 


Chap. XIM. AH I : 
*h were not of the fons of Levi ; though they were not 
+; ongtoady þ ber = indeed was Jeroboam's Sin ; not that 
he choſe mean Perſons, for ſome of the Zevites were ſuch ; and his 
Sin had not been leſs, if he had choſen the Nobleſt and Greateſt 
Perſons; as we ſee in the Example of Uzziah, 2 Chron. 26: 18, 19. 
But that he choſe Men of other 'Tribes,contrary to God's appoint- 
ment, which reſtrained that Office to that Tribe. z To whom that 
Office was confified by God's expreſs Command ; but he gave the 
Prieſthood promiſcuouſly to any Perſon of any other Tribe. 
32 And Jeroboam ordained a feaft « in the eighth 
month, on the fifthteenth day of the month b, like un- 
to the feaſt that 3s || in Judah, and he || offered c upon 
j| Or the altar, (ſo did he in Bethel ) 4|| ſacrificing unto the 
Lwent up to Calves e that he had made : and he placed in Bethel f 
Izbe altar, the priefts of the high places which he had made. ; 
CC. 2 Either, 1. A Feaſt of Dedication, like that which was in 7#- 
j] Or, *”® 4h, at the Dedication of the Temple. Or rather, 2. The Feaſt of 
acrifice. * Tabernacles, as may be thought, 1. becaulc that began on the fit- 
reenth day of the Month, vir. 23+ 34+ 2- Becaulc he is not 
blamed for deviſing the Feaſt ( which thereby ſeems to have been 
of God's appointment ) but only for devijng the month, wer. 33-for 
keeping God's Feaſt, not in God's time, which was the fifreen day 
of the Seventh Month, and ſo onward, Levite 23. 34+ Bur on the 
fifteenth day of the Eighth Month. And this alteration he made, 
either, 1» To keep up the difference berween his SubjeQs,and thoſe 
of Judah, as by the differing Manners, fo by the diſtinC&t times of 
their Worſhip. Or, 2. Leſt he ſhould ſeem direQly to oppole the 
God of Iſrael, ( who had in a ſpecial manner obliged all the Peo- 
ple to go up to Jeruſalem at that time, Deur. 16: 16: ) by requiring 
their attendance to Celebrate the Feaſt elſewhere, at the ſame time. 
Or, 3. To engage as many Perſons as poſſibly he could,to come to 
his Feaſt ; which they would more willingly do when the Feaſt 
at Jeruſalem was paſt, and all the Fruits of the Earth were moſt 
perfe&ly gathered in. + And ſo onward till the Seven days ended. 
c He took his Pattern thence,to ſhew, That he worſhipped the iame 
God, and profetſed the tame Religion for Subſtance, which they 
did ; howloever he differed in Circumſtances,as here he did in the 
time. c Either, x. By his Prieſts. Or, rather 2. By his own 
Hands ; as appears from Chap: 13: 1, 4- which he did, ro give the 
more countenance to his new-deviſed Solemnity. Nor 1s this 
ſtrange ; for he might plauſibly think, that he who by his own Au- 
thority had made others Prieſts, might much more exerciſe a part 
f that Office ; at leaſt, upon an extraordinary occaſion ; in which 
caſe,he knew Devid himſelf had done ſome things, which otherwite 
he might not do. #« 7. e. He himſelf did offer there in like manner, 
as he now had done at Dan. e For they were two, wer: 29. f As 
he had done at' Dan, ver: 31. l 
3 So he || offered upon the altar which he had made 
in Bethel the fifteenth day of che eighth month, ever 
| in the month which he had deviſed of his own heart g : 
and ordained a feaſt unto the children of Ifſrae], and he 


offered upon the altar, | and burnt incenſe. 
z Which he appointed without any Warrant from God, which 
was Superſtition. Compare Jer: 7- 31. 
CHA ÞP. XIIL 
rephet Of fFudah propheſicth againf# the altar at Bethel : FJeroboam, 
ine © nov. gy of hn, withererh ; and, at the prayer of the 
prophet, is reſtored, 1—=6. He, ref.:ſing the King's enterramment, ae- 
parterh from Bethel, 5 —-- 10: An old prophet, ſeducing hum, bringeth 
him back, 11 —— 19. He is for it reproved of God by the old prophet: 
and ts ſlain by a Lion : and buried by the old prophet : who confirmeth 
his prophecy, 2032. Jerobogm 5 obſtinacy, 33, 34: 
| N D behold, there came a man of God # out of 
Judah by the word of the LORD 6 unto Bethel : 


and Jeroboam ſtood by the altar to burn incenſe. 
a An Holy Prophet. b By Divine Inſpiration and Command. 
2 And he cried againſt the altar c in the word of 
the LORD, and faid, O altar, aitar d, thus faith the 
- LORD, Behold, a child + ſhall be born unto the houſe 
of David, * Joſiah by name e, and upon thee ſhall he 
- offer the prieſts f of the high places that burn incenſe 
" upon thee, and mens bones ſhall be burnt upon thee. 

c And conſequently,againſt all that worſhip ; which is oft ſigni- 
fied by the name of the altar. See 1/a: 19: 19; 1 Cor: 9: 13. Heb: 
7: 13: and 13: 10. d He direQs his Speech to the Altar ; partly, 
becauſe the following Signs were wrought upon it; and partly ro 
ſignifies That Jeroboam would no more regard his words, than the 
Altar did ; and yet they ithouid take effe&t. e Which being done 
above 3oo years after this Prophecy ; plainly ſhews the abſolute 
certainty of God's Providence, and Fore-knowledge, even in the 
moſt contingent things. For this was in it ſelf uncertain, and who]- 
ly depended upon Man's Will, both as to the having of a Child, 
& as to the giving it this Name. Therefore God can certainly, and 
effeQually over-rule Man's Will which way he pleaſeth ; or elſe it 
was poſhible, that this predition ſhould have been falſe ; which is 
Blaſphemous to imagine. f Synecdochically, the Bones of the 

Prieſts, 2 King. 23: 15, 16. whereby the Altar ſhould be defiled. 


3 And he gave a ſign the ſame day g, ſaying, This 
;s the fign which the LORD hath re : Behold, 
the altar ſhall be rent, and the aſhes that are upon ir 
poured our. 


g 3. e. He then wrought a Miracle, to aſſure them of the Truth 
of his Prophecy. | 


4'And it came to paſs when king Jeroboam heard 
the ſaying of the man of God, which had cried againſt 
the altar in Bethel, that he put forth his hand þ from 
the altar 5, ſaying, Lay hold on him. And his hand 
which he put forth againſt him, dried up k, ſo that he 
couid not pull it in again to him. 


| Or, 


| Or, 
Fo offer. 
Gr,to buru 


ſacrifice. 


Li NGTS 


hands on,and to ſtir them up to do ſo. #5 Where it was employed, 
in offering ſomething upon it. k Or, withered, the Muſcles and Si. 
news,the Inſtruments of Motion,were ſhrunk up. This God did, 
partly to chaſtiſe Jeroboam from. offering Violence to the Lord's Pro. 
phet : partly, to ſecure the Propher againſt further Violence ; and 
partly,that in this Example God might ſhew,how highly he reſents 
the Injuries done to his Miniſters, in,and for the faithful diſcharge 
of their office. 

5 The altar was rent,and the aſhes poured out from 
the altar, according to the fign which the man of God 
had given by the word of the LORD. 

6 And the king anſwered 1, and ſaid unto the man 
of God, Intreat now the face of the LORD thy God »», 
and pray for me, that my hand may be reftored me 
again, And the man of God beſought + the LORD », 
and the kings hand was reſtored again o, and became 
as it was betore. 

li. e. Spoke; as that word is oft uſed in both Teſtaments.m Who 
by his Zeal for thee, hach manifefted himſelf ro be thy God and 
Friend,in a fingular manner ; and therefore wilt hear thy Prayers 
for me, though he will not regard mine, becauſe I have forſaken 
him and his Worſhip. = To aflure Jeroboum, that what he had ſaid, 
was not from ill-will to him,and that he heartily deſired his Refor- 
mation, not his Ruine. 0 Partly to affure him, that the ſtroke was 
from God : partly, becauſe he repented of that Violence which he 
intended againit.the Propher,for which God inflited ir : and part- 
ly, that this Goodnefs of God to him, might have led him to Re. 
pentance ; or, if he continued Impenitent, leave him without all 
ExCules | 

7 And the king faid unto the man of God, Come 
home with me, and refreſh thy ſelf, and I will give 
thee a reward p. 

Þ Horrid Stupidity ! He deſires to require the Inſtrument, bur 
takes no notice of the chief Cauſe and Author of this great and 
wonderful Mercy, which was Gode 

Ss And the man of God faid unto the king *, If thou 
wilt give me half thine houſe, I will not go in with 


thee, neither will I eat bread, nor drink water in this 
place. 


9 For ſo was it charged me by the word of the 
LORD g, ſaying, Eat no bread, nor drink water r, nor 
turn again by the ſame way that thou cameſt 5. 

q My refuſal of thy favour,is not from any contempt,or hatred 
of thy Perſon ; bur in obedience to the juit Command of my God. 
who hath forbidden me all furtherConverſe arCommunication with 
thee.” » To wit, in that place, or with that People. Whereby 
God declares, how deteſtable they were in Gods Eyes ; not be- 
caule their Idolatry was fo bad as thar of the Heathens, but becauſe 
they were vile Apoſtates from the True God, and embraced this 
Ido]-worſhip, againſt the Lighr of their own Confciences, meerly 
ro comply with the King's Humour and command ; and becauſe 
their Vicinity and relation to the Tribe of Judah, made this more 
dangerous, as to their infe&ion by it. 5s That by thy avoiding the 
way that led thee to Bethel as execrable, although rhou wenteſt by 
my t1pecial Command,thou mightelt teach all others,how much they 
lhould abhor that way,and «ll thoughts of going to that place,or ro 
ſuch Pcople, upon any trivial and unneceflary occaſion. 

Io 50 he went another way, and returned not by 
the way that he came to Bethel. | 

11 C Now there dwelt an old prophet 7 in Bethel «, 
and his + ſons x eame and told him all the works that 4ye/m 
che man of God had done that day in Bethel : the words 


which he had ſpoken unto the king, them they told 
alſo co their father. 


t A Prophet of the Lord ; one to whom,and by whom,God did 
ſometimes impart his Mind as is manifeſt from wer. 20. 21. and 
one that had a ReſpeC&ro the Lord's Holy Prophets, and gave Cre- 
dit to their PrediCtions :all which the following Relation thews: but 
whether he wasan holy and good Man, may juſtly be doubted,ſc- 
ing all thoſe Qualifications might meet in a vicious Man,to,and by 
whom he may reveal ſome part of his Mind, as he did to Balaam 
Numb. 23, &c. and in ſuch,his other Qualities are ſometimes found; 
and we find him in a downright and premeditated Lye, and that 
withour any great temptation to it, ver. :8. And albeir an holy 
Propher might poſſibly have continued in the Kingdom of 1ſ-2el,he 
would never have gone from his own Habitation,to dwell at Berhel, 
the chief Seat of Idolatry, unleſs with deſign to preach againſt it: 
which it 1s evident he did not ; his Sons ſeem ro have been pre- 
ſent ar,and to have joyned with others in that Idolatrous worlhip, 
ver.11. and that not withour their Fathers connivence. « For thither 
he came to dwell probably expeQting ſome great advantages from 
Jeroboam ; but he came out of Samaris, 2 King. 23. 18- where he either 
was born,and had lived before. Or, his uſual dwelling was at Berhke!, 
bur had lately been at Samaria, and was now returned to Bethel. 
x Who probably were eye and car-witneſſes ef what had paſſed. 


12 And their father ſaid unto them, What way went 
he ? for his ſons had ſeen what way the man of God 
went, which came from Judah, 

13 And he ſaid unto his ſons, Saddle me the afs. So 
they ſaddled him the afs, and he rode thereon: 

14 And went after the man of God, and found him 
ſitttng under an oak y : and he faid unto him, Ar: thou 
the man of God that cameſt from Judah ? And he ſaid, 
I am. 


3 Being faint and weary with his Journey,and poſlibly with the 
hear,which makes him chuſe this ſhady place ; and eſpecially wittt 
bunger and thirſt,ver. g. And he might eaſily gueſs that this was the 
old Prcophet,by his Age and Carriage, and,it may be,by his Prophe- 


f ? | eb: 
tle face of 
$ ke LORD, 


* $0 Nur, 
22: 18; & 
24; 13; 


' Chap. Xt T 


4 To point out the Man whom he would haye the People lay | 


tical Mantle;and by the Character which his Sons had given hum. 
15 Then 


Ch 
20. 3 


<< 


jo, 


Fchep. X11l. 


+ Heb. 
canor « 
, Peut. 


10, 21. 


+ Heb. 4 


4d WAS» 


p Ch aPs 
29. 36. 


| 


15 Then he faid unto him, Come home with me. 
and eat bread. ; 

16 And he ſaid, I. may not return with thee, nor 
goin with thee : neither will I eat bzcad, nor drink 
water with thee in this place z. 

2 7, e. In Bethel, where thou defireſt me to do it. 

17 Fort it was faid to me by the word of the LORD, 
Thou ſhalt eat no bread, nor drink water there, nor 
turn again to go by the way that thou cameſt. 

18 He faid unto him, I am a prophet alſo as thou 
art, and an angel ſpake unto me by the word of the 
LORD, faying, Bring him back with thee into thine 
houſe, that he may cat bread, and drink water. But 
he lyed unto him 2. 

a Not with evil deſign againſt him, but out of curioſity,to know 
all the truth and circumltances from his own Mouth,and ro expreſs 
his kindneſs to him, and ro relieve his prefling hunger ; whereby 
poſſibly he thought to pleaſe God,and to compenſate for his miſcar- 
riages. But his vin was great ; for he did not only tell a premedt- 
tated Lye,burt alſo made God a Lyar,and to contradict himſelf,and 
all this withour any pretcnce gf neceſlity, or benefit to himſelt. 

19 So he went back with him, and did eat bread in 
his houſe, and drank water. 

20 T And it came to pals, as they ſat at the table 6, 
that the word of the LORD came c unto the prophet 
that brought him back #4 : 

b There the Prophet meets with a ſevere Judgment, where he was 
pleaſing himſelf with this ſeaſonable Refrethment. c By ſecret 1n- 
{tin& into his Mind ; as ſometimes God ſpake to Moſes and other 
| Prophets when they were in company wit: others. a So he makes 
this Prophet publickly to call himſelt Lyar,and ro pronunce a tci- 
rible Sentence againſt him.to whom he profeiTed ſo much kindnel:. 
Indeed the Hebrew words are ambiguous. and by others rendred 
thus,#o the Prophct whom he had brought back ; which aggrees very wel! 
with the Hebrew Phraſe ; and may ſeem to be the beſt Tranſlation, 
by comparing ver: 23» where the very fame Phraſe is ſo rendied ; 
and wer: 26. where this meſlage 1s ſaid to be jpoven ro him.But thefe 
Arguments are not cogent ; not that from ver: 23. becauſe it is 2 
common thing for the ſame Phraſe in divers Verſes, and ſome- 
times in one and the ſame Verſe,to be diverſly uſed 3 nor that from 

wer: 27: for that may be rendred concerning him. And therefore our 
Tranſlation is better, as is manifeſt from wer. 27. 

« 21 And he cried eunto the man of God that came 
from Judah, ſaying, Thus ſaith the LORD, Foraf- 
much as thou þaſtdiſobeyed the mouth fofrhe LORD, 
and haſt not kept the commandment which the LORD 
thy God commanded thee. 

e With a loud Voice,the effect of his Paſſion,both for his own 
guilt and ſhame, and for the Prophets approaching miſery, and 

his unhappy influence both in procuring and in denouncing of 


it. f z. e. The word of command coming out of his mouth. A 


Metonymy of the Caule for the Effect. 

22 But cameſt back, and haſt eaten bread, and 
drunk water in the place, of the which the LORD 
did fay to thee; Eat no bread, and drink no water ; 
thy carcale ſhall not come unto the ſepuichre of thy 
fathers g. 


& 7, e, Thou ſhalt not die a natural, but a viotent death ; and 


A 1 6 


| 
Chap. XI ; 
was prepared for his deathzand by this ſudden death freed from all 
the miſeries of an evi! Timeand World,and ſpeedily let into Eter- | 
nal Glory. 4ſ- Thirdly, As the World and all Men in it were made 
for God's Glory,and all their Lives and Deaths ought to be Jaid out 
in his Service ; fo it cannot ſeem ſtrange nor harſh if God ſhould 
bring his deſerved death upon him in this manner, for the accoms= 
pliſhment of his own Glorious Deſigns, as to vindicate his own Ho« 
nour and Jutrice from the imputation of Partiality ; to affure the 
Truth cf his Predicrions.and thereby provoke Jerobozm and his Ido- 
lacrous Followers to Repentance;to Juſtifie himſelf in all his dread= 
fu' Judgments which he intended to inflict upon Jeroboamm's Houſe, 
and the whole Kingdom of 1/-ael,for their curſed Apoſtacy;and to 
warn all ſucceecing Sinners not raſhly to venture upon ſmall Sins, 
and eſpecially to take heed of greater Sins, for which they might 
expect far ſorer puniſhments. k His Life and Soul being gonehis 
dead Body tails to the Ground,and lies there. 1 See on ver. 38. 
25 And behoid, men paſſed by, and ſaw the cat- 
caſe caſt in the way, and the lion ſtanding by the car- 
caſe : and they came and told jt in the city where the Wi 
old prophet dwelt. | 4 
26 Ard when the prophet that brought him back 8 
from the way, heard thereof, he ſaid, It is the man of 
God, who was diſobedient untothe word of the LORD: 


chorefore che LORD hath delivered him unto the lion, l 
which hath torn him, and ſlain him, according to the + Hebs ||| 
word of the LORD, which he ſpake unto him m. broken, | 

m Or rather ,cocerning him : for ſo the Particle Lamed is oft uſed, | 
as Gen: 20: 13- Pſal. 3: 2: and 91: 11. Compare with Marth: 4: 6, | 
Sce tne Notes on wer: 20, 

27 And he ſpake to his ſons, ſaying, Saddle me the 
als ». And they fadled him. 

3 Being ſecure as to himlelf, becauſe many others had been 
there without any harm 3 and hecaule he perceived the Propher's 
weath was a Judgment of Uod, and thar for {pecial Reaſons. 

28 Ard iie wenr and found his carcaſe caſt in the 
way, and tie afs, and the lion ſtanding by the carcaſes 


the lion had not eaten the carcaſe,nor + torn the aſs 0: 

o Here was a concurrence of Miracles: That the Afsdid not rut 
away trom the Lion,according to his nature and cuſtom,bur boldly 
ſrood itill as reſerving himſelf for the carrying of the Prophet to 
his Burial ; that the Lion did not devour its prey,as the manner is; 
nor yet go away when he had done his work which he was ſent for, 
bur ſrood ſrill, partly, to preſerve the Carcaſe of the Prophet from 
orher wild Beaits or Fowls, which would quickly have eaten it ; 
partly,as an evidence that the Prophet's Dearth was nat caſual,nor - 
the effect of a Lions hungry & revenous Diſpoſition,but of God's 
ſingular and juſt Judgment ; and conſequently, that his Prediction 
was Divine, and ſhould be infallibly accompliſhed in its proper 
time ; and partly, as a token of God's Favour to the deceaſed 
Prophet, of whole —_ Carcaſe he rook ſuch ſpecial Care : theres 
by lignifying, that although for wiſe and juſt Reaſons he thought 
fit to take away Ins Life, y<t his Remains were precious to him; 
and his Soul did live in his fight. | 

29 And the prophet took up the carcaſe of the man 
of God, and laid it upon the aſs, and brought it back: 
and the oid prophet came to the city, to mourn,and to 
bury him. 
zo And he laid his carcaſe in his own grave p, and 

they q mourned over him, ſaying, Alas my brother r. 

p So that threatning, wer: 22. was fulfilled ; and withal, the me= 


SAL od FIT oy - 
2 2 44368 I. 


” 
£5 as + 
$232 


(S481! 


a > 7 3%, 


T0245 
_— \ 


fo 
> . 5.2 —? 
;- 


that in this Journey,before thou returneſt to thy native habitation; 


and thy Carcaſe ſhall nor be buried in the proper Scpulchrezwhich 


was eſteemed a kind of Curſe, and a note of Infamy ; as the con- 
trary was reckoned an honour and bleſſing. See chap; 14: £3. Ja: 
14: 19, 20. Jer: 22+ 19+ and 26. 24. 

23 4 Andit came to pals, after he had eaten bread, 


and after he had drunk,that he ſadied for him the als.*., 


70 wit, for the prophet whom he had brought back. 
.*. That he might ſooner come to his home, and, if poſſible, 
eſcape the Judgment threatned. Bur, it is obſervable,he duth not 


accompany him ; his guilty Conſcience making him to expect and | 


fear to be involved in the ſame Judgment with him 

24 And when he was gone, a * ii1on met him h by 
the way, and flew him s : and his carcaſe was caſt in 
the way &, and the aſs ſtood by it : the lion aiſo ſtood 
by the carcaſe /. 


þ For there were many Lions in Judea,and this was brought hi- 
ther by God's ſpecial providence. #: Why doth God punith a good 
Man 10 ſeverely for ſo ſmall an offence ? 4»ſ. Firſt, His Sin was not 


{mall, for it was a groſs Diſobedience to a poiitive Command, 


Obj. Bur he ſuppoſed, and was told by another Prophet, that God 
had repealed his Command, and ſo was deceived. Av}. 1. He had 
no ſufhcicnc diſcharge from the former Command ; for he neither 
was aſſured thar the old Man was a Prophet,nor that the meſſage he 
delivered was from God;but had reaſon to ſuſpect the contrary,or 
at leſt to enquire the mind of God in this doubtful Point, which he 
groſly neglected to do,& willingly believed the meflage, becauſe it 
luited with his own inclination and neceffiry. Add to this, that 
he being a Prophet was obliged to the greater exactneſs in obedi- 
ence toallGod's Precepts;and therefore this Sin was much greater in 
him than in another,becauſe hereby God was diſhonoured,and the 
Authority and Succeſs of his meſſage blaſted,and Jeroboam and the I- 
dolatrous Iſraelites heardened in their wicked courſes;for the preven- 
tion whereof it was neceffary that God ſhould exerciſe Severity to- 
wards him. .4ſ. Secondly,As his Sin was not ſo ſmall,ſo his puniſh- 
ment was not ſo great, as may be imagined. For, as to his out- 
ward Man, his bodily death ( which was a Debt that he owed to 
God and Nature) in this way was not ſo painful & terrible as ma- 
ny other kinds of death ; and as to his Soul, God, by giving him 
a gracious Admonition both of his Sin and Danger,ver: 21, 22. awa- 
kencd him to true Repentance,which doubtleſs he practiſed,and fo 


mory of his Prophecy was revived and prefcrved among them,and 

his very Carcaſe reſting there,mighr be a witneſs of their Madneſs 

' and deſperate Wickedneſs, in continuing in their abominable Ido-« ; 
 latry,after ſuch an aſſurance of the dreadful effecrs of it. q The old 
| Prophet and his Sons,and others, whom common humanity taught 
to lament the untimely death of ſo worthy a Perſon. r Which was an 
uſual form of expreſſion in Funeral-Lamentations. See Jer: 22: 18. 

31 Andit came to pals after he had buried him,that 
' he ſpake to his ſons, ſaying, When I am dead, then 
bury me in the ſepulchre wherein the man of God is 
buried ; * lay my bones beſide his bones /. 

F That I may be ſecured from that Judgment threatned wer: 2. 

2 For the ſaying which he cried by the word of 
the LORD, againſt the altar in Bethel, and againft 
all the houſes of the high places,which ere in the cities 
of * Samaria #, ſhall ſurely come to paſs. 

t 7, e. Of the Kingdom of Samaris ; as it was called,though not 
when this Fact was done, yet before theſe Books were writen. 
Samaria was properly the name of one City, 1 Kings 20; 1: but 
from hence the whole Kingdom of 1[rae! was fo called, Jer; 31: 5+ 
Hoſe 7: 1; and 8: 5: and Ames 3: 9g: and the King of Jrael is called 
the King of Samaria, 2 Kings 1: 3.. Hoſ: 10: 7: and ( as here ) we 
read of rhe cities of Samaria, Ezra 4 10. 


33 \ Aﬀeer this thing, « Jeroboam returned not 
from his evil way, but + * made again of the loweſt ; 7, 
of the people prieſts x of the high places : whoſoever rerurncd, 
would y, he | confecrated him z, and he became one and made. 


of the prieſts of the high places. | * Chap; 
# i: e: Aﬀeer all theſe things : the Singular Number put for the 
Plural ; after ſo many,and evident,and fucceflive Miracles. Which led b: 
is noted to aggravate his Infidelity and Apoſtacy. x He abated not # = 5 
ſo much asa circumſtance in his Idolatrous Worſhip. » Withour 79% 
any reſpect to Tribe or Family, or integrity of Body, or Mind, or 
Life ; all which were to be regarded in the Prieſthood. & Heb. 
he filled his hand, Of which Phraſe fee Exod: 28; 41: and 29: 9, 33» 
34 And this thing became fin .*. unto the houle of 
Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and co to deſtroy ix from 
off the face of the earth: 


11 2 


* 2 King! 
23. 18, 


*cee Chap 
16. 24 


Rh Either; 


Chap. XIV. | h 
©. Either, an occaſion of ſin, and means of hardening all his 
Poſterity in their Idolatry : or, 4 puniſhment for ſo the word ſ# 1s 
oft uſed. This his obſtinate continuance in his Idolatry,after ſuch 
warnings was the utter ruin of all his Family. 
SH AL. XV, 

Teroboam ſendeth his Wife diſguiſed,and with Preſents to the Prophet Ali= 
jah at Shiloh, to enquire concerning his Son, who was Sick, 1 ——— 4. 
He, forewarned by God, denounce:h his Rum becauſe of Idolatry : And 
the Death of his child ; And the Deſtruttion of Iſragl, 516. His 
Son dieth and is buried : And he likewiſe : Nadab his Son ſucceedeth, 
17 20. Rehoboam aud Judah ſm againſt the Lord, 21 = 24+ 

- Shiſhak King of Egypt ſpoileth Jeruſalem, 25 ==—=—= 28, He dieth : and 
Abijam his ſon Succeedeth, 29-=<=3 Ie 
A T that time « Abijah the ſon of Jeroboam fell 


ſick 6. 

_ 8 Either, Firſt, Preſently after the things deſcribed in the for- 
mer Chapter :which, through related in the beginning of his Reign, 
yet” might be done a good while after it,and 1o 4#ijah the Prophet 
might be very old, as he is deſcribed to be, v. 4- Or, Secondly, 
many Years after it, 7. e- Whilſt Jereboam perſiſted in his former 
courſe. For this Phraſe is oft uſed indefinitely, and without re- 
ſpe& of the time laſt mentioned before it,as Dan. 12. 1- Matth. 4.1. 
6 By the ſtoke of God to puniſh Jereboam's Rebellion againſt God. 

2 And Jeroboam faid to his wife c, Arile, I pray 
thee, and diſguiſe thy ſelf 4, that thou be not known 
to be the wife of Jeroboam e, and get thee to Shiloh : 
Behold, there is Abijah the prophet, which told me 


that * I ſhould be king over this people. 

c Partly,becauſe he would truſt none elſe with this ſecret ; part- 
ly, becauie ſhe might, without ſuſpicion enquire concerning her 
own Child ; and partly, becauſe ſhe would enquire moſt exaQly, 
and diligently, and faithfully acquaint him with the whole truth. 
d Change thy habit, and voice, and go like a private and obſcure 
Perſon. e This caution proceeded : Firſt, From the pride of his 
heart, which made him loth to confeſs his folly in worthipping 
ſuch ignorant and helpleſs Idols,& to give Glory to the God whom 
he had forſaken. Secondly, From jealoutie and ſuſpicion, leit the 
Prophet knowing this, ſhould either give her no Anſwer,or make 
it worſe than indeed it was. Thirdly, From Policy,eſt his Peo- 
ple ſhould by his example be drawn to forſake the ſenſleſs Calves, 
and to return to the God of Juaah,whom they had raſhly forſsken. 

2 And take | with thee ten loaves, and || cracknels, 
and a || cruſe of honey f, and go to him & : he ſhall 
—_— hat ſhall become of the child 
[Or borcle. £18 thee what iba 

E ff A- preſent, - after the manner, Jaz. 13. 17. 1 Sam. 9. 7,8. 
:2 Kings 5. 15. and 8. 8. but mean, as became an ordinar Country 
Woman, which ſhe perſonated. g To enquire the event of this 
ſickneſs, as the following words imply. 


| Chap. 
1. 3b 


+ Heb: 
hine hand. 


to Shiloh, and came to the houſe of Ahijah : but Ahi- 


F 7% jah conld not ſee, for his eyes | were ſet þ by reaſon of 

Jr002J9. his age. 

heavineſs. h Or, ford ftill, or were grown ſliff; the Nerves, by which the 
Eyes and Eye-lids are moved, being contraQted and withered. 


5 And tne LORD faid unco Ahijah, Behold, the 
wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thee for her 
ſon, for he 3s ſick : thus and thus ſhalt chou ſay unto 

| her : for it ſhall be, when ſhe cometh in, that ſhe ſhal; 
feign her ſelf :o be another woman. 

6 And it was /o, when Ahijah heard the ſound of 
her feet, as ſhe came in at the door, that he ſaid, Come 
in, thou wife of Jeroboam z, why feigneſt thou thy 
ſelf ro be another ? for I em ſent to thee with + heavy 
tidings. 

; By which diſcovery he both reproves their folly,who thought 
to conceal themſelves or their deſigns from that God from whom 
they expe&cd and deſired the diſcovery of the moſt ſecret things; 
and withal gives her aſſurance of the truth and certainty of that 
Meſſage which he was to deliver. ] 

7 Go, tell Jeroboam, "Thus ſaith the LOR D God 
of Iſrael, Foraſmuch as I exalted thee from among 
the people, and made thee prince over my people k 
1ſrael : 

k For ſo they were when Jeroboam was firſt ſet over them. 

' $8 And rent the kingdom away from the houſe of 
David, and gave it thee : and yer thou haſt not been as 

- my ſervant David /,who kept my commandments, and 
who followed me with all his heart, to do hat only 
which was right in mine eyes, 

 #F Who though he fell into ſome ſins, yet,firft,he conſtantly per- 
ſevered in the true Worſhip of God ; from which thou art revolt- 
ed. Secondly, He heartily repented of, and turned from all his 
ſins whereas thou art obſtinate and incorrigible. 

9 But haſt done evil above all that were before 
thee »- : for thou haſt gone and made thee other gods 
and molten images », to provoke me to anger s, and 
haft caſt me behind thy back p : 

m Above all the former Kings of my People, as Sa», and S0- 
lemon, and Rehoboam. n Or, other Gods, to wit, ( for ſo and oft 
ſignifies among the Hebrews, as hath been formerly noted ) molten 
images, namely, the Golden Calves : which he calls other gods, not 
as if the Iſraelites eſteemed the Calves made of their own Gold, 
to be gods indeed, which it is incredible ſhould find belief with 
any man 1n his wits, eſpecially with the whole Body of the 1/r4- 
elites,vrho knew that the Ark and Cherubims, though made by Gods 
ſpecial dire&ion, were not Gods, but only Pledges of God's Pre- 
ſence, &c Nor as if they thought them to be other gods in a tri 
and proper ſenſe ; for it is apparent that they ſtill pretended to 


EF" INC 8 


4 And Jeroboam's wife did fo, and aroſe, and went | 


Chap. XIy 
Worſhip the God of their Fathers, as the Fews at Jeruſalem: OI 
though in a differing manner ; but only becauſe God-rejetted their 
whole Worſhip, and, howſoever they calicd or accounted it, he 
reckoned it a manifeſt defeC&tion from him,and a betaking of them. 
ſelves to other gods, or devils, as they are called, 2 Chron, 11, 15. 

by whoſe Inſtigation they were led to ſuch Idolatrous praQices,and 
whom alone they ſerved and worſhipped therein, whatſoever pre- 
tences they had to the contrary. 0 z. e. Whereby thou didit pro. 
voke me. For otherwiſe this was not Jeroboarm's defign in it, bur 
only to eſtabliſh himſelf in the Throne. p Delpiſed, and dijree 
garded, and forſaken me, and my Commands, and my Worſhip, 

as we do things which we caſt behind our backs. 

Io Therefore behold, I * will bring evil upon the + c1,,., 
houſe of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam 1+. 2g. 
* him that pifſeth againſt the wall q, and him that is * Chip, 
ſhut up and left y in Iſrael, and will take away the {1 

, 


oy 


remnant of the houſe of Jeroboam, as a man taketh yg, g, 
away dung /, till it be all gone. 


q Either, ſo much as a Dog : or, any male Children. Of which 
Phraſe ſee the Notcs on 1 Sam. 25- 22. r Thofe who had eſcaped 
the fury of their Encmics invading them,ceither becauſe they were 
ſhut up in Caves, or Caſtles, or ſtrong Towns : or, becaule they 
were left, over-Jooked or neglected by them, or ſpared as poor, 
1mpotent, helpleſs Creatures- But now, faith he, "They ſhall be a'1 
ſearched out, and brought to deitruftion. Sce more on Deut. 32, 
36. / Which they remove,as a loathiom thing,out of their Floults, 
and that throughly and univerſally. : 

11 Him that diecth of Jerobam in the city, ſhall 
the dogs eat: and him that dieth in the field, ſhall che 


fowls of the air eat : for the LORD hath ſpoken zz. 

t So both ſorts ſhall die unburied. 

I2 Ariſe thou therefore, get thee to thine own 
houſe ; and when thy feet enter into the City «, the 
child thall die. 

u Preſently upon thy entrance into the City ; when thou art 
gone but alittle way in it, even as far as 70 the threſhold of the Kings 
door, v. 17. which poflibly was near the Gates of the Ciry. And by 
the event of this branch, judge of the Truth of the reſt of my 
Prophecy. 

13 And all Ifracl ſhall mourn for him x, and bury 
him ; for he only of Jercboam ſhall come to the grave y, + 
becauſe in him * there is found ſome good thing toward ,,;., .. 
the LORD God of [fracl z, in the houſe of Jes 1g: ;. 
roboam 43. 

x Either, Firſt, For the loſs of ſo worthy and hopeful a Perſon 
Or,Secondly,For the ſad Calamities which thould follow his death, 
which poflibly his moderation, and witdom, and vertue, might 
have prevented, whereof his death was a certain prefage and evi- 
dence. So they ſhould mourn, nor ſimply for him, but for their 
own loſs in him. y Shall have the honour of Burial denied to the 
reſt, v. 1. » Some Pious inclinations and intentions of taking a- 
way the Calves,or of permitting or obliging his People to go up to 
Jeruſalem to Worſhip, if God gave him Life and Authority to do it, 
and of truſting God with his Kingdom in that cale. » Which is 
added for his greater commendation ; he was good in the midſt 
of ſo many temptations and wicked examples ; a good branch of 
A bad ſtock. 

14 Moreover, the LORD ſhall raiſe him up a king 
þ over I{rae], who ſhall cut off the houſe of jeroboam 
chat day c : but what 4? even now, 

b Bauſha, chaps t5: 538. c When he is fo raiſed 5 in the very 
beginning of his Reign, chap. 15: 29. d But what do I ſay, he jha 
raiſe, as 1t were a thing to be done at a great diſtance of time ; he 
hath already raifed him in ſome ſort: the man is now in being, it 
| Not 1n power, who {ſhall do this : this Judgment fhall be ſhortly 
exccuted. 

15 For the LOR D ſhall ſmite Ifrael e as a reed is + , King 
ſhaken in the water f, and he ſhall * root up Iſrael out 17: 24; 
of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and 
thall ſcatter them beyond the river g,becaulſe they have 


made their groves h, provoking the LORD to anger. 

c Becauſe they obeyed Jereboam's wicked command of Wors- 
ſhipping the Caives, and that willingly, Hs. 5: 11- f Eaſily and 
variouſly, hither and thirker, with every wind. So ſball the King- 
dom and people of Iſrael be always in an unquiet and unſettled 
poſture, toſſed to and fro by Foreign Invaſions and Civil Wars ; by 
oppoſite Kings and FaGtions, and by the diflentions of the People. 
See 2 Kings 17: 18. g To wit, Euphrates, oft fo called by way of 
EMminency, as Gen: 15; 18: and 31:21. 1 Kings 4:21, 24 This was 
accomplithed in part, 2 Kings 15: 29. and more fully, 2 Kings 17: 6. 
þ For the Worſhip of their Ido)s, Exod: 34: 13. Dent: 16: 21, God 
having before condemned the making and Worlthipping of the 
Calves, by which they deſigned or pretended to Worſhip the True 
God ; he now takes notice that they were not contented with the 
Calves, bur ( as it is the nature ot Idolatry.and all fin,to proceed 
from evil to worſe ) were many of them tallen into another and a 
worſe kind of Idolatry, even their worthip cf the Heatheniſh Baals, 
which they commonly exerciſed in Groves. See on 1 K'zgs 18: 19. ' 


16 And he ſhall give Iſrael up, becauſe of the fins of 


Jeroboam, who did ſin, and who made Iſrael to lin z. 
; To wit, by his invention, and making of the occaſion of their 
ſin, the Calves 3 by his example, by encouraging thoſe and only 
thoſe that worſhipped the Calves ; and by his Authority requiring 
and compelling them to do it. This is mentioned as a monſtrous 
aggravation of hisWickedneſs,that he was not content with his own 
ſin, bur was the great Author and chief cauſe of drawing others 
into ſin,and of corrupting and undoing the whole Ku:gdom:which 
therefore God would never forgive him, nor forget him, but upon 


2 Chron: 


| Cha; 


{ Hel 
lay ao' 


| Or, 
Rand! 
210ages 
þatues 


= occaſions mentions him with this eternal brand of infamy upon 
| him, 
| 17 © And Jeroboams wife aroſe, and departed, and 


CArme | 


ng 


. "Chap- XIV: 


+ Heb. 
lay downs 


#, Chron: 
12 13: 


| Or, 
Fanding 
zmages, Or, 
ſtatues. 


E 3 


came to Tirzah & : and when ſhe came to the threſho'd 


of the door /, the child died. 

t An Ancient and Royal City, Jef: 12: 24: in a pleaſant place, 
Cant: 6: 4: where the Kings of Iſrael had a Palace, Chap: 5: 33: 
and 16; 6,8, 23, 24: whither Jeroboam was now removed from 
Shechem, either for his picaſure, or for his Sons recovery, by th: 
healthfulneſs of the place. { To wit, of the King's Houſe, whict 
probably was upon, or by the Wall of the City, and near the Gate, 
which was the place of Judicature, Sec v. 12. 

18 Ard they buried him, and all Iſrael mourned foi 
him, according to the word of the LORD, which hc 
ſpake by the hand of his ſervant Ahijah the prophet. 

19 And the reſt of the acts of Jeroboam, how he war- 
red,and how he reigned, behold, they are written 1n tac 
book of the Chronicles of the kings of Irael . | 
By which 


Mens Edification- . ; ; 

20 And the days which Jeroboam reigned, were two 
and twenty years » : and he Þ ſlept with his fathers o, 
and Nadab his ſon reigned in his ſtead. | 

3 So he lived till Aſ#'s ſecond year, Chap 15. 25- 0- Either, 
Firt, He was Buried with his Anceſtors. Bur their Sepulchre 
ſeems to be too mean and improper for a great King ; and Kings 
uſe to be buricd in peculiar Sepuichres, Or, Secondly, He died, 
as his Fathers did. : 

21 4 And Rehoboam the fon of Solomon reigned 11 
Judah: * Rehoboamwas forty and one years oid p when 
he began to reign, and he reigned ſeventeen years 11 
Jeruſalem, the city which the LORD did chufe out of 
all the tribes of iſrael, to put his Nawe there : and lit: 
mothers name was Nazamah, an Ammonirteſs q. 

p Therefore he was born a year before Solomon was King, as appears 
from 1 Kings 11. 42. This is noted asan aggravation of Rc/20000m 5 
folly, that he was old enough to have been wiſer. q A people 
curſed by God, and ſhut out of the Congregation of his people tor 
ever, Deut. 23.3. Neh.i3-1. This is oblerved as one cauſe borh of 
Gods ditpleature in puniſhing Solomon with ſuch 2 Son, and of Rehe- 
boam's Apoſtacy after his three firit years, 2 Chron. 11: 17. 

22 And Judah didevil r in the tight of che LORD, 
and they provoked him to jealoufie with their fins 
which they had commitced, above all that their fathers 


had done. 

r Aﬀer a little time, 2 Chron. 11.17. : 

23 For they allo / built them high places #, and 
|imazes, and groves # upon every high hill,and under 
every green tree x. : | 

S They followed the example of the 1ſraelttes, although they were 
better inſtructed, and had the Temple in their Kingdom, and liberty 
of acceſsto it, which was denied to the Iſraelites ; and the privi- 
ledge of Worſhipping God in his owa way, and the Counte!s, and 
Sermons, and Examples of the Prieſts and Levites, to teach and 
ſabliſh them, and the dreadfui example of I/7rae!'s horrid ApoPacy 
to caution and terrifie them. # Which was unlawful, and, now 
eſpecially when the Temple was Buitc, and ready to receive them : 
unneceflary, and therefore exprefled a greater contempt of God and 
his expreſs Command to the contrary. « Not oaly atcer the manner 
of the Heathens and Iſraelites, bur againſt a dire and particular 
prohibition. x The People were univerſally corruptea . whichisa 
prodigious. all things contidered, and is aclcar evidence of the great- 
neſs and depth of the Original corruption of Man s Nature, which 
without Gods Grace is ready to break forth into all forts of wicked- 
neſs. 

24 And there were allo Sodomites 7 inthe land 
aud they did according to all the abominations cf the 
nations which the LORD caſt out before the chiſdic:: 


of Ifrael. 


3 i. e. Males, who proſtituted their Bodies to the filthy Luſts of 
others : of whom ſee on Deuz. 23: 17. who alſo dil this in the 
worſhip, and to the honour of their Idols, as alſo the Women d'4. 
Numb. 25.1, 2 And this might be one occalion of lo greata {p-.ad- 
ing of idolatry amoag the Luſtful ſ7aelires. And onthe other tive 
God doth frequently puniſh Idolatry with Corporal uncleannets. 
Rom.1. 21, 28. Sce 1 Kwgs 15. 12. and 22.46: 2 Krg5 23, 7, 

25 T And it came to pals in the fiith year of king 
Rehoboam z, that Shiſhak king of Egypt a came up 
againſt Jeruſalem 6. | 

z Preſently after his and his peoples Apoſtacy, which was not til! 
his fourth year : When the Apoſtatical 1ſraelites enjoyed Peace anc 
ſome kind of Proſperity, at firit, for many years together: of whicl, 
difference two reaſons may be given : Firſt, That Judabs tins wer. 
committed againſt clezrer Light, and more powerful means and re- 
medies ofall ſorts, and therefore deſerved more ſevere and ipcedy 
Judgments. Secunuly, That God diſcovered mo: c Love to Judah 
in chaſtizing them ſpecdily, that ſo thy might be humbled, and 
reformed, and ſo gracioutly preſerved, as it happened ; and more 
anger againſt Iſrael, thar he ipared them, and by their 1mpuniry hard- 
ned and ripened them to that roral Deſtruction which he intended 
to bring upon them. Of whom fee 1 Kings 11: 40; and 2 Chron 
12;2, &c. where this Hiſtory is more tul'y d-{cribed. He is thoughr 
' by many to be Solomons Brother-in-law Bur how little ſuch Relations 
ſignifie among Princes, when their Intereſt is concerned all Hiſtories 
witneſs. Beltides Rehobcam was not Solomon; Son by Pharachs Daugh- 
ter, and ſo the relation was in a manner extin&. b Either, irom 
ambition and a defireto enlarge his Empire : or, from jcalouſie of 
Rehoboams growing-greatneſs 3; Of which iec 2 Chron, 11, or, by 


IN Oo 


—_— 


Jercboams inftigation 2 or, from a covetous deſire of poſſeſſing theſe 
great Treafurcs which David and Solomon had left : and, above all, 
by Gods Providence. difpoling his heart to this expedition for 
Rehoboams puniſhaient. | 

26 AnG he took away the treaſures c of the houſe of 
che LORD, and the treaſures of the kings houſe, he 


:ven took away a!l: and he took away all the ſhields 
of goid * wich So:omon had: made. 

; Ir is implied, that firſt he rook the Ciry : which may ſeem 
tranec, conificering the great ſtrength of that City, and how much 
time ir took Ne. uchadnezzar and Tits to take it. Bur, Firſt, Ic 
night coſt Shiſbak aiſo ſome time. and along yicge e're he took it, 
thous h that be not here related. Secondly, Ir is probable that David 
and S9:omon in their Building and altering of this Ciry, had more 
iefpett roState and Magniiicence, than to its defence, as having no 
great cauſero fear the invaſion of any Enemies, and being too ſecure 
in reference to their Poſterity, bccaute of Gods Promilc of the 
xingdom to be continued to them and to their Seed for ever, And 
It 15 probable and certain, that after the diviſion between Judab and 
Iſrael, the Kings of Judah did add very much to the Fortifications 
of this Ciry. | 

27 And king Rehoboam made in their ſtead brazen 
ſhields, and commi:ced them unto. the hands of the chiefof 
the T guard 4, which kept the door of rhe kings houſe. 

a4 Whereay the Golden Shields, as being more precious, were 
kept in a certain place. 

28 And it was ſo, when the king wentinto the houſe 
of th: LORD e, that theguard bare them, and brought 
them back into the guard-chamber. 

e By which it ſeems the afflition had done him ſome good, and 
brought him back to the Worſhip of God, which he had forſaken, 
Chap 12: 1, 

25 \ Now the reſt of the as of Rehoboam, and 
all rhat he did, are they not written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of Judah f. 

f Such a Book of Chronicles as that mentioned above, v.19. . 

30 And there was war between Rehoboam and 
Jeroboam g all rheir days. 

g Notan Invaſive War with Potent Armies, which was forbidden, 
Chap: 12: 12: and not revived till Av/jams Reign, 2 Chron: 13. but 4 
detenſive War from thoſe Hoftilitics which by ſinall Parties and 
Skirmilhes they did to one another. 

31 And Rehoboam flept with his fathers, and was 
buried with his fathers in the city of David : and his 
mothers name was Naamah an Ammoniteſs bh, And 
Abijam his fon reigned in his ſtead. 


h This is repeated as athing very obſervable. See above, v. 21. 


ER A P. XY. 


Abijam followeth his Father's Sins : God hywever keepeth promiſe « He dieth, 
and Aſa his Son ſucceedeth him, x = - $8. His good Reign, 9- 15. 
Broſha warreth againſt him : he maketh a League with Benkadad, 
16 --— 22. He dieth, and Fehoſaphat ſucceedeth him, 23, 24. Nadab's 
w.cked Reign : Baaſha flayeth h.m : deftroyeth his Father's Houſe ; and 
ſucceeds him : Has wicked Reign, 25 34 


N ſon of Nebat, reigned Abijam over Judah. 

s Obj. iow can this be. when he Reigned 3Years, v. 2. and Ala, 
his vucccltor, began his Reign in the twentieth Year of Jeroboamn, 
v.92? Az}. Parts of Years are ommonly called and accounted Ycars 
bothin the Old and New Teſtament, and in Prophane Writers. So 
his Reign began with Jeroboarn's 18th Year, and continued his whole 


| 19th Year, and ended within his 2oth Year, in whichalſo 4ſa's Reign 


began And thus one and the fame Year may well be, as it fres 
quentiy 18, attributed to two ſeveral! Perſons. 

2 three years breigned he in Jeruſalem : and his mo- 
thers name was Maachah the daughter of Abilhalom c. 

b See the laſt Note, on wer: xr. c Or, of Asſ;zlom, as he is. called 
2 Ch'on; 11: 21. And tecauſe he is here mentioned as a known 
Perſon, without any addition of his Kindred or Quality, fome con= 
c.ive that this was Abſalems Daughter, called properly Tamar. 2 Sam: 

4 27. and from her Royal Grand-mother,' 2 Sam: 3: 3. Maathah ; 
and that ihe 1s called Michajah( whichdiffers not much from Maachah) 
be Langhter of Uriel, 2 Chron: 13; 2+ becauſe ſhe was firſt Married 
to U iel, as Joſephs affirms, Antiq. 8. 3. and afterwards to Rehoboam. 
Orheis think this was another Perſon,. and thar both ſhe and her 
Facher had each of them ſeveral Names, which was not unuſual 
among the Hebrews- 

And lic waiked in al! the ſins of his father d; which 
ne had done before him: and his* heart was not perfe& 
with the LORD his God, 
tather, | 

d Which his Father lived in, Fither, Firſt, Before his Humiliation. 
Or rather, Secondly, after his Deliverance from Shak, when, tho 
he did not openly renounce the Worſhip cf od, he ſeems to have 
relapted into hi, tormer Sins; which otherwiſe would nor have been 
\cemcmbredagainſt himz as Davias name and memory'"isnever loaded 
with the Game of h1s Sins, becauſe he truly -repeated of them: 

4 Nevertheleſs, for Davids ſake did the LORD his 
God give him a ||lamp e in Jeruſaiem, to fer up his ſon 
airer him, and to eſtabliſh Jerufalem f : 

e ive, A Son and Succefſlor to perpetuate his Name and Memory, 
which otherwiſe had gone 1nto ob{curity. The ſame Phraſe is uſed 
above, ©: 11336. 2 Kngs8: 19: 2Chr;21;7, fi.e. That he might 
maintain that Ciry, and Temple, and Worſhip, as a Witneſs for 
God, inthe World, againſt the 1raelites and Heathen World, who 
ſhould have enquired afrer ir, and embraced the True Religion 
there eſtabliſhed and ſer up, asa Beacon upon an high Hill, that all 
Men might rake notice of it. EFT 

5 Becaufe Dayid did :bat which was right in the om 

S234 O' 


me 


Chip. X 


as the heart of David his i -4* 


[| Or, 


canals, 


1H 


! 


. 
l 
| 
l " 
; 


q! 


+ Heb: 


runners 


Ow in cheeighteenth yearof king * Jeroboam 2 the * , Chro: || 


13: Is 


= Chap: 


(| 
i 
: 


: 


4 


F 2 Chr: 
T3: 3; 


* 2 Chr: 
145 1; 


|] That is, 
Grand 
morher. 


1aP. XV. 


| 
of the LORD, andturned not afidefrom any thing that 
he commanded him all the dayspfhis life, * ſave only 


in the matter of Uriah the Hittite g. 


£ Ne. How is this true, ſeing David ſinned in the matter of 
Nabal, x Samz2 5: and Achiſb, chap: 29: and Mephiboſbeth, and his Indul- 
gence to his Children, Admijah, Amnon and Abſalom ; and in the 
_— of the People ? Arſ. This and the like Phraſes are not to 
be underſtood as excluſive of every ſinful Aion, but only of a 
ſinful courſe or ſtate,or of an habitual & continued Apoſtaſie from 
God, or from his Ways, as the very Phraſe ofturning aſide from God, 
or from his Commands, doth conſtantly imply, as appears from 
Exod: 32; 8: Deut: 9: 12,16. 1 Same 8:3: Pſal: 78: 517: 1/m44: 20: 
17im:1. 6. and 5.15, &c. And thus it is moſt true. For David's 
other Sins were either ſudden and tranſient Aﬀs, proceeding from 
humane Infirmity and extraordinary Temptations,and ſoon repented 
of and blotted our, asin the caſes of Nabal and Achiſb ; or, miſtakes 
of his Judgment, which was not fully convinced of the finfulneſs 
of ſuch Actions, as in the other Caſes alledged ; whereas that which 
concerned Uriah's Wife was a deſigned and ſtudied Sin, long con- 
tinued in, defended with a Succetſion of other Sins, preſumprtuous, 
and ſcandalous to his Governmeat, and to the True Religion, which 

he ſo eminently profeiled. | 
6 And there was war between Rehoboam and Jero- 


boam + all the days of his life. 

þ Which was ſaid, chap 14.30. and may be here repeated to ſignifie 
the Cauſe and Original of the War berween Abijam_ and Jeroboarn, 
which is implied here, and particularly deſcribed, 2 Chron. 13. 
Abijam continued the War which Rehoboam had begun, and puſhed 
it on to 2 deciſive Battel. Bur the place may be thus rendred, Yet 
there was War, &c. i. e. Although God was pleaſed to ſhew ſo much 
reſpe& to David, as for his ſake to continue the Succeſſion to the 
Kingdom in his Poſterity, yet he thought fit tro manifeſt his Dil- 

leaſure againſt David's Succeſfors for their Sins, and to mix their 
ove and Happineſs with Wars and Troubles. 

7 Now the reſt of the a&ts of Abjjam, and all that he 
did, are they not written inthe book of the Chronicles 
of the Kings of Judah # ? And there was war berween 


Abijam and Jecoboam. | 
z In their Annals ; whence they were long after this time Tranſla- 
ted into the Sacred Book of Chronicles. See above on Chap. 14. 19. 
8 And Abijam flept with his fathers, and they buried 


him in the city of David; and Alfa * his fon reigned in 


his ſtead. 
9 © Andin the twentieth year of Jeroboam & king of 


Iſrae], . reigned Aſa over Judah. 

k In or towards the end of the Year. See above, verſe 1. 

10 And forty and one years reigned hein Jerufalem : 
and his || mothers I name: was Maachah, the daughter of 


Abiſhaiom. 

1 i. e. His Grand-Mothers, as appears from ver. 2. who is called 
his Mother, as David is called 4b:jam's Father, v. 3. and this 4/s's 
Father, v. 11. And io the names of Father, and Mother, and Sons, 
and Daughters, are oft taken both in Sacred and Prophane Authors, 
for Grand-Parents and Grand-Children. And his Grand-Mothers 
Name may be here mentioned, rather than his Mothers, becauſe his 
' Mother was either an obſcure Perſon, or was long fince dead, or 
indiſpoſed, or unwilling to take care of the Education of her Son, 
and io he was Educated by the Grand-Mother, who, though ſhe 
did poifon his Father 46:5am with her IdolJatrous Principles, wv. 12. 
yet could not infe& 4/z, nor with-hold him from proſecuting his 
good purpoſes of Reforming Religion. Which is here remembred 
to his praiſe. : | 

11 And Aſa did that which was right in the eyes of the 
LORD w, as 44 David his father. 

» As to the Government of his Kingdom, and Lite, and the 
Reformation, and Eftabliſkment of God's Worſhip. 

12 And he took away the Sodomitess out of the land, 


and removed all the idols that his fathers had made. 
» Of whom ſee chap. 14. 24. not all efthem, but thoſe whom he 
could find out ; but ſome eſcaped his obſervation and cenſure, as 


appears from Chap. 22. 46+ : 

12 And alſo * Maachah his mother, even her he re- 
moved fronr being Queen o, becauſe the had made + an 
idol p in a grove, and Aſa | deltroycd her idol, and burnt 
it by the brook Kidron 9. | 

05. e» He took from her either the name and authority of Queen- 
Regent, which ſhe, having been Rehoboam's Wife,and 4bijam's Mother, 
took to her ſelfduring 4/s's Minority, and abuſed to the Patronage 
of Idolatry ; or, the Dignity of the Queen-Mother, and thoſe Guards, 
or other Enſigns of Honour, or Inftruments of Power, which, as 
ſuch, ſhe had enjoyed and miſemployed. Otherwiſe, he removed her 


. from the Queen, 1.e. from his Wife, that ſhe might not be infe&ed by 


her, and afterwards infe& his Children: which was a prudent and 
neceſſary care,for the prevention ofſo great and publickaMiſchict, p 
Heb.a terrer,or horrer,i.e.an horrible Ido]; which it may be he ſo called, 
either, becauſe all Idols, though for a ſeaſon they pleaſe, yer in the 
end will bring dreadful efſe&s upon their Worlhippers : or, becauſe 
this was an Idol of a more horrible or terrible ſhape, more abomi- 
nable than ordinary, and not to be ſeen without Horror : whether 
it was that filthy Idol, called Priepus, which was commonly placed 
in Groves or Gardens ; or, Pan, or ſome other Heathen god, to whoſe 
Service ſhein a ſpecial manner devoted her ſelf. q That when it was 
burnt to Powder, it might be thrown into the Water, and be untit 
for any Uſe. See Exod. 32. eo. Deut. 12. 3. 

14 But the high places were notremoved 7 : never- 


theleſs, Aſa his heart was perfe&t with the LORD / all 


his days. 
r 0bj, He did take theſe away, 2 Chron+ 14. 3. Anſw. He took 


away thoſe which were devoted to the Worſhip of Idols, as1s there | 


ſaid, he took away the altars of the flrange gods, and the high places, to 
wit, where they were worſhipped ; but as for thoſe high Places where | 


K 1 NG Sv. 


——— — 


up to Jeruſalem 
near Neighbours, formerly their Friends, were become their Enc. 
mes, and watched all opportunitics to invade or molcſt them, 


a up to Jeruſalem 3. and partly, becauſe the people were ſo ob. 
: inately bent towards them, that it was, or ar leaſt, ſcemed to 
Mm, 1Mpoſſible ro remove them without grear Offence, or ſuch 


and the things which himſelf had 
dedicated, into the houſe of the LORD, filver, and 


# 4:jam, to wit, when he was in diſtreſs, and going to fight with 
Jeroboam, 2 Chron. 13+ though afterwards he did not pertorm his 
Vows, nor bring in what he had Devoted ; whether becauſe he wos 
prevented by Death, or bacauſe he afterwards relapſed to Idolatry 
45 May icem probable from the 12th Verſe of this Chapter. 

I6 © And there was war between Aſa and Baaſha 


King of Iſrael all their days ». 
# So long as they two Lived and Reigned together. Which is 
not ſo to beunderſtood, as if there were a ſolemn and declared War 
continuing all that time ( for 4/s was qgrzict in a great meaſure for 
his firſt zen years, 2 Chron. 14. 1. till the 1ſraelitechad recovered them- 
lelves from that dreadful Blow given them by Abijam, 2 Chron. 13s 
and Baaſha began to Reign in Aſa's third Year ) but ſo that there 
were many private and particular Hoſtilities praiſed among them; 
in which ſenſe the ſame phraſe is uſed, Chap. 14+ 30. 
17 And * Baaſha king of 1ſrael went up againſt Ju- * Cr 


dah x, and built y Ramah xz, that he might norſuffer any 16 :: 


to go out or come in to Aſa King of Judah 4. 


x Perceiving Aſa's great Succeſs ; of which ſee 2 Chron. 14.and r "A 
and the defeCtion of many of his ewn Subje&s to him upon that 
occaſion, 2 Chron. 15: g. he began to beſtir himſelf, and commen- 
cetha War againſt him y i,e. Repaired and fortified. z A City 
of Benjamin; which cither belonged to the Kingdom of 7ſael, from 
the Diviſion ( as ſome other places ofthar Tribe are ſuppos'd to have 
done ; of which ſee on 1 Kings 11.13.) or belonged to Judah, but was 
now Invadcd and taken by Baaſba,and Fortified. a Therefore he choſe 
this place, becauſe it was in the way from his Kingdom to Jeruſalem, 
and, as ſome add, in, ornear the ſtraits of the Mountains, where 
they could caſily diſcover and hinder all Pafſengers that way. 

18 Then Aſa took all the filver, and the gold that 
were left b in the treaſures of the houſe of the LORD, 
and the treafures of the kings houſe, and deliver'd them 
into the hand of his ſervants : and king Aſaſent them to 
* Benhadad ec the fon of Tabrimon, the fon of Hezion 
king of Syria, that dwelt at Damaſcus, ſaying, 

| 6 Theſe poor Remainders, which either Shiſhak had left at that 
time, chap; 14: 26; or, Abijam, 0: Aſa, or others, both of iſrael and 
Judah, had dedicated ; which probably was not inconfiderable, be- 
cauſe 4/a had got great Spoilstrom Zerah, 2 Chyon: 14: and he and his 
numerous and proſperous People did at this time expreſs a great 
Lea! for the Houſe and Worſhip of Gud. c Wherein he commirted 
three great Faults,among many others, Firſt, hc Alienated things 
conſecrated to God, withour neceflity. Secondly, He did this out 
of Carnal Fear and Diſtru& of that God whoſe Power & Goodneſs 
he had lately experienced. Thirdly, He did this for an ill intent, to 
hire him to the breach of his League and Covenant with Baaſhs, 
v. 19. and to take away part of that Land which by Right, and the 
ſpecial Gift of God, belonged to the [ſraelites. 

I9 There is a league betweenme and thee, avdbetween 
my father and thy father d: behold, I have ſent unto 
thee a preſent of filver and gold : come, and break thy 
league with Baaſha king of Urael, that he may + depa:t + Heb 
from me EC. 40 Hp. 

a Whereby it appears, that albeit he was an Adverſary to I/acl all 
Solomon's days, chap. 11. 25. yet after the Diviſion of the Kingdoms 
of [ſrael and Judah, he was in League with both of them, either, 


* + Che 


16: 2, 


- becauſe his Deſigns lay upon the enlargement of his Empire other 


ways ; or rather, becauſe he thoughtirt his Wiſdom and Intereſt to 
leave them to themſelves ro undo one another by their inteſtine 
Wars, and ſo to prepare the way to his Conqueſt of both ; whereas 
his invading of either of them might have made up the Breach, and 
forced them to unite againſt their common Enemy. And therefore 
as ſoon as he was free from this fear, and one of them necded and 
earneſtly deſired his help againſt the other, he gladly embraced the 
opportunity. e That being called to defend himielf, he may be 
forced to depart from my Territories, : 

20 So Ben-hadad hearkned unto king Afa, and ſent the 
captains of the hoſts which he had, againft the cicies of 
Ifrael, and ſmote jon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maachah, 
and all Cinneroth f, with all the land of Naphecali. 

f The Northern parts of Baaſha's Kingdom, which were neareſt 
to his own Kingdom of Damaſcus, and moſt remote from thoie 
parts where Baaſhs was now employed, which were in the mot 
Southern parts of his Dominions. 

21 Anditcame to paſs, when Baaſha heard :hereof, that 


he left off building of Ramath, apd dwelt in Tirzabg. 


g Now 


Ta 


eaten © as 


*C 


Yeyh 


_———_— 


= 
j 
it 
BS, - A, 
© al 


| "Chap XVI: 1. & £ 0 & © | __ 
| - Now the Royal City of /ra:!. See Chop: 14: 17. There he 2-f people Iſrael to fin, to provoke me to anger 4 with their 

bode <o defend his own Kingdoms, we a __ —_ * _ ſins * | | | | 1 

4ja, 1eſt the $;r:an King ſhould make a ſecond and worſe Invalion.Þ . | Gio E 1 ind mean Eftate. See 1 Sam. 2. 8. Pa” 

So Ala ex ny" Succeſs in _ Vagony gn - = _ _ Quef How is Baajha's Exaltation to the Kingdom aſcribed roCGod. ; 

"Is Won l0metinmes MECT WI 1 , , w_ lay, ov 

Crd Calele, So there is no judging of Cauſes by tvents: when he gor it by Treachery and Cruelty ? Af. Though that way 


: ; or manner of Invading the King.om was from himielf, and his 
22 Then king Aſa made a prociamation throughout | vo wicked Heart: yet the Tranſlation of rhe Kingdom from Nadab 


21l Judah , (none was T exempted .*. ) and they took a- | to Baaſhs ſimply conſidered, was from God, who by his Decree and 
way the ftones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, where- _ gore the = ology CO Le jar va 
. © - > C -» aa(nks - 

with Baatha had builded : and king Aſa buile with them opportunity of executing God's Jada upon Nadal and ſuch 
Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah 6. ſucceſs thereupon, that he ſhould get a preſent and quiet pofſcflion 

-, All forts of Perſons were obliged to come, except thoſe who | of the Kingdom. Nay, the very A@ of Baaſha, to wit, the killing 
were diſcnabled by Age.or Infirmity, or Abſence,or by the publick of his Malter Nadab, was an att of Divine Juſtice, foretold and 
Service of the King and Kingdom in other places. þ 2. e. Repaired appointed by God. C4ap: 14. 19+ And if Baaſha had done this in 
and ftrengthened them, for they were builr before. See Jer: 41: 9. | Obedience to God's Command, and with a ſingle Delign, to ex- 
Q-ef. Why did he not rather perfe& the Fortifications of Rama | ecute God's Vengeance threatned againſt him, it had been no more * 
which Baajha had begun? Anſ. Becauſe Baaſha might have returned | a Sin, than Jehu's AR in killing his Maſter King Jehoram, upon 
and recovered it afterwards : and he thought it moſt convenient | the ſame account, 2 Kings 9, But that Banjba did this, meerly to 
that there ſhould be no City nor Fort in that place. En gratifie his own Pride, or Covetouſneſs, or Malice ; this was not 

23 The reſt of all the acts of Aſa, and all his might, from God, bur from himſelf, and therefore is charged upon him as 
2rd all that he did, and the Cities which he built, are Murder here, wv. 7: Ad See on 1 Kings i4. 9. . 
they not written in the book of the Chronicles of the | 23 Behold, I will take away the poſterity of Baaſha, 
Minds of fudah 7 Nevertheleſs 3, in the time of his old and the poſterity of his houſe : and will make thy houſe ; | 
2oe he was diſeaſed in his feet. like 'the houſe Jeroboam the ſon of Nebat, Chap: 

© Notwithſtanding the great things which he had done, and the 4 * Him thatdieth of Baaſha inche city, ſhall the dogs nn 


glory and proſperity which he enjoyed, he felr the cifedts of Humane | eat: and him that dieth of his in the fields, ſhall the pn 
Infirmity, and of his own Sins of which ſee 2 Chron. 16. 12, 13. fowls of theair eat. ha 


24 And Afa flept with his fathers, and was buried 


SHcol N ge 
hs 


5 Now the reſt of the acts of Baaſha, and what he 


with his fichers in the city of David his father: and *| q;6_ and his might, * are they not written in the book * + Chroz 
*2Chr0: 73 Jehoſnaphar his {on reigned in h1s ſtead. ofthe Chronicles of the kin gs of Iſrael 2 16; 13 | 
Mie n:s: 25 Y And Nadab the ſon of Jeroboam Þ began to] {5 <, Baaſha flepe with his Fathers, and was buriedin | 


"aled Jo- reign over Irael, in the ſecond year of = king of Ju- Tirzah, and Elah his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

RN en - apart [7,And alſo by the hand of the propher Jehu the fon =— | 
reigned, 26 And he did evil in the ſight of the LORD, and ot Hanani, came the word of the LORD e againſt 

_—_ 5 his Eurber and tn lis fa wha Baaſha, and againſt his houſe, even for all the evii that 

GO _ bin {6 = p a8: he did in the ſight of the LORD, in provoking him to 

hay vas In.the Worſhip of the Calves which his Father had made. | ®P&Er with the work of his hands, In being like the | 

2- < And Raaſha the ſon of Ahijah, of the houſe » houſe of Jeroboam, and becaule he * killed him f. *Chap'r5: 
of lfiachar, con{pired againſt him, and Baaſha ſmore s The meaning is, The Meſſage which came from the Lord to Fehu, 29; and | 


; | pn ae: v.1; Oc, was here delivered by the hand, i. e. the Miniitry of Jehu, 
kim at Gibbethon 3 which belonged to the Phiiiſtines 7, | unto Baaſba. Jehu did what Gol commanded him in this at be Kors uy —_ ; 
for Nadab and alli Ifr1ei jaid ſiege to Gibbethon ) it was not without apparent Hazard to himſelf. fi. e. Nadab ; who 
m 1. e. Of the Tribe, which.is oft calied an Houſe, as Judg: 10: 9: | though he be not expreſſed, yer is ſufficiently underſtood : r. By the 
Pſai; 135 20 Hoſe1: 7. 1 Who, taking advantage of the Diviſion | manifeſt reference which theſe words have to the Murder committed 
berween Iſrael and Judah, had retaken this Town, which belonged | by Baaſba, which was done upon Nadad only, c<. 15. 28 2. By the 
to the Tribe of Dan, jof: 19; 44: and belonged to the Levites, Joſ: 21: | foregoing words, the Houſe of Jeroboam ; i, e His Poſterity, which was 
23 upon whoſe departure to Judah, 2 Chron: 11: 14: the Kings of | Nadab. Queff. Why doth God puniſh him for duing God's Work ? 
1{-aelſeizes' their Towns and Landsto their own uſe, as was noted Anſ. 1. Though God appointed, that Jero%vaw's Family ſhould be 
before ; which made them ſo much concerned for this Town, to | cut off; yer he did not give Basſbs Commiſſion to do it ; nor had 


belicge ir both now and many Years after this time, Chap. 16. 15. declared ow, or by whom he would doit. 2. Baaſhs did this, not to 
25 Even in the third year of Aſaz king of Judah, did | fulfill God's Will, bur his own Luſts. See on wer. 2. 0 
Baaſha ſlay Lim o, and reigned in his ſtead. 8 In the twentieth and ſixth year of Aſa king of Ju- 


» How this agrees with 2 Chron, 16- 1. ſee in the Notes there, dah, began Ela the ion of Baajha to reign 0 
e Which he did, nor to fuifil God's Threatning, bur only to advance | Tirzah, wo years g. 


himic!f; and therefore this is called Murder, Chap. 16 7. g One compleat, and part of the other, ver. 10. which in Scrip= 
2g And 1t C4Mme tO paſs when he reigned, that he | ture-accouat is reckon'd fora Year. See above 7. I5. and 15. 25+ 


ſmote ail rhe bouſe of Jeroboam, he left not to Jeroboam 9 And his ſervant Zimri ( captain of half hz chari- 


any chat breathed p, until he had deſtroyed him,accord- | ,,*, : : NS; kg 
* Chap. ir.g unto * the ſaying of the LORD qg, whick he ſpake 54 ) conſpired againſt him, as he was in Tirzah, 


Ifrael in 


y LS drinking himſelf drunk in the houſe of Arza 4 teward + Heb: 
'+ 10 by hisſervant Ahjan on Shilonite :; _ 42.6 of bus gr in Tirzah 3 I TY dal 
.e. Any of the Males of that Fanuly. - See Deut- 20. 16. Joſh. . * oats ; ; 0 | 
Fs, _ q Þ God over-ruled Baaſha's Ambition and Cruelty, to þ i e. Of all his Military Chariots, an4 the Men belonging to 9% GC 


: D ms, them: the Chariots for Carriage of neceffary things, being pur into 
"”_ _” ad ger gong” A which ts Ge other. and meaner Hands, # Whilſt is &\rces were elſe where im- 
O c 1 bs) ! 3 


a 6 ployed, v- 15. which gave Zimri advantage to execute his Deſign, 
and which lie made Iſrael to ſin F. by h1s$ proVOCAtOnN 10 And Zamri went in and {more him, and-kiiled 


wherewith' he provoked the LORD God of Urael to| him in the twenty and ſeventh year of Aſa king of Ju- 
anger. : dah, and reigned in his ſtead. a 
r So that ſame wicked Policy which he uſed to eſtabliſh the King- 11 © And ircame to paſs, when he began to teigh:; 
_ m _ FIGEF: Jo , _ _ _ Ruine : which is very} on as he ſac on his throne, that he flew all the houſe 
requently. the Evenc of Ungodly Counte!s - R : pts, hs | 
1 4 Now the reſt of the acts of Nadab, and all that of Baaſha : he left him * not one that piſſeth againſt a * ; Sanis 


he did, are they not written in the book of the Chro- wail, [| neither of his kinsfolks, knor of his friends [. 25: 225 


- . K 2 k Heb. Avengers; to whom it belong'd to Revenge his Death, See ſi Or, beth 
* See above nicles of the kings of Iſrael * 3 ſha ki Numb. 35.12. 7 His Confidents, and familiar Acquaintance, ſuch his kinſmen 
"#298 22 And there was war between Aſa and Baaſha king | ;; were moſt likely to hinder his Sertlement in the Throne,and to 4nd +15 
of Iſrael all their days. Avenge their Friends Quarrel. Friends. 


23 Inchethir: yearof Aſa king of Judah, began Baa- 12 Thus did Zimri deſtroy all the houſe of Baaſha, f Hed 
S ſha the ſon of Ahijah co reign over all Iſrael in Tirzah *, | according to the word of the LORD, which he ſpake "3 
ins ewenty and four years. againſt Baaſha w, + by Jehu the prophet: - 
24 And he didevil in the ſight of the LORD, and mie. Thus fulfilling God's Threatning, bur either without his 
walked in the way of Jeroboam, andin bis ſin where- | k20wledge, or meerly for his own ends. 


» 


: 13 For all thetins of Baaſha, and the ſins of Elah his 

W1 a , : . | 
th he made Iſrael to ſin ſons ; by which they ſinned, and by which they made 

EE I s” - A -P, wow WI [ſrael to fin, in provoking the LORD God of 1{rael ro 
2u prophecyeth againſt Baaſha, 1 7» Elah Jucceeaeth him * Him | ,nger with their vanities ns | 
Zimri ſlayeth, and jucceedeth: He, beſieged by Omri, burneth himſelf. | _” | a4 Y <_ A 
g. 20: Gui proveilith agaiaii Tint aut Kher « Solis 2 1.e- 1dols, oft called Yanities : as Deut: 42:21; 1Sam* 12: 219 


. . becaule they are but imasinary Deities, and meer no 
Samaria : Followeth the ſins of Feroboam, and dieth, 21> 28. Ahab h, J eat 4 mY —_ UNASUIATY. » Þ ,- 
on ſucceedeth him: He is more wicked [ohan his Predeceſſors, 29 —33. things 1 Cor. 8. 4 having nothing art all of a God in them, and 


 Hid oe Jericho : = Joſbus's Curſe is fulfilled in him. 34. wa = prabiara f Elah . and all that he 
am . by 
rn , begs ot the LORD cumeroJehu « the {or did, are they not written in the book of the Chronicles 
__ ymnggs b, _ Baaſha, laying, FY of the kings of Iſrael * ? 
ct, Or Whom fee more, Chron 19-2 and 20 34. | he ' \ Ld ; 
& Who alſo was a Prophet, 2 Chron. In ; "y i5 4 Inthe twenty and ſeventh year of Aſa king of 


2 Foraſmuch as 1 exalted thee out of the duſt c, and | Judah, did Zimri reign ſeven days in Tirzah : and the 
made thee prince over my people Iſrael, and thou hali | people wereencamped againſt Gibberchon,which belonged 
walked in the way of Jeroboam, and haſt made my | to the Philiſtines o, 


———_ 


31; 0 Which 


Chap. | 


*See Chap: 
$14. 19: 


s 


23. 32. 
* Mic. 
G. 16. 


| it @ light 


f Heb.was 
thing? &c. 


XVE S 4 


© 0 Which had been beſieged before, Chap. 15. 27. but, it ſeems, 


was then relieved, or afterwards recovered by the Phil:tines ; taking 
the advantage of the Diſorders and Contentions which were among 
their Enemies. 

16 And the people that were encamped, heard ſay, 
Zimri hath conſpired, and hath alſo ſlain the king : 
wherefore all Iſrael made Omri the captain ofthe hoſt 
king over Iſrael that day in the camp. 

17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Iſrael 
with him, and they befeged Tirzah. | 

18 And it came to paſs when Zimri ſaw that the city 
was taken, that he went into the palace of the kings 
houſe, and burnt the kings houſe over him p with fire, 
and died ; 

pOr, and he burnt, &rc. Either, x. Omri burnt it over Zimri ; for 
Pronouns ſometimes reſpe more remote Nouns. Or rather, 2- 
Zimri ( to whom both the foregoing and following words apparently 
belong ) who burnt it upon himſelf; that neither himſelf, nor the 
Royal Palace and Treafures might come into the hands of his 1n- 
ſulting Adverſary, ; 

19 For his fins q which he ſinned, in doing evil in the 
ſight of the LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboamr, 
and in his fin which he did, to make [Iſrael fin. 

q i.e. This befell him forhis fins. r Which he might do, either 
before his Reign, in the whole courſe of his Life, which isjuſtly 
charged upon him, | becauſe of his Impenitency : or in the Seven 
Days of his Reign ; in which, he had time enough ro publiſh his 
Intentions or Decrees, about the continuance of the Worſhip of 
the Calves; or to Sacrifice to them, for his good Succeſs, either 
already obtained, or further deſired. 

20 Now the reſt of the a&s of Zimri, and his treaſon 
that he wrought, are they not written in the book of 
the Chronicles of the kings of Iſrael * ? 

21 © Then were the people of Iſrael divided into 
ewo parts s : half ot the people followed Tibni the 
ſon of Ginath, to make him king t and halt followed 
Orri «. 

s Fell into a Civil War : yet neither this, nor any other of God's 
dreadful Judgments could win them to Repentance ; which is an 
Evidence oftheir prodigious lmpiety- and Incorrigibleneſs, and how 
ripe they were for Ruine. # Difdaining that the Soldiers ſhould uſurp 
luch a Power over the whole Kingdom. u Becauſe they approved 
the Perſon, though not the manner of his EleQtion. : 

22 butthe people that fellowed Omri es x 4- 
ainſt the people that followed Tibnithe ſon of Ginath : 
o Tibni died y, and Omri reigned. 

©'x Partly, becauſe they had the Army on their fide ; and princi- 

pally, by the appointment and judgment of God, giving up the 

Iſraelites to him who was much the worſt ; v. 25, 26+ y A violent 

Death, in the Battel. : 

23 © In the thirty and one year of Aſa king of Judah, 
began Omri to reign over Iſrael twelve ycars z : fix 
years reigned he in Tirzah. | 

z i. e. And he Reigned twelve Years, not from this 31 Year of 
Aſa, for hedied in his 38 Year, v. 29. but from the beginning of his 
Reign, which was in 4/a's 27 Year, v. 15, 16. So he Reigned four 
Years in a ftate of War with 7ibn/, and cight Years peaceablys 


"24 And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer, for 


two talents of fiiver, and built on the hill, and called 
the name of the city which he built, after the name of 


+ Heb. : Shemer, . OWNer of the hill | * Samaria. 


*See Chap: 


-' a Towit, the City ; and eſpecially, a Royal Palace, becauſe that 
at Trzah was burnt, v. 18. 
"'25 © Bur * Omni wrought evil in the eyes of the 
LORD, and did worſe than all that vere before him. 

. 26 For hewalked in all the ways of Jeroboam b the 
ſon of Nebat,and in his ſin wherewith he made iſrael to 


ſin,: to provoke the LORD God of Lſrae] to avger with | 


their vanities, 
+i e Didnotonly promote the Workkip of the Calves, as Jeroboam 


$2 d all his Succeſſors hitherto had done ; bur did alſo imitate all 


Jeroboam's other ſins, which doubtleſs were many and great ; and 
radventure he added this to the reſt, that together with the Calves, 

Worſhipped Devils : 7.8. other Idols of the Heathens, as may be 
thought from 1 Cor. 10. 20. where his Worſhip of the Devils, and of 
the Calves is diſtinguiſhed. Beſides, though he did no more for the 
ſubſtance of the Attion, than his Predeceflors did; yet he might 
juſtly and truly be ſaid to as worſe than they, becauſe he did it with. 


. % 


- grezter Aggravations, after ſo many terrible Examples of Divine 


Vengeance upon the Kings and People of 1/rael for that Sin ; or, 
'becauſe he made ſeverer Laws concerning the Calf-Worſhip ; whence 
we read of the ſtatutes of Omri, Mich. 6.16. or did more induſtriouſly 
:and violently execute them, with greater Deſpight againſt God, 
-and Malice againſt his Servants. 
27 Now the reſt of the as of Omri, which he did, 
and his might that he ſhewed, ere they not written in 
.the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Iſrael ? 
28 So Omri ſlept with his fathers, and was buried in 
'Samaria, and Ahab his ſon reigned in his tead. 
29 © And in the thirty and eighth year of Aſa king 
of Judah, began Ahab the ſon of Omri to reign over 
Ifrael ; and Ahab the ſon of Omri reigned over Iſrael 
" In Samaria, twenty and two years - 
20 And Ahab the ſon of Omri did evil in the ſight 
of the LORD, above all that were before him. 
21 Andit came to paſs, | as if it had beena light 


N G S. 


thing for him c to walk in the ſins of Jeroboam the ſon 
of Nebat ; that be took to wife Jezebel 4 the daughter 
of Ethbaal e king of the Zidonians f, and went anq 
ſerved Baal g, and worſhipped him, 

c As if that Sin were not big enough to expreſs hi 
of God ; as if he thought it hk this Wir and == me 
himſelf with ſuch a Vulgar Fault. Bur the Hebrew runs thus ww 
zt a light thing, ©'c? i. e. Was this but a ſmall Sin, that therefore 's 
needed to add more Abominations ? Where the Queſtion ax is 
uſual among the Hebrews, implies a ſtrong Denial ; and intimar - 
That this was no ſmall Sin, but a great Crime ; and might "Ins 
ſatisfied his wicked Mind withour any Additions. d A omg 
infamous for her Idolatry, and Cruelty, and Sorcery, and Filthineſ;, 
See Chap; 18: 4: and 21: 8: 2 Kings 9: 22: Rewel: 2: 20. e Called 
Ithobalus, or Itebalus in Heathen Writers f So the was of an He. 
theniſh and Idolatrous Race, and ſuch whom the Kings and Peo ; 
of I/rael were expreſly forbidden to Marry. g z. e. The Idol which 
the Sidonians Worthipped, which is thought to be Hercules : or falie 
gods : for this Name is common to all ſuch. And this Idolarr 
was much worſe than that of the Calves; becauſe in the Calve, 
they Worſhipped the True God ; but in theſe, falſe gods or Devils 
as 1s evident trom Chap; 18: 21, g 

32 Andhe reared up an altar for Baal in the houſe 
of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. 

33 And Ahab made a grove 5 ; and Ahab did more 
to provoke the LORD God of Iſrael to anger, than all 
the kings of Iſrael that were before him. 

h Againſt God's expreſs Prohibition, Deut: 5: 5, 

34 Inhis days ; did Hiel the Bethelite & build Jeri- 

cho}: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firſt- 


born, and ſet up the gates thereof in his youngeſt /iz 


he Ipake by Joſhua » the ſon of Nun, . 

# This is here added, 1. As a CharaQter of the time > 
ſtance of the Truth and Certainty of Divine Prodiions and _ 
nations, this being fulfilled 800 Years after it was threatned ; and 
withal, asa Warning to the Jrazl:tes, not ro think themiclves inno- 
cent or fate, becauſe the Judgment thteatned againſt them by A4hijah 
Chap. 14+15. Was not yet executed, though they continued in that: 
Calt-worſhip which he condemned ; bur to expett the certain accom- 
pliſhment of it in due time, if they perſiſtee in their Impenitency, 
Or, 2. As an evidence of the horrible Corruprion of his Times, arid 
of that high Contempt of God which then Reigned. & Who lived in 
Bethel, the Seat and Sink of Idolatry, wherewith he was throughly 
leavencd. 7 A place ſeated in the Tribe of Benjamin, but belonging 
tothe Kingdom of ſſrael: which place he ſeems to have choſen for his 
Buildings ; net ſo much forhis own advantage, as our of a contempt 
of the True God, and of his Threatnings, which he deſigned to con- 
vince of Falſhood by his own Experience ; and out of an ambitious 
defire to advance his own Repuration and Intereſt thereby, by 
attempting that which he knew his King and Queen too, would be 
highly pleaſed with. 12. e. In the beginning of his Building, God 
took away his Firſt-born, and others ſucceſſively in the progreſs of 
the Work, and the youngeſt when he finiſhed it. And1o he found 
by his own ſad Experience, the truth of God's Word, and how vain 
it was to contend with him. Queſt, Why did not God rather puniſh 
Hiel himſelf? Anl. This was aterrible Puniſhmeart,to ſee his Children 
cut off by Divine Vengeance, before their time, cuc afte- another ; 
and all this, for his own folly and raſbneſs. Compare Fer. 52. 0. 
And as for Hiel himſelf, poffibly after he had been ſpared ſo long 
chat he might be an Eye-witneſs of his Sons untimely Deaths ; he 
alſo might be cut off, though it be nog Recorded, asnot belonging 
to the Prophecy here ment:oned ; or, if nor, his preſent Impuniry 
was his greateſt Miſery ; either, as it continued his Torment in the 
ſad and laſting Remembrance of his Loſs and Miſery ; or as it was 
4 mean to hearden his Heart fo for greater Judgments, to which 
he was referved. n= Of which, ſee on Joſh. 6. 26. 


C a A FAVE 
Elijah foretelleth Ahab that there ſhall be a great Drought : Is ſont to Che« 
r:th, where the Ravens feed h:m, 1 7. He i ſent to Zarephath to 
a Widow, who feedeth him with M:al and O:l which waſted not. 8== =16. 
Her Son dieth, and he raiſeth him, 17 23. She acknowledgeth him 
to be a Prophet. 24, 


A N D + Elijah @ the Tiſhbite b who 45 of the Þ in- 
habitants of Gilead c, ſaid unto Ahab 4, * As the 
LORD God of Iſrael liveth e, before whom I ſtand f, 
there ſhall not be dew nor rain g theſe years b, but ac- 
cording to my word z. 

a The moſt Eminent ef the Prophets, Matth: 17: 3: who is here 
brought in» like Melchiſedeck, Gen: 14: 18: Heb. 9; 3: without any - 
mention of his Father, or Mother, or beginning of his Days like . 
a Man dropt out of the Clouds, and raiſed by God's ſpecial Pro- 
vidence as a Witneſs for himſelf, in this moſt degenerate time and 
ſtate of things ; that by his Zeal, and Courage, and Power'cf 
Miracles, he might give ſome Check to their various and abominable 
Idolatries, and ſome reviving to that ſmall number of the Lord's 
Prophets, and People, who yet remained in 14el : as we ſhall ſee. 
b So called either from the place of his Birth or Habitation ; or for 
ſome other reaſon not now known. c Which was the Land beyond 
Jordan. See Gen:31:21 AHaving doubtleſs admoniſhed him of his Sin 
&danger before this;&now upon his obſtinacy in his wickedCourles, 
he proceeds to declare, and execute the Judgment of God upon hin. 
e I ſwear by the God of Jſrae/, who is the only True and Living 
God; when the gods whom thou haſt joined with him,or preferred 
before him, are dead and ſenſeleſs Idols. f Either, ir. Whoſe Miniſter 
I am ( as this Phraſe is oft uſed, as Num. 3: 6: Deut:10: 8. and 17.12. 
18. 5.) notonly in general,but eſpecially in this Threatning, which 
I now deliver in his Name and Authority, and not from my own 
Imagination or Paſſion. Or, 2. Whois now preſent with me, anda 
Witneſs of what Iſay ; andlet him puniſh me ſeverely, if 1 tpeak 
not the Truth. g "This was a PrediQion, but was ſeconded with 
his Prayer, That God would verific it ; as it is Recorded Jo. 5. 


17. Andthis Prayer of his was nor voluntary,and malicious, but 


as - 
neccliary, 


Chap. Xvi. | © 


Segubm, * according to the word of the LORD, which * Joſh: 6 
26, 


f Heb 
Elijabu, 
Luk:4:25 
he is caltd 
El:48, 

+ Heb. 


ſojourntr!, 


* james 
Fe ITs 


eb? 
hu, 
uy 
#, 
cb, 
mer, 
me$ 

7e 


Heb. at 
the end of 
day; Gen. 
4 3" 
.Famv 14. 
26, 


Chap. XV IE 


and 


'b. @ # 


Marv, and ( all things conſidered ) truly Charitable ; that by 
RD Ben and long AfﬀiGtion, God's Honour,and the Truth of his 
Word and Threatnings ( which was now ſo horribly and univer- 
ally contemned ) might be Vindicared ; and the Ifracktes ( whom 


their preſent Impunity and Proſperity had hardned in their Idola- 


:oht hereby be awakened to ſee their own Wickednels, 
_ jan ton of their Calves, and other Idols ; and their Depen- 
dance upon God,and the nec-ſſiry of returning to the True Reli- 
gion. hz. e. Thele following Years, which were three and an half, 
Luke 4; 25 Jam: 5:17. 4 1.6 Unrtil I thall declare, That this Judg- 
ment ſhall ceaſe, and thall pray to God for the Removal of it- 


2 And the word of the LORD came unto him, 


ſaying, ] 
"T Get the hence,and turn thee Eaſt-ward,and hide 
thy ſelf by the brook Cherith &, that is before Jordan. 
þ Thus God reſcues him from the Fury of Ahab and Jezabel,who, 
he knew, would ſeek to deſtroy him. Qu Why did not 4446 ſeize 
upon him immediatly upon theſe words ? Avnſ. r. This muſt be 
aſcribed to God's over-ruling Providence, who hath the Hearts of 
all men in his hands ; and hath oft prote&ed his Prophets and 
Servants in ſuch caſes. 2. He might Jay this not by word of 
Mouth, but by Letter and "Meſſage ſent to him ; as that word is 


: ſed, as Exod: 18: 6. 
— hs all 2. that thou ſhalt drink of the brook, 


and I have commended 1 the Ravens m to feed thee 


there. 


1 5. e. I have decreed or appointed. Or, 7 ſhall command, i.e. ef 
feQually move them. by Inſtin&s and Inclinations,which I ſkall pur 
into them, which ſball be as forcible with them,as a Law or Com- 
mand is to Men. God is faid to Command both Brute Creatures, as 
Amos 9; 3 Jonah 2: 10. and ſenſeleſs things; as Job 38: 11, 12. Pſal; 
18 13. Iſa: 5: Grand 45:12. when he cauſeth them to do the things 
which he intends to Effe& by them m Which he names,and chuſeth 
for this work: partly,to ſuccour the Prophets Faith againſt humane 
Infirmity,by the credibility of the thing, there being many Ravens in 
thoſe parts,and thoſe delighting to reſide near Brooks of Waterzand 
that ſort of Creatures being apt & accuſtomed to ſeek Proviſions, and 
to carry them away to the p:aces of their abode: and partly,to ſhew 
his Care and Power in providing for the Prophet by thoſe Creatures. 
which are noted for their Greedineſs,in monopolizing Provition to 
themſ!ves, and for their Malignity and Unnaruralneſs towards 
their own Young ; that by this ſtrange and noble Experiment he | 
mighr be taughr to truit God in thoſe many and great Dithculties 
to which he was likely ro be expoſed. Obj. The Ravens were un. 
clean, Lett: 11:15 Anſ. They were Unclean for Meat, but not for the 
Touch But howioever that Ceremonial Law was over-ruled by 
necellity, and by the Law-givers Ditpenſation. 

5 So + © weut and did according unto the word of 
the LORD: for he went and dwelt by the brook 
Cherith, thar is befo:e Jordan. 

6 And the ravens brought him bread and fleſh » in 
the morning o, and bread and fleſh in the evening p : 


and he drank of the brook. 
n Not raw,but boiled by the Miniſtry of ſome Angel or Man, 


-and left in ſome place or places till the Ravens came for it : in all 


which, there is nothing inctedible,confidering the Power and Pro- 
vidence of God. 0 p z«e For Dinner and Supper,according to the 
Cuſtom. See Gen: 43: 25+ Ruth 2:14. Luke14: 12. Aﬀs 10; g, 10. 

7 And it cane to pa, þ afrer 4 while q, that the 
brook dried up r, becauſe there had been no rain in 


the land. 

g Heb. 4t the end of days ; i. e. of a Year ; for ſo the word days 
is oft uſed, as in Exod. 3.10. Lev. 25-29. Numb.g. 22+ Judg. 17. 10. 
1 Sam. 1.3:and 27: 7. And this ſeems to be a convenient time for the 


drying up of the Brook, which was gradually dried up. And fo this 


. agrees well with Chap 18:1. in the third Year of which,ſee the Notes 


there r God ſo ordering it, partly for the Puniſhment of thoſe 


| Iſfratlites who lived near it, and had hitherto been refreſhed by it : 


Y Luk. 4+ 


+6. called 


borepra, 


- therefore was inhabited by Gentiles. See Luke 4. 25. 


partly, for the Trial and Exercile of Elijas Faith,and to teach him 
to depend upon God a'one,.uot on any Creature for his Support:and 
partly, to ſhew his own alltufficiency in providing for his People. 

8 © And tne word of the LOKD came unto him, 


ſaying, 

9 Ariſe, get thee to * Zarephath #, which belongeth 
to Zidon t, and dwell there : behold, I have com- 
manded « a widow-woman there to ſuſtain thee. 

s A City between Tyrus and Sydon,called Sarepta by St. Luke,Chap: 
4. 26. by Pliny and others. t To the Juriſdition of that city,which 


And Gods pro- 
viding for his Prophet, fir®, by an unclean Bird,and then by a G:1= 


-tile, whom the Jews eſtcemed Uuclean, was a notable Preſage of the 


Calling of the Gent:/es,and of the-Rejection of the Jews. « 7. e. Ap- 
pointed or Provided,as before, ver.4.for that ſhe had as yet no Re- 
velation or Command of God abour it, appears from ver. 12. 

10 So he aroſe, and went to Zarephach : and when 
he came to the gare of the city. behold the widow wo- 
man was there gathering of ſticks : and he called to 
her x, and ſaid, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little watter 
in a veſſel, that I may drink. 


x Knowing by Divine Suggeſtion, that this was the woman de- 
ſigned. 


It And as ſhe was going to fetch rt, he called to 
her, and faid, Bring me, I pray thet, a morſel of 


bread in thine hand y. 


y Which he faid only to try her,&ro make way for what follows: 
12 And ihe ſaid, As the LOR Þ thy God iiveth z, 1 
have not a cake,bur an handfui ot meal in a barrel, & 
a little oyl in a crute : and behold, I a» gathering two 


ſticks 2, that I may goin, aud dreſs it for me and my 


fon, that we may eat it, and die 6: 


i 


N G 8. Chap. XVII. 
z By which ſhe diſcovers, That though ſhe was a Gentile,yet ſhe 4 
owned the God of Jſrae! as the True God. 3 7. e. A few ſticks, g 
that number being oft uſed indefinitely for any ſmall number, | 
both in Scripture, as Hof. 6. 2- and by other Authors. 6 For ha- 8 
ving no more Proviſion,we muſt needs periſh with Hunger. For inn 
though the Famine was only in the Land of 1ſrael, yet the Effects | 
kl 


[ 


of it were 1n Tyre and Sidox, which were fed by the Corn of that 
Land. See AFs 12. 20. Or the fame Famine might be in thoſe 
parts alſo ; the chief cauſe of the Famine, to wit, the Worſhip of 
Baal, being common to both places. 

13 And Eljjah faid unto her, Fear not ; go axd do as 
chou haſt faid :bur make me thereof a little cake firſts, 
and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for 
thy ſon. 

ec Which he requires as a trial and exerciſe of her Faith, and 
Charity, and Obedience, which he knew God would graciouſly and 
plentitully reward;and ſo this would be a great Exaniple to encou- 
rage others to the practice of the ſame Graces upon like occalions. - 

14 For thus faith the LORD God of Ifrae} 4, The 
barrel of meal e ſhall not waſte, neither ſhall the cruſe 


of oil fail, until the day tha: the LORD + ſendeth rain 
upon the earth. | | 
4 In whom I perceive thou truſteſt. e 7 e. The Meal of theBarre! 
An iypallage or Metonomy. $0 the cruſe of oil for the oil of the cruſe. 
15 And ſhe went and did according to the ſaying of 
Elijah f : and ſhe, and he, and her houſe did eat || many || Or,s 
days g. years 
f Giving Glory to the God of 1/-ae!, by beliving his Prophet. 
2 7. e. Along time, even above two Years: See Chap. 18. 1. Heb. 
days; 1.e. a full Year ; asver. 7. n:mely, before the following Event 
— her ſon happened, and the reit of the time of the'Famine 
atter 1t. : 
16 And the barrel of meal waſted not 5, neither did 
che cruſe of oil fail, according to the word of the = 
{ ORD, which he ſpake + by Elijah. t Heb. 
þ God ſtill Creating new, as faſt as the old was ſpent. oy the 
i7 4 And it came to pals after theſe things, that the MG 4 
ſon of che woman, the miſtreſs of the houſe, fell ſick, 
and his ſickneſs was fo fore, that chere was no breath 
; lefr in him, 
; Or, no Soul or Life, as this Hebrew Word oft ſignifies * i.e. He 
died,as is manifeſt from the following Verſes. See alſo Heb. 1:; 35. 
18 And the faid unto Elijah, What have I co do with 
thee &, O thou man of Ged? att thou come unto me 1 
to call my ſin to remembrance mz, and to flay my ſon d 
k Wherein haveT injured or provoked thee?Or,Why didſt thou 
come to Sojourn in my Houſe,(as the following Words ſeem to ex- 
plain theſe) if this be the frint of it ?They are words ofa troubled 
Mind,favouring of ſome rathnels and impatience. { Didit thou come 
for this end,thar thou mighreſt ſeverely obſerve my Sins,and by thy 
Prayers bring down God's juſt Judgment upon me, for them,as thou 
hair for the like cauſe brought down this Famine upon the Nation? 
m Either, 1. To my rememb:ance ; thar I ſhould by this dreadful 
Judgment be brought to the knowledge and remembrance of my 
Sins, which have procured it Or rather, 2- To Gods Remem- 
brance : for God is oft ſaid in Scripture,to remember Sins, when he 
puniſheth them ; and to forge: them, when he ſpares the Sinner. 
See 2 Sam. 16.10, Have I initead of the Blefling which I expe&ed 
form thy preſence, met with a Curſe ? 


TREES —— a I» 2 a 


OR —————_— ———_— — 


t Heb. - 


givetbe 


fall 


A ee ee ee eee Cee et rayon nee ee en eter ere 


19 And he ſaid unto her. Give me thy ſon x. And 
he twok him out of her boſom, & carried him up into a 
loft 0, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. 

n Into mine Arms. 0 A private place, where he might more 
freely and fully pour out his Soul to God, and uſe ſuch Geſtures 
or Methods, as he thought moſt proper, without any offence or 
obſervation. 


20 And he cried unto the LORD,and ſaid, O LORD 
my God, haſt thou aiſo brought evil upon the widow, 
with whom I ſojourn, by flaying her fon p ? 

p A Prayer full of powerful Argi.ments. Thou art the Lord,that 
canſr revive the Child and my Gd ;. and therefore wiltſt not, do 
not deny me. She is # W-dow, add not affliction to the afflicted ; 
deprive her not of the great Support and Staff of her Age : She 
hath given me kind Entertainment : Let her not fare the worſe 
for her kindneſs to a Prophet, whereby wicked Men will take 
occalion to reproach both her, and Religion- 


21 And he © ſtretched himſelf upon the child q three 
times,and cried unto the LORD r, and faid, O LORD 
my God,1 pray thee let this childs foul come F into him + feb. in- 
again & to his its 

9 Notyas if he thought this could contribute any Warmth or ward p#7#« | 
Life to the Child ; bur partly, to expreſs, and withal to increaſe | 
his Grief for the Child's Death,and his Deſire of its reviving ; that 
thereby his Prayers might be more fervent, and conſequently, 
more prevalent with God : and partly, thar ir might apppear, That 
this Miracle, tho wrought by God alone.yet was done for the ſake 
of Elijah, and in anſwer to his Prayer. Compare 2 Kings 4+ 34, John 
9: 6 A#: 20:10. r Firſt, he ſtretched himieif,then he piayed,and 
char for Three times ſucceflive!y.' 5 By which it is evident, That 
the ſoul was gone out of his Body, and therefore doth ſubſilc 
withour it afrer Death; Compare Gen. 35. 18. This was a great 
Requelt 5 but Elias was incouraged to make it ; partly,by his Zeal 
for Gods Honour, which he thought was concerned in it,and would 
be eclipſed by ir; partly, by the experience which he hail of his 
prevailing Power with God in Prayer : and partly, by a Divine 
Impulie moving him to deſire ir. ' 


22 And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah, 8 the 


t Heb. 
meaſured- 


ſoul of the child came inco him again, and he reviveg. 
| 2K | 22 And 


ap. XVIN, LE & Z 
22 And Elijah took the child,and brought him down 
out of the chamber into the houſe, and delivered him 
unto his mother : and Elitah ſaid, See, thy ſon liveth. 
24 © And the woman ſaid to Elijah, Now by this I 
know # that thou art a man of God, and zhar the word 
of the LORD in thy mouth zs truth #. 


t Now I am affured of that concerning which IT began upon this 
fad occaſion to doubt. # That the God whom thou profeſſeſt, is 
the true God ; and the Dodrine and Religion which thou Teach- 
eſt, is the only True Religion ; and therefore henceforth I whoi- 
ly renounce the Worſhip of Idols. 

C H A ÞP. XVIIL 
Elijah in the extreamity of Famine ts ſent to Ahab : metteth good Obadiah, 

1——7. Chargeth him to certifie the King of his coming ; He bringeth 

Ahab to him, 8 -—16. He reproveth Ahab and the Congregation © By 

Fire from Heaven convinceth Baal's Prophets : They ave ſlain, 11-=--=40. 

Elijah by Prayer obtaineth Rain : Runs before Ahab to Jezreel. 41---46. 

N D it came to paſs after many days, that the 
word of the LORD came to Elijah in the third 


year a, ſaying, Go ſhew thy ſelf unto Ahab 6, and I 


will ſend rain upon the earth e. 

a Either, 1» From the time when he went to hide himſelf by the 
B:ook Cherith ; Six Months before which time the Famine might 
begin, tho it was not yet come to extremity. And ſo this being 
in, or towards the end of the third Year, it makes up theſe Three 
Years and Six Months,7aw.s.17. Or, 2. From the time of his going 
to Sarepta,which probably was a Year after the Famine begunzSee on 
Chad 17. 7. and fo this might be in the middle of the Third Year, 
which alſo makes up the Three Years and Six Moneths. 6b To ac- 
quaint him with the Cauſe of this Judgment, wer. :8. and to ad- 
viſe him to remove it, and upen that condition to promiſe him 
rain, e According to thy Word and Prayer, which thou fhalt 
make for it. Thus God takes care to maintain the Honour and 
Authority of his Prophet, and in Judgment remembers Mercy to 
Iſ-ael for the ſake of the Holy Sced yer left among them, who ſuf- 
fered in this common Calamity. 


2 And Elijah went to ſhew himſelf unto Ahab 7 : 


and there was a {ore famine in Samaria. 

a Wherein he ſhews a ſtrong Faith, and reiolute Obedience, and 
invincible Courage, that he durſt at G« d's Command 1vun into the 
Mouth of this raging Lion ; which was a degree of Martyrdom. 

2 And Ahab called T Obadiah which was 7 the gO- 
vernour of his houſe e: (now Obadiah feared the LOKD 


greatly f: 

e Being valued by 44a for his great Prudence and Fidelity,and 
therefore indu)ged as to the Worſhip of the Calves and Baal.f Queſt, 
How could he and ſome other I/ael:res be ſaid to fear the Lira when 
they did not go up to Jeruſalem to Worſhip,as Lod had commanded? 
Anſw.Although they ſeem norto be wholly excuiab'e in thisnegle&, 
becauſe they ſhould have preferred Gods Service before their world- 
ly Commodity, according to the good Example of the Prieſts and 
Levites,and the generality of the God'y Peopie who did fo, Chron 
11. 13, 16. yet becauſe + Aa yg God in Spirit and Truth, 
and performed all Moral Duties to God and their Brethren, and 
abſtained from Idolatry,and being kept from Jeruſalem by violence, 
they thought neceflity, and the apparent Hazard of their Lives, 
would excuſe them fiom Ceremonial Services ; and God bare with 
their Infirmity hercin- 

For it was /o, when Þ Jezebel cut off the prophets 
- THeb.Izi= of the LORD,that Obadiah took an hundred prophets g, 
and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them 4 with 


bread and water z ) 

g Which Name is not given to ſuch as are endowed with an 
extraordinary Spirit of Prophecy, but to ſuch Miniiters as devoted 
themſelves to the Service ot God in preaching,Praying Prajting God, 
and the like, as 1 Sam: 10: 10511, 12. and in this place compared with 
wer. 22 Where Elijah ſaith, 1 only remam a Propher of the Lord, to wit, 
ſtrialy ſo called ; and Matzh. 16. 41. 1 Cor: 12: 28, 29. and 14. 29 
hþ With the Hazard of his own Life,and againſt the King's Com- 
mand ; as wiſely conſidering, that no Command of an Earthly 
Prince could over-rule the Command of the Supreme Lord, the 
King of Kings, or diſcharge him froin thoſe Acts of Piety to God, 
and Charity ro Men, which God's Law indiſpenſably required. 
5 Either properly ; which was a great kindneſs in thoſe Circum- 
ſtances : or figuratively, /. e- w th Mcart and Drink. 

5 And Ahab ſaid unto Obadiah, Go into the land, 
unto all fountains of water,and unto all brooks &: per- 
adventure we may find graſs to ſave the horſes and 
mules alive, | that we loſe no: all the beaſts. 
+Heb:rhas k About which, Graſs was moſt probably to be found in that 
we cut not great Drought. 
of our 6 So they divided the land between them, to paſs 
ſelves throughout it. Ahab went one way by himſelf /, and 
| Soon the Obadiah went another way by himſelf. 3 

a I Nor daring to truſt any other, Obadiah excepted, leſt being 
bribed by ſuch as had Graſs for their own ule, they ſhould nor 
give him a true Account. | : 

7 © And as Obadiah was in the way, Behold, Elijah 
met him : and he knew him, and fell on his face »z, and 
ſaid, Art thou that my lord Elijah ? 

m By this profound Reverence, ſhewing his great Reſpe& and 
Love to him. 


8 And he anſwered him, I aw: : go tell thy lord s, 


Behold, Elijah 3s here. | 
» Ahab: whom,though a very wicked Man.he owns for Obadiah's 
Lord and King ; thereby inſtrutting him,thar he did well in owning 
himasſuch ; and thar the Wickedneſs of Kings doth not exempt 
their Subje&s from Obedience to their Lawful Commands. 
'9 And he faid, What have I tinned o, that thou 


wouldeſt deliver thy 1ervant into the hand of 


t Heb. 9- 
badiahu. 

| +tHeb. 
over his 


keuſe. 


N GC % 


Ahab, to ſlay me ? 

o Wherein have I ſo offended God,and thee,that thou ſhouldeſ; 
inflict this puniſhment upon me, and expoſe me to certain ruin 
by this means ? 

Io As the LORD thy God liveth, there is no na- 
tion or Kingdom p, whither my lord hath not ſent to 
ſeek thee : and when they ſaid, He is not there ; he 
rook an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they 
found thee not g. 

? to wit,near to his own,where he could in reaſon think that Z:. 
Jah had hid himſelf. Nothing is more frequent than to underſtand 
General Expreſſions with ſuch Limitations. q Not that he could force 
other Kingdoms to take anOath,bur that by his Perſuaſions hepre. 
vailed with the chief Perſons in ſeveral Kingdoms for his Satisfa&i. 
on to ſwear that they did not know of Elijshs being among them, 
Which was not hard for him to obtain. For Ahab was a grear 
Prince, and had a great Intereſt among the Neighbouring Kings. 
The King of Tyre was his Father-in-law ; the King of Moab Tribu. 
tary to him ; Fehoſhaphaz, his Friend and Relation, to whom the 
King of Edom was Tributary. We read alſo of all thc Kings of Arg. 
bia.and of all the Kings of the Hittites,and of Syria, 1Kings 10:15,29.which 
as they corroſponded with Solomon,ſo how far they might be Allied 
to,or Confederate with Ahab,we know not ; nor what Articles or 
Aggreements were between him and them,among which this mighe 
be one, That they ſhould deliver up to one another all their Fugi- 
tive or Baniſhed Subje&s upon Demand ; which might give ſuffi. 
cient ground for his deſire or expeQation of this Oath. T.ef How 
then could Elijah lie hid in the Houſe ofrheWidow of Sarepra? Anſw. 
That might eaſily be, exther,becaule ſhe her ſelf, or at leaft others, 
did not know particularly who he was ; or, becauſe ſhe uſed all 
poſſible Care to conceal him, her Conſcience and Intereſt both 
obliging her ſo to do ; or becauſe God fecured him there. 

11 And now thou ſayelt, Go tell thy lord, Behold, 
Elijah #s here. 

12 And it ſhall come to paſs, as ſoon as I am gone 
from thee, that the ſpirit of the LORD » ſhall carry 
thee whither I know not /; and ſo when I come and 
tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he will ſlay me 5: 
but I thy ſervant fear thze LORD from my youth «. 

r The Ho'y Ghoſt, to whom the Inſpiration and Condu® of the 
Prophets is commonly aſcribed in Holy Scripture,as 1/a. 48-16.and 
61:1, Matthe 4. 1. At:16:6,7. who might do this either immediate« 
ly by his own Power,or by an Angel,or by a ſtrong Wind. [Such 
tranſportations of the Prophets having doubtleſs been uſual before 
this time, as they were after it. Sec 2 Kings 2.16-Ezek.3.12,14. Mat: 
4. 1. As 8.39. t Either as a curſed Impoſtor that hath deluded him 
with vain Hopes : or rather,becauſe I did not forthwith ſeize upon 
thee, and bring thee to him to receive puniſhment, « He ſpeaks 
not theſe, nor the following Words,in way of vain boaſting ; bur 
only for his own neceſſary vindication and preſervation, that he 
might move the Prophet to pity and ſpare him, and not put him 
upon that hazardous aftion ; which yet he was reſolved to do, if 
the Prophet peremptorily required it» 

. I2 Was it not told my lord, what I did when Jeze- 
bel flew the prophets of the LORD? how I hid an hun- 
dred men of the LORDS prophets by Þ fifty in a cave, + 16k 
and fed them with bread and water ? fitrnflin 

14 And now thou faycſt, Go tell thy lord, Behold, 
Elijah zs here: and he ſhall ſlay me. | 

15 And Eljjah ſaid, As the LORD of hoſts x liveth, 
before whom I ſtand, I will ſurely ſhew my ſelf unte 


him to day. 
x The Lord of all the Creatures, which are called Gods Hofs, Gen; 
2; 1+ Deut: 4:19. Pſal. 103.21. and 148. 2, and are all ſubje& ro his 
Command. He mentions this Title as his Shield,under the ProteCi- 
on whereof he did,and durſt venture to come into Ahad's Preſence- 
16 SO Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told hinus 
and Ahab went to meet Elijah. 
17 4 And ir came to paſs when Ahab ſaw Elijah, 
that Ahab ſaid unto him, Art thou he * that troubleth * Act.16 


Iſrael y ? 20. 
y Havel at laſt met with thee, O thou great Diſturber of my 
Kingdom, the Author of this Famine,and of all our Diſquiets and 
Calamities ; 
18 And he anſwered,T have not troubled Iſrael, but 
' thou and thy fathers houſe z, in that ye have forſaken 
the commandments of the LORD, and thou haſt fol. 


lowed Baalim. 

z Theſe Calamities are not to be imputed to my Paſſions, bus 
thine & thy FathersW ickedneſs, which God puniſheth by this means. 
He anſwered him thus boldly,becauſe he ſpoke and acted in God's 
Name, and for his Honour and Service, whoſe Vaſlal 4hab was. 

19 Now therefore fend a, and gather to me all 
Iſrael 6 unto mount Carmel e, and the prophets of Baal 
d four hundred and fiftry,and the prophets of the grove 


e four hundred, which eat at Jezebels table, | 
s To wit, Meflengers, that this Controverfie between thee and 

me may be decided ,the true Cauſe of theſe heavyJudgments diſcover- 

ed and removed, That fo this Plague may be removed. 6 By their 

Depuries,or Heads,or repreſentatives,that they may be witnetiles of 

all our Tranſactions. c Not that Carmel in Judah, 1 Saf: 15:12. but 

another in /ſachar by the Mid-land Sea, Jof: 19; 26. Jer.56:18. which 

he choſe as a very convenient place, being nor far from the Center 

of his Kingdom,to- which all the Tribes nught conveniently reſort, 

at ſome good diſtance from Samaria, that Jezebel might not hinder 

his Deſign : and a very high mountain, Amo: 9.3.and that upon the | 

Sea,whence he might have the opportunity ro diſcover the Rain as 

irs firſt approach, which he did,ver:42,%c. « Which' were difperſed 


— 


Chap. XVill, . 


in all the parts of the Kingdom, e Which attended upon thoſe 


gaols or Idols which wers worſhipped in the Grayes, which were 
neaz | 


Cl 


Y 
th 


t:16 


wt. AS 


F chap XVII. I. 


| Or, 
thougst5. 


"See Jolh. 
24. 15. 


| Or,God, 


tHeb.The 
word 15 


good, 


| Or, Go! 


|| Or, 
AO PF 

| Or, 
beard 

|| Or, 
leated. 

u and 
down at 
th 

*ve alt ar, 


near the Royal City,and much valued and frequented by the King 
and rhe Queen, r Kings 15: 13: and 16: 33. 2 Kmgs 13; 6, and there- 
fore were maintained at the Queens Charges 

20 So Ahab f ſent unto all the children of Ifrael,and 
cathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel. 

f He complied with Ejav's motion ; partly,becauſe it was fo fair 
and roaſonabic.that ic could not refuſe it with Honour,nor without 
theDifcontent of all his People, this being propoſed in order to their 
Deliverance from this terrible Famane ; partly, becaute the Urgency 
f the preſent Diitreſs made him willing to try all meas ro remove 
ic ; partly from a Curiotiry of ſeeing tome extraordinary Events; 
and principally, becauſe God inclined his Heart to cloſe with 1t- 

21 And Elijah came unto all the people, and faid, 
How long halc ye between two || opinions g ? It the 
LORD be God bh, follow him z : but if Baai &, * rhen 
follow him: And the people anſwered him not a word /. 

g Why do you not make ſtraight Paths with your Fect, as the 
Phraſe is.Heb:12:13 2? Why do you walk ſo lamely & unevenly, being 
ſo unſteddy in your Opinions and pracrices,and doubting whether 
itis better to Worſhip God or Baal? þ Whom you pretend to Wor- 
ſip in the Calves, 2 Kings10:16, 31 compare Exod:32:4. # Worſhip 
him,and him only and thar in ſuck place & manner as he hath com- 
mazided you,and nit by the Calves. & If Baal can prove himſcif to 
be the True God: / Being convinced of the reaſonableneſs of his 
Propoſition ; taugit by Experience,that Johovah had ſent this Judg- 
ment, and that Baa! could not remove it, which had ſraygered 
them in their Opinion abour Baal; yet not daring to diſown Baal, 
for f-ar of the Ditplcafure of the King, then preſent. | 

22 Then ſaid Eiijah unto the people, I, even 1 only 
remain m2 a prophet of the LORD ; bur Baals prophets 
ar2 four hundred and fifty men. 

m T» wit,here preſenr, publickly to own and plead the Cauſe of 
God ; for he oppoteth himſelf only to Baals 450 Prophets, becauſe 
they only were preſent; rhe Prophers of rhe Groves,being.it ſeems, 
not permitted by 7-z-vel (chrough her Pride,or Obſtinacy, or Care, 
and Kindneſs to them ) ro go rhither. Sce Chap, 22. 6. As for the 


orher Prophets 'f the Lord, many of them were flain by 4hab or 


cz, bel, or baniſhed, or hid in Caves. gen 

22 Let them therefore give us two bullocks », and 
let them chuſe one bullock for themſelves o, and cut it 
in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under : 
and I will dreſs the other bullock, and lay it on wood, 
and put no fire under : 

n He attempts the Deciſion of this Controverſie, not by God's 
Word, which was either rejected, or diſpiſed, or grolly neglected 
by the generality of that People ; but by a Miracle, to which all 
that had common Senſe muſt needs ſubmit. o Which they judge 
beſt and fitteſt for their purpoſe. 

24 And call ye on the name of your [|| gods, and I 
will call on the Name of the LORD:and the God that 
anſwereth by fire p, let him be God. And all the peo- 
ple q anſwered and faid, + Ir is well ſpoken. 

p 7. e. Thar ſhall conſume the Sacrifice by Fire ſent from Hea- 
ven 5 which the People knew the True God uſed to do,as Gen:4:4: 
Tu1:6:21:and 13:20. q Even the Baalites themſelves; partly, becauſe 
they could not without great reproach to themſelves and Baal, re- 


Baal's Power and Divinity,having probably had ſome Experiments; 
of ſupernatural and progidious Events done in the Worthig aq 


fute ſo equal a motion; and partly,becauſe they were confident A 


Baal by Gods juſt and wite Permiſſion, for the hardening of that! 


Apoſltatical and wicked People in their Idoiatry ; as God hath in 
ſeveral Ages for the like reaſon ſuffered lying Wonders to be 
wroughtby the Devil, whom they worſhipped in and by their Idols. 

25 And Elijah faid unto the prophets of baal, Chuſe 
ye one builock for your ſeives, and drels 7 fit{t, for ye 
are many r : and cail on the name of your || gods, but 


put no fire under. 

r And I am willing to give you the precedency. This he did, 
partly becauſe if he had firit offered,and God had anſwered by Fire, 
as he knew that he would do, Baal's Prie{t; would have been diſcou- 
raged, and upon ſome Excuſe (which would eaſily be accepred in 
regard of the Kings Authority, and the Favour which they had 
with the People) would have defiitcd from making the trial on their 
part ; and partly,becauſe the Diſappointment of the Prieſts of Baz!, 
of which he was well aſſured, would notably prepare the way for 
the Peoples more diligent attention unto his Words aud Actions, 
and cauſe them to entertain the Prophets good Succefs with more 
Admiration and Aﬀection ; and this coming laſt, would leave the 
creater Imprefſion and Relith upon their tearts- And rhis they 
accepted, becauſe'they might think, that if Baal did anſwer them 
firſt, which they preſumed he would the Pcopte would be fo confir- 
med & heightned in their Opinion of Baal. that they by the Kings 
Aſtiirance might murder Elja4 before he came ro his Experiment. 

26And they took the bullock which was given them, 
and they dreiled zt ?, and called on the name of Baal 
from morning « even until noon, ſaying, O Baal, || hear 
us. But there was no voice,nor any thar|| anſwered. And 
thcy.|| leapt upon the altar x which was made y. 

}J Which being choſen by them,v:25.was now put into their Hands 
by thoje who had theBcairs in theirCuſtody,till they were taken away 
for Sacrifice. #t Cur it in picces,and laid the parts in or upon the 
Wood « From the time of the Morning-Sacrificezwhich advantage 
Elijah fuſfecred them to take for their Sacrifice. z Or, over the altar: 
which might calily-be done the Altar being low, & ſuddenly made 
for the p:ctenr ule. Or rathergbeſiae (as the Hebrew (al) oft ſignifies) 
the altar 7 or, before it. They uted ſome ſuperſtitious, unutual,and 
dito:derly Geſtures, either pretending to be acted by the Spirir 01 
their God,and to be 1n a kind of Holy Rige,and Religious Extaſic ; 
or,in way of Devotion to their god;which they might borrow from 
ric Practice of their Progenitors, who, amongtt orther thi1gs, uled 
Dancing in God's Service and Preſence, ay Ex; 15; 20;and 32:19 


er 


K- 1 Ne © 


ij 

q 
Al 
il] 


Chap. XVIII. | 


Fung. 21; 21. 2.5m: 6. 14, y Heb. which be made ; Either, Firſt, 
E/:as ; which tome thing was already made, though the making of 
ir be not mentioned til afterwards, wer: 31. and that it was their 
Deſign, by leaping upon his Altar, ro overthrow ir. Or rather, 
Sccondly, Ahab on their behalf 3 or, any other Perſon : that being 
only an Hebraiſm, the Third Perſon Active, being pur for the 
Paltive Verb, as our Tranſlators wel! render ir. 

27 And it came to pals at noon z, that Elijah mock- j 
ed them «, and faid, Cry, Taioud : tor hejsa god, ci- t Heb! | 
cher || he is talking, or he f is purſuing, or he is in a 37% # |} 
journey 6, or peradventure he {leepeth, and muſt be £399! 
awaked i On j 


oz 
d 
if 
of 


! 
x When they had long tried all means in vain. # Derided them y Frogs 

& their gods, which were indeed,and had now proved themſelves to hath 8 

be ridiculous & contemprible rhings. By this example we ſee,rhat purſuirs 

all jeſting is not unlawful, but only thatwhich intrencheth upon Pie« 

ty.& good Manners. See on Eph:5:4. 6 He is employed abour ſome 

other buſineſs, and hath nor leiſure to mind you: for being a god | 

of a ſmall & narrow Underſtanding,he cannot mind t vo things at if 

once,and you are immodeſt & unreatonable to expeTt it from him. | 
28 And they cried aloud c, and cut themſelves after 

their manner with knives and lancers 4, till + the blood + Heb. 

guſhed out upon them. poured our if 
c As if Eta had ſpoken the truth,and their god needed rowzing. blood «pon || 

d Mingling their own Blood with their Sacritices ;as knowing by theme 

experience, that nothing was more acceptable to their Baal ( which 

was indeed the Devil) than Humane Blood ; and hoping hereby to 

move their god to pity and help them And this indeed was the 

prattice of divers Heathens in the Worthip of their falſe gods, as is 

manifeſt both from Scripture,as Levit:19.28. Deut:141. 1 Kings 18: 28. 

and from the expreſs Teſtimonies of Plurarch, Lucian, Apuleius, and 

many others. 


29 And it came to paſs, when mid-day was paſt,and - _ 
they + prophetied e until the :izze of the F offering of +#cb.had | 
the evening lacrifice f, that there was neither voice, nor props. 


any to anſwer, nor any f that regarded g. t Heb. 4+ | 
 e 4.e. Praiſed,and prayed unto,and worſhipped their God ; for ſo ſeendinge | 

the word propheſying is uſed, r Sam: 10: 10:and 19: 20, &C. i Chron. T Heb. &fe 

25.2, 3. Matth. 7. 22. tentiun. 


1 Cor. 11. 4.and 14+ 5; 6. &c- f Heb. of the 
Sacrifice, which being here oppolcd to the time of their offering, 
which was the morning,v.26. muſt needs be meant of the Evening 
Sacrifice; of which ſee Exod 29.39. &c.which is called the Sacrifice, by 
way of Eminency, becauſe it was more folemn-and publick,and fre= 
quentcd,than the morning Sacrifice;of which divers Reaſons may be 
given. See Exod. 12. 6. Pſal: 141. 2. Aﬀs 3; 1. 3 Heb there was 
0 attention ; Either, Firſt, Of their god, who was ſo far from an- 
iwering,that he did not mind any of their Words and Actions. Or, 
Secondly, Of the Pcople,who were now tired out with ſo long at-= 
tention and expectation;and therefore more readily deſerted them, 
and approached to E/jah and his Altar, at his Call, v. 3o. 

30 And Elijah ſaid unto all the people, Come near 
unto me 56, And all the people came near unto him 
and he repaired z the altar of the L ORD k that was 
broken down /. 

h Come away from theſe impudent Deceivers to m2, and expect 
from me what Satisfaction you defire.: Which by the Peoples help 
was quickly done;the Materials being all ready,& very ſlightly pur 
together,only tor the pretent occalion.E Which had been built there 
by tome of their Anceitors for the offer ing of Sacrifice to theGud of 
drach, which was frequently done in H:gh-Places,of which this was 
none of the le:ſr cminent ones: bur being for ſome rime neglected, 
18 needed Reparations: | Eirher,Firſt, by the Prieſts of Bazl at this 
time, who laped upon it to that end : of which ſee on wer. 26. 
Or rather, Scco::dly,by ſome of the Baa/ites,our of their Enmity to 
'the Txue God, whoſe Temple. becauſe they could not reach,they 
ſhewed their Malignity in deſtioying his Altars, chap 19. 14. 

31 And Eljah took eweive ttones, according to the 
number of the tribes of the fons of Jacob m,unto whom 
the word of the LORD came, ſaying, * Iſrael ſhall be 
thy name s. 

1 This h2 did, partly, to renew the Covenant between God and 
all the 'T'11ves, as Myſes did, Exod. 24. 4 Partly, to ſhew, thar he 
prayed and acted in the Name,and for the Service of the God of all 
rhe Patrizrchs, and of all the Tribes of 1/-ae/.and for their good: and 
partiy,to teach the People, that rhough the Tribes were divided as 
ro their Civil Government,they ought all ro be united in the Wor- 
thip of the ſame God and in the ſame Religion. » Which Jacob was 
graciouſly anſwered byGod when he prayed to him, & was honou- , 
red with the glorious Title of Jrae!, which noted his prevalency £4 
with God and Men. And I calling upon the ſame God,doubrt nor 
of a like gracious Anſwer;S if ever you mean to have your Prayers 
granted,you muſt nor ſeek to Baal for it.who,as you now lee, nei- 
ther hears nor regards his moſt devout Worſhippers ; but unto the 
God of Jacob; and if you would recover the Honour which was 
once conferred upon Jacob, and continued a long time to kis Poa 
ſreriry. you mult return to that God from whom you are revolted. 

32 And with the ſtones he o builr an alcar pin theName 
ofthe LORD q : and he made a trench abourt the altar, 
as grear as would contain two meaſures r of ſeed. 

o With the aſbiſrance of the People, who readily yielded their 
helping hand. p Which, though generally forbidden, he might do, 
becauſe he did it by che command & ſuggeſcion of God, who can 
diſpence with his own Laws,and upon apparent & urgent necefli- 
ty,and for a work of great mercy.(to which even byGods Command 
rhe Ceremonial Laws muit give place, Hof.6.6. Mar.2.27.) even for 
the convertton of the {/raelites, whom it was impoſlible ro bring ro 
the Altar of Jeruſalem at this time. q By the Authority of God, 
and for his Worſhip. » z. e, Two third parts of an Ephah: which 
ihews that the Trench was of a competent largeneſs. 

23 And he pur the wood in order, and cut the bul- 
lock in pieces, and laid 4im on the wood,aud faid, Fill 
2 K 2 four 


* Gen. 
32: 28. 
2 Kings 
17. 34+ 


, IP. RVII. | 
SeeJurg. four barrels with water /; and * pour zt on the burnt- 
p: 29. ſacrifice, and on the wood fr. 
| [Which they could quick!y fetch.either from the River K:ſhon;or, 
if that was dried up,from rheSea;both which were at the foot of the 
Mountain. See Jer. 46.18. t This he did to make the Miracic 
more glorious,and more unqueſtionable,and ſo more ſucceſsful. 

24 And he ſaid, Do i: the ſecond time. And they 
did zt the ſecond time. And he ſaid, Do 3: the third 
time. And they did zt the third time. 

And the water + ran round about the altar, and 


he filled the trench alſo with water. 

26 And it came to paſs, at the time of the offering 
of the evening {acrifice «, that Eiijah the prophet came 
near, and ſaid, LORD God of Abraham, Ifaac,and of 
Iſrael, let it be known this day, that thou ar: God in 
Iſrael, and that I am thy ſervant, and hat I have done 


all theſe things x at thy 'word y. 

« Which time he choſe, that he might unite his Prayers with the 
Prayers of the Godly Jews at Jeruſalem, who at that .time aſſem- 
bled together to pray, A#s 3; 1. x Brought this Famine, gathered 
the people hither, and done what have done, or am doing here. 
y Not in compliance with my own Paſſions,but inObedience to thy 
Command,as thy Agent and Minifter-For that aftion of ſhutting up 
Heaven, and that of killing the Prieſts of Ba?!, muſt needs expole 
him to grear Envy and Reproach;which made this Publick Vindica- 
tion neceſſary,as it was allo effeQtual,being witneſſed from Heaven. 

37 Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people 
may know that thou «rt: the LORD God,and tha: thou 
baft 


eurned their heart z back again a. 

Z That they may feel ſo powerful and ſudden a change in their 
Fearts, that they may know it is thy Work, and the effet of thy 
Grace to them, and in them. Or, when thou haſt turned, &c. or, be- 
cauſe thou, &c. So the Particle Yau is oft uſed;and the Senſe 1s, That 
they may know thee to be the True God, by the effe&ts of thy 
Divine Power, in converting their Hearts, and that in ſo miracu- 
lous a way,and in anſwer to my prayers. 4 Unto thee,from whom 
they have revolted. 

28 Then the fire of the LORD fell,and conſumed the 


burnt-ſacrifice, and the wood, and the ſtones, and the 
duſt, and licked up the water that as in the trench. 

39 And when all che people ſaw 7:, they fell on 
their faces 6 : and they ſaid, The LORD, he zs the God; 
the LORD, he is the God c. 


b In way of acknowledgment and adoration of the True God 
E He alone ; and Baal is a dull and ſenſcleis Idol. And they double 
the words, to note their abundant fatisfaftion and aſſurance of the 
Truth of their Aſſertion. 

40 And Elijah ſaid unto them 4, || Take the prophets 


of Baal.let not one of them eſcape: and they took them, 
and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kijhon e, 


and ſlew them there f. 

d He takes the opportunity, whilft the Peoples Hearts were warm 
with the freth ſenſe of this great Miracle: e Thar their Biood might 
be poured into that River, and thence conveyed into the Sea, and 
might not defile the Holy Land. f Queſt. How could E/ja/ do this, 
ſeing he was but a private Perſon ? 4rſw. Firſt, He had no doubr 
the Conſent of all rhe Hcads of the People, who were here ailemb- 
Jed ; and of the King too, who duiſt nor reſiſt the univertaj Tor- 
rent, and co.11d nor deny that they were Impoſtors, and wortiy 
of Death ; and probably was by the prophet affured of Rain when 
this was done. Anſw.Secondiy,As thele Idolatrous Prieſts were ma- 
nifeſtly under a Sentence of Death, paſſed vpon tuch by the Sove- 


Heb. 


| Ents 


[| Or, ap- 
prehend, 


Authority to execure it, as being a Prophet, and an ext1aordina y 
Miniſter of God's Vengeance againſt Sinners, now eſpecially when 
the Magiſtrate ſo grolly neglected his Duty therein. 
41 4 And Eljjah faid unto Ahab, Ger thee up g, ear 
| Or, = & drink b,for there is || a ſound of abundance of rain z. 
Jound of® # From the River,where the King and he had been preſent ar the 
| moiſe of laughter of Bas!'s Prieſts,to thy Tent: which probabiy was pitched 
7818. on the ſide of Carmel. þ Take Comfort, and refieth thy {cif: for 
neither the King nor any of the People could have any leiſure to 
eat,being wholly intent upon the decihon of the great Controverſie. 
5 The Rain is as certainly and ſpeedily coming,as if I did actually 
; fee it, or hear the Noiſe which it makes God's Wrath is now ap- 
/ peaſed, and thou ſhalt have no cauſe to repent of this days Work. 
42 So Ahab went up to eat and to drink, and Elijah 
went up to the top of Carmel &, and he caſt himſelf 


down upon the earth, and put his face berween his 


knees +. 

k Where he might ſecretly & ardently pour out his Prayers unto 
God;and whence he might look towards the Sca,and Giicein when 
the Rain was coming. 1 He either 1ate,or rather ,kneeled upon his 
knees, and then caſt down his Face to the Ground between his Knees; 
either,in roken of profound Reverence and Humility ;or,out of Fer- 
vency. of Spirit, which oft diſpoſeth Men ro uncouth Geſtures,which 
at other times,or in other Men, would be ridiculous; but in them 
and in thar caſe, are uſual and allowed ; or, that rurning away his 
Eyes from all outwardObje&s,he might be more intent and earneſt 

' upon his Work, or pray to God without Diſtrattion. 

And faid co his ſervant, Go up now », look to- 
wards the ſea». And he went up, and looked, and 
faid, There #s nothing. And he ſaid, Go again ſeven 
times 0. 

-m Whilſt I continue praying. » Whence Clouds and Vapours 
uſually ariſe. E/7jah defired to have timely notice of the very fult ap- 
pearance and fignification of Rain,not our of Vanity or Ambition, 
bvttharA4hab & the People might know that it was obtained from Je- 
bxvahk by the Prophets Prayers, & thereby be confirmed in the T'ruc 

: 


ETNGLE 


reign Lord of Lite and Death,Dewr.13 and17 io E!-jah had ſufficierr f 


Chap. XIx, 
Religion. 0 Letus not be dejeRed fer ſome Diſappointments, but 
continue to wait upon God, ho will anfwer me,and thar ſpeedily. 

44 And it came tO pats at the leve;ith ume, that he 

ſaid, Beho!d, there ariſeth a little cloud out of the ſeq 

1ke a mans hand. And hefaid, Go up, {ay-unto ahab: 

+ Prepare thy chario?, and ger thee down, that the rain t Heb. 
[top thee not. Je, Or 
45 And it came to paſs in the mean while, that the wy 
heaven was black witch clouds and wind, and there was 

a great rain, Ard Ahab rode and went to Jezreel p. 

? Not that in Judah, Joſ: 15: 56. but another City in the border 

of Iſſachar and Manaſſeh, Joſ: 19. 18. 

46 And the haiid of the LORD was on Eiijah q,and 

he girded up his loyns 7, and ran before Ahab {; + ro t Heb 


the entrance of Jezreel. hog come 
q God gave him more than natural and ordinary ſtrength, where. fo Jexreel, 
by he was enabled to outrun Ahab's Chariot, and that for fo many 
Miles together. rThat his Garments, which were then long, mighe 
nor hinder him. See 2 Kings 4+ 29: and 9:1 / Partly,to ſhew how 
ready he was to honour and ſerve the King,if he did not exalt hime 
{ſelf above or againſt God:partly,that by this humble & {elt-denying 
Carriage,it might appear,that what he had done was not from En- 
vy, or Ambition, or Humane Paſſion,bur only from a juſt Zeal for 
Gods Glory : partly, that by his Preſence with the King, and hig 
Courtiers who attended upon him, he might animate and oblige 
them to proceed in the well-begun Reformation of Religion : and 
partly,to demonſtrate,thar he was neirher aſhamed of, nor afraid for 
what he had done, tho' he knew how J7:zabel would reſent it, but 
durſt venture himſelf in the midit of his Enemies,as being confident 
of the divine Power-and Prytcttion. 
CHAEFP AA 
Elijah threatned by Jezebel flecth to Beer-ſheba ; Is comforted by an An- 
gel, 1 -— 8. At Mount Horeb complaining to God, he is ftrengthned 
by a ſpecial Rewelation, 9 - 14. 1s jent to anoint Hazael,Fehu,and 
Elijha, 15 —— 18. Eliſha followeth Elijah, rg mn. 2, 
A N D Ahab told Jezebel & ail chat Elijah had done, 
and wichal how he had ſlain all the prophets with 


the iword. 

a For his Vindication, and her Satisfaftion. b To wit,of Baal. 
not of the Groves, who were not preſent,as my be gathered from 
chap. 18, 19, 22. and 22. 6G. 

2 Then Jezebel ſent a meſſenger unto Elijah e, ſay- 


ing, * So ler the gods do rs me, and more allo, if x 
make not thy life as the lite of one of them by to mor- ' * 


row at tris time d. 

c She gives him notice of it before-hand : partly, out of the height 
of her Spuir,as icorning to kill him ſecretly and furreptitiouſly,and E 
reſolving to make him a publick Sacrifice : partly,out of her Impa- ; 
tience,ti}l the had breathed out herRage,which tie could do ſpeed. 
ly, when it required iome time and preparation to ſeize him, who ' 
was now ſo much eſteemed and favoured by all the People,partly, 
becauſe ſhe ſuppoicd,rhat he who had the confidence to come thi« 
ther (whcere,it ieems,ſhe was at this ttme) would {till have theſame 
Confidence to itay there, and be ebiidged in honour fo maintain 
his ground : and principally, from Gods ail-difpoling Providence, 
that ſ© he might have an opportunity of eſcaping. 4d So far was 
ſhe from beiug changed by that moir eminent Miracle, that ſhe 
perſiſts in her tormer Idolatry,and adds to it a mad and monſtrous 
Confidence, that in ſpight of God ſhe weuld deitroy his Propher. 

2 And when he faw 7har, he aiote, and went for his 

fe e,and came to Beertſheba, which bc/onged to Judah f, 


ind left his lervant there g. 

ei. e To ſave his life : or,according to his ſoul, or mind. Whereby 
it may be 11.timatcd that he did nor flee fromJezree! by the hand or dis 
reCtion of the Lord.by which he came thither, ch 18.46. but becauſe 
of his own fear aiid apprehention of danger, For this may ſeem to 
be an a& ot humane trailty. For God had brought him hither, and 
his Pretence might teem very neceffary here to incourage & ingage 
'cthe King & People to go on to deſtroy the Prieſts of the Groves, 
and to purge ourt {dolatry ; and his withdrawing as we ſee,did dit- 
courage ail the reir,and occaſioned their return to Idclatry again; 
and, having had ſuch a late and ample experience of Gods all-ſu- 
fficiency in protecting him againſt the King & 450 of Baals Prieſts, 
and the current of the People incenſed againit him for the Famine, 
he had little reaſon ro fear the Threats of an impotent Woman, 
whom God cou'id cut off in a moment. But El:as was a man ſubje# 
ro Like Paſſions as we are, Jam.5.17. which probably is ſaid with reſpe& 
to his fear and diſcontent,maniteſted here and v.4. And ft he ſhould 
be exalted abwve m:nſure ( which was allo Pauls caſe, 2 Cor-12.7 )for 
his eminent Gifts, and Graces,and miraculous Works,God ſaw fit to 
withdraw his Grace,and to leave him to himlelf, that he might be 
ſenſible of his own impotencie and finfulneſs,and might not dare 
to take any part of Gods honour to himſelf. f Either, Firſt, To the 
Tribe of Juaah,according to the firſt Diviſion ; for Simeon's part,in 
which See: fſheba was, was after wards taken out of it. Or, Secondly, 
to the Kingdom of /udah. g Partly, that he mighr abide there in 
{lafery ; and partly, that he ſhould wait there till his return: partly, 
becauſe he would not expoſe him to thoſe Perils and Hardſhips 
which he expc&cd : and partly, becauſe he deſired Solitude, that he 
might more treely converic with God, | 

4 © But he himfcift went a days journey into the wil- 
derneſs þ,and came and fat down under a juniper-tree: 
and he * requeſted} for himſelf ; that he might die,and *Jonab 4 
{aid, It is enough &, now, O LORD, take away my 3, eſs 
life : for I am: not better than my fathers /. Life 

h The vaſt Wilderneis of 4rabia. He durlt not ſtay in Fudah,tho' FO 
good Jeheſhaphat Reigned there, becauſe he was Allied to Avab, and 
was a Man of an eaficr remper.whom Ahab might circumvent, & et- 
ther by force or art ſeize upon Elijah, # Heb. for his life, or, his ſoul 
that It mzghr be raken away from his Body. Or, with bus ſoul, as 
it is Ja; 26; 9, 7, e. He delired it heartily or fervently. Which he 


did 


(ha 


+ He 


ho fe 


F Frek. 
1.4, & s 
9 


: : ; 2 
\, Chap. XIX5 : | K I N G $& e Chap. XIX.' 
did nor only for hisown fake, that he might be freed from his great | were paſt, he proſecutes his Journey, and goeth on to the mouth | 
Fears and Troubles ; bur eipecially from his Zeal for Gods Glory, } of the Cave, and there ſtands till. Or, the words may be rendred 
which he ſaw was and would be dreadfully eclipſed by the relaple } Afrer ( as Yau is elſewhere uſed ) he was gone out, and ſtand.ng inthe 
of the 1jraelites into Idolarry, and by Ejavs Death, it it hould be moth of the Cave : which may be mentioned as the reaſ:n why he 
procurcd by the hands of Jezebel, or of the Worſhjppers of Baal; and | covered his Face, becauſe now he wanted the ſhelter of the Cave. 
therefore he wiſhed to dic in peace, and by the Hand of God. KI ' c What before he ſpake by an Angel, he now ſpeaks to him again 
have lived long enough for thy Service, and am nor like to do thee immediately. 
any more agen FRO " Words _ m__ _—_— — uy ! 14 Andhe ſaid, I have been very jealous for the 
ood upon thelc un{table and incorrisitble people. at] thou!id | ; | 3.3. 
jAaeSs. in Life, when other Prophets 6? 5 _ gone before me, HIRE God of hoſts: becauſc the children of Iſrael have 
have loſt their Lives by Jezebel, or other perſecutors. orſaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and 
5 And as he lay and ſlept under a Juniper-tree, be- {lain chy prophets with the ſword ; and I, even I only 
hold then, an angel touched him, and ſaid unto him, | amlefr, and they ſeek my life, co take it away. 
Ariſe and eat. 15 And the LORD {aid unto him, Go, return on thy 
il 6 And he looked, and behold, there was a cake baken | way 4 tothe wilderneſs of Damaſcus: and when thou 
+Hcb. On the coals, and acruſe of water at his + head : and he comeſt, anoint Hazael rs be king over Syria e, 
: fr. did eat and drink, and laid him down again. = OT _—_ _ en = _ way from Horeb 
; "OT cus. oint ; Either, Firſt, Figuratively, 1. ce. appoint 
Y And the angel of the LORD came again the ſecond declare him King 3 which was done, 2 joke 8: = For Hh Word 
time and touched him, and ſaid, Aiite, and car, becaulc | i; oft uſed of them who were never anointed with Oil, P/al: 45; 7: 
the journey x too great for thee m. Iſa: 45: 1: and «G1. 1. Zech. 4 14. Dan. g. 240 Or, Secondly, Pro- 
mi. e. Above thy ſtrength, now eſpecially when thou art faint, | Perly 3 which mighr be done, though it be not related. Again, 
and weary. and faſting. ns : gy egy thy ap ; or, by another : for ſo he anointed Fehu 
8 And he aroſe, and did eat and drink; and went un Þ ?Y 9 2 8787 9. I 6. FRE FPS - 
Y the ſtrength of that meat » * fourty days ard fourty 15 And * Jehu the fon of Nimſhi f ſhalt thou anoint 2 Kings 
Se Deut. EY O " ts be king over Iſrael : and * Eliſha g the ſon of Shaphat 7,237 
9.9, 18. nights, unto * Horeb o the mount of God. f Abel-Metol ea: -S Apnat* Luke 4. 
Mat. 4.22 » God giving that Food a far greater and more dural le vertue | © Ci-MC1.O1An, inalt thou anoint 70 be prophet in thy 27. called 
*FExcd. than ordinary. o He wandrcd hither and rh:ther tor qo days, ii. | VOM. 
3 1, at laſt he came to Horev, whici in the dire Road wasnot wbove 3 f 1. e. His Grand-ſon, for he was the ſon of Jehoſaphat, 2 Kings 9, 2, 
or 4 days Journey. 35 Whom he conitituted Prophet, by caſting his Mantle over him, 
9 4 And he came thither unto a cave, and iodged | tere, v. 'g. _ : 
there : and behold, the word oi the LORD came tOutm. 17 And it ſhall come to paſs, that him that eſcapeth 
and he ſaid unto tim, What doſt thou here p, £jjah ? che ſword of Hazael, ſhall Jehu ſlay : and him that eſca- 
p Aracit Reproof. This isnor thy proper place nor the fation | peth from the ſword of Jehu, ſhall Eliſha ſlay 5. 
in which I tet thee, which was in J-a-1, ro turn that back-'ud:ng h Here the order of times ſeems to be perverted ; for Eliſha was 
people, to which end I gave thee my heip, and wouid have pro- I a Prophet before Jehu or Hazael were Kings, and Hazael was King 
ceded ro affift thee further, if thou hadit continued there. Nor dic | before Jehu. Bur thar is of no moment as to the ſubſtance of the 
I give thee thoſe excellent Gifts to lie idle in this Wilderneis, but f thing threatned, which is only this, Thar one or other of theſe 
to employ them for thy peoples Good, whom now thou natt de- J ſhould intallibly execute Gods Judgments upon the Apoſtatical 
ſerted, and art come hither, not by my Cominand, vut tmough Þ [/-aelites. Eliſha is ſaid to ſlay them, either becauſe he flew thoſe 44 
thy own Fear and Cowardile. Children, 2 Kings 2. 24. beſides others whom upon like occaſions he 
10 Aud he ſaid, I have been very jealous for the might deſtroy 3 or, becauſe he by Gods appointment inflicted the 
LORD Go4 of voſts q: for the chiidren of Iiraei have Seq pay _—_ by nag OF orien ww LioG yr of 
| HSE. , - 49. 2+ ; 1; 16; an 4 $6 is Cuttings 
for {lakenthy covenant, chrow a down tl oo Gees, and 21 ophecies and Threatnings of Gods Judgments: a prophets * 
*Rom.11- flain rhy prophets witi the ſwo:d : 2nd * L, even L only \ ig laid to pull down and 19 deftroy what they only declare and foretel 
4 Chap. am lefr/, and they {eek my iife to take I. dWay 7, ha:l be pulled down, Oc. Hazael began to ilay them before Jehu 
18. 22. q T have not b-en wholly wanting to my Vocation, but have |. 45 King, 2 Kings 8; 28: though his Cruelty was much increaſed 
vi executed my Office with Zea) for Gods Honour and Service, and | afterward, * 2 107 32: and 13: 1, 2,3. and Fchs deſtroyed thoſe 
| with the hazard of my own Lite z and am fl.:d hirhcr, not being whom Hazae! did nor. as King foram himſelf, and Ahaziah, and his 
| able to endure to ſee the Diſhonour done to thy Name by then | +2 Brethren, 2 Kings 9: 24, 27. and 10. 14. all the near Relations 
; obſtinate Idolatry and Wickediueſs, r Thoſe which were cre&ed | 2t wicke!! bas. OI ; { | 
for thy Worthip in High-places, which they did nor deſtroy, becautc 18 * Yec | [ have left #5 me ſeven thouſand & in Iſrael, F Rome 
they were to bc abolithed by thy Command, Deus; «2: but our of Þ all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal,and every 1M. 4. - - 
meer contempt and oppolition againſt thee, and theretore they wut- mouth which hath noe kiiled him / || Or, 1wil 
fered the Altars of Baal to ſtand. ſ To wir, of all thy Prophets, 1 - Or. 1 hove reli ar. Thos b G frank ' leave. 
mean, which do boldly and publickiy plead thy Caule : tor the reſt Fo rt” MOT - he &r "< wht, 3 oh ae x Bu ar 
of thy Prophets who are nor lain, hide themlitives, and dare not Ws OP, 17 _— % h » m_— OS = 1 ea £02 = Or 
appear to do thee any Service. #1 deſpair ofdoing them any good : | 520.47, "6h atone, YA ainhsg a+ oder ws a wh ng a 
for inſtead of receiving my Teſtimony, they huuc for my L:te. 1 wi{ (ſerve, from the ſlaughters laſt mentioned and from Jezebels 
Bae 4 | Rage. & Either, definitely ſo many : or rather, indefinitely, for 
11 Andhe {aid, Go forth, and ſtand upon rhe mount | inazy thouſands3 the number of ſeven being oft uſed for a great 
before the LORD. And behold, the LORD paſſed by «, | 2umber, as Lev. 26. 18. Pjal 12.6. Mc. 5.5. Zech. 3 9. Luke 17. 4. 
"Ezck. and a * great and ſtrong wind rent the mounraius, and For it is alrogether improbable that all the Jraclires, except 70oo, 
ons WO _ , did worſhip Baal :.except Bal be here Synecdochically pur for all. 
-4.837- brake in pieces the rocks x before the LORD ; but the | their Idols, and the Calves among others. li e. All thoſe who have 
9 LORD was not in the wind ”: and after ti.e wind en nor worthipped Baal, nor profeſled Reverence or SubjeRion to him : 
earthquake ; but the LORD was notin rhe earthquake. which Idolaters did to oo Idols, ——_ the Knee, Row. 11: 4. 
« Either, Firſt, By his Harbingers : for. as ir follows the Lo-o | COMPAate Row. 144 55% 8 L +4 Ang Wy iſting them, or by kiſſing 
was nor yetthere. Or, Secondly, Himſelf. And fo this is a brief | Hand with their Mourh, before them, and in reſpe& rothem.;; 
q "fee Nl 58 ROT 4g a: | of which mention is made both in Scripture, as fob 31. 26, 27, 
and general Deicriprion of the thing, after which the manner of it F, + and in Pour, ui Fn 44s 
1s particularly explained. x Wheteby he both prepares E/jah to __ ys wean 1 Cod ck = GE on * «ape 
receive this Diſcovery of God with greateſt Humility, Reverence, | P'® "an oo mak __ © ſuf "ans Fro . =— Ve. ne I wp 
and Godly Fear ; and fignifies his Ainnghrty and Irreirſftible Powe1, Mz. He _— 14ol, 6x near g DE Bl hor nn = 
to break the ha:deſt Hearts of the 1jra-lites, and to bear down al. G Ty: _ © W "ts _ ou ra ry Deg m7] "he win 
oppoiition that was or ſhould be made againſt him in the Diſcharge | 5. pity be hs 74 -i gr ay" ns a 
of his Office. y The Lord did not vouchtate his Special and Gracious | 22 20ne Tor tus peopte The h OY = found 'EER S 
Preſence ro Elijah in that Wind, where he confidently expe&ed Þ _ 19 4 So he departed t ENCE, ana TOUnN Eliſha the 
him : which poſſibly was, Either, Firſt, To qualine the excefhive fon of Shaphar, who was plowing with twelve yoke of 
Fervour and Paſſion of E!tjah, which mixed it ff with his Zeal tor | zxey before him, and he with the twelve 2: and Elijah 
God, and ro make him more mid in bs Centres, and moreme:k | paſſed by him, and Caſt his mantle upon him #, 
might ſooner expe& (ods Preſence and biciled Succeſs, than in the b Ho had dap CE NOnns: gp ins be chanted 
Stoim of Anger or Impatience. Or, Secondly, To teach him not 9, b edn q < oor" a; þ ES ere Mz _ - wird 
to w-nder if God did not accompany his terrible Adminiſtration at jms Far ys 8 wot +7 Soaprcy; Ragkes ” Fl ms 5 wo TH 
Mount Carmel with the Preſence of (is Grace, to turn the hearts of = days; : TRIES es Oe _ CE © ! 
the 1ſraelirzs to himſelf, as he deſired, bur God for wiſe and juſt po Ceremony conferring _— —_ = ce of a Prop ty eb 
Reaſons ſaw fit to deny, Gud was pleated ro accempany with the Gifts and Graces of his 
12 Ard af he earthonake.s fire: hu che FED Spirit, whkerewith he endowed and qualified him for it. The Mantle 
2 {4119 Alter Ne eartnquake,anre 3 ur tne h AT] was the utual Habit of the Prophets. See 2 Kings. x. 8- Zech. 14. 4. 
not 1n the fire : and after the hire a {til ſmall VOICC &. Bur whether he did allo Anoint him, is uncertain. Sce the Note 
z Wherein it is implicd That God was preſent. Which perad- | on Yerle 16: PE ho (gn 
PO was to AP ror God RED Pr wy work in _ my og 20 And he left the OXCNn, and ran after Elijah 0, and *Marth.$ 
iN MIS OWN tine, 707 by might r power, but by hz own ſpirit, Zech: 4: 6: . K , 37 : ——— ' 
which moves with a Bats? ban yet with a ſweet of gentle Gate. _ P, = Fear: I gh, rey _ Wn: 21, 22. |, 
þ 4 13 Anditwes/e, when E:ijah hear zt, that he wrapped | © G — — " £ 17S ry 1 ; E.lal = IN, + Heb. Gog 
his iace in his mancle @, anu went out, and ftood in the | | G0 back agzin 7 ; for what haye 1 done to theeſ? rewn. 
fa antelis ts of cling þ « heb F : 5 o Being powerfully moved by Gods Spirit to follow E!/ 52h, and 
n ritg 111 © WwW CAVEY. ang ehold, there Came a VOICE who!ly to give up himſclf to his FunCtion-, p Or, but be ſaid : or, yet 
; unto him, andlaid, What dolt tt;ou hete, Eiijah c ? he ſaia. q i.e. Bid them farewell by rhe uſual: Ceremony, See 
a Through Horror and Dread f Gods preienice, being ſenſible | Gen. 29. 11. and 31+ 28. 4#s 20. 37., rAnd take thy leave of them, - 
that he was neicher worthy no+ able ro wdure the fithr of God | as thou deiireſt, and then return to me again». Either. Firſt, To 
with op:n face. Compare Gen: 16. 13: with Exod; 3: 6 6b Which | hinder thee from pertorming thar Office. , Thar Employment to 
God cominauded him to do ; and as he was going towards tac | which 1 have cailed rhee, doth nor require an Alienation of thy 
mouth of the Cave, he was atfright-d and ſtopped in his court, by | Heart from thy Pai ents, nor the roral negiect of them. Oc, Secondly, 


the dicautul Wind, and Earthquake, and Fire ; ano, we 


1 = 
q yu > 
SS 21&.C 


; To make ſuch a Change in thee, that thou ſhouldelt be wuling ro 
| : 


fortuke 


3 «& 3} 


} 


'q 


hap. 


deſirable. 


Rn - Fl 
-mi3chiey 
þ 


+ Heb. 
T kept not 
back from 
him, 


E > Chap: 


197 28 
+ Heb: 
ar! &t my 


fert. 


| Heb. . 


RR, E347 


forſake thy Parents, and Lands, and All, and defire only this Liberty 
to £o and bid them farewe], that thou mayſt follow me. Whence 
comes this marvellous Change ? Ir is not from me, who did only 
throw my Mantle over thee . but from an higher power, even from 
Gods Spirit. which hath changed thy Heart. and conſecrated thee 
ro thy prophetical Office: which therefore it concerns thee vigorouſly 
ro execute, and wholly to devote thy ſelf to it. 

21 And hereturned back from him t, and took a yoke 
of oxen, and ſlew them, and boiled their fleſh with the 
inftrumentsof the oxen «, and gave unto the people x, 
and theydid eat : then he aroſe, and went after Elijah, 


and miniſtred unto him. 

t From Elias to his Parents; whom when he had ſeen and kifled, 
he returned to the Field where Elijah was. ui c- With the wood 
belonging to the plow, ©. to which more was added, as occation 
required But that he burned, to ſhew his toral relinquiſhing of his 
former Employment. x i e. He made thereofa Featt for his Ser- 
vants who had been plowghing with him, and for him, and his other 
Friends and Neighbours who came to take their leave of him. 
Hereby he ſhewed how willingly and joyfully he forfook all his 
Friends, that he might ſerve God in that high and honourable 


Employment. 
OH AP XX. 


Benhadad not content with Ahabs Homage, beſizgeth Samaria, 1--=12. By the 
Direfion of a Prophet the Syrians are twice beaten : and Benhadad hides 
himſelf, 1330. The Syrians ſubmit themſelves, and Ahab maketh a 
Covenant with Benhadad, 3 1----34, The Prophet by a Parable reproveth 
Abab : and denounceth Juagment againſt him, 35 43. 

A N D Benhadad # the king of Syria gathered all his 

hoſt cogether b, and there were thirty and two kings c 
with him, and horſes, and chariots : and he went upand 


beſieged Samaria, and warred againſt it. 

a Called A4adad by Joſephus, and Adar by the LXX, and Azores by 
Juftin; ſuch changes of Names being uſual in their Tranſlations 
into other Lauguages, and by other Authors. b To war againſt 
Iſrael : wherein his deſign was to amplifie the Conqueſts which his 
Father had made, chap: 15: 20: but Gods Deſign was to puniſh 1/-2e/ 
for their Apoſtacy and Idolatry, «c Petty Kings, ſuch as were in 
Canaen in Joſbuas time, who indeed were no more than Governours 
of Cities or ſmall Territories. Theſe were either Subject or Tri- 
butary to Benhadad, or hired by him. 

2 Andhe ſent meſſengers to Ahab king of Ifrael into 
the ciry, and ſaid unto him, Thus faith Benhadad, 

2 Thy ſilver and thy gold is mine &, thy wives alſo, 
and thy children, even the goodliteſt are mine. 

d Ichallenge them as my own, 2nd accordingly expettto have 
them forthwith delivered into my poſſeſſion, if thou expeteft peace 
with me. 


4 And the king of Ifraclanſweredand ſaid, Mylord 
O king, according to thy ſaying, I am thine, and all 


that I have e. | | 

eI do ſo far comply with thy Demand, that I will own thee for my 
Lord, and my ſelf for thy Vaſlal and Tributary : and will hold my 
wives, and Children, and Eſtate, as by thy Favour, and with an 
Acknowledgement. Bur it is nor likely that he would deliver up 
his wives and Children into the Barbarians hand, or that his proud 
and imperious wife Jezebel would permit him ro do ſo. 

5 And the meſlengers came again, and ſaid, Thus 
ſpeaketh Benhadad, ſaying, Although 7 have ſent unto 
thee, ſaying, Thou ſhalt deiiver me thy ilver and thy 


gold, and thy wives, and thy children f : 

F Although I did before demand not only the Dominion of thy 
Treaſures, and wives, and Children, as thou mayſt ſeem to under- 
ſtand me, bur alſo the propriety and a&tual poſſeſiion of them ; 
wherewith I would then have been contented : 


—_— 


6 Yet I will ſend my ſervants unto thee to morrow | 


about this time, and they ſhall ſearch thine houſe, and 


the houſesofchy ſervants ; andit ſhall be,chat whatſoever | 


is f pleaſant in thineeyes, they ſhall put it in their hand 
and take it away g. 

x Yet now I will not accept of thoſe Terms. but together with thy 
Royal Treaſures, Iexpett all the Treaſures of thy ſervants or Sub- 
jets; nor will I wait till thou deliver them to me, bur I will ſend my 
Servants into the City, and they ſhall have free Liberty and Power 
to ſearch out and take away all which they deſire, and this to pte- 
vent Fraud and Delay ; and then I will grant thee a Peace. 

- Then the king of Iſrael called all the elders of the 
land b, and ſaid, Mark, I pray you, and fee how this 
man ſecketh himfetf ;: for he ſenc unto me for my wives 
and for my chiidren, and for my ſilver, and for my gold, 
and + I denied him not &. 
 þ Whoſe Counſel and Concurrence he now deſires in his Diſtreſs. 
5 Though he pretend peace, and a Friendly Agreement upon theſe 
Terms propounded, it is apparent by thoſe Additional Demands, 
Thathe intends nothing leſs than our utter Ruin. & Igranted his 
Demands in the ſenſe before mentioned- : 

8 And all the elders, and all the people faid unto 
him, Hearken nor wnre bim, nor conſent. 

9 Wherefore he ſaid unto the meſſengers of Benhadad, 
Tell my lord the king, All that thou didfſt ſend for to 


" thy ſervant at-the firſt, I will do : but this thing I may 


not do /. And the meſſengers departed, and brought 


him word again. 
LIf I would do it, I cannot, becauſe my People will nor ſuffer it, 


10 And Benhadad ſent unto him, and ſaid, * The 

ods doſo unto me, and more alſo, if the duſt of Samaria 

{hall ſuffice for handfuls for all the people that F follow 
me m. 


N © $ 


2 If I do not aflau!t thy City with fo potent and themercvs an 
Army, that ſhall turn all thy City into an hcap of Duſt, and ſhall 
be ſufficient to carry it all away, though every Soldier take but one 
handful ofit:; See the like Boaſt, 2 Sam; 17: 13. 

11 And the king of rael anſwered and ſaid, Tell 
him, Let not him that girdeth on h;s harneſs, boaſt him- 
felf, as he thar purtteth it off ». 

z Donor Triumph before the Fight and ViRtory, for the Events 
of War are uncertain. 

12 And it came to paſs, when Beyhadad heard this 


ſelves in aray o: And they let themſelves in aray againſt 


Haſlt thou ſeen all this great multitude ? behold, I will 
deliver it into thine hand this day ; and thou ſhalt know 
that I am the LORD r. 


> Who having hid himſelf before, now ventures to come to Ahad, 
having this welcome Meflage in his Mouth. q God» though forſaken 
and negleQed by Ahas, prevents him with his gracious Promite of 
Help 3 partly, That 4þab and the Idolatrous 1aelites, might hereby 
be fully convinced and won to God, or left without all Excule : 
and partly, that Benhadads intolerable Pride, and Contempt of God, 
and of his people, might be repreſſed and puniſhed - and partly, 
that the remnant .of his Prophets and people who were involved in 
the ſame Calamity with thereſt ofthe 1#-aelites, might be preſerved 
and delivered. r And not Baal, becauſe 1 wiil deliver thee, which 
he cannot do. 

114 And Ahab faid, By whom ? And he ſaid, Thus 
faichthe LORD, Even by the || young men of the princes 
of the provinces s. Then he ſaid, Who ſhall + order the 
battel « And he anſwered, Thou z. 

| 5sNot by old and experienced Soldiers, but by thoſe young Men ; 
citner the ſons of the Princes, and great Men of the Land, who were 
gene:ally fled thither for Safety : or their Pages, or Servants that uſed 
ro attznd upon them ; who are bred up delicately, and ſcem unfit 
for the buſineſs. # Partly to encourage the young Men to Fight 
couragiouſly, as being in the preſence of rheir Prince : and partly, 
thar it might appear, that the Vitory was wholly due to Gods 
gracious and powerful Providence, and not to the Valour or Worthi- 
neſs of the Inſtrument. 

15 Then he numbred the young men of the princes of 
the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty 
two: and after them he numbred all the people, even 
all the children of 1frael , being ſeven thouſand x. 

vs Either, 1, All the Men ; for they only went our ro Battel; and 
the reſt of the Men might be conſumed with the Sword or Famine, 
or other Ju igments : Or rather, 2. All the Men of War, or all 
that were fit to go out to War; all, except thoſe whom their Age, 
r Infirmity, or other ſufficient Cauſes excuſed. x Which number 
may poſlibiy be noted with reſpe& unto thoſe 5000, commended 
chap; 19:18. for whoſe ſakes principally God gave this deliverance, 

16 And they went out at noon y : but Benhadad was 
drinking himſelf drunk in the pavilions,he and the kings, 
che thirty and two kings that helped him. 

y When they were eating, and drinking, and ſecure from all fear 
and expeQarion of an Aflault. , 

17 And the young men of the princes of the provin- 
ces went out firſt, and Benhadad ſent out, and they told 
him, ſaying, There are men come out of Samaria. 

18 And he ſaid, Whether they be come out for peace, 
rake them alive ; or whether they be come ouc for war, 
take them alivez. .' 

z He bids them not Fight, for he thought they needed not to ſtrike 
one ſtroke 3 and that the Jreelites could not ſtand the firſt brunt. 

19 Sotheſe young men of the princes of the provinces 
came out of the city, and the army which followed 


them. 

20 And they ſlew every one his mans : and the Syrians 
fled b, and Iſrael purſued them : and Benhadad the king 
of Syria eſcaped on an horſe, with the horſemen. 

a1. e, Him who came to Fight with him, or to ſeize upon him, 
as Benhadad had 'commanded; b Being amazed at the unexpetted 
and undaunted Courage of the 1/raelires, and being ſtruck with a 
Divine Terror. 

21 And the king of Ifrael went out ec, and ſmote the 
horſes and chariors 4, andſlew the Syrians with a great 
Slaughter. 

c 1.e. Proceeded further in his March, and Fought againſt them. 
d i:e. The men thar fought from them, or belonged to them : for 
ſo Horſes and Charzots are ſometimes taken. See on 1 Sam: 13: 5. 


22 T And the prophet came to the king of Iſrael, and 
ſaid unto him, Go, ſtrengthen thy ſelf, and mark, and 


the king of Syria will come up againſt thee. 

e Conſider what is fit and neceflary for thee to do by way of 
Preparation, or Prevention. f Next Year about this time, when 
the Seaſon comes of going forth to Battel ; of which ſee 2 Sam; 11:13 
1 Obron: 20: 1; 2 Chron: 36 10. 


23 And the ſervants of the king of Syria ſaid unto 
him g, Their gods «re gods of the hills, therefore they 
were {trongerthan we: but let us fight againft them 1n 
the plain h, and ſurely we ſhall be ſtronger than they. 


g They 


Chap. XX 


{ meſſage ( as he was drinking, he,and the kings in the + Heb, 


[| pavilions ) that he ſaid unto his ſervants, || Set your __ 


(Ur, Tents, 
Or \Place, 


the city, the En. 
o Put your ſelves and Engines in order, to make the Aſſault. GINCs. And 


13 4 Andbehold, theie | came a prophet p unto *hey plas 
Ahab king of Iſrael, ſaying, Thus ſaich che LORD gq, Engines, 


Heb. ads 


proachea, 


|| Or, 
Servants, 
T Heb: 
bind, & 
tye, 


ſee what thou doeſbe : for at the return of the year f * 


(ha 


+ Heb 
that W, 
fallen, 


+ Heb 
the Wa 
21th [{r 


| Or, # 
V.uadl, 


[0;, fro; 
wamber t 
Wmber. 
? Heb. 
amber, 
it hin F1 
Camber, 


'", 


(hap. X X+ l. 


g They ſuppoſe that their gods were no better than the Syrian 
gods ( which the Idolatry of the Iſraelites had given them too great 
Cauſe to imagine ; ) and that there were many gods who had each 
his particular Charge and Juriſdition ; which was the Opinion of 
all Heathen Nations, That ſome were gods of the Woods, others 
of the Rivers, and others of the Mountains ; and they fancied rheſe 
to be the latter, becauſe the Land of Canaw was a mountainous 
Land, Deut: 12: 2 And the great Temple of their God ar Jeruſalem 
ſtood upon an Hill, and ſo did Samaris, where they had received 
their laſt Blow : or becauſe the Jſraelites did generaily chuſe High 
places for the Worſhip of their gods. It is obſervable, that they do 
not impute their ill Succeſs to their Negligence, and Drunkenneſs, 
aad bad Condu&, or Cowardize, of which they were really guilty ; 
nor to the Valour of the Iſraelites ; but to a Divine power, which 
indeed was viſible init. þ Wherein there was not only Superſtition 
but Policy ; becauſe the Syrians moſt excelled the Iſraelites in Horſes, 
which are moſt ſerviceable in plain Ground. 

24 Anddo this thing, Take the kings away every man 
out of his place 3, and put captains & in theirrooms. 

; Who being of ſofter Education, and leſs experienced in Military 
Matters, were leſs fit for his Service ; and being many of them, 
but Mercinaries, and therefore leſs concerned in his good Succeſs, 
would be more negligent and cautious in venturing themſe]ves for 
his good. & #: e: Experienced Soldiers of his own SubjeQs, who 
will faithfully obey the Commands of the General ( to which the 
Kings would not ſo readily yield )' and uſe their utmoſt Skill and 
Valour for their own Intereit and Advancement. 

25 And number thee an army, like tte army Þ that 


& {FO £& 


which were left of that great Army. * Either, 1.. Our of the Fields, 


fell npon 27000 ( not of the men that are left, as we tender it, ) but 


as the reſt of his Army did. Which is diſtin&ly, and particularly 
noted of him, becauſe he was the moſt eminent perſon-in it, and 
the Head of it- Compare the Title of Pſal. i$, Or, 2. At, and from 
the noiſe and report and that tercible Fall of the Wall, or Walls ; 
which poſſibly might be in the outſide, or Suburbs of the Ciry 5 
from whence he fled further into the City. # Or, a chamber, within 
a chamber ; where he ſuppoſed he mighr he hid. till he had an Oppor= 
runity of making an Eſcape, or of obtaining Mercy, _ 

31 4 Andhis ſervants faid unto him, Behold, now, 
we have heard that the kings of the houſe of Iſrael are 
merciful kings x : let us I pray thee, put ſackcloth on 
our loins, and ropes upon our heads y, and go out to the 
king of Iſrael, peradventure he will fave thy life. 

x More merciful than others, becauſe that Religion which they 
had profeſſed, taught them Humanity, and obliged them to ſhew 
Mercy. y As a teſtimony of our ſorrow, for undertaking this 
War ; and that we have jultly forfeited our Lives for it, which we 
ſubmit to their Mercy. 

32 $o they girded ſackcloth on their loins, and put 
ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Iſrael, and 
ſaid, Thy ſervant Benhadad faith, I pray thee let me live. 
And he faid, Is he yet alive ? he js my brother z. 

z I do not only freely pardon him, but Honour and Love him 
as my Brother. 


#Hb. thou haft loſt, horſe for horſe, and chariot for chariot: | 33 Now the men did diligently obſerve, whether 
2 and we will fight againſt them in the plain, and ſurely | 9 :bing would come from him, and did haſtily catch jr 45 
#4. we ſhall be ſtronger than they. And he hearkned unto | 4nd they faid, Thy brother Benhadad b. Then he ſaid, 
their voice, and did ſo. Go ye, bring him: then Benhadad came forth to him - 
26 And it came to paſs at the return of the year, that | 4nd = concen _ "Word þ up —_ =s pry Kt 
TON” a Or, They took tha ord jor a good token, and made haſte an 
_—_— I Syrians, and went up to Aphek/ wang it, (4.8 _ Word } from _ is « Go his Aoncls ; 
Se they repeated the Word again, to try whether the King would own 
OY { Nor that in Judah ; of which, Joſh: 13; 4:and rs. 53. but that | ir, a it only dropt cafually from him 3 or made hgh know, whes 
nfl q in Aſer3of which, 7oſh. 19. 3o. Judg. 1. 3:. nigh unto which, was | cher it was him: i. e Whether he ſpoke this from his Heart, or. 
PPMIUG the great Plain of Galilee. And this ſeems to be one of thoſe Cities only in Diſſimulation or Deſign : for it ſeemed too good News te 
which Benhadads Father had taken from Iſrael v. 34. Here alſo the | be true. 6 Underſtand, liverh : for that he enquired after, Yerſs 
S»ians might rerreat, if they ſhould be worſted 32s 
27 And the children of Ifrael Were nuwbred, and 34 And Benhadad ſaid unto him, The cities which 
10: were || were all preſent m, and wentagainſt them =»: atidthe | my father took from thy father c, I will reſtore, and 
dud, children of I{rael pitched before them o, like two little | chou ſhalt make ſtreets 4 for thee in Damaſcus, as my 
flocks of kids p : but the Syrians filled the countrey. father made in Samaria. Then /#id 4bab, 1 will ſend 
m i. 2. All the Forces of the Iſraelites were here gathered toge- | thee away with this covenant e. So he made a covenant 
ther, to oppole the Syrians : ſo if thoſe had been conquered, all had rote th 4 fone hi; 
been loſt. n Being perſwaded, and encouraged ſo to do ; partly, to with Nil, ang en ” away. 
prevent the miſchicfs of a Siege in Samaris. andthe waſte of all the c Either, 1. From Baaſha, Chap: 15: 20; whom he calls 4habs 
reſt of their Countrey : and partly, by the remembrance of their Father, becauſe he was his Legal Father ; i.e. His Predeceſſor. Or, 2, : 
former Succeſs, and an expeRatic n of the ſame Aſſiſtance from God | From Orr! ; 1n whoſe time, it ſeems, he made aſucceſsful Invaſion 
againe . 0 Probably upon ſome hilly Ground, where they might | 12e9 the Land of Jrael, and took ſome more of the Cities, and 
ſccure themſelves, and watch for Advantage againſt their Enemies ; | 42% amonglt the reſt ; though it be nor elſewhere Recorded in | 
which may be the reaſon why the $jrians durſt not aſſault them be- | Scripture. Or, Markers, ©, places where thou mayſt either receive 
fore the ſeventh Day ; v.29. p i:e. Few, and Weak, and Heartleſs; the Tribute which I promiſe to pay thee, or exerciſe Judicature 
being alſo for conveniency of Fighting, and that they might ſeem | upon my Subjetts in caſe of their Refuſal, Or ourlers (as the LXX 
to be more than they were, divided into two Bodies r ge it) gs _ —_— Rr ſtr was, S ort _ DOS, 
| which might curb the Kings of Damaſcus and keep them from at<. 
h an , q. a there I Cos man of hp 1 IJ tempting any other Invaſion into the Land of 1/razl. e He takes no 
the king of 1 rael, and aid, Thus laith the - RD, | notice ot his Blaſphemy againſt God ; nor of the vaſt Injuries which 
Becauſe the Syrians have ſaid " LORD #s« God of | his people had ſuffered from him, but only minds his own Grandures 
the hills, but he # not God of the valleys : therefore | and the advancement of his Power. . Eh 
will I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, | _ 35 q And a Ceſtalil man of the ſons of the Prophets 
and ye ſhall know thac I aw the LORD r. ſaid unto his neighbour f A _— h_ ord of _ LORD g, 
9 Which he knew, either by common Report, ſtrengthned by Site me þ, I pray thee ar ce: "_ ed co imire 
their preſent Choice of a Plain Ground for the Battel : or rather him 5. h IS 
y Revelation from God, who diſcovered their Secret Counſels f Or, Brother, another Son of the Prophets. g In the Name, and 
2 Kings 6: 12: r To wit, The Univerſal Lord of all places, and | by the Command of God, whereof doubrleſs he had informed him. 
Perſons, and Things h So as to wound me, v. 37. He ſpeaks what God commanded him, 
29 And they pitched one over againſtthe other ſeven though it was to h's own hurt ; by which Obedience to God, he 
davs d fo it w; hes is che £ bs of be barrel ſecrerly reproacheth 4habs Diſobedience in a fareaſter matter; And 
J5, GNC 79 it Was, Wat in tne 1eVency Gay ne OR Prophet by Gods appointment delires, that looking like & 
was joined, and the children of Iſrael ſlew of the SYI1ans | wounded Soldier, he might have the more free acceſs ro the King, 
an hundred thouſandfootmen in one day. and diſcourſe with him ; which it was very hard for a Prophet toe 
ZO Bur the reſt fled tO Aphek in the City and the obrain, that lort of Men being hateful ro Ahab, Chap: 333 $8: and ro 
wall s fel] d 1; board £ h his Courtiers. # Not out of Contempt of Gods Command, butmoſk 
all s tell upon twenty and Leven tnouland © TRE en probably, in tenderneſs and compaſhion to. his Brother. 2720” A 
that were le '$- and Benhadad fled, and came into the 26 Then ſaid he unto him, Becauſe thou haſt 'not : 
(0: fron SIty 7, [| + into an inner chamber #. obeyed the voice of the LOKD, behold, asfoon as thou 
amber to _ the _ ( the Singular Number for the Plural LO wh art departed from me, a lion ſhall flay thee. And as 
hambee, Nothing more frequent ) ofthe City-3- or of ſome great Caſtle, or ' A TR "Ip TURE Bp 
t Heb, Fort, in, or relies 5, City, in which Top were now fortifying them- {oon as he was ceparted from him, a lion found him, , Chap. 
wn , felves; or of tome part of the City where they lay. Which might | and flew him &. Es 0 Core 
Gamber, poſſibly happen through Natural Cauſes 3 but moſt probably, was k If the puniſhment ſeam too ſevere for ſo ſmall a Fault, letit be *' 
Pithy , Effected by the mighty power of God, then ſending ſome tudden | conſidered; x. That diſobedience to Gods expreſs Command, eſpe- 
Canter, Earrhquake, or violent Storm of Wind. which threw down the cially when ir is delivered by a Propher, is agrear Sin .andno-leſs 


Wall, or Walls upon them ; or doing this by the Miniſtry of Angels. 

hich cannot be incredible to any Man. except to him rhat denies 
the Truth of all the Miracles Recorded in rhe Old and New Teſta- 
ment ; which being Atteſted, many of them, by Jews and Heathens ; 
1t15 the height of Folly and Impudence to deny. For ifever Miracle 
was to be wrought, now ſeems to have been the proper time, and 
{eaſon for 1t . when the Blaſphemous Syrians denied the Soveraign 
and Infinite Power of God, and thereby in ſome ſort obliged him, 


- for his own Honour, to give a Proof ofir ; and to ſhew, Thar he 


Main B 


was the God of the Plains, as well as of the Mountains ; and that 
he could as effeQtually deſtroy them in their ſtrongeſt Holds, as in 
the open ficlds;& make the very walls,to whoſe ſtrength they rruſted 
for their Defence, to be the Inſtruments of their Ruine. Bur it may 
be further obſerved, thar it is not ſaid, Thar all theſe were killed 
by the Fall of this Wall; bur only that the Wall fell upou them, Kil- 
ing ſome, and ban othiers; as is uſual in-thoſe caſes. Nor 
ts itneceſf ry, that the Wall ſhould fall upon every individual per- 
fon ; bur*.c is ſufficient to juſtitie this Phraſe, ifir fell upon the 


_ 


ody 'of thenx; for the Words in the Hebrew run thus, 1he Wal 


«a, 
= 


than Capital, 'Deut: 18; 19. 2. This Fault was much worſe in 2Pro- 


phet, who very well knew the Authority of Gods Commands, and 


this way or manner of punithing them. . 3. We cannot judge ofthe 
Caſe, becauſe this Man might be guilty of many other hainous ſins 
unknown to us» bur known to God ; tor which, God might juſtly 
cut him off: which God choſe rodo upon this occaſion, that by the 
ſeverity of this Puniſhment of a P: ophets Diſobedience, proceeding. 
from pity to his Brother, he might rcach _4hed the greatnefs of his 
fin, in ſparing him through fooliſh pity, ., whom by the Eaws of 
Religion and Juſticez and Prudence, and common Safety, he ſbould .' 
have Cur off, and what puniſhment he might expe for it. , 

37 Then he found another man, and ſaid, Smite me, 


I pray thee. And the man ſmote him, #-fo that in + Heb. 
TBE or ne ſmiting and 
38 Sotheprophert departed, and waited for the king *%7x. 


{miting he wounded him. 


by the way, and diſguiſed himſelf / with aſhes w upon 


his face. | ER. 
23K 4 { That 


' 
l 
| 


i 


Chap. XX! 


iN 


© 1 That he might ſooner gain Acceſs to the King, and Audience 
fron him. Sec on v. 35- wm Whereby he changed the Colour of 
it. Or, with a vail, or cloth, or band ; ( as the Hebrew Dottors under- 
ſtand the word) whereby he might ſeem to have bound up his wound. 
which probably was in his Face; for it was to be made in 2 very 
conſpicuous place, that itmight be viſible to 4hab and others. 

+ 29 Andas the king paiſed by, he cried unto the king : 
and he ſaid ny, Thy ſervant went out into the mid(t of 
the battel, and behold, a man oturned aſide, and brought 
a man unto me, and ſaid, Keep this man: if by any 
means he be milling, then ſhall thy life be for his lite p, 


or elſe thou ſhalt + pay a talent of ſilver. 

» This following Relation is not an Untruth, but a Parable 3 an 
uſual way of Inſtruftion in the Eaſtern parts, and ancieat Times, 
? and moſt fit for this occaſion, wherein an obſcure Prophet was to 
| ſpeak to a great King ; whoſe Ears were tender, and impatient of a 

own-right Reproof, and exceeding Partial in his own Cauſe; who 
by this Artificeis made to condemn himſelf. before he was aware of 
it, and ſo forced to receive the Prophets juſt Sentence with more 
patience and Moderation : Compare 1 Sam: 12; and14. s My Com- 
mander or Superior, as the manner of his Expreſſion here following 
ſheweth. p Thou ſhalt dic in his ſtead ; as below, v. 42. Compare 
Exod. 21. 23. 
+ Heb. be 49 And as thy ſervant was buſie here and there, | he 
was rot Was gone. And the king of Ifrael ſaid unto him, So ſha 
thy judgment 9 be, thy ſelf haſt decided it. 

q i.e. Thy Sentence ; or the Sentence againſt thee : thou muſt 

erform the Condition to which thou didſt ſubmit. Either ſuffer 
the one, or do the other. . 
41 Andhe haſted, and took the aſhes away from his 
face : and the king of Iſrael diſcerned him that he was 
one of the prophets 7. 
r Either 1. By his Face, which was known either to the King, or 


to ſome of his Courtiers there preſent. Or, 2. By the change of 
thethe manner of his Addreſs to him, which now was ſuch as the 
Prophets uſed. ; | 

42 And-he ſaid unto him, Thus fſaich the LORD, 


| * Chap: * Becauſe thou haſt let go our of :hy hand a man + whom 


| +F Heb, 
i Weigh. 


#427; ,f IT appointed co urrer deſtruction, therefore thy life ſhall 
& wo his life s, and thy people for his people 7. 


s Quef. What was the great Sin of 4hab in this Aﬀtion, for which 
God fo ſeverely Puniſheth him? 4nf. The great Diſhonour hereby 
done to God, in ſuffering ſo horrid a Blaſphemer, wv: 23. to go 
unpuniſhed, which was contrary to an expreſs Law, Lev. 24. 16« 
Obj, \Whar is this to Benpadad, ſeing that Law concerned Jſraelites 
only ? Anſs It reached both to them that were born zn the land, and 
{ asis there expreſſed ) unto ſtrangers that were among them, and in 
their. power, which was Benhadads caſe 3 for God had delivered him 
into Ahabs hand, for his Blaſphemy, as he promiſed to do, v. 28. by 


. 


which a& of his providence, eſpecially compared with that Law, 
5t was moſt evident, that this man was appointed by God to Deſtru- 
Aion, as is here ſaid: Bur 4hab was ſo ſar from puniſhing this 
Blaſphemer, thathe doth nor ſo much as Rebuke him, bur Treats 
himlike a Friend, and a Brother ; diſmiſſeth him upon eaſie Terms, 
and takes his Word for the performance, and takes not the leaſt Care 
for the Reparation of Gods Honour, bur only for the Amplification 
'of his own power. # Queſt. Why were the people puniſhed for 4hats 
Sin ? Anſ. 1. Becauſe 4hab was puniſhed in the loſs of his people 
'2. The people were puniſhed for their own Sins, which were many, 
'and great 3 though God took this occaſion to inflift ir. 3. The 
eat injury and, miſchief was hereby done to his own people ; who 
Þy this moſt fooliſh and wicked at, were expoſed ro all thoſe 
Rapines and Slaughters which Benhadad either did commir, or might 
have;commitred againſt chem afterwards : of which, conſequently 
Ahab was guilty. And it muſt be conſidered, Thar all the Jraelites 
(ere the Lords peculiar people; nor did their Apoſtacy from God. 
de prive God of his Right: & the Kings of Jrael and Judah had theſe 
"committed to them, in way of Truſt, ro be Governed and Prote&ed 
'by them. And therefore Ahab for this groſs breach of his Truſt, 
was juſtly liable, though nor to the Cenſures of his people, yer to 
the Hand of God, who was his King and Governour. 
43 And the king of Iſrael went to his houſe, heay 


 anddiſpleaſed uw, and came to Samaria. 
- & Not for his ſin, bur for the ſad effeAs of ir upon himſelf, and 
le ; which he might confidently expett, having had many ex- 
Periences, that Ged did not ſuffer the Words of his Prophets ro fall 


to the ground. , 
SH M2. X Xp 
hab covetetb to buy Naboth's Vineyard : Which u denied him, and he is 
grieved, 1-— 4. Jezebel writeth Letters againſt Naboth : He is condemned 
of Blaſphemy, and floned, 5 — 14. A44ab poſſeſeth the Vineyard, 15, 16, 
Elijah denouncech Judgment againſt Aheb and Jezebel, 17 ==26, 1; 
repenting, God deferreth the Judgment, 24 —— 29. 
[ A N D it came. to paſs after theſe things, 1has Naboth 
| | the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jez- 
reel «, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria. 
a Where one of Ahabs Palaces was, as the other was in Samaria. 
2 And Abab ſpake unto Naboth, ſaying, Give me thy 
* vineyard that may have ic for a garden of herbs, be- 
cauſe it 3s near unto my houſe, and I will give thee for 
+ Hzb, ita better vineyard than it : or if it + ſeem good to thee, 
be good in T will give thee the worth of it in money. 
thine eyes. And Naboth ſaid tro Ahab, the LORD forbid it 
me, that I ſhovld give the inheritance of my fathers 
b For God hath expreſly, and for divers weighty Reaſons forbidden 
- thealienation of Lands from the Tribes and Families to which they 
were allotted, Lev 25. 15, 23, 25- Num. 36. 7. Ezek. 46. 18. And 
although theſe might have been alienated till the Jubilee, yer he 
durſt nor {cll it ro the King for that time ; becauſe he ſuppoſed, | 


N G S. 


that if once it came into the Kings Hand, eſpecially to be made + 
Garden of Pleaſure, and affixed to his Palace, neither he nor his 
Poſterity, could ever recover itagain; and ſo he ſhould both offeng 
God, and wrong his Poſterity ; which, being, as it ſeems, a Pious 
Man, he durſt dot do. 

4 And Ahab came into his houſe, heavy and difplea- 
ſed, becauſe of the word which Naboch the Jezreelice 
had ſpoken to him : for he had ſaid, I will not give thee 
the inheritance of my fathers: and he laid him down 
upon his bed, and turned away his face c, and would 
eatno bread 4. 

c From the Light, and Company which either then were with 
him, or might cometo him, to the Wall, as Hezekiah did under » 
like dejeCion of Spirir, 1a. 38. 2» d Refuſed to cat meat in his 
uſual rime. 

5 CU But Jezebel hiswife came to him, andſaid unto 
him, Why 3s thy ſpirit ſo ſad, that thou eateſt no bread > 

6 Andhefſaidunco her, Becauſe Iſpake unto Naboth 
the Jezreelice, and ſaid unto him, Give me thy vineyard 
for money ; or elſe if it pleaſe thee, I will give thee 
enother vineyard for it: and heanſwered, I will not give 
thee my vineyard. 

7 And Jezebel his wife ſaid unto him, Doeſt thou 
now govern the kingdom of Iſrael e ? ariſe, and ear 
bread, and let thine heart be merry : I will give thee 
the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, 

e Art thou fit to be King, that canſt pur up ſuch Aﬀeronts from 
thy Subje&s, and haſt not the Courage touſe thy Abſolute power 
to diſpoſe of them, and theirs, as ſeemeth good unto thee * 

8 So {the wrote letters in Ahabs name, and ſealed 
thew with his ſeal, and ſent the letters unto the elders, 
and to the nobles f that were in his City g dwelling with 
Naboth. | 

f Whom ſhe very well knew to be fit for her purpoſe: g 5.e. In 
Jezrecl. So ſhe ſeeks to deſtroy him with a pretence of Juſtice, and 
with as little reflectiofi upon 4hab, as might be. 

9 And jhe wrote in the lecters, ſaying, Proclaim a 
faſt þ, and ſet Naboth || on high # among the people. | Hy 

h To romove all ſuſpicion of hatred, orevil deſign in ab, and I thnyy 
to beget a good opinion of him among his people, as if his AfMli- the pal, 
&ions had done him good, and as if he were grown zealous for Gods . 
Honour, and careful of his Peoples welfare, and therefore deſirous 
to prevent the further diſpleature of God againſt his City and 
Kingdom, and in order thereunto, to enquire into all thole ins 
which provoked God againit them, and effeCtually to purge them 
out. 7 In a Scaffold, or ſome other high-place, where Malefaftors 
were uſually and fitly placed, that they might beſeen, and their 
defence heard by all the people. 

10 And ſer ewo men, ſons of Belial, before him, to 
bear witneſs againſt him, ſaying, Thou didſt || * blaf-! He. 


5, $ 


pheme & God and the king : and then carry him out 4, (; 
and * ſtone him m that he may die ». Job:25g 

k Heb. Bleſs. Bleſſing is put for curſing and blaſpheming, as 705. 1. 5. * Ats6; 
and 2.9. fo alſo here. as 1s apparent» beczule his 5leffng God and 11: 
the King had been no Crime. It is a Figure called Euphemiſmus. God * Lev: 
would have blaſphemy ſo much abhorred,thart ir ſhould not eaſily and 24 14! 
unneceſlatily be named by its proper name Compare Pſ. 16.4 To 
the place where Malefattors were puniſhed, which was our of the 
City, Lev. 24. 23. of. 7. 24. Mar. 15. 20. Heb. 13. 12, partly, to ſhew 
chat they were unworthy of all humane ſociety, and avhorred by all 
the people: and partly, becauſe the place where they were killed, 
was the eby ceremonially polluted. m2 "The proper puniſhment of 
Blaſphemers, Lev: 24. 15, 16. » As one thar curſed his God, and 
his Political Father, his King. See Exod. 21+ i7. and 22. 28. 

11 And the men of the city, ever the elders, and the 
nobles, who were the inhabicants in his city, did as Je- 
Z2bel had ſent unto them o, and as it was written in the 
letters which ſhe had ſent unto them. 

o Which isnot at all ſtrange in them who had for a long time caſt 
off the fear and ſenſe of God, and proſtiruted their Conſciences and 
Religion to pleaſe their King, and ſold themſelves to all manner of 
wickedneſs, and could notnow make a ſafe and honourable retreat, 
and durſt not diſobey Jezevel/s command, by whom they knew the 
King was wholly governed; and who could eaſily have taken away 
their Livesin the ſame manner, if they had refuied to kill Naboth. 


12 They proclaimed a Faſt, and ſet Naboth on high 
among che people. | 
13 And there came in two men, children of Belial, 

and ſat before him : and the men of Belial witneſſed 
azainſt him, ever againſt Naboth, in the preſence ofthe 
people, ſaying, Naboth did || blaſpheme God and the [ Heb: 
king. Then they carried him forth our of the city, Is 
and ſtoned * him p with ſtones that he died. >, Kind 

p And his Sons with him, asit "mY be thoughe from 2 Kings g. 26. g: 26: 
that ſo the King might have an undiſturbed poſſeſſion ; for whick 
they might pretend thoſe examples, Num, 16. 32+ Joſ. 7. 24. Bur. 
theſe were examples of extraordinary vengeance, and by ſpecial 
Warrant from God ; and the Law of God was politively contrary 
to it, Deut. 247 16. ; IS 

14 Then they ſent to Jezebel q, ſaying, Naboth 1s 
ſtoned, and is dead. 

q By whom they knew the Affairs of the Kingdom were managed 
and this Deſign contrived. 
I5 © And it came to paſs, when Jezebel heard that 
Naboth was ſtoned, and was dead, that Jezebel ſaid to 
Ahab, Ariſe, take poſlefiion of the vineyard of N _ : 


Chap. XX: | & 


"I. 


. "(hap: XX [. . . I. 
the Jezreelite, which he refuſed to give thee 


money : for Naboth is not alive, but dead. ; 

| 7 Either, Firſt, By right of Confiſcationgto repair the Injury which 
he did to the King by blaſpheming him. Or Secondly, By tyrannica 
Uſurpation. Or, Thirdly, By right of Inheritance * for tome fa. 
that Hhab was his next Kinſman, his Sons being Dead ; which they 
judge more likely, becauſe his Land was next to the Kings- 

16 And it came to paſs, whenAbab heard rhac Naboth 
was dead.that Ahab roſe up to go down to the vineyard 
of Naboth the Jeſreelite, to take poſſeflion of it. 

17 © And the word of the LORD came to Elijah 
the Tiſhbite, ſaying, : ; 

18 Ariſe,go down to meet Ahab king of Iſrael, which 
3s in Samariaſ: behold, he is # in the-ineyard of Na- 
both, whither he is gone down to p{ eſs it. 

ſ Either,who now is there.and about ro dart thence to Jexretl : 
or, who.commonly dwells there. * Or rater, h- wil be ; by that 
time that thou comeſt thirher, thou ſhalr fil him there. : 

19 And thou ihait ſpeak unto him, ſaying, Thus ſaich 
the LORD, Haſt thou killed,and alſo taken poſſethon «: 
And thou ſhalt ſpeak unto him, ſaying, Thus ſaith te 
LORD, in the place where dogs licked the Blood of 
Naborth, {hail dogs like thy blood, even thine x. 

» Thou haſt murdered an Innocent & Righteous Manz& inſtead 
of repeating for it, thou ha't added another piece of injuſtice and 
violence to it,and art going confidently agd chearfully ro reap the 
Fruit of thy wickedneis; He aicribes Jezebels Fatt to Ahab, bc- 
caule Jezebel did ir by his Connivance,and Conſent,and Aurhority . 
and for the ſatisfa&tion of his inordigate Appetite. x Queſt, tow 

was this fulfilled, when Ahabs blodwas not licked in J-zr-e/,which 
was in the Tribe of 1ſachar. but in the Pool of Samar, chap.22.38- 
which was in the Tribe of Ephraim ? Anſ. Firſt, This was donc. 
though not in the ſame individual place, yet in the ſame genera 

placc,# e.in the Territory of Samaria,within which Jezreet was & in 
a place of the ſame nature, a publick and common place ; for fuct, 
was both the place of Nabo hs Execution, and the Poo} of Samara 

Secondly, This was particularly accompliſhed in his Son uram,a 

is affirmed, 2 K-ngs 9- 25,26 whole blood is not improperiy called 
Ahabs blood, becauſe Children are ſaid to be born of their Parents 
blood. See Joh. 1.13. AF# 17. 26. Obje Theſe words, thy blood, ever 
thine,ſhew that it is meant of Ahab's Perſon. »ſ» True, the threat- 
ning was ſo dire&ed and deſigned at firſt ; but afterwards, upon 
his humiliation, the puniſhment was transferred from him to his 
Son,as is expreſſed, ver.29. Obj. This is aid ro be fulfilled in 4habs 
Perſon, chap. 22.38. Al tirher that may be referred to tome other 
Prediction or Commination not elle-where mentioned : or ra- 
ther, it intimates, that it was in part, and in ſome ſort fulfilled in 
him,though not ſo ſevere!'y and opprobriouſly, nor with ſuch Cha- 
ra&ers of theCurſe as it was in his Son zwhence he there mentions 
only the thing,withour any regard unto the place here deſigned But 
it may further be obſerved, T hat although upon Ahabs humiliation 
the Curſe here threarned might ſeem to be wholly tranflared from 
his Perſon to his Poſterity ;yet upon Ahahs return to fin,in the next 


for | 


KIN QO © 


- 
IH Hoo «| 
Chap. XXL, 
25 © But there was none, ike unto Ahab g, which 
Iid ſell himſelf co work wickednefs in the ſight of the 
LORD, whom Jezebel his Wife || ſtirred. ry 1 | | Or, inci | 
7 Nne among all the Kings of I-a'l which had been before him. ted. | 
> This is added to thew, that temptations to ſin are no excuſe to ' 
the ſinner. - : Foſa = 3 
26 Ad he did very abominably in following idols, 
;ccording to all things as did the Amorictes 3, whom the _ 
LORD c iſt our before the- Children of Iſrael. i 
i i, e. The ſevgn Nations of Canz#, all called by this'Name,as A 


Gen 15, 16.and 48: 22. tos 2. 9, 10. Eo $-o 
27Andit came to paſs when Ahab heard thoſe words,. 


that he rent his clothes, »nd put ſackcloth upon his fleſh, 
and faſted, and lay in ſackcioth, and went ſofciy.k - 
k i. e. Slowly and filently,after the manner of mourners or thoſe 
who are under a great conſternation, and in deep. coſideration- 
28 And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the 
Tiſbbice, ſaying, * y 
29 Seeſt thou how Ahab humblech himſelf before me? 
becauſe he humbieth himſelf before me /, 1 will rot pl 
bring the evil - in his days : but * in his ſons days will + King. | 
{ bring the evil upon his houſe. | 9: : & x 
Tt i.e. In my preſence,&upon my threatning: Bur this humiliation 
or repentance of Avabs was only externa! and ſuperficial, ariſing from 
the terror of Gods Judgments ; and n. t ſincere and ſerious,proceed=- 
ing f.om thc Love of.,od,or a true ſente of his ſfin,or aſolema pur 
pole of amendment of his Life,as appears, becauſe all the particulars 
of his repentance here. wer. 27 are external and ritual only; nor is 
chere the leaſt intimation of any one- ſign or fruit of his true re- 
pentance,as that he reſtored Naveths Land.or reproved his infamous 
Wife ; but in the very next Chapter you find him retu-ning to his 
2rmer Vomir hating and threatning the Lords Prophers,&c. m 5.4 
The Judgment threatned, both that wer. 19. which was not infli&- 
dupon.4-ab w th fo much ignominy,% with that particular fignt« 
cure of Gods vengeance, thar it was to be done in: the tame place, 
as 1t was upon his Son Jeram ; and eipecially that, wer. 41: 23, 
which was wholly ſuſpended unrill his $ ns days. ; 
CHAP. XXIL - 
Ahab intending Way againft the Syrians, is adviſed by Tehoſhaphat þi ſt.fo 
ack Counjel of God: Anabs Proph ts adv:ſe him to it,eſpecially zde lf 
1-12. Micaias, # prophet of che Lord, diff» adeth wm from it: 4nd 
is put in Priſon by Ahab, 13 - — 28. Ahab gveth to the Battel, is Nlain: 
The Dog: lick his Blodd , and Ahaziah. ſucceedeth him, 19 \--—— 46, 
Fehojbaphits good reign over Judah ; His Afts and Death : Felnoram 
Jucceedeth him, 41 —— 50 Abaziahs evil Reign, 1 =*) 53-07 
N D they 4 continued three years þ without -war 
between Syria and [fſrael. 2; 
# The Syrians and Iſraelites deſigned in the following words. 
b Computed from the laſt War and League wherewith it was 
concluded : becauſe both Ahab and B-uhad:d were ſo weakned and 


broken by the late Wars, that they needed and deſired Peace to 
recruit themſelves, and repair their former-loſſcs, | 


-4. 


Chapter,be brings back the Curſc upon himſelf,and fo it is no won- 
der if it be in tome tort fulfilled in him alſo. 
brew word,rendred in the place where,may be,and is by ſome learned 
men otherwiſe rendered, either thus, Þ:ſtca# .f#his that ; that being 


in his ffead: or, like as : or, becauſe that: So 1: doth not del:gn the / 
Place, but the cauſe and reaſon of this Judg.nent» And an this 
ſenſe the ſame word 1s uſed, . 10. 


Zecing 2 
20 And Ahab faid to re y,Haſt thou found mes, 
O mine enemy a? And h®anſ{wered,l have found zbeeb : 
becauſe thou haſt ſold" thy ſelf c to work evil in the 
ſight of the LORD a. 


 Upon,and after his delivery of the meſſage laſt mentioned.which 
3t was needleſs to repeat. z Doit thou purſi.c me from place to place ? 
Wiltſt thou never ict me reſt? Art thou come after ine hither with 
thy unwelcome Mcſlages ? a That art always diſturbing, threatning, 
and oppoſing me. and exprefling not ſo much Gods mind, as thy 
own batred aad emnity againſt me. Comp. ch. 22. 8. b The haid 
of God hath found and overtaken thee in the very a&@ of thy lin. 
c Thou halt wi!fully and wholly reſigned up rhy l1elf to be the , 
bond(lave of the Devil,or Baal,and of wicked Zezebel,to do whatto- | 
ever they perſwade thee to do ; as a man that ſells himielf ro ano- | 
ther is totally in his Maſters Power, and mult imploy all his t-me | 
and {trength for his ſervice, Compare 2'King 17.17. See on Rom. 7. | 
14. di e. Impudently and contempruouſly. Withal he minds him, 


that although his fin was in a great meature hid from the eyes of 
men by Jezebels cunning conti1ivance,yet it was evident and kaown 
to God, who would require it at his Hands. ' 
: 2r Behold, * I will bring evil upon thee, and will 
Chap. take away thy poſterity, and will cut off from Ahab 
(4. , * him that piſſerh againſt the wall,and * him tha is th 
+ Kin.g,g. 22M that piilern againit the wall,and * him that 15 jhut 
* Sam. UP, and lefc in Iſrael. 
Y. 22, e Of which ſee on chap: 14: 10. 
* Chap. 22 And will make thine houſe like the houſe of *Je- 
OM roboam the ſon of Nebat, and like the Houſe of * Baa- 
15.292 ſha the ſon of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith 
* Chap. thou haſt provoked we to anger, and made [frael to ſin. 
I6; 3, 23 And * of Jezebel alſo ſpake the LORD, fayiug, 
* Kin The dogs ſhall eat Jezebel by the || wall f of Jezreel. 
: S& F Or, by the ditch, or fort: org mn the Portion, as it is explained, 


a4 ditch 2 Kings 9+ 36. the Hebrew Chel. here being put for chelck, uted there 

p * by an Apocope of the laſt Hebrew Letrer, which is not unuſual: in 
the Hebrew tongue 

24 * Him tnat dieth of Ahab in the city, the dops 


*Chap. "HF 
ts. 12ng ſhall eat ; and him that dicth in the ticld,thall the fowls 
6: 4 Of the air Cat 


Thirdly, The H-- ' 


frequently ſaid ro be done in anothers placs which was only done | 


2 And it came to pals in the third year, that * Jeho- +, c4 
ſhaphac the King of Judah came down to the king of 1s: wy” 
Iſrael ec. OS | 

c Having now, as he ſuppoſed, made afirm peace with 4hab b 
the Alliance coutracted berween Joram his Son,and Athaliah, Ababs 
Daughter 3 Of which ſee 2 Kings 8: 18. 2 Chron: 18: 1. | | 

3 (And the king of Iſrael ſaid unto his ſervants, Know | 
ye that * Ramoth in Gilead is ours d, and we be|| ſtill, * ; Chros | 
and take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria ) 2 6: 73. 

d i. e. Belongeth to us by right,both by Gods Donarion,and de- |: Heb» fa 
ſigaarion of it for a*Ciry of Refuge, Joſ. 21: 38. and by our laſt Jer from 
agreement with Benbodad 1 Kings 20. $4,which te refuſeth ro deli- taking its | 
ver up to us upon our demand. | 

4 And he ſaid unto Jehoſhaphat, Wilt thou go wich | 
me to batrel to Rimotn-giiead And Jehoſhaphat ſaid | 
co the king of Ifrae!, * I am as thou art, my p<opie as * 2 King; 
thy peopie, my horſes a+ thy horſes e. 3-7. | 

e I will heartily and effectually joyn with thee ; and my 
Forces ſhail thail be at thy ſervicey as much as thine own. 

5 And Jehojhaphac faid umo the king of iſrael, En 
quire f I pray tee, at the word of the LORD to day: 

f By ſome Prophet; that we may know the mind of God in it, 
and «hat ſucceſs we may expect. This was the practiſe of the - 
God!y. See Juag- 1. 1: and 20; 28. 154m. 23, 2. 

o Then the king of Iſ{caei gathered the prophets g to- 
gether, abour tuur hundred men, and ſaid unto them, 
Shall I go againſt Ramocth-gil.ad to battel,or ſhall I for- 
bear ? And they ſaid, Go up: for the LOKD ſhall 
deliver zt unto the hand of the king. 

£ Which doubtleſs were his own faiſe Prophets or the Prieſts of 
Baal ; probably thole very 400 Men whom jcz-b-! preſcrved from 
that great ſlaughter, Chap: \8 whe yet gave in their Anſwer in the 
Name of Jehovah, nor of Baal ; either. in con pliance with Jehoſha- 


phat ; or rather, by Ahabs direction, that good j hojhaphat might be 
deceived by them, into a good opinion of the War. 


7 And Jenoſhaphar 1id,1s rhere not here a Prophet of 
the LORD beſides b, that we might enquire of him? 


. h Bcſides theſe, who may ſeem to be ſuch by your Opinion, 


and their own profefſion : but I defire further ſatisfaction from 
{ome other Prophet. 


> And the king of Ifrael ſaid unto Jehoſhaphat, There 

;s yet one i man (Micaiah & the fon of Imlah) by whom 
we may enquire of the LORD ; but 1 hate him, for he 
dorh not piopheſie good concerning me, but evii /, And 
Jeholvaphat 1aid, Let not the king fay fo m. 
# To wit, in this place for ws th I can ſpeedily ſend : for there 

I ' WcTrg 


| 
| 


WV 


—> wv: a . £© [ 


were a'ſo other Prophets elſewhere in the Kingdom as E!ijah,Flijha, 
- and others ; but theſe were mot at hand for'the preſent occaſion. 
þ Nor one of the 1:2 Prophets, who lived: abour .15o Years after 
this time, bur another of that'name.. / He is always, a meſſenger of. 
evil tidings ! Which was true, but no ſufficient reafon why he thould 
hate him, becauſe Mainh was purely Gods Tnftrumeat in all his 
Mcſages :' ind whatfoever'evil he threatned, hab himſclf was the- 
cauſe and procurer. of it. #,Do.not preſage ewitto our enterprize: 
lef us nexhey-hare his perſon, nor diſpil "his meffage ; bur firſt 
| hear it, and;then doias-We\ſce thuſe. 33 ed. bh. 2 
| Or, Ez= 9 Then the king of Ifracl calledan{] Officer,and laid, 
h, Haſtenibizber Micaiah;, che fon of-Inahe- © v1 
To And the king of I{rael,and Jehoſhaphat the, king 
| of Jud%}; ſac -each'on his'throne,” having pur on their 
T Heb. es * in a || void;place ov in the ebtranice of the gate 
. of Samaria, 'and alt che propticts prophetied betore 
OO 2400 CY OE PRANY = 
# Their Royal Rohes, and;/Enfigns of Majeſty. 8 In the place of 
Tallicarore whieh was in, or nigh the Gate of the Ciry, and in the 
front of ſome void plac?, Wer either Pcople ſtood to kear and 
ſee Juſtice: adntiniſtred: 3 or Souldicrs were placed for the defence 
of the Ciry in timg oEWar,, 
11, And Zedskiah thsifon of Chenaanah made him 


» Lap. 


z$ > 


nn} 


- With theſe thalt; thou: puſh the Syrians, until thou have 
conſumed them 51 6/ £3 & Eee 
-{,p Fir emblems'of the power and Viftory of theſe two Kings. The 
Dex ilis-Gods Ape; and thefafſe Prophers ſomerimes imitating the 
Etus:iwhp her they Uttlared Gods mind by words,did alſo often- 
times confirm it by ſenfible Fgns - Sec 7/2. 20.2. Jer. 27. 2. 4 Heb. 
Jehwvab ; whoſe Name'he pretends, ro gain the more credit and 
counttmance to- his words.* See on v. 7. © o 
-.\ 42 And alt the prophets propheſied fo ſaying,Goupt 

R2mothcgilead, and proſper : for the LORD hail deli- 

Ver. 7.1pro the kings hand. | 

-::13 And.the'Meitenger that was gone to call Micaiah, 

Fpake urto hin} faying,Beho!ld now, the words, of the 

prophers declare 'go0d unto the king with one mouth : 


let thy. word, .I pray thee, be like the word of one © 


then, and ſpeak.rber which is good r. . 
\...y This. he.deſigns,. .not out of any Love to Micaiah ( whom he 
* pexſuades-to debauch his" Conſcience, ) but meerly out of a defirc 
bt to gratify, his Kings humour. 
| 14 And Micaiah faid, 4s the LORD liveth, what 
the LOR D' faith 'unto'me /, that will I ſpeak. 
2 J/WBitanſwer God {ſhalPpur into my mind and mouth ; which, 
it ſeems, was not yet done... Thy « . 
.* x5: $::So he came to the king,and the king ſaid'unto 
him; Micaiah, hall we go againſt Ramoth-gilead to 
| bitte or ſhall' we forbear ? And he anſwered him 7, 
C-.. 'Go, "and proſper::, for the LORD ſhall deliver it into 
the. hand of the king. | 
C ".. 3,, &, Nat ſeriouſly,bur.ironically, ufing the very words of the falſe 
_ 'Prophets,in way of deriſion : As appears,Firſt,from his omiſſion of 
_ that. tolemn Freface, Thus ſaith the Lord ; or, this is the word of the 
; IM Lord," Lich the prophets generally uſed, and which himſelf uſeth 
Þ "when he'comes to his ſerious anſwer, v. 19, Secondly, From Ahabs 
bs. reply, ver, 16. which ſhews that he ſuſpeted Micaiahs ſincerity in 
Ir, "that Arſwer,& gathered by his geſture or manner ofſpeaking,that 
Lc.” , he ipake only mimically, as repreſenting and traducing the falſe 
Wo Prophcts for their anſwer. Sce the Like Ironical paſſages, Ger. 3. 
Oc 10: 14. 1K-ngs 18:27. Eccleſ. 11:9. Exck.20:39. Ames 4. 4,5. 
| All which expreſſions are not uſed to lead Men into miſtakes; bur 
ba ro bring them to the ſight of their fin and dury;which may be done 
- ſometimes molt efficaciouſly in this way. So Mica/ahs meaning is 
plainly this, Becauſe rhou doſt not ſeck to know the truth, but 
only to pleaſe thy ſelf, go to the battle, as all thy prophets ad- 
viſe thee, and expe the ſucceſs which rhey promiſe thee, and try 
the truth of their Prediction by thy own coſtly experience. 

16 And the king ſaid unto him, How many times 
ſhall T adjure thee #,that chou tell me nothing, bur :ha; 
which 3s true in the Name of the LORD ? 

u I adjure thee again and again,that thou give over this mockery, 
and ſeriouſly tell me the mind of God in this matter. 

17 And he ſaid,l ſaw x all Iſrael* ſcattered upon the 


hills y, as ſbeep that have not a ſhepherd x: And the 
LORD faid, Theſe have no maſter, let them return 


every man to his houſe in peace 4. 

x In the Spirit, or ina Viſion. y Upon the Mountains of Gilead, 
nigh Ramoeth : either, where they lay ercamped by 4habs order : or, 
to which they fled from the Enemy,eſteeming that the ſafeſt place. 
See Matth, 24: 16. t As people who have loſt their King, See Num. 
27:17. 1[a- 40» 11. and 44: 28. Ezck. 34. 23- @ Diſcharged from the 
War : which was fulfilled, wer, 26. 

18 And the king of Iſrael ſaid unto Jehoſhaphat, Did 


I not tell thee, that he would prophetie no good con- 


* Matth, 
9: 36. 


, 
[1 


and * all the hoſt of Heaven e ſtanding by him f,on his : 


8.10. right hand, and on his lefr. | 
Eb.1.7, «© Becauſe thou giveſt credit to thy falſe Prophets,and diſtruſteſt } 


I4+ /,mmy words,as it they were bur the ſuggeſtions of my own tancy,& | 


Matth. 


| horns df iron p: and he.faid, Thus laichithe LORD.q, | 


N CG $. 

hatred of thy Perſon;I will give thee a diſtinct & true account of the 
whole matter,in Gods Name and Preſence. d By the Eyes of my Mind 
for he could not fee the Lord with bodily Eyes. e 7. e. The: Angels 
who are oft called Gods hoſt or befts, becauſe of their great number 
excclient order,& conſtant readineſs to attend upon God, - & to exe. 
cute his Commands. : See Gen. 2, 1. Pſal 103.21.and 148.7. TRE 
Angels were both good and bad,the one pcſſibly on his right, the 
other on his left hand. Nor is it ſtrange that the Devils are cal. 
led the hoſt of Heaven ; if you conſider,Firit, That their original ſear 
was in Heaven, and Men in Scr:pture arc oft called by the name 
of the placc from whence they came. Secondly, That the name 
-of Hcav1 18 oft given to all that part of the Wor!d which is zbove 
the Earth,and among the reſt,to the Air. asGen.12.0:and 7,11.and 8:2, 
and 27, 28. Deu:4:11; and 11:11. where the Devils refidence and 
domiion-J:es, Epy: 2: 2. and that both Michael and bis Sneels, 2nd te 
Drapon anc! his Angels are ſaid tobe; and to Wate war in keatm Revii. 
12. 7, 2. e. either theAir, or the Church: And this place is nor to 
be underſtood as ifMicsiah had ſeen with his bodily Eves, tie 
Lord and his Angels ting in rhe third Heaven ; but that he ſaw 
a repreſentation of thE Divine Preſence in the Ajr, attend<d with 
gocd and bad Angels f Ia the poiture of Miniſters, to recci.e 
and Ex=cute his Commands. 

2» And the LORD ſaid, Who ſhall || perſwadeAhabg, | 9. ;. 
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead ? And one iv, 
{aid on this manner, and another ſaid on that manner 
$ This is nor to be groſly unJerſtocd,as ifGod did ask and take 
:counic] f om his Creatures,or were at a lols to find out an expedicnt 
to accompliſh his own Will ; did conſider ſeveral ways; and then 
cloſe with that which upon debate appeared to be beſt; a!l which 
it 1s ridiculous to imagine concerning a God of perfe& and infinite 
knowledge ; but only to bring down divine things to our ſhallow 
' Capacities, avd to expreſs the various means which God hath to 
execute his own Deſigns. 

21 And there came forth a ſpirit b,and ſtood before 
the LORD, and ſaid, I will perſwade him. 

þ An evil Spirit came out of the knot or company of them, ſtand- 
ing poflibly on the left hand, and preſented: him{clf before the 
Throne, as having ſomething to ſay to the Lord: 

22 And the LORD laid unto him, Wherewith? And 
he {aid, 1 will go forth, & I will be a lying ſpitic in the 
mouth of all his prophets k. And he ſaid, * Thou ſhalt *Juds.g. 
perſwade him, and prevail allo / : go forth, and do ſom. 

k T willinfpire a Lie into the Minds and Mouths of his Prophets: 

7 I will give them up into thy hands,and blind their minds, & leave 
them to their own ignorance and wickedneſs,which will certainly 
lead them into dreadful miſtakes. 92 This is not a Command, but 
only a Permiſſion ; which is oft expreſſed in the Imperative Mood ; 
as 1 Sam:16:10. Matth:8:22. Joh:13:27. I will nor hinder thee trom 
rempring them.nor give them Grace to withſtand their temptation; 
whereby thou mayelt be aſſured of Succeſs. 

23 Now therefore behold, the LORD hath put a ly- 
ing ſpirit in the mouth of all theſe thy -prophets,and che 
LORD hath ſpoken evil concerning thee. 

24 But Zedekiah the ſon of Chenaanahz went near, 
and ſmote Micaiah on the cheek o, and ſaid, * Which *2 Cir 
way wene che- ſpirit of the LORD from me to ſpeak '*' 


unto hee p? 
n The chief of the Falſe Prophets, who was much in the King's 
Favourgupon which he now preſumed. o In way of Contempt and 
Scorn, Job 16: 10: Fer: 20; 2. Lamcnite 3.30 Mark 14:65. P 7. e. In 
what manner went it? Foraſmugh as I and my Brethren have con- 
ſulred the Lord,and anſwered if his Name,and have the ſame Spi- 
rit which thou pretendeſt to have, and not a lying Spirit, as thou 
doſt falſly and maliciouſly athirm, How it is poſſible that the ſame 
Spirit ſhould rel us one thing, and vhee the quire contrary ? 
25 And Micaiah ſaid, Behold, thou ſhalt ſee in that 
day, when thou ſhalt go || inco | an inner chamber to || Or, fn 
hide thy ſelf 9. Chanbrr, 
q Out ofa juſt fear and expeQation cf the deſerved puniſhment *? Cham 
of a falſe Prophet, and of the great Author and Abercor of this 7. , 
pernicious War, and of Ahbab's DeſtruQion. + Heb: b 
26 And the king of Ifrael ſaid, Take Micaiah, and © 


ame 
carry kim back r unto Amon the governour of the city, rag 4 
and to Joaſh the kings fon. 

r To wit, into Priſon ; where it ſeems, he was before ſhut up ; 
for ſo the Lords Prophets were uſed by Ahab. And ſome think 
he was the Deliverer of that unwelcome Meſlage, chap. 20.41,42. 

27 And fay, Thus faith the king, Pur this fellow in 
the priſon, and feed him with bread of aflicqion, and 
with water of afiiction /, until I come in peace z. 

J i. e. With a very courſe and ſparing Diet, whereby he may be 
only ſupported to endure his Torment» See Der. 16: 3. 2 Chr: 18. 
26. 1a. 30; 20. t Until Ireturn in Triumph,which I doubt nor I 
ſhall do in ſpight of all his maliciousSuggeſtions to the contrary, & 
then I ſhall call him to an account for all his Lies & impudency. 

28 And Micaiah faid, If thou return ar all in peace, 
the LORD hath not ſpoken by me z. And he ſaid x, 
Hearken, O people every one of you. 

4 T acknowledge my ſelf to be an Impoſtor,and to deſerve Death. 

x 7, e. Micaiah, the Perſon laſt named,being aſſured of the Truth of ; 
his Prophecy, calls all the People to be Witneſles of it. 


29 So the king of Ifraet, and Jehoſhaphat the king 
of Judah y went up to Ramoth-pilead. {xl 
3 Who,though a good Man, yet was eaſily deceived in this mat- 
ter 5 partly, becauſe Micaiah was a Perſon unknown to him,and borh 

| he and the other Prophets pretending to. give their Anſwer in the 
Name of the Lord,it ſeemed hard to him to determine the Contro= | 
verlie, which only the Event could decide ; and therefore it 15 no 


wonder if he was over-born by the vait Diſproportion of 400 Pro- ; e | 
phers to one; and by his Relation, and Obligation, and afſctton ro 3 
- Aa's a 


Chap. xxw F 


Kt 


” Chap XXII. 


[ Or, when 
be was ro 
grſgu'ſe 
pimeif- 
gud inter 
into the 


baitel, 


+ Heb. i 
bu frmpli= 
cit). 

tf Heb, 
qoynts an1 
the breaſt « 

late. 

4 Heb. 
made ſick. 


+ Heb. 
aſcended. 


f Heb. 
boſom, 


7 Heb. 


came, 


y Chap; 


21:19, 


F 2 Chr. 


20; 31. 


ro Abab : and partly,becauſe the War was juſt and Lawful to recover | 
his own Rights, which the Syrian King unjuſtly detained from him. 


20 And the king of [ſrael ſaid unto Jehoſhaphar, || 1 
wi diſguiſe my ſcIf z,and enter into the battel, but put 
thou on thy robes «. And the king of Iſrael diſguiſed 
himſelf, and went into the battel. 


z 7, e. Put of my Imperial Habit, that the Syrians may not know | 


me,& dire& their main Force againſt me;which they will aſſuredly 
endeavour, as knowing that this War proceedeth from me and 1s 
likely ro die with me:and then thou ſhalt ſee that this Man 1s a falſe 
Propher,and I ſhall have the Succeſs which I deſire and expe&,not- 
withſtanding all his Preſages, # Thy Royal Robes : which thou 
mayſt do without any Danger, becauſe thou art not the Object 
either of the Syrians Rage, or of this falſe Propheſie- ; 

21 Bur the king of Syria commanded his thirty and 
two captains, that had rule over his charions b, ſaying, 
Fight neither with ſmall not great, ſave only with the 


king of Iſrael c. | 

b And the Men that fought from them, or with them, 2. e. his 
whole Army. Poflibly the Chariots and the whole Army were 
deſtributed into thirty two ſeveral parts & eachCaptain ruled thoſe 
Chariots and Soldiers attending upon them, which fell to his ſhare 
c This he ordered.either' in Policy,truly ſuppoſing this to the beſt 
way £2 put an end to the War: or, with Delign to take him Pri- 
ſoner, that thereby he might wipe out the ſtain of his own Capti- 
vity, and recover the Honour and Advantage which then he loſt: 
or rather, by the Power and Providence of God, which drſpoſc tn 
the Hearts of Kings as he pleaſeth ; and inclined them ro this 
courſe, that they might, though ignorantly, accompliſh his 
Word and Counſel. 


2 And it came to piſs, when the captains of the | 


chariots ſaw jehoſhaphar, that they ſaid, Surely it zs the 


king of Iſrael. And they turned aſide d to fight againlt , 


him and Jehoſhaphat cried out e. 

d They drew their Forces from their ſevera! quarters towards 
Tehoſhaphat- e To the Lord for Help, 2 Cor. 18. 31. ; 

33 Andit came to paſs, when the captains of the 
chariots perceived that it was not the king of 1ſrael f, 
and they turned back from purſuing him. 

f Which they eaſily perceived ; eith-r, by the Words uttered to 
God or them : or, by the difference of his Shape and Countenance 
from that of 4hab, which probab'y many of them very well knew. 

34 And a certain man drew a bow T ata venture g, 
and {mote the king of Iſrael between the Þ joints of the 
harneſs b : wherefore he ſaid unto the driver of his cha- 
riot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the hoſt z, 
for I am | wounded. 

g Heb. Þ his ſimplicity, 1. e. ignorantly, without care,or ckoiſe, 
or any defign,or thovght of reaching Avab. Or,according to his per- 
fe#ion, i.e. with his perfeQt and utmoſt ſtrength; which is mentioned 
as the reaſ»n why it pierced through the Joynts - of his Armour. 
h Where the ſeveral parts of his Armour are joyned together;which 
poſſibly were not then joyned with ſo much art and cloſeneſs as 
now they are. f Our of the midſt of the Hoſt where the Heat of the 
Battel was, into a lafer part of the Army. See the next Verſe. 

25 And the battel | increaſed & that day : and the 
king was ſtayed up / in his cha: iot againſt the Syrians, 
and died at even, and the blood'ran out of the wound, 
into the + midit of the chariot. 

k i. e. Grew hot and violent. I Was ſupported by Cordials, or by 
his Servants, that by his Preſence he might encourage his Soldiers 
to Fight more couragioufly,and that he might fee the event of the 
Battel. 

26 And there went a Proclamation throughout the 
hoſt »9,about the going down of the ſun, ſaying, Every 
man to his city, and every man to his own country ». * 

- Probably by Jehoſhaphat's Order, with the Conſent of the chief 
Captains of Iſ-ae/ ; and poſſiby with the permiſſion of the King of 
Syria, upon notice of Ahabs Death, which was the only thing at 
which he aimed, v- 31. » The King is dead, and the Battel end- 
ed : and therefore every man hath liberty to return to his own 
Houſe and private occaſions. 


37 © So the king died, and + was brought to Sama- 
ria, and they buried the king in Samaria. 

28 And one waſhed the chariot in the pool of Sama- 
ria,and the dogs licked up his blood o,and they waſhed 
his armour, according * unto the word of the LORD, 
which he ſpake p. 


o Together with the Water wherewith it was mixed. p Of which 
ſee the Note on chap: 21. 


195 

39 Now the reſt of the ads of Ahab,and all that he 
did, and the ivory houſe q which he made, and all the 
Cities that he built, are they not written in the book of 
the chronicles of the kings of Iſrael ? 
_ 9 Heb. the houſe of the tooth or teeth, to wit, of Elephants : See chap. 
10:18. Not that it was made wholly of ſolid Ivory, but becauſe the 
other materials were covered,or intermixed.or adorned with Ivory. 
Compare Amor 3: n5, 


49 S0 Ahab flept with his fathers, and Ahaziah his 
ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

41 JAnd *Jehoſhaphat the ſon of Aſa began to reign 
over Judah 1n the fourth year of Ahab r king of Iſrael. 


I. &F # FF WU 


» Who Reigned 22 Years; therefore he Reigned about 18 Years 
with Ahab. 

42 Jehoſhaphat was thirty and five years old when he 
b-gan to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years s 
ia Jeruſalem : and his mothers name was Azubah the 
daughter of Shilhi, 


s Part, by himſelf ; and partly,with his Sons whom he took int 
the Fellowſhip of his Kingdom. Of which,ſee more on 2 Ms. 


43 And he waiked in all the ways of Aſa his father z, 
he turned not aſide from it, doing that which was right 
in the eyes of the LORD : nevgrtheleſs,the high places 


were not taken away « ; for the people offered and 
burnt incenſe yet in the high places. 

t He took the ſame care for the government of his Kingdom;and 
eſpecially for the reformation of Religion, that ſa did : of whom 
ſce Chap, 15.11- u ObjeF. It is ſaid, he did take them away, 2 Chren. 
17.6. Anſw. He took away thoſe which were ere&ed to Idols; of 
which,he ſeems to ſpeak there, becauſe the high places are there joined 
with Groves, which were generally ere&ed to ols, and not ro the 
True God, as will appear to any one that ſhall compare all the 
Sc:iptures where groves are mentioned: but he could not take away 
thoſe which were ere&ed to the true God; of which, this place 
manifeſtly ſpeaks;as alſo that parallel place, Kings 15.14.where ſee 
the notes- Or, he took them away, but not fully ; or not in the 
very beginning of his Reign. 

_ 44 And Jehothapnat made peace with the king of 

racl Xx. 


x With Ahab firſt,& then with his Son. T his is noted as a Blemiſh 
: in his Government,2 Chron, 19. 2. and proved of moſt miſchievous 
Conſequence to Jehoſbaphats Pofterity;as we thall ſee 2 K:ng.9.and 10, 

45 Now the relt of the acts of Jehoſhaphat, and his 
might that he ſhewed, and how he warred,are they not 
, written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of 
| Judah y ? 

y Whence the moſt memorable Paſſages were T I 
that Canonical Book of the Chronicles. ;- OT INN 

45 And the remnant of the Sodomites z which re- 


mained in the days of his father Aſa, he took out of 
the land. 


z Of whom ſee Der. 23. 17. 1 King. 14. 24 and 15. 12. 
£ 47 There was then no king in Edom : a deputy « was 

ing. 

a Sent,and ſet over them by the Kings of Judab,from the time of 
David, 2 Sam. $* 14. until the days of Jehoram, 2 Chron. 21. 8. 
© 48 Jehothaphat || made ſhips 6 of Tharſhith c ro go to 
Ophir « for gold: but they went not ; for the ſhips were 
broken at Ezion-geber e. 

b As 1t is expreſſed, 2 Chron. 20. 36. Or,there were to Jehoſhaphat 
ten ſhips ; the Ellipſis of the Verb Subſtantive,and of the Prefix Lamed, 
being frequent in the Hebrew Language. Some render the Words, 
he made ten ſhips ; ſo joining both Texts together, and out of both 
compleating the ſence c Either, x Of the Sea, as this Word is 
thought ſometimes to be uſed. Or,rather 2.70 go zo Tarſh:ſb,( as it is 
expreſſed, 2 Chron, 20:36.) and thence to Ophir,as it here follows. See 
more on 1 Kings 10.22: d Of which, See 1 Kirgrg. 28: e Which 
was in Edom, and conſequently in fehoſhaphats Territories. 

49 Then faid Ahaziih the fon of Ahab unto Jehoſha- 
phat,Ler my ſervants go with thy ſervants in the ſhips, 
but Jehoſhaphar wouid nor f. 

f 06j. Ir is faid,that he did joyn with Ahbaziah herein, 2 Chron.20« 
35, 36 Anſw.That was before this time,& before the Ships were bro- 
ken ; for the breaking of the Ships mentioned here, wer. 48. is noted 
to be the Effe& of his Singin joyning with Ahaziah,and. of the Pro« 
phecy conſequent upon it, 2 Chren.20.37. And good Jehoſhaphat be= 
ing warned & chaſtiſed by God for this ſin, would not be perſwaded 
co repeat it ; whereby he ſhewed the ſincerity of his Repentance. 

5o And Jehoſhaphat ſlept with his Fathers, and was 
burried with his fathers in the city of David his Father: 
and Jehoram his ſon reigned in his ſtead, 

51 \ Ahaziah the fon of Ahab began to reign over 
[ſrael in Samaria the ſeventeenth year of Jehoſhaphat g 


king of Judah, and reigned two years þ over Iſrael. 
£ By comparing this Verſe with wer. 41: it appears, that 4hazih 
was made King by his Father, and Reigned inConjunQion with him 
a year or two before Ahabs Death,and as long after it ; even as Je- 
horam the ſon of Jehoſhaphat was made King by his Father in his 
Life-time, as we ſhall ſee hereafter ; which poſſibly was done in 
— with Ahabs deſire upon Marriage of his Daughter to 
Jehoſbaphats Son ; and it may be Ahab, to induce and incourage him 
to do ſo, gave him an Example of it, and made his Son his Fartner 
in the Kingdom. b Either after his Fathers Death : or one be- 
fore it, and another afrer it. 
52 And he did evil in the fight of the LORD, and 
walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his 


mother, and in the way of Jeroboam 5 the ſon of Ne- 
bat, who made Irael to fin. 
i; Which Clauſe ſeems here added,to fhew,how little the Autho- 


rity and Example of Parents, or Anceſtors, is to be valued, where 
it 15 oppoſed to the Will and Word of God. 


53 For he ſaved Baal, and wortbipped him, * and 
provoked to anger the LORD God of lirael, according 
to all that his father had done. 


» — 


IT, KINGS. 


3L 2 


Chap. 


d.v.4! 


4 


{| Or, ha# 
ten ſhips. 


* By ſs dos 
ing, 


4 
.* ol 
- 


, hap: 
T " 
ſ 


ge - _ 
XEZICETES 


IE IE I EEE 


| + Heb. 


CHAF.L 


.þ vebelleth againſt Iſrael, x. Ahaziah being ſick ſendeth to Baalet- 

w « Elijah ya his Death, 1————4- Ahazinh hearing i, 

ſendeth twice Captains of 50, to bring Elijah to him : Upon whom - 

bringeth fire from Heaven, 5==— 12. The third Captam entreatet! 

'* Elviah:: Who encouraged by an Angel, goeth and telleth the King of his 
* Death, 13——16+ Jehoram ſueceedeth him, 17 ——= 18. 


HEN Moab 4 rebelled againſt Iſrael, * after the 


"KL death of Ahab. 

z Which had been ſubdued by David, 2 Sam: 8: 2. as Edo was; 
and upon the diviſion of this Kingdom into two, Moab was adjoined 
to that of 1el, and Edom to that of Judah, each to thar Kingdom 
upon which it bordered. And "when the Kingdoms of [*ael and 
Judah were weak and forſaken by God,they rook that opportumty 
to Revolt from them 3 Moab here, and Edom a little afrer it. 


2 And Ahaziah fell down through a latteſs in his up- 
per chamber 4 that was 1n Samaria,and was ſick,and he 


{ent meſſengers, and ſaid unto them, Go, inquire of 


Baal-zebub c the god of Ekron, whether I ſhall || reco- 


| Iive.SoGr- ver of this diſeaſe ? 


b Tn which, the Latteſs might be left ro convey Light into the 
lower Room. Which if it now ſeem abſurd to be in a Kings Palace. 


KINGS 


2 Which defire did not proceed from a carnal and malicious 
Paſſion ; but from a pure zeal, to vindicate Gods Name and Hoe 
nour, Which was ſo horribly abuſed ; and from the motion of 
Gods Spirit ; as is evident from Gods miraculous Anſwer to his 
deſire. And therefore Chriſt doth not condemn this Fatt of &/as, 
but only reproves his Diſciples for their perverſe imitation of it, 
from another Spirit and Principle, and in a more unſeaſonable 
time, Luke 9: 54, $5 ; . 

11 Again alſo he ſent unto him another Captain of 
fifty, with his fifty : and he anſwered and faid unto 
him, O man of God, 'Thus hath the king ſaid, Come 
down quickly ». 

» Wherein he diſcovers more Petulancy and Impudence than 
the former ; and ſhews, how little he was moved or affrighted by 
the former Example. LI 

12 And Elijah anſwered and ſaid unto them, If I be 
a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and 
conſume thee and thy fafty. And the fire of God came 
down from heaven, and conſumed him and his fifty. 

13 © And he ſent again a captain of the third fifty, 
with his fifty : and the third captain of fifty went up, 


Chap. Il, 


and came and fell on his knees before Elijah,and || be- || pq, 
"ught him o and ſaid unto him, O man of God, I pray owes. 
thee, let my life, and the life of theſe fifty thy ſervants | Heb. 


Li 
* 
il p 
mw 


we muſt not think it was ſo then, when the World was not arrived 
to that height of Curioſity and Art, in which now it 15. But the 


Words may be, and are by ſome rendred,rhrough rhe Ba!tlements ( or proyed 


b. 
| The bed 
| whither 
| thou art 


| gon? up, 


| 9267 com? 


ir . 


' hat 
was the 


the wan? 


| zhou ſhalt - 6, 29, Deut. 18: 10. 


he Latteſs in the Battlements) of the Roof of the Houſe. Wherc 
be ocſ aca cr after the manner, and then ſtanding and look- 
ing through, and leaning upon this Latteſs, which was grown 1n- 
firm, it brook, and he fell down into the Court or Garden belong- 
"ing to the Houſe. c Properly, the God of Flies. An Idol ſo called, 
becauſe it was falſly ſuppoſed to deliver thoſe People from Flics, 
which were both vexatious and hurtful to them : as Jupiter and Her= 
- cules were called by a like name among the Grecians,for the ſame rea- 
"fon, And it is evident, both from Sacred and Profane Hiſtories, 
hat the Idol- gods, being conſulted by the Heathens,did ſomerimes 
{hae Gods Permiſſion, and Juſt Judgment, give them Anſwers; 
- though they were arqpives 6 obſerved, even by the Heathens them- 
ſelves, to be dark and doubtful. 


© 2 But the Angel of the LORD faid unto Elijah the 
'Tilbbire, Ariſe, go up to meet the Meſſengers of the 
king of Samaria, and ſay unto them, 7: ir not becauſc 


there. is not a God in Iſrael d, that ye go to inquire of 


Baal-zebub the God of Ekron ? 


4 Doſt thou not by this ation caſt contempt upon the Gold of 


of Ifrael, as if he were either ignorant of the Event of thy Diſeaſe, 
or unable to give thee any Relief; and as if Baal-z:bub had more 
Skill and Power than he ? 

4 Now therefore e thus ſaith the LORD, || Thou ſhalt 
not come down from that bed on which thou art gone 
up, but ſhalt ſurely die. And Elijah departed f. 

e For this was a very hainous Crime,to deny the PertcEtions of 
God, and to transfer them to an Idol. See Lev:t, 19: 3t: and 20. 
f The Meſſengers not daring to Apprehend 
him, as ſuſpe&ing him ro be more than Man, becauſc he knew the 


| cown from ſecret Meſſage which the king delivered to them in his Bed-Cham- 


ber, 
5 T And when the meſſengers turned back unto him, 
he ſaid unto them, Why are ye now turned back g ? 


& Before you have been at Ekron : which he eaſily knew by their 
quick return- 


6 And they ſaid unto him, There came a man up to 
meet us,and faid unto us, Go, turn again unto the king 
that ſent you,and ſay unto him, Thus fairh the LORD, 
Is it not becauſe there is not a God in Iſrael, r1hat thou 
ſendeſt to irquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron ? 
therefore thou ſhalt not come down from that bed on 
which thou haſt gone up, but ſhalt ſurely die. 

7 And he ſaid unto them, || What manner of man 
was he which came up to meet you, and told you theſe 


manner of words ? 


8 And they anſwered him, He was an haicy man þ, 
and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins z : and 
he {41d, It is Elijah the Tiſhbite. 

h Either, 1+ As to his'Body ; the hair of his Head and Berad being 
through negle& grown long,and ſpread over much of his Face. Or 
rather, 2. Asto his outward Garment, which was rough and hairy, 
ſuch as were ſometimes worn by Eminent Perſons in Greece,in anci- 
cnt Times ; and were the proper Habit of the Prophets. See 1ſa_ 
20:2. Zech: 33:4. Mat:3:4. Heb: 11:37- 8 As Jekn the Baptiſt alſo had ; 
Mat: 3: 4. That by his very outward Habit, he might repreſent 
Elias, in whole Spirit and Power he came. 

9 Then the king ſent unto him a captain of fifty, with 


his fifty, and he weat up to him, ( and behold, he fat on 


the top of an hill ) and he ſpake unto him, Thou man of 


God &, the king hath ſaid, Come down /. 

k So he calls him in way of Scorn and Contempt ; q. d- Thou 
that vaunteſr, as if thou waſt more than a meer Man. 7 The King 
commands thee to come to him : which if thou refuſeſt, I am 
here to carry thee to him by Force. 

Io And Elijah anſwered and ſaid unto the captain of 


fifty, If I be a man of Ged, then let fire come down 


_from heaven, and conſume thee and thy fifty », And 
there came down fire from heaven, and conſumed him, 


and his fifry, x 


-- 


be precious in thy ſight. 


o Expreſſing both Reverence to his Perſon, and a Belief of his ©” bim. 


Power, and a Dread of God's Judgments. 

14 Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and 
burnt up the two captains of the former fifties, with 
their fifties : therefore let my life now be precious in 
thy fight. 

15 And the Angel of the LORD ſaid unto Elijah, 
Go down with him, be not afraid of him. And he a- 
roſe, and went down with him unto the king p. 


? Not fearing the rage of the King, nor of Jezebel, nor of all 
their Forces: Wherein he gives an eminent Example of his Faith 
and Obedience ; and withal, of his Growth in Grace ſince that 
time that he fled for fear of Jez:bel, 1 Kings 19: 3. 


16 And he ſaid unto him q, Thus ſaith the LORD, 
Foraſmuch as thou haſt ſent meſſengers to inquire of 
Baal-zebub the God of Ekron, (3s i: not becauſe there js 
no God in Ifrael to enquire of his word ? ) therefore 
thou ſhalt not come down off that bed on which thou 
art gone up, but ſhalt ſurely die. 

q To his very Face. Nor durſt the King lay hands upon him, 
being daunted with the Prophets preſence,and great courage, and 
confidence ; and affrighted by the late dreadful Evidence of his 
Power with God and over Man ; and withal, ſtruck with a divine 


and extraordinary Terror. 


17 4 So hedied according to the word of the LORD 
which Elijah had ſpoken :and Jehoram » reigned in his 
ſtead, in the ſecond year of Jehoram the ſon of Jeho- 
ſhaphar king of Judah s, becauſe he had no ſon. 

r His Brother, Chap. 3. 1. for hz had no ſon to ſucceed him, as it 
here follows.s Other Paſſages of Scripture ſeem ro claſh with this, 
as that Ahazia/,, who reigned but two years, began his reign in Jeho= 
ſhaphar's ſeventeenth vear, 1 Kings 22: 51- and therefore this Fehoran 
muſt begin his Reign in Jchoſhaphar's Ninteenth Yearzand therefore 
before the Reign ot Jehwam, jenoſhz»bat's Son ; and that Jehoram the 


ſon of Jehoſhaphar began to reign in the fifth year of Joram, Ahab's ſon, 
«2 Kings: 8: 16 Anſw, Thele difficulties are ecafily reſolved by this 
| conſideration, That it was an utual Praftiſe among Kings in former 


Ages,to make their Sons ſometimes their Viceroys and Deputies in 
the Adminiſtration of the Kingdom ; and ſometimes formally Kings 
in ConjunSion with themſe]ves, and whilſt they lived ; whereof 
chere are inſtances both in Profane Hiſtory, among the Perſims, 
Greceks,and Romans,and in the Sacred Scripture,as in David; 1 Chron. 
23. 1. and 29: 22+ in Uzzi/ah, 2 Chron: 26: 21. ( and to come cloſe 
co the point ) in Jehoſbaphat, 2 Kings 8. 16. who in his Seventeenth» 
Year when he went to 4hab, and with him to Ramoth-Gllead, ap- 
pointed tis Son Jchram his Vice>roy, and ( in caſe of his Death) 
is Succefſor. In the ſecond year from that time, when Jehoram 
was thus made Vice King in his Fathers ſtead and abſence : this; 


, . 3 » - b 
Jehoram, Ahab's fon, began to Reign £ and in the fijch year of the © 


reign of this Joram ſoz of 4:a5, which was about the Twenty fourt!r 
year of Jehoſhaphar's Reign Jehoram the jon of Jehoſhaphat was formal- 
'y made King of Judah, together with his Father; or whileſt Jehoſha- 
phat lived, and was king of Ja4ah alſo. And fo all the places agree. 
To which ſome add,thar this Verſe, or this part of it, wherein the 
difficulty conſiſts, is wanting in ſome ar.cient Copies, and is orit= 
ted by* the LXX Interpreters ; which is far more prudent and Pious 
to granr, than upon ſuch Chronological difficulties to queſtion 
the Truth and Divinity of the Holy Scriptures. 

18 Now the ret of the acts of Ahaziah, which {- 


did, are they r ot written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of 1ſrae] ? 


; | CHAP. II. 
Eljah taking bis leave of Eliſha, with hu mantle divideth Jordan, rw 8, 
And granting Eliſha his requeft 6n Condition, is taken up by a fiery Chas 


riot into heaven, 9 11. Eliſha dividing Jordan with Elijahs 
Mantle, is acknowledged his Succeſſor, 12 - 18. He with Salt 


healeth the Waters at Jericho, 19 - 22. Children mock him, he 
Curſeth them : and they are devoured by two Bears, 23 2Fs 


A*N D it came to paſs, when the LORD would take 
= A up Elijah into heaven by a whiulwind, that Elijal 


| 


went with Eliſha from Gilgal, 


FH 
in 
or 0 
074'1 


&c1 


"© 


2) 
Joh 


"c 


*0 
l}, 


Tetup. 17: 


* ; Sam 
;. 26. 


'$6 Exod; 
IG 21; 
Jolk:3:1 5* 


f Heb. 
Thu haft 
ar 


in uiking, 


V Chap: 
6, wg 


, Chap. 
(3. 14, 


2 And Elijah ſaid unto Eliſha, Tarry here, I pray 
thee 2 : for the LORD hath fent me to Bethe! < and 
Eliſha ſaid unto him, 4s the LORD liveth, and * as thy 
ſoul liveth, I will not leave thee. 50 they went down 


co Bethel . | | 

s This he deſires, Either, r. That he beiag lefr alone,mi oht betrer 
prepare himſelf for his great Change. Or, 2. Our of his Humility 
and Modeſty : he deſired no Wirneſles of his Glorious Remoyval.and 
no Fame and Glory fromit. - Or, 3. Out of Indulgence to E1yþa, 
that he might nor be overwhelmed with Griefat ſo ſad a ſight. Or, 
4. That he might try his Love, and whet his Deſire to accompany 
him ; it being highly convenient for Gods Honour, and the Church's 

ood, ( which E5ab ſought above all things ) that there ſhould be 
Witneſſes of ſo glorious a Tranſlation. 6 Which was truth, bur 
not the whole truth : for he was to go a far longer Journey. But he 
was firſt to go to Bethel, as ailo to Fericho, to the Schoo!s of the 
Prophets there, that he might comfort, and ſtrengthen their hearts 
in Gods Work, and give them his laſt and dying Counſlels. 

And the ſons of the prophets that were at Bethel 
came forth to Eliſha, and ſaid unto him, Knoweſt thou 
that the LORD will take away thy maſter c from thy 
head d to day? and he ſaid, Yea, I know it ; hold you 
your peace e. | 

c This was revealed to ſome of the Sans of the Prophets, and by 
them to the whole Colledge. 4 Heb. from above thy head : Which 
Phraſe may reſpeR, either, 1. The manner of fitting in Schools, where 
the Scholar far at his Maſters feet, Deut; 33: 3: 48s 22.3. Or, 2. 
The manner of El:jahs Tranſlation, which was to be by a Power 
ſent from Heaven, to take him up thither. e Do not aggravate my 
oricf, nor divert me with any unſeaſorable Diſcourſes : that I may 
digeſt my Sorrow, and prepare my 1eIf for ſo great a Stroke, and 
diligently attend all my Maſters ſteps, leſt he be inarched away from 
me whilſt I am talking with you ; and thatI may beg and obrain 
ſome great Bleſſing from him, before his departure- 

4 And Elijah ſaid unto him, Eliſha, carry here, I pray 
thee : for the LORD hath ſent me to Jericho : and he 
faid, 4s the LORD liveth, and as thy foul liveth, I will 
not leave thee. Sothey came toJericho. 

5 And the ſons of the prophets that were at Jericho, 
came to Eliſha, and ſaid unto him, Knowe ſt thou that the 
LORD will take away thy Maſter from thy head today ? 
And he anſwered, Yea, I know it ; hold you your peace 

6 And Elijah ſaid unto him, Tarry, I pray thee here: 
for the LORD hath ſent me roJordan. And he ſaid, as 
the LORD liveth, and as thy ſoul liveth, I will not 
leave thee. And they ewo went on. 

7 And fifty men of the ſons of the prophets went and 


ſtood || to view f afar off: and they two ſtood by Jordan. 

f To obſerve this grear Event, Eijahs Tranſlation to Heaven, 
which they expeQted every moment, now when he had taken his 
laſt farewell of all the Prophets: and whereof they deſired to be 
SpeRators, not ſo much to fatisfie their own Curiolity, asthat they 
might be Witneiles of it to others. Ss 

8 And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapt it together, 
and ſmore the waters, and * they were divided bsther 
and thither, ſo that they two went over on dry ground. 

9 A And itcame to paſs when they were gone over, 
that Elijah ſaid unto Eliſha, ask what I ihall do for thee, 
before I be taken away from thee. And Eliſha faid, 1 
pray thee, let a double portion of thy Spirit g be upon 
me. 

g Either, r. Double to what is in thee. Which it ſeemsnot pro- 
bable, that he had confidence either to ask, or to expe&t. Or, 
rather 2. Double to what the rs{t of the Sons of the Prophets may 
receive at thy Requeſt upon this occaſion. He alludes ro the double 
portion of the Firſt-born, Dcut: 21; 175 But though E!.jþs delired 
nomore, yer God gave him more than he defired or expetted ; and 
he ſeems to have had a greater portion of the Prophetical and 
Miraculous Gift of Gods Spirit, than E!7jah had. ; 

10 And he ſaid, ||'Chou haſt asked a hard thing +: 
nevertheleſs, if thouſeeitme when I am taken trom thee, it 
ſhall beſo unto thee : bur if not, it {hall not be ſo 5. 

h i:e. A rare and fingular Blefling, which I cannot promiſe thee, 
which only God can give ; and he gives it only when, and to whom 
ke pleaſeth. #- This Sign he propoled, not withour theinſtinQand 
dire&tion of Gods Spirit, that hereby he might engage him more 
earneſtly to wair, and more fervently to pray for this mercy, _ 

11 And itcame to paſs as they (till went on and talk- 
ed, that behold rhere appeared a * chariot of fire, and 
horſes of fire &, and parted them both afunder, and Elijah 
went up by a whirlwind into Heaven /. 

k A bright Cloud form<d into ſuch alikeneſs, managed by Holy 
and Blef!ed Angels ſent from Ilcaven to condutt him thither. / Inco 
the Thizd Heaven, being in the way ſo transformed and changed, 
as might make him mect to be admitted into thoſe blefied Manitons, 


12 T And Elitha ſaw #t, and cried, * My father, my 
father #, the chariot of Iſrael, and the horſemen there- 
of y, And heſawhim no more : and he took hold of 
his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces, 

. m So he calls him foc his Fatherly AﬀeCQtion ro him, and for his 
Fatherly Authority which by his Office he had over him, in which 
reſpeCt the Scholars of the Prophets are called their Sons, as 1 Kings 
20: 35- Who by thy Example, and Counſels, and Prayers, and 
Power with God, didſt more for the Defence and Preſervation of 
Iſrael, than all their Chariots and Horſes, or other Warlike Provi- 


lions. The Expreflion alludes to the form of Chariots and Horſes 
which be had ſcen» 


itL KK TAS 


Chap. Ty 
13 He took vp ziſo the mantle of Elijah, that fell | 
from him o, and went back and ſtood by the | bank of + Heb. | 
Jordan. : FE... ? 
o God ſo ordering it for Elijba's Comfort, and the: ftrengthning 
of his Faith, as a Pledge, that together with Elijahs Mantle, his 
Othce and Spirit ſhould reſt upon him. = 
14 And he cook the mantle of Elijah, that fell from 
him, and ſmote the waters, and ſaid, Where zs the 
LORD God of Elijah p ? and when he had ſmitten the 
waters, they parted q lither and thither ; and Eliſha 
went Over. | | 
p Who at Eltjahs Requeſt divided theſe Waters, and is as able to 4 
do it again : and hath given me his Spirit, and Office, and therefore x Wl 
I humbly beg, and confidently expect his Afﬀiſtance in this matter. 
q Bur theſe Words after | Where is the God of Elijah? | are by many 
rendred otherwiſe, and that agreeably to the Hebrew, even himſelf 2 
or, even the ſame ? ( which words they join with the former, as art it 
Emphatical Addition, or Repetition, which 1s uſual in fervent —_ 
Prayers. But they may be rendred withour an Interrogation, thus, $ 
Surely he is, to wir, here preſent. and ready to help me. Or, ſurely 
he.is the ſame ; to wit, to me, that he was to Elijah, as able and 
willing to work for me, as for Eljah, Then the following words 
they render, (as they are in the Hebrew) and he ſmote the water, and it 
was divided. By which Repetition it may ſeem, that he ſmote it 
twice, and that at the firſt ſmiting,. the Succeſs did not anſwer his 
Deſire and ExpeQtation. Which God fo ordered, partly to keep hint 
in a modeſt and humble ſenſe of his own Inſufficiency, that he 
might not be puffed up with the great Gifrs which he had now 
received ; Compare 2 Yor: 12. 7, And partly, to ſtir him up toa 
more lively Exerciſe of Faith and Prayer, which followed Gods 
Denial or Suſpenſion of his Help, as it is here expreſſed ; which alfa 
was attended with defired- Succeſs. _ 8 
15 And when the fons of the prophets which were * to * Vert 74 i 
view atJericho, ſaw him r, they faid s, The ſpirit of \ 
Elijah doth reſt on Eliſha. And they came to meet him, 
and bowed themſelves to the ground before him 5. 
r Or, as 1t is in the Hebrew, And the ſons of the Prophets who lived in 
Jericho, jaw h1m over-againft them, from ſome Hill where they ſtood 
at a convenient diſtance, to obſerve the Event, wv 7. 5 Heb. and they 
Jaid, either by Revelation 3 or rather, by the viſible EffeRs of it 
which they ſaw. s Thereby teſtifying their Reverence and Subje&ion 
ro him as El4ja/s Succetſor, and their Maſter and Teacher. 
16 Q Andthey ſaid unto hini, Behold now, there be 
with thy ſervants fifty f ſtrong men 7, let them go, we + Heb? 
pray thee, and ſeekchy maſter, leſt peradventure * the ſos of 
{pirit the LORD hath taken him up, and caſt him ftrengch, 
upon F fome mountain, or into fome valley «. And many 
he ſaid, Ye ſhall not ſend. Fs 


AR:8:393 
rt Able totake ſuch a Journey « They thought, either, r- That + Hep? 


God had not finally taken him away from them, bur only for a gy- of the 
time ; comp- 1 Kings 18; 12; which they heartily defired, and there- mountains 
fore eaſily believed 3 or thar God had only taken away his Soul, 
and that his Body was caſt down into ſome place, which they deſired 
to ſeek, that they might give it an honourable Burial. 

17 And when they urged him, till he was aſhamed x, 
he faid, Send. They ſent therefore fifty men, and they 
fought three days, but found him no:. | 

x 1-e. 'Towit, to deny them any longer, leſt they ſhould think his 
denial proceeded from a neglett of his Maſtez, or a contempt of 
the Sons of the Prophets, cr a ſecret Gontent he took in his Maſters 
Lofs, that he might have his Honour and Power. Or, til they were 
aſhamed, becauſe he did to ofr, and 1o obſtinately deny their Requeſt. 

18 And when rthey came again to him( for he tarried 


at Jericho ) he {aid unto them, Did I not ſay untoyou, 
Go not ? 


19 4 And the men of the city ſaid unto Eliſha, Be- 
hoid, I pray thee, che fituation of this city x pleaſant, 
as my lord ſeeth : but the water is naught, and the 
ground f barren y. _ NE 

y Either it was ſo originally, at leaſt, as to that part of the City Ly Heb. 
where the Colledge of the Prophets was ; for it is not neceſſary to cauſing #® 
underſtand this of the whole Territory : ory it became ſo from the miſcarry. 
Curſe of God inflifted upon it, either when 7ojbua firſt took it ; or 
afterwards, when Hel rebuilt ir. Howloever, upon the Prophers' 
Care, it grew exceeding fruitful, and therefore 15 commended for 
irs Fertility by later Writers. | 

20 And he faid, Bring me a new cruſe x, and pus 
falt cherein a. And they brought it to him. | 

z Partly, thar there might be no ground of Suſpicion, that the 
Cure was wrought by any natural Vertue of any thing which was, 
or had been in the Crute before, but only by Gods Power : and 
partly, that there might be no Legal Pollution init which mighe 
offend God, and hinder his MiracuJous Operation by it. . # A moſt 
improper Remedy; for Salt naturally makes Waters brackiſh, and 
Lands barren. Hereby therefore he would ſhew, Thar this was 
efccted tolely by the Divine Power, which could work either 
without means, Or againſt them. 

21 Andhe went forth untothe ſpring ofthe waters, 
and caſt the ſalt inthereb,and ſaid, Thus ſaiththe LORD, 
I have healed theſe warers : there ſhall not be from 
tnence any more death c, or barren land. 


b Which was in it {elf idle and ineffeQual, conſidering both the 
quality of Salt,and the ſmall quantity of it,and the place where it was 
put; the Fountain which quickly works out any thing which is put 
into It ; Sec Lev 11: 36, but was only uted as a {ign of Gods Preſence 
and Power, which did the thing ; compare £x2d:15. 25: 2 Kings 4:41: 
and 6: 6; c1.e. Hurt, or Danger, as dearh is oft a:cd, ( as 2 Cor: 115 
23- ) to Men or Beaits by arinking of it, a fo-merly. 


Mi | 


22 SOthe waters were hcaledunto t nis day, according. 
to the ſaying of Eliſha which he ſpake . 


31. 3 ” if 


} Heb. 
at 


Ke 
le” Kings 
16.31, 32, 


ap. Il. 


23 | And he went up from thenee unto Bethel d : 
and as he was going up by the way, there came forth 
little children e out of the city f, and mocked him g, and 
ſaid unto him, Go up &, thou bald-head , go up thou 
bald-head &. 


4 To the other School or Colledge of Prophets, to inform them 
of El:jaks tranſlation, and his Succeſhon into therſame Office ; and to 
dire and comfort, and ftabliſh them, as he ſaw occaſion, e Or, 
children ; or, young men : as. this Hebrew word oft ſignifies, as Gen: 22: 
5, 12: and 41: 12: 2 Chron: 13: 7; Iſa- 11: 6. Itis more than probable 
they were old enough to diſcern between Good and Evil, as their 
Expreſſion ſheweth. f Bethel, which was the Mother-City of Ido- 
larry, 1 Kings 12: 28, 29; Hoſt 4 15: and 5:8. where rhe Prophets 

laated themſelves, that they might bear witneſs againſt it, and 

;ifſuade the people from itz though, it ſeems, they had but ſmall 
ſucceſs there. & With great petulancy and vehemency , as the 
Conjugation of the Hebrew Verb ſignifies; deriding both his Perſon 
and Miniſtry. and that from a prophane Contempr of the True 
Religion, and apaſſionate Love to that ldolatry which they knew he 
oppoſed. h Goupinto Heaven, whather thou pretendeſt that Elijah 
is gone. Why didſt not thou accompany thy Friend and Maſter to 
Heaven ? O that the ſame Spirit would take thee up alſo, thatthou 
mighteſt not.trouble us nor out 1ſrael, as Elijah did ! i So they mock 
his naturs] Infirmity, which is a great Sin. & The repetition ſhews 
their Heartineſs and Earneſtneſs, that it was no ſudden nor raſh flip 
of their Tongue, bur a Scoff proceeding from a rooted Impiety and 
Hatred of God and his Prophets» 

24 And he turned back, and looked on them, and 


curſed them / in the name of the LORD mw : and there 
came forth two ſhe-bears » out of the wood, and tare 


forty and two children o of them. 

I Nor was this Puniſhment too great for the Offence, if it be 
conſidered, that theſe Chiidren were grown up to ſome maturity ; 
( See on v. 23- ) that their mocking proceeded from a great mal:- 
gnity ofmind againſt God ; that they mocked not only a man, and 
an ancient man, whoſe very Age commanded reverence ; and a 
Prophet ; but even God himſelf, and that moſt admirable and glorious 
Work of God, the aſſumption of Elijah into Heaven. which makes 
it in ſome degree reſemble the Sin againſt the Holy Ghoſt ; that they 
might be guilry of many other hainous Crimes, which God and the 
Prophet knew ; and were guilty of Idolatry, which by Gods Law 
deſerved Death 3 that the Idolatrous Parents were puniſhed in their 
Children ; and that, if any of theſe Children were'more innocent and 
ignorant of what they ſaid, God might have mercy upon their Souls, 
and then this Death was nor a Miſery, but a real Blefling to them, 
that they.were taken away from that wicked and idolatrous Education 
which was molt likely to expoſe them not only to Temporal, but 
to an Ercrnal Deſtruftion- mm Not from any carnal or revengetul 
Paſſion, but |y the morion of Gods Spirit, and by Gods Command 
and Commiſſion, as appears by Gods concurrence with him. Which 
God did, partly, for the terror and caution of all other Idolaters 
and prophane perſons who abounded in that place : partly, to vindi- 
cate rhe Honour, and maintain the Authority of his Prophets; and 

articularly, of Eliſhs, now eſpecially inthe beginning of his Sacred 
Miniſtry. And this did beget ſuch a Confidence in Eljba. that he 
durſt venture to go into Bethel after this was done ; and ſucha teror 
in the Berhelices, that they durſt not avenge themſelves of him. » 
Poſlibly robbed their Whelps, and therefore more fierce. Prov: 17:12: 
Hoj 13: 8. but certainly a&ed by an extraordinary Fury. which God 
raiied in them for this purpoſe. o This Hebrew word ſignifies not 
only young Children, but thoſe alſo who are grown up to maturity, 
as ven: 32: 22: and 34. 4: and 37; 30; Ruth 1. 5. 
25 And he went from thence to mount carmel p, and 
from thence he returnedto Samaria 9g. 

p Partly, to decline the Fury of the people of Bethel: partly, that 
he might retire himſelf from Men, and converſe more freely with 
Ged. and ſo fit himſelf more for the diſcharge of his Employment : 
and partly, that he might viſit the Sons of the Prophets who lived 
in that place, or nearit. q By the direQtion of Gods Spirit for the 
Service which he did, chap, 3. 11. &Cc, 


C H A*'P. IIL 
*choram followeth the Sin of Jeroboam : He with Jehoſhaphat and the King 
of Eaom goeth to Battel againft Moab, 1= 81 They in Difireſs for Water 
obtain it by Eliſha, and a Promiſe of Viftory, 9 === 20, The Moabites 
decerved by the Colour of the Water, coming as to Spoil, are overcome, 

20 25. Fhe King of Moab, by ſacrificing his Eldeft Son raiſeth the 

Stege, 26, 27. . 

Nt Jehoram the ſon of Ahab began to reign over 
Iſrael in Samaria, the eighteenth year of Jehoſha- 
phac king of Judah a, and reigned twelve years. 

# Queſt. How canthis be true, when 4haziah, Jehorams Predeceſlor, 
who Reigned two Years, began his Reign in Jehoſbaphats 17th Year, 
1 Kings 22.51. ? Anſ. Either, Ahaziah Reigned the greateſt part of 
two Years, to wit. of the 17th and 18th Years of Jehyhaphat. ( parts 
of Years being oft called Years in the computation of Times, both 
in Scripture and other Authors) and Jehoram began his Reign towards 
the end of his 18th Year : or, Ahaz:1ah Reigned part of this two 
Years with his Father, and the reſt afrer him. 

2 And hewroughtevilin the fight of the LORD, but 
not like his father, and like his mother : for he put away 


the f image of Baal, * that his father had made b. 

b Not from any Principle of Conſcience ( for that would have 
reached the Calves alſo - ) but either, becauſe he was ſtartled at the 
dreadful Judgments of God inflited upon his Father and Brother 
for Baal-worſhip : or, becauſe he needed Gods help to ſubdue the 
Moabites, which he knew Baal could not do: or, to gratifie Jehoſbaphatr, 
whoſe help he meant to crave, which he knew he ſhould never 
obtain without this : and for this reaſon, it ſeems, Jezebel was wil- 


' ling to conmave at it, as a trick of State. 


Nevertheleſs, he cleaved unto the ſins of Jeroboam 
c the ſon of Nebat, which made Iſrael to ſin; he de- 


parced not therefrom. 
«> e- The worlbip of the Calves: which all the Kings of 1ae/ 


= EN & 8 


kept up as a Wall of Partitioh between their Subjefs and thoſe of 


Judah. Thus he ſhews that his Religion was over-ruled by his 


Intereſt and Policy. 
4 4 And Meſha king of Moab was a ſheep-maſter 4, 
andrendred unto the king of Iſraelan hundred thouſand 


lambs, and an hundred thouſand rams, with the woo. 


a4 A Man of great Wealth ( which in thoſe times and places 
conſiſted much in Cattel ) which enabled and emboldned him to 
Rebel againſt his Soveraign Lord. 

' F But it came topalſs, when Ahab was dead, that the 
king of Moab rebelled e againſt the king of Iſrael. 

e See of this chap 1: 1. Tt is here repeated to make way for the 
following Story. Ahaziah did not attempt the recovery of Moab; 
either, becauſe he was a Man of a low Spirit and Courage : or, 
becauſe his Sickneſs, or the ſhortneſs of his Reign, gave not oppor- 
 tunity for it. 

6 Q And king Jehoram went out of Samaria f the 
ſame time, and numbred all Iſrael g. 

f To ſome place appointed for the Rendezvous of his People: g To 
wat, ſuch as were fit for War. 

7 And he went and ſent to Jehoſhaphat the king of 
Judah, ſaying, The king of Moab hathrebelled againſt 
me : wilt thou go with me againſt Moab to batcel ? and 
he ſaid, I will go up : I am as thou art, my people as 
thy people, and my horſes as thy horſes h. 

h Of which ſee on 1 Kings 22:4. He joins with him in this War; 
partly, becauſe the War was very juft init ſelf, and convenient for 
Jehoſhaphat, both in the Fray” that Rebels and Revolters ſhould 
be chaltifed and ſurpreſled, leſt the Example ſhould paſs into his 
Dominions, and the Edemites ſhould be hereby encouraged to revolt 
from him, as they did from his Son; and in particular, that the 
Moabites ſhould be humbled, who had with others Invaded his Land 
before this time, 2 Chron; 20. 1. and might do ſo again if they were 
not brought low ; for whicha fair opportunity was now offered to 
him; and partly, becauſe Jehoram had reformed ſome things, and 
Jeh:ſhaphat hoped by this means to engage him to proceed further 
in- that work. 


8 And he i ſaid, Which way ſhall wego up? And he 
auſwered, The way through the wi:derneſs of Edom &. 
z Either, Jehoſhaphat : or rather, Joram: for the followine anſwer 
may icem to be Jehoſhaphats. k Which though it was much the longer 
way, yet they thought it beſt ; partly, to ſecure the King or Vice-Roy 
of Edow, of whom they might have ſome Suſpicion, from that 
Paſſage 2 Chron.20. 22: and to carry both him and his Soldiers along 
with them into the War, both to ger their Aſſiſtance, and to prevent 
them from making a war of diverſion againſt Judah,whilſt Jehoſhaphat 
was engaged againſt Moab ; and partly that they might invade Moab 
on their weakeſt ſide and where they leaſt expe&ed them. God alſo 
thus diſpoſed their Hearts to make way for the following Miracle. 
9 Se the king of Iſrael went, and the king of Judah, 
and the king of Edom / : and they fercht a compaſs of 
{even daysjourney mm: and there was no water » for the 
hoſt, and for the cattel F that followed them. + Heb: 

[ i. e« The Vice-Roy under Jehoſhaphat, 1 Kings 22. 47. here called their fea! 
king ; either, becauſe he was ſo called and accounted by his own 
people : or, becauſe that word is ſometimes uſed for any Prince or 
chief Ruler. See Deut. 33.5. Judges 18. 1.and 21. 25. 1 Kings 20, 1. 
m Becauſe thy made a great Army, which could move but ſlowly ; 
and they fetched a greater Compals than was uſual, for ſome advan« 

tage which they expe&ed by ir. » A frequent want in thoſe hot 
and deſart parts 3 and now, as it ſeems, increaſed by the extraor- 
dinary Heat and Dryneſs of the Seaſon. 

Io And the king of Iſrael ſaid, Alas, that the LORD 
hath called theſe three kings together, to deliver them 
into the hand of Moab o. 

0 So he chargeth his Calamity upon God ; and not upon himſelf 
whoſe Sins were the true and proper cauſe of it. 

1x But Jehoſhaphat ſaid, Is there not here a prophet 
of the LORD, that we may enquire of the LORD by 
him p? And one of the king of Iraels ſervants anſwered 
andſaid, Here is Eliſha the fon of Shaphat, which poured 
water on the hands cf Elijah 9. 

Þ This he ſhould have asked before, when they firſt undertook 
the expedition, as he did in a like caſe, r Kings 22. 5. and for that 
neglect he now ſuffers : but better late than never : His AfliQtion 
brings himao the remembrance of his former Sin,and preſent Duty, 
q i. e. Who was his Servant : this being one office of a S-rvant : 
and this Office was the more neceſſary among the 1/raelites, becauſe 
of the frequent Waſhings which their Law required. 

12 And Jchoſhaphatſaid, The word of the LORD 
is with himr. So the king of Iſrael, and Jehoſhaphat, 
and the king of Edom went down to him /. 

r We may enquire the Mind of God by him : for he is a true 
Prophet» Which Jehoſbaphat might eaſily underſtand, becauſe being 
a good Man,and a great Favourer of the Lords Prophets,he would 
diligently enquire,and many Perſons would be ready toinform him 
of all things of that nature, and, amongſt others, of Elijah's calling 
of Eliſha by caſting his Prophetial Mantle over him, 2 King. 19. 19. 
and of Elijah's Tranſlation, and El:ſba 's Subſtitution in his place, 
and of the proofof it, 2 Kings 2. 8, 14 ſ To his Tent; which 
was either in the Camp, or not far from it 3 for he went along 
with the Army by the Impulſe of Gods Spirit, for this very occaſion. 
They did not ſend for him, but went to him, that by giving him 
this Honour, they might more effeQually ingage him to give them 
his utmoſt Afſiſtanee 3 &,becauſe they had hears that he was a man 
of a rugged temper andcarriage, who therefore was to be ſweetned, 


and ſo diſpoſed to pity and relieve them. 


13 And Eliſha ſaid uatothe king of Iſrael, What have |, 7, 
[ to do with thee? ? * Get thee to the prophets of thy Ruth # 


father, 5: 


Chap 11, 1 (; 


os 


t He 
attche, 
viche 


*$o Judg: 


” eb, 
* Oyed 
wy 
f lied, 
Od hin. 
hf With g 


Jeb: 
r feet]! 


t, Vehap. 11L: 


{fHcb. 


$4» 


f Heb, 
ditches, 
viches, 


PMecher 
i lleb, 


hf 
Gd 


Vire (716 


her, and to the prophets of thy mother u. And the 
_ of Iſrael ſaid unto him, Nay x : for the LORD 
hath called theſe tliree kings y together to deliver them 


into the hand of Moab. | = 

} ] defire to have no Diſcourſe nor Converſe with thee- u 1- E. 
To the Calves, winch thou after thy Fathers Example doſt wor- 
ſhip ; aad ro the B.rals which thy Mother yet worſhippeth by thy 
Permiſſion; and to which thy Heart is yer inclined, though thou 
kaſt deſtroyed one of his Images for politick Reafons. Ler thele 
]do!s whom thou worſhippeft in thy Proſperity. now help thee in 
thy Diſtreſs. ' * 7 renounce thoſe falle prophets and Bazls, and will 
ſcek to none but God for help, y If thou haſt NO refpect for me, 
yet pity this innocent King of Ecom, ns good Felrſhaphat, who are 

y [ - r 6. 

involved in the ſame Danger with my leite . . 

' 14 And Liitha ſaid, - As the LORD ot hofts In eth, 
before whom I ſtand, Surely were it not that I regard 
the preſence of Jehoſhaplat the king of Juiah z, I woud 
not look toward thee, nor ſze tliee. | 

z {hom I Reverence and Love for his Vertu? and Piety, 

15 But now bring me a mioſirel s. And it came to 

paſs when the minſtrel played, that the hand of the 
LORD b + came upon him. 


a One that can ing and play upon a_Muſical Inftrument. Thi- 
he requires, that his Mind which had been diſturbed and inflamicd 
with Holy Anger at the fight of wicked Fehoram, might be com 
poſed, and chcered, and united within it {elf, and th q he mig! 
be excircd to the more fervent payer to God, and joytul'y praiſing 
him ; whereby he was prepared to reccive the Prophetical Inip: atto:. 
For although Prophecy be the Gift of GOD, yet men mighr do 
ſom<thing either to hinder or further the reception of 1t : for which 
Cauſe Pau! bids Chriſtians ſtudy to get the Witt of Prophecy, 1 Cor: 
14: 1. And for this very end the Colledges of the Prophets were 
erected, wherein the Sons of the Prophets did uſe divers means ro 
procure this Gift, which a'ſo they did ſometimes receive, as we ice 
2 Kings 2: 3, 5: and, amongſt other means, they uſed Inſtruments 
of Muſick to exhularate their Spirits, Of. 2 Sam: IO. 5- Of the 
great power of Muſick upon the AﬀeGtions, fee the Notes on 1 Saw 
16: 16 b i.e. The Spirit of Prophecy, fo called, to note that it 
was not from Elijha's temper of Body or Mind: that it was no natu- 
ral nor acquired vertue inherent in him ; bur a ſingular Gitr of 
God, given to whom and when he pleaſed. This Phraſe 1s uted 
alſo Ezek: 1:8:and 3; 14 22: and 8: 1. £5 : 

16 And he ſaid, Thus ſaith the LORD, Make this 
yalley + ful of ditches c. | = 

c Which may reccive the Water, and hold it for the uſe of Men 
and Beaſts. — : 

17 For thus ſaith the LORD, Ye ſhall nor fee wind d 
neither ſhall ye ſeerain, yet that valley ſhall be filied wit! 
water, that ye may drink, both ye, and your Cattel, ac 
your beaſts . | 

d Any of thoſe Winds which commonly produce Rain. Anc 
ſezing is here put for perceiving or feeling, one ſenſe for anorhe:, 
or for all, as Ger:4.2: 1« compare At57;12: Exod;20:18. and elftewhete. 

18 And this is but a light thing in the tight of «< 
LORD e, he will deliver the Moabites allo into you 
hand. 

e This is but a ſmall Favour in compariſon of what heintendsrt: 
you for J-h9ybaphats fake. He will give you more than you ask © 
expe&t. For they were ſo weakned and diſcouraged with the grea 
Drought, that they had no hopes of proceeding in che offenſive Wa. 
and thought it ſutlicient, if 1t were poſſible, to detend rhemſelve 
from the Moabites, wv. 1 


— : | | 
19 And ye ſhall ſmite every fenced city, and ever: 


choice city, and ſhall fell every good tree f. and ſtop a 
wells of water, and + mar every good piece of 1an 
with ſtones. 

F This 1s, Either, Firſt, A Command and then the laſt Clauſe is 
an Exception from that Law, Dert: 20: 19. which being delivere 
by a Prophet, might be obeyed. And if this Command fcem ſevere 
it muſt be conſidered, that the Moabites were a very wicked Peop!: 
perfidious, cruel, implacable Enemies to Gods peopleupon all occa/i- 
ons, and now in a ſtate of Rebellion. Or rathez Secondly, a Predi- 
Qtion of their Succeſs, that they ſhould have ſo full and complear « 
Viftory that they ſhould be able to do all which is here expreſſed 

20 Andit cameto paſs in the morning, when th: 


' meat-offerings was offered g, that behold, there cam« 


watgr þ by the way of Edom z, and the countrey wes 
hille& with water. 

g 1. e. The Moraing-Sacrifice : of which Exod: 29: 39, 40. which 
doubtleſs was attended wirh the ſolemn Prayers of Gods people, as 

e Evening-Sacrifice unqueſtionably was, 4s 3- 1: there being the 
ſame reaſon for ſubſtance tor borh times. At this time Elſhah joineu 
his prayers with the prayers of Gods people, eſpecially thoſe at Fe- 
ruſalem,- as Elijah had done at a like time, 1 Kings +8. 29. and thz: 
time God che to anſwer his and their prayers, and to work this 
Miracle, that thereby he might determine the Controverſie betwee:: 
the Iſraelites and the Jews, abour the place aiid manner of worthip 
and give apublick Teſtimony from Heaven for the Jews, and again: 
the J/raelires. þ Miraculouſly produced out of ſome Rock or Vei; 
of the Earth. 7 From thoſe parts which were towards Edu. 


21 QC And whenall the Moabites heard that the king: 
were come up to tight againit them, they f gathered al. 
that were abie to F put on armour &, and upward, and 


ood in the border /. 
k Heb. To gird on a girdle, 1. e. a Military Girdle, to which thc 


Shin, Sword was faſtened, 2 Sam: 20: 8. 1 Kings 2.5. IOr, in that border, 
! dich g tO wit, of their Countrey, which was rowards Edom, which way 


they underſtood the Kings came. Here chey ſtood probably ro dc- 
tend the Paſlages into their Countrey- 


22 Andthey role up eaily in the morning, ani the 


rt © FS Chap. 11 


ſun ſhone upon the water, and the Moabites ſaw the 
water on the other fide 2s red as blood m. 

7 Becauſe of the Morning-Sun, which mecting with the Vapours 
that aroſe trom the Earth, and ſhining through them upon the Wa- 
ter, gave it a reddiſh TinCture. God aifo {o ordered things, that 
their Senſes and Fancies were diſturbed, orthe Air ſo diſpoſed, that 
ir might ſeem of this Colour. And they might more eaſily miſtake 
this tor Blood, becauſe they knew that that ground was generally 
dry, and without any Trenches or Streams of Water,now eſpecially 
in this dry Seaſon, there being no noiſe of Wind and Rain. v. 17. 
And they might juſtly think that the three Kings being divided in 
their Religion and Incerefts, and diſcontented for want of Water, 
might fall inro Diflentions, and Heats, and mutual Slaughters, of 
which they had a late Example, 2 Chron. 20. 22, 23. 

23 Andthey tatd, This blood : the kings are ſurely 
i ain, and they have ſmitten one anocher : now there- , xx.q,- 
tore Moab to the ſpoil ». | d:{troyed; 

7 They were ſo highly confident, that they ſend no Scouts, but 

arch thither with their « hole Army and that in great Diſorder. 
V/ herein there was alto a Divine Hand, ſtrengthening them in their 
Miitakes, and hardening them to their DeftruQtion. 

24 And when they came to th: camp of Iſrael, the 
I{raclites roſe up and ſmote the Moabites, ſo that they 
ed betore them : but || they wer:t fo; ward ſmiring the (Q,, zz 
Moabites, even in their countrey 0. ſmote in 

o They purſued them ro their own Countrey, and entred it with it, even 
and after them ; the paſſes, which before the Moavites defended, ſmitings 
being now open for them. 

25 And they beat down the cities, andon every good 
piece of land caſt every man his ſtone p, and filled ir, and 
chey ſtopped all the weils of water, and felled all the 
z00dtrecs :; | only in Kirharaſethg lefc they the ſtenes + Heb: 
chereof 7 ; Howbeit the flingers / went about zr, and ,,;7 
{more it 7, left the 

p The Stones which happily had been with great care and pains Fones 

pickt out of the Land, and laid in heaps after the manner, they vhereof in 
diſpcifcd again, and flew the people, who ſhould have cleanted Kir-hards 
them again. q Which was the Royal and ſtrongeſt City of the (ch. 
Moabites, 1ja: 16: 7, 11, 1ato which the remaant of the Moabites were 
gathered, where alſo their King was with them. » The Walls and 
Buildings of this Ciry only were left; other Cities and, in amanner, 
cher whole Countrey being utrerly deſtroyed, ſ Either, Firſt, 
Such as flung imga!l Stones againſt thofe that ſrood upon the Wall 
to defend it. Or rather, Secondly, Such as flung great Stones againſt 
the Walls to break them down, according to the manner of thoſe 
rimes. #7. e Made Breaches in the Walls, by which they mighr 
enter into the City, and take it. 


26 4 And when the king of Moab ſaw that the battel 
was too fore for him, he cook wich him ſeven hundred 
men that d:ew ſwords, to breakthrough even unto tHe 
«ing of Edom # : but they coulg not. hg 

« Lat being unable to defend the City longer, he might i. bs 
in eicape : which he chote to do on the King of Edoms quarter : 
vEcauic he thought either that his was the weakeſt fide : or, that 
ie would more willngly ſuffer him to elcape, becauſe he was not 
o hearty in the War as the reſt, bur only forced to it, and he might 
1creafrer have tome occaiton of the King of Moab to joyn with hun, 
as before he had, 2 Chron. 20, 22 

27\'IThen he took his eideſt ſon x that ſhould have 
cigned 1a his ttead, and * otiered him for a burnt-offe- * a qc 
111g upon the wall y, and there was f great indignation 2. r: 
gaiulit Iſrael z, and they departed from him, and re- t Heb. 
.urned tO their own land. een” > 

x E:ther, Firſt, the King of Ezoms Son ; whom in this eruption he "ey aging: | 
rook, and then Sacrificed. Compare Amos 2: 1. Bur, Firſt, That _ 
pace Ipeaks of the king, nor of the king: jon ; and of the burning of” 
is bones, nor of the offering of a living man for a Burnt- Offering. 
zxecondly, this would not have made the beſicgers to raiſe. their liege, 
2ut to have tollowed it more warmly to revcnge ſo barbarous an 
Action. Thirdly, The following clauſe, hat fbould have reigned in - 
4:5 ftead, agrees not ſo well to the Edom:tes, whole King was only 
ehojhaphats Vice-Roy, and therefore his Son had no right toſucceed 
11m; as1t doth to the Moabites, whoſe King was revolted from Iſrael, 
1:10 intended to keep that Kingdom to himie!f and Children Or 
arher, Secondly, his own Son ; whom he Szcrificed ; partly, to 
obrain the favour of his God, according to the manner of the 
Phenicans and other people in grievous and publick Calamities ; 
whereot we have maniteſt Teſtimonies, borh in Scripture. as Pſal; 
106.37 Ezek.20.31, and in Heathen Authors, as Parphyrins, Plutarch, 
and othe:s : and partly, to oblige the 1ſ-elites to quit the ſiege out 
of compaſſion ; or, as deſpairing rv Conquer ( at leait withour greater 
iofs of men than it was worth ) him who was reſolved to defend 
himſclf and City ro the utmoſt extremity. y That the beſicgers 
might tceit, and be moved by it. z Or, great trouble or repentance 
:pon Iſrael, 1. e. the 1ſraelitiſh King and people ( who was the firſt 
-auſe ofthe War, and had brought the reſt into confederacy with 
1im ) were greatly afflicted and grieved for this barbarous ation, and 
relolved to proſecute the War no further, and fo withdiew their 
Forces, aSaito did their Allies, and returned to their ſeveral Homes. 
Which they were the more willing to do, b<cauſe the Kingdom 
and Countrcy of M:2b were fo ruinated buth as to their Men, and 
Cities, or Villages, and Lands, thar they were all ſecure of any grear 
annoyance from it. ED 


GaReM SP. IVY. 4 
Eliſha multiplicth the Widows Oyl, 1 7. He is lodged by a Shunamite 
Woman, who u barten : He promiſeth her a $12 © Whichis born, $17. 


Diet, and u raiſed by Elijba, 18 37 At Gilgal h: healeth the 
deadly Pottage, 38 -— 41. And feed:th ;09 Men with 20 Loaves and 
a ©"2 J 4 


ears of Corn, 42 — 44- 
OW there cried a ceptain woman of the wives of 
the ſons of che prophets a, unto Liitha, ſaying, 


* | * ? ; 1Y L- +> ” £ L Pay A 
Thy {:rvantmy Husbaiid is dead, 29d then kaowWel, thar 
3 L 4 Fly 


bap. I 


Fr 


[| Or, 


creditor e 


} Heb. 
zhere was 
 aay- 
+ ticb: 
laid hold. 
on him, 


ll Or, 
had ſaid. 


V. It £& 1 
thy ſervant did fear the LORD 5: and the creditor Is 
come to take unto him my two ſons to be bond»men c. 

a Who, though they were wholly devoted to Sacred employment. 
were not excluded from Marriage, no more than the Prieits and 
Levites, b His poverty therefore was not procured by his idleneſs, 
or prodigaliry , or rather, wickedneſs ; but by his Piety, becauſe he 
would not comply with the Kings way of worſhip, and therefore 
loſt all worldly advantages. c Either, to uſe them as his ſlaves, or 
to ſell them to others, according to the Law. Of which ſee 
Exod; 21: 2: Lev: 25: 39: Iſa: 50: 1: Matth: 18s 25. . 

2 AndEliſha ſaid unro her, What ſhall Ido for thee 4: 
Tell me, what haft thou in the Houſe e ? And ſhe faid, 
Thine hand-maid barh not any thing in the Houſe, fave 
a pot of oil f. | | 

a How ſhall I relieve thee, who am my ſelf poor ? e Which 
may contribute to the Payment of thy Debts, or, ar leaf, to the 


- fatisfation of thy Creditors, who may perchance deal favourably 


with thee through my perſwaſion. f Which was uſcful tor divers 
things about the Service of God, and health, or delight, or orna- 
ment, and other uſes of men. See Juag, 9. ge 

3 Then he ſaid, Go, borrow thee veſſels abroad of all 
thy neighbours, eve» empty veſſels, [|borrow not a few. 

' 4 And when thou art come in. thou ſhalt ſhut the 
door upon thee g, and upon thy Sons, and ſhalt pour 
out þ into all thoſe veſſels, and thou ſhalt ſer aſide that 
which is full. 

g Partly that none may hinder thee from minding thy, work of 
filling and removing the Veſſels, which will require attention and 
diligence - partly, that thou alone mayeſt enjoy the benefit of it ' 
partly, leſt any of thy Creditors ſhould break in upon thee, and 
{cizeupon thy borrowed Veſlels before they are filled : partly, that 
thy mind being freed from diſtraftion, may be wholly employed in 
Prayer and Praiſing of God : and partly, that it may be manifeſt 
that this is the. work of God alone. hþ Out of the Por, in which 
God multiplied the Oil from time to time. 

F SO ſhe went from him, and ſhut the door upon her, 
and upon ber ſons : who brought the weſſels to her, and 


ſhe poured out. 
6 Anditcameto paſs when the veſlels werefull, that 


ſhe ſaid unto her ſon 3, Bring me yet a veſſel. And he 
Faid unto her, There & not a veſlel more. And the oil 


ſtayed &. 

# To one of them ; for ſhe had two, wv. r- k To teach us, that we 
ſhould not waſte any of Gods good Creatures 3 and that God would 
not work Miracles unneceſlari'y. 

-- Then ſhe came and told the man of God : and he 


ſaid, Go, ſell the oil, and pay thy || debt, and live thou 
and thy children of the reſt /. 

p het do Juſtice to others, and then take care of thy ſelf and 
Children? ; 

1.884 And + itfell on a day, that Eliſha paſſed to Shu- 

RB, where was a great woman z; and ſhef conſtrain- 
ed Bim o to cat bread p. And ſo it was, that as oft as 
he paſſed by, he turned in thither to eat bread, 

m ACiry in Iſachar, near Mount Carmel. Jof: 19: 17, 18; whither 
the Prophet frequently went. #» For Eſtate, or Birth and Qualiry 
See Gen. 24: 35: i Sam: 25: 2. oBy herimportunate deſire. p To 
take his repaſt there. 

9 And ſhe ſaid unto her husband, Behold, now 1 
perceive, that this is an holy man of GOD 9, which 


paſſeth by us continually. | 
q A Prophet, as Judges 13: 6: and that of eminent Holineſs : by 
our kindneſs to whom, we ſhall procure a blefling to our ſelves. 
io Ler us makea little chamber, I pray thee, on the 
wall r, and letus ſet for himtiere a bed, and atable, anc 
a ſtool, and a candleſtick [| ::and it ſhall be, when hc 


cometh to us, that he ſhall curn in thirher. 
. 7 That he may be free from the noiſe of FamiUy-buſineſs, and 
enjoy that privacy, which, I perceive, hedeſireth for his Prayers 
and Medirations. { He will not be troubleſome or chargeable to 
us : he cates not for rich Furniture or coſtly Entertainment, and 
is content with bare neceffaries. | ; 

11 And it fell on a day that he came thither, and he 


turned into che chamber, and lay there. 
12 And he ſaid to Gehazi his ſervant, Call the Shu- 
mnamicte. And when he had called her, ſhe ſtood before 


him 5. 

5 t» e, Before the Prophet, in the door of his Chamber, as it is ſaid, 
®: 15: The relation ſeems to be a little perplexed, but may be thus 
conceived. Its in this Verſe recorded in the general, "That the 
Propher ſent Gehazz to call her, and that ſhe came to him upon that 
cail : then follows a particular deſcription of the whole buſineſs, 
with all the Circumſtances» firſt, of the meflage with which Gehaz: 
was ſent when he wentto call her, and of her anſwer to that meſſage, 
wv: 13. and of Gehazi”'s conjeQture thereupon, v:14. and then ofher 
coming to the Prophet at his call : which is there repeated to make 
way for the following Paſſages. 

13 And he ſaid||unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, 
thou haſt been careful for us,. with all this care, What 
zs to be done for theer ? Wouldeſt thou be ſpoken for 
to the king, or to the captain of the hoſt « 2 And ſhe 
anſwered, I dwell among mine own people x. 

; Wherewith ſhall I recompence all tay care and kindneſs to me 
and my ſervant ? « With whom he juſtly had great power for his 
eminent ſervice, Ghap: 3- x I live 1n Love and Peace among my 


Kindred and Friends : nor have 1 any cauſe to complain of them, 
or to ſeck rehict from higher Powers. 


pa 


N G S. 


14 Andhe ſaid, What then zs to be done for her .:. 2 
And Gehazi anſwered, Vetily ſhe hath no Child, and 
her Husband is old. 
.*. Haſt thou obſerved any thing which ſhe wants ordeſires ? Fox 
the Prophet kept himſelf much in his Chamber, whilit Gebazi wenr 
more freely about the Houſe, as his occaſions led him. 
i5 And hefaid, Call her. And when he had called 
her, ſhe ſtood in the door y. | 
y Out of reverence, humility, and modeſty, waiting till he came 
to her, or called her further in to him; 
16 And he faid, About this + ſeaſon, according to 
the time of life z, thou ſhalt embrace a ſon. And ſhe 7 thts 
ſaid, Nay, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto” © 
thine hand-maid 6. 
z Of which Phraſe ſee on Gen; 18; 10. a Do not delude me with 
vain hopes. She could not believe it for Joy, and tuppoſed the Pro. 
pher might ſay thus either for her tryal, or from his own private 
judgment and affeftion, and not by warrant from God. 
17 And the woman conceived and barea ſon, at that 
ſeaſon that Eliſha had ſaid unto her, according to the 
time of life. 
18 © And when the child was grown, it fell on a 
day, that he went out to his father to the reapers. 
I9 And he faid to his father, My head, my head 5: 
and he faid to a lad, carry him to his mother. 
b His Head was grievouſlly pained : which poſſibly came from the 
heat of the Harveſt-ſeaſon, ro which he was expoſed in the field. 
20 Andwhen he had taken him, and brougat him to 
his mocher, he ſat on her kneestill noon, and they died. 
21 And ſhe went up,and laidhim onthe bed of the man 
of God, andſhur the door upon him e, and went our. 
c Partly. in hopes that this might contribute ſomething to the 
Childs reſtitution ro Life,ſhe having in all probability had an account 
of the like Miracle done by Elijah, 1 Kings 17: 21: and partly, that 
ſhe might for the preſent conceal the death of the Child : which if 
it had been known, would have filled her Husband with grief, and 
hindred her journey and opened the mvuths of the Enemies of God 
and his Prophets to blaſpheme : whereas ſhe had a confidence put into 
her by God. that the Propher could and would reſtore her yon. 
22 And ſhecalled unto her Husband, and ſaid, Send 
me, I pray thee, one of the young men. and one ofthe 
alles, that I may run to the man of GOD, and comg 
again, 
23 And he ſaid, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to 
day ? tis neither new moon nor ſabbath 4d, And ſbe 


ſaid, It ſhall be || well e. | 
da Which were the chief and uſual times in which they reſorted to f Heb, 
the Prophets for inſtruction,for which be ſuppoſed ſhenow wenr,nor P***: 
iuſpe&ting but that the Child was well by chis time» e My going 
will not be troubleſom to him, nor prejudicial to thee or me, He.. 
peace, 1. e. peace be to thee, farewel, or be contented, let me gre 
24 Then ſhe ſadled an afs, and ſaid to her ſervant, 
Drive, and go forward: || ſlack not thy riding for me, __ 
except I bid thee. Ire _ 
25 So ſhe went, and came unto the man of God to for me 
mount Carmel : and it came to paſs when the man of riae, 
God ſaw herafar off, that he ſaid ro Gehazi his ſervant, 
Bekold, yonder is that Shunamite : 
26 Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and ſay unto 
1er, Is it well with thee ? Is it well with thy Husband? 
{5 it well with thechild 2 And ſhe anſwered, 1: is well f. 
f So it wasin ſome reſpeQs, becauſe it was the Will of a Wiſe and 
Good God, and therefore beſt for her. Or, it ſhall be we: though 
che Child be dead, I doubr not by Gods Bleſſing upon thy Endea- 
vours it ſhall live again and do well; But ſhe anſwers ambiguouſlly, 
and briefly too, that ſhe might ſooner come to the Prophet, and 
more tuJly open her mind to him, | 
27 And whenſhe came to the man of God tothe hill, | 
{he caught] bim by the feetg : but Gehazi came near to f Heb. 
thruſt her away h. And the man of God ſaid, Let her # #*- 
alone, for her ſoul js || vexed within her 5: and the | yy, 
LORD hath hid it from me, and hath not told me k. ji. 
g She fell at his Feet and touched them, as a moſt humble and 
earneſt ſuppliant. Compare 1 Same. 25. 24. Matth. 28. 9. Withal, 
the intimated, what ſhe durſt not preſume to expreſs in words that 
ſhe deſired him to go along with her. h Judging this poſture indecent 
for her, and offenſive tro his Maſter.  Difturb her not, for this 
uncouth geſture 1s a ſign of ſome extraordinary gricf. k Whereby 
he ſignifies, that what he knew or did, was not by any Vertue in- 
herent and abiding in himſelf, but only from God,who revealed to 
him only what and when he pleaſed, Compare 2 Sam 7» 3. 


28 Then ſbe ſaid, did Ideſire a ſon of my lord/? Did 


not I ſay, do not deceive me m ? 

I This Child was not given to me upon my immoderate deſire, for 
which I might have juſtly been thus chaſtilted, as Rachel was, Gen- 
30: I. —_— with 35. 18. but was freely promiſed to me' by thee 
in Gods Name, and fromhis ſpecial Grace and Favour: and there- 
fore I truſt both thou didft pray forit, and God deſign it asa Blefling, 
and not as an AfﬀiQion, as now it proves, unleſs thou doſt obtair: 
the Child for me a ſecond time, which I know thou canſt do, and 
I humbly beg thee todo. m» With vain h-pes ofa Comforc that I 
ſhould never have, And I had been much happier if I had never 
had it than to loſe it ſo quickly, Therefore thou art in ſome 
meaſure concerned to revive my dead hopes, and to continue to me 
the great Bleſſing which thou haſt procurcd- - 


29 Then he ſaid ro Gehazi, gud up thy loins s, = 
ta 


Chap. LV: ; a 


yl 
im 


f Heb 
Once h11 
and on; 
thither, 


eb, 


Heb. 
r feet, 


Heb, 


1140 


Vs Gap. IV. 


tntion, 


f Heb, 


once 


thither, 


IT. 


ke my ftaff in thy hand, and go thy way : if thou 
So put man, ſalute him not : and if any falute thee, 
anſwer him not againo: and lay my ſtaff upon the 
face of the Child p. 


*> up thy long Garments about thy Loins for expedition See 
; LE. 18 us 0 An Hyperbolical expreſſion ; Make no delays 
nor ſtops by the way, neither by words nor ations: bur go with 
all po'{ible ſpeed. Compare Z#k 10: 4: He requires this haſte, that 
the Mirac e might be done ſecretly and ſpeedily before the Childs 
death was divulged, which might cauſe many inconveniences. See 
For God can work a Miracle by the moſt unlikely 
as he did by a Rod, Exod. 14; 16. and a 


on ver; 24. Þ 
and contemptible means, 
Mantle, 2 King: 2:8 ; 

zo And the mother of the child ſaid, 4s the LORD 
liveth, and as thy foul liverth, I will not leave thee 9. 
And he aroſe and followed her. 

q Until thou goeſt home with me. For ihthad-no great con- 
dence in Gehazi, nor was her Faith ſo ftrong as to think that the 
Prophet could work ſo great a Miracle ar this diſtance, and by 
his Staff : which poſſibly was one reaſon why this did no good. 
Compare Matth: 9. 18, and 13. 58: and 17. 20. 

21 And Genazi pailed on before them, and laid the 


ſtaff upon the face of the child, but there was neither 


| jf:5, «- yoice, nor || hearing 7: wherefore he went again to | 


meet him, and told him, faying, The child ;s not 


awaked /. : 
7 i, e. Neither ſpeech, nor Senſe,nor any fign of Life, to wit, in 


K.I NG & 


the Child. Which :i4appointment might proceed frem hence, that 
Eliſhs having changed his mind, and yielded to her importunity 
to go with her, did alter his courſe, and not joyn his fervent 
Prayers with Gehazi's aGtion, but reſerved them till he came thi- 
ther | i. e Not revived : death being oft and firly compared to 
a ſleep, as Pſal- 76. 5. Dan. 12.2. becauſe of the Refurrettion which 
will in due time follow it, and here followed ſpeedily, which 
makes the expreſſion moſt proper in this place. 
2 And when Eliſha was come into the houſe, be- 
hold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed. 
223 He went in therefore, and {hut the door upon 


them twain ?, and prayed unto the LORD. 

£ Upon himſelf and the dead Child, that he might pray to God 
without diſtraction, and might more freely uſe ail thoſe geſtures 
and means which he thought fit. 

24 And he went up and lay upon the child x, and 
put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his 
eyes, and his hands upon his hands x, and he ſtretched 
himſelf upon the child, and the fleſh of che child waxed 
warm /. 

, And although ſome ceremonial uncleanneſs might ſeem to be 
contraſted by the touch of this dead Body yet that was juſtly to 
give place to a Moral Duty, and to an attion of ſo great Piety 
and Charity as this was.efpecially w hen done by a Propher, and by 
the inſtin&t of Gods Spirit, who can diſpence with his own Laws. 
x One part upon another ſucceſſively ; for the difproportion of 
the Bodies would not permit it to be done together. Compare 
1 King.17.21: As 20.10. y Not by any external hear, which couid not 
be tranſmitted to the Childs Body by ſuch flight rouches of the 
Prophets Body ; but by a Natural heat, proceeding from a princi- 
ple of Life, which was already infuſed into the Child, and by dc- 
grees enlivened all the parts of his Body. 

5 Then he returned and waiked in the houſe # to 


me hither, and fro z, and went up and ſtretched himſelf upon 


him « : and the child neeſed ſeven times, and the chiid 
opened his eyes b. 

z He changeth his poſtures for his own neceflary refreſhment, 
and walked to and fro, exerciſing his mind in prayer to God,and 
Faith,for the accompliſhment of this work # Repeating his former 
ations, to teach us not to be diſcouraged in our Prayers, if we be 
not ſpeedily anſwered, but to wait with Patience,and continue,and 
be mſtant in Prayer,till we obtain what we ſeek for. 6 So the work 
begun in the former Verſe is here perte&ed. Although Miracles 
were for the moſt part done in an inſtant, yet ſometimes they were 
done by degrees, as here, and 1 Kings 18.44.45» Mark 8. 24, 25 


26 And he called Gehazi, and laid, Call chis Shuna- 
mice. So he called her,and when ſhe was come in unto 
him c,- he ſaid, Take up thy fon. 


e Heb. come to him, to wit, to the Door of his Chamber : Where 
probably he met her with this joyful Meſlage. 


37 Then ſhe went in 4,and fell ac his feet,and bow- 
ed her ſelf ro the ground, and took up her ſon, and 
went Our. 


d Into his Chamber, and. after ſhe had done him honour,to the 
Bed where the Child lay,whence ſhe took him, and went her way. 

38 9 And Eliſha came again to Gilgal e, and rhere 
was a dearth in the land, and the ſons of the prophets 
were ſitting before him f : and he ſaid unto his ſervant 
Set on the great pot, and ſceth pottage g for the ſons 
of the prophets. 

e When he came with Elijah, chap.2. tr. where was a School of the 
Prophets, whom he deligned to comfort concerning the preſent 
Dearth and their other diſcouragments, and ro confirm in the pro- 
feſfion and prattiſe of Religion, and to inſtruct in the Duties of the 
aq Seaſon. f At his feer,as Scholars ro be taught by him. See 
C778 


- 2+3- As 22.3. g He provides no delicious Meats, but meer 
Neceſlaries, to teach them the contempt of wordly delights. 


39 And one went our into the field to gather herbs, 
and found a wild vine h, and gathered thereof wild 
gourds his lapful, and came and ſhred them into the 
Pot of pottage; for they knew hem noc. 


h A plant called Coloquintida,whoſe Gourds or Leaves reſemble the 


Leaves of a Vine,and are very bitter, and pernicious to the eater. 


40 So they poured our for the men to eat : and ir 


came to paſs as they were eating of the pottage, that 


they cryed out, and ſaid, O thou man of God, there is 
death in the pot z : and they could not eat thereof. 

z i»e. Some deadly thing : which they gathered from its exceſlive 
bitterneſs, by which poſhbly ſome of them m1ght diſcern whar it 
Was. 

41 But he faid, then bring meal : and he caſt it into 


the Por &: and he ſaid, Pour out for the people, that 


they may eat : and there was ro | harm in the pot 1. +Heb.evi! | 


Chap. V+ 


k Together with the Pottage which they bad taken out of it. ching. 


I The Meal rook away that hurtful quality,nor.by its natural Power, 
which could do little in ſo ſhort a time, but by the ſupernatural 
Bleſſing of God upon it. : 

42 T And there came a man from Baal-ſhaliſha, and 
brought the man of God bread of the firſt fruits m, 


ewenty loaves » of barley, and full ears of corn || in the || Or, bis 


husk thereof, and he faid, give unto the people o, that 
they may eat. 

m Which were the Prieſts due, Numb. 18. 2. but theſe, and pro- 
bably the reſt of the Prieſts dues, were uſually brought by the 
Pious 7ſraelies, according to their ability and opportunity, to the 
Lord's Prophets; partly,becauſe they did a great part of the Pricſts 
oifice : and partly, becauſe they were not permitted to carry them 
to Jeryſalem ; and they might reaſonably think that their circum- 
ances being extraordinary. would warrant their giving of them 
to extraordinary Perſons ; and that thoſe ceremonial Inſtitutions 
ought to give place to the greater Laws of neceſſity and mercy to 
the Lord's Prophets - And this paſſage ſeems to be noted hereznor 
only on occaſion of the following Miracle ; bur alſo that by this 
one inſtance we might underſtand how ſo many Schools of the 
Prophets were ſupported. » Smail Loaves, as appears, both becauſe 
one Man brought them all fo far ; and becauſe, otherwiſe there 


| had been no Miracle here. o To wit, the Sons of the Prophets, 


who were then preſent with him, wer. 38. 
43 And his ſervitor ſaid, What ſhould I ſet this be- 
fore an hundred men ? He faill again, Give the people, 


ear, and ſhall leave thereof. 


44 So he ſet it before them,and they did eat,and left 
thereof, according to the word of the LORD. 
CRAP. V. * | 
Naamen by his Captive Maids report goeth to Eliſhs to be cured of his Les 
proſizy 1 ——— 9g, Elijha ſends to kim a Command to waſh in Jordan » 
He is angry, and dildainith it, His Serrzants Advice $ He doeth it, and 


is healed, 10. -— 14. Heyeturneth with Gifts to Eliſha, who ve- 
fuſeth them : He departs,15 —19. Gehazi, Eliſha's Servant abuſing 
his Maſter s Name un'o Naaman ; taketh Gifts from him ; is ſmitten 
with Leproſie, 20---==27. | | 
OW Naaman captain of the hoſt of the king of 

SY 114, was a great man Þ with his maſter a,and || + 
honourable b, becauſe by him theLORD had given || de- 


Liverance unto Syria c : he was alfoa mighty man of 
valour, but he was a leper. 

a In great Power and Favour with the King of Syria. b Highly 
eſteemed both for his quality and Succeſs. c Which expreſſion he 
uſeth, partly, to Mind the Jſrae!ites, that all the hurt they had from 
the Syrians was from the Lord, who uſed them as his Rod, and gave 
them the Succeſles againit Ijrael, which are recorded ; and partly 
ro check that proud Conceit which then was working, and after- 
wards more fully diſcovered it ſelf in the Iſraclitiſh Nation, as if the 
Care, and providence, and Goodneſs of God, were wholly confin= 
ed to themſelves, and not imparted to any other People. 

2 And the Syrians had gone our by companies 4,and 
had brought away captive out of the land of Ifracl a lite 
tle maid, and ſhe | waited on e Naamans wife. 

d Making Inroads into the Land of 1/-2:1 to rob and plunder 
afrer the manner of thoie times. Sce 1 Sam. 30. 8. 2 Kings 13. *£, 
and 24.2: e Heb. was before, 1. e. ſrocd before her, or miniſtied to 
her. Compare Dez. 1. 38. : 

3 And ſhe ſaid unto her miſtreſs, Would God my 
lord were | wich the prophet that zs in Samaria f'; for he 
would | reccver him of his leproſie g. 

f Either,Firſt,In the Kingdom of Samaria. Or,Secondly, In the 


, 


commonly refided,though he went ro other places,as need required 
s Or, take him away ( as this H:brew Verb is uſed, Gen. 30. 23. Zecch, 
I. 2+ ) from his leproffe, i- e. take away lis leproſie from him. 

4 And one went in, ard toid his iord b, faying, Thus 
and thus ſaid the maid that zs of the land of Ifrae}. 

þ One of Naaman's Servants hearing this, went in and told it to 
Naaman, and he to the King of Sjris, which is implied. Or, Aud 
he went in, &C. 1. e. Naman, mentioned, wer. 1. hearing this from 


5 And the king of Syria ; ſaid, Goto, go, and I will 
{cada letter unto the king of Ifrael k. And he departed, 
and took | with him ten talents of filver, and tix thou- 
ſand pieces of gold }, and ten changes of raimenr. 

i Joram the fon of Ahab, chap. 3. 1. k Deſiring him to obtain this 


Favour from the Prophet. 7 Partly,for the Charges of his Journey ; 
and partly, for Preſents to the Prophet, or others, as ke taw fir. 


6 And he brought che letrer co the king of 1ſraei,fay- 
ing, Now when this letter is come unto thee, Þehoid, 


I have :berewith {ent Naaman my {ſervant to thee, that 
thou mayeſt recover him - of his leprolie, 
3 M mits 


ſcrip, or 
garment. 


that they may eat: for thus faith the LORD; * They lf Yea; 


+ Heb. 
b efore . 


|| Or, 


gracious. . | 


in countea 
Nance. 


|| Or, 
Vitzorys 


tHeb: was 
before. 


+ Heb- 


befcre. 


Ciry of Samaris : where he was when fhe was taken : or, where he t Heb: g#< 


ther 11. 


his Wife, told it to the King of Sy1 la, as the next Words intimate.P,- 


ri Heb. in 
his hand, 


| 
I 
J 


: 


j 


1 
14.4 
ing 


W119 


| } 
|} 
| 
| 


| 
' 
! 
| 


i 
| 


*Deut: 32 
| 39* and 
| þ Sam;2;6. 


1 - 
, - 
«Is 


Chap. V. 


| Be 


mw 7.e. Procure his recovery by the means of Eliſha, v. 3. 4.whom 
thou maiſt command to uſe his utmoſt skill and power herein. 

And it came to paſs, when the king of Iſrael had ! 
read the letter, that he rent his clothes », and ſaid, Am | 
*T God, to kill and to make alive o, that this man doth 
ſend unto me to recover a man of his leproſie ? Where- 
fore conſider, I pray you, and ſee how he ſecketh a 

uarrel againſt me p. $4 

5 » Either,in deteftation of his Blaſphemy in giving God s PerfeQi- 
ons to him: or rather,for Grief,arifing from a ſuſpicion & fear that 
the Syrian made this only a pretence for the War which he deſign- 
ed againſt him. o He expreſleth it thus, becauſe Leprofie 1s a kind 
or degree of Death, Numb. 12. 12- and he thought it as impoſſible to 
Cure it, as to raiſe the Dead, p For not doing what he requires, 
which he knows impoſlible for me to do. 

8 And it was /s, whenElitha the man of God q had 
heard, that the king of Iſrael had rent his clothes, that 
he ſent to the king,faying, Wherefore haſt chou rene thy 
clothes r ? Let him come now to me,and he ſhall know 


Land this was taken. 


that there is a prophet in Iſrael. 

g Whom Jiram had not adviſed with, either, becauſe the ſudden 
ſurprizal made him forget it : or, becauſe he hated him, and ſcor- 
ned to beg any thing from: him, e There was no juſt occaſion 
for thee to do ſo. BY. : : . 

9 So Naaman came with his horſes,8 with his cha- 


riot, and ſtood at the door of the houſe of Eliſha /. 
ſ Waiting for Eljah's coming to him. : 
io And E:iſha ſent a meſſenger unto him ?, ſaying, 


. Go, and waſh in Jordan ſeven times, and thy fleſh ſhall 


come again « unto thee, aud | thou ſhalt be clean. 

# Which he did, partly,to try and exerciſe Na#mar's Faith & Obe- 
dience ; partly,for the Honour of his Religion and Miniftry,that it 
might appear he ſought not his own Glory & Profit in his mira- 
culous Performances, but only God's Honour,and the Good of Men: 
and partly, for the diſcovery of the Almighty Power of God, that 
could by ſuch ſlight means cure ſo deſperate a Diſeaſe. u Which 
was in great part conſumed by the Leprolie. See Numb. 12.12. 

11 But Naaman was wroth x, and went away, and 


+Heb.ſaid ſaid, Behold, I + thought y, he will ſurely come out to 
or, # ſaid te, and ſtand, and call on the Name of the LORD his 


fir. #7 God, and | ſtrike his hand over the place z, and reco- 
| it jure Ver the leper. 
come out. 3 Suppoſing himſelf deſpiſed and mocked by the Prophet. y Here- 
+ Heb, in he gives an Example of the perverſceneſs of Mankind, who are 
move #p apt to prefer their own Fancies before Gods Appointments. z Over 
and dewn. or upon the affeed part where the Leproſie 1s ; without which 
it ſeemed to him ridiculous to expeCt a Cure. 
+ Heb. 12 Are not | Abana and Pharpar,rivers of Damaſcus, 
mans, better than all the waters of Iſrael ? May I not waſh in 
them, and be clean a? So he turned and went away 
in a rage. 

@ Is there not as great a virtue in them to this purpoſe ? But he 
ſhou'd have conſidered, that the Cure was not to be wrought by 
the Water, but by the Power of God, who might uſe what means 
and methods of Cure he pleaſed. 

x3 And his ſervants came near, and ſpake unto him, 
and ſaid,. My father 6b, if the prophet had bit thee do 
ſome great thing,wouldeſt thou not have done ir ? how 
much rather then, when he ſaith to chee, Waſh and be 
Cican £ 
& Or. our father. So they call him, both to ſhew their Reverence 
and Aﬀettion to him, and to mitigate his exaſperated Mind. 
14 'ihen went he down, and dipped himſelf feven 
times in Jordan, according to the ſaying of the man of 
God: and his fleſh came again like unto the fleſh of a 
2Luke little child c, and * he was clean. | 
4; 27, c i e. Freſh and pure,free from the leaſt mixture or mark of the 


Diſeaſe. 

15 © And he returned to the man of God 4,he and 
all his company, and came and ſtood before him : and 
he ſaid, Behold, now I-know that there is no God in all 
the earth, but in Iſrael e : now therefore, I pray thee, 
take a blefling f of thy ſervant. 

d To give him thanks,and a recompence for his great kindneſs 
e By this wonderful Work Iam fully convinced, that the God of 


Iſreel is the only True God, and that other gods are but impotent 
Idols. f A thankful acknowledgment. See on Gev. 33s 11. 

16 But he faid, As the LORD liveth before whom I 
ſtand,I will receive none : and he urged him to. take zz, 
buc he refuſed g. 

g Not that he thought it ſimply unlawful to receive Gifts or 
Preſents, which he did receive from others,chap:4. 42: but becauſe of 
the _ circumſtances of the preſent caſe ; this being much for 
the Honour of the True God and Religion, that the Syrians ſhould 
ſee the generous Piety, and Charity, and Kindneſs of his Miniſters 
and Servants,and how much they deſpiſed all that worldly Wealth 
and Glory, which the Prieſts os prophets of the Gentiles ſo greedi- 
ly ſought after ; and that hereby Naaman might be much confirm- 
ed in that good Religion which he had embraced,and others mighr 
be brought to a love and liking of it. 

17 And Naaman faid, Shall there not then, I pray 
thee, be given to thy ſervant two mules burden of 
earth b ? for thy ſervant will henceforth offer neither 

| burnt-offering, nor ſacrifice unto other gods, but unto 
the LORD. 

x bh Wherewith I may make an Altar of Earth, as was uſual, Exog 

120+ 24: kie defires the Earth of this Land, becauſe he though it 


» 


I N G Ss. 


more holy and acceptable to God, and proper for his Service ; or, 


becauſe he would by this Token profeſs and declare his Conjun&ti. 
on with the 1/raelites in the Worſhip of God, and conſtantly pur 
himſelf in mind of his great Obligations to that God from whote 


And though he might freely have taken this 
Earth without asking any leave, yer he rarher defires it from the 
Prophets Gift, as believing that he who had put ſo great a Vertue 
into the Waters of ſra?!,could put as much into the Earth of 1-ael, 
and make it as uſeful and beneficial ro him in a better way. And 
theſe thoughts, though extravagant and groundleſs, yet were ex. 
cuſable in a Heathen, and a Novice, who was not yet throughly 
inſtrued in the True Religion, 


18 In this thing the LORD || pardon thy ſervant, 
that when my maſter goeth into the houſe of Rimmon 3; 


bow my {elf in the houſe of Rimmon: when I bow 
down my ſelf in the houſe of Rimmon 7, the LORD 


pardon thy ſervant in this thing »s. 

; A Sjrian [do], called here by the LXX Remman, and AS: 7:45 ; 
Remphm, k Or, arm, as that word ſomerimes ſignifics, both in 
Scripture and others Authors ; or, ſbu/der. Upon which, the King 
leaned, either for ſtate, or for ſupport, Compare chap. 7.2. | Nor 
in honour to the Idol, which I do here, and ſhall there, openly re. 
nounce ; but only in compliance with the King's infirmity and con. 


; veniency, who cannot well bow if I ſtand upright. » Becauſe 


there ſeemed to be an appearance of Evil in this attion, though 
done with an honeſt mind, he deſires the Prophets Prayers that 
God would not charge it upon him as Idolatry, nor be diſpleaſed 
with him for that praQtice. 

19 And he faid unto him, Go in peace ». So he 


departed from him 7 a little way. 


about this matter,Go,and the Peace or Blefling of God go along with 
thee. So the Propher both Prays ro God to blets and direct him 
in this and all other things, and intimates that God would do ſo. 
Or ſecondly, To the former, wer. 17. trouble not thy ſelf about any 
of our Earth,but go to thy own Land,and I with thee from God, and 
doubr not bur God will give thee peace, 1. e- his favour and other 
Blefſings,which are ofr contained in this Word,if thou doſt periiit 
in this Religion which thou haſt now received. Or rather, 
this is only a farewel Salutation, wherewith the Prophet diſnuſſeth 
him without any further Anſwer to his Requeſts or Inſtruction 
about his Doubt : which he forbore by the Motion of Gods Spirit, 
which ſometimes gives and ſometimes demies Inſtructions to Pers 
ſons or People, as he thinks fir. See 4#.16.6,7. And the Prophet 
by the Spirits Direction might forbear to give him particular An* 
ſwers,partly, becauſe theſe matters were nor of ſuch Importance as 
to concern the Efſence or Foundation of Religion : and partly, be< 
cauſe he was yet but a Novice, and not able to bear all Truths, 
which was for a time the condition of the Apoſtles,Foh. 16.12. nor fit 
to be preſled to the practice of the hardeir Duties, which Chriſt 
himſelt thought not convenient for his Diſciples,Matth.9.14,15,16,17« 
And therefore he at preſent accepts of his profeſſion of the true, 
and his Renunciation of the Falſe Religion ; and of this De- 
claration, that what he did in the Temple of Rimmen ſhou}d not 
now be ( as he had formerly intended and practiſed it) a Religious 
Action towards the Idol, but only a civil Reſpect ro his Maſter. 
And what was neceſlary for him to know further about the Law-= 
fulneſs or Sinfulneſs of that Action, the Prophet might take another 
and a more convenient time to inform him, 

20 { Bur Gehazi the ſervant of Eliſha the man of 
God, ſaid, Behold, my maſter hath ſpared Naaman this 
Syrian #, In not receiving at his hand that which- he 
brovght : but as the LORD liveth,I will run afcer him, 
and take ſomewhat of him p. 

o A Stranger,and one of that Nation who are the implacable Ene« 
mies ofGod's People : whom therefore thy Maſter ſhould not have 
had ſo much regard to,as to the Lord's Prophets, who better deſer- 
ved and more needed the Money which he offered, than Naaman 
himſelf did. p He ſwears,thar he might have ſome pretence for the 
Action to which he had bound himielf by his Oath; not conſider. 


ing that to {wear to do any wicked Action,is ſo far from exculing 
it, that 1t makes it much worſe, 


21 So Gehazi followed after Naaman:and when, Naa- 
man ſaw him running after him, he lighted down from 
the chariot to meet him q, and ſaid, + Is all well ? 


me r, ſaying, Behold, even now there be come to me 
from mount Ephraim two young men of the ſons of the 
prophets - give them, I pray thee, a talent of ſilver, 
and two changes of garments. 


7 This was a very unlikely Story ; but Naamaen was not willing 


to queſtion it,but glad of the opportunity of ſhewing his Gratitude 
to the propher, 


23 And Naaman ſaid, Be content, take two talents: 
and he urged him /, and bound two talents of ſilver in 
two bags, with two changes of garments, and laid them 
upon two of his ſervants,and they bare them before him. 


J Who at firſt refuſed it upon a pret : 
Ace ts his Maths pert by pretence of Modeſty and Obe 


he let the man go «, and they departed. 


t A ſafe and private place which he choſe for that {e, and 
where pofſibly he hid and kept other things which apt Ge by 
ſuch like Frauds and Artifices. # Before they came within ſighr 
of his Maſter. 


Eliſha ſaid unto him, Whence comeſt thou Gehazi ? and 


DE —— 


he ſaid, Thy ſervant went + no whither, 
=: 26 And 


| Or be fas 


Vourable 
to worſhip there, and he leaneth on my hand &, and ] ** 0 Gr, 


T Heb. a 


n Theſe words may contain an Anſwer : Either,Firſt,To his laſt little piece 
Petition, v. 18. and fo the ſenſe may be this, Be not too {ollicirous 9 grounds 


+ Heb; 


q Thereby teſtifying his greatReſpect to the Prophet hisMaſter; 1s there 
22 And he faid, All js well : my maſter hath ſent peace? 


24 And when he came to the || tower t,he took thew || Or;ſea® 
trom their hand,and beſtowed chem in the houſe ; and 2/*% 


25 But he went in and ſtood before his maſter » ang tHe af 


bither, 0: 
thith 


4 $1 


Chap. DY © j 


. 0 
ece 


" 


Us 
d} 


om XX 
'? a. I 
Ik ,ape } « 
© 2% 


; IL 


26 And he ſaid unto him, Went not mine heart rb 
thee x, when the man turned again from his chariot to 
meet thee? Is it a cime y to receive money, and to re- 
ceive garments,and oliveyards,and vineyards,and ſheep, 
and oxen, and meneſervants, and maid-ſervants z ? 

x Did not my Mi-1d, being enlightned byGods Spirit,diſcern what 
thou faidſt and didit ? y Was this a fit ſcaſon for rhis a&ion ? I had 
but newly and obſtinately refuſed his Gifrs, for great Reaſons ; of 
which ſee on ver. 16. and now thou haſt given him cauſe to think, 
that I was a curfed & wicked Impoſtor,who vain-gloriouſly refuſed 
;3n Publick,what I inwardly and greedily defired,and ſought only a 
fitter place & opportunity to take; and that all our Religion is but 
an Impoſture 3 and that the God who owns ſuch a vile Wretch for 
his Propher, as thou haſt repreſented me to him. is not ſo holy and 
righteous as we pretend. 2 Which Gehazr intended to purchaſe 
with this Money : & therefore the Propher names them,to inform 
him, That he exaQtly knew by Divine Inſpiration not only Gehazz 5 
outward a&ions, but even his moſt ſecret Intentions» 

27 The leproſie therefore of Naaman ſhall cleave unto 
thee, and unto thy ſeed for ever ||. And he went out 


from his preſence Þ a leper 4s white as ſnow *. 

| || . & For ſome Generations ; or for a long time, as that word 1s 
oft uſed, and as may be thought by comparing this with Exod: 20:55. 
& 34:7. | Being confounded with the ſenſe of his Guilt,and Shame, 
and Miſery,and baniſhed from the Company of others by GodsLaw, 
Levit.:13:and 14+ * Which is the worit kind of Leprofie,and noted 
by Phyicians to be incurable. See Exod. 4: 6. Numv:12+10. 2 Chron: 
26:19,20. Nor was this puniſhment too ſevere for Gehaz/'s Wick- 
edneſs, which was great, and various, horrid Covetoutneſs, which 
is Idolatry 3 the Prophanation of Gods Name,by a wicked Oath ; 
down-right Theft 3 deliberate and impudent Lying, and thar to a 
Propher, which was in a manner # lying to the Holy Ghoſt, like theirs, 
Afts 5:3. A deſperate contempt of Gods Omniſcience, Juttice,and 
Holinel(s; an horrible Reproach faſtned upon the Propher,and his 
Religion ; and a miſchievous Scandal given to Naaman and all 
other Syrians that might hear of its 


CHAP. Tk 


Eliſha giving leave to the young Prophets to enlarge their Dwellings, cau- 
ſeth Iron ro ſw m. 1 —— 7. He diſclojcrh the King of Syria's Coun: 
ſel, 8 -—i2, Who ſendeth Syrians to apprehend him : He is preſerved 
by Angels, they are ſmitten with Blinan-ſs : are brought mto Samaria 
and diſmiſſed in Peace, 13---==23+ Samaria ts beſieged, and brought to 
Such extream Want and Famine, that Wimcn eat their own Chilaren, 

-39. The King ſendeth to ſlay Elijba, 30 = 33. 


24 

AN D the ſons of the prophets a ſaid unto Eliſha, 
Behold now.,the place where we dwell with thee 6, 
is r00 ſtrait for us c. 

& kither ar Bethel : or, Jericho : or rather, at Gilgal: as may ſeem 
from its nearneſs to the River of Jordan, wer. 2. b Or, before thy 
Face ; 4. e« under thy Inſpe&ion and Dire&ion ; where thou doſt 
frequently dwell with us. Or, ro thy face ; which may be joyned 
with the following Words; and ſo the ſenſe may be this : Ir 1s ap- 
Parent to thy view,thar this place is toc ſtrait for us. c The number 
of the Prophets increating by the gracious Providence ofGod and 
by the Miniſtry and Muacles of E!.jah and El:ſba. 

2 Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan 4, and take 
thence every man a beame, and let us make us a place 
there where we mav dwell. And he Anſwered, Go ye. 

d 1, e, To the Woods near Jordan,which were near-to them. See 
on vV. 1. ez, e. A picce of Timber for the Building- Hence it may 
be gathered, That alrhough the Sons of the Prophets principally de- 
vored rhemielves ro ReiigiousExerciſes, ſuch as Prayer,and praiting 
of God,and the ſtudying of Gods Word and Inſtrutting of others, 
and waiting for Divine Revelations ; yet they did ſometimes 


employ themſelves about Manual Arts 3 which now they might 


be torced to, through the Iniquity of the Times. 
2 And one ſaid, Be content,I pray thee,and go with 
thy ſervants. And he anſwered, 1 wiil go. 
4 So he went with them And when they came to 
Jordan, they cut down wood. 
f Heb . . 
tm, into the water : and he ctied, and ſaid, Alas maſter, 
for it was borrowed g. 

Ff The Iron fell from the Wood. g He was the more concerned, 
partly, becauſe he was not forced to be idle and uſcieſs ro them in 
the common Work ; and partly,becaute it was his Friends loſs, who 
now was likely to iufter for his kindaels ; and as Juſtice obliged 
him to reſtore it, ſo his Poverty diſenabled bim from it- 


6 And the man of God faid, Where feil ir? and he 
ſhewed him the place : and he cut down a ſtick, and 
caſt ir in thither, and the iron did ſwim, 

7 Therefore ſaid he, Take it up to thee : and he put 
out his hand, and took it. 

8 © Thea the king of Syria warred againſt Iſrael, and 

FHeb..;z took counſel with his ſervants,ſaying,t In ſuch and ſuch 
the place a Place ſhall be my || camp .. 


* s *." Thither I will ſend my Forces,to ſurprize ſome place : or to 
» lie in Ambuſh where the King or his People were to paſs, ver 9g. 
Sg 9 And the man of God ſent unto che king of Ifraei, 


ſaying, Beware that thou paſs nor ſuch a place,for thi- 
ther the Syrians are come down. 
Io And the king of Iſrael ſent to the place hþ which 
the man of God cold him, and warned him of, and ſa- 
ved himſelf ; there nor once nor twice &. 


6 Either Spies,to try whether the Propher ſpake Truth:or rather 
Soldiers, to iccure the Place and Paſſage deligned. i Either his 
Perſon when he was to pats thar way : or his People, or Places 
of Importance. k Bur much more frequently, 


K 1.8 & 2» 


Chap. V 
11 Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was fore 
troubled for this thing, and he called his ſervants, and 
ſaid unto them, Will ye not ſhew me which of us 5s for 
the king of Iſrael ? 
12 And one of his ſervants faid, + None, my lord, + x4ep, 
O king : but Eliſha the prophet, that is in Iſrael,telleth 
the king of Iſrael the words that thou ſpeakelſt in thy 
bed-chamber. 
12 T And he ſaid, Go, and ſpie where he is, that EF 
may ſend and fetch him /. And it was told him,faying, 
Behold he zs in Dothan . 


{ For though I cannot conceal my Deſtgns from him, yet T may 
poſſibly take him by force ; his Power being, I doubr nor, much 
inferiour to his Knowledge, 1m A City near Sheichem, Gen.37. 17. 
and not far from Samaria. : 

14 Therefore ſent he thither horſes, and chariots, 
and a F great hoſt : and they came by night and com- + Heb. 
paſſed the city abour. heavy. 


15 And when the || ſervant of the man of god » was Or, Mn'qf 


riſen early, and gone forth o,behold, an hoſt compaſſed * 
the City, both with horſes and chariots : and his ſervant 


ſaid unto him, Alas my maſter, how ſhall we do ? 

u Who having been with him bur alittle time,even ſince Gehazis 
Diſmiſſhon,had not yet ſeen anyExperiments of his great Power-or, 
if he had hisFaith might eaſily be ſhaken upon ſo great & ſudden a 
danger. 0 Either out of the Gates of the City, where he might lee 
them ; or, out of his Houſe into the Streets of the City. where he 
might learn this by the Common Fame and Tumultr of the People. 


16 And he anſwered, Fear not : for * they that be *2 Chron 


with us, are moe than they that be with them. 

17 And Eliſha prayed, and ſaid, LORD,I pray thee, 
open his eyes,tha: he may ſee p. And the LORD open- 
-d the eyes of the young man,and he ſaw : and behold, 
the mountain was full of horſes, and chariots of fire 
4 round about Eliſha r. | 

f That by ſome viſible Appearance, he may ſee the Inviſible 
Guard of Angels which incompaſls & defend us. q Which is uſeful, 
both for Defence to thoſe that are ſurrounded by it,8& Offence to 
the Enemies who ſhall arremprt to break through ir. »r Either the 
Mountains were round about the City, and therefore round about 
El:jha who was within it: or, he ſaw in a Viſion, Eliſbs upon the 
Mountain encompatled with Fiery Horſes and Chariots. 

13 And when they came down to him s,Eliſha pray- 
ed unto the LORD, and faid, Smire this people, 1 pray 
thee, with blindneſs. And he ſmote them with blind- 
neſs i, according to the word of Elitha. 

5s Either in the City, into which they eaſily gor admiſſion wh 
they Declared, Thar the only end of their coming, was to tas 
Elijba : or in the Field without the City, whither he went ro meet 
theme : Nor with a toral Blindneſs, that they could fee nothing, for 
then they would not have followed him ; but with a partial Biind- 
neſs taat they could nor diſtina&iy diſcern the Man they ſought ; 
which mighr be by ſome Alteration made by God in their Brain, 
or in the Air. Sce the Notes on Gen. 19: 11. 

199 And Elitha faid unto chem, This is not the way, 
neither #s this the City « : + follow me, and I will bring + neb. 
you to the man whom ye ſeek x. Burt he led them to come ye 
Samaria y. : eto. 

uTo wir, where you will find the Man for whom you ſcek,which 
was very true ; becauſe he was now come out of the City ; and if 
they had gone on in that way into the City, they had found that 
Elijba was gone thence. There is indeed ſome Ambiguity in his 
Speech, and an Intention ro deceive them, which hath ever been 
eireemed lawtul in the ſtare of War,as apprars from the uſe --fStra- 
tagems x And ſo he did, though not in ſuch manner as they expected 
and defired.y Which ſeemed to them to be ſme ſmall and ordinary 


322 Fo 


; City ; their Senſes being {till deluded by a Divine Operation. 
5 Butas one was felling a beam, the F ax head f fell 


20 And it came to paſs, when they were come into 
Samaria, that Eliſha ſaid, LORD, open the eyes of theſe 
men, that they may ſee. And the LORD opened their 
eyes, and they ſaw,and behold rhey were in the midſt of 
Samaria. _ 

21 And the king of Iſrael z ſaid unto Eliſha, when 
he ſaw them, My father «, ſhall I ſozite them ? ſhall T 
ſmice them 6? 

z To whom E!;ſbz had doubtleſs ſent notice of his Intentions, that 
he might accordingly p:epare himſelf. a Now he gives him this Ti- 
tle of Reverence and Aﬀecrion, becauſe of a great & preſent Benefit 
he received from him ; though ctherwiſe he hated him, and would 
not hearken to his Counſel. 6 The repetition of the queſtion ſhews 
his great deſire to ſmite them, and that with utter Deſtruction. 

22 And he anſwered, Thou fhalt not ſmite them : 
Wouldeſt thou ſmice choſe whom thou haſt taken cap- 
tive with thy ſword,and with thy bow c ? ſer bread and 


water before them 4, that-they may eat and drink, and 
go to their miſter. 


c Ir is againft the Laws of humaniry,and Cuſtom of War,to kill 
Captives,though chou thy ſelf haſt raken them with thy own Sword 
and Bow; which may ſcem to give thee ſome colour of Right to 
deſtroy them ; but much more unworthy will it be in cold Blood 
to kill! thete, whom nor thy Arms, but Gods Miraculous Providence 
hath put into thy Hands. 43. e. Give them Meat and Drink, which 
may refreſh and ſtrengthen them for their Journey. Which was 
an action of ſingular Picty and Charity,in doing good to their Ene« 
mies, which was much to the Honour of the true Religion; and 


of no leſs Prudence, that kereby the hearts of the $7/2%7 might be 
3M 2 both 


[ 
[14 
| 


1:1 


. 


hap. 


VI. 


[E 4 


both mollified towards the Iſ-aelites,and afraid to Oppoſe that Peo- 
ple who had ſuch an Invincible Protettor: 
23 And he prepared great proviſion for them, and 


when they had eaten and drunk, he ſent them away e, 
and they went to their maſter. >o the bands of Syria 


came no more f into the land of Iſrael. 

e Refreſhed, bur diſarmed, as is moſt probable. f Either, 1. In 
ſuch a manner,to wit, in ſmall Bands,or Companies, which might be 
Entrapped, as theſe had been : bur their next Artempt was, by an 
open and ſolemn War,and a Conjunttion of all their F orces,which 
they till ridiculouſly conceited would be roo hard for the King, & 
Prophet,and God of [ſrael;notwithſtanding their multiplied Experi- 
ences to the contrary. Or, 2. For ſome conſiderable time; unt11 
the Terror of theſe Examples was got our of their Minds. 

24 © And it came to paſs after this, that Benhadad 


king of Syria g gathered all his hoſt, and went up,and 


beſieged Samaria. 

g He whom Ahab wickedly and fooliſhly ſpared, 1 Kings 20:42. 
who now comes to requite Ababs Kindneſs and to fulfil thar Divine 
Prediftion. Benhadad was a name very frequent among the Kings of 
Syria, 1 Kings 15. 18, &«- and Chap: 13 24+ 2 Kings 13:3, 24. 1t not 
common to them all- See Jer: 49: 27- Amos 1: 4» . 

25 And there was a great famine in Samaria : and 
behold they beſieged it,until an afſes head was /0/d for 
fourſcore pieces 6 of ſfilver,and che fourth part of a kabz 


of doves dung & for tive pieces of ſilver. 

h Suppoſed to be Shekels ; and the common Shekel being valued 
at fifteen pence of Engliſh Moneygthis amounts to five pounds. A vaſt 
price, eſpecially for that which had on it ſo little Mear, and that 
unwholſome,and unclean by Law,Levir 11.13.though neceſſity might 
ſeem to excuſe their Violation of that Law. 7 A meaſure containing 
24 Eggs. k Which they uſed not for Fre ( for he is ſpeaking here 
only of the ſcarcity of Food) but for Fo:'d Which if it ſeem 1n- 
credible,it muſt be conſidered, Firſt, That Famine hath conſtrained 
People to eat things as improper and unfit for nouriſhment as this, 
as dry Leather,and Mans Dung,as is implied, 12.36.12. and affirmed 
by grave Hiſtorians. Secondly, That ſome Creatures do ulually cat 
the Dung of others. Thirdly, That Doves Dung,though it be hor- 
ter than ordinary,might in other reſpe&s be fitter for Nouriſhment 

than other, as being made of the beſt and pureſt Grains, and hav- 
ing ſome moiſture 1n it, &«c. Fourthly, That this H:brew Word be- 
ing of an abſcure & doubrful ſignification,and no were elſe uſed, 
may be,and is by Learned Men otherwiſe rendred and underſtood: 
either, firſt, of the Corn which is found in the Crops of Doves: or, 
ſecondly, of the Guts and other Inwards of Doves : or rather, 
thirdly, of a ſort of Cicer or Pesſe, which in the Arabick Language 


'( which is near a kin to the Hebrew, and from which many Words 


are explained ) is Called Doves Dung : for this was a Food much in 
uſe amongſt the poorer Iſraelites, and was by all eſteemed a very 
courſe Food, and therefore fit to be joynei with an afles Head : 
and a Kab was the uſual Meaſure of all torts of Grains and Fruits 
of thar ſort. 

26 And as the king of Iſrael was pafling by upon 


the wall ], there cried a woman unto him, ſaying, Help 
my lord, O king. 
1 To give neceſlary order for the Defence of the City againſt 


| Aſſaults, and to ſee if the ſeveral Guards were watchful and dili- 


] Or, Le? 
not the 
Lord ſave 
thee. 


3 


—4 


*Deut. 
28:53457. 
+ Heb. 
orher. 


gent, and if his Dire&ions were executed, and to obſerve the Mo- 
tions of the Enem 


Y. 
27 And he fſaid,|| If the LORD do not help thee ws, 
whence ſhall I help thee ? our of the barn-tloor, or out 


of the wine-preſs » ? 

m Or, let not God help thee,as ſome both ancient and late Interpre- 
ters render the Words. So they are Words of Impatience,& Rage, 
and a formal Curſe, withing that God would not he'p her, as tc 
could nor.as Joſephus amongſt others underſtand it : which agrees too 
well with the Chara&er of the Man, an Infide}, and .n Idolater, 
and a wicked Man,and at this time ina great Rage,as appears from; 
wv. 31. Or, they may be rendred thus, No; (as this Hebrew Particle 1s 
ſometimes uſed, as Job 20 17. Pſal: 34:5.and 41:2.and 50 3 Prov: 3 
3, 25. and 31 4.) let the Lord help thee, So it may be taken,cither, 
Firſt, As a Dire&ion : No : do not cry to me; but to God for help 

God help thee, for I cannot; Or rather, Secondly, As a prophane 
Scoff. No: come not fo me, but go to him to whom El:ſha diretts 
you ; Pray to the Lord: you ſee how ready he is to help you,by his 
ſuffering you to come to this Extremity:wait upon God for Relief. 
as Eliſha adviſeth me: but I will wait no longer for him, v. 33. and 
T will take a courſe with Eliſha for thus abuſing both me and my 
People with vain hopes. Or, thus,*he Lord (on whom forlooth thou 
and 1 are commanded to wait for help) w:/ not help thee, as he cou'd 
eaſily do, and would do, if he were ſo good as Eliſha pretends ; 
whence then ſhall T help thee ? n Doſt thou ask of me Corn or Wine 

which I want for my ſelf ? ; 

28 And the king faid unto her, What aileth thee ? 

And ſhe anſwered, This woman ſaid unto me, Give me 


thy ſon, that we may cat him to day,and we will eat 


1 XN & © 


upon the Wall, either to defend the City ; or rather, t» ſeckfor 
relief from the Soldiers, for whoſe Provitions the King doubtleſs 
rook ſpecial care, as it was neceſſary, for the preſervation of the 
place. { Under his inner Garments, in token of his ſorrow, «nd 
with a pretence of humiliation, which he would ſhew by ourward 
ſigns, as his Father 4þab had done, not without ſome advantage 
to himſelf, 1 King. 21. 27, 28, 29. 

- 3X Then he faid,* God do ſo, and more alſo to me, 
if the head of Eliſha the ſon of Shaphac ſhall ftand on 
him this day z. 

; If I do not this day take his head and life» This wretched and 
partial Prince overlooks his own great and various fins, & amongſt 
others,his obſtinate cleaving to the Idolatry of the Calves,and tie 
Whoredoms and witchcrafts of his Mother Jezebel, 2 King 9.22.and 
the Wickedneſs of his People, which was the true and preper cauſe 
of this and all their Calamities ; and lays the blame of all upon 
Eliſha, either, ſuppoſing that he who had the Spiric of Ejah reſting 
upon him, had brought this Famine by his Pray ers, as El:ja/ had 
formerly done, 1 King, 17.1 or, becauſe he had encouraged them ro 
withſtand the Syrians, by promiſing them help from 'zo0d in due 
time : or, becauſe he would not by his interceſſion to God, and the 
working of a Miracle, deliver them from theſe Calamities, as he 
calily could have done. Burt he did not conſider,that the Prophets 
could not work what Miracles, and when they pleaſed, but only as 
far as God ſaw fit, whoſe time was not yer come ; otherwiſe, it 
was Eliſha's Intereſtygas well as theirs,to be freed from this diſti cls, 


32 But Eliſha fat in his houſe »,(and the Elders x tat 
with him) and the king ſent a man from before him y: 


but ere the meſſenger came to him, he ſaid to the el- 
ders z, See ye how this ſon of a murderer a hath ſent to 
take away mine head b:Look when the meſſenger com- 
etch, ſhuc tne door, and hold him c faſt at the door : 


Is no. the found of his maſters feet behind him 4d 2? 

u In the Houſe where he lodged : for he had no Houſe of his own, 
having forſaken all when he followed Elijah, 1 Kings 19.20,21. x $o 
they nughr be called, Either, Firſt, from their age. Or ratherg 
Secondly,trom their office, which was either Ecclefiatrical,or Civil : 
ſo they were cither the Sons of the Prophets : or rather,ſome Godly 
men who were then in ſome power and Office, either in the Court, 
or Army,or City as may leem probable trom what he requ:res of 
them. And though Joram was a wicked King, and mol: oi ais Ofi= 


; Ccrs probably I.ke himielf ; yet there were ſome of them, whom 


El jha's itoly Life and Powerful M:niſtry, and Glorious Miracles, 
aiid he great and publick benetits procured by him, had won to 
God, and ro the True Religion, at leaſt ro the profelſion of it 

among which Jehu might be one : and theſe were here littiag with 
him ;. cither, to ieceive comfort and counſel from him in rhis di- 
{rrefſed time ; or rather, to ſfollicite kim to uſe his Power with 
G d, tor their relief : which according'y he doth, and in compli- 
ance with them, nor out of any fear of the King, ( from which he 
very well knew by frequent experience,and certain aſſurance, that 
God both could and would deliver him ), he gives the foilowing 
aniwer, chap.7-+, y Or, one of them who ſtood before his face,one of 
his Guaid,or tome other Officer, to rake away his head as it follows. 
z Bcing admoniſhed by God of his danger. a The genuine Son 
of that wicked 4hab tie Murderer of the Lords Prophets, i King 18. 
4 and 21 9. whoſe ſon he is not by Birth only, but alto by his man- 
ners & bjoody ditpuſirion. Compare 50þ.8.44.This expreſſion may 
feem very harth and unfit ; nor is it to be drawn into imitation by 
others ; bur it muſt be conſidered, that he was an extraordinary 
Prophet, intruſted with a power in ſome ſort ſuperior to that of 
Joram,and had Authority to controle and rebuke him in the Name 
of the King of kings. 6 To kill me,before he hear what I have ro 
ſay. c Nor to the King. but the Meſſenger. who was laſt men- 
rioned ; that he may not break it upon me,and take away my Life, 
before the King comes. & You ſhall nor necd to hold him long 

"or the King is juſt at his heels coming, as is probable ; either ro 
reCal his rain and furious 1tenrence ; or, at leaſt to debate the mat- 
rer with the Prophet, and to procure relief. 


33 And while he yet taiked with them, behold, the 
meitenger came down unto him e; and he faid f, Be- 
10id this evil g is of the LORD 65, what ſhould 1 waic 
tor the LORD any longer z ? 


my ſon to morrow. | 

29 So * we boiled my ſon,and did eat him o : and ] 
ſaid unto her on the F next day,Give thy ſon, that we 
may ear him : and ſhe hath hid her ſon p. 

o Adreadful Judgment threatned to them in caſe of their Apoſta 
Cy,Deut.28.56,57- in which they were now deeply plunged. Com- 
pare Ez-k 5-10. p Either,that ſhe might eat him alone; or rather,thar 
tbe mighr ſave him from Death, her Bowels yerning towards him, 
and her hunger being in great meaſure ſatisfied. 


30 © Andit came to paſs, when the king heard the 
words of the woman,thar he rent his clothes q, and he 
paſſed by upon the wall, and the people r looked, and 
behold, be had ſackcloth within upon his fleſh / 

q Partly. in Grief for ſuch an horrid Fatt : and partly, through 


was held taſt, thar he could not come at the Propher till the King 
came, as the Prophet had commanded them to do. f Either, 1. Te 
Meſſenger in the Kings name & word- Or,Second!ly, The King hims 
{clf, who, though nor here named,may be preſumed ro be preſent 

both by the Prophets prediction of his ſpeedy coming,and by the 
preſence of the Lord,on whoſe hand the king leaned, chap. 7.2: g This 
dreadful Famine, which is now ſo extream, that Women are for- 
ced to eat their own Children.h He hath inflicted it,and {for onchr 

that I ſee) he will not remove it. Thus he lays all the blame upon 

God, not, as he ought,upon his own, and his M thers wickedneſs, 

which provoked God, who doth nor willingly afflift, ro ſend this 

heavy Judgment upon him. 7 Thou bids me wai! upon God for 

help : but I perceive I may wait long enough before deliverance 

come ; I am weary with waiting,I can wait no longer. 


CHAP. VIE 


Eliſhs proph:ſieth incredible Plenty in Samaria : Aud the death of a zreat 
Lord, who would not believe the Propheſie, 1, v. Four Lepers wiſe: the 
Camp of the Syrians, ani bring tidings of their flight, being haſted away 
by God.z —11. The king ſindeth Spizsr, who confirm this Report : And 
he [poileth their Tents ; Great Plenty : the Lord, on whoſe Hand the King 
leaned, 1s troden upon by the Pecple, and dieth, 12 ——=—— 20 


Yen Eliſha ſaid a, Hear ye the word of theLORD, 
Thus ſaith the LORD 5b, To morrow abnut this 
time ſhall a meaſure c of fine flour be /old for a ſhekel d, 
and two meaſures of barley for a ſhekel, in the gate of 
Samaria. 


a Either,to the Meſſenger,to be reported to the King : or rather, 
ro the King, being then come to him, as it is exprefſcd, wer-18.and 


Indignation at the Prophet, ver» 34 7 Who were in great numbers 


to bis Courtiers, who were come wath him, vr. 2. þ The Lord 


whom, 


Chap. VII, 


e To wit, to the door, where alſo we are to underſtand that he 


Chap 


*, Sar 
fi 24h 


f Heb, 
» [bb 
fn Pte 
Wament 


: Heb, 


in It: 


4 gt js 
, 48d, 


: 2 Tm. 
\ 244 


f Heb, 
» ſob 
fn Pla 
"meng, 


tlic 
(8 1: 


: chap: VIE: 


| People of Ca :4aa-: 


IL KK 8 


whom vou have ſo highly offended, and at preſent deſpiſe and refuſe 
to wait upon, of his own meer Grace and Bounty hath ſent you the 
glad ridings of your deliverance. c Heb. Seab, a meaſure containing f 
fix Cabs, or 144 Egg-ſhelis, or about a Peck and a Pottle of our, 
Mcature, 4 Compare this with chap: 6e 25. | 
2 Then + a lord on whole hand the king leaned e, | 
anſwered the man of GOD, and faid, Behold, if the: 


thing be? And he ſaid, behold, thou ſhale ſee jt with 
thine eyes, but ſhalt not eat thereof yg. 

e When he walked. See Chap. 5, 18, f Through which he could 
Rain down Corn, as once he did Manna. g A juſt puniſhment for 
ſuch peremptory unbelief, whereby he m:de not only the Propaer, 
but even God himſelf ( in whoſe Name it was evident Elijha faid 
and did this and other things ) a Iyar» 

2 T And there were four leprous men at the entring 
in of the gate h : and they ſaid one to another, Why 
fit we here until we die ? 

h To wit. of the City ; out of which they were ſhut by vertue of 
Gods Law, Lev. 13. 46. and 14+ 3. either, the dwelling place of 
the Lepers, was near the Gate : or, they were come very near the 
Gate, tor fear of the Syrians. 

4 If we ſay, we will enter into the city, then the Fa- 
mine zs in the city, and we ſhall die there : and if we fir 
ſtill here, we die alſo» Now therefore come, and ler 
us fall unto the hoſt of the Syrians: ifthey fave us alive, 
we ſhall live; and if they kill us, we ſhall bur die. 

5 And they roſe up in the ewilight i co go unto the 
camp of the Syriins : and when they were come to the 
uttermo{t parc of the camp of Syria, behold, there 2945 
noe man there. 

; In the Evening twilight, as appears from v. 9. and 12. 

6 For the LORD made the hoſt of the Syrians to 
*heara noiſe koi chariots ,and anoiſe of horſes, even the 
noiſe of a great hoſt: and they ſaid one toanother,Lo,the 
king of Ifrael hath hired againſt us che kings of the Hit- 
tices /, and the kings of the Egyptians » to come upon us. 

k Either, in the Air: or rather in their Ears : otherwiſe the 
Samar'rans hai heardit- { Under which name (as elſewhere under 
the name of the Amorites) he ſeems to underſtand al!, or any of *he 
For though the greateſt number of that people 
wer. deſtroyed, yet very maiy of them were ſpared, and many ot 
them upon zoſbua's com.ng, tled away, tome to more remote parts, 
( which that famous and ancient Inſcription upon a Pillar in Africa 
reſtifics) and others to the Lands bordering upon Canaan, where by 
reaton of the ſcarcity of Inhabitants there was in that Age roum 
enough forthem; and thete they leated themſelves, and grew nume- 
rous and powerful, and had (after their ancient and conſtant manner) 
Kings over them. The Kings alſo of Z,rw or Sidon may be here 
included. m By whichthey may underſtand, either the King of &gypr 
the Plural number being put for the Singular, as it is ellewheie : 
or. the Princes and Governours of the ſeveral Nom; or Provinces 1n 
Egyp:, ſuch being oft called &-ngs in Scripture. 

7 Wherefore they aroſe and fled in the twilight, and 
left their rents, ard their horſes, and their atles, even 
the c'mp as it was, and fled for their life -. . 

:”. To ſave their Livesz which they fancied tobe in ſuch preſent 
and extieam danger, that they durſt nor ſtay ro take away any of 
their Goods, bur every man fl:d rhe next way before him- 

8 And when thele lepers came co the uttermoſlt part of 
the camp, they wenrtinto one tent, and dideat and drink, 
and carried thence filver,and goid, and raiment,and went 
aid hid#t : andeame again, and entred into anorher tent, 
and carried chence aſs, and went and hid zz. 

9 Then they ſaid oneto another, We do not well»: 
this day « a day af goodrtidings, and we hold our peace : 
if we carry till the morning- light, f lome miſchicfwill 
come upon us : now therefore come, that we may gc 
and rell the kings houthold. 

n Not well for our Brethren, whom we ſhould pity and help : 
nor well for our ſelves, tor we may ſuffer for this negle&t, eithet, 
from the Syrians, who may lie lurking hereabouts; or, from ou! 
King and people ; or, from Gods immediate hand.. 


12 So they came, and called unto the porter of che 
City : and they toid them o, ſaying, We came to the 
camp of t.1e Syrians, and behold, therewas no man there, 
neither voice of man, but horſes tied, and aſles tied, 
and tne tents as they were, 

o To wit, the Porter and his Companies. 

11 And he called the porters p, and they told zz ro 
the kings houſe within. 


Þ Either, his fellow-porters of the City : or rather, the Porters 
or Guards of the Gate of the Kings Houle. 


i2 4 And theking arole in the night, and faidunto 
his ſervants, I will now (hew you what the Syrians have 
done to us : they know that we be hungry, therefore are 
they gone out of the camp; to hide themſelves in the 
held, faying, When they come out of the ciry, we ſhall 
catch t'-em alive, and get into the city. 


MX &- % 


q So the ſenſe is, We may well venture theſe hrrſes, though we 
have no more. becauic both they and we are ready to periſh through 
hunger ; and therefore Jet us uſe them whilſt w2 may for our 
common good,or to make the diſcovery. Burt the repetition of the 
Phraſe ſeems to imply ſomething more empharical and ſignificant 
than the ſaving of tour or five Horſes, for which it is not probable 
they would be fo much concerned in their circumſtances: The 


bo] ; 4 x . : words therefore may be rendred otherwiſe, Bekold, they are of a truth 
'" LORD would make windows f in heaven, might this ' , y are of 


{ the Hebrew prefix, Caph, being not here a note of ſimilitude, as the 
other Tranſlations make it, and as it is commonly uſed. bur an 
aftirmation Gf the truth and certainty of the things, as it is taken 
Num: 11; 1: Deut.9g* to: Hoſt 4* 4:and 5:10: John 1-14. ( all the mult.tule 
of the horſes of 1/-ael that are left in it : ( to wit, in the Ciry : )behold, 
I fay they are even all the multitud:s of the Horſes of the Iſraelites 
which (i. e. which multitude ) are c:nſumed, i.e. reduced tothis ſmall 
number, all conſumed except theſe five. And thus the vulgar L:tin, 
and ſome others, underſtand ir. And this was indee! a memorable 
paſſage, and worthy of a double behold, ro ſhew what miſchief the 
Famine had done both upon Men and Beaſts, and to what alow ebb 
the King of 1/ra:l was come, thar all his Troops of Horſes, to which 
he had truſted, were ſhrunk to ſo ſmill a number. 


14 They took therefore f two chariot-horſes r, and + Heb 


the king ſent after the hoſt of the Syrians, ſaying, Go, 5» chk Ill: 
o0f5 6f Ror=:it 


and ſee. 


r Or, two chariots of Horſes ; or rather. two chariot-horſes: as divers) = 


render the words, 1 e, Horſes which belonged to the Kings Chariots. 
For ſingle Horſes ſeem much more proper for this ſervice, than Cha- 
riots and Horſes. And whereas it was moved by the Kings Servant, 
that all the five Horſes ſhould be ſent, it ſeems it was thought by 
the King and orhers, that two were ſufficient for that purpoſe, 

15 And they went after them unto Jordan, and lo; 
all the way was full of garments and vetlels, which the 
Syrians had caſt away f in their haſte / . and the meſſen- 
gers returned and told the king. 

JS Or, in their fear or confternation, wherewith God ſtruck them. 

16 And the people went out, and ſpoiled the cents 
of the Syrians: So a meaſure of fine flour was /«ld for 
a thekel, and two meaſures of barley for a ſhekel, accor- 
ding co the word of the LORD. 

17 4 And the king appointed the lord on whoſe hand 
he leaned, co have the charge of the gate 7 : and the 
people trod upon him in the gate, and he died, as the 
man of God had ſaid, who ſpake when the king came 
down to him. - | 

t Partly to prevent tumults, and diſordersand miſchiefs amongſt 
the people : and partly, to take order about the ſhutting of the Gares, 
itneed were, and if the Syriazs ſhould happen to return upon them. 

18 And ir came to paſs, as che man of God had ſpo- 
ken to the king, ſaying, Two meaſures of barley for a 
thekel, and a meaſure of fine flour for a ſhekel., ſhall be 
co morrow about this time in the gate of Samaria : 

19 And that lord an{wered the man of Gud, and ſaid, 
Now behold, ifthe LORD ſhould make windows in hea- 
ven, might ſuc"na thing be? And hefſiid, Behold, thou 
(balt ſee ic with thine eyes, but ſhalt nor eat thereof. 

20 And oit fell our unto him : for the people trod 
upon himinthe gate, and he died, 


CAP. VII. 


The Shunamite having, by Eliſha's 4dvuice, left the Land becauſe of the 
Famine, returneth home : And hath her whole Eſtate reſt»red to her for 
Elifha's ſake, i=«..6. He cometh to Damaſc.1s Benhaaad is ſick And 
ſend. th Hazael ro him with Preſents ; Eliſha foretelleth Benhadadswiolent 
death ; and Hazatl's cruel Reign, with Tears, Haxael's Auſwer ; He 
killerh bus Maſter, and ſucceedeth hm, 7 -—— 15. FJehiram's wicked 
Reign in Judah . Edom and Libna revolt, 16 23. He dieth, and 
Ahaz1ah his $.n ſucceedeth him; tius wicked Reign; He entertaineth 
Friendſhip with Joram King of Iſrael, 24 29. 


Chip. vill 


es 


IO. 29. 


+ Gr. 


Hen 2 ſpake Eliſha unto the woman b ( * whoſe ſon « ;1 - .. 


he had reſtored to life ) ſaying, Ariſe, and go thou 
and thine houſhold, and ſojourn whereſoever thou canſt 


Chap: 


4. 35+ 


ſojourn c : for the LORD * tath called fora famine 4, * pai. 


aud it ſhall alſo come upon the land ſeven years e. 


a This particle of time may be underſtood, either, particularly Hag.1.11:; 


and definitely of the time next following the former Hiſtory . or, 
more generally and indefinitely ( as it is frequent!y uſed ) of che time 
in which Elba and this Shwamitiſh Woman lived. Poflibly this 
mighr happen before the Hiſtory of Naawan, chap 5. or at leaſt, before 
the Siege of Samaria, chap. 6. Butthis is not certain. 6 Exprefling 
his gratitude for her former Kindnefſes, by taking ſpecial care for 
her preſervation. c In any convenient place out of the Land of 
Iſrael. 4 i.e. Hath app«inted to bring a Famine or a great ſcarcity 
of Proviſions. This Expreſſion intimates, that all afli&tions are 
ſent by Gud, and come at his Call or Command. e A double r:me 
to the former Famine under El:jah, Fames 5. 17. which is but juſt 
and reaſonable, becauſe they were {till obſtinate and incorrigible 
under all the ſevere and ſucceeding Judgments of God, and under 
the powerful miniſtry of Elſba, who confirmed his DoQrine by 
glorious Miracles. See Lev. 26. 21, 24, 28. RE 

2 And the, woman aroſe, and didafter the ſaying. of 
the man of God : and ſhe went with her houſhold, and 
ſojourned in the land of the Philiſtines f ſeven years. 

f Either, becauſe that was near her Lands and dwelling, which 


13 And one of his ſervants anſwered and ſaid, Let 
fome take, | pray thee, five of the horſes that remain, ! 
which are lefc Fin the City : ( behold, they are as the | 
multitude of Iſrael that are let in it : behold, I ſay, | 
they are even as all che mu:tirude of the 1traclites that | 
are conſumed q ) and let us {cad and fce; | 


ſhe thought the might have an eye to, when occalioa required. : or, 
becaule there was more plenty than in Judah : or, becaute ſhe kaew 
that her going to dwell in Judabþ would be very diſpleaſing to the” 
King of 1ſrae!, whole favour the was like to need hereafter. Nor 
was there now that danger of Idolatry from the Philifines, as there had 
beed formerly, becauic their Power and influence was now growts 
inconſiderable, and probably many of the jcw; and Trad;tes lived 

2 M3 anon $ 


Tor. 16: 


in || 
their aft 
n:ſhment, 


o- \if 
It 


| 


Or, 


eunnuch. 


bis hand, 


} Heb. 


tive. 


+ Heb. 


* Chaps 


T3: 3. 
Amos 
"9, 
* Chap. 
T5- 16. 
Hoſ13.16 
Amos 1. 
13% 


zap. VIII. 


{ +} Heb: in 


Chap.1.2, 


and ſet it. 


IT. 


among them. And this Land, though bordering upon 7rael, was 
free from this Famine, that it might appear that this was a ſpecia 
Hand and Judgment of God upon the 772elites for their Idolatry, 
and for their unprofitableneſs under all the means of Grace which 
.now they plentifully enjoyed by Eliſha and many other Prophets ; 
which the Philiffines not enjoying, their ſin was much lefs, and 
therefore their preſent condition was better. 

2 Andit came to paſs at the ſeven years end, thatthe 
woman returned out of the land of the Philiſtines : and 
ſhe went forth to cry unto the king for her houſe, and 


for her land g. 

g Which having been forſaken by her, were poſſeſſed by her 
Kindred,or others,who had obtained them from the King,and now 
intended to keep the poſſeſſion of them- _ 

4 And the king talked with Gehazi the ſervant of the 


man of God b, ſaying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the 


great things that Eliſha hath done. 
; h Queft, How could the King ſpeak with Gehazz who was a Leper - 
'Anſw. Either, the King might ſpeak with him at a convenient 
diſtance, it being uſual for others to diſcourſe with Lepers, as 
'2 Kings 7,8. Matth. 8. 2. Luke17. 12. or, his Leproſy might be of 
that ſort which was not infeQious 2 or, if his Leproſy was ſuch as 
made him yet to be unclean. the Kings great Curioſity might ealily 
prevail with him to breaka Ceremonial Law, who made no ſcruple 
of violating Gods Moral Law. : 

5 And it came to pals, as he was telling the king how 


he had reſtored a dead body to life, that behold, the 
woeman# whoſe ſon he had reſtored to life, cried to the 
king, for herhouſe, and for her land. And Gehazi ſaid, 
My lord, O king, this # the Woman, and this 5s her 


ſon, whom Eliſha reſtored to life. 

; By Gods wonderful and Gracious Providence brought thither 
in the moſt advantagious ſeaſon. 

6 And when the king asked the woman &, ſhe told him. 


So the king appointed untoher a certain || officer, ſaying, 
Reſtore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field, 
ſince the day that ſhe lefc the land, even till now. 

» & Concerning the truth of Gehaz:'s relation: 


7 © And Eliſhacame to Damaſcus / ; and Ben-hadad 
the king of Syria was ſick, and it was told him, ſaying, 


The man of God is come hither. 
_ T Either to theCiry : or rather. to the Kingdom of Damaſers ; by 
comparing v- 9. as Samaria, which properly was the name of the 
City. is 1ometimes the name of the Kingdom ; of which fee on 
1 Kings 13: 32+ Hither he came by the ſpecial direQion of the ſpirit, 
and under Gods prote&tion, upon the Errand here following. 
8 And the king ſaid unto Hazael, Take a preſent in 
thine hand », and go meetthe man of God, andenquire 
of the LORD by him, ſaying, Shall T recover of chis 


diſeaſe ? 

-m By which he thought to purchaſe his Favour, and the healing 
of his Diſcaſe. ; 

9 So Hazael went to meet him, and took a preſent 


f with him, even of every good thing of Damaſcus, for- 
ty camels burden », and came and ſtood before him, and 
ſaid, thy ſon Ben-hadad o king of Syria hath ſent me to 
thee, ſaying, Shall I + recover of chis diſeaſe ? 


» Hazael carried the more noble Preſent, hoping, as his Maſter 
did, to ger ſome Intereſt in the Prophet, and advantage to himſelt 
by it. Whether the Prophet received it or not, isnot here mentioned ; 
but it is moſt probable he did not, from his former praGtice, chap: 5. 
and becauſe the Reaſons which then ſwayed him. were {till of the 
ſame Force, o He who before perſecuted him as an Enemy, chap 6: 
13, 14. now in hisExtremity honours him like a Father. 

10 And Eliſbaſaid unto him, Go, ſay unto him, Thou 
mayeſt certainly recover : Howbeit, the LORD hath 


ſhewed me, that he ſhall ſurely die p. 

Here is no contradi&tion: for the firſt words contain an Anſwer 
to Benhadads Queſtion, wv. 8. Shall I recover this Diſeaſe > To which 
the Anſwer is, thou mayeſt or ſbalt recover, i. e. notwithſtanding thy 
Diſeaſe, which is not mortal, and ſhall not take away thy life. The 
latter Words contain the Prophets Explication of. or Addition ro 
thar Anſwer, which is, that he ſhould die, not by the power of his 
Diſeaſe, but by ſome other Cauſe. Bur it is obſervable rhart in the 
Hebrew Text it is, lo, the Adverb, which ſignifies nor ; which though 
moſt affirm to be pur for h,the Pronoun, ſignifying zo him ; yer others 
take it as it lies, and Tranſlate the Words thus, Say, hou ſhalt not 
recover : for the Lord hath ſhewed me, that he ſball ſurely die Or, accor- 
ding to the former reading, the firſt Words may be taken inter- 
rogatively, ſay unto him, ſbalt thou indeedrecover ? ( as thou doſt flatter 
thy ſelf - ) no : ( which Negation is implied in the very queſtion, 
and gathered from the following Words ) for the Lord hath ſhewed 
me, that he ſhall ſurely die: 

11 And he ſetled his countenance ſtedfaſtly g, until 
he was aſhamedr : and the man of God wept. 

9 The Prophet fixed his Eyes upon Hazae! » Either, ti!) the Pro. 
Phet was aſhamed ro look any longer upon him : or, till Hazael was 
aſhamed, as apprehending that the Prophet ſuſpe&ed or diſcerned 
ſomethingextraordinary, and of an evil and ſhameful Nature in him 
The Hebrew words are ambiguous, and may indifferently be referred 
ro either of them : but they ſeem more properly to belong to Hazael, 


10. 32. & becauſe it follows by way of DiſtinCtion, The Man of God wopr. 


12 And Hazael faid, Why weepeth my lord ? And he 
anſwered, Becauſe I know * the evil that thou wilt do 
unto the children of Iſrael / : their ſtrong holds wilt 
thou ſet on fire, and their young men wilt thou ſlay with 

"the ſword, and wilt * dajh their children, and rip up 
their women with child. 


As. IC 


EN @ $8. 


j 


| Judah begin to reign, 


ſin in Hazzel : and the evil of ſuffering upon 1/7201, 


13 And Hazael ſaid, But what, 
that he ſhould do this great thing? And Eliſha anſwer- 
ed, The LORD hath ſhewed me that thou ſha beking 
over Syria #. 


and 9:8, or ſo impudent, for which Dogs are noted : or, ſo fierce and 
barbarous, and inhumane. Compare Pſal: 22: 16, 20: and 59: 6. 
# And when thou ſhalt have Power in thy hand,thou wiltft diſcover 
that bloody Diſpoſition, and that Hatred againſt Gods people, which 
now lies hid from others, and poſſibly from thy ſelf . and therefore 
with the: Kingdom thou wiltſt inherit their cruel Diſpoſitions. 

14 So he departed from Eliſha, and came to his 
maſter, who ſaid to him, What ſaid Eliſha to thee > 
And he anſwered, He told me 7hat thou ſhouldeft ſurely 


TECOVECT x. 

:« He repreſents the Prophers Anſwer by halves, that by his 
maſters Security he might have the fitter opportunity to execute 
his Treaſonable Deſigne 

is Andit came topaſs on the morrow, that he took a 
thick cloth, and dipt is in water.and ſpread it on his face y, 


ſo that hedied : and Hazael reigned in his ſtead s. 

3 Pretending itmay be to cool his immcderate Hear with it, bur 
applying it fo cloſely, that he choaked him therewith : by which 
Aitifice his Death ſeemed to be Natural, there being no figns of a 
violent Death upon his Body. Andthis he the more boldly attempred, 
becauſe the Prophets Predi&ion made him confident of the Succels. 
z Having the favour of the People, and of the Men of War 

I6 « And in the fifth year of Joram the ſon of Ahab 


king of Iſrael, Jehoſhaphat being then king of Judah, 


to reign As 


was noted bef re : which Dominion ofhis ended at his fathers return. 
But now Jeh:ſhaphat, being not far from his Death, and having divers 
Sons, and fearing ſome Competition and Diſſention among them, 
makes Jehoram Ring the ſecond time, as David did Solomon upon the 
like occaſion, 1 Chron: 29+ 22; which 1s the thing here related. But 
of this ſee more in the Notes on 2 Kings i: 17: and 3: r. 

I7 Thirty and two years old was he when he began 
to reign, and he reigned eight years b in Jeruſalem, 

6 Part with his Father, and part by himſelf alone. 

18And he walked in the way of the kings of Iſrael c, 
as did the houſe of Ahab : for * the daughter of Ahab 4 


was his wite ; and he did evil in che ſight of the LORD. 

c After his Fathers Death. d Athaliah, v. 26. This unequal 
Marriage, though J-hoſbaphat poſſibly deſigned it as a mean of uniring 
the rwo Kingdoms under one Head, and in the True Religion, is 
here and elſewhere noted, as the Cauſe both of the great Wickedneſs 
of his Poſterity, and of thoſe ſore Calamities which befel them. 


19 Yer the LORD would net deſtroy jJudah, for 


aim alway e# a Þ light f, and to his children. 


Covenant made with David. But when the Meſſiah was once come, 
chere was no more need of any Succeſſion, and the Scepter might and 
did withour any Inconvenience depart from Judah, and from all the 
iucceeding Branches of Davids Family, becauſe the Mefiah was to 
hold the Kingdom for ever in his own Perſon,th»ugh not in ſo groſs 
a way as the carna] Jews imagined, bur in a Spiritual manner. f i. e» 
A Son and Succellor. Of this Phraſe ſee on 1 Kings 11. 36. 

20 4 In his days Edom revolted from under the 
hand of Judah g, and made a king over themſelves. 

£ Under which they had been from Davids time, 2 Sam; 8, 14: 
Compare 1 Kings 22+ 47. 

2: SoJoram went over to Zair, and all the chariots 
with him, and he roſe by night and ſmotethe Edomites 
which compaſſed him about ; and the captains of the 
chariors, and the people h fled into their tents. 

h i. e. The common Soldiers of the Edomites, herein following the 
example of their Captains. 

22 Yet Edom revolted j from under the hand of Ju- 
dah untilthis day. Then Libnah & revolted / at the ſame 
Une. 

; Forthough Joram had given them a Defeat, yer it may ſeem to 
have been no great ſl:ughter, bur only a putting them to flight ; and 
therefore they might eaſily rally again. And Jehoram could nor pur- 
ſue the Victory, becauſe he was recalled by the revolt of his own 
Subje&s, which had took the occaſion of his Abſence and probably 
feared that others would follow their Enample, if they had the like 
occaſion. k A conſiderable City in Judah, belonging to the P1'eſts, 
Jof: 15; 42: and 21: 13. 1 Why, ſee 2 Chron: 21; 19, 11+ TItis probable 
they returned to their Obedience, becauſe thoſe Words, unto this day, 
which are added to the former Clauſe, are omitted here. 

23 And the reſt of the acts of Joram, and all that he 
did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of Judah ws ? 

m Of which ſee on 1 Kings 14; 19. of 

24 And Joram ſlept with his fathers, and was buried 
with his fathers in the city of David : and * Ahaziah 
his ſon reigned in his ſtead, 

25 © Inchetwelfth year of Joram # the ſon of Ahab 
king of Iſrael, did Ahaziaho the fon of Jehoram king of 


mn Of; 


— 


is thy ſervant a dog :, 


t Either, ſo vile and unworthy, as this Expreſſion is uſed, 2 Sam: 7.8: 


Chap VII. 
JSo here was a double Cauſe of his Grief and Tears, the evil of 


* Jehoram the ſon of Jehoſbaphat king of Judah + began * . cþ; 


21, 4 
a Jehoram was firſt made King or Vice-Roy by his Father divers t Heb. 
Years before this time, to wit, at his expedition to Ramoth-Gilead,as TUlgned, 


* Ver. 36+ 


David his ſervants ſake, * as he promiſed him to pive + , 5m. 
To 13: 

e Heb. al days, until the coming of the Meſſiah, as it is elſewhere t Heb. 
limited and explained : for ſo long, and nor longer, this Succeſſion candle, 0! 
might ſeem neceflary for the making good of Gods Promile and lamp. 


* 2, Chr 


ITY. £35 


4 


f Heb, 
wmber 1 
8 chamber; 
"1 King 
19, 16, 


"2 Chr, 


W , 7 


ls 


2G 


b, 
or 


Chit 


hap» IX: I I. 
Firſt, He began to Reign ia the Confines of Jorams rith and 12th. 
Ycar. in the very end of his 11th Year, or towards the beginning 
of the 12th, whence iris indifferently aſcribed to the one or the 
other. Or, Secondly, The one year of 4haz/#h did concur with 
the latter half of Jorams nth Year, and the former half of his 12th 
Year: and if he could not be ſaid to begin ro reign in both theſe 
Years, yet he might unqueſtionably be ſaid to reign in both of hem; 
and the Hebrew word, both here and chap: 5: 29. properly fignines 
hereigned, and not, he began 20 reign, as it is Tranſlated. Or, Thirdly, 
Ahaziah began to Reign with his Father, and during his Lite accor- 
ding to the late Example both in Judah and Iſrael, there being alio 
ſpecial occaſion for it, by reaſon of Jorams cruel and long ſicknets, 
2 Chron: 21. 18, &c. and this was in Joram's 11th Year, and then 
his Father diced, and he began his ſingle Reign in Jorams 12th Year, 
o Called alſo Jehoahaz, 2 Chron. 21s 17. and Ahaziah, 2 Chron, 22-6: 

26 Two and twenty years old p was Ahaziah when 
he began to reign ; and he reigned one year in Jeruſa- 
lem ; and his mothers name was Athaliah, the daughter 
9 of Onari king of Iſrael. | 

y How this agrees with 2 £/r0m: 22: 2. ſee on that place. q l« e. 
His Grand-daughter. See above on v 18. 

27 And he walked in the way of the houſe of Ahab, 
and did evil in the ſight of the LORD, as 43d the houſe 
of Ahab ; for he was the ſon in law of the houſe of 
Ahab r. 

r He was the proper Son of 4thaliah, Daughter of Ahab. and the 
Grand-Son-in-law of 4has, becauſe his Father was 4habs Son-in-law, 
v. 18, 

28 4 And he went with Joram the ſon of Ahab, to 
the war againſt Hazael king of Syria in Ramoth-gilead, 
and the Syrians wounded Joram. 

(Cap: 29 And * king Joram went back to be healed in Jez- 
415. reel of the wounds | which the Syrians had given hin» 
{., at Ramah {, when he fought againit Hazael king of 
nimewith : ? S 

+5rians Syria : and Ahaziah the fon of Jehoram king of Judah. 
vi ww went down to 1ſce Joram the fon of Ahab in Jezreel, 
s. hecouſe he was Þ ſick. 

Heb. =. { The ſame place with Ramoth, or Ramoth-Gilead. 


pied, 
C 1 AF 


Eliſha ſendeth a Y\ung Prophet with Inftrufions to anoint Jehu King over 
Iſrael: whom he chargeth to deffroy the Houſe of Ahav : and fleeth, 
g-— 10, Jehu 1s made King by the Soldiers, killeth Jaram in the Field of 
Naboth, 11 - 26. Killeth alſs Abaz.iah King of Judah, 217 —29. 
Cauſeth Jezebel ta be thrown out of a Window : who is devoured by Dogs, 
: manes 7 & 


AX D Eliſha the prophet called one of the children 
| of the prophets, and ſaid unto him, Gird up th) 
loins a, and take this box of oyl in thine hand, and g- 
to Ramoth-gilead. 

a For haſte, to take this opportunity when the Kings of 1ſ-ael and 


Judah were both abſent, chap: 8: 29: and Jehu, as it ſeems, was left 
in Chief Command. 


2 And when thou comeſt thither, look out there Je- 
hu the ſon of Jehoſhaphart, the ſon of Nimſhi, and goin, 
and make him ariſe up from among his brethren, and 

Hh, Carry him to an Þf inner chamber 6. 


tmber in 6 Partly, that the Work may not be hindred : and partly for 
[ember the ſecurity of thy own Perſon. See v. 3. 


'[ Kings Then * take the box of oyl, and pour zt on his 
9.16 head, and fay, Thus faith the LORD, I nave anointed 
thee king over Iſrael c : then open the door, and flee, 
and tarry not . 

c This was not his whole M«ſſage ; but the reſt of it is parcicularly 
declared, wv. 7.8, 9, 10. and is to be underſtood here. 

4 \ So the young man, even the young man the pro- 
phet, went ro Ramoth-gilead 4. 

d Which is herenoted, as an eminent aC& of Obedience, whereby 
he run into a manifeſt hazard of his Life. 

5 And when he came, behold, the captains of th.- 
hoſt were ſitting : and he ſaid, I havean errand toti.ce 
O captain. And Jehu ſaid, Unto which of all us ? 
And he ſaid, To thee, O captain. 

6 And he aroſe, and went into the houſe e, and he 
poured the oyl on his head f, and ſaid unto him, Thus 
{faith the LORD God of I{rael, * I have anointed thee 
king over the people of the LORD, even over Ifrael. 


e1. e. Intoan Inner Chamber in the Houſe, v. 2. 7 Thereby in 
Gods Name letting him in to the aftual poſſeflion of the Kingdom: 
For if Elijah did before this time Anoint him, as ſome think, from 
T Kings 19. 16. that Un&tion did only confer a remote right to the 
Kingdom, as Samue!'s Union did to David, 1 $a, i6. 13. Though 
others think Elijah did perform that Command by Elijha, to whom 
he left it in charge. and ELſha waited Gods time and commani4 for 
the aCtual execution of it, which he received at this rime. 
7 And thou ſhalt ſmite g the houſe of Ahab thy 
maſter b, that I may avenge the blood of my ſervants 
,  theprophets, and the blood of all the ſervants of the 
Kings LORD, * at the hands of jezebel. 
15, g1.e. Kill and deſtroy, as that word is uſed, Gen: 8: 21» and 
F, Kings elſewhere, h Thy former Lord and King. 


": (hr, 


4%nw,& 8 Forthe whole houſe of Ahab ſhall periſh, and *1 
» S will cur off from Ahab * him that piſlech againſt the 
5.22 Wall, and him taat is ſhut up, and leftin Iſrael. 


9 AndI will maks the houte of Ahab, like thehouſe 


K 1 8-6 


 Obj. Tr way in the eleventh year of Joram, chap: 9:29. al. Either, | of * Jerohoam the ſon of Nebat, and like the houſe of + 


- 


| 


F 


(Oy _or ] \ 


4 
* Baatha the ſon of Ahjjah. _ _ 
ito And the dogs ſhall eat Jezebel in the portion of 15: 20: & 
Jezreel z, and there ſhall be none to bury ber. And he 21 227 
opened the door, and fled. _ 


' 
7 In that part of Land in or near the City, which belonged to | 
Naboth. | 


| 
11 Y Then Jehu came forth to the ſervants of his | 
i | | 


+ 


| 
| 
a4 | 


fore came this mad fellow #2 tothee ? And he ſaid unto 2*%®: 
11m, Ye know the man, and his communication ». 

k To the reſt of the Commanders and Officers there preſent, / Is 
not this unlucky Meſſenger come with ſome ill Tidings ? » They 
perceived him to be a Prophee by his Habit, and Ge'itures, and 
manner of Speech. And theſe prophane Soldiers eſtecmed the 
Lords P:ophers Mad-men partly, becauſe of their negleQt of them- 
ſelves, and contempt of all Worldly Wea!th and Honour, which the 
wiſe Men of this World ſo greedily ſeek, and of their ſtrange and 
uncouth manner of living : partly, becauſe of their Hoiy Excrciſes 
to which they devoted themſelves, which they eſteemed nothing bur 
a Religious Phrenzy : 2nd partly, becauſe of thoſe unuſual and 
ſeemingly ridiculous Geſtures and A&ions which the Prophets ſome= 
rimes uſed in raptures of Spirit, or in the Fervours of Devotion. 
Compare Jer: 29: 26: Fohn 10; 20: 4s 26: 24. n You rightly gueſs that 
he was a Mad-man, and fo it appears by his Diſconrle with me, 
which was, after the manner of hat ſort of Men, vain and imper- 
tinent, to te]l me of my fins, or of my duty, or ſuch things as are 
not worth my ſpeaking, or your hearing. 

12 And they ſaid. Ir z failes ; tell us now p. And 
he faid, Thus and thus ſpake he to me, ſaying, Thus 
faith the LORD, TI have anointed thee king over Ilrael. 

o There 1s ſemething extraordinary and of great Importance in 
his Mcfſage, as we plainly perccive by his ca'iling thee into an 
inner Chamber, by his great Expcdition, and by his Geſture and 
Carriage. p His Conccalmeat of the thing made them more greedy 
ro kiow Its 

13 Then they haſted q, and took every man his gar- 
ment, and put it under him r on the top of the ſtairs /, 
and biew with trumpets, faying, Jehu F 1s king. 

qBeing well pleaſed with the thing ; partly, fromthe advantage 
which hereby they expected 3 partly, from that defire of Change 
which 1s1n moſt Mens Natures; and. principally, by Gods P:ovi- 
dence, inclining their Hearts to Jehu. r A Ceremony uſed in the 
taitera parts rowards Superiors, in token of great Reverence ta 
his Perſon, that they wouid hot have his feet to touch che Ground, 
and that they pur themiclves and their Concerns under his teer, 
and into his Ditpotal. See on Mat. 21. 7. f in ſome highand eminent 
piace, whence he might be ieen and owned by all the Soldiers, wha 
were called together upon this great occaſion. : 

14 So Jehuthe fon of Jehoſhaphar the ſon of Nimſhi, 
conſpired againſt Joram : ( Now Joram had kept 
Ramoth-gilead, z, be and all Ifracl, becauſe of Hazael 
king of Syria —— | 

t Which Interpreters conchdeTo have becn taken by Joram before 
this time, though the raking of it be not mentioned. This rhey 
gather, Firſt, from the mention of rhe inner chamber, v. 2. and of 
the ep of the fairs here. Secondly, From w. 15. lt none go forth out 
of the Citys But theſe Arguments 1ccm not to be cogent Nor the 
former, becauſe there mighr be ſome Suburbs or our-Buildings be= 
!onging to the City, or notfar from it- which the 1raelites might 
have in their poſſeſſion. Nor the latter, as we ſhall rhereſee» And 
if it was taken, why ſhould a [ſrael be there to keep it» for which 
a ſtrong Gariton was ſufficient ? The words therefore may be other- 
wiſe rendred, exaaly according to the Hebrew, Joram had k-pt, or 
did kcep ( to wit, by his Army left there ) or put guards, or laid ſiege 
at, or to { for ſo the Particle Beth is oft uſed ) Ramoti-Gilead., And 
therefore he had al 1ſracl, 1. e. all the Military Force of 1jrael, with 
him, that he might both maint.in the Siege and withal oppolie 
Hazael who ſought to relieve it. 

15 But * king | Joram was returned to be healed in 4 
jezreel, of the wounds which che Syrians * had given g, 2g 
:1m. when he fought with Hazael « king of Syria.) And + Heb. 
jchu ſaid, If it be your minds, ther F let none go forth Jehorame 
or eſcape out of the City x, togortell it in Jezreel y. | Bun : 

« When he came with an Army, either to retake the City taken + Heb. let 
>y Jo'am: or, to raiſe the Siege» x Or, from the City; either from , eſca _ 
within the City, or from beforeit, from the Siege or Army. y That ,| No s 
we may ſurpriſe him, and ſo more eaſily ſubdue him. ho: 

16 So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel z, 

( forJoram lay there ) and Ahaziah king of judah was 
come down to ſee Joram. 

z Accompanied with the Horſemen of his Army. 

17 And there ſteod a watch-men on the tower ir 
Jezreel, and he ſpied the company of Jehu as he came, 
and ſaid, I ſcea company. And ſjoram ſaid, Take an 
norſeman, and fend ro meet them, and let bim fay, 1s i 
peace s ? | . 

a Enquire who it is comes, and ifhe comeupon peaceable terms, 

For he teared, Icft either the S3#F1 ans had prevailed there ; Ory lome 
Sedition or Rebellion was raifed againſt him ; which the Example 
of Libuah, and his own guilty Conſcience, made him fcar. 

_ 18 S0 there weit one on horſeback romeer him, and 
taid, Thus faith the king, Is it peace? And Jchu ſaid, 
What halt chouto do with peace 5? turn thee behind 
me. Anuthe watchman toid, ſaying, The meilenger 
came to them, but hv cometh nor agein. 

6 What right haſt thou, or thy Maſter thac feat thee, to Peace ? 

19 Ihen heſent our a fecund 0a hojteback, which 


3'M 4 came 


!'ord k, and one ſaid unto him, Is all | well/2 Where- + Heb. 


T Hebe 


reigneth, 


hap. IX, I K 1 


came to then, and ſaid, Thus ſaith the king, 1: it peace* 
And Jchu anſwered, What haſt thou to do with peace : 
turn thou behind me. ; 
20 And the watch-man told, ſaying, He came even 
unto them, and cometh not again : and the || driving 3s 
ching. like the driving of Jehu the ſon of Nimſhi : for he dri- 
Heb. veth Þ furiouſly c, 0 | 
nmadneſs, c« As his Temper is haſty andfierce, ſo is his March. 

- 21 And Joram ſaid, + Make ready. Andhischariot 
: _ was made ready. And Joram king of Ifrael, and Aha- 
ziah king of Judah went out, cachin his chariot, and 
they went our againſt Jehu 4, and + met him in tne 


portion of Naboth the Jezreelite e. 

d Or, to meet Jehu, to know his Intentions, and by his Preſen ce 
torepreſs any ſeditious Inclinations which might be in Jeb or his 
Followers. e In that Field which formerly 


belonged to Naveth, 
art whereof was incloſed by 4hab, and made a Garden. 

x 22 And it came to paſs when Joram ſaw Jehu, that 

he ſaid, 1 ir peacef, Jehu? And he anſwered, What 

peace g, ſo long as the whoredoms of thy mother 


Jezebel, and her witchcrafts b are ſo many ? 

f Doſt thou come to me with a peaceable Mind, or in a way of 
Hoftility * For now, when it was to5 late, he began to m_ 
ſome Treachery : which God hid from him before, to prepare him 
for Deftrution, g What cauſe haſt thou to expett Peace, when 
thou haſt ſo long abetted, and doſt ſtill aber, and allow thy Mother 
5n her abominable Prafices ? þ Which are to be unJerſtood, either, 
Firſt, Literally : Spiritual Whoredom, which is Idolatry, being 
oft puniſhed with corporal. Sce v2? 0. and Witchcraft there was oft 
practiſed by Idolaters. Or rather, Myſtically and Spiritually, of 
her Idolatry, which is oft called Whereaorm, becauſe it 1s a departing 
from God, to whom we are all tied by many Obligations 3 and 
Witchcraft, either, becauſe it doth ſo powerfully bewitch and deceive 
Mens Minds 5 or, becauſe it is a manifeſt entring into Covenant 
with the Devil. For Idolatry being her chief Sin, andthe cauſe of 
all the reſt, it ſeems improbable, that Jehu would omit that in the 

' Inditement which he drew againſt her. He mentions not Joram's, 
but his Mothers Sins ; partly, becauſe they were more notorions 
and infamous : partly, becauſe they were the principal cauſe why 
God inflicted, and he was come to execute theſe Judgments : partly, 
becauſe by his Connivance he had made them his own : and partly, 
becauſe he could find no groſs and odious matter wherewith to 

EE: charge him, except about the Worſhip of the Calves ; which he 

=} forbore to mention, bothleſt it ſtheuld loſe his Intereſt amongſt his 

Officers and Soldiers, who were dovoted to that Worſhip ; and be- 

cauſe he himſelf intended to keep it up. . 

23 And Joram turned his handsz, and fied, and ſaid 

to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah. 

; Either, that therewith he might turn the Reins of the Chariot : 
or, that by this motion he might direQ his Chariotcer to turn it 


h 
an And Jehu f drew a bow with his full ſtrength, and 


ſmote Jehoram between his arms &, and the arrow went 


z Out at his heart, and he + ſunk downin his charior. 
& Between his Shoulders. when he was turned,or turning back,the 
Chariot being probably open behind, as many times they were: 


hand wit 


Heb . : b Snrcy 1 
NE 25 Then faid Fehbu to Bidkar his captain, 'Vake up, 
and caſt him in the portion of the fieid of Naboth the 
IOr, Jezreelite : for remember how that || when I and thou 


7 and thou rode together after Ahab his father /, * the LORD laid 


* were ih tj. burden m upon hime 

them that | Which might be when Abab went in his Chariot, attended with 

his Nobles or chief Officers ( of which theſe were two ) to take a 

formal and ſolemn poſſeſſion of Naboths Land ; for then the Prophet 

216 29% 1 19, &c. i, E. this grievous Prophecy : for ſuch are oft, and 

truly called burdens, as 1/a- 13: 1: and 15: 1; Jer: 23: 33, 34. Nthbi 1: 
26 Surely, I have feen yeſterday, the + blood of 


SH. Naboth, and the blood of his ſons », faid the LORD, 
oas. 3 Py . oy  # 

and I will requite thee in this |! plat o, faith the LORD. 
I! Or, Now therefore take and caſt himinto the plat of greundp, 


Portions 


according to the word of the LORD. 

» Who, as it ſeems, were killed with their Father by Jezebel”s 
advice, to make the poſſeſſion of the Vineyard more ſure to Ahab, 
though it be not mentioned in its proper place, 1 Kings 21; 13. For 
it is not unuſual to bring in ſuch fragmentsof Hiſtory in ſuccecd- 
ing Writings which were neglected in the Hiſtory of thoſe matrers. 
Thus we read of the Earthquake in the days of Uzziah, Amos 1% 1. 
which was not recorded in his Hiſtory in the Books of the Kings or 
Chronicles. Although he might well be charged with taking away 
the lives of his Sons, becauſe he took away the neceſſary ſupports 
of their lives: o Of which ſee the Noteson 1 Kings 21: 19, p Wheie 
he ſhall Jie unburied, and be a prey to the Dogs or Fowls, accor- 


27 C But when Ahaziah the king of Judah ſaw 7s, 
he fled by the way of the garden-houſe q: andJehu fol- 
lowedafter him,and ſaid, Smite him alſo r in the chariot : 
end they did ſo { at the going up to Gur, which 7s by 
Ibleam : and he fled ro Megiddo, and died theret. 

gq By ſome ſecret way, hoping to eſcape, whilſt they were buſic 
about Jeram. . r As you have done Joram, for he alſo is of the Houſe 
of Ahab, chap: 8:18, ſ They ſmote or wounded him, but not mortally ; 
either, ſuppoſing that the wound was mortal ; or, being more remiſs 
in executing Jehu's Sentence againſt him, becauſe they were not ſo 
much concerned in his, as in Jorams Death , or, becauſe they had 
ſome kindneſs for him, either for his own, or for Jehoſbaphats ſake. 
# Que. How doth this agree with 2 Chron 22: g. He ſought Abaziah :; 
and they caught him, for he was hid in Samaria, and brought him to 

Jebu ; and when they had Nluin him, &c ? Anſ. Either, Furlt, Somaria 


yy . S . * A 
r Kings Elijah met him, and denounced this Judgment againſt him, 1 Kings | 


ding to the prediQtion, 1 Kings 21: 24. 


N G 8. Chap X. 


isthere to be underſtood, not of the City, but of the Kinzdom, or 
Territory ſo called, 1 Kings 13: 32. and elſewhere, in which Megidoo 
was : and fo that may be noted to ſhew that he could not flce into 
his own Kingdom where he might have been ſafe ; bur was forced 
to take up in another part of the Kingdom of 1-ae!, in the Terci- 
tory ofSamaria, and there to hide himſelf». Or, Secondly, if Samaris 
be the City, then the Hiſtory is briefly and imperfe&!y deſcribed 
here, and the defeC&ts ſupplied there, ( the Book of Chronicles being 
'N great part written for that end, to ſupply things omitted i 1 the 
Book of Kings) and out of both, the Hiſtory may be thus com- 
pleated : He fled firſt to Megidao, and thence to Samaris, where he 
was caughr, and thence brought to Jehu, and by his Sentence was 
put to death at Megiaao, either becauſe Jehu was there at that time 
upon {ome occaſion ; or, for ſome other reaſon, which at this dif 
tance of time we cannot underſtand. 

28 And his ſervants carried him in a chariot, to Te- 
rutalem, andburied himin his ſepulchre with his fathers, 
in the city of David #. 

# Which they did by Feizu's permiſſion for Jehoſhaphat”s ſake, 
2 Chron: 22' 9» 

29 And in the eleventh year of Joram x the ſon of 
Ahab, began Ahaziah to reign over Judah. 

x Of this ſee the Note on Chap: 8: 25. 

3o 4 And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel 
heard of zt, and ſhe f painted her face, and tired her 
head y, and looked out at a window. 

y Either, hoping that by her Majeſtick dreſs and carriage, ſhe 
might ſtrike Jeh# or his followers with ſuch an awe, that they ſhould 
not offer any injury to her perſon : or rather, becauſe, perceiving 
her caſe to be deſperate, and that ſhe couid not live, was reſolved 
to die with honour and gallantry, 

z1 Andas Jehu centred in at the gate 5, ſheſaid, Had 
Zmri peace, who ſlew his maſter  ? 

2 Ofthe Kings Palace. a Remember that thy Brother Traitor 
Zimri had but a very ſhort enjoyment of the benefit of his Treaſon 
and was ipcedily and ſeverely puniſhed for it by my Grand-Father 
Omri, 1 Kings 16: 9,16. and do thouexpett the ſame from ſome 
of my poſterity. 

32 And he lift up his face to the window, and ſaid, 
Whozs on my ſide, who ? And there looked out to him 
wo co three || eunuchs b. || Or, 

b For ſuch uſed to attend upon Queens in their Chambers. chambers 

33 And he ſaid, Throw her dewn. So they threw ain. 
her down c, and ſome of her blood wasſprinkled on the 
wall, and on the horſes : and he trod her under foot. 

ce Being mercenary Creatures, they quickly comply with Jehus 
command, facrificing her Life to ſave their own. 

34 And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, 
and ſaid, Go ſee now this curſed woman, and bury her d: 
for ſhe 5s a kings daughter e. 

d This he ſuddenly commanded, either, becauſe he had forgot the 
charge given him above, wv. 10, or, becauſe having done his own 
buſineſs, he was careleſs about Gods Work, and the fulfilling of his 
threatning. e See 1 Kings 16: 31. Hedoth not ſay, becauſe ſhe was 
a kings wife, leſt he ſhould ſeem to ſhew any reſpect to that wicked 
and curſed houſecf 426, which God had devored to ignominy and 
utter de{truction: 

25 And they went to bury her: but they found no 
more of ker tian the ſ{cull, and the feet, and the palms 
of her hands. 

26 Wherefore they came again, and told him : andhe 
ſaid, This is the word of the LORD f, which he ſpake 
i by hisſervant Elijah the Tiſhbite, ſaying, * In the por- + Heb, 
tion of Jezreel ſhall the dogs eat the fleſhof Jezchc! : by thehaud 

f This ſtrange Providence brings that to his mind which he had 9: 
forgotten, or did not regard. 

37 And the carcaſe of Jezebel ſhall be as dung upon 
the face of the field, in the portion of Jezree!, /o that 
they ſhall not ſay, This # Jezebel g. 

£ Theſe words are not extant in the place where this Prophecy is 
firſt mentioned, 1 Kings 21: 23. but are here added, either by Jeu, 
by way ofexplication and amplification : or rather, becauſe Ej2þ 
ſpoke them, thoughgthey be not there Recorded, as being tor the 
ſubſtance of them contained in the former words ; it being uſual to 
inſert ſome paſlagesin following Writings, which had been omitted 


in the former. 
25. 4 a ® 


Fehr: by bes Letters Cauſeth 70 of Ahabs Sons to be lain : Tre Faſt is excuſef 
by Elijahs Prophecy. 1 IT. Alſo 42 of King Abaziahs Brethren, 
12 —— 14: By ſubtility he flayeth all the Prieſ#s and Prophets of Ahab ; 
Breaketh down his Images and Temple, 1 5 === 28, He followeth the 
Sinwf Jeroboam, 29 31. Hazael oppreſſeth Iſrael: Jehoahax, 

Jucceedeth Jehu, 32 36. 


AN D Ahab had ſeventy ſons a in Samaria 5: And 
Jehu wrote letters, and ſent to Samaria, unto the | 
rulers of Jezreel c, to the elders 4, and to | them that + Heb. 


brought up Ahabs children e, ſaying, nouriſherts 
\ Either, Firſt, Properly Sons by ſeveral Wives. Orrather, Se- 
condly Grand-ſonsare comprehended, who are ofc called ſoxs ; and 
Grand-fathers, fathers in Scripture. 6 Either, becauſe they were bred 
up there, that being the chief City of the Kingdom 2 or, becauſe 
upon the tidings of Jerams flaughter, they fled thither, or were by 
their Friends conveyed from ſeveral parts thither, as to the ſtron geſt 
plzce ; in which it may ſeem by Jekhn's meſſage, they intended to 
defend themſelves and 4habs Children, and to fer up one as king 
in Jorams tead : orrather, becauſe they were leſt there by Joram, 
when he went to Ramoth-Gilead, that, if the Syrians had prevailed 
againſt him, they might have ſafety in that very ſtrong and great 
City, and he by their means ſuccourfrom it» c Lcb, che —_— 
[OUTLET 


T Heh: 
ÞUu3 her exe 
11 paints 


ng. 


x Kings 


21: 23s 


nap 


I Heb 


f 


9m 


' kb, 
ni 


la 
Q 


» 
1and 


ngs 
# 


ahh 


I Heb 


haps N. 


76 


' kb, 
ni 


IE 


fed thirher with 4525s ſons, upon the news of Jeku's Aﬀtions and 
Succciles : 


1maria,to take care of them there. d Either, by Age : or rather,by ' 


Office, the Rulers or Senators of Samaria. e That had a more parti- 


cular care of rhe ſeveral Children under the inſpeQion of the prin« ; 


ces or rulers here mentioned. 

2 Now atiloen as this letter cometh to you, ſeing 
vour maſters {ons are with you, and there are with you 
chariots and horſes, a fenced city alſo, and armour : 

Look even out the beſt and meeteſt of your — 
ſons, and ſet him on his fathers throne, and fight for 

our maſters houſe f. 

fThus he ſpeaks,cither becauſe he had ſome notice of their inten- 
tions thus to do: or,to make tryal of them,whether they would do 
ſo,or would be true to him and his deſigns : or, to fignife to them 
his intentions of fighting againſt them, if they did fo, that by the 
terror hereof he mighr bring them to a compliance with him. 

4 But they were exceedingly afraid,and ſaid,Behold, 
two kings ſtood not before him g : how then ſhould we 
ſtand ? 

z All their Power and Intereſt, either in Jezreel, or in the Army 
before, or in Ramoth-G:lead, could not hinder him from executing 
his deſign,from killing the rwo Kings,& from invading one of their 
Kingdoms. Ir is true, he ſurprized the Kings, which a little weakens 
their argument; but fear and ſelf-love made them eaſily yield to it. 

5 Aud he that was over the houſe h,and he that was 
over the city z,the elders alſo,and the bringers up of the 
children ſent to Jehu,ſaying,We ere thy ſervants, and will 
do all that thou ſhalt bid us & ; we will not make any 
king : do thou that which is good in thine eyes. 

þ The chief Governour of the Kings Palace or Caſtle there. 
5 The chief Magiſtrate or military Governour. k They made no 
delays or conditions, but ſubmited all to his mercy. 

6 Then he wrote a letrer / the ſecond time to them, 
ſaying, If ye be + mine,and #f ye will hearken unto my 
voice, take ye the heads of the men 2, your maſters 
ſons,and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this time: 
(now the kings ſons being ſeventy perſons,were with the 


great men of the city, which brought them up ) 

I Thus Jezebel is requited for her Letter dire&ed in like manner 
to the Elders of Naboth's City, whereby his life was wickedly taken 
away. 1 King. 21- 8, And it is probable that ſome of theſe Eiders 
were concerned in that very Buſinefs, which makes the Judgment 
of God more remarkable. 2 Which word ſeems to imply that 
ſome of them were grown up,who doubtleſs trod in their Parents 
ſteps; and thoſ: that were younger, were jultly cur off for their 
Parents fin: of which ſee on Exed. 20.5. Deus. 5. 9. 

7 And it came to paſs when the letter came to them, 
that they took the kings ſons, and flew ſeventy per- 
ſons .*., and put their Heads in baskets, and ſent him 
them to Jezreel. 

.*. Fehu julrly required this, becauſe the Soveraign and moſt righ- 
teous Lord of all mens Tives commanded it ; but the Samaritans 
wickedly obeyed it,becauſe they deſtroyed Perſons in a great mea- 
ſure innocent, meerly out of laviſh fear, and without any know- 
ledge of, or regard to. Gods Command. 

8 © And there came a mzitenger,and told him, fſay- 
ing, They have brought the-Heads of the kings ſons. 
And he aid, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entring 
in of the gate », until the morning. 

» The place of Judicature ; to ſignifie, that this was an af of 
Juſtice, and of Gods Righteous Judgment ; and the place of great- 
eſt concourſe, where people went out of the City, and came into 
it, and whither they. reſorted for Judgment, and other occaſions; 
that all men mighr behold this dreadtul ſpefacle of divine ven=- 
geance upon 4Ahab's Family, and thereby might juitifie Fehu's cauſe 
and proceedings. 


9 And it came to paſ*+ in the morning, that he went 
out,and ſtood, and {.id to all the people s,Ye be righte- 
ous: behoid, I conſpired againſt my maſter, and ſlew 
him : but + who ſlew all thele ? 

o Either, Firſt, To the promiſcuous multitude m*-t there to gaze 
upon this {ad and ſtrange ſpeQacle. So the lenſe is,Be not ye troub- 
led nor affrighted with thele unuſual and diſmal occurrences : if 
any thing be amiſs in theſe actions, I do here publickly and ſolemn- 
ly acquit you as Righteous and innocent ; do not you therefore 

ear any vengeance from God or men for it ; if there be any gu:lr, 
it is in me, and in thoſe who cut off theſe heads» Or, Secondly, 
To thoje who cut off, and brought the heads ; for the ſame per- 
ſons did both, and were here preſent,as F*ehu commanded them, wv.s. 
to them he {peaks in the audience of all the peopic; or by all the 
people may be meant all choſe who brought the heads,8 were there 
waiting for Fehu, according to his order. So the ip-ech is in part 
Tronical, to this purpoſe,7du are Righteous in your own eyes,and you 
look upon me as a Traitour,and Rebel,and Murderer,becauſeT have 
Tien againſt,and flain my Maſter,which I acknowledge I have done 
Bur if 1 am guilty, you are not innocent,and thereto: e cannot ac- 
Cuſe me : for I have killed one but you a great number. This ex- 
Plication ſeems probable; only the H-brew word, ham,being generaily 
uſed of the common peopie,m:y ſcem not ſo fitly to agree ro theſe 
Rulers and great Men, who had brought the Heads ; and that ex- 
preſſion, to a the people, implics, that Jehu did nor direct his ſpeech 
to ſome particuiar rerlons, bur to the whole Body ot the People 


or rather, had been ſent by Joram with his ſons to Sas ! 


v 


1 N & $S 


z 


Gods, and done by his command. p Whom he mentions; rather than 
Eliſha ; partly, becauſe El:ſha was now dead, and therefore his name 
and memory was more ſacred thanE//ſba"s,who was yet alive;this be- 
ing the common humour and folly of Mankind,to value and honour 
thoſe that are dead, whom they contemned whilſt they lived : and 
partly, becauſe Z/jah's Prophecy was known, and publick, and fa- 
mous ; when Eliſha's was delivered in a corner, and that not from 
his own mouth, but by one of the Sons of the Prophets, 

11 So Jehu flew all that remained of the houſe of A- 
hab in Jezreel,and all his great men rand his || kinsfolks, 
and his prieſts /, until he left him cone remaining re. 

r Whom he had 4dvanced and made Great in Wealth,or Honour, 
and quality ; who had been partners with him in his ſins 3 and, who 
were likely to be avenged of his death. { His Domeſtick Prieſts 
which had waited upon Ahab and Jezebel in their Idolatrous fervi- 
ces,and were fed at the Kings Table. Compare « Kings 18:19. Or, 
his chief officers of State ; as that word is ſometimes uſed : Of which 
ſee 2 Sam. 8: 18. compare with 1 Chron: 18: 17, Obj. Theſe were 
inciuded in his great men mentioned before» Anſw. Yet may they 
well be mentioned apart as a diſtin&.and the moſt eminent ſort of 
the Royal Seed of Judah, Chap. 11. 1, 2. 

I2 And he aroſe and departed,and came to Samaria. 


And as he was at the + ſhearing houſe « in the way, 

# Where they uſed to ſhear Seep, and then to Feaſt after their 
manner, 1 Sam: 25: 36. 2 Sam*13:23- Or, this may be the name of 
a place, Beth-hek-d of the jb pheras : or, Bethaheked-robim. 


13 Jehu + mer with the brethren * of Ahaziah king 


_—-- 


= — 


We are the brethren of Ahaziah, and we go down þ to 


falute the children of the king, and the children of the 
queen. 


x Not ſtrifly ſo, for they were killed before this, 2 Chron;21: 19. 
but his brethrens ſons, as they are called, 2 Chron: 22: 8. or others of 
his near kinſmen, ſuch being oft called brethren in Scripture: as Getl 


13: 8, 
14 And he ſaid, Take them alive. And they took 


them alive, and flew them y at the pit of the ſhearing- 


of them. 


» Partly,in compliance with Gods Command, chap. 9. 8. for theſe 
were of the Houte of Ahab by the M«ther-lide Chap. 8. 18. and 
partly thar they might neither claim the Kingdom of 1ſ-ael in right 
of their Grandmother ; as they might well have done,if God had 
not given it to Jehwu 3 nor revenge the Deaths of their near Rela- 
tions. z Whrere he intended to Bury them. 


right, as my heart is with thy heart 4? And Jehonadab 
anſwered, It is. If it be,give me thine hand e. And he 
gavehimhis hand:&he took him up to himin the chariot. 

s A Kenite, i Chron.2.55. and a man of fingular Prudence and Pi« 
ety ; as appears from this Hiſtory,and from fjer.35-6. b To congra- 
tujate with him,for the deſtruCtic n of that wicked Family; and to 
encourage,and adviſe him to proceed in fulfilling the Will of God 
revealed ro him. c Jehu ſaluted Jehonadab. d Doſt thou heartily 
approve of,and affe& me,and my preſent Proceedings,as my Heart 
d-th as ſincerely cleave to thee,as thine own heart doth?e As a ſign 
of friendſhip and conſent. See Gal. 2. 9. Theſe may be the words, 
either, 1- Of Jehu 3 and ſo here is an Eliplis, If #t be : for, And Je- 
hu ſaid, If it be. Comp. 1. K ng. 20.34. Or, 2 Of Jehonadab, who 
having laid, It is. adds, 1f it be, i e. If thine heart be with mine, 
as thou ſayſt it is, give we thine hard, Bur this the Eliplis is larger 
than the former. And it ſeems not ſo decent and proper for ſe- 
honadab a Stranger and Subje&, to ſpeak thus to the King, as for 
the King to ſay ſo to him. 


16 And he ſaid, Come with me,and ſee my zeal for 
the LORD Ff. So they g made him ride in his chariot- 
f 7.e. For the Vindication of his Honour and Quarrel,and for the 
Execution of his Commands. Do not believe my Words, but mine 
Attions,which thine eyes thall behold. g 7. e. Jehu's Servants open- 
ed the duor of his Chariot, and lift up Jehonadab into it. 


{pake unto Elijah. 


þ Either all his Houſhold : or rather, all his Kindred,and Relati- 
ons, though more remote from him» | 


18 And Jehu gathered all che people together z,and 
ſaid unto them, Ahab ſerved Baal a little, bat Jehu ſhall 
ſerve him much &. 


; By their Repreſentatives,their Elders or Rulers, as was uſual : 
to whom he'1mparts his mind : and they being generally Corrupr, 
and Time-ſervers,& ſuch as had no ſence of Religion in them,durſc 
not oppoſe his Reſolution, bur ſeemed to comply with it. & As if 
he had ſaid, My quarrel is only with A4babs Family, and not with 
Baal ; which my attions ſhall. manifeſt. Which words being mani- 
feſtly falſe, and ſpoken with a deſign to deceive, cannot be 
excuſed from Sin, though they were uftered with a pious intenti= 
on ; this being an unmoveable Principle, That we mult not 4s the 


then preſent, whom he clears fiom all vlame, and to whom he ap- 
Peals as Witneſſes. between him and thele perions, 
ro Know now,chat tacre thail fall unto the earth no- 


thing of the word of the LOKD, wtuch the LORD 


leaſt Evil of Sin. that the greateſt good may come, Rom. 3. 8 And 
if Jehonadab did concur with Jehu herein,it was a humane Infirmiry. 
19 Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Ba- 


al, all his ſervants Zand all his prieſts,let none be want- 


3 N 10g ; 


Chap: x1 


Jexvee}, i. e. The great Perſons and Officers of the Court, which ſpake p concerning the houſe of Ahab: for the LORD | 
then was, and had bcen for ſome time at Jezreel, who either had | hath, qgne that which he ſpake * +by his ſervant Elijah 9. *:Kinge || 
? But the truth 1s,neither I nor they are to be blamed 3 nor you 2 | 
{ that aſſiſted & encouraged me here:n : for this is not mans work, but 7 _— | 
e hat 


f. 29. 


07s 


[] Or, ac- 
quain= 
fance. 


+ Heb. 
Houſe of 
Sh -pherds 
binding. 
f Heb. 


of Judah, and ſaid, Who are ye ? And he anſwered, found. 


+} Heb. to 
the peace 
of, &s 


houſe z, ever two and forty men ; neither left he any 


Is And when he was departed thence, he Þ lighted + txcb. 
on Jehonad2b the ſon of Rechabs, coming to meet himb, found. 


and he Þf ſaluted him c,and ſaid unte him, Is thine heart T Heb. 
| bleeds 


F 


17 And when he came to Samaria, he ſlew all that *, Chron. 
remained unto Ahab þ in Samaria, till he had deſtroyed 22. 8. 
him,according to the ſaying of the LORD, * which he * 2 King. 

| 21.21» ' 


| | 
| 
| 


' 


' 
1 


'F 
+1 

t p : 
'V'Þ 
| 

'n ' 
t : 
| 


E A 


ſacrifice to do to Baal m ; who- 
he ſhall not live. But Jehu did! 
he might deſtroy the | 


-hap. X- 
ing : for T have a great 
ſoever ſhall be wanting, 
7 in ſubrility », to the intent that 
worſhippers of Baal. 
7 Fither, 1. All his Miniſters: of whom there may ſeem to have 
been ſeveral ſorts, whereof rwo are here diſtinctly mentioned, #4 
Prophets and Prieſts;and the reſt of the Inferior ſort,may be compre- 
hended under this generalTitle of Servants, becauſe they were tO At- 
tend upon the others in their Sacred Miniſtrations. And theſe being 
once deſtroyed, Jehu rightly concluded.that the reſt would fall of 
courſe. And this ſence may ſeem to be favoured by ver.22 wherein 
Veftments were brought forth for a/ theſe Worſb pprrs of Baal ; which 
werenot commonly uſed by thePeople,in theW orſhip eitherotGod, 


_ EW Houſe: Or,becauſe having been taken in the very aft 
> Xe” olatry, their Deftruction was more juſt and eatbacble. 
OY the Shay Men, and their Cſhicers. 6 7, e. Caſt their 
© putt ho wo City : Bur that was not proper Work for the 

* FUAYQ: 12 r COU!d t ey1o oon have done 1t;no , 
do a= they were going in haſt to other © "urn So mo 

it neccflary to be done ; becauſc 7 ; the 

: e they intended 7 
CR ; by : :ded to pull down the 
i y them in its Ruines, and turn it 1 
Hoa: as it follows This W , and turn 1t 1nto a Draught= 
.This Word therefore 1s,a J01 
nd may be joined 
the next; and both rendred, 7: 50] ppereatnn 
; "ey went haſtily and eagerly ; 

: s Ne: ER d, 'y agerly ; properl 

wo ng themſelves out (Hiphil for Hithpahel,which is oe ] - 

the Hebrew Language) and went, 0h .6. 
' 12. hafted, Heb.pujbed him imielf, 2. 

. elf on,or flung himielf, z. 2. w 7 
. 2, W 
haſte ; and in the Greer Text, Mark 14:72 pg, 
City near to Samari here : . 
aria, where another eminent Temple of Baal was 


Clap. XY a 
h Pe 


a 2 * 


feb.th 
Fl wer6 


The like Expreſſion 1s uled, Efh.6. 


c Either, 1. To tome 


- _—_ _ ax by =_ 137 pets "a Miniſters- Or, 2. All his 4 
orſhippers,as the lame WOr is Tranſlated.in rhe cloſe of this Verſe. erected: But this ſeems not to agree wi ; ; 
Nueft. How could all theſe be contained in one Houſe of Baal? Ai. bur one Houſe or Temple of w—_ ink ptr FR being ';Chre. 
Well enough,for the number of Baal: Worſhippers had been vaſtly and following Verſes. Or rather, 2. To _ "ar es oregoing 11.10. 
diminiſhed by the Miniſty of Eljah, and El;jþa,and the reſt of the ing to this Houſe of Baal, which may be he q ings belong- | tHeb/ſe 
Prophets ; and by Joram s neglect, and diſuſe of that Worſhip. F ther for ſome 1cu] y be here called the City ; ©3- for 
the generality of the 1ſf-azlites had too much knowledge on h ; a ©} were ver ann, herd - "RO = Fo es wn : or, becaule they Tininn 
Ns Relivious reſpect to ROT. Idoid; ob! g to] ; _w_ | wi Arya m— capacious-For as their were diversChambers jan 
it in compliance with the humour of their King 4 WOT. pond of the Priefts ad LG __ On. RIG $027, Tor the" uſe | 
for werldly,or wicked ends; and therefore when the King deſerted Thar this famous Temple of Baal ag 1 may probably be conceived, 
ir, they generally for{ook it ; ſome f-w filly and befotted Perſons of which, the Prieſt : f wad many ſuch Buildings;in ſome 
excepted, who are here gathered together. Beſides, this H | or | Were great number bel _ _ I 7 AI there 
Temple of Baal might be very large and capacious, and ably peradventure migh WI rs = ane: mnge Goure, 1 Kng.r0.19.) v | 
was f becauſe it was the kit 8 nf pron cOPE : wp pes + Gar tag rant g : well;and others cf them might be for divers ; 
City, and nigh his Palace, and for the uſc of the 7 Agar = 0 Buildings the ane oo guns ev of Baal, And into theſe 
9 Fe whole Court : and for great and high Solcmuitics a hs i es Gs go,and that haſtily, to ſurprize,and kill 
WET'S the name bf che Bae Frnepte 3 9-6 __ E i pos ls lens : _ of Bual, who were there imployed 1n pre- 
ſignifies, not only the principal Building. but all the ws 'B x" other Serview belongs WONG WIA Wore 69 Do Ollorec ; or, inn 
dings and Courts belonging to it ; in which all che Worth; _—_— 26 And they TS to that Houſe, or that Solemnity. 
ſrood when they Worſhip 't mie] 34.5 Woke 1ey brought forth the | [Image 
y ipped, ſo it might be here ; and 1o there houſe of Baal ges Out of the + Heb) 
_ was ſpace ſufficient for all the Worſhippers of Bal, which can ad Heb. 7 ad 3 and burat them 4. Stat - 
reaſonably be rhought to have bern art this time in all Jra:l. mm I eb. zt, i, e. The ColleQion of the Images ; or,cach of th NY 
will offer to him a noble and acceprab'e Sacritice3 not of Shee 27 And they break down the Lon of B: Ay qi 
Oxen, &cc. as they underſtood it ; bur of his own b-loved P x5 brake down the houſe of Baal d = pate oy 
and Prophets, and Servants 3 as he meant it. With an # ng houſe unto thisda J,an RF draught- | 
ſign, that he might both certainly Diſcover, and urrerly Deſtroy e The Chicf 1 y: h: ; | 
l Tem ya ve 4 farther trouble, Or danger ot Sedition ed f And the like hey Us CE wRrmppes more than the reſt 
mult 1n his Kingdom. - red! : as may b ith the reſt'of the Houſes of Baal 1 : 
| . of : 4 e garl ; in 1 
DR 20 And Jehu 1aid,} Proclaim s a ſolemn aſſembly for ching: 200 Sowa _ PII OnnY 8 pegs of ths 
Baal : and they proclaimed zz. 28 Thus Jechu deſtroyed Baal f 
o Heb. Sanfifie, Prepare your ſelves,and al] things neceſT: 29 Howbei , out of Ifrael. 
Co FeerieeT and Featr, ol ings neceſſary ond rn w_ the ſins of } erohoam the ſon of Ne- 
21 And jehu ſent through all Iſrael « and all Ss | afrer ER ; jp to ſin, Jehu departed nor from 
lef: _—__ of Baal came, fo that there was not a man | the! and 6s. D OT wan No. «gag 
| eft that came not p:and they came into eve ont "of 
Hf the i - He 1 6 . 
" Or,ſo ſul Baal ; and the houſe of 07 gs [full fi ' houſe qof h; s "og = he diſcovers his Hypocriſie,that he follows God as fa Os 
nec another rom one ead tO | cg the Worlhip, F Baal — I of Aba, 
ro0 ="Dy 1p of Baal but no turther:for Till reli 4 
"NN Either, r. Becauſe they thought Jebu wat ſerious and fi; 5 Sus the Worthip of the Calves ; _— 1 OO {till reſolves to keep 
his Profeffions; it bei MS 6 and ſincere in | irritate h; ; partly,leſt he ſhould difobli 
mouth. =: Aer __ it aq. gi 6a" uſual for men too cafily ro be- | ind w owe and Subjedas who had been long - m_ 
, What they W1ih to be true- And for the Prieft;whici Aa #5 &p7 'ere heartily afficted to it: and par 5 -<cthgs, 
ſtroyed before,ver, dr e Prieſt;which Jehu dc- | i,oor for his P ps partly, leſt he ſhould © 
os dec 46-04 Y 3 4 5 avi Sam yay _ carp why done,only becaut, | David. Sad his pt Ro. n to their Obedience to the Houſe of 
fear of their Lives; for certain Death _ -u Family. Or, 2- Fo: | ac durtt not truſt tha G Sordogfognre inexcuſable, both becauſe 
De, 0.0. is ertarar;y Faber you threatned to ali that did | whoje Power, and Fai | _ with the keeping of his Kiagaom, of 
' they knew would be executed 1. a G f 5 1 and bloody Temper, | amp.c Experience in or —_— and Kindneſs to hims he had fuch 
ns poÞiticy of thi Ro Hi 4 pu on on was |. had io great and Eg. Hour, ” the mes ge and becauſe he 
known to be indiff wed es: for Jehu was | ou 5 loving ficſe pre over in the matters of Religt- 
known tobe inifrir & ynconcennljn marters of Recon-one | Bu wich a bis night and then deeroping je with Worltip of 
forſook it when the next Prince J did}; and did io ; and | mency, none dari n deſtroying it with no lefs Vel | 
d!:iand ch > y, none daring to mutter a "Ox 4h Og ; cne= 
doubrful wheth ] Joram aid 5 andt erefore it was | cauic the Houle RR ENS 98 either Caſe ; and be= 
WE Love: ro _ U - R—_ | cap m—_ Fargeſt ports ” his kyoony was, _— likety HG or — his Ceticor 
only deſerted in com lacency t if y em ACC , AQ On, and much m 1 oy ow” we © nn eclining Condiri. 
vidence, deceiving rh 29 Mind # —__ Or, 3. By God- juſt Pro- | Kingdom thould gw wo ely ro fall into his Hands, than thar his 
own Ditubion "x4 7 gs their Hearts to cume 2- Arid TO into theirs. 
and hk Cod - q7.e. The Teuwple. % $I che LORUL faid unto Jehu þ, Beca ſe tl 
Bring f - 4 2id unto him that as over the veſtry haſt done well in executing that which Ie ule thon 
ring orth veltments r for "—_ 3 | cves 1.and h; 8c) 35 T1gnt 1N mine 
And he brought them ' — 0=3ach tn mn oE Baa! 4 ies a0 oe _ of Ahab according 
» Sacred Garm . : p . . Ine Neart thy chil 
of the Lords Miniſtry np wo = by the Prieſts and others fourch FOneFurons ſhall fit on Ces of i - "a _— 
Devil borrowed this Cuſtom in his Wodiv!. om thence the Th Ing: gs P: opher, as above, Chap.9.7. #4.c I If, wry 
« . c IS . . > -f 4 wait o Go art, 
23 And Jchu went, and Jehonadab th 1s Hart an expreticd, theſe Attions were good and oe —_ h 
chab s 1 c ab the ſon of Re- vasnor io. k And 1o they did; - gs 
s into the houſe of Baal, and faid >= | v*7. 35. Joajb, Craps 13. 10. Jerol y aid ; namely ,7ehoa-az, below 
worſhippers of Baal,Search,and look that = _ of the | Cap: 15 8. . 10. Jeroboam, Chap: 14: 24. and Zechariah, 
with you none of e nere 21 Bur Jehu : 
i 7, bur th i G | : in the law © ; 0 
nmon Cones of the LORD :, b © | LORD _ RI_ no hoo to walk in the | Fthe + Heh: \Chrag, 
s Whom the Bnabrerpollib 4;d k :d not from the i fn 1 all his heart 7: for he depart- ſeven 0 
nothing : or, if any of the | ana rho (ps roar ſuſpe&ed | to ſin ins of Jeroboam », which made Iſrael 
was now too late to amend their Err ected any thing..ic 1 His : 
4 1 or. t Bec: » REP Soon His obe ; 
_ offend Baal, and deride, or pollute his - my thei Preience | fuineis. OE OE three neceſſary Properties,Care or Hzed* 
phane Perſons have been oft excluded fromSol ip: whence Pro- | in one ;ins! C: ity, and Sincerity, #2 His relolved cont: , 
both by Jews and Heathens. So this did olemnA@sof Worſhip | &al{ch  1ng'e Courte, is juſtly alledged as an A ntinuance 
aa; 1s 41d nor raiſe their ſuſpicio alſcheartedaeis in all his other Action n Argument of his 
b 4 And when they went in « to offer Gerkfibe n. 12 In theſe dave er Actions. 
urnt-offerings.Jehu appointed tourſ, &s, and | Ort o: and ys » the LORD began + to cut Iſrael #Heb:" 
and faid, If : F 6 ricore men x withour : and Hazael ſinote chem in : «off th 
Go 4: Fl uy O 5 men whom I have brought into racl Þ 3 in all the coafts of It- _ 
1ands, elcape, be that ; __ z ] | Ky _ 
for the life of + any bat lerteth bim go, his life ſhall be com mg: Mage Either DR RO a way be gathered by 
« When ſome in the cutting them off : er to dimintth the number of the People, b 
Doin» Tar penny we - PO went to the Altar to offe, | Borders, wn: : hg to ſtraiten their Borders. p ; kg pl 
oY aſſiſt them, in caſe of any CnGcion ing doubtleſs in readineſs to | 1 explained, wer: —_ Aa of their Land beyond Jordan, as it 
| rs fol ir came to pals atſoon as he y had made —_ —_——_— Core apa pollibly he executed rhoſe 
f Heb. th the guard, a+; to -— + 1p; 56 Tag __ {aid to | che Gadites, and nS, [eric 07 mx on dats 
eb.ze Je a, Go in, and lay then: | tot x ae es, and the Manafhtes, ,. . 
nary t none come forth, And thev finoce them 5 45 - Aroer, (which zs by the river Arnon) || even * G riſing, 9 
| _ of the ſword, and the guard and th with th | 1&4 and Baſhan. even * Gi- the ju 
them out b "ſs e captains cal: 9 To wit, from | Or,59% 
2 , and went TO the city of the houſe of Ba; : 24 Now th Go Land of Concer, po Gilead 
3 5. e. The Chicf Prieft &f Boa. Sec 2 ©: aal c. | , 34 Now the reſt of the ads of Jeh he & Bibi 
ſuffered them to ecedy Bithar becauſe 7 rip z So far he | vic, and ali his might, are they ny ehu, and all that he © Amos 
en they were nut all O : POW S written 1 | 
vt all Of the chronicles of the kings of Iſrael, en in the book ,.,, 
35 Aud 


hap: 


1 3o 


eb: 0+ 
12d 1wf4 


j n 


Heb.the 
Fl pert 


| ; Chre. 
12.10- 

Jifleb/eed 

It 


| [yg 


"Crop, 
wn, 


ſed Houſe, except he were married very young, and therein over- 


wo I. 


5 And Jehu ſlept with his fathers, and they buried 
him in Samaria, and Jehoahaz his ſon reigned in his 


d. 
m_ And + the time that Jehu reigaed over Iſrael in 


Samaria, was twenty and eight years. 

CHAF XL 
Athaliah deſtroyeth alt the Royal Fawily : only Fehoaſh eſcapeth : is hid ſox 
Tears in the Houſe of God, 1 - 3. Tehoiada giving order to the. 
Captains in the ſeventh Year anointeth him King, 4 —— 12- Athaliah 
is lain, 13 16. The Covenant us renewed between God, the King, 
and the People : and Baal's Warſbip is d:ſtroyed : the King is ſet on hu 

Throne, 17: Js. - : 

N D when * Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah ſaw 
that her ſon was dead,ſhe aroſe, and deſtroyed all 


the + ſeed royal «. 

4 i « All of the RoyalFamily,left after thoſe Slaughters, 2 Chron, 
21-2, 4. and 22. 1- and 2 Kings 10: 13, 14. eXCept One, as the next 
Verſe limits and explains it- This the did, partly out of Rage at 
the Extirpation of her Family - reſolving,that David's Family ſhould 
not out-live hers ; partly, from Ambition and deſire of Rule ; for 
which many perſons have deſtroyed their neareſt Relations ;partly, 
from the Zeal which ſhe had for Idolatry,and the Worſhip of Bas! 
which the intended to eſtabliſh ; to which ſhe knew the Houſe of 
David were implacable Enemies. And partly,in her own Defence, 
that ſhe might ſecure her ſelf fromJehu'sFury.who was commanded 
by 50d, and reſolved in himfelf, utrerly to deſtroy all the Bran- 
ches of Ahab's Family. whereof ſhe was one, Chap. 8. 18, 26. For 
had ſhe not done this,ſhe tuſpe&ed;thar either the King.or People 
of Judah would have delivered her up to Jebu upon his Demand 
Poſſibly thoſe whom the ſlew were Joram's Child:en by another 
Wife : of which, ſee on the next Verſe. And this was the fruit 
of Jehoſhaphat's Marrying his Son to a Daughrer of rhar Idolatrous 
and Wicked Houſe of 4hab, even the extirpation of all his Poſte- 
rity, but one. And this dreadful Judgment God permitred, and 
inflicted upon him and his, to ſhew how much he abhors all ſuch 
ſinful and unequal Affinities. 

2 But Jehoſheba 6 the daughter of king Jorom c ſiſter 
of Ahaziah, took Joaſh the fon of Ahaziah c, and ſtole 
him from among the kings ſons which were ſlain 4; and 
they e hid him, ever him and his nurſe in the bed-cham- 
ber f. from Athaliah, ſo chat he was not ſlain. 

b Called Fehoſhabeath, 2 Chron- 22.11. 6 To wit, by another Wife, 
and not by this Athaliah : for it is nor likely Jehoiadah who Married 

er, 2 Chron, 22. 11- would have married one of that wicked and cur- 


ruled by his Parents. «c Either, 1. His adopted,and Legal Son,who 
was to ſucceed him,though he was of another Houſe, & of Nathan's 
Family, as many think - tuch Perſons being ſometimes called the 
Sons of their Predeceſſors,as we ſhall ſee hereafter. Or rather, 2- His 
proper and nzrural Son:for not only he,bur the reſt who were (lain, 
are here called the kings (i.e. Joraw's) ſons. d Either,t. From amidir of 
the Carcaſſes, where this Infant was laid, and tuppoſed by her to be 
Killed, though it was not quite dead;either through the Compaſſion, 
or connivance cf the Inftruments of this Execution ; or by ſome 
other Artifice which his Nurie uſed. Or, 2. Out of that Apartment 
of the Palace which was alloted for the Kings Children. e Jeh1ſheba 
and her Husband Jeho:zadah. f Which was in the houſe of the Lord ; 
as is affirmed in the next Verſe. So rhat it was one of thoſe 
Chambers adjouyning, or near to the Temple, which were for the 
uſes of the Priefs and Levites, and for them only : which made it 
more proper for this purpole. _ 

;And he was with her hid in the houſe of theLORD, 
ſix years g : and Athaliah did reign over the land þ. 

g Either, £haliab though they were all Dead ; or if ſhe ſuſpected 
that this was preſerved, ſhe thought an infant could do her no 
great harm ; and that ſhe could ſo well aſſure the Kingdom to her 
ſelf within a few Years, that ſhe need not fear any ſuch weak 
Competitor ; or ſhe was willing to ſmother up the buſineſs,leſt if 
ſhe had made a ſtrict and diligent Search for it, the People ſhould 
thereby learn, that there was yet a Son of Davids Family left ; and 
ſo be unquiet under her Government, and deſirous of a Change. 
þ Which ſhe had an opporrunity to do, becauſe ſhe was not only 
the late Kings Wife, but alſo was probably made Queen-Regent 
upon Joram's going to Ramoth-Gilead. : 

4 And ” in the ſeventh year Jehoiada ſent 3, and fet 
the rulers over handreds &, with the captains / and the 
zuard ,and brought them to him into the houſe of the 
LORD », and made a covenant with them o,and took 
ah oach of them p in the houſe of the LORD,and ſhew- 
ed them the kings ſon. 

Z If this action of Jehoiadab's ſeem ſtrange and irregular, this was 
no ordinary caſe, but there were divers peculiar things in it; as that 
Athaliah was a meer Uſurper, having no pretence of Right to the 
Crown, and one of that wicked Houle which God had particularly, 
and by Name, devoted to Deſtruction ; that Jehoiadsh's Wife was 
nearer Allied,and had more Right to the Crown,than A4thaliah; that 
the Crown of Judah was by Divine appointment appropriated to the 
Sons of Dawid ; and therefore the right of the Crown was inhe- 
tently in him whom Jehviadeb ſer up, which Right her Uſurpation 
could not exclude ; That Jehoiadah was not a meer private Perſon, 
but the Husband of the Kings Aunt ; and probably the High-prieſt, 
to whom it belonged in great part to ſee the Laws of God exe- 
Cuted : That Jehoiadah did not att alone in the buſineſs, but had 
the Conſent and Concurrence of the Chief Rulers both Civil and 
Eccleſiaſtical ; and beſides all this,that it is conceived, That he had 
a ſpecial Motion of Gods Spirit, or the DireCion and encouragc- 
ment of the Prophets of that time. So that this ation cannot be 

rawn into a Preſident for ſucceeding Times, and for other King- 
doms. k Of whom tee Exod. 18. 25. . Of theſ: there were five, 
Which are named, 2 Cyron. :3:1- And theſe were either, r. Civil or 
Military Officers.Bur then {uch ſmall Officers could not have ſtood. 


K 1NG: & 


eminency,as their Work ſheweth, wver.5,6,7.and 2 Chron. 23,1,2+ and 
their diſtin&tion from the Captains and Guard. 1 Or, Princes,or Nebles, 
or Commanders ; ſuch as he knew were weary of her Idolatrous and 
Tyrannnical Government, and Faithful to their King. »» Poflibly 
thoſe who had been the former King's Guard, who had been dif- 
placed by 4thaliah,as Perſons whoſe Fidelity ſhe ſuf] petted. 27. e. 
Into the Courts of that Houſe, which oft come under the Name of 
the Houſe, or Temple of the Lord : for into the Houſe none but the 
Prieſts or Levites might enter. 0 To reſtore the King to his King- 
dom, and Religion to its purity. p For their Secretie and Fidelis 
ty in the preſent Deſign. | 


5 And he commanded them,ſfaying, This is the thing 


the 
kings houſe s : 
9g Either, 1. A third part of you, (1. e. of the whole Number, in- 
cluding thoſe that come in, and thoſe that go our on the Sabbath) even 
they that enter in on the Sabbath - and ſo the two other Third parts 
were to conſiſt of thoſe that went out on the Sabbath ; as ſome 
gather from wver.6,7. Or rather, 2. A third part only of thoſe that enter 
in on the Sabbath, who ſeem to be plainly divided into three Thirds 
here ; and wer. 6 as s/ole that went jorch on the Sabbath are ex reſly 
diſtributed into Two parts, ver. 7+ 71:e. That come into the "ow 
ple on the Sabbath-day, For the underſtanding of this matter,you 
muſt know, That the Levites were; in and from Dawas time,diſtri- 
buted into Twenty four Courſes, which were to do the Work of 
the Temple ſucceſſively, and by turns; each Courſe conſiſting of 
about a Thouſand Men for his Week : of which ſee 1 Chron. 23.and 
24. 5 Eicher, 1. Of that Bed-chamber where the King now was. But 
it is unlikely, and without Example, either that one Bed-chamber, 
or the Temple, or any part of it, ſhould be called the King's Houſes 
And beſides, the Kings Perſon is ſecured by other Perſons, ver.7. 
Or rather, 2. Of that Part which leadeth to the Kings Palace,which 
A:haliah now poſlefſed, and whence they might expe& Oppoſition: 
6 And a thud part ſhall be at the gate of Sur z, and a 


third part at the gate behind the guard «:fo ſhall ye keep 


£ The Chief Gate of the Temple called the High-gare, 


the middle-gate, Jer: 39: 3- and the gate of the entrance, Exek: 40: 15g 
u Either, 1. The Kings Guard Or, 2. The Guard of the Temple; 


che watch of the houſe || that it be not broken down x. ||Or, from 


| 2 King.15+35» breaking 
and the foundation gate, 2 Chron: 23:5. and the eaſt-gate, Jer: 19: 2: and 


for ſuch a Guard there was, and a Ccaprain of the Guard, called, 
the Caprain of the Temple, AGRF- 4: 1: and F3 24. This Gate was in the 
South-ſide ; and as ſome think,is that which is called Sippim, or the 
threſhold-gate, 2 Chron 23 4. * i.e« So you ſhall guard all the Gates 
or Entrances into the Houſe or Temple of (50d, that neither &hali. 
ah nor any of her Soldiers may break into the Temple, and Defile 
it, or Deſtroy it ; as the w:1l doubtleſs endeavour to do, Qr, and 
ye ſhall keep the watch of the Houje Maſſach : as the LXX and other In- 
terpreters render it ; who think this was the name of an Houſe 
not far from the Temple ; in which, or againſt which, they were 
ro keep a Guard. | - 


ſabbath y, even chey ſhall keep the watch of the 
the LORD about the king z. 


3 i, e: Who having finiſhed their Courſe, and Week, ſhould have 
gone home, but were detained, 2 Chron: 23:8- z Whilſt the reſt 
guard the Doors and Entrances into the Temple; thele ſhall have a 
ipaciel c_ of the Kings Perſon, part on his Right, and part on his 
Leit Hand. | 


8 And ye ſhall compaſs the king round about a,every 
man with his weapons 1n his hand : and he that cometh 
within the ranges 5,tet him be ſlain ;and be ye with the 
king as he goeth out, and as he cometh in c. 

9 And the captains over the hundreds did accordin 
to all things that Jehoiada the prieſt commanded : _ 
they took every man his men that were to come in on 
the ſabbath, with them that ſhould go out on the ſab- 
bath, and came to Jehoiada the prieſt. 

a When you have ſer your Watches, and Guards, all the reſt of 


you ſhall draw near to the King to preſerve his Royal Perſon from 
all Afſaults and Dangers. 6 Or, Fences, i.e. the Walls wherewirh 
the Courts of the Temple were Invironed : See ver 15. Or,'your 
Ranks or Order, If any of Athaliah's Guards ſhall attempr to break in ve 
upon you, or within your Bounds. c Whether the King ſhall go 
out of the Temple, to offend, or ſubdue his Enemies; or retire 
hither to Defend himſelf; do you always accompany him. 


10 And to the captains over hundreds,did the prieſt 


pantes, 
houſe of Heb. 
Bana. 


Temple of the LORD. 

d Offenſive and DefenſiveWeapons, which he gave to the Captains, 
both for themſclves.and for all their Soldiers: for they all came into 
the Temple unarmed,t- prevent ſuſpicion. Theſe are called Davidr, 
either becauſe they were fuch as he had raken from his Enemies, which 
he had dedicated to God,and Jaid up in the Temple,as Monuments 
of Gods Goodneſs to him. See 18am: 21: 9. 2 Sam: 8:7, 11. 1 Kings 
7-51 Or, becauſe David had made a Sacred Armory in the Temple, 
whence Arms might be taken upon extraordinary Occaſions, for the 
Defence of the Temple, or Ciry of God. | 

1x And the guard ſtood,every man with his weapon 
in his hand, round about the king,trom the right + cor- , ,z... 
ner of the temple, to the left corner of the temple e, ſhoulder. 
slong by the altar f, and the temple g. 

e From the South-eaſt, ro the North-eaſt fide. f The Altar of 
Burnt-offerings,which was by the Great and EaiternGate of the Temes 


ple. £ #. e. By, and towards the other parts of the Temple, which. 
rhey defended on all fides. ; 


put the 


kinz in; much ſtead, And why dig he avs rather engage Captains 


i2 And hs brought forth the kings ſon, and 
| : crown 


3N2 


Chap. Xi 


of Thouſands, or greater Perſons,whom doubtleſs he might eaſily 
have brought into this Confederacy ? Or rather,Prie#s or Levites of 


that + ſhall do ; a third part of you 9 that enter in* on * 1 Chrog 
abbath r, ſhall even be keepers of the watch of the 9: 25. 


7 And two || f parts of all you that go forth on the |'or, Come 


eg; 
<0= Fi anives 


give king Davids ſpears and ſhields d that ere in the br 


LF 
* 
" 
['] 


| 
[ : | 
| 
l 
wid! | 
'S 
| F141 
: i 
v: TP! { 
L T3 
(i 
| 
: 


. 


t Heb. let 
he King 
I'VE 


* 2 Chro. 


?24z Tl. 


| hay* XIl. I [. 


K 


. - E d 
own upon him, and gave him the teſtimony h, an 
toy be him king, and anointed him z ; and chey 


clapr their hands, and faid, f God fave the king. 

þ 3. e The Book of the Law, which he put into the Kings ad, 
to mind him of his Duty at his entrance upon his Kingdom, whic 
was to Read and Write out that Holy Book, Devt:17:18. and to Go- 
vern himſelf and his Kingdom by it ; the Law of God being fre» 
quently and moſt properly called a Teſtimony, as Pſal:$:78: 5:and 132- 
12. Iſa $:16,20. See alſo Deut: 6: 17, 20. 2 Amgs 23: 3. becauſe it 1s a 
Witneſs of Gods Will, and Man's Duty. # As they uſed to do un 


doubrful caſes, when there was any competition or queſtion about 
the Crown, as now there was. 


13 © And when Atkalizh heard the noiſe of the guard, 
and of the people &, ſhe came to the people / into the 
temple of the LORD m. : i 

k Who came thither upon the hearing of the Noiſe and Tidings ; 
of what was done, 1 To onquire into the Cauſe of this great 
Noiſe ; being hitherto kept in deep Ignorance, partly, becauſe it 
was managed with ſo much Secreſic.and in the Temple : and part- 
ly,becauſe the People univerſally hated her,&wiſhed her downfall. 
*n 2. e. Into the Courts : whither by Jehoiadah's Dire&tion ſhe was 
permitted to enter, though contrary to his general Order. wer. 8. 
that ſo he might draw her into his Net. : 

14 And when ſhe looked, behold, the king ſtood by 
a pillar || as the manner was, and the princes and the 
trumpeters by the king, and all the peopie of the land 
rejoyced, and blew with trumpets : and Achaliah rent 


of the LORD «a all his days, wherein Jehoiada the 
Prieſt inftructed him. 


a To wit, for the matter of it, though not with an honeſt and 
ſincere mind, but only by the influence of his good Tutor and 
Reſtorer, as the words here following plainly imply 

Bur the high places were not taken away 6 : the 


people ſtill ſacrificed, and burnt incenſe in the high 


places c. 

bTo which the people were ſo fondly & ſtrangely addifted,that 
the foregoing Kings, though men of riper years, and great power 
and courage, and finally ſettled in their Thrones, could not take 
them away ; and therefore ir is not'ſtrange if 7eho/ads could nor 
now remove them, when the King was very young and tender,and 
not well ſettled in his Kingdom, and when the people were more 
moves and diſorderly through A4thaliah's male-Adminiſtration. 

c To God. 

C And Jehoafh ſaid*o the prieſts 4, * All the mo- * Chap, 
ney of the || + dedecated things e thar is brought f into |{, +, , 
the houſe of the LOR D,eves ||the money of every man pug, * 
is ſet at g, and all the money that F cometh into any t Heb4j. 
mans heart h to bring into the houſe of the LORD, ine. 

4 Remembering that he owed his preſervation & reſtauration to Or. and, 
the Temple, and that he was made by God the Guardian of his fl a 
Temple and Worihip,and that he had covenanted to be ſo,he now Fe money 
takes care to repair it. e This may be, Either, Firſt, The general f 
deſignation of the Money,the particulars whereof here follow. Or - 5of 
rather, Secondly, A ſpecial branch of it,the Money which had been 7” eſtian 


her clothes, and cried, Treaſon, treaſon. 

| Poſſibly by one of the two famous Pillars of theTemple;of which 
ſee 1 Kings7:21. nigh unto which the Throne was erre&ted. If it be 
ſaid, That none but Prieſts might come hither : I anſwer, ordinarily 
they mighr not :but the King being a Sacred Perſon,e'pecially upon 
ſuch extraordinary occaſions might be there. Or,upon » ſcaffold. poſ- 
ſibly that Brazen Scaffold which $So/omon ereQed, 2 Chron: 6: 13.and 
left there for ſuch purpoſes. See 2 Kings 23: 3. : 

15 But Jehoiada the prieſt commanded the captains 


of the hundreds,the officers of the hoſt ,and ſaid unto 
them, Have her forth without the ranges » : and him 
that followeth her s, kill with the ſword : for the prieſt 
had ſaid, Lether ;otbeſlain in the houſe of cheLORD p. 


m Of theſe Companies of Levites, who are elſewhere called the 
Lords Hoſt, and now were the Kings Hoff. » Of which, ſee above, 
wer. 8. If the will not go out of them of her own accord, force her 
out «f them. o If any of the People come hither upon this occaſion, 
ſhall ſtand up for her help- p i. e. In the Court of the Temple, leſt 
it be polluted with her Blood. 

16 And they laid hands on her q,and ſhe went by the 
way by which the horſes came into the king's houſe 7, 


and there was ſheſlain 5s. 

g Or, they gave her ſpace or room,to wit,to go out of the Court of 
theTemple,and did not keep her within it,as they could have done. 
Or, they appointed bands for her * they ordered two Bands of the Le- 
wvites to follow her,and kill her. » By the great and publick Road 
in which Horſes and Chariots went to the Palace. s In an ignomi- 
nious place and manner ; as her Mother Jezebel had been. , 

17 T And Jehoiada made a Covenaat between the 
LORD.and the king,and the people ?, that they ſhould 
be the LORD's people ; between the king alſo and the 
people «; | 

e A SacredCovenant, whereby he ſolemnly ingaged both the King, 
and People,as it here follows,that they ſhould be the Lords People ; i. e. 
Thar they ſhould renounce,and root out all Idolatry,and ſer up and 
maintain Gods true Worſhip. Comp. 2 Kings:23.10« u This wasa 
Civil Covenant, whereby the King engaged himſelf to Rule them 
ju/Hy and in the fear of God ; and the People obliged themſelves 
to Defend and Obey him. Comp. 2 Sam: 5; 3. 

18And all che people of the land went into the houſe 


_ of Baal,. and brake it down, his altars and his images 


brake they in pieces chroughly, and ſlew Mattan the 
Prieſt of Baal before the altar x : and the prieſt appoin- 
red officers | over the houſe of the LORD y. 


z To which poſſibly he fled forRefuge:or rather, he was brought 
thither as a fit Sacrifice to his God, » Of which ſee more parti- 
cularly, 2 Chron. 23: 18, 19. 


\* I9 And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the 
captains of the guard, and all che people of the land, 
and they brought down the king from the houſe of the 
LORD,and came by the way of the gate of the guard z 
et the kings houſe, and he fat on the throne of the 
ings. 
3 e. By the Gate of the Royal Palace,where the Kings Guard 


ood. 

20 And all the people of the land rejoyced, and the 
City was in quiet ; and they flew Athaliah with the 
ſword b:/5de the kings houſe. 

22 Seven years old was Jehoaſh when he began to 


reign. 
CHAP. XIL 
Jehoaſb reigneth well all the days of Jehoiada : He giveth order for the 
repair of the Temple, 1 16. He diverteth Hazaecl from Jeruſalem, 


by a preſent of the hallowed Treaſures : He is flain by his ſervants ; 4- 
maziah ſucceedeth him, 17 = 2s 


N * the ſeventh year of Jehu,Jehoaſh began to reign; 
and forty years reigned he in Jeruſalem : And his 

mothers name was Zibiah of Bcerſheba. 
2 And Jehoaſh did bar which was right in the ſight 


either formerly or lately vowed or dedicated to the uſe and ſer- 


' vice of God and of his Houſe,either by the former Kings; of which 7 Heb. 


ſee below, ver. 18. and compare 1 Kings 7. 51. and 15. 15. 2 Kings _ 
e 


12:18. 2 Chron: 15:18. or, by the King or his People. f Or rather, 

that ſhall be brought : for though the people might Vow to bring it heart of 8 
thither in convenient time, yet it 1s not likely they would bring 
much money thither in the Tyrannical and Idolatrous Reign of 


| Athaliah : or, if they did, that Athaliah would nor ſeize it for her 
own uſe. .*. 7. e. The half Sheke], which was paid for every one 
' that was numbred from :0 Years old and upward ;. of which the 
' very ſame Phraſe is uſed, Ex.30-31- compare 2 Chron. 24.c,6,9. g Heb. 


the money of ſouls, or perſons, «ccording 30 the taxing. 7. e. the money 
which every man that had vowed his Perſon to God, paid accor- 
ding to the rate which the Prieſt put upon him ; Of which ſee 
Levit, 27.2, &c. hþ All that thall be freely offered. See Exod 25. 
2.and 35. 5. ; : : 

5 Let the prieſts take is to them 3, every man of his 
acquaintance, and let them repair the breaches of che 
houſe, whereſoever any breach ſhall be found &. 

: Let them go abroad through all the parts of the Land, as they 
have acquaintance and intereſt,and gather up the Money,and bring 
it to Jeruſalem, k Either through decay ; or, by ill accidents ; or, 
by the malice of Athaliah or her Relations : Of which ſee 2 Chron. 

*4. 7: 6 . 

6 But it was ſo,that | in the three and twentieth year þ Heb. is 
of xing Jehoaſh,the prieſt had not repaired the breaches 11, wn. 
of the houſe /. rieth year, 

I Either,becauſe the People were generally corrupt & backward and third 
to the Worſhip of God, eſpecially where it coſt them any thing : year« 
or, becauſe the Perſons employed in making the Colle&ions, were 
negligent, or unfaithful, perverting the Money received, to their 
own uſes, as may ſeem probable trom the contrary chara&ter of 
other Perſons, of whom it 1s noted, that they dealt faithfully, below, 

V. 15+ Or, becauſe the people did not like this way of Colle&ion,and 
had no good opinion of the ColleC&ors Faithfulneſs. 

7 Then king Jehoaſh called for Jehoiada the prieſt, 
and the other prieſts,and ſaid unto them, Why repair ye 
not the breaches of the houſe ?now therefore receive no 
more money of your acquaintance, but deliver it mz for 
the || breaches of the houſe, Las 

m is e. The money which you have already received- Pairing of- 

8And the prieſts conſented to receive no »re money 
of the people, neicher to repair the breaches of the 
houſe ». 

3 Nor to take the charge of that Work which the king had com- 
mitted unto them,but freely to reſign it to whom the King thould 
appoint. 

9 But Jehoiada the prieſt « took a cheſt,and bored a 
hole in the lid of ir, and ſet it beſide the altar y, on the 
right fide, as one cometh into the houſe of the LORD : 


and the prieſt that kept the + door q,put therein all the f _ 
money that was brought into the houſe of the-LORD: Slarejpal 


o By the Kings conſent, 2 Chron. 24. 8. þ In the Prieſts Court. 
Obj. It was placed wirhour, at the gate of the houſe of the Lord, 2 Chr. 
24-8. 4». Either, Firſc, It was firſt placed by the Altar, and after- 
wards thence removed to the Gate of the Court, for the Peoples 
greater farisfaCtion,that they might come thirher,& put in their mo- 
ney with their own hands, Or, Secondly, That place 2 Chron. ſpeaks - 
of the Gate of the Temple ſrrictly ſo called, nigh unto which the 
Altar of burnt-offerings was. Or, Thirdly, It was placed near the 
entrance into the Prieits Court,which was over againſt the Altar, 
and not far from it, ſo as the People ſtanding in their own Court, 
might either pur their money into it, or ſee when the Prieſts put 
it in. q The Door of the Prieſts Court, which, together with the 
Temple and all its utenſils, was committed to the charge of the 
Prieſts and Lewites, Numb. 18. 4- 1 Chron.9.26, &c. 
Io And it was ſo,when they ſaw that there was much | 
money in the cheſt, that the kings [| ſcribe r, and the | moot 
high Prieſt came up,and they + pur up in bags,and told ons -PY 


che money that was found in the houſe of the LORD. jond 


r Who kept an exa& account hereof in writing, See 2 King.19. 


2, and 22+ 3s 
uw And 


7 0 0:3 Chap. Xy, Fur 


] 

+ Heb. 
ought 
: in h, 


1 


4 


1+ Heb, 
; = fo 


236.9 


J'Chap. 
I &15, 16 


| 


{Heb, 
we ug 


[0r, 
Who, 


f Heb 
te rwen 
"th year, 
 ;hird 
ſur, 


XI Hap. XIII: 


h, is 
Jet 
year, 


bird 


yt 


g of- 


ſet 


eb. 
d up. 


1 


] 


| 


| + Heb. 


mught it 


; f Heb, 
got forth, 


'Chap. 
$15, 16+ 


{Heb, 
" uy 


(Or, 
Wim, 


, began to reign &@ over Ifrael in Samaria, and reigned 


I' 


11 And they gave the money, being told, into the 
hands of them that did the work, that had the overſight 
of the Houſe of the LORD /: and they Þ laid it out to 
the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the 
Houſe of the LORD ; : 

{ Who were choſen out of the people» not without a refleftion 
upon the Prieſts for their neglect or unfairhfulneſs. 

12 And to maſons, and hewers of ſtone, and to buy 
timber, and hewed ſtone, to repair the breaches of the 
Houſe of the LORD, and for all that + was laid out 


for the Houſe to repair it 7. 
: And for all other things which were neceſſary for the ceparation 
of the Houſe. 

' 13 Howbeit, there were not made « for the Houfe of 
the LORD, bowls of ſilver, ſnutfers, baſons, trumpets, 
and veſſels of gold, or veſlels of ſilver, of the money 
that was brought into the Houſe of the LORD. 


4 To wit, until all.the breaches ofthe Houſe were repaired ; bur, 
when that was done, they laid it out for theſe things, as is noted 
> Chron. 24+ 14+ 

14 But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired 
therewith the houſe of the LORD. 

i5 Moreover, * they reckoned not with the men, 
into whoſe hand they delivered the money to be be- 
ſtowed on workmen ; for they dealt faithfully x. 

x For they perceived by many experiments that they were Faithful. 

16 * The treſpaſs-money, and * fin-money was not 
brought into the houſe of the LORD y: it * was the 
prieſts. | 

3 i. e. It was not employed towards the reparation of the Houſe, 
becaule, as itfollows, it was the Prieſts 5 it was given them for their 
private uſe and maintenance- Queſt, If this reaſon was weighty, how 
could the money of them that paſſed the account, or, the money that every 
man was ſet at, be thus employed, 'as they were, wv, 4+ for thele 
alſo may ſeem to have been the Prieſts? Anſw. They were not 
appropriated to the Prieſts, but, for the ſervice of the tabernacle of the 
congregation, as is {aid of the former, Exod. 3o. 16- Or, for the Lord, 
Lev. 27. 2, 9, 14, 23- 

17 © Then z Hazael king of Syria went up, and 
fought againſt Gath a, and took it : and Hazael ſet his 


face b to go up to Jeruſalem. 

zZ i.e. In this Kings days, when Jehoiada was dead, and Joaſb 
revolted from God : of which ſee 2 Chron; 24. 17, &c. 4 Once a 
City of the Philifines, bur taken by David, 1 Chron. 18. 1. and now 
a part of the Kingdom of Judah. 6 i. e. Direfted his March, and 
ted his Forces. Or, undertook in good earneſt. So the ſame Phraſe 
is uſed 2 Chron. 20, 3. Jer- 21. 10. Exzek.35. 2 


18 And Jehoaſh king of Judah*rook all the hallowed 
things c that Jehoſhaphatr, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah his 
Fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicate, and his own 
hallowed things, andall the gold :hat was found in the 
treaſures of the houſe of the LORD, and in the kings 
houſe, and ſent i# to Hazael kingofSyria,and he + went 
away from Jeruſalem. 

c That neceflity of ſaving his Kingdom and People by this means, 
which otherwiſe might ſeem to excuſe the fat, was brought upon 
himſelf by his Apoſtacy from God. See on 1 Kings 15+ 18. 

19 T And the reſt of the adts of Joalh, and all that 
he did, are they nor written in the book of the chroni- 
cles of the kings of Judah > 

20 And his ſervants aroſe, and made a conſpiracy, 
and ſlew Joaſh d in || the houſe of Millo e, which goeth 


down to Silla f. 

d Of which ſee 2 Chron: 24:25. e Fither, inthat ſtrong and fa- 
mous place in Jeruſalem called Mille : of which fee 2 Sam: 5: 9g: 1 Kings 
9: 15, 24. and 11 27. into which he poſſibly retired for his ſecurity, 
being afraid even of his own Subjetts and Servants, Or, in ſome 
other place called by the ſame name;for ſome reſemblance it had with 
it. f 1. e. Which ſtandeth upon the deſcent ?o $:Ua, or upon that 
deſcending cauſeway which leadeth from Mi to the Kings Houſe 
Some refer this to Joaſh, and render the place thus, They ew him at 
or near the houſe of Milo, deſcending, or as hc was going down to Sills, 
to eſcape their hands. | 

21 For Jozachargthe ſon of Shimeath, and Jehozabad 
the ſon of Shomer h, his ſervants, ſmote him, and he 
died ; and they buried him with his fachers 1n the city 
of David, and Amaziah his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

g Called alſo Zabad, 2 Chron: 24: 26. t Called Shimrith, 2 Chron: 
24: 26, Except Shomer be the fathers name, and Shimrich the Mothers. 
3 1-e- In the ſame City, but not in the ſame Royal Sepulchre, 


2 Chron; 24. 25. 
CHAP xD 

Fehoahaz King of Iſrael, faloweth the ſin of Jeroboam : is oppreſſed by Hazael ; 
and relieved by prayer, 1 - 9. Joaſb his ſon ſucceedeth him in the 
Kingdom, and in his Idolatry, 10 =mm13. Elifha, propheſieth to Joaſb 
three Vifovies over the Syrians, and dieth: Joaſh's Lamentation, 
14 —19. AM year after the Mabites invading the Land, a dead man 
being caft into Eliſha's Sepulchre, u reſtored to life, 2021. Hazacdl 
aieth, and Joaſh recovereth the Cities which had been taken from þs 
Father, 22==25, 


N + the three and twentieth year of Joaſh the ſon of 
Ahaziah king of Judah, Jehoahaz the ſon of Jehu 


ſeventeen years, | Z 
# ich. reigned : which is put for began #o reign, 2 Kings 3:1: and 
$; 16, 25: and 12: 1. 


K ING & 


LORD, and + followed the fins of Jeroboam the ſon of 
Nebat, which made Iſrael ro fin, he departed not 
therefrom. 


 afeer. 
3 4 And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt 


of Hazael, all :heir days b. | 

6 Or rather, a# his days, as it is explained, wv. 22. | 

4 And Jehoahaz beſought the LORD, andthe LORD 
hearkened unto him c : for he ſaw « the oppreſſion of 
Iſrael e, becauſe the king of Syria oppreſſed them #. 

c Nor for his ſake, for God regards not the prayers of the wicked 
and impenitent, Pſa/. 66. 18. Prov. 1. 28. and 55: 8. bur for other 
reaſons expreſſed below, wv. 23. 4d i- e. He obſerved it with care 
and compaſſion. e His choſen and once beloved people. He now 
helps them, becauſe of his former and ancient kindneſs to them- 

f To wit. very grievoully, as it is expreſſed v. 7. So that he helped 
them not for their own fakes, bur becauſe of the rage of their 
Enemies, and their Blaſphemies, which doubtleſs accompanicd it. 
See Dent: 32: 27: Pſal: 12: 4+ EE 

5 ( And che LORD gave Iſrael a * favioursg, fo that * 5 
they went out from under the hand of the Syrians : and 25: 
the — ig of Iſrael dwelt in their tents + as before 
time 5, | 


In ; 
_ . . . . . . a © 
peace and ſecurity, not only in their ſtrong Cities, but even in 


their Tents in the fields. 
6 Nevertheleſs, they departed not from the fins of 


ked therein : and there Þ+ remained the grove z alſo in waltes. 
Samaria. ) + Heb. 

# Which Ahab had planted for the worſhip of Baal, 1 Kings 16; 32: food. 
and which ſhould have been deſtroyed, Deur: 7. 5. | 

7 Neither did he & leave of the people | to Jehoahaz, 
but fifry horſemen, and ten chariots, and ten thouſand 
footmen: for the king of Syria had deſtroyed them, and 
had made them like the duſt by * chreſhing ». 
_ & i. e. The King of Syria, -v: 4. with which this Verſe is to be 
joyned ; wv+ 5: and 6. being put within a Parentheſis, as it isin our 
Tranſlation, But this verle may he tranſlated otherwiſe, 4/though be 
( either the King of Syris, v. 4+ or the Lord, wv, 5. to whom Judg- 
ments are off aſcribed, even when wicked men are the inſtruments 
of executing it ) had ns left, &c» And ſo it may be joyned with the 
next foregoing Verſe, as a great aggravation of their impenitency, 
and obſtinate continuance in their Idolatry, notwithſtanding ſuch 
terrible Judgments, which in all reaſon ſhould have driven_them 
from it. /7.e. Ofhis Army, or Men of War, as the following words 
evVIince. - 9 7.e. Had broken and ground them to duſt, or powder, 
as the Corn is many times broken by Threſhing. | 

8 4 Now thereſt of the ads of Jehoahaz, and all that 
hedid, and his might », «re they not written-in the book 
of the Chronicles of the kings of Iſrael 2? 
» For though his ſucceſs was nor good. he hewed much perſonal! 
valour and courage. Which is noted to intimate, that the 1/raelites 
were not conquered, becauſe of the baſenels and cowardiſe of their: 
King, but meerly from the Righreous and dreadful] Judgmear of 
God, who was now reſolved to reckon with them for their filthy 
Apoltacy. | 
9 And Jehoahaz ſlept with his Fathers, and chey buri- 
ed himin Samaria, andJoaſh his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 
To © In the thirty and ſeventh year of Joalh king of 
Judah o, began Jehoaſh the ſon of Jehoahaz co reign over 
Iſrael in Samaria, and reigned fixteen years, 
o By which, compared with v. 1: it may be gathered. that Jehoahaz 
had two or three Years before his death made his Son Jehoaſh King 
with him * which is very probable, becauſe he was perpetually in 
ithe ſtate of War and "conſequently in danger of an untimely death. ; 
' and becaulſe he was a Man of Valuur, as 1s implied here, v. 12. and 
declared 2 Chron: 2.5. | 
11 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 
LORD ; he departed not from all the fins of Jeroboam 
the ſon of Nebat; who made Iſrael fin : but he walked 
therein. . BE | 
12 And the reſt of the as of Joaſh, and all that he 
did, and his might wherewith he fought againſt Amaziah 
king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Iſrael ? 
12 And Joaſh flept with his fatbers, and Jeroboam ſat 
upon his throne : and Joaſh was buried in Samaria with 
che kings of Iſrael. 
14 4 Now Eliſha was fallen ſick, of his ſickneſs 
whereof he died, and Joaſh the king of Iſrael came down 
unto him, and wept over his face p, and ſaid, O my 
father, my father, and the charior of Iſrael and the 
horſemen thereof 4. 
pN-r for any true Love and Reſpe& to him, for then he would 
have followed his counſel, in forſaking the Calves, and returning 
to the Lord ; but for his own and the Kingdoms ineſtimavle lots 
in him, 4q See 2 Kings 2, 12. : p 
15 And Elithaſaid unto him, Take bow and arrows. 
And he took-unto him bow and arrows. = 
16 And he ſaid to the king of Iſrael, F Put thine Heb. 
hand upon the bow. And, heput his hand wper ##; and; , 


* Amos 


fe. 3s 


. r1ae. 


2 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of che 


Eliſha puthis hands ugon the kings hands. 


3 3 17 And 


H.b. ii 
walked || 


Ifrael, and he delivered them into the hand of * Hazael * Chap: | 
king of Syria, and into the hand of Benhadad the ſon #8: 12: 


' $ i= aay,. 
g Either Eliſha, werſe. 141 or rather, Jehaaſh, the Son of REN LW || 
j Jehoahaz, below, wv. 25. and Jerobosw his Son. 2 Kings 14. 25. and third | 


Make t hing 


| 

W 
1 
1 


ee Ver: | 


"ff 


| 
[| 


che houſe of Jeroboam, who made Iſrael ſin, bur + wal- + xr, 4 


: 
: 
[1 


| 


— ” ——_ w 


[ 


h + Heb. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


| 


| + Heb- 
| face. 


T Heb. 


returned 


25. a5 


ap XIV. 


| were aown., 


17:And he ſaid, Open the window eaſtwardr: and as 
opened ir. Then Eliſha ſaid, Shoot : and he ſhot. __ 
he ſaid, The 2rrow of the LORD's deliverance, and the 
arrow of deliverance from Syria : for thou ſhalt ſmire 
the Syrians in Aphek/, till thou have conſumed them - 
y Either towards Syria, which lay North-Eaſt-w ard,from the os 
of Iſrael : or, towards the Iſ-aelires Land beyond Jordan, which lay 
Eaft-ward from C-naan, and which was now poſſeſſed by the ow 
Either way this Arrow is ſhot againſt the Syrians, as atoken w w 
God intended to do againſt them. /ſ Not in the City, but = r » 
Territory of it, where it ſeems there was a great Battel to OS t 
between the Iſraelites and Syrians, Of Aphek lee 1 Sam: 4; 17 and 29:1 
1 Kings 20: 30 though it is poſſible there mighr be ſeveral Cities 01 
that name* Or, as z Aphek, 1. e. thou ſhalt ſmire them as they Pp Er 
ſinirten in the City or Territory of 4phek, i. e. utterly Dy ng 
See 1 Kings 20: 26, 29, 30. the Particle as being oft under 00d, as 
hath been formerly and frequently proved. ? 1.e. The Syrians, po 
all that people, bur their Armies, or at Jeaſt thar which was to a 
at Aphek, where a dreadful Battel was to be fought. Or, if this be 
meant of all the Syrian Armies, thisis to be underſtood ne wevugr he 
3f he did nor hinder it by his unbelief or negleCt, ſignified in the 
following Verſes. 
18 And he ſaid, Take the arrows : and he took them. 


And hefaid untothe king of Iſrael, Smite upon the ground 


# : and he ſmote thrice, and ſtayed. 
u The former ſign portended Viftory, and this was to declare the 


number -of the Victories. | ; 
19 And the man of God was wroth with him, and 


ſaid, Thou ſhouldeſt have ſmitten five or ſix times, then 
hadſt thou ſmitten Syria till thou hadft conſumed : : 


whereas now thou ſhalt ſmite Syria but thrice x. 

x Queſt. Wherein was Jehoaſb his fault, or why was the Prophet 
angry with him? Anſ. The Prophet himſelf did not yer know wm 
many ViRQories Jehoaſþ ſhould obtain againſt the Syriazs, but wS 
had ſignified to him, that he ſhould learn that by the number of the 
Kings ſtrokes- And he was angry with him, not ſimply, —_ 
he ſmete only thrice, but becauſe of his unbelief and Idolatry, : 
provoked God ſo to over-rule his heart and hand, that he ſhoul 
{mite but thrice, which was a token that God would aſſiſt him no 
further. Although his ſmiting but thrice might proceed eitherfrom 
hisunbelief or negligence, For by the former ſign, and the Prophets 
Comment upon it, he might clearly perceive that this alſo was 1n- 
tended asa fign ofhis ſucceſs againſt the Syrians, and therefore he 
ought t» have done it frequently, and vehemently. | | 

20 4 And Eliſha died, and they buried him y : and 
the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming 


in of the year z. : 
7 In or near Samaria, % In the Spring, when the Fruits of the 
_ Earth grew ripe- : 

21 Andic came to paſs as they were burying .*. aman, 
that behold, they ſpied a band of men a, and they caſt 
the man into the ſepulchre of Eliſha b : and when the 
man ec + was let down, and touched the bones of Eliſha 


d, he revived, and ſtood up on his Feet e, | 

*; Or, were ahorr to bury, as that Particle is oft uſed in the Hebrew 
Tongue. # Coming towards them, but at ſome diſtance. b Not 
daring to carry thedead Corps further to the place appointed for his 
burial, they made uſe of the next burying-place, where Eliſha was 
buried, and there they removed ſome Stone, or opened ſome Door, 
and haſtily flung down their dead Corps there. © 1- e. The man's 
dead Body, er the Coffin in which he was put. 4 Which might eaſily 
be, the Coffin and linen in which Eliſba's Body was put, and the 
Fleſh of his body being now conſumed : for this was ſome conſider- 
able time after his death. e Which Miracle God wrought there, 
partly, todo honour to that great Prophet, and that by this Seal he 
might confirm his Do&rine, and thereby confute the falſe Dorine 
and Worſhip of the J/-azlites ; partly, to ſtrengthen the Faith of 
Joaſh, and of the 17 aelites, in his promiſe of their ſucceſs againſt the 
Syrians ; and partly, in the midſt of all their Calamities to comfort 
ſuch Iſraelites as were Elijba's followers, with the hopes of that Eternal . 
Life, whereof this was a manifeſt pledge, and to awaken the reft of 
that people to a due care and preparation for it. 

22 q But Hazael king of Syria oppreſſed Iſrael all 
the days of Jehoahaz. 

23 Andthe LORD was gracious unto them, and had 
compaſiion on them,and had reſpe& unto them, becauſe 
of his covenant with Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacob, and 
would not deſtroy them, neither caft he them from his 
+ preſence f as yet. 

f 1. e. From the Land of Canaan to which the preſence, and pub- 
lick and ſolemn Worſhip of God was confined- | : 

24 So Hazael king of Syria died, and Benhadad his 

ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

25 And Jehoaſh the ſon of Jehoahaz F took again 

out of the hand of Benhadad the ſon of Hazael, the 


and zook, Cities which he had taken our of the hand of Jehoahaz 
his Father by war : three times did Joaſh beat him g, and 


recovered the cities of Iſrael. 
g According to the Prediftion above. v 19: 


C H AJ Þ., XIV. 


fmaziahs good reign * His juſtice on the Murderers of his Father : His Fiftory 
over Edom : Warreth againſt Jehuaſb King of Iſrael: Is overcome by him ; 


and ſtain by his own People : Azariah ſucceedeth him, x —— 22. Jehnaſh 
diech 3 and Jeroboam hu Son is King over Iſrael : Hu Afr, and Death : 
Zachariah hu Son ſucceedeth him, 23 - 29. 


N the ſecond year of Joaſh ſon of Jehoahaz king of 


* 2 Chron @ Ifrael , reigned * Amaziah the fog of Joaſh king 


of Judah, 


Il. KINGS. Chap. XIV, 


@ i« e Afﬀer he began to Reign alone: for he Reigned two or 
three Years with his Father ; Of which ſee on chap. 13. 10. 
2 He was twenty and five years old when he began to 
reign, and reigned twenty and nine years b in Jeruſalem : 
and his mothers name was Jehoaddan of Jeruſalem. 
b To wit, 14 Years with Joaſb King of 1ſrael, who reigned onely 
16 Years, chap: 13; 10: and 15 Years after the death ot Joaſh, vr 
with Jeroboam the Son of Joaſh, as is affirmed here, werſe. 17: and 
2 Chron. 25; 25. 
3 And he did hat Which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD «c, yet not like David his Father 4: he did 
according ro all things as Joaſh his Father gid e. 
c Thar which was in ſome ſort agreeable tg Gods Will, d Not 
ſincerely, 2 Chron. 25, 2. e1,e. For atime ſerved God aright, bur 
afterwards fell to Idolatry, 1 Chron 25. 14. as Joaſh had done, 2 Kings 
I2e J. 
4 Howbeit f, the high places were not taken away : 

45 yet the people did ſacrifice, and burnt incenſe on the 
high piaces. 

F Tnough he did right, &c, for this particle is tobe joyned with 
thoſe words, the reſt being to be cloſed with a Parenthelig, 
5 © Andit came to paſs aſſoon as the kingdom was 
confirmed in his hand, that he flew his ſervants * which « ,__ 


had ſlain the king his Father .*. 12, 26, 
.*. Whereby it is implied, that his Fathers Murderers had powerful 
Friendsand Abettors, and that their fa& was in ſome ſort approved 

by the generality of the people, to whom Joaſh had made himſcif 

| hateful by his Apoſtacy to Idolatry, and by his ingratitude to the 

Houſe ot Jehoiaaas 

6 Bur che children of the murderer he ſlew notg : ac- 
cording unto that which is wricten in the book of the - 

law of Moſes, wherein the LORD commandedg, ſaying, 

* The fathers ſhall not be put to death for the/children, , D 
nor the children be put to death for the fathers ; bur . a _ 
every man fha!l be put to death for his own fin. Ezck: 18: 
g Wherein he ſhewed ſome Faith and Courage,that he would obey 20. 
this Command of God though it was very hazardous to himſelf, 
ſuch perſons being likely to ſeek revenge for their Fathers death. 

7 He ilew of Edom h in the valley of ſalt ;, ten chou- 
ſand, and took || Selah & by war, and called the name 
of it Joktheei /, unto this day. 

þ 1.c., Of the Edomites, or the children of Seir, as they are called 
2 Chron. 25. 11. either, becauſe they dwelt in Seir ; See Gen. 36. 8. 
or, becaulie theſe people were confederates. And he invaded theſe 
people becauie they were Subje&sto his Kingdom, from which they 
had revolted in Joram's days, 2 Kings 8: 20. i Which was the Land 
of Edem ; Of which ſee 2 Sam: 8; 13; Pſal: 60: 2. k Or, the rock: 
the chicf Ciry of that part of Arabia, called by other Authors Perra, 
which ſignifies a rock, becauſe it was built upon a Rock, 2 Chren. 
25 12. { Which ſignifies, the obedience of God, 1. e. given him by 
God as a reward of his Obedience to Gods Meſſage by the Prophet 
2 Chron. 25.8, 9, 

8 C Then Amaziah ſent meſſengers to Jehoaſh, the 
ſon of Jehoahaz ſon of Jehu, king of Iſrael, ſaying, 
Come, let us look ene another in the Face . 

2 Let us fight perſonally, and with our Armies? This challenge 
he ſent, partly upon the late and great injuries done by the 1ſ-aelices 
to his people, 2 Chron. 25- 10, 13. and partly, from ſelf-confidence, 
and a deſire of advancing his Glory and cas op by his Arms. 

9 And Jchoaſh che king of Iſrael fent to Amaziah 

king of Judah, ſaying, The thiſtle that was in Lebanon, 
ſent to the cedar that was in Lebanon », ſaying, Give 
thy daughter ro my fon to wife o; and there paſſed by 
a wild beaſt chat was in Lebanon, and trod down the 
thiſtle p. 
n By the chile, a low and contemptible, yet troubleſome Shrub, 
he underſtands Amaziah z and by the cedar, himſelf, whom he inti- 
mates to be far ſtronger than he, and out of hisreach. » Ler us make 
a match, i. e. let us fight. On:ly he expreſſeth this Bloody work 
1n a Civilmanner, as Amaziah had done, wv. 8. and as Avner did, 
2 Sas, 2.14, Or, let thy Kingdom and mine be United under one 
King, as formerly they were ; and let us decide it by a pitched Bat- 
tel, whether thou or I thall te that King. Or, as ſome expound 
it, by affirming, That ir was great arrogancy and preſumption for 
him to defire a Friendly League or Affinity with him ; he leaves 
him to gueſs how intolerable it was that he ſhould undertake to 
-wage War againſt him. p And with no leſs eaſe ſhall my Soldiers 
tread down thee and thy Forces. 

ro Thou haſt indeed ſmitten Edom, and thine heart 
hath lifed thee up : glory of rhs 9, and tarry þ at home : + Heb. # 
for why ſhouldeft thou meddle to hy hure, that thou ;;, buſt, 
ſhouldeſt fall, even thou, and Judah with thee ? 

q Content thy ſelf with that Glory and Succeſs, and ler not thine 
Ambition betray thee to ruin. ; 

Ix But Amaziah would not heary : therefore Jehoaſh 
king of Iſrael went up /, and he and Amaziah king of 
Judah looked one another in the Face at Becth-ſhemeſh, 
which belongeth to Judah #. 

r Becauſe God blinded and hardned him to his deſtruQion, for his 
abominable and ridiculous Tdolatry, 2 Chron: 25: 10. {To wit, inro 
the Kingdom of Judah, carrying the War into his Enemies Countrey- 

# Which is added to diſtinguilh it from that Berhſhemeſb in 1ſachars 
and another in Naphrhali, Joſ. 19. 22, 38. 

I2 And Judah f was put to: the worſe before Iſrael, +} Heb.u# 
and they fled « every man to their tents. ſmigtens 

# Being unſatisfied in the ground and manner ofthe quarrel, and 


diſcouraged by their Kang's Kdelatry, aud ſmitten by God with a 
ſpucit of tear, 


|| Or, the 


rocks 


| 13 And 


0 —=<now + 


*Matth 


N 39, M 
led Fon, 


Bw. XIV: IL a FAY Chep. _ 


r; And Jchoaſh king of Iſrael took Amaziah king of that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how — 
Judah, che fon of Jehoaſh, the ſon of Ahaziah, ar Berh- , he recovered Damaſcus, and Hamath, 21þich belonged ro 
themeſh, and came to Jeruſalem x, and brake down the ' Judah # p, are they nor written in the book of the DEN = 
wail of Jeruſalem, from the gate of Ephraim y, unto Chronicles of the kings of 1{rae! ? WE 
the corner-gate; four hundred cubits z. þ Theſe were Cities of Syr:a, but were taken from the Syrians by 

x Commanding entrance in Amaziah's name, and with his conſent, ' David and — 2 _ 1 - 2 _ > 3. and probably by chem 
which he durſt rot deny. y Which led to Ephraim 2 Which was ' incorporated wm . ANG a ek - RIOT PENEEY own Tribe, 
done, partly in ſcorn and contempt ; and partly, that he might re- to w YR _ that rime - ey belonged ; but afrery ards they were 
enter and retake it, if they ſhould attempt to renew the War. I the Syri ny - an Im 9 ow eee cr by this Jeenfmn, 

14 And he took all the gold and ſilver, and all the 29 And Jeroboam _ vu ” _—_ = __ even with 
veſſels that were found in the houſe of the LORD, and the kings of Ifrael ; and Zachariah his fon reigned in 
in the treaſures ofthe kings houſe, and hoſtages a, and his itead. 
returned to Samaria 6. 


a To afſure their peaceable carriage towards him. b He did not : CA WS XV. = 
keep Jeruſalem, nor ſeek to gain the poſſeſſion and dominion of that þ Azariah his good Reign « but is puniſhed with Leproſie, and dicth, 1==7, 
Kingdom : partly, becauſe he thought he could not keep it, conft- Zachariah reigneth ill: is ſlain by Shallim * who reigreth a month. and 
dering the difficulty he found inkeeping his own from ſuch porenr | zs ſlain by Menahem, 8 — 15. He & ſtrengthened by Pul K ng of Aſſyria. 
and near Enemies as the Syrians were 3 and the great affe&ion which Pekahiah his Son ſucceedeth him, 16 — ——-— 22: He i5 ſlain by Pekah, 


all J»4ah bare to Davids Houle : and partly, becauſe God fo inclined 23 —— 26. 4 part of the Iſraelites is carried away Captive t» Aſſjria by 
his heart, that he might make good his promiſe to David and his Tiglath Pileſer, 27 = 29. Hoſhea flayeth Pckah, and ſucceedeth him : 
Family. Jotham s good Reign over Judah : Ahaz ſucceedeth him, 30---38. 


x5 \ Now the reſt of the a&s of Jehoaſh which he TN the twenty and ſeventh year of Jeroboam king of 4 xx.r/ 
did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah | Iſrael «, + began Azariah 5 fon of Amaziah King of hs 
king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the Judah to reign « | 


Chronicles of the kings of Iſrae] 4 SS a Qveſt, How can this be true, ſcing Amaziah, the Father of this 

16 And Jehoaſh ſlept with hisFathers, and was buried | 4zar.3þ, lived only till the 15th year of Jerotoam's Reign, chap; 14: 
in Samaria with the kings of Iſrael, and Jeroboam his | *» 23? 4anw. This might be either, Firſt, Becauſe Jeroloam was 
ſon reigned in his ſtead. made King by, and Reigned with his Father eleven or twelve years, 


; | q j 2nd afterwards Reigned alone ; and ſo there is a two-fold beginni 
I7 4 And Amaziah the ſon of Joaſh king of Judah. of his Kingdom ; by the his wes his hoe x Yous Ka te", 
lived after the death of Jehoaſh ſon of Jehoahaz king of Jater, his 15th Year. Or, Secondly, becauſe there was an Inter- 


Iſrael, fifteen years. Reign for eleven or twelve Years in the Kingdom of Judah ; either, 
| 13 And the reſt of the as of Amaziah, are they not through the prevalency of that Fation which cur off Amaziah the 
F :1 the book of the Chronicles of the kings of Father, and kept the Son out of his ang, nog or, becauſe Azariah 
. written 11 tne DO & 8g was very young when his Father was lain, and the people were 
Judah ? . aot agreed to reſtore him to his Right till his 16th Year, chap: 14:21, 
18: Yor. 19 Now * they .. made a conſpiracy againſt him in | 2? Chr. 26: T- And yet theſe 11 or 12 Years of Inter-Reign,.in which ny 
I: J eruſalem : and he fled to Lachith c, but they ſent after he was excluded from the exerciſe of his Regal Office, ſome think - . i 


to be included in thoſe 52 years which are here acſribedto Azariah's 


| Reign, v. 2. which may well be doubted. 5 Called alſo Uzziah here 
*. ie The people, or the princes and chief men among them | and v.13, 30. cSolely and fully to exerciſe his Regal Power. 


poſſibly thoſe whoſe Sons he had delivered up as Hoſtages to Jehoaſh, 2 Sixteen years old was he when he began on reign; 
with the connivence, if not approbation of the people ; as appears, » 


becauſe the deſign was carried on openly, and 1'eddily,and irrefifti- ind he reigned two and fifty years a 1n Jeruſalem, and 
bly. as the following words ſhew. c A ſtrong City in Judah, rowards his mothers name was Jecholiah of Jeruſalem. 

the Philiſtines : Of which ſee Jof. 10. 31» and 15. 39. 2 Kings 19. 8. d Beſide the ſixteen Years of his Minority laſt mentioned. 
d Either, ſecret Murderers : or rather, bands of Soldiers ; for 2 And he did hat which was right in the ſight of the 


this Rebellion was carried on by ſtrong hand, and open force. | 7.OR D, according to all that his Father Amaziah had 
Compare 2 Kings 12. 20. and 15. 10, 15+ done. e - 
: 3 


20 And they brought him on horſes e, and he was| ,: = 55 
; Tra : * * 1. E. In the ſame manner, unſincerely, and but for atime. | 
buried at Jeruſalem with his Fathers in the Ciry c "4 dave that f the high places were not removed : the 


David. eo le bo ; : - " 
Oo. math tf; rl et aig. : ſacrificed and burnt incenſe ſtill on the high 


And all the people of Judah took * Azari-! | | |! 
han! 2L q 7 ag f Underſtand this, as howbeit, chap: 14: 4. {04 a OO 
bra, ( which was ſixteen years old ) and made him ki:g | 5 4 And the LOR D & fr mn SE king, ſo that he © Chron: | | 


him d to Lachiſh, and flew him there. 


(Chron: ſtead of his Father Amaziah f. Y - * > p 26. 19. 
$1 bes f Whichthey did, either in oppoſition to the conſpirators * or, t: ha P : oP =r g unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a 
a4 Uzs ſhew their affeQion to the houſe of David, and thattheir quairel was | - bee hou eb : and Jotham the kings ſon was over the 
wu, onely perſonal againſt Amaziah, whom they looked 1pon as the | 1:OWe, judging the people of the land 7. 
Author of all their late Calamities. This Azariah is called Uzziah { The Cauſe whereof ſee 2 Chron: 26: 16. h Separated from 
2 Kings 15. 30. 2 Chron. 26, 1 both names ſignifying the ſame thing | Convertation with others by vertue of that Law, Lev. 174. 46. which 
for ſubſtance ; that, Gods help ; and this, Gods ſtrength ->eing the Law of the King of Kings, bound Kings no lefs than 
22 He built Elath g, and reſtored it co Judah þ, afte: | 5ubjefs. 7 i. e. He governed the Kings Court and whole Kingdom 
that the king ; ſlept with his Fathers. in his Name, and as his Vicegerent. _ _ 
g i.e. Repaired and Fortified it: for it was built before, Deut. 2. 8 6 And the reſt ofche acts of Azariah, and all that he 


þ From wham it had revoltzd with the reſt of Edam, in » hich Land | d1d, are they not written in the book of the chronicles 
| this place was, upon the Red-Sea- #1 e His Father Amaziah ; who | f the kings of Judah ? 


gs perſeR his Coaquelt of Zim, bug Jelt Tome work MERE 7 So Azariahflept with his Fathers, and * they buried * 2 Chron. | 


22 © In the fifreenth year of Amaziah, the ſon of him with his Fathers in the cicy of David, and Jocham bin 
Joaſh king of Judah, Jeroboam the ſon of Joaſh king o! his ſon reigned in his ſtead. | 4 on | 
Iſrael began to reign in Samaria, andreigned forty and | , ® © In che thirty and eight year of Azariah king of 
one years. | | ' | fedan &, did Zachariahthe fon of Jeroboam reign over 

24 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the = _ — a i 

* * NIC ce Ec OTEeS ON V. 2e 

LORD : he deparrednot from all the fins of Jeroboum} |, 1.9 he did chat which was evil in the fight of the 

25 He reflored the coaſt of rot from the carts > of LO RD, as his Fathers had done : he departed not from 
Hamath &, unto theſea of the plain, accordingto the © lins of Jeroboam the ſon of Nebat, who made lfrael 


| tO fin 
word of the LORD God of Ifrael, which he ſpake þ\ . | | FS Eno 
_ | *Math: the band of his ſervant * Jonah », the ſon of Amirtrai | ,. ** And Shallum the ſon of Jabeſh /conſpired againſt + J,þ 342 
4 | 9,49. the Prophet, which was of Gath-Hephere | him, and * ſmote him before the people m, and flew 26. Amos | 
. p 3 z_ * » . ._ . 
fe ultdfors. þ Which was the Northern Border of the Kingdom of Iſrael, Numb. | UM, and reigned __ his ſtead. TM 
13. 21-and 34. 8, {i-e. Unto the dead Sea, which once was a goodly 7 One of his chicf Captains. m2 Openly and impudently : which | 
Plain, Gen. 13. 10« which was their Southern border. m Or, Jonas, he preſumed to do.; either, becauſe he remembred thar the promiſe 
one of the ſmall Prophets ; though this P:ophecy of his be nor of the Kingdom made to Jehu, was confined to the Fourth Gene- 
Recorded there ; and therefore it is remembred here. ration, cap. 10, 30, which he obſerved to be now expired ; or, 


= ; - | becauſe he perceived that the people were generally diſaffte&ed ro 
26 For the LORD ſaw the affliction of Iſrael, that ir their King, and Hs Neo artien 


2as very bitter»: for there wasnot any thutup, norany} 1, Arq the reit of the a&s bÞ Zachartahi behold, 


left o, nor any helper for Ifrael. Set | | _ | 
» Whereby he was moved to piry and” help them, though thi they are written in the book of che Chronicles of the 


were an unworthy people. 0 See of this Phraſe on Deur. 32. 36. Kings of Iſrael. 


FR 


1 Kings 14. 10, and 21. 21- 12 This was * the word of the LORD which he ſpake * Chzp- 
27 And the LORD ſaid not that he would blot out | unto Jehu, ſaying, Thy ſons ſhall ſiron the Throne of If» + 55.074; 

2 | the name of Ifrael from under heaven : but he ſaved | rael unto the fourth generacion. And ſo it came to pals.. x. 8, g. 
_w ; . them by the hand of Jeroboam the ſon of Joaſh. | 13 © Shallum the fon of Jabeſh began to reign in the caled Oz- 


; 0 i, e. Not yet : he yol _ _ m—_ this, as de Me ' nine and thirtieth year of * Uzziah king of Judah, and + Heb 
id by the ſucceeding Prophets, though not in thoſe Words. See : 2 I + , - ; - --—- 
po Ih + 5 , de reigned f a full month in Samaria. + m__ 


28 © ow the reſt of the ads of Jeroboam, aad all} 75 For Menahem the ſon - Gadi, wentup from __ da 
| 3 N 4 _- 


KING Ss. Chip. XVI, [up 
againſt Pekah, as the Man who by his Murder of King Pekahiah the 
Son of Menahem, whom rhe A4ſhrian Monarch ſer up and favoured, 
and by his unneceſſary War with 4haz, had brought the 4ſjrian upon 
thems and cauſed the loſs of one half of that Kingdom. g ef. How 
could this be, when Jetham Reigned wy 16 Years, below, wv. 33 ? 
Anſ. The meaning is, That he began his Reign in the rwentieth Year 
after the beninning of Jethams Reign ; or, which is the ſame thing, 
in the fourth Year of Ahaz, Son of Jotham, as appears from chap. 16. 
1+ But the Sacred Writer, having not yet made mention of 4hazx, 
thought ir more proper to number Hoſhea's Years by J0:ham, of 
whom he had ſpoken, than by Abaz. Beſides. as J9tham did Reign 
divers Yearsin his Fathers Life, ſo might 4haz in Jothams Life, and 
Jotham might for divers Reaſons (which it is needleſs here to enquire) 
reſign up the Adminiſtration of the Kingdom wholly into A4þaz his 
hands ſome Years before his Death, and therefore might be faid to 
Reign but 16 Years, though he lived longer. 


nap. XV. 'TI. 
zah, and came to Samaria, and ſmote Shallum the ſon = 
Jabeſh in Samaria,and ſlew him, and reigned in his ſtead. 

15 And the reſt of the adts of Shallum, and his con- 
ſpiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the 
book of the Chronicles of. the kings of Iſrael. 

16 © Then Menahem ſmote Tiphſah », and all that 
were therein, and the coafts thereof from Tirzah s : 
becauſe they opened not to him p, therefore he ſmote 


Chap: 7, and all * the women therein thar were with child, 
* 12; 


'Chap- 


| t Heb. 


WEIE. 


* , Chr; 
5: 263 


* filver, that his hand might be with him, to confirm the 


| cauſed to even of all the mighty men of wealth, cf each man x fifty 
| come forthe ſhekels of ſilver, to give to the king of Afſyria : ſo the 


T There hjm, and reigned in his room. 


"Ila 7: 1: Tſrael in Samaria, and reigned twenty years. 


. Phulaſar. or Phui-Aſſur,.the Son of that Pul or Phul above, v. 9. a Of 


13 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 
0 


land /'; and Menahem gave # Pul a thouſand talents of 


kingdom in his hand «. 

7 Called by Heathen Authors Pl Belechus, who by the help of 
Arbaces the Mede, vanquiſhed Sardanapalus the laſt Monarch of A4ſhria, 
and tranſlated the Kingdom to Chaldes, and was the firſt King of 
Babylon and Aſyria ; Arbaces being made King ofthe Medes and Perſians. 
{ To wit, of Iſrael, as the Context ſhews. * 1. e. Agreed or promiſed 
to give, as the next Verſe explains ir. « That he might afliſt him 
againſt all that did or ſhould oppoſe him. By which it 2ppears, thar 
his Cruelty to Tiphſah was ſo far from eſtabliſhing him, as he ex- 
petted, that it weakned and endangered him fo far, that he was 
forced to call in a Foreign Prince to his Aide 


20 And Menahem + exacted the money of Iſrael, 


king of Afyria turned back, and ftayed not there inthe 
land. 

* i. e. Of each of thoſe wealthy Iſraelites. Bur as each of theſe 
were not equally Wealthy, ſo it is not probable that he taxed them 
equally. Others therefore render it, zo or for each man, 1 e. for 
every Aſjrian Soldier : which Interpretation is favoured by the 
wn, ul the Words in the Hebrew Text, which differs from that 
1n our Tranſlation. WY 

21 { And the reſt of the as of Menaheni* I 
that he did, are they not written in the book ofthe 
Chronicles of the kings . of Iſrael ? 

22 And Menahem flept with his Fathers, and Peka- 
hiah his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

23 © In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, 
Pekahiah the ſon of Menahem beganto reign over Iſrael 
in Samaria, and reigned ewo years. 

24 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 
LORD, he departed not from the fins of Jeroboam the 
ſon of Nebat, who made Iſrael to ſin, | | 

25 But Pekah the ſon of Remaliah, a captain of his, 
conſpired againſt him, and ſmore him in Samaria, in the 
palace of the kings houſe, with Argob, and Arieh ||, and 
f with him fifry men of the Gileadites y : and he killed 


|} Who might be either Pekah's partners in this Treaſon : or, the 
Kings Courtiers or Officers, who were now ſlain with him. y Who 
aſſiſted him in the execution of his Treaſon. 


26 And the reſt of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that 
he did, behold, they are written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of Iſrael. | 

27 © In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of 
Judah, * Pekah the ſon of Remaliah began to reign over 


28 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 
LORD, he departed not from the fins of Jeroboam the 
ſon of Nebarc, who made Ifſtael to ſin. 

29 In the days of Pekah king of Iſrael, came * Tig- 
lath-pileſer z king of Aſſyria, and took Ijon, and Abe]- 
beth-maachah s, andJanoahb, and Kedeſh, and Hazor ec, 
and Gilead 4, and Galilee e, all the land of Naphtali, 
and carried them captive to Aſſyria. 

z Or, Tiglath-pilneſer, 2 Chron- 28, 20. called in Heathen Authors 


which ſee « K:ng515. 20. b A City of Ephraim, Joſ, 16.6. c Two 
Cities of Naphrl:, Jof 12: 22» and 19. 36. d All the Land beyond 
Jordan, which was nigher to the Aſian than the reſt. eTo wit, the 
upper Galilee, as may be gathered from the following Words, a, 
| ( or, even all ) che Land of Naphtali : which ſeem to be added by way 
of explicati-n or reſtriQion, to ſhew what Galilee he meant, even the 
upper, in which Naphral:”s lot fell, See the Notes on 1/a. 5g. 1. 


20 And Hoſhea the fon of Elah made a conſpiracy 
8gainſt Pekah the ſon of Remaliah, and ſmote him, and 


flew him f, and reigned in his ſtead, in the twentieth 
year of Jotham the fon of Uzziah g. 


e| did, behold, they are written in the book of the chroni- 


31 And the reſt of the ads of Pekah, and all that he 


cles of the kings of Iſrael. | 

32 © In the ſecond year of Pekah theſon of Remaliah 
king of Iſrael, began * Jotham the ſon of Uzziah king * » the: | 
of Judah to reign. 273 33 
23 Fiveand twenty years old was he when he began 

to reign h,and he reigned ſixteen years in Jeruſalem : and 

his mothers name was Jeruſha, the daughter of Zadok. 


þ To wit, properly and alone : for he had Reigned before this, 
aS his Fathers Deputy and Vice-Roy | 


34 And he did that Which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD : he did according to all that his Father Uzziah 
had done. 

25 4 Howbeit, the high places were not removed : 
the people ſacrificed and burnt incenſe ſtill in the high 
places : he built the higher gates of the Houſe of the 
LORD z. 


; Not of the Temple properly ſocalled ; but of one of the Courts 
of the Temple, probably that which Jed ro the King's Palace, 
2 Chron. 23. 20- called alſo thenew gate. Jer. 26. 10. and 36. 10. 


36 C4 Now the reſt of the a&s of Jotham, and all 
that he did, are they not written in the book of the 
Chronicles of the kings of }udah ? | 
37 ( In thoſe days kthe LORD began to ſend / againſt 
Judah, * Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the fon of «1;;.,, 1. 
Remaliah. ) 


k i.e. Towards the end of Jotham's Reign. li.e. Diſpoſed their ; 
Hearts to unite their Forces rogether, and to make preparation fora , 
war againſt Judah : which yet they did not execute till 4haz his Reign. : 


35 And jotham ſlept with his Fathers,and was buried 
with his Fathers in the ciry of David his Father, and 
Ahaz his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 


Ahaz's Idolatry, 1 — 4. Rexin King of Syria : and Pekah King of Iſrael 
war again# him : he hireth Tiglath-Pileſer againſt them, 5===g, Abat 
goeth ro Damaſcus to meet the King of Aſſyria, ſecth an Altar : the Pattern 
whereof he ſends to Uriah, who maketh one like it at Jeruſalem : Ahaz 
acrificeth on it, 18 ==am16, He ſpoileth the Temple : Herekiah ſucceedeth 
him, 17 29. 
N * the ſeventeenth year of Pekah 2 the- ſon of FO 
Remaliab, Ahaz the ſon of Jotham king of Judah £ Chr 
began to reign. a 
a Of which ſee on chap. 15. 30. 
2 Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to 
reign b, and reigned fixteen years in Jeruſalem, and did 
not thet which was right in the ſight of the LORD his 
God, like David his Father. 
b Of the Difficulty here arifing, ſee the Notes on chap. 18. 2: to 
which it more properly belongs. 
2 But he walked in the way ofthe kings of Iſrael, yea, 
and made his ſon to paſs through the fire c, according 
to the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD 
caſt out from before the children of [ſrae], 
c Either, r. By way of Luſtration, to paſs haſtily thorow it, ſo as 
to be ſcorched, and, as it were, baptized with ir: Or, 2. By way of 
Oblation, ſo as to be utterly conſumed, aud offered for a Burnt-offe= 
ring, which was the praftice of Heathens, and of ſome 1ſrael:tes, in 
imitation of them 3 of which, ſee 2 Kings 21: 6. Pſal, 105. 36 ſer. 7« 
31. which ſeems beſt to agree with 2 Chron. 28. 3« where it is ſaid, 
he burnt his children, 1. e. 1ome of them : firſt one, as is here noted, 
and afterwards others of them, as is there obſerved. Of theſe 
praftices, ſee more on Lev. 18. 21. and Dev. 18. 10. : 
4 And he facrificed and burnt incenſe in the high 


places, and on the hills, and under every greentree 4. 

d After the manner ofthe Heathens ; See on Deut. 12, 2. Jer 2. 20: 

Hoſea 4. 13+ I” 
5 © * Then Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah ſon of *I7:" 
Remaliah king of Iſrael, came up to Jeruſalem to war: 

and they beſieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him e. 

e Becauſe God of his own meer Grace, undertook their Prote&ion, 


as he promiſed to do, and diſappointed the Hopes and Deſign of 
their Enemies : of which, ſee on 1a. 7. 


6 Atthat time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath f 
to Syria, and drave the Jews from Elath : and theSyrians 
came to Elath, and dwelt there unto this day. 

f ne. Took it from the Jews, who had not long lince taken it, 
chap. 14.22, Itlay in the land of Zdom, upon the Red Sea, very con- 
venuently for Navigaticn ; of which, ſee on 1 Kings g. 26. 


f Which hedid more calily effeR, becaulc the people were enraged 


| 


7 90 


C HA Þ.XVI | 


Ji 5 
7,40, C 


'Chap- 


Ro AAS a dane. at ob yy * 


Ji. 


IT. 


« %0 Ahaz Cant meſſengers to Tiglath-pileſer king of 
ATi Tying I am thy ſervant, and thy ſon g : come 
y.2n {ve m2 out of the hand of the king of Syria, 
ans ©:c of the hand of the king'vt Iſrael 4, which riſe 
up 2zainft me. 

s I yield my fzIf to thee, as thy Vaſſal, to ſerve and obey thee, 
ad pay theeTribute upon condition thou doſt aſſiſt me againſt my 
Enemies. h For though they were now gone from Jeruſalem, yet 
he july concluded they would return again,and from time to time 
moleſt and vex him. 

$ And Ahaz * took the ſilver and the gold that was 
found in the houſe of the LORD, and in the treaſures 
of the kings houſe, and ſent zt for a preſent to the king 
of Ailyria. Eg . 

5 And the king of Aſſyria hearkened unto him : for 
6. the king of Afſyria went up againſt + Damaſcus z, and 
wt" took it, and carried the people of it captive & to Kir /, and 
ſlew Rezin. | 

; The Mztropolis of the Syrians, and the Head of that Kingdom, 
Iſa. 7.8. k As was propheſied, Amos 1: 5. 1 Not Kir of Moab, If. 
15: 1+ but a part of Med;a, which then was ſubjett to the King of 
Aſſyria. 

io © And king Ahaz went to Damaſcus, to meet 
Tiglath-pileſer king of Affyria mz, and faw an altar » 
that was at Damaſcus : and Aing Ahaz ſent to Uriah 
the prieſt the faſhion of the altar,and the pattern of it, 
according to all the workmanſhip thereof. 

-» To congratulate his Vifory, and acknowledge his Favour 
and Help, and to beg the Counrinuance of it. # Ofan excellent 
Stru&ure, upon which the Syrians uſed to offer to their Idols; ſee 
2 Chron, 28: 23- | : £ : 

11And Urijah the prieſt built an altar according to all 
that king Ahaz had ſent from Damaſcus 0; fo Urijah the 
prieſt made ir againſt king Ahaz came from Damaſcus p. 

o So he complied with the Kings Command againſt his own Con- 
ſcience, and againſt the expreſs Command of that great God, to 
whom the King, and he both, were ſubje&. p He made haſte,and 
delayed not to do it, to pleaſe the King and advance himſelf. 

12 And when the king was come from Damaſcus, 
the king ſaw the altar : and the king approached to the 
altar, and offered thereon 9. 

q To wit, a Sacrifice,and that not unto God,but unto the Syrian 
Idcls, as appears from 2 Chron. 28. 23,24- to whom that Altar was 
appropriared. Whether he offered this by himſelf,or by a Prieſt, 
Is not certain. : 

13 And he burnt his burnt-offering, and his meat- 
offering, and poured his drink-offering, and ſprinkled 
the blood of | his peace-offerings r upon the altar. 

r For the Heathens; and Ahaz, in imitation of them, offered the 
ſame ſorts of Offerings to their FalſeGods,which the Iſraelites did to 
the true, the Devil being-noted to be Gods Ape in his Worſhip. 

14 And he brought alſo the brazen altar [which was 
before the LORD x, from the fore-front of the houſe, 
from between the altar and the houſe of the LORD «, 
and put it on the north ſide of che altar x. | 

{ Of Burnt-offerings,made by Solomon, and placed there by God's 
appointments 7 7+ e. From before the Lords Houſe ; Sce on Lev.1, 3. 
u Or rather, from between his Altar, &c. or, that Altar, &c. His 
new Altar was at firſt ſet below the.Brazen Altar, and at a further 
diſtance from the Temple. This he took for a Diſparagement to 
his Altar 3 and therefore moſt impiouſly & audaciouſly takes that 
away,and puts his in its place. x Or, of that Altar ; or of his Altar; 
as before. So he put Gods Altar out of its place and uſe. 
| 15 And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the prieſt,ſay- 
"i ing, upon the great altar y burn * the morning burnt- 
'», oftering, and the evening meat-offering, and the kings 
burnt-ſacrifice, and his meat-offering, with the burnt- 
offering of all the people of the land, and their meat- 
offering, and their drink-offerings, and ſprinkle upon 
it all the blood of the burnt- offering, and all the blood 
of the ſacrifice z:; and the brazen altar ſhall be for me 
to enquire by #. 

7 i.e. Thisnew Altar; which was greater than So/omon's,cither,in 
quantity,or 1n his eſtimation. z Whatlſoever is offered to the true 
God,either in my Name ( for poſſibly de did not yet utterly forſake 
God, but worſhipped Idols with him) or on the behalf of the People, 
ſhall be offered upon his new altar:Which he ſeems to preſcribe,not 
only to gratifie his own Humour,but alſo in deſign to diſcourage, 
and by degrees to extinguiſh the Worſhip of the True God:for he 
concluded,that the Worthippers of God would never be willing to 
offer their Sacrifices upon his Altar- a That fhall be reſerved for 
my proper uſe,to enquire by 3 1. e, at which I may ſeek God,or his fa- 
vour,or enquire of his Will,to wit, by Sacrifices joined with Prayer, 
when I ſhall ſee fit» He faith only ro ſeek, or to enquire 3 not ſeek the 
Lora, or, to enquire of the Lord,as the Phraſe is more largely expref[:4 
elſewhere ; but he would not vouchſafe to mention the name of 
the Lord, whom he had ſo groſly forſaken and deſpiſed. 


16 Thus did Urijah the prieſt, according to all char 


ing Ahaz commanded 5. 


b Having once begun to debauch his Conſcience, he could not 
| NOW make an honourable Retreat ; and therefore proceeds to exe- 
Ilngg Wee all the King's Commands: 


"8 7 C And king Ahaz cut off * the borders of che 

lag; baſes, and removed the laver from off them, and took 

5, down the * ſea from off the brazen oxen that were un- 
der it, and put ic upon a pavement of ſtones t. 


Chap- 


pb were 


KK FF Ss 


c Which he did, either to expreſs his Contempt of them, or to 
rendzr them Inconvenient for the uſes to which they had been 
deſigned; or to diſpoſe of them, or of the braſs of them, in ſome 
other place and way, as beſt ſuited with his fancy ; or for the King 
of Aſhris, as it follows in the next Verſe. | 

18 And the covert for the ſabbath 4 that they had 
builr in the houſe,and the kings entry without e,turned 
he from the houſe of the LORD, for the king of Aſ- 
ſyria f. | 

4 The form and uſe whereof 1s now unknown. Ir is generally vn- 
derſtood of ſome Building, or Covert, either that where the Prieſts 
after their Weekly Courſe was ended, abode until the next Courſe 
came, and relieved them ; which was done upon the Sabbarh-day, 
fee 2 Kngs 11: 5,7- or that in which the Guard, or Watchmen of 
the Temple, kept their ſtation 3 or that under which the King uſed 
to ſit to hear Gods Word and ſee the Sacrifices ;which is called,che 
covert of the Sabbath,becauſe the chief times in which the King uſed 
it for thoſe ends, was the Weekly Sabbath, and other ſolemn Days of 
Feaſting,or Faſting ( which all come under the name of Sabbaths in 
the Old Teſtament) upon which the King uſed more certainly,and 

ſolemnly, to preſent himſelf before the Lord. than at other times. 
e By which the King uſed to go from his Palace to the Temple } ſee 
on 1 Kings 10: 5,12: fi. e. That he might ingratiate himſelf with 
the King of 4ſjria,by his publick Contempt and RejeQion of that 
Religion which had been the only Partition-wall between theKings 
of Judah, and other Kings3 and which poſſibly the preſent King of 
Aſjria did vehemently diſlike and hate ; and therefore required 
theſe things from Ahaz. 

I9 © Now the reſt of the acts of Ahaz, which he did, 


are they not written in the book of the chronicles of 

the kings of Judah ? | 

20 And Ahaz ſlept with his fathers, and was buried 

with his fathers in the city of David, and Hezekiah his 

{on reigned in his ſtead. 

CH AP. XVII. 

Hoſhes King of Iſrael his wicked Reign : Being ſubdued by Shalmaneſer King 
of Aſſria, he conſpireth againſt him with So King of Egypt : He is be- 
ſteged : taken Priſoner : and with all the People carrizd Captive to Af 
ſyria for their Sins, 1 23+ The ftranze Nations tranſplanted into 


Samaria, are plagued with Lions : an Iſraelitiſh Prieſt is [ent to them : 
Whence followeth a mixture of Religlons, 24 —=——41. 


FF the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, + began + xcs. 
Hoſhea the ſon of Elah to reign 4 in Samaria, over reigned. 
Iſrael nine years 6. | 

a Queſt. How can this bewſhe,ſeing it is ſaid, that he reigned, or 
brgan to reign in Iſrael in. the twentieth year of Fotham, chap: 15: 30. 
which was the Fourth Year of Ahaz, as was there noted ? Auf. He 
uſurped the Kingdom in Ahaz his Fourth Year; but either was not 
owned as King, by the generality of the People; or was not accepted 
and eſtabliſhed in his Kingdom by the 4ſhr:an, till Abaz his Twelfth 
Year : Or, in his eight firſt Years,he was only a Tributary Prince, 
and the King of Aſhria's Vice-Roy; and after that time he ler up for 
himſelf, which drew the 4ſjrian upon him. 6b To wit, after his 
Confirmation and peaceable Poſſeſſion of his Kingdom : Fer in all, 
he reigned Seventcen, or Eighteen Years ; to wir, Twelve with 
Ahaz, who reigned Sixteen Years, and Six with Hezekiah, 2 Kings 
18 


: 10. 
2 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 
LORD, but not as the king of Iſr:el that were before 
him c, | 
c For he neither worſhipped Baal,as many of his Predeceſſors did; 
nor compelled the People ro Worſhip the Calves;one of them, thar 
of Dan, being deſtroyed,or carried away before, as the H:brew W ri- 
rers aſirm; nor,as ſome add, hindred thoſe by force, who were min- 
ded to go to Jeruſalem to worthip, And yet, the meaſure of the 1 
raclites lins, being now full, vengeance comes upon them withour 
remedy ; Compare 2 Kings 23:26. 
Againſt him came up Shalmaneſer 4d king of Aſ- 
{vria, and Hoſhea became his ſervant, and Þ gave him , pq; 
[| preſents e. 


Writers make him the ſame with Sernacher;b,who Eight Years after bute. 
this time, invaded the Kingdom of Judah ; See chap.18:10,13, it be- 

ing very frequent in the Ezſtern parts, for one man to be called by 
leveral Names, eſpecially by the People of ſeveral Countries. Joſe- 
phus affirms,that he met with his Name in the Annals of the Tyrians, 
which were extant in his days. He came againſt him,either becauſe 

he denied the Tribute which he had promiſed to pay ; or that he 
might make him Tributary. e Swore Fealty to him,and engaged 

to pay him a Tribute. 

4 And the king of Aſſyria found conſpiracy in Ho- 
ſhea : for he had tent meſſengers to So king of Egypt f, 
and brought no preſent to the king-of Aſſyria,as be had 
done year by year: therefore the king of Aſlyria ſhut him 
up, and bound him in priſon g. 

f By heathen Writers called $us,or Sabachus,that by his Aſſiſtance 
he might ſhake off the Yoke of the King of 4ſjria ; who now was, 
and for many Years had been the King of Eg yp:*s Rival; See 2 Kings 
18. 21, Fer: 37:5. Sg To wit,after he had come up againſt him,and 
taken him, with Samaria ; the particular Relation whereof here 
follows. "If 

'5 J Then the king of Afſyria came up throughout 
all che iand, and went up to Samaria, and beſieged ic- 
chree years. 

6 5 * In the ninth year of Hoſhea, the king of Afly- + cy; 
ria took Samaria, and carried Iirael away into Afſyria, 18: 10: 
and placed them in Halah, and in Habor, 4 the river of 
Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes 4. 


\-þ This 1s added,to diſtinguiſh this place from the former,which 
was either in 4ſjris,0r in the mountainous and leis inhabited parrs 


3 0 o£ 


Chap. XVI ; | 


= —_— 
- _ 


m _ 


He Er ——ESO= 


ne erm ren I 


ny ——— nn en 


rn Sl 


renaresd. 


d The Son, or Succeſſor of Tiglath-pileſers The ancient Hebrew || Or, ;-;- 


bp. XVI. ' 8 = 
radia. Hither he carried them, partly to replenith ht 
nn , oo nary; becauſe theſe places were at fo great 2 o_ 
tance From Canaar,that this wonld cut off all Hopes and Thoughts 
f returning to their own Country. | 

g- Tor j it was,that the children of Iſrael had finned 

againſt the LORD their God, which had brought them 

19 out of the land of Egypt, from under the hand of 

Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gotls : 

8 And walked in the ſtatutes of the heathen 7 (whom 
the LORD had caſt our from before the children of 11- 
rael) and of the kings of Ifrael,which they had made &. 

5; e. According to the Laws and Cuſtoms of the Heathen,in the 
Worſhip of their Baals, and other of their fins. & 7 e, Which the 
Kings cf 1/rael had ordained copies the > &1 mg p of the Calves, 

{ their going up to Jeruſalem ro WOrthip ; 
Þ And the children of 1ſrael did ſecretly hoſe things 
tht were not right,againſt the LORD / their God,ancl 
they built them high places in all their cities, from the 


rower of the watchmen, to the fenced city m. 
1 This belongs,cither, 1. To their groſs Idvlatries,and other abo- 


minable Pra&tices, w 
Compare Exek:$:12. Or, 2. 
Words are ot 
Text ; they cloaked, Or 
againſt, he red the | 
larrous Worſhip of the Calves,with fair Pretences of necetity the 
Two Kingdoms being now divided,and at enmity ;and of their ho- 
neſt i nrenrion of ſerving the True God,and retaining the ſubſiance 
of the Jewiſh Religion, from which they alledged,thar rhey differed 
only in Circumſtances of Worſhip. In all parts and places,both 
in Citics,and in the Country; yea, the moſt uninhabired and ne= 
gle&ed parts, where few or none dwell,belide the Watchmen, who 
Ire left there in Towers,ro preſerve the Cattel and Fruits of the 
E-rth, or to give notice of the approach of Enemies. 


7 


/ 


To the Worſhip of Calves; And [© the 


diſguiſed, or covered things that were nor right 


TT 1T3F T5 


hich they were aſhamed ro own. before others; ; 


or before, or rowards tha Load : 1. e. They covered their Idos : 


part of the Tribe of Benjamin, and thoſe of the Tribes of Simecr 
and Levi who adhered to them,and were incorporated with them; 
and therefore very fitly dencminated from them: Sce of this Phrate 
on I1- Kings 11: 13- 

19 Alſo Judah kept not the commandments of the 
LORD their God, but walked in the ſtatutes of Ifrae! 


which they made 7. i 

d Judah's Idolarry and. Wickednelſs is here remembred, as an 
aggravation Of the fin of the. 1/racl:ter, which was nor only evil in 
it ſelf, bur ſcandalous, and miſchievous ro their Neighbours, who 
by their Examples were inſtru&ed in their wicked Arts, and pro= 
voked to an Imitation of them ; See Hoſbea 4+ 15, and compare 
Matth. 18. 7. 

20 And the LORD rejeded all the ſezd of Iſrael e, 
and afflicted them,and delivered them 4nto the hand of 


ſpoilers, until he had caſt then our of his ſight. 

e 7. e. All the Kingdom, or Tribes of Jſracl : firſt, one part of 
them, chap. 15.29. and now the reſt. Bur this extends not to every 
individual Perſon of theſe Tribes; for many of them removed into 
the Kingdom of Judah, and were aſſociated with them, as appears 
from 2 C#ron. 11.16. and many other places. : 

21 For * he rent Iſrael from the houſe of David,and 
* they made Jeroboam the ſon of Nebat king f,and Je- 


o 


herwiſe rehdered, and thar agreeably to the Hebrew | roboam drave Ifraei from following the LORD g, ard 12.:0,:8. 


made then ſin a great flu þ, 

f Which Attion is here aſcribed to the People,becauſe they would 
not farry till God, by his Providence, had inveſted Jeroboam with the 
Kingdom which he had promiſed him; bur raſhly,and unthankfully, 
and revellioufly,roſe up againſt the Houſe of Dawid,to which they 
had ſuch great Obligations ;and ſet him upon the Throne without 
Gods leave or advice. g He not only difſwaded,but kept them by 
force from Gods Worſhip at Jersſalem,the only place appointed for 
It. þ So the Worſhip of the Calves is called,to meet with thar idle 
Conceit of the Ifraelites,who eſteemed it a ſmall ſin,eſpecially when 
they were forced to it by ſevere Penalties ; which yet he ſhews 


Chap. XVI 


*1 Kings 
Is 11,31, 


ro And they fer them up T images and * groves in 


Arno ' every © high hill, and under every green tree : 
"Exo0d:34 11 


| 23. Deut: ac Jjd the heathen » whom the LORD carried away | 


16 before thems zand wrought wicked chings to provoke 
12.2 the LORD to anger p.. Tn 7 
| '  » Not only to the Lord, which was praiſed and tolerated, ſome- | 
ic ze ſins; by whoſe Example they ſhould have 

—_— petun: In def! ebe and ene of God, and his | 
Authority and Command, as the NEXT Verſe thews. 

14Fx01:20. 12 For they ſerved idols ”, whereof the LORD had 

3.4.Deur: faid unto them, * Ye ſhall nor do chis thing, | 

5: 7, 8. 12 Yet the LORD teſtified againſt Hrael q, and * 

 Deut» 5xjnit Jidah: + by all the prophets, and by all * the 

© i by = r, ſaying, * Turn ye from your evil ways, and 

the baut keep my commandments, and my ſtatutes,according to 

of al. all the law which I commanded your fathers s, and 

*+ Sam. yyhich I ſent to you by my ſervants the prophets, 


q Diſowned, and gave Teſtimony againſt their falſe Worſhip, 
which they would faiten upon him, and againſt all their Impieties. 
» To whom he declared his Mind, by extraordinary Revelations 
aad Viſions,and by whom he publithed it to you bearing Warneſs 
from Heaven to their Do&rine,by eminent and glorious Miracles. 
s Whereby he accuſeth them of Partiality. that they obſcrved only 
thoſe Laws of God which they might ſately keep.and hved in the 


9: 9- 

e Jer: 18: 
$1:&25:57 
& 35:15. 


conſtant Breach of others,which theirKings torbad them to obſerve. | 


14 Notwithſtanding,they wouid nor hear, but * har- 
dened their necks like to the neck of their fathers,that 
did not believe in the LORD their God. 

t i.e. Refuſed to ſubmit their Neck to the Yoke of Gods Precepts. 
A Mctaphor from ſtubborn Oxen, that make their Necks hard, 
or ſtiff, and will not bow to the Yoke ; ſee on Dzzr: 31; 27. 

15 And they rejected his ſtarutes, and his covenant 
that he made with their fathers,& his teſtimonies which 
he teſtified againſt them,aad they followed vanity «,8 
became vain x, and went after the heathen that were 

round about them, concerning whom the LORD had 
cbarged thein, that they ſhouid not do like them. 

« i, e. Idols ; oft ſo called, becauſe of their nothingneſs, impo- 


tency, and unprofitableneſs ; and to ſhew the folly and madneſs 


of ITdolaters. x By the long Worthip of Idols, they were made 
like them, vain, ſortiſh, and ſenſeleſs Creatures. 


16 And they left all the commandments ofthe LORD 
* Exod, 7 their God, and * made them molten images,even two 


* Deur. 
31; 27. 


32:8. calves, and made a *grove,and worſhipped all the hoſt 
1 _— of heaven z, and ferved * Baal. 
12: 20. 


Sn 3 They grew worſe and worſe ; from a partial Diſobedience to 
1RINg5 qgme of God's Laws,they fell by degrees to a total Apoſtacy from 
14*+15»235 all of them. z The Stars, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, &c, See 


oc I 6: 33® De:t -] 
». Kines © © - : 
16: 31 17 And they * cauled their ſons and their daughters | 


& 22.53» to paſs through the fire, and uſed divination, and in- 
Ch.11:18 chantments, and fold themſelves to do evil 2 in the ſight 
oy hg: of the LORD, to provoke him to anger, 
Ch: 26: $0 Of which Phraſe, ſee on 1 Kings 21: 21. : 
: 18 Therefore the LORD was very angry with Iſrael, 
and removed them out of his tight b: there was none 

*: Kings left * bur the tribe of Judah only c. 
Ute 13. b 1, e. Our of Canaan, the only place of Gods ſolemn Worſhip, 


did not excuſe it from being a fin, and a great fin too. 


22 For the children of 1ſrael walked in all the ſins of 


And there they burnt incenſe in all the high places, - Jeroboam which he did,they departed noc from them 3: 


z; But willingly, and refolutely followed the wicked Examples 


_ Commands of their Kings, though contrary to God's expreſs 


ommands. 


23 Until the LORD removed Iſrael out of his ſight, 


Me in the Kingdom of Judah; bur alſo ro the Idols or Baals of the t as he had laid by all his lervants the prophets. So Was 
lcael carried away out of their own land to Aﬀfyria, 
unto this day. | 


k& They continued to the laſt, obſtinate and incorrigible under 
all rhe InſtruQtions and CorreQions which God ſent to them ; and 
therefore were moſt juſtly given up by God into this dreadful 


Capriviry;which all this foregoingDiſcourſe was deſigned toprove. 


24 4 And che king of Ailyria | brought men fromBa- | | 
bylon mz, and from Cuthah, and from Ana, and from | 
Hamath,and from Sepharvaim »,and placed them: in the ' 
cities of Samaria, Inſtead of the children of Iſrael ; and 


they poſſeiſed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof. 


! Either Shalmanezer, or rather his Son and Succeſſor, Eſarkaddon, 
Ezra 4+ 2. becauſe this was a work of ſome time ; and as his Father 
had projeCted, & poſſibly began this; ſo he execured or finiſhed it: 
whence it is aſcribed to him rather than to his Farther. 2 Which 
then was ſubje& to the 4ſjrian Monarch ; but a few years after 
revolred from him, & ſct up another King; as appears both from Sa- 
cred & Prophane Hiſtories. n Several places then in his Dominion. 
25 And ſo it was at the beginning of their dwelling 
chere,zhat they feared not the LORD ||; therefore o the 
LORD ſent lions among them, which ſlew /ome of them. 
|| They did nor acknowledge,nor worſhip God in any ſort. «For 
this groſs Negle&,& contempt of God, which was contrary to the 
Principles & Prattices of theHearhens, who uſed to worſhip theGods 
, of the Nations where they lived, and gave that honour to their 
falſe gods, which here they denied ro the true. Hereby alſo G04 
 aflerted his own Right and Soveraignty over thatLand, and made 
them to underſrand,that neither the [raelites were caſt out,nor they 
brought into thar Land by their Valour,or Strength, but by God's 
| Providence,who as he had caſt rhe[/-aelives out for their negle& of 
Gods ſervice ; ſo both could,and would in his due time,turn them 
out alſo,if they were guilty of the ſame 1ins. | 


26 Wherefore they ſpake p to the king of Aſlyria, 
ſaying, The nations which thou haſt removed, and pla- 
ced in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of. 
the God of the land 9 : therefore he hath fent lions a- 
'mong them, and behold, they ſlay them, becauſe they 
know not the manner of the God of the land. 

p /.e. They wrote, or ſent Moſſengers to him ſor relief. q They 
ſuppolcd the true God to be like one of their Topical Deities, who 
had their particular Countries and Provinces allotted to them. 

27 Then the king of Aﬀyria commanded, ſaying, 
Carry thicher one of the prieſts r, whom ye brought 
from thence, and let them go and dwell there, and let 
him teach them the manner of the God of the land. 

7 7. e. One of the chief of the Prieſts,with others,to be under his 
Inſpection and Direction, as may be gathered from the following 
words 3 where it is ſaid of the ſame Perſon,or Perſons,le: them go, 
&c. and then, let him teach, &c. Nor is it probable, that one Prieſc 


could ſuffice for the inſtruction of the Inhabitants of ſo many and 
diſtant parts. 


| 28 Chen one of the Prieſts whom they had carried 
away from Samaria, came and dwelt in Bethel, and 


and gracious Prelcnce ; or, out of his Church. c And the greatclt| 


o 


caught them how they ſhould fear the LORD /., 


t fo 
w oY 


oc S-, --, Y.0, t »— OO ron oo; pagHde 


<< 


PP, 


'IL  . 
hap. XVII. 


1ngs 
13 l, 
Ings 
g28, 


th FF £ 


ſ i, e- The manner of Gods Worſhip, as it was praCtiſed in Iſrael; 
as may be garhered both from the Quality of this Perſon, who was 
an [ſraclitih Prieſt;and from the place of his Refidence,Bethel,a place 
infamons for the Worſhip of the Calves, and from the manner of 
their mukiag Prictts by tits man's DireQion, ver: 32: 

29 Howbeir,cvery nation made gods of their own t, 
and put them in the houſes of the high places, which 
the Samaritans « had made, every nation in their <iti2s 
wherein they dwelt. 

: Or, worſ>iped ( as that Y-rb 1s ſometimes uſed ; of which, ſee 
Exod: 32:35.) i.e. thoſe whom they worſhipped in the places from 
whence they came, whoſe names here follow, « 7. e. The forrnyer 
People, or Inhabitants, nor of the City, but of the Kingdom of 
Samarigas 

20 And the men of Babylon made Succosh-benoth, 
and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of 
Hamath made Aſhima. 

31 And the Avites ma@ Nibhaz,and Tartak,and the 
Sepharvites burnt their children in fire toAdrammelech, 
and Anammelech, che gods of Sepharvaim. 

32 So they feared the LORD,and made unto them- 
ſzlves of the loweſt of them prielts of the high places x, 
which ſacrificed for them y in the houſes of the high 
places. | 

x Se the Notes on 1 Kings 12:31. 3 To wit,unto the true God: 
For as to thz Worſhip of their ownGods, they needed no Inſtruti- 
on, and would not permit a Perſon of another Religion to mint- 
ſer therein, 


ln 33 * They feared che LORD =, and {ſerved their 
.; own gods,after the manner of the nations|| whom they: 
I; carried away from thence s. 

" z Thcy worſhipped God externally in that way whick the 1rac- 
a#* lites uſed. a Theſe words belong, either, 1. To both the foregoing 


$”/” granches, and to the 1ſraelites ; and then the ſenſe is, They trode in 


bs, 


the ſteps of their Predeceſſors,the Iſraelites ( whoyin regard of their 
ſeveral Tribes,are both here,and elſewhere,called Nattons) who did, 
many of them, worſhip both God in their Calves, and Baal too. Or, 
2. To the laſt Branch only ; but then the Words muſt be otherwiſe 
rendred ; they ſerved their own Gods, after the manner of the Nations 
from which thiy brought,or carried them,or from whence they ( theſe new 
Inhabirants ) were brought ; z#. e. each of them ſerved the god of 
the Country or Place whence he was brought, as is related above, 
v2r:30,31. But theſe Nations could not ſo properly be ſaid to be 
carricd away,or to be carried away captive (as this Hebrew word ſigni- 
fies) as the [/razlites ;and therefore the former Interpretation ſeems 
more proper. 

34 Unto this day they b do after the former manners: 
they fear not the LORD c, neither do they after their 
ſtatutes d,or after their ordinances,or after the law and 
commandment which the LORD commanded the chil- 


32. dren of Jacob e, * whom he named Iſrael f. 


deſcribing,and to the deſcription whereof he returns, ver.41. So the 
following Verſes are a Digrefſion, wherein he deſigns only to take an 
occaſion ro compare them with the Ijraelires, and to aggravate the 
fins of the 1/razlites above theirs, which he doth,ver:3 5,&c-and then 
returns to the former Deſcription,ver:41 Or rather, 2. The 1/rae- 
lites,who arc the principal Subjetts of this whole Diſcourſe ; and of 
whom he unqueſtionably ſpeaks, wer; 35- and thence to wer; 41. of 
whom alfo the laſt words of wver:33-are to be underſtood;and from 
thence he takes an occaſion to return to his main buſineſs, to relate, 
2nd aggravate the ſins of ſael ; and thereby to juſtifie his ſevere 
proceedings againſt them,to all rhe World.So the ſenſe of the place 
1s this; As the 1ſa:lites before their Captivity, gave theſe Nations 
an ill Example, in ſerving the Lord, and Baal together; fo, or after 
their former manner,they do unto this day,in the land of their Captivity. 
c Though they pretended to fear,and ſerve both the Lord & Idols, 
yet in truth they did not,and do not fear or worſhip the Lord,but 
their owa Calves,or other vain Inventions: and God will not accept 
thar mongrel and-falſe Worſhip, which they pretend to give to the 
true God. Or, this may intimate,that the [/raelites were worſe than 
their Succeſſors, becauſe theſe feared the Lord, and Idols too ; bur 
they did quite caſt off the Fear and Worſhip of God in their Capti- 
vity,and wholly degenerated iato Heatheniſh Idolatry. 4 7.e. Gods 
Law delivered to their Fathers, and to them, as their Inheritance, 
P/al:119:111. This is alledged as an Evide:1ce,that they did nor fear 
the Lord, whatſoever they pretended, becauſe they lived in the con- 
fant breach of his ſtatutes, e 7, e. Themſelves : the Nown put 
for the Pronoun ; which is uſual among the Hebrews. f A Name, 
ſignifying his ſpecial Intereſt in God, and Power with him,which 
was given to him,not only for himſelf, bur for his Poſterity alſo, 
whomGod frequently honours with that Name. And by tis great 
favour he aggravates their fin. 
: 35 With whom the LORD had made a covenant g, 
kis & and charged them,ſaying,* Ye ſhall not fear other gods, 
© nor bow your ſelves to them,nor ſerve them,nor ſacri- 
tice to them : 

gs Containing many precious Promiſes, upor: the Condition here 
following : ſee G-n.17.7. Exod;19;5.and 24 7. 

26 But the LORD who brought you up out of the 
land of Egypt,. with great power, and a itretched-out- 
arm, him fſhail ye fear,him ſhall ye worſhip, and to him 
ihall ye do ſacrifice. 

27 And the ſtatutes,and the ordinances,and the law, 
and che commandment which he wrote for you, ye ſhall 


Oblecve to do for evermore, and ye ſhall not fear other 
gods : | 

38 And the covenant that T have made with you,ye 
thall nor forget, neicher ſhall ye fear other gods, 


b Either, z- the Samaritans, whoſe Religion he hath hitherto been | 


ſeveral qualities cr Actions : Hezekias in this, Thai hz fell upon 
| 302 


N G &. 

39 But the LORD your God 5 ye ſhall fear, and he 
ſhall deliver you our of the hand of all your enemies 3. 

h t. e, God alone, as the whole Context ſhews. i And therefore 
you have no pretence of need to go to other gods for relief. 

40 Howbeit,they did not hearken,bur they did after 
their former manner. | 

4.1 So k theſe nations / feared the LORD,and ſervel 
their graven images, both their children,and their chi1- 
drens children : as did their fathers, ſo-do they unto this 
dav. 

k i.e. In like manner, and afcer their Example. 1 Who came in 


their ſtead. | 


Hezekiah King over Judah his good Reign : HE: u not ofroid of the King 
of Aſſyria : and overcometh the Plilifines, 1 ——— $8 Sawaria is car« 
ried away Coptive by Salmanaſer King of Afſria : fur their ſins, g=--12, 
Sennacherib invadcth Judah : and Hezekin' payeth him Tribute, 13-16, 
Rabſhakeh ſent by Scnnacher:b, revileth B:zekiah : Blaſphemsth God: and 
#irreth up the People to mutiny : which is told the King, 17 37. 

Ow it came to pals in the third year 2 of Hoſhea 


of Ahaz king of Judah beg-n to rqggn. 
a In the third of thoſe nine years mentioned, £25.15. 1. of which 29: 1 
ſee there. See below wer. 19. 


gan to reign #5, and he reigned twenty and nine years 
in Jerulalem : his mothers name alſo was Abi c, the 
daughter of Zachariah. | 

b How is this credible ? For then 4haz, who lived bur Six and 
Thirty Years, chap 19:2, muſc beget Hezekiah art the Eleventh Year 
of his Age. An]: 1. There are ſome like Inſtances mentioned by 
credible Authors ; which theſe very Men will nor deny,who are ſo 
ready to quarrel with the holy Scriptures for ſuch matters. 2+ This 
being the confelled Cuſtom of Sacred, and other Writers, in the 
numbring of Years,fometimes to omit,and ſometimes to add thoſe 
which are imperfect, or unfiniſhed : And ſo Abaz might, be near 
One & Twenty Years old when he began to Reign,and near Seven- 
teen Years older when he died : And on the other fide, Hezekiah, 
when he began to Reign, might be only Four and Twenty years 
old compleat,and but entred into his Five & twenty Year. =—— And 
thus 4haz might be between Thirteen & Fourteen Years o!d,when 
he got Hezekiah ; which is not at all ſtrange,eſpecially in rhat Na- 
tion to which God had promiſed a ſingular degree of Fruitfulneſs, 
and in that Houſe of David to which God had made fo many, and 
ſuch great promiſes. 3. It is not certain that 4haz lived only Thirty 
ſix Years,for thoſe Sixteen years which he Reigned, Chap.16.2. may 
be compured, not from the firſt beginning of his Reign, when he 
Reigned with his Father ; ( of which,ſee the Notes on Chap. 15.30.) 
which was at the Twentieth Year of his Age, but from the begin- 
ning of his Reign alone. 4+ Some affirm, That H:zck:ah was not the 
Narural, bur only the Legal Son and Succeſſor of 4hax : for the 
name of Sox is given in Scripture to ſuch Perſons : as 1 Chron, 3.16. 
comp. with 2 K:mgs 24.17. Matth.1.12. compare with Jer-22.30:.and to 
Adopted Sons, AF. 7. 21. H:b.u.24. And to Sons in Law, 1 Sam.24. 
16. and 26. 17. Luk. 3.23. Any of theſe Solutions are far more cre- 
dible to anyMan of common Prudence,than that theſeSacredBooks, 
whoſe Divine Original hath been ſo fully evidenced both by God 
and Men,are but the Fictions and Contrivances of a baſe Impoſtor. 
And if none of theſe Solutions were ſufficient.it is abſurd to con 
clude, That a true Reſolution cannot be found, becauſe it is 
not yet found ; becauſe it is manifeſt, That many difficulties both 
in Scripture, and in the Arts,which were formerly judged Inſolu- 
ble,have been cleared in later Times ; and therefore we may juſtly 
expect the Reſolution of other Difficulties, which may be though 
not yet fully explained. c Or, A4biah, 2 Chron. 29. 1. 


3 And he did that which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD, according to all that which David his father 
did. 

4 T * He removed the high places d, and brake the + 
f images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces 11. « 


choſe days the children of Krael did burn incenſe to it f, 
and he called it Nehuſhran g. 


d i. e. The moſt of them,or ſuch as the People moſt frequented : 
for all were not taken away, Chap-23.13,14+ And this he attempted 
to do,notwithſtanding the Peoples great and conſtant Aﬀection to 
them; partly, becauſe he had more Zeal and Courage than his Prede- 
_ccflors: and Partly,becauſe the dreadful Judgments of God upon the 
Kingdom of 1ſrael for their Superſtition and Hdolatry,had made the 
People of 7ud42 more pliable to the Commands of God,and of their 
good King. e By Gods Command to be an Ordinance or Mean for 
the conveyance of Gods Bleſſing to the People: which therefore had 
been hitherto kepr as a Memorial of Gods Mercy ; but being now 
commonly abuted ro Superſtition, was deſtroyed. f Nor doubt- 
leſs as to a God, but only as to an Inſtrument and Token of 
Gods Mercy, by and through which, their Adoration was directed 
ro God, and given to that only for Gods ſake. g 7.s. He ſaid, 
This Serpent, howſoever formerly honoured,and uſed by God as a 
ſign of his Grace, yet now it is nothing but a piece of Braſs, which 
can do you neither Good nor Hurt ; and therefore is no fit object 
for your Worſhip, 


5 He truſted in the LORD God of Ifrael þ, ſo that 
afcer him was none like him among all the kings of Ju- 
dah, nor any that were before him :. 

bh Without calling in Foreign & Heatheniſh Succours to ſrabliſh 
or help him-; which his Father 4haz did ; Chap.i6.7 and 14.7. and 
before him 4ſa, 1 Kings 15-18, 19. with reflection up n whom this 
ſeems to be noted. ; To wit, of the Kings of 744225 only; for Da- 
vid and Solomon were Kings of all 1'rael. Objet#. The like 15 laid of 
Foſtah, Chap. 23. 25. Anſw, Each of them excel'ed the other in 


21: 9 


3 2 


"4 


this 


Chap. XvIT, | 


ſon of Elah king of Iſrael,chbar * Hezekiah the ſon *: Chron: | 1 
. 28: 27: &  \fiſf 
He 1584 | 


2 Twenty and five years old was he when he be- Ne 
at. I-Q, 


2 Chron, 


the * brazen ſerpent that Moſes had made e : for unto + Heb. 
S; atues. . 
* Numb. 


| 
I" 
4 : 


| 
| 


[ 
: 
" 

[ {1 

fl 


XVIII, T1. 


this Work with great, Expedition, even in the beginning of his] 
Reign, which Jofa- did not, c:4p-23. and with no leſs Reſolution, 
undertaking to do that which none of his Predeceſſors durſt do, 
even to remove the High Places, wherein Joſiah did only follow 
his Example 3 Chap. 22. 1, 3+ 

6 For he clave to the LORD, and departed not 7 
from following him &, but kept his commandments 


which the LORD commanded Moſes. 

k In the general Courſe of his Life,and eſpecially in the matters 
of Gods Worthip. : 3 9 

7 And the LORD was with him, and he proſpered 
whitherſoever he went forth : and he rebelled againſt 


the king of Aſſyria J, and ſerved im not. b=- 

1 He ſhook off that Yoke of Subje&ion and Tribute,to which his 
Father had wickedly ſubmitrred, Chap.16.7. and reaſlumed that full 
& independent Soveraignty which God had ſetled in rhe Houle of 
David, which 4haz could nor alienate further, than for his own 
time: Arid Hezek/ab's Caſe differs much from that of Zedekiah,who 
is blatned for Rebellion againſt the King of Babylon,both becauſe he 
had ingaged himſelf to him by a ſolemn Oath and Covenant, which 
we do not read of haz ; and becauſe he broke the Covenanr which 
he himfelf had made ; and becauſe God had aQually given the Do- 
minion of his own Land and People to the King of Babylon, and 
commanded both Zedekiah and his People ro ſubmit to him. And 
whereas Hezekiah is here ro Rebel ; that Word implies, only 
a defe&ion from that Subje&ion which had been profeſſed and per- 
formed to another ; which ſometimes may be juſtly done, and 
ſometimes may not : and therefore that Word doth not neceflari- 
ly prove this Afton to be a Sin. And theſe Words, he rebell:d, Occ. 
are explained by the next following Words, and he ſerved him not. 
And that it was not a Sin in him,ſeems moſt probable, becauſe God 
did own,and aſſiſt him therein 3 and did nor ar all reprove him for 
it, in that Meſſage which he ſent to him by 1/aiah about this mat- 

ter, Chap. 19. 20, &c. nor afterwards, though he did particu/arly 
reprove him for that which might ſcem a leſs Fault, for his Vain 

glory, and Oftenation, 2 Ciron. 32. 25, 26. For what he faith, 1 
have offended ; ſee on wer. 19. _ 

8 He * ſmote the Philiſtines m evez vnto | Gaza,and 
the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen, 
to the fenced city ». 

m And recovered from them what his Father had loſt, Ckron.28. 
18. and more. » Of which Phraſe, ice on Cap. 17. g. ; 

9 © Andit * came to paſs in the fourth year”of king 
Hezekiah,( which was the ſeventh year of Hoſhea oſon 
of Elab king of iſrael) that Shalrnanezer king of Aftyria 
came up againft Samaria, and beſieged ir. 

o The Seventh of thoſe Nine Years expreſſed, Chap. 17.1. 

10 And at the end of three years p they took it, ever 
in the ſixth year of Hekekiah ( that is * the ninth year 
of Hoſhea king of Iſrael ) Samaria was taken. 

> Towit, ofthe Siege; 5. e. In the Third Year, as this Phraſe is 
uſed; Dewt. 14. 28. Jojb. 9. 16. 17. Jer. 34. 14. comp. with Exod. 


21. 2. , 
1x And the king of Aſſyria did carry away Ifrael into 
Affyria, and put them * in Halah, and in Habor,by the 
river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes g : 
; 9 Of which ſee above on Chap. 17.6. _ | | 
12 Becauſe they obeyed not the voice of the LORD 
their God, bur tranſgreſted lis covenant, nd all that 
Moſes the ſervant of the LORD commanded r, and 
would not hear them, nor do them. | 
+ They began with one Sin,the Worſhip of the Calves;but from 
thence they were led by degrees into the Viohtion of all the other | 
Commands : although indeed,that one Sin made them in ſome ſort. 
guilty of the Breach of the whole Law, Jam. 2. 10. | 
. 13 JNow * in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah 
did f Sennacherib king of Aﬀſyria s come up againſt all 
the fenced cities of Judah, and took them x. | | 
s The Son or Succeſfor of Salmaneſſer. i.e. Againſt many of them: 
univerſal Particles being frequently fo uſed doth in Scripture, and 
other Authors ; for that all were not taken,appears from Chap.19.8. 
And this Succeſs God gave him; partly,to lift him up to his own 
grearer and more ſhameful Deſtruftion : partly, to humble and 
chaſtiſe his own People for their manifold ſins, &afterwards to raiſe 
them up with more comfort,and glory: and partly,to gain an emis 
R nent opportunity to advance his own Honour and Service,by that 
nuraculous Deliverance which he detigned for his People. 


; 14 And Hezekiah king of Judah fent to the king of 
Aflyria to Lachiſh, ſaying, I have offended #, return 
= from: me : that which thou putceſt on me, will I bear. 
And the king of Afſycia appointed unto Hezekiah king 
cf Judah, three hundred calencs of filver, and thirty 
ralcnts of gold. 


_ © To wit,againſt thee; 78. T have given thee occaſion of Warring 

57 againſt me,whereof £ now repent. Or, his ill Succeſs might make 

4 him think that he had ſinned againſt God in this Attion,and might 

: make him willing to ſubmir ro him, though God graciouſly pre- 
vented it. « Of which ſee on Exod. 25, 39. 


. If And Hezekiah gave him all the filver that was 
found in the houſe of the LORD, and in the treaſures 
of the kings houſe. | 

16 Ac that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the 
doors of the temple of the LORD ; and from the pil- 
lars, which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid x.and 
gave Þ it to the king of Aiſyria. : 

x So repairing the injury which his Father had done to them 
and puting them into the ſame condition in which Solomon left 
them, 1 Kings 6.32. 

17 And the king of Aſſyria ſent 7 Tartan, and Rab. 


hop. 


+ Heb. 
| From after 
| kim. 


*Iſa14. 


" 29. 
| + Heb. 
AzLA hs 


| * Chap. 
175. 3. 


* Chap. 
17. 6. 


* r Chro. 
5: 26. 


| + Heb. 
' Sanheriv, 


"ig: 


f Heb. 


them, 


ET IN Ww a 


he underſtood not,judging of the 
gods; and judging of God's Worſhip according to the vain 


themſelves into the power of ſuch a 
Enemy, by going our of the City. 


Hath he not ſent me to che me 
that they may eat their own dung, and drink + their feet, 


H 


tris, and Rabſhakeh from Lachiſh to king Hezekiah, 
with a + great hoſt againſt Jeruſalem ; and they wenc 
up,and came to Jeruſalem : and when they were come 
up, they came and ſtood * by the conduir of the upper þ: 
pool,which is in the high-wav of the fullers field. 

y Having received the money, upon which he agreed ro depart 
from Hezekiah and his Land, wer.16. He breaks his faith with Heu24 
ktah, thereby juſtifying Hez«kiabs Rebellion,and preparing the way 
for his own approaching DeſtruRion. 

18 And when they had called to the king z, there 
came out to them Eliakim the fon of Hilkiah a, Which 
was Hver the houſhold b, and Shebna the || ſcribe c and 
Joah the ſon of Aſaph the recorder. f 

2 7. e. Sent a Meſlage to him, to come, 
them. 2 Of whom ſee, 1/2.22.20, &c, b Heb. over the houſe ; either 
of God: or rather, of the King here mentioned ; as appears from 


13.22. c So called ro diſtinguith him from another Shebns who was 
over the houſe, Iſa. 22.15. 


19 And Rabſhakek ſaid unto them,Speak 'e NOV 
HezeF1ah, Thus faith the great king,the Ar Aſſyria 
What __ zs this wherein thou truſteſt 2 

20 Thou || fayeſt 4 ( but e they are but + vain wo d 
[| 7 have counſel and ſtrength for the war g: rorcsſ') [| Or 


[| Oc, 


whom dolt thou truſt h,char thou rebelleſt againſt me 2 ralt+f 
T Heb. 
f Wiras of the Lips, 5.e. vain, unpro- word of 
come not from thy the lips. 


d Either to thy People,to encourage them : or rath ithi 
ſelf. e Or, ſurely : or, only. 0 er,within thy 


fitable, idle ralk, without any eff:& ; or they 


heart ; thou ſpeakeſt this againſt thy own knowledge. g Counſel to || Or, but 
contrive,ſirength or courage to execute:which two things ate of greats counſel end 
cit neceflity -and uſe for War. Bur the words are,and may rendr- /"%. 


ed otherwiſe ; either thus, hou Jſpeakeſt ſurely words of 

Thou encourageſt thy ſelf,and thy people with talk. and words; bus War. 

counſel and frength axe fur War, are neceſſary for thy Defence : nei 

ther of which thou fiaſt within thy ſelf, but muſt ſeek chem from 

others : and where wilt'ſt thou find them ? o7 whom (as it follows} 

aoſt thou truſt ? Or thus,thou ſayeſft,T have the word of my lips. (Either 

1. Words wherewith to pray ro God for help. Or, 2. Eloquence, 

ro encourage my Soldicrs and People) connfel and firengch for way, i.e 

I am furnithed with all things neceſlary for my Detence. þh "a 

ing it 15 apparent thou halt not ſtrength of thy own, from whom 
ſtaff of this 


dolt thou expe& ſuccours ? 
21 Now behold, thou + truſteſt upon the 
bruiſed reed ;,even upon Egypt,on which if a man lean 
It will go into his hand, and pierce it & : ſo is Pharaoh ;14'* 
king of Egypt unto all that truſt on him / ws 


s He calls Egypr a Reed, with alluſion to the Reed I 
Banks of Nilus were full ; and Bruiſed, to note - 5c hptnsr er 
infufficiency to ſupport him. Comp. Exzek. 29. 6,7. k By ſome of 
the fragments into which it will be broken. 7 Doing them no 


good, —_ _ _ 

22 But it yE lay unto me,We truſt in the LORD rr 
God ; is nor that he whoſe high places, and whoſe at- 
tars Hezekian hath taken away m, and hath faiq to Ju- 


dah and Jeruſalem, Ye ſhall worſhip before this altar in 


Jeruſalem ? 


7 Thereby robbing him of that Worſhip and Serv; 1 
had in thoſe places. Thus boldly he freaks of Be OS he 
great God,by their falſe & petty 


ot the Aeathens,who meaſured Piety by the multitude of - ogy 


23 Now therefore, I pray thee, give || pledges to 
lord » the king of Afyria, and I will 3 nav, i_ 4 | Or, 


Chap. XVI; 


Feb, 


Vp, 
"Ifa.7., 


or ſend to Treat with Serretary, 


the lips ; i. e. WE fir 


f Heb, 


thouſand horſes, if thou be able on thy part to ſet riders #4 


upon them. 

» i.e. Give him Hoſtages to ſecure him from thy £ 's F 
and he will depart from thee. Or rather, wins + on, 
battel: Seing thou haſt counſel and ſtrength for War, do nor lie 
lurking in thy ſtrong hold, but come our into the open Field, and 
lerus try for Maſtery:and whereas thou may*ſt pre-end thou want« 
= _ FX ” fight en ag _ wiltſt accept of my Challenge 

will furniſh the with 2000 Horſes, if thou haſc R; x 
ala mwas” cas] | ou haſt Riders for them - 

24 How then wilt chou turn away the face of one 
captain oof the leaf: of my maſters ſervatts,and put thy 
_ on Egy pt for chariots and for horſemen 2 : 

o How wiltſt thou force him to turn his bact 
away from Fo ? Ny 9h __ en} fro 

25 AmI now come up without the LORD » avainf 
this place to deſtroy it? The LORD ſaid is a,Q0 
up againſt this land, and deſtroy it. 2 

? Without his Conſent and Commiſlion 2 
Infpiration ; or, by his Providence. But inde« 
God's Word, nor regarded his Providence : hx F ; 
ſtrike a terror into Hezetiah and the Peo B _ OT © 


26 Then ſaid Eliakim the ſon of Hilkiah and Shebna, 


7 To wit, by ſecret 
d, he neither owned 


and Joah, unto Rabſhakeh, Speak, I pray thee, eo thy 
ſervants in the Syrian language, (for we underſtand it) 
and talk not with us in the Jews language, in the eats 
of the people that are on the wall x. 


# Upon which theſe Officers frood ; not being willing to put 
Barbarous and Perfidious 


27 But Rabſhakeh ſaid unto 


own Pils « with you 2 
5s Ta 


them, Hath my maſter 4 1c. 
ſent me to thy maſter,and to thee,to ſpeak hed words? * ware! 


n which ſit og the wall, f #*" 


- 
. 


A a 


j IPs 


"Is, 1c 


"Ik 36. 


«U 


'G 37.7 


i; 


wo 


Av 
: 
P 


4 
b 


a 0s, ſeek 


I Heb, 
wie wit? 
BTL. j= 


| if, 
1%, 
q .. 


i0r, 
r ſ 
keveta, 


"Il, 104 


"Ik 36. 


giry 37.f% 


[ 

Luke 
Ml 4. 
hd 
Elzng, 


[8 


""2t10n, 


Laps XIA. 


1s four. 


IT 


;Totell them to what Extremities and Miſcries he will force them. 

238 Then Rab{hakeh ſtoodand cried with a loud voice 

in the Jews language #, and ſpake, faying, Hear the 
word of the great King, the King of Affyria. 


t That he might affright the People into a compliance with him, 
which he perceived Eliakim and his Brethren endeavour to prevent. 


29 Thus faith the king, Letnot Hezekiah deceive you, 
for he ſhall nor be able to deliver you out of his hand : 

30 Neither let Hezekiah make you truſt in the LORD, 
ſaying, The LORD will ſurely deliver us, and thiscity 
ſhall not .be delivered into the hand of the King of 
Ailyria. ; 

1 Hearkennot unto Hezekiah :for thus ſaich che king 
of Aſlyria, ||f Make an agreement with me by a preſent 


, and comeout to me, and then cat ye every man of 


his own vine x, and every one of his fig-tree, anddrink 
ve every one the waters of his || ciftern : _ 

" u To redeem your ſelves from all the Calamities of a cloſe Siege, 
and that Death which certainly will follow on them. Or, procure, or 
purckele a Bleſſing from me ; i. e. a bleſſed Peace 3 whereby you may be 
delivered our of your diſtreſſed and curſed condition, and receive 
from me the Bleſſings of Prote&ion and Provition, which your King 
cannot give you. x Upon theſe terms, TI will give you no diſturbance; 
but quietly ſuffer each of you to enjoy his own Poſlcihons. 

22 Uncal Icome andtake you away toa land like your 
own land y, aland of corn and wine, a land of bread 
and vineyards, aland of cil-ol;ve, and of honey, that 
ye may live and not die : and hearken not unto Heze- 
kiah, when he || perſwadeth you, faying, The LORD 


will deliver us. | 

y i.e, A fruitfuland pleaſant Land. Becauſe he could not conceal 
from them his intentions of tranſplanting them into another Land, 
which he had already diſcovered in his dealing with the 1[raelites, and 
other Nations ; he aſſures rhem, they ſhall be no loſers by it; and 
ſhall only change their place, but not their condition anid comforts ; 
which they ſhould enjoy in that Land, no leſs than in their own. 

33 * Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered 
at all his laad out of the hand of the king of Afſyria 

34 Where arethe gods of Hamath, andof Arpadz ? 
where are the gods of Sepharvaim s, Hena, and Ivah 6 ? 
have they c delivered Samaria out of mine hand ? 

z Of which ſee Jer. 49. 23. # Of which ſee Chap. 17. 24. b The 
names, either 1. of Idol-gods. But why ſhould only theſe two be 
named, 2nd not the gods of the other places here mentioned ? Or 
rather,2.of Cities or Countries,as is manifeſt from Chap.19.13. where 
thoſe words are repeated among other places, whole Kings are there 
mentioned, and where they are rendred, of Henah and Fvab, as they 
thould be here alſo, the words in the Hebrew being the very ſame. 
c 7. e. Either the gods here mentioned, which rogether with other 
Idols, were Worſhipped in Samaria. Or, 2. Their gods ; which 
is calily underſtood from the foregoing words. : 

25 Who are they among all the gods of the countries, 
that have delivered their countrey outof mine hand,that 
the LORD ſhould deliver Jeruſalem out of mine hand ? 

36 Bucthe people 4 held their peace, and anſwered 
him not a word : for the kings commandment was, 
laying, Anſwer him nor e. 

d i.e. Either theſe Three Men, this Word being ſometimes uſed 
of a very few men, as 1 Sam. 9. 24. Or rather, che people that were 
with them upon the wall, v. 26. to whom he ſpake, and from whom 
he expeCted an anſwer. eWhich was wiſely ordered ; partly, leſt by 
their words they ſhould either betray their Fears, or provoke their 
Enemies to greatec Injuries or Blaiphemies ; or give them ſome 
advantage or direQion for their further Proceedings : and partly, 
that by chis Inſtance of Obedience and Calmneſs, he might fee the 
reſolution of the People to cleaveunto their King ; and the vanity 
of his Attemprs to ſeduce themto a defeQion from him. | 

27 Then came Eligkim the ſon of Hilkiah, which was 
over the houſhold, and Shebna the ſcribe, and Joah the 
fon of Aſaph the recorder, to Hezekiah * with heir 


clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabſhakeh. 
C HATE LIL 


Bezckiah acquainteth Iſaiah the Prophxct with the Blaſphemies of Rabſbakeh : 
he promiſeth deliverance from the Lord, 1 7. Sennacherib u forced 
30 march againſt the Moors : ſendeth blaſphemas Litters to Hezekiah, 
8 13. His Prayer, 14 19. 1{#iah prophecieth :he Deſtruttion of 
Sennachcrib and good of Z:on, 20 34. The ſame night an Angel 
Loyuth the Aſſyrians ; Sennacherib is murdered at Nineveh by his own 

of, Tomo 2, 

ND * it LL to paſs, when king Hezekiah heard zt, 
£4 that he rent his clothes, and covered himſelf wich 
lackcloth, and went into the houſe of the LORD. 

2 And heſent Eliakim, which was over the houſhold, 
and Shebna the ſcribe, and the elders of the prieſts 
covered with ſackcloth, to* Ifaiahthe propher, the fon 

Amos: 

3 And they ſaid unto him, Thus faith Hezekiat, This 
day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke a, and || blaſphe- 
my : for the children are cometo the birth, and there is 
not ſtrength to bring forth 6. | 

aEither, i. From God, wherein God rebukes and chaſtens us ſorc- 
ly. Orrather, 2. From the 4ſjrian, who reviles and Reproacheth 
us : for tis buſineſs hereis to complain, nor of God, but ofthe 4ſhrian. 

E are like a poor Travelling Woman in great Extremity, and 
Wving no ſtrength left to help her ſelf, and to bring forth her 
Pac into the World. - We have attempted to deliver our ſelves 


KINGS | 


| Of the Spirit of jealouſie, Numb. 5. 14. 


fromthe Aſjrian Yoke ; and had carried on that work to ſome ma«» 
rurity, and as we thought, . brought ir to the Birth ; but nov we 
have no might to finiſh, ui-lefs thou 2ffift us. Ve have begun an 
happy Reformarion, and arg hindred by rhisinſolenc 4ſjria:, from 
bringing, it to perfeion, See 2 Chrn. 32, 1... - ,, | | 

4 It may be c the LORD thy God 4 will heareall the 
words of Rabſhakeh, ;,whom the: king of. Aſyria his 
malter hath ſent to reproach che living God, atid will 
reprove the words f which the LORD thy God hath 
heard : wherefore lifc up «by prayer forthe remnant g : : 
that are | lefr. "IT IITE, | | | t Hebg 

c He ſpeaks doubtfully, becauſe he knew not whether God would 19-#4- 
not delver them all up into the Aſſyrians hand, as he, and his 
People deſerved. Buttfometimes this is not a word of doubr, bur 
of yood hope ; as Num), 22.33. Joſb. 14.132. d To whom thou arc 
dear and precious. He fairh-not our Goa, becauſe he feenied tohave 
forſaken and rejeSted them ; and rhey, by their Deſignshad forfeited 
all their intere{t jn him. ez. e. Will ſhew by his'A@ions, that he 
hath heard them with juſt indignation. f Or rather, -wil repzove 
him, ( an Elliptis of the Pronouns, which 1s frequent in the Hebrew 
Tongue ) forthe wor4s, as the Syriack, and Arabite, and C4ldee render. 
it. g This he mentions as an Argument, to-ſtir up 1/aiah to pray, 
and to move Gods Compaſſion towards them ; That they were but 
a ſmall Remnanteither of Gods People, of whom Ten Tribes were 
now loſt : or of the Kingdom of Judah, which had ben greatly: 
waſted and depopulated in the days of 4baz ; and now lately by 
this Aſſyrian, v. 13. 

5 So the ſervants of king Hezekiah came to Iſaiah. 

6 T Andlfaiah faid untothem, Thus ſhall ye ſay to 
y our maſter, Thus ſaith the LORD, Be not afraid of the 
words which chou haſt heard, with which the ſervants 
of the king of Aſſyria have blaſphemed me. 

7 Behold, I will ſend a blaſt upon him h, and he ſhall 
hear a rumour, and ſhall return to his own land, and I 
will cauſe him to fall by the ſword in his own land. 

hþ Heb. a wind, a Storm or Tempeſt, by which name God's 
Judgments are ofr called ; 7z.e. a violent, and ſudden, and terrible 
Stroke ; namely, That miraculous Deſtruftion of his Army, . of 
which, v. 35. Although the place may be rendred thus, 1wil put s 
Spirit within him, ſo that he ball hear @ rumour, and returi, &c. For 
by Spirit, is many times underſtood an Imagination, or Inclination, 
or Aﬀettion; in which ſenſe we read of the Spirit of feary 2Tim. 1.7. 
Of the Spirit of ſlumber, Rom.. 
11, 8. Or,. 4 Spirit againſt ( for ſo the Hebrew Prepoſition Beth is ofc 
ufed, as hath been noted before ) him; Of whom this Word is 
elfewhere uſed, as Judg. 9. 23. 1 Sam. 16. 14, 23. 1 Kings 22, 23.48 
it is alſo given to Man's Soul, Job 12. 10. Ecclef. 12. 7. which is a 
Spiritual ſubſtance, as the Angels are. And this Intarpretation , 
ſeems moſt agreeable ro the deſign of this Verſe, which is in brief 
to repreſent all the Judgments of God which were to befall him, 
and which are related in the following Hiſtory ; and therefore all 
the other Particulars being contained in the following Branches of 
this Verſe ; the tidings of Tirhakab,v.g. in theſe words, he ſha# hear @ 
rumour 3 his an his own Land, and being ſlain there; v. 36. 
37. in the next words, it ſcerns moſt probable, That the chiefeſft 
of all the Judgments, to wit, the DeſtruQion of 185 thouſand 
Souldiers in one night, v. 35. is not omitted here, bur expreſſed in 
the firſt branch of the Verſe; and the Spirit herejs the ſame thing, 
which is there caleld an Age; this latter Word being there uſes 


tolimitand explain the former, which otherwiſe was of a doubtful 
ſignification. | | By | 

8 © So Rabſhakeh returned 3, and found the king of 
Aſſyria warring againſt Libnah : for he had heard thac 
he was departed from Lachiſh &. | = S-—- 

z; To the King, to give him an account of the Treaty, and to 
adviſe with him what was further ro be done ; leaving behind hint 
the Army under the other Commanders mentioned, Chap. 18. 17. 
as is moſt probable from the other threatning Meſſage here follow- 
ing ; which would have been very unſuitable, if his Siege had been 
raiſed. & Nor being able to take it. | BELLS TH bot 

9 And when he heardſay of Tirhakah king of Ethio- 
pia /, Behold, he is come out to fight againit thee ; he 
{ent meſſengers again unto Hezekiah, ſaying, | 

1 Heb. of Cuſb, 7. e. Firther, x. of Arabia, as that Word is moſt 
commonly meant ; of which ſee the notes, and eſpecially my Latin 
Synopſis, upon Numb. 12. 1, Or rather, 2. Of Ethiopia beyond Egypr. 
Nor was there any need, that he ſhould force his paſſage through 
Ezypt, which is objefted againſt this Opinion by a very Learned 
Man ; becaufe the Egyptians ( againſt whom this Sennacherib Warred, 
as Heathen Hiſtorians, Herodotus and Beroſus, relate ) and the Ethiopians 
were Confederates in this Expedition, as 7oſep/aw expreſly affirms ; 
who lived above 1600 Years nearer the time when this was done, 
than we ; angl therefore was more likely ro underſtand ir. 


10 Thus ſhall ye ſpeak to Hezekiah king of Judah, 
ſaying, Ler not thy God in whom thou.truiteſt deceive 
thee, ſaying, Jeruſalem ſhall norbe delivered imo the 
hand of che king of Aﬀyria. 

11 Behold, thou haſt heard whac the kings of Aſſyria 
have done toall lands, by deſtroying them utcerly : and 
ſhale thou be delivered mw ? 

m No certainly, never expett it : 
denial; as Gen. 18. 17. | 

12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which 
my fathers have deſtroyed ; as Gozin, and Haran, and 
Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in The- 
lafar 2? - EE | 

| ain places abour, or beyond Eurbrates. See Gen. IT. 31. 
Exen. 27. 23. | : . 
13 Where is the king o of Hamath, and the king of 


ſuch queſtions oft imply 2 


0 2 Arpad 
3 


" 
i 


Li 


IE. — 9 _——_— p- -_ 
gs en r= EAT et _ an & 


4 + _ - x 
on ONS On tn = n= gs es 
——_ IX 


- LOOT IE IL) ESCCCEENS IS 
RD — — —_= 


Eee —— A — 


I 


It. 


©] 
ry % 
if 
, k 
4 
: 


IF 
4 
' 
| 
l 
£ 


+ Fcb. By 
the hand 
of, &C. 


F Heb the 
Fallneſs, 


C 

1} Or, the 
foreſt and 

. is fruitſul brought up my very Chariots to thoſe Mountains which were 


$:1d. 


IR 


| ſaid, O LORD God of Iſrael, 


"vo 
Arpad, and the king of thecity of Sepharvaim, of He- 
nah, and Ivah p ? . By 

0 Fither, 1. Their god whom he here calls their King ; becauſe 
they looked upon him as their Prote&or and Governour; WHic 
Kings are, or ſhould be to their people. Or rather, 2» Their King 
properly ſo called. Andas befort he compared their gods with the 
God of Jeruſalem; ſo now he compares their Kings with King Heze- 


tiah; and by both intends to perſwade them, rhat neither their 
God, nor theirKing, was able ro ſave them out of his Hand. p Of 


which ſee the notes on Chap. 18. 34- 

14 © And Hezekiah received the letter of the hand 
of the meſſengers, and read it : and Hezekiah went up 
:nto the houſe of the LORD 9, and ſpread it before the 
LORD r. | 

q i. e. Into the Court of the Temple : for further he might not 
enter. r i e- Before the Ark, or Temple, which he did, not to 
acquaint God, but :0 ſtrengthen his own Faith, and quicken him- 


ſelf to P 8 
HE Ard Hezekiah prayed before the LORD, and 


* which dwelleit between 


the cherubims, thou art the God, ever thou alone of all 
the kingdoms of the earth, thou haſt made heaven and 


earth : 

16 LORD, 
LORD thine eyes, 
Sennacherib, which 
living God... i 

5 i. e. The Meſſenger who brought this railing Letter, v. 14. Or 
Rabſhakeb, who was eaſily underſtood our of the former Chapter, 
although he would not do him the honour to name him; or, ſent :t ; 
to wit, This Letter. ; : 

17 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Aſſyria have 
deſtroyed the nations, and their lands» 

18 And have þ caſt their gods into the hire : for they 
ere no gods, but the work of mens hands, wood and 
ſtone 3: therefore they have deſtroyed then, 

19 Now therefore, O' LORD our God, I beſeech 
thee ſave thou us out of his hand, rhat all the kingdoms 
of the earth may know that thou ar: the LORD God, 
even thou onely. | 

20 © Then Ifaiah the ſon of Amoz ſent to Hezeki- 
ah, ſaying, Thus faich the LORD God of Iſrael, Thar 
which thou haft prayed to me againſt SennacheriÞ king 
of Aﬀſſyria, I have heard 7. 

ti e. Accepted ir, and will anſwer it: A common Synecdoche, 

21 This i5the word thatthe LORD hath ſpoken con- 
cerning him, The virgin «, thedaughter of Zioa x hath 
deſpiſed thee, and laughed thee to ſcorn ; the daughter 
of Je:uſalem hath ſhaken her head at thee y. 

# So he calls Zion, or Jeruſalem ; partly, becauſe ſhe was pure in 
good meaſure from that groſs Idolatry wherewith other people were 
defiled, which is called Spirituai Whoredom: Partly, ro ligne, that 
God would defend ker trom that Rape which Sernacherib intended 
to commit upon her,with nolefs Care and Zeal, than Parents do their 
Virgin Daughters from thole who ſeek ro Force and Deflour then: : 
and partly, ro intimate, that as ſhe had not yet been rorced, and 
taken by her Barbarous Enemies, ſo ſhe ſhould ftill retain her Vir- 
ginity, in 1pight ofhis Attemprs againſt her. # 1. e. The People of 


bow down thine ear, and hear : open, 
and ſee ; and hear the words of 
hath ſent him «s to reproach the 


ENG 


remote from me. 


fred, 


Tim come into the Land of Caraan at one Border 
Lebanon, and lreſolve to march on to the other extreme Border, and 

{o to deſtroy the whole Countrey, fiom one border to another ; the 
borders of a Land bciag oft pur for the whole Land within its Bor- 
ders; as Exod. 8. 2. Pſal. 74+ 17. and 147. 14. Iſa. 54.12. Or, as1t is 

in the Hebrew, into the Lodging of his Border ; tor which, 12 the Parallel 
place, 1ſa, 37. 24+ it is, i290 542 height of 115 varder, And fo this may 
be underſtood of errfalem ; which it is not probable, that in all 
his brags he would omit ; and againſt which, h's chief Deſign now 
lay, which he here calleth a loxzing, for its contemprtible ſmallneſs, 

if compared with his great and vaſt Ciry of N:niveh ; or, as itis in 
Iſa, 37. the height, tor ts two famous Mountains, Zion and Mortah ; 
or for the Mountains which were round about Jeruſalem ; Pſal.125. 2. 
and he adds, of {:5 border, becauſe this Ciry was in the Border of 
Tudah ; as be ng parr ofitin the Tribe of Benjamin, and ner the 
Kingdom of the 'Yun Tribes, which was now in the 4ſjrians hands. 

þ i. e- The Foreſt of Mount Carmel, which may ſeem to be another 
Inaccefſible Place; like Leban;n. Or, into his foreſt, and hs fruirful 
For Carmel, though properly it was a pleaſant and fruitful 
Mountain in the Tribe of Ifixchar, of which ſee 7oſb: 12: 22: yer it 
is oft us'd to fignifie, any fruitful place, as 1s manifeſt from Iſs; 10: 18: 
and 16; 10: ſer: 2: 79. And thus all the parts of the Land are here 
enumerated . the Mountains, the Citics, the Woods, and the Fruit- 
ful Fields. Or his fr:itful foreft ; to wit, Jeruſalem ; which is thought 
by many Interpreters, to ve called a Freſt, Jer 21: 14: Ezek: 20: 46, 

a name which azrecs well enough to Cities, where Buildings are 
very numerous, and cloſe, and high, like Trees in a Foreſt. And if 
Feruſalem might be called a Foreſt, it might well be called Hezekiah's 
Carmel ; or, Fru:tfu! Place: becauſe his chict Strength,and Treaſure,& 
Fruit was now in it:and this lalt Word may ſeem to be added here, 
to intimate, that this was nor like other Foreſts, unfruitful, and 
barren. And fo boththis, and the foregoing words are underſtood 
of the ſame pizce, even of Jeruſalem 3 the Jait Branch being joined 
ro the former by way of Appoſition ; into the: lodging of his border, the 
foreſt of his Garmel;, or, his jruirful Fureſt; there being no more words 
1n the Herew [ecxr, 

24 I have digged and drunk ſtrange waters z, and 
* with the to'c of my feet havel dried up all the rivers * 
of || beſieged places &. | 
i Such as were never diſcovered nor uſed by others. And therefore | 
all thy endeavours to deprive me of water for my Army, 2 Chron: 2. 
3. are Idle and Frunlels. k AndasT canfurnith my Army with 
Warer digged our of rhe Earth, by their Labour, and my Art; ſo 
I can deprive my Enemies of their Water, and can ary up their rivers, 
and thar with 1/:e ſole of my feet ; 7. e. With the March of my vaſt 
and numerous Army, who will eaſily do this, either by marching 
through them, . and each carrying part away with them : or by 
drinking every onea little of them : or by their pains, making many 
new Channels, and deriving the Waters of the River into them 
as Cyrus dried up Evpirates, and thereb y took Babylon. 6 
25 || Haft thouu 1otheard long ago, howT have done 


have I brought it to pats, that thou ſhouldeſt be to lay 
waite fenced cities ito ruinous heaps m, 


! Haſt thou not long fince learned, that which ſome of thy Philo- 
ſophers could, and did reach thee ; that there is a Supreme and 


Calamities were ſent, and ordered ; whole meer Inſtrument thou 
art, ſo that thou haſt no cauſe for thele vain Boaſtings ? This work 
15 Mine, more than thine. 


Conſtituted, or Purchaſed, or Adorned, for all theſe ways is this 
Hebrew Verb uſed ) i: { either jerulalem, which he now threatned ; 


I 


Or 
fenced, 


Deur, 
1. 10, 


7 


it, and of ancient times that I have formed ic 1? now || Or, # 
thou not 


heard how 


maae it 
: tet: on __ , long ago, 
owerful God, by whoſe Decreeand Providence ail theſe Wars and ,,, formed 
it of ancie 
TEL . times ? 

Or, as it isin the Margent of our Bibles, ſhould 1 

Haft thou nos heard that ( a Particle oft underſtood ) I have made (5. e. now bring 


it to be 


V+ 
M3. 


Chap. Xx Pr 


or rather, the Fewij> Nation, which he endeavoured to Root out : 
the Relative Pronoun, b2ing put without the Antecendent, which 


5 laid waſte, 
and fenced 
cities to be 


Zion; i. e. as it follows of Jeruſalem ; ſo called Synecdochically from 
the Mountain and City of Zim, which was an Eminent part of ir. 
Cities and Countries are oft called Morhers, as 2 San. 20. 19. and their 
Tnhabitants Daughters ; as Numb. 21+ 25. Joſb. 17. 16. Judges rt. 27. 
Pſal. 45. 13- and 137.8. y Laughed at all thy proud and impotent 
Threatnings. This is a Geſture of Contempr and Derifion ; of 
which, ſee Pſal. 22: 7. and 44 13. Jerr 18. 16. Mitch 27. 39. | 
22 Whom haſt thou reproached and blatphemed ? 

- and againſt whom haſt thou exalred thy voice z, and litr 
ap thine eyes on high a? even againſt the holy Ore of 
Irael 6. 
z By Raifhakeh, who cryed with a loud woice, Chop. 18, 28. a A 
Geſture of Pride, and Scornfulneſs, Prov, 21- 4. 6 Notagainſt Man 
bur againſt the H»/y God, who will nor ſuffer thy Impious Blaſphemies 
ro go unpuniſhed ; and againſ} the holy One of 1/-ael, who hath a 
ſpecial relation and kindneſs to 1rael, having as it were ſet himſelf 
apart for them, and ſet them apart for himſclf, as being at this time 
the Gad of the Jews only, and not the God of the Genriles ; whom, 
as yet, he ſuffered to walk in their own evil ways, A: 14. i6. And 
therefore he will Plead their Cauſe againſt thee. 


22 By Þ thy meſſengers © thou haſt reproached the 
LORD, and haſtſaid, Withthe multirudeot thy chari- 
ots lam come up to the heighth of the mcuntains d, to 
the fides of Lebanon e, and will cut down Þ the tall ce- 
dars thereof, and the choice fir-trees thereof f: and I 
. will enter into the lodgings of his borders g, and into 
the || fore{t of his Carmel h. 


c So thou haſt advance ti:y. very Servants above me. #& I have 
thought inacceſſable by my Army. e An high Hill, tamous for 
Cedars and Fir-trees, here following. f This may be underſtood, 
either, r. Myſtically, FT will deſtroy the Princes, and Nobles of 
Judah, ( whichare ſometimes compared to cedars, &c. )) Or, their 
ſtrongeſt Cities. Or rather, 2. Literally, I will cut down the Trees 
that hinder my March, and plain and prepare the way tor all my 
numerous Army and Chariots And by this one Initance,he intimates, 
that nothing ſhould ſtand in his way ; no not the hzghelt and frongeſt 
Places: g 1. e. Thoſe Towns and Cities ( which he calls Lodgiugs in 


is to be gathered our of che Context ; of which I have rmerly given 
inſtances) long ago, and form:d it of ancient times? 7. e. Didſt thou not 
hear what I did tor this People many Ages lince,that I carried them 
out of Egypt in ſpight of P-aroh and all his Holt ; and through the 
Red-Sea, where I overthrew the Egyp:ians ; and through the vaſt 
howling Wild:rn:/s; and thea brought them into this Land, by a 
ſtrong hand, by which I deſtroyed all their Enemies, and planted 
them in their {tzad ? By which thou mayeſt underſtand how dear 
this People ate to me, and how eaiily I co11d deſtroy thee before 
them, if I ſaw it {it; and thar the Places which thou haſt taken, and 
the Conqueſts which thou haſt made here, are not to be imputed 
to thy Valour, or Numbers, but uato my Providence, who for 
wiſe and juſt Reafons, have given them up into thy hands, as it 
here follows. "this may ſeem to be the trueſt ſenſe, becauſe that 
barbarous Prince and People were much more likely to hear the 
tidings of what G:4 id for the J/raclires in Ezypt, and at the Red-ſea 
and in Canaan ; the fame of which was ſpread in all thoſe parts x 
than to hear of, or be initracted in the Dotrine of Gods particular 
Providence in the Government of ſeveral Nations, and all their 
Counſels, and attions of Srate, and War. For, though tbe A4ſrian 
was indeed the Ro.4 in Gods Hand, &c. T3. ro. 5. yet L didnot 1o 
underſtand it, nor was God in all his thoughts, but he minded only 
the enlargement of his own Empire, by the Deſtru&ion of other 
Kingdoms, as it there follows, v.7, 13, 14, 15. m This Tranſlation 
ſeems better to agree both with rhe foregoing Branch of this Vecſe, 
and with rhe following Verſe, than the other Intzrrocative Tranſ- 
lation in the Margent ; and the plain ſenſe ſeems to be this, Great 
ThingsI havedone for this People, which thou canſt not be j gnorant 
of ; but now I have changed my courſe towards them, reſolved to 
Puniſh them ſeverely for _ Sins ; and therefore, now 1have broug't 
zt #0 paſs, 7.e, T have ſo diſpoſed of things by my Providence, that 
thou ſhouldeſt be a Great and Vittorious Prince, and that thou 
ſhouldeſt imploy thy Forces againſt them, to do my werk upon 
them, zhat thou ſholdeſ? be ( to wit, a perton raiſed up, and fitted, 
and ſtrengthned for this very purpoſe ) ro lay waſte fenced cities ( and 
to turn them ) znzo 7uinozs heaps; 7, e, That thou ſhouldeſt be ſo 
ſucceſsful as thou haſt hitherto been, firſt againſt the Kingdom of 
Irael, and now againſt Judah. 


power, they were diſmayed and confounded, they were 
as the graſs of the field p, and «s the green herb, a; * che 


way of Contempt }) which are in his urmoſt Borders, and moſt | 


orals 


Y111n0145 


heaps 3 


1 Heb. 


26 Therefore » their inhabitants o were + of ſmall mfg 


* Plat 
129. 0. 


3k 


* 


(ack'2s 
Ms 384qe 


UN 


. 
V+ 
"8. 


| '0r, 
binge 


Hap. X1X- 


ol 
M:s 3844» 


AY! 


tHeb, the 
t-a)ing 
/the beuſe fruit upward 6, 
7 Judah 

int re 
maneth, 


' | ſeb. the 


wading, 
fs To 


IT 


graſs on the houſe tops, and as corn blaſted before it be 
rown up 4. | | 

2 Becauſe I had armed thee with my Commiſſionand ſtrength, and 
taken away their Spirit and Coyrage, and withdrew my help from 
them, to give it ro thee. o The people of Iſrael, and Judah, and 
other Places which thou haſt Conquered. p Which is weak and 
quickly fading, and unable to reſiſt any Hand or Inſtrument which 
offers Violence toit. 4 te. Alltheir Deſigns and. Hopes were dif- 
appointed, before they could come to any Perfe&ion or Succeſs. 

27 But I know thy || abode, and thy going out, and 
thy coming in 7, and thy rage againſt me 5. 

+ Though thou doſt not know me, yet I throughly know thee,and 
all thy Deſigns and AQtions, all thy ſecret and fubtil Contcivances 
in the place of thy abode, in thy own Kingdom and Court ; and the 
Exccution of thy. Deſigns, abroad, what thou intendeſt in thy going 
ou:, and with whar ſucceſſes or further rhoughts thou comeſt in, or 
returneſt to thy own Land. For the Phraſe, Compare Det: 31: 2; 
Pla!; 139: 2, 3« 51. e. Againſt my ſervant Hezck/ah, and my people, 
againſt whom he was engaged, becauſe they would nor deliver up 
Jeruſalem to him, which he demanded, Things are frequently ſaid 
to be done againſt God, which are only done againſt his People. 
becauſe of that near Union and Relation which 1s betweenythem. 
See Zech: 2; 8; Aﬀs 9: 4, 5- But the Words may well be ropdpel, 
and thy rage is with m2, or before me, as the Syriack hath it ; or, WW=ni- 
felt ro me ; as the Chaldee rendersit. And ſo this Branch of the Verſe 
anſwers to the former ; 1 know, &c, and it 1s before me. 

28 Becauſe thy rage againſt me, and thy tumult # 1s 
come up into mine ears, therefore * I will pur my hook 
in thy noſe, and my bridle in thy lips  ; and I will turn 
thee back by the way by which thou camelt :. 

t i, e. Thy tumultuous Noiſe, thy Clamours, and Blaſphemies 
which Rabſbakeh in thy name belched forth againſt me, with @ loud 
woice, Chap: 18. 28. « A Metaphor from wild and furious Beaſts, 
that muſt be thus managed. x I will cauſe thee to return to thy 
Home with ſhame and lots. 


29 And this ſball be a ſign unto thee y, Ye ſhall eat 
this year ſuch things as grow of themſelves, and in the 
ſ:cond year, that which ſpringeth of che ſame, and in 
the third year z ſow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, 


and eat the fruits thereof 2. 

3 To wit, of the certzin accompliſhment of the Promiſes here 
made to thee ; That Zim ſhould triumph over this inſulting Enemy, 
wv. 21 That God would not only preſerve the Ciry from his preſent 
fory,v.24 but alto, That God would bleſs his people with a durable 
Prolperity, and an happy Increaſe, v. 3o, 31- And thus, it 15 not 
only a ſign ofa ſhort Deliverance, which would be paſt before this 
fign was fulfilled, ( though there are Inſtances of ſuch fignsas to!- 
lowed the thing done ; as Exod. 3: 12: Iſa: 7: 14. ) but ofa future 
Mercy, which was to continue long after that ſign. And this ſign 
was the more neceſſary, becauſe otherwiſe Hezekiah and his people 
had cauſe to fear, That the Syrians, would be. greatly enraged for 
cheir ſhameful Repulſe, and the Deſtrution of their Army, and 
would quickly recruit their Army, and rerurn againſt them with 
far greater Force and Violence. But fomeatfirm, That Sennacherib 
when he heard of Tirhakah's March againit him, of which, v. 9. 
went with his Army to meer him, and overthrew him, and the 
Egyptian who was j-ined with him, as was noted before; and proſe- 
cuted his Viftory, by foliowing them into Egypr, and E:hiopia ; in 
the Conqueſt of which, he ſpent two years; in which ſpace, the 
people did eat {uch things as grew of themſelves : and inthe third 
year returned to Jeruſalem, intending to' Beſiege it. Ir 1s true, it is 
Jaid and ſo the Sign wenr before the thing, ( which may be objected 
againſt the truth of this Relation) v. 9, That when he heard of Tirhakah, 
he ſent M.ſſengers to Heztkiah, pretending as if he would forthwith 
come againſt him; butit is nor ſaid, thar he did fo : nor is it fer 
down what he did-with 7irhakah, becauſe the Deſign of the Sacred 
Writer, was only to write the Hiſtory of the Jewiſh Nation ; not of 
others, but only with reſpe& ro them. z This was an excellent tign, 
for it was miraculous ; eſpecially, conſidering the waſte and havock 
which the A/hrians had made in the Land 3 ani that the Jews had been 
forced to retire into their ſtrong hold, and conſequently to neglect 

their Tilling, and Sowing, and Reaping ; and yet this Year they 
ſhould have ſufficient Proviſion from thoſe Fruits of the Earth which 
the Aſjrian lefr and the Second Year, which probably was the year 
of Releaſe, in which they might neither Sow, nor Reap, from ſuch 
Fruits as the Earth brought forth ofits own accord ; and fo in the 
third Year 2 You ſhall not Sow, and another Reap, as lately you 
did ; but you ſhall enjoy the Fruit of your own Labours. 

And + the remnant that is eſcaped of the houſe of 


© 
Judah, ſhall yer again rake root downward, and bear 


b i. e. Shall increaſe and multiply greatly, A Metaphor from 
Plants. - Compare Job 29. 19: 

31 For out of Jecuſaiem ſhall go forth a remnanr c, 
and + they that eſcape out of mount Sion 4: * the zeal 


of the LORD of hots ſhall do this «.. 

c That handful of Jews whonow were gathered together, and ſhut 
up in Jer«ſalem, ſhall go out to their ſeveral Habitations, and by my 
ſingular Bleſſing increale exceedingly. d The ſame thingexpreitcd in 
other words, which is uſual :n the Hebrew Language. .*. Alchough 
when you refle&t upon yourſelves, and conſider either your preſent 
fewnets, and weakneſs, or your great unworthinets, this may ſeem 
too great a Bleſſing for you to expeQ, or believe ; yet God will do 
it from the Zeal which he hath, both for his own Name, to vindi- 
Cate it from the Blaſphemous Reproaches ot the A4ſyrians, and for 
the good of his undeicrving people. 

32 Therefore thus faich the LORD concerning the 
king of Afyria, He ſhall not come into this city, nor 
ſhoot an arrow there, nor come betore it with ſhield, 
nor caſt a bank againlt it e. 

e Which wascruc, though he ſent Ratjhakeh, and others, with a 
great Hott again Jers{#lew, Coap, 18. 17+ Kither becaule that £avit 


4 


KM uw S 


—- 


- eſpecially,in the times of the Old 7:ftament, when rhe grace of God in 


| Chap. XW 
went away with Rabſhateh to Liindh ;above v. $. Or rather, becauſe 
that Army did nor form a cloſe Siege againſt ir, but only marched 
towards it, and diſpoſed themſelves fo as to block it up at ſome 
diſtance ; poſibly waiting till the King cf Aris had taken Libnab 
and Lachiſh, ( which they preſumed he would ſpeedily do ) and 
ſhould come up with the reſt of his Forces, whea they intended 


— 


- _ . CS ES 
— <— ——— mr an 


— 


£1 


to fall more vigorouſly ro their Work, | 
33 By the way that he came, by the ſame ſhall he re- 
eurn f, and ſhall nor come into the city, ſaith the LORD. 

f Whereas he expe&ed to devour the Kingdom of Judah at one 
Morlſcl, and then to proceed further, and to conquer Egypr, or other 
Neighbouring Countries 5 and, as it is ſaid of him, and concerning 
this very time, and deſign, 1/a. 10, 7. To cut off Nations net & few; - 
he ſhall meer with fo: ſad a diſappointment and rebuke here, that 
he ſhall make haſte to return with ſhame to his own Countrey, | 

34 For * Iwill defend chis cicy to fave it, for mine * Chap 
own fake, and * for my ſervant David's ſake g. 20' 6: 


- — — 
= —-— 


—_ nn cu —_—_ i ———_——_ 


ie nn ann eG PER EFT SS 


Cr "ummm ro rn” pare —- —— RI EI Er a ry nn ane 


I II ne BE Ro nt nt wn rr 


. .& For my Promiſe and Covenants-ſake made with David, concern- * 1 Kings || i 
ing the Stability and Eternity of his Kingdoms. See 1 Kings 11.1.2,13. 11. 12,13. || 


j 
7 / 
” 


35 9 And * it came to pals that night 5, that the | 
angel of the LORD went out, and ſmore #in the camp : 
of che Aﬀyrians & an hundred fourfcore and five thou- * 
land: and when they roſe earlyin che morning, behold, 
they were all dead corpſes. 

þ Fither, 1. In the Night following this Meſſage of the Propher 
to Hezekiah : Or, 2. In that famous Night when God deſtroyed the 
Aſſrians, It was done in this manner. For ſuch expreſſions ate oft 
ulcd of an indefinite and uncertain time, as that day is frequently 
taken, as 1/a. 4-1. and 26. 1, and 27.1, &*c. i With Peſtilence, or bil 
ſome other ſudden and mortal ſtoke. & Either before &ibnah ; or, in | 
ſome other-place near Jeruſalem, where they were encamped, 

36 S0 dennacherib king of Afſycia departed 4, and 
went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 

TI Whom God ſpared, nor in Mercy, but in Wrath ; reſerving 
him to a more dreadful and ſhameful Death, by the hands of his 
own Children. 

37 And it came to paſs, as he was worſhipping in 
che houſe of Niſroch his god, that Adrammeiech and 
Sharezer his ſons ſmote him with che fword : and they 
eſcaped into the land of F Armenia ”», and *Eſarhaddon + Heb, 
» his {on reigned in his ſtead. Ararat. 

m Which wasa place mot fit for their purpoſe, becauſe it wasnear * Ezra. 
to that part of 4ſjria and was very mountainous and inacceſſible by 4. 2- 
Armies ; and the people more ſtout, and warlike, and conſtant Ene- 
mics to the Aſhrians. » Who ſent great Supplies to his new Colony 
11 Samaria, Ecra 4 2. fearing, it ſeems, leſt Hezekiah ſhould improve 
the laſt great Advantage to diſturb his new Conqueſts there. 


GAP. XX | 
Hezekiah receiving a Meſſage of Death : by Prayer hath his L'fe lengthned 
for a fign the Sun goeth backwards. 1 It. The King of Babylons 
Ambaſſadors come to Hezekiah : with Letters and a Preſent * he ſhewetb 
them all his treaſures, 12. 15. Whereupon Iſaiah frretelleth him rhe 
-Bavylonifh Captivity : He dieth : and Manaſſeh is King, 16 -——=2 7, TIS 
N * thoſe days @ was Hezekiah ſick unto death : and * Chap: 
the prophet Ifaiah the ſon of Amoz came to him; 32. 24+ - 
and ſaid unto him, Thus faich the LORD, + Set thine —-- ol | 
houſe in order 6: for thou ſhalr die, and not livec. G,, Al 
a i, &. In that Year of the "4ſhrian Invaſion, as is manifeit from! chayse. | 
hence, that that was in Hezekiahs 14th Year, chap. 18. 13. and God; mcern ng «| 
now added, r5 Years more to him, chap. 20. 6. and yet Hezekiai gp;ye houſe. 
Reigned only 29 Years in all, «hap 18: 2. And this happened, = 
Either, Firſt, After the deſtru&ion of Semacheribs Army. Or, Sccond- | 
ly, Before it, as may be thought from v. 6. where he ſpeaks of his 
Deliverance fromthe King of Afjria,as a future thing» Ir is true that 
when Hezekaah received that inſolent Meſſage from the A4ſrian, he 
was in health, and went into the Temple to pray, chap. 19. 14. bur 
there might be time more than enough for this Sickneſs and Reco- 
very, between that Threatning, and this Defrruftion of the 4ſjrian. 
b Take care to make thy Will, andrto ſettle the Aﬀairs of thy kamily 
and Kingdom; which he the rarher prefſeth upon him, becauſe the 
{rare of his Kingdom required it : for it is plain, that Hezekiah had 
nor as yet any Son, Manaſeh his Heir and Succeſſor not being born 
rill chree years after this time, by comparing this chap. 20. 6. with 
'hap. 21.1. cAccordingto the Courſe of Nature, and of thy Diſeaſe, 
which is mortal in its kind,and w1!l be ſo in effect,'f God doth nor 
miracuiouily prevent it. Such Threatnings, though abſolutely 
expreſſed, have ofr-times ſecret Conditions, which God reſerves in 
his own Breaſt, See Jonah 3. 4. | . 
2 Then he turned his face to the wall d, and prayed 
unto the LORD, ſaying, , 


4 Eicher, becauſe tze Temple lay that way , or rather, that by 
turning his Face from the Company, he might intimate his deſire 
of Privacy, and ſo might with more Freedom and, Fervency pour 
our his Soul to God. 

3 I beteech thee, O LORD, remember now how IL 
have walked before thee in truth e, and wich a perfect 
heart, and have done hat which js good in thy fight: and EP 
Hezekiah wept Þ ſore f. t Hob, 

e 1. e. Sincerely, with an honeſt Mind, as the following Words —_ 1 
explain it. I have in ſome meaſure ( humane frailty excepted ) kept?,,,,.us" 
the Condition which thou didft require, 1 Kings 8+ 25. and there- Oy 
fore do humbly beg of thee, thar rhe Promite made to D.rvis and ro < 
his Poſterity upon chat condition, may nor fail ig my Perſon, for 
as yet thou hait not given me a Son. See on v. x. I am not Con= 
ſ:ious to my {elf of any groſs Exorbitances in the Courſe ofmy Life, 
for which thou uſeſt ro ſhorten Mens Days, and cur off my Life in 
thy Diſpleature, which by this ſharp Mceflige thou threatneit ro do: 

f Partly,tor that horror of Death which is and was coamnon to Men, 


"bei 
_ — > — 


EY _ 2 
——C——————————C—————  —— —_— 
ee ee CD LESS 
—_ TT eo ey 2 Ry 


Ss __ 
a . 
> . 


m_ 


Chriir was not fo tally manifeſted, as now 1t is; and principally, for 
- the diltiacted and miſerable Condition in which tae Church and 
| 304 Srate 


ry 3c fr, though tl] [7 ; f th 
7 4 Stare hen likely to be left, though the uncertainty Of The 
| - on to = 5 th 2nd the great Pronenels of the people to 
back{lide to their falſe Worlbip, and evil Pradtices ; which he eaſily 
received, and which he knew would bring far worſe Calamities 
upon them, if he were removed ; as afterwards it came 70 paſs. 
4 Andit came to pals, afore Iſaiah was gone out 
into the middle || court g, that the word of the LORD 


ame to him, ſaying, | 

| y g To wit, ofthe Kings Palace ; of which ſee on 1 Kings 7.8. Or, 
into the middle city, as it is in the Hebrew- For ſome obſerve, that 
| there were three Cities, or three parts of this City; one called zhe 
City of David in Sion; another called Jebus, or Salem ; and a third 
which was betwixt thoſe two parts, and united them all into one 
City, called Jeruſalem, This is noted to ſhew Gods great readineſs 
to hear the ſincere and fervent Prayers of his Children. | 

5 Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the captain of my 


people, Thus ſaith the LORD, the God of David thy 
father þ, I have heard thy prayer, I have ſeen thy tears: 
behold, I will heal thee ; on the third day 7 thou ſhalt 


20 up into the houſe of the LORD &. 


mat 1 CIO TR 


| | 
|Or, city: 
: 


£{ Which ſhews that the Cure was 


will make it good in thy perſon. Which 


| miraculous. & To giveme Solemn Praiſe for this Mercy. 
proves the perfe&ion of the Cure. 


6 AndI will add unto thy days fifteen years /, and I 
will deliver theeand this city out ofthe hand of the king 
of Aſſyria mz : and * I will defend this city for mine own 


ſake », andfor my ſervant Davids ſake. 

I Beyond what-thou doſt expeQ, and wn what thou wouldſt 
| do if Ithould leave thee to the force of thy Diſeaſe. m This is added 
| either, firſt, Becauſe he might otherwiſe fear the A4ſjriansreturn to 
this City from which he was ſo ſhamefully repulſed. Or, Secondly, 
Becauſe this fickneſs happened before that great ſlaughter, chap. 
19. 35. Of which ſee the Notes onv. 1, » To vindicate my Glory 
againſt that infolent Blaſphemer- 


7 And Ifaiah ſaid, Takea lump of figs o. And they 


took and laid zt on the boil .*., and he recovered, 

+ Though the deliverance was certainly promiſed, yet means muſt 
be uſed , and thoſe ſuitable : for this hath naturally a power of ripen- 
ing and ſofting Boils or Sores ; though that Power was altogether 
inſufficient to produce ſoſudden and ſo compleat a Cure. .'. Which 
ſeems to have beena Plague-ſore. ] 

8 © And Hezekiah ſaid p unto Iſaiah, What ſhall be 
the ſign q that the LORD will heal me, and that I ihall 
g0 up into the houſe of the LORD the third day ? 

p Or rather, had ſaid : for it is evident this was faid before his 
recovery, though his recovery be mentioned before it ; ſuch 
tranſpoiirions being frequent in Scripture, q He asketh a Sign, nor 
becauſe he diftruſted it ; but for the ſtrengthning of his Faith, 
which otherwiſe might be ſhaken by the greatneſs of his danger, 
and by the contradiftion between this and his former Meſlage. 
Compare Judges 6:17, 37, 39. Iſa: 7:11, | 

9 And Ifaiah faid, This fign ſhalt thou have cf the 
LORD, that the LORD will dothe thing that he hath 
ſpoken : hall the ſhadow go forward ten degrees, or go 
P back ten degrees ? — 
| +: 10 And Hezekiah anſwered, Its alight thing for the 

| ſhadow to go down ten degrees : nay, burlet the ſha- 
dow return backward ten degrees. 
c r To wit, in an inſtant : for that Courſe or Motion of the Sun is 
natural for the kind of it, though miraculous for the ſwiftneſs of it ; 
bur the other would be both ways miraculous. 

it And Ifaiah the prophet c:ied unto the LORD /F, 

and * he brought the ſhadow tendegrees backward, by 


: 
| 
| 


| ' Chap» 
#9: 34. 


* bx 2 . « . 

2 Ih. 38. which it had gone down 1n the f dial of Ahaz «. - 

+ Heb: S Being moved by Gods Spirit firſt to offer him this Sign, and 
then to pray for it. #t Que#. 1. What were theſe degrees ? 4nſ. Lines 


degrees. 


in the Dial : but whether each of theſe Lines or Degrees noted an 
hour, or half an hour, or a quarter of an hour, is uncertain, and not 
very conſiderable im this caſe. Queft. 2- What was it that went 
down ? Anſ. Either, Firſt, The Shadow alone went back without 
the Sun. For God could- ſo diſpoſe of the Light of the Sua, by 
interpoſling Clouds, or other things, that the Shadow ſhould fall 
only upon thoſe Lines, and in-thet manner as God direQedir. And 
whereas the Sw is {aid to have gone down, that may be ſpoken 
according to appearance, as other Paſſages of Scripture are under- 
ſtood, as when the -Moon is called one of the great Lights, Gen. 1 
though it be lct5 than ſome of the Stars; and when the Sun is ſaid 
togo down, Jer. 15. 9. and to be turned into darkneſs, Joel 2. 31. Or 
Secondly, The Sun ir ſelf went back, and the Shadow with it., 
This may ſeem moſt probable : Firſt, By comparing this with Fe/. 
10. 13., where the Sun it {cIf ſtood ſtill. Secondly, Becaule it is 
ſaid, the Sun it ſelf returned, Ia, 38.8. for which he here mentions 
the Shadow only, becauſe the Mizacle was-not ſo eaſily diſcovered in 
the Sun, as 1n the ſhadow of a Dial, And though the Sun may be 
elſewhere taken improperly, yet,where the improper ſignification 
is unneceflary, the proper is and ought to be preferred before it. 
Thirdly, Becauſe this Miracle was noted by the Babylaians, who, 
having underſtood that ir was done for Hezekiah his ſake, ſent to 6n- 
quire into the truth and manner of it, 2 Chrons 32. 3x. Obj. If this 
had been done,the Heathen Hiſtorians and Aſtronomers would have 
taken notice ofir, which we donot find that they did. 4v/. So it is 
moſt probable they did : although thoſe Books be not now extant :; 
which is not ſtrange; this being confeſſed and bewailed, that ſo very 
few of the firſt and ancient Writers are now left, Herodotus himſelt, 
the firſt, and Father of the ancient Hiſtorians, being long after this 
time. 'And yer it is obſerved, that there are ſome Intimatians of 
theſe things left, though mixed with Fables, as many true Hiſtories 
were ; as what the Poers fabled of Jupiter's making the Night twice 
as long as it ſhould have been, that he might enjoy Almena longer. 
Whether the Sun or ſhadow went backward ſuddenly, or leiſurely, 


þ 1 am mindful ofmy promiſe made to David and his Houſe, and 


4 


NO. *% 


no great moment, the mirzcle being evident either way. » Which 
Ahaz had made in the kings Palace. This Dial he mentions, becauſe 
the truth of the Miracle might be beft and ſocneſt diſcovered there; 
this Dial poſſibly being viſible out of the Kings Chamber, or at leaſt 
being near to it, and the Degrees being moſt diſtin& and ccnſpicucus 
in this Dial 3 but the ſame thing wasdiſcerned by all other Dials. 


I2 C * At that time Berodach-baladan x the ſon of + 
Baladan king of Babylon, ſent letters and a preſent unto 
Hezekiah y : for he had heard thac Hezekiah had been 


ſick. 

x Called Merodach-Baladan, Iſa. 39. 1: whoſe Name Joſephus found 
in that famous Chaldean Hiſtoriany Beroſus. He ſeems to have been 
the King of aſhria's Vice-Roy in Babylon, and upon that terrible 
Slaughter of 185 Thouſand in the 4ſjrian Hoſt, and the Death of 
Sennacherib,and the differencesamong his Sons, to have uſurped an 
abſolute Sovereignty over Babylon; and either himſelf or his Son 
deſtroyed the Aſjrian Monarchy, and tranſlated the Empire to Babylon, 
» Partly, for the Reaſons mentioned, 2 Chron, 32. 31. and partly, 
to aſſure himlelf of the Friendſhip and Afiſtance of Hezekiah againſt 
the Aſhrians, their common, and as yet powerful Enemy. 


13 And Hezekiah hearkned unto them z, and ſhewed 
them all the houſe of his || precious things, the ilver,and q o;, 
the gold, and the ſpices, and the precious ointment,and ſpicery, 
all the houſe of his || F armour, and all that was found in us” 
his treaſures a: there was nothing in his houſe, nor in 7: 
all his dominion, that Hezekiah ſhewed them not 6b, 

z 1. e.: Granted their deſires of a League and Amity with them, 
a For though his Countrey had lately been harafled by the Aſrians, 
yet he had reſerved all his Treaſures and precious things, which 
he and his Fathers had gathered in Jeruſalem. Beſides, he had conſi- 
derable Spoils out of the 4ſj71an Camp. Alſo he had many preſents 
ſent to him, 2 Chr. 32.23« which doubtleſs were things of conſider- 
able Worth. 6 Which hedid through vain Oftentation and pride of 
heart, 2 Chron: 32. 25, 26. being liftedupby the great Honour which 
| God had done him, in working ſuch glorious Miracles for his ſake, 
and by the great Reſpe&ts & Preſents rendred to him from divers 
Princes and People, and now by this great Babylonian Monarch. Sao 
hard amatter is it even for a good man to be high and humble. 


14 C Then came Ifaiah the prophet unto king Heze- 
kiah, and ſaid unto him, What ſaid theſe men, and 
from whence came they unto thee ? And Hezekiah ſaid, 
They are come from a far countrey c, even from Ba- 
bylon 4. 
c A vain-glorious Expreſſion, 1ntimating the great Honour which 
he had from all parts both far and near. 4 That great and porent 
Monarchy ; which he ſpeaks to magnifie his own Honour and 
Happineſs. 
i5 Andhe ſaid, What have they ſeen in thine houſe 
e? and Hezekiah anſwered, All the things that are in 
mine houſe have they ſeen : there is nothing among 
my treaſure that I have not ſhewed them, 
e He asketh, not that he was ignorant of it, but that from his An« 
{wer he might take the occaſion of delivering Gods meflage to him. 
16 And [{aiah ſaid unto Hezekiah, Hear the word 
of the LORD. 
17 Behold, the days come, that all that in thine 
houſe, and that which thy fathers have laid up in ſtore 
unto this day, * thall be carried into Babylon f : no- * Chip, 
ching ſhall be lefc, ſaith the LORD. *9- 3h 
f This Judgmentis denounced againſt him for his pride, which 25 7. 
God exceedingly abhors ; and for his Ingratitude, whereby he took ts th 
that Honour to himſelf which he ſhould have given intirely to 
God ; and abuſed Gods Gifts and Favours to the Gratification of 
his own Lu+ts 3 Of both which ſee 2 CEron. 32. 25, 26. and for his 
carnal Confidence in that League which he had now made with the 
King of Babylon, by which, it 1s probable, he thought his Mountain 
co be ſo ſtrong, that it could not be removed. 


18 And of thy ſons that ſhall iſſue from thee, which 
thou ſhalt beger g, ſhall they take away, and they ſhall 
be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon h. 

g 1.e, Of thy Grand-Children, who are oft called Sous. þ They 
ſhall be Servants to that Heathen Monarch, whereby both their 
Bodies will be ſubje& to Slavery, and the Luſts of their Lords, and 
their Souls expoſed to the peril of Idolatry, and all ſorts of Wicked- 
neſs ; which muſt needs be very grievous to ſo good a Man as 
Hezeklah, .and was indeed a very fore Judgment. Whereby God 
would teach the World the great Evil of (in, yea even of thoſe ins 


which are generally efteemed bur ſmall and venial; for ſuch were 
thoſe ſins of Hezekiab noted upon v. 17. 


I9 Then faid Hezekiah unto Iſaiah, Good is the word 
of the LORD 3, which thou haſt ſpoken. Andhe ſaid, 
[| 1s #* not good, if peace and truth be in my days & ? 

7 T heartily ſubmit to this Senrence, as being both juſt, becauſe 


deſerved and procured by mine and my Peoples ſins; and merciful 
+ becauſe the Puniſhment is leſs than I have deſerved. & "= 


mw 


Iſa,39., 


Veſſels, 


|| Or, Shaft 
there nt 
' be peace 


ſpeaksnot as if he were careleſs and unconcerned for his Poſteriry» 
( which neither the common Inclinations and Aﬀe&ions of Nature 
in all Men, nor that fingular Piety and Charity which was eminent 
and manifeſt in Hezekiah, can ſuffer us to believe ) or for the Church 
and People of God, for whoſe Welfare he was ſo ſolicitous and 
induſtrious in the whole Courſe of his Life ; bur becauſe it was a 
ſingular favour thatthis Judgment did not immediatety follow his 
ſin, the Cauſe of it, but was ſuſpended for a longer time. ' 


20 C And the reſt of the a&s of Hezekiah, and all his 
might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and 
brought water into the city, are they not written in the 


&C. 


andin the ſame time in which it had gone down, is a Queſtion or | 


book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah ? 
| 21 And 


NL nd truth, . 


ank 47 FAY a 


Chap. 


LP”, 


XL Bao. X &i1f. ir © 1 
F mw Hb. the Chemarin: ; which were miniſters of Idols, Hof. 10. 5. 

diſtin from the Prieſts,Ze-ph. 1.4.Pofſibly they were the highett rank 
of Prietts, becauſe they are here employed in the higheſt work, which 
was to burn Incenſe. » A particular god, of greateſt eſteem with 
them, fo called : though elſewhere the name of Baal js common 
to all falſe gods. 

6 And he brought out the * grove » from the houſe 
the LORD, without Jeruſalem, unto the brook Kidron, 
and burnt it at the brook Kidron, and ſtamp it ſmall 
to powder, and caſt the powder thereof upon the 


graves of the children of the people p. 

o See on ver. 4. f i.e. of the common people, whoſe Graves were 
made togerher in ſome common place, which was generally accoun- 
ted very impure and contemptible,and therefore a fit place for this 
filth ro be thrown into. Ocr,of Baſtards, who are oft called :he chil- 
dren of the people ; who as they had this brand of Infamy laid upon 
them, that they might not enter into the congregation of the Lord, Deut. 
23.2. ſo poſſibly they were expoſed to this further Ignominy, to be 
buricd in a peculiar, and in the moſt infamous place. Oc rather, as 
it is in the Hebrew, of the people, 1. e. thoſe Idolatrous people, as it 1s 
explained, 2 Chr. 34.4. and here ſufficiently implied 1n this and rhe 
foregoing Verſe. E 

7 And he brake down the houſes of the Sodomites q 
that were by the houſe of the LORD, where the women 


wove Þ hangings r, for the grove /. 

q Whercin ſome Males proſtiruted their Bodies to the Luſts of 
others . which abominable praftice was both a priniſhment of Ido- 
latry, R.1:23,24427:and apart of Ido-worſkip, this being done to 
the honour of ſome of their Idols, and by the appointment and in- 
ſtigation of rhoſe impure and diabolical Spirits, which were worſhip- 
ped in their Idols. Sce 1 King:14:247and 15:12:and 22:46. r Or,curtains, 
either to draw before the Idol or Idols which were worſhipped in 
the Grove, to preſerve them from defilement, or to gain more re- 
verence for them ; or which were ſet up in the Grove, that the 
abominable filthineſs laſt mentioned, might be commitred within 
them. Or, garments for the ſervice of the Grove,for the Idols or the 
Pricſts belonging to them Heb. houſes, i.e. either lirtle Chappels 
made of woven work,like thoſe which were made of Silver, Att:19: 
24. within which there were ſome repreſentations of their Grove- 
Idols: or rather, Tents made of thoſe Curtains for the uſe above men- 
tioned. /. Or, for Aſherah, an Idol fo called, as was notcd before. 

8 And he brought all the prieſts : our of the cities of 

Judah, and defiled the high places # where the prieſts 
| had burnt incenſe, from Geba x to Beerſheba y, and 
brake down the high places of the gates z that ere in 
tho entring in of the gate of Joſhua the governour of 
the city a, which were on a mans left hand at the gate 
of the citv., 

: To wit, belonging to the high-places here following, whether 
. ſuch-as worthipped ldois ; or rather,ſuch as worſhipped God in thoſe 

forbidden places, Deut-12.11. as may be gathered from the following 
Verſe- « By burning dead mens Bones upon them, as ver.14,16, 
20. or by putting them to ſome other unclean or filthy uſe. x The 
Northern border of the Kingdom of Judah: Of which ſee Jof. 18. 
24: 1King.15.22- y Which was the Southern border. See Gen. 21. 
31. Judg. 20. 1. 7,9. frome one end to the other. z Which were 
ereQed by the Gates of the City. hexze mentioned,unto the honour 
of their Tutelary Gods, which after the manner of the Heathen, 
they owned for the Prote&ors of their Ciry and Habitations. 
@ This circumſtance is noted to ſhew 7oſiahs great zeal and impar- 
tiality, in rooting out all monuments of Idolatry, withour any 
.reſpet unto thoſe great perſons who were concerned in them, or 
affected to them. : ; 

9 Nevertheleſs,the Pricſts of the high places 5 came 
Not up to the altar of the LORD in Jeruſalem c, but 
they did cat of the unleavened Bread 4, among their 


brethren. 

b Which Worſhipped the True God there. © 7. e. Were not 
ſufferea ro come thither ro the Exerciſe of their Prieftly funE&tion; 
as a juſt puniſhment for the corruption of Gods Worſhip, and the 
tranſgreſhon of ſo plain and poſitive a Law of God,Deut.12.11.which 
was much worſe in then who had more knowledge to diſcernGods 
mind therein, and more obligations ro obſerve it,and to ingage 0- 
thers to the obſervations of it. Compare Ezek.44.10 4 i.e. Ofthe 
Meat-offerings; allotted to the Prieſts, wherein there was to be no 
Leaven, Lev. 2.4,5,1-,11. and conſequent!y of other Proviſions be- 
longing to the Prieſts, which by a Synecdoche are contained under 
this one kind. Thus their Spiritual blemiſh puts them into the 
very ſame ſtate which corporal blemifhes brought them, Lev. 21-17, 
&c. And thus he mitigates their punithment : he ſhuts them out 
fromSpiritualServices,butallows them natural&neceſſaryProviſtons 

10 And he defiled Topheth,which zs in the valley 0 


the children of Hizzom e.that no man might *make his 


.& 


"er, 18, 


+ Deur: 
'%.  e Of which ſee 7of. 15. 8. Neem, 11. 30« Jer-7. 31: and 19. 6, 1: 


f See on Lev. 58. 21. Deut. 18. 10. ; 
11 And he took away the horſes g that the Kings of 
Judah had given to the ſun h, at the entring in of the 
' houſe of the LORD ;,by che chamber of Nathanmelech 
the || chamberlain &, which was in * the ſuburbs /, and 


burnt the chariots of the ſun »- with fire. 

Z Either,1. The Carved or Graven Horſes,to which were adjoyned 
a Graven Chariot, in which there might be a pi&ure of the Sun, 
which the Heathens uſed to repreſent in this manner. Or rather, 
5. Living Horſes:For, 1-Such the Eaſtern Nations uſed to Conſecrate 
to the Sun, to ſignify the ſwiftacſs of his morion. 2- Theſe Horſes 
are mentioned a part from the Chariots,and are faid to be giver v0 
the Sun,which is not ſaid of the Chariots : and to be taken away, when 
the chariots were burnt, &Cc. and a ccrtain place is here allorted ro the 
Horſes,not to the Chariots. þ Either, ro be Sacriticed to the Sun, 
or,to draw thoſe Chariots in which che Kings,or ſome other in theur 


b, 4 


ſon,or his daughter to paſs through the fire to Molech f. - 


N G. 8. Chap. 


their ſread,and by their appointment, went forth every Morning to 
worſhip the rifing Sun : for both ticſe were the Cuſtoms of the 
Armenians and Perſians,as Xenophon teſtifies. ! i, e. By the Gate of the 
outward Court of the Temple : for the Courts are oft contained 
under the name of the Houſe or Temple, k Or, officer, to whom 
the care of theſe Horſes was committed. ! Either, 1. Of the City 
of David : or rather, of the Temple : in certain outward Buildings 
belonging to the Temple,and the uſes thereof. See Ezek.45-2. Heb. 
in Parvarim ; a place near the Temple, called alſo Prbar, Chr. 26. 
18. though it be not now known either where it was,or why it was 
ſo called. mw Which were made for the honour and worſhip of 
the Sun,as was before expreſſed. _ 

12 And the Altars that were on the top. of the upper 
chamber of Ahaz w,which the Kings of Judah had made, 
and the Altars which.* Manaſſch had made » in the 


ewo courts p of the houſe of the LORD, did the King 


caſt the duſt of them into the brook Kidron 9, 


upon their Idols,that they were not content with all their publick 
high places and Altars,but made others upon their Houſe-tops, for 
the worſhip of the Heavenly Bodies. See Jer-19.13. Zephar.5. o Queſt. 
How could this be, when Manaſſ:h had taken them away before, 
2 Chr.33-15 ? Aſw. Either, theſe altars were not ſo fully deſtroy'd 
as they ſhould have been, the foundations of them being lefc through 
the negle& of the Officers appointed ro do that work,upon which 


Amon's new Altars are called by his fathers name,becauſe they were 
built by his example,and in the very ſame place where his Fathers 
Altars were ; as the Walls which {aac digged in the ſame place, 
where Abraham had digged them before, were therefore called by 
their ancient names; Ger.26.15. See more on the next verſe. p The 
Prieſts and the Peoples. See <h.21.5. q Partly, to ſhew his deteſta- 
tion of them : and partly,to aboliſh the very remembrance of them 
as far ar he could. | 

. 13 And the high places that were before Jeruſalem, 
which were on the right hand of che[|mount of corrup- 
tionr, which * Solomon the King of Ifrael had builded 


/ for Aſhtorech, 7 the abomination « of the Zidonians, 


Ammon, did the King defile. 

r 7,e. The Mount of Olives, 1 King: 11.7, here called the moung 
of corruption, tor the grols Idolatry there: practiſed, which is oft ex- 
preſſed by the name of corruption. See Exod, 32,7. Deut+32. 5. In 
the Hebrew 1s an elegant alluſion between Miſcah, anointing, and 
Maſbcith, corruption, as there is between Bethel and Bethaven, Hoſ. 
4. 15. | Not the ſame indvidual Altars ; which doubtleſs either 
Solomon upon his repentance,or ſome other of Jofah's Godly prede- 
ceflors had taken away long before this time ; but other. Altars 
built by Maneſſeh or Amon, which becauſe erected by Solomons ex- 
ample, and for the ſame ule, and in the ſame place, are called by 
his name ; this brand being left by the Holy Ghoſt upon his name 
and memory,as a juſt punithment of that abominable practice,and 
a mean to deter others from the 1ike.e Of which 8& the reſt,See on 
r King 1i-5.6,7- u 7.e. The Idol, fo called, becauſe it was abomi- 
nable, and miade them abominable to God. 


14 And he * brake in pieces the f images, and cut 


of men x. 


out of their Graves, v.16. 

15 4 Moreover, the altar that was at Beth-el y, and 
che high place * which Jeroboam the ſon of Nebat,who 
made Iſrael to ſin, had made, both that altar, and the 
high place z he brake down, «nd burnt the high place, 
and (tampt it ſmall ro powder, and burnt the grove. 

» Qreff. How could he rigtitly do this, ſeing Berhel was a part of 
the Kingdom of 1/rael,nor of Judah? Anf, Either, Firſt, This City 
was now under the Kingdom of 7udah,to which 1t was added by 4- 
bijah long fince, 2 Chron 13.19. Or, Secondly, He did this by vertue 
of that ancient right which David & his Poſterity had to the King. 
dom of ljrael, which though ſuſpended for a time by Gods grant of 
the Ten Tribes to Jeroboam,and the ſucceeding Kings of Iſrael ; yet 
theſe being all exrin&t,it might ſeem to return to him,at leaft ſo far 


runity,and eſpecially our of thoſe parts of it which bordered upon 
Judah. Or, Thirdly, The King of Babylon having engaged ii a War 
with the 4ſjrian,Hezekiah's great Enemy,& aaving thereupon occaſi- 
on for Hezekiahs Friendſhip, did ( as ſome ſuppoſe ) enlarge his 


f Dominion, and give him tome power over the ingdom of 1ſrael, 


at leaft as ro matters of Religion: Which may ſeem not 1mproba= 
ble from 2 Chr.30.1,4,5,6. And the ſame power ſeems to have been 


_continued,and ſome kind of League made between the King of Ba- 


bylon and Manaſſth ( who thereupon was reſtored to his Kingdom, 
2 Chron.33.13.)and after him Joſiah,who therefore was ſo zealous in 
his quarrel againſt the King of Egygr,2 Chron, z 5420,0c. Or, Fourthly, 
He did it in purſuance of Gods prediQtion concerning this Afton, 
1 King. 13. 2+ Which ( in a matter ſo good, and ſo agreeable to 
was) had the force of a Warrant or command upon him to do it, as 
Gods predittion of the Converſion of the Gentiles by the Meſſias,was 
a command to his Apoſtles to preach to them, 4#513. 47. z Which 
ſeems to have been ſome little Temple or Houſe ere&ed for that 
Worſhip, or for the Prieſts attending upon ir. : 

16 And as Joſiah turned himſelf a, he ſpied the ſepul- 
chres that were there in the mount, and fenc and rook 
the bones our of the fepulchres, and burnt :hew upon 
the alcar, and pollated it, according to the * 
the LORD, which the man of God proclaimed, who 


proclaimed thels words 6. 


i3Pa 8 Toſia?” « 


word of , 


" In 
$| 


XXIV 


"Ih 
a" 
| 


# 


Cl. 
2b. 5. 


Fo”. © 


» 7. e. Upon the Roof of the Kings Houſe- They were ſo mad _ 


Amon built his new Altars. Or if they. were wholly rooted out, 


bl 


Heb. 


x 7. e. Of the Idolatrous Prieſt#, which he cauſed to be taken ſtatues. 


12. 28. 


as to pluck up Idolatry out of the Land of {rael,as he had OPPOr= 


Gods will and word, as the extirpation of Idolatry unqueſtionably | 


1 King? 
13+ 3+ 


beat down, and || brake them down from thence, and Or, ran || .j | 


|| 7hat is; j 
the mount | 
of olives, 
and for Chemoth the abomination of the Moabites, * :Kin- 
and for Milcom the abomination of the children of*** 7 


*Exod.232 | | 
down the groves,and filled their- places with the bones ;*. | 


*r King; iſ 
| 


' f 
: 
f 4 - 
311 
t 
x 
| i 
-WHF MF! 
{4} 
[48.4 
9% ni 
T0000 it 
} 1387 
inn 108)! 
11M [4 
ih. ri 
14 87 11087 
ry v i 
143000! ; 
ity Wat | | 
tþ \ | 
| 41.9 | 
: is | 4 l ; ' 
\ f | n 
i 4 
; 1 
{ 
: 1 : 
| 4 [ 


. 


| 


| 


i 


if 
i 
4 
\: 
" 
bh 
mM. | 


[Chap. XX1f, | t1. | 

a Jofiah's car? and zeal was ſo great, that he would not truſt his 
Officers with theſe things,but would ſce them done with his own 
Eyes. 6 30o years before it was done. 

pot Then he ſaid, Whar tiile 5s that that [ ſee c? And 
|, Kino: 5 men of the city told him, 1: 5s the ſepulchre of 
Ef oY the man of God, which came from Judah,and proclaim- 
| ed theſe things that thou haſt done again the aitar of 
Beth-el. = ; i= 

c It was the manner then, as now it is, to ſer up little Pillars 
or Stones, by,or upon the Graves of the higher ſort of Men,upon 
which the name of the perſon, and ſome Remarkable paſſages re- 
lating to him, were Engraven. : 

18 And he ſaid, let him alone : let no man move his | 

+ Heb. bones : ſo they let his bones + alone with the bones | 


eſcape. of * the prophet that came 4 out of Samariac 
*1King- J Which were now mixed together. « The Place of his Birth ' 
13-11 or former abode, though now he were in Bethel, 1 Sam-13.11. 


19 And all the Houſes alſo of the high places that 
were in theCities of Samaria f,which the kings of Iſrael 
had made to provoke the LORD to anger, Joſiah took 
away, and did to them according to all the acts that he 


had done in Bethel. 
F By what Authority he did this, ſee on ver. rs. 
Or, 20 And he || * ſlew ail the prieſts of the high placesg, 
| + that were there upon the Attars b,and burnt mens bones 


*Exod. ypon them, and returned to Jeruſalem. 

——q £ Either, 1. 'The Prieſts which Jeroboam had made of the meaneſt 
Chap. 11. of the People, whom he flew,both for their Preſumptuous Uſur- 
_ pation of that ſacred Office, which of it ſelf was punithable with 
” Death by God's Law, Num.3.10- and for their Idolatry. Or rather, 
2. The Prieſts of Baalim ; by comparing this Verſe with the foc- 
- thtr, where ſpeaking of the ſame High places, he doth not ſay, 
which Jero:oam made ; as is uſual when he ſpeaks of the High 
Places of the Calves ; but which the othcr kings of 1[rael made, who 
were divers of them. Worthippers of Baal; and by conſidering the 
Parallel place, 2 Chren.34.4. where it 1s ſaid they brake down the altars 
of Baalim, &c, By this Relation it appears, and from the nature of 
the thing,and common prattice in like caſes, it 15 more than pro- 
bable, that after the departure of the King of 4ſjria, divers of the 
| Iſraelites who had retired to other parts, and kept themfelves our 
i of the Conquerours hands, returned together with their Prietts ro 
| their own Land, and to their old trade of Worſhhipping Idols; 
_ to whom, peradventure, they aſcribed this their Deliverance from 
that Judgment which Jehovah had brought upon them. 6 Accord- 

ing to that Famous Prophecy, 1 Krng. 13:1, 2. : 
q 21 © And the king commanded all the people,ſaying, 
4 _ * Keep the paſlover ; unto the LORD your God, * as 


Exod.1: it #s written in this book of the covenanc &. 
3. Lev.23. # Having aboliſhed Falſe Worſhip, he now endeavours to fer up 
5- Numb. the True Workhip of the True God. & In this Book which I have 
9.2. Deut. found ; wherein is contained the Covenant made between God aid 
x6. 2, AIſratl, and the terms of it. a 
22 Surely there was not holden ſuch a paſſover from. 
the days of the judges mthat judged Iſrael, nor in all the 
days of the kings of Iſrael, nor of the kings of Judah : 
7. e, Celebrated with ſuch Solemn care, and great preparation, 
and numerous Sacrifices, 2 Chron.35.7,8 9.and univerſal Joy of al] 
good men ; which was much the greater, becauſe of their remem- 
brance of the former wicked and miſerable times under Manaſeh, 
and Amon; and the good hopes they now had of the happy Eſta- 
bliſhment of their Nation, and the Trre Religion ; and of the pre- 
venticn of Gods Judgments denounced againſt them. mz Or, from 
the days of Samuel, the laſt of the Judges; as it is expreſfed 2 Chr.35. 
8. None of the Kings had taken ſuch care to prepare themſelves, 
the Prieſts, and People,and accurately to obſerve all the Rites, and 
diligently to purge out all uncleanneſs, and to nenew their Cove- 
nant with God, fo' ſolemnly as Joſiah now did. 
- 24 But in the eighteenth year of king Joſiah, wherein 
this paſſover was holden to the LORD in Jeruſalem. 
24 C Moreover, the werkers with familiar ſpirits, and 
1 Or,7er4- the wizards », and the || images, and the idols, and all 
thim, the abominations o that were ſpied p in the land of Ju- 
dak.and in Jeruſalem,did Joſiah put away,that he might 
* Lev. 20- perform the words of *.che law, which were written in 
27. Deut. the book that Hilkiah the prieſt found in the houſe 
#8. 1. of the LORD. 


» Of which ſee on Levit. 19. 51. and 20. 27, Nuntb. 22, 5. Dent. 18. 
11, o Three words noting the ſame thing, to ſhew, That all the 
Inſtruments and Monuments of Idolatry were Deſtroyed,asGod had 
Commanded. p z. e. All that were diſcovered ; not only fach as 
were in the place and ſtate of Worſhip, bur ſuch as their Prieſts or 

ealots tad removed, and endeavoured to hide and ſecure. 

25 And * lixe unto him was there no king: before 
him 9, that turned to the LORD with all his heart,and 
with all bis ſoul,and with all his might,according to all 
the law of Mofes, neither after him aroſe there any 
like him. | 
| 4 To wit,for las diligent Study in God's Law and his exa& care, 
and unwearied Induſtry ,and ferventZeal,in rooting out of Idolaters; 
and all kinds and appearances of ldolatry,not only in J#dah,but in 
Jſrael alio 3 and in the Eſtabliſhment of the erue Religion in all his 
Dcminions,andin the contorming of his own Lite, and his peoples 
too, (as far as he cou!d) ro the holy Law of God : though Hezekiah 
might excel him in ſome other particulars ;' of whom therefore the 
hke is ſaid above, Chap. 18. 55+ 


CD CEE IN _ 


* Chap. 
18. 5. 


* Ter 15. 


+ Heb. © the fierceneſs of his great wrath, wherewith his ange: 


£1NG 358 


ry Becauſe though the King was moſt hearty in his Repentance, 
and acceptable to God, as was ſaid before and therefore the Judg- 
ment was delayed for his time ; yet the People were generally 
corrupt- and ſecretly averſe from Joſiah's pious and excellent Re- 
formation, and inclined to their old Luſts and Idols ; as appears 
from the Complaints of the Prophets, eſpecially Jerem:ah and Ze. 
phaniah, againſt them : and by the following Hiſtory, wherein we 
ſee that as ſoon as ever Joſiah was gone,his Childrenzand the Prin- 
ces,and the People, ſuddenly and greedily returned to their former 
Abomi-ations. 5s The ſins of Mwmaſ:», and of the Mcn of his 

Generations z who complyed and concurred with his IdoJatroug 
and cruel prattices, Chap.24.3,4+ are juitly puniſhed in this Gene« 
ration : partly,becauſe of Gods Soveraign Right of puniſhing Sin. 
ners ( ſuch as theſe unqueſtionably were) when, and upon what 
occaſion he ſees fir ; partly, becauſe of that publick warning and 
Declaration of God,that he would viſit the Iniquity « the Fathers 
upon the Children : and principally, becauſe theſe Men had never 
ſincerely Repented of their own, nor of their Fathers Sins ; but 
their hearts ſtil] hankered after them ; which, though nor yer ſeen 
by Men, was manifeſt ro God, who therefore pronounced this 
Terrible Sentence againſt them. 

' 27. And the LORD faid,T will remove Judah alfo out 
of my ſight, as I have removed Iſrael ; and will caſt off 
this City Jeruſalem,which I have cholen,and the houſe 
of which I ſaid t, * My Name ſhall be there. *, 

t To wir, upon the conditions in ſundry places exprefled, which g . 
they broke, and therefore God juſtly made thein to know /is breath 

of promiſe, as he threatens, Numb. 14. 


7 


34 

28 Now the reft of the acts of Joſiah,and all that he 
did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of Judah ? 

29 © * In his days Pharaoh-necho # king of Egypt *:Chron; 
went up againſt the king of Afſyria x to the River Eu-35: 2%. 
pbrates y : and king Jokah went ag:inft him z ; and he 
{ſlew him 4 at * Megiddo, when he had ſeen him b. * 7e, 

u Called Necos by Herodotus, who makes mention of his Fight 512. wu 
wherein, as he ſaith, Necos Conquered the Syrians in Mazaalo, >, 1. e. | 
The King of Babylon, who having formerly Rebelled againſt the 
Aſjrian his Lord, bad now conquered him 3 as appears by the courſe 
of the Sacred, and the concurrence of the Prophane Hittory ; and 
therefore is here and elſewhere called the Aſſprian, and the King of 
Aſſria, becauſe now he was the Head of that Empire. »y 7. e. Aga:nſt 
Carchemiſb by Euphrates, as 1t is expreſſed, 2 Chron. 35. 20. which the 
the 4ſjrian had taken from the Syrians, 1ſ#.10:9- Pharaeh's Confedee 
rates, who therefore ſendeth Forces againſt the A4frians, that he 
might both help them,and ſecure himlclf. x Ecither to defend his 
own Country from Pharaoh's Incurſions ; or to Aſſiſt the King of 
Babylon, with whom he ſeems ro have been in League, as was noted 
before. #2 7,e. Gave him his Deaths Wound there ; though he dyed 
not till he came to Jers/alem,2 Chron.35.23,24. b 7.6. When he fought , 
with him, or in the firſt Onſet. Thus Fighting is called & looking 
in the face, 2 Rings 14+ 8. ; Es 
| -30 And his Servants Carried him in a chariot dead 4 
from Megiddo,and brought him to Jeruſalem,and buri- 
ed him in his own ſepulchre : and * the people of the *:Chra 
| land took * Jehoahaz the ſon of Joſiah 4, and anointed 36.1. 
1im e, and made him king in his fachers ſtead. *1 Chron, 

c i, 6. Mortally Wounded,as in the former Verſe;and as wecom- 3-15. Jet 
monly ſay of a tick man, paſt hopes of Recovery, that he is a dead 
man ; Compare Gen. 29. 3. 4d Who was younger than Jchoiakim, by 
comparing ver.31. with 36. yer preferred by the People before the 
 -lder Brother ;either becauſe Jeho;akim refuſed the Kingdom for fear 
of Phara:h, whom he knew he ſhould hereby provoke. Or becauſe, 
| Jehoahaz was the more Stout & Warlike Prince; whence he is cal« 
&d a Lion, Ezek. 19.3. though indeed he ſhewed his courage more a« 
gainſt his People, than his Enemies : but they judged, that he was 
more able and willing to defend them againſe rhe conquering 
Army. e As they uſed to do in ſuch Extraordinary caſes, becauſe 
this was a Troubleſome time,and he was nor the right Heir to the 


King, 


Crown, and therefore needed this Solemn Rite of Confirmation, 
| which Solomon had in the ſame Circumſtances, 


31 T Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when 
he began co reign,and he reigned three moneths in Fe- 
ruſalem : and his mothers name was * Hamuital, the * Chap; 
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 24. 18, 
32 And he did that which as evil in the ſight of the 


LORD, according to all that his fathers f had done. 
f 7. e. His grand Parents, Manafſeh, and mon. He reſtored that 
Idolatry which his Father had deſrroyed;part'y,to gratifie the gene- 
rality of the People,who had made him King, and who were incli- 
ned to their old Superſtitions, even in Joſahs time, as was obſerved 
before, though reſtrained from the ourward aQs,by fear: and part- 
ly,to ſweeren the King of E;ypr,who poſſibly was a Zealous Idolater, 
by his compliance wich him in rhe Worſhip of Idols. 
33And Pharaob-nechoh pur him in bands at Riblah 5, 
in the land of Hamath || chat he mighe nor reign 3 in po, 
Jeruſalem, and f put the land to a tribute & of an hun- cau{e i! 
dred talents of filver, and a talent of gold, 
g Either, becauſe he preſumed to rake the Kingdom without his + Heb” 
leave and conſent x; or becauſe he renewed the War againſt Pharaoh, 4 'F# 
as ſome affirm,and by him wasConquered,and taken Pritoner. þ An #291 its 
eminent City in Sj7is; of which fee Num, 34, 11. 2 King 25.6, where 1378. 
' Pharaoh now was to finiſh,or make good his conqueſts, whither Jeho- 
'ahaz was Carried to receive his Sentence. i Or becauſe he had reigned; 
';.e, Tzker the Kingdom without right,and without his leave. Or, 
according'to the other reading, the b:gmmning of his Reign ; the word 
 reigniny being commonly uſca for b:g.ming- ro reign; when he was 
ſcarce warm in his Throne. k To wit, a Yearly Tribute,whereby 


26 « Norwichitanding, the LORD turned not from * they ſhould acknowledge him to be their Superior 3 and for which, 


' he would be their Protector, when they needed his help. 


angers: was kindled againſt Judah r,* becauſe of all the + proyo- 
cations that Manalleh: had: provoked him withals, , 


34And Pharaol-nechoh niadcEliakim the ſon offoſiah 
Ikipg, in tÞe room of Joliah his father, ad turned his 


111168 


F3/ 


++, Chap. XXllt 


hap. 
Mat, 1 


S caled 


1M. 


þfſeb> 


wth, 


Reigned, | 


k 


It,: ap. XX1V- 


Ling, 
). 


1rONs 
0, 


&, 


1Þ, 
18, 


Mat, 1 


Scaled 
MM. 


þ{ſeb? 


wth 


ES 


name to * Jchoiakini m, and took Jehoahaz away » : 


'and he came to Egypt, and died there. 


I Whom he perccived to be of a more mild and peaceable Ciſp0- 
ſition. m2 Becauſe the giving of Names was accounted an a& and 
ſign of Dominion ; which therefore Parents did to their Cinildren, 
and Conquerors to their Vaſſals or Tribataries. Compare Chap. 
24. 17. .Dan 1. 7. * Partly as a puniſhment for him : and partly, 
that he might give no diſturbance to his Brother. 

25 And Jehoiakim gave the ſilver and the gold to 
Pharaoh, but he taxed the land to give the money 
according to the F commandment of Pharaoh ; he ex- 
acted the filver and the gold of the people of the land, 
of every one accorCing to his taxation, to give /# unto 
Pharaoh-nechoh. 

35 © Jehoiakim was twenty and. five years old when 
he began to reign o, and he reigned eleven years in 
Jerufalem : and his mothers name was Zebudah, the 
daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 


d Either, 1. When he began to Reien alone, and with full Power, 
or after Jehoahaz his Death : till which the People would nor dif- 
own him whom they had Anointed King, which was eſteemed a 
great tie ; 2 Sams 19. lo. nor own, or accept Fehoiak:m as their 
King, but only as his Brothers Vice-Roy, though Pharaoh had by 
violence forced him upon them. And ſo Jehoahaz might be his Elder 
Brother, and the ſame who is called Johanan, and is firſt mentioned, 
as the eldeſt ſon, 1 Chron. 3. 15. though he may be placed hrſt, nor 
in regard of his Birth, but of his Dignity : the Crown being firſt 
put upon his Head. Or, 2. When he was firſt ſer up by Pharaoh, 
and ſo this was the Elder Brother, though by Popular Violence 
put by his Right. See on v.31. 

37 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the 


LORD p, according to all that his fathers had done. 

p By Idolatry, the Opprefſion 6fhis People,and the Perſecution vt 
the Prop:cts, and other good men, Fer. 26. 20. Ezek. 19. 5, 6, 7. 

C A P. XXIV. 

Fehoiakim firſt ſubdued by Nebuchadnezzar, Rebelleth againſt him, to his own 
Ruine : Fehofachin his Sn is King in his ſtead, 1 6» Hts vil Reign : 
Feruſalem ſpoiled and made Captive by the King of Babylon, 8 -16. 
He maketh Zedckia' King ; he reigneth ill, unto the utter Deſtrution of 
Judah, 19- 20, | > 

N * his days « Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 6b 

came up c, and Jehoiakim became his ſervant. three 

years : then he turned and rebelled againft him 4. 

a 7. e. In Jehoiakims Reign, in the end of his third Year, Dan. x. r. 
or, the beginning of his Fourth, Jer, 25. 1. b The ſon of Nabopolaſar, 
who quite ſubdued the Afrian, firſt his Lord, and then his Com- 
petitor, and made himſelf Abſolute Monarch of all thoſe partsof the 
World. c To wit, againſt Fehoiakim, as the Friznd and Confederate 
of Pharaoh, whoſe Forces he had lately Conquered. Jer. 46. 2. 4 By 
the inſtigation of the Egyptian, who threatned him if he did not 
Rebel, and promiſed him hisutmoſt Affiſtance ifhe did. 

2 And the LOR D fenc againſt him bands of the 
Caldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the 
Moabites, and bands of the Children of Ammon e, and 
ſent them againft Judah to deſtroy it, * according to 


d Ty the word of the LORD, which he ſpake Þ by his ſer- 


vants the prophets. 
e For Neb:»chadnezzar's Army wis made up of ſeveral Nations, 


4 iand who were willing to Fight under the Banner of ſuch a Puiſſant and 


Victorious Emperor. 

3 Surely at the commandment of the LORD canie 
this upon Judah, to remove them out of his ſight, for 
* the ſins of Manaſleh f, according to all that he did. 

f Properly and dire&ly for their own ſins, and occaſionally far the 
ſins of Manaſſeh, which had never been charged upon thein, if they. 
had nos made them their own by their impenitency for them, and 
repetition of them. 

And alſo for * the innocent blood yg that he ſhed, 
( for he filled Jeruſalem with innocent blood ) F which 
the LORD would not pardon. | 

g To wit, of thoſe Prophets and Saints, who. either rzproved, or 
would not comply with his Idolatrous Worſhip. 

5 4 Now the reſt ofthe ads of Jehoiakim, and all 
that he did, are they not written in the book of che 
Chronicles of the kings of Judah ? 


6 SoJehoiakim ſlept with his fathers : and Jehojachin | 


þ his ſon reigned in his ftead. 

þ Called alſo Jechon:ah, 1 Chron. 3. 16. { as Jehoakim alſo was, by 
comparing this with Mar. 1.12. J and in way of coutempt, Choniah, 
fer. 22. 24. 

7 And the King of Egypt came not again any more 
out of his land 5: for * the King ofBabylon had taken 


' from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates, all 


thar pertained to the king of Egypt. 

i To wit, in this Kings days; nor until Zedekiahs time, Jer. 37. 6, 
4. noc to any purpoſe. He could not now come out to Protett the 
King of Judah, being ſcarce able ro detend his own Kingdom. 


8 © Jehoiachin was cighteenyears oid when ne began 
to reign &, and he reigned in Jeruſalem chree months 7: 
and his mothers name was Nehujhra, tre daughter of 


Elnathan of Jeruſalem. | 

k O5j. He was then bur E'ght years old, 2 Chron. 36. 9. Anſ. 1. Both 
are true ; in his Eighth Year he began to Reign wirh his Farner, 
who made him King with him, as divers other Kings of rae! and 
Falah had done in the like runes of trouble ; and in his Eighteenth 
Year he Reigned alone. 2. He is called a ſon of eight years when he 


began to reign, 2 Chron, 36. 9, becauſe this was the Eighth Year, not 


| Tranſlation ; or in ſome of them, 1 Ard ten days which are added, 
2 Chron 36. 9. But ſuch ſmall ſums are frequently omitred in great 


N G. S: Chip." XK1V:| 
ofhis Age, but of rhe $aby'oniſo Captivity,or Bondage ; under which, 1 
t both he and his Father had beea juſt ſo long ; for itbegan in the 
fourth Year of Jehojakim, as it is afhrmed, Jer. 25. 1+ and co':tinued 
all his Reign, which laſted Eleven Years, Chap. 23- 36. and ſo the 
hrſt Year of Jehojakim was preciſely the Eighth Year of that Capti» 
vity. And this is certain, That the. Years of Kings mentioned in 
Scripture, are not always accounted from the beginning of their 
Age, but from ſome other Remarkible Time or Thing : thus Saul 
when at Mans Eſtate, is called, the ſon of one year, 1 Sam, 8 of 
witch ſee my notes there ; and Ahaziah, ( whole Father lived only 
; Forty Years, 2 Chron.21.20. ) is called a ſon of forty and two years when 
| he began to reign,. 2 Chron, 22. 2+ becauſe that was the Forry and ſe- Wh: i 
cond Year of the Reign of Omr''s Family, as moſt think. And theres SILLY | 
fore it cannot ſeem ſtrange, if the Years of this King be compured, Why 
not from h13 Birth, but from the beginriing of ſo great and famous Wk"! 
a Change of the 7ewifh Aﬀairs, as this Captivity made ; this being the - (a 
' uſual way of the Romans and Greeks, and other more Ancient and WT | 
Eaſtern Nations, to compure the times from the great Changesand Ws; | 
Revolutions happening among them. And thar this was the praftice Wir | 
ofthe Jewsin the Compuration of theſe very times, is evident from ? 
the wiſe vf it in the Prophecy of Ezekicl, ch. 1. 2. which was the fiſth 
year of Jehojakims captivity ;- and Chap. 33. 21. in the Twelfth year of 
our Captivty; and Chap. 40. 1. in the Twenty fifth year of our Captivity. 
3. Toall this might be added, That ſome here acknowledge art 
Error of the Scr:be, and affirm, That in the firſt and beſt Copies, in 
2 C:ron, 36. 9. it*was not eizht, but eighteen; which they gather from 
hence, becauſe choſe two Ancient and Venerable Tranſlators, the 
Syriack and Arabick, read there, as it is here, was eighteen years old ; 
which they fay, they would never heve preſumed to do, it chey had 
; not ſo read it in thoſe Hebrew Copies, out of which they drew their 


Numbers. See on G:n. 14. 13. 1 Kings 16, 8. : 


9 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of the ja! 
LORD, according ts all chat his father had done. wn 
Io Cx*At fnat time the ſervants of Nebuchadnezzar * nn, x3 || 
king of Babylon came up againſt Jeruſalem», and che 7. | 
City T was beſieged. NE ORs | 
m Either, r. Becauſethe People had made Fehojach'n King without 
his conſent. Or, 2. Becauſe he had ſome notice,or art leaſt a ſaſpicion 
of his intentions to Rebel againſt him, and-to joyn with Egypt a- 
gainſt him, as Zedekiah his Succeſſor did But wharſyever was the” 
Second and Immediate cauſe of it, the chief cauſe was Gods Commands 
ment, or .the direQion of his Providence, as it was ſaid, v. 3. ; 
11 And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came 
againſt the city, and his ſervants did beſiege ir. 
. I2 And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went-out tothe 
king of Babylon», he, and his mother, and his ſervants, 
and his princes, and his || officers, and the king of Ba- yg or, 
bylon took him in the eighth year of his reign o. ', Eunuchs. 
2 i.e. Yielded up himſelf and the Ciry into his hands ; and' this 
by the Counſel of Jeremiah ,and to his own good. 0 5. e. Of N:buch. 
aanezzar's Reign ; as appears by comparing this with Chap. 25. 8, 
and becauſe Jehojachin Rergned not halfa Year, IE 
13 * And he carried our thence all the creaſures of * chap: 
the Houſe of the LORD, and the treaſures of the kings 20. 17+ 4 
houſe, and cur in pieces p all this veſſels of gold q which I 39. d. 
Solomon king of Iſrael had mide r in the temple of the 
LORD, as the LORD had ſaid. 


p Or rather, took away, as this word elſewhere ſignifies :. or cut of, 
ro wit, fromthe Temple. For why ſhould they cur in pieces thoſs 
Veſſels which might conveniently be carried away ? And that they 
were not cut in pieces, but reſerved whole, is manifeſt from Ezrs 1; 
7. and Dan. F. 2,3. q i-e. The moſt and choiceſt of them, by com= 
paring this with chap. 25. 14; 15- rSo heexpreſſcrh it, eitherFirſt, 
becaule theſe Veſle!s were made by the godly Kings of Judah,inſtead 
of thofe which Solomon made, and ſo they go by his Name ; as the 
Ship of the Argonauts was {tflI reputed rhe fame Ship, though ir 
was from time to time recruited with new marerials, until nothing 
of the old was lefr. Or, Secondly, Becauſe though the City and 
Temple had been rifled more than vnce borh by the Kings of Ezypr 
and J/aecl, and by the wicked Kings of Judah ; yet thete Golue 
Veſſels were preſerved from rhem, either by the care of the Prieſts, 
who hid them our of the way ; or by the clemency of the Conque= 
rors, and the reverence which they bare to ſuch ſacred Inſtruments 3 
or by the ſpecial providence of God, diſpoſing their hearrs to leave 
chem. Or, if they had. been taken away. by any of theſe Kings, 
they mighr afterwards be racovered by the intreaty, or at the Coſt 
of the godly Kings of Judah. 


14 And he carried away all Jeruſalem /; and * all « j,,, | 
the Princes, .and all the mighty men of valour, ever x; 
ten thouſand * captives, and all the craftſmen and 
ſmichs # : none remained ſave the pooreſt ſorc of the 
people of th  -.. 4: * 
{i. e. The Inhabitants of Jeruſalem 5; Hot ſimply a4, but the beſt I 
and moſt conſiderable part, as the following words explain and re- 
ſtrain ir. 5 Which are more patticularly reckoned up,: v. 16. where 
there are 75000 m:ghty men, and 4 rent fryer and choſe mes#- 
tioned v, 15. make up the other 2000, « Which might furniſh chem 
with new Arms, and thereby give him freſh rrouble. 
15 And * he carried awdy Jzhoiachin co Babylon, , 
and the King s mother, and the King's wives, and his. 


Heb, % 
came inte , 
Siege. 


|| officers, and the mighty of che land, 7ho/e carried Be # , Chr; 
into captivity, from Jeruſalem to Babylon. 35. 10. 
16 And all the men of might, even ſeven thonſerd, EC b. 2, 6. 


and craftſmen, and ſrmichs a thodfand, all :hat were ſtro: Lon. 


and apt for war, even thetathe king of Babylon broughe 
captive. to Babylon. 
17 4 And 


* the ki 


ng of Babylon made Martraniah « Jer 37.7. 
FP 3 


* tus 


: 
tl 


ll 


» 


i , 1——7. Nebuzar-Adan burneth Feruſalens and the Temple : breaketh 


* , Chr; 
$ 36.17. 


- Why 


EL 0-4 


Fap. XXV: S 
ſtead, and changed his 


*his fathers brother king in his 


ame to Zedekiahx. ; 
, x That be might admoniſh him of (what this Name ſignifies) the 
juftice of God,which had ſo ſeverely Puniſhed Jehojakim for his Rebel- 
lion; and would noleſs certainly overtake him,if he ſhould be guilty 
of the ſame Rebellion and Perfidiouſneſs, of which his Predeceſlor 


y ilty. 
es & * Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when 
| he began to reign, and he reigaed eleven years 1n Jeru- 
{alem : and his mothers _ was * Hamutal, the 
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. _ 

5 And he did that which was evil in the ſight of che 
LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done. 

20 For through the anger of the LORD ir came to 
paſs in Jeruſalem and Judah, until he had caſt them out 
from his preſence, that Zedekiah rebelled againſt the 

Sing of Babylon 7. 
_ he "<a If Sins were the true Cauſe why God gave them 


icked Kings, whom he ſuffer'd to do wickedly, that they might 
hed ws the a. deſerved,and threatned Puniſhments upon themſelves 


and their People. 


IChr.3.15. 


ES H 4 P. 33V; 
eruſalem is beſieged : Tedekiah taken : his Sons Nain : and hs eyes put out, 


" down the Wall of the City : carrieth the Remnant, except a few poor 
Labourers, into Captivity * and much treaſure, 8 17. Slayeth the 
Nobles at Riblah, 18 21. Gedpliah is made Governour of Judah : 
he is ſlain : the reſt flee into Egypt, 22——26. Evil-merodach advanceth 
Fehojakim in hu Court, 27 39. 


= itcame to paſs * in the ninth year of his reign, 
, in the tenth month, in the tenth dy of the month, 
Jer: 34- & that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came, he, and all 

his hoſt, againſt Jeruſalem a, and pitched againft it, 
* and they buile forts againſt it round about 5. 

s To chaſtiſe Zedekiah for his Rebellion and Perjury, 2 Chron 36. 13. 
bPartly to keep all Supplies of Men or Proviſions from entring into 
the City : And partly, that from thence they might ſhoot Darts, or 
Arrows, or Stones into the Ciry. :See Jer. 5 2, 4. Ezek. 4.2.& 17.17. 

2 And the city was beſieged unto the eleventh year 
of King Zedekiah. 

2 Andon the ninth day of the * fourth month c the 
52, . + +" Þ 4 

famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for 
the people of the land 2. 

c Which Word is eaſily underſtood, by comparing this and the 
firſt Verſe, and Jer. 39. 2: and 52. 6. where itis expreſſed. 4d 5. e. 
For the common ſort of People, who flock'd thither from all parts, 
upon the Approach of the Babylowzan Army ; but only for the great 

en and Soldiers. See of the grievouſneſs, ofthis Famine, Lam.. 
19. and Ezek. 5. 10, 12. 

4 <4 And thecity was broken up e, and all the men 
of war fled f by night, by the way of the gate, between 
two walls g, which is by the kings garden, ( now the 
Caldees were againſt the city round about ) and ths Zing 


h went the way coward the plain z. 

e By the Chaldeans, who broke and entred the Gate, Jer. 39. 3. 
FWhich word is fitly ſupplied out of the parallel place, Jer. 39 4. 
or out of the following Verb, went away. g Between the outward 
and inward Wallof the wo by aprivate way, having the advantage 
of the darkneſs of the night, and poſſibly of ſome Vault under the 
ground. þ This word alſo is neceſſarily to be underſtood ; partly,by 
its ſingular, which agrees not with zhe menof war; and pactly out of 
the next Verſe, where it is expreſſed, 7# Of Jericho, as it follows. 

5 Andthearmy of the Caldees purlued after the king, 
and overtook him in the plains of Jericho : and all his 
army was ſcattered from him. 

6 So they cook the king, and brought him up to the 
+ Heb. king of Babylon, to Riblah &, and they + gave judgment 
Gake judg- upon him Þ}, | 
ment with k Of which ſee above, 23. 33- and below v 21. where Nebuch- 
him. adnezzar ſtaid, that he might both ſupply the Beſiegers with more 

Men, and Military Proviſions, as their occaſions required ; and 
have an eye to Chaldea. to prevent or ſupreſs any Commotions 
which might happen there in the time of his abſence. 1 The Kings 
Officers appointed thereunto, examined his Cauſe, and paſſed the 
following Sentence againſt him, : 

7 And they ſlew the ſons Zedekiah before his eyes, 

+ Heb. and tf put outtheeyesof Zedekiah, and bound him with 
wade blind. fetters of braſs, and carried him to Babylon . 

» Thus two Prophecies werefulfilled, which ſeemed contrary one 
to the other, that be- ſhould go ro Babylon, Jer. 32. 5. and 34. 3. and 
that he ſhould never ſee Sabyios : Which ſeeming Contradi&tion, be- 
cauſe Zedekiahthe Falſe Prophet could not reconcile, he concluded 
both were falſe, and that Jeremy was a falſe Propher ; and it ſeems 
Zedekiah the King might ſtumble at this difficulty. 

8 © Andin the fifth month, onthe ſeventh day of the 
*SceChap. Month », ( which &.* the nineteenth year of King 
24. 12. & Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon ) came Nebuzar-adan 
\C5g 24. || captain of the guard, a ſervant of the king of Babylon, 
A by —_ unto Jeruſalem : ; 

xa = Queſt. How doth this agree with Jer- 52. 12! where he is ſaid 
to come thither on the tenth day ? Anſw. Either he came to Jeruſalem 
on the Seventh Day, and burnt the.Temple on the renth Day : Or 
this Sacred Writer ſpeaks of the day of his Departure from Kiblah 
towards Jeruſalem, and Jeremiah ſpeaks of his coming to Jeruſalem, 
which was abour three days Journey from Riblah. 


* Jer» 


N G S. Chap. Xxy,pF 
Kings houſe, and al} the houſes of Jeruſalem, and every 4 
reat mans houſe burnt he with fire. 
o Which had now ſtood about 450 Years. : 
10 Andall the army of the Caldees that werew:th the 
captain of the guard, brake down the walls of Jeruſalem 
round about, 
11 Now the reſt of the people that were left in the 
City p, and the Þ fugitives that fell away to the king of 


%er.4.3- 4 


Babylon, with the remnant of the multicude 4, Cid 7 ab! 
Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carry away. way, © 


p Whom neither the'Sword nor Famine had deſtroyed, who were 
832 Perſons, Fer. 52. 25- being Members and Traders of that City ; 
For it is likely that there were very many more ofthe Countrey Peo« 
ple who were fled thither, who were left with others of their Bre« 
thren to manure the Land, as it here follows. q To wit, of the 
Inhabitants of the Countrey. | 
12 But the captain of the guard left of | the poor of | 


the land, 7o be vine-dreſſers and husbanamen. bl Heb. tha 
13 And *the * pillars of braſs r that 2yerein the houſe + Chap, 


of the LORD, and the * baſes, and the * braſen ſea that 20. 115, | 
was in the houſe ofthe LORD, did the Caldees break inJ<r: *7. 
pieces, and carried the braſs of them to Babylon. > K 
r The Carriage whereof to Babylon was foretold, Jer. 27. 21, 22. = Fog 
14 And the pots, and the ſhovels /, and the ſnuf- *.1 Ki, 
fers, and the ſpoons, and all the veſſels of brafs where- 7. 27. * | 
with they miniſtred, took they away. "1 Kings | 
ſ Of theſe and the following words, ſee on Exod. 27. and 1 King: 7: Is 
6. and 7. x0d, 


15 And the fire-pans, and the bowls, and ſuch things Ic | 
as were of gold, in gold, and of ſilver, 3» ſilver, the 5o. ©” 
captain of the guard took away. 
16 Thetwo pillars, f one ſea, and the baſes which 
Solomon had made for the Houſe of che LORD, * the ,j.,,.;, 
braſs of all theſe Veſſels was without weight. * 1 Kings | 
17 * The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, 7-47, | 
and the chapiter upon it was braſs : and the height of ' us | 
che chapiter three cubits : and the wreathen-work, and 3 «ai 
pomegranates upon the chapiter round about, all of 
brafs : and like unto theſe had the ſecond pillar with 
wreathen work, 

18 4 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the 
chief prieſt ;, and * Zephaniah the ſecond prieſt «, and +7... ,y, 
the three keepers of the + door. 25. | 
£ The High-Prieſt, Grandſon of that Hilkiah, of whom ch. 22. 4. T Heb» | 
and Father ot Fehozaadack,who, as it ſeems, was taken with his Father ; *kre|bld, * | 
and when his Father was lain, v. 21. he was carried away to Babylon, 
aSit 15 nored, 1 Chron. 6. 13, 14. #u Who was the High-Prieſts De- 


puty, when he was hindred from the execution of his Office, ſee on 
Numb. 3. 32. 2 Sam.$8. 16, 2 Kings 23. 4. | 


19 And out of the city he took an ||officer, that was y 
{et over the men of war, and five men of them that ,,,,;, 
f were in the kings preſence x, which were found in + Heb. 
the city, and the || principal ſcribe of the hoſt, which /#» #* 
muſtered the people of the land, and threeſcore men of *#/* | 
the people of the land y that were found in the city. ſcrite of th 

xi,e, Of them who conſtantly attended upon the Kings Perſon, captain of 
ſee 1 Kings 10. 8. Eſth. 1. 14. Objet#. Theſe were ſeven, Jer. 52, 25+ the lf. 
Anſ. Either five were firſt taken, and two after them : Or two of 
the ſeven were of an inferiour rank, who therefore are here omit- 
ted. » Who had been moſt forward or aftive in the Rebellion. 

29 And .Nebuzar-adan captain of the guard, took 
theſe, and brought chem to che King of Babylon, to 
Riblah. 

21 And the King of Babylon ſmote them, and ſlew 
them at R3blah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was 
carried away out of their land. | 

22 Q * And as for the people that remained in the * Jer, a {| 
land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 5,9 Þ. 
had left, even over them he made Gedaliah the ſon of _ 
Ahikam, the ſon of Shaphan z, ruler. 


z A righteous and good Man, and a Friend to the Prophet 7e- 
remiah, Jer, 26. 24. | 


23 And when all the* captains of the armies a, they 
and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made 
Gedaliah governour, there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 
?ven Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, and Johanan the 
ſon of Careah, and Seraiah the ſon of Tanhumeth the 
Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the ſon of a Maackhathite, 
they, and theic men. 

a Whicheſcaped away when Zedekiah was taken. See above, v. 4, 5- 

24 And Gedaliah ſware to them, and totheirmen 6, 
and ſaid unto them, Fear not to be ths ſervants of the 
Caldees: dwell in the land, and ſerve the king of Ba- 
bylon, and it ſhall be well with you. 

b Aſſured them by his Promiſe and Oath, that they doing whathe 
required, ſhould be kepr from the Evils which they fearcd. This 
he might ſafely ſwear, becauſe he had nor only the King of B-bylov's 


Promiſe and Iatereſt too, but alſo Gods Promiſe for their Indem« 
nity, deliver'd by Ferewiah. 


25 But ic came to paſs in the ſeventh month, that 
Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaaniah, the ſon of Eliſhama, of +4! 
the ſeed | royal c, came, and cen men d with him, and $194" 


— 


Dao 


T Heb, 


41] 4. 
6, & 


| » 9. 


| th in 
pies. © 


a 


} 


* Tere 40. 


(earo, 


Wag rv 


I 
9 And he burnt the Houls of ths LORD o, and the 


Fi 


* {qy0t2 


| TBS L CY 
f 47. 2.* fmote G2daliah, that he died, and the Jews and the 
 _ : Caldees that were with him at Mizpah. _ 

- And therefore moved with Envy to ſee ſomean a Perſon advan- 
ced into their place. See this Hiſtory more fuily deſcribed, Jer.41. 
4 To wit, Ten Captains or. Otficers, and under each of them many 
Soldiers, otherwiſe the Atrempt was Tidiculous. —  _, ora 

26 And all the people both ſmall and great, and the 
{r43-4- captains of che armies aroſe, and * came to Egypt : for 
they were afraid of the Caldees. 

27 © And ir came to paſs in the ſeven and thirtieth 
; 'ear ofthe captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the 
twelfth month, on the ſeven and twentieth day e of the 
month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the 
year that he began” to reign, did lift up the head of 
Jehoiachin king of Judah out of priſon. 


of his life. 


N 1c LS Chap. | 


eOr, on the 25th gay, as it is Jer. 52.32. for then the Decree was | [ 
made, which was executed upon the 27th day. - Tt Heb. if 

28 And he ſpake # kindly to him, and ſet his throne £9 *#ng b4 4 
above . the throne of the kings that were with him in —_ qi 
Babylon f. = j > 35 EN [I 

flt ſeems though the Power'of theſe Kings was taken away, yet | 
ſome Honour and ReipeCt was given to them, even in the place of 
their Captivity, and to Jehorachin more than to any of the reſt. 

29 And changed his priſon-garments : and he did eat 
bread continually before him yg all the days of his life. 

$ i.e. In his Preſence, and at his Table, the following Allowance 
being given to him for the maintenance of his Family and Royal 
Dignity. Compare 2 Sam. g..10. + png: ins 

39 And his allowance was a continual allowance given 
him of che king, a daily rate for every day, all the days 


= ——_——_—_E= —_— 


+ LL CHEERS 


Bs this (ame Writer 

ngs . . . 

| Ieords uſed in the place now quoted,, ond in the beginning 
93 ſome other Paſſages, 


F added by ſome other Prophets ; 
I Boeks is, to compleat the Hiſtory 
in the Books of Samuel and Kings, an ro 
alogies : 
b, 
ſes, | Family, of which he was to be born. 
ngs 
ings © , | 
» 3 And whereas many things 1n theſe Genealogies to us are obſcure 
2.21 
moſt Importance. 
CHAPEL 
29, | Adam's Line to Noah, 1———4. Noah's Poſterity by Japheth, gn, By 
Ham, 8 16. By Shem to Abraham, 17 27. Hu Poſterity: by 
= I Tſbmael, 28 31 By Keturah ; and Iſaac, 32———34. His Poſterity ; 
Ty 


by Eſau : the Kings and Dukes of Edom, 35 —— 54. 


DAM, * Sheth «, Enoſh, 
| mY a i. 8. Adambegat Sheth: And fo in the following 
19, Particulars. For brevity ſake he only mentions their 


Yr Names ; but the reſt is eaſily underſtood out of the 


WT former Books, and from rhe nature of the thing; and 

Ich, from ſome following Paſſages where the Senic is compleated. 

the 2 Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered, 

xs face, | 3 Henoch, Methuſhelah, Lamech, 

Mt 4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth 56. 

he oft b Formerly he mentions only one Son,but here he names and treats 

tain of of Noai/'s three Sons, partly becaule they were all the Founders of 

of. the New World ; and partly becauſe the Accompliſhmeant of Noah's 
Famous Prophecy, Gen. g. 25, 26, 27. could not otherwiſe appear, 
bur by the account of their ſeveral Poſteriries. 

a.to, 5 * The ſons of Japheth z Gomer, and Magog, and 


Madai, and Javin, and Tubal, and Meihech, and Tiras. 
6 And the ſons of Gomer ; Aſhchenaz, and || Rip- 
ky, hath e, and Togarmah. | 
tim c Or, Dtphath: For thoſe two Hebrew Letters which anſwer to 
R(ipies, our D and R, being very like, are oft confounded and exchanged, 
| as V. 7.41, 46, 50. 
Jer. 7 And the ſons of Javan ; Eliſbah, and Tarſhiſh, 
9, ” Kittim, and |} Dodanim. 
an 3 The ſons of Ham ; Cuſh, and Mizraim, Put, and 
7, Canaan, | | 
9 And the fons of Cuſh ; Sheba, and Havilah, and 
Sabta, and Raama, and Sabtecha : and the ſons of Raa- 
mah ; Sheba and Dedan. 
10 And Cuſh* begatNimrod : he began tobe mighty 
upon the earth. 
11 And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and 
Lehabim, and Naphruhim, 
12 And Pathruſim, and Caſluim, ( of whom came the 
{Philiſtines d, ) and * Caphthorim. 
da Of which ſcc the Notes on Gen. 10. 14. 
13 And* Canaan begar Zidon his tirſt-born, and Heth, 


Jer 4% 
. an10, 


} 


Vt. 
by 
Sel G; aſhice, | 
e The Pcople ſo called Sothe Names which follow until v. 17. 
are not the Names of particular Perſons, but of People or Nations. 
And all theſe deſcended from Canaan, chough ſome of them were 
afterwards extinC or confounded with others of thei Brethren by 
Cohabitation or mutual Mairiages. whereby they lott their Names : 


Which is the Reaton why they are mentioned, at leaſt under theſe 
; ; 2mes. . : 
fHcb 4 15 Andthe Hivice, and che Archite, and the Simire, | 
King 15 And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the 
Hamathite, 


Heſe Books of the Chronicles are not the ſame which are ſo called 1 Kings I4. 19. and elſewhere, ( becauſe ſome Paſcages * 
ſaid to be there mentioned, ave not found here) but other Rooks, and written by ether Perſons, and for other Ends. Yet 
took out of thoſe Books ſuch Hiſtorical Paſſages as were mot uſeful or neceſſary, They were written 
after the Babyloniſh Captivity, as appears from 2 Chron. 36. 20, Oc. by Ezra, as may be gathered not only from the ſame 
d of that Book which goeth under the Name of Ezra, but alſo from 
which we may obſerve hereafter, and from the ExatIneſs and Diligence here uſed in making Catal-gues 
1 of Perſons and Families, which alſo is uſed in the Book of Ezra. If one or two Paſſages ſeem to be of a later Date, thoſe were 
| there being ſome few ſuch Additional Paſſages in the Books of Moles. The chief Deſign of theſs 
of the Kings cf Judah, and to gather up ths Fragments of Sacred Hiftory, which were omitted 
explain ſome Paſſages there mentioned, aid to give ay exatt Account of the Gene- 
7hich ( though ignerant or inconſiderate Perſons may think trivial and uſeleſs ) was a Work of great Neceſſity, to 
prelerve the Diftinttion of the Tribes and Families ; that ſo it might appear that Chrifs came of that Nation, and Tribe, and 
And' this Account having been hithert) negle&ted, is moſt ſeaſonably mentioned in the(e 
Books, becauſe this was to be in a manner the laFt part of the Sacred and Canonical Hiſtory of the Old Teftament, and therefore 
the fitteſt place to Record thoſe Genealogies, upon which the Tiuth and Authority of the New TeiHtament in ſome ſort depends. 


Perſons here named, were known to them by thoſe wer particular and exact Genealcgies, which they kept in their ſeveral Families 
and in publick Regiſters ; from whence this Sacred Pcu-man, bythe Diredtjon of God 5s Spirit, took thoſe Things which were of 


14 The Jebulire e alſo, and the Amorice, and the. 


NICLES 


and doubiful, they were not ſo tothe Hebrews ; and all the 


17 The ſons of * Shemf; Elam, and Aſhur, and 
Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and 
Gether, aad || Meſhech. ;-; > 

f Either the Name of Sons is ſo taken here as to include Grandſons, || Or, 


who are called Sons, Gen, 29. 5. 2 Sam. 1g. 24. Or, - theſe 'Vords, Maſb- 
The Children. of Aram, are underſtood and inſerted before Uz, out Gen. to, 
of Gen, 10. 23. where they are expreſſed. | © 


23+ 
18 And Arphaxad begac Shelah g, and Shelah begat 
Eben. | | 
g Either Immediately, or Mediately by his Son Cainan, who is 
expreſſed, Luke 3. 35. of which, God afliſting, I ſhall ſpeak in its 
proper place. 


19 And unto Eber were born two ſons : thename of | 
the one was || Peleg, ( becauſe in his days the eartt was | That {s, 
divided þ, ) and his brothers namie was Joktan. diviſion. 

hIn their Languages and Habitations : Of which ſee Gen. 11. 7.. 

20 And * Joktan begat Almedad, and Sheleph, and *qe,. 
Hazarmaveth, and Jerah. I 

21 Hadoram alſo, and Uzal, and Diklah, 

22 And Ebal z, and Abimael, and Sheba, 

# Or, Obal, as it is Gen. lo. 28. Such proper Names being oft 


differently written, according to the difference of Times, and 
People, and Writers. 


23 And Ophir. and Havilab, and fobab : all theſs 
were the {ons Joktan. 
24 * Shem, Arphaxad &, Shelah, | 2 


0 4 
k Having given a brief and general account of the Original of Gen. re? 
the World and the Peaple in it, he now ;cturns to a more large 


* Gen. 18. ||} 
22» & IH; 


| 
|| 
| 
[1M 
l 


1039 
26, 


and particular Account of the Genealogy of Shem, from whom the wo ke 3. 

Jews were deſcended. . k] Gen cad 
25 * Eber, Peleg, Ren, . RE 
26 Serug, Nahor, Terah, *. Gen. 17, 
27 * Abram, the ſame is Abraham; | x I] 


28 The ſons of Abraham ; * Iſaac, and * Iſhmael; +, 5. 
29 Thele are their generations : The * firft-born of *. Gene 16; 
Iſhmael, Nebajoth: then Kedar,and Adbeel,and Mibſam, 1*:..15+ 


20 Miſhma, and Dumah, Maſſa, ||Hadad, and Tema, 13. - moo 
31 Jetur, Naphiſh, and Kedemah. Theſe are the || Or, 
ſons of Iſhmael. Hadar, , 


32 Now * che ſons of Keturah, Abraham's concu- &**+ *5- 
bine : ſhe bare Zimran, and Jokſhan, and Medan, and Coat 
Midian, and iſhbak, and Shuah. And the fons of Jok- x, 2. 
ſhan ; Sheba, and Dedan. | 
. 33 Andcheſons of Midian ; Ephah, and Epher, and 
Henoch, and Abida; and Eldaah. Al theſe are the fons 
of Keturah.. OE, * Gen: £1; 
34 And* Abraham begat Tfaac. - * The ſons of Tfaac ; +; 
Efau, and Iſrael. - * Gen. 25. 


35. The fons of ® Fſau ; Eli»haz, Reue), and Jeri , Ty 36, 


{and Jaalam, and Korah. 
| 


+..9, 2. 
3- © 4 36 The* 


ap IL 
r, Ze- 


|. Gen» 
p27» 


26 The ſons of Eliphaz ; Teman, and Omar, ||Ze- 
hi. and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna /, and Amalek. 

] There is another Timna, the Concubine of Eliphaz. Gen. 36. 12. 

but this was one of his ſons, though called by the iame name 3 there 

betng ſome Names common both to Men and Women 1n the Hebrew 


Md in other Languages. 
: th The ſons of Reuel ; Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, 


and Mizzah. 
23 And the ſons of Seir »» ; Lotan, and Shobal, and 


'Zibeon, and Anah, and Diſhon, and Ezer, and Diſhan. 
1m One of another Nation, Prince of the Horims ; whoſe Genealogy 

55 here deſcribed, becauſe of that affiniry which was contrated be- 
tween his and Eſau's Poſterity ; and thoſe who were not united and 
| incorporated with them, were deſtroyed by them. See Deut. 2. 12: 
Or,H- 29 And the ſonsof Lotan ; Hori, and || Homam : and 


n. Gen. -o:; 
F2- 22 Timna was Lotans fiſter. 
=_ 40 Theſons of Shobal ; || Alian, and Manahath, and 


| Or, 4- . 
| on, Gen. Ebel, || Shephi, and Oaam. And the ſons of Zibeon ; 


6 23 Ajah, and Anah. 
| Ina - The ſons of Anak ; * Diſhon. And the ſons of 
ls. 23. * Diſhon, || Amram, and Eſhban, and Ithram,and Cheran. 


42 The ſonsof Ezer ; Bilhan, and Zavan, and ||Jakan. 
The ſons of Diſhan ; Uz, and Aran. : : 

43 Now theſe are the * Kings that reigned in tlie 
land of Edom », before any King reigned over the 
children of Iſrael ; Bela the ſon of Beor : and the name 
of his city was Dinhabah. | 

» Of this and the following Verſes ſee on Gen. 36. 31, ©c. when'e 

this whole Relation is taken. 


44 And when Bela was dead, Jobab theſon of Zerah 
of Bozrah reigned in his ſtead. 

45 And when Jobab was dead, Huſham of the land 
of the Temanite, reigned in his ſtead. 
: 46 And when Huſham was dead, Hadad the ſon of 
| Bedad (which ſmote Midian in the field of Moab) reigned 
þ in his ſtead: and the name of his city was Avith. 
| 47 And when Hadad was dead, Samlah, of Maſrekah 
reigned in his ſtead. 

48 * And when Samlah was dead, Shahul of Rehoboth 
by the river, reigned in his ſtead. 

49 And when Shahul was dead, Baal-hanan the ſon 
of Achbor reigned in his ſtead. 
| - Fo Andwhen Baal-hanan was dead, || Hadad reigned 
| _ Gen ;n his ſtead : and the name of his city was || Pai : and 
ſ ap MY his wives name as Mehetabel the daughter of Matred, 
{ Gen. 36. the daughter of Mezahab. 
L 2 51 Hadad died alſo. And the * Dukes of Edom 
26. = were, Duke Timna, Duke Aliah, Duke Jetheth. 
52 Duke Aholibamah, Duke Elah, Duke Pinon, 

Duke Kenaz, Duke Teman, Duke Mibzar. 

54 Duke Magdiel, Duke Iram. Theſe are the Dukes 


of Edom, | 
$7 > 2 vÞK 
The Sins of Iſrael : Of Judah by Tamar : The Children of Jeſſe, 1——17. 


| Kd 
emaan. 
-M 36, 


0* Gen. 
ft 36. 37« 


if] Or, Ha- 


Of Caleb the Son of H-zron: Of him by the Daughter of Machir, 18 2 4. 
And Jerahmeel, 25 13. Of Sheſjban, 34 41. Another 
Branch of Caleb's Pofterity, 42.——49 Of Caleb the Son of Hur, 
FO »L 


Heſe are the ſons of || Iſrael ; * Reuben, Simeon, 


"O Levi, and Judah, Ifſfachar, and Zebulun, 
* Gene2g- 2 Dan, Joſeph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad anc 
Z 2» & X4 T. : 


$: & 35-” 2 The ſons of * Judah @, Er, and Onan, and Shelah : 
uo, ba oo whichthree were born unto him of the daughter of * Shua 
Fen 38. the Canaaniteſs. And Er the firſt-born of Judah, was 
3-& 46. evil in the ſight of the LORD, and he flew him. 
= -* s Whom he puts firſt, becaule the beſt part of the right of the 
*.Gen: Firft-born, to wir, the Dominion, was conferred upon him, Gen. 49. 
38. 2. $. and becauſe rhe Meffiah was to come out of his Loyns. 

Gen. And * Tamar his daughter in law, bare him 
"- Ko o* Pharez, and Zerah. All the ſons of Judah were five. 


'*Ruth a. F The ſons of * Pharez ; Hezron, and Hamul. 
. 28. 6 And the ſons of Zerah ; ||Zimri, * and Ethan, and 
or , * Heman, and Calcol, and|| Dara : five ofthem-in all. 
ai. bIf theſe be the ſame who are mentioned as the ſons of Macho], 
Fx wo x Kings 4. 31. Either the ſame Man had two Names, Zerah and 
TINS Machol, as was uſual among the Hebrews : or, one of theſe was their 
Or, immediate Father, and the other their Grandfather. 
Angra 7, Andthe ſons of Carmi c : |] Achar 4, the troubler 
} Or, of Iſrael, who tranſgreſſed in the thing * accurſed. 
Achan. c Who is here mentioned, becauſe he was the Son of Zimri, who 
* Joſh.6. is alio called Zabdi, Joſ. 7. rt. & Called Achan, Joſ. 7. 1. and here 


28. & 7.. 1. Achar, with alittle variation for greater ſignificancy : For Achar 
ſignifies a Troubler. 


Oe = 8 And the ſons of Fthan 3 Azariah. 

*"/y 9 The ſonsalſo of Hezron that were born unto him ; 
. L Or, Ca- Jerahmeel, and || Ram, and || Chelubai. 

Verſe * 10 And Ram * begar Aminadab, and aminadab 

* Ruth , begat Nahſhon. prince of the children of Judah. 

19. Mat, 11 And Nahſhon begatSalma, and Salma begat Boaz. 

L. 4, 


LL CH RONICEHISE S$ 


13 * And Jeſſe begat his firſt-bora Eliab e, 
Abinadab the ſecond, and || Shimma the third, 
e Called alſo Elihu, 1 Chron. 27+ 18. unlefs that was another 1 Or 
perſon, and the word Brother be taken more largely for a Kinſman, Shanna; 
as it is frequently uſed. : 1 Sam " 
14 Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 4 
15 Ozem the ſixth, David the ſeventh f: 
f For though he had eight Sons, 1 Sam. 16. 10. one of them either 
died preſently after that time, or is negleRed for ſome reaſon now 
unknown, as others are. See the Nores on Mat. r. 8, c, 
16 Whoſe ſifters were Zerujah, and Abigail. Anq 
* the ſons of Zerujah ; Abiſhai, and Joab, and Aſhe], 
as three. 
17 And Abigail bare Amaſa, and thefather of Amaſa 


Jether the Iſhmeelite g. 

Z By Birth or Habitation, but by profeſſion an Iſraelire, 2 $2am, 

17. 25, Where ſee my Notes. 

18 And Caleb the ſon of Hezron þ + begat children + 11.1, 
f Azubah hb wife, and of Jerioth : her ſons 5 oy 
of Azubal hz wife, an erioth : her fons z are theſe, 2 with 
Jeſher, and Shobab, and Ardon. child Azys 
h Not that Caleb, Num. 13. 6. for he was the Son of Jephunneh, of dal. 
whom he ſpeaks Ch. 4. 15. but another Caleb. 7 z.e. The ſons, either 

1. of Jerioch, ſhe being laſt mentioned ; or, rather 2. of Azubah 

who is by way of diſtinQtion called his Wife, when Jerioth probably 

was only his Concubine, and, as it may ſeem, barren: and therefore 

upon Azubah's death he married another Wife, v. 19, And thoſe 

other Sons of this Galeb mentioned below, v. 42. are his Sons by ſome 

other Wite diſtin& from all theſe. 

19 And when Azubah was dead, Caleb took 
him Ephrath, which bare him Hur. | 

20 And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat * Bezaleel. 
21 And afterward Hezron went in &to the daughter Sec 
of * Machir, the father of Gilead /, whom he + married * Nun. 
7 When he was » threeſcore years old, and ſhe bare him 27-1. 
Segub. f Heb; 
k i.e. Lay with her. as that Phraſe is commonly uſed, as Gey. 4.8. 
and6. 4. {! Ota man fo called. Or, if G:lead be the Name of that 
known Couutrey, Father is put for Head or Governour, as it isuſed, 
1 Sam. 24 11. 2 Kings 5. 13-and 16.7. 1/3. 22.27. Or, for Prote&our, 
or Curator, as Father is uſed Job 29-16 Jer. 2.27. Lam.5.3. This 
Man being a Man of noted Valour, and the great Champion in 
thoſe Parts. m2 Heb. And he took her, to wit, to wife, Or, After he 
had taken her : for fe the Particle vau is uſed, as hath been formerly 
noted. n Heb. And he was, to wit, when he went inunto her, Or, 
when he married her. 

22 And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty 
Cities in the land of Gilead 0. 

o Which he had, though he was of the Tribe of Judah, as here we 
ſce, becauſe he married a Daughter of Manaſſeh, Num, 26. 29. whence 
he is Called a Son of Manaſſeh, Num. 32.41. Deut. 3- 14. And becauſe, 
being a Man of great Courage, he joined himſelf with that half 

Tribe in ſubduing Gilead, wherein he ated ſo valiantly and Succeſs- 
fully,chat he had 23 Cities or great Towns given to him to polleſs 

or diſpole ot : or, rather to Rule over them, and have ſome advantage 

from them ; As a King is faidro have his Kingdom, although he 

hath nor the propriety of all the Lands and Houſes in ir. 

23 * Aid he cook p Geſhur and Aram q, with the * Nun; 
rowns of Jair r, from them s, wich Kenath ?, and the 32. 4r_ 
towns thereof, even chreeſcore cities : all theſe belonged Dent 314 
to theſons of Machir «, the father of Giiead. IE 

p Or, For he had taken. So this is the Reaſon why he had ſo great Y 

a Territory and Juriſdittion givento him. 9 Two Cities or great 
Townsſo called. » 7. e. With thoſe 24 Cities which he is faid to have, 
v. 22, 57,e. from the former Inhabitants,which is eaſily underſtood. 
t Which was taken by Nobah, one of Jairs Commanders ſent by 
him.to take it, as may be gathered from Num. 3 2. 41, 42. u Partly 
:o his own Sons, and partly to his Son-in-law Jair, who by reaſon 
of that dear Aﬀethon which was betwixt them, and his forſaking 
lis own Tribe and Kindred ro fight for them and to dwell with 
chem, 1s here reckoned as his own Son. 


24 And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephra- 
tah x, then Abiah Hezrons wife bare bim Aſhur the 
facher of Tekoa z. 

x A place then ſo called by a ConjunQien of the Names of the Man 
and his Wife ; afterwards tuppoſed to be called Bethlehem-Ephratah- 
Others tranſlate rhe words thus, When Caleb took Ephratah. So it 
is an Ellipfis of the Verb which is here to be underſtood our of 
wv. 19. where it is expretled, y Afﬀeer the fathers death. « A known 
place, 2 Sam, 14. 2, 4. Fer. 6. 1. Amos 1. 1. Whoſe Father he is called, 
becauſe he was either the Progenitour of the People inhabiting there: 
Or, their Prince and Ruler : Or, the Builder of the City, 

25 And the ſons of Jerahmeel the firſt-born of Hez- 
ron were, Ram the firlt-born, and Bunah, and Oren, 
and Ozem, and Ahijah a. 

a Or, of ( the prefix, mem being oft underſtood ) 4%ijah, his 
Wife ſo called; as may ſeem probable from rhe next Verſe, where 
he mentions another Wife. 


26 Jerahmeel had alſo another wife whoſe name was 
Atarah, ſhe was the mother of Onam. 

27 And the ſons of Ram the firſt-born of Jerahmee! 
were Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker, 

28 And the ſons of Onam were, Shammai, and Jada. 
And the ſons of Shammai ; Nadab, and Abiſhur. 

29 And the name of the wife of Abiſhur was Abihail, 
and ſhe bare him Ahban, and Molid. 

39 And the ſons of Nadab, Scled, and Appaim: but 
Seled gligd without children, 


* 2 Sam; 
2. 18, 


unto 


f00ks 


12 And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begart Jelle, 


| ZI And 


2 ate ved ad. ad 


I'Chap 
1:4L 


PI TT I AETeE 


I']oh. 


(5:17, 


tt, 


ZVUs 


ap. II. 


| L CHER 
21 And the ſons þ of Appaim ; Iſhi. And the ſons 


Keever: Iſhi ; Sheſhan. And * the children of Sheſhan ; Ahlai. 


4, 3" 


| ' Chap: 


1: 4L, 


J'Joh. 


(5:17, 


Or, 
ab, 


"MMnu- 
(th. 


0r.4ta. 
ts; or, 
Tp 

- ns of 
ve Houſe 
i Joab, 


bad 


Jabez ||; the Tirachires, che Shimeathites, and Sucha- 


E + the father of the houſe of * Rechab. 


b An Exoprefiion ofc uſed both afrerwards in this Verſe,and elſe- 


where, and in prophane Authors roo, where there is but one Son. 
Ic is an Enailage of the number, which is frequent in the Hebrew. 


32 And che ſons of Jada the brother of Shammai ; Je- 


ther, and Jonathan: and Jether died without children, 


22 And the fons of Jonathan ; Peleth, and Zaza. 


Theſe were the ſons of Jerahmeel. 


24 Now Sheſhan had no ſons c, but daughters : and 


Sheſhan had a ſervant an Egyptian, whoſe name was 
Jarha. 


c To wit, living when he died, his Son 4blai, v: 31: dying be- 
fore him : unlels Ahlai was the Name of a Daughter. 

25 And Sheſhan gave his daughter to Jarha his Ser- 
vant to wife, and the bare him Arttai. 

26 And Artai begat Nathan,and Nathan begat * Za- 


37 And Zabad begat Ephlal,and Ephlal begat Obed, 

38 And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu begac Azariah, 

39 And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begar Ele-1 
aſah. 

40 And Eleaſah begat Siſamai, and Siſamai begat 
Shallum, ; 

41 And Shallum begat Jekamizh, and Jekamiah be- 
gat Eliſhama. 

42 Now the ſons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel d 
were,Melha his firſt-born,which was the father of Ziphe: 
and the ſons of Mareſhah the farher of Hebron f. 


4 To wit, of that Caleb mentioned v.18.as appears by comparing 
that Verſe with vi 25+ And theſe are his Sons by another and his 
third Wife. See on v: 18. e The Name either ofa Man : or of a 
Place, of which ſee Joſ. 15: 24, 55. And then Father is ro be under- 
ſtood here as v.23,and 24. f Not the place fo called, bur a Man ; 
as 15 evident becauſe his Sons here follow. 

43 And the ſons of Hebron ; Korah, and Tappuah, 
and Rekem, and Shema. 

44 And Shema.begat Raham the father of Jorkoam: 
and Rekem begat Shammat. 

45 And the ſon of Shammai was Moan : and Moan 
was the father of Beth-zur g. 

Zg A Place in Judah, Joſh;:15.58. See on w: 23/ 

46 And Ephah Calebs concubine bare Haran, 
Moza, and Gazez : and Haran begat Gazez. 

47 And the ſons of Jahdai h ; Regem, and Jotham, 
and Geſhan, and Pelet, and Ephah,and Shaaph. 

þ The Son of Gazez laſt mentioned : which is implied becauſe 
he follows next after him in the Genealogy. Or, The Sons of 
Moza : whoſe name might be changed into Jahaai for ſome reaſon 
now unknown. 

48 Maachch Calebs Concubine bare Sheber and Tir- 
hanahs. 

49 She bare alſo Shaaph the father of Madmannah z, 
Shevah the father of Machbenah,and the father of Gi- 


and 


| bea: and che daughter of Caleb was * Achſah. 


; This, and divers other following Names are the Names of 
Places in Judah, and Father is meant as v. 32, 2 


+ 
5o Theſe were the ſons of Caleb the ſon of Hur,the 
firtt-born of Ephratah ; Shobal che father of Kirjath- 
jearim. 


51 Salma the father of Beth-lehem &,Hareph the "Ss. 


ther of Beth-gader /. 

k To wit, in part: For Boaz deſcended from another $2/men, who 
was the Son of Naaſſan, v. uu. 4 Called alſo, Panuet the fatyer of 
Geaor, chap: 4: 4. 


52 And Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim,had ſons; 


[| Haroeh m,and || half of the Manahethices. 


Pharhice, || Ataroth s, the houſe of Joab c, and half of 
the Manahethites «, the Zorites x, 

q Of that Salma mentioned, wv. 51+. 7 i.e. The inhabitants of 
Bethlehem. s The name of a Perſon, or People. ; The Proge- 
nitors of Joab's Family. « The other half being mentioned w. 52. 
x For, to wit, the Zorite. 

55 And the families of the Scribes y which dwelt at 
thites. Theſe are the * Kenices that came of Hemath 


y Either Civil, who were Publick Notaries, who wrote and ſigned 
Legal Inſtruments : or Eccleſiaſtical. And thele were cither Lewires, ' 


or S/meonites,or rather Kenites,and are here mentioned nor as if they * 


were of the Tribe of Judz, bur becauſe they dwelt among them, 
and probably were allied ro them by Marriages,and fo in a manner 
Incorporated with them. = Or, rather, dweis ; Heb. Were Dwell.rs, 


| cer of Talmai King of Geſhur : the fourth, Adonijah the Uh" k 


nan, the ſecorid || Jehoiakim, the third [| Zedekiah, | OZ 
. the fourth Shallum b. Uzzrgh, 


{ ftrapge if he have the Name of Sor with it. See the Notes on Lk. 3. 


N I Cc LM. Chap. 1 

theſe were Deſcendanrs of Judah, which they were not ; bur this "i! 
Tranflation only ſignifies their Cohabiration with rhem,for w hich 
cauſe they are here named with them. || A place in Jadah,io named 
probably from that Famous FJabez of that Tribe, chap.4.9, + Who 
dwelr in Judah, Judg. 1. 11. Thus they are diltinguith'd from the 
other Branch of the Kenitcr, who dwelt in the Tribe of Manaſſe/, 


Juds. 4+ 11, 
ASP. it 

The Sos of David, 1——=9g, His Line t0 Z:dekiah, io 

ceſſirs of Jeconia, 17 24+ 
TOw theſe were che ſons of David, which were WAL 
born unto him in Hebron : che tirſt-born * Am- *2 Sami! 
non, of Ahinoam the * Jezreeliceſs « : che ſecond || Da- 3: 2: Ml 
nie], of Abigail che Carmeliteſs 6 : | * Joſh: | 
4 Of that Jezree! in Judah, Joſ. 15- 56. not of that in Manaſh Jof. 15: 56, WT 
17.16. 6 So called, becauſe ſhe was the Wife of Nabal who wet Or, A 6 |! 
in Carmel, 1 Sam, 25. 2. which was in Judah, Joſ. r5. 55. Chileah, || | 


2 The third, AblaJom the-ſon of Maachah,the daugh- aSam:J: | 


| 
} : 418 
n a0 * 


:6. rhe$S: 


lon of Haggith : = h BS on 
2 The titch, Shephatiah of Abital . the ſixth, Ithream 11 6k 
by * Eglah his wife c. 4 * 2 Sans JA 

c Which Title belongs either to all the foregoing Women, or 3: 5. f 
rather,as the ſingular numberſhewerh,ro £z/3b only,latt mentioned : 
who poſſibly may be ſo called becauſe the was hs firft, and there- 
fore moſt proper, Wife, though her ſon was born afrec all the reſt 
before-mentioned,and therefore both ſhe and her Son are pur in the 
lixth Place, the Wives being here named only for the Sons ſakes. 
See More on 2 Sam. 3.5, ; : 

4 Theje lix were born unto him in Hebron,and * there + 
he reigned ſeven years and fix moneths : and * in Jeru- 2: 
{alem he reigned thirty and three years. ? 

5 * And theſe were born unto him in Jeruſalem, 5% . Wl 
[|| Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and * Solomon, 5: rs: 
four 4, of || Bathibua the daughter of | Ammiel e : * 2 Sam: 

d All Davids Children by her,as the Text politively affirr1s : and 12: 24- a 
therefore Solomon is called her only Son, Prov. 4. 3- becauſe ſhe loved || Or, | 
him as if he had been ſo. e Called alſo Elam, 2 Sam: 15. See Shammus,, 

ON 2 Sam. 14: 3. | 
6 Ibhar, alſo, and || Eliſhama, and Elipheler f, 

f And he had rwo other ſons called by the ſame Names,v.$.but 
they were by differing Wives: and probably they were then diſtin- 
guithed by ſome additional Clauſe or Title, which is here omitred, ©? 
becauſe ir was now needleſs for us to know it : Or, the two firſt *** 
weredead before the two ſecond were born,& therefore rhe Names 
of the decealed were given to theſe ro preſerve their Memory. 

7 And Nogah, and Nepheg, ard Japhia, - * "ul 
8 And Elithama, and || Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine g. zeel;ods, i 

g Ovj. There are bur ſeven mentioned, 2 Sam. 5. 14, &c. Anſ. Ch: 14.7 
T'wo of them are omitred there, becauſe they died very early,or * 2 Sam: A | 
were Inglorious,or died without iſſue: And here we have all the ſens 13: 1; I 
of David as it here follows v.9g. which Clauſe is not added 2 Sem.s. * 1 Kings | 

9 Theſe were all the ſons of David, beſides the ſons of u: 44; | 
the concubines, and * Tamar their ſiſter. | & 15: 6: 


10 And Solomons fon was * Rehoboam, [|| Abia his | je» 


Z* 


i 


» | 


ſon, Aſa his ſon, Jeholhaphac his fon, nfo, | 
11 Joram his ſon, || Ahaziah his ſon, Joaſh his ſon, |! Or,4za- || 


12 Amaziah his ſon,|| Azariah his ſon.Jorham his ſon ''-*-2Clr: ii 
13 Ahaz his ſon, Hezekiah his fon, Manafleh his ſon, g; C2 
14 Amon his ſon, Joſiah his ſon. [| 
x5 And the ſons of Joſiah were the firſt-born | 


ahaz, | 


Joha- 2 Chron: | 


bþ Of whomzat leaſt under that Name, there is nv mention in the , Kin 
Hittory of the Reign of Joſiahs Sons, 2 Kng.2 3,8 24+ But in Jerems | c. 2 x 

22. 11- there is mention of Shallum the Sr of Joſiah King of Judah, l Os. 
wh.ch reigned inſtead of Joſiah his Father. Which moſt conceive to Jehoahaz, Bi 
be the ſame who is otherwiſe called Johoahax, 2 King. 23. And this', King. 
ſeems molt probable, 1. From that Phraſe, he re:gned inſtead of Joſiah ; , OY 

which implics that he immediarely ſucceeded his Father;otherwiſe | Or. 
he would nor have been ſaid ro have reigned inſtead of his Brother, p1;16 + | 
as Z deklah 1s laid to reign inſtead of Jecojachim,2K ng 24.17.becauſe i Kine 
he was his next Succeſſor. 2 From the Order of that Sermon or . .. gf Nl 
Diſcourſe ci Jeremiah, which was dire&ed to Zelckiab, and his Ser- n 0. Ka al 
taniah, (| 


vants, and People,as appears by Jer.21.1,2, 11.& 22. 1,2,whom he ad- 
2 King: 


moniſh.th by the Examples of the Kings his Predeceſfors.and of the 
Senteuce of God concerning each of rhem,& that in order as they 34: 19> 
reigned; 1. Of Shalum, v.11, &c. 2 Of Jehojakim, v. 18, &c. 2. Of 24: 17s 
Jechoniah, &c. Therefore Shallum 1s the ſame with Jehoahaz, who 
was the firſt King after Joſiab, 2 King.23.31.; 3- From the nature of 
that Prophecy, Jer. 22+ 11, 12. Which beſt agrees to Jehoahaz, who 
was carried captive not ſo far as Babylon, bur only to Egygr a very 
near Countrey, whence the people hoped that he would ipeedily & 
ealily rerurn,or be re-eſtablithed in his throne by the King of Ezype, 
in oppolition to the King of Babylon. 4. Becauſe Jehoahaz was one 
ot Joſiah's younger Sons,as appezrs by comparing 2 King. 23. 31, 6. 
An this Shalum 1s here called his fourth Son. 1 _; 
16 And the ſons of Jehoiakim, || Jeconiah his fon,Ze- || Or, Je- | 
dekiah his fon z. | RE ED | hojachm, 
; Nor his natural Son, for he was his Uncle, 2 Kinzs- 24: 17. but * King: 
his Legal Son,or his Succeſfor,upoa wham the Sons Right was de- 2X 6. 


volved by vertue of thar Law, Numb. 27. 8,9,10.and. therefore it is not = pv 
y Jar: 
Or tin:s was another Zedekiah ; becauſe ir is improbable and wirh- EY 
out Example,that one and the ſame Man thould be rwice mention- 
ed in the 1ame Genealogy as the 5on of ewo ſeveral Parents- 
17 And the ſons of Jeconiah ; Afr &, + Salathiel ,,, 7-1 
* his ſon /. * Mat: 1. 


fT Heb. 


For the other tranſlation, which dwelr, may [rem to intineate that 


k Or, of Jechon;ah the captive, or trifenr ; which is added to ſhew 11. 
3 1 : : 
' I Qt tnat 


is noted, 


a hen he was Captive in Babylen,as it 
| his Son when he was Captive in Bavyten,as 1 : | 
Og er he was carried Captive, 2 Kings 24: 17. Ohbj. Ir 1s 
aid of this Jechoniss, Jer, 22: 30. Write this man Childleſs. Anſw. " 
he is called, becauſe he was an Unhappy Prince,and had no Son - at 
ſucceeded him in the Throne, as the next Words explain it. Rr * 
more on that Place. ! Either his Legal,or his Natural Son:of whic 
ſee the Notes on Jer:22.30: and Mat: 1:12:and Luke 3. 27. 

18 Malchiram allo, and Pedajah mw, and 


Jecamiah, Hoſhama, and Nedabiah. : : 
» The Sentence ſeems to be ſhort and imperfeQ,as 1s frequent 1n 
the Hebrew Language, & ſomething 15 here underſtood, as,” T he Sons 
aIſo of Salathiel were Malchiram and Pedsjah, &c. as they gather _ 
hence that the ſame Zcrubabel is called the Son of Pedajah, v: 19.4n 
the ſon (5. e.) the Grandſon ) of Salsthrel, Mat: 1: 12, Or, Malchiram 
and the reſt here named were the Sons of Jechoniah ; and they arc 
differing Zrrubbabels,wehich are mentioned here v:19. and Mat:1: 12, 
and Luk:3:27. of which ſee the notes on thoſe places. 
19 And the ſons of Pedajah were, Zerubbabel, and 
Shimei ; and the ſons of Zerubbabel ; Meſhullam, and 


Hananiab, and Shelomith their liſter =: 

7 e. Siſcer to the two laſt named Sons of Zerubabel, to wit, by 
both Parents 3 and therefore named b-fo.e the other five, v:20. who 
were her Brethren by the Father, but not by the Mother. 


20 And Haſhubah, and Otei, and Berechiah, and 
Hazadiah, Juſhab-heſed, five s. 


o Either of Zerubbabcl : or of M:ſbullam,as is gathered from hence 
that the Sons of Hinaniah ( Brother to Mejhallam, wv: 19 ) are named 
w: 21- and therefore thoſe v: 20. are preſumed to be the Sons of Me- 
ſbullam. But that is no neceſſary Inference,for M ſbullam poſſibly had 
no Sons, and therefore he paſſeth from him to Hananian, V: 21 

21 And the ſons of Hananiah, Pelariah, and Jeſajah: 
the ſons of Raphajah, the ſons of Arnan, the ſons of 


Obadiah, the ſons of Shekaniah p. 

p All theſe Men,both Parents and their Sons here blended toge- 
ther, are mentioned as the Sons of Hananiah, and Branches of the 
Royal Stock. ; 
| 22 And the ſons of Shechaniah ; Shemajah : and the 
| *Ezra.8.2. fons of Shemajah ; * Hartuſh, and Igeal, and Bariah. 
| and Neariah, and Shaphar, 1ix 4. 

9 To wit, including the Father. But the Hebrew word, Shiſha, 
which is rendied ſx,may be the proper Name of one of the Sons of 
l, Sh majah, who may be to called, becaufe he was the ſixth Son. 

+ Heb. 23 And the ſons of Neariah r ; Elioenai, and | He 
I Hizkjabu zekiah, and Azrikam, three. | 

r» Who alone is here mentioned,becauſe his E'ider Brethern pro- 
bably died withour Lttue. ; . 

24 And the ſons of Elivenai were, Hodajah,and Elia- 


ſhib. and Pelajah,and Akkub,and Johanan,and Dalajah, 
and Anani, leven. 


CRP. IV. 

The poſterity of Judah by Caleb the Son of Hur, 1——4. By Aſpur, 
5 8. By Jabez : Hu Prayer, 9 20, The Poſteriry of Shelah, 
21 23. The Poſterity, and Cities of Simeon : Their Conqueſt of 
Geador : And of the Amaltkites in Mount Seir, 24 43- 

HE ſons @ of Judah ; * Pharez, Hezron, and || Car- 


46. 12. mi, and Hur, and Shobal. 

} Or,Che- &# i.e. The poſterity : For only Pharez was his immediate Son. 
f lbai, Ch. Bur they are all mentioned here only to ſhew Shobal's Deſcent from 
.2-9 Judah, of whom he intended to ſpeak more particularly. 

' Or, Calb, 2 And\| Reajah b the ſon of Shobal,begat Jahath,and 


Shenazar, 


| 
| 


* Gen. 
38. 29.& 


| eps oo Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. Theſe are the fa- 
| ..y milies of tie Zorathite c. 
Ch. 2. 52. $© Called Haroch, cþ: 2; 52. of whom ſee there. e Of whom ſee 


on chap: 2:53. 


3 And theſe were of the father of Etam d ; Jezree), 


2vas Hazelelponi. 

d Eram is the Name either of a Man, or ofa Place : of which ſee 
below, v:32:and 2 Chr:u:6. Whoſe Inhabitants deſcended from him. 
The name of his Father is not here expreſled. 

# 4. And Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezzr the fa- 
ther of Huſhah, ' Theſe are the ſons of Hur, the firſt- 
born of Ephratah e, the father of Beth-lehem f. 


_ eEither they are other Sons beſides thoſe mentioned,ch.2.or there 
is ſome variation in their Names, which is moſt frequent among the 


Father, and chap:2:51. to Selma,his Son, who had it either with, or 
after his Father. Sce the Notes on chap, 2: 51, 52+ 


5 And * Aſhur the father of Tekoa, had two wives, 
Helah, end Naarah. . 

6 And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and 
Temeni,& Haahaſhtari. Theſe were the ſons of Naarah. 

7 And the ſons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, 
and Ethnan g. 


Verſe. The like Ellipſes we have in the end of v. 13. and of ch. 
7, ver: 18. 


8 And Coz begat Anub,and Zobebah,and the fame- 
lies of Aharhel, the ſon of Harum. 

9 And Jabez h was more honourable than his bre- 
thren ;: and his mother called his name ||Jabez,ſaying, 
f That is Becauſe I bare him with ſorrow. 
forrowful. h One of the Fathers of the Families of Aharhel laſt mentioned- 

z For Courage, and eſpecialty for true and fervent Piety expreſſed 
f Heb. 7f in the following Petition. 


thou wilt, 


&c. + Oh that thou wouldeſt bleſs me indeed /,and enlarge 


MA ONICL ES. 


and Iſhma, and Idbaſh : and the name of their ifter | 


Hebrews,as hath been oft proved. f This Title is here given to the. 


8 Underſtand here,#nd Coz,out of the beginning of the following | 


10. And Jabez called on the God of Iſrael k ſaying, | 


my coaſt -z,and that thine hand might be with me »,and 


not grieve me p. And God granted him that which he z. 
requeſted. 

k When he was undertaking ſome great and dangerous Service, 
I T truſt not to my own or Peoples Valuur, but only to thy Bleſſing 
and He!p. m Drive out theſe wicked and curſed Canaanices, whom 
thou haſt commanded us to root out,and therefore I juſtly beg and 
expett thy bleſſing in the Execution of thy Command. » To pro. 
tet and ſtrengthen me againſt my Adveriaries- o Or, work wt; 
( for ſo the Hebrew Prefix Mem is lometimes uſed, as Cart .1:2:& 3g, 
Iſa: 5:7.8.) evil, 7. eſo reſtrain and govern it. p Thar it moy nor 
oppreſs and overcome me, which will be very grievous to me, 
The conſequent pur for the antecedent ; and more 1s underſtood 
than is exprefſed. He uſ-th this expreſſion in alluſion to his Name, 
which ſignifies grief, 9. d. Lord, let me not have that Grief which 
my Name implies, and which my Sin deſervese 

1x And Cheljub the brother of Shuah, begat Mchir, 
which as the father of Eſhton. 

12 And Eſhton begat Beth-rapha, and Paſeah, and 
Tehinnah the father of || Irnahaſh. Theſe are the men || Or, 74; 
of Rechah g. Ci'y of Nas 

q From theſe are ſprung the preſent Inhabitants of Rechah,a Town baſh, 
not elſewhere mentionod, 

13 And the ſons of Kenaz r ; Othniel, and Serajah: 
and the ſons of Othniel ; || Hatharh s. [| Or, 4. 

r The Sons either of Chelub, wer. 11. or of his Son Eſbton, v. 12. thath and 
and the Father of Jephunneh,and conſequently Calleb's Grandfather, Meny: 
v. 15. Whence Caleb is called a Kimnexite, Numb: 32: 12- 
ſtrand, and Meonothai, out of ver.14. See above on ver: 7. 

14 And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Serajah, be- 
gat Joab, the father * of the || valley # of F Charathim, * yy, 
for they were Crafcſmen. 11, 35. 

t 7. e. Of the Inhabitants of the Valley. || Or,inha- 

15 And the ſons of Caleb the ſon of Jephunneh ; Iru, Þitants 
Elah,and Naam: and the ſons of Elah; || even Kenaz «. ihe Pale, 

u Another K-naz differing from that Kenaz, wv. 13. Or, his Name + Thar ; 
might be Uknaz. Crefiſmm, 

16 And the ſons of Jehaleleel x ; Ziph;and Ziphah, | or 
Tiria, and Azareel. U Kaz, 

x The Son of Kenaz, or Uknaz laſt mentioned. 

17 And the ſons of Ezra y were, Jether, and Mered, 
and Epher,and Jalon: and ſhe bare z Miriam,and Sham= 
ma, and Iſhbah the father of Eh: emoa. 

y The Son of 4zareel laſt named. x She, 7. e. Bithiah, bare unto 
Mered, As may ſcem by comparing this with v. 18. 

18And his wife «|| Jehudijah 6 bare Jered the father | Or, 4 
of Gedor, and Heber the facher of Zocho and Jekuthi- Jew. 
el the father of Zanoah. And theſe c are the ſons of Bi- 
thiah the daughter of Pharaoh d, which Mered took. 

s Either Ezra's Wife, or rather, another Wife of Mered. b Or, 
the Jeweſs,ſo called to diſtinguiſh her from his Egyprian Wife here fol= 
lowing. c To wit, Miriam, and the reſt following, v. 17. d Either 
1. of Pharaoh King of Egypt: For Mered might be a Perfon of great 
Eſtate and Quality : Or this might be only Pharaoh's Iilegitimate 
Daughter. Or, of ſome other Egyptian or 1ſraelite called by that 
Name 3 which might eaiily happen upon divers occaſions. 

19 And the ſons of his wife {| Hodiah e, the ſiſter of | 05, J« 
Nahum,the father ofKeilah the Garmite,and Elhtemoa jel, 
the Maachathite. mentiond 

« His third Wife. ". 

20 And the ſons of Shimon f were, Amnon,and Rin- 

ah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. And the 1ons of Ihi g were 
oheth, and Ben-zoheth. 


f Another Son of the Father of Keilah, mentioned v.19. & Son 
of Tilon laſt mentioned. 


21 The ons of Shelah þ4 * the ſon of Judah were, Er, *en.;! 
the father of Lecah,and Laadah the father of Marelbah, ', 5. 
and the families of the houſe of them that wrought fine 
linen, of the houſe of Aſhbea, 

þ Having treated of the Poiterity of Judah by Pharez, and by 
| Zare, he now comes to his Progeny by Shelah, of whom ſee Gen.38:; 

22 And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joalb, 
and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab z,and Jaſhu- 
bi-lehem. And, || zheſe are ancient things &. 

i Which they ruled in the name and for the uſe and ſervice of 
the Kings of Judah,to whom Moab was Subje& from David's Time. 
Or, who had Poſſeſſions 72 Moab: or, who married wives in Moab, k The 
Senſe is either, 1. Theſe Perſons and things were in Ancient times; 
and therefore it is not ſtrange if now they be ſo little known.But 
that might have been with equal Truth faid of divers other parts 
of this Account. Or, rather, 2. But thoſe Bleſſed times and Things 
are long ſince paſt and gone. Our Anceſtors then had the Domi-« 
nion over the Heathen, but their degenerate Poſterity are now 
ſlaves to them in Chalazs, Perſia, &c, where they are employed as 
Potters or Gardiners, or in other Servile Works. 

23 Theſe were / the Potters, and choſe that dwelt a- 
mong Plants and Hedges: there they dwelr xs with the 
king » for his work. 

1 Or rather, theſe are : for he ſeems to oppoſe their preſent 
Servitude to their former Glory, and to ſhew their low and mean 
Spirits that had rather tarry among the Heathen to do their Drud- 
gery, than return to Jeruſalem to terve God and enjoy their Frees 
dom. m Or, tarried, Or, now dwell; when their Brethren are re- 
turned, » Of Babylon or Perſia : Eſteeming it a greater Honour an 
Happineſs to ſerve that Earthly Monaich in the mcaneſt Employ= 
meats, than to terve the King of Kings ia his Temple, and in his 
moſt Noble and Heavenly Work, 

24 The 


Mai, 
5 Under- whobegay, 
© 


[ Or, 38. 


Chap: Iv. | i 


that thou wouldeſt + keep me from evil o, that it may + Heb. Dy 


_ 


P- 

Or, Je 
[ Gen 
A 10, 


Tod: 6: 


P. IV. 
Or, Jer 


CC = 0 


24 The ſons of Simeon s were || Nemuel,and Jammi, 


.Dr FTdGen- Farib, Zerah, and Shaul : 


. 
- 


A 10, 


i of 


o Theſe are here joyned with 7udah,becauſe their Poſſeſſion was 
od: 6: taken out of Judahbs Portion, Joſ.19.1.This Account ſeems ro differ 
from that, Gen 46. both in the Number and Names of the Perſons, 
which is not ſtrange, c2ntidering how Cuſtomary it was amongſt 
the Hebrews for one Perſon to have 2,or 3 Names given to him upon 
ſeveral occalions. And for Ohad, Gen-46.10- he may be omitted here, 
becaule he left no Poſterity or Family after him, as the reſt did. 

25 Snallum his ſon p,Mibſam his ſon, Miſhma his ſon. 

p 7. e. Son of Saul laſt mentioned. 

26 And the ſons of Miſhma ; Hamuel his ſon, Zacchur 
his ſon, Shimei his fon. _. 

27 And Shimei had ſixteen ſons, and ſix daughters : 
but his brethren had not many children,neither did all 


their Family multiply,F like to the children of Judah q. 


Hb. 
by a The Tribe of Simeon did not increaſe proportionably to the 
Tribe of Judah in which they dwelt as appears by thoſe two Ca- 
talogues, Numb 1. 22. & 26. 14. Which is ro be aſcribed to Gods 
thi Curie upon them delivered by the mouth of holy Jacob, Gen. 49. 
Na. and ſignifyed by Myes his negle& of them when he bleſſed all 
the other 'Tribes. | 
Lis 28 And they dwelt at * Beerſheba r, and Moladah, 
I” ' and Hazar-ſhual, 
A y This, and the following Cities are mentioned, Je. 19. 2. &c. 
Has with no great Alterations. 
ms | 29 And at || Bilhah, and at.Fzem, and at || Tolad, 
al ; 0; Balah . —_ 
> J;.; 30 And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag 
gat, Jib19:37 5 3 3 
(0,54. 31 And ar Beti-marcaborh,and || Hazar-ſufim,and at 
I job: Berch-birei,and ar Shaaraim,, Thele ere their cities unto 
em. Þ+,,,_the reign of David c. 
01, c Either 1. of Davids Poſterity ; 5. e. as long as the Kingdom of 
uſah y O . 
ha» . þ is ” Judah laſted, or until the Captivity of Babylon But this ſeems not 
sf JB?" to be true 5 for Simeon was gone into Captivity with the reſt of thi 
ley, Ten Tribes long before that time Or rather 2+ of David himlelf. 
| And this may ſeem to be added,becauſe ſome of theſe Cities though. 
tis } oiven to Simeon by Joſhua, yet through the Sloth or Cowardiſe o; 
voy, thar Tribe, were not taken from the Philiſtines, until Davias time, 
who took ſome of them ; and, the S-meonites, having juſtly forfeited 
. their Right to them by their negleQ, gave them to his own Tribe, 
For it is evident concerning Z:klag,one of them, that it was in the 
Ph:litines hands in Davids time,and by them given to h:m,and by 
him annexed to the Tribe of Judah, 1 Sam. 27. 6 _ : | 
It.zher, 32 And their vi.liges were,|| Etam,and Ain,Rimmon 
Iik:19:7: and Tochen, and Alban, five cities. 
33 And all their villages that vere round about the 
*e Jo, Bu- ſame cities unto || Baal. Theſe were their habitation: 
* Rite, and || their geneaiogy. | 
Jik:9:3. 34 And Meſbobah,and Jamlech 4,and Joſhah,the ſor: 
J'% ey of Amaziah. ; 
we ad Theſe and the reſt here following are particularly mentioned 
# wes for their Valiant and Succeſsful Atchievements related wy, 39 &c. 
| —_ 35 And ſoel, and Jchu the fon of Joſibiah,the fon © 
I, © Serajah, the fon of Afjel, 
| 26 And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jebohajah,and 
2 Aſajah, and Adiel, and Jefimiel, and Benajah, 
Je 1 37 And Ziza the ſon of Shiphi, the ſon of Allon, the 
n, ſon of Jedajah, the ſon of Si:imri, the ſon of Shemajah. 
md ; - 2) 
© in 28 Theſe e F mentioned by their names, were princes 
Jay, in their families: and the houte of their fathers Þ increaf- 
Fit. ed greatly f. 
Ji e Namedv. 34.35,36,37- f Which forced them to ſeek for new 
—_ and larger Habitations. 
Jiu: 39 And they went to the entrance of Gedor g, even 
= unto the eaſt ſide of the valley hb, to ſeek Paſture for 
— their flocks, 
£ To thar Countrey that belongs to Gear, or borders upon it , 
either that Jedor, Jo/.15.58. or that called Gederah, Joſ. 15.36. kh Of 
which ſee on 1 Sam: 17: 1, 52, 
40 And they found fat paſture and good, and the 
land was wide, and quiet, and peaccable: for they of 
Ham z had dwelt there of old &. 
a | £ 7. e The Poſterity of that curſed Ham, either the 4rabians : or 
) ' 


Mit, 42 And ſome of them,even of che 1ons of Simeon, five 
ago Dundred Men, went to mount Seir o, having Þ for their 
®Dey- captains Pelatiah,and Neariah,audRephajah,and Uzziel| 
* .__ the ſons of Ilhi, 


the Canaanites, or Philiſtines, who deiccnded from Ham, Gen. 10. 6. 
And accordingly thete words contain a Reaſon, either 1- to prove 
that the land was good ; becauſe the A4rabians, who being wholly 
given to paiturage, uſed to find out the Choiceſt Grounds, had 
formerly pitched their Tents there. Or, 2. Why they went and 
poſſeſſed rhis place, becauſe it was not 1n the Hands of their Bre- 
thren of Jadah,but in the Poſſciſion of that People which they had 
Authority and Command to expel. & :. e. Had poſſeſſed ir of old , 
and hitherto. Or, dwelt there before, i. e. before they came and ; 
Caſt them out of their poſſeſſions. 
41 And theſe written by name,came in the days of 
Hezekiah king of Judah 7, and ſmote their tents »», and 
the habitations that were four.d there, and deſtroyed 
them utterly unto this day z,and dwelt in their rooms ; 
becauſe here was paſture there for their flocks 
I But a little before their Captivity,which was :n the ſixth year of 
Hezekiah,2 King 17. So their Joy in their new,and pleaſant,and fruit- 
ful Poſſeſſions laſted bur for a very little while. 2 :2.e-The People 
dwelling in Tents : for ſo it ſeems theſe ſtill did tor the conveni- 
\encyofPaſturage.n i.e.ſoas they could never after recover themſelves. 


N I C LS 


o Probably about the ſame time. Te WM 1: 
43 And they ſmote *the reſt of the Amalekites p that * See WW 


were eſcaped, and dwelt there unto this diy q 1 Sam: 154i 

p Nor deſtroyed by Saul, or David, or his Succefſors. q Either x. 3: 8 30- || lj | 
until the Captivity of theTen Tribes. Bur that happening ſo ſpeedi- 17-2 SamJ'{ Wt 
ly after this time,this Expreſſion may teem to be very improper & 8: 12. l/; 
inſignificant here. Or rather 2. until the Babylonijb Captivity,or the - 
time next after ir, when theſe books were written. For although 
the main Body of that Tribe dwelling in Canaan were carried into 
Captivity, yet this ſma'l Remnant of them having removed their 
dwellings,and being planted in Mount Ser, which lay Southward 
from J«aah, might poſſibly be continued and preſerved in thoſe 
Parts, when their Brethren were gone into Captivity, 


CHAP | 
The Line of Reuben unto the Captivity : Their War again## the Hagarites, 


 I—— 10. The Chief Men and Habitations of Gad, 11 - 17. the 
* Number of the Reubemtes, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manaſſeh, that 
warch:d againſt the Hagaritss and overcame them, 18——=24, they are 
- all carried Captive into Aſſyria, 25, 26. 
OW the ſons of Reuben the firſt-born of Iſrael, 
( for he was the firſt-born a,bur foraſmuch as he 

* defiled his fathers bed, his birth-right þ was given unto * Gen: 
the ſons of Joſeph c the ſons of Iſrael 4: and the genea- 22: ani 


logy is not to be reckoned after the birth-right e. 49: 4+ 
aTheſe & the following words to v.3.which are incloſed within 
a Parentheſis, ſeem to be inſerted here as an Anſwer to a ſecret Ob. 
jection,or asaReaſon why Reubens Genealogy was not ſer down firſt, 
but Juazhs was put before it, which is double,the firſt follows im« 
mediatly, the other is in the laſt clauſe of this Verſe. 6 7.e. The 
Righr «ofthe firſt-born, which although it contain in it ſomething of 
Dominion, Gen. 27. 1,32. which Joſeph had in his own perſon, Gen. 
49. Yet principally conſiſted in having 2 double Portion, as ap- 
pears from Deus; 21:17: which Joſeph enjoyed both in his Perſon and 
in his poſterity, which had 2 parts of twelve in Canaan. And it is 
Joſeph's Poſteriry which is here conſidered. c &phraim and Manaſſeh, 
cach having a diſtin& Portion. 4 This is added emphatically, be« 
cauſe they were reputed and treated as if they had been the imme=- 
diate Sons of Jacob: of which ſee Gen: 48: 5« e This is the ſecond 
Reaſon, which ſheweth both why Reubens Genealogy was nor firſt 
mentioned ; and if another Tribe was to be ranked before it why 
that was Judah, and not Joſeph, as it might ſeem moſt fir for the 
former Reaſon ; becauſe, ſaith he, the Order of their Genealogy 
was not to be ruled by the Birth-right,but by an higher Priviledge, 
which was given to Judah, and which here follows. 
2 For * Judah f prevailed above his brethren g, and Will | 
h of him came the * chief || ruler 3, but & the birch-right « gg, | 
was Joſephs. ) | 8.0. 
f Not the Perſon ( for ſo Jeſeph prevailed ) but the Tribe bf Pal. 60:73 | 
Judah. g Excelled the other T11ibes in number and power, and & 108: 8: | 
eſpecially in the following Priviledge. h Or, for,as the Hebrew vau is *Mic. 5.2. | | 
oft uſed: This being a Reaſon of the foregoing Aſſcrtion,or a De- Mat.2.6, || 
claration wherein he did prevail. 5 The Government was by Gods þ. Or, | 
Promiſe and appointment to be ſeated chicfly and mor durably in Prince. 
thatTribe,firſt in David & his Succeſſors, &then in the Meſfiah, who 
ſprang out of Judah, Heb:7:14: which was a far greater Priviledge than 
the Birth- right. Or. as to the Ruler, ( i.e.as to the Point of Do« 
minion ) he was more than he,or preferred before him, i: e: before Joſeph, 
who is named in the very next clauſe,the pronoun being referred 
unto the following nown, which is frequent among rhe Hebrews, as 
Pſal:87:1:&105:19 k Or,although,as var is oft uſed;ſo this prevents or 
removes an ObjeQion againſt J#dah's Precedency taken from his 
Birth-righr. 
3 The ſons, TI ſay, of * Reuben the firſt-born of Iſrael 
ere, Hanoch and Pallu, Ezion, and Carmi. | 
4 The fons of joel 3; Shemaiah his ſon, Gog his ſon, 
Shimeit his ſon, | 
I Who was the Son either of Carmi laſt mentioned: or rather of 
Hanoch Reuben's Firſt-born, becauſe he and his were ſucceſſively 
Princes of this Tribe as may be gathered from v:6. 
5 Micah his ſon, Reay. h ti- tun, Baal his fon, _ | 
6 Beerah his ſon, whom || Tilgath-pilneſer king of |; or, tg. 
Aſſyia, carried away captive : he was prince of the Reu- /ath-pileſer Yl 
benites. _ 4 ch 
7 And his brethren w by their families, ( when the 27 Wh 


a 
e 


F' 
ſ | 
WARES 
5 b "nl ' 
is \ 


* Gen 46. |: 
9.Exod:6: I 
14. Numb. | 

26: 5, 4 


genealogy of their generation was reckoned ) were the 4 
chief » Jeiel, and Zechariah. | 
7M i: e: The other Sons of Reub:n and their Poſterity. n Heb: the 
Jhead, each vas the Head of his Fawily. | 
8 And Bela the fon of Azz, the fon of || Shema, the, \ .. .. | 
fon of Joel, who o dwelt in* Aroer, even unto Nebo, myjab y.4. 
and Baalmeon. * Tolh:12, 


o To wit, the Renbenites, all theſe here before mentioned, as ap- 15,16, 
pears both by the following Verſes,which relate to the whole Tribe; 
and by the Agreement of this Deſcription of their Inheritance with 
that, Joſ+ 13: 15,16, | PE as | 
9 And eaſtward hep inhabited unto the entring in of 
the wiiderneſs from the river Euphrates q: becauſe heir 


-Cattel were muiriplied r in the land of Gilead. 

P 5: e: The Tribe of Reuben, 4 From Jordan and the Wilderneſs bee 
yond it unto Euphrates. Or, of che Wilderneſs, which lies $owaras or 
reacheth 70 the River Euphrates, namely, the great Wilderneſs of Ke- 
demoth, Deut: 2: 26: which was extended far and wide towards Eu- 
phrates : for that was the Eaſtern border of Keubens Pof{cflion, and 
not Euphrates, to which their Habiration never reached. » Which 
forced them to enlarge their Habiration as far as they could Eaſt- 
ward towards Euphrates, : 

10 Andin the days of Saul they made war s with the _ 
Hagarites *, who fell by their haiid : and they awelt inf Heb. 
cheir tents # # throughout all the caſl-/and of Gilead x, #pou al ws 

s The Gaajtes and Manaſſites joyning with them in the War, v:f4ce of the 


— 


18, 19. 5 The Ibmedites, who dwelt un 4rabia ths Delert. u Theesf- 
| 3Qs2 Jjratlizss 


hap. 


; 


|| 
| 


Y + Heb: 
| daunhters: 
| © Ch: 27. 


| 29. 
8 7 Heb: 


| forthe 


* » King: 
| 15. Iz Z2: 
| *2Kin:14: 
16, 28. 


+ Heb: 
ſens of 


walour. 


* Gen:25* 
15: Ch: r 
3ls 


+ Heb: led 
captive, 
+ Heb: 
ſouls of 


men, as 
Numb. 
31: 35» 


, 


Iſ-a:lites took poſſeſſion of their Lands and Tents or Houſes. 


q their go.ngs 13 


= 


x Which lay Eaſtward from the Land of Gileaa- : 
ir And the children of Gad,whe dwelt over againſt 
them, in the land of * Baſhan unto Salcah, were as fol- 


loweth. yy : 
12 Joel the chief z,and Shapham the next,and Jaanaz, 


and Shaphat in Baſhan =. | | 

yThePrince of the Tribe,or at leaſt of hisFamily,when they were 
numbred,to wit,in the days of Jorham, v.17. zz. e Who dwelt in 
the City of Baſban, Others thus, Who abode in Baſhan to defend the 
City and Country, when their Brethren went out to War againſt 
the Hagarens, v. 18. : 

13 And their brethren of the houſe of their fathers, 


were,Michael,and Meſhullam, and Sheba, and Jorai,and 
Jachan, and Zia,and Heber, ſeven. k 
14 Theſea are the children of Abihail the ſon of Hurt, 
the ſon of Jarozh,the ſon of Gilead,the ſon of Michael; 
the ſon of Jeſhiſhai, the ſon of Jahdo, the ſon of Buz : 


{ laſt named. : ; 
I © Abi che ſon of Abdiel, the ſon of Guni, chief of 


the houſe of their fathers 6. | 

> This 4h; was the Head or chief of the Houſes or Families 
either 1. of thoſe ſeven named, v-13. Or 2. of Abatel and Gunt laſt 
named, and of their Fathers. 


16 And they c dwelt in Gilead & in Baſhan e and in 
her + towns f, and in all the ſuburbs g of * Sharon 5, 


upon Þ their borders z. 

c 5. e, The Children,or Tribe of Gad. @ 7. e. In part of Gilead: 
for the Reubenites and Manaſſites dwelt in other parts of it,Deur.3.12, 
i3, 16. e in the Land of Baſban,as it is ſaid v. 11. Qz. How come th: 
Gadites to dwell in Baſhan, when «ll Baſban is expreſly ſaid to be 
given to the half Tribe of Manaſſeh, Deut, 3«13- & Joj.13.29, 30? Av. 
ll Baſhan is put for the greateſt Part of it by a Synecdoche, very 
frequent in Scripture & all Authors; and ſo the Gadites might po: 
ſeſs a part of it. And thus both Baſban and Gilead are uſed tor parts 
of them, Joſ. 17.1. where it is ſaid of Machir a Manaſſite, that he had 
Gilead and Baſhan. And as it 1$ unqueſtionably true that Gzlead is 
taken ſometimes more largely for all the Land of the 1[raelites be- 
yond Jordan,ſometimes more ſtrictly for that part of it which Bor- 
ders upon Mount Gilead; of which ſee my notes on of. 17. 1. The 
like may be preſumed concerning Baſban ; and ſo in its ſtrieſtſenſe 
it might be all given to the Mznaſſies, and yet in its largeſt Senſe 
might comprehend a Part of the Land belonging to the Gaaites. 
f i.e. In ſome of her Cities and Towns. g 7-e. In its Fields and Pa- 
ſture-grounds, 1 Chron:27:29. þ Not that within Jordan, 1Ja:35:2.but 
another without Jordan. # To wit, of Gilead and Baſhan, For 
Gilead, properly ſo called, or the greateſt part of it, belonged 
to the Reubenites ; and Baſhan, or the greateſt part of it,to the Ma- 
naſſites; and ſo the Gadites (whoſe Habitation was between the Reu- 
benites and Manaffites) had thoſe Parts of both their Countries which 
were towards their Borders. Or, unto :heir Borders, i. e. as far as 
the Suburbs or Fields of Sharon, which were laſt mentioned, were 

extended. . 
17 All theſe were reckoned by Genealogies in the 


days of * Jotham. king of Judah &, and in the days of 
* ſeroboam / king of Ifrael. 

&W ho reigning long, partly in hisFathers days,and partly by him- 
ſelf, 2 Kings 15. And being at leaſure as to Wars or Troubles, 
thought this a fit Seaſon to examine the ſtate of his people. / Either 
the ſecond of that name, of whom ſee 2 Kings 13.13, 14. Or rather 
the firſt Ferobo4m : partly becauſe he is called ſimply Jeroboam, with- 
out any Addition; which ſhews that he ſpeaks of the moſt Famous 
of the two : and partly becauſe this Work of raking an Account 
of tlie People doth far better aggree to the Times of Zeroboam the 
Firſt, when the Kingdom of [/rael was firſr ereted and eſtabliſhed, 
and broken off from that of Judah, when it was neceſlary for Jero- 
hoam, to know his own Strength and the Numbers of his Peo- 
ple, than to the Times of Jerobo#m the ſecond, when the Kingdom 
of Ijracl was broken, and near to its Ruine. 

18 The ſons of Reuben,and che Gadite,and half the 
tribe of Manaſlſeh, + of valiant men, men able to bear 
buckler and ſword, and to ſhoot with bow, and skilfu! 
in war, were four and forty thouſand ſeven hundred 
and threeſcore, that went out to the war. 

19 And they made war with the Hagarites, with *Je- 
tur, and Nephiſh, and Nodab »». 

m i.e. With the Poſterity of Jetur, &c. who were Ifhmeelites, 
appears from Gen. 25, 15+ ; 

20 And they were helped againſt them », and the 
Hagarites were delivered into their hand, and all that 
were with them 0: for they cried to God in the battel, 
and he was intreated of them, becauſe they pur their 


eruſt in bim. 
n To wit, By God, v.22 who gave them extraordinary Courage 
and Succeſs. o Their Friends and Allies in this War. 


21 And they T took ayay cheir cartel, of their camels 
fifty thouſand p, and of ſheep ewo hundred and fifty 
thouſand, and of afles two thouſand, and of + men an 
hundred thouſand 9. 


ERRELOUNITICTL EF 


1444760 men ; or part of them by the conſent of the reſt. r Of 
which, 2 Kings 15. 29. and 17. 6: 


23 And the children of the half-tribe of Manaſſeh « 
dwelt in the land x: they increaſed from Baſhan, unto 
Baal-hermon, and Senir, and unto mount Hermon. 

u Having difcourſed of the Reubenites, w. 3, &c. and next of the 
Gaaites, v. 1, &c. he now comes to the Manaſſites. x 5.e. In their 
Land, to wit, in the Northern part of the land beyond Jordan. 

24 And theſe were the heads of the houſe of their 
fathers, even Epher, and 1ſhi, and Eliel,and Azriel,and 
Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, andJahdiel, mighty men of 
valour, | famous men, axd heads of the houſe of their + 1:0 
father on men of 


25 And they tranſgreſled againſt the God of their 1am 
p'e of the land, whom God deſtroyed before them. !7:7: 

26 And the God of Iſrael ſtirred up the ſpirit y of * ——_ 
Pul king of Aſſyria,and the ſpirit of Tilgath-pilneſer king 
of Aſlyria, and he carried them away, ( even the Reu- 
benite,and the Gadite,and the half tribe of Manafleh ) 
and brought them unto * Halah, and Habor,and Hara, * 
and to the river Gozan z, unto this day. &, 

y He fo governed his Countels and AﬀeQions, that he ſhould 


bring his Forces againſt this People rather than others. x Of which 
Places lee, 2 Kinge15. & 17. 

CHAP. VI 

The Sons of Levi : the Line of the High Prieſts from Aaron to the Captio 

wity, 1 I5. The Families of Gerſhom, Merari, and Kohath, 16-<-48. 

The Office of Aaron and his Line unto Ahimaaz, 49 53. The Cities 

of the Prieſts and Levites, 54 


18. 
H E. ſons of Levi; * || Gerſhon, Kohath, and , 

Merari. l he ee 
2 And the ſons of Kohath ; Amram,Izhaft a,and He- 6:16, = 
bron, and Uzziel. Ch: 23:6; 
# Called alſo Amminadab, v. 22. compare Ezod, 6. 2s || Or, Ger. 
3 And the children of Amram ; Aaron, and Moſes, /* v6: 
and Miriam. The ſons alſo of Aaron; * Nadab and A- 

bihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
4 Eleazar begat Phinehas,& Phinehas begat Abiſhua, 
5 And Abiſhua begat Bukki,and Bukki begar Uzzi 5, 
b In whoſe days ir is ſuppoſed that the High-Prieſthood was tran- 


flared from Eleazar's Family to Ithamar's, for fome Cauſe now un- 
known, in whole Line it continued for ſome Succeſlions. 


6 _ UZzzi begat Zerahiah,and Zerahiah begat Me- 
rajoth, 

7 Merajoth begat Amariah,& Amariah begat Ahitub, 

8 And * Ahicub begat Zadok, and * Zadok begat , 
Ahimaaz, hy _ 

9 And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat * + Sam: 
Johanan, 15: 27; 

10 And Johanan begat Azariah, ( * he it 5s that exe- « 


7:6:and 
18: 11. 


"> 0 
o 


TLev.o.y 


cuted the prieſts office c fin the * temple that Solomon Gs 
built 4 in Jeruſalem. ) F Heb. is 


c Sodid all the reſt,bur it is implied that he did ir worthily,he tbe uſe. 
filled his place,and valiantly diſcharged his Office in Uzziahs time ; * 1Kin:6: 
of which ſce 2 Chron: 26: 17, &c. Or this, he, may relate to Johanan, 2 Chr: þ 
otherwiſe called Jehyjadar, who is ſo highly commended for the 
good Service which he did ro the Houſe of God and of the King : 
of whom ice 2 Kings 11. d In Solomons Temple ; ſo called to diſtin- 


guiſh it from the ſecond Temple which was built or in building 
when theſe Books were written. 


11 And * Azariah begat 
zat Ahitub, | 1: 3; 
12 And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat ||| 0", * 
Shallum, _ 
OW Shalum begat Hilkiah,and Hilkiah begat A- 
zariah, 
14 And Azariah begat * Serajah e, and Serajah begat * ye: 
Jehozadak, 
e Who was ſlain by Nebuchadnezzar at Riblah,2 Kings 25:18,21, 
I5 And Jchozadak went into caprivity, * when the , 
LORD carried away Judah and Jeruſalem by the hand 
of Nebuchadnezzar. 
x6 The ſons of Levi ; * || Gerſhom, Kohath, and Me- + Trot: 
rari f. 6: 16: 


f This he repeats,as the Foundation of the following Genealogy || Or, 6% 
of thoſe Levites who were not prieſts. ſbon, V: 1, 


17 And theſe be the names of the ſons of Gerſhon ; 
Libni, and Shimet. 

18 And the ſons of Kohath were Amram, and Izkar, 
and Hebron, and Uzziel. * 

19 The ſons of Merari ; Mahli,and Muſhi. And theſe 


Amariah, and Amariah be- *5ce x;n 
Ch: 9; 11; 


11: 11. 


2 Kings 
25:18, 


are the families of theLevites according to their fathers. 
Zg Who are diſtinguiſhed and named from their Fathers. And the 


p For Camels were very numerous in 4rabis,being uſed in War following Catalogue iS thought to contain the ſucceſſive Heads or 
and for Burdens. &c. and being very patienr of thirſt,and therefore | Chiefs of their ſeveral Famihes until the Times of David,by whom 


moſt fir for thoſe hot and dry Countries. q Whom they took Pri- 
ſoners, and either uſea as Slaves, or ſold them for ſuch. 


22 For there fell down many ſlain, becauſe the war 
as of God r, And they s dweit in their ſteads until 
the captivity F. 

» God put them upon it,and might:ly aſſiſted them in it, s 5. e. 
That Parry of theſe Tribes which went out to this War being 


they were diſtributed into ſeveral Ranks or Courſes. 


20 Of Gerſhom; Libni his ſon,Jahath his ſon,* Zim- Os 


mah his ſon þ. Ethans 


4 i.e. His Grandſon, by his Son Shimei, as appears from v.42-43- \7or.42 
the Names of Father and Sor being oft uſed in Scripture of more ks 


remote Progenitors or Succeſlors. dajah, 


21 || Joah his ſon,}| Iddo his fon, Zerah his ſon, Jea- Hoke "7 


terai his ſon, 22 The 


Chap. VL 


fathers,and went a * whoring after the gods of the peo- * 2 King; 


fHeb, 
In 


; Leys, 


£x.30, 


vi, Tek ap. VI. . CHRON on Chap. Vi 


| Or, 22 The ſons of Kohbath ; || Amminadab his ſon , Say be | 1 the Names ofthe Perſons who ſucceſ- 
I;:-», Korah his fon, Aſir his ſon. | bo Soba op : 

I ne Etkanah his ſon, and Ebiaſaph his ſon, and Afſir py And theſe ar the ſons of Aaron : Eleazar his{on, 

jon OO , Phinehas his ſon, Abiſhua his ſon, | 

BET! 5 


[2h 24 Tahath his ſon, || Uriel 5 his ſon, |] Uzziah his $* BuKki his fon, Uzzi his ſon, Zerahiah his ſon, 
| Nh , p @ oy ot f < Gao Rex FOES” » || 52 Merajoth his ſon, Amariah his ſon, Ahitub.his ſon, 


Verſe 39  ; Called alſo Zephaniah, w. 36. where alſo Uzziah here following | $3 Zadok his ſon, Ahimaaz his ſon. 
' See We ;- called Azariah. : . 54 Now theſe are their dwelling places throughout 
| 5 25 And che ſons of Elkanah &; * Amaſai, and Ahi-, their caſtles in their coaſts, of the ſons of Aaron, of the 
Ny moth. families of the Kohathites: for theirs was the lot b. 
Verſe 25- + The Son of that Koralr mentioned above, v. 22. as is manifeſt + Or, 2h Lot or Portion which here follows. Or, the firſt Lot as 
;$am. by v. 35, 36, 37. and by Exod.6. 23, 24. _ | appears by the ſequel. | 
1.1. 25 As for Eikanah / : the tons of Elkanah ; || Zophat| $55 And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah; 
his ſon, and Nahath m2 his ſon. and the ſuburbs thereof round about it. 
ng | p This was anccher Sena) Son * Grandes of go —————— 56 But the fields of the city, and thevillages thereof, 
| and ceirner e JON Or DBrorner © 17: 07 a ENtLONcEa, 
wy _ For Bo rg tot Cen” abi CE they gave to Caleb the ſon of Jepbunneh. 


Ver. 34. 27 * Eliabhis fon, Jeroham his ſon,Elkanah = his ſon. 34 And to the ſons of Aaron they gave the cities c of 
Lid, » The Father of the Prophet Samuel, 1 Saws. 1 1. who therefore Judah, namely, Hebr on ? he city of refuge,and Libnah with 
| | her ſuburbs,and Jattir, and Eſhtemoa, with their ſuburbs. - 
| Called 28 And the ſons of Samuel ; the firſt-born, || Vaſhni, | , « Or, ou: of the Cities; the Hebrew ehbeing put for eeth,as hath 
ng: Job and Abiah. been oft noted. l Gt ns CE 
"| #33 29 The Tons of Merari ; Mahli, Libni hisſon,Shimei | 5SAnd||Hilen with her ſuburbs, Debir with herfuburbs, 
i; His Ton, Uzza his fon 59 And|| Aſhan with her ſuburbs, and Beth-ſhemeſh [ yon, ll 
36 x T . . olon, | bl 
30: Shimea his ſon, Haggiah his ſon, Aſajah bis ſon with her ſuburbs. = ONE Joſh 27. (Mi 
p om David ſet over the| ,.. $2 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba with her \, 1 
31 And theſe o are they whom David ſet over "Few : bs. 
6. { ſervice p of ſong in the houſe of the LORD, afcer| '22urbs, and || Alemerh with her ſuburbs, and Anathorh |; Or, 4iag}i 
ls. that the * ark had reſt 9. with her ſuburbs, All their cities throughout their Joh. 2:., ji 
' (hap. o Whoſe Names here follow. p Heb. the Hands, Hand put for amijies, were thirteen cities d. | i'G | 
ks Miniftryor Service, which is commonly Performed by the Hand. 4 Whereof 41 are here numbred, and two more added to them, 


Or, 

. Almon, 
| Thus God is frequently faid to ſpeak or command things by the Hand Jof. 21. 13. | : | 
0d: (i.e. the Miniſtry) of Moſes Compare 2 Chron. 29. 27, q Which 61 And unto the ſons of Kohath, which wwe tax of Joh. 21, 
was in Davids Time, 2 Sem. 6. 17. Ms c the family of that tribe, were cities given our of the half 
6: 32 Ad they miniſtred before the dwelling-place o tribe, namely, out of the half :ribe of Manaſleh, * by lor, *Joſh. 24! 
Gere the cabernacle r of the congregation, with linging,until | teq cities fo | "2 
= Solomon had built the houſe of the LORD inJ er uſalem: e Overand abovethe Prieſts who were of the ſame Family of Ke- | 
and chenthey waited on their office according to their | 9th and Tribe of Zvi. f Or, by lor. ( witha full Point, for there the 
order s. Senſe ends. ) All their Cities were ten Cities as it is exprelly ſaid, of. 

+ Or, the Tabernacle of the Tent, as the ſame Hebrew words are 21: 26. Thoſe wor ds, ail their Cities were, are to be underſtood out of 
tranflated, Exod. 39+ 32, and 40. 2,6, s Which David hadappointed A A Verſe ; which is not unuſual in the Holy Scripture: And 
by the Spirit, ES a tak ths O this ſacred Writer explains himſelf, v. 66, &c, where eight of theſe 


. ; - | Cities are named, whereof only two are taken out of this half 
iHeb, 32 And theſe 7 are they that | waited with their T,;, of Mevefeb, v. 200MM either two being amet, Tof, 23: $5, the: 


jk, Children : of the ſons of the Kohathite ; Heman af where theſe things are more plainly and fully declared. ſy + 

ſinger, the ſon of Joel, the ſons of Shemuel «, 62 And to the ſons of Gerſhom g throughout their 

tTo wit, Heman have {2996 ol and Aſaph, v. 39. and Ethan only, out of the tribe of Iiſachar, and out of the tribe 

V. 44+  # VOY, Cee TRE FIOPGeet. ot Ather, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of 

34 + ſon ofElkanab, the ſon of Jeroham, the ſon] 1. tribe of Manafſeh in Baſhan, —_ cities. | 

= |Ver. 264 of Eliel, the (on of || Toah, | ſ, s Underſtand here, Cities were given, which is alſo underſtood; 
_ wh. 25 The ſon of [|Zuph, the ſon of Elkanah, the fon +.5;, and expreſſed, v. 64. | | 

7: 10, Of Mahath, theſon of Amaſai, 63 Untothe ſons of Merari were given by lot through- 


| Thin: 36 The fon of Elkanah, the ſon of || Joel, the ſon} our their families, our of the tribe of Reuben, and out 
- "24 of Azariah, tne ſon of Zephaniab, of the tribe of Gad, and Gut of the tribe of Zebulun; 
ks nk 37 Te ſon of Tabath; the ſon of Aflir, the ſon off * twelve cicics. - * Joſh, 55: 


wr. | ti, F*Ebiaſaph, the ſon of Korah, _ 64 And the children of Iſrael gave to the Levites hb Fi 
n:6: | *Erod, 28 The ſon of Izhar, the ſon of Kohath, the ſon of| theſe cities i with their ſuburbs. _ | 
EP | 64 Levi, the ſon of Iſrael. h i.e. Tothe Tribe of Levi, conſiſting of Prieſts and other Levires; 
39 And his brother x Aſaph ( who ſtood on his]? Which are numbred or named in this Chapter. . — . 
right hand ) even Aſaph the ſon of Berechiah, the ſon ' ©5 And they gave & by iot our of the tribe ot che chil- 


of Shimen dren of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of 
» : T* . : * F þ a © > 
x Aſaph is here called Hwmans Brother, both by birth being of the Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benja- 

En ſame Tribe and Father, Levi; and by his Office and Employment, ; min, theſe Cities which are called by their names & - 
; which was the ſame with his, | k To wit, to thole Levites of the F-mily of Kohath who were Prieſts, 
, Me | FE ; ; as appears both by v. 57, &c. where the Cities given to the Aaronites 
m, 40 Th = ſon of Michael, the ſon of Baaſiah, the ſon Kot, 5 to be we out of the Tribes here named, even out of 7Zudah, 
;: 113 of Melchiah, ( under which Simeon is compre:1eaded, becauſe his Lot lay within 


41 The ſon of Echai, the ſon of Zzrah, the ſon of that of Judah) aid Benjawin ; and by the next Verſe where the 


Adajah other Kohathices who were not Prieſts are called, the Reſidue of the 

bs. Families of the Sons of Kokath, by way of diſtinftioa from thoſe of 

-h; 42 The ſon of Ethan, the ſon of Zinmah, the fon i them ro whom his w. 65. relates. © {Which are expreſſed by their: 
of Shimei, | Names above, wv. 57, &c. 


43 The ſon of Jahath, the ſon of Gerſhom, the ſon} 66 And the 7:/{4ue of the families of the ſons of Ko- 


Ling: of Levi. | hath, had cicies of their coaſts » out of the tribe of 
8 44 And their brethren the ſons of Merari, F:od on Ephraim. | TSR 

the left hand : Ethan 3 the ſon of || Kithi, the ſon of _ ”» Or, of their borders, i.e. of their Countrey contained within its 
xod: 5M Abdi, the ſon ot Malluch | Borders, as that wocd is oft uſed, as hath been noted before. 

A 5 g . AM ; 
6 | wy, 2 Cal'ed alſo Jeduthun, 1 Chron. 5.16. 2 Chron, 354 15. andin 67 * And they » gave unto them o of the cities of s 75: 
» 4 | *S the Titles of divers Pſalms. ; refuge p, Shechem in mount Ephraim with her ſuburbs : 4,7 21; 
45 The fon of Haſhabiah, the ſon of Amaziah, the they gave alfo Gezer with her ſuburbs. ESD 
ſon of Hilkiah, » Either the Ephraimites: or rather the Children of Iſr2el, as it is 


46 The fon of Amzi, the ſon of Bani, the ſon of expreſſed v. 64. who gave part out of Ephraim, and part out of the 
Shamer, | half-tribe of Manaſſeh, as it here follows, But the Ephraimites could 


. | (<3 not give away any Cities belonging to the Manafftes, 07. e. Tothe 
47 The ton of Mahli, the ſon of Muſhi, the fon of wy of the Kohathites laſt mentioned. p Or, thecitirs (14. e. the 


Merari, the ſon of Levi. Ciry : the plurai number uſed of ne; of which frequent Examples 
48 Their brethren alfo the Levites 2 were appointed have been given b:fore, ſee Chap. 7, 3, 12, 14..) of refuge. Or, 


untoall manner of ſervice of the cabernacie of the houſe i, ( the conſtruct form being pur for the abſolute, of which 


of God * there wants m__ LON in the Hebrew Language ) the _ of 

: TEE oy | | refuge. As to the Names of thefe Cities, divers of them are difter= 

Yi z _— of them as had no Skill in Conging Were otherwiſe employed. ing from thoſe Names which were given to them, Jo. 21+ 15. Nor 
Ir. Lev.1.9, 49 Dut & Aaron and his flons ottered upOors the aitAr; is at at all ſtrange that the Names of Places ſhou!d be changed in 
han | Exo.5, of the burnt-otfering, and * on che aitar of inccule, and; ſo many hundreds of Years 23S were between Joſbua and ore _ 
er:42 were appointed forall the work ofche place molt hoiy, and | And to the Cities themſclves, rhis is further to Re Jace! 
or, to make an atonement tor Iſraei, according to ail that| IÞ**,"hey are dilperied among all the Tribes, parry char os 
1ajah, Moſt , 5 Prophecy might be fulfilled concerning the ſcatrering ot Z-vz, 
rfe 41 oles the ſervant of God had commanded. Geneſis 49. 7. and partly that every Tribe might have Teachers 


s Having mentioned the Work and Employment of the High | among them by whom they mighr be direged in, and Rs 
3 Z 9 


KSee Joſh. 


x. where 
ry of | 
ſe Cities 
ve other 
MES: 


| * Gen. 
| 46. 21. 


ap. VII. 


to the obſervation of Gods Laws, 


'22-and with 


and Kirjathaim with her ſuburbs. 


with her ſuburbs, and Mahanaim with her ſuburbs, 


E CI RON 


upon which their ſafety and 


ineſs wholly depended. 
wy” And * Jokmeam withher ſuburbs, and Beth-horon' 


c ſuburbs, 
69*And Ajalon with her ſuburbs, and Gath-rimmon 
with her ſuburbs. : 

70 And outof the half-tribe of Manaſſeh, Aner with 
her ſuburbs, and Bileam with herſuburbs, for the family 
of the remnant of the ſons of Kohath. _ 

71 Unto the ſons of Gerſhom were g:ven out of the 
family. of the half-cribe of Manaſſeh, Golan 1n Baſhan 
with herſuburbs, and Aſhtaroth with her ſuburbs. 

72 And out of the tribe of Ifſachar, Kadeſh with her 
fuburbs, Daberath with her ſuburbs, 

73 And Ramoth with her ſuburbs, 
her ſuburbs: ; 

74 And out of the tribe of Aſher, Maſhal with her 

uburbs, and Abdon with her ſuburbs, 
"25 And Hukok with her ſuburbs, and Rehob with 


her ſuburbs. = £Þ 
26 And out of the tribe of Naphthali, Kedeſh in 


Galilee with her ſuburbs,and Hammon with her ſuburbs, 


and Anem with 


77 Unto ths reſt of the children of Merari, were gives 
out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her ſuburbs, 
Tabor with her ſuburbs. 1]. 

78 And on the other ſide Jordan by Jericho, on the 
ealt-iide of Jordan were given them out of the tribe of 

en, Bezer in the wilderneſs with her ſuburbs, and 
ahzah with her ſuburbs, - 

79 Kedemoth alſo with her ſuburbs, and Mephaath 


with her ſuburbs. 
8o And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gileaq 


- '$x And Heſhbon with ker ſuburbs, and Jazarc with 
her ſuburbs. 
: | H A ÞP. VIL 


The Sons of Iſſachar, 1 5. Of Benjamin, 6——12. Of Nephtali, 13. 
Of Manaſſeh, 14——19. Of Ephraim : Their Calamity : and Habitations, 
29——29. Of Aſber, 30 40. 

'T.Ow the ſons of Iffachar were, * Tola, and [|Puah, | 

N. Jaſhbub 2, and Shimron, four. 
© g Called by way of contradiQtion, Job, Gen. 46- 13. _ 

2' And the fons of Tola ; Uzzi, and Rephajah, and 
Jeriel, and Jahmai, Jibſam, and Shemuel, heads of 
their fathers houſe, ro wit, of Tola : hey were valiant 
men of might in their generations, * whole number was 
in the days of David b, two and twenty thouſand and 
ſix hundred. 

"*þ When he numbred the People, 2 Sam. 24. 1, &c- 

3 And the ſons c of Uzzi, Izrabiah : and the ſonsof 
Erahiah ; Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Iſhiah, five 
&: all of them chief men. 

c For, the ſom ; for he names but one Son, 4 Including their 
Father &rakiah. 

4 And with them by their generarions, after the 
houſe of their fathers were bands of ſouldiers for war, ſix 
and thirty thouſand wer e: for they had many wives 
and ſons. 

e To wir, of the Poſterity of Uzz?, as the other 22600, v. 2. were 
the Poſteriry of Tobab. 

'5 And their brethren among all the families of Iſſa- 
char, were men of might, reckoned in all by cheir ge- 
nealopies fourſcore and ſeven thouſand. 

6 The ſons of * Benjamin ; Bela, and Becher, and 
Jediael, three f. 

* f They were Ten, Gen. 46. 21+ and five of themare named, cþ.8. 
7. but here only three are mentioned, either becauſe theſe were 
moſt Eminent for Courage or Fruitfulneſs ; or becauſe the other 
Familes were now extinCt. 

7 And the ſons of Bela ; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and 
Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five ; heads of the houſe 
of their fathers g, mighty men of valour, and were rec- 
koned by their genealogies, twenty and two thouſand 
and thirty and four. | 

g Exch of them Head, or Chief, or Commander ofthat Houſe or 
Family from which he was deſcended, or to which he belonged. 
For it may ſeem by comparing this with chap. 8. 3, 8c» that theſe 
were not the immediate ſons of Belah, but his Grandchildren de- 
ſcended each from a ſeveral Father ; and their Fathers are here 
omitted, peradventure becauſe they were obſcure Perſons, as their 
Sons are mentioned for their Eminency. 

8 And the ſons of Becher ; Zemira, and Joa(b, and 
Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and 
Abiah, and Anathoth, and Aiameth, All theſe are che 
ſons of Becher. - | 
9 And the number of them afrer their genealogy by their 
generations, heads of the houſe of their fathers, mighty 
men of valour, was twenty thouſand and ewo hundred. 

x0 The ſonsalſo of Jediael, Bilhan : and the ſons of 
Bilhan, Jeuſh, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, 


FC & BS 


1x All theſe the ſons of Jediael, by the heads of their 
fathers, mighty men of valour, were ſeventeen thouſand 
and two hundred ſouldjers fit to go out for war and battel. 


and Huſhim, the ſens of |] Aher 5, 


gathered, 1. from Gen. 46. 23. where Huſhimis mentioned as the 
only Son of Dan, where alſo the word ſons is uſed of that one Man 

as it 15 here. 2. From the Clauſe ofthe next Verſe, the ſons of Bilhah, 
who was Mother both to Dan and Naprhali, ;. Becauſe otherwiſe the 
Genealogy of Dan is quite left out- 4. From the word another, which 
15 uſed in theHebrew Writers to deſign an Abominable thing which 
the Writer diſdained tu mention ; whence they call a Swine, which 
ro them was a very unclean and loathſome Creature, another thimg 

And it muſt be remembred that the Tribe of Dan had made them- 
ſelves and their Memory Infamous and Deteſtable by that groſs 
Idolatry which began firſt and continued longeſt in that Tribe 

Juag. 18. For which reaton many Interpreters conceive this Tribe 
is omitted in the numbering of the ſealed Perſons, Rev. 7. 


1 3 The ſons of Naphtali ; Jahziel, and Guni 
Jezer, and * Shallum, the ſons & of Bilhah. wm 


and to Dan, See on v. 12. 


14 The ſons of Manaſleh; Aſhriel, whom ſhe bare 


m, ( but his concubine the Aramiteſs bare Machir the 
facher of Gilead x. 
z. e. Grandchildren, as v. 13. For both 4(brie! 

the Grandchildren of Machir ow of —_ 0g vr 
27 1, m: To wit, his Wife, as may be thought, becauſe his Concubine 
'S here oppoſed to her. Or, whom hegot ; for the Hebrew Word 
yalad is ſom2rimes uſed of Mens begetting, as Gen.5.18,&c. Compare 
P/al. 24 7. But theſe and the following words may be otherwiſo 
rendied according to the Hebrew Text, whom his Concubine the 
Aramiteſs bare, who bare him ( which Ellipſesare very frequent in 
che Hebrew ) for merh, of, or by Machir; So this was a differing 
Ajbriel from him named Num. 26. 31. for that was Gil-ads Son, and 


this his Brothzr. n A Perſon ſo called 
war fr 3 peg » as 1S manifeſt from v. 17. 


I5 And Machir took to wife the Fer o of Huppim, 
and Shuppim, whoſe ſiſters name as Maacah _ 
che name ofthe ſecond p was Zelophehad : and Zelophe- 
had had daughters q. | 


o Which Word is here fitly underſtood out of the follow l | 
where it is expreikd, and ſhe is called Maacah, who alſo eds: 
wif- of Ma hir, v. 16. p Of the ſecond Son or Grandſon of Mach ; 
» for ſo Zelophehai was, Numb. 26 29. &c. Or, Zelophehad is here 
called zhejecona, becauſe he was the younger Brother of 4ſbriel, who 
was the eldeſt ton of Hepher, the Son of Gilead, the Son of Machir 
q 3. e. Onely Daughters, and no Sons. : 


16 And Maacah the wife of Machirbare a ſon, and ſhe 
called his name Pereſh, andthe name ofhis brother was 
Shereſh, and iis ſons were Ulam and Rakem. 


Manaileh. 


r To wit, Aſbriel and Zelophehad, narhed, v. 14, 15. the Relative 
ma, - ms na to the remoter Antecedent ; as is frequent in 
18 And his ſiſter « Hammoleketh bare Thod 
| and 
Abiezer, and Mahalah z. ; 
= - e. Gileaas Siſter. 8 Underſtand, and Shemida, out of the next 
erle. 
19 And the ſons of Shemida were Ahian,and Shechem; 
and Likhi, and Aniam. > x 


' 20 And the ſons of Ephraim ; Shuthelah, and Bered 
his ſon «, and Tahath his ſon, and Eladab his ſon, and 
Tahath his ſon, ; 


« Either, 1. the Son of Sharelah ; and ſo Tahath the ſon of Bered : 
ſo the reſt, which make up ſeven ſucceeding ors 4 Or 2. _- 
ſon of Ephraim, and ſo Tahath is the ſon not of Bered, but of Ephraim 
and ſo forward. And thus all theſe were Brethren, and Sons or 
Grandchildren of Ephraim living together at one time with their 
Father. Obj. This cannot be, becauſe then Ephraim had two ſons 
called Shathelah, and two called Tahath, Avſw. That might eaſily 
happen ; either becauſe the firſt Shathelah and Tahath were dead 
before the other two of thoſe Names were born : or becauſe rivo of 
them were Ephraims Sons, and two of them his Grandchildren called 
rm _ _ For this is certain, the Name of Sons is 

romiſcuo uſed concernzng immediate Chi a 
Skdren, DT Gm pe: Fran I 008 Crane 
21 And Zabad his ſon, and Shutelah his ſon, and 
Ezer, andElead, whom the men of Gath that were born 
in zhat land, flew *, becauſe they came down to take 
away their cattel. 

x This Hiſtory is not recorded elſewhere in Scripture, but it 15 in 
the ancient Hebrew Writers, though mixed with many Fables. The 
Philiſtines (_ one of whoſe Cities this Gath was) and the Egyptians 
were next Neighbours; and in thoſe ancient Times it was uſua 
for ſuch to make Inroads one into anothers Countrey, and to carry 
thence what Prey they could take ; as we find both in Scripture and. 
in profane Writers. And as the Philif;nes had probably made ſuch 
Inroads formerly into Egypr, and particulacly into the Land of Goſber, 
which was the utmoſt part of Egypr bordering upon the Phil:fiines 
Land ; ſo the Iſraelites might requite them in the like kind : and parti* 
cularly the Children of Ephraim, either preſuming upon their Num*- 


and Zethan, and Tarſhiſh, and Ahiſhahar. 


| bers and Strength ; or having poſlibly received the greateſt _ 
rem 


12 Shuppim alſo and Huppim 5, the children of || Ir, j| 0; 
\ Iri, v. Te 
h Called Muyppimand Huppim, Gen: 46. 21. alſo Hupham and Shuphan | Or, * 
Numb. 26. 39. i But divers take the Hebrew Word aher for a f4biram 
Common, not Proper Name, and render the words thus, another ſon Numb, 
or the ſon of another Family or Tribe, to wit, of Dan, as may be 26+ 38, 


* 
Gen, 

k i.e. The Grandchildren * for Bilhah was Jacobs Concubin 46. 24+ 

Mother both to Naphtali, the Father of theſe laſt named Ro Shillm, 


17 And the ſons of Ulam, * Bedan. Theſe * 1 Sam, 
the fons of Gilead, the ſon of Machir, the fm of ts ws 


_ 4 


40 
N,; 


Sm, 


[0 


, 


oy 


VII. 


; 
AT) 
- 


| NR. 
from the Ph1;Fines in their Tat Invaſion, might make an Attempt 
upon the P:1l;Rines to their own great lofs ; as 1s here related. And 
this ſeems to have happzned alittle before the Egypiian Perſecution, 
and before the Reign of rhat new King mentioned, Exod. x. 8. The 
P..liſtines are here called the men of Gath, either becauſe they were 
{ubjc& ro the King of Gat, as afterwards that Peop'e were ; or 
becauſe rhey lived about Gath. And this Clauſe, that were born in 
tha: land, may be added emphatically, as the Motive which made 
them more reſolute and furious in their Fight with the Epnraimites, 
becauſe they fought in, and for their own Land, wherein all their 
Wealth and Concerns lay, and againſt thoſe that unjuſtly endea- 
voured to turn them out of their Native Countrey. 

22 And Ephraim their father y mourned many days 
and kis brethren z came to comfort him. 

Either, 7. That Ephraim of whom he ſpeaks, v. 20. whoſe Sons 
are here named. Bur that to many ſeems hard, _— if theſe 
ſeveral Sons named, v. 20, 21. be underſtood ſucceſſively ſo as each 
Man be the ſon of him who is named next and immediately before 
him, which ſeems moſt probable ; for ſo here are ſeven ſucceſſive 
Generations of Ephraim, which it is notlikely that Ephraim lived to 
ſee ; for then he muſt have been near 200 yearsold, Although it 
is not neceſſary that the Perſons here ſaid to be ſlain, ſhould be that 
Generation which was laſt mentioned3 but the Particle whom may 
belong to the other Sons of E2braim of the fourth, or fifth, o* ſixth 
Generation. Nor is the word, whom, in the Hebrew Texr, which 
runs thus, and the men of Gath -/lew them, i. e. the Soay 0: Ephraim 
in the genera], as they are expreſfled in the beginning of v.20. without 
reſpe&to this or that particular Generation. And therelative Particle, 
them, may be referred not unto the Perſons Jaſt named, but unto 
ſome of the other and more remote Perſons: th's being acommon 
Obſervation of Hebricians, that the Relative ofc belongs to the 
remoter Antecedent. Or, 2. Zabaathe Father of the three Perſons 
and Families laſt named, who mighr poſſivly have two Names and 
be called both Zebad and Epiraim. Or rather the Name of Ephraim 
may be pur patronymically ( as the Learned ſpeak) for the Son and 
Succeflor of Ephra m3 who being now in Ephraim's ſtead, the Head 
ofthe Tribe, as 01d Epiraim was 1n his time, might well be called 
by the ſame name. Thus 7c is pur for his Son Jaco5 or Iſrael, 
Aims 7. 9. and Moſes for the Sons of Moſes, ſal, go. Title, and David 
for his Son Kehoboam, 1 Kings 12, 16. and for Chiiſt, Fer. 30. 9. Ezek; 
34.23, ind ( as many think ) Abraham for Jacob, Abrahams Grandchild, 
48; 7.16 And theſe words, their Father, ſe:m to be added by way 
of diltinQion, to ſhew that he meant nor this of the od Ephraim, bat 
of another, who was Father to the three Perſons faid to be ſlain, 
wv. 21. For if he hal underſtood this of the firſt Ephra/mghaving called 
theſe rhe Sons of Ephraim, 1t might ſeem ſuperfluous a1d tautological 
to tell us that Ephraim was their Father. % 4.e. His Kinſman, as 
that Word is frequently uſed. 

22 And when he went in to his wifz, ſhe conceived, 
and bare a ſon, and he called his name Beriah, becauſe 
It went evil with his houſe. | 

24 ( And hisdaughter « was Sherah, who built þ Beth- 


horon the nether, and the upper, and Uzzer.-therah. ) 
4 i, e. His Grandchild, or Grear Grandchild ; for ſuch are oft 
called Sons or Danghers in Scripture. 6 7. e- Rebuilt or repaired, which 
poſſibly Ge did in Foſhua's time. And this Work may be aſcribed 
to her, becauſe theſe \Works were done either by her deſign or 


HH ROMNMIC LS 


37 Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, ahd Shilſhah, and 
Icthran, and Beera. - JE | 
33 And the ſons of Jether|| ; Jephunneh, and Piſpah, 

and Arah. | | | | 
29 And the ſons of Ullaz ; 
Rezia", | He 
i Another ſon. of Jether, as may be gathered by the courſe of the 


Genealogy, though he be not expreſſed with his Brethren,v 38. See 
the like defect v_ 18. and 34. 

49 All thele were the children of Aſher, heads of rheir 
fachers houſe, choice and mighty men of yalour, chiefof 
the princes. Andthe number throughout the genealogy 
of them that were apt to the war, and to battel, was 


ewenty and ſix thoutand men. 


CA. »Y, vir 
The Sons and Chief Men of Benjamin, 1 314. 
Jonathan, 35 49. > 


N Ow Benj:imin « begat * Bela b his ficſt-born, 
the ſecond, and Aharah the third, 


The Stock of Saul and 


for Saul's ſake, who was of this Tribe ; and partly, becauſe this Tribe 
adhered to David and the Kingdom of Judah, and went with Judah 
into Babylon 3 and now were returned from thence in greater Num= 
bers than the other Tribes, except Judah. Þ Socalled by Moſes : but 
the Names of the ret vary from thoſe in Moſes :.either becauſe the 
ſame Perſon had two ſeveral Names, as hath been often noted : or 
becauſe theſe were not the immediate ſons of Benjam.n. but his 
Grandchildren here mentioned in their Parents ſtead, poſſibly becauſe 
they were more eminent than their Pa-ents. 


2 Notiah the fourth, and Rap-a the fifth. 

3 And the ſons of Bela, were || Addar, and Gera, 
and Abihud, 

4 And Abiſhua, and Naaman, and Ahoah, 

5 And Gera, and || Shephuphan, and Huram. 


heads of the fathers of the inhabitancs of Geba 4, and 25. 
they removed them e ro * Manahath : | 


becauſe he here ipeaks of them who were removed, and they are ſaid 
to be removed, v 7. He deſcribes the Sons of 5mjamin by the Places 
of their Habitation, without an exa& Account of their. Parents 
becauſe their Genealogies were broken by that almoſt roral Ext: i pas 
tion of this Tribe, Judg. 50. e Either their Fathers, or their Heads 
and Superiours removed them : or they removed themſelves; either 


becauſe they were too numerous fot that place . or becauſe. they 
deſired to change their Habitation, and hoped it would be for ths 
better, and judged Manahath a more convenient Place. 
7 And Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he f removed 
them, and begat Uzza, and Ahihud g. TC 
f Either, r. Their Father : Or, 2. Gers laſt mentioned, who, it 
ſeems, was the chief Counſellor or Promoter of this Work. g When 


contrivance ; or by her Inſtigation and Iifluence upon her Husband he was ſeated in Manahath. 


and Brethren who did it. 


8 And Shaharaim begat childres in the countrey of 


25 And Rephah was his ſon, alſo Rezeph, and Telah | Moab h, after he i had ſent them away. Hulbim and 


his ſon, and Tahan his ſon. 

26 Laadan his ſon, Amrmihud his fon, Eliſbama c 
his ſon, TO 

e The head of the Tribe of Ephraim in the Wilderneſs, Num.t: 10. 

27 || Non his'ſon, Jehotbuah his fon. | 

28 And their poſſeflions 4 and habitations were 
Bethel e, and the F towns thereof, and eaſt-ward * 
Naaran, amd weſt-ward Gezer, with the f towns there- 


of; Shechem alſo and the towns thereof, unto |}| Gaza ; 
' f and the towns thereof. 


d i.e, The Portion alloted to the Tribe of Ephraim. 
ftood in the Border of Benjamin, but belonged to Eph aim. f Not that 


from Ephraim, but another of rhe ſame Name, Or rither Ad-azzs, 
as it is in the Margent of our Bible ; the Particle, ad, here rendred 
unto, being a part of the Name; for why ſhou!d «no be put to this 
Town, which is not put to any of the other ? 


29 And by the borders of the chi:dren of* Manaſſeh, i 
Beth-ſhean and ber towns, Tannach and her towns, * | 


j 6 oy o 
: Baara were his wives |&. | 


hþ Whither he had removed himſelf either at the ſame time + rw 


i EL melech did, Ruth. 1.1. &c. or upon the ſame or like occaſion. i E 
- or Gers laſt mentioned. k Others joyn theſe words « ith theformer, 
. and render the place thus, after he had ſent them ( to wit his Sons } 


away, with Huſh m ard Baara his wives, 1. e. as he alſo ſent his wives 
away from him. Which may be here mentioned as a Brand upon 
him, to ſhew that he was without natural Aﬀettion to his Wives 
and Children. And it ſeems the inore probab'e that he divorced 
them , becauſe we find him married to another Wife, v. g, 


9 And he begat of Hodeth his wife, Jobab,aud Zibia, 


- Which and Meſha, and Malcham, 


ro And Jeuz, and Shaciiah, and Mirma. Theſe were 


. of the Philiſtines, which belonged to azother Tribe, and was remore his fons, h-ags of the fathers. 


11: And of Hulhim he begat Ahicub, and Elpaal. - 
12 The ſons of Eipaal ; Eber, and Miſham, and Sha- 

med, who built Ono, and Lod / with the crowns thereof, 
I Of which ſee Ezre 2. 33. Nech 7-37. and 1h. 35. 


. 13 Beriah alſo and Shema, who were heads of the 


Megiddo and her towns, Dor and her towns. In taeſe . fathers of che inhabicants of Ajalon ms, who drove away 


dwelt the children of: Joſeph g, the ſon of Iſrael. 
g i. e, Of Ephraim, Joſeph's Eldeſt Son, 
Joſeph, as hath been noted before. 
30 * The ſons of Aſher : Imnah, and Iſhuah, and 
Iſhuai, and Beriah, and Serah their ſiſter. 
21 And the ſons of Beriah ; Heber, and Malchiel 
who #s the father of Birzavith: | 
.32 And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and 
Hotham, and Shuah their tiſter. 
33 And the ſons of Japhlet, Pafack, and Bimhal, 
and Aſhvath. Theſe are the children of Japhlet. 
24 And the ſons of Shamer || ; Abi, and Rohgah, 
Jehubbah, and Aram. 
35 And the fons of his brother þ4, Helem, Zophah, 
and Imnah, and Sheleſh, and Amal. 
b Brother either of Shamer the eldeſt, namely Hotham: or of Aram 
laſt mentioned. 


35 The ſons of Zophah ; Suah, and Harnepher, and 


Shual, and Beri, agd Imrah ; 


who is ſometimes ca!led j L 


the inhabitants of Gaths. | | | 
m A Place formeily belonging to the Tribe of Dan, Jo. rg. 42.. 
ut after the return fr om Badylon poſſeſſed by the B:njamtes, becauſs 


| both Dan and the reſt of the ten Tribes were yer for the generality 


cf them in Captivity, and but few of them returned. » Either, .. 
Ar that time when they made ſuch a ſlaughter among Zphraims. 
Chijdren, ch. 7. 21. and were poſflibly purſuing their Vi&tory, till 
thcy were driven back by theſe B:njamites who came to the Succour 
of their Brethren, Or, 2. Now when they were returned from 
the Captivity, and found the Men of Gath potlefſed of 4aim. Or, 3. 
At ſome other time not mentioned in Scripture- 

14 And Ahio, Shathak, and Jerimoch, 

15 And Zebediah, and Arad, and Ader, | 

16 And Michael, and Iſpah, and Joha, the ſons of 
Beriah;. | 0 | | 
A . 7 And Zebadiah, and Meſhullam, and Hezeki, and 
EDer, | . | 

13 Thmerai alſo, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the ſons 

of Eipaal, 
1y And Jakim, and Zicktri, agd Zabdi, 


2 Q2 4 20 And 


Chap. VIl;| 


Atah, and Haniel, and V*** 37! | 


Aſhbel » Gen; 


s He had ſpoken ſomething of this Tribe before, chap. 75. 6. but Numb. 
now he treats of it again, and that more fully and exactly ; partly 26. 38; 


6 And theſe c are the ſons of Ehud : theſe are the Num 


c Either thoſe three laſt mentioned ; or rather theſe following, v. 7, 2- 52+ 


ba, V.13- 


{4 


| Called 
; ehiel, ch. 
D. 35- 
Chap. 
D- 35+ 
Or, 
haps 9» 
'37- 
Or, 
Sh:imeamn, 


hap. 9, 


Iſbboſbeth. 


| 7 eh 


* > Sam. 

9. 12. 

j Or, 
Tathres, 

; Chap. 9. 
41. 


* Neh. 
I Is Io © 


hap. IX. '* 


Or, She- fonsot fl Shimhi. 


. 2 
Zechariah, 


20 And:Elionai, and Zilthai, and Eliel. | 
21 And Adajah, and Berajah, and Shimrath, the 


22 And Iſhpait, and Heber, and Eliel, 

23 And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan, | 

24 And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah, 

25 And Iphedejah, and Penuel,the ſons of Shaſhak. 
26 AndShamſherai, and Shehariah, and Athahiah, 
27 And Jareſiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the ſons of 

Jeroham. ; : : 
28 Theſe were heads of the fathers by their generatt- 

ons, chief men. Theſe o dwelt in Jeruſalem. 

o All thefe named from v. 14. to this place. : 
29 And at Gibeon dwelt the || facher of Gibcon p 

( whoſe * wives name was Maacha : ) 
£3: e The chief or Ruler of the Benjamuates dwelling there. 


20 And his firſt-born ſon Abdon, and Zur,and Kiſh, 


and Baal, and Nadab, 

21 And Gedor, and Ahio, and |] Zacher. 

32 And Mikloth begat || Shimeah. And theſe alſo 
dwelt with their brethren 9 in Jeruſalem, over againſt 
them 7. | 

q i. e. With thoſe other Benjamites ſpoken of w- 28. 7 In ſome 
Street or part of Jeruſalem, which was over againſt that where their 
Brethren dweJr. 

33 And * Ner begat Kiſh, and Kiſh begat Saul, 
and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchithuah, - and 
Abinadab, and || Eſbbaal. ; 

34 And the fon of Jonathan, was [|Merib-baal, and 


Merib-baal begat * Micah. 

25 Andtheſons of Micah , were Pithon, and Melech, 
and || Tarea, and Ahaz. 

26 And Ahaz begat Jehoada, and Jchoada begat Ale- 
meth,and Azmaverh,and Zimri,and Zimri begac Moza, 

27 And Moza begat Binea: Rapha was his fon, Eleaſa 
his fon, Azelhis fon, 

28 And Azel had fix ſons, whole names ave theſe, 
Azrikam, Bocheru,. and Iſhmael, and Sheraiah, and 
Obadiah, and Hanan. All thefe were the ſons of Azel. 

9 And the ſons of Eſhak his brother, were Ulam his 
ficſt-born, Jehuſh the ſecond, and Elipheler the third. 

. 40 And the ſons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, 

archers s, and had many ſons, and fons ſens, an hundred 


ad fifry. All theſe are of the ſons of Benjamin. 

- s Heb: Thi? tread the bow : For the Bows of Steel, which theſe 
uſed, required great Sttengrh to bend them ; which therefore they 
did by treading the Bow with their Feer, and pulling the String 
with both their Hands. 
mm” EMIRP. IF. 

The chief of the Tr.be of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manafjer, wlo 
returned from Coprivity, and dwelt at Juruſalem, 1 9. Alſo the 
: Priefts and Levi:es, and how they executed their Office in the Templ: at 

Feruſalem, 10 34. The Fam:ly of Saul, 45—44. 


\ © all Iſrael were: reckoned by genealogies : and 

"behold, they were written in the book of che Kings 

of Iſrael and Judah a, who b were carried away to 
Babylon for their rranſgreflion. 


iz Nor in that Sacred and Canonical Bookſo called, but ( as hath 
been oft obſerved before ) in the Publick Records, wherein there 
was *an Account of that Kingdom, and ofthe ſeveral Families in it, 
according to their Genealogies. 6 z. e. Which Tribe or People of 
Judah Ia mentioned. : : 
2 Now -the firit inhabitants c that dwelt in their 


poſſefiions, In their cities 4, were the Iſraelites e, the 


Prieſts, Levites f, - and the Nethinims g. 

c The firſt afrer the Return from Babylon. di e. That took poſ- 
ſeſſion of their own Lands and Cities, which had been former] 
allotted ro them ; bur of late years had been taken from them for 
theirfins, and poſſciſed/by other People. e 7. e. The common Peo- 
Ple of Judahand Iſrael, called here by the general Name of Iſraelites, 
which was given to them before that unhappy Diviſion of the two 
Kingdoms,and now isreſtored to them when the Iſraelites are united 
with the Jews in one and the ſame Common-wealth, that 1o all the 

Names and Signs of their former Divition might be blotted our. And 
although the generality of the ten Tribes were yet in Captivity, yer 
divers of them were now returned, eicher ſuch as had long before 
the Captivity fled to Jeru/alrm to Worſhip God, and joined them- 
ſelves with 7udah as thoſe 2 Chron, 11. 16, and others, Or ſuch as, 
upon Cy7: his general Proclamation, affociated themſelves, and re- 
turned with thoſe of Judah and Benjamin. f Theſe took poſlefſion of 
the Citics or Places belonging to them, as they had need and oppor- 
unity g A certain Order of Men, either Gibeonites, or others joyned 
with them, devored to the Service of God; and of his Houte, and 
of the Prieits and Levires ; who, that they might attend upon their 
Work without Diſtra&tion, had certain Places and Pofſcilions given 

to them ; which they are now ſaid to repoſleſs. | 
2 Andin* Jeruſalem dwelt of the children of Ju- 
dah and of the chiidren of Benjamin, and of the chil- 


dren of Ephraim, and Manaſſeh 5h. 

bh i. ee Some of each cf theſe Tribes ; either ſuch as offered them- 
ſelves ; or ſich as were choſen by Lot : See Neb. 11, 1, 2. 

4 Uthai, the fon of Ammihud ;, the fon of Omri, 
the ſon of Hari, the fon of Bani, of the children of 
Pharez the ſon of Judahe 


RH RONICLIES 


; That there is ſo great a Diveslicy of Names between this Cata- 
'ogne and that Neb. 11, may be alcribed ro two Cauſes : 1. To the 
Cuſtom of the Hebrews, who uſed very frequently to give two or 
three ſeveral Names to one Perſon : And, 2. To the change of 
Times ; for here they are named who came up at the firſt Rerurn ; 
but. many of thoſe in Nehemian might be fuch as returned afterward, 
and came and dwelt either in ſtead of the Perſons here nained, who 
might be then dead, or gone from Jeruſalem, or with tac. 

5 And of the Shilonites &, Aſajah / che ticit-born, 
and his ſons. 

k Or, Shelanites, as they are called from Shelah, Numb. 26. 29, 
! Called alto AMaaſec/ah, Neb. 11.5. 

6 And of the ſons of Zerah ; Jeuel, and their bre- 
chren, fix hundred and ninety. 

7 And of the ſons of Benjamin ; Sallu theſon of Me- 
ſhullam z, the ſon of Hodaviah, the ſon of Haſenuah. 

» Who is mentioned, bur deſcribed by other Parents, Neb. 11. 7. 
or atleaſt by Perſons under other Names. Poflibly theſe were his 
more unmediate, and thoſe his more remote Parents : or he might 
be born of oc.e, and adopted by anorher. For this is certain, Meri 
are ſometimes 'n Scripture called the Sons of thoſe who adopted 
them, or whoſe Righr of Inherirance fell ro them. 

8 And Ibnejaithe fon of Jeroham, and Elah the ſon 
of Uzzi, the fon of Michri, and Meſhullam the ſon of 
Shoph utiah, the ſon of Reuel, the ſon of Ibnijah ; 

9 Andtheir brethren according to their generations, 
nine hundred and fifty ſix o. All theſe men were chief 


of che fathers in the houſe of their fathers. 

o They are reckoned but 928 in Neh. 11. 8. either becauſe there 
he mentions only thoſe that were by Lot determined to dwell ar 
Jeruſalem, ro whom he here adds thoic who freely offered themſelves 
to it ; ſee Neb. 11. r, 2. becauſe ſoine of the Perſons and Families 
firſt placed there were dead or extinguiſhed, or elſe removed from 
Jersſaiem upon ſome emergent occaſion. 

ro And of the prieits ; Jedajah, and Jehojarib, and 
Jachin, 

1: And Azariah p the fon of Hilkiah q, the ſon of 
Methullam, che fon of Zadok, the ſon of Merajoth, the 
{on of Ahicub, the ruler of the houſe of God r. 

Þ The ſame called S:raiah, Nehem. 11. 12. q Fither of him in 
Toſtals's time, 2 Kings 22, 8, or rather another of the ſame name 
r Or, a ruler in the houſe of Goa * Not the High-Prieſt, who was Ezrs, 
Ezr2, 3. 8. but a chief Ruler under him ; either the ſecond Prieſt, as 
ſuch are called, Num.3.32. or the Head of one of the 24 Families or 
Courtes of the Prieſts. | 


12 And Adaiah the fon of Jeroham, the ſon of Paſhur 
s, the ſon of Malchijah, and Maaſai the ſon of Adie], 
che fon of Jahzerah, the fon of Meſhullam, theſon of 
Meſhillemich, the ſon of Immer. - 

5 3, e. His Great Grandſon, as appears from Neb. 17. 12, 13. 

13 And their brethren, heads of the houſe of their 
fachers, a thouſand and ſeven hundred and threeſcore, 
+ veiy able men 7 for the work of the ſervice of the 


Qualiticatzon for their Place ; becauſe the Prieſts might meer with 
great Oppotition and Difhculcy in the faithful Diſcharge of their 
Oitice, 1a the Execution of the Cenfures upon all Impure Perſons 
withour Exception, and in preſerving Sacred things from Violation 
by the Touch of Forbidden Hands. Of which ſce an eminent Ins 
ſtance 1a Azarizb; 2 Chron, 26. 17, &Cc. 

14 Andof the Levites z Shemajah the ſon of Haſhub, 
the fonot Azrikam, the fon of Haſhabiah, of the ſons of 
Merar1. 

15 And Bakbakkar, Hereſh, and Galal : and Mattaniah 
the ſon of Micah, the ſon of Zichri, the ſonof Aſaph. 

16 And Obadiah the ſon of Shemajah, che fon of 
Galal, the fon of Jeduthun : and Berechiah the ſon of 
Afa, the fon of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of 
the Netophathite . 

u Or, Netrophathites ; which were in Judah, ch. 2. 54. Here they 
nov dwelt, either becauſe their pri pec Cities were nor yet built : or 
becauſe they were nor yet numerous enough to repleniſh them. 

17 And the porters x were Shailum, and Akkub, and 
Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brerchi;ca. Shallum was 
the chief: 

x Whoſe Office ir was to keep all the Gates of the Temple, that 
no unclean Peifon or Thing might center into it. 

18 ( Who hicherto waited inthe kings gate y eaſtward) 
They were porters in the companies z of the children 
of Levi. 


In the Eaſt-gate of the Temple, which was ſo called, eitherbe- 
cauſe ic was the chief and moſt Magnificent of all the Gates : or 
becauſe the Kings of Ju42h uſed ro go to the Temple through that 
Gate, 2 Kings 16. 18. Compare Ez-k. 44. 1, 2. Under this Gate he 
comprehends all the reſt, which alfo were guarded by theſe Porters. 
z Or, according to the companies, or orders, Or courſes, i. e. They kept 
the Gates ſucceſſively, according to that Metho(l into which chem- 
ſelves and the reſt of their Brethren rhe Levices were diſtributed, 
for the more convenient management oftheir ſeyeral Offices; among 
which this of the Porters was one. | 

I9 And Shallum the ſon of Kore, the ſon of Ebiaſaph, 
the ſon of Korah, and hisbrethren ( of the houſe of his 


father) the Korkites were over the work of the tervice, 


| 


| keepers of the entry &, 0 
g Or, 


keepers of the | gates of the tabernacle 4: and their ; ye, 
fathers b being over the hoſt of the LORD c, were zrbulis 


houſe of God. u Heb, 
; Heb. mighty men of valour , Which is here noted as anexcellent ys ng 


- 


, 


Chap. Ix, Un 


th: 
1,2. 
| dat 


6 9. 
(Hel 


| hunde 
01,8 


FHel 
Vere 
the ks 
Gr. 


THe 
in 
in by 
and ( 
them 
tale 
| Or 
Veſſel 
q Or 

Ex 


39:2: 


IX, * IX. 


#fh,26. 
1,2. 

' | Fam» 

; feb 

JI indd, 

I 01w9f. 


ſeb. 
"ty me 
alour, 

; | 


- 


bujey. 


THeb. 
in by tale 


tale 
| Or, 
veſſels, 
&>, 
boli | *Exo9. 


39:23, 


[Or,try $ 
| 0, — 


PHcb:they 
Yreover becauſe 
wy ty. $0 thereof 


bring them 


| Or, Bux 


L CG © & 


a Or, who weys, to wit, in time paſt, which is expreſſed in a like 
exſe,v,20., when the Tabernacle was franding,before the Temple was 
built. 6 The Kohathites, of whom ſee on Numb.4.4. c Or, with. 
(as this Hebrew Particle is oft uſed ) the ho#, &c. i.e. When the 
Tiraclires were in the Wilderneſs, encamped in a military manner 
round about the Tabernacle, with,or among whom theſe were then 
placed. d #.e, Ofthe Vail by which they entced into the Taber- 
nacle;which he calls the entry diſtinCtively, becauſe then there were 
no Gates. The meaning is, That all things were now reſtored to 
cheir PrimitiveOrder & Inſtitution ;&the ſeveral Perſons took theſe 
Pla es & Offices upon them,whick their Anceſtors had before them. 

20 And * Phineas the ſon of Eleazar was the ruler 


over them e in times paſt,and the LOR Dwas with him f. 
e 1. e, Over all the Porters, and other Levites and Prieſts before 
mentioned. f To direct, and affiſt, and bleſs him in the diſcharge 
of his Place. Which feems here related to encourage his Succeflor, 
and conſequently all the Prieſts and Levites of this time to go on 
couragioully and reſolutely in their Work,not doubting but God 
will irand by them as he had done by their Fathers. 
21 And Z&echariah the ſon of Methelemiah,was g porter 


þ of the door of the tabernacle z of the congregation. 
gs To wit, inthe time of David,as the following Verſe ſheweth, 
See ch. 26: 1,2.and 27:2. + 1,e. Chief Porter. # 7. e. Of the Door 
which led out of the Prieſts Court into the Tabernacle, in which 
the Ark was placed, 2 Sam.6.17. : 
22 All theſe which were choſen to be porters in the 


gates, were two hundred and twelve. Theſe were reck- 
oned by their genealogy in their villages & : whom * Da- 
vid and Samuel the * ſeer + did ordain / in their || ſet 


office mn. 

k Where there uſual Reſidence was,& whence they came to Jeru- 

ſalem in their Courſes. 1 In the tines of the Judges there was much 
Diſorders & Confuſion both in the Jewiſh State & Church,and the 
Lev'tes came to the Tabernacle promiſcuouſly,& as their Inclinat'- 
ons or Occaſions brought them. But Samuel the beit of Judges, 
having ſome proſpect and good hopes cf deliverance from their 
Encmies, and of ai happy Sertlement of the Iſraclitiſh Church and 
Nation ; and obſerving that the Levires were greatly increated, h: 
began to rhink If eſtabl ſhing ſomeOrder among theLevires in the.) 
Mainiſtraticn abour the Tabernacle. And theſe intentions of his 
probably were communicated by him to David, who after Samuel: 
Death and his own peaceable Settlement in his Throne,revived and 
perf-tcd Samuels Deſign. & took care to pur it in Execution. m2 Heb. 
in their faith, or faithfulneſs, i, e, Either, 1. In their office, which is 
called faithfulneſs, becauſe this is required in that office. Or, 
2 In the Faithful 01:charge of their Dury and in obedience to the 
Will of God ſignified to them by Revelation,or by rhe ſpirit,as it 15 
ſaid of David, 1 Chron.28. » 2, which they received by Faith,and ac- 
cordingly deſigned,and David executed it. And 6 this is added tc 
ſhew,thar this was no Humane Invention,as ſome might conceive, 
bur a bivine Appointment, to which all ought to ſubmit. 

23 So they and their cuildren had we orerlighe n of 
the gates of the houſe of che LORD, »amely, the houſe 
of the tebernacie o, by wards p. 

n To wit,in Davia's time. 0 This 1s added tn explain what he 
means by the Houſe of the Lord,n"vt that Tabernacle which Davia 
had fer up tor the Ark ; bur that ore folemn Tabernance, which 
Moſes had made by Gods expreſs Command and moſt particular Dj 
rettion ; which in Davids time was at Gibern; in which God was. 
and would be worſhipped unti the Temple was built- See 1 Kings 
3: 2, &C, 2 Chron:1:3,5,& þp 7.e By Turns or courſes,cach of th-m 
at his Gare, and in his appoited tune. 

24 In four quarters were the porters q : towards the 
eaſt, welt, north, and ſouth. 

q i,e, The Chief Porters, as this is explained, v. 26. 

25 And their brethren which were in their villages 
were to come r after ſeven days s, from time to time 


with them 7. 

r From their ſeveral Villages to the Place of Worſhip. 5 Every 
Sabbath or Seventh day theCourtes were changed,& the New Com- 
ers were to tarry tili the next Sabbath=day. See 2 King 1. 5,7.9. 
? 7, e. To be with them, z- e. with rhe Chief pirters, who always 
abode 1a the Place of 'zod's Worſhip, and ro miniſter to them + 

25 For theſe Levites. the tour chief porters, were iz, 
their || fet office u ; and were over the || chambers and 


treaſuies x of the houſe of God. 

7. e. They were conſtantly upon the Place,and in the executi n 
of their office.thar ſo they might overſee & dere the Inferiour Por- 
ters in their Work. Or, as others render the Words, agreeably :0 
the Hebrew Tcxt, For theſe (i. e. their Brethren, v. 25.) were under the 
charge, or committed to the truſt of the fiur chief porters, who allo were 
Levites. as their Brethren were ; whe: eas the Cheef of all of chem 
was a Pricett. Either way thete Woids contain a Reaſon of w at 
was ſaid,v. 25. why rhe re[t were to come tn thele,and to be with 
them. x In which the Sacred Urenſils, and other Treaſures be» 
longing to the Temple, were kept. 

27 And they lodged round about the houſe of God y. 
the charge was upon them, and f the openiug 
every mo;ning pertained to them. 

) Therefore they were obliged to conſtantReſidence in the Place; 
and were not permitted to dweil in- the Villages,as their Brethren 
Were. 


28 And certain of them had the charge of the mini- 


and care; ſtring veſſels, that they jhouid F bring them in and out 
themout by by tale. 


29 Some of them alſo were apyoinced to overſee the 
veſſels, and all the || inftrumenrs of the fancuary, and 
the fine flour,and the wine, and the vil, and the frank- 
incenſe, aud the 1pices. 

3o And || ſome? ot the ſons of the: prieſts made * the 
ointment of the ſpices &. 


g day and night þ. E 
c 7.e. Others of the Levites ; of whoſe ſeveral Offices he had Tpb.. 


N”' 1 CL BS 


z This is addcd to prevent a Miftake,and to ſhew,that althoygh 
the Levites were intrutted with the keeping of this Ointment, yet 


| None but the Prieſts could make it. See Exod: 30: 22, &c. , 


1 And Mattichiah,oze of the Levites ( who was the 


a i.e. Was to take care that Fine Flour might providedand kept 
ſafely and well,that when occaſion required they might make Cakes 
in Pans to be offered to the Lord : of which ſee on Lev! 2: 5. 


32 And other of their brethren of the ſons of the 


were free f: for | they were imployed in that 


ken before. 4 Or rather, were; which is underſtood, and-all along 


in the foregoing and following Verſes,and again in this very verſe. 


e Where they waited,that they might be ready to come whenſo- 
ever they were called to the Service of God in the Tabernacle. 


f From all Trouble and Employment, that they might wholly ar- 


rend upon the proper Work. g Either compoſing or ordering Sa- 
cred Songs3 or aGual ſinging ; or teaching others to ſing them. 
þ i.e. Continually, and particularly in the Morning and Evening, 
the two times appointed for ſolemn Service and Offerings. 
24 Theſe ctief fathers of the Levites, were chief 
throughout their generations: theſe dwelt at Jeruſalem. 
; Upon their return from Babylon they were not ſuffered to chuſe 
their Habitations in the Country,as others were.but were obliged 
ro ſettle themſelves at Jeruſalem, that they might conſtantly atrend 
upon Gods Service there, and be ready to inſtru& the younger 
Levites in their Office, as they needed or deſired it. 

25 And in Gibeon dwelt che father of Gibeon, Je- 
11121 + whoſe wives name was Maacha & : 


gy, that he might make way for the following Hiſtory. Which is a 
Figure called Epanalepſis, which is frequent both in Sacred and 
Prophane Writers. 


36 And his firſt-born ſon Abdan, then Zur,and Kiſh, 
and Baai, and Ner, and Nadab, | 

27 And Gedor, and Ahio,8& Zechariah,and Mikloth. 

23 And Mikloth begat Shimeam,and they alſo dwelt 
with their brethren at Jeruſalem over againſt their bre- 
chren. 


Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi-ſhua, and Abinadab, 
and Eſhbaal. | 

40 And the ſon of Jonathan was Merib-baal: and 
Merib-baal begat Micah. 

41 And the ſons of Micah were Pithon, and Melech, 
and Tahrea, * and abaxz. | 

42 And Ahaz begat Jarah,and Jarah begat Alemeth, 
and Azmaveth, and Zimri: and Z.imri begat Moza. 

43 And Moza begart Binea: and Rephajah his ſon,E- 
leaſah his fon, Azel his ſon. 

44 Aud Azel had fix ſons, whoſe names are theſe : 
Azrikam, Bocheru, and Iſmael, and Sheariah,and Oba- 
diah, and Hanan, Theſe were the ſons of Azel. 


WAP. X 


Sauls Overthrow and death, 1 7. The Philiſlines triumph over Saul 
8 10. The Kindueſs of Jabejb-Gil:ad rowards Saul and his Sons : 
His $:n, 11 14» 

OW * the Philiſtines fought m_ Iſrael , and 

the men of Iſrael fled from before the Philiſtines, 
and fell down || ſlain in mount Gilboa. 
a Of this and the following Verſes till v 13. ſee my Notes on 

1 Sam. 31. where we have the ſame thing expreſſed almoſt in the 

ſame Words. 


2 And the Philiſtines followed hard afrer Saul, and 
afrer his fons, and the Philiſtines flew Jonathan, and 
[| Abinadab, and Malchi-ſhua, the fons of Saul. 

3 And the batce] went fore againſt Saul, and the 
t archers + hit him : and he was wounded of the ar- 
chers. 

4 Then faid Saul to his armour-bearer, Draw thy 
ſword,aud thruſt me through therewith,leſt theſe uncir- 
cumciſed come, and || abuſe me : but his armour-bearer 
would not, for he was ſore afraid. So Saul took a ſword, 
and fell upon ir. 

And when his armour-bearer ſaw that Saul was 
dead, he fell likewiſe on the ſword, ard died. 

6 So Saul died, and his three ſons, and all his houſe 5 
died together. 

b 1. e. All his children, to wit, then preſent with him, namely, 
Lis three ſons, as it i» expreſſed, 1 Sam: 31. 6- For itis evident that 
Iſbboſbeth and Mepiboſheth were not ſlain. But nothing is more com- 
mon in Scripture and all Authors,than to underſtand a of a great 


and moir conſiderable parr. : 
7And when all the men of Iſrael that were in the val- 


ley c,ſaw that they fled, and that Saul and his ſons were 
2 R 


Chap. X. || 


3 
firſt-born of Shallum the Korhite ) had' the [| ſer dffice | 


{ over the things that were made || in the pans 9. fs 
' b 


Kohathites, were over the + ſhew-bread b to'prepare it + Heb. 


every ſabbath. « bread of 
b Of which ſee Exod. 35. 13. R ' ordering. 
33 And thele c ared * the ſingers, chief of the fa- * Chap: 6: 


thers of the Levites, who remaining in the chambers e, 31:& 25:1 
work + Heb:up= 
on them. 


+ Heb. 
k In this and the following verſes to the end of this Chapter he whoſe ſ#« 
repeats what he ſaid before, ch: 8: 29, &c. concerning Saul: Genealo- ſters name. 


19 * And Ner begat Kiſh,and Kiſh begat Saul, and *Ch-8.33- 


dead, 


_ 


Or,rruſt” 
Or, ox 


*Ch. 8435. 


* Sam, || 
31, r, 2s. 
i Or, 


| Or, 1bus , 1 
1 Sam. [ 
14. 49. 
T Heb. 
ſhoovers | 
with bows. || 
t Heb. |} 
ound him. || 
| Or, mock | 
me, ( 


| 
| 


T5:23. 1 | 70! 
© * 1 Sams Vengeance for it» g Againſt Gods exprels, and plain,and poſitive 


(Chap. XI. EH KO 
dead, then they forſook their cities, and fled, and the] 
Philiſtines came and dwelt in them. | 
Z Which was beneath Mount Gilboa, where the Fight was, v: 1 
o And it came to paſs on the morrow, when the 
Philiſtines came to ſtrip the ſlain, that they found 
Saul and his ſons fallen in mount Gilboa. ; 
9 And when they had ſtripped him, they took his 
head, and his armour,and ſent into the land of the Phi- 
liſines round about, to carry tidings unto their Idols, ; 
and tothe people. ; 
roAnd they put his armour in the houſe of their gods, 


and faftened his head in the F tegaple of Dagon &. 
d And his Body ſevered from his Head to the Wall of Berhſhan, 
2 Sam; 31: 10. 

it And when all Jabeſh-gilead heard all chat the 
Philiſtines had done to Saul: 

12 They aroſe, all the valiant men, and took away 
the body of Saul,and the bodies of hisſons,and brought 
them to Jabeſh,and buried their bones under the oak in 
Jabeſh, and faſted ſeven days e. | 

e To wit, every Day till Evening,after the manner of the Jewiſh 
Faſts. : 

13 SoSaul died for his tranſgreflion f which he Tcom- 
+Heb, Mitred againſt the Lord, * even againit the word of the 
wenkereſ:d LORD g,which he kept nor ;and alſo for asking counſel 
* i Sam: of one that had a familiar ſpirir þ, * to enquire of zt : : 
13:13. & fTheſenſe is, Wonder not that Sau! fell by the Hands of the Phi- 
liſtines, who were armed againſt him by his own Sin,and by God's 


Command : which is a great Aggravation of any Sin- þ Which alſo 
was contrary to a manifeſt Command, Lew!?: 19: 31. and moreover, 
contrary to kis ownConſcience,which was ſo fully convinced here- 

| of, that he had endeavoured the utter Extirpation of all ſuch Per 
' ſons, in purſuance of Gods Law. See 1 Sam;28:9. 3 23% dint 


28: 7. 


the Event of the approaching Battel. 
14 And enquired not of the LORD &: therefore he 

;flew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the ſon 
of 7 Jelle. | | 
. | & +Obj. Saul enquired of the Lord, 1 Sam: 28:6. Anſ. He did ſo, but 
not in a right manner,not humbly and penitently,not diligently & 
importunarely,notpatiently and perſeveringly:but whenGod would 
"not anſwer him ſpeedily,he gives it over,and goes from God to the 
- Devil. Compare 1 $am:14:18,19. Such an inconfiderable and trifling 
- Inquiry as Saut made, is juſtly accounted to be no Enquiry at all. 

As they are ſaid not #6 eat the Lords Supper, 1 Gor: 11:20. who did eat 

it 12 a finful and irregular manner. 


GHAT. AL 

David wade King at Hebron : by Joabs wallour winneth the Caſtle of Zion 
from the Febuſites : repaireth the city of Jeruſalem, 1 9, A Cata-= 

logue of his mighty men, 10 47- 
Hen * all Ifrael 2 gathered themſelves to David 
unto Hebron, ſaying, Behold, we are thy bone 

and thy fleſh. 4Y 
s i.e. All the Tribes ef Iſrael, as it is expreſſed, 2 Sam: 5:1. 75.e. 
their Elders,as it is here ſaid v.3- and Officers,and a great multitude 

of the Souldiers and People. _ | 

+ Heb: 2 And moreover,7 in time paſt,even when Saul was 
bub yeſter- king, thou waſt he that leddeſt out, and broughteſt in 


F Heb. 
Iſai. 


day & the Tſrael : and the LORD thy God ſaid unto thee b,Thou 
$0: ” ſhalt || feed my people Lirael, and thou ſhalt be ruler 
"8% over my people [{rael. 

þ Or, concermng thee : for it is apparent that they knew of it ; 
and therefore many of them oppoſed David hitherto againſt their 
own Conſciences. 

3 Therefore came all the elders of Iſrael to the king 
ro Hebron, and David made a covenant with them in 
Hebron before the LORD, and they anointed David 
king over Iſrael, according to the word of the LORD | 


+ Heb. by + by * Samuel. 


*be haud ef 4 And David and all Ifrael * went out to Jeruſalem c, 
* 1Sam: which is Jebus, where the Jebuſites were, the inhabitants 
16: 1]. of the land. | 
Aa Sad this and the three following Verſes ſee the Notes on 2 Sam: 
ers . Og XC, 

5 And the inbabitants of Jebus ſaid to David, Thou 

ſhalt not come hither. Nevertheleſs David took the 

caftle of Zion, which #s the city of David. 

6 And David ſaid, whoſoever ſmitteth the Jebuſite 
+ Heb. firſt, ſhall be + chief and captain; So Joab the ſon of 
head, Tervjah went firſt up, and was chief d. | 
d Before this he was one of Davids Chief Captains,2 Sam:3:22:23. 
[| That is, and General of the Forces of Judah ; but now he is made Captain- 
Zion General of all the Forces of Iſrael and Judah. 
2Sam:5:7: 7 And David dwelt in the caſtle ; therefore they 
t Heb: called || it, The city of David. 
TH, 8 And he built the city round about :even from Mil- 
15+ :>-. 10 round about:and Joab Þ repaired the reſt of the city. 
$o= . 

ing andin= 9 So David | waxed greater and greater : for the 
creaſing, LORD of hoſts was with him. 
"259M: 70 * Theſe alſo are the chief of the mighty men 
ior ' p14 Whom David had,(who || ſtrengthened themſelves with 
f#rongly him in his kingdom e,and with all Iiracl f, co maks him | 
with him, 


N16 LI B > 


king, according to the word of the LORD,concerning 
[ſrael. | 

e Who helped him with all their Might to ſettle him is his 
Kingdom. f In conjunQtion with all thoſe Loyal Iſraelites who 
joyned with David .; of whom ſee the next Chapter. 

11 And this is the number of the mighty men, whom 
David had :) Jaſhobeam|] an Hachmonite g the chief of || Or, (n 
the captains: he lift up his ſpear againſt three hundreq, Y #4 
ſlain by him h at one time. "os 

g Called the Tachmonite and Adino the Eznite, 2 Sams 23:8. h To 
wit,by his own Hand,5oo more being ſlain by others then joyning 
with him,who purſued the Viory that he alone gor,& in the pur- 
ſuit flew 500, both which Sums make up the 800 numbred 2 Sam: 24: 
8. the ſlaughter of all which is juſtly aſcribed to him, becauſe jr 
was the Effet of his Valour. Bur concerning that and other Dif. 
fcrences about theſe Perſons or Things,ſee my Notes on 2 Sam: 23, 

12 And after him was Eleazar the fon of Dodo the 
Ahohite, who was one of the three mighties. 

13 He was with David at [| Paſdammim, and three 
the Phiiſtins were gathered together to battel, where br ag 
was a parcel of ground full of Barley, and the people mi, 
fled from before the Philiſtines, 1Samcinej, 

14 And they || ſet themſelves in the midſt of that . Or ford, 
parcel, and delivered it,and flew the Philiſtines,and the _— 
LORD faved ther by a great || deliverance. . HOrghru 

15 Now || three of the thirty captains * went down *2-in: 
co the rock to David, into the cave of Addullem, and jj” 
the hoſt of the Philiſtines encamped in the valley of * 


- * 2 Sam, 
Rephaim. = 


3'13. 
16 And David was then in the hold, and the Phili- | 0r,46 
ſtins [| garriſon was then at Beth-lehem. PW. 

17 And David longed and ſaid, O that one would 
give me drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem 
that zs at the gate. 

18 And the three brake through the hoſt of the Phi. 
liſtines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, 
that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to Da- 
rid. But David would not drink of it, but poured it 
out to the LORD. 

19 And ſaid, My God forbid it me, that T ſhould do 
chis thing : ſhall I drink the blood of theſe men, + that + Heb, 
have pur their lives in jeopardy ? for with the jeopardy of with this 
their lives they brought it : therefore he would not liv, 
drink it- Theſe things did theſe three mightieſt 3. 


,* Heb. rheſe three mighties, to wit, laſt mentioned, whereof one 
was 4*ijhar, v.20. For the Atts of two of the firſt three are here 
patſed over, being recorded 2 Sam, 23. 


20 And Abiſhai the brother of Joab, he was chief of 
the three: for lifting up his ſpear againſt three hundred, 
he flew hem k, and:had a name among the three. 

k He vanquiſhed them all,and flew a great number of them ; tho' 


it be not ſaid that he ſlew them all at one time, as it is ſaid of 
of Jaſhobeam above wv 11. 


21 * Of tne three he was more honourable than the * , 5,9; 
ewo, for he was their captain, howbeit he attained nov :3:9.&c, 
unto the fir three /. 

{ He did not equal them in valiant Exploits. 

22 Benayjah the ſon of Jet.ojada, the ſon of a valiant 
man of Kabzeel, + who had done many acts: he flew + yy; 
ewo lion-like men of Moab : alſo he went down, and gre of 
ſlew a lion ina pitin a ſnowy day. deeds, 

23 And he ſlew an Egyptian, + a man of great ſta- , ,,,, 
eur:, hve cubits high, and in the Egyptians hand was a , manef 
ſpear like a weavers beam, and he went down to him meſure, 
with a ſtaif, and pluckt the ſpear out of the Egyptians 
hand, and flew him with his own ſpear. 

24 Theſe things did Benajah the ſon of Jehojada, 
and had the name » among the three mighties. 

m Or, had a name, i. e. was greatly reputed : For though he did 


not equal Ab:iſhai, one of theſe three, as appears by v. 20,21. yet he 
did excel the third of them, and all the thirty here following. 


25 Behold, he was honourable among the thircy,but 
attained not to the fr# three ; and David ſet him over 
his T guard ». 

» Heb. his hearing or obedience, i. e, thoſe that were always ready 


to hear and obey or execute his Commands, to wit, the Guards of 
his Body. 


26 Alſo the valiant men of the armies, were Aſahel 
_ brother of Joab, Elhanan the ſon of Dodo of Beth- 
chem : | 
27 Shammoth the || Hararite, Helez, the Pelonite, | 
28 Ira the ſon of Ikkeſh the Tekoite, Abiezer the An- frail 
tothite, 2 Sami233 
29 Sibbecai the Huſhathite, Tlai the Ahohite, 25- 
30 Mahari the Netophathite, Heled the ſon of Baa- 
nah the Ne:ophathite, 
31 Ithai the ſon of Ribai, of Gibeah,char pertained to 
the children of Benjamite, Benajah the Pirathonite, 
3 Hurai of the books o of Gaaſh, Abiel the Arba- 
chite, 


3 


+ Heb. 
hearing. 


G r.fami! 


o Or, 


my 


Chap. Xl 


(0r,s 


Wee 


F'San 


1:2, 
tHeb 
ing bu; 


C 


hey 


Ke, 


eb, 


ings 


fami)) 


ts . 
gaitt, 
102 Je 


| 


Chaps XUl. L CHD 
s Or, of the walleys, i.e. of one of them :the Plural Number ſor 
the Singular : ſo called becauſe he was born or bred there. 
23 Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbo- 
nite, 
24. The ſons of Haſhem 
ſon of Shage the Hararite,. | | 
? Or, Jaſhem, to wit, Jonathan here following, ' and Shaama 
here omitted, but expreſſed, 2 Sam. 23. 32, 33. 
25 Ahiam the fon of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the 
fon of Ur. = 6 0Þ Shy h ; p 
26 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 
27 Hezco the Carmelite, Naari the ſon of Ezbai, 

1 Ortle 38 Joel the brother of Nathan q,Mibhar.|| the ſon of 

Hagger150. Hagger1, ' x6, 

q Either 1. The ſame who is called Jas! the (on of Nathan of Zobah, 
being poſſibly his Brether by Birth and Nature, and called his Sor 
by Adoption, or right of Succeſſion to his Eſtate : or called his 
Brother at large for his near Kinſman, and his $02 for his Nephew : 

2. Another, who, upon the Death of the former, was put in 

his ſtead. 

29 Zelck the Ammonite,Naharai the Berothite, the 
armour-bearer of Joab the ſon of Zerujah, 

40 Ira the Ithrice, Gareb the Ichrite, 

4r Uriah the Hittite r,Zabad the ſon of Ahlai, 

r The laſt of that Catalogue in 2 S«m.23-39 But here ſome others 
are added to the Number, becauſe though they were not of the 
Thirty.yet they were Men of great Valour and Renown amongſt 
David's Commanders. ; ; : 

42 Adina the ſon of Shiza, the Reubenite,a captain 
of the Reubenites, and thirty s with him. 

5 Thirty Captains who were under him as their Colonel. 

42 Hanan the fon of Maacah, and Jehoſhaphat the 
Mithnite. 

44 Uzziah the Aſhterathite, Shama and Jehiel the 
ſons of Hothan the Aroerite ?, 

t So called poſſibly becauſe. his Station and Quarters were upon 
the River Aroer beyond Jordan, being placed there for the Detence 
of thoſe Parts. , 

45 Jediael the ſon of Shimri, and Joha his brother, 
the Tirzite, 

45 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jerimai, and Joſhaviah, 
the ſons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabire «. 

x So called either becauſe he was by Birth a Moabite,though now 
proſelyted ro the trueReiigion,or from ſome eminent Service done 
by him againſt the Moabites,as among the Romans Scipio was called 
Aſiatick and African,becauſe of his great Atchievements and ViCtories 
over thoſe Parts and People» : 

47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jaaſfie) the Meſobaate. 
CH A P. XII. 

The Companies that came to David at Ziklag when Purſued by Saul : Jome 
of Sauls own Family : ſome of the Tribe of Gad : of Benjamin : and 
Judah : and Manaſſeh: 1 22. The Armies that cams to him at 
Hebron : their Feaſt, 23 4 

OW * thele are they 

19:2. + while he yet kept himſelf cloſe s, becauſe 

tHeb.be- of Saul the ſon of Kiſh :and they were among the migh- 

mu ?. ty men, helpers of the war. 

a Or, was ſhut up,or ſhut out, from his own Land and People; for 
he ſpeaks not of that time when he was ſhut up, and hid himſelf 

P P> anc 
in Caves in the Land of Judah, but when he was as Ziklag. 

2 They were armed with bows,and could uſe both the 
right hand and the left b, in hurling ſtones and ſhooting 
arrows out of a bow, even of Sauls brethren of Benja- 
min c. 

6 With like nimbleneſs and certainty. Compare Judges 3:15. and 
20:16. c i. e Of Saul's own Tribe : who were moved hereunto by 
Gods Spirit,and by the conſcience of their Duty to David,to whom 
God had given the Crown in reverſion ; and by their Obſervation of 
Gods departure from Saul,and of his ſpecial Preſence with David,and 
his gracious Providence for him. 


3 The chief-was Ahiezer, then Joaſh,the ſons of || She- 
maah the Gibeathite, and Jeziel, and Pelet, the ſons of 
Azmaveth, and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite. 

4 And Iſmajah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among 
the thirty, and over the thirty 4, and Jeremiah, and Ja- 
haziel, and Johanan, and Joſabad the Gederathite, 


d 3..e. Who came attended with 3o valiant Benjamites, and was 
their Leader and Commander- 


5 Eluzai and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, 
and Shephatiah the Haruphire, 

6 Eikanah, and Jeſiah, and Azareel, and Joezer and 
Jaſhobeam the Korhires. 
a7 And Joelah, and Zebadiah thg ſons of Jeroham of 

edor, | 

8 And of the Gadite there ſeparated themſelves e un- 
" toDavid into the hoid to the wilderneſs f,men of might, 
: - f and men | of war, fic for the bactel, thac couid handle 
tac, ,, Ihield and buckler : whoſe faces were like che taces of 
hems lions g, and were Þ as fwift as the roes upon the moun- 
Um the tains þ. 


ein e« From $Saul,to whom they had hitherto adhered ; and from their 
i <_ B:erhien of ther own Tribe, who yer maintained Sauls Cauſe ; and 
Pe from their Families, & the placcs where they lived, from whom they 
went to David. f Or, imo the ld of the Wilderneſs ; tee. Either to 

the Cave of Adailam cr Engeds 3 or rather to Ziklag, as appears frem 

% b Which was 11 the Wilderneſs of J#4ah, which 15 here called che 


p the Gizonite, Jonathan the 


[Or,Shim. 


With 


Oo, 
» Om, chat came to David to Ziklag, 


|Or, 
Homagc,. 


--- 


NICHES. Chap, XIT, 
bold, or the fortreſs, which name 1s alſo given to the City of Devid, | 
1 Chron. 11:7. the Hebrew word being the ſame both here and there. 


g Who were full of Courage,and by the Majeſty and Fierceneſs of 
theirCountenance terrified their Adverſaries. þ As their very Looks: 


datinred their Enemies, and pur them to flighr,ſo they could eaſily * 
purſue and overtake and deſtroy them in their Flight. 


9 Eze:r the firſt,Obadiah the ſecond, Eliab the third, 

io Milhmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, - 

11 Attai the ſixth; Eliel the ſeventh, 

12 Johanan the Eighth, Elzabub the ninth, 

13 Jeremiah the-tenth, Machbanai the Eleventh. 

I4 Thele were the ſons of Gad,caprains of the hoſt : 
+ one of the leaſt wa%over an hundred, and the greateſt , ;;. . 
over a thouſand z.. . | | ns 


; Not that they brought now ſo many Men with them, but ei- gn it 
ther, 1. They hat hitherto been Captains or Colonels under Saul, cgy1d re. 


or in the eſtabliſhed Miliria or Bands of their Tribe. Or, 2. The) Js 
were ſo afterwards under David,who for their Valour and Bideliry ng 
rhus advanced them. FL the greateſt 

15 Theſe are chey that went over Jordan & in the firſt » :houſand © 
month,when it had F overflown all his banks /,and they 
put to, flight all them of the valleys m, both toward the + Heb- #6 . | 
eaſt, and toward the weſt ». | led ever. 
k. To wit, in Sau['s time, when it ſeems, the enemies of the I{- 
raelites had made an Inroad,and done ſome Miſchiefs to the Itrace 
Ittes beyond Jordan, to whoſe Help theſe then came. 1 As it con- 
monjy did abour ttt time. See Joſ: 3:15: and 4: 18. Jer: 49: 19, 

This is hored either as a Deſcription of the Time when this was. 
done, it being uſual with Hiſtorians to nore the Circumſtances of 
ou Actions: cr as an aggravation of the Fact. And poſſibly theſe 
eing Men of great Nimbieneſs and Dexterity, d:d ſweem over 
Jordan, through their 2tdent D-:fice to help their Brethren, and ro 
fight with their Enemies. m 5. e. The people that lived in the Vals 
leys or Deſarts beyond Jordan,who,as it teems, when Saul was en- 
gaged againſt ch< Phiſiſtines, took that advantage to fall upon the 
iraelites beyond Jordan, n Either; 1. the People that lived more 
Eaſtward and remote from Jorden,and thoſe who lived more Weſt- 
ward or nearer to it. Or, 2, them made they fly ſeveral ways,ſome 
Eaſtward, ſome Weſtward, as they ſaw the way open for them. 
See Deut: 28: 7, 25. | 

16 And there came|| of the children of Benjamin 
and Judah t6 the hold 0 unto David. || ſo; 

0 To the ſame Hold mentioned v: 8. where ſee the Notes. 

17 And David went ont f to meec them, and anſwe- 
red pand faid unto them,If ye be come peaceably unto + x1, z;z 
.me to help me, mine hearr ſhall + be knic unto you q : fore th em* 
but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies r, ſeing f Heb. be 

: , : ones 

there is no || wrong in mine hands s, the God of our | Or, wi 
fathers look thereon, and rebuke it z. ; Ban _ 

:, e. Spake; as that word is oft ufed in Scripture even of him _ 
that ſpeaketh firſt. q I hall ever eſteem and love you, and ſhew 
this by my Attions to you hereafter. » Which your Number,and 
Qualiry, and near Relation to Sul gives me ſome cauſe to ſuf 
pe. 5 1 have done no Injury to Saul, nor to you; but have ſpared 
him and you when it was in my power to have deſtroyed you» 
£ To wit, by his Hand and Power manifeſted for me and againſt 
you for your Perfidiouſneſs. 

18 Then t the ſpirit came upon Amaſai », who was 
chief of the captains, and he ſaid, Thine are we, David, 
and on thy ſide, thou ſon of Jeſſe ; peace, peace be un- - 

> IT thed Aman 
to thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for thy God [2;. 5 
helperth thee x. Then David received them : and made Jud. 6, 
them captains of the band y. 34 

« Not only ſaving Graces, bur other Heroical and generous Mos. 

tions are aſcribed roGcdsSpirit,which here ſtirred up inhimamore 
than ordinary greatnels and preſentneſs of Mind and Reſolution. 
x We have oblerved God's ſingular and gracious Care of thee, and 
Kindneſs to thee,and if we ſhould oppoſe thee,we ſhould be Fighters 
againſt God and his Word and Providence. yz. e. Of thoſe Forces 
which they brought with them. Or, he puts chem among the h:ad:s or 
officers of us band ; i. e. He gave them Commands either now in his 
{mall army, each accordirg ro his Quality : Or afterwards when 
he was ad\anced to the Kingdom : for it is not here expreſſed 
when he did this. 

19 And there fell ſoze of manaſſeh to David (when 
he came with the Philiſtines againſt Saul to battel, but 
they helped them not z; for the lords of the Philiſtins, | 
upon adviſement, ſent him away, ſaying, * He will * , gy; 
fall to his malter Saul, f to the Feopardy of our heads.) 29: 4. 

z i. e.The Manaſlites here named,and the reſt of David's Forces, t Heb. of 
to whom they had now joyned themſelves,did not help the Phili- *9r heads. 
ſtines in Battel, as David had pretended ro do. : 

20 As he went toZiklag a, there fell to him of Ma- 
nafſeh, Adnah, and Jezabad, and Jedaiel, and Michael, 
and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Ziithai, captains of the 
thouſands that were of Manaſſeh. 

. # As he returned from the Camp of the Philiſtines ro Zilleg, 
r Sam: 29: 11. 

21 And* they helped David |] againſt the band of *he *,$:am:303 
rovers b: for they were all mighty men of valour c, and 1, 9, 10 
were Captains in the holt 4, || Or,with 

b i,e. Againſt the Amalekires who had taken and burnt ZiMag, 4 band. 
whom David and his 6:0 Men were now purtuing, whom theſe 
accompanied in that expedition. Or, w:rh a band or troop of Souldi= 
ers. which they brougar along wich rhem to Davia's Ailiitance, 

c Therefore they readily came ro David's txIp. 4 Therefore they 
bronghr others along with them. 

22 For at that time e day by day, there came to Da- 
hid co help him, until it was a great hoſt, like the hoſt 
of God f. 2 R 2 e 5.e, 


+ Heb. rh. 


pirit clo= 


' ' 


| 
| | 
| 
| j 
[| 
| 
| 
i 


| 
| 


+ Heb. 
brethren. 

4 Heb, aA 
multitude 
of them. 

7” 2 Sam:22 
$,9. 


| + Heb. 


men of * 
$1871:5. 


cl, or, 
ranged itt 
battel. 

| Or, ſe? 
the battel 
in ara). 

+ Heb... 
without 8 
Inari and 
A heart. 


ing their 
rank. 


þ 


| Nap- Xll.. 


} Or,krets 


k -C-A R O 


e 7. 8. While he was at Zillag, and in int ah wT'1\ _ 
principally at Aebron, as the next Verſe explains it. f #. e. 1nnu- 
.conw'< like the Stars or Angels,both which are called God s hoſts. 
Oth. the ho# of God, i. e. a very great Hoſt, great things being ſo 
called, as Cedars, Mounrains, &c. of God. Bur the particle of likeneſs 
here added excludes this ſenſe, for it had _w_ very improper to 
ſay, a great h»ſt like a great hoſt, 1. e. like it 1elt. | 
"22 And theſe are the numbers of the || bands, that 


were ready armed to the war, and * came to David to 


bd. Hebron. to turn the kingdom of Saul to him,* accord- 
m:2. ing to the-word of the LORD g. 


g Whereby he had ſettled the Crown upon David after Saul's 
death. : - Ya Phe ary \ 
24 The children of Judah that bare ſhield and ſpear, 
were ſix thouſand and eight hundred h ready || armed to 
the war, ; 
'þ Who came hither in the name of all their Brethren : for that 

whole Trible ſtuck to Davrd zt his very firſt coming to Hebron. 

25 Of the children of Simeon,mighty men of valour 
for the war, ſeven thouſand and one hundred. 

26 Of the children of Levi, four thouſand and ſix 
hundred. 

27 And Jehojada was the leader of + the Aaro- 
nites 7, and with him were three thouſand and ſeven 


hundred. 

i Not the High-prieſt, for that was Ab:iathar, r Sam: 23. 6. but 
one of Eminent place under him, and who had a great Power and 
intereſt among his Brethren. | 

28 And * Zadok &, a young man mighty of valour, 
and of his fathers houſe twenty and two captains 7. 

k Thought to be the ſame who was made High-prieſt in Solomons 
time, 1 Kings 2: 35. which if rrue, he was very young at this time« 
I Whom he brought along with him. _ : 

29 And of the children of Benjamin, the + kindred 
of Saul, three thouſand : for hitherto the + * greateſt 
pare of them had kept the ward of the houſe of Saul »». 

m 7.e. Indeavoured to keep the Crown in their own Tribe, and 
in Sauls Family. : 

20 And of the children of Ephraim, twenty.thou- 
{and and eight hundred mighty men of valour,j famous 
throughout the houſe of cheir fathers. 
 31And of the half tribe of Manaiſeh »,eighteen thou- 

ſand, which were expreiſed by name o, to come and 
make David king. 

.#. Which was within Jordan : for of the other half beyond Jor- 
dan he ſpeaks v. 37. o Which were not aſhamed nor afraid pub- 
lickly to- own David firſt by purting their Names to fpme Paper 
preſented to them for that purpoſe ; and then by marching to him 
to Hebron, : 

22And of the children of Iſſachar,»hich were menthat 
had underſtanding of the times p, to know what Iſrae] 
Ought to do : the heads of them were two hundred,and 

all their brethren were at their commandment. 

Þ- Either, 1. $kill in the Stars,and ſeveral Seaſons and Changes of 
the Aif 3 which might be of good uſe in Husbandry,to which this 
Tribe was addiQted, Gen: 49: 14. Deut: 33:18. Or rather, 2. Poli- 
tical Prudence to diſcern & embrace the fit Seaſons for all Aftions- 
as appears, 1.ftoni the following words,to know what not only their 
own 'Tribe but all 1/reel ought to do. 2. By the great Authority and 
Command which they had over all their brethren upon this ac- 
count, as it here follows. 3+ Becauſe this is ſo conſiderable a Cir- 
cumſrance in all Humane, and eſpecially in publick Afﬀairs, that 
the Succeſs or Diſappointment of them depends very much upon 
the right or wrong Timing of them, and th:refore this is a very 
fit expreſſion to ſignifie their great prudence. And particularly they 
ſhewed this point of their Wiſdom ar this time ; for as they had 
adhered to Sal, whileſt he lived,as knowing the time was not yet 
come forDavid to take poſſeſſion of the Kingdom, & as they could 

not joyn themſelves to David, whilſt Abner lived, and was potent, 

and had the Comfnand of the other Tribes wherewith they were 
encompaſſed, ſo as ſoon as he was dead, and they bad opportunity 


| Or, r417- £0 declare themſelves, they owned David for their King. 4. By 
gers of bats the like uſe of this Phraſe, Eſfth: 1: 13- 


33 Of Zebulun ſuch as went forth to battel.|] expert 
an war, With all inſtruments of war, fifry thouſand 9, 
which could keep || rank r ; they were F not of doubie 
—_—_— | 

For this Tribe being next to that of 1/achar,which was generals 
Iy well-afte&ed roDavid,were probably very much. ſwayed by their 
Opinion and Advice: r Or, which were diſpoſed or prepared, ot order- 
ed for batted or to fight for David, if occalion ſo required, s Heb. 
without an heart and an heart : which may relate either, 1. to the 
whoie Body of them,they were all of one heart and one mind to- 
wards David, not fome for him, and others ſecretly againſt him, 
bur all with one ſoul and one conſent adhered ro him. Or, 2. To 
the ſame particular perſons,they were each of them lincerely Loyal 
to David, and did nor diſſembie with David, pretending to be for 
him,whilt in their hearts they favoured Saut's Family ; which poſ- 
ſibly ſome of thoſe who came to Hebron, did. Or this is particularly 
nored of this Tribe, becauſe they lay under ſome ſuſpicion in this 
matter ; as alſo ſome of the other "Tribes did ; and therefore the 
like teſtimony is given to all of them, +: 38. 

14 And of Naphtali a thouſand captains, and with 
them, with ſhield and ſpear, thirty and ſeven thouſand, 

35 And of the Danirtes, expert in war, twenty and 
eight thouſand and ſix hundred. 

36 And of Aſher,luch as went forth to baits], {| ex- 
pert ig war, forty thouſand, 


WH Ic:1iKt0> 


hundred and rwenty thouſand. 


heart ? to make David king. 
t To wit, after the death of Abner and IÞvoſterh. 


for thern. 


Ifachar, and Zebulun, and Naphtali x, brought bread 
on aſſes, and on camels, and on mukes, and on oxen y, 
and || meat, meal, cakes of igs, and bunches of raifins 
and wine, and oil, and oxen, and ſheep abundantly : 


for there was joy in Ifrael z. 

«That lived not far from Hebron,the place where they now were; 
x This is added by way of amplification & explication,to ſhew thar 
he did not underſtand rhis of thoſe Ifraclites only who lived in the 
Neighbourhood of [H-brn,but of tholt that lived at ſome diſtance, 
yet were nearer to Hcbr-n, than ſome of rhe other Tribes here na« 
med.y Which,though not commenly uſed in this manner,ncr fit for 
ſuch purpoles, now they ſo ufed, becauſe the quantity of Proviſi- 
ons which they brought was very great,as the Numbers of the Pecos 
ple at Hebron were, and Horſes they had few in 1/rael, and moſt of 
their 4ſ's and Camels, and Mules here mentioned probably were uſed 
rocarry divers Men,or Women aad Children,to this great,and pub- 
lick,and happy Solemnity. z Partly becauſe their Civil Wars were 
wholly ended, and they were all united under one King: and 
partly becauſe they had now a King of Eminent VaJour and Piety, 
and Felicity, and therefore expeCted to be ſaved from all their 
Enemies and Calamuties, as the were. 

CHAP. - AL 

David fetchech the Ark from Kirjath-jearim, with great Solemmity, 

j 8. Uzza being ſmitten, the Ark us left at the Houſe of Obed- 

Edom, 9 I4. 
N D David conſulted with the captains of thou- 


{ands, and hundreds, and with every leader 4. 
s Or, Governour, or Eldcr of the People. | 
2AndDavid taid unto all the congregation of Iſrael b, 
If it ſeem good unto you, and that it be of the LORD 
our God c, F let us ſend abroad d unto our brethren 
every where, that are left e in all the land of Iſrael, and 
with them a!/o to the Prieſts and Levites, which are f in 


{elves unto us. 


after the taking of Jeruſalem and the rwo lirlt Fights with the Phi« 
liſtines, whereas here it is placed before the latter, and there is no 
mention here of the former. The matter may be thus conceived : 
There being now a great and general concourſe of all 1rael, and 
David being now Eſtabliſhed in his Throne with univerſal conſent 
and applauie,he begins with God, and his firſt Thoughts and Cares 
are about Religion and the Ark, then the great Inſtrument and. 
Ornament of it,and rakes the opportunity of this aſſembly to deſire 
their advice and concurrence with him in it, that the Ark might 
be brought either to Hebron, which then was the Royal City ; or 
to Feruſalem, which as probably he told them, he was reſolved ta 
Beſiege, and doubted not, by Gods Help, to take. After this was 


ſembly was diſmiſſed, only ſome of them David reſerved to go wittx 
him againftFeruſalem,which accordingly he did,and ſucceeded in his 
Enterprize, as 1s related, 1 Sam: 5. But before this Reſolution 
could be executed,the Philiſtines came & fought twice with David, 
as IS related 1 Sam: 5: 17, &c. and here ch: 14: 8, &c. And after they 
were repulſed with great loſs and ſhame,Dav:d ſets upon the Exe« 
cution of that which before he had reſolved, and in order to if 
calls another General Aſſembly of the People. c 3. e. If this Tranſe 
lation of the Ark be pleaſing to God, which I purpoſe to enquire 
by the Urim after the manner, and to att accordingly. d Heb. lee 
25 break out and ſend, 3. e. let us ſend Meſſengers ſpeedily and uni- 
verſally to the ſeveral Tribes, We are now in ſome fort pent up in 
a Corner of the Land in Hebron, bur let us bieak up the Aﬀemb] 
and diſperſe our ſelves, and ſend far and near about this Work. Ic 
is a Mcraphor from the Sea or Rivers, which, when the Banks are 
Broken, do ſuddenly overflow the whole adjoyning Country. e By 
which word he minds them of the great Deſolations and DettruQt= 
ons which God for their fins had hitherto made among them ; and 
therefore adviſeth that Remnant whom God had ſo graciouſly ſaved 
in and from thoſe dreadful Ruines that they would more ſeriouſly 
{er themſelves to ſeek God than they had formerly done. 


3 And let us + bring again the Ark of our God to us: 
for we enquired not at it fin the days of Saul p. 

f The Ark was then neglected ; and the generality of the People 
either lived in the groſs neglect of the ſolemn worſhip of God ; or 
contented themſelves with going to Gibeon and offering Sacrifices 
there, not caring, though the Ark, the Soul of the Tabernacle,was 
in another place. g So it was in the days of Sam wel ; bur it is ra« 
ther charged upon Saul than him : partly becauſe Samuel was ex« 
erciſed with continual Wars or expectation of Wars with the Phis 
liſtines all che time of his Regency, and therefore wanted the Ope 
portuntty to bring back the Ark,whici Sau! had, 8 neglected: part= 
ly becauſe S-7uel ropk care to ſtir up and maintain Religion among 
them by other Means and in an extraordinary manner; whereas rhis 
was bur one Branch of Sauls Impiety, and was joyned with a con= 
tempt of all Religion, as the Hiitory of his Life thews : ano partly 
becaule it was inore proper to excuſe himſelf and the pr: tent 

Generation 


Chap: XII, - 

37 And on the other ſide of Jordan,of the Reubenite, 
and the Gadite, and of the half-tribe of Manaſſeh, with 
| all manner of Inſtruments of war for the battel, an 


s. 
DI 


38 All theſe men of war,that could keep rank, came 
with a perfe& heart to Hebron, to make David kinp 
over all Iſrael: and all the reſt alſo of 1frael ere of one 


39 And there they were with David, three days, 
eating and drinking : for their brethren had prepared 


40 Moreover,they that were nigh them «, even unto 


|| Or, 


viFugl of 
meal, 


T Heb.lei 


us break 


{ 25g 
bi end. 
their cities and ſuburbs, that they may gather them-#Heb-ir 


the cities 


6 i. e. Unto all the People then aſſembled with him at Hebron, fhtir ub 
This Story is mentioned in another place in. 2 Sam: 5: & 6. even#% . 


propoſed by the King and accepted by the People, this great Aſs 


+ Heb, 
bring a 
bou!» 


[That 


4 place 


reache, 


1 
b 4 


eb, 


Chap. 


+ Heb. 


waat the 


Py ride. 


f Heb, 
ſage. 


| Called 
Nichin, 
1$m.6.6. 


"2Sim.5. 
lt, &+ 


* the Ark: and there he died before God. 


:; iscalled || Perez-uzza, to this day. 


anointed King over all Iſrael, all the Philiſtines went 
- up to ſeek David, and David heard of i, and went out 


.oneration who were guilty of this negleQ, than to rake into the 
yy of their deceaſed pa Beto and lay his Charge againſt thoſe 
who were dead and gone ſome good while ſance- 

And all the congregation ſaid that they would do 
ſo : for the thing was right in the eyes of all che peo- 


le þ. 
FP þ Their Conſciences ſmiting them for their former negligence, 
and being fully convinced-of the Piety and Reaſonablenels of this 
Propoſition. ; 
5 So * David gathered all Iſrael 3 together, from 
Shihor of Egypt &, even unto the entring of Hemath, 


to bring the ark of God from Kirjath-jearim. ; 

7 5. e. Allthe choſen Men of Iſrael, as it is phraſed, 2 Sam. 6. T. their 
Elders and Repreſentatives. k Of which ſee Num 34 5. Joſ-13. 3- 
« Chron. 13+ 5» 


N 7c & ns 6 

13 And the Philiſtines yet again ſpread themſelves 
abroad in the || valley ||. 

God ſaid unto him, Go not up after them, turn away 
from them, * and come upon them, over againſt che 
muiberry trees. | 

15 And it ſhall be, when thou ſhalt hear a ſound of 
20ing in the tops of the mulberry-trees, :hat then thou 
ſhalt go our to battel : for God is gone forth before 
thee, to ſmite the hoſt of the Philiſtines, 

16 David therefore did as God had commanded him : 
and they ſmote the hoſt of che Philiſtines from Gibeon 
even to Gazer. 

17 And the fame of David went out into alllands6, 


6 And David went up, and all Iſrael to* Baalah, that 
js, to Kirjarh-jearim 7, which belonged ro Judah, to bring | 
up thence the ark of God the LORD, that dwelleth | 
between the cherubims, whoſe Name is called on zt m. 

I Which Explication is juſtifyed by Joſ, 15. 9, 60. where the fame 
City is called by both Names. Obj. They are ſaid to go from tliis | 
Baale, 2 Sam. 6. 2. Anſ. 1. Some Learned Men render that Place al- 
ſo to Baale, the particle Mem being ſometimes uled for 79 amongſt the 
Hebrews, and eſpecially amongit the Arabians. 2. Both were true ; 
they firſt went to Baale for the Ark, as is here ſaid, and then went 
from Baale to bring or to carry ( for the word ſignifies either ) or carrying 
from thence the Ark of God, as is there related. Bur of this and other 
difficulties or differences btween theſe two Relations, ſcethe Notes 
on 2 Sam, 6. 


7 And they Þ carried the ark of God ina new cart 

out of the Houſe of Abinadab, and Uzza and Ahio drave 
the cart. 
8 And David and all Iſrael played before God with 
all their might, and with þ t{inging and with harps, and 
with Pfalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, 
and with tiumpets. 

9 And when they came to the threſhing-floor of || 
Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark, for 
che oxen || ſtumbled. | 

ro And the anger of the LORD was kindled againſt 
Uzza, and he ſmote him, * becauſe he put his hand to 


11 And David was diſpleaſed, becauſe the LORD 
had made a breach upon Uzza : wherefore that place 


12 And David was afraid of God that day, ſaying, 
How ſhall I bring the ark of God h»e ro me ? 

13 So David + brought not the ark home to himſelf 
to the ciry of David, bur carried ir aide into the houle 
of Obed-edom the Girtite. 

14 And the ark of God remained with the family of 
Obed-edom in his houſe three months. And the LORD 
bleſſed * the houſe of Obed-edom, and all that he had. 


CHAF Xi 


Eirams Kindneſs to David, 1. His Felicity in Poople, Wives and Chilaren, 

2—7, His two Vifteries againſt the Philiſtines, 8. 17. 

OW * Hiram king of Tyre ſent meſſengers to 
N David, and timber of cedars, with maſons and 
carpenters to build him an Houſe. 

2 And David perceived athat the LORD had con- 
firmed him king over Iſrael, for his kingdom was lift up 
on high, becauſe of his people Iſrael. 

a By the Remembrance of Gods Promiſe and his Providence com- 


plying with it, &c. Burt of this and thefollowing Verſes ſee the 
Notes on 2 Sam 8. 12, &c. where the ſame Hiſtory is related. 


2 And David took + mo wives at Jeruſalem : and 
David begat mo ſons and daughters. 

4 Now theſe are the names of his children which he 
had in Jeruſalem, Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and 
Solomon, 

5 And Ibhar, and Eliſhua, and Elpalet, 

6 And Noga, and Nepheg and Japhia, 

7 And Eliithama, and || Beliada, and Elipbaler. 

8 And when the Philiſtines heard that * David was 


againſt them. 

9 And the Philiſtines came and ſpread themſelves in 
the valley of Rephaim. 

io And David enquired of God, ſaying, Shall I go 
up againſt the Pailiſtines ? and wilt thou deliver them 
into mine hand : and rhe LORD faid unto him, Go 


and the LORD brought the fear of him upon all na- 


tions. | R_- 
b i, e. Tnto all the nezghbouring Countries, 


- ES. / 


David having prepared a place for the Ark, ordereth the Prieffs and Levices 
to bring it from Obed-Edom, 1 24-He perfermeth the Solenmity thereof 
with great joy, 25 28, Michal aeſpiſgh him, 29. 


A N D Davidmadehim hoſes 2 in the city of David, 
and prepared a place for the ark of God, and 
pitched for ic a tent 5. 


aA Palace conſitting of many Houſes or Apartments for his ſevec 
ral Wives and Children. 6 Rueft. Why 4id he nor firſt ae ces 
Tabernacle of Moſes from Gibeon, where ir now was, that ſo he might 


put the Ark into its proper place ? Av/. Partly becauſe he had no 
motion or direction from God concerning the Tabernacle, as he had 
concerning the Ark: and partly becauſe he thought the Tabernacle 
was not ſo neceſſury for that end as formerly, ſeing he intended 


NOI to ſet upon the building of the Temple, as appears from 
Chap. 17- 


him for ever 4d. 


CONtinues. 
3 And David gathered all Iſrael together to Jeruſalem, 
to bring up the ark of the LORD unco his place which 
he had prepared for it. 
4 And David aſſembled the children of Aaron, and 
the Levites, | | 


5 Of the ſons of Kohath e; Uriel the chief, and his 
|| brethren an hundred and twenty. 


Elizaphan, v 8. and Hebron, v. g. and Uzziel, v, to. were Kohath's 
Children ; of which ſee Exod. 6.17,18, 22. 


6 Ofthe ſons of Merari ; Atajah the chief, and his 
brethren two hundred ard twenty. 

7 Of the ſons of Gerſhom ; Joel the chief, and his 
brethren an hundred and thirty» 

8 Of the ſonsof Elizaphan ; Shemajah the chief, and 
his brethren ewo hundred, 

9 Of the ſons of Hebron ; Eliel the chief, and hig 
brethren fourſcore, 

Io Of the fons of Uzziel; Amminadab the chief, and 
his brethren an huadred and twelve. 

11 And David called for Zadok, and Abiathar the 
prieſts f, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Aſajah, and 
Joel, Shemajah, and Eliel, and Amminadab : 


fF i. e. The Chief Prieſts, 45:athar the High-Prieſt, Zadok 
ſecond Prieſt, ſee Numb. 3. 32. gn-rrielt, and Zadok the 


12 And ſaid unto them, Ye are the chief of the fa. 
thers of the Levites : ſandtific your ſelves g, both ye 
and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the 
LORD God of Iſrael unto the place that E have prepared 
for it. 


g By ſolemn purification and Preparation of your ſelves, both i 
Soul and Body. See on Exoa+ 19+ 10, 15. id ; ” 

13 For * becauſe ye did i: not at the firſt b, the 
LORD our God made a breach upon us, for that wes 
ſought him not after the due order &. 

h Becauſe you did not ſanftific and prepare your ſelyes by ſal 
Prayer, 2nd iceking Countc] from God, and *þ a ſerious conkders. 
tion of Gods Will as tothe Manner of carrying it which it was 
your Duty more than others to obſerve and ſee it executed. 5 He 
takes a part ofthe guilt to himltlf, becaute ir was his Duty, as welt 


up, for I will deiiver tzem inco thine hand. 

I1 So they came up to Baal-perazim, and David 
{mote them there. Then David ſaid, God hath broken | 
1n vpon mine enemies by mine hard, like the breaking 
forth of waters : therefore they calied the name of thar 


[Thar 3, Place [] Baai-perazim, | 


#flace o 


"es, gave a commandment, and they were burnt with fice. | 


12 And when they had lefc their gods there, David 


{ it executed, and their overtigir 41d not excuſe hig. 


as theus, diligently to read the Law and word of God, aad to ſce 


. k A . 
to the Rules which he appointed. ccording 


14 Sorheprieſtsand the Levites ſanaified themſelves, 
to bring up the ark of the LORD God of [ſrael, 


15 And the children of the Levices / bare the ark of , 


God upon their ſhoulders, with the ſtavesthereon, as * 
Moſes commanded, according to the word ofche LORD, 
; To wit, the Kohathires, Nb. 4, 4. 


SK 3 


Chap. XV. 


| | Or, t ha 
14 Therefore David enquired again of God, and\ Or, of 


Rephaim. 


2 Then David ſaid, F None ought to carry the * ark f Heb: _ 
of God but the Levites c : for them the LORD hath if is _— 


choſen to carry the aik of God, and to miniſter unto ark of God, 


: but for the 
c And that upon their Shoulders: of which ſee Num. 4. 15. and Levites 


7. 9. and not in a Cart, as it was before to our great grief and loſs. * Numb. 
di. e. So long asthe Ark is to be removed, and as chat Worſhip 2. 15- 


Deurt. 31.9% 


noe "JF Or, 
e To wit, of Aram or Izhar, Kohath's Sons, Num. 4. 27. Otherwiſe ſ aſwe F 


* 2 Sam G. 
3- Chap. 


4 15. 
16 Arg 


VU. . 
* 2 Sam. 
F + 23s 


13. 74 


od. 25. 
14,Numt. * 


& 7.9. 


APs RV, 
| 16 And David ſpake to the chief of the Levites, to | 
appointtheir brethren 0 be the ſingers, with inſtruments 
of muſick, pſalteries, and harps, and cymbals, + ſounding, 
by lifting up the voice with joy. 
17 So the Levites appointed * Heman' the ſon of 
Joel : and of his brethren, * Aſaph the fon of Be- 
! rechiah, and ofthe ſons of Mecari their brethren, * 
| __ Elthan the ſon of Kuſhajah. - 
oy +a 18 And with them their brethren of the ſecond de- 
Ch.6 44 gree m, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, 
| and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benajah, and Maatiah, 
| and Matrtithiah, and Eliphalet, and Mikniah, and 
| Obed-edom, and Jeiel the porters. | 
mm The firſt rank or degree of Sacred Muſicians being thoſe three 
famous Perſons named v. 17- next unto whom wee theſe here na- 
med. » Who wereto k:ep the Doors of the Tabernacle and Courts, 
bur withal were inſtrufted in Muſick and ſinging, that when they 
were free from Attendance upon their proper Othce, they might 
not be idle nor tinprofitable perſotis in God's Houſe. 
19 So the ſingers, Heman, Aſaph, and Ethan, were 
appointed to ſound with cymbals of braſs. : 
20 And Zechariah o, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, 
and Jehiel,and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaſiah, and Be- 


najah, with Pſalteries on Alamcth p. 

o In this Catalogue Ben is omitted, who was mentioned v. 18. Yet 
others think him to be the ſame whois called Arariah, v. 21. But 
Ben might be ſome other perſon, who was indeed appointed for this 
Work, as is related, v. 17, 18. and yet he might be taken off by 
d:ath or ſickneſs, or ſome ſudden and extraordinary Accident which 
hindred his Execution of the. Place and Work allotted for him, 
which might force the chief of the Levites to appoint ſome other 
in his ſtead, when they came to pur their Inſtitution in prattice, as 
here they did. p Or, with ( as that particle 1s elſewhere uſed ) 
Alamoth ' which is thought to be the name of an Inſtrument of 
Muſick; or of a certain Tune, or Note, or part in Muſick. The 
certain ſignification of it is not now known, nor is it neceſſary 
for us to kaow it. And the like may be ſaid of Sheminith, wv. 2r. 

21 And Mattithiah, and Eliphaleh, and Mikneiah, 
and Obed-gdom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps || 
| Or, * on the Sheminich q to excel r. 
his q See on v. 46. r Which word may be here added to note the 
eighth td Excellenty of that Inſtrument, or Norte, or part of Muſick ; or that 
everſee. there was a greater Extenſion or Elevation of the Voice than in 
the former. |. 

22 And Chenaniah chief of the Levites || was for | 
} 0, ;, ſongs: he inſtructed abour che ſong, becauſe he was 
was 1 

/— Skilful, | 
he info. 8 ig # Heb. Was for lifting up, either, r, of rhe Ark Z he was for 

©, Carriage of the Ark, being appointed to inſtrutt or dire the time 
about the : mk 1 
carriaze, and manner of carrying the Ark, and when they ſhould mike a ſtand 
tl Ich, Or a change in the Bearers. Or rather, 2. of the Voice : he was the 
lifting up Moderator of the Mulick, inſtruQing them when and how ro lifr 
Wl prophe= up their Voices, or change their Notes, or make their Stops, which 
h : beſt agrees with the following Reaſon, becatife he was 5ilful: For this 
Wy. required far more Skill than the carriage of the Ark ; which any 
man of common diſcretion could eaſily govern ; and with v. 27. 
where this ſame Chenanieh is joyned with the Singers. 

23 And Berechiah,. and Elkanah were door-keepers 
for the ark ?. Er 

: They wete appointed to keep the Door of the Tent in which 
the Ark was to be put and kept, that no unallowed Perſon might 
preſs in and touch it;and in like manner they were to attend upon 
the Arkin the Way, and to guard it from the preſs and touch of 
prophane Hands ; for which end theſe two went before the Ark, 
as their other two Brethren mentioned in the cloſe ofv. 24. came 
after it, thatſo it might be Guarded on all ſides: which, how neceſfary 
it was to be done, ſufficiently appears from the danger of coming 
too near the Ark, or to look into it, which was exemplified in the 
Bethſbemites, x Sam. 6. 19. 


24 And Shebaniah, and Jehoſbaphat, and Nathaneel, 
and Amaſai, and Zechariah, and Benajah, and Eliezer 
Numb, the Priefts * did blow with the trumpets before the 
10. 8. atk of God: and Obed-edom and Jehiah were door- 
keepers for the ark. 

25 So * David and the elders of Ifrael, and the cap- 
tains over thouſands, went to bring up the ark of the 
covenant of theLORD, out of the houſe of Obed-edom 
withjoy. _ 

26 And it carne to paſs when God helped the Levites 
# that bare theark of the covenant of the LORD, that 
thy offered ſeven bullocks, and ſeven rams. 
= Either, 1. by giving them ſtrength to carry their Burden « or 
4.adies! 2. byencouraging: them in their Woik with ſome comfort- 


| 
| 
| 
| 


l 

F Heb. 
pu ſeng 
b-4r. 


'  , Sam; 
G6. 12, 13 
Co 


_able Sign of his preſence with them, and approbation of their work 
and manner of carrying the Ark. When they ſaw that he did not 
cut off any of rhe Perſons employed, as he had done before, but 
ſpared and favoured them ;| which they perceived when they had 
gone ſix paces, as appears by 2 Sam. 6. 13, 

27 AndDavif»zrcloathed with a robe of fine linnen 
x, and all the Eevites that bzre the ark,and the ſingers, and 

FAIRE: Chenaniah the maſter of the + ſong with the ſingers, 

V "5h i David aiſo had upon him an ephod of linen. - 

22. «x5i.e. Witha Linen Ephod, as it is explained in the cloſe of this 

Verſe, where this circumſtance is repeate1, becauſe it was a notable 

and unuſu:Ithing for David, who was no Levite, to wear a Levitical 


Garment. Sce ot this andthe following Verics the Notes on 2 Sam. 
G, 14, 15, F64 


SIS ONICELES 


238 Thus all Ifrael brought up the ark of the covenant 
of the LORD with ſhouting, and with ſound of the 
corner, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making 
a noiſe with Pſalteries, and Harps. 

29 And it came to pals as the ark of the covenant of 
the LORD came to the city of David, that Michal the 
daughter of Saul, looking out ata window, ſaw king 
David dancing and playing, and ſhe deſpiſed him in her 


heart. ' 
Cv 2 A AFL 
David's Feflival Sacrifice and Alms. The Pſalm of Thankſoivi hk ; 

Quire, and the —_ ſaid amen, 1 _ ROE. Þ > M5 

and Muſicians appunted to attend the Ark continually, 37 43. 

O * they brought back the ark of God 2, and ſet *, g, 
ID ir in the midſt of the tent that David had picched 6. 1; 
for it: and they offered burnt-ſacrifices and peace-offe. 
rings before God. 

a Of theſe three firſt Verſes ſee on 2 Swn.6. 17, 18, 19, 

2 And when David had made an end of offering the 
burnt-offerings, and the peace-offerings, he bleſſed the 
people in the name of the LORD. 

3 And he dealt to every one of Iſrael, both man and 
woman, to every one a loaf of bread, anda good piece 
ef fleſh, and a flagon of wine. 

And he appointed certain of the Levites to miniſter 
before the ark of the LORD, and to record, and to 
thank, and praiſe the LORD God of Iſrael : 

5 Aſaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, 
and. Shemiramoth, and Jehiei, and Marttithiah, and 
E119, and Benajah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel Þ with 
Piaiteries and with Harps ; but Aſaph made a ſound ,,;;;. - 
WIL CV mbais. mes of 

6 Benajahalfo and Jahaziel the prieſts, with trumpets Pſalteric 
continually before the ark of the covenant cf God. and Harys, 

7 Then on that day David ll delivered firſt :hjs p/alws þ —_— 
to thank the LORD into the hand of Aſaph and his ſie =" 
brethren : LORD by 


6 Whereby it is implied, that after this he delivered many other the hand of 
Pſalms ſucceſſively into their Hands, to be ſung by them to the Aſoph, 
praiſc of God in his publick Service. See 2 Sam. 23. 1. 2 Chron.29.30. 

As for the matter of this Pſalm, I ſhall defer the Explication of it 
til! I come to the Book of Pialms, where we ſhall find it in the 
ſame words, in P/al. 96. and 105. 


8 * Give thanks unto the LORD, call upon his name: , 
make known his deeds among the people. Toh 
9 Sing unto him, ſing pſaims unto him, talk ye of all 
his wonderous works. 
Ito Glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart of them 
rejoycs thac eek the LORD. 
11 Seek. the LORD and his ſtrength, ſeek his face 
continually, | 
12 Remember his marvellous works that he hath 
done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. 
13 O ye feed of Irael his ſervant, ye children of 
Joeob his choſen one. 
14 He 5s the LORD our God, his judgments are ith 
all the earth. 
15 Be ye mindful always of his covenant : the word 
which he commanded to a thouſand generations. | 
16 Even of the * covenant which he made with Abra- + Cf? 
ham, and of his oath unto Iſaac :- "9 2.1 
17 And hath continued the ſame to Jacob for a law, 26. 3. & 
and to Iſrael for aneverlaſting covenant, 28, 13. 
18 Saying, Untothee will Igive the land of Canaan, 
+ the lotof your inheritance. + Heb? 
19 When ye were but + few, * even a few, and vie rd. 
ſtrangers in it ; # Hebl 
20 And when they went from nation to nation, and _—y 
from ove Kingdom to another People. * Gen.36 
21 He ſuffered no manto do them wrong: yea, he 39- 
* reproved Kings for their ſakes, 
22 Saying, * Touch not mine anointed, and do my * Gen 1%: 
prophets no harm. OW 
23 * Sing unto the LORD all the earth : ſhew forth - ” 
from day to day his ſalvation, * Plal: 
24 Declare his glory among the heathen : his mar- 195: '5', 
vellous works among all nations. * Pha, 96 
25 Forgreat is the LORD, and greatly to be praiſed : 
he alſo - to mr _— all gods. 
26 For all the * gods of the people are i : but the * Ley; 
LORD made the os _ + 3: 5c _ 1 
27 Glory and honour are in his preſence ; ſtrength 
and gladnels are in his place. | | 
| 28 Give unto the LORD, ye kindredsof the people 5 
give unto the LORD glory and ſtrength. 
29 Giveunto the LORD the glory due unto hs names 
bring an offering, and come betore him, worſhip the 
LORD ia the beauty of holineſs, 


tf Heb, 


cy, le 


30 Fea % 


Chap. Xy| 


D 


o 
29. * 
Nun 
, 3 
|| Hs 
tuthe 
I'y a 
they 


THe 
farthy 


*:S. 
1, 


uo 


Chap. XVII. [. 


tC a = 0 


2- Fear"before "him, all the earth: the world alſo 
ſhall be ſtable, that it be not moved. 

31 Letthe heavens be glad, and let theearth rejoyce: 
and le: menſav among the nations, the Lord reigneth. 

32 Let the ſea roar, andthefulneſs thereof; let the 
fieids rojoyce, and all that 7s therein. 

33 Then ſhall the trees of che wood ſing out at the 
preſence of the LORD, becauſe he cometh co judge 
the earth. 

*f.1079 34. * O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good : 
1.& 118. for his mercy endureth for ever. 
1, & 136, 35 And lay ye, Save us, O God of our ſalvation, and 
a gather us together, and deliver us from the heathen c, 
that we may give thanks :o thy holy name, an glory 
in thy praiſe. 
c This might ſeem an improper and unſcaſonable Prayer for Da- 
vids time, when the Ifraclites were not yet ſcattered amongſt the 
Heathen, bur indeed it was not ſo : partly becauſe they had already 


N Ic 4. Chap. XVI 


' T brought uplſrael, unto this day, but + have gone from þ 1x.y. 
{tent to tent, and from one tabernacle ts another. 
' 6 WhereſoeverT have walked with all Iſrael, ſpakeT a 
word toany of thejudges of Iſrael ( whom I commanded 


to feed my people /) ſaying, Why have ye not built me 


an houſe of cedars ? 
7 Now therefore thus ſhalt thou ſay unto my ſervant 
David, Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, I took thee from 
the ſheep-cote, even Þ from following the ſheep, that + Heb | 
thou ſhouldeſt be ruler over my people Iſrael : from after. 
2 And TI have been with thee whitherſoever thou haſt 4 
walked, and have cut off all thine enemies f.om before 
thee, and have made thee a name like the name of the 
great men that are in the earth. LEES s 
9 Alfo I will ordaina place for my people Iſrael, and 
will plant them,and they ſhal dwel in their place,and ſhal 
be moved no more, neither (ball the children of wicked- 


been ſadly divided by a Civil War among themſelves; and though 
they were now externally and viſibly united under David, yet he ; 
might juſtly think that there were ſome who yet retained 1n their ; 
Hearts their o!d Leaven, their Hatred ofhim, and their affe&ion to 
Saul, which might hereafter break forth when occafion was offer'd, 

as it did, 2 $am.16. 8. and therefore he juſtly prays, that they may : 
be gaih. red and united together in hearty Love as well asin outward | 
Shew : and partly, becauſe this Pſalm or Prayer was made by David ; 
for the uſe of the Church, not only in that preſent time, but 1n 


future Ages, in which David foreſaw by the Spirir of Prophecy, or , pired, that thou muſt go ro be with thy fathers, that I 


by conſideration of thoſe Ancient and Sacred PrediQtions, Deut. | 
31. and 32. thatthe Iſraelites would one time orother forſake God 
and for their Apoſtacy be diſperſed among the Heathens, when 
they ſhould have great and particular needof this Prayer, 
36 Bleſſzd be the LORD God of [lſrael for ever and 
Peat. ever : and all * the people faid, Amen, and praiſed | 
9.15- the LORD. 


- So he left there d, before the ark of the covenant from him that was before thee. 


of the LORD, Aſaph and his brethren, to miniſter before 
the ark continually, as every days work required: 
d i.e. He appointed them their Work and Station there. | 
3 And Obed-edom, with their brethren, threeſcore | 
and eight : Obed-edom alſo the fon of Jeduthun, and 
Hoſah to be porters e : 
e Or, Door-keepers, as the ſame Hebrew Word is rendred, 6. 15. 
23, 24. of which ſee the Note on v. 23. : 
39 And Zadok the prieſt f, and his brethen the 
'| Kings Prieſts, before the tabernacle of the LORD, * in the 
14 high place that was at Gibeon, | 
f Not the High Prieſt, bur the ſecond, and the Chief Prieſt at 
Gibcon, where tae Famous Tabernacle and Altar made by Moſes ſtill 


were, 1 Chron 21. 29. 2 Chron. .3. where alſo the Ordinary Sacri- 
fices were offered, and the ſtated and publick Woſhip of God 


neſs. waſte them any more : ( as at the beginning, 


6 Such as are devoted and wholly given up to Wickedneſs ; 
elſewhere called Children of Bel:al. 


10 And || lince the time that I commanded judges to 
be over my peop:e Ifrael ) moreover, I will ſubdue all 
thine enemies. Furthermore, I tell thee,that the LORD 
will build thee an houſe. 

11 And it ſhall come to paſs, when thy days be ex- 


[| Or, as. 


will raiſe up thy ſeed afcer thee, which ſhall be of thy 
ſons, and I will eſtabliſh his kingdom. 


12 He ſhall build me an houſe, and IT will eſtabliſh 
his throne for ever. 


12 * I will be his father, and he ſhall be my-ſon, and * 4 Sam. 
I willnot cake my mercy away from him, as I took it 7+ 14. 


14 Bur 1 will ſettle him in mine houſe c, and in m 
kingdom dfor ever, and his throne (hall be eſtabliſhed 


for evermore. 


c In my Dwelling-place, either, 1. In Jeruſalem, the place where 
God had put his Name for ever, 2 K:ngs 21.4, 7« 2 Chron. 6. 5,6. 
Compare » Kings 11.36. and 15. 4. Or, 2. In the Temple, which 
is more properly and conſtantly called Gods Houſe ; and fo this. Ex+ 
preſſion agrees but very imperfe&tly with Solomon, or his Succeſlors, 
who might be ſaid to be {ſertcled in Gods Houſe, becauſe they were 
ſerrled near 1t,and in ſome ſort ſet over it,becauſe they were to take 
care that the Prieſts and others ſhould perform their Offices and Gods 
Service in it; bur ſtritly and properly agrees only to Chriſt, to 
whom alone that Promiſe alſo of an Everlaſting Eſtabliſhment in this 
Kingdom belongs, as was noted on. 2 Szm. 7, And this Expreſſion 
ſeems to be moſt emphatically added, to ſignifie, that that Perſon 
in whom all thoſe Promiſes ſhould be fully and perfe&ly accompli- 


hawvs been. | 


was performed, as it here follows, for which the Prieſts were placed 
there; as the Extraordinary Worthip was before the Ark upon 
great Occaſions, as when God was contulted, which was to be done 
before the Ark and by the High-Prieſt, Exo4.28. r2,20,21.who now 


: ſhed, ro wir, the Mefſias, ſhould be ſettled not only in the Kings 
Throne, as others of Davids Succeilors were, bur alſo in Gods Houſe 
. or Temple ; and conſequently, that he ſhould be a Prieſt as well as 
a King ; which Myſtery was more clearly revealed ro David, Pſal. 


was Aviathar ; who thereforeabode here with the Ark, when Zaack 
was left at Gzbeon. 


40 To offer burnt-offerings untothe LORD upon the 


{ 


a 


Exod. altar of the burnt-offering continually * ||morning and + 
9.38. evening, and te do according to all that zs written in the 
Numb. Jaw of the LORD, which he commanded Iſrael : 

Til, 41 And with them Heman andJeduthun,and the reſt : 


ihemrn- that were choſen, who were expreiled by nameg, to give ' 
iy ul in thanks to the LORD, becauſe his mercy endureth for , 
threveming, ever : | 
g So exceeding careful was this good King of Gods Worſhip, that | 
he would have no perſon employed in it, bur ſuch as he appointed 

to it, and were fit for ir. 


42 And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trum- 
pets and cymbals, for thole that ſhould make a ſound, 
and with muſical inſtruments of God þ : and the ſons 

';, of Jedurhun were + porters. 


h :.e Appointed and appropriated to the Worſhip and Honour 
of God. 
42 And all the people departed every man to his 
houſe .aad David returned to bleſs his houſe. 
CHAP. XVIL | 
avid defrening to build God an Houſe : Nathan at firſt approveth of it : 
2 aw aig of God forbiddeth him, 1 2 o_ him 
Bleſſmgs and Benefits in hu Seed, 11 IS, David's Prayer and 
Thankſgiving, 16—22+ 
Ow * it came to paſs 4 as David fat in his houſe, 
that David ſaid to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I 
dwell in an houſe of cedars, but the ark of the covenant 
of the LORD remaineth under curtains. | 
# This whole Chapter it explained, 2 Sam. 7: where the ſame 
things are recorded with very little variation. of the Words ; which 
alſo hath been conſidered in my Notes upon that Chapter; to which 
I refer the Reader, taking notice here but of ſome very few things. 
2 Then Nathan taid unto David, Do all that is in 
thine heart, for God js with thee. 
3 Andit cams to paſs the ſame night, that the word 
of God came to Nathan, ſaying, 


4 Goand tell David my ſ{&rvant, "Thus faith the Lord, 


* Sam, 
1. I, CC 


110. 1, 2, 4. and may be intimated, though obſcurely ( as was fit and 
uſual in that ſtate of the Church ) in theſe Words. 4 Ether. 1. In 
the Kingdom of 1/7ae!, which God calls his Kingdom, becauſe he was 
in a ſpecial manner their King and Governour, having raiſed them 
up and formed theminto a Kingdom, and given them that Prote&ion 
and Aſſiſtance which Kings owe to their Kingdoms ; and becauſe he 
expected and required from them, what Kings do from their People, 
that they ſhould be wholly governed by his Laws, and devoted to 
his Service. Or, 2. In Gods Kingdom in a more large and general 
Sence. And this, as well as the f,rmer Phraſe, may feem ſingularly 
to belong to the Meſſiah, who was not only to be the King of rae, 
bur alſo of all Nations, as was foretold even in the Old Teſtament, 
as Pſal. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12+ and 22. 27, 28. and 72, 11. 1a, 2, 4! 
Hag. 2. 7- and ſo this may be an Intimation of that great Myſtery 
which is more fully revealed in the New Teſtament, to wit, that 
Chriſt is the Head, or King, or Governour ofall Gods Church, con- 
ſiting of Jews and Gentiles, and ofall Nations, and indeed of all 
Creatures, the Angels not excepted 3 all which is Gods Kingdom, 
and by him given to his Son our Bleſſed Lord Chriſt. And for the 
ſignification of theſe great things there is ſo great and remarkable an. 
Alteration of the Phraſe here from what it is in 2 Sam. 7. where 
ſpeaking to David, he conſtanly calls it his (7. 2 Davids ) Kingdom, 
and his Houſe, v 12, 13, 16, 19, 25, 27. for which he here ſaith my 
Houſe, and my Kingdom, which alſo he diſtinguiſheth from his Throne, 
which is mentioned in the next Clauſe of this Verſe, and in v, 11, 12. 
Bur theſe things I ſubmit ro the Judicious Reader. 

15 According toall theſe words, andaccording toall 
this vihon, fo did Nathan fpeak unto David. 

16 And David the king came, and fat e before the 
LORD, and f{aid, Who amTI, O LORD God, and what 
is mine houſe, that thou haſt brought me hitherto ? 

e Which may note either his Geſture ; or his Coatinuance there 
till he had finiſhed this following Prayer. 

17 And yer this was a fmall thing in thine eyes, O 
God, for thou haft a!ſo ſpoken of thy fervants houſe for 
a great while to come, and haſt regarded me according, 
to the eſtate of a man ofhigh degree, O LORD God f. 

f ive. Theu haft treated me as if I had been born the Son of a 
great Monarch, and not a poor Shepherd, as indeed I was, O Lord 
God. Oth. 'Thus,. Thou ha#t regarded or reſpetted me as the Type or 
Figure, or according #6 the Rawk or Order of that excellent Man,or Man of 
high Degree, who is alſo the Lord God, i.e. of the Meſſiah, who is 
God-Man. 3. s, Thou haft given to me and my Houſe an Everlaſting 


Thou ſhalt not build me an houſe to dwell in. 
5 For I have not dweltinan houls ſince the day that 


Kingdom, which is the peculiar Priviledge of that great Perſon the 
Meihab, Dan, 2. 44. aid 7. 13, 14+ | | 
3 R 4 x3 What 


ap. XVIII. 1. CHER 


PY 18 What can David f ſpeak moreto thee for the ho- 

'—*  nour of thy ſervant ? for thou knoweſt thy ſervant. 

19 O LORD for thy ſervants ſake g, and according 
to thine own heart ol thou done all this greatneſs, in 

I own all theſe | greatthings. 
OS - 7.21. it is, for jy nov -* Ht s. for the ſake of thy 

Word and Promiſe made to thy Servant ; as that Phraſe, for Davias 

ſake, is oft thus underſtood, for God's Covenants ſake made with 

David. 

209 O LORD, there is none like thee, neither is there 

#ny god beſides thee, according .to all that we have heard 

with Our ears. 

21 And what one nation in the earth 3s like thy 
people Ifrael, whom God went toredeem 70 be his own 

cople, to make thee a name of F greatnels and terri- 
bleneſs, by driving out nations from before thy people, 
whom thou haſt redeemed out of Egypt ? | 

22 Eor thy people Iſrael didft thou make thine own 
people for ever, and thou LORD, becameſt cheir God. 

22 Therefore now LORD et the thing that thou haſt 
ſpoken concerning thy ſervant,and concerning his houſe, 
be eſtabliſhed for ever, and do, as thou haſt faid. 

24 Let iteven be eftabliſbed, that thy name may be 
magnified for ever, ſaying, TheLORD of hoſts is the 
God of Iſrael, even a God to Iſrael b, and /et the houſe 
of David thy ſervant be eſtabliſhed before- thee. 

h Or, The Lord of Hoſts, the God of Iſrael, is a God to Iſrael, i. e He 
is really to his People that which he hath ſtiled himſelf, heir God, 
having taken ſuch care ofthem, and ſhewed ſuch Mercy and Truth 
to them, as did fully anſwer thar Title. 

+ Heb. 25 For thou, O my God, | haſt told thy ſervant that 

uw thou wilt build him an houſe : —_— thy ſervanc 

| vere? 7/7 hath found 31 bis heart to pray before thee. 

=_ 26 And now, LORD, ( thou art God, and haſt 

promiſed this goodneſs unto thy ſervant. ) 

27 Now therefore || let it pleaſe thee to bleſs the houſe 
of thy ſervant, that it may be before thee for ever : for 
thou bleiſeſt, O LORD, and it ſhaft be bletled for ever. 

CH AF XVIJL}- 

David ſubdurth the Philiftines and the Moabites : ſmiteth Hadarezer and 
the Syrians, | 8. Tou ſendeth Hadoram with preſents t0 bleſs David 
the preſents and ſpoil David dedicated to God, 9g 12, he putteth 
gariſons in Ed'm, 13. Davids Officers, 14 7. ; 

Ne” after this * it came to paſs, that David ſmote 


Heb. 


baneſſcs. 


| Heb. 
eatneſſes 

d teryible 
MINgs. 


| pleaſed thee 


*2 Sam. 8, 


| 2, &c. the Philiſtines a, and ſubdued them, and took 
| + Heb. Gath and her +towns out of the hands of the Philiſtines. 
| daughter, , Allthis Chapter is explained on 2 Sam. 8. 
2 Andhe ſmote Moab : and the Moabites became 
| Davids ſervants, and brought gifts. 
| 8 3 And David ſmote || Hadarezer king of Zobah unto 
2 Sam. | Humath, as he weat to eſtabliſh his F dominion by the 
8. 3. river Euphrates. 
* Heb. 4 And David took from him a thouſand chariots, 
ng 4. r. and ſeven thouſand horſemen, and twenty thouſand 
footmen : David alſo houghed all the chariot-hor/es, 
but reſerved of them an hundred chariots. 
+ Heb. 5 And when the Syrians of F Damaſcus came to 


Darmeſck. Hadarezzr king of Zobah, David flew of the Syrians 
| two and twenty thouſand men. 

6 Then David put gariſons in Syria-damaſcus, and 
the Syrians became Davids ſervants, a:d brought gifts. 
Thus the LORD preſerved David whitherſoever he 
went, 

7 And David took the ſhields cf gold that were on 
the ſervants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jeru- 
falem. x | 

cazdin 8 Likewiſe from || Tibhath, and from Chun, cities 
the Book of of Hadarezer, brought David very much braſs, where- 
Sam. Beta, with * Solomon made the brazen ſea, and the pillars, 


_ Ber0- and the veſſels of braſs. 

= « King's 6b For which 2 Sam. 8. '$. Betah and Berothai are mentioned. 

"2 Ras Either thereforethey were the ſame places called by ſeveral names, 

iy "be 4. 3s is uſual : Or they were four neighbouring places, our of all 

I5 which the Braſs was taken, whereof two places having been named 
n there, and omitted here, and the other two places there omitted 

are here rermembred. 
Te 9 Now when||Tou king of Hamath heard how David 
% > had ſmitten all the hoſt of Hadarezer king of Zobah : 
01» vi 6 4 
< Moms. 10 He ſent Hadoram his ſonto king David, || to en- 
8. 9. quire of his welfare, and || ro congratulate him, becauſe 


4 64g he had fought againſt Hadarezer, and ſmitten him, 
h - <piany ( for Hadarezer f had warred with Tou ) and with him 
zo /clure, all manner of veſſels of gold, and filver, and braſs. 
t hc. 11 Themalſo king David dedicated unto the LORD, 
_— with the t1ver and the gold chat he brought from all 
nu cage? theſe nations ; from Edom, and from Moab, and from 
Fars, the children of Ammon, and from the Philiſtines, and 
from Amalek. 
I2 Moreover, Abiſhai the ſon of Zerujah ſlew of the 


Edomites in the valley offaic, eighteen thouſand. 


azALTC4AE $ 


Chap. XIX 
13 And he put gariſons in Edom, and all the Edo- 
mites became Davids ſervants. Thus the LORD preſer- 
ved David whitherſoever he went. 
» 14 So David reigned over all Ifrael, and executed 
judgment and juſtice among all his people. 
15 And Joab the ſon of Zerujah as over the hoſts, 
and Jehoſhaphat the ſon of Ahilud, || recorder. | 0 

16 And Zadok the ſon of Ahitub, and |] Abimelech A 
the ſon of Abiathar, were the prieſts, and || Shauſha #2, 


was {cribe. : : Sam, 
17 And Benajah the ſon of Jehojada was over the |* 17: , 


Cherethites,and the Pelethices : and the ſons of David .11;,,1,.; 


were Chief f about the king. in Sam. 
Ca F XIX ey 


Davids Meſſengers to Hanin are villanoully intreated, The Sam. x. and 
Ammonites and Syrians are overcome by Joab and Abiſhai, 6——1 5. By Shitha, 
David himſelf, 16 19. | I Tin 
Ow * it came to paſs after this, that Nahaſh the g. ;. * 
king of the chiidren of Ammon died a, and his t Heb. 
{on reigned in his ſtead. _ = vens 
a Of all the Contents of this Chapter ſee the notes on 2 Sam. ro, of the ik 
where we have tae ſame things, and almoſt the very ſame words. = 
2 And David ſaid, I will ſhew kindneſs unto Hanun *' 
the ſon of Nahaſh, becauſe his father ſhewed kindneſs 
to me. And David ſent meſſengers to comfort him 
concerning his father : ſo the ſervants of David came 


into the Jand of the children of Ammon, to Hanun, to 


p—; 


comfort him. 


3 Bur the princes of the children of Ammon ſaid to 
Hanun, 4 Thinkeſt thou that David doth honour thy + Heb. is 
facher that he hath ſent comforters untothee ? are not *hine yer 
hisfervants come unto thee for to ſearch, and to over. #2, 
throw, and to ſpie out the land. 

4 Wherefore Hanun took Davids ſervants , and ſhaved 
them, and cut off their gartnents in the midſt hard by 
cheir butcocks, and ſent them away. 

5 Lhen there went certain, and told David how the 
men were ſerved. And he ſent to meet them ( forthe 
men were greatly aſhamed ) and the king ſaid, tarry at 
Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return. 

6 And when the childrenof Ammon ſaw that they had 
made themſelves f odious to David, Hanun and the 

: 3 Heb. 
children of Ammon ſent a thouſand talents of filver to ;, 2a, 
hire them chariots and horſemen out of Meſopotamia, 
and our of Syria-maacah, and out of Zobah. 

7 50 they hired thirty and two thouſand chariots 6, 
and the king of Maachah and his people, who came 
and pitched before Medeba. And the children of 
Ammor: gathered themſelves together from their cities, 
and came to battel. 

b 7. e, 32000 Men fighting from or with Chariots, as that word is 
elſewhere uicd : of which ſee my Notes on 1 Sam. 13.5. And this 
Interpretation ſeems the more probable by comparing this place 
wath 2 Sam. 10,6. where thisarmy is ſaid to conſiſt of 20000 foormen, 
and 120c0 men of Jjhrob; which make up theſe 32000 men, who 
foughr partly from Chariots, and partly on foot with Chariots, or 
att-nding upon the Charior-, as the ancient manner of fighting was. 

And heie v 6. this Army is made up of Chariots and Horſemen : 


where, except the Chariots be underſtood of footmen, there were no 
footmen in the Army, which is unuſual and incredible. 


8s And when David heard of it, he ſent Joab, and all 
the hoſt of the mighty wen. 

9 And the children of Ammon came out, and put 
the battel in aray before the gate of the city : and the 
kings that were come, were by themſelves in the field. 

io Now when Joab ſaw that | the battel was ſetagainſt + 1g, 
him, before and behind, he choſe out of all the ||choice ze faz f 
of Iſrae], and put them in aray againſt the Aﬀſyrians. #h bit 

1: And the reſt of the people he delivered unto the 1 Or yg 
hand of + Abiſhai his brother,and they ſer themſelves in ,yy. 
aray againſt the children of Ammon, + Heb. 

12 And he ſaid, If the Syrians be too ſtrong for me, 4" 
then thou ſhalt help me . but if the children of Ammon 
be too ſtrong for thee, then T will help thee. 

I3 Be of good courage, and let us behave our ſelves 
valiantly for our people, and for the cities of our God : 
and let the LORD do zhat which js good in his light. 

14 So Joab and the people that were with him, drew 
nigh before the Syrians, unto the battel ; and they fled 
before him. 

I5 And when the children of Ammon ſaw that the 
Syrians were fled, they likewiſe fled before Abiſhai his 
brother, and entred into the city. Then Joab came 
to Jeruſalem. 

16 And when the Syrians ſaw that they were put to Tis 
the worſe before Iſrael, they ſent meſſengers and drew donor 


tr YEE WOE YL) 


forch the Syrians that were beyond the || river : and; 
|| Shophach, the captainef the hoſt of Hadarezer, wen? Shuach 
before them, 2$2.10- 


17 And 


v Gr, 


f Heb, 
Briſpals 


«int 
yes 
rid, 


| Ub, 
Shobacn: 
2$3.16! 


Chap: XX. 


. [IC H ke 


17 And it was told David,and he gathered all Iſrael, 
and paſſed over Jordan, and came upon them, and ſet 
the battel in aray againſt them, ſo when David had put 
the batcel in aray againſt the Syrians,they fought with 

1. 

"_ Bat the Syrians fled before Iſrael, and David flew 
of the Syrians ſeven thouſand men,which fought in cha- 
riots,and forty thouſand footmen c,and killed Shophach 
the captain of the hoſt. 

c How this agrees with 2 Sam-10-18.ſec in the Notes on that place. 

19 And when the ſervants of Hadarezer ſaw that 
they were put to the worſe before Iſrael, they made 

eace with David, and became his ſervants: neither 
would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any 
more. 


CHAP. XX. 
Rabbah beſicged, ſpoiled, and tortured by David, 1——3}. Three Giants 
ain, 8. 
A ND * it came to paſs, that + after the year was ex- 
pired, ar the time that kings go out to battel, Joab 
led forth the power of the army, and waſted the coun- 
try of the children of Ammon , and came and be- 
fieged Rabbah, ( but David rarrcied at Jeruſalem ) and 
Joab ſmote Rabbah, and deſtroyed it. 
Of this firſt verſe ſee my Notes on 2 Sam.11-1.and ofy.2,3.0n 
2 S$a,.12,30,31-and of the reſt of this Chapter on 2 Sam, 21.15, CC. 
where alſo an account isiven of the ſeeming differences between 
* this and that Relation. Ig 
Nb. 2 And David * took the crown of their king from 
right of, off his head, and found ir | to weigh a talent of gold, 
and there were precious ſtones in it, and it was ſer upon 
Davids head; and he brought alſo excesding much ſpoil 
+, &m, Out of the city. | LD 
rt 3 And he brought out the people that were 1n 1t,an 
| 0, cut them with ſaws and with harrows of iron,and with 
mined. axes : even fo dealt David with all the cities of the 
wagry children of Ammon. Aad David and all the people 
"returned to Jeruſalem. | 
4 And ir came to paſs after this,* that there || aroſe 
war at || Gezer with the Philiſtines ; at which time 
Sibbechai the Huſhathite ſlew || Sippai that 20as of the 
0Jaare> Children of || the giant, and they were {ubdued. , 
rgin,2. 5 Andthere was war again with tho Phililtines, and 
im219 Elhanan the ſon of [| Jair flew Lahmi the brother of 
,,22- Goliah the Gittite, whoſe ſpear-ſtaff was like a weavers 
f Heb. s beam, 
nan of 6 And yet again * there was war at Gath,where was 
niet. + a man of great ftature, whoſe fingers and toes ere 
f bir to þ 
four and twenty, fix 02 each band, and fix on each foot 


the gyant rm 
«Rapbs, and he alſo was F the ſon of the giant. 


% 4 Sams 
I; 

+Heb. at [4 
the returns 
ofthe year. 


|0;, re + But when he || defied Iſrael, Jonathan the fon of! 
mens [| Shimea, Davids brother ſlew him. 
floweh, - © Theſe were born unto the giant in Gath; and the) 
1Sm, fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his ſer 
6:9 yants. : 
GHAÞF. ML | 
David numbereth the people, 1———6. Hz repenteth : of three Judgments 
propounded, he chooſeth the Peſtilence : and why, 7 13- David,by 
Gods direfion, buildeth an altar, and jacrific:th: the Plague is ſtayeth, 
ra. I O- 
| _ : ND * [| Satan ſtood up 4 againſt Iſrael, and pro- 
Or, an voked David to number [ſrael. 
adverſary, # Heb. #09. ro wit, before the Lord and his Tribunal to accuſe 


Wn 22, David and Tſrae!, and to beg Gods permiſſion to tempt David ro 
VF number the people. Sranding is the Accuſers poſture before Mens 
Tribunals ; and conſequently the Holy Scripture (which uſeth to 
ſpeak of Sod, and of che things of God, after the manner of Mer, 
to bring them down to our capacities) elſewhere repreſents Satar 

' In this poſture, as 1 Kings 22,2. Zech 3.5. And 'o this agrees with 
2 Sam.24.1. Where the Lord is ſaid ro me David, 1. e. to give Satar 
Commiziſion or Perm-fſion ro move him ; for otherwiſe God tewpterh 
710 man, James 1 13 Bur of this, and of this whole Chapter,and of 
the Variations and ſeemingContradiQions between this Narrative 
and that in Samzel, ſee my Notes on 2 Sam. 24. 

; 2 And David {aid to Joab.and co the rulers of the peo- 
ple, Go, number Ifrael.trom Beerſheba even Dan ; and 
bring the number of them to me, that T may know 
it, 

3 And Joab anſwered, The LORD make his peovle 

an hundred times as-many mo as they be : but my lord 

fab. , the king, are they not all my lords ſervants, why then 

"þa;, doth my lord require this thing : why will he be + a 
cauſe of treſpaſs to Iſrael 5. 


b Or, why will he be, or, why ſhould this be a treſpaſs, or a cauſe of | 
treſpaſs, or an occaſion of puniſhment, (for Hebrew words ſignifying ſw 


are oft uſed to note the puniſhment of ſin:) or # deſolation,or a cauſe 
of dejolation or deſtruttio(for the verb whence this nown proceeds is 
oft uſed in that ſenſe) to or againſt Iſrael? Why wilſt thou provoke 
God by this (in to puniſh 122! ? Thus he ſpeaks, becauſe God com- 
monly puniſheth the People for the fins of theirRulers,becayſe,they 
are for the moſt part guilty of their fins in one kind or other ; or 
at leaſt God takes this occaſion to puniſh People for 21) thesr £05: 


4 Nevertheleſs, the kings word prevaaled agazndt 


F. 


NICHES Chap, XXL 


Joab : wherefore Joab departed, and went throughout 
all Iſrael, and came to Jeruſalem. 


5 And Joab gave the ſum of the number of the peo- 
ple unto David. And all hey of Iſrael were a thouſand 
thouſand and one hundred thouſand men that drew 
{word : and Judah was four hundred threeſcore and ten 
chouſand men that drew ſword. | 

6 But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among 
them & ; for the kings word was abominable to Joab. 

c Partly for the followingreaſon ; and principally by Gods ſpe- 
Clal & gracious Providence to theſe twoTribes,toLevi,becauſe they 
were devoted to his Service ; and to Benjamin, becauſe they were 
the leaſt of all rhe Tribes,having been almoſt extin&,7udz.21.& be. - 
cauſeGod foreſaw: that they would be faithful ro the Houſe of Da- 
vid in the divifion of the Tribes,and therefore he would not have 
them diminiſhed. And 50ab preſumed to leave theſe rwoTribes un- 
numbred,becauſe he had ſpecious pretences for it; for Levi,becauſe 
they were no Warriors, and the Kings Command reached only to 
thoſe that drew ſword, as appears from v. 5- And for Benjamin, be= 
cauſe they, being ſo ſmall a Tribe, and bordering upon Jeruſalem | 
their chicf Ciry, might eaſily be numbred afterward. . _ 

7 7 And God was diſpleafed with this thing d,chere- , ,,.y, ,, 
fore he ſmote [ſrael e. | i wore 

a Becauſe this was done without any colour of necefſiry,and out of ; the eyes | 
mezr Curioſity,and Oftenation,and carnal Confidence,as Davids own of the 
Conſcience told him, which therefore ſmore him,as it is related,2 $4, LORD 
24: 10, e Which is particularly related in the following verſes. concerning | 

8 And David faid unto God,* T have ſinned greatly, ki thing.” 
becauſe I have done this thing ; * but now I beſeech * 2 Sam. | 
thee, do away the iniquity of thy ſervant, for I have 24 Gans 
done very fooliſhly, I 


9 And the LORD ſpake unto Gad, Davids ſeer, ſay- as 


ing, 

10 Go and tell David,ſfaying, Thus ſaith the LORD, | 
I | olter thee three things, chuſe thee one of them that | m 2] 
I may do zr unto thee. FO 

1 So Gad came to David, and ſaid unto him, Thus A 
ſaith the LORD, + chuſe thee, THeb. take, 

-12 Either three years famine, or three menths to be #9 #/* 
deſtroyed before thy foes, ( while that the ſword of 
thine enemics overtaketh zhee ) or elſe three days the 
word of the LORD, even the peſtilence in the land, 
and the angel of the LORD deſtroying throughout all 
che coaſts of Iſrael. Now therefore adviſe thy ſelf what 
word I {hall bring again to him that {ent me. | 

13 And David ſent unto Gad, I am in a great ſtraſt : 
let me fall now into the hand of the LORD, (for very 
[great are his meicies) but let me not fall into t 
of man. | 

14 So the LORD ſent peſtilence upon Iſrael ; and 
there fell of Iſrael ſeventy thoutand men. 

15 And God lent aa * angel unto Jeruſalem to de-* 2 Sam; 
{troy it : and as he was deſtroying, the LORD beheld, 24. 16. 
ind tie repented him of che evil, and ſaid to the angel 
tat deftroyed,Tt is enough,ſtay now thine hand. And 
c1e Angel of the LORD ltood by the threſhold-floor of 
|| Ornan the Jebulite. | Or 4rays 

16 And David lift up his eyes, and ſaw the angel of nab,2Sam; 
che LORD itand between the earth and the heaven, 248. 
having «4 diawn ſword in his hand ſtretched out over 
Jerulaiem : then David and the elders of 1/ael,who were 
clothed in fackcioth f, feil upon their £4 

F 7. e. In mourning Garments, humbling themſclves before God 
for their Sins, and deprecating his Wrath againſt the People. 

17 And David laid unto God, Is it not | that com- 
,nanded the people ro be numbred ? even [ it is that 
nave ſinned and done evil indeed ; bur as for theſe ſheep 
what have chey done ? let chine hand, I pray thee, O 
LORD my God, be on me, and on my fathers houſe, 
but nor on thy people, that they ſhould be plagued. 

18 TacnÞ the * angel of the LORD commanded + 11. 
Gad to izy to David, that David ſhou!d go up and ſet a» anget- 
up an alcar upon. the LORU, in che thrething-floor of 2:34, 
Ornan the jebutice. | 

19 Ard David went up at the ſaying of Gad, which 
he ſpake in the name of the LORD | 

20 || And Ornan turned back, 
and his four fons with him hid 
| Ornan was threſhing whear. n 
| Pi —_ Pra ang th is go _ Bace from the Angel Ae Lov? 
j -e ſaw rhe angel, and (ſo did) kis Pati wo fewn omar >. _— 


partly becaute of theGlory & Majeſty in which the Angel nouns and his four 
which mens weak and tintul natures a 


as a ; , » ſons with 
no e to bear;and partly;;,,, z; 

from the fear ofGods Vengeance whi Part?Y him, hid 
{ cuir in the Land, and now ſcemed 


ch was at this time riding Cir- gpomglues , 
, ro be coming to their Family, * 
21 Andas David came to Ornan,Ornan looked, and 
ſaw David, and went out of the threſhing-floor, and 
| bowed himſelt co David with bis face co the ground. 
j . . 
1 22 Then David ſaid to Ornan T Grant me the t Heb. 
places of ;4zs chreihing floor, .that I may build an altac®** 
| 2 © therein 


ne hand [Orauany; 


and ſaw the Angel ; | Or,vhes 


themſcl 2 .Ornan 
mfelves g. Now tie 


a 


L 
4 


| 


SZ IEC TT 2-0 


therein unto the LORD ; thou ſhalt grant 1t me for the 
full price, that the plague may be ſtayed from the peo- 
le. ES SO” | | 
: 22 And Ornan faid unto David, Take it to thee,and 
{xt my lord the king do rhat which 3s good in his eyes: 
Io, I give :hee the'gxen alſo for burnt-offerings, and the 
F threſhing-inſtruments for wood, and the wheat for the 
meat-oftering, L give 1t all. ; 
24. And king David ſaid to Ornan, Nay, but T will 
yerily.buy it for. the full price: for I will not cake 7a 
which: thine for the LORD, nor offer burnt-offerings 
without coft. . | | | 
"25 So Dang pgve to Seirmg for the place, 
dred Shekels of Gold-by. weight. | 
_ And David 565% jag an Altar unto the LORD, 
and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings,and cal- 
led upon the LORD ; and he anſwered him from Hea- 
ven by fire 4 upon the Altar of burnt-oftering. _ 
þ Heb. by fire ſent from Heaven : which was the ſign of Gods Ac- 
CEPTance. See Levit. 9, 24. 1 Kings 18. 24, 38. 2 Chron. 7.1. 1h 
"> 3 BY my —porEs 10 o Angel, and he 
A his ſword again into the ineath th 
NS a" that ms when David faw that the LORD 
had anſwered him in the rhreſhing-floor of Ocnan the 
Jebufite, chen he ſacrificed there z. 
; When he perceived that his Sacrifice there offcred was accepta- 
ble to God, he proceeded to offer more Sacrifices in that place, and 
did not go to Gibeon, as otherwiſe he ſhould have done. c 
29 For the Tabernacle of the LOR D which Moles 
made in the wilderneſs,and the altar of the burnt-ofter- 
* i King. ing were at that ſeaſon in the high place at ” Gibeon. 
3:4. Ch. - >, Bur David could not & go before it /7 to enquire 


| mh ng ;.of God mz for he was afraid becauſe of the ſword of 


| FHeb. ro the angel of the LORD ». 
| Jeck God, . k 5. ack notc_ 7 3. e. Before the Tabernacle, where the Al- 
| 3Chr. 1:5. tar ſtood. » Heb. to ſeek God, i. e. humbly ro beg his Favour by 
Prayer and Sacrifice. » i» e- When he ſaw the Angel ſtand with 
his drawn ſword over Jeruſalem, as is related above, ve I5, 16. hc 
durſt not go away thence to Gibeon, leſt the Angel in the mean 
time ſhould deſtroy Feruſalmm ; for the prevention whereof he 
thought it moſt proper to* continue to worthip God in that place, 
which he had conſecrated by his ſpecial Preſence and gracious 


- oat CHAP. XXIL 


, ” or the Building of the Temple, 1 5. Inſerufeth Sole- 
__ yo ta uo and bis | 106166 . he chargeth the Princes 
to- affiſt his Son, 19 ——19. 

"Hen David ſaid a, * This is the houſe of the 
| LORD God 6, and this 5s the altar of burnt-offe- 
ring for Iſrael. | Þ 

s Partly by his obſervation of this gracious and glorious Appea- 
rance of God, and his command to erect an Altar and his Accep- 
tance of a Sacriſice offered in this place : & partly by the Inſtin&t 
and Dire&ion of Gods Spirit, by which as he is ſaid to have had the 
patern of the houſe, Perch, Altar, &c. 1Chron. 28:11,2,19- Jo doubtleſs 
he was alſo inſtruged as to the-place where the Houſe ſhould be 
built, 6 This is the place appointed by God for the building of 
his Temple and Altar. 

2 And David commanded to gather together the 
ſtrangers that were in the Land of Iſrael c, and he ſet 
maſons to hew wrought ſtones d, to build the houſe of 
God. 

cThe ſame perſons whom Solomon afterwards employed in the ſame 
Work : of which ſee 1 Kings 5:15. compared with 1 Kings g; 20, 21. 
d Wherein he could not do much,being prevented by death: but 
Solomon carried on and perfeted what David had begun. 

3 And David prepared iron in abundance for the 
nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joyniings e ; 
and braſs in abundance without weight. 

e To be uſed together with melted Lead,for the joyning of thoſe 
great and ſquare Stones together. 

4 Alſo cedar-trees in abundance : for the Zidoni- 
ans, and they of Tyre, brought much cedar-wood to 
David. | 

5 And David faid f, * Solomon my Son 7s young 
and tznder g, and the houſe 7h2t is ro be built for the 
LORD, muſt be exceeding magnifical, of fame and of 
glory throughout all countries: I will therefore now 
make preparation for it. So David prepared abundant- 
ly before his death. 


| | Ehap. 


© » Cam. ſix hun- 


k $4: 24. 


*Devt.12. 
5. 2 Sam. 
»4: 18, 


| 
| 
| 
11. 
| 


— —— — ——— ————— —— 


ZE © Chap. XXII 


name, becauſe thou haſt ſhed much blood upon the 
Earth +4 in my ſight 5. 

þ Not that Wars either now are or then were {1:nply Unlawful, 
or that David ſinned in ſhedding the Blood of War; tor it is mas 
nifeſt, that Davids Wars were undertaken by Gods command, or 
with his Leave, and were attended with his Biting ; bur partly 
becauſe Davids Military Employments did for a good while {ill his 
Head and Hands,and gave him no leiſure for Temple-work : and 
principally for myſtical Significarion, to reach us that the Church 
(whereof the temple was a manifeſt & Tlluſtrious T'ype.) thould be 
built by Chriſt, he Prince of Peace, Ta. g. 6. and thar ir thou} be 
gathered and built up,net by might or power,or by force of Arms,bur 
oy(zods, Spirit,Zech.g 6.and by the preaching of rheGoſpel of Peace. 
; Which I have taken particular notice of. And this expreſſion 
may poſſibly be added in reference to U-iah and the reſt of the If 
raclites, who .were flain at the Siege of Ribbah by Davids contrie 
vance; Which peradventure David had in his Eye, P/al. c:4, where 
David confefling this Sin, uſcth this very Expreiſion, 7 .4ys dong 
this Evil in thy [tgnt. 


9 Behold, a ſon ſhall be born to thee, who hall Þe 
a Man of reſt, and 1 will give him reſt from all his | That is, 


enemies round about : for his name ſhall be || Solomon, "9x 
and I will give peace and quietnels unto Iſrael in his 1;, 1 Kin; 
days. 5:5.Chey, 
ro * He ſhall build an houſe for my name, and he 1% 131 
ſhall be my ſon, and I »## be his Father, and I will 
eſtabliſh the thone of kis Kingdom over Iſract for ever &; 

k Of this ſee my Notes on 2 $am7. 7. 13. | 

11 Now my Son, the LORD be with thee, and 
proſper thou /, and build the houſe of the LORD thy 
God, as he hath ſaid of thee. | 
I Go on proſperouſly in carrying on this Work. Or, the Lord 
give thee that Reſt and Proſperity which is neccilary for it. 

i2 Only the LORD give thee wiſdom and unders 
ſtanding ; and give thee chargs concerning Iſrael »z, 
chat thou mayelt keep the Law of the LORD thy Goda 

m 1.e, Give thee Inſtrudtions or DireQion rigtitly to manage 
and rule his people J/rael. Or, and ſet thee over Iſrad,as the Syriack 
renders 1t;whom the Arabick follows : Or when (as the Hebrew vai 
is oft uſed) he ſbal (et thee over Iſrael, i. e. when thou ſhalt be King 
for then Silemiu would need this Wiſdom, for which therefore ho 
Prayeth, 1 Kings 3: 9. : 

13 Then thalt thou proſper, if thou takeſt heed to 
fulfil the ſtatutes and judgments which the LORD char- 
ged Moſes with concerning Ifrael. Be ſtrong, and of _ 
g00u courage, dread not, nor be diſmayed, [ Or,nm 
14 Now behold, !| in my trouble » I have prepared 
for the houſe of the LORD, an hundred thouſand ta- 
lents of gold e,anda thouſand thouſand talents of filver p; *Amwery 
and of brafs,- and iron, withour * weight : (for it is in 
abundance ) timber alſo and ſtone have Iprepaxed, and 
thou mayett add thereto. 

This he alledgeth as a reaſon why he could do no more, becauſe 
of the many Troubles and Wars both Forreign and Civil, whereby 
much of his Treaſurers was exhauſted. » A Talant of Gold in 
the firſt conſtitution was 30920 Shekels, as may be gathered from 
Exod.38:24,25,26, and fo this amounts to a very vaſt Sum,yet not 
impoſſible for David to get,conlidering how many and great Cons 
queſts he made, and what vaſt Spoils and Preſents he gor ;and thar 
he endeavoured by all juſt & honourable ways to get as much as ha 
could, not out of Covetoulſneſs, or for his own Ends, bur meerly 
out of Zeal for Gods houſe. And whereas ſome obje&, that this 
quantity of Gold and Silver was ſufficient, tho the whole Fabrick 
of the Temple had conſiſted of Mally Gold and Silver : it is to be 
conſidered,that all this Treaſure was nor ſpent upon the Materials 
of the Temple, but a very great part of it upon the Workmen, 
which were nigh 260000, whereot a great number were Officers, 
which being employed for ſo long time together, would exhauſt a 
conſiderable part of it ; and what was not employed in the build= 
ing of the Temple, was laid up in the Sacred Treaſures for future 
occaſions,there being mention of the great Treaſures lefr by Davia, 
even in other Authors:.Buc ſome Learned Men make theſe Talents 
far leſs than thoſe in Moſer his Time ; and they conceive, that as 
there was two ſorts of Shekels both of fold and Silver, the come 
mon and the ſacred Shekel, whereof rhe latter is commonly thought 
to be double to the former, fo alſo there were Talents »f divers 
kinds and values. For the Hebrew word kar, which is rendered 
a Talent, properly ſignifies only a Maſs or a Picce, as it is uſed, Exos. 
29:23, I Sam: 2:36, Zech:5:7. $0 it may indifferently denote either 
a greater or a lefler piece. And this 1s certain, and obſerved by 
two Ancient and moſt Learned Writers, Yarra and Pellux, and by 
others, that a Talent among the Greeks and Romans ſometimes 
notes but a ſmall quantity : and that a Talent of Gold contains on- 
ly fix drams. And Homer in his Jiads, among other things of no 
great value, which are propounded as Rewards to the Conqueror 
at a ſolemn and publick Exerciſe, a Bondweman, an Horſe and a Pot, 


f W:thin himſelf, or in his own thoughts. g And therefore 
through yourhtul vanity and folly, and unſerledaeſs, may not uſe 


ions as this great Work requires. Of Solomons Age, ice 1 King:3:7, 
& Then he called forgolomon his Son, and charged 
him to build an houſe for the LORD God of Iſrael. 
>. 57 And Did faid to Solomon, My Son, as for me, 
2 SaB * je was in my mind to build aa houſe F unto the name 
—<ofP1 of the LORD my God. | 
6: 17: 8 'But the word of che LORD came to me, ſaying, 


that Care,and Contideration,and Diligencee in making ſuch Provie- 


1ch:28:3. * Thor haſt ſhed biood abundantly, and haft made 
WS05:5:3- reat Wars 3 thou ſhalt nor build an houſs unto my | 


mentions 7wo talents of Geld 5 which plainly ſhews that in his Tims 
which was after the Building of this Temple ) Talents of Gold were 
very far inferiour in quantity and price to what they had been in 
former Ages. And Joſephus a Jew, and therefore rhe more compe- 
rent judge of tlreſe things, ſpeaking of this very thing for 10-009 
Talents of G1ld hexe mentioned, he puts 10050, and for 1000090 
Talents of Silver he puts 100000 ; either becauſe the Talents in 
Moſes his time were of ten times more bulk-and price than in D4- 
vids and Svlomons time,and therefore thete Tajents reduced to them 
amounted to no greater Sum; or becauſe he read to in his Copy of 
the Hebrew Bible. And certainly it is infinitely more tolerable,and 
reaſonable to ſuppole, that there is a mittake here in the generality 
of the preſent Copies of the Hebrew B ble, through the Errour ot 


| the Scribe, (which being only in a Numcral and Hiſtorical Paſſage, 


night happen without Impeachment to th-Care OR ET OVLOeSnn 
which 


"Lin 
Jy 39 
(i, ;8 


[ Nam 
þ 4 


nt ts, 
able, 

am.7, 
1 Kin; 
Chey, 


131 


r,in my 
10. 


vVer;h 


which hath ſo miraculouſly preſerved all the moſt Importane and | rhong the ſons of Levi, namely, Gerſhon, Kohath, ang 
3, 3 


Ji 


— ———— 


LL. CHER 


Subſtantial parts of Scripture,as hath been formerly ſaid) than upon 

ſuch pretences to deny the Truth and Divine Original and Autho- 

riry of the Holy Scriptures. Add to this, that all the Gold then uſed 

was not of equal worth and purity; as appears borh by the ſpecial 
Commendation given to ſome ſorts ofGold in divers parts of Scrip- 

ture, and particularly by the difference obſerved in this very Hi- 

ſtory between the Gold and &old which David gave for this uſe ; 
whereof one little part being diſtin&ively called pure Gold and re- 

fined Gold, 1 Chron:28:17,18- it is ſufficiently implied;that all the reſt 

of the Gold was not refined nor pure, which might greatly diminiſh 

the worth of it;for in what degree it was impure or allayed with 

other things in thoſe Times and Places we cannot know art this Di- 

ſtance : and therefore we cannot make a true Eſtimate what thoſe 
Talents of Gold did amount to in our Value. p Juſt as much in 

Siver as in Gold; for this is known and agreed, that the Proportion 

of Gold to Silver in Ten to One. : 

15 Moreover, there are workmen with thee in 

iThat is, abundance, hewers,and || workers of ſtone and timber, 
um d and all manner of cunaing men for every manner of 
omen work. 
16 Of the gold,the ſilver and the braſs,and the iron, 

there is no number. Arile therefore, and be doing q,and 


the LORD be wittrthee. 
q To wit, when thou ſhalt come to the Throne in my ſread. 
17 David alſo commanded all the princes of Itrael 
to help Solomon his Son, ſaying, | 
18 Is not the LORD your God with you ? and 
hath he mt given you reſt on every fide ? for he hath 
given the inhabitants of the land into mine hand, and 


the land is ſubdued betore the LORD, and before his 
people r. 

r Either 1. Tt is brought under the command of God and of you 
his people,all the enemies of God and of I/rael,in it or near it,being 
now perfectly ſubdued. Or, 2, Ir is really ſu>dued, whereof both 
God and your own Eyes are witneſſes, 

19 Now ſet your heart and your ſoul to ſeek the 
LORD your God : ariſe therefore, and build ye rhe 
ſanRuary of the LORD God, to bring the ark of the 
covenant of the LORD, and the ho'y veiſels of God, 
into the houſe that is to be built to the name of the 


LORD. 
CH AP. XXIIL 
David maketh Solomon king, 1. The number and diſtribution of the Levites, 
according to their families, 2——23. Their Office, 24 32. 
O when DaviJ was old and fuli of days, he made 


* Solomon his ſon king over 1fſrael 4. 
"Kingi, # Not that he did reſign the Kingdom to him, bur that he decla- 
39. red his mind concerning is Succeſſion into the Throne after his 
(38.5, death. As David himſeif is called King. 1 Sam: 16: 1. becauſe he 
was appointed and ancinted to be King after Seuls death, though 

till then he was only a Subject. : 
2 And he gathered together all the princes of Iſrael, 


with the Prieſts and the Levites 6. 

b Partly to declare Gods Mind and his own Will, that Solomon 
ſhould be his Succeſſor ; and ſo to cut off the claims and pretences 
which others of his Sons might make ro the Crown : and partly to 
acquaint them with thoſe Directions which he had received trom 
God by the Spirit, as appears from ch. 28: 11, &s. concerning the 
Eſtabliſhment of a new order and method in the Minuttration of 
the Prieſts and Levites in the Temple. 

3 Now the Levites were numbred from the age of 

'Nanb, * chicty years and upward c : and their numbers by 

6+ their polis,” man by man, was thirty and eight chou- 
ſand. 

c Not only till fifty, as it was appointed, Mumb:4:2,3. but even 
till their death : For that was bur a Temporary Law grounded upon 
a ſpecial reaſon, becauſe the Levites were employed 1n carrying the 
Tabernacle and vacred veſlels from place to pace 3 and therefore 
God would have them fred from rhoſe burdens when they came to 
feel the infirmities of Age: which R-aſon wholly ceafing upon the 
Building of the Temple-and their work veing far catier than it had 
been, and their Service being more a privilege than a Burden,their 
time of Service is juſtly and firly prolonged. 

I), 4 Of which, cwenty and tour thouſand were || to ſet | 
wi. forward the work of the houſe of the LORD 4 : and liz 


$2 thouſand were * officers and judges e. 

'* 4 4.e. To take care that all the Work of the Temple abour Sa- 
crifices and other parts or means of Gods Service ſhould be puncrus 
ally & diligently performed,either by themſelves or others: Which 
they were not to do all at once, bur by courſes, roo00 at a time, as 
we ſhall ſhortly ſec. e Whole work it ſeems to have been to judge 
of and determine all difficult Cauſes or differences which might a« 
riſe either among the inferior Prieſts or Levites about their Sacred 
Adminiſtrations ; or among the People,which being governed in all 
their Concerns only by the La+s ot Myer. it was fit and neceſlary, 
that the Prieits and Levites thould be conſulced and concerned 1n 
their martecrs. 

5 Moreover, four thouſand were porters f, and four 
thouſand praiſed che LORD with inſtruments g which 
"3 I made ( {a4 David) to praile therewith. 
vl f Whoſe Office was to take the Charge of all the Gates of the 
W.6.1 Temple and its Courrs,thart no forbidden or unclean Perſon might 
;, ?enter there,and of the Courts themieIves, and of ſeveral Chambers 
iGr,g, Or Buildings belonging to the Temple and the Service thereof. 
4 & 29, Theſe aliv were to do their Work by turns. g Whereof 288 were 
&, Perſons of greater $skill than their Brethren, and did inftrutt them, 
IHeb, and had ſome Authority over them. 
Bm, G And * David divided them into + courſes h a - 


moth, three. | 
24 Theſe were the ſons of * Levi, after the houſe of , Numb, 
their fathers ; even the chief of the fathers, as they were BD pheqgoy] | 
counted by number of names by their polls, thac did the 
work for the fervice of the houſe of the LORD, from 
the age of * twenty years q and upward. 


N ICL KS Chap, 
Merar1. 

þ Whicli he did not by his own Invention, but as 4 Mar of God 
and by che command of God, and with the Advice and nts fo. 


of Gad and Nathan the Prophets, as is manifeſt from 2 Chron: 8: 14: 
7” 262 IC; | : 


; | 
7 Of the * Gerſhonites were || La2dan and Shimei. 


could nor be their immediate Sons. 

9 The ſons of Shimei ; Shelomith, 
and Haran three, 
of Laadan. 


and Haziel, 
Thele were the chief of the fathers 


and Jeuſh, and Beriah : Theſe four 
Shimei. 


& Not that Shimei named wv: 9. but another and I 
or Grandſon of that Shimes. y nother,and pothbly the Son 


I: And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the ſe- 


their fathers houſe /. 


! They were reckoned together as one Family,and 1 
led by the name of their two immediate P FARE Were Hats 
of their Grandfather Shime? e Parents, but by the name 


12 The fons of Kohath ; Amram :; I 
and Uzziel, four. y ram ; Izbar, Hebron, 


13 The ſons of * Amram ; Aaron and Moſes : and 
moſt holy things », he and his ſons » for ever, to burn 6: 20. 


co * bleſs in his name for ever. 


already ſanRQified by God in the higheſt degree,but ively, t e: : 

that he might keep chem from ee Ber het. per: S Ry "cl JR 
only his eldeſt Sons the High-prieſts ſucceſlively,bur all his Poſre. ; 
rity or all the Prieſts ; for the Works here Sing omar _ _— oy 


all burn Incenſe, 2 Chron: 29: 11. Luk 1: 9- and to miner. in the 


hg was and to bleſs the People in Gods name, Numb. 6: 23. Det: 
10: 8. 


63 23» 


14 Now concerning Moſes the man of God, his ſons 
were named of the Tribe of Levi». 

2 i.e. They were accounted only as common Levites,and were 
not Prieſts - which is mentioned partly to ſecure the Prieſthood 
within the bounds to which God had confined it, left they ſhould 
prelume ro invade it upon a confidence 1n the Nobleneſs of their 
Extrattion : and partly for the honour of Moſes, and the demon- 
ſtration of his eminent Piety and Self-denial, who willingly lefr 
the Government to Feſhus. and the Prieſthood to Aaron, and was 


content to have his Poſterity reduced to a very private and mean 
condition. 


17 And the ſons s of Eliezer were, * Rehabiah || the 3, 4. 
of Rehabiah + were very many. 


0 For, zhe ſon : the plural number for the ſingular, as Gen: 46:23. 
1 Chron: 2: 8, 3T. and oft elſewhere. p Heb, che frft, 3. e. the tirſt- FP 


20 Of the ſons of Uzziel ; Micah the firſt, and Je- 


ſhiah the ſecond. 


21 The ſons of Merari ; Mahli,and Muſhi : the ſons 


of -Mahli ; Eleazar, and Kiſh. 


22 And Eleazar died, and * had no fons, but daugh- , FR or 


ters: and their || brethren the ſons of Kiſh cook them. ,,.1g. 


23 The ſons of Muſhi, Mahli, and Eder, and Jere- || Or, 
Kinſmens 


: * | 
qAs the Levites were anciently numbred from two ſeveral times, Nomb. 


from the 25th year of their Age, and from the z3oth Numb. 4: 3. © 3 = + 
& 8.24. In like manner and for the ſame Reaſon they are here 3.0 8.24. 
numbred both from their 2oth year,as here, when they were more 

ſolemnly prepared for,and inſtructed, and by degrees exerciſed in 

ſome parts ot their Work ; and from their zoth year, above wv. 3. 

when they were admitted ro the full and compleat Exerciſe of all 

the Parts and Works of their Office. 
were now ſooner admitted to ſervice than they had been formerly 
by the Conſtitution of Moſes, is given in the next verſes, becauſe 
now their Work was more eaſte,they being wholly diſcharged from 
that burdenſome Work of carrying the Tabernacle and irs Ucen=- 
fils, which was too heavy for young and render Shoulders. To which 
may be added, thit the number ot the Iiraclites were greatly in- 
creaſed, and conſequently the Services which were to be performed 


And the reaſon why chey 


392 Ly 


XXIIt- 


* Chap. 
8 The ſons ; of Laadan, the chief was Jehiel, ang 26: 21: 
Zethan, and Joel, three. © _ _ | 


Or.Libui, 
7 i. e. His Poſterity : and ſo in the following verſes : for theſe Ch. 6.17. i 


Io And the Sons of Shimei & were, Jahath, [| Zina, || Or, Z;- 
were the ſons of zah, V.11. br | 


cond : but Jeuſh and Beriah f h:d not many ſons : fHeb-4;4 al 
therefore they were in one reckoning, according to * i= i 
Þ'y Jour, 


f Aaron was ſeparated, || that he ſhould ſandtifie the * Exod; 

incenſe before the LORD, to miniſter unto him, and 7, He 
- 30+ & ©: 

m Nor poſitively ; for ſo he could not ſanQifie them, they beitip Ho. Fc 


hi ; 
were polluted when they were touched by any other Sacks - Nat army 4. 


culiar to the High-prieſt,but common to all the Pricſts, who might Numb. 


15 * The ſons of Moſes were, Gerſhom and Eliezer. * F4 4 y 
16 Of the ſons of Gerſhom. || Shebuel was the chief. ,,.% 15. 


chief p. And Eiizzer had none other ſons, but the ſons LOO 
:24:20, 
*Chap:26» 


born. He is ſo called not becauſe others were born after him, bur os the 
becauſe none were born before him. Sec on Mat: 1; 23. a SO 
18 Of che ſons of Izhar |] Shelomith the chief. very highly 


19 Of the ſons of Hebron ; Jeriah the firſt, Ama- 7###/pled.. 
rjah the ſecond, Jahaziel the third; and Jekameam the 
fourth. 


|Shelomerh. 
Ch. 24:22, 


| 


ww M2 
% 


1 

Chap. X XIV. L. 
| ; by the Levites on their behalf were multiplied, 

| the Temple was much greater than that of the 
therefore more of theLevites were to be imployed,and conſequent- 
ly they were to be ſooner taken into Service. 


| ” 25 For David ſaid, the LORD God of Iſrael hath 
| 1 Or, andgiven reſt unto his People || that they may dwell in Je- 
I he dweleth ruſalem for ever. | 

{| in Jeruſe= 26 And alſo unto the Levites r, they ſhall no more 
tm, $6 carry theTabernacle,nor any veſſels of it for the ſervice 


thereof. | 
' » Or rather,as concerning the Levites,of 


he Work of Sanftuary ; and ſo it may ſeem to make this Diviſion impro 
— tw and and irregular, the ſeveral Members of it being altogether the ne: 
Oc rather, of the things of God, 7. e. of all perſons miniſtring in 
che Sanftuary, and of all Holy Miniſtrations done in it, and of 
all other matters of the Lord, as they are called by way of diſtinction 
rom the Kings matters, 2 Chron, 19. 11, 

6 And Shemajah the ſon of Nathaneel the ſcribe, 
one of the Levites, wrote them before the king, and the 
princes, and Zadok the prieſt, and Ahimelech the fon 
of Abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of the 


Prieſts and Levites : one Þ principal houſhold being ta-+ Heb. 


i | 


whom he is here ſpeaking: 


; : ken for Eleazar, and exe taken for Ithamar houſe of th 
< # je of the 

. 27. For by the laſt words of David s, 2 TIC f Or,the Chief (which word 1s eaſily ſupplied out - context)? #4. 

+ Heb. were T numbred from twenty years old and a oVe. out of one houſe of the fathers was taken (to wit,by Lot) for Eleazar (i.e 

numbcr. s By his laſt Order and Conſtitution made by Gods dir Eftion & | yt of his Family) and that which was taken after it was taken for Itha 


+ Heb: 


ne | : | (> of the LORD, in | ® The third to Harim, the fourth to SEOrim. 
6s +9700 aan for the ſervice - = — in the purifying 9 The fifth to Malchijah, the fixth to Mijamin, 
$ the courts, and in the chambers, ] Io The ſeventh to Hakk h heb wo # £6: 
hand of the OF 11 holy things t, and the work of the ſervice of the OZ, the eighth to * Abjjah,* Netis; 
for of © of God 3 1x The ninth to Jeſhua, the tenth to Shecaniah, «, 17. 
Aaron. g 


CE ” 


by the Spirit, as hath been once and again noted and proved before. 
This i here added to ſignifie,that this great Aﬀair was thus anni 
byDavid,not in his younger years,when it mighr have been ___ oht 
to have the effe& of youthful Heat,and Contidence, and Preſump- 
tion,and Raſhneſs,but when he was come to the greateſt Maturity, 
when he was old and near his death,and going to give up his Ac- 
count to his Lord and Maker, of all his Actions, , 
of the Alterations which he made in the Service of God;which ic 
declared was done by the ſpirit of God, Theſe were 1n a manner his 
dying words, which uſually make the deepeſt impreſſions: c 
28 Becauſe + their office was to wait on the ſons 0 


2 5. e. Holy places, and Garments, and Veſſels, and Sacrifices, 
[which were to be waſhed and cleanſed from any Filthineſs which 
-poſſibly might cleave to them. 


5] <v.6:30-1-..29-Both for-cthe ſhew-bread, and for * the fine flour 


and particularly Þ 


mar,i.e. out of his Family. The meaning is,that the firſt Lot fell to 
Eleazar, and the ſecond to Ithamar ; and the third to Eleazar, and 
the fourth to thamar ; and ſo ſucceſſively, until all the families of 
Ithamar had received their Lots: And afterwards all the Lots came 
forth to the reſt of El:azars Families, whichwere double in number 
to thoſe of Ithamar, as was ſaid v. 4. 

7 Now the firſt lot came forth g to Jehojarib, the 
ſecond to Jedajah, 

g To wit, out of the Veſſels in which all the Lots were promiſe 
cuouſly put together, and out of which they were ſeverally taken. 


13 The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Je. 
ſhebeab, 


14 The fifceenth to Bilgah, the fixteenth to Immer, 


Chap: 9: :for meat offering,and for the unleavened cakes,and for 15 The ſeventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to 
29,&c. that which is baked in the || pan, and for thar which is | Aphbſes. 
yrs # fryed, and for all manner of meaſure and ciſe «. 16 The ninteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to 


Gods Law. 


# This is to be underſtood either, 1. particularly of the Meaſure 
Or Quantity of-fine Flour, and Wine, and Ol), which was fixed by 
Or generally of all Meaſures uſed either inSacred or 

Civil Things,the publick Standards whereof were kept in the San- 

ctuary or Temple; of which ſee on Exod:3e:13. and thereof the care 

of keeping them inviolable and producing them upon Occaſion, 

muſt -needs belong to the Prieſts, under them to the Levites, who 

were to examine other Meaſures and all things by them, as oft 

as occaſion required ; that ſo the Prieſts might be at more leiſure 

For their higher and greater Employments. | : 

" 30 And to ſtand every mornings to thank and praiſe 
the LORD, and likewiſe at even x. 


. x The two Solemn Times of offering Sacrifices : which Work 
was attended with Publick Prayer and Thankſgiving. 

31 And to ofter all burnt-facrifices unto the LORD 
in the ſabbarhs,in the new moons,and on the ſet feaſts, 
by number, according to the order commanded unto 
them y continually before the LORD : 


7 7.e. Unto thoſe Perſons, the Levites, of whom he ſpeaks. Or, 
conccrning them, 7. e. abour thoſe things- 


32 And that they ſhould keep the charge of the ta- 
bernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the 


Jehezekel. 


17 The one and twenticth to Jachin, the two and 
twentieth to Gamul, 


18 The three and twentieth to Delajah, the four 
and twentieth to Maaziah. | 


| 19 Theſe were the orderings of them in their ſer- 
vice h, to come into the houſe of the LORD, accord- 


ding to their manner z, under Aaron their father &, as 
the LORD God of Iſrael had. commanded him. 

h In this order and method they were to come to perform the 
Offices of the Temple. # i.e. To come into the meetiplo every 
Sabbath-day, and to continue there all the Week along until the 
next Sabbath, when they were relived by others,as the manner was: 
See 2 Kings 11:5. 1Chron:9: 25. ki. e. Under the inſpection and 
direction of the High-prieſt, whom he calls Aaron, becauſe he 
repreſented his Perſon,and executed his office, and alſo came out of 
his Loyns, and ther father, becauſe of the authority which by Gods 
appointment he had over them,and that love,reverence,and obedi- 
ence which they owed to him. 

20 And the reſt of che ſons of Levi / were theſe. Of 
the ſons of Amram, * Shubael : 


12 The eleventh to Eliaſhib, the twelfth to Jakim, Luke i:5, 


of the ſons of Shuba-» clap! 
holy place, and the charge of the ſons of Aaron z their , 


el ; Jehdejah . No 
brethren, in the ſervice of the houſe of the LORD, 


: : 16; 
Either ſuch as were only Levites,and not Prieſts:or rather, ſuch 5; 


& 7. e. What the Prieſts ſhould commit to their charge, or com- 


mand them to do. 
CHAP. XXIV. 


The Prieſts are divided by Lot into 24 Ord:«rs, 1 19. Avniſfters al- 
lotted them out of the Levites, out of the Tribe of the Kohathites and 


as were not named or numbred before in this or the formerChapter. 

vw Who being, as it ſeems, an eminent perſon, or having a very 

| numerous Family, was not reckoned with or under his Fathers Fa* 
mily, but was accounted as a diſtinct Head of another Family. 

' 21 Concerning Rehabiah » : of the ſons of Reha- 

biah, the firſt o was Jeſhiah. - 


Merarires, 20 3k, me 2 The ſon of Eliezer, chap» 23-17. o By Birth, or Place. 
Ow theſe are the diviſions @ of the ſons of Aaron: | 2, Of the Izharite ; * Shelomoth p : of the ſons of «ch; 
*Ley. Io. * The ſons of Aaron ; Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar | g1elymoth » Jahath. | Shelomit 
1,5. and Ithamar. - : ; : - p Called alſo Shelomich, chap. 23. 18, 
| - a e. Ig nv" Branches into which that Family was 6Gi- 23 And the ſons of * Hebron ; Jeriah the firft q, Ama- +, 39, 
vided or diſtributed. ? ; : : | - ” 239% 
*Numb:3 2 But * Nadab and Abihu died before their father, riah the ſecond, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the & 163!- 


fourth. 


q Which word is fitly ſupplied both out of the reſt of this verſe 
the ſecond,third,and fourth having a manifeſt reference to the firſt,and 
out of 1 Chron:23:19. and 26:31. where it is expreſſed. 

24 Of the ſons of Uzziel ; Michah : of the ſons of 
Michah ; Shamir. 


25 The brother of Michah was Isſhiah : of the ſons 
of Isſhiah : Zechariah. 

26 The ſontis of Merari were, Mahli and Muſhi : the 
{ons of Jaaziah r; Beno. 


r The ſon either of Mahli: or rather of Muſhi laſt named ; for 
Mahli's Poſterity comes wv: 28. 

27 The ſons of Merari by Jaaziah 3 Beno s ; and 
Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri. 

5 Whoſe name is here repeated with his Brethren,becauſe he was 
the Firſt-born and Head of the reſt, who were all rekconed with 
and under his Family, as if they had been Branches of iit. 


28 'Of Mahli came Eleazar, * who had no ſons. 


4:826:6i: and had no children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar 
| executed the prieſts office b. . 


b i.e. Were the only Perſons to whom and to 
the Execution of that Office was committed. 


2 And David diſtributed them, + both Zadok of the 
ſdns of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the ſons of Ithamar 
according to their Offices c in their ſervice. 

c Or, courſes : or, prefeFures, i. e. Allotting to each of them ſeveral 
times wherein they or theirs ſhould by turns have the Govern- 
ment of Holy Miniſtrations in the Temple Service. 

4 And there were moe chief men found of the ſons 
of Eleazar, than of the ſons of Ithamar, and thus were 
they divided. Among the ſons of Eleazar, there ere 
ſixteen chief men of the houſe of heir fathers, and eight 
among the ſons of Ithamar, according to the houſe of 
their fathers. . 

5 Thus were they divided by Lot 4, one ſort with 
+Heb:he another ; for | the governours of the ſanctuary, and 


whoſe Families 


# Chap- 


29 Concerning Kiſhz; the ſon of Kiſh was Jerah- ,: 
rk M gOvernours of the heuſe ofGod e,were of the ſons ofElea- | me 64 = | i j 3:23 
ary, aud Za, and of the ſons of Ithamar. © Another of Mzþli"s Sons,as ppears from I Chron: 23: 21. 
princes of Partly to prevent that envy or Emulation which otherwiſe 20 The ſons alſo of Mujhi : Mahli, and Eder, and 
God. . might ariſe among them: and partly thar all mens minds and Con- ; , ; 


Jerimoth. Theſe were the ſons of the Levites, after che 


Genz23:6. ſciences might be fully ſatisfied in the Order now eſtabliſhed by houſe of their fathers 
31 'Thefo 


this Divine way of Deciſion. e But that is no other than the 


Xiy, Fap- XXV- 


eh: 12; 
17. 
ke i: 5, 


| *(h, 6:33» 


| [oewiſe Nethaniah, and || Afarelah, the fons of Aſaph under 
ſurtlph, 
ofthe Range 
| Or;. 


[With Shi- 
ml menti= 
mv, 17. 


"8 


kn 


I. 


the ſons of Aaron «, in the preſence of David the king, | 
and Zadok and Ahimelech, and the chiefof the fathers 
of the Prieſts and Levites, even the principal fathers 
over againſt their younger brethren x. | 
ui e. Anſwerable for Number and Order to thoſe of the Prieſts, 
ſo as there ſhould be a ſeveral ccurſe of the Levites for each courſe 
of the Prieſts: This is expreſſed concerning the Singers, <<. 25- and 
the like is implied concerning the Porters, ch. 26. and is here ſuthci- 
ently intimated concerning thoſe Levites which wereemployed in 
other Sacred Miniſtrations- x The Lots of the elder and younger 
Brethren were promiſcuouſly put together,and the order was ſettled 
as the Lots came forth, withour any regard to the Age or Dignity 
or Number of the Perſons or Families, the youngeſt Family having 


the firſt Courſe if they had the firſt Lot, &' 
C 1% A Fs AAS. 


The number and Offices of the Singers out of the ſons of Aſaph, Heman, and 
Feduthung, 1——7. Their divijim by Lot into 24 Orders, 8 31. 


Oreover, David and the captains of the hoſt z 
ſaparated b to the ſervice of the ſons of * Aſaph, 

9. 2Chr. and of * Heman, and of * Jeduthun c, who ſhould 

| prophecy d with harps, with pſalteries,and with cymbals ; 

' and the number of the workwen e, according to their 
ſervice, was ; 

a Poth of the Civil and Sacred hoſt : to wit, aUthe Princes of Iſrael, 
with the Priefts and the Levites, whom David gathered together, ch. 23.2, 
for this very end,that in their Preſence and with their Approbation 
and Conſent, all theſe things might be eſtabl;ſhed ; 'who are here 
fitly called the Captainsof the Hoſt ; for the Princes were under Davin, 
rhe chief Captains or Commanders of the Militia or Trained Bands 
of the Kingdom ; and as the Levites are called an Hoſt, and the Lords 
Hoff, Num. 4. 23. and elſewhere becauſe of their Number and Order 
in Holy Miniſtraticns ; ſo theſe Prieſts and Levites werethe Captains 
and Governours of the reſt. b 7. e. Diſtributed them into their 
ſeveral Ranks and Orders : Which, though chiefly done by David 
as a Prophet, and by Divine direCion, as hath been oft obſerved, 
yer is here imputed in part to the Captains of the Hoſt, becauſeir' 
was done with their Concurrence and Approbation. c 7. e- To the 
Service of God under the Condutt and Command of theſe Perſons. 
43. e. Praiſe God by ſinging the Pſalms of David, ( of which fee on 
ch. 16.7. ) and other Sacred Songs made by themſelves, who were 
P:ophets in ſome ſort, or by other Prophets or Holy Men of God. 
Or this Aftion of theirs is called prophecying, becauſe it had been 
formerly performed by the Prophets and the ſons of the Prophets : 
of which ſee 1 Sam. 10.5. & 19. 20. 2 Kings 3. 15. 1Chron. 15. 1g. 
e Ofthe Perſons employed in this Sacred Work. 

2 Of the ſons of Aſaph; Zaccur, and Joſeph, and 


ald Je the hands of Aſaph f, which propheſied + according fo 
the order of the king g. 
f i.e. Under his overſight and direQion, glIn ſuch manner and 
order as David appointed. 
3 Of Jeduthun : the ſons of Jeduthun þ ; Gedaliah, 
and || Zeri, and Jeſhajah, Haſhabiah, and Matrithiah, 
| fix, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who 


propheſied with a Harp togive thanks and to praiſe the 
LORD. 


h Or, his ſons, (the conſtratform being uſed before the abſolute 
of which there are Examples in Scripture ) Jeduthwn, called by his 
Fathers name : otherwiſe they are nor ſx 3 unleſseither Jeduthun 
their Father be included in that number ; or Sh;mei mentioned 
w. 17. be one of them, as many Learned Men think. See the like. 
1 Chron. 24. 23. 


4 Of Heman : the ſons of Heman ; Bukkiah, Mat- 


Ver. 14- 
f Heb, 
h the hands 


kr, 
Ver, 11- 


HH R O'N TC L 


21 Theſe likewiſe caſt lots over againſt cheic brethren ;,Which, together with their Scholars, make up the 4000 mentioned 


Chap. 


hap. 23-5. | | | 
8 And they caft lots, ward againſt ward q, aswell tha 
mall as the great, the teacher as the ſcholar r. 


q i.e. A Ward, or Rank, or Courſe of Levitesanſwerable to one 
of the Prieſts, upon whom the Levites were to wait in their Holy 


Miniſtrations , ch. 23. 28. r Withoutany reſpe& to their different 
Ages or Abilities. 


9 Now the firſt lot came forth for Aſaph to Joſephs, 
the ſecond to Gedaliah, who 7? with his brethren and 
his ſons were twelve. 


5 3. e, For the Family of Aſaph, of which 7oſ-ph was. Here that 
Clauſe, he, his ſons, and hu brethren were twelve, is tobe underſtood, 
as It is exprefled inall the following Verſes, otherwiſe they do not 
make up that number of 288 mentioned v 7. # Heb. he : which 


wn being here expreſly, is rightly underſtood and ſupplied in the 
reſt, 


Io The third to Zaccur, he, his ſons, and his brethren 
were twelve : | 


IT The fourth to Tzri, he, his ſons and his brethren 
were twelve. 


12 The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his ſons and hisbre- 
thren were twelve : 


x13 The ſixth to Bukkiah, he, his ſens and hisbrethren 
were twelve : 


14 The ſeventh to Jeſharelah, be, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve. 


15 Theeighth to Jeſbajah, be, his ſons and his bre« 
thren were twelve. | 

16 The ninch to Mattaniah, he, his ſons and his bre- 
thren were twelve. 
17 The tenth to Shimei, he, his ſons and his brethren 
wire twelve : 
18 The eleventh to Azareel, he, his ſons and his bre= 
thren were twelve, 


I9 The twelfth to Hafbabiah, he, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : 


20 The thirteenth to Shubael, he, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : 

20 The fourteenth to Mattithiah, be, his fons and 
his brethren were twelve : | 

22 The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : 


23 The fixteenth to Hananiah, he, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : h 
24 The ſeventeenth to Joſhbekaſhah, he, his ſons and 
his brethren were twelve: 
25 The eighteenth to Hanani, be, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : 


26 The ninteenth to Mallotui, be, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : 


27 The twentieth to Eliathah, he, his ſons and his 
brethren were twelve : | 


28 The one and twentieth to Hothir, be, his ſons 
and his brethren were twelve : | 


29 The two and twentieth to Giddalti, he, his ſons 
and his brethren were twelve : 


30 The three and ewentieth to Mahazioth, he, his 
ſons and his brethren were twelve : 


"C00Y 


taniah, || Uzziel, || Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, 
Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti and Romamtiezer, Joſhbe- 
kaſhah, Mallothi, Hothir, ad Mahazioth. 

5 Alltheſe werethe ſons of Hemanthe kings ſeer i in 
the|| words of God &, to lifr up the horn /. And God 


gave to Heman fourteen ſons, and three daughters. 
;. Or, Prophet, which is the ſame thing, 1 Sam.9. g. Either he was 
a Prophet as well asaSinger ; or he is thus called becaule he propheſe- 
ed in the ſenſe deſigned, v. 1» And heis called the kings ſeer, either 
becauſe the King took ſpecial delight in him ; or becauſe he frequent- 
Jy attended upon the King in his Palace, executing his Sacred Office 
"There, while the reſt were conſtantly employed in the TabernagF. 
& i.t—-Teling ſuch Divine Songs as were inſpired by God to the 
Prophets or holy Men of God. | Either 1. Metaphorically, to extol 
and praiſe God for exalting the horn ( i. e. the Power and Kingdom) 
.of David ; of which Phraſe ſee Pſal.g2. 10. & 132, 179. Or rather 2. 
Properly, to praiſe God with the ſound of a Trumpet ( as was uſual, 
as 2 Chron, 5. 12+ & 13.22. ) orſome other Muſical Inſtrument made 
. of Horn, which being a Martial kind of Muſick, might be moſt 
rateful to Davide Martial Spirit : though he was alſo skilled in other 
nſtruments of Muſick which he uſed in the Houſe of God, as is 

expreſſed in the next Verſe. 

6 All theſe were under the hands mz of their father 
for ſong in the Houſe of God, with cymbals, Pfalteries 
and Harps, for 'the ſervice of the Houſe of God, + 


f ch; z, according to the kings order, to Aſaph, Jeduthun, and 
the bang,  Heman », 


3x The four and twencieth to Romamtiezer, he, his 
ſons and his brethren were twelve. 


GCHAP XXYVLI 
The Divifion of the Porters, 1———12. The Gares aſſigned hy Lot, 13 ===19: 
The Levites have charge of the Treaſures of the Temple, 29 28. 
Officers and Judges, 29-——32. 
Oncerning the diviſions of the porters ||: Of the 


Korhites as || Meſhelemiah the ſon of Kore, of | rhey were 


as followeth. 
the ſons of || Aſaph 5s. | | _—_ 


# Not that famous 4ſaph the Singer, but another Aſaph called alſo mizh,v. 14. 
Eviaſaph, ch. 6. 37. r, Ev 


2 And the tons of Meſhelemiah were, Zechariah the ſap, 
firſt-born, Jediael the ſecond, Zebadiah the third, Cp; 6 
Jathniel the fourth, 0. " 
3 Elamthe fifth, Jehchanan the ſixth, Elioenai the © 
ſeventh ; | 
4 Moreover, the ſons of Obed-edom were, Shema-. 
jah the firft-born, Jehozabad the ſecond, Joab the third, 
and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the fifth : 
5 Ammiel the ſixth, Ifſachar the ſeventh, Peulthai | 
the eighth : for God bleſſed || him 6. | That is 
b To wit, with a numerous Poſterity and other Bleſſings, for his Obea-edom, 
RelpoBt cad Aﬀoion wo the Ark. See 3 Zam.G. tr. us Cha | 
SE | Oo unto Shemajah his ſon were two fons born, 13. 14+ | 
"th 7 i.e. Under his direftion, as v. 2. » Heb. by the hands of the King, la; | : s 
ſthe king. M6 ge pra —_ abr _ a that ruled throughout the houſe of their fathers c : for 
ment, and under the Condu&t of 4/aph, Feduthun, and Heman. they were mighty men of yalour & 
7 $0 the number of them, with theirbrethren that were 


*h:13:10 
elmitiy 


h.23:9 | 
26.31 


Chap 


43; 22 


b 


6 That had the command of their Brethren and Families, being, 


- . ', asſome ſay, Captains of Hundreds or of Thouſands : of which ſee 
inſtructed in the ſongs of the LORD , even all that were Exod. 18. 25. 2 Kings 11, 9. d This clauſe is divers times mentiO. 


cunning o, was ewo hundred fourſcore and eight p. ned, becauſe their Office required both Strength and Courage : for 
s Who werc ſo skiltul thas they were able to tcaci others. > they were to ſhut the Doors of the Temple, one whereof was fo 


1533 greas 


ap. XXV1. L- TH R O 


greatand weighty, that 11 the ſecond Temple it required the help 
of twenty Men ro open and ſhur it, as Jo{ph%5 an Eye-witnels re- 
ports. They were alſo to keep the Guard, and to keep our all 
unclean or forbidden Perions who might ſometimes preſumpruouſly 
attempt to eter into the Temple, as Uzzia/ did, and to prevent 
or ſuppreſs any Tumults or Diſorders which might happen in the 
Temple or in its Courts, and to keep the Treaſures of the Temple, 
V. 20,22,24,26. and to be Officers and Judges over Iſrael, v.29. and to 
manage every matter "pertaining to God, and the affairs of the King, 


V. 32, 
| 4 The ſons of Shemajah ; Othni, and Rephael, and 
Jeb: Obed, Elzabad, whoſe brethrea were | ſtrong men ; 
[, Elihu and Semachiab. 
ll 8 All theſe of the ſons of Obed-edom : they, and their 
ſons and their brethren, able men for ſtrength for the 
ſervice, were threeſcore and two of Obed-edom. 

9 And Meſhelemiah had ſons and brethren, ſtrong 
men, eighteens 

xo Alſo * Hoſah of the children of Merari, bad 
ſons ; Simri the chief, ( for though he was not the 
firſt-born, yet his Father made himthe chiefe. ) 


. 38. 


lutely for ſome groſs Miſcarriage, as Gen. 49» 4. or only in this re- 

ſpe&; becauſe he wanted either Strength or valour, or ſome other 

Qualification neceſſary for his Office. ; 
11 Hilkiah the ſecond, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah 


the fourth : all the ſons and brethren of Hoſah were 


thirteen. Þ 

-12 Among theſe were the diviſions of the porters, 
even among the chief men, having wards one againſt 
another f,. to miniſter in the Houſe ofthe LORD. 

{ Heb. having wards againſt or anſwerably to their Breckren, to wit» 
the other Levites, who were divided into 24 Courſes, as the Pricſts 
| alſo were, and ſo, it ſeems were the Porters. 

[oO 4 13 And they caſt lots as well che{mall asthe great g, 

bel fir the according to the Houſe of their fathers þ, for every 

all as for pate 5. 

g'eat. * g Determining the times and places of their Service not by Age 
or Dignity but meerly by Lot. +h A ſeveral Lot being allowed for 
each ſeveral houſe. i Thatit might be known to whom the Care 

: of each Gate was more eſpecially commirred. ; 

Called 14' And the lot eaftward fell co || Shelemiah ; then 


eſbelemis for Zechariah his ſon ( a wiſe counſeller & ) they caſt 


PP; Ver-1% Jots, and his lot came out northward. 

| k Which is noted as an excellent and uſeful accompliſhment for 
his Office, in which there was need of Wiſdom as wel} as Courage, 
as may appear by the deſcription of their Wok, wv. 20, &c. See the 
Note on v. 6. : 

15 To Obed-edom ſouthward, and to his ſons, the 
Houſe of + Aſuppim /. 

I A Place ſo called : or of gatherings, ſo named either from the 
Aſſembly of the elders, who mer there to conſult about the Afﬀai:s 
of the Temple: or from the People who were there gathered roge- 

' ther, to hear the Diſcourſes and Debates of rhe Teachers of the Law : 
or becauſe the Gifts of the People towards the Houſe and Worſhip 
of God were kept there. See 2 Kings 22. 4. 2 Ciron. 25. 24. 
| 16 To Shuppim and Hoſah 2, the lot came forth 

vor, _ weſtward, with || the gate Shallecheth », by che cauſey 

S- Of the going || up o, ward againſt ward p. | 

| Kings m Who for ſome reaſon were joyned together in the Cuſtody of 

no. 5. that Gate. n A Gate of the Courr ſo called, as ſome think, becaulte 

Chr F the Aſhes and filth efrhe Temple were caſt our on that ſide which 

9-4: was the moſt convenient Gare for thar purpoſe, becauſe that was a 
private Quarter, the great Ways to the Temple lying on the other 
ſides. o By which Cauſey they went up towards the T<mple p Which 
may ceſpc& either r, The time of their Watching, thit when one 
Guard went off, an»ther came on. Or rather, 2. the place of thei: 
Guard : and ſo this may be underſtood, either 1. of this Weſtern 
Quarter, wherethere was a double Guard, either becauiſ* there were 
two gates there, as ſome think,or for ſome other cauſe now unknown 
Or rather, 2. of all the Quarters compared together ; of all which 
having ſpoken, he adds this, That as one Gate was bver againſt 
another. the Weſt againſt the Eaſt, and the North againſt the South, 
ſo one Ward was over againſt anvther. 

17 Eaftward were ſix Levitesq, northward four aday, 
fouthward four a day, and toward Aſuppim r two and 
ewo. 

9g Forthat being the chief Gate of the Temple required a better 

+ Guard. »7. e. The houſe of Aſuppim, as it is called v. 15- where alſo 
itis ſaid to be on rhe Sourh ſide; on which there ſeems to have 
been a double Guard both belonging to Obed-edos, wv. 15. one at the 
South-gate, and the other at Aſuppim ; where poſſibly the Sacred 
Treaſures mentioned m. 20. &c, were lay'd up, and therefore a 
particular Guard was neceſfary. See on v. 15. 

18 At Parbar s weltward, four at the cauſey rt, and 


two at Parbar «. 

s Or, As concerning Parbar, which was another Gate, or fome 
building on the Weſtern Quarter of the Temple. #& Which led to 
Parbar. u At the Gate or Houſe itſelf ; by which it may ſeem, thar 
this was a place of ſome importance, eirher the veſſels of the Temple, 
or ſome part of the Treatures of Gods Houſe, being kept here. 


19 Fheſfe are the diviſions of the porters among the 
ſons of Kore, and among the ſons of Merari, 
20 And ofthe Levites, Ahijah »as over the treaſures 


of the | dedicate things -. 

x Either theſe are the ſame kind of Treaſures, the latter Phraſe 
only explaining the former, the particle and being uſed for that u : 
orrather they are two different kinds of Treaſures, the former con- 


Heb. 
68: herings, 


* Mal. 3. 
190. 

{| Heb: holy 
Bharngs, 


e Taking away the Birth-right from the Firſt-born, either abſo- | 


{ ſervice of the King ». 


1 C LB 6 Chap. XXyt 


taining the Sacred Veſſels and other Treaſures, whichty Geds Com- 
mand were 2pprepriated to the Maintenance cf the Houſe, and 
Worſhip, and Miniſters of Godgas Tithes and Fiift-f-uits, and cther 
things; and the Jatrer only thoſe things which had been freely TiVeEn 
or dedicated ro God for thoſe Ends ; of which 1ce v. 26, 27, 

21 As cencerning the ſons of || Laadan : the ſons of | Or® 
the Gerſhonite Laadan, chief fathers y, even of Laadan ;;, 
the Gerſhonite were || Jehieli z. 

7 i.e. Which ſons were chief Fathers, or Heads of the Houſes 
of their Fathers. z Underſtand here, and hs ſons, which here Jehiel, 
follow. Ch. 23.8 

22 The ſons of Jehieli ; Zetham, and Joel his bro. 
ther, which were over the treaſures of the Houle of the 
LORD a. 

# As Shelomith and his Brethren were over the Treaſures of the dedicated 
things, werſe, 26. Burt both may ſeem to have been fubje& and 
accountable to Akijah, who was over both theſe kinds of Treaſures, 
v.20, Or Az:jah might have a g2reral overſight into the Mana« 
gement of thoſe Treaſures as an Auditor of the Accounts, although 
the others had more dignity and power 1n tbe diſpoſal of them. 

23 Ofthe Amramice, a»d the Izharite, the Hebronite, 
and the Uzziclite b. os 

b Or, AS cOncer 111g the Amramite, &c. The mea ng IS, The 
perſons here following were of theſe, or themoſt of theſe Families. 
| Only here is none of the Family of the Uzzielites 3 either becauſe 
that Family was now extin& ; whence it is that we read no more 
of them in the Scriprure, bur only in this place, and Num. 3. 27. 
or becauſe there was none of them tit to be employ'd and truſted 
in theſe Matters. : 

24 And * Shebuel the ſon of Gerſhom, the ſon of 
Moſes, was ruler of the treaſures c. 

c The Prince or Chiefover all thz Treaſures, and Treaſures men« 
tioned either before or aſterward, as his very Title ſhews, which 
1s particularly given to him and to none of the reſt. 

25 And his brethren by Eliezer 4; Rehabiah his ſon, 
and Jeſhajah his ſon, and Joram his ſon, and Zichri 
his fon, and * Shelomith his ſon : 

a Another Son of Moſes, Exod 18. 4. 

26 Which Shelomith and his brethren, were over 
all the treaſures of the dedicate things, which David 
che king, and the chief fathers, the Caprains over 
thouſands and hundreds, aad the Captains of the hoſk 
had dedicated. 

27 | Out of the ſpoils won in battels,did they dedicate + Heb: 
to f maintain e the Houſe of the LORD. hes 

r Heb. To ſtrengchen it, either to mak: that building ſtrong and are; au 
ſubſtantial by thele and other charges : or rather to repair it when pojl; 
it ſhould be built; for which they might the rather rake particular 4 Hey 
Care, becauſe it was likely, that every one would contribute tothe frrengthen. 
building of the Temple, and there would be no want for that uſe Z 
but few would provide for the Repairs of ir, when by the Injury 
of Men ortime, it ſhould receive any damage. 

28 Andall that Samuel the * Seer, and Saul the ſon » - 
of Kiſh, and Abner the ſon of Ner, and Joab the ſon 9. 9, % 
of Zerujah had dedicated, and whoſoever had dedicated 
any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith f, and 
ot his brethren. ; 

f Who is particularly named here, and v. 26. becauſe they were 
chiefly commirted to his Truſt, he being, it ſeems, a Perſon of 
Eminent Wiſdom and Faithfulnefs. . 

29 Of the Izharice, Chenaniah and his ſons g were 
for the outward bulineſs þ over Iſrael i for Officers and 
judges &, 

£ Who are probably thought to have been 1600, for that Suny 
added to the 1760, v. 3o, and the 2700, wv. 32. make up thole 6o9s 
Levites which were Officers and Judges, 1 Chorn. 23.4, b For that 
bulineſs of the Lord and of the King ( as it is explained here, wv. 3o. 

32.) which was to be done without the Temple and without 
Feruſalem; for what was to be done within them was committed to 
other hands; as we have ſeen. # Synecdochically, 5. e. over part 
of Iſrael, even over the Midiand part, and that which lay upon the 
| Sea-Coaſt . for the other parts of the Land on both ſides of Jorden 
are here committed to others, v. zo, 31, 32. k Who ſhall be Offi 
cers and Judges over the People, in the ſeveral! Cities and Towns or 
Parts of the Land, to determine Queſtions and Controverſies which 
might ariſe among them. And the reaſon why the Levites were 
intruſted with theſe matters was, becauſe the Common or Munici« 
pal Law of Jrael, by which _ had and held all their Rights, 
was no other than the Law of God, whereof the Prieſts and 
Levites being the beſt and eſtabliſhed Interpreters, muſt needs 
therefore be the moſt proper Judges of things depending there« 


uUPpOon. 

: 30 And ofthe Hebronite, Haſhabiah and his brethren, 

men of valour, a thouſand and ſeven hundred were 

+ officers, among them of Iſrael on this ſide Jordan 
weſtward 7, in all buſineſs of the LORD m,, andin the + px.y; ' 


over the 
1 In thoſe parts of the Land of Canaan which border upon Jor- charge« 
dan, or are not very remote from it. m7 2. e. In all things which 
did or ſhould concern the Houſe or Worſhip of God ; partly to 
take care that ſuch Monies as were cither impoſed by a Tax or free= 
ly given by the People, towards the building or repairing of the 
Temple, or rewards the Sacrifices and other Holy Miniſtrations 
ſhould be gathered and received, and faithfully ſent up to Jeruſalem 
to be employed in that Work ; partly to fee to the Execution' 
ofall the Laws of God among the People, and to reſtrain or puniſh 
wilful Offenders againſt it. n= Not that all the Kings Bulineſſes 
were managed by them ; for itis apparent, both from the nature 
of the thing and from Scripture, that the Kings Military Aﬀairs 


Ch. 6. 7, 
f| Or, 


*Ch.23.16, 


*Ch.23:16, 


were managed by his Captains, and his Political or Civil Aﬀairs 
WEL# 


4 


*Ch 


| 23,1 


[0 
2 F; 
Th 


Chap. XX VII: 
Chap. XXV1L,| 


XYT, 
E CM 
were managed by the Princes a R 
Tribes - but ec grin ——_ and Judges, 26d Office O N T C f # E = 
Yecrees, made perſua <; erved the King in the Ex rs of other þ Or. The <i . 
Rights of King and a to the Laws of God, by i ark of his | Word is Ze chief Prieff. Or rat] 0. 

: EY ace omg Poop: were eſtabliſhed ir 2 _ ane I Ae _ wy 2s GM. 41. ps a chief Prince, as this Hebrew 

, King was the Princi y- Th WETE TO, be order 2d ings both in a Capr Yr SHZS10. te and elf: .1 47. 22. 2Sorn $8. 18 & aps 

; El Lows, i fre Perſon intruſted wi jr Now as the { For: ain of tars Courſe, b ewhere. Probably he 29. 26, 

, aws, ſe Levices chiefly ted with the E; bor alchonol che Bs ut a great Oificer 1 y he was not onl 

,, 17 his Peoples Tranſo ba - &$ C 1efly Were | b 5 XECUtiOn of IS - - 5 rac Priefts m - imcer nth C & y 

P20 anſgrefſions, and hi e his Eyes by whi yet it is not likely 'ght cakeup Arms 1e Court and State 

, and deſerved Cent: S S, And his Hands by whi F vhich he ſaw rm - _ ely, that ſuch . P Arms in 1t0me ſpec; TOs 

L doings of this w ures upon them for oh JV hich he inflited due | of y. clipecially feing the r were conſtant Othc pecial Caijes; 

O 15 WAS VETY much for the ſerv: 1eir Miſcarriage | of other Lribes $ the reſt ofthe Caprai cers in the kings 
23.8. was eſtabliſhed and or the ſervice of the K. ges. And the | Prieft a ;bes. Beiides, neirth -aptains here named gs 
Beſides oh 1 ecured by ſuch Ri l mg, whoſe Throne | 1 tr that rime, but Zaadok or -x Benaja9 nor F:hoj med, were 
wy y Were to take car ighteous Adi: , in whom rhe Pri 02 or 4aviathar Fehojadah was High 
ro keep the People 1 e care by their Counſ miniſtrations- | the e Pricfthood had bee 2r, and before pe 
5 X ple in Obedience Ir * ountel and A Ke 1e Gays of Samnel ; een for a lo >efore them Avimelecs, 
were moſt obliged 4 beth tence to their Kinz . which uthority G Thi l muct and Saul, and David IP time rogether, EI oy 
21 Among the EF obliged to do. the Levites þ rh 5 is that Benajah, who 2 and Solomon, 200 
* Chap” pen among 5 e Hebronites was * Jerijah th 4 7a and above Ig We who w4s * mighty am s 
13, 19. ONg tie Hebronites * Jerijah the chief | Ammizabad his fon 7 thirty .: and in his ong the , | 
ons of his f: , accord n his fo n his A 
wy athers. In tl = 1ng To the gener As i Who ſl, mt: nN z courſe Was SIM 
of David, they were R gong Say vear » of the atl- | Father OY to have been his Fathers L 23. 20g 23 
A "> ou - a reion = C a tain k > 4 rs ie : 27. » 
among them mighty OY AG and there were Milos” necded a De Kings Guard, 2 | LIN becauſe his Chap. 1J 
ad 0. i valour. at Jazer os ys The fo Ne Or 1N tac other pl: . and therefore 12; AL 
3 azer of G | urth c Place 33 23S 
4 os es ile- | Afahelthe broklntt for the fourch mo os 
diſtributions of Fa 1T Year, 1N which he made all him 'C di 6 r of Joab 'F and Zeb IE nth, was f » 
" Whinkphaecs FOR __ Offices ets as _— preg —mte ind {fond : and in his 2 do he , ebadiain his ſon after 2 Sam. 
- | ere Name itl 1ele 2prer . wence 23. 24. 
or near that place, bur fi , either becauſe the prers. + B : y and four thou- Cl 
cauſe th g : , ut tor what cauſe P05 Y y were ſeared in Fs y which, it : ; uUu- 12Þe $35 
hat = S-ogmg numbred there by aig fa way ms : or be- _— David was 9 gg Foundation of this Proje& w S% 
" ent by David t ! avids Fo - 7 uring which ti roject was laid 
32 And jus brett! 0 | Chief C rces were then divi ich time 4ſahet ” Slain: 
"IF 8 ethren men of valo ommanders, wher ivided into 24 Cour was Slain, 
D : and ſeven hundred p chief f ur, were two thou- a5 the number of Phang os Aſakel was one Krug tp under 24 
6 Os made rulers over the Reub athers, whom king rad oogrnags Lines wes much Jl hn ther Fobich 
2.1 the half cri eubemte, Ti = ingdom, the defi avid was f han that which 1 
' ; tribe o J , the Gad ff el1gn was p2 s fully ſettled in hi 1s 
f Hebe to God, and t Manalleh, for every matte oY and _ increaſed to this —_ and the chro = RR 
ag. ; Whilh: 1d + affairs of the king r pertaliiing rag 2 Sam, 2.23- m Not 4, ol I 7. e. Aﬀeer his ys WR Soul- 
+ Chron, 1SAa very great 0” merous, but Ze:bad: __—_—C, for in his tim ath, of which 
and an half ; y greatnumber to be empl | > T3. CEE adiah his $ iS time the 
gill heſides tho +hen all-the ret of :mployed about two Tri 8 The fifth caprtai on, y were nor fo 
Progr wy Mou eit of the Tribes had vo Tribes * ks ci1 Captain f 
ler Chgnania! $ had only i70:; ; Futh ] = or the fift] | 2 
waſte hereof is ml r Chgnanian ; of whom 1 TOO, Ve JO. ; z the Izrcahite : : . : th month. | 
| more remote "x8. .npe Df egey the Tribes withou Is But the 7 four chouſand. : and in his courſe woes «s Shatth- 

ih, and folema Worſhi e Kings Courr, and from h ut Jordan being 1 ” Suppoſed | wenty and 
and ke OImPp, needed m / rhe place of : EF - to be the fa 
= my them 3 he ÞoaQiceof OW ordinary help _ PEG | Snammohb, J Chron Lt. 27 me called Shammah S 

KF (0) BY OT the = iN < Che fs an, 2 0am, 2 
> and in Obedience to their Eos a caey and the Worlkip ' 9 Theſixth ce fi Ef: 
= ; ) captain ; | 
: fon or the ſixth | 

= CH A F, XAT _ Ikkeſhthe + — Sroatirpay month, was * Ira the 
+ I , Captains for every ſeveral Month [. an ny thouſand : in his courfe were twenty _ Cop 
YL es, :6 mT . on! , I a wn. Io h 4 It. 28, 

His Counſel 22. The chief keepers of D 4, The Princes of the 12 j Hel e ſeventh captain for th 7 OED. 

Y ' elors and Fr o ava s Treaſur elez the P - r tne fev ; 

iends, 32 LABS > elonite o, of the chi enth month 

the - TO 34 31. jn his courſ: , of che children of OY EPS 

e W the children of urie were twent n 0 Ephraim X q 

and wit, the chief f of Iſrael after their numbe o So called alſo r Chron, 11 and four thouſand, ra 
and ief fathers and C . r, to 11 Theei FIRE BY. and the Palrite x 

| f undreds, and their offic _ of thouſands Sibbecai tl gary captain for the ei ors $2: 

| 11 an ers at 't - 1 kne ; gntn Mm y - 

[4.2 y matter of the 'r 1at ſerved the kin ulbathite, of tl : onth, was * 

Out e mon courſes b, which came 1 S: courſe were twent { the Zarhites p : andin hi * 2 Sar, 
pr” fs ” HEE d. thr —— _ woe p _ Family «> 07h thouſand. P: andin his 2x, 18, 
ſand : ery courſe were twe! months | 22 Thenintl = "_— 

« =_— ty and four chou- ; the Anetothite + _—_ the ninth month, was PEO ESE 
their ſeveral OK copy Militia of I/rael as1 { were CWenty and fo enjamites: and tn his —_ 
wherein the Mi ta as It here follows. 6 ra wn de rio under * I3 The rene ur thouſand. | 1S courſe 
agony ogg Ty occaſion fo theſe Perſons wh all the buſineſs harai the Net captain for the tenth 
to of the nhe ar nmands, by courſes or by t o were to attend gourſt etophathite, of ch month, was Ma 
Conte ions wt "_g of the diviſſons, or bred urns, Or, according ' Ourig was TWenty and ff S Zarhites : andi hi 4} 
Ollie + 1 'O WIC they wore dultel » adoOUt the Companie PEP 2 our thouſand n n1s 

: which is com I ſtriburted. c17.e E P S Or 4. e. eleventh : 0 
and elſewher moaly tignitied by thi 'e. Executed their was Denay _ captain for the « 5 : 
ere. & Wh y this Phraſc enajah th 'e elev 
Wins upon the King cir! were to be Armed and Muſt wy a phraim : and 1  <p00497 ew of the —_— month, 
King ſhould ſee fir 1cr at Jeruſalem or | ered, and to {; : in his Courte 3 ildren of E 
rutted and Exerciſed | cr nea? 300009 of his Perp the y and four thou- 
the defence of their Kin in the uſe of their Arms R "og WEre 15 The tweitth captai | 
and in the r g and Kingdom wheni , and fitted for [ Heldai 1 captain for the twe! | 
ſudden Tu Son Ns time ſuthcient Proviſion hen itſhould be needful a1 the Netophiithite of Qchn1 twelfch month, was 
aa uits or Irruptions of Enemi n Was made againſt an > were ewenty and fou chniel : and in hi : | 
difte'b ived that the Burden of i es. And this monthly C Y 16 Furth r thouſand. 5 courſe ! Or 
> Ov ts the People, _ a NE” OY nad equally ruler of the res over the children of Iſrael _ 
er the firſt : enbenite , rael 4: th Ch Se 
Jaſhobeam courſe for the firſt n of the Simeoni s was Fliezer the q ; tho OR 
e the ſon of Zabdi e firſt month, was. eonties, Shephari he ſon of Zichri 
PO ab Cee In was / R 3 Jar! ICHTL & 
"—_— Bs four thouſand diel : and in his courſe were ”: Ha pb rs m Pro > ge of Maacha. 
: whom ſee 2 Sam. 23. 8. and Xia at all times, —_ Sed nctone cad conf as they are called below 
3 Of che chil 7 r Chron. t1 { : ther of W ant Rulers of . 
- nidren of P Wi ME uperiour Powe ar or Peace ; wl of the Tribe. 
Captains of the Hoſt erez f, wasthe chief of fore them, c/ rto theſe 24 Captains, and 10 ſeem to have had 
c f Or, of Pharer ar gr firſt month, of all the * and Aﬀftnes — Aire, probably Fric L nptager' wy named on 
cems to underſtood e Poſterity of Ju1ah reat Afﬀairs of his Kingd: s chief Counſellors ” 
why he was the We of Jaſhobeam, and to » Gen. 46. 12. This 17 Of the Levi * ingdom. ” 
was ( which - chief, Oc. and the verſe = ms as a reaſon : T of the Aa evites, Haſhabiah the = 
children of udp oaks underſtood out of the Po . rendered thus, He | 18 Of ronites, Ladok : on of Keniuel * 
the io end omhtanes ga of the Tribe'of 5, words ) ef the of [if Judah, Elihu r, eve of th | Chap: 
( or, therefore he cr onged, and of which Yaalas- Judah, to which M achar, Omri the Go TY, hb 1e brethren of Darzid: 26. 3Gs 
gr rot In hee ( ro wit, 1N "pmrtines f he was r Called alſo Eliab, 1 Sam « $ ——— | "I _— 
in Power, and Authority, f, x nd Precedenc ans A787. 
(what OY Ew was their wig Ar oper rig Spmoyr were jms, + | a Ot Zebulun, Iſhmajah h 
ang gets omg ogg follow and Kee —_— of the Hoſt P = Jerimoth, che ſon A ſon of Obadiah : of 
4 And over er, and was Captain fo frſtmonb,; there. | \ the child ot Azriel : 
el c or the fi ys ren O = 
| [ Or,Dads, | Dodai an Ahohite — che ſecond - _ —_— of the half os, the ſon of 
| in 2 the rulerg: inhj ? is courle par ont x ajah : Manafſeh, Joel the f . 
| et Ln Mikloth alſ; » Joel the fon of 
2}. 96 thoubad” ourle likewiſe we 1 allo 21 Of thel 
re twenty and four | { the halt-cribe of M 
» Who war oil our | ſon of Zechariah : anaſſeh inGilead Tg | 
of this Doda; dean the Captain of tal Abner : : of Benjamin gs do the 
! Phraſe th a1, as Zevadiah was atrer 4 Aenpg Courſe afrer the d | _ Jaaſiel tne ſon of 
clic and n -r ſ, Pr cr ahel, V. 7. B pg eath » Of D- | 6 
"ou. NEINE in wool 7 uſhciently intimates, that the _ differing Þ were the pri in, Azareel the fon. of 
caſh ofhis necett places. Or, 2. His L,; , e ſame thing 1s PrinCes of the tri | O Jeroham Theſ; 
here and not In w_O Bur why ak took © or Deputy in s Of the moſt of the Tri tribes 5 of Hracf. : oy 
Officers of hi the 1eft of rhe C Wor uch an one be named probably becauſe thar Tri ribes, not of all : for ; 
45 a Perk 1s Courle ; who ſc ME Or rather 3. On : one Prince; « that Tribe was jo d gg for Gad is omitted 
9 $ a Perton then of gre cems here particul - e of the } Cauſ ; and Aſher, for Ag with the Renbenires I 
I0r, p "The ahoud great Igor 5 Eminency ularly to be named | auſes now unknown ner ome fuch reaton : or yo —_ under 
Principal Was Benaj captain ot the nolt t 4 03 Ne worth-our Enquiry r ſome other 
as Benajah the fc tor the + 23 But D Juiry. 
Oftcry in hi jan the fon of Jehojada : third month ——_ avid took not the . 
1s courſe a || chief pr ? nty years old number of them #1 
were twenty and f : prieſt þ ; and | ; oid and unde - tem Om 
Y our thouland - had ſaid, he wolg i xr 52 becauſe *che LORD® 
[Levon d increaſe Ifreal iike ro th .ORD Gen» 
ENS tu; ro the ſtars of che'5: 5: 
3 5 4 
E The 


E | 
(Chap. XXVTIL. I. 
et The meaning is, David when he defircd ro number the Peoplc 
he deſigne/i ro number only thoſe who were from twenty years old 
anc upward Or ( waich is the ſame thing ) thoſe that drew ſword, 
3 Chrou 21+ 5. an4 not thoſe who were jrom twenty years old and un- 
der. u And therefore to number them all both above and under 
twenty years 01d, had been both an infinite trouble and a rempting 
of od, cra queſtioniag of the Truth ofhis Promiſe. And prſſibly 
chis Circumſtance might in part deczive or quiet David's Conſci- 
ence, that his deſire of knowing the number of his People, did not 
proceed from diſtruſt of Gods Promiſe or Providence, bur from 
a Pradent Care to know the true State and Strength of his King- 
. dom. | | 
- .24 Joab the ſon of Zerujah began to number x, but 
he finiſhed not y, becauſe * chere fell wrath for it againſt 
[24 15. Ifrael z, neither F was the number put 1n the account 


Ch.21 59. of the Chronicles of King David 4. 
b T Heb. « To wir, All from Twenty Years old and upward, as David 
aſcended. commanded him. y For Levi and Benjamin he counted not, 1 Chron, 
21. 6. z Whilſt he was doing the Work ; which was one reaſon 
which made him to ceaſe. Heb. And here fel &c. Though Dawid 
numbred them with Caution and Limitation, as. was noted before, 
yet this didnort hinder Gods Wrath from falling upon J/-«el fort his 
Sin. #2 Theſenſ: is either 1. That the full number was nor Re gi. 
ſtred, becauſe Levi and Benjamin were not counted by Joa5. Or a- 
ther 2. That David being ſenſible of and ſmarting for his Sin,would 
not have the number brought in by 7:45 to him, put into the pub- 
lick Regiſter, though Gol wou'd have it recorded in Scripture for 
the inſtructionfof ſucceeding Ages. For he ſpeaks aot he-e of the 
Account given in to the King, which was done, and was Joabs 
A; bur of the putting of rhe Account int» the publ ck Records, 
which was not done, and which could not be done but by David's 
Command or Permiſſion. | 
25 And over the kings tre-ſures b was Azmaveth the 
ſon of Adiel : and over the ſtore houſes c in the fields, 
in the cities, and inthe villages 3 and 1n the caſtles, was 
Jehonathan the ſon of Uzziah. 

b Of Gold or Silver, or other things of great price. which for 
greater ſecurity were keptin Jeruſalem and in the Kings Palace: and 
thither the Tribute-money alſo was ſent and committed to his Care. 
c Of the Fruits of the Earth, orthat ſhare of them which belonged 


or Ciftles, as there was convenieacy and occaſion. 

26 And over them that did the work of the field 4 
for tillage of the ground, was EzZri the ſon of Che- 
ub. . | 

| d Over the Kings Husbandry. | 

27 Andover the vineyards e was Shimei the Rama- 
+ Heb. thice: + overtie increaſe of che vineyards for the Wine 
ever that cellars, was Z:abdi the Shiphmite. | 
which was + g5.,e, Over the Workmenand Labourers in the Vineyards ; as 
of the Vine" the next Officer is over the Fruit of the Vineyards In like man- 
yards, ner, one Man was over the Labourers in tve Fields, v- 26. and 

another over the Fruits of the Fields put 1nto Stores after the man 
7 P. 2H. 

5428 And over the olive-trees, and the ſycamore- trees 
that were in the low plains, was Baal-hananthe Gederite : 
and over the cellars of oil was Joajh. | 

29 And over the herds that fed in Sharon f, was 
Shitrai the Sharonite, and ovzr the herds that were in 
the valleys was Shaphat the fon of Ad.ai. 

f A place famous for its Fruitfulneſs. Sce Iſa 33-9 & 35. 2. 

20 Over the camels alſo, was Obil the I{hmeelite g : 
and over the Aﬀes, was Jehdeja che Meronothite. 


g So-called, either becauſe he was born of that People, or had 
lived among them; or from ſome notable Exploit which he did a- 


gainſt them. ; ; 
21 And over the flocks, was Jaziz the Hegerite. All 


theſe were the rulers of the {ubſtance which was king 


Davids. 


2 Aifo Jonathan Davids uncle was a counſellor, a 


| Or, wile man, anda || ſcribe þ: and Jehiel the || ſon of 
S.crtary. Hachmoni was with rhe kings ſons 7. 
{; Or, h Either one Learned in the Laws of God, which were alſo the 


Hachmoil?e, T vs of theLand, by which all their Counſels were to be ruled. 
Oc, the King: Secretary. # As their Tutor or Governour. 


© 2 Sam. 32 And * Ahithophel was the kings counſellor &, and 


». "ext + Huſhai the Archite was the kings companion /. 
I5. 37. k The Perſon whoſe Counſel in matters of State the King moſt 


prized and followed. 1 Or his Friend, as he is called 2 Sam. r5. 37. 
The Perſon whom he moſt truted with all his Secrets, and whoſe 
Converſation was moſt pleaſant and acceptable to him. 

24 And after Ahithophel m7, was Jehoiada the ſon 
of Benajah, and Abiathar 3 and the general ofthe kings 
* Ch.11.6- army was * Joab. | 

m i.e Afﬀeer his death, theſe were his chief Councellors, 
CHAP, XXVIIL. 

David in a ſolenm Aſſembly declareth G1ds favour to him, and promiſe to bu 
ſon Solomon : exhorteth them to fear God, and encourageth Solomon to buld 
the Temple, 1———10. Giveth him a pattern for the form and Gold 
end Silver for the materials, 11 21. : 

N D David aflembled & 4ll the * princes of Iſrael, 

the princes of the tribes, and * the captains of the 
companies that miniſtred to the kingly courſe, and che 
captains over the thouſands, and captains over the 

*Ch.27 25. hundreds, and the * ſtewards over all the ſubſtance and 

uo Or,cartel. || poffeflion of the king, and of is fons, with the || 

$01.2. ofhicers, and with * the mighty men, and with all the 
' © valiant men unto Jeruſalem, 


« 
\Ch.27.16. 


Ch. 27. 
N,2. 


BREE UNICEE $ 


ro the King, which were laid up in the Fields, or Cities, or Villages, ' 


s This Aſſembly ſeems to be diſtin& from that c<. 23. 2. ang 
more general, as may be gathered from the perſons ſaid to be aſe 
'embled here and there. Though others think them to be the ſame 
and this to be a return to his former Diſcourſe: y 


2 Then David. the king ſtood up upon his feet 3, 
and ſaid, Hear me, my brethren c, and my people. 
As for me, I had in mine heart to build an houſe of reft 
4 for the Ark of the covenant ofthe LORD, and e for 
the foot-ſtool of our God, and had made ready for the 
building : | 

b Partly out of Reverence to God and his Word, which was the 
Matter of the following Diſcourſe ; and partly out of Reſpe ro this 
great and honourable Aﬀembly. c So he calls the Princes and chief 
Rulers, both becauſe they had a ſhare with him, though under him 
in the Government ; and in Compliance with the divine Com« 
mand, that the King ſhould not be lifted up above his brethren, Deur. 17. 
20. d A place where it might be fixed, and no more removed fronx 
place to place, as it had been. e Which is here put expoſitively, 
tor by the Foorſtool, &c. he means the Ark. 

3 But God faid unto me, * Thou ſhalt not build an + 
houſe for my Name, becauſe thou ha# been a man of , ,*" 

og 
war, and haſt ſhed + blood. 1 Kirgy 

4 Howheit, the LORD God of Iſrael choſe me be- 5 5. 

fore all the houſe of my father to be king over Iſrael * £: 22. 
for ever: for he hath choſen * Judah zo be the ruler ;and +1, 
of the houſe of Judzh, the houſe of my father ; and 4. 
among the houſe of my father, he liked me to make me * 2 Chr, 
king over [frael. - + Ia 

5 * And of all my ſons (for the LORD _—_ 49.8. 
me many ſons) he hath choſen f Solomon my ſon to 1 Sam, 
{1t upon the throne of the Kingdom of the LORD over 15.3: 
Iſrael. es, £78.68, 

flris not my Fancy or fond AﬀeRtion,. but Gods expreſs Will P- 


that So/o70n thould be preferred before his elder Brethren ; ___—_— 


therefore all of you are obliged to ſubmir to him, and accept of 
him as your King by Divine Appointment. 

6 And he ſaid unto me, * Sojomon thy ſon, he ſhall *: Sa; 
build my houſe and my courts : for I have choſen him 7-13: 
zo be my ſon, and I will be his father. 
7 Moreover, I will eſtabliſh his kingdom for ever, Ties 
if he be + conſtant ro do my commandments and my + Het; 
judgments, as at this day g. ſirong, 

s As he hath begun and hitherto continued in ſome good mea« 
ſure to do. 


8 Now therefore in the ſight of all Iſrael, the con- 
gregation of tne LORD, and in the audience of our 
God þ, keep and ſeek for ail the commandments of the 
LORD z your God, that ye may poſlcſs this good land, 
and leave zt tor an inheritance for your children afres © 
you for ever, | 

h i.e. Ido hereexhort and charge you every one, calling God 
who is here preſent, and this Congregation wherein all 1ael are 
preſent by their Repreſentatives, for Witneſs again? you, if you 
do nor follow my Counſel. # Keep thoſe Commands which you 
know, aud ſzek for or ſearch into what you ure yet ignorant of, that 
you may dittinctiy underſtand the whole will of God and all the 
ye - po Duty, and ſeriouſly give up your ſelves tothe Practice 
TNETCOF, ; 

9 And thou, Solomon my fon, know thou the God 
k of thy father, and ſerve him with a perfe& heart, and 
with a willing mind ; for * the LORD ſearcherh all *;5,n.5, 
hearts, and underſtandeth all the imaginations of the 7. 1 Kings 
choughts /: if thou ſeek him, he will be tound of thee ; $39: Pl 
but if thou forſake him 9, he will caſt thee off for oy 
cVer 7. | _ & 1; 

k Know him, ſo as to love him and ſerve him, as it follows : 


2 Fat 


+ 22, 


for 10, 
Words of Knowledge in Scripture-uſe commonly imply Aﬀettion 
and Prattice : or acknowledge him. as thy God, by loving and »teying 
him : For otherwiſe Solomon did already know God, having doubt= 
leſs been very well inſtructed in the knowledge of {-ods Nature 
and Law. 1 If thou doeſt only put on a Profciiion of Religion to 
pleaſe me and ſecure thy hopes of the Kingdom; or if thy obedience 
to God be unſincere and with grudging, thou may'ſt indeed deceive 
me, but thou canſt not deceive him, for he ſcaicheth thy inwa:d 
Thoughts and the Motions of thy Heart. m It when I am dead and 
gone, and thou art perfely at thy own diipoſe, chou ihaltſt calf 
off that Religion and Fear of God of which chon now makeſt 
Proteflion, and ſhalt continue to do fo without trus Repeatance for 
thine Errours. » Notwithſtanding all ais Premiſes mae to me 
and to my Seed, and that great Honour and Vavcur which he 
-_ ſhewed to thee, - with which poſſivly thou mayelt flatrer rhy 
lelt. 

Io Take heed now, for the LORD hath choſen 
thee to build an houſe for tae ſanctuary o, be ſtrong p 
and do Zr. | 

o Or, for a ſanfuary, 7. e. which is to be a Sanuary for him, 
towit, for the Ark, to dwellin. p Take Courage and Reſolution 
to break through all Difficulrties, Troubles, Diſcouragements 0r 
Oppoiitions which thou mayeſt poſſibly meet wirke, 


11 Then David gave to Solomon his fon the patter 
of the porch q, and of the houſes thereof r, and of the 
creaſuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, 
and of the inner paciours thereof s, and of the place 0 
the mercy-ſeat *. 

q To wit,of the Temple ; which is neceſſarily to be underſtood/ 
y Either 1. the Houſes of the Porch, fo called becauſe they wear 


Wed 


througle 


Chap. XXvi, Þ 


ik. + 


dy 


Pithj) 


i | chap: {XViil. 


Los 


7 Heb. of 


ot that 


yi with 


| Main be 
< if the, 


"am. 


T: 
l King, 6 


24,06. 


* Exod. 


EK: C3 > 


: - nf "I"! Fa, - 1 3 - 
through the Porch into them. Or rather 2. 41 e Sunam> of 
; (Ft . ; "EO oC 1 | 
Temple manifeirly underſtood in the next forego ing ep c a _ 
Verſe ; to wit, the Holy Place, and the Holy of Holes ; wh 


ON I C LS 


Ie = away £5 -b A 
ay well paſs for two Houſes, becauſe they Were ſeparated y 

Ta tition End becauſe they wer? of diilcring Dimentitons, as ap- 
cars by 1 Kings 6: 2, 20- eſpecially ſeing the Holy Place is called 
_ greater Houſe, 2 Chron: 3: 5: comparatively to the Holy of Ho- 
lies which was the lefſer Houſe,and ſo you have two Houſes. s By 
theſe he ſcems to underſtand all thoſe Rooms which were made 
ar ainſt the wall of the Houſe round about, as 1t 1S ſaid 1 King 6: 5. which 
te here called by divers names,according to the difference of their 
Gruation or uſe. # ie. In what particular part of the Holy of 
Holies it was to be placed. - 

12 And the pattern + of all « that he had by the 
ſpirit x, of the courts of the houſe of the LORD, and 
of all the chambers round about, of the treafuries of 
the houſe of God, and of the treaſuries of the dedicate 
things ). | 

u = Even the Pattern of all : for this clauſe belongs both to the 
foregoing and to the following particulars. x By the Spirit of 
nod. as is evident from v. 19. For ſeing all the particulars of the 
T abernacle built by Moſes were ſuggeſted to him by Gods Spirit, 
by which even the Workmen were inſpired, Exod: 25: 40. and 3T. 
3. it 15 not credible that God would ute leſs care and exaQtneſs in 
the building of this far more glorious and durable Work. y All 
which were within the Courts or adjoyning to them, as the other 
Chambers,- v. 11. were adjoyned to the Houſe. 

13 Aifo for the courſes of the prieſts and the Levites, 
and for all the work of the ſervice of the houſe of che 
LORD,and for all the veſſels of ſervice in the houſe of 


the LORD. ; Re 

14 He gave of gold by weight, for things of gold, 
for all inftrumeats of all manner of ſervice, filver alſo 
for all inſtruments of ſilver, by weight, for all inſtru- 
ments of every kind of ſervice. 

15 Even the weight for the candleſticks ofgold,and 
for their lamps of gold, by weight for every candle- 
ſtick, and for the lamps thereof : and for the can- 
dleſticks of ſilver by weight, both for the || candleſtick, 


and al[o for the lamps thereof, according to the uſe of 
every candleſtick z. ; 

z Whether they were large and fixed in one place, whereof there 
were ten in the Holy Place, 1 King. 7: 49: or ſuch as were leſs and 
Jooſe to be carried from place to place, as need required. 


16 And by weight he gave gold for the tables of 


ſhew bread #, for every table ; and likewiſe ſilver for 
the tables of ſilver | 

a By this and 2 Chron. 4: 19. it apppears, that there were divers 
Tables to be uſed either ſucceſſively or together about the ſhew- 
bread ; but one of them ſeems to have been of more Eminency and 
uſe than the reſt, and therefore it is moſt commonly called the 
Table of the Shew-bread in the iingular Number. But of this and the 
reſt of the Utenſils here named, ſee the Notes on Exodus. 

17 Alſo pure gold for. the fleſh-hooks,and the bowls 
and the cups: and for the golden baſons be gave gold 


by weight for every baſon,and /ikewiſe ſilver by weight 
for every baſon of ſilver. 

18 And for the altar of incenſe, refined gold by 
weight ; and gold for the pattern of the chariot of 
the * cherubims b, that ſpread ont their wings and co- 
vered the ark of the covenant of the LORD <«. 

b i. e. Of the Cherubims, which Solomon was to make, of which 
ſee 1 Kings 6: 23. ( for thoſe which were faſtened to the Mercy-ſeat 
were made by Moſes long before) which he firly compares to a Cha- 
riot, becauſe within thega God is oft ſaid to ft and to dwell, as 
2 Kings 19. 15. Pſal: 80: 1. & 99: 1. and ſometimes he is ſaid to 
ride upon @ Cherub, Pſal. 18. 10. And becauſe a Chariot is made to 
carry a perſon from place to place,this Expreſſion may be uſed to 
intimat that God was not ſo fixed to them by the building of this 
Temple, but that he both could and would remove from them if 
they forſook him. And when they did fo, God did make uſe of 
the Chariot of his Cherubims to convey himſelf away from them, 
as is noted, Exek; 10:15, ©. c Not above it,for that was done by 
Moſes his Cherubims, but before it, to keep it from the Eyes of 


the High Prieſt, when he entred into the moſt Holy Place, 1 King. 
G; 23- 


19 All this ſaid David,* the LORD made me under- 
ſtand in writting by + is hand upon || me 4, ever al] 


| 0c, he works of this pattern. 


d The meaning is either 1. That God revealed this to Samuel, 
( ſee 1 Chron: 9: 22.) or Gas, or Nathan, or ſome other Man cf God 
who put it into Writing, and by them to David. Or, 2. That 
God did, as it were, by his own Hand and Finger, (wherewith he 
wrote the Ten commandmenrs,Exod:31:18.) write theſe things upon 
the Table of my mind, which now I deliver to thee. 

20 And David faid to Solomon his fon, Be ſtron 
and of good courage e, and dos : fear not nor be dil- 
mayed, for the LORD God, eves my God, will be with 
thee, he will not fail thee, nor forſake thee, until 
thou haſt finiſhed all the work for the ſervice of the 


| houſe of the LORD. 


e Sec the Notes on ve 10» 
21 And behold, the courſes of the prieſts and the 


Levites, even they ſhall be with thee for all the ſervice of 
the houſe of God, and there ſhall be with thee for all 


manner of workmanſhip, every willing skilful man, for | : 


Chap, XXIX, 


any manner of ſervice : alfo the princes and all the pee» 

ple ill be wholly at thy commandment. 

GHAP. XXIX 

David by his Example and intreaty. 1 5. Cauſer the Princes and 
People ro ofer willingly, 6———9. David's Thankſgiving and Prayer, 

10——19, The People having bleſſzd God and Sacrificed, make Solo= 

mon King, 29————-25- Davias reign and death, 26 5 


LE nmom_—_Y David the king faid unto all the con- 
gregation, Solomon my ſon, whom alone ' God N 
God hath choſen, 3s yet * young and tender a, and the *ch:22:g; W 
work is great : for the palace is not for man, but for | 
the LORD. 


a Comparatively : for he was now married,as appears by Com« 
paring 2 Chron 9g: 30:and 12: 13. 
2 Now I have prepared with all my might for the 
houſe of my God, the gold for :hings rs be made of gold 
and the ſilver for :hings of filver, and the braſs for things 
of braſs, the iron for things of iron,and wood for things 
of wood ; onyx-ſtones, and ones to be ſet b, gliſtering 
ftones,and of divers colours, and all manner # precious 
mom nah Eons in abundance. 
iamonds, or Emeraulds, or i 1 
Stones which are uſually ſet in Sarapay 1 yo Pong ag NET OE 
3 Moreover, becauſe I haye ſet my afteion to the jj 
houſe of my God,7 Ihave of mine own proper good c, tHeb.thera if 
of gold and ſilver, hich T have given to the houſe of * '*, a 


my God, over and above all that I have prepared for 2 
the holy houſe, PICPATEC TOT preejure. 


c Of that which T have reſerved as a pecuVar Treaſure to m 
__ I after I had ſeparated thoſe th which I had G——_ 
to God. 


4 Even three thouſand talents of gold, of the gold 

of * Ophir 4, and ſeven thouſand talents of refined ſilver * 1King$ 
to eventos the walls of the houſes wthal e: 9: 28, 

da Which was accounted rhe beſt and pureſt gold : vf which £, 

Job: 22: 24: © 28: 16. Iſs. 13: 12. by whda it ——_—_ that 
thoſe 100000 Talents mentioned before, Ch: 22: I4- where a coure 
ſer and impurer fort of Gold. e The walls of the T*mple with 
Gold, and of the Rooms adjoyning to it, with Silver beaten out 
into plates and put upon the other Materials here and there as it 
was thought fir. 

5 The gold for :hixgs of gold, and the ſilver for things 
of ſilver, and for all manner of work to be made by the 
hands of artificers. And who hey is willing, F to con- 
ſecrate his ſervice f this day unto the LORD 2 

f Heb. to fl bis hand, 3. e. to offer an Offering, 
Levit. 8: 33. as I have done. - {Or fem; 

'6 Then the chief of the [| fathers and princes of the LO Re | 
cribes of Ifrael, and the captains of thouſands and of * chap. 
hundreds, with the * rulers over the kings || work, offer- 27-25-. 

d willing| {On Jug 
oe EY . ſtance 
7 And gare for the ſervice of the houſe of God, of" 
gold five thouſand talents, and ten thouſand drams,and 
of ſilver ten thouſand talents ; and of brafs, eighteen 


chouſand talents, and one hundred thouſand talents of 
iron, 


8 And they with whom precious ſtones were found, 


gave them to the treaſure of the houſe of the LORD, by * Chap: 
the hand of * Jehiel the Gerſhonite. 26; 21, 


9 Then the people rejoycedyg, for that they offered 
willingly, becauſe with perfe& heart they offered wil- 
lingly tothe LORD : and David the king alſo cejoyced 
with great joy. SSH 

g Becauſe this was both an Effe& of Gods Grace in them, and 
an Eminent Token of Gods Favour and Goodneſs to be continued 


ro them,and a good Pledge that this great and long deſired Work 
of the building of the Temple, would receive a certain and a ſpee- 


dy Accompliſhment, | 
David bleſſed the LORD before all 


T Heb! #» 
fl his 
hand. 
as Exod: 32: 29 


Io Wherefore 


che congregation ; and David ſaid, * Bleſſed be thou, . | 
LORD God of Iſrael our father, for ever and ever. * Gr. thou 

ir * Thine, O LORD, is the greatneſs, and the "9 ** 
power h, and the glory, and the victory, and the ma- __ 


O', b. 

jelty : for all #447 is in the heaven, and in the earth, 5s or run 
thine ; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art * Mat6- 
exalted as head above all z. 13-1Tim, 


h ic e. Thou art Great and Powerful, &c. 5 As the Sovereign 7: Rev. 
Lord and Owner of all Perſons and Things. "_ 5:13» 


12 Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou 
reigneſt over all &, and in thine hand is power and 
might, and in thine hand it & to make great, and to 
give ſtrength unto all /, 


k 3. e. Thou diſpoſeſt of Riches and Honour; as thou pleaſeſt- 
I Even to the weakeſt, whom thou canſt make ſtrong, and to the 
ſtrongeſt, who are weak without thy help. 

Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and 
thy glorious name. es = 
14 But who am 1, and what js my people, that we + Heb.re 
ſhould Þ be able to offer ſo willingly m after this ſort ? rain, or, 
for all things come of thee, and # of thine own have we 9a 
. rength, 
en thee Fa. | (: - - + Heb. .of 
mM i. 6. That thoy ſhouldeſt give us both ſack Riches our of ,p;,. 1d 

2 T which | 


vent 


| ' *Pſal. 39. 


9 & 144-4. 


l *iSam:16. . . 
{ -.Ch-28-9 and haft pleaſure in uprightneſs. As for me, in the 


4 Heb. 
1 ; found. 


XYIK, IE HH KO 


which we ſhould be able to make ſuch an Offering, and ſuch a 
willing and free heart to offer them ; both which are thy Gitrs and 
the Fruirs of thy good Grace and mercy to us. » We return on: 
ly what we have received,and therefore we do only pay a Debt to 
thee, and do not hereby oblige thee or deſerve any thing from 
thee. : 

i5 For * we are ſtrangers before thee, and ſojour- 


ners, as wereall our farhers 0: * our days on the earth 


are as a ſhadow, and there 7s none Þ abiding p. 

o Theſe words may contain a reaſon, either 1. of the firſt clauſe 
of v.14. WioamT, &c. i. e. What mean and contemptible Crea- 
tures are we and how unworthy of ſo high a Favour ? For,ſaith he 
here, we, I and my People, as it 1s v. 14+ are ſtrangers, Sc. poor 
Pilgrims who bring nothing into the World, and paſs haſtily 
thorough it, and can carry nothing with us out of it. Or rather 
2. Of the laſt clauſe of that 14th verſe, of :h/ne own, &c. For the 
Land which we poſſeſs is thine, not ours ; we are not the Propri- 
etors or perpetual Poſſeſſors of it, but only thy Tenants : and as 
our Fathers once were meer ſtrangers in it,even with or beforeMen, 
Pſal. 105. 12. ſo we at this day are no better with or before thee, 
having no abſolute Right and Title in it,but only. to travel through 
it, and ſojourn in it for that ſhort time that we live in the World, 
And thus the Argument ſeems to be borrowed from Levir. 25. 23 
where this is given as a reaſon why the Inheritances of the Land of 
Canaan could not be Sold for ever, but only till the Jubily, for 
faith God, the land is mine, as to Dominion and Propriety, for ye were 
( or, fer, or, but you are ) only ſtrangers and ſojourners with me. pþ W:. 
only give to thee what we muſt ſhortly leave, and what we cannot 
keep to our ſelves: and therefore it is a great Favour thar thou 
wilſt accept ſuch Off:rings 30r,and therefore we are not perpetual 
Poſſefſors of this Land and the Fruits of it, bur only Pilgrims and 
Paſſengers through it« 


16 O LORD our God, all this ſtore that we have 
prepared to build thee an houſe for thine holy name. 
cometh of thine hand, and #s all thine own. 

17 I know alſo,my God, that thou * trieſt the heart. 


uprightneſs of mine heart I have willingly offered al; 
theſe things : and now have I ſeen with joy thy people 
which are | preſent here, to offer willingly unto 
thee q. IN ; 

q By the largeneſs of their offering I diſcern the ſincerity, Wil- 
tingneſs and Generofity of their Hearts towards thee : for Davia 
judged,as in reaſon and' charity he ought, of the Tree by its Fruit, 
and of their Hearts by their Attions.. 

18 O LORD God of Abraham, Iſaac, and of Iſrael! 


our father, keep this for ever in the imagination of the 


{ Or, /a- thoughts of the heart of thy people r, and || prepare 


their heart unto thee 5s. 

y Since it is from thy Grace that thy People have ſuch willing 
Minds to thy ſervice,as was before acknowledged, I beg the con- 
tinuance of that Grace to them, that they may perſiſt in the ſame 
generous and pious Diſpoſition towards thee and thy Worſhip. 
s Or, rather, as it is in the Margent, favliſh or confirm, &c, Thou 
who haſt begun a good Work, confirm and carry it on by thy 
Grace, otherwiſe it will languith, and this very Pcople will prove 
degenerate. 

i9 And give unto Solomon my ſon a perfet heart 
to keep thy commandments, thy teſtimonies and thy 
ſtatutes, and to do all zheſe things, and to build the pa- 
lace for the which I have made provilion 7. 

£ By Purchaſing the place, 1 Chron. 21. and providing for the 
Expences of the Work. 

20 And David faid to all the congregation, Now 
bleſs the LORD your God. And all the congregation 


lefled the LORD God of their fathers, and bowed ' 


own their heads, and worſhipped the LORD and the 
king «. 


« The Lord with Religious, and the King with Civil Worſhip, | 


asS it 1s evident. 


21 And they ſacrificed facrifices unto the LORD x, 
and offered burnt-offerings unto the LORD, on the 
morrow after that day, even a thouſand -bullocks, a 
thouſand rams, and a thouſand lambs, with their drink- 
offerings and {ſacrifices in abundance for all Iſrael y : 


x Before the Ark which was there. y Either r on the behalf of 


211 Iſrael; to praiſe God in their Names to procure God's Preſence 
and Bleſling tor them all. Or 2. So many, thar the Feaſts which, 
afre: the manner, were made of the remainders of the Sacrifices, 
were abundantly ſufficiear for all the ſraelires which were then 
reſent and d-fired to partake of them ; or for all the Governou: s 
of Iſrael there Afſembl:d,who' may well paſs under the name of a/ 

| Ifradl becauſe they repreſented them all. 


'22 And did cat and drink before the LORD » on 
that day with great gladneſs, and they made Solomon 


* x King, the ſon of David king the ſecond time a,and * anointed 


him unto the LORD 7 be the chief governour b, and 
Zadok to be prielt c. 

z #, e. Before the Ark, in Courts or Places as near to it as they 
conveniently could. Or, as in Gods Preſence, in a Solemn and 
Religious manner, praiſing God for this great Mercy, and begging 


his Bleſſing upon this great Aﬀair. # This is called the ſecond 


zime in reference to the firit time, which was either r. when he 


' was made King during Azonijahs Conſpiracy, of which ſee 1 King: 


1: 34, Oc. And ſo this was done after Davids Death, and not, upon 
that day, when this Feaſting and Solemnity laſted, as the words 
at ficſt view ſeem to infinuare, this being related in the ſame verſe, 
and immediatly after the Relation of the Feaſt. Bur there are 
Examples of things done at diſtant times put together in one verſe, 


NIC LL ES 


as AF, 7.15. So Jacob went down into Egybt, and dyed, he and our Fa- 
thers, 1. e. firſt he, and afterward our Fathers. So here, They ai4 
eat on that day with great glaanels, and atterward they made 
Solomon king the ſecond time. And this Oppinion ſeems to be 
confirmed by the following Paſſages, in which it is related, that 
at this ſame time they anointed Zadok to be prieſt, and that Solomon wag 
King inſteal of David, and that all Iſrael, and all Davids ſons ſubmitted 
'0 him : all which was not done till after Davids Death, as may be 
gathered by comparing this with 1 King:1:& 2.Or 2.in 1 Chron: 23:1, 
where it.1s ſaid that David made Solomon his ſon king over Iſrael ; 
z. e. he declared him his Succeſſor. And ſo this ſecond time was 
during Davids Life. And what David had more privately declared, 
chap: 23. he now more ſolemnly owns in this great and genera] 
Aſſembly, in which by Davids Order, and the Conſent of all that 
Aflembly, Solomon was anointed King, 7. e. to be King after his Fa= 
thers Death. And this Opinion the Text ſeems mot to favour, 
For it is ſaid, And they made Solomon King, &c. they, who ? That 
mulſr be fetched out of the foregoing Words and Verſes,the; who 
did eat and drink before the Lord on thas day with great gladneſs, as it is 
here ſaid, and then immediately it follows, and that with a copu« 
lative conjunQion, and they made Solomon King, &c. which without 
violence cannot be pulled away from the foregoing Words. And 
therefore they muſt be David and all the Congregation, who were then 
prelent, v. 20. of whom it is ſaid, they ſacrificed, &fc, ver. 21. and 
they did eat, &c. And they made Solomen, &c. The great objeQion 
agaurlſt this Opinion is, that they anointed Zadok to be Prieft at 
this time, which was not done till after Davids death ; for till then 
Aviathar was not thruſt out from being Prieſt, &C. 1 King: 2; 26, 27. 
This indeed is a difficulty,but not inſoluble, It muſt be remem« 
bred that the High-prieſt had his Vicegerent who might officiate 
in his ſtead, when he was hindred by 1ickneſs or other indiſpenſ- 
ible Occalion ; and that there ſeems to be ſomething more than 
1d inary in Zadok's caſe ; for although Abiathar was properly the 
High-prieſt,yet Zak ſeems after a ſort to be joyned in Commiſſion 
vith him, as we ſee 2 Sam: 15: 29. © 19: 11 and it is expreſly ſaid 
Zadok and Abiathar were Prieſts, 2 Sam: 20: 25- and 1 King: 4: 4. And 
r may be further conſidered, that this anointing of Zadok might 
2e occaſioned by ſome miſcarriage of Ab:athar not recorded in 
Scripture. Poflibly he was unſatisfied with this deſign of Tranſla« 


Perton and Right, which afterwards he did more openly defend : 
Which being known to David by information, might induce him 
and the Princes who favoured $:/omen to take this courſe. Which 
they might the more willingly do in conſideration of that Divine 
Threatning, 1 Sam: 2: 38, &c. of Tranſlating the Prieſthood from 
[thamar's and Elis houſe, of which Abiathar was, to Eleazars Line, 
to which it had been promiſed to perpetuity, Numb:25 13. of which 
Line Zadek was. And they might judge this a fit Seaſon, or might 
be dire&ted by God at this time to Execute that Threatning to 
the one, and pramiſe to the other Family. And yer this Aion of 
theirs in Anointing Zadek did not, as Ifuppoſe,aQtually conſt:tute 
him H:gh-prieſt,but only ſettled theReverfion of it upon him and 
his Line after Abiathars death.Even as Daw:ds making Solomon King, 
ch: 24: 1 and their anointing Solomon to be rhe chief Governour here. did 
not put him into aCtual Poſſeſſion of the Kingdom, but only gave 
him a Righr to it in Reverſion after the preſent-King's death, as 
Samuzl's anointing of David, 1Sam: 16, had done to David before 
him. Hence, notwithſtanding this Anointing, Abiathar continued 
to exerciſe his Office till Solomon thruſt him out,1 King:2:27- and event 
after he was removed from the Execution of his Office, yet he was 
reputed the Prieſt till he died,being fo called 1 Kings 4: 4. And this, 
I hope may in ſome ſort reſolve that difficulty.For the otherArgu« 
ments may ſeem not conſiderable, For as for what follows v. 23s, 
24, 25. Then Solomon ſat on the Throne, &c- That indeed ſeems to be- 
long to the time after Davids death, being iufficiently ſeparated 
from this 22d» verfe ; and not ſo knit to the foregoing Words, as 


thoſe words, and they made Solomon King, &c. are, and for the pare« 
ticle, then, that is confetled by all to be often uſed at large and n= 
d:finitely for,oboxt,or after chat 1me. b i.e. To be King after Davids 
death, c Of which the laſt Note but one. 


23 Then Solomon ſat on the throne of the LORD 
d as king 'in ſtead of David his father, and proſpered, 
;and all Iſrael obeyed him. 

d 7. e. On the Throne of Iſrael, which is called the Throne of the 
Lord,cither more generally as all Thrones are the Lords,by whom kings 
reign, Prov 8:15 and Magiſtrats are ordained, Rom: 31:1,2. or more, 
ſpecially and peculiarly 3 either 1. becauſe the Lord himſelf was in 
a peculiar manner the King and Governour of Ifrael, not only in 
the time of the Judges, bur afterward, Pſal. 44. 4. and 89: 18 and 
149: 2. 1/a:'33: 22. or, 2, becauſe it was the Throne of Ch: iſt the 
Loid, whoſe Vic-gerents David and Solomon, and their Succcſlors 
were,for whom this Throne was reſerved, and by whom it was to 
be eſtablithed and enjoyed for ever, Luke 2: 32, 33. Or, 3. The 
Tarons of th? Lord 1s put for, The Throne of the People of the Lord, by a 
conciſe & ſhort manner of Speech, which it frequent in the Hebrew 
Language, as when rhe Key of David is put for the Key of the houſe of 
David ; and the Mountain of the Lord, for the Mount ain of the Lords Houſe : 
Or 4. Becauſe this Throne fell to Solemon not by right of inheritance, 
for he had elder Brethren, but by the ſpecial Appointment and 
Gift of the Lord» And ſo this, of the Lord, is the Genitive Cauſe of 
the Efficient, as the Learned call it, and ſignifies, which the Lors 
gave him, 


24 And all the princes, and the mighty men, and 
all the ſons likewiſe of king David + ſubmitted chem- 
{elves unto Selomon e the king. 

e Heb, Put their Hands under Solomon, i. e, They owned him for 
their King, and themſelves for his Subje&s, and ſware Fealty £9 
him ; which poſſibly they now did after the ancient mannner wit 
that Ceremony of putting their Hands under his Thigh, which was 
uſed in Swearing, Gen, 24: 2: & 47: 29. or at leaſt the thing is fig* 
nified by a Phraſe taken from that pratice formerly uſed,tho now 
neglefted; it being uſual in all nations and Languages to ſignific 
preſent things by Phraſes taken from Ancient Cuitoms- 


25 And the LORD magnified Solomon exceedingly 


1N 


Chap. XXIX; 


"1ng the Crown to Solomen, and did now ſecretly favour Admijahs , 


tHeb g0% 
the hand 
under S0* 


lomoen. 
Gen-24-4 


3641-9 | 


— 


rm 


"LY 


Ix 


{Heb.g9% 
the bs 
under $0 
lomoen. 
Gen-244 


4899] 


p 


"Chap: I. 


HI 


«Hine: in the fight of all Iſrael, and * beſtowed upon him ſuch 
-oyal majeſty f, as had not been on any king g before | 
' him in HUrael. ; : 

f 3. e. Such Honour and Reputation, together with Power and 
J' Riches,and all things which make a King Great and Glorious. g Ei- 
ther David or Sa!!l, or any of the former Governours of Iſrael, the 

Word Xing, being oft uſed. in a large ſenſe for any Governour, 
26 Thus David the fon of Jeile, reigned over all 


Tſrael h, | 
h This Sacred Writer having mentioned the Anointing of Solomor: 
to be King, v.22. and upon that occaſion proceeded to give a fur- 
ther Account of Solomons Attual Settlement in his Kingdom, and of 
his proſperous and glorious Management of it, v.23,24,25+ he now 
rTerurns to his main and proper Buſineſs,to give an Account of the 
Cloſe of Davids Reign and Life. Thrs, i.e. 1n manner hitherto exe 
preſſed, David reigned, &Cc., , 
27 And the time that he reigned over Iſrael, was 
King. * forty years : * ſeven years reigned he in Hebron,and 
,n thirty and thres years reigned he 1n Jeruſalem, : 
+5m's'5 28 And he died in a good old age, full of days z, 
C 3+: riches and Honour 3: and Solomon his fon reigned in 
his ſtead. 


CH RON I CHE S 


being now weary of his Life, and deſiring to be with GOD. 0 


behold they are written in the || book of Samuel the 
ſer, and in the} book of Nathan the prophet, and in? Heb. 
the book of Gad the ſeer &. 


which were written part by Srzxel, | and part by Nathan and Gad- 
Oc,in the Annals or Chronicles of that Kingdom, which were writ- 
ten by Nathan and Gad,who were not only Prophets, but Hiſtorio«= 
graphers or Annaliſts ; out of which either they or ſome other 
Prophets rook out by the direQion of Gods Spirit ſuch Paffages as 
were moſt important and uſeful to the Church and to the 
in ſucceeding Ages, 


that went over him 1, and over Iſrael, and over all the 
kingdoms of the countries mz. 


manifold Troubles;and his great Succeſſes and Atchievements:The 


them, as Pſal 31. 15. & 97. 5. 
bordering upon the Land of Canaan, or not far from ir, 


| 

. .| 
Chap. | 
7 Fully fatisficd with the days which God had given him.having | 
ad the happinels to ſee his Beloved Solomon ſettled in his Throne, 


29 Now the Ads of David the king, firſt and laft, « | 


5 - Wl 1 


JOr iſo | 
b : 
word:, 


& Either in the two Books of Samuel, as they are now called, 


orld 
30 With all his reign and his might, and the times 


! 1. e. The Changes which befel him, both his Perſecutions and 


Word time or times being oft put for things done of happening in 
» Heb. Of theſe Countries, to wit, 


WHEL 


II CHRONICLES | 


CHAP. I. | 

K. Solomons ſolemn Offering at Gibeon, 1=»——=6. His choice of Wiſdom, 
is bleſſed by GOD, 7 12. His Strength and Wealth, 149 ——17- 

: N D * Solomon the ſon of David was ſtreng- 

thened # in his kingdom, and the LO R D 


*; Kings 
2: 45 


his God was with him, and magnified him 
* exceedingly. 

s Or, cſtabl;jhed, after his Seditious Brother Adonijah and his Par- 
tifans were ſuppreſſed ; and, he was received with the univerſal 
Conſent and Joy of his Princes and People. 


2 Then Solomon ſpake 6 unto all Iſrael], to the cap- 
tains of thouſands and of hundreds, and to the judges, 
and to every governour inall Iſrael, || the chief of the 
fithers. 


b To wit, concerning his Intention of going to G:beon, and that 
they ſhould attend him thither, as the next Verſe ſhews. 


«(Chr.23. 
Vo Heb. 


| Or,h4ad 
of the ja= 
MH 

Fo Gre 


honour, nor the life of thine enemies 7 neither yet haſt 
asked long life ; but haft asked wiſdom and knowledge 


for thy elf, that thou mayeſt judge my people over 
whom TI have made the king : ; 


2 So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, 
went to the high place'c that as at * Gibeon, for there 
was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which 
Moſes the ſervant of the LORD had made in the wil- 
derneſs. 

c Upon which the Tabernacle was placed ; whence it is called 
the great high place, 1 Kings 3. 4. 

4 * But the ark of God had David brought up from 
Kirjath-jearim, to the place whi:h David had prepared 
for it : for he had pitched a tent for it at Jeruſalem d. 

d He ſeparated the Ark from the Tabernacle, and brought it to 


Jeruſalem, becauſe there he intended to build a far more noble and 
laſting Habitation for it. 


5 Moreover, * the brazen altar that Bezaleel the ſon 


F,King. 
4 

1Ch. 16 
39. & 21+ 
2 


* 1 Sam. 
6: 17, 
iChr:16.1, 


*Exo:38:1- 

| Or, was 

there, . 
tabernacle of the LORD : and Solomon and the con- 
gregation ſought unto it f. 

e Either Mes mentioned v. 3-or Bezaleel here laſt named, by the 
Command and Dire&ion of Myes : or David,who may be ſaid to pur 
it there,becauſe he continued it there,and did not remove it,as he 
did the Ark from the Tabernacle. f z. e. Sought the Lord and his 
Favour by hearty Prayers andSacrifices in the Place whichGod had 
appointed for that Work, Levis. 17. 3 4. 


6 And Solomon went up chither to the brazen altar 


of Uri, the ſon of Hur, had made, |] he e put before che 


before the LORD, which g was at the tabernacle of 


the congregation, and offered a thouſand burnt-offec- 
ings upon it. 


g 7.e. Which Altar. But that he had now ſaid w. 5. and therefore 


would not unneceſſarily repeat it. Or rather, wh: and fo theſe | : 
Words are emphatical,and contain a Reaſon why Solomon went thi- | the Notes there ir is explained,and the ſeeming differences recon- 


ther, becauſe the Lord was there graciouſly preſent to hear prayers 
and receive Sacrifices« 


7 In that night 4 did God appear z unto Solomon, 
and ſaid unto him, Asx what I ſhall give thee. 


bh After thoſe Sacrifices were offered. i In a Dream,of which ſee 
the Notes on 1 King: 3: 5, &Cc. 


8 And Solomon faid unto God, Thou haſt ſhewed | 


great mercy unto David my father, and haſt made me 
* to reign in his ſtead, 
"". Now, O LORD God, let thy promiſe unto David 
t Ha 7 my father be eſtabliſhed : * for chou haſt made me king 
mach ,:4, OVEr a people, Þ like the duſt of the earth in mulci- 
auſt of the tude ; | 
key Io * Give me now wiſdom and knowledge, that I 
x, may * go out and come in before this people: for who 
27:13, 6an judge this thy people zhat 3s ſo great & ? 
Whar one Man is ſufficient to govern 1o numerous a People. 

Ir And God faid ro Solomon, Becaute this was in 

thine heart, and thou haſt not asked riches, wealth, or 


of Chr: 
W: 5, 


{ i.e The taking away of their Lives. 

12 Wiſdom and knowledge is granted unto thee,and 
I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, ſuch as ; 

*none of the kings have had,that have been before thee, * x Chr: 
neither ſhall there any after thee hare the like. 25: 25: 
13 Then Solomon came fr9r2 his journey to the high P22 

5 . Ecclel-2:9 
place » that 2-45 at Gibeon, , to Jeruſalem, from before | 
w_ rcabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over l 
Iſrael. ll 
» Or, from the High-place : for the Hebrew prefix Lamed, which | 
commonly {ignifies #9,1s ſometimes put for the Latine de,which 1ig- ] 
nifies from. | i 
14*And Solomon gathered chariots »and horſemen : * i King! 
and he had a thouſand and four hundred chariots » and 4: 26: 
ewelve thouſand horſe-men, which he placed in the * wo 
chartot-Cities, and with the king at Jeruſalem. I 
# Of this, and the three following Verſes, ſee the Notes on 1 | 

Kings 10. 26, Oc. | 

i5 * And the king f made ſilver and gold at Jeruſa- * r King: 

lem as plenteous as ſtones, and cedar-trees made he as 10: 27- 
the ſyvcamore-trees that are in the vale, for abundance. re nu} 
16 * And + Solomon had horſes brought out of E- my 


, : ww 
gypt, and linnen yarn : the kings merchants received * 1 King. 
the linen yarn at a price. 


10. 28. 
17 And they fetcht up, and brought forth out of E- 9: 28 
gypt a chariot for ſix hundred ſhekels of filver, and an 


] 


+ Heb.z 


horſe for an hundred and fifty : and ſo brought they Vo | 


out hoyſes for all the kings of che Hittices, and for the bwrſes . 
kings of Syria, T by their means. which wa 


Solomon! 
CHAP. IL 


. fT Heb. 
| their hand, 
Solomon appointeth Workenen to build the Temple. His Embaſſage to King 
Hiram, for Workmen and Materials : promiſing to furniſh him with Vie 
Fuals, 1 19. Hirams kinanels, 1——16, Solomon numbreth © 
and divideth the Warkmen, 17, 18. 
A N D Solomon determined to build an houſe for 


the name of the LORD, and an houſe for his 
kingdom 4. 


a i.e. A Royal Palace for himſelf and his Succeſſors. This whole 
Chapter, for the ſubſtance of it, is contained in 1 King. 5- and in 


cied. 


2 And * Solomon told out threeſcore and ten thou- *; x, s | 
ſand men to bear burdens, and fourſcore thouſand to 5: 15. 
in the mountains, and three thouſand and ſix 
d to overſee them. 

3 And Solomon ſent to || Huram the king of Tyre | g,. 
aying,As thou * didſt deal with David my father, and yiran. 
Gidft ſend him cedars to build him an houſe to dwell 1 Kin: 5:45 

therein, ever ſo deal with me b. * 1 Chr, 

b Which words n_y be commodiouſly underſtood from the na- *t ** 
ture of the thing,and from the following words,ſuch Ellipſes being 
frequent in the Hebrew. Or, without any Ellipſes,the ſenſe being 
here ſuſpended, is compleated, wv. 7. ſo ſend me, &c. the 4 5. and 


6 verſes being inſerted by way of Parentheſis, to uſher in, and ens 
force his following Requeſt. 


4 Behold, I buid an houſe to the name of the 
LORD my God, to dedicate jt to kim c, amd to burn 
before him f ſweet incenſe, and for the continual frew + xx.g, 
bread 4,and for the burnt-offerings morning and evening Incenſe of 


| 


on the ſabhaths, and on the new-moons, and on the SPic#: 
42 4 folemn 


ſolemn feafts of the LORD our God. This is an | 
ordinance for ever to Iſrael. 

c i e, To his honour and worſhip. 4 So called here and Nm. 
4:7. becauſe it was to be there continually, by a conſtant Succeſſion 
of new Bread.when the old was removed: Of which ſce Exoa: 25. 
30. Levit. 24: 8. 7 | 

5 And the houſe which I build is great e: 
;zs our God above all gods. 

e For though the Temple ftrictly ſo called, was but ſmall, yet , 
the Buildings belonging to it, both above and under ground, were | 
large and numerous. ; a 
gs. 6 * But who f is able to build him an houſe, ſeing 

the heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain , 
him f?who am I then that T ſhould build him an houſe, 

| 


fave only to burn ſacrifice before him g. | 

f When I ſpeak of building a great Houſe for our great God,let 
be ſo fooliſh ro think that I mean to include or comprch-nd 
g 5. e. To worſhip him there 


for great 


2:4, or 
_ 8.00 ww ea qua ob po 
ength. God within it, for he is infinite. 
where he is graciouſly preſent. : 
Send me now therefore a man, cunning to work 


in gold and in filver, and in braſs, and in iron, and in 

Heb. # purple, arid crimſon, and blue, and thar can $kill T to 
ave orave With the cunning men that are with me in Judah 
99g. and in Jeruſalem, whom David my father did provide. 
Or, al- $8 Sznd me alſo cedar-trees, fir-trees, and || algum- 
#$174- trees our of Lebanon : ( for I know that thy ſervants 
25% can $kill to cut timber in Lebanon and behold, my 

ſervants, ſþa# be with thy ſervants, 

9 Even to prepare me timber in abundance : for the 
kouſe which I am about to build, ſha!l be F wonderfully 


great b, 


h See the Notes on wv. 5- 
10 And behold,I will give to thy ſervants, the hew- 


ers that cut timber,twenty thouſand meaſures of bearen 
wheat, and twenty thouſand meaſures of barley, and 
ewenty thouſand barhs of wine, and twenty thoufand 
baths of oyl. 

11 Then Huram the king of Tyre anſwered in wri- 
ting, which he ſent to Solomon, Becauſe the LORD 
hath loved his people, he hath made thee king over 
them. 

12 Huram ſaid moreover, Bleſſed be the LORD 
God of Iſrael that made heaven and earth, who hath 
given to David the king a wiſe ſon, ft endued with 
prudence and underſtanding,that might build an houſe 
for the LORD, and an houlc for his ki:gdom. 

13 And now I have ſent a cunning man ( endued 


wich underſtanding ) of Huram my fathers z ; 
i ire. Who was my Fathers chief Work-man. Or, Huram 46:, 
a Man ſo called ; the Prefix Lamed being here only a Norte uv the 
Accuſative Caſe. Sce more on chap: 4-16. | 
14 The fon of a woman of the daughters of Dan &, 
and his father was a man of Tyre, skiiful to work in 
pold and in filver, in braſs, in iron, in ſtone and in 
timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linnen and in 
crimſon ; alſo to grave any manner of graving, and to 
find out every device which ſhall be pur to him, with 
thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my 
lord / David thy father. EEE 
k Of which ſee the Notes on 1 King: 7.4." 1 So he call David 
here, and Solomon in the next Verſe, either out of ſingular reſpet 
ro their Greatneſs and true Worth : or becauſe he was indeed 
Trivutary to them : or, at leaſt, his Country was nouriſhed by 
their Country, as it was afterwards, AF. 12: 20. 
15 Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the 
' oil, and the wine which my lord hath ſpoken of, let 


£9-*”” him ſend unto his ſervants: 


Heb. 
preat and 
wonderful, 


+ Heb. 
knowing 
prudence 
£1 nag 


ſanding, 


ding t0 
al - 16 And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much 
need. as thou ſhalt need, and we will bring it to thee 1n 
Tok fiotes by ſea to Joppa, | and thou ſhale carry it up to 


{ Fine. Jeruſalem, 

5:13z& 127 * And Solomon numbred all © the ſtrangers that 

9: 20. were in the land of Ifracl, after the numbring, where- 

THE the wich David his father had numbred them ; and they 

en ths Were found an hundred and fifty thouſand, and three 
23, thouſand and fix bundred. 


ferangers. ; 
m For David had nor only numbered his own People,for which 
he ſmarted, 2 Samuel 24. bur afcerward he numbred the Strangers, 


them, and employ them abour his Buildings, as he ſaw fir. Yet 
Solomon thought fit to number them again, becauſe Death might 
have made a conſiderable Alteration among them ſince David's 
numbrirg of them ; and ir behoved him to have an exa&t Account 


of them. 
18 And he ſet * threeſcore and ten thouſand of chem 


jo be bearers of burdens, and fourfcore thouſand ro be 
hewers in the mountains, and three thouſand and fix 
* hundred over-ſeers to fer the people a work. 
CH 


A P. I. 
The place and time of building the Temple. The meaſure and ornaments 


# As itis 
yerle 2- 


TSF ONICLIESC 


the LORD appeared unto David # his father, 


; underſtood by the Spirit of God. 
. Threſhing-floor formerly ftvod, 


ſecond month 4, in the fourth year of his reign. 


1 K:ngs: 6. 


not out of Vanity, but that Solomon might have a true Account of 


| Chap, III 
Hen * Solomon began to buiid the houſe of t ; 


: he 
LORD at Jeruſalem in mount Moriah, [| where . + op 
. 1 &C 
; in the .Or which 
place that David had prepared b in the threſhing floor = fn 
c of *|| Ornan the Jebuſire. David his 
a Which Place the Lord had Conſecrated by his gracious A J ather. 
pearance there, 1 Chron. 21: 26, Or, which was ſhewed unto Davis ' 1Chr:27, 
to wit, to be the place where rhe Temple ſhould be builr ; which 19 C224, 
God pointed out to him.part'y by his Appearance.and princi I1y Or, aray. 
by his Spirit Suggeſting this to David at that time. 6 Py Ty 'y 1ah,2Yam. 
down the Buildings which were upon it, or near it, by Ievelline 24:18, 
the Ground, and poſſibly by marking ir our for rh, Temple a. 
Courts, the Dimenſions whereof he very particularly and exaQly 
c 4. e. In the place where thir 


2 And he began ro build in the ſecond day of the 


« Of this Verſe,and the reſt of this Chapter, ſee my Notes on 


3 Now theſe are the things * wherein Solomon was *iKin:6:,. 
T inſtructed e for the building of the houſe of God. The t Heb. 
length by cubics after the firft meaſure f was threeſcore Pun. 
— _ the breadth twenty cubits. 

e Partly by his Father David,and artly by the Spirit 0 

which injpired and guided him in ho ads Work. Or who _ 

Solomons Founaations, the Hebrew verb being pur for the noun bh " 

is elſewhere. The Senfe 1S, Theſe were the Meaſures of the ous w_ 

dations, upon which he intended to build the Temple. f ;.e 5g 
cording to the Meaſure of the firſt and ancient Cubir. By whi h 

It is evident that there were Cubits of different ſorts and 1iz "7 - 

which allo appears from Ezek: 40: 5: and 43: 13, Pu: how big thoſ? 

Cubits were, and how much Jarger than the Common Cubitrs.a 1 
whether this was was che Cabit uſed by Aofes in the buifding of s 
Tabernacle,which teems moſt probable,or ſome other & yer lar - 

Cubir, is nor agreed among Learned Men, and cannot bw be 

exattly known, nor is it of any great momentr for us ro know . 


, And the * porch that was in-the front » 

= : the h | : 

the length of :t Was according to the wad A of "uſe," 1 King 

— ewenty cubits, and the height was an hundred © 

and twe - id it Within wi 

_ ntyg : and he overlaid it within with pure 

& This being a kind of Turret to the Buildi 

of it here omitted 1s expreſſed to be tn <—rp0 fe 

5 And the greater houſe þ he ceiled with fir-tree. 

which he overlaid with + fine gold, and ſet thereon ; 

palm-trees and chains, f _ 
008» 


h i, e- The holy Place, which was thrice as large as th ; "WR 
or the Holy of Holies, which is called :h arge 95 the leſſer houſe Gen.2u, 
the Notes on 1 Chron: 28; 11. 1s Called the of holy Houſe, v.8. See 


6 And he ÞF garniſhed the houſe with i | 
ſtones T for beauty :; and the gold was mos "atone 
vaim 5. ; fGr. fo 
i See the Notes on 1 Kings 9: 26, &c: gry. 

7 He overlaid alſo the houſe, the beams, the pofts 

and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof with pold 

and — cherubims on the walls. YO 

8 And he made the moſt holy houſe, «| 

whereof was according to the breadth of _s hoe 
—_— IC the breadth thereof twenty cubits : 

and he overlaid it with fine gold : 

dred talents. Tr nn wa an 


9 And the weight of the nails & was fifty ſhekels 

of gold : and he overlaid the upper chambers 1 with 

gold. | 

k i. 6, Of each of the Nils or Heads of thoſe Nai! 

Plates were ftaſtned to the Boards. 1 Of which foe CT - 

IIs Dos 

10 Andin the moſt holy houſe he made two che- 

_— || of image-work zs, and overlaid them with! (s 

gold. "methint) 

mi Made in the ſhape of young Men or Boys,as they ZIGRE .. marbles 

are, Or, of moveable work, fo called becauſe they were nor fixed towok- 

the Mercy-ſeat,as the Moſaical Cherubims were, but ſtood upon their Gr.of 9% 
din wh 


of o . o . , 
fees, as it is faid here wv: 13. in a moving poſture. 


1r And the wings of the cherubims were twenty 
cubits long: ene wing of the one cherub was five cubits, 
reaching to the wall of the houſe : and the other wing 
was likewiſe five Cubits, reaching to the wing of the 
other cherub. 

' 12 And one wing of the other cherub was five cu- 
bits, reaching to the wall of the houſe : and the other 
wing was five cubits alſo, joyning to the wing of ths 
other cherub, 

13 The wings of theſe cherubims ſpread themſelves 
forth ewenty Cubics : and they ſtood on their feer, and - 
_ faces ere || inward ». ; || Or, # 

ny Heb. Towara; the Houſe,or rather,that Houſe, not the Ho ſe, 9474 ih 
as divers underſtand it; for then their backs muſt hw cx Mo eeoſ 
towards the Ark, which was indecent and direaly contrair to the 
poſture of Moſes his Cherubims which looked towards it, bur the 
moſt Holy Houſe, which was laſt named, w: 8. and of which he con- 
| tirkues yet to ſpeak - this Poſture being moi? agrecable to their 
Uſe, which was with their Wings to cloſe in the Ark and cover 


it, as it is exprelly affirmed below, chap: 5.8. % Mat! 


thereof, 1 10» The Cherubini, tt——I3. The Vail and the 
Pillars, 117: 


14 Aud he made the * yai! 6 of blue, and purple 
ane 


Fl. 


lings 


Or, 4 
ard f b 
oe. 


 Mat.a7 
'1. 


| j 4 __ 


feb. 
{ed 10 


gb 
Kings 


Tir 21s 
be: $2: 21: 
+ Heb» 
FR 


"al: : 
i That 15 
j joal 


' &bliſÞ. 


#1if is 
jog 


frek: 43 
ty, 17: 


#| Kings 
"23; 

| fHb* 
fm hls 
into h.5 


1,25; 


| Or. 
foe 


|: 38: 


T Heb: 
Pniſhed ro 
Make 


1 Kin 
I: _ 


fHeb: u 
phe fo 


r, 
Yoldrons, 


[That 1, 


' ; KingS 


lis a Lilige 


F hs 


ng 


I IT. 


and crimſon, and fine linen, and + wrought cherubims 
thereon. 

o To wit, the Inner Vail before the moſt Holy Place, by com- 
paring this with Excd: 26: 3i. 1 Kings 6: 21. 

15 Alſo he made before the houſe p * two pillars of 
thirty and five cubits f high 4, and the chapiter that 
was On the top of each of them was five cubits. 

i. e. Before the Holy Houſe, or befcre the Temple, as this is ex- 
plained, v: 17: leſt it ſhould be underſtood of the Moſt holy Houſe 
of which he had ſpoken before. q To wit, both of them : of which 


ſce the Notes on 1 Kings 7: 15. 

16 And he made chains, as in the oracle r, and put 
them on the heads of the pillars, and made an hundred 
pomegranats s, and put them on the chains. 

r As he had done, or like unto thoſe which he made, in the Or- 
cle ; of whichſee 1 Kings 6: 21, The Particle, as, is oft underſtood 
as G:1n. 49: 9: Dent: 33* 22, &cy s Jneach Row : or 2901n all, as 1s 
ſaid 1 Kings 7. 20. 


17 And he * reared up the pillars before the temple, 
one on the righchand, and the other on the lefr, and 
called the name ofchar on the right hand, ||Jachin, and 
the name of that on the lefe, || Boaz. 


CG 5 A © 46 
The Altar of Braſs : 1- The molten Sea upon twelve Oxen, © 5. The ten 
Lavers, Canadleſticks and Tables, 6 $. The Courts and the Inſtruments 
of Braſs, 9 18. The Inſiruments of Gold, 19 22, 


Oreoverhe made * an altar of brafs, twenty cubits 
che length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth 
chereof, and ren cubits the height thereof 4. 

a Qz. How could this be when God had ſaid, Thou fhalt not go up 
by Steps 'unto m.ne Altar, that thy Nakedneſs be wot diſcovered therion, 
Exod: 20: 26. and Steps were neceſſary for ſo high an Altar as this 
was ? Anſw. 1. Theſe Steps were ſo made that there was no fear of 
this Inconvenience. 2. That Law was uſeful and fit when 1t was 
made ; bur afterwards when the Prieſts were commanded to wear 
Lim:n Breches in their Holy Mir iſtrations to cover their Nakeaneſs, 
Exod:28:42. it was not neceſſary. 3. Howſoever God could undoubt- 
edly diſpenſe with his own Law, as here he did ; for he it was that 
gave theſe Dimenſions for the Altar 


2 * Aiſo he made a motcen ſea 6b, of ten cubits, F from 
brim to brim, round in compaſs, and five cubits the 
height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compaſs 
ir round ab::ud aboar. 

b Of this and v: 3, 4, 5, &c: ſee the Notes on 4 Kings 7: 23, &c. 

3 * And under it was the ſimilitude of oxen, which 
did compals it round about : ten ina cubit compaſſing 
the fea round about. Two rows of oxen were caſt, 
when ic was caſt. 

4 It ſtood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward 
the north, and three looking toward the weſt, and three 
looking toward the ſouth, and three looking toward 
theeaft: and the ſea was' ſet above upon them, and all 
cheir hinder parts were inward. 

5 Andthe thickneſs of it was an hand breadth, and 
the brim of ic like the work of the brim of a cup, || with 
flowers of lilies ; azd it receivedand held three thouſand 


Kings Daths. 


6 He madealfo *ten lavers c, and put five on the right 


tHeb the hand, and five on the left, to waſhin them: + ſuch tbings 


ms as they offered for the burnt-offering, they waſhed in 

frig them ; butthe ſea was for theprieſts to waſh in. 

: c Of which ſee 1 Kings 7 : 39, &c-. 

ings 7.* And he made ten candleſticks of gold according 

"4:  totheirform 4, and ſet them in the temple, five on the 
rignt hand, and five on the left. 

a Either 1. the Form which was appointed for them by God, who 
ſignified ir to David, Orrather 2 the old Form which God preſcri- 
bed to Moſes, Exod: 25: 31, &c. for ſo theſe were made, And this 
Clauſe ſeems to be added here,becauſe in many things there was a 
great variation from the od Form, asin the poſture of the Cherubims, 
the height of the Altar, and divers other thing. 

* Rings 8 * He made alſo ten tables e, and placed them in 
:4: the temple, five on the right ſide and five on the left, 
10:23, 32d he made an hundred || baſons of gold. 
'-* e Of which ſee 1 Kings 7: 48. 

* [Kings $9 Furthermore, * he made the court of the prieſts, 
635 andthe great court, and doors for the court, and over- 
Hs laid the doors of them with braſs. 

—_ Io And * he ſet che ſea on the tight fide of the eaſt- 


end, over againſt the ſouth. 
ir And Huram made the pots, and the ſhovels f, and 


[Or, ozts, the [|baſons ; and Huram + tiniſhed the work thathe was 


to make for king Solomon for the Houſe of God : 


f o theſe and the following Verſes ſee the Notes on 1 Kings 7: 
409, XC. 


s 12 Towit, the twopillarsand *the pommels, an1 the 
Chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, anc 


the two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapi- 


ters, which were on the top of the pillars : 

,, 23 And four hundred pomegranates on the twc 
wreathes ; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, 
to cover rhe two pommels of the Chapiters, which wer: 
7 upon the pillars, 


HH RONIC INE 


Chap. V. 
14 He made alſo baſes; and || lavers madehe upon 
the baſes : 
I5 One fea, and twelve oxen under it. EE 
16 The pots alſo, and the ſhovels, and the fleſh-hooks, | 
and all their inſtruments did Huram his father g make, _ 
s _— Solomon for the houſe of the LORD, of 7 bright Heb made || 
rails.  prig738, OT 1; 


$i. e. Solomons Father ; the Relative being put before the Ante- 49 a 
cedent, which isnot unuſual in the Hebrew Tongue. And heis ſo 

Called here, becauſe Solomon uſually called him by that name our of 

that great reſpe& which he bare to him for his excellent Art and 

Service which he did for him : it being uſiial to call great Artiſts 

and Inventers of things by this Name ; of which ſee Gen: 4: 20, 2. 

Or, Huram Abiu or Abif, a Man ſo called, or Huram Abi, as ch: 2: 13. 


17 Inthe plain efJordan did the king caſt them,in the 

1 clay ground, between Succoth and Zeredathah. + Heb: 
18 Thus Solomon made all theſe veſſels in great :hickneſs:. 
abundance ; for the weight of the braſs could not be  *4c 
found our. ground, 
19 And Solomon made all the veſſels that were for 

the Houſe of God, the golden altar alſo, and the cables 


whereon the + ſhew-bread wes ſet h. t Heb. 
h Which were of Gold; and ſo are diſtinguiſhed from thoſe ten by:ad of 
Tables mentioned v. 8. which ſcem to have been made of Silver. faces, 
Compare « Chron. 28. 16. 


20 Moreover the candleſticks with their lamps, tha 

they ſhould burn after the manner 3 before the oraclet 

of pure gold ; | 

i According to the preſcription of God to and by Meſes. _ 

21 And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs 

made he of gold, and that + perfect gold. t Heb. 

22 And the ſnuffers, and the [|baſons, and the ſpoons, ger fall 
| of gold: 

the inner doors thereof for the moſt holy place, and che 


doors of the Houſe of the temple, vere of gold &. 
k To wit. in part; they were made of Wood, 1 Kings 6. 39- 
2 Kings 18. 16. but covered with Golden Pjates. 


_ a A Þ. V. 


The dedicated Treaſures ; 1. The ſolemn Indu##ion of the Ark into the Oracle 
2 to. Glory and Praiſe u ſung to God who appeareth in a Cloud 
which filed the Houſe, 11 14. HR, 

Hus all the wotk that Solomon made for the. Houſe 

of the LORD was finiſhed: * And Solomon brought 

in all the things that David his father had dedicated ; 

and the filver, and the gold s, and all the inſtruments, 
put he among the treaſures of the houſe of God. 


a Or, even (as that Particle is oft underſtood) the Silver, andthe Gold, 
the Remainder of thoſe vaſt Sums mentioned i Chron. 22. 14. 

2 * Then Solomon afſembled the elders of Itrael Þ, 
and all the heads of che tribes, the |} chief of the fathers , 
of the childrenof Iſrael unto Jeruſalem, to bring up the , 
ark of the covenant of the LORD, out of the city of | 
David, which 7s Zion, 


b Of this and the following 
I 


2 Cc, . 
3 Wherefore all the men of Ifrael aſſembled them- 
ſelves unto the king in the feaſt, which was ia the fe- 
venth month. BEES 

4 And all the elders of Iſrael catne, and the Levites 
took up the ark. 

5 And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle. 
of the congregation, and all the Holy veſlels that were 
in the tabernacle, theſe did the Priclts azd the Levites 
bring up. 

5 Alſo king Solomon and all the congregation of 
Iſrael that were aſſembled unto him before the ark, 
ſacrificed ſheep and oxen, which could not be told nor 
numbred for multitude. | | 

7 And the prieſts brought in the ark of the covenane 
of the LORD, unto his place, to the oracle ofche houſe + 
into the Holy p!/ace, ever under the wings ofthe cheru- 
bims. | 

$ For the cherubims ſpread forth their wings over the 
place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark 
and the ſtaves thereof above. - 

9 And they drew out the. ſtaves of the ark, that the 
ends of the ſtaves were ſeen from the ark before rhe 
oracle, but they were not ſeen without. And |} there 10 
it is unto this day c. chey af 

c When this Hiſtory was firſt writzen; not when it was reviewed ;j,,, as 
by Ezra, who made ſome Additions to it : For after the Return from , Kings 
Babylon, neither Staves nor Ark were any more ſeen or heard of $g g 

10 There was nothing in the ask fave the cwo tables 
which Moſes * pur therein at Horeb, || when che LORD » p.,, 
made 4 covenanz with the children of {ſrae], when they ro. 2, 5. 
came out of Egypt. : | | .._ W 

11 Andit came to paſs when the prieſts were come Ig 
' out of the holy place : for all the prieſts har were 


Ty Kings 
7. $hs 


2, &C. 
Or, 


Verſes ſee the Notes on 1 Kings 8. Rs So 


as 


p preſent were ſandtified, and did not #hem wait by + Heb. 


courſe 4d, ' -Jen-d, 


iT35 4 Acccrding 


and the cenſers, of pure gold :and the entry ofthe houſe, #5; ol, ] | 


1 Kings 


rul-rs of the 


hap. VI. _ 

| ; via ointment, 1 Chron. 24. 25, WRIC 

__— pan nay "4 pox but in bobiinery Solemnat1es 

ſuch as this eminently was, they all came together. 

12 * And alſo the Levites which were the ſingers ; all 

F* : Chron. of them of Aſaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their 
F'5- ”- ſons, and their brethren ; being arrayed in white I1nen, 
having cymbals, and pſalteries, and harps, ſtood at the 
- eaſt-end of the altar, and with them an hundred and 
twenty prieſts ſounding with trumpets. ) 

I; It came even to paſs,as the trumpeters and ſingers 
were as one, to make one ſound to be heard 1n prailing 
and thanking the LORD: and when they lifr up their 
yoice with the trumpets, and cymbals, and inſtruments 
of mulick, and praiſed the LORD, ſaying, * For he 5 
good, for his mercy endureth for ever 2 that zher the 
Houſe was filled with a cloud, even the Houſe of the 
LORD ; Ny 

14 So that the prieſts could not ſtand to miniſter by 
reaſon of the cloud : for the glory of the LORD had 
filled the houſe of God. 


CG HA ÞP. VE 


Solomon Bleſſeth the people and praiſeth God, 1——1T. His excellent Prayer, 
wherein he jbeweth the right uſe of the Temple, 12 42. 
Hen * ſaid Solomon «, The LORD hath faid that 
8.12,&C. he would dwell in the * thick darkneſs. 
*Lev.16 2- *, This whole Chapter for the Subſtance, and almoſt all the Words 
Exod. 20. of jt, are explained in.the Notes on 1 Kings 8. 
woe. 2 But I have built an Houſe of habitation for thee, 
and a place for thy dwelling for ever. 

2 And the king turned his face, and bleſſed the whole 
congregation of Iſrael, ( and all the congregation of 
Iſrael ſtood ) 

' 4 And he ſaid, Bleſſed be the LORD God of Iſrael, 

who hath with his hands fulfilled ehat which he ſpake 
with his mouth co my father David, ſaying, 

| 5 Siacethe day that Tbroughe forth my people out of 

the land of Egypt, I' choſe no city among all the tribes 
of Iſrael to build an Houſe in, that my name might be 
there, neither choſe I any man to be *a ruler overmy 
people Iſrael : 

6 But I have choſen Jeruſalem, that my name might 
be there, and have choſen David to be over my people 
Iſrael, 

7 Now * it was in the heart of David my father, to 
build an houſe for the name of the LORD God of Iſrael. 

'.  $ But the LORDſaidto David my father, Foraſmuch 
as it was in thine heart to build an Houſe for my name, 
thou didfſt well in that it was in thine Heart: 

9 Norwithſtanding, thou ſhalt not build the Houſe, 
butthy ſon which ſhall come forth out of thy loins, he 
ſhall build the Houſe for my name. | 

' xo The LORD therefore hath performed his word 

that he hath ſpoken : for I am riſen up in the room of 
David my father, andam ſet on the throne of Iſrael, as 
the LORD promiſed, and have built the Houſe for the 
name of the LORD God of [{rael ; 

it Andin ithave I put the ark, wherein is the cove- 
nant of the LORD, that he made with the children of 
Iſrael. 

12 And he ſtood before the altar of the LORD, in 
the preſence of allthe congregation of Iſrael, and ſpread 
forth his hands ; 

13 ( For Solomon had made a brazen ſcaffold, of 
five cubirs f long, and five cubits broad, and three 

* Feb. zhe cubits high, and had ſet in the midſt of F the court; 
length and upon ithe ſtood, and kneeled down upon his knees 
thereef,$C- before all the congregation of Ifracl, and ſpread forth 
T _ his hands toward Heaven ) 
— 14 And faid, OLORD God of Iſrael, * there is no 
God like thee in Heaven, nor in the earth ; which 
keepeſt covenant, and ſheweſt mercy unto thy ſervants, 
that walk before thee with all their Heart. 

15 Thou which haſt kept with thy ſervant David my 
father, that which thou haſt promiſed him, and ſpakeſt 
with thy mouth,and haſt fulfilled iz with thine hand, as 
it is this day. 

», Gm: 26 Now therefore, O LORD God of Iſrael, keep 
Hos 2. with thy ſervant David my father, that which thou haſt 
' « Kings 2: promiſed him, ſaying, * | There ſhall not fail thee a 
4- &6, 12. man in my fight to fit upon the throne of Iſrael ; yet ſo, 
t Heb: z #bat thy children take heed to their way to walk in my 
| Fhere ſo? law, as thou haſt walked before me. | 
be cus of 17 Now then, O LORDGod of Ifrael, let thy word 
Pal. 132. be verified which thou haſt ſpoken unto thy ſervant 
*Cha 'Þ & David. : '1 

# 18 ( Butwill Godin very deed dwell with men on 


PC. 13.6. 


+ Kings 


or place 0 
help. 

* Exod. 
15. It. 
DEUt. 3.24, 


Iſa. 66+ 1. 
A8s 7:49. the earth ? * Behold, Heaven, and the Heaven of Heayens 


EE WIHRONTITCLIE S. 


cher they hays carcied them captives, and pray toward 6ar!: 


Chap. YI, 
cannot contain thee ; how much leſs this houſe which 
I have built ? ) 

19 Have reſpe& therefore to the prayer of thy ſer- 
vant, and to his ſupplication, O LORD my God, to 
hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy ſervant 
prayeth before thee : | 

20 That thine eyes may be open upon this Houſe day 
and night, upon the place whereof thou hait ſaid, that 
thou wouldſt put thy Name there, to hearken unto the 
prayer, which thy ſervant prayeth || towards this place. q 

21 Hearken therefore unto the ſupplication of thy :4; 
ſervant, and of thy people Ifrael, which they ſhall 
7 make towards this place : hear thou from thy dwel- 
ling place, ever from Heaven, and when thou heareft | Heb. 
| forgive. IO, 

22 If a man ſin againſt his neighbour, f and an oath favorrajt, 
be laid upon him, to make him ſwear, and the oath % Gr. ' 
come bofore thine altar in this Houſe : As 
23 Then hear thou from Heaven, and do, and a» Neve 
judge thy ſervants by requiting the wicked, by recom- kim. * 
penting his way upon his own head, and by juſtifying 
the righteous, by giving him according to his righte- 
oultnels, 

24 And if thy people Iſrael |] be put to the worſe || o- ;, 
before the enemy, becauſe they have ſinned againſt Sniza, 
thee, and ſhall recurn and confeſs thy Name, and 
pray, and make ſupplication before thee |] in this || Or, 
Houſe : Brea 

25 Then hear thou from the Heavens, and forgive 
the ſin of thy people Iſrael, and bring them again un- 

- = land which thou gaveſt to them, and to their 
athers. 


r, ty 
} 
Piace, 


Y 


CDaang 


26 When the * Heaven is ſhut up, and there is no * : King - 


rain, becauſe they have ſinned againſt thee ; yet if they 7+ " 
pray towards this place, and confeſs thy name and turn 
from their ſin when thou doſt afli& them : 
27 Then hear thou from Heaven, and forgive the 
fin of thy ſervants, and of thy people Ifrael, when 
chou haſt taught them the good way, wherein they 
ſhould walk ; and ſend rain upon thy land which thou 
halt given unto thy people for an inheritance. 
28 If there * be dearth in the land, if there be », ., 
peſtilence, if there be blaſting, or mildew, locuſts, or © b 
caterpillars; if their enemies beſiege them Þ in the cities + He, ; 
of their land ; whatſoever ſore or whatſoever fickneſs thelad sf 
there be ; theirgate, 
29 Then what prayer,or what ſupplication ſoever ſhal 
be made of any man, or of all thy people Iſrael, when 
every one ſhall know his own ſore, and his own grief, 
and ſhall ſpread forth his hands || in this Houſe: 1 Os; 
30 Then hear thou from Heaven thy dwelling-place, wow 
and forgive, and render unto every man according be: 
unto all his ways, whoſe Heart thou knoweſt : ( for 
thou onely * knoweſt the Hearts of the children of * 
men ) 
x That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, 
+ ſo long as they hve Þ in the land which thou gaveſt 
unto our fathers. | althe dey 
32 Moreover, concerning the ſtranger, * which is wii. 
not of thy people Iſrael, bur is come froma far countrey f He. 
for thy great Names fake, and thy mighty hand, and 7". ” 


. 8 ** of the land, 
ſtretched out-arm ; if they come and pray in this ? Joha 12, 


Houſe : | 20. 
33 Then hear thou from, the Heavens, even from 38%, 

thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the 

ſtranger calleth to thee for ; that all people of the earth 

may know thy Name, and fear thee, as 49h thy people 

Urael, and may know that | this Houſe which I have , jy, 

built, is called by chy Name, thy name 
. 24 If thy people go out to war againſt their enemies cald uy 

by the way that thou ſhalt ſend them, and they pray # hoſe 

anto thee toward this city which thou haſt choſen, and 

the Houſe which I have built for thy Name : 


35 Then hear thou from the Heavens their prayer 
and their ſupplication, and maintain their || cauſe, !" 

36 If they ſin againſt thee, ( for there is * no man go_ 
which ſinneth not) and thou be angry with them and Jam... 
deliver them over before ther enemies,and + they carry 1Job. '4 
them away captives unto a land far off or near ; ant 

37 Yet, if they + bethink themſelves in the land = hes 
whetherthey are carried captive,and turnand pray unto ;privs 
theein thelandof their captivity, ſaying, We have ſinned, cr) 
we have done amiſs, and have dealt wickedly ; | Hb 

38 If they return to thee with all their heart, and dr bi 
with all their ſonl, in the land of their captivity, whe- 7» chr 


1Chr. 24 
28. 9, 


+ Heb; 


|| Or,4gh, 


heir 


| 


gift 


"Ch 
413 


VI, 


en, 


ſ, 
rag 


| Kinoy 


m=r 


h, 20.9, 


Heb. is 
eld if 
eir gates, 


_- 
ward: thy 
uſe: 


1Chr. 24 
8.9, 


" He 
poy th! fart 
f the land, 
John 12, 


"EN 
Ads 8:27, 


f Heb. 
thy name 
called pt 
this buſe 


captivts 
carry the 
away. 

+ Heb, 
bring ba 
to thut 
heart 


J jt $1.9907 


Fs, 
ww 


Up2P- VII. || LL 
their land which thou gavaſt unto their f.t'1ers, and 
toward the city which thou haſt choſen, and toward the 
Houſe which I have built for thy Name : 

29 Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy 
dwelling-plece, tlieir prayer and their ſupplications, 
and maintain their | cauſe, and forgive thy people 
which have ſinned againſt thee. | 

40 Now, my God, let (I beſeech thee) thine eyes 
be open, and Jet thine ears be attent | unto the prayer 
that is made inthis place. 

41 Now * therefore ariſe, O LORD God, into thy 
'261.132- reſting place 6, thou and the ark c of thy ſtrength 4 : let 

' thy prieſts, O LORD God, be clothed with ſalvation e, 
and let thy ſaints rejoyce in goodneſs f. 

b O thou that ſitteſt in the Heavens, ariſe from the Throne of 
thy Glory, and come down into this place, which thou haſt appoint- 
ed for thy conſtant and fixed Habitation, from which thou wilſt 
not remove, as formerly thou haſt done, from place to place. c z. e- 
Thou in the Ark. 4 Which is the Sign and Inſtrument of thy great 
power put forth from time to time on the behalf of thy people. 
e 7. &. Let them be adorned and encompaſſed on every fide with thy 
Prote&ion and Benediftion. For he ſeems rather to ſpeak of the Sal- 
vation afforded to the Prieſts, than of that which by Gods bleſſing 
on the prieſts Labours; is conferred upoa the People ; this being a 
Prayer for Gods bleſſing upon the whole Community, conſiſting 
of Prieſts and People. fr. e- Let them have cauſe of Rejoycing | 
and Thankſgiving for the EffteRs of thy Goodneſs imparted unto 
them» | ; 

42 OLORD God, turn not away the face of thine 
"13 55. anointed f : remember * the mercies of David thy fer- 
t vant T. 


Or, 
170e 


4 cb. fo 


} 


promiled to David aid to his Houſe for ever. 


CHAP. FI 


Fire from Heaven and a Glery in the Femple witneſs the Divine Acceptance : 
the People worſhip, 1 3. Solomons ſolemn Sacrifice, 4 7. having 
kept the Feaſt of Tabernacles ; and the feat of che Dedication of the Altar, 
ke diſmiſſeth the People, 8 11; God appeareth to Solomon : promiſeth 


his favour on obedience : el/e threatneth grievous Judgments, 12-22. 
\ T Ow * when Solomon had made an endof praying, 
{ 'r Kings N the *firecame downtrom heavena, and conſumed 
| a , the burnt-offering, and the ſacrifices ; and the glory of 
kg6.21. the LORD 5 filled the Houſe. 
a In token of Gods Acceptance of his Prayer. See on Lev. g. 24. 


”_ 1 Kings 18.38. 64i,e. The Cloud, which was the Sign of Gods 
glorious and gracious Preſence, : | 
. 2 And the prieſts could not enter into the houſe of 
the LORD c, becauſe the glory of the LORD had fil- 
led the LORDS houſe. 
c Compare Exod. 495. 35. | 
3 And when all the children of Iſrael ſaw how the 
fire came down, andthe glory of the LORD upon the 
houſe 4, they bowed themſelves with their faces to the 
ground upon the pavement, and worſhipped, and praiſ- 
'Cup, Ed the LORD ſaying, * For bezs good, for his mercy en- 
$13, dureth for evers 


4 The Cloud firſt came down upon the Houſe, and' then entred 
into the Honſe, and was ſeen both within it by the Prieſts, and 
without it by the people. 

4 Then the king and all the people offered ſacrifices 
before the LORD. 


5 And king Solemon offered a ſacrifice of twenty 


thouſand ſheep : ſo the king and all the people dedi- 
cated the houſe cf God. 
\1Chron 6 * And the prieſts waited on their offices, the Le- 
5,16. vites alſo with inſtruments of mufick * of the LORD, 
b Chron. which David the king had made to praiſe the LORD, 
'®. becauſe his mercy endureth forever ; when David praiſ- 
-ro8D. ed || by cheir miniftery e + and the prieits ſounded 
tleb: by trumpets before them, and all Iſrael ſtood, 
rhend. &« For David compeſed the Pſalms or Hymns, 1 Chron. 16, 7. and 


appointed them to be ſung by the Levites, and Inſtrumental Muſick 
to be joyned to their Voices. 


7 Morcover, Solomon hallowed the middle of the 
court f that was before the houſe of the LORD: for 
there he offered burnt offerings, and the fatofthe peace- 
offerings, becauſe the brazen altar which Solomon had 
made, was not able to receive the burat offerings, and 
the meat cfterings, and the fat. 

F Of this and v. 8, 9, 16. ſee the Notes on 1 Kings 8. 64, &c. 

8 Alſo at that time Solomon kept the feaſt ſeven 
days, and all Iſrael with him, a very great congrega- 
tion, from the entering in of Hamath, unto * the river 
of Egypt, 

9 And in the eight day they made Þ a ſolemn aſſem- 
bly : for they kept the dedication of the altar ſeven 
days, and the feaſt feven days, le 


"oh, I3, 


} Heb. .4 
Firaine, 


H R ONITC LE 


fand merry in heart for the goodneſs that the LORD 
had ſhewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Iſrael 


| and my judgments : 


 Ifrael. 


and two thouſand 'oxen, and an hundred and twenty | 


Chap. VII*, WW 
10 Andontherthree and twentieth day ofthe ſeventh Wl 
month, he ſent the people away. unto their tents, glad I 
1481 
Af 
his people. | | j| 
1: Thus * Solomon finiſhed the houſe of the LORD, « , King? | 
and the kings houſe: and all that came into Solomons 9. 1, &c. || 
heart tomaks in the houſe of the LORD, and in his Ul 
own houſe, he proſperouſly effeted, . 
g See on 1 Kings9. 1, 2, | | 
12 And the LORD appeared to Solomon by night; 
and ſaid unto him, I have heardthy prayer, * and have *nqe. 
choſen this place to my ſelf for an houſe of ſacrifice. 
123 IfT ſhut up heaven that there be no rain, or if 
I command the Locufts h co devour the land, orifIſend 
peſtilence among my people : : 
þ i.e. Uſe my Authority and Power over them to. cauſe them 
to do ſo. A Metaphor elſewhere uſed in reference to unreaſonable 
Creatures, as 1 Kings 17. 4. Amosg, 3. who are not properly capable 
of a Command, or of Obedience. 
I4 If my people f which are called by my name, 
ſhal humble themſelves and pray, and ſeek my face,and |, j 
as : , ſpon whom 
turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from ,;, ,,me is. 


v8 ai and will forgive their fin, and will heal their cated. | 
and. 


1MAF 
Wl! 1 
TWP 
\ 
.\| 
'] 


s. RN 


IN 


0 
it q 

: iv . 
" 


+ Heb:. .|\| 


il 


if 
i : 
. 
[ | 
i! / 
we | 
k 
Ft ' 
b 5 : 
( 


. R . , * Chap: 
tent | unto the prayer that is made in this place 54. 6. pon. ih 
: Or, That ſha be made in or towards this place : for he ſpeaks of + Heb. To\\Þ 


give to the prayers which ſhall be made he prayer | 


; . place. 
16 For now have * T choſen, and fanaified this houſe"... 
6 


&, that my name may be therefor ever : and mineeyes ” 
and mine heart ſhall be there perpetually. os 


k Of this Verſe and the reſt of this Chapter ſee the Notes "on 
1 Kings 9. 3, &C+ | 


17 And as for thee, if thou wilt walkbefore me, a* 
David thy father walked, and do according to all that 
I have commanded thee, and ſhalt obſerve my ſtatutes 


18 Then will I eſtabliſh the throne of thy kingdom, 
according asI have covenanted with David thy father, |} 
ſaying, * + There ſhall not fail thee a man 7 be culerin , Chaps || 

6. 1G... - || 

19 * Butif yetutn away, and forſake my ſtatutes ahd + Hebs 1 | 
my commandments, which I have ſet before you, and *#re 4% i 
all goand ſerve other gods, and worſhip them: = — "J 
20 Then will I pluck chem up by the roots out ofmy * Ley. 26.ll 
land which I have given them; - and this houſe which I 14; 33: - | 
have ſanctified for my name, will I caſt out out of ny Deur: 2#- i 
ſight, and will make it 70 be a proverb, and a by-word *5: 3% 31} 
among all nations. | | 

21 And thishouſe whichis high, ſhall be an aftoniſh- __ - | 
ment to every one tuat paſleth by it ; ſo that he ſhal ſay, * Dene.29 
* Why hath the LORD done this unto this land, and 24- | 
untothis houſe ! | ' Jer: 22: 8g 

22 Andit he anſwered, Becauſe they forſook. the 7 | 
LORD God of their fathers which brought them forth 
out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, 
and worfhipped them, and ſerved them ; therefore hath 
| he brought all this evil upoathers 


CHAP, VII. 


Solomons Buildings, 1. 6. The Heathen who remained in the Land he 
maketh Tributaries : but the Ijraelites Rulers, 7 11. Hy yearly 
folemn Sacrifices : he appointeth to the* Priefls and Levites theit plates, 
12 16, The Navy fetcheth Geld from Ophir 17, 18. 


Nd * it came to paſs ( at the end of twenty years, : _ :: -;| 
wherein Solomon had built the houſe of the * 1 Kings} 
LORD, and his own houſe.') TEE a 
2 That the cities which Huram had reſtored to Solo- | 
mona, Solomon built them, and cauſed the children of 
Iſrael to dwell there. | 


#s Which Solomon gave to Hiram, who not being pleaſed with 
them, 1 Kings 9+ 12, 13. here returns them to him again: 


3 And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and pre- 
vailed againſt it. ES, | 

4 And he built Tadmor in the wilderneſs b, and all 
the ſtore- cities, which he built in Hamath. 

b Of this and the following Verſes, ſee on 1 Kings g. 18. &c. 


5 Alſo he built Beth-horonthe upper, and Beth-horon 
the nether, fenced cities, with walls, gates and bars ; 

6 And Baalath, and all the ffore-cities that Solomon ns 6 0 
had, and all the chariot-cities, . and the cities of che deſired to ; 
Horſemen, and Þ# all that Solomon defired to build, 


# Heb. A : 
the aefire of i 


Solomon , ll 


IL 14 2H|£A 


aap. IX. * 


all the land of his dominion. 7 

4 +7 4s for all the people that were left of the Hittites, 
and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, 
and the Jebufites, which-were not of Ifrael, 

8 But of their children who were left after them in the 
land, whom the children of Iſrael conſumed not, them 
did Solomon make to pay tribute unto this day. 

9 But of the children of Iſrael did Solemon make no 
ſervants for his work : but they were men of war, and 
chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and 
horſemen. 
| 10 And theſe were the chief of king Solomons officers, 
eveu two hundred and fifty that bare rule over the peo- 
ple. 

it And Solomon * brought up the daughter of 

' Pharaoh out of the city of David, unto the houſe that 
he had builc for her : for he faid, My wife ſhall not 
dwell in the houſe of David king of Iſrael, becauſe zhe 
places are f holy whereunto the ark of the LORD hath 
COMms c. 

c Not becauſe every place where once the Ark came was thereby 
conſecrated to God, and might not after the Ark was gone be put 
to any common uſe ; for then both the houſe of Obed-edom and 
all other places where the Ark either reſted or paſſ:d were made 
Holy thereby, and unlawful for Men to dwell in ; but either 7. 
Becauſe ſhe was a Woman, and attended by many other Women, 
who beſides the common Pollutions of all, are ſubje& to many and 
frequent Ceremonial Pollutions peculiar to their Sex, and either 
ſhe, or at leaſt many of her followers might be Heathens at this 
time ; and therefore he thought ir indecent that ſuch perſons ſhould 
come as it were in Gods ftead, and ſucceed him in the place where 
he had dwelt, Or, 2. He ſpeaks not of the time when the Ark 
was gone, but whilſt it was there ; and theſe words contain a Rea- 
ſon not ofthe more remote words, why he now brought her up thirher, 
but of the words immediately preceding, why he built this Houſe 
for her, becauſe the Ark was now in the Houſe of David, which 
therefore ought to be kept pure and free from the very Danger and 


Appearance of Pollution. : 
I2 Then Solomon offered burnt-offerings unto the 


LORD, on the altar ofthe LORD, which he had built 
before the porch. 

{ © Exod« 13 Even after a certain rate every * day, offering 
29+38- according to the commandment of Moſes, on the 
| ſabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the ſolemn 
»* Exod. feaſts, * three times in a year, eves in the feaſt of un- 
23-24: leavened bread, in the feaſt of weeks, and in the feaſt 
—_—_ 16. of tabernacles. . 
Kr 14 And he appointed according to the orderof David 
| *xChr.24. hisfatber, the * courſes of the prieſts to their ſervice, and 
"Ts * the Levites to their charges, to praiſe and miniſter 
*1Cbr:25 before the prieſts, as the dury of every day required : 
*", Chr-g, ths * porters alſo by their courſes at every gate : for 
| 27.826 1. | ſo had David the man of God d commanded. 

+ Heb. _ d: e A Prophet inſpired by Godin theſe Matters, whoſe Com- 


So was the mands therefore are the Commands of God. 
command 15 And they: departed not from the commandment 
* "ga v. of the king, unto the prieſts and Levices, concerning 
BT any matter, or concerning the treaſures. 
© x6 Nowallthe work of Solomon was prepared e unto 
the day of the foundation of the houſe of the LORD, 
_and-until it was finiſhed : ſo the Houſe of God was 
perfected. _ 
e All the Materials were procured, and in all points ſquared and 
| fitted and compleated before hand. . 
17 Tten went Solomon to Ezion-geber f, and to 
| Eloth, ar the ſea-fide in the land of Edom. 
F Of this and the next Verſe, ſee the Notes on 1 Kings 9.26, &c, 
© "18. And Hucam ſent him by the hand ofhis ſervants, 
ſhips, and ſervants that had knowledge of che fea, and 
they wenr with the ſervants of Solomon to Ophir, and 
took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and 


| broughe them to king Solomon. 


_—=7 OCH IMP. IX. 
' The: Quaen of Sheba wiſiteth Solomon, and admireth hu wiſdom: giveth and 
'_Teceiveth preſents, 1 '2, Solomons Gold, his Targets,13 16. The 
Throne of Foory, 17 19. 'Hu veſſels, his preſents, 20 24. His 
char iots and horſes ;, his tributes, his reign and death, 25——31. 

* ; 1... A ND * when the Queen of Sheba heard of the fame 
r Kings ab . 
bo. », Gee. of Solomon, ſhe came to prove Solomon & with 
Mart 12.43-- hard queſtions atJeruſalem, with a very great company, 
Luk.11.3i- and camels that bare ſpices, and gold in abundance, and 
precious ſtones : and when ſhe was come to Solomon, ſhe 

communed with: bim of all that was in her heart. 
a Ainvwaſt all this Chapter is contained in 1 Kings 10. where it is 
explained. : : 

2 And Solomon told her all her queſtions : and there 
was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her 
not, 

L 2 And when the queen ofSheba had ſeen the wiſdom 
of Solomon, and thg houſg that he had built, 


*, Kings 
3.1. & 7 


Heb. 
S6 oLneſs © 


] Or, Elath 
Deut. 2. 8; 


EF IFC L ESC 


build in Jeruſalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout | 


| ſervants of Huram : 


-”.. 


4 And the meat of his table, and the ſitting of his 
ſervants, and the attendance of his miniſters, and their 
apparel, his || cup-bearers alſo, and their apparel, ang! Or, 
his aſcent, by which he went up into the houſe of the '*%: 
LORD, there was no ſpirit in her. 

5 And ſhe ſaid to the king, Ir was a true + report 
which T heard in mine own land, of {| thine as, and w»,;. 
of thy wiſdom. || Or, 

6 Howbeit, I believed not their words, until I came ſajings, 
and mine eyes had ſeen it: and behold, the one half of 
the greatneſs of thy wiſdom was not told me : for thou 
exceedeſt the fame that Theard. 

7 Happy are thy men, and happy are theſe thy ſer- 
vants, which ſtand continually before thee, and hear 
thy wiſdom. 
| 8 Blefled be the LORD thy God, which delighted 
in thee to ſet thee on his throne, zo be king for the LORD 
b thy God 7 becauſe thy God loved Ifrael, to eſtablif 
them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them 
wo ſadgaont and juſtice. : 

z.e. In the Lords Name and Stead, both i 
Kings haveand hold their Kingdoms from Goa” View 
gerents and Deputies; and in a ſpecial manner, becauſe he ſat in 
Gods own Throne, and Ruled over Gods Peculiar People, and didin 
a ſingularand eminent manner maintain the Honour and Worſhip 
of God in his Land and in the Eyes of all the World beſides. 

9 Andſhegave the king an hundred and twenty talents 
of gold, and of ſpices great abundance, and precious 
ſtones: neither was there any ſuch ſpice as the queen of 
Sheba gave king Solomon. 

10 And the ſervants alſo of Huram, and the ſervants 
of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought 
algum-trees, and precious ſtones. 

11 And the king madeof the algum-trees ||+ terriſes , 
to the Houſe of che LORD, and to the kings palace, . H 
and harps and pſalteries for ſingers ! and there were þ;; _—_ 
noeneluch ſeen beforein the land of Judah. Gr ou 

12 And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba 
all her deſire, whatſoever ſhe asked, belides that which 
ſhe had brought « unto the king : So ſhe turned, and 
went away to her own land, ſhe and her ſervants 


c Beſides what he gave her of his Royal Bounty, as it is expreſſed, 


1 Kings 10. 13, which was in compenſation for her Preſents, as is 
here noted. 


13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in 
one year, was fix hundred and threeſcore-and fix talents 
of gold 3 
14 Beſides that which chapmen and merchants brought: 
and all the kings of Arabia, and ||. governours of the || Or, 
countrey, brought gold and ſilver to Solomon. Captain 
Is And king Solomon made two hundred targets of 
beaten gold : fix hundred heels of beaten gold went to 
one target. | 
16 And three hundred ſhields made he of beaten gold: 
three hundred ſhekels of gold went to one ſhield : and 
the king put them in the houſe of the forreſt of Leba- 
non. 
i7 Moreover, the king madea great throne of ivory, 
and overlaid it with pure gold. 
18 And there were ſix ſteps to the throne with a 
foot-ſtool of gold, which were faſtened to the throne, 
and i ſtayes on each ſide of the fitting-place, and two t Heb 
lions ſtanding by the ſtayes. _— 
19 Andtwelve lions ſtood there, onthe one fide, and 
on the other, upon the lix ſteps, There was not the 
like made in any kingdom. 
20 Andallthedrinking veſſels of king Solomon were of 
gold, and all the veſſeis ofthe houſe of the forreſt of Leba- 
NON, were of | pure gold : || nene were of ſilver ; it was + Heb: 
not any thing accounted of in the days of Solomon, ut _ 
21 For the kings ſhips went to Tarſhiſh with the || Or, rr! 
every three years once came the 24/7 
ſhips of Tarſhiſh bringing gold and ſilver, || ivory, and 7 "og 
apes, and peacocks. elephants 
22 And king Solomon paſſed all the kings of the ww. 
earth in riches, and wiſdom. 
23 And all the kings of the earth ſoughtthe + pre-, ,, 
ſence of Solomon, to hear his wiſdom that God.put in EO 
. 3; fate 
his heart, 
24 And they broughtevery man his preſent, veſſels ot 
ſilver, and veſſels of gold, and raymenc, harneſs, and 
ſpices, horſes, and mules, a rate year by year. . 
25 And Solomon * had four thouſand ſtalls 4d for * i Kings 
horſes and chariots, and twelve thouſand horſemen 4: 26 
whom he beſtowed in the chariot-cities, and with the A k4 
king at Jeruſalem. 
4 To wit, greater Stalls, in each of which were ten Stalls, in all 


49009 Stalls as it is I Kings 4. 26, where {ce the Notes. 
. 26 * And 


T Heb, 


Or, faji;, 
b 


Chip, tx. Þ 


rms de 


% 


r, fas, 
Heb, 

2 ways, 
s alcents, 


Or, 
pt ailile 


+ Hebs 
pandis 


f Heb: 
(hat up. 

|| Or, thr! 
Was 10 flor 
In them. 

| Or, 
elep2a8ts 
teeth. 


+ Heb, 


fact. 


"Chap 


K:-.TF, 
3 F 


$i 10. 
That i 


y LIE 
THANE _ 


King:1 


1, &C- 


f Heb, 


bt Kin 
29, 


*(þ12:15« the 
& 13* 22- 


+4 


25 * And he reigned over all the kings, * from the 
|| river,cven unto the land of the Philytines, and to the 
border of Egypt. | | 
. 27 And the king 7 made filver in Jeruſalem as ſtones, 
; and cedar-trees made he as rhe Sycamore-trees, that 


X. 


+ Heb. oye in the low plains, in adundance. | 
OM 28 * _—_—— var. agg Solomon horſes out 
6 Ig 7oVDt. and out of ail lands. | 

oa. Of = { 5 the reſt of the * as of Solomen firſt and 
© ;Kivg: laſt, are they not written in the | book of Nathan the 
1 A prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, 
pony ind in the viſions of *Iddo the ſeer e, againſt Jeroboam 


ſon of Nebat ? 

+ Mentioned alfo chap.12.15. ſuppoſed to be the ſame who 1s cal- 
led Obed, ch.15: 1. This, and the other Prophers mentioned, were 
alſo HHiſrorians,and wrote ſome Annals or Hiſtories of their times; 
our of which theſe ſacred and Canonical Books were taken, either 
by theſe, or other Prophets. ; 

20 And Solemon reigned in Jeruſalem over all Iſrael 
forty years. . 

And Solomon ſlept with his fathers ; and he was 
buried in the city of David his fathers, and Rehoboam 
his ſon reigned in his ſtead, | 
E HARP. © 


Rehoboam made king. The Iſraelites by Feroboam requeſt a relaxation, 
1———5. Rehoboom refuſmg the old mens counſel, by the advice of young 
men, anſwercth them roughly, 6 15. Ten tribes revolting, kill 
Hamoram, and make Rehoboam to flee, 16 19. 

ND * Rehoboam went to Shechem a: for to She- 

chem were all Iſrael come to make him king, 

5 The Contents of this Chapter are in 1 Kizgs 12, where ſee the 
Notes. 

2 And it came to paſs when Jeroboam the ſon of 
Nebat, ( who was in Egypt, whither he had fled from 
the preſence of Solomon the king ) heard ze, that Jero- 
boam returned out of Egypt ; | 

2 And they ſent b and called him. So Jeroboam and 
all Iſrael came, and ſpake to Rehoboam, ſaying, 

b Or, For ( as that Particle is off uſed, as hath been noted before) 
they had ſent, &c. So this is the Reaſon why he returned, as was 
faid, v. 2+ : 

4 Thy father made our yoke grievous, now there- 
fore eaſe thou ſomewhat the grievous ſervitude of thy 
father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and 
we will ſerve thee. : 

5 And he ſaid unto them, come again unto me af- 
ter three days. And the people departed. 

6 And king Rehoboam took counſel with the old 
men that had ſtood before Solomon his father, while 
he yet lived, ſaying, What counſel give ye me, to re- 
turn anſwer to this people ? | 

7 And they ſpake unto him, ſaying, Tf cthou be kind 
to this people, and pleaſe them, and ſpeak good words 
to them, they will be thy ſervants for ever, 

3 But he forſook the counſel which the old men gave 
him, and took counſel with the young men that were 
brought up with him, that ſtood before him, 

9 And he ſaid unto them What advice give ye, that 
we may recur an{wer to this people, which have ſpo 
ken to me, ſaving, Eaſe ſomewhat the yoke that thy 
father did put upon us ? 

10 And the young men that were brought up with 
him, ſpake unto him, faying, Thus ſhalt thou anſwer 
the peovle that ſpake unto thee, ſaying, Thy father 
made our yoke heavy,but make thou ix ſomewhat ligh- 
ter for us: thus ſhalt thou ſay unto them, My lictle 
fger {hall be thicker than my fathers loins. 

Iz For whereas my father + put a heavy yoke 
upon you, I will put more to your yoke : my father 
cnaſtiſed you with whips, bur I will chaſtije you with 
{corpions. | 

12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehobo- 
am on the third day, as the king bade, ſaying, Come 

again to me on the third day. 

12 And the king anſwered them roughly, and king 
Rehoboam forſook the counſel of the old men : 

14 And anſwered chem after the advice of the young 
men, ſaying, My facher made your yoke heavy, but 1 
will add thereto: my father chaſtiſed you with whips, 
but I will cha{tiſe you with ſcorpions. 

15 So the king hearkened not unto the people, for 
the cauſe was of God, that the LORD might perform 
l.his word which he ſpake by the * hand of Ahijah the 

Shilonite, to Jeroboam the ſon of Nebart. 

16 And when all Iſrael ſaw that the king would not 
hearken unto them, the people anſwered che king, ſay- 
ing, What portion have we in David? and we have 
none inheritance in the fon of Jeſle : every man to 
your tents,O Iſrael : and now David, ſee to thine own 
houſe. So all Lirael went to their tents, 


2, 


H R © N FF C Ln 


| 


Chap, 


17 But as for the children of Iſrael that dwelt in the 
cicies of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them, 


18Then king Rehoboam ſent Hadoram that was over 


to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jeruſalem, 
19 And Ifrael rebelled againſt the houſe of Dayid #4 hci} 


unto this day, 
CHAP. XL 


Rehoboam raiſmg an Army to [ubdue Iſrael, is forbidd:n by Shemaiah 
1——4. He ftrengtheneth his Kingdom with Forts and Proviſion, 5<-=12. 
The Prieſts and Levites, and ſuch as feared God, forſaken by Feroboam, 
who turne:h Idolater, ſtrengthens the Kingdom of Judah, 13—17., The 
IWives and Children of Rehoboam, 18 23» 

ND * when Rehoboam was come to Jeruſalem.he 
gathered of the houſe of Judah and Benjamin 

2 an hundred and fourſcore thoufand choſen mer which 

were warriours, to fight againſt Iſrael, that he might 

bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam. 


4 _ this Verſe, and wv. 2, 3, 4. ſee the Notes on 1 Kings, 12. 
21, &C. 


2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemajah the 
man of God, ſaying, 

2 Speak unto Rehoboam the ſon of Solomon king 
of Judah, and to all Iſrael in Judah and Benjamin, ſay- 


ing, 

4 Thus faith the LORD, Ye ſhall not go up, nor 
fight againſt your brethren : return every man to his 
houſe ; for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed 
the words of the LORD, and returned from going a- 
gainſt Jeroboam. | 

5 And Rehoboam dwelt in Jeruſalem, and builc ci- 
ties b for defence in Judah. 

b i, e. Repaired, and enlarged, and fortified them : as building is 
oft uſed in Scripture, as hath been formerly proved : For theſe Ci- 
ties, or divers of them, were built before, as appears from 5oſ.io. 
10. & 12. 15. & 15. 24, 33, 35, 58: & 19: 42. 

6 He built even Beth-ichem, and Eram,and Tekoa, 

7 And Beth-zur, and Shoco, and Aduliam, 

8 And Gath, and Mareſha, and Ziph, 

9 And Adoraim, Lachiſh, And Azekah, 

io And Zorah, and Ajalon, and Hebron, which 
are in Judah and in Benjamin, fenced cities. 

11 And he fortified the ſtrong holds.a:d put captains 
in them, and ſtore of victuals, and oy), and wine. 

12 And in every ſeveral City c he put ſhields, and 
ſpears, and made them exceeding ſtrong, having Ju- 
dah and Benjamin on this ſide. 

c To wit, fo fortified, as he ſaid wv: r1. 

13 And the Prieſts and the Levites that were in all 
Iſrael, f reforted to him our of all their coaſts. 

14 ( For the. Levites left their * ſuburbs, and their ſented 


roboam and his ſons had caſt them off from execuring * as 
che prieſts office unto the LORD 4. . FR0R 

4 They would not ſuffer them to inſtru& and affiſt the Iſraelites ic 
in the Worſhip and Service of God, nor to go up to Jeruſalem to 
Worſhip in their Courſes : and thele Prieſts would not joyn with 
_ ” "_ bes "oa __ Faves, as eas any delired and com= 
manded to do ; and therefor 2Y WI r ; 
i and Poſleſſions WO Code Pry Y OO IO 

15 And he ordained him pricſts for the high places 
and for the devils, and for the calves e which he had 
made. ) 

e Or, for the high places, both for the Devils (i, e. the Baals, or falſe 
gods, which d:vers of his People Worthipped, whom he permit= 
ted and encouaged to do ſo, giving them liberty to do any thin 
but ro ſerve God at Feruſalem ) ana for the Calves. So he ; Hove, 
ewo ſorts of High-places, ſome ſor Baal, and ſome for rhe True 
God, whom he preteaded and would be thought ro worſhip, in 
and by the Calves. 

16 Anr:d after them out of all the Tribes of Ifrael, 
\uch as let their heart to ſeek the LORD God of Ifra- 
el f, came to Jeruſaiem, to ſacrifice unto the LORD 
God of their fathers. 

Fe f Such as loved and feared Gad in truth, and with their whole 
cart. 

17 So they ſtrengthened the kingdom of Judah, and 
madeRehoboam the fon of Solomon ſtrong three years: 
for three years they walked in the way of David and 
Solomon g. 

g This honourable menticn of Selomon, as a Pattern of Piety,is 2 


conſiderable Evidence of his true Repentance before his death : of 
which ſee more on 1 Kings 11. 43. 


18 And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter 
of Jerimoth to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab, .. __ 
the fon of Jeſle : _ F_ 


19 Which bare him children ; Jeuſh, and Shamari- 
ah, and Zaham. 

20 And afcer her,he took * Maachah the daughter of 
Abſalom, which bare him Abijah, and Attai, and 
Liza, and Shelomith, 


15: 2» 

She is cal. 
led M (bas 
iah the 
daughter 
of Uriel. 


Chi13:2, 


Me] 21 And 


the tribute, and the chiidren of Iſrael ſtoned .:im with if | 
ſtones, that he died : but king Rehoboam + made ſpeed +4 xxe6: | 
rength {| 


| 


+ Heb.pris | 


poſleflion, and came to Judah and Jeruſalem : for * Je- t#mſclve | 


2, ; 
h;13:9+ | 


: 


ELIT HH Xa 0 


hap. XII. 


Abſalom above all his wives and his concubins: (for he 
cook eighteen wives,and threeſcore concubines,8 begat 
twenty and eight ſons and threeſcore daughters ) 

22 And Rehoboam made Abijah the ſon of Maachah 
the chief,zo be ruler among his brethren 4 : for he thought 
to make him king. | © | 

h he declared him his Succeſſor, & gave him the Dominion over 
his Brethren: wherein (if he was not the Firſt-born.as it ſeems to be 
implyed, becauſe this is mentioned as an Effe& of his Superlative 
Love to his Mother) he tranſgreſſed that Law, Det. 21. 15, 16. un- 
leſs God was pleaſed to diſpence with it at that time. Ln 

23 And he dealt wiſely,& diſperſed 3 of all his chil- 

dren throughout all the countries of Judah and Benya- 
min, unto every fenced city &: and he gave them vict- 
uals in abundance : and deſired F many wives /. 

7 Leſt his other Sons ſhould after his death unite their Counſels 
and Forces together againſt 46jah, he wiſely diſperſed them into 
ſeveral and diſtant Places, and under pretence of honouring them 
with the Government of them, he made them Priſoners in a ſort, 
appointing ſeveral perſons to obſerve their motions, and prevent 
their Combinations. & Aggreeable to their Quality, that their Re- 
ſtraint might be more ealie to them. 7 Either 1. for his Children: 
or rather, 2. for himſelf, by comparing this with v. 21e 


C H A P. XI. 


Rehoboam forſaking the LORD is puniſbed by Shiſhak, 1 4. Shemajah 
reprovech him : He with the Princes repenteth : Is preſerved in hu 
kingdom ; but is ſpoil:d of the treaſures of the temple, and of his royal 
palace, 5 12. His reign and death, and Abijah his ſon is made king, 


13 16. | | 
AN D it came to paſs when Rehoboam had eſtabli- 
ſhed the kingdom, and had ſtrengthened himſelf, 
* he forſook the law of the LORD, and * all Iſrael 
Weglornca: with him. ; 
$ 28:19, 2 And it came to paſs, that in the fifth year « of 
king Rehoboam, Shiſhak king of Egypt came up againſt 
*;Kin14. Jeruſalem ( * becauſe they had tranſgreſled againit the 
24-25- LORD) 
s Preſently after the Apoſtacy of the King and People, which 
was in his fourth year, by comparing this with chap: 11: 17. 

With twelve hundred chariots, and threeſcore 
thouſand horſemen : and the people were without num- 
ber that came with him out of Egypt,the Lubims 6, the 
Sukkiims c, and the Ethiopians d. 

b A People of 4fica bordering upon Egypt : of whom ſee chap:16. 
8. Dan:1i:43- Nah.3.9. c A People living in Tents, as the Word 
ſignifies ; and ſuch there were nor far from-Egypr,both in Afics and 
in Arabia» d Either thoſe beyond Egypr, or the Arabians. 

4 And he took the fenced cities which pertained to 
Tudah, and came to Jeruſalem. 

s Thea came Shemajah the prophet to Rehoboam, 
and fo the princes of Judah,that were gathered together 
to Jeruſalem becauſe of Shiſhak, and ſaid unto chem, 
Thus ſaith the LORD, Ye have forſaken me,and there- 
fore have I alſo left you in the hand of Shilbak, 

6 Whereupon the princes of Ifrael, and the king 
humbled themſelves, and they ſaid, The LORD is 
righteous. , 

7 And when the LORD ſaw that they bumbled 
themſelves e, the word of the LORD came to Shema 
Jah, ſaying, They have humbled themſelves, therefore i 

_ Þ Or,a7iz- will not deftroy them, but I will grant them || {ome de- 
zle while. Jiverance,and my wrath ſhall not be poured out f upo:; 
Jeruſalem by the hand of Shilbak. 

e Which though they did not forcedly, yet God was pleiſed {c 
far to regard it, as to mitigate their Calamity. f I will give ſcme 
ſtop to the courſe of my Wrath, which was ready to be poured 

forth upon them to their urter Deſtruction 

8 Nevertheleſs, they ſhall be his ſervants ; that they 
may know my ſervice,end the ſervice of the kingdoms 
of the countries g. 

£ That they may experimentally know and feel the difference 
between my Yoke and the Yoke of a Forreign and Idolatrous 
Prince, and what Miſchief they have done to themſelves by for- 
ſaking me and my Service. 

9 So Shiſhak king of Egypt came up againſt Jeruſa- 
lem, and took away the treaſures of che houſe of the 
LORD, and the treaſures of the kings houſe þ, he took 
all : he carried away alſo the ſhields of gold, which So- 
lomon had * made. 

þ Upon which condition,and Rehoboam's Submiſſion to him he de- 
livered up to him the fenced Cities of Ju4ab,which he had taken, v, 
4+ But of this, and the two next verſes, ſee on i King: 14: 26, &c. 

To Inſtead of which king Rehoboam made ſhields 
of braſs, and committed them to the hands of the chief 
of the guard,that kept the entrance of the kings houſe 

j 1x And when the king entred into the houſe of the 
LORD. the guard came and fet them,and brought them 
again into the guard-chamber. 

12 And when he humbled himſelf, the wrath of the 
D turned from him, that he would not deſtroy 


t Heb, a 
ulitude 
pf wives, 


* 1 King. 


14: 22+ 


| Or, and 
get im Tu- 
dah there 


21 And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of | 


N ITC LL B-$ 


; Heb. There were good things. The meaning 15 either 1: Though 
there were many Corruptions in Judah, yet there were alſo divers 
good things there, which were not in Jael, as the Word and Ordi- 
nances, and pure worſhip of God, Prophets and Miniſters of Gods 
Inſtitution,and divers true Religious People. And fo this is an ad. 
ditional Reaſon why God would not deſtroy them. Or, 2, Notwith. 
ſtanding this loſs, they began to recruit themſelves,and to regain 
ſome degree of their former Proſperity. Whence it follows, v: i: 
So, there being ſome reſpite given, and Peace being reſtored, Rehge 
boam ſtrengthened himſelf, &c. 

13 So king Rehoboam ftrengthned himſelf in Jery- 


falem and reigned : for * Rehoboam was one and forty * 1 King; 
years old when he began to reign, and he reigneq '* 2. 
ſeventeen Years in Jeruſalem, the city which the 
LORD had choſen out of all the tribes of Iſrael, to put 

his Name there: and his mothers name was Naamah 


an Ammonitels. | 

14 And he did evil, becauſe he |] prepared not & his! Or.fre, 
heart to ſeek the LORD. IDame7.3, 

k Or, direfed not : or, ſettled not, &c. i. e. Although he humbleg 
himſelf, and ſeemed penitent for a ſeaſon, and profeſſed the True 
Religion and Worthip of God ;yet he quickly relapſed into his for. 
mer Sins,becauſe he was not ſincere nor ſerious in his Aions,and 
his heart was not right with God. 


15 Now the Ads of Rehoboam, firſt and laft, are 
they not written in the + book of Shemajah the pro- + Hey. 
phet, and of Iddo the ſeer, concerning genealogies / 2 wn, 
And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam 


continually. 

{ In an Hiſtorical Account written by him of the Genealogics 
and Actions of the Kings of Judah. 

16 And Rehoboam ſlept with his fathers, and was 


buried in the city of David ; And Abijah his ſon reig- 


ned in his ſtead. 
CHAP. XIL 
Abijah Warreth againſt Jeroboam king of Iſrael, 1-73. Declareth the 
right of his cauſe, 4—»—— 12. Truſteth in God ; overcometh Feroboam, 
13----20. Hi wives and children, 21, 22. 
OW * in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam *1Kin;; 
began Abijah to reign over Judah. i, &, . 
2 He reigned three years in Jeruſalem * (his mothers 
name alſo was Micajah the daughter of Uriel 2 of 
Gibeah ) and there was war between Abijah and Jero- 


boam. 

a Called Maachah the Daughter of Abſalim, 1 King: 15. 2. She might 
be Daughter to one, and Grand-davghier to the otherzor the pro- 
per and natural Daughter of the one, and the others by Adoption; 
of which there are Inſtances in Scripture: or the ſame Perſon might 
be called Uriel and Abſalom. See 1 Kings 15: 2. 

3 And Abijah + ſec the battel in aray c, with an ar- +11; 
my of valiant men of war, eve» four hundred thouſand nd 
choſen men : Jeroboam alſo ſet the battel in aray a- 8%" 
gainft him wich eight hundred thouſand men, being 


mighty men of valour. 

c Againſt Ferobogm. We need not ſcrupulouſly enquire into the 
Lawfulneſs of this War for this Abijah, though here he makes a 
fair Flouriſh and maintained the better Cauſe, yet was indeed an 
Ungodly Man, King-15:3. and therefore minded not the ſatisfaction 
of his Conſcience, but only the Recovery of his Parents Ancient 
Dominions. ; 

4 And Abjjah ſtood up upon mount Zemaraim &, 
which zs in mount Ephraim, and {aid, Hear me, thou 


jerobouam, and all Iſrael. 
d4Soie commodious Place whence thisVoicc might be heard by 
ferobeam, and ſome of his Hoſt, who potlibly were pitched in the 
Valley Or, the two Armies being pitched near to one another, A- 
F ja might defire a Parley before they fought ; whereupon Ferobo- 
am,and ſome of his Commanders and Souldiers, might draw near to 
:im, and ſtand below him at. the bottom of the Hill, where they 
might hear his Speech; which Jeroboam was the more willing to do, 
that in the mean time he might cauſe an Ambuſhmens to come behind 
Abijah and liis Army,as he did v.13. whileſt he was quietly ſtand- 
ing before them,and ſeemed to hearken to any Terms of Accom- 
modation which might be offered. 

5 Ought ye not to know, that the LORD God of 
Iſrael gave the kingdem over Ifrael to David for ever, 
even to him and to his ſons by a covenant of ſalt e ? 

e z. e, By a perpetual covenant, which thy Uſurpation cannot 
difanul. For the Phraſe ſee on Numb. 18.19. 

6 Yet Jeroboam the ſon of Nebat, the ſervant of 


Solomon the ſon of David,is riſen up and hath*rebelled 
againſt his lord. 

7 And there are gathered unto him vain men, the 
children of Belial f, and have ſtrengthened themſelves 
againſt Rehoboam the ſon of Solomon, when Rehobo- 
am was young g and tender-hearted &, and could not 


witchſtand- them. 

f Such as have caſt off the Yoke & Obedience which they owed 
both to God and to their King. g Not in Age, for he was then 
41 years old, but in his Kingdom, which he had but newly obtain= 
ed,and in Experience in Politick,and efpecully in Military Afﬀairs, 
ro which he was wholly a ſtranger,as having been born and bred up 
in a time of great Peace and Security. h z. e. Cowardly and fear- 
ful,who durſt not adventure to chaſriſe theRebels as he Mould have 
done. But herein Ab!jsh forgets his Duty both to his F ather, vhom 


*; King: 
11 :26. 


were good LOR 


thing. hin altogether : || and alſo in Judah things went wellz, 


he falſly traduceth ; and to God, by whole Expreſs Command Re- 
hoboars waas reltrained from the War againſt rae, which rene 


Chap. XIlr C | 


| 


*1] 


f Heb. 
the hea, 
Ch:20; 
* Acts 
3% 


| Chap: 


X11. I CH OM 


he had both courge and Reſolution to proſecute, as appears from | 
the Hiſtory, 1 Atugs12, 21. : | ; 
s And now ye think to with-ſtand the kingdom of 
the LOKD.inthe hand of the ſons of David z,and ye be 
a great multicude &, and here are with you golden 
calves {, which Jeroboam * made you for gods m. 

;Thar Kingdom which was not ſet up by Vain Men in purſuance 
of their own Ambition and Difcontenr, as yours was, but ordained + 
and eſtabliſhed by God himf{clIf in the Houſe of David. & Or, be« 
cauſe (that Hebrew Particle being oft ſo uſed) ye be, &c. This he 
mentions partly as the Ground of their Confidence, that they had 
more Tribes and a greater Hoſt; and partly as a preſage of their 
Downfal, which truſting to the Arm of Fleth is. / Or, #ut there 


*1 King: 
y2; 29» 


1c 18 Chap. xIVIR 


Jeſhanah with the cowns thereof, and Ephraim e with . 
the rowns thereot. $9 

d Which Jeroboam recovered afterwards, as appears by thh 
courſe of the Hiſtory, tho it be nor particularly mentioned, whic 
is the caſe of many other conſiderable things. And in the mea" 
time it is very probable,that when Jer*boam's Hoſt was diſcomfited? 
ind he expected that A4bijah would purſue his Victory,he removed 
the Golden Calf from Berh-el, which lay near Abijahs Kingdom, to 
ſome ſafer place» e A Ciry ſo called, poſlibly the fame which is 
mentioned, 7o4.41:54. or thar which is called Ophra, Judz. 8: 27. 

20 Neither did Jeroboam recover ſtrength again in 
the days of Abijah* andthe LORD ftrook him f, and 
he died g. 


are, ©c. There'is that among you which may damp your courage 
and Confidence : You worſhip thole Images which God abhors and 


monly uſed, - e. inftead of God, ro give them the Name of God, 
as Exod. 32-4. and that worſhip which is peculiar to him. 


9 * Have ye not caſt out the prieſts of the LORD, 
the ſons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you 
prieſts after the manner of the nations of ether lands ? 
{o that whoſoever cometh} to conſecrate himſelf » with 
a young bullock, and ſeven rams, the ſame may be a 
prieſt of chem that are no gods o. 

2 i, e, To make himſelf a Prieſt. See on Levit. 7: 37+ 0 That 
have nothing of the Nature or Power, though you give them the 
Name of Gods. : 

10 Burt as for us, the LORD p is our God, and we 
have not forſaken him q,and the prieſts which miniſter 
unato the LORD, are >: {ons of Aaron, and the Le- 
vites wait upon their bulinels. LS 

p Heb. Jehovah, the oniy True and Great God. q We maintain 
his Honour and Worſhip which you 12ve ungratefully rejected. 

11 * Aid they burn unto the LORD every morn- 
ing, and every evening, burnt fac:ifices and ſweet in- 
Tev:24.6 conſe : the * thew brezd aiſo ſer they in order upon the 

pure table r, and the candieſtick of gold 5 with the 
*Fxod: lamps thereof, * to burn every evening t, for we keep 
7:21. the charge of the LORD our God « ; but ye have for- 
faken him. 
7 So cailed. becauſe it was made of pure Gold, Exod. 25. 23,24. 
s He faith Table and Candleſtick, though there were ten of each, ch. 
4+7,8. either 1. b<cauſe Shiſhak had carried away all bur one : Or, 
2. the ſingular number is pur for the plural, as 1 Kmgs. 7, 48. and 
oft elſ-where. Or, 3. becauſe ordinarly there was but one of each 
uſed at a time for thoſ: uſes. t And from Evening to Morning con- 
tinually, Lev. 24 2, 3. for which end one Candieirick was ſufficient 
and it 1s very improbable that all the Candieſticks were uſed every 
night. « This he ſaith, though he was an ungodly King ; either 
becauſe he flattered himſelf, and fancied thar his keeping up the 
External worſhip of God would make full fatisfaction for the Ere 
rours of his Lite : Or, that he might hereby encourage his own 
Heb. i Souldiers, and convince or terrifhe his Enemies. 
ep. 17 


10 T2 And behold God himſelf ;s with us Þ for our cap- 

(Ck:20:29, tain, and his prieſts with ſounding trumpets to cry 

Aces 5- alarm againſt you x : O children of Iſrael, * fight ye 

i* not againſt the LORD God of your fathers y, for ye 
ſhall no: proſper. 

x Upon the ſounding whereof God hath ſuddenly promiſed to 
aſſiſr his People, Numb. 10. 9g, y You have nor only us for your 
Enemies, but (God, even the God whom your fathers honoured and 
ſerved, to their own great Comfort and Benefit. 


13 But Jeroboam cauted an ambuſhment to come 
-abourt behind them = : ſo they were before Judah, and 
the ambuſhment was behind them, 


z Whilſt Abijah was diſcourling, Jeroboam takes the advantage 
of it to lay an Ambuſh, 


14 And when Judah looked back, behold, the batte' 
was before aad behind: and they cried unto the 
LORD, and the prieſts founded with the trumpets, 

15 Then the men of Judah gave a ſhout ; and as the 
men of Judah ſhouted, ir came to paſs that God ſmote 
a Jeroboam and all Iſrael before Abijah and Judah. 

a By ſtrengrhning the Hearts and Hands of the Men of Judah, 
and taking away the Spirits and Power of their Enemies ; and it 
may be, by tome extraordinary Aſſiſtance. 

16 And the Children of Iſrael fled before Judah : and 
God delivered them into their hand. 

17 And Abjjah aud his people ſlew rhem with a very 
great ſlaughter : fo there fell down ſlain of Ifrael five 
hundred thouſand b choſen men. 

b A vaſt number : bur it harh been oft obſerved and recorded 
by ſacred and profane Hiſtorians, that in thoſe ancient times there 
were very numerous Armies,and oft times very great Slaughters3 
and if thisSlaug ter was more than ordinai y,there is notaing ftrange 


nor inc:edible, becauſe the Almighty God tought agaiaſt the 1i- 
raclitcs. 


15 Thus the children of Iiracl were brought under 
at that time.& the chugren of juda!: prevailed, becauſe 
they reiyed upon the LORD c God of their fathers. 

e They pur their Truſt in him and contideatly expected Help 
from ham : which is a diſpoſition of heart rhat God prizeth and 
Taketh kindly. Sce 2 Kmgs 18: 5. 2 Cien: 20. 20, Pſal, 22; 4. Dan. 
3: 28, 

i9 And Abyah purſued after Jeroboam, and took 
cities from him, Beth-el 4 with the cowns thereof, and 


* Chap. 
11; 14+ 


+ Heb.9 
fil his 


LaNAf 


* Ch,2:4- 


ſeverely forbids. m Or, for God, as that piural word is moſt com- | vexation and horror of Mind:or with ſome painful and lingring,buc 


f 1, e. jeroboam, as appears from the contrary condition of 4= 
b/jah deſcrib:d in the n-xt verſe. Him God mighr ſtrike either with 


incurable Ditcaſe, like that of Fehvram, which tormented him two 
years together, and at laſt killed him, 2 Chron. 21.19, g Not pre« 
ſently, bur a year or two after this rime. 

24 But Abjjah waxed mighty, and married fourteen 


wives, and begat twenty and two ſons, and ſixteen 
daughters h. 


þ Not now after this ViQtory, for he died preſently after ir,but 
| in the whole time of his Life, before he was King, and afterward. 4 
22 And the reſt of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, " 


and his ſayings, are written in the || ſtory of the pro-|| Or,Cct 4 


li 
: 


ap * mentary. 
phet * Iddo. —— 
CHAP. XIV. * Chivas | 

Aſa is made King : he deſtroyeth Idolatry, 1 5. Having veace he t 


frengthneth his Kingdom with Forts ' and Armigs, 6 - 8. Ima 


[trait, calling on GId, he overthroweth Zerak, and ſpoileth the Ethiopte * 
ans, 9 


15- | 
Q? Abijah ſlept with his fathers,and they buried him itt 
in the city of David, and * Afa his ſon reigned in* ; Kings 
his ſtead : in his days the land was quiet ten years #. 1x5; 8, &; | 
# 3. e. There was no open War, either by Baaſhs or others; © | 


only there were ſecret Grudges and private Hoſtilities between his 
and Baafha's SubjeQs, 1 Kings 15. 16. 


2 And Aſa did thas which was good and rightin the 
eyes of the LORD b his God. | 

b Of this and the next verſe, ſee on 1 Kings 15: 11, 12. 

3 For he took away the altars of the itrange gods, | 
and the high piaces, and brake down the + images,and 4 xx.,, / ill 
cut down the groves : "RY 

4 And commanded Jadah to feek the LORD God 
of _ fathers c,and to do the law and the command- 
ment &. | 


c By his Royal Edifts he requiced them to Worſhip God, and 


him only. 4 z.e. To praQtiſe all which the Laws of Moſes required 
of them. 


5 Alfo he took away out of all the cities of Judah 
the high places, and the f mages : and the kingdom t Heb:ſinta 
was quiet before him. — iages. 

6 And he built fenced cities in Judah : for the land | 
had reſt, and he had no war in thoſe years, becauſe 
che LORD had given him reſt. 

7 Therefore he ſaid unto Judah, Let us build thefe 
cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, 
and bars, while the land zs yet before us 4 : becauſe we 
have ſought'the LORD our God, we have ſought him, 
and he bath given us reſt on every fide : ſo they built 
and prolpencty | 

d i, e. In our Power,as that Phraſe is oft uſed. See on Gen. 12.00 

8 And Aſa had an army of mes e, ———_ rargets 
and ſpears, out of Judah, three hundred thouſand, and 
out of Benjamin, chat bare ſhields and drew bows, two' 
hundred and fourſcore thouſand : all theſe were mighty 
men of raijour. | 


e Which, as it ſeems, he had now | 
{ Information of Zerab's Delign againſt | coy _— OE TOLL | 

9 * And there came.our againſt them Zerah the E-+ Chi6;& 
tchiepian f with an hoſt of a thouſand thouſand & three 
1undred chariots, and came unto Mareſha g. 

Or, the Arabian, as the Hebrew w I 
TA been noted before ; Theſe nd ron Y 
Erhopians,who alfo could not have come to 4/a,but thorough Ezypr, 
which probably the King of Egypr would not permit him to do. 
3; A City upon and within the Borders of Judah, Fol, 15. 44. 

10 Then Aſa went out againſt him, and they ſet 
—— in aray in the valley of Zephathah, at Mare- 

ah. 

i: And Afa cried unto the LORD his God, and 
faid, LORD, Þ z: 3s * nothing with thee h to help,whe- ft1cb.z # 
:her with many, or with them that hav for 
Jelp us, O LORD our God, for we reſt 


Fues, 


} 


in thy Name ; we go againſt this multitude. O %%* whe 
LORD thou ar: our God. 1! ail azainſt 7,5 

: r God, let not || man prevail againſt ,;,, za 
thee. 


: | nefrrength. 
h 1. e. There is no difference, nor no difficulty, with thee, 7 By * 1 Sat | 


tay Commiſſion, in Contidence of thy Aſſiſtance a1d for the main» 14:6. 
renance of thy honour, and tervice, and peop.: . || Or, mr 
12 So the LORD tmoce the Ethiopiaus before Ala, fa! man, 

and before Judah, and the Echiopians tied. 
13 And Afa and the people char were with bim.pur- 
3U2 k:ied 


fore Aſa- 


, 


n _ 
* 


Chap. XV. WIC HR O 
faed them unto Gerar &:and the Ethiopians were over- 
thrown, that they could not recover themſelves, for 

+ Heb. they were | deſtroyed before the LORD and before his 

brotzn. Hoft, and they carried away very much ſpoil. 

k A City of the Philiſtines, who probably were confederate with 
them in this Deſign. 
14 And they ſmote all the cities round about Ge- 

* Gen. 35-rar /, for * the fear of the LORD came upon them : 

- gs 77-and they ſpoiled all the cities, for there was exceeding 

much ſpoil in them. 
1 Partly becauſe they had joined with Zerah in this War ; and 


partly becauſe the Erk:opians had ſheltered a great part of the Re- | 


* mains of the Army in them. 
15 They ſmote alſo the tents of Cattel m, and car- 
ried away ſheep and cammels in abundance, and re- 


turned to Jeruſalem. 

m 1. e. The dwellers in Tents, which were either a part of Ze- 
ral's Company or joyned with them, or had come along with 
them to furniſh that great Hoſt with neceſſary Proviſions ; which 
their Cuſtom of dwelling in tents made them more capable of 


doing. 

CHAP. XY. 

Aſa with Judah and many of Iſrael moved by Azariah the Prophet, renew 
a ſolemn Covenant with God, 1 15. He removeth Maachah hs 
Mother for her- dolarry : bringeth the hallowed things again into the 
Temple ; and enjoyeth a long peacey 16 19. / 

-1-A ND the {pirit of God came upon Azariah the fon 
of Oded. 


{HP 2 And he went out | to meet Aſa, and faid unto 


| him, Hear ye me, Afa, and all Judah and Benjamin, 
| ** The LORD zs with you @ while ye be with him,and 
+ Heb-be- ;f ;e feck him, he will be found of you : but if ye for- 
fake him, he will forſake you 5. 


* s To defend you againſt all your Enemies, as now you have 


* Jam:4:$ 
ſeen, and you may hereafter expe&, if you perſiſt in thar good 


o Courſe into which you are entred- 6b Bur ler not this Viftory 


mike you preſumpruous or ſelfe-confident; for you are upon your 
good Behaviour; and if you leave God, he will leave and deitroy 
you afrer he hath done you good. 

- 2 Now for a long ſeaſon * Ifrael h2rh been without 


* Cli12:1 the true God, and without a teaching prieſt, and with- 


out Law c: 

c Heb. For many days have been to Iirael without the true God, &c. 
7. e. They have long lived without the ſouad knowledge and 
Worſhip of the True God. The Prophet confirms his foregoing 
Exhortation and the Threatning annexed ro it, Thar if they for- 
took God he wou'd forſake them, for the uſual manner of Gods 
' dealing with Iſrael formerly, and therefore in the ſame caſe they 
may expett the ſame uſage. Iſrael here mentioned and propound- 
ed as an Example is here underſtood, either, 1. Specially of the 
'Ten Tribes diſtinguiſhed by that Name from the Kingdom of 7u- 
dah ; whoſe Condition had been ſince Jereboams Revolt, and now 
was ſuch in ſome meaſure, as is here deſcribed, they having been 
- and ſtill being, withour God and his True Worſhip, and there- 
fore expoſed to many Vexations,and Wars,and Miſeries. Bur theſe 
| Had nor as yet turned unto God or ſought him, nor was God yet 
' Found of them, as is ſaid of this Iſrac], v. 4. Nor had they as yer 
been exerciſed with thoſe grievous and continual Vexations, and 
Wars, and mutual Deſtruttions of which he here ſpeaks, wv. 5, 6. 
And which in ſucceeding times they felt. For except that one 
Blow which they had from Ab:jah, ch. 13- we read of none other 
great Miſchiefs which befel them. Or rather 2. Generally of the 
whole Nation of 1/raet in former times, and eſpecially in the times 
of the Judges ; to which all that follows ſuirs very well © For then 
many times they were,though not wholly and univerſally, yet in a 
very great meaſure and for the generality of them, without God, 
and bis Law, and Teaching Prieſts, as plainly appears from divers 
Paſſages in the Book of the Judges ; and then indeed they were 
brought to all the Exigencies and Calamities here following ; then 
they had grievous Wars both Foreign and Domeſtick; and then 
they did ſometimes turn to the Lord and ſought him, and he was 
found of them,and did raiſe up Judges and Saviours to them ; of 

which ſee Fudg: 2. at large, and Juag. 3. 9,15. and 10.10, &c. 
But when they 'd in their trouble did turn unto 


the LORD God of Lirael, and ſought him, he was 


found of them. 

d i.e, Iſrael, mentioned wv: 31 

5 And in thoſe times e there was no peace to him that 
went out, nor to him that came inf, but great vexati- 
ons were upon all the inhabitants of the countries g. 

e When [Iſrael lived in the groſs Negle& and Contempt of God 
and his Law and Worſhip. f Men could not go abroad about 
their private Occaſions without great Danger ; as it was in the 
days of Shamgar, Jud, 5.6. which is a good comment upon this 
Text. £g Heb. of theſe Contries,i. e. The divers parts of the Land 
. of Iſracl, both within and without Jordan. 
4Heb.b-a* 6 And nation was + deſtroyed of nation þ, and city 
ren inpieces of city : for God did vex them with all adverſity. 

h i. e. One part of the People of Iſrael deſtroyed the other by 
Civil Wars : of which ſee inſtances, Jug; 9: 23, &c. and 12. 1 
&c. As all the People of Iſrael are called a Nation, ſo the ſeveral 
Tribes and Families of them are ſomerimes called Nations, as Cen. 
17: 4, Exck. 2: 3. A 4: 27. compared with Pſal. 2: 1. 

7 Be ye ſtrong therefore 7, and let not your hands 
be weak & : for your work ſhall be rewarded /. 

5 Go on therefore Couragiouſly and Reſolutely to maintain 
Gods Worſhip and to root our Idolatry,as you have begun to do; 
For this is the only right method of preſerving your telves from 
ſuch Calamiries as your Predeceflors have felt. k Be not diſcoura- 
ged with the Oppolition which you may poſlibly neert with.! What 


N I CLE © 


| you do for God and for his Honour and Service? ſhall not go un. 
requited. 

8 And when Aﬀa heard theſe words, and the pro. 
phecy of Oded the prophet mz he took courage n, ang 
put away the + abomineble idols out of all the land 
of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the citics which | e 
had taken o from mount Ephraim, and renewed the 9% 
altar of the LORD p, that was before the porch cf the 
LORD. 


m To wit, of Azariah, v. 1. who was alſo called by his Fathers 
| Name Oded, Or Oaed may te here pur patronymically for the 
fon of Odd ; as David is put for Chriſt the ſon of David, Fer. 20: 
9. and elſewhere ; and Moſes for the Sons of Moſes, Pſal. go. Title 
Or here is an Ellipſis of the Relative Word, of which there arc 
| many inſtances both in ſacred and profane Authors ; as 2 Sam. 21. 
19. the Brother of Goliah : Mat: 4: 21. John the ſon of Z:bcae : Ike 
24. 10, Mary the Mother of James, by comparing Mark 15. 40. Joh 
I9: 25, Mary the Wife of Cleephas, and many other places. And 
ſo this place may be thus read, when Aja keard theſe wards, even the 
Prophecy of the Son of Oded the Prophet. And this Elliplis is the more 
caſte and tolerable, becauſe this defe&t mighr be well enough un« 
derſtood and fupplied out of v. 3. Though ſome underſtand this 
to be another Prophecy of Ozed the Father, which is nor here ex. 
prefled, which Azariah his Son repeated to them for thc confir. 
mation of his own Prophecy. n For it required great Courage to 
put away all the Idols, tro which ſo great a Number of his People 
were to this day addiQed, and among others, Maachah the Queen, 


Ct ap. Xy, 


bg 
ed 


a IMing!in 


| #15 mother, whom for this reaſon he depoſed, 1 Kings 15: 13. o To 


wit, Abijah his Father ; which was ealily underſtood from <<. 13. 
19. Or, which had been taken, the aftive word being oft ſo uſed 
1mperſonally fcr the paſſive, as Hebricians know. p Which had 
been either decayed through Age and long Uſe of ir, or broken 
by his Idolatrous Mother's means : Or, he conſecrated, or dedicated 
the altar, &c. Which poſſibly had been polluted by Idolaters, and 
now needed ſome purification. 

9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin,and * the * cy, ;; 
ſtrangers with them, out of Ephraim and Manaſſeh, us, 
and out of Simeon 9, ( for they fell to him 7-our of | 
Ifrael in abundance, when they ſaw that the LORD 
his God was with him.) 

_ 9 Which Tribe,though they had their Inheritance out of the Por®. 
tion of Judah, did for the generality of them Revolt to Jeroboam 
with the other Tribes, as appears from many paſſages of Scripture. ' 
Which they might conveniently do, becaute their Portion bors' 
dered as on one ſide upon that of Judah, ſo on the other tide upon 
that of Dan ; and therefore might indifferently joyn with the one 
or other,as they ſaw fit. » To wit, from the King of Iſrael. 
10 So they gathered themſelves together at Jeruſa- 
lem in the third month 5, in the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Aſa t. | 
s To wit, of the ſacred Year in which the Feaſt of Weeks or 
of Pentecoſt fell : of which ſee Exod. 23: 16. Deut: 16; 9. t Aſa 
nad Peace but Ten years, ch.14.1. After which probably there were 
ſome Bickerings and Skirmiſhes, which ſeem to have been com- 
poſed : and after that Zerah comes againſt him and is diſcomfited. 
Upon this great Succeſs many of the 1/raelizes fall to him ;-and in 
his fifteenth year he calls this Aſſembly. 

it And they offered unto the LORD + the ſame +: 5 
rime, of the ſpoil which they had brought #, {even'that 49. 
hundred oxen, and ſeven thouſand ſheep. 

» Taken from Zrreh and his Complices, ch: 14:13, &c. 

12 And they entred into a covenant x to ſeek the 
LORD God of their fathers, with all their heart, and 
with all their ſou]. 


x They engaged themſelves by a ſerious and ſolemn Covenany 
before the Lord and this great Aſſembly. 


12 That whoſoever would not ſeek the LORD God © © 
of I{rael y *ſhould be put to death z, whether ſmall or *Denti;i 
great, whether man or woman. 5, 9.15. 

y Whoſoever ſhould obſtinately refuſe to pay unto God thar 
Solemn Worſhip which he required at his Temple in Jeruſalem ; or 
ſhould diſown God, or ſerve other Gods. z By vertue of all thoſe 
Laws which command that ſuch perſons ſhould be cut of; and in 
purſuance of that Law, Deu: 17: 2. Compare Heb: 10: 28. 

14 And they {ware unto the LOR D with a loud 
voice, and with ſhouting, and with trumpets, and wich 
COTneEts. 

15 And all Judah || rejoyced at the oath ; for they 
had ſworn with all their hearc, and ſought him with 
their whole deſire, and he was found of them ; and the 
LORD gave them reſt round about. | 

|| 7. e. A great number of the People,as ſuch general Expreſſions 
are frequently underſtood : for none doubt but there were many 
Diſſemblers and Ungodly Men at this time among them. 

16 And alſo cencerning * Maachah | the mother of «; ings 
Aſa the king, he removed ber from being queen,becauſe 15: 13: 
ſhe had made an Þ idol in a grove : and Afa cut down t Heb- 
her idol and ſtamped 3r, and burne 3: at the brook 7%" 
Kidron. | 

. | Of this and the following verſes, ſee on 1 King; 15. 2, 10, 14; 
Is. 
17 But the high places were not taken away out of 
_ : nevertheleſs, the heart of Afa was perfect all his 
ays. 
18 An he brought into the houſe of God the things 
that his father had dedicated, and that be himfelf had 
dedicated, filrer, and gold, and yeſlels, 


91: And 


Cap 


* ih | 


f Heb 
Derm | 


f Heb 
which 1 
hu, 


"th. R 
! He, 


"adn: 
Wunaay 


"Ter.s 
10.6.0 
" Loldw; 
7 

I Ring 
15+ 32, 


tis 


Clap. XVI. I 1. 


19 And there was no more war unto the five and 
thirtieth year of the reign of Ala *. 

* For though there were continual Skirmiſhes between Aſs and 
Beaſhs and their People a!l their days, r Kings 15. 16. yer 1t did nor 
b-eak forth into an open War rill Aſa's 35th year, ze. till chat was 
ended. But how this 35th year is to be computed, ſee the Note 


on <>: 16.1. 
C H A F. AETL 
Aſa maketh a League with the Syrians againſt the king of Iſrael, 1——5. 
Fir which the Prophet reproving him, he putteth him intopr/[on, 7 19. 
He is ſick, and ſeeketh ro the Phyſicians, and not.to God : hus death and 
burial, 11 ! 4. 
N che lix and thirtieth year of che reign of Afa a, 
* Baaſha king of Iſrael came up againſt Judah, and 
built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go 
out or come into Aſa king of Judah 6. 
a Or, of the Kingdom of A[s, 3. e. of the Kingdom of Judah, which 
was now Aſa's Kingdom; or from the time of the diviſion of the 
two Kingdoms. Rehoboam Reigned 17 Years, ch, 12.13. Abijah 3 
Years, >. 13. 2. Aſa had now Reigned 15 Years, ch. 15. 10. All 
which put together, make up the 35 years mentioned ch. 15. 19. And 
in the next year Basſba wars againſt him ; and the ground of War 
was the defe&tion of many of his Subje&s to 4ſs, ch. 15. 9. whom 
Aſa endeavoursto engage together with his own SubjeCts, by an Oath 
and a Covenant, to be true and faithful to God, and conſequently to 
; himſelf; which was done in has 157þ year, ch. 15. 9, 10. and there- 
fore inhis 16:þ year, called here the 36th year of his Kingdom, he 
commenceth an open War againſt him. If it be obje&ed, Thar 
the R-ign, or Kingdom of Aſa is otherwiſe underftood of the time of 
Aſa's perſonal Reign ( as I may call it) <<. 15.10. The anſwer is 
obvious, That there are many inſtances in Scripture ( ſome of which 
have been formerly given, and -thers will be given in their proper 
places, ) where the ſame Word or Phraſe 15 taken differently, and 
that in the very ſame Chapter and Hiſtory- And particularly this 
variety is elſewhere ufed both by Sacred and Prophane Writers, 1n 
the Computation ofthe years of Princes, which are ſom-times rec- 
koned from the beginning of their Reign, and ſomerimes from 
other remarkable Times and Occurrenees. Thus Nebuchadnezzar's 
years are ſometimes compured from the beginning of his Reign, as 
2 Kings 25. 8, %er. 52. 12. 29, 30. and ſorietimes trom his compleat 
Conqueſt of Syria and E£gypr, &c. as that Paſſ:ge, Dan. 2. 1. In the 
ſecons! year of Nebuchadnezzar, is by the general ftream of Interpreters 
underſtood. Thus A4haziab's years. which doubtleſs were uſuaily 
computed from the time of his Birth, and compured from another 
Head. ch. 22+ 2. where fee the Notes. And the like differences 
are obſerved in computing the years of ſome of the Syrian Monarchs 
and Remen Emperors ; and particularly of Auguſtus, the years of 
whoſe Reign are variouſly acc-unted by the Rowan Hiſtorians ; 
ſometimes from his tirſt Conſulſhip, ſometimes from the time of 
the T:-iurnvirate, and ſometimes from that Famous Viftory at AFium, 
where he utterly overthrew his Competitor, and made himſelf ſole 
and vnqueſtionable Emperor. And therefore it is not ſtrange if it 
be ſo here. And that it muſt neceſſarily be thus underſtood, appears 
from hence, that it cannot be the 36:þ year of the Reign of 4/s 
in his own perſon, becauſe Baaſhs began to Reign in 4ſa's 34d year, 
r Kings :5. 28. and Reigned only 24 years. and conſequently died 
in ſas 26th, or 27th year, as it is ſaid he did, 1 Kings 1g. 8. b That 
he might keep his SubjeQs from revolting to Aſa, as he perceived 
they b<gan to do, ch. 15. 9. and keep Aſa's Subje&s from coming 
into his Dominions to ſeduce his People from their Obedience to 
hi 


*1K10gs 
| 15; 379 


m. 

2 Then Afa brought out ſilver and gold c out of the 
treaſures of the Houſe of the LORD, and of the kings 
Houſe, and ſent to Benhadad king of Syria, that dwelt 
at F Damaſcus, ſaying, 

c This Verſe, & wv. 3, 4. 5, 6. areexplained, 1 Kings 18+ 18, XC. 

3 There is a league between me and thee, as there was 
between my father and thy father : behold TI have ſent 
thee ſilver and gold, go, break thy league with Baaſha 
king of Iſrael, that he may depart from me. 

4 And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Aſa, and ſent 
+1, the captains of | his armies againſt the cities of Iſrael, 
with we and they {mote Ton, and Dan, and Abel-maim, and | 
ki, all the ſtore-cities of Naphzali. 

5 Andit came to paſs, when Baaſha heard r, thathe 
left off building of Ramath, and let his work ceaſe. 

6 Then Aſa the king took all Judah, and they carri- 
ed away the ftones of Ramath, and the timber thereof, 
wherewith Baaſha was a building, and he built there- 
with Geba, and Mizpah. 

7 And at that time * Hanani the ſeer came to Afa 
Cig.2 King of Judah, and faid unto him, Becauſe thou haſt 

* relied on the king of Syria, andnotrelied on the LORD 

thy God, therefore is the hoſt of the king of Syria 
eſcaped out of thine hand 4. 


4 And ſo reſerved to be a Scourge to thy Kingdom and Poſterity 
hereafter : Whereas if he had j'\yyned with Baaſha againſt thee, thou 
ſhouldeſt have overthrown them both, and prevented all that Mit- 
chief which that Monarch will do one day to thy Family. 

8 Were not * the Ethiopians and the Lubims e, F a 
huge hoſt, with very many chariots and horſemen ? 
yet becauſe thou didit rely on the LORD, hedelivered 
them into thine hand. 

e Either the L:9/ax5 in Africa ; or another People, poſſibly deſcen- 
"ec. :, ded from them, but now ſeated in ſome part of Arabia. 

% f.agy 9 For* the eyesof ths LORD runto and fro through- 
"toldw;t, Our the whole earth, || ro ſhew himſelf ſtrong in the 
xc. behalf of :hew, whoſe heart is perfect f roward him ; 
5: 32.5 herein thou haſt done fooliſhly ; 
orth ® thou thalt haye wars g. 


f Heb. 
Dirmcſek, 


Th 466 
t Hey 5: 


"NE" 
Waarce, 


* HRONICERMS 


©Y Chap. XVI | 
f 7. e. Upright and ſincere, as thine 18 not, Obj. The heart of Als bl 
is ſaid to be perfe? all by days, ch. 15. 17, Anſw. He was perfe&t 
and ſincere in the things there ſpoken of, in the Eſtabliſhment of the 
outward Worſhip of God ; but notin the inward Worthip of God, 
truſting, and fearing, and loving him with all his heart, of which 
he here ſpeaks. Or thus ; He was perfett or ſincere in the general 
Courſe of his Life, thaugh in ſome particulars, whereof this is one, 
his heart did not perfe&ly cleave to God, as it ſhould have done« 
g With Baaſjha, c}. 16. 4. > bes 404 | 
10 Then Aſa was wroth with the ſeer, and put him ,,.,, 4 
| :ſon-houſe h, ſor he was in a rage wich him, T2, 
in f a priſon-houle þ, lor as In a rage with him 


becauſe of this thing, And Aſa + oppreſſed ſome of the on Juby 
people the ſame time. + Heb 

h Or, in the houſe of the ſtocks, in which the Feer, or, as ſome of c1/h44s 
the Hebrews ſay, the Necks of the Priſoners were locked up. See 
Fer. 20. 2. & 29. 26. 

11 And behold, the acts of Aſa firt and laſt, lo, they 
are written in the book ofthe kings of Judah and If{rael. 

12 And Afﬀa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign 
was diſeaſed in his feet until his diſeaſe was exceedin 


great : yet in his diſeaſe he ſought not to the LORD, 
but to the phyſicians 2. | | 

7 He did not humble himſelf before God, nor earneſtly deſire his 
Help, bur pur all his Confidence in the Skill and Faithfulneſs of 
his Phyſicians, of whom it ſeems, he had great experience. 

13 And Afa ſlept with his fathers, and died in the 
one and fortieth year of his age. 


14 And they buried him in his own ſepulchre, which 
he had + made for himſelf in the city of David, and, ,; + 
laid him in the bed which was filled with ſweet odours, + Hh 


and divers kinds of ſpices prepared by the apothecaries —_— 
art &: and they made a very great burning / for him. 

k As the manner of thoſe Nations was. See Gen. 50. 2. 2 Chron, 
21. 19. | To wit, of precious Spices ; thereby teſtifying thei 
Thankfulneſsfor many Benefits which they enjoyed under his Go« 
vernment, and their Reſpe& to him notwithſtanding hiz Miſcarris 


ages. 
CH A P: XVII 


Tehoſhaphat is made King, reigneth well and proppereth, 1 6. He ſendetk 
L-wvites with the Princes, to teach Judah, 7 9. He # feared by thi 


Nations round about, who bring him preſents and tribute : his greatneſs, 
captains, and armies, 10 19. 


N D * Jehoſhaphat his ſon reigned in his ſtead an! | 

ſtrenthened himſelf againſt Iſrael a. * 1Kingh 

s Againſt the King and People of 1rael, who had moleſted the 15+ 24s 

Kingdom of Juazh, with Wars all the day: of 4ſa, after that Sin of 
his mentioned, ch. 16. 2, &c. 

2 And heplaced forces in allthe fenced cities. of Judah, 
and ſet gariſons in the land of Judah, and in the cities 
of Ephraim, which Aſa his father had taken. 

2 Andthe LORD was with Jehoſbaphat, becauſe he 


walked in the firſt ways of his [| father David 5, and p or of 6 
{ought nor unto Baalim. father, and 

6 Which David walked in before he fell into thoſe horrid Sins of D&vid. 
Murder and Adultery, Or, # the ways of David, and hu Father's firſt 
ways. For the beginning of 4ſa's Reign was laudable, as we have 
ſeen, though he declined ar laſt. For it ſeems more probable that 
this Paſſage is a RefleQion upon Aſs, whoſe laſt ways were much 
his worſt, and of whoſe Repentance we haye no Evidence, than 
upon David, who, though he fell dreadfully in the matter of Uriah, 
yet did manifeſtly repent of it, and return to his firft and holy 
courſe of Life, in which alſo he continued until death; having this 
CharaGter given himby the Holy Ghoſt, after his death, That be 
aid right in all things, ſaving that of Uriah, 1 Kings 15: 5. 

4 But ſought to the LORD God of his father, and 
walked in his commandments, and not after the doings 
of Iſrael c. | 


c 1.e. Their Wozſhip of the Calves, or other Idols. 

5 Therefore the LORD ſtabliſhed the kingdom in his 
hand, andall Judah + brought to Jehoſhaphat preſents d, 
and he had riches and honour in abundance. 

d As SubjeQts in thoſe times and places uſed codo to their Kings,® 
asa Token of their Reſpe& and SubjeRion to them. See 1 Sam. 10. 
27. 28. 1 Kings to. 25: 2 Chron: 32: 23, 

6 And his heart || was lifc up. e in the ways of the, . ..... 
LORD : moreover, * he took away the high places | That 33, 
and groves f out of Judah. ne ney, 


_ raged. 
e Above all diſcouragements, and difficulties and fears, by which rage 


- 
Mens Hearts uſe to be caft down: He was Valiant and Reſolute for EW 
, God and his Ways. f To wit, ſuch only wherein Idols were Wor- 
ſhipped, as appears by comparing this with ch:20: 33. And theugh 
4ja had done this before, yet either he did not do ir throughly ; 
or the Jews ( who were many of them mad upon their Idols ) had 
ſecretly made new Ones, inthe Jatter part of his Reign, when he 
grew more infirm in Body, and more remiſs in Gods Catiſe. 

7 Allo in thechird year of his reign, he || ſent to his 


prunces, even to Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to 


+ Het 


aV8, 


[| Or, fer: 


Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michajah, co pr ps 
teach g in the cities of Judah. : 


hail: 
g Toinform the People of their Duty, and ofthe Kings pleaſure. 
As Judges or Juſtices of Peace teach or inſtrut the People in the 
Laws of the Land, when they deliver their Charges upon the Banch; 
lo did thele Princes in the Kings Name, ad moniſh and require the 
Pcople to obſerve and obey rhe Laws of God, which were the 
Municipal Laws of that Land : The particular Explication and 
Intorcement whereof, they Jeft to the Levites and Priefts here 


therefore from hence- | 


iollowing, who were ſent tor this end,)and accordingly ranghz rhe 


People, v. 9. 
* U-9 S Ard 


hap. XVIIL. in ic art O 

| 8 And with them be -/ent Levites, eve» Shemajah, 
and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Afahel, and She- 
miramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobi- 
jah, and Tob-adonijah, Levites ; and with them Eli- 
ſhama and Jehoram, prieſts. 

9 And they taught in Judah, and had the book of che 
law of the LORD with them, and wentabour througn- 
out allthe cities of Judah, and taught the people. 

ro And * the fear of the LORD Þ fell upon all the 

© Gen. 35' kingdoms of the lands that were round abour Judab 5, 
+Heb +. {o that they made no war againſt Jenoſhaphar. 
ets Hm  b Jultly concluding from this ſingular Picty that God would emi- 
| nently appear for him, and againſt all thoſe who had ill Will to him, 
which was their Caſe. For even the Heathens could nor bur obſerve, 
that the King of Judah were either Proſperous or Unhappy, accor- 
dingly as they ſerved God or forſook him. 
:1 Alſo ſome of the Philiſtins ; brought Jehoſbaphat 
reſents, and tribute-ſi'ver : and the Arabians & brought 
Fim flocks. ſeven thouſand and ſeven hundred rams, and 


ſeven thouſand and ſeven hundred he-goats. 
; Who had been SubjeQs to this Kingdom ever ſince David's 
Time, but, ir ſeems, had neglected this Duty in the Times of his 
Predeceffors, bur now were moved by their own Fears to perform 
it. k Either becauſe he had upon ſome juſt occaſion waged War 
againft thers, and ſubdued them ; though the Particulars of it be 
notdeſcribed in Scripture : Or, becauſe, they voluncarily put them- 
ſelves under his Protection, in Recompence whereof they ſent him 
thoſe Preſents: Or, only as a free Acknowledgment of their Reſpects 
to him. 
. 12 And Jehoſhaphat waxed great exceedingly ; and 
he built in Judah || caſtles and cities of ſtore. 

13 And he tad much buſineſs in the cities of Judah 7: 
and the men of war, mighty men of valour ere 1n 
Jeruſalem. 
 IPartly to repairand fortifie them, and furniſh them with al] 
aeceffary Proviſions: and partly to purge our all the Relicks and 
Secds of Idolatry and Injuſtice, which were more ſecretly and ſubrilly 
managed in the Cities than in the Countrey, and which were firſt 
and moſt in the Cities, and thence ſpread their Infe&ion into the 
Countrey about them. See Jer. 2. 28. 

14 And theſe are the number of them according to 
the houſe of their fathers. Of Judah the captains of 
thouſands. Adnahthe chief, and with him mighty mer 
of valour, three hundred thouſand. 

E--- i5 And fnext to him m was Jehohanan the captain, 

Heb: #: and with himtwo hundred and fourfcore thouſand. 
bu hand. m Either 3. After his death, as his Succeſſor in the ſame Com- 

mand. And the like is ſuppoſed concerning Jehozabad, v.18. Or, 
rather 2. Next to him in placeand Authority ; or, at leaſt, in Pow- 
er and the Numbers of his Hoſt. S IN 

16 And next him, as Amaſiah the ſon of Zichri, 
who willingly offered himſelf» unco the LORD,and with 
him two hundred thouſand mighty zen of valour. 

» As Voluntiers and Auxiliaries, to be ready upon Occaſion. as 
the Service of God and the King ſhould require. Poſſibly theſe or 
moſt of them were the Strangers which had come out of [74:1 into 
the Kingdom of Jadab in 42's days, and probably fince that in his 
Time. | 

17 Andof Benjamin, Eliada a mighty man of valour, 
and with him armed men wich bow and ſhield,” two 
hundred thouſand. 

18 And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an 
hundred and fourſcore thouſand, ready prepared for 


the war. 
' 19 Theſe waited on the king o, beſides thoſe whom the 
king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah. 

o Theſe above-mentioned were the Trained Bands or Auxiharies : 
whoſe chief Officers waited upon the King toreceive his Commands, 
and to raiſe, and bring in all, or part of their Forces, to the ſervice 
of the King and Kingdom, as need required. | 


I! G1, - 


Dalaccs. 


©S H AP. XVEIEL. 


Gehoſhaphat joined m affinity with Ahab, is perſwaded to go with him againft 
Ramoth gilead, 1 3, Ahab, ſeduced by falſe prophets, according to 
the word of M:cajah, u ſtain chere, 4 34» 


Ow Jehoſhaphat had riches and honour in abun- 


dance, and joined affinity with Ahab #. 

a For Joram his eldeſt Son married Athaliah, Ababs Daughter, 
><. 21. 6. 2 Kings 8. 18, This Chapter is for ſubſtance the ſame with 
1 Kings 22. where it is explained. 

2 * And Þ after ceriain years he went down to Ahab 


* rKings to Samaria : and Ahab killed ſheep and oxen for him in 
+ Hb abundance, and for the people that he bad with him, 
\ + the ex and perfwaded | him to go up with him to Ramoth- 
of years. gilead. 
t. Heb. 3 And Ahab king of Iſrael ſaid unto Jehoſhaphat king 
_ of Judah, Wilt thou go: with me to Ramoth-gilead ? 
r. lived : 
BG And he anſwered him, I amas thou art, and my people 
C-mpare as thy people, and we will be with thee in the war. 
Mat:zo;21, 4 AndJehoſbaphat ſaid untothe king of Ifrael, Inquire, 
T pray thee, at the word of the LORD to day. 

5 Therefore the king of Iſrael gathered together of 

Prophets, four hundred men, and ſaid unto them, Shall 


N I CL & % 


we g0 to Ramoth-gilead to batte}, or ſhall I forbear ? 

And they ſaid, Go up, for God will deliver ir into the 

kings hand. 

6 Bur Jehoſhaphat ſaid, Is there not here a prophet of 
the LORD + beſides, that we might enquire of him ? 

7 And the king of Ifrae! ſaid unto Jehoſhaphar, f Heb.;z 
There js yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the © 4 
; LORD : but I hate him, for he never propheſieth 
good unto me, bur always evil: the fame js Micajah 
the ſon of Jimla, and Jehoſhaphart ſaid, Let not the 
king ſay ſo. 

8 And the king of Ifraelcalled for one of his || offi | 
and ſaid, f Fetch quickly Micajah the fr —_— *1 Or, 

9 And the king of Iſrael, and Jzholhaphar king of vi 
Judah, fat either of chem on his throne, clothed in heir haſten, 
robes, and they fat in a || void place, at the entring in | 
of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophelied 
before them. 

Io And Zedekiah the ſon of Chenaanah hath made 
him horns of icon, and ſaid, Thus faith the LORD 
With theſe thou ſhalt puſh Syria, 
ſumed. THeb. thy 

ir And all the prophets propheſfied ſo, ſaying, Go ;;;”"* 
up toRamoth-gilead, and proſper : for the TORD ſhall © 
deliver zt into the hand of the king. | 

12 And the meſſenger that went to call Micajah, 
ſpake to him, ſaying, Behold the words of the prophets 
declare good ro the king || with one aſſent : let thy word 
cherefore, I pray thee, belike one of theirs, and ſpeak 
thou good. | 

13 And Micajah ſaid, As the LORD liveth, even 
what my God faith that will I ſpeak. : 

14 And when he was come to the king, the king ſaid 
unto him, Micajah, ſhall we go coRamoth-gilead to 
batrel, or ſhall I forbear ? And he ſaid, Goye up and 
proſper, and they ſhall be delivered into your hand. 

15 And the king faid to him, How many times ſhall 
I adjure thee, that thou ſay nothing but the truth to 
me, in the Name of the LORD ? 

16 Then he ſaid, I did ſee all Ifrael ſcattered upon 
the mountains, as ſheep that have no ſhepherd, and 
the LORD ſaid, Theſe have no maſter, let them return 
therefore, every man to his houſe in peace. 

17 (And the king of Iſrael faidto Jehoſhaphat, Did 
I not tell thee, that he would not prophecy good unto 
me, || but evil ? ) : 
18 Again he faid, Therefore hear the word of 
LORD: Ifaw the LORD ſitting upon his throne = 
all the hoſt of heaven ſtanding on his right hand, and 
on his left, . 

19 And the LORD faid, Who ſhall entice Ahab 
king of Iſrael that he may go up and fall ar Ramoch- 
gilead ? and one ſpake, ſaying after this manner, and 
— ſaying after' that manner» : 

20 Then there came our a * ſpirit, and ſtood « 
the LORD, and ſaid, I will Jani him. - re 
_— _ _ him, Wherewith 2 

| 21 Andhe aid, I will go out aud be a lying ſpiri 
in the mouth of all his prophets. And the cab Bur 
thou ſhalt entice himr, and thou ſhak alſo prevail ; go our, 
and do even ſo. x 
: 22 ane __ _ LORD hath put a 
ying Ipirit inthe mouth of theſe thy prophets, an 
LORD hath ſpoken evil againſt rat : pg 

23 Then Zedekiah the fon of Chenaanah, came 
near, and {mote Micajah upon the cheek, and ſaid, 
Which way went the ſpirit of the LORD from me, to 
ſpeak unto thee 2? _ 
24 And Micajah ſaid, Behold, thou ſhalt ſee on that 
day, when thou ſhalt go || into t an inner chamber to 
hide thy ſelf. [| Or, jw 

chamber i 


25 Then the king of Iſrael ſaid, Take ye Micajah; ,j,nir- 
and carry him back to Amon the governour ofthe city, + Heb. 
and to Joaſh the kingsſon : "© chamber i 

26 And ſay, Thus faich the king, Put this fellow in * 9% 
the priſon, and feed him with bread of affliction, and 
with water of affliion, until I return in peace. 

27 And Micajah faid, if thou certainly return in 
peace, then hath not the LORD ſpoken by me. And 
he faid, Hearken, all ye people. 

28 So the king of Urael, and Jehoſhaphat the king 
of Judah went upto Ramoth-gilead. 

29 And the king of Iſrael ſaid toJehoſhaphat, I will 
diſguiſe my ſelf, and will go tothe battel, bur put thou 
on thy robes. So the king of Ifracl diſguiſed himſeif, 


| Or, floor, 


until + they be con- 


THceb:w1:; 


078 mouth, 


I Or, bu 
far evil, 


Job 66 


and chey wegt to the baitel, 
| 2G Now 


w 


Chap. XVIIL 


(n2] 


q 


þtwee? 
nl 
hitween 
wraftp: 
+ Hel 


pale | 


FPlil, 


* (hap 
17. 4. 6 


YA 
I; 


166 


r, 170 
her 50 
pare 
eb. 9 
ober # 


ambit 


Ip. X1X; 


bm 


eb; 


js, gud 


wade ſick. 


1 


* (hap. 


} Heb. he 
rewned 


os, © 


"7, 
"Pll:82:1: 


. 
. « 


At:10;34 
Nom:2, 
tp: 6; 9: 


Col: +207 
IPeticnq; 39+ rv. 17. 23- two Letters in the Hebrew Word, which is not unuſual in that 
'7* *8 Moreover, in Jeruſalem d:d Jehoſhaphat ſet of the 2 - 

Levites, and of the prieſts, and of the chief of the fathers | : | 
of Iſrael p for the * judgment of the LORD 4, and for firſt Letters being nor Prefixes,as they are commonly made, but pait 


Tſrael. 


. : ds than the nature of this Work can i 

>1 And it came to paſs, when the captains of the | more words pare 
of o "= . th L 

chariots ſaw Jehoſhaphar, that they ſaid, Ir zs the king es Sacred Matters concerning the Laws and Wo 

ut 


Iſrael : therefore they compaſled about himto fight: 


Jehoſhaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him, and | then he made this Order concerning 


God | moved them 70 depart from him. 


. , more than implyed in the beginning of the Verſe. 
22 Foritcame to paſs, that when che captains of the as: Rnng e Verſe 
chariots perceived, that it was not the king of Itrael, 


they turned back again | from purſuing him. 


: hems or, waen your Brethreu that awed in ruery City ſhall - 

> And a certain man drew a bow F at a venture, | **<m or, U "y City ſhall come to you, 

| ad {note the king of Iſrael + between the the joynts of | 7.22 {6.50 eſſed v. 10. appealing from their Ciry Courts tothe 
Hleb.inÞ5 the harneſs : therefore he ſaid to his chariot-man, 
p77 Turn thine hand, that thou mayeſt carry me out of the | are ſaid ro return, or be returned, as Blood, 1 Kings 2. 23. and Clouds 
1". hoſt, for I am F wounded 
joveen the NOM, a hi . Thar theſe Cauſes were never brought to Feruſalem before, and 

4 And the battel increaſed thatday : howbeit, the | ;1..ceore cannor b hoy » wy OO 

hevern the a of Iſrael ſtaid himſelf up in his chariot againſt the IT IAy lace 10.50 cermrnien Thirkur's Thanapg 


rſt Syrians until the even. And about the time of the ſun | are ſaid to be returned to Weſtminſter, which never were there be= 
(s 


going down, he died. 
CH A P, AA 
Tehoſhaphat reproved by the Prophet Jehu, wiſiteth his Kingdom, 1 


4+- | Womb till the time of their Converſion. And rhe Duſt, i 
kis Inſtruftions t0 the Judges, 5——7. To the Priefts and Levites, ſ, i. e. Mans 


8 


[T. 


| Fo D Jehoſhaphat the king of Judah returned to his 


houſe in peace 4, to Jeruſalem. 


a Safe, bzing miraculouſly delivered from eminent danger, as was 


xelated,; ch. 18. 31, 32+ 


a E . ins. - , - 

2 And Jehu the ſon of Hanani the ſeer b, went our nd Conſciences, upon the hearing, of the Parties, ſhall judge to be 
to meet him, and ſaid to king Jeholhaphat, Shouldeſt | as Corrupt Judges do. | ine 
6.139 thou belp the ungodly, and * love them that hate the Io And what cauſe ſoever ſhall cometo you of your 

RD c? therefore ;s wrath come upon thee from brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and 


before the LORD d. 


b Of whom ſee 1 Kings 16. 1, 2. c Was this agreeable to thy Duty and judgments x, Ye (hall even warn them that they 
and Love which thou profeſſeſt to God _ _— rv _ 

haſt entred into ſo ſtrift an Alliance &Friendſhip with wicke p eg, 46” | 
my ſworn Enemy» and given ſuch Aſſiſtance to him ? d Therefore Fi ry hs. —_— on your brethren ;: this do, and JS 
God is angry with thee, and will chaftiſe thee for this miſcarriage. all NOT Tretpals &, ; 
Which he did partly by ſtirring up the Moabites, and others to invade u Of which ſee the Notes on Deut. i7 8, 
- him, <<. 20, partly by permitting his Eldeſt Son Fehoram to Kill all | OF Differences ſhall ariſe abour the ( , 
his Brethren, <<. 21: 4. and principally by bringing that ſore and | 2Ne party poſſibly putting this, and the other a quite differing 
almoſt general Deſtrution upon his Gravd-children by Jehu, 2 Kings Senſe upon the ſame place, or one alledging one place, and the 
9. 27. and 10+ 13, 14. Which was the proper Fruit of his Alliance | other another place, which may ſeem to clath with it. »y Ye ſhall 


with Ahah. 


Nevertheleſ; thereare * good thinzs found in thee e admonith the Offender, and others, to take berter heed to them= 
17.4, 6s © os ha he AE away —_ __ ha ue of che les d. ſelves, and their ways for the future. z So you ſhall not bring Guilt 


and haſt prepared thine heart f to ſeek God. 


ei.e, Good ——__ pans _ an quan 6rd wg 
God more regards than this particular Error : and therefore thou "IP La | | «> eg 
he will haben thee, yet 4a will not utterly deſtroy thee. f Oc, of] Fox —— of = __ - 2 and Zebadiah the ſon 
dire&ed or ſet thy heart ; 3. e, Thou haſt ſought and ſerved God with | © mael, the ruler of the houſe of Judah c, forall the 
all thy heart, and not feignedly, as many others do. And this work hp | 
of preparing or direQting his heart, is here aſcribed ro Jehoſhephat, you e. + Deal couragiouſly, and the LORD ſhall be Heb.-. _; 
as el{ewere it is attributed to God, Prov.16. x. Phil. 2.13. becauſe with the ood f. | - F 
it is Mans Attion, but performed by Gods Grace, preventing, S s and dos 


enabling, and enclining him to it- 


- or Eccleliaſtical Matters c Either x the Pri 1Ce, or chief Rul 

4 And Jehoſhaphar dwelt at Jeruſalem 3 and + he} 1. nc King, of che Tribe of Judah, which is called the Houſe of 
went Out again g through the people, from Beerſheba Judah. 2 Sam: 2: 4, 7, 10: 1 Kings +2: 21, 23. 1 Chron: 28: 4: Jer: 
a/vmt, to mount Ephraim h, and brought them back unto the 


LORD God of their Fathers z. 


g Once he went by his Officers, c<. 17. 7, &c. Now he went in fully, the Kings houſe of Jud#b, Jer: 22:6- And whoſo fit to manage 
his own perſon. h i-e. Through his whole Kingdom, whereofrheſe 

vere the two Bounds. 7 Such of them 3s had revolred from God to ' : Tac - 

Idols, he reclaimed by his good Counſel and Example and by the In- | 224 his People; or between Subje& and Subje&, which may be 
ſtruftions of the Levites and Prieſts: whom doubtleſs now he carried | called the Kings Matters, becauſe it was a principal part of his Office 


with him, as he ſent them before with his Officers of Stare. 


5 And he ſet Judges in the land, throughout all the ſee your juſt Sentences executed ; which work was fitly committed 


fenced cities of Judah, city bv city & ; 


\ Or JUC ; | _ | CorreCtions, and might work the Guilty to an acknowledement of 
 & In every City. for it ſelf and the Countrey adjacent, that Juſtice | their Fault, and a ſubmiſſion to their Frnithnens. And A this is 
might be adminiſtred with the moſt eaſe and convenience to the 


People. and they might nor all be forced togo up to Jeruſ.lem. 


a . vigorouſly in their Work, becauſe they had the Levites to ſtand by 
6 And faid ro the judges, Take need what ye do : mM anc y rats we wdly- 
Fat.:. for * ye judge notfor main, but for the LORD 7, * who | their doing of Good and Juſt Things, 


is with you 2 Þ in the judgment. 


C H A P. XX. 
ths. © { Yourepreſent Gods Perſon, tv whom Judgment belongeth, and Sobel drab ft Judah : 7h Fl 5h FY ; 
t Het. 5 YOU have your Commiſſion and Power from God, and not from Man, | ** js _—_ : Jenojbaphat in his fear procdaimeth 8 
4-7 .only ;and your Admi-iſtration of Juſtice is not only for Mans good fa#t, i SMBs 3. 13. Jehaziel's Prophecy, 14 7. 
matterof but alſo for Gods Honour and Service. m Both to obſerve your | The En:mies are-vverthrown, 20 "25: The People r-turn in Triumph 
MF. Carriage, and to defend you againſt all thoſe Enemies whom the bleſſing God, 26 ——3. Hs Reign: his Nevy miſcarrieth, 
Impartial Exerciſe of Juſtice may provoke. EDT. | | 
7 Wherefore now, ler the fear of the LORDbe upon \& came to paſs after this alfo, that the children of 
: you, take heed and do zz : for there isno iniquity with | & Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them 
Deut. the LORD our God, nor * reſpe& of perlons » nor | 


Job 34: 19: ©0KINgS of gifts 6. | | | 
zz. 9 And therefore you who are in Gods ſtead, and do his Work,and | # To wit, the people that dwelt in Mount Sei Compare 
1. muſt give an Account to him, muſt imitate God here. Of reſpet$ of rag. ' nt Seir, who were now 


Perſons, ſee Deut. 10.17. Job 34. 19. Afts 10.34. oSoasto pervert] is the Name of a peculiar People called either Mehumin, of whom # Gri” 
Judgment for them ; by comparing this with Exod. 23. 8. Deut. 16+ 


controverſizs r, + when they returned to Jeruſalem <5. 


| | now dwelt in Mount Seir. being either of the Old Stock of the 
þ Who were not Prieſts and Levites, but ſuch perſons of othe: 
Tribes as weremoſt Eminent for their dignity Ability and Integrity. 


1. CHRONEICIRES Chap. XX. 


A he kir :1 had commanded the cap- , But whether theſe Perſons made up one Court, called the Sanhedrim 
zo Now tve king of Sy ria had con Crutoe: th \ by which all Cauſes Eccleſiaſtical and Civil were decided ; or there 
tains of the chariots that were with him, laying, Fig ; 
ve not with ſmall or great, fave only with the king of 


were two diſtin& Courts, the one Eccleſiaſtical, conſiſting of the 
Priefts and Levites ; the other Civil, conſiſting of the Chief of the 
Fathers of Iſrael, beiongs to another place to determine, and requires 
: qi e& For 

IÞ, 
God, r For Matters of Difference b:tween Hikes 6a rf our 
When Fehoſbapha: and his Company were . returned to Jeruſalem, 


eſtabliſhi Jud h 
But ſo this laſt Clauſe may ſeem ſupertiuous and wm ny pal 


1 | Or rather, 
when they, i. e. the Cauſes. and Controverſies laſt mentioned, fhal 
rerurn, or be returned to Jeruſalem ; i. e. When the Cauſes ſhall be ſo 
difficulr that the Judges ordained in every City cannot determine 


great Court or Council at Jeruſalem. OF which ſee on Exod. 18. 26, 
Deut, 1.17 $& 17.8, Asforthe Phraſe, not only Perſons but Thin gs, 


Eccleſ. 12. 2. and Reprogch, Hoſ (2. 14 If it be further obje&ed, 


be anſwered both from the uſage of our Law, wherein ſuch Cauſes 


fore ; and from the uſe of Scripture, wherein Sinners are commonly 
faid to return to the Lord, though they had never been with the Lord 
in that Senſe before, but wereeſtranged fom God even from the 


Body, is ſaid to return #0 the Earth, Eceleſ. 12. 7. though it was 
never there befores 


9 Andhecharged them, ſaying, Thus ſhall yedo in the 
fear of the LORD, faithfully and with a perfe& heare 7. 


e Paſſing ſuch Sentences with their Mouths, as your own Minds 


Juſt, and nor ating againſt your own Conſciences forCarnal Motives 


blood «, between law and commandment, fſtacutes 


treſpaſs not againſt the LORD y, and /o wrath come 


x When any Debates 


meaning of any of Gods Laws 


not only give a Rightebus Sentence for what is paſt, bur ye ſhall 


and Wrath upon your ſelves and others, which otherwiſe you will 
certainly do. 


11 And behold, Amariah the chiefpricft ;s over you 


kings matters d: alſo the Levites [hall be officers before 
ake courage þ 
4 Shall be your Preſident to dire& and aſſiſt you. 6In ſpiritual, 


13: 11: Ezek: 4: 6. Or, 2. The Ruler of the Kings Houſe, which 


alſo ſeems to be called the Hoſe of Fudah, 2 Chron. 22, 10, and more 


the Kings Matters as the Ruler of the Kings Houſe 2 4d For Civil 
Cauſes or Controverſies which might ariſe cither between the King 
to ſee them juſtly decided. e They ſhall beat your command to 


to the Levites, as perſons who might add their Inſtructions to the: 


an Argumentto encourage the Judges to proceed couragiouſly and 


them and affiſt them. #7. -, Shall prote& and bleſs good Judges in 


F other beſide the Ammonites «, came againſt Jehoſhaphat + Gr. of ch 
to battel. | Mireans: 


Confederate with chem, as appears from wv. 10, 22, 23. Or, This < .26.,7,$- | 
you read 2 Chron. 26-7. ( and fo there is only a Tranſpoſition of 


Language ) or Minzans, as the LXX Interpreters render this word ; 
or Ammonium, or Mehaammonim, ag it is in the Hebrew' ( the two 


of the Word or proper Name of that P: ople) who, as it may ſeem, 


Edomites, or another Nation ſince come in their ſtead or mixed with 
them» Others render the place thus, for ( 25 the Hebrew way ts oft 
$ VU 4 gaken | 


Chap. XX. TH ICIH RO 


the largeneſs of the Contederacy, 


Mount Ser in their Quarrel. 
- 2 Then there came ſome that told Jehoſhaphat, 


ſaying, Therecomethagreat multitude againſt thee from 
beyond the ſea b on this fide Syria e, and behold, they 


be in Hazazon-tamar, which is Engedi. 
 b To wit, the Dead Sea, beyond which Mount Serr lay. c Or, 
and from Syris, largely ſo called, and fo it includes the Moabites and 
Ammonites, And it may be thus exprefled, to intimate that they 
Came by the Inſtigation of the Syrians, who thought by this means 
= revensc themſelves of Fehoſbaphat for joyning with Ahab againſt 
TNEMe. 2 R 

; And j-hoſaphat feared d, and ſet j himſelf to 
ſeek the LORD e, and proclaimed a faft f chroughout 


all Judahe 

d Partly from Humane f..'!ty. and partly from the Remembrance 
of his 6wn Guilt and the Wrath of God de::ounced againſt him 
for .it, <<. 19. 2. e ThePhraſe notes his et: 'c_ N olution, Scriouſ- 
neſs, and Earneſtneſs in it, and the prep. i:.;, +24 7 
forit. f Partly in token of his Humiliativ 4a Point ac? for his 
Sins, and partly tro make himſelf and his peoplic nv Fervent 10 
their Prayers. ; 


4 And Judah gathered themſelves together, to 9+! 


+ Heb. 


T1 face. 


they came to feek the LORD. 

And Jehoſhaphat ſtood in the congregation of 
Judah. and Jeruſalem, in the houſe of the LORD g 
before the new court h. 
 £ Largely ſocalled, #.e. in one of the Courts of the Temple, 
even in the Court of the People, and upon that Brazen Scaffold 
which Solomon had Ere&ed for ſuch a purpoſe, 2 Chron. 6. 13 +h7. e. 
Belidevsand before the Prieſts Court : for there were but two Courts 
belonging to the Temple, as is noted 2 Kings 21. 5. & 23.12. Aad 
Fehoſhaphar ſtood in the one, which muſt be thar of the People ; and 
before the other, which therefore can be no other than that of the 
Prieſts, %hich is called the New Court, becauſe it had been lately 
renewed when the Altar was renewed, ch. 15.8. as the Command 
of Love is called a new Command, Joh. 13. 34, 1 John 2. 8. becaule it 
was ſo ſolemnly renewed, and revived, and reinforced by Chriſt. 


6 And ſaid, O LORD God of our fathers, ar? not 
thou God in Heaven ? and ruleſt ne: thou over all the 
kingdoms of the heathen ? and in thine hand is there 
»ot power and might, ſo that none is able to withſtand 


thee. 

7 Art not thou our God, + who didft drive out the 
inhabitantsof this land before thy people rael,and gaveſt 
it to the ſeed of Abraham * thy friend for ever 3? 

#5, e. To whom thcu haſt engaged thy ſelf by Covenant to be 
his Friend, and the Friend of his Seed for ever, and therefore we 
truſt thou wilt nor forſake us his Poſterity. 


$8 And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a 


K: ſanQuary therein for thy name, ſaying, 
4 hy 4 9 * If when evil cometh upon -us, as [| the ſword. 
+332 84 judgment &, or peſtilence, or famine, we ſtand before 


Chap. 6. 
28. this houſe, and in thy preſence, ( for thy name 3s in 


_ zhe” this houſe ) and cry unto thee in our affliction, thou then 
wdement, Wilt hear and help. 
| "  k Or rather, the ſword of Judgment-or of Vengeance, 3. e- War where- 
by thou judgeſt and puniſkeſt thy People for their Sins. Compare 
Levite 26. 25. 

ro And now behold, the children of Ammon, and 
4,9, 19. Moab, and mount Seir, whom thou * wouldeſt not Jer 
* Numb. Tſrael invade, when they came our of the land of Egypr, 
20. 21. but * they turned from them, and deſtroyed them 


nor : 
11 Behold, I ſay, how they reward us, to Come to 


caſt us out of thy poſſeſſion, which thou haſt given us 


to inherit. 43's : 
12 O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we 


have no might againſt this great company that cometh 
againſt us 1: neither know we what to do, but oureyes 


are upon thee 7. 

I Thus he ſpeaks, partly though he had great Armies to be drawn 
together in due time upon great Occaſions, <<. 17. 14, &c. Yet 
he ſeems to have been ſurprized by theſe Men before his Forces were 
in readineſs to oppoſe them, and partly becauſe he well knew and 
piouſly and wiſely conſidered that no Humane Forces, though 
numerous and valiant, were able ro defend him withour Gods 
Aſſiſtance, which he feared by his Sins he had forfeited, and then 
he had really been as weak as Water. m Looking to thee only tor 


Reliefand Succour. 
13 And all Judah ſtood before the LORD with their 


little ones », their wives and their children. 

» Whom they uſed to preſent before the Lord in times of great 
Diſtreſs, partly to ſtir up themſelves ro more fervent and faithful 
Prayers, that rheir Eye being upon their harmleſs and render Canils 
dren, might affe& rheir Heart with a greater Senſe of their Miſery : 
and partly to move God to Compaſſion, not as if he were capable 


of Paſſions or Changes upon ſugh a Sight, but begauſc God bath 


| Heb. 
hou. 


* Jam, 2. 
* 


EDeut. 2. 


taken ) with them ( 3.e. with the Moabites ) were.the Ammonites or 
children of Ammon. Which may be diſtinQly noted, either to ſhew 

in which not only the Meabz#es 
were engazed, who.dwelt nearer Jehoſhapbats Kingdom, bur the | 
Ammmites alſo who lived at a greater diſtance from him: Or to 
intimate that the Ammonites bein poſſivly inſtigated by the Syrians 
their next Neighbours, were the firſt Beginners and chief Promoters 
ofthe War, and Engaged both the Moabirer and the Inhabitants of 


fixing his Heart ' 


help of the LORD : even our of all the cities of Judaii * 


A ICIS. 


---> 5600 himſelf that he will be prevailed with by ſuch Methods as 


14 Thenupon Jahazielthe ſon of Zechariah 
| g theſo 
- Benajah, the ſon of Jeiel, the ſon of Mattaniah - 
Levice of the ſons of Aſaph, came the ſpirit of the LORD 
in _ _ of the congregation o. 
6 He was ſuddenly inſpired by God with the followin 
; s Meſſage. 
: ks And he aid, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye 
in abttants'of Jeruſalem, and thou king Jehoſhaphat 
_ faith the LORD unto you, * Be not afraid nor 
iſmayed by reaſon of this great multitude, for the 
_ -q not yours, but Gods p. 
p God will fight for you, and 111 
= vo _ gl CO and he alone will: do the Work, you 
16 10 morrow go ye down q agai 
| ; gainſt them : behold 
_ _ up by rs b, _ of Ziz, and ye ſhall fing + Heb 
, them. at the end of the || brook, befor 7 ſent, 
5 mite : e the wilderneſs % 
q From Jeruſalem, j ..q, Paley 
Me upon ws v = Sox he and his Army now were ; which ale 
17 1e Inall not zeed to fight in this battel : ( 
e: ; ICt your 
ſelves, ſtand ye ill, and ſee the ſalvation of the LORD 
| m_ You, O Judah and Jeruſalem : fear not, nor be 
imaid ; to morrew go out againſt th 
| LORD will be with = . _— Oo hs 
: 18 And Jehoſhaphat bowed his head, with bis face to 
the ground r + andall Judah, and the inhabitants of Je- 
rut ..em feil before the LORD, worſhipping the LORD 
y In token of his Reverence to God and his Meſſage, his bulic? 
of the Promiſe, and his Thankfulneſs for ſo great a Favour Y 
| . I9 And the Levites, ofthe children of the Kohath. 
_ = - _ children of the Korhites, ſtood up s to 
' praiſe the D God of Iſrael with a 1 
emp oud voice on 
5 By Jehoſhaphats Appointment. # 7, e. With moſt I 
with Heartand Voice lifted up : whereby they DO ning 
aſlurance of the Viftory, as if it were al:cady accompliſhed, 
20 And they role early in the morning, and went 
forth into the wilderneſs of Tekoa : and as they went 
forth Jehoſhaphat ſtood and ſaid, Hear me, O Judah 
and ye inhabitants of Jeruſalem, * Believe inthe LORD * Lick 
your God, fo ſhall ye be eſtabliſhed ; believe + his 4 ff 
prophets ?, ſo ſhall ye proſper «. _ 
# 7, e; Gods Promiſe delivered tous by this 
quently all other PrediCtions of the Prophets 
or ſhall be 
Promiſe. 
21 And when he had conſulted wich the people x, he 
appointed fingers unto the LORD y, and Þ that ſhould + Heb 
ou the —_ —_ S, as tiey went out before 2: 
che army, and to lay, * Praiſe the LORD, for hi "P1361 
endureth for ever. ; A _— 
x 7,e. With the Elders or chief of the P 
their Advice abour the Expediency of the The ; 
ach Fug. on LEO HY prepare themſelves and the Pe 
ro this great Work of Praiting God To the H -rVi 
of God z Or, the Glory, or one, or NN Sy 
( by a vulgar Hebraiſm ) the Holy Majeſty ; a Periphraſis of God. 
Ir, accoralng t0 the beauty or magnificence of the ſantuary 2,0, 10 the 
_ wks ORIEY Magnificent Manner, as they uſed to do it 
'Nn rac Mm 3 W ; c 
INE: - . P 4 ; vg _ the following Song was uſually ſung, as 
22 | And whea they began Þ to ſing and to praiſe 4, | Heb.«i 


:he LORD fer ambuſhments b againſt the children of 
Ammon, Moab and mount Seir, which were come - * 


1gainſt ſudah, and || they were ſmitten. + Heb.in 

# So acceptable are the Fervent Prayers of Gods People to God, [imging and 
and ſo terrible to their Enemies. 6 Or, lyers in watt, either 1, he proſe, 
Holy Angels, who appeared inthe ſhape of Men, and poſſibly pur |; Or,thy 
on the Appearances and Vilages of Moabites or Ammonites, and in ſmare one 
that ſhape ſlew the reſt, who ſuppoſing this Slaughter to be done anther. 
by a part of their own Army, fell upon them, and ſo broke forth 
into Mutual Slaughters. Or, 2. God raiſed Jealouſies and Ani- 
moſiries amongſt themſelves, which by degrees broke forth, firſt 
into ſecret Ambuſhments, which one party laid for another, and 
then into open Huſtilities and Outrages to their utter Deſtruttion. 

So Vain are all Mens Attempts againſt God, who needs none to de- 
troy his Enemies but themſelves, and their own Miſtakes and Pal. 
lions, which he can when he Do, arm againſt them. 

23 For the children of Ammon and Moab, ſtood up 
againſt the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to flay and 
deſtroy them : and when they had made an end of 
the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped Þ to deſtroy + Heb; 
another. or the 

24 And when Judah came toward the wateh-tower deftrutti, 
c in the wilderneſs, they looked unto the multitude, 
and behold, they were dead bodies fallen upon the 
earth, and Ff none eſcaped- here wi 

c Which ſtood upon the Cliff of Ziz mentioned above v. 6. or = an 
ſome other Hill which looked toward the Wilderneſs, where their eſcapinge 
Enemies lay encamped, whoſe Numbers, and Order, and conditi- 
on they could deſcry fiom thence. 

25 And when Jehoſhaphat and his people came to take 
away the ſpoil of them, they found among them in 


abundance both riches with the dead þodies, and 
precious 


* Exod, 
14-1314 


his Prodicte 
OO, and conſe- TY 
that either h 
# Take heed, leſt by your Unbelief you Se Gen 


; partly to take 
and partly that 
People under them 


+ Heb. 


Chap. xx Þ 


[TI 
bleſs 


*He 
had. 


* Ch. 


lo, 


*#1K 
22.41, 


mide to. 


fr , 


"IKings 


qa, fo, 


5.16 


Chap» 


ſ That I's 
bleſ$11ige 


* Heb! 
kead. 


*Ch. 17. 


Io, 


#1 Kings 
212.41, CC. 


mide 70 aſe 
Gn, 


| 3 ! King 


a, fo, 


. and his Worſhip. 


; book of the kings of 1frael. 


K X« 11 C HU 


precious jewels 4 ( which they ſtript off for themſelves) 
more than they could carry away : and they were three 
days in gathering of the ſpoil, it was ſo much. 

a Which they brought with them partly to corrupt any of Jeko- 
ſhaphat's Officers as they ſaw Occaſion : partly to procure neceſlarie: 
for their vat Army frem time to time: and partly becauſe the) 
cams to a Triumph rather than to a Fight, being ſecure and confi 
denr of the victory, becauſe of their great Numbers, and eſpeciall; 
becauſe they thought to ſurprize Jeboſhaphat ere he could make any 
conſiderable preparations againſt them ; God alſo permitting them 
to be puffed up to their own deſtruion. 

26 And on the fourth day they aſſembled them- 
ſelves in the valley of || Berachah e; for there they bleſ- 
ſed the LORD : therefore the name of the ſame place 
was called the valley of Berachah unto this day. 

e Heb. of bleſcing ; ſo called from their ſolemn Bleſsings and 
Piaifes given to God in it upon this Occaſion. 

27 Then they returned every man of Judah and Je- 
ruſalem, and Jehoſhaphat in the * forefront of them, to 
go again to Jeruſalem with Joy : for the LORD had 
made them to rejoice over their enemies. 

28 And they came to ſeruſalem with plalteries, and 
harps, and trumpets, unto the houſe of the LORD f 

7 To renew their Praiſes in the Court of the Temple, the proper 
and uſual pſjace for it. 

29 And * the fear of God was on all the kingdoms 
of thoſe countries g when they heard that the LORD 
fought againſt the enemies of Iſrael. 

g Which were near, or which heard theſe things. - 

20 So the realm of Jehoſhaphat was quiet : for his 
God gave him reſt round abour. 

21 * And Jehoſhapat reigned over Judah : he was 
thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and 
he reigned twenty and five years in Jeruſalem : and his 
mothers name was Azubah rhe Daughter of Shilhi. 

22 And he walked in the ways of Aſa his father, 
and departed not from it, doing tht which was right 
in the tight of the LORD. 

33 Howbeit, the high places were not taken away 6; 
for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts un- 
to the God of their fathers z. 


h Nor fully nor univerſally ; of which ſee on «<<. 17.6. 5 The 
Fault was not in Jehoſhaphat, but in the People, who, though they 
did Worſhip the true God, yet would not beconfined to rhe Tem- 
ple, but for their own Conveniency, or frem their affection to their 
Ancient Cuſtom, choſe to Worſhip him in the High Pjaces; which 
Jehoſhapha: was forced to connivear, leſt thoſe People being debarred 
from that dearly-beloved Practice, ſhould fall into a Neglect of God 


34 Now the reſt of the ads of Jehoſhophar, firſt 
and laſt, behold, they are written in the } book of 
Jehu the ſon of Hanani, * who Þ is mentioned in the 


' 35 And after this & did Jehoſhaphat king of Judah 
joyn himſelf with Ahaziah king of Iſrael, who did 
very wickedly }. 

k This is mentioned as an Aggravation of his Sin, after ſo great 
a Favour and Obligation laid upon him by God; and after he hid 
been ſo ſharply reproved and threatned by a Propher for the ſame 
thing, eþ. 19; 2+ yethe relapfes into the ſame Sin; which procee- 
ded partiy trom that near Relation which was contracted between 
the two Families, and partly from the ſweetneſs and eaſineſs ef Je- 
hyhaphat's Temper, which could not refift the Sojicirations of o- 
thers, in ſuch things as might ſeem indifferent. For he did nor 
joyn with him ina War, as he did with Abad, bur in a peaceable 


of David, becauſe of the covenant that he had made 


# Two ſons called by the ſame Name, though doubtleſs diſtin« | 
/ 


oviſhed by ſome additional Title, which is not mentioned here, 
becauſe it did not concera ſucceding Ages ro know it- Though 
indeed there is a Difference in their Hebrew Names, the one being 
Azaria, the other Azariahu, hu being the laſt Syllabe in his name, 
aS in Elihu, and others» b So he is called either, 1.» Becauſe he was 
ſo by Right: Or 2» Becauſe he was King not only of Judah and 
Benjamin, but of a great number of !/-ae/ices, who had come into, 
and ſett]-d themſelves in his Kingdem, in his and in his Prede- 
ceſſors days; who being a conſiderable, and the pureſt and beſt 
part of 1ſrael, may well be called J/r««!, being more truly and 
properly Gods {ree! than their Apoſtate Brethren, who were no 
longer wortby of that Name. Or 3. Becauſe all his Subjects were 
Iſraelites; and therefore he was King of 1/[ratl, though not of all 1[rael. 
Or, 4. With ſome reflection upon his Memory, for making fo 
ſtrict an Alliance and Friendſhip with the King of 1ſrael, whoſe 
Cauſe he defended with his own and his Kingdoms great hazard, 
as if he had been the King not ſo much of Judah, as of 1/rael. And 
this miy be the rather noted here,b-cauſe here ſpeedily follows aſad, 
Effect of that wicked and curſed Match. Some ſay I/rae! was foiſt- 
ed into ſome Copies by the tranſcriber inſtead of Judah, as it was 
firſt writren. IN x $40 | 
3 And their father gave them great gifts of ſilver 
and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities 
in Judahs but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram, be- 
cauſe he was the firſt-born ec. 
c Whom he conceived rhat he ought to prefer by vertue of that 
Law of God, Deut. 2:. 15. though otherwiſe he would nct have 
dene it, having probably ere this time perceived his perverſe and 
wicked Inclinations, and how much he was ſwayed by tus Idola- 
tcrous Wife, Now he ſaw his Error when it was coo Jate. | 
Now * when Jehoram was riſen up to the king- _ 
dom of his father, he ſtrengthened himſelf d,. and flew * 
all bis brethren with the ſword e, and divers alſo of the 
princes of Iſrael f. ;- 
d He rook C-urage and hardned his heart, 2s that word ſome= 
times ſignihes. e Partly becauſe they either did,or he knew that chey 
would, oppoſe him in his wicked Deſigns ; and partly for his 
own Security, leſt his people, who, as he believed, would be high- 
ly exaſperated with the Execution of his Counſ?!s, ſhou}d advance 
any of them to the Throne, and depoſe him. F Either x. of J«- 
dah, here called Iſrael, of which ſee rhe Notes on wv. 2. Or, 2. The 
Princes or Chief Men of Iſrae!, properly fo called; not the Princes 
of a!l Iſrael or of the ſeveral Tribes thereof, bur the Chief of thoſe 
Iſraelites, who out of love to God, and to the true Religion, had 
forſaken their Eſtates and worldly Advantages in the Kingdom of 
Iſrasl, and were now incorporated with the Kingdom of Judah. 
Theſe he eſpecially ſtruck at, either 1+- Becauſe his Wife inſtigared 
him thereunto, both to puniſh them for their Revolt fiom her Fax 
ther, and to deter others from following their Example : Or, 2. 
Becauſe ke juſtly and truly rhoughr theſe would be moſt firm and 
conftant to, and zealous for that Religion which he was reſolved 
to oppoſe, being both by their Conſcience and Intereſt obliged to ir,. 


5 Jehoram was thirty and two years old'g when 
he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Je- 
rufalem. JE x 

g Of this, and v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.ſee the Notes on 2 Kings 8.17, &Cc.. 
6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Iſrael, 
like as did the houſe of Ahab : for he had the daugh- 
ter of * Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which wss +» Ch, 22, 
evil in the eyes of 'the LORD. | 26 | 

7 Howbeit, the LORD would not deſtroy the houſe. 


with David b, and as he promiſed to givo a Þ light to 

him, and to * his ſons forever. 

h For which in 2 Kings 8 1G. it is for David his ſervants ſake ; i. e. T Heb. 
Not for David's Merits, but for Gods free promiſe and Covenant, lamp or 
2S iis here explained. candle, ; 
8 In his days the Edomites revolted from under thef * 2 Sam-; 


way only, in a Matter of Trade and Commerce. And yet God 
ſharply reproves and punifheth him for it. v 37. to ſhew his grear 
Giſl:ke and dercfiation of all friendly and famiiiar Converſation of | 
his Servants and People with Idolaters and profefled Eremies of Ged 
and of Religion, as Ahaziah was, who is therefore thus ſtigmarized 
in the yixt words, who did very wickedly. I Or who did induftrizuſly 
and mal. ciouſly and conſtantly work wickedneſs, as the Hebrew phrale Im- 
plies, giving himſelf ep to Idolatry ad all wickedneſs. 


26 And he joyned himſelf with him to make ſhips 
to g0 to Tarſhiſh mz: and they made the ſhips in Ezi- 
oN- geber ». 


m Of which ſee on 1 Kings lo. 22. & 22. & 48. n Of which 
ſee on 1 Kings 9. 26. 


37 Then Eliezer the ſon of Dodavah of Mareſbah, 
prophecied ayainft Jehoſhaphar, ſaying, Becauſe thou 
haft joyned thy ſelf with Ahaziah, the LORD hath 
broken thy works. And the (bips were broken that 
they were not able to go to Tarſhi(b, 


CHAF. MAL 
Jehoram is made King and /layerh bis Brethren, 1——= 4. His wicked Reign, 
5m —7. Edom and Libnah revolt, 8--- =13. The Prophecy of Elijah 
againſt f.m in writing, 12— —— 15. Phil:ſtines and Arabians oppreſs 
tim . hit incurable dijeaſe, death and bruial, 16—--20, 

\ | Ow * Jehoſhaphar ſlept wich his fathers, and was 
buried with his fathers in the city of David : 

ahd Jchoram his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 

2 And he had brethren the ſons of Jeheſhaphar, 
Azariah @, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah a, 
and Michael, and Shephatiah : all theſe were the ſons 
of jehothaphar king of Iſrael 4, 


| raiſed up ſo many Enemies againit him, both from abroad 3nd ax 


dominion of Judah, and made themſelves a king. 7 2 
* . . . | 1:19$ 
9 Then Jehoram * went forth with his princes, and ;,. .s. - 
all his chartoes with him : and he roſe up by night, and 2 Kings 
{mote the Edomices which compaſled him in, and the = I 
captains of the chariots. * "+7 2b: LO As 
4 . | 4 IT, Occ» 
19 So the Edomites revolted from under the hand + jeb. 
of Judah unto this day. The ſame 2im2e alfa did Lib- bend. 
nah revolt from under his hand ; becauſe he had for- * 2 Kings 
{aken the LORD God of his fathers 5. 6. 
;. To wit, publickly and avowedly, {ctring him at Defiance, as 
the next Verſe ſhews. And this is mentioned, either r. As the - 
Reaſon why the Prieſts, whoſe Ciry Libnah was, forſook him, be- 
cauſe he had forſaken God ; Or rather, 2. As the Reaſon why God: 


home. | 

11 Moreover, he made high places & in the moun- 
tains of Judah, and cauſed the inhabirants of Jeru- : 
ſalem ro commit fornication /, and compelled Judah 
thereto. 


+ Not to the Lord, whoſe ſworn Enemy he was, but to Baals or 
Falſe Gods. 1 Not only by his Counſel and Example, bur as it fol- 
lows, by Force, by Threats and penalti-s. 


12 And there came a writing to him fromElijak the 
prophet ww, ſaying, Thus ſairh the LORD God of. 
David thy father », Becauſe thou haſt not walked in 
the ways of Jehoſhaphat thy fathero, nor in the ways | 
of Aſa king of Judah ; = 

m Qu. How: could this be, when E!{jah was wrapt up. to 
ven un Fehoſhaphajs time, 2 Kings a 3. il. ſy, E\fhcr I, 

3 5 


Heo2. k 
This 


ap. XXI. I CHRO 


; ſome other Prophet called E/;ah, becauſe he aQed in 
os = 5 be Power of Zlijeb, for which cauſe John the Baprilt alſo 
3s ſo called. Or rather, 2+ This was rea ly written by Elijah, who 
by che Spirit did clearly foreſee and forerell the Reign of fehoram, 
(as others did of Joſiah, « Kings 13 2. and 1/4iah of Cyrus, < 45. 
3- long before they were born) and in conſideration thereof left 
this Prophecy with Eſha, to be delivered in due time by him, or 
ſome beer perſon in his Name, and as from his Mouti. » Whoſe 
Name he mentions either to upbraid him with his degeneration 
from ſo worthy a parent: Or totake off his preſumption and confis 
dence, which was grounded upon his being the Son and Succeſlor 

_ of David, in whoſe poſterity the Crown was ſettled for ever by Gods 
ſpecial Appointment, and by the Approbation of the people. o 
hoſe wiſe Counſel and good Example thou haſt deſpiſed, 


13 But haſt walkedin the way of the ings of Iſrael, 

- and haſt made Judzh and the inhabitants of Jerufalem | 
to g0 a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the houle | 
of Ahab, and alſo haſt flain thy brethren of thy fa- 


thers houſe, which were better than thy ſelfp: 
More Innocent, and Righteous, and Pious 


_ Behold, with # a great plague will the LORD 
ſmite thy people q, and thy children, and thy waves 7, 
and all thy goods. 

' 9g Qs. Why the People for his Sin? Anſw. 1. Becauſe the Gene- 


eb. a 


t ſiroke 


——— _ 


” R—_- 


had flain all the * eldeſt. So Ahatiah the ſon of Jecho- * Chap.z1; 
;ram king of Judah reigned. I7. 


; mily, who o:herwiſe, rhey expe&2d, would recover ſtrength, and 


NICLES. 
CHAP XXIL 
| Ahatiah is made King, reigneth wickedly 1-— = 4+ In his conf. deracy 
with Foram the ſon of Abab he is ſla'n by Jehuz 5 m—--= 9. Athol a; 
d:ſtroyeth all the Seed Royal, ſave Joaſh who was kia, and uſu peth the 
Kingaom, 10-—=— 2. - 
Nd the inhabitants of Jeruſalem made * Ahazjah , * Kings 


his youngeſt ſon, king in his ttead : for the bai,d 
of men that came with the Arabians a to the camp, 


_ Chap. xy, 


4 Either, 1. « crue! fort of Men who came along with the Ara. 
bians, and therefore ſlew thoſe whom the Aratans had ſpared, 
and only carried into captivity Or, 2. Tae Piyliſtins, who did ac- 
company the Arabians 1n this Exp diticn, c/, 21 16. who lived 
near the Kingdom of Judah, and tner<fore thought ro make as ſure 
work as they could in deſtroying all the Branches of che Royal Fa- 


revenge themſelves upon them. 

2 Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he 
began to reign b, and he reigned one year in Jeruſa- 
lem : his mothers name alſo was * Athaliah the daug- 


ter of Omri c. 
b Obje# He was then only 22 years old, as is affirmed, 2 Kings 8. 


F Ch. 22.2 


raliry of them ſinned in complying with his Wicked and Idolatrous 
Commands through Fear. wv. 11. 2. Becauſe he ſuffered in his peoples ; 
| Deſtruction :; F:r as the Honour, and Safe y, and Strength of a + 
© King lies in the Multirude and preſp-riry of his People, Prov. 14. 
| .28. So when they are diminiſhed and deſtroyed, the King is very 
much weakned and endangered by ir. » Whoſe Lives ſhall go for 
the Lives of thy Brethren, v. 4. 
15 And thou ſh:lt have great ſickneſs by diſeaſe of 


thy bowels, untill thy bowels fall out, by reaſon ofthe 
ſickneſs day by day s. _ 

s i. e From day to day continually. Or, year upon year, 7. e. one 
year after another, or, for che ſpace of two years, as the Event ſhews, 
wv. 19. Heb. days upon days.Days are oft pur tor a year, as Exod. I3.'0. 
Levit. 25. 29. Numb. 9. 22. Judg. 17, 10. 1Sam. 1.3, & 27. 7. 

feos 4. 4. 

{4 16 Moreover, the LORD ſtirred up againſt Jeho- 
ram the ſpirit of the Philiſtins:, and of the Arabians, 
that were near the Ethiopians #. 

e A People fully ſubdued and diſpirated : but God now raiſeth 
their Spirits and Courage to ds his Work. = Heb. near the Euſh:tes, 


and though it doth for the moſt parr, yet it dorh nor aiways ſigniſie 


26. Beſides, Joram his Father, died 1n his fortieth year, as 1s twics 
noted, ch 21.5, 20. how then can this be rrue? Aw. 1. In the 
Hebrew itis, 4 ſon of 42 years, &c which is an ambiguous Para'e, 


the Ape of the Perſon, as is manifeſt from 1 Sam. 13. 1. where ſee 
the Notes. And therefore it is not neceſſary that this ſhould note 
his Age, (as it is generally preſumed to do, and thar is the only 
ground of tie difficulty ) bur it may note either « The Age of his 
M. ther Athaliah; who being ſo great, and infamous, and miſchie« 
ous a perſoa to the Kingdom and Rvyal Family of Judah, it 15 noy 
ſtrange if her Age be here deſcrib<d, eſpecially ſeing ſh+ her ſelf 
did for a ſeaſon tway this Sceprer« Or, rather 2. of the R-ign of 
that R1yal Race and Fam ly from which by his Mother he was de- 
ſ{c-nded, ro war, of the houſe of Omryi, who reigned 6 years, 1 Kings 
16, 23, Aaab his fon reign=d 2: years, + Kiugs 16. 29, Abaziah 
bis ſon two years, 1 Kings 22. 51 YJoram his ton 12 years, 2 Kings 
2. 1. All whicn pur togerher, mak-s vp exialy theſe 42 years, 
For Abaziab begen his Reign in Jorams 1:th year, 2 Kings 8 25; 
And ſvch a kind of Coa:purat on of the years, not of the Kings 
Perſon, but of his Reign or Kingdom, we had before, ch. 16. x. 
where ſec the Nores. And ſo we have an account of the Per- 
ſo:s Age, in 2 Kings 8. 26. and here of tae Kingdom ro which he 
b-I:-1ged. Anſw. 2. Some acknow'edge an Eriour in the trans 


r.e Either che Ethiop:ans, from whom chey were parted only by 
the Red Sea, each dwelling up»n the oppoſire Shores of ic : Oc, ra- 


[cribers \f the preſent Hebrew Copies, in which L-nguag: the rus 
mera' Letrers tor 22 and 42 are 1o like, thar chcy night eaſily be 


24, KC, . 


ther a people in Arabia. frequently mentioned in Scripture, and ſo miſt:k:n. For that irwas read 22 here, as it is in the Book of Kings, 
called, either for their likeneſs in Colour and Complexion tro the in other H-brew Copies, they gather from hence, that it is a+ this day 

thiopians properly ſo called ; or becauſe the one of cheſe people ; fo read in Jivers :ncient Greek Copies, as alſo in thoſe rwo ancient 
were a Colony of the orher. But the Erhiopia'ns above Egype were } Traxfl:tions, rhe Syriack and tne Arabick, and particularly in that 


far enough from theſe other Arabians, being ſeparated from them 
' by ths Red Sea. 

i7 And they came up into Judah, and brake into 
+ Heb. it, and + carried away all the ſubſtance that was found 
rriedeap= in the kings houſe, and his ſons aiſo and his wives x : 
giv*82 #9 that there was never a ſon lefc,him fave [[Jehoahaz y 


p Oro youngeſt of his ſons. 


oh. | 
Ch. 22.7. X Whom alſo they flew, ch. 22. 1. except Ahaziah and Athaliah; 


Or 4zari- who poſſibly were hidden in ſome ſecret and fafe place. y Ciiled aiſo 
ah.Ch. 22, 4haxiab, which ſignifies the very ſame thing with Jehoahaz; and 
6. Azarieh. ch. 22. 6, whoſe fignification 1s near akin to the other, all 


ſignifying Gods taking or helping of him. 

18 And after all this the LORD ſmote him in his 
bowels with an incurable diſeaſe. 

19 And it came to pals that in proceſs of time, afcer 
the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reaſon of 
his ſickneſs: fo he died of ſore diſeaſes : and his 
* Ch. 16. People made no. burning for him, like the * burning of 
14. his fathers. 


20 Thirty and two years old was he when he be- 
gan to reign, and he reigned in Jeruſalem eight years, 
and departed z | wichout being delired ||: howbeir 
they buried him in the city of David, but not in the ſe- 
palchre of the kings. 


+ Heb 


without 


Famous and molt Ancient Copy of the Syriack which was uſed by 
the C'urch of Auth in the Primitive Times, and to this day is 

k:pt in the Church of Ant:0ch from which thar moſt Reverend, 
Le-rned Pious, and Pub'ick ſpirited Archbiſhop Uſher did at his 

own great Cr:arge get a:orher Copy tranſcribed, in which he hath 

publithed to al! rhe World that h- found ir h-re written ewenty and 
two years old, &c, Nor doth this overthrow t'e Authority ot the 
Sacred Text, a. Infide's wculd have it, partly becauſe it is cnly an 
Hiſtorical Paſf.ge of no Imp »riance ro th- Subſtantial D-Erines of 
Faith and a god Life ; a:d partly becauſe rhe Queſtion, here is not 
whether this Text be true, but which is the true Reading of the 
Text, wherher rhat of rhe generaliry of preſent Copies, or that 

which w:$uſfed in tae Ancient Copies whichthe Anci n- and Ve- 

nerable Tranſlators above mentioned did follow : For it ſ-ems un«- 
reaſonable ar.d uncharitable ro rhink that all of them wou'd have 
conſpired to have changed the Text, and put in twenty andrw), for 

forty, and two, if they had to read it in their Hebrew Copies. Nor 

can this op-n any great door to tho't innumerable Ci:anges which 

{ome have bL.ily and rafhly made in th- Hebrew Tex witt out ny 

fuch pretence of Authority, as there is for this, which as ti.ey ars 
affirmed without Reaſon, or Authoricy, or Neceſſity, ſo they 
may as eaſily be reje&:d. If all chis will rot fatisfic our pr:\-nr 
I:fidzls, Id fire them only to conſider whar hath been hint-d be- 
fore upon ſuch Occaſion , thatmany difhcu'ties w h ch did icem un- 
anſwerable, bzing now fu'ly cleared by later Wr ters, it is but rea® 
ſonable to th: k rhar this may be fo in aft-r times, either by find* 
19g of ſome H-brew Copies in which it may be Twenty and twe years, 
&c or, by ſome orhe-r way. ci. e Of Omri's Family : Or of Ahab, 
Omri's Son, Grandchildren are oft called Sons and Daughters, as 
Matth. 1. 1. Luke 3. 26. 


| @efare, 
h ay] z Heb. Wenr, t> wir, the way of all the Earth, as it 1s more fully 
expreſſed, Joſ. 23. 14+ Or, io the land of darkneſs as Jb. 10. 21, 22. 
Or, to his Jong home, Ec-leſ. 12.5. Or, went away, to wit out ef this 
World ; as this Word is uſedy Fob. 14. 20. E cleſe 5; 15: & 6; 4: there 
being many ſuch Words and Phraſes uſed concerning death in the 
Old and New Teſtament, ſignifying that death 1s not an Arnihi- 
Jation, but only a Tranſlation inro another place and ſtate: Sce 
Gen: 15: b5: Phil: 1: 23: |, Heb: without deſjre, which may belong 
either r. To himſelf; he had no defire of living longer, nor any | 
pleaſure in Life, but was heartily weary of ir, tnrough his exceſs 
five Pains: Or, rather, 2: To his people who did nor deſire thar he | 
ſhould live longer, bur ofr an4 neartily withed that he had died - 
ſooner : W aich conempr of him they fhewed both by making no 
burning for him, as they uied to do for Gnod and Laud+ble Kings, ch: 
6: 84: and by denying him burial among che Kings, as it here fol- 
Jows, Defre is here put for a perſon or thin whoſe life or continue 
ance is deſirable, or deſired by others, as 1/s: 2: 16: Ezek: 24: 16, 18, 
2r, 25: Dan: 9: 23: & 19; 11, 19: Ardthis is an empaatical expreſ- 
ſion, becauſeir is utual with Men ro Jefire the deatas of ſome per- 
ſons, whom afterward they lament and heartily wiſh they w:re a'iv 
again, as they have cauſe todo, Bur for this ungodly and unhappy 
- Prince. his people dia aot on'y 1n bis life time wiſh his Death, bur 
afterwards they d:d not repent of thoſe deſires, nor wiſh him alive 
againz but rejeyccd that they were delivered from fo great a p;ayue 
as he was to them, 


andthe Syrians ſmote Joram. | 


was ſick, - AN 


3 He alſo walked inthe ways of the houſe of Ahab, 
for his mother was his counſeller 4 do wickedly. 
d Being a Crafty and an Iimperious Woman. 
4 Wherefore he did evil in the fight of the LORD, 
like the houſe of Ahab : for they were his counſellers 
after the death of his father e, to his deſtruction. 
e Who, whilſt he lived, ſeduced his ſon by his Counſel and Au- 
thority, and made other Evil Counſellers then unneceflary, 
5 He walked alfo after their counſel, and went 
with Jehoram the ſon of Ahab king of Iſrael, to f Heb. 


war againſt Hazael f king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead : — 
bo 


ded 
f Following the evil Example of Jehoſhaphat therein, ch. 18. though = 
he would not follow him in what was good. Bur of this and the fol- | Other 
lowing verſes ſee 2 Kings 8. 28, 29. &g. 21, 27. | wiſe cal- 

6 And he returned to be healed in Jezreel, becauſe jeq 41- 
of the wounds + which were given him at Ramab, ziah, : 
when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And||A- — 
zariah the ſon of Jehoram king of Judah, went down |... *c, 
to ſee Jehoram the ſon of Ahab at Jezreel, _—_ nt v2 

_ nN 


*,k 


(is 4, 


*2Rin 
Ih, 4, 


P | 

| | | 

' , <= 

EL 11 CHRONICERS Chap. XX 

: WE f le, which may be called Courts, the plural number | 
= And tho 4+ doſten inn of Ahaziah * was of Gods Court of the People, \ may e pi\Ural nur 

Fc PRA. _ rs on CI Deron he wias.. being put for the ſingular, in regard of grear amplitude and divers 

JV CONUNS TL Co . Wa . ; 


; : 7: ſh; | JVarrers and partitiens, into which it was or might be divided : as 
out with Jehoram againtt Jehu the fon of Nimini, | the Temple is called San#uary, becauſe *of its diviſion into divers 
we CO k 


woege a *ntod * f the houſe arts, Levit,26. 21. : 
rIndo. ite whom the LORD had anointed *® to cut o1r the parts , : 
: uCg. i W- x _ * | | 6 But let none come inco the houſe of the LORD $ 
» 2 Kings © by his Providence ſo diſpoſing Occaſions and 4h2ziah's Incli- j fave the priefts, and tney that miniſter of the Levites 9, | 
9 7 _ nations, thathe thould come ac that ſeaſon to receive h1s deſerved chey ſhall g0 in, for they are holy: but all the people tf Heb) 
"2 BUS": Tudgements ©.+:-.- | {ball keep the watch of the Dh, z. es 
J0...33 & And it cameto paſs that when Jehu her EXecuting g Strialy ſo called, as it is diſtinguiſhed from 'the Courts. into &©Y* 28 
jndzment upon the houſe of Ahab, and * found the | which others were permitted to come, v. 5+ to wit, into the Hely | 
Pa: : ſ, f the brethren þ of A- I Place. h They who are to miniſter in courſe, or by my preſent 
oriz:ces of Judah, and the Tons ot the br w 
PFL32C6 | Op. q Ahaziah 5, he flew them. appointment- # 7. e. Of the houſe of the Lora, as the phraſe may be 
haziah, that miniſtre tO Anazla he f bis Couſins, or near filled up our of this place and 2 Kings 11. 6: The ſence is. Let 
þ Either properly fo called: Or the Sons ki ah —_ Ain, [them ſtand in their Court to prevent and oppoſe any perſon who 
Kinſmn, who are off called Brethren : ”_ > ing baziah, as is {ball endeavour violently to break into the houle to ſcize upon the 
v. 1. # Vhar came thither to wait upon t oy Children a< is noted | Kings or to diſturbe their preſent work z which he expe&ed Arha« 
here implycd, anJ1 withal to vilit Joram and his Chi z liah and her Complices would do. - x 
2 Kngs 10. 13. : 7 And the Levites ſhall compaſs the king round about, 
2K R «© 1ziah & 2 and they caught him, TO <p 0 
Fevig & _ he —_ Frogs: _ = 4 ks — OH to [every man with his weapons in his hand, and whoſo- 
"2g or he was hid 1n Samarlai s ) rough . j - 
( \cy buried him», Ever elſe cometh into the houſe, he ſhall be put to death: 


chu : and when they had {lain him, t] * : - | _.M 
ms ret gence y ; ©: the ſon of Jehoſhaphar, who but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when = 


| , -11( of [he goeth out. | ; 
—_ pay roms wich all - _ — 8 So the Levites and all Judah'did according to all 
AZ41c 2d:no power to K . ; | : - 

A ng _ __—_ pi _ — eſcape, 2 Kg 9:6 things that Jehojada the prieſt had commanded, and 
[Either 1 I of, Kinodom of $0722r7a, to wit, in Mcgidds : Or, 2- [took every man his men that were to come in * on the 
In the Ciry of Samaris: and fo he fled firſt to Megidds ; and not _ {abbath, with them that were oO £0 out on the ſabbaths 
ins himſelf fafe there, he fled to Eng Shady " ——— for Jehojada the prieſt diſmiſſed not the courſes, 

eat thence by Jehu” Mer. dds, where he recelv< m | . . . : 
ſos change hy ie A Garter upon 2 Kingr 9» 27: » They j 9 Moreover, Jehojada the prieſt delivered to the cap- 
&2ve his Servants leave fo carry him away to Jeruſalem and bury him ! tains of hundreds, ſpears, and bucklers, and ſhields, that 
there. 2 Kings 9. 28. Boch Gol and Men are oft-times {aid rod bag been king Davids, which were in the houſe of God. 


what they anl others do by their permiſſion, when they could | To And he ſetall the people ( every man having his | 
hinder them. » 4. e, His Poſterity, b:cauſe rhey were young on his hand) from the right + ſide of the + Help| 
f:eble, bzing ground berween two Milſtons, the great and growing | eby | 


. 2 ! : 
power of Jebu; and the craft and tyrrany of Ahaliuh. temple to chelefe ſide of the temple, along by the altar Sorting | 
*, Kings F -. che Mother of Ahaziah and the temple, by the king round abour. þ y | 
is, > To * Bur when Athaliah _ wb eggs 4 defiroved 211 2x Then they brought out the kings Son, and put © 

= = her _ Pas _ = Jada : upon him the crown, and *geve bj the teftimeny, and * neue: 

tne Iced royal OL the NOUIe Or JUUaH, | | made him king : and Jehojada and his ſons & anoi 18. | 
0 This, and wv. rr. 12. are explained on 2 Kings 17; 1. 2,3- 5 Jehoj ons & anointed 17 = | | 

| 


1 
1 
þ 


wy pane —_—— 
— —— m—_— —— 
© Rs ee CEC Ire EE CST 
Ocoee IE arr —n — SE EEe Ie II IEEn AED EDO ao SW > DC —— 
_ mr ne rn rn ern 


ts Bur ſehoſhabeath the daughter of che king took him,. and faid, } God fave the King. 


Joath the ſon of Ahaziah, and. ſtole him from among / by fas oh. mong the reſt, whom afterwards he ungrateful- 4 Heb 


| | be King | 
the kings ſons that were {lain, and put him and his nurſe | * > Now when Athaliah heard the noiſeof che people live. E. | 
in a bed-chamber. So Jehoſbabeath the daughter = running and prailing the king, ſhe came to the peopie 
king jehoram, the wife of Jehojada the prieſt ( tor ſhe |; 1-0 the houſe of the LORD. 


was the ſiſter of Ahaziah ) hid him from Achaliah, {o 13 And ſhe looked, and behold the king ſtood at 


that the flew him nor. | his pillar, at the entring in, and the princes and the 
12 And he was with them hid in the houſe of God) | trumpets by the king: and all the pzople of the land 
ſix years, and Athaliah reigned over the land.  . rejoyced, and founded with trumpets; alfo the ſing- 


ers with cheir inſtruments of muſick, and ſuch as taught 


CHAP. XXL to ſing praiſe. Then Athaliah rent her clothes and 


Tehojadah maketh Joaſh King, x —==—11, Athaliah is ſain, 12 —I5- ſaid F Treaton, treaſon. | | f Hebs | 

Ti pure Warſhip of God is reſtored 16 —— 21, 14 Then Jehojada the prieſt brought out the cap- Conſpiracy 

"rTngr Nd * in the ſeventh year Jehojada ſtrengthened | tains of hundreds, that were fer over the hoſt, and ſaid 
It. $, OCC. 


himſelf, and took che caprains of hundreds a, | unto them, Have her forth of che ranges : and whoſo 
Azariah the fon of Jeroham. and Iſhmael the ſon of | fo:loweti her, let him be flain with the ſword, For the 
Jenohanan, and Azariah the ſon of Obed, and Maaſe- | prieſt faid, Slay her not in the houſe of the LORD. 
jab the ſon of Adajah,and E.iſhaphat the fon of Zichri, | 15 So they laid hands on her, and when ſhe was 
060 covenant wich bw come to the entring of the horſe-gate, by the kings 
a Net ail bur thoſe here foilowing, in whom he put moſt truſt. houſe they flew her there- SY 
Bur tis Caapter 1s almoſt a!l taken out of 2 Kings 11+ where it is 16 And Jehojada made a covenant between him } 
a + FEI Jat PILE | and between all the people, and berween the king, 
2 And they went about in Judah, and g2thered the: 4. they ſhould be the LORDS people m. 
Levites-out of all che cities of Judah 5, and the chief of | j; .. The Lord. as is ſufficiently implied in t'ie end of this verſe, 
the facners of Ifrael c, and they came to Jeruſalem, and plainly exprefſed 2 Kings ri. 17. Or, between himlelf; that the 
5 Partly becaulethey could do t'14is withour any ſutpicion, upon © People might ſee chat he brought them under no bond , but what 
pretence of ſome 1fotemn Feaſt ; which time. it is probable, was he would rake upon himſelf. m7. e, That every one in his place 
ciolen for this purpoſe : and partly oecauſe he knew them to be well and ſtarion w uid maintain the Law and Worſhip of God. and root 
alteCted to the Cauſe of God and te King, to which they were ob | out all falle Worſhip waich they did in the next verſe. 
liged by the tw: firmeſt ties, Conſcience and Intereſt. c 7 e. Both 1- Then all the people went to the houſe of Baal, 
of rhe rwo Tribes. and of the ten Tribes, all which :re called 1ſra- and brake it down, and brake his altars and his _— 
Ore 


e/; and heuſerh the name of Jſrael rather than tha of Judah; bes . K . » F 
cau'? raere were now great numbers of the other Tribes incorpora- 12 PIECES, and * flew Maccan the prieſt of Baal be " Dent; 


ted wirh 1ſrael; and theſe he eſteemed more faithful rhan many of. the altars. : . 23. 3 
Judah, having given better proofs of the truth of their Religion! 18 Alfo Jehojada appointed the offices of the 
than chey; and therefore he pick't out of the chief men of the cther| houſe of the LORD by the hand » of the prieſts the 


Tribes, as well as of Judah and Benjamin. . - Ws R 6 ; 
; And all the congregation made a covenant with Levites, whom David had * diſtributed in the houſe * :Chron} 


he king i ed x of the LORD, to offer the burnt-offerings of the 247... 
ve king in the houſs of Gde and he fl nn chem, | FORD, a6 levrinen inch * La of Maſe iches Pr 


"ten. * Gd of che from of hdd joycing and linging, 4: it was ordained F by David. MHIeb.bi 
©... This 55 &| . # | 5 F, 7 Or. as it is in the Hebrew put the offices of the houſe of the Lard the hands 
1Kines , + 05 55 0G thing that ye ſhall do 5 A third part of ;,zo rhe hand, i. e. he reſtorcd the Prieſts and Levires, either 1. To of Devid, 
4.&0. c You entring on the {abbath, of the prieſts and of the rheir places and offices, which poſſibly in the time of the Idolatrous 
Ch 6.16. Levites ſhall be porters of the + doors ; Sri and - pen" py been ron rw of to perſons of other 

7 18. &@ Both that of S/ Ki ; ' EIs.. ribes, partly to gratifie thetr wicked friends, and partly to bring 
T Heb: een hs _ ot har, 2 Kage 11. 6. ROO GOTTA Gods Houſe and Worthip into-diſgrace : Or, 2. to es exerciſe of 


threftolds, 5 And a third part ſhall be at the kin gs h ouſe - anda _— offices, from which they had been in a great meaſure hinds 
19 And he ſet the * porters at the gates of the houſe , FE 

: of the LORD th bich lean i 1Chron, 

e Ac the Exſt-gate. thought o be & calle! becauſe it t50d lower : nat NONE Wien Was unclean 1N Aly .C , &, 

than the reſt ot the doors ar the font of t .e ſteps by which they ching, ſhould enter in. 

went up from the Kings hou'e to che Temple. f Either 1 In the 20 And he rook the captains of hundreds, and the 

| bles, and the governours of the people, and all the 

lity of the Levites who had no particular ffations a:lotted to them _ s 5 PETER . 

as their Brethren had. v. & 5. Lv were tO b2 in tic Prieſts Comrrs Þ people of the land, and brought down the king from 

as the Peopic, wha were in the Court of the People: or 2, in the 3N 2 ce 


= 


| 2 Kings 
b2e I, &Ce 


| 
j 


} 


If Heb. 70 
renew, 


| 


1 


3! 


* Exod. 


b Oo. I 2g 13, 
4. 


Heb, a 


6e, 


Chap. XXII. 


ſe of the LORD: and they came through? | 
= ra o into the kings houſe, and ſer the king; the LORD and alſo ſuch as wrought iron and brals to 


upon the throne of the land. 


o To wit, 
lace. 


21 And all the people of the land rejoyceds and 
the city was quiet, after that they had ſlain Athaliah 


with the ſword. 
*C H.AiP. XXIV. 


Foaſh reigneth well all the days of Jehojada, I = 14, he dieth : is 
buried honourably : aud Foaſh falleth to Idolatry : flayeth Zechariah the 
ſon of Jehojada, 15 —==>== 22+ Heis ſpoiled by the Syrians: ſiain 
by Zabad and Jehozabad. Amaziah ſucceedeth him, 23 ——= 27s 


Oaſh * was ſeven years old 4 when he began to reign, |_ 


and he reigned forty years in Jeruſalem: his mo- 
thers name alſo was Zibeah of Beer-ſheba. 
# A great part of this Chapter is explained on 2 Kings I2. 
2 And Joaſh did that which was right in the ſight of 
the LORD, all the days of Jehojada the prieſt. 
3 And Jehojada took for him two wives,and he begat 


ſons and. daughters. 
4 And it cameto paſs after this, 2bat Joaſh was mind- 
ed 


+ to repair the houſe of the LORD. 

5 And he gathered together the prieſts and the Le- 
vites, and ſaid to them, Go out unto the cities of Ju- 
dah, and gather of all Ifrael 5, money to repair the 
houſe of your God from year to year c, and ſee that ye 


haſte the matter. Howbeit the Levites haftned zr not. 
b i. e. Of all the Iſraelites that were in the Kingdom of Judah 


'See Ch. 15. 17. and 21. 2+ c Either r. repair part ot it every year, ; 
gather it from year to year 


cill you get ſuch a ſum as may ſuffice for the work ; for he ſuppoſed | 


till the reparations be perfefted : Or, 2. 


one or two years colle&ion would nor ſuffice for the work,whether 


\ jt were that colle&ion of half a ſhekel for every man, of which ſee 


Exod. 30. 12,13. 2 Kings 12. 14, or a voluntary contribution requi- 
red for the preſent exigence of the Temple by virtue of the com- 
mand and example of Moſes, who made ſuch a colleCtion for the 
building of the Tabernacle, Exod, 35. 5+ See alſo Nehem, 10. 32. 
which he thought would not be any greatſum, becauſe of the great 
iniquity and impiety which yet had reigned for many years, and yer 
continued in the generality of the people of the Land, the Levites 
not excepted, as the laſt Clauſe of this Verſe ſhews _ 

6 And the king called for Jehojada the chief d, and 


faid unto him, Why haſt thou not required of the Le- 
Vites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jeruſalem, 
the colle&ion, according to the commandment of * Moles e 


the ſervant of the LORD, and of the congregation of 


Iſrael, for the tabernacle of witneſs? 

4 It is obſervable, that he is not called the Chief Prieft, or High- 
Prieff, but only tbe Chief, or the Head, which he might be in many 
other reſpects, either by reaſon of his near relation to the Royal Fa. 
mily ; or becauſe he was the Chief of one of the 24 Families, or be: 
cauſe he had been the chief man in the contriving and bringing 
about of this great Change, and the General of the Forces employ> 
ed about it. And the High Prieft ſeems ro be mentioned as a diſtince 
perſon from Jehvjadah here, 2 Kings 12+ 9, 10. All which make ir 
queſtionable, whether Jehojsdah was the High-Prieſt or no. e Heb, 
the Collefien of Moſes, i. e. ſuch an one as he commanded or made 


in the like caſe : of which ſee on v. 5. In like manner we read of | 


he [ins of Manafſeh, 2 Kings 24. 3: and of the Sin of Feroboam frequently, 
; $- For the ſons of Achaliah f, that wicked woman, 
had broken up the houſe of God g, and alſo all the 


dedicate things of the houſe of the LORD did they be- 


ſtow upon Baalim. | 

f To wit, Ahaziah, and his Brethren before they were carried 
away captive, c<þ. 21+ i7. who did this by her inſtigarion, as this 
o_ implies. g Both broken up the Treaſuries, and defaced the 


ouſe it ſelf. IF 
8 And at the kings commandment they made a 


cheſt, and ſet it without at the gate of the houſe of the 
LORD 5, | 
h i. e. Of the Court of the People, whither all manner of perſons 


might come to offer. | 
9 And they made 7 a proclamation through Judah 


and Jeruſalem, to bring in to the LORD the collection 
that Moſes the ſervant of God laid upon Iſrael in the 


wilderneſs. 
55. e. A Collection anſwerable to it; as they are ſaid to be guilty 


of the- errour of Balaam and gainſaying of Core, Jud. v. 11. who fell 
into fins of the ſame kind. 
xo And all the princes and all the people rejoyced, 


and brought in» and caſt into the cheſt, untiil they 
had made an end. 

11 Now it came to pals, that at what time the cheſt 
was brought unto the kings office &, by the hand of the 
Levites, and when they ſaw that zhere was much money, 
the kings ſcribe, and the high prieſts officer came and 
emptied the cheſt, and took it, and carried it to his 
place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered 
money in abundance. 


k From the gate of the Court into one of the Chambers be- 
longing to the Temple, which was appointed by the King for this 
office. 


12 And the king and Jehojada gave it to ſuch as did 
the work of the ſervice of the houls of the LORD, 


=EAHAREONICLES. 


—=—_—— 


of the Court belonging and leading to the Kings Pa» 


Chap. Xxty, 


and hired maſons and carpenters to repeir the houſe of 7 
Zeb #, 
mend the houſe of the LORD. Paaling 

12 So the workmen wrought, and | the work was 
perfeted by them, and they ſer the houſe of Ged in 
his ſtats, and ſtrengthened it. 

14 And when they had finiſhed it, they brought the 
reſt of the money before the king and Jehoj da, where- 
of were made veſſels for the houſ: of the LORDY, ever 
veſſels ro miniſter, and || to offer 2yiz22!, and ipoons, 
and veſſels of gold and filver : and they offered burnt- 
offerings in the houſe of the LORD continually, all 


the days of Jehojada. 
{ Becauſe Athaliah and her Sons had taken the old ones away, 


Hm upon 
the Work, 


|, Or pe/lil,, 


«7. 

If But Jehojada waxed old, and was full of days 
when he died, an hundred and thirty years old was he 
when he died. 

16 And they buried him in the city of David among 
the kings, becauſe he had done good in Ifrael mr, both 
towards God, and towards his houſe. 

7 ts & In Judah, which was an eminent part of 1ſ-ael, and the 
only part of it which cwaed God, or was owned by God as his 
Iracl, to whom therefore he oft appropriates this name, thereby 
ſignifying that the other Tribes were unworthy of that honourable 


py and had forfeited all their right in at to Judah, See on 
Cl» 21s 2. 


17 Now after the death of Jehojada, came the prin- 
ces of Judah, and made obeiſance to the king »: then 
the King hearkned unto them. | 

n In that poſture preſenting their requeſts to him, that they 
might nor be confined to unneceſſary and troubleſome journeys in 
coming to Jeruſalem ro worſhip, but might have the liberty, which 
their Fore-rathers enjoyed, of worſhipping God in the High-places. 
Which liberty, when once they had obtained, they knew they could 
then worſhip Idols without obſervation or diſturbance; which was 
the thing art which they aimed. And for the prevention of ſuch 
Abuſes, God obliged all ro worſhip kim in one place. 

18 And they left the houſe of the LORD God of 
their fathers, and ſerved groves and idols: and wrath 
came upon Judah and Hon, +1 for this their treſpaſs 0. 

o By Hazael King of Syria: of which ſee 2 Kings 12. 17, 18. 

19 Yet he ſent prophets to them,to bring them again 
unto the LORD, and they teſtified againſt them : but 
they would not give ear. 

20 And the ſpirit of God | came upon Zechariah Þ Heb, 
the ſon of Jehojada the prieſt, which ſtood above the So 
people p, and ſaid unto them, "Thus faith God, Why "2g 
tranſgreſs ye the commandments of the LORD, that ye g 
cannot proſper ? becauſe ye have forſaken the LORD, 
he hath forſaken you. 


f In an higher place, that his voice and meſſage might be the 
better heard. 


21 And they q conſpired againſt him, and ſtoned 
him with ſtones ar the commandment of ihe king, in 
the court of the houſe of the LORD. 


q i. e. The people to whom he preached, who were eaſily cor- 
rupted by theexample of their Apoſtate King and Princes. 
22 "Thus Joajh the kingremembred not the kindneſs 
which Jehojada his father had done to him, but flew his 
ſon: And when he died, he ſaid, The LORD look 
upon zt, and require #t r. 
r i.e. Make inquiſition for my innocent blood. Which he did 
not wiſh from any deſire of private revenge, with which ſo wiſe 
and good a man would never be willing to die; b=t partly from a 
zeal to Publick Juſtice and the puniſhment of ſuch groſs wickeds 
neſs; and partly to deter them, if poſſible, from compleating their 
murderous intentions. But theſe words may as well be rendred ins 
dicatively as optatively, the Lord will look upon it, and require it, i. e, 
He will examine this Action, and require ſatisfaction from you 
for it- : + Heb. m 
23 And it came to paſs F at the end of the years, ;je raw 
that the hoſt of Syria came up againſt him : and they tio of th 
came to Judah and Jeruſaiem, and deſtroyed all the”: 
princes of the people from among the people z, and ſent + Heb; 
all the ipoil of them unto the king of } Damſcus «. Darmeſch 
s So ſoon did God hear the cry of his Holy Prophets blond, and 
revenge it. # That it might appear they were ſent and directed 
by God, to ſingle out to deſtruction the firſt beginners and chief 
promoters of this general Apoſtacy. « To Hazael the King ef that 


part of Syria called Syris Damaſcena, from its Capital City Das 


maſcus. , *T 2y.26. 
24 For the army of the Syrians * came with a ſmall , 


company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great Deut: 3 
hoſt into their hand, becauſe they had forſaken the 3o- 
LORD God of their fathers. So they executed Judg- 113% 7 
ment againſt Joaſh. 

25 And when they were departed from him, ( for 
they left him in great diſeaſes ) his own ſervants con- 
ſpired againſt him, for the blood of the ſons x of Jeho- 
jada the prieſt, and flew him on his bed, and he died : 
and they buried him in the ciry of David, but they 


buried him not in the ſepulchres of che kings. 
x 7,e, Of 


FoK 


1, 


f Heb, 
hand, 


f Heb, i 
they pla, 
7 Heb. 
beat of a 
ger, 


i Heb; 1 


] Ms o ? / 
ind 


ils, 


x 7, e, Of 7:cho rich hik fon : the pſural number Sos, put for the 
fingular $92,:5 1t 15 trequentiy beth in Scripture,as G2 46. 7. Numb. 
* 5. 4 8 ard {n Ciciro 3nd other prophane Authors Or he might 
L.11} other ſons of Jehojadsh with bim, either becauſe they own: 
ed him in what he hid id 3 or leaft they ſhouldrevenge his death. 
(Or. fo=5* 26 And theſe are they that conſpired againit him; || 
Zib:d the fon of Shimeath an Ammonireſs, and Jeho- 
! . . . 
zabad, the fon of {| Shimrith a Moabirteſs. 
27 Now concerning hisfons, and the greatneſs of the* 
., burden /ai4 upon himy and the F repairing of the houſe 
295 Of God, behold, they ; -itten i f 
R or God, benold, they are written in the || ſtory of the 
x 12, 14. Þook of the kings. and Amaziah his fon reigned in 
tHeb. Is {tead. 
funding. » Either the ſevere Propheſies againſt him, which are off called 
| Or C97® Buriens; of which one inſtance is Recorded, and there might be 
others that are not Recorded ; or the great Judgments of God upon 
him, both by the Syrians, v. 23, 24. and by great diſcaſes, v. 25. 


CHA P. XXV. 


Amatiah beginneth to reign well ; Naysth his father's murtherers, x <=n.ug, 
Hwuing hired an army of [ſraelitcs againſt the Edomites, at the word of a 
Prophet he diſmiſſurh them, 5 10, And with his own people overs 
throweth the Edomites : Toe Iſraelites in their return home Spoil, 1 1+<=-1 3. 
Amaziah ſerveth the gods of Edom, and deſpiſeth the admonition of the 
Prophet, 14 =— 16+ Hz provketh Joaſh to his over-throw, 17 < -«-« v4, 
His Reizu, Hels ſlain by C nſptracy, 25 ==—28, 

Maziah * was twenty and five years old a when he 

began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine 
years in Jeruſalem: and his mothers name was Jehoad- 
dan of Jerufalem. | 
a Of tis Verſe, and v. 2, 3, 4. ſee the Notes on 2 Kings, 14. 
I. &c. 
2 And he did that which was right in the ſight of the 

LORD, but not with a perfect heart. 

Now it cams to paſs, when the kingdom was + eſta- 
bliſhed wo him, chat he ſlew his ſervants that-had killed 
the king his father. . 

i But h= flew not their children, but did as it ;« writ- 
, ten in the law of the book of Moſes, where the LORD 

Deur. . « f. . 

4, io; commanded, ſaying, * The fathers ſhall not die for 
Kin, 14- the children, neither ſhall the children die for the fa- 
thers, but every man ſhall die for his own fin. 

5 Moreover, Amaziah gathered Judah cogether, and 


(87's 

: Kings 
$2. 21: 

| Or, Shoe 


Vir. 


mintarye 


 2Kings 
G1, C&Cs 


7 Heb c0nte 
fm:d upon 


htm, 


Jr-30. 30 
£7, 18, 20, 

over hundreds, according to the houſes of their fathers, 
"Numb, throughout all Judah and Benjamin ; and he numbred 
;;} them* from twenty years old and above, and found 
them three hundred thouſand choice mer, able to go 
forch to war, that could handle ſpear and ſhield. 

6 He hired alſo an hundred thouſand mighty men of 
valourour of all Iſrael b,for an hundred talents of filver. 

6b Out of the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes. 

7 But there came a man of God to him, ſaying, O 
king, let not the army of Iſrael go with thee ; for the 
LORD #*: not with Ifrael c, 0 wit, with all the chil- 
dren of Ephraim. 

c He hath forſaken them, and for their ſakes will curſe thy Fore 
ces, it thou joyneſt thy felf with them. 

8 Bur if thou wilt go, do z, be ſtrong for the bar- 
tel d: God ſhall make thee fall before the enemy: for 
God hath power to help, and to caſt down. 

a Take Courage and ſtrengthen thy ſelf, as much as thou canſt 
Ir 1s an Ironical Conceſſion, l:ke that, Go, and proſper. 

9 And Amaziah faid to the man oi God, But what 
ſhall we do for the hundred talents which I have given 
to the+ army of Iſrael? And the man of God aniwer- 
ed, The LORD is able to give thee much more than 
this. 
+H%.u To Then Amaziah ſeparated them, to wit, the army 
their place, thar was come to him out of Ephraim, to go F home 
gs "again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindied a- 
tw. Bai .rjudah e,and they returned home fin great anger. 

. - Becauſe they were both d:{ſgraced by tis Rejection. and dif- 
appvinrted of that Prey and Spoil which they hyped to gain, where- 
as nw they were ſent away empty 3 for rhe 100 Talents proe 
bably were given to their officers only to ra.ſe Men for thi: Services 
thar Sum being otherwiſe too Small to be diſtributed into ſo many 


hands. 


11 And Amaziah ſtrengthened himſelf, and led 
forth his people, and went to the valley of falt, and 
ſmote of the children of Sier, ten thouſand. 

12 And other ten thouſand ieft alive, did the chil- 
dren of Judah carry captive, and brought them away 
unto the ropof che rock, and caſt them down from the 

} Heb; 2, ©Op of the rock, that they were broken all in pieces. 

Im: f te 13 But + the ſouldiers of the army which Amaziah 

a ſent back, that ti:zcy ſhould nor go wich him to batrel, 
fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto 
;Beth-horon f, and ſmoce g three thouſand of them b, 
and took much ſpoil. | 
f To wit, Beth-horon rne Lower, which was in the Tribe of Ben- 


jamin; and from chenc to Samaria,either x to the City of Sams- 
'ria; for the Kings of J»dsh had taken diverſe Places within the 


f Heb, 
band, 


IL CHRONICLES 


w > Mn 
j 


»* -.—  a_ 
| | | Chap. KXMW 
Kingilom of Iſrael. Or, 2; To the Kingdem of Srmaria : Beth-hovn, © 
and all other Places between that City and their own Kingdom. g | 
7, et Killed, as that word is generally underftood. þ Not 3000 Cities, 
but 3oco Perſons dwelling in them, who poſſibly oppoſed them 
in taking the Spoil, which was the Thing th-y ſought; EE 

14 Now it came to paſ:, after that Amaziah was 
come from the ſlaughter of the Edomites, that he 
brought the gods of the children of Seir. and ſet them 
up zo be his gods,and bowed down himſelf before them, 
and burned incenſe unto them. 

I5 Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled 
againſt Amaziah,and he ſent unto him a Prophet,which 
faid unto him, why haſt thou ſought after the gods 
of the people, which could nor deliver their own peo- 
ple our of thinehand ;? | 
: Therefore thou art not only ungrateful and 1mpiovs, but alſo 
ridieulo: fly fooliſh in offending thatGcd whoſe Power and Goodneſs 
thou haſt now found, andin worſhipping ſuch guds cf whole Im- 
potency theu baſt had late Experience. | : 

16 And it came to pals as he talked with him, that 
the king {aid unto him, Art thou made of the kings coun- 
ſel &? forbear, why ſhouldeſt thou be ſmitten/2 Then 
the Prophet forbare, and ſaid, I know w that God , 
hath t determined to deſtroy thee, becauſe thou haſt f Heb. y 
done this, and haſt not hearkned unto my counſel. counjelled, || 

k Who art thou that preſumeſt to direct and govern my Afﬀairs, | 
without my Commuſſiont I Provoke me no further, leſt I cauſe 
thee to be killed for rhv Sawcineſs. m This he might know either 
by the plain and poſitive Rules of God's Word, as Prov. 2G, ts or 
by the Suggeſtion of God's Sp-rit, | ll 

17 Then * Amaziah King of Judah took advice », * 2 Kings! 
and ſent to Joaſh the ſon of Jehoahaz, the ſon of Jehy + *: 
king of Iſrael, ſaying, Come, let us ſee one another in 
che face. 

2 1, e. About the Injury which the 1rae/ites had done to his Pens 
pley wv, 13. and how he ſhould repair ic. But of this, and the fol 
lowing Verſes ſee on 2 Kings 14« 8. &c» | > ; I 

18 And Joaſh king of Iſrael ſent to Amaziah king of 1 
Judah, ſaying, The || thiſtle that was in Lebanon, ſent | Or, far« "By 
co the cedar that was in Lebanon, ſaying, Give thy z;p. vr, | 
daughter to my ſon co wife : and there paſſed by +a wi:d thorn. 
beaſt that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thiſtie. + jx.6. , 


and made them captains over thouſands, and captains 
. home, why ſhouldeſt thou meddle to thine hurt, that 


i 


19 Thou fayeſt, Lo, thou haſt ſmitcen the Edomites bea# of ki | 
and thine heart lifteth thee up to boaſt : abide now ar#*. | 


thou ſhouldeſt fall, eve» thou, and Judah with thee. 

20 But Amaziah would not hear, for * ic came of* Ch: 42. 
God o, that he might deliver chem into. the hand of their 7: 
ememies, becauſe they ſought after the gods of Edom. 

o Who gave him up to his ewn Ercor and Paſſion; in order to 
his Ruine- 


21 So Joaſh the king of Iſrael went up and they ſaw 
one another in the face, both he, and Amaziah king of 
Judah, at Becth-ſhemeſh, which belongerh to Judah 

22 And Judah was Þ put to the worſe before Iſrael, + Heb. 
and they fled every man to his tent | ſmitten, 

22 And Joath che king of Iſrael took Amaziah king of 
Judah the ſon of Joaſh, the ſon of Jehoahaz, ar Beth- 
ſheheth, and brought him to Jeruſalem, and brake 
down the wall of Jeruſalem : from the gate of Ephraim | 
to + the corner-gate, four hundred cubits. + Heb ths © 

24 And he took all the gold and the filver, and alltheg,,, of i | 
veſſels that were found in the houſe of God with Obed- that looks 
edom p, and the treaſures of the kings houſe,the hoſta-#+, Ch. 
ges alſo, and returned to Samaria. 76. ge 

p 5. e With Obed-edom's Poſterity, ro whom the cuſtody of the 
Sacred Treaſures was committed; See 1 Chron. 26, 15. 

25 And Amaziah the ſon of Joafh king of Judah, li- 
ved after the death of Joaſh ſon of Jehoahaz king of 1{- 
rael, fifreen years. 

26 Now the reſt of the ads of Amaziah, firſt and laſt: 
behol1, are they not written in the book of the kings of 
jndah and Iſrael ? 

27 Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away , .. my 
+ from following the LORD, they + made a conſpi- Yor 7 


racy againſt him in Jeruſalem, and he fled to Lachiſh :+ Heb, 
but they ſentto Lechiſh after him, and flew him there. conſpired « 
28 And they brought him upon horſes, arid buried 72/59 
him with hisfathers in the city of || Judab. wy _ f 
CHAP. : XXVI, David, as 
Urziah is made king ; reigneth well in the days of Zechariah, and proſpe- 2 Kings 


It 1s, 
reth, 1 « 15. He invadeth the Prieft*s office 3, is ſmitten with 4 14. 20. 
; leprofie, 16 —=21. He dieth, and Jotham ſucceeded him, 22, 23. 


Tx all the people of Judah took * || Uzziah 4,s , x. 
{pe OI gs 
who wes ſixteen years old, and made him king ,, a;. & 
in the room of his father Amaziah. | EY nn 
a Called alſo Azariah, 2 Kings 14+ 21. both Names ſignifying | Or Azge 
the ſame thing; God's Strength, or He!p. See of this and v. 2, 3 #3 


Ss 


4, on 2 Kin;s 14, 21, 22; & 15: 29 3: 


TX 3 2 He 


hap. XVI. 


that the king ſlept with his fathers. 

3 Sixteen years old as Uzziah, when he began to 
reizn, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jeru alem: 
his mothers name alſo was Jecoliah of Jeruſalem. 

4 And he did thet which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah did 5. 
| 6 To wit, for a Time, but not perfe&ly nor conſtantly, which 
| was Amaziah's Caſe alſo. 


: 


| 5 And he ſought God « in the days of Zechariah d, 
H:b.in who had underſtanding e + in the viſions of God f : 
far and as long as he ſought the LORD, God made him 
| to proſper. 

ci. e. He perſiſted in the True Religion and Worſhip of God. 
d As long as he lived. Compare ch» 24. 2, e Who was a very know- 
ing and experienced Perſon, Or, who made him underfanding ; Or, 
who infiructed him; who was his Tutor and Teacher, and had great 
Authority and Influence upon him; and ſo reſtrained him from 
thoſe Exorbitancies to which he was otherwiſe inclined. f Either 
3. In Prophetical Viſions, which he either recerved from God hin; » 
ſelf; or underſtood and explained the Prophertical Viſions of others, 
which was a ſpecial Gift of God + Of which ſee Gen. 41+ 15. Dan. 
I. 17. & 2+ 19. Or, 2. In the Law and Word of God, which ſome- 


times cometh under that Name, as Prov. 29- 18. & Iſae 22. 1,5. 

6 And he went forth and * warred againſt the Phi- 
liſtins, and brake down the wall of Gath g and the 
wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Aſhdod, and built ci- 
ties || about Aſhdod, and among the Philiſtins. 

g Which had been taken by Hazael in the days of Joafh his Grand- 
father, 2 Kings 12. 87. but was either relinquithed by him becauſe 
it lay ſo far from his other Dominions : or retaken by the Phili- 
ſtins, who had now repaired its Fortifications, and kept it. 

7 And God helped him againſt the Philiſtins, and 
_ the Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the 

ehunims. 
| 8 And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah, and his 
f Heb, name + ſpread abroad, eve» to the entring in of Egypt, 
pou. for he ſtrengthened himſelf exceedingly. 
| 9 Moverover, Uzziah built towers in Jeruſalem, at 
* Neb. 3. the * corner-gate, and at the valley-gate, and at the 
x3, 194 turning ef the wall, and || fortified them. 

32 To Alf6 he built towers in the deſert h, and || digged 
on 14 many wells, for he had much cattel, both in the low- 
| Or, re- Country, and in the plains: husbandmen alſo and vine- 
paired. dreſſers in the mountains, and in || Carmel ; for he 
[| Or, «2? Joved + husbandry. 

jour mary 8 kh Partly to guard his Cattel from the Inroads and Depredations 
q DO. Gait which the Arabians were accuſtomed ro make : and partly to give 
24% Notice of the Approach of any Enemy, and to give ſome ſtop to 
their March on that ſide, 

1: Moreover, Uzziah had an army of fighting-men, 
that went out to war by bands #, according to tne 
number of their account, by the handof Jeiel che ſcribe, 
and Maaſejah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, 
"one of the kings captains. 

z i. e, Some Bands at onetime and ſome at another, as Occaſion 
required- See the Notes on 1 Chron. 27. 1, &c- and 2 Chron. '3 14. 

12 The whole number of the chief of their farners 
of the mighty men of vyalour, were two thouſand and 
ſx hundred. 

13 And under their hand was f an army three hun- 
F Heb. the dred thouſand and ſeven thouſand and five hundred, 
[power of an that made war with mighty power, to help the king 
(99% againſt the enemy. | 

14 And UZzziah- prepared for them throughout all 
the hoſt, ſhields and ſpears, and helmets, and haber- 
eb. geons, and bows, and ſlings to caſt ſtones. 

15 And he made in Jeruſalem engines invented by 
cunning men, to be on the towers, and upon the bul- 
| warks, to ſhoot arrows and great ſtones withal: and 
A his name Þ ſpread far abroad, for he was marvellouſly 
{+ Heb. helped till he was ſtrong. | 
| vent forth. 16 But when he was ſtrong &, his heart was lifted up 
| to his deftruction: for he rated againſt ths LORD 
| his Gods. and went into the temple of the LORD® , to 
[ burn incenſe upon the altar of incenfe. 

k When he was ſtrengthened in his Kingdom, and free from the 
fear of any Enemy» * Into the Holy place, where the Altar of In- 
cenſe ſtood, and into which none but the Prieſts might enter, much 


21s offer incenſe. F 
17 And Azariah the prieſt went in after him, and 


with him fourſcore prieſts of the LORD, that were 


valiant men 3 
| 18 And they withſtood Uzziah/ the king, and faid 
| *Num. £ unto him, 1: * appertainerb not unto thee Uzziah, to burn 


| IV. 7 


[? 


[ Ifa 14. 
R9- 


| LOr:n the 
rountry of 


| fſbaod. 


| 
[ 
| 
| 


[The ſancuary for thou haſt treſpaſſed, neither ſhell it 
” be for thine honour from che LORD God »-. 


I Heb, Stood up again# Uzziah not by force, or laying hands upon 
im to reſtrain him, for in the next Verſe you {till find the Cenſer 


I. CHRONICLES. 


> He built Eloth, and reſtored it to Judah, after 


Chap. XXv1t 


Infamy upon thee for this preſumption. But this they expreſs mo« 
deſtly, and.by a figure called Meiofis, where mo;e is meant than ig 
expreſſed, becauſe they conſidered that heto whom they ſpake 
though an Offender, was their Lord and Soveraign- : 

' 19 Then Uzziah was wroth », and hada cenſer in 
his hand, to burn incenſe : and while he was wroth 
with the prieſts, the leproſie even roſe up in his fore. 
head o, before the priefts in the houſe of the LORD, 


from beſide the incenſe altar p. 

_ » Withthe Prieſts. o So as he could not hide his ſhame:though 
it 15probable it'was aJſo in the reſt of his Body- p By a ſtroke from 
an inviſible hand coming from the Altar ; that he might be aſſured 
that this was the effe& of God's juſt diſpleaſure. againſt him. 

20 And Azariahthe chief priett, and all the prieſts 
looked upon him, and behold, he vas leprous in his 
forehead, and they thruſt him out from thence q ; yea, 
himſelf * haſted alſo to go out, becauſe the LORD had 


{mirten him. p 
a As Eth 

4 Not by force, as was noted on v. 18. whica needed not, for, 6, ; 
he voluntarily haſted away, as it follows ; but by vehement per« 
{waſions and denunciations of God's further Judgments upon him, 
if he did notdepart- Some ſuppoſe that the Earth-quake mention- 
ed ms 11. Zech. 14+ 5. happened uponthis occaſion, as anothes 
token of God's diſpleaſure againſt this unparallel'd arrogancy- 

21 * And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day 
of his death r, and dwelt in a * + ſeveral houſe being a 
leper s,for & he was cut off from the houſe of the LORD: * » Rings 
and Jotham his ſon was over the kings kouſe, judging a5 5. 

eve 13, 


the people of the land. 
7 God would have this Leproſie to be incurable,as a laſting mo- Fly / 
nument of his Anger againſt ſuch preſumptuous Invaders of the. weeds 
Prielt's Office. 5s As he was obliged to do by Law, Lev 13, 46, 
which he durſt not now reſiſt, being under the hand and ſtroke of 
God, and under the fear of further and worſe Plagues, if he didſo. 
r So the following words are a reaſon of the former ; he dwelt in 
a ſeveral houſe, becauſe he might not come into the Temple or 
Courts, nor conſequently into any publick Afſembly, or the Socie- 
ty of others Or, and therefore, as the Hebrew Chi oft ſignifies ; 
| and the Particle'and is oft underſtood. So it isan inference from 
the next fore-going words, He was a Leper, and therefore he was 
cut off, &c. He who could not content himſclt with Gods allow- 
ance; bur uſurped the Prieſts place and office, is now deprived of 
the priviledge of the meaneſt of his People. A juſt and moſt ſuitable 
Judgmenr. 


22 Now the reſt of the a&s of Uzziah, firſt and laſt, 


J 


5 
- 


in his hand; but only by admonition and reproof, which here fol» 


lows. m Expe& that God will puniſh thee, qr put ſome brand of his ſtead, 


did Haiah the prophet the fon of Amoz write. 

23 $0 Uzziah ſlept with his fathers, and they buri- 
ed him with his fathers in the field of rhe burial which 
belonged to the kings : for they ſaid, He 3s a leper ; and 
Jetham his fon reigned in his ſtead. 

C H A P. XXVIL 
Jotham reigneth well, proſpereth, 1==-4. Rendreth the Lmmonites trivuta- 

ries ; bus reign” Ahaz ſucceedeth him, 5 9. 
| Hm *was WWenty and five years oid when he be- 

J gan to reign, and he reigned fixteen years in Jeruſa- * , King 
lem : his mothers name alſo was Jeruibah the daughter 15,32, 
of Z2dok. | 

2 And he did that which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD, according to all that his father Uzziah did : 
howbeir he entred not into the temple of the LORD 
And the people did yet corruptly. 

a To wit, to offer Incenſe- Butteing this was not commendable, 
hows this mentioned as an exception from the fore-going Cha- 
rafter, Thar he did as his Father did in that which was right?&>c. 
Anſw, It is an exception only from the laſt Clauſe, where alſo one 
word may be ſupplicd out of the fore-going words as is moſt uſual, 
in Scripture, thus, He did according to all that his Father Uzziah did 
then ir fitly follows, howbeit, &&c, i. e. except in his miſcarriages. 

3 He built b the high-gate e of the houſe of rhe 
LORD,and on the wall of || Ophel 4 he built much. 

b i. e- Repaired it : for it was built before, <- 11+ 5, c Other- 
wiſe called the New gate, Jer. 36- 10. d A Tower upon or near the | Or, tht 
wall of Jeruſalem, whick probably he fortified, as his Father had / ' | 
done other Towers, ch. 26: 9. g 

4 Moreover,he builtcitiesin the mountains of Judah, 
and in the foreſts he built caſtles and towers. 

5 He fought alſo with the king ofthe Ammonites e,& 
prevailed againſt them. And the children of Ammon 
gave him the ſame Year, an hundred talents of filver,and 
cen thouſand meaſures of wheat, and ten thouſand of ,,..... 
barley. { So much did the children of Ammon pay un- 
co him, both the ſecond year, and the third. 

e Who, it ſeems, endeavoured to ſhake off the yoke which from 

David's time had. been put upon them. 
' 6 So Jotham became mighty, becauſe he |] 
his ways 4 before the LORD his God. 

4 Or, dreftd his ways, i- e his counſels and ations by the rule 
of Gods Law- , 
7 Now the reſt of the Ads of Jotham, and all his 


|| Or, of 
prepared , Th , 


incenſe unto the LORD, bu to the * prieits,the ſons of wars, and his ways, lo,they are written in the book of 
| * Ex, 309. Aaron, that are conſecrated to burn incenſe : go out of the kings of Iſrael and Judah. 


8 He was five and twenty years old when he began 

to reign, and reigned ſixteen years in Jeruſalem. _ 
9 And Jotham ſlept with his fathers, and they buried 
himin the city-of David ; and Ahaz his ſon a OR 
e 


Cap 


"4 Kin 


16, 2s 


[ Or, ? 
redjacrt; 
* Lev. 
214 


f Hebs 
Dame 


t2Kin 
5+ 27: 
Is 7. 

| Heb. 
ſons of 
by. 


}Heb- 
ſtand t0 
te king 


VIt 


ſth 


z 


ns 


ts 


*Deu.34. 


3. 
Judg. x. 
i. * : 


Chap. KXVIIL 
C H A P. XXVIIL. 
ghaxz reigning id, 1 4, is ſmitten by the Syriaus, and by the Iſras 

elites, 5 — 7. who carry away captives; which, by the advice of a 

prophets they retwrn, $8 ——1I5.. Abaz ſendeth to the king of Aſſyria 

for help againſt rhe Philiſtines and Edomites, but obtainech none, 

16 —2'. He dyeth, and Hezekiah is king, 22= "= - 27. 

AS * was twenty years old when he began to 

reign, and he reigned ſixteen years in Jeruſalem? 
but he did not that which was right in the fight of the 
LORD, like David his father. | 

2 For he walked in the ways of the kings of Iſrac], 
and made alſo molten images for Baalim a. 

To worſhip his Baalim, or falſe Gods, in and by them. 

10; of*#- 3 Moreover, he || Burnt incenſe in the yelley of the 
warifce, fon of Hinnom, and burnt * his children in che fire, 
MLv-15, 'fter the abominations of the heathen whom the LORD 
I' had caſt out before the children of L{rael. 

4 He ſacrificed alſo, and burnt incenſe in the high 
places, and on the hills, and under every green tree. 

5 Wherefore the LORD his God b delivered him, 
into the hand of che king of Syria, and they ſmote him 
and carried away a great multitude of chem caprives, 

1:9, and brought them to + Damaſcus: and he was alfo de- 
1mſek. livered into the hand of the king of Iſrael, who ſmote 
him with a great {laughter. 

b God was 415 God, ta-ugh not by Covenant and Grace, and" 
ſpecial Relation, which A#az had renounced, y«t by his Sovera'gn 
Dominion over him: For God did not forfeit his Right by Ahaz 
his denying it: 

6 For * Pekah theſon of Remaliah flew in Judah an 
y-27 hundred and twenty thouſand in one day, which were 
Hb, al T valiant men : becauſe they had forſaken the 
a: us. LORD God of their fathers. 
by 7 And Zichri a mighty man of Ephraim, flew Ma- 

aſejah the kings ſon, and Azrikam the governous of the 
+Heb-ch, houſe, and Elkanah that was | next to the king. 
ſimi 8 And the children of iſrael carried away captive of 
ting, their. brethren, two hundred thouſand women. ſons 
and daughters, and took alſo away much ſpoil from 
them, and brought the ſpoil to Samaria. 

9 But a prophet of the LORD was there, whoſe 
name was Oded: and he went out before the heſt that 

"75a, 6g. GAME to Samaria, and faid unto them, Behold, * be- 

% © cauſe the LORD God of your farhers was wroth with 

I. 10. 5+ Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye 

47.6 have ſlain them ina rage that reacheth up unto heaven e. 

es ci. & [na moſt high and fierce manner An uſual Hyperb: le, 

15. * witha! ſignifying that their Rage did cry aloud and was heard to | 
O%. x I, heaven, from whence it would pull dowa vengeance upoa r' em. 

g. 19 And now ye purpole to keep under the chi.dren 
7k, 1. of Judah and Jeruſaiem for bond-men, and bond wo- 
y5. men unto you: but are there not with you, even with 

you, ins againſt the LORD your God 4d? 

d Which. if aot repeated of, may bring down the like venge 
ance up'n your own Heads, FO 

11 Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives 


* 4 Kings 
16 


t 2 Kings. 


IL CHRONICLES. 


- 


| houſe ofGod,and cut in pieces the veſle!s of the houſe of 


| 27 For again the Fdomites had come and ſmitten = 
Judah, and carried away T captives. + Heb. 3 WW 

18 * The Philiſtins a:f'» had invaded the cities of the coprivity, WM 
low country g, and of the ſouth of Judah 6, and had' Ezek-16! I 
taken Beth-jthemeſh, and Ajzion, and Gederoth, and 57" i 
Socho, with the Þ villages thereof, and Timnah with 4 rx; . i 
the + villages thereof, Gimzo alſo and the villages daughters! 
thereof : and they dwelt there. f Heb. |} 


 £ That part of Judah which was tow? ds the Sea, and towards ##%2##er%4 | 
the Philiſtins Lande þ Of which fee Jof, 15+ 21. ES - [] 
I9 For the LORD brought Judah 'ow, becauſe of O24 | 
Ahaz king of I{rael: for * he made Judah naked;, and | 
cranſgreiled fore againſt the LORD. 
7 Taking away their Ornament and their Defence and Strength, 
to wit, their Treaſures, which he ſent tothe 4ſrian ro no p. rp-ſe; 
their Frontier Towns, and «ther ſtrong Holds, whick by tis Fly 
and W .ckednefs were loſt ; their Religion, and the Divine Prote&i- 
on, which was their great and only firm Secwity, wv hich by his 
Sins he forfeited. See the Notes on Exod 32: 25. 
20 And * Tilgarh pilneſer king of Afſyria came unto 's* 29 
him, and diſtreſited him &, but ſtre.gthened him not/. 
21 For Ahaz took away a portion out of the houſe 
of the LORD, and out of the houſe of the king, and of 


the princes, and gave it unto the king of Aﬀſyria: but 
he helped him nor/. | 
k Or, fraitned him, by robbing him of his Treaſures. 1 A moſt 


Emphatical Expreſſion; for rhough te weakned his preſent En-my 
the Syrian, as is related, 2 Kangs, 16. 9. yet really, ad all things 
conſidered, he did nor ſtrengthen Abaz and his Kingdom, bur rather 
weaken them ; for by the removing the Syrian, who, though a trous 
bleſom Neighbour,zwasa kind of bulwark ro him, as to mary othes 
Enemies, he ſmoothed the way for himſelf, a far more, dangerous 
and miſchievozs Fnemy. as appears by his Invaſion of Judah in the 
very next King's Reign. | 
22 Andin the time of his diſtreſs did he treſpaſs yet 
more againſt the LOK D. This is that king Ahaz mw. 
m That Monſter an! Reproach of Man kind, rhit unteachable and 
1ncorrigible Princ-, wh- m even grievous Aﬀflit:ons made worſe, 
which commonly make Men better. This 15 h- whof: name deſerves 
to be remembred and dereſted for ever. Or, King Abaz was. the - 
ſame, no Changling, not a whit better by all the M=thod: which WT 
God uſed with him F Hebs; 
22 For he facrificed unto the gods of + Damaſcus, Parmeſek: 
which ſmote hims : and he ſaid, Becauſe the gods of 
the kings of Syria help tbem, 7herefore will I facritice to 
them, that they may help me. But they were the ruine 
of him, and of ail Iſrael. : 
n Or, which had ſmitten him formerly, i. e. had ena'.le1 their W rs 
ſhippers, the Sy: ans, to ſme him, as h- fonetly imagined: » hich 
yet he ſaw confuted. having now found by experience, that th-y 
could nor fave rhem from the -ſhrian Pow.r, | 


24 Ard Ahaz gathered together the veſſels of the 


God,and ſhut up the doors of the bouſe of the LORD, 
and he made him altars in every corner of Jeruſalem: 
25 Ard in every ſeveral city of Judah he made high 
places [| co burn incerſc unto other guds, and provoked 
to anger the LORD God of his fathers. 
27 Now the reſt of is acts, 2nd of all his ways, firſt 


[ Or, 7s 
offer-) 


again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren ; 
for the fierce wrath of the LOR D is upon you. 

12 Thea certain of the heads of the chiidren of E- 
phraim, Azariah the ſon of Johanan, Berechiah the ſon 
of Meſhiliemoth, and Jehizkiah the fon of Shailum, 
and Amaſi the ſon of Hadiai, ſtood up againſt them 
that came from the war: | 

13 And ſaid unto them, Ye hall not bring in the 
captives hither: for whereas we have offended againſt 


the LORD already, ye intend to add more to our fins. 
and to our treſpaſs: for our treſpaſs is great, and rhere 


zs fierce wrath againſt Iſrael. 

4 So the armed men left the captives and the ſpoil, 
before the princes, and all the congregation. 

i5 And the men which were expreſſed by name e, 
roſe up, and took the captives, and with the ſpoil clo- 
thed all that were naked among them, and arraied 
them, and ſhod them, and gave them to eat and to 
drink, and anoinced them. and carried all the feeble 
of them upon aiſles, and brought them to Jericho, * the 
city of pa-m trees, to their brethren; then they re- 
turned to,Samaria. 


e Which were appoinred to take care about the Management of 
this buſineſs 


16 At that time did king Ahaz ſend unto the kings f' 
of Aſſyria to heip him. 


f i. e The King ; the Plural Number for the ſingular : Either, 
T+ Becauſe he was a Great King, and a King of Kings; as he 
Elephaar, or, as orhers think, the Crocoaiie, is called Behemoth, 


i kings of Judah and Iſrael. 


and laſt, behold, t ey are written in the book of the 


i 28 And Ahaz ſlept with his fathers, and they buried 
him ip the city, ever in Jeruſalem: but thev brought” 
| him nor into che fupaichres o: the kings of Iirael; and 
Hezekiah his ſon reigned in his ſtead. 
CHA P. XXIX. 
Heze kiah his ;00d reign, he reſtorech Religion ; exhorteth the Lemites; 
I 11. They jan#ifie themſelves, and cleanſe the houſe of God 


12- -- 19, He offereth lolemn Sacrifi-es, with ſongs of Praiſe, and the 
Congregation add their offerings, 20 » = » 36, 


| H Ezekiah * began to reign, when he was five and + 2 Kingy 
ewenty years old, and he reignednine and twen- 18. 1. 
ty years in Jeruſalem : and his mothers name was Abi-. 
jah the daughter of Zechariah. | | 

2 And hedid that which was right in the ſight of the 
LORD,according to ail that David his father had done. 

3 He, in che firft year of his reign, in the firſt month; 
opened the doors of the houſe of the LORD a, and 
repaired them. | 

s Which Ahaz his Farher had ſhut up, cb. 28. 24. 

4 And he brought in the prieſts, and the Levites, 
and gathered them together inrco the eaſt-ſtreets, 

b Which was before the Eaſtern Gate ot the Temple. 

5 And laid unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, ſan&i- 
fie now your ſeives, and ſandctifie the houſe of the 
LORD God of your fathers, and carry forth the fil- 
thineſs cour of the hojy place 4: 

c That filthy Altar, which Avaz nad put in the place of God's 


which ſignifies Beaſts, Job qo» becaule of his vaſt buik aid Em Altar, 2 Kings, 10. 1i, &c. and the I:iols, or other abomirable or 
nency above other Beaſts. Or, 2. B-cauſe he wrore to diveite of polluting things. which were there. 4 Tre Tewplic; or the Prieſts 
the Kings or great Princes, who may be called Kings in amore ge: Court, which allo is calied an holy Place, Levite 6 16. & 10. 13* 
nera] ſignification of the Word, and indeed are fo called. 1a, 10, ' Numb. 28. 7. 

$8. Are mot my Princes #lrogether Kings, 6 For our fathers have tranſgreiſed, and done that 


Eg 'X 1X 4 which 


KXIX. II CHRO 


which was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, 
and have forſaken him, and have turned away their 
f Heb: #- faces from the F habitation of the LORD, and T tur- 


Chap. 


bernacle: yed their backs #. . 
So Gr e Either 1 M=taphorically; they have wilfully, and obſtinately, 
T Heb and con'umeliouſly forſaken God,ard his Houſe and Worſhip; that 
given the fture being a fignificatioa of Contempt. - Or 2: Literally and 
week; properly. For 4baz having removed the Altar of God into a by- 
place, 2 Kings, 14. and direfting his Worſhip towards the Eaſt, afe 
ter the manner of the Heathens, whom he deſigned to follow; and 
nor to the Weſt, as the /-aelites did by God's Command, in which 
Quarter the Ark was, he muſt nzeds conſequ:ntly turn his Back 
upon the Altar, and Houſe, and Ark of God. 
*Ch, 28. 7 Alſo * they have ſhut up the doors of the porch, 
| 24 and put out the lamps, and have not burnt incenſe, 
nor offered burnt-offerings in the holy place, unto the 
God of \fſrael. | 
8 Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Ju- 
THebom gh and Jeruſalem, and he hath delivered them to 4 


99Mtion: ; 


Deut: 28: trouble, to aſtoniſhment, and to * hifling f, as ye ſee 


25: with your eyes. 
| * 1 Kings Ff 7. e. To ſuch Calamities as all that ſee'and hear of, ſhall be aſto+ 
$; 8. nifhed at, and hiſs at thoſe, who by their own Sin and Folly have , 
- brought ſuch Miſeries upon themſelves. See on 1 Kinzrg. 8. 

9 For lo, our fathers have fallen by the ſword, and 
our ſons, and our daughters,and our wives areg 1n Cap- 
tivity for this. = 

£ Or, were, though they were preſently releaſed, <<. 28; 5. 14. 15. 

10 Now 3t 5s in mine heart to make a covenant with 

the LORD God of Iſrael, that his fierce wrath may 

__ _- turn away from us. ; 
| N'Or , - 11 My ſons, || be not now negligent #, for the 
feed LORD hath * choſen you to ſtand before him, toſerve 


| * Nom.s him, and that ye {bould miniſter unto him, and [|burn 


| 14+ & 184 incenſe. 

| 2, 6. þ So ke calls them indiff-rently, though many of them were e!. 
[| Or, *fer der than himſelf, becauſe he was by his tender Love and AﬀeRion, 
Sacrifiies ag he was by his Office obliged to be, a Nurſing Father to them. See 
Iſa. 4% 23. i In ſanktifying your ſelves and rhe Temple, wv. 5. and 
in quickning and preparing your ſelves and the People to Gods 


Service. : 
12 Then the Levites aroſe, Mahath the ſon of Ama- 


- Tai, and Joel the ſon of Azariah, of the ſons of the Ko- 
hathites: and of the ſons of Merari; Kiſh theſon of Ab- 
di, and Azariah the ſon of Jehalelel ; and of the Gerſho- 
nites; Joah the ſon of Zimmah, and Eden the ſon of 

oah. | 

: 13 And ofthe ſons of Elizaphan ; Shimri, andJe- 

heil : and of the ſons of Aſaph ; Zechariah, and Mat- 

taniah : 


14 And of the ſons of Heman ; Jekiel and Shimei : | 


and of the ſons of Jeduthun ; Shemajah, and Uzziel. 
Is And they gathered their brethren and ſanctified 
themſelves, and came, according to the commandment 
I Or, ##2he Of the king, || by the words of the LORD, to cleanſe 
buſineſs of the houſe of the LORD. 
he LORD. 16 And the Prieſts went into the inner part of the 
houſe of the LORD Kk&, to cleanſe ir, and brought out 
all the uncleanneſs that they found in the temple of the 
LORD, -into the court / of the houſe of the LORD. 
And the Levits took it to carry it out abroad into the 
brook Kidron. 
k Not the Holy of Holies, into which onely the Higheprieſt 
might enter, and that bur once in a year, but tae Holy Place Ito 
wit, the Prieſts Court, called here tae Cours by way of Eminency. 


I7 Now they began on the' firſt day ot the firſt 
month to ſarRite, and on the eighth day of the month 


fied the houſe of the LORD in eight days, and-in the 


ſixteenth day of the firſt month they made an end »-: | 
- In 16 Days purging the Houſe, and Porch, and Courts, and all 
the Chambers bel»nging to rhe Temple. This is neted to imply 
partly the Univerſal Abuſe and Defilement of all the parts of it by 
Ahazyz which required ſo much rime to remove ; and partly the 
diligence of the Prieſts in this Work. 
18 Then they went in to HeZekiah the king, and 


faid, We have cleanſed all the houſe of che LORD,and 
the alcar of burnt-offering, with all the veſſels thereof, 
and the ſhew-bread table, with all the veſſels thereof. 
19 Moreover, all the veſſels which king Ahaz in his 
reign did cait away in his tranſgrefſion,. have we pre- 
pared and ſandtifed, and behold, they are before the 
altar of the LORD. | 
20 Then Hezekiah the kingaroſe early, and gather- 
ed the rulers of the. city, and went up to the houſe of 
the LORD» 
: 21 And they brought ſeven bullocks, and ſeven rams, 
Lev: 4 and ſeven lambs, and ſeven he-goats »for a * ſin-offering 
*'+ for the kingdoms, and for the ſanuary p, and for| 
| Judahgq, and- he commanded the prieſts the ſons of! 
Aaron to offer them on the alrcar of the Lord. 


» The Number of ſeven is famous and cuſtoinary in Sacred Mat- 
t:rs, an }15 here uſed ntegardvf the vaſt numbers and various kinds 


' LORD, with cymbals, w'th pſaiteries, and with harps 


NICLES. Chap. XXIX 


of Sins the Guilt whereof yet lay wpon the Kingdom, whick was 
now to be expiated. Indeed, in caſe of one particular Sin of Ignoa 
rance done by the People, there was but one bullock to be offered, 
Levit. 4. 13, 14. but here the Sins were many and prefumptuous, 
&c.o To make Atonement for the Sins of the King and the Roy- 
al Family, and the Court. p For all the Idolatry and Uncleannefs 
wherewith the Temple had been pol'uted, which, as it ha4 been 
cleanſed naturally by the Prieſts Hands, ſo now was to be purged 
morally by Sacrifices, q For the Sins of all tie People of 7uaah. 

22 So they killed the bullocks, and the prieſts re- 
ceived the blood, and * ſprinkled it on the altar: like- 
wiſe when they had killed the rams, they ſprinkled the 
blood upon the altar: they killed alſo the lambs, and 
chey ſprinkled the blood upon the altar. 

23 And they brought # forth the he-goats for the f Heb, 
ſin-ofering, before the king and the congregation, and 
they r laid their * hands upon them. be 

7 7. e: The King and the Elders of the Gongregation in the Name 5, __ 
of the whole Congregation» 

24 And the prieſts killed them, and they made re. 
[Conciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make 
an atonement for all Iſrael s for the king commanded 
that the burnt-offering and the ſin-effering ſhouid be made 


*Ler.g 


T4, 1 F, 
Hcb.s.2, 


— 
> O—— 


for all Iſrael. 


5 i+ e. For Judah and Benjamin, and all the reſt of - the Tribes 
whereof a conſiderable number were now in his Dominions. *1 Chron 
. : rot 
25 * And he ſet the Levites in the houſe of the 16-44% 
K 2F+ 6. 


| . - 9 *® Q 
according to the commandment of David, and of Ga = m_ 


the kings ſeer, and Nathan the Prophet: for ſo was the 2x. r. 
commandment + of the LORD t by his prophets. 

26 And the Levites ſtood with the inſtruments * of ys by 
David, and the prieſts with * the trumpets. of hs 
27 And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt- 10RD, 
offe:ing upon the altar: and + when the burnt-offering T Heb by 
began, the ſong of the LORD began «l/s with the», vr 
trumpets, and with the + inſtruments ordained by Da- 23. ;. " 
vid king of Iſrael. Amot6., 

28 And all the congregation worſhipped, and the 4 ' Num | 
ſingers ſang, and the trumpets founded: and all his + Heb ; 
continued untill the burnt-offering was finiſhed. 


in the time 
29 And when they had made an end of offering, f Heb. 
the king and all that were + preſent with him, bowed ©" 
themſelves and worſhipped. roo 
30 Moreover, Hezekiah the king, and the princes ſoy. 
commanded the Levires, to ſing praiſe to the LORD, * Hb. 
with the words of David, and of Aſaph the ſeer : and {%% 
they ſang praiſes with gladnefs, and they bowed their 
heads and worthipped. 
31 Then Hezekiah anſwered and ſaid, Now ye 
have || conſecrated your ſelves unto the LORD x, come 
near, and bring facrifices, and +* thank-offerings into 
the houſe of the LORD. And the congregation | Or flld 
brought in ſacrifices, and f thank-offerings, and as many yeur hand; 


as were of a free heart, burnt-offerings «. } Heb. 
+ Now that you have reconciled your ſelves and the Houſe to Gods thavkss 
| Favour, aad that he is willing and ready to accept your Sacrifices 
# Wherein there was more generoſity than in the other Sacrifices, 
; becauſe they were wholly burnt and off:red to God, and the People 
: had no ſhare in them «5s they had in the reſt. 


32 And the number of the burnt- offerings which 
the congregation brought, was threeſcore and ten bul- 
locks, an hundred rams, and two hundred lambs: all 
' theſe ere for a burnt-offering unto the LORD. 
| 33 And the conſecrated things x were ſix hundred 


cam they to the porch of the LORD; ſo they ſancti- ; 9X<2, and three thouſand ſheep. 


x 7 e. All the offerings conſecrated to God beſides the Burnt- 
offerings already mentioned. 

34 But the prieſts y were too few, fo that they could 
nor ſlay all the burnt-offerings z : wherefore their bre- f Heb, 
thren the Levices | did help them || cill the work was /'eneitn 
ended, and untill the other priefts had ſanRified them. ©" 
ſelves: for the Levites were more upright in heart, to 
{anctifie themſelves, than the prieſts. 


y To wit, ſuch as were ſanQifi:d and fir for their Work, as the 
following words ſhew : for otherwiſe the number of the Prieſts 


; was more than ſufficient for this Employment. z And much leſs all 


the other Sacrifices, which were more numerous; The {laying 
whereof was the Prieſts proper work, Levie. r. 5, 6, || Neceſlicy 
excuſcing their deviation from the Rule, as ic hath excuſed others 
in the like Caſes. 


35 And alſo the burnt-offecings were in abundance *, 
with the fatof the peace-offerings, and the drink-offer- 
ings for every burnt-offering. So the ſervice of che 
houſe of the LOR D was ſet in order. 

* Or, Fir the Burnt-Offerings were to be offered alſo 1» abundance. 
So it is a reaſon why the Prieſts could not ſlay all the Barnt-offerings, as 
was ſaid © 34. B:cauſe there was ſo muchother work for them, 
for . the Burnt= offerings were not only to be ſlayed, bur 
alſo to be offered, to wit, wholly, and with them rhe Far of Peacie 
offerings, &C« 

36 And Hezckiah rejoyced, and all the people, that 

| (x0 


* Chap 


* Chr 
29. 48 


*Nur 
9. 10, 


| Heb 
wat ris 
in the 
ofthel 


4 Het: 
6 gria 
numbe) 
er, 1 


Us 


346 


4: 


7 


* Chap: RYRX. 


I 1. 


*;chron, God had * prepared the p:ople : for the thing wes 
29- 38- gone ſuddenly. 

| + It was, as a very great, ſo a ſudden Change, that the People who 
but the other day were ſo ready to comply with wicked 4þaz 
in his Idolatrous and Impious Preicriptions, werz now ſo free and 
forward in Gods Service : whereby it plaialy appeared-to be the 
Work of the Almighcy God chayging their Hearts 'by his Holy, 
Spirit, 

CHEAP. Xa 


Hezekiah proclaimeth # ſolemn Paſſover for Judah and Iſrael, 1 ——— 12, 
They having, deſtroyed the Altars of Inolatry, keep the feaſt 14 days, 
13 —=- 26. The Pricfts and Levites bleſs the people, 27. 


Nd Hezekiah ſent to all Iſrael a and Judah, and 
wrote letters alſo ro Ephraim and Manaſſeh 6, 

that they ſhould come to the houſe of the LORD at 
Jeruſalem c, to keep the paſlover unto the LORD God 


of Iſrael. 

a Whereby he underſtands all the Perſons ef the Ten Tribes. 
who were now. lettled in his Kingdom; as appears by their contra- 
diſtin&tion to Ephraim and Maraſth here following. bz. e- To all 
the remainders of the Ten Tribes, v- 5. who are here Synedochi- 
cally expreſſed by the names of Ephraim and Manaſſeh, as elſe-where 
by the name of Ephraim only. Bur he names theſe rwo Tribes, be- 
cauſe they were nearcſt to his Kingdom, and a great number of 
them had Jong ſince, and trom time to time joyned themſelves ro 
the Kingdom of Judah, 2 Ehron. 15.8, 9. and therefore had moſt 
hopes of ſucceſs amongſt them.c Admoniſhing them of their Duty 
to God, and perſwading them to comply with it. 


CARONICLES 


. the country of Ephraim and Manafſeh, even unto 


; mocked them. x4 


Chap. .XX 


Zebulun : but they » laughed them to ſcorn, and 


28. e. The Generality of the ten Tribes ; who by long want of 
Meat had now loſt all their Appetire to Gods Ordinances, and from Y 
a neglect were now fallen into a Contempt and Deriſion of them ; 
for which they paid dear. Forabout ſix years after their R-fuſal of 
this Offer of Grace, they were all carried Captive, 2 K:ngs 18. 1,10, s | 

11 Nevertheleſs, * divers of Aſher, and Manafleh, * © TN 
and of Zebulun, humbled themſelves, and came to Je- '** | 
ruſalem. 

12 Alfoin Judah the hand of God was to give them 
one heartto do the commandment of the king, and of 
the princes, by the word of the LORD o. A 4oe> 

0 7. e God by the Power of his Grace inclined their Hearts to 
an unanimous compliance with Godsand the Kings Will. And this 
1s mentioned as the Reaſon of this worderful Change wrought in 
theſe Mer, who had lately been utterly averſe from Gods Worſhip, : 
and wholly given up to Idolatcy ; as was noted before on ch 29. 36. 

I 3 Ard there aſſembled at Jeruſalem much people, 
to keep the feaſt of unleavened bread in the ſecond 
month, a very great congregation. | 

14 And they aroſe, and took away the *altars p that 
were 1N Jerulalem, and ail the altars for incenſe took 
they away, and caſt ;hem into the brogk Kidron. 


p To wit, of Burnt-offerings 3 becauſe they are diſtinguiſhed | 
from the Altars of Incenſe here following ; both which were remos 


* Ch. 28 
24» 


2 For the king had taken counſel, and his princes, 
and all the.congregarion in Jeruſalem, to keep the pal-| 
ſover in the ſecond * month &. 

d Which was againſt the cemmon Rulz and Praftiſe, but was 
zuſtified by that Supreme Law of Neceſlity, and by a juſt Impediz 
ment, which made the doing of rhis in its proper time to wir, the: 
fourteenth day of the fiſt Month, impoſſible, becauſe the Temple; 
was not cleanſed, nor they prepared till that time was paſt, ch. 29- 
3, 17- Compare Numb. 9. Icy IIs 

2 For they could not keep it at that time e, becauſe 
the prieſts had not ſanctified themſelves ſufficiently f , 

neither had the people gathered themſelves together to 


Jeruſalem g. ; 

e Which God had appointed for it, Exod. 12. 6. One Reaſon 
whereof was evident in it ſelf, becauſe the Temple was not then 
purified and prepared; to which he adds twe orher Reaſons. f To 
Wit, in ſuch manner and degree as was fit, nor in \uch nu-nbers as 
were neceſſary for the ſlaying and offering of ſo many thouſands of 
Paſcha!eofferings, as appears, becauſe they were not ſutfficisnt for 
thoſe Off:rings, which were comparatively few, <. 29. v. 32 33, 34- 
g As they uſed and ought to dat that time from »1lpJaces: which 
now they could not do, becauſe neith?r the thing was agreed upon, 

- nor the Peap!e ſummoned thither till the proper time was palt. 

4 And the thing Þ pleaſed che king, and all thecon- 
Sregation. 

5 So they eſtabliſhed a decree b, to make proclami- 
tion throughout all Iſrael, from Beer ſheba even to 
Dan, that they ſhould come to keep the paſſover unto 
the LORD God of Ifraet at Ieſuſaiem : for they had 


f Heb. in not done iff of along time in ſuch ſort as it was written. 
6 great h They fixed this Refolutions 7 7. e. So as God had commanded 
mmher, them to do it, to wit, That'all the Males in [ral ſhou'd do it: 
fer. 13. Waich exprzſs Command of God they oughr to have obeyed, rather 
Us than the wicked Commands or Edits of M:n ro the contrary : which 
was both the Judgment and Praftiſe of the Prieſts and Levitzs, and 
other godly Ifraclites, as 1s manifeſt from 2 Chron. 15. 8, &c. 

6 So the poſts went with the letters from the king 
and his princes throughout all Iſrael, and Judah, and 
according to the commandment of the king, faying, 
Ye children of Iſrael, tusn again unto the LORD God 
of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iſrael, and he will return to 
the remnant of you, that are eſcaped out of the hands 
of the kings of Aſſyria k 

k To wit, Pul and Tilgath»pilneſsr, who had carried their Bre- 
ge away Captives, 2 Kings 15. 19, 29» I Chrox. 5.20. 2 Chron, 
29- 20, | 

7 And be not ye like your fathers, and like your 
brethren, which treſpaſſed againſt the LORD God of 
their fathers, who therefore gave them up to deſolation: 


tHe, as ye lee. 
brden ms 8 Now + be ye not ſtiff-necked as your fathers 


nw necks, were, but | yield your ſelves / unto the LORD and en- 
by terinto his Crnttnary which he hath ſanctified for ever m, 
"** and ſerve the LORD your God, that the fierceneſs of 


his wrath may turn away from you. 

1 Heb. Give the Hand tehim; 7. e. ſubmit your ſelves to him by 
obeying his Commind, and renew your Covenant with him: borh 
which things were done amengſt Men by this Czremony of giving 
the Hand. Sce 1 Chron. 29+ 24. Ezra 10 19. Ezek, 17. 18. m Not 
for a tranſient and temporary uſe ; but as long as the State and 
Church ef 1/ra«! had a beeing, whatſoever Alterations ſhould hap- 


*Numb- 


9, I0, II 


{ Heb. 

ws right 
in the eyes 
of the King: 


FHebs 
- the 


ved and deſtroyed, partly becauſe all the Iſraelites were confined te 
tne A'rars of the Temple; and partly becauſe theſe Altars were 
erected to Idols. | 
Is Then they killed the paſſover on the fourteenth 
4ay of the ſecond month : and the Prieſts and the Le- 
vites were aſhamed 9, and fandified themſelves, and 


brought in the burnt-ofterings into the houſe of the 
LORD. 


7 Their Negligence and Remiſneſs being upbraided by the great 
and general Alacrity and Forwardneſs of the People- | 
16 And they ſtood in Þ their place, after their man- + Heb. 
ner, according to the law of Moſes the man of God : their #and 
the prieſts ſprinkled the blood r, which they received of "+ 
the hand of the Levites s. | 
r Of the Sacrifices upon the Altar, Zevir.:r.-5. 5 Who flayed * 
and killed the Sacrifices which the Prieſts, if they had been ſanctis 
fied, ſhould have doae, as it was oblerved before, ch. 29. 34+ 
17 For there were many in the congregation that were 
not ſanctifieds : therefore the Levites had the charge 
of the killing of the paſſoversx,for every one that was 
not clean y, to ſanftihe them unto the LORD. 
# That had more deſire to come to the Paſſover, than care and 
diligence to cleanſe and-prepare themſclves for it. Now theſe per® 
ſons were either 1. The Prieſts who were before taxed with Un» 
cleanneſs and Unprieparedneſss Or rather 2. the Pevple, as is im- 
plyed in the wora Congregasion, and expreſſ:d in the next verſe. and 
confirmed by the Reaſon here following. « Becauſe many of the 
People were unclean,and therefore many more Sacrifices were to be - 
offered for their Purification than the Prieſts could kill- z 5. e. Ei- 
ther 1. the Paſchal! Lambs; which the Levires here offered, becauſe 
cf the Impuriry of many of the Maſters of Families, who otherwiſe, 
as ſome think, ſhould have killed the Paſchal Lambs in their own 
Houſes, Exod. 12 3- Or 2. The other Sacrifices which accompani- 
ed the P.aſ[>vergwhich alſo are called by the ſame Name, as is evident 
from Deut, 16. 2, 3. where ſee my Notes; which the Levites here 
killed, for the Reaſons row mentioned». » So far as they could 
make any diſcovery of their uncleanneſs, either by their own Con- 
f- ſion, or otherwiſe, But there were many whoſe Uncleanneſles 
weie not known, and therefore did nor cleanſe themſelves, as is ſajd, 
wv. 18, as they ought to have donz?. | 
18 For a mulcitudeof the people, eves many of Eph- 
raim and Manailch, Ifſachar, and Zebulun, had not 
cleanſ2d themſelves, yet did they eat the paſſover,other- 
wiſe than it was written z: bur Hezekiah prayed for _. 
chem, ſaying, F The good LOKD pardon every one. + Heb #f 
2 They had fo eager a eſire ro partak2 of this Ordinance, that LORP+, 
-ather than neglect ir, thy would venture upon it with ſome Ce- ##e $108 
remonia] Uacleznn-{s upo- them, pardon, 
19 That prepareth bis heart to ſeek God, the LORD 
God of his fathers, though he be not cleayjed according 
to the purification of the ſanfuary a. 
a i, e« With that Ceremonial Purification which was required of 
them that cime into Gods Sanctuary. Sa he calls it to diſtinguiſh 
from thar Moral and Internal Purity which they are here ackaow- 
ledged to have. 
20 And the LORD hearkned to Hezekiah, and 
healed the people. | 
b From their Uncleanneſs; which it ſelf was a Spiritual Diſeaſe, 
and which protab'y produced a Diſeaſe, cr Diſtemper, oc Trouble 
in their Minis and Conſciencies; which alſo had formerly brought, 
and might juitly now bring even ourward Diſ:aſes upon the Body, 
or, at leaſt Guilr, which is a Diſcaſe upon the Soul : From all which 
the Lord was pl-aſed nowto heal them, by pardoning this the'r Sin, 
and accepting them and their Services, as if they had b:en clean« 


= 


pen therein, 

9 Forif ye turn again unto the LORD, your bre- 
thren and your children ſhal! frxd compaſſion before 
them that lead them captive, ſo that they ſhall come 
again into this land : for the LORD your God zs * gra- 

*F:oa;. Cious and merciful, and will not turn away bis face 
366. {rom you, if ye return unto him. 
19 So the poſts paſled from city to city, through 


Which ic is ikelyGod waspleaſed to manifeſt by ſome outward Signs: 

! poſſibly by fire from Heaven conſuming the Sacrifices ; which was 

the uſual Token of Gods Approbationzas hath been formerly nored 

: more than once. | 

' 21 And the children of Iſrael hat were | preſent at  -- 

' Jeruſalem, kept the feaſt of unleavened bread ſeven jp _ 

| days with great gladneſs : and the Levites, and the” 
3X prieſts 


2b: In 
n.nts 

oth. 
<b. #0 


Oo 


+64 
by 


be 
nd. 


Wares, 
Hebe 
ill to 
ec An 


ap. XXXI. 


art of 


prieſts praiſed the LORD day by day, ſinging with 
+ loud inſtruments unto the LORD, ſ 

22 And Hezekiah ſpake + comfortably unto all 
the Levites c that taught the good knowledge of the 
LORD 4: and they did eat throughout the feaſt ſeven 
days, offering peace-offerings, and making confettion 


e unto the Lord God of their fathers. 

c Encouraged them to a chearful ard diligent attendance upon 
their Holy Miniſtrations by rhe promiſe of his Favour and utmoſt 
Care for them, which he fairhtully performed, ch. 31. 4+ &c. 4d Who 
by their Office were to. in{truct and build up the people in the 
Knowledge and fear of God : which is mentioned as the Cauſe of 
his Reſpect and Kindneſs to them, which was for #heir works ſake, 
as it is ſaid 1 Th. 5- 23. e Either r Confeſſing their ſins: which 
Work was to accompany many of their Sacrifices: of which ſee 
Levlt, 5. 5. and 16. 21. Or rather, 2 Confeſling Gods Goodneſs, or 
praiſing of Gcd, which oft goes under this Name, as I Chron. 16. 8, 
24. which alſo ſeems to be more proper work for this Seaſon of Joy, 

23 And the whole aflembly rook counſel to keep 


* other ſeven days: and they kept other ſeyen days with 
gladneſs f. 


#} Not in the ſame manner as they had done the former,..with 
off:ring new Paſchal Lambs, and eating only Unleavened Bread, 
( of which there is ne: the leaſt intimarion in the Text } bur only 
in the Solemn Worſhip ef God, by Sacrifices, and Prayers, and 
Praiſes, and publick Inttruction ef thar great Congregation, tnrhe 
good Knowledge of the L1rds which was ſo dear to Hezeklab, v.22. and 
at this time moſt ſcaſ-nable and neceſſary for the pe: ple, after ſo 
tong and diſmal a Night of Ignorance, Superſtition and Idlarry, 
as both 1/eel and Judeb hed been involved in- 1 IN 

24 For Hezekiah king of Judah + did give to the 


congregation F Aa thouſand bullocks, and ſeven thou- 
ſand | ſheep þ; and the princes gave to the congregation 


a thouſand bullocks, and ten thouſand ſheep: and a | 


great number of prieſts ſan&ified themſelves. 

' g Firſt ro-GoJ, to whom the parts appointed were offered in 
way of Thankſgiving 3 and then to the People, who feaFeJ upon 
the Relicks, as the Offerer uſed to do in the Peace offerings : ad 
Hezekiah, who was the Offerer. gave away his Right in the Re- 
mains ef . lie Sacrifices to the People. bþ wh-ch Generolity is the more 
conſide:able, becauſe it was in the beginning of his Reign, when 
he found the Royal Exchequer exhauſted and empty ; ana when he 
had been ar grear Exp:nce about th- clernliag and refiiting of che 
Temple} and making Preparations for this great Feaſt. i Having 


now both more Time and further Need of tancefying themſelves | 


to offer theſe numerous Sacrifices. 


25-Arid all the congregation of J udah, with the prieſts 


out of Iſrael, and the ſtrangers that came our of the 
land of Iſrael, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoyced. 

26 So there was great joy in Jeruſalem: for ſince the 
time that Solomon the Son of David king of 1frael, 
there was not the like in Jeruſalem. 

27 Then che prieſts the Levites & aroſe, and * bleſſed 
the people / and their voice was heard, and their pray- 


* Er came wp to | his holy dwelling place, even unto 


heaven. 

k Thoſe of the Levites who were Prieſts aiſo; for to them only 
this Work belonged, 1 Chron: 23+ 13. Or, the Prieſt and the Levites: 
For as the Levites did ſome other part of che Pri:ſts Work at this 
time, it is not ſtrange if they did this alſo. Or the Pricſts mighe 
bleſs by ſolemn pronunciation of the Bleſſing, and the Levites 
by cheir Acclamarions, or withrheir Muſical Inſtruments / Either 
commended them for their great Zea'and D:ligcnee in Gods Service. 
Or ratier, lolemaly prayed ro God to bleſs them 3 and their Pray- 
er Was not in vain, as the following words ſhew. 


CH AP.- XXXI, 


The People forward in deftroying Idolatry : Hezekiah ordereth the Courſes 


of the Prieſts and Levites : and provideth for their work and main- 

fexance, 1 4. The People forward in Offerings and Tithes 

g —— 10: Heezthiah appointeth Officers to diſpoſe of the Tithes, 
11 <= ig, bis fincerity, 20, 21. 

Ow when all this was fini/hed, all Iſrael that were 

+ preſent, went out to the cities of Judah, and * 

brake the + Images in pieces, and cut down the groves, 

and threw down the high places, and the altars out of 


2 Kings 41] Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim alſo and Manaſ- 


ſeh 2, + until they had utterly deſtroyed them all. 'Then 
all the children of Iſrael returned every man to his 
poſſeſſion into their own cities, 


I 1. CARONICLES. 


Chap. XXXI 
offerings, and for yarns” gray to miniſter, ard to 

give thanks, and to praiſe in the gates of the 

the LORD 5. 4 - _— 


6 1. e. Within the Gates of. the Houſe of the Lord : which is here 
called Tents, partly-becauſe all Houſes are oft ſo called, as Judges 


19. 9: and 20. 8. Pſal. 69. 25. And partly becauſe the 
Lord, to wit, the eg Formal wm ſo 4k praghang 
ed there, and kept their Statiens and Orders there by courſe, 

3 He appointed alſo the kings portion of his ſubſtance, 
for the burnt-offerings c 50 wit, for the morning and 
evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-offerings of the 


 fabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the ſet-feafts, 


as it 5s written in the * law of the LORD. * Numb 
c Which had hitherto been, and were to be taken out of the 38, & 20 

Treaſures of the Temple which were colle&ed from the People " 

I Chron. 26420. Nehem. 10. 32,33: but that he mighr eaſe them in 

their preſent poverty, which his Predeceſſors had brought upon 

them, and engage th2m to a more chearful attendance upon Gods 

Service, he took the Burden upon himſef. 


4 Moreover, he commanded the people that dwelt 

in Jeruſalem, to give the portion of the prieſts, and the 
Levires, that they might be encouraged in the law of 

the LORD 4, 

,41, e. Freed from worldly Cares and Diſtrations, and enab!ed to 

give up themſelves entirely to the ſerious Srudy of Gods Law,in 

which many of them were ignorant, and tothe Inſtruction, and Di. 

recti2n, aad quickning of the People in their ſeveral Duties, 

5 And as ſoon as thecommandment + came abroad e, + yy,, 
the children of 1rael brought in abundance the firſt- brake fry 
fruits of corn, wine, and oil, and || honey f, and of all ||Or,day 
the increaſe of the field, and the tithe of all hinge 
brought they in abundantly. | | 

e Either 1, as ſoon as the Report of this Command of the King, 

V. 4 was got abroad into other parts. Or, 2+ as ſdon as the King 

enlarged 1d extended that Command to all the parts of his King 

dom, which v. 4» Was confined fo them that dwell in Feruſalem. 


f Or, Dares, as the Hebrew Writers generally, and mariy other learn- 


ed Hebrecians underſtand this word, which is given to them, be« 
cauſe of the Sweetnefs of theirTaſte in ſame ſort reſembling Honey. 
tor the Law requires no Tithes buc of the-Fruits of Trees, or of 
the Earth, or of Beaſts, 

6 And concerning the children of Iſrael and Judah, 
chat dwelt in the cities of Judah, they alſo brought in 


che tithe of oxen and ſheep g, and the * tithe of holy » x,,. 1 


'G 11s 
and the Levites, and all the congregation that came : od b, and laid them + by heaps. 


s Either 1+ In thoſe Cirizs belonging to Ephraim and Manaſſeh, 
which the Kings of Judah had formerly taken from the Kings of 7- 
rael, Or, 2. In the Tribes of Ephraim and Manaſſh. For although 
theſe were a part of Hoſbes's Kingdomy yet Hezekiah preſumed to do 
this partly by virtue of the Law of God, to which both [ſrael and 
Judah owed Subje&ion, which commanded the extirpation of theſe 
things out ef the whole Land of Canaan : Partly by the ſpecial 
Impulſe and Dire&ion of Gods Spirit, which ſometimes did put 
perſons upon Heroical and Extraordinary Attions, not ro be 
drawn into Imitation; And partly becauſe he knew that Heſbea con- 
rented himſelf wirh the Worſhip of the Calves, and did not pra- 
criſe that great Idolatry which his Predeceflors had uſed, and there- 
fore would patiently ſuffer the breaking of theſe Images of Baa!, 
and the things belonging to them ; which is all that was done ar 
this time- 


h 2 And Hezekiah appointed the courſes of the priefts 
and the Levites, after their courfes, every man accor- 
ding to his Service, the prieſts and Levites for burnt- 


things, which were conſecrated unto the LORD their 430. + 
Devr, 14 
£ They brought innot only the ſame Tithes which the Dwel- 28. , 

lers in Jeruſalem did, to wit, of corn, and wine, and oil, &c which T Heb? 
they kad In their own Store-houſes in that City ; but alſo Oxen and heaps, 
Sheep, which were 1nore proper to the Country : For under the Ci» #i4!, 
fries of j udah,are comprehended the Suburbs and Territories adjacent 

and belonging to them, as is evident from the Nature of the Thing, 

and the Law of God. h This may be taken either 1. by way of Ex» 
plication, even rhe Tithe of Holy things; &c+ Or rather, 2- by way of 
Addition, the Tithe, of all Holy things which are conſecrated wunte the 

Lord, wlicther by Vow, or voluntary Promiſe, or otherwiſe ; as the 
Tithes of Gains by Merchandiſe, or Spoils of War, &s. of which 

ſee; Gen. 14; 20, & 28. 22. Numb, 31. 284 30. 

7 In the third month 3 they began to lay the foun- 
dation of the heaps, and fnifhed them in the ſeventh 
month |, 

i« To wit, of the Sacred Year, Exod, 12. 2. in which their Hare 
veſt began, k In which their Harveſt ended and the Feaſt of Tas 
bernacles was kept, Exod. 23. 16. Levit. 23. 34+ 
And when Hezekiah and the princes came and 


ſaw the heaps, they bleſſed the LORD /, and his people 
Iſrael -. | | 

I Both for giving ſuch plentiful Proviſions to his Land in this 
Year, and fer giving his People ſuch liberal and pious Hearts to- 
wards this good Work. m They praiſed them for their forward- 
neſs and faithfulneſs in it- 

9 Then Hezekiah queſtioned with the prieſts and | 
the Levites concerning the heaps #. | 

2 How it cameto paſs that no more of their Proviſion was ſpent, 
and there yer remained ſuch great Heaps of it. 

10 And Azariah the chief prieſt of the houſe of Za- | 
doks, anſwered him, and ſaid, * Since the people began * Mal. 3. 
to bring the offerings p into the houſe of the LORD, **: 
we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty : for 
the LORD hath bleſſed his peopleq, and that which 7s 
left is this great ſtore. 

0 Either 2. th: High-Prieſt, called alſo Zadok, r Chron. 6. 12. 


becauſe he was of his Line and Family. Or, 2. the Chief-Prieſt, or 


the Head of that Family of Zadk or of Eleazar ; as there was anos 
ther Chief Prieſt of the F amily of Abiathar or of thamar. See 2 Sam. 
8. 17. 1 Cbron. 24. 3. but both ſubject to the High: Prieſt. p Which 
they did from the beginning of the Harveſt according to the man- 
Nec. 9 In an Extraordinary Degree. 
11 Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare || cham-l Or Jorg 
_ in the houſe of the LORD r; and they prepared #99 
them, 
_ 7 Largely ſocalled, to wit, in the Courts, or in the chambers ade 
joyning to the Houſe. 
R 12 And brought in the offerings and the tithes, and 
the dedicate things faithfully : over which Cononiah 
the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the 
next, 
13 And Jchiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and _ 
©, 


Chap. XXXUE. | 11. CHRONICLES. Chap. XXX 


hel, and J<rimoth,and Jozabad,and Eliel, and Iſmachi-. the wall that was broken e, and raited it up to the ro- 


| Heb: #* 1h, and Mahath, and Benajah, were overſeers F under wers f,;and another wail without, and repaired * M1l- 


* > Sanf 


the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother s, at the lo g i the city of David, and wade || darts and ſhields for fodl 
commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the in abundance. - or weepl 
ruler of the houſe of God te. ; e By Joaſh, Atm25.:23: and not ſince repaired, 2 Chron, 25+ 23: | 

5 i« 6, Todiſpoſe of thoſe Proviſions by their Dire&ion, and to be 7 Either 1. as high as the Towers, or the rops of the Wall: Or. 2: 
accountable to-them therein. t Either the Supreme Ruler, to wit, As far-as the twg Tower s, of Gates, which were made. in.the Form 
eþ< High*Prieſt: or the Chief Ruler under him, and in bis ſtead, . of Towers, and has-the uſe of Towers. to wit, that, of Ephraim, 
being appointed by him to inſpe& this Work. See above, v. 16, & and the Corner-Gate, both mentioned above, <<: 25: 23, Or, 
T1 Chron. 9. 11. Jer. 20. I. | | - i brought up my or Inſtruments of Defence »pox* the rowers: g OF 
- 14 And Kore the ſonof Imnah, the Levite, the por- which ſee. 1 Th 


-will- ings:|,. _—_— rg 3 
of years a ſeg Fm hs — | gathered them together to, him; in the ſtreet of the gate ſpate rol 
: 4s -2.:;of the city,' and f ſpake comfortably unto them, ſay ing, their hell 
# At the Eaſt-gate of the Lords houſe; of which ſee on c<. 23.8.;} 7 Be ſtrong and EQUIBSIONS, be not afraid ner dil- . 2 Ki f 
x To the Prieſts and Levites, to whom they were, appropriated, by ''Maid for the king of Aſſyria, MOC for all the multitude 6. 16, 
God. y To wit, the remainders of the freewil offering, Levit.,2«;| that is with him : for '*-rh2re 'be mo with us, thanwwith _ | 
v I; th 8 Sin- offering and treſpaſs-offering, Levis. 6. 18. 22, & 7. || him. (YE 2:0 17-eatevl af Vu IC * ſer. i 
' 1: and the Shew= bread, Lev. 24.9» L413 0s ha — 8 Wi 4, 3g Pe "bends, | . : 's > Yo 

; op . .- -. {1:8 With him3s an * arm of fleſh, but wi 
feb. 15: And f: next him- were Eden,; and: AMinjartiny Joon wes Ga hpecs Foy yt | 
* Joſh. 4 , and Jeſhuah, and Shemajah, Amariah, andShecaniaty, | ASd the bene: + reſte 7 3 ooquetagal 5 che ed hone 
10s, rr, 12 E the cities of the prieſts z, in their || jet office, to give ' | ow 7 iodide of co 9c” 4 | 
y =p 'J 


to their brethren by-courſe, :as well to the greatastorthe \ Flezekiah king of Judah.” * : 
his ſervants - co Jeruſaleny þ ( bue he. himſelf laid ſiege | 


{mall *+...4 | 9 After.chis. did Sennacherib king of Afſyria ſend 
ſeveral Portions belonging to. the Prieſts, who. abode in their ſeveral ainſt Izchiſh, and. all his j.power with .him ) unto ry He | 


[ ” 


M 


z-. Who were intruſted with the Receiving and Diſtributing of the | 


Cities, whilſt their Brethren came up to Jeruſalem . , . Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah, that were demmien 
16 Beſide their genealogy of males, from threeyears ar. Jeruſalem, ſa ing, FO ' = 
old and upward 4, evey unto every one that entreth in | ,* þ Of this and the following'Ver'es ſee the Notes on 2 Kings 18z 
to the houſe of the LORD%, his daily portion for their 17, RE Ret #f: —_— = 22 
ſervice in their charges, according to their courſes” - | 72 Thus faict Sennacherib King of Aſſyria, where- | 
# To whom a portion of theſe things was allotted, as is here-im- | ON (oſs) ye "truſt, that ye abide'|| in the fiege in Je- ||Or, 5 
' Plicd, © That were capable of entring thither, .and doing Service | ruſalem ? oe. þ : ; | the o 
jos py Sens Peg get "__ io On gg Doth*Hezekiah perſwade you to give over your — 
Priefis and Levis. = - |{elves to die by famine ang by thirſt, faying, The 
| 17 Both to the genealogy of the prieſts by the houſe | LORD our Eod 'ſhall deliver vs our of the hand of the 

[5 the of their fachers, and the Levites, || from ewenty years King of Aſtyria? © | LEG PE Es 
= * 4 oid and upward, in their charges by their courſes: 0 Hath not the ſame Hezekiah taken away his high 
ther 18 And'to the genealogy of all their little ones, their | Places, and his altars, and commanded Judah and Je- 
wives and their ſons, and their daughters, through all | fulalem, ſaying, Ye (hall worſhip before one altar, and 

| Or; the congregation c. for in their |] ſet office they ſandi- burn incenſe upon it. | 

mh cod thornfaives in hottces. 13 Know ye not what I and my fathers have done 
c This 's alledg=d as a Reaſon why their Wives and Children were j UNTO all' the people of other lands ? were'the gods of 


provid-d fr out of the Holy things, ———S ſequeſtred them- the nations of thoſe lands any ways able to deliver their © 
ſeives from world'y Aﬀa'rs, by which rhey migit otherwiſe have, ]ands out of mine hand? 


{gry pos Lorag lies, and intirely devored themſelves to} .. 1, yr 0. .,,a5 there among all the gods of thoſe nations 


19 Aſo the ſons of Aaron the prieſt, which were in that my fachers _ Utter ly deſt-oyed, that could deliver 
tLev. 25, * the fields 4 of the ſuburbsof their cities, in every ſeve- his people out, of mine hand, thar ary God (bould be 
34- rl city, the men that were expreſſed by name, to give able to deliver you out of mine hand ? 7 

umba portion to all the males amony, the prieſts, and to all | 75 Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, 
35-2" that were reckoned by geneaiogies, among the Levites. | 20r p=rſwade you on this manner, neither yer believe 
d Wno are oppoſed to thole that lived in or reſorted to the great him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able 
City Jeruſalem. E465 to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the 
20 And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, | hand of my fathers : how much leſs ſhall your God de- 

and wrought that which was good, and right, and truth | liver you 5 out of mine hand, 
before the LORD his God. | + Seing I have d:ſtroyed ſ9 many Nations, and ſome of them 

21 And inevery work that he began in the ſervice ' ſtronger chan you, in ſpight of all rheir gods, it is nct probable 

of the houſe of God, and in the law, and in the com- thar your God ſhould defend you, which none of the reſt could do 


. ey f . for their People. | 
mandments to ſeek his God, he did zz with all his +; Andhis ſervants ſpake yet mereagainſt the LORD 
heart, and proſpered. | 


! God, and againſt his ſervant Hezekiah. ol 
CHAP. XXXIL |} +47 * He wrote alſo Letters to rail on the LORD *2 Ki 


Sennacherib invading Judah, Hezekiah fortifieth himſelf, and encourageth God of Urael b and to ſpeak againſt him, ſaying, As 19- $+ 
the People, 1 —— 9. againff Senmacheribs blaſphemousm-ſſuge and letters, the gods of the nations of ether lands have not deliver ed 
10,—— 20. An Avgel deſhoyerh the Hoſt of the «yrians, 21--23- their people out of mine hand, fo (ball not che God of 
——_—  — 5+ OE 8 IRA mac ago Hezekiah deliver his peop'e out of mine hand, _. 
mansA 3 w. ng EI 7 18 * Then they cryed with a loud voice in the Jews» , xx 

ſpeech unto the people of Jeruſalem that were on the 18. a 


*: Kings, A Fter * theſe things, and F the eſtabliſhment there- : | "SR 
18. 13, of a, Sennacherib king of Afſyria came, and en- wy oO and to trouble them, that they 


tred into Judah, and encamped againſt the fenced ci-| 7, \ q they fpake againſt the God of Jeruſalem, 


n&. ties, and thought co win them for himſeif. : _— 
7 Hevechis #4 'An Empharical Preface ſignifying that notwithſtanding all _ againſt the gods dupe mn of the eart l'wbich were 


truth. his Pious Care and zcal for God. yet God ſaw fit ro Exerciſe him : the wen of the hands © k Kh * 
$* Gr. with a ſore Tryal an.' Calamity ; which yer he rurned ro tus great | 20 And for this cauſe Hezekiah the king, and the 
Ch. Jl. Honour and Advan-'age: b He deſigned and bragged that he wouid prophet Ifaiah the ſon of Amoz, prayed and cried to 
20. win them all, and did acrually win many of them, 2 Kings 18. 13. jy 4 
f gorge 2 And waen Hezekiah ſaw chat Sennacherib was ,x #* And the LORD ſont an angel which cut off * » Ki 
" om —_ that | he was purpoſed to fight againſt Je- all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and the "9 *$ 
f Heb. his 3 SED Sas. PEEL, captains in the camp of the king of Afſyria : ſo he 
facewns ts 3 He took counſel with his princes, and his mighty. ——_— with "nan of face to hs own land And 
T - bd ki 2 ” a 

ary men, to ſtop the waters of the fountains c, which were when he was come into the houſe of his god they that © . x; 


without the city: and they did heip him . 
6 With Earth or other RN caſt Sr Few and withal to de- CAME forth of his own bowels, | flew him there Fat, 


' Tive the Waters by ſecrer Pa i er ground to Jevſs- with the ſword. | | _ 

lems n Roche Re Tipe WO OY i 22 Thus the LORD faved Hezekiah, andthe inha- ; Hed 

ROPE 4 So there was gathered much people together, who bitants of Jeruſalem from the hand of Sennacherib the ,,zge 

werfew 4 ſtopt all the fountains, and the brook that + ran chrough king of Afſyria, and from the hand of all other, and feb. 
* the midſt of the land, faying, Why ſhould the kings of guided them on every 1ide. 

Aſlyria come and find much water 4? . 23 And many broughe gifts unto the LORD to Je- ; 14.4 


4 gies Was _ cnqpenigg > "5.2 ww Country, and the Want, ryfalem, and Þ preſents ro Hezekiah king of Judah : pre 
bed bw won roma wedo 4 that he was magnified in che ſight of all nari things 
_ wy 5 Alſo ® he ſtrengthened himielf, and built up all i _ 4 — "M 


from thenceforth. 


0 


—_— 


'2S$+2. E Oc : 


= 


bap. XXXIII. 


þ Or, of al thoſe Nutions, which were not very remote, from Ga 
nan and heard theſe matters. WD: 


24 *In thole 


* and he||gave him a ſign. - | 
1 Of which ſee a more particular Account, 1 Kings '20. 1. Oc: 
25 But: Hezekiah rendred nor apain, according to 
the benefit doze unto him:. for his heart was lifted up 
» ; therefore there was wrath: upon him, and upon 
- +: Judah and Jerufalem »;. 


- m Fer that, prodigious :ViRtory:.pver the 4{j7rians, above v, 21, 


hd: 


| ' firmatioh of that Work by a ſtrange and ſupernatural Motion 'of 
- » the Sun; and by the Honour ſince= done him by an (Embaſly from 


221% WCn 
+23, 
© xi 
Jo 


ny Ant : 12 Kings, 20+ 1:2, $66,” W 
nn for Net S Sino becauls they oged him. in it, as they con- 
els.in the.-next-verſc- SEE NS, ; WO ETES 
25 NotenhRanding:"Eletckiah humbled himſelf 
____ for # the pride of hisheare ( 54th he and the inhabieancs 
f65. + of Jerufalem)-{o, that the wrath of the LORD came: 
lif:ing nor upoh them in the.days of 'Hezekialt : | 
27 And Hezekiah had exceeding much''trches ant 
Honour £ 5nd he made” himfclf creafurics' for filver, and 
for gold, and for. precious ſtoncs, ang for ſpices, ard 
bv... for Fe? and for all manner of + picaſant jewe!s ; 
45k 28 Store-houſes allo' for the increafe of corn, and 
-. wine, and oil ; and ſtalls for all manner-of beaſts, and 
Eotes for flocks. : 


| ſe Mareover he provided him cities 6, and poſſeffions 
of flo 


43 2 


© 4 


cks, and herds inabundance : for God. had given 
him ſubſtance very much. -; 


o Heb; be made, &c. Either he purchaſed them ro himſelf by his 
Gold” or 'Silver: Or, he. repaired, and fortified, and beaurtified 
them- for the Honour and' Safery of his Kingdons, * But the former 
Sence ſe-ms to agree betrer with the following: Words. 

- $9 .. This ſame 'Hezektah' alfo ftopped the; upper wa- 
ter-courfe of Gihon p, and brought ir ſtraight down q 
to.the weſt-fide of the city of David.. ;; And Hezekiah 


proſpered in all his works. | 321d 
-. Þ A Riyulet near- Jer»/ales conſiſting of two Streams, the upper 


#n1 rhe lower which was brought into anocher, called rhe lower Pool, 
Wa 22i'9. The former he diverted and brought: byſecrert Pipes in- ; 
to Feruſ:lem, which was x Work of great Arr and Labour, and , 
P9licy,-and therefore is here commended. q Whercas before it | 
f:rchcd a compaſs, and thereby might have bcen boaeficial to the 
hs Fe Atllyriza Hoſt, LE | | | | 
eres, 21 Howbeit, in the buſmeſs of the F embaſſadours of 
> Kings th2 pricices of Babylon, who * ſent unto him to en- 
12. quire of the wonder that was done in the land, God 
-39- 1. left him » to try him, that he might know s all hat 
2was 1n 13 heart. | 3 9 SW 
 # To wit, to himſelf, and his own Impotency and Corruption. 
God wichdrew from him thoſe Supplies and Afſitances of his Spiric 
waict wou'd certainly and effeQually have kept him from that (in, 
and ſuff:red Satan ro tempc tim, and him to fall inro the fin of 
Pride and Oſt=ntation. 5s Either 1+ That God might kiow ir. So 
x. is ſpoken of God after the man ter of Men ; whereof we have had 
” many inſtances. Or, 2+ That Hezekial might know that he had In- 
fic-nuties aad Sins as vel as V:rtucs 5 and therefore thar the great 
Mercies which he had reccived were not the Effefts of his own Me- 
rit2s, as he might bz prone to believe, bur of God's free Grace: 


438 CHRONICLES 


8 
days Hezekiah was ſick to the death, | 
Is and-prayed unto the LORD ; and heſ{g6#& unto him, 


and for his mirgculous Reſtauration fiom; ;Szckneis, and the con- | 


which was brought inta ons Pool, called the epper Pool, Ifa. 7. 3: | 


Chap. XXX11 
*| whereof the LORD had faid, * in Jeruſalem ſhal my « ,,, 
name be for ever. c vg 

5 And he built altars for -all the hoſt of heaven, in * Deur. 
the two courts of the houſe of the LORD. 17. 3. 

6 And he cavfed his chi'!dren to paſs throuph the | Deuraz, 
fire in the valley of the ſon of Hinnom :; alſo heobſery- z Kings 2 
ed times, and uſed inchammients, and uſed witch. 29.&9g.. 
craft, and * dealt with a familiar ſpirit, and with wiz- ©b. 6.6, 
zards: he wrought muchevil inthe ſight of the LORD +» "Fragen 
to provoke him to anger. . . 8 21.Deur. 

7 And he-fet a carved image ( the idol which he 28. 10. 
had made ) in the houſe of :God, of which God had ? gs, 
faid to David;- and to , Solomon his ſon, In * in this +3;p-- 
houſe, and-in Feruſfaletn, which I have choſen before +1. 6. - 
all-che tribes of Iſrael, will 1 put my Name for ever. *Pfalizzj 
8 * Neicher will I any more .remove the foot of If 4+ 
raet-from out-of the land which .I have appointed for , \, 
your fathers+ fo that they will take heed to do all that 
1-lhave commanded them, according to the whole law, 
and the ftatuces, and the ordinances by the hand of 
| Moſes. Eo | | 
| - 9 $0 Manaſſeh made Judah and the inhabicanits of 
Jeruſalem 'to-err,' «vd ro do worſe than the heathen, 
| Whom the LORD had deftroyed before the children of 

—_ ENT EE OTh INS 4 

: Io And the LORD ſpake to Manaſſeh, and to his, 

people : but they would not hearken. | if 

-.-1t Wherefore the LORD brought, upon them thes 
' captains of the hoft F of the king of Aſſyria, which + py, 
took Manaſſeh among the thorns b, and bound bim which vw; 
with || fetters, and carried him to Babylon c. the king, 

b In ſome Thicket where ke thought to hide himſelf from the | Or, 
Aﬀyrians till he conld make an eſcape, as the Ifraelires formecly chaing, 
Bled to do, 1 Sam 13. 6. Or, with hdoks; a Metaphorical Expreſſ® 
: on. Or, in his Forts, i. e, in one of them« c Either therefore Eſar= 

kaddon Sennacherib's Succeflor had recovered Babylon from Mcrodache 
Baladan: Or ratter, tiie King of Babylon is here called the King of 
Aſhria, becanie at this time he had added Afjria to his Empire, who 
having- been informed by his Ambafſadeurs of the great Riches 
' which were in H z<&iah's Treaſures at Jeruſalcm, which he was des 
 firous ro enjoy; and withal being aſſured of Manaſth his degenera- 
| cy from the Piery apd Virtue of his Father, and frem that God 
whoſe Power alon@made Hezekiah formidable, he thought this a 
ie Seaſon to invade Manaſeh's Kingdom ; whith he did with ſucs 
CEiSs ; 
12 And when he was in afflition, he beſought the ' 
LORD his God, and humbled himſelf greatly befors .. 
the God of his fathers 5 

13 And prayed unto him, and he was intreated of 
him, and heard his ſupplication, and brought him 
again to Jeruſalem into his kingdom. Then Manaſleh 
knew that the LORD he was God c. | 

. £ i. e, He was convinced by his own Experience of Gods power, 
Jaſtice, and goodneſs, that Jehovah alone was the True God, and 
not thoſe Idols which he had Worſhipped, by which he had 
received great Hurt and no Good, 

14 Now after this he built a wall 4 without che 
city of David, on the weſt-fide of Gihon e, in the 
valley, even to the entring in at the fiſh-gate, and 
\compaſſed about || Ophel f., and raifed it up a very [| Or, thi 
great height, and puc captains of war in all the fenced mover. 
cities of Judah. | 
. a He repaired and ftrengthned that Wall which Hezekiah had 


built, ch. 32. 5. and which poſſibly the King of Aſjria, when he 
laſt rook Jeruſalem, had cauſed ro be thrown down, either wholly; 


, 32 Now the relt of the a&s of Hezekiah, and his 
# fn. Tf goodnels,, behold, they ere writren in * the viſion 
>. +6 of Iſaiah the prophet, the ſon of Amoaz, andin * the 
37:& book of the kings of ſudah and Ifrael. | 
= 39- 33 And Hezckiah ſlept with his fathers, and they 
io 6: buried him in the || chiefeſt of the Sepulchres of 
: 19, :0; Duried him: in the || chiefeſt ot che Sepulc res of the 

- bigh-{ons of David-: and all Judah and the inhabitants of 
- Jeruſalem'did him honour at his death: and/Manafſeh 
\ * his ſon reigned in his ſtead. : 

CH AP. XXXIHH. 

M maſſeh's wicked reign, 1 =—=—= 10, His Captivity, 11» His prayer 
844 Reformation, 12 17. His atts 18, 19; and death, 20. 
Amon's wicked Reign, is ſlain by his ſerwants, 21 24. Taey 
being ſlain, Foppah ſucceederh him, 25. 


z Kings 


\Anaſſch * was twelve years old when he began | 


or in part. e On the Weſt-fide of the City of David, to which. 
Kezekiah had brought this Water-courſz down, ch, 32. 3o. into the 
great Pool which he had made to receive it 3 and pcſlibly this Wall 
was built to ſecure the Free Uſe of it tg the Cit1zens when they 
ſhould be diftreſſd, or beſieged by an Enemy. f With a Wall. Of 
Ophel ſee before, ch. 27, 3. | 

15 And he took away the ſtrange gods, and the Idol 
out of the houſe of the LORD : and all the altars that 


he had built in the mount of the houſe of the LORD, 


andin Jeruſalem, and caſt them out of the city. 
7 16 And he repaired the altar of the LORD, and. 


ſacrificed thereon peace- offerings,and * thank-offerings, : 7- 
and commanded Judah' to ſerve the LORD God of * 


| Ifrael. 


& That thereby he might, as far as he could, repair the Injuries 
which he had done to God by his Impious Commands, wv. ge 


L. 7,-&c. 1 to reign &, and he reigned fifry and five years 
| in Jeruſalem z ny 
a This, and the following Verſes; to v. 11. ate taken out of 


2 Kings 21. 1, Oc. | 
2 But did that whi: &'was evil in the ſight of the 


' Deut. 
*./7- whom-the LORD had 6.{t our before the children of 


Ifrael. 


oa 2 For j he built 2gain the high places which Heze- | 


vd built, kiah his facher had * b-oken down, and he reared up 
z Kings altars for Baalim, and * made groves, aad worlhipped 


LORD, like unto the * abominxtions of the heathen; !: 


' 17 Neverthelels; the people did: ſacrifice {till in the 


high places, yer unto the LORD their God only. 

18 Now the reſt of the a&ts of Manaſleh, and his 
prayer unto his God, and the words of the * ſeers that * ! Sam. 
{pake to him inthe Name of the LORD God of 1frael, 9: ” 
behold, they are writer in the books of the kings of 
Hrael 5. 

h i.e. Of Judah oft called {ſrar!, as hath been noted before. He 
ſpeaks nor of thar part” of rhe Canon, called the Book of Keng:, for 
theſe things are not mentioned there, bur of their Publick Re- 
cerds, where all things vere particulary wentioned, and whence 
the moſt important tings Were faken by the Prophets, and. pur ins - 


-4. Cx all the hoſt of heaven, and ſerved them. 
=_* 4 Alfo he built alters the houts of the LORD 


Jl. I. 


to thoie Canynical Books: 


19 His 


[0H 


', King 
219, & 


F Heb. 
multiplies 


Ve/L 


= King 


44.h, &c. 


(hap- XXKXIV. LS I ]. Cc H R (0, 
19 His prayer alſo, and how God was intreated of 
him, and all his fin, and his treſpaſs, and the places 
wherein ke builc high places, and ſet up groves, .and 
| raven images, before he was humbled, behold, they 

are written among the ſayings of {| the ſeers 7, 

i Or. cather, of Hyſai, a Writer ſo called; for when the 5acred 
Pen-aten make a Reference, they: conſtantly refer us to fome parti- 
cziar Book or certain Author, as to the Chronicles of the Kings ft Ir as 
el; or Judah; to the Prophecy of Ahijak, or Obed, &c. 

20 So Manaſſeh ſlept with his fathers, and they 
buried hirh. in his own houſe &, and Amon his fon 
reigned in.his ſtead; 

& 7, e.' In his Garden ; of which ſee on 2 Kings 2r.. 18. 

1 Kings. 21 * Amon was two and twenty years old when he 

9&6 began to reigh; and reigned two years in Jeruſalem. 

' 22 But he did that which was evil in the fight of the 

LORD, as did Manaſſeh his father : for Amon facrifi- 

ced unto all the carved images which Manaſſeh his fa- 

ther had made, 'and ſerved them. . , | 

23 Andhumbled not himſelf before the LORD as 

Manaſfeh his father had humbled himſelf: but AmonT 

treſpaſſed more and 'more. Ih. 

24 And his ſervants conſpired againſt him, and ſlew 
him in his own: houſe: + | 
.. 25 But the people of the land flew all them that had 
conſpired againſt king Amon, and the people of the 
land made Joſiah his ſon king in his ſtead. 

; CH A P. XXXIV. 

Tofiah's good reign, nt, 2, He defirayeth Idolatry, 3. He repairs the 
Temple, 4 == 7. Huldah prophecieth the deftruftion of Jeruſalem, 
g = 28, Jofiah's covenant with God, 29 —— 33- 

' i; Kings JF Offiah * was eight years old when he began to reign, 

u4& ') 4 and he reigned in Jeruſalem one and thirty 

ears. ER | | 
4 4 Of this Chapter ſee the Notes on 2 Kinzs 22. & 23. - 
| 2 Arid he did that which was right in the fight of the 
LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, 
and declined neither to the right hand nor to the lefc. 

3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was 

Kings yet young b he begaih to go after the God of David 

I his father: and in the cwelfth year he began * to purge 

Judah and Jeruſalem from the high places, and the gro- 

« ves, and the carved images, and the molten images. 

\ b In the 16th Year of his Age 3 when he was entring into the 
Age and State of Temptation and Youthful Lufts; and had the 
Adminiſtration of his Kingdom wholly in his own Hand and Power 
arid none to Rebuke or Reſtraia him ; yet even then he begins to, 
be Religious in good Earneſt, ; _ ; 

. - 4 * And they brake dowr the altars of Baalim in 

», his preſence ; and the [| images that were on high above 

'W.23- them, he cut down, and the groves, and the carved 

[0r, ſw. images, and the molten images he brake in pieces, and 

ge. made duft of them, and ſtrewed it upon the | graves of 

them that had (ſacrificed unto them. 


[0 Hoſes 


# Heb. 
multip!; ea 
| wpof 


a a 5 And* he burnt the bones of the prieſts upon their 
pw, Altars; and cleanſed Judah and Jeruſalem. 


77 6 And ſo did he in the cities of Manafleh, and Eph- 
2 kings raim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali c, with their [| 
+ 'mattocks, round about. 


c Which was in the utmoſt and nothern Borders of the King- 
dom of Iſrael. For it muſt be remembred, that the Ten Tribes 
were now gone into Captivity ; and thoſe who were come in their 
| r_g weak and few, and not able to withſtand the Power of 

ONAns - ; 

7 And when he had broken down the altars and 
'Heb.o the groves, and Wad beaten the graven images f into 
nite hows powder, and cut down all the idols throughout all the 
lard of Ifrael, he returned to Jeruſalem. 

8Now in the * eighteenth year of his reign, when he 
had purged the land, and the houfe 4 he ſent Shaphan 
the ſon of Azaliah, and Maaſejah the governour of 
the city, and Joah the ſon of Joahaz the recorder, to 
+,- Tepair the houſe of the LORD his God. 
$; d The Houſe of God, called the Houſe by way of Eminency. 
ne 9 And when they came to Hilkiah the high-prieſt, 
they delivered the money that was brought into the 


[Or ,meuls. 


F, Kings 
b, 3. 


4 


#1ci_. <=: 


RAS: [- 2m joyning to the Temple or within the 
Courts. , ” © wt 
12, And"the men did the work faithfully : and the 


Overleers of them wereJehath and Obadiah,the Levites; 
of the ſons of Merari; and Zechariah, and :Meſhul- 
lam, of the ſons of the Kohathites, to ſet it forward; 
and other of the Levites, all that could skill of infſtru- 
ments of muſick g. WOES COR TRE 
£ Or, all theſe here named, wee kilful in Isfirumerts of Mufeck. 
Which may be here mentioned, either to. their Commendation, 
that they were fit for, and. ,careful and diligent in this Empioy- 
ment wherewith they were now intruſted, no leſs rhan in their 
own proper Work : Or, to intimate; that as they were skilful,-ſo 
they were exerciſed in both their Employments,and did ſucceſſively 
overſee the Work, and praiſed God with their Voices and Inſtrus 
ments for his Gracieus and Powerful Help inccatrying on the Works 
- 13 Alfo they were.over the bearers of burdens, and 
were overſcers of all that wrought the work in any 
manner of ſervice: and of the Levites there were {cribes; 
and officers, and portess; SEEN HOSTS 1 xn 

14. And when they brought out the money that was _ 
brought. into the: houſe of the LORD, Hilkiah the * 2 Kings 
prieſt *' found the 'book of the law of the LORD, he fs je 
given |. by Moſes. | STE; 1 by oy 

I5 And Hilkiah anſwered and ſaid to Shaphan the 
ſcribe, I have found the book of the law in the houſe 
of the LORD. * And Hilkiah delivered the book to 
Shaphan. | | 
16 And Shaphan carried the hook to the king, and 
broughe the king word back again, ſaying, All thac * * 
was committed F to thy ſervants, they do ir. greg 
. 17 And they have Þ gathered together the money poured out. 
that was found in the houſe of the, LORD, and have 97, elred, 
delivered it into the hand of the overſeers, and to the 
hand, of the workien. . - _ EY 

18 Then Shaphan the ſcribe told the king, ſaying 
Hilkiah the prieſt. hath given me a book. Joie | 
phan read Þ it before the King. | | + Heb; if 
 I9 And it came to paſs when the king had heard 
the words of the law, that he rent bis clothes. | 
20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam , 
the ſon of Shaphan, and || Abdon the ſon of Micah, | Os, —_ 
and Shaphan the {cribe, and Aſajah a ſervant of the 5 Kings 
kings, ſaying, _ | ' 22, 12. 
21 Go, enquire of the LORD for me, and for them 
that are left in Iſtael, and in Judah, concerning the 
words of the book that is found : for great isthe wrath 
of the LORD that is poured out upon us, becauſe our 
fathers have nor kept the word of tke LORD, to dg 


of. 


FT Heb. ts 


after all that is written in this book. 


22 And Hilkiah and they that the king hadl appointed j 
went to Huldah the propheteſs, the wife of Shallum + ._ . 
the fon of Tikvah, the ſon of || Haſrah, keeper of the || Or, Hitt 
+ wardrobe ; ( now. ſhe dwelt in Jeruſalem || in the * Kin " 
colledge ) and they ſpake to her to that efe&#, = 2 os = s 
23 And ſhie anſwered them, Thus ſaich the LORD ft Heb- 
God of Iſrael, Tell ye the man that ſent you to. me, gn 
24 bus faith' the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil [1 
updn this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, ever or, in the 
all the curſes that are written in the book - which they ſecond part, 
have read before the king of Judah : I OY 
25 Becauſe they have. forſaken me, and have burnt 
incenſe unto other gods, that they might provoke me 
to anger with all the works. of their hands ; therefore 
my wrath ſhall be poured out upon this place; 'and ſhal 
not be quenched. | | DE | 
26 And as forthe king of Judah,*Who ſent you to 
enquire of the LORD, fo ſhall ye fay unto him, Thus 
faich the LORD God of Iſrael concerning the words 
which thou haſt heard, RY - 
27 Becauſe thine heart was tender, and thou didſt 
humble thy ſelf before God when thou heardeſt his 
words again{t this place, and againſt the inhabitants 
thereof, and humbledſt thy ſelf before me, and didſt 
rend thy clothes, and weep before me 7 I have even 


. houſe of God, which the Levites that kept the doors, 
#1!) Had gathered of the hand of Manafſetr and Ephraim, 
and of all the remnent of Iſrael, and of all Judah and 
Benjamin, and they e returned to Jeruſalem. 

e i, e, The Levires who had gone abroad through all Joſtab's 
Kingdom to gather Money for this good Uſe, and now came with 
nts! It to Jeruſalem to ledge it in the Treaſuries of the Lords Houſe. 
10 Andthey put zt in the hand of the work-men,that 
had the over-ſighe of the houſe of the LORD, and 
they gave it rotne work-men that wrought in the houſe 
of the LORD, to repair and mend the houle : 

It Even to the artificers and builders gave they #, 
to buy hewen ſtone, and timber for couplings, and |]to 
floor the houſes f which the kings of Judah had de- 


thou ſhalt be gathered to thy grave in -peace, neither 
ſhall thine eyes ſee all the evil that I will bring upon 1 
this place, and upon the inhabitants of the ſame. £0 
they brought the king word again. . | 
29 * Then the king ſent, and gathered together all 
the elders of Judah and Jeruſalem» | 
o And the king went. up into th? kouſe of the 
LORD, and all the men of Judah. and the inhabitants | 
of Jeruſalem, and the prieſts, and the Levices, and all + 34. 


* 2 Kinge, 


33 44 


the people | great and ſmall : and hs read in their from grear | 


dr 19;mall, 


3Y 2 


Itroyed, 


« 
TIA wo - 


heard thee alfo, faith the LORD. E (} 
28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and + | 


#3 re  <  24* 
7 x * Þ .* . | 
hap:- KXXTyY, | 
. _ 4 , 
C ap: 4 | 


by che hawgl bl 


Chap. XXXV. 


- ears all the words of the book of the covenant, that as 


ear 
ind in the Houſe of the LORD. . 

pr And the king ſtood in his place, an&made a co- 

venant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, 

and to keep his' commandments, .and his teſtimonies, 

and his ſtatutes, with all his Heart, and with all his 

ſoul, : to-perform the words of the Covenant which are 


written in this book. : 
> And he cauſed all that were F preſent in Jeruſalem 


+ Heb. p : . 

found. and Benjamin * to ſtand to i* h. And the inhabitants 

— of Jeruſalem did according to the covenant of God z, 
5, ”. ». - g : 


the God of their Fathers. 


; intain it, or perſiſt in its as this phraſe is uſed, 
0 Fo "He mo" ha to aca themſcIves by an Oath or 
Covenant, That they would obſerve and obey the Laws of God, as 
his godl 'Predeceflors had formerly done, and, which indecd they 
WETre bebore obliged ro do. 3 They complied with God s, and the 
King's Command, as to the-outward Acts of God's Worſhip, though 
not with-an upright heart,” as appears by the Hiſtory, 787) 

23 And Joſiah took away all the: abominations out 
of #llthe countreys that pertaines to: the children of: 1f- 
rael, ctard'made all char-were preſent in Iſrael to ſerve, 
evinitoferve the LORD their GOD. £4»# all his days 


theydeparted not + from following the LORD, the God 


of their' Fathers. | 
TETObT; C.HAP. XXRXY, Rp I 
ab keepeth s ſolemn; paſſover, 1 ——= 19+ He prove e117 Phar ao 

6 mr ht 15 ſlain at Megiddo, 29 —== 24 Lamentations for Jo- 


- ah, , OWN Joſiah kept a paſſover unto the LORD 


OR 56 Jeruſatem : and they killed the paffover on 
* 2 Kings the * fourteenth day of the firſt month. 
23-2122. "> And he ſet the prieſts in their charges, - and en- 
—_ ” — them to the ſervice of the Houſe of the 


LOR LL 
2 And ſaid unto the Levites that taught all Iſrael, 


which were holy ' unco the LORD, Pur the holy ark 
in the Houſe b which Solomon the ſon of David king 


of Iſrael did build : * it ſhall not be a burden upon your 
| ſhoulders c : ſerve now the LORD your Cod, and his 


eople Iſrael. 
: a Dr and which were holy. b 1n the Temple : Or, in the Holy of 
Holies. Whence, it may ſeem, it had been removed, cither 1. by 
ſome of the Wicked and Idolatrous Kings of Judah, poſſibly by Jo» 
ſial's Father Amon,which peradventure may be implied by thar cx- 
preſſion, ch..33. 23: Amon. treſpaſſed more and more, i e. more than 
he or his Father Maxaſthþ had done, which ſeems to poinr at ſome 
very enormous Crime 'committed by him« Or, 2. By Jofiah's Or- 
der, That the Tmple might | be throughly repaired, boch in the 
Holy place, and in the Moſt Holy place, which ſome of the Idola. 
trous Kings of Judah, it may be, had defaced or defiled ; and theres 
fore it was to be ſearched'in order to its Reparation ; and to that 
end it might ſeem fit ro remove the Ark: And upon this occaſion 
Hilkiah might find the Original Book of the Law, which was writ- 
ten by the hands of Moſes, and by God s Command was laid beſide 
the Ark, and upon the removal of the Ark was eaſily diſcovered, 
c Or, that it might not be a burden, &c. So theſe words are to be 
joyned: with the former; as the Reaſon why Solomon built this Houſe, 
that the Ark might have a conſtant and fixed Habitation, and not 
need to be cariied from place to place upon their ſhoulders. as it 
had been done whilſt it was in the Tabernacle. And withal, this 
is mentioned as an Argument to quicken them to the more dilis 
Aa, gent Service of God in their. preſent work, becauſe they were 
1: n. freed from that troubleſome part of their Office which lay upon 
' a«c2, Their Fore-fathers. | 2 
* 1Chron' 4 And prepare your ſelves by the houſes of your 
9. 10. fathers, .after your courſes, according to the * writing 
= _ . David king of Iſrael, and according to the * writting 
& 25. & of olomon his ſon. : 
26.*Ch-8., 5 And ſand din the place e, according to the divi- 
T4. fions of + the families of the fathers || of your brethren 
+ the people, and after the diviſion of che families of 
the Levites © | 
d Or. miniſter, as thit word is frequently uſed. e z. e. In the Court 
your bre- of the Prieſts, which is fo called elſewhere, as hath been noted be- 
* thren. fore. fi. e According to the ſeveral Families, both of the People, 
+ Heb: the whom he calls their-Brethren, leſt they ſhould deſpiſe them, or 
 ſonsof the grudge to ſerve them, and of the Levites. For the Paſſover wag 
people. to be eaten by the ſeveral Families according to their numbers, 
Exod. 12. 3. And therefore he commands theſe perſons, that when 
the Paſchal Lmbs were brought to them to be killed,as they were, 
v,-7, 8, 9. they might ſo order the matter, that they might be di- 
—m—_ to the ſeveral Families, whether of the Levitical or other 
ribes. 
* Ch. 29, S SO kill the paſſover, and* ſan&ifie your ſelves, and 
x5. & 30. Prepare your brethren g, thacthey may do according to 
| 3, I5. the word of the LORD, by the hand of Moſes. 
zZra, 6, » By purifying them and quickning them to fit themſelves for 
200 ſo great and ſolemn a Work. | 
+ Heb 7. And Joſiah | gave to the people of the flock, 
offered, lambs and kids 6, all for the paſſover-eferings, for all 
that were preſent, ro the number of thirty thouſand, 
and three thouſand bullocks ;-: theſe were of the kings 
ſubſtance. 
h For either' of theſe might be uſed for the Paſchal-offering, 
Erod. 12. 5. i Which were to be offered after the Lambs, upon the 
; ſeveral days of the Feaſt of Unleaved Bread, 


| + Heb- 


from aſter, 


Yor, for 


SL CHRONICLES. 


: becauſe the Prieſts, who.were SanQtified, were not ſufficient for 


8 And his princes &j gave willingly untothe people, 
to the Prieſts and to the-Levites /: Hilkiah, and Ze- 
chariah, and Jehiel, rulers of -the houſe of God, m,gave 
unto the prieſts for thei'paſſover-offerings, two thouſand 
and ſix hundred ſmall cattel, and five hundred oxen, 

k Not the Political, but Eccleſiaſtical Princes, or the chief of 
the Priefts and Levites, whoſe Names here follow. ! For the uſe 
of any of the Families of any of them, as need ſhould be, For the 
ſuppoſed the 30000 which the King had given were not ſuffice 
for all the Familics. Or, the King gave his Cattel to the P eoplg 
only, or principally, for they only are menrioned for that Gift, ». 
7: And therefore theſe perſons here named give their Cattelnot on, 
ly to the People, but alſo to the Pricſts and to theLevjtes,as It Is hereex. 
preſſed. And the Levites being not yer ſufficieritly' provided for, 
tome of their Brethren, named v- 9. gave 5000 more peculiarly ung 
the Levites, as is there ſaid. m2 For ſo they were; Hilkiah being the 
High-Prieſt, and the other the two Chief Prieſts, of the two Lines 
of 'Eleazar and 1themar, who, many. times were to officiate in the 
High-Prieſts ſtead; and were in Power and Digruty next to him ; 
and were in ſome ſort Joint|Comtni{lioners with him' in Ruling the 
Affairs of the Temple. .. ©. 4: ; | 

9 Conaniah alſo, and Shemajab, and:.;Nethanee]; 
his brethrens and Haſhabiah,; and Jehiel, and Jozabad, 
chief of the ' Levites, | gave unto the: Levites for paſſo- Fr 
ver- offerings, five thouſand ſmall catte}, and fivehundred * See Ch 
OXen, © (its * ITC 21 Wios ett; 29, 34 

10 So the ſervice was prepared, and :the prieſts 
ſtood in'their' places, and the Levites in their courſes, 
according tothe kings. commandment, 

ir And they killed the: paſſover, and the prieſts 
ſprinkled the blood fromtheir hand,and the Levites * flay- 


ed them ». | 
» Which they 'did, though properly it belonged to the Prieſts, 


T Heb, 
off ered, 


thar Work, there being ſo many thouſands of the Cattel ; and they 
were ful'y 'imployed in the killing .of the Sacrifices and the ſprink- 
ling of t2e Blood, which was more properly the Prieſts work than 


- « 


the other. 


I2 And they removed the. burnt-offerings o, that they 
might give according to the diviſions of the families of 
the people to offer unto the LORD p, as it is written 
* in the: Book of Moſes: . and ſo did they with the 


OXEN 9q. | 
0 7, e. Thoſe Catrel which wereto be offered for, Burnt-offerings 
to wit, ſcme of the lefſer Cattel;: for theſe alſo might be offered as 
Burnt-offerings, Levit. 1. 16. And hence it may ſeem that all theſe 
ſmall Cartel were not given to the People to be eaten by them for 
their Paſchal Lambs, bur that ſome of them were to be offered 
as burnt-offerings for the People. And theſe chey put apart by 
themſclves partly leſt they ſhould be confounded with them which 
were for another uſe; and partiy,. that they might not be hind- 
red from that which was their preſent and more immediate work, 
as it follows, that they might give, to wit, the Paſchalslambs or 
Kids. p Theſe words may belong either 1. to the more remote, 
words, the burnt-offerings, the other words being to be put within a 
Parentheſis, or there being a traje&Qion in the words, which is fre* 
quent in Scriptuxe, and which is here obſerved by ſome learned 
Interpreters Or, 2. to the laſt words, and ro the Paſchal lambs, 
which they were firſt to offer to the Lord, by killing them and 
ſprinkling the Blood, as was noted before, and then to be given to 
rhe Peoplez though the giving be here mentioned before the offering, 
ſoch Tran'poſitions being uſual in Scripture, and other Authors. 9 
To wir, as they did with the lefſer Catte), of which ſee the firſt 
Note on this Verſe, gy removed rkoſe Oxen which were to be 
offered as burnt-offerings, from thoſe which were to be offered as 
Pexce-offerings. y 
13 And they. * roſted the paſſover with fire, a=cor- 2 
ding to the ordinance : but the orber Holy offerings 7 
ſod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and þ * Exod: 
divided them ſpeedily among all the people. by 4 
r Thoſe from which the Burnt- offerings were removed, wv. 1 2: to 
wit,the Peace-offerings.part of which tell ro the ſhare of theOfferer, + Heb, 
who was Yoſiah, and by his Gift to the People: nad then 
14 And afterward they made ready s for themſelves, ,,,, 
and for theprieſts: becauſe the prieſts the ſons of Aaron 
ere buſied in offering of burnt offerings and the fat un- 
till night therefore the Levites prepared for themſelves, 
and forthe prieſts the ſons of Aaron. 
s To wit, the Paſchal»-lambs, and their part of the Peacz-offer- 
ings. OT : 
I5 And the ſingers the ſons of Aſaph, were in their , 14, 
+ place according to the # commandment of David, þ,;;m. 
and Aſaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun, the Kings * » chr 
ſeer : and the porters * waited at every gate ; they 25" ** 
might not depart from their ſervice ; for their brethren - _M s, 
the Levites prepared for them». 


Lev. 3 


& 26. 14 
16 So all theſervice of the LORD was prepared the &c. 
ſame day, to keep the paſſover, and to offer burnt- 
offerings upon the Altar of the LORD, according to 
the commandment of king Joſiah. + Hobs 
17 And the children of Ifſcael, that were + preſent, fon: 
kept the paſſover at that time, and the feaſt of unlea- 
vened bread, ſeven days. *, Kings 
18 And * there was no paſſover like to that, kept 23, 22 
in Iſrael, from the days of Samuel the p:ophet ; nei- 


ther did all the Kings of Iſrael keep fucha paſſover as 
Joſiah 


Clap. XXXV, 


(tap: 


t, Kin 
I", 29. 
Jet 46. 
#Heb. 
kuſco 


tHleb.# 
juſe of 1 


v”Y, 


*$01 Ki 


22 39, 


f Heb, 
Vale ſick, 


| Or, 4. 
mg the 
ſeulchres, 
"Tech. 


I. 11; 


«_—_ 


Gap, KXXVI. | IT. C HRO 
ofiah kept, aad the. Prieſts and the Levites, and all 
Judah and ſacl that were preſent, and the inhabitants 
of Jeruſalem : 

: 9 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Joſiah was 
this paſſover kept. LR” 
1 Kings, oy * After all this, when Joſiah had prepared the 
42: + temples, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight 
7 i% ” againſt Carchemiiſh « by Euphrates, and Joſiah went out 

wh againſt him. ; ; 
: + Wh:n he and his People hoped that God was reconciled, and 
the Foundation of a folid and laſt:ng Happineſs was laid, their hopes 


e quickly blaſted So much are Men oft miſtaken in their Judg- 
Ne ENS Deſigns of God's Counſel and Providence. Which 


the 4ſhriaz had lately taken from the King of Egypt ; of which he 
Ija. fo. 9. 

" - Bur be ſent Embaſſadors to him, ſaying, What 
have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not 
iHeb.che againſt thee this day, but againſt the | houſe where- 
werfn) with I have war x for God y commanded me to make 
w haſte; forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with 

me, that he deſtroy thee not. _ : 
x He". again# the houſe or family of my war, 1. e. Againſt the 
Houſe of the King of Aſjris, between whom and rhe there is War. 


y Either his Falle god by their lying Prieſts: Or, the True God | 


eirher, 1. by ſore Prophet: For God's Prophets nſed ſomerimes to 
deliver, Nh aver es, ace from God to Heathen Kings. Though 
it is not probable either thatPharaoh would regard rhe Command of 
the-triie God: Or, thar a Pcophet of the Lord would not acquaint 
Joſiah with this Meſſage : or that Joiah would oppoſe Pharaoh in & 
War undertaken by God's Command. Or, rather 2. by a Dream, 
as God ſpoke to another Heathen King, Abimilech, Gen: 20. 3. 
Thongh it is not impoſſible that he pretended this for his own Ads 
vantage that Joſiah might not aſſiſt his Enemies. 

22 Nevertheleſs, Joſiah would not tiirn his face from 
him z,but * diſguiſed himſeif a, that he might fight 
with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Ne- 
cho, from the mouth of God#, and came to fight in 
the valley of Megiddo. 

z Being peradventure incouraged to do ſo by 4 Miſinterpretation 
of that Promiſe made ro him, ch. 34 28. Thos ſhalt be gathered 10 thy 
grave in p:aree Thus God over-rules the Errors and Miſcatriages 
of Men to the Accompliſhmenr of bis own Counſels, # Changed 
his Havit, that be mig't not give Þis Enemies the Advanrage ot 
aiming at bis Perſon, which ke-wiſely :hought they would dd, that 
bring a likely courſe to end their trovble, as indecd it proved, 6 Ei- 


"$91 Kin; 


22, Jv, 


ther 1. which Pharaoh ſent to him in the Name of God, or-as come, 


ing from God's Mouth. Or. rather 2. which Phare0þ received trom 
the Mouth of God, who was pleaſed ſome way or other to impart 
bis Mi:id to him ; and which Phararh acquainted him with by the 
Command of God. And therefore 7oſiah is here blamed for nct 
hearkning to this Meſſage. Although, if he ſinned herein, it was 
only a fin of Ignorance, for he did not know that God had ſpoken 
this to Pharaoh, and was not bound to believe his Teſtimony, which 
he had good reaſon to ſuſpecr in this matter, Yet, me thinks, he 
ought ſo far to have regarded it, as to have enquired the Mind of 
God abour it; which he neglected to do, and therefore he cannot 
te wholly excuſed, and is here taxed for its 
22 And the archers (hot at king Joſiah : and the 
king ſaid to his ſervants, Have me away : for I am 
th, fore F wounded. | 
wick, 24 His ſervants therefore took him out of that cha- 
riot, and put him in the ſecond chariot that he bad: 
and they brought him to Jeruſalerf, and he died, and 
10r,«. Was buried || in one of the ſepulchres of his fathers. And 
any the * all Judah and Jeruſalem mourned for Joſiah. 


770 25 And Jeremiah lamented for Joſiah, and all the 


1: linging men, and the ſinging women ſpake of Joſiah in 
their lamentations to this day ec and made an ordi- 
nance in Iſrael, and behold, they are written in the 
lamentations &d, 

c In all their ſucceeding Lamentations for their publick Calami- 
ties, and for the ruine of their City, and Temple. and Stare, and 
Church, they reme-: bred Joſiah's death as their firſt and moſt fatal 
blow, and as ti:zt which opened the Flood-Gates to all their follow- 
ing Miſerie , and it was ordained that they ſhould do fo, as the 
next words intimate. d Either in that Canonical Book of Jeremiah's 
Lamentations, or in ſome other Volume of mournfull Ditties,made 
by diverſe Perſons upon occaſion of their following Calamities, 
which 1s ſince loſt. : 

26 Now the reſt of the acts of Joſiah, and his+ good- 
fHeb: neſs e, according to that which was written in the law 
nb; Of the LORD. ; 

* e Either 1. his Piety towards God and his Houſe. Or, 2. his Be- 

nignity, Clemency, and Kindneſs towards his Subjects, being of a 

moſt render Diſpoſition and Carriage both towards God, ch. 34. 27- 

and towards Men. Bur the former ſ.ems principally intenCced, bee 

cauſe it beſt agrees both with the Hiſtory of Jeſiab.. which is wholly 
taken up with the former, and ſpeaks little or nothing of the latter, 
and with the following words; and it doth not diſagree with the 

Hebrey word heſed, which though it doth moſt frequently expreſs 

kinineſs to Men, yet lom*times ir nores a Man's Picty to God and 

his Houſe, as is manifcſt from Nehem. 13- 


I 4» 
27 And his deeds firſt and laſt, behold, they are 
Written in the books of the kings of Iſrael and Judah. 


C HA P. XXXVI. 


Jehonhax, ſucceeding, ir depoſed by Pharaoh, and carried to Egypt, 1 === 4 
Jebojakim's wicked Reign; his captivity into Babylon. 5 8 Je- 
#0jachin likewiſe, g =——— 10. Zedcki#h's withed reign z his contempt 


temple at Babylon. Dan: 1: 1, 


| d Heb. At the return of the year, 1. e. Atithe beginning of the next || Or, Mat- 


LORD his God, and humbled not himſelf f before Jere- 


miah the prophet, /peaking from the th of the 
LORD. ns "IE ; 


preſs Commands, which he would nor yield to thorough the pride 
of his Heatr, asis intimated by this Phraſe and expreſsed Jer 38. 19. 


NICLES Chap. KXXVI. | 


of the Prophet, and vecllim againſs Nebuchadnezzar, 12, 13. Je® 
ruſalems deflrufion, 14 — 21. The proclamation of Cyrus, 22. 23» s £ 
”” * the people of the land took Jehoahaz « the, _— 
ſon of Jotiah, and made him king in his fathers &. 
ſtead at Jeruſalem. | 
a The Contents of this Chapter for the Subſtance of them, are ex- 
plained in the Notes upon 2 Kings, ch, 23+ 31, &c. & 24. & 25, what 
1s peculiar to it ſhall be here opened, ſo far as is neceſſary. 
2 Joahaz was twenty and three years old when he 
_ to reign, and he reigned three months in Jeru- | 
alem. ; 
3 And the king of Egypt | pit him down at Jeru- + Heb: re- | 
ſalem, and F condemned the land in an hundred talents moved hits, | 
of ſilver, and a talent of gold. ! _ 
. 4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother "** 
king over Judah and Jeruſalem, and turned his name 
to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Joahaz his brother 
and carried him to Egypt. | 
5 Jehojakim was twenty and five years old when he 
began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jeruſa- 
lem ; and he did that which was evil in the fight of the 
LORD his God. | | 
6 * Againſt him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of * , xingy 
Babylon, and bound him in || fetters to carrie him to 24: 1; 
Babylon: ; oy 
7 * Nebuchadnezzar alſo carried of the veſſels of the ©5%%* 


houſe of the LORD co Babylon, and put them in his : LR 


[ 
i | 


a. OVERS EN OY rent ys * 
_ 


_ ER. 


8 Now the reſt of the ads of Jehojakim, and his 2+ 
abominations which he did, and that which was found 
in him b, behold, they are written in the book of che 
kings of Iſrael and Judah: and || Johojachin his ſoap ,, 5,4. 
reigned in his ſtead. | | ___ 

6 That Crime ef Rebellion _ the King of Babylem, which for r Chr: 33 


a time he kept in his own Breaſt bur when he ſaw fit, he diſcovered 16. 
it, and was convicted of it. Sze 2 Kings 24. 1. or, Contah, 

9 * Jehojachin was eight years old when he began Jer: 22324; 
to reign c, and he reigned three months, and ten days , -_ 
in Jeruſalem, and he did that which was evil inthe ,Z g.* 
ſight of che LORD. $5 | MY 

c Of which ſee the Notes upon 2 Kzngs, 24. 8. where he is ſaid 
to be 18 years ole. DRE: | 

io And + when the year was expired 4, king Ne- t Heb «? 
buchadnezzar ſent, and brought him to Babylon, with *** wag 
the + goodly veſſels of the houſe of the LORD, and { 41.” 
made || * Zedekiah his brother e king over Judah and »«/:: of 
Jeruſalem. deſire: 


year according to the Sacred Account of the Hebrews, at the Spring faniah, 26 
of the Year, the time when Kings go forth to Battel, as is elſe- Kin; 248 
where ſaid, when Nebuchadnezzar, among others, went forth to 17: 
ſetcle ard enlarge his Conqueſts. e Largly ſo called, for this wa Jer. 37- 
his Uncle, or his Fathers Brocher, as he is called 2 Kings 24. 17. be- 3» &<. 
ing the Son of Joſish, See 1 Chrone 3. 15, Jer. 1. 3+ 

11 * Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when , 


he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jeru- 24. 18. - 
{alem. Jer. 52. 1, 


12 And he did that which was evil in the fight of the &c. 


2 Kings . 


f By Repentance for his paſt Errors, and Obedience to God's ex- 


13 And healfo rebelled againſt king Nebuchadnez- 
Zar, who had made him ſwear by God, g: but he ſtif- 
fened his neck, and hardened bis heart þ from turning 
unto the LORD God of Iſrael: 


g W © had required and forced him to ſwear Fealty and conſtant 
Obedierice ro him by the True God. whom he had ſerved. and 


there wer no f remedy », bea';ng 


xhom he called upon to be a Witneſs againſt him if ke broke his 
Oath. So h:s Rebellion was aggravated with Perjury, and horrid 
Contempt of God. Compare Ezek. 17. 18- þj, e. He added Ob- 
ſtinacy and Incorrigibleneſs to his Sins, 

14 Moreover, all the chief of the prieſts, and the 
peopie tranſgreſſed very much z, after all the abomi- 
nations of the heathen, and polluted the houſe of the 
LORD which he had hallowed in Jeruſalem, 


5 They were univerſally corrupt; and therefore God juſtly 
brought vp-n them a general Deſtruction. 


15 * Arid the LORD God of their fathers ſent to+ Jers 25. 
them T by his meſſengers, rxingup || betimes, and fſend- ;/,.& z5. 
ing k; becauſe he had compallion on his people, and 15. 
on his dwelling place : bon i 
k i. e. Sending them early and diligent'y, as a careful Houſe. *** © © 
holder who riſerk berimes abour his Paſineks, and purſues it till his wefene 
Night come. God ſent them many Prophers and Meſfages, ſome ar $7 $ 
the very beginning of their Apoſtacy, and others afterwards, as they lr S - ur 
proceed=d in thei: Impierty,untill the very day of their Captivity» Ke. / 
16 But they mocked the meſſengers of God 1, and Gl” 
diſpiſed his words, and miſuſed his prophets », until © 
the wrath of the LORD aroſe againſt his people, till + xzep 


$-T-Y 1 Of 


hap. 1. 
and Perſecuting them as they did Jeremy. Or, ſeduced : 
his Prophets, i. e By their Prophecies, which they perverted or mil- 


conſtrued. 


and Exckiel That he ſhould not ſee Bablyen, Exek. 12. I; 
* , Rinos Becauſe the People would not repent, and God would not par- 


25, i3&c, don theine 


the Caldees, who ſlew their young men with the ſword, 
in the houſe of their ſanctuary e, and had no compal- 
ſion upon young man or maiden, old man,or him that 
ſtooped for age: he gave zhem all into his hand. | 

o Either in Jeruſalem, wiich was: he. dwelling place of God s San- 
ctuary: Or, in the houſe which was their Sanitary ; 
Euphrates, Gen: 15: 18: is the River which is Euphrates, It 1s pro- 
bab'e they killed them in the very Courts and houſe of God, to 
whic1 ſome of them fled for Refuge, ſuch places being eſteemed 
Sacred and Inviolable by the Heathens themſclves. 

18 And all the veilels of the houſe of God, great 
and ſmall, and the treaſures of the houſe of the LORD, 
and the treaſures of rhe king, and of his princes: all 
theſe he brought to Babylon. 

i9 And they burnt the houſe of God, and brake 
down. the wall of Jeruſalem, and burnt all the palaces 
thereof with fire, and deſtroyed all the goodly veſle]s 


E Z R A. 


1 Of which fee Inſtances, Ezek. 11. 4, & 20. 49. » Impriſoning 
themſelves by 


An Enineart Inſtance we ' have in this, That becauſe 
Foremy propheſied that Zedekiah ſhould be led to Bablyon, Jer. 32: 5: 


Therefore they believed neither, as the Hebrew Writers relate: z 


17 * Therefore he brought upon them the king of 


as the River of | 


20 And Þ them that had eſcap2d from the ſword, f Heb. ;j, 


Carried he away to Babylon: where the were ſer. 7 ainde 
vants to him and his ſons, untill the reign & the king- from bs 


dom of Perſja. 

21: To fulfil the word of the LORD by the mouth 
of * Jeremiah, untill the land * |] had enjoyed her jab- * Jer. x5, 
baths p : for as long as ſhe lay difolate ſhe kejr {aþ. 7,'* & 


bath, to fulfill threeſcore and ten years 9. qui 


Þ 1. e. Had reſted from the labour of the Husbandmen in plow. * Ley 26 
ing and Ha:rrowing it,Oc, the People that ſhouid have managed it, 34,3: ... 
being defroyed. Of rhe Pharſe ſee the Notes on Levis. 25. 2+9 || Or, ac. 
That ſo the 70 years Captivity propheſied of by Jeremy, might be ceped 
accompliſhed. 

22 * Now in the firſt year of Cyrus king of Perſia r, *Ezr. ,, 
( that the word of the LORD ſpoken by the mouth of * 
* Jeremiah might be accompliſhed ) the LORD ſtirred 
up the ſpirit of Cyrus king of Perſia, that he made a 
| Proclamation throughout all his kingdoms, and put jt + ths a 
alſo in writing, ſaying, 12. why 
; + Tis, and ths next verſe, are repeated in the beginning of the 294 19; 
next Book, where they will be more fitly explained. 


| 23 Thus faith Cyrus king of Perſia, All the king- 
'doms ef the earth hach the LORD God of heaven 
' given me, and He hath charged me to build him an 
| houſe in Jeruſalem, which #s .in Judah; who 5s rhere 
{among you of all his people? the LORD his God be 
with him, and let him go up. 


Ceo 


thereof. 


Hat this Book of Ezra is part of the Canon! 


Chriſt or hs Apoſtles _with breach of tha: Truſt 3, and partl» by the un 
was the Writer of this Buok i; alſn, and ever 


uality; for he was che Sn, or Grand=5on (| 
: 6. 6 14. andhe was a ready Scribe in the Law of Moſes, Ezra 


nicl, and N 1:m1ah, and Mordecai, and Z ro» 
ether Holy and Learned Men did review he Canonical Boo 
Borbr,and digeſted them into that Order in witch now we 
Piety, and ſacred Fun#ion of th:ſe Perſ-ns, and to the preſent Eſtate 
Fo be feared that many of them were ignwrant or corrupt tn the Principles 
farther calam tie- and 4iſperſions ; which alſo might be 
Goa hath ever ujed for the guidance of his Chur,h, acce 


C HjA P. I 


Cyrus's Proclams tion to I|rael for building the Lord's Temple at Jeruſas 
lem, i - ---— 4. The chiet of the People prepare for their return, 5» 6. 
Cyrus reſtores the V.jſ" ls of the Templs to Shejboazzar Prince of Fudah, 


7. 8. Toeir number, 9 —— 11. 


N OW in the firſt year of Cyrus king of Per- 


ſia #, ( that the word of the LORD * by 
the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled ) 


the LORD ſtirred up the ſpiric of Cyrus b king of Per- 
ſia, that he 4 made a proclamation throughout all his 
kingdom, and pu: it allo in writing, faying, 

2 To wit, Of tis Empire or Reign in Babylon : For he had now 
been Kirg of Perſia for many Years, 62. e, Put into him a Mind 
and Will to this Work 

2 Thus ſaith Cyrus king of Perſia, the LORD God 


of Heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth c, 
and he hath * charged me « to build him an houſe ac 


Jeruſaiem which 5s in Judah. 


c To wir, in thoſe parts of the Wor'd ; all that vaſt Empire for- 
merly under the Afſyrians and B bylomans. The Gift of which 
| he aſcribes ro the grear God eitaer by virtue of thoſe common 
Notions which were in the Minds of the Heathens, who thongh 
they » orſhipp:i Idols, yet many of them did acknowledge a true 
and ſupre:m Grd : Or by that clezr and expreſs Prophecy of 1/aiah 
C'onN- re:1ng him, Iſa. 44 28. & 45+ I, 33. ſo long before he was 
born ; which Prop iecy the Jews had doubrleſly ſhewed him, which 
alſo carried a great evidence with it, eſpecially to him who was ſo 
higi:ly grarified and encouraged by it: or by a ſpecial Illuminati: 
on wich God vouchſaf:d to-him, as he did to Nebuchadnezzar and 
Darius, and ſ»me others of the Heathen Princes. &4 Either by his 
; Prophets, 1/aiah 'ormerly, or Daniel now ; or by an inward ſuge 
geftzon to his Mind. 


2 Who 3s there among" you of all his People 4? his 
God be with him e, and let him go up to Jeruſalem, 


* > Chron. 
29. 22. 
Jer. 25. 
12 & 29. 
Io. 

'T Heb. 

' Cavjed a 
 Unice 10 


FLA 


* Th. 44- 
28+» & 45. 
T3. 


| 2. 2. why alſ> did carejully keep them, and faithfully tray. G , 
the Oracles of GO D, Kem. 3. 2. wh? al; / :nimous conſent of ali, both J:ws and Chriſtians, at this day. And that Ezra 


was, the opinion of the Jews, who had the beft means of knowing this, and i: moſt ,preeavle to bis 
45 the word is elſewhere ujed ) of Seraiah, Ezra. 7. 1. 


= gn ; . imielf an Eye- witneſs of theſe Tranſattion« : : 
is evident from this Book; and was himjelf -y bel, / & {vr alt Which makes that rrobable which the Jews report, that thee P ophets, and 


bs of the Old-Teitament and addig here and there ſome few PaſSages in the Hiftoricsl 
have them in our H«brew-Bibles : This being a Work moft ſuirabl- to the Prudence an 4 
of the Jewiſh Naiion, who had been long in Captivity in Babylon, where it wag 
of Religion, and who were yet in a broken con-ition, and likely to be expoſed to 
lrgnified t2 ſome of them; and it was ſuirable allo ra that care which the wiſe and gracious 
rding to their ſeveral ecca{cons and neceſſities, 


R A: 


eal Scripture is evident, partly from the Teſtimony of the Jewiſh Church, to which were committed 


tranſmit them to'us, and are not once charged either by 


FT, ww was the High Prieft, 2 Kings. 23 18. 
, 7.6, and -ndowed with a more than o dinary m:alure of God's Spirit, as 
In his time alſo there lived atvers ether holy Men of G 0 D, as Da- 


by a moderate Tax to be laid either or:ly upon thoſe Jews who 
were reſolved to ſtay, or upon the Gentiles alſo3 which the Perfcax 
' Monarchs being aiſojure, had a Power to do; and which was the 
; more reaſonable, becauſe the King himſelf ſubmitted to ir, and 
| borea great part of the burden ;. and b:cauſe ir was for the Houſe 
; of that grear God ro whom they all owed taeir preſent Peace and 

great Felicity. #. Which upon this occaſion I give you leave to 
, tranſport. 

5 Thenroſe up the chief of the fathers of Judah and 
Benjamin # and the prieſts and the Levices, with all 
them whoſe ſpirit God had raiſed to go up &, to build 
the houſe of the LORD which 3s in Jeruſaleme 


: And with them ſome of other Tr bes, as appears from 1 Chrex, 
9+ 3. but theſe oanly.are named, b-caule rhey were moſt conſide- 
rable tor number and quality. k To who.m God had given chat 
pious Diſpoſition, and that Fortirucie and Reſolution which it re- 
quired to break through their difficulties, which were great and 
many, ſuch as their preſent penury, the length, and hazard; and 
coſtlineſs of the Journey, their Sertlements in comfortable Habita- 
trons, their diſperſion 1n ſeveral an4 diſtaxt places, which hindred 
the ConjunC&tion of their Counſe's 2d Attions, the multitude of 
their Enemies, the aCtual poſſeſſion of their Country by others, the 
great backwardneſs of many of their own Brethren to go with ther, 

and many otker diſcouragemer:ts. 
|} 6 Andall they that were about them, [| ſtrengthened j Thu i 
their hands I with veſſels of ſilver, with gold, with heheths 
goods, and with beaſts, and with precious things, be- 
, lides all tat was willingly offered. 

{ Either becauſe they had embraced, or at leaſt favoured *he 
Jewiſh Religion. concerning which they were inſtrufted by tae If» 
raclires that had now for a long time dwelt among them : or, ra- 
ther, that they might hereby gratifie the King's humsr, and pur< 
chaſe his favour: for they perceived him to be hearty and forward 
1n the work. 


7 Alſo Cyrus the king brought forth the veſſels of 
the houſe of the LORD, * which Nebuchad-nezzar+, gingy 


| ſupplied, either by the voluntary Contributions of the People ; or - 


f 


which 3s in Judah, and build the houſe of the LORD 
God of Iſrael, ( hes the God ) which is in Jeruſalem f. 


d To wit, of I/razl A material clauſe ; by vertue of which they 
ju*'y refuſed rhe help of thoſe Aliens, who prerended tojoyn witi 
them in the building, :h. 4+ 2, 3+ e Let his God help him, as I alſc 
ſhall do. f Or only, in Jervſalem, as it is in the Hebrew, So it 
notes the place where he allows and requires them to build it, 


And whoſoever remaineth g, in any place where 

he ſojourneth, let the men of his place + help him b 

with ilver, and with gold z, and with goods, and with 

beaſts, beſides the free-will-offering for the houſe of 
his God that #s in Jeruſalem. 

' g Who, when his Brethren were gone up, was deſirous to go 


+ Heb. 
lift him 
up: 


had brought forth out of Jeruſalem »z, and had put 24.13. 
them in the houſe of his gods : 2 Chr. 36. 
1m Obj. Theſe are ſaid to have been cut in pieces, 2 Kings, 24. r3.7- 

how then are they here returned ? 4»ſw. That Hebrew word uſed 

2 Kings, 24. 13. ſignifies notſo properly to cut inpieres, as to cut of, 

as from the uſe of the word, Deut. 25+ 12. 2 Sam, 4 12. 2 Kings 

18. 16e fer. 9. 26. And theſe veſſels when they were taken away 

from the Temple, might very well be ſaid to be cut off from it, be- 

cauſe they had for ſo long time been ſo conſtantly, and as it were, 
inſeparably united to it, and kept in it. In like manner, che mea: 
offering, and drink-offering are ſaid to be cut of from the hoxſe of the Lord, 

Joel 1.9. And it is very improbable, that they ſhould deface and 

cut 1n pieces theſe magnificent Veſſels which they could ſo caſily 
tranſport whole to Beblyon, Although, if ſome of the larger of them 

had been cut into two or more parts, yet the parts of them might 


with them, bur forced to tarry there for want of neceſlaries for his 


= # ; 


Journey, h I require my Officers to take care that they may be.4em ro their former Unity and Form, 


be delivered to the Fews, who could, without great dithculry,reſtore 


8 Even 


——_  _— 


Chap. [, ! 


»43* - 


#* Ce 


[0r, 
71s 


Neh.7 


*Ne 


11, 


WU 


Neb, 


I 


. the 
dep 
be 


(18 


79 
6, 


6 | lap: It: 


P $ The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and 


8 Even thoſe did Cyrus king of Perſia bring forth | 

by the hand of Michredath the treaſurer, and num- 

+ Gee Che bred them 7 unto * Sheſhbazzar o the prince of Judah p. 

14+ » i{e. Hecauſed them ro be delivered ro the Jews by number. 

ſ 0 7. e. Zerobabel, as appears by comparing c. 3. 8. with 5. 16. tO 

whom the Perſians, or rather the Caldeans, had given this name of 

Sh jhbazzar,"s they gave other names to Daniel, and his companions, 

Dan. 1. 7. p And the Captain and Governour of theſe returaing Jews, 
<ap. 2. 2. SotheScepter is not yet departed from Judas. 

' 9 And this js the number of them: thircy chargers of 

gold, a thouſand chargers of ſilver, nine and 


ewenty knives 9. | | 

' q Large Knives uſed in the kil!ing of the Sacrifices, which are 
here mentioned, becauſe the Hafts of them were made of, or co* 
vered with Gold or Silver. 

110 Thirty baſons of gold, ſilver baſons of a {ſecond 
fort r, four hundred and ten : and other vellcls a thou- 
ſand s. 

+ The firſt or chief were of Go19, and theſe of Silver are called 
the ſecond, or next to them of worth and ute. 5. He ſpeaks of Ve:- 
ſels of a middle ſize; fo: great and ſmall wer” 5400, as it follov's 
here. Or, as ſome render it, other Veſſ ls by thouſands: they wer: 
not diſt-n&ly numbred according to the:r various forms and ules, 
but were promiſcuouſly pur t-:gether by thouſ«nds. 

ir All the vetteis of goid, and of filver, were five 
thouſand and- four hundred. All rheſe did Sheihbazzar 
bring up with them of + the captivity, thac were brought 
up from Babylon unto Jeruſalem. 


CGMMASFTE 


The number of the Perple that returned, 1 35. and «f the Priiſts 
, 36 39. of rhe Levitis, 40, of the ſingers, 41. of the Porters, 
42. of the Nethinims, 4; 54. and of Solymos Servants, 55--60 
Concerning the Prieſts that c:uld no: ſhew their Pedegree, 61 63. 
The whole number of them and their Subſt ance, 64 67. Ter 
Oblations G68 70. 


Ow * theſe are the children of the province # that 
4 went up out of the captivity, of thoſe which 
 - had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the 
king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and 
came again unto Jeruſaiem and Judah, every one unto 
hs city 6b; 
ai, e. The Iſraelites, called the children of the Province, enther 1. 
Sy Of Babylon, of which Province we oft read, as ch. 7. 16. Dan. 2.48. 
&3.'", 12, 30. called the Province by way of eminency 3 of which 
they are called Ck.ldren, becauſe -»f their Birth aud Hab:tation in it 
for a long time, it being uſu] to call rhe Inh3birants of any City or 
- place irs Children. Or rather 2. Of Judea, called a Pr:vince, ch. 5.8. 
And he cal's it chus ernphatically ro mind himſelf and his Brethren 
of that ſad Change which rheir Sins had made among them, thar 
from 2n illuſtrious, independent, and formidable Kingdom, were 
fallen to be an ebſcure, 1ſervile, and contemptible Province, ficſt 
under the Chaldeans, and now undcr the Perſians 6 Either unto 
thoſe Cities or Towns which belong:d to their ſeveral Anceſtors | 
Or rather, to thoſe which were now allotted to them, and from 
this time poſſeſſed by them, For rheir former Cities were 
either demoliſhed,or poſſeſſed by cther Perſons, which they were 
not now in a capacity of diſturbing. 
2 Which came -with Zerubbabel c Jeſhua, Nehe- 
PP miah, || Serajah, Reelajah, Mordecai, Bilſhan, Miſpar, 
oy * Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah :; the number of the men of 


Neb.7.9. the people of Iſrael. 

c As for this Catalogue, it differs in ſome names and numbers 
from that Neh. 7. which might be frm divers cauſes, partly be- 
cauſe ſeveral names were given to «ne and the ſawe Perſon ; and 
partly becauſe of the many Chang's which mizhr happen in the 
ſame Families berween the t:me of the firſt making of this C:ta- 
logue by Ezra, and the mak ng of it anew ſo many Years as that 
Catalogue Nehem, 7. was made after the fofmer. 

3 The children d of Paroſh e, two thouſand an hun- 


dred ſeventy and two. 

d i.e. The Poſteriry, as the word 1s for the moſt part if not 
conſtantly raken in this Catalogue» e That deſcended either from 
Pareſh, or from that Family whereof Paroſbh was the chief. And ſo 
for the reſt, : 

4 The children of Shephatiah, three bundred ſeventy 
and two. | | 

5 The children of Arah, ſeven hundred ſeventy 
and hve f. | 

f In Nehem.. 75. 10+. they were only 652. It ſeems 775+ marched 
out of Babylon, or gave in their names thar they would go; but 
ſome of them died, others changed their Minds, others were hin- 
dred by Sickneſs, or other C:lvatities, happening to themſelves or 
near Relaricns 5 and fo there came only $52. ro Feruſal-m.And rhe 
like is to be ſid in the like differences ; which ir fuifices to hint 

* Nek 7 once for all. ; 

i *7* 6 The children of * Pahath-moab,of the children of 
Jeſhuah, and Joab g, two thouſand eight hundred and 
twelve, 

gz Or, of Feſhuah- Joib, as the former was Pahath-moabs 
7 The chiidren of Elam, a thoutand cwo hundred 
fifry and four. 


{Heb. 
the tranſ> 
£0"189108, 


*Nch. 7. 
6 &c, 


(> 


five. 
9 The children of Zaccai, ſeven hundred and three 
{core, ES 
| Or, zi» +o The children of || Bani, fix hundred forty and two. 


7u, 


v1.5 
FP - Chap. L 

12 The children of Azgad, a thouſand two hundred | 
ewenty and two. 

12 The chiidren of Adonikam, ſix hundred ſixty 
and ſix. 

14 The children of Bigvai, two thouſand and hfty 
and fix. | 
15 The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and 


four. | | | 
' 16 The children of Ater of Hezekiah b, ninety and 
eight. | h 

h Of Ater the ſon of Hezekiah, not the king, bur another famoug 
perſon 1o called. | | 

17 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty 
and three; | 

18 The children of | Jorah; an hundred and :; -. -. 
rwelve. | | on, _ 

19 The children of Haſbum, two hundred twenty Net - 
and three: 


_ = ED = AETA aa MEIT —_— Fo OE PIES - 
— — > — ————  — — — ————— ———_—— ———— 


CCS 


= errno DDD 
an— DD C—  ——— —— —— 


| 24. 
20 The children of || Gibbar, ninty and five. PIR 
21 The children of Beth-lchem 5, an hundred cwenty || Or, be 
and three. Neh. 7. 


z Either of a Man called Bethlehem, or the Bet lehemite by way of 25« 
eminency. Or, of tie place fo called. And fo theſe were the re- 
mainders of the Inhabitants of that City. And the like may bs 


ſaid of the two following names, Nezophab and £1a:hoch, or others 
of che l;ke Nature. 


22 The men of Netophah, fifty and fix. 
. . 3 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and 
eight, | 0, 
24 The children of [] Azmaveh, forty and two. [| Or, Perth 
25 The children of Kirjath-arim &, Chephirah, and az»ves. | 


Beeroth, ſeven hundred and forty and three. Net. 7s 
k Or, Kiriah-jearim,, as it is Neb. 7: 29. 28. 


26 The children of Ramah, and Gaba, ſix hundred 
twenty and one. 

27 The men of Michmas,an hundred twenty and two 

28 The men of Beth-el and Ai, two hundred twenty 
and chree. 

29 The children of Nebo, fifty and two. 

39 The children of Magbiſh, an hundred fifty and fix. 


31 The children of the other * Elam 1, a thouſand * Se yes 
ewo hundred fifty and four. 7. 

I For one Elam was mentioned before, wv. 7. | 

32 The children of Harim, three hundred and 
ewenty. 

33 The children of Lod, || Hadid, and Ono, ſeven || Os, 
hundred twenty and five. | | AY 

. . iItis1 

- 34 0 childrea of Jericho, three hundred forty res fre 

35 The children of Sanaah,-three thouſand and ſix 
hundred and thirty. 

35 The prieſts : the children of * Jedajah of the: ! 
houſe of Jeſhua, nine hundred ſeventy and three. tors 1 

37 The children of * Immer, a thouſand fitry and $4 +4. 


pies: 


Chrar 


wo. * CRE 
33 The children of * Paſhur, a thouſand two hun- 3 Chana! 


dred forty and ſeven. 
39 The children of * Harim »s a thouſand and ſe- 
venteen. | 
m The Head of one of th? Twenty four Courſes which Dwid 
appointed, 1 Ehron. 24. 8. Ofall which Courſes, ſome obſerve,here 
are not above four or five that returned. There is another Hurin 
mentioned above, v- 32- but that was no Prieſt as this w:s, v. 36» 
49 The Levires : the children of Jeſhua, and Kad- 
miel, of the chiidren of || Hodaviah, ſeventy and four. | Or,. 
41 The ſingers : the children of Aſaph, anhundred 79 . 
rwenty and eight. | | ms alfs 
42 The children of the porters : the children of Shal- Hod:vab. 
lum, the children of Acer, the children of Talmon, the Neb- 7- _ 
children of Akkub, the children of Halica, the chil- #3: 
dren of Shobai, 3» all, an hundred thirty and nine. 
43 The Nethinims »: thechi'dren of Ziha, thechil- 
dren of Haſupha, the children of Tabbaoth, 


» The perſons devored ro the inferiour Services of the Prieſts 
and Levites: of whom ſee 1 Chron, g. 2 


44 The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, 
the children of Padon, | | 
45 The children of Lebanah, the children of Haga- 
| bah, the children of Akkub. 
46 The children of Hagab, the children of || Salmai, | Or, 
the children of Hanan, ated 
47 The children of Giddel, the children of 6G ahr, 
the children of Reajah, 
48 The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, 
the children of Gazzam, 
49 The children of Uzza, the children cf Paſeah, 
the children of Befai. 
5o The children of Aſnah,the children of Mchunim, 


24» 3: 


1r Lhe children of Echai, tix hundred eweanty and 


N s: © 
&, 1, three, 


the children of Nephulim. 


2 2 51 The 


hap. It. 


pha, the children of Harhur, 
52 The children of || Baz 


Or, Baz« 
hida, the children of Harſha, 


Ich. 7. 


F children of Thamah, 


pha, 

55 The c 
dren of Sorai, the children of Sophereth, the children 
of || Peruda, | 


ors Pez 
: o Either of thoſe ſtrangers and Proſelytes, whom Solomon uſed 


Aa 


leh. 7.57. 


ET 
ex The children of Bakbuk, the children of Haku-| ruſalem, offered freely for the houſe of God to ſet it 


luth, the children of Me- 
53 The children of Barkos,the children of Silera,the 
54 The children of Neziah, the children of Hati- 


kildren of Solomons Servants o ; the chil- 


Chap. It; 


up 1n his place. 
z 7. e. To the ruins of the houſe; or to the place where that 
houſe ſtood. 


69 They gave after their ability unto the * treaſure +, , _ 
of the work, threeſcore and one thouſand drams of :5 roy 
gold {| and five thouſand pound of ſilver, and one hun. * 
red prieſts garments. 

1 A dram of Gold is ſuppoſed to be of the weight of the fourth 
part of a iheke], and of the value of a French Crown. 


70 So the prieſts and the Levites, and ſome of the 
peopte, and the fingers, and the porters, and the Ne. 
chinims, dwele in their cities, and all Iſrael in their 


in the building of the Temple. 1 Kings 9g. 21- to the ſervice of 
which, as ſome add, he devored them; as there ſhould be eccaſion 
hereafter. Or, others who had lived in Solomons Family, and after 


Cities. 


his death, called themſelves and their Families by that name, as 


to ſo great a Prince. 
56 The children of Jaalahy 
the children of Giddel, 

57. The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hat- 
til, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children 
Or, 4n% of || Ami. 
eh 7 59. 
I Chrons 

b. 
T Kings 


the children of Darkon, 


mons ſervants were three hundred ninety and two. 
59 And theſe were they which went up from Telme- 


"hk lah, Tel-harſa p, Cherub, Addan, and Immer 4q : bur 
ce, 
ſeed, whether they were of Ifrasl. 

f The names of the ptaces whence they came, and where they 
had lived in the time of their Capt:vity. q The names either of.the 
Heads of the Families living in the places Jaſt mentioned; .or of 
other places where the perſons here underſtood had dwelr. . 

_60 Tae children of Delajah, the children of To- 
blah, the children of Nekoda, tix hundred fifry and ewo. 
. 61 And of the children of the Prieſts : the children 
of Habajah, che children of Koz, the children of Bar- 
Znllai : ( which took a wife of che daughters of * Bar- 


zillai the Gileadite, and was called after their namer. ) 
.r To wit, Barzillai, Which name he preferred before that of 
tiis own Family, accounting it, as it ſeems, a greater Honour to be 
allied ro fo noble a Family, than to be a Prieſt of rhe Lord. But 
by this ambition he deprived himſelf of the honour and advantage 
of the Prieſthood, as it is here nored, wv, 62. 
62 Theſe ſought their regiſter amorg thoſe that were 
reckoned by genealogy s, but they were nor found: 


Heb. therefore F were they as polluted, put from the prieſt- 


2 Same 
1s 27+ 


eſteeming it a great honour to them that they had been Servants 7ye Altar ſer up, 1—— 


' ple gathered themſelves together, as one man to Jeru« 
58 All the * Nethinims, and the children of * Solo- falem. 


; 


they could not ſhew their fathers houſe, and their il 


CHAT. MM. 


3. The Feaſt of the Tabernacles kept, g. their 
continual offerings, 5, 6. W.rkmen hired, 7. Prieſts and Levites are 
appointed to ſet forward the work, 8, 9. The foundation of the 
Temple is laid, with great joy and mourning, 12, 13» 


Nd when the ſeventh month was come a, and 
the children of Iſrael were in the Cities, the peo- 


a Or rather, was comin?, or drew near. For the Altar was ſet up 
after this time, v, 3. which yet was imployed the firſt day of thig 
month, ve 6. This was a ſacred kind of month wherein there werg 
divers Feſtivals, as appears from Lev. 23. for which the People had 
been preparing themſelves, and now came to Jeruſalem to the cele« 
bration of them. 

2 Then ſtood up || Jeſhua the ſon of Jozadakb, an 
his brethren the prieſts,and || CE the ſon c of * Nor,3" 
Shealtiel, and his brethren, and buil» the altar d of the Jag ts 
God of 1fracl, to offer burnt offerings thereon, as z is | can)” 
%* o = y 

written in the law of Moſes the man of God. Zorobabyl, 

b The High-Prieſt. c s. e. The grandſon : for he was the ſen of Mart 11, 
Peaziah, x Ckron. 3. 17, 18, 19. d Which was of more preſent and Luke ;, 
urgent necefliry than the Temple, both to make atonement to God 27, 
for all rheir fins, and to obtain Gods affiſtance for the building of Called Sa 
the Temple, and co ſtrengthen their own Hearts and Hands in that ##thiel. 
great work wherein they ſaw they ſhould have many Enemies. 
2 And they ſet the altar upon his baſes, ( for fear #2- 5. 
as upon them, becauſe of the people of thoſe coun- 
tries ) and they offered burnt-offerings thereon unto + 
the LORD, even burnt-offerings morning and evening. 

4 They kept alſo the feaſt of tahernacles e, * as it 3s 
written, and * offered the daily burnt-offerings f by ol . 
number, according to the cuſtom, F as the duty of ;:, &c. 4 


hey were hood 
[ute . b 


rom the 


riefl=oed. 


Preſerve the diſtinRions of the ſeveral Tribes and Families, which 
was neceſſary both to make our their Claims or Tirles ro Offices cc 
Inheritances, which might b-long ro them by death, or otherwilſes 
as her2 we ſee, and to- govern themſelves thereby in the marter of 
Marri-g2s, and ſome other things wherein the pratice of ſome 

Laws required the knowledge of theſe things : and partly by the 

ſpecial Providence of God, that ir might be certainly known of 


czre Of all their Families, ſo doubrleſs they took a more punctual 
and ſingu/ar care about the Royal Family, upon which all their 
hopes depended. 

63 And the || Ticſhatha s ſaid unto them, that they 
ſhould not eat of the moſt holy things, till there ſtood 


up a prieſt with * Urim and with thummim «. 
. #1.e. The Governour, to wit, Zerubbabel. Whence Nehemiah alſo 
1s fo called, Neh. 8. 9. and 10.2. « That this point Which ceuld 
not be found out by any human skill or induſtry, might be derere 
m'nd by divine direction. Hereby it appears that the Urim and 
Thummim were 1o& in the deſtruction of the City and Temple, 
tho* the Jews fed themſelves with hepes of recovering them, bur 
in vain. Of the Urim and Thummim, ſee Exed. 28. 30» Nume 27. 
21, 1 Sam. 23, 9. 

64 The whole congregation + together was * forty 
and wo thouſand three hundred and threeſcore x: 

x The particular ſumms here recited come only to 29818. Unto 
whom are added 1n this ro:al tumm 2542. Which either were of 
the other Tribes belide Judah and Benjamin : or were ſuch as were 
ſuppoſed by themſelves and others to be Iſraelites, but could not 
prove their pedigree by their genealogies, and therefore could not 
be ſo punctually and particularly diicribed, as ths former. 

65 Beſides their ſervants, and their maids, of whom 


| Or, g0- 
ernour. 
” Exod 
28. 30, 


2b. as 


ven: and there were among them two hundred ſinging- 
men and finging-women y. 

y For Women as well as Men were devoted to, and imployed in 
this exerciſe 11 the Temple-Service, as appears from 1 Chron. 25. 
5, 6. And tic Parents of theſe Perſons had taken care ro inſtruct 
and exerciſe them as far as they could in this Art, both for Geds 
ſervic?, and for their own benefir, when Jerujalem and the Temple 
ſhould be re-buile ; which they knew would be done afrer Jeremiahs 
7o years were expired. ; 

66 Their horſes were ſeven hundred thircy and fix : 
their mules two hundred forty and hve :. | 

67 Their camels four hundred thirty and five : their 
aſſes ſix thouſand and ſeven hundred and ewenty; 

68 And fone of the chief of the fathers, when 


they came to the houſe of the LORD & that 7s at Jg> 


5 The Jews were generally very cxatt apd careful in their Genea- | 
Togies, partly fiom their own Choice and Intereſt, that they mighc 


what Tribe and Family the Meſſiah was boin. For as they rook | 


there were ſeven thouſand three hundred thirty and fſe- - 


every day required ; t Heb. thy 

e This ſeems to be mentioned Synecdochically for all theSolem- *##trr of 
nities of this Month, whereof this was the moſt eminent and moſt *#* dayiv 
laſting. Ocherwiſe it is not probable, that they would neglect the #15 4at, 
Day of Aten=:ment which was ſo ſeverly enjoyned, Lev. 23. 27, 28, 
29. and was ſo exceeding ſuitable to their preſenticondition ; ſee on 
v. 6. f Heb. Burnt offerings day by day, Tt. e. Every day of that Feaſt 
they uffered as many Sacrifices as were preſcribedz of which ſee 
Numbe 29. 13, &Cc. 

5 And afterward offered the continual burnt-offer- 
ings, both of the new-moons, and of all the ſer-feaſts 
of the LORD, that were conſecrated b.and of every one 
that willingly offered a free-will-offering unto the 
LORD. 

g The Morning and Evening Sacrifice : of which ſee on Numb. 
28.6, h 1. e. Seta part for the ſolemn and holy Service of God. 

6 From the firſt day of the ſeventh month began 
they to offer burnt-offerings 3 unto the LORD : but 
{+ the foundation of the temple of the LORD was not + Hebizh 
get laid. zemple of 

: And the other Sacrifices which were to be offered with them up» the Lord 
on that day, being the Feaſt of Trumpets, Numb. 29. 1» &Cc. Burnt- 96 et jul 
offerings are oft pur for all Sacrifices, as hath been obſerved once and ava, 
again. k Though it is protable they had done ſomething towards 
the removirg of the rubbiſh, and preparing the way for it. 

7 They gave money alſo unto the maſons, and to 
the [| carpenters, and meat, and drink, and oil, unto þ gy; 
them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar- workmen! 
trees from Lebanon to the ſea of * Joppa, accordipg to* Act 9 
the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Perſia. 36» , 

8 Now in the ſecond year of their coming unto the 
houſe of God at Jeruſalem, in the ſecond month, be- 
gan Zerubbabel the ſon of Shealtiel, anc Jeſhua the ſon 
of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the 
prieſts and the Levites, and all they that were come out 
of the captivity unto Jeruſalem, and appointed the 
Levites from twenty years old and upward, to ſet for: 
ward the work of the houſe of the LORD. 

9 Then ſtood Jeſhua 1with his ſons, and his brethren; | 
Kadmiel and his ſons, the ſons of [| Judah Þ together, toll 0r,Hu#: 
ſer forward the workmen » in the houſe of God: ® 
che ſons of Henadad, 2»4ib their ſons and their brethren; Heb.t 
che Levites. one, 


! Not the High-Prieſt ſo called, byt a Levite, of whom ee 6b. 2. 
40. m By their preſence and favour to encourage them to a cheare 


flick, PF: 
tftueroſh, 


tul and vigorous prolecuticn of the work: 
| 10 And 


| B Z 

10 And when. the builders laid the foundation of 
the temple of the LORD, they ſet the priefts in their 
apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the ſons of A- 
ſaph, with cymbals to praiſe the LORD, after | the 

, * ordinance of David » king of Ifrael. _ 

n Heb. By, or Jecording to the hands of David, i. e. in ſuch 


"Chron. manner, and with ſuch Pſalms, or Songs, and Inſtruments as God 
hath appointed by the Hands or Miniſtry of David. : 

11 And they * ſang together by courſe, in praiſing 
x25.1- and giving thanks unto the LORD ; becauſe he ;s good, 
tExod. for his mercy endureth for ever towards Iſrael : And all 
ns the people ſhouted with a great ſhour, when they 
x praiſed the LORD, becauſe the foundation of the houſe 
of the LORD was laid. 

12 But many of the Prieſts and Levites, and chief 
of the fathers 20bo were ancient men, that had ſeen the 
firſt houſe o when the foundation of this houſe was laid 
before their eyes, wept with a loud voice p; and many 
ſhouted for joy : 

oWhich divers of tiem might very well do; becauſc it was de» 
ftroyed not quite Six:'y years ago, as 1s manifeſt from 2 Kings 25- 
2 Chron. 36. & Ezek, 40+ 1. p Partly becauſe of the pocr and ſmall 
preparations made for this in compariſon of what was made for the 
other Temple : paitly becauſe this Temple was diveſted and deſti> 
me of thote things which were the —_ Glory of the former 
Temple, to wit, the Ark, andthe Urim and Thummin, &. partly 


k an. IV. 
w"d 


becautc theſe foundacon-tones were far mferiour to the former, | 


both for quantity and price, * Kings 7. 9, 10. and partly becauſe 
theſe foundation: were of a far nar:ower compals than the former: 
for altho igh the fond -t:ons of this Houſe of the Lo-d. ſtrifly fo 
cal'ed, were at leaſt of equal largeneſs wita thoſe of the former, by 
c'mparing 1 Kings 6. 2. and Ezra 6. r, 2, 3. yet the foundations of 
the whole building bzlong ing 'o the firſt Temple, and adjoyning to 
it, cT in the courts of it, were far larger than theſe. ; 

13 So that the people couid not diſcern the noiſe of 


the ihout of joy, from the noife of the weeping of the 
people: for the people ſhouted with a loud ſhout, and 


the noiſe was heard afar off. 


CH 4 FP. IF. 


The Adverſarit s, being not accepted in the building of the Temple with the 
Jews, endeavour to hi:der it, '———6, Ther falſe and mali> 
cious Letter '0 Artaxerxes, 7 I7. Ar.axcrxes's decree, the build: 
ing is hindred, 18 24, 7 
my Ow when the adverſaries of Judah and Benjamin 
| ar yay a, heard that + the children of the caprivity 
reþr;s. built the Temple unto the LORD God of Uſrael : 
tin: # The Samaritans, as appears from wv. 2, 10, 
2 Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief 


* 


So 


R. A bn Ih 
the fourth and ri:hFKing of Peyſia, as che 1s called Dan. 11. 2. Or a* 
ther 2. Cambyſes the Son and ſucceſſor of Cyrus, as may appear, : 4- 
Becauſe none but he and Smerd:s were between Cyrus and this 
Darius. 2., Becauſe Cambyſes was known to be. no friend to this 
Jewiſh Nation nor Religion 3 and therefore ir is very improbab'e | 
that theſe crafty, and malicious, and induſtrious Enemies of the 
youu would omar fo great an opportznity when it was pur into thelr 

ands. _ 
7 Andin the days of Artaxerxes » wrote || Biſhlam, þ 9, ;, 
Mithridah, Tabeel, and the reſt ef their + companies, peace. 


letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and incerpre- 
red o in the Syrian tongue. x 

n Either 1. Artaxerxcs, the Son of Xerxes. Or, 2. Smerdis the 
Magician. Or rather, 3. the ſame Cambyſes, called by his Chaldee, 
Name Ahaſbuerus, ve 6. and here by his Perſian name Arrarerxes : 
By which name he is here called in the Inſcription of this Letrer, 
becauſe ſo he was called by himſelf and others in the Letters writ- 
tzn either by him, or to him. « Or, expoſed or declared. The ſenſe is, 
t was written in the Chaldee or Syrian Languaye,and in the Syrian 
Character : for ſometimes the Chaldee or Syrian words are writ. 
ten in the Hebrew Character, as Hebrew words are oft written in 
an Engliſh Character. | , le 
_ 8 Rehumthe chancellovr, and Shimſhai the || ſcribe, ||:Or, ſz» 
virote a letter againſt Jeruſalem, to Artaxerxes the king 0-9. 
in this ſort. | 

9 Then wrote Rehum the chancellour, and Shimſhai + chatd, 
the ſcribe, and the reſt of their + companions; the Di- fiecicr, 
naites, the Apharſachchites, the Tarpelices, the Aphar- 
fites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Suſanehires, 
the Dehavites, ane che Elamites p. 


? Several People thus called from the ſeveral places of thar vaſt 
' Aſſyrian Empire, from which they were fcrched, and who were 
unired rogether into one Body, and ſent as one Colony by the Af 
.ſyrian Monaichs into theſe parts. 


Io And the reſt of the nations, 


( | whom the great and 
noble Aſnappar q brought over, and ſet in the cities of 
Samaria : and the reſt that are on this fide the riverr 
+ and at ſuch a time 9. : 
Either Eſarhaddon, or ſome other Perſon the | era 
FR, ——_—_ with his Subj-cts and Dew——s ha 
of this Colony, and conducted them hither. » To wit, Euphrates, 
s The date of the Epiſtle was particularly expreſſed in the Epiſtle, 


bur here it, was ſufficient to note it in the general. 

1x This is the copy of the letter char they ſent unto 
hint, ever unto Artaxerxes the king ; Thy ſervants, the 
men on this ſide the river, and at fuch a time. y 

12 Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which 
came up from thee to us, are come unto Jeruſalem, : | 
building the rebellious and the bad city, and have || ſet f Chald 


of the fathers, and ſaid unto them, let us build wich 
 youb; for we ſeek your God, as ye doc and we do 
Ecrifice unto him, ſince the days of Eſarhaddon king 


of Aſſurd, which brought us up hither. : 

b This they ſpake not ſincerely as appears from their diſpoſition 
2nd deſigns diſcovered in the following Hiſtory, but thar by this 
conju*ction with them they might pry into their counſels, and 
thereby get an opportunity to find ſome-matter or pretences of Ac» 
cuſarion againſt them, c For ſo they did, though in a muogrel way : 
ſee 2 Kirgs 17, 26, &ca a Son-of Sennacherib, and after him King 
of Alſjria, 2 Kings 19. 37.: Who brought or ſent cheſe perſons hither, 
Eicher 1, in the days of S*lmanaſar, who 'ived and reigned in 
Afſrria but eight years before Eſarbaddins Reign ; and ſo Eſarbad- 
don might be one of bis moſt eminent Commanders, and the Man 
by whom that Colony was ſenr. Or, 2. in the Reign of Eſarhaddon, 
who ſent this tecond Colony to ſupply and ſtrengthen the firſt, 

3 Bur Zerubbabel, and Jejhua, and the reſt of che 

chief of the fathers of Iſrael, ſaid unto them, + Ye have 

ff. nothing- to do with us e to build an houſe unto our 
isfr God, but we our ſelves together f will build unto the 
asf] ORD God of Iſrael, as king Cyrus the king of Perlia 


hath commanded us. | 

e A; being of anoth:r Nation and Re<ligion, and therefore not 
concerned in Cyrus his Grant, which was c »1fined to the Iſraelites 
and ro the worſhippers of the true God. f i. e. Who are united to- 
gether by Cyrus his Grant in this Work. Or, alone, as this word 1s 
tometimes uſed, as 7% 34. 29. Pſal. 33. 15. Hoſ. T1. 7. 

4 Then the people of the land g weakned the hands 
of the people of Judah, and troubled them in build- 
ing þ. 

8 Heb. of that land, the preſent Inhabitants of that Province, ts 
wit, the Samaritans. h By falſe Reports and and Threats, and other 
means deicribed afrerwards. We ; 

5 And hired counſellers againſt them z, to fruſtrate 
their purpoſe, all the days of Cyrus king of Perſia k 
even untH the reign of Darius. king of Perſia /. 

i Who by their Arrifices and Intereſts in the Perſiaa Court 
ſhould give ſome ſtop to their Work: k For though Cyrus ſtill fa- 
voured the Jews, yer he was then diverted by his Wars, and his Son 
Cambyſes was left his Vice-Roy, who wasa very wicked Prince, and 
an Enemy to the Jews and their Religion. Heb. and untill, &c. z. 
e. Not only in” tze Reign of Cy7«s, but alſo of Cambyſes, and of the 

R Magician after whom was this Darius: of whom ſee chap. 5 & 6. 
(Heb. 6 And in the zeign of F Ahaſuervs »s, in the begin- 
tſtuerejh, ning of his reign, wrote they. «to him an accuſation'a- 
gainſt che Inhabirants of Judah and Jeruſaiem. 
» Which isſuppoſed by divers lezrnzd men to be from this time 
2 common Nam- to divers lucceeding Kings of Perſia. And this 
rakes it ſeem doubttur who this was. This was euther 1. Xerxes 


up the wal ns . an 7 joined the foundations. og > 
£ Either 1. The Jews had begun te build or "oP &- C, 

' the Walls which — 4:5/: watlmgr lefr, pry. ſome part of niſhed. 

this manner. Or, 2. This is a meer fiction, which being confident- 

ly affirmed, they thought would eaſily find belief with a Kin 

whoſe Heart and Ears they poſſeſſed by their hired Counſellours. £7" ,; 

and others cf their Friends, or the Enemies of the Jews. . TE t Chaldy 
13 Be it known now unto the king, thar if this City F ©. 

be built, and the walls ſet up again, then they will not #- nf 

t pay toll, tribute, and cuſtom, and fo thou ſhale <n- f Chald: 

damage the || revenue of the kings. we are 


Jowed toe 


the ſalt of 


kings palace, and it was not meet for us to ſee the kings 4 palacs 
+ diſhonour «; therefore have we ſent and certified the + Chald. 
king; ps. fg fe  nakedneſre 
| Thus they "preterid the Kings ſervice to their own nialicious DW 248 
deſigns and private intereſts | To 
15 That ſearch may be made in the book of the re- 
cords of thy fathers » : fo ſhalt thou find in the book of 
the records, and know that this city 5s a rebellious city, 
and hurcful unto kings and provinces, and that they 
have + moved ſedition + within the ſame of old cime: xg, -,,- 
for which cauſe was this city deſtroyed. = @* Chal 
x Political Fathers, i. e. thy Predecefſors, the former Em 


perours made 


which rogerher with the Empire were now in the hands of the Pers che midſt 
fian Kings, to be ſearched or read, as the Kings pleaſure 'was, or as thereof, 
the affairs of the Empire required. - 


16 We certifie the king,that if this city be built again 
and the walls thereof ſet up: by this means thou ſhalr 
have no portion on this ſide the river. | 
| 17 Then ſent the king an anſwer unto Rehum the 
chancellor, and to Shimſhai the ſcribe, and to the reſt - 
of their | companions that dwell in Samaris, and unto | Chalds 
{the reft beyond the river, Peace, and at ſuch atime. NOR 
18 The letter which ye ſent unto us hath been 
' plainly read before me. | 
19, AndI commanded, and ſearch hath been made, 
;and it is found, that this city of old time hath + made cree is. ſet: 
inſurrection againſt kings, and that rebellion and ſedi- + Chalde- 
| tion have been made therein. | | 
20 There hath been mighty kings alſo over Jerufa- 7: 
lem, which have ruled over all ceantrics beyond the 
River, and toll, tribute, and cuſtom was paid unto 
them. 3 £4 a 217; Give 


me # de* 


ip. 14 


unto Artaxerxes king of Perſia ; and the writting ofthe f Hb. ſos | 


they aggravate in re FE 


14 Now becauſe + we have maintainancs from the 1***4,vit% 


_ . iT Chald. 


of this Empire, namely in the Aſſyrian and Babyloniſh Records, + Chal dis 


+ Chald.5p 


I fred up it 


1 
b| 
| 
/ 


hald. >1 + Give ye now commandment to cauſe theſe 
 # de- 6m to ceaſe, and thar this City be not built, until a70- 
E ther commandment ſhall be glven from me. —_ 

22 Take heed now that ye fail not to do this : why 
ſhould damage grow to the hurt of the kings? 

22 Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes letter 
was read beforeRehum,and Shimſhai the ſcribe,and cheir 
| companions, they went up in haſte to Jeruſalem unto 
Chatg, the Jews, ard made them to ceaſe F by force and 
y arm and POWET, | | 

p.7. 24 Then ceaſed the work of the houſe of God y, 
which 3s at Jeruſalem. So it cexſed unto the lecond year 
of the reign of Darius king of Perla z. 

7. For they neither could nor mighr proceed in that work againſt 
their Kings Prohibition, without a ſpecia! Command from the King 
of Heaven; which they had chap 5+ 1, 2+» 2 To wit. Darius the Son 
of HyFaſper; Sucgefor of Cambyſes: nor, as ſome would have it Dart- 
us Nthus, the Son of fr axcrxes Lorgimanus, who was not Emperour 
till above 100 years after Cyrus, and conſequently from the begins 
ning of the building of the Temple to the finiſhing of it muſt be 
about 130 years; which is not credible to any one that coniiders ; 1. 
Thar rhe ſame Zerubbabel did both lay rhe Foundations and finiſh the 
work, Zcc'. 4. 9. 2. Thar ſome of the ſame perſons who ſaw the fini. 
fhing of this ſecond houſe had ſeen the glory of the firſt houſe, Hag. 2,3. 


CHAP. V. 


Zerubbabel bring encourag'd by Haggai and Zechariah the Prophets, ſetteth 
fer vard the werk, 1, 2. Their adverſarics epfaſe 'em again, 3—=5* 
Toe ry Later 10 Darius concerning this mattrrg 6 I7, 


Prophets ® Haggai the prophet, and*Ze- 
Rs NF Hen the Prophets ® Haggai the prophet, an e 


Zech. r. Jews that were in Judah and Jeruſalem, in the name of 
s the God of Ifrael b, even to them. 
s i. e. Tado's Grand child; for he was the ſon of Barachia. 6 Com- 
minding them from God to return to tle work of building the 
Temple, with promiſe of his fayeur and afliſt.nce, 
'2 Then roſe up Zecubbabel the ſon of Shealtiel, and 
Jeſhua the ſon of Jozadak,and began to bui!d the houſe 
of God which is at Jeruſtem: and with them were 
the prophets of God helping them c. | 
c Encouraging the Peop'e to work by their preſencey and affurz 


ance of ſucceſs. | . 
'2 Act the fame time cams to them Tatnai, gover- 


nour ot! this fide the river, and Shethar-boznai 4, and 
their companions, and faid thus unto them, Who hath 
commanded you to build this houſe, and co make up 
this wall 2? 
* @ Not Rebum and Shimſhar, &c. who were either dead, or removy- 
| ed from their Officzs by tne new Emperour Dariws, as is very uſual. 
* Ver. wo. 4 * Then faid we e unto chem afier this manner. 
T C-ald.. What are the names of che men 7 that make this buiid- 
eharbud ing? 
oy builds e Either r. We Tatnai and Shethar-boznai. And ſo this is an addi- 

tional and more expreſs enquiry concerning the names of the Build- 


EX 23 £4 


chariah the ſon of Iddo #4, prophecied unto the | 


Ir And they returned us anſwer, fujirg, We are 
the ſervants of the God of heaven ard earth, and build 
the houſe that was built many years 3go, which a gicar 
king of Urael built, * and ſet up. Kio 

12 But after that our fathers had provoked the God 6. 1. © 
of heaven unto wrath, he gave them into the land of, _ 
* Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon the Chal* . : King 
dean, who deſtroyed this houſe, and carried the pecpie Ig 7 
away into Babylon. Sy 

13 But in the ficſt year of *Cyrus the king of Baby- 
lon, the ſame king Cyrus made a decree to build this 
houſe of God. 

14 And * the veſle!s alſo of gold ard filver of the * Ch. r:7; 
houſe of God, Which Nebuchadriiczzar took out of the 3: 6.5, 
temple that was in Jeruſalem, and brouyht them into 
the temple of Babylan, thoſe did Cyrus the king take 
out of the temple of Babylon, ard they were delivered 
unto one, Whoſe name was Sheſhbazzar, whom he had 
made || governour. h O. J« 

15 And faid unto him, Take theſe veſſels, go carty 2% 
them into the temple that 7s in Jeruſalem, and ler the 
houſe of God be built in his place. 

16 Then came the ſame Sheſhbazzar , and laid the 
foundation of che houſe of God which 1s in Jeruſalem. 

And ſince that time even until now &, hath ic been in 
building, and yet is not finiſhed. 

k Allowing for ſome innterruptionse 

I7 Now therefore, if it ſeem good to the king, let 
there be ſearch made in the kings treaſure houſe, which 
is there art Babylon, whether it be /o, that a decree was 
made of Cyrus the king, to build this houſe of God at 
Jeruſalem, and let the king {end his pleaſure to us con» 
cerning this matter, 


CHAP VL 


| Davius anſwereth the former letter, 1 7» and maketh a new decree, 
8 12. By ths help of the Ad'virſaries, and the direRions of the 
Pr-phots the Temple is fined, 13——15« The Feaſts of the Dedicae 
tion, I6———18, and of the paſſover, are kept, 19 22. 
Hen Darius the king made a deeree s, and ſearch 
was made in the houſe of the + rolls, where the 
treaſures + were laid up in Pabylon 6. + Chald 
4 Either 1. To ſearch the Rolls. Or rather 2. To' permit and 4%. 
promote the building of the Templ:, And ſo rhe following words T Chalt 
may be rendred. after fearch' was mad?, &c, the Hebrew Particle v3u 74de ts 
being ofc fo uſed, as hattr been noted before. & Either, 1. In the, 4: cend, 
Kingdom or Empire of Babylon, which he now poſſ-ſſed : Or 'rae |) Or, & 
ther, 2, In the City of Babylon where ſearch was firſt made. ſup- #491. of 
poſing that this Edit which was made preſently after Cyrus had in 4 af; 
taken Babylin, was kept there, bur not finding it there, they ſearchy 
ed in Ackmecha, and found it there» ; 
2 And there was found «c at || Achmetha 4, in the 


mY 


© Ct.r.r, 


ers, And tiis ſenſc is favoured by comparing v. 9,' 10. where the 
ſame qu=ſfions here ſeverally made, v. 3+ and 4- are in like manrier 
diſtinguiſli2d. And fo the 1zered Writer ſpeaks this 1n their Per- 
- ſoa. Such variation ef perſons being frequent in the Hebrew Lan. 
guage, as the Learned know. Or, 2.2: Jews; and fo the Tranf- 
Jatzon muſt be alittle varied,and the words read without an Interro» 
tiov1 thus, Then we rold them accordingly, ( 3. e. according to what 
they aslted ) what were the names of the men that maae this building, 
7. e. viho were the chief Undercakers and Encouragers of this 
Work : For although the Hebrew Particle, 4h, - rendered what, 
ſeems always to be uſed interrogatively, yet the Chaldee Particle, 
man hzre rendeted what, is uſed otherwiſe, as is manifeſt from Dan. 


I7, 

D « But the eye' of their God was upon the elders'of 

the Jews, that they could* not: cauſe them to ceaſe f, 

dll the: matter came to Darius : and then-they return- 

ed anſwer by letter concerning this matter. 

- f Becauſe God over ruled their Hearts and Hands, that they did 

nor hind:r them by force, as they could have done, 

6 The copy of the letter that Latnai, governour on 
this ſid the river, and Shethar-boznai, and his compa- 
nions the Apharſachites g, which were on this ſide che 

_ river h, ſent unto Darius the- king. : 

z-A People ſa called, ſent hither asa Colony. As for the other 
people mentioned ch-p+ 4. 9. they ſeem ro have had a greater power 
with Rehum and Shimſhai than with theſe new Officers, who made 
choiſe of other Companions. 4 Whereby: the Fare diſtinguithed from 
thoſe 'of their Brethren, who yet conrinued 1a ther Native Couns 
try beyond-rhe, River. and were not tranſplanted hicher. 

7 They ſent alecter unto him F wherein was writ- 
ten thus ; Unto Darius'the king, all peace. 

8: Be it known unto the king, that we went into the 
province of Judza, to' the houſe of the great God z, 
| $Chald. which is built: wich f great ſtones and timber 1s laid 1n 
| Sour of therwalls; and this: work goeth faſt on, and proſpereth 
IS o in their hands. | 2 | 

5 Whom+the Jews account the great God, the God of gods, 

eſteeming all others to be bur little and falſe gods. | 
' 9 Then asked:we thoſe elders, and faid unto them 
”  _ - thus, Who commanded you to buily this houſe, and to 
make up theſe walls” | E- 

1> We asked their names alſo, to certifie thee, that 


+ ChzW.z4 
the mitt 
whereof. 


place them in the houſe of God. 


_ recited ) and net Darixs's; whick decs not begin vill the next 
verſe, 


palace, that is in the province of the Medes, a roll, ang 
therein a8 a record thus written; | 

c Here the Kings anſwer may ſeen: to begin, and this followiag 
accovnt: Fe ſends to theny, and after that Jays down bis coms= 
mands-. d The Royal Ciry of the-Medes and Perſians. 

3 In the firſt year of Cyrus the king, the ſame Cyrus 
the king made a decree concerning the houſe of God 
at ar Fravay Let the houſe be built, the place where 
they offered Sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof 
be ſtrongly laid; the hejght thereof threeſcore cubits, 


and the breadth thereof cthreeſcore cubits e : 

e He- did not command them to make it ſo large, for he left the or- 
dering of the proportions of the Building ro their $kill and choices 
but he reſtrained them that they ſhould make it nolarger; Ieſtthe 
ſhould hereafter make uſe of it to other purpoſes againſt himſelf: 
But thoſe proportions differ much from thoſe of Solomon's Temple, 
which was bur Thirty cubires high, only the Porch was 12@ Cubits 
high, and but 20 Cubits in breadth. Either therfore Solomons Cubits 
were facred Cudits, which were Jarger than the other, and theſe 
vere but common Cubits. Or, the 60 Cubirs of heighth are meant 
only of the Porch, which he would nor have to be fo high and mage 
nificent as that of Solomons” was, leſt rhey ſhould be puffed. up 
with it, and by degrees arriveat their former height and infolence. 
And the werd rendred brcadth. may be, and is by-ſome readred 
more generally, the e::tenſion, or amplitude, or rhe length of it ;-it be« 
ing improbable that the King ſhould give orders about the breadth, 
end nene about the length of it. | 
4 With three rows of great ſtones,and a row of new 
timber f: and: let the expences be given out of the 
kings” houſe, 

F As S:lomon's Temple was built, 1 Kivgs 6. 36. Whereof Darixs 

was informed by ſome of the Jews, whoalto defiredthat it might be 
dene in this manner. ES? 

5 And alſo let the golden and filver veſſels of the 
houſe of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out 

of the temple which 7s at Jeruſalem, and brought unto 
Babylon, be reſtored g, and F brought again urico the'; q4,1q 
remple which is at Jeruſalem, every one to his place ; and gu, 


g To Sheſhbazzar : For this is part of Cyrus's Decree ( which is 


we migat: wie the names of the men that were the} 
chi2t of them.” 


s Now 


Chap. vi: 


1]: 


'S 


"Chap. VI. EB ZE 


6 Now therefore Tatnai, govertiour beyond the ri- 
f chalde ver, Shethar-hoznai, and | your companions the Aph- 
_ Joie rfachites which are vented the river, be ye far from 
of thence h: | | 
h i. e. From hindering or diſcouraging the work. 
7 Let the work of this houſe of God alone; let the 
governour of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews, 
| build this houſe of God in his pl.ce. _. 
f Chald. 8 Moreover, Þ I make a decree, what ye ſhall do to 
apy 4 the elders of the Jews, for the building of this houle of 
"14, God: that of the kings goods, even of the tribuce be- 
yond the river, forthwith expences be given unto theſe 
 Chalds Then, that they be not Tf hindred 5, | 
mad 7 ; From proce ding in thr. work for want of money. 
alt 9 And that which they have need of, both -young 
bullocks, and ratris, and lambs, for the burnt-offerings 
of the God of heaven, wheat, ſalt, wine and oil, accor- 
ding to the appointment of the prieſts which je at Jeru- 
falem, let it 4 


{Chald., Jo That chey may offer + ſacrifices of ſweer favours 


ſotjs unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the | 


o"0s king, and of his ſons. - 

alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his 
f Chald. houſe, and being ſet up, + 1:t him be hatiged thereon, 
_— and let his houſe be made a dunghill for this. 

4 12 And the God that hath cauſed his name todwell 
there, deſtroy all kings and people that ſhall pur to 
their hand, to alter and to deſtroy this houſe o* God 

which js at Jeruſalem: I Darius-have made adecree, ler 

it be done with ſpeed. | | 
13 Then Tatnai, goverhour op this fide the river, 
. Sherhar-boznai, and their companions, according to that 
which Darius the king had ſent, ſo they did ſpeedily. 
14 And the elders of the Jews built, and they proſpe- 
red through the propecying of Haggai the prophet, and 

Zechariah the fon of Iddo &; and they buile and finiſh- 

ed zt, according to the commandment of the God of 

Iſrael, and according to the F commandment of Cyrus, 

and Darius, and Artaxerxes /, kings of Perſia, . 

k This is a ſeaſonable intimation, that this great and unexpeQed 
- ſucceſs was not to be aſcrived to chance,nor to the kindneſs or good 
humour of Darius, bur unco God only, who by his Prophets had 


required and encouraged them to proceed in the work, and by his 
mighty p>wer diſpoſed Darius Heart to ſuch kind ard noble Pur- 


| chald. 
igrie, 


— 


e given them day by day without fail. 


it Alſo I have made a decree, that whoſoever fhall | 5 


: ready fcribe & in the law of Moſes, which the LORD 


R M£. Chap. VL |} 

#7, e, Of the King of Ferfie, which was now King of 4712 al.v [ 

or Emperor of that vaſt and famous Afyrian-Empire: which ws _ 

firſt ſubdued by the King of. Babylon. who therefore is ſomewhere © 

Called rhe Aſſyrian ; and for the ſame reaſon the Perſian Monarch 1s * 

here.ſo called emphatically, ro nore. the great Power and Gr olnets 

of God, in turning the Hearts of theſe great Monarchs, whole Pie: 
decefſors had been the chief Perſecutors ard Oppreſſors of Ged's 

Peop c- 9G A ES 

CHAP. VI. 

Ezra's Genealogy, 1 5. The Priefls, Levites and Exra go up fo Jes 
Fuſalen, 6———10. The gracious Commiſſion cf Artaxcyxcs ro Exra, 
14 20, Evra blefſeth God for bis fawour eo his pople, 27, 28, 

Ow after theſe things, in the reign of * Artax- * Net. ». | 
erxes a king of Perſia, Ezra * the fon of Serajahb, ,, | 

the fon of Aziriah, the ſon of Hilkiah. *1 Cluc * | 
4 The ſame of whom he ſpeaks, ch. 6.14. 6 5. e. His Grandſon, 6 14. _ 

Here are divers Perſcns omitted for brevity ſake, which may be ſups 

plyed out of 1 Chrox. 8, 7, 2, g, 10, rt. FP > h 
.2 The ſon of Shallum, the ſon of Zadok, the ſon of 

Ahitub, 6h "One 
3 The ſon of Amatiah, the ſon of Azariah, the ſon 

of Mecajoth, ug et os 4 
4 The fon of Zerajah, the fon of Uzzi, the ſon of 
kki : 


_ 


l,: "I | DT | af 2 

The ſon of Abiſbua, the ſon of Phinehas, the ſor - 

of Eleazar, the fon of Aaron the chief prieſt; oy 
6 This Ezra went up from Babylon c, and he was 4 


God of Ifrael had given, and the king granted him all 
his requeſt, according to the hand of the LORD his 
God upon him «e - EO AS 
c Wirth the King's Conſent and Commiſſion. di. 4 A learned? 
and expert Door : for in that tenie the word Scribs is oft uſed;as: 
Jer. 8.8, Matth. 7. 29s & 17. 10.8% 23. 2,13. Mark I2. 28, compare with 
Matt. 22. 35, 36. @ +. e. By the Grace and favour of God ſo diſs 
poſing the Heart of the King, : ne ; 
7 And there weft up ſozze of the children of Iſrael, 
an4 of the prieſts, and the Levires, and the ſingers, and - © | 
the porters, and * the Nethinims unto Jerufalemf, in *.ch+2 | 
the ſeventh year of Artaxerxes the king. cx ©. wi | 
f This is here related in the general, but how he procured this is 
particutarly related lereafier. ne re. Le on 
8 And he came to Jerufalem in the fifth month, 
which as in the ſeventh year of the king. ; |. - 
9 For vuponi the firſt day of the firſt month + beganhe *__ 
to go up from Babylon, and onthe firſt day of the fifth } Hebe 


month came he to Jeruſalem, according to the good Y ww 


” - 


poles and Aﬀtions. 1 Who 15 tlrought to be either 1. Xerxes Das | 
rivs his Son and Suctefſor, who was called allo Ariazerxes, and 4bas 


ſbuerns, who is here joyned with his Father Darius, poſſibly be- | 


cauſe he favoured the Jews, and promoted their Cauſe with his Fa- 
ther, and faw to the Execution of his Father's Decree, and was 
his Father's Vice-Roy, if not made Co-Emperor with his Father in 
his Life=rime, which was notunuſual- Or 2« Artexerxes Longimanus, 
the Son of Xerres, who was beſt known by the name of 4rtexerxes ; 
who is here joyn:d with Cyrus and Darius, becauſe though the Tem- 
ple was finiſhed, as to the ſubſtance of the work, in Dariuss Reign, 
4, 15, Yet it was afterwards more fully compleated and adorned by 
Artaxcrxer, as is. evident from eh. 7. v 20, 27, by whom Nebemiah 
was ſent ta Feruſalem with a large Commiſſion and full Power to 
take care abour che Building of the Ciry, and all other things 
cencerniag the Jewiſh Nation and Religion. 


; 15 And this houſe was finiſhed on the third day of and, do it- 
Eh. 3. the month * Adar, which' was inthe fixth' year of the 


___ r&fgnof Darius the king. 

Foy vites, and the reſt of trhe children of thecaptivity, kept 

mrietiothe dedication of this houſe of God with joy; 

| 17 And offered at the dedication of this houſe of 
God, an hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four 

"8.35, hundred lambs; and for a in offering for all Ifrael, 

1Kings * ewelve he-goats according to'thenumber of the tribes 


$63, | 
5:00 of Iſrael, 
$. 


f had. ;5 at Jeruſalem; f * as it is written inthe Book of Moſes. 


wing 19 And the children of the captivity kepec the paſſover 
witing, * upon the fourteenth day of the ſixth month. 
*Num.3. 20 For the prieſts and theLevites were purified togs- 


6.&8.9-ther, all of ttem were pure, and killed the paſſover 


; 00.12. for all the childremof the captivity, and for their Bre- 
thren the prieſts; and for themſelves. 


21 And the children of frael, whichy were'come 
again out of captivity,and all'fuch as had ſeparared them- 
ſelves unto them from the filthineſs of the heathen rs of 


the land, to ſeek the LORD God of Ifrael, did eat: 


ms 7. e, Such «s had foriaken that filthy and Idolarrous Religion” 
of the Heathens, and were profelyted to the Jewiſh Religion : for 


Tuch were aliowed $0 cat thz paſſ;ver Exod. 12. 48. Nums. g. 14: 


22 And kept the feaſt of unleavened breai leven 


days with joy: for the LORD had made thern joyful, 
and turned the heart of the king of Afſyria 7 unto them, 


£0 ſtrengchen their hands in thg work of ths byuſe of 


God, ths God of Iſrael, 


16 And the children of Ifrael, the prieſts and the Le-' 


18 And they ſet the prieſts intheir diviſions, and the 
Levites in their courſes, for the ſervice of God, which} 


hand of his God upon hin. SY "of thegoing 
to For Ezra had prepared his heart g to ſeek þ the law, »?- 

of the LORD, and to do it, and co teach in Iſrael; 
ſtatutes and judgments. .— 25- / ; of = 
 £ Or. direfied, &0- 1. e. He had ſet his Mind and Aﬀections u-on 
it. and made it his. chief deſign and buſineſs. & 7, e. To ſearch and 
fi1d our the true fence and meaning of it,and thence to learn whar 

' Sins or Errors were to be reformed, and whatDuties were to ws: - 
| tormed, 2 The order 6f things in this Verſe is very, obſervable « 

| firſt he endeayours to underftand God's Law and Word, and thar 

' nof for Curiolity or Ofſtemtation, but in order to Practice » Next + 

! he conſcientiouſly practiſeth what he did underſtand, which made © 
; his Doctrine much more eff:crual : And then he earneſtly :defireg : 
« and-labours to inſtract and edific others, that they alſo might knvuy 


11 Now this is the copy of the letter that the king 
Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the prieſt, the ſcribe, even a 
ſcribe of rhe words ofthe commandmentst of the LORD 
and of his ſtatures to Itrael. EE rs fie 

þ The Piiraſe ſeems empharical noting that he explaingd both | / 
"the words, and the things: For the Jews iv.che Land of their Capris; 
vity had in a great, m2aſure loſt both their Language, and the Knows. - 


+ 


ledge of God s Comimands, and therefore Ezzs and his Compamions © 


”4 


inſtruct them irr both. Of which ſee more! on Nekern. 8. 8. .; JC 
12 Artaxerxes king of kings, || uncq Ezra the prieſt, Ort 
a ſcribe ofthe law of the God of Heaven, perfect peace, ew 
and at {uch a tims. eng ag : Wield. « 
13: I make a decree, that all they of the people of If-. 2ofec +; 
rae], and of his prieſts and Levites in my realm,:whictz Lo fu 
are minded of cheir own free wiltto 80 up to Jeruſalem; G04 of 
go with thee, | fm 
| Fg, Forafſtnuch as thou art ſent | of the king, and,of geace,& 
his * ſeven counſelters, / to —_— concerning Judal NEE” 
| and Jeruſalem, according to the law of thy 'Gad'm fn before 
which 7s in thine hand =: | I Ss ': 7 1770 the inp: 
I His chief Nobles and Officers of State 3 ef whom ſee 'alſs x4þ. * Eſth 1. 
1. 10, 14. ” { & Tomoke inquiry intoall Abuſes and «Deviations 14: 
from your Law, and to, redreis them. » Wh ch is-now and always 
in thy hand, being ths matter of thy daily Rudy and exerciſe 3 
which thou now carcieſt along with the, the Interpretation 
whereof belongeth unco rhee. HED : DS, 
15 And to carry the ſtiver and the gold which the 
king and his. counſelors, have freely offered unto'the 
God of Iſrael, whoſe habitation 5s in; Jeruſalem ; | 
16 * And all the filver and gold'thac thou canſt find o *.£l 8, 
in all the province of Babylon, with thefree-will-offe= <** 
ring of the peopie'p, and of the prietts offering willingly 
for che houſy of cheir Gods which 5 in Jeruſalem: 
I £ 3 | o in O, 


» 


Tt P. VI. | E Z 
04. 2. Procure, as that word is uſed, Gen. 6. 8. & 26- 12. ſal. 
Bg. 3. & 119. 152, Prov I. 13. & 2. 5. & 3. 13. Whatſoever thou 
canſt ger of my Subjects by way of fx e gift. To Wity of Iſrael. 
"17 That thou mayeſt buy ſpeedily with this money, 
bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat-ofterings, and 
their drink-offerings, and offer-cthem upon the altar of 
the houſe of your God which is in Jeruſalem : 
13 And whatſoever ſhall ſeem good to thee, and to 
thy brethren, to do with the reſt of the ſilver, and zold, 
that do after the will of your God. 

19 The veſſels alſo that are given thee for the ſer- 
vice of the houſe of thy God, hoſe deliver thou before 
the God of Jeruſalem. 

20 And whatſoever more ſhall he needful for the houſe 
* of thy God q, which thou ſhalt have bccaſion to beſtow, 
beſtow it out of the kings treaſure houſe. T0 

9 Towards the Reparation, or adoraing, or compleating of it. 


e£ the Notes on #4. 6. 14, 

21 And]I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a de- 
Cree to all therreaſurers which are beyond the river,that 
whatſoever Ezra the prieſt, the ſcribe of the law of the 
God of heaven,ſhall require of you,it be done ſpeedily. 

22 Unto an hundred talents of ſilver, and to an 
hundred meaſures of Wheat, and to anhundred baths of 
wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and ſalt without 
preſcribing how much x | 

r Bzcauſ: it was but of mean price, and of very common and ne- 
ceilary uſe in all their Szcyyfices, Leve 2. 13. Marky. 49. 

22 + Whatſoever is commanded by the God of hea- 
aig, Ven, let it be diligently done for the houſe of the God 
«ſo ver of heaven: forwhythould there be wrath againſt the 
y t522 realm of the king and his fon s ? 

" s For th: omifſiva of any part of his Worſhip occaſioned 
by my negleq; This danger aud duty he diſcerned, partly by na- 
tural lighr, and principally by the Information of Ezra, ch. 8. 22. 
who had the King's Ear and Hearr. 

24 Alſo we certifie unto you, that touching any of 

_the prieſts and Levites, fingers, porters, Nethinims, or 
miniſters of chis houſe of God, it ſhall not be lawful to 
impoſe toll, tribute or cuſtom upon them. _ | 

25. And thou Ezra, after the wiſdom of thy God, 
that 7s 1n thine hand : ſet magiſtrates and judges which 
may: judge all the people that are beyond the river, all 

i fuch, as know the laws of thy God, and teach ye them | 


hal. 


R A. 
5. Of the ſons of Shechaniah ; the Ton of Jaheziel c, 


and with him three hundred males. ; 
F ' £ Either his only Son, or the moſt eminent of his Sons, and 


therefore ſo ca'led here: | 
6 Of the ſons alſo of Adin; Ebed the ſon of Jona- 
than, and with him fifty males. 

7 And of the ſons of Elam ; Jeſhajah the ſon of Arha- 
iah, and with him ſeventy males. 

8 And of the ſons of Shephatiah ; Zebadiah the ſon 
of Michael, and with him fourſcore males. | 
9 Of the ſons of Joab ; Obadiah the ſon of Jehiel, 
and with him two hundred and eighteen males. 

10 Andofthe ſons of Ske!omith; the ſon of Joſiphi- 
ah'z and with him an hundred and threeſcore males. 

1: And of the ſons of Bebai; Zechariab the ſon of 
Bebai, and with him twenty and eight mules. 


[1 


Hakkatan, and with him an hundred and ten males. youg:s oy 
1; And of the laſt ſons of Adonikam, whoſe names | 
are theſ”, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemajah,and with him 
threeſco:e males. 

14 Of the ſons alſo of Bigyai ; Uthai,and || Zabbud | or, z. 
and with them ſeventy males. ry oF ge 
Is Aud TI gathered them together to the river that '9meread 
runneth to Ahavad;and there || abode we in tents three j g, pit 
dayes: and I viewed the people, and the pricts, aud ch. * 
found there none of the ſons of Levi e. 

d Or the river of Ahava, as it is called 'v 21. 31. By comparing 

of theſe places, it ſeems rhat 4hawva was the name berth of the Ri. 

ver, and of the Town or place by which it ran. Either this was 


that River which other Writers call 4d8ava : which runs to Aſhriag 
which thence is called 4diabene: or ſome other River running 1ata 


Euphrates, e To wit, who were ſimple Levites, and not Prieſts. 

And therefore the Levites mentioned, chap. 7. 7s by anticipation 

were not yet come to him. ; 

16 Then ſent I fos Eliezer f, for Ariel, for Shema« 

jah, and for Elnachan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, 

and for Nathan, and for Zecharia, and for Meſbullam, 

chief men : alſo for Jojarib, and for Elnathan, men of 
underſtanding g. 

f To come to we, and go along with me to Jeruſslem. g Whe 

ſeem to have had more knowledge than pious Zeal for God, and his 
Houf: and ſolemn Worſhip, which was confined to Jeruſalem. FREE 
17 And I ſent them with commandment g unto Id. _ 
do the chiefh, at the place Caſiphia s, And Þ I told them T ib 1 


that know.them not. | | 
#7, e; Which God hath put into thy Heart, and which appears 
In the, works of thy hand. Wiſdom is ſometimes aſcrib<d o | 

' the-bands; *Pſal. 78. 72. Sec my Latin Synopſer on Gen- 48. 14. Or, by 

the Hſdow of. God, _ he means the Law of God, which was ſaid to be | 

In his hand, v. 14. | 

26 And whoſoever will not do the law of thy God, 
ang:the law of the king «, let judgment be executed 
ſpeedily upon him, 2h:ther it be unto death, or + to, 

KD bahiſhmenc, "or coconhiſcation of goods, or to impri- | 
To wit concerning theſe matters Or, which Law of Gad is by ; 
Fiiszhyrlandion now become 'my Law allo, to which I expect their 
unQualiand ready obedience. For as for the Civil Laws of the 
mpuse,; Ezra neither was skilful in them, 'nor was intruſted with 

tae Execution of them, which was committed to other hands. 
27''Blefſſed be the LORD God of our Fathers, which 
hath-pur ſach a thing as this in the kings heart, . to 
beaurifie the houſe. of. the LORD, which 5 in Jeruſalem; 

28 And hath extended mercy unto me before the 

king-andhis counſellors,and before all the kings mighty 
pritices;;” and TI was firengthened as the hand of the 

LORTfmy God was upon me, and I gathered together 

outof all {rael chief men to go up with me. 

yg Re 2 i G04 p. VIE: 

_ Companions who returned from Babylon, 1——=14. He ſexdeth to 
Talks for Levites ts be Miniſters for the Temple, 15 20. He keepeth 

' & Faſt-ar * Arw08, 2123» Hs committeth the Treaſures to the 

© Ciiftody*of. the Priefts,  24——30. From Ahava they come to Feruſa- 
ak Ina 132, Tie. Treaſure is weighed in the Temple, 33 35. The 
l ©. Commiſſion is delivered 0" the” Adverſaries, and they further the Houſe 

I al 

"T Heſ& &re now the chief of their Fathers, and th;* 
=. 55 the genealogy of them that went up with me 

, from Babylon, in-the reign of Artaxerxes the king. 
= 2: Of the ſons of Phineas ;/ Gerſhom : of the {ons of 

+Ichamar : Daniel : of the ſons of David ; Hattuſh, 

"© Fl Of the ſons'of- Shechaniah:- of the ſons of * Pha- 
roſh 2; Zecharia'- and' wich him* were reckoned by 
genealogy of the miles b, an hundred and fifry. 

a i. e. One of the Soas of Pharoſt': whereby he is diffcrenced 
from the ether Shechanish, ve 5. b: Though che Males only be Cx- 
preſſed here, and in'rhe ſuccetding Verſes, yer it is more than pro- 
bable they carried the Women aloag with them, as they d:d car- 


ry lit:l: ones, as it is exprelſcd here, v. 21. 


\* 4 Of the ſons of Pahath-moab; Elihoenai, che ſon 
of Zerahiah, and with him two hundr cd males. 


[ 


Requeſt. 


what they ſhould ſay unto Iddo, and to his brethren the pon way 
Nethinims, at the place Caſiphia, that they ſhould ,,,yy, 
bring unto us miniſters for the houſe of our God» : 
£ Which he might do, partly by virtue of that Authority whick 
he had over them by his Prieſthood ; and partly by that Authority 
which le either had received, or could eaſily procure from the 
King to that purpoſe. þ The head of the reſt, either by Ecc'cſia* 
ſtical Order or Government, which the Perſian Kings allowed ta 
the Jews; 6r by ſome Grant or Commiſſion from the King. : Not 
2 place near the Caſpian Lake, as ſome gueſs from the likeneſs of 
the names; for that was at tod great a diſtance for his preſent pur 
poſe, but ſome other place not far from Ahavs ; where he knew that 
there was a Colledge, or conſiderable company of Levites together. 
18' And by the good hand of our Ged upon us, they 
brought us a man of underftanding,of the ſons of Mahli 
the ſon of Levi, the ſon of Iſrael and Sherebia, with 
his ſons, and with his brethren, eighteen ; ED: 
19 And Haſbabiah, and with him Jeſhajali of the ſons 
of Merari; his brethren and their ſons, twenty, # Gee 
20.* Alfo of the Nethinims, whom David and the a, (;, 
princes had appointed for the ſervice of the Levites &; 


wo hundred and twenty Nethinims : all of them were 


expreſſed: by name. i 


k The Gibeonites who were devoted to this Service by. Joſs, 
and the Princes of his time, Joſ. 9. 21: and are ſaid to be appointed 
by David and his Princes, becauſe ehey were confirmed by them 


in their former Office, and more particularly applied to the ſeveral 


Services of the Temple: Though. this be nor diſtinctly related in 
1 Chy. 24: & 25, & 26. becauſe his buſineſs there was to give an ac- 


count only of the new Conſtitutions and Alterations made by De* 
vid in thoſe matters. 


' 21 Then I proclaimed a faft there, at the river Aha- 


va, that we might aMi& our ſelves before our God, to 
ſeek of him a right way / for us, and for our little ones, 
' and for all our fubſtance. 


17. e. A ſafe and proſperous Journey ; or ſuch a way and courſe 


as might be beſt for us. 


22 For I was aſhamed to require of the king a band 


of Soldiers and Horſemen, to belp us againſt the enemy 
in the way: Þecauſe we had ſpoken unto the king, fay- 
ings, The hand of our God is upon all them for good, 
that ſeek him, but his power and his wrath 5s againft all 
them that forſake him. 


23 So we faſted and beſought our God for this, and 


he was intreated of us mx. 


»» Hz gave us ſome Aſſurance of his gracious Anſwer to our 


24 Then 


Chap. VUIL = 


I2 And of the ſons of Azgad ; Johanan || the ſon of | Or, the, 


7 Heb, 
They thi 
682 0ui 
the cape 
Ut, th 
ſons of 4 
tranſpor! 
110, fo 
Gr, 


[Or, ex 
alted. 

Gr. glori 
eh 


go 


| Chap» 13: 

24 Then [ ſeparated twelve of the chief of the prieſts, 

Sherebiah, Haſbabiah ; and ten of their brethren with 

them 7: | 

un Or, and Sherebiah, &c. who were the Levites mentioned v 18. 

who were joynrly intruſted together with the Prieſts with the 

charge of carrying theſe things carefully and ſafely. The Particle 
and, 1s oft underſtood, 

25 And weighed unto them the filver and the gold, 
and the veſſels, even the offering of the houſe of our 
God, which the king, and his counſellors, and his lords, 
and all Iſrael there preſent ; had offered. . . _ 

26 I even weighed unto their hand, ſix hundted and 
ſifty ralents of 11ilver, and ſilver veſſels an hundred ta- 
lents, and of gold an hundred talents : 

27 Alſo twenty baſons of gold, of athouſand drams, 
#Hebz!- and two veſſels of + fine copper, + precious as gold o. 
lm,orſpin= o Heb. deſirable as gold; not that it was of equal price and worth 
ing braſs. with it- bur for irs incomparable Excellency in its kind, and for 


+ Heb» its great Rarity, for which cauſe there were only two Veſlels of 
defrable. that ſort. ; 


28 And I ſaid unto them, Ye are | holy unto the 
LORD, the veſſels are Þ holy alfo, and the filver and 
ainſs, The gold are a free-will-offering unto the LORD God 
Lev.21-6- of your fathers. 
te we 29 Watch ye, and keep them, untill ye weigh them 
#. before the chief of the prieſts, and the Levites, and 
chief of the fathers of Iſrael at Jeruſalem, iz thecham- 
bers of the houſe of che LORD. 

30 So reok the prieſts and the Levites, the weightof 
the ſilver, and the gold, and the veſſels, to bring them 
to Jeruſalem unto the houſe of our God. 

31 Then we departed from the river of Ahava, on 
the twelfth day of the firſt month, to go unto Jeruſa- 
lem, and the hand of our God was upon us, and he 
delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of ſfach 
as lay. in wait by the way p. 

p To: wir, in the dire&t way. Whereby it may be conjeQtured, 
thar God dire&ed them to fetch a little compaſs, and to goa more 
uncouth and unſuſpe&ed way, as they had begged of Cod, v. 21+ 

32 And we came to Jerutalem, and abode there 
three days. 

23 Now on the fourth day was the filver, and the 
gold, and the veſſels weighed in the houſe of ous God, 
by the hand of Meremoth the ſon of Uriah the prieſt 
and with him was Eleazar the ſonof Phinehas, and with 
them was Jozabad the ſon of Jeſhua, and Noadiah the 
ſon of Benui, Levites: | 

34 By number and by weight of every one : and all 
the weight was written at that time. 


ks 35 + Alſo the children of thoſe that had been carried 
un: ut of AWAY; Which were come out of the captivity q, offered 


th apri= burnt offerings unto the God of Iſrael, twelve bullocks 
i, for all Iſrael, ninety and fix rams, {ſeventy and ſeven 
af '** lambs, twelve he-goats for a ſin offering : all this was a 
wm - h 
im, {o burnt-offering unto the LORD. 
Gr, 'q To wit, theſe now commers, whom God had fafe'y conducted 
hither. 
26 And they delivered the kings commitlions unto 


[Or, exe 
alted, 


Gr. gloyi 
8 fie 


fide the river; and they || furchered the people, and the 


houſe of God r. £-. 
'r In the adorning and furniſhing of it with theſe Veſſels and 
other Conveniences ; and in promoting Gods Worſhip and Service 
herein, 


CHAP. IX: 

Ezra and others, hearing of the unlawful Marriage of the People with 
Strangers, mourn for it, 1 4. He prayeth unto God, and confeſſeth 
their Sins, and particularly this, 5 15s 

Ow when theſe things were done, the princes 4 

N came to me, ſaying, The people of Ifract, and 

the priefts, and the Levites have not ſeparaced chem- 

ſelves from the people of the lands b, dcing according to 
their abominations c, even of the Canaanite, the Hit= 
tite, the Perizzite, the Jebuſite, the Ammonice, the 

Moabite, the Egyptian, and the Amorite. 


a Who feared God, and underſtood that Ezra was come with 


RK2Þ2 4 


j| of the kings of the lands, tothe fword, to captivity, and 


the kings lieutenants, and to the governours on this | 


Chap. I 


from Jer, 25, 9. ©. Or rather, 2 Since their return, as may be 
gathered from. v. 8, 9, !o, 14. e Who ſhould have reſtrained the 
People from this Sin, by their Authority and Example; and by dos 
ing otherwiſe, made the Sin more general, and involved them® 
ſelves and the Nation in the Guilt cf it. REES wy 

..3 And when LI heard this thing, I rent my garment, 
atid my mantle, f and pluckr off the hair of my head; 
and of my beard g, and fat down aſtonied h. 

f Both my inner and my upper, Garment. z In teſtimony of my, 
greatGrief and Indignation;which was uſual among all thoſe Eaſtern: 
and Ancient People, where vn he did not tranſgreſs; that Law, Lev. 
19. 27: Deus. 14, 1+ becauſe he did not ſhave off all the Hair, bur 
only plucked off ſome Hiirs. - h partly tor Grief and Shame at the 
Sin 5 and partly for fear of ſome great and dreidful Judgmenc 
which he expected and feared for it, .  . _ © : 

4 .Then were afſembled unto me ; every one that 
trembled at the words of the God of Iſrael & becauſe of 
che tranſgreſſion of thoſe that had been carried away / 
and I fart aſtonied untill the evening facrifice m., _ 

; To joyn with me both in lamenting the Sin, and in indeavouring 
the redreſs of it. & #. e. Who ſtood in awe of God, andof his Word 
and durſt nor violate his Commands; or who feared his Threat 
nings againſt thoſe that did ſo, andrrembled for fear of Gods Judg» 
ments upon them, and upon the whole Land for their ſakes, as 
the following words imply. Compare 7/s. 66. 2, 5. / To wit, in- 
to Captivity, and were ſafely rerurned from it, and yer were not re- 
tormed either by their former Afictinn, or by their larrer D-liv:» 
_— -m When the People uſed to Afﬀemble together, Sce Pſal. 141. 
- #36 8: ; FR | t | 

5 Andat the evening ſacrifice Þ aroſe from my [|hea- i Or, i= 
vineſs », and having rent my garment and my mantle, fiction, IJ 
I fellupon my knees, and fpread out my hands untothe 
LORD Rs... . TO RW: 6” 

n i. « From that mournful poture, wv. 4. and put my ſelf into 
the poſture of a Petitioner. Or, by reaſon of my heavinels, or afflition. 

ving mourned for the Sin, I conſidered that was nor. ſufficient, 
and that God expected the Confefſion and amendment of ir, and 


therefore I fell to prayer. "RE 
'6 And faid, O my God, IT am aſhamed and bluſh to 


lifr up my face to thee, my God : for our iniquitiess © _- - --. | 
are increaſed overour head p, and our ||treſpaſſes grown oo | 
up unto the heavens . OY 


o He Includes himſelf in the number of the Tranſgreſſors, not 
only by a Rethorical Fignre called Communication, bur partly becauſe 
he himſelf was guilty of many Sins ; and partly becauſe the Princes 
and Prieſts, and ſo many of the People having done this, the Guile 
was now become National. p Like deep Warers, in-which we are 
aSIt were drowned, and ready to perith. Compare Pſal. 38.4. 
7 Since the daysof our fathers, have we been in a great 
treſpaſs unto this day q; and for our iniquities have we, | 
our kings, and our prieſts been delivered into the hand ſ 


to a ſpoil, and toconfuſion of face, as is is this day. 
q We are not purged from the Guilt and Fi!th of our Fathers 
Sins, but we are ſtill fecling the ſad Effects of their Sins in the crn- 
cinuing Captivity of a great number of our Brechren; and weare ſtill 
repeating the ſame Sins : | RS 
8 And now for a flittle ſpace + grace hath been 
ſhewed fromthe LORD our God, tolcave us aremnant + 1.4, ,,; 
to eſcape s, and togive us a || nail ? in his holy places, mens. 
that our God may lighten our Eyes x, and give us a 
little reviving in our bondage? PF [| Or, 4 

7 Ir is but a little while ſince God hath delivered and reftored us, Tho e-\4 
and yet we arc already returned to our former Sin and Folly. Or f, ales 
thus, we have enjoyed this Favour but a little while, and now we and ft 
are ſinning itaway, and ſhortning our own Happineſs. s That by py =” : 
his Favour many of us fhould eſcape our of Captivityzwhom he calls *2**** 
but s remnants becauſe the far greateſt part of the Hraeliciſh Nati- 
on were yet in Caprivity. # z: e. Either 1. A juſt and merciful 
Prince of our own Nation and Religion ; ſuch being. compared to 
Nails and Pins, as 1s. 22+ 23+ Or rather, 2. Some kind of Settle 
ment; whereas before we were toſſed and removed from place to 
place asour Maſters pleaſed, Ir isa Meraphor from Tents, which 
are faſtened by Cords and Nails, or Pins. « z. e, Inthis holy Land, 
as the Land of Judahis called Zech. 2 12+ Or, in Jeruſalem. which 
is called T-e koly City, Neb. 11+ 1, 18. Dan. 9. 24. which is peculiarly 
mention:d, becauſe of the Temple, which was the Nail which fa- 
ſtened their Tents, and gave them ſome ground of hopes to cen- 
rinue in their Land, * i, & That he might revive and comfort our 
hearts. Foras darkneſs is oft put for a State of Sorrow and Afﬀicti= 
on, ſo Light is put for Joy and Comfort. y For we are nor quite 
delivered, bur ſtill wear our Fetters upon us, being even here in 
ſubjecrionto our former Lords, | | | 

For we were bond-men z, yet our God hath not 

forſaken ns if! our bondage, bur hath extended mercy 


large Commiſſion from the King, and with this deſign, ro reform 
2'l Diſorders. whereof this was not the keaſt. 57 e. From the 
Heathen Nations round about them, which God had expreſly com- 
manded them to do, Deut. 7. 2, 3. c To wit, either, 1. Marrying 
promiſcuouſly whomſo: ver they liked, as the Heathens uſed ro do z 
Or, 2. Imicating them in their Tdo!atrous or other wicked Prattices, 
into which they were drawn by their Hearheniſh Afﬀinities. Al- 
though they are not ciarged with any other Crime beſades their 
Marriage in the following account cf ar. ; = 

2 For they have taken of their daughters for them- 
ſelves, and for their ſons: ſo that the holy ſeed have 
mingled themſelves with che people of :ho/e lands d: yea, 
the hand of the princes and rulers e hath been chief in 


this treſpaſs. = 
_ @ This they had done, either 1. In the Lanl of their captivitys 


0 


- Into which tacſe People were carrizd as well as orhers, as appears |. 


unto us in the fight of the kings of Perſia, to give us a ,_- -. .. 

iving b ſet up the houſe of our God, and + to re- 7 Heb. co 
reviving b, to ſet upthe hoult d, bor 
pair the deſolations thereof e, and to give us ta wall 4+ yes. 4 
in Judah andin Jeruſalem; , . , _ Zo 

Z i. e. In greater Bondage. than that in which we now are. 
s i. e. Hath given us to find Favour in their Eyes: 6 To recover 
us from the Grave of dreadful Calamities in which we lay like dead 
Men and dry Bones, Ezek, 37+ 1,c. c To wit, of the Temple; either 
ro build rhe Houſe where there was only an heap of cheRuines ofthe 
old Temple. Or rather 2. To frequent and cekbrate the Worthip of 
God in thar place, which hath long Jain like a deſolate and neglected 
place.For tie Building of the Houſe was mentioned in the next fore- 
going words d Heb. an hedge, or a fence ; either 1. The Wa'l built 
abgur Jeruſalem, Bur it 1s probable that was 1.0t yet builc, a»weſhail 


2'2: 4 ſee 


hap. XR. 


25 mMuci 2 fence ro tte re 


ro time. 


Hieb.2 grolly abuſed them ? 
Tteb. 5y 
hentof 
þ ſeruant. 


Heb. 


m n0uh g\eanneis. 
mouth. 


Exod. 


and the contrary courſe will make you ſtronger- 


thee Jeſs than utter ruine ? 


before thee s, becauſe of this 7. 


ſ:e by the following Hiſtory. Beiides, this fence 3s inti 
ſt- of Juaah, as ro Terulalem : -WE 
Favour and ProteQion of the Kings of Perſia whoſe Edits on their; deareſt Relations. 
b-half were under God their Security againſt all thoſe Enemies 
wherewith thy were encompalled Or 3. The powerful and gr«= 
cious Providence of God, which had brought them rogerher, and 
planred rhem in their own Land,and watched over them irom tune, 


io And now, O our God, what ſhall we ſay afcer 


this e? for we have forſaken thy commandments, 
e Whar Apology can we make for our ſelves afcer thou haſt 
conferred ſuch great and high favours upon us, and we have fo 


1: Which thou haſt commanded + by thy ſervants 
the prophets, ſaying, The land unto which ye go to 
poſſes, it is an unciean land with the fiithine 
people f of the lands, £ with their abominations, which 
have filledic + from one end to another, with their un- 


f This notes the cauſe or matter of this uncleanneſs. The Land 

was nor unclean in it ſelf, bur only polluted by the filthineſs of its 
Inhabitants. g Or, of theſe Lands, which are round about it. Thas 
Land is as corrupt as any of the reſt ot rhe Heathen Narion:, 
—_” i2 Now therefore * give not your daughters unto 
cur. 7, their ſons, neicher cake their daughters unto your ſons, 
nor ſeek their peace, or their weaith for ever : þ thar 
ye may be ſtrong i and eat the good of the land, and; 
leave zt for an inheritance to your children for ever. 


h But root them out, as I have commanded you ro do; which ' Ch ; 3 
alſo they have abundantly deſerved, borh of mine, and cf your fruit of their own ſin. 2. That Children may, and ſometimes da 
hands. See Det. 7. 2+ i. Although you may fancy thatthis way ot 
making Leagues and Marriages with them, is the only way to eſta- 
bliſh and ſettle you, yer I affure you, it will weaken and ruin you, 


13 And after all that is come upon us for our evil 
| deeds, and for our great treſpais &, feing that thou our 
Heb. God þ haſt puniſhed us leſs than our iniquities deſerve 1, 


14 Should we again break thy commandments », and 
joynin affinity with the people of theſe abiminarions ! 
wouldeſt not thou be angry with us till thou hadit con- 
ſumed us, ſo that there (hould be no remnant nor eſcaping o? 


» Was this a fic and juſt requital of all thy kindefles ; or was l rac , 
this thy end and deſign _— oe ations ? or wilt thou takz this , regulare the buſineſs k Tanis 1$ meant, either I. Of the matrrer of 


: 3 ab] & any thing from : 
well from our hands? o Can we realonably expe y Thing Irom |, put away. Or, 2. Of the manner of ir, which muſt be according to 


- . ' the 
15 O LORD God of Iſrael, thou ar: righteous p, for , 4 Ariſe, for :his matter belengeth unto thee /; we alſo 


we remain yer eſcapedq, as ## is this day : behold we are _. V 
before thee in our treipaſſesr : for we cannot ſtand. will be with thee ; be of good courage, and do jt. 


? A juſt and holy God. who doit hare. and wilſt infallibly pu. 


{s of che 


E £& A. 


d To wit, into ccnjux al ſociety with ovr ſelves. 
e la caſe of our repentance, and refo1 mation. Therefore let us not 
ſorrow like perſons without hope, ner lit down 1n d-ipair, bur ler 
us fall upon action, and amend cur errours, and then truſt to 
Gods mercy. : 

3 Now therefore ler us make a covenant with our- 
God, f to put away all the wives f, and ſuch as are t Heb. 


born of them g, according to the counſel of my lord þ, 7s for, 
and of thoſe that tremble at the * commandment of our ,, ot? 
God z, and let it be done according to the Jaw &. | 

f Which though it may 'eem harſh. yet is net unjuſtyif it be con« 
ſidered, r. That Marriages made between ſome prohibited Pers 
ſons; as ſupp>ſe, between a Father, and his Daughter, a Brother 
and a Sifter, are not orly unlawful but void Marriages, atid -pſo 
facto. null, by the Political Laws of Civil Narions, And therefore 
theſe Martiages with Idolarrous and Heathen Women being exs 
preily and ſever'y forbidden by God» might well be diſannulled. 
And it was one of good Theodoſins his Laws, that thoſe actions which 
were done againſt Jaw, ſhould be accounted not only unlawful, bur 
null. 2, That there were many peculiar laws given to the Jews cons 
cerning 1he marrying, and putting away of Wives. as hath been 
obſerved before in their proper places, and therefore it is nor 
ſtrange, it there be ſomething more in this caſe, than is now uſual 
with us 3+ Suppoſing the Matrimonial Tye had continued, yer 
they might be excluded from co-habitation with them, as a juſt pu« 
niſhmenr upon rhem for the wi'ful breach of a known and poſitive 
Law of God. g This may ſeem harder than the former, but many 
things may be ſaid; 1, What ever evil befeleither them or their 
Children, they had all reaſon to accepr it as the juſt and deſerved 


ſuffer, at leaſt cemp» ral evils. for their Parents ſins, or upon occa« 
ſion of them, ismoſt evident, both by the Scriprure inſtances, and . 
by the Laws and Uſages of Nations in ſome caſes. 3, This may 
ſeem to have been a neceſſary part of ſeverity,partly as a proper 
puniſhment of the Pirents fin herein, andro deter others more ef 
fecrually tiom rhe like practices: partly to prevent the corruption 
of their other Children by the Converſation and Society of this unz 
godly and idolatrous Brood : and partly, leſt ſuch Children, being 
continu-lly preſent with them, and ſtealing into their affections, 
might at Iaſt prevail with them to take their ejected Wives again, 
4+ Theſe Chil.iren were only caſt out of the Families and Commons 
wealth of 1/-ael, bur wefe not utterly forſaken and ruined, but due - 
care was probably taken by Authority, that they ſhould have ſome, 
proviſion made tor them, and ſome care taken abour their Educati- 
' en in the Jewiſh Religion, &c. hþ Either 1. As thou counſelleſt ard 
deſireſt us to do» Or, 2. Let us doit in fuch manner as chou ſhafy' 
thirk fit and agreeable to the Law, asir follows : for it requires 
great caution, as being a matter of no ſmall difficulty. #5 And of 
other ſerjous and religious perſons, who may with rhee confider and 


the bufineſs, 1:t rhat be done which the Law requires ; let them be 
Rules cf Gods Law. 
{ Beciuſe thou haſt both $kill to manage it, and authority both 


; from God, and from the Perſian King to do it. 
5 Then arote Ezra, and made the chief prieſts, the 


Chap. X. 
mated ro be ence, that he durſt ſo free'y and ſu''y dNcharge ris Cuty, V heree 
Or 2 The | by he ſhcwed, that he hor oured Ged mare thin his nearcſt and 


f H-b., 
Wepre #8 
great Weeps 
3g, 


nith tin and ſinners, 'Or, thou art m.rcifil, as appzars from hence, 


us, but lefc a remaant of us, The Hebrew word here rendred r:zhce- 
ous, is ofr uſed for merciful, as'is w=1l known to all rhe Learned. 7 | 
Or, though we remain &c. i. e. Though thou haſt yer ſpared us in 
Part, yer thou art righteous, and therefore wilt certainly puniſhand 
deſtroy us acccrding to our deſer's, if we do nor repent us, and 
reform this great wick:dneſs. r We are here in thy preſence. and 
ſo are all our fins ; we are arraigning our ſelves betore thy Tribu- 
nal acknowledging our ſeives te b- vile offenders, and thee ro be 
juſt, if thou deſtroy us. s To wit, in Judgment as that word is 
oft uſed, as Pſal. 130. 3. Compare Pſal. 1 5. we muſt needs fall and 
periſh at thy preſence, as the phraſe is, Pſ#l. 9. 3. ; Becauſe of this 
Our great guilt, and the aggravations of 1t. 
; _- 3 dv 
Shecaniah encourageth Ezra to r:-form th* flrange Marriages, 1 4+ 
* All Tjrael ſwear to do accordingly, 5. Exra mourning, ofſcmbleth the 
p eple, C 8. The people at the exhorta'ion of Ex'!a repent, and pro- 
miſ: amendment, 9 14. Their care to perform ity 15, 16. The 
names of them that married flrange wives, 17 44. 
N Ow when Ezra had prayed, and when he had 
confeſſed, weeping and caſting himſelf down be- 
fore che houle of God, rhere afſembied unto him our of 
Hrael, a very great congregation of men, and women, 


and children «: for the people Þ wept very ſore 6. 

a Awakened by the words and example of this hoiy Prieſt, an d 
great Potentate. So inexpreflible is the good, which is done by the 
good example. and the evil, which 1s done by rhe bad example 
of a great Perfon, or of a Miaiſter. This fame of his great paſſion 
of grief, and of his many end publick expreſſions rhereofin the Courr 
b-tore the) Temple being in an inſtant diſperſed over all the City, 
brought a grzat company together. & Being greatly affected with | 


falem 3 


Gods 


and for # che great rain 9. 


that norwithſtanding all our ſins thou inſt not urrerly deſtroyeil Levires, and all Ifrael to ſwear, that they ſhould do 
according to this word. And they ſware. 

6 Then Ezra roſe up before the houſe of God, and 
went into thc chamber ws of Johanan the ſon of Elia- 
ſhib : and hen he came thither, he did eat no bread 
nor drink water: for he mourned becauſe of the tranfſ- 
greffion of them that had been carried away. 

2 That he with the Princes-and Elders, as it follows wv. 8. might 
cenſulr abour the execution of rheir Reſolution: 

7 And they made proclamations throughout Judah 
and Jeruſalem, unto all the children of the captivity, 
that they ſhould gather themſelves together unto Jeru+ 


8 And that whoſoever would not come within three 
days, according to the counſel of the princes and the 
elders, all his ſubſtance ſhould be + forfeited, andtH*b.4 
himſelf ſeparated from the con 


that had been carried away. 
» Eicher by Baniſhment : Or rather by Excommunication from 
the Church, and People, and Houſe and Publick Worſhip of 


gregation » of thoſe 


9 Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin 0, ga- 
thered themſelves together unto Jeruſalem within three 
days : ( 1t was the ninth monch, on the twentieth day 
of the month ) and all the people ſat in the ſtreet of 
the houſe of God p, trembling becauſe of :h;s marter, 


o Nor cnly of theſe ewo Tribes, as appears from the following!” - 


woted, 


+ Het. tht 
er, 


Ezra $ prayer, and w.th the common fin. 


in Iſrael concerning this thing e- 


—_ 


2 And Shechaniah the foa of Jehiel, oe of the ſons 
of Elam, anſwered and ſaid unto Ezra, We have treſ. 
paſſed c againſt our God, and have raken d ſtrange 
wives of the people of the land : yet now there is hope 


c He faith, we, either, 1. B-:cauſe he was guilty in this marrzr. 
Oc, rather, 2, In the name of the Pcopl:, and their ſeveral Fami- 
Iizs, and ls own amongſt the reſt. For this mans name 1s not in 
the following Carcalogu-, but thzre we bave his Father, Je*el, and 
his Fzrhers Bret. ren, five other ſoas of his Granifather £7212,v.26., 
It was therefore an evidence of his great Courage,and ood Contci- 


w 


Catalogue, where rhere zre Prieſts and Levites ; bur all rhe Iſracli- 
tes, v. 25. who are thu« deſcribed, partly becauſe the greateſt part 
of them were of thete Tribes, though others were mixed with them: 
and partly becauſe they all now dwelt in that Land which formerly 


which was next tothe Temple and wichin the view of it, that ſo 
they might be as in Gods preſence, whereby they might be awed to 
a more faithful and vigorous proſecution of their work. And this 
place they might chute rather than the Court of the People, becauſe 
they thought ir mipht be polJuted by the delinquents, who were a!1 
ro come thither. q Which they took for a token of Gods diſplea» 


fuce aguanſt rheny. + 
io And 


was appropriated to rhoſe Tribes, p In that ftreer of the City, 


Q yo ww i. 


"Zh, - 


eb. ab 


Clap. 
f Heb. 


Or have 
brought 
back. 


|| Or. we 


in this 
thing. 


| Or, #4 


+ Heb, 
food, or 
were ape 
pointed = 


Vers 


| *Z:ch, 7. 
I, 


have ca% 
"_ id Bo Fa, 
ſea t0 aWwcnu, 


have great- n 
ly offeuded 


2 Kings great aftiiction and reproach # : the wall of Jeruſa- 
5-19, lem alſo © js broken down, and the gates thereof are 


[. 


- to encreaſe the treſpaſs of Iſrael. 
11 Now therefore make confeſſion unto the LORD 


NE #& Þ. 


1- And Fzra the prieſtſiood up, andfaid unto them, 
Ye have tranſgreſſed, and | have taken ſtrange Wives 


M 1 4H : 


of the flock for their treſpaſs. 


; was the uſual geſture in thoſe caſes. Ot 


Ezek: 17. 18. 


| 20 And of the ſons of Immer ; Hanani, and Zeba- 


God of your fathers, and do: his pleaſure r, and ſepa-' q;.1 


rate your ſelves from the people of the land, and from ! 


the ſtrange wives. 

7 You have ſinfully pleaſed your ſelves, now pleaſe God by 
your Ovedience to his Command. 

12 Then all the congregation anſwered, and ſaid 


with a loud voice, as thou haſt ſaid, ſo mult we do. 


much rain, and we are not able to {tand withour, 
cher is this a wok of one diy ortwo : for |[|we are ma- 
y that have cranſgrefſed in this thing. 

14 Let now our rule;s of all the congregation ſtand 
s, and let all th m which have taken ſtrange wives * in 
our Cities, come at appointed times, and with them 
the elders of every city, and the Judges thereof «, un- 
til the fierce wrath of our God || for this matter, be 


be diſpatch» 1, Let the great Counc'l, cailed the Sanhedrim,be ſettled, and meet 
ed, to judge and determin of a:l particular - Cauſes» # To wit, © 


Who 


ligion before their Marriage ; or fince revolred from it. # 


are belt ab'c to inform the great Council of the quality of the per- ' 


ſons, and of all Matters ot Fact and Circumſtances. 
the thing be done, and Gods wrath thereby removed. | 
15 Only Jonathan the fon of Alahel, and Jahaziah' 
the ſon ot Tikvah, F were employed about this mar- 
ter y: and Meſhullam, and Shabbethai the Levite help- 


ed theme 

y To wit, to t:ke due care that the buſineſs ſhould be executed 
in the manner propoted, thar the Officers and Delinquents of eve- 
ry City ſhould come ſucceſlively in convenient time and order, as 
theſe ſhould appoint, and to take and keep an exatt account of the | 
whole tranſition, and of the names ofthe Cities and Pertons whole | 
Cauſes were diſpatched, and to give notice to others to come in | 
their turns, and to prepare the buſineſs for the hearing of the Jud- 
ges. And theſe two were Prieſts, as their Coadjurors or Helpers 
were Levites ; that ſo they might inform the perſons concerned, if 
any matter of doubt did ariſe. : 

16 And thechiidren of the captivity did fo: and 


Ezra the prieſt, 2y.1h certain chief of the fathers, after 


% "© Co Until 


jab, and Shemjah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah. 


Iſhmael, Nechancel, Jozabad, and Elafſah. 


=: A.ſo of the Levites ; Jozabad, and Shimei, and 
13 But the people are many, and it is a time of Kelajah, ( che ſame 5s Kelita ) Perhaliiah, Judah, and 
Ne1- | 


lEZer. 
| 24 Ofthe ſingers alſo, Eliaſhib: and of the porters 
 Shallum, ard Telcm, and Uri. 


| 25 Moreover of Iſrael b : of the ſons of Paroſh, Ra- 
miah,and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and E- 


leazar, and Malchijah, and Benajah. 


b i. e. Ofthe People of J/-ae!, d ſtinguiſhed from the Prieſts and 
the Levites hitherto named, who before were called Judah and 


Benjamin, v. 9 where ſee the notes. 


26 And of the ſons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, 


and Jehiel, and abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah. - 


taniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza. 
28 Ofche ſons 
Zabbai, and Athlai. 


29 And of the ſons of Bani ; Mzſhullam, Malluch, 


and Adajah, Jaſhub, and Sheal, and Ramoth. 


39 And oi the ſons of Pahath-moab, Adna, and Che- 
Benajah, Maaſejah, Mattanizh, Bezaleel, and Bin- 


Jal, 
nui, and Manaileh. 


31 And of the ſons of Harim ; Eliezer, Iſhijah, Mal- 


chiah, Shemajah, Shimeon, | 
32 Benjamin, Malluch, 2nd Shemariah. 


33 Of che ſons of Haſbum ; Maranai, Mattathah, 


Zabad, Eliphglet, Jeremai, Manafleh, and Shimci. 


35 Eenajah, Bedejah, Chelluch, 

26 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliaſhib. 

37 Macttaniah, Mattenai, and Jaaſau, 
38 And Bani, and Binnui, Shemei, 


the houſe of their tathers, and all of them by rbeir names 
were ſeparated z, and fare down in the firſt day of the 


tenth month ro examine the matter. 

z 7. e Sequeſtred thenuelves from all other buſineſs, and gave 
themſclves wholly to this. \ 

17 And they made an end with all the men that had 


taken ſtrange wives, by the firſt day of che firſt month, 
18 And among the ſons of the prieſts, there were 
found that had taken ſtrange wives: namely, of the ſons 
of J:ſhua, the ſon of Jozadak, and hisbrethren ; Maa- 
ſejah, and Eliezer, aud Jarib, and Gedaliah. 
i9 And they gave their, hand & that they would put 


39 AndShelemiah, and Nathan, and Adajah, 
40 || Machnadebai, Shaſhai, Sharai, 

41 Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, 

42 Shallum, Amariah, and Joſeph. 

4.3 
Zebina, Jadau, and Joei, Benajab. | 

44 All theſe had taken ſtr-nge wives : and ſome of 
them had wives by whom they had children c. 

c Whereby he implics that moſt of their Wives were barren. 
Which came to paſs by Gods ſpecial Providence, part'y to manifeſt 
tis diſpleaſure againit ſuch matches, and partly that the prattice 
of rhis great and necetfary dury might not be cacumbred with too 


away their wives : and being guilty, they offered a ram 


many dithcultics, 


————— 


NEWY 


MFA H | 7 


His Bok ſeems n1t to have been written by Ezra, becauſe 1t is written in a quite differing, and more plain and eaſie ſtile, and without that mize 
ture of Chaloe-, or Syriak wards, which is in the Bok of Ezra, but by Nehemiah, cb. 1. 1. who wrote an account of his own Tranſatlians,as kzra 
did of his. But whether this be the ſame N:hemiah, who came up with Zerubbibel, Ezra 2. 2. and N:hemiah 7, 7. may be queltione.d, che ſame 


rame being oft given ts diver: perſons. ; 
Title of his .'ffice, and jo be/angs toany Governour, whether 16 was Zeruboab 
CHAP. I. | 
Nehemiah underf{anding by Hanani, the affiiftion of the Jews, and the miſe- 
ry of Jeruſalem, 1 ———- 3, mournet h, fasteth and prayeth, 4» His prayer 

for them, 6—=— 10» and for ſucceſs in his Petition to the King) 11, 

He words « of Nehemiah the ſon of Hachaliah, | 

Acd it came to pals in the month * Chilleu 6, 

in the twentieth year c, as I was in Shuſhan 4 the 
palace, 

# Or rather, the afs or deeds as the word oft ſignifies : of which 
he here treats. 6 Which is the ninth Month, containing part of 
November. and part of December, c Of Artaxerxes, ch, 2. 1- d The 
Chict and Roy al Ciry of Perſia, Eh. 3. 15. 

2 That Hanani, one of my Brethren e came, he and 
certain men of Judah, and I asked them concerning 
the Jews that had eſcaped f, which were lefr of the 
captivity g and concerning Jeruſalem. 

e Of my ramily or Tribe or Nation. f Our of the ſlavery which 
they indured in {trange Lands. g The remnant of thoſe NUME- | 
Tous Caprives. 

2 And they ſaid unto me, the remnant that are | 
left of the captivity there in the province 5 are in 


burnt with fire &. 
þ i. e. In Judca, which was now made a Province under the Pcr- 


fran Monazchs : fee the Notes on Ezra 5. 8, # Deipiſed and dr; 


And for the na'ne of Tirſhatha, which is uf:d both Ezra 2. 53. and Nehemiah 7, 65. 90. that ſeems tobe rhe 


&, or Nehemiah, or any ether. 
ſtreſſed by the neighbouring Nations. &7. e. The walls and gates 
continue in the tame woful plight in which Nebuchadnezzar left 
them ; the Jews not being yer in a condition to rebuild them, n-r 
having Commiſſion from the Kings of Perſia to do ſo, but only ro 
build che Temp!lc and their own private Houſes. And this mae 
their enemies {corn them ; who alio would have ruined them, bur 
for fear of offending the Perſian King. 

4 Andit came to paſs when I heard theſe words, 
that I fate down and wept, and mourned certain 
days, and prayed before the God of Heaven. 

5 And aid, I beſeech thee, * O LOR 


and obſerve his commandments, 

6 Let thine car now be attentive, and thins eyes 0- 
pen, that chou mayeſt hear the prayer of thy ferva , 
which I pray betore thee now, day and night, for the 
children of [{rael thy ſervants, and confels the ſins of 
the children of Iſrael, which we have ſinned againſt 
thee: both I, and my Fathers Houſe have fiuncd. 

7 We have dealt very corruptly / againſt thee, and 
have not kept the commandments, nor the ſtatutes, nor 
che which thou commandelt thy ſervanc 
Moles. * 


1 Or, we have wholly corrupted, to wit, our fclv2r, and onr ways,. 
and thy Worlhip. a A 8 Remems- 


a 1, e. They covenanted or ſwore by giving their hand ; which 
which ſee Leviz. 6, 2. 


-- 


21 And of the ſons of Harim ; Maaſejah, and Eli 


22 And ofche ſons of Paſhur ; Elivenai, M:aſcjah, 


- 
I 


; 27 And of theſons of Zactu ; Elioenai,Eliaſhib,Mat- 


theſe heathen Nations ftich as weie not profelyted to the Jewiſh Re- ! 


alſo of Bebai, Jehohanan, Hananiah, 


34 Of the ſons ot Bani; Maadi, Amram, and Uel- 


3 Of the ſons of Nebo ; Jehicl, Marttichiah, Zabad, <P 


) oY | - D God « n.n.g.4. 
of Heaven, the great and terrible God, * that keep- *Exou 20. 
eth covenant, and mercy for them that love him, 6. 


j 


Chap | 


| 
| 
| 
| 


[ Or,Mab- 
nadegat, 
accordiag 
ro 1ome 


p- IE. 
$ Remember, I beſeech thee the word that thou 
commandedſt thy ſervant Moſes, to deliver to us, 1ay- 
ev.26. ing, * If ye tranſgreſs, I will ſcatter you abroad among 
Deur. the nations : | 
5, & 9 But if ye turn unto me, and keep my command- 
ut-30: nents, and do them ; * chough there were of you caſt 
our u:nto the uttermoſt part of heaven, yet will I gether 
thzem from chence, and will bring them untothe piuce 
that I have choſen to ſet my name there. | 
1» Now theſe are thy ſervants, and thy people, 
whom thou haft redeenied by thy great power, and 
by thy ſt-ong hand. : 
11 O LORD, I beſeech thee, let now thine ear 
be attentive unto the prayer of thy ſervant, and to the 
eb. who prayer of thy ſervants, + who deſire to fear thy name: 
Z fear, and proſper, I pray thee,thy ſervant this day, and grant 
delight 10 }im mercy in the ſight of this man mm. For I was the 


RH: MI 14 £ 


kings cup-bearer #. | 

m The King: who though a god by Office, 1s but a Man by Na- 
ture, and therefore hisheart is wholly at thy diſpoſal. n W hereby 
I had opportunity to ſpeak to him, and ſome tavour and freedom 
with him ; which encouraged me to make rhis Prayer, and to hope 


for ſome ſuccel-, 
EMSP. IL 

Artaxerxes underſtanding the cauſe of Nehemiahs ſadneſs, 1- -6: ſendeth 
him with Letters to Jeruſalem, 5, 8. Nehemiah to the grief of the ene- 
mies comerh to Feruſalem, 9 —- 11. and ſecretly by night wieweth the 
ruins of Teruſalem, 12 <= 16. Hz encorrageth the Jews 70 build, 
17, 18. The enemies deriding, charge them with 7cb:Uon agams: the 

King, 19- Nehemiahs anſwer, 20. : 
Nd it came to p2fs in the month * Niſan s, in 
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes b the King, 
that wine was before him : and I took upthe wine, and 
gave it unto the king: Now I had not been before time 


{ad in his preſence. 

a Which was four Months aftcr he had heard thoſe ſad tidings. 
The reaſon of this long ſilence and delay might be manifold, cither 
becauſe he thought fir that fome time ſhouid be ſpent by himſelf 
and poſſibly others of his Brethren in tceking God hy folemn Prayer 
and Faſting, for Gods blefling, and the good fuccels of this great 
affair: or-becauſe he could not take ſo long and dangerous a journcy 
in the depth of Winter: or becauſe his turn of attending upon 
the King did not come to himtil] that time : or becauſe till rhen 
he wanted a fit opportunity to move it to the King, by reaſon oz the 
Kings indiſpoſition, or occaſions, or multitude of attendants, among 
whom there probably were divers encmics to the Jews, who, h. 
feared, might hinder his deſign and defire, b Artaxerxes Longimanus 
the Son of the great Xerxes, whoreigned both with his Father, anc 
after his death alone : whence tae years of his reign are compured 
two ways, one from the death of Xerxes; and the other from hi: 
firſt entrance upon the adminiſtration of the Kingdom, which was 
committed tohim in the fifth year of Xerxes ; when he began th: 
Grecian War, and Jeft his Son King or Viceroy in his ſtead, as the 
manner of the Perſians was. Ir may ſeem doubtful, and 1s no: 
much material which way of computation is here uſed. Othei: 
underſtand this of 4rtaxerxes Mnemon. 


2 Wherefore the King faid untome, Why 7s thy 
- countenance ſad c, ſeing thou art nor fick? this is nothin 


elſe but ſorrow of heart. Then I was very fore affraid 
c His faſting joyned with inward grief had made a ſenſible change 
in his very Countenance. 4 Partly being daunred by the Majeſty of 
the King, and the ſuddenneſs and ſharpneſs of his queſtion : partly 
fearing leſt there was ariſing ſome jealouiie or ill opinion in the Ring 
concerning him ; partly becauie it was an unuſual and ungratefu! 
thing to come into the King of Perſia's preſence with any badges or 
tokens of ſorrow, Efth. 4. 2» and principally from his doubts or 
fears of diſappointment, becauſe his requeſt was great and invidi- 
ous, and odious to the moſt of the Per/ian Courtiers, and might be 
repreſented as dangerous, and might ſcem improper for a tune of 
teaſting and jollity. 
wart 3 And faid unto the King, * Letthe King live for e- 
pn nz vere. Why ſhould. ot my countenance be fad, when 
Dan. 2. 4 fhe city, the f place of my fathers ſepulchres f, /ieth 
&6 21. waſte, and the gates thereof are conſumed with fre? 
+" x 4 Then the King ſaid unto me, for what doſt' thou 
uſe. make requeſt ? ſo I prayed to the God of Heaven g? 

e My ſadneſs comes not from any diſcontent with my own con- 
dition, or any diſaffeQHion ro the King, for whom my hearty Pray- 
ers are that hemay live for ever; but from another cauſe. f Which 
by all Nations are eſteemed ſacred and inviolable and honourable, 
He ſaith not a word of the Temple or of Religion, for he wilely 
conſidered that he ſpake before a heathen King and Courr who ca- 
red for none of thoic things. g Tod ret my rhoughts and words, 
to incline the Kings heart ro grant my requeſt. 

5 And I faid unto the King, If it pleaſe the King 5, 
and if thy ſervant have found favour'in thy fight z, 
that thou would(t ſend me unto Judah, unto the city 
of my fathers iepulchres, that T may build it. 

þ My requeſt, watſoever it 1s, I humbly and who!ly ſubmir ir to 
the King's good pleaſure, being reſolved toacquieſce in it. i Ipre- 
tend no merit, but am an humble Suppliant for thy Grace and Fa- 

\ your, whereof having received ſome tokens, I am thereby embol- 
dened to make this farther requeſt. 
6 And the king fſaid unto me, ( the + queen alſo 


Eſth-3 7o 


tHeb.wjf 


with them, as Hiſtorians note: and peradventure, becauſe the 
Queen expreſſed ſome Kindneſs to him, and promoted his requeſt 
with the King 1 This queſtion ſhewed the King's reſpe& and 
affeftion to him, and that he was not willing to want his attendance 
longer than was neceflary. m2 Either that 12. years mentioned, 
ch. 5. 14. & 13.6. or rather a far ſhorter time : for which cauſe, 
among others, ke built the walls with ſuch diſpatch, even in 52 
days, <. 6+ 15. and probably nor very long after that returned to 
the King, by whom he was ſent a ſecond time with more ample 
Commiſſion, and for the King's ſervice, and the Government of 
that part of his Domintons. 


7 Moreover, Ifaid unto the King, If it pleaſe the 
king, let letters be given me to.the governours beyond 
the river, that they may convey me over z till I come 


' into Judah. 


» That they may ſafely condu& me through their ſeveral Ter- 


YICOrICS» 


?, ard for the wall of che city, and for the houſe that 1 
ſhall enter intog. And the King granted me, * accor- 
ding to the good hand of my God upon me. 

o Of the forreſt of L:banus, famous for pleaſure and for plenty 
of choice Trees. p To wit, of the King's Palace, which was ad- 
joyning to the houſe of God. Or, of the r9wey or Fence belonging 
to the Houſe of God, to wit, for the Gates of the Courts of the Tem- 
ple : for though the Temple was built, the Courts and other buil- 
dings belonging to the Temple might yet be unfiniſhed» q Where- 
with I may build an Houle in which I may dwell whilſt I am 
there, and which I may diſpoſe of as I ſee fit. 


9 Then I came tothe Governours beyond the river, 
and gave them the kings letters. ( now the king had 
ſent captains of the army. and horſemen with me. ) 
10 When Sanballat the Horonite Fr, and Tobiah the 
ſervant s the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them ex- 
ceedingly: that there was come a man to ſeek the wel- 
fare of the children of Iſrael, * | 

r So called, either from his Family, or from the place of his 
birth or rule, which is ſuppoſed to be Horonarm, an Eminent City of 
Moab, Ija. 15. 5. Jer. 48. 3. 5 So called probably from his ſervile 
original, or condition from which he was advanced to his pres 
ſent power and dignity : which alſo may be mentioned as one rea- 
ſon why he now carried himſelf ſo infolently and perverſely to- 
wards the Jews ; it being uſual for Perſons ſuddenly raifed from a 
mean to an high eſtate, 10 to demean themſelves. 

11 So [came to Jeruſalem,and was therethree days ?. 

t Reſting my ſelf after my long Journey, and enquiring into 
che ſlate of the City. : 

12 AndI aroſe in the night «, I andſome few men 
with me, neither told FE ay man what Ged had put in 
my heart to do at Jeruſalem : neither vas there any 
beaſt with me. ſave the beaſt that I rode upon x. 

s Concealing both his Intentions and Attions as far and as long as 
1e could, as knowing that the life of his buſineſs lay in ſecrecy and 
:xpedition. x to prevent noiſe, and the notice of whatT did. 


13 And I went out by night y, by the gate of the 
valley z even before the dragon well a, and tothe dung- 
port b, and viewed the walls of Jeruſalem, which were 
broken down, and the gates thereof were conſumed 
with fire. 

|» The Footmen which accompanied him dire&ing and leading 
him in theway. His deſign was to go round abour the City, to ob- 
ſerve the compaſs and condition of the Walls and Gates, that he 
might make tuffcient proviſions for the work. z. Of which ſee ch. 
3. 13: a Afountain or water ſo called, either from ſome figure ofa 
Dragon or Serpent which was by it : or from ſome living Dragon 
which abode there when theCity was deſolate forDragons delight to 
be in deſolate places,and nigh to Springs of Water, as divers have ob- 
ſerved. bThrough which they uſed to carry the dung out of theCity. 
14 Then TI went on to the gate of the fountain c, 
and to the kings pool 4: but there was no place for the 
beaft that 2. 5 under me to pals e. 
c 7. e: Which led to the Fountain, to wit. of S$iah or Gihon. d 
That which King Hezekiah had made : of which ſee, 2 Chron. 32 
3, 39 e The way being obftructed with heaps of rubbiſh. 
15 Then wentl up in the night by the brook F, 
and viewed the wall, and turned back, and entred by 
the gate of the valley, and ſo returned g. 
f Of Kiaron ; of which ſee on 2 Sam. 15, 23. g Having gone 
round about the City. 
16 And the rulers knew not whither I went, or 
what I did, neither had Ias yet told it to the Jews noc 
to the prieſts, nor to the nobles, nor to. the Rulers, 
nor to the reſt that did hb the work z. 
h Or, were to d», or ſhould do, 7. e, Whom he inteeded to imploy 
in it. 7 Here following, of building the Walls. 
17 Then ſaid | unto them, ye ſee the diſtreſs that we 
are in, how Jeruſalem Jieth waſte, and the gates there- 
of are burnt with fire : come, and let us build up the 
wall of Jeruſalem, that we be no more a reproach. 
13 Then I told them of the hand of my God which 


ſitting by him&) for how long ſhall thy journey be? 
and when wilt thou return /? $6 it pleaſed the king to 


ſend me, -and I ſet him a time 2. 
k which'is here nored, partly asan unuſual thing ; for common- 
Iy the Kings of P.rfia dined alone, and rheir Queens ſeldom dined 


| was good upon me ; asalſo the kings wordsthat he had 
ſpoken unto me. And they ſaid, Let us riſe up and build, 
So they iirengrhened their hands for 7his good werk. 


I 9. Bur 


ſ 


Chap. II . 


s And a letter unto Aſaph the keeper Þ of the kings + jy, , 
- o 0 f 

forreſt, o that he may give me timber to make beams :he King; 

for the gates of the palace, which appertained to the houſe chard 


0 Gr, 


*Ezra7.9 


*Juc 


" (hap. 


. of 

g5 

9 
* Cha12 
10, 
* Ter,31> 
;8. 


} Heb. at 
kis hand. 


*:Chron. 


*Juds. 5. 
23s 


* Ezra. 3+ 


Ir. NB # B 


i9 But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah / 
the ſervant the Ammonite, and Geſhem the Arabian & 


heard ir, they laughed us to ſcorn, and deſpiſed us, and 
{aid, whar is this thing that ye do? Will ye rebel a- 
gainlt the king /f 

k Either the Kings Lieutenant in Arabia, as Tobiah was among 
the Ammon:tes, and Sanballat among the Moabites ; Or, rather an 
Arabian by his Birth. And it ſeems probable that both he, and Saz- 
baYar, and Tobiah, were chief Men or Governours among the Sama- 
ritans, Or in their Army» Seech. 4. 1, 2, 3. {Do you deſign to 
fortifie this City againſt rhe King. 

20 Then anſwered I them, and faid unto them, The 
God of heaven, he will proſper - us; therefore we 
his ſervants will ariſe and build,: bur * ye have no por- 


tion, nor right 9, nor memorial » in Jeruſalem. 

» You have no authority over us, nor intereſt in our Church or 
State, or City, but are meer Aliens from rhe Common-wealth of 
Iſrael, We difown and deteſt that mungrel-Worſhip and Religion 
which you have ſer up. We defire not yeur favour, or friendthip, 
or help in this matter. And you have nothing ro do ro enquire 
into, or meddle with our concerns, or to hinder usn our prelent 
undertaking. zNo Teſtimony or Monument either of yourRelJation 
to us by Birth orReligon, or of your kindneſs to us or to this place: 
Pur we have many memorials of your Malice and Enmirty again{t us. 


GH A P.: Ml 
The Names of the ſeveral Families that builded ; their Order wherein, and 
the proportion huw much they builded, 1 —— 32. 


Hen * Eliaibib the high prieft « roſe up þ with his 
brethren the prieſts, and they built the ſheep- 


M 1 4 H. 
8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the ſon of Har- 
hajab, of the gold{mirhs; next unto him alſo repaired 


Hananiah, th: ſon of one of the aporthecaries, and 
they || fortified m Jeruſalem unto the broad wall. 


m Tt is not ſaid, they repaired, as was ſaid of the'reſt, but they 
fortified it, either becauſe this part of the Wall was 
than the other, and therefore they needed nor to repair it, but on- 
ly to make it ſtronger by ſome additions ; or to note their extra- 
ordinary care and diligence, that they would not only reparr it, 
and reſtore it to its former ſtate, but make ic ſtronger than ever it 
was ; which alſo might be fir to be done in that parr of the City. 
Others render it, they left, as this word commonly ſignifies : and 
ſo the meaning 1s, they omitted the building of thar part of rhe 
Wall,becauſe it remained ftanding ; this being that ſpace of 400Cu- 
bits which was pulled down by 7oafb King of 1ael, and rebuilt by 
Uzziah, who madeit ſo ſtrong, that the Chaldeans could nor pull 
it down withour more trouble than they thought fir ro imploy a= 
bout ir. Bur this Chapter gives us an account of what they did 
in the Building, nor of what they did nor, bur left as they found ir. 

9 Andnext unto them repaired Rephajali the fon of 


Hur, the ruler of the half parr of Jeruſalem ». 


n As Rome was anciently divided into ſeveral Quarters or Regi- 
ons, ſo was Jeruſalem, and eſpecially this was divided into two 
parts, whereof one was in the 7'ribe of Benjamin, and neareſt ro the 
Temple, the other in the Tribe of Judah, and more remote from 
it : which accordingly had two ſeveral Rulers, this man and the 0- 
ther, verſe 12. but both under the chief Governour of the Ciry. 
10 Andnext unto them repaired Jedajah the Sou of 


Harumaph, even over againſt his houſe o: and next un- 


gate c ; they ſandtified it d, and ſer up the doors of it; 
even unto the rower of Meah e they ſandtifted it, unto | 


the tower cf * Hananeel. 

a Grand-child of Joſhua ; the firſt high-Prieſt after their return 
from Babylon. b Began the work. c Which was next to the Tem- 
ple ; ſo called, either from the Sheep-Marker, or the Sheep-pool of 
Betheſda, Jolm 5. 2. where the Sheep were waſhed, and then ' 
brought to the Temple to be ſacrificed. 4 Or, they prepared or re- 
paired it : for ſo the word ſometimes ſignifies. But our Tranſlation 
ſeems beſt, both becauſe that uſe of the word is moiſt common, and | 


becauſe this is ſpoken only of this uate, which being builr by the 


Prieſts, and nigheſt ro the Temple, and with a ſpecial Eye to the 
ſervice of the Temple, for which both men and things were moſt 
commonly brought in this way, and being alſo the firſt part ofthe 
building, might be in a peculiar manner jan# fied by tolemn Prayer 
and Sacrifice, whereby it was dedicated to Gods dervice, and this 
either, 1+ As 1t was conſidered in it ſe!f, or with reſpett to the reſt 
of the Building, of which this was the beginning, and in a manner 
the firſt-fruits, and therefore in the ſanCtification of it the whole 
lump and building was ſanctitied. And ſeing the whole City 1s 
oft called the holy City, it is not ſtrange if the Walls and Gates 
of it be alſo holy, and ſaid to be ſan#ified, and eſpecially this Gare, 
Compare Deut. 20, 5. e Or, of an hunared; ſo called, either 
becauſe it was an hundred Cubits high, or fo far diſtant from 
the Sheep-Gate. : 
2 AndFÞ next unto him,buile the men of Jericho f: 
and next to them built Zaccur the ſon of [mri. | 
f The Poſtcrity of the ancient Inhabitants of Jericho. See Ezra | 
34: : 
2 But the * fiſh- gate g did the Sons of Haſſenaah build, ' 
who alſo laid the Beams thereof, and ſet up the doors 


2, 


* thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof þ. 


- £ Ot which mention is made, 2 Chron. .43. 14. Neh. 12. 39. Zeph. 
1. 10. ſo called, cither from the Fiſh-market which was ncar it ; 
or, becauſe the Fiſh was bi ought in by it from the Sea, Neb. 13, 16. 
this Gate being North-Weſtward from Jeruſalem. h This is either 
here related by anticipation. the whole work being here mentioned | 
together, though this part was not done till afterwards, ch. 6. 1. 
& 7. 1. Or this was done to ſome of the Gates, but not to all ; 
and therefore rhis is ſaid go be done more compleatly and uni- 
verfally atterwards. 

4 Aiid next unto them repaired i Merimoth the fon 
of Urijzb, the ſon of Koz : and next unto them repaired : 
Mcfhuilam the ſon of Berechiah,the fon of Methezabeel: 
and next unto them repaired Zadok the ſon of Baana. 

z; To wit, the demoliſhed or decayed Wall, there being no Gate 
in this parts And ſoin the reſt which follow. 


5 And next unto them the Tekoites repaired ; but 


their nobles putnot their neck & to * che work of their 


Lord /. 


k 7. e Did not ſubmit to it, would not further it, either through 
Pride, or Sloth, and Careleſneſs, or Covetouſnels, or ſecret Compli- 
ance with the Enemies of the Jews. 1 Either, 1. Of Nehemiah, who 
was their Lord and Governour, and had given a genera] command 
tor the carrying on of this work. Or, 2. Of God, whom they 
owned for their Lord, whole work this was, partly becauſe it had 
proceeded thus far by God's ſingular Providence and Blefling : 
and partly becauſe it was done for the defence of the City, and 
Poople, and Temple of God. And therefore they are branded to 
all Poſtcriry for the negleC& of ſo great and pious a work. 

6 Moreover the 0d gate prepared jehojada the ſon 
of Paſcah, and Mecſhuliam the ſon of Beſodejah ; they 


laid the beams thereof, and fer up the doors thereof, 
and the locks chereof, and the bars thereof. > 

7 And next unto them repaired Mclatiah the Gibe- 
onite, and Jadon the Meronothirce, the men of Gibe- 
an, and of Mizpa, unto the throne of the governour 
on this ſide the river /. 

1. e. Unto the place where the Governour of the Country on 
this fide Euphrates,, for, and under the Perſian Kings, fometimes had 
a Palace or Throne, to which all perſons iiving in the Adjacent 
parts, were to retort for Judgment. 


- — 


to him repaired Hattuſh the ſon of Haihabniah. 
o That part of the Wall which was next to him, which his own 
Intereſt obliged him to do with care. 

11 Malchijah the ſon of Harim, and Haſhub the 
ſon of Pahath-moab, repaired the F other piece, and 
the tower of the furnaces. 

I2 And next unto him repaired ſhallum the ſon of 
Halloheſh, the ruler of the half part of Jerulalem p, he 
and his Daughters 9. 

f 7. e. Of theother half, &c. ſee on ve 9. 4 Who wereeither Heir- 
efles, or rich Widows, and cauſed part ro be done at their charges. 

T3 
bitants of Zanoah, they built it, and ſer up the doors 
thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and a 
thouſand Cubics on the wall unto * the dung-gate 

I4 But the dung-gate repaired the Malchiah the ſon 
of Rechab, the ruler of part of Beth-haccerem r : he 
built it, and ferup the doors thereof, the locks there- 
of, and the bars thereof. | 


# A Town or Territory, the Government whereof was divided 
between, two perſons. 


I5 Burc* che gate of the fountain repaired Shallum *Ch 2.14; 


the ſon of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah, he 
built it, and covered it, and ſet up rhe doors thereof, 
the iocks thereof, and the bars thereof, and che wall of 
the Pool of * F Siloah s by the kings garden, and unto 
the ſtairs that go down from the city of David. 


5s Thar part of the Wall which was direQaly againſt that Pool. - 


16 Aicer him repaired Nehemiah the fon of Azbuk, 
the ruler of the half parc of Beth-zur unto zhe place over , 
againſt the Sepu!chres of David t and to the * pool thet 
was made «, and unto the houſe of the mighty x. 


# 7. e. The place which David appointed for his own Sepulchres, 


' and the Sepulchres of his Succeflors the Kings of 1/-ael and Judah. 


# To wit, by Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 20, Whereby it is diſtinguiſh- 
ed from that Pool which was natural. x Or, of the valiant : which 
poſſibly was formerly appointed for the receipt of thoſe chief Cap- 
rains that ſhould atrend upon the King in their courſes, or of ſome 
other valiant Commanders, who thould upon occaſion reſort to- 


. Feruſalem. 


17 After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the ſon 
of Bani : next unto him repaired Haſhabiah, the ruler 
of the half parc of Keilah, in his part. 

18 After him repaired Bavai the ſon of Henadad, the 
ruler of che half part of Keilah. 

19 And next to him repaired Ezer the fon of Je- 
ſhua, the ruler of Mizpah, another piece over againſt 
the going upto the armory y at the turning of the wal! &. 

y Either to the houſe of the Forreſt of Lebanon, which was the 
Armory from Solomon's days, liz. 22. 8. or to fome other place 
which either beforc or ſince that time had been utcd as another, 


and leſs Armory for common occaſions. x Or, at the corner ; Or, 
which is in corner, 


20 Aﬀter him Baruch the fon of || Zabbai, earneſtly j| g;,zs 
repaired a the other piece, from the turning of the cai. 


wall b, unto the door ot the Houuſe c of Eliathib the 
high prieft. | 

a Did his work with emincat Diligence and fervency : whichis 
here noted to his commendation. b Or, from the corner, as v. 19. 
c Unto that part ofthe Wall which was over againſt, or next to 
this door. 

21 After him repaired Mcremoth the fon of Uijah, 
the ſon of Koz, another piece, from the door of the 


houſe of Eliathib, even to the end of che houfe of Eii- 


aſhib s, 
A 4 There 


A N 
—_ 3 


Chap. I | 


| Or. le - 
Feruſalem [ 


bn 11.1 unto #12 
leſs demoliſhed Lent 


t Heb. 
ſecond meas | 
[/ UT 


* The vailey- gate repaired Hanun, and the inha- *Ch 2. 135 | 


Ch. 2. 13. | 


*Joh. 9.7. 
THeb Shes 


2 Kings, 


20. 29, 


7 
\ 


; 


j 


i 


q 
il 


* 
- 


bhap. IV. > . BE NE #2 E 
; 4 Therefore the door was not in the middle of the Houle, as 
_.- now they commonly are, but ar one end of it. 
22 Aﬀcer him repaired th. prieſts, 
- plain e. 
e Either of the plains of Jordan ; or of the plain Country round about 
_ Feruſalem, as It 1s calied, ch. 12. 28. And they are thus called, be- 
cauſe they or their Parents, either were born, or now did, or 
former'y had dwelt in thoſe parts ; whence they came to Jeruſalem, 
when the ſervice of the Temple required it. | 
22 After him repaired Benjamin, and Haſhub, over 
againſt their houſe : afcer him repaired Azariah the 10n 
of Maaſciah, the ſon of Ananiah by his houſe. 


the men of the 


ho EC. £% 


MH 3 8 3 Chap. Iy, 


his people. e Will they pick up their broken ſtones out of the Rui. 7 

nes.and patch them rogether, for other Materials they want. f+. e, 

Which rs were burnt, and broken, or conſumed to powder,to 

wit, by the Chaldeans when they took tlie City. Sec on chop. 1. 3, 
2 NowTobiah the Ammonite was by him and he 

ſaid, even that which they build, if a fox go up g, he 


ſhall even break down their ſtone-wall 5. 

Zz He mentions the Foxes, becauſe they were very numerous in 
thoſe parts, and becauſe in the late Deſolations the Foxes did walk 
in the mount and City of Zion, Lamen, 5. 18. wherewith he ſeems 
to upbraid them- + Itis ſo low, thata Fox can eaſily ger to the 
top of it, and ſo weak, and done ſo haſtily and carcle{ly, that the 
leaſt thruſt will tumble it down. 


24 Aﬀcer him repaired Binnui the fon of Henadad, 
another piece, from' che houſe of Azuwiah, unto the! 
turiiing of the wall, even unto the corner. 

25 Palal che ſon of Uzai, over againſt the turning! 
of the wall f, and the tower g which liech our from the, 
==” kings high houſe þ, chat 4s by the * court of the pri-, 
& :;. {on 5 : after him, Pedajah the {on of Paroin. 

. - F In a parr of the Wall, which jutted out as t/2 rower here fol- 
lowing did, and therefore was oppolice to, or over againſt thar tur- 
ning. g Or, even the tower. h tither from the Royal Palace: or from 
ſome other ſmaller houſe which the King farmerly builr there, e1- 
ther for proſpe& or for Defence. # A place oft mentioneds of 
which ſee Jer. 32. 2. & 38. 7, 1 | 


*Jer.32 2+ 


|'* 2Chron» unto the place over againſt * the water-gace / toward 


| iO 3- ,,, the eaſt, and the rower that Jierh out. 

| —_ k Or, who dwelt in Ophel : for this ſcemsto be only a deſcitpt'- 
| *Ch.8. 3. 22 of the perſons, whoſe work foilows. / So called, becauſe by 
| & 12: 37 that Gate water was brought in, cither by the People for rhe ulc ot 
* that partof the City, or rather by theſe Nerhinims. who were G1- 
| beonites, for the uic of the Temple, for which they were draweroof 
Water, Jol. 9. 21. : 

27 Aﬀeer them the Tekoits m7 repaired another piece, 
. over againſt the great tower that lieth out, even unto 


the wall of Ophel. 
# The ſame ſpoken of before, v. 5. who having diſpatched their 
firſt ſhare ſooner than their Brethren had done theirs, freely offe- 
red their help to ſupply the Defe&s of others, who, as 1t ſecms, ne- 
glefted that part of the work which had been committed to them. 
And this their double diligence is noted borh for the greater ſhame 
of their Nobles, who would not do any pait of it, ve 5. and foz 
their own greater honour, who were ſo far from being corrupted 
by the bad Example of their Nobles, that they were cather quick- 
| ened andenflamed ta greater Zealand induſtry in this publick and 
pious work, 
28 From above * the horſe-gate » repaired the 
117.16. Prieſts, every one againſt his houſe. 
Jer. 31.40 #= Not that belonging to the King's Palace, 2 Chron. 23. 15 bur 
- one of the Gares of the City ſo called, either becauſe nigh unco that 
were many Stables for Horles : or becauſe the Horſes commonly 
went out that way to their watering place. 

29 After them repaired Zadock the fon of Immer, o- 
ver againſt his houſe : after him repaircd a;ſo Shemajah 
the ſon of Shechaniah, the keeper of the eaſt-gate o. 

o To wit, cf the City, or of the Temple : which being the chief 
Gate, was commitred fo his particular Care and Cuſtody. 

30 After himrepaired Henanial the ton of Shele 
miah, and Hanun the ſixth ſon of Zalaph, another! 

< piece: afcer him repaired Meſhullam the ſon of Bere- 
chiah, over againſt his chamber p. | 
p Orchambers the ſingular number tor the plural. 
21 After him repaired Malchiah,the g0:d-{miths ſon, 
unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, 
over againlit the gate Miphkad, and to the || going up 
of the corner. 

22 And between the going up of the corner unto 

the ſheep-gate, repaired the gold-{miths and the mer- 


chants: 
G HA P. IV; | 


The Enemies ſcoff and are angry, 1----=3. Nehemiah prayeth again$ 
'em, and continueth the work, 4, 5. Underftanding the wrath and 
deſign of th: ir Enemies, he ſetteth a watch, 7 ——= 12. He a-m:th and 
encourageth the Labourers, 13 18, And giuein miuitary pre= 
precepts, 19 ---- 23. 

__... B<& came to paſs, that when * Sanballat heard 

OT IH that we buiit the wall, he was wrioth, and took 

great indignation, and mocked the Jews a. 

= Pretending contempt in his words when he had gricf in his 
Cart. 

2 Andhe ſpake before his brechren b and thearmy of 

+ Heb; Samaria c, and ſaid, Whar do theſe fecbie Jews? will 

Jeave ro (EY Þ fortific themleives ? will they ſacrifice ? willthey 

themſelves, make an end in a day 4? will they revive the ſtones our 


*. Kings, 


[Or fcorner 
chamber. 


' implacable Enemies to God, and to his people, and neceſlary for 


Z- | 
26 Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in * || Ophel &, 


4 Hear, O our God, for we are + deſpiſed: and worn , 17, 
their reproach upon their own head z,and give them for debbin ; 
a prey in the land of captivity & : ws 

; Let them be really as contemprible as they repreſent us to be. 

This, and the following requeſts, may ſeem barſh, but they were 
both juſt, as being directed againſt ſuch malicious, inveterare, and 


the vindication, and defence of God's Honour, and Worthip, and 
People. k Ler them be removed from our Neighbourhood ,and car- 
ried into Captiviry ; and there let them find no favour, bur further 
ſeverity. Or, give them). a prey to their Enemies, and let theſe 
carry them into the land of captivity. 

5 And * cover not their iniquity, and let not theic »ppy,og. 
ſin be blotted out from before thee / ; for they have 14, :;5. 
provoked thee to anger be'ore the builders me. 

[ Let their wickedneſs be in thy ſight, ſo as to bring down de- 

' ſerved judgements upon them, that either they may be convinced 
and reformed, or others may be warned by their example. God is 
ſaid ro cover or hide fin when he forbears to puniſh it. m7. e.They 
have not only provoked us Builders,but thee alſo. Or, they have 
provoked or derided the builders to their face, 1. e. openly and 1mpu= 
dently, in contempt of God, and of this work, which is done by 
his direction and encouragement. : 

6 SO built we the wall: and all the wall was joyned 
together unto the half thereof ; for the people had a 
mind to work. 
= Either, 1. in length or rather, 2. in height: for the whole 
circumference of the Wall was diſtributed among the Builders, who 
alſo had carried on the work, beginning at the ſheep-gate, and end- 
ing there alſo, as appears from ch. 3. 1, 32. and the walls of Jeruſg= 
lem are ſaid ro bemaae up, here v.7. 

- 7 But it came ro paſs that when Sanballat, and To- 

biah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the, 

Albdodites, heard that ÞF the Walls of Jeruſalem were? Heb, 

made up, and that the breaches began to be ſtopped s,,,,,*,, 

then they were very wroth. the - 

. 04.e, That the breaches which the Chaldeans had made, and left 2 Chr. 24 

in the Walls, were well-nigh ſtopped up 13. 

_ 8 Andconſpired all oi them rogether, to comeand to 

[fight againſt Jeruſalem, and f co hinder it. + Heb: » 
9 Neveitheleſs, we made our prayer unto our God, make. 


and ſera watch againſt them day and night, becauſe of'” 04 
chem: 

to And Judah p ſaid, The ſtrength of the bearers 
cf buidens is decayed, and there js much rubbiſh q, ſo 
thar we are nor able to build the wail r. 

Þ 7. e. The Jews now dwelling in Judah, to wit, ſome of them 
bei g partly terrified by their Enemies, and partly wearied with 
hard and continuallabours. q More than we are able ſuddenly to re- 
move. r Being f.rced ro ſpend our time in removing the rubbiſh, 
and orher works impoſed rpon us ; and therefore we muſt deſiſt, 
at Icaſt fora ſcaſon. 

11 And our adverſaries ſaid, They ſhall not know, 
neither ſee, till we come inthe midſt among them,and 
flay them /, and cauſe the work to ceaſe. 

J We will come ſecretly, and unexpeRedly upon them,ſo as they 
ſhall neither torice their danger, nor be able to prevent it. 

I2 And it Came to paſs that when the Jews which 
dwelt by them z, came, they ſaid unto us ten times «, 


[| From all places, whence ye ſhall return unto us, hey 
will be upon you x. 


r Or, among them: whereby they came to the knowledge of 
their counſels. « 7.e. Very often, A certain number for an uncer- 
tain. x 2.e. Trey will invade you every way, by which we can 
come to you,or you tous; and therefore do you keep Watches on #9 #* 
very fide. But theſe words may be otherwiſe rendred thus, On all 
parts where you ſhall ve quiet, or at reſt. (i.e. ſecure: for the Hebrew 
Schab 11gnifies not only to return, but alſo zo be quiet, or at eaſe, as 
Hebricians know ) they wlll be upon us, #. e. upon our people, 
and City Jer:ſalem, where you are. And they rather ſay upon us 
than «por you, to manifeſt their affeQion to them, and conjun&i- 
on with them, and that rth-y looked upon themſelves as Members 
of the ſame Body and Church with them and rook what was defig- 
ned or done againſt them. as if it were againſt themſelves, and 


| Or, Te# 
from al 
places ye 
muſt return 


: 1 _ therefore gave them this friendly notice. Or the 'En- 
of the heeps of the rubbiſh e which are burne f ? i dred res Rho told this ( to oi. the RnwGes = 3: 50 hy 2 
6 Tobiah, wv. 3. and Geſhem, c<. 2. 19. and others, whom he calls times coming from all places where they dwelt, or reſted, Heb. you reft- 
his Brethren, becauſe of their ConjunGtion with him in office and in- ed. The ſecond perſon being put for the third, as ir is both in the 
tereſt. c Whom he deſigned hereby to incenſe againſt them, or at Hebxew Language, as Gen, 10. 19. 30. & 25, 18. and in the He- 
leaſt ro underſtand their minds herein. 4 Do they intend to be- brew Text, Pal. 22. 9- and 1n other Languages and Authors : of 
gin, and finiſh the work, and keep the Feaſt of Dedication by Sa- | which ſee my Latine Synopſis upon Gen.19;19: and that it is ſo bere 
crifice all in one day ? for if they ſpend any long time about it, we have the conſent of the Seventy, and Arabick, and of ſome mo- 
they cannot think thar we, and the reſt of their Neighbours, will' dern and accurate Interprerers,who render it by a Verb of the third 
ſuffer theo do it. Thus he perſwaded himſeifand his Compani- perſon ) about vs; whence they came purpoſely to inform and 
ons, that their attempt was ridiculous; and this miſtake kept him warn us. Or thus, They told rhis to us ten times from all places whence 
from giving them any diſturbance, till it was too late. So God in- they did returnio us, Which phraiſe of returning tv us, 1, e. to Jeruſa- 
fatuated him to his own grietand ſhame, and to the advantage of Jen:, ſuirs very well with thoſe perſons who came up with their 


Brethren 


FH 


came f 


| Or,e 


Me we 
vith þ 
Weapor 
Va! r, 


1091 


f 


, 
i 


Chap. V. 


N EH 


Brethren from Babylon to Jeruſalem, and went thence into ſeveral 


parts of the countrey to dwell,where they thought meer, and retur- 
ned now, and at other times,as they had occaſion,to their brethren 


Heb from 


* Heb. on 


ty loyns, 


fHcb, 


came for;h, 


| Orevery 


Me went 
vith his 
Weapon for 
Vat or, 


at Jeruſalem. 
12 Therefore ſet I + in the lower places behind the 


tz vwer yall y, end on the higher places z, I even fer the peo- 


777" ple after their families, with their ſwords, their ſpears 
lace, XC : F ; 


and their bows, 
y To ſtand by, and within the Walls where they were loweſt and 


E M 1 4 H. 


3 Some alſo there were that ſaid, We have morga- 
ged ourlands, vineyeards, and houſes, that we might 
buy corn, becauſe of the dearth. 

4 Which might: eaſily happen, both from the multitude cf the 
People now in and near Jerryſalem, and from their buiiding work, 
which wholly took them up,and kept them from taking care of their 
own Families,and from the expeQation and Dread of their enemies 


Invaſion, which hindred them from going abroad to fetch in Pro- 
vitton, and the people round about from bringing it in to them; or 


not yet raiſed to their due height, and therefore moſt liable ro the | from divers other cauſes. 


Enemies afſault. z Upon the tops of the Walls where they were 
finiſhed, and the towers which were built here and there upon the 
Wall; whence they might ſhoot arrows, or throw ſtones againſt 
their enemies, when they made their Approaches. 

14 And 1 looked, and roſe up, and ſaid untothe no- 
bles, and to the rulers, and to the reſt of the people, 
Be not ye afraid of them: remember the LORD which 
is great and terrible, and fighc for your brethren, your 
ſons andyour daughters, your wives, and your houſes; 

15 And it came to paſs when our enemies heard 
that it was knowa unto us, and God had brought their 
counſel ronought, that we returned all of us to che wall, 
every one unto his work 4. 

a Our enemies being fruſtrated in their hopes, which were 
wholly built upon the ſecrecy, and iuddenneſs of their attempr, 
we knowing this, returned to our vuſineſs. | 

16 And it came to paſs from chat time forth b, that 
the half of my ſervants « wrought in the work,and 
the other half of them held both the ſpears, che ſhields, 
and the bows, and the habergeons ; and the rulers 
were behind alle the houſe of Judah f. 

b Leſt our enemies ſhould repeat their enterprize. c Of my 
domeſtick Servants, and of my Guards, who ſhould have attended 
upon my own perſon. 4i.e- All their weapons: they ſtood in their 
Arms prepared for Bzttel, e Partly to encourage them in their work, 
and ſometimes to afliſt with their own hands: and partly to dire& 
and command thcm in caſe of an aſſault, fi. e. The Jews who 
were upon the wall. ; 

17 They which built on the wall, and they that 
bare burdens, with thoſe that laded every one with one 
of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other 
hand held a weapon ge 

g This is 1.0t to bs taken properly, for they could never have 
done their wo:k with one hand ; and the next Verſe tells us the 
Sword was not in their hands, but by their ſide ; bur figuratively; 
this being a proverbial ſpeech, ſuch as is frequent amongſt the La- 
tines, as when they ſay of a man pretending kindneſs with evilde- 
ſign, He carried bread in one hand, and a fone in another. 

18 For the builders, every one had his {word pgirded 
ft by his ſide, and ſe built: and he that ſounded the 


trumpet h was by me. ; 
þ To call the People together, when, and where 1t was fit and 


neceſlary. 

19 And Ifaid unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and 
to the reſt of the people, The work is great and large, 
and weare ſeparated uponthe wall,one far from another. 

20 In what place therefore ye hear the ſound of che 
trumpet ; reſort ye thither unto us: our God ſhal fight 


for us. 
21 So we laboured in the work : and half of them 


held the Spears, from the riſing of the morning, cill 
the ftars f appeared z. 


; Working very early, and very late. 

22 Likewiſe at the ſame time {aid T unto the pec- 
ple, Let every one with his ſervant lodge within Jeru- 
falem k, that in the night they may be a guard to us, 
and labour on the day. 

k Not in the Suburbs, or adjoining Villages, as probably many 
of them did, returning thence to their work in the morning, 

23 So neicher I, nor my brethren, nor my ſervants, 
nor the men of the guard which followed me, none of 
us put off our clothes /, || ſaving that every one put them 
off for waſhing m. 

I Neither by day, nor by night, as. the manner is when we go 
to Bed ; they conſtantly kept themſelves in a readineſs for fight- 
ing. m When they were to waſh and cleanſe rhemſclves from ſome 
natural or moral impurity, which mightbefal them or their garments 


The people complain of their Brethren, by reaſon of their Debts, Mortgages, 
and Bondage, 1-—— 5- Nehemiah rebuketh the Uſurers, and cauſeth 
them to make a Covenant of Reſtitution, 6 13. He forbeareth his 
own Allowance, and keepeth Hoſpitality, 1, —— 16. The quantity of 
his Prepara: ions, and his Prayer, 18, 196 

ND there was a great cry of the people, and 
of their wives, againſt their brethren the Jews a. 
a To wit, the great and rich ones who had opprefled their Bre- 


thren. 
2 For there were that ſaid, We, our ſons, and our 


daughters are many b: therefore we take up Corn for 


them-c, that we may eat, and live. : 

6 Which is in it ſelf a Bleſſing, bur to us is turned into a Curſe 
ei.e. We are forced by our and their Neceflities to take up Corn, 
to wit, upon their own unreaſonable terms, as is here implied, and 
Plainly ez prefſcd inthe following Relation. Orhers,Ler us rake up,&Cc. 
7. e. ſcing we do the, publick Work, let proviſion be made for us 
and our Ciildren out of thepublick Stock, But this 15 no Petition, 


but a complaint, as will app-ar. 


4 There were alſo that ſaid, We have borrowed 
money for the Kings tribute e, and that wupcr our lands 
and vineyards» 

e Which was Jaid upon them all. Sce Ezra 4: 13 & 7: 24: 

5 Yet now Gur fleſh ;s as the fleſh of our brethren f, 
our children as their children : and lo, we bring into 
bondage g our ſons and our daughters þ co be ſervants, 
and /ome of our daughters are brought into bondage al- 
ready, neither is it in our power to redeem them i ; tor 0. 


ther men have our lands and vineyards. 

f We are of the ſame Nature, and Nation, and Religion with 
them, although they treat us as if we were Beaſts or Heathens, for= 
getting both Humanity and God's Law, Deut- 15; 7: g We are com- 
pelled to ſell them for our Subſiſtence. þ Wh'ch was an evidence 
of their great Neceflity, becauſe their daughters were more render, 
and weak, and unfit for Bond. ſervice, and more expoſed to Injuries 
than their Sons. : Which we are allowed to do, Ex2d. 21. 7. bur 
have not wherewith to do it. 

6 And I was very angry when I heard their cry, and 


theſe words. 


exact uſury every one of his brother. & And I 


aſſembly againſt them /. 

k Which was againſt the plain and poſitive Law of &ed, Deus.-23. 
19, 20. eſpecially in this time of publick Calamity and Dearth. / [ 
called a publick Cofigregation, both of the Rulers and People, the 
greateſt part whereof were free from this Guilt,and therefore more 
impartial Judgesof the matter, and repreſented it to them, that the 
Offenders mighr be convinced, ani reform this Abuſe; if nor for 
Fear of God, or Love of their Brethren,yet at leaſt for the publick 


8 AndlI faid untothem, We, after our ability, have 
*redeemed our brethren the Jews, which wereſold u:co 
the Heathen 2; and will ye even ſell your brethren ? 
or ſhall they be ſold unto us »? Then held rhey their 


peace, and found nothing to anſwer. 

m I, and my Brethren, and Pre. ecefſors, have uſ:d our utmoſt 
Intereſt and Power, both with the Kings of P:;/iz, that our Bre. 
thren might be redeemed from that Bondage into which God had 
ſold them for their Sins ; and with particular Perſons in Babylen,and 
Perfis, and the adjacent parts, whoſe Bond-flaves the Jews were, 
and who would not part with them withouta Price,which we paid 
for them. » Do you expett that we ſhould pay you a Price for 


them, as wedid to the Babylonians ? Or, muſt we uſe as much im- 


portunity to ſolicit you f.r theic Redemption, as we did to their 
Enemies ? 


9 Alſo I faid, It is not good 0 that ye do: ought ye 


C 


7 Then + I conſulted with my ſelf, and I rebuked + Heb » 
the nobles, and the rulers, and ſaid unto them, Ye #*-rt con- 
{et a great/* ho 


ſhame, and the Cries of the Poor. * 


hap. V 


| 


| 
| 


| 
| 
| 
| 


L2v,2v 


not to walk * in the fear of our God, becauſe of the * Ley 255 
reproach of the heathen our enemies p ? 36. 


04.e. It is a very badand wicked thing; as this ſame phraſe is 
uſed, Prov. 16: 29: & 17: 26; & 18: 5: & 19: 2. a common Figure, 
called Mei9ſfs, where more is underſtood than is expreſſed. p Who 
are round about you, and obſerve all your Aﬀions, and will loarh 
and r. proach both you for ſuch barbarous uſage of zour Brethren, 
and R- ligion for ycur ſakes : Which if you have any Love or Re- 
ſpe& either to God, or to your ſelves, you wall prevent. 

10 I likewiſe, and my brethren q, and my ſervants r 


+ might exadt of them money and corn /: I pray you 


let us leave off this uſury. 

q To wir, in Office ; thoſe who are employed with me in the 
Government of this People. r In my name, and for my uſe /{ As 
a juſt Recompence for our pains and Care for the Publick Good, 
to which we wholly devote our ſelves, even to the negle& of all 
our private Concerns. But I will not rigorouſly exa&,but do freely 
rem:t my ownright, which, in thoſe Circumſtances,it is my Cury 
ro do; and theretore you alſo oug}.t todo ſo, ſeing I lay no. bur- 
den upon you, but what Iam willing to bear a part of upon my 
own Shoulders. ; 

11 Reſtore, I pray you, to them, even this day, 
their lands,their vineyards, their olive-yards, and their 
houſes, aiſo t che hundredth part « of the money and of 
the corn, the wine, and the oil,that ye exact of them. 

t Alſo require not : whichis to be ſupplied cut of the next Verſe, 
where it is exprefſcd in their anſwer to, and grant of this deſire. 
« Which they required every Mouthfor the uſe of their Monies or 
Goods, according to the Cuſtom then uſed, and afterwards by rhe 


Romans. 
12 Then ſaid they, We will reſtore them x, and will 


require nothing of them yz, ſo will we do as choy fayeſt, 


f Heb. 4 
lend them 
money, So 
Gr. 


Then TI called the prieiis z and * cook an oath of them 2, WG 
> 3 y 


that they ſhould do according to this promiſe. 


8, 
x To wit, the Lands and Houſes. y Eor the hundredth part, 9 


x Either 1. As Delinquents in that kind ; or rather as Witneiles ; 
that the Oath being raken before the Prieſts, who ated in' God's 


Name and ſtead, the Oath might make the more deep and durable 
Impreſſhon upon their Conſciences.Sec Numb. 5:1 9; 1Kings 1,8,3.32. 
a Not of the Prieſts laſt mentioned, for it doth not appear that anv of 


4 y- them 


Pe VI, 4 

them were guilty,and it is abſurd to think that they only were guilty 
of this Extorrion,as they muſt be,if this them belongs to them only; 
bur of all the Perſons who were before charged with this crime,v.3, 
4. whether Prieſts or others, as is evident from the Text, and from 
the narure ofthe thing. ; 

13 Alſo I ſhook my lap b, and ſaid, So God ſhake 
out every man from his houſe, and from his labour c, 
that performerh nor this promiſe ; even thus be he 
ſHaken out, and | emptied. And all tne congregation 


% 


or 


did according to this promiſe. 

b i; e: The Lap or cxtream parts of my Garments, which I firſt 
folded together and then ſhook it and ſcattered it aſunder. This 
was a Form of Swearing then inuſe. c i:e: From enjoying what he 
hath gor by his labour. ; 

14 Moreover from the time that T wes appointed 


to be their governour in the land of Judah, from the 


my brethren e have not eaten the bread of the Gover- 


nour f. EE 

da Not that he continued fo long together at Jeruſalem, of which 
ſee chap:236: but that he ſo long governed fery/atem by himſelf when 
he was preſent , and in his abſence, by a Deputy. e Lirher my 
Fellow-officers, or they whom TI left in my itead, who as they were 
to comy work, ſo might have required my rights. f 7, e: Thar 
a[lowance which by che Laws of God and Nations, and of the King 


their own Dignity and Offi:e, and of the publick Service. 

I 5 But the tormer governours g that had been before 
me, were chargeabic unto the people, and had raken 
of them bread and wine, beſide torty ſhekels of iilver 5; 
yea even their ſervants bare rule over the people 7: bur 
{odid not I, becauſc of the fear of G<d k. 

g Not Ezra, who was no Governour, but only a Prieſt ſent to 
teach them,and to re&ific Church-abuſes, ror Zerubbabei,bvur others 
between him and Nehemia?, whom. he forbears to name,®becautic he 
deſigned not to diſgrace any Perſon,bur only to reform the Abules. 
h Which they required of the people for every day ro defray taerr 
other Exp:nces' 7 5. e. Ruled them with Rigor and Cruelty ; which 
fault of the Servants is charged upon their Maſters, the former 
Governours, becauſe they did not reſtrain nor puniſh then. & be- 
cauſe I feared to brzak Gods Commands,or to i:cur his Dilpleaſure 
by ſuch immoderate and unſeaſonable Oppieſſions of the Pevple 
T'kis he ſpeaks not to commend himſelf, vut rather to diminiſh his 


'1 


Supererogation, to be admired rather than imitated ; but only his 
Dury in that caſe, which for bis own ſake he durſt not decline; and 
conſequently that it was their Duty alſo now to relinquiſh even 
thoſe Rights which in other Times and Conditions they might law, 
fully require. : 

16 Yea, alſo I continued in the work of this wall /, 


neither bought we any land mz: and all my ſervants 


ere gathered thicther unto the work. 

I Overſceing, direfting and encouraging the Workmen, which 
was my whole bulineſs; and this at my own Loſt. m Ot our poor 
Brethren, whoſe Necetlities gave me abundent opportunity of en- 
riching my ſelf with good Bargains. Bur I durſt nor build my houſe 
upon other Mens Ruins. 

17 Moreover, here were | at my table an hundred 
and fifty + of the J-ws and Rulers », beſides thoſe that 
came unto us from among the Heathen thar are abour us. 

» Not only Jews of the inferior ſort, for whom meaner Proviſions 
might ſufhce,but alſo theirRulers,ſuch as there were in many places 
for whom berter Proviſion was fir: who reſorted to him upon all 
occaſions, either to pour oat their Complaints, as here they Cid; 
or to give him notice of the Encmies deſig; or to receive his or- 
ders and direQions. 

18 Now that which was prepared for me daily, as 
One ox, #1d {1x choice (beep ; alſo fowls were prepared 
for me, and once in ten days, ſtore of all forts of wine : 
yerfor all this required not I the bread of the Gover- 


nour s, becauſe the bondage was heavy upon this people, 
o But bore it out ofmy own Eſtate : Which was very ccnſidcra- 
able his Office in t1e Perſian Court being a place of ve: y great pro- 
fit as well as Honour, and that Profit no doubt conrinued to him in 
this his abſence from the King From this great aud daily Expence, 
it ſeems more than probable, that Nehemiah did nor continue here 
for twelve years together, as ſome would think, or ar leaſt thar he 
did not this all that time,bur only during the great and preſent Exi- 
gences and Diſtreſſ:s of rhe Jews, which ceaſed in good part after 
the Walls werebuilt, and the Hearts of all the Jews revived, and 
their Enemies diſpirited thereby. 
earns 29 * Think upon me, my God, for good, according 
13:*2to all that I have done for this people p. 


5 C:mmac- 
E4 a 2} 
l :eaens ly; 
ÞF Gr chzre- 
abaxy. 


a 


for thine own ſake ; for thou art plealcd, and haſt promiſed praci- 
ouily to reward us accorting to our works, and to mete to Men 
the ſame meaſure which they mete to others: 
CHAP. VL 
Sanballat and Tobiah ſending to N:hemiah to meet chem, intend to do him 
miſchief, 1, 2. Nehemiah's an{wer, 3. They charge him with Rebellion, 
4 ——— 7. his anſwer toit, 8, 9g. Shemajah's falſe Prophecies to diſ- 
courage Nehemiah, 10. his reply, 11 —'— 13. The work is fiaiſhed to 
the terror of the Enemies, 15, 16. Secret Correſpondence between the 
Nobles of fudah and Tobiah, 17, 18. 


0 bet it came to paſs, when Sanballat, and Tobi- 

ah, and Geſhem the Arabian, and thereſt of our 
enemies heard that I had buile the wall, and hae there 
was no breach left therein; ( though ac that time 


"'NBAHEMI 4 H. 


ſid, Amen, and praiſed the LORD. Ard the people | 


twentieth year, even unto the ewo and thirtieth ycarof 
Artaxerxes the King, that is, twelve years d, I and. 


of Perſia, the Governours might require for th: Maintenance of | 


Praiſe, ani to ſhew that this was no heroical Aion, nor work of 


p As I have done thy people good for thy ſake, ſo do me goo! | 


| T had not ſetup the doors 4 upon the gates. ) 
a Not all of them- See on Ch. 3. n, 2, 3. 
2 Then Sanballat, and Geſhem fenc unto me, ſay- 


ing, Come let us meet together b in ſome one of the vil- 
lages in the plain of Ono c, But they thought to do 


me miſchief. 

b To conſulrabout the common ſervice of our Maſter the King 
of Perſia ; or to make a friendly Accomodation. c A City in the 
Tribe of Benjamin ; Of which ſee chap. 11, 35. and > Chron. 8. 12, 

2 And 1 ſent meſiengers unto them, ſaying, Lam 
' doing a great work 4d, ſo that I cannoc come down : 
why ſhould the work ceaſe, whilſt I leave it, and come 


down to y Ou. 

d He tells them one, but not the only, nor the principalreaſon of 
his refuſal, becauſe his coming might cauſe the work to ceaſe, not 
only by the negle& of it during his abſence, but by his death, 
which they by this means might compaſs ; though he thought ir 
not fir to expreſs ſo much ro them. : 

4 Yet they ſent unto me four times after this ſort, 


andT anſwered them after the ſame manner. 
5 Then ſent Sanballat his ſervant unto me, in like 
manner the «fitth time, wich an open letter e in his 


hand. 

e Thereby bidding open Defiance to him, as before he had uſed 
ſecret Practices; and intimating thar he would do that by mani- 
feſt force, which he had intended to do by ſudden furprize- 

6 Wherein was Written, It is reported among the 
heathen F, and || Gaſhmu g faith ir, that thou and the IOr, ©. 
' Jews think to rebel : for which cauſe thou buildeſt the ſemver. 

wall, that thou maiſt be their king, according to theſe 


words þ. 

f The neighbouring People whom you proudly and d:f{dainfully 
cail H.athens or Gentiles, g Called Gybem, v. 1. Who athrmed ir 
and would prove it. h 7, e. According to theſe reports; or, that 
thou maitt juſtifie and verifie theſe Rumours. Others according to 
theſe things, i, e, When theſe things whichthou art now doing ſhall 
be finiſhed. Bur the firſt ſenſe ſeems moſt agreeable to the uic of 
the ſame words in the next verſe. 

7 And thou haſt alſo appointed prophets to preach 
of thee at Jeruſalem, ſaying, There is a king in Judah 3: 
and now fhall it be reported to the king, according to 
theſe words, Come now therefore,and let us take coun- 


{el rogether &. 

# We have now a King of our own Nation, and are free from 
the Bondage of a Forreign Yoke. k That we may impartially 
examin the matter, that cither thy Innocency may be cleared, and 
falſe Accuſations may be prevented ; or if thou art guilty, the 
King may be informed. : 

S Then I ſent unto him, ſaying, There are no ſuch 
thingsdone as thou ſaiſt, but thou feigneſt them out of 
thine own hearr. 

9 For they ail made us afraid 7, ſaying, Their hands 
{hall be weakened from the work, that it be not done« 


Now therefore, O God, ſtrengthen my hands. 
[ 7. e. They endeavoured to do 1o, and aQtually did terrifie ſome 
Perioas. 

10 Afterward T came unto the houſe of Shemajah, 
the ſon of Delajah' 2, che ſon of Mehetabel, who was 
ſhur up»; and he faid, Let us meet together in the 
houſe of God, within the Temple 0; and tet us ſhut 
the doors of the Temple ; for they will come to ſlay 
thee ; yea, in the night will chey come to ſlay thee. 

-m Probably one of the chief of the Prieſts, s Chron. 24. 26. nIn 
his Chamber adjoining ro the Temple, upon pretence of ſingular 
Devotion, Sequeitration from, the World, and ſpecial Acquaintance, 
and much Communion with God in hisRetirements, after the man- 
ner of the Prophets; and withal upon pretence of certain know- 
ledge, which he had by the Spirir of God and of Prophecy, concer- 
ning their approaching Danger, from which they could be ſafe no 
where burtin the Temple, whichthe very Heathens owned for a San« 
Ctuary, which they mightnor violate. o For the danger is fo near, that 
we cannot fafely tarry here fo long as to conſult what to do in this 
jan&ure» His deſign herein was partly to diſcourage and diſgrace 
Nehemia", and thereby to ſtrike a dread unto all the People, and 
give a ſpeedy and full ftop to the work ; partly to prepare the way 
tor tie Enemies to a{tault and take the City, whilit Nehemiah was 
lburt up. and unableto give them any oppoſition ; partly to juſtifie 
their Accuiation of Nek:miah to the King by his flight upon it; and 
partly,that there by the help of other Prieſts, who were conſcious of 
his Plot, he might either deitroy him, or ſecure hisPerſon till theCi- 
ty by foine of his Complices were betrayed into theEnemies hands. 

11 And 1 ſaid, ſhould ſuch a man asI pflee? and 
who 2:5 there that being as I am, would gointo the tem- 

ple to {ave his life q 7 I will not go in, 

p Ithe chief Governour, upon whoſe preſence, and Counſel, and 
Condutt, the very lite and Beeing of the whole City and Nation 
in a great meaſure depends : T who have profeſſed ſuch Reſolution, 
and Courage, and confidence in God. 1 who have had ſuch emi- 
nent Expe: tence of God's graciousand powerful Afﬀiſtances, of his 
calling me to this Employment, and carrying me through it when 
our Danger was greater than now it is: Shall I now diſhonour 
God and Religion, and berray the People and City of God by my 
Cowardiſe ? God forbid. This is not the Count! of God, nor 
of a Friend, bur a plot of mine Enemies, as ithere follows. q As 
if T had an evil Caute or Conſcience ; as if I were a Malefa&or, 
who fled thicher for refuge ; as if I durſt nor truſt God with my 
Preſervation, except I wear into the Temple, which it.is nor laws 


ful for INC, being LiO Pricſt, [00] do, 
i: And 


' 


4 OCIELTES 


' 


Chap. Y[, 


tHeb. 
mult ipli [4 
ther let ts 


poſmg 2 


| Twiahs 


IOr, ms 
tir, 


a Y l. 


, Ute 
VeTr.2. 


; 4 Pp. VII. 


f Heb. 
nultiplied 
ther letters 


| Iviahs 


bir, 


pm own City and Nation. 


IO, mae. Urtered my | 


N E HN £ 


12 And lo, I perceived r that God had not ſent 
kim, but that he pronounced this prophecy againſt 
me : for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him, 

r Partly by conſidering the ſinful Nature and pernicious Conſe- 
quence of this Counſel ; partly by the Suggeſtion of God's Spirit, 
whoſe Counſel and Help I ſought in this matter ; and partly by the 
Event which diſcovered that there was no ſuch Danger from tae 
Approach of the Enemy, as was pretendcd. 

13 Theretore as he hired, that I ſhould be afraid, 
and do {o, and ſin s, and that they might have matter 


for an evil report, that they might Reproach me -r. 

ſ By going into a place forbidden to me,and that in ſuch a time, 
and manner, and upon ſuch an occaſion; which would have been 
both Sinful and Shamefi:l See on v 11. 7#£ As A Coward, and 
conſcious of my own guilt that fo they mightmake me contemp- 
tibl- and odious, both to my own People, and to 
of Perſia: | 

14 My God, think thou upon Tobiah, and Sanbal- 
lat according to theſe their works, and on the prophe- 
teſs Noadiah «, and the reſt of the Prophets that would 
have put me in fear. 

# One that falſly pretended to the Spirit of Propheey, todeceive 
and Geſtroy Nehemiah: He prays to God io remember and puniſh 
theſe Falte Prophets, becau.c he was n«t yet in a capacity to doit, 
having ſuck powerful Enemies round about him, and fo many 
rich and potent Jews highly diſconrented for their great loſs by his 
means, chap. 5. 

I5 So the wall was finiſhed in the ewenty and fifth 
day of the month Elul x, in fifty and two days y. 

x Anſwering part to our Auguſt, and part ro September. y To be 
computed either. 1. From the time of Sanballat's tending this Let- 
ter to him : Or as moſt judge, from the beginning of the work : 
Which though a great thing, yt it 1s not at all incredible, con- 
ſidering 1. That the Walls aud Gates were not wholly pulled 
down by the Chaldeans : For to what purpoſe ſhould they make 
that waite of time and labour 2. That where the Walls were 
thrown down, yet the Materials remained, which they now uſed. 
3. That in the building of the Walls they minded not Curioſity, 
but only Stiength an- ſafety 4, The great numbers of the Buil- 
ders, and the prudent Ditiribution of the Work among them, and 
their admirable Leal and Diligence in the Work- 5. That there 
want not parallel Inſtances even in Heathen Authors; for both 
Curtius and Arian report, that Alexander the Great built the Walls 
of new Alexanaria; which contained above ſeven Miles in length, 
within twenty days ſpace. 6. That there was an eminent hand of 
God in carrying on this Work, which their very Enemies here ac- 
knowledge. 

I6 Andit came to paſs. that when all our Enenues 
heard theresf, and all the Heathen that ere about us 
ſaw theſe things, they were much caſt down in their 
own eyes 2, tor they perceived « that this work was 
wrought of our God 5. 

z 7. e. In their Opinion, or themſelves being Judges. For 
though ordinarily Men are very prone to judge partially, and ſtill 
10 flatter themſclves with vain hopes and Fancieszyet this caſe was 
ſo clear and remacrkuble, that they began to deſpair, Now they ſaw 
that all was loſt thar their Deſignes were broken, and thar their 


M- 1 4 
the city e To wit, Hananiah lait mentioned ; for it was needleſs to 
ſay any thing in commendation of Harani, who had ſhown his 
Piety and Zeal for God and his country,in taking a tedious journey 
from Jeru[al:m to Shuſhan, to inform Nehemiah of the ſad Eſtate of 
Jeruſalem, and to implore his helping hand to relieve it, chap. r. 
f He choſe not Magiſtrates and Officers our of any partial or carnal 
Reſpetts ro his own Kindred, or Acquaintince, or Favourites, but 
trom true Piery and Prudence, ſuch as were fitteſt for, and would 
be moſt Fairhftul in their Employments. gs This is added as the 
Ground and Reaſon, both why he was Faithful,and why Nehemiah 
put ſuch truft and confidence in him becauſe he knew that the Fear 


| of God would keep him from yielding ro thoſe Temptations to per- 
| fidiouſneſs, which he was likely to meer wirh when Nehemiah was 
gone, and againſt which a Man deſtiture of God's fexr hath no ſuf- - 
ficient fences h More than moſt Mn did, or, above the common 


Chap. VH, 


the king | 


pitch of Piety. ef 
3 And1I faid unto them, Let not the gates of Jeruſa- 
lem be opened,until the ſon be hot 3; and while they k 


point watches of the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem every one 
in his watch,and every one to be over againft his houſe 

77, 6 TU it be clear and broad day; when enemies approaching 
may be diſcovered, and rhe People of the City will be ready for the 
Detence in the caſe of an aſſault. &k 7. e. The Watches appointed to 
that end,as is manifeſt from the following words. 1 z. e. Every one 
in his rurn keeping watch with others in that watching-place which 
1s next to his nouſe. 


nerality of the p:ople. 

5 And my God put into mine heart », to gather to- 
gether the nobles and the rulers, and che people o,that 
they might be reckoned by genealogy p, and I found a 
regiſter of the genealogy of them which came up at the 


firſt q,. and found written therein ; 

» This ation, though meerly prudential, he doth nor aſcribe to 
himſelf, or his own Wit, bur to the gift,and Grace of God dire&- 
ing and inclining him to ir. o Not only forthe parricular end here 
mentioned, bur for divers other weighty purpoſes and matters, of 
which the following Chapters treat: p That ſo it might appear ro 
what Families each perſon belonged, and where their ancient Ha- 
bitations lay, which for a great number of them were in the City, 
the repleniſhing of which was now his deſign. 9 To wit, with 
Zerubbabel, as it follows, v. 7; Bur this following Catalogue differs 
in ſome particulars from that Ezra 2: of which ſee the notes there. 
6 * Theſe are the children of che province, that 


bylon had carried away, and came again to Jeruſalem, 
and to Judah, every one to his city ; 


of the men of the people of Iſrael was this: 


Miſchief was now likely to fall upon their own heads. a By that 
aimirable Courage, and Conſtancy, and quickneſs wherewith this 
Work was managed, notwithſtanding all their Difficulties and Diſ- 
couragements. 6 Thar it was the Work of that mighty God of 1/- 
rael, whom they had great reaſon to fear : and withal they took it 
for an ill Omen, to chem, and a ſure Preſage that God would ſtill 


watch over that City and People, and cruſh thoſe who ſhould op-[- 


Poſe or diſturb them. 

17 Moreover, in thoſe days the nobles of Judah 
7 ſent many letters unto Tobiah c, and rhe letters of 
Tobiah came unto them. 

c Correſponding with him againſt Nehemiah, and againſt their 


18 For there were many in Judah ſworn unto him #4, 
becauſe ke was the ſon in law of Shechaniah the ſon of 
Arah ; and his ſon Ichanan had taken the daughter of 


Methullam, the ſon of Berechiah e. | 

d To be true to him in the proſecution of his wicked deſigns. e 
This is noted to ſhew the miſchief of ſuch unequal and forbidden 
Marrizges; and how reaſonable and neceſſary Ezra's Action was in 
the difloJution of them. 

19 Aiſo they reported his good deeds before me, and 
words to him : and Tcbiah ſent letters to 


put me in fear. 
CHAP. VII 
Nehemiah committeth the Charge of Feruſalem to Hanani and Hananiah, 1, 
2. His Advice to them, 3, 4 He finds out a Regiſter of the Genealogy of 
th.m that came at firſt out of Babylon, 5 —+=— 65. The whole number of 
them, 66,67. Their $:bſtlance, 68, 69. Their offerings, 70v—73. 
OW *t came to paſs when the wall was built, and 
I had ſer upthe doors, and the porters, and the 
lingers, and the Levites were appointed g. 

a i.e. When T had taken order that the Levites ſhould be ſum- 
moned from all plac-s to celebrate the Dedication of the Wall, as 
it was done, chap: 12: 27. 

2 That 1 gare my brother Hanani b, and Hananiah 
the ruler of the palace c, charge over Jeruſalem 4:. { for 
he ewas a faithful man f,8& feared God g above many hb.) 

b Of whom ſee chap. 1. 3,2. cr. e. Of Nehemiah's Court, juſtly 
fo called, becaulc he lived in great Sp!cndor, and like a Vice-Roy, 
though it was wholly at hisown charge. &@ To preterve its Peace 
*1d Safety, and to rake particular care of the ſhutting the Gates of 


eight, 4 A 4 


8 The children of Paroſh, twothouſand an hundred 
ſeventy and two. 
9 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred feven- 
ty and two. 
10 The children of Arah, ſix hundred fifty and two. 
-11 The children of Pahath Moab, of the children of 
Jeſhua, and Joab, two thouſand and eight bundred and 
eighteen. : 
12 The children of Elam, a thouſand two hundred 
fifry and four. 
12 The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and 
five, 
: 14 The children of Zaccai, ſeven hundred and three- 
Tore. 


15 The children of [] Binnui, fix hundred forty andy —_ tak 
eight. OTE 
16 The children of Bebai, ſix hundred ewenty and 
eight. : 
17 The children of Azgad, two thouſand three hun- 
dred twenty and two. | 
18 The children of Adonikam, fix hundred threeſcore 
and ſeven. 
19 The children of Bigvai, two thouſand threeſcore 
and ſeven. | 
20 The children of Adin, ſix hundred fifty and five. 
21 The children of Arer of Hezekiah, ninery and 
eight. 
22 The children of Haſhum, three hundred twenty 
and eight. | . 
23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty +> 


and four. 


24 The children of || Hariph, an hundred and [| Or,Jers. 


twelve. 

25 The children of || Gibeon, ninety-and five. 

26 'The men of Bethlehem, and Netophah, an hun- 
dred fourſ{core and eight. . 

27 ihe men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and 
27 Ihe 


ſtand by, let them ſhut the doors, and bar ther, and ap- 


4 Now the city was Þ large and great: but the peo- 4 40y, . 
ple were few therein, and the houſes were not built m. broad of | 
 #n7,e, Not all,nor compleatly built; but only ſome flight Build- hands, or | 
ings of Boards or tones were made for the preſent uſe of the ge- ſpaces. | 


went up out of the captivity, of thoſe that had been * Ezra 2. 
carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Ba-” 


7 Who came with Zerubbabel: Jeſhua, Nehemiah, 
|| Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Biiſhan, || Oc,Sers- 
Miſpereth, Bigvai, Nahum,Baanah : the number, 1/ay,##* 


|| Or, Gif= | | 
bar. 


G 


| 


{ 


i 2 


Chap. VII. FNEHEM 14 H. 
ſ Or; 4- 28 The men of |] Beth-azmaveth, fourty and two. ty and ſeven? and they had two hundred forty and 
maveth. 29 The men of || Kirjath-jearim, Chephirah, and | five ſinging men, and finging-wemen. 


+6 Hm Besroth, ſeven hundred forty and three. 
20 The men of Ramah, and Geba, ſix hundred 

twenty and one. 

21 The menof Michmaſh, an hundred and twenty 
and two. 

22 The men of Beth.el and Ai, an hundred twenty 
and three: 

The men of the other Nebo, fifcy and two. 

24 The children of the other * Elam, a thouſand 
two hundred fifty and fours . 

25 The children of Harim three hundied and 
twenty. 


*Sez v.12. 


| 36 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty 


and five. 
- 37 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, ſeven 
hundred twenty and one. 
28 The children of Sanaah, three chouſand nine 
hundred and thirty. 
* ,Chron, / 39 The prieſts : the children of * Jedajah of the 
24. 7. ouſe of Jeſhua, nine hundred ſeventy and three, 
| 40 Thechildren of Immer, a thouſand filry and two. 
41 The children of Paſhur, a thouſand two hundred 
forty and leven. | | 
42 The chiidren of Harim, a thouſand and ſfeven- 
teeny 
43 The Levites : the children of Jeſhua, of Kadmiel, 
IOr,Hods- ,,.7 of the children of || Hodevah, fevenry and four. 


=o amy 44 Th> ſingers : the children of Aſaph, an hundred 


Judah, "forty and eight. 
Ezra. 39, 


Akkub. the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, 
an hundred thirty and eight. 

46 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the chil- 
dren of Haſupha, the children of Tabbaoth, 

47 The children of Keros, the chiidren of Sia, the 
children of Padon, 

48 The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, 
the children of Shalmai, 

49 The chi'dren of Hanan, the children of Giddel, 
the children of Gahar. 

50 The children of Reajah, the children of Rezin, 
the children of Nekoda, 

51 The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, 
the children of Phaſeah. 

52 The children of Beſai, the children of Meunim, 
the chi.dren of Nephiſheſim, | | 

53 The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, 
the children of Harhur, 

54 The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, 
the children of Harſjha, 

55 The children of Barkos, the children of Sifera,the 

children of Tamah, 

56 The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 

57 The children of Solomons ſervants: the ctildren 


of Sotai, the children of Sophereth,the children of Pe- | 


rida. 
58 The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, 


the children-of Giddel. 

59 The children of Shephatiak,-the children of Hat» 

| til, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children 
[| Or, Ani of || Amen : 

60 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomons 
ſervants, were three hundred ninety and two. 

61 * Aud theſe were they which went up alſo from 
Tel-melah, Tel-hareſha, Cherub, Addon and Immer : 
but they could not ſhew their fathers houſe, nor their 
[Or, pede. || ſeed, whether they were of Iſrael. 

62 The children of Delajah, the children of Tobiah, 
the children of Nekoda, ſix hundredforty and two. 

63 And of the prieſts , the children of Habajah, che 
children of Koz, the children of Barzillai, which took 
oxe of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to wike, 
and was called after their name. 


YEzZri2:59 


gree. 


64 Theſe {ought their regiſter among thoſe that were . 
' alſo the ſenſe aud meaning of them : they expounded the mind 


| and will of Gcd in what they read, and applied it to the peoples 
' preſent condition, as they ſaw fir, as the manner of the Prophets 
generally was. And hetice the people were ſo deeply affefted with 


reckoned by. genealogy, but it was not found: there- 
fore were they as polluted put from the prieſt-hood. 

65 And|| the Tirſhatha ſaid unto them, that they 
| Or, th: ſhould not cat of the moſt holy things, ill there ſtood 
gYvernur. yy a prieſt with Urim and Thummim. 

66 The whole congregation rogether, as forty and 
two thouſand, three hundred and threeſcore. | 

67 Beſide their man-fervants and their maid-fervants, 
- ofwhom there were ſeven thouſand three hundred thir- 


— Mi 3-2, & 
wer ee eee hone + . 


45 The porters: the children of Shallum, the chil- 
dren of Ater, the children of Talmon, the chiidren of 


68 Their horſes ſeven hundred thirtie and fix : their 
mules two hundred forty and five: 

69 Their came!s four hundred thirty and five: 
thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty aſſes. 

7o And 7 feme of the chief of the fathers gave unto 
the work: the Tirſhatha » gave to the treaſure a thou. T Heb. 
land drams of gold, fifty baſons, five hundred and thir. *””: 
ty prieſts garments. 

ri,e. The Governour, to wit. Nehemiah. So it is no wonder that 
the number of the moneys, and other things here conttibuted,gif. 
fer from that Ezra 2. becauſe this is another colle&ion; that wag 
made in Zorohabel's time, and this in Ezra's. 

71 And ſeme of the chief of the Fathers gave to the 
treaſure of the work, twenty thouſand drams of gold 
and two thouſand and two hundred pound of filver. ' 

62 And that which the reſt of the people gave, was 
twenty thouſand drams of Gold, and two thouſand 
pound of ſilver, and threeſcore and ſeven prieſts gar- 
ments. 

73 SO the prieſts, and the Levites, and the porters, 
and the fingers, and ſome of the people, and the Nethi- 
nims, and all Hrael, dwelt in their cities; and when the 
ſeventh month came, the children of iſrael were in their 


Cities. CH -vHL 
Ezra bringeth, and expoundeth the Law of Moſes, and bleſſeth Ged with 

the people, 1» 8. Nehemiah and Ezra comfort the People, 9 1 2. 

The peoples forwaraneſs to hear, and to be inſirufted inthe Law,13---i5, 

They make themſelves booths, 16, 17. And keep a faft ſeven days, 18, © 

ND all * the people gathered themſelves rogether »p,,... 
as one man, into the ſtreet that was before the 
water-gate a and they ſpake unto Ezra * the ſcribe, *Ez:1 6; 
to bring the book of the Law of Moſes, which the 
LORD had commanded to Lfrae]. 

a Of which, ſee Nehem: 3: 26. 

2 And Ezra the priieft þ brought the law before the 
congregation, both of men and women, and all Þ that + Heb: 
could hear with undeiſtanding c, upon the firſt-day of 'hmir 
the ſeventh month. Rao 

b Who came 1: or 13 years before Nehemiah to Jeruſalem ; and Nears 
either tarried there, or went back to Babylon, being forced to do ſo 


fix 


| by ths Kings command, or ine1penſible occ+fons.and then retur- 


ned again with Nehemiah. ci,e. And ſuch children as were come 
to years of underanding 

; And he read therein before the ſtreet that yas be- 
fore the water gate, + from themorning untill mid-day, 100 
beiore the men and the women,and thoſe that could yy, 
ur derſtand : andthe ears of allthe people were attentive 
unto the book of the law. 

4 And Fzra the fſciibe ſtood upon a ÞF pulpit of tHebaw. 


wood, wiich they had made for the purpoſe, and be- 7 9. 
fide him ſtood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anajah, 
and Urijah, and Hiikiah, and Maaſeiah on his right 
hand, and on his left hand, Pedajah, and Miſhael,and 
Maichiah, and Harſhum, and Haſhbadana,Zechariah, 
and Mejhullam &. 

d Partly to declare their conſent and concurrence with Exya in 
whar he jaid and did: and partly that they,or ſome of them might 
bear a part in the work. 

5 And Ezra opened the book in the Þ ſight of ail the 
people ( for he was above all the people ) and when he 
openedir all the people ſtood up e. 

e Either in reference to God's Word ; of which ſee Num. 12 32. 
Judges 3: 20.1Or that they might hear his words the more diſtin&ly; 
or rather,becauſe the obſerved that Ezra compoſed himſelf to pray- 
er or thankſgiving ; which is here generally decl:red, but doubt- 
leſs was more particularly and largely expreſſed in that Aſſembly, 
as appezrs by their anſwering Amen, 4men, to his prayer. 

6 And Ezra blefled the LORD the great God : and 
all the peop'e anſwered, Amen, amen, with lifting up 
their hands : and they Bowed their heads, . and wor- 
(hipped the LORD with their faces to the ground. 

7 Alſo Jeſhua,and Bani andSherebiah, Jamin,Akkub, 
Shabbethar, Hodijah, Maaſeiah, Kelita, Azariah, 
Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites cauſed the 
people to underſtand the law f: and the people ſtood 
in their place g. 

f As well the words, which being Hebrew, now needed to be 
tranſlate] into the Chaldee or Syriack Language, which was now, 


tHeb.gu, 


an + henceforth the common language of thar people, who togerher 
with their Religion, had alſo in a great part loſt their Janguage : as 


it- g 7. e, In their ſeveral places and ſtations into which the compa=- 


' ny ſeems to have been diſtributed for conveniency of hearing ; 1t 


not being likely that ſo vaſt a Congregation could diſtin&ly hear 
one mans voice, Or,by their Fatzons i. 8. by the ſeveral ſtations of the 
Levites.and perſons laſt named ; who ſeem to have had ſeveral ſcat 
folds, by comparins this with chap.g,4. upon which they ſtood, as 
Ezra did upon his Puipit, v. 4; 

8 50 


w- 


Chap, vin F h 


t Or, z 
they m1: 
TR" 
MFWCE 
tree in 
Vhrd; of 


Law, 


. A 


Heb, 


it : 


LI; 


:7 6; 


bi, 


6 vin Fchap. VIII. 


| Or, the 

ex Ez 
F3ra2.63. 
Num.29- unto the 
;. Dent. for all the people wept 9, when they heard the words 


16.14, 15: of the law. 


[ Or ; that 
they might 
miruc 


8$ So they read h in the book of the law of God di- 
ſtintly, and gave the ſenſe ;, and cauſed thew to un- 
derſtand the reading k. 


» To wit, Ezra and his Companions ſucceſſively or ſeverally : z. e. 
The meaning of the Hebrew words, which they expounded 1n the 
commcn language. &z. e. That which they read, to wit, the ho- 
ly Scripture the action being put for the objet, as viſion 1s -Oft 
pt for the thing ſeen, and hearing for the thing heard, and fear 
for the thing feared. So they gave them both a tranſlation of the 
Hebrew words into the Chaldee, and an expoſition of the things 
contained in them, and of the duty incumbent upon the people 
by virtue of them, the declaration whereof was a great part of the 
Priefts work, Mal. 2. 7. : 

9 And Nehemiah, which is || the Tirſhatha, and 


ra the prieſt, the Scribe, and the Levites that taught 


the people, ſaid unto all the people, * This day js holy 
LOR D your God /Z, mourn not nor weep : 


{ To wit, as a day of feaſting and thanksgiving to God, and re- 
joicing in his mercies : for otrerwiſe even faſting days were holy 
to God in the general, though not in the ſenſe heremeant. m Out 
of a deep ſenſe of their great guilt, and of their extream danger by 


reaſon of it» ; 
10 Then he ſaid unto them, Go your way, eat the 


far, and drink the ſweet », and ſend portions unto them 
for whom nothing is prepared 0: for this day 15 holy 
untoour LOR D p, neither be ye ſorry, for the joy 
of the LOR D is your ſtrength 4. 


» Feaſt before the Lord, as the duty of the day obligeth you to 
do. 0 for the relicf of your poor brethren, who elſe muſt mourn 
whilſt you rejoice: See of this duty and prattice, Dez. 16. 11. 14, 
E/th. 9. 19+ þ Being the Feaſt of Trumpets, Levit. 23. 24: and the 
beginning of this joyful month, wherein ſo many days of feaſting 
and thanksgiving were to be obſerved. q 7. e. Rejoicing in Godin 
the manner preſcribed in his word, or ſerving him with cheerfulnels, 
and thankfulneſs,which is your duty always, but now eſpecialiy,will 
give you that ſtrength borh of mind and body, which you greatly 
nccd, both to perform all the duties required of you, and to in- 
dure and oppoſe all thecraftyCounſels and malicious deſigns of your 
enemics againſt you : whereas this deje&ion of mind, and exccfſive 
oricf,if you induige it,will both offend God,and damp your ſpirits, 
and weaken your very bodies,and make you untir forGods lervice,or 
for your own neceflary occaſions, & ſo an eafie prey to your Enemies. 

11 So the Levites ſiilled all the people r, faying; 


Hold your peace 5s, for the day is holy, neither be ye 


N EB H B M #48 


þ 


ed as the moſt eminent place, but with an uſual Synecdoche, this 
placei being pur for any place neareſt the ſeveral Cities of Judah, 
where theſe branches were ro be procured. b Of which fee on 
Lev. 23. 24: Deut. 16. 13: 

16 So the people went forth, and brought them and 
made themſelves booths, every one upon the roof of 
his houſe c, and in their courts 4, and in the courts of 
che houſe of God, and in the ſtreet of the wWatcr- gate 
and in the ſtreet of the gate of Ephraim e. : 

c For the Houles there were made flar ; of which ſee Devr. 22 
8. d Bclonging ro their own Howults : for theſe might be an 
where in the open air. e 'Lhat gate of the City which led to wn. 
Tribe of Ephrainn. 

17 Andall the congregation of them that were come 
again our of the captivity, made booths, and fate under 
the booths: for f lince the days of Jothua the ſon of Nun, 
unto that day, had nor the children of Iſrael} done ſo 
z : and there was very greatgladnelſs. 

f Or, ſurely, as the Hebrew Ch: is oft uſed, as hath been noted be. 
fore. For the following words ſeem nor fo much to give a reaſon 
of what was laſt ſaid or done conccrning their dwelling in booths ; 
as to contain the holy Writers RefleQtion upon the pre:enr Celebra- 
tion of this Feaſt. g Either, 1. So as to the matter or ſubſtance of 
the thing. So it implies that all the while this Feaſt of Taberna- 
cles was not obſerved. Which ſeems alrogether improbable, con- 
1dering how expreſly this was commanded to be celebrated, Lew. 3 
&Cc. and what excellent Kings and Prieſts, and Prophers there had 
been within thatrime. ſuch as were perſons of greatunderſtandins 
and moſt expert and ſtudious in God's Word, and therefore could 
not be ignorant of ſo plain a duty. And withal fo througly pious 
and caretul, and zcalous for God, and the obſervation of his Law 
and Worſhip, and tome of them commended for their univerſal O- 
bedience to all God's Commands ; and therefore would nor be guil- 
ry of ſo grols a negle&, Beſides that this Feaſt was obſerved. is 
ſufficiently implied mn 1Kgs 8.2465. and 2C/r.7.9.and is particular= 
ly exprefled Ezra 3.4. Or rather, 2. $0, as to the manner and circum- 
ſtances. They never kept this Feaſt ſo joyfully, as the next words 
declare, having not only the ſame a of rejoicing which rhe 
formerly had,but ſome ſpecial cauſes to increaſe their joy, ro wit _ 
remembrance of their ſtupendious deliverance both our, of the Land 
of their Captivity, and out of the hands of their wicked and mal: 
cious Neighbours ever fince their return, and eſpecially now when 
they were new building the Wals of Jeruſalem ; they never kept it 
ſolemnly and religioully : for whereas at other times, only the firſt 
and Jaſt day of that Feaſt were celebrated with an holy convocation 
Levit. 23. 35, 36. John 7.37. now there was an holy convocation. 
and the pcople aſſembled, and attended upon the readins of the 
Law every day of this Feaſt, as is noted in the nexr verſe. 


grieved. 

7 Whoſe paſſions being once raiſed, could not ſuddenly be com- 
poſed. 5 Ceate from weeping and mournful cries, and , turn your , 
lamentations into thankſgivings- | 

12 And all the people went their way to eat, and 


t a ſolemn affembly, * according unto the manner. 


10 Alfo day by day from the ticlt day unco the laſt 


' day, he readinthebook of the law of God 5 : and they 


kept the feaſt ſeven days, and on the eighth day was 


to drink, and co ſend portions, andto make great mirth, 
becauſe they had underſtood the words that were de- 


clared unto them #. 
t Becauſe they now knew God's mind, and their own duty,which 


they werereſolved to praftiſe ; which gave them ground of hope 
and truſt in God's mercy, and conſequently of great and juſt joy- 


12 And on the ſecond day were gathered cogether 


the chief of the fathers of all the people, the prielts and 
the Levites #,unto Ezra the ſcribe, even || to underſtand 


the words of the Law x. y 
« Chuſing rather to confeſs their Ignorance for their cdification, 


Le in the than vainly to pretend to more knowledge than they had : where- 


PWrd: 0 f 
Law, 


f Heb. by 
the hand of. 
Lev. 23. 
34. Deur, 
6. 13, 


-;, in they ſhew both true humility, and ferious godlinels, that they 


h Which was commanded to be done at this Feaſt, Deiit.5 x. ro T Heb. q 
11, 12. though not enjoined to be done every diy, asnow out of refirannt. | 
a {ingulac zeal they did. SIN 23s 

36. 


EH APD 


y n h 4 <'s Ea 
Tae Jolemn fas and repentance Hl te peopie, 1, 2. and the monner of it, q, 
2:7; 21 F als G5 f iF rol e */1. >» . 
The Levites conf:ſs and bleſs God for his goodneſs ty chem, and their 


fathers, 4 -——8. iu Ezyp7. 9, IO. mm ther journcy ous of it, xx, 15 
" y . . 21 f. . , *47 : =_ -. Y » out 

1:0 wn Sat, 13, 14. 7! T2err journe) toward Canaan, 15---18. in 

Ybe Wilderneſs, 19 -—— 21. ariving ons the Nations before them, 22. 


5 


. Ls o . 2 
— 26. in hearing their prayer when in trouble,and ſaving them, 27 -— 
ct - 3 . 


They confeſs their jins, 52 a=——_—_—z, and ſeal a Covmant, 38. 
Ow 1n the twenty and fourth day of this month a, 
the children of Urael were aff:mbled with faſting, 


Chap. 


were more carcful to learn and praCtice their duty than to preſerve 
the.r r-putation with the people. x Thar they might more ex- 
a&t'y underand the meaning of ſome things which they had heard 
before, and ſo inſtruc the pcople in them. 

14 And they found y written in the law which the 
LORD had commanded + by Moſes, that the children 
of Iſrael ſhould dwell in * booths in the feaſt of che 


ſeventh month. 
3 Upon 'Ezra's information, and their diſcourſe with him. 


15 And that they ſbould publiſh z, and proclaim TY 


all their cities, and in Jeruſalem, {-ying, Go forth un- 
to the mount 4, and tetch olive branches, and pine- 
branches, and myrtle-branches, and palm-branches, and 
branches of thick trees b, to make booths,as z# is written. 

Z 7. e, And they found this alſo written, which is to be ſupply- 
ed out of the former verſe, that they ſhould, &c. which, though it be 
not particularly required, ſo as isexpreſſed in the words here tol- 
lowing, yet in the general is required by virtue of that Precepr, L-v. 
23, 4. Numb. 19. 10. And according to this Tranſlation, irmuſt be 
underſtood in the cloſe of this verſe, that they did accordingly pub- 
liſh and proclaim, ©c. Bur theſe words may be rendred, which ( as 
this Hebrew word is rendred here, v. 14. and moſt commonly ) 
alſo ( fo the Particle Yau is uted,s Ja 6. 1. Jer. 1. 3.) they did publiyb, 
&c, For io they did, as is evident and acknowledged ; and 1t ſeems 
fir that ſo much ſhould be expreſſed ; and thetic v ords being 1o par- 
ticular and properto this ſpecial occaſion,ſeem to intimate, that this 
is rather an hitiorical relation of what they now did, than a decla- 
ration of that which theLaw require4them to do, which was but in 
very general terms, and ſo exadt and not particularas this following 
Precept is {aid to be. « The Mount of Olives, which was next Jeru« 
ſalem, and forced with Olive-Branches, and probably with the reſt 
here me::tioned : for theſe Trees may ſeera to have been planted 
F.ccaveurs principaily, for the ule of this Capital City in this very 


and with fackcloths, and with earth upon them. 

a The next day but one after the Feaſt of Tabernacles, which be- 
gun on the 14th d:y, and ended on the 22th day, Levie. 23. fortheir 
conſciences having then been fully awakened by the Law read ro 
them, and their hearrs being full of grief for their grear ſins, which 
they were not ajlowcd to expreſs in that time of publick Joy and 
Triumph ; now when that was paſt, they reſume their former 
thoughts and paſſions, and recalling their fins to mind, ſer aparc 
a day for folema faſting and humiliations 


2 And * the leed of Ifrael ſeperated themſelves from 


all + ſtrangers b, and ſtood and confeifed their fins, and * 
I 


the iniquiries of their fathers c. 

6 From all familiar and unnecetfary ſociety with the heathens 
and particularly from thoſe ſtrange Women whom ſome of them 
had married. For though Ezra had done this formerly, Ezra 10 
as far as he hid knowledge of the perſons faulty, and power ro re- 
drets their faults, yet ,it ſeems,thcre were ſomeCriminals,who were 
either without his knowledge, or out of his power : or, theſe were 
ſome new Delinquenrs, that fiace that time had fallen into the ſame 
crror, and ſhewed rite truth of their repearance, by the forſaking 
of their beloved fins, and deareſt relations. See again Nehem. 13 4 
c Which they contels partly as one cauſe of their preſent ſulfer- 
ings : and partly becaute they by their praQices had juſtified their 
fathers ſins, and made them their own. 

And they ſtood up in their places, and read in the 


book of the Law d ofthe LORD their God, one fourth 


| part of the day e, and «zother fourch part they coueſ- 


ſed f, and worſhiped the LORD their God g. 

4 So asthey did before. giving them the ſenſe of what they read, 
of which ſee on chap. 8. 5, 8. e To wit, for three hours; for there 
were accounted twelve hours in their day, John 11. 9g. Probably 
they began after the morning Sacrifice, at which diverlſe religious 
People uſed to be preſent, but now they were all aſſembled rogerher 


upon this great occaſion : and they continued their work from that 


eaſt, witich, thoughy long neglected, ſhould have been celebrated | rime rill the Evening Sacrifice, with which they cloled the work of 


ONCE Every Year And therefore this place feems to be here defigns | the day. 
(] 


f Both God's mercies, as appears frum the matrer of the 
4 B foliow. 


Ezra 10. 
I. 


Ct. 13.30. 
ft 


ied. 


children of 
oy fr ang ere 


1p, IX. SE i E 
| following ,. .., <1, #1ua their own Sins, as is expreſſed. v. 2. this 
day being ch-efly {er apart for that work. g Partly by the acknow- 
ledgment and adoration of his wonderful mercy 1 forgiving their 
fins, and ſaving them from the deſerved Judgments, which they 
either fe'r or feared, and giving them his Law, and the knowledge 
thereof & partly by imploring his further grace and m-rcy to them. 
4 Tien ſtood up upon the || ttairs of the Levices -, 
Jeſhua and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebi- 
af, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud VOIC? 2 
unto the LORD their God. 

h Or, «pon the ſcaffold, &c 3. e. Upon ſuch Sraifs, or rather Scaf- 
folds. or Pulpirs, as the Levites uted to itand upon, when rhey 
taught the People. Burt you muſt northin{ rhar all the perſons here 
named {tood in one place, and utrered the following words rogerher; 
which would have cauſed great confuiion in their ſpecches, by 
which means, bur few of the People could have diftin&!ly heard, or 
underſtood them, but that they ſtood upon ſeveral Pulpirs, each 
of them either reaching of thar part of the Congregation which 
was allotted to him, or praying or bleflſing God with them. 2 
Thereby teſtifying their deep ſenſe of their fins and miſcries, and 
their fervent and importunate deſire of God's mercy. 

5 Then the Levites, Jeſhua and Kadmiel, Bani, Ha- 
ſhabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, «»d Pethahi- 
ah, ſaid &, Stand up and bleſs the LORD your God 
for ever and ever /; and blefled be thy glorious name, 


which is exalted above all blefling and praiſe. 

k All the following words. Either therefore they all uſed the 
ſame words, being compoſed and agreed upon by Ezra and them- 
ſelves ; or they all prayed in the ſame manner, and to the ſame pur- 
poſe, having agreed among themſelves concerning the matter of 
their Confeſſions and Prayers: And thefe are the words which 
one of themuſed ; and it1is implied that the reſt of rheir Prayers 
of the ſame nature. / From day to day, as long as you live, and 
to all eternity. | x 
Gen.r.1. 6 Thou, even thou art LORD alone, * thou haſt 

Deur.19. made heaven, the * Heaven of Heavens, with all cheir 
tl hoſt, the earth and all things that are therein, the ſens 
and all that zs therein, and chou preſerveſt them all, and 


* the Hoſt of Heaven m» worſhippeth thee, 

m Either, 1. The Stars, which after their manner worſhip and 
praiſe God, as all the creatures do after their manner, of which ſee 
Pſal. 148. or rather, 2. The Angels, who are 1o called, as 1 Kings, 
22.19. Lke 2. 13- who do worſhip God truely and properly. And 
it is moſt uſual, and reaſonable to underſtand all words properly, 
where there is no need of a figurative interpretation. And it 
this were u::lerſtoo1 of Meraphorical, and obje&ive worſhipping 
of God, there ſeems to be no reaſon to appropriat that to zhe hos? 
of Heaven, to wit, the Stars, ſeing the hoſts of Sea and Earth do 
in that ſenſe worthip God no leis than the Stars do, namely, in 
giving Angels and Men matter and occaſion of worſhiping and 
praiſing of God. 

7 Thou art the LORD the God, who Gdidſt chooſe 
* Genzrr. * Abram », and broughteſt him forth out of Ur of the 
31.&12.1. Chaldees, and gaveſt him the name of * Abraham. 
*Gen. 17. #= Out of the midit of all his Nation and Family. When thou didſt 
5. paſs by, and negle& the reſt of them, ſuffering them to walk on 1n 

their idolatrous and dezſtru&ive courſes ; thou didſt chuſe and fingle 
out him to ſerve and glorifie thee, to be Father of all the fairhtul, 
the Progenitor of the Mcfſias, and the perſon in whom, not we only, 
bur all Nations ſhould be bleſſed, and to enjoy thee to all erernity. 

8 And foundelt his heart * faichtul before thee o, 

R and madeſt a * covenant with him, to give the land of 
_— the Canaanites,the Hittites,che Amorites,and thePer1z- 
* Gen.z2.Zites, and the Jebufites, and the Girgaſhites, to give x 
».&15.18, 1 ſay, to his ſeed, and haſt performed thy words, for 
& 17- 7.9. thou art righteous. 

o When thou madeft that admirable trial of his Faith and Obedi- 
ence, in requiring him to offer up his only Son aac, rhou didft 
find our, and diſcover his faithfulneſs, which was well known to 
thee before, and alſo was wrought in him by thy Grace. _ 

*Exod 2: g * Anddidit ſce the attliction of our Fachers in E- 

25: 83:7; oypt,and heardeſt their cry by the red fea : 

*Exod 14: 19 And * ſhewedlt figns and wonders upon Pharaoh, 

10: and on all his ſervants, and on all the people ofhis land: 

p ys, for thou kneweſt that they dealt proudly againſt them 

WE hop p: fo didft thou get thee a name, as it is this day. 

* Exo:14. I * And thou didſt divide the ſea before them, fo 

21, 22; that they went through the midft of the ſea on the dry 
land, and their perſecutors thou threweſt into the deeps, 

*Bxo: 1c. 45 2 fone intothe * mighty waters 9, 

IL.» Treating thy People with great ſcorn and contempt, like Slaves 
and beaſts. 9 7. e. The deep waters, fuchas thele were, into which 
when a ftoneis thrown, there is no hopes of ſeeing it again. 

12 Moreover, thou * leddett chem in the day by a 
cloudy pillar, and in the night by a pillar of fire, to 
give them liglit in the way wherein they ſhould go. 

A 13 * Thou cameſt down alſo upon mount Sinai,and 

Exod:19: {; k {t . ] eh > H b l ” 
20.8&20. 7: PAaKelt with them irom Heaven, an gaveſt them righc 
tHeb-law; Judgments, and F true laws 7 ; good 5s ſtatutes and 
ef cruthY commandments ; 

7 Not ſuch Laws as ſome of the heathen Laws were, which 
taught them falihood, ſuperſtition, idolatry, and other errors, but 
ſuch as diſcover the truth, and the true mind and will of God, and 
the true and only way to life. s Both in themſelves, and to us 
alſo, bzing uſeful ro teach, and comfort, and fave us» I76 

14 And- madeſt known unto them thy holy ſabbath 
t, and commandeſt them precepts, itatutes, and laws, 


by the hand of Mofes thy ſervant : 


Jr, ſeaf- 


*Gen.2.1. 


* Ex0?13: 
21; 


M23 24 Chap. 1% 
t That holy and bleſſed Sabbath-day which thou d'dſe 87-{s and 

\anfiifie to Adam in Paradiſe, Gen. 2. 3. commanding him, and in 

him, all his Poſterity to obſerve it, which yer almoſt all People 

and Nations have quite forgotten, yea ſo far, as to mock at them, 

Lam, 1. thou dzdſr graciouſly reveal unto thy peop'e, reviving 

chat ancient Law by another particular Law abour 1t given to us in 

the wilderneſs. *p 

15 And * gaveſt them bread from heaven for their 306. 


| I4, 15, 
hunger, and * broughteſt forth water for them out of + wg 


the rock, for their thirſt, and promiſedſt them that they 6. Numb. 
ſhonld * go in to poſſeſs the land, | which thou had(t #139 Gc. 
{worn to give them. "+3" 
eb, 

16 But « they and our fathers dealt proudly x, and which thy 
hardned their neck, aad hearkned not to thy com- had# 1 
mandments. up thine 
# Notwithſtanding all theſe ſingular and wonderful Mercies : _— 
which he hitherto recounted to aggravate their Sins, which he now $*** Flew, 
comes to confeſs, and to lead them to a fincere and !ngenuous grief 
and repentance for their Sins, not only for the miſchicft which rhey 
brought upon themſelves, bur for the injury and indignity which 
they offered to. God. x7. e Sinned preſumptuouſly, and with 
conrempr of God, as ſcorning to ſubmit their wills to Gods. 

17 And refuſed to obey y, neither were mindful of 
thy wonders that thou didft among them : but hardned 


their necks, and in their rebellion | appointed z * a Ai cb, 
captain to return to their bondage : but thou art Fa God , thotg 


ready to pardon, * gracious and merciful, flow to an- * Numb, 
per, and of great kindneſs, and forſookeſt them not. 74: 4 

7 Perſiſted in their diſobedience after many Admonitions, and In- T eb s 
Vvitations to repentance. & 2. e. Deligned, purpoſed, and reſolved Goa of pare 
to do {o, Numb. 14+ 4, and therefore they are ſaid to do ſoas Abra- #9 
ham 1s ſaid to have offered up 1/aac, Heb. 11. 17« becauſe he inten- * Exo,34. 
ded, and attempted to do ir. 6. 

18 Yea, * when they had made them a molten calf. Rn. 
and ſaid, This is thy God that brought thee up out of *'Ex01 
Egypt, and had wrought great provocations, 

19 Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forfookeſt them 
not in the wilderneſs a: the pillar of the cloud depar- 
ted not from them by day to lead them in the way ; * Exod. 
neither the * pillar of fire by night to ſhew them light, 13. 22. 
and the way wherein they ſhould go. Numb, 

a Where if thou hadſt left them without thy condu& and com- 14;.'+ 
forr, they had been utterly loſt and undone. 7 Cor. 0 

20 Thou gavelt allo thy * good ſpirit þ to inſtru 4 Numb 
them, and, with-heldeſt not thy * menna . from their x11. 1, 
mouth, and gaveſt them * water for their thirſt. * Exo.16 

6 Which thou didfſt graciouſly and plentifully impart unto Me- 4'Jolh. s, 
ſes, and then unto the ſeventy Elders, Numb. 11: 17, 25, 26. to the 2? 
end that they might be able to dire& and govern thy people wiſc- * Exo,r! 
ly, and in thy fear. " 

21 Yea, * forty years didſt thou ſuſtain them inthe 


wilderneſs, fo that they lacked nothing, their * clothes — wg 
waxed not old, and their feet ſwelled not c. *Deuts. 


c_ Ot which, ſee the Notes on Dent. 8. 4- 
| 22 Moreover thou gaveſt them kingdoms, and na- 
tions, and didft divide them into corners d : fo they 
polletied the land of Sihon * and the land of the king *Num.:. 
of Heijhbon, and the land of Og king of Baſhan. 21, Of, 

a Or, into a corner. But the ſingular number is very commonly 
pur for the plural. Thisjs underirood, cither, 1, Of the Ifraelites, 
ro whom God divided by lot the Kingdoms and Nations laſt mention» 
ed, and gave them all the corners, or ſides, or quarters, ( for all theſe 
the word ſignifies ) of their Land. Or rather, 2. Of the Heathen 
Nations, whom God in a great meaſure deſtroyed, and the remain«= 
ders of them he diſperſed into corners ; that whereas before the Iſra- 
elites came, they had Jarge habirations and dominions; now they 
were cooped up into corners, ſome of them into one Town or City, 
and ſome into another, in the ſeveral corners of their Land, as 
inde:d we find them afterward ; whilſt the Iſraelites dwelr in a 
large place, and had the poſſeſſion of their whole Land, ſome few 
and ſmall parcelsexcepted. Compare Deut, 31. 26. where the like 
phraſe is uſed in the fame ſenſe. 

23 Their children alſo multipliedſt thou as the ſtars 
of heaven, and broughteſt them into the land, concer- 
ning which, thou hadſt promiſed to their fathers that 
they ſhould go in to poſleſs it. 

24 So the children went in and poſſeſſed the land, 
and thou ſubdued(t before them the inhabitants of the 
land, the Canaanites, and gaveſt them into their hand, 
with their kings, and the people of the land, that chey 
might do with them F as they would. 

25 And they took ſtrong cities, and a fat land, and | 
poſſeſſed heuſes full of all goods, || wells digged, vine- —_— 
yards, andolive-yards, and # fruit-crees in abundance: ';.,, il, 
ſo they did eat, and were filled, and * became fat, and | or, - 


delighted them in thy great goodnels e. Ferns. 

e i.e. In all theſe comforts and bleſſings, which by thy great Heb.fre# 

goodneſs they obrained and enjoyed. of food. : 
26 Nevertheleſs, they were diſobedient, and rebelled *D<v*3" 


againſt thee, and * caſt thy law behind their backs, 2 rings 


and flew thy * Prophets, which teſtified againſt them, to x. 9. 
turn them to thee,and they wrought great provocations. * 1Kn9% 
f i. e, Negle&ed and deſpiſed thy Laws, would not regard nor 79: )” 
obſerve them; whereas they:ſhould have had them continually before 
theiceyes,to dirett and govern them. Compare Pjal 50.17.Ezek 23.35. 

27 * There« 


a. 


7 Hel 
at the 
M7,0r 
ed 


'T y 
f Het 
'? 9 ny 
Wi.F eat 
Ur.0%G; 
/ "a 7s, 
lic Kon 
|\ rt; 


Pip 
vrlig,43 


eut, 4. 


Ut " 


Chap- * N BE HR 
"Tudg. 2. 
14. . 


the hand of their enemies. 


' 
returned ! 


' 1 
(0 (5/4%, 


deliver them, according to thy mercies, 


m2, hardened their neck g, and would not hear. 
wt ATA 


0: 


m# 07 hou them into the hand of the people of the lands. 


tOtMe 


I7-13- 


t Heb. 172 
{7,9 ſo much as to hear them! 
(14S, 2 X 

thou art a gracious and merciful God. 
Y 22 Now therefore our God, the great, * the migh- 
*3+-ty, and the terrible God, who keepeſt covenant and 
* cb, mercy 4, let not all the | trouble ſeem little before thee 
zrinſf. 92+ that hath come upon us, on our kings ON our prin- 
1-49 ces, and on our prieſts, and on our prophets, and on 
2 feord Cur fathers, and on all thy people ſince the time of the 

kings of Afſyria », unto this day. 

15. e. Covenanred Mercy, or thy Covenant of Mercy and Peace. 
Or,he adds mercy,becauſe the Covenant in it {e}f was nor a ſufficient 
ground of hope, becauſe they having 1o baſely broken it, God was 
diſcharged from keeping it, and thercfore they fly to God's free and 
rich Mercy for relief. m Do not thou account 1t ſmall and in- 
ſufficient for our puniſhment, and that it is fir to continue and en- 
creaſe it. n Stri&ly and properly 1o called ; for from them was 
the beginning of all the calamities, both of Judah and of Iſrael, 
as appears from 2 Kings 15. 19+ and 18. 13. Or, the Kings of Ba- 
bylon, ſo called, 2 Chron. 33- Il» 

22 Howbeit, thou «rt juſt in all that is brought up- 
on us : for thou haſt done right, but we have done wic- 
kedlys Z 

24 Neither have our kings, our princes, Our prieſts, 
nor our fathers kept chy law, nor hearkened unto thy 
commandments, and thy teftimonies, wherewith thou 
didſt teſtifie againſt them. | 

25 For they have not ſerved thee in their kingdom, 
and in thy great goodneſs that thou gaveſt them, and 
in the large and fat land which thou gaveft before them 
o, neither turned they from their wicked works. 

0 7. e. Which thou didſtlay open to their view and Poſſeſſion, 
removing their Enemies, and all impediments out of the way. _ 

26 beheld, we are ſervants this day, and for the land 
that thou gaveſt unto our fathers, to eatthe fruit there- 
of, and the good thereof, behold, we are ſervants in itp. 

Þ In that Land wherein heretofore, under thee, and by thy fa- 
vour, We were rightful Lords and owners. ; 

37 And it yieldeth much increaſe unto the kings 
whom thou haſt ſet over us q becauſe of our fins : allo 
they have dominion over our bodies, and over our Cat- 
tel 7 at their pleaſure, and we are in great diſtreſs. 

7 We plow, and ſow, and labour, and thou giveſt thy bleſſing to 
our endcavours ; and yet in a great meaſure this is not for our ſelves, 
as formerly it was, but-for our Kings, tro whom we pay great and 
heavy tributes for theſe things; of which ſee Ezra 6. 8. and 7. 24, 
» Prefling or forcing both us and our beaſts to go and do whar 
they pleaſes : 

{Hoa 38 And becauſe of all this s, we make aſure covenant 
the ſ2al. *, and Wrice it, and our Princes, Levites, and pricfts | 
"%,0r ſeal. ſeal unto its 

s 5 Becauſe allthis miſery lies upon us for our fins,we do heartily 


repent of them, and reſolve to torſake them. s Or, we faithfully 
promiſe and engage our ſelves to future obedience. 


27 * Therefore thou deliveredſt them into the hand 
P15 of their enemies, whovexed them, and in the time of 
5 © their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardeſt 
them from heaven : and according to thy manifold mer- 
cies, thou gaveſt them favours, who ſaved them out of 


,., _ 28 Bur after they had reſt, f they did evil again be- 
me, fore thee : therefore lefreſt thou them in the hand of | > 
their enemies, fo that they had the dominion over them : 
yet when they returned and cried unto thee, thou hear- 
deft :h4:m from Heaven, and many times didſt thou de- 


29 Andceſtifiedſt againit them, that thou mighteſt bring 
them again into thy law : yet they dealt proudly, and 
hearkened not unto thy commandments, but ſinned 
againſt thy judgments ( which if a man do, he ſhall 

Weh.che live in them f) and F withdrew the ſhoulder, and 


”* 20 Yet many years didft thou} forbear them h, and 
< teltitiedſt * againſt them by thy ſpirit in thy prophets 
{Hebpre-2 ; Vet would they not give ear &: therefore gaveſt 


6X f Of which ſce on Levit- 18. 5. Ezek, 20. 11. Rom, 10. 5. Gal. 3. 
*?RINBS, 12. & 7. e. Would not ſubmit to thy yoke, like ſtubborn Oxen. 
3- h4i.e, Thou didit delay to bring upon them theſe Judgements which 
2 Chr0: thou hadſt treatned, and they had deſerved, and didſt wait for 
5f.15- their Repentance. #7 By thy proph.ts, who ſpake to them by the 
c. '” Inſpiration of thy Holy Spirit, whom therefore they ſhould have 
toy Hana o obeyed. k 7. e. Would not obey them, nor would they vouchſafe 


2 Nevertheleſs tor thy great mercies ſake thou 
didft not utterly conſume them, nor forſake them, for 


M 1 | 4 Bf. 


prayeth with 7eſbua and Bani, &. before the feaſt of Tabernacles, 
ch: 8: v. 4, ©c. we haveno mention of him, c<. 9. but the whole 
work of that ſolemn Faſt-day was managed by them alone. without 
any mention of Ezra, whoſe name would not have been omitted, .if 
he had been then preſent. It is true, we meet with Ezrs after this,at 
the Dedication of the Wall of Jeruſalem, c<.i1. 36 and therefore he 

was then freed from this Impediment, whatſoever it was; but thence 

it appears that he was not dead. 6 This is added to diſtingbiſh him 

from others of that name, whereof we have one Nehem. 3+ 16. 


Serajah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 

3 Paſhur, Amariah, Malchijah, 

4 Hattuſh, Shebaniab, Malluch, 

5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 

6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 

7 Meſhullam, Abijah, Migamin, 

3 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemajah : theſe wer: the priefts: 
'9 And the Levites: both Jeſhua the ſon of Azaniah 

Binnui of che ſons of Henadad, Kadmiel, , 
Io And their brethren Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita 

Pelajah, Hanan, : 
I: Micah, Rehob, Haſhabiah, 

I2 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah ; 

13 Hodijjah, Bani, Beninu. 

14 The chiefof the people c, Paroſh, Pahath-moab 

Elam, Zattu, Bani, ; 
c 7, e. Their Elders, or Repreſentatives, ating in the ſtead, and 


by the appointment of all the reft : for ir had b 
and unneceſlary for every one of the prone vs feal.. Es 


Is Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 

16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 

17 Ater, Hiskijah, Azzur, 

18 Hodiah, Haſhum, Bezai, 

19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 

20 Magpiaſh, Meſhullam, Hezir, : 
21 Melhezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua, 
22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anajah, 
23 Hoſhea, Hananiah, Haſbub, 

24 Halobeſh, Pileha, Shobek, 

25 Rehum, Haſhabnah, Maaſcjah, 

26 And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 

27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah. 


vites, the porters, the ſingers, the Nethinims. and all 
they that had ſeparated themſelves from the propleed 
_ _ =—_ _ law of God, their wives their ſons 

and their Daughters, every one having knowled 
having underſtanding. . "IPA 


4 Thoſe who did not write and ſeal with their own hands. b 
only by their Deputies above-mentioned. NON 


29 They clavetotheir brethren e, their nobles, and 
entred into a curſe, and into an oath f, to walk in Gods 
law which was given + by Moſes the ſervanc of God, + Heb- 5y 
and to obſerve and do all the commandments of the bt: handof. 
LORD our Lord, and his judgments, and his ſtatutes. 

e They owned and ratified what the others had done in their 

names, declaring their afſentto ir by their words, or by the lifting 

up of their hands, as the manner was. f 7. e. An Oath bound with 

a Curſe or Imprecation upon themſelves, in caſe they violated it. 

30 And that we would not give g * our daughters * Exod. 
unto the people of the land, nor take their daughters 34: 16- 
for our ſons. | Deut:7:3, 
 $ To wit, in marriage. Having ſworn obedience to God's Laws 

in the general, they now de ſo to ſome particulars, wherein they 

had lately tranſgrefſed, or were moſt prone to tranſgreſs. 

31 * And if the people of the land bring ware, or x 

any Victuals on the ſabbath day to ſell, hat we would hn q" _ 
not buy it of them on the ſabbath, or on the holy day, 23: rs 
and that we would leave * the ſeventh year þ, and the Deue: 5: 
* exaction of | every debt z. 72; Chap: 


h 1. e. Leave the land at reſt from plowing or tilling it in that [fe 
- : 252 


year, according to God's command, Exod. 23. 10, u. Levit. 25, 4. i 
Heb. hand; Debts are called hanas, becauſe they are commonly 
contratted or confirmed by a Bill under the hand of the Debtor. 
32 Alſo we made ordinances for us, ro charge our fHeb:eve. 
ſelves & yearly with the third part of a ſhekel, tor the '7 #9%*: 
ſervice of the houſe of our God ; 

k i. e. Every particular head or perſon among us, Which th 

had warrant to do both fromthe nature of the Sh becauſe hos 

was neceſlary to be done for the upholding of God'sWorkhip, & from 

the warrant of former examples in the like caſe, 2 Chron. 24. 5. 

33 For the ſhew-bread, and for the continual meat- | 
offering, and for the continual burnt-offering / * of the ScexNumb: 
ſabbaths, of the new moons, for the ſet feaſts, and for 28; & 29 


*Deur r5: 
2 


CH AF. As 


The Names of thoſe that ſealed the Covenant, 1 ===—27, The reft of 
TT» the People cleave to them : The Covenant, 28 ——— 39. : 
Heb, as OW + thoſe that ſealed « were, Nehemiah the Tir- 
OO ſhatha 6b, the ſon of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah, 
29? o Bork in their own Names, and in the Name of all the reſt. It 
[OrteG. PAY leem 

might be 
ſickneſs, or other 
this preſumption, That whereas Exr# appears, 


CO//TY 


the holy things ws, and for the ſin offerings =, to make J 
an atonement for I{rael, and for all the work of the 
houſe of our God, 

{ Formerly theſe things were provided out of the Treaſures of the 
Temple, 1 Chron.26.20, And when thoſe failed, out of the King's 
Treature,2Cron. 31.3. But now both theſe failing, proviſion is here 


on ſtrange that Ezra doth not appear among them. But that} made for them another way. m 7. e. For the Sacrifices, all which 
8 becauic he was prevented, either by death, or by ſome were holy. » Which are particularly mentioned,as moſt neceſfary 
extraordinary impediment, for which we have; and ſuitable to their preſent. ſtare, which was exceeding ſinful, 
and preacheth, and | and therefore miſerable, and calling aloud tor atoning Sacrifices. 
(4 


4 B 2 34 And 


Chap. 


28 * And the reſt 4 of the People,the prieſts,the Le- *Ezr.2:43 || 


* 
I 
' 


| 


- 2 -—"W oo. 


p- XI. 
| 24 And we caſt the lots amongſt the prieſts, the 
Levices, and the people os, for the wood-offering p, to. 
bring ## into the houſe of our God q, after che houſes 
-- ofourfachers r, at times appointed, year by year, tO 
+. 16, burn upon the altar of the LORD our God, * as ## #5 
written in the law. | | | 
o To determine the time and order in which cacl: of them ſhould 
take the care of the buiineſs. p For the Wood, which was ro be 
ſpent in great quantity. being uſed in every Sacritice, ana Iormerly 
Fad been ſupplyed out of the Temples Treaſures, or by theKing ; 
which con!d not now be done. 9. z. e. aro the place appointed 
to reccive it in the buildings adjoining or belonging to the Tem- 
le. 77.e Accocding to our ſeveral Families which were to take , 
the charge of it by courſe. G 
x: 233 And * ro bring the firſt-fruirs of our ground s, 
Leve and the firſt-{#u;rs of all fruit'of all trees, year by year, | 
23- unto the houſe of the LORD. h - 
5 7, e Of the Fruits of our ground. All the particulars of the 
firſt Fruirs are exattly and diſtinQly mentioned, thar none might 
pretend ign>rance when they withheld any part of the Prieſts dues; 
which ac that time elpeciaily the people were very prone to do, | 
through poverty or covetouſizels or prophanenels, and that the 
Prieſts rights might be firmly aſſured ro them. 
26 Alfo the firſt born of our ſons, and of our cattle, 
(as it is written * inthelaw ) & the firltlings of our herds, 
x0: 13- 21: of our flocks, to bring to the houſe of our God, 


Sig HE MIA HE. 


p95g unco the prielts that miniſter in the houſe of our Gcd : 
s.Numb. 37 * And that we thouid bring tne firſt-fruits of our 
s: 15:16. dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner 
Lev: 23: of trees, of wine, and of oil, unto the prieſts, to the 
gg rs of the houſe of our God, and * che tithes of 
* 19. & chambers of the houſe of our God, and * the tithes o 

8.126%. our ground unto the Levites, that the fame Levites 
eur; 18: might have the tithes in all the cicies of our tillage e. 

: & 26:2: 77 e The Tithes of all the fruits of the gronnd bclonging to 
Lev: 27: our ſeveral Cities. 2 ey 

of 238 And theprielt the fon of Aaron « ſhallbe with che 
n-  Levites, * when che Levites take tithes: and the Levites 
Num:18 ſhall bring up x the tithes of the tithes unto the houſe 
6. of our God, to the chambers, inro the treaſure-houſe y 

z 7. e, Some Prieſt or Prieſts appointed to this Work, that ſo nei- 
the. rhe. pzople might wrong the Levites, nor the Levites detraud 
the Pricits, of their dues. x At their own charges. y To wat, 
of the Temple ; where it was laid up for the utc of the Prieſts. 

29 For the children of l{rael, and the chiidren of 
Levi, * ſhall bring the offering of the corn, of thenew 
wine, and the oil, unto the chambers where ' are the 
veſſels of the Sanctuary =, and the prieſts that miniſter, 
and the porters, and the fingers ||, and we will norfor- 
ſ;ks the houſe of our God 7. 

z Where other things belonging to the Temple are Jaid up, and 
therefore theſe things alſo ſhall be put there. || 2. Ce. wW here alſo are 
the Prieſts and others that miniſter in t:eir couries, for whole uſe 
theſe proviſions are made. Þ 2. e. Who do here tolemniy declare 
and engage our elves that we will take care from time to rime, that 
the houie and ſervice of God be not neglected or torlaken,for want 
of neceflary Provitions to ſupport it. 

CHAP XS 
The Rulers and the tenth Man chojeun by Lyt, diveil at Jeruſalem, "MeV 

A Catalogue of their Names, Numbers and Fumiltics, 5 19. The 

reſeaue of the People dwell in other Cities, 20 = 


36. 

ND the rulers of the people dwelt at Jeruſalem 52: 
A the reſt of the people aifo calt lots, ro bring one 
of ten to dwell in Jeruſalem 5 the holy ciry, and nine 
parts ts dll in other citics, 

s Which their very Office in ſome ſort obliged them to do! 5 


That the Buildings of the Ciry might 'be compleated, and rhe 
Honour and ſafety of it better provided for. 


belonged, although ſome alſo of other Tribes dwelt in it, Of which, 
and other things relating to this Catalogue, fee r Chron, g. 3, &c. 
Z And his Family and Relations with him, and under him as their 
head, as appears from wv. 6. 

5 And Maaſejah the ſon of Baruch, the ſon of Colho- 
zeh, the ſon of Haſaiah, the fon of Adaijah, the fon of 
Jojarib, the fon of Zehariah, the fon of Shiloni. 

6 Ail the ſons of Perez that dwelt at Jeruſalem, 
were four hundred threeſcore and eight valiant men h, 

h Such were moſt proper for this place and time, becauſe of its 
many enemies round about it. 

- And theſe are the {fonsof Benjamin : Sallu the ſon 
of Methullam, the ſon of Joed, the ſon of Pedajah, 
theſon of Kolajah, the fon of Maaſejah, the ſon of 1- 


thiel the ſon of Jeſajah. 


8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred 


| twenty and eightz. 


! So here were more of Benjamin than of Judah, becauſe the City 
did chiefly and moſt properly belong to that Tribe, as hath becn 
noted before. 

9 And Joel the ſon of Zichri was their overſeer & : 


and Judah the ſon of Senuah, was ſecond over the city. 


k The Captain of their Thouſand. 

10 Of the prieſts; Jedaiah the ſon of Jojarib, Jachin, 

11 Serajah the ſon of Hilkiah, the ſon of Mcſhuilam, 
the ſon of Zadok, the ſon of Merajoth, the ſon of Ahi- 
tub, 2yas the ruler of the houſe of God /. 

I One of the Chief Pricſts, who ruled with and under the High 

Prieſt, See Numb 3. 32. 1 Chron. 9. 11. 2 Chron 19: 11. & 31. 13. 

i2 And their brethren that did the work of the 
houſe | ere eight hundred twenty and two: and A- 
dajah the fon of Jeroham, the ſon of Pelatiah, the ſon 
of Amzi, the ſon of Zechariah, the ſon of Paſhur, the 
{on of Malchiah, 

12 Andhis brethren chief of the fathers rwo hundred 
rorty and two: and Amalbai, tne ſon of Azareel, the 
ion 0iAhaſai, the ſon of Meſhillemoth, the ſon of Immer. 

14 And their brethren mighty en of valour, an 
nundred twenty and eight : and their overſeer was 
Z2bdiel, || the fon of one of the great men m, |.Or,the/m 

mM i, e, Of a perſon then or lately eminent in Valour, or Worth, of Hagges 
or Dignity. Or of Gedol/im, or Haggedolim, a Man fo called. dojim. 

15 Aifoof the Levites ; Shemajah the fon of Haſhub, 
che fon of Azrikam, the fon of Haſhabiah, the ſon of 
Bunn1. | 

15 And Shabbethai, and Jozabad of the chief of the 
Levites + had the overſight of the outward buſineſs of fHeb.zei 
the houle of God ». over. 

2 7, e, For thoſe things belonging to the Temple and its Service, 
which were ro be done without it, or abroad in the Country, as 
for the gathering in oft':e voluntary Contri-utions, or other ne- 
_— Proviſions out of the {everal parts of the Land. See x Chron. 

17 Andmattaniah the fon of Micha, the ſon of Zab- 

di, the fon of Aſaph, as the principal to-begin the 
thankſgiving in prayer 0s and Bakbukiah the ſecond a- 
mong his brethren,and Abdathe fon of Shammua, the 
ſon of Jedurhun, 

0 7. e In thepubdlick and ſolemn Prayers and Praiſes, which were 
conſtantly joyned with the Morning and Evening Sacrifice, at 
which tac Stagers were .preſent, and praiſed God with a Pſalm or 
Hymn, which this Man began. 

8 All the Levitesin the holy city, were two hundred 
fourſcore and four. 


19 Moreover, the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and 


F of God, 


2 And the people bleſſed all the mea that willingly 
offered themiclves to dwell at Jerufalen c. 

c Becauſe they denyed themſelves, and their own ſafety and pro- 
fit for the publick good ; for this Ciry was the butt of all the Mali- 
cious plots of their Enemies; and for the preſent it was rather 
chargeable than benefici.l o its Inhabitants; whereas the Country 
did more eaiily and certainly aiford them ſupplies. 

Now thele are the chief of the province 4 that 
dwelt in Jeruſalem : bur in the cities of Judah, dwelt 
every one in his poſſeſſion in cheir cities, ro it, T{rael e, 
the prieſts, and che Levites, and the # Nethinims, and 


Ft » 
Ezr. 2. the * children of Solomons ſervants. 


i Heb. 3; 


the gares, 


their brethren that kepr che | gates were an hundred ſe- 
venty and cwo. 

20 And the refidue of Iſrael, the prieſts and the T.e- 
vites, were in all the Cities of Judah, every one in his 
inheritance. 

21 * But the Nethinims dwelt in || Ophel, and Ziha, . c.... 

"4 . Rr See ci. 
and Gilpa were over the Nethinims. Rr” 
_ -— 8 '. | of rp 

22 The overſeer alſo of the Levites at Jeruſalem was j Or. 7 
Uzzi the fon of Bani, the fon of Haſhabiah the ſon of :ower- 
Mattaniah, theſon of Micha : of the ſons of Aſaph, the 
ſingers were over the buſineſs of the houſe of God 5. 


of >. #@ 4,e. Of Judea, which was now made a Province, e# e. The | 


fp t. ee Were to take care at Feryſal?m for the ſupply of ſuch things 


Chap. Xl. 


'N 


& 


63 


"Fra 


I, 


generality of the people of Jrael, whether of Judah,or Benjamin, or | #5 Were neceflary for the Temple and the Service of God, from 
any othcr Tribe 3 AS appears by this general Enumeration of all | r1ume to time, whillt others minded the outward buſmeſs, Vs 16. And th 
the Inhabitants of the Land, in which either the People of 7x- | this Office was very proper for thera, both as they were Levites, Or. 
dah and Benjamin are included under che Title of [jracl, or they are | to Whoſe care thoſe things belonged ; and as they were Singers, 


5s. 


2 br b . _s : "15, 
not here mentioned: which is ablurd to think, becaule they made | who were nor to come to Jeruſalem by turns, as other Levites, 2nd (Or, 
up the greateit number of them. And rheie he calls Jae! rather | 45 the Priefts did, but WCre conſtantly ro re{ide there, and therefore jrb, y. 
than Ju4zh, partly becauſe there were many of the other Tribes | were more capable of minding this buſineſs. Beſides their Em- (Or.Gz, 
now joined and incorporated with them ; and partly bccauſe none | ployment was not fo frequent, nor ſo great as ſome others were, they y 
of the Tribes of [/rae/, except Judah and Binjamin, dwelt in Jeruſz. and therefore they had more leiſure for ir. Oran; 
lem, as appears from the ſequel. 22 Forq it was the kings r commandment concer- Nin, y 

4 And at Jeruſalem dwelt certsjz of the children of | 2108 them, that |] a certain portion ſhould be for the j0:,z (+ wig 
Tudah, and ot the children of Benjamin f : of the chil- | 1NZE7rs, due for every day. EN" 
dren of Judah ; Athajah g the ſon of Uzziah, the ſon WP. , ES OG pgs on RN _ Minn V5'0. 
2 00 Ou. 2S 9 Ot -ICIC : 3 Ora rec »mpente iorit; Or : { th: 
f One. ah the ſon of Mahalalee!, + of the children of Perez: who madce this Conſtitution. Or rather 2. The Kings of Perſia, who f thank, 


F For to theſe two tribes this City anciencly and moſt properly 


47 


k, 4» 


. 
| Or, oj 
(14. 
|0r, to 


Vidmmash. 


*\Chron. 
& I4 


"Era 
y 1, 


it y, iq 


V. Is, 


V516, 


V v./ 


Ori. 2 Amariah, | 


| OrSeba. 
any I4 


0:84w;, 4 1ddo, || Ginnecho. Abijjah &@, 
(C [ M. Ile 


7 
þ I ) Y S I Fe 
Or Ginze. 


(Or.Sal,; 


N E HH E M 1: 


8 


Chap. XIf 


4 . - ® , _ oy _ Si A 4 
;5 called imp'y the king in the next verſc alſo; who took this care at j wait, and perform their Othce, one ſtanding over againſt another, as 


the reque! and by the direftion of Ezra or Aenemiah. Or this might'| it is explained v. 24, ward over ogarinft ward ; for the Hebrew word 


be Nehemiol's Command, which 1s called rhe #:ng's command, becauſe 
it was done by the King's Deputy, or a Commiſhoner whom the 
King impowered to do whathe ſaw fir for the Houſe and Service 
of God, commanding all the People to obey him therein ; as he had 
formerly Cone to Ezra 7: 18, 20, 23e 

24 And Pethahiah the fon of Meſhezabeel, of the 
chiidren ol! Z.erah the ſon of Judah, was at the Kings 
hand / in all matters concerning the people r. 

j Or, on *5: #225 part, to determine Civil Cauſes and Contro- 
verſics between Man and Man, by the Laws of that Kingdom ; 
which peradvcnture he underſtood better than Nehem:a/, and there- 
fore was appointed for this work, but {til unter Neh@niah. Or, ac- 
cording t9 the King's appointment, as the hand is uſed, as Numb. 4. 49. 
and ellewhere. £ Either in civil Differences between them ; or in 
things berween the King and People ; as in matters of Tribute, or 
Grievances, ©&c. wherein this Man poſſibly was chict juſtitiary un- 
der Nehemian. - 

25 And for the villages, with their fields, ſome of 
the children of Jud.h dwelt at Kirjath-arba «, and 
the | viilages thereof, and at Dibon,and in the villages 
thereof, and ar Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof. 

w T's, and wot of the other places herz named,. had been de-| 
froyed by rac Cha!deans; bur the Jews now repaired the beir of 
the ruinated Houtes, and by degrees rebuilt others. 

26 And at Jeſhuz, and ac Moladah, and at Beth- 
phelet, 

25 And at liazar (bual, and at Beer-ſheba, and 7z 
the villages thereof. 

28 And at Ziklag, and at Mckonah, and zz the vil- 

lages thereof, 
29 And at Enrimmon, & at Zareah,and at Jarmuth, 
20 Z4noah, Adullam, and i» their villages, at La- 
chith, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and in the vil- 
11g2s thereof: And they dwelt from Beer theba, unto 
tie valicy of Hinaom. 

3r The chi:dren alſo of Benjamin || from Geba, 
dwelt || at Michmaſh, and Aija, and Bethel, and in 
the! es, 
> And at Anathoth, Nob, Anania, 

Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim, 

Hadid, Zeboim, Nebullat, 

Lod, and Ono, * the valley of crafts-men . 

r, ir; the valley, &c. Or this is another place called Ge-haha- 


Cr 


- > 
. 7 


vill 
A 


(#) 


- 


rafun. 
36 And of the Levites, were divifions y i» Judah and 
in Benjamin, 

y Or, fir the Levites, ( to wit,thoſe of them who were not ſettled 
in Jeruſalem ) there were diviſions, i, e, places appointed for them, 
and diſtributed among them! 

CHAF- ALE 
The Prieſts, r -7. and Levites which came ub with Zerubbabel, 8,9 

The Succeſſion of High Pricfts, 10 -—21. Certain chief Levites, 22 

26, Tre manner of dedicating the Wall, 275 = 43. The Offices of Prieſts 

end I,-wvites, 44 of Singers and Porrers, 45 —— 47. 

OW theſe are the * priefts a, and the Levites, that 
went up with Zerubbabel the ſon of Shealcie], 
and Jeſhua ; Serajah, Jeremiah, Ezra 6, 

a i. e, The chief of the Prieft:, as they arc called here, wv. 7. To wit, 
the heads of tioſe twenty four courſes which Dzv/d appointed by 
Divine Direction, r Crone 24. And whereas there are twenty four 
and here but rwenty two, and v- 12, &c.only Twenty, the reaſon 
ofthis vifference may potlibly be this, becauſe Two of the twenty 
four cou: ies were extinct in Babylon, or at Iealt none of them was 
then returned ; and two of the Perſons here named, wv. 2, 5.to wir, 
Hattuſh, and Maca1ah, may be omirtcd in the account of rhe Poſte- 
rity of theſe perſons, v: 12, &c- tecaute they had no Poſteri:y. 
Poffibly theſe were not the tame couries. waich David had ap- 
pointed, but others which Zerubbabel and Jrijhua had conſtituted in 
imitation of that Order as far as they could. 6 Either this was ano- 
ther Ezra. or ifit were the ſame menticned Ezra 7. he lived to a 
great Age ; which may well be ſuppoſed conſidering his great So- 
bri-ty,and Abſtinence from thoſe Evil Prattices which ſhorten Mens 
Lives, and his great Picty to which Go? promiſed long Life, and 

vithal the ſpecial Providencezof God continuing him fo long in ſuch 
a {cafon, waerein the Church of God did greatly necd his help and 
counſe]. 


* 093 UI Loa 23 
= Þ va tb 


2 
© 


Malltch c, Hattulh, 

- © In the Repetition of this and ſome other Mens names hereafter 
v. 14. &c, There are ſome ſmall Variations,which are very frequent 
in that Language, 

2 [| Shechaniab, || Rekum, || Meremoth, 


d4 The Progcnitor of 7::n the Baptiſt, Luke 7. 5. 

5 || Miamin, || Maadiah, bilgah, 

6 Shemajahl, and Jojarib, and Jedayjah, 

7 || Sailu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedajah : theſe were the 


C:-fa, chiek of the prictts, and of their brethren e inthe days 
"2, v.16. of Jeſhua. 


I Moadis ette. Of the Pricſts, who were thor Brethren. Rn, : 
"V! 17, $8 Morcover the Levites : Jeſhua Binnui, Kadmiel, 


' Sherebiah, Judah, «ad Mattaniah, which was over || 


| thar is, the thankſ-iving, Be and his brethren. 
 Paims 9 Alſo Bakbukiah, 


-RTKSIS 


and Unni, their brethren were 


e watches f. 


Over againfr them 1n th 
;. 2. Ia the places where they were appointed To ftand, and 


of Which ſee 1 Chron: 25: 


Eliaſhib þ, and Elialbib begat Jojd, 

g Here follows a Catalogue of the Jewiſh }T:oh Prieſts ; which 
vas the more necefſiry; b-cauſe their times were now to be mea» 
ſured, not by the years of their Kings as formerly, bur by their 

High Pricits. þ Of whom ſee Nehem 3. 1. & 13: 4,5. : 

[1 And jojada begat 7onuthan, and Jonatizan begat 
Jaddua 7. 
_ # Generally ſuppoſed to be the ſame Man who was High Pric{t 
inthe days of Alexander the Great; as Joſephus mentions ; whence a 
great DNithculty ariſeth,how Nehemiah could mention t..is Man,wio 
tcvems not to have been high Prieſt ti}l many years after Nebem: ah's 
deata. Burt it ſeems not neceflary that this Jaduva ſhould be the 
ſame Perſon, for he might be the Father of-that Jadaua, both be. 
ing called by theſame name, Or,if he were the ſame, the Bleſſing 
of a very long Life might be given to this great and exceilent Go- 
vernour, as itwas to Ezr2, that famous Scribe, as was noted on v. 
L andthar for the very fame reaſon. He might aiſo live to ſee Jad. 
ara, though not to fce him High Prieſt which might be many 
years after- Or this patſage might be put into this Book by ſome 
ſacred or inſpired Pen-man, there being ſome,though but few,ſuch 
pallages in the foregoing Books of Scripture, which were added by 
ſucceeding Men of God 1n atrer-times 

12 And in the days of Jojakim were prieſts &, the 

chief of the fathers : of Serajah,Merajah,; of Jeremiah, 


Hananiah. ' 

& As their fathers were prieſts in the days of Toffis, ſo in the 
days of Jojokimn the lon of Joſhua, the ſons of thoſe Perſons exccu- 
ted the Prieſthood in their Fathers fteads, ſome of their Fathers 
probably being yet living, and many of them now dead.- 


13 Of Ezra, Meſhullam : of Amariah, Jehohanan: 

14 Of Melicu, Jonathan : of Shebaniah, Joſeph : 

15 Of Harim, Adna : of Merajath, Helkai : | 

16 Of Iddo, Zechariah, of Ginnethon, Meſhullam, 

17 Of Abijab, Zichri : of Miniamin, of Moadiah, 
Piltai : 

18 Of Bilgah, Shammua : of Shemajah, Jehohanan : 

19 And of Jojarib, Mattenai : of Jedajah, Uzzi : 

20 Of Sallai, Kallai : of Amok, Eber : 

21 Of Hilkia, Haſbabiah : of Jedaja, Nathaneel. 

22 The Levites in the day of Eliaſhib, Jojada, and 
Johanan,and Jaddua,were recorded chief of the fathers: 
alſo the prieſts, to the reign of Darius / the Perſian, 

[ Either Darius Codomanuts, and then what was faid concerning 
Jadaua, v. 11. muſt be in part rep-ated and applied here : or,Darius 
Nehus ; and fo this Jaddua might be father ro him who was in the 
days of Darius Codomanus, and of Al-xander the Great. | 

23 The ſons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, werg 
written in the Book of the * Chronicles w, even until 
the days of Johanan the fon of Eliathib. 

mM ie e In the publick Annals or Regiiters, in which the Genea- 
logies of the ſeveral Families were fer down by the Jews with great 
exactneis, as all perions agree, 

24 And the chiet of the Levites: Haſbabiah, She- 
rebiah, and Jejhua the ſon of Kadmiel, with their bre- 


26 Theſe were in che days of Jojakim, the ſon-.of 
Jeſhua, the fon of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehe- 
miah the governour ; and of Ezra the prieſt, the ſcribe. 

27 And at the dedication of the wail p of Jerufaiem 
they ſought the Levites out of all their piaces 9,to bring 
them to Jeruſalem, to keep the dedication with glad- 
neſs, both with thankigivings and with ſinging with 
cymbals, pſa't.r'es, and with hips. | 

And of the Gates which are mentioned v. 39. and of the City 
it ſelf within the Gates ; which is here dedicated to God and to his 
Honour and Service, not only upon a general account, by which 
we ought todevote our {clves,and al! that 1s ours,to God ;Þut npon 
a more ſpecial ground,becaulz this was 2 place which God himfelt 
had choſen, and fa-Eified by his Temple and gracious Preſence,and 
therefore did of right beloag to him ; whence it is oft called-+he 
holy City, as hath been obſerved b-tores 
God by this Dedication, withal imploring the Preſence.and Favour, 
ard Bleſſing of God to this City by folcmn Prayers and Praiſes, 


and Sacrifices,, wherewith rhis Devication was accompanied» Sce 
' Deut; 20; 5. 1 Kings 8: 63. Ezra 6; 17. Pfal: 30. title. q To which 
they were now retired «fter that great and generel Aſſembly, c#:8 

9. & 10. : 

28 And the ſons of the ſingers gathered themſelves 
' together, both out of the plain country round about 
Jeruſalem, and from the villages of Netophathi. 

29 Aliſo from the houſe of Giigal, and out'of the 
ficlds of Geba, and Azmaveth : for the fingers had baile 


' them villages round about Jerui:iem r. 


at hand for the Scivice of God, and of 


r That rhey might be near 


{1.5 Houtlt. 


10 And Jclbua begat Jojakim g, Jojakim alfo begar 


1s the ſame there and here. Others, 2ccoraing ro their turns or courſes, 


F iChr.g. 
14, &c. 


* according to the commandment of David the man of *:Chr:24 
God, ward over afgainit ward ». & 25,0026, 
u Of which ſee on v. 9. 
25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah ,Meſhullam, 
Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the ward,at the 
|| chre{hoids of the gates 0. [| Or;77+ 
o To wit, of the Temple, their watching-place being cloſe by the ſurier, o, 
T hreſhojds of the Gates, as it row is; aſſemblizs, 


And they re{orei ir ro - 


( : 
: 


———_—_ _ —_— = — ——_ 
ens yr AE en <A I EE I nn gn I RIS AI EO 


46 P» XII. 
20 And the prieſts ana the Levites purified them- 
ſelves and purified the people, and the gates, and the 
wall /. 
f 2 by ſprinkling the water of Purification upon them, by 
which the Tabernacle and ſacred Utenſils were purified, Num- 8: 
and partly by ſolemn Prayers and Sacrifices. 
21 Then I broughe up the princes of Judah ? upon 
the wall «, and appointed two great companies of thews 
Ch:2:13 that gave thanks, whereof ove went on the righthand 
© 3: 13* upon the wall toward * the dung:gate : 

t And half of the people with them, as it is expreſſed afterwards ; 
wv; 38. u For the Wall was broad and ſtrong, and ſo orgered that 
Men might conveniently walk upon it. as at this day it 1s in many 
Cities, x Towards the South and Eaſt. 

22 And after them went Hoſhajah, and half of the 
princes of Judah, 

33 And Azariah, Ezra y, and Meſhullam, 

y Not the Scribe, as is evident from v: 36. but another Ezra. 

34 Judah and Benjamin,and Shemajah, and Jeremiah. 
25 And certain of the prieſts ſons * wich trumpets : 
namely, Zechariah the ſon of Jonathan, the fon of She- 
majah, the ſon of Mattaniah,the fon of Michajah, the 
ſon of Zaccur, the ſon of Afaph : 

26 And his brethren, Shemajah, and Azareel, Mila- 
lai, Gilalai,Maai, Nechaneel, and Judah, Hanan, with 
" * the muſical inſtruments of David the man of GOD, 
and Ezra the ſcribe before them. 
37 And at * the fountain-gate, which was over a- 
S Chas. gainſt them, they went up by *the ſtairs of the city of 
David z, at the going up of the wall above the houſe 
*Ch.3.26: of David, even unto * the water-gate eaſtward. 
& 8.1, 3, z By which they went up to the hill of Son and City of David, 
x6. 38 And the other company of thems that gave thanks, 
| went over againſt them a, and I after them,andthe half 
>Ch:3.17. of the people upon the wall, from beyond * the tower 
27 wa ae try Co awry, - 
of the furnaces, even unto the * broad wall 5 : 

as To wit, on the other fide of the city, Northward and Eaſtward. 
6 Which they made thicker and ſtronger than the reſt of the Wall, 
| for ſome ſpecial reaſon. 

'*2 Kings 239 And from above * the gate of Ephraim, and a- 
I TEM | bore the * old gate, and above * the fiſh-gare, and the 
"4 4 tower of Hananeel,and * che tower of Meah,even unto 
* Ch. 3. 1. the ſheep-gate : aud they ſtood ſtill in the priſon gatec. 

: c Waiting,as alſo their brethren did,that they might go together 
in due order into God's Houſe, there to perfeCt the ſolemnity, 

40 SO {rood the two companies of them that gave thanks 
in the houſe ef God 4d, and I, and the half of the rulers 
with me es 

d i: e: In the Courts of the Temple. e And Ezra, and the other 
half with him; as appears by comparing this with wv: 31, 36: 

41 And the prieſts ; Eliakim, Maaſcjah, Miniamin, 
Michajah, Elioenai, Zechariah, az Hananiah with 
trumpets. 

42 And Maaſejah, and Shemajah, and Eleazar, and 
| Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and 
t Heb. EZzer: and the fingers | ſang loud, with Jezrahiah cheir 
x 2hpaFs overſeer. 
J "257 R 43 Alſo that day they offered great Sacrifices, and 
| rejoiced : for God had made them rejoyce with great 
joy ; the wives alſo, and the children rejoiced : ſo that 
the joy of Jeruſalem was heard even afar off f. 

f Either their loud voices and inſtruments were heard toa great 
diſtance : or the fame of ir was ſpread far and near, 

44 And at that time were ſome appointed over the 
chambers for the treaſures, for the offerings g, for the 
 < firſt-fruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them our 
| || That is, Of the fields of the cities the portions || of the Jaw h for 
- appointed the prieſts and Levites : | for Judah reioiced for the 


Numb. 


TO. 2. 


NERE MM 1 4 EB. 


there were chief of the ſingers », and ſongs of praiſe and 


thankſgiving unto God. 

m And Heman, and Jeduthun, 1 Chron; 27: 1.\ but Aſaph only is 
mentioned here, as the moſt eminenr and uſeful in that work. » 
There were ſome overſeers, whoſe Office it was to ſee thar the 
ſingers were {ſit for,and diligent in their work : and therefore they 
took care of ic at this time. 

47 And all Iſrael in the days of Zerubbabel, and in 
the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the ſingers, 
and the porters every day his porrion, and they || ſanQi- | That i 
fied holy things o unto the Levites, * and the Levites tp ; 


rt 

ſanifed them unto the children of Aaron. « 

0 7,e. They ſequeſtred or ſet apart the Firſt-fruits and Tithes 
from their own ſhare, and devoted them to the uſe of the Levites, 
to whom they belonged. And ſo did the Levites by the Tithe of 
the Tithes. Thus they all conſcientiouſly paid their dues to God 
or his Aſſigns, and did not prophane theſe things which God had 
{ ſanCtificd, nor take them to their own common uſe, as divers un- 
godly or covetous perſons had formerly uſed to do when they had 


opportunity. * 4 » IT 


Upon the reading of the Law, Separation - is made between Iſrael and the 
mixt multitude, 1 3. Nehemiah at his return to Jeruſalem, cau- 
ſeth the chambers to be cleanſed, 4 - 9. He reſtoreth and reformeth 
z he Offices of the Prieſts and Levites 1M the houſe of God, 10 =— - 14. 
and ſeeing the wielation of the Sabbat h, he contendeth with the Nobles of 
Judah, 15 18. He ſbutseth the gates, and ſetteth a watch at them, 
19 === 72 The puniſhment of marrying with ſirange wives, 23-—28. 
Nehemiah's prayer, 29 31, : 

N that day # | they read in the book of Moſes in Tir: 


the + audience of the peopleb; and therein was SHebas 


found written, * that the Ammonite and the Moabite *Deur.:;, 
ſhould not come into the congregation of God c for ever; 3. 

a Not now preſently after the Dedication of the Wall and Gates 
and Ciry, but upon a certain day, as that Phraſe is very common- 
ly uſed 1a Scripture without any relation to the time or things men- 
tioned next before it; to wit, when Nehemiah was returned again 
from the Perſian Court to Jeruſalem, from which he had been abſent 
for ſome conliderable time, in which ſome errours and abuſes had . 
crept in, which now he endeavours to remove. 6 Partly becauſe 
it was not only the Prieſts, but alſo the Peoples, duty to ſtudy 
} and underſtand God's Law and their own duty : and partly that 
the people hearing thar this was the expreſs mind and will of the 
great God,might the more willingly yield to the following Duties 
ſome of which were attended with difficulty, and required ſelf- 
denial. c 7.e; Not be incorporated into the Common-wealth of J/. 
rael nor be joyned with any 1/raelite in Marriage relation,as appears 
from werſe 3. That pra&ice being a plain Comment upon this Law, 
Bur ofthis and the next verſe ſee the Notes on Dent; 23. 3, 4. 

2 Becauſe they met not the children of 1frael with 
bread and with water, but * hired Balaam againſt them * Nunb: 
that he hould curſe them : howbeit our God turned 22: 5- 
the curſe into a blefling. Joſh.:49, 

2 Now it came to paſs when they heard the law, that 


they ſeparated from 1rael all the mixed multitude d. 

« i. e: All the heatheniſh people with whom they had contraQ- 
ed Alliances. Sce << 9: 2: and Ezra 10: 3, 

4 And before f this Eliaſhib the prieſt e F having } jo. 
the overſight of the chamber f of the houſe ofour God, + Heb.is 
was allied unto 'Tobiah g: ing jecoun, 

e The High-prieſt, chap.3:1: or ſome other prieft ſo called, there 
being divers E#/cashivs in or about this time, Ezr# 10:6, 24,27, 36. 
though the firſt ſeems moſt probable, by comparing this verſe with 
verſe 28. and with chap. 12. 10, 11- f 7. e. Of the Chambers, as ap- 
pears from the following verſe, and from wer: 9: where it is called 
chambers, and from the nature ofthe thing,the High-prieſt having 
the chief power over the houſe of God, and all the chambers be» 
longing to it- The ſingular number for the plural. g The Amme- 
niteand a violent Enemy toGod's people. So this isnoted as a great 
blemiſh to Eltashib,8& as the cauſe of his other miſcarriage noted »: 5, 

5 And he had prepared for him a great chamber g ; 
where afore-time they laid the meat offerings, the fran- 
kincenſe, and the veſſels,and the tithes of the corn, the P 
new wine, and the oil, ( f which wascommanded to be t He 3 


- 6 mm 
given to the Levices, and the ſingers, and the porters ) ,,4 q:# 


. by os: law, prictts, and for the Levites + that waited 5. 
F A eb. for g Such as they had lately ingaged themſelves to give, or other 
| Tad of voluntary or preſcribed offerings, h 7: e; The foretaid firſt-fruits, 
| SH Bl and tithes, and other things which God by his Law appointed for 
- +P#7 them: # Partly for the eminent Gifrs and Graces which they obſer- 
| fo %. _. vedin many of them: and partly for the great benefit which they 
had now received by their Miniſcry ; and therefore for the compe- 
tent proviſion which hereby was made for them,that ſo they might 
wholly wait upon their Office, to the peoples edification & comforr. 
45 And both the ſingers and the porters kept the 
| ward of their Godk, and the ward of the purification 1, 
ES. Chon _— to the commandment of David, and of So- 

on. 


- 25. & es, lomon his 
FT Chron., & ise. That Ward, or Charge, or buſineſs which God had pre- 
25. r, &c. ſcribed to theme 1 And in partitealar the charge of purificatim. 1: e: 
of taking care that no unclean perſon or thing might enter into the 
Houſe or Courts of the Lord : which care did certainly belong to 
the porters, as is expreſſed, 2 Chron:23:19. and at this time,and in 
ſome ſort, as it ſeems to the ſingers who, beſides their proper im- 
ployment were alſo over the buſineſs of the houſe of God, as is affirmed 


%, 


and the offerings of the prieſts. Levitt 
g By removing the things which were in it, and uniting divers 
ſmall Chambers into one, and furniſhing it for the uſe of Tobiah 
when he came to Jeruſalem : whom he ſeems to have lodged there, 
that he might have more free and ſecret communication with him, 
this being 1n a place where the people might not come. . 
6Bur in all this t5me was not] at Jeruſalem þ : for in 
the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Baby- 
lon, came I unto the king 5,and | after certain days &|| + Heb. « 
obtained T leave of the king : the end of 
h And Eliaſbib took the occaſion of my abſence to do theſe things, #2)” F 
ſuppoſing thar I would no more return thither. ; To wit, from lOr, _ 
Jerujalem ; where he had been once and again. & Heb. in the end of w—_— 
aays, or of a year, as that word ofc ſignifies, que/"ehs 
7 And I came to Jeruſalem, and underſtood of the 
evil that Eliaſhib did for Tebiah, in preparing him a 
chamber in the courts of the houſe of God; 
8 And it grieved me ſore 1, therefore I caft forth all 
the houſhold ſtuffol Tobiah out of the chamber. 


chap: 11: 22. Which being a general expreſſion, may well compre- 
hend, if-it doth not principally deſign this, that they ſhould take | 
Care to keep the Houle of God free fromall pollution. And poſſibly 
as the Porters were to take care that no unclean thing mighr enter 
there, ſo if it- ſhould through their inadvertency enter in;the ſingers 
were to remove it» 


reſpets ought not to have come there, being no Prieſt, a ſtranger, 
an Ammonite, and one of the worſt of thar people ; and that all 
this ſhould be done by the permiſſion and order of the High-Prieſt, 
who by his office ſhould have puniſhed 2nd reformed theſe things 


{Thar ſo ſacred a place ſhould be polluted by one who in many 


+46 For in the days of David * and Aſaph »v, of old, 


12 Others. 


9 Then 


Chap, Xl W 


+ He 


eral 


[0r,f 


Wy ur) 


+Heb 
x thei 


ind. 


Ver 2: 
Meb. 

Ruin: 
10rgbſ 


w;ong, 


le, 
iT 


, Xt) 


That j. 
' apart 
Numb 
, .26, 


eb. he ” 
' read, 
eb. A 
ut. 23, 


ime. 
Jeb.bts 


ſe;our, 


eb. the 
mand 
t of tot 
11140 


eb. #t 
end of 
Je | i 
ly re 
| ed. 


ball 


Mal;1:8 
tNumb. 


WW/th 


tHeb: 
i their 
Ind. 


Mor 22, 
Meb. 
kuineſes, 


won; 


9 Then I commanded, and they cleanſed the cham: 
bers m2 ; and thither brought'T again the veſſels of the 
houſe of God with the meat, offering and the frankin- 
cenfſe. 

m By ſuch means and rites as were then uſual in ſuch caſes. See 
Numb, «9. 9. 

Io And T percei 
had not been given thers » : 
ſingers that did the work, 
field 0. 

n» Which might be either, 1. From this corrupt High-Prieſt 
Eliaſhib. who took their portions, as he did the Sacred Chambers, 
ro his own uſe, or employed them for the entertainment of Tob:ah, 
and his other great Allies. Or, 2- From the People, who either 
out of Covetouſnelſs reſerved them to themſelves, contrary to their 
own tolemn agreement and Covenant, chap.10.37.or wereto offend- 
ed ar Eliaſh:b's horrid and manifeſt abuſe of facred things, that they 
abhorred the Offering and Service of God.as others did upon a like 
occaſion, 1 Sam. 2. 17. and therefore negle&ed ro bring in their 
Tithes. &c. which they knew would be preverted to bad uſes. oTo 
his pcflefſion in the Country,being forced to do ſo for a livelyhood, 

11 Then contended I with the ruters o, and faid, 
Why is the houſe of God forſaken p ? And TI gathered 


them together q, and ſet them in their Þ place 7. 

9 Tſharply reproved thoſe prieſts to whom the management of theſe 
things was committed, for negle& of their Duty, and breach of 
their late ſolemn Promiſc- p You have not only injured men in 
with-holding their dues, but you have occaſioned the negleC&t of God's 
Houſe and Service q To Jeruſalem from their ſeveral Country Poſ- 
ſeſſions, . in which they were diſperſed. r Reſtored them to the 
exerciſe of their Ofhce. 

12 Then brought all Judah the tithe /of the corn,and 
the new wine, and the oil unto the || treaſuries. 

ſ Partly out of the reſpe& which they had to Nehemzah, and to his 
command . and partly becauſe they ſaw they would be applied to 
their proper uſes, and not abuſed, as they had beene 

12 And I made treaſurers over the treaſuries, Shele- 
miah the prieſt, and Zadok the ſcribe z, and of the Le- 
yites Pedajah : and Þ next to them was Hanan the ſon 
of Zaccur, the fon of Mattaniah: for they were coun- 
ted faithful x, and + their Office was to diſtribute unto 
their brethren x. 

t The Eccleſiaſtical Scribe, who was to keep the accounts of the 
Receipts and Disburſements. » By common Fame,and the conſent 
of thoſe who knew them. Such he now ſought our the more dili- 
gently, becauſe he had late experience of the perfidiouſneſs of the 
former Truſtees. x According to their ſeveral Families,as the Law 
had preſcribed. : : 

14 * Remember me, O my God, concerning this y, 
and wine not out my | good deeds that I have done for 
the houfe of my God, and for the || Offices thereof. 

9 What I have done with an upright heart for thy Houſe and ſer- 
vice be pleaſed graciouſly to accept,and remember for my good,ac- 
cording to thy promiſe. : ; 

15 In thoſe days ſaw I in Judah ſome treading wine- 
preſſes on the Sabbath, and bringing in ſheaves, and 
lading aſles ; as alſo wine, grapes, and figs, and all 
manner of burdens, which they brought into Jeruſalem 
on the ſabbath day , and I teftified againſt them z inthe 
day wherein they fold vicuals. | 
_ 2 I proteſtedagainſtthe ation, and admoniſhed them to forbear 
It 


ved that * the portions of the Levites 
for the Levites and the 


i were fled every one to his 
= 


5 
- 


b Heb. 


Egmaing 


(Or, fore- 


Heb. 
Was upon 
{lM 


(aber 


E M I © Chap. Xil,\l 
will lay hands on you g. Frem that time forth came f 
they no more on the ſabbath, 

£ I will puniſh you and ſeize your goods: For this was a temptati- 
on to covetous or needy Jews that hved in or near the City to ſteal 
opportunitics of buying their Commodities, which then they might 

do with more advantage. 
| 22 And I commanded the Levites, that they ſhould 
Cleanſe themſelves b, andzthat they ſhould come and keep 
the gates i, to ſanctifie the ſabbath-dav. Remember 
me, O my God, —_— this aiſo, and ſpare me ac- 
cording to the || greatneſs of thy mercy &. 

h Partly becauſe the work they were now ſet upon, though com- 
mon inits nature, yer was holy in deſign ofir, and had reſpe&un- 
to the Sabbath : and partly, becauſe the day in which they were to 
do this was the Sabbath-day,for the obſervation Whereof rhey were 
obliged to prepare and purifie themſelves. / Either, 1. The Gates 
of the Temple. Bur a particular command was ſuperfluous in that 
caſe, becauſe it was their conſtant work and charge to .do this 
both Sabbath-days and eve: y day. Or rather, 2. The Gates of the 
City ; for of them he ſpake laſt, wer. 19. and nor daring to truſt 
the common Porters of thoſe Gates, not being able always to em- 
ploy his men in that work, he committerh the charge of them for 
the preſent ſeaſon, and upon the Sabbath-days, to the Levites, to 
whom the care of ſJan&itying rhe Sabbath 41d properly belong. k 
Whereby he intimates, that though he mentioned his Good-works 
as things wherewith God was well-pleaſed, and which he had pro- 
miſed to reward, yet he neither did,nor durſt truſt to their merit, 
or his own worthineſs, but, when he had done all, he judged 
himſelf an unprofitable ſervant,and one that needed God's infinite 
Mercy and Indulgence to pardon all his fins,and particularly thoſe 
infirmities and corruptions which adhered to his good deeds. | 
23 Inthoſe days days alfoſaw 1 Jews that #* had mar- 4 o;, z,g 
ried wives of Aſhdod 1, of Ammon, #»d of Moab : made to 
I A City of the Philiſtines, 1 Sam. 5. 1, 2, &Cc. awell with 
24 And their children ſpake half in the ſpeech of them. 
Aſhdod, and # could not ſpeak in the Jews language, ,£2r3-9:2, 

—— f f Heb they 
but according to the language Þ+ of each people m. diſcerned 
m Which their Mothers inſtilled into them, together with their ,;; 9 ſpeak. 
Principles and manners- + Heb. of 
25 AndI contended with them, and || curſed them #, people and 
and {mote ocertain of them p, and pluckr off their hairq, people. 
and made them ſwear by God, ſaying, Ye ſhall not gy omg 
give your daughters unto their ſons, nor take their 


daughters unto your ſons, or for your ſelves. 

2 i, e. Cauſed them to be Excommunicated and caſt out of the 
Society and Priviledges of God's people. This and the following 
Puniſhments were juſtly inflited upon them, becauſe this tranſ- 
greſfion was contrary both to a very plain and expreſs Law of God, 
and alſo to their own late ſolemn Covenants and promiſes, of 
whigh ſee Ezra 1o. Nehem: 10130; 0 7. e. I cauſed them to be beat- 
en with {tripes, according to the Law, Deut:25: 2. p Such whoſe 
faults were moſt aggravated by their quality or other circumſtan= 
ces : to whom he added this puniſhment over and beſides the for- 
mer. q Or, ſhaved them, The hair was an Ornament and Enſign of 
Liberty among the Eaſtern Nations ; and baldneſs was a diſgrace 
and token of tlavery and ſorrow. See 1/a: 3: 24: and rg: 2: Fer. 48. 
37+ Ezeh.s 29. 18. 
26 Did not Solomon king of Iſrael ſin by theſe 
things ? yet * among many nations was there no king + Kinos 
like him, who was * beloved of his God, and God £ ns 
made him king over all Ifrael : * nevertheleſs even him 2 Chron- 
did outlandiſh women caule to fin. I: 12. 
27 Shall we then hearken unto you yrto do all this KG, Sam, 


16 There dwelt men of Tyre alſo therein, which 


fabharh unto the children of Judah, and in Jeruſalem 6. 
4 Which they might take in the Sea near Joppa, or bring trom ' 
Tyre to Joppa by Sea, and thence to Jeruſalem, which was bur a ſmall} 
Journey, 6 The holy City. where God's Houſe and Preſence was; | 
and where the grear Judicatories of the Nation were. So this is ad- 
ded as an aggrayztion of their fin, that this was done with manifeſt 
contempt of God and Men: 

17 Then I contended with the nobles of Judah c, and 


great evil, to tranſgreſs againſt our God, in marrying + 
brought fith #, and all manner of ware, and fold onthe | itrange wives ? 


: 24. 
: Kings 
11. 1, &c: 


r Shal we juſtific your ation by permitting or not puniſhing it? 


God forbid. 


28 And one of the ſons of Joiada /, the ſon of Eli- 


aſhib the high prieſt, was ſon in law to Sanballat the 
Horonite : therefore I chaſed him from me re. 


JS Said by Joſephus to be that Manaſſes who by 'Sanballats intereſt pro- 


cured Liberty to build the Samaritan Temple in mount Geriz:m ; 
to which thoſe Prieſts who had married ſtraiige Wives, or been 


|| Or, mub- {i 


le, «, 


Heb, bes 


'n the 


ſaid unto them, What evil thing 3s this that ye do, and 
prophane the ſabbath-day ? 


ci. e. Their chief men and Rulers ; whom he chargeth with this 
fin, becauſe though cthers didit,it was by their countenance. or Con» 
nivance.and they ſhould and might have puniſhed and reſtrained it, 
18 Did nor your fathers thus, and did not _ our God 
bring all this evil upon us 4, and upon this city ? yet 
Jo bring more wrath upon Iſrael by prophaning the ſab- 

ath. 
d Which you ſo well and ſadly remember,that I need nor tell you 


the particulars: 

19 And it came to paſs, that when the gates of Jeru- 

' falem * began to be dark e before che ſabbath, 1 com- 

manded that the gates (hould be ibut, and charged that 

they ſhould not be opened cill after the ſabbath : and 

ſome of my ſervants ſer 1 at the gates f * that there 
ſhould no burden be brought in on the ſabbath-day. 

e Which was about Sun-ſetting by reaſon of the Mountains 
Which were round about, and near feruſalem, Pſal. 125; 2. f Our of a 
ditfdence in thoſe ro whom the keeping of the gates was committed 

20 So the merchants and ieliers of all kindof ware, 


otherwiſe criminal betook themielves,and with,or after them,others 
of the people in the ſame or like circumſtances, # i. e. From my. 
Preſence and Court, and from the City and Temple, and all the 
Priviledges of the Prieſthood, ;and from the whole Congregation 
and Church of 1/rae!. whereof 1 am a Member. b 
29 Remember them, O my God, + becauſe they + Heb. 
have defiled the prieſthood,” and * the covenant of the For the de- 


prieſthood «, and of the Levites, - 

u That Covenant made between me and his Progenitors for them- ———— 
ſelves and their Poſteriry,whereby I promiſed to give them an ever= | 
laſhing Pri:ftlinod, Numb. 25+ 12, 13. and they covenanted with me: 
thar they would fairafully and holly execute that jacred Fun&ion. 
according to the rules which I gave them, whereby among other 
things,they were enjoyned to keep themſelves pure from all unlaw+ 
full marriages; and fron all other things which might pollute them, 
or the Prieſthood. 
30 Thus cleanſed I them from all ſtrangers,and * ap- 
pointed the wards of the prieſts and the Levites, eve- 


ry one in his buſineſs. 

1 And for the * wood offering at times appoint- «g,,... * 
ed, and for the firſtfruits x. Remember me, O my © TY 
God, for good. 


* Ch.12.1r: 


lodged without Jeruſalem once or twice. 
21 Then I teſtified againſt them, and faid unto them 


Why lodge ye | about the wall ? it ye do /o again, I 


x And particularly I took care for theſe things,becauſe they had 


been lately negleQed. .; pet 
4Þ a. ESTHER, 


beccuſe to them were committed the Oracles of 
very frong preſumption that they were true to their truſt, 
and lejs, never charged th-m with unfaithfulneſs herein : 
#b.iged to do it for the Inſiration and Cantion of the Chri ug 
frine of the Apo'iler, The Yen men of it i» beth by Jewiſh and Chriſtian Int 


CHAF. L 
Ahaſuerus and Vaſbti make a Royal Banquet, 1 9. He ſends for 
Vaſbti, 10, 11. ſbe refuſeth to come, 12» He conſulteth his wiſe men a- 
bout it, 13 =— 15. Their judgement and advice, t0 put her away, 


16 19. He maketh the Decree of Men's Soveraignty in their own 


h s, =moeoe22, 
ouſe gs came to paſs in the days of Ahaſuerus s, 


( this is Ahaſuerus, which reigned from In- 
dia even unto Fthiopia,over an hundred and 


ſeven and twenty provinces b. ) 

a 24. Who was this King » Anſw. It is confeſſed and manifeſt 
that this was one of the Kings of Perſia : But which of them it was 
is not yet agreed, nor is it of any necefliry for us now to knows 
Bur it 1s ſuthciently evident that this was either, 1. Darizs Hyſtajpis, 
as divers both Jewiſh and Chriſtian Writers affirm : for his King- 
dom was thus vaſt, and he ſubdued dis, as Herodotus reports : and 
one of his Wives was called Mofa, which differs little from Ha- 
daſſah, which is Efther's other name.. Efth. 2:7: Or, 2. Xerxes, whoſe 
Wife. as Heredotus notes, was called Ameſftris, which is not much 
differing from Efher: by whom all theſe things were tranſa&ed 
whilſt he was potent and proſperous, before his unhappy expedi- 
tion againſt the Grecians. Or, 3. Ariazerxes Longimanus, to whom 
the Chara&ers of Ahaſuerus repreſented in this Book do not diſa- 
gree. And whereas it is obje&ed, that by this account Moracea; 
muſt be a man of about 140 years, and contequently Eſther, who is 
called his Uncles daughter, chap 2-7:muſt be too old ro make a Wite 
for the King ; as for Mordecai,it may be granted, there being divers 
inſtances of perions of greater Age than ttat in ſacred and propha,,c 
Hiſtorians ; and for Efther it may be faid that ſhe was his Uncles 
Grand-daughter, nothing being more frequent than for the names 
of ſons or daughters to be given to more remote Poſteriry. 6b $9 
ſeven new Provinces were added to thoſe 120 mentioned Dar. 6:5. 

(2 That in thoſe days, when the King Ahaſuerus face 


| on the throne of his kingdom c, which was in Shuſhan 
[ Or, chef the || palace &, ; 

city, - £ 3.e. Either was lately advanced to it : or rather was ſettled in 
the peacable poſſeſſion of it» d Or, thecaftle : or the chief or royal 
city; as both Jewiſh and Chriſtian Interpreters render it. Shuſhan 
might be the proper name of the Palace, which thence was given 
to the whole City. Here the Kings of Perfis uſed to keep their 
Courts chiefly in Winter, as ordinarly they were in Ecbatans in 
Summer. SY OE 

3 In the third year of his reign,he made a feaſt unto 
all his princes, and his ſervants, the power e of Per- 
fia and Media, the nobles and princes ot the provinces 


being before him. 

ez. e, The mighty men ; the chief Officers of State, and Com- 
manders of all his Forces: whom by this ſplendid entertainment 

| he endeavoured to oblige and aſſure to himſelf. 

4 When he ſhewed the riches of his glorious King- 
dom, and the honour of his excellent majeſty, many 
days, even an hundred and fourſcore days f. 

f Making every day a magnificent Feait either for all his Princes, 
or for ſome of them, who might come to the feaſt ſucceſſively, as 
the King ordered them to do. The Perſian Feaſts are much celebra- 
ted 'in Tathaks for their Jengrth and luxury. 

-5: And when theſe days were expired,the king made 


+ Heb. afeaſt unt all the people chat were | preſent g in Shu- 
found, fhan the palace, both unto greac and ſmall, ſeven days, 
| in the court of the garden h of the kings palace. 
£ Both ſuch as conſtantly reſided there, and ſuch as were come 
thither upon their occalions, of whatſoever condition or quality. 
h the Perſizh Gardens were exceeding large and pleaſanr. 
6 Where were white, green, and || blue hangings faſte- 
1 Oc, vi9-ned with cords of fine linnen and purple,to tilver rings, 
** * * 'and pillars of marbel : the beds # were of gold, and 
JOr,of por- ſilver, upon a pavement || of red, and blue, and white, 
phyre, and and black marble» 
marble,and ; For in thoſe Eaſtern Countries,and ancient times,they did not 
alabaſter, frat Cables, as we do, butreſted or leaned upon Beds : of which 
and fone of 4; have many teſtimonies both in Scripture,as Eſt: 7; 8: Ames 2. 8, 
blew to and 6:4. John 13. 23- and in all other Authors: 
four. + And they gave them drink in vellels of gold, (the 
+ Heb. Veſlels being divers one from another ) and t royal wine 
wine of the in abundance, F according to the ſtate of the king. 
kingdom. 8 And the drinking was according to the law, none 
+ Heb-9- qjd compel & : for ſo the king had appointed to all the 


cy han of Officers of his houſe, that they ſhould do according to 


the king. .&Very mans pleaſure. 

k 7. e. According to this Law whichthe king had now made;that 
none ſhould compel another to drink more than hepleaſed ; which 
the Perſians, and other looſe and heatheniſh Nations uſed to do ; 

- though that Praftice was condemned by the wile and ſober heathens 
and among others by this great Prince. Or, 9 men did compel ano- 


ther to drink accding to the law, 7. e. as by the Laws or Orders of 


the Perſians preſcribed and uticd in their Feaſts they might have 
done, if not refttained by this Law, 


ES IT HE K 


God, Rom, 3. 2. ro keep them ſafely, and tranſmit them caveſully to Pofterity, And iti: @ 
that our bleſſed Lord, and his holy apefiles, who taxed the Jews with many faults beth greater 
which, if the Jews had been guilty, they would cerdainly have done, and by their Office were 

ftlian Church, whoſe Faith was built n» leſs upon the Writings of the Prophets, than upen the Doc. 

erpreters, ancient and modern, thought Te be Mordecai : who was both an holy 


man of God, and aprincipal Atter in this tiftory, And therefore who ſo fit and proper for it as himſelf. 


# ire Book was conſtantly received for a part of the Canon of the Scripture by 


gether, bur in ſeveral places. 


the People of the Jews; whaſe authority herein is the more conſiderable, 


9 Alſo Vaſhti the Queen made a feaſt for the wo- 
men 4, iz the royal houſe which belonged to king Aha- 
ſuerus. 


I Whilſt the King entertained the Men. For this was the com- 
mon cuſtom of the perſians, that Men and Womendid not feaſt ro« 


Io On the ſeventh day, when the heart of the king 
Was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biz- 
tha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Car- 
cas, the ſeven || chamberlains m that ſerved in the pre. || Or, «. 
ſence of Ahaſuerus the king, _ 

»- Or, Eunuchs, which were much in uſe, and in favour in the 
Eaſtern Courts, and particularly with the Perſian Emperours,as an- 
cient Hiſtories inform us. 

11 To bring Vaſhti the Queen before the king, with 
the crown royal, to ſhew the people and the princes 
her beauty, for ſhe was F fair to look on. FHebgud 

| 12 But the queen Vaſhti refuſed to come » at the of cue 
kings commandment Þ by his chamberlains: therefore 7: 
was the kingvery wroth, and his anger burned in him. |," 

x Being favoured in this refuſal by the Laws and Cuſtoms of Per- th 

: . . by the han 
fa, which wasto keep Mens Wives,and eſpecially Queens,as much of his e 
as might be, from the view of other men. nk w 

13 Then the king ſaid to the wiſe-men, which knew * 
the times o, (for fo was the kings manner towatds all 
that knew law and judgement p. 

o Either, 1. The Hiſtories of former times, what Princes have 
done in ſuch cafes as this was. Or, 2. Things done or to be done 
in time ; what was juſt and fit to be done, or what was the Law and 
Judgement in theſe caſes, as the following words explain it, and how 
and when things were to be done. Sce my Notes on 1 Chron 12. 

32. Times are oft put in Scripture, and other Authors, for the 
things done in them, bY a common Figure called a Metonymy of 
theAdjuntt. pTo wir,to conſult with them in all matters of moment. 

14 And nextunto him was Carſhena, Shethar, Ad- 
matha, Tarſhiſh, Meres, Marſena, and Memucan, the «x, 
* ſeven Princes of Perſia and Media, * which ſaw the * , Kin 
kings faceq, asd which fate the firſtin the kingdom r ) 25:19. 

q Which had conſtant freedom of acceſs to the King, and fami- 
liar converie with him : which is thus expreſſed, becauſe the Perſian 
Kings were very ſeldom ſcen by their Subje&s. r Which were his 
chief counſellors and Officers,and had the precedency from all others, 

I5 + What (hal we do unto the queen V aſhti,accord- t #i # 
ding to law, becauſe ſhe hath not performed the com- © 
mandment of the king Ahaſuerus, by the chamberlains? 

16 And Memucan anſwered » before the king, and 
the princes, Valſhti the queen hath not done wrong to 
the king Onely, bur alſo to all the princes, and to all 
the people / that are in all the provinces of the king 
Ahbaluerus. | 

r Who, though laſt named, ſpake firſt either becauſe the king 
firſt asked him ; or becauſe he was the chief of them all, either in 
Dignity, or in Reputation : or tecaulſe it then was, as now it is in 


another thatis better than the. -M paſs 1 
u Which this cunning Politician knew it would do. Wes —_ 4, 
_ 


many places, the cuſtom for the youngeſt Cor:nſellors or Judges to 
deliver their opinion firſt: ſ By giving them an Example and En- 
couragement to contemn and diſobey their Husbands. It isa crime 
of an high nature, and therefore deſerves an exemplary puniſhb- 
ment. 

17 For this deed of the queen (ball come abroad un- 
to all women, ſo that they ſhall deſpiſe their husbands 
in their eyes, when it ſhal be reported, The king Aha- 
ſuerus commanded Vaſhti the queen to be brought in 
before him, but ſhe came not. 

18 Likewiſe ſhal the Ladies of Perſia and Media ſay 
this day untoallthe kings princes, which have heardo 
the deed of the queen» Thus 5hall there ariſe too much 
contempt and wrath r. 

t Conte pt in the Wives, and thereupon Wrath in the Husbands ; 
and conſequently Strife in Families; which may produce great and 
general miſchicts- 7 

19 + If itpleaſe the king «, let there go a royal com + Heb#? 
mandment | trom him, and let it be written among 6-99 
the laws of the Perſians, and the Medes, Þ that it be the oN 
not altered x, that Vaſhti come no more before King ;,j,; ks 
Ahaſuerus, and lec the king give her royal eftate | unto Heb 


caution was neceſſary for hisown ſecutiry; for if the Queen ſhould ' Hebat 
recover her ſtate, and the kings favour, he was moſt likely to fall y je 
F4 s 


into his diſpleaſure. 
p anne 


ſhall be publiſhed chreughout all his Empire, ( for it 15 


20 And when the kings decree which he ſhall make, 


great 


4F great) all the wives ſhall give to their husbands honour, 
borh to great and ſmall. 
21 And the ſaying Þ pleaſed the king and the princes 
yin the J, and the king did: according to the word of Memu- 
ges 0] 7 Can : 
king. _ » Partly becauſe th-ir own Authority and Intereſt was concerned 
int; and cſpecial'y by the fingular Providence of God, who deſig- 
ned to bring about his own grear Work by this ſmall occaſion. 
22 For helent jetters into all the kings provinces, in- 
to CVery Proviice according to the writing thereo?, and 
to every peepic after their languge, that every man 
Heb.thas 120utd bear rule in his own houſe, and Þ that it ſhou!d 
me foi Þe publiſhed according to the language of every people z. 
publ.ſh it Thar all ſorts of Perſons,not Men only (who by ftudy or tra- 
ccorving vel many times underſtand divers Languages) but the women alſo 
pv the lou might undeiſtand it, and therefore be incxcufable if they did nor 
guage of his comply with it; for which end it wasnot only written in each lan= 
paaple, guage, for that Writing might come but to few hands, but more- | 
over it was publiſhed in the ſeveral Cities and Tow ns by ſuch Per- 
{ons as uled re publith the King's Edifts. Others, That . he ſhould 
Jpeak 7n the language of his own people, 5. e. That mca ſhould nor in 
compliance with their Wives, who were oit of -ther Nations and 
Languages, inurethemſclves to ir, and bring their Wives Lan- 
£uage into the Family ; but that men ſh-uld uſe their own proper 
La:guage. and cauſe their Wives and Chil:'re:: ro ule it ; this being 
one {1gn of Dominion, and therefore frequent after tis timeamong 
tle Greeks and Romans, who together with their victorious Arms, 
broughr in their Language intoother Countries,and in a great mea- 

ſurc impoſed it upon them. 
CHAP. 1k 


The Virgins of the K'ngdom being gathered together, a Queen is to be cho- 


+ Heb. was 


by 
Y 
- Fo 4 


Ir ys ff. 
hs, 


[eb.goud 


COunte= 


purifying of the women. 


Hi EE © Chap. 
' 9 And the maiden pleaſed him þ, and ſhe obtained 
kindneſs of him, and he ſpeedily gave her things for 
puriacation, with ſuch things as betonged to her,and f Heb 
ſeven maidens 2which were meer to be given her, our of 297% 
the kings houſe, and Þ he preferred her and her maids 7 
unto the beſt place of the houſe of the women, "3 
& Partly becauſe ſhe was very beautiful,and therefore he ſuppoſed 
the would be very acc<ptable to the king ; which would be tis ad- 
vantage ; and paitly by the Divine Pow.ci, xhich moveth the hearts 
of men which way he plcalcrh. 
10 Eſtherhad not ſbewed her p:op!e.nor her kindred : 
for Mordecai had charged her that ihe ſhould nocthew it 5. 
; Leſt the knowledge hereof ſhould eirher make her contempti=- 
le or ovious ; or bring ſome inconvenience to the whole Nation, 
as things might happen. Bur there was alſo an hand ofGod in cau- 
ting this to be concealed, for the better accompliſhment of thar 
which he deſigned, though Aordccai was ignorant of it. 


11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court 
of the womans houſe, + to know how Eſther did, and t Heb.|f 
what ſhould become of her. « 

12 Now when every maids turn was come to go in 
toKing Ahaſuerus; after that ſhe had been cwelve 
months, according to the manner of the women &, for 
fo were the days of their puritications accompliſhed, 
to wit, 11x months with oyl of myrrhe 7, and fix months 
with ſweet odours w, and with o:ber things for the 


ſ 


 & Who were kept ſo long partly for their better purification, as 
it here follows ; partly our oftate avzthat which became ſo greata 


= ſen, 1 *»—— 4. Eſther, nurſed by Mordecai, is choſen t» be one of the 
Heb, 
ch Was 
the hand 
his eu« 
hs, 


her purification, 12 - - 14. She pleaſeth the King, and is made 
Queen, 15 ——17, The king makes a Feaft for his Princes and Ser- 
wants, 18 20. Abrdecai diſcoverith a Treaſon ag acnit the King, 2.1. 
22. which i recorded in their Chronicles, 23. : 
Frer theſe things when che wrath of king Aha- 
| ſuerus was appeaſed,he remembred 4 Vaſhti, and 
what ihe had done, and what was decre<d againit her. 
a With griefand ſhame, that in "is 'Vine ini Rag:, he hal fo 
ſeverely puniſhed, and 1o irrevocab'y reie&-d fo beauriful and deſi- 
rable a perion, a;.d that for fo imall a provocation t'» whiCh the was 
eaſily led by the modeſty of her Sex,aud by the Laws & Cuiioms 


Virgins, 8- and preferred before the ref, 9 —— 11. The manner of 


King ; and partly that being ſo long in ſafe cuſtody,the king might 
be {ure thar the Child begottea upon any of chem was his own, 1 
Which is uſual both for making the skin exally clean,& ſmooth, 
and ſolid,and for giving ſtrength and vigour to the body: mWhich 
was the more neceſſary, becauſe the bodies of men and women in 
thoſe hor Countries,did of themſelves yield very ill tceats, ifnor 
corrected and qualified by Art. 

13 Then thus » came every maiden unto the King ; 
whatſoever ſhe defired o was given her, to $0 with her 


out of the houſe of the women, unto the kings houſe. 
% Thus purified and prepared ; and thus as it follows. 9 For orna- 
ment, or by way of attendance. 

14 In the evening {he went, and on the morrcow ſhe 


of Perſia. 


Miad, and procure him another amiable ( :0::10:t. ; 

3 And jer che king appoint Othcers in all the provin- 
ces of his kingdom, that they may gather cogether all 

Web mrs © fair Foun virgins unto Suthan the palace, to the 
leheng, houſe of the women, + unto the cuſtody of || Hege the 
[Or,Hegai, Kings chamberlain, keeper of the women c, and let 
1.8. their things for purification 4 be given them. 

c Either, i. Of the Virgins, who are oft called Women, as here 

v.11,12. and elf{ewhere. Soit is a Synecdoche. Or, 2. OF all the 
Women, both virgins and Concubines, only the Virgins he him- 
ſelt rook care of, as requiring mvre ca e «nd caution, anil the 
Concutines be commited to S$.8jhgaz, vr, i4. his Depu.y. d i. e. 
To cleanſe them from all impu: itics anc undecencies. to ano:nt, and 
pertume, and auvorn, and every way prepare them for the King's 
preſence and Service : for the legal puiiications of the Jews he ne- 
ver regarded. > ; 

4 And let the maiden which pleaterh the king, be 
queen inſtead of Valhii, And the thing pleaſed the 
king, *and he did fo, | 

5 New in Shuſhan. the palace there was a certain 

Jew, whoſe name 2s Mordecai, the fon of Jair, the 
fon of Shimei, the ſon of Kiſh, a Benyjamire. 
: Kings 6 * Who e had been cartied away from Jeruſalem, 
<0.IF, » " PU . - . 
ARR with the captivity which had been carried away with 
36. 10. Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the 
ſer. 24- 1, king of Pabyicn had carried away. 


21:9:14 
Kings 
: 19, 


bat i 


2 Then ſaid the kings ſervants b chat miniſtred unto 
him,Let there be fair young virgins ſought for the king. 
b Who for th-ir own Intere:ts were obliged to quiet the King's 


—_— 


returned into the ſecond houſe of the women, to the 
cuſtody of Shaaſhgaz, the Kings Chamberlain, which 
kept the concubines p: ſhe came in unto the King no 
more, except the king delighced in her, and that ſhe 
were called by name. 
p Whereof Darius Nthus is reckoned to have had 369. 

15 Now when the turn of Etther, the daughter of 
Abihail, the uncie of Mordecai ( who had taken her 
for his daughter) was come to go in unto the king,ſhe 
required noching q but wharHegaithe kings Chamberlain, 
the keep-rof the women appoinced: and Eſther obtained 
favour 1in the fight of all them that looked upon her r. 
q To ſhew rhat the was nor delirous to pleaſe the King, and ther 


ſhe was brought to the King without and againſt her own inclina» 
tion end choice. rl. e. Was admucd by them for her beauty. 

16 So'Efther was taken unto king Ahaſucrus, into 
his houſe royal /, in the tenth month ( which #s the 
month Tebeth ) in the ſeventh year of his reign. 

S And into his bed, as is implied To which it is not lirange, if 
ſhe though a virtuous perſon,did in thoſe circumſtances yield, coi- 
ſidering the iniirmiry of Human Nature, and of that Sex, and rhe 
ſtate of thoſe times, when pjural.ry of Wives were premitted, and 
Concubines were owned as Wives ; and theſe Virgins were by this 
ation made his Wives or Concubines. Beſidez, it is not known to 
us whether Merd:cai and Efiver had not di:eCtion, or a difpenſation 
from God in this matter; it being certain that God can diſpenſe 
with his own politive Laws. 

17 And che king loved Eſther above all the women, 
and ſhe obtained grace and || farour F in his fight more 


than all the virgins ; fo that he ſer the royal crown u- IOr,tind- 
So 


| 


[ 


* 


v_—_— - 


e This may be referred either, 1. To K'ſb, Mordecai's Grand-fa- 
ther laſt mentioned : or. 2. To Mordecar, who was then carried a- 
way, cither x. In the Loins of his Parents ; in which fenſe Lev? 
is faid to be zithed in 4iraham, Hcb. 7 and as thoſe Perions named , 
Ezra 2 are faid t have been carried away by N:buchadnezz4", Ezra 2. j 
1. which is not true of the moſt of them in their own pecfons, but 
only as in their farh*rsLoins.Or 2.In his own perſon: and then in- 
deed he was a man of more than ordinary years. Bur of that ice the 
Netes on chap. 1. 1- 
7 Ard he f brought up Hadaſſah ( that 1s Eſtherf) 
{Heb my. bis uncles daughter, for ſhe had neither father nor mo- | 
hed. ther, and the maid was F fair and beautiful, whom | 
Mordecai ( when her father and mother were dead ) 
took for his own daughter. . | 
f Hadaſah was her Hebrew name before her marriage and ſhe 
was called Eſther by the King after 1t | 
$ Soir came TO pais, waen the kings commandment 
and his decree was heard, and when many maidens 
were gathered together unto Shuſhan the palace, to 
the cuſtody of Hcgai, thar Eſther was brought g alfo 
unto the kings houte, co the cuſtody of Hegai, keeper 
of the women. =D 
z Or, taken and thar by force,as that word oft ſignittes: ſo great 
was the p: wer and tyianny OI che Perſian Rigs, that they cou-s 
nd did take what perſons racy liked to their own ule. 


4 


Jebifi 
god wil 
King. 
eb. fu 
ore iſh 
leb.tw# 
paſs 0a 
8). 
oh 
Heb. 
here 
0100 


tHeb fair 
o form, &- 
gudef 6 01= 


— ——— 


— . —— ——— — 


pon her head, and mad? her. queen 1n ſtead of Vaſhti. _ ad 
18 Then the king made a grear feaſt unto all his prin- foodies 
ces and his ſervants, evtn Eſthers feaſt, and he made 


a 
t releaſe to the ces #, and gave gifts according to 
the ſtate of the&king. tHeb.reft. 
ti. e, He rook off a good pirt of thoſe heavy taxes which the 
Perſian Kings laid upon their People. : 
19 And when the virgins were gathered together the 
ſecond time «, then Mordecai fart in the kings gate x. 


v Either, 1x. When Efher, with others, were brought ro the 
Kings houſe, as it was decreed above, v: 2, 3- which is called 7he 
ſecond time, becaute they had taken this couite once betore when 

7ajbzi was cholen Queen: Bur there isno mention of any fuch for- 
mer ule ; and by the manner of propoſing,it ſeems to have been a 
new proje&. Or, 2. Since Ether was declared Que-n ; for though 
that point was decermined,the King's Luſt was nor yer fatisfied,o 
theretore being pleaicd with the former Experiment, he dclired a- 
nother Collection of Virgins whom he might make hs Concubines: 
And this ſcems beſt to agree with the following words. For it 1s 
not probable that Mordecai ſaute at the King's Gate till Ether was 
Queen ; for till chen he only watked before rhe court of the womens 
houſe, as is exprelicd v. 11. x Either 1» Voluntarily, to learn the 
progrels of Aitairs. Or, rather - 2, By Oiuce,as one of the King's 


Guard 


A 
£ 


& Eh. 
J Big- 


” 
y! S« 
y. the 


oppor- 


IL) 


bee Eft5. 


IO. 


z9 Wig 


' people, 


Ir courts 
e Efh. 
1 


FO c 


EF = oa 


Guard or M'nifter;; being advanced to this place by Eflher's On] 
though withourany diſcovery of her Relation ro him. 

29 Eftber had nor yer ſhewed her kindred, nor her 
as Mordecai had charged her: for Eſther did 
like as when ſhe was 


the commandment of Mordecai, 


brought up with him. ; 
21 * In thoſe days ( while Mordecai ſat in the kivgs 


gate) two of the kings chamberlains, || Bigthan and 


Fereſh, oF thoſe which kept the | door y, were wroth, 
and ſought + to lay hand z on the king Ahaſuerus. 

'y Either = Of the King's Chamber. Or, 2. Of his Court ; and 
ſo they fate in the Gate, as Mordecai did, who by that means con- 
trafting ſome familiar acquaintance with them, might make ſome 
diſcovery of their Minds and deſign. = #. c. Violent hand; to kill 
him as this Phraſe is uſed, ch. 3. 6. and elſewhere. | 

22 And the thing wasknown to Mordecai, who told 


;t unto Eſther the queen, and Eſther certified che king 


thereof, in Mordecais names : 
23 And when inquifition was made of the matter, 1t 


was found out, therefore they were both hanged on a 
tree : and it was written in the book of che Chroni- 


cles be'ore the king ||. H 
| This may be referred, either r. To the Writing, to note that 

this was writen in the King's preſence by Scribes, who were con- 

tinually preſent with the King to write all remarkable paſſages hap- 
pening in the court from time to time. Or, 2. To the Book, 
which was laid up before the King, that he might more eaſily and 
frequently perule it for his own delight or direction. 

C KP. NL. 

Haman is advanced by the K ng, 1 4. being deſp'ſed by Mordecai, 
be ſeeketh to deftroy all the Jews, 5, 6. He caſteth Lots,7. and accuſing 
the Jews to the King, chtamneth @ Decree to pus them to death,8---=-I1. 
Letters iſſued out to deſtroy all the Jews, 12 15. 

A Frer theſe things did king Ahaſuerus. promote Ha- 

A man the ſon of Hammedatha the * Agagite a, 

and advanced him, and ſer hisſeatabove all the princes 


that ere with him 6. 

2 5. e. Ari Amalekite of the royal Seed of that Nation, whoſe 
Kings were commonly and ſucceflively called Agag, as hath been 
obſerved before. Ir is true, he is calſed a Macedonian in the Apo- 
cryphal Additions to this book, and ſo he mighr by bis Birth or 
Habitation in that place, though by his original, he was of ano- 
ther people. b Gave him the firſt place and ſear, which was next 
to the King. Compare 2 Kings 25. 28. 


2 And all the kings ſervants that were in the kings 
+ gate bowed, and reverenced Haman ; for the king 
had ſo commanded concerning him: but Mordecai * 


bowed not, nor did him reverence c. 

_ © The reaſon of which obſtinare refuſal, was either 1. The Qua- 
lity of the perſon ; that he was not only au infamouſly wicked 
Man, and an Heathen, but of that Nation, which God had ovliged 
the Iſraelites to abhor and oppoſe from Generation to Generation 3 
and therefore he durft not thew outward reſpe& to a Man whom 
he did, and ought inwardly to contemn- Or, rather 2- The nature 
of the thing 3 for the Worſhip required was not only Civil, but 
Divine 3 which as the Kings of Perſia did undcubred!ly arrogate to 
themſelves, and expect and receive from their Subjects and others 
who cane into their preſence, as is affirmed by divers Authors, 
fo they did ſometimes impart this Honour to ſome of their chief 
Favourites, that they ſhould be adored in like manner. And that 
it was ſo here ſeems more than probable, becauſe it was wholly 
ſuperfluous and almoſt ridiculous to give an expreſs and particular 
command to all the Kings Servants that were in the King's Gate, as here 
it was, to pay a Civil Reſpect to ſo great a Prince, which of courſe 
they uſed, and were ever obliged to do ; and therefore a Divine Ho- 
nour muſt be here intended. And that a Jew ſhould deny this Ho- 
nour, orthe outward expreſſions of it, ro ſuch a perſon, is notſtrange, 
ſeing the wiſe and ſober Grecians did poſitively refuſe to give this 
Honour to the Kings of Perſis themſelves, even when they were 
to make their Addreſſes to them 3 and one Timecrates was put to 
death by the Athenians for Worſhiping Darius in th-t manner. 


3 Then the kings ſervants which were in the kings 
gate, ſaid unto Mordecai, Why tranſgreſſeſt thou the 
kings commandment ? : 

4 Now it came to paſs, when they ſpake daily unto 
him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told 
Haman, to ſee whether Mordecai his matters would 
ftand 4; for he had told them that he as a Jew e. 

d i. e. Whether he would perliſt in his refuſal, and what the 
event of it would be. e And therefore did not deny this reve- 
rence to Haman out of pride, or any perſonal Grudge againſt him, 
much leſs out of a rebellious Mind and contempt of the King's 


Authority aud' command, but meerly out of Conſcience, becauſe 
he was a jew, who was obliged to give this honour to none bur to 


| God only. 


5 And when Haman ſaw that Mordecai bowed not, 
nor did him reverence, then was Haman fu'l of wrath. 

6 And he thought ſcorn f to lay hands on Mordecai 
alone ; for they had ſhewed him the people of Morde- 
Cai : wherefore Haman ſfoughe toweſtroy all the Jews 
g that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahaſue- 
rus even the-people of Mordecai. 

f He thought the particular Vengeance was unſuitable to his 
Quality» and to the greatneſs of the Injury. g Which he attempted, 
oY from that implacable Hatred which, as an Amalckite, he 

ad againſt them ; partly ffom his Rage againit Aprdecai ; and 
partly from Meradecat's reaion of this Conrewpr, becauſe he was a 
Jew, which as he trucly judged, extended it felt to all the Jews,and 


E R. 
would equally ingage them all in the ſame negle&t and hatred of 
his perſon. 

7 In the firſt month (that is the month Niſan) in the 
twelfth year of kirgAhaſuerus,* they caſt Pur,thatis the 
lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to 
month h, to the twelfth wcnth 3.that zs,the month Adar, 
_ hþ The Diviners caſt Tots, according to the cuſtom of thoſe an. 
cient and eaſtern People, what day, and what month would be moſt 
Jucky, not for his ſucceſs with the King ( of whoſe compliance with 
his requeſt, he made no doubt ) but for the moſt effeQtual and yni. 
verſal Extirpation of the Jews. i Wherein appears both his im. 
placable Malice, and unwearied dil:gence in ſeeking Vengeance of 
them with ſo much, and ſo long trouble to himſelf ; and God's 
ingular Providence in diſpoſing the Lot to that time, that ſo the 
Jews might have ſufficient ſpace of time to ger the decreereverſcd, 
as they did. 

8 And Haman faid unto king Ahaſuerus, There is a 
certain people & ſcattered abroad, anddiſperſed among 
the people / in all the provinces of thy kingdom m, 
and * their laws are divers from all people », neither 
keep they the kings laws o ; therefore it is not © for the 
kings profit to ſuffer them p. 

k Mean and contemptible, not worthy to be named. 
therefore, if rolerated, may poiſon all thy SubjeQs with their per- 
nicious Principles ; and whom thou mayit eaſily cruſh without any 
great noiſe or difficulty. m For though many of their Brethren 
were returned to their own Land, yet great numbers of them ſtaid 
behind, either becauſe they preferred their eaſe and worldly com- 
modities before their Spiritual Advantzges; or becauſe they wanted 
Conveniency or Opportunity for a remove; which might happen 
from divers cauſes. » They have peculiar and fantaſtical Rites, and 
Cuſtoms, and Religion ; and therefore are juſtly offenſive to all thy 
People, and may either infe&t them with their Conceits, or occaſion 
great Difſentions and Diſtra&ions among them. o As is manifeſt 
by Mordecai's bold contempt of thy late Edi& concerning me, which 
being done by kim as a Jew, the whole Nation are involved in this 
Crime, and are prepared to do ſo when they have occaſion, p To 


live in his Kingdem. 71 do not ſeek herein ſo much my own Re- 
venge as thy Service, 


9 If itpleaſe the King, let it be writcen q + that they 
may be deſtroyed : and I will pay ten thouſand talents 


the buſineſs - : -o bring it into the kings treaſures. 

9 Let there be a written Edi& from the King. » Whether theſe 
were Hebrew, or Babyloniſh,or GrecianTalents we cannot certainly 
knows But which ſoever they were, it was a vaſt ſum to be paid out 
of his own Eſtate, which he was willing to ſacrifice to his revenge! 
5 Either. r. Ofthis buſineſs, to wit, of deſtroying the Jews ; which as 
ſoon as they have procured to be done, I will pay the Money into 
their hands, that by them it may be paid into the King's Exchequer. 
Or rather. 2- Of the King's Buſinels, or of the Treatures, as is im- 
pled in the following words. I will pay it to the King's Recei- 
vers, that they may put it into the King's Treaſures. h 

io And the king took his ring from his hand, and 
gave it unto Haman # the ſon of Hammedatha the A- 
gagite, the Jews || enemy #. 

# That he might keep it as a Badge of his Supreme Authority 
under the King, and that he might ule it for the ſealing of this De- 
cree which now he deſired or of any other,, as hereafter he ſhould 
ice fir. Compare ch $., 2,8. and Gen. 41. 24, u So he was both by 
Inclination, as he was an Amalekite, and eſpecially by this mali- 
cious and deſtruftive Deſign and Reſolution. 

it And the king laid unto Haman, the filver ;s gi- 
ven to ,thee*x, the people alſo, to do with them as it 
ſeemerh good to thee. 


x Keep it to thy own uſe 
for the ; So) : : 


12 Then were the kings || ſcribes y called on the thir- 


I do not deſireit, I accept thy offer 


cording to all that Haman had commanded unto the 
kings Leutenants,and to the governours that were over e- 
very prevince, and to the rulers of every people of 
every province according to the writing thereof, and to 
every people after their language,in the name of kingA- 
haſuerus was it written, and ſealed with the kings ring. 

3 This he did ſo ſpeedily, though it was a year before the in- 
tended Execution, !elt the King ſhould change his Mind, either by 
his own clemency, or by the perſwaſion of others. 

13 And the letters were ſent by poſts into all the 
kings provinces, to deſtroy, to kill, and to cauſe to pe- 
riſh all Jews, both young and old, * little children and 
women, in one day, evey upon the thirteenth day of 
the twelfth month ( which is the month Adar ) and 
to take the ſpoil of them for a Prey z. | 


z Which was to oblige them to the greater Severity and Rea- 
dineſs to execute this Edi& for their own advantage. 


14 The copy of the writing for a commandment 
to be given in every province, was publiſhed unto all 
people, that they ſhould be ready againſt that day. 

15 The poſts went out, being haſtened-by the kings 
commandment ||, and the decree was given in Shuſhan 


the palace : and the king and Haman ſat downto drink, 
but the city Shuſhan + was perplexed. 
|| Either by/this Decree made in the King's name, or by ſome 
-particular aid ſncceeding command, which Haman could eatily ob- 
tain front the King, f Notonly the Jews, but a great number of the 
| Ciriz-hs, either becaute they were related to them, or engaged es 
; them 


of ſilver 7 to the hands of thoſe that have the charge of 


Chap. 11l, PT 


*Ch.9.24, 


*Ezr.4.13 
Acts 16, 
20 


T Heb, 
I Who meet, 0r te 


ual, 


+ Heb, 
deſtroy 
them. 

+ Heb, 


weighs 


[| Or, 9p« 


preſſor, 


p Or, Secrt« 
teenth day of the firſt month, and there was written ac- et 


, 


* Not ex* 
ceptings 


ka 
fa 


ip.rq 


+ 


(Me 


" Cha Pp. 


+ Hebs 
ſackeloch & 
ajnes were 
laid under 
many 


tHeb. cu 


7 Heb. 


zum -h? 


tad ſet be- know what 1t was, and why it was- 


fore her. 


T Heb. re- 


ſ.ration, 


IV. FE $7 


them in worldſy coficerns ; or out of humanity and compaſſion to- 
wards ſo vaſt a number of innocent people now appointed as Sheep 
for the ſlaughter ; or out of a fear either of ſome Sedition and Di- 
ſturbance which might ariſe by this means; or of ſome Damage 
which mightaccrue to themſelves or Friends, who happily under 
this pretence might be expoſed to Rapine or ſlaughter ; or of a 
publick judgement cf God upon them all for ſo Bloody a Decree. 


CHAT! Iv. 


The grcat Mourning of Mordecai and the Jews, 1=—— 7. 


ple, 4 wn 5, She, excuſmg her ſelf, is threatned by Mordecai, 

8 —- 14. She appoints a general Fat, and reſolves to go in to the King, 
yg —_— I. 
WW en Mordecai perceived all that was donz, Mor- 
Cecai rent his clothes, and put on ſackcloth 

with aſhes, and went out into the midſt of the city, 
and cried witha loud and bitter cry a, 
a Pzrtly to expreſs his deep Senſe of the miſchief coming upon 
his Peopje3 partly to move the pity of others to do what they 
could to prevent 1tz and partly that by this means it might come 
to the Queens Ear. 


2 And came, even before the kings gate ; for none 
»:ight enter into the kings gate bþ clothed with fſack- 
cloth c. 


b And therefore he might not fit there, as he had hitherto done. 
c Leſt it ſhould give the king any eccaſion of Grief or Trouble. 


2 And in every province whitherfoever the kings 
commandment and his decree came, there was great 
mourning among the Jews, and taſting, and weeping 
and wailing, and f many lay in ſackcloth and aſhes. 

4 So Eſthers maids, and her F chamberlains came 
and told it her. Then was the queen exceedingly grie- 
ved.and jhe fent raiment to clothe/Mordecai,and to take 
away his ſackcloth from bim : bur he received it nor. 

d That ſo he might be capable of returning to his former place, 
if not of coming to her toacquainr her with the caute of that un- 
uſual Sorrow. 

5 Then called Eſther for Hatach, ove of the kings 
chamberlains, F whom! he had appointed to attend upon 
her ; and gave him a commandment to Mordecai, to 


6 So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the ftreer 
of the city, which as before the kings gate. 

7 And Mordecai told him of all that had happened 
unto him, ard of the ſum of money that Haman had 
promifed to pay to the kings treaſuries for the Jews, to 
deſtroy them. | 

8: Alſo he gave him the copy of the writing of the 
decree that was given at Shuihan to deſtroy them, to 
ſhew # unto Eſther, and deciare iz unto her, and to 
charge her z that ſhe ſhould go in unto the king to 
make ſupplication unto him, and to make requeſt be- 
fore him for her people. 

# Not only in his own name, to whom ſhe manifeſted a ſingular 


reſpect, though his relation to her was yet unknown, bur allo 1n 
the name of the great God.- 


9 And Hatach came and told Eſther. the words of 
Mordeca1. 

Io Again Eſther ſpake unto Hatach, and gave him 
commandment to fay unto Mordecai ; 

11 All the kings ſervants, and the people of the kings 
provinces do know &, that whatſoever, whether man 
or woman, ſhall come unto the king into the inner 
court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put 
him to death m, except ſuch to whom che king [hall hold 
out the golden ſcepter that he may live: but I have nor 
been called co come in unto the king thele thirty days ». 

k By common Fame of this received cuſtom and Law. 1 Within 
which, the Kings Reſidence and Throne was m This was decreed, 
partly to maintain both the Majcſty, and the {afery of the Kings 


Perſon ; and partly by the contrivance of the greater Othcers of | 


State, that few or none might have acceſs to the King but them- 
ſclves and their Yrieads And many fuch ſevere Laws there were 
in the Perfian Courts which profane Hiſtorians relate, as that if any 
Perſon looked upon one of the Kings Concubines, or wore any of 
his own Clothes,or drunk of that water which he had appropriated 
to. himſelf, and other ſuch like things he was puniſhed withdeath. 
n Which gives me juſt cauſe ro fuſpect and tear that the Kings 
Aﬀections are alienated from me, and rherefore that neither my 
Perſon nor Petition will be acceptable to him, 

12 And they told to Mordecai Eſthers words. 

13 Then Mordecai commanded to anſwer Eſther, 
Think not with'thy ſeif char thou ſhalt eſcape inthe 
kings houſe o, more than all the Jews: 

0 7. e, Being, or becauſe thou art in the Kings Houſe, and an e- 
mincent Member of his Family. 

14 Forit thou alcogecher holdeſt thy peace at this 
time, then ſhall there + enlargement and deliverance 
ariſe to the Jews from another place p, bur thou and 


; He ſheweth E- 
Rher the cauſe of it, and adviſeth her to petition the King for - her Peo- 


A Em 


ſwer, 


nor drink t three days, night or day : I alſo and 


I periſh, I periſh =. 


of abſoJuteFaſting ſo long upon all the Jews, which very few of them 
were able to endure, And fo the like Phraſe is taken, 4#s 27. 33. 
where he ſaith, This is the fourteenth day that ye have continued fa- 
ting having taken nothing. u Which ſhe had choſen toatrend upon her 
perſcn, and were doubtleſs either of the Jewifh Nation, or proſely- 


long, either T1. To the thing only, that as they did faft, ſo ſhe 
would. Or, rather, 2. Tothe time of three day and three nights ; 
for ſo ſhe might do, though ſhe went to the King on the th.rd day. 
Hor the Faſt began at evening, and fo the might continue her Fat 
three whole nights. and two whole days, and the greatelt part of 
tne third 3 a part of aday being repured a «ay in the account of 
Scripture, and other Authors : of which ſce on Mat. 12. 40. Yea, 
ſhe might faſt all that day too : for ir is probable ſhe went not ro 
the King il] he had dined ; when ſhe ſuppoſed the might find him 
in the molt mild and pleaſant humour, and thenrerurned to her A- 
partment, where ſhe taſted till the Evening. y Which is againſt 
the Law now mentioned. z Although my danger be great and evi- 
dert, conſidering the expreſneſs of that.Law, and the uncertainty 
ofthe Kings mind, and that ſeverity which he ſhewed ro my Prede- 
ccflor Yajhii ; yet rather than neg!e& my duty to God, and to his 
People, I will go to the King, and cat my ſeif chearfully and re- 
{oJurely upon Gods Providence for my ſafety and ſucceſs. 


5. And being encouraged by the King in her Petition, 6. Invites them 
to another banquet, 7, 8, Haman's joy, but angry with Myaecai for 
contemning him, 9 13: By the counſel of his Wife he builds 8 
Gallows for him, 14. 


OW it came to paſs on the third day «, that E- 


houſe : and the king fat upon his royal throne in the 
royal houſe, over againſt che gate of the houſe. | 
a Of which ſee the Notes on ch. 4. 16. b That ſhe might ren- 


der her ſclfas amiable in the King's Eyes as ſhe could ; and fo ob- 
tained” her requeſt. 


ſtanding in the court, rhat ſhe * obtained favour in his 
ſight : and the king held out to Efther the golden ſcep- 
ter that was in his hande: fo Eſther drew near, and 
touched the top of his ſcepter 4. 


c Inteſtimony that he pardoned her preſumption, and accepted 
her perſon, and was ready to grant her petition, d In token of her 
thankful acceptance of the King's great favour, and of her reve- 
rence and ſubmiſſion to his Majeſty, whereof thar might poſlibly 
be an uſual token, and it may be, at the King's call and invitation 
to her to come nezr to him. 


3 Then faid the king unto her, what wilt thou, quzen 


given thee to the half of the kingdoms 

4 And Efther anſwered, If i: ſeems good unto the king, 
let the King and Haman e come this day unto the ban- 
quet that I have prepared for him. | | 

e Whom ſhe invited, partly that by ſhewing ſuch reſpeR ro the 
King's great Favourite, the might inſinuate her ſc]f into rhe King's 
good opinion and affeftion ; and partly, that if ſhe ſaw fic,ſhe migar 
then preſent her requeſt ro the King. : 

' 5 Then the king ſaid, cauſe Haman to make haſte, thar 
he may do as Either hath faid: fo the king and 'Haman 
came tothe banquet that Eſther had prepared. 

6 And the king laid unco Elther atthe banquer of wine 
f, What is thy Petition ? and ic ſhall begcanted thee: 
and what is thy requeſt ? even to the half of the kingdom 
it ſhall be performed. 


f Either 1. At the latter end of the Feaſt, when they vu: 9 
drink Wine more freely, whereas in the former part, moſt of : heir 
drink was Water. Or, 2. Ather Banquet; which is ſo called, be- 
cauſe it confiſted norof Meats, which probably the King had plen- 
tifully eate:z before at his own Table, but of Fruits and Wines ; 
which Banquets were very frequent among the Perſfaus. 


7 Then anſwered Eſther, and ſaid, my pericion, and 


thy fathers houſe ſhall be deſtroyed q: and who know- 1 
eth whether thou art come to the kingdom for ſuch a 
time as this 7 ? | 

p From another hand, and by another means 3 which God can, 
and'I am fully perſwaded, will raile up. q By the righteous an | 
dreadful Judgement of God, punituing thy Cowardite,o teliz.ceking 


my requelt zs ;' | 
8 If Thave found favour in the fight of the king, 


and if ir pleaſe rhe king to grantmy peticion, and 5 © 


perform my requeſt, let the King and Haman come to * Teb. # 


16 Go, gather together all the Jews that are | pre- 
ſent in Shuſhan, and faſt ye s for me, and neither eat 


: my 
maidens « will falt likewiſe *, and ſo will Igo in unto 


the king, which is not according io the law 7; and if 


2 And it was /o, when the king ſaw Eſther the queen, 


. 5 And pray ; which was the main buſineſs, to which faſting was 
only an help and an Handmaid. # To wir, ſo asyou uſe to do, 
either deliciouly or plentifully. Leave off your common Meals, 
Dinners by day, and Suppers at night, and eat and drink no more 
than meer neceſſity requires ; that ſo you may give your ſelves to 
conſtant and fervent Praycrs, for which your ordinary repaſts will 
unfir you. For it is not likely that ſhe would impole the burden 


ted by hers, or others means, to that Religion, x Which may be- - 


- 


4 


to all that Eſther had commanded him, paſſes. 
| CHAT Y. 
Eſther wentuting en the King's favour, haththe golden Scepter held ont ta 
her, 1 —— 3. She inviteth the King and Haman to # banquet, 4, 


the banquer that I ſhall prepare for them, and 1 1 ll dott® 


to morrow as the king hath 1aid 7. 


4 CV 3 g-] 


ww 


T H- 
found, 


17 do Mordecai f werit his way, and did according t Heb. 


ſter put on her * royal apparel b, and ſtood in the* Ch. 8 
inner court of the kings houſe, over againſt the kings & 8. 15] 


Chap 
8. & 7 


Efther ? and what is thy requeſt ? * it (ball be even "$60 
. 23" 


Chap! 
and thy want of Love to God, and to his and thy own People. 
r It is probable God hath raiſed thee ro this Honour for this very Seas 
ſon; and therefore go on couragiouſly,and doubt not of the Succeſs: 

15 Then Eſther bad 1h return Mordecai his an- 


j 


1 
| 


j 
| 


1 


| 


4 


| 
| 
| 
f 
| 


: 
: 
; 


: 
: 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


'# 
"FT 


| g I will arquaint thee with my humble requeſr. She did not 
preſent her petition ar this time, bur delayed it till the next _ 

- 3ng5 either rhrough modeſty, or becauſe the was a little daunte 
- with the Kings preience, and had nor yet geod courzge to propoſe 
her requeſt: or in policy, becauſe ſhe would further engage the 
Kings affeQtion ro her by a ſecondentertainment, and would alfo in- 
timate to him that her petition was of a more than ordinary Nature: 
and principally by dire&tion and diſpoſition of the divine Pro- 
vidence, which took away her eourage or utteranc? for this time, 
that the might have a berter opporrunity for it the nexr t1ume, 
by that great accident which happencd betore it. | 
9 Then went Flaman torth that day, joyful, and 
with a glad heart : but when Hamanſaw Mordecai in 
the kings gate, that he ſtood not up, nor moved for 

him þ, he was full of indignation againſt Mordecai. 

þ Partly leſt he ſhould ſeem, or be interpreted to give him that 

- adoration which he hitherto had juſtly denied - partly becauſe by 
his bloody and barbarous deſign and praice, he had pur off all hu- 
manity, and forfeited all reſpe& 3 and partly to ſhew how little he 
feared him, and that be had a firm contidence in his God that he 
would deliver him and his people in this great exigency 3 which he 
was the more encouraged to hope, becauſe God had inclined Efther s 
heart to that pious and valiant reſolution of interceeding with the 

King, which he doubred not would mect with good ſucceſs. 

io Nevertheleſs, Haman refrained nimſelf 3, and 
-b.cay. When he came home, he ſent and 7 called for his friends, 


770 come. and Zerch bis wife. Ef | 

; From taking preſent vengeance upon Mordecar, to which he 
was ſtrongly inclined,and which he might cafily have effeed, cither 
by his own, or any of his Servants hands, without any expettati- 
on, or fear of inconvenience to himlelf, who having obtained li- 
cence todeſtroy a wholeNation,could eaſily get a pardon for having 
killed one obſcure and infamous Mcmber of it., Herein therefore 
Gods wiſe and powerful Providence appeared in diipoting Hamzns 
heart, contrary to his own inclination and intereſt, and making 
him, as it were to put Fetters upon his own hands. Ede 

1t And Haman told them of the glory of his rich- 
es &, and the multitude of his Children, and all zhe 
things wherein the king had pgromored him, and how 
he had advanced him above the princes and ſervants 
of the king. 

& Partly to gratifie his own vainglorious humour, and partly to 
aggravate Mordecai's impudence in denying him civil reſpeQ, and 
to alleviate his own vexation cauſed by 1t. 

12 Haman faid moreover, Yea, Eſther the queen gid 


that ſhe had prepared, but my felt; and to morrew 


am TI invited unto her alſo with the king /. 
I Thus he makes that matter of glorying which was deſigned 
, for, and the occaſion of his utter ruine. $0 ignorant are the wi- 
| ſeſt Men, and ſubje& to fatal miſtakzs, rejoicing when they have 
moſt cauſe of fear and grief, and forrowing for taole things which 
' tend to joy and comfort. | : 
13 Yet all this availeth me nothing mz, fo long as I 


ſee Mordecai the Jew ſitting at the kings gate ». 
m i. e, Gives me no content. Such torment did his envy and 
malice bring upon him. » Enjoying that honour and priviledge 


place, and by the Kings command : though this Jaft, and the chief 
cauſe of his rage, he was ſomewhat aſhamed to expreſs. Either Mor- 
ca: was come, h&ing laid by his ſackcloth for this rime,thar he mighr 
be in a capaciry of coming thither, and {o of underſtanding how 
matters proceeded. Beſides, this was a private Faſt, and ſo he was 
not obliged always to wear his ſackcloth in publick,during the whole 
time of the Faſt, though he did once come abroad with it,that rhe 
cauſe of it might be publickly known,and fo'come to Efher's cars. 
| 14 Then ſaid Zereſh his wite, and all his friends un- 

Heb. ere. © him, Let a | gailows be made of fifty cubits high o, 

| and to morrow ipeak thou unto the king, that Mor- 

decaimay be hanged thereon : then go thou in merrily 
with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleaſed 

*Chap.7-9+ Haman, and he cauſed * the Gallows to be made. 

o That it might be more conſpicuous to all. and thereby be more 
diſgraceful to Mord:cai, and ftrike all Haman's Enemies with the 
great dread of deſpiſing or oppoling him. 

CHEAP. VL. ” 
Ahaſuerus's ſleep being taken from him,commands the Chronicles to be vead, 
J. And reading of Mordecai's diſcovery of the Plot againſt his Life, asks 

what Honour had been done to him, 2, 3. Haman coming to the King to 

have mordecai hanged, unawares gives gcounſel to hononr him, 4—1 1. 

Haman telling his Friends what had b:fallen h.m, is foretold of his final 

Tuine, 12,13. Heis call d to Efther's banquet, 14. 


+ Heb. a 


bb N that night F could not the king ſleep &, and he 
+» Sang commanded to bring the book of records of the 


a away. : . 
4 ?* chronicles þ: and they were read before the king c. 
| + How vain areall the contrivances and indeavours of this fooliſh 
impotent Man againſt the Wiſe and omnipotent God. who hath the 
hearts and hands of Kings and all Men perfeRly at his diſpoſe, and 
can by ſuch trivial accidents ( as they are accounted ) change their 
minds, and produce ſuch momentousand terrible effe&s ! b His mind 
being troubled he knew not how. nor why,he chuſerh this for a di- 
vert:{\ement, God putting this thought aad inclination to him, for 
otherwiſe he might have diverted himſelf, as he uſed todo at other 
times, with his Wives or Concubines, Or Voices and Inſtruments 
of Muſick, which was far more agreeable to his temper. c Until 
the Morning, when he intended to riſe our of his Bed. 
YOr, Big. 2 Andic was found written, That Mordecai had told 
than, of [| Bigthana and Tereſh, two of the kings camber- 
| ch. 2- 21. lains, the keepers of the 5 door, who ſought to lay 


"ah * hand on the king Ahafuerus, 


let no man come in with the king unto the banquet | 


without diſturbance, and denying me the worſhip due to me by my 


H E R. 


. 3 And the king ſaid, What honour and dignity hath 
been done to Mordecai for this ? Then ſaid the kings 
ſervants that miniſtred unto him, There is nothing done 
for him p. 

? He hath had no recompence for this great and good ſervice, 
Which might happen either through the King's forgetfulneſs ; or 
through theenvy of the Courtiersz or becauſe he was a Jew, and 
cheretore odious and contemptible. 

4 And the king ſaid, Who 3zs in the court? ( now 
Haman was come 9 into the outward court of the kings 
houſe r, to ſpeak unto the king to bang Mordecai on 
the Gallows that he had prepared for him. ) . 

9 Early in the morning, becauſe his Malice probably would not 
ſuffer him to ſleep and he. was impatient till he had executed his 
detired revenge 3 and he was reſolved to watch for the very firſt op- 
portunity of ſpeaking to the King, before he was engaged in other 
matters. r Where he waited 3 becauſe it was dangerous to come 
into the inner court without ipecial licence, ch. 4. 11. 


5 And the kings lervants ſaid unto him, behold, Ha- 
manſtandeth in the court. And the king ſaid, Let him 
come 1n. 

6 So Haman came in, and the king ſaid unto him, 
What ihall be done unto the man 5 + whom the king t Heb. is 
delighteth to honour ? ( now Haman thought in his 7% t. 


. 6 A 
hea:ts, To whom would the king delight to do honour bing h " 
more than to my ſelf ?) —_ 


s He names none, becauſe he would have the more Impartial An- 
ſwer. And probably he «knew nothing of the difference between 
Haman and Mordecai, 8 As indeed he had great reaſon to preſume 
becauſe he had not yer forfeited that favour which the King had 
ſhewed ro him above all others. 
7 And Haman anſwered the king, For the man ©, q, ., 
whom the king delighteth to honour, whoſe he« 
SF Let the royal apparel « be brought + which the nour the 
king uſeth to wear, and the horſe that the king rideth ©" 


upon x, and the crown royal which is ſet upon his head y. + Hb It 

u His outward Garment which was made of Purple, interwoven ;þ,y brin 
with Gold, as Ju/tin and Curtizs relate. x Uſually : which was zz, A, 
well known both by his excellency, and eſpecially by his peculiar apparel 
fat 1 and Ornaments, Comp. 1 Kings 1: 33- y Fither 1. U- +4 46, 
| pon the King's head. Or, 2. Upon the Horſes head 3 which ſeems ,j,,,uih 
beſt to agree. 1+ With that ancient Chaldee Interpreter, and other ,j, js 
Jews who take it thus. 2. With the ſignification and order of eh 
the Hebrew words. 3. With the following Verſes, in which there himſelf 
15 no further mention of this Crown, but only of the Apparel, and © 
of the horſe, to which the Crown belonged, as one of his Orna- 
ments 4. With the cuſtom of the Perſians, which ſome affirm to 
have been this, to put the Crown upon the head of thar Horſe, 
upon which the King rode. 


o OS CY 
9 And let this Apparel and horſe be delivered tothe 
hand of one of the kings moſt noble princes, that they 
may array the man zhal, whom the king delighteth 
to honour, and bring him on horſeback, through the , 1.4 
principal ſtreets of the city, and proclaim before him, cauſe tm 
Thus jhall ic be done unto the man whom the king de- # ride. 
ughreth ro honour, 
2 1,e, Cauſe this to beproclaimed, to wit, by ſome publick Of 
ficer appointed for that fervice. Compare Ger. 41. 43» 
10 Then the king laid unto Haman, make haſte, and 
cake the Apparel, and the horſe, as thou haſt ſaid, and 
do.even ſoto Mordecai the Jew, that ſicteth at the kings 
gate : Þ let nothing fail of all that thou haft ſpoken. + Heb. ſuf 
It Then took Haman the Apparel, and the horſe, ;.. ,., 
and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horſeback whirrfa!; 
through the ſtreet of the city, and proclaimed « before 
him, Thus ſhall it be done unto the man whom the king 
delighterh to honour, : 
4 Either himſelf, Or by the Officer. 
12 And Mordecai came again to the kings gate b: 
buc Haman hafted to his houſe, mourning ard having 
his head covered c. 
6 To his former place and Office 3 ſhewing that as he was not 0+ 
verwhelmed by Hamar's threats and malicious deſign, as appears 
by chap. 5.9.” SO now he was not Puffed up with all this honour. Be- 
ſides, he came thirher to attend the ifſue of the main buſineſs, and 
to be at hand to aſlzſt or encourage the Queen, ifneed were: which 
now he was more capable of doing, than hitherto ke had been. 
c In token of his ſhame and grief for his unexpe&ed, and great diſ- 
appointment of his hope and defire, and for the great honour done 
ro his moſt diſpiſed and abhorred Adverſary, and this by his own 
hands, and with his own publick diſgrace 3 and for ſuch further 
Inconvenicnces as this unlucky Omen ſeemed to preſage to him. 
13 And Haman told Zereſh his wife, and all his 
friends, every thing that had befallen him. Then ſaid 
his wiſe mens, and Zereſh his wife unto him, If Mor- 
ecai be of the {ccd of the Jewse, before whom thou haſt 
begun to fall, thou ſhalt not preveil againſt him, bur (halc 
ſurely fall before him f. 
d4 The Magicians, whom after the Perſian manner he had called 
rogether to conſulr with upon this great and ſtrange emergency. 
e Which they were told, and was generally ſuppoied, bur they 
were not intallibly ture of it. f This they concluded, cither +, By 
oo of policy, becauſe Haman's reputation and intereſt was hcre= 
by tinking,and Apraecai ( whom they underſtood to be a Man of great 
Witom and Courage, and Governmeart of himſelf) was new got in= 
to the Kings favour, and thereby was likeiy togain an opportunity. 
vi 


| Chap. V1, "c 


a 


/ 


him 


| Ftp 


+ Heb. Fo 


drink, 


* Ch: 5:6: 


* (Ck: 3:9. 
fHeb.chat 
thy ſbould 
fefiroy and 
bll, aud 
reuſe to 


qoiſb. 


{ Heb.” 
whoſe heart 
hath filled 


him. 


} Heb.the 
man adyer= 
Jary. 

THeb. Ha 
man the 
wicked, 
|Or,at the 


reſence of 


(Heb With 
Mg 


Jews within his Dominions. 


VII. E-£ 7 


ofmaking his Addreſſes to the King, who being of a mild diſpoſi- 
tion, might eaſily be moved to a diſlike (if not revecation) of his 
own bloody Decree,and conſequently to adeteſtation of that perſon 
who had procured it. Or, 2. By former experience,and the obſer- 
vation of God's extraordinary attions on the behalfof the Jews,and 
againſt their Enemies in this very Court and Kingdom. Or, 3. By 
inſtin# and inſpiration to their minds, either from God, who might 
ſuggeſt this ro rhem, as hedid other things to other wicked men 
Balaam, Cajaphas, &Cc+ for his own greater Glory, and the good of 
his people : or from the devil, who, by God's premiſſion, might 
khow this, and reveal it to them who ſought to him in their ſuper- 
flitious and idolatrous methods. 
:- 14 And wiule they were yet talking with him, came 
the kings chamberlains,8 haſted co bring Hamang un- 
to the banquet that Eſther had prepared, 
' g Who was now ſlack to go thither, by reaſon of the great de- 
jection of his own mind, and the fear of a worſe entertainment 
from the King and Queen than he had formerly received. 


CH AP. VIL 


Eſther makeih a Petition for her own and her Peoples life, ' 3. She 
accuſeth Haman, who had determined to defiroy the Jews, 4. Haman is 
afraid, 5. the King im his anger, 6 --——- 8. being informed of the 
Ga'/lows which Haran had built for Moraccat, cauſeth him to be hanged 
thereen, 9, 10. 

Qg2 the king and Heman came 7 to banquet with 

Eſther the queens 


2 And the king ſaid again to Eſther, on the ſecond 


day, * at che banquet of wine «, What 3s thy pecition, 
queen Efther ? and it (ball be granted thee : and what | 
zs thy requeſt ? and it ſhall be performed, eves co the 
half of the kingdoms. 

a Soitis called to note that it was not deſigned for a Feaſt to fill 
their bellies, bur rather for a Banquet to delight and pleaſe their 
Palates with Wine and other Delicacies3z fee on chap. 5» 8, 

2 Then Eſther the Queen anſwered and ſaid, If I 
have found favour in thy tight, O king, andif it pleaſe 
the king, let my life be given 1ve at my petirion v, and | 
my people c at my requeſt. 

þ It is my humble and only requeſt, That thou wouldft not give 
me up to the malice of that Man thar deſigns toitake away my life, | 
and will certainly do it, if thou doit not prevent it c And the 
lives ( which is catlily ſupplied our of the tore-going branch) of my 
People the Jews, of whom 1am deſcended. 

4 For we are * fold d, I and my people e, Þ to be 
deſtroyed, to be ſlain,and to periſh f: but if we had been 
ſold for bond-men, and bond-women, I had held my 
tongue g, although the enemy could not countervail 
the kings damage b. 

d By the craft and cruelty of that man who offered a great Sum 
of Money to purchaſe our deſtruttion. e For we are all given up to 
his malice and rage, without any exception of my own Perſon. f 
She uſeth varicty of expreſſions to make the deeper impreſſion u- 
pon the King's mind: g Becauſe that Calamity had neitherbeen ir- 
recoverable, nor intolerable, nor yet unprofitable to the King for 
whoſe honour and ſervice, I ſhould willingly have ſubmitted my 
{elf and People to any kind of bondage. þ His ten thoutand Talents, 
if paid into the King's treaſury, woul4 nor repair the King's loſs 
in the Cuſtoms and Tributes which the King receives from the 


5 Then the king Ahaſuerus anſwered and ſaid unto | 
Eſther the queen, Who zs he ? and where is he zF that 
durft preſume in his heart to do ſo & ? 

i The Expreffions are ſhort and doubled, as proceeding from a 
diſcompoſed and enraged mind. & z. e. To circumvent me, and 
by ſubrilty to procure an irrevocable Decree,whereby not only my 
Eitate ſhould be ſo much impaired, and fo many of my innocent 
Subje&s be deſtroyed without Mercy,but my Queen alſo ſhould be 
involved in the ſame danger and defſtruttion. 

6 And Eſther faid, | The adverſary and enemy is 1 F 
this wicked Haman, Then Haman was afraid before 
the king and the queen. 

I Of the King, and of my Perſon and people. 

7 And the king ariling from the banquet of Wine in 
his wrath, ext into the palace-garden »»: and Haman 
Food up to make requeſt for his life to Eſther the queen: 
for he ſaw » that there was evil determined againit him 
by the king. 

m Partly as diſdaining the company and fight of ſo ungrateful 
and audacious a perſon : partly ro cool and allay his troubled and 
inflamed Spirits, and partly to conſider within himſelf the hai- 
nouſneſs of Haman's crime,and the miſchief which himſelf had done 
by his own raſknet(s, and wtat punithment was fit to be inflicted 
upon ſo great a Deliaqueat. # By the violent commotion of the 
King's mind and paſſions. 

s Then the king returned out of the palace-garden, 
into the place of the banquet of Wine, and Haman was 
fallen upon the bed o whereon Eſther was. 'Then ſaid 
the king, Will he force the queen alſo p + before me 
inthe houſeq ? As the word weat out of the kings mouch 
they 7 covered Hamas face /. 

. 0 Or, by, or beſize rhe bed, on which the- Queen fat at Meat, after 
the manner : where he was fallen upon his Knees, and upon the 
ground, at her feet, as humble Supgliants uſed ro do, and as the 
Queen did at the King's feet, chap:8:3: p Will he now attempt my 
Queens Chaſtity as he hath already atrempred her life ! His preſum- 
ption and impudence I ſee will ſtick at nothing.He ſpeaks not this 
out of a real jealouſic, for which there was no cauſe in thoſe cir-. 


- 


pon the Jews, 


NH BR 
makes the worſt conflruQtion of all his words and aftiens. 9 Inmy 
own preſence and Palace. » i.e. The King's and Queen's Cham- 
berlains then attending upen them. { Partly that the King might 
not be offended or grieved with the fight of a Perſon whom he now 


loathed + and partly becauſe they looked upon him as a condem= 
ned Perſon 3 for the faces of ſuch uſcd tobe covered. 


9 And * Harbonah, one of the chamberlains?, ſaid xc, , | 
before the king, Behold alfo the + gallows fifty cubits +Heb.zrl 


high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who had 
ſpoken good for the King «, {candeth in the houſe of 
Haman. Then the King faia, Hang him thereon. 

: Who knew this either by his own Obſervation,or by the Infor= 
mation of ſome of his Brethren, who were lately ſent to Haman's 
| Houſe, ch. 6; 14: where they might caſily ſee ir, or at leaſt hear of 
'1t. And this he faid either out of a diftaſt which he had taken as 
' gainſt Haman for his great inſolency, and barbarous cruelty; or in 
| compliance with the King's inclinations,and the Queen's deſire, E- 

ven to the ſaving of the King's lite, ch: 2: 21, 22, 23- and therefore 
deſerved a better requital than this even from Haman,if he had not 
; baſely preferred the ſatis/aCtion of his own revenge before the pre- 
ſervation of the King's life. | 
Io SO they hanged Haman onthe gallows that he had 
prepared x for Mordecai. Then was the kings wrath 
pacihied y. | 

x Which ſtood in his own houſe, as was now ſaid,and made the 
puniſhment more grievous and ignominious. y Judgement being 
now molt juitly executed upon this abominable criminal. 

EaHAP. VIiIL 
Mor decai ts advanced wer the houſe ef Haman, 1, 2. Eſther maketh #» 
Petition ta the King to reverſe Haman's Letter, 3 5, Abate 
erus grantath ts Effher and Mordecai, 7, to write to the Jews 10 defend 
themſelves, 8. Mordecai”s Litters in the King's Name to defend them- 
Jelves, and defiroy their Aſuilants, 9 14. Mordeca:'s honour, 
and the Jews joy, 15 17, | 


ON that day did the king Ahaſuerus give the houſe 
of Haman s the Jews enemy, unto Eſther the 
king b,for Eſther 


! 


queen,and Mordecai came before the 
had told what he was unto her c. 

a With all his Goodsand Eſtate, which being juſtly forefeired to 
the King, he no leſs juſtly beſtowsit upon the Queen,to compenſate 
the danger ro which Hsmes had expoſed her. +57i.e. Was by the 
Queen's deſire admitted into the King's Preſence,and Favour, and 
Family, and, as it ſeems, made one of the ſeven Princes. ci:e:How 
nearly he was related to her : which till this time ſhe had wiſely 
concealed ; this being the fit ſeaſon to declare it. 

2 And the king took off his ring 4 which he had ta- 

ken from Haman, and gave- it unto Mordecai, And 
Eſther fer Mordecai over the houſe of Haman e. 
4 That Ring which he had formerly given to Haman for that pre- 
ſent, or any further uſe, c<:3: »o: henow gives to Mordecai, and 
with it that Power and Authori'y, whereof this Ring was a hon, 
making him,as Haman had been, the Keeper of nis Signet. e Asher 
Steward, to manage that great Eſtate for her as he thought fitteſt. 


3 And Efther ſpake yet again before the king, and 


7 To repeal that cruel Decree of which ſee ch: 3: 13- 

4 Then the king held ont the golden ſcepter. g to- 
ward Eſther,So Efther aroſe,and ſtood before the king. 
g In token that he accepted her Perſon aud Petition, and that 
ſhe ſhould ſtand upon her feer. ; 

5 And ſaid, If it pleaſe the king,and if T have found 
favour in his ſight, and the thing /cem right before the 
king, and I be pleaſing in his eyes þ, ler icbe written 


h She uſeth various Expreflions,thar ſhe might inſinuate her ſelf 
into the King's Favour, by ſuch a full and repeated reſignation and 
ſubmiſſion of her ſelf to the King's good pleafure. i She prudently 
takes off all the envy and hatefulneſs ofthe a&ion from the King, 
and lays it upon Haman, who had for his own wicked and felfifh 
ends contrived the whole buſineſs, and circumvented the King un 
it : which ſhealledgeth as a reaſon why it ſhould be repealed, bee 
cauſe it was ſurreptitiouſly and craftily procured. | 

6 For how Can I + endure to {ce the evil & that 
come unto my people ? or how can Iendure to ſee the 


deſtruRion of my kindred ? | 
k My heart will fink under ir,8 I ſhal never be able to ſurvive it. 
7 Then the King Ahaſuerus faid unto Eſther the 
queen, and unto Mordecai the Jew, Behoid I have gi- 
ven Eſther the houſe of Haman, fand him they have 
hanged / upon the gallows, becauſe helaid his hand u- 


I You ſec how ready I have bzen to grant your requeſts; anl T 
do not repent of my Favour to you, and am ready to grant your 


further Deſires, as far as the Law will permit we tg do. 


8 Write ye alſo for the Jews m» as ir liketh you in 


in the Kings name. and ſeal it with the Kings ring » : 
for the wricing which is written in the Kings name and 


ſealed with the Kings ring, * may no man reverſe o._ 


Commanders of the !* 9: Dan 
2,15 .6,82 


m On their behalf, to the Governours and 


cumſtances. vut from an exaſperated mind which rakes all occaſions 
to vent i* ſelf agaialt the perion who gaye ghe provocation; and ? 


Chap. VI 


fell down at his feet, and 4 beſought him with tears, THeb. aud 


to put away the miſchief of Haman f the Agagite, and Pegs 
his device that he had deviſed againſt the Jews. ſought him, 


to reverſe + the letters deviſed by Haman 5: the ſon of THeb. zhs 


Hammedatha the Agagite, || which he wrote to deſtroy | Or foks 
the Jews which are in all the Kings provinces. wrote. 


ſhall + Heb; be © 
able that F 
18) Jees 


"FSee chap 


q 


| 
4 


» 


dap. VIII. 

| Qual, being no Jeſs irrevocable than the former, and coming laſt | 
will repeal the former. Or, 2. To the former Lerters, as a rea- 
ſon why he could n-t grant their delires in recalling them.becaule 
they were irrevocable by the Law of the Medes and Perſians. And 
this ſenſe, though reje&ed by many, ſeems to be the trueſt, be- 
cauſe here is no mention of rever/mg Haman's Letters, which Either 
had defired w 5. and the King denied for the reaſon here all-dg- 
ed 5 and becauſe the following Letter doth not contain one word 
abour rhe reverſing of the former, nor doth it take away that pow- 
er which was given to all Rulers to deſtroy all the Jews,c#:3.1 2,13. 
but only gives the Jews power and authority to ſtand up in their 
own defence, v- 11. which, all circumitances conſidered, was ſut- 
ficient for their preſervation, 


9 Then were che kings ſcribes called at that time in 
the third month ( that is the month Sivan ) on the 
three and twentieth day thereof p, and it was written 
(according to all that Mordecai commanded) unto the 
Jews q.,and to the lieutenants, and the deputies, rulers 
of the provinces r, which re from India unto Ethiopia, 
an hundred twenty and ſeven provinces, unto every 
province according to the writing thereof, and unto e- 


= TH EK. 


very people after their language,and to the Jews aCccor- 
ding to their writing, and according to their language. 

p Which was above two months after the former decree. All 
which time God ſuffered the Jews to lye under the terrour of this 
dreadful day, partly that they might be more throughiy humbicd 
for, and purged from th ſe many ani great fins under which they 
lay ; partly and particularly rhat they might be convinced of their 
great in and folly in neg!:&ing the many offers and opportunities 
they had of returning to their native Country, and to the free and 
full exerciſe of the true Religion, which could be had :o where 
but in Jeruizlem ; by which means they being now duyperſed 1n tac 
ſeveral parts cf tis vaſt Dominion, were like to be a very eaiie 
prey to their enemies whereas their Brethren in Judca were :n a 
better capacity to preſerve themſelves : partly that rheir moſt 
malicious and inveterate Enemies might ha.c an opportunicy of; 
diſcovering themſelves to their ruine, as the event ihewed : and} 


and unexpeteq4 deliverance. 
this Letter ſhould be ſent in due time before it was too late: for 
there were yet near nine Months ro come before that appointed | 


raged to uſe itfoc their own defence. r That they ſhould pub/ith 
and diſperſe them into all parts, that both themſelves and others 
might take notice of the King's pleaſure and kindnets to the Jews. 
Io And he wrote in the king Ahafuerus name, and 
ſealed ir with the kings ring, and ſent letters by poſts 
on horſe back, and riders on mules, camels, and young 
dromedaries / : 
S Which were not employed in the ſending of the former Let- 
ter : but this coming later required more care and ſpeed, that the 


have time to furniſh themſelves with neceilaries for their own de- 
fence. 

1x Wherein the king granted the Jews which werein 
f Liberty every City, | to gather themſelves cogether,and to ftand 
and authv= for their life z, to d:i{troy, to ſlay, and to cauſe te pe- 
- rith all the power of the/people « and province, that 
would afſauit them, beth liccie ones, and womenx,and 
ro take the ſpoil of them for a prey : 

: To ſtand upand fight for the defence of their Lives againſt all 
that ſhould ſeek to deſtroy them, « Either Governours or gover- 
ned, withour any exception either of Age, Dignity, or Sex; as it 
follows. x Which is here added, becauſe it was put into tae for- 
mer decree ; and to ſtrike the greater terrour into their enemies ; 
and according tothe Laws and Cuſtoms of this Kingdom; whereby 
Children were puniſhed for their Parents offences 3 which allo in 
ſome caſes was allowed and practiſed in ſacred ftory: Yet we read 
nothing in the execution of this decree of the ſlaughter of Women 
or Children, nor is it probable that rhey would kill their innocent 


dle with the ſpoil. 

12 Upon one day, in all the provinces of king Aha- 
ſuerus, namely upon the thirteenth day of the twelfch 
month, which'iss the month Adar. 

13 The copy of the writing, for a Commandmenc 
 . _ - -- to be given inevery province, was Þ publiſhed unto all 
+ Heb, re 
vealed. gay to avenge themſelves on their enemies. 

14 So the poſts thac rode upon mules «nd camels went 
out, being haſtened, and preiled on by the _ com- 
mandment y, and the decree was given at Shuſhan- the 


palace, | | | 
7 By hisparticular and expreſs Command to that purpoſe. 


15 And Mordecai went out from the preſence of the 

| Oc, vie- king, in royal apparel of || blue and white, and with a 

are. opreatcrown of gold z, and wirha garment of fine li- 

 nen,and purp!e ; and the city of Shuſhan # rejoiced and 
was glad : 

- » Which the chief of the Perſian princes were permitted to wear, 


day. 9 That they might underſtand their Liverty, and be encou-}- 


Jews might be caſed from the torment of their prefenc Fears. and] 


Children, who were ſo idulgent to their Families, as not to med- 


people, and that the Jews ſhould be ready againſt char | 


6 Which is 1s off put for gladneſs, as 2 Sam. 22. 29. Job 18; 5,6: 
Pſal. 27. 1. becauſe light 1s pleaſant and diſpoſeth a man to joy 
whereas Dzrkneſs inelines a man to ſorrow. c This explains the 
former Metaphor by two words expreſſing the ſame thing, to note 
the greatneſs ofthe Joy. d Inſtead of that contempt under which 
they had lain, 

17 Andin every province,and in every City, whither- 
fover the kings commandment and his decree came, the 
Jews had joy and gladnefs, a feaſt and a good day e: and 
many ofthe people of the land became Jews; for the fear 
of the Jews f fell upon them. 

ei. e. A time of feaſting, and rejoicing, and thankſgiving. f 
Whom poſlibly they had irritared by their former Threatnings and 
now gave this evidence of their Repentance that they were willing 
to ſubmit to that ſevere precept of Circumciſion, 

CHA P, 
The Jews ſlay their Enemies, 1 — 9. with the ten ſonsof Haman,1 rt, 

Ahaſuerus at the requeit of El'her, grantcth ancther day of faughter, 

The days of Pur:m made feſtival. 
Ow in the tweifth month ( that is the month A- 


Chap, IK. : $ 


dar ) on the thirteenth day ofthe ſame when the 


kings commandment and his decree drew negr to be 


' put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the 


Jews hoped to have power over them a, ( though it 
was tu;ned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule o- 
ver them that hated them. 

a In that day which was ſeleQed by Haman with great Induſtry 
and Art, as the moſt Ineky day, anu which thcir enemies had oft« 
tiacs tormerly thought of and no doubt thieaind the Jews with it. 

2 The jews gather: d themicives together in their 
cities, throughout ali the Provinces of the king Aha- 
luerus, to lay hand on iuch as feught their hurt ; and 
no man could wittitand them b: forthe fear of them c 
fell upon ail people, | 

b Their Enemies, though they did and were allowed to take up 


Goiontheir fide who by ſuch nnuſual and prodigious Methcds 
(whereof doubtleſs they had been particularly informed) had brorghr 
avour iuch a mighty and unexpeged deliverance, | 

2 Aud all rhe rulers of the provinces, and the lieute- 
nants,ar.d the depurties,and Þ cfficers of the king 4|| help- 
ed the Jews: becauſe the fear of Mordecai fell upon them. 

4 Heb. andall them that did the King's buſineſs, i. e. Not only the 
chief perſons deſi: ned by the foregoing words, but all the other 
Muiſters or Ofticers of what quality ſocver. ; 

4 For Mordecai was great & in the kings houſe, and 
his fame went out throughout all the provinces: for 
this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater. 

e i, e. The greateſt in Place, and power, and Favour with the 
King, both to his near relation for his beloved Queen, and for his 
good ſervice done to him in preſcrving his Life, and managing his 
Afﬀairs; and for thoſe exce!lent Abiliries & Virtues which he diſco. 
eh in him ; and eſpecially by the diſpoſition of the heart-ruling 

old. 

5 Thus the Jews ſmote all their enemies with the 

ſtroke of the {word, and ſlaughter, acd deſtruction, and 
did F whatthey would unto thoſe that hated them. 
| 6 And in Shuiban the palace f the Jews flew and de- 
ftroyed five hundred men g. 
. F 7. e. In theCity ſo called, as was noted before chap. 12 2: it not 
being probable either that they would make ſuch a ſlaughter in the 
King's Palace, or that they would be ſuffered foto do. g Whom 
by long experience they knew to be their conſtant and inveterate 
Enemies,and ſuch as would watch all opportunities to deſtroy them 
which alio they might poſlibly now attempt to do.Part of them al- 
{o'might be friends and Allies of Haman, and therefore the avowed 
| Enemies of Mordecasr. 

7 And Parthandatha, and Dalphon,and Afapatha, 

8 And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha, 

9 And Parmaſhta, and Ariſai, and Aridai, and Va- 
Jezatha, 

10 The ten ſons of Haman, the fon of Hammedatha, 
the enemy of the Jews, ſlew they ; burton the ſpoillaid 
they not cheir hand &, 

þ Either becauſe they were deſirous .it ſhould come into the 
King's Treaſury : or becauſe they would leave it to their Children, 
that ir might appear that what they did that day was not done out 
oF malice to their Perſons and Families, or covetouſneſs of their 
Eſtates, bur out of meer neceſlity, and by that great and approved 
Law of Selt-preſervation, and that they were ready to mix Mer- 
cy with Judgement,and would not deal with their Enemies fo 1ll as 
it was apparent thar their Enemies intended to do againſt them. 

11 On thatday thenumber of thoſe that were ſlainin 
Shuſhan the palace, | was brought before the king bh. 

h Poſſibly with evil deſign to incenſe the King againit the Tews. 

12 And the King ſaid unto Eſther the Queen, The 
Jews have' slain and deſtroyed five hundred men in 


Shulhan the palace, and the ten fons of Haman ; what 


- the 


but with ſufficient diſtiaRtion from rhe King's Crown. 4 Not only 
Jews, but the greateſt number ofthe Citizens, who by the Law of 
Nature written upon their hearts,had an abhorrency from bloody 
Counſels and Deſigns, and a complacency in a&s of Benignity and 
Mercy : or for other reaſons; of witch fee on Chap. 3+ 15. 


' 16 The Jews had light 5, and giadneſs, and joy c,and 
honour 4. : 


have they done in the reſt of the kings provinces z * 
now what is thy petition? and itiball be granted thee: 
or what is thy requeſt further ? and it ſhall be done- 

; In which doubtleſs many more were lain. So thatT have fully 
granted thy Petirion. And yet,if thou haſt any thing further to as, 
1 am here ready to grant 18, En 

x13 Then 


partly for the greater illuſtration of God's glorious Power, and} Arms againlt reem, yet were eatily conqueied and deſtroyed by, 
Wiſdom, and goodneſs, in giving his people tuch an admiravle ; the Jews. c Who had ſuch potent Friends at Court, and fo great 
Yet God ſo ordered things, that a 


THeb #lſe 
which ad 
the buſavſs 
that be. 
longed ts 
the king, 
[| Or,exte 
led, Gr. bi 
niured, 


f Heb. «- 
cording td 
their will, 


+ Heb. 


(Ae 


Fel 


fled 


I, IK. 


-b. 6 
ng td 
will, 


= & #* 

12 Then faid Eſther, Tf it pleaſe the king, let it be 

granted to the Jews which are in Shuſhan, to do co 

morrow alſo according to this days decree k, and þ let 

Feb. lt Hlamans ten fons be hanged upon the gallows 7 

g hangs k7i. e To kill their implacable Enemies. For it is not impro- 
bable that the greateſt and worſt ofthem had politickly withdrawn 
or hidden theinſelves for that day 3 after which, the Commiſſion 
granted to tne Jews being expired. they confidently returned ro 
their .omes 3 where they were taken and ſlain by virtue of this 
Private and unexpected decree. / They were ſlain before : now 
let their bodies be hanged upon their Father's Gallows, for their 
greater infamy, and the rerrour of all others who thatl preſume to 
abuſe the king in like manner, or to perſwade him to execute ſuch 
crueJties upon his own Subje&ts.This cuſtom of hanging up the bo- 
dies of MajefiQtors after their death, was frequent among the Jews 
and Perſians alſo, as 1s well known. 

14 And the king commanded ir fo to be done ; and 
the decree was given at Shuſhan, and they hanged Ha- 
mans ten ſons, 

15 For the Jews that were in Shuſban gathered them- 
ſelves together on the fourteenth day alſo of the month 
Adar, and ſlew three hundred men at Shuſhan, but on 
the prey they laid not their hand. 

15 But the other Jews that were in the kings pro- 
vinces gathered themſelves together , and ſtood for their 
lives, and had reſt from their enemies, and flew of their 
foes ſeventy and five thouſand ; bur they laid not their 


hand on the prey : 

17 On the thirteenth day ws of the month Adar, and 
onthe fourteenth day Þ of the ſame reſted they, and 
made it a day of feaſting and glagneſs. 

m This belongs not to the Feaſt, but to the work done before 
it. The meaning is, This they did, 5. e- they flew their Foes, as 
was now ſaid, wv. +6- upon the thirrgenth day. 

18 But the Jews that were at Shuſhan, aſſembled to- 
gether on the thirteenth day thereof, and on the four- 
. teenth thereof . and on the fifreenth day of the ſame 
they reſted, and made ita day of feaſting and giadnels. 

19 Therefore » the Jews of che viliages, that dwelt 
in the unwalled towns o, made the fourteenth day of 

the month Adar, a day of gladneſs and feaſting, and a 

good day, and of ſendicg portions one to another, 

» To wit, becauſe they did their whole work up-n the thirteenth 
day, as was noted verſe i7. to which this manifeitly relates, the 
18th verſe coming in as it- were by way of Parentheſts. o Heb. 
the cuties of the villages, i.e. in the leſſer Cities and Villages; which 
are here oppoſed to the great City S»uſbay, & thoſe who dwelt in ir. 

20 And Mordecai wrote cheſe things p,. and ſent let- 
ters unto all the Jews that ere in all the provinces of 
the King Ahaſnerus, both nigh and far ; 

p Either, 1. The Letters here following. But that is diſtinQly 
mentioned in the next words. Or, 2. The Hiſtory of theſe things 
which was the ground of the Feaſt : which Mordzcaz knew very 
well ought to be had in remembrance,and to be told to their Chit- 
dren and Poſterity, through all ages, according to the many Com- 
mands of God to that purpoſe,and the conſtant Prattice of the holy 
Men of God in ſuch caſes. | 

21 To ſtablith this among them, that they ſhould 
keep the ſourceenth day of the month Adar, and the 
fifteenth day of the ſame q yearly : 

q Becauſe both theſe days had been ſer apart this Year, the latter 
at Shuſhan, the former in other parts : and becauſe the great Work 
of God, which was the ground of this Solemnity, had been done 
both upon the thirteenth and the fourteenth day. : 

22 As the days wherein the Jews reſted from their 
enemies, and the month which was turned unto them 
from ſorrow to Joy, and from mourning into a good 
day : that they jthould make them days of feaſting and 
joy, and of ſending portions one to another, and gifts 
to the poor. = ; 

r Which they uſed to give upon days of Thankſgiving ; of which 
ſee Nehem: 8: 10. 

23 And the Jews undertook / to do as they had be- 
zun, and as Mordecai had written untothem, 

f Having by this means opportunity to gather rhemſelves toge- 
ther vpon any occaſion, the chief of them aſſembled together, gnd 
freely and unanimouſly conſented to Mordeca:'s delire in this matter, 
and b-und it vpon themſelves and Poſterity. - 

24 Becauſe Haman the fon of Hammedatha the Aga- 

i, ire, che enemy of all the Jews, had deviſed againſt the 
t Het” Jews to deſtroy them, and * had caſt Pur (that is, the 
lot ) to + conſume them, and todeſtroy them, 


fHeb.in it 


ous; 
THeb 25 But + when Eher came before the King, he com- 


manded by letters that his wicked device which he de- 
viſed againſt the Jews, ſhould return upon his own 
head, and that he and his ſons ſhould be hanged on 
the gallows. _ : 

Th: 26 Wherefore they called theſe days Purimy after the 
15 name of || Pur ; therefore for all the words of this let- 
ter, and of that which they had ſeen : concerning this 


matter, and which had come unto them, 2 
£ 5, e, Bur for the reſpe& which they juſtly bare to Mordeca!'s let- 


B RK. Chap. X: | 

p . ; 

27 The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and, 
upon their ſeed, and upon all ſuch as joined themſelves 

unto them , ſo as it ſhould not + fail, that they THe>22f. 
would keep theſe two days, according to their writing 

x, and according to their appointed time every year: .| 

ive, Gentile Proſelites 3 who were obliged to ſubmir to other ' 
of the Jewiſh Laws, and therefore to this alſo; the rather becauſe 
they enjoyed the benefit, of this days deliverance 3 without which 
the Jewiſh Nation and Religion had been in a great meaſure,ifnor 
wholly, extin& in the World. x i. e. According to that writing 
which was drawn up by Mordecai with Efhers content, v.23.29.and 
atterwands confirmed by the content of all che Jews in the ſeveral 

places. 

28 And that theſe days ſheuld be remembred, and 
kepr throughout every generation, every family, every 
province, and every City ; and that theſe days of Purim _ 
ſhould not # fail fromamong the Jews, nor the memo- tHeb. 2aſs. 
rial of them Þ periſh from their ſeed. tHeb.mg- 

29 Then Eſther the queen, the daughter of Abihai 
and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with + all authority y, to #Heb. ;y 
confirm the ſecond letter of Purim. | frength, 
3 The former Letter, wv: 20: did only recommend, but this en- 
joins the obſervation of this Solemnityz becauſe this was not only 
Moraecai s Att, who yet had by the King's Grant a great power and 
Authority over the Subje&ts of that Kingdom, and conſcquently 
over the ſews, bur it was the A& of all the Jews, binding them- 
{elves and Poſterity ro it, V: 27: Or, with all might or efficxcy, and 
as that word uſually ſignifies ; He preſſed ic with all earneſtneſs 
and venemency. | o" | 

30 And he ſent the letters unto all the Jews, to the 
hundred twenty and feven provinces of the kingdom 
of Ahaſuerus, 25th words of peace and truth z; 

z Or, even words of peace and truch, Which may reſpe& either 15 
The form of the Writing, wherein after the cuſtom he {aluted * 
them with hearty wiſhes of their true Peace or Proſperity, or of the 
continuance of thoſe two great Bleſſings of God,Truth,7. e- the true 
Religion ; and Peace,either among themſclves,or with all men,that 
they may peaceably and quietly enjoy #nd profeſs the Truth Or, 
2. the manner of his Writing,which was with Peace, i e. Friend- 
ſhip and kindneſs to his Brethren, and Truth 2, e. Sincerity which is 
the more noted and commended in him, becauſe it is ſo unuſual in 
ſuch great Courtiers as he now was. Compare chap. 10: 3. or the 
Martter of his Wricing ; which was to dire& and perſwade them to 
keep both Peace and Truth, i. e. both to live peaceably and lovingly 
both one with another, and with all their Neighbours, not inſult- 
ing over them upon their confidence in Mvrdecai”s great power, or 
upon this late and great ſuccels, as men naturally and commonly 
do, nor giving them any freſh provocations, and yer holding faſt 
the true Religion in ſpight of all the Artifices or Hoſtilities of the 
Gentiles among whom they lived. 

31 To confirm theſe days of Purim in their times ap- 
pointed, according as Mordecai the Jew, and Eſther the 
queen had enjoyned them, as they had decreed + for 4 xx.y, { 
themſelves and for their feed, the matters of the faſt zþeir ſous. 
1ng and of their cry ||. / 


E 


l, ed 


terz and becauſe they rnemielves hay ſeen and felt this Wonderful 
Work of God on their behalt. 


|; For or about thoſe great and overwhelming Calamities which | 
were decreed toall the jews, and for the removing of which, not 
only E?her, and the Jews in Shuchan, bur all other Jews in all pla 
ces, as ſoon as they heard thoſe diſmal Tidings,did doubtleſs accor- 
ding to the Preceprs of Scripture, and the conſtant praftice of 
their godly Predeceflors in all ages, fly ro thatlaſt and only Refuge 
of ſeeking to God by Faſting. and earneſt Prayers,and ſtrong Cries 
unto God ; which God was pleafed graciouſly to hear, and in an- 
{wer thereunto to give them this amazing Deliverance. And this was 
that which they were now to remember, to wit, the greatneſs of 
their danger.and of their reſcue from it-And accordingly the Jews 
uſe to obſerve the firſt of thoſe days with Faſting and Crying, and 
other Expreſſions of vehement Grief and Fear, and the Jatter with 
m eaſting, and Thankſgiving, and all Demonſtrations of Joy and 
riumph. IO I ISS W) 

22 And the decree of Eſther f confirmed theſe mat- 
ters of Purim, and it was written in the book *. | 
+ Who had received Authority and Commiſſion from the King 
to impoſe this upon all the Jews. * Either in the publick Regiſters 
of that Kingdom ; Or rather, in the Records which the Jews kept 
of their moit memorable paſlages, ; 

| —A-P. X. 4 
Ahaſuerus his greatneſs” 3. Mordecai's advancement, ; 


A Ne che king Ahaſuerus laid a tributeupon the land, 
£ Iand «por the Iſles of the ſeas. _ 3 | 
a i. e, Upon all his Dominion, whether in the main Continent, 
orin the Iſlands. ; | PE: . 
2 And all the a&s of his power, and of his might,ant 
the declaration of the greatneſs of Mordecai, where- 
unto the king Þ advanced him, are theys not written _ , . 
in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and + Hebs.., 
Perſia ? | INES maac him 
2 For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahaſye-&*®* 
rus, and great among the Jews, accepted of the mul- 
cicude of his brethren þ pong the wealth of his people, 
and ſpeaking peace to all bis leed c, Ne 
þ Who did not envy his greatneſs, as men moſt commonly do. 
in ſuch caſes, but rejoyced in it, and bleſſed God for it,and praited 
and loved him for his right and ſweet management of his vaſt power, 
: Or, for all his ſeed, to wit, the Jews, who were of the ſame. Seed 
and root from which he was deſcended. He ſpoke and atted with, 
great Kindneſs and Friendlineſs to them when they reſorted ro him 


CaſiOne 5; | 
upon any Occaſions Ip J O B, : 


es Oh yy 
a ai Se 


Chap. I. 


Ome thinss are ts be premiſed in the 

@s ſame have dreamed, but a real Hiſtory, 

e# ant diffin# account of the Places, Perſms, 
men of holy Scripru e, who mention him as a 
Cammnical Buk of Scriptur ; 
James, in #he paces new cifez, and frim that Quetation taken from 1t 
ws and Chriſtians in all Ages. 3. The time in which Job lived, 
in the days of the ancient Patriarchs* This may be gathered. 
much of 200. Tears; whereas, after Moſes. Mens . 
the true Religion, which then remained among divers Gentiles, which 


eventhe Gentiles were to repair when they would ſacrifice to God. ; 
Dreams aid Viſions, agreeably to God's Method in theſe ancient times ; 


and appropriated te the People of Iſracl. 


which is bere diſcaurſed between Job and his Friend. 
it being agreed who ti: 
who was mait capable of giving this exadt account, 
23, 24. ſopoſſibly when he was deliver 
I. I. and the time of his Drath, Chap. 42. 16. x7. 
Or, 2. Elihu which may ſeem to be favoured by Chap. 32. 
portunity of coming '0 the Knowledge of this Hiſtory and Diſcourſe, 
Iſrael, wh» was now oppreſſed in Egy 
fo be unlike to thab of Moies in his other Writings, that is net ſtrange, 


| CHAP}]L 
Job's Country and ſincere holineſs : his children : their feaſts: and his reli- 
gieus care for them, 1 === 5. Satans appearance before God : Gia 5 
charafer of Job, 6 —8. Satan imputeth Job's goodneſs to his proſperity 
and ſo obra.neth leave to affli# him in his goods, 9 —12. Job's Oxen, 
Sheep, Camels, and Servants deftroyed, 13 17. His Sons and Daugh- 
ters periſh, 18, 19, Job with his mantle rent, head ſhaved, ana upon 
the ground worſbippeth ; bleſſ@h God : ſinnethenot. 20 =22% 
T Here was a man in the land of Uz «, whoſe 
name as * Job, and that man was | perſe& 6b 
and upright c, and one that feared God 4, and eſche- 


wed evil e. | 
s Which was either in Edom, called, The Land of Uz, Lam. 4.21. 

or in ſome part of Arabia, not far from the Chaldeans and Sabears, as 
this Chapter witaefſcth ; ſo called probably from Uz, one of Efau's 
poſterity, Gen. 36. 28. Jer. 25. 20. b Not legally or exaQly, ashe 
confefſeth Ch. 9. 20. but comparatively to ſuch as weie partial in 
their Obedience to God's Commands, and as to his ſincere Inteati- 
- ons, hearty affeQtions, and conſtant and diligent endeavours to per- 
form all his duties to God and Men. «© Heb. right, exat and re- 
gular in all hisdealings with Men ; one of an unblamable converſa- 
tion, doing to others as he would have others to deal with him. 
d'One truely pious. and devored to God's Worſhip and Service. 
ez, e. carefully avoiding all fin againt God or Men. 

2 And there were born unto him ſcven ſons and 
three daughters. 

3 His + ſubſtance alſo was ſeven thouſand ſheep, and 


| * Exck, 

I4. 14. 
:Jam 5. 11. 
t Ch. 2. 3. 


oxen, and five hundred fſhe-affes g, and a very great 
+. houſhold ; ſo chat this man was the greateit 4 of ail 
the *: men in the eaſt 7 


Fudg, 5. 12+ 1 Chron. 5. 21s and from the plain teſtimonies of Ari- 


| Burdens in-theſe hot and dry countries, as being able ro endure 
thirſt much better than other Creatures, and for {ſervice in War. 


alſo may be included in this Expreſſion, whickis of the Feminine 
Gender,becauſe the greateſt parr of them ( from. which the deno- 
mination is uſually taken ) were She-Afſ+s. þ 7. e Oneofthe richeſt. 
i. To wit, that lived in thoſe parts : ſuch general Expreſſions be- 
ing commonly underſtood with ſuch limitations. 

- 4 And his ſons, went and fealted & in their houſes, 
every one his day I, and ſent and called for their three 
ſiſters to eat and to drink with them. 

k To teſtifie and maintain their Brotherly Love. 1 Not every 
day of the week, and of the Year; which wouid have been bur- 
denſome and t:dious to them all, and groſs Luxury and Epicurifm, 
which holy 95 would not have permitted ; bur each his appointed 
day, whether his Birth-day, or the firſt day of the Moath, or any 

- _ Other ſet time, it matters not. 
. 5 And ic was ſo, when the days of :beir feaſting was 
** * eh. r2, $92 .about »», thatJob ſentand * ſanctified them », and 
©... roſe up early in the morning's, and offered burnt-offe- 
rings according to the number of them all: for Job faid, 
+ 1Kings. It may be that my fons have ſinned p, and + curſedGod 
21.10,13.4 in their hearts 7. Thus did Job [| continually þs. 
| _[ Heb. a/ m When each of them had h:d his his turn, which peradventure 
a * Came one ſpeedily, though not immediatly afrer another. And 
there was ſome conſiderable interval before their feaſting time. 
” 7. e. He exhorred and commanded them to ſan&ife themſelves 
for the following Work, to wit, by purifying themſelves from all 
Ceremonial and Moral Pollution, as the manner then was, Exod. 
19 10 and by preparing themſelves-by true ,repentance for all 
their ſins, and FREIOET ſuch as they had commirted in their time 
of Feaſting and Jollity,and by fervent prayers to make their peace 
with Sod by Sacrifice. o Thereby ſhewing his ardent Zealin God's 
Service, and his imparience rill God was reconcilcd to him. and to 


his Children. p His Zzal for God's Glory, and his true Love to 


30». 


1 O B 


General comcerning this Book, efore 1 rome fo the Particulars, 1. That this was no Fifljon or P arable, 
which is ſufficiently evident, both ſrom the whole Contexture of the Book wherein we have an ex. 
and things here mentiened, with their ſeveral Circumſtances, and eſpecially the ſucceeding Pen. 
real and eminent example ef Prety and Patience, as Ezek. 14 14. James 5, 11. 
which is - manife both from the Stile an! Matternof it, and from the tactte approbation given to bt by Ezekiel and 
as ſuch, 3 Cor 3, 
and theſe thing: 
1. From his long 
Lives were far ſhorter, as is manifeſt. 
afrer Moſes his time was in a manner quite extingutſhed. 3. From the. 


Sacrifices bere commenty uſed, whereas, after the giving of the Law, all Sacrifices were confined to 
nh , ha 6 7 4 4. From the way of Ged's imparting of his Mind 16 the Gentiles at this time by 


g; Becauſe there is nat tbe leat mention ef 
wous Affiiions in Egypt, nor of their glorious deliverance oat of it, though nothing coxld have been more ſeaſonable or ſuitable to the Matter 

4. The Pen-man of this Beok, is not certainly known, nor is it material for us to know : toy 
the principal Author, it is of ns moment by what Hand or Pen he wrote tt: | was & 
who, as in his agony he wiſhed that his word: and carriage were written in a Book, Chap. 19, 
ed from it, he ſatisfied bis own and others deſires therein, Gn!) ] 
was added by another hand; the like ſmall Addition: being made in other Books of Scripture, 
1s, 16. Or, 3: Moſes, who when he wa: in the Land of Midian, where he had #þ- 
and conſidering that it might be very u/eful for the Comfort and Direftion of Ged's 
pt,did by bis ewn Inclination, and theDireftion of God's Spirit commit it #0 Writing, 1nd whereas the Stileſeem; 
con ſidering the differing nature of the Bucks, this being almoſt all Poetical, and 
the o'her meerly Hiforical, for the miſt part, 0: plain Precepts or Exhortations 
Moſes lived 42 Tears in Midian, which w.s a part of Arabia, in which he muſt needs learn that Language. 


TOrattle. oe thouſand camels f, and five hundred yoke of | 


-f Camels in theſe parts were very numerous, as is manifeſt from | | - 


frotle and Pliny, and very uieful, and proper both for carrying of | thinks 


g/Which were preferred before He-Afles, as ſerving for the tame } 
uſes as they did, and for Breeding, and Milk alio : Burt He-Afes | 


| 


2. That thisis a 
Jy": and from the unanimous conſent of the Church, bath of 

wwe ſaid and dene, moſt probably was before Moſes, and 
life, which by comparing Chap. 1 with 42+ 16. could net want 
2. From vhat conſiderable Knowledge of God, andof 


the place of the Tabernacle or Temple, to which 


whereas afterward theſe di coveries were withdrawn from the Gemiles, 
in this Beok of the Children of Iſrael, neither- of their rej. 


Bur moſt pr-bably it was either, 1. Job himſelf 


Cnly what concerns bis general Charafter, Cay. 


And for the Arabick words here ujed, ir wnſt be remembred, that 


his Children made him jealous ; for which he had cauſe enoug 
from the corruption of May's Nature, the frailty and Folly of 
Youth, the many Temprathhs which atrend upon Feaſting and 
Jollity, and the eaſineſs of fliding from lawful ro forbidden De. 
lights. q Not in the i 5 rene and higheſt degree, which it 
is not probable either that theyfhould do, now eſpecially when they 
had no provocation to do it, as being ſurrounded with Bleſlings 
and Comforts, which they were aCtually enjoying, and not yet exer- 
ciſed with any afflittion, or that Job ſhould ſuipett ir concerning 
them, bur deſpiſed and diſbowoured God ; tor both Hebrew and Greek 
words ſignifying curſmg. are ſometimes uſed to note,only yeuin 
ling or detrafing, or ſpeaking evil, or ſetting light by a perſon. Thus 
whart is called curſimg ones father or mother, Exod. 21. 17. is elſewhere 
called ſetting light by them, as Deut+ 27. 16. Ezek. 22. 9. See 
alto 2 Pet. 2.11. Jude 8. and many other places. r By ſlight and low 
Thoughts of God, by negleQing or forgetting to give God the praiſe 
and Giory of the Mercies which by his favour they enjoyed, by 
taking more hearty delight in rheir Feaſts and Jollity, than in the 
Service and fruition of God : For theſe and ſuch like diſtempers of 
Heart are moit uſual in times of Proſperity and Jollity, as appears by 
common experience, and by the many Divine Cautions we have a- 
gain{tthem, as Deut. 6. 1 1«Heſe 2, 8 and elſewhere. And theſe miſcar. 
riages, though inward and ſecret, Job ealls by ſuch an hard name as 
uſually ſignify s caſing, by way ofaggravation of their ſin,which per- 
adventnte they were too aptto fleight as a ſmall & trivial miſcariagee 
57.e, Ir was his conſtant courſe at the end of every feaſting time. 

6 Now there was a day z, when Þ the icns of God « 


| 


% %A 
i 

£ x00 

«= 
Chap. 1; 
3 
ap. I- 

, i 


came to preſent themſelves before the Lord x, and * Sa- bil 
tan came alſo || among them y. | * Heb. th 


zz. 6 Acertain time appointed by God. « 7. e. The holy Angels, adveſar. 


ſo called, 70s 38. 7. Dan. 3. 25, 28+ becauſe of their Creation by || Heb. #s 
God, as 4am allo was, Luke 3.38. and for their great reſemblance the midfif 
; of him in Po«er, and Dignity and Holineſs, ard for their filial affe- thew, 


Ction anJ1 Obedience to him. x 2. e. Before his Throne, to receive 
s Commands, andto give hin-an account of their Negotiations: 
2 Compare 1 Kings 22. 19. Zech, 4. 14. Luke, 1. 19. But you muſt not 


; hat theſe things werereally done, and that Satan was mixed 


; with the holy Angels, or admicted into the preſence of God. in 


! Heaven, to maintain ſuch diſcourſes as this with the bleſſed God, 
or that he had formal Commiſſion and leave to do what follows, 
{ but itis only a parabolical Repreſentation of that great Truth, that 
5 God by his wiſe and holy Providence, doth govern all the A&ions 
, of Men and Devils to his own ends: Ir being uſual with the great 
God to condefcend to our ſhallow Capacities, and to expreſs him- 
ſelf, as tne Jews phraſe it, In'the language of the Sons of men ; i, t* 
in ſuch manner as Men uſe to ſpeak and may underſtand. y Being 
forced to come, and give up his account. 


7 And the LORD faid unto ſatan, Whence comeſt 
chou 2? Then ſatan anſwered the LORD and ſaid, 
from Þ going to and fro in the Farth a, and from wal- 
king up and down in it, | 

z God being here repreſented as Judge, rightly begins with an 
enquiry, as the ground of his further proceedings, as he did Gen. 
3- 9. and 4. 9. # Whereby thy permiſſion I range about, obſer- 
ving with great diligence all rhe Diſpoſitions and Atons of Men, 
and working in them and among them as far.as I have liberty and 
opportunity 


che Earth, a perfe& and an upright man, one thabfea- 
reth God and eſcheweth evil ? 

6 Haſt thou taken notice of him, and his Spirit, and Carriage? 
and what haſt thou to ſay againſt him ? 

9 Then fſacan anſwered the LORD, and ſaid, Doth 
| Job fear God for nought c, 

ci-e Sincerely and freely, and out of pure love and reſpe& to 
thee ? No, It is policy, not Piety, that makes him good ; he doth 
not ſerve thee bur ſerveth himſeif of thee, and is a meer Mercena- 
ry, ſerving thee for his. own ends- 


io Haſt thou not. made an hedge about him 4 and 
about his houſe e, and about alli that he hath on every 


ſide? 


+1Pet-5 l 


f 
8 And che LORD faid unto ſatan, + Haſt thou con-tHe.l 
ſidereth my ſervant Job 6b, that there is none like Him iN jeart #- 


_——— 


hi, 


{Hl 


(or 


PI F fide? thou haſtbleſfſed the work of his hands, and his 
Yorgarch + ſubſtance is || increaſed in the land. = 
Web. #79 7 Ze. Defended him by thy ſpecial Care and Providence from all 


j firth* farms and inconveniencies: which is able to oblige and win perſons 
60.28.14 of che worſt tempers. . e His Children and Servants. 


e, | 11 But put forth thine hand f now, and touch g all 
4 »ifhe that he hath, * and he will curſe thee to thy face 6. - 

vil {He "tt f To wir, in way of Juſtice and Severiry,as thar Phraſe is uſed, 
a _ Iſa . 5+ 25+ Exzk. 25.7, 13,16. g i.e. Afi or deſtroy,as this word 
d gt t0 ty is uſed, Gen. 26. 11. Ruth 2,9. Pſal. tog.15. Zech. 2. $8. h He who 


f P is now ſo forward to ſerve and bleſs thee, will then openly and bold- 
- ly blaſpheme thy Name,and reproach thy Providence, as. unjuſt and 
unimerciful tor him. ; ; 

a= 12 And the LORD aid unto Satan, Behold,all that 
h he hath zs in thy F power z,only upon himſelf & put not 
y 1g forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the pre- 
p 19" fence of the LORD 7. = | 

7 Igive thee full power and liberty to deal with his Wife, Chil- 
dren, Servants,and all his Eſtate, whatſoever thy Wit or Malice ſhal 
} prompt thee to do. k His Perſon, Body, or Soul. 1 7. e. From that 
f place where God was repreſented as ſpecially preſent,being forward 

and greedy to do the Miſchief which he had permiſſion to do. 
 13Amd there was a day when his ſons and daugh- 


ters were eating and drinking wine in their eldeſt bro- 


s thers houſe. . his Love and F aithfulneſs to me,and therefore miniſtring more mat- 
; 14 And there came a meſſenger unto Job,and ſaid, = a cone | ay es 4 eels pee wy lefr ye —_ 
| . ' : , ontinue to me 

. The oxen were plowing, and the aſſes feeding beſide of Body, and a compoſed Mind, and an Hear vo Gong _—_ 

; them ms: good pleaſure ; and thar he hath reſerved and Prepared ſuch a feli- 
| m i.e. Belide the Oxen, therefore both were taken away toge- city for me, whom no Caldeans or Sabeans, no Men nor Devils can 
p | ther. take away from me ; Of which ſee Chap. 19: 25. 
| Hie,hen I 5 And © the Sabeans » fell upon them,and took them 22 In all this & Job ſinned not /, nor * charged God *Or,attrin 
hk away ; yea they have ſlain the ſervants with the edge fooliſhly m.. buted folly 
t of the ſword,and I only am eſcaped to tell thee o. k i e. Under all theſe preſſures. Or, inall that he ſaid did p- —_ 
7 % A people of Arabia, who led a wardring Life, and lived by | upon theſe ſad occaſions. / To wit,in ſuch manner as the De pre= i: 
) robbery and ſpoiling of others, as Strabo and other Heathen Wri- {aged that he would, and as 15 expreſſed in the following words As ** : 
; ters note. o Whom Satan ſpared no leſs maliciouſly than he deſtroy- Chriſt ſaith, John 9. 3. Neither hath this man fonned, nor his parents.to 
, ed the reſt, that F944 might have ſpeedy and certain intelligence of | wit, ſo as you imagine, in an emunent or extraordinary degree.Bur 
| his Calamity. | both here and there humune Infirmities are excepted, of which*Job 
16 While he was yet ſpeaking p,there came alſo an- | oft acknowledgeth himſcIfto be guilty. NSr was the queſtion be. 
| ſaid, The fire of God 9 is fallen from hea- | v2 Gov and Saran, whether Job had anyſin in him, bur whether 
| i0r, « other, and lai b & Nre OL Wod q 1 | he was an Hypocrite, or would blaipheme God; which is here de- 


to digeſt his former loſs, or indeed co ([wallow his Spittle, as he ex- 
an extraordinary manner; to intimate that both God and Men were 


Air which is oft called Heaven, as hath been noted again and again, 
whereof Satan is the Prince, £ph.2.2. 

17 While he was yet ſpeaking,there came alſo anos 
ther,and ſaid, The Caldeans s made out three bands z, 
tor 4 | fb. and + fell upon thecamels, and have carried them a- 


Heb. te {word,and. I only ameſcaped alone to cell thee. 


he midfif might be able roeſcape them. _ 
F x8While he was yet ſpeaking,there came alſo another 


R ———— « in their eldeft brothers houſe: 
K 7. e. 


vation of the Judgement. 


ﬆ wilderneſs x,and ſmote the four corners y of the houſe, 
and it fell upon the young men z,and they are dead, 


B. Fe” Chap. II 


was born, and have Joſt only things without and beſide my ſelf. gl 
ſhal be as rich when I die as 1 was when I was born,&therefore have 
reaſon to be contented with my condition, which alſo is the com- 
mon lor of all men. Thizher, i. e. into my Morhers Womb, which 
in the former clauſe is underſtood properly, but in this figugatively 
of the Earth, which is our common Mother, as it is called b many 
Authors,our of whoſe Belly we were taken, and into which we muſt 
return again, Gen: 3: 19+ Eccleſ. 12: 7, And as our Mothers Womb 
1s called zhe lower parts of the Earth, Pſal: 139. 15. fo it -isnot harſh 
if reciprocally the lower partsof the Earti:he called our Mothers Womb. 
Nor is it ſtrange thar the ſame Phraſe thou'd be rak-n both properly 
and metaphorically in the ſameVerſe; for {o it 1S Matth, 8. 22. Let 
the dead ſpiritually bury the dead corporally. See a!ſo Levit. 26; 21, 
24. Pſal: 18. 26, &c. bþ Hehath taken away nothing but his own, 
and whar he ſo gave to methar he reſerved theS upremeDominion & 
Diſpoſal of in his own hand.$o 1 have no cauſe to murmure'orcom- 
Plain of him. Norhave I reaſon to fret and rage againſt the Calde- 
ans and Sabeans, and other Creatures, who were only God's Inftry. 
ments to execure this wife and holy Counſel. 7 ;. e.The Lord, God's 
Name heing ofren pur for God himſelf, as Pſal. 44: 5- and 48. 10. 
and 72: 18, 19. Dan: 2. 19, 20, As Names are put for Men, As 
I: I5: Rev: 3: 4 The Senſe is, IT havenocauſe to quarrel with 
Gnd, but much cauſe to bleſs and praiſe him, that he did give me 
fuch bleſlings, and ſuffered me to enjoy them more and longer than 
I deſerved ; and that he hath vouchſafed to afMi& me, which I 
greatly needed for my Souls good, and which I rake as a Token of 


pufee, Ven 7, and hathburne up the ſheepand the ſervants,and | ,;.q ana diſproved. m Heb. Nor imputed folly to God; 7: e: for. Hat 
conſumed them, and I only am eſcaped alone to tell | hefrom blaſpheming God, that he did not entertain any diſhonou. 
thee rable thoight of God,as if he had done any thing unworthy of his 


- RN infinite Wiſdom, or Juſtice, or Goodneſs, bur heartily a oved 
> Before he could have time to compoſe his diſturbed Mind, and and coauietis good pleaſure, and in his er ou _ oh 


; preſſeth it, ch. 7. 19. q A terrible flame of fire ſent from God in | {harp proceedings againſt him. 


GERHAP.. IL 


is Enemies,and all thi ags conſpired to his ruine. 77. e. From the | Satans ſecond appearance before God: Job's charafter continuing the ſame, 


condemneth Satan, r==—= 3. Satan Juageth him not ſufficiently tried 
unleſs his beey ſuffer ; and ſo obtaineth leave to hurt his yen > rh. 
touch his life, 4——6, Job ſmote with boils, ſcraperh himſelf, and fit= 
teth down in aſhes, 75, 8. bis Wives folly ; he roprowet h her,acknowl-ag- 


ing Gods Sovere:gnity, and former Mercies, 9, 10, His three Shan, 
and their ſorrow, 11 —13, 


way, yea, and ſlain the ſervants with the edge of the A Gain there was a day 2, when * the ſons of God 


came to preſent themſelves before the LORD Gr. «hi 


adverſary. s Who alfo lived upon the Spoil, as Xenophen and others obſerve. and Satan came alſo among them. to reſent hi f Angels 6 
| Heb, # # That they might come upon them ſeveral ways, and nothing | before the LORD. S , P mſclf : EE 


4 Another ſet time ſome convenient pace afrer the former cala- 


| : þ mities. Ofthis, and the two next Verſes, ſee the Not Chap: 
and faid, Thy ſons and thy daughters were eating and | 1; 6, 9,8. ++... 


2 And the LORD ſaid unto Satan, From whence 


eaſting after their manner,and as Job generally feared and | comeſt thou ? And + Satan anſwered the 4Chap.1.9 
ſuſpe&ed, wins againſt God, v. 5. Which was a dreadful aggra- | C\; d, From LORD, and 


going to and fro inthe Earth,and from wal- 


jm 19 And behold,there came a great wind * from the | King up and down in it. 


3 And the LORD faid unto Satan, Hafſt thou' con. 


ſidered my ſervant Job,that rbere is nene like him in the 


._ _andIonl eſcaped alone to tell thee. Earth, || a perfect andan uprighe man, one that fear- ,-.. 
x Wheng: no force Winds came,as having moſt power in ſuch eth God and eſcheweth evil 2 and {till 5 he holdeth faſt (Cha.1.8; 


open places. See Fer. 4. 11. and 13. 24. y In which the chief | his integrity E, alchough thou movedfſt me d againſt him t 


ſtrength of the houſe did conſiſt. Ir ſmote theſe either all together, | + 
or father ſucceſſively, one immediatly after anorher, being poſlibly 
a Whirl-wind,which comes violently and ſuddenly, whirling about 


is Very great. z His Sons intheir youth, and his Daughters alſo, as 
appears from the ſequel. 


4 From his ſeat whereon he was ſitting ina diſconſolate poſture. ly 


u j God upon him, and his humiliarion of himſelf under his hand. See 
Jeb, f Gen. 37.34. &c 7, e. Cauſedthe Hair of his H:ad to be ſhaved or cut 
u ſet off, which was then an uſual Ceremony in mourning, of which ſee 
Exe 9. 3. 1a. 15.2. and 22.12, Jer: 7; 29. and 41. 5. Mich. 1. 16. 
d In way of Self-abhorrency,and Humiliation and Su pplication une 
to God. e To wir, God, who is expreſſed in the following verſe 


he 


20 


lo 


the Glory of his Soveraignty,and of his Juſtice,and of his Goodneſs 


thename of the LORD 3. 


7 I brought none of theſe things which I have now loſt, with me, 


Eeived them fron the hand and fayour of that God who hath now 


| 18 abc cious ſuggeſtion to the contrary. 
"Per.gh in a Circle,and being driven about by the power of rhe Devil, which ſame perfet and upright _—_— 


to deitroy him without cauſe e. ſwallow 
b Notwithſtan4ing all his. Trials and Tribulations, and thy mali. 4m up. 
c 3.e. He continues to be the Chap. 19+ 
ch he was before. All thy endea- 10: 
vours to pull away his Integr:ty, have made bim only ro hold it the 


. faſter. 47. e. Didft perſwade me, and prevailed with me to d 
[Oral 20 Then Job aroſe 4, and rent his [ Mantle b, and | Bur this, as the reit of this ea 15NOT to ] 


ſhared his head c, and fell down upon the ground #4, | properly, as if God could be moved by any of his Creatures to alter 
and worlhipped e. tis purpoſes, which are all Erernal a: d Unchangeable,and eſpecial- 


0 it. 
be underſtood 


by Satan, as if God would gratifie him, by granting his deſires ; 


"are bur the deſign of theſe words i- to fiznifie both the Devils reſtle 
+ To teſtifie his deep ſenſe oHand juſt ſorrow for the heavy hand of Milice in promoting Mans miſery, ard Gods permiſſion of it Fare 
own wiſe and holy Ends. ei.e, Wichour any ſpecial provocation 
whereby he more than others, deſerved ſuch heavy puniſhments. 
Which alſo Jeb himſelf oft alledgeth for his Juſtification ; although 


dorh nor deny himſelf ro be a Sinner, as is apparent from Ch. 7. 
» 21. and 9.2. and13. 23, 26, Nor that %in deſerves Judgments; 


; . _—_ Eee : Or, without any ſuch cauſe as thou did{t alledge, which was his 
| . and who is the only Obje@ of Religious Worſhip: Inſtead of curſing OR CO OD ge, 
God, which Satan ſaid he would do, he adored him, and cave hin Hy pocriſie: Or, an vain, as this word is ufed Prov. 1. 175% Ezek. 6. 


. andelſewhere. Soir is not referred to Gods d-ftroying him 


| ” alls, in this moſt ſevere Di ' "ear Devbey but to Satans moving God ſo ro do. Andſorhis place may be thus 


Tee : | rendred exaQtly according to the Hebrew: And : hou h F1 7 
' L:jTim. 21 Andfaid, * Naked came I out of my Mothers | 80 him in vain, or withour effe for ro NIE 


, 61, womb f, and naked (bal I return thither Z : the LORD | haſt loft thy Delign and Expettation therein, which wos to take a 


42. gave, and the LORD hath * taken away þb; bleſſed be ray wy + wth whiciin ſpight of all chy Art and Malice he tiff 
{ holdeth Ialt. 


for rono purpoſe. #. e. Thou 


4 AndSatan anſwered the LORD, and ſaid, Skin for 


when I came out of my Mother's Womb into the World: bur I re= | SKiD,y$4,All that a man hath will he give for his life + 


4 D f The 


required his own again. I ſtill have all that Subſtance wherewith I 


God 


Heb. ts 


Chap. II. 


7 U 
fon of theſe words is plain,wh 
a Tk chat Honour and Praiſe which God [dx ag by 
pretending that he had done no more than the meane -w — 
monly do by the Law of Self-Preſervat:on. Andirt 1s S C _ 1 - 
this was a proverbial Speech then in uſe, wherein if there be 1om 
difficulty to underſtand it at this diſtance | of 


he ſenſe, and eſpe- | 
than the common lot of many other Proverbs, t , | 
cially the grounds whereof are frequently unknown to perfons of ; 
. other Nations, and after times» : 
thoſe ancient Times, thongh they had ſome Money,yet the main of | 


: « : : ſiderable | 
their Eſtate lay in Cattel, of which the Skins _ |» vt" ab 'end thy Torments. Or, curſe God, though thou die for it : Bur 


Moreover, it is known, 


part, and their chief Traffick lay in the exchan 


dity for another, and, among other things, it cannot be queſtioned - 


at they did commonly exchange Skins of one kind for-Skins 
og No Gicoenting 4 their ſeveral inclinations or OG 
So the meaning may be this, As Men willingly and 94 AT y B! ” 
one Skin in exchange for another Skin, and one —_—_ ity " a 
nother, ſo (the Hebrew Particle Yau, being oft ſo uſe _ | ong » 
of compariſon, as it 1s Prov. 17- 3- and 25+ 3, 23,25-27* - ; : 
Man hath, his Houſe, Cattel, Children, wil he give, and that =_ 
willingly for his Life: 5 & To redeem or ſave his own life : ry 
rather thus, Skin for Skin, might then be a Proverb like t - © 
ours, Boay for Body, when one man is ſo far obliged for another. 


- And 'we have ſome ſuch Expreſſions among us ; as when we ſay of 


THeb.b/eſ; 


yy 


* Or, enly 


tHeb.bleſs 


1 Kin.21. 


IO, 13. 


2 Man, who doth ſo ne dangerous Attion, His Skin, is & his Body 
will pay for it, i+ 6 It may coſt him his Life. 
might be taken, 1» From Sacrifices, 


that in 


B. Chap. It: f 


*ch {5 to detraft from Job j ment of his Temptations, and the aggravation of Jobs miſery by 


unnatural unkindnefs to him, which is declared Ch. 19. 17. and 
elſewhere. #» Art thou yet ſo weak to perſiſt in the praftice of Pie« 
ty, whenit is not only unprofitable to thee, but the chief occaſion 
of all theſe thy inſupportable miſeries, and when God himſelf not 


time, it is no more | only forſakes and leaves thee in this helpleſs and hopeleſs condition, 


but is turned to be thy greateſt Enemy ? o Seing thy bleſſing of 
God availeth thee ſo little, it is time to change thy note, Curſe God 
and die, 1: e. reproach him to his face, ard tell him of his Injuſtice 
and Unkindnelſs to thee, and that he loves his Enemies and hates his 
Friends and thatywill provoke him to take away thy Life, and fo 


although this word ſometimes ſignifies curſmg, as Job 1, 11. and 
1 Kings 2'.- 10; yet moſt properly and generally it ſignifies be/mg, 
and ſo it may very well be underſtood here as a Sarcaſtical or Ironje 
cal Expreſſiony ſuch as there are many in Scripture, as Eccle/ u. g. 
Lam. 4. 21. andinall Authors. And fo the Senſe may be this, Bleſs 
Goa, and die i. e. I ſee thou art ſet upon the bleſſing of God, thou 
blefſeſt God for givingy and thou blefleſt God for taking away, and 
thou art ſtill bleſſing of God forthy loathſome and tormenting Dif. 
eaſes, and he rewards thee accordingly, giving thee more and more 
of that kind of Mercy for which thou blefleſt and praiſeſt him. Go 
on therefore in this rhypious and generous courſe,and die as a Fool 


dieth, and carry this Reputation to thy Grave, that thou hadſtner +» 


common Senſe in thee to diſcern between Good and Eyil, between 


And this P roverb.. thy Friends and thy Foes. Or, rather, awake out of this Stupidi. 
in which there was Skinfor ty and Lethargy+and give over this abſurd & unreaſonable prattice, 


Skin - 3. e. the Skin of a Beaſt for, or inſtead of, the Skinor Body jand as God gives thee no Help nor Comforty!et him loſe thy Praiſ-- 


of the Man, which deſerved to be uſed as the Beaſt was, and which | 


es and Service, And this being her ſenſe, it is not ſtrange he re. 


ing ofthe Beaſt, which was ac« | proveth her ſo ſharply for it. And yet it ſeems hard to think that 
are -4 rpm ary = Hove Spy 4 ty Which the Mans ſins were i Jobs Wife ſhould arrive at that height of Impudence and Impiety, as 
lathe Or, 2 From Hoſtages or Ranſomes, wherein one Man , in plainterms to bid him Curſe God. 


was given for,or inſtead of Another.So now the Senſe may be this, | 
Any Man will give Skinfor Skin, 1. e. the Skin, or Body, or Life 
of another, whether Man or Beaſt, to fave his own ; yea, aft that a , 


man ha:h, whether Goods or Perſons, ſuch as Job hath loſt, wil he 
givefor his Life. Job is not much hurt nor concerned ſo long as his 
own Skin is whole and ſafe. Others,thus: Skin «pon ( for ſo theHe- 
brew Particle Behad is ſometimes uſed, as 2 Kings 4: 5: Amos g: to. 
As alſo the Greek Particle Anti, which aniwers to 1t, 1s underſtood 
John 1;16.Grace for Grace,i.e Grace upon Grace,or al) kinds or degrees 
'of Grace ) Skin,ana all that # man hathy\. 0 all theſe words belong to 
the price which a Man pays ; now follows whar he hath or expe&-. 
eth to have for ir;will he give for his life, 1. e.in exchange for his Life, 
or to fave his Life. This alſo is a plauſible Interpteration, only it 
is nor very probable, That rhe fame Hebrew Particle Behad ſhould 
be uſed in two ſo differing Senſes in the ſame verſe, 1n the former 
part to ſignifie upon, ( which if this Sacred Writer had meant, be 
wou'd likely have expreſſed it rather by that other Hebrew Particle 
Al, which is commonly fo uſed, than by this which is ſo abiguops 
and ſe!\dom ſo raken, and otherwiſe uſed in this very Verſe ) and 
in the latter toſignifie for,or inſtead of. However the Senſe is plainly 
this, Thisis ſo fer from beirg an Evidence of Job's ſincere and gene- 
rous Piety, that it is only an A& of deeper Hypocriſie, and meer 
Seif-Love ; he is wellenough contented with the loſs of his Eſtatey 
and Chileren too, ſo long as he flezps in a whole Skin ; and he is 
weil pleaſed thar thou wilt accept of all theſe as a Sacrifice or Ran- 
ſom in his ſtead ; andirt is not true Patience and Humility which 
makes him ſeem to bear his Croſf:s ſo ſubmiſſively, as depth of po- 
liey, that by his feigned carriage ne may appeaſe thy Wrath againft 
him, and prevent thoſe forther Plagues which, for his Hypocriſie 
and other ſins, of which he is conſcious, he fears thou wilrſt other» 
wiſe bring upon his own Carcaſs ; as wall plainly appear upon fur- 
ther trial. ; 

+ But put forth thine hand now,and touch his bone 


and his fleſh g,and he will + curſe thee to thy face. 

g Touch, i. e. ſmice him, nor fleighrly, but to the quick, and to 
the Bones ard Marrow, ſo as he may feel Pain and Angwhh indeed 
wiich is oft expreſſed by reaching to the Bones, as Pſal. 6. 2. and 
32. 3. and 51. 8. 


5 Andthe LORD ſaid unto Satan, Behold, he #s in 


thine hand, * bur ſave his life h. | 

þ Do not attempt to take away his Life, which I will not ſuffer 
thee to do. 

— So went Satan forth from the preſence of the 


LORD, and ſmote Job with ſore boils ;, from the ſole 


of his foot unto his crown k. 

7 Like thoſe inflited upon the Egyptians, wich are expreſſ:d by 
the ſame word,' and threatned to Apoſtate Iſraelites, Deur, 28. 27, 
whereby he was made Joarhſome to himſelf, and to his neareſt Re- 
lations, Chap. 19 .13, 19. and aviſible monument of Divine DiCſ- 

leaſure, «nd filled with tiring and conſuming pains in his Body, 
and no leſs Torment and Anguiſh in his mind: | & In all the our- 
ward parts of his Body. His Tongue he ſpared, that ir might be 
capable of venting thole Blaſphemies againſt God which he expeCt- 
ed anddeſirzd. ; 

8 Azid he took him a potſbeard / to ſcrape himſelf 
withal ; and he fat down among the aſhes /, 

I Partly to allay the Itch which his Ujcers cauſed: and partly to 
ſqueeze ourt,or to take away that purulent Matter which was under 
them,or flowed from them;and was the great cauſe of his Torment. 
And this he did not with ſoft Linen Clothes, either becauſe he had 
not now a ſufficient quantity of them for ſo much uſe; or becauſe 
therein he muſt have had the helpofothers who abhorred to come 
near him, Ch. 19+ 13, 14, 15. Nor with his own handsor fingers, 
which were alſo ulcerous, and ſo unfit for that uſe - and befides *: 
loathed to touch himſelf, but with Potſheards,cither becauſe rhe 
were next at hand, and ready for his preſent uſe; or in token of his 
Repentance and deep Humiliatien under Gods heavy hand, which 


made him decline all things which ſavoured of tenderneſs and de. ' 


licacy. { Heb. I duſt er afbzs, as Mourners uſed ro de; Of which 
ſee Job 42. 6. Jonah 3. 6. Mat, 11. 21- 

9 Then faid his wife 9 unto him, Doſt thou till re- 
tain thine integrity » ? | curſe God and die o. 

m Whom the Devil ſpared with cruel intent to be the Inſtru» 


$0 But he ſaid unto her, Thou ſpeakeft as one of the 
fooliſh p women ſpeaketh:What ! Shal we receive good 
at tho hand of God, and ſhal we not receive evil 9 ? In 
all this did not Job ſin with bis Lips », 

p 7. e. Like a raſh, and inconſiderat,and weak perſon,” that doſt 
not underſtand, nor mind what thou ſayeſt, Or, like a wicked and 
moſt prophane perſon ; for ſach are frequently called Fools in Scrip= 
ture, as Pſal.14. 1. and 74+ 18. and every where in the Proverts. 
9 Shal we poor Worms give Laws to our Supreme Lord and Go- 
vernour, and oblige him always to bleſs and tavour us,and never to 
afHict us ? And fhal not thoſe great and manifold, and long con= 
tinued Mercies,which from time to time God hath freely and graci- 
oufly given us,compenſate for theſe ſhort afflictions?Ought we not 
to bleſs God for thoſe Mercies which we did nor deſerve, and con- 
rentedly to bear thoſe Correftions which we deſerve,and need:and 
( if it be not our own fault ) may get much good by. r By any Ree 
fleftions upon God,by any impatient or unbecowing Expreſſions. 

IT Now when Jobs three friends heard of all this e- 
vil that was come upon him,they came every one frem 
his own place ; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the 
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathice s : for they had 
made an appointment together,to come to mourn with 
him, and to comfort him. 

5 Which were Perſons then eminent for Birth and Quality, fox 
Wiſdom and Knowledge, and for the profeſſion of the true Reli- 
gion, being probably of the Poſterity of 4braham, and a-kin to Joby 
and living in the ſame Country with him. 

12 And when they lift up their eyes afar off:z, and 
knew him not #, they lift up their, voice and wept, and 
they rent every one his Mantle, and ſprinkled duſt up- 
On their heads toward heaven x. 

t To wit, atſome convenient diſtance from him : whom they 
found fitting upon the ground, either in the open Air, or within 
his own Houſe. » His Countenance being ſo fearfully changed 
and disfigured by his Boils. x Either upon the upper part of their 
heads, which looks towards Heaven : or caſt it up into the Air ſo as 
it ſhould fall upon their hvads; as they did AFs 22, 23. See Jof. 
7. 6. Nehem. 9. 1. Lam. 2+ 10D. - ; 

13 So they ſat down with him upon the ground » ſe- 
ven days,and ſeven nightsz, and none ſpake a word to 
him a: for they ſaw that his grief was very great. 

Y In the poſture of Mourners condoling with him. £ Which 
was the uſual time of mourning for the Dead, Gen.5o. io. 1 Sam, 
31. 13. and therefore proper both for Jebs Children,who were dead 
and for Jeb himſelf, who was in a manner dead, whilſt he lived: But 
we mult not fancy that they continued in this placeand poſture ſo 
long together, which no Laws of Religion or Civility required of 
them, and theneceſlities of Nature could not bear ; but only that 
they ſpent a great, or the greateſt part of that time in ſitting with 
him and filenc Mourning over him.And ſo ſuch general Expreſſions 
are frequently underſtood, as Luke 2. 37. and 24. 53» Aﬀs 20. 31, 
a Either 1. about any thing: Or, rather, 2.about his AMi&ions and 
the cauſes of them. "The reaſon of this Silence was partly the great- 
neſs of their grieffor him, and their ſurpriſe and Sf 090" Bora at his 
condition ; partly becauſe they thought it convenient to give him 
ſome further time to vent his own Sorrows,& partly becauſe as yet 
they knew not what to ſay to himefor though they had ever eſteem- 


ed himto be atruly wiſe & godly Man,& came with full purpoſe to 
comfort him, yet the prodigious greatneſs of his Miſeries, and that 
Hand and Diſpleaſure of God which they manifeſtly perceived in 
them, made them at a ſtand, and to queſtion Jobs Sinceriry, ſo that 
they could not comfort him as they had intended,and yet were loath 
to grieve him with thoſe Convitions and Reproofs which they 
thoughthe greatly needed. And here they ſtuck till Job gave them 
occaſion to ſpeak their Minds. 


CH AP. III. 
Job curſeth the day, t==a=y Of his birth, 10--=-12. The eaſe and honours 
. of death,13--=-19. Life in anguifh, matter of complaint, 20-===2 4 What 
he feared is now come upen him, 25, 26. Dk 
Frer this opened Job his mouth 4, and curſed his 
day 6, 
« He 


f0r, 
it wt 1 
mneea) 
th ds 


a, IÞ up. HI. 


# He ſpake freely and boldly. as this Paraſe is uſed Prov.31e 8.9. 
Eph. 6: 19. and elſewhere. 6 To wir, his Birth-day, as is evident 
from verſe 3- which is called ſimply a Mans day, Hoſ.7.5. Which al- 
ſoſome others,through the ſame Infirmiry, and in the fame Cir- 
cunſtanczs, have curſed, as we ſee Jer*20+ 14 In vain do ſome 
men endeavour to excule this, and the following Speechesfof Job, 


for th:m, Chap. 38: 2, and 40:4., and 42. 3, 6- And yet he doth 
not proceed ſo "Ra tro curſe or blaſpheme God, but makes the De- 
vila Liar in his Prognoſticks : But although he doth not break 
forth into dire& and down-right Reproaches of God, yet he makes 
ſecret and indire& Refle&ions upon Gods Providence. His Curſe 
was ſinfal, both becauſe it was vain, being applied ro an unreaſon- 
able thing, which was not capable of Bleſſing and Curling, and to 
a Day that was paſt, and ſo our of the reach ofall Curſes ; and be- 
cauſe it was applied ro one of Gods Creatures, all which were and 
are in themſelves very good, and pronounced bleſſed by God, and 
| fo they are, if we do not turn them into Curſes ; and becauſe it 
caſts a blame upon God for bringing that Day, and for giving him 
that Life which that Day brought into the World. He pronounceth 
that Day an uahappy, woful, and curſed Day, not in it ſelf, bur 
with reſpe& to himſelf. + 


'Hb.0% | > And Job * ſpake, and ſaid: 
_ 2 + Let the day periſh wherein I was born c,andthe 


night in which it was ſaid d, There is a Man-child con- 


18,19. 
Jer.20.14- ceived e.. k 
c Lex the remembrance of that day be utterly loſt. Yea, I hearti- 

ly wiſh that ic had never been. Such wiſhes are apparently fooliſh 

and impatient, and yet have been ſometimes forced from wiſe and 

good Men in grievous Diſtreſſes, not as if they expe&ed any effeQ of 

them, bur only to ſhew their abhorrency of Life and to expreſsthe 
intollerableneſs of their grief,and to give ſome vent to their paſſions 

4 With Joy and Triumph, as happy ridings. Compare Jer. 2C-15+ 

e Or, rather, brought forth, as this word is uſed, 1 Chron. 4. 17. For 

the time of Co:iception is unknown commonly to Women them- 

ſelves, and doth not uſe to be reported among meny as this day is 


ſuppoſed to be. : 
4 Let that day be darkneſs f, let not God regard it 


from above g, neither let the light ſhine upon it. 

f 1 wiſh the Sun had never riſen upon charDay to make it Day, 
or,which is all one ,that it had never been;and whenſoever tharDay 
returns, 7 wiſh it may be black, and gloomy, and uncomfortable, 
and therefore execrable and odiousto all Men. g 7. e. From Hea- 
ven.either, 1. By cauſing the Light of the Sun which is in Heaven 
to ſhine upon ir. So ir agrees both with the foregoing and following 
Branches of this Verſe. Or, 2. By bleſſing and favouring it, or by 
giving his Bleſſings ro Men upon it.Let it beeſteemed by all an un- 
lucky and comfortleſs Day Or,Let not God require 1t, 3. e. bring 1t a» 

# gain in its courſe,as ocher Days return. In this Senſe God 1s ſaid 
to require that which is paſt, Eccleſ. 3.15. Compare v.3, 6. _ 

105,44. 5 Let darkneſs and the ſhadow. of death b|] ftain it, 

ky: # let a cloud dwell upon it,* let the blackneſs of theday 


"0:14 terrific it &. | 

imttrris þ 5. e A black and dark ſhadow like that of the place of the dead 

fits which is a Land of Darkneſs,and where the Light is Darkneſs, as Job 

thſe who explains this very Phraſe, Ch, 10» 21, 22. Or, ſo groſs and 

bare abjre palpable Darkneſs, that by it horrors and damps may take away 

4). Mens Spirits and Lives # 7.e. Take away its beauty and glory, 
and make it ab»minable as a filthy thing. Or, c4a/lenge :t, 2. ee take 
and keep the entire poſſcſſion of it.ſo as the Light may not have the 
leaſt ſhare in it. k To wit, the Day,i. e. Meo init« Let it be always 
obſerved as a frightful and diſmal Day. : 

6 As for thac aignr, let darkneſs ] ſeize upon it; let 
i0;, 1+ it not be joined unto the days of the year ms; let it not 
#ntrz- COMS into the number of themoneths ». 
jyreoomy I i.e. Conſtant and extraordinary Darkneſs, without the leaſt 
tres. glimmering of Light from the Moon or Stars. m7. e. Reckoned as 

One, or a pari of one of them. The night is diſti»guifhed from che 
artificial day, bur it isa part of the naturil day, which conſiſts of 
24 hours. Or, rather, let it not rejoyce among the days, &c. Joy here, 
and terrour, v. 5. are poetical'y and figuratively aſcrib-d to the day 
or night,with reſpe& to Men, who either rejoyce or are affrighted 
in it. Let it bea ſad, and as it were a funeral Day. » 7. e To beone 
of thoſeNights which go to the making up of the Moneths 


7 Lo, let that night be ſolitary o; let no joyful voice 
p come therein : 

0 z« e, Deſtitute of all ſociety of Men meeting and feaſting toge- 
ther, which commonly was done at night, Suppers being the moſt 
folemn Meals among divers ancient Narions See Mark 6. 21. Luke 
I4. 16. John 12. 2. Rev. 19. 9,17. p Neither of the Bride and 
Bridegroom, nor any that celebrate their Nuptials, or any other 
merry Solemnity. 


8. Let them curſe it that curſe the day q, who are 

[0r,41;. Teady to raife up || their mourning r. 

Viethen, q i.e. Their Day, to wit, their Birth-day : For the Pronoun is 
here omitted for the Meeters ſake; For this and the following 
Chapters are written in Verſe, asall grant. So the Senſe is, when 
their Afligions move them to curſe their own Birth-day, ler them 
remember mine alſo, and beſtow ſome Curſes upon it. Or, the Day 
of their diſtreſs and trouble, which ſomerime 1s called fimply the 
day, as Obad. 12. Or, the Day of the Birthor Death of thar perſon 
Whoſe Funerals are celebrated by the hired Mourners, who in their 
ſolemn Lamentations ufed ro curfe the Day thar gave them ſuch a 
Perſon, whom they ſhould ſo ſuddenly leſe, and therefore it had 
berter never to have .enjoyed him, and to curſe the Day in 
which he died as an unlucky and execrable Day. Or, the day,i«e. 
the Dayelight: which to ſome perſons is an hateful thing, and rhe 

bje& of their Curſes, namely, to lewd Perſons and Thieves, to 
whom: the morning light is even as the ſhadow of death. Ch. 24. 17. as 
alſo to _ oppreſſed with. deep Melancholly,as it is nereimplied 
v. 20. So the Senſe is this; They who uſe to curie the day only, 
bur generally love and bleſs the night, - yer let this night be as abo- 
minable and execrable to them as the day-time gener:1ly is: » Who 


7 O B. 


who afterwards is reproved by God, and ſeverely accuſeth himſelf 


and Tears, and Complaints,and with them Curſes, as Men 11 great 
paſſions frequently do.Or,ſuch Mourning-Men, or Mourning-Wo- 
men, whoſe common Employment ir was, and who were hired to 
mourn,and therefore were always ready to do Jo upon Funeral oc- 
caſions; of which ſee 2 Chron. 35. 25. Jer. g: 17, 18, 20. Etek. 30+ 2. 
Joel. x. 15+ Ames 5: 16. Matth. 9. 23. And this Senſe ſuits with the 
uſe of the laſt word in Hebrew W riters,ofwhich a plain and pertinent 
Inſtanee is given by the learned Mercer. Bur becauſe that word is 
commonly uſed in another Senſe for the Leviarhan,both in thisBook 
and eJſewhere in Scripture,as P/al.74:14-and 10426. Iſs. 27.1: And. 
becauſe this very Phraſe of raiſing the Leviathan is uſed afcerward,Ch: 
41. 26. others render the words thus, Who are prepared, or ready to 
raiſe the Leviathan, Ir is evident that the Leviathan was a great and 
dreadful] Fiſh or Sea-Monſter, though there be ſome diſagreement 
abour irs kind cr quality, and that the raiſing of, or endeavouring 
to catch the Leviathan was a dangerous and terrible work,as is plain 
from Job 41, And therefore thoſe Sez-Men, who have been general- 
ly noted for great Swearers and Curſers, eſpecially when their paf- 
ſions of Rage or Fear are raiſed. being now labouring to catch this 
Sea-Monſter, and finding themſelves and their Veſſel in great dan- 
ger from him, they fall ro their old trade of Swearing and Curling, 
and curſe the day wherein they were born, and the day in which 
they ventured upon this moſt hazardous and terrible work- Others 
underſtand this Leviathan myſtically, as it is uſed, Iſa: 27: -1. for 
the great Enemy of Gods Church and People, called there alſo the 
Dragon, to wit, the Devil, whom the Magicians both now do, and 
formerly did uſeto raiſe with fearful Curſes and Imprecations.Not 
as if 70b did juſtifie this praftice, bur only ir is a raſh and paſſionate 
wiſh, that they who pour out ſo many Curſes undeſervedly,would 
beſtow their deſerved Curſes upon this Day- 
9 Let the ſtars of the twilight thereof be dark s, let 


dawning of the day #. 


render it amiable and delightful to Men, be covered with thick dark- Chap.s 1; 
neſs, and that both in the Evening Twilight, as is here expreſſed, when 18. 
the Stars begin to ariſe and ſhine forth ; and alſo in the further pro= 
grefs of the Night, even till the Morning begins to dawn, as the 
following words imply. * Let its darkneſs be aggravated wirh the 
diſappointment of irs Hopes and ExpeRations of Light. He aſcribes 
Scaſe or Reaſoning to the Night, by a Poetical Fi&ion uſual in all 
Writers. « Heb. The Eye-lids of the dy, i. e. the Morning-Star which 
uſhers in the Day,and the beginning, and conſequently the pro= 
greſs of the Morning Light, and the Day following. Let ths 
whole natural Day, conſiſting of Night and Day, beblorred our of 
the Catalogue of Days, as he wiſhed before. 


Io Becauſe it x {but not up the doors x of my mothers 


y Womb, nor hid forrow from mine eyes z. 

x To wit, thenight or the day : to which thoſe rhings are aſcri- 
bed which were done by others in them, as is frequentin Poetical 
Writings, ſuch as this is Or,he, :. e- God:whom in modeity and Re. 
verence he forbears to name. Yer he doth nor curſe God for his 
Birth, as the Devil preſaged, but only wiſherch that the day of his 
Birth might have manifeſt CharaQers of a Curſe impreſſed upon it. 
x That it might either never have conceived me, or at leaſt never 
have brought meforth. y Which word is here ficly ſupplied, both 
out of Ch. 1. 21. and 31. 18 where ir is expreſſed ; and by Compare 
ing other places where it is neceſfarly :o be underſtood, rhough the 
Womb only be mentioned, as Fob 10. 19. Pſal. 58.3. 1/a.48: 8. Jo: r. 

5. x Becauſe it did not keep me from entring into this miſerable 

Life, and ſeeing, 7. e. feeling, or experiencing, ( as that word is oft 

uſed ) rhoſe bitter ſorrows under which I now groan. ; 

1r Why died I not from the Womb « ? Why didI not 

give upthe Ghoſt when I came out of the Belly b ? 

4 i.e, As ſaon as everT was born or come out of the Womb. b The 

ſame thing expreſſed in other words, which is an Elegancy uſual 

both in the Hebrew, and in other Languages. 


12 Why did the knees prevent me c? or why the 
breaſts that I ſhou!d ſuck 4 ? 


c Why did the Midwife or Nurſe receive me and lay me upon 
her knees, and did not ſuffer me tro fallupon the tare ground, and 
there to lie in anegle&ed and forlorn condirion;till merciful Death 
had taken me out of this miſerxbleWorld into which the cruel! kind- 
neſs of my Mother and Midwife hath betrayed me? 4 Why did the 
Breaſts prevent me) which may be fitly underſtood our of the former 
Members ) to wit, from pzriſhing through hunger,or ſupply me chat 
T ſhould have what zo ſuck? Seing my Mother had nor a miſcarrying 
Wr-mb, bur did unhappily bring me forth, why had ſhe not 4 
Breaſts? Or,why were there uy Breaſts for me which I might ſuck? 
Thus Jo5 moſt unthankfully and unworthily deſpiſeth and traduc- 
eth theſe wonderful and {ingular Mercies ofGod towards poor help- 
leſs Infants, becauſe of the preſent Inconveniences, which he had by 
means of them. 


13 For now ſhould Thave lien ſtill, and been 
I ſhould have ſlept ; then hadT been art reff. 


e Free from all tioſe tormenrs of my Body and Mind which now 

oppreſs me. _ 

14 With kings fand counſellors of the earth, which 

* built deſolate places for themſelves g : 

f 1 hadthen been as happy as the proudeſt Monarchs, who afeer 
all their great Archievments and Enjoyments, go down ints their 
Graves where I alſo ſhou!d have been ſweetly repoled. g Which, 
ro ſhew their great Wealthand Power, or to leave bebind them a 
glorious Name, rebuilt ruinous Cities, or built new Cities and Pala- 


ces, and other Monuments, in places where before there was meer 
ſolitude and waſteneſs. 


15 Or withprinces that had gold, who filled their 
houſes. with ſilver. 

16 Or * as an hidden 4 untimely birth ; I had not 
been & : as Infants which never ſaw lighe /. 


h Undiſcerned and unregarded.:s Born before the due time,8&there. 
fore extin&. & To wit, in the Land' of the Living, of which he 


quiet e, 


*Ch.15.28 


*Pla.s8;8, 


are brim full of forrow, and always ready to pour out their Cries 


here ſpeaketh. / Being ſtifled and dead before they were born. 
4D 2 17 There 


Chap. V+ 


Mu 
EEG mere Di BIT nn be ES 


EatESEzRE. a 
= 


it look for light but have nonez, neither ler it ſee * the * pq, ,3, 

Eye-lids of 

5 Let the Stars, which are the Glory and Beauty ofthe _ to Fhe merning 
C 


DC ome -= = - - 


_—_= _— 


a. een 
-_ Wn 


J 


17 There #m the wicked ceaſe from troubling »: and 


#Heb.wes there the Þ weary be at reſt », 

_ Mm 1. e. In the + od which though not expreſſed, yer is clearly 
frength. * 5mplied in the foregoing Verſes. 
| blecs of the World ceaſe from all thoſe Vexations,Rapines,and Mur- 
' ders, which here they procured: 0 Thoſe who were here moleſted 
' and tiredout with their Tyrannies, now quietly ſleep with them, 


or by them. 
18 There the priſoners reſt together p ; they hear not 


the voice of the oppreſſor 9. : 

þ i. e. One as well as another,they who were kept inthe ſtrong- 
eſt Chains.and cloſeſt Priſons,and condemned to the molt hard and 
miſerable ſlavery,reſt as well as thoſe who were Captives 1n much 
better Circumſtances: Or, in like manner,(as this word oft ſignifies) 
as thoſe Oppreſſors and opprefſed do. q Or, ExaFor, or Tastnaſter, 
who urgeth and forceth them by cruel Threatnings and Stripes, tO 
greater diligence in the Works to which they are condemned. vee 
Exod. 3. 7. and 5. 6, 10, 13. Jeb meddles not here with their eter- 
nal ſtate after Death, or the ſentence and judgement of God againſt 
wicked men, of which he ſpeaks hereafter, bur only ſpeaks of their 
freedom from worldly troubles, which is the only matter of his 

Complaint and preſent Diſcourſe. 
*Or,#there . 19 The ſmall and great r 


the (ame. is free from his maſter. ; 6 
r 7. e. Perſons ofall Qualities and Conditions, whether higher 
or lower. 5 In the ſame place and ſtare,all thoſe kinds of diſtinCQti- 
ens and differences being for ever aboliſhed. 2 : 
20 Wherefore is light given 7 to him that 1s in mi- 


ſery, and life unto the bitter i» ſoul « ? | 

5 Heb. Wherefore ( for what cauſe,or uſe,or good ) doth he, (7. «, 
God, though he forbear to name him, our of thar holy Fear and 
Reverence which till he retained towards him ) give Light, cither 
the Light of the Sun, which the Living only behold, Eccle/. 6. 5. 
and 7. 11. Or. the Light of Life, as may ſeem borh by the next 
words,and by comparing Pſal. 56- 13. and becauſt death is off ſer 
forth by the name of Darkneſs, as Life by the name of Light. Theſe 
areſtrong Expoſtulations wich God, and quarrelling with his Pro» 
vidence, and with his Bleſſings ; but we muſt confider, that Job 
was but a man, and a man of like Paſſions and Infirmities with 0- 
ther men, and now in grievous Agonies, being not only under 
moſt violent and yet continual torments of Body, but aJſo under 
great diſquietments of Mind,and the deep ſenſe of Gods diſplea- 
ture, and was alſo left to himſelf, that he might ſee what was in his 
Heart, and that all ſucceeding Ages might have in him an illuſtri- 
ous Example of Mans Infirmity, and the neceſſity of Gods Grace 


| Chap. HI. 


* zre there 5,and the ſervant 


to help them in time of need. And therefore it is no wonder if 


kis Paſſions boil up and break forth in ſome indecent and ſinful Ex- 


prefſions. « Unto ſuch to whom Life it ſelf is very birter and bur- 


denſome. Why doth he obtrude his Favours upon thoſe who abe 
hor them? _ - 


21 Which + long for death, but it cometh not,and dig 


THeb wai? for it x more than for hid treaſures. 
Rerv.9-6. _ ;, e. Deſireand pray for it with as much earneſtneſs as men dig 
for Treaſure : But it is obſervable, that Jeb durſt not Jay violent 
hands upon himſelf, nor do any thing to haſten or procure his 
Death; but notwirhſtanding all his Miſeries and Complaints, he was 
contented to wait all the days of his appointed time, till his change 
came, Ch, 14+ 14. ; 
-' 22: Which rejoyce exceedingly, and are glad when 
they can find the grave. 4 
23 VVhy is light giveny to a man whoſe way is hid z, 
| * and whom Goed hath hedged in 4. 
Ch.19'8s. , Theſe words are conveniently ſupplied out of v,20.where they 
Lam:3:7- are,all the following words hitherto being joyned in conſtruction 
and ſenſe with them. z To wit, from him ; who knows nor bis 
way, i. e. which way to turn himſelf,what courſe te take to com+ 
fort himſelf in his Miſeries,or to get our of them, what method to 
uſe to pleaſe and reconcile that God who is fo angry with him,ſeing 
his ſincere and exa& Pietys to which God is witneſs, doth nor fatif» 
fie him,or what the end of theſe Calamities will be.a Not with a 
Hedge of Defence, like that Ch. 1. 10. but of Offence and Reſtraint; 
z.e. whom God hath put as it were in a Priſon or Pond,or Jike Cat- 
tel in Grounds incloſed with an high 2ad ftrong Hedge, over or 
through which they cannot get,ſo that he can ſee no way nor poſ- 
ſibility to eſcape, bur all refuge fails him- s 
- 24 For my ſighing cometh + before I eat 6, and my 
=_” roarings e are poured out like the waters 4. 
meats eat; orrather,all the time whilſt I am eating ( forſo this Phrale is 
uſed, Plal: 72: 5. Before the face of the Sun, Oc. that 1s, as we tran- 


ſhte it, aslong as the Sun endureth ) I fall into bitter Paſſions of figh- ; 


ing and weeping, partly becauſe my Neceſſity and Duty obligerh me 
to eat, and ſo to ſupport this wretched Life, which I long to loſe 
and principally becauſe of my uninterrupted Pains of Body and 
Hortors of Mind, which mix themſelves with my very Meat, and 


do not afford me one quiet moment. Compare Pſal. 102. g. c 1.e.} 


My loud outeries, more befitting a Lion than a Man, which yet ex- 
tremity of grief forceth from me Compare P/al:22: !.and 32:3: di.e, 
With great abundance,and irreſiſtible violence, and inceſſant conti- 
nuance, as Waters flow in a River, or when they break the Banks 

and-overflow the ground. 
25For e || the thing which I greatly feared is come u- 
ponme f, and that which I was afraid of is come unto 
me. | 
...e This is another Reaſon why he is weary of his Life, and why 
he repents thar ever he was born, becauſe he never enjoyed any ſo- 
lid and ſecure Comforr.. f Heb. 7 feared a Fggr, ( 7.e. a danger or 
miſchief in one kind or other, the” Att being here put for the Ob- 
je&,as Joy and Love are oft pur for the things rejoyced in, or loved, 
and here F-ar for the thing feared, Or, 1 feared with fear, i.e. Ifear- 
« -. - -144 greatly ) and it came. Even in the time ofmy Peace and Profferi- 
 ** ty, I was tull of Fears, conſidering the variety of Gods Provid- 
ences; the courſe and chapgeableneſs of this vain World, the Infir- 


feared a 
fear,and it 
came upon 
Re, 


» The great oppreflors and trou- 


 b Heb. Before the face of my bread, i e. either when I am going to 


O B. Clap. ly 
mities and Contingencies of humane Nature and Life, Gods Juſtice | 
and the ſinfulneſs of all Mankind. And theſe Fears of mine were nor 
in Vain, but are juſtified by my preſent CaJamities. So that I have 
never enjoyed any ſound Tranquility fince I was born ; and there. 
fore it hath not been worth my while to live,ſince all my days haye 
been evil, and full of vexaticnand tozinent, either by the fear of 
Milſceries, or by the ſufferance of them. 

26 I was not in ſafety, neither had I reſt,neither was 


I quiet g, yet trouble came 5, 

£ Three Expreſſions noting the ſame thing, which alſo was figni. 
fied in the next foregoing Verſe, to wit, that evenin his proſper- 
ous days, he never wasſecure or at reſt from the torment of Fear & 
Anxiety. Others, I did not misbehave my {e&If in Proſperity, abu. 
ſing it by Preſumption,and Security and Voluptuouſneſs, whereby 
I might have provoked God thus to afflict me;bur I lived ſoberly and 
and circumſpe@ly, walking humbly with God,and working out my 
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, litcle expeQting that God would 
be ſo fierce an Enemy againſt me. kh Heb. 4nd trouble came as I fear. 
ed it wou!d. So between Fear and Calamity my whole Life hath 
been miſerable, andI had reaſon to repent of ir. 


CHAP. IV. 


Eliphaz ſpeaketh though it will grieve Job, 1, 2. Job had inflrufted ay 
ſtrewgthened others in their ſorrows, but now fainted himſelf,3-- 5.Eliphaz 
reproacheth him with hu confidence in his nprightneſs, which he now ſuſpe8. 
eth: for that Gods judgements were not againft the righteous, but the wick. 


&1, 6 11. His fearful viſions, 12 =— 16, The righteouly 
God : the Angels charged with folly: the Vanity of man, \— wary u 


: | TP Eliphaz the Temanite « anſwered, 
aid 
a Who ſpake firſt, becauſe poſſibly he was the eldeſt, or of great- 
eſt Authority or Zeal. 
2 If we aſlay * to commune with thee, wilt thou 
be grieved þ ? but F who can with-hold himſelf from, 


ſpeaking c? THeb.who 
| G6Or,( without a Note of Interrogation ) thou wilt be grieved.Onr can refrain 
' words will undoubredly vex thee, and not comfort thee, as we in- from wird; 
' tended and deſired to do. We muſt not uſe wordsof Comfort, but 
of ſharp Reproof, which will be irkſome ts thee: and this makes me 
; deſire to be ſilent, if it were poſſible. c When he hears ſuch unres- 
: ſonable and ungedly words coming from ſuch a perſon as thou art, 
; Whereby rhou doſt accuſe thy Maker, and reproach his Providence, 
and contemn his Bleflings. No man who hath any reſpe& ro God, 
. Or Iove to thee, can forbear reproving thee. 
' 3 Behold, thou haſt inftruted many 4,and thou haſt 
ſtrengthened the weak hands e. 
4 Teaching them thoſe Leſſons which thou haſt not learned and 
wileſt notpraGtiſe, to wit,patiently to bear afflictions,and to ſubmit 
to Gods Will and Providence in all things, which thou moſt ſhame. Y 
, Fully refuſeſt rodo. e By adminiſtring Supperts and Comforts and 
: ———_ to ſuch as were unable to bear their Burdens, or todo their 
| Duty. | 
| 4Thy words have upholden him that was falling f,and 
thou haſt ſtrengchened Þ the feeble knees g. Th 
f Ready to ſink under their preſſures, or to fall from God, or bowing 
into ſin, ( as that wordis uſed, 1 Cer, 10. 12. Gal. 6. 2. and elſe. ener 
where) through deſpondency and diſtruſt of Gods Providence and _ 
Promiſe, or through Impatience. g Such as were weak hearted and 
fainting under their Trials. See 1/a. 35. 3. Dan. 5. 6. Heb. 12. 12. 


{ 5 But nowit his come upon thee,and thou fainteſt ;, 
1t toncheth thee & and thou art troubled. 

þ i: e: The evil whichthou didſt fear, Chap: 3: 25. and which was 
come ypon thoſe whom thou didſt ſo comfort. « Thou alloweſt in 
thy ſelf what thou wouldeſt not bear in others. Whar in them was 
a Vice,in thee it ſeems. is become a Virtue. Thou art wiſe for 
Others, but not for thy ſelf ; a good Phyſician to cure others, bur 
not thy ſelf ; quick ſighred ro ſee the faults of others, bur blind to 
thine own. k It is now come to be thine own caſe. | 


6 Is not this thy fear,thy confidence, the uprightneſs 
of thy ways, and thy hope &? 

: & So the Senſe is, We now plainly ſee what was the Nature and 
Complexion of :hy Fear of God, thy Confidence in him, the uprightneſs 
of thy ways, andthy Hope in Gods Mercy, which thou didſt make 

: ſhew and boaſt of, and tor which thou waſt become ſo famous. 'Thy 

{ preſent carriage diſcovereth to thy ſelfand others, that it was but 

; meer talk andappearance, and there was nothing ſound and fin« 

cere in it. Inthy proſperity ir was eaſie to make a ſplendid pro- 

feſſion of Religion ; but men are beſt known by affliftion, and this 
now ſfhewethof what Meral thou art made: For now thou doſt caſt 
off thy Fear of God, and ali thy Confidence and Hope in him, and 
haſt ler go that Integrity of thy ways, which hitherto thou gidſt 
ſeem to hold faſt ; whereas true Piery is uniform, and conſtant, 


and 


F Heb. s 


Heb: the 


: | and ſtedfaſt in all varieries of Conditions, and under all Trials and 


| Temprations, But this Tranſlation removes the and from its pro 
| per place, and changeth the order of the Words, which is this in 
the Hebrew, thy hope, and the uprightneſs of thy ways, which words 
j may be reſtored to their own order, and with that variation our 
{ Tranſlation may ſtand, and this ſeems to be the true ſenſe. And ſo 
{ here are four diſtin&t Queſtions, Is net this thy Fear ? - Is net this thy 
Confidence * Is not this thy Hope? Is net this the uprightneſs of thy ways? , 
But others make only two Queſtions and render the words either 
thus ; Is not ( or rather, Was no? ) thy Fear ( of God ) thy Confidence? 
And the uprightn:(s of thy way thy Hope ? i e. Did not thy Fear of 
God, and the Integrity of thy Life, of which thou didſt make ſuch 
eminent Profeſſion, proceed only from the love of thy ſelf, and of 
this preſent World ? And from thy Confidence and Hope that God 
would bleſs and proſper theefor it? For now when God with- 
draws his Favour and Blefſings from thee,thy Religion is vaniſhed, 
and thou haſt caſt off all Fear and Reverence of God, as thy 1mpi- 
.ous Speeches fkew. Or thus : Would nt thy Fear be thy Confidence, 
| and the uprightneſs of thy ways thy hope? i. e. If theu hadſt indeed 
| that Fear and Integrity to which thou pretendeſft, it would give thee 
good ground of Hope and Confidence in the midſt of all thy Diſtreſles, 


and thou woulgſt not ſo faintand finkurder thy Calamaties as _ 
; Tag 


Hof: 


i Heh 
balth 


L ly 


'L | O 
thap. IV. | 8 
| - thou dot, for want of a ſolid foundation of true Piety, Burt bor" 
; th:ſe Tranſitions, beſides orher Inconventencies, ſtumble ar the 
ſam? ſtene, and pervert the order of the words in the Hebrew Text, 
of which ſee before ; which is nor to beallowed without ſome kind 
of necefſity, which is not in this caſe. : 

7 Remember, I pray thee/,who ever periſhed »» be- 
ing innocent s ? or where were the righteous cut offo > 

{ Give me one example hereof out of all thy experience or 
Reading. i.e. Was fo utterly undone, as thou art, ſo miſerably 
aflifted by ſuch unparallel'd and various Judgments from God and 
Men, all coafpiring againſt thee. » Who had net by his wicked- 
neſs provoked ſo merciful a God to dothat which is ſo unuſual, 
& in ſome ſort unpleaſing to himſelf, Therefore thou art guilcy of 
ſome great, though ſecrer, Crimes, and thy ſin hath now found thee 
our, and hath brought down theſe ſtupendious Plagues upon thee. 
o By the Sicle of Divine Vengeance before his time, which is 
like to be thy caſe. His judgment herein was raſh and falſe; bur nor 
without ſome appearance of truth ; For God had made many Pro- 
miſes, not only of ſpiritual and eternal, bur alſo of temporal Blef- 
ſinzs, to all chat ſhould faithfully ſerve and obey him, which ac- 
cordingly hedid from time totime confer upon them, as we ſee by 
the cxamples of Noah, Lot, Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacob, and doubr- 
leſs many others which had lived in or before their days. And this 
was Gods uſual method under allthe times of the Old Teftament,as 
we ſce by the People of 1ſrael, who were generally either in an hap- 
py and flouriſhing, or in an afflicted and miſerable ſtare, accor- 
ding to their Obedience to Ged,or their Apoſtacy from him. And 
therefore it is notſtrange thar they fell into this miſtake: But al- 
lowing for this miſtake,and the conſequence of it, his uncharitable 
Opinion of Job, the method which he uſerh with Job 15 commenda- 
ble, and to be imitated by others in their dealing with perſons in 
ſickneſs or affli&tion ; For he doth nor flatter him 1n his Sins. nor 
immediately and unſcaſonably apply Comforts ro him, bur endea- 
vours to convince him of his Re and to bring hin to Repenrance, 
as the only regular way to his Remedy. FS, 

8Even as I haveſeen p,* they that plough iniquity, 


and ſow wickedneſs q, reap the ſame 7 

p As thou haſt never ſeen any Example of a righteous man cut 
off, ſo on the contrary I have ſeen many Examples of wicked men 
cut off for their wickedneſs. Or, 4s far as 1 have obſerved : Or, Bur 
as I have ſeen or experienced. q They that deſfigned!y and induſtri. 
ouſly work wick-dneſs, firſt plotting and preparing themſelves for 
it, and then continuing to purſue and execute it, as Husbandmen 
firſt plow vp and prepare the ground, and then caſt in the Seed. 
Compare Prov. 22: 8: Hoſ. 103 13:7 #. e. Iniquity, Or ſuch Trouble or 
Tnjury ( for ſo alſo the Hebrew word, Aven, ſignifies ) as they cauſe 
to others. Or,the fruir of their Iniquity,the juſt Recompence and 
Puniſhmeat of ir, which is ofc called Sin or Iniquity,as Geneqs7;Numb, 
tThat is, 123 21: and 16: 26 and 32; 23; Compare Gal. 6: 7,8; 
hh aw 9g By the blaſt of God s they periſh, and F by the 


z, 35 Ia: breath of his noſtrils are they conſumed. 

pod <. - To wit. Of his Noſtrils, as it here follows ; 7.e. by his Anger, 

Q 15% which in Men ſhews it ſelf, in the Noſtrils, by hor and frequent 

L 13" Breathings there,anu therefore by an Anthropopathy is aſcribed to 

Ic 3% God: by a ſecrer and oft undiſcerned,* but mighty and powerful 
E+ Judgment of God, by which they are blaſted and blown away as 

PW... Chaff by the Wind, as the Phrale 1s, Pſal. nt. : 

tin, 10 Theroaring of * the Lion, and the voice of the 

tPl.;8: 6: fierce Lion F,” and + the teeth of the young Lions are 


broken «. 

£ Underſtand waniſheth, or periſhech, out ofv. 9: or, #reſirained,or 
ſuppreſſed,as may be gathered out of the following branch of this 
Verſe. « Which is true lirerally ; the Lions when taken having 
moſt commonly rheir T -eth broken,as ancient and madern Writers 
relate. But rhisis here myſtically meanr of wicked and powerful 
Tyrants, who are ofc and fitly compared to Lions, Exek 32: 2. and 
38: 13:2 7.m 4' 173 who though fora time they perſecure and op- 
preſs other men,yer in due time they are reſtrained, and broken, 
and cruſhed in pieces by the mighty Power of God appearing a- 
gainſt them in ſomeeminent Judgments. Poſſibly he may ſecret- 
ly accuſe 50b, or his Children, or both, that being perſons of great 
wealth and power in thoſe parts, they had wickedly abuſed ir to 
ruine their Neighbours, and thefore were juſtly cut off 


I1The old Lion peciſheth for lack of prey x, and the 


ſtout lions whelps are (cattered abroad y. 
_* Becauſe they cannor go abroad to ſeek ir, and their young ones 
either cannot find,or do not bring it rothem. See Pſal. 59: 14: 15: 
and 199: ro: y Gone from their Dens ſeveral ways to hunt for prey, 
f Heb, by and can find none, 
bukh, 12 Now z a thing a was|| ſecretly brought to me 6, 
and mine ear received c a little thereof 4. 

z Heb. And, or, Moreover, I will further convince thee by a Vi- 
ſion which I 12d relating to ſuch matcers as theſe. That here fol- 
lows a Relation of a Viſion is apparent from the pun&ual deſcrip- 
tion of all irs Circumſtances. To think as ſome do, that this was 
bur a Fiftion and Artifice which Eliphaz uſed,that his words mighr 
have more authority wit? Fob ; or that this was a Diabolical Delu- 
ſion ſeems to be both uncharitable and unreaſonable, partly becauſe 
Eliphaz, though under a miſtake concerning Jeb's caſe, was doubt 


{ *Pal.7:14: 
Prov:22:8: 
: Hof: 10413; 


himſelfa Lyar for Job's convittion ; - and partly from the matter of 


the Nzvil, bur holy and agreeable to the Divine Majeſty and Puri- 
ty,and uſeful for mens Sroliics, and Humiliation and Reforma- 
tion, Ir was thereforea Divine Viſion, which in that Age and 
Stare of the Church, before rhe holy Scriptures were written, was 
the uſual way of God's diſcovery of his Md t>tieſe that ſought 
to him. a Heb. A word, to wit, from God, av Prov. 13: 13: a Do- 
Qrine or-Meſſage. b Heb. was ſtoln, or brought by ſtealth into me, 
7” e. privately and ſecrerly, as the Word of God uſed to come to 
the Prophers, being ſpoken in their Ear, as it was to Samnel, 1 Sam. 
9; 15: and the like rt Moſes, ſo as Pharaoh, though preſear. could 


ſecret Whiſper. This is oppoſed -ro the more publick delivery of 
(zod's Word by tbe Prophets to rhe People, which was done by 


_ this Viſion, which is no way ſuitable ro the Nature or Deſigns of | - 


not hear nor obſerve ir, Exod. 11: 1: with a low and {till voice, a 


£rymg algnd, Iſa. 58:1; 63.8. I heard. dOr, » parcel thereof, i, e\- 


B. 4 Chap. I 


of God's Word, not of chat particular Word which God had now 
delivered to Eliphaz, which doubtleſs God would fo ſpeak,thar he k 
rs whom he directed his Speech, mighr hear ir all, and Eliphaz cer- 20 
tainly would be as careful] notto lote a SylJable of ir; but a parcel | 
of God's Word in general,which this indeed was: And withal, this 
may be a modeſt and humble expreſſion, ariting from a deep lenſe 
of his own inlirmity, and the ſmall meaſure of bis knowledge of 
Divine things, whereof he knew only ſome little fragments and 
parcels, as Pazl faid, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 13:9. As ifhe had 
t2id, Many Idoubrt nothave more familiar acquintance with God, & 
more full Revelations from God than I can pretendrto,bur a little of 
that Treaſure God hath been pleated ro impart to me. : 

12 * In thoughts e from the viſions of the night f, 
when deep ſleep fallech on men F. 

e In the midſt of my Thoughts, or, by reaſon ofmy Thoughts, 
my perplexing Thoughts. The word properly ſignifies a branch, 
and thence a Thought, as 1 Kings 18: 21; which proceeds from the 
Mind, as Branches from a Tree,and a perplexing Thought, which is 
entangled like the Branches of a Tree. Theſe Thoughts were the 
occaſion of the following Fear. f This may belong either to the 
Thoughts laft mentioned, or to the Fear following 3 both which did 
ariſe om the Y.ſions of the,Night, z. e. fiom the great importance and 
the terribleneſs, of ſuch Viſions, whereof probably he had former 
Experience, and now had an expe&ation of another of them which 
God had raiſed and wrought in him, to prepare him the better for 
the reception of it. Yiſins differed from Dreams herein, that God 
imparted his Mind to a Man in Dreams when he was aſleep, bur in 
Viſffens, when they were awake. And theſe Yiſons ſometimes happen 
by day,as Luke 1: 22; As 16: 17: and 26: 19: but moſt frequently 
by night, whence we read of Yiſfon, or Viſions of the Night, as Gen.46: 
2; Job 20:8; and 33: 15. And ſuch this was which made ir the 
more terrible. f In thedead of the Night, when Men uſually are 
in a deep ſleep ; though Eliphaz was nor now aſleep, as appearsfrom 
the nature of a Vifion, and from the following words. 


*Ch:33:i5 


14 Fear f came upon me &, and trembling, which TIER 
made || all my bones to ſhake, || Heb«rhe 


& Either cauſed by the apparition following : or ſent by God to multitude 
humble him,and to prepare him far the more diligent attention to, of my 
revVerent reception of, and ready compliance with the Divine Meſ- bones. 
ſage. 

15 Then ba ſpirit ; paſſed before my face, the hair 
of my fleſh & ſtood up /. 


hb Heb. And, or, Fr, as this Particle is oft uſed. So this was the 
reaſon of the foregoing Thoughts and Fear, i An Angel in ſome 
viſible ſhape, otherwiſe he cen]d not have diſcerned it, ner would 
have been affrighted at it. kz7.e. Ofmy Body, as Feſb is taken,Gen. 
2:24; Pjal. 16:9: and 119: 120, 1 Through that exceflive horrour 
cauſed by ſo glorious, unuſual,and terrible a Preſence. Which God 
uſed to excite in Men upon ſuch occaſions to convince them, that 
it was ——— Imagination cr Illuſion, but a real Viſion and Re- 
velation, and'thar from God. 


IG It ſtood ſtill », but T could not diſcern the 
form thereof » : an image was before mine eyes o ;+Or, 1 
T there was ſilence p, and I heard a voice, ſaging, heard a 
» Having paſſed by him to and again he made a ſtand, as one /## voice. 
that had ſome buſineſs with him, and addreſſed himſelf ro ſpeak to 
him.» To wit, exattly and diſtia&ly, ſo as co know what or who it 
was. I ſaw ſome corperal or viſible Reſemblance, though in a 
conſuſed manner. p The Spirit, which poſlibly had made ſome 
noiſe with his motion, now ſtanding ſtill made no noiſe , all other 
perſons and things about me were fileat,and I alſokept in my Voice 
and Breath, as much asI could, tharT might diſtinttly hear what I 
perceived the Spirit was ſpeaking to me, In the Hebew, the words 
run thus, Silence and 8 Voicey ( i: e a ſilent, or ſtill,or low voice, by 
a vety common figure, called Hendiadi ) 1 heard. | 
17 Shal mortal man be more juſt chan God q? ſhall 

a many be more pure than his maker s ? | 

9 The ſenſe is, Thou, O Jo, doſt preſumpruouſly accuſe God 
for dealing harſhly and unrighteouſly with thee,in ſending thee in- 
to the Wor'd upon ſuch hard terms, and puniſhing an innocent and 
righreous man with ſuch unparalleY'd ſeverity, bur « onfider things 
calmly within thy ſelf, IfG-d and thou come to a Trial beforeany 
equa} Judge, canſt thou think that thou wilſt go away juſtified, and 
the great God ſhall be condemacd; No righteous man will puniſh 
another without cauſe,or more than he deſerves ; and therefore if 
God do ſo with thee, as thy words imply, he is leſs juſt than a man : 
which is blaſphemous and abſurd to imagine. » A great & mighty 
man, asthis word ſignifies, a man eminent for Wiſdom, or Fu- 
ſtice, or power, or any other Perf-&ions,ſuch as thou art thought 
by thy ſelfor others to be; who therefore might expe& more fa- 
vour thanapoor miſerable and contemprib'e man, which the word, 
ensſch, uſed in the former Branch, ſignifies, So he anticipates this 
ObjeRion which Job might make. 5 An unanſwerable Argument 
againſt Job, He made thee, and that for himſelf and his own Gle- 
ry, and therefore hath an unqueſtionable right to deal with thee: 
and diſpoſe of thee, the Work of his Hands, as he ſees fit Wo to 
him that frriveth with his maker, Iſa. 45: 9. Beſides, he made man- 
juſt and pure, if a man have any thing of Juſtice or Purity in him 
it is derived from God the undoudted and only fountain of it, and 


leſsa wiſe and good man, and therefore wou'd not needlefly make f therefore irmuſt neceſſarily be in God in a far more eminent de. 


gree. 


18 Behold z, he * put no truſt in his ſervants « : 
a gy” b) 
|| and his angels he charged with folly x : 

; This deſervesthy ſerious confideratiori. Theſe and the follow- 
ing words ſeem to be the words of Eliphaz, explaning the former 
Vikon, and applying it to Job's Caſe, and enforcing it by further 
Arguments: «7.e. In his Angels,as appears both by the next words 
of this Verſe, where they ate called by way of Explication and Re- 
ſtriion, his Azgels ; and by the next Verſe where men are oppoſed 
ro them They are called his Servants by way of Eminency, that 
general Name being here appropriated to the chief of the kind, as 
is very uſual in all Authors in like caſes; and withal to intimate 
that Soveraign Dominion which the great God hath over the glori. 
ous Angels, and much _ over Men, by victue whereof he hath 
4 3 4:2 


* Chis 15. 
and 25:4; 
2 Pet.2: 45; 
|. Or, ot in 
&is Angels 
in whom 


he Put light, 


hap, IV. @ = 

unoneſtionable Authority to treat them according to his goo 

—. And theſe God is ſaid to put no :wſt in, becauſe he could 

not be confident that they, if left to themſelves, and deſtitute of 
the Succours of his Power and Grace, would continue to be loyal, 
and faithful, and ſerviceable to him. and would not revolt from 
him, as ſome of their Brethren had done. And for this cauſe God 
was pleaſed, after ſoine time of Trial, to give ſome ſpecial and fur- 
ther Grace, either by Chriſt or otherwiſe, whereby they ſhould be 
infallibly confirmed in the ſtate of Grace and Felicity. x Or, with 
Vanity: i. e, He diſcerned Folly and Vanity in the Angelical Na- 
tures,when he had firſt made them; which although he ſaw and pro- 
nounced them, no leſs than the viſible Creatures, Ger. 1-to be wery 
good in themſelves, and free from the leaſt degree or tinture of fin ; 
yet comparing them with himſelf, and conſidering them in them- 
ſelves alone, he ſaw ſomething of Folly and Vanity in their very Na- 
tures, becauſe they were Creatures, and therefore ſubje& to mani- 
fold changes, and, among others, to fall from God, or into ſin; as 
it appeared by the ſad experience of ſome of | them. Seing there- 
fore the Angels, which ſo far exceed Mankind in Wiſdom, and 

Strength, and Purity, and Juſtice, and all other PerfeHions,do fall 

incomparably ſhort of God in theſe things, it is moſt abſurd as well 

as impious,to think that Man is more juſt or pure than God,as was 
faid, v, 17: and as thou, O Job, ſeemeſt to furmiſes Others, Nor 

( Heb. And not ; the negative Particle being repeated out of the 

former branch of the Verſe, as it is Pſal. g: 18; Prov. 17; 26. and 

elſewhere, ) in his Angels, in whom ( both which Particles are fre- 
quently underſtood. as hath been proved before) he pur Light,or Splers 
dor,to wit, fingular Wiſdom,and Purity,beyond what he put in Man. 

19 How much lefs y on them = that dwell in hou- 

% ſes of clay s, whoſe foundation js in the duſt 5, hich 

I are cruſhed c before the moth 4 ? 

F y Underſtand, doth he put truſt in them, 8c. 
underſtand, deth he charge folly on them, &c. Either of theſe ſupple- 
ments are natural and caſie, being ferched out of the former Verſe, 
and neceſſary to make the ſenſe compleat. The ſenſe is, what ſtrange 

reſumption then is it for a fooliſh and mortal man to pretend to 
an higher Priviledge than the Angels do,to make himſelf more juſt 
than God, or to exalt himſelf above or againſt God, as thou oſt ? 
z i.e. On men, as it follows, who though they. have 1mmorta) 
Spirits, yet thoſe Spirits dwell in mortal Bodies, which are great 
Debaſements, and Clogs, and Encumbrances, and Snares to them ; 
and which are here called Houſes,Cbecauſe they are the Receptacles 
of the Soul, and the places of its ſettled and continual abode ) and 
Houſes of Clay, and Earthly Houſes, 2 Cir: 5;1; partly becauſe they 
were made of Clay, or Earth, Gen. 2: 7: 1 Cor: 15: 47; and partly to 
note their great frailty and mutability ; whereas the Angels are 
free Spirits, onconfined to ſuch Carkaſſes,and dwell in celeſtial,and 
glorious, and everlaſting Manſions. bWhoſe very Foundation, no leſs 
thanthe reſt of the Building, i» the duſt; who as they dwell in 
Duſt and Clay, ſo they had their Foundation or Original from it, 
and they muſt return to ir, Eceleſ. 12: 7. And, asto their Bodies, 
lye down and fleep in it, Da. 124 2; as in his long home, Eccleſ. 12: 5: 
and the only continual City which he hath in the World. «c Heb. 
they cruſh them, 3. e. they are or will be cruſhed. The Attive Verb 
uſed imperſonally, as icis chap. 7: 3: and 34: 20! Prov. 6: 30: Luke 
12: 20. 4d 1. & Sooner than a Moth is cruſhed, which is eaſily don: 
by a gentle touch of the Finger- An Hyperbolical expreſſion So 
the Hebrew word, {phnz, commonly ſignifying place, doth here 
note time, as it is uſed, Gen. 27: 7: and 29: 26: and 36: 31: Or, at 
the face, or appearance of # Moth. No Creature is ſo weak and con- 
temptible, butone time or other it may have the Body of Min in 
Its power, as the Worms, the Moths Couſin-Germans, have in the 
Grave, But he inſtancerh in a Moth rather than a Worm, becauſe 
It is the weaker of the two, and bzcauſe ir better agrees with the 
ſimilitude of anHouſe,in which Moths commonly are more frequenr, 
and powerful, and miſchievous, than Worms, How then canft 
thou think, O Jeb, to conrend with thy Maker, that muſt become 
a Prey to ſuch ſmall and impotent Creatures - : 
+Heb.bea. , 29 They are } deſtroyed from morning to evening e ; 
ten in pie> they periſh for ever f without any || regarding 


Ces, z 
+ Heb.put- 
ting the 
heart. 


*2Cor.s © I, 


s F. 
Spirher, 7. Speedily, between Morning and-Eveniog, like the 
Graſs; they flouriſh in the Morning,and in the Evening are cut off, 
Pal. 90: 5, 6- Orrather 2. Al the day long, asthe Phraſe is, 2 Cor 
11: 25 There is not a moment wherein Man 15 nor ſinking and 
drawing on towards Death and Corruption. f As to haman ap- 
pearance and the courſe of Nature, as many ſuch like paſſages arc 
to be underſtood In this Book; or in Reference to this preſent anc 
worldly Life, which when once loſt is never recovered, Jeb 16: 22: 
Pſal. 39:13: g Heb. without putting the Heart to it, the word 
Heart being underſtood here, as alſo chap» 23. 6, and 34: 23; 1a. 
41; 20: as may appear by comparing 1 Sam. 9: 20: 2 Sam, 18: 3: 
Iſa. 41. 22.and 57: 1. where the ſame Phraſe is uſed, and the word 
Heart expreſſed. The meaning is either,t: Yet few or no men tharſur- 
vive them lay it to heart as they ſhould de.Or, 2. They periſh beſide 
the expeQation of all men. when beth themſelves and others 
thoughttheir Mountain was ſo ſtrong, that it could not be removed 
Or rather, 3. Fhis is ſo common a thing for all men, though never 
ſohigh and great, toperiſh in this manner, that no man heeds it, 
bur paſſeth it by as a general accident not worthy of obſervation. 
Orh. No man procuring or furthering it ; Heb. without any mans pur. 
zing the hand to it, z. e. They periſh of themſelves withour any vi 
olent hand. : 
*PC39:13i, 27 * Doth not their excellency b which is in them, 
, : & Þ - 
| &49-14. £9 away #-? they * dye even without wiſdom &, 
 FOli:36122> + Whatſoever is really or by common eſtimation excellent in 
| Men; all their Natural, and Moral, an Civil Accompliſhments, as 
high Birth, great Riches, Power and Wiſdom, &c. Theſe are ſo far 
from preſerving men from periſhing,as one would think they ſhould 
do,that they periſh themſelves, together with thoſe Houſes of C lay 
in which they are lodged. 7 Or, go away ( 7. e. die and periſh ax 
that Phraſe is ofc uſed, as Ger. 15: 15. Jof. 23: 14: Job. ro; 21: Pſal. 
58: 9: Eccleſ.12. 5: Math. 26: 24.) with (as Beth is oft uſed) them: it 


fools die alike, Eccleſ. 2:16: Or, 2. They never attain to perfe& 
Wiſdom, to that Wiſdom which Man once had, much leſs to that 


”-D B, 


Or, how much more,. 


doth not ſurvive them, kEicher, 1. Like Fools. Wiſe men and | 


Wiſdom which is in God,which Job conceiveth he hath ; otherwiſe 
he would not ſo boldly cenſure the Counſels and Works of God as 
unrighreous or unreaſonable, becauſe his human and narrow Capa- 
city cannot fully underſtand them. Morover,asfoly is oft pur for 
unrighteouſnets and wickedneſs ; ſo is wiſdom for juſtice and good- 
neſs; which is ſo known,'that it is needlels io prove ir ; and ſo by 
wiſdom here may be meant that perfe@ juſtice and purity, which 
Job arrogated to himſelf, and which E/phaz here denies to all men, 
V. 17, &C. | 
= i + WB. £ 
Wrath fooliſh: the wicked miſerable, 1-=-=-5. Evil cometh not by thance, 
It is natural to our condition, 6, 7, This #5 our motive 10 prayer and 
truſt in God, $8. whoſe unſearchable power and wiſdom are againſt the 
high and crafty for the relief of the puor, 9=--<+16. Their happine(s,whom 
God correfFeth, and God's gracious careef ſuch, 17-=-==27, 


All now a, if there be any b that will anſwer thee c, , 


and to which Þ of the ſaints d wilt thou || turn e 2 - ” 
a 7. e, Invite, or make proclamation ; as this wordis oft uſed,as þ Q; j,; 

. b] 

Deut. 20; 19: Judges 124 1: Fere 2: 2; and 35 12: and 7: 2: Call them ; 
all as it were by their names : conſult the whole Catalogue of them 
all ,which thou didſt ever knowor hear of. 6b To wirt,of the Saints, 
as it follows. «c7.e- Comply with thee, anſwer thy deſires or expe. 
Qtations Try if there be any one Saint that will defend or allow 
thee in theſe bold expoſtulations with God, Or, as it is in the He- 
brew, If there be any that doth anſwer thee, 1. e. whoſe Opinion or 
Diſpoſition and Carriage is anſwerable, or like to thine. So anſwer. 
ing 13 ſometimes uſed, as Prov. 27: 19; Eccleſ. 10: 19: Thou wilt 
find many foolsor wicked men, as it follows werſe 2. to anſwer or 
imitate thee in their ſpeeches and carriages,but not one ef the Saints 
like thee ; which deſerves thy ſerious confideration, and gives thee 
juſt cauſe to queſtion thine integrity: « Either 1- The Angels,who 
are ſometimes called Saints, as Job 15: 15: Dan. 8: 13: Zech, 14; 5: be- 
cauſe they are eminently and perfeQaly holy ; or r ather 2. Holy men; 
as appears both from the Word, which moſt comonly is ſo uſed ;; & 
from the oppoſition of the fool:ſh man to theſe, v. 2: and becauſe the 
example of men was more proper and efferal for Jobs ConviQion 
than of Angels, e Or, bok, look about thee, view them all, and ſee 
ifthou canſt find one like thee. l|Or jnarg. 

2 For wrath f killeth the fooliſh man g, and || enyy 4. 


h ſlayeth the ſilly one 5. 

f Either 1. The wrath of God ; or rather 2+ A Mans own 
Wrath, fretting,and impatience, and indignation ; which kils men, 
partly naturally,as it preysupon a Mans ſpirit, and waſteth him in- 
wardly, and f95 haſtens his death ; of which ſee Prov. 14; 3o: and 
17: 22. partly morally, as it prompts him to thoſe raſh, and furious, 
and wicked aQtions which may procure his death . and partly me- 
ritoriouſly, as it provoketh God to cut him off, and to bring upon 
him thoſe further and ſevere ſtrokes, which he menticns in the 
following words. g Either, 1 Therafh and incenſiderate man, 
who doth not ponder things impartially ; bur like a man mad, 
rageth againſt God, and torments himſelf and all that hear him.Or, 
2. The ungodly Man, who is frequently called a foo! in Scripture 
language, and who is here oppoſed to the Saints, v, 1: kh He taxeth 
Job, whoſpoke with great envy at thoſe that were never born, or 
were in their Graves, chap. 9: 10, 12, &c. i Properly, the Man, 
who for want of true Wiſdom,g1s ſoen deceived with falſe Opiniogs 
and Appearances, and preſent Things ; which is thy caſe, O Job ! 
The ſente of the Verſe may be this;: I perceive, O Job ! that thou 
arc full of envy at wicked men, who at preſent arc, or ſeem to be 
'n an happier condition than thorvgand of wrath againſt Goc,'vho de- 
11es thee that Mercygand loadsthee with Afflitions; and this ſhews 
rhee to be a fooliſh ard weak man. For thoſe Men,norwithſtanding 
heir preſent Proſperity, are doomed to great and certain miſery, as 
't here follows. And to this Verſe coheres with the following, as 
well as, the foregoing Verſes. 

3 * I have ſeen krhe foolifh / taking roet m7; but ſud- *PC3735 


Jdenly » I curſed o his habitation p. 
k I have oft obſerved, itin my experience. Having ſeverly re- 
buked Job for his tranſports of Paſhon, and intemperate Speeches 
:gainſt God, he now returns to his former Argument, apd proves 
| that ſuch dreadful] and deſtruQtive Judgements of God do nor befall 
| the righteous, but the wicked, as be obſerved, chap. 4. 7, 8. Withal 
1eanfwersan objeftion concerning the preſent and ſeeming pro- 
[perity of the wicked, which he confeſſeth that he himſelf had 
' 'ometimes obſerved. 7 7, e. The wicked man,who is quite deſtitute 
of true, z. e, of ſpiritual and heavenly wiſdom. »» Not only pro« 
} ſperous for the preſent, bur,as it ſeemed, firm and ſecure for the fu. 
cure, being ſtrongly fertified with Power and Riches, and Children 
:60, ſo as there was no appearance nor danger of a change. » In a 
moment, beſides and before mine, and his own, and all other mens 
expeQtation. 0 Either, 4. I judged thar he was a curſed Creature, 
notwithſlanding of his Proſperity, and [ foreſaw and foretold ir, 
by the Rules of Scripture, or the direCtion of Gods Spirit, that he 
would certainly ſooner or laterbe ſtript of all his Bleſlings and have 
Gods Curſe fall heavily upon him. Or rather, 2. I ſaw and percei- 
ved by theevent which followed his Proſperity, that he wasa Man 
 accurſed of God. For he ſpeaks not ig-theſe words of what his eſtate 
conſtantly was even inthe midſt of his happineſs, though even then 
he was really accurſed ; but of what it was'by a ſudden change. p 
| Or, as the Hebrew word ligniſies, hw pleaſant or commogious habitati- 
on, perſons or things in it, or belonging to ir, being comprehended 
in that word by an uſual Metonymy. 


4 * His children.q are far from ſafety r, and they are « pg,is 
; venpag in the gates : neither is there any to deliver ;55 
ther f. | 


q Whoſe gteatneſs and happineſs he deſigned in all his en- 
terpriſes ſuppoſing that his Family was and would be eftabliſhed 
for ever. 7 7, e. Are expoſed to great dangers and calamities in this 
life, and can neither preſerve themſelves, nor the great inheritance 
which their Fathers get and leſt. for them. Thus to be far frem 
peace,Lam. 3;17. Is to.be involved indeſperate troubles, 55 e. In the 
place of Judicature ; ro which they, are brought for their offen- 
ces, and where they will Pro = hn wage and few crno Friends ; 
partly becauſe being wickedly Educated, ard rruſting to their own 


greatneſs, they, were inſoleat and-injuriousto all their ors :, 
and 


Chap, y. 7 


THeb, 
May oy 


[Or 
quly 


[Or.la 
} Heb 
0 of 
'N 
wal if 
fy; 


op 


the 


lock, 


Wig. 


$7435" 


(al-119: 


) © 


: ts p.V. 


4 Ch8:9; 


|Or, in: 
qu, 


[Orlabouy. 


f Heb. the 


ſw if the 
ng 

nl lift y 

th; 


24: Mirk 9: 49, 


*Cheg:10: 
12;18:; 


,, 


* and Greatneſs of God's Nature and Works ; which he doth partly as 
* an Argument to enforce the Exhortation ro ſeek and commit his cauſe 


"Adbaue, waters o upon the Þ fields 


F. 
and partly becauſe thoſe many perſons whom their powerful Fa- 
thers defrauded or oppreſſed, do ſeek for Juſtice, and the reco- 
very of their Rights, which they eafily obrain againſt ſuch perion« 
as plainly declared by their Aftions that they neither feared God, 
nor reverenced Man,and therefore were hated by all ſorts of men. 
5 They can find no Advocats nor Afſiftants, who are either able or 
willing to help them ; But like 1bmae!, as their hand was formerly 
againft every man, ſo now every Man's hand is againſt tzem, 

5 Whoſe harveſt « the hungry » eaterh up,and tak- 
eth it even out of the thorns z,and the * robbersz ſwal- 


loweth up « their ſubſtunce. 

u which they now juſtly and confidently expe to reap after 
all their coſt and labour for that end, but are fadly and fudden]y 
diſappointed ; Which is a great aggravation of their miſery. x 2. e. 
The Poor, whoſe neceſſities make them greedy and ravenous to car 
it all up ; and from whom he can never recover 1t,nor any thingin 
recompenſe of it. y i.e. Our of the Fields, notwithſtanding the 
ſtrong thorn Hedges, wherewith it 1s incloſed and fortified, and all 
other dangers or difficulties which may be in their way. They will 
rake it, though they be ſcratched and wounded by the Thorns a- 
bout it. 2 So called from their long Hair, which ſuch perſonsnou- 
riſhed, either becauſe of their wild and ſavage kind of life, which 
made them negle& the trimming of their hair and body: Or, that 
they might look more terribly, and ſo affright all thoſe who ſhould 
indeavour to oppoſe them : Or, the thirſty, as the word may ſignifie 
from another root. And ſo it anſwers well to the hungry, in the 
former branch «, Greedily, and as there is no hope of Recover- 


"5 Although b || affliction c cometh not forth of the 


duſt d, neither doth trouble ſpringout of the ground ; 

b Or, For, or rather, Becauſe. So tie following words may con- 
tain 2 reaſon why he ſhould ſeek unto God, as he exhorts him, v, 8. 
Or, Surely, asthat Particle is oft uſed. And ſo it isa note of his 
proceeding to another Argument. ©c Or, Intquity ; as this werd oft 
ſignifies,and of this the following Sentence is true. And fo this firſt 
branch ſpeaks of ſin, and the next branch of trouble, which is the 
fruit of fin : And both fin and rrouble are faid to come from the ſame 
Spring. Burt this word ſignifies alſo, affii#:on, or miſery, or trouble, 
as Pſal. 90. 19. Prov. 12. 21 Which ſeerns moſt proper here, both 

becauſe it is ſo explained by the fallowing words zrouble ; and again 
trouble, wv. 7: the ſame thing being repeated in ſeveral words, as is 
uſual in holy Scripture,and becauſe ri greatrhing which troubled 
J0b, and the chief matter of theſe Diicourſes was Job's Afi tions, 
not his Sins. « Ir ſprings not up by chance,as Herbs which grow of 
their own accord out of the Earth : Or, ir comes not from Men 
or Creatures here below, bur ir comes from a certain and an high- 
er caule, even from God, 3nd that for man's fins, and therefore 
thou ſhouldeſt ſeek to him for redreis, as it follows, wv. 8. 

7 Yet man is born unto || trouble e, as f the ſparks 
fly upward Ff. 

e i.e. He is ſo comonly expoſed to many and various troubles, 
25 if he were born to no other end : Arflition 1s become in ſome 
ſort natural and proper to man, and it 15, together with ſin, tranſ- 
mitted from Parents to Children, as their moſt cerrain and conſtant 
Inheritance;God having allotted this Portion to Mankind for their 
fins. And therefore thou takeſt a wrong courſe in complainir.g ſo 
bitterly of that which thou ſhouldeſt paticncly bear, as the common 
lot of Mankind, and thy right method is to ſeek unto God who in- 
flits it, and who onely can remove it. f #. e. As naturally,and as 
generally, as the ſparks of fire fly upward,which do ſo univerlally and 
conſtantly. Heb. and the ſparks, &5. Bur the Particle and1s ofr uſed 
comparatively for as, as Ch. 12: 11; & 14: 12:& 24: 3: Prov. 25: 


8 I wouldg ſeekunto God h, and unto God would I 


commit my cauſe z. 

g If I werein thy condition; And therefore I would adviſe thee 
to the ſame courſe. þ To wit, by Prayer,and Humiliation,and Sub- 
miſſion, imploring his Pardon,and Favour,and Help and nor repine 
at him, and accuſe his Providence,as thou doeſt. 7 7. e. Commend 
my afflited condition to him by fervent Prayer,and refign my ſelf, 
and all my concerrs to. him.and humbly hope for relief from him. 
Or,propound my matters. i, e. Make known my afflift:ons and requeſts 
to him ; or, put or diſpoſe my words, i. e. Pray to him, and pour our 
my complaints before him. 


9 * Which doth great things + & and unſearchable ; 


[marvellous things w + without number. 
k Here Eliphaz enters upon a Diſcourſe of the Infinite PerfeQtion 


to God, wv. 8. becauſe Gnd was infinitely able cirher to puniſh him 


Io Who giveth rain » upon the earth, and ſendeth 


z He begineth with this erdinary and obvious work of God, in 
which he implies that there is ſomething unſearchable and wonder 
ful, as indeed there is in the riſe ofir fromthe Earth,in the ſtrange 

anging of that heavy Body in the Air, and in the diſtribution of it 
as God ſees fit, Amos 4: 7: and how much more in the ſecret Coun- 
{ck and hidden paths of Divine Providence, which Job took the lj- 


B. 


berty to cenſure, o Either Fountains and Rivers, which is another 
great and wonderful work of God : Or rather Rain-water, as the 
following words imply: the ſame thing b-ing repeated in other 
words after the manner. p Or, «pon all places abroad, 3.e. which 


Chap. V 


nave no covering to keep out the Rain. 


choſe which mourn may be exalted toſatery r. 


Or, rather, 2: another example of .Gods great and wonderful 
Works. And the Infnitive Verb is here put for the Indicative; He 
ſetteth up, &c. which is very frequent in the Hebrew, as Pſal. 56: 
13: Zech. 3' 4: & 12:10, He giveth this inſtance to comfort and 
encourage Job to ſeek to God, becauſe he can raiſe him ourof his 
greateſt depths, and uſeth to raiſe others in the like condition. 7 
Notwithſtanding all the craft and power of their Enemies. 

12 * He dilappointeth the devices of the crafty s, 


{o that their hands || cannot perform their enterpriſe z. 
5 Such as are cunning to work evil, and to cover it with fair 
rences, as the Hypocrites uſe to do,and as Jeb's Friends charged him 
with doing ; God breaks the hopes and delſings ofſuch Men ; as he 
hath now blaſted thy expeQation, and raken away thy outward hap- 
pineſs, which was thething thou didſt deſign in taking up the Pro- 
feſion of Religion. t Or, any thing : ory what is ſohd or ſubſtantial : 
Or, wiſdom, i.e. their wiſe counſel, or crafty deſign. They cannot 
execute their cunning contrivances. 
12 * He taketh the wiſe in their own craftineſs # : 


and the counſel of the froward is carried headlong y.; 
u Wicked Men, who are wiſe to do evil, and wiſe inthe 


turns t1em againſt themſelves; as we ſee in Achirophel, Haman &c. 
x Or perverſe,or wreſtlers : ſuch as wind and turnevery way,as wreſt- 
{lers do,and will leave no means untried to accompliſh their counſels. 
y 5,e. Is tumbled down and broken, and that by their own precipi- 
rationand haſte. Their malice cannor have the patience to proceed 
wiſely and leiſurely againſt Gods Church and People, but makes 
-hem eager and yenturous, and ſo to make more haſt than good 
ſpeed in their wicked deſigns. 

14 * They || meet with darkneſs in the day time z, 
and grope 4 in the noon day as in the night. 

Z 7.e. In plain things they run into groſs miſtakes and errors,and 
commonly chuſe thoſe counſels and courſes which are worſt for 
chemſelves. Darkneſs oft notes miſery,but here ignorance or error, 
as it is alſo uſed. Ch. 12: 25; & 37: 19; and elſewhere. # Like blind 
Men to find their way, not knowing what to do. 

15 But he faveth the poor 4 from the ſword, from 
their mouth c, and from the hand of the mighty. 

b Or helpleſs; who therefore flee to Gcd for refuge, c Or fom 
the Sword wich cometh our of their mouth ; 7. e. from all their cen- 
ſures, ſlanders, threatnings, deceitſul infinuations,falſe ſwearings of 
wirn-fſ2s unrighreous ſentences of corrupt Judges ; whereby their 
good names, or eſtates, or lives, may be expoſed to the utmoſt ha. 
zards, And chis is firly oppoied to the Sword of the hana, implied 
in the next branch of the Verſe. Or, om the Sword by their mouths 
7.e. by thoſe wicked mens words againſt the godly, which 
God wonderfully over-rulech to the working out of the i d<lj 
verance. 


eth her mouth f. . 

d So this poor man obtaineth what he in ſome meaſure hoped or 
expeRted from God, to whom he commirted his cauſe; and other 
poor Men will be encouraged by his example to place their hope 
in God ; e 7,e. wicked Men. The abſtra& from the concrete, as 
pride, deceit, injuſtice, are put for proud, deceitful and unrighreous 
Men, Jer. 13:9; 2 Pet 3: 13: f 7. & They are filencedand con- 
founded,being convicted of their own wickedneſs and folly,& find- 
:ng that not only the poor are got!out of their Ners and Snares, in 
which they thought that they had them faſt, bur alto the Oppreſlors 
themſelves are inſnared in them; and all this by ſudden and unecx- 
peed means. 


17 * Behold g,happy is the man whom God corre&-* 


the Almighty k&. 
g For what I am ſaying, 
without ſerious confideration. þ Heb. bleſſeaneſſis (i. e various and 
great happineſs, as the plural Number implies) beleng to that Mar 
whom God rebukes, to wit, with ſtrokes, Ch. 33: 16, 19, Thoſe «Mi. 
Qions are ſo far frommaking thee miſerable,as thou complaineſt, that 
they are,and will be,if rhou doſt thy Duty, the means ofthy Happi- 
neſs : Which though a Paradox to the World,is frequently affirmed 
in holy Scripture ; and the reaſon of itis plain, becauſe they are 
pledges of Gods love, which no m2N can buy too dear ; and though 
victes, yer neceſſary Phifick to purge out that fin which is deeply 
fixed in all Mens Natures, and thereby to prevent far greater, evers 
infiaite and eternal Viſeries. Without reſpe& to which this Pro- 
poſition could not be true or tolerable. And therefore is plainly 
ſh-ws, that good Men in thoſe ancient times of the Old Tetament, 
had the proſpe&, and belief, and hope of Everlaſting Bleſſedneſs in 
Heaven after this life.? i. e. Do nor abhor it as a thing pernicious 
and intolerable,nor refuſe it as a thing uſeleſsand unprofitable, nor 
{light it as a mean and unneccflary thing; but on the contrary, prize 
c highly,as a favour and vou-:hſafement of God ; for ſuch negative 
-xprefſions oft imply the contrary, as 1 Theſ. 52 20: 1 Tim. q: 12: 

Jee Prov. 10. 2: & 17: 21; k Or, of rhe all-(uffciert God, who is 

able to ſupport and comfort thee in thytroubles,and to deliver thee 

,ut of them, and tro add more calamities to them, if thou art obſti- 

"ate and incorrigible, 


woundeth, and his hands make whole, 
I Towir, the Wounds, as good Surgeons uſe to do when they 
have drefled them, in order to their healing-Comp.P/al. 147: 3: Exek: 


+D4 he 


11 * To ſet up on high thoſe that be low q; that *:Sam:2-7 | 


Pſal:113 7 


'9 Theſe words contain either 1: A Declaration of Gedsend in 
giving Rain, which is to enrich thoſe who were poor, or mourning 
ior the drought, by ſending Rain, and making their Lands fruirſul: 


4 


Ne: 4:15: 
ſfal:3 3:10 
IfA:;8.10: 


PFe- | Or,canmot 


perform as 
ny things 


* 1 Cor: 3? 
19: 


; opinion 
of the World, he not only deceiverh in their hopes and contigs 


* Deut:28 
29: 

Ch: 12: 253 
Amos 8:9 
[or ,runinte 


EET, - * Pal. 107 
16 * So the Poor hath hope 4, and iniquity e ſtop- 42: 


Pro.3 122 


eth þ ; therefore defpile not thou # the chaſtening of Heb-12-5: 
Jam: 1:12: 


though moſt true, will not be believed Rev: 3:192 | 


"18 * For he maketh ſore, and bindeth up] : he *Deut 32: 


I Sam: 2:6. 
Iſa: 30:26: 


34+ The Senſe is, Though he hath ſeen it fir to wound thee, yer Hol. 6:1; 


l 
( 
k 
ji 


Pſ: 912 3: 


Heb fom 
che 4anas 


| Or, when 
the tongue 
courgeth. 


Ez<s:34+ 


25; 
Hoſ;2:18: 


* Pſal: 91: 
13: 


hip, F 


Pro 24. 16; 


* Tfa:11:9: 
& 35: 9:& 
G :.- 25: 


{] Or,,nuch: 


he will not always grieve thee, but will in due time releaſe thee from 


all thy Miſeries. T herefore diſpair nor. 
' 19 * He ſhall deliver thee» in fix » troubles ; Yea, 


in ſeven there ſhal no evil couch thee 0. | 

m To wir, if thou ſeekeſt ro him by Prayer and Repentance zz. e. 
Manifold or repeated ; as Six is ufed for many, Prov. 6:16: 0 To 
wir,ſo as to undo or deſtroy thee, as zouching is uſed, Foſ. 9; 19. Heb. 
T1;28, 1 John 5+ 18. See allo Gen: 26: 11. 29. 2 Sam. 14 10. P/al, 
195: 15: Zech 2: 8. Thou ſhait have a good iſſue our of all thy 
troubles, though they are both great and many. 

20 In famine p he ſhall redeem thee from death 


q, and in war © from the power of the Sword 7. 

p Which Job mighr be thought to far, as being ſo poor that he 
needed his Friends Contributions for kis relief. q brom that terrible 
kind of dearh. r Theſe tiings he utcers wita more confidence, 
partly becauſe the rewards or puniſhments of this life were more 
conftantly diſtributed to Men in the Q/ Teſtament according to their 
god cr bad behaviour than now they are: And partly, becaule it 
was his particular Opinion, That great AﬀM:Cions were the conſtant 
fruits and cer:ain evidences of a Man's wickedneſs ; and conſequent- 
ly that great Mercies and Deliverances ſhould infallibly follow upor 
true R-pentance and Godlineſs. 


21 Thou tball be hid « || from the ſcourge of the 
rongue, 7 neither ſhalt chou be afraid «of deſtruction 


when it cometh x. 7 

s 5, e, ProtzQed as in ſome ſecret and ſafe place. 7 i.e. From 
falſe accuſations and virulent flanders and reproaches, either by d1- 
verting their Tongues to other perſoasor things ; Or, by clearing 
thy integrity. # Taou ſhalt bave no cauſeto fear it, becauſe God 
will ſecure thee in itand from it» x To wit, upon orhers,near thee, 
or round about thee. 

22 At deitiuction and famine thou ſhalt laugh y: 
*neither ſhale thou be afraid of the beaſts y of the earth, 

3 Thou ſhilt nor onely be redeemed from famme. verſe 20. and not 
fear deflrution, wer, 21: but thou ſhalt laugh at them, not with a 
l:.ughter of icorn and contempr, as rhis word is uſed, Ch, 38: 18. 
Pjal. 2: 4: & 37: 13-(for God's judgments are to be entertained with 
reverence and gooly fear) but with a laughter of joy and triumph, 
ariſing from his juſt ſecurity and confidence in God's watchful and 
gracious Provide:ice which will either ke2p him from it,or int, or 
do him much good by it. » 5.e. The wild beaſts which werenume- 
rouMnd miſchievous in thoſe parts. See Deur. 28: 26; 1 Sam. 17. 34: 


3 2 For thou ſhalt be in league with the ſtones ofthe 


field z. And the beaſts of the field a ſhall be at peace 


with thee. 

z Thou ſha!t be free from any annoyance by Stones,either in thy 
walking, or other poſtures, or in thy Plowing, as if they had mane 
an inviolable league with thee. Stones may be, and in theſe ſtony 
Countries were, hurrful to Men many ways ; either by bruſing or 
hurting their fzet, when they walked barefoor, as the manner then 
was; or,by giving them occaſion of ſtumbling, or ſlipping, and fa]. 
ling ; Or by falling npoa a Man from a Rock, or higher ground, as 


ſometimes ir hath happened : Or filling his grounds, fo as to hinder 


his plowing.and make nis Lands unfruirful. Nay,the Stones {Lall nor 
only ceaſc to be aurcful, bur rhey thall be uſefu], and beneficial to 
thee : they ſh21l,as1t were,preſent themſclvesto thee when thou haſt 
occaſion enh-r £6 {ling them at thine Enemies, as then was uſual, 
Fudg. 20: 16: 2 Chrmm: 26: 14; Or to make Fences to thy ground : 
Or to build »n hou;e. This is a bold Metaphor,but ſuch are frequent, 
a: in orher Authors, f: alſo in ſcripture, as Iſa. 28: 15: Hoſ 2: 18: 
a Eit+er 1. the wil Beaſts; & then rhis is an adaition ro the former 
priviledge ; they ſhall noc hurt thee, wer. 22. nay, they ſha]: be. 
fri:nd th-e, as b<ing at peace with thee, here v. 23: Or, 2. the 
tame B-aſts, who otherwiſe may be refraQory and hurtful to a Man 
many having been killed by them. 


24 And thou Galt know b || that thy tabernacle «c 
ſhat be in peace 4, and thou ſhale viſit thy habitation e, 


, 


Or, 2har and ſbair nor || ſin f. 


peace 15:hy l ; . 
tabernacle: it follows, including alſo the Inhabirants,Children, or Friends, and 


| | Or, erre: Servants. d Shall enjoy great ſafety from all their Enemies, and 


b By certain and conſtant experience. cz, e, Thy habitation, as 


concord among themielves,and proſperity in all their concerns : al] 
which are comprehended underthe {weet name of Peace e i e, Ma- 
Nage ard order thy Family,andall thy domeſtick Aﬀairs,and world- 
ly Concerns, wich care and diligence. Yiſiting 1s oft uſed for regar- 
ding or taking care of,as Gen. 21. Ruth. 1: 6: Pfal. 8: 4: & 80; 14: 
f E:ther by unrig teouſneſs in thy dealings with thy Family or 
others; or by neglefting God & his Service in thy Family; or by 
winking at any fin in thy domeſticks which thou canſt hinder. 
Burt becauſe he ſpeaks nor here of Job's Dury, bur of his priviledge, 
and that in owrward and world'y things, it ſeems better rendred by 
others, and thou ſhalt not err, or miſcary, or mijs thy way or mark, 
a< rhisv-ry v ord is uſed below, Ch. 24: 19: & 14: 16: & Judg. 20; 
16. Tho ſhalr not be diſappointed of thy hopes, or blaſted in thy 
endeavours, bur ſhalt ſneceedin them. Or, and thu ſhalt not wan. 
der, or be a wanderer, having no houſe in which to pur his head, 
which Job might have ſome grourd to fear : but thou ſhalt have an 
habitation of thy own, which thou ſhalt viſe, and manage as thou 


did{t before. , 
25 Thou ſhalt know g alſo that thy ſeed ſha# be || 


greath, and thine oflfpring ; as the graſs of the 


earth &. 

g Parr'y by afſ1rance from God's Promiſes, 'and the Impreſſions 
of his Spirit; and partly by experience in due time. h Thy poſte- 
rity, which God will give thee in ſtead of thoſe which thou hait loft, 
ſhall be high and honourable, and powerful. Or, ſhall be many 
# Which ſhall come out of thy own Loins,as Branches our ofa Tree, 
as the word ſignifies. And this word ſeems added to the former,to 
reſtrain and explain it, by ſhewing that he did not ſpeak of his 1; Pi- 
ritual Seed, as Abraham's Seed isin part underſtood, bur of the fruit 
of lis own body. k Both for its pleatiful increaſe, and for its flou- | 
riſhing greeneſs- | . | 


o 


= {Dd A. 


26 Thou ſhalt come to thy grave in a full age 7, like 
as a ([bock of corn + cometh in ww, in his ſeaſon ». 


Thou ſhalr nor be cut off by an hand of violence before thy time,as 
thy Sons and other wicked Men have been, bur ſhalt die in a good 
old age, as did Abraham, Gen, 25: 8: and Meſes, Deut 34: 7: m As an 
heap or ſtack of corn is broukgt in, to wit, to the barn: Heb. aſcendeth, 
or riſeth: which word is very proper and uſual in this caſe : for a 
ſtack of Corn is faid to riſe, when by the addition of new heaps and 
handfulsit is raiſed toan higher pitch : Or, 7zs cut off, as this ſame 
word is uſed, Pſal, 1c2: 25: Cut me not off, &c. Heb. Make me not to 
aſcend ; And thus it is firly uſed both of the Corn, which,when it is 
cutup,aſCends, or is lifred up from the Earth, on whick it lay, and 
is advanced into Stacks, and high heaps, either in the Barn, or in 

che Field ; and of Man. who when he dies, his Spirit goeth upward 
to Heaven, as is implied even there where in the perſon of an Epi- 

cure it is queſtioned, Eccleſ.3;21: nIn Harveſt,when the Corn is ripe, 
27 Lo this, we o have ſearched it p, ſo iris; hear it, 


and know thouit q + for thy good r. 


as thou wilt hear from their own mouths. p This is no raſh or ha. 
ty conceir, but what we have learned by deep conſideration and 
nard ſtudy, long experience, and diligent obſervation,both of God's 
word, fo far as he hath been pleaſed ro reveal] himſelf. and of the 
courſe and methods of his Providence, and dealing with Men in the 
World. q For to us thou ſeemeſt by thy words and carriage to be 
wholly, orin a great part ignorant of theſe things. » Lerthe ad. 
vantage which will come unto thee by following this counlel, re. 
move thy prejudice againſt it. 


CHAP. VL. 
Job's anſwer, He wiſbeth his troubles were duely weighed, for then would 
his complaints appear juſt, 1----=7- Prayeth for aeath; his hope in its 


8-=----10. He is wnableto bear up under his burthew, x1, 12. He vin. 
dicateth himſelf again&# his friends, and reproveth them, 13=»==30, 


| Ub Job anſwered and ſaid, 
2 Oh that my grief « were throughly weighed 5, 
and my calamity || laid in the ballances together c ! 


my grief: The att being put for the objeR, as is uſual, fear for the 
thing feared, &c. and the ſame thing being here repeated in dif- 
fering words. Or 2. My ſorrow : or my wrath, or rage, as thou 
d1dſt call it, Chap. 5: 2: So his wiſh is, that his ſorrow or wroch, 
were laid in one Scale of the Ballances,and his calamity in the other 

that ſo it might be known whether his ſorrow or wrath was greater 
than his miſery,as was pretended, b Were fully underſtoed,and duely 
conſidered. Thy harſh rebukesand cenſures of my 1mpatience,and 
hy pocriſie,and wickedneſs, proceedeth from thy Ipnorance,or unſen= 
ibleneſs of my inſupportable calamities. I deſire no favour from 
thee: But O that I had a juſt and equal Judge that would under- 
ſtand my Caſe, and cenfider whether T have not juſt cauſe, for ſuch 
birter complaints. Or, at leait, whether the greatneſs of my Bur- 
den ſhould not procure ſome allowance to my infirmity, if I Thould 
ſpeak ſomething indecently and unadviſedly, and prote& me from 
ſuch ſevere cenſures. c E:ther 1. together with my grief ; or, rather 

2. rog<ther with any the moſt heavy thing to be put into the other 
Scale, as with the Sand,&c. as is exprefled in the next verſe - where 
alſo the Particle it, being of the ſingular number, ſheweth thay 
there was bur one thing to be weighed with the Sand. 


3 For now it 4 would be heavier than the Sand 


the Seae ; therefore F my words are ſwallowed up f. 
d i, e My grief or calamiry ; 
f As this Verb is uſed,Prov. 20:25: Obad. v: 16 : My Voice and Spirit 
faileth me. So far am I from ſ peaking too liberally of it,for which 
I am now accuſed that I cannor find, nor uttter words ſufficient to 
expreſs my ſorrow or miſery ; bur my groanings are ſuchas cannor 
be uttered ; asis ſaid inanother caſe, Rom. 8: 26: When I would 
expreſs it, the words ſtick in my throat,and I am forced, as it were 
to {wallow them up. 


4*For the arrows g of the Almighty b oe within' 
me # ; the poiſon whereof & frinketh - my ſpice 1: 


gainſt me. 

So he fitly calls his AfiQtions,becauſe,like Arrows, they came 
upon him fwifrly and ſuddenly one after another,and that from on 
high,and they wounded him deeply and deadlily + So he calls them 
either generally,becauſe all afflictions come from him,or particularly 

becauſe God's hand was ina ſingular mannereminent and viſible in 
his miſeries, Ch. 1.0r yet moreeſpecially, becauſe they were imme« 
diatcly ſhor by God into his Sprrit,as it follows. 5 Bclides theſe E- 
vils which are paſt, Chap, 1. there are other miſeries that are con- 
ſtaar and fixed in me, the ſharp pains of my Body, and diſinal hor- 

rours of my mind. k Implying that theſe Arrows were more keen 
and pernicious than ordinary, as being dipped in God's wrath, 2s 
the barbarous Nations then and ſince uſed to dip their Arrows in 

Poiſon, that they might nor only pierce, but burn up and conſume 
the vital parts, 7 z. e. Exhauſteth and conſumeth, either 1. my 

vital Spirits, together with my Blood, the ſeat of them, and my 

heart, the ſparing of them, as Poiſon uſed todo. But 1 doubt che 
Hebrew Word rusch, is never uſed in that ſenſe. Or, 2. my Soul, 
which is commonly the Spirit,my Mind and Conſcience. So he tells 
them, that beſides the miſeries which they ſaw, he felt others, and 
far greater, though inviſible torments in his Soul, which if they 
could ſee, they would have more pity for him. And in this ſenſe 
this place is, and may very well be otherwiſe rendred, whoſe Priſon 
my Spirit drinketh ap, i. e. my Soul ſucks in the venom of thoſe Ca- 
lamiries, by apprehending and applying to it ſelf the wrath of God 

manifeſted and conveyed by them. m Either 1. great Terrors ; or 2« 

Gods terrible Judgments ; or, rather 3. theſe terrors which God 

immediately works in my Soul, eitherfrom the Senſe of his wrath 

accompanying my outward troubles ; or from the ſad expettation of 
oenger and greater torments. 7 They are like a numerous and well- 

ordered Army,under the Condu& of an irreſfiſtable General, who dee 


ſigns and duets them to invade me on every ſide, 
| 5 Doth 


T Heb: af. 


{ In a mature and old, but vigorous age, as the word implies, cendeth, 


f Heb: fn 


oIris not my ſingle Opinion, buc my Brethren concur with me, thy ſelf. 


f Heb:b;ſt. 


# Either 1» my calamity, as it follows, or the cauſe or matter of»: 


of ; Thatit, 
e which is heavier than dry Sand gs _ 


my grief 


*Plal:48:1 
Ch: 16/12, 


13 
* the terrours of God »: do ſet themſelves in array n a-. Pla: 88; 
T5, 


Chap. yt, 


* 


expres 


{He 


b: FL 


þb.l; t 


That is, 
nt - 
expr4s 
| grief 


al:48:1 
hz 16:12, 


bu $8; 
, 1Ge 


T Chap. VI. 


F Hebe P11 
g'#js: 


+Heb: fck- 
meſſes of my 


mean, 


5 Doth the wild afs bray + when ke hath graſs? or 


loweth the Ox over his fodder o ? 

os Thou wondreſt that my diſpatition and carriage is fo greatly 
altered from what it was, Ch.4: 3, 4, 5; but thou mayeſt cafily learn 
the reaſon of it from the brute Beaſts, the Alsand Ox, who when 
they have convenient and common Food, are quiet and contented ; 
but' when they want that,they will reſent it,and complain in their 
way by braying or lowing : See Jer: 14; 6: And therefore my Car- 
riageis agreeable to theſe common principles of nature, which are 
both in Men and Beaſts, by which their diſpoſition and deportment 
is generally ſuicable to their condition. Ir is no wonder that you 
complain not, who live in eaſe and proſperity, nor did I, when it 
wasſo with me ; but if you fe]t what feel,you would be as full of 
complaints asI am. : 

6 Can that which is unſavoury be eaten withour 
ſale p? or is there any taſte in the white of an egg q * 

p Can, or do Men uſe to eat unſavoury Meats with delight, or 
without complaint ? This is either 1. a refle&tion upon Eliphaz his 
diſcourſe as unſavoury, Which could not give him any conviction 
or farisf.&tion. Buthis cenſure of Elphaz his Speech begins not r1ll 
wv: 14 and then ir proceeds: Or, rather 2: a A Juſtification of Job's 
complaints(of which both the foregoing and following Verſes treat) 
by another Argument. Men do commonly complain of their Meat 
when it is but unſavoury,how much more whea it is ſo bitter as mine 
is ? which is implied here, and expreſſed in the next Verſe; where 
the Senſe here begun is compleated,and this general Propoſition is 
accommodated to Job's condition. q Heb. in the white of a yolk, i.e. 
which encompaſſeth the yolk of an ws. 

7 The things that my ſoul refuſed to touch, are as | 


my ſorcowful meat 7. 

r Heb. 4s the ſickneſſss or ſorrows of my meat, i.e. as my ſorrowful 
Meat,which I am conſtrained to eat with grief of heart» The Par- 
ticle as,eicher 1. notes not the fimilitude,but the truth of the thing, 
as it is oft uſed, as hath been formerly noted and proved. So the 
Senſe is, That ſuch M-=at as former'y he ſhould have abhorred ro 
touch, either for, the equality ofir, or for his tears or ulcerous Mi- 
ter, which mixed themſelves with it, he was now forced by the ne- 
ceſſities of Nature, and his own Poverty,to eat : Or, 2: implies thar 
che following words are not to be underſtood properly, bur mera. 
phorically. And ſo the Senſe may be this, Thoſe grievous afflitions, 
which according to the principles and common inclinations of hu- 
mane naturz,I dreaded the very touch and thought of,they are now 
my daiiy, though ſorrowful bread ; Iam forced conſtantly to feed 
upon them ; as other Perſons in great afflictions are ſaid ro be fed 
with bread of tears, P[al- 80: 5: and to eat aſhes like bread, Pſal: 102: 
9; Others make thisa cenſure of Eliphas his words, as ungrateful 
& loathſom to him. Bur thar Senſe ſeems neither to agree with the 
words of this verſe, nor wirh its ſcope and coherence with the for- 
mer, of which ſee the Notes on v; 63 


8 O that I might have my requeſts ! and that God 


Heb: wy Would grant we Tthe thing that {long for | 


expefFations 


s 7. e. The thing which Ihave ſo paſſionately defired ; and not- 
withſtanding all your vain words, and weak arguments, do ſtil] 
juſtly conrinne to delire, to wit, death, as 1s expreſſed wv; 9; and 
more largely Ch. 3: 

9 Even that it would pleaſe God to deftroy me : 
that he would let looſe his hand «, and cut me off. 

: To end my Dayesand Calamitics rogether. u Which is now as 
it were bound up, or reſtrained from giving me that deadly blow 
which I detire. O that he would reſtrain himſelf and his hand no 
longer, bur let it fall upon me with all its might, ſo as to cur me off 
as it foll-ws. 

10 Then ſhould IT yet have comfort x, yea, T would 
harden my ſelf in ſorrow y : let him not ſpare v, for I 
have not concealed the words of the holy One 5. 

xT ae thoughts of my approaching death wouid comfort me in all 
my ſorrows. This would ſolace me more than life, with all that 
worldly ſafety,and glory,and happineſs which thou haſt adviſed me 
to ſeek unto God for. y i.e. I would bear up my ſelf with more 
courage and pari-nce under all my torments.with the hopes of my 
death,zand that bleſſedneſs into which I know I ſhall after death be 
admittea, as he more fully ſpeaks, Ch: 19- 26, 27: whereas now I 
pine away in lingring, and hopeleſs miſeries. Or, I wwuld burn, i. 
e. Ian content to burn) inſorrow- Or. I wonld pray ( as this word 
ſienifies in Hebrew Writters ; and praving may be here pur for praiſing 
or worſhivping «cf God, as it is frequently uſed in Scripture) in, or 
for my ſorr»w or pain; Then T w-uld worſhip God, and ſay, Blefled 
be the Lord's Name for theie afflictions, as I did for tbe former, Ch: 
I: 20, 21: 2 Butler him uſe all ſeverity againſt me, ſo far as to 
cur me off, and nut ſuffer me to live any longer ; which will ſeem 
to mea cruel kind of patience towards me. #7.e, Of God, who is 
frequenrly called the Holy One in Scriptur?, as 1(a: 40; 25: & 57: 15; 
Hab: 3: 3: and is ſo ina moſt eminent and peculiar manner. The 
Senſe is, Therefore I do nor fear dearth, but deſire it; and that not 
only to be freed from my preſent troubles,but alſo & eſpecially ro 
pur me into the poſſeſſion of the happineſs of the next life ; of which 
T am aſſured, becauſe I have in good meaſure performed r{:e condi- 
tions of that Covenant upon which he hath promiſed it ; for, as 
for the Wo#ds of God, i. e. That Light of Sacred Truths and Pre. 
cepts which he hath been pleaſed to impart to me, 7 have not conceal- 
ed them, neither from my ſelf, by ſhutting mine eyes againſt them. 
or ſuffering my prejudices, or paſſions, or worldly Intereſts to blind 
'my Mind, leſt I ſho!11d ſee them as you think I have done ; nor 
from others ; but a« I ny ſelf have ſtedfaſtly believed them, and 
not wilfully and wickedly departed from them, ſo I have endea- 
voured vo teach and commend them to others, and have not been 
aſhamed, nor afraid, boldly to profeſs and preach the tru Religion 
in the midſt of Heathens who are round about m-. Anid therefore 

I know that if God doth cut me off, Ic will be in Mercy, and I ſhal' 
bea gainer by ir. Some tranſlate and diſtinguiſh che Verſe thus ; 
Yet this is my comfort ( though, or when I ſcorch with paiu, and Hy, 7. e. 
God doth nor ſpare me, but afflifts me molt leverely ) that I have not 
concealed the words of God,but have profeſſed and praftited them, 


3 


FHeb,joul, 1x What ismy {trength tharc I ihould hope b and what 


is ming cad 6 ? that I ſhould prolong my lif 42 


7 O B. ; Chap. 


6 My Strength is ſo ſmall and ſpent,thit alchough I may linger 2 
while in my torments, yet 1 cannot not Jive long,and thezefore 1t 1s 
vain and abſurd for me to hope for ſuch a reſtitution of my ſtrength 
and proſperity as thou haſt promiſed to me, Chap: 5: 22, Oc. And 
therefere I juſtly pray that Cod would rake away my life. c Either 
1: What is the end or period of my Miſeries ? When may Iexpe& 
it? I feeno end of them ; Iknow not how long I may pine and 
lingerin them. Therefore, Lord take me ſpeedily away. Or,'2: 
W tar is the end of my life? Or, what is death to me ? Tr is not 
terrible, but comforsable, as he ſaid v: 10: I need nor thoſe vain 
conſolations which thou giveſt me of being kept from [Zeath, wv. 20: 
or having Life continued and Health reſtored. Death is nor 
the matter ofmy fear,bur of my deſire, To wit,by my ſeeking roGod 
forir, as thou adviſeſt me, Ch: 5: 8: Why ſhould I detire or en. 
deavour the prolongingof my life. Or, that 1 ſbould lengthen ous 
my deſire, to wir, of lite, and thoſe comforts of life which rhou haſt 
propounded to me. Idelire not to live Jonger, though in the graareſ(t 
tplendour and proſperity, but to be diſſolved,and to with my Gcd 
and Redeemer, Ch: 19: 25: The Hebrew word nephiſh, here rendred 
oul or life, oft ſignilics deſire, as Gen. 23: 8; Dent: 23; 24: Prov: 23: 23 
Eccleſ: 6; 9; | <A . tt 
12 Is my ſtrength the ſtrengthof Nones? Or, js my ,.; . , | 
fleſh + of braſs e©'& | *' . Fn 

s I am not made of ftone or braſs, but of fleſk, and blood,as others *”* 
are, and thereforeTI am utterly unable ro endure theſe miſeries lon- 
ger, and can neither hope forznor deſire any continuance of my life, 
cor reſtauration of my former happineſs,but only wiſh for that death, 
which is the common refuge of all miſerable perſons, as I ſaid, Ch; 
3:17,18e , X 
12 Is not my helpin me Ff, and js wiſdom driven 
quite from me g ? | 

f Though I have no ſtrength in my Body,or outward Man, yetT 
have ſome help and ſupport wirhin me, or in my inward Man,even 
the Conſcience of my own Innocency and Piety, notwithſtanding 
all your bitter accuſations and cenſures,as if I had no integrity, Ch: 

4:6. g IfT have no ſtrength in my body, have I thereforeno wif. 

dom or judgment left in my Soul ? Am I therefore unable to judge 

of the vaniry of thy diſcourſe, and of the truth of my own caſe ? 

Have I not common ſenſe and diſcretion ? do not I know my own 

condition, & the nature & depree of my ſufferings better than theu 

doeſt. Amnor I a better Judge whether I have integrity or no,than 

thou art ? But this verſe is rendred otherwiſe,and that very agreeably 

to the Hebrew Words, What if I have no help in me, ( 7. «. If I cannot 

help my ſelf, if my outward condition be helpleſs and hopeleſs, as 

I cenfeſs it is ) is wi(dem driven quite from me? Havel therefore loſt 

my underſtanding and common reaton ? Cannot I judge whether ir 

is more deſirable for me to live or todie, whether I am an Hypo- 

crite or no, whether your words have truth and weight in them or 

no ; whether you take the right method in dealing with me, whe. 

ther you deal mercifully and ſincerely with me, or no. Yet again 

( becauſe the conſtru&ion and ſenſe of theſe words is judged very 

difficult ) this verſe may te joyned with the following, and rendre 

thus, par if chere be ns help in me (or,if 1be wt able to bear my alaries) 

and if counſel be driven fom me, fo that I know not whar to do,or how 

to help cr eaſe my ſelf? Or, and ſubſifto:ce, or pewer of ſubſefting be dri- 

ven, or taken away from me, 10 that I can neither help my ſelf out of 

my troubles, nor ſubſiſt under them, yet #0 the affliFed pity ſbould 

be ſhewed, &c. : : : ; | 
14 f To him that is afflifted þ pity ſhould be ſhewed+ peb:ts | 

from his triend z, but he forfaketh the fear of the Al- bim that | 

mighty &. meleerh. 

h Heb. To him that s meltcd or difflved with offliiions, or in the 
Furnace of afflitions; thar is, in extreme milſcries ; for ſuch per- 
ſons are ſaid ro be melted,as Pſal. 22: 14: & 107: 26: & 119: 28: Nah: 

2;10: # His friend, ſuch as thou, O Elphaz pretendeſt ro beto me, 
ſhould ſhew kindnets, benignity, and compzſfiion, in his Judgment 
of h1m, and carriage towards him, and not paſs ſuch unmerciful 
and heavy cenſures upon him, nor load him with reproaches. & Bue 
thou haſt no love or pity for thy nerghbour and friend ; which isa 
plain evidence that thou art guil:y of that which rhou didſt charge 
me with,even- of the want of the Fear of GOD; for, didſt thou 
rruly Fear GOD, thou couldeſt not,and durſt not be fo unmerciful 
ro thy Brother, both becauſe God hath ſeverely forbidden and con- 
demned that Diipoſition ar d Carriage, and becauſe God is able to 
puniſh thee tor it, and mere unto thee the ſame hard meaſure which 
thou meteſt ro me. Butthis Verſe js, and may be otherwiſe ren» 
dred, Should a ropreach(for fo t':e Hebrew cheſed of: lignifies) be laid 
upon him that is afflifted by his Friend, even. that he forſaketh the feav 
ef the Almighty ? Should my friend have faſtened ſuch a reproach u- 
pon me, than which none1s worſe, that Tam an impious Man, and 
deſtitute of che fear of God, Chap: 4: C -, 8: This he mentions, as 
that which was moſt grievous ard intolerable to him. 

15 My brethren / have dealt deceirfully »z as a brook, 

and as the ſtream of brooks s they paſs away : 

li, e. My Kinſmen or three Friends ; for though Zliphez only 
had ſpoken, the other two ſhewed their approbation of his Diſ- 
courle, or,at leaſt, ofrhar part of it which contained his Cenſure 
of Job's perſon and State. 2 Under a pretence of Friendlhip and 
Kindnets, dealing unrighteouſly and unmercifully wich me,and ad- 
ding to theſe atflictions which they ſaid they came to remove. x 
W hich quickly vanith,& deceive the hopes of the thirſty Traveller, 

16 Which are blackiſh by reaſon of the ice 6, and 
wherein theſrow is hid p. | | 

o Which in Winter, when the Traveller neither needs not deſires 
it, are full of Water then congealed by the Froſt. p Either 1: Under 
which the Water made of Snow, which formerly fell,and afterward 
was diſſolved, lies hid. So he implies that he (ſpeaks not of thoſe 
Brooks whichare fed by a conſtant Spring, bur of them which are 
filled by accidental and extraordinary falls of Water or Snow melred, 
which run into them. Or 2: Wherein there is abundance of Snow 
mixed with or covered by the Ice : Or, in which the Svow covers it 
ſelf, i. e. Where 1s Snow. upon Snow. Which gives the Traveller 
hopes, that when he comes that way ia Summer, b: ſ{kall find good 
ſtore of Water here for his refreſhment. 

5 Doth 


A E 


P. VI. 


eb:in Place s. 
beat 
of 
b: ex- freſhing and neceſſary. s In which the Traveller expe&ed to find 
ſhed: them to his comfort : But they are gone he knows not whither. 


18 The paths of their way are turned afide ; 7 they 


go to nothing and periſh. 
f i. ee The courſe of thoſe Waters is changed ; they are gone out 


ſumed ; as it here follows. : 
/ 19 The Troops « of Tema x looked, the companies 


3 of Sheba waited for them« 

u As this word is uſed, Ger. 37: 25: Iſa. 21; 13. Heb,The ways, 
put for the travellers in the ways, by an uſual Metonymy. And fo 
it muſt needs be meant here, and in the next clauſe, becauſe rhe 
following Verſe, they were confounded, &c. plainly ſheweth, that he 
here ſpeaks of Perſons, not of ſenil-\s things. x This place and 


Waters were very ſcarce, and therefore precious and deſirable 
eſpecially to Travellers,who by their Motion,and the heat to which 
they were expoſed, were more hor and thirſty than other Men. y 
As-before zhe tr:opss And thus he ſpeaks, becauſe men did not there 
travel ſingly, as here we do, but in Troops and Companies, for 
their greater ſecurity againſt wild Beaſts and Robbers,of which they 


had great ſtore. _. 
20 They z were confounded becauſe they had hop- 


ed « ; they camethither, and were aſhamed 5. 
z7.e. The Troops and Companies. # They Comforted them- 
ſelves with the ExpeQation of Water there to quench their thirſt. 5 
As havingdeceived themſelves and others with vain and falſe hopes. 
prifernw 21 || For c now ye are | nothing 4 ; ye ſee my caſting 
e are like down, and are afraid.e. 
to them. e He gives the reaſon why he charged them with Deceitfulneſs, 
Heb:70/t: and compared them to theſe deceitſul Brooks. 4 Or, as nothing,the 
note of {imilitude being oft underſtood, Heb. as or, 7,2. you are 
fo me as if you had not been, or as if you had never comets me ; 
for { have no benefit nor comfort from you and your Dilcourſe, 
but only an increaſe of my Miſery. e When you come near to me 
and perceive my great and manifold Calamities, you ſtand as ir 
were at adiſtance ; you are ſhy of me, and afraid for your ſelves, 
either leſt my Sores. or Breath ſhould infeCt you ; or leſt ſome fur- 


0B, 


When the Weather grows milder, and the Froit and Snow is 
diflolved. r In the hot Seaſon of the year,when Waters are moſt re- 


of their Channel, flowing hither and thither, till they be quite con- 


Sheba were both parts ofthe hot and dry Countrey of 4rabia,in which | 


356 I7 * What time ra was m_ T they _—_ T 1s to - —_— out of _ —_— _—_— - 1s wg uſual in S$crip- 
9.32 t r they are conſu Out OT their j fure the words of One that u aeſperate to be' but wind 0 ;/ e, ec 
ut off. when it is hot, Y T nlumed and vain. Do you take me for a deſperate and diſtra&ted "hays, 4 


i knows not, or cares not what he ſaith, but only ſpeaks what comes 
; firſt inhis Mind and Mouth? The W#:zd is oft uſed to expreſs 
vain words,as Chap. 15:2: Fer. 5. 13: and vain things, Jobs 7: 7. 
Prov, 11: 29: Some render the whole Verſe thus, Do ;ou in your 
| arguings think, ox ought you to think the diſcourſes of a dejefied, or de. 
: ſponding,or ſorely affiifted Man ( ſuch asI am ) to be but words and 
; wind * i.e, vain and empty,as inaced the Diſcourſes of ſuch Perſons 
uſe to beeſteemed by ſuch as are in an higher and more proſperous 
condition, But you ſhould judge more impartially,and mere mer- 
cifully, Poſſibly the Verſe may be rendred thus Ds you think ro re. 
prove the ſpeeches of a deſperate, or dejefied, or miſerable Man (ſuch as 
I am, and you uſe meaccordingly ) with ( the Prepoſition being 
very frequently omitted and underſtood in the Hebrew Tongue ) 
words and with (for the Hebrew prefix,Lameg,oft ſignifies with, as hath 
been formerly proved ) wind. You think any words or Arguments 
will be ſtrong enough againſt one in my Circumſtances. So it agrees 
with the foregoing Verſe. 
27 Yea j,yeoverwhelm* the fatherleſs #,and ye dig + Heb: » 
. Ye 


a pit for your friend x, cauſe to fal 
t Your words arenot only vain and uſeleſs and uncemfortable to upon 
me, but alſo grievous and pernicious. Heb. Wuruſh or throw your. » 
ſelves upon him. For words 1n Hiphil are oft put recjprocally, as He. 
bricians know. You fall upon him with all your might, & ſay/allthar 
you can deviſe to charge and grieve him. A Metaphor from wild 
Beaits that fall upon their Prey to hold it faſt and devour it. You 
load him with Cenſures and Calumnies. # Or the deſolate, i. e. me 
; who am deprived of all my dear Children and of all my Efſtare,for. 
iakenby my Friends, and by my heavenly Father ; which ſhould 
have procured me your Piry rather than your Cenſure, x Or, you 
feed or feaſt ( for fo this Hebrew word is oft uſed, as 2 Sam: 3: 75: 
. 2 Kings 6: 23: Job 4015; J) upon your friend, i, e. You inſult and tri= 
; Umph over me, whom ſometimes you owned for your Friend. 
28 Now therefore be content, look upon me, » for 
' it 3s | evident unto you, & if T lie, | i Heb: be. 
# Bt pleaſed either 1. To look upon my Countenance,if itbetrays/9*.J0ur 
any Fear or Guilt,as if Iſpoke contrary to my own Ccnſcience, Or /***+ 
rather 2, To conſider me and my cauſe further and berter than you 
| have done, that you may give a more true and righteous judgment 
concerning ir. 2 You will plainly dicover it. A little further con. 
ſideration and diſcourſe will make it manifeſt, and I ſhal readily ac- 
knowledge it. 
29 * Return a,T pray you, let it not beiniquity 6 ;* Chis 


. 


ther Plagues ſhould come upon me, wherein your ſelves for my 
ſake, or becauſe you are in my company, ſhould be involved : or, 
leſt I ſhould be burdenſome to you, and need and call for your cha- 
ritable Contribution toſupgort my ſelf, and the ſmall remainders 


yea,return again, my righteouſneſs zs || in it c. | That is in 
a Turn from your former courſe of perverſe Judgment. lay aſide this matter 
Paſhon and Prejudice againſt me,let me beg your ſecond thoughts, 


of my poor Family, or for your he'ping hand to afſiſt and ſave me 
from mine Enemies, who may poſſibly fall upon me in this place, 
as the Caldeans and the Sabeans did upon my Servants and Carte] 
elſewhere ; which is implied in the next Verſes. So far are you 
_ being true Friends and Comforts to me, as you wculd ſeem 
to be. 

22 Did I fay f, Bring unto me g? or, give areward 


for me h of your ſubſtance ? 
f Or, I: zt becauſe 7 ſaid, Is this,or what elſe is the reaſon why you 


bares ; I beg not your Faveur,but your Juſtice; judge according to 
right, and do not conclude me to be wicked, becauſe you ſee me to 
be miterable, as you have fa'ſly and unjuſtly done. Or, there ſhall be 
miquity, to wit, in my words which I have ſpoken, and which I 
am further about to ſpeak: Which you will find upon the review. 
c 7. e, In this cauſe or matter between you and me; the Reletive 
without the Anrecedent,which frequent in the Hebrew Language. 
You will fnd the right to be on my fide. 


and a ſericus review of my eaſe. b To wit,in your Thoughts or De- 


+ Heb: 


ars afraid of me,or alienated from me- g Give me ſomething for my 
Support or Relief. Did either my former Covetouſneſs or my pre- 
ſent Neceſſity make me troubleſome or chargeable to you > hEither 
to the Judge vefore whom I am brought and accuſed, that he may 
give a favourable Sentence in my behalf: Or to the Enemy who 
hath taken me Captive» Or give agift for me, 1.e, for my uſe or 
need. Did I ſend for you to come and viſit me for this end ! Nay, 
Did you not come of your own accord ? Why then are you thus 
unmerciful to me ! Methinks you might at Jeaſt have given me 
gocd and comfortable words, which is the eaſieſt and cheapeſt part 
ofa Friends work,when I deſire and expeted nothing elſe from you. 

23 Or deliver me j from the enemies hand z or re- 


deem me & from the hand of the mighty ? 
; By power and the force of your Arms,as Abraham delivered Lot 
 & by Price, or Ranſom. 
24 Teach me / andI will hold my tongue m; and 


cauſe me to underſtand wherein I have erred ». 

I Inſtead of ce:i:ſuring and reproaching,inſtru& and convince me 
by ſolid Arguments. 1 will patiently hear and gladly receive your 
counſels. Or I will be filent,T will neither contradict you,nor com- 
plain of my own Griefs. Compare Job4c:4,5.Prov.30:32:n 7.e. My 
Miſtakes and Miſcarriages. , 
? but what doth 


30 Is there iniquity in my tongue d? cannot F my 


taſte e diſcern perverſe things f ? 

4 Conſider again, and more throughly examine, if there be any 
Unrruth or Iniquity in what I have already fail, or ſha)l further 
ſpeak to you. ere. My Judgment which diſcernsand judgeth of 
Words and Ations as the Taſte or palate doth of Mears. f ;. e. Falſe 
Opinonscr ſinful Expreſſions. I am not ſo bereft of common un- 
derſtanding, as notto be able ro diſtinguiſh between good and evil. 
Ard therefore ifT have uttered, or ſhould utter ary perverſe words, 

I ſhould apprehend them to be fo as well as you doe. 

CHAS YVIL 

Our Times are like thoſe of H relings, reſtleſs and hopeleſs ; Death defir- 

able : Our dnys are as a Weavers Shuttel ; Our Life ts as Wind : nd 

he was conſumed out of this World, and ſhould appear in it no more, 

| ER -10. Therefore he will ſpeak ro Ged, 11, 12. Is tircd out ana weary 

of Life, 13--4=-16» Man unworthy of Gods notice, 17====19: He conjeſſ: 

eth tis ſin, and prayeth for forgivenneſs, 

I there not || * an appointed time to man upon [Or.ox- 
Earth « ? .are not his days alſo like the days of an fare; 

hireling b2? | © Chapag. 

a Is there not acertain and ſhort time limitted by God, wherein 73: 1+: 

Man ſhall live in this ſinful, and vain, and miſerable World, after lal: 39:4 

which he ſhall live in an bolier and happier place and ſtate? And 


my palate 


25 How forcible are right words s 
your arguing reprove p ? 

0 7,e. The words of Truth or ſolid Arguments have a marvellous 
power to convince and perſwade a Man ; and if yours were ſuch I 
ſhould readily yield re them. p Or, your arguing argue. 'There is 
notruth in your Afertions, nor weight in your Arguments, and 
therefore are they of no account or power with me. 

25 Doye imagin to reprove words q, and to re- 
prove the ſpeeches of one that is deſperate r,which are 


as wind s ? 
qz.e. Do you think that all your Arguments are ſolid and un- 


isira Crime in me to deſire that God woujd give me ſome eaſe 

and reſpite for the preſent, and bring me to that bleſſed and joyful 
pzriod? 6 Whoſe time 1s limited and ſhort, being but for a few 

years, 1(a: 16: 14: & 21; 16: and ſometimes but for days, Job 14. 6: 

Matt: 20: 1, 2; and whole Condition is full cf Toil and Hardſhip. 

2 As a Servant F earneſtly defireth the ſhadow c, 

and as an Hireling looketh for the reward of his 4 p5cy 


work d : peth afuer 
c1.e. The Sun-ſet, or the Night,the time allotted for his reſt and 
repoſe, Pſal: 104: 23: And why may notT alſo deſire the time of 


an{werable, and all my Anſwers are bur idle and empty words ? 
Or, do you think it is ſufficient to cavil and quarrel! with ſome of 

. my words and expreſſions, without conſidering the Merits of the 
cauſe, and the Truth of my Condition, or giving an allowance for 
Humane Infirmity, or for my extream Miſery,which may eaſily force 
from me ſome indecent Expreilions ? r Of a poor miſerable, hope- 
leſs and helpleſs Man ; for the words of ſuch Peſons are commonly 
negle&ed and deſpiſed, although rhere be truth and great weight 
in them. See Ec:leſ. 9: 16. And ſuch are generally thought to 
ſpeak from deep Paſſions and Prejudices more than frem Reaſon & 
Judgment. 57. e. Which you eſteem to be like the Wind, vain 
and lighr, without ſolid ſubſtance, making a great noiſe with little 
ſenſe, and to little purpoſe. Burt this laſt branch of the Verſe may 
be,and by many is rendred otherwiſe : dns, do ye imagine( which 


my reft ? 4 Heb hu work ;-whichis oft put for the reward of it, as 
Lev: 29: 13: 1/a: 40: 10: & 49:4: Or, theend of hi work. 
3 Soeam I made to poileſs f months g of vanity b, 


and weariſome nights ; are appointed to me. 

e This ſoreſpe&snot ſo much the deſire and expe&ation of an 
hired Servant, which is exprefſed wv. 2: as the ground and reaſon of 
ir, which is plainly implied there,to wit, his hard Toi) and Service, 
which makes him thirſt after reſt. fGod, by his ſoveraign Power 
and Providence,hath given me this as my Lct and Inheritance. g So 
he calls them rather than days, to note either the irkſomnelſs 2nd 
tediouſneſs of his Aﬀflition, whereby every day ſeemed a month 
to him, or their length or continuance, which, as ſome infer from 


hence, had now been upon him ſome months. þ Empty and un- 
latisfying 


Wn... __ 


S 


Chap. VII; 


*,Far 


23; 
fHeb 


Pig q 


[ 
ta 


y' ff 
frer: 


F fr. 


*Neut2$:; 


; Fehap. VII F; 


ſatisfying, or falſe and deceitful, not giving me that eaſe and rei? 
which they promiſed me, and I expe&ted. 7 He mentions nightr, 
becauſe thar is the ſaddeſt time for tick and miſerable Perſons; the 
darkneſs and ſolitude of the night being of rhemſelves uncomfort- 
able, and giving them more opportunity for ſolemn and forrowful 
Thoughts and Refle&tions upon their own Miferiess 


4* When I liedown &, Ifay, when ſhall Fariſe,and 


Ge 11:12: | the night /be gone ? and Lam full of toffings to and 
+H-b. the fro 2 unto the dawning of the day ». 


guenitg be 
meaſured. 


* Clag:25* 


& 16; 223 
& 17:11: 


Plal; 90:6. 


& 1023115 


& 103:15: 


& 144/45 
If; 38: 12: 


& go: 6: 


Jan:4: 14: 
"fee. Vain: Iſa: 57:13: Hoſe 8. 7 quickly paſſing away, ſo as 


wt returns 


[7 ſce,that 
15, to enjoy. 


That is, 
(an live n0 


linger, 


,01m.12: 
33 


tHeb:HeT, 


'Plaoz:163 


. 


Chap. 9 
HY, +: ” 


IT 
tifielt me through viſions 0. | | 


& To get ſome reſt and ſleep. 1 Heb: the evening. The part put 
for the whole, as it is Gen: 1:5: m From fide to ſfidein the Bed, as 
Mea in grievous pains of bedy, or anxiety of mind uſe to be, n 
So this Hebrew word is uſed alſo 1 Sam: 3c: 17: Pſale 119. 147* 

5 My fleſh is clothed o with worms p, and clods of 


duſt q; my skin is broken r,and become loathſom. 

6 ; e. Covered all over as with a Garment.  p Which oft breed 
and hreak forth in divers parts of living bodies, as Hiſtory and Ex- 
perience wirneſſeth, and which were eaſily bred out of Jeb's cor- 
rupted Fleſh and Sores. 9 Either the Duſt of the Earth upon which 
he lay,which his Sores would quickly lick up ; or the Scabes of his 
Sores, which by degrees mouldred away into duſt. r By Ulcers 
breaking forth in all parts of it. 

6 My days are ſwifters than a Weavers Shuttles, 


and are ſpent without hope «. 

s Thetime of my life haſtens to a period ; and therefore vain are 
thoſe hopes which you give me of a Reſtitution to my former Pro- 
ſperity in this World #& Which paſſeth in a moment from oneend 
of the Web tothe other, # To wir,of enjoying any good day here. 

7 O remember « that * my lifeis wind y ; mine eye 


t ſhall no more || ſee good =: 
x He turneth his Speech to God, as appears from v: 8. 12, 14. 


never to come again, as is ſaid Pſal, 78. 39. 271. e. Enjoy ( for ſo 
ſeeing is ſometimes uſed, as Pſal. 34. 12: Jer: 17: 6:) good, to wit, 
in this World, as my Friends flatter me. Compare Chap. 143 12: & 
19: 26: 2738 

8 Theeye of him that hath ſeen me, ſhal ſee me no 
more 4: thine eyes «re upon me, and || I am not b. 

a fn this mortal ſtate : I ſhall never retutn to this Life again. 
b Either, x. If thou doſt but caſt one angry look upon me, I am nr. 
7.e. T ama dead Man. So that Phraſe is uſed,Gen:5. 24: & 42: 13; & 
44: 20s Pſal. 103.16: Jer.31215. Or, 2. When thine Eyes ſhall be upox 
me, (i. e. when thou ſhalt look for me to do me good,thou wilt find 
that) 1amnot, thatT am dead and gone, and uncapable of thar 
Bounty and Goodneſs which thou giveſt to Men in this World. 
Compare v 21: Pſal: 10: 15: - Fer; 50: 20. 

9 As the cloud is conſumed c and vaniſheth away 4; 
ſo ® he that goeth down to | the grave ſhal come upno 


more e, 

c Being dried up or diſſolved by the heat of the Sun. &d Never 
returneth again. e To live a natural mortal Life amongſt Men. 
For, that he doeth not deny a fucure Life, is manifeſt from Chap; 
I9: 25, &Cc. ; 

to He ſhall return no more to his houſe f,* neither 


thall his place know him any more g. 

f To enjoy his Houſe and Pcſſeſſions again;g i.e. He ſhall no more 
be ſeen aad known in his former Habitation and Condition by his 
Friends and Neighbours. The place pur for the Men of the place, 
as Chap 8: 18:% 20:9: Pſal. 37: 10. f 
» 11 Therefore 4 Twill not refrain my mouth, TI will 
ſpeak inthe anguiſh of my ſpirit ; [ will complain in the 
bitteraeſs of my ſoul z. 

h Since my Life is by the common Condition of Mankind fo vain 
and ſhort, and when onceloſt, without all hopes of recovery, and 
withal extreamly miſerable, I will plead with God for pity and re- 
lief before I die; knowing that I muſt now ſpeak,or eſe for ever at- 
ter hold my peace, as to requeſts of this nature. 7 I will 10r ſmo- 
ther my bitter Anguiſh within my own Breaſt, which will make t 
intolerable, but I will give it vent, and eaſe my ſelf by pouring 
forth Complaints, and expoſtulating with my God, who,as I hope, 
will heaz and help me one way or other. 

12 Am 1a Sea, or a Whale &, that thou ſetteſt a 


watch over me / ? 

k Am Iſo great, and powerful, and dangerous a Creature, that 
thou needeſt to uſeextraordinary Power and Violence to rule and 
ſubdue me ? AmT as fierce and unrully as the Sea, which, if thou 
didſt not ſet a watch over it, and Bounds to it, would overwhelm 
the Earth, and deſtroy Mankind upon it ? Or,am I a vaſt and un- 
governable Sca-monſter, which, if thou didſt not reſtrain it by 
thy Powerfull Pcovidence, would overturn Ships,and deſtroy Men 
in it, and devour all the leſſer Fiſhes? Have I behaved my felt to- 
wards thee, or towards Men, with ſuch Rage and Violence, as to 
need ſuch Chains to-be put upon me ? Or, is my Strength 10 great. 
as that of the Sea, which can endure ſo many and long Storms one 
afrer another, and yet can ſubſiſt under them, and after them ? Or, 
ofa Whzle, that can laugh at Darts and Spears? as is ſaid Chap: 41. 
29. No Lord, thou knoweſt that I am but a poor weak C reature, 
Which thou canſt cruſh with the leaſt touch of thy Finger,without 
theſe violent and unſupportable Pains and Miſeries ; and that Thave 
net been ſo fierce and boiſterousin my carriage,as to need ordeſerve 
theſe extraordinary Calamities. ! That thou thouldeſt guard and re- 

rain me with ſuch heavy and unexampled Milſeries, leit I ſheuld 
break into Rebellion againſt thee,or into Cruelty towards Men. 


13 * When ſay, my Bed ſhall comfore me, my 


Couch ſhall eaſe my complaint m : 
m By giving me ſweet and quiet Sleep, which may take off the 
{ſenſe of my Torments for that while. 
Then thou ſcarreſt me with dreams », and ter- 


O B. 


me, or from the Devils Malice, who by thyPermiſſion diſturbs me 
in this manner 5 ſo that I am afraid to go to ſleep,and my Remedy 
Proves as bad as my Diſeaſe. o The ſame thing with Dreams.; for 
there were not only Day-vifions,which were off:red to Mens fight, 
when they were awake; but alſo Night-viſions.which were preſented 
to Mens Fancy in their Sleep and Dreams. See Gen: 28:1 2.& 41;1,2: 
Dan: it #9 31. & 4, 5, 10. : 
5 So chat my Soul chooſeth p ſtrangling q,and death 


t wretched Life. q The moſt violear fo it be bur a certain and ſudden 

: death.r Heb than my bones i.e. than my Body,formerly the Souls dear 

and deſired Compamion,or than to be in the Body,which commonly 

; Confiſts of $kin and Fleſh,and Bones but in Job was in a manner n0- 

thing but a bundle of bones ; for his Skin was every where broken 

' and his Fleſh was quite conſumed; as he oft complains,and his Bones 

' allo were nor free from Pain and Torment ; for as\Satans Commiſ. 

ſton reacherh to Job's bones, Job 2: 5: ſo doubtleſs his Maliceand wic. 
ked Deſign would engage him to execute it to the utmoſt. 

16 * I loath zz, s I would not live alway x ; 
alone, « formy days are vanity x. | 

s To witymy Life laſt mentioned, * In this World,if I might, no 


this extremity of Miſery, Or, let me not live for ever, lingring in this 
miſerable manner,as if thou woulceſt not ſuffer me to diezbut hadſt 
a deſign to perpetuate my Torments. Or, let me not live out mine age 
or the full time of my Life, which by the courſe of Nature, might 
do ; for ſo the Hebrew word Olam is oft uſed;but cut me off, and 
that ſpeedily. « z. e. Witadraw thy hand from me, either 1. thy 
ſupporting hand which preſerves my Life, and ſuffer me todie: Or 
rather 2. thy correfing hand, as this ſame Phraſe is uſed, wer. 19: 
x Either 1. my Life is in it ſelf, and in its beſt eſtate a moſt vain 
unfatisfying,uncertain thing ; do not add this evil to it to make it 
miſerable. Or 2. my Life 1s a vain, decaying,and perifhing thing 
it will of it ſelf quickly vaniſh and depart, and doth not need to be 
forced from me by ſuch exquiſite Torments. | 


him y 2 and that thou ſhouldeſt ſet thine heart upon 
him z ? 

y What is there in that poor, mean, contemptible Cres 1- 
led Man, miſerable man, 6 this word ſignifies, which can re Ge 
incline thee to take any notice of him, to ſhew him ſuch reſpe&, or 
to make ſuch account ofhim ? Man is not worthy of thy Favour 
and he is below thy Anger. Ir is too great a condeſcention to thee. 
and too great an honour for man that thou wiltſt contend with him 
and draw forth all thy forcesagainſt him, as if he were a fit match 
for thee; whereas men uſe to negle& and ſlight mean adverſaries 
and will notdo them the honour ro fight with them. Compare : 
Sam; 24: 14. Therefore do not,O Lord, thus diſhonour thy ſelf 
nor magnifie me.I acknowledge that even thy CorreQtions are Mer- 
cies and Honours, but, Lord, let me be no more ſo honoured. 
z i,e, Have any regard to himyſo far as toafflit him,whichthough 
it be grievous 12 1t{elf, eipecially when it is aggravated as mine Is, 
yet unto thy peopleitis a great mercy and bleſſing,as being highly 
neceſſary and uſeful to humble chem, and purge them from ſin,and 
prepare them for glory : as on the contrary, thoſe wicked men 
whom thou doeſt deſpiſe and hate, and deſign to deſcroy,thou doeſt 
forbear to puniſh or affli&t them. 

18 And zhat thou ſhou'deſt viſit him « every morn- 
ing b, andtry him « every moment? 

a To wir, puniſh or chaſten bim, as the Word is. oft uſed, as 
viſiting is oft uſed, as Exod: 20: 5. and 32:34>and 34: 7: - b 5. e. Eves 
ry day But hementions the morning, either becanſe that is the be- 
ginning of the day, and fo is put ſynecdochically for the whole day 
as the evening,v:4: is put for the whole night : Or he ſpeaks of God 
after the manner of men, who reſtand ſleep in the night,bur in the 
morning riſe and go abour their buſineſs, and viſit or inſpe& thoſe 
perſons and things which they have a reſpe& for, or care of. c 5. 
e. affli& him, which is oft called trying, becauſe ir dgth indeed try 
a man's faith and patience, and perſeverance. But this and the for. 
mer Verſe may poſſibly be otherwiſe underſtood, not of Aﬀflitiens. 
but of Mercies. Having declared his loathipg of life, and his paſſi- 
onate deſire of death,and urged it with this conſideration, that the 
daysof his life were meer vanity ; he now perſues it with this expoſe 
tulation. What is man, that vain. foolifh Creature, that thou 
ſhouldeſt magnifie or regard, or viſit him, ( to wit, with thy Mercy 
and Bleſſings, ofwhich thoſe words are commonly uſed, 7. e. thar 
chou ſhouldſr fo far honour and regard him, as by thy viſitation to 
preſerve his Spirit, or hold his Soul in life ) and #ry him, which God 
doth not only by Aﬀfi&ions, bur alfo by Proſperity and outward 
Blefſings, which commonly dete@ a mans Hooncctls and diſcover 
that Corruption which before lay hid in his Heart? Therefore, O 
Lord, do not thus magnifie, and viſit me with thy Mercy, but rake 
away my lifes : 

19 How long wilt thou not depart from me 4, nor 
let me alone till { ſwallow down my ſpittle e ? _ 

d How long will it be e're thou withdraw thy afflifting hand from 
me ? el. e. For a lirr - time ; or that I may have a breathing time ; 
A Proverbial Expreſſion, like that Spaniſh Proverb, 1 have mot time 
or liberty to ſpit out my ſpittle. Or this Expreſſion may have reſpe& ts 
Job's diſtempered and calamitous condition wherewith he was ſo 
overwhelmed, that he either had not ſcrength, or could not take heed 
to ſpit out his ſpittle as he thould have done;but ſwallowed it down 
a5 ſick and melancholy Perſons often do. s 
20 I have ſinned f, whart ſhall I do unto thee g, O 
thou preſerver of men þ why * haſt thou ſet me as a 


mark againſt thee,ſo that Tam a burden to my ſelf ;? 

f Although I am innocent and free from thoſe crying ſins, for 
which myFriendsſuppoſe thou haſt ſent this uncommonJudgmeng 
upon me, yer if thou beeſt ſtrick to remark what is amiſs, I freely 
confeſs that I am a ſinner, and therefore obnoxious tothy Juſtices 
and I humbly beg thy pardon forit; as it followg verſe 21. And 
therefore accept of this Confeſſion. g To fatisfiethy Juſtice, or 


= With ſad and dreadful Dreams ariſing either from the Melan- | 
tholly Humor which is now ſo fixed in me, and predominant over | 
; 


regain thy Fayour, 1 can do nothing to purchaſe or deſerve it, 
4 E 2 - and 


- 


Chap. VI 


rather + than my life r. '+Heb. thai | 


? Not ſimply and in it ſelf,but comparatively, rather than ſoch a 27 #0nes- Ms | 


*letme- Ch:10:1) 
*Ch:10;240 
F £1 # : & 14:6. |jj 

not 1n Proſperity ; for even ſuch a Life is but Vanity, muchleſs in Pfal.39:1J|| 


I7 * What 5s man that thou Gouldeſt magnifie * 


Heb. 2: 6; 


*Ch: 16:12, 
Pſal;21:125 
Lam- 3.12 


: 
q : 
5 
= 


i 
i 


it 
eu! 


: 


Pſal.8:4| 
144: -33 


hap. VIIT. | 
and therefore implore thy Mercy to pardon my fins. Þ O thou 
who, as thou waſt the Creator of Man, delighreſt to be, and ro be 
called the Prefſerver and Saviour of Men ; and .that waiteſt to be 
kind and gracious to Men from day to day, as occalion requires ; 


which ſheweth what oppinion he hath of thee. & 5. 5. The concern 

of thy Houſe and Family : Anuſual Metony my, [ Either, 1. which 

thou haſt gor and managed with righteouſneſs ; ſo he call; it by way 
N, i - yE3 y 7 rd 

OT EEIESST 3 neon anno pan Gel pak prope he cconigly 
Name,and tothe manner of thy dealing with all the reſt of Mankind. |chou haſt got thy eſtate by fraud and oppreſſion. Or, 2. W ich thoy 
Orh. O thou obſerver of M1 |; thou who doeſt exactly know and ſhaltnow manage with juſtice,and not wrongfully,as chon haſt done, 
diligently obſerve all mens inward motions, and outward actions ; M6 © hough thy beginning was {mall, yer ty latter 
and rherefore if thou ſhalt rt br tn _ mize -—  7;6p ie end ſhould greatly encreaſe m. 

q ſeemeſt to be, I wy ON 7 = je 7 mr O T4 * ah as Foy mn The ſenile 1s either, bs Though thou hadſN poſſeſſed bur ver 
te 3s *h 4/2207 Tabtghd ag I = <a 2s be CE and of my | ©ffle atfirſt, yer God would have wonderfully bleſſed and increaſed 
row5OF t y 6 FW "rh _ and; s MT, es oflo ;Tay eſtate. Whereas now God hath brought thee down from + 
110 Fn; no Way able to relt$ Or EndUIC THE AMauits OE 10 Þ | great eſtate almoſt tonothing. Which is an evidence of his diſplea« 
«<buottgbart & | {ure and thy hypocritie. Or,2. Though the beginning of thy fur 

. ” Birr = : au ; DO vg ure 

I. _ why doſt thou not 77haga my yn, | rh wn Or, CT ers _ ga Arts now _ ſmall], yet if 
and take away mine 1N1qUITY /: 7 LOT NOW Na CEP IN thou dof repent and ſeek God it ſhall va ly increaſe. 

the duſt / ; and thou ſhalt ſeek me in the morning, but; 8 Forenquire, I pray thee, of the former age », and : 

I ſhall not be >. prepare thy ſcif to the ſearch of their fathers o, Der: ,, 


2 2. e. Of our Predeceffors, who had the adv intage of longer life Ct 
IF: 18, 


k Seing thou art ſo gracious to others, ſo ready to preſerve and | t | 
pardon them, why may not I hope for the fame favour trom thee ? and more experience,hefides more frequent revelations from God, 


{ If thou doeſt not ſpeedily help me,it will be roo Jare,I thall be dead, thaa we have. Who alto will be more impartial Judges of this cauſe 
and fo uncapable of thoſe Bleflings which thou uſcſt ro give to men than w2 may be thought to be. Imform thy elf from them by 
in the land of the living. m #. e. When thou ſhalt diligently ſeek the i::{truCtions which they left, either in Word or Writing, what 
for me, that thou mayeſt ſhew favour to me, thou wilr tind that I their Opinion was about the manner of God's Dealings with Men. 
am dead and gone,and ſo wilt loſe thy opportunity : Hejp therefore o Do not ſlightly, but ſerioullly and induſtriouſly ſearch the anci- 
ſpeedily. A mw a Records 
C H Pe / . - +* - Re 
Bildads repovof, Jeb's words ſaid tobe as wind, God iſt in all his ways, & 9 ( on C —_— of ris P, 7 xv ag T no- Gi ch: 
| and in his dealings towards Job's children : if he would pray r9 God, and ©* ing, DECAUule Our wide EE OTE 1 TIRGOW 4. ) Gen. 
yy we indeed pure and upright, G'd would ariſe for him, 1----=7; For this _Þ But lately born, and tterefore have but Jittle Knowledge and : N:47:9; 
he appealeth 16 the hiſtory of ancient times, which declare the bad end Experience, as it follows. q I his 15 meant either, 7. Oftheir lives Kh mY 
of the Hypocrite,$--=--19: and the hope and joy of the upright, 20-=--22, ED Files, WO WOE 0 Fe: ow = __ Anceſ- 7: _ ; 
; . "6+ X S, atria , Ww g 's gave the cortunity to £9939: 5: 
Hen anſwered Bildad the Shunite, and laid, know and fee the courſe of God's Providence nin. good Dar 144:4: 
2 How long wilt thou ſpgak theſe things ? and bad men,and the differing endsand iilves of their lives. Or, 22Of mens T Heb:ue, 
how loxg ſhall the words of thy mouth be lhke a {trons lives 1a general; which being very ſhort, mens Obſervation 
wind a? | reacheth bur to very few events in compariſon of thoſe which may | 
- be known by the Records and Teſtimony of all former Ages. j 


& 7. e. Boiſterous and violent, ſwelling and furicus, oppoſing all vn by 
perſons and things that ſtand in thy way, not ſparing either God | 10 Shall not they teach thee F, and tell thee, and ut-! 
| ;ter words out of their hearts 5? | 


or Men. | 
© Gen? 18: X Doth God 6 pervert judgment c £ or dotii the | r Afſuredly they will inform thee that it js as we ſay.fs Not Dar 
25: Deur: Almighty pervert juſtice ? { tially, bur ſincerly, ſpeaking their inward thoughts ; nor raſhly, 
32: 4: b Heb. The 1:ghty God, as this word ſignifies, che Almighty, or but from deep conlideration ; not by hearſay from others, bur their 
: $547 : bn . ; own knowledge and experience. 


Cap: 34:17: Alſufficient God, as the next name of God here implies. Theſe Names _— : : 
- 2Chr-19:7: are emphatically uſed, to prove that Gcd cannot deal unjuſtly Cr Ii Can the ruſh T grow up without mire t ? canthe + Heb if 


Dan'9:14: falſly with Men, becauſe he hath no need of it, nor temptation to agg u grow without water ? ud it ol, 
Rom: 3:5: it, being ſelf-ſufficient for his own happineſs, and being able by his 77. e. If ir bznotin moiſt and miry ground, This and what fol- : 
own invincible Power to do whatſoever pleaſeth him ; unleſs Men |lows he mentions as it were in the perſon ofthoſe Ancients to whom 
, will impudeatly ſay, that God doth fallly for meer love to falſhood, [he had referred him,cf whom he faith that they would give him ſuch | 
without any neceſſity of it, or advantage to himſelf by it ; than | Inſtructions as theſe. = Or, the graſs : or, the meadow, as this word | 
which nothing can be more abſurd and ridiculous: for this makes | js uſeq, Gez: 41: 2:7, e. The Graſs of a Meadow. But our Tran- ' 

him worſe than the vileſt of men, who a& unjuſtly and falſly, be- {lation ſeems the beſt, becauſe it is compared with other herbs, 
_ _— | __ 555 ar 7 yore _—y deſigns. 7's w_— 12*Whileſt it;s in yethis greennels x,and notcutdown P1296: 

throw the Courſe of Juſtice 1n giving Judgment ; or, judge unrigh- . : \, £ S S70. pu 17.6 

teouſly ? No, this ah ponmnr+= þ. with God's Nature,which iseffen- err wager ora, they herb z. "Ws Feng 

tially and neceſſarily juſt, and with his Office of Governour of the F n— ETE Y it promueth 10ng Fond will for hoes. Swan 

World, Gen; 18: 25. | ut it down it withereth of it ſelf,and will fave a man the labour ! 

th : : of cutting or piucking it up. Ir gives not a man ſo much warning 
4 If thy childrem have ſinned againſt him 4, and he | that he can cur jt down in time,as other green herbs do, but ſudden. 


©. wv » > » y is! as! I Th 
f Heb: #:' have caſt them away © for their trantgrethion e : ' as 7 e. wr ap ie anos Pry ry preſence,or 
. WW. > r (JF » , 2x= 4 ;> 2 , . . 
ed 2 Whar though chou vaſt Jn 2 greer meaſure innocent; thy Chil- | hey urviving ; in wie ſente ic feems robe faid thar Iſhmael died 
*4 —D d fo Colontiies fell "hr be 7% fe preſence of bus brethrem, Gen: 25:18: The reſt of the Herbs look= 
eir tranſ= dren, upon whom a great part of rheie Calamities fel], miyhr be ing upon it,and admiring this ſudden change. Fer a&i fS 
greſſim. guilty of great ſins ; and therefore God is not unrighreous in theſe > UPON. 10, S000 CUITONE TREE ENCE PEAS. 10ns of Senſe 
| occedings. e Or, E2th expelled, or caft them 9:7 \ 10 wit, out of and Underſtanding, are off aſcribed to hifetels Creatures both in 
proceedings. Src p : Scripture, and in other Authors. | 


Fhis f: - as an gives his Wife a Bill of Me 
TL GD EF x 13 SO are the paths of all that forget God a, and the 


Divorce, of which rhis word is uſed) by mcans, ( Heb by t2e hand, - [1 Fe 

which is oft ſo uſed ) of their wickedneſs. Or, hath lefi them in the hand hypocrites hope ſhall periſh be Chu11:29 

of their ſin ; to wir, to be puniſhed by it,and for it. Compare Nam, | ar. e\ Of wicked men who are branded with this ſame. Chara- A ay 
* T2; 


32: 23; Nur ſin ſhall find you outs | Cter, Pſa: 4 17s _—— _ _— ht 6-2 » —_ NT _ EX pi 
48 I . : - Plain it, who are deſcribe their firſt and fundamental miſcarri»- *10*'* 

*Ch:11:175 F 4 thou f wouldeſt ſeek unto God bertimes ES and ng which is, that hey Reger, /.e. neglett, forſake, and deſpiſe 
& 22:23: make thy ſupplication to the Almighty ; (for ſo this Phraſe-is commonly- undertitoos, az Dent: 6:12: and 8:11, 
f But God hath ſpared thee, whom he might juſtly have deſtroy. &c, and 4 2: 182 Fer; 2; 32: and 23: 27: } God, i.e his Preſence, and 

ed with thy Caildren, and. thou art yet capable of his favour if Commands, and Worſhip, and Providence ; . and therefore break 

thou ſeek for it : And therefore ceaſe from theſe cauſeleſs and un- forth ints manifold ſins. But by their paths he doth not underſtand 

thankful Complaints. g Heb. rije early to ſeck kim, fe, if thou the courſe of their ations, or manner of their living, but the events 

wouldeſt ſeek him ſpeedily, early and diligently. See Chap'5:8;:and which befall them, called rheir paths objetively, becauſe they are 

7; 18, 2b But this may be underſtood of the time paſt; and this the paths of God, or the methods of his Providence, or manner of 

Verſe being conneQed with the next, may be thus rendred and un- his dealing with them. Now this may be accommodated to the 

derſtood ; 1f thou had jought ( for the Future Tenſe inthe Hebrew foregoing ſimilitude in thismanner ; ſuch is the Proſperiry of wjce 

is oft put for the paſt) unto God betimes ( as thou didſt ſeem to do, ked men, becauſe it wants the ſolid foundation of their Piety; and of 

Chap: 1: 5:) and made ſupplication tothe Almighty; If withal thou hadſ# Gods Promiſe and Blefſing conſequent thereupon, it quickly vanith= 

been pure aud upright, i. e If thy prayers had been accompanied with eth into nothing þ& 7. e. He ſhall loſe what he hoped for,(hope being 

purity and uprightneſs of heart an4 life,they ſhould have been heard off pur for irs obje&) even uninterrupted and abiding felicity, and 

and anfwered. But becauſe thou didſt regard iniquity in thy heart, with it aJl hope of reſtitu: -3n. + Heb 


therefore God would not hear, and did not anſwer thy prayers,but 14.7 Whole hope ſhall be cut off c, and whoſe truſt av 
anſwered thee with a Curſe in lead of a Bieſhag,as he uſeth to deal ] be + a fi b d whoſe hip 
7-1" och a ſhalt ve T a lpeeders web 4. EE loaths lin, 

4; c i, e. Whoſe Wealth anlontward Glory, which is the matter of + Heh: s 


6 If thou were pure and upright &, ſurely now he his hope,and rruft, ſhall be cut off, 7. « ſuddenly and violently taken fide 
would awake for thee i, and make the habitation & of away from him. Whoſe hope ſhall be irkſome or tedtous to him, by the oyſe, | 
thy righteouſneſs I proſperous. ſucceſſion of ea neſtexpeQation and o_ 1" - 0g wg a per Tfa:59:5,6 

h If thou wert in truth what thou pretendeft, and haſt been ro bi - _ CES _— 1 feeble” = _ _ ; 
Donglcſs Iſs rowards Gal and Men: But Gold's fevere dealing 497,97 Pulled in pieces.and unable to defend the ſpeederthat made 

: ; ,  aokat - > ir. application is obvious. : $Pkeomil 
with thee is an evident token, that notwithſtanding all thy fair a = ; n : ; Chz27:1 
ſhews,thou art but an Hypocrite and ſecret Sinner. And this ſenſe ' 75 He e ſhall lean upon his houſe f; but it _ not 
may ſeem to agree both with the ſame Charge brought in againſt ſtand s : he ſhal hold irfaſt 5, but it (ball not endure, 

| eEither the Spider : Or rather the wicked man ſignified by it. 


+þ by Eliphaz, Chad: 4:6,7: and with the following Diſcourſe, pars- | b) 
2 des fo hich V: 13: oy; Or thus, If thou $ouldeſt be pure Gp F 4. e. He ſhall cruſt ro the multitude and ſtrength of his Children 
right; 3. e. if thou wouldeſt joya Reformation to thy Supplication. | and Servants, and to his Wealth,all which come under the name of 
-And this ſenſe may. ſee:a beſt to ſuit with the foregoing Verſe, ac- | a mans heuſe in Scripture ufe. g 5. e. Not be ableto uphold it ſelf, 
cording ro the common Trantlation. ii. e Beſtir himſelfto help | norhim that truſted to it. þ Or, he ſhall take faſt hold of it, not ” 


thee, as being his faithful Friend and Servant, whom he could nor upheld it, bur to ſtrepgthen and uphold himſelf by ir, as it is in the 
in honour or juftice forſake ; whereas now he ſhews a deep fleep, | former branch. ; 
and wholly negles thee,and turaeth a deat Fir to all thy Prayers ; 16 ? He 


[ | T 0 B. Chap. V1. 


I 
THcb.cake 

"uy oaly a 
Nth kand 


f 


S 


nt 


It: 4; 


þ.1ft 


el, 


129:6; 
17:6 


h:11:29 
18.14; 
$1210 
0419125 


Heb: 
ſe hip! 
ths hi NM, 
Heb: 9 
ders 
ule. 


1:59:5,6 


Ch:27al 


Chap» IX. 


'C 29:19 


THeb.cale 


Ni 


15 * He is green & before the ſun?, and his branch 


2 ſhooteth forth in his garden ». 

i Either, 1. The perſe& man here underſtood out ofv.20.where 
ir is expreſſed : Or, rather, 2. The Hypocnte, of w hom he hath hi- 
therto treated, to whom this and the tollowing Verſes very well a- 
gree; Whom he beforecomparcd to a Ruſh, andthen to a Spiders 
Web, andnow to a Tree, which is of a more ſolid Subſtance, and 
more durable:as if he ſaid, as ſome wicked men are quickly cut 
off in the very beginnings of their Proſperity;ſo there are orhers who 
ſeem to be more firmly grounded, and yet they allo at laſt come to 
ruine. þ i; e. Flouriſhsth in the World. Either, 1. Publickly and 
in the view of all men,who obſerve it withadmiration,and applauſe 
and envy, Compare 2» Sam: 12: 12. Or, rather, 2. Notwithſtanding 
all the ſcoiching heat ofthe Sun, which ouickly withers theRuſhes 
and Herbs of which heſpake before, 
freſh the tree. And ſo doth many a wicked man ſecure himſclf,and 
thrive and proſper even in times of great danger and trouble, and 
in ſpight of ail oppoſition. m Or, His branches, the ſingular number 
for the plural ; eitier, 1. Properly, and ſo this belongs to the 
deſcription of a flouriſhing Tree, by the ſpreading of its branches 
here, as by the depth of its root, v; 17. Or, 2. Metaphorically, 
to wit, his Caildren, which are here mentioned as additions not On» 
Iy to his comfort, bur alloto his ſtrength and ſafety. »n A place 
where it is def-nded from thoſe injuries ro which the Trees of the 
fie!d are fuvje& from Menand Beafſts,and where, beſides the natural 
advantages common to all Trees, it hath peculiar helps from the 
Art and Induſtry of M-n,by whom it is watered and aſſiſted,as need 
requires. So he {uppoleth this Man to be placed in the moſt defi 
able Circumſtances. 

17 His roots were wrapped about the heap 0, and 


ſeeth p the-place q of ſtones. 

o To wit, of Stones,which word may he here underſtood our of 
the latter Branch of rhe Verſe,as isvery uſual in Scripture uſe. This 
Circumſtance of the Tree is added, to fignifie, either, 1. Its firmneſs 
and ftrength, thar it was not :n looſe and ſandy Ground, which a 
violent Wind might overthrow, bur in ſolidand hard Ground, with- 
in which were many Stones, which its numerous and ſpreading 
Roots embrace,folding and inrerweaving themſelves ſeverally about 
ſevera!Stones. Or, 2+ Its ſingular and extraordinary growth in 
ſpight ofall diſadvantages and oppoſirions; that evenSrony-ground, 
which is very prejudicial to Trees, Matth; 13: 5- doth not hinder 
its growth, but only add to its ſtreagth- So God and Man ſeem to 
conſpire, and a'l things concur to t2cure and perpetuate this Mans 
happine's. Some render the words, His roors are wrapped, or folded, 
or ſprea about, or beſide a ſpring, as the Hebrew gal ſometimes ſigni- 
fies; as Joſhua 15: 19. Cante 4. 12. #:e. A moiſt ground, which 1s 
much to its advantage : See P/al: 1: 3.Jer.17; 8. þ He, z: e- The Tree 
whoſe Rovts he laſt menrioneth, reacherch thither,ſpreadeth himſelf 
ſo far, rakes the advantage ofthat place for the ſtrengrhning ofits 
ſc] Seeing is oft put for enjoying, and is frequently attributed to life- 
leſs things,by a known Figure,calledProſopopeia.q Heb The henſe,vehich 
55 oft uſed for aplace ; as 2 Sam: 6; 17: 1 Kings8- 6. Others render 
the words thus, He lvoketh upon the houſe of ſtones; 7. e. made of Stones 
for greater beaury and ſtrength. He ſtanderh proudiy, and looketh 
boldly upon its Owners houſe, nighuato which it is placed, even 
in his Garden, as was ſaid before. 


' 18 If he r deſtroy him from his place s, then #t # ſhall 


deny him, /aying, 1 have not ſeen thee «, 

r Eicher God, who is the Saviour of good men and the Deſtroyer 
of the wicked ; Or, the: Owner : or any other Man ; for rhis 1s an 
indefinite ſpeech, and may be taken paſſively and imperſfonally ; 
which isvery common in the holy Text and Language. s In which 
ke was planted. t i.e. The place: ro which denying him, and ſeemg 
him,are here aſcribed figuratively, as we have ofc ſeen, # z.e. IT do 
not know, nor remember that ever thou waft planted here. He 
ſhal be ſo utterly extirpared and deſtroyed,that there ſhal be no Foot- 
ſtep nor Name,nor Memorial of him lefr there. 

19 Behoid,this is the joy of his way x,and out of the 
earth ſhall others grow y. 

* This is the joyful and happy ifſue of the flouriſhing courſe, ſtate, 
and condition ( which is frequently called a way) of this Tree, or 
of the Hypocrite manifeſtly repreſeated by. and expreſſed wv. 13. 
It is a Sarc 1{in or L:eny, and 1s robe undcrlſyu contrartwiſe of his 
ſad and unhappy end. yz. e. Out of che {4aMEcarth or place ſhal a- 
nother tree grow; which could not be, if there had been but a ſtump 
of ir lefr though under Ground. So it notes the total extirpation 
of the Tree, and of the Hypocrite,that his Pecſon and all his Chil- 
dren and Family hal be utterly extin&,and fo a ſtranger thal come 
into his place, and enjoy the fruit of his labours. But the words 
arz and may be otherwiſe rendred very agreeably ro the Hebrew 
Text, And out of other ground they ( 1. ce. Plants or Trees, of which 
he is here ſpeaking ) ſha! grow, or, others ſba!l grow, or plants ſhall 
grow ; the Noun being contained in the Verb: So tie ſenſe is, 
This Tree ſhill be rooted up, and the very Ground of itſo curſed, 
that nothing ſhil grow or tariveinit; but other ground ſhall be 
fruitfu!, and other Trees that ſtood round about it ſhal ſtand fill 
and flouriſh in their places. His deſign in all this is to prove Job to 
be an Hypocrite, becauſe he meets with their lot, which 1s total 


deſtruction. 


20 Behold, God will not caſt away z aperfe& man, 
neither will he 7 help @ the evil doers : 
z Heb. Not deſpiſe or rej:#; i e. He will not deny them his help, 


*wyodly as appears by the oppoſite and following Branch of the Verſe : He ' 
land will not ſuffer them to be utterly loſt a ie. Deliver them our of 


their Troubles : Her:ce it may ſeem that thou,O Job, art not a per- 
fe& or upright man, bur an evil-doer - But this is certain,if for the 
future thy heart and way be not perfe&,and thou doeſt not ceaſe to 
do evils thou wilt be utterly and irrecoverably loſt; as on the con» 
traty, if thou doeſt repent and reform, he will help and deliver 
thee, and reito:e thee rothy former glory and happineſs; which 
Promile, thoagh it be not aere expreſſed,is ſufficiently implyed in 
the conrrarty threatning, as is evident from the following words 
Which plaiily ſup»ole it, and have a reference to it : ſuch Ellipſes 
of Contraries being not unuſual in Scripture, as we ſhal ſee hereaf- 
ter, ep<c:ally 1n the Book of the Prov.rvs, 


: @'& 


buc doth only cheriſh and re- 


= Till hefill thy mouth 03th laughing 5, and thy 
lips with f rejoycing.4. 

6 And what I have CE peneral of all nerfe& men, ſhall be 
made good to thee, if thou beeſt ſuch an one ; God will not for- 
ſake thee, nor deliſt from doing thee good, 7:77 he fill, &C. 2.. God 
Will give thee ſuck abundant matter of rejoycing, that thy heart 
_ nor be able to ho!d ir, bur ir ſhall break cur at thy mouth and 

1PSe 
22 They thas hate thee «c ſhall be cloathed with 
ſhame d, and the dwelling-place ofthe wicked e | (hall 
come to:nought. 

c Thar rejoyce in thy Calamities. & 7. e. Shall be wholly cove- 
red with it, thal be utterly confounded, when they ſhal obſerve 
thee whom they have deſpiſed and inſuitzd over, td be ſo wonder- 
fully and ſurprizingly reitored to thy former, or a greater felicity. 
e Either particularly of thy Enemies, who dealt ſo unworthily and 
wickedly with thee ; or, more generally of all wicked men. Hav- 
ing ſhewed what good Gced would do to the perfe&t man, he now 
declares the contrary portion of the wicked;and as he ſaid,that God 
would not help them, v. 20. ſo here he adds, that God will bring 
not only them, but their Houſe, 7. e. their Family and Eſtate to 


nought. 
CHAP. IX 

Jobs anſwer : Man cannot ſtand in Judgment with God ; becauſe of his Jus 
fiicey Wiſdom, and Power, which are unſearchable, 1 — 
help or reaſon againſt God is vain: nor can we anſwer him ; but muſt ſup= 
plicate to our Judge, 12 —— 15, Gods ſovereignty and our wileneſs 
before him, 16 21. The godly are puniſhed as well as the wicked, by 
general calumities, and wicked oppreſſim, 22———24. His time ſwift; 
his ſorrows bitter ; if wicked, he could not clear himſelf ; nor would God 
hold him innocent, 25 ——31. yet wiſheth jor a days-man,and a removal 
of divine terror ; then would he, before God, maintain his znnacency, 

32 3 5- 

4 | *Hen Job anſwered and ſaid, 
2 Iknow it is fo a of a truth: but how ſhould 
_— juſt b || with God c ? 

4 lowit, as you ſay, that God is juſt inall his ways tha 
doth ordinarly bleſs the Nktoows, and puniſh the Wicked. Heb 
and how, &c. i. e. And I know that no man is abſolutely juſt, or 
can defend his Righteouſneſs, if God be ſevere to mark what "15 2. 
miſs in him. c Either, 1. being compared with God : Or, 2. be. 
fore God, as the ſame Phraſe is taken, 1 Sams 2 26, Pſal 130+ 3.[the 
be brought before Gods Tribunal to debate the matter with him. 

3 It he will contend with himd, he cannot anſwer 
him one of a thouſand e. 

a If God be pleaſed to contend, ( to wit, in judgment; debate, or 
plead; for ſo this word is ofc uſed: ,as Heſ. 2. 2. and 4; ..1. Mzch 6:5 
Compare 1/a. 45.9. ) with man. thee to one Acculation or Ar- 
gument among a thouſand which God ſhal produceagainſt him:Or, 
_ _—_ of a thouſand, So _—_— he be from being able to main- 

aln his Own 1nnocency againſt God, if God ſet hi 1 
as his Adverſary, _ Sh OR A 

4 * He is wiſe in heart f, and mighty in ſtrength s 
who hath hardned himſelf againſt him 5, and hath pro- 
ſpered ; ? 

} Either, r. really and profoundly wiſe ; or, 2. wiſe in his mind 
or underſtanding, which in Hebresv is oft called hz heart, as Prov 
2. 10:and 6. 3 2, Hoſ. 4. 11. becauſe the Hebrews make the heart the 
Seat ofthe Underſtanding, orof the reaſonable Soul. The ſenſe is 
He is infinitely wiſe,and ſoknows all things, and ſearcheth all mens 
hearts and ways, and diſcovers a multirude of fins which mens ſhort. 
ſighted eyes cannot ſee ; and therefore can charge them with innu- 
merable evils, where they thought themſelves innocent, and ſes 
far more malignity than men could diſcern in their ſins: and men 
cannot conceal any of their fins from him, nor cheat him; as they 
may other men, with crafty devices and evaſions ; So that there 
is no contending with him. g z.e. Omnipotent. and. therefore if 
men contumacioufly perſiſt in contending with him after they are 
convicted and condemned, he can eaſily cruſh them. So that whe. 
ther Men contend with God by wiſdom or by ſtrength ( which are 
the two ways of one mans contending with another ) God will be 
Conquerour. h 7. e, Obſtinately contended with him. Or, ſpoken 
hard things towards him,quarrelling with him,oppoſing & reproaching 
Gods Providence towards him as hard and unjuſt. Compare Jude 
v, i5. # Heb. Hath been at peace. i.e. hath not provoked God to 


his own deſrruction, A common . Figure, called Mz:ofis, whereby . . 


more is underſtood than is expreſſed. | 
5 Which removeth the Mountains &, and they know 
not / : which overturneth them in his anger m» ; 

k He proceedeth to give particular Evidences of the Divine Power 
and Witdom, which he mentioned v. 4, { :.e. Suddenly and un4 
expeCtedly, ere they were aware of it. They, 7. e the Mountains to 
which he aſcribes Senſe and Knowledge figuratively, as hath been 
oft noted. In token of tis diſpleaſure with men that lived upon 
them, or near them. 

s Nhich ſhaketh the earth »out of her place,and the 
pillars o thereof tremble. 

» 7: e, Great portions of it, by Earthquakes, or by removine I. 
flands, which ſometimes hath been thi 07, e. The — = 
the ſtrongeſt parts of it, the Mountains, yea the deep and inward 
parts of it, which like Pillars ſupported thoſe parts which appear to 
our view, and yet havebcen diſcovered and overturned by Earth- 
quakes. | 

7 Which commaindeth the ſun, and it riſeth not p, 
and ſealeth up the ſtars 9; PI 0 

He ſpeaks either, 1. Of that which God'cari do; ar rather /as 
he doth in the foregoing and following Inſtances. )z. Ofwhat God 
aftually doth, and thateither, 1. Ordinarily; and ſo he gives Laws 
to the Sun that ir ſhall not riſe, butar ſuch times; and ro ſuch pa- 
ces, and in ſuch manner as he hath appointed ; as that ir ſhall riſe 
conſtantly at its ſet time, and never diſorderly ; that it ſhall nor 
riſe for diverſe Moneths together in ſome parts of the World, &74 
Or rather, 2. Extraosdinarily, (. for of ſuch} Works of God he #1: 

4E; courſerh 


Chap, IX 


ſhout ing 
for joy. 


+ Heb, 


T Heb.ſh, J | 


no; be. 


*Pal. 


143: 2 
|| Or,before 


God. 


*Ch.36;9, | 


courſeth in thisplac2 ) and ſo it may noteeſther ſome ſtop given to 
the Sun for a ſmall ſeaſon, like that in Bens time; which might 


have been,though it be not recorded,or fame penny tempeſt 
or dark ſeaſon,wherein the morning is made darkneſs,as the P hraſe is, 
Amos 4+ 13. Compare 5, 8. wherein the Sun doth not at all appear 
( as it was for many days together, As 27. 20. ) and conſequently 
3s to thoſe places and perſons,as if he were not riſen. For things in 
Scripture are off ſaid to be,or not to be,when they appear or diſap- 
-xr ; of which ſome inſtances have been formerly given,and more 
we ſhall have hereafter, in their proper places. qi» e. As1t were 
covereth and ſhurreth them up that they may not ſhine, as in dark 
and diſmal Tempeſts, like that now m<ntioned, A#r 27: 20. when 

neither ſun nor ſlars appeared for many days. 
2 * Which alone r ſpreadeth out the heavens s, and 


treadeth upon the + waves of the ſea z : 
r 5.e. By his own ſingle power, withoutany other help. 5s He 
ſpread them out like @ curtaing Pal: 104: 1, 2. and he in a manner 
ſpreads them again every day ; #: e: keeps them ſpread for the com- 
fort and benefit of this lower World, and doth not roll and fold 
them up, as he will doin due time : See [/# 34: 4- 2 Per: 3; roiRev. 
6: 14. Or. beweth down the heavens, as the ſame Hebrew Verb is ren» 
dred, Pſal: 18: 9. So it is a further deſcription ofa black and tempe- 
ſtuous ſeaſon, wherein the Heavens ſeem to be brought down and 
nearer tothe Earth. # 5. e. Repreſſeth and ruleth them when they 
Tage and are tempeſtuous: for treading upon any thing, © ſignifies in 
Scripture uſe Power and Dominion over it: as Deut: 33-29. Job 40:12 

Pſal.60:12: and 91. 13. Luke 10: 19. , ; : 

9 * Which maketh « + Ardurus, Orion, and Pleia- 


31,8&. des, and the chambers of the ſouth x. 
Amos5:8. y Either 1. created them ; or rather, 2. ordereth and diſpoſeth 
- TFHeb.4h, them, as the word making is ſometimes uſed in Scripture : govern- 
" Cell and eth their rifing and ſerringy and all their Influences. x Theſe he 
Cimahe | names as Stars or Conſtellations of greateſt note and eminency: 
for ſs they are both in Scripture & other Authors,and ſuch as have 
or are thought to have a ſpecial influence in raiſing Storms and 
Tempeſts : but under them he ſeems to comprehend all the Stars, 
which as they were created by Wod,ſoare under his Government, 
ArFurns isa Northern Conſtellation, near that called the Bear, which 
Tiſerh rous about the beginning of Seprember,and by its riſing produ- 
cerh )as P/my affirms) horrid Storms and Tempeſts. Orion is a more 
Southerly Conſtellation, that ariſeth ro us in December,and is noted 
by Aſtronomers for raiſing fearful Winds and Tempeſts both by 
Seaand Land. The Pleiades is a Conſteliation not far from Orion, and 
near that called the Bull, which we call the Sever Stars; To us it 
- Tiſeth at thebeginning of the Spring, and by irs riſing cauſeth 
Rains and Tempeſts, and therefore is unwelcome to Mariners at 
Sex, By the chambers, ' (or inmoſt and ſecret chambers, as the word 
ſignifies ) of the South, he ſeems to underſtanJ thoſe Stars and Con- 
ſtellations which are toward the Southern Pole, which are fitly 
called inward chambers, becauſe they are for the moſt part hid and 
ſhatup ( as Chambers commonly are ) from theſe parts of the 
World, and do-not rife or appear to usti]l the beginning of Sum- 
mer,when they alſo raiſe Southerly Winds and Tempeſts, as Aſtro- 

nom?rs obſerve. 


rxoWhich doth great things paſt finding out, yea and 


wonders without number y. 

y Which words were produced by Eliphaz, Chap:5:9:(where they 
are explained ) and are here repeated by Job, to ſhew his agreemear 
with him therein. 


1x Lo, he goeth& by mea,and I ſee him not 5, he paſ- 


ſeth on alſoc, but | perceive him not. 
= 7;e;He worketh by his Providence in ways of Mercy or Judg- 
ment. a Or, beſides, or before me, in my Preſence 6b Iſee the Ef. 
Fe&s bur I cannot underſtand the Cauſes or Grounds of his Actions 
for they are incomprehenſible by me, or by any other men: for 
though he ſpeaks only in his own perſon,vet he means it of all men; 
that ſuch is the weakneſs of mens Underſtandings,that they cannot 
ſearch our Gods Counſels and Ways : Sze As 17: 27: Rem: 11: 337 
e He goeth from place to place, from one ation to another : He 
*Ih.45.9: ſpeaks of God after the manner of men, 
Jer18:6. © 12 * Behold, he taketh away d, | who can hinder 


Rom.9.20 him : who will ſay unto him, What doeſt thou e? 

*Heb: who QIf he determine to take away from any man his Children or Ser- 

eanturn yants, or Eſtate, as he hath done from me. e Who is able to re. 

him away- ſtrain him from doing it * Or who dare preſume to reprove him for 

Ch: 11.10. jt ?” And therefore far be it from me to quarrel with God, whereof 
you untruly-accule me. 


13 If God will not withdravv his anger f the + proud 


helpers g do ſtoopunder him he 

f 7:e: If God reſolve not to withdraw his Rod and Stroak, the 
Effe& of his Anger. Or, without if, which is not in the Hebrew, 
God willnit withdraw his anger, i: enot forbear to puniſh, neither be- 
cauſe any man can over-power and reſtrain him; nor for fear leſt he 
ſhould rebuke him for proceeding to puniſh, as is implied by com- 
paring this Verſe with the former. # 7: e. Thoſe men who ſhal un. 
dercake to uphold and defend him whom God intends to puniſh and 
deſtroy;who are fitly called proud helpers becauſe this is a moſt proud 
and inſolent,and preſumptuous at ro oppoſe themſelvesto theLord 
God Almighty and to his Counſeis and Courſes; or ( as it is in the 
Hebrew ) Helpers of pride, becauſe they give affiſtance to that man 
who carries himſelf proudly and ſtoutly towards God, under his 
correCting hand : Or ( as ſome tranſlate it } che helpers of Egyps,or the 
Egyptian helpers ; i: e; the moſt potent helpers : for Egypr was in Jobs 
time powerful and flouriſhing Kingdom, and not far from Jobs 
Countrey. And the werd Rahab here rendred pride,is elſewhere put 
for Egypt,as Þſal: 87: 4: Iſa; 51:9; and ( as ſome take it ) Job 26: 52: 
h i; e: Shall fall and be cruſhed by him;and conſequently they who 
are helped hy bim muft fall with him. 


14 How much leſs ſhall ;I anſwer him |, #»d chooſe 


Out my words #0 reaſon with him /? 

_ # Since no Creature whatſoever can reſiſt his Power,and no man 
living can ſearch out or comprehend his Counſels and Ways ; how 
can I, who am a poor, contemptible, diſpirited Creature ; contend 


* Gen:1:6, 
+} Heb. 
heights. 


- FChap:38 


_ 


© 8+ - 


Or ſhall I contend with him,and expeCt to ger the better of him þ 


another ? 
15 Whom, though I were righteous mw, yet would ] 


judge o, 


ſelf of any lin. = i: e: I durſt not undertake to plead my Cauſe x. 
gainſt him ; or maintain my Integrity before him becauſe he knows 
me better than I know my ſelf,8& becauſe I am wholly in his hands 
and at his mercy. o To wit that he would hear me meekly, and 
judge favourably of me and my cauſe, and not according to the ri. 
gours of his juſtice. | 
16 If ] had called p, and he had anſwered me, ye: 
would I not believe, that he had hearkned unto my 
VOICE 9. 
Þ ie, Prayed, as this word is commonly uſed ; to wit, unto m 
Judge, for a favourable Sentence,as he now ſaid,and therefore it was 
needleſs here to mention the Obje& of his Calling or Prayer. 9 F 
could not believe that God had indeed granted my deſire though he 
had done it;becauſe I am fo infinitely below him, and obnoxious to 
him, and ſtill full of the tokens of his diſpleaſure ; and therefore 
ſhould conclude that it was but a pleaſant Dream or Fancy,and not 
a real thing; Compare Plal: 126: 1. 

17 For he breaketh me r with a tempeſt s,and mul- 


tiplieth my wounds without cauſe 7. 

r This is the reaſon of his foregoing Difftidence, that even when 
God ſeemed to anſwer him in words, yet the courſe of his Aions 
toward him was of a quite contrary nature an& tendency. s As 
with a Tempeſt ; 7: e. unexpe&ed]y, violently, and irrecoverably. 
# Not ſimply withour any deſert of his or as if he had no fin in him 
for he ofc declares the contrary; but without any evident or ſpecial 
cauſe of ſuch {ingular affliQions; 7: e.any peculiar and extraordinary 
guilt, ſuch as my Friends charge me with. 

18 He will not ſuffer me to take my breath «, but 


flleth me with bitterneſs x. 

# My Pains and Miſeries are continual, and I have not ſo much 
aS a breathing time free from them. x My AfMiQtions are not only 
long and uninterrupted,but alſo exceeding ſharp and violent,contra- 
ry to the common courſe of Gods Providence. . 


I9 It I ſpeak of ſtrength y, lo he is ſtrong z : and if of 


judgment 4, who ſhal fer me a time to plead þ ? 

» If my cauſe were to be decided by power. z ::e: ſtronger than I. 
a If I would contend with him in a way of right. b There is no 
ſuperiour Judge that can ſummon kim & me together,& appoint us 
a time of pleading before him,and oblige us both ro ſtand to his Sens 
tence ; and therefore I muſt be conrented to fir down with the loſs. 


20 If I juſtifie my felt c, mine own mouth (hall con- 
demn me 4: if I ſay,l am perfect e, itf ſhall alſo prove 


me perverſe. 

c If I plead againſt God mine own Righteouſneſs and Innocency, 
a Gol 1s fo infinitely wiſe and juſt that he will find ſufficient mat- 
ter of condemnation from my own words, though ſpoken with all 
poſſible care and circumſpe&ion;or he will oiicover ſo much wick- 
edneſs in me of which I was not aware,rhat T ſha] be forced to joyn 
with him in condemning my ſelf, e If I were perfe&t in my own 
opinion ; IfI thought my ſelf compleatly righteous and faultleſs: 
f 2. e. My own mouth, as he now ſaid. Or, he, i: « God, who is 
eaſily underſtood by comparing this with the former Verlſes,where 
the ſame he 1s oft mentioned. 

21 Though 1 were pertect, yet would I not know my 


ſoul : I would deſpiſe my life g. 

Z 7; e. Though God ſhould acquir me inJudgment,and pronounce 
me perfe& or righteous, yet would I nit know, 7: e: regard or value 
( as that word is oft uſed ) my ſoul,;: e. my life; as the ſoul frequently 
fignifies,as Gen. 19. 17. Jo# 2:6. John 10: 15, x7.and as it is explained 
in the following branch, where {fe is put for ſoul, and deſp:fing for 
not knowing: ind ſo the ſame thing is repeated in differing words, ard 
the latter Clauſe explainsthe former, which was more dark and 
doubrful, according to the uſage of Sacred Scripture. So the ſenſe 
is, Though God ſhould giveSentence for me,yet I ſhould be ſo over=- 
whelmed with the dread and terrour of the Divine Majeſty, that I 
ſhould be weary of my life. And thereforeT abhor the thoughts of 
contending with my Maker,whereof you accuſe me; and yetT have 
reaſon to be weary of my life, and to defire death. Or thus, If I /ay 
I amperfe&,as the very ſame Hebrew words are rendred,v:20:::e.1f T 
ſhould think my ſelf perfe&, yer I would nor know, i: e: not acknows 
ledge my ſoul; T could not owne nor plead before God the perfe&ion 
and integrity of my Sou), but would only make Supplication to my 
Judge,as he ſaid, wv: 16: and flee to his Grace and Mercy: 1 would ab- 
hor, or rejef, or condemn my life, i: e.my Converſatioa : So the Senſe 
is, I would notinſiſt upen,nor truſt in the integrity either of my 
Soul and Heart,or of my Life,fo as to juſtifie my ſelf before the pure 
and piercing Eyes of the All-ſeeing God. | 

22 This zs one zhing b, therefore I ſaid it 3, he de- 


ſtroyeth the perfect and the wicked &, 

h In the other things which you have ſpoken of Gods Greatneſs, 
Juſtice,ec. Ido not contend with you, but this one thing I do, and 
mult affirm againſt you. 7 I did not utter it raſhly, but upon deep 
Coenſideration.k God ſends Aﬀfiictions promiſcuouſly upon good and 
bad men. Compare Pſal:73; 2, &c. Eccleſ; 9; 2: Jer: 12: 1, &C. 

23 If the ſcourge ſlay fuddenly /; he will. laugh at 


the trial of the innocent m-. 

I Either 1. If fome common and deadly Judgement come upon 
a People which deftroys both good and bad. Or, 2. If God inflits 
ſome grievous and unexpeRed ſtroke upon an innocent perſon, as 1t 
follows. m As he dothat the deſtruction of the Wicked, P/a/: 2; 4+ 
His outward Carriage is the ſame to both : he negle&s the Innocent 
and ſeems not to an{irer their Proyers, and ſuffers them to pers 


With him ? k7#;e, Anſwer bis Allegations and Arguments —_ 


= =o 


Y againſt me» Heb: Chooſe my words with ( or before,or againſt, as this | 4 
Particle is uſed, Deut.g: 7:P[al:94: 16: Prov:30:31:)him, i: e. Shall T try 
whether God or I can chooſe ficter Words, or ſtronger Arguments? 


| ; 


uſing choice, and forcible and elegant words, as one man doth with | 


} 


not anſwer x, bur I would make ſupplication to my 


m Though Ihad a moſt juſt cauſe, and were not conſciousto my 


Ch, 7. 


hb 17Ps 
(ire, 
Orcbips 
( Bethe 
'ab1.8 


(a;773. 


ſiedface 


6 $2” OY OO” ORC SO 


{ 
| þ, \ 7 
with others, as if he took pleaſure in their ruine -alſo. But withal, 
he intimates the matter and cauſe of his laughter or complacency 


Ix 


41), 


to Gods honour, and their own eternal advantage. 
24 The earth » is given o into the hand of the wick- 


where, and who ishe s ? 

2 7. c The poſſeſlion and dominion of men and things on earth. 
o To wir,byGed the great Lord andDiſpoſer of it by his Providence 
p Into their power. As good men are ſcourged,v. 23.10 the wicked 
are advanc=d, and proſpered in this World. q 7, e He blinds their 
eyes that they cannot diſcern between Truth and Falſhood, Juſtice, 
and Unrighrteouſnefs; He. Who? Either, 1. The wicked laſt men- 
tionzd, who either by power or by Gifts corrupts the Officers of Ju- 
ſtice. Or rather, 2. God, whom the Pronoun he, deſigned all along 
this Chapter ; Who is oft ſaid to blind the minds of men, which he 
doth not poſitively by making them blind,but privatively by with- 


drawing tis own lighr, and Icaving them to their cwn Miſtakes and 


thatname, and du'y adminiſter that Office ; Whoſe faces God may 
be ſaid to cover, becauſe he removeth them from their high places 
into obſcurity, and covers them with contempt, and in a manner 
paſſeth a Sentence of Congemnation and Deſtruction upon them ; 
Covering of the face being tac uſual poſture cf condemned Perſons, 
and of men in miſery : Of which ſee Eſth; 7. 8. Pſal: 44:22:1/a: 
15.17. Jer. 14F. Sothe ſenſe of this Verte is,God commonly ad- 
vanceth wicked men into Power and Honour, and cafteth down 
men of true Worth and Virtue from their Seats. r+ If it be not as 
Ifay, If God donot theſe things. 5 Either, 1x. Who will confute 
me by ſolid Arguments? Or, 2. Who doti theſe things? Who 
but God doth diſpoſe of the World in this manner ? 

& 16, 25 Now? * my days « are {wifter than a poſt x : they 
flee away, they ſee no geod y. 

: What he had ſaid of the Calamities which God uſually infli&ed 
upon goad men, he now exemplifieth in himſelf. « The days ei- 
ther of my proſperity : For the time of AﬀiQion is commonly de- 
{cribed by the n:gh: : or rather, 2. Of my life,as the laſt Clauſe ſhew- 
eth; For it were an abſurd and codtradiftious ſpecchto ſay that his 
proſperous days ſaw no good. x Who runs or rides upon {wift hor- 
{ezs. y Tenjoy no good in them. Seeing 15 oft put for experiencing 
cither good or evil, Job 7. 7. Pſal: 34.12. John 3; 36. and 8. 51. 
n4/þp> 25 They are paſſed away us the Þ || ſwift ſhips z : *as 
(ze, the eagle 2 that haſteth to the prey. 

(r;kip! 2 Heb Ships of defrreqwhich make great haſte,as if they longed for 
(tithe their effred Haven,as it is called Fſai,r07.30.Orſhips of pleaſure; Which 
"d1.8 fa:l more ſwiftly than Ships of great burden. #s Which generally 
flies moſt Cvifrly, Deut: 28. 49. Jer: 4: 13: Lam: 4: 19. eſpecially when 
its own hunger,and the ſighr of irs prey, quickens his motion. _ 
Um, 27 *IF 1 ay b, Twi forget my complaints ce, I will 
fid/ae Jeave off my Þ heavineſs d, and comfort my felfe : 

b If T reſolve within my ſelf. cI will ceaſe complaing. d Heb; 
mine anger ; wherewirth Job was charged by his Friends, Chap; 18:4« 
my anzry Expreſſions. el willendeavour to take comfort. 

28 I am afraid of all my forrows f: I know that thou 


wilt not hold m2innocentg. 

f Or, my pains and griefs : I find all ſuch endeavours vain; for if 
my grizfs be ſuſpended for a little time, yet my fears continue. g [ 
plainly pzrc:1ve that my changing my note 1s to no purpoſe; for 
thou, O God, (to whom he makes a ſudden Apoſtrophe, as he dorh 
alſov: 31. ) wiltſt no: clear my innocency by removing thoſe Aﬀi- 
tions which make -1.em judge me guilty of tome great crime. Words 
proceeding from great impatience and deſpair oft relief. : 

29 If I be wicked þ, why then labour I invain z ? 

h Heb. I ſhal be wicked, or guilty, towit, before thee. Whether 
Ibe holy or wicked, if I diſpute with thze,I ſha) be found gui'ty, 
Or thus, 7 ſhal be uſed like a wicked man,and pu i1thed asfuch. So this 
is oppoſed co his not being held innecent, v- 28. 7. e not being acquit-' 
ted or exempr from puniſhment z Why tien ſhould I not indulge 
my gricfs, but reſtrain them ? Why ſhould I comfort my ſelf wich 


which God takes in their Afi&tions, becaule to them they are but 
trials of their Faith, and Patience, and Perſeverance, which tends 


ed p;he covereth the faces of the judges thereof 9;if notr, 


Luſts. Or by Judges he may here mean thoſe who are worthy of 


O © B, 


that might lay his hand wpon us both r. 
9 Or, a Reprover; or, a Judge or Umpire, whoſe Office was to re- 
prove the guilty Perſon, .r z. e Uſe his Power and Authority to ap- 


put forpower, and /eying on the hand upon another was oft times an 
att and ſign of Superiority and Domiaion. 


his fear s terrifle me; 

s Otjedively ſocalled, i. e. The fear and dread of him, of his 
Majeſty and Juſtice. Let him not deal with- me rigorouſly accord- 
ing to his Soveraign Dominion and 2erfe& Juſtice,but according to 
his wonred Grace and Clemency- ' | | 

35 Then wouldT fpeak, and not fear him s : + but 
it 5 not fo with me «. 


: 7.e. T would ſpeak freely for my ſelf,being freed from the dread 
of his M:jeſty,which takes away my ſpirit and courage,and ſtoppeth ſelf. 
my mouth. «z.e. I am not free from his terrour, and therefor: can- 
not and dare not plead my Cauſe boldly with him; and to have no- 
thing elſe to do but to eaſe my ſelf by renewing my Complaints, as 
he doth in the next words. , Others thus, But 1 am mot Jo with my 
ſelf, 5.e Tam in a manner beſides my ſelf, diſtracted with the ter- 
rours of God upon me, Or rather thus, For 1 am net (o with my ſelf, 
or 11 my own Conſcience, as I perceive I amin your eyes; to Wits 
an Hypocrite and ungodly man. So this-isa reaſon why he could 
ſpeak to God without ſlaviſh fear, becaute he was conſciousto him= 
ſe]f of his own Integity: I have a good Conſcience within my ſelf, 
and therefore could uſe boldneſs in ſpeaking ro Ged, provided he 
would not deal with me in ſtri& juſtice,but upon the terms of grace 
and mercy which he hath propoſed to ſinners, and with allowance - 


to humane Inficmities: 
SEP. X 


His Life a burthen : his complaint that he could not ſze the cauſe or end of 
Gods puniſhment ; God delighteth not to oppreſs; nor was his innocence, 
rhough ſuſpeted by men, hid from God, 1 ---....-. 7. He urgeth that be- 
ing Gods work, in his hands, receiving all from him, God would not de- 
ſtroy him, 8 ————— 13. His ſens expoſe him to Gods wrath, which 
was terrible upon him, 14—17, Curſeth his birch : Death deſireable 
to him, 18 ——22. 


M Y * ſoul is || weary of my life a, T will leave my 
of ) the bitterneſs of my ſoul c. 


2 So the Senſe is; My foul is weary of dwelling in this rotten P#% 
and miſerable Carcaſs: Or IT am from my heart, or with my very 

Soul weary of my life;and therefore I may be excuſed if I complain 
Or, My foul 3s cut off while I live; i e T1 am dead whilſt Ilive I am 
in a manner buried alive. b$o the ſen'e is,I will complain, and the 
burden or hazard of fo doing I will take upon my ſelf and be willing 
to bear it : I muſt give my forcows vent, let come on me what will,as 
he faith, Chap. 13.13. Bur the words may be read interrogatively, 
Shall I then ( or, how can Ithen ) leave my complaint,( i e. give over 
complaining ) within or concerning ( as the Hebrew #l oft fignifies)my 
ſelf ? or they may be rendred thus, /wi/ trengthen ( as:this Verb fig- 
nifies, Neh. 3 8. ) my complaint againſt my ſelf, whereby le impliesthat 
he would not complain againſt God,ſo as to accuſe h:m of Injuſtice 
but only againſt himſelf,or againſt his own life; os conc-rnmg my ſelf ; 

7 e. I muſt renew and encreaſe my Complaints, as God renews and 
encreaſes my Sorrows. c My extream Miſery forceth my Coms : 
plaints from me- 
2 I will fay utito God, Do not condemn me & ; hew | 
me wherefore e thou contendeſt with me. 

d Or pronounce me not to be # wicked man as my Friends do, neither 
deal.with me as ſuch,as I confeſs thou mighrzſt do by thy Soveraign 
Power-and in Rigo:ous Juſtice: O diſcover my Integrity by remo- 
ving this ſtroke for w! ic'4 my Friends ſo highly cenſure & condemn 
me. ez e. for what ends and reaſons and for what ſins; for I am not 
conſcious to my ſelf of any peculiarand eminent ſins by which I 
have deſcrved to be made the moſt miſeratle of al) Morrals; 


2 1s :t good unto thee f that thou ſhouldeſt oppreſs g? 


34 * Let him take his rod away from me, and let not &5 4 


ſtood really,as if God would make hin filthy, bur only judici.ily, 
that God wou'd prove him to be a moſt gui'ty and hirhy Crea-ure, 
notwithſtanding all the Profeſſions and Evidences of his Purity be- 
fore men 2»: 5. e.I ſhal be { altogerher filrhy,that my own clothes, 
ifthey had any ſenſe in them, would abhor to touch me. A figure 
called Proſopopaia. . 

32 For he is not a manasI ayy o, that I ſhould anſwer 
him p, and that we thould come together q in judge- 
ment, | 

0 But one infinitely ſuperiour to me in Majeſty ,and Power, and 
Wiſdom, and Juſtice. p That I ſhou'd pr-ſume to debate my Caule 
with him,or anſwer bis Allegations againſt me. q tace to face, to 
Plead upon equal terins before a Superiour and indifferent Judge, 


ſeerh outſides only,& judgeth by zppearances, and. is liable to many 
miſtakes,and cannor ſearch out ſecret faults without forcing men by 
cruel uſage t» accuſe themſelves But thou needeſr none cf theſe 
Arts, thou ſeeſt mine heart & mine uprightneſs, which myFriends 
do not ſez, whotherefore are more excuſable in charging me with 
hypociifie: Butthou knoweſt all things, thou needeſr not examine 
me by Tortures, as thou now doeſt, v. 6 For, thou knoweft that I am 
not wicked, as he faith wv, 7, and therefore donot thou deal with me 

as if I were wicked. 
5 Are thy days as the days of man ? are thy years as 

mans days mn 2 

n Manstime 1s ſhortand uncertain,and therefore he muſt improve 
his time, whilſt te hath ir, anddiligently ſearch out the Crimes of 
4E4 Male= 


Chap. X. 


33 * Neither is there + any. [| days-man 4 betwixt us, * 1Sam:2. 
25:VECT:194 
t Heb:ons 
that Shal 


point the time and place of our Meeting;to order and govern us 1n | Or. U, ha 
pleading ; and to oblige us to ſtand to his decition. The hand is off vire , 


3.24 


Iam ſo 
with m 


complaint upon my ſelf b,; I wiil ſpeak in ( #r * Ch.7:16; 
|| or,cut off 


ſlive 


Vain hopes of dcliverince,a> thou adviſeſt me,C-8.6.or fzek ro God, . . . f Heb.the 
as 1 hath. 45 apr Chap. 5. $ for that eaſe which 1 ſec hz is reſolved that chou (houldeſt deſpiſe b F the work of thine hands z labour of 
not to give me? Way ſhould | trouble my ſelf with clearing mine and ſhine upon the counſel of the wicked & ? wn; thine hands 
innocency, ſeing God will ſtill hold me guilty? f Doſt thou take any pleaſure in it? Haft thou any advantage or 
ka 30 *if1 waſh my ſelf & with ſnow-water/, and make | honour by i:? Doſt thou think irright and juſt,and becoming. the 
hand fs lem « Rule: of the World ? g By thy abſolute and irreſiſtible Power, with- 
my nands NeVer 10 Cican, p out any regardro that Juſtice and Equity, and Clemency, by which 
k Either 1 really, by SanCtification, cleanſing my heart and life | .;,0 uſeft es govern Mankind. hi. e. Shew tiy contempt ofthem, 
from all filthine!s ; or rather 2, declaratively or judicially; 5. e. If | ;.,,., by denying them common favour and prote&ion; or by de- 
I clear my ſeIffrom all imputations,and fuli'y prove my innocency ftroying them. : Which every Workman loves and maintains. 
befare men. /:. e As men cleanſe their Bodies, and as under the | |; gy the Mctholsof chy Providence ſezm to favour the courſes 
Law they purified themſelves with water, which he here calls wa- | , 4 pra@ices cfwicked men, to whom thou giveſt proſperity and 
ter of Snow, eirher becuuſ by irs purity and brightneſs it reſembled ſvcceſs, whiiſt chou frowneſt upon me and other good men. This 
Snow; or becauſe in thoſe dry Countries,where freſh :nd pure Wa- may have reference, either to JobsFriends. whoſe ungolly Cenſures 
ter was ſcar 'e,Snow-watrer was much in uſe,or becauſe that Water | 6,5 (cemed tr approve by continuing Jobs Aﬀiiftions upon him : 
might be muchuſcd among them in ſome oftheir ritual Purificati® | 5. ,, the Chaldeansant Sabeans,u hy had ſucceeded in their wicked 
ons, as coming down from Heaven. | : ; zttempts upoa Jes. but it ſeems to be more generally meant of wick» 
I0;nul, 31 Yet ſhalt thou plunge me in the ditch m.,and mine | q men. | 
" own clothes ſhall || abhor me ». | 4 Haſt thou eyes of fleſh / or * ſeeſt thou as man « . 
al . #5. e. In miry and puddle water, whereby I ſhall become moſt | ſeth yz ? r Sam; 
filthy. Burt as Jobs waſhing,ſo Gods plunging him.&c is not under- 1 i.e. Ofa man, who iscalled f:ſhyas Gen. 6. 13. 12.40:6. 5 Man 16:7. 


> _ FM —_— EECLAEESS=E 7 - 


- _ Sens a -—_ - 
_— _— - = my m_— 7 
—_r—o——pre Pn IR — _ 


G5... ACS ORE TER ! ", 


lt ATE TS. ERREOENGW 


Tr EE — 


- EGIFT 30S FN EN IS — En Or eCeIro—_ A _ m_ - —_ 


. 
"I 


. ” - * 
I—_ II en I ern > DE. cn ORR A 


* 'Chrp.X. 
MalefaQers,and puniſh them whilſt he may,leſt bydeath heloſe the 

: opportunity of doing Juſtice,& the Criminal get out of his power- 
F Buc it is not {o with thee,thou art eternal & unchangeable, and ſeeſt 
| at one view all mens hearts,and all their aCtions prefent & ro come: 
and therefore thou doſt not need to proceed with me in this manner 
by making ſo long and ſo ſevere a ſcrutiny into my heartand life. 
6 That thou * enquireſt after mine iniquity, and 


+ FCh.44.16 ſearcheſt after my ſin o ? 
o Keeping me ſo long as it were upon the Rack to compel] me to 
_ accuſe my elf, as men ſometimes do. 


FHeb.ir# - +Thou knoweſt that Tam not wicked p,and zhere is 
-uatx none that can deliver out of thine hand 9. 
IIEY my” ? i, e. An Hypocrite, or anungodly man, as my Friends account 


me : and therefore deal not with me as ſuch.q The ſenſe 15, Either 
1+ Thou doſt not need to keep me faſt in thy Priſon, leſt I ſhould 
make an eſcape, or any ſhould reſcue me out of thy hands, which 
none can do ; Therefore take off thy hand from me. Or, 2.If thou 
doſt not help anddeliver me, none elſe can do it; Therefore do not 
thou fail me : which, conſidering Gods merciful nature, isa good 
Argument. If any man oppreſs another, he may have relief from 
thee, who art higher than his Oppreſſor, Eccleſ. 5. 8. but thou art 
the ſupreme and uncontrollable Ruler of the World, and therefore 
thou muſt needs do right, Ger. 18. 25. And therefore do not thou 


oppreſs me. See above v. 3. ; 
#Heb rok 8 Thine hands + have made me, and faſhioned me 


pains abour together round about r ; yet thou doſt deſtroy me 5. 

me, ri. e. All of me, all the Faculties ofmy Soul, and all the parts of 
my Body, which are now over-ſpread with Sores and Ulcers ; I am 
wholly thy Creature and Workmanſhip, made by theeand for thee. 
s Or, ſwallow me up ; to wit, without cauſe, or any eminent provo- 
cation of mine ; as if thou didſt delight in doiag and undoing, in 
making and then deſtroying thy Creatures, which doth not become 
_ thy Wiſdom or Goodneſs. 

| 9 Remember,l beſeech thee,that * thou haſt || made 


me as the clay rs, and wilt thou bring me into duſt a- 


*Gen.2.7 gain « ? 
ing - # i. e. Of the Clay, the Note of ſimilitude here expreſſing the 


| Or, truth of things, as it doth, John 1. 14+ and elſewhere, as bath been 
wrou:ht, before obſerved : Or, as a Potter maketh a Veſſel of the Clay; and 
ſo this may note both the frailty of mans Nature, which of it ſelf 
decays and perifheth,and doth not need ſuch violent ſhocks & ſtorms 
to overthrow it;& the excellency of the Divine Artifice commend: d 
from the meanneſs of the Meterials ont of which it was made;which 
isan Argument why God ſhould not deſtroy it. »Wiltſt thou now 
cauſleſly and violently deſtroy thy own Work ? But the words are, 
and may be read without an Interrogation ; And thou wilt bring me 
into daſt again, out of which I was made: I mufr die by the 
courſe of Nature, and by the Sentence of thy Law ; and therefore 
whilſt I do live, give me ſome eaſe and comfort, 

*Plal-139 ro * Haſt thou not poured me out as milk! and crud- 


1415-16 Jed me like cheeſe x? 
x Thus he modeſtly and accurately deſcribes Gods admirable 
Work in making Man out of a ſmall and liquid,&as it were milky 
ſubſrance, by degrees congealed and condenſed into that exquiſite 


frame of mans Body. y : 
11 Thou haſt clothed me y with skin and fleſb, and 
haſt + fenced me with bones and ſinews z. 

7. e. Covered my inward and more noble parts; which,as Phi!o- 
ſophers and Phy ficiars obſerve, are firſt formed. So he proceeds in 
deſcribing mans formation gradually. z Which are the ſtay and 
ſcrength of rhe Body; and lome of them,as the Skull and Ribs. en- 
cloſe and defend its vital and moſt noble parts. 

12 Thou haſt granted me life 4 and favour b,and thy 


viſitation c hath preſerved my ſpirit #. 

s Thou didſt not only give me a curious Body, but alſoa living 
and a reaſonable Soul : Thou didſr at firſt give me life. and then 
maintain it in me; both when I was in the Womb ( which is a mar- 
vellous Work of God ) and afterward when I was unable to do any 
thing ro preſerve my own life. b Or, benignity, or bounty, er mercy, 
or kindneſs ; which 1s here, as ofc elſewhere, put for its fruits or ef- 
fets. Thou didfſt not give me a meer life, but many other favours 
neceſſary,or convenient,or belonging to it, fuch as Nouriſhmenc by 
the Breaſts, Education, Knowledge, and InſuQion, &c. c 7 e. 
| The care of thy Providence watching over me for my good,and vi- 
ſiting mein mercy ; as Gods viſiting is underſtood, Exod,4qey 1. Luke 1. 
78. though elſewhere it is an AQt of Puniſhment. 4d 7. e. My Sou] 
or Life, which is liable to manifold Caſualities and Dangers, if God 
did not watch over us and guard usevery day and moment. Thoy 
haſt hitherto done grear things for me,given me Life,and the Blef. 
ſings of Life,and daily Preſervaticns and Deliverances; And wiltſ 
thou now undo all that thou haſt done ? And ſhalI who have besn 
ſuch an eminent Monument of thy Mercy,now be made a SpeQacle 
of thy Vengeance, and that without cauſe ? 


13 And theſe things haſt thou hid in thine heart e : 


T know that this is * with thee f. 

e This place may be underſtood, Eicher 1. Of 7ebs preſent AMi- 
ftions ; So the ſenſe is this; Yet in the midſt of all thoſe Manife. 
Nations of thy Grace and Kindneſs ro me, thou didſt retain a ſecrer 

urpoſe of changing thy courſe and carriage towards me, and of 
tg. theſe dreadfu] Calamiries upon me. Or, rather, 2. OF 
his former Mercies, theſe things, to wit, laſt mentioned; thou ha#t 


_—— — 


f Heb, 
hedge a. 


&% 


% 


*Ia.59:12 


7 O B. 


| hid them in thy heart; i. e. thou doſt exatly remember them, as this 
Phraſe is uſed Pſal.119.1r. Luke 2. 51. So the Argument is this, 
Let the remembrance of thy former great Favours vouchſafed to , 
me,move thee to give me further Blefſings,& a ſpeedy Deliverance. | 
For this is uſually both with God and Men,to chooſe and delight to 
do more good to thoſe to whom they have done much good already 
which is the ground of that known paſſage, Matth. 13.12. To him 
that hath ſbal be givin. 1, e. In thy mind and heart; thou haſt noc 
forgor it : So the ſamething is here repeated in other words. 


14 If I ſin g, then thou market me þ,agd thou wilt 
not acquit me from mine iniquity 5: 


g IfI commit the leaſt Sin;as who is there that 1iyerh.an 

not? h Thou doſt not wink at or paſs by my Sins, = goo —_ 
doſt other Mens, but doſt ſeverely and diligently obſerve hens lf 
thar thou mayeſt puniſh them : Compare Chap. 14.16. & 2.4 i 
($0 thou art reſolved to puniſh me with Rigor, and that thoy 
m_ ere np and pity,and help me: Words of great impatience 

If If I bewicked &, wo unto me 7; and if Ibe righ- 
teous 2», yet T will nor lift up my head »: I am full of 
FT confuſion s, therefore ſee thou mine affliction ; 

k i. e. An ungodly Hypocrite, as my Friends eſtzem me. I Then 7 Heb, 

I am truly and extreamly,and muſt be eternally miſerable. e. An '8min, 
upright and good man : So whether good or bad,all comes to one; 
I have no relief. » Or, yet can 1 not, &c. The Future Tenſe being 
uſed potentially : YetI have no comfort,nor confidence,or hopes & 
any good. Lifting up the head or face, is oft mentioned as a ſign of 
comfort and confidence. as Pſal: 3: 3. Luke 21. 28. As on the con. 
trary,Grief andShame are deſcribed by its deje&ion or caſting down 
o Or,reproach from my Friends,& from others,Chap,30.1,%c.and from 
God too,who caſts me off and makes me contemptible: I have abun- 
dance of Shame in the diſappointment of all my hopes,and thecon- 
tinuance and aggravation of my Miſery ; notwithſtanding all m 
Prayers to God to remove or mitigate it: And I am confounded 
within my ſelf, nor knowing what to ſay or do. Let my Extremie 
ty move thee to pity,and help me. 

16 For itincreaſeth: thou * hunteſt i ZE a fterce lij- 
ON p ; and again thou ſhewelſt thy {elf marvellous upon 17,3 n 
me 9. an.3.1o, 
> Which hunteth after his Prey with great cagerneſs, & when he 
overtakes it,falls upon it with great fury.q Heb. 4nd :hou returnef aud 
ſheweft thy [elf marye ous upon or in,or againſt me. The Lion Tears irs 
Prey ſpeedily, and ſo ends its torments ; but thou reneweſt my Ca- 
l:mities again and again, and makeft my Plagues wonderful beth 
for kind and extremity, and continuance. 
17 Thou-reneweſt || thy witneſſes r againſt me, and 
increaſeſt thy indignation s upon me ; changes and war [The 6 


e are againſt me. thy plagur 
” ts e. Thy Judgments,which arethe Witneſſes and Evidences both Ruth 1.21 
of my Sins,and of thy Wrath, 57. e.My Miſeries the effe&ts of thine Cha6s, 
Anger. Theſe words are added to explain what he meant by renewing 
witneſſ:s. t Or, changes and an army; which may be a Figure called 
Hendadis, for the changes of an army, i: e. many Miſeries ſucceeding 
one another, like Companies of the Soldiers ofan Army in Batre]; 
Or, changes may note the various kinds, and an Army the great num- 
bers of his Afi&ions. 
18 * Wherefore then haſt thou brought me forth out 


of the womb > O that I had givenup the Ghoſt, and no'©3" 


eye had ſeen me x. 
« To wit, alive; 7z.e. that Thad never been born alive. 


19 T ſhould have been * as though I had not been ; I 


ſhould have been carried from the womb to the grave; 
x Or, O that I Lad been; And ſo in the following branch, 0;that 1 

had been carried. For why ſhould not theſe Verbsof the Future Tenſe 

be ſo rendred here,as that v.18.is,the reaſon being wholly the ſame. 
20 Are not my daysfew *? ceaſe they x, and let me*Seechy 


aloney, that I may take comfort a little: potty 
x My Life is ſhort,and of it ſelf haſtens apace to an end, there js [3913 
no need that thou ſhouldeſt puſh is forward,or grudge me ſome eaſe 
f'r ſo ſmall a moment. Or,lay aſiae,or remove thy hand or anger 
from me. 
21 Before I go to the place whexce T ſhal not return, 
> even to the land of darkneſs, & the ſhadow of death ||. 
z Into this World and Life; See Chap. 7.9, 10, ||i” e. A dark 
and diſmal Shade : See on Chap 3- 5s. | # Heb: # 
22 Aland ofdarkneſs t,as darkneſs it /elf, ad of the jj, gum 


ſhadow of death, without any order,and 2here the lightains 


is as darkneſs *. = x nu 

+ Eirher in things, without any Succeſſion of Day and Night, © 
W :nter and Summer:Or ameng Perſons where great & ſmall are inJ” p 
the ſame conditicn,Chap. 3-19. * Where there 1s no difference be- hs 
tween Light and darkneſs ; where the Day is as dark as the Night pure” 


where there is norhing bur perpetual and uninterrupted Darkneſs 


CHAT. AL 

Zophars Reproof : Jobs words too many and falſe even to mockery in juſti- 
tying himſelf, 1 . 4. Should God (peak, his Wiſdcm and Juſtice, and 

al! his Perfeftions would appear infinitely greater than what Job conce:ve 
of them, 5 10. God knoweth Man ſeeth Witkedn-ſs and confidereth 
it ; but Man is ignorant and fooliſh and in vain pretendeth to Wiſdom, 
11, 12. If Job would prepare his Heart, and pray,and put away his Singhe 
ſhould again lift up hus Head, and forget his Miſery, and his laſt days be 

hriebreſt; but the Wicked ſhal periſh, 13 20, : 

Hen anſwered Zophar the Naamathite, and faid, 
2 Should not the multitude of words be an{wer- |, 


ed 4? and ſhould + a man full of talk be juſtified 5? | 
a Doſt thou think to carry thy Cauſe by thy long and tedious Dil- 
courſes,conſiſting of empty words without weight or rzaſon? 6 Stal 
we by our ſilence ſeem to approve ofthy Errors ? Or ſhal we think 
thy caule the better, becauſe thou uſeſt more words than we do? 

3 Should thy || lies c make men hold their peace 4? q0r, # 
and when thou mockeſt e, thallno man make thee ©- giz 
ſhamed f? 

c i.e. Thy falſe Opinions and Aſſertions both concerning thy ſelf 
and thy own Innocency, and concerning the Counſe!s and Ways of 
God. d As if thy Arguments were unanſ{werable. e Both God,Chop» 
10. 3. and us,and our friendly and faithful Counſels, Chap. 6.'4115 
25, 26. f By diſcovering thy Errorsand Follies, 

4 Fcrthou haſt ſaid *, my doRrineg js pure þ, and yg, 
* I am clean in thine eyes 5. *Chas" 


g Cenceming, God and his Providence, + i:e, Tiue and _ 
z 


Chap, x 


22- I fo #g3 ny a 


*PC1 


22, 


hap, i 


f Heb, 
gnomin, 


-AM.3.10, 


| That ir, 
hy plogur 
Ruth 1.21 
Cha6s, 


Ch.z.ut, 


Fee Chap 
1:6:48:9; 
Wlzgu3 


dark 


 _—_— . VIP he. + a... Aa. wh... At. 


; f Heb, l 
mani" 


"Chap. XI. 


5 1 am innocent before God;I have not ſinned either by my former 
Adions, or by my preſent Expreſſions. Thou ſtandeſt wholly upon 
thy Juſtification. But Zophar aggravates and perverts Job's words, 
for he did not deny that he was a Sinner in God's ſighr, Chap. 7. 
20. 21.and g. 2, 3. and to. 14.but only that he was an Hypocrite 
or ungodly Man, as they made him- 

5 But, O that God vvould ſpeak, and open his lips 
againſt thee & ; 

k i« e. Plead with thee according to thy deſire, Chap. g. 32, &c. 
He would ſoon pur thee to ſilence and ſhame. 

6 Andihat he would ſhew thee the ſecrets of wiſdom 


I. chat thoy are double to that which is m: know there- 


3 


19.13: fore that * God exacteth of thee Ze/5 than thine iniquity 


#eſerveth n. | 
l i, e, The unkown and unſearchable depths of God's Wiſdom 
and Counſels,in dealing with his Creatures. ”: z. e,That they are far 
more and greater (the word 4ouble being uſed indefinitely for mani- 
fold,or plentiful,as 1/4.40.2.8& 61.7 Jer. 17.18« Zech, g. 12. ) than that 
which hath a beeing or exiſtence, #. e.The ſecret Wiidom of God is 
infinitely greater than that which is revealed to us by his Word or 
Works: The greateſt part of what is known of God,is the leaſt part 
of thoſe PerfeQions that are in him. And therefore thou doſt rathly 
and fooliſhly in paſſing ſuch a bold cenſure upon God's ways, and 
judging ſo harthly of his proceedings with thee, becauſe thou doſt 
not comprehend the reaſons of them, and in judging thy ſelf inno- 
cent, becauſe thou doſt not ſee thy Sins ; whereas the all-knowing 
God ſees innumerable Sins in thee, for which he may utterly deſtroy 
thee, though thou diſcernef themnot : Burt the words are and muſt 
be rendred, either thus, that he hath double, 7, e. abundant Wiſdom : 
For ſo this Hebrew word ſingnifies,Cha.6. 13.8&12.16.Prov.2.7.&3.21 
Or,that they are double to, or in that beeing or eſſence; to wit, to God, 
of whom he is here ſpeaking ; Orgzo the beeing ; i, e. to God,who calls 
himſelf by the Name 7 am,Exod. 3. 14.which ſignifies beeing,and who 
appropriates bceeing to himſelf, !ſa.4 5.18. I am, and there is none elſe 
beſides me ; as elſe where he is ſaid to be the only wiſe, and only Poten- 
zare,and only immortal beeing, 1 Tim. 1, 17. & 6. 15, 16. u Heb. God 
lends or gives, or forgives thee part of thine iniquity, or of thy puniſhment, 
So far is he from dealing worſe than thou deſerveſt, as thou doſt 
moſt falſly andjwickedly accufe him: | 
.. 7 * Canfſt thouby ſearching find out God » ? canſt 
vEccli3er! 


Rom, x1: COU find out the almighty * unto perfeRion ?' 

33 0 7. e. Diſcover all the Depths of his Wiſdom, and the Reaſons 
*Ch.26.14 Of all his Afﬀtions: 

f Hebthe 8 1t 3s as high as heaven p, what canſt thou do 9? 


7 O B. 


tary, and therefore common to all Men ; and therefore it is not 
ſtrange if 70b partake of the common Diſtemper. e z. e. Ignorant, 
and dull, and ftupid;as to the knowledge of divine things,and withal 


theſe high Afﬀairs. 


13 * It thou f prepare thine heart g, and ſtretch out 
thine hands & towards him 3; PE 
f O Job, thy buſineſs is not to quarrel with th 7 
Works,but to addreſs thy ſelf to Y rag To wit, no Cc is 
expreſlcd, 2 Chr. 19, 3+ & 30. 19.Pſal.78.8« If thou Prepare thy heart, by 
fincere Repentance forall thy hard.Speeches of God,and Sins againſt 
him, and with a pure and upright Heart ſeek unto. him ; wathour 


thine heart,turning thy bold Contentions with God into bumble 
fincere Supplications to him, +þ z. e+ Pray, which is here pw ane 
by its uſual geſture, as Chap. 15. 25.P/. 88, 9+ i4,e, To God, as ap= 
pears both from the nature of the thing, and. from the Context. 
14 If iniquity be in thine hand &, put it far away J, 
and let not wickedneſs dwell win thy tabernacles ». 

& Either 1. If thou haſt in thine hand or Poſſeſſion, any Goods 
got by Injury or Oppreſlion, as it ſeems they ſuppoſed that he had. 
Or 2, more generally,If thou allgweit thy {elf in any ſinful praQtiſes. 
The hand is put for aQtion, whereof it is the Inftrumenr. I Keep thy 
ſelf at a great diſtance, not onlyfrom ſuch. aRions,bur alſo from the 
very Occaſions and Appearances of them. m Let it not bayea quiet 


in thy ſelf,or in thy Family ; whoſe ſings Job was oblidged as faras he' 
could to prevent or reform ; as he had done Chap. i. 5, He faith Ta- 
bernacles, becauſe anciently-the Habitations of great Men conſiſted 
of ſeveral Tents or Tabernacles, as we ſec Gen, 24. 67. & 31. 33. 

15 For then ſhalt chou lift up thy face o without ſpot 
?, yea, thou ſhalt be ſtedfaſt q, and ſhalt not fear. 

0 Which notes Chearfulneſs, and holy Boldneſs and Confidence: 
asa dejected Countenance notes Griefand Shame. See Gen. 4+ 5 6. 
2 Sam. 2: 22.70b 22: 20. Luke 21:28. p Or, Being without ſpot : So it IS 
only an Elipfis of the Verb Subſtantive, which is moſt frequent. And 
this firly follows as the ground of his Confidence, becauſe hz: ſhould 
in this caſe have aclear and unſpotred Conſcience,and aſenſe of bis 
own Innocency. Or without blemiſh, as the word properly ſignifies; 
i- e. without any ſenſe of guilt, or any ſhame conſequent upon it 
either from God or Men. The ground of the expreſſion is this, 


heights of deeper than hell, what canft thou know r ? 
havens ?Thou canſt not meaſure the heights of the viſible Heavens,much | 
leſs ef the Divine Profe&ions. q To wit, to find him out. r Con- | 

cerning him and his ways,which are far out of thy ſight and reach. | 

9 "The meaſure thereof is longer than the earth r,and | 


broader than the ſea s. 
r From one end to the other. 5 Which is called the great and wide 
Sea, Pal. 104. 25. 
10 * If heſ] cut off s, and ſhut up «, or gather toge- | 


*Ch9.12. ther x, then + who can hinder him y ? 
1 Or, mok , | * # | 

1 MARE 8 Towit, a PerſonoraFamily, « In a Priſon, or in the hands | 
Tr " of an Enemy. This ſhutting up,is oppoſed to the or.ning of the Priſon= | 

0.299 Joors, and to that enlargement,which God is elſe where ſaid to give to 
Men.x Either .ina way of Judgment,asa like word is uſed, P/al.26.9. - 
Gather not my ſoul with ſinners. Or, rather 2. in a way of Mercy, as this - 
word is generally uſed in Scripture;this being every where promiſed 
by God to his People,as an eminent Mercy that he would gather them 
zogethey- So this 1s oppoſed to the former aftions, and the ſenſe of 
the place is, whether it pleaſcth God to ſcatter a Family, or to ga- j 
ther them togetier from their Diſperſions. y From doing what he j 
pleaſeth and deſigneth with his own Creatures : Who canreſtrain | 
him either by giving Law to him, or by force and power? Or,who : 
can contradig or an{wer him, or objeS# again(} him, or retort or return us ' 
pou him ; i. « charge him with Injuſtice in ſuch proceedings? W hich | 
ſenſe may ſeem to agree beſt both with the ſcope of the place, and | 
ſtate of the queſtion between him and Job; which was not whether ; 
any Man could reſiſt God's power, but whether he could queſtion 
his Juſtice ; and with the following Verſe. 


"P1011, IL For * he knowetb vain man z: he ſeeth wicked- 
14- & 35, neſs alſo « ; will he not then conſider 7? b? 
"I zThough men know bur little of God,and therefore are very unfit 


(an turn 
him away? 


and his vanity, or falſhood, or folly, or raſbneſs ; for all theſe this word 
ſignifies. He knoweth that every Man in theWorld is guilty of much 
Vanity and Folly,and therefore ſeeth ſufficient reaſon for hisSeverity 
againſt the beſt Men ; ſuch as thou, O Job, fancieſt thy ſelf to be ; 
and if thou wert ſo,thou haſt no reaſon to wonder at or quarrel with 
his proceedings : And if thy quarrel be that he ſburs thee up, or cuts 
thee of,wen he gathers others under his wing and Prote&ion, whom 
thou thinkeſt or knoweſt to be worſe than thy ſelf, while thou doſt 
impeach his Juitice,thou doſt but betray thy own Vanity andFolly: 
For he knows both whom he chaſtiſeth,and whom he ſpareth, and 
why he doth it, though he do not acquaint thee with the reaſons of 
all his ations. & As * knoweth the Vanity of all Men, ſo he.ex- 
altly perceiveth the Wickedneſs of evil Men, though it be covered 
With the Veil of Religion. He ſeeth thy evil heart which diſcovers it 
ſelf by ſuch wicked and ſcandalous Speeches againſt the Juſtice and 
Goodneſs of his Providence,which gives him juſt cauſe to continue 
and increaſe thy Miſeries. Though thou art partial, and flattereſt 
thy ſelf with a Conceit of thy own Integrity, yer he knoweth thy 
Hypocrifie and Wickednpeſs. 6 Shall ke only ſee it as an idle Spe- 
ator, and nor obſerve it as a Judge to requite and puniſh it ? 


f Heb, 12 For + * vain man would be wiſe c, though man 


empty o& be born d /;kea wild aſſes colt e. 
bollow c Or, Net or, But vain or empty man ( that fooliſh Creature that ſince 


"Pf73-22. the Fall is void of all true Wiſdom and ſolid knowledge,and Judg- 
& 92. 6. ment of the things of God ( would be wiſe ; i. e. pretends to be, and 
cel, 3.8- would be thought wiſe and able to paſs a Centure upon all God's 
ways and works. Or thus, Bnt vain man #5 fooliſh, or, without heart, 
ze, without Underſtanding, unable to judge aright of the ways and 


That when Mens Faces are ſported wirh Dirt, they are aſhamed to 
ſhew them. And Job was charged by his Friends;as having many 
Spots upon him, yea; ſuch as were not the-Spors of God's Children. 
q Or, frmor fixed : Either 1- as to his outward Condition, which 
ſhould be conſtantly proſperous. Or rather as to his Mind, which 
ſhould have ſtrong and comfortable aſſurance of God's Favour, and 
of his own Safety and Happineſs: For this ftedfaſtneſs is oppoſed un- 
to that fear, which is incident to wicked Men; who,even when they 
are free from aQtual Miſeries, yer oft-times are tormented with the 
dread of them. 

16 Becauſe thou ſhalt forget :hy miſery r,and remem- 
berit as waters that paſs away s : 


r Thou ſhalt be free from fear, becauſe thy great and ſettled Pro- 
ſperity ſhal baniſh our of thy Mind all thoſe fad end irkſibm thoughts 
of thy former Calamities,which naturally ingender fears of the con- 
tinuance or return of them, Perſons blefſed with eminent Delive. 
rar:ces, and an happy Settlement, are frequently (aid in Scripture to 
forges their former Sorrows, as Gen. 41« 51. 1ſa. 54. 4» John 16. 21- not 
thar they ſimply forget them, burbecauſe they have no ſad or fright- 
ful remembrance of them : For remembring and forgetting in$ cripture, 
do not ſimply noteaQts of the Mind,but alſo AﬀeS&ions and Pradtiſes 
ſuitable to them, as is well known. 5s Thou thalt remember them 
no more,than Men remember cither a Land-flood, which as it comes 
ſo it goes away ſuddenly, and leaves few or no foorſteps or memo- 
rials behind ir, or the Waters of a River, which as ſoon as rhey are 
out of ſight, are out of mind, becauſe of the new Waters which im- 


. f Heb ſhal 
mediatly come in their ſtead ariſe above 


the noone 


17 And :bine age t Þ thall be *clearers than the noon- 


heady and untraQable; and therefore very incompetent to judge of 


which thy Prayers will be in vain. Or, If thou diretteſt, or reflifiett 


and ſettled abode or allowance. = 5. e. In thy Habitation, :. cither- 


Chap. 


things of God. Fora Verb very like this,and coming from the ſame 
Root, ſignifies to have ones heart taken away, Cant. 4-9. d And mans 
born, i.e. he isby his Birth ſuch; this evil is now natural and heredi- 


day x ; thou ſhalt || ſhine forth y, chou ſhalt be as the 2. 


morning Z. *Pf, 37.6. 
7 7, e, The remainder of thy Life and time in this World.u Heb. - by a 4- 
. 58. 8. 


a . ' them. x Or, above the noon-day, or above the Sun at noon-day, when |Or,fee up. 
Judges of all his Counſels and Altions,yet God knows Man exattly, ; - - | ; higheſt pirch, as well as in its greateſt Glory. y Lioke in 11a. 40.31, 


ſhall ariſe : Men are faid to fall into troubles, and to ariſe out of 


Scripture commonly ſignifies Proſperity and Glory, as Ef. 8: 16. - 
Job 18.5,6.8 38: 15-Prov.4q:18. Or, if thou art in dgrkneſs, as this word 
properly ſignifies, Job 19; 22. Amos 4: 13. 7. e. If thou comeſt into any 
diſtreſs and trouble. z 3. e. That Night of trouble ſhall certainly and 
ſpeedily be followed with the Morning of Deliverance and Com- 


forr, which ike the Morning-light ſhall ſhine brighter and brighs 


rer, until the perfe& day. 


18 Andthou {balc be ſecure becauſe there is hope a ; v Low. 26! 
yea, thou ſbalt dig about ihee b,end *thou (halt take thy Pol. 3. 5: 


& 4, 8. 
4i. «Thy Mind ſhall be quier and free from Terrors, becauſe thou Pro. 3-24- 


reſt in ſifery c. 


ſbalt have a firm and wel/-grounded Hope and Confidence in God's 
merciful and providential Care of thee. Or, thou ſhalt be confident that 
thou ſbalt have what thow hopeſt for ; the at hype, being put for the 
objeR,as is very uſual. 7... Thou ſhajt haveAflucance in and fromGod, 
that thy hopes (hall not be diſappointed but fu}filled. This is oppoſed 
ro thar tear, v. 15. 6 Either to fix thy Tents, which after the manner 
of the 4rabians were removed from place tq place for conveniency 
of Paſturage for their Catrel ; or to tind out Water for thy Cattel,as 
they did, Ger. 26, Or ro plough the ground, as he had done, Chap- 
1.14- Or to make a Fence about thy Dwelling.For both the forego- 
ing & plowing palages expreſles his ſecure & ſafe condition.cFree 
from-Dangers and the 


: ear of them;becauſe of God's fatherly provi __ 
dence watching oyer thee when thou canſt not watch over thy ſelf. _ 


19 Allo thou (halt lie down, and none ſhall make #.c.. 


thee afraid ; yea, many ſhall F make ſuit unto thee d. Pfa.45-22- ] 


4 F 4 De» 


p. XII. 


4 Deſiring thy favour and frendſhip, becauſe of thy great Power 

and Riches, and eminent Felicity : See Ger. 26. 26, Oc 

' 20 But the eyes of the wicked ſhall fail e, and | they 

. y ſhall not eſcape f,and * their hope ball beas [[the giving 
up of the ghoſt g. 

; =o E Or, be > me 4 either with Griefand Tears for their ſore Cala- 

k.8.15, mitics: Or with long looking for what they thall never attain,as this 

8. 14. phraſe is taken,Pſal.69.3.Jer.24.6.Lame 4 17.Andthis ſhal be thy con- 

r,s puff dition, O Job, if thou perſiſteſt in thine Impiery, f They thall never 

earth. obtain Deliverance out of their Diſtreſſes, but ſhall periſh in them. 

* 2£ #4.e. Shall be as vain and deſperate as the hope of Life is in a Man, 

when he is at the very point of death. Or, as ap»ff of breath,v/hich 

i5-gone.in a moment 3 -9r p0 _ hopes of recovery» 

Tob's Anſwer : His Friend's Self-conceit : The Miſerable always deſpiſed 
" #hough Upright : The wicked proſper, I==== 6. God's Power and Pro- 
Loidence is ſeen in his Works, 7 —n——il, With the Ancient is W; ſaom, 
| but eſpecially in God, arid Power ; Judges are Frols, Princes weak and 
--mnean, Darkneſs Light before him, $2---=22. And whole Nations are 0- 

wer-ruled by him, 23===25. By 

ND job anſwered and ſaid, 

FA. - 2 No doubt;but ye are the peoples,and wiſdom 

ſhall die with you 6. 

' a You three, Ls you only are the people, i.e. People of all People 
for eminency of Wiſdom,the only company of reaſonable Creatures; 
all others are but Fools or Beaſts:You have engroſſed all the Reaſon 
of Mankind; and each of you have as much Wiſdomas an whole 
People pur together. It is an Ironical Expreſſion,as the next Verſe 
ſheweth. 6 All the Wiſdom and knowledge of Divine things which 
is in the World, Jives in you, and will die and beutterly loſt when 
you die. This you think of your ſelves; and this makes you ſo con- 
fidently and peremptorily deliver your Opinions, and give Laws 
tome and all Mankind, and even to God himſelf. 

Ch.r3.2. © 3 But * T have an | underſtanding «c as well as ye, 

Heb. + T aw not inferiour to you d: yea, F who knowethnot 


Te. ſuch thingsas theſe e ? 
_ (*- qty which is oft putfor the underfanding, as Job 34. 34- 
£00y «7 Xs $. 22, i. e. God hath given me alfo the Knowledge and 
| [ Fer.5.2 I. A, ” > . 
er than 47 ilityto judge of theſe matters.sIn theſe things, which he ſpeaketh, 
u, not in a way of vain-glorious Boaſting, bur for the juſt and neceflary 
Heb. vindication both of himſelf,and of that cauſe of God, which for the 
th whom ter and ſubſtance of it he maintained rightly, as God himſelf 
re % atreſts,Job 4.2.7. e The truth is, neither you norl have any reaſon to 
= puffed up with ourKnowledge of theſe things;For the moſt fooliſh 
p iſe ? and barbarous Nations know that God is Infinite in Wiſdom, and 
Power,and Juſtice.But thisis not the queſtion between you and me. 
Ch.16.10 , ,*] am as one mocked of his neighbour f, who cal- 
17- 5. Jeth upon God, and he anſwereth himg: * chejuſtup- 


| bo, 4 right man is laughed to ſcorn b. ; ; 
Prov. _f Heb.1 am # deriſien (the Infinite being put for a Noun, as 1suſual 
&. 2. both-in the Hebrew and other Languages )to my neighbour, i. e. to theſe 
three who have pretended and would be thoughr to be my Friends 
and Neighbours; whom therefore ſuch carriage doth very ill become: 
Inftead of ſupporting and comforting me, they make a Sport and 
Scorn of me. g This who belongseither 1..to Job, whohere declares 
his own Pradticein this caſe;when you mock me,Igo toGod withmy 
complaints and Prayers, and he hears me,though you will nor. But 
this {ſeems not to agree either with theContext,or with other paſſages 
of Jeb;in which he conſtantly com plains,that God did: not hear nor 
regard his Prayers, nor pity and he!p him: Or 2. to fob's Friends; 
and ſo this is either 1.An Aggravation of theirCrime,that they ſhould 
mock him who made a great Profeſſion of Religion,who uſed duly to 
call upon God,and to receive anſwers from him,and therefore ſhould 
have carried themſelves more pioufly and charitably, and compaſſi- 
onately towarfls their miſerable Brother.Or 2. as the reaſon of their 
Mockage of Jeb, becauſe God who negle&ed Job's Prayers, heard 
theirs, and gave them thoſe Mercies for which they prayed ; and 
therefore being themſelves well and at eaſe;they were hard-hearted 
towards their poor afflicted Brother, as the manner of Men is. This 
ſeems to ſuit well with the following Verſe. Or 3.as an Argument 
E againſt their ſcorning or flighting of him;God hears you when you 
A pray, therefore you ſhould turn your Mocks of me into prayers for 
me ; and you ſhould pity me, whom God'doth not bear-when I 
Pray : And as God hears you, ſo you ſhould hear and comfort me, 
whenT pour out my Complaints to you. Bur theſe words may be 
brought in mimetically,as being ſome of their ſcoffing words: They 
ſay of me, Let him call upon God, and God will hear him : For ſo they 
=”: had ſuggeſted to Job, Cha. 5. 8. & 8. 5,&c. & rr. 13. But this,ſaith 
Job, T takefor a piece of Mockery, and inſulting over my Miſeries: 
For I know by {ad Experience,and they ſee the contrary,that though 
I call and cry again and again, yet God hath no regard to me.h 7.e. 
I, who,notwithſtanding all their hardCenſures and reproaches,muſt 
and dare ſtill owne it,that through God's Grace I am a juſt and 
upright Man, am derided by them. This he repeats again, be- 

cauſe it was very grievous and burdenſom to him. 


| 5 He thatis ready to flip with bis feet 3, is «5a lamp 
deſpiſed & inthe thought of him thart is at eaſe /: - 


i 5. e. The juſt Man laſt mentioned,who is upon the brink of the 

* * Pit or Grave,ready to fall into miſchief, ſo as never to riſe again in 
this World, which is my caſe, and the occaſion of their ſcorn and 
contempt. & 7.e. Like a Lamp or Torch, which whilſt it fhines 
clearly and in a dark Night,is very uſeful and comfortable;bur when 
it draws towards an end, and 1s nighextinR, and in the light,is neg- 
JeRed anddefſpiſed, as that which is unneceflary and troubleſom and 
offenſive. So the ſame man, who, when his Feet ſtand faſt,in a pro- 
ſperous Condition, is magnified and adored by all;when his feer /ip 
or fumble, as the Phraſe is, P/- 94.18. Jer. 13. 16. when he is in mi- 
ſery, is commonly forſaken and deſpiſed. 7: e. In the Opinion of a 
Man that lives in great Eaſe and outward Happineſs;which generally 
makes Perſons to Sever and deſpiſe thoſe who are in AfiQion.But 


s ? 
© 


- j ee *2. 


- Inn —_— 
: 


ke wordsin the Hebrew Text, He ( which is eaſily under- 
So andy Ifverſs 4. the juft and wpright man ) is as a Torch deſpiſed in 
rhe opinion or thought ( as this or the like words coming fromthe ſame | 


70 B. 


_—_ 


" theſe words are a little otherwiſe rendred, and that agreeably tothe ; 


Hebrew Root are uſed, Pſ. 146. 4. Dan. 6.3. Jon. 1. 6, Or becauſe of 
the ſplendeus ; for ſo this Root and its Derivatives elſewhere ſignifie 
as Cant. 5, 14. Jer.5. 28. Ezek. 27. 19. Andeither of thele fignifi« 
cations agree well with the placo, Or, cor:pared with the ſplendor, or 
greater Luſter and Glory ) of him that lives in tranquility ; he ( i.e. the 
Juſt Man ) z or,becauſe he is;)for this may be the reaſon of the con« 
tempt ) reaay to ſlip with his foot ; 1. e. ready to periſh. 


6 * The tabernacles of robbers proſper mm, and they *Ch. .;.,1 
that provoke God are ſecure » ; into whoſe hand Gog Phal. 37:7 
35-X 927 


CIs + N A 
Mal. 'IFo 


bringeth abundantly o. 

m Thy Opinion delivered Chap. 11. 14, ©«.is confuted by daily 
experience ; which ſhews that the moſt wicked and injurious, and 
impudent Oppreſlors, Tyrants and Robbers,are ſo far from meeting 
with thoſe Diſappointments and Miſeries, wherewith thou didit 
threaten them, that they commonly ſucceed in their curſed Enter- 
prizes, and flouriſh in Wealta and'Glory,and fill their Houſes with 
the Goods of others which they violently took away ; whereof the 
Chaldeans and Sabeans, Chap. 1+ 15, 17. are a preſent and pregnant 
Evidence. n They whoſe common praQtiſe it isto deſpiſe and pro- 
voke God, are confident and ſecure, live without Danger or Fear. 
o So far is God from cruſhing ſuch Perſons, that he ſeems to tavour 
them with wonderful Succeſs, and by his ſpecial and more than 
common Providence, puts into therr hands the Opportunities which 
they ſeek, and the Perſons and Goods of other more Righteous 
Men which they lie in wait for. 


7 Bur asknow the beaſts, and they ſhall teach thee p; 


and the fowls of the air, and they ſhall tell thee. 

? To wit, objeQtively ; 7. e. If thou obſerveſt the Beaſts,and their 
Properties and AQtions, and Events, from them thou mayeſt learn 
this Leſſon : What Leſſon ? I anſwer, Either 1. that which was laſt 
mentioned,v,s.God's Providence doth order thingsin the like man- 
ner among the very Beaſts,and Fowls,and Fiſhes ; of which the moſt 
Ravenous and Miſchievous fare the beſt,whilſt thoſe which are more 
Harmlets and Serviceable, and Beneficial to Men, meet with the 
hardeſt uſage. O r2 That which Zophar had uttered with ſo much 
Porrp and Gravity, Chap. 11. 9, 8, 9. concerning God's Infinite 
Wiſdom, which, ſaith Job, thou needeſt not go into Heaven or Hell 
to know, but thou mayſt learn it even from the Beaſts, ec. 

8 Oripeak tothe earth, andit ſhall teach thee, and 
the filbes of the ſea ſhall declare unto thee. 

9 Who knoweth notin all theſe q,that the hand of the 
LORD hath wrought this r ? 


q Or, by all theſe Brute-creatures r That God by his power and 
Wiſdom hath created and ordered all this which is in them, or is 
done by and among them. 


10 * In whoſe hand s 5s the || ſoul t of every living *Num.r5 


things, and the breath x of | all mankind. 
5 7, e, At whoſe abſolute diſpoſal it is to give it, or take it away 


when and how it ſeemeth good to him.s The Life,or the Soul the Þ Heb. al 
Principal of Life « 7. e. Of all unreaſonable Creatures,of which he fbf man 


[poke v. 7, oppoſed to man in the laſt words. - x Or, the ſpirit, as 
that word is commonly uſed ; 7 e. the Immortal Soul ; which is no 
leſs a Creature, and in God's power to diſpoſe of it, than the Ani. 
mal Soul of unreaſonable Creatures. 


11 * Doth notthe ear try words ? and the + mouth 


eaſt his meat y ? 

»y As the Mouti taſteth and thereby judgeth of Meats, and as it 
liketh or difliketh, ſoir receiveth or reje&teth what is put into it ; 
ſo it is the Office of the Ear, or rather of the Mind,which hears and 
receives the Opinions and Diſcourſes of others by the Ear,nort raſhly 
to approve or condemn everything whichit hears,but diligently and 
thoroughly to ſearch and try whether it be true, and ſo to be em- 
braced ; or falſe, and to bereje&ed. Interpreters are much puzled 
about the Connettion and Deſign of theſe words : But they ſeem to 
be either 1. An Apology for himſelf, why he did not comply with 
their Opinion and Arguments, becauſe they did nor ſuit with his 
Ear or Mind ; and though he had confidered and tried them, he 
could not diſcern any weight in them. Or,rather 2. a- Reproof to 
bis Friends, that they did fo haſtily condemn his Perſon and his Do- 
rine withour a ſtri& and ſerious Enquiry. Or, 3. a Preface to his 
tollowing Ditcourſe ; whereby he invites them to hear and judge of 
his Wordsand Arguments more candidly and impartially ; and not 
to ſcorn all that he ſaid, becauſe of his preſent Foverty and Miſe- 
ry, as Men at caſe uſe to do; nor to caſt away the good for any 
mixture of bad with it ; but calmly to weigh and debate things 
both within and among themſelves and with him,thar they and he 
roo might all agree in difallowing whatſcever ſhould appear to be 
falſe, and owning of every truth. 

12 With the ancient is wiſdom, and in length of days 
uſterſfanding xz. | 

2 Theſe words contain a Conceſſion of what Bildad had faid,ch.8: 
8,9- Anda joyning with him in that appeal ; but withal,an intima- 
tion, that this Wiidom was bur finite, and imperfe&, and liable to 
many Miſtakes ; and indeed meer Ignorance and Folly,if compared 
with the divineWiſdom,of which he ſpeakes in the next and follow- 
ing Verſes. And therefore that Antiquity which they pretended 
for their Opinion, ought not to be received againſt the Oracles or 
Truths of the eternal and moſt wiſe God. 


12 || With him « is wiſdomb and ſtrength : he hath | Th5 
y with _— 
Ch.36. 5 


counſel and undeſftanding c, 

a ive. With God ; the Relative being pnt for the Antecedent, 
which is eaſily and neceffarily underſtood out of the Scope of the 
place, and all the following Verſes. 65 Perfe& Wiſdom is only in 
him,and all Wiſdom in theWorld cometh from him,who giverh to 
old or young as it pleaſeth him : The ancient are not wiſe without 
his Gift and Grace, and with that a younger Man may be wiſer tha 
the Ancients, as Pavid was, Pſal. 119. 100. c Counſel, i, e. PraQtical 
Wiſdom to guide all the Afﬀairs of the World, and Underſtanding, 
or a ſpeculative Knowledge of all Perſons and Things. 


I4 Behold, he * breaketh down 4d, and it cannot be *Ch,v!* 
can 14227 


built again : he ||ſhutteth F up e a man, and there 
be no opening f. 
s To wit, Houſes, Caſtles, Cities, which God deſigneth to de« 


ſtray 


*Ch.341! 
T Heb pu 
late, 


Chap.630 . 


+Heb. aþ(" 


Chap. XI, T 


226 


[| Or, If, 


Rev. 3-1 


n.15. 


, bf 
b, al 
f man 


369! 
eb pa* 


p60 . 


That 15, 
tþ GvY. 
1.36. Fo 


TA " XIE. 


* 


ftroy utterly. » Tfhe will ſhut up a Man in Priſon, or in afty ſtraits 

or troubles. f Without God's Permiſſion and Providence. | 
15 Behold, he wich-holdeth the waters g, and they þ 

dry up: alſo he ſendeth them out, and they overturn 


the earth. p 

g Which are reſerved in the Clouds, that they may not fall upon 
the Earth. hr. e. The Waters upon the Earth, Ponds,and Springs, 
and Brooks, and Rivers. 


16 With him is ſtrength and Wiſdom 7: the deceived 


and the deceiver are his &. 

; He doth the things here mentioned in the foregoing and ſuc- 
cccding Verſes, and that both powerfully, ſo as no Creature can 
reliſt and hinder him, and wiſely ſo as none can prevent and over- 
reach him. The ſame thing he had ſaid before,v.1 z.but he repeats it 
here to prepare the way for the following Events, which are eminent 
Inſtances, both of his Power and Wiſdom. & 3. e. From or by him, 
and wholly ſubje& to his diſpoſal. That oneMan deceiveth another, 
and that the other is deceived by him, either in Divine, or Civil 
and Worldly things, (which ſeem to be principally intended here by 
comparing the following Verſes, ) this is from God,and by the con- 
dutt of his wiſe and powerful Providence, God giveth to the De- 
ceiver more Wit, and knowledg?, and Art, and withal Opportu- 
nity, and all favourable Circumſtances for his Deceit.He alſo gives 
leſs Underſtanding to the Deceived, and witkdraws from him either 
wholly, or in part, that common Light of Diſcretion, which is his 
Free Gift, and he may juſtly give, or take away as he pleaſeth, and 
leaves him to his own Ignorance and Error, Pride and Self-conceit, 
and to all thoſe Prejudices, Paſſions, and Luſts, which commonly 
corrupt Mens Minds, and to the Power and Crafts of Saran, that 
grand Deceiver. He governs the Deceiver, and ſers bounJs to his 
Deceits to whom, and when, and how far they ſhall extend ; as 1s 
manifeſt from Deur. 13 1. 1 Kings <2. 20. 1/a. 19+ 14+ Ezek. 'q» 9. 
Mat, 24.24. 2 Theſſ, 2 11. Rev. 20. 3, 8. Healſo over-rules all this 
to his own Glory,and the accompliſhment of his righteous Dehigns 
oftrying the good,and puniſhing wicked Men,by giving themup to 
believe Lies: Yet God is not the Cauſe or Author of any Error or 
Sin, but only the wiſe and holy Governour and Diſpoſer of it 


17 Heleadeth counſellors away ſpoiled /, and maketh 


the judges fools ws. | 

1 The wite Counſellors or Stateſmen,by whom the Afﬀairs of Kings 
and Kingdoms are ordered,he leadeth away as Captives in triumph, 
being ſpo:led either of that Wiſdom which they had, or ſeemes or 
pretended to have ; or of that Power and Dignity which they had 
enjoyed. m Partly by diſcovering their Folly, and partly by infa- 
tuating their Minds, and turning their own Counſels to their ruin : 
Of which ſee 2 Sam. 15. 31. & 17. '4, 23. {ſa 19 11. 1 Cor. 1. 19. 
15 He iooſcth tnebondof kings », and girdeth their 
loins with a girdle o. 

n Either 1 Paſſively, whereby they are bound He freeth them 
from Priſon or Reſtraint Or rath-r 2. AQively, that wherewith 
they bind their Subje&s to Obedience, to wit, their Power and Au- 
thority, and that Majeſty which God ſtamps upon Kings, to keep 
their People in awe : Ali wr ich God can, and oft doth take away 
from them, and freetii the People from their Bonds, when it pleaſeth 
him : Of which all Hiſtories give Inſtances :; Se Dan. 2.21 «Either 
1.With a Girdle of Dignity and Glory which was put upon theLoins 
of Men in great Honour and Authority. as //a. 11. 5. & 22. 21.Jer. 
13. 1, 2. 50 this member of tte Verle is oppoſite to the former, 
and the ſenſe of the whole is, he either ca teth down kings, or rai- 
ſeth them up, as he pleaſeth. But the Sc-ipture no v here menti- 
ons this Giral- as on of the Ornaments of Kings. Or rather,2.With 
a ſervile 'zirdle ; For ſeing all, both the foregoing and ſucceeding 
paſſages do evidently note afts of Judgmen or Punithments, in- 
flicted upon them, it ſeems improper to underſta d this alone of 
an a& of God's Favour to them. So tne ſenſe 15, He reducerh 
theminto a mean and ſervile Condition ; - which 15 thus expreſſed, 
becauſe Servants did uſe ro gird up their Garments ( whi. h after 
the manner of thoſe parts and times were looſe and long )that they 
might be fitter for attendance upon their Ma'ters ; of which ſee 
Luke 12. 37. and 7.8. And fo this is an amplificati n of the for- 
mer ſentence. He not only d-poſeth them from their Thrones, but 
brings them into Bondage and Slavery: 

19 He leadcth princes paway ſpoiled,;and overthrow- 
eth the mighty. 

? So this Word, which uſually ſignifies Priefs, is oft uſed, as 
Gen 41. 45 and 47. 22, 26, Exod 2: 16: 2 Sam.Q:; 18. Compared 
with 1 Chron :8. 17. 


*Ch32.9. 20 * Heremoveth away Þ the ſpeech q of the truſty r: 

a. 3-:,3. and takethaway the underftanding ofthe aged. 

9 the &q Either 1. By taking away or reftr<ining the Gifr of Urterance 
(4 


faithful, 


"Pf. 167. 
40. 


' Dan.2.33. 


from them, that they thould not beable to expreſs their Troughts 
with ſuch clearneſs and Poweras they uſed ro do ; which God oft 
doth to wiſe and eloquent Men. Or 2 BY bringing them into ſuch 
ſtraits and troubles that they know not wha to ſay or adviſe. Or 
J- By taking away their Underſt:nding whi h ſhould ſuggeſt and 
dire& their Speech, as it here follows. Or 4 By permitting them 
to betray their Truit and either not to ſp ak when they thou'-', or 
to ſpeak ot ;erwiſe than chey ſhould,and to uſe their Wir and Rhe- 
torick, not to dire&t, but to deceive, and ſo celiroy a Prince. r1.e, 
Of thoſe wiſe and eloquent Counſellors, that were, and for their 
great Abilities might be truſted by the greateit Princes with all 
their Afﬀairs. 

21 * He poureth contempt upon princes s, and 
[| weakneth z the ſtrength of the mighty. 

5 1. e. He makes them contemprible to their SubjeQs and others 


|| Or,Jooſeth # Heb. He looſeth the Gi-dles Whic' Phraſe ſignifies Weakneſs, as 
the girdle of Iſa. 5: 7. as the girding of the Girdle notes Strength 2nd Power, as 
the frong. 1ſne 22: 21+ & 45: 5. Both rheſe Phraſes being taken from the quas- 


* Che28.3. 


lity of rheir Garments, which being looſe and long, did diſ-inable 
a Man for Tra- el or Work 


22 He * diſcovererh deep things our of darkneſs «,and 


' 2equilye bringeth ouc co light the (hadovy of deaths 


£.10.26 


2 5. e, The moſt ſecret and crafty Counſels of Princes, which are 


t Cor, 4.5, contrived and carried on inthe dark» 


= 


Kb 


x What hitherto he ſaid of Princes, he now applies to Nations 

and people,whomGod dotheither increaſe or diminiſh as he plealerh, 

3 He multiplies them ſo that they are forced to ſend forti: Colonir's 

into other Lands x Or, leadeth them in , or, bringeth them back in- 

ro their own Land, and confineth them there. 

24 Hetaketh away the heart « of the + chief b. of the 

people of the earth; and * cauſeth them to wander in a 

wiiderneſs where thereis no way c. 

a Which ſignifies either, 1; Their Courage, i 1 125 & 

rather, 2. Their Wiſdom and Eherar as Ro Fs bay = 

the following words ſhew. 6 Either for Place and Power ; © os 

Wiſdom and Condutt. c z. e. Fills them with confuſion, and un- 

certainty, and perplexity of mind, ſo that they know not how to 

govern themſelves or their People. X 

25 They grope din the dark without light e, and he 

maketh them w + ſtagger like a drunken man f. 

d Like men that cannot fee their way. e Two Phrales expreſſing 
the tame thing, empHarically to expreſs their profound darkneſs. 
f Who ree's hither and thither wit'.out any certainty. $So they 
ſometimes take one courſe, and ſometimes another, as reſolving to 
try all Experiments, and indeed not knowing what to do. 

FO Os. lar ers XIII. 

Fob's friends not wiſer than he ; he would reaſon with Gid ; b 
lyars, and talked deceitfully for God, who arty ſearch 6 _— hoy 
for acc. pting perſons, 1 ——- 10. God's excell-mcy, and they as aſbes 
and clay, 11, 42. He t reſolute, being inextream miſery, and having 
confidence in G1d, before whom he n ould ſpeak, ana Goa ſhould ſave hum ; 
not ſo with an hypocrite, 13 - 16. He ordereth his cauſe to plead 
with God, only deſireth a removal of God's hand upon hm, 19 —- 22. 
His requeſt, to know his ſins and Goa's pmwrpoſe, ſmce God delighteth not in 
our miſery, 23 28, 

ES mine eye hath ſeen all :5;s, mine ear hath heard 
_ underſtood it «4. 

# Aiithis which either you or I have diſcourſe 7 | 
Infinite Power and Wiſdom of God, I know, i pe ening che 
my own Obſervation and Experience.and by hearing it from my An- 
ceſtors ; ſo that Idid not need your tedious and impertinent difſ- 
courſes concerning thoſe matreis. 

2 * What ye know, he ſame do I know alſo: I am 
not inferior unto you. 


3 * Surely I would ſpeak tothe Almighty b, and I de- 
ſire to reaſon with God. | | 

b According to thy wiſh, Ch. 11: 5. T had rather debate the mat- 
ter with Gol than with you. I am not afraid ofpretenti. gmy Pers 
ſon and Cauſe before him, who is a Witnets of my Integrity, and 
would not deal ſounmercifully with me as you do. 

4 Burt ye are forgers of lies c ; *ye are all Phyſicians 
of no value 4. 

c i.e, Authors of Falſe Do&rine, to wit, that great Affiiftions 
are peculiar to Hypocrites and wicked Men. d Unfait!:ful and Un- 
skilfu), preſcribing bad Remedies, and milapplying good ones. 
| 5 Othatye would altogether hoid your peace, and 
it tbould be your wiſdom e. 
| e For then your Ignoratice and Folly had been concealed, which 
is now manifeſt, Compare” Prov. 17: 26. : 

6 Hear f now my reaſoning, and hearken to the 
pleadings of my Lips g. 


done. g #. e. To the Arguments which I ſhall produce. 

7 * Wiil ye ſpeak wickedly for God b ? And talk de- 
ceicfully for him ? 

h Will you utter Falſhoodsupon pretence of pleaſing God, or of 
maintaining God's Honour or Juſtice? Noth ie need tuch defences? 

s Will ye aCcept his Perſon ; 2 Will ye contend& for 
God/? 

z Not judging according to the right of the Cauſe, but the quali- 
ty of the Perſon, a» corrupt Ju: ges do & i e.Wrangle and quarrel 
with m-, and cavil at my Speeches, and pervert my meaning./ "I 
That you may gratifie him, or defend his Rights ? | 

91s it goud » that he ſhould ſearch you out »? or as 
one mocketh another, do ye /o mock him o ? 

m Will it be to your Credit and Comfort ? n 5. e. Narrowly exi- 
mine your Hearrs and Diſcourſes, whether you have uttered Truth or 
Fa ſhood, and whether your Speeches proceed from true Zeal for 
God, or from your own Prejudices and Paſſions, and from a deſire 
to curry Favour with him- oTo wit, by covering your uncharitable- 
neſs and corrupt affettions with prerences of Piety, a+ if God could 
not diſcern your Arti'.ces; or by pleading his Cauſe with weak and 
foolith Arguments, which is a kind ofmock-ry to-him, and an Inju- 
ry to his Cauſe ; or by ſecking to flatter him with falſe Prailes, as if 
he did diftribure the i hings -t this World » ith exa& Juſtice proſ- 
pering onl» the good and :everely affliting none bur wicked Men. 

10 He will ſurely reprove you p, if ye do ſecretly 9 
accept Perſons. 

p 7. e Puniſh you; as this word is ofruſed,as hath been once and 
again obſerved, 4 Though it be concealed in your own Br-aſts 
andno Eye ite it ; yea, though it be ſo cloſe thar your ownMinds 
and Conſciences, through Ignorance, or Ina.ivertency,or Slothful- 
neſs, do not perceive it, yet He, who is greater than your Conſci- 
ences, lces and knows it. 

11 Shall not his Excellency r make you afraid 5? and 
his dread fall upon you ? 


Juſtice and Power, which can and will puniſh you for it. 5s OF 


r His infinite Wiſdom which ſees Jour ſecret Falſhnods, and his 


fpeeking raſhly or falſly of his Ways and Counſels. 
12 Your remembrances 7 are like unto afhes ; your 
Bodies & ere like to Bodies of Clay, | 


4 F 2 - f Eicher 


Chap. 


23 * He encreaſeth the nations, and deftroyeth *Pſal.rof 


them * : he enlargeth the nations y and iſtraitneth them 3% ! 
apain %L. T Heb. | 
| ': » leadeth it 


* fi e. Attend toit, and conſider it more ſeriouſly than you have . 


bil 


uy ! 
1þ 
i 


f Heb. 
heads. \ 
* Pfal. 


107» 49! 


| 


= 
+ Heb. k 
wander * 


*Ch.12:4 


* Ch.23. l 


* Ch.6.4 
& 16. 25 


*Ch. 17.8 
& 32. 21 
& 36. 4 


4 - 


nap. XII. 
| + Either 1; Aﬀively, Z. e. your Memorials, or your Diſeourſes and 
Arguments by which you deſign to bring things to my remembrance, 
So he might poſſibly allude to that paſſage, Chap. 4. 7- Remember 
pray thee, &c. That, and all your other Memento's are like unto aſhes, 
7. e. contemptible and unprofitable: Heb. as Parables, or Speeches 
of duft, or aſhes. Or 2. Paſſively, all that which 1s moſt excellent 
or memorable in you 3 your Wealth, and Dignity, and Wait, 
and Reputation, or whatſoever it is for which you expett or deſire 
to be remembered, it is all but poor deſpicable duft and aſhes : 
And therefore you have juſt reaſon to abhor your ſelyes, and to 
dread the Divine Majeſty, as I now adviſed you, # Though they be 
not full of Sores and Boils as mine is, yet they are but Duſt, and to 
Duft they ſhall return as well as mine. Heb. 7our backs, which, be- 
1ngthe ſtrongeſt part of the Body, is put for the whole Eody, Or, 
Tour Eminencies, or Excellencies, as this word moſt properly fignitics, 
as Hebricians obſerve, ſo it anſwers to their memorables. All thoſe 
things wherein you do," or think that you do excel others, are but 
like Emioencies, or Lumps, or Heaps of Clav, vain and utelcfs 
- things, if compared with the Excellencies of Gods Or, Tour heights, 
z. e. your lofty Diſcourſes are like Clay, 7. ce. without ſolidity and 
ſtreogth. | | \ 
12 + Hold your peace x, let me alone that T may 


ha ſpeak y, and let come on me what will z. 

| x Do notnow interrupt me in my Diſcourſe; which peradyenture 
F he obſerved by their geſiures, ſome of them were now attempting. 
y That I may freely utter my whole mind. x For the event of my 
Diſcourſe with God, wherewith you threaten me, I am willing to 
ſubmit my ſelf to Him, to do with me as He pleaſeth : For I know He 
will 'not judge ſo ſeverely and paitially of me, or my words, as you 
do, but will accept what is good, and paſs by any circumſtantial de- 
feRts in my Perſon or Speech, as knowing that I ſpeak from an upright 


Heart, 
14 Wherefore doT take my fleſh in my teeth, and 


put my life in mine hand (('z ) ? 


Cz ) According to this Tranſlation the Senſe ſeems to be this, If 
you ſpeak truth, and God puniſheth none but wicked Mcn, why 
doth he bring me ( whom he knows to be no Hypocrite, as you flan- 
der me ) to that extremity of pain and miſery, that I am almoſt 
conſtrained to tear, ard eat my own Fleſh ( which is mertioned as 
the Charater of Men in great anguiſh, 2/a. 9. 20, and 49. 26, J) and 
am ready to lay violent hands upon my ſelf ? Is it fo gicat a crime to 
complain in this caſe, or at leaſt to erqui c into the cauſe of this 
unwonted ſeverity: But this ſenſe ſeems not well to (uit either with 
the foregoing orfollowing Verſes, but to come in abruptly. Others 
therefore render the words thus; Why ſhuld I take my fleſh in »y 
teeth, &c. And ſo this may be either x, A reaſon of this ardceuc 
deſire of liberty of Speech, becauſe he could hold his Tongue no long- 
er, but muſt needs tear hin.ſelf to pieces, if he had not ſome vent for 
his grief. So this agrees well both with v. 13. where hedefircd 
this f;eedom, and with v- 19. where the ſame Senſe is expreſſed in 
plainer words. Or, 2. An Antidote againſt Deſpair. I perceive, O 
my Friends, by your Diſcourſes, that you intend to Grive me to 
utter Deſpair, if I do not turn to God in another manner than yet 
I have done. Which if it were true, T ſhould certainly tear my 
Fleſh, and violently take away my own Life : But I ſce no reaſon 
why I ſhould give way to any ſuch deſpair or deſperate Ations ? 
And this alſo hath a good dependapce upon the foregoing words , 
Let come on me what will, ( q. d. Bur I have no reaſon to fear ſuch 
Conſequences as you ſuggcſt, nor to deſpair of a mercitul Audict cc 
ard Relicf from God; ) and a good connexion with thoſe which fol- 
low, v. 15. where he declares his Hope and Contidence ip God, The 
Phraſe of haying one« Liſe in his hand, notes a condition extreamly 
dangerous, ahd almoſt deſperate, as Judges I2* 3 1Sanm. 19. 5. 
and 238, 21. Pſal. 119, 10g. : 

*PCſ. 23:44 15 * Though heſlay mes, yet I will cruſt in him 56: 
Pro.14.32. but c I will + maintain mine own ways 4 before him e. 
He a Though God ſhould yet more and more encreafe my toriments, 
{Prove ar a+ {9 that I could bear them no longer but ſhould perceive my ſe:f to be 
&#% at the point of Death, and without all hopes of Recovery in this 
World. 6 Or. ſhall I not truft in him ? Shouid I deſpair 3 No, I will 
not, I know he is a juſt, and a faithful, and merciful God, aud he 
knows that mine Heart is upright before him, and that I am no Hy- 
Pocrite, c Though I will truſt io him, yet I will humbly expoſtulate 
the matter with him. d I will argue, or prove, or demonſtrate my ways, 
7. e. I will make a full free Confeſfion of the whole courte of my Lite, 
and I will boldly, though ſubmiſfiv:ly, aſſert mine own Integrity, 
which he alſo will, { doubt not, acknowledge. And what I have dore 
» ' amifsI will as freely conteſs, and make Supplication to my Judge for 
= _—_ of it, e Before his Tribunal : for I defire ne other judge 
ut 1m. 

16 He alſo hall be, ( or is) my ſalvation f: forg an 

hypocrite ſhall not come before him, 

FI reft Mured that he will fave me out of theſe Miſeries ſooner or 
later, one way or other, if not with a temporal, yet with an eternal 
Salvation after Death ; of which he ſpeaks, Chap. 19. 25, &c. g Or, 
but. as this Particle commonly fignifiesz for this Clauſe 1s put by way 
of oppoſition to the former ; and the ſenſe is, But if I were an Hypo- 


: my Cauſe with him, as now I deſire to'do, nor could I hope for any 
= Salvation from, or with him in Heaven. | 
17 Hear diligently my ſpeech h, and my declaration 
z with your ears. | 
h This he defired before v, 6. and now repeateth, either becauſe 
they manifeſted ſome neglc& or diſhke of his Speech, and ſome defire 
tointerrupt him: Or, becauſe he now comes more cloſely to his bufi- 
neſs, the foregoing Verſes being moſtly in way of Preface to it. 7 7. ec. 
The words whereby I declare my Mind. | | 

18 Behold now, I have ordered my | cauſe &; I 
know that I ſhall be juſtified /, 

To wit, within my ſclf. 1 have ſeriouſly and fincerely conſi- 
dered the ſtate of my caſe, and what can be ſaid either for me, or a- 
eainfſt me, and am ready to plead my Eauſe. / i e. Acquitted by 
God from that Hypocritie aud Wickedneſs wherewith you charge me, 
anddeclared a righteous and ianocent Perfon, humane Igficmities cx- 
Cepted, 


Lo. —_— 


5 0 B 


4 crite, as you alledge, I durſ} not preſent my ſelf before him to plead | 


19 Who zs he that will plead with me »»? for now if 


I hold my tongue, I ſhali give up the ghcft x. 

m Where is the man that willdo it? Nay, O that God would do it: 
which here he implies, and preſently expreſſeth. n My grieffor Gcd's 
heavy Hand, and for your bitter Reproaches would break my Heart 
it 1 ſhouid not give it vent, Ts 

20 Only do not two things unto me vo; then will I nor 


hide my elf from thee p. | 

s Which two he expreſſcth, v. 21. p Then ſhall I boldly preſent 
my ſelf and cauſe before thee, 

21 * Withdraw thine hand far from me q: and let *Ch.g.34, 


not thy dread make me afraid r, 35.633.7, 
q 7. e. Suſpend my torments during the time of my pleading with 
thee, that my Mind may beat Liberty. » Do not preſent thy telf to 
me 19 terrible Majeſty, neither deal with me ic rigorous Juſtice ; but 
hear me meckly, as one map hearcth another, ai.d plead with me Up« 
on thoſe gracious terms, wherewith thou uſeſt to deal with Markind, 


22 Then call thou, and I will anſwer: or let me 


ſpeak, and anſwer thou me 5. 

s Then chuſe thy own Method. Either do thou charge me with 
Hypocrifie, or more than cc mmon Guilt, and 1 will deferd ny (et ; 
Or I will argue with thee concerning thy extracrdinary Severity to- 
wards me; and do thou ſhew me the Reaſons of it. This Propoſal ſa- 
youred ot too great Self confidence, and of Irreverence towards Goc; 
for which, and ſuch like Speeches, he is reproved by God, Chap. 38. 
2, 3, and qo. 2, 

23 How many are mine iniquities and ſins : ? Make 


me to know my tranſgreſlion and my ſin «. 

# That am a Sinner I confe:s; but that I am guilty of ſo many cr 
ſuch hainous Crin es as my Friend: ſuppoſe, I utterly deny ; and if 1t 
'be ſo, do thou, O Lord, diſcoyer it to my ſhame, # If peradventure 
my heart ceceive me therein ; for I am cot conſcious to my ſelf of a- 
ny caormous Crime, 


24 Wherefore hideft thou thy face 


me for thine enemy y ? 
x i. e, Withdraweſt thy favour and help which thou didft uſe to af- Ruth 1.21, 
ford me 3 as this Phraſe js commonly uſed, as Deut. 13. 17 Pſal. 13, Chap. 6.9 
1. and 102, 2, (Fc. »y i.e, Dealcſt as ſharply with me, as if I were 
thy profeiſed Encmy, 
25 * Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro ? 


wilt thou purſue the dry ſtubble z ? 

2 Doth it become thy infinite and excellent Majeſty to uſe all thy 
might tocruſh ſuch a poor, impotent, frail Creature as I am, that caa 
no more reſiſt thy Power, than a Leaf, or a little looſe and dry Straw 
can reſiſt the fury of the Wind or Fire, 

26 For thou writeſt « bitter things b againſt me, and 


* makeſt me to poſſeſs the iniquities of my youth c. 

a 1,e. Thouappointeſt or infliteſt. A Netaphor trom Princes cr 
Judges, whoancicntly uſed to write their Sentences or Decrees, con- 
cerning Perſons or Cauſes, brought be:ere them. Scc P/ſ. 149. 9g. 
Jer. 22. 30, John 19. 22, b je A terrible Sentence, or moſt frie- 
yous Puniſhments. c Thou doſtnow at once bring upon me the puniſh- 
ments of al my fins, not excepting tholeof my Youth which becauſe 
of the folly and weaknels of that Age, are uſually excuſed or witked at, 
or, at leaſt, but gently puniſhed. 
27 * Thou putteſt my feet alſo in the ſtocks 4, and *Chzzu 
f lookeſt narrowly unto all my paths e ; thou ſetteſt a *S oh. 


printupon the f heels of my feet f. +Hebyrat 
d Thou encompaſſcſt me with thy Judgments, that I may have no 
way or poſlivility to eſcape. e When thou haſt me faſt in Priſon, 

thou make't a ſtrit and diligent ſearch into all the &Rions of my life, 

thar thou maiſt find matter to condemn me. f #. e. Thou foiloweſt 

me cloſe at thehecls. either '0 obſerve my Aions, or to purſue me 

with thy Judgments, ſo that thou doſt oft tread upon my heels, aud 

lcave the prints o: thy Footſteps upon them. 


28 And heg, asa rotten thing, conſumeth ; as a 


garment that 15 moth-eaten. | | 
£ Either, 1. Man, or fob, ſuppoſed to be God's Adverſary in this 
conteſt, So he ſpeaks of himſelf in the third P-rſ.n, as js uſual in 
this and other Sacred Books, So the ſenſe is He, Z. e. this poor frail 
Creature. this Carkaſs or Body of mine ; which poſſibly he pointed at 
with his Finger. conſameth or pineth away, (5c Sohe mentions here 
the cffc& of podg ſc vere proceedi: gs againſt him, to wit. his Con- | 
;\umption and utter Deſtrution which was in aking haſte towards him. | 
Or, 2. God, of whom he hitherto ſpoke in the ſecond Perſon, and 
now in the third Perſon, ſuch chapges of tcrſons beirg very frequent 
in Poctical Writings ſuch as this is. So he continucth the fo mer 
Diſcourſe. ai.d as before he mentioned God's ſevere Enquiry in'o his 
ways. and Sentence againſt him. ſo here he deſcribes the Conſequence 
and dreadful Execution of it upon him + He, i .e. God, conſumeth (for 
the Verb is ative _) me as rottenneſs conſumeth that in which it is. or, 
as a rotten rhivg is conſumed, and as s Moth which eateth a Garment. 
CHAP. XIV. 
Mans natural m'ſery, fin, and fhwt | fe our plea with Ged nit to diſturb us 
by his power, but ſuffer us to accompliſh our appoin ted time, 1——— 6+ 
The other Creatures decay cnd rev,ue; but Man once dead, returneth not, 
fall the end of all things, 9 w=——— 12, He wiſheth to be hid in the 
Grave in hopes of the Reſurretlion, 13 Is. for that here God 
was flriit in marking his iniquity, and prevailed againſt him, 16— 200 
Man's miſery with reſped# to his Children, 21, 22. 

An that is born of a woman a, is + of few days , Hitb fr 


and * full of trouble c. ons 
4 This expreſſion is here uſed, either, 1. To intimate the cauſe of a < 
of Man's Miſery, that he was born of Woman, -a weak Creature, 1 Per. 
3. 7+ and withal corrupt and fintul, and of that Scx by which fin and *: zo 
all Calamity was brought ipto the World, See Chap. 15. 14. and Gen. 
3-17. 1 Tim. 24 13z 14+ Or, 2. To note the univerſality of the things 
Every Man, every Mothers Son, as we uſe to ſpeak. Mens Faibers 

arc oft times unknown and uncertain, but their Mothers are always 
defiviteand certain. One Man was then to be bory, ard afterwards 


x, and * holdeft *Deut.z;; 
| 20 


PC. 25.7, 


! 


was born without an carthly Father, to wit, our Lord and —_— 
Ss of _ Chriſt 3 


Chap. X11. 


fl 


flleb 


1.9.34, 
X 33.7, 


eut.32, 


h 1.21, 
2p. 6.9 
I9. 11, 
$3 19, 
l, 42.3. 


, 28.7 


h 33.1 
leb, 06 
veft, 

eb.nuts 


'o ,_ vIV. 


Chriſt ; but no M1ft was ever born without a Mother, 6b A ſhort liv'd- 


7 0 B. 


Creature in himfelf, and therefore needs no violent hand to cut him ' 
off, becauſe he withereth ſo foon of h's own accord. c And there- - 
fore a fitter ObjeR for Divine Compaſſion, than for his fary or ſfeve. | 


rity. He chiefly intendeth himiclf, bur he expreſleth it thus gene- 
rally, partly to relieve himſelf with the thoughts of the common Cala- 
mities of Mankind ; and partly to move God with the conſideration 
of the fraiity and miſery of huinane Nature, and conſequently of his 
Condition, 

2 * He cometh forth 4 like a flower e, and is cut 
down : he fleeth alſo as a ſhadow f, and continueth nor. 

4 Out of his Mothers Womb, Chap. 1. 21. e Which quickly prow- 
eth up and maketh a fair ſhew, but ſoon withereth, or 15 cut down, 
f Which being made by the Sun, follows its motions, andis in perpe- 
tual variation, until at laſt it quite vanifh and diſapocar. 

2 And doſt thou open thine eyes upon ſuch an one g, 


and bringeſt me into judgment with thee 5 ? ,— 

Z; Either, 1. To take thought or care about him, Or rather, 2. To 
obſerve ail his ways, that thou maiſt find cauſe of puniſhment, He 1s 
not a fit match for thee. It is below thee to contend with him, and 
to uſe thy infinite Wiſdom and Power to cruſh him. This ſeems beſt 
to ſuit with the ſcope and context. þ 1. e Pleadeſt with me by thy 
Judgments, and thereby, in a manner forceſt me to plead with thee, 
without granting me thoſe two neceſſary and favouradle Conditions, 
expreſſed ( hap. 13 20, 21, 

4 + Who * can bring a clean 3hing out of an unclean 
; 2 Not one |. 

i 1 do not ſay, I am clean, as Zophar pretendeth, Chap. 11. 4. but 
confeſs that I am a very inclean Creature, and therefo:e liable to thy 
Juſtice, if thou wiltft deal rigorouſly with me : but remember that 
this is not my peculiar caſe, but the common lot of every Man, who, 
coming from finful Parents, and being infettzd with original Corru- 
ption, muſt unavoidably be unclean. Why then doſt thou 1ptlift ſuch 
peculiar and ex:raordinary Judgments upon me, for that which is 
common to all men? And although my original Corruption do not ex- 
cuſe my aftual ſins, yet Thopeit may procure ſome mitigation tomy 
puniſhments, and move thy Divine Pity, which oft ſheweth it ſelt up- 
on ſuch occaſions, See Gene 8. 21. k 1-e. No man can cleauſe him- 
ſelf, or any ether from all tin. See 1 Kings 8. 46s ſal. 14. 3. Eccleſ, 
7 21. Thisis the Pcerozative of thy Grace, which therefore I humbly 
implore of thee. ; 

5 Seing his days / are determined mw, the number of 


his months rej with thee », thou halt appuinted his 


bounds that he cannot pals o. _— 

1 The das, or ( as it follows ) menths of his Life. m Are by thy 
Sente..ce and Decree limited to a certain period. n 7 e, ExaQly 
known to thee, Or, in thy power and diſpoſa], « Thou haſt appoint- 
ed a ceriain end of his days, beyond which he cannot prolong his Life. 
And therefore let this ſhort Life, and unavoidable Death, ſuffice tor 
Man's puniſhment, and do not add further and ſorer Calamities. 

6 * Turn from himp that he may T reſt q, till he ſhall 
1g: accompliſh as * an hireling his day 7+ 
p Withdraw thine affliting hand from him« q That he may h-ve 
ſome preſent comfort and eaſe Or, and /et zt ceaſe, to wit, the affli- 
Rion, which is ſuffi-iently 'mplicd. Others, And let him ceaſe,to wit 
tolive, i e. Take away my Life. B tthat ſeems not to agree with 
the following Clauſe of this Verſ-, nor with the ſucceeding Verſes. 
7 Give him ſome :cſpite, til! he fimiſh his Courſe, and come to the 
' period or his Lite, which thou haſt alloted to him, asa man appoints 

a ſet time to a mercenary ſervant. : 
7 For thers is hope ofa tree, if it be cut down that it 
will ſprout _ s, and that che cender branch thereof 
(s 


will not cea 
s But M-n, hough a far nobler Creature, is in a much worſe con- 
dition, and when euce he loſeth this preient and worluly Life, he ne- 
ver recove's it : Therefore ſhew ſome pity to him, and give .Quum ſome 
Comfort whi'ſt he lives. R 
8 Though the root thereof wax old t in the earth, 


and the {tock thereof die « in the | g.0und ; 
# Begin to wither and' decay. u Co wit, 1n ou:ward appearance 


9 Net through the ſent of water x it will bud, and 
bring forth boughs like a plat y. 


x 1. e. By means.of Water. Sent or Sme{lis figuratively aſcribed to 
a Tree, y Like a Tree newly plated, 
"1-5.'5 10 But man dieth, and | waſteth away z: yea,man 


40 giveth up the ghoſt; and where is he a ? 
7 His Jody by degrees rotting away z Or, and is cut off, as this 
ward 15 uſed, Exod. 17. 13+ 1{a* 14+12: 4 i.e. He1s no where, or, 
he is not, to wit, in this World, as that Phraſe is commoniy uſed 
See Job 3,16, ard 9, 8 21. ; 
1t As the waters fail from cheſea, and the flood de- 


cayeth, and drieth up 6 : : 

b This may be wr: derſtood, cither 1, By way of oppoſition, The 
Waters go, or flow out of the Sea, and return thither again, Eccleſ. 1. 
7 and a Lake, or River lo etimes decayeth, and drieth up3 but after- 
wardsis recruited and repleniſhed. Bur man lie:h, &c- a+ it follows. 
Or, 2. By way of reſemblance, As Wate's j. e. ſome portion of Wa- 
ter, fail jrom the Sea, being either exhaled or *rawn up by the Sun, 
or received and ſuuk1oto the dry and chirſty Earth, or overflowing 
its Banks ; and as the Flood or a River or a Fond, ( for the word 
fig 1fies any cor fiderable ( onfluence of Waters ) in a great erought 
decayeth, and is dried up . in both which caſes the ſelf ſan.c Waters nc- 
ver return to their former plares. So it is with man. Or thus, as 
when the Waters fail from the Sea, i e, when the Sea forſakes the place 
Into which it uſed to flaw, the River which was fed by 1t, Eccleſ. 1.7. 
decayeth and drieth up without all hupes of recove'y, fe Mao, when 
once the Fountain of his radical moiſture is dried up, di-s, aud never 


revives again. 
12 So manlieth down c, and 1iſeth not d, till the 


heavens be no more e, they ſhall not awake, nor berai- 
{ed ou of their leep. 


*Ch:8.9: 
pſ:g0:5 0s 
& 102:1 le 
& 103: I5: 
& 144* 4* 
Ila: 49; 6: 
James I: 
yo, If: 
zPet;1:24* 


+Heb.H#/00 
will guts 

*3c8:593s 
Pal:s1:5; 
John 3: 6: 
Rom: 5: !23 
Eph; 25 33 


+Ch: 9: 15 


flleb:duf; 


Chap. Xl 


c To wit, in his Bed, the Grave, or fo ſleep the ſleep of Death, as 
this Phraſe is, uſed, Gen. 46. ©. Dent, 31 16. = Sam. 7. 12, 1 Kings 
t. 21. 4To wit, to this Life : For he ſpeaks riot here of the Lite to 
come, nor of the ReſusreQon of the Body after D-ath by the Divitie 
Power; of his belief whereof te giveth ſufficient evidences in'thvers 
places, e i.e, Either, 2.' Never ; becauſ- thetteaveris, though they 
thall be changed inrtheir Qualitics, yet fhall never ceale to be as tothe 
Subſtance of them. And therefore everiaſiing and unchangeable th ngs 


| are expreſſed by the duration of the Heavens z of which fer Pal, 72. 


ne 


5, 7, 17. and 8g. 30. 38,37 Matth. 5. 18; and 24.35. Or, 2. Not 
uatil the time of the general Reſurr:Qon, and the Reſtitution of things, 
when theſe viſible Heavens ſhall paſs away, and be no more, at teaſt in 
the ſame form and- manner as row they are: Ot which ſee Pal. 102.26. 
Luke21, 33, 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, Rev. 21.1, ! © -- 

13 O that thou wouldeſt hide me 1n Þ the Grave f, 
that chou wouldeſt keepme ſecret g, until thy wrath be 
paſt þ, that thou wouldeft appoint-me a ſe time i, and 


remember me &. wr 

F Either, x, In ſome dark Vault under Ground, ſuch as .good me 
hide themſclves inin time of Perſecution, Heb. rr. 38. Lord hide'me 
in tome hiding placejrom thy Wrath, arid all the incollerable « ets 
of it, which areupon-me + for Icannot be hid from thee, but by thee. 
Or,. 2. In the Grave properly ſo called. Though | know Life once loft 
1s 1rrecoverable, yet I heartily defire Death, rather than to continue 
in theic Torments, And {the next words and wiſh ſeem to ſuppoſe 
the continuanceof his Lite. that is not ſtrange ;. For he ſpeaks like one 
almoſt diſtraQted with his Miieries, ſumetimes wiſhing one thing, ſome- 
times another, and the quite contrary. as ſuch Perſons uſe to do. 
And theſe Wiſhes may. be underii ood disjun tively, T wiſh either that 
I were dead, or that God would give me Life free from theſe Tor- 
ments, Or theplace may be underſtood thus, I could wiſh, if it were 
pollible, that I mightly in the Grave for a tin e, till theſe Storms be 
blown over, and then be reſtored ta a comfortable Life, g In; ſome 
ſecret and ſafe place, under the ſhadow of thy Wings ard Favour, that 
I may have ſome ſupport and comfort from thee þ Whilſt I am op« 
prefled with [uch grievous ard various Calamities, which he calls God's 
Wrath, becauſe they were, or ſeemed tobe, the cffcs of his Wrath. 
7 To wit, to my Suffcrings, as thou haſt done to my, Life v. 5.  k I. 6. 
Wherein thou w'liſt remember me. towit, *@mercy, .or ſo asto deli- 
ver me: F.r it is well known, that God is frequently ſaid to forget 
thoſe whom he ſuffers to continue in Miſery, and to remember thoſe 
whom he delivers out of it. 


14 If a mandie, ſhall he live again /? all the days of , yy, wl 
T my appginted time will I wait til my change come m. warfare. 


{ 1. e. tic (hall not, .Bamely 10 this World, as was {:14 betore, The 
aftirmative queſtio ; is equivalent to an abſo'u c denial, as Gen, 18.17. 
P/al. 56. 7. fer. 5. 9. andevery where, m Seing Death puts an end 
toali mens hopes of any comfortable being here, becauſe man once 
dead never returns to life z | will therefore war on God, ard hope 
for hisfayour whilſt Live, and it is roffivle to - pjoy it, and will 
continue waiting from time to time, until my change come i e. either 
1. Death, the great and laſt Change ; which 15ex, rfſed by the root 
of this word, ob 16. x7. Or, 2. The change of my Condition for 
the bet er, which you upon your Terms encourage me to expe, and 
which [ict truſt in God | thall enjoy 3 for his word properly ſigni» 
fie: Viciſſitndes or Changes in ones Cod1tion 3 and this ſeems ro ſuit beſt 
with the !oliowing Veiſe And this Change, or a comfortable Life 
here job ſo heartily wiſheth, not only from that love of Life a: d Com«= 
tort which is natur-liyi1mplanted in all men, good and bad, andis uot 
forbidden by God, which alſo was ſtronger in thoſe Old Teſtament 
Saints, when the diſcoverics of God's Grace to finners, and of E'et- 
bal Life, were much dark: r than pow they are 3 but alſo becauſe this 
would be an cffeGtualvindication cf his own Integrity and Good names 
and of the ronour of Keligioo, both which did ſuffer ſome Echpſe 
ww - ooh cxtream Calamities, as is eyident from the Diſcourſes of his 

rICEE> 

15 Thou ſhalt ®call, and I will anſwerthee =: thou 


wilt have a defiretothe work of thine hands o. 

nI cruſt th:re is a time con 10g wh-n thou wiltſt grant me the Mer» 
cy which : ow thou denieft me to wit, a favourabic hearing, when 
thou wilrft call to me to ſpeak for ty ſelf, and 1 ſhall anjwer thee; 
which | know will be to thy ſatisfa@tion and my comfort. Compare 
this with Chap. 1 ;. 22. where the ſame words arc uſed io this ſame ' 
tenle, Or, hou ſhalt call ine our of the Grave or my | alamitics, and 
I ſhall anſwer thee, and lay, hereI am, raiſed out of the Pit in which I 
was buried »y thy powerful and gracious Command 0 # e. To me 
who am thy Workmarſhip in divers :clpeRts, f om whom thou now 
ſeemeſt to have anaverſivn and abhorrency,but 1doubt not thou wii ft 
have adeſi e 1, e. ſhew thy affe@ion or Good-will:o me 3 or a defire 
to look upon me, and to deliver me, Nor is it ſtrange that jeb, who 
lacrely was upon the br ok of Deſpair, doth now breathe out words of 
Hope, luch Ebbings and Flowings being uſual both with Fob clſc> 
where, as Chap. 13s Is, 16, and with David frequently in the Pſalms, 
and with others of God's People. 

16 * For now pthou numbreſt my ſteps a, doft thou 


not watch over niy lin 7. | 

þ 50 fl:131s a reafon ef his defire of D-ath, v. 13. - Or rather. But 
now; fc this ſeems to be added by way of oppoſition, I believe thou 
wilttt picy and help me. but for the preſent it is far otherwiſe with 
q Thou «© akeſt a ſtri@& enquiry ibto all my. aRions, that thou 
maift find out all mine Errours, and puniſh them. Compare Jeb 13: 
27. 2nd 31 4, and 34. 21 Pj. 56. 6. x te, Doſt thou not watch 
tor my Haltings, or Miſcarriages, as if thou waſt glad of an occafion to 
puniſh me ; Or, thou doſt not delay the puniſhment of my ſim « For the 
ſame tiebrew word fignires both ſin, and its puniſhments. 

17 My tranſgreflion is ſealed up in a bag s, and thou 
ſeweſt up mine iniquity z. he 

s 4s Writtwgs of other choice things, that they may be ſafely kept, 
and ail of chem brought forth upan occaſion, and not one of them 
torgotten of loſt, Compare Deaf. z2 34. Job 23%. 9. Hof. 11. 12, 
t 1. e. Thou keepeſt all my fios in thy memory, and faffeneſt the guilt 
of them upon my Conſciexce. Or, thou addeſt te my ſin, ove fin to a» 
nother, the follies of my youth, Job 13. 25 to thoſe of my riper years, 
Or, thou addeft to my puniſhment, i, e. thou puniſheſt me more thag 


| mine i8iquitics deſcrye, all things couſidered. For this finfyl thought 


40 3 feetns 


j 
j 
' 


> i 


+ Heb:hel| 


*Ch; 49:38 | 


*Plal:136h 


2, 3: ; 
Ch: 23:27! 
Prov: 5-217 


Jer:y296 


; 
} 
1 


f 


; 
n 
| 


if 
1: 
'y 


F 
' 
[T] 
| 


: 


| 
[ 
\ 
i 
' 


Fog 


, IP. XV. . 7 8] B, Chap, Xy7 Fm 
ems ſometimes to have riſen in Job's mind, as may be gathered 5 For thy mouth + uttereth thine iniquity 4 
A en, ou « this Book : Which therefore Zophar decrics, and thou ch ooſeſt hs rongue a hs ems fry 4. quity &, and TR, 
Heb, fs 78 And ſurely as the mountain falling F cometh to | 5. _— ters + Nihover genre 4 cy heart, and juſti. 43? a. 
h. nought s: and the rock is removed out of his place: ſpeakeſt wickediy, bur craftily : Thou co-eret thy im A Thou *- gs 
s As when a great Mountain falls, either by an Earthquake or In- | ples and paſſions with fair pretences of Piety and ref ect 9.4 r _ wok, 
undation of Waters, or from any other cauſe, it moulders away like a | wherewith thou endeavoureſt to mock God, and "ta men os : 
fading Leaf, (as the Hebrew word ſignifies). and never recovers 1ts 6 Thine own mouth condemn = = . 
Former height and ſtability, and as the Rock, when by the violence of | J: yea, thine own li Nik xe , and not - 
Winds or | ron &c. it is removed out of its place, and thrown EM © 1 Vn 11Þs te! ine againſt thee. 
down, is never re-advanced. And as the waters by continual drop- y Condemnation of thee is grounded upon thine own words. 


pings, or violent and frequent aſſaults, wear away, or break the fones 
70 pieces, ſo as they can never be made whole again: And as thou 
waſbeſt away, to wit, by a great and violent Inundation which thou 
ſendeſt, the things which grow out of the duft of the Earth, to wit, Herbs, 
and Fruits, and Plants, which once waſhed away are irrecoverab- 
1y loſt, and or ( ſo as this Particle is oft uſed, 1. & in like manner, 
to wit, irrecoverably) thou deſtroyeſt the hope of man; 1.e. So when 
man dies, all hope of living again in this world isutterly oſt: And 
this ſeems to be the- plain meaning of theſe two verſes. And as be- 
fore he declared the hopeleſneſs of man's rejauration from death 
to this animal life, by way of oppoſition: to ſuch things as did riſe 
ina manner from death to life, v. 7, &c, ſo now he declares it by 
way of fimilitude or reſemblance to ſuch things, as being once lolt 
and gone, are paſt all hopes of recovery. 

19 The waters wear the ſtones : thou + waſheſt away 


the _ which grow ont of the duſt of the earth, and 


thou deſtroyeſt the hope of man. . 
20 Thou prevaileſt for ever againſt him x, and he 
paſſeth y : thou changeſt his countenance z, and ſend- 


eſt him away 4. 

x When once thou takeft away this life it is gone for ever: For 
he ſpeaksnot here of Man's future and eternal lite in another World. 
y i.e. He dieth,or is about to die: Man's death is oft called a paſage 
or # going;to intimate that it is not an annihilation,but only a tran- 

Mlation of him into another place and fate. z Eirher, 1. His Viſage, 
-which by death and its harbingers, 1s quite transformed in col.ur 
and ſhape, as we ſee by daily experience. Or, 2. The face and 
Nate of his Aﬀairs,asto worldly Riches,and Pleaſures,and Honours, 
all which he leaves behind him. - To his long home by death. 

21 His ſons come to honour, and he knowerh it 
not b; and they are brought low, but be perceiveth i: 
not of them. * 

b Either, 1. Is ignorant ofall ſuch events: Or, 2.Is notconcerned 
nor affeed with them A deador dying man minds not thele things. 

22 But his fleſh upon him {hall have pain, and his 
ſoul within him ſhall mourn c. 


c This is man's condition; he is miſerable both when he dies, be- 
cauſe be dies without hope of returning to life, as he had diſcourſed 


before; and (ahe now adds) whilſt he lives, whilſt bis feſb is wpon | 
him, and his ſoul within him ; whilſt the ſoul is cloathed with or uni- | 
ted to the body, he feels ſharp pain in his body, and bitter grief 


Teth for, thon breat'e't forth falſe and blaſphemous ſpeeches againſt 
him- Or, 2. Thou doeſt by thy words and examples, and prin- 
ciples, as far as in thee lies, baniſh Prayer out of the World, by 
making it uſeleſs and unprofitable to men.” 


7 Art theu the firſt man has was born /? or w; 
thou made before the hills » ? FO 


{ Haſt thou lived ever ſince the Creation of the world, a 
ſured up the experiences of all Ages in thy own breaſt, oc 
ſpeakeſt fo arrogantly and magiſteriaily, and with ſuch contempt of 
other men ? Artthou the moſt ancient and the wilſeſt of all as, ae 
men ? Whom doeſt thou make thy ſelf? m Before the Earth was 
made and diſtinguiſhed into Mountains and Valleys. 


8 * Haſt chou heard the ſecrer of God » ? and doſt 


gory rein wiſdom to thy ſelf o ? 
z Hath God acquainted thee with all his ſecret Counſels,w 
he governs the World, that thou doſt paſs fo bold a = rp, 
all his Deſigns and Afions? o Art thou the only wiſe man inthe 
World, and we and all others but fools? 
9 What knoweſt thou that we know not p? what 
Tr ng chou, which zs not f in us? 
Þ He retorts upon Job his own expreſſions, Chap. 1 2 
, .I2.3- and 13, 2, 
10 With us q ere both the gray-headed, and ww 
aged _ much elder than thy father. 
q 1.e. Among us; Either 1. Some of us, who ſeem to h 
very ancient; from Chap. 32. 7. Or, 2. Some others "oven 
we have converſed, and who are of our opinion in this matter 
And this they oppoſe to that paſſage of Job's, Chep- 12. 12. ; 
| 11 Are the conſolations of God {mall with thee r ? 
15 _— ww ſecter thing with thee s ? ; 
r Are thoſe Comforts, which we in the Name and accordi 
Mind, and by the DireCtion of God, have propounded _ - = Savon 
condition of thy true Repentance, Cþ 11: 13, 14, &c. ſmall and con- 
temptible in thine eyes 5 Haſt thou any ſecret and peculiar ground 
or way of Comfort which is unknown to us, and to all orher men,cx- 
cept thy ſelf; For which, or in compariſon of which thou defpileſt 
our Conſolations as mean and trivial? To pretend to this is vani 
and impudence: And if thou haſt nor this, to deſpiſe and reje& _ 
Comtoi 4 is horrible pride and ftubbornneſs. 
12 Why doth thine heart carry thee away t 2 
. ff? A 
what do thine eyes wink at « ? 4 " 
£ Why doſt thou ſuffer thy ſelf ro be tranſported b 7 
and Juſts of thine heart, to uſe ſuch unworthy Ka on Proefl mgm 
preſſions borh Concerning us, and concerning God and his Provi- 
dence, us i.e, What doeſt thou aim at > What benefit doeſt thou 
expect from ſuch wcrds and carriages? So it is a Metaphor from 


and cuſtoms of ſinning, and ſinneth as freely and eafi dil 

and delightfully, as frequently and abundantly as men, efpcetally in 

thoſe hoy Countries, uicd to drink vp water. But this did nor Job: 
And 


in bis ſoul. Seing therefore the ſtate of man upon earth is ſo vain Archers, who wink when they take their ajm at a mark. Or, wh 
and unhappy every way, Lord give me ſome comfort to ſweeten ao thine eyes wink; 1. e. Why doeſt thou look with ſuch an angry, fo 
my life, or take away my life from me. percilious, and di{dainful 'ook, expreſſing both thy contempt Rm 
mn gs _ _ _ The eye is obſerved both by God and 
CHAP. XV. mg Ai of : pon Diſcoverer of the heart ; and winking with the eye, 
of a malicious mind, Pſal. 3 5. 19. Prov. 6.13. and 10.10, % 1 Kin 
Eliphaz's reproof: Job's knowledge and talkwain : He feareth mr God, nor 13 That x thou turneſt thy ſpiric y againſt God, s.,6 p 
Prayeth to him ; but hu own mouth uttered hi iniquity, and ſhould con- and letteſt fuch words gO out © thy mouth - x Gr 
demn him, 1------6. Job net the wiſeft of men, 7, 8- Nor wiſer than x Or for, or ſurely. y 1. e. Either thy breath ; h | p "ig 
they, who were elder than he, 9. 10 He deſpiſed the Conſolations of | thy toul: For all theſe the Pri: ſignifies H "a ed _ G4 ' 
bk God, and turned away hu ſpirit agaimſt him, tt ———13. The An- | ſþ-rit to returnto, or to return aga.nſt thar God "Way _ Ear Fry Plats 
£4 gels not clean in God's Jen: much leſs man, 14--=--16. A deſcription of | receive it. whom thou didft Hes 
1 the Ancients: Their wiſdom and reports concerning deftruttion, and ter- K , : 
o rours 0n the wicked, and the cauſes of it, 17---=35. a. > What is man 2, that he ſhould be clean? and Eclt. 
| #28 ; : he which is born of a woman 4, that he ſhould be righ- *%. - 
| Hen anſwered Eliphaz the Temanite, and ſaid, teous b ? S” 1 Joh 
f Heb- 2 Should a wiſe man & utter | vain knowledge | # Heb. frail, or ſick, or wretched wan: His mean original and co a: 
E knowles b, an fill his belly c with the caſt wind 4? rupt nature ſhewerh him ro be unclean. a From wi he efron 
' of wind © @ Such as thou ſeemeſt and pretendeft to be. b i. e. Empty Infirmity and Corruption, and Guilr, -and the Curſe conſequent u- 
words without any ſenſe or ſolidity in them. « i, e. Satisfie his Poe. Ha To wit, In his own eyes, as thou, O Job art, 
own Mind and Conſcience, which being ſecret, is compared to the I5 * Behold, he putteth no truſt in his ſaints c : yea 
Inwards of the Belly ; as Chap. 32. 19+ Prov. 20c 27. and 22. 8. the heavens « are not clean in bis ſight EF 
d i, e. With Diſcourſes which are not only flaſhy and unprofitable, C 1s E+ In his Angels, as appears b —_ b 
& without any weight.bur alſo doiſterous and pernicious both to | called his S#ints or Holy ones Me 4 Pſ ON $E whore 
himſelf and others ; as the Eaſt-wind was in thoſe parts, Gene. 41.6. | Mat- 18.1e. and 24 36. Who thou ks On OSS 13, 33. 
Exod. 16. 13+ Hoſ, 12. 1. : ; could not be confident in them 4 - 5 Ante" wars w ks oy a 
3 Should he reaſon with unprofitable talk 2 or with | that they would continue in their lategrity if "nog 07 
ſpeeches wherewith hecan do no good e ? themſelves, and not upheld by God's Ganial Groce nd Aſſiſtance. 
e Either to himſelf or others, but much hurt; which is impli- Sce the Notes on Jcb 4-18. d Heb and the heavens, i e- either, 1. The 
ed by the contrary, as is uſual. Heavens properly ſo called ; which though they be free from thoſe Fl 
4 Yea, | thou cafteſt off fear f, and reftraineſt|| pray- OY —_ oo & do appear in heavenly bodies,yet are ſun, 
erg before God. Ph, :1oſop re Ew / pots and blemiſhes in them; as fear: 
Or,ſpeech. f Heb. Thou makeſt woid fear ; i. e. the fear of God, as the word | pareCb. 25, 5. where the ſtars a by Cn enmyeck:Com- "I 
CEE wade aud; Or Fiety =bd Religion, which oft | iſo there be metaphorical! a g bo we :0 be pure: Unleſs the ſtars F.3 
cometh under the name of fear. This may be underſtood, either | 4. and for other hoi Miniſtets fC S” Angels, as they are Job 38, 
1. Of Job himſelf; that he caſt off all Reverence to God, by uttering | and 12. 1,44 2 Thy Apende "ke q wag Dan. $ 10: Rev. 1- 16, 20» 
fuch bold and reproachful expreſſions concerning God and his Pro- | pur for its Inhabitants ; Gichs fo God nom bring off 
vidence. Or, 2: with reſpe& to others; that by his inſolent and | 15-18,21- Or for the 'An = E 1 , AS Pſal- 73-g- Dan-476- Luke 
unworthy ſpeeches of and carriage towards God, and by thoſe falſe | and 148- a6 -* Sas A ro _ _— Heaven, as Pal: 89. 6- 
and pernicious principles which he had laid down;as that God dealt | words. And theſe are me pure: To wit, the ſame thing in other 
with men in way of abſolute Soveraigaty, not of Juſtice; and that | comparatively to God; bi, which - by, _— and perfe&ly, and 
he made no difference between good and bad in the courſe of his, | is ſaid to be good and wiſe, and re on OR InEny God on'y 
Providence, but did equally Stay 2 or atflict beth of them ; He did | corruption, but not from im RO. The Angels are pure from 
that which tended to rhe ſubverkon of the fear and worſhip of God. | finning if God ſhould aan Sr rd Fe me nor from a poflibility of 
g As this Hebrew word ſignifies alſo, Pſal. 102. r. te or ; aw his help from them. j 
ſpeech; Whick well agrees to Prayer, which is accompanied with 16 How much more abominable and filthy ;s man al 
ſerious ioughen od groſs Tis ſenſe is, either, r. In ſtead | Which drinketh iniquity like water e ? y : *01, 
of humble and fervent Prayer to God, which thy Condition cal- e Who beſides his natura) proneneſs to ſin,hath contrafted habits 


Heb.with 
, Chap, 
0. 13; 


tho: KV. 


* 1 Thefſ: 
\. 3. 


$199.10, 7; 35x 2 he knoweth 7 that * the day of darkneſs z is 
''? ready at his hand s. 


And therefore though the things dehvered by him-and the reſt be 

rrue in the general, yet they commita great errourin miſapplying 

them to Fob, for winch therefore they are afterwards reproved. 
17 I will ſhew thee f, hear me, and that which I 


have ſeen g, I will declare. | 
f I will prove what I have affirmed, that ſuch ſtrokes as thine are 
peculiar to Hypocrites and Wicked men.” g I ſpeak not by hear- 
lay only, but from my own experience. 
18 Which wiſe men b have told from their fathers z, 


and have not hidit&: 

hb Who are moſt ableto be Witneſſes and Judges in theſe matters: 
; Or, Anceftors, who diligently obſerved this,and carefully tranſmit- 
red their own judgement and experience ſucceſſively to their Po- 
ſterity: k They judged it to be ſo certain and important a Truth, 
that they would not conceal it in their own breaſts,but made con- 
ſcience of publiſhing it for the inſtruQtion and comfort of ſucceed. 
ing Ages. : 

19 Unto whom alone the earth was given/, and no 
ſtranger » paſſed among them ». 

{ Either, 1+ By the ſpecial and gracious gift of God ; Whereas 
wicked men invaded their parts of the Earth, and took them away 
by force: Or, 2. By the choice and conſent of the People, who for 
their greatand known wiſdom and virtue conferred this power and 
truſt upon them: This he alledgeth partly to make their Teſtimony 
more conſiderable, becauſe thete were not obſcure, and mean, and 
fooliſh men,whoſe words are commonly deſpiſed, but the moſt wor- 
thy and famous men intheir places and ages and partly to contra- 
dict and confute what Job had ſaid, Chap: 9+ 24. That the earth was 
given into the hand of the wicked. By the earth he means either the 
dominion of the earth, To wit, of that part of the earth in or nigh 
which Job and his friends lived; Or rather, the poſſeſſion of the 
earth; i- e- of a great portion of worldly goods : Or particularly, the 
land, or that land (as the word properly lignifies) to wit, the land of 
Canaan,which was given by ſpecial gift unto Abraham (from whom 
it ſeems moſt probable that both Job and his Friends were deſcend- 
ed) and to Iſaac and to Jacob : Who though they met with ſome 
common and ordinary afflictions, yet enjoyed a great meaſure of 
comfort and wealth, and honour, and power in the World, as the 
Fruits of God's Bleſſing, and of his Covenant made with good Men, 
whilſt wicked men were expoſed to manifold. diftreſſes and griev- 
ous calamities- All which thoſe holy Patriarchs diligently obſerv- 
ed, and induſtriouſly imparted to their children, to encourage them 
to continue and proceed in the ways of true Piety» But how was 
the Earth or Land given to them alone, as is here ſaid ? Anſwer, Ei- 
ther 1. Becauſe Noah and his Sons (of whom ſome underſtand theſe 
words) had the ſole poſſeſſion and dominion of the Earth, Or 2. 
Becauſe Canaan was given to Abraham and to his Seed alone: And 
ſome of Abraham's Children had the dominion of, or an ample poſ- 
ſeſſion in thoſe parts where Job and his Friends lived, who alſo ſeem 
to be in the number of them. Or 3.Becauſe they only had it either 
by God's ſpecial and gracious Providence, or'by the choice and 
approbation of the People; whereas wicked men took it by Rapine 
and Violence, without asking leave either from God or Men. m 
i. e. The Enemy ; for ſuch are called Strangers both in Scripture, as 
Prev. 5. 10. Iſs. 1. 7. Ezek: 11. g. and 28. 10 andin other Authors. 
No perſon of 2 ſtrange Nation and Diſpoſition, or Religion. »n 1. 
Through their Land, as this phraſe is uſed, Numb; 20. 18. to wit, 
fo as to moleſt or diſturb, or ſpoil them as the Sabeans and Chalde- 
ans did thee, God watched over thoſe wiſe and holy Men ſo care- 
fully, that no Enemy {houid invade them ; and ſo he would have 
done over thee, if thou hadſt been ſuch an one. 

20 The wicked man travelieth with pain o all þ:s 
days, and the number of his years is hidden p to the op- 


preſſor 9. 
- 0 i, e> Lives a life of care, and fear, and grief, by reaſon of God's 
Wrath, and the Torments of his own mind, and his manifold and 
dreadful outward Calamities. p i, ee He knows not how ſhort the time 
ofhistyranny and life is,and therefore lives in continual fear of loling 
them. The number of a good Man's years are alſo hid from him as 
well as they are from the wicked men : But to thoſe this 1s a great 
torment and miſchief; whereas it isnot ſoto him. Or,and a few years 
(Heb. » number of years, put ty a common Hypallage, for years of number; 
as few years are calied, J:b. 16. 22+ becauſe they are ſoon numbred; 
as men of number,is put for a few men, Gen.34-30. Deut.4-27. and 3h. 
6.) are laid, or treaſured up; ie. are allotted to him by God's ſecret 
Counſe]; for God cuts of ſuch men in the midſt of their days, Pſal, 
55.23.whereas long life is promiſed,and commonly given to Righ- 
teous Men. 9 i.e. To the wicked man- but he names this one forr of 
them, the Oppreſſors, partly becauſe he ſuppoſed Jeb to be guilty 
of this ſia, Chap. 22. 6. partly in oppoſition to what Job had affirmed 
of the ſafety and happineſs of ſuch perſons, Chap. 12. 6. and partly, 
becauſe ſuch are moſt apt to expe& and promiſe to themſelves a | 
longer and happier life than otber men, becauſe of their ſingular 
preſervatives and advantages of life above other men. : 
21 + Adreadful ſound 5s in his ears r: *in proſperity 


the deſtroyer ſhalt come upon him <5. 

r Even when he feels no evil,he is tormented with perpetual fears 
and expeQations of it from the ſenſe of his own guilt,and of God s 
all-ſceing eye and righteous judgment. See Lev. 26. 36. Deut- 28-65. 
5 Or,ſhall invade and deſtroy him ſuddenly and unexpetedly: which 
IS a great aggravation of it. 

22 He believeth not that he ſhall return out of dark- 


neſs r, and he is waited for of the ſword «. | 
t i.e-When he falls into trouble,he deſpairs of God's mercy and of 
deliverance, by reaſon of his guilty Conſcience : Which he ſpeaks 
with particular refle&ion upon Jeb,who wou!d receive no comfort 
nor matter of hope- u i-e- Beſides the Calamity which 1s upon him, 
e is inconltant expeCation of further and greater miſcries; for zhe 
ſword is oft uſed for any grievous affliction ; as Luke 2» 35: 


23 He * wandreth abroad for bread, /aying, Where 


x His Poverty is ſo great, that he is forced to wander hither and ; 
thither to ſeek for Bread, and cannot find ir. A juſt puniſhment for | 


tim that took away the Bread and Subſtatice of others by violence. ( 


T6 


Ch 


7 He 15 aſſured of it from his own guilty Conſcience; « i.e.-The 
time of his total and irrecoverable and everlaſting deſtruQion. 
« 1e- Ready to ſeize npon him, or take him by the hand or ſhou!- 
der like a Serjeant to arreſt him- The words may well be'rendred 
was prepared by his hand ; 1. e- by his works or ations: which being 
moſt commonly done with the hand, are oft called by that name 

AS Exod. I4 31. Jndges 9. 16. Prov to: 4- and 12. 24, Sothe ſenſe is. 
OY . himſelf, _ oy his wicked- life he hath prepared 

ored up Calamities and Deſtru&io 

Rn ,- Ne I n os A — _ therefore 

'24 Frouble and. anguiſh - hall make him afraid b ; 
they ſhall prevail againit him, as a King ready to the 
battel c. Ep | I y | 

b i- e: When trouble comes, in ſtead of truſting and hopin 
comforting himſelf in God, as good Men Go in ea an 
39. 6+ he1s full of torment and dread of the. iſſue of it, and con- 
cludes it will end in his utter ruine, as he hath great reaſon to do, 
c Or, prepared or furniſhed ; or diſpoſed with his army round about him as 
this wordſcems to ſignifie. | ST 

25 For d he ſtretcheth out his hand againſt God e, 
and ſtrengthneth himſelf f againſt the Almighty g. 

d Now he gives the reaſon of all the forementioned Calamities 
which befel him, which was his great wickednefs in the time ofhis 
peace and proſperity, e i-e- He commonly and cuſtomarily ſinned 
againſt God with an high and our-ſtretched hand; i. e- boldly and 
preſumptuouſly,as one that neither deſired his favour,nor feared his 
anger. f 1 e- He putteth his forces in array, as if he would fight 
with him. g Which aggravates the madneſs. of this poor cons 
temptible Worm that durſt fight againſt the Omnipotenr God: .. 

26 He runneth upon him h, even on bis neck 5, u- 
pon the thick boſſes of his bucklers &: 

h 1- e. Afſaults him,or ruſheth upon him with great ſwiftneſs and 
fury ; as this Phraſe ſignifies; Dan. 8- 6- This he, is either 1: God; 
who was expreſſed twice in the laſt verſe,and who is here produced 
as entring the Liſts and fighting with his daring Adverfary- Or ra« 
ther, 2+ The wicked man, of whom and whole ſin and miſery he 
ſpeaks in the whole Context, both before and after this; who in the 
laſt verſe was introduced. as preparing for the Battel, and here as 
actually and impudently fighting with him- i As a ſtout warrier who 
cometh cloſe to his Adverſary and graples with him,and taketh him 
by the neck to throw him down. *Compare 2 Sam- 2+ 16- Job. 16- 12. 
Or, with hisneck- So itis a Metaphior from a mad and raging Bull; 
which runs upon his Enemy with an hard and ſtiff neck. &k i-e, E- 
ven where his Enemy is ſtrongeſt : He is not diſcouraged with the 
Enemies thick and ftrong,and eminent Shields, but boldly ventures 
in upon them, and amongſt them- Or, with the thick boſſes (Heb- the 
thickneſs and eminency) of his ſhields, wherewith he invaded the enemy, 
that ſo he might both defend himſelf, and offend his enemy ; for 
the ancient Shields were uſeful both ways, becauſe they had a ſharp 
Iron or Steel in the midſt of them. — £4 "M2 

27 Becauſe he coyereth his face with his fatneſs /, 
and maketh collops of fat on his flanks ». SY 

/ This 1s mentioned as the reaſon ofhis inſolent carriage towards 
God, becauſe he was fat; i.e.rich and potent, and ſucceſsful,as that 
expreſſion ſignifies, Deut. 32-15. Pſal.78.31. Jer.q6.21. His great pro= 
ſperity made him proud and ſecure, and regard'!eſs of God and Men! 
m His only care and ſtudy is to pamper and pleaſe himſelf, and 
obey his own mind and Juſfts, and in defence and purſuance of 
them he contends with God, | 5 

28 And he dwelleth in deſolate places », «nd in hou- 
ſes which no man inkabiteth, which are ready to bes 
come heaps s. | | | 

» Theſe words may noteeither, r His tyranny and cruelty, where« 
by he makes the places of his abode and dominion deſolate by his 
frequent Murders, Spoils and Opprefſions, wherewith he deſtroyeth 
great numbers of his People, and forceth others to flee out of his 
reach. Or, 2. His Pride and Power, and Wealth; which enabled an 
engaged him to build deſolateHovuſes and Cities for his own glory, 
and ſafety, and conveniency ; Of which ſee the Notes, on Ch. Jo I Fo 
Or,z.His Puniſhment and Miſery,that for his Impiety towards God, 
and oppreſſion of Men, he was driven out of his Deminions and 
Pofleſſions, and forced to flee into deſolate places for ſafety and an 
habitation. This ſeems beſt to agree with the Hebrew words, which 
run thus; But (for ſo the particle and,is commonly uſed as hath bee 
oft ſaid) he ſhalldwell, &c. And ſo this is fitly oppoſed td this laſk 
mentioned Proſperity, and is the beginning of the deſcription of his 
Miſery, which is continued in the following verſes. o Which 
were ready to fall, and to be turned into an heap of Stones. 


29 He ſhall not berich p, neither ſhall his ſubſtance 
continue q, neither ſhall he prolong the perfection 
thereof » upon the earth. > i 

? 1. e. Not abide rich, but ſhall become poor» 9 What he hid 
gotten ſhall be raken from him. » 1. e. The perfe&ion of his Sub» 
fttance, or that compleat Eſtate and Glory which he hath attained, 
ſhall not be continued to him and to his Poſterity. Or, neither ſha 
their perfeion ( i» e. that Proſperity and Wealth, and Power wherein 
they placed their Perfe&ion or Happineſs) ſpread it ſelf, or be propa 
gated or ſpread abroad, but ſhall be diminiſhed and taken away : Ir 
1S a Metaphor from a Tree. Compare Job 8. 16. | 


20 He ſhall not depart out of darknefs s, the flame 
z (ball dry up his branches #, and by the breath of || his 
mouth x ſhall he go away y. p; ee TNT 

s His Miſery ſhall have no end. t God's Anger and Judgmentu- 
pon him. « Either 1. His Children; Or, 2. Wealth, and Power,and 
Glory, wherewith he was encompaſſed and 2dorned and ſecured, as 
Trees are with their Branches. x i. e. Of God's Mouth, as appears 
both by comparing this with v. 25; where God is expreſſed as the 
Adverlary with whom this wicked wretch contendeth : and by the 
nature of rhe thing,and the whole Context all this Mans Calamities 
being manifeſtly the effe&ts of God's anger ; and by other p'aces of 


' Scripture, where the breath of God's mouth or lips are mentioned, 


as that whereby he deſtroyeth wicked men ; as 4b 4 9: {3. 11: 4. 
2 Theſſ: 2. 8. And this exprefſion intimats tops, with how mECY fa- 
4F 4 a 


mY W 


[| That 
God's. 


mouth, 


18 D- XVI. 
ciliry Gold ſubdneth his enemies, he needsno Armsor Inſtruments; 
his Word; his Baft, on A& ofhis Will is more than ſufficient to do 
it. y Heb. gobzck; 1+ e. retreat and run away from God faſter than 
he did run towards and upon him, wv. 26. So it is a continuatioh of 
the former Metaphor of a Battel or Confli& Between two perſons. 

21 Let nor him that is deceived, truſt in vanity z: 
for vanity « ſhall be his recompence 5. | 
z i.e. In the vain and deceitful things of this world, ſuch as Pow- 
er. Riches, Honour,&c.of which,and of the loſs of them, he had been 
Jargely diſcourſing ; and now he ſubjoyns a general Caution toall 
en 
with the fore-mentioned perſons : And withal, he ſecretly intimates 
Job's great ſin which was the cauſe of his ruine ; To wat, his carnal 
confidence in thoſe vain things,the Wealth,and Glory,and Children 
which God had given him: From which Crime he therefore vindi- 
cats himſelf heresfter. - i.e. Diſappointment and diſfatisfaQtion,and 
the vaniſhing or loſs of all their imaginary felicity. The ſame word 
Vanity;being elegantly repeated in anotherſenſc,asis uſual in Scrip- 
ture and all Authors. þ Heb: his exchange; he ſhall exchange one 
vanity for another,a pleaſing vanity for a vexatious vanity.Burt this 
Vetſe is and may be rendred otherwiſe ; The Hebrew Particle #t, be- 
ing here, as itis clſe-where, taken for a ſimple Negation. Thus, 
He that u deceived with Vanity (i.e. with the vain things of this world, 
wherewith moſt men are deceived and bewitched) wzll not believe 
that Vanity (1c. x oe and diſappointment,and miſery) ſhall be 


his recenipence. And ſo this is an' aggravation of his Calamity, that 
it ſurprized him when he was confident and ſecure from all fears 
of ſuch an event. 


32 Iefhall be [| accompliſhed c *before his time 4, and 
his branch e ſhall not be green f. 


c To wit, that which- was laſt mentioned, that Yanity ſhall be hs 
recompence, Or, it; le. his Branch mentioned in the next Clauſe of 
the verſe, from which itis underſtood in this former Clauſe,as is ve- 
ry. uſual in the holy Scripture, ſhall be conſumed, or, cut off. d 1. e. 

n by the courſe of Nature, and common Providence, it might 
have continued and flouriſhed much longer. e Either, 1. His Glory 
and Proſperity» Or rather, 2.;His Children ; by comparing ve34- 
where the deſolation is ſaid to fall upon all the Congregation and 
Tabernacles of theſe men : And ſo he refle&s upon Job who loſt his 
children. f i. e. Shall not continue to flouriſh, as it had done. 


He g ſhall ſhake off þ his unripe grapes i as the 


vine &, and ſhall caſt off his flower as the olive /. 

g Either, r. The wicked man, who by his ſins is the Author of 
his own ruine-. Or, 2. God who is eaſily underftoed both from the 
Matter and Context. h Heb. Shall rake away by Violence. 3 1. e. His 
Fruit, his Children, or other Comforts before their time. & i.e. As 
the Vine either it ſelf droppeth, or rather loſeth its tender Grapes, 
which'are plucked off by a violent hand. ! Which flouriſheth much 
About the ſame time with the Vine, and is commonly handled in 
the ſame manner. 


24 For the congregation » of hypocrites ſe# be de- 
ſolate », and fire o ſhall conſume the tabernacles of bri- 
bery p. 

”m i.e. Their Children, and Servants, and Friends, and Depen- 
dents. » i. e. Utterly deſtroyed: o i. e« Some eminent and terrible 
Judgement of God, which 1s oft expreſſed by fire; as [ſaiah gs 19. 
and 26. 11. f i.e Which were either built or maintained by ex- 
tortion and bribery, or fuch like unrighteous Courſes, whereof 
they thought Job guilty, Chapter 22. 8. 

* They conceive miſchief q, and bring forth 


*PC. 7. 14: [| vanity r, and their belly s prepareth deceit z. 
Ifa. 59. 4 9 i & They deviſe and contrive injurious and pernicious enter- 
Hoſ. 10.13 prizes againſt others. r Or, Iiquity, or Injury, or Trouble; Either, 
| Or, n.- 7 To others: They execute what they had contrived, Or, 2. To 
themſelves; the miſchief they deſigned for others, falleth upon their 
own heads, and they reap what they ſowed. * ive. Their inward 
arts, their hearts and minds; See above on verſe 2. # Either, 1. 
or others, whom they deſign to cheat : Or, 2. For themſelves, 
who whilſt they ſeek to deceive others, ſhall find that they rthem- 
ſelves are moſt deceived, as being deprived of all their defires and 
opes wherewith they fed themſelves, and caſt into all thoſe Cala- 
mities which they thought ro prevent by theſe Artifices. 
CH AP. VI. 
Job' s anſwer : His Friends increaſe hu miſery, 1---8: His Inſulting enemies, 
g===I 1" God's Power againft him, 12---=16. His Innocence ſhould cry 
to Heaven, where it was known: He wiſbeth to plead with God, 17--2 1: 
Pleaſeth himſelf with the proſpe# of Death, 22: 
Hen Jeab anſwered and ſaid, 
2 I have heard many ſuch things «: || * miſerable 


comforters b are ye all. | 

a Both from you, who do ſo odiouſly repeat the ſame things, and 
from divers others : For theſe things, though you pride and pleaſe 
our ſelves in them, as if you had made ſome great and ſtrange 
iſcoveries, are but vulgar and trivial. 6 In ſtead of giving me 
thoſe Comforts which you pretend to do, Chapter 15. 11. and 
which my condition leudly calls for, you feed me with Terrors, 

and Cenſures, and Scoffs- : 
Shall F vain words have an end c? or what em- 


boldneth thee that thou anſwereſt d? 

c When wilt thou put an end to theſe idle and impertinent Diſ- 
courſes ? He retorts upon nim his Charge nt 18, Chapter 15. 
2, 3. 4 Towit, ſo, orin ſuch manner, ſo cenſorioufly, and oppro- 
briouſly, and =_ torily, What ſecret grounds haſt thou for thy 
Confidence ? Thy _— are flaſhy and weak ; if thou haſt a- 
ny ſtronger produce them- ; | 

4 I alſo could ſpeak as ye de: if your ſoul e were in my 
ſouls ſtead, I could heap up words againſt you f, and * 
*Lam:2-15 ſhake mine head at you g. 

e i-e- Your Perſon, as Gen. 12.5. f 1.e. I could multiply Accu- 
fations and Reproaches againſt you, as you do againſt me- g In way 
of Deriſion, as this Phraſe is moſt commonly uſed ; as 2 Kings 19. 
21. Plal-22 75+ Iſa 39. 22+ Matth 27: 39- | 

5 But I would ſtrengthen you h with my mouth, and | 


Or,cut of. 
Ch.22.16 
. 55. 23- 


_ quity. 


' NOr, trou- 
bleſome. 
FCh. 13.4. 


+ Heb. 
words of 
Wind. 


f O B. 


to take heed of running into the ſame Errour and Miſchief | 


' and as this Phraſe is moſt commonly uſed, as Pſal 22: 8- and 35. 


% 


the moving of my lips ſbould aſſwage your grief ;. 
h ie Dire&, and ſupport, and comfort you: 7 i. e My Diſcourſe 
ſhould comfort you- The words, your grief, are here underſtood 
either out of the fore-going Clauſe, where they are implied, or our 
of the next Verſe, where they are expreſſed; Poſlibly the words 
may be thus rendred without any Ellpfes, which is moſt natural, if 
the Tranſlation be true and ſuitable; Compaſſion ( for the Hebrew 
word Nia, comes from Nud, which ſignifies to condole) ſhould refrain 
or govern my lips, that they ſhould avoid all Speeches which may vex 
you, and ſpeak only what may be to your Comfort and Benefit : 
whereas you let your Tongues looſe to ſpeak whatſoever pleaſeth 
you, or tormenteth me. 
6 Though Iſpeak &, my grief is not aſſwaged: and 
rhough I forbear, + what am I caſed /? f Heb, 


k To God by Prayer, or to you in way of Diſcourſe, I What gue; 
relief. Job having reproved his Sons los their unkind Ele . has 
wards him, and aggravated it by his Reſolutions to have dealt more 
friendlily with them,if they had been in this caſe ; Now he returns 
to his main buſineſs, to deſcribe and aggravate his Miſeries,if by any 
means he could move his Friends to pity and help him- 1 Or, wha: 
partor grain of my grief or miſerie departeth from me ? TI receive not 
one jot of caſe. Neither ſpeech hor ſilence do me any good. 

7 But » now he » hath made me weary 0: thou p 
haft made deſolare all my company q. 

m Or, Surely, as this Hebrew Particle moſt commonly ſignifies 
2 e God, as appears by the following Words and Verſes. o Either 
of complaining, or, of my Lift- p He ſpeaks in the ſecond Perſon 
to God, as in the former Clauſe in the third Perſon of God : Such 
—_ of Rn are very —_ in Scripture, and elſe-where 
q Haſt turned my Society into Deſolation, b 7 
dren and ann F OTOIIETY On 

8 And thou haſt filled me with wrinkles r, which is 
a witneſs againſt mes: and my leanneſs riſing up in 
me 7, beareth witneſs to my face «, 

r By conſuming all my Fat and Fleſh. 5 Heb- Which 5s a witneſs 
of the Reality, and Greatneſs, and juſt cauſe of my Sorrows. Or 
which become or made a witneſs ; i, e. is produced by my Friends aS 
a Witneſs of God's Wrath, and of my Hypocrifie and Impiety 
t 1-& Which is ia me- Or, riſmg up againſt me, as Witneſſes uſe to 
riſe and ſtand up againſt a guilty perſon toaccuſe him « As Wit- 
neſles are to accuſe a perſon to his fice, openly and evidently, ſo 
as any that look on my face may plainly diſcern it- Bur this Clauſe 
may be rendred thus, My leanneſs in my face; (i. e- which appears in 
my face, and cauſeth the wrinkles which are viſible there) rijech 
up againſt me, and beareth witneſs, as before 

9 * He teareth ze in his wrath x, whe hateth me y; *Chap.no. 
he gnaſhech upon me with his teeth 2; * mine enemy !5, 1. 
a ——— his-eyes upon me 6. "Ch.n. 

x Heb» His wrath teareth me in pieces, as a Lyon doth his 
y Heb- And he hateth me; ive. He purſueth- me wk a LOT 
and rage Or, And he 1 become mine enemy ; Or,he ſets hamſelf againſt me 
with all his might: Or,He treats me like an implacable enemy- 2 Which is 
a Geſture, and ſign of extream Anger and Fury ; as Pſal- 35. 16. 
and 37- 12. Laments 2: 16+ asclſe-where of grievous pain ; as Luke 
13- 28- a Either, 1, God, who of a Friend is now become my 
implacable Enemy. Or, 2- Eliphaz, who deals with me more like 
an Enemy than a Friend» 6 i» & Looks upon me with a fierce and 
ſparkling Eye, as enraged perſons uſe to do- 

10 Theyc have gaped upon me with their mouth 4, *:m +.» 
they * have ſmi ” Mich ; 

y mitten me upon the cheek reproachfully e, Mich. ;: 
they have gathered themſelves together againſt me f. 

c The Inſtruments of God's Anger, my Friends, as they are ſalſly 
Called: d Opened their mouths wide againſt me; Either, 1- To de= 
vour and deſtroy me ; as a Lyon which fallsupon his Prey with 0- 
pen Mouth ; as this Phraſe is uſed, Pſal- 22+ 13, 14+ And this they 
did, aggravating and increaſing his Sorrows, whereby he was well- 
nigh overwhelmed. Or, 2+ To ſcoffand deride me, as it follows, 


21: e Or, by reproach ; or in way of ſcorn and contempt ; whereof 
ſuch ſmiting was a ſign, as 1 Kings 22+ 24+ Lament: 3. 30» Mich. 5+ 1+ 
The ſign is here put for the thing ſignified : They deſpiſed and 
derided me- f is e-They arecome from ſeveral places and met to- 
gether here, nor for me, or to comfort me, as they pretended, but 
ro rally againſt me, or to torment and grieve me- Heb- they have 
filled themſelves, $c&- Either 1+ They have filled up their numbers, 
they are all come ag4inffme' Or 2- They have filled their Minds 
with evil Opinions of me, and their Hearts with Courage and Re- 
ſolution to ailaulc me, and their Mouths with Words and Argu- 
ments againſt me. Compare Eccl- 8. 11+ Aﬀs 5+ 3. ; 

it God # hath delivered me to the ungodly g, and ibs" 
turned me over intothe hands of the wicked. ſhut me 1 

g Either 1. To my Friends, who a& the part of the Wicked, in 
cenſuring and condemning the Righteous whom God approveth, 
and 1n pleading for a falſe and wicked Cauſe. Or rather 2. Tothe 
Chaldeans and Sabeans, who were a moſt wicked People, living in 
groſs contempt of God, and injuriouſneſs to all forts of Men- 
For this beſt ſuirs borh with the firſt Clauſe of the next Verſe, 
which ſheweth that he ſpeaketh of Jeb's firſt Afiftions which be- 
fell him when he was at eaſe ; and with Jo's principal Scope, which 
was to prove, that both eminent Proſperity and Afition did in- 
differently happen to good and bad Men; and this was evident 
from this Example, becauſe holy Job was ruined, when theſe wick- 
ed people were moſt Viftorious and Succeſsful- 

12 Iwas at caſc b, but he hath broken me aſunder i; 
he hath alſo taken we by my neck, and ſhaken me to 
pieces k, and * ſer me up for his mark 7. 

þ I lived in great Peace and Proſperity, which makes my preſent 
Miſerics more grievous to me ; andtherefore my Complaints are ex- 
cuſable, and I deſerve pity rather than reproach from my Friends. 
: Broken my Spirit with the ſeaſe of his anger, and my Body with 
loathſom Ulcers,as alſo by deſtroying myChildren, apart of my own 
Fleſh or Body. kt Asa mighty Man doth with ſome young Strip« 
ling, when he wreſtleth with him. 7 That he may ſhoot all his 

Arrows 


*Che7.29 


Chap. xv T 


tHe 


x. 
; / F \o , * 1, 1.0 - : 
_—_ , 5p me, and that with dehght, which Archers have in bunk yr ek nl Blatne of it before all Men; and if T be inno- 
, . : 5 at 1 ma I to It 7 - - x 
13 * His archers compaſs me round about ; he | Religion, (which ſuffers co this pa man to yr | 
cleaveth my reins aſunder », and doth not ſpare ; he | 9*Y die in peace with God, and may leave the ſayour "of a good 
pourech out my gall upon the ground. ms DERRY 4 
mM i-e- His Plagues or Judgements el{e-where compared to Arrows, : : CHAP. XVIL 
and here to Archers. # With his Arrows, 1- e- he wounds me in- His miſerable Life ; Falſe Friends : Their Puniſoment, 1 === 5. His Con-« | 
wardly,and mortally, and incurably ; which alſo is noted by powring tempr ; and Sorrow, 6, 7. The Righteous ſhould be eſtabliſhed, 8, g. | 
0:7 the galtt; ſuch Wounds being deadly. But he was given over to death, Il =—is, | Ys |; | 
14 He breaketh me wich breach upon breach » ; he MI [| breath is corrupt , my days are extindt 6, the | 
runneth upon Me like a giant o. L gravesc are ready ior me d. ; [Or ,nlf 
n My Calamities have no Interruption, but one immediately ſuc- a 1 e, It ſtinks, as it doth in dying perſons. Or, my Spirit is cor- a 
By flea , - ; reptcd, or ſj [ 7 Iri Sdwyd mori... 
my cceds another, as it did Chap: x- o Who falls upon his Enemy with » Or jpenr, or loft, i» & My vital Spirits, and natural Powers 
by k all his might, that he may overthrow and kill him? = oo &d ; My Soul is ready to leave the Body, 6 The Lamp of | 
-_ t5 I have ſewed ſackcloth upen my kin p, and de- | $4. © and upon the point of going our, and that an a 
; cleg h - - © 1e- The Grave; the piural number being put for the ſin- 
ed My norn 1n the duſt q. gular, as Sepulchres, 2 Chron- 21+ 20+ Cities, J rd þ 
? i- e- T put on Sackcloth ſowed together, not upon my other | Zech- 9. g- are put WERE cock of chat.” pe I 2:]Þ Iffes, 
Garments, but next to my Skin, as was done in great Calamiries ; | as ready to receive me. The ſenſe and ſo f Tr their mouths 
as Ny _— 39» So far am I from ſtretching out my hanas againſt Gd, | ſame with the former ope of this Vetle js the 
whereot Iam accuied, Chapter 15- 25+ that I have humbled my ſelf 2 . . . 
deeply under his hand: q TI have willingly parted with all my Wat FOO _ mockers uy ith me ef And doth not 
Wealth, and Power,and Glory, (as the horn oft ſignifies in Scripture, D Ad, T continue an their provecation F T Het | 
as Pſal. 75.5. and 132. 17: Luke 1- 69.) 'and been contented to lie e Po nor my Friends, in ſtead of comforting, mock and abuſe lodge. | 
in the duſt, and to endure the Contempt which God hath brought me, as if I had made uſe of Religion only as aCloak to my wicked= - | 
upon me. | __ Moy If there be not mackers with me, underſtand, let God do 
16 My face is foul with weeping, an 4 on my eve- | 2 9£10 to me. It 1s a form of an Oath, which is defeQively ex- 
Ta PINS, y CY preſſed after the manner of the Hebr Y 
lids zs the ſhadow of death 7. midſt of cruel X the Herews. | Aogedoy © an ns 
| ; cruel mockers, which is a ſore Aggravation of my AMi&i 
r1 eA groſsand terrible darkneſs. My ſight is very dim anddark | on. Thus he returns to what he had ſaid, Ch 6 A . 
aSis uſual in caſe of ſore Diſeaſes or —_ Grief and Weeping, | mates the neceſſity and juſtice of his foll Aro phat 1 4 
prang, 2. 1 - and eſpecially in the approach of death : Compare | therwiſe might be choughe too bold. 7 Either , [2 veg eye 
pay rg dnt aro a" Body. Dothey not continue t | | 
17 Not for any injuſtice in mine hands s: alſo, my bans eyes of 5 An Mind. or. ui Scot phy futies 
prayer is pure #. o not only moleſt me in the day-time - when they are with my 
s And all this is not comeupon me for any injurious dealing with _— ” dge with me in the night, andare continually in my nr 
others by oppreſſion, or deceit, or bribery, wherewith I am impli- Ih reak my fleep, and ditturb me in Dreams. And therefore is 
citely charged, Chap- 15. 16, 20, 34+ but for other reaſons known to c a little diſordered, I may be excuſed. 
God only, tor I cannot diſcover them, 7 I do not caſt off God's 3 Lay down now, put me in a ſurety with thee g 
ao nr en pl rip nn hens ohne Foe 00 ETD Han eG wn By li 
7 J InCcere et ; 
Heart, and undefiles Conftincs See Plat. logr 7. Prov. 28+ 9g. ther to God, al 1. no reg bee e Eg oe 
1 Tim, 2+ 8. So that I have lived inoffenfively towards God, and to- | and from the next verſe. Theſe words contain b hah fo 
wards Men : And therefore your Aſſertion is both uncharitableand | ble deſire to God that he would appoint him a Fare - 4. _—_ 
falſe, that eminent afflitions are peculiar to ungodly men. undertake forhis freinds, that thay ſhould refer ho ke rhe 2 
18 - earth, cover not thou my bloud «, and let my "_ —— them to God, or to ſome other Perſon who Toa 
Ne cry x have no place. erermine the matter in God's Name, and according to God's Will: 
| 6 : u So called not aftively ; To wit, his own Blood, but paſſively oo _—_ God would be his Surety, or appoi him a Surety who 
"þ.13-24 or objeQiyely; i e- the Blood of others ſhed by him and lying upon hic Ph maintain his righteous Cauſe againſt his Oppoſers ; for ſo 
his Conſcience. The Earth is ſaid to cover that Blood which lies this Phraſe is oft uſed, as P/al. 119. 121,122. 1a- 38-14 And ſome 
undiſcovered and unrevenged : Of which ſee on Gen- 4 10, I 1+ Iſa. expound thus, as they did, Chap. 16. 21 of Chrif Jeſus, who was 
26+ 21+ But faith Jeb, if I be guilty of deſtroying any one Man b called our Surety, Heb- 7- 22+ Appoint, I pray thee, m Suret (i 
Murder or Oppreſſi - n, asIam traduced, O Lord, let the Ez TE Chcift who is now) with thee, to plead my Ct > oil Roe a 
diſcloſe it; let it be brought to light, thar I may ſuffer condign Appeal from God unto God, or a kindof Challenge or Deſire of de- 
Puniſhment for it. x Either 1 Paſſively, to wit, the cries and groans baring his Cauſe with God: Which, though it favoureth of too 
which I have forced from others by my Opprefſions: Let thoſe cries much boldneis and Irreverence to God, yet ſeeing Jeb expreſſerh 
have no place to hide them. Orrather 2, AQively, the Cry of my the ſame deſire almoſt in the ſame manner, Choprer g. 33, 34: and is 
Complaints to Men, or Prayers to God; Let them find no place in tharply reproved by God for contending with him, Chap- 49. 2. Tknow 
the Ears or Hearts of God or Men, if this be true Or, no place, re. no inconvenience of aſcribing the ſame thing to him here. So the 
no regard, or no power or ſucceſs ; in which ſenſe God's Word is | 1<nfe is, Becauſe IT am not able to deal with thee immediatly, Cone 
Lam 3.39 is ſaid no to have place in evil men, John 8* 37- And Eſau not to Iidering the dread of thy Majeſty, my only deſire is, that thou 
{ich. 5% find p ace of repentance, Heb. '2. 17. t e. All his Intreaties and Tears wouldeſt deal with me upon fair and equal terms, as if thou wert | 
could nor prevail with his Father to repent of and retratt the Bleſ- a Man like my ſelf, and appoint ſome Man who ſhall in thy name 
fing given f.om him to Jacob- ; and ſtead determine the time and place for the trial of my cauſe with 
Feb. in \> Aiſo now, behold, my wienek i in heaves thee» And this ſuits well enough with the two following verſes 
the bivh , 9 D FJ, | becauſe his Friends were without Un i ry 
plac 5? and my record f #s on high, v. 5: therefore he deſires to ceaſe Þ, "ms aa h + _— 
fo S . - - : . rm w » J - 
2 Betides the witneſs of Men, and of my own Conſcience, God | bate his Cauſe with God, who was juſt and Savaial = _— - 11d 
m ſeorners, 18 Witneſs of my Integrity, : be favourable to him- þ i. & Agreeand promiſe,or be Surer alt en 
20 My friends z | ſcorn me 4: but mine eye poureth | whereof that was the uſual geſture, Prov: 6 x, 2. &19. 18: FA 22.26. 
out rears unro God b. 4 For thou haſt hid their heart from underſtanding iz 
: hr —_ _ by from the ſcorns and injuries cf others. therefore ſhalt thou nor exait them k. 
a So this word is uſed, Pſal- r19-- 1+ Prov+ 3-345 and 19. 28+ bTpour : Thou haſt blind ; 
forth my prayers and Tears to (od, that he would judge ime —_ ſee or Toocks which _ _- end Ty, 
"hauge. ding _ Innocency,and _ my —_— Co yon Fee _ Experience: Therefo:e I deſire a more wiſe bone” abls 
21 that one might plead IOor a Man Wit (0) udge. k r e., Thou wilſt not give them' the Vi i 
Is 45. 9. c, as a man pleadeth for his || neighbour ! this Conteſt, but willt give Sentence for =, end ibn them, 
Rom.9.20 c O thar eith-:r I or ſome faithful Advocate might be admitted to and make them aſhamed of their confidence in affirming falſhoods 
[Or,friends rue my Cauſe either with God,or rather with you, before God's of thee, and punith them ſeverely for their miſcarriage. It is an 
ribanal,:zod being Witneſs and Judge between us. Burt this verſe uſual figure, whereby much more is underſtood than is expreſſed. 
is, and that very agreeably to the Hebrew Text otherwiſe tranſlated 5 He that ſpeakech flattery to bis friends /, even the 
mo wm —— Either pr reſpe& to Chriit, 4nd he, (1.e.God | EYES of his children ſhal fail : | 
wt m8 Y. alt mentioned. to wit, God the Son, Chriſt Jeſus) w: plead for u 1 Hereby Job chargeth them, either '. With flattering hi IT 
man (ie, tor me, againſt whom you plead. He modeſtly ſpeaketh | vain Hopes, and Pr:omites of the retu wan, Ya 1d rn 
of himielf in tie third Perſon, as is uſual) with God, (to wit, with | when hk that his caſe was Tf, mmm _ Wi «22-66 
; 2 & | : knew tha We perate. Or 2+. With flattering 
God the Father : ) and the Son of Man (as Chritt is oft called) w'l | and befriending God, and giving a partial ſentence out of reſpett 
plead for his Friend, or Companion, or Neighbour, i. e. For a Man whom | to him; For which he reproved and condemned th " bets . 
he hath raken into that Relation ro himſe}f. Ir is plain, that the | Chap: 13- 7, 8, 9+ where ſee the Notes. Some render chewy 4 b is. 
Myſtery of Man's Redemption by Chriſt was known to the ancient | He that utrereth, or declareth his mind or thoughts (as this w = x _ 
Patriarchs, as hath been oft noted before ; and to fob among ethers, | hes, Pſal. 139- 2, 17*) mith flattery, or to flatter or decei —=— 
Chap. 19 25, Or, 2. As the marre: for which he prayed and cried | ther. m He ſhall be ſeverely uniſhed,nor onlyin his P _ _ 
to God; Tha*(ſo the Hebrew Yau is frequently uſed) be (i. e. God) | even in his Children, whoſe Eyes ſhall Rail ES wy” E _ 
woula plead, of judge, or give Jentence for « man ( i. e. for me, orin | of Reliefand Deliverance our of thoſe Calamities which. > gona 
wy cauie) _ God, (i.e Page: himſelf, the Noun _ =_ _ the | upon them for this Sin of their Parents. | 
ronoun, «Ss Gen. 2. 20. and 4. 15. Lev. 14-15, 16-and ele-where, | * _—_— 
at his own Tribun-1, to which I have a as aman pleaddch By _—_ af made me allo * a by-word o of the pe9- \ Ch.zoigh 
for his Friend or Neighbour, with or before an earth'y Judge and Tri- ang ng £ 1 GE my I was as a 7 Tabret y. l:Or, beforg 
*Cho1.20 bunal, This ſcems molt agr- eable to the Scope of rhe place, which 0 art N d, we" = deſigned by this Pronoun in this Book. m_— 
was to maintain his own Integrity againſt his Friends before God. 4; 'g a" - * i. ralk. My Calamities are ſo great and pro- = _ 
Feb: 22 When + a tew years are come, then ſhall I go the | ,Zremti that they fill all People with Diſcourſe, andare become F*%"s 
eb years . p proverbial to expreſs extream Miſeries. Compare Numb- 
way whence I ſhall nor return d. Deut. 28. 37. p Or, but, or although, as this Particle is of 7 TA 
a i. e- To the ſtate and place of the Dead, whence men do nor, he aggravateth his preſent Miſery by the mention ofhis former 
and cannot return to this Life. The meaning is, my Death haſtens, | ſperity. Or, #o their faces, or openly. They do not only reproach 
and therefore I carneſt;y deſire that the cauſ- — before God, . me behind my back, bur revile and mock <A and aus: a ſort of 
ff vven me and my Friends,may i.e ſearched out and determined, | my Calamities even to my Face. 7 i. e. I was the Peoples Delight 
t if I be guilty of theſe things whereof they accuſe me, I may | and Darling, and matter of _ Praiſe, and entertained by them 
+ with 


\. "Chap. XVI. 


F:Q 


B. Chap. X 


* 


5. XVII 


with applanſes, and as it were with Inſtruments of Muſick. Or, 7 
am 4s a Tabret ; i, e. matter of ſport and merriment to them. 


7 Mineeye alſo is dim by reaſon of ſorrow /, and all 


, ® || my members are as a ſhadow #. ; 
mo 5 Through exceſſive weeping and decay of Spirits, which cauſe 
a dimneſs in the ſight. + My Body is ſo conſumed, and my col- 
Jour ſo wan and ghaſtly,that I look more like a Ghoſt, or a Shadow, 
_ than like a Man. : : 
8 Upright men ſhall be aftonied at this «, and the 1n- 


nocent ſhall ſtir up himſel|fagainſt the hypocrite. 

# Wiſe and good Men, when they ſhallſee and confider my Cala- 
mities, will not be ſo forward to cenſure and condemn me,as you 
are, but will rather ſtand and wonder at the depth and myſteriou!- 

.neſs of God's Counſels and Judgments, which tall ſo heavily upon 
innocent Men, while the worſt of men proſper. x Bur, or Yer, 
' (notwithſtanding all theſe Sufferings of good Men, and the aftoniſh- 
ment which they cauſe,) inmcent(or religious Perſons ſhall be ſo tar 
from joyning their Opinions, and Counfels, and Intereſts, with Hy- 
procrites, or prophane men, who thence take occaſion to cenſure the 
afflicted Perſon, and to reproach and condemn, and deſert the Pro- 
feſſion and PraQtice of Godlineſs, that they) will fir up themſelves 
againſt them in holy Indignation, and will oppoſe their wicked cour- 

ſes, and will prefer afflied Piety before proſperous iniquity. 
9 The righteous alſo ſhall hold on his way y, and 


| oy he that hath clean hands z Þ# ſhall be ſtronger and 
meth, ſtronger «. 


9 i» e: Shall perſiſt in that good way into which he hath entred, 

- and not to be turned from it by any afflictions, which may befal 
- himſelf or any other good Men, nor by any contempt or reproach 

caſt upon them by the ungodly, by reaſon thereof. z i. e- Whoſe 

Life and the courſe of his Ations 1s Holy and Righteous ; which 

is a ſign that his Heart alſo is pureand perfe&. # Sha!l not be ſha- 
; ken and diſcouraged by the grievous Aﬀilitions of the Godly, nor 
- by the bitter cenſures and reproaches of Hypocrites, or wicked'men, 
- caſt upon them for that cauſe, but will be confirmed thereby, and 
- made more conſtant and reſolute in cleaving to God, and his ways, 
_ and People, in ſpight of all difficulties and miſeries. 
1-6. 29, 1 1O 

b: for I cannot find one wiſe man c among you. 

b i. e. Come now again (as this phraſe is oftuſed) and renew the 

. Debate, as I ſee you are prepared and reſolved to do; and Iam 

ready to receive you. Or, return into your ſelves, and conſider my 
- Cauſe again ; peradventure your ſecond thoughts may be wiſer. c To 
- wit, in this matter. None of you ſpeak like wiſe or good Men, 

but like raſh and heady perſons, you cenſure me as a rotten Hypo- 
| crite, and misjudge of God's ways, and condemn the' Generation 
Cha; 1.6.0f God's Children upon frivolous grounds. 
9. 25. © 11 * My days dare paſt, my purpoſes e are broken 


Heb. :he off, even | the thoughts of my heart f. 

ſeffon. © &d Thedaysofmy life. I am a loſt and dying man, and therefore 

: . the hopes you give me ofthe bettering of my condition,are vain 
and groundleſs. e Or, my difigns, or thoughts, to wit, which I had in 
my proſperous days, concerning my ſelf a:id Children, and the con- 
tinuance of my happineſs. f Heb. Th- prſſeſſions of my heart, i.e- thoſe 
thoughts which in a g:eat meaſure poſſeſſed my heart, which were 

moſt natural, and familiar, and delighiful to me. All my thoughts, 

| and deſigns, and hopes, are diſappointed and come to nothing. 


Ecbinegp 12 They g change the night into day 6: che light 


js + ſhort i becauſe of darkneſs k. 
g Either 1. My Friends Or 2- My Sorrows, of which he is here 
ſpeaking. Or 3. My Thoughts laſt mentioned. Poſſibly theſe words 
may be joyned wi:h them thus: The thoughts of my heart change the 
night into day h They do ſo vnceſſant'y purſue and and diſturb me, 
- that T can no more reſt and ſleep inthe dark and ſilent nights, than 
in the midſt of the Light and Tumults of the Day. Or, they change. 
the day into night. Heb. they put the night for, or im &-ad of (as the He- 
brew Lamed is elſe-where uſed) theday i. e. They make the day as 
ſad and dark as the night to me. So it ſeems beſt to agree with 
the following branch of the Verſe. #1. e. The day-light, which 
oft-rimes gives ſome little Comfort and Refreſhment to Men in 
miſery, ſeems to be gone and fled as ſoon as it is b-gun. & 1. e. Bee 
cauſe of my giievous pains and torments which follow me by day 
as well as by night. , 5 
13 IfI wait /, f the Grave is mine hor: 


made my bed in darkneſs ». | 

- T If I ſhould give way to thoſe hopes of my Deliverance and Re- 
ſtauration which you ſuggeſt to me. m I ſhould be ſadly difap- 
. Pointed ; for I am upon the borders of the Grave, which is the only 
Houſe appointed for me, in ſtead of that goodly Houſe which you 
promiſe ro me here upon condition of my Repentance: -» I expe& 
no other reſt but in the dark grave, for which therefore I prepare 


THeb. Hel. 7: I bave 


| _ , my ſelf 
 nr*e"qgd 14 I havet ſaid to corruptionos, thou «rt my father p: 
__ © -to the worm, thou «rt my mother: and my lifter 9. 
o Heb. 7 the pit of Corruption, the Grave. p I am neara kin to 
thee, as being taken our of thee, and thu wilt receive and embrace 
me, and keep me in thy houſe. as Parents do their Children. q Be- 


and Conjun&tion berween me and the Worms. 
i5 And where i: now my hope r? As for my Hope /;, 
who ſhall ſee irc ? 

r And what then is become of that hope which you adviſed me 
to entertain? -1. e. The fulfilling of my hope, or the Happineſs 
which you would have me expe&t. Hope being put for the thing 
hoped Br, as Prov. 13- 12. 1 Cor. 9, 16, # No Man ſhall ſec it; it 
ſhall never be. 

16 They « (hall go down to the bars of the 


when our reſt together 5s in the duſt y. 
« Either x. They that would ſee my hope, they muſt go into 
the Grave to behold it. Or rather 2. My hopes of which he ſpake 


pit x, 


plural,as is very uſual in theſe Poctical Books, x Le. Into the cloſeſt 


7 O B. 


Bur as for you all, * do ye return, and come now. 


Chap: XVIII ; 
and innermoſt parts of the Pit ; My hopes are dying, and will b« by. 
ried in my grave. y So the Senſe is, when thoſe SpeQtators, toge« 
ther with my ſelf, ſhall be in our graves. Heb. Seing that (as this 
Hebrew particle, im, oft ſignifies: Or, certainly, as it is uſed, Numb, 
17-13. Job+ 6. 13. and elſe-where, ) our re# ſhall be together in the 
duſt, 1. e. Iand my hopes ſhall be buried together. 
CHAP. XVI 
Bildad's Reproof: Job's words many: Hz deſpiſed his Friends : He wexed 
himſelf ; bus in vain, 1 4. The Calamity of the wicked, 
5 ennnn——_— 
Hen anſwered Bildad the Shuhite, and ſaid: 
2 How long will it beere ye @ make an end of 
words? Mark6, and afterwards we will ſpeak. 
4 Either 1, You my Brethren. Why do you not give over dif- 
courſing with Job, who is wholly tranſported with rage, and not 
fit to be diſcourſed with, arleaſt until both you and he have better 
conſidered what to ſay. Or rather 2+ Thou, O Job, of whom he 
ſpeaks here, as alſo verſe 3. in the plural number, either becauſe 
there were ſome other perſon or perſons preſent at this Debate,who 
by their Words or Geſtures ſhewed themſelves favourers of Job's 
cauſe; Or becauſe it was a common Idiotiſm of the Eaſtern Lan- 
guage, to ſpeak thus of one Perſon, eſpecially where he was one 
of Eminency or Authority. Job's Speeches were generally longer 
than his Friends, and they ſeemed very tedious tothem. 6 Confi- 
der the matter and our words better. Or, inform us, Heb. make us 
to underftand, Seing thou lookeſt upon us as ignorant and brutiſh 
men, as itfollows, do thou inſtru& and inform us. Ceaſe cavilling 
and railing, and produce thy ſtreng Reaſons, that we may conſider 
and anſwer them, or yield to them, 
3 Wherefore are we counted as beaſts c, and f reput- tHebia. 
ed vile din your fight e? (Nl 
c 1 e- Ignorant, blockiſh and ſtupid men. Chap: 17: 4, 10 d Heb. Lameg. ti 
polluted or unclean,i. e+ not fit to be converſed or diſcourſed with; or 
contemptible, as ſuch rhings are. e Either 1, To your Faces, or in 
your own hearing- Or 2+ In thy ſight or Judgment, O Job ; ſo he 
ſpeaks of Job in the plural number, as he did verſe 2. 
4 He teareth + himſelf f in his anger: ſhall the 
earth be forſaken g for thee þ? and ſhall the rock be 


removed out of his place ;? 


f Heb: bs 
Soul, 


f 1- e- Job, of whom he ſpeaks in the third Perſon for the ſecond, 
as Chapter 12+ 4+ and 16+ 5+ Obad. 3- 3- Or, O thou that teareſt thy 
ſelf. Thou cemplaineſt of us for vexing thee with our Speeches, 
; When in truth rhou art thy own greateſt tormenter by thy own Im- 
' Patience and Rage. g To wit, by God. Shall God give over the 

Government of rhe Earth, and Men, and things in it, and ſuffer all 

things to fall out by chance, and promiſcuouſly to good and bad 
| Men, without any regard to his Truth, or "Wiſdom, or Juſtice ? 
| Shall God forbear to rule the World righteouſly, as he hath hither- 
; to done, in favouring good Men, and deſtroying the wicked ? 
| þ j- e Forthy ſake ; or to prevent thy complaints and clamours. 
| Z Shall the Counſels of God, which are more firm and unmoveable 
than Rocks, and the whole courſe of his Providence be altered to 
comply with thy Fancies or Humours ? 


5 Yea, & the light of the wicked ſhall be put out /, 
and the ſpark of his fire ws ſhall not ſhine. 


k The thing is true and certain, notwithſtanding the Diſſatis- 
fattion and Oppoſition againſt it, 7 All their Glory and Felicity 
ſhall periſh. m2 te Their higheſt and brighreſt Glory, which he 
callerh the ſpark, &c- becauſe, like a Spark it ſhines briskly for a mo- 
ment, bur is quickly extin&. ; 

6 The light ſhall be dark in his tabernacle =, and 
his || candle ſhall be put out with.him 0. 

% i-e. In his Family. In ſtead of his former Splendor, both he 
and his ſha)l fall into Extremacy of Miſery- 0 i- e- His Glory ſhall 
die with him, and not deſcend to his Poſterity, as he hoped and 
deſigned. Or, h# Candle, which was with him, or ſhone upon him, 
ſhall be pur our, 

' 7 The ſteps of his ſtrength p ſhall be ſtraitned q, and 
his own counſel ſhall caſt him down 7. 

p te» His ſtrong Steps, by a vulgar Hebraiſm. By ſteps he means 
his Counſels, as the next branch. explains it, his attempts and aQi- 
ons; and by ſteps of ſtrength, ſuch of them as ſeem to be moſt firm 
and ſettled, contrived with greateſt Strength of Underſtanding,and 
carried on with great reſolution and might. 9q i.e. Shall be hindred 
and entangled, He ſhall be caſt into great difficulties, and Trou- 
bles, and 'perplexities, ſo thar he ſhall not be able ro proceed, and 
to accompliſh his Enterprizes, but ſhal) find himſelf enſnared by his 


[| Or,Lom: 


, r He ſhall be undone by his own Contrivances; either becauſe God 


cauſe of the ſame original, and the moſt ſtrit and intimate Union |; 


own devices, as the next words declare it. This phraſe is uſed alſo 
Prov. 4+ I1, 12+ and it is oppoſed to the enlarging of a Man's way or 
Steps, which ſignifies Succeſs and Proſperity, as Pſal. +1 and 3 1.8- 


will give him up to dangerous and deſtructive miſtakes of his way; 
or becauſe God will oppoſe him, and turn his own devices againſt 
him ; which he can eafily do, by throwing in unexpeRed accidents: 

8 For he is caſt into a net by his own tecet s, and hs 


walketh upon a ſnare z. 
s By his own choice, and deſign, and aQions: #t And therefore 
muſt needs be entangled and deſtroyed. | 
9 The * grin ſhall take bimz by the heel «, nd the »cy; 5;5: 
robber x ſhall prevail againſt him. | | 
# i. e. Take faft hold of him, ſo as to keep him in thoſe diſtreſles: 
x When he 1s enſnared, the robber ſhall come upon him, and take, 
and ſpoil, or kill him. Or, the horrible or terrible man, the Huntſman, 
that Jaid the ſnare for him. A Metaphor from thoſe who hunt for 
wild Beaſts, who firſt lay ſnares for them, and then ſeize upon them 
in the ſnares 
10 The ſnare 7s F laid for him in the 
a trap for him in the way. 
3 Where he doth not expe& nor diſcern it- The former ſnare 


and +Heb.his 
ground z, ”= 


*ch. 15-21 


in the ſingular number, v. 15. which he here changeth into the | 


he laid for himſelf, but this was Jaid for him by another- 
11 * Terrours-z ſball make him afraid on every ſide, 
and ſhall F drive him to his feet #, 


CIs 251 
N rod. 

46. P 
Z Both 4% 2914 


vi. F cap. XIX- 


Tebibid- 


Yr, Lany; 


'þ; 545+ 


Jeb: hi 


7 0 
z Both from men, and from God, and from his .own unquiet 
mind and guilty conſcience. - Shall force him to flee hither and 
thither, and he knows not whither, being ſecure and ſafe no where, 
but purſued by Terrors from place to place. _ 
12 His ſtrength þ ſhall be hunger-bitten e, and de- 


6:15:23 ftrudtion ſhall be ready at bis ſide d, _ | : 
Satan b Either 1- His Children, which are, and are called a Man's 
Strength, as Gen 49+ 3- P/#!- 127- 4, 5+ Or rather 2+ His Wealth, 
and Power, and Proſperity. c Or, famiſhed, 1- e- utterly conſum= 
ed- & i-e- Shall follow him at the heels, as a moſt diligent Ser- 
vant, or conſtant Companion: SET 

12 It ſhall devour the + ſtrength of his skin e: ever 


the firſt-born of death f ſhall deyour his ſtrength. 

£ Heb- 7s bars, or rather, the branches of the skin, i- e- either the 
Veins, and Sinews, which branch out themſelves through the Skin 
as well as eiſe-where: Or the Fat and Fleſh which like barrs ſup- 
port the Skin, and adorn and beautifie it, as branches do a Tree ; 
without which the Skin is ſhrivel'd up and deformed- f i-e- A moſt 
remarkable and terrible kind of death. The fr/t-born was the chief 
of his Brethren, and therefore this Title is given to things eminent 

In their kind, as 1/a+ 14+ 30+ Col: 1” 18. Heb: 12+ 23* Reve Ir © 

*Ch 8:14 714 * His confidence g ſhall be rooted out of his ta- 


& 11: 2% bernacle 6, and it 5 ſhall bring him to the king of rer- 


10-28, TOUTS R. SO | 

_ g ie All the matter of his Confidence, his Riches,Children, OG 
þ i.e Qurt of his habitation. , i To wit, the loſs of his Confidence. 

k Either 1- Into extream fears and Horrors of Mind. Or 2. To 
death, which even Ariffotle called, The moſt terrible of all terribles- 
And this it will do,either becauſe it will expoſe him to his enemies, 
who will kill him; or becauſe the ſenſe of his Diſappointments,and 

Loſſes, and Dangers, will oppreſs his Spirits, and break his Heart. 

15 Ir ſhall dwell in his cabernacle /, becauſe #: 3s 

none of his m: brimeſtone ſhall be ſcattered upon his 


habitation m. 

I It, i- e Deſtrution, expreſſed v- 12. and deſigned by this par- 
ticle 1, v+ 13+ ſhall not come upon him and his for a fcaſon, for 
then there might be ſome hopes of Recovery ; But it ſhall fix its 
abode with me- m This may be added either 1. By way of Cor- 
re&tion, did I ſay, hu Tabernacle? T muſt retra&t the Expreſſion ; 
for in truth, it i none of his, it is become another Man's: Or 2- As 
a reaſon of the ruine of his Tabernacle,becauſe it is none of his own, 
but gor from others by deceit or Violence. But theſe words are, 
and may be joyned with the former, and both thus rendred. 4 
Stranger, ( Heb. one that is not his, that is not deſcended from him, 
and hath no relation to him) ſbal dwell in his Tabernacle, 1. e. ſhall 
poiſeſs his Houſe and Goods. 7 It ſhall be utterly and prodigiouſly 
deſtroyed, as it were by Fire and Brimeſtone. He ſeems to allude 
both to the deſtruftion of Sodom, upon which God did ſcatter Brim- 
ſtone and Fire, which happened not long before theſe times, and 
could not be unknown to them who lived near that place, and 
were diligent obſervers of God's Works; and to the Judgment 
which befel Job Chapter 1- 16- when the Stranger hath taken and 
rifled his Dwelling, he ſhall forſake it as an accurſed place, and 
ſhail burn it with Fire and Brimeſtone ; that there may be no Mo- 
nument of ſo vile a perſon left upon the Earth. 

16 His roots ſhall be dried up beneath, and above 


ſhall his branch be cut off o. 
0 i. e- He ſhall be deſtroyed both Root and Branch, + e- both 
himſelf and his Poſterity- Compare Mal 4. 1- 


+Hebs bars 


"Plal.199- 15 * His remembrance jhall periſh p from the earth, 
P.. 2.22; and he ſhall have no name in the ſtreet. 
& 10. 9, Þ1In ſtead of that Honour and Renown which he deſigned to have 


both whilit he lived, and after his death, he is not ſo much as re- 

membred, unleſs it be with contempt and reproach: . 
nor 18 + He ſhall be driven q from light into darkneſs r, 
him, and chaſſed out of the world. 

q Heb. They ſhall drive him, i: e- his Enemies, or thoſe whom he 
hath oppreſſed ; or they whom God ſhall appoint to do it, whether 
Angels or Men. Orit is an 1mperſonal ſpeech, and to be reaared 
paſhvely, as it is alſo Job 7- 3. Luke 12+ 20+ and 16: 9+ r From a 
ſplendid and proſperous Life to diſgrace and miſery, and to the 
Grave, the Land of Darkneſs and Forgetfulneſs, as the following 
words explain ir. : 

i9 * He ſhall neither have ſon nor nephew among 
his people s, nor any remaining in his dwellings. 

s Butif any ſuch ſurvive, they ſhall be in the hands and power of 
Strangers, or rather of their Enemies. : 

20 They that come after him ſhall be aſtonied at his 


»:th/Li»m, day t, asthey that || went before « | were affrighted x. 
tHeb. lsi2 £* i ©. At the day of his Deſtruftion, as the word day is uſed, 
bold 0n hops PJ#l. 37+ 13- and 137+ 7+ Exek» 21. 25: Obad- 12. They ſhall be a- 
rour, mazed at the Suddenneſs, and Dreadfulneſs, and Prodigiouſneſs of 
it, as Job's Friends were at his calamities, Chapter 2- Iz, 13- wi.e. 
Before the perſons laſt mentioned. Thoſe who lived in the time 
and place where this Judgement was inflicted. x Or, filed with hor- 
reur, partly through Humility and Compaſſion, and parcly for fear, 
leſt the Judgment ſhould overtake them alſo. : 
21 Surely ſuch .re the dwellings of the wicked, and 
this ;s the place of biz that knoweth not God jy. 
Y ie Who dotk not acknowledge, nor fear, nor ſerve God, as 
this phraſe is uſed, 1 Sam. 2: 12+ Pal. 79. 6. 2Theſſ* 1. 8: 


\ CHAP. XIL 
c Job's anſwer + His Friends Strangeneſs and Reproaches vex him, 1 =umas ;, 
He layeth before them hs grear Miſery to provoke their Pity, 6 22. 
Wiſbeth his words might be recorded, 23, 24. His hope in his Redeemer, 
and the Reſurrefion, 25 —- 27 His Friends ſhould not reproach his 
Integrity, for fear of like Judgment, 28, 29. 
Hen Job aniwered and faid, 
| 2 How long will ye vex my ſoul, 
in pieces with words 4+ 


FIſa4-22e 
Jer. 22430. 


| Or, Lived 


and break me 


s With meer empty words void of Senſe or Argument, with | 


Fas 


B. Chap. Xl 
your impertinent and unedifying Diſcourſes, and bitter Reproach- | 
es, aSit tolloweth- | | 
3 LIheſe ten times b have ye reproached me: ye | 
are not aſhamed bar ye || make your ſelves ſtrange 1Or,bai 
to me 6. | your ſeln 

b i- & Many times. A certain number for an uncertain. So this "4inſt 
phraſe is oft uſed, as Gen- 31- 7. Nunb, 14 22, && c Thar you | 
carry your ſelves like Strangers'to me, and are not concerned not 
affefted with my Calamities, and condemn me as if you had never 
known my former Pity and Integrity. 

4 And be it indeed, 7hat { have erred 4, mine errour 
remaineth with my ſelf e. 

4 Tf my opinion in this point be feulty and erronequs, as you 
pretend it is. Or, if I have ſinned, (for Sin is oft called Error in 
Scripture) and am therefore puniihed- e Either x. Ir is likely to 
continue, I fee no cauſe from your r-aſons to change my Judge- 
ment. Or 2: I ſuffer deeply tor my $ins, and therefore deſerve 
your pity and help, rather than your reproaches, whereby you add 
affliction to the AﬀMflited: ; 

5 If indeed ye will magnitie your ſelves againſt me f, 
and plead againſt me my reproach g. 

f re-Uſe lofty,and imperious,and conremptuous'ſpeeches againſt 
me : Or, ſeek Praiſe and Honour from others, by your conquering 
or out-reaſoning of me- g Either 1- Your Reproaches of me : If 
your reproachtul and cenforious ſpeeches muſt paſs for ſolid Ar- 
guments- Or 2. My wickedneſs, which, if true, were juſt matter 
of reproach, and the cauſe of all my miſeries. Or 3+ My con- 
remptible and calamitous condition, for which you reproach and4l 
condemn me as an Hypocrite and wicked man. 

6 Know now h that God hath overthrown me 5, and 
hath compaſſed me with his net &. 

h Conſider what I am now ſaying. # Hath grievouſly afflited 
me 1n all kinds: Therefore it ill becomes you to aggravate my mi- 
ſeries; and if my Paſſions, hereby raiſed, have broken forth intro 
ſome extravagant and unmect Expreflions, I might expe& your Pi- 
ty and favourable Conſtruftion, and not ſuch ſevere Centures and 
Reproaches. Heb. God hath perverted me, i. e. Either my State'or 
Condition, as was now ſaid, or my Right and Cauſe. He oppref- 
ſeth me with power, and will not give me a fair Hearing, as it fol- 
lows, verſe 7, He giveth me very hard meaſure, and dealeth worſe 
with me than I might in Reaſon and Juſtice expe& from ſo wiſe 
and gracious a God: This is an harth refle&ion upon God ; bur 
ſuch paſſages have ſometimes come from good Men, when under 
ſore Afﬀicftions and Temptations, which was Job's caſe. kie-Wairth 
Afflictions on every ſide, ſo that I cannot eſcape, nor get any free- 
dom to come to him and plead with him, as I deſire. Y 

7 Behold, I cry our J of || wrong », but I am not 


heard: Icry aloud, but rbere ;s no judgment ». 

I To wit, unto God by Prayer or Appeal. 9 That I am op- 
prefled, Either 1.By my iriends: Or rather 2+ By God, who deals 
with me according to his Soveraign Power, andexa&@ and rigor- 
ous Juſtice, and not with that Equity and Benighity which he 
theweth to the generality of Men, and hath promiſed ro good Men, 
ſuch as he knoweth me to be. » God will not hear my Cauſe, nor 
paſs Sentence; which Imight reaſonably expe& from him ; But he 
quite neglets me, and hath utterly forſaken me, and left me in 
the hands of the devil and wicked men. See the like Complaints 
of other good Men in the like caſe of Deſertion, Pſal. 13+ 2- and 
22. 2, and 88- i5. Lament» 3- 8+ Habak. 1. 2 

8 He hath fenced up my way that I cannot paſs o, 
and he hath ſet darkneſs in my paths p, 

0 1. e. So that I know not what to ſay or do, and can ſce no means 
nor poſſibility of getting out of my Troubles. p So that I cannor 
diſcern my way, or what courſe I ſhould take. 

9 He hath ſiript me of my glory q, and taken the' 
crown r from my head. | | 

q 1, e. Of my Eſtate, and Children, and Authority, and all my 
Comforts. r 1. e. All my Ornaments. 

10 He hath deftroyed me on every fide 5s, and I 
am gone #: and * mine hope « hath he removed like 
a trec Xx. 

5 1. e, In all ReſpeQts, and to all Intents and Purpoſes, my Per- 
ſon, and Family and Eſtate. & i.e. Iam a loſt and dead Man, Ge- 
ing is oft put for dying, as Gen. 15. 2. Pſal. 39.13, « i.c. All my 
hopes of the preſent Life, as he oft expreſſeth ir; but-not of the 
Lite to come, as appears from Job 13. 15, !6. and 19- 25, &cs 
* Which being once plucked upby the roots, never groweth again. 

11 He hath alſo kindled his wrath againſt me z, and 
* hecounteth me unto him, as'ee of his enemies z. *Ch-13. 

y He hath ſtirred up his Wrath againſt me of his own accord, Lam. 
without any provocation of mine. Humane Infirmity excepred. 

z i.e. He uſcth meas ſharply as ifI were an invererate Enemy of 
God and ofall Goodneſs, though he knoweth I am and have ever 
been an hearty Lover and Servanc of him: 

12 * His troops & come together, and raiſe up their 
way b againſt me, and encamp round about my ta- *Cha. 6 
bernacle. | | 

2 1 & My Afflitions, which are but God's Inſtruments and Sol- 
dicrs marching under his Condu&, . 6 Either 1. Caſt a Bank or 
Trench round about me, .asan Army doth when they go to beſfiege 
a place- Or rather 2, Make a Cauſey or raiſed Path, as ?ioneers 
uiually do in low and wateriſh Grounds for the march of an Army: 
God removes all Impediments out of the way, and lays me open 
to all manner of miſchief. | 

13 * He hath put my brethren c far from me 9, and *pg;;1.x 
mine acquaintance verily are eftranged from me. & 38. tx 

c i-es My Kindred and Priends, who might and ſhould have ſup- & 69 8 


[Or, 


lences 


*Ch 2 


| becauſe they f-ared or diſdained, or at leaſt negle&ed to viſit or 


ported and comforted me in my Diſtreſs. 4d Either t. In place ; & 88.8, 


ſuccour me: Or 2. Intheir Aﬀe&ions which are tar from me,when 
their Bodies are preſeat with me, as I find in you: Bur this alſo I 
aſcribe to God ; he hath alienated your Hearts from me- 


4 & 2 14 My 


ap. XIX. 7 v 
14 My kinsfolk have failed me e, and my familiar 


friends have forgotten me f. +. 
; e To wit, to perform the Offices of Humanity and Friendſhip which 


they owe to me, f 7, e. Negic& and diſregard me as much as if they 


had quite forgotten me. ; | 
15 They that dwell in mine houſe g, 2nd my 


maids þ count me for a ſtranger ;: I amanalienin their 


ſight k. : | 
S ficb. The ſojwurzers of my houſe 3 i. e. ſuch as had formerly ſojourned 


with me, .whether Strangers, Widows, and Fatherleſs, whom by the 
Law of Charity and Hoſpitality he entertained: Or hired Servants, 
who had for a good while their Habitation and Subſiſtence in his Fa- 
mily. þ Whoby reaſon of their Sex, commonly have and ſhould have 
mote tender and compaſſionate Hearts than Men, And therefore this 
is God's doing, who hath hardned their Hearts againſt me. 7 Regard 
my Commands and Concernsno more than a Stranger. k The lame 
thing repeated through vchemency of Paſſion, becauſe this lay VETry 


heavy upon him, 
ſervant /, and he gave »e no anſwer ws: 


16 I calledmy 
| though I intreated him » with my mouth 0, 


1 To do ſome ſervile Office about me for my caſe or relief.m He paſ- 
ſed by as if he had been deaf, becauſe he loathed and feared to come 
near to me. n To ny Commands I added humble and carneft Defires. 
o Either. r. with gentle and moving Speeches ; Or rather 2. with my 
own Mouth and not by a Proxy. 

17 My breath is ſtrange to my wife p, though I en- 

n b. 7) treated for the childrens /«kg of F mine own bedy 9. 

24 Þ Who by reaſon of the Stink of my Breath and Sores denicd me 
her company. q By theſe Pledges of our Mutual and Matrimonial 
Tyc and afﬀeRion, the Children which came out of my Loyns, and 
were begotten by me upon her Body. But divers render the words 
thus ; and I entreated the children of my own body : i. e. Either ſome of 
Job's younger Children, who by reaſon of their tender years were kept 
at home with their Father, when their elder Brethren and Siſters were 
gone abroad to the Feaſt z or (ome of his Grand-children by thoie 
grown Sons and Daughters 3 for ſuch alſo oft come under the name of 
children. But this ſenſe ſeems not ſo proper, partly becauſe accord: 
ing to that Tranſlation here is mention only of 7ob's entreating 
them, but not a word of their denying his Requeſt ; «hich is the on- 

' ly matter of his preſent Complaint 3 and partly becauſe according to 
the former Trazſlation, it is a great and juſt Aggravationof his Wifes 
Unkindneſs, and --exatly anſwers to the foregoing Verſe, where the 
Servants perverſeneſs is aggravated in the ſame manner, and by part 


of the ſame words. 
Ir: the 78 Yea || young children r deſpiſed me ; I aroſe s, 
hed, And they ſpake againſt me. 


7 Or, Fools; the moſteontemptible Perſons. s To wit, from my 
Seat, to ſhew my reſpe@ to them, though they were my Inferiors, to 
ſhew my readineſs to comply with that mean and low Condition into 
which God had now brou;ht me. Or, 1ftood vp. tor ſo this word 
ſometimes ſignifies, I did not diſoblige or provoke them by any un- 
civil and uncomely Carriage towards them, but was very courteous to 
_—_ . ard yet they make it their buſineſs to rail againſt me, as you 
alſo do, 

19 * All + my inward friends # abhorred me ; and 


they whom I loved « are turned againſt me. 


PC. 41.9. 
$$. 13, 


a the # Heb. the menof my ſecret z my Intimates and Contidents, to whom 
n ofmmy 1 impartedali my Thoughts, and Counſcls, and Concerns. u Sincere- 
;f, ly and fervently, which they fo ill requite. He ſaith not, they who lo- 
ved me ; for their ſove, had it been true, would have continued in his 
&fiition, as well as in his Proſperity. 

| 20 * My bone xcleaveth to my «kin y, || and to my 

Ch 30-39 geſhz, and I am eſcaped with the skin of my teeth a. 
my x7, e. My Bones. the Singular colleQively put for the Plural ; as 
- 4 * Chap. 2. 5. Prov 15. 30» » To wit, immediately. the tat and tleſh 
9 ** next tothe Skin being conſumed. The Senſe is, I am worn to Skin 


and Bone: Sce the ſame Phraſe Pſal. 102. 5. x Or, as ( the Parti» 
cle and, bcing often ſo uſed, as hath been oblerved before _) ro my 
fb : . i, e. either as formerly it clave to my Fleſh: Or as near and as 
cloſely as it doth to theſe remainders of Fleſh which are left 1n my in- 
ward parts. @ I ain ſcarce ſound and whole, and fr. e from Sores in 
any part of my Skin, except thatof my Jaws, which holdeth and co- 
vereth the roots of my Teeth. This being, as divers obſerve, the De- 
vils Policy to leave his Mouth untouched, that he might more freely 
expreſs his Mind, and vent his Blaſph: mies againſt God, which he ſup- 
poſed ſharp pain would force him to do, and which he knew would be 
of pernicicus Conſequence not only to Feb, but to others alſo. 
21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye 
my friends b, for the hand of God hath touched c me. 
6 For ſuch you have been and till pretend tobe ; and therefore fal- 
fil that relation, and if you will not help me, yet at leaſt pity me. c 
;,e. Smitten or afflited me ſorely, as this word is oft uſed y as Chap. 
1-14. Pſals 104. 32, 
22 Why doye perſecute me as God 4, and are not 


ſatisfied wich my fleſh e ? | 

4 Either 1. as God doth ; or rather 2, as if you were gods and 
not Men; as if you had the ſame infinite Knowledge which God 
hath, whereby yon can ſearch my Heart and know my Hypocrific, 
and the ſame ſo»e cign and abſolute Authority to ſay and do what 
you pleaſe with me, without giving any reaſon or account of it, 
which is indeed the Prerogative of the great God, but it belongs 
not to you who are Men, and therefore lyable to miſtake and miſ- 
judging, and ſuch a5 muſt give an account to God of all their 
words and carriages towards their Brethren, and particularly to- 
wards Perſons in «fi; tion, and withal ſubje& to the ſame Diſeaſes 
and Calamities under which I groan; and therefore may need the pity 
which I expe@ from you. & &. e. With the Conſumption and Torment 
of my whole Body, b tads toit the Vexation of my Spirit by grie 
| vous Reproaches and Cenſures ; but are like Wolves or Lions that are 
+ Heb.who not contented with devouring the Fieſh oftheir Prey, but alſo break 


their Bones. 


8 Co 23 | Oh thatmy words f were now written ; oh that | 


B 


they were printed in a book ! 

f Either 1. ' the following and famous Confeſſion of his Faith, 
Ve 25, Wc, Orrather 2, all his foregoing Diicourſes with his Friends, 
which he was ſo far from diſowning or being aſhamed of. that he was 
defirous that all Ages ſhould know, that they might judge between 
him and them, whoſe Cauſe was bettcr, and whoſe Arguments were 
ſtronger. | 


24 That they were graven with an iron pen g and 


leadb, in the rock forever! 

£ Of which alſo there is mention, Fer. 17. x- h Or, or lead; or 
with lead, the Particle and beivg oft fo uſed ; as Gen. 4. 2c. Exod, 1, 
6, Jer. 22, 7. For this Lead may be either i. the Writing-peti which 
might be cither of Iron or of Leads For though Lead beof it ſelf 
too ſoft, yet there was an Art of tempering Lead w:th other Metals, 
to ſuch a degree of hardneſs, that it could pierce into a Rock; as 
they did alſo temper Braſs; ſo that they could make Bows and 
Swords of them, Or 2, the Writing-table; for the Ancients did 
uſe to write divers things in Lead, as 1s well known. Or 3, the Wri- 
ting-Iok, asI may call it: For they uſed tograve the Letters in a Stone 
with an Iron Tool, and then to fill up the Cuts or Furrows made in 
OO with Lead, that the words might be more plaifly ſeen and 
read. 

25 For ; I know & that my redeemer / liveth aw, 
and hat he ſhall ſtand » || at the latter day o upon the |0r,at le 


carth p. 

# This is the reaſon of his great Confiderce in the Goodneſs of his 
Cauſe, and his Willingneſs to have the matter depending between him 
and his Friends, publiſhed and ſubmitted to any Tryal becauſe he had 
a living and powerful Redeemer to plead his Cauſe, and vindicate his 
Perſon frem all their ſevere Cenſures, and to give Sentence for him. 
k T have uo Knowledge nor Confidence, nor hope of Reſtitution to 
the Proſperities of this Life 3 yet this one thing I know, which is more 
comfortable and conſiderable, and thercin I rejoyce though I be now 
a dying Mun, and in a deſperate condition for this Life, 1 In whom 
I have a particular Intereſt, and he hath a particular Care of me. 
Neſt, What Redeemer, and what Deliverance doth Job ſpeak of in 
'his and the- two following Verſes? Anſw, Some late Interpreters 
underſtand this place Metaphorically, of God's delivering Job out 
of his doleful and deſperate Condition, and reſtorivg him to his for. 
mer Splendor and Happineſs in the World ; it being a very uſual 
thing 1a Scripture, tocall eminent Davgers or Calamitics by the 
name of Death; as Pſal. 22, 1s. and 88 4, 5. Exch. 37. I, 12. 
2 CY. It. 23, And :reat and glorious Deiiverances by the name of 
Quickning and Reſurreftion ; as Pſal. 951i. 20. Iſa, 26. 19, Rem 11, 
Is But the moſt Interpreters, both ancient and Nodern, under- 
ſtand it of Chriſt and of his Reſurrc&ion, and. of Jeb's ReſurreRion 
to Life by his Power and Favour : Which ſeems moſt probable for 
many reaſens. 1. From that known Rule, that a proper and literal 
Interpretation of Scripture, is always to be preferred before the Meta- 
phorical, where it ſuits with the Text, and with other Scriptures. 2, 
From the Hebrew word Goel, here uſed ; which although ſometimes 
it be uſc.d of Ged abſolutely or effentially confidered, yet it moft pro- 
perly agrees to Jeſus Chriſt : For this word, as all Hebricians know, 
is primarily uſed of the next Kinſman, whoſe Office it was to redeem 
by 2 price paid, the ſold or mortgaged Eſtate of his deceaſed Kinſ. 
man, Levit, 25. 25. and to revenge his Death, Numb. 35. 12. and 
to maintain his Name and Honour by raiſing up Seed to him, Det. 
25. 5 Allwhich moſt fitly agrees to Chriſt, who is our reaceſt Kinſ- 
man and Brother, Heb. 2. 14; a$havin? taken our Nature upon him 
by Incarnation : who alſo hath red:emed that everlaſting Inheritance 
which our firſt Parents had utterly loft and fold, by the Price of his 
own Blood; and hath revenged the Deathof Mankind. upor the great 
Contriver of it, the Devil, by deſtroying him and his Kingdom ; and 
hath taken a courſe to preſerve our Name, and Honour, amd Perſons 
to Eternity, And if the places where God is called Goel in the Old 
Teſtament, be examined, it will be found. that either ail or moſt of 
them may be, andfſome of them muſt be un derſtood of God the Son, or 
oi Chrift, as Gen 48. 16. Jſa: 59: 20, Sce allo Pal: 74: 2: Iſa: 
41: 14; & 44: 6: & 49: 7: & $2: 3: & 63: 16 3 Becauſe 
Job was ſo far from ſuch a firm Confidence as he here profeſſeth, that he 
had not the leaſt degree of Hope of any ſuch glorious temporal Reſtau- 
ration as his Fricnds promiſed to him, as we have oft ſeen and obſerved 
in the former Diſcourſes, as Chap. 16: 22: & 17: 12, 13, G@c. and 
therefore that hope which every righreous Man hath in bis death, Prov. 
14+ 32. and which Jeb oft profcſicth that he had, muſt necet{arily be 
fixed upon his Happineſs in the future Life. 4. Becauſe ſome of the 
following Expreffions cannot without wreſting and violence be appli- 
cd toa Metaphorical RefurreQion, as we ſhall ſee in the Sequel. 5. 
Becauſe this is a. more lefty and ſpiritual Strain, than any ia Job's for- 
mer Diſcourſes. and quite contrary to them, And as they generally 
lavourof Dejeftion and Diffidence, and do cither declare or increaſe 
his Grief ; ſo this puts him into another and much better Temper - 
And therefore it is well obſerved, that after thistime avd theſe Expreſ- 
ſion”, we meet not with any ſuch impatient or deſpairing Paiſlazes, as 
we had before ; which ſhews that they had inſpired him with new Life 
and Comfort. 6. Becauſe this well agrees with other Paſſages in this 
Book; wherein Job declareth, that although he had no hope as to this 
Life, and the Comforts thereof, yet he had an hope beyond Death, 
which made him profeſs, Though he ſlay me, yet will 1 truſt im him, 
Job. 13. 15. Truft in him: For what ? Surcly for Comfort and Hap- 
pineſs. Where? Not in this Life, for that he ſuppoſeth to be loſt, 
therefore it muft be in the next Life. And this was one reaſon why he 
ſo vehemently deſired Death, becauſe he knew it would bring him un- 
to God and unto true Felicity. And this his hope and confidence in 
God, andin his Favour to him, Job oppoſeth to thoſe foul and falſe 
Aſperſions which his Friends had caſt upon him, as if he had forſa« 
ken God, andceſt off all fear of him, and hope in him, Object. 7. 
{: this place had ſpoken of the ReſurreRtion of the Body, ſome of the 
Hebrew Writers or Commentators upon this place, who did believe 
that Do@rine, would have underſtood it ſo, and have urged itegeinſt 
the Sadduces, which theydid not. Arnſw, 1. All the Jewiſh Wri- 
ters which are now extant, lived and wrote fince Chriſt's time; when 
the DoRors of that People were very ignorant of many great Truths, 
and of the plain meaning of n any Scriptures, and very corrupt 1n 
their Principles as wellas in their Praiſes, 2, There was # _ 

a 1 | , 


Chap. XI. | 


thſt 


bud, 


Chap. XIX. 


[0r, ter 
TY 
Wake thy - 
Mis body 48d therefore many words are to be underſtood in ſome places, to 
be detroy- corr pleat the ſenſe : The meaning of the place is this z Thovgh my 
ed 2+ ys Skin 15 now in a great meaſure covſumed by Sores, and the reſt of it, 
f my fp together with this Body, ſhall be devoured by the Worms which 
LIſce may ſeem to m ke my Caſe quite deſperate, Heb. And though (which 


7 0 


Reaſon why thev could not underſtand this Text thus, becauſe 
oh believed that Jobin his Agonies did deny God's Providence, and 
conſequently the ReſurreRion and the future Judgment, which though 
it was a moſt uncharitable and falſe Opinion,yet forced them to 1nter- 
pret this Text another way, ObjeF, 2, fow1s If credible that Job, 
in thoſe ancient times, and in that dark Stateof the Church, fhould 
know theſe great Myſteries of Chriſt's Incarnation, and of the Refur- 
re&ion and Life to come? Arſwe 27, The Myſtery of Chriſt's Incar 
nation was reveal:d to Adam by that firſt and famous Promiſe, that 
the ſeed of the wenan ſhould break, the Serpent s head, Gen: 3: 15; 
which being the only Foundation of all his Hopes, for the Recovery 
and Saivation of himſelf and of all his Poſterity, he would doubtlets 
carefully and diligently teach and explain it, as peed required, to 
thoſe that deſcended from him. 2. That the ancient Patriarc''s and 
Prophets were generally acquainted with theſe DoQrines, is undeniad- 
ly evident from Heb: 11: and x Fet: 8: 9, 10, Il, 12. 3. Particu» 
larly Abraham, from whom Job is ſuppoſed to have deſcended 3 had 
the Promiſe made to him, that Chriſt ſhould come out of his Loins, 
Gen: 12;.3: and is ſaid to have ſeen Chriſt's day, and rejyce to ſee 7t, 
John 8: $6, and had his Hopes and Deſires fixed upon a divine and 
heavenly City and Country, Heb: 11: 10, 16. And as Abraham knew 
2nd believed theſe things himſelf, ſo it is manifeſt that he taught 
them to his Children and Servants, Gen: 18: 19: andto his Kindred 
and others, as he had occaſion: ,And therefore it cannot ſeem ſtrange, 
that Job profeſſcth his Faith and Hope in theſe things, m Iam a dy* 
ing Man, and my Hopes are dying, but he liveth, and that for ever 3 
and therefore though I die, yet he both can and will make metc live 
224in in due time, though notin this World, yet in the other, which 
is much better; and though I am now highly cenſured and condemn- 
ed by my Friends and others, as a great Difſembler and a ſecret Sinner, 
whom God's Hand hath found out ; yet there 15 a day coming where- 
in my Cauſe ſhall be pleaded, and my Name and Honour vindicated 
from all theſe Reproaches, and my Integrity brought to light. n I 
am falling and dying, but he ſhall ſtand firm, and unmoveable, 
and viRtorious, in full Power and Anthorlty : All which th's word 
ſtand ſignifies; and therefore he 1s 2ble to make me ſtand in Judg- 
ment, and to maintain my Cauſe againſt all Oppoſers. Or, he ſhall 
ariſe, as this Verb moft commonly ſignifies; 7: e. Either 1, he thall 
exiſt or be born, asthis word is oft uſed 3 as Namb: 32: 14: Deus: 29; 
22; J-dges 2: 10; 1 Kings 3: 12. Mat:11, 11; And 1t notes Chriſt's 1n- 
carnation, thatalthough as he was God, he was now and from ail E- 
ternity in beeing, yet he ſhould indue time be made Man, | and be 
born of a Woman. Or 2. he ſhall ariſe out ofthe Duft z which had 
been more probable, if it had been in the Text from or out of, as now 
it is upon, theearth or duſt 3 for Chriſt's ReſurreQtion from the Dead, 
might be firly mentioned here as the Cauſe of Job's Reſurre&ion, which 
followeth. » Either y. in the days of the Meffiah or of the Goſpel, 
which are oft called the latter or laſt days or times; as I/a 2: 2: Hoſt 
3:5: Joel: 2; 28. Compared with As 2: 17: x Tim: q* 1: and 2 Tim: 
3:1. Heb: 1 1. Or rather 2. at the day of the general ReſurreQi- 
on and Judgment, which, as thoſe Holy Patriarchs well knew and 
firmly believed, was to be 4t the end of the World; and which is 
called the laſt day, John 6. 40, 44, 54: and 1: 24 and 12: 48; 
x Pet: 1: 5, For this was the time when Job's Reſurreftion, of 

which he ſpeaketh here, was to be. Hebs at the /aft : By which word 
he plainly intimate:, that this hope wa: not of things preſent and of 


B. Chap. X| 


dred, s Heb. Out of my feſb, or with ( 25 the Particle Mev is uſed, 


Cant: I: 2. and 3: $: i/e: 57: 82 _) my fleſh, i. e: with exes of fleſh, as 
Job himſelf calls them Chap: 10: 44 Or with bodily eyes 5 my ticſh or 
Body being raiſed from the Grare, and reſtored and re-uvited to my 
Soul. And this is very fitly added, to ſhew that he did not ſpeak of. 
mental or ſpiritual, but of a corporeal Viſion, and that after his deaths 
# The ſame whom he called his Reaeemer, v: 25; i:e. Chrift 5 of which 

| ſce the Note there, who being God-man, and having taken fleſh, and 
appearing in his fleſh or body with and for Job upon the Earth, as was 
ſaid v: 25: might very well be ſcen with his bodily eyes. Nor is this 
underſtood of a ſimple ſeeing of him ; for ſo even they that pierced 

him ſhailſee him, Rev, 4: 7: but oft ſeeing him with delight and com- 

fort, as that word is oft underſtood, as Gen 48; 11: Job: 42. a6: Pal. 

128. 5: 1/a: 53-11,0f that glorious and beatifyi:'g Viſion of God, which 

Is promiſed to all God's People, Pſal: 16: 11: and 17: 15; Matth:' 5; 

8: 1 Cor: 13: 12; 1 John gi 2, 


27 WhomT ſball ſee « for my ſelf x, and mine eyes 


conſumed + within me z. 


For my own comfort and benefit, as that Phraſe is oft uſed. Or, which 
15 much of the ſameimportance, on my behalf; to plead my cauſe, 
and vindicate me from all your Reproaches. y To wit, for me or in 
my ſtead. I ſhall not ſee God by anothers eyes, but by my own, and 
by theſe ſelf ſame eyes in this ſame body which now I have. Heb. Not 
« ſtranger ; 1.e- This priviledge fhall be granted to me and to all other 
ſincereServants of Ged, but not to Frangers, i: e: to wicked men, who 
are oft called flrangers ; a Pſal: 18: 44, 45: and 54: 3: Prov: 21: 8: 

becauſe they are eſtranged or alienated from God, and from his Ser- 
vice ard People And if I were ſuch an one, as you ſuppoſe me to 

be, I could never hope to enjoy that happineſs. 2x This I do confident- 
ly expect and hope for, though at preſent my Cafe ſecms deſperate, 
my very inward parts being even conſumed with | Hard 3 and though, 

as T have ſaid, the Graveand the Worms will conſume my whole Body, 
not excepting the Reins which ſecm to be ſafeſt and furtheſt out 'of 
their reach. Or, without though, which is not in the Hebrew, My 

reins are conſumed within me- So this may be a ſudden and pafſionate 

Ejaculation or Exclamation ( ſuch as we find Gen: 48: 18: and oft in 

the Book of P/alms ) ariſing trom the Contemy ation and confident Ex- 
peRation of this his unſpeakable happineſs, wherein he exprefſeth his. 
vehement deſire and longing for that bleſſed time and ſtate. Thereins 

are oft put for the carne Deſires or AﬀeCtions, whereof they are ſup- 

poſed to be the ſeat 3 as Job 38: 36: Prov: 23: 16. and Men are oft 
in Scripture ſaid to be conſumed or eaten ap, or the like, by ardent af- 
fetions 3 as P/al. 69. 19: and 843 2: aud 119: By, 82: John 2: a7, 


28 But ye ſhould ſay b, Why perſecute we him e; 


ſhall behold, and not + another y : though my reins bes 7 He, fi 
firanger. 


_ 4 In manner before and after expreſſed No wonder that he repeats F Heb. in 
it again, becauſe the Meditation of it was moſt fivce: to him. = #: e; 2 me 


| 


[| ſeing the root of the matter is foundin me 4? 
4 Or, Therefore, becauſe this is my Cafe, and my Faith and Hopein 


God, b $0 the Future is uſed Potentially ; as it is 0bad: v: 12: and 


f Or, and 
what root 
of matter 


and that you will be more moderate in your Cenſures and Expreſſions 
concerning me, as being convinced and ſweetned by this ſincere and 


Worldly Felicities of which his Friends had diſcourſed ſo much, but 
of another kind of, and a far greater Bleſſedneſs which fhould accrue 
to him in after-times, long after he was dead and rotten. Or, the, 
lait ; who is both the fir# and the laſt, Iſa: 44: 6: Rev: 1: 11. who ſhall, 
ſub:ue and ſurvive al! his and his Peoples Enemies, and after others 
the laſt enemy, Death, 1 Gor: 15: 26. and then ſhall raiſe up his Peo-. 
ple and plcad their Cauſe. and vindicate them from all the Caium- 
nics a.'d Injuries which are put opon them, and conduq them to Life 
and Glory. p The place upon which Chriſt !hall appear and ſtand at 
the laft day. Heb upon the du; ih which his Saints and Members lie 
or ſleep, whom he will raiſe out of it. And therefore he is fitly ſaid 
to ſtand '-pm the auſt, or the Grave, or Death; becauſe then he will - 


ſolemn Profeſſion of my Faith and Hope, Or, 2. Peradventure you 
will ay; tu wit, by way of Excuſe for your ſelves. cSoit is a corre» 
Qtion of themſelves; ſeing things are thus with him, we are blame-wor-« 
thy that we have perſecuted him with ſuch bitter Inveaives, and we 
will do ſo no more. Or, wherein or how ( for ſo that Particle is ſome«- 
times uſed, as the Learned obſerve) do we perſecute him as he chargeth 
us, v: 22, He accuſeth us falfly.and without cauſe given on our parts. 
So it is an Apology for their hardSpeeches againſt him, which Job puts 
1nto their mouths as their Exception to his Charge which he mention- 
ed,. v; 22; and upon that occaſion falls into a moſt terious and patheti- 
cal Exclamation. v- 23, 24: and into a moſt ſolemn Declaration of his 


Faith in God his Redeemer, v: 55 26, 87. and after that Digreſſion he 


put that among other Enemies under his feet 3 as is expreſſed, u Cor 1 5, reſumes the former matter, and here prepounds an Objeftion,to which 
25, 25 Some render the words thus, and that very agrecably to the he gives a ſevere Anſwer, which may ſeem to ſuit much better with 
Hebrew, The laſt, or at the la# he ſhall ariſe or fland up againſt C tor ſo this than with the former Expoſition. d Theſe words contain either, 


thi- very Phraſe is ſed, Gen: 4: 8: Juages 9. 18: ſal 54: Ze ) the 
duſt and fight with it, and reſcue the Bodies of the Saints, which arc 


1. A Motive or Reaſon why they ſhould cerreft themſelves for perſes 


cuting him, and defiſt from it; becauſe, ſaith Job, the root of thematrer, 


held in it as Priſoners. from its Dominion and Territories. Some un- | 27» 297d is in me, The root notes the Occafion or the Foundation, or 
derſta-d this of God, that He ſhould ſtand 1a in the field as Conqueror the Truth and Subſtince ofa thing. And by this mater or word may 
of all his Enemies. But this neither agre's with the words, the Hes | be meant e'ther, 1, That famous Profeſſion of bis Faith and Confidence 


brew Aphar, ſignifying dſt, and being neyer uſed of the field or place. 


in God v: 25, 25, 27: which. ſaith he. Thave notuttered vain-glori- 


of Batcel z ner with Job's icope, which was to defend himſelf againſt | oufly or hypocricically, but from my very heart, wherewith ] believe 
his Friends Accuſations, and to comfort himſelf with his hopes and | what I have ſpoken with my mouth, as is ſaid upon another occaſion, 
atſuranceof God's Favour to be exhibited to him io due tin.e. Which Rom: 10:9, 30. This Word or Faith is rooted in mine heart, as it 
end the words in that ſenſe would by no means ſerve, becauſe God ſhould be, Matth: 13: 21» Col: 2, 9. I am no Hypocrite, as You aſperſe 


had been one of them. and though his C:uſe had been bad, and his 
Friends ſhould with God havetriumphed over him. 


26 || And though after my skin, worms deſtroy this 
body q ; yet r in my fleſh s (ball I fee God :: 


ogg : ke a me, but an upright perſon, having a root of true Religion in me; which 
.migh: and would be Conqueror of all his Ene-1ics, though Job himfelf hats ſhould allay ———— dorks yoo witlicy 9s heap 
with ſome circumſtantial DefeCts or Miſtakes in my Diſcourſes, or Miſ- 
carriages into which my Paſſion or Pain might tranſport me, and make 
you repent of your cruel uſage of a truly good may, But although Je5 


had this rootin his heart, yet this was doubted of, and not diſcerna- 


q Ihe ſtyle of this and other Poetical Books is conciſe and ſhort, | ble by Jeb's Friends, and therefore could be no Argument to. them, 


Poſſibly it might be better to underſtand by this root of the word, to 
wit, of God's Word, which is oft called the word, by way of eminency, 
the Foundations or fundamental Truths of Divine Daftrine, which Job 
heid 3 as appeared by this glorious Confeſſion; howſoever he might 
err in the matter of Controverfie with them ; which being a diffe- 


Particle, as it is oft elſewhere, is here to be underſtood, as the oppo- | rence in leſſer things, they ſhould mildly have bors with it, and not 
ſition of the next Branch ſheweth ) after my skin ( which either now azgravated it and traduced him, as if thereby he had renounced God 


Is, or ſuddenly will be conſumed by Soresor Worms _) they ( 7: e: the 


and the very Principles of Religion, as they did. Or, 2. The word 


deftroyers or devenrers, as is \n-plyed in the Verb; ſuch Imperſonal | gr thivg under debate among ther. So the ſenſe may be this, The 


Speeches being uſual in the Scripture ; as, Gen. 50: 26, Luke 12: 20 
and x6: 9. where the aRions are *xpreſſed but the Perſons or Things 
ating arc underſtood, And by the Deſtroyers, he moſt probably 
deſigns the Worms which do this work -n the Grave) deſtroy or cut 
off, or deveur this ; 5: ez all this which you ſee left of me, this which 

now point to, all this which is contained within my Skin, all my 
Fleſh and Bones, this which I know not what to call, whether a living 
Body, ora dead Carkaſ+, becauſe it is between both; and tt:erefore he 
did not ſay, this bor, becauſe it did ſcarce deferve that name, r For 
the Particle and is oft uſed adyerſatiyely ; Or, then, as it is oft ren- 


root or truth'of the thing debated by us is with me; i. e is on my ſide. 
Your Diſcourſes and Arguments have no truth nor ſolidity in them, 
as mine have. You ſpeak whatever cometh into your mirds anda 
meuths 3 but my Diſcourſes are rooted and grounded upon ſound 
Knowledge and deep Confideration. But this was . no convincing an- 
ſwer ; for they could cafily retort the ſame thing upon him again,” 
and their Affirmation might feem as g-0d as his; for it was only a 
begging of the thing in queſtion. Orrather, 2 a defence of them- 
{elyes and of their former ſharp and ſevere Diſcourſes, which ÞS 

, 4G3 called 


the ſenſe is, It would become you, or, It is your duty upon this ac- is found in 
count toſay. Or, you will ſay ; 4: e: Either, I. | hope you wil ſay ſo, me ? 


| 


[ 
4 


=. a_—_ — 


MP HASTIES OE IRIS 9 


—_ EI OI. DS 


po 8 ANNE un 


Yo XX. | 


called Perſecution, wv. 22+ And having made a ſhort;but vehement 
and important digreſſion, v-23, &c. he returns to the main queſtion 
between them here: And the ſenſe of this Verſe ( with ſubmiſſion to 
better Judgments ) ſeems to me to be plainly this ; Bur ye wil Jay ; 
z. e. I know will obje& againſt my Charge ; How or wherein, or why 
do we perſecute him ? Why doth he charge us with ſo black a Crime ; 
ſeing or for ( as Yaz is oft uſed ) the rot. 3. e. the Foundation or 
Cauſe, or occaſion of the word; 3. e. of thoſe words or paſſages of 
ours Which are ſo ill taken, or of the matter ; 7. e. of the thing now 
debated among us, 7 in me ; i.e. Fob = the occaſion to it by his 
boiſterous Paſſions and wicked Expreſſions againſt God, which we 
- neither can nor ought to endure, but are to be ſharply reproved. 
And ſo this Verſe contains their ObjeQion or Apology which Job 
© puts into their mouths,to which he makes a ſharp and ſuitable reply 
in the following Verſe. 
29 Be ye afraid of the ſword e ; for wrath bringerh 


the puniſhment of the ſword f,that ye may know g that 


* -*  #bere 45 a judgment þ. | 

: . ere. Of CO dteceble Jullgment to be inflitted on you which 
is called the ſword ; as Peut. 32.41, and oft elſewhere. Do nor pleafe 

. _. yourſelves with ſuch pretences and crafty evaſions, as if the blame 
' Were whollyin me, not in you: God will not be mocked by you; He 
ſees and will puniſh your moſt unrighteous and uncharitableJudge- 
ment of me, and dealing with me. f For that wrath or fury which 
is in your hearts,and breaks out of your lips againſt me,doth deſerve, 
and will certainly bring upon you zhe puniſbment ( Heb.puniſbents or 
zniquities : but iniquity 1s oft put for pun;ſhment ) of the ſword ; i e. a 
dreadful Judgment God. Or,without any Supplement,except 
that which is generally underſtood, for wrath ( that fin of Wrath or 
Rage againſt a Man.eſpecially againſt one in AﬀiQtion)is an iniquity 
(Heb.iniquities,the Plural number being uſed by way of aggravation; 

as Pſal.73.22.and elſewhere : Or,of the iniquities ; the Hebrew prefix 
Mem being here underſtood, as it is in many other places) of the 
ſword; 7. e+ one of thoſe iniquities whichule to be, or are fit to be 
iſhed by the ſword ; 3. e. by ſome eminent Judgment ; as Job 31+ 

19. An iniquity of the judges 1s an iniquity to be puniſhed by the judges, as 
our Tranſlation hath it- g The ſenſe is either, 1» This Admonition 

] now give you, that you may know itin time,and for your good, 
that you may ſeriouſly conſider and prevent it. Or,2. This Judg- 
ment will come upon you,that you may be taught by your own fad 
and coftly Exp?rience what you would not learn without it. hk ;.e. 
That there will be a time of Judgment when God will call Men to 
an account for all their hard Speeches and Miſcarriages, and parti- 
cularly for their raſh and uncharitable Cenfures of their Brethren, 
Mat. 7. I. Rom. Ito 4+ James 4. 11. either in this life, or at that laſt 
and dreadful Day of the general ReſurrefQion ( of which he ſpoke 
w. 25, &c. )and Judgment. God ſees and obſerves,and will judge 
all your words and ations, and therefore do not flatter your ſelves 


IS with vain hopes of a Ix" 4 


 . 


THT H A P. XX. | 
Zophar's Anſwer : The fate and portion of the wicked natwithfanding for 4 
time he may proſper and flouriſb, 1 29, : : 
; Hen anſwered Zophar the Naamathite, and ſaid, 
2 Therefore a, do my thoughts cauſe me to an- 


ſwer b, and for this I make haſte c. 

# For this thy ſevere Sentence and Denunciation of God's Judg- 
ments againſt us,Chap«19.29.which much more juſtly belongs to thy 
ſelf,and is aQually executed upon thee;and becauſe of thy Reproach- 
es, as it followeth, v. 3. 6 I thought to have troubled my ſelf and 
thee with no further Diſcourſes,conſfidering how exccptious and in- 

| corrigible thou art, but my thought; or conſideration of thy reproach. 

| ful words, force me to break ſilence, and fo anſwer thee as the mat- 

ter requires, c I ſpeak ſooner thanT intended, becauſe I am not 
able to contain my ſelf longer, and fear leſt I ſhould forget whar is 
in my mind. Poſlibly he interrupted Job, when he was proceeding 
further in his Diſcourſe, Or, be prevented ſome of his Brethren 
who made an offer to ſpeak. 


2 I have heardd the check of my reproach e and the 
ſpirit f out of my underſtanding g cauſeth me to an- 


WET Y8. 

d From thy mouth. Or, ſba# I hear ? to wit, with patience and 
with6ut a reply * Whocan endure it? e #. e. Thy ſbametuland op- 
{ obrious reproofs of us,as if weand all thyFriends were void of all 
Cater and natural affeftion towards thee, and were haters and 
cruel Perſecuters and even devourers of thee, Chap. 19.19,22. and as 
if we were guilty ofmoſt hainous Crimes, and might expe& God's 
Vengeance upon us- . f #. & My ſoul or Mind. g Or, becauſeof (for 
ſo the Hebrew Mer oft ſignifies ) my underſtanding; 7. e. Out of, or 
becauſe of that certain knowledge which I have of this matrer from 
ſtudy and experience : I have not ſpoken, and I ſhall not ſpeakout 
of ignorance, or prejudice, or paſſion and rage againſt Job, as he 
aſperſeth us, but only what I evidently know, and yet hope that I 
can and ſhall convince thee of. h i. e. Forceth me to ſpeak. Or, 
anſwereth for me ; i, e. either vindicates me againſt thy Calumnies ; 

or, ſuggeſteth an anſwcr to me- 
4 Knoweſt thou »ot this 5 of old &, ſince man was 


placeduponearth / ? 
| 7 7. e. This which I am now about to ſay : How canſt thou, thou I 
fay,who pretendeſt to ſuch an exa& anduniverſal knowledge ofmen 
and things, be ignorant of ſo notorious a thing which wicked men 
ſenſibly feel, ,and good men diligently obſerve,and all men are for- 
ced to acknowledge one time or other? & z. e.From the experience 
of all former Ages. 1 5. e. Since the World was made, and there 
were any men to obſerve God's Government of it; _ 

5 * That the triumphing of the wicked #is + ſhort », 


 * Pſal. 37- { : 
35, 36. and the joy of the hypocrite » but for a moment ? 
= 4:55 2 Heb. Is from near ; 3. e. from, or for a little time : They have 
From mear. ror long enjoyed it, and it will ſhortly vaniſh. » This he adds by 
- way of refleQion upon Job, who though he did clear himſelf from 
groſs wickedneſs, yer might be guilty of deep hypocriſie. 
* Tſa.ig. 6 * Though his excellency mount up cothe heavens 


63 14 0, and his head reach unto the f clouds : 


£ 43-4: © eThough he be adyanced to great Digmuty and Authority in the 
Heb. Q 
cloud, 


- =_ 
i al OI. . —_—_— 
Wo Gere — cvs Sy waa; = ww 5; - 7  3* 


World. | 


J 0 B. 


7 Yet he ſhall periſh for ever, like his own dung ?; 
they which have ſeen him 9 fhall ſay, where 5s he x > 

þ Which men caſt away with contempt and abhorrency.Compare 
I Kings 14. 10. & 2 Kings 9. 37, 9q With admiration at his felicity, 
r #. e. He is no where to be found ; he is utterly loſt and GONE. 

8 He ſhall fly away * as a dream 5s, and (ball nor be "PL.73.20, 
found * : yea, he ſhall be chaſed away as a viſion of the 
night He 

s Which forthe preſent makes a great ſhew and noiſe, and high 
Iy affeAs the Fancy, but hath nothing ſelid nor permanent in jr : 
for as ſoon as the man awakes, all vanitheth, and the rememb1 ance 
of it'is quickly loſt. * The man will be utrerly loſt and gone tove- 
ther with all his riches and glory. « Which appears to a man in 
the night and in his ſleep, 

9 * Theeye allo which ſaw him, ſhall ſee him no + 
more, neither ſhall his place any more behold him x. 

x 7, & It ſhall not acknowledge nor contain him. A figure cal- 
Proſopopeis, as Job 7. 10. Or. neither ſhall it ( 5. e. the Eye laſt men- 
tioned ) behold him any more in þ#u place. 

Io || His children ſhall ſeek to pleaſe the poor y, and | Or, 4, 
his hands (hall reſtore their goods z. Poor ſhal 

3 Either 1. To get ſome ſmall relief from them in their extream Preſs his 

neceſliry. Orrather,2,Leſt they ſhould revenge themſelves of them ; *#'laren, 
for the great and many Injuries which their Father did them ; or 
ſeek ro the Magiſtrate for Reparations. s By the Sentence of the 
Judge, to whom the oppreſſed Poor will appeal, notwithſtanding 
all their entreaties and endeavours to diſſwade them from ſo doing, 
11 His bones @ are full of the ſis of his youth 5, 
which (ball lie down wich him in the duſt, 
a 1. e. Hiswhole Body, even the ſtrongeſt parts of it, which may *Ch.13.26 
ſeem moſt remote from danger. b Heb. Of his youth ; 3. e. of his Pal. god, 
youthful Pleaſures and Luſts,by a Meronomy of the ſubje&, And this 
may beunderſtood either, s. Of the fins themſelves; that he thall 
perſevere in his youthful Lufts even in old Age, and ſhall die with- 
out Repentance. Or rather, 2, Of the punithment of his ſins, of 
whic!. he is ſpeaking both in the foregoing and following Verſes. 
He ſhall feel the ſad effeQts of thoſe ſins in his riper years,as riotous 
linners commonly do ; and, as it follows, attended him to his 
Grave. Or, with his ſecret ways or ſins, as others render it.Where- 
by he poſſibly intimates, thar Job, though he appeared righteous 
before others, yet was guilty of ſome ſecret wickedneſs for which 
God was now reckoning with him. 

12 Though wickedneſs beſweet in his mouth c,though 
he hide it under his rengue « ; 

c 7, e. Tohis taſte ; though it greatly pleaſe him for the preſent 
a As an Epicure dotha ſweer Mortel, which he is loath to ſwallow, 
and therefore keeps and rolls it about his mouth that he may longer 
enjoy the pleaſure of it. Though he be highly pleaſed with 1s Luits, 
and cleave to themin hearty love, and reſolve to hold them faſt, 
and improve them to the greateſt delight and advantage. 

I3 Though he ſpare ite, and forſake it not, but keep 
it ſtill f within his mouth f, ; 

e 4. e. Will notpartwith it; or gratifie and obey it, in ſtead of u Heb - 
ſubduing and morrtifying it- f To ſuck out all the {weetneſs or be- '* milhf 
nefit of it ; though it be very delightful ro him. bis put 

I4 Yer his meat in his bowels is turned'g ; 7t is the 
gall of aſps h within him. 

g Into another nature or quality, from ſweet to bitter. h i.e.Ex- 
eceding bitter and pernicious. Gall is moſt bitter; the Gall of Ser- 
pents 1s full of Poyton, which from thence is conveyed to their 
mouths by Veins, as Pliny obſerves; and the poyſon of Aſps is moſt 
dangerous, and within a few hours kills without remedy. 

i5 He hathſwallowed down riches and he ſhall vo- 


mit them up again z: God ſhall caſt them out of his bel- 
ly &. 

7 1,'e. Be forced toreſtore them with great ſhame and torment, as 
Gluttons ſometimes do loath, and with griefand pain caſt up that 
Meat which they have caten and ſwallowed down with much greedi- 
neſs and delight» k If no Man's hand can reach him, God {ſhall 
find him out, and puniſh him ſeverely. : 

16 He ſhall ſuck the poylon of aſps /, the vipers 
tongue m ſhall ſlay him. 

7 That which he hath greedily and induſtriouſly ſucked in as plea- 
fant and wholſom Nouriſhment, ſhall in the iſſue be as ungratcful 
and deſtruftive to himas the poyſon or head ( for the H=brew word 
ſignifies both, and the poyſon lyes in the head ) of 4ſps would be to 
one that ſucketh it. » Together with its Teeth,in which the Poy- 
ſon lurks, which it conveys by biting a Man. 

17 He ſhall not ſee » the rivers, || the flouds, the 


brooks of honey and ||butter o. | Or, 

2 i. e. Not enjoy, asthar word is oft uſed ; as Pſzlm 196, 5. Eccl. ſrean' 
2.1. 0 That abundant fatisfa&tion and comfort ( oft ſignified by 6rw#. 
theſe or ſuch like Metaphors ; as, Pſal. 36.8. 46. 5-1/a. 7.15, 22: [Or,009 
& 41. 18. )either which he promiſed ro himſelf from that great E- 
ſtate which he had got by deceit and oppreſſion; or which good 
men through God's blefſing may and commonly do enjoy, 

18 That which he laboured for p, ihall he reſtore, 
and ſhall not ſwallow it down q : f according to his 
ſubſtance 5hall the reſtitution be r, and he ſhall not re- 
joyce therein s. the (+. 

Þ Heb.Laboxr ; 7. e. the Goods which were gotten with labour,et- g,,vyl 


Ch. 7.8, 
I'0, 

Pſ.73.36, 
& 103. 16, 


X 


+ Heb 
PR n4 v 


ther 1. By the labour of others ; or rather, 2. By his own Jabour : ,,,1ay. 
Which may relate as well to the Goods of others, which he gotnot 
without pains and difficulty;or to his own Goods honeſtly gotren by 
the ſwear of his Brows. And this is an aggravation of his Milery hat 
he was forced to reſtore not only other mens Goods which were 12: 
his hands, but his own alſo to make reparation for their damages. 
q To wit, ſoas to hold it ; for otherwiſe he did ſwallow it, but 
withaldid ſpeedily vomit it up again, v. 15. which was as if he bad 
not ſwallowed it He ſhallnor poſſeſs it long, nor to any conſider 
ble purpoſe. # ive, He ſhall beforced to part with all his Eſtate to 


make . 


Chap. Xx, 


«13.26 
. 9948, 


Heb. i 
ve mid o 
's palntt 


Chap: 


Heb. 
eruſbed, 


* Fecleſ. 
$, 13, I5, 
#Heb- 
know? 


| Or,there 
ſhall be 


none Jeft fe or 


his meat. 


| Or, trou- 
bleſom, 


311dgment. g This Phraſe notes both the -.uthor of his Plagues, 
{zxod, and he nature and quality of them, that they ſhall come v- | 
pon him like rain ; 7. e. with great vehemency, and fo as he cannot - 


h As uc fell upon thy Sons, Chap» b 18, 19g. : 


"If.24. 18, 
Jr.48 43. 
Amos5.r9 


f Heb. the 
lightning 
x6 
ah, 4. 
Hab gg 
*Ch18.11 


"6. 


d.0.6 


make compenſation for his Wrongs done to others. 5 5. e. He ſhall 
not enjoy what he had gotten, -becauſe ir ſhall be taken from him. 


19 Becauſe hehath + oppretſed,and bath forſaken the 
poor t ; becauſe he hath violently taken away an houſe 


which he built not «, ES 

# By his Oppreſſion he brought men to utter Poverty, and then 
forſook or left them in that forlorn eſtate, affording no Mercy nor 
Help to them. Or,ſome he made poor by hisOppreſlion,and others 
that were poor he ſuffered to perith for want of that Relict which 
he ſhould and might have afforded them ; which is a crying fin in 
God's fight, aud one of thoſe fins for which God deſtroyed Sodom, 
Exck. 16+ 49. and therefore fitly mentioned here as one of the fins 
for which God puniſhed this wicked man. Or, He oppreſſeth- and 
leaveth poor ; as Bro::ghton renders it. # i.e. Which was none of 
his. Hcb. Hz hath violently takin away an houſe, and ( or, but ) dd 
not build ( or, reparr, as building is oft uſed ):t; ro wit, that Houſe 
for his own uſe ;-1. e. he did not build or poſſeſs that Houſe as he 
intended to do, but was cur off by God's hand before he could en- 
joy the fruit of his Oppreſſons : EE 

20 * Surely he thall not | feel quietneſs in his belly 
x ; he ſhall not favg of that which he deliredy. 

x i. e. He ſhall have no peace nor ſatisfa&tion in his mind in all his 
Gains, partly becauſe of his perpetual fears and expeCtations of the 
Wrath of God and Man, which his guilty Conſcience knoweth that 
he deſerves : and partly becauſe they ſhall be ſpeedily taken away 
from him He fti}l continueth che Metaphor ofa Glutton, whoſe 
Belly is not quiet untilf it hath vomited up that wherewith he had 
oppreſſed it; y 7. e. Any part of his good and delireable things,but 
he ſhall forfeit and loſe them all. . 

21 || There ſhall none of his meat be left z, therefore 
ſhali no man look for his goods 4. 

z For his own future uſe ; bur he ſhall be ſtript of all. # It be- 
ing publickly known and obſerved that he was totally ruined,none 
of his Kindred or Friends ſhal trouble themſclves to ſeek for anyRe- 
licks of his Eſtate,as is uſually done after mens deaths.But this Verſe 
is and may be rendred otherwiſe : There ſhal none be left for hus meat 
(7. e. he ſhail leave no Heir who ſhall poſſeſs or enjoy his Goods ) 
becauſe ( for ſo the Hebrew Particle 4l-chenis oft uſed ; as Gen. 39.26. 
Num. 14. 43. Pſalm 42, 7. Jer. 48. 36. ) none of bus goods ſhall remain, 
either fr bis Heir, or any other ; all ſhall be utrerly loſt. ; 

22In the fuineſs of his ſufficiency he ſhall be in ſtraits 
þ: every hand of che || wicked c ſhall be upon him. 
b In the height of Proſperity and Abundance he ſhall be diſtreſſed 


and tormented cither by the horrovrs of an unquiet Mind and guilty , 
Conſcience, woich makes him every moment expe& Divine Venge- | 


ance to fall upun his head : Or rather,becauſe of the ſudden and un- 
expe&ted Aſſault of oth-r men combining againſt him, and ſpoiling 
ail his Goods,as it follows.cWho lives by injury and the ſpoiling of 
others,and by God's Providence are direR&ed to fallupon him.Or,*f 


7 OD B. 


the labourer, whoſe wages poſſibly he harh detained ; Or, of ſuch as 


are in trobls or miſery, as this word ſignifies, Job 3. 20- who may 
jo''ntly invade him,cither becauſe their neceſſity tempts and drives 
them to ſpoil others ; or rater becauſe they were ſuch as had been 


brought into their Calamity by his Oppreſlions, and therefore now |, God, which he would hereby intimate, that they were not ſuch 


take R<parations from zim 


that part. Tt 1s probable he mentions this in reference to the like 
expreſſioivaf Job, Chap. +6. 13+ q Into which it had entred, and 
wherewith ifwas co'cured, r To wit, the Terrours of Death; be» 
cauſe he perceived by the tinEtvre of his Gall upon the Weapon, that 
his wound was mmcurable. Or Horrcurs of Conſcience, becaute he 
cannot hve, and dare not die. | 

26 All darkneſs sſhafl behid t in his ſecret places « : 
a fire not blown (ball conſume him ; it thall go ill 
with him that is left in his tabernacle y. 

s 2. e. All ſorts of Miſeries both of Soul and Pcdy, and Eftate. 
t Or, is hid or la:d wp ; to wit, by God for him. This Phraſe may 
note, That though it be not a&ually upon him,yet it is reſerved and 


overtake him. « Either 1. in his kid treaſures, as this very word 
!1gnifies, P/. 17 14. He treatures up wealth, and with God's wrath 
and curſe, Or 2.in thole places where he confidently hopes to hide 
and ſecure hinfelf from ali evils and enemics : yet even there God 
ſball find him out- Or, for, or in #erdof ( or with,tor both ways the 
prefix Lamed is oft uſed ) his hid tr:aſurzs x To wit, by man; bur 
kindled by God himfelf,as that was, Cha 1. 16. He thinks by his 
might and violence to ſecure himſelf from Men, but God by his 
own immediate hand, or in ſome unknown ard nnexpetted manner 
will find him out. Some underſtand it of hell-fire ; of which ſee 
Iſa. 30. 33. i. e. With his toſterity or Family, who ſhall inherit 
his Curſe as well as his Eſtate. 
27 * The heaven ſhall reveal his iniquity z, and the 

earth « (ball riſe up againſt him. | 

2 7. e. God ſhall bea ſwift witneſs againſt him by ſome extraor- 
dinary Judgments ; ſtill he refle&s upon Jeb's Caſe, and the Fire 
from Heaven, Chap. 1. 4 z. e. All Creatures upon Earth ſhall con- 
ſpire with God to deſtroy him. 

28 Theencreaſe of his houſe þ ſhall depart c, and his 

goods ſhall flow away 4d in the day of his wrath e. 

b Either 1. his Poſterity ; or rather, 2. his Eſtate got by the 1a- 


ken away from him: See 2 K-ugs 20, 179, & Like Waters; to wit, 
ſwittly and ſtrongly, and ſo as ro return no more. e 7. e. Of God's 
wrath ; when God ſhall come to execute Judgment upon him. 


29 * This ;s the portion ofa wicked man from God f; 


and the heritage + appointed unto him g by God. 
f Who like a wiſe Maſter ofa Feaſt gives to every Man his preper 
Portion,andasa juſt Judge diſtributes to him according to his deſerts. 


g Heb. the heritage ( 4, e. the Portion, as before ; called here an heri= 
zage ; partly tonore the ſtability and afſurance ofir, that it is as firm 
as an [nheritanceto the right Heir ; and partiy in oppoſition to that 
Inheritance which he had got:en by fraud and violence ) of his word; 
either 1. Of God's Wors, z. e. which is allotted ro him by the Word 
or Sentence of God. Or, 2» Of the wicked man's word, the reward 
of his ſpeeches ; which, like his aCtions, are and may well be pre- 
ſumed to be wicked and blaſphemous, and many ways offenſive to 


. God: And he inſtanceth in his ſpeeches rather than his a&ions, to 


22 When hs 1s about to fill his belly 4, Gode (ball caſt 


thz tury of his wrath f upon him, and ſhall rain i#upon 
him g while he isecating -. | 
di. e, When ke hath enough and abundance to fatisfie all his Ap- 


petites, and hall deſign to take the pleaſure of all his Gains, and to 


ſpend his days in Epicuritm and Senſuality: e Who is oft under- ' 


{tood in this Book where he is not expreſſed; and fo he is here as ap- 
pears from the following words;becauſe there is no other perſon here 
expreſſed, who was to inili& theſe evils upon him; and becauſe they 
are ſaid to be rammed down wpon him ; which implies their comi''g 
from Heaven, or from God. f Some dreadful and deftrudtive 


p:event or avo1. It. 
Compare P/alm 78. 30, 31s 


24 * He ſhall flee from the iron weapon s, and the 
bow & of ſteel / ſhall ſtrike him through m». 


W—_— 


[4 
i 


z 1-e. From the Sword or Spear ; and ſo ſhall thing himſelf out of / 


danger. k An Arrow ſhort out of a Bow. A diſtantplace and un- 
known hand ſhal unexpegedly fall upon him ; So that he ſhall only 
go from one «anger t-» anothor. 1 Which is of great ſtrength, and 
therefore ſendeth forth the Arrow with greater force, Compare 
Pſal. 18. 24 Or, of braſs, as the word properly ſignifies : which 


the Ancients did ſo temper and harden, that their Bows were com- | 


monly made of it. m2 7. e. Mortally wound him. 


25 Itis drawn» and cometh out of the body o yea, 
f the gliſtering ſword p cometh out of his gall q;z * cec- 


'rors are upon him 7. 


z Either 1. a Sword, which may be underſtood out of this Hebrew * 
. Verb, which is for the moſt part uſed of that Weapon ; as Num. 22. 


23, 31. Jud.$. 20. &c. and out of the following Branch of the Verſe. 
Or 2.the Arrow laſt mentioned, which had entred into his Body,and 
now was drawn out of iteitaer by himſelf, or by ſome other perſon; 
as 1s frequent in thar caſe, if peradventure he might be cured. o Or, 
out of his body ; i. e. the body of the wounded man; as appears both by 
the next Clauſe of the Verſe. which is added to explain the former; 
Whereit is, out of his gall : and fromthe uſe of this Hebrew word, 
which ſignifiesa man's body or carkaſs; as Judges 14. 8. 1Sam 31.12. 
Iſa. 5 25. Nahum. 3.3. p The word properly ſignifies lightning, and 
thence a gliſtering weapon, the bright Sword or Spear ; as Deut. 32. 41. 
Ezek. 21.10,15- Nah. 3« 3. Hab, 3. 1x Whereby it is implyed,that he 
was doubly wounded ; firſt, by the Arrow, and then to make more 
ſure work, with the Sword or Spear thruſt into him. Bur the word 
may as well iignifie the bright and ſharp point of an arrow, of which 
he ſpoke hith-rto ; and vaving in the genera! ſaid, that it came out of 
b# body, now he determines the part of the body, che gall; which 


| 


meet with J0,who, tho' he had made ſome colourable excuſes for his 
act.ons, yet was manifeſtly guiity of hard and ſinful ſpeeches againſt 


harmleſs and excuſable things as ob pretended, as appeared by theſe 
ſevere Judgments which they brought upon wicked men. 


C H A P. XXI. 
Job's Reply ; he complaineth net to man, in whoſe judgment he hath moſt 
reaſon to grieve ; but exciteth their attentionto conumcing and amazing 
truths, x ——— G6 The wickea proſper till in their pride they fear not 
God, 7 15 yet he purgeth himſelf from their counſel, and ac«= 
knowledgeth that often their deſtrafion from God is manifeſt, at leaft in 
their children, 16 =n=——_ 21. God is righteous in both caſes, and both 
ave alike in their death, 22 — 26 The wicked are indeed 
reſerved for deſftruftion, bur who dareth mw mithfland them ; 
and in the grave they are at reft, whether all others follow them, 


$7 34 
Ut Fob anſwered and ſaid, 
2 Hear diligently my ſpeech,and let this be your 
conſolations 4. | 
a Or, This ſball be your conſolations ; 7. e. I ſhall accept of your pa- 
rient and diligent attention to me in ſtead of all thoſe contolations 


which you owel to me in this condition, and which I expetted 
from you. 


3 Suffer me that I may ſpeak 5, and after that I have 
ſpok:n, * mock on c. 


c If Ido not defend my Cauſe with ſolid and convincing Argu= 
ments, go on 1n your ſcoffs if you p'eaſe. 


4 As for me; is my complaint to man 4? and if is 
were ſo e, why ſhould not my ſpirit be + troubled 


and of : And this queſſion implies a Denial, or that his Complaintis 
not to,or of man; tro wit,on'y, but to, or of God ; as is here ſuffici= 
ently implied, and oft elſe where expreſſed by Job in this Book. So 
the ſenſe ſerms to be either 1. this, I do not make my moan Or Com= 
plaint unto, or expect relief from you, or from any men,but from 
God only : and therefore you have reaſon patiently to hear "me when 
I am pouring forth my Complaints ro God. Or rather 2. this. Do 
I only complain,or have Treaſon to complain only of you,and your 
uumerciful carriage to me z or of men who have dealt barbarouſly 
with me ? Chap 1. and 3o. 1.9. &«. Surely no: But my Complaint 
is of God,and of his hard and ſevere dealing with me. Tris he who 
hath alienated my Friends affeQions from me, and ſtirred up mine 
enemies againſtme., , And though it hath been my chiet care and 
buſineſs ro pleaſe and ſerve him, ver he hath alſo ſethimſelf againſt 
me, and ſhor all his Arrows into me. And therefore my Expoſtu« 


 Jarions with him (which here follows,v 7.) is the more reaſonable ; 


and if you will hear me calmly and patiently, you will find that L 
have cauſe of complaining.z.e. Ifmy Complaint were only of Man 
I have cauſe to be troubled. Or,if it be ſo,z.e: If Ido not complain 
of Man, but of God,it is no wonder if mySpirit be greatly oppreſſed 


lheweth that the Wound was both deep and deadly, as they are in j and you ought to allow me the Iiberty of eaſing my troubled mind, 


+ G4 and ' 


Chap. Ad 


treaſured up for him,and is kept as in a ſure place,and thall infallibly | 


bour, and employed for the uſe ofhis Family. c Shall be loſt or ta- 


f Heb 
4 His decree 
from God. 


*Ch:16410 
b Wirhout ſuch interruption as you have giveri me, Chap. 20; 3 & 17+ 2- 


2 _ Ff Heb. 
d Or, of man ; for the prefix Lamed commonly ſignifieth 4. to ſbortnedi 


*Ch. 1 
18, 19. 


*Ch.27.1 


ap. XXI. 
and modeſtlypleading my Cauſe before God. f Heb, be ſbortned or 
fraitned;; i. e. either grieved, or vexed, as this word ſignifies, Exoa- 
6 9. Numb. 21. 5. Judges 10. 16. & 16+ 16. The heart 1s enlarged 
by joy, and contrafted by ſorrow ; as appears by Philoſophy and 
Experience. 8 

-þ.lzok 5 f Mark me, and be aſtoniſhed g, and lay your 

me. hand upon your mouth. h. 

g Coniider what Iam about to ſay concerning the wonderful Pro- 
ſperity of the worſt of Men, and the intolerable Preflures of ſome 
good Men, ſuch as I have manifeſted, and ſhall prove that Tam,and 
it is able to fill you that are but SpeRators, with aſtoniſhment and 
horrour at the Grange and myfterious courſe of Divine Providence 
herein: and therefore it is no wonder, if I who ſuffer ſuch things 
from that God whom I have fo faithtully ſerved, am overwhelmed 
with the ſenſe of it. þ z. e Be filent, as this Phraſe is oft uſed, as 
Chap. 40. 4. Prov. 10. 32+ Mich. 7. 16. for ſhame forbear to vex me 
with your words: Or, you will lay, &c. the Imperative being pur 
for the Future, as is uſual, I am perſwaded you will be filenced and 
cenvinced by what I hall fay. 

6 Even when I remember z, Iam afraid, and trem- 


bling taketh hold on my fleſh. 
 # What I have partly obſerved,and-partly felt of theſe things. The 
very remembrance of what is paſt, fills me with dread and horrour. 


ch. 12:6. we * Wherefore & do the wicked live /, become old »», 


17-10 yea, are, mighty in power ? 
73*3-12  þ He expoſtulares this matter partly with his Friends ; if things 
Er 12: 5* be as you {ay, how comes this to paſs,&c.partly with God himſels; 
12Þ.1:16. \yhercfore doth the righteous God diſtribute things ſo unequally? 
I TowitJong and happily ; as living is ofttaken,as Lev. 18.5. r Sam, 
10. 24. & 45.6. Pſal. 38.19- 4 painful and afflicted life being a kind of 
death, and oft ſo called. as Peur. 3o. 15, 19. Prov. 15. 10. & 19. 16. 
x Cor. 3. 22. & 15. 31. 92 To wit, in their proſperous eſtate. 

8 Their ſeed » is eſtabliſhed » in their ſight q with 


them, and their off-ſpring before their eyes. 
= Either 1. the Fruits of their Ground : Or,rather 2. their Chil- 
dren ; asit is explained in the next Branch of the Verſe, the words 
both here and there uſed, being commonly ſo underſtood.s i e. They 
multiply and proſper greatly. p Which is a greataddition to their 
ppineis. 
FHeb. are 9 Their houſes + are 
ze from of God upon them 9. | 
h 9g They neither fear nor feel any diſturbance. : 
to Their bull gendreth and faileth not,their cow cal- 


veth, and cafteth not her calf. 
1x They ſend forth their lictle ones like a flock r,and 


their children dance. 

'» Of Sheep or Goats, as the word ſignifies; in great numbers,and 
with ſweet concord : which is a ſingular delight to them and to 
their Parents, ; 

12 They take the timbre] and harp; and rejoyce at 


the ſound of the organ. 
13 They ſpend theirdays || in wealths, andin a mo- 
ment # go down to the 7 grave. 

s In good; 5. e, in the enjoyment of all the good things of this life, 
without any mixture of evil. # They do not die of a lingring and 
tormenting Diſeaſe, as I now, and many other good Men die, but 
ſuddenly and ſweetly like Lambs ; as is uſually faid in ſuch caſes. 
. 14 * Therefore x they ſay y unto God, Depart from 

Ch 22176 for we deſire not the knowledge of thy laws z. 
' x Becauſe of their conſtant Proſperity. Heb. 41d : or Jer. Tho' 
God be ſo gracious to them, yet they ſay and do thus to him. 
9 Sometimes in words, but commonly in their thoughts and affeEti- 
ons, and the language of their lives: See Plalm 14. 1, & 36. r, 2. 
Mal. 3. 14, +5, Tit. 1.16. 2 Much leſs the Praftiſe. 
| 15 What 5s the Almighty 4 that we would ſerve 
'*Ch.35:3-him? and * what profit ſhould we have, ifwe pray un- 
*3:14- to him ? | | 
a Whart excellency is there in him ? and what advantage have 


we, or can weexpet from him? : 
16 Lo, their good js not in their hand 5 : the coun- 


ſel of the wicked is far from mec. F 

b This ſeems to be an anſwer to the foregoing Queſtion and a Con- 
futation of that ungodly opinion and praiſe, v. 14, 15. wicked men 
( faith he ) have no reaſon to negle& and reje& God, becauſe of their 
Proſperity, for their good ; 3. e. all their Wealth and Felicity,is not in 
their hand ; 3. e. it neither was obtained, nor can be kept, by their 
own might, but only by God's power and favour, upon whom they 
wholly depend for it. Or, the ſenſe is, Though they have Riches, 
and Power, and Glory in their hands, yer their true and proper good 
is not in their hand : i. e. They are deſtirute of that in which their 
true happineſs lies ; to wit, in God's love and favour; and all the 
Comforts which they enjoy are attended withGod's wrath and curſe, 
and therefore not to be envied by any man in his wits. They ſay to 
God, depart from ws, when indeed their true and only felicity conſiſts 
in the enjoyment of him. Compare P/al. 4. 6.7. c Therefore I 
am far from approving their Opinion, or following their courſe, 
or enjoying their Proſperity, or deſiring to partake of their Deli- 
cates upon ſuch terms. 
7 How oft 4 is the ||candle e of the wicked put out? 


I 
and bow oft cometh their deſtruction upon them ? God f 


diftributeth ſorrows in his anger. 

d This Phraſe notes, either 1. The rarity and ſeldomneſs of it. 
This, I confeſs, ſometimes happens, butnot ofr- Or rather,2.The 
frequency of it ; I'grant thar this happens ofr,though not conſtantly, 
as you affirm. And this ſeems beſt to agree both with the uſe of this 
Phraſein Scriprure, where it notes frequency ; as Pſal. 78. 40. Mat: 
38. 21. Luke. 13, 34. and neverſeldomneſs ; and with the foregoing 

' words, as a reaſon why thecounſel of the wicked was far from him ; be- 
| | cauſe they oft-rimes pay dear for it in this life, and alwayes in the 
* next life; and with the following Verſes, wherein he diſcourſeth 


\Jargey, not of the Proſperity of the wicked(as he thould hare done, 
1 


ſafe from fear, neither is the rod 


I] Or, i*= 
mirth. 


+ Heb hel. 


] I Or,levp. 


7 O B. 


4 the Angels, he juagerh them, 7. e. he exatly knows them, and accord- 


if the ſenſe of theie words were this, that ſuch were b 
| afliQed ) but of their Calamities.- e Or, lamp; 5. e, - uf Some 
outward happinels ; as Chap, 18. 6. 2 Sam. 21. 17. Pal 132. 17 
f Who is manifeſtly underſtood out of the following words, this 
being God's work, and proceeding from God's anger. 

18* They are as ſtubble before the wind, and as chaff . .... 
that the ſtorm carrieth away g ? This 
£ i.e. Their deſtru{ion ſhall be ſpeedy,and certain,& irrecoverable. Ifs aq 
19 God layeth up + || his iniquity # * for his children: Hor 
he rewardeth him, and he ſhall know it &. t Heb. 

þ To wit, in his Treaſures, Rom. 2. 5. # Orratber, the puniſhment Fealeth 
of his iniquity ; z.e. He will puniſh him both in his Perſon and in his 9%) 
Pofterity. & z.e. He ſhall live to ſee the deſtruKtion ofhis Children, || That is, 

20 His eyes ſhall ſee his deſtruction /, and * he ſhall *** 2b 
drink #2 of the wrath of the Almighty. Poet th 

] 3. e. He ſhall be deſtroyed; astoſee death ; is to die, Pſal. 89. y8, * i ; 
Heb.11.5.and to ſee affiifion, or any kind of evil, is to feel it, Pſalm. go, * wo 
I5. Lam. 3.1. and :oſee good, isto enjoy it, Chap, 7. 7. & g. 25. Pſal. J 154, 
34+ 12. Orthis Phrafe may be empharical, he thall foreſee his 1yin 
haſtening rowards him, and not be able to prevent or avoid it : he 
ſhall ſenſibly feel himſelf ſinking and periſhing : which aggravates 
his miſery. m Not ſip or taſte, but rink; which word commonly 
notes the abundance of the thing ſpoken of. | | 

21 For what pleaſure bach he in his houſe after him », 
when the number of his months is cut off in the 
midft o ? 

» Or, for what deſire, or'care, or ſludy hath he for, or concerning ( as 
Beth 1s oft uſed ) his houſe, i. e. his Childrens When heis dead and 
gone he caresnot what becomes of his Children, as irreli 910N Ccom- 
monly makes men unnatural : he is not concerned nor afte&ed with 
their felicity or miſery. See Chap. 14. 211 And therefore God doth 
puniſh both him and his Children,whilſt he lives, v. 19,20. Or thus: 
W har delight can he take in the thoughts of the glory and happineſs 
of his Poſterity, when he finds that he is dying a violentand untime* 
ly death ? So this is a farther proof that this man is neither happy 
in himſelf, nor with reference to his Poſterity. o When that num- 
ber of Months, which by his Conſtitution and the Courſe of Na- 
ture, he might have lived, is diminithed 'and cut off by the hand 
of Violence. 

22 Shall any teach God knowledge p ? ſeing hejudg- +ICo.n, 
eth thoſe q that are high. & 45. 9. 

p i. e. Diſcretion, or how to govern the World ? For ſo you do, Rom-11. 
whilſt you tell him that he muſt not ſorely afflict the godly,nor give 34: 
the wicked much and long proſperity here. q Either 1. The higheſt 1Cor.2,16 
Perſons, whether in Earth, as the greateſt Kings ; or in Heavens 


er.2F.15, 
Rev.14.19 
& I9, 15, 


ingly gives Sentence concerning them, as he ſees fit ; and therefore 
it 15 great folly and preſumption in vs to dire or corre& hisJudg- 
ments: Or, 2. Thoſe things that are high, and deep, and far out of 
our reach, as Gods ſecret Counſels and Judgments are. | 

23 Oner diethfF inhis full ſtrength 5s, being wholly +144, 
at eaſe and quiet. burr. 

7 To wit, either r. One of theſe wicked men,of whoſe conditi- fefim.nin 
on he is here ſpeaking. Or, 2. Any one man, whether good or the rai 
bad.  s In a ſtate of perfe& Health, and Strength, and Proſperity ; #f # n+ 
all which this Phraſe implies. | feflim, 

24 His || breaſts s are full of milk, and his bones are | 9: 
moiſtened with marrow *. DT 

s The Hebrew word is not elſewhere uſed, and therefore it is di- 
verſly tranſlated ; either 1, Breaſts. Bur that ſeems ver improper 
here, becauſe mens Breaſts do not uſe to be filled with Milk. Or, 
2.Milk-Pails. But their fulneſs is common, and no ſign of eminent 
Pleary,which is here deſigned. Belides, the following Branch, which 
in Job and elſewhere frequently explains the former, implies that it 
ſignifies ſome part of man's body, as all the ancient Interpretersren- 
der it, either the ſides, as ſome of them have it, or the bowels, as 0 
thers. Bur for the following Mzk, they read 7at ; the Hebrew Let- 
ters being exaQtly the ſame in both words : and the Hebrews by 
the name of Mi/kdo oft underſtand Far. t& Which is oppoſed to the 
dryneſs of the bones, Job 3o. 3o. Pſal. 102 3. which is cauſed by Old 
Age, or grievous Diſtempers or Calamities. 

25 And another «dieth in the bitterneſs of hisſoul x, 
and never eateth with pleaſure y. 

v Either 1 Another wicked man. Or, 2. Any other man pro- 
miſtuouſly conſidered, either good or bad. So hereby he thews how 
indifferently, and alike, God deals the Concerns of this Life to one 
and another, to good and bad, So heſhews that tt ere is a great 
variety in Gods diſpenſations; that he diſtributes great proſperity 
to one, and great Afﬀfiiftionsto another no worſe than he, according 
ro his wife but ſecret Ceunſel. x 7. e, with heart-breaking painsand 
Sorrows. yz. e; Hath no pleaſure.in his life, no not ſo much as at 
mea]-time, when men uſually are moſt free and pleaſant. 

27 They ſhall lie down alike in the duſt z, and the 
worms ſhall cover them. 

z All theſe Worldly Differences are ended by Death,and they lie 
in the Grave without any diftin&ion,till the time of General Reſur- 
re&ion and Judgment comes. So that no man can rell who is good, 
and who is bad by any Events which befall them in this Life. | 

26 Behold, I know your thoughts 4,and the devices 
b which ye wrongfully imagine c againſt me 9. 

a I perceive what youthink,and will obje&,and fay for your own 
defence. b Or, evil thoughts, for ſo this word is oft uſed, as Prov. 
12- 2. & 14.17. & 24.8. 1/a. 32. 7. 6c Or, wreft, or violently force. Fcr 
they ſtrained both Job's words, and their own thoughts, which 
were byaffed by their Prejudice and Paſſion againſt 7984. &d For I 
know very well that your Diſcourſes, though they be of wicked 
men in the general, yet are particularly levelled at me. 


28 For ye ſay e, where js the houſe of che princef ? 4b 
and where ore | the dwelling-places of the wicked g ? 7m fi 


e Towit, in your minds. f7:.e. It isno where,it is loſt and gone. Tabern®* þ 
This is ſpoken either i.OfJ6b,or his eldeſt Son, whoſe houſe God had of rhe W 


lately gyerthown, Or rather, 2, In gzneral of wicked Princes Or ed, 
Poteatates, 


Chap. XXL. F 


29. 5, 
13:3, 


— . . a 


#8 


tran 


10.1}, 


45. 9. 
m.11, 


072,16 


Teb. in 
verypera 
100.0 in 
firength 
V1s Pere 

100, 


Jr, milk 


| < ef XXII 
b 


fP,0.16-4: 


+ Heb. the 


day of 
Wrath? 


+ Heb. 
Graves, 
f Heb, 
watch in 


the hiapre 


_ THeb: 


Pal 


good 
ſucceſs des 
end 


7 (4 


a? 


Potentates, as the following Anſwer ſheweth.So the meaning of the 
queſtion is, That it was apparent from common obſervation, that 
eminent Judgments, even 1n this Life, were ſooner or later the por- 
tion ofall ungodly men. g Which is added to limit the former 
Expreſſion, and to ſhew that he ſpake only of wicked Princes. 

29 Have ye not asked them that go by the way 4 ? 


and do ye not know their tokens i ? | 
h Theſe are the words, either 1.Of Job's Friends, who thus con- 
tinue their former Diſcourſe by a ſecond Enquiry : Orrather,2. Of 
Job himſelf, who anſwers one queſtion with another. You may learn 
this, which is the matter of our debate, to wit, that good men are 
oft afflicted, and that wicked men do commonly live-and die in great 
Proſperity, and are not puniſhed in this World, even from them that 
go by the way, 3. e. either from Travellers, who having ſeen and ob- 
ſerved many Perſons, and Places, and: Events, are more capable 
Judges of this matter ; or from any Perſon that paſleth along the 
High-way,from every one that you meet with.Itis ſo vulgar and tri- 
vial a thing, that no man of common ſenſe is ignorant of it. 2 z. e. 
The Examples, or Evidences, or Signs of this truth, which they that 
go by the way can produce. They will ſhew here and there in di- 
vers places the goodly Houſes and Caſtles, and other Monuments 
of Power and Dignity, which wicked Potentates have ere&ted, and 
to this day do poſleſs, and in which divers of them live and die. He 
alludes here to thoſe Tokens which are ſet up in High-ways for the 
dire&ion of thoſe who travel in them. 
o * That the wicked & is reſerved / to the day of 
deſtruction ? they m ſhall be brought forth » to | the day 


of wrath o. 

k This is the thing which they might learn of Paſſengers! 1 Or, 
with-held or kept back, to wit, from falling into common Calamities, 
though in truth he be not ſo much kept from evil, as kept for evil ; 
he is reſerved from a leſs, that he may beſwallowed up 1n a greater 
miſery ; as Pharach was kept from the other Plagues, that he might 
be drowned in the Sea. ”: He ſpeaketh of the ſame perſon ; only the 
ſingular number is changed into the plural, poſſibly to intimate, that 
although for the preſent only ſome wicked men were puniſhed, yet 
then all of them ſhould ſuffer. n To wit, by the condu of God's 
Providence and Juſtice,as MalefaQors are brought forth from Priſon 
to Judgment and Execution, though they be brought to it ſlowly, 
and by degrees,and with ſome kind of Pomp and State, as this word 
ſignifies. o Heb. Tothe day of wrath ; 1. e, of ſpecial and extraordi- 
nary Wrath ; either to ſome terrible and deſolating Judgments 
which God ſometimes ſends upon wicked Princes or People: Or,to 
the day of the laſt and general Judgment, whichis called in Scrip- 
ture the day of Wrath ; For the day of the general Reſurre&ion and 
Judgment was not unknown to Job and his Friends,as appears from 
Chap. 19. 25, &c. and other paſſages of this Book. 


3 O B. 


| 


ſo much upon thy own Righteouſneſs, as if thou didft obl;jgeGod 
by it : oras ifhe could not without imury afflit thee, who ſuppo- 
ſeſt thy ſelf ro be a righteous perſon,though indeed thou art not fo, 


as he ſaith, v. s, 6, &ce+ but if thou wert real! I 

debtor for it. b Or, becauſe ; or, but ; or, pos or Be bo. AA, 
Clauſe is to be read without an Interrogation, and the former with 
it. © A wiſe or good man ( for theſe in Scripture uſe are one and 
the ſame ) doth much goodto himielf; he promotes his own Peace 
and Honour, and Happineſs by his Goodneſs ; and having ſo great 
a reward for his Vertue, God is not indebted to him, but he is in. 
debted to God for it. P! 


_ 3 1 ir any pleaſure d to the Almighty, that thou arc 
righteous ? Or js it gain to him, that thou makeſt thy 
ways perfect e ? | 


4 i.e. Such a pleaſure as he needs tor his own eaſe and content- 
ment, without which he could nor be happy,as appears by the fore- 
going and following words : For otherwiſe God is oft iaid to de- 
light in the good AQtions of his People, to wit,to far as to approve 
and acceptthem. e That thy Life is free from blemiſh, as thou 
pretendeſt, bur falſly, as I ſhall ſhew. 

4 Will he reprovethee f for fear oftheeg? Will heen- 
ter with thee into Judgment þ ? 

f Will, or doth, or would he reprove thee ? 3. e. puniſh thee. For this 
word is frequently uſed of realRebukes orChaſtiſements,as hath been 
ofc noted. g Becauſe he is afraid, leſt if he ſhould let thee alone, 
thou wouldſt grow too greatand powerful for him , as Princes oft- 
times cruth thoſe Subjetts of whom they are afraid ? Surely no. As 
thy Righteouſneſs cannot _ him, ſo thy wickedneſs can do him 
to hurt. Or, for hy piety er feligion, which is commonly called by the 
name of fear ? Doth he puniſh thee becauſe thou feareſt and ſerveſt 
him,: as thou doſt infinuate ? No ſurely, but for thy ſins, as it fol- 


as appears from the Hebrew Text, where the words lye thus, Wit 
he for fear of thee reprove thee, or enter with thee into Judgment ? 
5 T1- not thy wickedneſs great, and + thine iniquities 
infinice ; 2 | 

# Thy great ſins are the true and only cauſes of thy miſery. The 
words may, very well be rendred thus, 1s net thy evil( i.e.thy puniſh» 
ment or affliction, which is frequently expreſſed by this very word) 
great, becauſe the Particle and being oft uſed cauſally, ( as it is Gen.18» 
13. & 22. 12, & 24+ 56. 1/3. 39. 1- & 64.5.) thine iniquities are infinite ? 
Are notthy Calamifies procured by,and proportionable to thy ſins? 
Thy own Conſcience tells thee they are ſo» And therefore thou 
haſt no reaſon to accuſe God; nor any perſon bur thy ſelf. 


6 For thou haſt taken & a 'pledge from thy brother 7 


| 31 Who ſhall declare his way p to his faceq? and | thing ». 


who ſhall repay him het he hath done y ? 

p 7. e. His wicked courſe and a&tions, and whitier they lead him, 
His power andſplendour is ſo great, that ſcarce any man dare re- 
prove him for his ſin, or ſhew him his danger. 
Whilſt he lives, as the ſame Phraſe is uſed,Deut. 7. 10. 
can bring him to an account c: puniſhment. 


32 Yet s ſhall he be brought 7 to the | Grave «, and 


ſhall f remain in the tomb x. 

s Heb. And. The pomp of his Death ſhall be ſuitable to the glory 
ef his Life. - With pomp and ſtate, as the word ſignifies. » Hede 
to the Graves ; 1. e. to an honourable and eminent Grave : The plu- 


n 
i 
' 


i 


8 
4 


k Or, Surely thou haſt taken.He ſpeaks thus by way of conje&ure,or free 


| ſtrong preſumption, when I conſider thy grievous and unuſual Cala- 
' mities, I juſtly conclude thou art guilty of all, or ſome of theſe 


g i- e. Plainly,and following Crimes ; and dothou ſearch thine own Conſcience,whe= 
y No man ther it be notſo with thee. 7, e. Either of thy Neighbour, or of 


thy Kinſman ; which are both called by the name of Brorher. This 


' 1s added to aggravate the offence. m 7.e- Without ſufficient and ju» 


ſtifiable cauſe. Which he might do many ways, either by taking 
what he ought not to take,Deut.24.6.0r from whomhe ought nor,to 
wit, the Poor to whom he ſhould give, Prov.3.27. or when, and in 
ſuch manner as he ought not, of which ſee on Devr. 24-10,11. or by 
keeping it longer than he ſhould, as when the poor mans neceflity 


ral number being oft uſedemphatically ro not Eminency,as Joo 49. | requires it, or when the debt is ſatisfied, Ezek. 18. 16. n Either by 
| raking their Garment for a pledge, againſt the Law. Exod. 22.26. or- 


10, Prov. .1. 20. Lam. 3.22. He ſhall not diea violent, bur a natural 
Death, and ſhall lie in the Bed of Honour. « Heb.Shall watch ( 2. e. 
have a conſtant and fixed abode,as Watchmen have in the watching- 
place ) # the heap, i. e. in his Grave, which is called an heap,either be- 
cauſe the Earth is there heaped up, or becauſe it was adorned wir; 
ſome Pyramid, or other Monument raiſed up to his Honour His 
Body ſhall quietly reſt in his Grave or Monument, where he ſhall 
be embalmed and preſerved ſo entire and uncorrupted, that he 
might rather ſeem to bea living Watch-man, ſet there to guardthe 
Body, than to be a dead Corps. : 
33 The clods of the valley y ſhall be ſweet unto him 


z, andevery man ſhall draw after him ||, as there aro in- 


numerable before him. 

7 i. e. Ofthe Grave, which is low and deep like a Valley. z He 
ſhall ſweetly reſt in his Grave, free from all cares, and fears, and 
troubles, Chap. 3. 17, 18. || Heb: He ſhall draw every man after him,to 
wit, into the Grave, #. e. All that live after him, whether good or 
bad, ſhall follow him into the Grave, 7+ e. ſhall die ashe did,So he 
fares no worſe herein than all Mankind: He is figuratively ſaid to 


draw them, becauſe they come after him, as if they were drawn by : 


his Example. : : TELE 
4 How then comfort ye me in vain, fſeing in your 


an{wers there remaineth ÞF falſhood * ? 

* Why then do you ſeek to comfort me with vain hopes of re- 
covering my Proſperity if I repent, ſeing your gtounds are ma- 
nifeſtly falſe, and common Experience ſheweth, that good men are 
very ofc in great tribulation, while the vileſt of men thrive and 
proſper in the World. 


CH AP. XXII. 

Eliphaz's Anſwer : Man's righteouſneſs profiteth not God ; nor can God fear 
man, 1 - 4+ He chargeth Job's m:ſcry on his ſins, 5-==--=11. which 
God beheld, and knew, nor could they be hid from him. 12 14. 
The wicked, and their miſery, 15 -—- - 17. If they proſpered he would 
not hold with them ; but their deſtrufion the r1ghteous ſhould laugh at, 
18 20, Heexhorteth Job to know God and his Law, and return 
80 him ; heſbould grow rich ; God ſhall be his defence, his joy and confi. 
dence, 21 —---- 26- If he would pray God would hear ; and his deſire 
and purpoſe ſhould land, 27 30. 

Hen Eliphaz the Temanite anſwered and faid : 
2 * Cana man be profitable unto God, s, ||as b 


he that is wiſe may be profitable to himſelf c ? 


2 i. e. Add any thing to his Perfe&ion or Felicity, to wit, by his 
Righteouſneſs, as the next Verſe ſhews. Why then doſt thou unifult | 77, 


wk 


x 
[ 
' 
£ 


otherwiſe by robbing them of their Rights, all other Injuries being 
Synecdochically comprehended under this. Qu. How could he tri 
the naked ? ſw. Hecalls themmnaked, either 1 Becauſe they had 
but very few and means Cloaths, ſuch being. oft called naked, as 
Deut. 28. 48. 1 Cor. 4. 11+ James 2. 15, Or, 2. From the effe&, be= 
cauie though he did not find them naked, yer he made them ſo. 
The like Phraſes we have 7/2. 47. 2. grivd Meal, i. e by grinding 
Corn make it Meal ; Amos 8 5. falſifying the deceitful ballances, i.e by 
falſifying making true ballances deceitful : And ſo here, to ſtrip the 
naked, is by ſtripping them to make them naked. 
hou haſt not given water 0 to the weary p to 


drink, and thou haft with-holden bread from the hun- 


BY 9- 6 | 
o Surely thou haſt been io hard heartedas to deny a Cup of cold 


} 


Warer to thoſe that needed and deſired ir. Water was oft times ſcarce 
and p:ecious in thoſe hot Countries,and was appropriated to parti- 


cular Pcrſons, without whoſe leave other perſons might nor take it. 


? i. e. To him, who by reaſon of hard labour ortravel, is weary and 
thirſty. So this word isuſed. Prov, 25.25. -4 To whom it was due 


' by God's Law, Prov. 3. 27. which alſo was known to Jeb by the Light 


of Nature. Hereby he intimates the greatneſs of this Sin of Uncha- 
ritableneſs, by ranking it with hainous Crimes, whereas Job ( as he 
thought } eſteemed it but a ſmall fault, if any. 


8 But s for | the mighty man, he had the Earth 7 
and the |} honourable man dwelt in it s. 


joymenr of ir. Which is meant either, 1. Of J0b,0f whom ke ſpeaks 
invidiouſty in the third perſon. The mighty man Job poſſeſſed, and 
-enlarged,and enjoyed his Eftate without any compaſſion to thePoor. 
Or rather, 2. Of other rich and potent men, who kad the Earth or 
Land, either 1. By Job's Judicial Sentence, which was generally,gi- 
ven in favour of the Rich, and againſt the Poor : Or, 2. by Job's 
kindneſs and courteſie, The Rich were always welcome to him, his 
Houſe was opento them, his Land was before therfi, when the Poor 
were driven away from his Houſe and Territories. s Either by thy 
| ſentence or permiſhon, he had a peaceableand ſure poſſeſſion of ir. 
He repeateth the fame thing in other words. 


9 Thou haft ſent widows : away empty «, and the 


arms x of the fatherleſs have been broken. _ 
5 Whoſe helpleſs Eſtate called for thy pity, Exod. 22.22. Dent. 24. 
19. « Either by denying them that Relief which their Poverty 
4h required, | 


| Chap. XX1 | 


lows. þ And condemn thee,to wit, for the reaſon laſt mentioned, 


for nought mz, and Þ ſtripped the naked of their Cloa- , 


» f Heb the 
7 Heb. And, or but the man of Arm, or Strength, or Power, to him THeb.emi- 
was the Earth,or the Land, 7. e. he had the firm poſſeſſion, orfree en- nent,or, ac« 


- 


+ Heb. * 
end to ei, | 
7niquities. 


of arns 


cepted for | 
countenahce 
2Kins-1; 
Ifa. 3. 3s 


--x0 » 


- 


hap, 


— 


% 


a a © 


required, or that right which their cauſe deſerved ; or by ſpoiling 
them of their Goods, becauſe thou knewelt them to be unable to op- 
ole thee, or to right themiclves.x 2: & All theirſupports,and COm- 
torts, and rights. An hainous fin, but falſly charged upon 50v. 
Io Therefore ſnares are round abour thee 2, and 
ſudden fear « troubleth thee ; | 
For thefe and the lik: Crimes. The cauſe of thy ruin 15 not 1e- 
cret from God's Soveraign Power, and unſearcha:l: Judgments(as 
thou prerendeft ) but plain and maniſe}, even thy own Crying 11715. 
>: Thou art encompatt{ed with Dangers and Calamities. & Beſtac tay 
preſe;at Miſeries thou rt tormented with the dread and expectation 
of further and {orer Judgments. 
1x Or darkneſs c that thou canſt not ſee, and 


dance of waters c cover thee. 


abun- 


bead of the 
, FS. 


\ 


Or, what 
EP(.10.11 
'& 59. 7. 

| & 73. 11% 
'& 94. 7+ 


Ul 


+ Heb. c- 
_ werlaſting 


42. 


[Or,ef ate. 


excellency, 


canſt not diſcern the true cauſe and uſe of all thy Sufterings. 
2. Grievous Calamities, which are oft called «7rtmeſs,whic': are ſuch 
that thou canſt ſee no way nor poſſibility of eſcaping. Either thou 
art troub'cd with fear of turther evils, as it is ſaid, 
the.groſs darkneſs of thy ty 
variety: of ſore afflitions, which are frequently comparcd to Waters, 
as Pal. 18. 16, & 66. 12. 1a. 43. 2. 


& Hebs the + the height of the ſtars how high they are e. 


Pſal. I 4» 2+. 
whether good or bad. And thercfore,O Job ihou art grolly miſta- 
ken, in thinking that all rhings in this lower World are managed by 
Chance, and without any regard to Juſtice, or ro juſtmen, and nor 
by the wiſe and holy Providence of God: For this is the genuine 
Conſequence of thy great Pinciple, that good men ſuffer as geeply 
as any .others, whilit the viJeit of men are exalred and flouriih. 
e. Yct God is far higher than they, and from thence can ealtly ſpy 


|| Or. chejr. the remnant of them 


b Either 1. A darkneſs and confuſion ofmind,fo great that thou 


Or, 


v. 10. or with 
preſent ſtate of miſery. « 1. e. Plenty and 


12 Is not God in the height of heaven d? and behold 


d Surely he is; and from that high Tower he {otcrh down upon men, 
to bchold, and govern,and recompenſe all their aEtions, 


7 O B. 


all men and things here below ; as the higheſt places afford the 


be{t 'projpetts. 


"12 Andf thou ſayeſt g, || How doth God know b ? 
can he judge through the dark cloud z ? 

 f Or, Therejore : From this true and certain Principle thou draw- 
eft this falſe and wicked Concluſion. Or, Ne, notwithſtanding this 


undeniable Argument. ' g Thou reafoneft thus within thy 1el?, as it 


' from v. 15. where it is expreſſed ) our ſubſtance ( 7. e. 


# Or, when ; or, ſeing that, or, becauſe : for this Hebrew Partic] 
Im, is oft uſed tor Chi. And ſo the following words may contain _ 
reaſon of the Joy and Laughter of the Innocent mentioned. ». I x 
becauſe when wicked Men are deſtroyed, they are preſerved od 
cauſe our ſubſtance, 7. e, our Souls and Bodies, and Subliftence ws _ 
cut down. He ſhould have ſaid their ſubFance; 7. e. the fubſtance of 
the Righteous ; bur he changeth the Perſon, and ſaith, our ſubſtance « 

pl 


cither as including himſelf in the number of righteous Perfons, ang 
3 


thereby intimating rhat he pleaded the common cauſe of a1l ſuch. 
whilſt Job pleaded the cauſe of the wicked,as is elſewhere obſerved: 
or becauſc he would hereby thankfully acknowledge ſome eminent 
and particular preſervation given to him amongſt other righteous 
Men; or becauſe heand his Brethren were of the fame ſubſtance 
with, and deſcended from the Loins of them whom God had mira« 


culouſly preſerved, when others round about them were cut off-ag 
s bl 


God had done for Abraham and his Poſterity, of which Race theſe 
are conceived to have been. And a like change both of Perſon and 
Number we find, Hoſ. 4+ 21.He found him( 1. e. Jacob in Bethel )and there 
he ſpate with us , i. e, with him, as repreſenting us, and for all our 
good. x All thatwas left undeſt;oyed in the general Calamir . 
Or, their excellency, all their defirable and de'eQable things. y;. «Of 
thoſe who are oppoſed to the righteous, and in whoſe deſtruftion 
the Righteous rezoiced. x To wit, of God's wrath : ſome dread. 
ful Jucgment, eith-r proper Fire, poſſibly that which deſtroyed 
Sod;m and Gomorrah, which ſuch knowing and inquiſitive Perſons 
could not be ignorant of, as a thing done nezr their- times and 
places ; or ſome other ſore calamity ; for ſuch oft comme under the 
name of Fire. But this whole Verſe 15,and may be otherwiſe rendred 
and that Interrogatively. I5-nor, ( orrather, was not, the Hebrew 
Prehx, he, being here underſtood,afrer the manner of the Language, 


almoſt all our 


; nature and kind ) cut of ( aJmoſt all deſtroyed in the flood ) and did 
; nor the Fire conſrme a remnant of them ; i.e. of Mankind, and of un. 


EE ee ES LS -. 


may 1cem by thy Diſcourſes. h i.e.God cannct dilcern,and theretore - 
doth notmind things ſofar below him and diftant from him. 72. e.' 


Through thoſe immenſe & innummerableClouds whichlye between 


the Heaven and the Earth, although our eyes feces but few of them. 
14. Thick clouds are a covering io him that he iceth 
gor, and he walketh in the circuit of heaven &. 
"> His converſation and buſineſs and dehghtis in the higher and 
heavenly World, which is wort' y of his care, but he wt'l not di- 
parage nor burden himſelf with the care of this contemptibleſpot 
'6F earth :- which was the opinion of many Heathen Philoſophers, 
and, as they fancied, was Job's Opinion allo. 
15 Halt thou marked the | old way / which wicked 


men have troden ? 
{ Heb. The way of antiquity, 7, e. of men living in ancient times,or 


Way. 
\So Gr. -Former ages : By this way is here meant, eirher 1- Their courſe or | 
| common pratice : Or, 2. Their end or ſucceſs ; as the wayis taken, | 
1 Sam.9.6,8. and as death, which 1s, and 1s Called 7he end of 21! men, | 
Eccleſ. 7. 2 is aiſo called the way of all the earth, Jol.23.14. 1 Kings 2. 2. | 
h 16 Which were cut down our of tine z2, | whoſe 
| +a foundation was overfiown with « fioud 7, = q 
pmred upm 7.e.Before theirtime ; who diced a violent and untimely death. | 
rheir foun- * VWho,rogether wich their foundaz/c:;, to wir, tie eaith and all their 
| ation ſupports & enjoymentsin it,were deltroycd by rhe general Deluge; 
- * which doubtleſs was very well known to them, becauſe they lived 
riot long after it; and which was moſt proper for this Argumear, 
Or, whoſe fo:ndation, 7. e, all their power, and riche*, and policy up- 
on «hich they build all their hopes and happineſs, was like a floud 
poured forth ; which made a great ſhew and noiſe for a time, bur 
> ſpcedily vaniſhed and came to nothing: 
7 * Which ſaid unto God, Depart from us 2: and 
| Or, co * what can the Almighty do [| for them 6 7 
them. o He reports J0b's words, Chap. 21e 14, 1 5. ( where they are ex- 
plained ) burto a contrary purpo!e. 7 alleoged them to thew that 
they proſpered notwithſtanding their  profeiied wickedneſs; and 
Eliphaz produceth them ro ſhew that tney vere cur off for it. 
| 18 Yet he filled their houſes withgood rhi.gs'p : bur 
; *Ch.ar 46 * the counſel of the wicked is far frimime #. 


p Yer itistru?, that for a time God did proſper them, as he did 
thee; which alſo was the aggravation ofcheir fin, and tbat which 


godly Mcn, in S:4om and Gemorraſy ? 

2 + Acquaine now thy felt || with him a, and be at 
peace b : thereby c good ſhall come unto thee 7. 

a 7. e. With God, as appears both from wv, 23. where he is ex. 
preiied, and from the nature of tie thing, rhere being no other 
way toHappineſs. Renew thy acquaintance and converſe with God 
by Prayer, which thou haſt reſtrained, Chap. 15. 4. and repentance 
for all thy fins, and true kumiliation under his hand, and hearty 
compliance with ail his Commands, and diligent care to ſerve and 
enjoy him; and be no longer eſtranged from God, asthou riow art 
b This iseither 1. a Promiſe, the Imperative being pur for the Fu. 
ture of the Indicative Mood, and ſo thou ſhalt have peace; i. e. Pro- 
ſperity and Happineis : Or, rather, 2. A Counſel or Command,IFf 
Ged be an Enemy to thee, as thou ſayeſt he is, reconcile thy ſelf to 


' Bim by true Repenrance, and earneſtly ſeck his Favour and Friend- 


; or Exhortation ; now folldweth the Promiſe. « 7. 


— 


haſtened their ruin © bur ar laſt, andin due time, God cut them off 
in a tremendous and exemplary manner; as he will:lfo do thee, if 


thou doſt not repent. q Herepeats Jcb's words, Chap. 21. 16. not 
without refieftion and tome kind of derition: Thou didſt foy ſo,but 
withour ſufficient reaſon, and againſt thy own principle, that God 
carries himſelf indifferently towards good and bad ; bur I who have 
obſerved God's rerrible Judgments upon wicked men, have much 
more reaſon to abhor their Counſels which had ſo ſad an itflue. 


19 * The righteous ſee it r, and are glad s: and the 


| *Pſal. 07. ;nocent laugh them to ſcorn 7. 


r Whom God oft ſpares in common Calamities, and makes them 
to ſurvive and ſee the deſtruQtion of the wicked ; as Noah Lot, &c. 
s Not that they in{ult over, or rejoyce in the ruin of any men, but 
becauſe they delight in the vindication of God's Honour,and Juſtice, 
and Holineſs, which is conjoynei with the deftruQtion of his cne- 
mies, and which is and ought to be dearer to them than all the in- 
tereſts of men. *: They juitly deride them, or their vain and yet 
ſtrong confidences which are now deſtroyed, and for their profane 


contempt of God and of his Judgments which now they feel, and 


for their deep and crafty counſels, which are now fruſtrated and 


tiirned-again{t themſelves. 


ſubſtance is not cut down, but 


20 Whereas « our | 
7 the fire x conſumeth, 


_ 
- 


ſhip, and do not provoke Him further by thy falſe and wicked 
Specches of Him, or by thy froward carriage to Him; And whereas 
thou arr tull of unquictneſsandrage againſt God,learn to poſſeſs thy 
Soul in Patience, give over murmuring againſt him, and get a 
compoſed, and quiet, and ſubmiſſive Mind and Heart;which is cal- 
led Peace, Judg, 6.23. &19, 20. 1/2. 57. 21. Thus far is the Command 
e. By followin 
theſe Counſels. d "Thou ſhal be freed from all thy Columitice _ 
enjoy all the hippineſs which thy. heart can deſire, 


22 Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth e, 
and lay up his words in thine heart f. 
e Take the Law and Rule whereby thou governeſt thy thoughts, 


' and words, aad wiole life, notfrom profane Heathens, whoſe Opi- 


nion concerning God's Providence thou haſt embraced, nor from 
thy own vain imaginations or violent Paſſions, which have led thee 
into thy preſent Errors and Miſcarriages, but from God, and from 
his Word, and from his Law, which 1s written in thy own Mind, 
and from the DoCtrines and Inſtruttions of the holy Men of God, 
who are all ofour mind in this matter. f7, e. Do nor only hear 
them with thine Ears, but let them ſink into thy Hearr, being re- 
ceived there by hearty affetion, and fixed by ſerious, and frequent, 
and praQtical conſideration cf them, Pſalm 115, 11, Math. 13. 9, &C. 
Luke 2.19, STIs | ; 

23 * If thou return to the Almighty-g, thouſbalt be 
built up 5; thou ſhalr put away iniquity far from thy 
tabernacles z. 

£ Or, home to the Almighty ; or, ſe as to reach tothe Almighty and be 
joyned to him. The Hebrew Phraſe is extraordinary, and empha« 
tical,andimplies a thorough and effeQual rurning not only from Sin, 
( which an Hypocrite may do in great part, at leaf for a time, u- 
pon carnal Motives, and without any reſpe& or love to God ) but 
alſo unto God, fo as to love Him, and cleave to Him,and ſincerely 
devote a Man's ſelf to his fear and ſervice. And he exprefſeth it in 
this manner, becauſe he thought Job to be an Hypocrite, and there- 
fore counſelleth him toturn to God in another and better manner 
than he had done ; to wit, with all his heart, and not feignedly. 
hþ God who hath pulled thee down in tiy Eſtate, and Honour,an 
Children, will repair thy Ruines, and give thee more Children, 
which is oft called bu:Iiing; as Gen. 16. 2. Exod. 1. 21. Ruth 4. 11. 
and bleſs thee with Proſperity and Happincfs, as building ſignifies, 
Jer. 42. 10. & 31. 4 7 This may be eithcr 1. a Condition upon 
which God makes the following Promiſes, Tf (-which Particle may 
be repeated out of the former part ofthe Verſe ) rho ſhalt put away, 
&c. 7. e. If thou Galt effe&ually purge thy ſelf and Family from 
all fin, and keep thy ſelf and them, as far as thou cant from all ap- 
pearances and occaſions of fin, which is the duty of all, and the 
praQtice of true Penirents. Whereby he ſeems to 'refle& upon Jes, 


or Children, notwithitinding his facrificing for them, Chap, 1. Or, 
rather 2. A Proimife, becauſe the conditions required had been 
expreſſed togetier, v. 21. 22. and in the beginning of this Verſe, 
after which he comes to the Promiſes, and begins with this, Th 
ſhalt be built up, and ſo proceeds to other Promiſes ; and therefore 
it ſeems not probable that he ſhould return to the Conditions again, 


and mix the Conditions and Promiſes together, which he hath 
{o carefully ſeparated in theſe Verſes» And fo it is either 1. a Spt- 
ritual Promiſe, If thou doſt ffacerely repent, God will give thee 
more: Grace efietually to reform thy ſelf and family, according 


41 
s WW 


[| That t, 
with God 


*Ch.8.56. 
& 11.13 


as if he had becn foulry and n(giicent in theGovernment of himſelf 


Fo 


XX, 


That ts, 
th God: 


1.85.6, 
1. I% 


Chap- XX11L 
to that rule, 7s him that hath, ſhall be given. Or, 2. 2 temporal Pro- 
miſe, Thou ſhalt put away iniquity or injury, or perverſneſs ( 1: e. either 

cryerſe and injurious Men: Or, God's Judgments, or the puniſh. 
ments of thy {ins z as Iniquity is very oft 
z. e. from all thy Dwellings and Tents, avd Poſſeffions ; no hand of 
violence ſhall come near them, no evil Plague ſhall come upon thy 
own Hahitation, or upon the Habitations of thy Children, as lately it 


did for thine and their fins, 
24 Then ſhalt thou lay up gold k || as duft 7, and 


[Or,n 29k the gold of Ophir Þ as the ſtones mz of the brook. 
duſts þ S-lid or choice Gold, as the Word fignifies. { 1, e. In great a- 
f Hed. My poundance, Or, upon the duſt, or ground : It ſhall be fo plentitul, and 
or #MNg therefore vile. that thou ſhalt not lock it up in Cheſts and Treaſu- 
the Fones, ries, hut tcatter it any where, and let it lie even upon the ground. 
m As plentiſully as if the pieces of God were but ſo many Pebble 
Stones, which are to be found in and near every Brook, Or, for the 
Stones; ine. in ſtead of them, Or, in the rach, or among the rocks : 
Gold ſhail heſo aboundant that thou mayeſt lay it any where, e-» 
ven upon or among the rocks, 

25 Yea, the Almighty ſhalllbe thy [| defence », and 


thou fhatc have # plenty of filver 0. _ 
n God by his ſpecial and watchfull Providence ſhall prote& thee 


from all dangersand calarnities: Heb, thy defences, or munttions. One 
God ſhall keep thee asſafely as many Munitions, oHeb.ſilver of ſtrength 
7. e: which by God's Bleffiny thall be thy Defence, Eccleſ; 7: 12: Or, 
ſilver of heights, i. e: high and heaped up like a Mountain: 

26 For þ then thou ſhalt have thy delight in the Al- 


mighty q and ſhalt * lift up thy face unto God 7, 

p $9 this Verſe contains a Reaton why he might confidently expect 
all thote former outward Bleſſings, becauſe he ſhould have God's 
Favour, which is the Spring and Foundation of them, Or, Snvely : 
Or. Tea, moreover ; for this Particle Chi, is ſometimes uſed by way 
of azgravation. or amplification, as Gen: 45: 25: 4 Sam: 14: 41. Iſa 
7: 9: & 32: 13- And this ſuits very well here; yea, God wil} do 
greater things than theſe for thee. 9 Thou ſhalt find delight not on- 
Iy in theſe outward comforts, but alſo, and eſpecially in God, whole 
Face ſhall ſhine upon thee ; who ſhall give thee theſe things not in 
anger and wrath, as kedoth to wicked Men. but as pledzes of his 
love and favour to thee, and ofthoſe great and eternal Bleſſings which 
he hat": in ſtore for thee : and accordinely thou ſhalt delight thy 
ſelf in worſhioping, enjoying obeying, and ſerving God in and 
with ail hi: Mercies. r i: e Lookup to him by meditation and pray- 
er,not as now thou doſt, with horror and grief, which is ſignified by a 
dejeRted Countenance, 2 Sam: 2: 22: Luke 18: 13: but with chear- 
fuinets and confidence, as this Phraſe oit notes, as Lake 21: 28: Sce 
on Job: x1: 15 : 

*pal.go; 27 * Thou ſhalt make thy prayer unto him, and he 


1 15, ſhall hear thee s, and thou ſhalt pay thy vows? 
sf, e. Anſwer thy Prayers, and not diiregard them, and hide him- 
ſelf from thee,as yow he doth. # 7. e Thou ſhait obtain thoſe Bleſ. 
ſings for which thou didſt make Vows to Ge, and therefore, accord- 
Ing e> thy Obligation, ſhalt pay thy Vows to him; The Antecedent 
is here ſuvpoſed and underſtood cut of the Conſequent. 


28 Thou ſhalt alſo decree a thing, and it ſhall be e- 
ſtabliſhed « unto thee, and the light ſhall ſhine upon thy 


ways x. 

v Thy purpoſ-s 1nd deſigns ſhall not be diſ:ppointed, but eff-Qed 
and ratified by God ; whic' is a great ſatisfation, x In all thy Coun- 
ſels, an:: Courſes, and 4&:ons. God ſhall give thee the light of his 
d:reior: and governance, and of comfort and ſicceſs; and thou fhalt 
not be in ſuch a dark, and doubtfull, and perplexed condition as now 
thou art. 

29 When men are caſt down y, then thou ſhait ſay 


%, There is liſting up a: and b he c ſball ſave &* Þ the 


humbie perſon e. 

y tied: *henthey( i: 6; they who do this work. It is an indefinite 
and imperſ» ai Sp--ch which is very common in the Hebrew f.an- 
guage) ſhall caſt d»wn_ or overthrow . ei her '- proud and wicked 
mer, 25 may be gueſſed by the opvofition of the humble and 1nno» 
cent, wh ſhould be ſaved, whuſt t' :ſ« were deſtroyed. S» the ſenſe 
is, when there ſhall come a general calainity which ſhall ſweep away 
all the wicked round about them. Or 2: Thee, or thine 3 which 
Pronou is »ft underſtood. So the ſenſeis. when through God's per- 
miſſion thou {a't be brought into ſome trouble, which Sod ſees fit 
for thee. x Within thy ſe|f with good atſurance and conidence. a 
Or, there hall be /:ſting up, either 1 for them, 1t they repent and 
humble themſelves, they ſhall be preſerved or reſtored. And this 
thou wiltſt afſu-e them of fro +thy own experience. Or.- 2. for thee 
and thine: God will deliver thee, when others are cruſhed and de- 
ſtroyed. 6b Or for, this Particle being oft put caſually, as hath been 
formerly noted $0 the following words contain a Reaſon why he 
might confidently tay, That there would be fuch a lifting up far a 
perlon ſo humbied. © i: e. God unto whom only Salvation , belongeth. 
Pſalm: 3:8; d Either 1. Eternally ; or, 2: Temporally 3 t> wit, from 
the Evils here m:ntioned; e Heb. Him that hath low or cait d'wn Eyes: 
Which Phraſe may h-re note. either r. fiumiity and Lowlineſs of 
of Mind and Diſpoiition, 2s Pride is oft expreſſed by high vr lofry !ooks, 
as Pſalm 18: 27:.8 101: 5'& 131: 1% Prov. 6 17. +B6 {> }this 1s a 
tacit Admonition and Reproot for Job, whom, for is confident juſti- 
fication of himicif, and his contemptuous Expreſſions and Cenfures 
concerning them, they judged to be guilty ©: incollerable Pride of 
Heart. Or, 2: Lowneſs of Eſtate 6r Condition, as 7ames 1: 10; So 
it notes him whoſe Eyes ana Countenarce are Jej=ted by reaſon of his 
great troubles and miſeries . as on the contrary. Pro:perity makes per- 
ons lift up their Eve- and Faces: 


20|| He f ihalldeliver g the Iſland of the innocent bh: 


and itz is deiivered by the pureneſs of rhine hands &. 

f i: e. God, as v: 29 whoſe rrerogative it 1s ro give, denverances, 
2 To wit, upon thy requeſt, as the following Claule ſheweth : God 
will hear :hy Prayers e+en for others: which is a great honourand com- 
fort; and much more for thy ſelf. þ Not only thy felt, when thou 
ſhalt become innocent and pure, but for thy ſake he will deliver 
the whole 1fand ( or Country, that word b:ing oit uſed not only 
for ſuch Lands or Countreys as were ſeparated trom Canaan by the 


{ Or, gol 1 
+Heb. /il- 
wer of 


ſlrength. 


Frhat1.15 


*Jam.4.6. 
ItP-t. 5.4, 
C3027 


[Or,thein- 
Ment (ha ll 
deliver the 


uſed ) far from thy tabernacles; . 


70 8B 


Chap. XXI 


Sea, as is commonly obſerved, but alſo for ſuch as were upon the 
ſame continent with it, as appears from Gen: 10: 6: (Fe Pſalmn2* ro 

97: 1: Jſa:ar: 5: ) in which thou dwelleſt. Or. the guilty, or hins 
that is not innocent : Forthe word here renered Tland, is ſometimes 
uſed for nef, in Scripture, as 1 Sam: 4:21: Prov: 311 4; So the Senſe is 
God will have ſogreata Reſpe@to thy innocency and purity, that for 
thy ſ:ke he will deliver thoſe that belong to thee, or live with thee 
or near thee, though in therſelves they be tinfa!l Creatures and 
ripe for deſiruftion. See Gen; 18:32: i To wit theIſlind. Or, he 
7: e: the guilty perſon. &þ& 7: e: Zythy Prayers proceeCing from a pure 
Heart and Conſcience. When thou ſhalt /ife up prre hands to God in 
Prayer, as it isexpreſfſed, 1 Tim: 2: 8: Wherchy as he affcrts the 


*" 


Frevalency of the righteous Man's Prayers with God for Mercy 
both for himſelf andothers ; and by this Argument he p:rſ.« adeth 7ob 
t5 Repentance : ſo withal h: a'ledgeth this as an Argument, or e- 
vidence that Job did not ſtretch out pure hands to God in Prayer as 
he pretended, becauſe his Prayers could nat vrevail for the preſerva- 
tion of himſelf or his Children, and much lefs for others at a greater » 


diſtance, 
RAP XXITTL 
Job's reply * his deſire to plead with Ged, 1 5s who ſhould not con« 
fo:md but ſtrengthen him, 6. 1: He cannot tehold God's way ; but he 
walked in the wayof his law, 8 12: God in his Providences 

bringeth about what he had decreed : Job's trauble herein,13 === 17; 

Hen Job anſwered and ſaid, | 
2 Evento day 4 5 my complaint bitter b «+ my | 
ſtroke c is heavier than my groaning d. 7 —_ " 

41 e: Even at this time, notwithſtanding aii your promiſes and pre- AY | 
tended Conſolations, I find no caſe or ſatisfatiun in all your | 
Diſcourſes : And therefore in this and the following Chapters, Job 
ſeldom applies his Diſcourſe to his Fr:ends, but only addreffeth his 
Speech to God, or bewaileth himſelf, b j.e. I do bitterly complain 
and have juſt cauſe to do ſo. But this Clauſe is and may be other- 
wiſe rendred : Even ſtill ( Heb. af this day ) is my complaint called or 
accounted by you rebellion or bitte neſs ? or the rage of an exaſperated 
mind?Do you ill paſs ſuchharſhCenſures upon me after all my De- 
clarations and Solemn Proteſtatioos of my Innocercy # c Heb. my y 
hand, paſſively z #. e. the hand or ſtroks of God upon me, 5 ihe 
ſame Phraſe is uſed, Pſalm 77. 2. and mine arrow, Job Chap. 34» 6, 

d i.e. Doth exceed all my Complaints and Expreflions : So far are 

you mifiaker, that think I complain more than [ have cavſe, Some _ 
render the wo ds thus, My hands are heavy ( i.e. feeble and hanging down 
as the Phraſ= is, Heb. 12: 12. My ftreugth and ſpirit faileth becauſe 
of mygroaning, 

3” O thatT knew where I might find him e! hat I 
might come even to his ſeat f. 

e To wit, God, as his Friends well knew, and the thing it ſelf 
ſheweth : Thou bidſt me acquaint my ſelf with him, Chap. 22. 21. I 
dcfire nothing more than his acquaintance and preſence ; but alas he 
hides his Face from me that I cannot ſee him, norcome near him. f 
f.e. Tohis Throne or Judgment-ſeat to plead my Cauſe before him, 
a5 it here follows, verſe 4. pot upon terms of ſtri@t Juſtice, but upon 
thoſe terms of Grace and Mercy upon which God is pleaſed to deal 
with h1+ ſinfull Creatures: See be:ore Chap. 9. 34, 35. & 16. 22. & 
17: 3, And this my Confi 'ence may be ſome evidence that I am not 
ſuch a groſs Hypocrite as youimagine me to be. | 


4 I would * order »y cauſe g before him h,and fillmy *Chap.123 


mouth with arguments #. 3. 12 
2 i.e. Orderly declare the things which concern and prove the © © 
right ofmy Cauſe ; h not onlydebating the Controvetrfic betw-en my 
Friends and me, concerning my Sincerity or Hypocrifie before God, 
asa Witneſs or Judge ; but alſopleading with God as a Party, and 
modeſtly enquiring, whether he doth not deal more rigorouſly with 
me than I mi-ht r-aſonably expe, wherein I defire no other Judge 
but h:mſeſf. j. To prove my Innoceney and Sincerity towards Gcd, 
and conſequently Iam ſeverely uſed. 
5 I would know the words which he would anſwer 


me, and underſtand what he would ſay unto me &. 

þ I long to k3ow wha: he would ſay, «itherto prove me an Hypo- 
crite, or to Juſtifie his harſh proceed-ngs againſt me; and if he thould 
diſcover to meany ſecret and unknown fin , for which he cantendeth 
with me, I ſhould humble my ſcif before him, and aCcept of the pu« 
niſhment of mine 101quicy, 

6 Will heplead againſt me with 4is great power /? 


no, buthe wouid put frength in me m. 

L 1. e. Oppreſs me with hi: Soveraign and Abſolute Power, as Men 
do thoſe whom they cannot fairly andJuſtly conquer ? m. The word 
ſtr-ngth, or power, being fitly ſup»lied out of the former branch of the 
Verſe, as is very uſual in Scripture, He would net uſe his power 
againſt me, but for me 3 by enabling me to plead my Cauſe, aid gi- 
ving Sentence according to that Clemency and Benienity, which 
according to his gracious © ovenant he uſeth towards his children. Or, 
He would put or ſet his heart ( this very Verb of putting or ſetting being 
elſe where uſed in this defeAive manner, for putting or ſetting the hears 
as Job 7: 17, Iſa. 41. 10: as it is fully exprefled, Iſa: 57, 1. Ezek, 
40: 4. & 44, 5. ) upon (the Prepofition Beth, in being ſometimes u- 


*Ch,r3i3, 


| ſed for al. wpon, as Neb, 2. 12+ /ſa21, 13. ) me, towit, to hear me 


and all my reaſons meckly, and to judge favourably and to help and 
deliver me as that & the like phraſes commonly fignifie inScripture uſe. 


7 There » the righteous o might diſpute with him p; 


ſo q ſhould I be delivered for everfrom my judge r, 

n At that Throne of Grace as it 1s called, H:hr.q. 16, where God 
lays aſide his Majefty. and Power, and judgeth according to his 
wonted Grace and Clemency, 0 Such as I do anddare avow my ſelf 
to be, tc wit, in tincerity, though not in perfettion- p, Humbly and 
modeſtly propounding the ground of their Confidence, and the Evi- 
dences of their Righteouſneſs q Upon ſuch a fair and equal hearing. 
r Either 1, Fromthe ſevere Cenlures of all corropt and partial Jud- 
 ges, ſuchas you my Friendsare, Or rather, 2. From the Damnatory 
Sentence of God 3 for he is not only pleading before him, but alfo 
with him. He would give Scntence for me, aud againſt himſelf, 
This and ſome :ſuch Expreſſi»ns of fob cannot be excuſed from Ir. 
reverence towards God, and tos great a Confidence in himſelf ( for 
which therefore God ſharply reproves him hereafter, and Jo» abhog. 


r<th himiclf, 4 H 2 $8 *.2:. 


h.g.t2. $8 * Behold, I go forward s, but he is not zherer 
and backward «, but I cannot perceive him: 


preſent himſelf before him. 


that I cannot ſee himsx : 


ous to diſcern God's Works. 


cannot find him out. » To wit. from me, He withdraweth 


vour, and will not afford me his prefence and audience. 


out hearing me. 


Jeb. the 
ythatis he hath tried me c, I ſhall come forth as gold 4. 


and my Heart, aud all my Actons Or, For, 3s this Particie com- 
monly fignifies, So this Verſe contains a Reafon wiy he ſo vehen.cyt- 
ly defired that he might plead his Cauſe with or bef:re God, 6 He 
cannot be deceived nor blinded, either by the Artifices of boid Accu- 
ſers or Advocats, or by his own Miiapprehenfions or Patfi>ns, but h: 
exatly knows the way that is with me, 7. e the diſpoſition of tay heart, 
and the whole courſe or manter © my life. c It he would exzmine 


of the Furnace pure from-all drofs. It would appear vpor: a fair hear- 


yet from that Hypoecriſic, and thoſe groſs Enormities wherewith my 
Friends charge me.- | | 

1x My foot hath held e his ſteps f, his way have I 
kept and notdeclined g. | 

e 7, &. Made a free and fixed choice, and taken faſt hold of them : 
been firmly and ſtrongly ſettled, and reſolved to continue in them, 
a5 the wore ſignifies. f Either 1- AGively, the fteps or ways i, 

* which Gad hiniſelfwalks ;. the paths of Holineſs, Juiiice,Mercy 5c 

wherein he walhed nith, or after God ; as the Phraſe is, Gen. 5, 24. 
2 Kings 23. 3. following his Example, Or, 2, Paflively. the ſteps 
or paths which God hath appointed mep to walk in, asChap. 21, 14 
g The ſame thing with that in the former part of the \ cre, in «iffe- 
rent expreſſions. : 

12 Neither have I gone back þ from the command- 


ment of his lips ; + I haveeſteemed 7 the word of his 
mouth more than || my neceſſary food k. 


life, human Infirmity excepted, 7 Heb.. 7 have hid or laid it up, as 
Mes do their beſt Treaſures, or what they moſt love and value. The 
Phraſe notes an high cſtimation of it, an hearty attcCtion toit, and a 
diligent care to preſerve it. k Or, my appointed food. or my dayly por: 
tion; 4. e, that food or proviſion which is pecetlary for the ſuppore of 
my life, as this word is uſed, Gen,q7-22, Prev. 30. 8. Gf 31, 15, which 
is more prized and deſired than all the riches 1n the world. 
12 But he is in. one mind, and* whocan turn him m2? 
and what * his ſoul defireth even at he doth x. 
: 1 i e.. Notwithſtanding all theſe Evidences of my fincere Piety,and 
Pl.11s 3, all my Prayers to him, he ſiill continues in the ſame mid and courſe 
of afflifting me, Or, but he is, i. c. if he be, againff oze, or againſt ;« 
ny man, as that "word is oft uted, 2s he now ſctteth himſelf againſt ne, 
Or, byt hets one, the Hebrew prefix Beth, being here the rote of a No- 
minative Caſe. as it is Job 28.8. Pſal. 68. 5. Hy. 13. 9. 
where. So the ſenſe.is, But why do I waſte words to no purpoſe 7 All 
my former conſtant Integrity, and my preſent profeſſion of it, gives 
4 me xo eaſe, he is ſtill one azd the ſame, conſtant, unchangeable in his 
Purpoſes and Counſcls of proceeding againſt o.c Or, he is alone,and 
there is none befides him,who can either ceſtraingor advice, or movehim. 
m No man can change his Counſels or Courſe, or inclikc him to ſhew 
favour to me. He is moſt abſolute and free to do. what he pleaſeth, 
and he dealeth with me accordingly, and not by thoſe milder Methods 
which he uſcth towards other M-o, n He will not do what I pleaſeor 
deſire, but oaly what pleaſeth himſelf. | Sol ects 
14 Forhe performeth the 1hivg that is appointed for 


me 9: and many ſuch things ere with him p. 

o Or,: he will perje, or finiſh my appointed portion, 7. e, thoſe Calami- 
ties which he hath allotted to me for my Portion, which as he hath be- 
gun to layon me, fo he is reſolved to make a full end of them, þ 
There are many ſuch Examples of God's proceeding with Men in way 
of abſolute S>vercignty and Severity, and his Counſcls and Providen- 
ces, though alwaysjuſt, yet are oft ſc<cret, and we cannot diſcern the 
Reaſonableneſs or Equity of them, which is my caſe. 

15 Therefore q am I troubled at his preſence ; when 


I conſider Tam afraid of him. | | 
q In conſideration of his glorious Majeſty, and fovereign, and ir- 


f 0 B. 


s i. e. Towards the Eaſt, which in Scripture is accounted the fore- 
part of the World, as the ticbrew name of it ſignifies, becauſe of the 
Light of the Sun, which ariſcth there, and draweth the eyes of men 
towards it. t To wit, ſo as | would have him, asa Judge to hear ard 
determine my Cauſe, of which he is here ſpeaking : For otherwiſe he 
knew and believed that God waseflentially preſent in all places. » 2. e. 
Towards the Weft. So alſo the North is called the Left-hand and the 
South the Right-hand, wv. g. becauic ſo they all are to a man who locks 
towards the Eaſt. He names ail the ſeveral pirts of the Woild, fo 
ſhew h:s eager defire and reftleſs endeavours to find out God, and to 


9g On theleft hand where he doth work x, but I can- 
not behold him : he hideth himſclfy on the right hand, 


x To wit, in a ſpecial and peculiar manner, more than in other 
Parts of the World ; for ſo indeed God did work in thoſe parts which 
were Northward from ob, becauſe there Mankiad ( among whom God 
dclightsto be and to work ) were moit numerou:, and moſt ingent- 
There alfo was the'Seat of the Aſian 
Empire, which was «minent in Job's time, and afterwards of the 0- 
ther ſucceſſive Empires[n and by allwhichGod did manygreat &glo- 
ri10us Works: But this Eebrew word 1s by others, and that very pro- 
perly and fitly rendred, when or whileſt he worketh, to wit, in ah E+ 
minent manner. So this is added to aggravate 7ob's unhappineſs, We 
may certainly find any man when and where heis working ; Bat I, 
ſaith he, ſearch for God even when and where he is working, and yet 

his ta- 
2 Either, 1. 
I cannot diſcern his Counſels, and Ways, and the Reaſons of his fe- 
vere dealings with me. Or rather, 2, He doth not ap; car to me 2: a 
Judge, to examine my Cauſe and Arguments, but condemus me withe 


xo But a he knoweth Þ the way that I take b : wher 


b me. a Thouph I cannot ſee him, yet my comfort is, that. he feeth me 


me throughly, which above all things i defire, 4 Which cometh out 


ing that lam free, thouzh not from all fin. as he had cunfeifed before, 


h i. e. Nat turnedatiic to any crooked or {inful path or courſe of |. 


and elſfe- 


reliſtivle Power,by which he cau do whatſocyer pleaſeth him,without 


; | giving any account of his matters. y When 1 preſent him to my 
Thoughts. Or, when he appears or ranifcſteth himſelf to me. Or 
for fear or dread of him ;, or, by reaſon of him. 4 
16 For God maketh my heart ſoft s, and the Almj gh- 
ty troubleth me : 

s Or, tender, He hath bruiſed, and broken, or melted if, fo that 3 
have no Spirit, nor courage, nor Strength in me, as this or the like 
Phraſe 15 uſed, Dext. 20, 3. Pſal. 39. 11. Iſa. 7. 4+ Jer. 51. 45. 

17 Becaute I was not cut off: before the darkneſs u ; 


7*ither hath he covered the darkneſs from my face x. 

# Becauſe God did not cut me off by death. « 3. e. Before theſe dark 
and diſmal Miſeries came upen me. Or, before the face, or hy reaſon 
ef the darkneſs, i, e, That God hath not cut me off by theſe Calamities 
but prolonged my days under them, that: he might increaſe my Tor- 
ment. x So that 1 might no longer ſee, or tec] my Miſeries, but 
might be taken out of them by my long deſired death, Seeing C and 
conſequently having before ones Face _) 15 oft put for Experiencing 
fur erjoyi. g good. or feeling evil, as job 20. 19. Pſal. 16, 10, &c. 
Or, tut be hath covered darkneſs, to wit, Death, which is fo called, 
Jes 10, 21, 22. and ciſewhere, from my Face, i. e. he will not allow 
me the favour to fee Death. 

C2.AF AMY, 
The Pradlice and Proſperity of the Wicked, 1 === 16. Their Puniſhment 
and Curſe in the End 19 25 | 


vw Hy ſeing * times are not hidden from the Al- * agg, 
mighty, do they that know him, not ſee his 7 


Cays &? 

a The ſenſe of the words according to this Tranſlation is this phy 
C how comes it to paſs _) ſeing times, ( i e. the ſeveral times of every 
Man's Lite, how long he ſhall live, or the fitteſt Scaſons and Oppartu« 
nitites { wich are oft called times,'as Gen, 24.11. rſal- 31. 25. and 
t19. 126. 4095s 1,'6,9. ) forev.ry Action, and particularly for the 
Puviſhment ot wicked Men,about which the preſent Controverfic was) 
are not hid.cen from, or unknown to the Almighty God, ( 4. &, ſeing all times, 
and Mes. that live, and things thatarte done or to be done in their 
times and ſealons, are exaftly known to God, ) do they that know him, 
( 7, e who loveard obey him, asthat word is oft uicd, as P/al. 9, 10. . 
&X 36. 10 & g1. 14. or they who obf:rve ard. regard his ways ard 
works done 1n the World ) not ſee { whence is it that they caunot gdiſ- 
cern_) his (i.e. God's ) days « ts e: his Times and Sealons which he 
fakes fur the Puniſhment of ungodly Men ; which if they were cons: ; 
ſt.nt 2nd fixed in this Life, as you pretend they are, they would not + 
be unknown' to good Men to whom God uleth to reveal his Secrets.and | 
| © <y couldnot be unobſeryed byſo many good Men, who make i: their. 

buſineſs to mind ard ſtudy the Works of God, andeſpecially tle courſe - 
and Methods of his Providence towards good and bad Mcn, Fhe times 
or days of God's executing Judgments upon. Sinners, are frequently ;. ' 
called the daysof the Lord, as Tſas 2+. 12. & 13: 6, fer. 46; 10, Come 
vare Job, 20. 28. Prov. Ca 34. As 2, 26. asthetime of Man's judg- 
ng '>Ca.lcd mans dgy, 1 £0r, 443+ But this Verſe is in part, and nay | 
vcry agreeahly tothe Hebrew Text be rendred and interpreted thus, 
Nhy or how are not times (+ e. the Times and Seaſonsappointed for the 
Puciihment of Evil-doers, about which the Diſpute was) hidden or * 
reſerved by or with God (i. e. kept as a ſecret in his own Breaſt, -and 
corcealeo trom the Knowledge of Mankind : How can you ſay or think : ' 
withany colour, that theſe Times are fixed and manifeſt to all Men, 
acd that Sinners are conſtantly puniſhes in this Life, and that fo noto- 
rio-fly, thatall good Men ſee it, as was ſaid,. Chap. 22. 15 mmamm— 1g,). . 
ſeing ( as the , Particle Vauis rendred,. Chap. 19,28. or for, as it is tres... 
quently uſed )' they that know, him (C that give themſclves to. under« 
itand and conſider-his doings in the World, who of all Men. are. maſt.,, 
likely to know this, ( 1f it were true and certain) d not fee his days, .- 
towit, of puniſhing the Wicked in this Life, as was ſaid before, And 
this he mentions as 2 fit Preface to uſher in the following Diſcourſe 
concerning the manifold Wickedneſs of M.n_ and withal their preſent - 


[mpunity. ; ery tt bal 
2 Same remove theland-marks 6b; they violently take © "7 
away flocks, and || feed thereef c. Oe A On $06 {nt 


b Or, they (7. e. the Wicked, of whom he here treats') #duch C to' 
wit, in an unlawful manner, and with evil defign, as this word is oft © 
uſed, as Gen. 26: 11,.29; Rath 2: 59: ſo as to invade, or pofleſs, or res” 
:mave, ).the Land-marks, by which Meas Lands are diſcerned,and*their ' 
Proper:ies ſecured ;z thatſo they may enlarge their own 'Border by * 
diminithing their Neighbour. Which is ſohorrid an a& of Injuſtice, ' 

'that it hath not only been ſeverely forbidven by God, Dext. 19. I4. 

& 27:17: Prov: 22z 28: & 23: 10: but alſo declared execrable by'the * 
Heathens 5 among whom it was permitted t6 any Man to kill him that ' 

did it. .c Or, feed them. , They do not hide of kill them, but'openly 

feed them, either in their oppreiſed Neighbours Ground, which,' by * 
taking away the Land: marks, they have made their own, or in' their * 

' own Paſtures, without any Remarſe, or Shame, or Fear of Puniſh-'" 

ment, either from God or. Meg, | bar 

2 They drive away the als, d of the fatherleſs e ; they: 

* take the widows ox f for a pledge g. | : P 
d Either the aſſes, the fingular Numberibeing uſed colleRivyely., Or XChi235%% 
. he ſaith #4e 4ſs, to aggravate their-Sin,that they robbed him who had 

. bur one afs, Compare 184m: i272, 3, 4. 'e, Whoſe: helpleſs. Gon- + 
dition required their Pity and Mercy. f Thereby depriving hes not 

only of the'Ox-it ſelf, but of al the benefic-of its Lavours, by Which; : 

ſhe ſuſtained her Life, ' g Contrary to God's Law, ficſk written-in Meas: 
Hearts, = aftcrwards in Koly Scripture,:£x54: 22: 26, 37; Deuti 24%) 

6, 10, &c. | Hr Vt os, - x. 3263 

4 They turn the needy out of the way b ;* the poor-. : 
of the earth hide themſelves 5 together &.' SALE agate 
b Either 1. Out of the way of Picty and Juſtice, They 'engage them 28; 
to take evil Courſes by their Exatnples, -or Promiſes, or Threatningss | 
 Qr 2+ Out of their Right.” Or 3.” Qut of their courſe and way of livinge- . _.,. 
Qr rather ( as the word properly ſtgatfics, and.as the next Clauſe ex- _. 
plains it ) out of the high-wzy 3; out of the path or-place in which theſe : 
wicked Oppreſfors walk and-range. They labour to keep. out . of their: 
way and tight for fear of their further Igjuriesand Oppreſſions,. i, For - 
icarof theſe wicked Tyrants and Perſecutors, & For their mutual -; 


comfort and detcace againſt thoſe who ſhouid invade or diſturb aan 
| lad 23 " 4+ ,'1., eſe 1 


—_ Ig 
or Warts: he 


on 


Chap. XXIV, 


SW | ap. XXIV. 4 OK Chap. XXIV! 
there. Or,alike. Thovgh!ſome of the Poor are more rearly related, or | foregoing Verſes. m 1, e. The Grapes in their Wine-preſſes, by a 
hive been more ſerviceable to theſe Oppreſiors, yet none _ Mctonymy ot the thing containing, for the thing contained, n Be. F 
can eſcape their Rage andViolence. : cauſe they are not permitted to quench their thirſt out of the Wine | 
5 Behold, as wild aſſes /inthe _—_ mM, 20 they > wich they make, though their labours both need and deſerve refreſhs | 
, ; 1 F * the |] 
forth to their work o, riſing betimes x07 a prey : th \, 12 Men groan o from out of the City p, and the ſoul 


wi:drneſs yie/deth food for them p, and Tor their ny 7 of the wounded cricth our : yet God layeth not folly 


dren q. es 
Which are wild, and lawleſs, and unteachable, and fierce, and 0 Fern x. 2 

WP pow or Food, which "they ſnatch out of the Goods or 2 NE: the ——_— of Ir)uries and gri-vaus Opprefſions. Þ Nat 
Labours of the iiusbandman 3 in all which they are fit Emblems of | O'ly in Deſerts or leſs inhabited places where theſe ſyrants have the 
theſe men. Or, theſe wild.men. For fo this word ſ1gnifies, Gen. 16, 12, | Efcater opportunity and advantage roprattice their Villanies, bur e- 
25 elſe where wild aſſes. The Particle, as, is notin the Hebrew. on 18 Cities where there I> a tace of Orc: c and Government, and 
mn. Which is the proper Havitatien of wild Aﬀeez, er 2. 24. If this | Gourts of Juſtice, and a multitude of P-ople to obſer+e and reftrain 
>< underſtood of the wild Men, he placeth the in the Deſert and 20 Actions; whereby they plainly declare that they neither tear 
Wilderneſs, either beca:ſe they by their Spoils and Violences have + . nor teverence Man, q Either 1. properly, their Soul ſympa- 
deftroved or Er,ven away the People, as 1s intimated Verſe 4. and - "_Y with the Body, and being gricved for its inſupportable m1- 
thereby turned populous places into Deſerts 3, or becauſe ſuch places os crycth to God and Men for help: Or rather 2. the Life os 
25 have but few Houſes and Inhabitants, ( which are oft ſo cailed, as :ood ( which oft cometh under that nave ) of thoſe who are there 
Gen, 21. 20, 21. Joſ 15.61, 62. 1 King 2+ 34 & 9. 18: Iſa. 42 11. wounded unto Death, as this word properly fignifics, Ezeb, 30. 24; 
Mat. 3 1. ) are molt tit for their Robberies, n. Either 1. The Poor _ aloud unto God for vengeance.Gen. 4: 10: Rev. 6:9. 107; wheres 
whom they ſpoiled and drove away from their own former Habitati- pr Fas might ſcem 1n ſome ſort obliged to puniſh them, and yet he 
ons into Deſerts, where they hid themſelves, and wrought hard for | £14 not as the next words declare, r So the Senſe 15, Yet God doth 
2 Subifience; ' Or rather 2. The Opprefſors who are more fitly com- par dre or lay to their charge this folly, or wickedneſs ; which 

pared to wild atſes, and more truly (aid to ſe: k for prey, than thoſe th GCE PRREE 15s commouly . called folly; 3 e. He takes no notice of | 
poor oppreſſed Perſons mentioned v. 4- and 0' whom he ſpears both : e/e horrid Oppreflions, nor hears the Cries of the Oppreiled, nor 
LICE in th« foregoing and following Verſes. 0 4 e. To ſpoil and rob, Ara the Oppretiors, Or, Tet God ( who ſeeth and permiteth all 
which is their conſtant Work and Trade. p They are ſodiiigent and dere nu is or or dereth, or dath, ( for all theſe things this Hebrew 
induſtriou: in that work, that they will fetch Food forthem and theirs hy JPET ) nothing which 1s abſurd, or foaliſh, or unſavenry 3 7: e.doth 
even out of Deſert-p'aces in which the Owners can very hard!y ſub- " , © Wm this peranfſion 2nd coantvance unworthy of himſelf, or 
fiſt. q Or Servants; for the ward f1_nifies both Children and Servants, | WIN a wiſe aud conſiderate man cannot reliſh or approve, or which 
ven the miwlo Fenily. | | isnot in it ſelf righteous and reaſonavle, though we do notalwile dif- 
fHeb they 4G Thev r reap every ene his + corn 5 in the field 7 : cern the reaſonableneſs of it: | 
p wony 7 Toe Wag 13 They are of thoſe that rebel againſt the light 5 E 


minzled . hy :oked 

| and + they g=ther the vintage of th wicked #. | 1e 11; 
ys bo r Either AS Poor. who are forced to ga:her in the Corn and they know nor # the ways thereof z, nor abide in the 
1edze rather 2. the Oppr:fſors, of | paths thereof x. 


+ +1, Grapes of their wicked Oppreſfots : Or 
200k ts bo big ſpeaks, v. 4. Boy, s i- e. The Corn of the Wicked, as | 
it is in the next Clauſe Or, that which is not their own; as the | tioned, aud as a great aggravation or their wickedneſs, that they were 
Seventy, and Chi'd-e, and Vulgar Latin trauflace it, reading the | nt modett fianers which were aſhamed of their evil ways; »nd there» 
Hebrew as two diſtin words They reap other Mens labours, | tore fiaged in the dark, and in ſecret, as ſome whio here follow : but 
2 ive In the Field of the right Owner from whom they take 1t f1nn<d impudently in the face of the Son, and in ſpight of all their 
He notes their great Power and Boldneſs, that they did nor come light, as well the Light of Reaſon and Conſcience, which abhors and 
ſuddenly and carrv away thei: Corn, whenit was laid up 'n the Barns, condemns their wicked ations, as the Light of Divine Revelation, 
or in heaps, but they proceeded leifurely, and ſtaid to reap the | Which was then in good meaſure imparted to the Church and People 
Corn, and by degrees carried it away; as it were in triumph, not of God in this time, and ſhortly after was committed to Writing 3 

a'l which they ſet at defiance, finning with maniteſt contempt of 


fearins any Interruption or Hindrance either from God or Man. : ; 
ag ED - themſei'ves : So” they promiſcuouſly robbedall, even | God, and of Men, and of their own Conſciences. # Either 1. they 
their own Brethrenin Tniquity 3 whereby alſo he may intimate the | do not defiie or care to know them 3 they are willingly ignorant of 


righteous Judgement of Godin puniſhing one wicked Man by ano-. | them. Or 2. they do not approve. nor love, nor chooſe them as 
ther, and in depriving Men of thoſe Goods which they had wickedly knowing frequently fignifiesin the Scripture uſe. « 7: e Of the light 
gotten. Or the wicked( the Singular Number being uſed colle&ively Or 1 ſuch ways and courſes as are agreeable to the light, Or, in 
CN reap Pequent's rh Oppreſlors _) gather the vintage 3 his ways, i e. 'n the ways of God, who is oft underſtood 1n this 
> i As IN Book where he is not expreſſed: x If they do ſome good aftions,yet 

3" They cauſe he naked x to lodge y without cloa- my = mo pac in well-doing they are not conſtant and fixed, 
thing DS, that they have no covering in the cold 4. - — Th ” . . . . o 

x 1,e. Thoſe whom they have.mad: naked, whom they ſtripped 14 _ murdererxifing wich thelight y, killeth the Mick 
6f their Garmeais and Coverings ; io far were they from exercifing | POOT and needy z, and in che night is as a,ghief «. 
Taſtice or Charity towards them. y To ſl:ep in the night, which 1s »Y As ſoon as the light appears, uling no leſs diligence in his wick | 
the coldeſt Seaſon. 2 Without Bed: cloaths to cover them. Compare cd practiſes, than Labourers Co 1n their honeſt and Gaily employments 
Dent. 24. 13 s Of the Night of the' Winter-ſeaſon. This Verſe is { Where he find> nothing to ſatisfie his Covetouſtels, he cxerciſeth 
and may fitiy be rendred thus 3 They cauſe Men to lodge naked, becauſe his Crueity. a #.e: He isreally a Thief ; the particle as being oft uſed 
they have no tloathins (i e becauſe thev leave them nothing where- to expreſs, not the reſemblance, but the truth of the thing. as Num. 
with'they can cloath themſelyes _) and no covering in the cold. They | 11+- 1. Deut: 9: 10: Ho. 4: 4. & 5. $0: John 1. 14. Inthe Night 
leave them neither Rayment to wear in the Day, nor a Covering for they rob men ſecretly and cunnipgly, as in the Day-time they do it 

| more openly and avowedly, 


the Nizhe. & X 
15 * The eye alle of the adulterer b waiteth for the 
* YProv. 7:55 


8 They 6 are wet with the ſhowers of the mountainse, | 15 *. ; 1 
and embrace the rock d for want of. a ſhelter. ewilight c, ſaying 4, No eye ſhall ſee me ; and + dif- + 
6 3, e., The:Poor being ſtripped of their Rayment, an4 forced a- guiſeth bzs face e. 2th his tees 


s Thiz1s added as the general Charater of the perſons before men- 


ter the 
Uni age 


fe f way .from their Houſes, . c With. the Rain-water, which 1n great | 6. j; e, The Adulterer ; but he mentions his Eye, becauſe the Eye in ſeeret: 
1444 ſhowpes runs. down from the Rocks or Mountains info the Caves or | diſcerns the difference between light and Carkneſs. c To wit, for i 
Holes in the ſides of th:m,to which: tliey tled for ſhelters d 7 e, Are the evening twilight, which is his opportunity. &d In his heart,com- 
glad when they cen find a Cavern or Cleft of a Rock in which they | forting himſclt with the thuughts of ſecretneſs and impunity. e Heb, 
may have ſome.proteftion. againſt the injuries of the Weather, aud | purteth his face in ſecret, covers it with a Vizard or Cloak, that he may 
, anhiding-placef: on the fury of cheir Oppreſliors, Compare Lam:4 5. | be undiſcovered, | 
9. They e pluck the fatherlefs from the breaſt f, and | 16 In the dark f they dig through houſes, which they 
take'a pledge of the poor g+ g had marked for themlelves þ in the day-time: * they , 
e The wicked Opprefſor, as is manifeſt from the following words. | know not the lights. » _ 
f either out of Cruelty, not ſparing poor Infants, but killing them : f Either 1, the Adulterer laſt mentioned ; although ſuch perſons do Joh:3:20 
-r out of covetouſneſs. and with defizn either wy Sing wrong, OT | no: uſe nor need” theie violent courics to get 1nto the Houſe of the 
to imploy her in their work to which they ſo Uir1 4 oy fucklios Adultereſs, but are commonly admitted upon milder and eaher terms. | 
wry hay not allow any of ve nes po eggs: © MUcKUIDB | Or 2. theThi.f & Robber, whoſe common' praiſe this is, -of whom 
ot ner Infant. g Of which ſee the Notes on C).p .  . | he ſpokev' 14: aid taviog on that occaſion inſerted the mention of - 
10''They' cauſe him h to go naked without clothing, | the Aculterer as one who -a&: @his ſin' in the ſame manner as the . 
and they take away the ſheaf from the hungry K. N:ght thief did, he now returns to him again. g The Thief and his 
1256; h The poor oppreſſed perſon, 7 Leaving him nothing, or next | Complice:s, þ Defigning by ſome ſecret mark the Houſe of ſome rich' 
fo nothing, to coverhim in che Day*time, when he ſhould go abroad | man whici they intended to rob, and the part of the houſe where they 
to his1aour to pet his living, but cannot for wapt of Cloaths to co- reſoiyed tocuter into'it: .7 Z:e; Do not love norlike it, as verſe 13. 
ver hisNakednefs. þ That ſingle Sheaf which the poor man had got | but avior it, as it tolſows. | +4 
_ the Sweat of his Brows to ſatisfie his _— Farr. wg nes 17 For the morning is to them even as thedhadow of 
Cake away, and added it to their own Stores and fu mt. v7, 1 arath &* "5 N 7 | 
are hungry ; or they ſent them away hungry 3: thoſe words being rc- morn 3 GOES, 70Y EN ” theterrouss ofthe | 
an, > oft uſual ) | ſhadow of death /, | 
peated out of the forter clauſe of the V. rſe. ( as 15 moſt uſual ) - > Terrib c Pay : 
which 't00b- or carried the ſheaf,, of their ſheaves 3 i 8. which reaped Wd e res, rae wu _ becauſe it both dilcovers them, and 
ob: and *ga'hered jn the rich man's Corn, tor which they received In- a aa ar =D , Lo ey Nos brought to light or diſcoyered 
Juries inſtead of a juſt Recompenſe for their labor 3 and that when they are overwhelmed wit eadly horrours and Terrours: Or. asthe 
words arc, and may 'vcry agreeablyto the Hebrew be rendred thus; 


God's liberality, and the bounty of the Eurth to them, invited and | | : 
of obliged them - Kind and paſs ations to othliers. EE, : RR te TI ſignifies ) they «mp [4 EO 
. of, ies” 1 het "PIR: noweth, every em knoweth 3 j- e. approveth and lovet 
Tx Which make oil within cheir walls Z,, ava tread the terrours of the ſhadow of death. 1. e. the grofleſt darkneſs of the Night 
| A tnerr wine-preſles %, and ſutfer thirlt », Ne” ._ | which toother en 15 a5 terrible a« the ſhadow of death, but to theſe 
F os Wa id Cee ene Eee" > the Oppre®: | OE ES 
. R ) AaTKNets, . 

f I . . : . ; 4 - L _ \ - Se - l 
2,9: 2, media Wal th ch Goplln fo thr | 18 Ho jo file Fa the waters mn ; their w portion ob 99 
Ol-ve-yards nor Vinc-yards leſt to them, but they were vioicntly } curſed in the earch» ; he beholdeth not the way of the ;je waters 
(ſpc!ted of, and driven away fromallthofe things, as was faid in the vineyard 9. 


a H 2 m In 


hap. 


ly take, 


| Heb. '7s 
peet to 


| 21.33, 


$2 x 
t 


'Orbe 
 Frufteth. 
, _— 


> Heb. vis- - 


XXIV. F 


m In theſe words he deſcribes either, 
ſition and deportment, that ſuch perſons are light and frothy in their 
ſpirits; or ſwife, or hafy to do evil, or unſtable in their ways as #he 
waters, or upon the face of the waters ; t. e. like the foam or froath, 
or any other light thing which ſwims upon the top of the waters. Or 
rather, 2. His miſerable condition, of which he manifeſtly ſpeaks 1n 
the next words, an1in the two next Verſes. For though Job conſtantly 
affirms and maintains it againſt his Friends, that many ungodly men 
do proſper and eſcape puniſhment inthis lite; yet withal he obſerves 
and affert:, that God will certainly ſooner or later puniſh them, and 

that he ſometimes doth it here, cutting them off by crue! and untime- 
Ay deaths, or otherwiſe inflifting ſome notable Judgment upon them 3 
of which he alſo ſpeaks Chap- 21. 17. Oe- So the ſenile is, He 7s 
ſwift, i. e. he quickly paſſeth away with all his glory, as the waters, 
which never ſiay in one place, but are alwiſe haſting and running a- 
way 3 Orlike a Ship, or any other thing which ſwimmeth «pn the 
face of the waters : Though he ſeems to ſtand as firm and unmovyeable 
as a Rock, and to have taken deep rooting in the Earth. yet he 1s 
ſaddently and unexpeftedly removed and pulled up by the roots. n Or 
his; for he ſtill ſpeaks of the ſame perſon, though with a change of 
the number, which is moſt familiar in this Book, and elſe where 1n 
Scripture, o Or, part, i. e. his Habitation and Eſtate, which he left 
behind him, þ Is really accurſed by God, and is by allMen who live 
nearit, or obſcrveit, pronounced accurſed, becauſe of the remarkable 
Judgments of God upon it, 2nd upon his Poſterity or Family to which 
he left it, and from whom it is ſtrangely and ſuddenly alienated. 9 
7 e. He ſhall never more ſee or enjoy his Vineyards, or other pleaſant 
places and things, which ſeem to be comprehended under this par- 
ticular, 
19 Drought andheat + conſume the ſnow-water ; / 


doth the grave thoſe which have ſinned r. 

r As the Snow, though it doth for a time lye upon the Ground, yet 
at laſt is diflolved into Water by the heat of the S2aſon,\atid that 
Water quickly ſwailowed up by the Earth when It is dry avd thirſty : 
So ungodly ſinners, though they live and proſper for a ſeaſon, yet at 
laſt they ſhall go into the Grave, which will conſume them, together 
with all their Hopes and Comforts» Their jolly Life 1s attended with 
a ſad and oft times ſudden and violent Death, not with ſuch a death as 
the godly die, which perfetts them and brings them to Happineſs, but 
witha conſuming and never dying death. 


20 The womb ſhall forget him "s, the worm Þ (hall 
feed ſweetly on him 7, he ſhall be no more remembred 


#, and wickedneſs x ſhall be broken y as a tree z. 

s His Mother thatbare him in her Womb, and much more the reft 
of his Friends, ſhall ſeldom or never remember or mention him ; 
to wit, with honour and comfort, but ſhall ratherbe airaid and aſha- 
med to own their Relation to one that lived ſach a vile and wretched 
Life, and dyed ſuch an accurſed Death, This he ſhall have in ſtead of 
all that Honour and Renown which he thriſted and laboured for, and 
expected ſhould perfume his Name and Memory. # This proud and 
inſolent Tyrant that preyed upon all his Neighbours, v. 2, 3, 0c 
ſhall himſelf become a prey and a ſweet morſel to the contemptible 


- Worms. #4. To wit, with Honour, cr ſo as he defired and hoped, but 


his nawe fhall rot, and ſcarce ever be mentioned but with Infamy and 
Execration, x #. & The wicked man, of whom he is here treating 3 
the abſtra@ being,put for the Concrete, of which many Inſtances have 
been formerly given; y Broken to pieces, or violently broken ?down 
as the wors ſignifies, He ſhall be utterly and irrecoverably deſtroyed. 
And this expreſſion plainly ſheweth. that the former Clauſes are not 
to be underſtood of the finner's happineſs in an eafie and confortable 
death, but of his curſed and miſerable end. 7 Which being once 
broken, either by its own weight, or by ſome violent wind, or by the 
hand of mn, never groxeth again. 

> 21 He « evilentreateth bthe barren zhat beareth not 


and doth not good tothe widow. 
aEither 1. God who isoft underſte>d. who having cut off his per- 
ſon, and brought him to his Grave, continues his Jud2ments upon his 
Wife or Widow, and Family. Or rather, the Oppr: flor, who is the 
Principal Subj:-& of almoſt all that is ſaid in this Chapter 3 whoſe 
great and manifold wickedneſs Js5 deſcribed fromv, 2. to 18. where 
he procee!s to relate the Judgments of God upon him for h:s ſins ; 
which having done, v. 18.19, 20. he here returns to the declaration 
of his further Wickedneſses the Cauſe of theſe Judgments. 65 Or feed- 
eth upen, or d?v'ureth, or breaketh in pieces 3 for all theſc the word ſigni- 
fieth, and all come to one and the ſame thing. c Barreneeſs was eſtec- 
meda Curſe and Reproach; and ſo he added affliftion to the afflicted, 
whom he ſhould have piticd and helped . But becauſe ſuca had no 
Children, and the Widows no Husbands, to defend or avenge their 
Cauſe, he exerciſed Cruelty-upon theme & Either, 1. He did her 
much wrong and harm, it being uſual in Scripture under ſuch Nega 
tive Expreſſions to contain the Affirmation of the contrary; as Exod, 
20.7. Prov. 19. 21. & 28.21. And ſo this branch anſwers to the 
former, of evil-entreating. Or, 2. He afforded her no help, or ad- 
yice, or comfort in her Diſtreiſes : And ſo he intimateth the great- 
neſs of Omiſſion-fins, and that the common negle& or cotempt of 
plain and poſitive Duties, whether of Piety to God or of Charity to men 
isto be reckoned among highand ha'nous Crimes, 

22 He draweth e alſo the mighty f withhis power's: 
he riſeth up-b, and || no mar is {ure of life 5. 

e Either intohis Net, as Pſalm 20. 9, or to his Party, to affiſt and 
ſerve himin his Enterprizes. f Who are mighty in Place, or Wealth, 
or Power : He praQiſeth upon theſe, as wellas upon the Poor. g 
Which being greater than theirs,he ſoon forceth them to comply 
with his defires and demands. þ To wit, againſt any man, as this 
Phraſe is uſed, Pſalm. 18- 38. & 44. 5. Whenhe ſets himſelf againſt 
2 man. and reſolves to deſtroy him?! z, e. None of them whom he ſo 
oppoſeth can be ſecure or confident of holding his life, but al: fuch 
give up themſelves for loſt men, as knowing they cannot reſiſt his 
greater mizht : Compare Dent. 28, 26. 

23 Theugh ir be given him #0 be in ſafety, whereon 


he refteth ; yer || his eyes «re upon their ways k, 

k Heb. He giveth to him to be in ſafety, or all things neceſſary for 
his fafety, &c. This Verſe is underſtood cither, 1. Ofthe Oppreſſor, 
If the Oppreſfor give a man his hand or promiſe, that he ſhail live in 


Cc, 


7. The wicked mans difpo- 


| foundation for any judicial conteſt with God, 


O B. Chap. 


ſafety by him; or, If the Oppreſſed give Gifts to the Oppreſſor to 
purchaſe his quiet and ſafety, and as 1t follows, he refteth upon that 


XN, - 


aſſurance given him, zet his, 7. e. the Oppreflors eyes are upon their 
ways, he watcheth for their halting, and ſeeks tor all occaſions to 
quarrel with them,and to deftroy them. Or rather, 2, Of God, and 


ſo the words are fitly rendred thus, He, 7. e. God, giveth, or granteth 
fo him, 1,6. to the Oppreſſor, to be in fafety, 7. e. te live a Quiet 
and comfortable life, and he reſteth ſecure, or he refteth or leareth upon 
him, 7. e. upon God ; hisjformer experience of God's favour makes 
him confid ent of the continuance of it : So he is not only happy in 
his preſent enj3y ments, but alſo of his freedom from diſtraQting tears 
of tuture miſeriecs?s and his 7.e: God's eyes are upon their ways, i, e. God 
bleſſeth and proſpereth him in all his undertakings. as this Phraſe ſt 
commonly ſignifies, as Deut. 118 12: Exra 5: 5. Pſalm 33. 1g 0 
yet his eyes are upon their ways, 1. e, although God giveth them \ p 
ſtrange ſuccefles, this doth not proceed from his jznorance or re _ 
leſnels of theic wicked ations, for he ſees and obſerves them al] an 
will in Cue time puniſh them, though not alwiſe jn this life, nor 2: Fog 
as their fins a:e committed, but in ſuch time and way, as he or 
wiſdom ſeeth moft fit. 4 Jon 


24 They are exalted for a little while I but + wn ws 


gone 7, and brought low », they are + taken out of 


not, 
T Hed, cla« 


the way oas all others p, and cut off gas the tops of the {4 w. 


ears of corn r. 

I They live in honour 2nd happineſs, but not f | 
beſt during this fhort and mortal life, which [aſteth but for _ be 
t1me,and therefore their preſent happineſs is not to be novice ; = 
15 1t any reproach to God's Providence , which hath time enoy Ap 
reckon with them hereafter. m Heb. arent ; to wit, in this Wo Id, 
they die. n As low as their Graves: Or, after C as the Particl F ' 
15 elſe whereuſei, as hath been obſerved before J they Rs: hack 
brought low ; to wit, by pining Sickneſs, or other grievous Judgm = 
9 7, e, Out of this World ans way ofliving by Death, Or are a 
et or ſhut up; to wit, in the Grave, the place of ſilence and im era 
p They <4 N0- more prevent or delay their Death, than the — 4 
wen inthe World. q?By Death's Sickle, or by a violent hand ; 
eh api oa. and maturity when he is arrived at his 

e& ſtature of wor ower an 
aye aanns _ d glory, then God cuts him off, and 

' 25 Andif tbe not ſo now 5, who will make me a 
oe, and woke my ſpeech nothing worth ? 

s To wit, as I have diſcourſed ; if God aoth not ſu ickec 
to live long and proſperouſly in the World arg of Fans 
and if good men be not ſometimes ſorely afflited here, if all thine: 
do not tall alike to all men in theſ: matters, : Io 
ts ONS. 

uaad s anſwer, Loa s majeſty and purity is ſuch as that man cannot be 

au ay * fore God Feds bim the heavenly lights doſe their Iuſtre and 
g ; "__ anſwered Bildad « the. Shuhite , 

aid, 
 @ Not to that which Job ſpake laſt, but to that which 
in Bildad's mind, and which ſeemed moſt reproveable in alt bs Tit. 
courſes ; to wit, his bold Cenſure of God's proceedings with him, and 
his avowed and oft repeated deſire of diſputing the matter with him. 

2 Dominion b andfear c, are with him d; he maketh 
peace in his high places |]; : 

b 7.e., abſojute and Soveraign Power over all Pe 
with whom to contend, is both” rebellion and Hoary grgphdm. 
underſtood. or rerrour, 7. e. that which juſily makes him dreadful to 
a'l men, and eſpecially to all that ſhall undertake to diſpute with 
him 3 awfull Majeſty, infiaite Knowledge. whereby he knows mens 
hearts and ways, far better than_they know themſelves, and ſees much 
!in 1n them which themſelves do not diſcover, and exaRt purity and 
Jaſtice, which renders him formidable to ſinners. d Emphatically 
fpoken : with him whom thou challengeſt ; with him who is not hght- 
ly and irreverently to be named, much lefs to be contended with.and 
therefore 1t 15 thy dnty to humble thy ſelf for thy preſumptuous words 
and carriazgs cowards him, and quietly and modeſtly to ſubmit thy 
ſelf and thy cauſe to his pleaſure, || This Clauſe as well as the follow- 
ing Verſe, ſeems to be added to prove what he laſt ſaid of God's 
Dominion and Dreadfulneſs : He keepeth and ruleth all perſons and 
things,1in Heaven in peace and harmony, and the order which he hath 
eſtabliſhed among them. The Angels, though they be very numerous 
and differing 'n orders and miniſtries, do all own his Soverajgnity,and 
acquickce in his Pleaſure, without any diſputing and murmuring. 
The Stars and heavenly Bodies. though vaſt in their bulk, atd vari- 
ous 1n their mot1ons, yet exattly keep their courſes and the order 
am _ _ OP : And therefore it is great folly and 

exempt thy ſelf from God's Turiſdiai 

with the methods of God's dealings with  — org af ns 

3 Is there any number of his armies e ? and upon 
whom doth not his light ariſe f? 
. Of the Angels, and Stars, and other Creatures, all which are 
his Hofls, whelly ſubmitting themſelves to his Will, to, be and do 
what God would have them : and therefore how inſolent and unrea- 
ſonable a thing is it forthee to quarrel with him ./ He ſpoke before 
of God's making peace ; and here he mentions the Armics by which, 
he keeps 1t. f Either 1; properly, his Sun, which riſeth upon all, 
Matt. 5. 45 Or rather 2, metaphorically; all that is in Men, which 
is or may be called /ighz : the light of life, by which men ſubfiſt,and 
arc kept out of the ſtate of the dead, called a land of darkneſs, Job 10+ 
22, The light of Reaſon and Underftanding, cailed Cod's Candle Pro: 
20. 27. by which thou O Job, art capable of arguing with God and 
with us, and all that peace, and proſperity, and comfort which thou 
ever didſt enjoy, which oft comes under the name of Light, as Eſfth. 
8.15, 16. Pſalm $7. I1:& 112, 4. Which being here called light, is 
to continue the Metaphor, moſt fitly ſaid to arzſe upon men: all this 
is from God, and therfore 1s wholly at his diſpoſal : he freely gave it 
all, and he may juſtly take it away 3 as thou thy fclf didſt truly ob- 
ſerve and confeſs, 0b. 1. 21. and conſequently thou haſt no reaſon to 
reproach God for diſpoſing of his own as he pleaſeth. Thou haſt loſt 
nothing which was thine own, and having no propriety, there is 00 


and 


4 * How 


| Cp: 


&c,&X 15 
145 Cs 


d. afe 


3, cla« 
P, 


b # 


[Or, ua. 
"me aend be 
br wider 
tng Waters? 
v0 Gr. 


? 
+ 


*Ch 4.17 


x Pſa. - + F 


\ an Advucit as thouart, to maintain his Rights and plead his Cauſe. 


XXVI. T0 


4 * How then, cat man g be juſtified with God 6: 

or how can he be clean that is born of a woman 7 ? 

» #g The word ſignifies M7 that is -z;ſerable, which ſuppoſeth him 
co be ſinful ; and that-ſuch a Creature ſhould quarrel with that Do- 
minion of God, to which the finleſs, and happy, and glorious An- 
gels willingly ſubmit, is moſt :bſurd and impious. + 1, e- Before 
God's Tribunal, to which thou doſt ſo boldly appeal- Thou maieſt 
plead thy caaſe with thy fellow Worms as we are, and expeC& to be 
juſtified, but wo to thee if the great God undertake to plead his 
Cauſe againſt rhee ; how ſeverely and certainly wouldſt thou then 
be condemned! 7 To wit, after the ordinary courſe ; for other- 
wiſe Chriſt was born of a Woman, but in a ſingular manner. This 
Birth :5 alledged as an evidence of Man's filchineſs, Job 14- 4- and 
15.14 F/o/m 51- 5- and of his Iyableneſs to God's Curſe and Wrath, 
Gen» 3+ 16+ Epheſ- 2 2+ and conſequently of his condemnation op- 

polite to the juſtification here men.1oned, and contidently expett- 

ed by Job in this conteſt- 
5 Behold even to the moon, and it ſhinneth not 4 ; 
vea, the ſtars are not pure in his ſight /. 

k The Moon, though a bright and glorious Creature, Job 31. 26. 
Cant. 619: if compared with the ſplendour of the Divine Majefty, 1s 
but as a dark and earthly lump, without any luſture or glory- He 
names the Aon and the Stars, rather than the Sum, becaute they ma- 
ny times are eclipſed or diſappear even toour eyes,which is a plain 
evidence of theirutter obſcurity in reſpe& of God's Light : Where- 
as the Sun, though that alſo be obſcure, if compared with God, yet 
it cas a conſtant and moſt clear Lighr. 
and thence proceeding to the Stars, the Sun is included between 
them. 1 He can diſcern many ſpots and blemiſhes in them which 
we cannot ſee ; and in like manner he can diſcover thoſe corrup- 
tions or fins in us, which are unknown to our own Conſciences, 

_ which ſhould make thee, O 7ov, tremble to appear before his Tri- 

bunal. | 

6 How much leſs man zhat.is a * worm m9: 
ſon of man which is a worm »? 

»m To wit, mean and vile, and impotent; proceeding from cor- 
cuption,and retuining to it; and withal filthy and loathlom,and ſo 
every way a very unfit perſon to appear before the high and holy 
God, and much more to contend with him- = The fame thing re- 
peated in other words; on'y for miſerable man in the Jaſt Branch he 
here puts the ſon of any man, of what degree or quality foever, to 
thew that this is true cven of the greateſt and belt of Men- 

CHAPF. XAFVE 

Job's reply ; This toucherh not Job, I —4- Who acknowledgeth God's 

power and providence to be infinite and unjearchable ; Of which we have 

bt ſmall knowledge, 5 n= 14 
HE Foo aniwered and faid, 

2 How haſt thou helped 4 bim that is without 
power b ? Low fſaveſt thou the arm zrhat hath no 


{trengrh 2? : 

a Thou haſt helped egregiouſly : Ir is an ironical expreſſion, im- 
plying the quite contrary, that he had not at all helped: See the 
like, Gen- 3* 22+ 1 Kings 18+ 27+ 1 Cor- 4-8, 10+ b Either 1- God, who 
it {cems is weak and unwiſz, and needed ſo powerful and eloquent 


and the 


Or rather 2+ Job himſelf: I am a poor helpiets Creature,my ſtrength 
and ſpirits quite bruken with the pains ofmy Body and perplexiries 
of my Mind, whom Nature,and Humanity,and Religion ſhould have 
taught thee to ſupport and comfort, with a repreſentation of rhe 
gracious Nature and Promiſes of God, and not ro terrifie and over- 
whelm me with difplaying his Soveraign Majeſty, the thoughts 
whereof are already ſo diſtrattive and dreadtul to me- : 

2 How hait thou counſelled kim 1hat hath no wit- 
dome? and bow haſt thou pientifuily declared the thing 
asSit is 4? 

c Either 1. God : Thou haſt in effe& undertaken to teach God 
how to govern the World. Or rather 2- Me, whom you take to be 
a man void of Underſtanding, Chap: 11. 2, 3- whom therefore you 
thould have inſtructed with wholeſome Counſels, in ſtead of thele 
impertinent diſcourſes; and who indeed do want wiſdom, being 
paf:aly at a loſs, and not knowing what to ſay or do- d Heb- Ej- 
Jjence, the truth and ſubſtance of rhe thing in queſtion between us ;\ 
Thou haſt ſpoken the whole truth, and nothing bur the truth, and 
4llthat can be 1fazd in the matter- Or Wiſdom,as this word is uſed, 
Pro. 3- 21+ A moſt wiſe and profouid Diſcourſe thou haſt made,and 
much ro the purpoſe : An Ironical Expreſſion as before- 

4 To whom haſt thou uttered words e? and whoſe 
{pirit came trom thee f ? 

e Forwhoſe Inftruttion haſt thou utrered theſe things ? For mine? 
Poft thou think me to be ſo ignorant that I do not know,that which 
the imeaneſt perſonsare not unacquainted with ; ro.wit, that God 1s 
incomparably greater aad better rhan hisCreatures? f So the ſenſe 
3s, whom haſt thou revived or comforted by this Diſcourſe? Not me 
ſurely- Thefpirit or breath of a Min is in a manner ſuppretled and 

intercepted in deep ſorrows and conſternarions, ſuch as Job's were, 
and when he is cheared or refreſhed,ir finds vert and breaths our free- 
ly as it did befere- Bur I do not remember that ever this phraſe is 
uſed in this ſen'e ; but.oa the contrary, the giving or reſtoring of 
life zre expreſſed by the coming in, and not by the going out of the ſpirit 
er breath, as appears from Gen- 2, 7; Ezek- 37. 5, 6, 10+ The words 
therefore are and may be otherwiſe underitood ; Either thus, Whoſe 
ſpirit or inſpiration, (as this word lignifies, Fob 32. 8-) came fromthee ? 
Who inſpired thee with this profou::d Diſcourſe of thine ? Was it 
by Divine Inſpiration, as thou would have us to believe? Or wa: 
it nota rath ſuggeſtion of thy own vain and fooliſh mind ? Or thus 
[ſe ſpirit went ot (to wit, ofhis Body by an extaſie of admiration) 
for zhee, by reafon of thy Difcoucrie ? I may be thought partial in 
my Cenſure of it, but thou mayeſt perceive none of our Friends 
here preſent admire ir, except thy ſc! Or to, or for whom (the 
Parricle etþ being here underitood out of the former Branch, as 1s 
uſual among the Hevrew:} d:dbreafh go ou: from thee ; 1 &- Did(t thou 


Or ty naming the Moon, | 


B. 


& Job having cenſured B/ld2s diſcourſe concerning God's Domi-« 
mon and Power, as inſignificant and impertinent torheir queſtion 
he here proceedeth ro ſhew how little he needed his Information in 
that point, and that he was able to inftru& him in that. Dotirine. of 
w hich accordingly he gives divers Proofs or Inſtances: Here he ſhew- 
<th thatthe powerand providence of God reacheth not ory to the 
things which we ſce,but allo to the inviſible parts of the World,not 
only to the Heavens above and their Inhabiran+s, and ro Mn upon 
Earth, of which Biland diſcourſed Chap: 25 2,3: bur alio to ſuch per= 
ſons orthings as are under the Earrh, or u..wver the Waters: which 
arc under the Earth ;3 which are our of our ſight and reach, and 
might bethoughr ro be our of tie ken vr care of Divine Providence. 
This Horew word ſometimes ſignifies Giants, as Deut. 2 18, 20 & J 
13: and i Chron 20. 8 Whence it may be tranſlated to ether great, 
and as it were, gigantick Creatures, and more cominonly dead men, 
4s P/1/m 88. 11+ Prove 2- 18+ & G» 18. & 20 16. T/a 14+ g- & 26- 4 9. 
Whence it is ſuppoſed meraphorica!ly ro ſignifie aiſo dead or lifeleſs 
things; though there be no cxample of that uſe of the word <iſe- 
where ; and it may ſeem improper to call thoſe things dead, which 
never had nor were capable of life. The next Helrew word, or the 
Verb is primarily uſed of Women with Child, and {iignifies their 
bringing forth their young Ones with travel! or gricuous pains, as Job 
39:3* Pſalm 29: 9+ I/a- 23. 4+ & 45-19. and thence it ſignifies either ro 
form or bring forth, as below, verſe 13- Prov- 26. 10. Or to grieve or 
mourn, or te be in pain» Accordingly theie words are diverily under= 
ſtood; either 1- Of dead, or lifeleys things, ſuch as Amber, Vearl, Co- 
, ral, Mctals, or other Minerals, which are fermed or brought forth - 
| to wit, by the Almighty Power of God, from »nder the waters; i e. 
; either in the botcom of the Sea, or within the Earth, which is the 
; loweſt El-ment, andin the Scripture and other Aurhors ſpoken of 

as under the waters ; this being obſerved as a remarkable Work of 
God's Providence, that the waters of the Sea, which are higher than 
the Earth, do not overwhelm ie. and from under (which may be re- 
peated out of the former Clauſe of the Verſe, after the manner o 
the Hebrews) the Inhabitants thereof; 1- & either of the Waters which 
are Fiſhes, or of the Earth, which are Men- Or father 2. Ofthe Gti. 
ants of the old World, which were Men of great Renoun whilſt 
they lived, Gen.6-3+ and the remem'rance of them and of their ex- 
emplary deſtruQion was now itt ſome ſort freſh and famous : who 
once carried themſelves intolently towards God and: Men,but were 
quickly ſubdued by the Divine Power, and drowned with 2 Deluge 
and now mw4rn or groan from under the waters wheie they were buried, 
and from under the preſent Þhabitants thereof, as before. Or % Of 
vait and gigantick Fiſhes or Minfters of the Sea, who by God's infinite 
Power were f.rmed or brought forth under the waters, with the other Ir 
hab:tants thereof ; To wit, of the waters, the leſſer Fiſhes. Or 4. Of 
aead men, and of the worſt ſort of them, ſuch as dicd in their fins 
and afrer death were condemned to further miferies; for of ſuch 
this very word ſeems to be uſed, Pro. 2.18. and 9. 18- who are here 
ſaid to mourn or groan from under the waters ; i. & from the lower parts 
of the Earth, or from under thoſe ſubterranean Seas of Waters, 
which are by Scripture and by Philoſophers ſuppoſed to be within 
' and under the Earth, of which ſee Derr. 8: 7. Jobs 28 4, 19. Pſalm 
33+ 7o and from under the Inhabitants thereof; 1. e. either of the Wa- 
ters or of the Earth, under which theſe Waters are, or with the other 
Inhabitmits thereof ; 1. e. of that place under the Waters, to wit, the 
Apoſtare Spicits- So the ſenſe is, rhat God's Dominion is over all 
men, yea even the dead, and the worſt of them, who though they 
wou!d not own God,nor his Providence,whilſt they lived, yet now 
are forced to acknowledge and feel that power which they deipiſed, 
and bitterly mourn under the fad effe&s of it in their ſubterraneal 
and infernal Habit.tions, of which the next Verſe ſpeaks more 
plainly. And this ſenſe teemes to be favoured by the Conrextand 
Scope of th2 place, wherein Jo begins his Diſcourſe of God's Pow- 
er and Piovidence at the lowermolt and hidden parts of the World, 
and thence proceeds to thole parts whict ate higher and viſible. Nor 
is it ſtrange that job ſpeaks of th:ſe matrers, ſerng ir is evident, 
that Job, and others of the holy Patriarchs and Prophets of old, did 
know and telteve the Dofrine of the future Life, and of its ſeveral 
Recompenccs to g-od and bad men. Others und rſtanid this of the 
Reſurre&ion of tie dead ; The deadjhall be born (as this word is uſed 
Pjalm 2 7. Prov. $. 24, 25-1.e. ſhall be raiſed, which is a kind of Re« 
gencration, or ſecond Birth, and is fo called, Mar. 19. 28. As 13. 
33+) from under the waters (ts ee. even thoſe of them that lye in the 
waters, Rev. 20.13. that were drowned and buricd in the Sea, and 
devoured by Fiſhes,c. whoſe cafe may ſeem to be moſt deſperate, 
and rher:fo1e they only arc here mentioned) and (or, even, this Par- 


ticle being oft uted expolitively) the Inhabitants thereof, 1. e. thioſe 
dead Corps which Iye, or have long lain there. 


hath no covering /. 


ſo it ſeems to be explained by the following word deftruZion, i. e. 
the place of leſtru&tion, which Interpreters generally underſtand of 
He11l, or the place of the Damned. Others :he Grave, the mnt ſecret 
and obſcure places and things. ri. e. Itis in his Preſence,and under 
his Providence. 5o far am I from imagining that God c nnort ſee 
through a dark Cloud, as you traduced me, Chapter 22. 13. thar I 
very we!l know, that even Hell ir ſelf, thar place of utter darkneſs, 
is not hide trom his fight. & 1. e« The place of deſtruction, as it is 
allo uſed. Prov. 15- 11. by a Metonymy of the Adjun&. I To wit, 
ſucis as to keep it our of his ſrghe. 

7 * tic firercheth our the north m2 over the ce 
place #, and h:ngeth the earth upon nothing 0. 

mM 1. &, Tic Northern Pole, or part 6f rhe Heavens, which he Par- 
ticularly mentions,and puts for the whole viſible Heaven, becauſe 
Job and fs Friends lived in a Northern Climate, and were acquaint- 
<d only with ti1- part of the Heavens, the Sourhern Pole and Parts 
near it being whoijy unknown to them. - The Heavens are oft and 
fitly ſaid to be ſpread ors &retched out like a Courtain or Tent,to which 
they are reſembled. » To wir, the Air, ſo calted, not Philoſophi- 
cally, as if1t were wholly empty, but popularly, becauſe it ſeems 
ro be fo, and is generally void of ſolid and viſible Bodies * o Up-/N 


ſpeak? For whoſe good, or to whar'cnd did} thou ſpeak this * 

God niededtit ror, I receive no Ediication or Benefit by it 
- | bh IR th 4 > * 44 > . x * ® % 7 
5 || Dead things g are fermet. from unter the wa- 


W Rs. a < Sg _ 3 - bo l "_ , 
3. andthe ihFabicants thereof. 


— —— — MD 


its own Gentcr, which 1s butan imaginzey thing, and in truth Nos 
thing: Or upon no Props or Pillars, but his own Power ar £10« 
vidence: Which isjultly celzbrated as a wonderful Wort of God, 
both un Soripru {: BReathe Authors. 

s He 


va and 


63 WJ veto 


4 Il 4 


Chap. XXV 


6 * Hell 5 5s naked before him 3, and deſtruction & *pC4.1398 


8, 
h As this word is frequently uſed, as Job 1 1.8. 1ſa. 57. 9, &c, And Heb+49132 | 


Pty *ch. 9 8. 
- Pal. 104. 
2, &Cs 


/ 


——_" 


Any 


Ou OOO OE: WROTE Se”. 


UT VEG OTE — —_— ——— ———— 


rr eee ee 


IH, 


ap. XXVL 
$ He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds, and 
the cloud is not rent under them p. : 

p This alſo is a miraculous Work of God, conſidering the na- 
ture of theſe Waters, which are fluid and heavy, and preſſing 
downward, eſpecially being oft-times there in great abundance : 
And withal, the quality of the Clouds, which are thin and looſe 
bodies of the ſame nature with Fogs and Miſts upon the Face of 
the Earth, and therefore of themſelves utterly unable to bear that 
weight, and to keep up thoſe waters from falling ſuddenly and vio- 
lently upon the Earth. 


9 He holdeth back q the face of his throne 7, 


ſpreadeth his clouds upon it. 
gi-e. To wit,from our view, that its luſture and glory ſhould not 
reach us, and ſo dazle our fight; he covereth it with a Cloud, ſas the 
next words explain it. Or, He holdeth faſt, or binds together, or ſirength- 
ens it, that it may be able to bear that burden. 7 Either s. This 
lower Air, which is as the face or open part of the Heavens, which 
is often calledGod's Throne,as Pſal.1 1.4. 1/a.66.1.4mes 9.6. Or 2.The 
appearance or manifeſtation of the Heaven of Heavens, where he 
dwelleth, whoſe Light and Glory is too great for mortal eyes, 
which therefore by Clouds and other ways he hides from us. 
10 * He hath compaſſed the waters 5 with bounds ?, 


E 33* 7*-+ until the day and night come to an end «. 
RE s To wit, of the Sea ; for of the upper Waters coming out of the 
end of Clouds he ſpake before. 7 Which are partly the Rocks and Shores, 
br with 32d principally God's appointment made at the firſt Creation, and 
wrkneſs renewed after the Deluge, Ger. 9g. 11, 15« that the Waters ſhould 
* Not overwhelm the Earth : See Job 38.8,10,11. Pſal. 104.3. Fer.s. 
22. #1. e. Unto the end of the World, for ſo long theſe viciſh- 
tudes of Day and Night are to continue, Gen- 8. 22: and 9. gs Oc. 
Fer. 5.22. and 3T. 35, 36. 
1x The pillars of heaven x tremble, 


ed at his reproof y. 

x Either 1. Thoſe Mountains which by their height and ſtrength 
may ſeem to reach and ſupport the Heavens, as the Poets ſaid of 4r- 
las; forthis is a Poetical Book, and there are many Poetical Ex- 
prefſions in it. Theſe tremble ſometimes by force of Earthquakes, 
or by God's glorious appearance in them, as Sinai did. Or 2. Holy 
Angels, but they are not ſubje& either to trembling orto Gods re- 
buke. Or, 3. The heavenly Bodies, as the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, 
which, as they may ſeem in ſome ſort to ſupport, ſo they do certain- 
1y adorn the Heavens >» And we know Pillars are oft made, not to 
f port, but only for ornament ; as the two famous Pillars of the 
Tehple, Fachin and Boaz, 1 Kings 7. 21; And theſe oft-times ſeem 
to tremble and be aſtoniſhed, as in Eclipſes or Tempeſts, and ter- 
rible Works of God in the Air, by which they are frequently ſaid 
to be affeQed and changed, becauſe they ſeem ſo tous ; and many 
things are ſpoken in Scripture according to appearance : See 1ſa. 13. 
30. & 24.23. Joel- 2.10,31. Mat- 24929, Oc. { Either 1- When God re. 
buketh them : For God is ſometimesſaid in Scripture to rebuke the 
lifeleſs Creatures ; which is tobe underſtood figuratively of the To- 
kens of God's anger in them. Or 2. When God reproveth not 
them, but men by them, manifeſting his diſpleaſure againſt ſinful 
men by Thunders, or Earthquakes, or prodigious Works, 

12 * He|| divideth the fea z with his power, and by 


his underſtanding @ he ſmiteth thorough 7 the proud 6. 
z He ſpeaks either 1. Of God's dividing the Red-ſea for the 1/ra- 
elites to paſs over : and conſequently the Hebrew word Ruhab,which 
here follows, and is tranflated pride, or the proud, is meant of Z- 
gypt, which is oft called Rahab, as Pſalm 87. 4. and 89. 10. Ja. 5r. 
- Burt it ſeems moſt probable that that Work was not yet done, 
and that Job lived long before 1ſ-ae!'s coming out of Egypt. Or ra- 
* ther 2. Of the common Work of Nature and Providence, in raiſing 
Tempeſts, by which he breaketh or divideth the waves of the Sea, 
by making deep Furrows in it, and caſting up part of the Waters 
into the Air, and ſplitring part of them upon the Rocks and 
Shores of the Sea. 4 1. e. By his wiſe Counſel and Adminiſtration 
of things, ſo as may obtain his own glorious Ends. 6 Either 1. 
The Whale, which is called King over all the children of pride, Job 41. 
'34. and which is ſometimes by force of Tempeſts caſt upon the 
ſhore. Or rather 2+ The Sea, which is fitly called proud, as its 
Waves are called, Job 38. 11. becauſe it is lofty, and fierce, and 
{welling, and unruly ; which God is ſaid toſmire when heſubdues 
'»ÞC: = g, and reſtrains its rage, and turns the ſtorm into a calm. 
$ Ho, 13 By his* fpirit he hath garniſhed the heavens 4; 
croſſing like is hand hath formed the + crooked ſerpent e. 
& bar- c Either 1. By his Divine Vertue or Power, which is ſometimes 
"Ia; 27. 2. called his Spirit,as Zach. 4.6. Mate 12. 28. Or 2. By his holy Spirit, 
. to which the Creation of the World is aſcribed, Gen. 1. 2. ſob 33.4. 
Pſalm 33. 6. d Adorned or beautified them with thoſe glorious 
Lights, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars. e By which he underſtands 
either 1. All the kinds of Serpents, or Fiſhes, or Monſters of the 
Sea. Or 2. The moft eminent of their kinds, / 29y0g em the 
Whale, which may be here not unfirly mentioned (as it is after- 
wards more largely deſcribed) amongſt the glorious Works of God 
in this lower World ; as the garniſhing of the Heavens was his no- 
blet Work in the ſuperiour viſible parts of the World. Or 3. An 


and 


and are aſtoniſh- 


Tfa:51.15- 
Dr,ſtilleth 
h: 38.11. 
j Heb: 

P ae 


being moſt eminent, as taking up a conſiderable part of the Nor- 
thern Hemiſphere, may well be pur for all the reſt of the Conſtel- 
lations or Stars wherewith the Heavens are garniſhed. Thus he per- 
ſiſteth ſill in the ſame kind of God's Works, and the latter branch 
explains the former. Andthis ſenſe is the more probable, becauſe 
Job was well acquainted with the Do&rine of Aſtronomy, and 
knew the nature and names of the Stars and Conſtellations, as ap- 
pears alſo from Chaprer gt 9. and 38. 31. 
14 Lo, theſe are ps f of his ways g, but how lit- 
tlea portion is heard of him þ? but the thunder of his 


power 5 who can underſtand ? 
f Or, the extremities, but ſmall parcels, the outſide and viſible 
wuk:; How glorious then are his inviſible and more inward Per- 


3 0 B. 


v3 


know, and of what is in him, or 1s done by him! 7 Ejthe ; 

mighty and terrible Thunder, which is pA mentioned ry 
nent Work of God ; as Job 28-25. & 40-9. Pſalm 29.3- & 77-18. Or 
2, Of his mighry Power, which is aptly compared to Thunder, in 
regard of its irreiiſtable force, and the rerrour which it cauſeth to 
wicked men : This Metaphor being uſed by others in like caſes: as 
among the Grecians, who uſed to ſay of their vehement and POWer- 
ful Orators, that they did zhunder and lighten; and in Mark 3. 174 
where powerful Preachers are called Sons of Thunder« 


CHA P. XXVII. 

He will not renounce his integrity, 1-----=6, The charattcr of an hypucrite 

and his miſery, 9--=-=10, The portion and heritage of the wicked. ; 
Oreover, Job | continued @ his parable b, and Heh: as. 

ſaid , ded to takt 

a When he had waited a while to hear what his Friends woulg ©: 

reply, and perceived them to be ſilent. b His grave and weighty, 

bur withal dark and difficult diſcourſe, ſuch as are oft called Parable, 

as Numb. 23. 7. and 24* 3, 15- Pſalm 49+ 4 and 78: 2, Prov. 26, 7. 

2 As God liveth c, who hath taken away my judge- 


ment &, and the Almighty, be hath + vexed my ſoul: 
He c confirms the truth & ſincerity of his Expreſſions by an oath, f Hebi 
becauſe he found them very hard to believe all his profeſſions. 4 744emy 
Or, my right, or my cauſe, i.e. who, though he knows my Integri- ſoul birt, 
ty and Piery towards him, yer doth not plead my Cauſe againſt my 
Friends, nor will admit me to plead my Cauſe with him before 
them, as Ihave ſo oft and earneſtly deſired, nor doth deal with me 
according to thoſeTerms of Grace andMercy wherewith he treateth | 
other Men and Saints, but uſeth me with great rigour, and by his 
Soveraign Power puniſheth me ſorely, without diſcovering to me 
what ſingular cauſeT have given him to do fo. 

_ 3 Allthe while my breath e is in me, and || the ſpi- 
rit of God fs in my noſtrils; 

e Which is the conſtant companion and certain Sign of Life both 
coming 1n with it, Gen 2. 7, and going out with it, 1 Kings 17+ 19, 
Pſalm 146+ 44 Or, my Sil, or Life f That Spirit or Soul which 
God breathed into me, Gen. 2, 5- and preſerveth in me- Or rather, 
the breath of God, i- e- which God breathed into me, which eminent- 
ly appears in a Man's noſtrils 

4 My lips ſhall not ſpeak wickedneſs, nor my tongue 
utter deceit pg. 

g I will ſpeak nothing but the truth with all plainneſs and im- 
partiality, neither defending my ſelf and cauſe by vain and falſe 
Profeſſions of thoſe Vertues or Graces which I know I have not; 
Nor: yet in compliance with your deſire and deſign, falſly accuſing 
my ſelf of thoſe Crimes wherewith you charge me, whereof I know 
my ſelf to be innocent- 

6 God forbid that I ſhould juſtifie you 4: till I die, 
* I will not remove # my Integrity from me. 

h te Your opinion and cenſure concerning me,as one convited 
to be impious or hypocritical; by God's unuſual and ſevere dealing 
with me- 5; Towit, declaratively, as real words are frequently un- 
derſtood ; Or by renouncing or denying my integrity, ofwhich God 
and my own Conſcience bear me witneſs. I will not, to gratifie 
you, ſay that T am an hypocrite, which I know to be falſe. 


7 My righteouſneſs I hold faſt &, and will not let 


it g0: my heart / ſhall not reproach me m: + ſo long as 
I live ». 

_ & Heb. have held fafl, i.e I have not only begun well,but con- 
tinued in well-doing ; which is a plain Evidence that I am no hypo» 
crite. Or, the paſt tenſe is put for the future, as is uſual, 7 wil 
hold faft, declaratively, as before, I wil: maintain it, that howſoever 
you calumniate me, I am a righteous Perſon. 1 i.e. My Conſci- 
ence, as the heart is oft uſed, as 1 Sam. 24. 5. and 25+ 31. Ezek, 14. 
5. 1John 3-20, 21. m Fither 1.With betraying my own cauſe and 
iNnOc-ncy, and ſpeaking whatT know tobe falſe, to wit, that I am 
an hypocrite» Or 2 For my former impiety or hypocrifie, where- 
with you charge me, » Heb. From, or for, or concerning my days, is &- 
the time of my Life, whether paſt or to come : Or the courſe of 
my Life : Days, or times being put here, as it is elſe-where, for aQi- 
ons done in them by Metonymy. 

7 Let mine enemy be as the wicked o, and he that 


riſeth up againſt me p, as the unrighteous. 

0 I am {ſo far from loving and praftiſing wickedneſs,whereof you 
accuſe me,that I abhore the thoughts of it,and if T might and would 
wiſh to be revenged of mine Enemy, I could wiſh him no greater 
miſchief than to be a wicked man. p Either 1. You my Friends, 
who in ſtead of comforting me, are riſen up to torment me. Or 
rather 2. My worſt Enzmies, 

8 * For what s: the hope of the hypocrite, though « yuh 
he hath gained q, when God taketh away r his foul ? 16:26. 
9 There is no reaſon why I ſhould envy or deſire the portion of 
wicked men; for though they oft-times proſper in the World, as 

have ſaid, and ſeem to be great gainers, yet death, which hafteneth 

to all men, and to me eſpecially, will ſhew that they are far greater 


|| That is 
the breath 
whichGed 
gave bim, 


*Ch; 40 


heavenly Conſtellation, called the great Dragon and Serpent, which | 


fetus and Operations: g i. e- Of his Works. h i.e- Ofhis Power | 
and Wqom, and Providence, and Aﬀtions. The greateſt part of | 
what WE%e or know of him, is the leaſt part of what we do not 


loſers, and die in a moſt wretched and deſperate condition; having 
no hope either of continuing in this life, which they chiefly deſire, 
or of enjoying a better life, which they never regarded. But I have 
a firm and well grounded hope, not of that temporal reſtitution 
which you promiſed me, but ofa bleſſed immortality after death, 
and therefore am none of theſe hopeleſs hypocrites, as you account 
me. »r Or, expelleth, or pluckethup : Which notes violence, and that 
he died unwillingly. Compare Luke 12. 29, when good Men are ſaid 
freely and chearfully to give themſelves or their Souls unto God. 


9 * Will God hear his cry s when trouble cometh *Þ —_ 
upon him x ? Pro: 172b; 


s An hypocrite doth not pray to God with comfort, or any ſolid ,, q 28:9: 
hope that God will hear him, as I know he will hearme, though not xg; 1: 15: 
in the way which you think. : When his guilty Conſcience will p,4:8:6: 
fly in his face, ſo as he dare not pray, and accuſe him to God, fo y;ch34 
as God willnot hear him. ... John 93" 
10 Will he delight himſelf in the Almighty « ? will James 4? 
he | 


always call upon God x ? 
© Will 


Chap. XXy1z, : ( 


F Hebi 
nate my 
oul bitter, 


| That i, 
be breath 
phichGid 
ave him, 


Ch: 4.9 


fatth; 


18:41: 
1090; 
= 
28: 9 
1: 15: 
e-8:16; 
h'2446 
19:31 
e549 


= . » / 
Ray AzAAavYA41 


» 


J 


+47 


S b | « Will he be able to delight and fatisfie himſelf with God alone, 


and with his Love and Favour, when he hath no other matter of 
d light? This Inow do, and this an hypocrite cannot do,becauſe 
his heart 1s chiefly ſet upon the World, and when that fails him, 
his heart ſinks, and the thoughts of God are unſavoury and trouble- 
ſome to him, « He may by his AﬀiGtions be driven to Prayer, 
but if God doth not ſpeedily anſwer him, he falls into deſpair and 
negle&t of God and of Prayer ; whereas I conſtantly continue in 
Prayer, notwithſtanding the grievouſneſs, and the long continu- 
ance of my Calamities- 

11 I wiil teach you || by the hand of God y + that 
' Or, being which 5s with the Almighty z, will I nor conceal, 
irhehand, »y i, e. By God's help and inſpiration; as God is ſaid to ſpeak to 
&. the Prophet with or by a fArong hand, Iſa, 8. 1x. IT will not teach 
you my own vain conceits, but what God himſelf hath taught me. 
Or, cenc?rning ( as the prefix Bet) is oft uſed, as Exod. 12. 43, 44- 
Pſaim 63. 6 and 87. 3+ Prov: 4+ 11.) the hand of God, i- e+ his Couniel 
and Providence in governing the World, or the manner of his deal- 
ing with Men, and eſpecially with wicked men, of whoſe portion 
he diſcourſeth verſes 13, 14, &c. ſhewing how far the hand of God 
is cither for them, or upon them, and againſt them. z i» e- What 
is in his Breaſt or Counſel, and how he executes his ſecret purpoſes 
concerning them ; Or, the Truth of God, the Do&rine which he 
hath taughr his Church about theſe matters. 

12 Behold, ail ye your ſelves have ſeen it a ; why 


then are ye thus alrogether vain 6b 2? 

a I ſpeak no falſe or ſtrange things, but what is known and 
confirmed by your own as well as others experiences. .b In main- 
taining ſuch a fooliſh and falſe opinion againſt your own knowledge 
and experiences Why do you obſtinately defend your opinion, 
and not comply with mine, for the Truth of which I appeal to 
your own Conſciences ? ; | 

13 This c is the portion of a wicked man with 


God 4, and the heritage of oppreſſors e, which they 
ſhall receive of rhe Almighty. 


c Thar which is mentioned in the following Verſes. In which Jos 
- . delivers cither, 1. The opinion of his Friends in whoſe perſon he ut- 


e. His own opinion,and how far he agreeth with them; for his ſenſe 
differs bur little from what Zophar ſaid, Chap. 20. 29. 4d Either laid 
up with God or in his Counſel and appointment; Or, which he ſhall 
have from God, as the next words explain it. e Who are mighty, 
and fierce, and terrible, and miſchievous to Mankind, as this word 
implies, whom therefore men cannot deſtroy, but God will. 


*Deut: 14 * If his chiidren be multiplied, zt rms for the 
Haſs i; {word f: and his off-ſpring ſhall not be ſatisfied with 


bread g. 


Juſtice. g Shall be ſtarved, or want neeeffaries. A Figure called 

Meioſis. 0 

. __ IF Thoſe that remain of him þ ſhall be buried in 

Pl78 640 death i and *his widows & ſhall not weep /. 

þ Who ſurvive and eſcape that Sword and Famine. 7 Either 

7. Shall die and ſo be buried. Or 2. Shall be buried as ſoon as ever 
they are dead, either becauſe their Relations or Dependents feared 
leaſt they thould come to themſelves again, and trouble them and o- 
thers longer; or becauſe they were not able to beſtow any Funeral 
Pomp upon them, or thought them unworthy of ir. Or 3. Shall be 
in a manner utterly extinC& in or by death ; all their hope,and glory, 
and name, and memory (which they deſigned to perperuate ro all 
Ages) ſhall be buried with them, and they ſhall never riſe again to a 
bleſſed Life: Whereas a good Man hath hope in his death,and leaves 
his good name alive and flouriſhing in the World, and reſts in his 
Grave in aſſurance of Redemption from it, and of a glorious Reſur- 
re&tion to an happy and eternal Life. & For they had many Wives, 
either to gratifie their Lu't, or to encreaſc and ſtrengthen their Fa- 
mily and Intereſt. 1 Either, becauſe they durit not lament their 
death, which was entertained with publick joy : Or, becauſe they 
were overwhelmed and aſtoniſhed wit? the greatneſs and ſtrange- 
neſs of the Calamiry, and therefore could nor weep: Or, becauſe 
they alſo, as well as other perſons, groaned under their tyranny 
and cruelty, and rejoyced in their deliverance from 1t. 


16. Though he heap up ſilver as the duſt, and pre- 


pare raiment as the clay m. 
mM i-e; In great abundance. - 
17 He may prepare it, but the juſt ſhall put ir cn », 


and the innocent ſhall divide o the filver. 

2 Either becauſe ir ſhall be given to him by the Judge to recom- 
peace roſe Injuries which he received from that Tyranr:Or, becauſe 
the right of it is otherwiſe transferred upon him by Divine Provi- 
dence. o Either 1. To the Poor : he ſhall diſtribute that which rhe 
oppreflors hoarded up and kept ' as wickedly as he get it» So this 
ſairs with Pro. 28. 8. Eccl. 2. 26. Or 2. With others, or to himſclF. 
He ſhall have a ſhare of it, when by the Judges Sentence thoſe ill- 


I gotten goods ſhall be reſtored to the right owners. 
Cn,8.15, 


booth that the keeper maketh 9. 


bl 


to death. q Which the Keeper of a Garden or Vin-yard ſuddenly 
rears up in Fruit-time, and as quickly and cafily pulls it down a- 
gain. Sce {as 1. 8. Laments 2. 6. 


19 The rich man ſhall lie down r, but be (hall not 
be * gathered s: he opencth his eyes #, and he 75 not #. 

» Eirher 1. To fleep;as this word is uſed Gen. 1913 5+ Deu?,6.7, XC. 
Or 2+ In death, of which ir is uſed 2 $2. 7. 12. 5 To wit, in Bu- 
rial, of wh-ch this word is uſed 2 Kings 22. 20. Jer: 8-2. and 25. 33- 
In ſtcad of that honourable Interment and Burial with his Fathers, 
which he expe&ed, he ſhall be buried with the burial ofan Als, his 
Carkaſs ſhall 1y like dung upon the Earth. z So the ſenſe is either 
1. he awaketh in the morni:g, promiling to himſelfan happy Day. 
Or 2, he looks about him for help and relief in bis extremity. But 
the words are and may be rend:ed thus: One epeneth his eyes, 1. C. 


*2 Kings 
2, 22% 


7 


ters them, and afterwards declares his diſſent from them. Or rather. 


f That they may be cur off by the Sword, either of War, or of MET 1s difficult, and diverſly apprehended ; Bur this may ſeem to 


ly it may be conne&ed thus,. Job having been diſcourſing of the 


* ide is houſe as a moth and as a ' 
18 * He builderh his houte as P, i | Arr, bur of God and of Nature, as is manifeſt from the foregoing 


2 Which ſertleth ir ſc]f in a Garment, but is quickly and unex- | 
pettedly bruſhed off, and diſpoſſefſed of irs dwelling, and cruſhed | 


. hh, vo - p n > _ = 7 
whillt a man can open kis eyes, in a moment, or inthe twinkling | 


COR 


0 B. - Chap. XXVRE 
of an eye. « He is as if he had never been, dead 

Family and Name extin& with him. - ber 

20 © Terrours take hold on him x as watters y : a*ct..q.: 

© [18-12 

tempeſt ftealeth him away in the night z. ” 7 —o—_— 

z From the ſenſe of his approaching Death or Judgment. y Ei- 
ther 1.in abundance, one terror after another. 2. Violently and 
rrefiſtably, as aRiver breaking its Banks, or a Deluge of Waters 
bears down & overwhelms all that is before it. z God's wrath and 
Judgment cometh upon him forcibly like a Tempeſt, and withal 
ſecretly and unexpetted'y like a Thief in the Night. 

21 The Eatt-wind « carriecth him away b, and he 
departeth : and as a ſtorm hurlech him our of his place. 

2 1. e Some violent and terrible Judgment, fitly compared to the 
Eaſt-wind, which in thoſe parts was moſt vehement and furious, and 
withal peſtilent and pernicious ; of which ſee Exod. 10.13: & 14-21. 
Pſal. 48- 7- and 78- 26. Hoſ. 13. 15- Jonah 48+ b Out of his place, as it 
tollows, our of his ſtately Palace wherein he expetted to dwell for 
ever; whence he ſhall be carried either by an enemy thar ſhall rake 
him and carry him into Captivity, or by Death» 

22 For God ſhall cait upon him c, and not ſpare 4: _ . . 

T he would fain flee our 6f his hand e. 7 a 1 

© His Darts or Plagues, one after another @d i.e. Shall ſhew no fee | 
_ _ pans, " wm when he crieth to God for ir.  e He ear-" * 
neitly delires and endeavours by all ways poflible to eſc 
Judgments of God, bur all in ex. whe ph 

| 23 Men f hall clap their hands g at him, and ſhall 
hiſs him 4.out of his place 5. 

f Who ſhall ſee and obſerve theſe things. g Partly in token of 
their joy at the removal of ſuch a publick Peſt and Tyrant: And 
partly by way of altonrſhmenr: And partly in contempr, and ſcorn, 
or derifion ; -All which this geſture tignifies in Scripture uſe : OF 
which ſee Lam. 2. 5+ Ezek, 25. 6. Nah. 3.19. b Intoken of their a- 
mazement, deteſtation and derifion. See 1 Kings 9. 8- 2 Chron. 29. 

8. fer. 25-9. Mich. 6. 16. # Now that he is out of his place and 
power, which they durſt not do whilſt he was in his place. Or, 
the Men of his place thar lived with,him or near him, and daily 
telc theeffe&s of his Tyranny. 

CH AP. XXVIII. 
The power and wiſdom of God in his works of nature, 1-=--11. 4 knowledge 

and wiſaom anſwering this u not found in man, nor to be bought or ac 

quired, | 2 w—u_—_, Death and deftrufion make their report of it, 22. 

I: 4; only in God, 23 -27. M's wiſdom us to fear God, 28. | 
Go there 1s || a vein for the ſilver , anda place I1Or,oMine 

for Gold, || where they fine it b. || Or, which 

a Where it is hid by God, and found,and fetched out by the art they fine. 
and induſtry of Man. The connexioa of this Chapter with the for- 


| 


be the faireſt account of it, Job having in the laſt Chapter diſcourſ- 
ed of God's various Providences and Carriages towards wicked men, . 
and ſhewed that God doth ſometimes, for a ſeaſon, give them 
Wealth and Proſperity, but afterwards calls them to a fad account, 
and puniſheth them ſeverely for their abuſe of his Mercies; And 
having formerly ſhewed that God doth ſometimes proſper the wick- 
ed all their days, fo as they Jive and die withour any viſible tok-n 
of God's diſpleaſure againit them, when on the contrary, good 
Men are exerciſed with many and grievous Calamiries, and perceiv- 
ing that his Friends were, as Men in all Ages have been, ſcan- 
dalized - at theſe methods of Divine Providence, and denied the 
thing, becauſe they could not underſtand the reaſon of ſuch une- 
qual Diſpenſations : In this Chapier he declares that this is onz of 
the depths and fecrers of Divine Wiſdom, not diſcoverable by zny 
mortal Man in th:s World, and that alchough Men had ſome degree 
of Wiſdom whereby they could dig deep, and ſearch out many 
hidden things, as the Veins of Silver, Gold, &c. yer this wasa Wit- 
dom of an higher Nature, and out of Man's reach. And hereby he 
ſecretly checks the arrogance and confidence of his Friends, who, 
becaule they had ſome parts of Wiſdom, the knowledge of natural 
things, ſuch as are here contained, and of Human Afﬀairs, and of 
ſome Divine Matters, therefore preſumed to fathom the depths of 
God's Wiſdom and Providence, and to judge of all God's ways and 
works by the ſcantling of their own narrow underſtandings. Poſſb- 


wonderful waysof God; both in the Works of Nature, Ch. 26« from 
v. 5. to theend, and in his Providential Diſpenſations towards wick- 
ed men,Ch 27. from v. 13, to the end, he here returns .to the firſc 
Branch of his Diſcourſe, arid diſcovers more of God's Wiſdom and 
Power in natural things. And this he doth partly, that by his ma- 
nifeſtation of bis ſingular skill in the ways and ations of God, he 
might vindicate himſelf from that contempt which they ſeemed to 
have of him, and oblige them to hear what he had further to ſay 
with more attention and conſideration, and partly that by this re- 
preſentation of the manifold Wiſdom and Power of God, they 
might be wrought to a greater Reverence for God and for his 
Works, and not preſume to judge ſo raſhly and boldly of them, and 
ro condemn what they did not underſtand in them. 6 Or rather, 
as it is in the margent of our Bibles, which they, ro wit, the Refin- 
ers, do fine. For he ſpeaks nor here of the Works of Men and of 


and following words. | 
2 Iron 1s taken out of the |] earth c, and braſs 4s 


molten out of the ſtone e. NS BE 

c Being mae of Earth, concofted by the heat of the Sun, into 
that hardneſs, and by Miners diged our of the.Earth. d Or, Copper. 
eA\V herewith it is mixed and incorpcrated in the Earth, and by fre 
and the art of the Meraliſt, it is ſeparated from it, and taken out of » 
ity as Pliny obſerves 34. 1, Io. and 36. 279. ; 

2 Hef ſetreth anend g * to darkneſs, and ſearch- 
eth outall perfe&ion þ: rhe ſtones 3 of darkneſs, and 


che ſhadow of death kB 
f Fither 1. Man the Miner, Or 2. God, of whoſe works of Na- 
ture he h-re ſpeaks, Or 3. God as the chief Author and DireQor, 
and Man asGods Inſtrument in the Work. g Or, 4 bound, how far 
the darkne!s ſhall reach, and how far the dark and. hidden parts 
and Treaſures of the Earth ſhall be fearched, and diſcovered, an-l 
4 I brought 


[ Or, Def 


FCh.r 2-22 


an. XXVIIL E 'l, 
- :ioht; þ i. e. Metals and Minerals, which are nothing 
rg ted, and hardened, and brought to maturity 
and perfeQtion- Or, unto all perfettion, 1. e- he perfectly and exaQtly 
ſearcheth rhem our, although the Hebrew Lamed may be here on]) 
a Note of the Accuſative Caſe, as ovr Tranſlation takes it. 2 Ei- 
ther Gems and precious Stons, which are calied by this word Provo. 
26.8. or thoſ: ſtones out of which the Metals-forementioned are 
"taken. + Which ly hid in the dark and deadly ſhades and bowels 
of the Earth. : : 
4 The flood breaketh our 7 from the inhabitant m», 


even the watcrs n forgotten of the foot o: they are dried 


up, they are gone away from men Pp. | 
This Verſe Peaks ed 1. Of another great and remarkable 
Work of God, whereby in ſome places cither new Rivers break forth, 
or old Rivers break in upon the inhabitants, and drive them av ay, 
and in other places Rivers, or other Waters, are dried up, or d-11- 
ved into other channels or grounds, by which means thete Land: 
arerendred more uſeful and fruitful. Or rather 2. Of an accident 
which comonly happeosia Mines, where, whilſt men are digging, 
a flood of Waters breaks in ſuddenly and violently upon them, and 
diſturbs them in their work. » Heb+ frim with the Inhab;tant, 1: E. 
out of that part of the Earth which the Mines in a manner inha- 
bit, or where they have their fixed abode, and for the moſt part 
dwell.Or.ſo that there is no Inhabitants or A%:der, i &. ſo that theMi- 
ners dare continue there no Jonger, bur are forced to come away. 
» Which word is cafily and fitly underſtood out of the foregoing 
word Flood. Or, without this ſupplement, the flvod may be ſaid to 
be forgotten, &c- tha: ſingu'ar word being collettively taken, and ſo 
convenie:tly joined with this word of the plural numier. oi.-. Un- 
trodden by the foot of Man. ſuch waters as men either never did 
paſs over, 01, by reaſon of their depth, cannor paſs over, or, ſuch 
as though the Miners at firſt for a while did paſs over, yet now 
cannor, or dare not, do ſo any more. Furegerfubneſs is here aſcribed 
to the foot, as it is to the hand, Pſalm 13 +» 5- ani itis put for Ig- 
norance or Unacquaintedneſs ; as all finnzrs are faid to forget God, 
though many of them never remembred nor minded him- p Heb. 
they are dried up (or, driwn up, to wit, by Engines made for that 
purpoſe) from men, (i- e from the Miners, that they may not be 
hindred in their work Or, with, or by en, the pretix Mem being 
oft pur for Beth, i- e-. by the labour of men) zhey remove, or vaniſh, 

or paſs away, and ſo the Miners return to their work 
5 As for the earth, . our of it q cometh bread r: and 


*Fzck.28. Under it s is turned up 7 as it were *jre «. | 
114. q Our of the upper-parts of the Earth, r Bread-corn, or other 
food for Mai''s uſe. 5 Either 1+ under th- ſame Earth, which © 
ther at the ſame time yields Bread out of irs upper, and Fire of 
its lower parts; or at ſeveral rimes ; that Earth which once was 
fruitful, becoming. by the 11 pefſition of Divine Providence, barren, 
and ſulphureous, &r, Or 24 under other parts of the Earth. z1e. 
Is digged out and terched up. « Either Gold and precious Stones, 
which glitter and ſparkle like fire : Or Coals, and Brimſtone, and 
other Mater:als of Fire, 20 | 
6' The ſtones of it are the place of ſaphirs x : and it 


hath y || duſt of goid z. : Ee | 
x i- e- Of precious Stones; the Saphire, as one of the moſt emi- 
'nent, being put for all the reſt. In tome parts of the Earth, the Sa- 
Phices are mixed with Stones, and cur out of them and poliſhed. Of 
- This Stone ſee Exod. 24+ 10. Ezeke 1+ 26. Cant- 5: 144 Lame 4+ 7+ 1. 6 
The Earth containeth in or under it. ' z Which is a diſtin@ thing 
from that Gold which is faund in the ma!s or lump, of which verſc 
2+ both ſortsof Go'd being found in the Earth, : 
7 Thereis a pati @ which no fowl knoweth, and which 
the vultures 6 eye hath not ſeen. | 
zTo wit,in the dark depths and bowels of the Earth.b Whoſe eye 
is very quick, and ſtrong, and which ſearcheth all plices for irs 
Prey, but cannot reach to theſe places, which yet the wiſdom of 
' Man by the dire&ioa of God's Providence findeth our. 
- 8 The lions whelps c have not trodden it, nor the 


fierce lion d paſſed by it. 
c H=b. The ſons of pride, a fit name for Lions, which are lofty 
, and ſtately Creatures, deſpiſing both Men and all other Beaſts thar 
' oppoſe them. « Which rangeth all places for Prey, and finderh 
out the deepeſt Dens and Caves of the Earth. The Birds and Beaſts 
havevft-times led men to ſuch places as otherwiſe they ſhould ne- 
ver have found out ; But they could not lead men to theſe Mines, 
\ - bur the finding. out of them is a ſpecial gifr of God, and an att of 
b that Wiſdom which he hath pur into Mane 
*Ch.9. 5; 9 * Heputteth forth his hand upon the || Rock e; he 
; Ur, fint. overturneth the mountains by the roots f. 
| e This and the rwo next Verſes are meant either 1- Of other e- 
minent and conſiderable Works of God, who ſometimes overturn- 
. eth Rocks, and produceth new Rivers in unlikely places. Or rather 
2. Ofthe ſame work of mining and digging for Gold, or other pre- 
cious things of the Earth, and of other effe&s of Man's Art and 
Wiſdom in that Work. The Miners reſolve to break through all 
oppoſition, and by Iron tools, or Fire or other ways, dig through 
the hardeſt Rocks. f He undermineth the very mouatains to find 
out the Metals lying at the bottom of them. 
xo He cutteth out rivers among the rocks g, and his 


eye ſeeth every precious thing þ. 

£ He maketh Channels there to convey away that Water which 
was breaking in upon him, and ifnot thus diverted, would have 
ſpoiled his work,of which ſee on verſe 4+ þ+ Having with great art 
and indefatigabl- Induſtry broke through all difficulties, he at laſt 
arriveth at his end, and finds our thoſe precious Treaſures which 
he ſought for. EE 
11 He bindeth the floods | from overflowing z, and 

thing that is hid, bring=th he torth to light &. 

5 He reſtraineth thzm, and as it were binderh them to their good 
behaviour, that they may nor overflow the Minz+ k Thoſ: Metals 
which did ly hid in the ſecret parts of the Earth, he diſcovers to 
himſelf and others. ; 

12 But where ſhall wiſdom } bs tound?. and where 


z1 the place of underſtanding m ? 


ks 


JOr, Gold 


' 0Aare 


fHeb.f7 0m the 
weeping 


DB: 
I Heb. That Wiſdom, for here 1s an Article which ſeems to be em. 
phatical. The ſenſe is, I confeſs that Man hath one kind of Wi. 
dom 1n a great Meaſure, to wit, to diſcover the works of Nature, 
and to perform the operations of Art ; But as for that ſublime and 
eminent Witdom, which conſiſts in the exa&t knowledge of a1] 
God's Counſels and Ways, and of the ſeveral manners and reaſons 
of his governing the World, and dealing with good and bad Men, 
thisis far above Man'sreach, and 1s the Prerogative of God alone, 
m Thereis no vein for that upon the Earth, as there is for Gold or 
Silver, 
i2 Man knoweth not the price thereof », neither js 
it tound in the land of the living o. 
% Man knoweth neither where to purchaſe it, nor how much ic 
is worth, nor what to offer in exchange for it. 0 Amongſt morta] 
men thar live upon Earth, but only amongſt thoſe bleſſed Spirits that 
dwell above. 


ſaith. 1: 5s nor with me. 
? To wit, of the Earth, becauſe zhe Sea here follows as a differ. 
ing place. This is a very common figure, whereby Speech is aſcri. 
bed ro dumb and fenicleſsCreatures: The mcaning is, this is not to be 
tound in any part of the Laizd or Sea, yeathough a men ſhould dig 
or dive never ſo deep to tind it, nor to be learned from any Crea. 
tures: For thqugh lieſe diſcover the Beeing,and j'ower,and 1n part, 
the Wiſdom of G:2d, yet they do nor inſt:u@ us in the methods 
and grounds of God's Provideintial Diipenſ. tions to good and evil 
Mea : Theſe are ſecrets of Wiſdom reſerved for God himicIE. 

I5 + Ic * cannot be gorten for go'd 9, 
filver be weighed »r for the price thejeof. 

7 The choiceſt Gold Jaid up in Treaſures, as the word ſignifies. 
r To wit, 1n the bal/az.ce bor in thole times money was paid vy 
weight, not by tale. Sce Gen, 23. 16. Jer* 32. 9, 10 

165 Ircannot be vaiued wi:h the gold of Ophir s with 
the precious Onyx z, or the Saphire. 

s Which was the beit ſort of Go!d- See on 1 Kings ge 28, Job 22, 
74+ #t Or, Saraonyx. See on Exod. 28. 20. 

17 The gold and the cryſtal « cannot equall it: and 


the exCiange of it ſhall not befor || jewels x of fine gold. 

w Or 2mber, which in thoſe parts was of very great price. Or, 
toe Dramond, The Hebrew word 1s not el{e-where uſed, and it hath 
in ic the fignification of Purity, or Clearneſs, or brightneſs x Or, Veſ- 
Jels, wherein there is nor only the excellency of the Materials, but 
tac Curioſity of Art, which renders the other much more valuable. 

is No mention ſhalj be made y of || coral, or of 
pearis : for the price z of wiſdom zs above rubies. 

y They are of no value, nor worthy to be named the ſame day 
with this, no1 fir to be mentioned as a piice or recompence,where« 
with to purchaſe this z,Or, the a:trattion, or acquiſition : Or rather, 
the extrattiom, or drawing forth, For Job uſeth the word of art which 
Was Proper in the taking of Pearls, as the following word, rendred 
by our Tranſlarors Rubies, is underſtood by divers, both Hebrew 
and Chriſtian Interpreters, and amongſt others by the late eminent= 
ly Icarned Bochart, who proverh it by divers Arguments. Now 
theſe Pearls are and were taken by men that dived to the bottom of 
rhe Sea, and drew them out thence, which is the very word which 
borh Arabickand Latin Authors uſe in the caſe, as indeed the ſame 
word 1s uſed of all Fiſhermen,who are 1aid to draw forth with their 
Hook, or Net, or otherwiſe, Fiſhes, or any other thing for which 
they are fithing. Moreover this di-ing, as it produced great profit 
ſo it was not without ſome danger and difficulty ; for it they heed- 
lefly put theic fingers into the gaping ſhell, within which the Pearl 
was, it ſpeedily cloſed upon them, and pur them to exquiſite pain, 
4 to the lots of their finger, and ſometimes of their life. hich 1s a 
fit repreſentation of the ſtate of thoſe perſons who ſearch after the 
knowledge of God's Counſels, and Ways, and the grounds of them, 
who as when they modeſtly enquire into them, and truly diſcover 
them, they have infinite advantage and fatisfaQion therein, ſo ifthey 
prie into them too boldly, ſearching into thoſe things which God 
hath. concealed, and raſhly judging of them above what they know, 
which Job judged to be his Friend's caſe, they expoſe themſelves to 
manifold ſnares and dangers. And this exrra#iom, or drawing forth, 
iS aptly uſed concerning this Wiſdom, which lying very deep and 
remote from the reach of ordinary men, is not to be obtained 
without diligent fearch and conſideration. And ſo the place may 
be thus tranſlated, the extra#ion or drawing forth of Wiſdom is above 
that (ro wir, the extraftion) of Pearls. 

I9 The topaz a of Ethiopia b ſhall not equal it ; nei- 
ther ſhall it be valued wich pure gold. 

a Of which ſee Exod. 28. 17. and 39- 10. b Or, Of Arabia: For 
C:ſb-ſign fies both Ethiopia and Arabia; and the Topaz was found 
in the Red-ſea, which liy berween both, and ſo might be aſcribed 
to either. : 

20 * Whence then cometh wiſdom ? 
the place of underſtanding «c ? 

c Where this precious Treaſure lies, and whence a man may 
fetch ir. 

21 Seing it is hid from the eyes of all living d, and 
kept cloſe from the fowls of || the air e. 

a4 Of all men that live upon the Earth- e Though they flic high, 
and can fee far and well, yer they cannot diſcern this : Men of the 
moſt raiſed underſtanding cannot diſcover it. It is to be found no 
where in this viſibleWorid, neither in the upper nor lower parts oft 


22 * Deſtrucion and death f ſay, we have heard 
the fame thereof g with our ears. 

7 Either 1. Men that are dead, and thereby freed from the en- 
cumbrance of their bodies, which depreſs their minds, and have 
more raited thoughts than men that live here. Or, 2. The Grave 
the place of the dead, to which theſe things are here aſcribed, as 


and where 1s 


they are to the dep:hs, and to the ſea, v- 14- by a Figure called Pro- 
ſopopeia. Ifa man ſhould ſearch for tris Witdem, either amongſt 
living men, or amongſt the dead, he could nor find it; yea,though 
he ſhould and might enquire of all men that formerly lived in the 
World, ſome of whom were perſons of prodigious Wir,and Le: n- 

ing, 


Chap. XXy1 


14 * The depth p faith, It is not in me: and the ſea x 


a 
4 
. 


Ver, 22 


33» 34! 


neither ſhall FHeb. fu 
gold hal 


nor begivm 
for it 
*Pro,z.1;; 
14.&8.11, 
19.and 16, 
16, 


LOr, wſth 
of fine gold, 


[Or 1 Ree 
mith, 


*Ver? 1% 


|Or, h14« 


Vehhe 


« Ver 14 


(XVI 


" Ver, 4 
OM, 11, 
3» 34! 


Heb. þ, 
ld my 
0; begivm 
w it 

Proc3.13; 
4-&8.11, 
9.and 16, 


Dr, weſt 
fine gula, 


Or, Ra 
06 h, 


er? 14 


&:: 
(up. KXVIIL J 
| ing, and of vaſt Experience, as having lived nigh a thouſand 
years, and made it their great buſineſs in that time to ſearch out 
the depths of this Divine Wiidom in the Adminiſtration of the 
World. g We know ir only by flight and uncertain rumours, but 
not fully and perfettly. 
22 God h underſtandeth the way thereof z, and he 
knoweth the place thereof &. | 
h ji.c+ God alone; as appears by the denial of it to all other 
things i Either the way how it1s to be obtained : Or rather, the 
methods or courſes which it takes in the management of all Aﬀairs 
in th2 World, together with its grounds and ends in them, k Where 
ir dwells, which is only in his own Breaſt and Mind, and in the 
beſt of Men,but in part,and only as far as it pleaſeth him to afford ir. 
24 For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and feerh 


under the whole heaven 7. 

I He, and he only knows it, becauſe his Providence, and that 
only, is infinite and univerſal, reaching to all places,and times,and 
things, paſt, preſent, and to come ; Whereas the moſt accute and 
knowing Men have narrow underſtandings, and ſee but very few 
things, and ſmall parcels of the Works of God, and therefore are 
very unfit to paſs a Judgment vpon them, becauſe the Wiſdom, and 
Juſtice, and Beauty of God's Works, is not clearly nor fully ſeen 
till all the partsof them be laid together. ; 

25 To make the weight for the winds », and he 


weigheth » the waters o by meaſure p. 

2» Which of themſelves are moſt light, and without any weight, 
and inconſtant, and ſuch as no Creature can order or govern them: 
But God manageth them all by weight, appointing to every;/Wind 
that blows, its teaſon, its proportion, its bounds and limits, when, 
and where, and how much, and how long each Wind ſhall blow, 
and for what ends, whether for Mercy, as to refreſh men in hor 
ſeaſons with its gentle gales, to cheriſh the Fruits of the Earth, to 
wafc Ships oa the Sea to their defired Havens, &c- or whether for 
Judgment, as to corrupt the Air, and thereby the Bodies of Men, 
and Fruits of the Earth, to blow down Houſes upon their Inhabi- 
tants, as he was pleaſed ro deal with my poor unhappy Chuldren. 
He only doth all theſe things, and he on:y knows'why he doth 
them. He inſtanceth but in ſome few of God's Works, and thoſe 
which ſeem to-be moſt trivial, and caſual, and uncertain, that 
theroby he might more ſtrongly imply and prove that God doth 
the ſaine in other things which are more conſiderable, and are ma= 
naged by more conftant Cauſes, and certain Methods; that he 
doth all things in the 'moſt exa& order, and weighr, and mealure. 
» But it ſecms a very improper ſpeech, zo weigh things by meaſure, 
and therefore this word may more fitly be otherwite rendred, he 
examineth, or diſpoſeth, ou fitteth, or direfteth, for ſo this Verb is 
eli: where uſed, as 1 Sam 2. 3. Pſalm 715. 3- Prov. 16, 2- and 21.2. 
o Towir, theRain-waters, as appears from the next Verle, which 
Goo layeth up in his Srore-houſes, or Bot:les the Clouds, and 
thence draws t:cm forth, and ſends them down upon the Earth in 
ſuch times and propo: tions as he thinks fir, and as may ſerve his 
ſeveral deſign- and ends p For liquid things are examined by 
meaſure, as other things are by weight: And here is both Weight 
and Meaſure. to tignific with what exa& and perfe& Wiſdom God 
doth govern the World. : 

26 When ne made q a decree for the rain r, and a 


way « for the lightning, of the thunder. 

Which was either from Eternity, or at the firſt Creation, when 
he ſerrled that courſe and order which ſhould afterwards be conti- 
nued. Or, When he maketh : But our Tranſlation ſeems beſt ro ſuit 
with tix then in the next Verſe, where che ſenſe is compleated. 
r An appointment, ans! as it were a Statute Law,that it thould fail 
upcn the Earth, and thar in ſuch rimes, ad places, and proporti- 
ons, and manner, as he ſhould think fit, cither for corret#:on, or for 
mercy, as Elihu ſpeaks, Job 37 3. 5s Or, Path, how it ſhould ger 
out of the thick Cloud in which it was thur vp, and as 1t were im- 
pritoned . Or, 4 courſe, which ſhoula for the furure be obſcrved, as 
to the time, and meaſure, and ends, and other circumſtances be- 
longing ro it. ; 

[Or mm. 27 Then t did heſee it «, and ||declare it x ; he pre- 
bois, .paredit y, yea, and ſearched it our z. 

t Either from Eternity, when he decreed what he would do, or 
when he firſt created them. « i. e. Wiſdom, wnich is he tubjeCt 
matter of the preſent Diſcourſe. This «od Jaw not abroad, bur 
within himſelf; he looked or refle&ed up-n it in his own mind, as | 
the Rule by which he would proceed in the Creation and Govein- 

' ment of all things managing them in ſuch ways and methods as 
were moſt agreeable ro his own molt wie and uiſearchab'e Coun- -| 
ſels, which no human or created Wit can reach or pierc. into. + oY 
he [aw it, toasto declare it, asit follows; So as to make it viſible , 
and manifeſt in ſome meaſure to his Creatures. Or. he Jaw it, 
i, e- heenjoyed it, Seeing being oft put for Enjoying, as Pſalm. 27. ' 
13. and 34, 12. Eccleſ. 3.13. and 2. 1- Compare Prov. 8 22. Xx1.c. , 
He made itevident, he diſcovered his deep Wiſdom which lay hid | 
before in his own breaſt ; or he laid the foundation of that Ditcove- | 
ry of it, which then was, or afterward ſhculd be maveto Ange's | 
and Men, as the H-avens did in themlielves declare the glory of God, Pſal. | 


_ 


T9. I. Before there was ſuch a Cre ture as Man to rake +.otice of it, | 
becauſe the Obje& was viſible in ir ſelf, and not made ſo by the Eye 
which afterwards beheld it. Or, did number it, i. > thewed it as it , 
were by number, nor only in groſs, bur as ir were by retail, inall 
the ſeveral works which he made. y i e« He had it in readines for the 
- doing of all his Works. as if he had been for a long rime preparing 
Materials for them $o it is a Speech of God after the manner of 
Men. Or, he diſpoſed it, is e. uſed or employed it inhis Work+z Or, 
he ſettl-d, or efablijhed it, i.e He firmly purpoled to do fuch and 
ſuch things in ſuch manner as he thoughrmect, and he cſtab'iſhed 
the order which he firſt made in the World, that ir ſhould continue 
in after Ages. Or, he direted ir, and directied and ordered al: things 
by it. z Not properly ; for ſo ſearching imp''es Ignorance,and that 
aman is at a loſs, and requires time and induſtry, all which is TC= 
Pugnant to the Divine perteC&ions ; bur figuratrvely ,as ſfugh expret- 
ſions are oft uſed concerning God, i-e He did; and dork, all things 
with that abſolure and perte& Wiſdom, and he kno:verh all his own 
Counſels and Attions, and the Reatons of them. ſo exattly,and per- 
&Qly, as ifhe had beſtowed a long time in ſearching, and judging, 


to find them out. And this, and the other Ats mentioned in this 
verſe, are to be underſtood of God ſolely and excluſively, it being 
here,as itis oft elſe-where in thisPook,ſ..ticiently implied,that this 
kind of Divine Wiidom, which conliſts in the accurate knowledge 
of all God's Counſels and Works, is far above, our of man's reach: 
Man doth not ſee this Wiſdem, but only ſo faras God is pleaſed to 
reveal it to him, and therefore he cannor declare it to otters; Man 
did not prepare, nor order, nor cntrive it, and therefore no wonder 
if he cannot ſearch it out. And ſo this is moſt fitly conne&ed with 


- 


the following verſe: For as here he tells us what Wiidom is deny- *Pſal.11 


cd to Man, fothere he informeth us what is granted to him. 


2 === 


XXIN 


1 Os Prov 


28 And @ unto man b he ſaid c, Behold 4, * the fear 1-7.& 9-1 


of the LORD e that is Wiſdom f, and to depart from E<<!*1-17 
| 13- 


[ 
| 
i 


i 


evilg zs Underſtanding þ. 

2 Or rather, But: For this is added by way of oppoſition,to ſhew 
that man's wiſdom doth nor lie in a curious Enquiry into, or an Ex- 
att knowledge of the ſecret paths of God'sCounſel and Providence 
bur in things of another, and of a lower nature. 6 Unto 4dam at 
firſt, and in, and with him, to all his Race and Poſterity. c1. e. 
Gd ſpake it, part'y and at firſt inwardly to the mind of Man. in 
which God wrote this with his own finger,and engraved it as a firſt 
Principle for his direction ; And partly afterwards by the Holy Pa- 
triarchs, and Prophets, and otber Teachers of his Church, whom 
God tent into the World to teach men true Wiſdom ; which ac- 
cordingly they did, not by acquainting the People with the ſecrets 
and intricacies of God's Countel and Providence, but by declaring 
the revealed Will of God, nd inſtructing them in their duty to- 
wards God and Men, makiag this their great, it not only buſineſs 
to make men wiſe unto Salvation. Sce Deut.4 6 & -9-29. d Which 
expreſſion notes the great importance of this Do&iine, and withal 
man's dulneſs and backwardneſs to apprehend and conſider it. and 
man's pronenels to place his Wiſdom in vain and curious ' peculati- 
ons. e i-e- True Religion, and the right Worſhip of God, bo:h 
inward and outward, all which cometh under this name. f In that 
only conſiſts man's true Wiſcom, becuſe that, and that on:y, is his 
duty, and his ſafety, and happineſs, borh for this Life, anc for the 
next; and withal this is attainable, whereas the depths of God's ways 
are unknown, and unſearchable to human or created Capacitics. 
g i e- From fin, which is called evi! eminent]y, as being the chicf, 


| if not the only Evil, and the cauſe of al} other evils a- d that which 


is conſtantly and immutably evil, whereas afflitio s are fiequen ly 
made geod and highly beneficial. Religion conliſts of two Bra; ch 
es, doing good and forſaking evil; the former is expreſſed in the 
former clauſe of this Verlie, and the latter in theſe words. þ Is the 


| beſt kind of Knowledge or Wiſd m to which man can attain i:: this 


Life. The ſame thing is here twice exprefled in ſeveral thraſcs, 
And the deſign of Job in this cloſe of his Diſcourſe, is not only to 
ſhew the miſtake, and repro: e the arrogance and boldn: ſs of his 
Friends, in prying into God's ſecrets, a d paſſing ſuch a r.ſh*cen- 


. fure upon him, and upon God's ways and carriage towards him ; 
; bur allo to vindicate himſelf from the impuration of i-ypocri/ie and 
; Profaneneſs, which they faſtned upon him, by ſhe« ing that he 


had ever eſteemed it to be his beſt Wiſdom, and true Intereſt, to 
fear God, and to depart from evil. | 


2 


CHAP. XXIX. | 
Job's former proſperity in God's favour, 1 === 5, His hmour and repute, 
6 11. For his charity, 12—1I6. And puniſhing the wicked, 17 
Hz# hope herein, 18, Hw glory and honour repeated, 19 
Oreover, Job Þ continued his parable, and 

{aid, 
2 Oh thar I were as iz moneths paſt, as i» the days 
when God preſerved me 5: | 
a To wir, from all thoſe miſcries which now I feel. This he 


- 


IF. + Heb. 
ded to taki 


Ups 


delires, not cnly for his own caſe and comfort, bur alſo for the vin- ' 


dication of his Reputation, and of the honour of Re igion, which 
ſuffered by his means: For as his Calamities were the only ground 
of a'] their hard Sp+eches and Cenfures of him, as a man toreſaken 
and hated by God, fo he rightly judged thar this ground being re- 
moved, and his Poſterity reſtored, his Friends would rake it for a 
token of God's favour to him, and begert in them a milder ana bet- 


rer opinion of him- Or lod 
ed Or, lamp: 


3 When his || candle þ ſhined upon my head c, 
when by his lighe I walked rhrough darkneſs 4. 

b i.e His Favour and Blefling, oft ſignified by the name Light ; 
as his diſpleature, and a ſtate of afflicton is freque::tly ca led durk- 
eſs, c Or, over my h-ad, to comfort and di:ie&t me The ground 
of the Expreſſion 1s rhis that lights uſe. to be carried and ſer on 
high, that men may make the better uſe of them, as the Sun for 
that end was p'aced above us. 4 I paſled ſafely through many dif- 


' ficulries, and dangers, ard common Clamities, which befel others 


who lived round about me, and overcame thoſe troubles which fell 
upon my ſelf. 

4 As I was in the days of my youth e, when the ſe- 
cret of God was upon my Tabernacle f: . 

e 1. e- In my former and' flouriſhing days, which he calls the 


' days of youth, becauſe thoſe are commonly the times of mirth and 


comfurt, as old age is called evil days, Ecclef. 12. 1. f When there 
was a ſecret Bleſſing cf God upon me, and my Family, prore&ing, 


| dirxe&ing, and ſucceeding us in all our Aﬀairs, which the Devil 


obſerved, Chap. r. 10. whereas now there is a viſible Curſe of God 
upon me and mine. | 
5 When che Almighty was yet with meg ; when 
my children þ were abeut me : PE | 
Z i.e. On my ſide; whereas now he is againſt me, and hath for- 
ſaken me. þ Or, Servants, or both, and therefore he uſeth this. 


word which comprehends both. : - [[Or,crzars. | 
6 When I watihed my fteps with || butter z, and the Ch. 20.17; 
rock poured + me out rivers of oil #. iHeb.with | 


/i- e.. When I abotinded in all ſorts 'of Bleſſings: which is oft 2* 


ſignified by this or the like Phraſes; as Ger. 49. 11. Devr. 33. 24. 
7b. 20. I7. PJalm 81. 16. When T had fach numerous Herds of 
Cartle, and conſequently ſuch plenty of Butter, that it I had need. 
ed it, or been pleaſed 1@ to ule it, I might have walked my Feer 

SS 3-: with 


3 | 


| | 
| it 
[ 
b þ 


| 
| 


: ar . "XXTX. 7 
s By ; 0 


Chap. XXX. ; 


: 


| jaw-teeth 17 And I brake 7 the j 

— pt N I CT Jaw © 

ME beef: T _ the {poil out of his mtg me wicked, and 

: r, the jaw boner, Or, the grinders, tho ſharpeſt and 
. nd ſtrongeſt | 


fitable, and accu 

, r{ed ba 

3+ 2+ Rev. 22: 15+ Creatures ; as 2 Sar. 16, g. 2 Kings 8- 13: Phile 
2 Yea, 


with it. þ When not only frui 
- Plac nly fruitful Fields, but 
Flee (lock thapte of nin was where Jb ved) iced | nero pron ethers 
; Ee . u 3 ++» vs elir » 
iF When I went mens po ag Sec on Deut. 32+ 413+ amen pcs, 1-5 others. It is yoke 1 vrolence wherewith t 
wy ok when I prepared my "any 5 the & through the | and 58. "6 _ their Teeth. nd > ga wha 
rom my dwelling. m To wi 0 1n the Ntreet p. and unjuſt] « &+ Forced them to reſt Jaim 38: and SE 
+ = ia; heogr maps, lp o wit, of the City, as the tf | Juitly taken away- ore what they had vi 57' 4+ 
3 place of Judi ity, as the followin 18 T —_ ad violent 
—_ been oft o:ſerved. -/ con ar_gel which was in the hy {hal Aeon I ſaid p, LT ihotl Be in m iy 
Gen 1h Ciry So Toll TITTIES Giwack | 2 I 5 ly =y days as the ſand r y neſt 9, and] 
5 e City : So Fob mi 3/4 She ity, IC» the Gate | C "hu er{waded my ſe ins p 
a ders clin + =, | ng mpeg erg — own univertl COIN men wich ks 
ſtrate, or Jude other Expreſſions, it appear '- er for me. By | Job's Opini od, and of all Men. Bur al y, and with the ſingu] 
, , or Judge in his Cou ppears tnat Fob was a Magi- & Ipinion, yet at other ti t although this was -: Xp 
place within, or ntry« f h Ee In that void S pectation of Ch er times he was ſub; $10INctimes 
the ratios arr hoy where the People -— Some & a: =_ Or mtimets, bus * —_— from Chap: _ ny and ex- 
8 The young men {a pong them. — ectly expiring in my mate = and peaceable, +4 18" Anr* vir 
and the aged aroſe, a 7 "Buy and hid themſelves q : goo rm Friends —_ _ ts copay in the ach, 
J Either out of a of UP Yr. ” Wh: enmnd me, and oy an IECIOUS perfume of a G O 
dR hichis in plentiful Inheriran a Good 
ty, or out of a Cont: rofound Reverence to my Perſon and Digni numerable- See G ce to all my Poſterity 
Wael X might cicher wr Ton Cole & Folty, which chey 19 My roo wes + ſpread out * and 41+ 49: WW 
diſcover by x Ay either underſtand by Informarti y, which they the dew la . pread out * by the 
2> Gomnernnd ation from others, or y all night u - waters, and 
which they Ce on Ces Or Carriages in Mm » OL s I was contri pon my branet 3 l 
1d my preſence, continual] S l 5, 
wenke hor + -23098 ga 's What 1 coma a chem ro "han krone 1S conflednty > wok yur Favour and Bleſſing, a as 
ent With them- See Leud- > way by them, or _ <P ranches, and conſt with moiſture dock vg pa > Hap | 
veneration they had f i8- 19-32. I Sings 2. 19: S as | riſhings equently muſt needs b frui in irs Root Pal. 14, 
Jaftice, and Faichfa ormy Perſon, in regard of that W! o great a 20 e fruitful and flou- Jer 1 
» and Inefs which tl egard or that Wiſdom, and y glory w P þ «17,8. 
my Proceedings. A they dilcerned in me, and is Was Tr = + freſh 7 in me « 
—_—+ chan oo aw} - v9 therefore they judged quite pewile pe t Th In ) in my hand. » and my * bow x =_ 
. 9 The princes refrained talkin ; Life was not Fon wht T had gained by my juſt and vi _—— 
and on their mouth . g#, and laid their _ the acceſſion = A ut growing, and —_ 1: and virtuous ,, 4), _ 
[ Either fearing that I ſhould diſt ! C uf gth, which is robe of rea Heb. with wr ng 7 Heb, 
pie arp Ag Fogg >= eaſy uw weakneſs by their er We - "50107 5p 4 5--etig kgs oe OO 
roved of, and fully ail entence which they rea- S of War, pH nd Arrows were principa ” Ifa.49,; 
of my Wiſdom, and di y afſented ro. Such an Opini y rea- | new Bow, wh y Heb. changed it ſelt, 1 principal In- 42.31, 
- : _ id not think an Upinion had they | O » when other Bows b elf, 1.e, grew aS1t 
1mpertinent Pcrſon as me ſuch a foolith, erron Or, changed its {t ws by much uſe &gro were a 
ck oftheir wond s you fancy or repreſent me cous,and | is expreſſed, 1/; cength, which word grow weak and uſeleſs 
n er at Job's wi to be. cI , cd, Iſa. 40-31. i rd may be he * 
their reſolution to Deſi] Lund gs OI and | ——Hank egg gar 21 Unto a 7 x hath got new cara erſtood, as it 
FHeb. che ( 10 + The nobles held their be J Prov- = 32. lence at my counſel 8 ve ear, and waited and kept {i-- 
Te -Fthe Clcaved to the ro 61238 eo mhrYy th and their tongue | 1. ExpeRing till I ſpoke : 
nobles was . * It lay as till as if it had d Ta. nora they were _ e, and ſilently liſtening to my C 
bid. ſpoken. one ſo, and they could not have | J _ and Juſt, and Good, re be like the Dincke _ 
II When the ea uagment- ; 2 an preferrin it b £-L0G, 
r heard R : gs it before their 
when the eye as i bs pn _—_ it bleſſed m@Sx, 2n dls 36, one my wor As they FT ; ir own 
Gifts —_— ne trelhts Ken ws op ar oi 4 ; G er eng. ed upon them 6b =o! 200 again 4, and wy 
ces; or hearti] | f God with emine r to confute th : : 
EE oe eb CO no nanny hen ng 
ons, and of the fſatisfaCti : ey ſaw in all m =. We it comes d » as the next verſc Jy: 
which T gave to th ion which I gave to all, and ny | Earth, is moſh s down gently and Sons: Expienns 
crees in all Cauſes ITT "lp; $75.7 his. and ane Fork _—_ in great and iN as 4a ME Fr Taper Ree ee 
pearance gave them occaſi ght before me » Whe 4 22 Andre ati: v4 x nes 
, on to \] | Ny ap. I tiey wait 
Gee bak * _ juft, and bond or As nl we gave Teſtimony opened their ns 8 me, as for the rain c, and they 
wo} hg A or being thought to be guilty of =4+"aj So far was I c As the Earth, or th or me «s for the latter rai 
Pal. 72. 7 4 Be =. ets of which ſee Chap: : y thoſe crimes where- | *Þe former rain ; ” we waiteth for the __ me 
| I 2: Prov. hb ecauſe * I delivered = the P : here oppoſed to it : _ ” Deut- 11, 14+ becauſe zhe Han £0 Wh, 
TR — —m pins. and him that hed poor = cried, and therewith to ſarisfie Pe 19-24 5. 7. d Toreceive my anni 4 nf 
z From his potent O Fo none to 1elp him a or opens its mouth IIIt, as the dry and parched ras, an 
great Wealth or Po ppreſſor. They did not honour. m . 24 If 1 1; to receive the Rain. parched Earth gapes 
the Aﬀflited, and OO but for my impartial J {xi e for my h - aughed ON them e. th 1 
: I, Ro apiarein; Juſtice and Pity ro the light of , they believed it 
againſt their might Fe aintaining their Cauic and R; my countenance th it not f, and 
ay partly _ y Adverſaries. a None nd Right, e Or ſported, or jefted wi Ncy caſt not down 
{> the would own. or help | 22d pleal; , or jeſted with them, i. e- ge 
them for it: To” y were poor, and unable to recc ep pleaſantly with them. FI , 1. e- carried my ſelf familiar] 
likely to cruſh b partly becauſe their Enemies recompence | © well-pleated with th | t was ſo acceptable to th ping" 
2 ccg6edatt _— them and their helpers. Which ma : ro _ — — a Ponte Sogpang _ believe alle en 
13 T | . "ny y al not b * 45: 26. Pſjal 126 | 
EC "ut. he blefling b of him that was read = 4 ERIN I wr —— pi rh yl 
& UPON MC :; and I cauſed : eady tO periſh all, as ir doth in caſe of grieve me, or mike my cou 0 OY 
ſing for joy e: uſed the Widows &d heart to very cautious not to ee ay or ſorrow, Gen 4. 5. — wes _ 
bþ Wherewith both he. and oth to change my countenance Rt: nor to give me any OD 
begged that God would bleſs > wr his fake bleſſed me, and 25 I choſe out their w rriage toward them. 
Obie of and tyranny of wicked EEE x hace by dwelt asa King in the ay f, and far g chief b, and 
: jet of Injuries and Oppreſſions,b "4 Who are the common the mourners k army s, as One zhat comfo h 
| In ne to offend thoſe a way #4 = moſt part they f They ſought _ fi OT 
., p s from thei 'elt them, : me for K 
29-77 race. ir Violence. e For her great eter ur _ hay Foe rg out Pr per ” or eps copper 
| . 1, ir 
wy Y 294 4 TI put on Righteouſneſs 5 or Judge, whill Any to accompliſh their ee om wher mny- 
eſ.5.8. me judgment was as a robe mw it cloathed me f: | © chore Mead us - wainng for my - naar" wy >. Prince 
* Asa Garment cov 14dem fg. * Oracle to ry . Icry, and My mind and 0 r Head, 
all the day long, foI ers the whole Body, and is worn Joy, into cl em: i Whoſe Preſence puts Lik ORE 08 TIE-Ke 
my Admin "6. was conſtantly juſt in the whole continually | ſence to — whole Army. And no leſs e, and Courage, and 
NES oats s$, publick and private, and neve courle of all | ed or forro = k As I was able and re..4 acceptable was my pre- 
, . 1 Perſ . nd re.cy to comfo ; 
ther Men, as the partial reſpe& ro my ſelf, or to th Peſo off this | and welco wful Perſons, ſo my Conſolations w rt any afflict- 
Decrees were | Sirens og of many Judges 1s. e Perſons of o- | th m to them Or, when h ns were always grateful 
| E . .. g My Jud e mourners, 1 &- I , en he, to wit, th : bly" 
ſhame and of wc qoepb T ., cone that ay” now _ ſternation Go -Se- wet my, when they are oe nd hm comforteth 
age » bur always Honour and wreat t | but are revived by the 'Þ by reaſon of ſozye great loſs = yn 
IF E was eyes h h . : .e- | King or General. reſence and Speech of = weak anger, 
as to the blind ;, and feet was I to tl | ile and valiant 
= oO tne 
h i- e In ſtead of E | C 
£ yes to . ; A H A . 
I Corporally Or, rather 2. —_ dire&, and aſſiſt. z Eithe _ Honour ts turned into Contempt ne XXX. 
no weakneſs were apt to miſta ally; ſuch as through ignor: : ears, Pains, Deſpicableneſs, 1 b His Proſperity into Calamity; 
rhe Craft and Artifices of evil e, and to be ſeduced or cheat _ er now, and his former Cha I 19, Notwithſtanding hi —_ 
. and adviſed, and led into a. nant men- Z- Theſe F ca a C by YO, 27 — 31 arity, and Hope, 20 = 4 6 v6 _ 
- who was unable to help himſelf tae EF FS Keatly to No him BVz now 4&4 they that a et 
16 Iwasa father / to th me in deriſi re T younger than Tb, h | 
ew ot m I ſearched our : * and the cauſe which | dined 4 to have ſet with ws Oe would have diſ- FR 
i-e- Had the care and b : a My condition 1 OgS OI M fl J 
+7. Thoſe which were not \ wah of a Father to them: m Eith univerſal ara wg changed for the role" _ , chan Þ 
ern 77 ri "my becauſe vhs 4 = » ledge or Tribunal, ar og and Betters _— - Is, taught" to _— 
ailing igent] enaui injure Perſons durſt » | and ſcoffs: Thu « a e me the Obje& of y 
hard and difficult y enquired after. Or urſt not | 7m; 'hus my Glory is tu > Obje& of their contempt 
7 , and poſſib] , 2, Thoſe which might have diſdained, 1 rned. into ſhame. 4d Or, r: 
I of the Oppreſlors pe P y were made ſoby th were | that j aained, 1. e- Whoſe conditi 4 r, rather 
; , ortheir Ad - y the fraud in the Opin e condition was TH 
| + Heb. rhe 192 could not find out, I 2s rene ts, which the poor injured P, rts | they were —— wa according to the dhericn of > "W _ 
pains to diſcover. er- | herds, and the x Are fnnnc Er Employment. e To be oi _ 
Dogs are ever ns or my Dogs whi cp= 
y where menti )ogs which watch my Flockse 
entioned with contempt as flehy, unpro- 


a WW «a 5 LÞ Hen 73 w Ty SS CT 


Tv 


XN, 


&, 
ed, 
al. 1.3, 
17.8, 


eb.new, 
Cn. 49, 


Heb, 
mged, 


l, 42, 3l, 


"Chap. XXX, 


+ Heb. 


come to my ears. 


2 Yea, whereto might the ſtrength of their hands 
profit me f in whom oid age was perithed g ? | 

} Nor was it ſtrange that I did, or would, or might refuſe to 
take them into any of my meaneſt Services becauſe they were Ut- 
zerly impotent, and therefore unſerviceable. g Or, loft, exther 1. 
becauſe they never attain to it, but are conſumed by their luſts,or 
cut off for their wickedneſs by the juſt Hand of God, or Men, 
in the midſt of their Days. Or, 2. becauſe they had fo waſted their. 


. . . - . G 1 
Strength and Spirits by their evil courſes, that when they came to | 


old Age, they were feeble and decrepit, and uſclets for any labour. 
Oc, 3. becauſe they had not that prudence and experience which 
is proper and uſual in that Age, by which they might have been 
uſeful, ifnot for Work, yet to Oversſee and dire& others 1n their 
Work. But the Words may be thus rendred, I whom vigorous Ag? 
w3:s periſhed, i. e. who were grown impotent for ſervice. For the 
Word here rendred od Aze, is uſed only here, and 7ob 5. 26. where 
alſo it may be ſo rendred, Thou ſhalt come to thy Grave m a vigorous, 
or mature Age, having the vigour of Youth, even in thine old Age, 
and until thy Death, as Mes had. And if this word do ſignific 
old Age, yet it ſignifies not every, but only a flouriſhing and vigo- 
rous old Age ; as the Hebrews note, and the word may ſeem to 1m- 
ply : Whence the Seventy Interpreters alſo render it Perfettion, to 
wit of Age, and of the endowments belonging to Age* _ 

2 For want and tamine þ they ere || ſolitary : 


1 - . . . . 
fleeing into the wilderneſs, + in former time defolate 


wfernight. and wall : | 3 

' þ Brought upon them either by their own ſloth or wickedneſs,or 
by God's juſt Judgment, Heb. I want and famine,which aggravates 
their following Solitude. Although want commonly drives Perſons 
to places of reſort and company ior relief, yertheywere ſo conſcious 
of taeir own guilt, and contemptibleneſs, and hatefulneſs to all 
Perſons,that they ſhunned all company, and for fear or ſhame fled 


into, and lived 1n deſolate places. 


4 Who cut up mallows z by the buſhes &, and juniper 


] roots for their meat, | 
; Or, P:r/lain, or Szlt, or Bitter Herbs, as the word ſeems to im- 


port, which thews their extreme necefliry. & Or, by the ſbrubs, nigh 
unto which they grew. Or, with the barks of trees, asthe VuJgar La- 
tine rende.s it. / Poſſibly the word may ſignifie ſome other Plant, 
for the Hebrews themſelves are at a loſs for the ſignitication of the 


Names of Plants. 


They were driven forth from among men m, (they 


cried after them, as affer a thief » ) 


6 To dwell in the clifrs of the valleys, in F caves of 
fHeb.holes the earth, and i the rocks. 


m As unworthy of humane Society, and for their beggery and 


diſhoneſty, ſuſpe&ed 2nd avoided of all men. » Giving one ano- 


ther warning of their danger from them. 

7, Among the buſhes they brayed o, under the net- 
tles p they were gathered together. 

o Like the wild Aſſes, Fob 6. 5. for hunger or thirſt. P Which 
ſcem not proper for that uſe. This Hebrew Word is uſed but twice 
in Scripture, and it is acknowledged both by Jewiſh and Chriftian 
Writers, That the ſignitication of the Hebrew Words which . ex- 
preſs Plants, or Beaſts, or Stones, &c. is very uncertain; and 
therefore this is by others. and may well b- underſtood of ſome 
kiad of Thorns : And ſo this is the ſame t' ing with the buſbes in 


the former Branch of the Verſe, 1nder which t1ey hid themſelves, 


that they might not be diſcovered when they were ſought out for 
Al* 
Juſtices» 


8 They were children of fools q, yea, children of 
fHeb.men + baſe men » : they were viler chan the earth s. 


if no name. q Either 1. The genuine Children of tooltſh Parents, their Chil- 
dren not only by Birth.but by Imitation; as they only are eſteemed 
the Chilaren of Abraham, who do the works of Abraham, Tthn 8. 39. | 
Or, 2. Fools, by 2 common Hebraiſm, as the jons of 2nen are put for 
Men, and the ch:[ar-n of Wijdom, for wiſe men,e&c. r Heb. meu without 
name, i, e- without any degree of Credit or Reputation ; as men of 
name is put for renowned Perſons, Gen- 6. 4. 5 Which we tread and 
: ſpit upon, and are nor willing to rouch. : 
_—_ 6. 9 * And now am ll cneir fong ?, yea, IT amtheir by- 
"pg word. . ; . 
Lam. 3. f The matter of their ſong and deriſion : They now rejoyce in 
14 63, my Calamities, becauſe formerly I uſed my Authority to puniſh 
ſuch Vag:ants and Miſcreants. 
fHeb,,ud 10 They abhor me, they flee far from me#, + and 
vith-bold ſpare not to {pic in my face x. 
wt ſpittle u In conrempt of my perſon and loathing of my ſores. x Not 
my literally for they kept far from him,as he now ſaid ; but figurative- 


ly, # e. they ule al! manner of contemptuous and reproachful Ex- 
prefſions and Carriages towards me,not only behind my back, bur 
even to my face. . 

11 Becauſe he y hath looſed my cord z, and affiited 
me 4, they have alſo let looſe the bridle þ before 
me c. 

y To wit, God, for it follows, He affi#ed me, which was God's 
work. z Either 1. He hath ſlackned the ſtring ( as this word ſome- 
times ſignifies ) of my Bow, and fo rendred my Bow and Arrows 
uſeleſs, either to offend others, or to defend my ſelf; #, e. He hath 
deprived me of my Strength or Defence : So this is oppoſed to that 


expreſſion, Chap. 29. 20+ Or, 2 He hath taken away from me that 


Power and Authority, wherewith. as with a Cord, I bound then 
to the good- beiraviour, and kept them within their bounds. The 
like Expreſſion is uſed in the ſame Senſe, Job 12- 18. a When 
they perceived that God whe had been my faithful Friend, and 


conſtant Defender had forſaken me, and was become mine Ene- 


my, tiey preſently rook this advantage of ſhewing their malice a- 
gainſt me: 6 They caſt off all former reſtraints of Law, or Huma- 
nity, or- Moiei:y, and gave themſelves full liberty to ſpeak or a& 
what they pleaſed againit me. c They durſt now do thoſe rhings be- 
fore mine Eyes; which formerly they trembled leſt they thould 


& 


OB. Chap. 
12 Upon my right hand d riſe e the youth f, they 
| puſh away my teet g, and they raiſe up againſt me the 
i ways þ of their deſiruction 3, 
d Tois Circumſtance is noted, either becauſe this was the place 
| of Adverfaries or Accuſers in Courts of Juſtice, P{al. 109. 6. Zach. 
{ 3- I. Or, to ſhew their boldneſs and contempr of him, that they 
caurit oppoſe him even on that ſide where his chief ſtrength lay. e 
To wit,in way of contempt and oppoſiticn,or to accuſe and reproach 
me, as my Frieni's now do; as one who by my great, bur ſecret 
wickednets, have brought theſe Miſeries upon my {cIf. f Heb. 
Joung Striplings, who tormerly hid themſelves trom my preſence, Ch. 
29. 8. g Either 1. properly, ttey trip up my Hee,s, Or, rather 2. 
Mceraphoricaily, they endeavour utt-rly to over-whe!m my goings, 
and to caft me down to the ground. þ 1. e. Caufey-ways,or Banks : 
So 1t is a Metaphor from Souldiers, who raite, or caſt up Banks, a- 
gainlt the City which they beſiege. Or, they raiſe up a Level,or 
imooth the Path by continual treading it : they prepare, and con- 
trive, and uſe fevgra! methods ro deſtroy me. 7 Either 1. paſſive= 
ly, fo the S-nle 1s, they raiſe, or keap upon me, 7. e. imputeto ime, the 
Ways, 1. e. the cauſes f their ru;ne, They charge me to be the Au- 
taor of their ruine. Or, rather. 2. Adively, of that deftruttion 
which they d-fign and carry on againſt me : Which beſt ſuits with 


the whole Context, whercin 7ob is conſtantly repreſented as the 
Patient, and wicked Men as the Agents. 


13 They mar my path &, they ſet forward my cala- 
mity /, they have no helper m. 

k As I am in great miſery,ſo they endeavour to ſtop all my ways 
out of it,and to fruſtrate all my Counſels and Courſes of obtaining 
Relicf or Comfort. and although Jeb had no hopes of a temporal 
deliverance or rettitution, yet he could not but obſerve and reſent 
the malice of thoſe who did their utmoſt to hinder it. Or, the ſenſe 
is, They pervertall my ways, putting perverſe and falſe conſtrui- 
ons upon them,cenſuring all my conicientious diſcharges of my du-= 
ty to God and Men, as nothing butcraft and hypocrifie, 1 Increa- 
fing it by their bitter Taunts, and Invettives, aud Cenſures. Or: 
they profit by,or are pleaſ-d and ſatisfied with ny calamity, Ir doth them 
gocd at the heart ro ſee me in miſery. m. This is added as an ag- 
gravation of their mal ce, they impudently perſiſted in taeir mali« 
cious deſigns againſt me, though none encouraged or aſſiſted them 
therein. Or, eventhey who had zo helper, who were themielv<s in a 
torlorn and miſerab'e condi:1on ; and yer they could 1, far forget 
or over-look their own calamities as to take pleaſure in mine. 


14 They came upon me as a wide bieakir:g in of wa=- 


ters; in the defolation o they rolled themſelves upon 
me 


n As fiercely and violent'y as a River doth when a greit breach 
is made 1n the Bank which kept it in- Heb. as at a wide breach; as 2 
belieging Army having made a breach in the walls of tlc City, do 
ſuddenly and forcibly ruſh into it. o Or, for, or inſtead of a aeſolati.. 
on; 4, e. that they might utterly deſtroy me. and make me deſo- 
late» Or, in the waſt place ; i.e. in tha' part of the Bank or Wall 
which was waſted or bruken down. þp As the Waters, or Souldiers 
come rolling or tumbling in «t the Breach. 

+ IF Terrors 9 are turned upon mer: they purſue ,. 
+ my ſoul s as the wind et: ard my welfare « paſicth F Heb. 
away as a cloud &. principal | 

q To wit, from God, who ſets Himſclf againſt me, and in ſome %*- 
ſort joyns his Forces with theſe Miſcreants. r Are dire&ed againſt 
me to, whom they ſeem not to belong,a+ being the por: ion of wicked 
Men.” s Heb. m1 princ.pal or excellent one, 1. e. my Soul, which is 
fitly ſo called,as being the chief part of Man; as it is called a Man's 
Glory, Gen. 49. 6. and hi+ onely One. Pjalm 22. 20. and «hich is the 
proper Seat and Obje& of Divine Terrors, as his Body was of his 
outward Pains and Ulcers» #7 : e. Speedily, vehemently, and ir- 
reſiſtab'y. « All the happineſs and comfort of my Life: x Which 
is quickly diſſolved into rain, or diſſipated by the Sun, or driven 
away with the Wind. 

16 And now my ſoul is poured out y upon me z 
the days of affliction have taken hold upon me. 

y All the ſtrength and powers of my Soul are melted, and faint- 
ing. and dying away, throug" my continued and inſupport-ble 
ſorrows and calamities- z Or, within me, as this tlebrew Particle 
is elſewhere uſed ; as Pſahn 42 5,6 Iſa 26. 9. Hoſea 11 8: 

17 My bones are pierced # in me bin the nighe-ſea- 
ſon c: and my ſinews d take no reft. | 

a Heb. 7, to wit, the Terror or Affliction laſt mentioned : Or; 
He, z.e. God, hath pierced my bones. Thisis no flight and ſuperficial, 
bur a moſt deep wound that reacheth to my very heart and bones; 
! and marrow. -Nothing in me is fo ſecret, but it reacheth it,nothing 
: ſo hard and ſolid, but it fee!s the weight and burden of it. 6 Heb. 
: from above me, by an Arrow ſhot froym Heaven, whence my Cala« 

mities come, and that in a ſingular and eminent manner. Or, by 

that which is «pen me: the ſores which are upon my Skin, er out- 
ward Fleſh, do pierce and pain me even to the Bones. For now 
he is come from deſcribing the Terrors of his Mind, to expreſy 
the Torments of his Body. c When others do,and I ſhould receive 
ſome reſt and refreſhment. 4 And the Fleſh of my ' Body whicts 
{ covereth the Sinews, and is mixed with tiem; and may ſeem to 
| be ſynecdochically expreſſed by the Sinews, which are the ſtrength 
: and ſupport of the Fleſh. So he hgnifies that neither his Bonesnor 
: his Fleſh refteth. Or, and my veins or Arteries, which reſt or move 
{ flowly when the Mind and Body are well compoſed ; but in Job did 


moſt vehemently and reſtleſsly, by :eaſon of his great heat, and 
pain, and paſſion. 


i8 By the great force of my diſcaſe is my garment 
changed e : It bindeth me about f as the collar of my 


4 


_ | ; 
e My Difcaſe is ſo ſtrong and prevalent; that it breaks forth e- 
very where in my Body, in ſuch plenty of purulent and filthy Mat- 
ter- that it infeQs 2nd diſcolours my very Garments. Others, By 
the great Power of G O. D my Garment us changed. In both theſe 
Tranſlations the Words, of my D/feaſe; and of God, are nor in the 
Hebrew Text, bur are ſupplied by : '& Tranſlators. But the words - 
Fu # ars 


P. XXX. 
are by ſome not untruly, nor unfitly rendred thus, without any 
ſupplement, With great force my Garment is changed ; for ſo this Verb 
is uſed, 1 Kings 22. 30. So the Senſe is, I cannot ſhift or put off 
my Garment, without great ſtrength and difficulty ; the reaſon 
whereof is rendred in the following Words. f It cleaveth faſt to 
me, being glewed by that filthy matter iſſuing from my Sores.gAs 
my Collar girdeth in and cleaveth to my Neck. He alludes to the 
faſhion of the Eaſtern outward Garments, which were ſeamleſs, 
andall of a piece, and had a ſtrait mouth at the top which was 
brought over the head, and contrafted and faſtned cloſe about the 
Neck. 

19 He bath caſt me into themire h,and I am become 


like duſt and aſhes z. | 

þ He hath made me contemptible, and filthy, and loathſom for 
my Sores, my whole Body being a kind of Quagmire, in regard 
of the filth breaking forth in all its parts. #7 Like one dead and tur- 
ned to duſt; more like a rotten Carkaſs than a living Man. 

20 TI cry unto thee, and thou doft not hear me &; 1 


ſtand up I, and thou regardeſt me mot m.. 

k To wit, ſoas to anſwer or help me. / Or, 1 ſtand, to wit, 
before thee, 7. e. I pray, as this Phraſe ſignifies, Jer. 15, 1. & 18.20. 
this being a geſture of Prayer, Mat. 6. 5- And fo the ſame thing 
is here repeated in other words after the manner ; Or, 7 perſiſt, or 
perſevere in praying ; I pray importunately and continually,as thou 
requireſt. »» So the Particle not is ſupplied out of the former Clauſe. 
Or, without the Negation, thou knoweſt or ooſerveſt me, and all my 
Griefs and Cries, and yet doſt not pity nor help me, bur rather takeſt 
pleaſure in the contemplation of my Calamities, as the following 
words imply. Or it may be taken Interrogatively, D*-/? thou regard 

' me ? 1, e, thou doeſt not. 


_—_ * 21 Thouart F become cruel » to me + with 7 thy 


e!. ſtrong hand thou oppoſeſt thy ſelf againſt me «. 
eb. the n Heb. Turned to be cruel, as if thou hadſt changed thy very Nature 
weth of which is kind, and merciful, and gracious; and ſuch thou haſt becn 
y hand, formerly inthy carriage to me: but now thou art grown ſevere, and 
andrigorous, and inexorable. o Thy power wherewith I hoped and 
expe&ed that thou wouldſt have ſupported me under my troubles 
thou uſeſt againſt me. : 

22 Thou lifteſt meup to the wind p: thou cauſeſt me 
to ride upon: it q, and diſfolveſt my || ſubſtance r. 

p Thou doſt not ſuffer me to reſt or Jie ſtill for a moment, but 
diſquieteſt me, and expoſeſt me, to all ſorts of ſtorms and calami- 
ties; ſo thatTI amlike Chaffor Stubble lifted up to the Wind, and 
violenty toſſed hither and thither in the Air, without the leaſt ſtop 
or hindrance? 9q 7 e, To be carried and hurried about by it. y By 
this reſtleſneſs, and the vehemency of theſe Winds, my Body 1s al- 
moſt conſumed and waſted, and my heart is melted within me. 

23 For I know that thou wilt bring me zo death 5, 


and ze the houſe appointed for all living 7. 

s I ſee nothing will fatisfie thee but my death, . which thou art 
bringing upon me in a lingering and diſmal manner. # Tp the 
Grave, to which all living Men are coming and haſtening. 

24 Howbeit he will not firecch out his hand to the 
Heb.heap | grave, though they cry in his deſtruction #. 
= # There is great variety and diffculty in the Senſe and Connexion 
of theſe words ; They may be joyned either 1. with the following 
Verſe, as deſcribing Job's compaſſion to others in afflition, which 
by the Principles of Reaſon and Religion ſhould haveprocured him 
ſome pity from God and Men in his afflition. And ro that pur- 
poſe the Words are, or may be tranſlated thus; But was 'no* my 
Prayers for them (which words may be underſtood out of the follow- 
ing Clauſe ) when he ſtreatched our his hand ? ( to wit, againſt them 
to deſtroy them) in hi deſtrufFion or oppreſſion (underſtand it ative'y, 
7. e. when God was about to deſtroy any other Man or Men ) was 


[8 . 
iſaom, 


the Verſe, as is uſual) mv cry for them ? the Feminine Gender 
| being put for the Maſculine, as ic is elſewhere ; or for theſe things.the 
: Feminine being put for the Neuter ; that is, for thoſe deſtruttive 
Calamities which were upon them? Or, 2» with the foregoing 
i Verſe. And ſo theſe words contain either 1. a Conſolation azainſt 
the Evillaſt mentioned : So the Senſe is, Though God will un- 
doubredly bring me to the Grave by theſe tormeats, yet this com- 
forts me, that ſurely he will not ſtretchout his hand ( to wit,to afHi& or 
puniſh me further, as this Phraſe is uſed, Exod 3. 20: 1/a. 9. 12, 
13. ) inthe Grave, thoughthey, 1. e« the periſhing Perſons cry or rear 
(1. e. be ſorely pained and tormented) in his deflrufiom, i e. whil- 
eſt God is deſtroying them. Or this laſt Clauſe may be read inter- 
rogatively, Is there any cry in his deſtruftion ? When a man is cut off 
or deſtroyed by Death, doth he then cry and complain ? No,there 
is an end of alitheſe Miſeries. Or, rather, 2. A Confirmation of 
what he laſt ſaid. For the whole Context ſhews that Job is nor tak- 
ing any comfort to himſelf, but rather aggravating his Sufferings. 
I know, ſaith he, that1am a dead Man, and my Condition is deſ. 
perate, for ſurely he, i. e. God will not fretch out his hand ( to wir, 
to ſave or reſcue me, as this Phraſe is uſed, Pſalm 18. 17. and 144. 
7. compared with 4s 4. 30.) ro orin the Grave, ( 1. e. toa dead 
Man, ſuch as Iam in effte&, having not only one Foot, butin a 
manner both Feet in theGrave,as being upon the very brink of the 
Pit ) though they cry ( to wit, unto God, 7. e. though there be a 
t and ageneral Cry and Lamenration for him among hisFriends, 
or others, and an earneſt defire of him, if poſſibly he might be re- 
ftored ro Life. again ) 2 his defirufion, i. e. when. he is deſtroyed 
or dead; yer all theſe Cries would be in vain. ' 

25 * Did not I weep f for him that was in trouble 

x > was not my ſoul grieved for the poor y ? 
Is. x Whence is it that neither God nor Man ſhew any compaſſion 
Heb. for to me, bur both conſpireto afflit me, and encreaſe my Torments? 
im that Doth God now mete out to me the ſame meaſure which I meted out 
was hard to others ?'Have I now Judgment without Mercy, becauſe I af- 
of day. Fforded no Mercy nor Pity to others 18 Miſery ? No,my Conſcience 
4 acquits me from this Inhumanity : I did not ſleight'y reſent, but 
bitterly'mourn and weep over others in their Miſeries; and there- 
fore I had reaſon to expe& more Compaſſion than I find. y Even, 
for him who was not capable of requiting my kindneſs in caſe of his 


* Pal. 35. 


T3, I 4. 
"Rom. 12. 


7 O B. 


not ( the Negation being underſtood our of the former Branch of | 


: Chap. XXX], 
| Recovery : which ſhews that my Sympathy was real, and not feigne - 
ed, asitis in ſome who pretend great ſorrow for the Rich in t, 
troubles, hoping thereby to inſinuate themſelves into their favour 
_ friendſhip, and thereby to procure ſome advantage to them. 
ſelves. 
26 When TI looked for good, then evil came ur» 
me 2: and when I waited for light, there came dark- 
neſs. 

z In ſtead of the return of the like pity to me, which I might 
juſtly challenge and expe@ whenſoever I thould ſtand in need of ir 
I meet with a 1ad diſappointment, and my Pity is recompenſed with 
others cruelty to me. 

27 My bowels boiled and reſted not a: the days of 
affliction prevented me 6. 

2 i.e. My inward parts boiled without ceaſing. The Bowels arc 
the ſcat of Faſſion and of Compaſſion; and therefore this may be 
underſtood, either 1. of his Compaſſionate and deep ſenſe of others 
Miſeries ; which is ofc exprefſed by Bowels, as Iſa. 16. 11. Col. 3. 12, 
and elſe where, of which he ſpake, wv. 25. to which he ſubjoyns 
the contrary uſage which he mer with, v. 26. And then, in this 
firſt partof v. 27. he renews the mention of his compaſſion to 0- 
thers, and in the latter part he adds by way of Antitheſis or Oppo- 
ſition, that his Mercy was requited with cruel affliftions. Or, 2. 
of the grievouſneſs of his Troubles, which is ſometimes expreſſed 
by the troubling or boyling of the Bowels, or inward Parts; as 
Lam. 1. 20. b 1. e. Came upon me ſuddenly, and unexpe&edly, 
when I promiſed to my ſelf Peace and Proſperity, as the uſual re- 
compence which God promiſeth and giveth to ſuch as fear and pleaſe 
him, as T have done. 

28 * I wentc mourning without the Sun 4 ; I ſtood * Pr ;g, 
up e, and | cried f in the congregation g. GX 42. 9; 

c Or 1 walked hither and thither as 1 could. Or, 71 converſe or ap- & 43. 2, 

pear among others. d Spending my Days in Mourning with- 
out any Sun-light or Comfort; or ſo oppreſſed with ſadneſs, that 
I did not care nor deſire to ſee the Light of the Sun. Heb. black 
nor by the $1m, My very countenance is changed and become black, 
but not b, the Sun, wiich makes many other perſons black ; Can. 
I. 5, 6. bur by the force of my Diſcaſe and deep Melanchoty which 
oft-times makes a man's viſage black and ditmaj. See Pſalm 119. 83. 
Lam. 5, to. And this he repeats in plainer terms. v. 3o. as an e- 
mincat token of his exceflive grief and miſery. e Either becauſe 
my Diſcaſe and Pain made me weary of other Poſtures: Or, that 
otaers might take notice of meand be moved with pity towards me. 
f With a loud ard direful clamour through. great and ſudden an- 
guiſh. g Where prudence and Modeſty taught me to forbear it, if 
; extream Neceſlity and Miſery had not forced me to it. 

29 * 1 am a brother h to dragons z, and a compani- *p;,,; 
on to || owis &. | || Or,0fri 

bþ To wit, by imitation of their cries: Perſons of like qualities be. 
| are oft called brethren, as Gen, qg. 3. Prov. 18.'g- # Which howl Mc, 1.8, 
' and wail mournful'y in the Deſerts, Mich. 1.8. either through hun- 

ger or thirſt, or when he fights with. and is beaten by the Elephant. 

{ k Whole ſad and mournful noiſes are known. Or, Ofriches, which 
. alſo 1s noted 'to make jamentable out-cries. 


| 3o * My skin 1s black uponme/, and my bones are ; Pf, r19, 


burnt with heat m2. 
| #4 Either by his dark-coloured Scabs, wherewith his Body was in 
a manner wholly overipread ; or by Grief, as before. »» The effe& 
of bis keaver and Sorrow, which dried up all his moiſture, and 
cauſed great Inflammations and burning Heats within him. 

21 My harp all© is turned to mourning », and my 
organ into the voice of them that weep. : 

» Either 1. I have now nothing but bitter lamentations inſtead 
of my former expreſſions of joy. Or, - Thoſe very things which 
formerly were occations and in{truments of my delight, do now 
renew and aggravate my ſorrows. 


CHA P. XXXL. 

He proteſteth his Continency and Chaſtity, God's Providence, Preſence and 
Judgments, his - Motives, 1 4. Hu juſt Dealings, 5 8, 
Free from Adultery which ought r0 be puniſhed by the Magiſtrate,g.=-12., 
Hu juft Carriage to his Servants, and the realon, 1, — 15. Hi 
Bounty to the Poor, for fear of God, and his Highneſs, 16 ==-===e 273, 
Nor Covetous, ner Idolatrous which ought to be pun ſbed bythe Magiſtrate, 
2.4 ——- - 28, Not Revengeſul, 29, 30+ Hoſpitable to Strangers, 31,32« 
His Repentance, 33* He wiſheth God would anſwer, and his Words might 
be recorded, 35 37. His Imprecation again#t himſelf, if he ſpake 
not the Truth, '3B 40. 

Made a covenant with mine eyes @ : why then 
ſhould I think upon 6b a maid c ? | 


a So far have I been from wallowing in the Mire of Uncleanneſs, 
or any groſs wickedneſs, wherewith you charge me, that I have ab- 
ſtained even from the leaſt occaſions and appearances of evil having 
made a ſo!emn reſoluticn within my ſelf, and a ſolemn Covenant 
and Promiſe to God, That I would not wantonly or luſtfully fix 
mine Eyes, or gaze upon a Maid, leſt' mine Eyes ſhould affe&t my 
Heart, and ſtir me up to further filthineſs. Hereby we plainly ſee, 
That that Command of Chriſt, Mat. 5. 29, was no new Command 
peculiar tothe Goſpel, as ſome would have it, but the very ſame 
which the Law of God revealed in his Word, and written in Mens 
Hearts by Nature,impoſed upon Men in the times of the Old Teſta- 
ment. Seealſo 2 Pet, 2. 14+ 1 John 2» 16. . 65. e. Indulge my ſelf 
in filthy and luſtful thoughts. . Seing I was obliged, and according- 
ly took care to guard mine Eyes:T was upon the ſame reaſon oblig- 
ed to reſtrain my Imagination. Or, . why then ſhould 7 conſider, or, con- 
template, . or look curiouſly, or thoughtfully, or diligently. Since 1 had 
made ſuch a Covenant, why ſhould Inot keep it ? c Which 1s em- 
phatically added, to thew that that Circumſtance which provokes 
the Luſt of others, had no ſuch power over him, and that he re- 
ſtrained himſelf from the very thoughts and deſires of filthineſs 
with ſuch Perſons wherewith the generalicy of Men allowed them- 
ſslves to commit groſs Fornication, as deeming it tobe either none, 
or but a very little fin. Withal he infinuats, with bow much more 
| caution he kept himſelf from Uucleanneſs with any married — 
210 


—— 


Lam. 4.8 
& 5.10, 


| 


"Fchup. XXL. 


4; 


Gr. 


& 15. 3- 


mein bas 
lances of 
TuNtice, 


Heb alie- 


nation : So 


*.Chr.16. te 


9. 
Ch.34.21* 
Prov. 5.2b 


Jer. 32-19- 


f Heb. Lee a Rat” 
bin weigh May know mine 1niegrity 0. 


7 


2 For d what portion of God 3s there e, from above 
#2 and has inheritance of the Almighty from on 
highg ? 

d The reaſon of my Continency and Chaſtity, was, the conſide- 
ration of God's Preſence,and Providence, and judgments. e War 
fruit or recompence might be expetted from God for thoſe who do 
{uch things ? Nothing but deſtruction, as it follows, v- 3+ I con- 
ſidered, that though theſe Pra&ices might at firſt pleaſe me,yer they 
would be bitterneſs in the latter end. f Anemphatical Ph: aſe to 
note, That how ſecretly and ſliely ſoever unchalt Perſons cerry the 
matter, ſo as Men canaot reprove or reproach them, yet there is 
one who ſtands upon an higher place, whence he hath the better 
proſpe&, who ſeeth both when, and in what manner, and with 
what deſign they do theſe things. 

3 Is notdeltruction to the wicked f? and af ltrange 
puniſhments to the workers of iniquity ? 

f Deſtruftion is their Portion. g Some extraordinary and dread- 
ful Judgment, which of right and courſe belongs to them, and on- 
ly to ſuch as they are, although it hath pleaſed God out of his So- 
veraign Power to inflict itupon me, who have lived in all good 
Conlcience before Him. Heb. an alienation or eftrangement, to wit, 
from God and from his favour : Had I been ſuch an one, I neither 
could nor ſhould have expetted any kindneſs or mercy from God, 
as now I do. 

4 * Doth not he ſee my ways 5, and count all my 
ps © 

þ i, e. All my counſels and courſes : This is another reaſon why 
he was ſo circumipe& and exaG in reſtraining his Thoughts and 
Senſes, ard whole Man from ſinful Prad&iſes, becauſe he knew that 
_ would diſcern them, and therefore puniſh them ; as he ſaid 

erle 3- 

5 IfT have walked & with vanity, or if my foot hath 
haſted to deceit m2 ; 

k i. e Converſed in the World, dealt with Men, / i* e. with Iy- 
ing, or falſhood, or hypocriſie, as this word 1s oft uſed, as Plog; 3: 
& 12. 3+ & 36. 3. Prov. 30. 8, andas the n:xt words explain it. 
m If when I have had any temptation or opportuni,y of enriching 


my ſelf,by defggdding or wronging others, I have readily and gree- 
dily complicd with ir, as Hypccrates ( ſuch as you account me ) | 
uictro do, and have nor rejected and abhored it : for more is here 
underſtood than is expreſſed. The ſenſe is imperfe&,and ſuppolerh 
an Imprecation, which iseither un+erſtood,after the manner of the 
Hebrews, or expreſſed in the next Verlſe. 


6 #Let mc be weighed in an even balance »,that God | 


a 


» This is either 1. an Imprecation ; or,rather 2. a Submiſſion to 
tryal,as the following words ſhew. The Senſe is,I am fo far from 
being conſcious to my ſelf of any Hypocriſie, or ſecret wickedneſs : 
whereby I have brought theſe unuſual Judgmen!s upon my ſelf, as | 
you traduce me, thar I deſire nothing more than ro have my heart - 
and life weighed in juſt Balances,and ſearched our by the All-ſceing 
God. 0 Heb. and ct him know (7. e. let him acknowledge and thew 
thar he knoweth and approveth : or let im make known to my | 
Friends and others, who ce:1ſfure or condemn me. Or, and he wil 
know ; (i. e. upon ſearch he will find out : which is ſpoken of God 
after the manner of Men : ) mine integrity. So this is an appeal to ' 
God to be witneſs of his ſincerity, and to vindicate him from the 
imputation of Hypocriſie. - _— 

7. If my ſtep hath turned out of the way p, and mine ' 
heart walked after mine eyes q, and if any blot r hath! 
cleaved to mine hands : 

? If Thave wittingly and willingly. and cuFomarily ( as you ac- 
cuſe me) ſwerved from the way of t:uth and juſtice which God hath 
preſcribed to me: For otherwiſe no Man here is ſo juſt, but he 
ſometimes takes a wrong Mp. Eccleſ. 7, 20. q If I have let my heart 
looſe ro covet and ſeek after forbidden things, which mine Eyes 
have ſeen ; wh:ch may defign either 1- the Luſt of Uncleannels ; j 
but of that he had ſpoken v. 1: and reneweth the diſcourſe, v- 9.Or 
rather, 2- the Luft of Coverouſneſs, which is called rhe luſt of the 
eyes," 1 John 2. 16+ partly becauſe it is oft cauſed by Sight, as Jo. 
7. 21. and partly becauſe oft-times all the ſatisfattion 1t gives, 1s to 

| pleaſe the tight, Ecclef, 5. 11. And this fin !s moſt legible in the ; 
following puniſhment, v, 8. where his loſs anſwers to this evil gain. | 
The Phrate notes the common method and progreſs of ſin, which | 
is to enter by the Eye to the Heart, Gen. 3. 6. Num. 15, 39 Ecclef.. : 
2. 10. & 11. 9. r Or, blemiſh, to wit, any unjuſt gain» IfT have 
in my hands or poſſeſſion, any Goods gotten from others by fraud ; 
or violence, which would be a great icandal and a blor ro my re- 
putation. i 

8 Then let me ſow, and let another eat s; yea, let ; 
my otf-{pring t be rooted our. 

5s Let Strangers enjoy the Fruit of my Labours, according to * 
Goi's Curſe, Levit. 26. 16. Deut. 28. 30. t As this word is uſed, | 
Jab 5 25. & 27. 14 Or, rather, my encreaſe, or gronths, or jprouts ; 
z. e all mv ants, and Fruits, and Improvements. For 1. ſothe 
Word properly ſignifies, 2. So this latrer Branch of the Verſe ex- } 
Pl:ins the former, as is moſt frequent in ti1s and ſome other 
_ of Scripture. 3, He had not now any Children to be root- 
ed our. 


9 If mine heart have been deceived by a woman «,or 
;f I have laid wait at my neighbours door x. 

u To wit, by a ſtrange Woman, or rather ty my Neighbours 
Wife,as the next words limir it ; for of a Maid he ſpoke before,v.1. 
and this cannot be meant of his own Wife. He ſaith, by a Woman, 
7. e. citier by gazing upon her Beauty, ſo as to be enamoured 
with it, and to luſt after her ; or by her perſuationsor allurements. 
Or, concerning a Woman, i.e. CONCErning impure converſation with 
a forbidden Woman, The Phraſe is very emphatical, rking from 
himſelf, and others,the vain excuſes wherewith men uſe r- palliate 
their ſins, by pretending that they did not deſign the wickedneſs, 
but were merely drawn in, and ſeduced by the ſtrong inticements 
and provocations of others. ': All which 56. ſuppoleth,: and yet 


nevertheleſs owns the great guilt of ſuch prattiſes even in that. 
© ns... 


, my Servant. # What Apology ſhall I make for my ſelf? . 


' creature made by the ſame God, and therefore-one of God's 'Sub- 


caſe. as well knowing thattemptation to ſin isno juification of 
it. x Watching for a fit opportunity to defile his Wife. Com« 
pare Proy, 7, 8, 9. | | 
10 Then let my wife grind untoanother y, and let 0- 
thers bow down upon her z. 2? IE. 
_ ) Either 1. Let her be taken captive, and made a flave to grind 
in other Mens Mills ; which was a fore and vile ſervitude, Exo.1 1. 
5. Judg. 16.21. I/a. 47. 2.Mat. 24. 41+ Or, rather 2. Let her be de< 
filed by another Man, as the next words expound it, and as theHe= 
brews underſtand ir,and as this very Phraſe 1s uſed by very ancient 
both Greek and Latzne Authors : ( Of which ſce my Larine Symopſis on 
this place.) And this is to be cautiouſly underſtood, not as if Fob 
delired, or would permit a requital in the ſame kind,but only,that 
if in that caſe God thou'd giveup his Wife to ſuch a wickedneſs he 
ſhould acknowledge his Juttice in it,and ( though withabhorrency 
of the ſin ) accept of that puniſhment of it. z Another modeit 
expreſſion of a filthy ation ; whereby the Holy Ghoſt gives us a 
Pattern and a Precept, to avoid notonly unclean AQions, bur alſo 
all immodeſt Expreſſions. | | | «9H IE 
11 For this 4 is an heinous crime; yea, it is an ini- 
quity fo be puniſhed. by the Judges b. & | 

a To wit, Adultery, whether committed by choice and deſign 
or by the ſolicitation of the Woman,v. g. b Heb. an iniquity of the 
Juages ; 1.6. which belongs to them to take cognizance of, and to 
punith, and that with death; and that nor only by the Law of Moſes, 
Deut. 22- 22+ but even by the Law of Nature, as appears from the 
known Laws and Cuſtoms of Heathen Nations in that caſe. See 
allo Gen- 38. 24. This is oppoſed to thoſe ſecret andleſſer fins, which 
are only known to, and puniſhed by God. | | | 

I2 For it 35a fire that conſumeth to deſtructien e,and 
would root out all mine encreaſe d. £22 

c For this fin would be as a ſecret but conſuming fire, waſting 
my Eitate and Reputation, and Body and Soul too, provoking God 
and enraging the Husband,and bringing down ſome extraordinary 
Vengeance upon me , And therefore the fear of God kept me from 
this _ ſuch like wickeaneſs. d 7. e. All my Eſtate : Compare 
Prov. 6. 27, | p | ; 

13 IfI did deſpiſe the cauſe of my man-ſervant e, or 
of my maid-ſervant, when they contended with me f; 

e If Iiufed my power over him to overthrow him or his juſt 
rights. And ſeing it is known that I was ſo juſt and kind to them, 
over whom I had ſuch unlimited power, it is not probable thar I 
ſhould be guilty of ſuch cruelty to others, as you impute ro me. 
f Either for :mpoſing heavier burdens than they could bear ; or for 
nor providing for them thoſe ſupports which their Nature and ne- 
ceflity required, or for any other plauſible cauſe. I heard them 
patient: y and indifferently,and did them righteven againſt my ſelf, 
it by any miſ-information or paſſion T had done them any Injury. 

14 What then ſhaJl I do when * God riſeth up gf and 
when he viſiceth þ, what ſhall T anſwer him 5? © 

g To wit, to plead the Cauſe of the Opreſſed againſt the Op- 
preſſor, and to execute Judgment, as this Phraſe is uſed, Palm 68. 
I. Zach. 24 13. and elſewhere. I uſed my Servant like one who was 
alſo my ſelf a Servant,and had a Maſter in Heaven, Col.4.1.to whom 
I was to give anaccount of my carriage to my Servant and to all 
men. h:. e. When he ſhall call me to his Tribunal, and ſeverely 
examine all my aQtions, and particularly the Cauſe between me and | 

15 * Did not hethat made me in the womb, make — 2 
him &? and|| did not onefaſhion us in the womb 12 + 3t. & 4 

k I conſidered that he was, though my Servant, yet,my Fellow» 2 Mal. 2. 
je&s, whom I could nor abuſe without the injury of his Supream 2 Or;did 
Lord. 1 Heb. Did he not form us in one womb? Notin one individual ner faſbionY 
Womb,bur in a Womb of the ſame kind, in an human Womb,with us in one 
a Body and Soul of the fame nature and quality, a reaſonable and Womb. © 
;mmortal Creature, and made after God's Image, no leſs than my 
ſelf, to whom therefore I owed ſome reſpe& for God's ſake. - 

| 16 If I have.withheld the poor from rheir defirem,or 
have cauſed the eyes of the widow to fail »: 

m i.e, Denied them what they deſired of me, either in- Juſtice 
or from Neceſlity : For he was not obliged to grant their vain, or 
inordinate deſires. » To wir, with tedious expeQation. of my Ju- 
ftice or Charity. ' I durſt neitker deny or delay my help when they 
required and needed it. | HAR | : 

17 Or have eaten my morſel my ſelf alone o, and the 
fatherlels ; hath not eaten thereof : 

o Without communicating part of my Proviſions or Eſtate to the 
Poor, as itfoillows. p This one kind of ncceflitous perſons is put for 
all the reſt: ES | ; 

18 For from my youth q he wzs brought up with me 
r, as with a Father s, and I have guided || her : from 
my mothers womb «. | 

a As ſoon as I was capable of managing my own Afairs, and of 
doing good to others. r In my Family, or at leaſt under my care 
and proreftion. 5 i.e. With all the diligence and tendernets of a 
Father. 7 7. e. The widow,mentioned v. :6.and commonly joyned 
with the Fatnerleſs. « i. e« From my tender years; ever ſince | was 
capabl= of diſcerning grod and evil, have m:de-conſcience of this 
Dury ; and this my continuance 12 well-doing is a good Evidence 
of my ſincerity therein, 6 ET 7 TOR on 

19 If I have feen any periſh for want of cloathing x, 
or any poor without covering: 7 


x When it was in my powerto cloath and armthem againſt cold 
and nakedneſs. '' » Sy 


20 If his loyns have not bleſſed me y,and if he were 
not warmed with the fleece of my ſheep z : 

y {+ 6: Given bim occaſion to bleſs and praiſe me, and to pray to 
God to bleſs me for covering them ;" 2 loyns being put ſynecdg» 
chical'y tor the whole Body : See the like exprefſion, Deur 24+ 13. 
and compare Gene 4+ Io» Luke 16 9+ & With cloathing made ofmy 
Wool. q 4 +] 

21 Tf 


4 7 


That 15» 
ow} 


the wi 


”. 


the 
wel 


2.136 
I. IS 


Tim- 6 


{.62.10 
Heb. 


' hand hath 
- kiſſed my 
- mouth, 


d. XXX 


when I ſaw my heip in the gate b-: 


E-5 Judges to do what I pleated. 


* and burdenſom to me. . 
- + 23 For * deſtruction from God was a terrourto med, 


' Wrath, and therefore I durſt not provoke him by any Impiety or 


19, 


- 25 * IfI rejoycedb becauſe my wealth was great,and 


" to God. 1 Heb. zhe light, to wit, the Sun, as appears by the oppo- 


\, Bat this he had now mentioned in plain and proper rerms, wv. 


' + Heb!my 


21 TfT have life up minehand againſt the fatherleſs «, 


a To fmite him wit? the Fiſt of Wickedneſs, as the Phraſe is, If. 
58. 4. to bring him ro the Judgment Sear, that under colour of 
Juſtice I might take away his Righr, as powerful Oppreſlors uſe ro 
do, or any ways to threaten, injwie, or cruſh him. 6 When I un- 
derſtood my advantage againſt him, and that I could influence rhe 


22 Then let mine arm fall from my ſhoulder blade c, 


and mine arm be broken from ||che bone. | 
c T am contented that that Arm which hath been ſo wickedly 
employed, may either rot off or fall our of joynt, and fo be uſciels 


and by reaſon of his highneſs e I could not endure f. 

4 I was ſo far from denying or queſtioning God's Providence, 
wherewith you ſeem to charge, me, that I always reverenced it, 
and-when by reaſon of my great Wealth and Power, and Intereſt, 
T had little reafon to fear Man, I ſtood in awe of God and of his 
Judgments, and made ir my care and buſineſs to pleaſe God. eOr, 
Excellency or Majeſty, which is moſt glorious and terrible. f I found 
my ſelf utterly unable either to oppoſe his Power, or to bear his 


Injuſtice. 

24 * If I have made gold my hope g, 
the fine gold, Thou art my confidence ; "+ 
*  £ i.e. The matter of my lope and truft, placing my chief joy 

and fatisfa&tion in worldly Wealth, expetting ſafety and happinets. 
from it : Compare Fſalm 62. 10» 


or have {aid to 


becauſe mine hand had # gotten much 2 : 

b To wit, carnally and exceſſively, eſteeming my ſelf happy 
therein without Goa's Love and Favour ; for otherwiſe it 15 not on- 
ly lawful, but a duty and gift of God moderately and thankfully ro 
rejoyce in the good things of this life: Ot which ſee Dex. 12. 7. 
Eccleſ.. 2. 24,25,26. & 3. 12,13.& 5. 18,19. 7 Aſcnbing my Wealth 
to my own Wit or Induſtry, rather than to God s Goodneſs and 
Mercy. And theſe fins he the rather mentions, partly for his own 
vindication, leſt it ſhould be thought that God took away his Eſtate 
becauſe he had abuſed it to Pride, or Carnal Confidence or Luxury, 
or the Oppreſlion of others. &c. and partly for the Inſtruftion of 
Mankind in ſucceeding Generations, that they might take notice of 
the malignity and odiouſneſs of theie Praftites, which by moſt men 
are reputed either laudable or harmleſs, or at worſt but light and 
trivial Miſcarriages. 


"26 *If I bcheld & + the ſun ] when it ſhined »», or 


the moon walking Þ in brightneſs » : 

k Not ſimply, nor only with admiration ( for it is a glorious 
work of God which we ought to contemplate and admire ) but for 
the end here following,or ſo as to aſcribe to it the honour peculiar 


fition of the Moon following, which is called zhe 1;ghr here, and Gen, 


3 O B. 


Yet conſidering that both Job and his Friends, who lived in his 
time and neighbourhood, were moſt probably the Poſterity or Kin= 
dred of 4raham and his Family, and by him or his inſtructed in 
the knowledge of the true God, and were alſo Men of great Power 
and Authority in their places; ir ſeems moſt likely chat they did 
reſtrain and puniſh Idolatry in their ſeveral Juriſai&tions, or at leaſt 
in their own Jarge and numerous Families, where the Maſters an- 
ciently had power of Life and Death without controul. « Not di. 
realy ( for nothing is more evident than this, that divers of the 
wiſer Heathens, who did worſhip the Sun and Moon, did Vet aAC= 
knowledge and adore the Soveraign and SupreamGod over and above 
all ) but by conſequence and conftru&ion, becauſe this was to rob 
God of his Prerogative, by giving to the Creature that religious 
Honour or Worſhip which 1s peculiar to God. x Wi.o is above the 
Sun and Moon, not only in place, his glorious Manſion and Palace 
being far above all viſible Heavens, but alſo in powerand dignity, 
or adorable excellency. 


me y, or lifr up my ſelf z when evil found him : 

3 I was ſo far from malice and revenging my ſelf of mine Ene- 
my, which is the common and allowed praCtile of ungodly men, 
that I did not ſo much as deſire or delight in his ruin, when it was 
brought upon him by other hands. Compare Exod, 23. 4. Prov. 24. 
17, 18. Whence we may judge whether the great Duty of loving 
and forgiving our Enemies, be a peculiar Precept of Chriſtianity, 


thatCharity which now is,and ever was theDuty of one Man to ano. 
ther in all Ages. z Heb. ſtirred up my ſelf to rejoice and inlult over 
his muſery. 

30 * Neither have I ſuffered F my mouth # to ſin, by 
withing a curſe to his ſoul : 

a Heb. my palate, which being one ofthe Inſtruments of Speech 


patſion or defire of his hurt did ariſe in me, I forthwith ſuppreſſed 
It, and did nor ſuffer it to grow and break forth into an Imprecati- 
on of hurt to him. 

31 If the men of my tabernacle b ſaid not, Oh that 
we had of his fleſh c |! we cannot be ſatisfied 4d. 

o 7. e. My Domeſticks and familiar Friends, who were much con« 
verfant with mein my Houſe, and were Witneſſes of my carriage 
to others, and of their carriages to me, and therefore beſt able to 
judge in the caſe. c Either 1. of Job's fleſh, which is thought to be 
an expreflion, either r. Of their fervent Love to him, cauied by his 
great readerneſs and kindneſs to them. Bur his meek and gentle 
carriage to his Servants he had expreſſed before in plain terms,v. 13, 
and taerefore it 1s not likely he \.ould repeat it at leaſt in fuch an 
obſcure and ambiguous phraſe,as is no where uſed in this ſenſe. and 
is uſed in a contrary ſenie, Chap. 19. 22. Or, 2. of their hatred and 
rage againſt him for the exceſſive trouble he put upon them in the 
entertainment of ſtrangers, which foilowsv. 32+ But itis very im» 
probable, either that 1o juſt and merciful a Man as Job, would put 
intoſerable burdens upon his Servants; or that ſome extraordinary 
trouble brought upon them by hoſpitality, would inflame them to 


16. Þſ. 136. 7, 8. by way of eminency,becaule itis the great light, 
find > ie wit oflighr to this viſible World. And this is under- 


ſtood either 1. of 7ob's Worldly Glory, «ro Proſperity, which is oft ; us time to farisfie our ſelves therewith ; which alſo is very unlikely. 
compared to light in Scripture, as the contrary 15 to darknets: And ; Or rather 3. of the fleſh of Job's enemy, of whom he laſt ſpoke, 


Fothe ſenſe of thoſe and the following words IS, IfI refle&ed upon 
my Wealth 2nd G'ory, with pride and admiration,and fatisfaCtion. 
25. 
_ and therefore it is not likely that he thould now repeat the ſame 
thing in dark and metaphorical expreſſions. And although this be a 
great fin before God, yet this 1s nor one of thoſe fins which fall 


- under the cognizance of human Judges, as it here follows,v.28.Or 


rather 2. of the Sun in tie Firmament : and fo this place ſpeaks of 
tie Tdolatrous Worthip of the Hoſt of Heaven, and eſpecially of 
the Sun and Moon, the moſt eminent and glorious of that number, 
which was the moſt ancient kind of Idolatry,and was moſt frequent 
in the Eaſtern Countries, in one of which Job lived. m 5. e. In its 
full trength and glory ; forthen it did molt affe& mens eyes and 
hearts with admiration at its beauty and benefits; and ſo move them 
to adoreit- Or, when it began to ſhine ; ( the compleat Verb being 
uſed of the beginning of it, as he re:gned, is oft put for he began to 
Yeren ) 1. e. at its firit riſing, which was a ſpecial,and the chief time 
for its adoration. » When it ſhines molt clearly ; or when it is at 
the full, for then eſpecially did the Idolaters worſhip it. | 
27 And my heart hath been ſecretly o enticed p, or 


q | my mouth hath kiſſed my hand r : | 

o In my inward thoughts or affe&tions, whilſt T made open pro- 
feſſion of my adherence to God and ro thetrue Religion, p Or, ſe- 
auced or deceived, by its plauſible and glorious appearance, which 
might eaſily cheat a credulous and inconſiderate perſon to believe 
that there was ſomething of a Divinity in them, and ſo induce him 
to worſhip it. This emphatical Expreſſion ſcems to be uſed with de- 


- fign to teach the world this necellary and uſeful Truth, thatno mis- 


take or error of mind would excuſe the praftice of Idolatry.qHeb; 
and, which ſeems more proper here, becauſe the ſecret errour of 
the Mind, without ſome ſuch viſible Ation and Evidence as here 
follows, had not been puniſhable by the Judges. r In token of 
Worſhip, whereof this was a ſign, whether given to Men, as Gen. 
41. 40. Pf. 2. 12, or to Idols, i. Kings 19. 18, Hoſ. 13+ 2. And when 
the Idols were out of the reach of Idolaters, that they could not kiſs 
them, they uſed to kiſs their hands,and, as it were, to throw kifles 
at them; of which we have many Examples in Heathen Writers : 
Of which ſee my Latin Synopſis on this place. 


28 This alſo s were an iniquity to be puniſhed by 
the judge t ; for I ſhould have denied the God s that is 
above x. | | | 

s No leſs than the other. forementioned fins, Adultery, Oppreſ- 
ſion, &c. t 7. e. By the Civil Magiſtrate; who being advanced and 
prote&ed by God, 1s oblidged ro maintain and vinuicate his Ho- 
nour, and conſequently to puniſh Idolatry. And this did not ceaſe 
to be his duty, alrhough the Magiſtrates of the World in Job's time 
were ſo far from this, that they themſelves alſo were Idolaters» 


” 


fuch an height of rageas this phraſe implies, againſt ſo. excellent 
and amiable a Maſter, Or 2. of the fleſh and other proviſions made 
; by J6b for ſtrangers ; Be feeds them liberally, but ſcarce alloweth 


V. :9, 30 Andiothis is an amplification and further confirmation 
of Job's choritable diſpoſition and carriage to his Enemy, although 
his Cauſe was fo juſt, and the Malice of his Enemies was ſo notori. 
ous and unreatonable,that al] who were daily converſant with him. 
and were Witnefles of his and their mutual carriages, did condemn 
and abhor them for it, and were ſo concerned and zealous in Job's 
quarrel, that they proteſted th:y could eat their very fleſh, and 
could nor be ſatisfied without it. And yet notwitbRtanding all 
theſe Provocations of others, he reſtrained both them and himſelf 
from executing vengeance upon them, as David afterwards did in 
a like caſe, 1 Sam. 24. 4+ & 2 Sam. 16. 9, 10. & To wit, without 
eating his fleſh. 

32 * Theſtranger edid not lodge in the ſtreet 
I opened my doors || to the traveller : 

e Or traveler, as it follows. f But in my houſe,according tothe 
Laws of Hoſpitality, and the uſage of thoſe times, when there were 
no publick Inns provided ſor the conveniency of ſuch perſons ; 
Gen. 18. 3. & 19. 2. Judg: 19. 15. 21. 


33 If I covered my tranſgreflions g, || as Adam b ; 
by hiding mine iniquity in my boſom z : 
£ This he adds to prevent or anſwer an Obje&tion. So the ſenſe 
is, either 1. And whereas amongſt theſe and other Virtues it may 
well be preſumed, that I had divers failings, as I do not now deny 
them, ſoI never covered them, but was forward to confeſs them 
to God or to Men, as I had occaſion. Or ( which 71 propoſe with 
ſubmiſſion to better Judgments. ) 2. If I uſed all this care and caus 
tion in my carriage towards Strangers and Enemies,and others,only 
as a Cloak to any ſecret and ſubrile way of wickedneſs, ſuch as you 
accuſe me of, and did nor ſeek to purge out all fin as in God's ſight, 
but only to hid my fins from men, and to have the better opportu- 
nity for oppreſling others, or indulging my ſelf in any other cloſe 
ſin, under a colour, and with : reputation of Juſtice and Holineſs. 
þ Either r. as Adam did in Paradiſe ; Which Hiſtory is recorded 
by Moſes, Gen. 3. 7, &c and was doubtleſs imparted by the godly 
Patriarchs to. their Children before Moſes his time. Or 24 like # 
man, or after the manner of men in their corrupt eſtate. Com- 
pare Hoſea 6. 7, # In my own breaſt, and from the ſight of all 
men 


' &- but 


of faniilies terrifie me : that I kept ſilence, 9nd went 
not out of the door & ? 


k This Verſe eithr 1. contains new Matter and another Argu- 
ment, or evidence of his Integrity taken from his Courage an 


faithfulneſs in the diſcharge of his duty as a Magiſtrates The Inter- 
rogation implies a denial, and ſo the ſenſe is, either 1. This, 1 4's 
not for fear of @ great Muitztude, or for any Contempt, Or Rv”, atk 

0:her 


or whether it be a natural and moral Duty, and a part and a& of 


See [| Orgotif 


Way. 
9 | Or,of# 
the mano 
of man, 


24 Did I fear a great multitude,or did the contempt | 


29 * If I rejoyced at the deſtruction of him that hateq * Prov. 
I7.5. 


*Mat.5.4h 


OM, 12, 


14 


15 put for another, or for all the reſt. The ſenſe is, If any 1ecret T Heb. 


Palate. 


*Rom1:. 


a 
Heb.13.t 
1 Pet.4.9 


x Sa 


Chap. XXX, L 


(XI, 


roOV, 


at.5.4h 
Mm. 12, 


1b. my 
late, 


4+ w_n——_" 


'Rotb1e, 
\ TR 
Jeb.13.% 
|; Pet 49 
| Orgotit 
pay. 

| Or, 
he mand 
f min, 


Top. XXXI1 


o 
- 
XS 


other inconvenience which might Þefall me from great and nume/0us 
Familizs, or combinations of People, who were ingaged for him, 
who had an unrighteous Cauſe, forbear to ſpeak for the poor oppreſied 
ane injured Perſon whom they a!l oppoſed, or deny to go ont of the 
Dr of my heuſe to plead his Cauſe, as a timerous and man-pleaſing 
Jade would have done. Or, 2. This, Though I could hav? terrified,or, 
w?i2l:ntly oppreſſed « great multitude, becauſe of my great power and 10- 
rercſt, yer did the moſt contempt:ble Perions, or. Families terrifie me 5 LE, 
1 was afraid to do them any injury, not for fear of them 
25 2ppears from the former Clauſe, but for fear of God 3 therefore T 
kept ſilence, and went nat out of the Door, 1. e. I durſt neither move 
Toague, nor Hand, Por Foot againft them, Or, 3. It contains an 
Amplification or Cor.firmation of what he ſaid, v: 33, Either thus, 
did i cover, or conceal my Tranſgreffions becauſe I was afraid of the 
raze of tte Multitude, or of the contempt of Families, which would be 
brouzhe upoa me by the confeſſion of my wickedneſs ? Did [ therefore 
berp ſilence, i. e. Forbare to confeſs my fin, and no? go out of my Dear? 
But keej> at home as one in that caſe athamed or afraid to be ſeen a» 
broad 2? No, the fear of ſhame or contempt from men, did not hin- 
der me from giving glory to God by confeſfing my faults. Or rather 
thus, di 1 I therefore cover all my oppreſfions, and frauds, and other 
wicked1 :effes ( wherewith you tax me )with the Mask of Virtue &Picty 
and uſe all poſſible caution and cunning inmy evil Courſes, becauſe] 
feared & he great Mulritude, Cwho were my Friends and Admirers, but 
in caſe of the diſcovery of my wickedneſs, would have hated and 
perſecuted me 3 ) Or becauſe the contempt of fo many Families ( whole 
favour and good opinion I needed or deſired ) terrified me 4 Then 
( as the Particle Vay is oft uſed, 7. e, If that werereally my caſe : J) 
1 ſhwld i" filent ( 1 ſhould ſilently and patiently bear all the ftroaks of 
God ar | all the reproaches of my Friends ) and net go out of the 
der: of my 1 hauſe, as one aſhamed to ſhew his face before men. But 
my con dition being through God's mercy far otherwiſe, and my 
Conſcicn ce bearing me witneſs of my Integrity in theſe and many 0- 
| ter thir igs, I dare now lifc up my Head and open my Mouth to 
plead my cauſe, and [defire nothing more than a fair hearing; 0 that 
ine would ' hear me / As it follows in the next Vere. 
[0r,b-hld ,- () that one would hear me /! || behold, my de- 
m—_—_ fire is that the Almighty would anſwer me z, and that 
mbty pill mine adverſary » had written a book o. EP 
aſwer me. | © that I might have my Cauſe heard by any juſt and impartial 
Judge? mi. e. anſwer my deiire herein, either by hearing me him 
{cIf: or by appointing ſome indifferent Perſon tojudge whether I be 
ſuch an Hypocrite as my Friends make me, or an upright Perſon,and 
whether { have nor cauſe tocomplain n Whoſoever he be that ſhal 
contend wich me, or accuſe me, God himſelf not accepted, nay. pol- 
ſibly being chiefly intended, though for reverence to him he for»ear 
to expreſs it.So this is another of Job's irreverent &preſumptuous Ex- 
preſſi>::5,forwhich he is ſo ſhirply reprovedafterwards. 04.c. Had given 
ine t1s Charge written in a Book or Paper, as the manner was inJu 
dicial Proceedings, that 1 might put in my Anſwerinto theCourt, which 
Yam ready todo. 


26 Surely I would take it p upon my ſhoulder q, avd 


bind it as a crown to me. : | 
þ i, e. That Book containing my Charge or Accuſation, q As 2 
Trophy or Badge of tlonour. [1 'nould not fear por {morcher it, but 
glo'y in it, and make open ſhew of it as that which gave me the hap- 
py and long deſired occaſion of vindicating my ſelf which I doubt not 
fully to do. ; 
27 I wouid declare unto him r the number of my 


ſteps 5; as a prince # would I go near unto him #. 

r i. e; Tomy Judge or Adverlary. s te. The whole courſe of 
my Life and A&ions, which I would exa&tly number to him, ſtep by 
ſtep, ſo far as can remember. I would not anſwer his \Ilegations a- 
g-nſt me but furniſh him with further matter of the ſame kind. and 
then anſwer all together. # i; e With undaunted courage and con 
fidece and aſſurance of ſucceſs, as being clearly conſcious of my owr 
ſincerity, not like a felf-condemned Malefattor, as my i: tends ſuppoſe 
me 70e.. » And not run away, or hide my (elf from my Judge, as 
guilty perſon+ defire to do. ; 

28 If my land cry againſt me x, or that the fur: 


rows likewiſe thereof F complain ; ; 

x Co wir, to God for r: +enge as tne hke Phraſ- is uſed, Gen: 4. 
10. Has 2 £1, Yecauſe I have gotten it from the right -Owners by 
+ Heb, the ©4107 Violence, as my Friends charge me, and as 15 implied in the 

» Fe . 

l nex: Verſe Z ; 

ws] 29 If I have eaten} the fruits thereof without money 


#Hebcau- y,0r have | cauſed the owners thereofto loſe their lifez 
ſed the ſoul  y & th r without paying the price required by the right owner for 
of the own- the Land or by defr uding my Workmen of the wages of their La- 
ers thereef bour-, 7 Killing them that ſo I might have undiſturbed Poſſc{ſion of 
#0 expire, it, as 4kab did Noth. 

or brearh 40 Let thiſtles grow in ſtead of wheat, and || cockle 


 . in ſteadof barley. The words of Job || are ended. 
| th eas || To wit, in anſwer to his Friends. for he ipeaks but little after- 
ly us wards, and that is to God. 
CHAP. XXXIL 
Elihu, Tob's fourth friend, ſpeaketh; he is angry with Fob for juſtifying 
himſelf, and with his th- ee friends for not ſatisfying, and yet conden n- 
ing him, \ - s, He excuſeth his youth ; but wiſdom is from 
God, and not from age, 6 --——9' theref re he ſpeaketh being full of 
matter, and his ſpirit conſtraining him,withoat accepting any man's perſon 


— — 


fleb.weep 


10 26 
fHebfrom (DO thele three men ceaſed + to anſwer Job, becauſe 
an/wering, he was righteous in his own eyes. 
a i.e, Was (elt conccited and obſtinately reſolved to juſtifhe him- 
ſelfboth againſt God and Men : therefore they give him over as 1in- 


7 O B. 


| Aram ; for Ram and Aiam are uſed promiſcuoeſly 3 Compare 2 


Chap. KX5 j 


Kings 8. 28. with 2 Chron. 22, 5. andRuth 4. 19. with Matth.. 193, 
Others, of Abraham, who as he was called 4bram poſſibly? was at 
firſt called only Kam. His Pedegree is thus particularly deſcribed, 
partly for his honour, becauſe his ſpeech declares him to be both « 
wiſe and a good Man, and principally to evidence the truth of this 
Hiſtory, which otherwiſe might ſeem to be but a Poetical fition, 
4 He juſtified himſelf, not without refleRion upon Ged, as d:aling 
too ſeverely with him, and denying him that hearirg which he ſo 
paſſtonatly defired. He took more care to maintain his own inno- 
cency than Gods glory. 


3 Alfo againſt his three friends was his wrath kind-\, 
led, becauſe they had found nc anſwer e, and yet had 
condemned Job f. +7 


e To F9b's Allegations and Arguments as to the main Cauſe. f As 
an Hypocrite or ungedly Man. 


4 Now Elihu had waited g till Job 6 had ſpoken, Þ Heb. ex 
becauſe they were | elder than he 7. peffed Fo 

£ With Patience as the word notes, h Add, and his three Friends ” words. 
as appears from the following words: It is a Synecdoche, whereof 
Inftances have been given before, 7 And therefore he expe@ed more der for de, 
lat sfation from them and gave them the precedency in the Diſ- | 
courſe. Wherein he ſhewed his prudence and modeſty. | 

5 When Elihu ſaw that :here was no anſwer in the 
mouth of theſe three men, then his wrath was kindled. 

6s And Elihu the fon of Barahel the Buzite, anſwe- 
red and ſaid, I «» | young, and ye are very old where- of das. 
fore Iwas afraid k and + durft not ſhew you mine o-  Hebs 
pinion, careds 

k To wit, of diſcovering my weakneſs and folly, and of being 
thought forward and preſumptuous. 


7 Ifaid, * Days ! ſhould ſpeak w, and multitude of *charzin 
years ſhould teach wiſdom ». | 

l 7. e. Multitude of days 35 by comparing the next Clauſe of the 
Verſe, Or men of &ays, i.e. of many days or years, old Men» mTo 
wit, wiſely and pertinently, as the next words limit it. n Should 
inftrud us that are you-ger 1 the paths of Wiſdom, and concerning 
the wiſe Counſels and Ways of God, about which the preſent Con 
troverſic lay, | * 

8 But o there 5s a ſpirit p in man « and * the inſpi- Np ht 
ration of the Almighty q giveth them underſtanding r. Prov. 2.6 

0 Or, ſareiy . It muſt be cou felled, p To wit, which gives him Kcclef. 
underſtanding, as is cafily and fitly gathered out of the laſt words of 2. 26: 
th: Verſe. And this is to be underſtood cither 1. of the human Spi- Dan.1.f1 
rit. or -caſonable Soul, which is in every Man. $o the ſenſe of the & 2. 21 
place is, Every man as a man, whether old or young, hath a reaſon- James 8+ 
able Soul, by which he is able in ſome meaſure to decern between 
Good and Evil, and to j::dge of mens Opinions and Diſcourſes: And 
therefore I alſo may venture to deliver my Opinion Or, 2: of the 
Spirit of God; the latter Clauſe being cxplicatory of the former, ac« 
cording to the manner. So the ſenſe is, I expe@&-d a true and full 
diſcoy: ry of the truth in this comroverſic from Perſons of your Years, 
Wiſdom anq Experience But upon ſecond thoughts I conſider that 
the knowledge of theſe deep avd divine Myſteries is not to be hador 
expected from any man as ſuch though never fo aged or wiſe, but 
only from God's Spirit, which alone knoweth the deep things of 
God. And this Spirit he ſaith is in man, not in every man, for the 
words ar: nor univerſal. bu indefinite, and man in this branch is no 
larger than them who receive Divine Inſpiration in the next Branch, 
And iothe ſenſe is, God is pleaſed to give his Spirit unto Mankind, 
®nto Men of all Ages a nd Qualitics, as he pleaſeth ; and having given 
it ?n lome meaſure to me, I may take the boldneſs to -utter my. 
thoughts. 4 7. e. Ged'sSpirit, or the gracieus Gifts thereof breath-" 
ed or inf»ſed into Man's Soul by God. r To wit, in Divine and 
$ — Matrers, which are the Matter of this Debate and 
Book. 


9 Great men s are notalwiſe wiſe: neither deth the 
aged underſtand judgment 7, 

s1.e, Men o' eminepcy for 4ge or Learning, vg Dignity ard Power 
'uch as fob's three Friends ſeem to have been. # What is juſt and 
right: Or the Judgment of God, and the Methods and Reaſons of 
his Adminiſtrations - 

10 Therefore I ſaid «, Hearken to me x: I alſo 
will ſhew mine opinion. 

« W thin my ſelf, and nowlI ſay it with my mouth. + Thou 
Job . ſpecially, who art more nearly concerned ( to whom theres 
fore he ſpeaketh in the Singular Number _) and thy Friends with 
thee, ; 

11 Behold, I waited y for your words : I gave ear to 
your reaſons z, whilſt ye ſearched out F what toſay #. + Heb. 

y With filence, and patience, and diligent at:ention : which there- derſtangs! 
fore I now expeR from you. x Or, !eaſonings, Heb. underflandings gs. 
or minds, the depth and ſtrength of your Diſcourſes your moſt tin- f Heby 
telligent and forcible Arguments againſt Jeb ; I ſearched and exa- ds, 
mined them to the bottom, a Whilſt you put your Inventions upon 
the Rack, aud ſtudied to find out all that could be ſaid agaivſt him, 
and fo furniſh your ſelves with the moſt convincing words end 
reaſon:. 


12 Yea, 1attended to you : and behold, there wes 
none of you that convinced Job 6, or that anſwered his 
words : 

b By ſolid and ſatisfaftory Anſwers to his Aſertions and Allega* 
tions, 


12 Leſt ye ſhould ſay c, We have found out wiſdom x 


= 


corrigible, 
'' 2 Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu. the ſon of 
Barachel the Buzite b of the kindred of Ram c : againſt 
F Heb, his Job was his wrach kindled, becauſe he Juſtified | him- 
Jud, ſelf rather than God d. 


God thruſteth him down, not man 4. 

c It is a defeRive ſpeech, and may b= thus ſupplied : Thus it 
was, or God thus left you to ycur own weakneſs and miſtakes, and 
impertinent diſcourſes, /eſt ye ſhould ſay, %c. i.e. leſt you ſhould 
aſcribe the conquering or filencing of Job to your own Wiſdem, 
Ape, and Experience ; Or icft you ſhould boaftingly ſay, We haye 


b Of the Poſterity ot 8x, Nahor's Son, Gen, 22: 21. © Or, of | 


4K diſcovee 


= 


& th 


Pp. XXXIH. 


.cvered and ſaid all that can or ved be ſaid in the Cauſe, the 
no "ind ſubſtance ofthe thing, that which may fully and finally rs 
the Coutroverfie, which is contained in the following Words. d 
Theſeare alledged by Elibu, in the perſon of 'Job's three Friends, Or 
2s their Words, The ſenſeis, the ſtupendious Judgments which are 
upon Jeb, have not been brought upon him by Man ſolely and Or1- 
g1nally, for then there might have been ſome ground for Jobs Com- 
plaints, there might have been injuſtice or cruelty 1N them, but 1m- 
mediately by the Hand of God,of that God, who being Omniſcieat, 
and Juſt, aud True, - and Mercifull, would never have dealt thus 
hardly with]Jeb,if he were not an Hypocrite, and guilty of ſome very 
groſs, though ſecret fins 3 which is the ground-work of our diſcourſes. 
But faith Elibv, this Argument doth not ſatisfic me, and therefore 
bear with me ifI ſeek for better. 


Heb.or- 14 Now he hath not Þ directed bis words againſt 


red. me #7 neither willI anſwer him with your words f. 
| e I am not engaged in this diſcourſe by any provoking words of 
Jeb, as you hayc been, which hath drawn forth your Paſſions, and 
byafſed your Judgments, but meerly from Zeal, for the vindication 
"of God's honour and bye to Truth and Juftice, and a finc2re delire 

" to adminiſter to Job matter both of conviRtion and of comfort. f 7. e- 
With ſuch Words or Argumentsas yours, cither weak and 1mpertt- 
'nent, or fierce and opprobrious. 


\ T5 Theyg were amazed h,they anſwered no more, 
+ they left off ſpeaking. 


£ i. e. Job's three Friends, of whom he ſpeaks ſometimes in the 
ſecond, and here in the third perſon, direQting his Speech to Job, 
& © andthe Auditors of this Diſputation. þ They ſtood mute like per» 
v theM- ſons amazed, not knowing what to reply to Jo's Arguments, and 
Wes, wonrdring at his bold and confident Afertions of his Integrity, and 

' _/ of his Intereſt in God, under ſuch ſad and manifeſt tokens of God": 
' juſt diſpleaſure againſt him. # Although Jeb gave them juſt 


Heb they 


7 0 B. Fn 


occaſion to reprove and confute him for his intemperate Speeches 
and preſumptuous and irreverent Expreſſions concerning God. 

16 When I had waited, ( for they ſpake not, but 
Nood ſtill ; and anſwered no morek; ) 

k Which he repeats as a ſtrange and unreaſonable thing that they 
ſhould be filent when they had ſuch Obligations to ſpeak for the Vin- 
dication both of God's Juſtice, and of their own; Truth and Repura- 
tion, 

17 I ſaid, T will anſwer alſo my part /; TI alſo will 
ſhew mine opinion. 

} I will take my turn and ſpeak what they have omitted. SE 

, 18 ForT am full of F matter », + the ſpirit within 


Heb. IE 7 conſtraineth me o. ; 
ends, - m i.e. I have many things to ſay in this Cauſe. = Either my own 
Heb +helSPirit or Soul, which is wholly diſſatisfied with what hath þcen 
>. + Thitherto ſpoken, and clearly *apprehends what may filence Job 
ad and end the Diſpute. Or, God's Spirit which he hath put in me, 
; the Spirit of Underſtanding, which hath diſcovered the truth of 
the matter to me, and the Spirit of Zeal, which urgeth me to 
plead God's Cauſe apgainſt Job. « Forceth me to ſpeak : It is a Me- 
taphor from a Man or Woman whoſe Belly is full with Wind, or 
with aChild, and is neyer at reſt till it be emptied and caſed of its 
burden, | 

19 Behold, my belly p is as wine q which + hath 
no veat ; it is ready to burſt like new bottles r, 

pi e. My mind or heart, which is oft called a man's belly, as 
Job 15. 35. Pſalm 40+ 8. Hab., 3. 16. John 75. 38. q As new Wine 
pent up cloſe in a Bottle, as the following words explain it and de- 
termine it, The Wine is here put for the Bottle in which it is, by 
a common Meronymy. 7 i.e. Bottles of new Wine, by the' ſame ge- 
neral Figure ; for otherwiſe old Bottles are moſt apt to burſt ; Matt. 
9s 17, 
20 I will ſpeak, + that I may be refreſhed 5; I will 
Heb.#h4t open my lips, and anſwert, 
may s That I may eaſe my mind of thoſe thoughts which now opprefſs it. 


reath. #1 will notutter impertinent words, but ſolid anſwers to Job's argu- 
ments. 


21 Let menot, Ipray you, accept any mans per- 
ſon « , neitherlet me give flatering titles unto man xz: 
# Do not expe that I ſhould out of tear or reſpe@t to any of you 
ſpeak partially, but bear with my free and plain dealing with you 
all. 'z AsT ſhall not cenſure and reproach Job as an Hypocrite or 
profane perſon, which you have done, ſo neither ſhallI flatter him, 
_ . faithfully reprove him for his exorbitant Speeches of 
(0) (1 ” 
. 22 ForIknow not to give flattering titles y : in /o 
doing 2%, my maker would ſoon take me away. 
yt. e, I have neither kill nor wil! to flatter Joþ or any Man ſo as 
. to debauch my Conſcience, or corrupt the Truth, or ſpeak falſly for 
his ſake. 27. e, If ſhould be guilty of that fin, God would quick. 
ly and ſorely puniſh me for it. Or, without this Supplement, My 
Maker" will quickly take me away ; to wit, out of this World. IT 
Garc not flatter any Man, becauſe I conſider I muſt ſhortly die, and 
go to, Judgment, to give an account of all my Words and Ai- 


_ ONSs 
|  _CHAP. XXXI. 
He offereth bimſelf in God's Slead to reaſon with Job, Yanwrnms 2, who 
had two hard thoughts of God, who by his greatneſs giveth no account of his 


| ell. 


Kebs 
Gs net oÞc1* 


with him: b Not only to what may pleaſe thee, but al 
may convince and reprove thee. 


2 Behold, now I have opened m 


tongue hath ſpoken} inmy mouth d. 
e Now I have begun to ſpeak, and intend with thy good leave to 
proceed in my Diſcourſe with thee. &d Heb; in or with my palate, for 
both Tongue and Palate are Inſtruments of Speech ; and that * oTeks 
ould ſpeak plainly and diſtinly ( which he deſigned to do) it is 
neceſſary that his Tongue ſhould oft times touch the Palate or Roof 
of the Mouth. 
3 My words ſhall be of the uprightneſs of my heart :: 
and my lips ſhall utter knowledge clearly 7. 

e I ſhall not ſpeak paſſionately or partialiy, as one reſolved to 
defend what I have once ſaid, wkether true or falic, but from an 
honeſt mind, or what I verily believe to be true, and from 2 fincere 
defire to do thee good, Ff I ſhall not ſpeak my own fancies or devices 
but only that which by diligent ſtudy, and divine inſpiration, 7 know 
tobe true, and this I ſhall do pliinly and clearly. : 

4 The ſpirit of God hath made me, and the breathof 
the Almighty hath given me. life g. 

£ I am thy fellow Creature, made by God's Spirits Gen, 1. 2, and 
qu:ckned by that Soul which God breathed into Man, Gen. 2. 9. and 
therefore fit and ready to diſcourſe with thee upon even and equal 
terms, according to thy defire. | FEWN 
5 If thou canſtanſwer me b, * ſetthy words in axder 
before me ; ſtand up z. | 
h 1 ſhall allow thee all freedom of Diſcourſe,l cannot terrific: thee 
as God would ; I ſhall not reproach thee, nor cavil at thee, 1s thy 
Friends have done, 7 To contend with me as thine Adverſary jin this 
Cauſe. * Ch.g 

6 * Behold, I amTaccording to thy wiſh in Gods & 1z. ky 
ſtead &:1 alſoam + formed out of the clays « 21. 

k 1 will plead with thee in God's name and tiead, and on his be- T fieb.ac 
half, which thou haſt oft wiſhed that God would do upon equal cording tg 
terms, and laying a fide his terrible Majeſty, ©. Or, I am as thou *Y mth: 
art with or towards Ged; 3, e. God's Creature like thy ſelf, as the F Heb: cut 
next words explain it, | ont of the 

7 Behold, * my terrour ſhall not make thee afraid; 4 
/ ch.rgai 
neither ſhall my hand be heavy upon thee /. 

1 Which was the Condition of that Diſputaction which thou didſt 
offer to undertake with God, Chap. 9. 34. & 13. 21, —_ 

8 Surely thou haſt ſpoken Fin mine hearing »s, and rn _ 
. ISy 
I have heard the voice of thy words, ſaying, | 

# I ſhall not charge thee with Hypocrifle as thy Friends do,” which 
Ged only can diſcern, but with thoſe words which I have heard from 
thee, 

9 * T «wclean without tranſgflireon, I am: innocent . EM 
neither #s here iniquity in me ». | mw 


ſo to what 


n Not ſimply and abſolutely none, for he oft confeſſeth himſelf to > - = 
be a finner, as Chap. 9.2,2,0«& 14-4 but no ſuch tranſgreſſion or ini- | i&27:s 
quity, as might give God juſt occafion to puniſh him ſo ſeverely, as is & 29, 14- 
implied inthe next verſe, where he blameth God for finding occaſions a- &; T9 
ainſt him iroplying that he had given him none 'by his fins. And 
thus far Elihy's Charge was juſt and true, and hereip it differs from 
the Charge of Fob's three Friends, who oft accuſe him, and that in 
words much 1:ke theſe. for aſſerting his own Righteouſneſs and Inno- , 
cency 3 although they did ir, becauſe they thought him a ſecret Sin- 
ner and an Hypocrite, whereas Elihu doth it upon other grounds, <- 
ven becauſe Job's juſtification of himſelf was accompanied with Re- 
fie&ions upon Ged as hath been ſaid. | 

Io Behold he findeth occafions againſt me o; * he «(9 


counteth me for his enemy p. 
o He picketh quarrels with me, and wateheth over and ſearcheth after 
all my Errours and Fra1lt:es, as Job (aid, Chap. 10. 6: & 14. 16, 19. 
ſeverely marking what is amiſs in me, that therice he may take occaſi- 
on to puniſh mejworſe than mine Iniquities deſerve. p Though I have 
endeavoured to be his Friend and faithfull Servant all my days, yet 
he treats melike an Enemy, This Job ſaid, Chap, 13: 24: and 19:11, 
11 * He putteth my feet in the flocks, he marketh 
all my paths 9. *ohi1p? 
q He narrowly pries into all my aQtone, that he may find matter for & 14 
further Severitics againſt me, 
12" Behold, in this thou art fot juſt ry; Iwill an- 
{wer thee, That God is greater s than man. | 
x I do notaccuſe thee of hvpocrifie, gor rip up the former Errour 
of thy Life ; but in this thou art unjuſt and much to blame, that thou 
boaſteſt ſomuch of thine own Integrity, and chargeſt God with ri- 
orous dealing, and calleft him to an account before thy Tribunal, and 
aud offereſt to diſpute the matter with him. s Not ovly in Power and 
Majeſty, which thou acknowledgeft, but alſo in Juſtice, aud Wiſdon), 
and Googneſs, and therefore thou doſt very fooliſhly, and preſump* 
tuouſly, and wickedly in confending with him, and ceoſuring his 
Judgments : thou forgetceſt thy diſtance from him, and cafteft off 
thatawe and reverence which thou ſhouldſt conſtantly maintain to« 
wards thy Soveraign Lord. 


13 Why z doſt thou ſtrive againſt him «? for Þ he þ yeb: be 
giveth not account of any of his matters x, anſwereth. 
t Upon what Grounds and for what ends? What advantage 9doſt nvf. 
thou expe from it? uw To wit, in a judicial way. Sce Chap. 13: 
6, x He neitheruſeth nor is by any Law oblidged to give an ace 


Ways, 9 — 13. God inſtrufeth man by viſions, 14 18 
by afflictions, yg —— 22. by bis wminiSiery, | by tk 254 When man 


prayeth and confeſſeth God will be gracious, 26 ——28. Theſe are God's 
methods of inflruting men, 29, 30. 


WW Heretore, Job, I pray thee «, hear my ſpeeches, 


and hearken toall my words 5. 

4 Perceiving the Error of Job's Friends, and that by their violent 
and opprobrious Speeches they bad exaſperated Job's mind, and 
_ thereby hindred the ſucceſs of their Diſcourſes, he applies himſelf to 

bim in milder ways, and treats him kindly, thereby to gain his 
| attention and affeRion, that his words might haye more acceptance 


count to any of h1s Creatures of the Grounds and Reaſons of his Judg- 
ments or Diſpenſations, as being the Sapream and Abſolute Gover« 
nour of all Perſons and Things, in whoſe Will and Pleaſure it be- 
cometh all men to acquieſce, And therefore, O Job, thou exceedeſt 
all bounds of Modefty and Humility and Reverence and Submitfion 
which thou oweſt to thy Maker, in that thou preſumeſt to demand 
2 reaſon for his dealings with thee, and to quarre! with him for 
not giving it to thee atthy deffre. Or, he anſwereth not all his Words, 


i.e. He doth not ſay, or hath not ſaid all that he can to juſtific 

his. aRions, which he can do many more ways than we can ina- 

eine; but hath reycaled ſo much of his will and ways to Mankind, as 
ITY OY OL WY 0D "PLL WIN h <# 


Chap-XXX10, | 


y mouth c, my +; 
* iN 
MY palgte 


| 


| 
| | 


wc =_mc c cwr———_wwrco 


up. XXXIIL 


D 4 © c—— 


he hath thought meet, and as their narrow Capacity can compre- 
:nd ; as he decjareth inthe following verſes: 
14. For y God ſpeaxeth z once, yea twice 4, yet man 
b nerceiveth it notc, : | 
7 Or, Nevertheleſs, as this Particle is ſometimes uſed. Although 
God doth not give men an account of his matters, yet he doth that 
for them which is much Letter, and which is ſufficient for them. 
z To wit, unto men by way of inftruftion or admonition, as ap- 
pears from the following verſes. a 7. e. Again and again, or oft 
times, this number being ſometimes put indefinitly, as below v.29. 
= Kings 6. 10. Pſal. 62. tt. When one ſpeaking doth not awaken 
men, God is graciouily pleaſed to give them another admonition. 
So God,though he will nor gratifie mens Curioſity in enquiring in- 
ro his hidden Judgments yet he will ſupply their neceſſity,and ac- 
' quaint them with their duty and intereſt ſo far as is fir, and they are 
concerned to know. 6b Which is ealily and fitly underſtood here 
from the former branch of this vert:, as being the Perſon to whom 
God ſpeaketh, as appears from the next verie- And ſuch Supple- 
ments are not unuſual in the Hebrew Language, and eſpecially in 
theſe Poetical Books, where the Stile is very conciſe and ſhort, and 
many things to be underſtood. c Through his inadvertency or neg- 
ligence or dulneſs, Man therefore hath no reaſon to charge God 
as if he were deficient in his notices and manifeſtations of his will, 
bur to accuſe himſelf for not improving revealed things to his own 
advantage, but deſiring rather to pry into God's ſecret Counſels, 
which was fos's errouc. = ; 
i5 Ina dream 4, in a viſion of the night e, when 
deep ſleep falleth upon men f, in flumbringsg upon the 
bed. 


4 This he mentions as the uſual way of God's revealing his mind 
and w1i'l zo Men in thole days, before God's Word was committed 
to writing, as Gen. 20.6, & 41. 1, 28. e This 1s added by way of 
explicationand limiration,to ſhew that he ſpeaks not ofevery dream, 
bat of thoſe Divine dreams {ua which God was pleaſed to vouchſafe 
ſome vition or reprejentation of [is will to the mind of a Man. 
f When mens ſenſes are bound up, and their minds free from all 
diſtracting cares and buſineſs of the World, and wholly at leiſure to 
receive Divine Imprefſions. g This is added, becauſe in this caſe 
the Man is lik? one that flumbereth. or between ſleeping and wa- 
king, or uncertain in which ſtare he is, as Paul could nor tell whe- 
ther he was in the Body, or out of the Body, when he was in his 
Extaſie, 2 Cor. 12. i, 2. 

16 Then + he openeth the ears of men hb, and ſeal- 


THeb. be oth their inſtruRion 5. 

revealeth, « þb 1. e, He revcaleth his Will to the Ears and Hearts of Men, as 
MAVT- this Phraſe is uſed, Job 36. 10, P/. go. 6. Iſa. 50. 4. _ 7 He imprinreth 
&h, thoſe Inſtructions, which he hath revealed to their Ears,upon their 


Minds, that aſter they have heard and received them, they do not . 


them flip, as Men commonly do moſt things which they hear, 
GR how God or Men; but do retainand hold them faſt, and 
are fully ſatisfied and aſſured of the truth and importance of them, 
Or, he ſealeth their chaftening, or corre#/0n, for ſo this word ſignifies 


as well as inſtruttion, 7. e.He gives them affurance of hrs purpoſe of 


corre&ing them for their ſins, if they do not preventir by a ſpeedy 
repentance. Or, he ſealeth it ( 7. e. his Woid con veyed to theirEars 


and Minds ) with chaftening them, i, e.He gives then, aſſurance of the j 
truth and reality of his Revelation by ſtriking them with a ſacred | 


dread and horrour, as was uſual in ſuch Dreams or night Viſions, 
as we ſee, Job 4+ 13, 14. Whic!: he did that they might remember 
it the better, and diſtinguiſh this from ſuch vain Dreams as are only 
the produQions of Man's fancy. | 

17 That he & may withdraw man from his + purpoſe 
I, and hide pride m from mag. 

k i, e. God, who was expreſſed, v. 14. and deſigned by this Pro- 
noun he both in the foregoing and following verſes. / i» e. From 
the excution of his purpoſe. Heb. from his work, 7. e, from his evil 
work, as the Chaldee and Seventy underſtand it , from ſin, which 
is truly and fitly called Man's work, becauſe it hath irs riſe in and 
from him, and is his own proper work, and very agreeable to his 
Nature in his preſent corrupt Eſtate,as on the contrary all the good 
that is in Man is God's proper and peculiar work, and is generally 
aſcribed to him in Scripture. So this is noted as the defign of God's 
giving Man this warning,to keep him from executing that evil work 
which poſſibly he had defigned to do ; of which ſee examples, Gen. 
20+ 5, 6+ & 31. 24. #7. e Either, 1. To take it away, as God is 
ſaid to hid fin, when he quite removes and forgives it, Pſal. 32. x, 
and ſorrow is ſaid to be kid, Job 3, 10- whenitnever isnor was: and 
underſtanding is ſaid to be hid, when it periſbeth,” Tfa. 29. 14. And 
Pride is here mentioned as the root of thoſe evil purpoſes or works 
Jaſt mentioned ; which for the moſt pait proceed from haughtineſs 
of ſpirit, whereby men ſcorn to ſubmir themſelves, and their wills 
and aGtions to God's Authoriry,and preſume to advance themſelves 
above God,and reſolve to follow their own willsand luſts in ſpight 
of God, and with contempr of him. Or, Pride may be here pur for 
all matter or occaſion of Pride, And God by this means is ſaidto 
hide Pride from man, becauſe by theie glorious and terrible Repre- 
ſentitions of his Divine Majeſty to a Man, he takes him off from 
the contemplation and admiration of his own excellency, which 
men are generaliy very prone to refle&t upon, and brings him to a 
ſight of his own nothingneſs and weakneſs, and to a ſenſe of his de- 


f Hebs 
k 


pendence upon God, and to an humble and ready ſubmiſſion ro - 


his will and pleaſure. : 
Wes 18 * He kecepeth back! his ſoul »: from the pit »,and 
fled per his life + from periſhing by the. {word 0+ 
Poſing "og 4 To wit; by theſe gracious admonitions whereby he leads them 
the ſworg, £0 repentance. 7» Either the Man, who is oft expreſſed by this 
" Part ; or, his fe, as the next branch explains it. » z. e. From the 
Grave, from Death or Deſtruftion. o 7 e. by ſome dreadful Judg- 
ment of God which was ready to fall upon him. 
i9 He is chaſtened alto with pain p upon his bed,and 
the mu'titude of his bones with ſtrong pain 9. | 
p Or gr:+/, with ſome painfu] and dangerous Diſeaſes, or Bodily 
Diſtzmpers, which 1s the tecond way whereby God inſtrufts men 
and excires them to repentance ; which alſo was Job's caſe. 9q The 


him by God's Meſſenger thall revive his Spirit, and by GESTEES Tee 


7 O B. 


Chap. XXXIIN 

Pain Prerceth his very Bones, even all of them. Or, even the freng ] 
multitudes of his Bones, 1. e. his Bones which are both many and » 
ſtrong. Or, according to another reading, the contention of his bones, | 
(7. e. the pain of his Bones whereby God contends with him ) is | 
ſtrong. This alſo was Job's Caſe, Chap, 30. 17. it 
20 * Fo that his life 7 || abhorreth bread s, and his * pat. | 
ſoul # dainty meat 7. r07. 18:4 
r 1.e« His Soul, as the next Clauſe explains it : or his Appetite | Or, mal 
which isa ſign and an a& of life. £i e. Common and neceſſary gerb him | 


food. 7 Suchas others do, and he tormerly did much deſire and gþhor. | 
Prize. : + Heb. iff 
2r His fleſh is conſumed away «, that it cannot be meat of 1 


ſeen x, and his bones that were notſeen ,, ſtick out, deſire” | 

z Through pain and pining ſickneſs. x Becauſe there is none left i 
to be ſeen, but he who before was fat and flouriſhing is now be- 
come a meer Skeleton. »y Formerly, becauſe they were covered 
with Fleſh and Fat. Bur this Clante is, and may be rendred” thus, 
and his Bones are broken, and are nt ſeen : which is to be metaphori- 
cally underſtood. | 

22 Flis foul draweth near unto the + grave z, and + Heb.#i 
his life to the deſtroyers «. 


z He ſeems to himſelf, and others,to be loſt and paſt all hopes of 
recovery. Which he adds for Job's comfort in his deſperate condi- 
tion. a4 To the inſtruments of death or deſtruction, whether it be 
Angels, whom God ſometimes uſeth in thoſe cafes, or Devils, who 
have the power of Death, Heb» e. 14. or Diſeaſes, which by God's ap- 
pointment are ready to givethe fatal blow. 

23 It there be a meſſenger b with him c, an * inter- 
preter 4, one among a thouſand e, to ſhew unto man 
his uprigheneſs f: 

6 Either 1. an Angel ſent to him from Heaven upon this errand; 
for the Angels are miniſtring Spirits, P/. 103. 20. Heb. 1. 14. and 
are, and eſpecially in that time and ſtate of the Church, were fre- 
quently employed by God upon Meſſages to Men. But why then 
lhould he tay, one of a thouſand Angels, {ceing any the meaneſt An- 
gel was very competent for this work ? Or rather, ». a Prophet or 
Teacher, forſuch are off called by this Name ; as Fudg.2.1. Mal. 2. 
7- & 3. 1- Rev. x. 20. 2nd ſuch Perſons are appointed by God fcr, 
and are moſt commonly imployed in this work. . c Either 1. with 
God to plead Man's Cauſe, and to pray to God for Man. Or,rather, 
2-with Man, who is expreſſed in the laſt Clauſe of this Verſe. and 
of whom this ſame Pronoun him is twice uſed in the tiext Verſe. 
Nor is itſtrange that the Pronoun Relative is put before the Noun 


bs IC4372 


to which it belongs, but uſual in the Hebrew Language, as Exo. 2. 
6. Prov. 5” 22. & 14. 33. andelſewhere. 4 One whole Office and 
: Workit is to declare the Mind of God unto the 1ickMan,and where- 
' fore God contends with him, and what God would have him to do. 
e A perſon rightly qualified for this great and hard work, ſuch as 
' there are but very few, ſcarce one of # thouſand. ; which expreſſion is 
' uſed to denote the rarity and fewneſs of Perſons, Eccleſ. 7. 28. + 
, which Words he doth covertly refle& upon 7ob's three Friends, and 
imply that they werenot ſuch Perſons, though they had undertaken 
to perform this Office or Work to Job ; and withal, modeſtly inti- 
mates, Thar a!though he was in himſelf mean and inferiour to all 
| ofthem( as heacknowledgeth ) yet he was ſele&ed by God for this 
work ; which he faith, nor out of a deſire of vain boaſting of him- 
ſelf, but to diſpoſeJob to a morediligent attention unto,and 2 more 
ready entertainment of his preſent Diſcourſes. f Or, ReQirude, 
or Righteouſneſs. Hi, 7. e. either r. Gods : To convince a Man 
that God is juſt and right in all his dealings with him, thongh ne. 
| ver ſo ſevere ; of which Job was not yet convinced. Or rather 2. 
; Man's ; to teach Man his Duty, or to dire& him to the right way 
and method how he may pleat: God, and procure that mercy and 
; deliverance which he thirſts after; which is not by quarrelling 
; with God, as Job did, but by an humble confeſſion, and hearty de- 
' teſtation and forſaking of his ſins, and ſupplication roGod for mercy 
! In and through Chriit the Redeemer, of whom Job ſpoke before.Or 
; thus, To diſcover to Man, that although he be afMlted; yer he is 
» an upright and righteous Perſon, and conſequently in God's favour; 
abour which good Men oft doubt, and need the help of a skilful M-- 
niſter to ſatisfie them therein. Bur this ſeems not ſo well to ſuir 
Job's caſe, who was ſufficiently, and more than enough perſwaded 
of hisown Integrity, and needed no Miniſter to preach that Do&- 
rine to him. : : EY : 
24Then g he h1is gracions unto him z,and ſaith, De- 
liver him / from going down into the pit, I have found -.. . 
[].a ranſom », ” _ o RfOrendo 
£ In thatcaſe, or upon the ſick Man's knowledge and pratice 7 em. J 
his duty. h Either r. the Meſſenger or Interpreter laſt mentioned, 
who is pitiful unto the fick Man, and in compaſſion to him doth all 
that he can for him, counſelling and comforting him, and praying 
to God for his Recovery in the following words, Deliver him, &c. 
for the ſake of that Ranſom which thou haſt revealed, and I have 
| diſcovered to him. Or rather 2. God, who is oft 1n this Book de- 
ſigned by this Particle ke, or him; whoſe property and prerogative 
it iS tÞ be gracious unto Man, and who alone can ſpeak the follow- 
ing wordsfwith power and authority. #i Pardoning hisſins,and de- 
livering him from his dangerous Diſeaſe, and from Death,and from 
the Hc!l which attendsupon it. -& To the Angel or Meſſenger. 
I To wit, miniſterially and declaratively ; in which Senſe the a&s of 
forgiving Sins, and reconciling Sinners, and ſaving Souls,are aſcri- 
bed to God's Miniſters ; as John 20. 23. 2 Coy, 5. 19, 20. I 7/me 4. 
16, Declare to him thatT have pardoned and will heal him- » Al- 
though 7 might juſtly deſtroy him, and ſhould do it ifI were ſevere 
to mark whatis amiſs in him, yer I will ſpare him, for I have 
found our an expedient anda way of ranſoming & redeeming Sin- 
ners from Death, both temporaland eternal,. which they by therr 
fins have deſerved, which is by the Death of my Son the Redeemer 
ofthe World, which ſhall be in the the fulneſs of time, and with re- 
ſepe& to which I will pardon this ſick Man, and others that ſhall 
repent and ſue to me for mercy,: as he hath done. 


[ 


=... 


. 25 His fleſh ſhall be freſher + than a childs »: he ſhall 
return to the days of his youth o. . 
2 i. e, More found and tender : Theſe joyful tidings delivered to 


Clildebood, 


4s K 2 


Ore 


ore his former health and vigour. #7. . To the ſame healthful 
and ſtrong conſtitution of Body which he had in his youth. 

26 He p ſhall pray unto God 9: and he will be fa- 
vourable unto him r, and he ſhall ſec his face with joys: 


for he will render unto man his righteouſneſs 7. | 

p Either, 1. the Meſſenger, orrather, 2. the fick Man. 9 being 
engaged and encouraged to do fo, either by the foreſaid gracious 
Mcflage ; or by his miraculous recovery through God's goodnels. 
7 In h-aring and anſwering his Prayers, which before he ſeemed to 
negle&. 5 Either, 1. God will look upon the Man with a ſmiling 
or well-pleaſed Countenance ; 'whereas before, he either hid his Face 
from him, or frowned upon him.Or, 2. The Man ſhall then be em- 
boldzned and encouraged to look God in the Face with comfort and 
joy , which before he was, not without cauſe, afraid to do : but 
now he ihall find that God is reconciled to him by the bleſſed effe&ts 
of it, both in his Body, and in his Conſcience. 7 7. e. According 
to his righteouſnes, or the fruit ofhis righteouſneſs, as on the con- 
trary Iniquzry is oft put for the puniſhment of iniquity. The Senſe 
is, He will deal with him as with one reconciled to him through the 
Mediator, and ſincerely repenting of, and turning from his former 
ſins unto the ſerious practice of righteouſneſs and true holineſs, 
and therefore muſt needs be favourable to him, as he hath declared 
and engaged himſelf to be in ſuch caſes. 


dr,beſbal © 2 || He looketh upon men «, nd if any ſay, I have 
#9" ſinned x and perverted that which was right y, and it 


B. | Chap. XXXIV. 
4 Let us chooſe to us judgment ec : let us know & a- 
mong our ſelves what is good e : 

c 7.8. Juſtice and Equity, Judgment being oft ſynecdochically uſ- 
cd for juſt Judgment, as Job 8. 3. & 19. 7. & 32- ge Pſal. 37. 28. 
Let us not contend for viftory,but only for Truth and Juſtice. This 
ſhall be my only care and buſineſs. Let us lay aſide all prejudices 
and animoſities, which I perceive have had too great an influence 
upon thee and thy Friends,and impartially conſider the naked truth 
and right of the cauſe. &d #, e. Let us diicover or make it known 
one to another. e Who hath the beſt cauſe. 

5 For Job hath ſaid, IT am righteous f: and my God 
hath taken away my judgment g. 

f Either 1, Tam perfeQaly righteous. ' But this Jeb did not ſay, 
bur the contrary, Job 9g. 2, 3.& 14. 4. Or,2. I am afincere Perſon, 
no Hypocrite, as my Friends make me. But this El/hu doth nor 
deny. Or 3- I am 1o far righteous, and have been ſo holy and 
blameleſs in my life, that I have not deſerved, nor had any reaſon 
ro expett ſuch hard uſage from God. And this Job had oft inti- 
mated, and Elihu doth juſtly blame him for ir, that he blazoned his 
own righteouſneſs with tacit refle&tions upon God for dcaling ſo 
ſeverely with him- g& For ſo Jeb had ſaid, Ch. 27.2. «, e. Redenies 
me that which is but juſt and equal, to give mea fair hearing, to 
ſuffer me to plead my Cauſe with, or before Him, ro ſhew me the 
reaſons of his contending with me, and whar fins beſides common 
Infirmities, I have been guilty of, whereby I have deſerved ſuch 


, and 
| I have profited me nor 2. , 
med, &c, # Either, 1. the ſick Man ſhall look upon, and converſe with 
F Mankind, his Friends, or others, as he did before, and ſhall ſay ( as 
the following word is, and may be rendred ) Thave ſinned, &Cc. 7. e. 
He ſhall confeſs to them that God was not to be blamed, but that 
he, by his own fin and folly, did bring thatevilupon himſelf And 
then he ſhall acknowledge God's great goodneſs to him,and ſhall add 
what follows in the next Verſe, He hath delivered my Soul, &c. and 
my life, &c. as they render it. Or rAther, 2. God diligently obſerves 
all Mankind. and their ſeveral carriages,eſpecially in ſickneſs and 
diſtreſs. x If there be any Man thar ſincerely ſaith thus, God hears 
it,and will pardon, and heal him, 2sit follows. y Either 1. I have 
judged perverſly of the juſt and right ways of God, cenſuring his 
proceedings againſt me as too ſevere and rigorous, whereas intruth 
I only was to be blamed. Or, 2. I have perverted God's righteous 
Law by bending it, and making it comply with my crooked ways, 
Or,l have ſwerved from the right and good way of God's commands: 
or, I have made crooked paths» So he repeats in other words what he 
ſaid in the former branch of the Verſe, 7 have ſmned. z I got no 
ood by ſo doing, as I vainly promited my ſelf, but I got much 
nc by it, even diſeaſes, and Griefs, and extream Dangers. This 
was the juſt. fruit of my fins. Iris a Meiofis whereby leſs is ſaid, 
and more is underſtood, of which we have' ſeen many examples 
before. TOR 
F Or, Þ» © 28 || He @ will deliver his ſoul þfrom 
 oufpany : pit, and his life c ſhall ſee the lighe 4. 


Se ite; bis life. © See on v. 18. 


which is oft called light, as darkneſs is put for afflicton,or 2. the l:ght 
| - of the living, as it follows,v. 30. the light of this World, z. e. his Life, 
[ .-which was endangered, ſhal! be reſtored and continued. This is op- 
| -\pofed to his going down into the Pit, in the former branch 

T Heb. . 
"twice and. wich man f. 

| thrice. - (All theſeways and methods doth God uſe to awaken, and con- 
"vince, 2nd ſave ſinners. f Either ſeveral'y, one way with one,and 
 anather way with another, or with the ſame Man, trying ſeveral 


going into the 


him for deliverance. | : 
*PC.56.13; -.. 30. * To bring back his ſoulfrom the pit, to be en- 
| | lighened- with the light of the living g. 
- £5. 4 That he may enjoy the light of life, and continue in the 
Land of the Living, out of which he was going. 
31, Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me, hold chy 
- peace þ,. and I will ſpeak. 
© þ Attend to whatT have further to ſay to thee with patience and 
ſilence. . 
-. 32 If thou haſt any.thing toſay ;,anſwer me: ſpeak, 
for þ deſire to juſtifie thee k. 

; Forthy own Juſtification, or in anſwer to the charge that I 
have already breughr againſt thee. k To wit, as far as may con- 
fiſt with Truth and Juſtice. I do not ſpeak with evil deſign, or a 
bitter mind, or as one reſolved to condemn thee whatſoever thou 
ſayeſt, and I ſhall be glad to hear any thing from thee, which may 
make for thy juſt vindication. 

33 If nor hearken unto me : hold thy peace, and I 
{hall teach thee wiſdom /. 
I is e. What thy wiſdom and duty is in thy circumſtances? 
CHAP. XXXIV. ; 
He aceuſeth Fob for charging God wich injuſtice, 1----9. God, the Almighty 

D:iſpsſer, Governour, and Judge of the World, cannor be unjuſt, 10s --17, 

Ir us nct fit to ſay of Kings and Princes they are unjuft, much leſs of God ; 

His power over, and obſervance of Man, who cannot hide from God, 

184---22. He exerciſeth hs Power and Juflice over them, 23---=30. 

Man's Duty under God's Affiitions, 31, '32. He reprovath Job's words 

againff God, 33--==- 37. 

\Urthermore Elihu anſwered, and ſaid, 
2 Hear my.-words, O ye wiſe men «, and eive 
ear unto me, ye that have knowledge. 

s Who are here preſent : do you judge of the trurh and reaſon 
of what have ſaid, and am further to ſay : for I am willing to ſub- 
mir all to the judgment of the truly wiſe. 

* Ch.6.30. 2 * For the eartrieth words b, as the + mouth taſteth 
& 12.11. meat. 


4 i.e. God, whoſe work alone this is. 6 Himſelf, or as it follows, | 
d ive. Shall enjoy either 1+ Proſperity, | 


29 Lo, all theſe things worketh God e F oftentimes. 


" means one after another, to bring him to repentance, and prepare | 


extraordinary Judgments. Which Elhu juſtly taxeth' him with as a 
very irreverent and preſumptuous expreſſion. 
6 Should I lie againſt my right þ ? F my wound 3s 
incurable without tranſgreſlion 7. 
i +h So Job hadfaid in effe, Ch. 27. 4, 5, 6. Should I falſly ac- 
; cuſe my ſelf of ſuch fins of which Iam no way conſcious to my ſelf? 
Should I betray mine own Cauſe, and deny my Integrity, and ſay 
' that I deſcrved worſe thanT have dons? 7. e. Without any great,or 
hainous, or crying ſin,as this word commonly ſignifies, which mighr 
| reaſonably bring down ſuch terrible Judgments upon my Head. 
7 What man 7s like Job, who drinketh up ſcorning 
' like water &? 


{ & 7.e. Abundantly and greedily: who doth ſo oft and fo eaſily 
| break forth inro ſcorntul and contemptuous expreſſions, not only 
| againſt his Friends, but in ſome ſort even againſt God himſelf, 
| whom he fooliſhly and inſolently chargeth with dealing rigorouſly 
; with him. The words may be thus read, What Man, being like Job, 
; would ar;nk up, &c, Thata wicked or fooliſh Man ſhould do thus, is 
| Not ſtrange ; but that a Man of ſuch Piety, Gravity, Wiſdom and 
Authority, as Jeb , ſhou'd be guilty of ſuch a ſin, this is wonderful. 

8 Which goeth in company with the workers of inl- 
' quity, and walketh with wicked men /? 

#{ Alchough I dare not ſay, as his three Friends do, that he is a 
| rg Man, yet in this matter he ſpeaks and atts like one of 

Thcm., 
9 For he hath ſaid », * It profiteth a man nothing, 

' that he ſhould delight hinaſelf with God ». 

mM Not abſolutely and in expreſs terms, but by unforced conſe« 
quence, and as concerning this Life,and with reference to himſelf; 
becauſe ke ſaid that good Men were no leſs, nay, ſometimes more 
miſerable here than the wicked, Ch. 9. 22, &c. 3e. 26. and that for 
his part he was no gainer as to this Life, by his Piery, but a loſer, 

, and that God ſhewed him no more kindnels and compaſſion than he 
' uſually did to tte vileſt of Men. Which wasa very unthankful and 
ungoaly Opinion and Expreſſion, ſeing Godlineſs hath the Promiſe 
of this Lite as well as of that to come, and Job had ſuch ſupports, 
and ſuch aſſurances of his own uprightneſs, and of his future hap= 
panels, as he confeſſeth, as were and ſhould have been accounted 
even for the preſent, a greater comfort and profit, than all which 
thisWorld can afford. » That he ſhould chute and delight to walk 
with God, and make ithis chicf care and bulineſs to pleaſe Him,and 
ro do His Commandments ; which is the true and proper CharaQer 
of a Godly Man. : NM 

10 Therefore hearken unto me, ye+ men of under- 
ſtanding os : * far be it from God that he ſhould de wick- 
neſs p, and from the Almighty, that he ſhould commit 

iniquity, Chap. 8.3: 
o You who are preſent, and underſtand theſe things, do you &_36- 
judge between Job and me. p This I muſt lay down as a Principle, Pf. 92.15: 
That the Righteous and Holy God, neither doth, nor can deal R994 
unjuſtly with Job, or with any Man, as Job inſinuates that God had 
dealt with him. | 
11 * For the work'q of a man ſhall he render unto *Pf.621: 
him, and cauſe every man to find according to his _— 
ways. : es 3. 20, 
q i. e, The reward of his work ; or according to his work. Job's aq,c.16.:7 
afflictions, though great and ſharp, are not undeſerved, but juſtly Rom 2.6. 
inflited upon hum, both for his original corruption, and for many |. q,c.10 
aQtuzl tranſgreſſions which are manifeſt ro God,though Jeb,through 1Pet-1.17 
his partiality, may not ſee them. And Job's Piery ſhall be recom- Rey, 22. 
penced it may be, 1n this life, but undoubtedly 1n the next» And 
therefore Piery is not unprofitable, as Job ſaith. 
12 Yea, furely God will not do wickedly, neither 
will the Almighty pervere judgment yr. 
r As Job hath wickedly affirmed. For the Phraſe,ſce onChap.s.3. 
13 Who hath given him a charge over the earth 52or 
who hath diſpoſed : + the whole world ? + Heb, al 
s 7,e. Over the Inhabitants of the Earth, to rule them according of it, 
to his Laws, and to givean account to him of it? Who or where 
is his Superiour that made the World, and then delivered the Go- 
vernmenr of it to God ? There is no ſuch Perſon. God himſelf is 
the ſole Creator, the abſolute and ſapream Lord and Governour of 
all the World, and therefore cannot do unjuſtly.The reaſon is part-= 


THeb.ming 
Arrow, 

Chap,6.4- 
& 16. 12, 


+Heb ma 


of heart. 


&-+ 


7 Heb. b 7. e. Man's mind judgeth of things ſpoken and heard. The Ear, 
Palate. he Senſe of Diſcipline is put for the mind to which things ae 
conveyed by iT. -- I6£ the note on Job 12. 11, 


4 . - , 
| YT PI Ww L 


ly becauſe all unrighteouſneſs is a tranſgreſſion of ſome Law, and 
God hath noLaw ro bound him bur his own nature and will: partly 
becauſe the Creator and Lord of the World muſt needs have all 
; poſſible PerfeQions in himſclf, and amongtt orkers,perfeR mee, 

and 


— - WA 


p. 


= 


(1.10 


29. 
tHeb.vp 
kms 


*GCen.3 
[cclel. 


12.7 


(Heb;bi 


TT, 


* 
12, 


Up. XXIV. 


7 8 


a needs be free from all imperfeQions and obliquiries, and 
ies wo from Injuſtice: And _ becauſe he is of himſelf All- 
ſufficient, and independent upon all other Perſons, and able to do 
and procure whatſoever pleaſerh him, and therefore as he hath no 
inclination, ſo he hath no temptation, to any unrighteous aQtions z 
This being generally the reaſon of all unrighteous ations 1n the 
World, becauſe the Perſons who do them either are obliged to do 
it, to gratifie ſome Superiour Authority who commands them to 
do it, or elſe do want or delire ſomething which they cannor juſt- 
Jy obrain. For he is a Monſter, and not a Man, who will take a- 
way any thing by injuſtice or violence, which he may have by 
right. # Or, committed, to wit, to him,to be governed by him, 1n 
the Name, and for the uſe and ſervice of his Superiour Lord, to 
whom he muſt give an account. 

14 * If he ſec his heart f upon man « ; 


unto himſelf x his ſpirit and his breath y .* 

u Heb. upon hm, is &- Man, as may ſcem probable fromw. 17. and 
15. where Man is expreſſed, and from the next Clauſe of this verſe, 
where he ſpeaks of that Spiric and Breath which is in Man- If his 
Eye and Heart be upon Man, if he diligently and exactly obſerve 
Him, and all his ways, and whartfoever 1s amiſs in him, and which 
follows upon ir of courſe, reſolve to puniſh him, Or, if he ſer his 
heart again#t (as this Particle El is uſed, Amos 7. 15» and clſc-wbere, 
as hath been noted before ) him, to wir, to cut him off. x If it 
plezſe him, to gather 70 himſelf, to wit, by Death, whereby God is 
{aid to take away Mens Breath, Pfal. 104. 29. and to gather Mens 
Souls, Plal- 26. 9. and the'Spirit is ſaid to return unts God, Eccleſ. 
12-7. Y i-e That Spirit and Breath, or that living Soul that God 
breathed intro Man, Gen. 2. 7. and gives to every Man that cometh 


into the World. ; 
— 15 * All fleſh = ſhall periſh 


Fidel. ſhall turn again unto duſt. 
BF ' 2 LE. —_ Man, who is called Fleſb, Gen. 6. 3, 17+ 1/a+ 40. 6- 
a Or, alike, Without any exception, be they great or mean, wiſe 
or fooliſh, good or bad, if God delign to deſt:oy them, rhey can- 
not withſtand his Power, but muſt needs periſh by his ſtroke. The 
defign of this and the foregoing verle 1s the ſame with that of v.13. 
(where ſee the notes) namely, to declare God s abſolute and uncon- 
troulable Soveraignty overall men, to difpoſe of them either to 
life or to death, as it pleaſeth him.and conſequently to ſhew that 7ob 
hid cauſe to be thankful to God, who had continued his life ſo 
Jong to him, which he might have taken away as ſoon as ever he 
had given it, and had no cauſe to complain of him, or to tax him 

with injuſtice for affliting him, as he did. 
16 If now thow haft underſtanding, 


hearken to the voice of my words. | 

þ As thou art a Man of Underſtanding, hear and conſider what 

I ſay. ; 
bis Shall even he that haterh right c, T7 govern d? 
2nd wilt thou condemn him that is moſt juſt'e ? 

c i- & That is unrighteous: Bur this he expreſſeth in a moſt em- 
pharicall manner, the reaſon: and we! ghr whereof ſeems to me to 
be this: If God beunjuſt, he is not ſo from fear of any Superiour 
(as inferiour Magiſtrates do many unrighteous chings againſt their 
Conſciences to pleaſe their Prince or chief Ruler, or to avoid his 
diſpleaſure) but meerly from an intrinſical hatred of Juſtice, or love 
of unrighteouſneſs : Which being moſt abſurd to imagine concern- 
ing God, therefore he cannot poſſibly be unjuſt,or do any unjuſt 
aftion. d So this word, which properly ſignifies to bindg 1s fitly 
rendred by moſt Interpreters, and ſo it 15 uſed 1/3. 3- 7. becauſe Go- 
vernours have a power to bind their Subjet&s by Laws and Penalties, 
and they are as it were the Ligaments by which Societies are bound 
and kept together, which without them would be difſolved and 
broken to pieces. Elibu's Argument here is the ſame with that of 
Abraham's, Gen. 18. 25. and that of St Paul's, Rom, 3- 5,6. If God 

be unrighteous, how ſhall he judge or govern the World? And the Argu- 
ment is undenyable; If God were unjuſt, there would be nothing 
bur injuſtice and confuſion, and miſchief in the World, whereas we 
ſee there is a great deal of Juſtice adminiſtred .by Rulers in the 
World, and all this muſt proceed from him who 1s the Fountain and 
Author of all Juſtice and Rule, and Authority. Andas the Pſ[almiſt 
faith, Pſalm 94+ 9+ He that formed the eye. ſhall not he ſee ? SoſayI; He 
that makes men juſt, ſhall he be unjuſt? # te. God, who hath 
given ſo many clear _ unqueſtionable RO of I 
in giving juſt and holy Laws, in encouraging and reward r 
ay pk Perfonerin this life, and 1n inflifting dreadful and 
remarkable Judgments upon Tyrants and Oppreſſours. Or, him 
that is juſt and mighty ; for the next verſe ſpeaks of ſuch who were 
generally in thoſe times more conſiderable for their Poker and Au- 
thority, than for their Juſtice. So hers 1s a double Argument a- 
gainſt Job's cenfures of God's Juſtice, He 1s juft, and therefore 
giveth thee no cauſe to condemn him, and withal- porent, and 
therefore can puniſh thee yer far worſe for ſo doing, 

18 Is it fi to ſay to a King, Thou art | wicked f; and 

F to Princes, ye are ungedly ? | 
f Or, thou = gr a Son of Belial. Though a King may 
really be unjuſt and wicked, yetthelir Subje&s neither may nor dare 
preſume to call them ſo, Exod. 22. 28s And therefore if ſome evi] 
thought did ariſe in thee, yet how waſt thou not afraid toutter 
fuch unworthy and almoſt blaſphemous expreſſions againſt God ? 
"Deutz1o. 19 How much leſs to bim that * accepteth nor the per- 


xi ſons of Princes g, nor regardeth the rich more than che 


if he gather 
(4].104- 


qHeb.up07 
me 


together 8, and Man 


hear this 6: 


(Heb;bind 


T Heb: Be. 


g 


Eph: 6 V . 
Cil-3. 2 -commonly proceeds from reſpe& of Pertons, 
Perry Whom therefore thou didſt owe more _— — 
: have exprefſed- + And therefore of equal worth and price Wit 


him, and equally lubje& to his power and pleaſure. 


: 
. ty 
_— l 


Chap. XXXIV.| 


B. 


# Whenſoever God doth but give the word, and ſend his Sum« 
mons for them. &k 1. e. The Rich and the Prince, no leſs than the 
Poor, muſt ſubmit to the Law of Death which God hath impoſed 
upon all men, without exception, and they cannot charge God 
with injury therein» { Whole Nations or People are no leſs ſub- 
je& to God's Power than any particular Perſons: Their Numbers 
cannot ſecure them from God's hand. » i- e. Diſturbed and ter- 
rified with thoſe Calamities which God ſhall bring upon them» 
x» Suddenly, and when they are molt ſecure. o Either, 1. Go in- 
to Captivity, or run, or fly away, they know not whether for their 
lives. Or, 2. Perith or die, as he taid before, and as this word is 
oft uſed, as Job 14. 20. Pſalm 37. 36. Eccleſ. 1.4. So the ſame thing 
is faid of the People, which in the firſt branch of the verſe was 
faid of the Princes. p Either from their place or power; Or out 
of this life, q Withour any hand or help of Man, by ſome ſeciet 
and ſtupendious Work and Judgment of God ; which he oft inflits 
upon thoſe who are out of the reach of Mens 


21*For his eyes are upon the ways of man r, and he 
ſeeth all his goings. | 

r This is added as the reaſon of the Judgments mentioned in the 
foregoing verſe, God doth not affli&t nor deſtroy either 


16: Lo 


ſible arts and tricks to hide them from him. Therefore po ma 
hath cauſe, to complain of God, but of himſelf, for all that he may 
ſuffer in the World. 


where the workers of iniquity may hide themſelves s. 


their wicked ations with plauſible pretences and profeſſions, bue 3- 
his ſight. 
23 For he will not lay upon man more than right t: 


that he ſhould f enter into judgment with God «. 

: More or heavier Puniſhments than they deſerve, or than are 
proportionable to their fins, which he accurate'y obſerves, as was 
now faid, and therefore can ſuit Puniſhments to them. « There= 
by to give him any pretence or occaſion of catring into Judgment 
with him, or condemning his proceedings ; For whith there 
might ſeem ro be ſome colour, if God did Jay upon Man more 
thanrighr. And therefore thou, O 706, hadſt no cauſe for thy Com- 
plainrs againſt God- 


24 He ſhall break in pieces mighty men + without 
number x, and ſer others in their ſtead y. 

x Neither their greatneſs, nor their numbers can ſecure them our. 
from the ſtroke of God's Jcſtice. y 1. ce. Give away their power 
and dignity roothers who ſhall come in their place. . 

.,25 Therefore he knoweth their works =, and he 
overturneth them in the night a, fo that they are 7 de- 
deſtroyed 6b. | | 


z 1.e. Hence it appears that he knows all their evil works, be- 
cauſe he judgeth them for them, God or Men are ofc-times ſaid in 
Scripture, to know or do a thing, when they only manifeſt their 
knowing and doing of it. Or, Becauſe, &ce as this prrticle is uſed, 
1a. 26+ 14+ and 61. 7. So this 1s ſubjoined as the ground or reaſon 
why he puniſheth them, as is related both in the foregoing, and in 
the tollowing words, becauſe he ſees all their wicked defigns and 
actions» are When they are at reit and ſecure; at mianight, 
as It 1s v- 20- *Or, he turneth, or bringeth upon them che night, to wit, 
of Calamity and Tribulation, as the next words explain it, and as 
the words 1:ht and darkneſs are oft uſed. Or, he turneth the night 
to wit, into day, i- e+ He knoweth all their deeds of darkneſs, an 
bringeth them to light. See above v. 22. 6b Heb: aud (or then, or 
therefore ; for both thele ways this Particle is ſometimes uſed) zhey 
ſhall be deſtroyed, or broken to picces, 

26 He ſtriketh them as wicked men c F in the open 
ſight of others d. 


c ie» As heuſeth toſmite wicked men, with a grievous and ter- 
rible ftroke- Compare 1/a. 27. 7- Or, for wicked men, or becauſe they 
are wicked men, therefore he deſtroys them without any regard to 
their quality. 4d In publick view for their greater ſhame, and for 
the greater glory of God's Juſtice, and for the greater terrour of 0+« 
ther Oppreiſours, and comfort of the Oppreſſed. , 

27 Becauſe they turned back F from him e, and 
* would not conſider f any of his ways g. 

e From the God, whom they or their Progenitors had owned ; 
and his Laws, which God hath written in the mind of all men, Rom. 
2:14,15- and ir may befrom the praftice of the true Religion which 


+ Heb; 


+ Heb: 
without 


+ Heb: 
[y uj bed, 


+ Heb: 


| ſometimes they profeſled. f Or, underſtand. They did not deſire 


nor endeavour to know them, at leaſt praQtically or to any good 
purpoles g Either 1. God's Providential ways. - They did not lay 
ro heart any of God's Judgments inflited upon ſuch Oppreffours as 
themſelves, which ſhould have given them warning, bur boldly per- 
ſiſted in the ſame wicked courſes Or, 2. His Precepts ; oft called 
his Ways, becauſe he hath appointed them for us to walk in. For 
theſe way's they were in a Ipecial manner obliged to conſider and 


_ praiſe : And the next verſe giveth us an inſtance of their back- 


iliding from theſe ways. 

25 So that they cauſe the cry of the poor to come b 
unto him z, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted &. 

þ Heb. To bring, &c. which is ambiguous, and may be read.,either 
1+ That he, 1+ & God, might bring, &c, So this is a reaſon why God 
ſmote them, &C+ as 1s ſaid, v. 26. Or, 2.That they, i- e- thoſe wick- 
ed men, might bring, &c. and ſo theſe words contain either 1. A 
reaſon of what was laſt mentioned, to wit, why they would notcon- 


| ſidernor walk in God's ways, becauſe they were reſolved to opprelſs 


the Poor, and give them cauſe to cry unto God ; Which they nei- 
ther would nor could have done, if they had throughly underſtood 
and conſidered God's ways. Or 2. An evidence or inſtance of it . 


flb:hy 20 In a moment 5 ſhall they & die, and che people / 
'%a; take ſhall be croubled m2 at midnight zz, and paſs away 0: and 


avay th age : oy” 
"els + the mizhty {hall be taken away p without hand 9. 


wherein it did appear, that they had turned back from God, &Cce, 
Ek FR . . . 3 
7 1.6: Unto Gdd, as the following word's imply, it being God's work 
to hear the cry, and plead the cauſe of the affuzied or oppreſſed. Otners, 
Upon him, or upon them, or Fact of them, to wit, of the Oppreſ- 

$8 K } {Ours ; 


*, #7 + 


Chap:3z 

. *P(34.1 a 

Princes Cc119+1 + 

or People unjuſtly, no nor our of his meer pleaſure and abſolute pro:;. 23; 

Soveraignty (to which Job ſeemed to impute his Calamities ) but 8 15. 3- i 

for their ſins, which God ſees exaQtly, alchough they uſe all poſ- Jer;16.17 
n 


22 * Thers js no darkneſs, nor ſhadow of death, « pq, 
I 39s I2. 
5 They may flatter themſelves, or cheat others by covering Amos 9-24 


they cannot deceive God, nor keep their hearts and ways from Heb. 4.1 


ſearching 


the place of 
beholders, 


THeb.fron 
after hin. 
*PC; 28. 
Ifa. Fe I 


1] , 
l 
| 
; 
l 
4 | 
l 4 
. 
: 


I 
j 
: 
f 
iq 
[1 
| 
, 
| 


| 


' 


7 


S=, 


wp. XXXIV., 7 0 
[ ſours ; upon whom the cry of the oppreſſed is ſaid to come, becauſe 
the vengeance of God is by that cry brought down upon them. 
k He delivereth the oppreſſed by raking the Oppreſſour away. 

29 * When he giveth quietneſs /, who then can 
make trouble »? and when he hideth his face », who 
then can behold him 8? whether it be done againit a na- 
tion, or againſt a man only p. ; 

l - * ahiy. 4 the poor and oppreſſed Perſons laſt mentioned, or to 
any other Perſon or People, as it follows. #2 No Man or Creature 
can hinder God's deſign and wock. » i-e. Withdraws his favour 
and help fem them, and thereby expoſeth them ro all Opprefſions 
or Calamities- 0oi- e« Who can look up to God with cheartuIneſs or 
confidence, to deſire or expe& his help? Or rather, who then wil 
fook upon him, or regard him, to wit, ſoas to pity or ſuccour him! If 
God be againſt him, what Man will or dare be for him? Al men 
will forſake and oppoſe him, and ſo he will be utterly loſt- For 
this (who) anſwers ro the (who) in the former branch of the verſe, 

and both of them ſpeak of Man and hisa&s oppoſed unto God,and 
to his att. p The caſe isthe ſame in both: God can carry on his 
work either of Mercy or Juſtice, as eaſily and irrefiſtibly upon an 
whole Nation or People as upon one particular Perſon 
30 Thar the hypocrite reign not, leſt the people be 


en{nared 9. ; | 

q Having ſaid that God could and would carry on his own work 
and deſign cff-&ually, whether againſt one Man, or againlt a whole 
Peop!e, he now procceds to give a further inſtance of God's migh- 
ty Power above and againſt the greateſt Monarchs, in whom their 
own and tiie Peoples ſtrength ſeem to be united, yer all together 
cannot oppoſe God in his work. God when he pleaſeth can and 
doth ſo order affairs, that the hypocrite ( 1 e- the profane wicked Prince, 
as one of the Kings of Judah is called, Ezek- 21» 25+ Bad Princes 
being called Hypocri#'s, becauſe they do commonly cover all their 


Oppreſſions, and Injuries, and Impicties too, with the ſpecious pre- 


tence of Juſtice and the Publick wood, and the diſcharge of their 
Tru# and Duty) may not reign, (i- e- may not conrinue his Reign 
and Tyranny, that he may and ſhall by his Soveraign Power and 


Omnipotent Providence be deprived of his Kingdom) 1:/t the people 


: be enſnuared, i-& leſt the People ſhould be longer, and more and 


more kept and held in the Snares or Fetters of Tyranny and Op- 
preſſion; ie. God doth this to free poor oppreſſed People from 
the ſm#es which ungodly and unrighteous Princes lay for them. 


Or, That the people be not enſnared any longer, Heb. That there be no 
ſnares 0” ox for the people. Or, For the ſnares, or ſcandals, or ſms (wbich 
are oft ſo called) of the Pcople» So the ſenſe is, That ſuch a wicked 
Prince may not contiaue to reign over that People, although by 
their ſins they had provoked God to give them ſuch a Prince, and 
to continue his Power over them. ; 

31 Surely it is meet r to be {aid unto God 5s, T have 


born chaſtiſment t, I will not offend any more «. 


r Certainly it is but fit and reaſonable that Man ſhould ſay thus, 
to his Maker and Supream Lord, and that in ftead of contendirg | 
with God he ſhould ſubmir to him, Or (which comes to the ſame 


thing) Br# hath he ſaid? So the ſenſe is, I have ſhewed the abſolute 
Power which God hath over all his Creatures, and thar he may juſt- 
ly, and doth oft-times ſeverely puniſh al! forts of menas he ſees fit: 
And this 50b ſhould have applied to his own caſe. Bur, T appeal to 
all of you, hath he t-e Jeb ( who is the principal ſubjett of this 
whole diſcourſe, and to whom he now beginsro dire@his diſcourſe) 
ſaid, that which here follows? which is a kind of form of Confei- 


Gon or Humilietion, which Eu puts into 70b's mouth,as fit to have. 


been uſed by him. Nay, hath not his ſpeech and Carriage been of 
a direQaly contrary nature and tendency? In ſtead of humblir; g him- 
- ſelf uncer God's hand which washis duty, hath henct been full of 
murmurings and complaints againſt God ? s Unto one ſo much th 
Superiour, ſo mighty and ſo righteous in all his ways; With ſuch 
--an one, a weak and ſinful Creature (as thou art) ſhould nor preſume 
to conteſt t Or, 140, or ſball bear it, to wir, quietly and con- 
tentedly ; I will bcar the Lord's indignation, and accept cf the pu- 
niſhment of my own iniquity andnot accuſe God falſly and fooliſh- 
ly, asI have done « Heb. I will not corrupt, to wit, my ſelf or my 
ways; Which is oft underſtood in like cafes. Or. 1wiltake or Je. 
mand no Pledge : For ſo this Verb is ofc. uſed. So the ſenſe may poſ\ 
ſibly be, Iconfeſs I have been too bo!d with God, in deſiring that 
he would come with me into Judgment, and that I could have a 
Pledge or Surety that he wou'd do ſo, but I willno longer defire 
it, but ſubmit my ſelf wholly to him. . 
32 That which I ſee not, teach thou me x; if T have 
doneiniquity, I will do no more y. 

x I'willno longer maintain mine innocency, but from thy Judg- 
ments I will conclude and have reaſon to believe thar there are 
ſome ſecret ſins in me, for which thou doeſt chaitiſe me, and which 
I through mine ignorance cr partiality cannot yet diſcover, and 
therefore do beg that thou wouldſt by thy Spirit manifeſt them to 
me. y I will amend my formererrours. 


33 | Shoxld it be according to thy mind 2? he will 


 ſboald it be rTecompenſe it ; « whether thou refuſe, or whether thou 
| from with Chooſe b, and not I c: therefore ſpeak what thou know- 


eft 4. 
z Having adviſcd and direfted Job how to behave himſelf, and 


what to ſay to Godin his Caſe, he now proceederth to enforce his 
advice by ſolid Arguments. ſhould it (to wit, God's chaſtening of 
thee, about which the great Controverſie was) be according to thy 
mind? Heb- from with thee, as thou wouldſt have it? Shall th Op1- 
nion or Aﬀettion give Laws and Meaſures to God that he hall af- 
Ai only ſuch Perſons, and in ſuch a manner and meaſure, and ſo 
Jong as thou wouldſt have him ? Doth God need, or ſhould he ſeck 
for thy advice how to govern the World, and whom, and when to 
reward or puniſh ? Doeſt thou quarrel with God, becauſe he paniſh- 
eth thee worſe and longer than thou expetteſt or deſireſt ? a To 
wit, Thy iniquity expreſſed v. 322 b Whether thou art ſatisfied 
or offended with his proceedings, 
bliged to give thee an account of hismatters ; whether thou would 
refuſe his Funiſhments, or accept of them. cIrtis not I, nor thou, 
that muſt preſcribe to God, but he will do what he pleaſeth. Or, 
byutnot I, 1- e+ do thou refuſe or chooſe as thou pleaieſt, and con- 
tend with God for doing with thee otherwiſe, than according to 


k. 4 FI 
Chap. XXXy, 
thy opinion or good will; but ſo would not Tdo, if it were my caſe, ; 
and I can ſay nothing for this courſe which thou takeſt, and there. 
fore do thou ſpeak what thou knowe#, or what thou canft tay for it, as 
it herefollows. d If thou canſt ſay any thing for this prattice, here 
I am ready to hear thy defence, and to juſtifie thee as far as I can 
truly and righteouſly do» Bur this verſe 1s and may well] be other. 
wiſe rendred, and that very agreeably ro the Hebrew, though fi11 
the ſenile wil be the ſame, Shall he, i e. Cod, render, or Tecompence it, 
(to wit, thy iniquity) according ts thy mind (i- e- no further than thoy 
doclt like and content) becauſe thou refuſeſt? (to wit, his Chaſtiſe. 
ment. is he obliged to forbear puniſhing thee becauſe thou art 
not pleaſed with its Shall not he diſpenſe either favours or affli&i. 
ons as he ſees fit without thy conſent ? ) Shalt thou chooſe, and not 1 > 
(So Elihu ſpeaks this in the Name and Perſon of God: Such ſud- 
den changes of Perſons being not unuſual in this Book. Shalt thou, 
O Job, chooſe for me, and not I for my ſelf?) therefore [peak what 
thou knoweſi- Tf this be thy opinion, ſpeak what thou canſt in de- 
tence of it: And here am II ready to pl-ad for God againſt thee. 
So here Elhu recurns to ſpeak in bis own Perſon. 
34 Let men ÞF of underſtanding tell me, and let a 
wiſe man hearken unto me e. F Heb. o 
eI am content that any wiſe Man ſhould judge ofmy words, ang tart. 

let ſuch conſider what I ſay. Or. as others tranſlate the place, Men 
of Underſtanding will ſpeak for or with (as the prefix Lamed is ſome- 
times uſed, as Gen» 46+ 26+ Numb: 18. 11+ Job 17+5+-) me, and wile 
Men will hearken or aſſent unto me- 

35 Job hath ſpoken without knowledge f, and his 
words were without wiſdom, 

f Fooliſhly and inconſiderately- 


35 || My deſire is that Job may be tried g unto the 

end h, becauſe of his anſwers ; for wicked men &. | Or, »y 

g Either 1- That he may be further tried by God, or exerciſed Father, lg 
wuh Afflictions, rill he be throughly convinced or humbled. Bur J*b be 
it ſeems harth that he ſhould pray tor the continuance or increaſe tried, 
of Job's Aﬀlictions, Or rather, 2- That his words and cauſe which 
I am now debating may be examined and ſifred, that you that are 
hcre preſent, or any other wiſe Men, may conſider and judge there= 
of, as he deſired above, verſes 2, 10, 34 & + & Thorougly and 
exactly, till the Cauſe be brought to an iſſue. Or, unto vitfory, 1 Er 
till judgement be brought forth unto Vitory- 7 Or, concerning his 
anſwers, or replies or diſcourſes ; For anſwering is oft uſed in Scripture, 
both in the Old and New Teſtament for ſpeaking. So he limits 
and cnangeth the ſtate. of the Controverſie: I do not meddle with 
Job's former life, nor charge him with hypocrifie, as his three 
Friends have done, bur I juitly reprove him tor his hard Speeches 
againſt God, whereby he hath reproached his Juſtice and Goodneſs. 
& 1 & On their behaif, or for theiruſe. He hath put Arguments 
into their Mouths againſt God and his Providence. Or, with or a« 
wong wicked men, as it he were one of them : Or ſuch Anſwers as 
they uſe to make, which therefore are very unbecoming ſuch a 
Man as Job js, or pretends to be- 


37 For he addeth rebellion unto his ſin I, he clappeth 


his bands m amongſt us, and multipliecth his words a« 
gainft God ». 


! He ſinned before, as other ways, ſo by impatience under his 


B. 


eb: 1 
gill refurn 
gthe 
yurd; 


#<:23:19: 


Hiebisk'es 


Cþ,22,7 
Plal; 16 2: 
Roill35; 


affictions, which may be aſcribed to human infirmiry ; but now he 
is grown obitinate and incorrigible, and in ſtead of repenting and 
humbling himſeiffor his fins, he excuſeth them, and juitifieth him- 
{clf, and accuſeth the bleſſed God. Or thus, For otherwiſe, unleſs 
he be th: oughly tried and rebuked, he will add rebellion unto his ſin, he 
will break forth into open rebellion againſt God, and (as it follows) 
he will clap, &c- For the Hebrew words are of the future tenſe, al- 
though tuch are oft rendred by the paſt tenſe- m2 In token of joy 
and victory, as this Phraſe is uſ-d, Pſalm 47-1. and g8-8- inſulting 
and triumphing, not only over us, as if nene of us were able ta 
anſwer him, bur in a ſort over God himſelf, in aſmuch as he hath 
again and again deſired leave of God to debate his Cauſe with or be- 
fore him, and in that caſe did nor doubt to maintain it, but could 
not obtain the favour or juſtice of a fair hearing- » Whereas the 
reverence which he oweth to God, and his infinite diſtance from 
him ſhould teach him to be very modeſt and ſparing in his Speech- 
es of God, Job on the contrary poureth forth whole flouds of bold 
and preſumptuous Expoſtulations with God, and refle&ions upon 
Goa's proceedings with him. 
H A P. XXXV. 

Our good or evil extendeth not to God, x —==7, But to men 0nearth whe 

are hereby oppreſſed, and cry out, but not unto God, nor are delivered, 
12» He exhorteth te hope in God, though for the preſent he he 
angry, 1 Jenn 16, 

Lihu ſpake moreover and faid, | 

2 Thninkeſt thou this to be right a, that thou 

ſaidſt, My righteouſneſs is more than Gods b ? 
a Canſt thou in thy Conſcience, upen ſecond Thoughts, approve 
of what thou haſt ſaid? 6 Not that Job ſaid this in expreſs terms, 
bur he ſaid thoſe things from which this might ſeem to follow, as 
that God puniſhed him more than he deſerved or expeRted, all 
things conſidered ; And that if he might be admitted to debate his 
cauſe with or before God, he did not doubt to carry it, andto ob- 
tain that eaſe and favour from God, which otherwiſe God would 
not afford him. But this Charge again? Job he proves in the next 
verſe. 


# 


3 For * thou ſaidſt, « What advantage will it d be 


unto thee e? and what profit ſhall I have || if 1 be cleav- "50 
ſed from my fin f ? 


*Ch:34-9 


[| Or, 9# 


. by my ſi, 
c This verſe contains the proof of the foregoing Charges : Job 
had off affirmed, that be was and {till continued to be Righteous, 
though he had no preſent benefit by ir, but much bitterneſs with it: 
And God was not kind to Job notwithftanding all his former and pre- 
ſent Piety, but dealr with him as ifhe had been a moſt wicked man; 
Which was in effe& to ſay, That he was more Righteous than God 


he regards not, as not being o- | 


d To wit, bis Righteouſneſs laſt mentioned. e i- e- Unto me; ſuch 
changes of Perſons being very frequent in the Hebrew Language. 
f Or, by the expiation of my ſm; For the ſame Hebrew word ſignifies 
both to ſm, and to purge our or expiate ſin. Or, by it (to wit, by my 
Righteouſneſs) more than by my ſin, $9 the ſenſe is, I have no more 

Pre- 


4+ I will anfwer thee, and thy companions g with 
feb! I > ; 
gill 1efurn hes. 2. Thoſe who are of thy opinion, or with whom thou doſt afs 
pthe Bate thy ſelf in thoſe Speeches and Carriages. Which feems to 


= VNXXV 
> -ofeot benefit by all my care fo pleaſe and ſerve God, than wicked 
nen have by their fins againft him. God regards iny cries no more 
than theirs, and ſhews no more kindneisor pity to me. than he deth 
to the moſt profiigat Wretches. But ſtill remember 70h ſpeaks not 
here of the future hfe, wherein he knew he ſhould have much ad- 
vautage, as he profeſſed before, but only of this preſent ſtate. 


Wis þ. meant not of Jobs three #riends (© as many underſtand it, for their 


opinions were contrary to Job's in this point _) but of wicked men, 
with whom 705 is ſaid to walk, and go in company for this ſame opinion 
or aſſertion, <h.4p. 34 8. 9. And theſe mea he here calls Job's com- 
pantons, partly becauſe they are very forward to harp upon the ſame 
firiog, and to accule God and juſtifie themſelves upon all cccafions 3 
and partly, that he might a waken Job to a more ſerious review 
of his former affections, by repreſenting to him, whoſe Cauſe he 
pleaded, and who were his Coniederates and Colleagues in this O- 
pinion. 

1:22:12 gs * Look unte the heavens, and ſee, and behold 

Mebulits ge Folds which are bigher than thou 5b. 

þ How much mo e is God, who is far aboveall tieayens, higher than 
thou? And theretore God 1s out of the reach of all profit or loſs by 
thy aftions if thy goodneſs do not profit thee, it1s certain it doth 
not proit him 3 and therefore doth not lay any Obligation upon 
him ro indulge er recompenſe thee for it, ſave only ſo far as he 
hath graciouſly oblidged hin-ſelf : and therefore thou canſt not accuſe 
him ot injuſtice for afflifting thee, nor pretend that thou hait deſerved 

' better uſage from him. And this innnite diſtance between God and 
thee ſhould cauſe thee to think and ſpeak more modeſtly and reve 
rently of that glorious Majeſty. : = 

6 If thou ſinneſt, what doſt thou againſt him 3? or 
if thy tranſgretlions be multiplied, what doſt thou un- 
to him ? ; : 

i Tay fins do himjno hurt, aud cherefore thy righteouſneſs brings 
him no beacfit as it foilows. ; 

7 * If thou be righteous what givelſt thou him ? or 
"0223 what receiveth he ofchine hand & ? 
M17 þ He gatucth nothing by it, nor Can indeed receive any good 
kil35; 0m thee, becauſe all thy good comes from him. Aud therefore 
thou hait vo reaſon to boatt of, nor to upi'raid God with thy P.cty, 
which is much to thy advantage. but nothing to his. 


8 Thy wickedneſs may hurt a manas thou art /, and 


thy righteouſneſs may profit the ſon of man. 

{ It God were tuch aii one 5 thu art. he might have benefitor 
hu-t by chine ations; but being an 10':nite, independent and ſelf- 
ſufficieatBceing, he i far exalted above all thy go.d or evil. 


9 By reaſon of the mwitirude z- of oppreflions, they 


make zbe oppreſſed to cry n . they cry out by reaſon of 
the arm of che mighty 0. 

m Or gr atneſSs Ih.s verſe is ſuppoſed to contain an Argument 
to prove what heſa d, v. 8 that one Mans wickedneſ- m.y hurt a 
nother. Burt he ra:her ſeems to begin a new mattcr, and having, 
anſwered one of Job's ObjeRiens, to proceed io another, which m?y 
be either 8. That which Jeb had oft complaived of that he cryed to 
God, ana God did not hear hi-cry z; which Elihu anſwers by a Paral- 
lelcaſe of men, crying out foro,preffion ; whom yet God doth nor 
hear, nor help, and that for juſt reaſons which he [eaves to Jeb to 
apply to himſcit. Or, 2, tha' which Job had alledged, Chap. 24, 12, 
and wiiici might ſeem to refle& upop God's Providence. This there- 
fore =libu repeats 1a this verfe. and auſwereth in the following, n 
Not only to murmur and complain, but to cry out by reaſon of ſore 
oppreſſion, aud to cry to the Oppreſſours, or others far pity and help. 
0 Becauſe their Opprefloursare too ſi. ong for them, 

10 Bur none pſaith q, Where is God r my Maker s ? 
who giveth * ſongs t in the night # ! 

p rew-r none ( tor tew are oft caiied and accounted as none, both 
in Scripture and other Author-,) of the great numbers of oppreſſed 
Pertons. q To wit, ſcrioutly or tincerely, ad it may be not ſo much 
25 in word and protefſion. r They howland c y o:t of men, and to 
men, vut they eek not after God, they do not acknowledge him in 
all cheir ways © they praiſe him not for that eaſe, and liberty, aud c- 
ſtate, and othet mercies which God gave them ; and by thisunthanks 
fulneſs the) forfeit their merciesz and therefore if God ſuffer Op: 

' preſlaurs to take them away, they have no cauſe to complain of 50d, 
but oniy of themſclve: : they will not youchſafe to pray to God ſeri- 
ouſly and te-ventiy, either rocontinue or to reſtore their oft mercics; 
and therefore if God do not hear, nor regaird their brutiſh cries a- 
riting only tro a natural ſenſe of their miiery, ir is not ſtrange nor 
unjuft s Who alone made me, and whoſe Power and Providence 
preſerveth me every day, and who only can prote&»and deliver me 
All which we. c ebligations upon them to praiſ: God and pray to him, 
and depend upon him, and aggravation: of their groſs neg'e@ of God. 
Heb, my Makers in the Plural Nu.nber, Which being uſed not only 
here, but alſo. Eccl ſ. 12: 1: 1ſ«, 54. 5: and that without any neceſſity 
when it might as well have been p:it 10 the finguiar nurober, yea 

| though Elobior be Plural,a+ it is Gen 1. 1. plaivly implies a Plurality 
of Perſons in the Divine Effence, of which ſee on Gen. i. 26, #1. e: 
Matter of Songs : great occaſion to rejoice and "raiie God, L] Either 
1. Metaphorically taken, i.e. inthe night of affi-Qion ; implying that 
they want not eauſe to bleſs God even in their afflitions Or rather 2: 


Mayes 


7 0 B. 


Properly, as this word is always uſed in Job, 5ne place excepted which 
the day ; either becauſe oppretſed Perſons, who in theiday time are 
ſervation, and reſt and ſlcep of the night, than in the Bleffings' of 
the day, which are procured by Man's 1nduſtry : of becauſe the Day 


Ought to remember God's Mcrcies with Thanigiving : Compare Pſal. 
42:8:JXn15;627 


It: Who teacheth us more then the beafts x of the | 


rt . 


is doubtful, to wit, Chap 36: 20: which he may mention rather than | 
cruelly uſed by their O.-prcfſours, arc permitted to reſt in the night : | 
or becauſe the Hand avd Mercy of God is more manifeſt in the pre- 
15 the time of Aion, the Ni-ht of Contemplation, when we do and : 


\ aſcribe righteouſneſs to my maker d. 


earth, and maketh us wiſer then the fowls of heaven. 

x This ts ment!oned as a further aggravation of Mens negle& of 
God in their Miſery. God hath given to Men thoſe Gifts wiich he 
hath denied to Beaſts. Reaſonand Relivion, Wiſdom to knw God and 
themſelves, and their Obligations to God, 2nd ther dependance us 
pon him. And th-refore it 1 becomeih them to lye like Brute-crea- 
tures, roaring and crying out in their Miferies, wi:hout taking any 
notice of Godin way of Prayer or Praiſe, and if they do ſo, it is no 
wonder if God take no notice of them. | 


12 There y they cry, ( but none giveth anſwer ) 
becauſe of the pride of evil men =. ; 
y Or, Then, as this particle is uſed,P/jal. 14 5. Eccleſ, 3, 17' Zeph 
I. 14. In that time or condition. 2 Either 1. of the Oppreſſhurs: 
So this is the rea{on no:. of the laſt Ciauſe, why none anſwererh, but 
of the former w1y they cry.the latter Clauſe being therefore ſhut up 
within a Parenthefis, and the words thus are to be tranſpoſed, as 
ſome place them; There they cry, becauſe of the pride of evil men. but 
none giv?th anſwer. The reaſon whereof followeth in the next verſe. 
Oc rather, 2: of the opprefled Perſons And ſo there is no need of 
any Parentheſis or Tranſpoſition. And ſo theſe words contain one 
reaſon ofthe words immediately foregoing. which is moſt natural and 
eaſic, and uſual, to wit, why none giveth anſwer, i e. why God doth 
not anſwer nor regard their cries, becauſe of their Pride. &c, be. 
cauſe they are both evil, wicked and impenitent, and proud, un- 
humbled for thoſe fins for which God brought theſe Miſeries uy 
them, and unſubducd to the Obedience of God, 


13 * Surely God will not hear vanity «@, neither & 


will the Almighty 6 regardit. Iſa. 1: 


a Either 1. vain and light Perſons, that have no true Wiſdom or Jers 11:1 | 


ſolid Piety in them, but are wholly addifted to vain and worldly 
things, rejoycing immoderately when they have them, and crying 
out for want of them, as here they do. Or 2. vain cries, which 
proceed not from Faith or Piety, but only from Self-love and a Na- 
tural Senſe of their Miſery 3 which is common to them with Brute. 
beaſts; The AbſtraR is here put for the Concrete, as wickedneſs is 
oft put for wicked men, and p'ide for proud Perſons, and the likes 
b Though God be able to help them, as this title of God implies, 
and though he be the Judge of the World, as the former name of God 
ſignifies, to whom therefore it belongs to r'ght the Oppreſſed againſt 
the Oppreſſour, yet in this caſe he juſtly refuſeth rohelp them. 


14 Although thou ſayeſt, thou ſhalt not ſee him c , 


yet judgment is before him d, therefore truſt thou in 
him e. 


c Or, thin canff net ſee hin; the Future Tenſe of the Indicative 
Mood being oft put potentially ; 7. e. Chou canſt not have thy de- 
ſire in appearing and pleading thy Cauſe before him. So this is 4 
new matter, and F lihu anſwers another Objeion of Job's : of which 
ſee Chap 23. 8, 9.and tells him that he is not to jude.c of God by pre- 
ſent appearance 3 becauſe though God may tor a ſeaſon hide his 
Face, and d. lay ro give him ao anſwer, yet he will certainly do him 
right.  1.e. Scfore God, or in his preſence, or at his Tribunal, or 
in all his Ways and adminiſtrations - And Judgment is put for Juſtice 
or juſt Judgment, as it is. job 8. 3. F/al. 37 28. & 99. 4. and oft elſe 
where. $0 the ſenie is, God isand will ſhew himleif robe juſt in all 
his ways, and therefore thou doft wickedly in retleting upon God's 
Juſtice. Or, yet judge thy ſeif before him inftead of accuting God, 
condemn thy ſelf, acknowledge thy fins, and then thou mel hope 
for »iercy, Compare « Cor. 11 3ie e Inſtead of murmucing againſt 
him, put thy truſt in him. Repent of what is paſt, and humble thy 
iclf under God's hand, and do not deſpond for the future, but wait 
upon God patiently in his way till deliverance- come to thee 3 for 
1t wili certainly come if chou doſt not hind: r it. 


I5 But now becauſe ;t is not ſo f, || he g hath viſits L,g. 


ed in his anger h, yet|| he knoweth is not z in great | That is, 


extremity k, 


i e. Becauſe Job doth not acknowledge God's Juſtice and his own 
Sins, and wait upon God in his way for Mercy according to the laſt 
advice givcnto him, v+ 14. g To wit, God, to whom this great 
Work of viſiting is aſcribed every where in Scripture; þ #. e. Hath 
laid griev:'us Afftiftions upon him ; all which is too little to bring 
J-» to compliance with G0d.- 7 Jobis not ſufficiently ſenſible »f it {fo 
as to be humbled under God's hand. k Or tno:gh C which Particle 
1s ſometimes underſtood,ofwhichZxamplesh.vetecn before_)ingrea' exs 
tremity, or aboundance, :o wit, of Afﬀ:&ions. Though Job hath hither ; 
to been and ſtill is exerciſed with very fore Calamities, vet they have | 
not brought Job to the knowledge of God and of hiraſelf, But this 
verſe isand may be rendred thus: And now know that his \” i, e&« 
God's_Janger 9ath viſited thee little or nothing,(to wit, in compariſon of 
what thu haſt deferved and wighteſt reatonably expeR ) . neither hath 
he known(1- e judged or puniſhed, as this ward is uſed, Prov. 10: 92 
an6 elſe where _) thee in or accoratng to( as the ;:refix Beth is ſorhetimes 
uſed _) the great adeundance, to wit, of thy fins. And therefore thy 
Complaint< againſt God are very unrighteous and unreaſonable. 

16 Therefore! doth Job open his mouth in vain m 
he multiplieth words without knowledge ». - 
l Hence 1t is inanifcft, mi.e. Pour forth his Comp'/ainrs without? 
any ſucceſs, and gets no eaſe by them, » Thereby diſcoverivg his. 

ignorance of God and of himſelf. 
| CHAP. XXXVI. 
Gad is juft in all his way: 3 towards the wicked, t——a—=—g. thegod! 
T——Lr. the hypocrite, 1 4 14. the poor, x5: Job's fins bin. 
dred Gods ſalvation ts bim : he admoniſheth him, 16 --— 21: God, 
power and ſever. 1gnity, and all his perfetions to be magnified, 220-33, 
F- Lihuaiſo proceeded, and laid. 
H14 


[, 2 Suffer me a little a, and I will ſhew thee + 
that 7 have yet toſpeak on Gods behalf þ. 
« G1ye mc thy pa'tent attention but a little longer, and I have done. 


. 6G 
b That I have not ſaid all that canbefſaid to juſtific God's proceedings _ 
againſt thee. | 


2 I will fetch my knowledge from afar c, and will 


c 1 e: From remote times, .and places, and things: IT will not 
confine my Diſcourſe to thy particular Caſe, but will juſtific God » 
4K4 F= 


Chap. XXIB 


pot Ch; 27: 
Proy. 1.284 
15. 294 


1 That is 


tHeb thas 
there are 
yet words 


; 
| 


[ 
i 


133 
| 
: 
| 
£ 
: 
: 
; 
' 


oy 
| 
| 
: 
: 
| 


; 
i 

I (| 
. : 


ap.XXXVI. F V 


declaring his great and glorious Works of Creation and Providence 
both in the Heaven and Earth, and the manner of his dealing with 
men in other Parts and Ages of the World : for theſe are che chict 
Heads of the following Diſcourſe, and therefore the beſt Comment u- 
pon this General Expreſſion. & I will acknowledge that which 15 true 
that God is Righteous, He adds the words, my Maker, either 1. as 
an Argument or Evidence of God's Righteouſneſs ; partly becauſe it 
is not likely that God ſhould be unjuſt to his own Creatures, fince e- 
ven Menare not only juſt, but kind to their own Works and Relati- 
ovis : and partly becauſe the Work of Creation gave unto God an 
abſolute right and pawer to diſpoſe of Job as he ſaw fit, as the Potter 
hath power over the Clay, Rom g- 21. and therefore there was no 
foundation for Unrighteouſneſs, nor any temptation upon God to 
do it : and partly becauſe Man's Maker muſt necds be a Beeing of 
all poſſible Perfe&ion, and therefore one of perfe& Righteouſnels. 
Or, 2. as aMotive or Obligation vpon him to plead God's Cauſe,l do 
not engage my ſelf in this Controverſie out of a pragmatical or 
contentious humor, nor out of any prejudice or ill will to thee, 
but meerly from the ſenſe of my Duty to my blefled Creator. With 
al, he refle&s upon Job as guilty of great folly and ingratitude 1n 
COS with him, in or by whom he lived, and moycd, and had 
is beings 
4 *For truly, my words ſha not be falſe e: he that 


is perfe& in knowledge is with thee f. 

e I will not ſpeak any thing againſt my own Conſcience, nor a- 
gainſt Truth, cither to flatter God, or to vex thee, as thou ſuppoſeſt 
thy other Friends have done, Chap 13. 7. and elſewhere. f This 
is meant either x. of God. Thou haſt to do with a God of perfect 
Knowledge, by whom all thy words aud aftions are weighed ; and 
therefore haſt need tobe more wary and circumſpet in thy expr-[- 
fions and behaviour. Orrather 2. of himſelf, as the former pa't of 
the verſe is- And he ſpeaketh of himſelf in the third Perſon for 
moceſtics ſake. He ſpeaks not of abſolute, but of comparative Per- 
fetion. And whatſoever perfeftien of Knowledge he had, he doth 
not aſccibe it to himſelf, but to God's Spirit, Chap. 32..8- And the 
meaning may be this; Thou haft not do with a Novice hatawith one 
who hath accurately conſidered, and through God's grace doth fully 
underſtand theſe matters, Therefore hearken tome. But the word 
rendred perf-# ſignificth alſo ſincere or upright, or right. And this 
may ſeem beſt to agree withthe former Clauſe wherein he ſaith Jthat 
he would not ſpeak what he knew to. be falſe ; and now he adds, 
That he was and would be upright in the uſe of his knowledge, orin 
the delivery of his opinion in this matter. and not be byaſſed by any 
paſfion or prejudice, either to ſpeak otherwiſe than he thought, or 
to judge otherwiſe than he ſhould. 

* Chig:44 5 Behold, Godis mighty, and deſpifeth not avg: 
& 12-13» * 5g 75 mighty in ſtrength and + wiſdom 5. 

2 His greatneſs doth not make him ( as it doth men _) te ſcorn, or 
deſpiſe, or oppreſs the meaneſt. Though he may do what te plea- 
ſeth, and none can hinder him, yet he will net uſeitto do any Man 
wrong as Job ſeemed to infinuate, Chap. 10. 3. & 19. 9, & 23 13 
h His Strength is guided by Wiſdom, and therefore cannot be im- 
ployed todo any thingunbecoming God, or unjuſt to his Creatures ; 
for either of theſe is folly. Or, in Frength, or vertue of heart : for 
the andis notin the Hebrew. So the ſenſe is, He 1s truly magnani- 
]mous, of a great and generous Mind or Heart, and therefore not Un- 
righteous : for all Injuſtice proceeds from littlencſs or weakneſs of 
heart, Truly great Souls ſcornunjuſt aQions. 

6 He 'preſerveth not | the life of the wicked 7: but 
' por. of 8iveth right to che || poor '—_@ 

fied; i To wit, for ever; but willia his due time forſake them, and give 

them up to the Deſiroyer. Or. he doth not or will not preſerve is put 

uy for, he will certainly and dreadfully deſtroy, by the Figure called Meivfis 

f uſed Prov. 17, 21. and oft elſe where. k He doth uphold, and he 

PF will certainly in his time deliver his poor oppreſſed ones from all their 
Oppreſſours: ; | 

7 *He withdraweth not his eyes from the righte- 


ous7: but with kings are they on the throne ; yea, 
he doth eſtabliſh them for ever », and they are ex 


" 137.16 


x6, 

& 27. 23: 
+ Feb: 
heart: 


*Pſ.33:18 
& 34. I5. 


B 
: K | Chap. XXXVYT 

y God's Admonition and Command: x They ſhall be reſtored to ; 
their tormer rroſperity, and ſhall live and die in it, This he ſpeaks 
according to the Tenour of God's Promiſes, eſpecially in the Old 
Teſtament ſtate of the Church, and according to the common cour\ 
and method of God's Providence, which Elihu and other good —_ 
had obſerved. a Ab:unding in worldlyComforts, and being enabled 
by God to rejoyce in them, which is God's Gift, Eccleſ, 3; 13: and 
delighting themſelves in God's love and favour to them. | 


12 But if they þ obey not, + they ſhall periſhby the * Feb 146» 
ſword, and they ſhall die without knowledge. ſhall pa's 
b The Righteous ſpoken of v. 7: oppoſed to the Hypocrites here awa)by 1 be 
following v; 13. for even good men may ſometimes be diſobedient to pogin 
Divize Admonitions, avd may ſuffer deeply, yea, even death it [cif Cgg:58 
for their folly ; See 1 Cor. 11:130, c In or for their ignorance as 
inadvertancy or folly. Or, becauſe they are without knowledge ; becauſe 
they are fooliſh or brutiſh, and will not learn the Lefſons which 
God ſo plainly teacheth them. 

13 But the hypocrites in heart d*heap up wrath e : 
they cry not f when he bindeth them g. 

d Such asare truly void of that Piety which they profeſs. Where. 
by he either ſecretly infinuates that Fob was ſuch an one ; or gives 
him this occaſion to ſearch himſelf whether he were not ſo: or rather 
admonifketh him not to carry himſelf/ike ſuchan one, ashehadhitherto 
done, and for which he rep:oved him, Chap. 34.8. e 4. e. By their 
1mpious and obſtioate carriage in all Conditions, they treafure up 
God's wrath azainſt themſelves, f Unto God for help. They live 
in the groſs negle& of God and ofPrayer; g To wit. with the Cords 
of AffliFion, evpreſſed, v. 8. which is mentioned as an Aggravation 
of their Wickedneſs : becauſe even wicked gmen, if not proefligately 
bad. will ſeck God in a time of Affliftion, Hoſea 5. 15 Withal he ſe- 
cretly reſletts upon Jeb as one that behaved himſelf like a wicked Man 
becauſe though be cryed out of God in way cf Complaint yet he 
did not cry unto him by humble Supplicatioen. : 

14 *-# They die in youth, and their life is ; a- 
mong the || unclean k, | 

h They provoke God to cut them off before their time. 
Their Soul ( i e. they themſelves ) ſhall d.c in youth. 
ſhall die or be extin@ - which Verbis ungerftood out of the former foul dieth: 
Clauſe after the manner of the Hebrews kh, Or, the filthy, or Whore- +Or Sedt. 
mongers, or Sodomites ; to whoſe deſtrution ( which happened not mites: 
long before this time _) he may ſeem to allude, The ſame is, They 
ſhall die by ſome dr-adfull and exemplary ftroke of Divine Ven« 
geance. 


15 He delivereth the [| poor in bis aflition, and 


openeth their ears / in oppreſſion 7. 

l ji, e Cauſeth them to hear, and underſtand, and do the will of 
God ; hearing acing oft put for obeyings And this latter Clauſe ſeems 
to be added to intimate, that he will not deliver all afflicted Per- 
ſons, but only thoſe whoſe Ears he openeth to receive his Counſels. 
m i e. Inthe time of thejr Oppreſſion. Or; byoppreſſion or tribulation 
as the means of opening their Ears and Hearts. 

16 Even fo would he » have removed thee o out of 
the p ſtrait znto a broad place q where there js no ſtrait- 
neſs, and #* chat which ſhould be ſet on thy table 7, ,,p 4 th 
should betull of fatneſs, table: 

n If thou hadſt opened thine Ear to God's Counſe!s, and humbled * Pl. 23:5 
thy ſelf under his correQting hand, and ſued to God for Mercy. 8 As 
this Verb 1s uſed, 2 Chron: 18. 31. Or, allured, or inti ed, or pe'ſwas 
ded thee, as the word properly ſignifies : which poſſibly may here 
be emphatical and may imply as that Job had by his 10s brought him- | 
telt1ato theſe ſtrai's, ſo that God would havebrovght him ou: 5f them 
by the uſual and : egular way, to wit, by perſwading him to turn 
from his fins. and humbly and carneſily to cry to God for Mercy, 
which if he had compiied with, God would haye delivered him, Þ 

Heb: our of the month or jaws of tribulation , which like a wild Beaſt 
was ready to ſwallow him up, q 1, e: Into a ſtate of caſe and free- 
dom. r Thy Diſhes, or the Food inthem. 


17 Burt thou haſt fulfilled the judgment s of the 


*Rom. 2: 


Tch:15!32 
& 22: 16; 
Heb. Pſ:55: 23: 
7 Or, their life THeb their 


[0 Be by 
nad 


+ Heb: the 


1 He never ceaſcth to care for and watch oyer them, nonot when 


they are atflited or perſecuted, when he may ſeem to neglc& them, 
m Though they may be apprefled for a time, yet oft times he not 
only delivers them, but alſo raiſeth them to the higheſt Honour 
and Happ'neſs in this Life z Compare 1 Sam 2. 8. P/al, 113. 7, 8, 
n Their Felicity is more ſtable and permanent than that of the wicked. 
o Having mentioned the Cauſe, that God did eftabliſh them ; he now 
mentions the effeR, that { #hey | are or continue to #e exaired ; the 

are not caſt down from their ,Dignity, as the wicked commonly 


are- 
8 And * if they be bound in fetters p, a»d be holden 


in cords of affliction : | 
p If through theviciſfitude of Worldly Aﬀairs, and the Righteous 
Judgment of God'upon them for their fins, they be brought from their 
Throne into a Priſon, as ſometimes hath been done. 
9 Then he ſheweth them their work 9, and their 


tran{grefſions, that they have exceeded r. 
i. e- Their evil Works, as the next Clauſe explains and limits it. 
By theſe Afﬀfiiftions he brings them to a fight of their Sins and to 
Repentance, which is theway and means of 2heir recovery. r That 
they have greatly finned by abuſing their Power and Proſperity ; which 
eyen good men are too prone to do. Yo 
10 * He openeth alſo their ear # to diſcipline z, and 


commandeth #« that they return from iniquity #. 

57. e, He enableth and inclineth them to hearken to what God ſpeaks 
by the rod, who would nothear in the time of their Proſperity - like 
them, Jer. 22. 21. t Or, 1» inſtruton, 1,e. to receive iuſtruftion + 
or ts chaſtening, i- e. to hear the rod, and who hath appointed it ; asis 
ſaid, Mich, 6. 9, « Either by his Word or Spirit accompanying the 
Afﬀi&ion and diſcovering the Mind and Will of God in this Diſpenſa- 
tion. x Which is the chief Cauſe of their Calamity. 


rx If they obey y and ſerve him, they ſhall * ſpend 


gy 


*Pſat107: 
10. 


Fch,33:16 
wr”. 


*ch:21:13 


| Or, Judge 
ment and 
juſtice 
ſhould ups 
hald thee: 


wicked : || judgment and juſtice take hold 0» the 7. 

s Or, the cauſe, or ſentence. as the word moſt properly fignificth» 
Thou haſt fully pleaded thcir Cauſe, and juſtified the hard and -re- 
proachful Speeches which wicked men in their rage utter © againſt 
God, condemning God and juſtifying themſelves. # Or, therefore 
( which 15 oft underſtood ) the ſentence and Judgment ( or, the judic-al ſen- 
tence, to wit, of the wicked now n.entioned ) ſhall tabe hold on thee. 
Thou haſt maintained their Cauſe againſt God, and God ſhall paſs a* 
gainſt thee their Sentence, or the Sentence of Condemnation due to 
ſuch wicked men. 

18 Becauſe there is wrath u,beware x leſt hetake thee 
away with his ſtroke y ; then * a great ranſom can- 
not} deliver thee z. 

v To wit, conceived by God againſt thee; Becauſe by thy plead- 
ing the Cauſe of the wicked,zhou haſt deſerved that God ſhould g1ve 
Sentence agaipftjthee, as was now ſaid, and haſt provoked God's 
wrath againſt thee, therefore look to thy (elf, and reconcile thy ſelf 
to God by true Repentance whiiſt thou maiſt, and before Sentetce be 
executed upon thee. x This is not in the Hebrew, but is neceſſai- 
ly to be underſtood to make up the ſence, and is oft underſtocd in 
the likecaſcs, and that before this Hebrew Particle Pen, as Gen. 3. 22+ 
& 11; 4.42: 4: ſai 86: 18. See the like alſo, Matth, 25.9, As 5.39: 
y Properly, with the ſtroke of his hand or foot. Tr is an allufion to 
men who oft expreſs their anger by claping their hands, or ſtamping 
with their feet. 4 For if once God's Wrath take hold of thee, and 
ſentence be executed upon thee before thou doſt repent and humble 
thy ſ:If to thy judge, neither Riches, nor Friends, no nor any Perſon, 
or thing in Heaven and Earth can redeem thee; no Ranſom or Price 
will be accepted for thee. : 

19 Willhe eſteem thy riches? zo not Gold, nor all 


the forces of ftrength. 

4 If thou couldſt recover thy loſt wealth or ſtrength, or thy Friends 
would imploy theirs on thy behalf, neither could the one ranſome 
thee, nor tlie other reſcue thee, 


YP(7145: 7: 
+Heb: furn 
thee aſpde: 


20 ® Des 


their days in preſperity z, and their years in pleaſures g. | 


* 
4 
5 
ML 
« 1.15 | 
J 


Walt 
12:26,2/ 
[ſz 46:1 
Rom:11t 
$ 1G 
2:16 


| 


G6: 


(34:10 


ho 
thy 


dg 
nd 


To 
1c& 


TH 
furn 


ſides 


ap. KXXVI. 


4: by ; which is not unuſual in the Hebrew Tongue. This is a proper 


Vo can ſay Thou haſt wrought iniquity ms ? 


-per:our Lord who gave him Laws for his Aftions, he might be ac- 


Gar oft 5. 


. arenot blind or _— muſt needs ſee and acknowledge it. s The 


got 52 

91.24, * neither canthe number of his years be ſearched out x. 

Hike t Infinite in Majeſty, and Power, and Wiſdom, and all PerfeQi- 
12, 0 


. * 
20 * Deſire not the night b, when c people 4 * are 


ﬀ e in their place f. 

©, Eirher I. pre 2 we in it thou mayeſt find ſome eafe or 
reſt,as ſome men uſually do. But this Job did not much defireyfor he 
complains that his Nights were as reſtleſs as his Days. Or rather 
2 Metzphorically, the Night of Death, which is called the Night 
both in Scriptures as John 9: 4+. and in other Writers; and which 
oþ had oft and earneſtly deſired, and even thirſted afrer, as this 
Verb notes» See Chap; 7; I5ec And this ſeems beft ro agree with the 
foregoing Counſel, v; 18. beware le# he take thee away with his ſtroke, 
For then, ſaith he, rhou art irrecoverably loſt and gone ; and there- 
fore take heed of thy fooliſh and off repeated deſire of death, leſt 
God infli& it upon thee in great anger. c Or, by which :- which 
words are ofc underſtood in divers Texts of Scripture. 4 Even 
whole Nations and Bodies of People, which are all Gods Creatures 
as well as thou, and yet are not ſpared by him,but cut off in wrath, 
and many of them ſent from one death to another; rake heed there- 
fore thou beeſt not added to the number. be. Heb. are made to 
#ſcend, i, e to vaniſh, or periſh, or die, as this Verb is ofc uſed,as 
Job 18: 16. Pſal: 102: 25. fln their ſeveral places where they are: 
or, ſuddenly before they can remove out of the Place where the 
hand and ſtroke of God finds them : or, in the Place where they are 
ſzrtled and ſurrounded with all manner of Comforts, and Supports, 
and Friends, all which could not prevent their being cut off. Poſe 
ſibly this Phraſe may allude to that expreſſion of Jobs, Chap: 29: 18. 

1 ſhal die im my neft. ES : 
21 Take heed, regard not g iniquity : for this haſt 


thou choſen rather than affliction 5. 
g Or look not to it,to witywith an approving or coveting eye,as this 
word is uſed, Prov. 23: 31. h Thou haſt. choſen rarher to quarrel 
with God, and cenſure his Judgements than humbly and quietly 
to ſubmit to them, and to wait upon God by Faith and Prayer for 
deliverance in his time and way. : 
22 Behold, God exalteth ; by his power : * who 


teacheth like him & ? | : 
i Or, 5 high, or exalted, the ative Verb being taken intranſitive- 


Argument to force the foregoing Counſels- God is Omnipotent; 
and therefore can with great facilicy, either puniſh thee far worſe, 
if thou beeſt obſtinate and refratory ; or dehver thee, if thou doſt 
repent and return to him. & He isalſo infnitely wiſe as well as 
powerful and as none can work like him;ſo none can teach like him. 
Therefore do not preſume to teach him how to govern the World, 
or to order thy Afﬀairs; bur know that whatſoever he doth with 
thee, or with any other men, is beſt to be done. And therefore 
be willing to learn from him ; learn Obedience by the things which 
thou ſuffereſt from him: and do not follow thy own Fancies or Af- 
fe&ions, but uſe the Methods which God hath taught thee to get 
out of thy Troubles, by Submiſſion, and Prayer, and Repentance. 
The words m'y be rendred, What Lord is like him? For the word 
Moreb in the Chaldee diale& ſignifies a Lord. This Tranſlation ſuits 


J O B. 


z pour down 4 rain according to thevapour thereof 5 : 

; Having affirmed that Gods Works are incomprehenſibly great 
and glorious, he now enters upon the proof of it , and he proveth 
it from the moſt common and viſible Works of Nature and Provis 
derice, which ifthroughly conſidered, are full of wonder, and paſt 
the reach ofthe greateſt Philoſophers, who indeed ſp:ak of them 
only by guefs,and by their innumerableDiſputations about them diſ- 
cover their ignorance in them. And hence he leaves ir -to Jo6 to 
conſider how incomparably more deep and unconceivable the ſecret 
Counſels andJudgments of God muſt needs be,&therefore how foo- 
liſh & preſumptuous a thing it was for himto judge & cenſure them 
9 i: e. He orders matters ſo wiſely and graciouſly, that the Waters 
which are in the Clouds, do not fall down at once in Spouts,or Rt- 
vers, or Seas ; which would be both unprofitable and pernicious to 
the Earth and to Mankind ; but by degrees, and in drops, which 
is beſt for mens ſafety and comfort, and for the refreſhm-.nt of the 
Earth. And this he obſerves as a wonderful Work of God, without 
whoſe Providence herein thoſe Waters might conſtantly or com- 
monly fall in Spouts, as ſometimes part of them both hath dones 
z Either the Waters, laſt mentioned ; or the Clouds, as it is expreſ= 
ſed in the next Verſe ; or the Aﬀive Verb is uſually imperſonally, 
which is frequent in the Hebrew Language, they pour down rain, for, 
the;1in 15 poured down. a Or, melt or aiffelve, which word is borrow= 
ed from Metaliſts, who difſolve Metais with Fire, and then pour 
them forth by degrees in parcels; as the Clouds are diffolved,and 
then poured forth in drops, as was now expreſſed. 5 i; e, Accor- 
ding to the proportion of Vapours which the heat of the Sun hath 
drawn up fromthe Earth or Sea into the Clouds. Or, into the wa- 
pour thereof. Soitnotes that great Work of God by which the Rain 
is firſt made of Vapours, and afterwards reſolved into Vapours, or 
into the matter of ſucceeding Vapours, by a conſtant rotation and 
TECCIProcation» 


abundantly c. 


c In ſuch plenty as the neceſſities of the Earth require;which alſo 
1s a wonderful Work of God. 


29 Alſo can ay underſtand the ſpreadings of the 
f cloudsd, or thenoiſe of his tabernacle e. 

da Or rather, of a Cloud, as it is in the Hebrew: whence it comes 
to paſs, that a (mall Cloud,no bigger than aMans hand,doth ſudden- 
ly ſpread over the whole Heavens:how the Clouds come to be ſud- 
denly gathered together, and ſo condenſed as to bring forth Thun« 
der and Lightning, which here follows # 7: e. The Thunder proe 
duced in the Clouds, which are oft called Gods Tent or Tabernacle, as 
Pſal: 18:11; and 104:3. becauſe there he oft times ſeems to dwell,and 
gives forth Tokens of his powerful and glorious Pceſence in thoſe 
mighty Works of Thundring and Lightning, wherewith Men are 
frequently afteniſhed and affrighted 

30 Bekold, he ſpreadeth his light F upon it g, and ce- 
vereth 7 the bottom ot the ſea þ. 


with the former Clauſe of this Verſe, but ours agrees well enough 
with thar, and is confirmed by the following Verſe. 
23 * Who hatch enjoyned him his way 1? or * who 


1 Wherein ae wouid walk, 7. e. what Conrſes and Methods he 
ſhould uſe in the Adminiſtration of Humane Aﬀairs: If he had a Su- 


countable to him,an'l queſtionable for what he did ; but he is Su- 
prezm, Abſolute and Uncontroulable, whe nath no Law to regulate 
him, but his own ho'y Nature and bleſſed w:!]., And therefore how 
raſh and impudenr, and abſurd a thing is it for any Man to cenſure 
his proceedings 2? Thou haſt ſwerved from the Law and Rule gi- 
ven T0 thee. : : 

24 Remember » that o thou magnifie his work ?, 
which men behold q ? 

# Cail ro mind this thy Duty, and take this matter into thy more 
ſer1ous thoughts, 'a:.d it will prevent thy horrible Miſtakes and Miſ. 
carriages. o ſotnis Hebrew Particle is uſed here, v. 10. 8 Job 3. 12. 
p Or, his works, the Singular Number being pur for the.Plural; eve. 
ry wcrk which he doth ; do not condema any of his Providen- 
tial Works cowards thee or others, -ut adore and glorifie them as done 
with admirable Wiſdom, and Juſtice, and Faithfulneſs. 9 To wir 
with aimration and aſtoniſhment ; which by their greatneſs and 
glory draw tne eyes and minds of all men towards them: which de- 
ſerve ro be entertained wit!: adoration and reverence of all men, 
not with cenſure and reproach. 


25 Every man may ize it r : man may behold ;t a- 


r To wir, his work, laſt mentioned. The Power, and Wiſdom 
and Greatneſs of Godis fo manifeſt in all his Works, that all who 


Works of God are ſo great and conſpicuous, that rhey may be ſeen 
at a great diſtance ; whereas little things cannor be ſeen, unleſs we 
be n:ar them - This Tranflationand Inrerpreration ſeems better to 
agree with the Context than that which is more common, Man doth 
behold it ( i: e; Gods Work or Works ) afar off,z: e. They ſee them 
darkly and imp?-rfe&ly, as thingsat a great diſtance,but not clearly 
and plainly,as things nearat hand, and therefore they are ſo aptto 
miſtake them, and misjudge of themes 


26 Behold, God js great ?, and we know him not « ; 


ns, and therefore juſt in all his Ways. « To wit, perfe&ly, 
Though we ſee ſomething of him 1n his Works, as was now ſaid, 
yet we ſee and know but little of him in compariſon of that which 
15 in him. He is incomprehenſfibly grear in his Efſence and in his 
Works, and therefore benor to raſh, O Job. as to centure thoſe 
Ways of God which thou canſt not fully underſtand. x He is from 
everlaſting to everlaſting eternal, as in his Beeing, ſo in all his 
Counſels ; which therefore muſt be infinitely wiſe and above the 
comprehenſion of ſhortsl1iv'd men. 


27 For y he maketh ſimall the drops of water y, they 


fi; e: The Lightning; of which the whole context ſpeaks, which 
is fitly called Gods Light,as it is called Gods Lightning, Pjak (44:6; be- 
cauſe God only can lightit. gz: e: Upon theCloud, which isina 
manner the Candleſtick in which God fers up his Lignt. þ The 


pterceth deep, reaching even to the bottom of it, and fpreading it 
ſelf upon it,and ſo covering it like a gay and glorious Garment ſud= 
denly caſt over and covering the Body of a Man or Woman; or as 
God is ſaid to cover himſelf with light as with a garment, Pſal:104:2. 
31 For* by them judgeth he the people z, he giveth 
meatin abundance &, 


executes his Judgments againſt ungodly People or Counrries. k Or, 
and(whick Conjun&ion is oft underſtood)be givethmear, &Cc. 7: e. By 
the ſelf. ſame Clouds he puniſheth wicked men by Thunder and 
Lightning, and provideth for others by thoſe plentiful Showers 
which accompany them. 

22 With clouds / he covereth the light »z, and com- 


mandeth it not fo ſhine », by the cloud that cometh be- 
twixt 0. | 

I With thick and black Clouds ſpread over the whole Heaveits, 
as it is in times of great Thunders and Lightnings. Heb.with hands; 
either the Clouds are ſo called for their refemblance to hands, i Kings 
18; 44: as being hollow and ſpread abroad : or the meaning is, that 
God covereth the Light as it were by the hollow of his Hand. as a 


136: 7: as being the Fountain of Light. » Or giveth a charge con- 
cerning it ta wir, that it ſhal be covered : Or, forbiddeth it, as this 
Hebrew word joyned with this Propoſition, uſually ſignifies, as 
Gen: 2: 17: and 28: 6, 1 Kings 2:43:and 11: 180, and elſewhere, 7: e. 
hindreth ir, as it wereby an expreſs Command or Prohibition, from 
irs uſual and proper work,to wit, from ſhining. e Which God inter- 
poſeth as a Veil berween the Sunand Earth : by which he doth, as 
ir were, deliver his Command or Prohibition to the Sun, that he 
ſhould nor ſhine. | | 
32 The noiſe thereof p ſheweth concerning it q; the 
cattel alſo concerning f the vapour r., 

p Towit, of or within the black or rhick Cloud ſpoken of v: 32: 
Or, his. i; e: Gods noiſe, to wit, the Thunder. which is called 
Gods weice, Pſal: 29: 4.5. 9g To wit, the Rain. which is the prin- 
cipal ſubje& of theſe Verſes, of which he ſpeakerh expreſly. wv: 27; 
28: and of its Companions, the Clouds. the Thunder and Light- 


ning in all the following Verſes. The ſenſe is The Thunder gives 


notice of the approaching Rain. » And asthe Thunder, ſo alſo the 
Cattel ſheweth q which Verb is underſtood out of the foregoing 
Clauſe, afrer the manner ) concerning the Vapourg.. e: concerning the 
coming of'the Rain ; bue he puts Yapour for the Rain, becauſe di- 
verſe Catrel are very ſagacious in this matter, and do not only per- 
ceive the Rain when ir is ready to fall; but foreſee it at ſome-di- 
ſtance by the Vapours which are drawn up by the Sun in great a« 
bundance, and by divers Motions and Aions, give men timely no- 
tice of it, 2s hath been obſerved not only by Husbandmen, burtalſo 
by Learned Authors. 


it CHAF, 


Lightning ſpreads farand wide over al) the parts of the Sea, and: 


Man ſometimes covers the Lighr of a Candle. m Either the Light- 
ning or rather the Sun which is fitly called Light, Fob 31: 26: Pſal: © 


Caap. XXXVI. Wl 


28 Which the + cloudsdo drop, and diftil upon man t Heb:be- 


+Heb:eloid 


+ Heb! 
the roots, 


»Ch:37:13 
i By Thunderand Lightning, he mariifeſts his diſpleaſure and & 38:23: 


+Heb that 
Which g#« 
efh up. 


ap. XXXVII. - 
C H A P. XXXVIL 
Gods great Works, Lightning, Thunder, Snow, Rain Winds, Froſt, Cloudr,and 
his providences towards Nations, whether for Correftion or Mercy, call for 
reverence and fear, 1 14. as alſo his unſearchable Wiſdom in 
them, 15 i8. We are ignorant, and cannot ſpeak to God ; but 
muſt fear him who reſpeFeth none, 19 —— 24. 
T this alſo a my heart trembleth, and 15 moved out 


of his place 6. 

s Of which I have already ſpoken, and am now to ſpeak fur- 
ther,to wit,the Thunder which hath oft times made even Atheiſts, 
and other wicked Men to tremble with a fear of horroun, and good 
T7ob:hear Men to tremble with a fear of reverence, and a due dread of Gods 
. ſat Judgments. b Leaps and beats exceſſively, as if-it would leap our 

» bj 9® My Body. ; . ; 
_e ay 2 + Hear attentively c + the noiſe of his voiced, and 
embling. the ſound that goeth out of his mouth e. _ 

| c It ſeemsnot improbable that whilſt Elihu was ſpeaking 1t Thun- 
dred greatly, and that Tempeſt was begun, wherewith God uſher- 
ed in his Speechy as it here follows, Chap: 38: 1: and that this occa- 
ſioned his return to that Subje& of which he had diſcourſed before, 
and his Exhortation to them to mind it with deeper atrention.dOr 
his Voice, ( to wit, the Thunder,which is called a Yoicz, Exod:20418: 
and Gods Voice, Pſal: 29: 4: ) with trembling ; becauſe the Thunder 
is an effe& or evidence of Gods mighty Power, and oft times of his 
Anger alſo. e As the voice ( and Thunder in Gods Voice ) goeth 
out of Mans mouth- Or,that is produced by Gods Word or Com- 
mand, which is oft ſignified by his Mourh. 

2 He dire&eth it f under the whole Heaven g, and 


his + lightning unto the.+ ends of the earth 
f To wit, his Voice : which he ſhooteth or guideth like an Ar- 


F Heb: 


OO 


It Alſo by || watering c he wearieth the thick clouds 


F : heſcattereth Þ || his bright cloud e. 
6 To wit, the Earth. 
turn,and thento pour forth abundance of Water. « By filling and 
burdening them with much Water, and making them to go long 
Journeys to water remote parts, and at laft co ſpend and empt = 
chemſelves there; all which things make men weary; and therefore |” 
are here ſaid to make the Clouds weary by a common figure called "> the 
Proſopope:a, e As for the white and lightfome Clouds ( which are cloud ſcar. 
oppoſed to the thick and black Clouds in the former Clauſe ) he *7 bis 
ſcatrereth and diſſolveth them by the Wind or Sun. Or, he ſcatter. 79". 
eth other Clouds by his light, i; e« by the beams of the Sun. Sv he ga. 318.4, 
thereth ſome, and ſecattereth'others, as he pleaſeth, cauſing either 
Clear, or dark, and rainy weather. : 
12 And it is turned round about f by his counſzls g: 
that they may do whatſoever he commandeth them 
þ upon the face of the world in the Earth. 
f The Clouds (now mentioned ) are carried abourto this or thar 
Place. g Not by chance ( though nothing ſeems to be more caſual 
and uncertain than the motions of the Clouds ) but by his order and 
governance. h Either be diſperſed and pats away without effe& to 
the diſappointment of the Husbandmans hopes, or be diffolved in 
{weet and fruitful ſhowers. 


Et 12, 


i, Oey Tow 
13 * He cauſeth it to come 5, whether for | correci- 2 9: 
on &, or for his land 1, or for mercy m. - 


z Heb. He maketh is (to wit, the Cloud or Clouds, and the Rain 18: 1g, 
which is init) ro find, to wit, a path, orto find out the Perſons or Ezr.1o,9. 
Place to which God intends either good or hurt by it» k Heb: for a Chap«36. 
roa,to ſcourge or corre Men by immoderate ſhowers. Or, for a 27, &«. 
Tribe, or certain portion of Land, which God intends particularly f Heb. s 


poly. row to the Mark, ſo diſpoſing it thatit may do that work for which 
THeb: þefends it. g Far and wide through all the parts of this lower * 
ings of World. h From one end of the Heaven to the oppoſite end or part | 
Fhe earth. of the Earth, as from Eaſt to Weft, Mat: 24: 17. : 

4 Afﬀeer it *a voice 5 roareth : be thundreth with the 


voice of bis exceliency &, and he will not ſtay / chem 


. . o - 
: PC29:2. when his voice is heard. : 
;7i:e. After the Lightning. For though the Thunder be in or- 
\ der of Nature before the Lightning, yer the Lightning is ſeen be- 
fore the Thunder is heard. k Or, with his excellent, or high, or lofty 
. Voice, both loud and full of Majeſty and Awfulneſs. / Or, delay. 
Heb. take them: by the heel, as Facob did El#u in the Womb, to delay 
orſtop him fromentring into. the World before him. » Either 1. 
the Lightnings ſpoken of in the beginning of the Verſe. Burt theſe 
do not ſtay till his Voice be heard, but come before it, Orrather, 
2: 'The Rains and Storms, of which he ſpoke beforezand will ſpeak 


©—_- wx" anger 


again, v: 6. : +: 
* ch's:o: , 5 God tbundreth marvellouſly» with his yoice.* great 
36:26. things doth be, which we cannot comprebend 0. 

EE” With a wonderful and terrible noiſe, and ſo as to produce ma- 
ny wonderful effeQs,as the breaking down of great and ſtrong Trees 
or Buildings, the killing of Menin a ſtupendious manner &c. o E- 
ven in the courſe of Nature,and in viſible things : which allmen 
ſee,turt ſcarce any can givethe true andſatisfaftory reaſons of them, 
for the greateſt Philoſophers ſpeak only by gueſs,and are greatly di- 
vided among themſelves about them. And therefore itis notſtrange 
if the ſecret and deep counſels of Divine Providence be out of our 
reach ; and it is great arrogancy in thee, O Jeb, to conſure them, 
* PC. 145: becauſe thou doſt not fully underſtand them. | 
36.7. 475 $6 For *® hefaith to the ſnow,be thou os the earth pe 
FHeb: ana likewiſe to the ſmall rain: and to the great rain of 
#oche his ſtrength 9, 
rs of p By his powerful Word and Will the Snow is made inthe Air, 
| n4;!0and falls upon the Earth where and when he ſeeth fit. 9 7: e. Thoſe 
'#Re ſhowers great tormsor ſhowers of Rain which come with great force and ir- 
of rainof reſiſtible violence- 
bir frength > He ſealeth up the hand of every man 7, that all 

men may know his work 5. | 

r By theſe great Snows and Rains he drives Men out of the Fields 
and ſealsor binds up their hands from all that Work, and drives 
them hometo their Houſes and in a manner ſhuts them up there.See 
Gen; 7: 16. Exod: 9: 19. Or, By his Handyors Power ( i. e. By thoſe 
powerful Works of his Hind here mentioned ) he ſealeth, or fbutteth 
»p, or keeperh cloſe every man, to wit, in his Houſe, asthe Beaſts in 
their Dens, v: 8. 5 That Men being hindred from AQtion and their 
own work, and ſobeing idle and art perfett leiſure, may fall into a 
ſerious contemplation of theſe,and other greatand glorious Works 
of God. Or, that he ( 7. e. every man, as was now expreſſed ) may | 
know ( or enquire into, or take an account of ) all his work-men: for | 
which the proper ſeaſon is when they are all bindred from their 
work, and brought together into the Houſe. 

8 Then » the beaſts go into dens «, and remain in 


their places. 
5 In great Rains or deep Snows. u For ſhelter and comfort. 
9 f Out of the ſouth x cometh the whirlwind y: and 


gold z out of the F north. 

x Heb. out of the inner chamber; as the Southern part of the World 
tHeb:[cat-1s called, becauſe in a great part of it was, and is hid and unknown 
| "pering to thoſe who live in the Northern Hemiſphere, in which Jobs ha- 
wind; bitation lay ; Or, out of the chambers of the South, as it is more large= 

+ ly expreſſed, Jebg- 9. for this is oppoſed to the North in the fol- 
lowing Clauſe» »y Violent and ſtormy Winds: which in thoſe parts 
moſt ncncly came out of the Sourh,whence they are called wh:rl- 
winds of the South, Zech: g: 14. So alſo 1a; 21: 1+ zi;e. Cold and 
freezing Winds, which generally come from that quarter. 


PEN. * By the breath of Ged a froſt is given: and the 
mY ' breadth of the waters is ſtraitned 6. 


of - 


—_ WO 


ww 


to puniſh in that kind. / i: e For Gods Land, whereby he under- rd. 


| ſtands, either 1. The Land which he favoureth, and where his Ser- 


vants live, ſuch as Cana#x was: which for that reaſon God blefled 
with Rain, as is noted Deut: 11: 12. Pſal; 68: 9, 10. But in Jobs time 
Gods people were not in Canaan,but in Egypt, where little or no Rain 
fell. Or, 2. The uninhabited or deſert parts of the World, which 
may be called Gods Land peculiarly, becauſe it is immediately and 
only under Gods care, as being not regarded nor poſſeſſed by any 
man. Forit 1s noted as a ſpecial a& of Gods Providence, that he 
cauſeth Rain to fall upon ſuch places, Jos 38. 26, 27. Or 3. his Earth, 
as 1t may be rendred, to wit, the whole Earth, which is ſaid to be 
the Lords, Plal. 24. 1. and 50.12, and which may be here oppoſed to 
a Tribe, orlittle part ofthe Earth. And ſo this may note a gener- 
al Judgment by exceſſive Rains inflifted upon the whole Earth, and 
all its Inhabitants, even the Univerſal Deluge: which then was in a 
manner of freſh memory, which came in a great meaſure out of the 
Clouds. And thus theſe two firſt Members ſpeak of Corre&ion,and 
the laſt of Mercy. m For the comfort and benefit of Mankind by 
cooling and cleanſing the Air and refreſhing and improving all the 
Fruits of the Earth, and other ways. 


14 Hearkenunto this, O Job : ſtand ſtill, and con- 


' ſider the wondrous works of God 5. 


z If there be ſo much matter of wonder and adoration inthe moſt 
obvious and ſenfible works of God, how wonderful muſt his deep 
and ſecret Counſels and Judgments be ? And therefore it would ber- 
ter become thee humbly to admire, and quietly to ſubmit to them, 
than to murmure or quarrel with them. 


15 Doſt thou know when God diſpoſed them o, and 


cauſed the light of his cloud to ſhine p ? 

o To wit, the things before mentioned, the Clouds, Rain, Snow 
Thunder and Lightning, and other Meteorss Did God ask Coun- 
ſel from thee ro acquaint thee withtis Counſels in the producing 
and erdering of them,when and where,and in what manner he ſhould 
diſpoſe them? God ordereth all theſe things not as it pleaſeth thee, 
but as he thinks meet, and in like manner he diſpoſeth of all humane 
Affairs, and of thine among the reſt. p Which may be underſtood 
either 1.0f che Light of the Sun breaking through the Clouds, when 
it 15 moſt glorious and comfortable. But though this Light break 
through the Clouds, yet it is very improper to call it the light of the 
Clouds, Or. 2. The Lightning,which is properly ſo called, as be- 


: Ing produced by and ina Cloud. Or, 3. The Rain-bow, which is 
; a light{ome and glorious Work of God, and therefore not likely to 


be omitted in this place,and which is ſeated in a Cloud, which alſo 
may well be called Gods Cloud, becauſe therein God puts his Bow,as 
the Rain bow is called, Gen: 9. 13. | 

16 Doſt thou know the balancings q of the clouds ; 
the wondrous works of him which is perfe& i» know- 
ledge r ? : 

q How God doth as it were weigh and ſuſpend the Clouds in Ba- 
lances, ſo that although they are ponderous and full 'of Water, yet 


; they are by his power keptup in the thin Air from falling down u- 


pon us in ſpouts and floods, as ſometimes they have done and gene- 
rally would do, ifnot over-ruled by an higher Providence. »r Who 
exattly knows the weighr. Theſe are effe&s and evidences of his in- 
finite Power and Knowledge. ; 

17 How thy garments are warm s, when he quieteth 


the earth # by the ſouth wind « ? 

s How and why thy Garments keep thee warm;of which as there 
are ſome natural cauſes, ſo it is certain that they are not ſufficient 
to doit without Gods bleſſing,as experience ſhews, Hagg: |: 6.7 :: & 
The Air about the Earth. » Which -though ſometimes ir brings 
Tempeſts, wv: 9: yet commonly it uſhereth in hot weather, Luke 12% 
55. asthe North-wind brings cold, v. 9. Or, fom the South-wind, 1.2. 
from the Tempeſt which was noted to come out of the South, wv» 9+ 
Heb: fom or by the South,» e. by the Suns coming into the Southern 
Parts, which makes the Air quiet and warm. ; 

18 Haſt thou with him * ſpread out the skie x 2yhich 


isſtrong y, and as amolten looking-glaſs 2. : 
x Waſtthou his Co-worker or affiſtant in ſpreading out the skie 


Pſal. 147. ® *:e. By the Word of God,as this very Pheaſe is explained, Pſal; 
17.18, 33: 6 ms will or appointment,ro which as the principal cauſe, 

all theſe Works ate aſcribed. þ The Froſt dries up the Waters in 
great meaſure, and bringeth the remainder into a narrower com- 
Paſs, as we ſce, 


like a Tent or —_ over theEarth? Or, canſt thou ſpread out 
ſuch another Skie ? Then indeed thou maiſt with ſome colour pre® 
tend to be privy to his Counſels,and to judge ofhis Works. y Which 


though it be very thin and tranſparent, yer is alſo firm and com- 
paces 


r,cleay. 
By cauſing them firſt to.receive and re- 7:15 weari. 


THeb. the 
cloud of his 


* Gen'.6 


Chap. XXxv1 bh 


feb. gu 


"[Tim. 
6:16, 

a6. 
'ha,, 


Þ 


1G 


4 j 
P. 0 


(ch:32.14 


'Heb.vold 


XXXVIL. 7 O 


pact and fredfaſt, and of great force when it is bent up, = Made 
of Braſs or Steel, as the mianner then was. : 

19 Teach us what we ſhal ſay unto him @ 3 bs we 
cannot * order our ſpeech b by reaſon of darknels c. 

a i.e. Unto God, either by way of Apology for thee: or rather 
by way of debate anddiſpuration with him abour his Counſels and 
Ways ; about which we know not what to ſay, and therefore are 
willing to be taught by thee who prerendeſt to ſuch exquiſite know 
Jedce of theſe macters. So is is a reproof of his preſumption and ar- 
rogance. 6 We know neither with what words or matter, nor in 
what method and-manner, to maintain diſcourſe with him, or 
plead againſt him. The words our ſpeech, are eafily underſtood our 
of the former Clauſe of the Verſe. c Both becauſe of the dark- 
neſs ofche matter, Gods counſels and ways being a great depth,and 
far out of rezch ; and b:cauſe of the darkneſs or blindneſs of our 
minds. 

20 Shall it be told him that I ſpeak d? I a man 
ſpeak e, ſurely he ſhall be ſwallowed up f- 

a4 Heb, that I will ſpzak. Shal I ſend, or who dare carry a Chal- 
lenge from me to God, ora Meſhge that 1 am ready and defirous 
to debate with him concerning his proceedings? This indeed thou 
haſt done in effe&, but far be ſuch preſumprioa from me. e If a 


B, 


and not preſme to quarrel or diſpute with him,as thou, O 70b,haft 
done. 3 Heb. He aoth not, or will nor behile,to wit, with rel} pe& or 
approbation: he beholdeth them afar off with ſcorn and conrempt- 
2 2:e, Huch asare wile in their own eyes,that lean to their own un- 
derftandings,and deſpiſe all other men jn compariſon of themſelves 
and icorn all their Counſels;thar are ſo puffed up with the opinion 
of their own Wiſdomythat they dare contend with their Maker and 


timares to be Jobs fault,and to be the true reaſon why God did net 
reipeCt nor regard him, nor his Prayers and Tears,as Job complain= 
ed. Ando this is allo atacit advice and exhortation ro Job to be 
humble and little in his own eyes,if ever he expeCted or delited any 
favour from God. 


C H AP. XXXVIII. ; 


The Lerd anſwers Job, 1 —= 3, declareth his works of Creation ; the 
foundation and the meaſures of the earthy 4 ———- 6. the Stars, rhe Sea 
and its bounds, T-——11, , the morning and its fight, 12-—- 15. the 
deprh of the jea:the gates and ſhadow of death : the breadth of the earth, 
16 -—- 18, theplaceof light and darkneſs ; the treaſures of ſnow and 
hail for battel, 19— 23+ the eaſt-wind, ſprings, and rain for the earch, 
24— 30* the planets, ordinances of heaven, and their deminion on the 
earth : clouds and lightning, 41— 735. Wiſdom and underſtanding 


Chap. XXXVIII 


preſume to cenſure his Counſels and Attions. Which he hereby in-. 


Man ſhould be ſo bold and venturous to enter the Liſts with God. 


f V'Vith the ſenſe of Gods infinite Majeſty and ſpotleſs Purity, 
21 And g now þ men ſee not 3 the bright light which 


7sin the ciouds &, but the wind paſſeth /.and cleanſerh 


them 22. : 
s Or, For, as this Particle is oft rendred ; the following words 


containing a reaſon of thoſe which go before. þ This Parricie 15 et- 


ther 1+ A note of time, and ſo it intimates aſudden change which 
then was in rhe Weather, which having been very dark, began now 
to clear up ; Or rather, 2. A note of inference to uſher in the Ar- 
gument. # Either 1+ do not obſerve ( as ſeeing it oft uſed ) nor con- 
ſider theſe glorious works of God ; or 2. cannot behold, or ar leaſt 
not gaze upon it. k Or,zn the Skies ; For the Hebrew word ſignifies 
both Clouds-and Skies. This is to be underſtood, either 1- of Erighr 
and lightſome Clouds : or rather 2,of the Sunz which is oft and 
emphatically called Light, as was noted before, and here rhe bright 
Light : which men oft times cannot behold, either when 1t 1s cove- 
red with a black and thick Cloud ; or when, as it follows, the Skie 
is very clear, and conſequently the Sun ſhine is very bright. And 
therefore it is not ſtrange if we cannot ſee God, who dwelleth in 
darknels, 1 Kings 8. 12. nor diſcern his Counſels and ways which are 
covered with grear obſcurity ; and if we dare not approach to him, 
with whom is, as it here follows, terrible Majeſty ; and if we pre- 
ſame to do ſo, we muſt ne:ds be ſwallowed up, as was faid v. 20. 
1 Or rather, when ( as this Particle is oft uſed ) the wind paſſeth. m Ei- 
ther theClouds. :.e.cleanſerth the Air from them;or the Skies by dri- 
ving away thoſeC!ouds which darkned it- 


22 +Fair weather » cometh out of the north s : with 
God 5s terribie Majeſty p. 


x Or, »hen ( which Particle may be well underſtood out of the 
foregoing verſe ; and ſothis may be a further deſcription ofthe 
rime when men cannot ſee or gaze upon the Sun,namely when) fair 
Weather, &c. Heb. Gold, either 1. properly. And to this may be no- 
ted asa wonderful Work of God, that the choiceſt of Metals, to wit, 
Gold ſhould be found in and fetched out ofthe bowels of cold Nor- 
thera Countries. Or, 2. Metaphorically, as this word is oft uſed of 
bright and ſhining things ; as we read of golden Oyl, Zech. 4.12.and 
we call happy times golden days. And ſo bright and fair Weather 
may well ve called golden, becauſe then rie Sua gilds the Air and 
Earth with ics beams, which alſo are called by Poets golden Beams, 
ei. e From the Northern Winds which ſcatrer the Clouds, and 
clear the Ski-, Prov. 25. 23+ þ And therefore weneither can nor may 
approach too nezr to him nor ſpeak preſumptuouſly or irreverent - 
ly to him, orofhim. Andſo this is the Application of what 
he had now ſaid, that we could not ſee the Sun,&c. much leſs God 
and withal it is an Epiphonema or Concluſion of the whole forego- 
ing Difcourſe. Thoſe glorious Works of his which TI have deſcribed 
arc Teſtimonies of that great and terrible Majeſty whici is in him ; 
which ſhould cauſe us to fear and reverence him,and not to behave 


_ ourſelves ſo infolently towards himzas Jeb hath done. 


23 Touching the Almighey,* we cannor find him out gq; 


. he * ;s excellent in power r, and in judgment 5, and 
' in plenty of juſtice z ; + he will not aftlict «, 


9 To wit, to perfeQion,as it is expreſſed Job 11- 7. We cannot 
comprehend him : his Beeing, Power, VViſdom, J uſtice, and his 
Counſels proceeding from them are paſt our finding out”: andrthere-: 
fore it is moſt abſurd and intollerable that thou, O Job, preſameſt 
ro cenfure what thou doſt not underſtand. r And therefore as he 
doth not need any unrighteous ation to advance himſelf,fo hecan- 
not do it, becauſe all ſuch thingsare aCts and evidences of impoten- 
oy or weakneſs.s 3. e. In the juſt and righteous adminiſtration of 
Judgment, as this word is oft uſed, and as thething it ſelf,and the 
following words plainly evince And this he adds,to intimate that 
although God had indeed a power ro cruſh Job, or any other Man, 
yet he never did nor can exerciſe that power unjuſtly or tyrannical- 
ly,as Job ſeemed to infinuate. * In great and perfe& Juſtice, ſuch 
a$ no Man can juſtly reproach, « To wit, without juſt cauſe, and 
above meaſure: as it may and muſt be limited both from the fore- 
going words, and from Jobs Complaint which was of that very 
thing ; and from the nature of the thing, becauſe otherwiſe this 
Propoſition that Ged wil net affii#.isnot ſimply and univerſally true. 

theſe laſt words may be joyned with the former ; and ſo ſome 
render the place,He is excel in power and or but,or yet,he will nor af. 
fi any Man with judgment and much (i.e. too much ) juſtice, i: e. 
with extremicy or rigour of Juſtice. 


24 Mendo therefore fear him x : he reſpeteth not 


7 any that are wiſe of heart z. 

* Fey this cauſe, to wit, becauſe of Gods infinite and excellent 
Perfe&tions,and eſpecially thoſe mentioned in the foregoing Verſe, 
mer do, or ſbould( for the Future Tenſe is of uſed Potenrially as He- 
brecians know ) fear or reverence him, and humbly ſubmit to him, 


feedeth the Lion and the raven 36 ——=— 41 


wind 6, and faid, 
4 7. e. B ganto debate the matter with him,as Job had deſired.4;:e. 
Our of a dark and thick Cloud, from which he ſent a terrible and 
tempeſtuous Wind,as the Harbinger of his Preſence. In this man- 
ner God appears and ſpeaks to him, partly becauſe this was his uſual 
method in thoſe times, as we ſee Exed: 19: i8; Numb: 9: 15, 16. See 
allo 1 Kings 19: 11; Ezek; 1: 4.partly to awaken Job «nd his Friends, 
ro the more ſerious and reverend attention to his words ; partly to 
ceſtific his diſpleaſure both againſt Job,and againſt his three Friends, 
and partly that all of them mighr be more deeply and throughly 
humbled and abaſed within themſelves, and prepared the better ro 
receive, and longer to retain the inſtructions which God was about 
to give them. | 
2 Who #sthise that darkeneth counſel 4 by words 8 
without knowledge f? 
c Ir Is aqueſtion of admiration and reprehenfion. What and 
where is he that preſumeth to talk ar this rate ? This language be- 
comes not a Creature,much leſs a Prefeſſour of Religion. The per- 
{on here deſigned is not Elibs who ipoke laſt, but Job who had [' - 
ken moſt, as is apparent from v; 1: and from. Chaps 42: 3: where 
Job takes the following reproof tg himſelf, and from the following 
Diſcourſe wherein God convinceth J by diverſe of the ſame kind of 
arguments which Elihu had uſed againſt him. d Either xr. his own 
Counſel; i:e. thar exprefſerth his own mind darkly and doubtfully 
Burt that was not Jobs fault. He ſpake his mind too plainly and free- 
ly. Or rather, 2. Gods Counſel, which is called ſimply Counſel by 
way of eminency, as the word and the commandment are oft put for 
the word and command of God, For the great matter of the diſpute 
berween Job and his Friends, was concerning Gods Counſel,and Pur-= 
poſe,and Providence in affliting Jeb ; which being a wiſe, and juſt, 
and glorious ation of God, Job had endeavoured ro obſcure and miſ- 
repreſentand cenſure. And Gods Decrees and Judgments are fre- 
quently called his Counſels, as Pſal: 33: 11. Prov: 19: 21:1/a: 28:29: 48s 
2: 23, e God dothnot charge Jeb, as his three friends had done, 
with hypocriſie and wickedneſs in the courſe of life. nor with Athe= 
iſtical Opinionsof God, or his Providence, as ſome of the Hebrew 
Writers do, but confines his Reproofro his hard Speeches. f Pro- 
ceeding from ignorance,and miſtake,and iriconſiderareneſs;nor from 
malice or rage againſt God; as his friendsaccuſed him. 


3 * Gird up now thy loins g like a man ; for I will 


lenge,Chap: 13: 22. andelſewhere. þ Or, I w!l ack thee queſtions ; 
which he doth in the following Verſes. 

4 * Where waſt thouz, whenT laid the foundati- 
ons of the earth & ? declare, 
ding /. 


Foundarion or lower part of the whole World,and ſettled ir as firm 
and faſt upon its own Center as ifit had been builc upon the ſureft 
Foundations / Bur if chou art ignorant of theſe manifeſt and vi- 
ſible Works, do nor pretend to the exatt knowledge of my ſecret 
Counſels and myſterious Providences. 

5 Who hath laid the meaſures thereof mm, if thon 
knoweſt ? or whohath ſtretched the line » upon it ? 

m Who hath preſcribed how long and broad and deep it ſhould 
be. n To wit,the meaſuring Line to regulate all irs Dimenſions, ſo 
as might be moſt convenient both for beaury and uſe. 


are joyned and faſtened rogether, and in which; next tothe Foun- 
dations, the ſtability of any Building does ccnfift. The ſenſe is, 
VVho was it that did build this goodly Fabrick,and eſtabliſh it ſo 
firmly that it cannot be moved without a Miracle. 

7 When the morning ſtars q fang cogether, || and all 
the ſons of God r ſhouted for joy s. 


and praiſe God, objeftively, becauſe they give men ample occaſion 
to do it 1n regard of their glorious Light and tupendious Motions, 

&c. Compare Pſal; 19: 1: & 148: 1, &c. But 1: theſe Stars are 
4a L 2 nor 


ff Aer theLORD anſwered Job « * outof the whirl- 


in the heart of man ; and in his works more than we can underſtand: he 


* Nahb.1.3 


demand of theeb and + anſwer thou me. *Ch-40;7. 
£ As Warriours then did for the Batre); Prepare thy ſelf for the T Heb. 
Combare with me, which thou baſt ofc deſired. I accepr of thy Chal- make me 


oP. 


+ ifchou haſt underſtan- B, al.rog 


: Pov:8.29. 
# Then thou waſt no wherezthou hadſt no beeing ; thou art bur & 3 __ 
of yeſterday ; and doſt thou preſume to judge of my eternal Coun-+F Heb if 
ſels! I made the World without thy help,and therefore can govern chou know. 
it without thy Counſel, & I donor need thee to be theController or eſe undere 
Cenſurer of my Works. k When I made the Earth,which is as the ſranding; 


s Whereupon are the + foundations therof + faſte- , xc. 


ned 0? orwho laid the corner-ſtone thereof p ? Sockers. 
o This ſtrong and durable Building hath'' go -Fomndations,but in + Heb: 

Gods Powerand V Vord which hath marvelleoſly: li it up- 1642 #9 

on it ſelf. p By which the ſeveral VValls and parrs oftte Building ſcale 


. {| Or then. 
q Either 1+ The Stars properly ſo called, who are faid to ſing So Gr. 


: 

: 

"1 
. 


Chap, ZXXVIIE | 


Gods Praiſes for the Founding of the Earth. 
not created when the Earth was founded, 

. There is no fatisfa&ory reaſon given why all the 
be called Morn:ng-ſtars, eſpecially when t 
by that name. 


| 
! 


fequent in thisand ſome other Books 0 
ge!s, who may well be called Stars, 
and particularly Miniſters of Gods Word are caliea, Dan: 8: 10:& 12. 
3; Rey: 1: 16, 20. and Morning-Ftars, becauſe of their excellent luſtre 
and glory, for which they are called Angels of Light, 2 Cor: 11: 14: 
and Chriit for the ſame reaſon is called the Mornmg-ſtar.Rev: 22; 16» 
7 The bleſſ:d Angels ; for Man not being yer made, God had then 
no other Sons ; and theſeare called the Sons of God, partly becauſe 
they had their whole beeing from him, and partly becauſe 
they were made partakers of his divine and glorious Image» And al 
theſe are ſaid to joyn in this work of praiſing God,probably becauſe 
none of the Angels were as yetfallen from their firſt eſtate, though 
they did fall within a very little time after Rejoyced in and bleſe 
ſed God for his works. Whereby he intimates, that they neither 
did adviſe or any way affiſt him in his works.nor diſlike or cenfure 
any of his works'as Job had prefumed to do with the works of his 
Providence, which are not inferiour to thoſe of Creation. | h 
$ * Or who ſhut up theſea with doors r, when it brake 


| * Genzr:9, S & b 
| forth « as if it had iſſued out of ths womb. 

5 Who was it, thou or 1, that did ſer bounds to the vaſt and ra- 
ging Ocean,and ſhut ic up as it were with Doors within 1ts proper 
place and ſtore-houſe, that it might nor overflow the Earth; which 
without Gods powerful reſtraintir would do? See Pſal_ 33. 7: 104e 
9. This ſenſe ſeems moſt proper,and to be confirmed by the follows 
ing Verſes. « Or, aftcr it had broken forth,to wit, from the womb or 
bowels cf the Earth; within which tke Waters were for the moſt 
part contained, Gen'1: 2. Compare 2 Per: 3: «. and out of which 
thy were by Gods command brought forth into the proper place 
or channel which God had appointed for tzem. 

9 When I made the cloud the ;;arment thereof *,and 


the chick darkneſs y a \wadling band for it 2. 

x When I covered it with Vapours and Clouds which ariſe out 
of the $22, and by Gods appointment hover above it, and cover it 
like a garment. 7 #: e. Black and dark Clouds, called Darknefs by 
an uſual Metonymy of the Adjun&t. So the ſame thing is repear- 
ed in other words after the manner. 'z Having compared the Sea to 
a New-born Infant, he continues in the ſame Metaphor, and makes 
the Clouds as Swadling-bands to keep the Sea within its bounds; 
though indeed neither Clouds, nor Air, nor Sands, and Shores, 
can bound the Sea, but it is God alone who doth it in and with 
theſe things. ( | 

Io And ||* brake up for it my decreed place a,and ſet 


!Or, eſis. Þars, and doors b. 

| 2 i:e. Made thoſe Vallies or Channels, and hollow places in the 
Earth, which might ſerve for a Cradle to receive and hold this 
FJ grear and goodly Infant when it came out of the Womb. See Ger.1 
*Ch:26 10 9- 19. Plal; 33; 7. Or, ordained, or eftabliſhed my Decree upon Or con- 
|  cernng it. b 4, e. Fixed its bounds as ſtrongly as if they were fortifi- 
| +Heb. <ed with Bars and Doors. 

the pridee®f xx And ſaid, Hitherto ſhalt thou come, but no tur- 


thy waves. ther : and here e ſhall F thy proud waves f be ſtayed. 

e To wir, at the Sand and Shore of the Sea, Jer: 5; 22. f Which 
rage and ſwell as if they would over-whelm all the Earth. 

12 Haſt thou commanded the morning g fince thy 


days h? and cauſed the day-{pring to know his place z? 
'g ie. The Morning-light, or the Sun which is the caule of ir. 
Diaſt thou create the Sun and appoint the order and ſucceſſion of 
Day and Night? h Since thou waſt born. This work was not done 
by thee, but by me, and that long before thou waſt born. 7 To ob- 
ſerve the punttual rime when, and the point of the Heavens where 
it ſhould ariſe ; which varies every day. Was this thy contrivance 
+ Heb. or mine? 
wings. 12 That it might take hold of the + ends of the earth, 
*Ch:37:3, that the wicked might be {baken out of -it / ? 

& That this Morning-light ſhould in a moment ſpread it ſeIf over 
the Face of the whole Earth, from oneend of the Hemiſphere to 
the other. I From the Face of the Earth.And this effeft the Morn- 
light hath upon the wicked, partly becauſe ir diſcovers them, and 
drives them into their lurking holes ; whereas the darkneſs hides 
them and draws them forth and gives them opportunity ro execute 
their Villanies without obſervation, Jeb 24; 15, 16,17. and partly be- 
cauſe it brings them to condign puniſhment, the Morning being 
the moſt fit and the moſt uſual time for executing jud gment ; of 

 'wiichſee Pſal: 101; 8, & Jer. 21: 12. 
14 Itmis turned » as clay || tothe ſeal o, and they p 


ſtand q as a garment r. 

» To wit, the Earth mentioned in the next foregoing Verſe. » Is 
transformed and changed in its ſhape and appearance.o Or,by the ſeal! 
which makes a beautiful or valuable impreſſion upon that Clay, 
which in itſelf hath no form, nor worth, nor comelineſsin it. So 
the Earth, which in the darkneſs of the Night lies like a confuſed 

| heapwithouteither form or beauty, when the light ariſeth and 
ſhineth'upon it, appears; in excellent order and great glory. p Bj- 
ther 1. the Inhabitants of the Earth, and particularly the wicked, 
mentioned both in the. foregoing and following Verſes. Or, 2. 
more generally, the men and things of the Earth, whether Natur- 


ll Or oof 


or other Buildings. 9 7:e- Prefent themſelves to our views, for 
which that poſture of ſtanding is moſt convenient. Or, confi, or a- 
bide, or are conſtituted. r Wherewith the Earth is in a manner clo< 
thed and adorned as with a Garment; as the bleſſed God himſelf is 
ſaid to cover h:mſelf with light as with @ garment, Pal: 104: 2. 

15 And s fromthe wicked their lighttis withholden, 


and * the high arms « ſhall be broken. 
s Or, But, for the following words ſeem to be added by way of 
oppoſition ro what went before. The Earrh,.and the Men, and the 


*Plcro:15 


not here the Obje&s or Matter, but the Authors or Inftruments of ; 


2. The Scars were 


but upon the fourth day. 
Stars ſhould 


here is but one Star known 
Or rather 2. the ſons of God,as it here follows,rthe 


latter Clauſe of the Verſe being explicatory of the former,as 13 moſt 
f Scripture,to wit, the An- 


as even Men of eminent note, 


al, as living Creatures, Herbs and Tees &c. Or artificial,as Houſes | 


things in it have the comfort and benefir of the Light, bur ſo have 


U 3. 


not the wicked. # 7; e, Their portion of Light: That Light which 
is enjoyed by others is withholden from them;either . by their own 
choice, becauſe they love and chooſe darkneſs rather thar light; or 
by the judgment of God, or the Magiitrate, by whom they are cut 
off from the light of the living,as it 1s called Job 33: 30: orat leaſt de. 
prived of their Peace,and Comfort, and Proſperity, which frequent- 
Iy goes under the name of Light 3n Scripture,and may be ſo called 
here by anelegant alluſion to the natural Light of the Sun mentio. 
ned before. « Their great ſtrength which they uſed tyrannically 
to the oppreſſion and cruſhing of others. 
16 Haſt thou entred into the || ſprings * of the ſea 2 
or haſt thou walked in the ſearch of the depth y ? 
x Heb: the Tears; i; e: the ſeveral ſprings out of which the Waters 
of the Sea flow as tears do from the eyes. y Haſt thou found out the !***: 
utmoſt depth & bottem of the Sea,which in divers places could ne- Heb. werpe 
ver be reached by the wiſeſt Mariner, or the longeſt Cables? Ang ** 
; how then canſt thou farhom the depths of my Counſels ? 
| 17 Have * the gates of death been opened unto « 
ad Pſcg: 13 
theez ? or haft thou ſeen the doors of the ſhadow of 
death a? 
2 Haſt thou ſeen,or doſt thou perfe&ly know the place and Nate 
' of the Dead ; the depths and bowels of that Earth in which the ge. 
| Nerality ofdead men are buried; or the ſeveral ways and methodsof 
Death; or the various ſtates and conditions of men after death?a The 
ſame thing repeated. 
I8 Haſt thou perceived the breadth of the Earth 6b ? 
declare c if thou knoweſt it all. 
b Doſt thouexa&ly know the whole Compaſs and all the parts of 
the Earth,and the ſftareand quality of all Countries, and of the men 
& things in them*cGive me an anſwer to theſeQueſtions,whichis far 
moreeafter to do,than te anſwer me to many other Queſtions which 
I could put ro thee about my ſecret Counſels and Providences, and 
the Realons of my dealing with thee as I do. 
I9 Where is the way 4 where light dwelleth e > and 
as for darkneſs where is the place thereof ? 
d Or rather, the place, as the next Clauſe explains it, and the 
Hebrew Phraſe will bear. e 7; e. Hath its conſtant and ſettled abode 
For in the place where Jeb lived, & in moſt other parts of the inha- 
bited Worldzit is like a Traveller that cometh & goeth continually 
every day. This may be referred, either 1. to the places under the 
two Poles, where firſt the light, and then the darkneſs continues 
for ſix Months together. Orrather 2+ ro the Sun the Fountain of 
Light. And as this is a Poetical Book, ſo this may be a Poetical 
Exprefſion andQueſtion, Whither goes the Sun when it departs from 
this Hemiſphere? Whereis the Tabernacle and the Chamber in 
which both ſacred. as Plal, 19. 4, 5. and profane Poets ſuppoſe the 
Sun to reſt ? Doſt thou know the place where the Sun when it ſets 
may be found, and whence thou canſt fetchit back again. For it is 
to be carefully obſerved that he ſpeaks not here of a bare and fime 
ple knowledge of this matter. which was plain and eaſe to Job, and 
many others,who were not ignorant that the Sun was the Fountain 
of Light, from whoſe approach Light comes, and by whoſe dee 
parture darkneſs is cauſed ; but of an operative Knowledge, even 
ſuch as could and did enable him to take it ro the bound thereof, as it 
follows v:20.And withal heſeems here to ſpeak notonly of the daily 
courſe and motion of the Sun, and the viciffitude of Day and 
Night, butallo and eſpecially of the firſt produ&ion of the Light 
which was before 70b was born, as is evident from wv: 21. And this 
makes the Queſtion moredifficult and more conſiderable, the ſenſe 
whereof may be this : Seing there was a time when there was no- 
thing but groſs and comforrleſs Darkneſs upon the face of theEarth, 
what way came light into the World ? Which was the place where 
Light dwelt at that time, and whence it was ferched? and whence 
came tharorderly conſtitution and conſtant ſucceſſion of Light and 
Darkneſs ? Was this rhy work? Or waſt thou-privy to it, or a 
Counlſellour or Aſſiſtant in it ? Or was it not done by me alone 
icng betore thou nadſt a beeing. 
20 That thou ſhouldeſt take itf || to the bound there- _. 
of g, and that thou ſhouldeſt know hb the paths to the iO + 


houſe thereof z > 

fi: e: Taking, bring or lead its asthis Verb is oft uſed, as Exod; 
25: 2. Fſal. 68.29, compared with Eph; 4: 11. 1 Kings 3: 24. and 
17. lo. Hoſea 14: 2. And many other ſuch pregnant Verbs there are 
in the Hebrew Language having the ſignitication of two Verbs in- 
cluded in one. And this zt refers principally to the Light, and ſecon- 
darily to Darknejs,as the conſequent of the other. g 7: e. Its whole 
courie from the place of its abode whence it is ſuppoſed to come, to 
the end of its journey which itis to go. Didſt thou dire& or guide 
the Light or the Sun,that he ſhould at firſt take, and afrerward con- 
ſtantly continue in that courſe which now it holds ; that it ſhould 
gofrom Eaſtto Welt, and rife ſometimes in one point or part of 
the Heaven,and ſometimes in another,% that its days journey ſhould 
be longer in one ſeaſon of the year, and ſhorter in another ? This 
regular and excellent courſe muſt needs be the effe& of great Wiſe 
dom. And whoſe wiſdom was it? thine or mine? þh To wit, pra= 
Qtically, ſo as to direQ or lead it in the manner now expreffed. 

; Where thou maiſt find it, and whence thou maiſt fetch it. 
21 Knowelt thou it becauſe thou waft then born? or 


becauſe the number of thy days ;s great ? 
k An ironical Queſtion : If thou pretendeſt that thou knoweft 
theſe things, and canſt readily anſwer theſe Queſtions, how comeſt 
thou by this knowledge ? Was it from hence becauſe thou waſt born 
| when I made the World, and that firſt conſtitution of the Light 
and Darkneſs in that order and ſucceſſion which continues to this 
| day, and thereby hadſt the opportunity of inſpe&ing my Works, 
' and ſeeing whence the Light came, and becauſe thou haſt gained 
this knowledge by long experience, as having lived ever ſince 
the Creation of the World until this time? Whereas in truth thou 
, art but of yeſterday, aud kneweſt nothing, as was ſaid, Chap: 8: 9. But 
the wordsare and may be otherwite rendred, doſt, or didſt thou 
know, either by thy own remembrance: or by the information of 
others, that thou waſt then born ( to wit, when I made the World? 
Or didſt thou know that vhou fhonldeſt then be born,then,to wit, when thou. 


waſt born? Or, dia thou then know,the two Hebrew Particles being 
; traniplaced; 


l Or,cur. 


Chap. XXXV1I, 


G 


Tits 8; 


v0, ſep. XXXVITE. 


Cie 


WCefe 


= 4 
f, 


tranſplaced, as 1s not unuſual in that Lancuige,thet then ſhould be 
born ? How couldſt thon know this when thou hadſt no being? ) ad 
that the numbcr of thy davs ſhould be great? That thou ſhouldſt live 
ſo long as thou haſt jived. Thou cou, 4ſt neither foreknow the time 
of thy Birth nor the length of thy Life. Or, and is the number of thy 
days great ? i.e. So great that it reacheth to the time ofthe Worlds 
Creation, 

>» Haſt thou entred into the treaſures of the ſnow ? 
or haſt thou ſeen the treaſures of the hail /. £ 

{ Dof# thou know where I have laid up thoſe vaſt quantities of 
Snow and Hail which Idraw forth when I ſee fit ? doſt thou know 
the cauſes of them,and the way to produce them ? Bur if thou art 
unacquainted with theſe treaſures, it is intolerable preſumption in 
thee fo pretend that thou knowelt thoſe treaſures of Wiſdom which 
Iye hid in my own Breaſt. ; 

22 Which » I have reſerved againſt the time of 


trouble », againſt the day of battel and war * 

mm i.e Which Snow, and eſpecially Hail. « 7.e. When I in« 
tend to bring trouble or calamity upon any Country or Peopte for 
their ſins, or for their trials. Or, ag2inft the time of the enemy, 3. e; 
when I intend to puniſh mine or my Peoples Enemies, and ro fight 
againſt them with theſe Weapons: Of which ſee inſtances, Exod: 
9: 14. Joſ: 10:11: Compare 1 Sam. 7:10; Jos 36; 31: Iſa: 30: 30: 

24 By what way o is the light parted p, which ſcatter- 


eth the eaſtwind upon the earth q ? | 
o Noſt thou know all the Cauſes, Means,Methods, and Circum- 
ſtances of this Work of God ? p Or, d:ſþerſed,or difiributed,to wit, 
in the Air, or upon the Face of the Earth. By Light he underſtands 
either 1. the Lightning, which breaks forth ſuddenly out of a 
Cloud, and with ſtrange {wiftneſs diſperſerh it ſelf, and flieth from 
Eaſt ro Weſt, as is noted Match: 24; 27. Burt this word Light put 
by it ſelf, and being underſtood properly, is conſtantly ufed in this 
Book for the Light of the Sun, and never for the Lightning, and 
where it is meant of the Lightning,there is ſome other word added 
to it, as Chap: 37% I5: where it is called the light of his Cloud, And. 
beſides, he ſpeaks of the Lightning in the next verſe; which were 
ſuperfluous if it were here mentioned. Or rather, 2. of the light 
of the Sun, which is commonly called /ig4t without any other word 
added to it, as Job 3: 4,9,16:& 24: 14:&.25: 3, &c And this light 
of the Sun, is variouſly parted or diſtributed in the World, ſhining 
in one place and time, when it doth not ſhine 1n another, or for a 
longer time, or with greater brightneſs and power and vertue than 
it doth in another. All whichare the effe&s of God's infinite Wiſe 
dom and Power, and ſuch as wereout of Job's reach to underſtand, 
or at the leaſt roeff:&. 9q i. e, Which light ſcatrereth,&c. 7. e. raiſeth 
the Eatt-wind, and cauſeth it to blow hither and thither upon the 
Earth. For as the Sunis juſtly called by the Poets,and others,the Fe- 
ther of he Winds, becaule he draws up thoſe Exbalations which give 
matter to the Winds, and for other reaſons; fo in particular the 
Eaſt-wind is oft obſerved to riſe together with the Sun,from which 
alſo it hath both its Latine and Greek Name. But ſome make this a 
diſtia& Queſtion from the former, and render the words thus, And | 
- (repeat, by which way ) the Eaſft-wind (under which all the other | 
Winds may be comprenended ) ſcatrereth it ſelf upon the Earth, i. e. * 
Wheace the Winds come, and whither they go, which is mention- 
ed as a ſecret in Nature, Job 3: 8: and how it comes to paſs that 
they blow in ſuch ſeveral manners,and with ſuch various and even 
contrary effe&s, Or thus, and by which way the Eaſt-wind ſcattereth * 
(to wir, the Clouds, or other light things : for this is noted in 
Scripture to be a moſt vehement Wind, and to ſcatter the Clouds, 
Ezoa; 14: 21: Jonah 4: 8:) upon the Earth ; 1. e. Whence it comes 
to paſs that the Exſt-wind was ſo violent and furious. But the words 
may be rendred thus, Which (z. e. which light of che Sun, or 
when it, to wit, this Lighr,) ſcattereth it ſelf ( as divers here render 


confeſſed) from (the prefix Mem being underſtood, as it is very fre- 
quently in the Hebrew Text ) the Eaſt ( for this Hebrew Word 
doth not only ſignifie the Eaſtern Wind, but alſo. the Eaſt, or the 
Eaſtern part of the Heavens or Earth, as Ezek: 4c: 19: & 42: 16: 
Habak: 1: 9. and in many other places, ( anf Kedem, the root of this 
word is conftantly ſo uted } upon or ever the Ear: b, all over the Exrth, 
And rhis is juſtly-mentioned as a wonderful! Work of God, That as 
ſoon as ever the Sun ariſeth, it parteth or 1carrereth its light in 
an inſtant,from one end of rhe Hemiſphere to anorher : but this I 
propoſe with ſubmiſſion. : 

25 Who bath divided a water-courſe for the overflow- 
ing of waters r? ora way for the lighting of thun- 
der s, 

7 For the Showers of rain which come down out of the Clouds, 
orderly,moderately,and gratually,as ifthey were conveyed in Pipes 
or Ch:nnels; which, without the care of God's Providence, would 
fall contuſedly, and altogether ; and, inſtead of refreſhing, would 
over-whelm the Earth. s 7. For that Lighroing nikbreating 
out of che Cloud with violence. cauſeth Thunder. Or,for Lightning 
and Thunder, Who opened a paflage for them out of the Cloud, in 
Which rhey were impriſoned ? And theſe are here joyned with the 
Rain,becauſe they are commonly accompanied with great Showers 
of Rain ; which 1s here noted as a wonderful work of God,that Fire 
and Warer ſhould come out of the ſame Cloud ? 

26 Tocauſe it to rain # on the earth 2ybere no man 
25 ; onthe wilderneſs wherein there is no man « ! 

# Thar the Clouds being broken by Lightning and Thunder 
might pour down Rain. #« Towit, to water thoſe parts by art and 
induſtry,as is uſualin cultivated and inhabited places. Which makes 
this work of DivineProvidence more neceſſary and more temarkable 
In providing for the relief of the wild Beaſts and Plants and other 
fruits on theſe forſaken Lands, which otherwiſe would periſh with 

ought. 

Uilc197. 27 * To fatisfie « the deſolate and waſte ground, and 
A to cauſe the bud of the tender herb to ſpring forth x. 

_ u ByRaining not ſparingly,but liberally and abundantly upon it. 
& There being many excellent and uſeful Herbs found in Deſart 
Places, which otherwiſe would be utterly negle&ed and deſpiſed: 


this Word, thar conjugation being often ufed reciprocally, as is 


28 Hath the rain afather y ? or who hath begotten 
the drops of the dew ? | 

y To wit, beſides me, Is there any Man vpon Earth that can be- 
get or produce Rain at hisplezſure ? No, this ismy peculiar work. 
And therefore ſeing thou knoweſt and canſt do rot!:ing as to rhe 
government of theſe ordinary effefts of Nature, hov great prefump- 
tions it to arrogate to thy ſelf the knowl:dge and management of 
the ſecret and myſterious affairs of my Providence in the difpolal of 
men. 

29 Out of whoſe womb came the ice 2 and the hoary 
froſt of heaven who hath gendred itz >» | 
2 What man either can produce them, or doth fully underſtand 
where or how they are engendred ? For Philoſophers jpeak of ricſe 
things only by gueſs, and the reaſons which ſeme afſ:gn for them 
are conſured by others,and ſo they will confute ene another to the 
end of the World, and prove nothing folidly, but rheir own igno- 
rance and the reatonableneſs of theſe Queſtions. | 

30 The waters are hid as ith a ſtone a, and the 


face of the deepb Þ is frozene 

ai. e. With Ice as hard as a Stone. 6 7, e. The great Sea, which 
is ofc called the deep, as Gent 7; 11: Pſal:107: 24: Iſa: 51: 10: & 63: 
13: 2 Cor: 11: 25: which in ſome parts is frozer, which 1s a won- 
derful work of God. 

21 Canſt thou bind c the ſweet influences « of || + 


+ Heb. 


taken. 


Pleiades e, or looſe the bands fof f Orion g? |! Or,theſzs | 
c i.e. Reſtrain or hinder them. Canſt rhou bind or ſhut up the V7 S*ars. 
Earth when they open it > 4 Or, the delights, becauſe this Conſtel- T Heb: C/= 


lation by its benign and opening Influences brings in the Spring, ##. 


the Herbs and Flowers, and other delights of the Earth. e Called, tHeb:Cef, 


alſo the Seven Stars Ofthis, and the following Conſtellation, ſee 
Jeb 9: 9, f By which it binds up the Air and Earth, by bringing 
ſtorms of Rain or Hai), or Froſt and Snow ; and withal binds or fteals 
the hands of Workmen, as is noted Job 37: 7« g This is another 
Conſtellation which riſeth in November, and brings in Winter. So 
the Senſ: of the Verſe is, Thou canſt nor blind the Earth when the 
one looſeth or openeth it, nor looſe or open ir, when the other binds 
or ſhutteth itup. 


32 Canſt thou bring forth þ || Mazzaroth # in his ſea> [Or; che 4 
ſon, orcanft thou | guide Arcturus & with his{ons [2 #welveSigns | 
h To wit, into view. Canſt thou make him toariſe and appear TH<b:guide 


inthy Hemiſphere? # By which he deſigns cicher r all the Con. 594: 
ſtellations, and eſpecially the Twelve Signs of the Zodizck: ox, ras 
ther, 2. ſome particular Conſtellation, as all the reſt here mention- 
ed are underſtood, But whether this be that which is called the 
Chamters of the South, Chap. 9: 7. Or, the Dog-Star, or ſomeother;, 
viſible in 7ob's Countrey, but not in ours, we may be ſafely and 
contented]y ignorant, feing even the Hebrew Dottors are nor agie- 
ed therein» k A Northern Conſtellation, of which ſee cn Job 9 9: 
I To wit, the leſſer Stars, which belong to it, and are placed ruund 
about it ; and attend upon it, as Children upon their Parents. 

23 Knoweſt thou  * the ordinances of heaven » ? 


canſtchou ſet thedominion thereof in the earth o . *Jer:3i:35- 


mn Either 1. ſimply, and by ſpeculation, doſt thou underſtand 


; them, Or, 2. pra&tically, or operatively, ſo as to eſtabliſh or rule 
, them,as the next Clauſe implies. » the laws which are firmly eſta- 
| bliſhed concerning their order, motion, or reſt, and their power- 


ful influences upon this lower World. Didſt thou give theſe Laws ? 
Or doſt thou perfe&ly know them ? o Canſt thou manage and over- 
rule their influences that they ſhall bring ſuch Seaſons and ſuch Weas 
ther as thou wouldſt have ? 
34 Canſt thou lift up thy voice to the clouds p, that 
abundance of waters may cover thee y ? 
? Either thutddering in them : or calling ro them with a lond 
voice, commanding them to rain. qi, e. Thy Land when it needs 
and requires rain. 
35 Canſt thou ſend » lightnings, that they may go, 
and ſay unto thee, + Here we are ; ? + Feb: bes 
r At thy pleaſure and upon thy errand. s An expreſſion of Ser- hold ws. 
vants declaring their readineſs ro obey their Maſters commands ; 
of which ſee Gen; 22:1. 1ſa: 6:8, 
36 * Who hath put wiſdom in the inward parts | 
or who hath given underſtanding to the heart « ? _ = 
# To wit, of a Man, Comp. 706 29: 27: Pſal;5 5: 6: Who gave thee w9e 9Y 
that wit and underſtanding which thou haſt, and which thou now 
uſeſt ſo arrogantly and wickedly,to contend with me,and to cenſure 
my aQtions ? » So he limits the former general expreſſion of the 
inward parts, The heart is made by the Hebrews the ſeat ofthe uf 
derſtanding, and is commonly put for it in Scripture. | 
37 || Who can number the clouds in wiſdom x, Or [Or declare 
f who can ſtay the bottles of heaven y ? An 
x Who can wiſely ſearch out and ExaQtly find the number of the FROM oo 
Clouds? They are numberleſs and filled with Water, as the next PIP ws 4 f: 
Clauſe implies. y To wit, the Clouds, in which the Rain is kept, as ie down, 
in Bottles, out of which God poureth them when he ſees fir. ; 4. Or: whin 
38 || When the duſt | groweth into hardneſfs,and the :5:; duſt is 
clods cleave faſt together z ? 4: Furned ints 
z This Verſe containeth a deſcription;cither 1, ofa creat drovetr ire 
when the Earth grows very hard,and cloſe,and compa& £4 oye ne ft Heb: a 


.the condition of the Earth preſently after the fall of che Rain, when £9474. 
-the Earth, which in time of drought was much of it diſſolved into 
'duſt, is now by the Rain cemented or united rogether. In either 
of theſe caſes it is the work of God: alone to keep the Clouds from 


pouring down more Rain upon the Earth. 
239 * Wilt thou hune the prey for the Lionz? 6r fill *Plal:1645 
+ the appetite of the young Lions. 21; 

a Is it by thy care and providence that the Lions who live in de- T Heb: the 
ſert places are furniſhed with neceſſary proviſions * This is juſtly © | 
mentioned as another wonderful work of God. 

409 When they couch in zheir deiis b, and abide inthe 
covert tolie 1a wait cf 
aL 73 6 When 


— 


7 O B. Chap. XXXV1Iilt. 


; Mat: 6:26: 


*Pla;29:9: 


*Chizg:s5: 


| Places. 


F Heb: of 


Chap. XXXI1X. 


| *PCal: 147; 


FTH<b Sal: 


FheExaFor. 


* 


6 When through Age and Infirmity they cannot range'abroad for 
Prey, as the young Lions do, but lie ſtill in their Dens, as 1t were 


expeting their Food from God, from whom alſo they receive it. 
© Watching till ſome Beaſt come that way upon which they may 


Prey. 

Al 
when his young ones Cry unto 
lack of meat. 

4 Having mentioned the nobleſt of Brute Creatures,he now men- 
tions one of the moſt contemprible and loathſome, to ſhew the care 
of Gods Providence over all Creatures, both great and ſmall. 
Which is more remarkable in Ravens, becauſe 1. they devour fleſh, 
which it isnoteaſie for them to find, 2. They are greedy, andeat 
very much. 3. They are generally negle&ted and forſaken by Man- 
kind. 4. Their young ones are ſoon forſaken by their Dams, that 
if God &id not provide for them in a more than ordinary manner, 
they would be ſtarved to death: 


H A P. XXXIX. 

Of the wild Goats and Hinds, 1----=4. The wild Aſe, 5-"»--8, The Uni- 
corn, Q === 12. The Peacock, Stork, and Oftrich, 13-----18. The Horſe, 
19-----25. The Hawk, the Eagle, 26-«==-30. Theſe Creatures nat 
fully known ts Job, nor governed by him, are Toffcient ts convince him, 
That he is mo fit Judge of the Counſels of God. : 

Nowelt thou the time 4 when the wild goats of 
the rock b bring forth c ? or canſt thou mark 


when the * hinds do calve « ? 

# Thar thou mayeſt then go to them, and afford them thy help 
in their hard work. 6 Which dwell in high and ſteep Rocks where 
no Man can come. See 1 Sam. 24. 2. Pſal. 104: 18» c Which they 
do with great difficvlty, as is implied Pſal, 29. 9g. and noted by 
Philoſophers, wherein they have no aſſiſtance from Men, bur onely 
from God. d When God by his ſecret inſtin& direQs them to a 
certain Herb called Seſeli, which, as Naturaliſts report, doth haſten 
and help forward their Birth» 

2 Canſt thou number the months that they fulfil ? or 


knoweſt thou the time when they bring forth e ? 

e Dolt thou exa&ly know when they d1d conceive,and when they 
will bring forth ; which is more uncertain in theſe, chan in other 
Creatures, becauſe there fall out many accidents which cauſe them 
to bring forth before their time,as thunder, P/al 29: 9. and other 
like cauſes -of ſudden fear, which may be many and various, in thote 
deſert places where they live. 


3 They bow themſelves f, they bring forth their 


young ones g, they caſt out their ſorrows 5. ; 
} Being taught by a Divine Inſtin& to diſpoſe themſelves in ſuch 
2 aur as may be fitreſt for their ſafe and eaſie bringing forrh. 
o wit, with great pain, being almoſt torn or rent aſuncer with 
dieth,as the word ſignifies : or,without any of that help, which 
ones, and their ſorrows 


* Who provideth for the Raven 4 his food ? 
God, they wander for 


aſts oft have. + 7.e. Their youn 


rerher Or; though (which Particle is oft underſtood ) they remir 
randy ther jorrows, i. e. Though inſtead of cheriſhing and fur- 
thering thaiy lame! which for their own eaſe and ſafery they 
ſhould do, "they Sobfhly hinder them, and ſo increaſe their own 


danger, yet by God's good Providence to them they are enabled to 
bring forth, as was now ſaid. -j 

4 Their young ones are in good liking z;, they grow 
up with corn k : they go forth, and return not to 
them /, 

# Or, grow trong, or fat ; notwithſtanding their great weakneſs 
cauſed by their hard entrance into the World; & Which they find 
and feed upon in the Fields. Or, as with corn, 7. e. as if they were 
fed with Corn ; the Particle as being oft deficient and to be ſup- 
plied» Or, :zn the Field, as this Ward in the Chaldee or Syriack Dia- 


le& ſignifies. / Finding ſufficient Proviſions abroad by the care and ; 


condutt of God's Providence, 
5 Who hath fent out the wild aſs free 2? or who 


hath looſed the bands of of the wild aſs » ? 

» Who hath given him this diſpoſition that he leves freedom,and 
avoids and hates that ſubje&ion which other Creatures quietly and 
contentedly endure? » Which is not to be underſtood privatively,as 
if God took off the bands which Men had put upon him,bur Nega- 
tively,that he keeps him fromreceiving the bands, and ſubmitting 
to the ſervice or Man. Who hath made him fo unrraftable and un- 
manageable ? Which is the more ſtrange,becauſe home-bred Afﬀes 
are fo tame and traQtable. 

6*Whoſe houſe LI have made the wilderneſs s,and the 

rren land p his dwellings. 

o Who uſeth and loveth ro dwell in Deſert Lands, Jer; 2; 24: 
Hoſ: 8: 3:9. p Called barren, not ſimply,for then he muit be ſtarved 
there, but comparatively, unmanaged,and therefore in a great mea- 
ſure unfeuitful Land. 

7 He ſcorneth g the multiude of the city r, neither 


regardeth s he the crying f of the driver . 

q Either 1. hefearerh them not when they purſue him, becauſe 
he is ſwifr, and can eaſily efcape them. Or, 2+ he values them nor, 
nor any proviſions nor advantages which he may have from them, 
but prefers a vagrant and ſolitary lite in the Wilderneſs before 
them. Or, 3. he diſdains to ſubmit himfelfre them, and reſoluce- 
ly maintains his own freedom. r He mentions the City rather than 
the Country, ly,becauſe there is the greateſt Multitude of Peo- 
ple to purſue,& overtake,and ſabje& him : and partly becauſe there 
is the greateſt plenty of all things ro invite him ; the Fruits 
of the Country being laid up in Cities in eſt abundance. s 
Heb. heareth,.3.e. obeyeth. © Heb. o' che Tackmaſter, or Exaftor of 
Labour, 7. e. He will not be brought to receive his Yoke, nor to 
do. this Drudgery, nor to anſwer to his cries or commands, as tame 
Aſſes are forced to do. 


8 The range of the mountain «is bis paſture, and he | 


ſcarcheth after every green thirg. 

u Thes which heſearcheth out, or findeth in the Moxntains, He prefers 
thar mean proviſion and hardſhip with his freedsm, before the 
farteſt Paſtures with Servitude, Why ſo weak and harmleſs a Creature 


DU. 


as the wild Aſs ſhould be untameable, when the moſt Savage Lions 
& Tigers have been tamed;and how there comes tg be fo vaſt a diffe- 
rence between the tame and the wild Aſs, thou canſt give no rea- 
ſon, but muſt refer wholly to my good pleaſure, ro which alſo 
thou ſhouldſc upon the ſame grounds refer all rhe various merhods 
of my providence and dealings with thee, and with other Mcn,and 
not ſo boldly cenſure what thou doſt not underſtand. ; 

9 Will the Unicorn x be willing to ſerve theey, or 
abide by thy crib z, ? 

x Iris mth diſputed among the Learned, bur is not needful to 
be known by others, whether there be, or ever was ſuch a Creature 
as we call the Unicorn ; or whether this Reem,which is the Hebrew 
Name of it, be the Rhinoceros, as ſome would have it; or a certain 
kind of wild Goat, called Oryx, which is very tall and ſtrong. and 
untraQtable; or one of that kind cf wild Oxen or Bulls, called Us ; 
Which may ſcem moſt probable, borh from the deſcription of this 
Creature here, and elſwhere in Scripture, which exattly agrees with 
its deſcripticn given by other Authors ; and from the deſcripticn 
of his work in this place ; which muſt in all reaſcn be agreeable to 
Creatures ef that general kind ; and from the conjunttion of this 
Creature with Bullocks in Scripture, Deut: 33: 17: andeſpecially 1/a; 
34: 6, 7: where having put Lambs, and Goats, and Rams together, v: 
6: az Creatures of the1ame, or very like ſort ; he mentions Bultocks, 
and Bal, and Reems, wv: 7: as belonging to the ſame general ſort of 
Creatures. Bur this I ſhall nor poſitively deterniine here, He that 
would know more, may ſee what the Reverend and Learned Mr. 
Cary! hath upon this Text out of Boorizs and: others,and my Latin $y- 
ropſis on Numb; 23; 22. y Canſt thou tame him, and bring him into 
ſubje&ion to thy command. z Will he ſuffer himſelfto be ried cr 
confined thereall night, and to be reſerved ro the work of the next 
day, asthe Oxen do? Surely no. And if thou Cant not rule ſuch 
a Creature as this, much leis art thou able to govern the World, 
or to teach me how to govern it, which thou preſumeſt to do. 

ro Canſt thou bind the Unicorn with his band inthe 
furrow a ? or will he harrow the valleys b after thee ? 

4 i.e, Inthy furrowed Field, by a Meroxymy. Or, to, or for (as 
the prefix Bech is oft uſed, as Gen: 11; 4: Levit: 16: 22: Job 24: 5: ) 
the Furrow, i. e. to make Furrows,or to Plow : for which work Cat- 
te] uſe to be bound together, that they may be dire&ed by the Hus- 
bandman, and may make right Furrows. b To wit, the low. 
Grounds ; which are moſt proper for, and moſt imployed in the 
work of Plowing. c Under thy conduQ, following thee ſtep by ſtep. 
1x Wilt thou cruſt him 4 becauſe bis ſtrength is 


great e? orwilt thou leave thy labour f to him g ? 

d To wit, for the doing of theſs works ? e Becauſe he is very 
able for thy work- And wilt thouby thy power make him willing; 
or force him to put forth and ſpend his ſtrength in thy ſervice ? 


f Either, r thy work of Plowing and Harrowing. Or, rather 2. 


the Fruit of thy Labour, or the Goods gotten by thy labour.as this 
word 1s oft uſed, as Deut: 28: 33: Jeb 20: 18: Pſal: 78. 46: & 128: 
2: Joh: 4: 38; towit,the frui's ofthe Earth procured by God's Blef- 
ſing upon thy induſtry» g To be brought home by him into thy 
Barnes, asthe next Verſe explains it. 

I2 Wilt thou believe him that he will bring home 


thy ſeed b, and gather 3s ito thy Barn ? 

þ Heb, will returnchy Seed; either 1. by Plowing and Harrewing 
thy Land ſo well that it ſhall make a good return to -thee for thy 
ſeed. Or rather, 2. by bringing into thy Barn, as it follows, thy 
feed, 2z.e. the produtt of thy feed, orthy ſheaves of Corn, as this 
word 1s uſed, Hag: 2; 19. 


13 Gaveſt thous the goodly k wings I unto the Pea- 
cocks: ? or || wings and feathers unto the Oftrich » ? 


z; The ſtile of this Bookis very conciſe, 2nd ſome Verb is mani- 
feſtly wanting to ſupply the ſenſe; and this ſeems to be ficly un- 


derſtood out of v: 19: where ir is exprefled. & Or, triumphant, that * 


wherein it triumpheth or prideth it ſelf, } Or, feathers. Heb. wing 
or feather. 'T he Peacocks beauty lies in its tail ; which may weil 
enough be comprehended underthis Name, as 1t 15 confeſſed, that 
the Latin word A/a which properly ſignifies a wing, is uſed by 
Martial and Cleudian to expreis the Peacock's tail m Or, as ſome 
render it, 0 the Oſtrich : whoſe Wings are much more great and 
goodly, 'than thoie of the Peacock. And for the otherword in the 
nexr Clauſe, which is reodred Oftrich,they trarflate it another way, 
For that the Hebrew word Haſidah doth not ſignific an Oſtrich, ſeems 
plain fiom the mention and deſcription of that Bird, P/ſal: 104; 17: 
Fer 8. 7. Lam; 4: 3: Zech: 5: 9. which doth not at all agree to the 
Oftrich. And foraſmuch as the following Verſes do evidently ſpeak 
of the Oftrieh, and iris abſurd to diſcourſe of a Bird which had 
not been ſo much as named, and conſequently the Name of it muſt 
be found in this Verſe, and there is no other Word in this Verſe 
which bids ſo fair for it,it may ſeem probable that this Word is nor 
ro be rendred the Peacock ( though it be ſo taken by moſt ) bur rhe 
Oftrich. Nor is it likely that both . the Peacock and the Oftrich 
ſhould be crouded rogether into one Verſe ; eſpecially when all rhe 
following Chara&ers belong only to the Jatrer. of them. Add ro 
this, thar it is confeſſed, even by the Hebrew Writers themſelves, 
Thar there isa great uncertainty in the ſignification of the Names of 
Birds and Beaſts ; and therefore it is zor ſtrange if many Interpre- 
ters were miſtaken in the ſignification of this word. » Or, or the 
wings or feathers of the Stork ( or, or ) the Oftrich? Or, didſt thou 
give (which may be repeated out of the former Branch ) the wings 
and feathers to the Stork? Or, werily ( the Particle im being oft uſed 
a5 2 note of confirmation, as P/al: 59: 16: & 63: 7: Prov: 3; 34 and 
23:18:) it hath wings and feathers like thoſe of a Stork; for ſo in- 
deed they are, black and white like them. And this may be noted 
as a great and remarkable Work of God,that ir ſhould really have 
wings and feathers as other Birds havey and particularly the Stork, 
who comes neareſt to-itin bulk and colour, although ctherwiſegby 
its vaſt bulk, it might ſeem to be a Beaſt rather than a Bird, «s 2£ 
1s alſo called by Ariſtotle and Pliny, and others. 


14 Which oleaveth her eggs in the earth p, and war- 


meth them in the duſt 9, | 
07. e. Which Oftrich ; whoſe property this is noted to be by 


Naturaliſts. Or, But 3 for this uauatural quality is oppgſed to oy 
good- 


Chap. XXX1x % 


|| Or, the 
feathers of 
the Stork 


d Oftrich, 


{Neh, 


Whrges 


9 hy 
le di 
| Heb:th1 
vr; 


X1x ſup. 


{Neh, 


Worges 


ln dig. 


(0 by 


Hebzhe 955 ſtrength 7 : be goeth on to meet F the armed men &. 


XXIX. \ | | 
oodlineſs of her Wings or Feathers» p Inthe place where - _ 
them ; where ſhe leaves them, either 1. from care, Ie L = 
ſhould cruſh and break rhem,if her vaſi Body ſhould fit _— - _ 
or rather, 2. from forgetfulneſs,or careleſnels, or unnatur _ 
folly ; to whichir is manifeſrly aſcribed in the following _ ES. 7 
Firher 1. covering them with Sand, that they may be warme -n 
hatched by that, together wich the heat of the Sun, Bur this 1S L 1- 
ed a fabulous report ; for the Adrab:ans, amongſt whom this Bird 1s 
oſt frequent, and beſt known, affirm, That ſuch Eggs do quickly 
periſh and putrifie. Or, rather 2. expoſing them tothe heat of the 
Sun, which being exceſſive in thoſe hot Countries,doth, and mult 
needs quickly dettroy or ſpoil them. And the Oſtrich is ſaid to 
warm them, becauſe her leaving them there is not onely the occa- 
Gon, but in ſome ſort rhe cauſe of the Suns warming them. 
i5 And forgetteth that the foot r may cruſh them, 


or that the wild beaſt may break them. 
r To wit, of wild Beaſts ( as it follows ) paſſing that way. 
16 She is hardned s againſt her young ones 7, as 
though they werenot hers # ; her labour is 1n vain 


ithout fear y ; 
we Or, He, z. / Cod hardens her, or, ſhe hardneth her ſelf. t 1.e. 
Againſt her Eggs,which he calls her young ones emphatically, to ag- 
gravate her fault and folly in deſtroying thoſe Eggs, which if nor 
negle&ed, would have bzen young ones. # As if they were laid by 
ſome other Bird. Or, that they may not be #0 her, 1. e. that they may be 
utterly loſt and deſtroyed; or as if it were her deſign to deſtroy their 
very becing«xTo wit,in laying her Eggs is wholly loſt. y This may be 
added as a farther aggravation.She dorh this,not becauſe ſhe 15 com- 
pelled to forſake her Eggs for fear of Men or Beaſts, but meerly out 
of an unnatural careleſneſs. Or,ſhe 1s without fear,or,for want of far, 
to wit, ofa provident fear and care about them. _ 

17 Becauſe God hath deprived her of wiſdom, nei- 


ther hath he imparted to her underſtanding &. _ 

z Becauſe God hath nor implanted in her that natural InſrinQ, 
and Providence, and AﬀeRion,which he hath pur into other Birds 
and Beaſts towards their young- And yet no Man preſumes to re- 
proach me for making this difference in my Creatures, And as lit- 


7 O B. 


tlereaſon haſt thou to blame me for afflifting thee, when others not 
ſo bad as thou for the preſent go unpuniſhed : becauſe I have no; 
leſs authoritry over thee, than over them,and can diſpoſe ofall my 
Creatures according to my good pleaſure» The great folly of this 
Bird is noted by Arabick Writers, who beſtknow her, and that not 
only for this property of forſaking her own Eggs, but alſo for other 
things, as that ſhe eats any thing which 1s offered to her, as Iron, 
Stones, Glaſs, hot Coals, &'c. Whereas other Birds and Beaſts 
have ſo much Sagacity,as to reje& improper and unwholſome things; 
that being purſued by the Hunter, ſhe thinks her ſelf ſafe and un- 
ſeen, by hiding her head in the Sind : For which, and other ſuch, 
qualities, Ir is a Proverb among the Arabians, More fooliſh than an 
Offrich, 

18 What time ſhe lifteth up her ſelf onbigh a, ſhe 


{corneth the horſe and his rider 6. 

# To flee from her purſuer : to which end ſhe lifteth up her head 
and body, and ſpreads her wings. 6 She deſpiſeth them in regard 
of her greater ſwifcneſs ; for though ſhe cannot flie becauſe of 
her great bujk,being ſaidto be as big as a new-bornCamel,yet by the 
aid of her wings ſhe runs ſo faſt, that Horſemen cannot reach her, 
as both Greek and other Authors have noted. 

19 Haſt thou given the horſe ſtrength ? haſt thou 
clothed his neck with thunder d ? 

c Either ſtrength of Body : or rather courage and generous con- 
fidence, for which the Horlie is highly commended. 4d i. e. With 
ſnorting and neighing; in the making of which ſound the Necks in 


regard of the Throat which is within it, anda part of ity is a prin- 
cipal Inſtrument : which neiſe may not unfitly be called zhunaer, | 
becauſe of the great vehemency and rage, wherewirh it is attended, | 
and the great Terrour which 1t cauſeth, eſpecially in War and Bat- ' 
tel, of which ſee Fer; 8: 16. and compare 1 Sam: 12:. 17, 18: 
where this very term of thundering is aſcribed to a far lower and leſs 
terrible noiſe. Noris this, as ſome alledge, an improper Speech, 

becauſe this thunder or neighing, is rather clothed with the Neck, 

as being within it, than the Neck with it ; for nothing 1s more 
common in Scripture than to ſays That Men are clothed with righ- ' 
Feouſneſs, humility, and other Graces,which yet are in ſtrifneſs of 
Speech within the Man,and not he within them. Bur becauſe this | 
word, in this form, is not elſewhere exfanr, ſome rend:r it others | 
wiſe, with a mane, with a thick, and full, and deep Mane, as the 

Phraſe of being.clothed with it implies. For this 15 mentioned by 

all Writers of Horſes.as a notable mark ofa generous Horſe ; which 

therefore they conceive would not be omitted here, where ſo many 

ſeveral properties and excellencies are deſcribed. And the Verb 

Raam,w hence this comes, in the Syriack Language ſignifies not on- 

ly to chunder, But alſo to be high or lofty: which ficly agrees to the 

Mane, which is inthe higheſt part of the Horſe. 

20 Canſt thou make him afraid as graſhopper e ? 
the glory of his noſtrils f is F terrible, 

e Which is eaſily affrighted and chaſed away by the leaſt noiſe 
ofa Man. Or, as divers others render the place, didft thou make 
him to move like a Graſheppper, Skipping and leaping as he goes ! So he 
deſcribes the poſture of a gallant and generous Horſe, who curvets, 
and pranceth, and as it were danceth as he walks. f That ſnoring,or 
found, and ſmoke which cometh out of his Noſtrils, eſpcially when 

e1Sinraged and ingaged in Battel, which is another note of a ge- 
verous Horſe, and ſtrikes a terrour into his adverſary. Or, the ve- 
hemeney, or majefly, or magnificence of his ſnorting, or ſnoring, as this 
word is rendred, Fer. $: 16. 


21|| He paweth gin the valley þ, and rejoyceth in 


' £ Or, He digzeth. Through courage and wantonneſs he cannot 
Nand fill,” but is beating,as it were digging up the Earth with his 
feet. þ This he adds, partly becauſe the gronnd being there more 
Plain and ſmoerh, he hath the better conveniency for his prancing 
and pawing with his feet, which in hilly and uneven ground he | 


Cannot ſo well do z and partly, becauſe Battels uſe to be pitched in | 


valleys,or low grounds,eſpecially Horſe Battels, ; Making ſemblance 
of great pride and complacency init. k With great readineſs & un- 
daunted courage. 7 : 

22 He mocketh at fear /, and is not affrighted : nei- 
ther turneth he back fromthe Sword mz. 

13. e. At all Inftruments and Obje&s of Terror,as Fear 1s oft uſed; 
as Prov. 1: 26: & 10; 24. He deſpiſeth what other Creatures dread. 
mm Or,becauſe of the Sword ; or, for fear of the Sword, as this Phraſe is 
uſed, 1ſz. 21:15; & 31: 8: Fer. 14: 16: & 50: 16. 

23 The quiver s rattleth againſt him, + the glitter- 
ing {pear and the ſhield o- ; | 

» Or, although the Quivir, &c» So this comes in as an aggra« 
vation of hiscourage Notwithſtanding the juſt cauits of fear which 
are mentioned in this Verſe. And the Quiver is here pur for the 
Arrows contained in it, by a Metonymy, very uſual in this very 
caſe, and in all ſorts of Authors, which being ſhor againſt the 
Horſe and Rider make this Rattling noiſe here mentioned. o Or, 
rather the /annce or javelin. For that this was not a defenſive, but 
an offenſive Weapon, ſeems plain, both from this place, where it 
is mentioned among ſuch, and as an objet&t of fear,which the Shield 
is not, and from 5%. 8: 18, 1 Sam. 17: 45; Whereit is fo uſed. 

24 He ſwalloweth the ground p with fierceneſs and 
rage : neither believeth he that zr zs the ſound of the 
trumpet 9. | 

? The ſenſe iseither, 1. He 1s ſo earneſt and eager upon the 
Barrel, that he ruſheth into it with all ſpeed, and runs over the 
ground ſo (wiftly,that he might ſeem to have ſwallowed it up. Or, 
2. He is ſo full of war-like Rage and Fury,that he nor only champs 
his Bridle,but is ready to tear and devour the very ground on which 
he goes. And the Phraſe here uſed is not unuſua},both in Arabick, 
and in other Authors: of which ſee my Lartine Synopſis on this 
place. q 7. & He isfo pleaſed with the approach of the Batte), and 
the ſound of the Trumpet calling to it,that he could ſcarce believe 
his Ears for gladneſs, Compare Gen. 45: 26: Luke 24: 41. Or,thus, 
He cannat ſtand ftill, or firm, ( as this Verb and the derivative from 
it is uſed, not only in the Chaldee and Syriack Diale&, bur alſo in 
the Hebrew, as Deut. 28: 59; 1 Sam: 2.35.) when the Trumpet ſoundeth'3 
His Rider can hardly keep him ſtil, but he ſtrives and !ongs to run 
to the fight. | 

25 He faith among the trumpets, ha, ha » ; and he 
{ſmelleth s the battel afar off :, the thunder of the cap- 
tains #, and the ſhouting. | 

r An Expreſſion of Joy and Alacrity, declared by his proud 
neighings, whereby he doth in ſome ſort anſwer the found of the 
Trumpets, in a way of ſcorn and challenge. 5s z. e. He perceiveth, 
as this Phraſe is uſed, Judg. 16. 9. t At ſome diftance, either of 
place, or ratherof time, as the word 1s moſt frequently uſed. He 
perceives by the motion of his Souldiers, and the clattering of the 
Arms,that the Battel is at hand,which is very welcome to him. « By 
which he underſtands, either the military Qrations which the Cap- 
tains make and deliver with a loud voice to animate their Souldiers 
to the Batte] : Or,rather the loud and joyful clamour begun by the 
Commanders and followed by the Soldjers when they are ready ro 
joyn Batte], that thereby they may both daunt their Enemies, and 
encourage themſelves» : OF; 

26 Doth the Hawk flie x by thy wiſdom y, and 
ſtretch her wings toward the ſouth z. | 

x In ſo fiagular a manner, ſo ſtrongly and ſteddily,ſo conſtantly 
and unweariedly, fo ſwiftly and ſpeedily,fo regularly and cunning- 
ly to catci: her Prey. » Didſt thou inſpire her with that wiſe 
dom ? z Which ſhe doth, either 1. when ſhe caſts her old Feathers; 
and gets new oneswhich is furthered either by the warmth of Sourh- 
erly Winds, or by the heat of the Sun, which was Sourh-ward from 
Job's Country, as it is from ours. Whence it is,that as wild Hawks 
do this by natural Inſtin&, ſo the places which Men build for the 
keeping of tame Hawks,are builr rowards the South. Or in,or to- 
wards Winter, when wild Hawks flie into warmer Countries, as 
being impatient of cold weather. 


27 Doth the Eagle mount up # + at thy command, 
and make her neſt on high 6 ? 

a Flies dire&ly upward till ſhe be out of thy: ſight ; which noo- 
ther Bird can do. 6 In the higheſt and inacceſſible Rocks. Comes 
pare Jer. 49:16: Obad. v. 4. | 

28 She dwelleth and abideth upoa the rock, upon 
the crag of the rock c, and the ſtrong place. 

c Whic ſhe doth, partly for the ſecurity of her ſelf, and her 
young : and partly that the may thence have the better proſpe& to 
diſcern her Prey, as it fo)loweth. | 7 ft 

29 From thence ſhe ſeeketh the prey; and her eyes 
behold afar off 2. 

d Her ſight is exceeding ſharp and ſtrong, ſo that ſhe is able to 
look upon the Sun with open Eyes, and ro behold the ſmalleſt prey 
upon the Earth or Sea, when ſhe is mounted out _of our ſight ; 


which when ſhe ſpies, ſhe flies to it with incredible ſwifrneſs, even 
like an Arrow out of a Bow. 


30 Her young ones alſo fuck np blood e: and ** Mat. 24 
. & 

e Either of the Prey which the Eagle hath brought to her Neſt -9k&* 175 
for them, or thar which themſelves catch and kill; being berimes 37* 


where the ſlain are f, there is ſhe g. 


inured to this work by their Dams. Naturaliſts nate of the Eagle, 
That ſhe drinketh no Water but Blood only. f Where any dead 
Carcafles are, yea, or are like to be : For natural Hiſtorians write 
ofthe Eagles, Thar they can preſage or ſmell a, Battel ſome days be. 
fore it be fought. And aithough ſome Writers affirm, That there 
are divers Eagles who do not feed upon Carkaſſes, and will not med- 
dle with them, yet that many Eagles do feed on thew is ſuffici- 
ently evident by the reſtimony both of Scripture,as Mat: 24:28;and 
of diverſe both ancient and later Writers. g To wit, in an in- 

ſtant, flying thither with admirable celerity. 

: CHAP. XE. IN 

God's reproof of fob, 1, 2, He humbleth himſelf, 3--<5=5. God as 
gin declareth his Righteoufneſs, WhjePy, and the pewer of his Wrath 
4L4 ” 


"7 


Chap. XXXIX, 


+ Heb. :he 
flame of the 


Spears 


+ Heb &y 


thy mouth. 


Chap. XL. | 
+ to aboſe the proud, 16-====14: A deſcription of Behemoth, I 5-==-243 
Oreover, the LORD anſwered Job #, and 
ſaid, A 
a Having made a little pauſe to try what Job could anſwer to his 
queſtions, and Job, being it ſcems aſtoniſhed with God's Rebukes, 
or expe&ing what God would further ſay, continued ſilent. 
+ Heb: ** 2 + Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty 
© gone inſtruct him b ? he that reproveth God c, let him an- 
—"- {werit d? 
4 wa Shall Job, who preſumed to contend with me in Judgement, 
| * andtodiſpurethe reaſonableneſs and equity of my proceedings,give 


me Inftri-tions or Dire&ions how to manage my own Afﬀairs, and 
govern my Creatures ? He juſtly mentions his Almightineſs,as a 
For how can he be unjuſt to 


convincing Argument of his Juſtice. ] 
his Creatures, who hath no Obligation to them, and never did nor 
can receive any thing from them, and who hath an adſolute, ſover- 
Taign, and incontroulable Dominion over them,and who being 1n- 
finitely and neceſſarily perfe&, and allſufficient within himſelf, can 
neither baye any inclination to Unrighteouſneſs, which is an im- 
perfeQion, nor any temptation to it,from any need he hath of it to 
accomplith his Deſigns, which he can do by his own omniporence, 
or from any advantage accruing to him by it, c That boldly cenſur- 
efh his ways or works ; which thou haſt done. 
my former and further queſtions at his peril. | 

3 Then Job anſwered the LORD, and faid, : 

4 Behold, I am vile e, what ſhall I anſwer thee f* 


© PC: 39/9, ® I will lay mine hand upon my mouth g. 
mY e What ef a mean and hs prying Fg Creature, that I ſhould 
preſume to contend withmy Maker and Judge? I confeſs my fault 
and folly, f I neither deſire nor am able to diſpute with thee. g 
I will for the future bridle mv Tongue, and inſtead of conteſting 
with thee, do humbly and willingly fubmit my felf to thees 
5 Once have I ſpoken, but I will not anſwer 5: 


yea, twice 5, but I will proceed no further k. | 
hb Or, ſpeak again ; anſwering being oft put for ſpeaking. I will 
contend no more with thee. 7 7. e. Oft times, or again and again, 
the definite number being uſed indefinitely. k In ſuch bold and 
preſumtuous Expreſſionsand Accuſations of thy Providence towards 
me. Vain therefore are the Excuſes which ſome Interpreters make 
for Job, as if he were faultleſs in his foregoing Diſcourſes, when 
8 ”_-_ chargeth him with faultineſs therein,and Jeb himſelf con- 

ech it. 

6 Then anſwered the LORD unto Job out of the 


whirl-wind 1}, and ſaid, 

IWhich was renewed when God renewed his Charge upon Fob, 
whom he intended to humble more throughly than yer he had done. 
Both this and the-next verſe are repeated our of Chap: 38:1,3: where 
" they are explained. TRY 
 * ch:38:3:2 7 * Girdup thy loins now like a man : I will * de- 
' * Ch.42:4. mand of thee, and declare thou unto me. : 

P:51:4; 8 * Wilt thou alſo diſanul my judgment m ? Wilt 


53: thon condemn me that thou maiſt be righteous » ? 

mm Every word is emphatical, Wil: ( Art thou reſolved upon it ) 
thou ( thou Fol, whom I took to be one of a better mind and rem- 
Per; had it been a Stranger, or myEnemy who had ſpoken thus 
of me, I could have born it, but I cannot bear it from thee) alſo 
( net only vindicate my ſelf, and thy own integrity,but alſo accuſe 
me) diſanul (notonly queſtion and diſpute, but even condemn, re- 
peal and make void, as if it were ungrounded and unjuſt) »y judg- 
nent ? 7.e.my Sentence againft thee, and my Government and Ad- 
miniſtration of Human Aﬀairs ? » Wilt thou make me uarighte- 
ous that thou maiſt ſeem to berighteous. 

9 Haſt thouan arm like God o ? or canſt thou thun- 


der with a voice like him p ? 
o*Thou art infinitely ſhort of God in Power, and therefore in Ju- 
Nice : for all his Perfe&ions are equal and infinite. Injuſtice is much 
more likely to be in thee, an impotent Creature, than in the A]- 
mighty God ; of which ſee the Notes on v: 2. p Therefore do not 
ume to contend with him. : 
10 * Deck thy ſelf now with majeſty and excellen- 


*Pf: 1041: 4 

Cy 9,and aray thy ſelf with glory and beauty. 

Nice, and conſequently in Power and Majeſty, take to thy ſe]f thy 
reat Power, come and fit in my Throne, anadiſplay thy Divine 
erfeQtions in the ſight of the World. Theſe and the following are 

zronical expreſſions, to make Job more ſenſible of his diſtance from, 

and ſubjeQ&ion to God. 

Ix Caſt abroad therage of thy wrath 7: and behold 

every one that is proud, and abaſe hims, 

r Inflit heavy Judgments upon thine Enemies, the Chaldeans and 

Sabeans, and others who'have injured or provoked thee. 5s Deſtroy 

Him with ap angry look, as I can do and delight ro do with ſuch 


Perſons. 
12 Look onevery one that is proud, and bring him 


'Jow : and tread down the wicked in their place 7. 

# Either 1. whereſcever they are. Or. ' 2. Where they are in 
their greateſt ſtrength and glory, and therefore are moſt ſecure and 
Confident. 'Or, 3. Forthwith,upon the ſpot,that the quickneſs and 
zmmediateneſs of the ſtroke may diſcover that it comes from aDivine 


x3 Hide them in the duſt together «, and bind their 


faces x in ſacret y. 

« Kill every one of them (as he faid vs 12: ( at one blow, as I can 
do, and bring them all to their Graves, that they may ſleep in the 
Duſt,and never offend theeznor trouble others more. x 7,e, Con- 
demn or deſtroy them. He alludes to the manner of covering the 
Faces of condemned Perſons, Eſther 7: 8; and of dead Men. 9John 
I:.44: & 20:7. Sec on Jeb 9g: 24. yEither ina ſecret place, bury 
them in their Graves : Or, ſecretly,with a ſecret and mviſible ſtroke, 
that it mayjappear it comes from the hand of a God. 


7 O B. 


da Let him anſwer , 


| 14 Then will I alſo confeſs unto thee, that thine 


own right hand can ſave thee 2. 

2 z. e. That thou art mine Equal, and maiſt venture to contend 
with me, But ſince thou canit do none of theſe things, it behoveg 
thee to ſubmit to me,and to acquieſce in my dealings with thee, 

Is Behold now {| Behemoth @ which I made with p 0 


thee b, he eateth graſs asan ox ec. Elephu 

a That ſome particular Beaſt is deſigned by this word is evident as ſo;., 
from v; 17; and frem the peculiar CharaQters given to him, whichthink, © 
are not common to all great Beaſts, But whar it is, is matrer of : 
ſome diſpute among the Learned. The generality of them are 4. 
greed thatthis is the Elephant, and the following Leviathan the 
Whale; which being two of the goodlieſt and vaſteſt Creatures 
which God made) the one of the Land, the other of the Sea, and 
wathal ſuch to whom the deſcription here given for the moſt part 
manifeſtly agrees,and the like is preſumed concerning the reſt, may 
ſeem to be here intended. And the difficulty of reconculing tome 
tew Paſſages to them, may ariſe either from our ignorance of thery, 
| or from the different nature and qualities ef Creatures of the ſame 
general kind in divers parts But ſome late and very learned men 
take the Leviathan to be the Crocodile, and the Behemoth to be x 
Creacure called the Hippopotamus,which may ſeem fitly to be Joyn- 
ed with the Crocodile, both being very well known to Job and his 
Friends, as being frequent in the adjacent Parts, both amphibicus, 
living and preying both in the Water and upon the Land, and 
both being Creatures of great bulk and ſtrength. I ſhall not under- 
take to determine the Controverſie ; bur fhall' ſhew how each part 
or the following Deſcription is or may be applicd to them ſeveral- 
Iy. And this being no Point concerning Faith or a Good Life,eve. 
ry one may take the more liberty to underſtand the place of oneor 
other efthem. 6 Either 1. upon the Earth wherethou art, whereas 
the Leviathan is in the Sea. Or, 2. as I made thee,for this Hebrew 
Particle is oft uſed as a Note of Compariſon, as Job g: 26: Pſal: 14: 
7. and elſewhere; in the ſame manner, and upon the ſame day. 
Whereby he may intimate, that being equally the Creator and So- 
veraign Lord both of Job, and ef this Behemoth, he had equal right 
to diſpoſe of them in ſuch manner as he thought meet. Or, nigh 
( as the Particle oft ſignifies ) wntothee, i.e: in a place not far from 
thee, to wit, in the River Nile where the Hippopotamus, as well 
as the Crocodile, doth principallly abide. Bur although thoſe 
Creatures were now in that River, yet they were madeelſewhere,e. 
ven where the firſt Man was made. c This is mentioned as a thin 
ſtrange and remarkable, as indeed it is, either 1. of the Elephant, 
in which God hath wiſely and mercifully planted this diſpoſitien 
that he ſhould not prey upon other Creatures, which ifhe had,bee 
ing ſo ſtrong and 'vaſt a Creature, he muſt needs have been very 
pernicious to them, but feed upon Graſs as an Ox deth. Or, 2. of 
the Hippopotamus ; of whom Hiſtorians relate, that he comes our 
of the River upon the Land to feed upon Corn, and Hay, or Graſs, 
as an Ox doth, to whom alſo he is not unlike in the form of his 
Head and Feet, and in the bigneſs of his Body,whence the 1talians 
call him the Sea-0x. 

.16 Lo now, his ſtrength 5s in his loins d, and his 


force 7sin the navel of his bellye. 

« He hath ſtrength anſwerable to his bulk, but this ſtrength by 
God's wiſe and mercifal Providence is not an offenſive ſtrength, 
conſiſting an or put forth by horns or claws, as it is in rayenous 
Creatures,but only defenſive and ſeated in his Loins,as it is in other 
Creatures, whereby he is rendred more ſerviceable to Men by the 
carrying of vaſt burdens. e. Which though in the Elephant it be 
weaker than his Loins, whence the Rhinocerss fighting with him aims 
at that part,yet hath a more than ordinary ſtrength in it, as appears 
by the binding of the heavieſt burdens under and abour it. This alſo 
agrees to theHippopotamus in an eminent degree, whoſe whole skin 
is noted by ancient Writers to be harder than any other Creatures, 
and almoſt impenetrable. 

17 || He moveth his tail f like a cedar: the finews of TW" 


his ſtones gare wrapt together. | 
f Whick:hough it be _ both in the Elephant and in the T 

Hippopotamus,yet when itis ereQed, is exceeding ſtiff and ſrrong/ 

But this may be underſtood, either 1. of his Generative Part, 

which is oft called by that, or the like name, which the following 

Clauſe of the verſe may ſeem to favour. Or,. 2. Ofthe Elephants 

crunk, which being ſo eminent and remarkable a part, would not 


q Seing thou makeſt thy ſelf equal, yea, ſuperiour to me in Ju-'| Probably be omitred inthis Deſcription, to which theſe words very 


htly agree, beczuſe of its admirable morion and ſtrength. Nor 
is it ſrrange that this is called his Tail, becauſe that word: is oft 
uſed improperly for any end of a thing, as Iſa: 7: 4. See alſo Dent; 
25:18: & 28;:13,*44, g This may be noted becauſe the Elephants 
Teſticles do rot bang down below the belly, as they do in other 
Beaſts, but are contained within his belly where they are faſtned 
by Ligaments ofextraordinary ſtrength. Or, the ſinews of the ter- 
ror thereof, to wit, of the Trunk laſt mentioned under the name of 
the Tail, 3. e. its terrible Sinews are ſtrongly and ſtrangely wrapped 
rogether, that he can moveit as he liſteth with wonderful dexterity 
and ſtrength. Or, the Sinews of his Thighs, as the latter word oft 
ſignifies in the Arabick Tongue, which is very near akin to the He- 
brew. The Thighs and Feet of the Hippopotamus are noted to be 
ſo ſinewy and ſtrong, that one of them is able to break or overturn 
a large Boar. SEE 
18 His bones þ are as ſtrong pieces of Braſs ? ; bis 


bones are like bars of iron. 

h Under whichtitle are coryprehended his Ribs (as the LXX.here 
render it) and his teeth, # Exceeding hard and ſtrong, as they are 
in both theſe Creatures. 

19 He is the chief of the ways of God &: he that 
made him, can make his ſword to approach unto him /. 

k i, e, Of God's Works, to wit, of that ſort, or among living 
and brute Creatures This is eminently ard unqueſtionably true 
ofthe Elephant, in regard of his vaſt bulk, and ſtrength joine 
with great aQtivity, and eſpecially of his admirable ſagacity a® 
aptneſs to learn, and of his ſigular uſefulneſs to Mankind, his 
Lord and Maſter, and God's Vicegerent in the World,and many 0* 
ther commendable qualities. And the Hippopotamus alſo is in fome 
ſort, as others note, the chief, os one of the chief of God's Works, 

in 


Chap p XL, " | 


{Heb 
riſe 


[/F 
Wn 


' bimin| 


fair? g 
yy his | 
we with 


iGh 2 


p. XL, 


| Whirlpool, 
I thou 


* p, XLI- J 


; ard of its great bulk and frength and ſagacity, and the man- 
_ his Dates Tonk in the Water and upon the Land, But it mu 

be granted that rhe Elephant doth exceed the Hippopotamus 1n mar» 
ny things: 1Though he beſo ſtrong and terrible, yer God can ea- 
fily ſubdue and deſtroy him.either immediately,or by arming other, 
Creatures as the Rhinoceros,or Dragon, or Tiger,againſt him: Or 
he that made him hath applied or given to him his Sword, or Arms, to 
wit, his Trunk, which may not unfitly be called his Sword, becauſe 
thereby he doth both defend himſelf,and offend his enemies. And 
this Trunk of his being a thing very obſerveable and admirable in 
him, and therefore not likely to be negle&ed in his Deſcription, if 
it were not intended by his Tail. v: 17: may ſeem to be deſigned in 


20 Surely the mountains bring him forth food mw 3 
where all the Beaſts of the field play ». 


»» Though this Creature be vaſtly great, and require much food, 
and no Man careth for it, yes God provides for it out of his own 
ſtores, and makes even deſert mountains to afford him ſufficient ſu- 
ftenance. The Hippopotamus alſo,though he live moſt in the Wa- 
ter, fetched his food from the Land,and from the Mountains or Hills, 
which are nigh into the River Nile. n They not only feed ſecure- 
ly,but ſport themſelves by him or with him,, being taught by expe- 
rience that he is gentle and harmleſs, and never preys upon them- 

21 He lieth s under the ſhady trees,in the covert of 


the reeds, and fens p. {- 

« TheElephanr lies down to reſt himſelf: and it is but fabulous 
which ſome Writers affirm that they have no joints in their Legs, 
and ſo cannot lye down, but ſleep or reſt themſclves ſtanding or 
leaning againſt a Tree, Which is denied and confuted by A4riftorle 
in his Hiſtory of Living Creatures, 2, 4: and by later Writers. ? For 
the Elephant being a Creature naturally hot, and living generally 
in bot Countries, diligently ſeeks for and delights in ſhady and 
wateriſh places,as is noted by 4riſfotle, and afrer him by Pliny. and 
lian. 

22 The ſhady trees cover him with their ſhadow ; 


the willows of the brook q compaſs him abour. 

q Or, of Nilw, of which this word is oft uſed in Scripture» And 
this ſeems to be the chief Argument by which the learned Bochart 
proves this to be meantof the Hippopotamus, whoſe conſtant reſi- 
dence is in or near the River of Nilus,or the Willows that grow by 
it, But it is well alledged by our Learned and Judicious Cary!, that 
this word Naal is never uſed to expreſs Nilus when 1t is put by it ſelf, 
as here it is, buronly where the werd Egypt is added to it, as it 3s 
in all the places which Bochare produceth. And this very phraſe, 
the Willows ef the Brook, is uſed of other Brooks or Rivers beſides 

Heb, Ge Nilus, as Lev: 23; 40* Compare Iſa: 15: 5. - 
wſch, 23 Behold, Þ he drinketh up r a river 5 an haſteth 
" not t: he truſteththat he can draw up Jordan into his 


mouth #. : : . 
x Or, He ſuatcheth, or drawethg or drinketh up as it were with 
forceand violence, as the word ſignifies. 5 z. e. A great quantity 
of water,hyperbolically called a River. as 1t is alſo Pſal: 78: 16: & 
105; 41+ This may be fitly applied to the Elephant, which becauſe of 
its great bulk and vehement thirſt, drinks a great deal of Water 
at one draught, as Naturaliſts and Hiſtorians have obſerved. : He 
drinks not with fear and caution and ſparingly, as the Dogs do at 
Nilus, for fear of the Crocodile z but tuch is his Courage and Self- 
confidence, that he fears no Enenue either by Water or by Land, 
but drinketh ſecurely and liberally. & He drinks as if he deſigned, 
or hoped, or deſired to drink up the whole River- He mentions 
Jordan, either as a River well known in and nigh unto Job's Land ; 
or becauſe poſſibly there were many Elephants which uſed to drink 
at it; oras aRiver inſome parts of it but ſmal], which therefore 
might give more colour to the Hyperbole, and to the Elephants 
fancy or expeRtation, than a vaſter River, ſuch as Euphrates, would 
have done» Bochart expounds this alſo of the Hippopotamus,which, 
though he cannot ſwim, and may be drowned, as Naturaliſts re- 
port,yet will continue ſecurely under Water at the bottom of Ni/# 
for ſome days together ; and he renders the verſe thus, Behold, if 
& River oppreſs or cover him, he fears not,he u confident os ſecure, though 
ordan (which is here put for zny River) ſhould break forth or over- 
flow above his mouth, i. e. ſhould over-whelm him. But the judg- 
ment of this I leave to the Reader. : 
24 || He taketh ic with his eyes : his noſe pierceth 


[0 viz through ſnares x. : - 
uy tale + According to this Tranſlation the ſenſe is this, He rakerh, or 


| theſe words. 


* bimin bis ſnatcheth, or draweth up (as was now ſaid, v.23; ) it q to wit, the 


or River Jordan ) with his eyes, i. e. When he ſees it, hetruſteth that 
thi he can drink it all up ; as we uſe to ſay,The eve is bigger than the bel : 
"ſevith his noſe or ſunt pierceth, &c. 7.e- heſecurely thruſteth his Snout 
i? jnto the River, even to the bottom ofir, to ſtir up the Mud, be- 
cauſe ke delights to drink muddy Water,and if there be any Snares 
laid for other Creatures, he breaks them to pieces, But this verſe 
js otherwiſe tranſlated by others, Will or Can any man rake him in 
his eyes ? (1.e. openly and by manifeſt force? Surely no. His force 
and ſtrength is too great for Man to reſiſt or overcome : and there- 
fore Men are forced to uſ2: many wiles and engines te catch him ; 
which is true both of the Elephant and of the Hippopotamus : ') Or 
pierce his Noſe with Snares or Gins? No, He may be taken by art and 
cunning, but not by violence. 
CHA P. XII 
God's Kingly Power and Authority above all the Children of Pride ſeen in 
the Leviathan, 1--===34, : : 
Anfſt thou draw out ||Leviathan with an hook 2? or 


his tongue with a cord | which thou letteſt 


. down &@ ? 

s Canſt thou take him with a Hook and a Line, as Anglers take 

as ordinary Fiſhes ? Surely no. Quefi, What 1s this Leviathan ? Anſwer. 
ThS$ is granted on all bands,rhat ir is a great and terrible Monſter, 
living in the Sea or Rivers, as Behemoth is a Land Monſter, Ir is 

. the general and received Opinion that iris the Whale, which 1s 
unqueſtionably called the Leviathan, Pſal; roqe 25, 26: which ha- 

' ving been diſcovered in the Scas next bordering upon 4rabis. pro- 
bably was not unknown to 796, wha was a very inquiſitive Perſon 


[That is,s 
Wale, or @ 


| Cos 
w,. 


O B. 
and well ſtudied in the Works of God, as this Book manifeſts, 


but ſome Jater and very learned Interpreters conceive that it is the 
Crocodile ; which was very well known in Egypt and in all the Parts 
adjacent to it. And this is evident,that the Hebrew Thannin (which 
is parallel to this word Leviathan, theſe two words being ſynony= 
mous,and the one promiſcuouſly uſed for the other, as appears from 
Pal: 74: 13, 14: Iſa; 27: 1; Ezek: 32:2! ) is uſed of the Crocodile, 
Ezek: 29: 3, 4: & 32+ 2, 3» Burl ſhall not poſitively determine this 
Controverſie ; but only ſhew how far the Text may be underſtood 
of both of them, and then ſubmit it to the Readers Judgment, this 
being a matter of no great moment, wherein Chriſtians may vary 
without any hazard. Only this I will ſay, That whatever becomes 
of the Behemoth of the former Chapter,whether that be the Elephant, 
or the Hippopotamus, that doth not at all determine the ſenſe ef 


codiJe, as the Context ſhall determine, which I confeſs ſeems to me 
to favour the latter more than the former. To which may be ad- 
ded, that it ſeems more probable that God would ſpeak of ſuch 
Creatures as were very well known to Job and his Friends, as the 
Crocodile was, than of ſuch as it is very uncertain whether they 
were known in thoſe parts, and in Job's time. This verſe, noting 
either the impoſſibility, or rather the great and terrible difficulty, 
of taking this Monſter with his Hook or Line, or ſuch like Inſtru- 
ments, may agree to either of them. For the Whale there is no 
doubt ; nor much doubt as to the Crocodile ; the taking whereof 
was generally eſteemed by the Ancients to be very difficult and pe- 
ri]lous ; whatſoever peculiar virtue or power from Nature or Art 
the Tentyrite had againſt them, as the Pſy#i were ſaid to have againſt 
Serpents. Some indecd obje&, that the laſt Clauſe cannot agree to 
the Crocodile, becauſe that hath no Tongue as is affirmed by 4riſ- 
totle, Pliny, and other Ancient Authors. But that is a miſtake,and 
the ground of it is plain, becauſe ther Tongues are but ſmall in 
proportion to their vait Bodies, and withal faſtned to their under 
Jaws, as the ſelf-ſame Auchors note. And that the Crocodile kath 
2 Tongue 1s poſitively affirmed by the ſad Ancient Authors, and 
by the Hebrew Wrirers, and by the 4rabians,to whom this Creature 
was beſt known, and by later Authors. 
' 2 Canſt thou put an hook b into his noſe c ? or bore 

his jaw throw with a thorn 4. 
_ 6 Heb. # Bulruſb; i; e, an Hook like a Bulruſh with its head hang- 
ing down, as is expreſſed 1/s: 58.15. c To hing him up by it forſale, 
or to carry him home for uſe, after thou haſt drawn him out of the 
Sea or River, of which he ſpake in the former verſe. « Or, with an 
Iron Hook or Inſtrument as ſharp as a Thorn ; wherewith thou u- 
ſeſt to carry little Fiſhes. | 

3 Will he make many ſupplications unto thee ? 
will he ſpeak ſoft words unto thee e ? | 

e Doth he dread thine anger or power ? or will he humbly and 
eartieſtly beg thy favour,that thou wouldſt ſpare him, and not pur- 
ſue him,or releaſe him out of Priſon ? Iris a Metaphor from Men in 
diſtreſs and miſery, who uſe theſe means tothem to whoſe power 
they are ſubje&. 

4 Will he make a covenant with thee f? wilt thou 
cake him fora ſervant for ever ? 
_ f Towit, to do thee faithful ſervice, as the next words explain 
it.Canſt thou bring him into bondage;and force him to ſerve thee? 

5 Wilt thou play with him as ith a bird g ? or wilt 
thou bind him for thy maidens 6 ? 

£ As Children play with little Birds kept in Cageszor tied with 
ſtrings ; which they do at their pleaſure and without any fear ? þ For 
thy little Daughters ; which he mentions rather than little Sons, be- 
cauſe ſuch are moſt ſubje& to fear. 

6 Shall the companions i make a banquet of him & ? 
ſhall they part him among the merchants / > 


upon him. Or, for him, 3. e. for joy that.thou haſt taken him. 1 As 
15S Uſual in ſuck caſes; that all who are Partners in the labour and 
hazard may Partake of the profit alſo and divide the ſpoil. 

7 Canſt thou fill his skin with barbed irons, or his 
head with fiſh ſpears »- ? 

- This may be underſtood, either r. of the Whale. And where. 
as it is objefted, that the Whales at this day are taken in this man- 
ner, and therefore this cannot be underſtood of them: it may be 
replied, both that this art and way of taking Whales is a late inven- 
tions and was not known in Job's time ; and that he doth not ſpeak 
of the abſolure impoſſibility, but of the great difficulty of taking 
theme Or 2. of the Crocodile, whoſe skin is ſo kard that an Iroa or 
Spear will not pierce it, as we ſhall ſee hereafter. 

8 Lay thine hand upon him »,remember the battel o, 
do no more. | 

x Either 1. in a familiar or Friendly manner, that thou maiſt 
catch him by deceit when thou canſt nor do it by force. Or rather 
2, in way of Hoſtility, ſeize upon him and take him by a ſtrong 
hand, if thou dareſt doſo. o Burt e're thou do attempt thar, con- 
fider what rhou art doing, and how hazardous thy enterprize is, 
and with whom, and with what diſadvantage thou art going to 
fight, andasit follows, do n0 more, proceed no further, draw back 
thy hand, and be thankful for ſo great adeliverance. Or the verſe 
may be rendred thus: If (whieh Particle is oft underſtood ) thou of- 
fereſt or attempteſt zo /ay violent hands on kim, thou wils have cauſe 
to remember (the Imperitive being put for the Future, ( which is fre- 
quent in the Hebrew Language) the batel,8& thou wilt do ſo no more ; IF 


thou doſt eſcapezthou wilt never forget thy danger,nor attempt any 
thing of likenaturefor the timeto come. 

9 Behold, the hope of himp, is in vain : ſhall not 4 

one be caſt down,even at the ſight of him r? 
y Either 1, of the Fiſh, ze. the hope of taking or conquering 
im. Or rather, 2. of the Man who laid hands upon him,as hope- 
ing to take him by force, but in vain. 4q The prefix He being put 
for Halo, as it is oft times in the Hebrew Text, as Gen.27336 iSam: 
2: 28: Jer. 3:6: & 31; a0; Exek: 20: 30. r Not only the fight, but the 
very ſight of him is moſt frightful.Such is the ſighs of the Whale to 
Mariner Who fear the overturning of their Veilel. And ſuchis:- the 
4 M fighs 


Chap. XL 


this Leviathan, but leaves it indifferent to the Whale or the Cro- * 


? Thy friends or afliftants in the taking of him. & 3.e. Feed 


& IRE 
: l 4 


hap.X LI. | 
fight of the Crecodile, by which alone ſome have been affrighted 


out of their wits. | i Þ. ; 
To None 5: /s fierce that dare ſtir him up 5s: who 


then is able to ſtand before me t ? 
5 When he ſleeperh or is quiet. None dare provoke him to the 
Battel. £ To contend with me his Creator, as thou Job doſt, when 


one of my Creatures is too hard for him. 
11 * Who hath prevented me « that I ſhould repay 


him x? whatſoever is under the whole heaven is mine y. 
. « To wit, with Offices or Service done for me,by which he hath 
5 *127 laid the firſt Obligation upon me, for which I am indebted to him: 
TEOT10 Who can be beforehand with me in kindneſſes, ſince not only the 
86; Leviathan, but all Men, and, as it follows, all things under Hea- 
ven, are mine, made by my hand, and inriched with all their in- 
dowments by my favour, without which, O Jeb, thou wouldſt 
not have had either reaſon or ſpeech to uſe ſo perverſly to reproach 
my Providence. Having now ſaid and largely proved that Man could 
noticontend withGod in power,he now adds,that he cannot do it in 
juſtice, becauſe God oweth him nothing, nor 1s any way oblidged 
to him. Which having briefly hinted to prevent an ObjeQion,he 
returns to his former Argument, the Deſcription of the Leviathan: 
* That I ſhould be ingaged to requite his favours. y Created by my 
Power and favour, and wholly in my poſſeſſion, and at my diſpoſe, 
#Heb:bars: 224 therefore cannor poſibly prevent me, as was now ſaid. 
Ch:18:13; 7I2 I will not conceal z his Þ parts 2, nor his power, 
| nor his comely proportion 6. LD 
z 7. e. I will particularly ſpeak of them. Here 15 a Meloſis,as there 
is, Chap: 14: 11: & 15: 18: and ofteliewhere. a Heb. hs bars, 1. 
e. the Members of his Body, which are ftrong like bars of Iron, 
b Which is more amiable and admirable in ſo vaſt a bulk. : 
12 Who can diſcover c the face of his garment #4 : 
or who can come to him || with his double bridle e? 
c Or, uncover, or take off from him. d The upper or outward 
part ofhis Garment, or, the Garment it ſelf : the word face being 
oft redundant, as Gen: T: 2: & 23: 3: and oft elſewhere, And by 
the Garment is meant the Skin which covers the whole Body, and 
may be taken off from the Body like a Garment. Who dare at- 
tempt ro touch his very outward Skin ? much leſs dare any venture 
to approach to him, to give him adeep or deadly wound. e to put 
it into his mouth, and lead him by it to thy Stable and Service,as 
thou doſt by an Horſe, Or ratker,(becauſe he plainly ſeems to per- 
ſift in deſcribing the ſeveral parts of his ey : of which he ſpeaks 
bothin the foregoing and following words ) Who can come within his 
Adenble Bridle, to wit, his vaſt Jaws, which have ſome reſemblance to 
a double Bridle:whence the Greeks call thoſe parts of tie face which 


reach to the Jaws on both ſides; the Briales.. : 
14 Whocan open the doors of his facef ? his teeth 


#re terrible round about g. 

f To wit, his Mouth. If it be open,none dareenter within it,as 
he now ſaid ; and here he adds, that if it be ſhut,none dare open it. 
£ This is true of ſome kinds of Whales, though others are ſaid to 
bave either none, or no terrible teeth : but it is more eminently and 
unqueſtionably true of the Crocodile, of which this very thing is 
oblerved by all Authors who write of it. 

+ Heb: is His Þ {cales are his pride h, ſhut up together,” as 

Srengpie- 24th a cloſe ſeal 3. ; 

{ces of ſhield. |, 4. prides and pleaſeth himſelf in hisſtrong and mighty Scales. 

I Heb: his frong ſhields ( 3. e. Scales ) are his pride» Or (as other, both 

* ancient and modern Interpreters render it ) His body ( or, His back, 
as this word is uſed, 1ſa: 38; 17: which, if weant of the Crocodile, 
is emphatical, becauſe his ſcales and ſtrength is in his Back, where< 
as his Belly is very ſoft and eaſily pierced, ) 1s the firengrh of ſbielas, 

2 e. fortified with Scales {trong as Shields. This 15 meant either, 

2. of the Whaley, whoſe Skin, though ir be ſmooth and entire, and 

withour Scales, may be ſaid to be, as (which Particle is oft under- 

ſtood) ffrong ſhields, becauſe it is, as Galen reports, exceeding hard 
and ſtrong, and almoſt impenerrable, and like a ſhield, eſpecially 
then when Shields were made of Leather ; and ſo 1t 15 not only on 
the back as inthe Crocobile,bur alto in the belly all over.Or,2.of the 

Crocodile,which hath Scales properly ſo called,and thoſe moſt rruly 

ſuch as here deſcribed, as all Authors and Eye-witneſles conſent. þ 

Cloſelycompadted together,as things thatare faſtaed together bya ſeal 

16 One is ſo near to another & that no air can come 


between them. - 
k Which plainly ſhews that the Shields or Scales are ſeveral ; 


*Rom:11: 


Phat 24; 18 


[[Or,within 


is all oneentire piece, unleſs there were a ſort of Whales having 
thick and ſtrong Scales, which ſome have affirmed, but is nor yer 


known and proved, : 
17 They are joined one to another ; they ſtick toge- 


ther that they cannot be ſundred 7. 
7 It is exceeding difficult, and almoſt impoſſible by any power of 
Art to ſever them one from another. 


18 by his neeſings » alight doth ſhine, and his eyes 


ere like the eye-lids of the morning ». 
= Which maybe underſtood, either 1. of any commotion or a- 
tation of the Body, like that which is in neezing, as when the 
hale ſtirreth himſelf, and caſteth or ſhooteth up great ſpouts of 
Water into the Air by the pipes which God hath planted in his Head 
for this uſe ; which water being thin and tranſparent, and illumi- 
nated by the Sun-beams, caſts forth a ſhining Iighr. Or, 2. of 
Reezing preperly ſo called, which the Crocodile is ſaid frequently to 
do, becauſe it commonly turneth its eyes to the Sun, as Strabs, and 
others note ; which when a Man doth, he is apt to neeze. n» To 
which they ſeem very fitly compared, becauſe the Eyes both of the 
Whale and Crocodile are dull and dark under the Water,but as ſoon 
as they appear above Water, they caſt forth immediately a bright 
and clear light, though ner like that of the Sun at noon day, which 
been too great an Hyperbole, yer like the Morning light, ſud- 

denly breaking forth after the dark Night. 

I9 Out ofhis mouth go burning lamps o, and ſparks 


| offire leap out, 


7 0 B.* 


07,6, His breathings and blowings are very hot,or flam; | 
following verſes explains this. This alſo _ ſeem A 
to the Crocodile, which breaths (as Ariſtetle affirms ) like the Hippo 
potamws, of which ancient Authors affirm, that $:s woſtrils are —_— 
large, and he breaths farth a fiery ſmoak like that of a Furnace, than «4 
the Whale, which rather caſts forrh ſtreams of Water, as was noted 
before, than flamesof Fire, there being no ſuch great heat obſerved 
in Whales, nor as far as I know, in any other fiſhes. 

20 Out of his noſtrils goeth ſmoak, as ous of a ſeeth-. 


ing pot or caldron p. 

Þ Heb. Poe. So a great Caldron is called, becauſe it ſends forth 

. great oi as : _— doth vapours ; as in like manner the great 
razen Laver in the Temple is called a Sea, for the great quanti 

of Water which it held. i T p ne 

21 His breath kindleth Coals q, 


out ofhis mouth. 
9 An Hyperbolical Exprefſion,noting only extraordinary Hear, 
22 In his neck remaineth ſtrength r,and + ſorrow is fHeb: jw, 


turned into joy before him 5. yOW rejojus 

r His neck is exceeding ſtrong. This is meant, <ither 1! of the ©: 

' Whale, who though he hath no Neck no more than other Fiſhes _ 

: have, yer he hatha part in ſome ſort anſwerable to it, where the 

Head and Body are joyned together. Or,2. of the Crocodile, whom 

Ariſtotle ( who made it his buſineſs to ſearch out the ſeveral Na. b 1 

tures and Parts of all living Creatures, and had all the helps and 

advantages which he deſired to find them out, ) and Scaliger, and 

others, affirm to havea Neck, though ſome deny it. 57. e. The 

approach of any Enemy, which uſually cauſeth fear and ſorrow in 

othets, fills him with joy, as being deſirous of nothing more than 

fighting. Or, ſorrow rejoyceth, or danceth, or triumpheth, &c. i.e. is 

prevalent and viQorious, aid quickly invades and conquers all thoſe 

Men, or other Creatures, which are in his way. Sorrow is his com« 

panion, or Harbenger, which attends upon him whereſoever he 

goes. This may be a Poetical Expreffion, like that of the Poets, 

when they bring in Anger or Fear going along with or before Mars 

into the battel. 
23 | The flax # of his fleſh « are joined together : + Heb th 

they are firm in themſelves, they connot x be moved 9 falling, | 
# Or, Parts, which ſtick out, or hang looſe, and are ready to : 

fall from other Fiſhes, or Creatures. = The word Fl is uſed of 

Fiſhes alſo, as Lev. 115 11: 2 Cor: 15: 39, x Without difficulty, 

yTo wit,out of their place,or from the orher Members of the Body. 

24 His heart & is as firm asa ſtone, yea, as hard as 


a piece of the nether mil-/tone a. 


and a flame goeth t Heb: 
J0 


z Either, r. That part of the Body is moſt firm, and hard, and 
ſtrong. Or, 2. His Courage is invincible; he is void of fear for 
himſelf, and of Compaſſion to others, which is oft called hardneſs of - 
heart, a Which being to bear the weight of the upper, ought to be 
the harder and ſtronger of the two. 

25 When he raiſeth up himſelf þ,the mighty e are a- 


fraid: by reaſon of breakings 4 they purifie them- 


ſelves e. | | 
& Shewing himſelf upon the top of the Waters. Or, becauſe of 
his Hight or Greatneſs, or Majeſty, for he is repreſented as a King, wv: 


34; © Even the ſtout-hearted Mariners or Pafſ-ngers, who uſe to 
be abovefear! d Either 1- Of the Sea, cauſed by his motion, which 
daſheth the Waves in pieces one _ another. Or rather,2: Of 


their Mind and State : by reaſon of their great danger and diſtreſs; 
which is expreſſed by this very word,Pfal 60. 2: Jonah 2: 4. e Either 
1. Naturally ; that being the uſual effe& of great terrour. See Ezek. 


7:17; Or rather 2: Morally, as this word is generally uſed. Thoſe 


| Mariners who ordinarily live in a groſs and general negle& of God, 
; and of Religion, are ſo affrighred with this imminent danger, that 


they cry unto. God intheir trouble, as is ſaid in like caſe, Pſal: 107: 28: 
and endeavour to purge their Conſciences from the guilt of their 
ſins, by confeſling and ſeemingly forſaking of them, and to make 
their peace with God, and obtain his favour and help, by their 
Vows, and Promiſes, and Prayers. . 
26 The {word of bim that layeth at himf cannot |or.awuf- 


hold g : the fpear, the dart, nor the || habergeon bh, plate. 
f That appreacheth to him, and dare ſtrike at him, g Heb. can 


nor ſtand, i.e. either, 1: Cannot endure the ſtroke, but will be bro- 
ken by ite Or, rather 2: Cannot abide or take hold of him, or be 
fixed in him; but is inſtantly beaten back by the exzeſſive hardneſs 


which agrees better to the Crocodile,than to the Whale, whoſe Skin | 


of the-Skin,which cannot be pierced by it, as may be gathered from 
this and other paſſages before and after it, This alſo ſeems -. better 
; to agree to the Crocodile, whoſe Skin no ſword, nor Dart, nor 
' Muſquet Buller (as others add )can pierce,than to the Whale, whoſe 
| Skin is eaſily pierced, as experience ſheweth in our Whales ; except 
, the Whale here ſpoken of were of another kind 3 which is not im- 
| poſſible. þ Or,Breaſt-plate. As offenſive Weapons cannot hurt him, 
{o defenſive Weapons cannot ſecure a Man from him. Bur Men 
, that go upon the deſign of taking either Whales or Crocodifes do 
| not uſe tofortifie themſelves in that manner. Some therefore take 
; this to be another offenſive Weapon, a kind of Dart, as this word 
ſignifies in the 4rab:ck Language; which is but a Diale& of the He- 
; brew,and from which the true ſignification of many Hebrew words 
' muſt be gathered. 
| 27 Heeſteemeth iron as ſtrawi, and braſs as rotten 


wood. 
z; He neither fears nor feels the blows of he one more than ofthe 


other, 
| 28 The arrow k cannot makghim flee : ſling-ſtones 
I are turned with him into ſtubble m. 

k Heb. the ſon ofthe bow; as it iselſewhere called the ſon of the qui- 
wer, Lam: 3; 13: the Quiver being as it were the Mother or Womb 
that bears it, and the Bow as the Father that begers it,or ſendeth it 
forth. © 1 Great Stones caſt out of Slings, which have a great force 
andefficacy ; of which ſee on 2 Chrox, 26:14, -» Hurt him no more 
than a blow with a lictle ſtubble. 

29 Darts are counted as ſtubble ; he laugheth at the 


(baking of a ſpear my. 


#4 Io 


Chap, XL 4 


jp 


"(h38:3 


"yo: g 
"19:6 


\XLLP-ap. XLII. 


eb: the 
8, 


Brea 


J 


» So far is he from fearing it, and flecing from it, that he ſcorn 
and defies it. 


pref "he goinred things upon the mire 0s 
(0297 0 


like ( which Paticle is oft underſtood ) [harp ſhreds, or frag- 


der him, 
Swords or Darts which were flung at him, and broken upon him } 
upon themire. The fragments of broken Weapons lie as thick at the 
botrom of the Water in the placeof the fight, as little ſtones do in 
the Mirey or as they do ina Field after tome. fierce and furious 
Batre!s: or thus.with him(or for himzi,e. for his defence)are ſharp fones. 
he ſpreadeth himſelf like an arrow, or threſhing inflrument ( which is fil- 
Jes and fortified with Iron ) in the mire or mudin the bottom of che 
Warer; So he doth not deſcribe his reſting place, but rather his Back, 
which he not unfitly compares to ſharp Stones or threſhing Inftru- 
ments, becauſe the Darts or Stones caſt at him pierce no more into 
him than chey would do into them if they were thrown at them. 


21 He make:h the deep p to boil like a pot q: he 


maketh che ſ-a r like a pot of ointment 5. 

p Thedeep Watzrs, or the Sea, which is called the deep, Pſal. 
107; 24: Jonah 2: 3: as it is cxplained in the next Clauſe. 9g To 
ſwell, and foam, aad froth by his frong and vehement motion, 2s 
any Liquor doth when it is boiled in a pot. r Ether the great Sea, 
the proper place of the Whale, Pſal: 104: 25: or, the great Ruver 
Nils, which is called a Sea, both inScripture. as 1a; 11: 15: and 
in other Authors ( of which ſee my Latin Synopſis) as Euphrates 1, 
called the Sea of Bxby/ong Ita: 21: 1: Jers 51: 36; cr Lakes or Pools 
which are moſt frequeuriy called Seasboth in the Old and New Te- 
fament. as every 0:16 kno-vs. Ard in ſuch Lakes the Crocodiles are 
no leſs than in N75. as it is attelied by Herodotus, and Strabo, and 
otiers. 5 This Ciauſe ſeems to be added very empharically to inti- 
mate that this Leviathan cauſerh not only a vehement commot on, 
bur alſo a great fragrancy in the Sea or Waters where it is. Which 
though it was nor obſerved by the Ancients, yet is unanimouſly 
affirmed by later Authors upon their own knowledge and experi- 
ence, that it caſts a perfume like Musk; of which ſee the Names 
and Words of the, Auti.ors in my Latin Synopſes, 

22 He maketh a path to ſhine after bim ; one would 


think the deep to be hoary t. | 
t When he raiſeth himſelf to the top of the Waters, he doth as 
it were plow it up and make large furrows, and cauzth a white 
froth or foam upon the Waters. - Fx 
lf}, = , 32 Upon earth & there is not his like || who is made 


_ without fear. x. : 
iſt 4 Either 1: firifly ſo called, a5 it is diſtinguiſhed from the Sea 


or Rivers, There is no Land-creature comparable co him for ſtrength 
WP. and courage. Or 2. largely raken. No Creature equals him in all 
points. Or, pon the duſt,as the word properly ſignifies,z. e. among 
all things thar creepin rhe duſt,among which this may in ſome ſort 
be numbred for the ſhortneis of irs feer. bur this were no great ho- 
nour to it to be the chief ot creeping things ; and therefore the for- 
mer Tranſlation leems more pr. p-r for the preſent deſign of mag- 
nifying this Crearurs above all uthers. x Fears no Enemy as being 
full of courage, nd {enſiv]e-of his own invincible ſtrengeh. _ Or, 
ſo as he cannot be bruiled or brokengvy reaſon of his prodigious hardneſs, 


all the children of pride. 

He doth not turn his back upon,or hide his face from the high- 
eff and proud-ſt Creaturesbur looks upon them with a bold and un- 
datzinted counrenance,as being witkour any fear of them,as was now 
ſaid. - & He carries himſelf with Princely Majeſty and Courage to- 
wards the ftouteſt and loftieſt Creatures; which, though of far 
higher ſtature rhan himſelf, be ſtrikerh down with one ſtroke of his 
Tail 2s he commonly doth Cows, and Horſes, and ſometimes 


Llephants. 
C H AP. XLIL 
9's humlintion and repentance, 1-----=6. God preferring Job's cauſe. re- 
priveth hu friends, for whom fob muſ? intercede, and God will accept him, 
J=anncg: God wagnifiech and bleſſeth Job, lo--==15 His age and 
death, 16,17. ; 
Hen job anſwered the LORD, and ſaid, | 
| 2 I know that thou canſt do a every thing b, and 


Or, x 

lnghes that || no thought can be withholden thee ec. 

line x —# Not only by powers ( for that he always thought ) hut alſo by 

t kad, Tight ; about which he had in ſome fort doubred and diſputed. Ir 
is a Maxim in Law, That a Man can only do that which he: hath a 
right to do. 6 Whatſoever it pleaſeth thee ro do with thy Creatures. 


fleb/harp 30 Þ Sharp ſtones are under him : he ſpreadeth ſharp- 


o According to this Tranſlation the ſenſe is, His $skin iS ſo hard 
and impenetrable, rhat the ſharpeſt ſtones are as eaſic to him as the 
Mire, and make no more impre{ion upon him. Bur the words are 
and may be otherwiſe rendred as continuing the former ſenſe, They 
( to wit, the Arrows, Darts or Stones caſt at him) are, or fall un- 


ments of ftenes, he ſpreadeth ſharp pointed things ( to wit, the pieces of 


of which I hive ſpoken before Fi 


4 He bzhoideth all high :bings y : he is a king over | 


'ven rams, andgo to my ſervant Job r, and offer up s for 


; his friends and for himſelf, as the nexc verie explains it. 


O B. 


s | demand of thee 3, and declare thou unto me. 
þ Hear and accepr my humble and penjtent Confoflion and Recan»= 
; tation. Z Or, and enquireto wit,Counſel or Inftru&tion, as a Scho- 
lar doth of his Maſter, as the following words nore. I wiil no more 
ſawcily diſpute the matter with thee,burbes informarion from thee- 
The words which God had uttcred to 7ob by way of chal'enge,Chap: 
38: 3: & 40: 7: Job returns to him again in way of ſubmiſſion. 
5 I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but 
now mine eye ſeeth thee &. 5 

& The knowledge which I had »f thy Divine Narure,and .Perfe- 
tions and Counſels, was hitherto dark, ar:d doubrful,and conjeftu» 
ra], being grounded chiefly, if not en'y, upoa th: Inftrufions and 
Reports of other Men ; but now it is elearand certain, as being im= 
mediately inſpired into my Mind by this thy glorious Apparition 
and Revelation, and by the Operation of thy Holy Spirit ; which 
makes theſe things as certain and evident to me, as if 1 ſaw them 
with mytbodily Eyes: | ; 

6 Wherefore Iabhor 1 my ſelf m, and repent in duſt 
anc aſhes ». 

/ 7.e, Diſlike, anddeteſt, and loath: »» Or, »y former words and 
carriage, One of theſe, or ſome like Supplement is neceſſary ro 
compleat the ſenſe,and is clearly gathered from the following words. 
2 Sitting in Duſt and Aſhes; which hitherto I have done in token 
of my grief for mv Affliction ; but now I deſire and reſolve to do in 
teſtimony of my Penitence for my Sins. 

. 7 Andit was /o that after the LORD had ſpoken 
theſe words unto Job, the LORD ſaid to Eliphaz the 


; Temanite 0, my wrath is kindled againſt thee, and a- 


gainlt thy ewo friendsp, for ye have nor ſpoken of me 
| the thing that is right, as thy ſervant Job hath g. 

ll, 6 As the eldeſt of the three, and becauſe he ſpoke firſt, and by 
his evil example led rhe reſt into the ſame miſtakes and miſcarriages 
þ To wit, Bildad and Zophar, who are not excuſed, but ſeverely re- 
proved, although they were drawn into the ſin by Eliphaz his au- 
thority and influence. Elihu is not here reproved, becauſe he dealt 
more juſtly and mercifully with Job, and did nor condemn his Per- 
ſon, bur only rebuke his fiaful expreſſions. q Either, «. 2s Job hath 
now ipoken : you have not acknowledged your errours as he hath 
done. Orrather, 2. asJob did in his Diſcourſes with you. Which 
15 not to be underſtood ſimply and abſolutely ( as is manifeſt from 
God's cenſure upon Job for his hard and evil ſpeeches of him ) bur 
, comparatively : becauſe Job was not ſo much tobe blamed as th:y, 
i partly becauſe his opinion concerning the methods of Gods Provi- 

dence,and the indiff:rency,and promiſcuouſneſs of its diſpenſatiops. y 
towards good and bad men was truer than theirs, which was that 
| Goddid generally reward good men and puniſh ſinners in this Life; 
partly becauſe their misbelief of God's counſels and dealings with 
| Men was attended with horrid uncharitabicneſsand cruelty rowards 
' Job, whom they wounded with bi*ter and injurious Speeches, and 
condemned as an Hy pocrite,nct only withour ſufficient evidence, as 
Not being able to ſearch his Heart, bur upon falſe and frivolous 
grounds, to wit, his tore Aﬀflitions, and againſt many Evidences 
of Piety which Job had given ; and partly becauſe Job's heavy 
preſſures might eaſily cloud and darken his mind,and draw forth his 
| Impatience and paſſionate Speeches ; which although it did nor' 
' wholly excuſe 7b, yer did certainly much extenvate his Offences ; 
whereas they were under no ſuchTemprations orProvocations,cither 


| from God or from Job, bur voluntarily broke forth unro their hard, 


X and ſevere, and untrue Exprefſions concerning Goa's Counſels and 
Job's Conditions, thereby adding affliticn to him whom God did 
ſorely affli&, which was moſt unfriendly and inhuman. 


8 Therefore take unto you now ſeven bullocks,and ſe- 


f Heb: ba 
face, or, 
perſon, 


your ſelves a burnt-offering,and my ſervant Job ſhal pray 
for you, for + him will I accept: : leaſt T deal with you 
after your folly u, in that ye have not ſpoken of me the 
thing which is right, like my ſervant Job 

r Whom though you have cenſured ar.d condemned as an Hypo- 
crite, Town for my faichful Servanr, human infirmiry excepted. 5 
By the hand of Fob, whom I do hereby conſtirire your Prizft ro Pray 
and Sacrifice for you, * To wit, on your behalfas well as on his 
own. « Leſt my wrath and juſt Judgmenr take hold of you for your 
falſe and fooliſh Speeches. 

9 So Elephaz the Temanite; and Bildad the Shuhite, 
and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according 
as the Lord commanded them x : the LORD allo accep- | 
ted * Job y. | } Heb: rhe 

x Shewing their repentance by their ſubmiſſion to God, and to face of Job, 
Fob for Gods ſake, and by taking ſhame to themſelves. » Both for 


10 And the LORD turned the Captivity of Job <s 


Chap. XL11t 


c He ſpeakseithery 1. of 75's thoughts. Thou knowelt me and all 
my ſinful and unworthy thoughts of thy Providenrial Dealings 
with me, though I was not able ro ſee the evil of them. Or 2. of 
God's thourhts. Whrarſoever thou thinkelt or propoſeſt to do,thou 
canſt or maiſt doit; and neither I nor any of thy Creatures can 
either reſtrain rthice f:om it, or condemn thee for it,as I have boldly 
and wickedly pretumed to do. So this laſt Clauſe ofrhe verle ex- 
Plains the forixcr., | | | 
F * Who is hed chat hidech counſel without know- 
ledge e? therefore f have I utrered that I underſtood 
44:5: not ;* things too wonderful for me, whic? I knew not g. 
9'6: 45 e What am I that I ſhiuld dare to da 10. Ah filly audacious 
Wretch that Iam,that I ſh-uld be guilry of ſuch madneſs ! e Which 
Words are repeated out of Chap: 38: 2: where thev are explained, 
fBecauſe my mind was without knowledye,therefore my ſpeech was 
ignorant and foolith. Or Being {:nfible of my 1wnorance and raſh- 
eſs, I think fir ro make this humbie and ingenious confeſſion. gl 
bave ſpoken fooliſhly and unadvifcdly of :1ings faravove my reach, 
even of God's infinite and ſoveraign Majeſty, and of his deep and 
unlearchable Counſels and Providence, : ; 
4 Hear, I beſeech thee, and I willipeak þ:; I will ' 


(hby8:4; 


when he prayed for his friends a: alſo b the LORD + _ 
| gave Job twice as much as he had before. been to Fob 


z 7. e. Brought him out of thar ſtate of Bondage in which he had unro che 
been ſo long held by Satan and by his own Spirit,and our of all his dow9les 
Difſtrefſ=s and Miſeries: Or, return Job's captivity, i. e- the Perfons' 
and Things which had been taken f:om him, not the ſame which he 
hid loſt, bur other equivalent to them, and that wich advantage. 

a Whereby he manifeſteth his Obedience to God and his true Love 
and. Charity ro them, in being ſo ready to forgive them, and hear 
tily to pray for them; for which God would nct Jer him loſe his 
Reward. 6 An emphatic] Particie.He nor only gave him as much as 
he loſt, bur double to it. : 

11 Thene came there unto him all bis brethren, and 


all his ſiſters d,&all they that had been his acquaintance 
before, and did eat bread wich him e in« his houſe 2: 
and they bemoaned him f, and comforted him over all 
the evil g that the LORD had brought upon him : eve- 
ry man alſo gave him a piece of money, and every ons 


an ear-ring of Gold þ. | 
4 M 2 cWhen 


& a I 
7 


- 


ES PS AL M Ss. Pal, Ll. 1h 


—— 


F al. I. : 

'c When Job had humbled himſelf.and God was reconciled to Job, 
he quickly rurnedthe hearts of his Friends to favour him, according 
to Prov. 16. 7, as during his impenitency, and for his trial and hu= 
miliation he had alienated their Hearcs from him, of which Jobſo 
ſadly comp'ains. d Largely ſo called, according to the Scripture-uſe 
of theſe Titles,to wit,his Kindred diſtinguiſhed from his other Ac- 
giainntence: 1, 6, Fealted with him,as that phraſe is commoniy uſed in 
Scripture,to congratulate with him for Gods great and glorious fa- 
Vour alre:zdy vouchfafed to him in ſo eminenit a Viſion : and Revela- 
tion. f They declared the ſenſe which they had of his Calamuties 
whilſt they were upon him,alchough they had hitherto wanted op- 

ortuniry to expreſs it. g Or, concerning all the evil; which though it 
wasbirter roendure when it was preſent, yer the remembrance of it 
revived in him by the Diſcourſes of his Friends was very de'ightful 
4s is uſual in ſuch caſes þ Partly to make up his former loſlcs, and 
partly as a &ſrimony of heir honourable reſpeCt to him. 

I2 So the LORD bleſſed 3 the latter end of Job more 
than his beginning : for be had fourteen thouſand ſheep 
and fix thouſand cainels, and 4 thouſand yoke of oxen, 


and athouſand ſhe-afſes, _ 
; No: only with Spiritual, but alſo with Temporal and Earthly 


Bleſings. 


13 He had alſo ſeven ſons and three daughters. Ined, as he complains. 


14 Andbecalled & the name of the firſt, Jemima,ang 
the name of the ſecond, Kezia, and the name of the 
third; Keren-happuch. 

k Giving them ſuch Names as ſignifie their excellent beauty, of 
| which ſee my Latine Synepſts. 

15 And in all the land were no women found ſo fair 
as the daughters of Job : and their father gave them 7 


inhe1itance among their brethren. 

1 Gave his Daughters a ſhare, and poſſibly an equa! ſhare with 
his Sons in his Inheritance;, which 1n 1o plentiful an Eſtate he mighr 
eaſily do, eſpecially to ſuch amiable Siſters, without the envy of 
their Brethren: and which peradventure he did to oblige them to 
ſettle chemſelves amongſt their Brethren, and to marry unto their 
own Religious Kindred, not ro Strangers. who in thoſe times were 
generally {wal'owed up in the gulph of Idolatry. 

i6Afcer this lived Job an bundred and forty years,and 
ſaw his ſons,and his ſons ſons, even four generations. 

17 Se Job w died being old, and fuil of days ns 

m Aﬀer God had turned his Captivity as is ſaid wv. 10, » By 
which lengrh -f f:isdays it ſeems mol? probable rhat he lived before 
the times of Moſes, when the days of humane life were much ſhorts 


- , F4 "S, 


The AR 


PSALMS 


GUMENT. 


TH B divine Authority of this Book of Pſalms is ſo certain and evident, that it was never queſtioned ins 

I the Church : Which being fixed, it ivof (mall m:ment that the Penmen of ſome of them 18 not now 
knomp : Nor doth this any more leſven its Authority, than it invalidates the Decree of a Prince, or an AF of 
Parliament, that it is net certain by whoſe Pen it was drawn vp. Moſt of them were compoſed by David, as 3s 
- evident both from the title of them, and from the expreſs Teflimony ef the New Teftament concerning ſome of 
them; and that by the inſpiration of Gods Spirit, as appears both from the divine matter and frame of them,and 
from 2 Sam. 23. 1. Mat. 22.43, @c. AGS I. 16. and 2: 25. But ſome of theme were compoſed by other Per- 


ſons 5, by Moles, as Pial. go. by Heman, end Ethan, 


and Alaph, as the title of the Pſalms ſhew 5 and by o- 


thers after their times, whoſe names are not mentioned, asis nou from Plal. 12 6. and 137. 1t is apparent 
/ 


that tbe Plalms were not written in the order in whic? they now 
by Ezra, as the Hebrew Do@ors affirm; or byſome other holy Prophet or Prophets. 


e 5 and thy were put 1nto this order either 


t is ſufficient for us, that 


the whole Bookis owned as Canonical by eur bleſſed Saviour, Luke 24. 44+/ 


PS ALI. 
The ARGUMENT. 


| His Pſalm was put firſt asa Prefaceto all the reſt. as a power- 
ful perſwaſive to the diligent reading, and ſerious ſcudy of 
the whole Book and of the reſt of the Holy Scripture, raken 
ow _ bleſſedneſs which attends upon the ſtudy and praftice 
thereof. | 
The Godly bleſſed, 1, Thr delight in Golds Law, 2. Their fruitſulneſs,3. 
The wretched courſe and condition of the ungodly, 4——6. 
Leſfſed * & the man «that walketh not in the coun- 


3 And / he ſhal be like atree * planted by the rivers 


his leaf aiſo ſhal not F wither 0, and whatſoever he x. 
doth ſhal proſper p, 


1 Or, for, asthis particle is oft uſ*d, as Pſa. 601 i2i and 168. i37 
Prov, 4:17: This being the proof of thar bleflednefsof a good man, 
which he had only aſſerted (v. 1.) m(1i.e.) A river; the plural num. 
ber being put for rhe ſingular, as it is Judy. 125 7, Jonah 1,5. and 
oft elſewhere, = #, e; In the time of fruit-bearing : Which being 
applied to the good man, notes either, 1, His ative goodne!s, that 


. F 2 . . +. * 
1 of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his ſeaſon n; gens 


tHebfodi 


'A0s4 
| Ur, i 
144d 
P 1 
8/M01g 
ſtib.n 
GB, 


. - P roV.qe 
14, I 5 * 


{el of the || ungedly b,nor ſtandeth c in the way d he ſceketh and improveth all opportunities for the doing of good; 
Or, offinnerse, * nor ſitteth in the ſear f of the {cornful g. 


excrciſing godiineſs, juſtice, temperance, charity, patience,&'«.ac- 


& The' Hebrew words are very Emphatical:Bleſzaneſs belongs to that 
mar; or. O the blefſeantſs of that man! Thrice bleſlzd is thar man;who 
ishere deſcribed negacively,and in thenext verſe politively+ 6 z:e. 
"That doth not lead his Life according to their counle),or courie, or 
wanner of living : That doth not aſſociate himieif with them, nor 
follow theirevil inſtigations or examples. Walking, notes choice of 
it, and continuance or progreſsin it, otherwiſe good men co ſome- 
times ſtep aſide into an evil Action. For the explaining of the phraſe 
fee Gen. 49: 6. 2 Chron, 221 3, 4, 5+ Prov.1.15. and 4 14-Mic.6: 16. 
c Which notes a more ſetcled abode,hardneſs and obſtinacy in iti z.e 
In their courſe or manner of Converſation 3 in the prattice of 
thoſe things which they chuſe and uſe to do;which is called a mans 
way, Pſal. ©. 8. and 25. 4+ 2 Pet, 2. 23 15, e Empharically fo called : 
here. as alſo Pſal. 26. 9. Eccleſ, 9. 2. Mat: 26: 45: Luke 7: 37. John 
9. 16, 31. who give up themſelves to the power and pradice of lin, 
making it their great buſineſs and their delight.f Which nores their | 
aſſociation, or incorporation of themſelves with them; a conſtant , 
and reſolved perſeverance in their wicked courſes, with great con- 
rentand ſecurity;and a great proficiency and eminency in the ſchoo], 
of Wickednzſs, and an ability and readiicſs to inſtru others there- 
in. £ Of thoſe who are nor only ditea'ed, but reje&, deſpiſe, and : 
ſcorn all Remedies ; who make a mock of fin, and of Gods threat- 
nings and judgments againſt Sinners ; who deride all wholeſome | 


reproofs and counſels, and make it their trade to ſcoff at goodneſs , 1 ; : 
and good mep. Divers have obſerved a gradation in this verſe, the judgement #,nor ſinners in the congregation of the righ- *pſ 24; 
12415» 


following clauſe ſtill exceeding the former,for fanaing is more than | 
walking, and firing more than fanding. And the way or courſe may 
ſeem to be worſe than the counſel or deſign, and the ſeat is worſe 
than the way : And Sinnerrin Scripture ute, are worſe than the un- 
godly,and the ſcornful ar the worſt'of Sizners : But I would not lay 


cording to the ſeveral occaſtons offered to him; or rather, 2. His 
certain proſperity.and happineſs, as may be gathered from the end 
of hits Verſe, and the oppoſite ſtare of the ungodly, wv. 4, 5, Thar 
he fhal have the fruit or benefit of his godly life in due time, or 
when it is expedient fer him; poſſibly in this life, but aſſuredly in 
the next life, o His happineſs is not ſhort ang tranſitory,as all world- 


ly felicity is,but fixed&everlaſting, like thoſe trees which are contin« 


ually green and flouriſhing: Or: «nd(like a tree) whoſe leaf never withers| 
All kis a&ions ſhal be crowned with ſucceſs and a bleſſed end or 
efe& : fee Rom. 8, 28. ; = 
4 Fhe ungodly are not ſo q : but are *like the chaff 


which the wind driveth away 7. 


q Their condition is far differing from the former,r In regard ei- = 4 


ther, 1,0f their ſinful diſpoſition. They are vain and frothy, unpro« 
ficable and hurtful, without any root of true and ſolid goodneſs, 
without any certainerid, or conſtant courſe, toſſed to and fro with 
every wind of their own luſts or temptations. Or rather, 2. of their 
wretched condition : They are reſtleſs and unquiet in their own 
minds and conſciences ; their ſeeming felicity, in which they pleaſe 


and pride themſelves, hath no firm foundation,but quickly vaniſheth 


and fleeth away as chaff doth before the wind, and their end is tobe 
burned, ſee Job 21. 18, Pſal. 35. 5, Mat. 3.12« 


5 Therefore s the unzodly ſhal not * ſtand t in the 


teOuUsS X, 

s To witgbecauſe they are ungodly : Or becauſe, as this particle is 
ſometimes uſed, as Gen, 38. 26, Numb. Io, 31, and 14:43. Pſal. 42. 64 
for this Verſe isadded to enforce or prove what he faid in the for- 
mer. * ( 7,e. ) Not ſubliſt or endure the trial ; or not be juſtified or 


j 


I}: & 


la: 37 


19: b; 


# tak; 


great ſtreſs upon ſuch Obſervations, | carry his cauſe: as this word is oft uſed,being oppoſed to fallin 

7 . SO ; £ * A5 , Ig, as 
2 But his delight ;s in the law b'of the LORD,* and Pal. 18, 38.and 20 8. Mal, 3. 2. Luke 21.36, Rom. 14+ 4. Eph. 6 13. 
« Either 1. In therimeof temporal calamities, when God ſhal ariſe to 


- Johh..8. 


"2% in his law doth he meditate ;day and night &. 


þh (i.e, ) In the ſtudy and pradtice of ir,as appears from the Con- 
text: The law of God may be here underſroouy of the whole DoGt- 
rine delivered by God ro-the Church confifting of DoQrines, Pre- 


their conſciencesare filled with horrour. Or 2, In that great and 
general judgment of the whole World. called here the Juagment 
emphatically: inthat ſolemn and general Congregation ofall Man- 


cepts, Promiſes, and Threatnings, &c, as israken Pſalm 37.31. and 
98.1- Iſar 51s 7. John 10:34. or more particularly of the preceptive 
part of it, which 1s commonly ſocalled : and fo this is noted as the 
p=-culiar charaQzr of a good man, tiat he del/ghreth himſcif nor 
oniy in the Ronife.wtch a bad'man may do, Mat: 13. 20. but e- 
ven inthe commands of God, Pſal, 11251. and ng. 47,127, 1431 John 
5: 3;which are unwelcome and burthenſume toa wicked man. i The 
word implies a deepyand erious, en4 aftettionate rhoughtfulneſs a- 
bour it :1ce Pſa. 19. 14. and 49.3- Prov. 24. 2. [/a, 33.18. k Not 


fe]dom and ſhght'y. as Hypocrites do, but diligently, frequently, | z Either 1, properly and fpeculatively be ſcaccheth and _— 


{conſrent'y, and upon all eccaituns: : 


kind, as the next wordsexpreſs it, i.e. In that ſociety which 
| ſhall conſiſt of none bur righteous Perſons, or amongſt the righte- 
ous ones on Chriſts xight hand, Mat. 25, 32: 


6 Foryths LORD * knoweth x the way of the righ- ,.. ..., 
Pro, 21. 40+ 


teous : but the way of the ungodly (hall periſh +. 
7 He now gives arcaſon of this great difference between the 
righteous and the ungodly, expreſſed in the foregoing Verſes: 


@! 


judge and puniſh them : for then the hearts ofthe wicked fail, and "A 


1.4 
474 


od 


q17 
1, 40% 


Peel. 11. P S 4 
all their hearts and ways, or ations} and therefore will preſerve, 
proſper, and bleſs them ; which may be gathered out of the follow- 
ing and oppoſitz clanſe of this verſe, and out of v: 1, 2: Or 2: 
praQtically and aff=Qtionately, as words of knowledge in Scripture 
do very frequently imply affeRion, as Exod: 1: 8: Pſal: 31: 7;& 101- 

hl 4: Heſ' 8: 4: Amos 3:2: He approveth, loveth, and delighteth mn 

7, [7 them, and in the courſe of theirlives, and therefore will recom- 

*'/ penſe them : Oc,he careth for & direfeth their aQtions to a bleſſed 
iſſue. + All their wicked deſigns and courſes ſhall come to nothing, 
and they ſha'!l periſh with them». iT 


PS. A a 

| The ARGUMENT. h 
HE Penman of this Pialm was David, as is affirmed, AFs 4: 
25. As f r the matter or ſubje&tof it, it may ſcem to have 
ſame reſpe& unto David, and to his ad vancement to,and ſettlement 
in the Throne of Judah and Iſrael; but the chief deſign and ſcope of 
it, and che primary inrention of the Holy Ghoſt in ir, was to deſcribe 
the M<fliah and his Kin :dom, as is manifeſt, 1: From expreſs re- 
ſtimonies of the New-Teſtament to that purpoſ?, as As 43 25: & 13; 
33- Hb 1 5:@ 5:5: and2: From the conſent o. the Ancient H-brew 
Wci-ers who did unanimouſly expound ir fo,1s is confeſſed by their 
ow 1 brethren, particularly by Ratbi Selomrn Farchi upon this place ; 
who h.ca ris memorable p:{lage, Our Doffors expounded this Pſalm of 
the K ng Meſſiah but that we may anſwer th? Hereticks(>y which he means 
th Chr ſt: .ns, as all know) 76 is expedient to interpret it of Davids per- 
ſon, as : he words ſound, Wiuch words, alrhough they are left out of 
ti: latrer Editions of tian Book, either by rhe fraud of the Jews or 
careleſnels, or mittake of others, yet are extan* in the ancient Evi 
tions of it, 3. From divers paſſa;;es of the Pſalm which do not a« 
or2e to David but ro Chriſt oniy. as the title of Son, of which ſee 


Heb: 1: 4, 5. Theextent of his Kingdom, wv: 8: and divine Wor- 
ſhip, v 11,12. ; 
The Kirgdom of Chrift, and the oppoſition of the Heathen foretold, 1-----5, 6, 


7, God giv+th him the Earth for his poſſeſſion, 8, 9. He ſummons all the 
Kings ani Juages of the Earth to ſubmit themſ:lves to him, 10--==-12. 


"Abeylng FT HY «* do the heathen þ || rage, and the peo- 
(Ur, 58 ple c | imagine x vain thing 42 
rn # Upon what provocatior or to what end or purpoſe ? 65 Or, 


ont Gentiles ; who did ſo apainſt David,as we ſee 2 Sam: 5: 6,17. 1 Chron: 
me 14: 8: O's: and againſt Chriſt, Luke 18; 32: Aﬀs 4; 25, &c. 6 This 
*#1, is eiti:cr another expreſſion of the ſame thingy as is uſual in Scrip- 


the Jews or lſraelices, who alſo combined againſt David 2 Sam: 2: 8, 
&c. and againſt Chriſt, As 4: 279, though chey were all of one na» 
tion, and deſcend<d from one and the tame mother, asthis word 
ſignifies, and it is uſed Gen: 25 23« d What they ſhall never be 
able to effe&, and if they could, it would de them-no good,as they 
fancy, but great hurt. 
2 The kings e of the earth f ſer themſelves g, and 
the rulers take counſel together, againſt the LORD 5, 
and 5 againſt his anointed &, ſaying, 5 RE 
e Either thoſe mentioned 2 Sam: 5: & 8. orrather Herod the Great, 
and the other Herod, and Pere and otters wirh or after them. 
So called in way of con-rempr, and to ſhew their madneſs in op« 
| poſing the God of Heaven. g The wor notes their firm purpoſe 
and profefſed hoſtiliry.an4 the combicaticri of their counſels and 
forces. h Either dire&Qly and profeſſedly ; or indire@ly and by 
conſequence, becauſ: 2vainit bis anointed, and againſt his counſel 
and coinmand. 7 Or, #har zs, as this particle is oft uſed, and the 
Jatter clauie explaining the former, and ſhewing in what ſenſe 
they foughr againſt that Gol whom they pret:nded to own and 
worſhip. k Againſt ſuch a King whom God hath choſen and ex- 
alted, and wonderfully accompliſhed and ſer up for his work and 
ſervice, - who therefore will certainly defend him againſt all his 
Enemies« 

"Wy 2 * Let us break their / bands m aſunder, and caſt 

I» 


} away their cords from us n. 

I ( i.e.) The Lords and his anointeds, m Which they deſign to 
put upon vur necks that they may bring us into ſubje&ion. They 
mean the laws of God, which the K:ng would oblidge them to ob- 
ſerve, which though eaſiz and plzaſunr in themſelves and to good 
men, Mat: ir» 29, 30; 1 John 5: 3. yet are very grievous and bur- 
thenſome to corrupt Nature, and to men of wicked lives. » The 
ſame thing expreſſed with a lirrTe more emphaſis, Let us not only 
break off their yoke and the cords by which it is f:ſtened upon us,but 
let us caſt them far away, that they may never be recovered, and 
we miy never be brought into bondage again. 

i 4 * He that fitteth o in the heavens p thall laughq : 
" the LORD ſhall have them in deriſion. 
o As the Judge upon his Tribunal, ard as the King of the whole 
World upon his Royal Throne ; who without ſtirring from his 

lace, can with one look or wqxd deſtroy all hi>enemies, p This 
15 @ppoſed to their being, and reigning upon earth, v: 2+ and is 
mentioned here, as it 4+ in other places of Scripture, as an evidenge 


below, as is noted Pſal; 11 4. and of his ſoveraign ard irreſiſtible 
Power, as is aence gathered, Pſal: 115: 3: See the Preface to rhe 
Lords Prayer | 
their crafty devices, whic1 he ſhall manifeſt to che World ro be 
"6 pans and contemptibile folliess Compare 2 Kings 19: 21. 
PJat 37543. EY 

& 9; S Thenr ſhall he ſpeak to them in his wrath s, and || 

4 © vex them in bis ſore diſpicaſure. TEE 

r In the inidſt of all their plo's and confilencesof ſucceſs. s He 

ſhall ſeverely rebuke rhem, nor ſo much verbally as really,by dread- 
ful Judgments. For Gods ſpeaking 12 oft put for his aftious ; and 
1o here it is explained by vexing in the next branch. Or, he ſhall 
pronounce a terrible Sentence againſt them. 


.5 Ycr # have If ſet « my king *Þ upon my holy hall 


Ted. 4. 
Wed: O Zion : 
TUeb. t NotwichFanding all their art fices and powerful combinations, 


"+ "il of 39 this word is commonly uſed in Scripture, as of Prieſts, z Chron: 
w; Mineſ i 


eurez or asthe fyriner word notes the Gentiles, ſo this may deſign - 


both of Gods clezr and certain kno + {edge of ail things that are done [ 


q ( zee. ) Shall borh deſpiſe and deride them and all 


Mt Zion # Heb. 1 have anointed, ( 7.e. ) deſigned,. appoinred «or conftiruted, * 


EL M 8, 


29: 22: and of Prophets, 1 Kings 19: 16, 19, 20: So alſo of Kings, 2$ 
Juag. 9: 8,153 2 Sam; 2: 4, 7: & 3: 39: Ezek: 28: 14. x Ina fingu- 
jar manner, who hath not his Kingdom by ſucceſſion from for- 
mer Kings, nor by eleQtion of the People, as other Kings have but 
by my ſpecialand extraordinary deſtination ; and who ruleth in my 
ſtead, and according to my will, and for my ſervice and glory. y 
(:.e,) Over my Church and People. Sion properly and ſtriiy ta= 
ken, was an Hill on the North part of Jerujalem,Pſalm 48. 2. where 
there wasa ſtrong Fort, which when David had raken he called ir 
the city of David, 2 Sam: 5.7, 9. and made it the head of his King- 
dom. But in a more large and improper ſente it is frequently put 
for the City Jerſalem, Pjal 483 12: & 87: 2: & 119: x: and for the 
Temple of Jeruſalem, Pſal: 157: 3; Iſa: 18: 75 Jer: 51; 10: which was 
builtupon the Hill of Moriah, which was either a part of Mount Sion, 
oranother Hill adjoyned to ir; and for the Crurch of the Jews, 
Pſalm: 65: 1: & 69: 36: & 97, 8; and for the Chriſtian Church, Heb. 
12. 22: Rev: 14:1: Andby theſe things it is plaia why Sion is here 
Called Gods holy H /! 


7 I will declare z|| the decree a: 
ecrees 


gotten thee c. 33 
and ſubmit to it upon their peril, Publication or promulgation is 
ef]:ntial to al] Laws or Statutes. @ Or. concerning the decree, (i. & ) 
the will or pleaſure and appointment of God concerning my ad- 
vancement into the Throne,and the ſubmiſſion and obedience which 
the People here following ſhail yieldto me, þ Which tho it may 
in ſome ſorr be ſaid to, or cf David, who was in ſome reſpe&s the 
Son of Ged, and begottren by him, as all Believers are, Toba 1. 12 
1 John 3:9. Jam. 1: 18. y:t much more truly and properly belongs 
to Chriſt, who is comm«cnly known by this Title both in the Old 
and New Teſtament, as Prov: 30. 4. Hoſea 11.1. Mat. 2. 15. & 3. 17+ 
& 4. 3, 6. and ofr elſewhere: And te whom this Title is expreſly 
appropriated by the Holy Ghoſt, who is the beft interpreter of his 
own words, A#s 13.33. Heb. 1.5. & 5. 5. and te whom alone the 
foliowing Paſſages belong. c This is alſo applyed by ſome.to David, 
and ſo thy day is the day of his Inauguration, when he.might be ſaid 
tO be begotren by God, ina\much as he w2s then raiſed and delive« 
red from all his troubles and calamities, which were a kind ofdeath, 
and brought forth and advanced toa new kind of life,of Royal State 
and Nignity ; and ſo this was the Birth-day tho' not of his Perſon, 
yet of his Kindom, as the Roman Emperors celebrated a double 
Birth-day ; firſt tte Emperor's, when he was born, and then the 
Empires, when he was advanced to the Empire. Bur this is bur a 
lean and farfetched and douttfulSenſe ; & therefore nor to be allow- 
ed by the laws of Interpretation, when the words may be properly 
underſteod concerning Chriſt, And ſo this may be wun- 
derſ\ood either , 1, of his eternal generation. This day, from all 
Erernity, which is well deſcribed by this day, becauſe in Erernity 
there is no ſucceſſion no[yeſterday, Jno [ to morrow, ] bur itis all 


| 35 onecontinuedday or moment without change or flux; upon which 
J account one aay 15 faid to be with the Lord as long as # thouſand years,and 


a thouſand years as ſhort as one day, 2 Pet. 3: $. or rather, 2. Of the 
manifeſtation of Chriſts Eternal Sonihip in time ; which was done 
partly in his Birth and Life, when his being the Son of God was de- 
monſtrated by the Tefimony of the Angel, Luke 1. 32. and cf God 
the Father, Matth: 3: 17: & 17: 5: and by his own wordsand works; 
but principally in his Re{urre&ien, which ſeems to be here mainly 
intended,of which day this very place is expounded, z#s 13: 33: 
Which Chriſt v-as in a mcſt ſolemn manner declared ro be the Sen of 
God with power, Rom: 1: 4: And this day or time Chriſt might very 
well be ſaid to be begotten by God the Father, partly becauſe the 
ReſurreGticn from the dead is in Scripture called a regeneration or ſe- 
cond Birth, Met: 19: 28: as well it may, being a reſtitution of that 
very B.cing which Man received by his firſt Birth, and that by the 
peculiar and migity power of God: Parcly becaule in this reſpe& 
Chrift is called che ft begotten of the dead, Rev. 11 15, and partly be= 
cauſe cf that common oblervation, T hat things are oft ſaid to b+ done in 
Script ure when they are declared or manifeſted to b+ done.: of which ſee | 
Inſtances, Gen. 41:13. Jer. 1:10, Exek, 43-2, and elfewhere, =- 
8 * Ask of med and I ſhall give hee the heathen fo; * PL.; 
thine inheritance e, and the uttermoſt partsof che earthf 


for thy poſſefiion. 

4 Claim or demand it of me, as thy right by my promiſe, and 
thy birth and purchaſe. e To be poſſeſſed and enjoyed by thee in 
a manner of 2n Inheritance, to wit, conftantly, ſurely, and perpe- 
rua'ly. f Either 1- the whole land of Canaan from one eid of it to 
the other, as this Phraſe is uſed, P/el, 61. 2. & 72. 8. waich is but 
a very narrow ſenſe, and that was bur a very ſmai! Kingdom, and 
no way agreeable to thoſe magnificent expreſſions here uted. Or ra» 
ther, the whole world, not only the Jew:!h Nation,bur the Gentiles 
alſo, as this phraſe is almoſt univerſally uſes in the Old Teſtament, 
15 Pal. 19. 4. & 22. 28. & 46. 10. © 65. 5+ Iſa, 40. 28. & 45. 22, 
&c. And fo theſe words declare the great amplitudes of the King- 
| dom of the Meſſiah, 


—— 


"thou ſhalt daſh them in pieces like a potrers veſſel, 27: & 

g (i. e.) Thoſe people thic will not quietly ſubmit to thee, ſhall 19: x5: 
be cruſhed and deitroyed by thee. þ With thy mighty power, 
which they ſhall never be able to reſift. 

10 Be wiſe ; now k& therefore,O ye kings / : be in- 

ſtructed, ye judges m2 of the earth. : 

i Underſtand yourtrue intzreft, þ Whileſt you have time and 
ſpace for repentance and ſubmiſſion. 1 You and your-people. But 
he ſpeaks of, and to Kings only, partly, becauſe they moſt needed 
the admenitien,as preluming upon their own power and gieatneſls ; 
and thinking it below them to ſubmit to him ; partly, becauſe 
their authority and example could do much with their people ; 
and partly, to intimare the greataeſs of this Monarch, and that he 
was Kivg of Kings, and Lord of Lords, m Or, rulers, or governoars. 
The ſame called Kings in the former branch. ; 

1x Serve the LORD with fear », and rejoyce s 


' with trembling p. 
| Ns (i.e) 


4M 3; 


Plal. IL 


the LORD- hath [1Or, for s | 


z Or publiſhed, that all people concerned may take notice of it, Heb. 155: 


* 


9 ? Thou (balt break them g with a rod of iron b Fg 


(4 
[ 


{aid unto me, * Thou art my ſon 6, this day have I be- #9 13: | | | 


al. 11], 

» i: e. With reverence and an awful ſenſe of his grea 
rious Maj ſty,as very careful and diligent to pleale him, 
to off:-n1 him. o Do not eſteem his 
grievance; but know that it 15a greater g 
the Subj: &s of this King, than tobe Emperors 0 
Pire ; aad a:cordingly rejoyce 1n it; 
ſtimible grace and benefic. 
this joy to which he calls them; an 
nal aad worldly rcjoycing, whic! 1 
and preſumprion and liceariouſnzls, 
that chey do not turn this grace 
entheir dread of Gods tremendous Majeſty, 
Judgments, if they ſh 
gainſt him : but on the contrary work out th 
trembling, as it is preſcribed Phil. 2, 12. Compare Ma 


ſon r leſt he be angry, and ye periſh 
when his wrath is kindled buta hccle ts 
in him #«- 

whereof this was 


Or, in the 1x2 KiGG q the 
Pal l|from che way 5, : 
02: 23. © bleſſed orethey rthatpur their cruſt 
9 In token of yourſſubjettion and adoration ; 


Prov: 3 T | 
6:20, aſiga among the Eaſtern Nations, as 1s manitecſt po rom oe 

TIEN ture, as 1 Sam:10: I. 1 Kings 19: 18. Hoſea 13+ 2. and Irom IIcAatnen 
ices, x MF 4 » To wit, the 


er:I 7:7; Authors. Submit ro his Perion and Government. - 066g Se 
Rom 9:33 Son of God, as »ppears from v. 7. called here rhe on, <# my 
& 10:13, Of eminency and 1na fingular manner, W hich _ ne 
Pet:2:6s £2 Chriſt than ro D+v/a; who is never part.cu arly called by _ 
*- Nam2. 5 7: &, Bc taken out of the way by ceath or deſtruction Or, 
periſh our of the way, 7; e. by loling the rigut way,by takvig wrong 

and evil courſes, the end of which wil] be y our certain afid urter 

ruine. Or'* for the way 1.e. for your evil way or manner of liv- 

ing,for your perverſe and foolith co::ri: of oppoting ny Son 1:tcad 
of ſubmitting cot1m. Or ain ( wiuca particle1s ofc underſ:u0u Jehe 
way, 7: e. in your wick: way or courle, in the mid: of yur pls 
and rebellioas againit tun ; and fo you will dre zn your ji, a>1t 18 
therefore here fitly propolecd as a powerfut Argument 0 di{Iwvadc 
them from ſuch dangerous and deſtrufive courics. 
degree of his anger is v<ry terrible, much more the <a 
of it, cauſed by ſuch a deſperate provocaiiou as this 1d. Oi, for hs 
wrath will be kjnded ſhrtly, or ſuddenly, or within a very little rim, wv 
this word is uſes Pſal: 81: 14, Cant: 3: 4. Iſs: 26. 20. Hs p-uencz 
will not laſt a'waysz but will ſhortly be turned uwiio 1u1y 3 and 
therefore rake heed that you neither deny nor delay iubjcct.on to 
him, but ſpeedily comply with his offers and commands beivis 1t 
be too late. » Who put themiſelves under his power and protection 
b2lieving in him, and expeCing ſafety and happineſs from hum, 
Which cannot with any colour be applicd to David, who always 
diſſwades all men from putting their truſt in Pri::ces,or 1n any men 
or thing beſides or below God, Plal; 20.7. and 44: 6. and 62. 67,8. 
and 118: 8.and 146: 3. and every where; and therefore it would 
very ill have become him to invire ockers to put their truſt in him. 
And he is pronounced curſ:d that rrufterh in man, Jer: 17+ 5. Bar 
Chriſt is every where propounded as an Object of truſt, not only in 
the New Teſtament, bur alſo in the Old, as 1/2; 28; 16. And there- 
fore they are moſt tru'y and fitly ſaid to be Lieſſed that pus ther truſs 
7n him. Under which fentence the conrraiy 1s implied, tar racy 
are moſt curſed and m-:ſerable creatures thar provoke anu Ooppo:e 


 $7:e. {hcieait 


thoughts and mention of it, and therefore expreſſeth it by the con- 
trary and bleſſed condition of his Friends and Subje&s. And ſuch 
Iike fgnifications of rhe miſeries of ſinners by the bletlednels of us 
thers oppoſed to them, we have Mar; 23: 39: Rev: 14: 43s 


PS AM OL | 
A Pſ'm of David a, * when he fled 6 from Abſalom his 


ſon. 
a Compoſed by David, as this phraſeimplies, Pſalm 110. 1. com- 
pared with Mat: 22+ 43. and generally eltewhere. 6 Or, after he 
had fied. Either this Pſalm was compoſed in his flight,or the mar- 
ter of it was then in his thoughts ; which afcerwards he digeſted , 
into this form and order. | 


The Pſalmi# complaineth of the multitude of his Enemies, 1, 2, Bat com- 
forteth himſelf with his confidence m and reliance on God 3 — 6, And 
manifold experiences of his former aſſiſlance, 7. He prayeth for his own . 
and the Churches Salvation 8; 


ORD, how are theincrealed that trouble me ma- 


ny are they that riſe up againit me c» 
c He might well ſay ſo ; for almolt all his people joyned in that 
Conſpiracy, 

2 Many there be which ſay of my ſoul 4, There 3s no ; 
help for him in God e, Selah f. | 
4 i,e, Of me : the ſoul being commonly put for the perſon, as ſa: 
46. 2. Amos 6.8, compare with Gen; 22. 16. e God hath utterly for. j 
faken him for his many crimes,and will never help him more.f This ' 
word is no where uſed bur in this Poetical Book of the Pſahns, and 
in the ſong of Habakkuk, Chap. 3. 3. 9, 13. Which makes that opi- 
nion probable that it was a Muſical Nore,direG&t:ny the Singer either 
to lift up his Voice, or to makea ſhort ſtop or pauſe, or to jiengrhen 
out the rune. Bur withal, it is generally placed at ſome remarke 
able paſſage; which gives occaſion ro think that ir ſerved alſo to 

quicken the attention or obſervation of the Singer and Hearer, 


$054 3 But chou, O LORD, arta ſhield || for meg: my 
o_— glory b, and the lifter up of my head 5: 

g Or. about me, on every ſide, where alſo mine enemies are. 

h Either 1» The Author of my Princely Glory and Majeſty. Thou 

didſt firſt give it, and I doubt not. thou wiltſt defend and reſtore it. 


” £ Sam. 
T5:14. 


, 


quently given, aad wiltſt further give me occaſion of glorying or 
boaſting of thy power and favour to me. ; Thou doſtand wiltſten- 
able me to look up to thee with comfort and chearfuineſs, and upon 
mine Enemies with confidence, and thou wiitſt lift me out ot the | 
mire in which I now lye, and reſtore me to my former power and 
dignity from which Iam failen, For the Phraic ice* Ger; 4; 7; Job | 
Liot5: Luke 18: 11+ 


=” Bf Wy A 


t and glo- 
and atraid | þ 
yoke your diſhonour and 
io:y and happineis to be 
f the great:{t Em- 
and blets God for this ine- 
p This is added to exprets the qualityof 
d ro diſtinguuth ir from chat Car- 
is Uſually actended with 1:cunty 
and to warn them to t-ke heed 
of God into wantonnefs, nor lack- 
and Rof his terrible 
01:1d hereafter revolt from ham, or rebel a- 
cir ſalvation with fear and 
ith, 28. 


expreſſed John 8: 24. which isa ſad aggravarion of rher death, and 


r a!"G ucight * 


him ; and fo curſed and miſerable that David dreaded the very : 


. grounded. 


Or, 2. The matter of my giorying thou haft formerly and free þ- 


Plal. IY. 


4: I cried unto the LORD with my voice &, ard he 


eard me out of his koly hiil/. Selah. 
k The witneſs of my Faith and fervency of affeQions, / Fither 
out of Heaven, fo callec Pſal: 15+ 1, compare 1/a, 66, 1. Or rather 
2. Outoi the hill of Sion, where God was eſpecially preſent, the 
Ark being there at this rime : towards which the Saints then uſed 
ro direct their Brayers,fom thenceGod heard and an{wered and bleC. 
ſed them, Plal. 128, 5.and134: 3. 
5 *1laid me down and flept 2; I awaked», for the * Pſ4.8. 
LORD luſtained me 0, 10V: 3:24 
m To wit, ſecurely, caſting all my cares and fears upon God, and 
relying upon his help. # In due time and manner, after a ſweet 
ard unciiiurbed fleep. o Or. ſupported me, as it were with his right 
hand, that I ſhould not fall under my burthen. He upheld my 
Ipirit, and perſon, and cauſe. 
o *1 wilinotbe afraid of ten thouſands of 
tave ſer rhem{elves againſt me round about p. 
Þ So that I tee ne humane way to eſcape. 
- 7 Ariſe 4, O LORD, fave me, O my God x, * for +p; 
thou haſt ſmitten all mine enemies 5 wp the cheek. = 


bone 7 : thou haſt broken the teeth « of the ungodly. 
9 Beſtir thy ſelf on my b<haif, and be no longer as an 16; ſpe. 
| Qtaror of my miſeries. r Who art mine by ſpecial relation and 
* Covenant, and I am thy ſon arid thy ſervant; Lord fave thine own. 
; 5 Thou haſt hitherto helped me, ao nor new leave me. #£ W! ich 
{ implies either contempt &repro*ch, as this phraſe ſignifies, 1 Kings 
1 22 24 Mich. 5. 1, John 18: 22, and 19 3. Orthe imartneſs and ſore- 
: neſs of the blow, whereby, as tbe next clavfe explains it, their 
* teeth were ſtruck out, and io they did not oniy receive hurt them. 

feives, but were Gdiſenabled fron: doing that miſchief to others 

which they dcfired and were accuſtomed to do. w7.e, Their 
; ſtre-gth and the inſtruments of their cruelty: He compares them 
TO Wiid Beals, 

s * S.uvation belengerh unto the LORD x : thy bleſ-* pr.,s. 
' fing 7s y upon thy peopie &. oCiah. er.3:23, 
x Texpctr not Salvation from my forces, but from thy power Hoſ:13.4 

an«! favour a'one. y Or ratier, ler #t be. So he cloſeth with aJon:2; 9; 

Prayer. & Either upon niy triencs and followers, who alone are 

thy people, the re1t being Rebelsto thee as well as. to me. Or, 

upon al: thy peop'e J/rael, to prelzrve my Friends, te convince 

21d convert mine Enemies, and to fave the body of the Nation, 

which withour thy Mcrcy are likely by this Civil War to be brought 


| to wuiter rune, 

PSAL,1V. 

; To the || ci. f muſician a on Negincth b,a pſalm of Da- 

{ vid. 
# The Maſter or D're&our of the ſacred Muſicians and Muſick o 

| the Temple: :t w. om tee 1Chron: 6: 31. and 15: 16, 17, and 

25: I, 2, 2 Chron: 20: 21. <Nd 34+ 12, 13; Neb. To him that over« 

. cometh, or excelleth, «1 tr unpreth, to wit, in' his profcfion of Mu- 
ſick. 6 Or, on fringea hſtruments, as 1141s word 1s tranſlated, Hab: 
3: 19+ ſor the Hebrew Verc ziggen whence ti1s 1s derived, ſignifies 
to play withthe hand upon an Iottitu ment, Sam. 16:23.and 18: ro. This 
Palin 1s for the mitier or ſuvi.ance oi it much Jike the tormer, 
and ſeems to have been made upon the ſame or {cme other like oc= 
caton, when he was ciſtrefſed either by Ab/elom or by Saul, or by 
tome other great and powerful Enemies. 


David prayeth for Audience, 1, He reproves the wicked, 2. The privi- 
ledge of the Godly and his Faith in God, 3. An exhortaticn to Duty, 4, 
5. The ungodly ſatisfied with Earthly Blefſmgs, but the godly cannot be at 
refl without the favour of God, 6.7, 8. 
Ear me when I call  O God of my righteouſneſs pr,;.; 
c : thou haſt enlarged me d when 1 was in diſtreſs; & 59.10, 


[| have mercy upon me e and hear my prayer. 17-and 
c Either the witneſs and defender of my righteous cauſe: Or, 1!" 

frem whoml expet& that righteous judgment and deciſion of m ſ Or, 6 

cauſe,which I cannot obtain from mine Enemies, who load me ang £/99%'v 

my cauſe with manifold Injuries and Calumnies. Or, O my righte. 

ous Gog, Or, O God of my mercy ; which title is given to God elſe. 

Wherey as P/al: 59. 10, 17. whereas this title, O God of my righteouſe 

neſs, is not given to God inany other place of Scripture, Pſal; 59. 

10, 17. O God, to whoſe mercy ITowe all that I have or hope for; 

which was a very fit and powerful Argument in Prayer, and very 

agreeable ro rhe following words,in which there is an acknowledge 

ment of Gods former Mcrcies, and a petition for Mercy, And 

{o this and other words in Hebrew and Greek which properly fig- 

nifie righteouſneſs, are oft uſed for mercy or kindneſs, as 1/a: 58: 8 P/al. 

31-1. and 36.10» 2 Cor. 9. 9. and in many other places 47: e. Freed 

me from my former ſtraits and troubles. So he urgeth God and 

ſtrengtheneth his own Faith with his former Experiences. e Thou 

maiſt juſtly deſtroy me for my many and great fins, and therefore 

I flee from thy Juſtice ro thy Mercy, on which all my hopes are 


people that , oY 


31:7,8 


ks 


[| Or,outre 
ee, 


9 


2 * Oye fons of menf;,how long will ye turn my glo-* 2664 
ry into ſhame g ? how long will ye love vanity b,and1cek 
after leaſing 5? Selah. 


f 7. & Princes and Potentates, as this Hebrew Phraſe ſeems, 
and is thought ro ſignifie, who are engaged with Saul or Abſalom 
againſt me. g Or, ſhall my Glory be for a ſhame, ( 7: e. ) be made 
by you matter of reproach and ſcorn ? By his Glory probably he 
means that high Honour and Royal Majeſty which God had c1- 
ther promiſed ro him, or conferred upon him ; wherewith, when 
he was in great ſtraits and. dangers, tl;ey might poſſibly reproach 
him in ſome ſort as this, Is this the Man, whom God ſo highly 
loves and honours and willexalt who now flees from one Mountain 
or Cave to another, who runsaway to the Philiftines whom his own 
Son hath baniſhed out of the Land'? Is this the effe&t of his glory- 
ing and boaſting of Gods favour and promiſes ? h #: e, Aﬀett 
and purſue theſe courſes and deſigns of oppoſing me and my King- 
dom. which you will certainly find to be vain and to no purpole. 
: Or, lying, the fame thing with vanity; theſe two words being 
promiſcuouſly uſed, as Pſal. 62. 9: Only this ſeems to add ſome 


Emphaſis, aud to intimate the fair bopes and promuting probabili- 
| c1ES 


Lad 


fs 


5 0 


ef . 
= x w- 
; 
| 
av . 
| Pal. IV - 
i Ll 


*Pal.gr, 


eceſs which they had, and which aygravate their diſap- 
vm mg Or, by hing, he may deſign thoſe horrid me yo 
which the Partiſons either of Saul or Ablalom had raiſed ag pres 
and which they joyned with their other indeavours to make him 
odious toall the people, and ſo the better to eff:-& his Ruine. 


But know that the LORD &, hath ſet apart } him 
that is godly m for himſelf » : the LORD will hear 


zhen I call unto him 0. | 
7 You fight not againſt me but againſt the Lord. 1 Or, hath 
wonderfully ſeparared me ; hath rejected the other Royal yp : 
Family, and hath called me by Name, and choſen me out © b: 
the Tribes and Families of 1/-ael, and out of my Fathers Family» 
though I was the youngeſt of them, and thought by Samu#l and by 
my Father to be moſt remote from this Honour. m (i: e- ) Me, 
whom, though you traduce and cenſure, as if I were an egreg10us 
Hypocrite and Impoſtor,who only pretended Religion for my own 
ambitious ends, God hath pronounced to be a man after his own 
heart, 1 Sam: 13: 14. And that Iamſuch in ſome good meaſure, 
both my own Conſcience and the general courſe of my life bear 
me witneſs : Which teſtimony David gives to himſelf not out of 
a vain glorious humour, but meerly becauſe he was conſtrained to 
to it by the Calumnies of his Enemies; for his own juſt and neceſſary 
Vindication. Or, his favourite, as this word of ſignifies : Him, 
whom he hath been pleaſed to chuſe and advance, not for any 
worth or merit ofmine, but out of his free grace and kindneſs to 
me ; who therefore will maintain the work of his own hands and 
grace, although TI cannot deny that I have been guilty of diverſe 
frailties and miſcarriages, for which God might juſtly reje& me, 
if he ſhould deal with me according to the rigours of his Juſtice. 
» Either 1. Inhis ſtead, or to be his Vicegerent, as all Kings are, 
and eſpecially the Kings of Gods own People. Or rather 2.For his 
own ſervice and glory, to fulfil all his will, as it is exprefſed 4s 
13. 22.Whbich may be ſpoken by way of oppoſirion to Saul,who had 
no regard to God, norto his Willand Glory, but minded only his 
own honour and advantage. o Therefore I am aſſured that God 
will hear my Prayersand ſave me out of your hands. 

4 Stand in aw p, and fin not 9: commune with your 


own heart upon your bed r, and be ſtill s. Selah. 

> Tremble therefore and be afraid, if not of me, yet at leaſt of 
God, who hath engaged himſelfin my Cauſe or Quarrel, and wall 
be an Adverſary to my Adverfariess or, be angry, as this word 1s 
here rendred by all the antient and ſome modern Tranſlators, and 
as it is thought by the Apoſtle, Eph, 4.26. Or, 4reyou angry. For 
It may be taken interrogatively ; Admit you be angry or difpleaſcd 
that God hath pine ws me an obſcure Perſon and of a mean Famt- 
ly,before ſo many noble and mighty men, et or bur ( as it follows) 
fn not;(# e«) do not ſo far indulge your anger as to break. forth into 
murmuring againſt God, or rebellion againſt me bur ſeaſonably 
ſuppreſs and mortifie your unadviſed and ſinful Paſſion, leſt it break 
forth to your own Ruine This Hebrew word ſignifies 1a general 
2 vehement commotion of the mind or heart, whether through grief, as 
2 Sam: 18' 33. or fear, as Exod. 15: 14. Deut. 2: 25. or anger, as Gen. 
45, 24. 2 Kings 19, 27, 28. Prov. 29. 9. Exek.16. 43. q By cheriſh- 
Ing and proſecuting your anger and malice againft me, and your 
Rebellion againſt Gods Authority» r Calmly and deeply conſider 
theſe things in your ewn Breaſts in the ſilent night, when you are 
at leaſure from the croud of diſtrating buſineſs, and free from the 
company of crafty and dawbing Paraſites. 5s Either 1. As to 
your outward A&ions;for this Verb oft ſignifies a ceſſstion of Aﬀi- 
Ons, as Joſh. 10: 13. Job 30: 27. Proceed no further in your wicked 
ſpeeches and contrivances againſt me. Or rather 2. As to your in- 
ward paſſions. Compoſe your tumultuous minds ; as this Verb is 
uſed, Pſal: 37: 73 and 62:2. and 137: 2. Suppreſs your anger arid 
rage, which tho' dire&ed againſt me only, yet 1s indeed againſt 
God and againſt his Counſel and Providence. 


5 Offer t * the ſacrifices of righteouſneſs  : and pur 


y your truſt in the LORD x. 
Wn; #£ To wit, unto God, that he may be reconciled to you, and 
4 27, may pardonall your Murmurings and Inſurre&ions againſt him and 


againſt me. For it ſeems plain that this, as well as the former 

erſe, is ſpoken not to Dawids Friends and Favourers, as ſome 
think, but to his Enemies, even to thoſe ſons of men, wv. 2. to whom 
he dire&eth his ſpeech wv. 3. * But know, and wv. 4. Stand in awe, 
and here Offer. "4 i;e. ) Righteous Sacrifices ; which requires that 
the perſons offering them be righteous and.do rightzons rb ings,and 
offer them with an honeſt mind, and with faith ( as ir follows ) and 
true Repentance, Without which he intimates rhat all their Sa- 
crifices were of no eſteem with God, and would be whollv unpro- 
fitableto them. And withal, it is probable that he refle&s upon 
the followers of Saul or of 4b/alom, who had the only place of Sacri- 


fice intheir poſſeflion, whileſt David was debarred of the opportu- 


nity of ſacrificing, as he complains, 1 Sam. 26-19- and according- 
ly they gloried in their Sacrifices, and upon that account promiſed 
themſelves ſucceſs againſt David, who was by Gods providence de- 
prived of the opportunities of reconciling and engaging God by Sa- 
crifices. x And then (7: e. ) ſo doing, you may rely upon God, 
and confidently expe& his aſſiſtance, which otherwiſe ir is in vain 
for you to hope for. Withal he ſeems to refle& upon his Enemies 
who truſted to an arm of fleſh, to their own great numbers and 
_ and to intimate what his courſe was, to wit, to truſt in the 
ord, 


6 There be many y that ſay, Who will ſhew us 2 


P $4 L M4 


| us that tranquility and outward happineſs which is the only thing 
that we defire-Withal he mayſeem to intimate the reaſon and morive 
which induced ſo many perſons to take part agzinſt him, which 
was their eager deſire of Honour or Worldly Advantage, which 
they promuted to themſelves by appearing againſt Davia.See 1 Sam. 
22: 7 6(i:e. ) Upon me and my Friends. Give us affurance of 
thy love and favour to us. andevidence it to us by 'thy powerful 
and gracious aſſiſtance, 


| 7 Thou haſt put gladneſs in my heart c more than in 


4 [the time zhat their corn and their wine increaſed 4. 


c Whatſoever thou ſhalr do with me for the future, as to my out- 
ward diſtreflesfand concernments,lI have at preſent unſpeakable plea- 
ſure and full ſatisfaQion in the impreſſions and teſtimonies of thy 
love mand to my Soul ; whereby alſoI am encouraged with con- 
adence to expe& good ſucceſs to my, righteousCauſe.d Than world- 
Iy perſons have in the time of a plentifulHarveſt,which is a time of 
great rejoycing, Judg. 9: 27. 1/4. 9; 3: Jer: 48; 33. 

8 * 1 will both elay me down in peace f, and ſleep: 
for thou LORD only makeſt me dwell in + ſafety g. 


e This word relates to the two following Verbs; as ſoon as 1 


ny Iy down upon their Beds and cannot fleep through diſtrafting 
cares or troubles. Or, in like manner, (t:e.) as they do who have 
abundance of Corn and Wine, of whom he laſt ſpoke, Luke 12: 29, 
f Either 1; In outwafd peace or ſafety, as the next clauſe explains 
it. Or 2: In inward peace or tranquillity of mind, as Luke 2: 29. 
reſting ſecurely upon Gods promiſes, and the condu@& of his wiſe 
and gracious providence. g lowe not my ſafety to my own valour 
or wiſdom, ncr to the courage of my followers; bur to thee only. 
Or,thou Lord,naakeſt me ta awell alone in afety : Either 1. Alone,or apart 
from mine Enemies. Compare Deut: 33; 28. Or rather 2. Though 
I be ina manner alone, (:: e. ) forſaken and deſtitute of Friends or 
Helpers, as that word is uſed, Pſalm 102: 7: Lam; 1: 1 


PSAL., V. 7 
To the chief muſician upon Nehiloth z, A pſalm of 
David 5. | 


a This is no whereelſe uſed in Scripture. Tr is generally and pro- 

bably thought to be a term belonging to Muſick, and ro ſignifie 
either ſome kind of tune : or rather an Inſtrument, and particu- 
larly a Wind-inſtrument,as Neginoth in the titleof the laſt Pſalm 
ſignified fringed Infiruments. b This Pſalm ſuppoſeth David to be 
in ſome great diſtreſs or trouble,erther from Saul or from A4bſalom, 
or ſome of their Courtiers: 


himſelf of Gods juſtice againſt his Enemies, 4. Profeſſing his 

 Faithin God, 7, He prayeth him to guide his goings. 8. He exclaims a= 
gainſt his Enemies cruelty, 9. and prayeth God 20 deſtroy them, 16. but ta 
preſerve the godly, 11, 12. 


ditation c. ; 


Which he calls. his Meditation, ro note that ic was not a lip-prayery 
only. but that it proceeded fromy and was accompanied with the 
deepeſt choughrs, and moſt fervent affeQions of his Soul. 


2 Hearken unto che voice of my cry,my King dand 
my God ; for unto thee willI pray e. - 


d It is the part and du 
o thee alone I will dire&all my Prayers; 


deſires of his Subje&ts. e 
and therefore from thee alone I expect ſuccour and relief. 

3 * My voice ſhalt thou hear in the morning f, O 
LORD, in the morning will I dire my prayer g, unto 
thee, and will look up þ, $— | | 

f Either 1. Metaphorically, ( i: e: ) early, ſeafonably, ina time 
when thou wiltſt be found, and art ready to hear. Or 2. proper- 
ly every morning. As ſoon as I awake,I an ſtill withthee, as he ſaith, 
Pſal: 139: 18. The firſt thing that I do is to pray to thee, I neither 
negle& nor delay that _ Bur this is not ſpoken excluſively as 
to his other times of Prayer, as appears from Pal: 55: 17. but only 
eminently, to ſhew his conſtancy, diligence, and eagerneſs in the 
work. g Or,: mine Eyes: Which may be well underſtood out of 
the following word ; which is uſual in Scripture. Or, it, ( ſoit 
is only a defe& of the Pronoun, which is moſt frequent ) to wir 
my voice, laſt mentioned; or which is equivalent my words, which 
iSalſo underſtood with this very Verb, Jos 33: 5. 2nd _is exprefſed 
with it, Job 32: 14. And the Verb here and thers uſed is very 
empharical, and notes his great care and exa&neſs ſo to direct or ors 
der,or compoſe himſelf and his Prayers in ſuch a manner as was moſt 
pleaſing to God. +4 To wir, unto thee( as he now ſaid ) for help; 
The word implies a confident, and withal a patient expeQarion of 
| Relief, as Pſal: 130; 6: Mis: 7: 7.'Hab: 2:1, Seeallo Pſal: 145, 15: 

AAS 31 he | | | 

4 For i thou art not a God that hath pleaſurein wick- 

_edneſs & : neither ſhall || evil dwell with thee 1, 

5 Or, but, or ſurely. k Or, in wicked men» Thou doſt not approve 
of, nor delight in them, or in their Prayers, but doſt hare and 
wiltſt deſtroy them, asit here follows, compare Prov. 17, t5, And 
this he taith partly for the conviction and diicouragement of his E- 
nemies, who were ſuch:and partly for his own vindication, to ſhew 
that he was not ſuch a wicked man, as they falſly and maliciouſly 
repreſented him, / 7. e. Have any friendſhip os fell/owſhip,or quier 
abode with thee, as thoſe that dwell together uſually have one with 


am Jaid down I will quietly compoſe my ſelf to ſleep;whereas ma» ſecurity, 


David earneſtly beſeecheth God to hear his Prayer, i——1. And affureth 


(on ear to my words, O LORD, conſider my me- $ 


© ( 5: e.) My prayer, as the words foregoing and following ſhew. 


of a Kingto anſwer the juſt and humble 


evil many 


*Pal. 3.51 | 
fTHeb.con= | 
fidence,or 


wan i. 


"=% 136, | 
6. | 


| Or, "the 
{o Gr, 


(Num 6 any good 4 ? LORD, * lift thou up the light of thy 
220, 


—_ = 


another. -- | : ; 
Ne. yy = covoyy = nag FOG S, Who are weary of waiti 5 Im fooliſh ſhall not ſtand } inthy ſight , 

i . IS, are wear alting” ,1 | A ne" 
6h upon God and ready to deſpair. Or rather, 2 Of is Enemies, thou hateſt go the WOT kers of 1n1quity 0. . Rx * Hab, r, 
and of the body of the people, who were either engaged againſt | # Or, the madmen, as the word properly ſignifies, as Feelel. 2. x, | 
m, or at leaſt unconcerned for him, and tought only their own 2» '2* and = 7-and 1s. 13. I/a, 44, 25; 7.e. Wicked men, 3s + Heb. be- 
eaſe and advantage. z Heb. make or give us toſee, ( i. e. ) to enjoy, the next words explain it: who axe indeed morally and really mad fore ching 
as this phraſe is frequently uſed, as P/al, 27: 13. and 34. 12. Eccleſ: PRIN fighting with the Lord God Almighty, and in expofing eye, 

2:1. and 3; 13. 4 (i:e. ) Worldly good, as appears by the op- themſelves to ſuch dreadful Hazards and Miſchiefs, for ſuch mean 

Poſition of the light of Geds countenance to-it in the next words, and and momentary advantages. » Either in battel againſt thee, as this 

by the explication ofit of Corn and Wine in the next Verſe. (5.e. Phraſe is uſed, D ents 7. 241 Jo). 1,52, and 7. 82. Or, in Judgment 

will put an eadto guy preſent Broils and Troubles, and give ** thy Tribunal ; ofwhich ſee + "7 « I, 5, COMPAIre 1 Sam, Fi 


—_ 


Pal. V. 


Joo 4r: ro. 


of it. Compare Mas. 7. viſe; 1 
no man thatdoth not ſin, er work _— Eccleſ. 7+ 20. 
P 


6 Thou (halt deſtroy them that ] 
HHebs :h LORD will abbor + the bloody and deceitful man 9. 
man Or, 
blood and Fa and Reproaches concerning me: as many 
ceitg, AQdefign miſchief againſt me or my 

neſs : of whom he oft ſpeaks» 
7 But #s for me,] will come 7 


| 
Heb: the 
le of 
thy holi. 
meſs, 


(hip toward © thy holy temple x. 


which, though I be now 
of mine Adverſaries, yet 7 | 
my former opportunities of coming thither 


truſting only to th 
ceptance Deke 7 
will come to pay my thanks and ſervice unto thee. 


came thither ſo rudely and preſumptuouſly, and with the Con- 
ſcience of ſuch wicked Hearts and Lives » Looking towards it, 

ws When I cannot come to it, Compare Dan. 6: 10. Or, at thy holy 
Temple, (7. e. ) the Tabernacle, which is ſometimes called by that 
Name. 


8 Lead me y O LORD in thy righteouſneſs \ be- 
fHeb:rheſ; cauſe of + mine enemies; * make the way 6 {traighr 


which ob= c before my face d. ; 
ſerve me. y Dire& my heart and counſels, and affairs, and all the courſe 
*Pſ:25: 4: and aQtionsof my life. & In thy righteous Laws; which ſometimes 
& 86:11, are called righteouſneſs, as Pſal. 119. 172. Mat: 3. 15. Or for or be- 
cauſe of, or accorsing to thy righteouſneſs; which is a Phraſe and Argu- 
ment frequently uſed in this Book of Pſalms, # Either 7. That I 
may give them no occaſion of {landering me orReligion for myſake. 
Or rather 2. Becauſe rhey are moſt malicious and miſchievous, and 
withal cunning and treacherous, as he deſcribes them in the next 
Verſe (which he uſeth as an Argument to enforce this Petition)and 
they lay Snares for me;and if thou doſt nor affiſt me,w1ill be too hard 
for me, and will triumph over me; which will refle& diſhonour u- 
Pon thee alſoe b ( i.e.) The way wherein thou wouldeſt have me 
to walk, or the courſe which thou wouldeſt have me to take ; for 
Gods Precepts or Counſels are moſt commonly called his way. c Or 
plajn or ſmooth that I may clearly diſcern it, and readily walk in it 
without miſtake or lett, or ſrumbling, or offence. This was aneed- 
ful requeſr,becauſe many good men are off at a loſs what their Du- 
ty is in ſeveral Circumſtances. And God granted this requeſt to Da- 
wid, as in many other things, ſo in this, that he ſhould not cut off 
Saul when he had opportunity and inſtigation to do it, 1 Sam, 24. 
and 26. but that he ſhould wait till God took him away. 4 To my 
view and for my walk : For men walk forward, not backward. 
9 For there ;s no || faithfulneſs F in their mouth,their 
inward part & + very wickedneſs e ; * their throat f is 


an 'open ſepulchre, they flatter with their tongue g. 
'e They ſpeak one thing and mean another» and under a pretence 
-of kindneſs they ſeek my deſtruQion : which makes ic difficu!r, fo: 
me'to know how I ſhould carry my ſelf to them : wherein thc: ec. 
fore I have begged thy dire&ion. f Either 1 Metonymically; thei: 
ſpeech coming out of their Throat, though ſmooth and ſu\til, ye 
is moſt pernicious. Or 2- Properly ; their Throat and Mouth arc 
wide opened ready to devour all that come within their reach A 


Or. /ed- 
| Faſtneſs, 
+ Heb:n 
his mouth, 
that is in 
: the mouth 
of any of 


them, 


” 
wr, 


[0] me. 
.. To Deſtroy thou them 5,O God ; let them fall || by 
their own counſels z: caſt them out & in / the multitude 
of their tranſgreflions, for they have rebelled againſt 
thee Me 

þ Heb. Hold them guilty, ( i; e- ) Condemn and puniſh them. Or, 
»nake them to offend, to wit, in their Counſels,as it follows: ſo as they 
may either be given up to bad and fooliſh Counſels: or fail in the 
: execution of their wiſe or crafty Counſels Or, make them deſolate, 
as the word is uſed, Ezek. 6 Ge Joel 1. 18. : (7+ e. ) Make their Coun» 
ſels notonly unſucceſsful againſt me, but alſo deſtrauftive to them- 
: ſelves . Or, fomtheir, &3: e- ) Let them fall ſhort of their aim: 
= and deſigns. Or, becauſe of the:r Counſels, which are ungodly and un- 
Ss juſtz.and ſo deſerve deſtru&tion.- k Out of thy Land, and from a- 
 monts thy People, whom they either infe& or moleſt by their wic- 
ked courſes. 1 Or, for or becauſe of, as before» m Againſt thy Au- 
thority and declared Will concerning my advancement to the 
Throne : which divers /ſraelites oppoſed againſt their own Conſci- 

ences See 2 Sam 3+ 8, 9, 10. . F 
x1 But letall thoſe that put their truſt in thee r, re- 
joyce-o 2 let them ever ſhout for joy, becauſe + thou 
defendeſt them : let them alſo that love thy name p be 


joyful in thee. 

9 That dare rely upon thy word and promiſe when all humane 
hopes and refuges fail : which was oft the caſe. of David and his 
followers: o Letthem have cauſe of great joy from thy love and care 
of them, and becauſe thou defendeſt them, as it follows. p ( 5: e. ) Thy 
Majeſty, thy Word and Worſhip, and Glory : all which is called 


thetr coun«- 


| ſets: 


FHeb:thou- 
covereſt 
over, or 
proteFeſt 
them: 


Party, but prays for all good men, though by their own miſtakes, 
or other mens artifices, ſome of them might now be in a ſtate of 


PSALM Ss. 


o ( 7: e. ) Such asmake Sin their choice, deſign and 
buſineſs, giving up themſelves to the conſtant or cuſtomary praQice 
23. Otherwiſe; ina general ſenſe, there 1s 


eak leaſingp: the 


lies, that make it their buſineſs to raiſe and ſcatter Calum- 
did. 9 Thoſe who 


Friends under a pretence of kind- 


into thy houſe «s in the 
multitude of thy mercy #: andin thy fear « will I wor- 


r To wit, with holy boldneſs and confidence,as becomes thy Son 
and Servant: Whereas mine Enemies cannot appear in thy preſence 
with any comfort and ſafety, v. 5. 5 To wit, the Tabernacle:from 
excluded through the malice and power 
thou wiltſt, I doubt not, reſtore me to 
to worſhip thee, which 
was my conſtant cuſtom and chief joy. # Or, By thy great mercy,(i.e.) 
great Mercy for admittance tbither, and ac- 
or becauſe of thy many Merciesto me: for which I 
#« With an ho- 
ly dread & reverence of thyMajeſty & of thy Houſe,and a due care 
to pleaſe thee in my Religious worſhip, and in the whole courſe of 
my Life. Which he oppoſeth to the careleſneſs of his Enemics who 


Gods namein Scripture. David doth not confine his Prayec to his 


— 


Pſal. 


miſe and covenant to bleſs them. And therefore my Prayer for 
them 1s agreeable to thy will. rs With thy Love and gracious Pro. 
vidence. ,s ( i; e: ) Keep him ſafe on every ſide. 
PSA YEH 
To the chief muſician on Neginoth a || upon Sheminith 
b, a plalm of David c. 

a Of which ſee on ?ſal: 43:1. b Or, wpen the eighth. 
to be the ſhrilleſt or loftieſt Note, as lomorh is the loweſt; of 
which ſee 1 Chron: 15. 20, 21. and, as ſome add, Mc:rh-lebben 
P/al. 9, the mean. Burt all this is only conje&ure ; and the Jews 
themſelves haye no certain knowledge of their own antient Mu. 
ſick,and of the ſignifications of the Terms belonging to it. c The 
occaſion of the Pſalm ſeems plainly to have been ſome grievous 
Diſtreſs or Diſeaſe of the Body then upon him, accompanied al- 
ſo with great trouble of Conſcience for his Sins, whereby he had 
brought it upon himſelf. 


David being very weak and feeble, preſenteth his miſery befare God, I—2, 
prayeth for his Mercy and Recovery, 4 8, Andbeing aſſured of s 
gracious hearing, triumphs over all his enemies, 9, 10. 


O * LORD, rebuke me not 4in thine anger e nei- *Plal:;s:; 
ther chaſten me in thy hot diſpleaſure f. 

4 ( 7.e. ) Do not chaſten or corre& ms, as the next Clauſe ex. 
plains it, and as this word is frequently uſed,” as Job 22; 4. Plat: 
Fo: 21: Iſa, 37: 4+ Rev: 33 19+ e With rigour or ſeverity, as my 
fins deſerve, but with gentleneſs and moderation, Jer: 10: 24. and 
46. 28, orſoas it may not be the effe& of thy ſtrift juſtice or An- 
ger, bur of thy Mercy and Faithfulneſs. f the ſame thing repeated 
after the manner, 

2 Have mercy upon me g, OLORD,for IT am weak h: 
O LORD, heal me 3, for my bones are vexed k. 

£ I plead not my merit, but thy free Mercy. h Or, 1 languiſh, 
my Body pines away,and my Spirit failsthrongh my exceſlive pains 
or troubles. 7 ( 7. e.) Thediſtempers of my Soul and Body,of both 
which this word is uſed, Pſal; 41: 4. and 107:18, 20. k My torment 
isſo deep and ſo general, that it reacheth , and is very grieveus e- 
ven to my Bones, though they are inward, and might ſeem to be 
out of the reach of it, and alſo ftrong and ſenſeleſs, and therefore 
can beſt bear it. See the like expreſſions, Job 4: 14: and 33: 19: 
Pſal: 38; 3. and 51; 8. 

3 My foul is alſo ſore vexed / : but thou,0O LORD, 
how long m ? 

I Partly by ſympathy with my Body ; and partly with the Bur 
then of my Sins, and the ſenſe of thine Anger, and my own dane 
ger and miſery. #2 Wiltſt thou ſuffer me to lye and languiſh in this 
condition ? It is a Figure called Apofiopeſis, very agreeable to men 
1n pain or anguiſh, who uſe to cut their words ſhort. | 


4 Return », O LORD, deliver my ſoul o: oh ſave 


me for thy mercies ſake. 

72 Unto me, from whom thou haſt withdrawn thy ſelf, and thy 
ſmiling Countenance, and thy helping Hand. o 7: e. ſave me or my [ 
life, as the Soul oft ſignifies, as Gen: 9g: 5: and 12: 5. Job 36: 14: Plat: 

33: 19. Dawid and other good men in thoſe times were much afraid 

of death, partly becauſe the manifeſtations of Gods Grace to his 
people were then more dark and doubtful ; and partly becauſe 
thereby they were deprived of all opportunities of advancing Gods 

Glory and Kingdom inthe World. Compare {3: 38: 1, 2, 3. 

5 * For in death p there is no remembrance of thee 9; *Phal:30: 


in the T grave who ſhall give thee thanks ? 9:& 88. 

? Amongſt the dead; or in the grave, as it follows, q To wit, 11.6 115+ 

by me David, conſiſting both of Soul and Body ; and no ſuch re- 17:& 118 

membrance, to wit, in way of thankfulneſs and praiſe, as the next 7: 

Cleuſe of the Verſe limits and explains it : which he might fear 35-15 
| 


18, 
would be true, not only becauſe he ſhould not have occaſion to THeb, el, 
praiſe God for this deliverance, but alſo becauſe he wasin grievous'® ©" 
1g0ntes cf Conſcience,& under tcrrors ofGods wrath and his eternal 
damnation; which being oft incident ro the ſaints cf God under the 

New Teſtament, it is not ſtrange if it were ſo alſo under the Old 
Teſtament. Beſides he ſpeaks of the remembrance or celebration 

of Gods Name and Grace in the Land of the Living, to the enlarge- 

ment and edification of Gods Church, and rhe propagation of true 
Religion among men ; which is not done in the other life, and was 

juſtly prized at ſo high a Rate by David and other holy men, to 

whom therefore it muſt needs be a great grief to be for ever de- 

prived of ſuch opportunities. Fcr otherwiſe David very well 

knew, and firmly believed that Souls departed were not extin&, but 

did go to God, Eccleſ. 12, 7. and there remember and adore and en- 

Joy -" though quite in another way than that of which ke here 

peaks. 
6 Tam weary with my groaning, || all the night 7 [0r, «7 
make I my bed to ſwim 5 ; I water my couch : with my 


tears. 

r He mentions this time, by way of aggravation of his miſery, 
becauſe that ſeaſon, which is to others by Gods appointment a time 
of reſt, was to him very ſad and doleful,whether from his Diſeaſe, 
which then came _ him more ftrongly, as it is uſual 3 or from 
the opportunity which the ſolitude and filence of the Night gave 
him to think of his own fins, or his Enemies perfidiouſneſs and ma- 
lice, or Gods diſpleaſure,or his future Eſtate, s To wit,wirh tears, 
See the like Hyperbole Jer. 94 1. Lam. 3. 48, 49. t Or, my bedſtead. 


7 *Mine eye is conſumed # becauſe of grief x ; If nob _ 
waxeth old becauſe of all mine enemies. . © P(31.98 
u Or,grown dim or dull through plenty of ſalt tears which I ſhed ; ,g. 70. 

Or, through the decay of my Spirits. x (#.e, ) My grief arilingf ,m.$.17 
from mine Enemies, as the next Clauſe interprets it, and from the 


oppoſition againſt him, 
+ Heb: x2 For thou LORD, wilt bleſs q the righteous: 55h 
crown him, favour r wilt thou F compaſs him as with a ſhield 5s. 
9g (#: e: ) Thou art reſolved, and haſt engaged thy ſelf by pro- 


conſideration of their multitude and rage, and falſeneſs. * Mat.7-iÞ © 
| Fr & 25. 
8 * Depart from me y, all ye workers of iniquity 2; ,? Y 
for the LORD hath heard «the * voice of my weeping 5. Luke 13: | ze: 
) I adviſe youfor your own ſakes to ceaſe from oppoſing or mo- 27; _ 'y 
leſting me, or inſulting over me, or approaching to me, with de- Pſal:119: vg 
In 


beloſtrz15: 
he paſt * Pfal: 37 
cune 22; 


ſign of deceiving and betraying me: for all your labour will 
z All you wicked Enemies of mine. #( 7. e. ) He will heart 


vi, 


ſ 
Orypor 
. « /. By" 
It 15 though: #2 #:ghch, 


[0s 


Wo, 


PRe).mt 
ilivere; 


every 


ike 13s 


7 
al:1197 


x 


Pfal: zl 


4 


; 2). V 1 'F : : | 
time being put for the future.as is tfual 1n prophetical Paſſages,ſuch 
as this was; David having received by the Spurit of God particular 


ue, 


Me" .not 


*=. 


ul 
N; 


and ſubmit to me. from whom they have revoltzd. Or, let them 


[0r, bu 


vere pieces, while there is T none to deliver 6. 


Ty, 50: all hopes of Reſtitution, 


Palrzs, b 


P'S 


afarance that Ged would hear and deliver him. 5(7z,e, ) Of my 
fervent Prayers joined with my Tears Te” 
© The LORD hath heard c my ſupplication ; the 
LORD will receive my prayer. 
c And.therefore will hear, as it follows. He draws an Argu- 
ment from his former Experience. 
to Let all mine enemies be aſhamed d and fore vexed 
letthem return e and be alhamed ſuddenly f. 
' 4 Oftheir vain hopes aad confidence of conquering and deſtroy- 
ing me. Or, they ſba!lbe aſhamed, becauſe of their great and un- 
expeQed diſappointment» e To wit,from their wicked ways, from 
their hoſtile and malicious praQtiſes againſt me. and ler tiem come 


turn back, as it is expreſſed Pſal: 56. 9. let them be put to flight. 
Or, let them be converted. ( i.e ) Repent of their Sins and return 
to their Okcdience to me. Although ir ſeems more probable both 
fioin the foregoing and following words, that this 7urning 05 Ye- 
turning is rather penal than penitential, Or, #h-y ſha!l gurn or return. 
Or this Verb may be taken adverbially and jovned ro the following 
Verb, as ir is frequently in orher places, and bo:h may te thus 
rendred, Let them, or They ſhall be again aibamed, C'otied, as it were, 
with double ſhame. f$Sooner than I could hope, or they did expe&t 


or believe. 
FS Av | 
Shiggaion « of David, which he ſang unto ths LORD, 
concerning the|| words bof Cujh c the Benjamite, 
a This ſcems to be the name of a certain kind either of Song or 
Tune, or Inftrument, which th-n was very well known, bur now 
is only matter of conje@ure ; wherewith I think it is nor fit to 
rrouble the unl-arned Reader ; And the learned may conſult my 
latin Sywpſts, b Thz falſeand flanderous Reports raifed or fo- 
mented by him. This was the occaſion of this Plalm.c By which 
he deligns either 1 Saul: whom he ri-ought 1t ind centto expreſs 
by his proper Name, for which he migar at this time have di- 
verſe rza{ens,and therefore he deciphers bim enigmatically,which 
is not unuſual in holy Scripture; where Babylon is called Sheſbach, 
Jer: 25: 26,and 51. 41. and Rome iscailzd Egypr and Sodom, and Ba, 
bylon in the Revelation ; and John the Bapriſt is called Elias, And 
he mighr call him Cuſb ; pirily,by a tacir Allufion to his Fathers 
Name Kkiſb; ani parrly, with reſpec to his black and wicked Dif 
poſition planted and firmly ri ored in him: Compare Jer. 13. 23: 
Amos 9: 7. Or 2. Some eminent and potent Commander or Cour- 
tier under Saul called C15, tizough he be not elſewhere named, it 
bzing the lot of many otter perſons to be named but once in 
Scripture. And he 1s called the Benjamite, becauſe he was one 
of that Tribe, in which Saul put moſt confidence: See 1 Sam: 
22: 7. 


The Pſalmiſt prayeth for deliverance from his perſecuting Enemigs, Iy2. and 
maketh aſolemn profeſſion of his Innocency "WY Faith he ſceth his 
Defence, 8-=-11, and the deſtrufion of his Enemies, 12==17« 


() Lord my God,in thee do T put my truſt 4: ſaye me 
from all them that perſecute me, - and deliver me. 
d All my hope and confidence isin thy Favour and Faithfulneſs 

to make good thy Promiſe made to me. _ : 
2 Leſt he etear my foul f like aliong, renting it in 


e (ie. ) Mine enemy, as it is expreſſed v. 4, even Saul, or any 
of his followers» f Out of my Body. Or deſtroy me and my Life 
25 Pal: 6: 5. g To Which he compares him both for Power and 
Cruelty, and withal intimates his own inability ro oppoſe or eſcape 
his Rage without Gods Almighry help. + Whileſt I have no con- 
ſiderable Force to defend my ſelf, bur am forced to flee to Moun- 
tzins and Caves, and Woods for my Safety. ; 

3 O LORD my God, it I have done this 2 ; if there 
be iniquity in my hands & : 

i( i. e, ) That which Cush and others falſly lay to my Charge. IF 
I delign or have endeavoured to take away Sauls Crown and Life by 
Violence, as Sauls Courtiers maliciouſly reported, xr Sam: 24: 9, 10. 
and 26; i9. k(ie) Inmy aftions or carriage towards Saul. The 
hand is oft put for a#.ons, whereof the hand isa great and common 
Inſtrument, as Pſal: 78. 42. and 109; 27. Jonah 3:8. IfI defign,or 
have attemptzd to lay violent hands upon Saz/. 

4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace 
with me /: C yea mT havedelivered him » that without 
cauſe o is mine enemy. ) 

I (i.e, To Saul, when he was peaceable and friendly towards 
me: For David was charged with evil Deſigns againſt Saul, before 
Saul broke our into open Enmity againſt him. »2 This Particle is 
here 1:ſe4 by way of correCion or oppoſition, as it is alſo Pſalm 2: 
6 Prov: 6 16. So far have I been from doing this, that T have 
done the contrary. # When it was in my power todeſtroy him, as 
1 Sam: 4. arid 26. 0 Without any Provocation on my part. 

5 Let the enemy perſecute my foul, and take it p; 
yea let him tread down my life upon the earth,and lay 
mine honour q in the duſt. Selah. 

pI am conteated and wiſh that S2v! may fo perſecute my Life 
as toovertake it, and take it away. q Either 1. That honourable 
and royal Eſtate to which I am choſen and deſigned. Or 2. My Re. 
putationand Memory. Or rather 3. The ſame thing which he cal- 
led his ſoul and his life in the former branch of the verſe, and here 
his honour ; it being very frequent to- expreſs one thing in ſevera] 
words'or phraſes iu one verle. And ſo here may be objerved a gra- 

ation. Let hint 1. Perſiſt ro perſecute It ; 2. Take it , 3. Tread it 
down, or deſtrov ir, and '4+ Lay itinthe duſt, or bury it, to prevent 
} 


s * Ariſe,O LORD. in thine anger »,lift up thy ſelf s, 
cauſe of the rage of mine enemies;and * awake for 
me to the judgmene that thou haſt commanded e. 


L M S. 


me. 5 That thou maiſt give them a deadly blow. A Metaphor from . 
men who ariſe and lift up themſelves to do ſo. Heb; Be rhou exalted: 
glorifie thy ſelf, and fhew thy ſelf ro be above them. : To execute 
that juſt and righteous Sentence cf $Sa»ls Depoſirion, and my Ad- 
vancement, which thou haſt commanded, i: e. appointed, (as that 
word is uſed Pſal: 148: 5: 1 Kings 17: 4.and in this very caſe, 1 Sam: 
13: 14: ) and declared by thy holy Prophet Samuel, 

7 SO ſhal the congregation of the people « compals 
thee about x:for theis ſakes y therefore return thou on 
highs. 

# Either 1. A great number of all ſorts of people, who ſhall ob- 
ſerve thy Juſtice, and Holineſs, and Gooeneſs in pleading my righ- 
teous Cauſe againſt my cruel and implacable Opreſſor. Or rather 
2. The whole Body of thy people 7rae/,co whom both theſe He« 
brew Words are commonly aſcribed in holy Scripture. x They 
will, and I astheir King and Ruler in thy ſtead will take * care thar 
they ſhal come from all partsand meet together to worſhip theez 
which in Saws time they have grofly negleCted, and. been permitred 
to negle&,and to offer to thee Praiſes and Sacrifices for thy Favour 
to me,and for the manifold Benefits which they ſhal enjoy by my 
Means, and under my Government. y Or, for its ſake ( te. ) For 
the ſake of thy Congregation, which now is wofully diſſipated and 
oppreſled,and have in a great meaſure loſt all adminiſtration of Ju- 
ſtice, and exerciſe of Religion. z Or, return to thy high place. ( :: e.) 
To thy Tribunal tofſit there and judge my cauſe. An Alluſfion to 
earthly Tribunals, which generally areſet up on high above the 
people, 1 Kings 10; 19. b 

8 The LORD fhal judge the people a: judge me 


ding to mine integrity hat 5s in me b, 0 
a Ic belongs to thee to judge all perſons and people, andto give 
Sentence between them, eſpecially when they appeal unto thee, 
which I now do: bIFI be guilty of thoſe evil Deftgns,towards him, 
wherewith Cu:h and others charge me,do thou give Sentence againſt 
me : but ifT be juſt and innocent rowards him,as thou knoweſt I 
am and have been, do thou plead my right. ; 


9 Olet the wickedneſs of the wicked come to an 


God trieth the beart and reins f+ 


c Let the Maliceof mine Enemies ceaſe, put a ſtop to their wick- 
ed PraCtiſes,either by changing their Hearts or by tying their Hands 1. 


of termination, it ſhal ceaſe : and an end of deſtru&ion, it ſhal be 
rooted out. Or, Let, 1 pray thee, wickeane(s conſume the wicked, (i: e.) 
Thoſe that are maliciouſly and incorrigibly ſuch. And ſo this 
Prayer is oppoſed to that following Prayer for the Juſt, And ſuch 
Prayers againſt ſome wicked Men we find uſed by prophetical per- 
tons, which are not raſhly ro be drawn into preſident by ordinary 
perſons. 4 Or, and theu wilt eſtablich, or confirm, or uphold* which 
1s oppoſed to that coming to an end, or conſuming laſt mentioned» e All 
juſt perſons and cauſes, and mine in particular which is ſo. f And 
therefore he knows that T haye not ſo much as a thought or a deſire 


of that miſchief which Cush and others report I am deligningas- 
gainſt Saul, 


10 f My defence is of God gs, which ſaveth the u- 
Pright in heart 5. 
g Heb. My ſbield is upen God, Hedoth as it were carry my Shield 
before me. See 1 Sam: 17: 7, He dothand will prote& me againſt all 
mine Enemies. h And therefore. me, whom he knoweth to be ſin« 
cere and honeſt in my Carriage toward him and towards Saul, 

IT || God judgeth 5 the righteous,and God is angry 
with the wicked k every day I. 
; (ice,) ) Defendeth,or avengeth, or delivereth, as this word is ; 
oft uſed, as Deut: 32: 36. Pſal, g. 4+ and 10.18. and 26, 1, &c, To 
juage, 15 properly to give Sentence : which becauſe it may be done 
either by abſolving & acquitting from puniſhment, or by condem« 
ning and giving up to puniſhment, therefore it is ſometimes uſed 
for the one, and ſometimes for the other,as the Circumſtances of the 
place determine it.& Which though it may ſeem a bold Supplement, 
yet is neceſſary;and eaſily fetched out of the next and following 
Verſes. Even then,when his Providence ſeems to favour them, 
and they are moſt ſecure and confident. 
12 I{fhe » turn not »,he « will whet his ſword p,he 
hath bent his bow q, and made it ready. 
m i, e.The wicked Man laſt mentioned,either Cuſh, or Saul,» From 
this wicked courſe of Calumniating or perſecuting me, ot. e. God 
who is often deſigned by this Pronoun, being eaſily to be under- 
ſtood from the nature of the thing. pz: e. Will prepare and haſten, 
and ſpeedily execute his Judgm.nts upon him. .q Did Ifay, He 
w:ll do it, nay, he hath already done it, his Sword is drawn,his Bow 
is bent, and the Arrows are prepared and ready to be ſhot. 
13 He hath alſo prepared for him - the inſtruments of 
death 5; he + ordaineth 7 his arrows againſt the perſe- 
CUTCOTS #. 


R, 


2, For himſelf, for his own uſe,to wir,to {hcot againſt kis Enemiest 
s (i, e, ) Arrows, or other deadly Weapons. s Heb. Maketh or work. 


v1 
f 


- Pſal, VI} 


O LORD, * according to my righteouſneſs,and accor- "F0# 18, 


* x Sams | 
end c, but eſtabliſh 4 the juſt e: * for the righteous _—— 


9. 
Pſal.139. ' 


or ſome other way 3 Say to it, as thou doſt ro the Sea, Hitherto Jer.11-20» 
haſt thou gone, but thou ſhait go no further,and here ſhal thy proud & 17.104 
Waves be ſtayed. Or, The wickeaneſs of the Wicked shal have an end, 8 20:12. 
not an end of perfe&ion, which is to be accompliſhed, bur an end” Rev.2:23+ _ 


+ Heb. my 
buckler is 


upon Gods 


[Or.Ged 
is arightea 
0u5 judge. 


7 Either 1+ For or againſt the Perſecutor, as it follows, Orrather HTS 
Plal:45.5. 
eth, deſfigneth or fitterh for this very uſe. « Or, againf furious and rs 


conceived miſchief and brought forth falſhood y. 


the ditoh which he made &. 


r Oppole thy jult Anger to their cauſclels and finful Rage againſt 


| 


fiery Perſecutorszas the word fignifies,and as.tis uſed Gen. 1,36.Pſal.1ol 3</ 
« Lain. 4.194 


14 * Behold,he x travelleth with iniquity, and hath J9=-#5- 


| : + Heb: he 
x (7,e. The Wicked, as is undeniably manifeſt from the matter hath dige 


and context. » This Metaphor note: h his deep defign,and continu- ged a pit, 
ed courſe, and vigorous indeavours for the doing of Miſchief, and * Job 4 8. 
his reſtleſsnzſs and pain till he have accomplithed ir, 


Plal:9: 15. 
15 + He made a pit,and digged it, * and is fallen into ,.. g. 
T4: Fo 

« Hath Prov: 5;: 2 


4 N 


Pial;59.3. 


& 10.2, & 


SALM 5 | Pal. vin 
firſt to the Devil, who being ſentenced by Ged to eternal Flemes, 
and Conquered and Tormented ty Chritr, maketh it his great bu- 
lineſs to revenge himſelf, which becauſe he canrot do upon God 
and Chriſt, he indeavours to do it upon their Scrvantsand Chl'dren; 
and next;to all rheſe Men who are his Vaſlals and eſpoule his Quar. 
rel ; whoalſo are provoked and conceive, though fa}ily, that they 
WS xs 4 I . are ir:jured by the Goſpel, and by the Preact ers, Profeflors, ar.d 
: 16 His miſchief ſhal return upon his ea head,and Praftiſcrs of it, -2nd therefore ſeek to revenge themielVes of them. 
bis violent dealing thal come down || upon his own pate Þ ih...ot we havean eminent Inſtance, Rev: 11. 10. Cctpare Hi, 


ij Which phraſe may note whence this retribution thould come, Þ y, 
« 4 _ 
even from Heaven or from the rightzous and remarkable Judgee 


ment of God. 


17 I will praiſe the LORD according to his righte- 
ouſneſs + :- and will ſing praiſe to the name ot the 
LORD moſt high. 


f Declared and afferted by him in their exemplary Puniſhment, 

and my ſeaſonable and won4ertul Deliverance» | 
FI AL. VIE 

To the chief muſician upon Girttith a, A pſalm of Da- 


vid 6. : : 
s The fame title is prefixed to Pſal: $i, and 84« This alſo 15 ſup- ? 


P 


on himſelf which he intended againſt 
me. Which may be underſtood either of Saul, who whileſt he plot- 
tcd againſt Davids Life,ran into apparent hazard of loſing his own, 
x Sam: 24. and 26- Or of ſome Courtier or Courtiers of Saul, ir. 
whom this was evidently verified; alrbough the Hiſtory and Me- 
mory of it bz now loſt. 


Pal. VIE. 


xz Hath brought that Evil np 


[Or 
pai] 


Pſal.3 Ts 
ard, 


4. 15. 


3 When I conſider the heavens /, the work of thy 
fingers mw, the moon and the ſtars » which thou hajt” _ | 


ordained o ; 

I Thine by Creation, as it follows. m(r. e. ) of thy hand, as it is 
expreſ[2d P/alm 102. 25. A part being here pur for the whole:Gods 
hand and finger being indifferently uſed to note his Power, as Exoa: 
8: 19. Luket1. 20, &c- Though ſome conceive that by this Phraſe 
he intended to ſignifie, both with whar facility God made this glo- 
rious Work, even with a touch oi his Finger: and with whar curi.. 
ous and exquiſite Artifice he framed it: the Fingers being much y- 
ſedin ſuch Works. » Either the Sun 1s inc'uded unde tiis genera] 


; : Titie: or he onitted it, becauſe he made this P/alm by Nichr,whe 
une or Song,or Inſtrument fo calicd , -: EE IT, DECI oht,when 
+ Prbret tar þ much led in Gath, Some ren» | **< Sun did notfall within his Contemplation o Or, fab! fhed, or 


: direffed, or diſpoſed, orerdered, i i.e, ) placed in thar excelic R 

= fs, ; n , £ . > X : the tine 1 o : b - - : p -C int and 

der it, For the Winep reſſes, and {ay a Was If be ſung ca hack | unalterable order, and direQed to ajl their ſeveral Courſes or Mo- 
of Vintage, 6 Ir isa great Queſtion among Interpreters, >» hetner , 


this Pſalm ſpeak of man in general,and of the Honour which God ts Wh s hat tl indf fk; x 

put upon him in his Creation; oronly of the Man Chriſt Jeſus. | 4 at pzs man qthnatt an Sag min ul of him r of oy 7.17, 
Poſſivly both may be reconciled and put roZzetner, and the Con» ; and the ſon of man s that thou viliteſt him # ? 1a). 14444 
-troverſy, if rightly ſtare*, miy be enved. For rhe ſcope and bu= Þ (7.e. ) How me-n ard inconliderable a thing is Man,if com-Hed:2:6] 
ſineſs ot this Pſalm ces plainly ro be this, to di'play and ccle- | pared with thy gloricus Mi;cſry,whoart 1o infinite in Power and 
brate the greac Love and Kindneſs of Go to Mar-kind not only Wiſdom, as taou haſt fhewed in the Frame of the Heaver.s, &«. 
in kis Creation, but alſo, and eſpecially in h:s Redempricn by *' q Heb. infirm, or mjerable Man. By which ir is apparent that he 
Jeſus Chriſt; whom, as he was Man, he advaiiced to the Honour {peaks of May,not accor. ing to the ſtate of his Creatior..but as fallen 
and Dominion kere mentioned, rhat ke might carry on that great ' into a {fate of Sin and Miterv, and Mortality. (5:e:) Careſt for him 
and glorious Work. So Chriſt is the pri«cipal Subje& of this and conferreit ſuch hig.: Favours upon him: 5 Heb: rhe ſon of Adam, 
Pſalm, of whom it 15 interpreted b:th vy Chr. himſelf, Ma:; 2 thar great Apoltate from, and Rebe! gainft Gods, the ſinful Son of 
16. and by his holy Apoſtic, 1 Cor. i 5: 27+ Hz*b: 2. 6,7, a 11nfu! Father, his Son by lik-veſs of Dit; ofition and Mannersno 
David extolleth the Majeſty, "Power, and Providence of God in the World, lets than by Procreation. All which re,ds:0 magnihe the foilow- 
1 -—- 3. and his Love ana Kindnels ro Mankind, 4, 5 in giving hin ing Me:cy. t Not in anger, as that Word is ſometimes uſed, bur 
Power over the Earth, 7. the Air, and 112 Sed, 8, 9. : w:th thy Grace and Mercy, as it is taken Gen: 21; 1, Exog: 4: 31; 
=. { LORDour Lord, how excellent zs thy name ec inall £2/2/: 65:9' and 106: 4 and 144: 3- tHeb'the 

 *PA. 113 the Earth d! * who halt let thy glory above the . 5For thou haſt made him a litcle lower than Þ the an- G6. 
gels u,and haft crowned him * with glory and honour, Pſal.82.6 


#5145 heavens e. | h Thou haſt in and tl Chriſt mercifully and wonderfully * 23%! 
3. "7 | «4c exnlained inthe next clauſe, * # L hou hattin and throvgi :1t mercifully and wonderfully = 
c 7, e. Thy Fameor Glory, as it 1s explained 1 OY reſtored Mai ro his Primiriv= ans happy Eſtate, in which he was 


- 


#Heb 
ham, 
my ju 
we; 
f Het: 
righteo 
ws, 


uw. 


Ir,” 
ofrud 


and as the Name commonly tigaifies, as Gen: 6. 4; Eccleſ. 7; 1: Phil, 
2; 9. And this Glory of God 15 moit eminent in the Goſpe),aad the 
work of Redemption. & Not only in I/rael,to which the Name and 
Knowledge of Gcd was confined, P/al. 76: 2.and 147. 19. but among 
all Nations. Which {hews that this Pſalm ſpeaks of the Meſſias,and 
the times of the New Teſtament» S:e 1a. 49: 5: Mal: 
e What do I ſpeak of the Earth ? thy Glory or Praiſe , reacheth ro rhe 
Heavens, and indzed above all the viſiole Heavens,even to the He 
ven of Heavens ; where thy Throne of Glory is eſtabliſhed, where 
the bleſſed Angels celebrate thy Praiſes. where Cariſt firteth at thy 


1.5. Oc. : 


but one remove beiow the Anvels; from which he was fallen by 
Sin. x7: e Man, f:llen and loft Man : who is indeed aQuaily 
crowned and reſt..red ro the Giory and Dominion here following, 
not in his 0w1i: perſon. but in Ci:r:ſt his Head and Repreſentative, 
who receives ths Crow: and Dowinion, net ſo much for himſelf 
who did not nced it,as fer Mans good and in his ſtead ; which alſo 
he will in due tim: cominunicats unto all his Members. And ſo the 
two differing Expoſitions of this place concerning Mankind and 
concerning Chriit, may be reconciled. For he ſpeaks of that hap= 
py & honourable Eftats by Gods Favour conferred firſt upon Chriſt 


\ then 
WEL 

tm2 04 
Whiua 
nd, and 
therr cit 
b# thay 


red 
ke, 


Tight Hand in glorious Majeſty, from whence he poureth down ex+ ' PY de abi 
. celllens Gifts x, a Babes, &o. L: it followeth, F , of waom therefore this place is rightly Expounded,Heb, 2: 6, 7, 8. 


1: *and then by his hands upen Markind,cven vpon all thar believe in 
2 Out of the mouth of babes and tucklingsf haſt thou ' him, And ſo this who!le place compared with rhat may be thus Pa- 


ro ceaſe, 


+ Heb: 
THeb. coſe 


. as 2 Chron; 13; 7. Prov: 1: 4. Eccleſ, 10: 16. {ſa. 3. 


* 1097; 1:18 24, 


7 ordained ſtrenggs 25 becauſe of thine enemies, that Fever W hart is Man that thou {hou'ideſt mind or viſit him by 


thou mighteſt F itill 4 the enemy z and the avenger k. 


thy Son whem thou haſt ſent inro the World! Whogthat he might 


f ' Either 1. Properly ſuch. For there is much of Gods Glory ſeen ! reſtorcMan to that happy and glorious Eſtate which was bur a little 
in Infants in their Concepticn afjd ſtrange Progreſs from ſmall and * below that of the Angels, was pleaſed to take up»n him Mans mi» 


contemptible Beginnings, in their Preſervatioa and Nonriſhunent | ſe:able and mortal Nature, and thereby to make himſelf ( who was 


in the dark Cell of the Womb, in th:ir bringing forth, anu brings 
ing up, in providing Breaſts and Milk for them, and keeping them 
from innumerable D:zngers, from which they are utteriy unab/e to 
keep themſelves. Bur this though it fets forth Gods Praite, yer 
how it Nills the enemy and Avenger,ſeecms not c'ear. Or rather, 
2. Metaphoricallyſo called,babes not ſo much in age &years,as in dil. 
poſition and condition ; weak and fooliſh, and contempribie and 
harmleſs perſons, who are vergafrequent!y called Babes or Ci:laren, 

4. Mat, 18, ;. 
Eph. 4. 14, &c. For ſuch are very unfir to grapple with an Ene- 
my : and therefore when ſuch perſons conquer the moſt powerful 
and malicious Enemies; ic muſt needs exceedingly confound and 
ſilence rhem, and mightily advance the glory of God: as indeed it 
did, when ſuch mean and obſcure Perſons as the Apoſtles and Mi- 
niſters, and Diſciples of Chriſt were,did maintain and propagate the 
Goſpel in ſpightof all the Wir, and Power, and Rage of their Ene. 
mies- S2e 1 Cor: 1. 25. 27, 28, 29. And of ſuch Babes as theſe Chriſt 
himſelf expounds this place. Mat. 21: 16- Of which more God wil- 
ling upon that place- g Or, thou haſt founded ( or confirmed, or eftabli. 
ſhed, or firmly ſetled,” or fitted, or perf-fed, as it is rendred by the 
LXX and vulgar Latine here: and by St. Mathew Ch: 21415,I (7:e.) 
perteQly and firmlyeſertled ) Strength : By which he ſeems to un- 
deritand either 1, The Ce)ebration or Praiſe of his ſtrength or po. 
wer, by comparing this with Mypt: 21;16.where it 1s rendred Pra;ſe, 
So it is on'y a Metonymy of the Adjun@, which is moſt frequent 
in Scriptare and all Authors. And fo the word Strength ſeems to 
be raken Pſal. 29: 1. and 96, 7. Or 2. A ſtrong and mighty King- 
dom," the Abſtraft being pur for the Concrete, than which no- 
thing 15 more frequent, even the Kingdom of Chriſt, or his Goſpel, 
which 1s ofccalled the 4-mor Power of God, as Pſal: 110+ 2. Iſa. 53:1. 
And rhis Kingdom being an everlaſting,and invin- 
clþle, an all-conquering Kingdom, Dan: 2: 44. itis no wonder it 
8s here call:d frength. And this Goſpel or Kingdom is here ſaid to 
be founded dr eftabliſhzd, not by che Hands or valiant AGtions of 
Men of Might, as other Kingdoms are, but meerly by the Mouths of 
Babes, &c- ( i.e. ) by the Words and Diſcourſes of Chriſt's Apo- 
ſtles and Diſciples. Which isjuſtly obſerved and celebrated here as 
a wonderful work of God. h( 5. e. ) Silence, and Confound, and 
Conquer.cither by Convincing and Converting them, or by deſtroy- 
ang them. i The Eaxemies o: God and of his people, the Devil,the 
head of them, whoſe Kingdom and Power is aboliſhed by this 
means. and all Men who fiyhe under his Banner againit God and 
Chriſr and his Members, kWhich Title moſt truly and fitly agrees, 


- 


: 
$ 


far above all Angels, even their Lord and Gcd)lower than the An- 
gels, mortal and miſerable for alittle time : after which he was 
advanced to the higheſt Honour,and to an univerſal Dominion 


over all Gods Works, the Angelsnot accepted. * Gent 


works of thy hands : 
his feet ||. | 

» Thou didft give all power andHall things into his hands, Mat: 
28:18. John 13: 3, 4 Bothin Heaven, where are the Angels men- 
tionzd v;5. and in the Earth, Air and Sea, as it follows. For no- 
thing is excepted beſides God, 1 Cor: 15: 25, 27: Heb: 2:8. || i: e 
Made them ſubje& ro himy as this Phraſe oft ſignifies. See Deur, 
33+ 3. Judges 5.27. Pſalm 18. 38. and 110, 1. 


field *. 
8 The ſowl of the air, ard the'fiſh of the ſea, 


whatſoever paſſeth through the paths of the ſea. 
9 O LORD our Lord, how exceVent is thy name 


in all the earth. | 

+ Here is no perfe& Enumeration, but under theſe are *"compre- 
hended all other Beaſts, and much more Men and Angels, * 7:e 
The wild Beaſts : which together with diverſe Fowls and Fiſhes 
were ſubje& to Chriſr.and are governed and employed as it pleaſeth 
him ; although many ofthem be without the reach, and are nut 
brought under the power ofany other Man, 


P'S A LI 
To the chief muſician upon AMuth-labben #, a Pſalm of 


David. | 
a This alſo ſeems to be another Title of ſome $cng or Tune, or In- 
ſrrumen: : of which we muſt and may be.ccntent to be ignorant, 
as the Jewiſh DoQtors alſo are. Some render ir, Upon the death of 
his Son, to wit, 4bſalom,or of cne called Labben,or, of the midale 
Man, or the Man that ſtood between the two Armies, to wit, Coliah 
who is ſo called in the Hebrew Text, 1 Sam. 17+ 4. Bit none of 
« theſe ſyit with the deſign and matter of the Pſalm, which 15 More 


| 


general, and relates to his former manifold Dangers, and the De- 
liverance which God had graciouſly given him our of them.And 
that ofGeliah agrees not with v.14;where there is mention of praiſe 
ing God in Zion, which then and long after wesin che Hands of 


the Jebuſires, David 


6* Thou haſt made him to have dominion y over the ,,*,, 
*thou haſt put all :hi»gs z under * ; cor; 
15s 25! 


7 + All ſheep and oxen },yea, and the beaſts of the + Hy 
Flocks 0 


Oxen alof 
and ohew 


b'the 


$2.6 
6. 1, 


Joroe Ml Will praiſe ;hee, O LORD, wich my hearr 4; L will 
] (bew forth all py marvellous works c. 
b (i e. ) With a ſincere and affeQtionate, and- united Heart. c I 


#eb thou 


hu man? 


wy juage= 
men, 


f Heb. 7% or, as 8 juft Judge. 


righteous 
wo, 


I0;, "24 tual end p : and thou 9 haſt deſtroyed Cities, their. me- 
dnims morial is periſhed with them r. 


\ the ens 
UN. 
rm2 0.8 


whitual 
md, and 
therr cities 
bft thou 

i 


4 


þ 

Plalg6 
.% 98. 
v 


Ii% 91:2, 


birh plac e. 
\Gr. $8. 
ne, 

f eb: tn 
= 


| VIl Plal. IX. 


David reſolveth to praiſe God, T, 2. for executing Judgment upon his E 
nerhies, 3, $. God is a Refuge to the Oppreſſed, 9, lo, David co#. 
the people of Iſrael zo praiſe the Lord, 11, 12« He prayeth him to conſi- 
der his Trouble, 13 that he might have cauſe to praiſe him, 14. The Hea- 
then by Gods Judgment fall inte che ſnare they made for others, 15, 16- 
The portion of che wicked that forget God, 171 A Promiſe of Mercy to the 
Needy and Poor, 18, And a Prayer for Judgment on the Ungoaly, 19, 29. 


will diſcourſe in the general of thy manifold Wonders wrought 
for me,and for thy Church and People formeriy. The particle a/ 
is herczas it is ofc elſewhere taken ina reitrained venle. 

2 | will be glad and rejoyce in thee #4: I will ſing 


praiſe to thy name, O chou moſt High. 
d (7. e, ) In thy favour ani heip vouchſafed to me, 
3 When mine enemiesare turied back e,they ſhal fal) 
and pzrith f at thy prelence g. 
e (5. e ) Diſcomfited an! put toiiight,f They ſhal nor ſavethem» 
ſelves by Flight, and reterve themf-ives to c0 further M.ichict,bur 
ſhal fumble as it were at Gall-traps by thze laid in their way, anc 
ſhal be purſued and overtakengand cut cff. g Upon thy appearance 
againſt them, One angry Look of thineis able co confound and 
deſtroy them. Heu. om thy face, becauſe rhou 6idft march in the 
head of our Armies, and againſt ihem. They could not ftand be- 
fore thee, So he atcribes the konour of his ViEtories to God only 
and to his preſence and afhitance. 
4 For | thou haſt maintained my right and my cauſc 
þ, thou ſateſt in the throa- z judging F right &. | 
h ( ive.) My righteous Canſe againt thine and mine Enemies. 
i Thou vidit judge aud give Senterice for me. & Or,O righteous Tuage, 


5 Thou haſt rebuked } the Heathen #9, thou haſt de- 
ſtroyed the wicked, thou haſt put out their name» for e- 
yer and ever. 

I (5. e. } Puniſhed, as Pſal. 6. r. or deſtroyed, as it is explained 
in the next Clauſe. m2 To wit, the Phil:ſtines and otber Heather, 
Nations, who did from time to time mole{t David, or the People 
of 7/razl, n Either that Fame and Honour which they bad gained 
by their former Expioirs, but now utrerly loſt by their ſhameful 
Defeats : or their very Memorial, as it fared with Amalck, 

6 ||O thou enemy 0,deltiuctions are come to a perpe- 


o This is a ſudden Apoſtrophe to the Enemies of Gods People Phi- 
liſtines, Amorites, or other Nations, who had formeriy made grear 
Havcck and Waſte among them. p Thou haſt deſtroyed the 1/raeli- 
tiſh Nation utterly and irrecgverably, and as it follows, their de- 
fenced Ciries,& their very Name-& Mcmorygaccording to thy own 
defire. So it is a Sarcaſme or Irony, an uſual Figure in Scripture 
and all Authors, whereby the quite contrary 1s ſignified; To wit, 
That they were not only fruſtrared of their Defiire+» and Hopes of 
deſtroying the {ſraelites, but were alſo ſubdued, and in a great part 

deſtroyc<d by them. Or this Verſe may be Ainderſtood of the great 
Waſteand Ruine which Gods Enemies had brought upon Iſrael be- 
fore tiis time : which is here remembred,:o make the 1j-aehites more 
thankful for their later or preſent Dcliwverances. Or ir may be ta- 
ken as a Prophecy of the future Calzmities which the Enemies ſhould 
by Gods permiſſion bring upenl/rael, of which he ſpeaks as of a 
thivg paſt and done,after the manner of the Prophets, But this place 
is otherwiſe rendred in rhe Margent of our Bible:,and by diverſe 0- 
thers, The Deſtru&ions of the Enemy ( which may be underſrood either 
1. AQively, which they cauſed, Or 2. Paflively,which they felt ) 
are come to a perpetual end, or, ar: fully and finally compleated, q Either 
1, Thou, O God, wio is oft undefirood and co:ched in a fans 
in this mannery Thou haſt deſtroyed their Citits. Or rather 2, Thou, 
O Enemy ' as may be gathered both from th: foregoing Clauſe 
where It is ſo expreſſed ; and from the next Verſe, where it fol- 
lows by way of oppoſition to this, Bur the Lord, &c. r The places 
and people are utter!y ex{rinCt; 

7 But the LORD ſhal enduze for ever 5:he hath pre- 

ared t his throne for judgment» 

s Though Cities and People may periſh for ever, yet the Lord a- 
bides for ever. Whichis ſufficient for the Enemies "Terror and for 
the comfort of his Church. #t Or, e#abliſhsd by his immutable Pur- 
poſe, and his irrevocable Promile: 

8 And * he {bal judge the world « in righteouſneſs ; 
he ſhal miniſter judgment to the people in uprightneſs. 


u Not you only, but all the Enemies of his Pcopte, and all the 
Men of che World, © 


0 * The LORD alſo will be + a refuge for the OP- 


pP SS 4 LL M6 


c Whoſe ſpecial and gracious preſence isthere; for there was the 
Ark at this rime, 4d7.e. To the Heathen Nations, that they alſo 
may be brought tothe Knowledge and Worſhip of the true Ged, 

12*When he maketh inquiſition for blood e he remem- 
breth them f:he forgetteth nor the cry of the i| humble g. 

e H-b., Bloods, The bloodſhed or murder of his innocent and holy 
ones:which though ke may connive at for a ſcaſon,yer he will cer- 
fainly call the Authors of it to a very ſevere Account, and avenge 
It upon them» fEither 1 The Humble, as ir follows,or the oppreſ- 
ied, v: 9, Thar rruit in him, and ſeek to him v4, 10. Whom he 
ſeemed ro have forgotren. Or 2, The bloods laſer mentioned.for thar 
Nonn and this Pronoun are both of the Maſculine Gerder:and then 
rememoring is put for revenging or puniſhing, asit is Devt. 25. 17, 
19+ Neh. 6, 14. Jer- 14. 10. and 44.21: and oft elſewhere. g Or 
meek, as this word which is uſed alſo Zech. 9.9. is Tranfl:ted Mar. 
21. 5. who do not, and cannot. and will not avenge themſelves, but 
commit their Cauſe to me, as the God to whom Vengeance velong- 
2th. Or affliffed, or oppreſſed ones, | 

[3 Have mercy upon me,O LORD, conſider my trou- 


me up from the gates of death 5: | 

h To wit, Compaſſionately and effeQually,ſo as to bring me out 
of it :From the Brink or Mouth of the Grave into which I was 
dropping, being as near Death as a Man is to the City;thar is come 
to the very Gates of it. And ſo the Phraſe is uſed P/at, 107, 18. 1/2. 
38. 10; and in other Authors, [ of whom ſee my Latin Synopſis. ] 
Gates elſewhere ſignifie power and policy, becauſe the Gates of Ci- 
ries were places both of Counſel and Strength; but the Gates of Death 
are never ſo taken in Scripture. | ; 
14 That I may ſhew forth thy praiſe in the gates & of 
the daughter of Zion /:T will rejoyce min thy ſalvation. 
k 7, e. In the great Aſſemblies. which are uſually in the Gates. 
Compare Prov. 31. 31. 1/a. 3. 36. Theſe Gates he elegantly oppoſeth 
to the former and declareth that if he be brought off them he will go 
into theſes / Either 1, Of Jeruſalem ſo called alſo 1/a: 1. 8. Zech.g, 9« 
Becauſe at this timeit was ſubje& to Zion; which at this time was 
the ſeat of the Kings Palace, and of the Ark. For Cities or Towns - 
velonging or ſubje& to any Metropolis are commonly called its 
Daughters, as Joſ. 15. 4%» 2 Chron: 13, 19. Pſal. 48. 1. Asthe chief 
Citiesare called Mothers, as 2 Sam. 20.19. Gal. 4:-26: Or 2, Of the 
people who live in or belong to, or meer together for civil and r2. 
i1gions Matters in Zion, For Cities are as it were Mothers to their 
people, giving them Birth and Breeding, and therefore the perple 
are commonly called their Daughters. So the Names of the Da'ghters 
of Egypt. Jeri 46» 11, andof Elem, Lam. 4 21, 22« and of Tyre, Pſg!, 
45- 12. and of Babel, Pſa. 137.8. and of Jeruſalem, Lam, 2. 3, 15, 
Mich, 4: 8. Are put for the people ofthole places. m To wit, wita 
'niricual Joy and Thankſgiving : elſe it were no fit Motive to be 
uſed to God in Prayer, 
I5* The Heathen are ſunk down in the pic that they, 
made z: in the net which they bid is their own foot ta- 
ken. T 
n Fallen into that DeſcruQtion which they deſigned to bring np- 
O 


N US: 
16 The LORD is knowno, -by the indgment which 


own hands, * Haggaion q, Selah. 

o Or, Hath made himſelf knewn,or famous e®n among his Enemies, 
by his moſt wiſe Counſels and wonderful Works, p Upon the Wics 
ked, as it followeth. q This is either a muſical Term, or a Note of 
Attention, a kind of b-hold,intimagiyg that the matrer deſerves deep 
and frequent M-4i: ation or Conſideration, as the word ſignifies, 


17 The wicked ſhal be turned into hell 7,and all the 
nationss thac forget God e. | 

r Either 1, Into the Grave, which isofc called Scheo!, into which 
they are ſaid to be turned, or to return, becauſe they were made of,or 
taken out of the Duſt, Eccleſ. 12. 7, Or 2. Into the place of eternal 
Perdition ; which alſo is ſometimes called Scheol, as Prov. 15, 24.3nd 
elſewhere. For he ſeems to ſpeak hagg of thoſe puniſhments which 
are peculiar to the Wicked, whereas the Graveis common to good 
and bad. And as v. 8- He ſzems to ſpeak of the Jaſt and general 


Judgment ofall rhe World, ſo this Verſe may be underſtood ofthe 


general puniſhmert of all Perſons and Nations conſequent upon it, 
And into this place wicked men may be ſaid to be turned back, or 
toreturn, either Becauſe it is their own proper place, A#s 1: 25« 
to which they belong, and from which they haye their Original. 
and their wicked qualities,as being of their Father the Devil, John 
8. 44+: In which reſpe& the Luft ( who are by all Interpreters un- 
derſtood to be living Men ) are ſaid to come out of the bortomleſy pir,. 
Rev. 9. 2, 3. Or 2, Becauſe they hid ſet themielves as it were in 
Bar tel-array againſt God, and were beaten back and driven from 
his Preſence into their Graves and into Hell it ſel Whom their 
great numbers and power cannot prote& fromeGods wrath.t That 


prefted x, a refuge in + times of + trouble. do notconſider nor regard God, nor his Precepts nor his Threat- 


x Goil will not only judge the World at the Jaſt day, and rhen 
give Sentence for his People againſt their Enemies, but even at pre- 
ſent he will give them his 7roteCtion, : ; 

10 And they that know y thy name 2 will put their 
truſt in thee ; for thou, LORD, baſt not forſaken 4 


them that ſeek thee 6. 

3 ( 5.e. ) That throughly underſtand and duly conſider. = ( 2. e. ) 
Thy Nature and Perfe&ions, thy infinite Power and Wiſdom, and 
Faithfulneſs and Goodneſs: which make a perſon a moſt-fit and pro- 
per Obj:& for Truſt. The name of God is molt frequently put forGod, 
as he hath manifeſted nimfſelt in his Word and Works, as Deut. 28: 
58. Pſal, 7: 17. and 20. 1. Prov. 18. 10, Oc. a The experience of 
thy fairhfalneſs to thy people in all Ages, is a juſt ground for their 
confidence, v4. e, That leek Help an4 Relief from thee by ferven: 
Prayer, m x-d with Faith, or rruſt in God, as is expreſſed in the 
former Claute. 


their oppreſſive and wicked Courſes. 


expectation of the poor [hall zo: x periſh for ever. 


ningsand Judgments, but goon fgcurely and prelumptuouſly in 
18 For the needy ſhal not alway be forgotten « : #the 


19 Ariſe, O LORD/)et not man preyail,let the hea- 


then be judged in thy light. 


u Though God for a time may ſeem to negle& or forget them, | 


1nd ſuffer their Enemies to triump1 over them. x Which negative 


particle is fitly underſtood out of the former Clauſe, »as ir 1s Pſz. 
t« 5. and 44. 18. 1/a. 23. 4- and 28. 27, 28. 


20 Put them in fear y O LORD, z4at the nations 


may know themfelves ts be but men &, Selah. 


y Subdue rheir proud and intoſent Spirits, and ſtrike them with 
Terror, cr with ſome terrible Judgment. z Heb. Weak, and miſz4 


Ii Sing preiſes ro the LORD which dwelleth in Zi- 
ON c3 declare among the people d his doings, | 


rable, and mortal Men, and theretorc altogether unable to oppole the, 


omnipotent and eternal God. This he 1aith, becaule wicked Men 


4 Na When 


Pſal. IX 


*Gen; 9:5; || 
| Or, Afi» [1 


Hed. 


£ 


ble h which I ſuffer of them that hate me, thou that lifreſt - 


5 Plale7. 
153 
d 57: 6: 
Prov:22;8 


he executeth p : the wickedis ſnared in the work of his * Plig2.3, 


* P1225, 


p ” 


-- 


ff 


w 


; ſal, + "hu Pp S 4 
when they are advanced to greatPower and Majeſty are very prone 
to forget their own Frailty,and to carry themfelves as if they were 
Gods. See 11g. 31. 3.Ez#k- 30. 7,8. Dan, 5+ 21+ 


PSAMT. X 


His Plalm contains Davids Complaint unto God againſt his 

maliciousEnemies.eſpecially thoſe of his own Peopic,whole 

wicked and deceitful PraCtices he here deſcribes, and tizen commits 
his cauſe to God, and begs his kelp againſt them. 


zImift complaineth of Gods hiding himſelf, 1. and of the outrage ana 

_— = A icken, 6 The We, 6, 7. and malicious practice 

of the wicked, 8-10. and their denying Goas onmiſcience. 11. David 

| prayeth for remedy againſt, and pun:ſhment upon the wicked, 12.1 5.and 
acknowledgeth Gods mercy in hearing the oppreſſed, 16 ———18. 

| \ X F Hy ſtandeſt thou afar of a, O LORD ? why 

hideſtthou thy /elf bF in times of trouble c ?_ 

F Heb: 2? - , T.jke one that neither ſeesnor hears, nor regards me, nor in- 

Seaſons in tendeſt any help for me.ib Or,chy face, out of v. 1 which did ſome- 

trouble, So times ſhine upon me : Or, thine eyes, by comparing this with Prov. 

Gr. 28; 27. Iſs, 1. 15, © When moſt need thy Pity and Succour. Do 

not add Afﬀflition to the Aﬀflifted, | : 
'2 + The wicked in hjs pride 4 doth perfecute the 


poor f: * let them be taken in the devices that they 
have imagined. 


+ Heb: in 
the pride of 
the wicked 
' hee doth 


perſecute. ; 
** Þf: 9:16, Or diſlike his wicked Courſes,or that he may have more 


him, to perſecute thoſe whom he ſhould prote& and cherith. 
ſeems to point at Saul or his Courtiers- e With great fervency and 
burning tury, as the word ſignifies, fTo wit, me who am through 
their Tyranny poor and deſtitute, and miſerable, and therefore the 
more proper Obje& for thy Compaſſien,and others who favour my 
righteous Cauſe. 


For the wicked boaſteth g of his F hearts deſire 5 
nd * || blefſeth the covetous 7, whom the LORD ab- 


borreth &. | 
g Or glorieth, or praiſeth, or pleaſeth himſeJf. h Or, in or. con- 
cerning, Or Petaaſe of the deſire, or cncupiſcence, or luſt of his heart or 
foul; which word is added to note the vehemency and fervency of 
it. He gloriethin his very Luſts, which are kis ſhame, Phil.3 19. 
abborrech 2nd eſpecially in the ſatisfaftion of his deſires how wickedly ſoever 
the LoRD he gets it-Deſire 1s oft put for the thing deſired, as Pſalm 21, 2. and 
| 78; 29, 30. iAndas he applaudeth himſelf, ſo he commends others 
-» that are greedy after, and get abundance of gain,tkough ir be done 
by fraud and violence,accounting ſuch the only happy Men, Or, 
- ghe covetous, ( the ſame with che wicked enlarging his delire, as was 
now ſaid ) bleſesh, or applaud:th,or flattereth himſelf in what he hath 
already gotten,and in the confident expeQation of the ccntinuance 
and increaſe of his Worldly Wealth and Glory, &k So his judgment 
as well as praQtice is contrary to Gods. Or, rather without any Sup- 
plement, as it is in the Margent, He abhorreth, or aefpiſeth, or pro- 
woketh the Lord, He ſets himſelf not only againſt Men but againſt 
God himſelf, as he decliteth more fully in the next Verſe. 


4 The wicked,through the pride / of his countenance 
w, Will not ſeek after God n; || God is not in all his 


*Fthoughts 0. , | 
I By which he ſcornsto ſtoop to God. or to own any Superiour, 
and makes himſelf and his own Luſts his only Rule,and his laſt end, 
and is full of ſel-conſidence, and a conceit of his own ſelEſufficien- 
cy and unchangeable feliciry, as 15 n>red v, 6. m So called,becaule 
though Pride be properly ſeated in the Heart ; whence ir is c.l!ed 
Pride, or loftineſs of Heart, or Spirit, as Pſalm 131. 1, Prov: 16: 18; 
Eccleſ: 7; 8, &«c, Yet it is manifeſted in the Countenance, and 
therefore is oft deſcribed by lofty Looks, as Pſa 101, 5, and 131, 
I. Prov: 6: 17: and 21, 4: and 30; 13,0, Which poſſibly was done 
purpoſely to meet with the Excuſes of provd Perſons, who when 
they are charged with pride for their 1:oks or geſtures, or appare], 
or the like, ute to make this Apology for themſelves ; that pride 
lies in the Heart and not in theſe ourward things. 2 7, e. Not ſeek, 
orenquire into the Mind and Will of God, to order his life by it ſo 
as t> pleaſe God, not ſeeking to h'm by prayer for his Favour and 
Bleſſing. Burt the words after Ted, arc not in the Hebrew, and it is 
thought by ſome too great bo!dneſs ro add them here. And there. 
fore others omitit and render tte Hebrew words, wil! no: ſearchor 
confcder, to wit his Attions, which ſeems ro be a more natural and 
ealie Supplement : he will nottrouble himſe'f ro enquire whether 
his ARions be juſt or unjuſt, pl-afing or offenſive to God, but with- 
out any care or conſideration ruſheth intoSin,and whatſoever ſeem. 
eth right in his own Eyes, But theſe and the former words are 
«nd may be, and that very-agreeably to the Hebrew. thus rendred 
without any Supplemeat. The wicked through his pride ( forſo this He- 
brew word by it ſelf fignifies,1/a.5. 16. and 10: 33. will not ſeck his 
( 7. c. Gods which is plain both from the foregoing and following 
words ) face, which is an uſual phraſe in Scripture, as 2 Chron, 7, 
14+ Pjalm 24.6. and 27. 8, and1o5. 44 ©c. o He hath no feri- 
ous thoughts of, or regard unto God or his word, which ought to 
command him. or his Threatsand Judgments, which ſhould keep 
himin awe. Or: all his thoughts are there is no God. to wit noſuch 
God as minds the Aﬀairs of the World and the AQtions of Men, 
and puniſh=th Sinners. He was a Driſt and owned a God, art leaſt 
in words but denied his Providence. 
F His ways are always grievous p:* thy judgments q 
are far above out of his ſight r : as forall his enemies, he 


puffeth at thems. 

p His whole courſe and carriage is vexatious to all that are with- 
in his reach, but eſpecially to the poor who cannot right them- 
ſelves, and to juſt and good Men, whom ke hateth and perſecu- 
cuteth. Or, kis ways, 7. e. hisdeſigns and enterprizes. at all times 
are proſp:101s, or jucceſsfuly: or co bring forth : for this Verb ſignifies 


22, 


+ Heb: 

| Soul, 
*Pr: 28:4: 
Romu;3 2: 
j Or, the 
c0Verous 
blefſeth 
himſelf he 


 Foryllhis 
| Fhoughts 
3 #5no God. 
- *Plangir: 
& 53:1 


d Throuzh pride of Heart ; which makes him forget God, V- 4-and 


deſpiſe the poor, and oppreſs others, either becauſe oy apes 


&9: 15, his Pride or Ambition. Or, in his Exaltation. This is the uſe that 
16, Pro:5: he makes of that power and authority to which thou haſt p_—_— 
; e 


L M S. 


bearing» or the bringing forth Chi!dren, Pſa. 29. 9. Iſa. 54. rs 
Jer. 4- 31. And the accompliſhment or diſappointment of deſigns 
is frequently expreſſed by this Mctaphor ; of which ſee 2 Kings 19, 
23- Pſal. 7x 14. 1Ja. 59. 4, &c. And thisſenſe ſeems beſt to ſuir 
with the Context. 9 Either 1 Thy Laws, which are oft called 
Judgement. Or rather thy Treatnings denounced againſt, and py. 
niſhments inflited upon Sinners. 7 Either 1, He doth not feel them, 
thou removeſt them far from him: which indulgence of mine is the 
cauſe of his inſolency. Or rather 2. He doth not diſcern or regard 
nor fear them, nor think of them, but goes on ſecurely and retolv« 
edly in his wicked courſes. He hath not ſo muck F:ith nor Reaſon 
as to apprehend or confider them,but like a Brute-Beait looks only 
downward to the Earth, and minds nor things above him. And 
thus it ſeems beſt to agree with the foregoing and following Clauſes, 
His Devices ſucceed, and therefore he neither fears Gods Judg. 
ments nor the power ofhis Enemies: but fancies his Happineſs to be 
unchangeable; as itfollews v: 6. 5 7: e. He deſpiſcth them-being 
confident that he can blow them away with a Breath. This is a 
Geſture of contempt or diſdain both in Scripture, as P/al: 2: $4 
Mal: 1:3. andinother Authors, as in Plaur us; where one ſpeaks 
thus to a proud and bragging Captain» Thou haſt blown away whole 
Legions with thy Breath, as Leaves are blown away by a wind. 


6 He hath ſaid in his heart ?, I fhal not be moyed «; THeb.s-: 


for I ſhall t never be jn adverſity x. AT pn 
t He thinketh or perſwadeth himſelf, « Or, removed, to wit, wn 

from my place and happy ſtate, » Or, becauſe I am not in adverſity, © 

therefore I never ſhall bein it. His preſent proſperity makes him 

ſecure for the future. Compare Rev: 18: 7. Or, yea ( for this par- 

ticle ſometimes hath no other ſignification or uſe, but only to am- 

plife or aggravate, as it is alſotaken 1 Sam: 15: 20, and 24:1.) I 

ſhall zever be in evil, So the ſenſe of the place is: I ſhall not only be 

kept from total ruine or a removal from my place and eſtate, bur 

I ſhall not mset with the leaſt c:oſs or trouble, For this evil is 

not the evil of Sin, as ſome here underſtand it, in which he knew 

that he was, and was reſolvedever to continue, but the evil ofpu-= 

niſhment, which was the only thing that he feared or regard» 

ed. 


7 * His mouth is full of curfing y, and + deceit and *Rom:, 
fraud z : under his tongue a 5s miſchief and || vanity 6b. 14. , 
Y Either 1. Of Oaths and Blaſphemies agaiaſt God, Or 2. Of THebide. 
revLing and execration of other men, eſpecially thoſe that 9% 
are good ; or thoſe that ſtand in his way and hinder his wicked de- | Or, ink 
ſigns. Or rather 3. Of Oaths and Imprecatiens againſt himſelf,of 7%) 
which this wordis uſed Numb. 5: 21. Deut: 29: 12, 21. Neh: lo, 29, 
By which he endeavours to gain Credit,and to make his Neighbours 
ſecure, and ſo to make way for the deceit and fraud which here 
follows. For this wretched Man is repreſented both here, and in 
the ſucceeding Verſes, as one that doth not a& with open Violence 
and Hoſtility, but with ſubtil and ſecrer Artifices, uſing all cun- 
ning Infinuations, and Flatteries, and Lies, and among others, 
Oaths, of which an Athkeiſtical Politician ſaid, that Men were to 
be deceived with Oaths, and Children with Rattles or Toyes. 
z Two words ſignifying the ſame thing, to note the frequency of 
his Deceits, Or one word may ſignifie the deceit lurking in his 
heart, and the other the manifeſtation of it in external Frauds and 
Stratagems. # Either 1. In his Heart, which is under the Tongue, 
Or rather 2. Under his fair and plauſible Speeckes, the Miſchief here 
following is hidand covered, Withal hefeems to allude to Serpents 
whoſe poyſon lies hidden under the Tongue, or within their Teeth. 
b Or rather niquity, as this word is oft rendred Injury, the vexation 
or oppreſſion of other men, which he covers wirh theſe fair pre- 
ences. 


8 Heſitteth in the lurking places of che villages c * in 
the ſecret places d doth he murder the innocent ; his ; Hab;3: 
eyes Þ are privily ſet e againſt the poor. Heb-hid 
c Not within the Villages, which is not a fir place for lurking, themſelun, 
bur about chem, in the ways bordering upon them or leading to 
them. as Robbers uſe to do. d That he may avoid the ſhameand 
puniſhment of Men ; which is the only thirg he fears, e Heb. Are 
hid. The ſenſe is either 1. He winketh as Men do when they ſhoot 
their Arrows at a Maik. Or rather 2. He watcheth and looketh out 
of his lurking-place, ro ſpy what paſſengers come that way. He 
alludes ſtill to the prattices of Robbers. 


he lieth in wait to catch the poor : he doth catch g the th ſos 
poor when he draweth him h into his net, __ 
Ff Where he Jurks and waits for prey. g Or fnatch, or ſeize upon, to 

wit, with violence, and to devour or deſtroy him: þ Or, by 
Arawing him ; or after he hath drawn h1me He layeth Snares for him, 

and when he takes him tears him in pieces: | 


10 + He croucheth,avd humbleth himſelf ;, that the +116; # 


poor may fall &|| by his ſtrong ones ]. breoketh 
iLike a Lion ( for he continues the ſame Metaphor ) which ga- himſelf. 
thereth himſelf together and lies cloſe upon the ground, partlythat || Or, '*® 
he may not be diſcovered, and partly that he may more ſuddenly, his frmg 
and ſurely, and fiercely lay hold upon his prey. But for this Tran- pa#?s. 
ſlation, becauſe this and is not in the Hebrew, and there is another 
and there prefixed ro the firſt Verb ; ſome joyn that firſk Verb to 
the end ofthe teath Verſe, and render the place thus, He catcheth 
the poor by drawing him into his net» and breaks him to pieces, as that 
Verb properly ſignifies. So there is only a defe& of the pronoun, 
waich 1s moſt frequent» And this makes the ſenſe complear,which 
otherwiſe would be imperfe& in that Verſe, and ſheweth us what 
he doth with his prey when he hath taken it, And this 10th verſe 
begins very well with the next Verb, He humbleth himſelf; Or He 
ſtoops, or bends himſelf, k Or, that he may fall ( for this Verb is 
ſometimes taken aCtively, as Joj.11: 7. Job 1: 15, ) upon the poor, 
That having firſt couched and lay'a down, and then of a ſudden 
riſing. he may leap and fall upon his prey, like a Lion. / 7: e. By 
bus ſtrong members, his teeth or paws.$o it is anEllipſis of the Noun 
Subſtantive; whereof we have examples, as 2 Sam; 21: 16 new for 4 
new ſword; and Pſalm 13: 16; full for a full Cup: and Mat: 1o: 423 
cold for cla water, 

11 He 


as the pins and trouble, ſo allo the ſucceſs{and comfort, of child 


— c_ 


- 


Plal, X 


9 He lieth in wait t ſecretly as a lion in his den f: + Heb;  - 


tHe 
vhi 


"Pol5 
P17; 1 


"Pot; 2 
19: & 
Ws: 13, 
146. 1c 
fr.10.1 ( 
M:5:.c 
Dn 4.34 
F #5, 
lim. 


3, 
W./ 


Intie 


pal, X- 


664 5: 


Or, 


W 


[xr He hath ſaid in his heart,God hath forgotten »* 
- he hideth his face », he will never ſee ir o. 


PS O46 MH 


avenge their cauſe, as he hath ſaid he would do, nor execut Judg- 
ments upon their Opprefſors, as he hath ſometimes done .or been 
thought to do. » Leſt he ſhould ſee, He rakes no notice of their 
Sufferings leſt he ſhould be engaged ro help thew. He will not 
encumber himſelf with the care of things done upon Earth, bur 
leaves it wholly to men to manage their Afﬀairs as they think fir. 
o To wit, the oppreſflion of the poor, or the deſign of oppreſſors 
againſt them, which is the chief ſubje& of the whole Pſalm, and is 
particularly expreſſed, v: 10, : 

12 Ariſe, O LORD, O Gold, lift up thine hand-p: 
if» forger not q the || humble, _ ; : 

p Toreſcue the poor, and to ſmite their Oppreſſors with an 
hand ſtretched out and lifr2d up, that the blow may be the greater, 
Compare Exod. 7. 5: 1s: 5: 25: and 9: 12, O's, Shew by thy ap- 
pearance for their Vindication, that thou doſt remember and re- 
gard them. | | : 

12 Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God, r # 


ifth, 


he hath ſaid in his heart, thou wilt not require 3#, 
F r The ſenſe is either 1. What is the cauſe of his contempt of 
God ? To which queſtion the next words give an anſwer, Thy con- 
nivance inakes him ſecures Therefore ſhew thy ſelf. Or 2. Why 
doſt rbou by giving them impunity ſuffer, and occaſion them to 
deſpiſe thee ? Doſono longer. hich racit deſire he inforceth by 
repreſenting their atheiſtical denial of Gods providence. ; 
14 Thou haſt ſeen it s, for t: thou beholdeſt « mif- 


chief and ſpite *, to _— it wit thy hand y: the} 
$4. poor F committeth him elfz unto thee ; thou art the 


wh helper ofthe fatherleſs a» : 

s Or, bur thou haſt ſeen it, and therefore they are horribly miſta- | 
ken, as they will find to their coſt. r Or, ſurely, as this particle 1s 
ofc uſed, as Job $. 6: Pſal: 73: 1t- u Not as an idle SpeCtator but 
with an eye of obſervation and yindication, asit follows. x z.e. 
All the injurious and fpiteful/ or malicious carriages of wicked 
men tewards thoſe that arc more righteous than *they. yHeb' ro 
give 1,e. to reſtore or pay, the ſimple Verb for rhe compound ; 
which is uſual inthe Hebrew tongue ) ir ( to wit, the miſchief 
which they have done to others) with thy hand, i.e. by thy own 
immediate and extraordinary providence, becauſe the oppreſſed 
were deſtitute of all other ſuccours, Or, to pur ( giving being oft 
uſed for putting, as hath been obſerved before ) it in or into thy hand, 
that thou mayeſt have ir alwaysin thine Eye, and under thy care 


6 Tob 22: To wit, the poor, w:"10: or the humble, which we are taught ; l 
- wo ſupply out of n 12: where he ſaith, forget not the humble. He | their Enemies, asthis word is uſed, Dent 32: 36: Pſa: 7: 8: and 
pal. 94-7" forgers and negleQs all their Oppreſſions and Prayers,and doth not | 135; 214. 07.e, Earthly and motta} men, who are made of the duſt 


and inuſt return to it, ſuch as the oppietlors of -thy people are; 
who yer picſume moſt audaciouſly and madly rocontend with thee 
their Maker and Judge, Thercfore it is time for thee to repre!s 
ſuch inſolency, and to ſkew how unable. they are co ſtand before 
thee. p To wir, the Fatherlefs laſt menrioned. 


FSA LL. Xt. 


To the chief muſician a P/alm of David. 

This Pſalm ſeems to have been Compoſed by David when he was 
perſecuted by Saul, and forced to flee from p!>ce to place for 
lafcty. c : 

David gf TONE himſelf in God, 1. againſt the wicked deſigns of hu 
Enemies, 2, 3; The Providence aud Juſtice of Ged, 4. to the rightecs 
and wicked, 5. : ; 
N the LORD « putT iny truſt : how ſay ye b to my 

{oul ec, Flee as a bird dto your mountain e. G 

2 1. e! In his faithfulneſs, who hith promiſed, and will,I boubt 
nor, give me the Kingdom, þ either 1. Ye my Friends ; who 
through diffidence and diſpondency adviſed him to this courſe. Or 

2. Ye my Enemies : who ſaid ic ſcoffingly and inſultingly : How 

Jay ye, With what face or reaſon can you ſay thus to him who hath 
the Lord God Almighty for his refuge? &© 7. e. Tome, as P/al: 6: 
4*and 7:2. dSuddenly and ſwifcly,and to ſome remote place, where 
thou mayeſt be out of Sauls reach. Feed not thy ſelf with vain 
hopes of the Kingdom, but conſult for thy own ſafety,which thou 
canſt not do witbour taking the wings of a Dove, or ſome other Bird; 
thar thou mayſt flee away our of tie land, and be atref, as thou ſay- 
eſt Pſa: 55: 6. Or, fle: away, O theu Bird, thou little ſilly Bird 3 
leit the Royal Eagle ſeize upon thee e7.e. ro ſome of your Moun- 
tains in Juazgand there hide thy ſelf But this was Davids common 
prattiſe;and therefore was no need that there any ſhould adviſe him 
to it, or that he ſhould reprove them for that advice Or,from 

which prefix is ofc wanting and to be underſtood, as Jeſe 10: 13: 

2 Sam; 23: 24: ) z0ur Mountain, i. e: from the Mountain, or mountainous 
Country of Judah,as it is called Joſ: 20: 73 The Mountain being frequent- 
ly put for a Mountainous Country,as Numb; 13: 29: and 23:7. Jef: 
9: 1. and 10: 6, 40: and off elſewhere; cr, from your Mountains, in 
which thou and thy Companions uſe to hide your ſelves, Flee in- 
ro ſomie Foreign Land where you may be ſafe. For this was the de- 
tign of Davids Enemies, as he complains 1 Sam: 26: 19: and after-. 
wards when David was under ſore Temptations, it was his practice 
once or twice, 


2 Forlo f, the wicked* bend :heir bow, they make » Pſal.64; 


4 
\ 


and conſideration, as the like phraſe 1«evidenrly uſed, 1a. 49: 16; 


| ready their arrow upon the f(trin that they may | 
Therefore thou doſt not, and canſt nor forger it, bur wiltſt cer- y P S & nm Mi / 3,4» 


privily 4 (hoot at the uprightin heart z. f: z1ch- in 


bz: 
xhide 


elves, 


_ 


tainly require its Or, his matters or cauſe, i, e- The care of his 
perſon and righteous cauſe, Heb. he leavech. Which word is uſed 
for committing to the truſt of another. Ger: 39; 6: Job: 39; 14. 
Iſa; ro: 3. #%e, Of ſuch poor oppreſſed ones as have no friend 
nor helper, one kind of them being pur for all the reſts 

I5 Break thou b the arm c of the wicked, and the-e- 


,.,, Vil men:* ſeek out his wickedneſs & 7:1! cou find nonee. 
Mal.7:9:  þ Or Thou wiltf| break. For it may be either a prayer or a pro- 
JJ 17. phezy. e 7, e. His ſtrength, the inſtrument of violence and mil- 

chief. & Search for it ſo ſtritly and puniſh theſe wicked Atheiſts 
ſo ſeverely, e 7. e. No ſuch wickedneſs, to wit, undiſcovered and 
unpuniſhed, or indeed left in the World, or at leaſt, 11 the Church, 
Which might happen becauſe thoſe wicked men here ſpoken of 


_ f Theſe are the words, either 1- Of Dat; Friends or Enemies; drkneſss 
confirming their former advice : which might ſuir with ir, if rhat 
was the Counſel of his Frieads; but not, it it was ( as it ſeems to 
bave been) the counſel of his Enemies ; for theſe would never have 
called themſelves wicked, nor David and his men upright in heart< 
Orrather 2. OfDevid himſelf: who having dire&eg his ſpeecli co 
his enemies, v: 1: now turns it to God, and pours out before him 
his Complaints againſt his Enemies, as his uſual cowtirſe is in this 
Book. They do not only ſpeak ſcornfully cf me, as I have ſaid, 
but, O Lord, they a& againſt me with all their mighrand malice. 
g They lay deſigns for my deſtruftion and they make all things 
ready to execute them. þ Our of their lurking holes, compare Pal: 
10: 8,9: and 64;5. For as ſome of his Enemies did opealy oppele 


ſhould be generally either convinced or rooted our, and the reſt 
ſhould be warned and reformed by their Example, and ſo this 
lewanejs ſhould ceaſe out of the land, as the phraſe is Ezek: 23: 48. 
T hat is ſaid to be ſought for and not found, which is utterly loſt, as 
Job 20:7, 8: Pſal; 37: 36: Rev: 16: 20: and 18: 21. And this 
phraſe 15 uſed both of good men,whoſe ſins are taken by Gods Grace | 
and Mercy,pardoning and purging them away, and of wicked men 
in the ſenſe above-mentioned. : | 
16? The LORD is king f for ever and ever g the 
heathen h are periſhed our of his land 2. | 
f To whom it belongs to prore& his Subje&ts. Therefore thou 
,. wiltſt ave the humble and puniſh the opprefiors. g Therefore his 
pevples caſe is ncither deſperate,ſeing he ever lives and reigns to | 
:5:.9, help them, and therefore he will help them in his time ſooner or 
Din 41 , later. h Either 1. Thoſe impious [[raelires who oppreſſed David 
$6.25, andother good men, whom, although they were reputed 7/raelires 
ITim.1an: by themſelves and others, yet he might call them heathens for their | 
'* heatheniſh opinions of God and his providence, and for their un | 
godly and unrighteous lives. Compare [/s: 1: 9; Amos.9y:7, Or' 
2+ The Canaznites, whom God as King of the World, did expel or 
deſtroy, and gave their land to his people. By which great exam- 
ple he confirms his faith and hope for the future, 7 i,e. Out of 
Caanan, Which God calls his land, Levit: 25 235 becauſe he ſpied it 
outfor them, Ezek: 20: 6: and gave it to them, and fixed his pre- 
{ence and dwelling in it. 
IO, ops. 6 27 LORD, thou haſt heard the deſire of the humble 
bk, & : thou wilt | prepare 7 their heart, thou wilt | cauſe 
fey thine ear to hear » : 
Wtthine k And therefore wilt ſtill do it, being vnchangeable and the 
®: at:n-; fanic for ever, 1 Or, dire or fit, by thy Grace and good Spirity 
ve, either that they may ſo pray as thou wiltſt hear : or that they may 
be made fit to receive the mercies which they deſire: which when 
they are, they ſhall have their prayersheard. Or, thou wiltf con. 
firm, or ſtablijh (as this Verb is oft uſed) their hear:, to bear their 
preſent preſſur-s, and ro wait upon, and hope,and truſt jn thee for 
d:liverance,- until} caou ſeeſt fir to hear and help them. ms In due 
time, though for a ſeaſon thou ſeemeſt to turn a deaf ear to them. 
But this and the foregoing Verb may be taken as a prayer, future 
Verbs being ofr uted impceratively, Prepare or ftabliſh their hearts 
{by giving them ſupport and aſſyrance of kelp inthe time of need, 
*nd then} cauſe thing gar to heare 


"Pal: 2 
To; & 


ſer1041 0 
L 


him, ſoothers did ſecretly undermine him, and with pretznecs of 
Friendſhip ſeek to betray im. # Ar me and my followers, who 
tave manifefted our integrity both rowards God, and towards Saul; 
whoml have faithfully ſerved and ſpared when I could have taken 
away h's life. * 


2 If &* the 


the righteous do 7» ? 2285 
k Or, for, or when, 17 e, Piety and Juſtice, and Fidelity and O& 752 33: 
Mercy, which are the Pi/Jars or Foundations of a State or Kingdom, 25 Fs 


eſtabliſhed, Prov, 29; 14» and which Saul and his Courtiers had mani- #9; 
f:ftly violated and overthrown in perſecuting David and his Friends. 
The ſenſe 1s, There is nothing in publick adminiſtrations, but difſ> 
order and oppreſſion, and right can take no place. m The condi- 
tion of all righteous men ( whom thou haſt engaged thy (elf to pro. 
ret and deliver ) will be deſpzrate ; which will nor be for thine 
honour: Heb. Whas hath che Rightes;5s done. As for me and my 
Friends upon whom all the blame is laid, what have we poor, but 
righteous perſons ( for which thou knoweſft us to be) alone ? name. 
ly, ro caule all theſe Calumaies and Perſecutions, or to cccaſion att: 
theſe Commotioas and Diſturbances of publick Peace and Juſtice. It 


, ts eaſte to ſlander, but let them prove their Accuſations by any one - 


'of our Adions. ES 
4 * The LORD ms in his holy temple s ; the sp1 2 
LORDS throne p zs in heaven : hiseyes behold, *his a 
'eye-lids try the children of men q, 15, 16; 
» To whom I appeal tomens unjuſt Tribunals! o Either 1. In 66: 73 
his Tabernacle, which is ſometimes called his Temple, as 1 Sam: 
1.9, and 3+ 3. P/2. 18: 6: and 38 2. and 68: 29: where he reſides 
ro hear the Prayers and Appeals of all his People. Or 2. in Hea- 
ven, as it 15 explainedin the next Clauſe ; which is alſo called Gods 
Temple, Mich. 1:2. Rev. 7. 15: and which ſeems tobe moſt emphari. 
call kerezfor GoJs being in Heaven is oft mentioned as an evidence 
ofhis glorious Majeſty, of his ſoveraiga Power ard Dominion. 
over all men and things, and of his accurate InſpeQtion inro all 
men and thei? a&ions here belowy . which from that high Towes 
he can ealily behold, as ir here follows. p Where he ſits to exa+- 
mine all Cauſes, and to judge all Men, and to give forth righteous 
Sentences according to every mans works; which is.my 'grea*Come 
fort and Joy» q 1,e. He dorh exaQly {and thoroughly dif -1n 
all men, and all that is in men, their moſt inward anu ſec: er Aﬀie, 
ons, 2/s. 7: 9. And therefore he ſees and will reward my Inno. 


4N 3 cency 


foundations / deftroyed, . what *+ can * PlalGot 


| as they are called, Pſs : 75 2, 3. and 82. 5, By which they are TH<b:harb 


>S , 


34 


4 , 
cency notwithſtanding all the Reproaches and Czlumnies of mine 
Enemies ; and withal he ſees all their ſecret and ſubtil and mali- 
cious Deſigns againſt me through alltheir cunning Pretences, and 
will diſcover and defzat them, : 
5 The LORD trieth »r the righteous : but the wick- 
ed and him that loveth violence s, his ſoul hateth e. 

r Eicher 1. He examines them,and knows them to be righteous, 
and conſequently approveth and loverh, and will preſerve and ble!s 
them ; which may be gathered from the contrary Condition of the 
Wicke!, whom God is ſuppoſed to try, though that be not ex- 
preſſed, and upon Trial fiads them to be wicked, and theretore 
hates and puniſheth them, as it follows. The like EliJpſis of an 
whole Sentence ſee on Pſal. 1» 6. Or, 2. He tryeth and exerciſeth 
them and their Graces by Afittions, or he corre&s them for their 
Sins ; which is oft called trying, as Pſal, 66, 10, Zech: 13. g. Jam: 
1:12: 1; Pets 4" 12+ So this 1s ſpoken by way of conceſſion, and to 
remove the Offence which ſome men might take at David, whoſe 
perſon and caufe they might be apt tocondemn becauſe of his trou- 
bles. Therefore he ſaith, God #ries, i. e. chaſtens, even righre- 

- ous perſons, yet ſtill he loves them, and therefore will in due time 
deliver them. But as for the wicked, let not them rejoyce in my 

Tryals, for far worſe things are appointed for them , God hates 

them, and will ſeverely puniſh them, s By which Charatter he 
deſcribes and brands his Enemies, and aggravates their Malice, be- 

cauſe they choſe and praftiſed Violence againit him, not for any 

need which theyhad of it(for David was a moſt peaceable and harm- 

leſs man, and neirher pretended nor indeavoured to do any more 

than todefend himſelf,and that, as'far as was poſſible, without the 

Now Offence or Injury of any other man) but meerly from their love to 
F Injuſtice and Violerce and their implacable Hatred againſt goog- 
neſs and good men. #t He hateth with, or from his Sou], 7 e, in- 


wardly and ardently. ; ; 

6 * Upon the wicked he ſhall rain 

8: 22: brimſtone, and||an horrible tempelt | 

NOr,s portion of their * cup y. | 

p "5 « Which notes their original to be extraorlinary,and from Gods 

| pers _ hand, and withal that they ſhould come plenrifully, ſwiftly, and 

= Pla6: $: ſuddenly, violently and unavoidably, as Rain commonly doth fall 

from Heaven. x 7. e. Grievous Plagues or Judgments which ate 

called Snares heres as alſo Job 18; 9, 10. and 22; 10: Th. 8. 1 4- 

and 24- 17, +8. Partly becauſe wicked men are otr tivic» {Arprized 

with them when they leaſt expe& ther, Luke 21- 35» And partly | 

becauſe they cannot efcape them, nor get out of them,bur are held / 

faſt and deſtroyed by them: |). #. e. Dreadful ſudgments ſo called | 

metaphorically, .and by al/uſion to the deſtruction of Sodom and | 

other places by theſe means.Bur this te ſeems to ſpeak nor ſomuch 

of preſent and temporal Calamit'es, as of their furure and eternal 

punifhments ; becauſe he manifeſtly ip-aks of rhole miſeries which 

are peculiar to wicked men ; whereas David knew very well both 

by his own Experience, and by the Hiſtory of Job,, and of 1ſraels 

Bondage in Egypt, that all things here came alike to all men, good or 

bad, Eccleſ; 9; 2. and that good men hid many times a greater ſhare | 

of worldly trobles than G-ds own people ; as David acknowledgeth 

and complaineth of it, Pſal, 73. y This is their portion, and as it 

were the meat and drink appointed ro them by God, This ſhall 

certainly and unavoidably be their ſtate or cnd:tion ; which is 

oft called a mans part or portion, as Pſal. 16.” 5x and 63. 10, and 

' 95:8: Mat: 243: 51, Healludes to the antient cuſtom of Ma- 

ſters of Families, or of Feaſts, who uſed to diſtribute the ſeveral 
portions of Meat ro their Domeſticks or Gueſts. 


7 For* the F righteous LORD loveth righteouſneſs : 


hiscountenance doth behoid the uptight z. 

* So this is given as the reaſon why God hateth and puniſheth; 
wicked men ſo dreadfully.becaufſe he loves righ:eoutnels, ard rhere- 
fore muſt nezds hate wickedneſs and puniſh wicked men, Or,But 
as this Particle is oft rendred. For this teems to be added by way 

* of oppoſition to what he now ſaid concerning the ſtate of wicked 
men. z Towit, with an eye of Approbation, and true and tender 
AfﬀeSion, and watchful and gracious Providence ; which is ofc 
ſignified by: Gods beholding or looking upon men, as Exod: 2. 25; Ezra: 
5: 53 Pſal: 25:18: and 33:18: and 34: 15, ©. A« on the contrary 
God is oft ſaid ro hide or turnaway his Face, or Eyes from wicked 


men. 
I NET P S AJL. XII. 
 JOr, wp To the chief muſician || upon Sheminith «, A Pſalm of 
*hecige- David b. 

# The ſame Title is prefixed to Pſa!:6. b This Pſalm was Com Ppo= 
ſed in the rime, and upon the occifion of Sauls i}] Government : 
and his Perſecution of David, and other good men who favour- 
ed him. 


« ſnares x, fire,and 


* Ezek; 
: this ſhall be the 


. + Heb. the 
LORD « 
righteous, 

be laveth 

righteouſ- 
weſce 

. $0 Gr? 


(! 
| 
i 


fer him inſafety.&c, But ſaying and doing are two things. They are 


ſerve them | from this generation for ever. 


men s are exalted. 


places. 
' puniſhed, but go about boldly and ſecurely whither they pleaſe. 3. ar? exaltid 


Their proficiency and ſucceſs, which is ſometimes ſignified by 
this Verb, as Gen; 26; 31: 
. worſe and worſe, and proſper 17 and by their Wickedneſs, 4. Their 
 unceſſant and unwearied Induſtry in doing Miſchiefro good men. 
Compare 1 Pet: 5: 8, el 
Argument to prevail with Ged to ariſe to help his poor people who 
are oppreſſed by wicked men. 5 Heb. Fileneſſes, 7-e. all manner of 
wickeJneſs, lying and ſlandering, prophaneneſs, oppreſſion, crue!- 


LL M $s. 


| 3 The LORD ſhall cut off all flattering lips, a»d the 
congue that ſpeaketh + proud things g. 


what they will do, and what great things they will effe&, to wit, 
by their Tongues, as they themſelves explain it in the next verſe, 
which rhey will uſe ſo cunningly and powerfully that they ſhall not 
need touſe their Hands, or ſtrike a Stroke. 
4 Who have ſaid, With our tongue will we prevail 5 
our lips f are our ownz; who zis Lord overus & ? : 
h By raiſing and ſpreading Slanders and evil Reports concern. With ws. 
ing him, whereby both Saul will be highly and implacably inrag'd 
againſt David, and the hearts or the teople alienated from him - 
which was indeed a very likely way to prevail againſt him and thar 
by their Tongues only. 7 #.e. At our own diſpoſe to ſpeak what 
we pleaſe. & Who can controle orreſtrain us? This was not the 
Language of their Mouths, for they were 1/raelizes that owned a God 
above them, ard they were Subjetts of Sax/, but the Language of 
their Ations. Scripture oft tells usnot only what men do aQually 
ſay, but what they would fay if they durſt, or whar their atticng 
mean, Pſa: 94. 7: Mal: 1.12,13: and 2: 17- They take ag great a 
liberty in their Speechesas if they believed there was no God or Man 
; ſuperiour to them : becauſe neither the fear of God, nor the ver. 
ence of Men, can keep them from ſpeaking whaticever they Pleaſe 
or whatthey ſuppoſe makes for their Intereſt. y 
5 For the oppreſfiion of the poor 1, for the ſghing of 
the needy, now m will I ariſe(faith LORD; ) I wit 


ſet him in ſafety from him that || puffeth at him ». 
! Oppreſſed by Saul through the inſtigation and artifices of hjs ®/nare 
im, 


fawning Courtiers- m Spezdily, ſooner than they imagine or ex. 
pet. 7 i.e. From him that deſpiſeth him, and hopeth to deftroy 
him with a puff cf Breath, or a parcel of Words, See this Phraſe 
Pſa: 10: 5.Only there it is conſtrued with beth and here with lamedg - 
which may make ſome difference» And the Supplement in our 
Tranſlation may ſeem to be large, and notneceflary, And the Place 
is, and may be otherwiſe rendred according to the Hebrew, with. 
out any ſuch largeSupplement,7w: ſet him ( to wit,the needy laſt 
mentioned,ſfo it is anEllipſis of thePronovn,which is moſt frequent} 
in ſafety: he (to wit, the Lord mentioned before) ſhall peak (as this 
Verb {ignifies, Prov, 6: 19: and 14:5: and 29: 5, 9: 7,e, ſhall 
ſpeak comfortably, by a Synecdoche ; or ſhall peak plainly, as this 
Verb is uſed, Prov: 12: 179. Hab: 2: 3.) to him, i.e, to the needy 
here mentioned. Or, he. i, e God, ſba4 ſpeak ( to wit,in bis wrath 
aSit 1s expreſſed P/a: 2;5:) to him, who 1s the cauſe of his oppreſſion, 
of whom he ſpeaks ve 3, 4; Or, ſbal puff at him, as he uled to do 
at his enemies, P[a, 10: 5. 

6s The words of the LORD are pute 6 words: * as 


ſilver tried in a furnace of earth p, purified ſeven times, 
o Or, ſmcere, without the leaſt mixture of Vanity or Falſhecd : 

and therefore ſhall infallibly be fulfilled, This he ſeems to add ro Þ1.18.30, 

anſwer an Obje&ion which might ariſe in ſome mens minds con- & 1194 


cerning what was laſt ſaid. You tell us, The Lord ſaith, I will 14% 
Proy:30:5 


*2 Sam? 
2% 31. 


ſo indeed in men, who'oft ſpeak raſhly what they cannot perform, 
and deceitfully whar they never intend : But all Gods words are 
pure from all manner of arois ; from all folly or fraud, or uncere 
tainty5 he is holy and true in all his No&rines, Threarnings, Pre. 
ditions andPromiſes, p #.e. Made ct ſuch Earth or Clay as was 
proper for, and then uival in that woik- See 1 Kings y; 46. 

7 Thou ſhalt keepthemq,O LORD ; thou ſhale pre- 
{Heb:him, 
q Either 1» The poor and needy, v. 5. from the Crafts and Ma- that is, 
lice ofthis crooked and perverſe Generation of men, and for ever, 2") mf 
Or 2. thy words or promiſes laſt mentioned,v. 6. Theſe thou wiltſt #9” 

obſerve and keep { as theſe two Verbs commen!y ſignifie ) both now, 
and from this generation for ever. i, e. Thou wiltſt not on'y keep thy 
Promite to me in preſerving me, and advancing me to the Throne, 


but alſo to my Poſterity from Generation to Generation. 


8 The wicked walk one every ſide r,when {the vileſt 
+ Heb: the 


r Which Phraſe may note 1: their great numbers, they fill al) Wl #%t 
2, their Freedem and Safety, they are not reſtrained nor ſos of 1” 


Iſa. 40:13. They grow 


1 Sam: 2: 21: 


And this is very fitly here added as another 


Pal. Xt, ; 


T Hebz 


g Or great things, or great woras, either bragging or threatning greatthing 


THeb, arg 


ſ Or,woul/ 


David being deftitute of humane Comfort, craveth help of God, x4 He ex- ' ty and the like . Or, vile perſons, the abitra& being pur for the 
claims againſt flattering and deceitful Tongues, 2 and comforteth himſelf concrete, which is frequent, as pride Pſa: 36s 11.. for a proud man, 


with Gods Judgments on them,3.and aſſureth himſelf of kis tried Mercies and many ſuch-like 3 both comes toone, vile perſens and vile pra- 
ro the need), 4 -- 8+ | tices were both advanced and incouraged through Sauls Miige« 


Elp « LORD for * the godly 4 man ceaſerh : ror 7:rment, whereby all the foundations were deſtroyed, + ho 
the faithful failefrom among the children of men. j; comes ) fignifies firſt 2 glutron, or arunkard, as Deut. 21, 20: 
c Or, ſave me and other good men from the Subrtilty and Rage | prov, 23: 21: and thence any vile perſon, as Jer: 15: x9: Lam: 13 11. 
of wicked men- Saul will not help us, and other men cannot help ; 


Before it is afit faſon forriieeto help. 4 Or hind £1 P SAL. XIII 
FRErerore It 1S Aa Nt lcalon or thee to REP. r Rina, Or Merciful, . . . 
as this word is oft uſed, as Pſa: 30: 5: and 31: 24: and 86: 2, g. To the || chief muſician, a pſalm of David 


= | : | ion of this Pſalm was Davia's deep and lons continued 

d. T and my Friends are ſorely and cauſeleſly perſecuted, baniſhed The OCcalion of this P _Qeep g 
from: our Homes and Friends, and which is worſt ofal', from Gods Diftreſſes, from which he prays for Deliverarce. FE 
SanQtuary, and yet few or none pity us 3 all Mercy and Humanity David complaineth to Goa of his delay to help, 1. and the Enemies triumph, 
is loſt. e Mcn have loſt not only ſerious Piery, buteven common | 2% , H* 2r9177g fer preventing Grace, 3» profeſſeth his truſt in Gvd, 44 
Honeſty in their words and dealings with men and boatteth of divine mircy, 5. * pſGoan 

> They ſpeak vanity f every one with his neighbour: Hf OW ng _ — ts —_— for e- 
* with flactering lips, and with + a double heare g do |. ver a; NOW ONg wWLTt ou mac tny Lace rom me: 
they {pcak a How long wilt thou forget (i. e. negle& or diſregard) me? For 


EIT 7 j l ever ? b i, e, Withdfaw thy favour and aſſiſtance. 
f Or, fa'ſbwd, which is a vain thing, and wants the ſolidity of 2 "PP E 
truth. 'L Pretending one Heart. and that they ſpeak from a kind 2 How long ſhaJl 1 take. countel in _ ſoul s : hav 


deceitful Heart. my be exalted over me ? 


; RG 


| [] Or, ſave: | 
* Ifa:57:1: 
[ Or, 


overſetr; 


* Pf. 28:3. « 
+ Heb; ar 
heart, and 

an heart: 


c How 


"gt 


are 


Y 


ul 


Pl, XIV. 


c How long ſhal T be in ſuch perplexities,and anxieties ofMind, 
not knowing what courſe to tzken,nor how to get out of my Trou- 
bles. Es 

2 Conſider and hear me,O LORD my God : *hg- 
ten mine eves d, leſt I fleep the ſleep of death e ; 

d Either 1, Becauſe I find my Counſel infufficient,v: 2: do thou 
enlighten my mind, and guide me by thy Counſel and Spirit 1nto 
the righ: way of obtaining thy Mercy and Help. So this Phraſe 1s 
uſed Pſal 19:8: Eph: 1; 18. Or, 2+ Dothou revive and comfort, 
an deliver me from the darkneſs of Death, which is ready to come 


*pſ,38: 10* 


= 


Pal. X[l 
+ Heb- *% 


+ * who eat up » my people o as they. eat bread p, and « 
Cafers UH ' | 


call not upon the LORD 4. | 
”m Have they Joſt their Wits? have they neither Religion nor 
comnion Diſcreticn,either of which wou'd reach chem not ro make 
th-mle]ves ſo harelul to the all-ſceing ar.d almighty God,and toall 
Men ? The words may be rendrc. ti us, Ds not all the workers of Ini- 
qulty krow it? So it 1s only an E!liplisof the Pronoun, wich is fre= 
quent, as I have thewed before. are rhey nor Con!cious ro thems= 
ſzIves of the Truth of *hat IT iay ? T dare appzal to their own 
Conſcrences. Burthis] propound with ſubmiſhon, »x Or: they eat 
upy (7.e, ) devour and deſtioy, as this word fignifies, Devt. 7: 16. 


upon me &t9 clo{/e mine Eyes.Nothing is more common than to ex- 
preſs great Dangers and Calamities by Darkneſs, and great Comforts 
and Deliveranc-s by Light, as Job 15: 22.and 17:13; and 30: 26: and 
by n enl:.ghrning of rhe Eyes, 25 Ezra 9; 8, Compare Prov: 15: 305 and 
20: 13: e (i.e, ) Left I fink under my burthen and dye; for 
Death: is oft ca'led a Sleep in Scripture, as Job 3: 13: and 14: 12; 
+ pf. 25:2; Pſal: 76: 5: John 11 11s : . 
PR * Left mine enemie ſay, I have prevailed againſt 
him ; f and thoſe that trouble me, rejoyce when I am 


moved g. 

f To wit, by my art or ſtrength ; which will refle& diſhonour 
upon thee,as if thou wert either unfaithful and unwindful of thy 
Promiſes ; or nnabl= to make them good. Therefore repreſs this 
their Arrogancy and Blaſphemy, and maintain thine own Honour. 
z£ Or, ftumb/e, or fall, to wit, into Miſchief. 

5 Bur I have truſted in thy mercy &; my heart ſhal 
1ejoyce in thy ſalvation, 

L Neither their Threats and Brags, nor my own Dangers ſhall 
ſhake my Confidence in thy Mercy promiſed ro me. 


6 I will {ting unto the LORD, becaute he hath dealt 
bountifuily with me #. 


Prov: 30: 14. Jer. 50; 17: Nab.3: 15. 0 i.e. The pcor and godly 
| [ſraclites, of whom he principally ſpeaks: whom: he calleth my pes- 
ple, Either r. Gods peop'e,as they were in many reſpe&s; Orra= 
ther, 2. Davids people . For Pavid {peaks both theſe words, and all 
the reſt of this Pſalm in his o':+4n Name and Perſon. And David 
mighr well call them his P-ople either becauſe they were his Friends 
and Favourers: Or becauſ: ne being anointed their King,they. were 
conſequently his People Or becauſe he was now aQtually their King, 
and 1o they were aCtually his Pcople: For ſome conceive that this 
Pjalm was made in the time, and upon the occaſion of Abſaloms Re- 
bejlion. p z.e, Wirth as little 1egrate or remorſe, and w:th as much 
greedineſ<, and delight, aid Conttancy roo, as they uſe to eattherr 
Meat, The Particle as is here underſtood, as it is Pſal. 125; 2; Prov: 
26+ 19: and 1n many other pliices. q They are guilty not only 
of gro!s Injuſtice; and Oppr-flion towards men. but alſo of her 
rid Impiery an4 Cont-mprt of God,whoſe Providence they deny, 
and whoſe Worſhip they wholly neg'e& and deſpiſe, 


in the generation of the rigiteous z. fear:d 8 
r 7, e, In t's place, or vpcn the ſpor. where they praQtiſcd jeare 
thele Infolences, God ſtruck them wich a panick fear. Or, Ten 


; Either r. In giving me that ſupport and aſſurance of his fa- 
vour which for the preſent I enjoy. Or 2. In giving me thar Mercy 
which he hath freely promiſed me: it being a common thing for 
David and other Prophets to ſpeak of future Dcliverances as it they 
were already come, that ſo rhbey may fignihie both the infallible cer- 
rainry of the th.ng,and tueir firm aſſurance thereof, Bur the werds 
may be rendred, When he ſhall have dealt bountifully with me, This 
Verb |royerly ſignifies to requitegor reward (zs it may be taken here, 


and 142. 7. 


P'S A To XIV. 


' they {eemed to have no cauſe for it, An Adverb of Place for an 


for ther: is arewardoj Grace, as we''as of Debt, Rom. 4: 4: ) but, Jult Exp*Qation of divine Vengeance, Heb. They feared with fear, 
h-re ir ſignifies a free and bountiful giving, as it doth allo Pſal. 119; 175 | #- e. Vehemently, where there was no caufe of fear, as is here impli- 


7, e. Inthe height of their Tyranoy and proſperous I'npiety, when 


Auverb of Time, of which rhere want nor Examples in Scripturs 
and other Avthrrs, as hath beex nored before. Or, thence, as this 
Particlz is rendred, Gen: 2:10: and 49; 24:1/a 6.5.20:i;e. From that 
time ; or for that Cauſe, as tome take 1., and 1t may be raken, Jeb 
25: 12: Pſal; 36: 12: i, e, For this their contempt of God and mani- 
feſt injury ro Men. 5 From rheir own guilry Conſciences, and the 


ed, ( for they are now ſuppoſed to be in a Srate of Power and Ty- 
r:N.:1y) as isexpreſſed in the Parallel place, Pſal: 53, 5: Or, they 
Jhall be greatly afraid, the paſt Tenſe being pur tor the future Pro- 


To the cFief mut:cian, a Pſalm of David. 


kedneſs and corruption « f Mankind, and elpecially of ungodly 


he the 
ef the 
f m'n 
caitid 


ſ 
Pig 


69:17: 


Men, and of his own Enemies. ; 
David jſhaweth che Atheiſm aud Corruption of men, 1--=-=3, He convun- 
ceth the wicked by ths l:ght of Conſcience, 4 <=-=6, and longeth for the 

| Salvation of God, 7. 
"rows HE * fool « hath ſaid in heart b, there is no Gode: 
53! 1: they * are corrupt 4, they have done abuminab:e 


'Jom, 1, WOrks, zhere is i10ne e that doth good f, 

06 a (i.e.) The wicked man : Fo: tuch are commonly and juſtly 
caled Fools Every where in Scripture, and rhar purputely ro meer 
wit; their falſe, yer common Conc-it »f themiclves,as if rhey were 
the only wiſe men, and all others were Fools, b (ie ) In his te- 
cret Thoughts, or within himlcif, ceirg afrard and aſhamed to ut- 
ter it with his mouth.Nour that it was his fix:d and conſtant Opint- 
on & Judgment,but this heſaita by Contt«uttion, becauſe he heartt- 
Iy wiſheth there were no God, and lives as if there were none. So 
this Text may be exp'ained by comparing it with Pſal 36; :;: and 
Tit: 1: 16. c He denies not Gods Being or Exiitence,bur only his 
Providence He ſaith not there is no Fehowah, wh:ch name of God 
notes his beeing, but no Elim, which exprefſcth God as rhe 


penſcth all the a&inns of all men according to their ſeveral qualities. 
a Heb. They have corrup'ed, to wir, themſclves, or their ways, as this 
word commonly ſi2nifies. Their great and wilful Wickedneſs is 


| the Fools here deſcribed. f None of their Aﬀtions are really and 
thoroughly good or pleaſing ro God ; for if fomeof them be ma- 
terially good, as when they do an att of Juſtice or Charity, yer 
they are poiſoned with bad Principles or Ends, not being performed 

' by them our of a gocd Conſcience, and fecious Care to pleaſe God, 
for then rhey would do one gcod Aftionas well as enother. bur in 
ypocrttle, or with vain Glory, or ſame ſiniſter and unworthy 

elign. 

2 The LORD looked down from heaven g,upon the 
children of men 4,to ſec if there were any that did un- 


derſtand, and ſeek God i. 
. & To ſearch out the Truth, God knoweth all things without 
ans enquiry: But this is a Figure called Anthroo»parhia, whereby 
Scripture ofc ſpeaks of God af--r rhe manner of M:n« + Up n the 
whole Body of the I[raeliti'h Nitin, a:d upon the generality of 
Mankind under Heaven ; for he ſpeaks of ail except his People, a:.d 
the Righteous ones, who are here oppoled to th-{t, wv: 43:5. 5 Thar 
did truly know God, to wit, ſas to love, and fear, and truſt, and 
Obey him, ( for ail theſ- are frequently fignifi-d in Scripture by 
this Expreflio 1 of know:ng God ) and rhar. did diligently ſeek im, 
(fe.) Study his Mind and Will that taey might do it, arid ſeck bus 
Graceand Favour. 
3 They are al' gonealſide & ; they are altogether be- 
Comethithy /:* there 35 noi.e ther dotigood,no not one. 
k To wit, from G»d, whom they ſhould have ſoughr, v 2: and 
from the Ru'z which he hath g:v:en :hcm and by which they ſome- 
times profeff:d, and 1e:m'd to govern themſelves. Or, are grown 
owre, as this word ſigaifies, Hof 4: 18. And lo this is a M-raphor 
om corruptzd Drinks, > tie next is taken from rotten M-at, / 
eb. ſinging, ( i.e, ) loathio've and abominable to. God, and to all 
.  Wiſeand fover Men. 
if 4 Have ail che workers of iniquity no knowledge mz? 


| 


"ey! 
Flag, 
'og, 3 


1 


The Ceſign of this Pſalm is to d:ſcribe and bewai? the horrible Wic- ' 
; ticle is taker, Gen 455 8: Pſal; 37: 20; Eccleſ; 2. 10: and 6: 2. So 
| he d-icr'bes the contrary 2nd tafe Condition of the Righreous. 


; the Hebrew beth oft ſignifies, that is, God is one their fide, and 


Judge and Governour of the World, who obſerves 3nd recom- p 


| + + O that the ſalvation of Iſrael were comeout of Zi--+ Heb who 


alledged as a ground of their Atheiſm or Infidelity. e To wit, of: 


harp ; For thy remembred what a potent Adverſary thzy 
a1, ani tnerefore had cauſe enough to fear, Or, But, as this Par- 


Or, when, as it oft ſignifies, and f11t Anſwers to the zhen in the be. 

ginning of the Verſe, when God ſha'l once appear for his People, a 

dreadful Horrour ſhall ſzize up-n their wicked Enemies. « 4,e. A- 
 mong them, with his gracious and Powerful Preſence to defent 
' th:m, ad to fight againſt their Enemies. Or, God is for, &c. as 


| ther=fi re there Enemies have great cauſe rotremble, 
6 * )e have ſhamed x the counſel of the poor y ; 


cauſe z rhe LORD 5s his refuge. | 

x i. e, Tzſfired and endeavoured to bring it to ſhame or diſappoint 
it. Compare Pſal: 6; 10: Or, ye have reproached or derided it, - as a 
foc-lith thinge y 7. 2. The cauſe which he hath raken ro defend. 
himſelf, which is nor by lying and fluttery and violence, and all 
manner of wickedneſs, which is your Counſel and uſual Praftice, 
bur by truſtingin God and keeping his way, and calling upon 
his Name z This was the ground oftheir Contempr and Scorn,that 
he lived by I aith in Gods promiſe and Providence, Or, but,as in 
the foregoing Verſe. Sothere ſeemstro bz an Eizgant and fir Op- 
ofition. You reproach them, but God will own and prote& them, 
and juſtifie their Counſel which you d-ride. 


be. * PL22, 
$8 


bl 


on ||! when the LORD bringeth back che captivity of »#Yzive, 
his people F Jacob * ſhall rejzoyce and Iſrael ſhall be _ 67 
lad. p *: - -. 
- || Theſe words direMly and immediately Corcern the deliverance 
of the P-ople of 7-ael out of thar ſinful and deplorable Eſtate, in 
which rt ey now were;zwhich having deſcrib:d in the Body of the 
Pia'm, he concludes, after his manner, with a Prayer to God ta 
hear and help them ozz of Z'on, where che Ark then was, whence 
God uſed to h:ar and Anſwer his Peoples prayers. Bur ultimarely 
and principally they Deſign a further, even the ſpiritual Redemp- 
tion and Salvation ofall Gods I1/ael by the M-ſſigs, as may appear 
by d.vers Conſider.tions. 3 I. That the Ancient Jews did thus un- 
derſtand ir,and among others, Jonathan's Targum or Paraphraſe on 
rhe Bible, expound it thus Ido no: expe G deon's Salvation,which 
was but Corporial, nor that of Sympſon — but the Salvation of the Me- 
fſias. With whom agrees the Targum of Feruſalem, 2. That the Do- 
&rcine of [{rael's Redemption or Salvation by Chriſt was very well 
known as to other Ancient Patriarchs, John 8: 56: 1 Pt: 13 10g 
11,12, ſo particularly to David, of whom it is exprefly ſaid, that he 
knew and foreſaw this Myſtery, AFs 2: 35, 31: in whole Book of Pſalms 
there aredivers and very diſtin& and clear Propnecies of ir; as we 
have in partſeen upon P/al: 23 and 8: and ſhall ſee more fully and 
& Evidently hereafrer. 3-T hat David and other holy Prophets in the 
midſt of their ſad T!.oughrs, ard Fears, and Troubles,, did vſ. 
uaily Comfort themfelves with the Pcomiſe 4nd Expzttarion of the 
Meſſias, by whom, and by whom alone tacy fhould receive that 
plenary Salv:t: n for which they groaned 3 of which it is thought 


' we have one iniſt-nce, Gen: 49: 18.. bur we have many unqreſtiar.- 


able Inſtances in the Prophecy of 73iah, as Ch; 7- 14: and 9: 6. 
&c. And this Courſe might be the more ſeaſonable f r David, bee 
ciuſe he ſpeaks here of his Troubles afterhe was ſerled in his King. 
dom, ( as may be gathered from the men-ion of Z/-mm, where rj.e 
Aﬀe was not rill thattime)and poſſibly of the ſad and ſinful Stire 
of his Kingdom during Abſalom; Rebellion ; and therefore finding 
himſelf fo ſtrangely diſappointed y that Peace and an 

4N 4 


'S 


* Mic: 3:4 


: 


| 
F 
if 1 
} 


5 There r | were they in great fear 5: for 8 God 5s + Heb,chy. 


1 


| 
| 


es er 


i eons een err 
no nu 


* Tf. 33- 
Z 


" Þ Or, re- 
—__ cerverh, 
Or, endi-« 
reth. 
- Exod: 
23* by 


| ; (41.RV-+ 


| Iſrael, but only of Judah 


I Perſons, as thou ſeeſt fit, I beg of thee the reſolution of this impor- 
' tant queſtion. And be propoſeti this quettion ro God thar the 


with thee for ever hereafter in Heaven ? 


F. 
[| Or, with1 


- the Nature of this precept waich reacherh to all, ir being plain and 


P S 4 


he Confidently expe&t1 when once he cate to the Kingdom, and 
wilely and juſtly prefaging that his Children and tie followng x 
nerat;ons of [a:lites for the lame Cauſes were likely ro ect with 
the ſame or greater Calamities than this, he wearicth limicit with 

he Exprefiion ofhis B2lief,, and deſire of the coming «t the Mceſlizs 
to fave his People. 4. To this alfo ſuits the mention of Zion bc= 
cauſe the Prophets knew and forero!d that the Meiſias or Delivercr 
ſhould firſt come to Zion, and ſhould ſet vp his Throne there, and 
from thence ſend forth his Laws and Edidts to the Gentile Worl-; 
as 1s poſitively affirmed, Plal: 2: 6; and 110: 2: Iſa, 2: 3; and 59; 
20: Compared with Rom: 11: 26; and in many other places.s. Uhe 
following words agree only to thistime, wherein he ipeaks of brin- 
ging back rhe Captivity of his people with the univerſal joy of all 
Zacob and Iſrael; which cannot z2gree to Dawia s time,wherein there 
was no ſuch Captivity of the People, but only a Civil war and mu- 
tual ſlanghter,which is quite another thing :; nor to the time of 1j- 
rael's return from Babylon, when there was no ſuch return of all 
and Benjamin, and ſome few of the other 
ribes, and the joy which the returning Iſraelites then had, was 


2. 


but low and mixed with many Fears and Dangers,and Reproaches; 


as we ſez in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah, And theretore they 
muſt belong to the times of the Meſſtas, by whom this Promiſe was 
fulfilled to the true I1{-ae! of God,who were brought back from that 
moſt real and dreadful, though ſpititual,Captivity of ſin and Satan, 
as.is declared; Lake 4. 18. Eph. 4+ 8. and ſhall be lirerally accom- 
pliſhed to the natural ſeed of Zacob or Iſract according to the Ex- 
peRation and belief of all the Jews in their ſeveral Ages, and of 
moſt Chriitian Writers, +( 7. e. ) His Captive people, Coptivity,be- 
ing oft put for Captives,as Deut, 21, 10.8 30, 3.Pſal: 126. 1,4z Or, 
bis people frem Captivity,of which ſce the former Note. * (7. 6) 
The ſeed oz Children of Jacob, 2s Aaron is named for his Sons, 
1 Chron, 12, 27» and 27+ 17. and David for his Sons, and the Ike. 


PSAL XV. 
The ARGUME NT. 


T* HE occaſion and time of Compoling this Pſalm is uncertain : 
£E 


bur the ſcope of it is plain, which is to give the Character oi 


an holy & happy Man, and to deſcribe rhe way to true Blefſednels. | 
Wherein this 1s obſervable, that he is wholly filent as to the Cere- : 
monial or Ritual Obſzrvations of the Law ; not, thar he dorh ditown 
them, orallow the negle& of them, as is manifeſt from David's con- 
ſtant Praftice, and from many other paſſages, but that he might 
undeceive the Hypocritical Iſrzelites, who laid too great a ſtreſs 
upon thoſe things, as if the diligent performance thereof world ex- 
cuſe their wicked Lives, which Error almeſt all the Prophets Co 
pbſerve and Condemn in them; and that he might inform the 
Church cf that, and allſuccceding Ages, that the ſubſtance cf Re- 
ligion didconſift ia the PraQtice of true Holineſs and Righteout- 


nels: 

any>nd, A Pfalm of Dawid. 

David deſcribeth a Citizen of Zion, 1, 1. e. He © purein Hearty 2. Gover= 
neth bis Tongue, 3. Contemns a vile Perſon, but Honours him that {ears 

- Gody 4. He us no Uſurer, <. 
-OR Da, * who {hall + abide b in thy tabernacle 7 

c Who ſhall dwell in thy holy hill « 2 
© 4 O'thou who art the ſoveraign Lord ot this holy Hill and Taber- 
nacle,to whom ic belongs to give Laws to it,and to admit or reje&t 


Anſwer coming from him, may have thegreater Authority and 1n- 
fluence upon mens Conſciences. b Heb. ſojourn, to wir, fo as to 
dwell,” as it is explained inthe next clauſe. Unleſs this clauſe be 
meant ofſojeurning in the Church here, and the nexr of dwelling 
in Heaven hereafter. Who ſhall enter thither and abide thereywith 
thy-good leaveand liking c (3. e.)In thy Church either 1, Militant, 
Who is a true and will be a perievering Member of this Church ? 
Oc,2. Triumphant ,or in Heaven ; which is called the rrue Tabernacle 
wot wade with mans hands, Heb, 8. 2, and 9. 11, Revel, 21. 3- dd To 
wit, -of Zion, ſo called Pſal. 2. 6. which 1s oft pur for the Church 
and for Heaven. Who ſhall ſo dwell in thy Church here, as to dwelj 


-*.2 *He that walketh uprightly'e, and worketh righte- 


ouſneſs f, and ſpeaketh the truth [| in his beart "41 
e Or, perfe&ly, or ſincerely, without guile or Hypocriſie, Loving, 


L M Ss. 


Plal, Xyj 


nor taketh or receive:h, ( i. e.) Entertaineth it cheerfully & greedily, 


as men uſually do fuch things, and eafily believerh it without tuffi. 


Client reaſon- 


nor ſ:}Fer another to defame him without ſome rebuke or honifica- 


tion of his diſlike, Prov. 25. 23- 


4 in whoſe eyes ma vile perſon mis contemned o ; 


bur he honoureth p them that fear the LORD : be th, 
{vveareth q to his own hurt r, and changeth not «s 2 

2 (i, e.) In whoſe Judgment and Eſtimarion. 7 (5. e. ) One that 
deſerves Contempt,an ungodly or wicked Man,as appears from the 
next clauſe : where he that feareth God is oppoſed to him. o Or, gc 
ſiſed,notwithſtanding all his Wealth and Glory, and Greatneſs: 
He doth not admire his Perſon, nor envy his Condition, nor court 
him with flatteries, nor value his Company and Converſation, nor 
approve ofor comply with his Courſes,but he thinks meanly ofhim 
he judgeth him a moſt miſerable man, and a great obje& of Pity, 
he abhors his wicked praftices,and labours to make ſuch ways Con- 
remptible and hareful toall men, as far as it lyes in his power. But 
this contempt of wicked men muſt be ſo managed as not to cauſe a 
contempt ot juſt Authority, which ifit be lodged in a wicked hand, 


doth Challenge not only Obedience, but alſo Honour & Reverence : + 
as is manifeſt from the Precepts and Examples of Chriſt & of his A. 
poſtles, who charge this upon the Chriſtians,every where althou gh 
theMagiſtrates of thoſe times were unqueſtionably, vile and wic« 
ked men.See As 23:5:Rom:13:1 Peti5.133&c. þ ive, He highly eſteem 


eth and heartily loveth them, and ſheweth great reſpe& and 


kindneſs to them, though they be mean and obſcure as to their 


worldly Condition, and though they may differ from him in ſome 
Opinions or pratices of Jeſſer moment. q To wit,a promiſſory Oath, 
engagingtnem by ſolemn Oath, to do ſomerhing which may be 
beneficial to his Neighbour. r (#-e ) To his own damage or pre- 
judice, As if a man ſolemnly ſwear by the name of the great God, 
that he will ſell him ſuch an Eſtate ar ſuch a. price below the full 
worth ; Or that, he will give a poor Man ſuch a Sum of Money, 
which when afterwards he comes to review and Conſtder,he finds it 
very inconvenient and burdenſome to him,where he is tempted to 
break his Oath, s To wit, his purpoſe or Courſe, but continues 


; firm and reſolved to perform his promiſe, and Sacrificeth his inter- 


eſt and profit to his Conſcience,and the Reverence of God and of an 


i- See Exod 23.1, Levit. 19. 16. Or, nor bearcth or c1« 
dureth, as this pbraſe ſignifies, Pſal. 69- 7+ Ezek. 36. 15. He Coth 


Gath. Sce Ezek: 17- 18, 19. * Exod! 


5*He that patteth not out his money to uſury z, * 


| X p or 22, 25, 
taketh reward « againſt the innocent. He that doth Lev.25.36 


; theſe things x, ſhall never be moved y. Deut. 23; 


* In ſuch manner as is contrary to Gods law : Of which ſee in, 9 


Ex9d: 22: 25: Levit- 25: 36, 37, u Or, # bribe from him who hath Ezeki 18, 


a bad cauſe ; that Re may either condemn the innocont or 
the guilty ; Both which God abhorreth. | 
ſuch things as naturally and neceſſarily flow from them,or are a-kin 


acquit 


God's Church here, and chough he may be ſhaken, and ftagger and 
fall, yer he ſhall never wholly and finally be removed or fall away 
from ir, nor from that happineſs, which was propoſed and promiſed 
to him, bur ſhall abide with God here, and go to him when he dies 
and be forever with the Lord, 


P SAL, XVI. 
[| Michtam 4 of David. 


neſs and excellency of the matter of ir ; for it Treats of Chriſt's 
Death and Reſurre&ion. But becauſe this Title is prefixed to 
Pſal: 56, 57, 58, 59, 60: wherein there is noſuch peculiar Ex- 
celicency,it may ſeem rather to be a Title belonging to the Mu- 
ſick or the Song,which, with the reſt, is now loſt 2nd unknowns 
Ir is a great queſtion among Expolitors, in whoſe Name and Per- 
ſon he ſpeakerh this Pſalm,whether his own or Chriſts. It ſeems 
bard to exclude' David's Perſon, to whom almoſt the whole 
P/alm properly and literally belongs, and to whom ſome parts 
of it do more conveniently belongrhan to Chriſt ; And ſome parts 
of it do peculiarly belong to Chriſt, of whom ir is expounded by 
the two great Apoſtles, Peter and Paul, As 2, 25, and 13: 35« 

And yetirt ſeems probable, by the contexture of the Pſalm, and 
the coherence of the ſeveral Verſes together, that the whole 
Pſalm ſpeaks of one and the ſame Perſon. But becauſe David was 
a mixtPerſon,being both a Member, and an eminent T'ype, of 
Cariſt,he may without any inconvenience be thought to ſpeak 


Worſhippingand ſerving God, and loving his Neighbour not in 
word. and ſhew only, but in truth and reality ; and this conſtantly, 
and in the whole courſe of his Life, as walking implies, f Maketh | 
it his work and buſineſs to do juſtly, (i.e.) togive to every one. 
his. due, firſt to God, and then to Men; for the words are general, 
and not reſtrained to either. g His words and profcflions to God 
and men, agree with and proceed from the thoughts and purpoſes 
ofhis Hearr. 


3 He that backbites not with his tongue b,nor doeth 
evil z to his neighbour &,. nor || taketh up / a reproach 


again{t his neighbour, 

hb He doth not take away or diminiſh his Neighbours good name, 
either by denying him his due praiſes,or by laying any thing to his 
Charge falſcly or without ſufficjent cauſe and Evidence, 7Z(7z.e, ) 
Any hurt or injury, k(Jj.e. ) Toany man; as isevident, 1. from 


certain, that both by Laws of Nature and of Moſes, it was not Jaw- 
ful todo evil to any man, except where God the Soveraign com- 
manded it, as he did ro rhe Canaanites and: Amalckites, 2. From the 
Scripture uſage of this word Neighbour, which frequently ſignifies e- 
very man,though aſtranger or an heathen, as appears from Gen: 29% 
4: Exod: 20.16, 17+ brvitc 18, 20. and 19, 15, &c. Prov.25, 8, 9. 
Ticks 10. 29, &c. Mat: 5, 43: 44 And he uſeth this word, Neigh- 


of himſelf ſometimes in the one and ſometimes in the other Ca« 
Pacity, to paſs from the one to the other, And therefore hav- 
ing ſpoken of himſelf as a Believer or Member of Chriſt, in the 
former part of the Pſalm, he proceeds to conſider himſelf as a 
Typeof Chriſt, and having Chriſt in his Eye, and beriyg inſpi- 
red by the Holy Ghoſt with the knowledge and Contemplation 
of Chriſt's Paſſion and ReſurreQtion, towards the cloſe of the 
Pſalm he ſpeaks ſuch things, as though they might be accommos 
dared to himſelf in a very imperfe&, obſcure,apd improper Sence, 
yet could not truely,literally,and properly,fully and compleat!y, 
belong to any but to Chriſt, to whom therefore they are juſtly 
appropriated in the New Teſtament. 
David «:ſ'rufting hs own Merit, and hating Idolatry, fleeth to God for Pre- 
ſervation, 1 4: He ſbeweth the Hepe in Life and Deaths —— 9,Of 


bur, becauſe he who is ſtritly ſo ts moſt within our reach,and moſt 
liable to the injuries which. one man doth to another. 1 To wir, 
into bis Lips or Mouth, which is underſtocd here, as alſo Exod. 26: 7: 
Job: 4:2; and fully expreſied 3 Pſal; 16; 4. and 50: 16; C 7, e.) Doth 
ndt raile it, though that may ſeem to be included in the fuſt 
Cauſe, that Back-bitezhnot : Or, doth not ſpread and propogaret ; 
w. hich men are too prone and ready to do; and which makes that a 


the Reſurrefion and Everlaſting Life, 10-===114 
PReſerve me b O God: 'for in thee do I put my 
truſt c, 


b From all mine Enemies. 
by promiſe oblidged not to deceive my Truſt. 


x Here enumerated, and a 12/ 
Eur, 


tothemaand joyned with them. y He ſhall conſtantly perſevere in {| 


9” 
Exod, 


[Or,oguld. 
en Pſalm 


s Divers render this word, a Golden Pſalm, becauſe of the preciouſ- of Davidz | 


4 


c Therefore thou art in Honour and *PA1.16.:1 
* Job 22:2 


2 * O my ſoul d, thou haſt ſaide untothe L O R D, &3xs-7: 


Thou ar: my Lordf: * my goodneſs g extendetb not to Plal5% 
| thee 5 np Rom: 11: 


d Which words are fitly underſtoood : For it is manifeſt he ſpeaks 35- 


to one Perſon of another. And it is uſual witk David to turn his 
Speech to his Soul, as Pſal: 42: 6: and 43: 5- e Thou haſt oft times 
avowed and profeſſed ir, and doſt {till perſift to do ſo. f By Crea- 
tion and preſervation and otherwiſe; to whom I owe all Service 
and Obedience uponthat account. g Whatſoever Piety or Virtue, 


publick, which before was bur a private injury and miſchiefs Or, | 


or Goodneſs is in me,or is done by me. þ( 5. e. ) Doth nor add any 
thing to thy Felicity. for tou do not need me nor my "_ 


164 


Went 
1.9 

lal. 7 
6: 

[ 02, F 
m2: 
fHeb: 
ther 


wid? | 


[.16-:! 
2202» 
75 

50'9 
1; 11; 


Xv; Pipfal xvi. 


_ this very word 1s taken, 


P.S. & 
of any advantage from it ; 


nor art capable f 
$i EC. 


word is uſed, Gen: ory 5: _— 26, 
, s not upon thee, i, e, Itlays no | 
ore Oe GP Fuds. i PJa: 563 12: Exek: 453 17» 
to the fame thing, The Sence 15, fic 
infinitely happy, and wr Author of all the good that 1s 1n, 
done by. any of his Creatures ; and therefore cannot prevent not 


lidge God any further, 


felf. | 
d his truſt in God-as a motive to perſwade God to preſerve him, 
4 I: wo bo here declares that he did not db ir, as thinking that 


| Ged was indebted to him for it, 


| Or, give 
pts to 8+ 
wther- 


l 


Tut. 
jt 9. 

lal: 73: 
%:& 

142, Fo 
Lm'2:24; 
fHeb: of 
®) part, 


"M.1; 52 
US: Pt"; 
'8; Fe, 


Miczz:g, 5: Jof: 17:5: Deut: 32: 9,' *In a ſweet land flowing with Milk and 


Folk, 23- 


. Liven me anexcellent lor, having planted me among thine own 


2 But jto the Saints that ere in the Earth k and to the 


excellent / in whom zsall my conn mM. 
* 7, e. Bur my goodneſs extendeth, which is 
Pe of the Gs Verſe: From which alſo there may be fetched 
another Supplement: O my ſoul, thou haſt ſaid, to the Saints, 
þ j, e, To thoſe holy and righteous 


Becauſe I cannot reach thee, I endeavour to pay a 
and Love, and Kiridnels to all Saints, 
and Servants they are, and whoſe image they bear. This may ſeem 
- more properly to agree to David, than to Chriſt, whoſe goodneſs 
was principally deſigned for; and imparted to Sinners, and did not 
find men Saints, but make them ſo ; nor was it confined to them, 
that lived with him upon the Earth, butextended to all the Belie- 
vers of all Ages before and after him. / Or, the magnificent, or 
mighty, or honourable, to wit, the Saints, as he now called- them 
whom, becauſe they were mean and deſpicable in the Eyes of the 
World, he honours with their juſt Titles, and by appropriating 
them to the Saints he ſufficiently intimates that all other men how 
great ſo ever, are but ignoble and wile Perſons,as he had called thems 
Pſa: 153 4. w i. e. Whoſe Company and Converſation is moſt 
Vleaſant and deſirable to me. Compare Pſa: 119: 63- 


4 Their ſorrows ſhall be multiplied thar || haſten -f- 
ter another Ged » : their dring-offerings o of blood p will 


I rot offer, * nor take up their names q into my lips, 

» Or, that preſene, or endow (as this Verb ſignifies, Exod: 22:16) 
another God, to wit, with Oblations, as it follows, God is not 
expreſſed in the Hebrew text, but ſeems fitly ana neceſſarily to be 
underſtood, becauſe of the following Offerings, which are made to 
none that is not-either really or by Repurarion a God, The Senſe 
is, Idolaters, notwithſtanding all their zeal or coſt about their Idols, 
gain nothing to themſelves, but abundance of ſorrow and miſery. 
This he mentioneth'partly as one Reaſon, why he would have no 
fellowſhip with them in their Idolattous worſhip, which he adds 
in this Verſe : and partly that by this Compariſon he might illuſ 
trate and commend his own Happineſs, in having the Lord for his 
Portion, of which he ſpeaks, v. 5: 6/ Or thus, let their ſorrows be 
multiplyed, &c- Having ſhewed his great ReſpeRt and AﬀeQtion to 
the Saints, and excellent Servants of the true God, he now declares 
what an abhorrency he had for thoſe that forfake the true God, 
and worſhip Idols To whom he wiſheth increaſe of their ſorrows, 
whereby they may either be | conv : .T 
agaifr. or may be cut off ; if they be impenitent and incorrigible. 
o Under which he comprehends all their Offerings, the reaſon be- 
ing for Subſtance the ſame inall : but he mentions theſe parricular- 
ly, becauſe of a ſpecial Corruption in them above their other $a- 
crificesg to wit, that the very matter of them was unlawful, as we 
ſhall ſee ; Which alſo might ſerve both ro convince and deter thoſe 
Iſraelites which hearkened afterIdolatry, and made no Conſcience 
of maintaining Communion with Idolaters, which was the Caſe of 


Or, isnet for thee,as this| 
For thy uſe or Bene- 


Obligation upon thee, FT » Heb. conſulted for me, 1. e, By his wiſe and gracious Counſel 


God is al-ſufficient and 
OT 1S 
ob- 
than he is gracionſly pleaſed ro eblidge hum- 
Thus he renounceth all Opinion of merit,and though he ur- 


cafiely underſtood 


&Cz 
Perſons that live upon Earth 


; ] incipally my goodneſs is extended, 
with me: 'To theſe only or principally my g rae Sag 


for thy ſake whoſe Friends 


be awakened and Converted to the Lord| D 


.L. M 8s. 


el ;my reins z alfo inſtru me &« in the night ſeaſons 


hith provided ſo goodan heritage for me and withal inſpired that 
Counſel and Wiſdom into me,by which I have choſen the Lord for 
my portion, and am fo fully farisfied with him, z i. e. My inward 
thoughts and affe&ions (which are commonly ſignitied by rhe Rein 
as Pſa; 7: 9:8 $6:2.&7 3.21:8&139: 13: Fer: 11; 20,and 12, 2: and 17:5 
10. ) being inſpired and moved by the holy Spirit. # i. e- Dire& 
me what courſe totake, how te pleatc and icrve God, and to put 
my whole Truit and Confidence in him, as it follows, 6 Not on- 
ly in theday time, but alſo in the aighr, when others are aſleep, buer 
my mind is working upon God, and the things of God, and 
improving the ſilence. and leaſure, and ſolitude of the night to holy 
Meditations, and the exciting of my aff-&ions towards God. | 
8 * I have ſet the LORD alwaysbefore me c:becauſz 

* be is at my right hand d, I ſhall not be moved e. 

c ire. I have always preſented, him to my mind, as my Rule and 
Scope, as my Witneſs and Judge, as my Patron and ProteQtor in 
the diſcharge of my Office,and inall my Aﬀtions. Hirherto David 
ſeems to have ſpoken in hisown Perſon, and with ſpecial reſpe&ro 
himſelf, hue now he ſeems to have been tranſported by an higher In- 
ſpiration of the Spirit of Prophecy, and to be. carried above himſelf, 
and to have an Eye tothe man Chriſt Jeſus, who is and was the end 
of the Law, and the great Scope of all the, Prophets, and to ſpeak 
of himſelfonly as a Type of Chriſt, and with more ſpecial reſpe& 
unto Chriſt,in whom this and the following Verſes were much more 
; truly and fully accompliſhed than in himſelf, Chriſt as man did 
always ſet his Fathers will and Glory before him, as he himſelf oft 
times declareth, eſpecially in St. John's Goſpel. 4 To. wit, to 


: ſtrengthen me, C for the right hand is the chief ſeat of a Man's 


ſtrength, and Inſtrument of AQion, ) to Prote&, aſliſtand Comfort 
me, as this Phraſe ſignifies, Pſs: 109; 31+ and 110; F5-, And this 
aſſiſtance of God was neceſſary to Chriſt as man. e Or, removed, ei- 
ther from the diſcharge of my Duty,or from the attainment of that 


ſtcuQion, and God ſers himſelf againſt me as an Enemy, withdraw- 
ing his favour from me and filling me with deadly forrows,through 
the Senſe of his anger; yet I donot deſpair but am afſured that 
God will deliver me out of all my Diſtreſles. 5 
9 Thereforef my heart g is glad, andrny glory þ re- 
Joyceth 5 : my fleth alſo ſhalf reſt & in hope 1. | 

f Upon this ground und Confidence» . g The proper ſeat of jo 
and of all the Aﬀe&ions. heither 1. my ſoul, which isindeed the 
Glory of aman. Or rather 2, my Tongue, which alſo is -a mans 
Glory and Priviledge, above all other living Creatures, -and the In« 
ſtrument of glorifying both 00d and man;& whoch is. oft called a 
mans Glory,as Gen; 49: 6: Pſal: 3o: 12: and 57: 8: and 108- 1: and149; 
5. Ando this very word istranflated, A#s 2: 26: And thus the diſ< 
tinftion between Heart and Glory, and Fleſh is more certain and evi- 
dent :Or,exulteth, i, e. Declares or expreſſerh my inward joy, For 
this Verb ſignifies not ſo much internal joy,as the outward & vilible 
emonſtrations of it, in Words or Geſtures and Carriages: ,,k.z. e; 
My body ſhall quietly and ſweetly reſt in the Grave, to which I 
am haſtening. /i:e. In confident aſſurance of irs incorruption 
there, and of ity ReſurreQion to a bleſſed and immortal Life,as it is 
explained v, 10, tx. The fleſh or body is in it felf,byt a dead and 
ſenſeleſs lump of clay, .yet Hepe is here aſcribed ro it figuratively,as 
it is to the brute Creatures, Rom: 8: 19, becauſe there is Matcer 
and Foundation for ſuch hope, if it were capable of it, the good 
promiſed and expeted being certainly future. | | 


many of them in $Sau['s time ; and to juſtifie himſelf for his Deteſ- 
ration of them, and ofall fellowſhip with them- p In which the 
Gentiles uſed (as divers learned men have obſerved} to Offer and 
ſometimes to drink part of the Blood of their Sacrifices, whether 
of Beaſts or of Men, as either of them were. Sacrificed, Which 
muſt needs be very hateful toGod, becauſe he had ſo ſeverely for. 
bidden the drinking of Blood to his people either ar their $acri« 
fices, or intheir common Food. 9 i.e. Of thoſeother Gods men- 
tioned before. I abhorthe very name and memory of them, Not 
that he thought it unlawful to name theſe Idols, which is frequently 
done by holy Prophets, but to expreſs the odiouſneſs of the thing 
by his loathing of the very name aud ſhadow of them. Compare 
Exod: 23: 13« Deut. 12: 3: Hoſ: 2: 16, 17: Eph: 5,3, Or the Senſe 
is, I will not ſwear by them : For taking up ones name is uſed for 
ſwearing, Exod; 22 79. SOT 1 SHA 
-*The LORD # theportion F of mine inheritance 
and my cups s: thou maintaineſt my lot z. | 
_  r. Or; of my diviſan, i. e- Of that inheritance which God hath 
mercifully divided, or diſtributed ro me, and which I by his grace 
have choſen for my ſeIF. I envy not the vaſt Riches and Glory of 
Idolaters, but do heartily rejoyce in God as my portion, :and deſire 
20 better nor no other Felicity. God who hath ſuffered other Na- 
tions to walk in their own Idolatrous ways, hath granted this fa- 
vour to me, to know and worſhip him the only true God. And as 
other Nations have choſen, and do adhereto their falſe Gods, ſo 
have I choſen God and will cleave to hims 5s The ſame thing re- 
peated in other words: The portion of my Cup, is the portion which 
15 put into'my Cup, as the ancient manner was in feaſts, where each 
had his portion of Meat, and of Wine allotted to hims, See Pſa; 
1!:6. The Cup oft denotesa Mans portion or Condition, as Mat: 
20: 22e and 26: 39, # i. e. My inheritance divided to me by lor, 
as the Cuſtom then was, Joſ.18; 1i: Jag: I. 3... 4. d. As thou haſt 


r, 


, 


People, an1 in that place which thou haſt chofen for thy dwelling. 
and worſhip, ſo, I doubt nor, thou wilſt uphold and preſerve me 
there, in ſpight of all the malicious deſigns ofmine enemies that 
ſeek to drive me hences _ | "LE | 

6 * The lines « are fallen unto me in'pleaſant places  ; 


yea,T have a goodly heritage. 


ut. e. My portion, which wal meaſured with lines} Compare 


Honey, and above all bleſſed with the Preſence and Knowledge,and 
Service of thetrue God; 


ro*For thou wilt not leave my foul »: in hell » ; nei- 
ther wilt thou ſuffer thine holyOne oto ſee corruprtionp. 
mt, e. My perſon, as this word is evefy, where uſed, by a Synec- 
doche of the part, and then the Perſon by another Synecdoche of 
the whole is put for the Body. The ſoul is oft put for the Body, ei- 
ther for the living Body, as Pſal: 35: 13; and 105. 18: or for the 
Carkaſs or dead Body. as it is takeny Levir. g: 28: and*21: 1: Num. 
5: 2: and 6. 6,9, It. and 9, 10: and 19; 11, 13:\. And fo it is inter- 
preted in this very place, as itis produced, A« 27 29,. &c. and 13: 
36, 37. ” te. In the Grave or ſtate of the Dead, as appears, 1. 
From theHebrew wordScheol,which is yery frequently ſo underſtood, 
as is undeniably evident from Gems 42: 387 Numb: 16: 308 Jobs 14-132 
Compare with 17; r3: Pſa. 18: 5, and 3043; and 141. 7: Ecgleſ. 9. 16: 
Ezek. 3 2.21, 27% Jonah 2. 2. and many other | places:j z. From''the 
following clauſe of this Verſe, 3 From A#s 2: and 132 where it 


is ſoexpounded and applied, o7. e. Me thy holy Son, whom thou. 


haſt ſan&ified and ſent unto the World. Ir is peculiar to Chriſt,co 
be called che bely one of God, Mark 1: 24: Luke 4: 34+ p Or. Retremeſe, 
7. 6 Tobe corrupted or putrified in the Grave,, as the Bodies of 
others arcs Seeing 1s of put for perceiving by experience. ' In which 
Senſe men are ſaid fo /ee good, Pſal: 34.13: and to fee Death, or the 
Grave, Pſal: $9: 48:. Luke 2: 26: John8, 51: and toſce fleep, Eccleſ. 8: 
16: And the Hebrew word Shochath, thongh ſomerimes by a Me- 
ronymy it ſignifies the P.t er place of Corruption, yer properly and 
generally it | | 
30: Pſa135: 7:and 55, 25, Jena 2. 6. and is ſo rendred by the 
{ſeventy Fewiſh Interpreters, Pſa. 107. 20. Prov. 28. ro.. Fer. 13. 
14: ahd 15+ 3- Lament. 4+20: Ezek. 19: 4; and 21:: 31, And fo it 
maſt be underſtood here, although ſome of the Jews do avoid the 
force of this Argument render it ce Pit. . But in that Seaſe it is: 
not true, for whether it be meant of David, as. they ſay, or of 
; Chriſt, it is confeſſed thar both of them did ſee the Pit, :, e. Were 
 Jaid in the Grave., And therefore jitmoſt necefſirily, be taken in 
: the other Senſe now mentiqned 3 and ſo it is properly, and literally 
{true in Chriſt alone, although it may in a lower and Metaphorical 
: Senſe be applied to Dayid, who had a juſt and well grounded Con - 
' idence, that although God might bring him into great Dangers and 
' Dilſtreſſes, which are called the ſorrows of Dearh, and the pains of Hell, 
P/#, 116. 3 yet God would not leave him to Periſh in orby them, 
1x Thou wilt ſhew me 9 the path) of life r: * in thy 


4A \ 9 i, F* 


y 


*P 


Plal, X\j 
7 T will bleſs the LORD, who hath given me coun-. 


*AQ!12:| ul 
{al:73 


121, 5« || 


Glory and Happineſs which is prepared for me. Though the Arch- 
ers ſhoot grievouſly at me, and both men and Devils ſeek my De=- © 


L LS V6 


+Heb.; 
awell cond 
fadent ly 


ignifies Corruption or Perdition, as Job 17:14. and 33:18, 


fi 
i 
it 
[ 1 
1 I 
} " j 
Witt 4 
14 ; 
A 


| j 
j 


; 
q 


preſence s is fulnels of joy /7, at thy right hand « there - .. 


Co pleaſures for eyermore. v - *Pat.olg | 


| Heb: 
pit bout 


ecerts 


*3pb23!10: oth; :]1* Ou | | : | 
Fl-26.2; notbing - J | am purpoſed » that my mouth (ball not der the ſhadow of thy wingsf., © 
Mal:3:2,3: franſgreſs 0. «Which God hath marveiloyſly 


os 
eG An 
© 49S IL. 


i 


-* s 
+ +. M5 3: 
. "gn - 


. XVII. 


Heb: ju+ gaint them in confidence of his hope, 13===-15. 
= 


| that thou wouldeſt judge righteouſly between me and mine Ene. 


:1i:5t let thine eyes 7 behold the things thatare equal g. 


oy $- 7. 


39.1, flictions, whereby the ſincerity or hypocriſie of mens hearts 


G "ſk 
-?'V 


q i.e! Give me 2n.ex2& and experimental knowledge 
my own Comfert, and the benefit of my People. » 1. e. 
that leadeth to Life, nor ro a temporal and mortal Life here, 


he is ſuppoſed ro be 


it followeth;the way to which is by the Reſurre&ion 
So the Senſe is, os wilt{t raiſe $6 from the Grave, and Conduct 
me to the place and ſtate of everlaſting Felicity. 5 Heb, With or 
before thy face. is e, In that heavenly Paradiſe, where thou art gract- 
ouſly and gloriouſly preſent, where thou doft clearly and fully dif* 
cover thy Face, and the light of thy Countenance; whereas in this 
Life thou hideſt thy Face and ſheweſt us only thy Back-parts, and 
we are 1n a fate of abſence from thee,and ſee thee only through a 
Glaſs darkly, and enjoy thee but in part. #? 2. e. Full and perfeCt 
joy and Satisfattion, which it is in vain to expe in this Life, and 
is only to be found inthe ſight of thee« See Exod; 33: 14: Pſa: 17: 
I5: Mati 5: $8: 1 John.3: 2: % Which he mentions as a place of 
greateſt Honour, as this was Ge: 48: 13, &C. 1 Kings 2: 19: Pſa. 45: 
9: and the place where the Ele& and Saints are placed ar the laſt 
day, Mat: 25333, &c, and laſtly, at the place where Chriſt himſelf 
3s faid to fit, Pſa. 110; is Mat: 26: 64: Col: 3: 11 Heb: 1.3: 
Taſting delights in. the Contemplation and fruition of God, 
PS A Le XVIL 
A Payer of David. a 
s David being now grievoully perſecuted and diſtreſſed by Saul 
2 other Enemies,and being-alfo beſpattered wtth many Calumnjes, 


x Ever- 


he appealsto the heart-ſcarching God, makes a ſolemn Proteſtation ' 


ofhis integrity, earneſtly begs of God proteGion and Deliverances, 
and being =o weary of his Life, by his-prefſing and manifold 
Calamities. be Comforts himſelf with the Contemplation and hope 
of an happier Life. 
David in confidence of his integrity, 
gainft-his Enemies, 7 — 9. He 
gerneſs to make a Prey of the innocent, 10 


1—— 6. prayeth to God for defence a. 
ſhewcth their Pride, Craft, and Ea- 
"Iz: Aud prayeth a= 


*Far + the right 4, O LORD attend unto my cryc; 
L pive car unto my prayer that gocth | not our of 


P.$S\4 LL: M Ss. 
Promiſes and- Threatnirgs thereof, which by deep and frequent 
Meditation I have hid and fixed in mine Heart,as the beſt Antidote 

So the ſame Verb is 
uicd with the like Supplement, Jef: 6:18: which alſo 4isin a man. 
ner included in the Verb, Or, 7 have «bſerved, to wit, ſo as to 

s Or, ways, i.e. The Cuſtoms and PraCtices, or the 

imitation of them; as may be gathered from the next Verſe,where 


ef1t for 
The way 
for 
dead and buried, v:10: Butto an erdleſs and 


-mmortal, and bleſſed Life after death in the preſence of God, 2s 
of the Body. 


 againft ſin ard temptation, P/a: 119: 9,11. r 


avoid them» 


Pſal. XVI, F 


he prays to be kept in Gods paths, which are oppoſed to theſe paths. 
: Or,of the wielenut man ; Such as Sauland his Courti-rs and Soldiers 
have thewed themſelves tcwards me» Although their rage and vi. 
olence againſt me, wight have tempted me to have repayed them 
in their own Con. yet I ſoibore it, and ſpared both others, ang 
Saul himſelf when his Life was at my Mercy, 1 Sam: 24: and 26: 
and this I did in obedience to thy Word,which required meto Ho. 


' Nour end preſerve the Lords Anointed. 


' 5 Hold vp my goings in thy paths «bat my footſteps 


T ſlip NOT x». 


T Heb, 5; 


| #® As by thy Word and Grace thou haſt hitherto kept me from 99 moved 
the paths of evil men, and Jed me into thy paths, ſo, f pray thee, 


enable me by the ſame means to perſevere in thy ways,and in mine * 


tempted, nor into any other ſin, whereby thou mayſtbe provoked 
or men may be cffended, and Religion diſgraced, f 


6 I havecalled upon thee y, for thou wilt hear me, 


O God z:inclinethine earuntome,and hear my ſpeech. 
7 It hath been ardftill is, and fhall be my conſtant courſe, to 
apply my ſelf to thee for zfliſtance and for deliverance, z For 
; though thou mayeft delay for a ſeaſon,I am well aſſured that thou 

w1iltit hear and arfwer me. 
7 * Shew thy marvellous loving kindneſs ,O thou || 


abhorrency of wicked courſes. x That I may not fa)l into thar fin 
of revenging my ſelf upon Saul, to which I may be more and more 


"Pf 31,91, 


that ſayeſt by thy right hand b, them which put their ! V% at 
truſt 7» thee c, from thoſe that riſe up againff Fon d. Jexef thes 


_ & Towit,in preferving and delivering me: which, 
I muſt ever acknowledge it to be an Att of kindneſs, 


if thou doft, in thee, 
or free Grace, Fon thiſe 


or undeſerved bounty, yea and of marvels kindneſs, becauſe of that File | 


my extream and preſſing Nangers, out of which nothing but a 


feigned lips d. | . 

b Heb. righteouſneſs, 1. e. Me who, notwithſtanding all their Ac» 
cuſations and {landers, am righteous ; Or, my righteous cauſe ; * 
do thou take notice of it and give Sentence for me ; or my righ- | 
reous Prayer. I defire nothing chat is unreaſonable or unjuſt, but 
mies, and vindicate thine own Honour,and faithfulneſs in making 
200d thy Promiſe to me ; which thy righteouſneſs oblidges thee to 
do» © 5. e. My ferver.t prayer attended with ſtrong Cries « Heb. 
wot with deveitful ligf, which ſpeak one thing when my Heart know- 
eth and defigneth another» And this profeſſion of his ſincerity in 
his Words, doth firly make way for hisſolemn appeal to God in} 
the following Verſes : | | 

2 Let my ſentence e come forth from thy preſence f : 


e Heb! my right or judgment, i. e. Judgment in my cauſe, 'or on 
my behalf. fi. e} From thee, and from thy tribunal to which I 
bring my cauſe. Do not ſuſpendor delay ir. bur ſpeedily examine 
my ja 4 and give Sentence in it.. g Or, Right. For though I deſire 
and need th '- 2g and Favour in many other ReſpeQs, yet I beg 
only juſtice in this cauſe between meand ther. | 

'2 Thou haſt proved & mine heart, thou haſt viſited 


”e i inthe night |, * thou haſt tried me /,and ſhalc f11d 


wonder of Gods mercy and power can ſave me. 6b ie. By thy 
great power. cOr, in it, 1. e. In thy right Hand, as was now ex« 
preſſed, Or, becauſe of ( as the Hebrew prefix Mem oft fignifies, as 
Pal: 12; 6: and elſewhere) theſe that exalt themſelves, ( as this word 
ſignifies, Job 20: 27: and 27: 7: Pſa. 59:1: ) not only againſt me 
but againſt thee who haſt engaged and declared thy ſelf for me, 
So this Prayer is like that Pſa: 66: 7: Let not the rebellious exals 
themſelves, But this place is otherwiſe tranſlated in the Margent of 
our Bibles, with which divers others, both Ancient and Jater In« 
terpreters agree, and thar more agreeably to the order of the words 
in the Hebrew Text, O thou that ſavefi(or tſeſt to ſave)them which 
truſt in thee (or, as the Hebrew word may be rended without an 
Supplement,” believers ) fom thoſe that riſe up againſt thy right hand, 
7. e, Either againſt thy mighty power, which thou huſt already 
ſhewed in my wonderful preſervation: Or, againſt thy Counſel 
( which is called Gods hand, 4s 4: 28; ) and revealed Willconcer- 
ning my advancement to the Kingdom, which divers of thoſe men 
did knowingly oppoſe, as may begathered from » Sam: 3: 9, 10. 
Or, againſt the man ( which word is oft vnderftood, whereof ex 
amples have been given, and more we ſhall have in this Book )- of 
thy right hand, as David is called Pſal: 80. 17> According: to this 
Treflation his Prayer is inforced wirh a double motive, to wit, his 
truſt in God, and his Enemies oppoſition againſt God. 


g* 


: b:Or ſearched or tried it, by many and fore Temprations and A-! uſe their urmoſt. care and diligence to keep, f As an Hen doth her 


eafiely and commonly diſcovered, and eſpecially by thy al-fceing 
Eye, And that is my great Comfort, that thou art Witneſs ef my 
innocency. #i Thou haſt madean inſpe&ionand enquiry into my | 
Hearts & Either 1, Metaphorically, :.e. inthe time of Trouble. 
Or, .2. properly ; when mens minds being freed from the incum- 
brance and- diſtraction of Buſineſs, and from the Pretence and So- 
ciety of men(Which either lays a reſtraint upon them, or tempts | 
them to uſe Diflimulation, }, do a& moſt vigorouſly and freely, | 
either upon Good or Evil, according to their ſeveral inclinations. 
T Accurately and ſeverely, 2s Gold-\miths do Metals. m2 i.e, Nos. 
thing of unrighteouſneſs, Heb. ſhalt not find, To.wit, that where« 
of mine Enemies accuſe me, namely Hypocriſie towards thee, and 
evil Deſign againſt $«ul, covered under fair Pretences, as they al- 
ledge. 'So this general Phraſe is to be limited - from the Context, 
as other generals moſt frequently. are: For he was. far from think- 
ing himſelf Sinleſs,that he often acknowledgerh his nrany and great 
ſins, and particularly, that,if. God ſhould enter into judgment with him, 
and be ſevere to mark iniquities no living man could be juſtified, Or, 
and before bim, Pſa: 130; 3: and 143: 2, # Or, I have reſolved upon 
Deliberation, as the word:implies oe I am fo far from praQtiſin 
againſt Saa's Life, as they charge me, that I will not wrong him ſo 
much asin a Word. Some joyn theſe Words with the next forego- 
ing, and render the place thus, That which I have chought, my mouth 
ſhall not tran[greſs, er rather, hath not trax{greſſed ; 1. e. My Thoughts 
and. Words always agree together. I abhor falſhood and diſſimy- 
lation.-. . -. | | 
- 4 Concerning the works of men p, by. the word of 
thy lips q, I have kept'me from r the paths s of the de- 
ſtroyer 7. Reo and | 1:72) 
| © þ Concerning my care and Caution about my Words,I have now 
fpoken v: 3: now I may ſay the like concerning my works. As for 
the works which men generally Praftiſe. Or,” Becauſe of ( as the 
refix, Lamed 15 oft uicd, as Gen; 2: 23: Numb: 16; 34» Fer: 4; 31» 
and 22. 10: and 23: 9: ) The works of men: $0 the Senſe may berhis, 
Obſerving and confidering the — of rhe Works ofthe men of 
this Age, with whom I converſe, or of all mankind, ſome ft w ex- 
cepred, conſidering, I ſay, how wicked and unreaſonable'and per- 
nicious they are, not only to others, bur alſo to themſelves ; I was 
reſolved to take more care in the ordering of my own Attions. 9 
i, e>» By the help of thy bl:{{ed Word and tte excellent Rules, 


abs er 


| 


tt were a young lyon Þ lurking in ſecret places 9. 


10; 8 9, 10. 


ae: Chickens: 


9 From the wicked g | that oppreſs me, fre + my 
deadly enemies b, who compaſs me about 3. 


g Or, becauſe of the wicked, h Heb from thoſe who are mine Enemies Mr 


again t 
right hand, 


Keep me as t he-appie of the eye e 2 bide me un- * Dent.z3 


| To: 
fenced on every fide and men Zech;2;8: 


| Heb;/hot 


waſte me: 


Heb: my 


n or for, or againſt my ( which Pronoun is eaſily ſupplied out of the agoinſ the 


foregoing Word, where it is expreſſed') Soul or Life, i.e. Who 
nothing but my Blood and Life will ſatisfie. 5 Which ſhews both 
their extream Malice and hi* great Danger 

10*They are inclofed in their'own fat & : with their 


mouth they ſpeak proudly /. 


k They live in great ſplendour and preſperity, whilſt I am exer« 


ciſed with many and fore Troubles. - The like Phraſe we have Joh 


I5: 29: Pſal: 73: 3.. Not only againſt us whom they ſcorn, but 


even againſt God himſelf whom they defpiſe, boaſting of ther own 
power, and what great things they will certainly effe& againſt me, 


x1 They. have now campaſled us in our fteps m;they 


have ſet their eyes » bowingdown to the earth o ; 


-m( :, *« Tn'all oar ways. We go from place to place, to Rocks 


and Caves; and Woods but whereſoever we go they are at hand 
and ready to ſurround us. 
; To wit, upon'or againſt vs; i. ee They have diſcevered us, and Heb: thi 
keep their eyes fixed upon us, that we may not eſcape, or as de- 
ſigning to ſhoot at n-0 i. e. Couching and caſting themſelves down 
upon the Earth, that they may not be diſcovered,and ſo may watch 
the fitteſt opportunity toſurprize us Which Senſe is favoured by 
the next verſe, and by comparing, P/ſal: 10: 16. Oth. To caſt us down 
to the Earth, * jr 


Of which ſee an example, $am;23526: 


IN (out; 


*Pl:119:50 


likens of 
him (that 
Is, if eve} 
ono of 
them) 15 4 


lyon that 


12 | Like a lyon that is.greedy of his prey p, and as atreb'o 


p When heis hungry and therefore crueh 9q See Pſal. 7: 2. an 


raven: 
g Heb: 
TH 


Hel; pr 


I Ariſe, O LORD,+diſappoint him »,caſt him down: Je bs - 


Thy inſtrument t@ execute vengeance vpen thing 
Enemies 


deliver my foul from the wicked,|| which is thy ſword 5. fgc , « 

r Heb: prevent his face, i. e. Go. forth againſt him, and meet |.-r, by 
and face him in barrel, as EnemieSuſe redo. Or,Prevent the exe- zhy Jword; 
cution of his miſchievous deſigns-againſt me ; ſtop kicain his ats _ 
tempr, and give himthe firſt blow, s Or, thy band, as it follows, 
Vi14q: ke 


VIL 


b, b; 
Ove 


| ? 
Plal, XVII. 
F ; "© py , 
| Enemies, or to. chaſtiſe ard exerciſe thy people : For which reaſon 
as being ordained for 
The Senſe is, do not puniſh me by this 
Rod: let me fall into thy hands, and not into the hands of wicked 
"men, 2 Sam; 24; 14. Or, by ( which Prepoſition 1s underſtocd, 


[Org from | 


we bY 


qhne hand, 
*Luk-16: 


26 


Children 


2. Whea I ſhall ariſe from the Dead : For Deathis very frequently 


- Comfort himſelf in his greateſt Agonies, with the Coniideration 


j . 
tam; 
W 


s 1341: 
| Or,cheir 


F-$:4 


the 4ſhrian is called Gods Rod, Iſa: 10: 5: 
CorreQtion, Hab: 1: 12: 


P/al: 2: 12: and oft eiſewhere) thy Sword, 1. e. by thy power. 


3: of their /#b/ance to their babes, 


ſer their Hearts-upon this vain and tranſitory World, and ncirhe 


i» e. Mind or Appetite, as that word is uſed, Job 29: 
29. 30, i.e. Nor only with common Mercies, 


are bleſſed with # numerous Poſterity, 
.or ſatsfiedas well as their Parents. Thc:re is abundantly enoug 


both tor them and for their Children, and to ſpare for their Chil- 


drens Children, as it follows. 


15As for me a,I will or ſha/]behold thy face 6 in rich. 
teouſneſs c : I ſhall be fatisfied d when I awake e with 


ehy likeneſs f. 


14 || From men which are thy band 5,O LORD from 
men of the. world «, * which bave their portion in 741 
life, end whoſe belly x thou filleſt with thy * hid trea- 
fure y : {they are full of childrenz, and leave the reſt 


; Wherewith thou doſt Corre& me. wi. e. Who proſper in and 


have,nor chuſe,or defire any other Portion or Felicity,as it follows.x 
20: 20, Provi 


as Food and 
Raiment, but with thy choiceſt and moſt precious good things, 
ſuch as men uſe to hide or keep in their treaſures, with extraordi- 
Wea'th and G'ory, and all the Delights and Comforts of the pre- 
ſent Life. 2 When many of the faithful Servants are barrenztheſe 
Or, their Children are filled 


Q 


C9 


L M 


ledgeth Gods help againſt bis Enemies, 32:— 50. - 
F Will love thee 


ſtrength &. 


_ 


$ 


my ſtrengrk and ſucceſs 


T !as it follows wv; 2. 


my high tower. | 
e To which I flee for refuge, as the 


whoſe ſtrength lyes in their Horns. The Horn is ofc 
as P/a: 92.10: Amos 6.13: and elſewhere, 


praiſed fo thall I be ſaved g from mine enemies. 
g Or, 1didcall and was ſaved. For the Furure 


are of another Nature. 4 I donor place my portion in earthly and ajready received. 


remporal Treaſures, as they do, but in bebolding God's face, 1-e. In 
the enjoyment of Gods preſence and favour 3- which is indeed en- 
joyed in part ia this Life, but not fully and ro Satisfaftion, © 
which David here ſpeaks, a+ appears from the laſt Clauſe of this 
Vecſe ; The ſight of God, and of his face, being frequently ſpoken 
of both in the Old and New-Teſtament, as a privi]ledge denied 
even to the Saints. in this Life and peculiar to the next Life, as1s 
manifeſt from Exod. 33' 20: Fudg. 13: 22; Mat 5: 8. 1 Cor: 13: 
12: 2 Core 3: 8: 1John3: 2, c With the Comfort of a good 
Conſcience, bearing me Witneſs thar, no:withitanding all the Ca- 
Jlumnies and Cenſures ofmine Enemies, I have been, and am up- 
right and righteous in the courte of my Life,both rowards thee and 
towards al men. Which Teſtimony will enable me to look God1n 
the Face wich boldneſs, when mine Enemies, being Conſcious to 
themſelves of groſs and manifo!d uncighteouſneſs towards thee and 
me, and others, will be afraid ro appar in thy Preſence, d Iam 
now greatly diſtreſſed and diffarisfied, and mine Enemies are filled 
and Frisfied with good things ; buc my rurn will come, the time 
is coming wherzin I ſhall beabundantly farisfied, to wit, with be- 
holding thy Face, whichis to me more comfortable and fatisfaCto- 
ry than all the Poſſeſſions of this World. e Either 1. When I ſhall 
de delivered from my preſent Diſtreſſes and C-lamiries. But theſe 
never are in Scripture, nor indeed can fitly be called by the name 
of Sleep, which is every where ſpoken of as a'ftate of reſt, and 
quietneſs; as Pſal. 127: 2: John 121: 12, 13: and conſequently de- 
liverance from them, cannot be compared to awaking. Or rather, 


called Sleep both in Scripture, as 1 Kings 1» 21: Iſ#. 26: 195 Jer. 
Fr 39, 57: Dau: 1252: John 11: 11, 13: and in other Authors ; 
and conſequently ReſurreCtion from the Dead, is juſtly and ficly 
called an ewaking, as it is Job 14: 12: Dan: 12: 2: John 11; 11: 
And fince the Dottrine of the ReſurreC&tion of the Juſt to a bleſſed 
and endleſs Life was not unknown to the Holy Men of God in the 
Old Teſtament,as it were very eaſfie to prove,nor to David in par- | 
ticular, as appears from Pſal:_ 16: 10,11- and from divers other 
paſſages, it cannot be imagined but David would Support jon| 


thereof, this being incomparably the moſt weighty and eff=<Ctual 
Argument and gronnd of Comfort, which he could poſſibly uſe. 
And this alſo beſt ſuits with the Context ; for Davids here oppo- 
fing his hopes and portion to that of his Enemies, and having no- 
ted, not without a ſecret refleQion and reproach upon them for ir, 
that their portion was in this life, v. 14: ir was moſt Conſonant to 
the place and to the thing ir ſelf, thar lie ſhould ſeek and have his 
Happineſs in the future Life, f Or, Imege. By which may be un- 
derſtood either, 1. Chriſt, the Son of God, who was known te 
David and other Prophets, as is evident, and that under the name 
ofthe Son of God, Pſal: 2; 17, 12: Prov 40; 4: Hoſ. 11. 1: compare 
with Mat, 2:15: who being exa&ly like to his Father, might moft 
ficly be called his likeneſs or image, as he is, Heb. 1:3, Or 2. the 
image of God ſtamped upon tis glorified Soul ; which muſt needs 
afford him infinite delight and ſatisfat.on. Or 3; God himſelf, or 
the Face of God menrioned in the former Clauſe, and explained 
here by another Phraſe, asis very ufual in theſe Writings. And this 
nrerpretarion may receive ftrength from Nam. 12: 8: where be- 
bilding the ſimil: tude of the Lord is evidently th: ſame thing, which 
13. elſewhere called ſeeing his face, and from Heb: 10: 13 where the 
7mage doth not note the likeneſs or repreſentation, bur the truth 
ad exiſtence of the thing. 


PSA LL. XYHE. 
The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm, with ſome few and ſmall Variations is written, 

.Þ 2 Saw 22. Ir was compoſed by David towards the end of bis 

Reign and Life upon the occalion here mentioned. 

Fo the chief mulician, 4 P/a/m of David,the ſervant of 
the LORD -, who ſpake unto the LORD the words 
of * this ſong, in the day that the LORD delivered 
him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the 


hand of Saul b: And he ſaid : | 

s Who eſteemeth it a greater Honour tobe thy Servant,than to be 
King of 1-4], 'and who doth intirely devote himſelf to thy Ser- | 
vice and Glory. - b 1,e After the Death of Saul, and the Con- 
queſt of a lhis ſucceeding Egemues,” and his own firm: eſtabliſh- 
ment un his Kingdoms 


of 


7 1, e. Watry 
pound theſe, 


ger, 
The ſame thing expreſſed in other words. ... - - 


The forrows of death b compaſſed me, and the 
floods of F ungodly meni made me afraid : | 


upon me. Compare Pſal: 53: 4+ #5 Their great mulritudcs and 
ſtrength, and violent aſſaults, breaking inuponme like aFlood,  . 
5 The || ſorrows of heli & compaiſed me about : the 
ſnares of death prevented me /..  _. eee 
k Or, of cheGrave, which brought me to the brink of the Grave. 
I Hadalmoſt takenhold of me, ere I was aware of my danger. 


unto my God ; he heard my voice out of his*temple m, 
and my cry came before him, evex unto his ears. 


or dire&ed thither. Or 2. Out of his Heavenly Habiration, which 
is oft called his Temple ; ſee on P/al: 11 4. | | 
7 Thenthe earth ſhook and trembled », the founda- 


he was wrotb, | | 
» Then God appeared oh my behalf 


mies. which is here compared to an Earthquake. o The Earthquake 
wasſodeep and violent, that it overthrew whole Mountains by che 


being, oft compared tro Mountains, as P/#k 46: 3, 4. and 144: 5, 1ſa; 
41:15: &e. | | 


by + itg. 
manifeſted his great diſpleaſure againſt my Adverſaies. qg Which 


notes the fervency, conſtancy and efficacy of his anger. 

9 Hebowed the heavens 7 aiſo and came down s,and 
darkneſs was under his feet. | | | 
r By producing thick and dark Clouds, by which the H-avens 
ſeem rocome down to the Earth. 5 Nor by change of place, bur 
by the manifeſtation of his perfence and power on my behalf. 
io And he rodeupon a cherub er, and did fly ; yea, 
*he did fly upon the wings of the wind. | 


the Ang:ls, who are ſo cilled, Gen: 3: 24; Heb g: 5:. who are alſo 
called Gods Chariots, Pſal: 68: 17; upon which he is ſaid to fit and 
ride; Al which i+ notto beunderſtood grofly, ,but only to note 
Gods uſing of the Miniſtry of Angels, in- raiting ſuch Storms and. 
Tempeſts as are here deſcribed. « As ſwiftly as the Wind. He 
came to my reſcue with all ſpeed. _ OO 4 
11 He made darknelshis ſecret place : his pavilion, 
round about him were dark waters y, 8nd thick clouds 
of the skies. | >. | Ok SR | 
x Or, his biding place, . i. e. He covered ' himſelf with . dark 
Clouds, from whence he ſecretly ſhora; his Enemiesgas ir follows. 
Vapours and thick Clouds, as the nexe Words ex- 


12 At the brightneſs bat was before him & his thick 
clouds paſſed < ond coals of fire, . - | 
z Art his glorious and powerfull apnreararce. - paſſ, Pr 
i.e Vaniſhed, ( as this Word is oft 7 vhop's at eee paſſe _ 
29: 3; Hab; 1: 10,) being diſſolved into ſhowers of Hail-ſtones, &c, 
of Melo LORD alſo thundered & in the beavens,and 
the Higheſt gave his yoice c.: hail-fozes and coals of fire. 
b To wit againſt my Adverlaries. Thunder is a ſign of Gods An=. 
i Sam: 23 103 and 7:10, 6 i.e. Thurider oft ſo called: 


t 4 Yea he ſent out hisarrows 4,and ſcattered them e> 


and he thot outligthnings,and diſcomficed them. 


d To wit Lightning, as it is explained in the next Clauſe: e To. 
wit, mine Enemies: Which is ſufficiently underſtood from wv. 3; 
and 17: and from the whole Context. , _ 


15Then the channels of waters were ſeen,and the. 


402 foundas 


c, O LOR D my 


c Moſt aff:&ionately and with my whole Soul; as the Hebrew 
word ſtygnifhes. I can rerurn thee no berter thing tor all thy Fa- 
vours then my Love, and Heart which I pray thee to accept. By 
loving him he underſtands not only h's inward affe&ion, bur ali 
allrhe outward Exprefſions and Teſtimones of it, praiſing and glo- 
rifying, and ſerving him- «4 From whom alone I have received all 
and ſectlemenr,and in whom alone I truſt, 


2 The LORD # my rock e and fortreſs, and my + Heb 
deliverer : my God, tf my ſtrength * in whom. I will z«&'or 
truſt, my buckler, and the horn f of my falvation,and Cliff. » >. 


Iſra-lites did to their Rocks. 
See Judg. 6: 2; 1 Sams 13; 6. f By which I have both defended my 
ſelf and ſubdued mine Enemies. It is a Metaphor from thoſe Beaſts 
put for power, 


2 1 will call upon the LORD who is worthy to bs 


Trace 
: is commonly uſed for that which is Paſt, And this ſeemsbelt ts 
aT donorenvy this their Felicity, but my Hopes and Happineſs agree with the whole Context, which is to praiſe God for mercies 


T Hebz 

: Bilial, 
þ i. e. Dangerousand deadly Troubles. Or, the Bands or Cords 

of Death, which had almoſt ſeized me, and was putring its Bands 


: [Or;Cerde) | 


6 In my diſtreſs I called upon the LORD, and cryed 


m either 1, Out of his SanQtuary 3 whence he promiſed to hear 
and anſwer the prayers of his people, which are either . made there 


tion alſo of the bills were moved and ſhaken o, becauſe 
in a miraculeus an d glorious 
manner, and with the great Terror and Confuſton of all mine Ene-. 


Roots. Whereby he deſigns his lofty and potent Enemies; ſuch 


8 There went up a ſmoke f out of his noſtrils " "NE 
and fire out of his mouth devoured : coals were kiadled F Heb, by 


p As is uſual in perſons tanſported with great anger and rage. He tHeb.him 


hy PC144. 51 


s Or upon the Cherubims, by an Enallage of number; that is, upon x 


h 
v2 
i i 


*Pſ.r1451 


He 


b:2: 
13: 4 


* PFuG:3: i | 
b 


* Pf: 11: 4 


4 


—_ 


- 


Pſ.104;3 


[Phal. XVII. 
Þ $ 


4 L M 
of 


ſoundation | | 
| of 9 of th | | 
[: : —< <—neTes þ be IA | woe diſcoveredfat th 
| Pe. By mighty _ terrible bo bucar breath of thy —_ S n Such as I and FR | | 
"REAR fas eng | vokysy wag ic —— 54 a_ cheEqrth _ CO any! page Hebgwois wakes. þ | 
10. 3: . out of || many ; Mahep aDOVE ; he an b OY __ 101: 5e Prov; henry 3” 6 7 tuck-bony Perſons 
| I, great : g An ls, or f I'S» me, & drew m m 7 G 10U wilt light : JUCN AS mine En ry ooks and 
waters, © , 17 He deli iſtance otherwi e | my God will enli my || candl —_— 
He delive erwiſe. c O n ighten ee: th ; | J 
\— ——_ 44 49 rs 1nf eds by Sifery and, Dat el 4 baryon & LORD10:, Lay þþ 
rom them <>& e 3 or thev W my.,and from all which are f, ort, and Proſperit my Candle, (; p ) ; Fr 
18 Ther at wanted neither M ere toO ſtrong fo 21: 17; and ofc ſignified by EOOY and Glory S P eiven me I; 
but < J prevenred me zi r Malice nor Po 's r mc. 29 F 29: 3: Pſa:g7; 11: zaleor a Light . ofterity a] [2 
| | * -hww_mgee Fes my fta y of my calami by my God e I haveſ|r 4h". LOEY OY 
| T4 t i Y. amity * ny cd 1] FUN thr F: 
Be 5. but they could ar cunning for me, a | x A d j.e. Broke have I leaped ove ough a troOOP &d : J M 
Pl: 1 %& t prev , and had Ih en thr raw Þ a [O 
EF * x; lb He brougl congk'y* th almoſt ſurprized ave ſcaled the rongh the armed Tr al «, 5 and \Orhnk Ny 
| | he delivered ght me forth & alſo i me ; | fakenthem. Is of their Brcogeſt yin mine Enemi LN 
k Our of m fica? becauſe he deli L inzoa large place 1: | fl 30 As for God his * \ ities and Caſtles, and 1g 4 
which T was ſhur wan nr yon - 442 vs neon [the LORD is* || ryedg + is perfeet f': ma 
and Plenty, and p and impriſoned. ut of the little ( thar truſt in hi || cryed g : hez Xt f : the wo 
—— ag oy ron lth a ed: Into ſtars of Caves in| fHis Co m_ +? be ts bicklerto all thoſe 
_— gnifies. : Whe a good" "wi ard tobe idence, though i Dag 2 
cit ſpring of hem; ods good reby he aſcri iN to | perfett underſtood , though it may ſometj al g; 
following e them, Which h Pl:aſure and fi aſCribes all hi d or unblameable. £ yet is always w1 y lometimes þb Re 937 
Merits gexpreſſions ſhould e thought fic ree Grace,a is| and approved by 1 e. £ The truth ys wiſejuſt, and edark pp 53 
erits, .which he ofc dt: | ſeem roſa to premiſe ,as the | reſt. - y innumerable E of Gods promi every way G: 12,4 : 
- 25 The LORD reward EEE E oe] a; For who God ek Co pate So eee | 
teou SWa | n O 7 O & 
Re: according to d me according to my righ ary boon OO Ee 07-0 c ww. Bo 
"* recomponſed leanneſs righ- muſt need r Who1 r, r Hel 
» AsThad a j ea Mme $ of my h God $beas{h ; IS A fired, ſ 
b - juſt Cauſc : y and 4 and the ave ſaid, b * ed, in; 
righteouſly with iſt Cauſe, and made ir my cx wo ond 1 TOY _ Deur.zz, | 
that = "rope by his Promiſe and all s rb wap uſineſs to deal —_— thoſe chattru _— his own =v els prov pr iN * 
w OR mile, , to ble. . Or this1 ruſt in him : Fei » that 192M,2: y 
iy. Cruſe apt wy unrighteo, Eo 6 cer and rewnd re | 7 Rock Orton Ample He i unchangenbe andin TER 
wer my ſ:1f£ 1ghteOuUs Nnems me, and " THEM ock in whi z.10 NE only i "| » a5 WO TH wha I nd in- la; 1 7H 
namely, by kill rom {traits and m1 mi2s And b 2d. to plead » Te 3 ich they may ſ: y is ſuch, and there 1 t I have now "NY 
Ber illing Saul, as I miſerics,by unri ecauſe ] would 32 1t is God tha afcly truſt. e1sno other God 
Th - me in a more h was adviſed r righteous maketh n c g1rdeth m 0 4 
SI SONIeOICY of Sung —— and effi ITO |. 7 Thus 1y way perfect k e with ſtrength 3 : 
ſe I I kept 6h Rios, and carria Qual manner Pleaſed 2 Meta eapftry me ftrength b h S z, and 
2r For Ih 1ands pure ge towards Soi % 1. C.| Git phor taken eirh oth of Mind 
have n( ave kept th ul, from irdle, wherew] er from a Mili and Body for B 
| nor wicked! e ways of th __ MO TE Danes is 
þ IT have any departed f e LORD plai ey were rend e Garments w ,or from a com 
W; obſerved rom m fp, a in and ſmoo red fitter fo were girt ab mon 
ny Paſons and Tree "i lee Hi vp af on on Oar oy oa ox _ Ares Innes A ng rmemns 
ked men d _ wilfuliy forl: COOP chem, made mine 0\ fu ounſels and enterpr) arch of an Arm Iz as Pioneers uſt y 
lefe the "oy Which he adds by en God. and brok q 1-e. Thave 4 mble in it, nor ao6-7 ws ſo thar I «<0 Je guided me 1 wm 
feſſion of +1 or followi y way of Corre&i en his Laws a nor] 35 He mak 1e ſhort of my end er miſs my w "— 
- L uch a ing Clauſcs \h 10n and Exp:;; $SW1C-; Ne eth my fee . NO” ay, nor 
in ſtrict Juſti perfc0t endifialefs vi ould be interp' xpiication 77 Upon Mm h3 t like hinds 
where utre m_—_ juſrified by efs righteouſneſs, \ <7 IR 28a Pro , l i. e. Moſt 4 1ph places. feet Land * ſett 
eſpeciall L y diſowns Pla ys and before God: V ereby he we - j and Contri wift and nimb] eth *D £ 
y tow , « 130: 3». : wh 1ght -ONTrLVENCce, - . e. Ash : enk, 32, 
pore, x th Tir hem) cul {and vp 2 nd wick Dev ind Expedtous inthe Execution: V he made me wife in Cel i 
, —_— S © . ion: .Whi made d 
Mardes and Falſhcod Toy copia not preteyd this Plalm was oy and eſcape fi a Captains He hich are tk me ſpeedy 
» and Adulter , | aving been 1 1a to withour Qm, pur! pe Irom mine E ' BaVe me great Ag; ao rwo great Fx. 
P PG meg* 2x For all of glmhere. | cen guilty of thoſe great Sins of| of hoes non tag proven required i 0 fe 
"bf nb r all bis * judgm: » as he confeff; of mine Enemi aceth me in ſafe s » Heb, maketh 3-% wer 
Id a r * put abu his on were before m pa: or obararoe> hr FR ET eſta F Jaces,our of oh me ſed 
ad : _ the Eyes dawg from me £ er, and I my OH ro — he hath En men as reach = 
5 i.e. O m, | that I mi s Mind, Idillec | { e tea y Victories. | me, and gi oy 
= God Wa þ. wed. —_—— my x7 ft Areas and of ſteel is Ameri my hands to war » 'r __ 10, 
E OT m * - was «7 2 ps Ir bp or —telet rho like not - _ which} _ I owe all Sins arms e. z fo thata bow "Pf. 144.1 ho 
+Hobewith Ny Ic bn ain right Þ befo 4 5 etain | ro break i ave. o My ftr ilitary skill, or ftren 59 
with. _— ine injaui re him z: cak it. rength is ſufh Xs rength We, 
.24 Theref n1QUITY # : and I T C1EAT NOT or Courage _ 
| p ore h . kept | ;: 35 hou haſt only to bend 1 2 f wile 
cording to ath the LORD tio aſt alſo gi nd it, but 
. in nl D re np and . given me . , 
jp _ be on - Sm—_ Lin ercounehaccrding cone me ac thy 6 rar 4 _ hand hath wn Fang of thy falva ha 
"9 OG *- 6 ovate Aba -ſighe the Cle -| p Thys$ ath made mg nN Me u © {| Or, vi 
that ſin whi my heart and efore men for Mii ro defend me roteQion "Ks h : yon 
_ Y ich [| as on waysSTo he th my own end iſchiefs, ETSY * 9 Kept me fre 1cn hath beers t ; neſs thou 
my Hereditary ond Nirural C rrup alleing Go. 16) Erm aa this word niſi, um from fling inco re Snare = 
© n over m2 rruption, : Either, 1, F 137 is & , Numb, 12: 3: eared, ed me. 
STE Hz. pn Ear Hci, een Do 
= renew ef, becanſs Sears oY ſin of kn ; "he + note, yaa which np jo Cy on _ R dined _ 
eK:ng, as b in borhas a Ma is might ſeem mol! ng Saul, which rcely ſhewed ervedzthy Grage , and mitigated th 
to advahc Repay + l;kely wa nand as a Soldier r agreeable a 36 Thou haſt i ro me and for me and Benign:ty hi 4# 
By the fair inaſclF ; ro which borh to revenge 3 and as ano; nd | my feet di inlarged my ſt ; +06 
. 0; 4 ich alſo he mi nge and ro inred to mage 1d not {li y NEPsS SF und 
r Sam: 24. Fr ny which P e migat ſeem ro preſerveand s Which befc | « 4h er me, th 
and his 6] and 26: $: and nece rovidence had ro be both invited and i were iſtraitned and y __ I +Heb.mins | 
which he wa p<rperual and ceſſirared by Saul IS - ew his h haft ſet my with the narro and confined to a Ji Aneles | 
' &{o tr; extream D s1mplac and, h y feet in al wneſs and di | a little C ls 
plca now nat eng rempred ogy opd we OTE altos, - note bas] 2 ens Pſa: 31: 8: we pr oa Auaigy oe 
[or,perf # ” oh the merciful | 2% i 5 2:2redin _ and eat ng . # Or, \ Sera ng Difficulties jnto e. Thou Fg 
** ſelf + with an || upri man thou wilt ſh $72 Pat - , as they are apt to to Fa ſtate of {24m} 
| on " pright man thou NE ſ-1e, them 3 kewl 9-3 mine enemi __ 's 
r. fonc, : 
ſuch 2 antes wit, in performi; ew thy] .. 28 I have 4 be id I turn again Gill che and overtaken 
Dee Ago” ws, chit being a great ng what thow haft Promi; riſe : they are | —_— them that the ey were conſumed 
try he rhe Jo Ter EE St oper Na Gr efalenundermy feers _—_— 
ſed. Na! : make them to +04 prejraaed 4 r5 as ofie the nes s after the mann the Ground, ſo - | + 
one __ 634 The Helge rd breach of Promif kedly with Wy 29 Porth is of Conqueror a mw uy tread upon their ; 
him the ame meaſuregwhich be = _— ih Thou hue expreſ. bactel : hag +6 irded mewith ft F937 B96 305 ahrns 
mercy and trut! is own doin teth our to'eth eſt ro ever 2941 14 ubd rength 7 PL 
wal, n, t oings, and ers, every | againſt m ued u a x unto 
through thy A Hate who SpahR=/2 pe thou Gar giveſt ro| *He ES | nder me thoſe that rol; _ FHeb:c0s 1 
* Lev; 26: i baba rhe put oy ifuland true to I gate 10 owt Songs he had ſaid ole up ſes 1 bw © - 
23,24, 2 : with* the f Pas thou wilt ſhew th ers, as| Y-.37: 38: and fhis great A id v. 32; left be ſh | 
212+, 27: T roward . TInew th fe _ 2. 25} and that h , rchievem ould 
28. 3 Free f thou:-willt | y If piire v -* of them © he might 81 ents and Viftori eem to arro* | 
i Or +4 or unfait! rom the leaft mi ilſt ſhew eby 16 ey; and : give God the wh ories mentioned 
; ve vu utcft, and aft indneſs ; er 11 ance of unrighte %. | mic u haſt alfo gi _ 
#y is ofr pur for t promiſed to imply and finc eovſneſs s, that I mi grven me 5 | 
+; $,4.-f x hug Sincerity.” 2 ba ro them that og nated ſuch _ y Either, 1. —__ deſtroy & w the necks y of mi 
TE Bo ada, Prove 3: hid perwinſi, 4. & Tl mit Fa ning + ; I. Thar Tmighe ſmit; em 2 that h ine Cage 
Gat. by ee alſo, Prov: 3: im, 2s thou h - Thou wilſt Pus | &io put my yoke u mite. or beh ate me "Xe 
, but'God's-p- : 3: 24. Mut aft threatned, I Croſs | 5. e. I Oc rather th pon their Neck chead thew, Or 07 
-.25.For tl | perwerſeneſs.1s judici S perverſeneſs here '» Levit: 26 1. e. Flee away f thus, Theu haſt cks, or brin wry x 2, That 1 6 
hte dc 10u wilt fave apap and penal. is moral and | dred, Exod: y from me : for : made them t gtrem into Cubies 
ng down high:-took = atticted-people Tae tnone genes A APs =. ny OR baba. cf 
bc ple @ ; - but wilt po not for the pg ay Hebrew Emery elſewhere. SG _ and ren- F 
: f1cah AC £ ” That OTE is only uſed ar are they þ 
ght have Oppart _- for the Neck, : 
unity TO deſtrey S 
_— 41 Ihe? 


VI Bl. XIX. 


Lam) 


Yoke 


t.32. 
* 3% 


144.1 


', with 


necks + 


thou 
multi 
Mt. 


b.mine 


les P 


5 oe A EEO ew gey _ i 


4r Theycryed,but there 4s none to ſave them: * even 
Job 27*9 unto the LORD #, buthe anſwered them not. * 
k15-12* , He ſpeaks of his I/razlitih Enemies, who in their Diſtreſſes 
Frov 44.26 prayed to God for help againſt him. | 
h.115-' 42 Then did I beat them ſmall as the duſt before the 


ng wind : I did * caſt them our 6 as dirt in the ſtreets. 


Frek:8.18 b Or, Rid them away, as Dirt is uſually ſwept or carried our' of 
Mich.3-4. Houſes or Streets, Or, tread them down ; Or bruiſe them, as men 
Jech,7 13: do Dirt when they walk in the Streets. 


$ 7:10 43 Thou haſt delivered me from the ſtrivings of the peo- 


ple c: and chou haſt made me the head of the heathen 
| 4: a people whomT have not known eſhal ſerve me. 
© c From Contentions, and Seditions, and Tumults of my own 
. people under Saul, and 1ſbboſbeth and Ybſalowm. d Of the Ammonites, 
* © Maabites, Edomites,Syrians and others. e Whom I had no acquaintance 
with; nor Relation to, no not by thy promiſe or grant ; even bare 
- barous and remote Nations. | 


_ . 44 tAfſoon as they hear ofme f, they ſhal obey me: 


urns 1 NE ſtrangers [| + ſubmit themſelves unto me g- 
i ear. F Either 1+ At the fame of thy Name, and Vitorious Arms, Or 
Wh. the 2- At the firſt tidings of my coming rowards them. Or rather 3, 
lur0f the As ſcon as they underſtand my will and pleaſure,they ſhal inſtant- 
hager. ly comply with it, g Heb. Shal lyeunto me, 1. e. ſhal ſubmit them- 
lor yield ſelves ro me not willingly and chcerfully. as they will pretend,bur 
faued 0 only our of fear, and by conſtraint. By which ir appears that this is 
wine, ſpoken with reference to David and nor ( as ſome would have it) to 
'{Heb,be- Chrift, becauſe Chriſt's people  are_ a willing people, Pſal; 1 10; 3+ 
and thoſe whom he Conquers do freely obey him. | 
45 The ſtrangers thai tade away b, and be aftaid ; 
out of their cloſe places &- 
- hi. e. Saall wither and decay in their hopes and ſtrength. z 7; e; 
Shal come trembling : one Verh being put for two, as Pſal; 22; 21. 
thou haſt heard me, i; e. Having delivered megand 42: 1. panteth, i:e 
| Panting haſtnerh, and in many other places. k Out of their ſtrong 
holds, where they fhal lurk and keep themſelves for fear of me, 
and whence they dare nor ſtir without trembling. Or for / as the 
Particle Mem is oft uſed ) their cloſe places, i: e, Leit I thould afſaulr 
and take them. Y 
45 The LORD liveth /, and bleſſed be my rock m: 
and let the God of my ſalvation be exalted. 

I He and he only is the true living God, and he hath manifeſted 
himſelf ro be for my Comfort, and for the confulion of mine Ene- 
mies, when other gods are dead and impot-nt Idols Or, Lt the 
Lord live So it is a joyful and thankful Acclamation, ſpoken afer 

the manner ofearthly Princes.m Let him have all bleflingand praiſe 
for lie is worthy of it- 
|. .. 47 Its God that f avengeth mez, and || ſubdueth 
_ the people under me. : : 
| martfor * That executed Vengeance both by me, againſt Malicious Ene- 
Y mies,and for me againſt Seu/,of whom I would not avenge my ſelf. 
(0,4. 48 He delivereth me from mineenemies:yea,* thou 
tek, lifteſt me upabove thole that riſe up againſt me o:thou 
 '59.1- haſt delivered me from the 7 violent man p. 
ro 8 Above their Malice and Power, p From Saul ; whom for Ho-« 
| Fen. ours fake he forbears to mention. 
wg, 49 © Therefore will I || give . thanks unto thee, O 
| ah, LORD, among the Heathen 9: and ling praiſes unto 


thy name. | SE 
.q Or, among the Gentiles or Nations; 1. e: Either, t. In the great 
Congregations conſiſting of rhe 1ſraclites of all Tribes; of wham 
this very word is uſ=d. Joſe 3. 17: and 4: 1. Erek: 2: 3,and gta 
#$ hath been noted before. Or 2. In the preſence of thoſe Gentiles, 
Wha reſorted ro Jeruſalem in great numbers,or before others of them 
' who are either ſubje& to me,or Confederate with me, as I have oc- 
Caſion of ſpeaking or writing to any ofthem: ' But this was but an 
yncertain and inconſiderable Buſineſs. And therefore David is here 
tranſported beyond himſelf even to his ſeed for ever, as it is ex- 
- Preſſed v. 50. and ſpeaks this in ſpecial Relation roChriſt, who was 
tO be his ſeed, and of whom he was an Eminent Type, and by 
whom alon2 this was done, to any purpoſe. And therefore this is 
juſtly applied ro himygand to his Preaching to and calling of the Gen- 
Viles, Rom, 15. 9. | ; 
9m). $2 Great deliverance giveth he to his king r.: .and 
IT ; ſheweth mercy to his anointed,to David,and tohis ſeed 
| s'* for evermore. - ' | 
' » To the King whom God himſelf choſe and anointed or conſti- 
tuted. 5s To all his Poſterity, and eſpecially ro the Meſfſizs, who is 
| called David: ſeed, As 13. 23. Rem. 1. 3- and his Son, ſal. 89; 27.” 
? and 110. Compare with Mat: 22 42 and the Seed' by way of Emis 
{ nency, Gal: 3: 16. and Gods anointed and King, Pjal; 2; 2: 
: .Þ SAL. AA... 
_. - : The ARGUMENT. "y 
He deſign of this Pſalm is to adore and magnifie the name © 
God for rhe diſcovery of his Wiſdom and Power, and Good- 
I ets, both by his great and glorious Works-of Creation and Provis 
d:nce 3 and eſpecially by kis Word and the holy Scripture; which 
he prefers before the former. 
' Too the chief muſician; a Pſalm of David. 


— 


The Heavens declare the glory of God, 1, So do Night and Day, 2, 71 and 

the Sun, 6: The Perfetion E yrs and Extent of Gods Law ; its Effetts, 

©, n*=>=12, He prayeth againſt Preſumpruous Sins, 13. SLE 
Cents FS de® heavens 4 declare b the glory of God c:and the 
4 firmament d ſheweth bis handy-work e. pn, 

4 Theſe vidible Heavens ſo vaſt and ſpacious, richly adorned with 

Sears, ſo various and admirable in their Courſe, or 'Station;ſo uſe 

ful and powerful in their Influences. 6 Nor properly,bur ObjeQive- 

ly, 'as the Earth and Trees and Srars are ſaid to 1peak, Job 12: 8.and 

38:7. Fe: 55; 12. they demonſtrate or make 1t evidenr and urdeni=: 

ble, to all men, .of Senſe or Reaſon : They are as a moſt legible - 

#vok wherein cyery be phat runs my Read it, 6 7. e, His glorious; 


pP s 4k, M5. 


. Beeing or Exiſtence, his eternal Power and God-head, as it is particue 
larly expreſſed, Rom: 1: 20. his infinite Wiſdom and Goodneſs. All 
which are ſo viſible to them, thart it is Ridiculous to deny or doubt 
of them,as it is eſteemedRidiculous to think of far meanerworks of 
Art,asanHouſe or aBookz&c.that they were made withour anArrtiſt, 
or without an Hand. &d Or the Expanſion, 7. e Allthis vaſt ſpace ex» 
tended from the Earth to the higheſt Heavens, with all its goodly 
Furniture, che ſame thing which he called Heavens, e The Excel- 
lency of the work diſcovers who was the Aur hor of it, that it did 
not come by chance, nor ſpring of it telf, but was made by the 
Lord God Almighty, - *'. -. © 5 
2 Day unto day f uttereth g ſpeech þ, and night unto 
nighc ſheweth knowledge: © I x 
f Or. rather, after ( as the Hebrew Lamed oft ſignifies, as Exod: 16s 
1. and 29. 38 2'Chron: 3o. 21+ Pſal: 96: 2. ) Day ; For the Day 
doth nor utter this to the Day, but ro us upon the Day. The Senſe 
is, Either, r, That orderly, and conſtant, and uſeful Succeſſion of 
Days and Nighrs one after another,declare this. Burof the Courſe 
of the Sun, the effec & whereof this Succeſſion is, he ſpeaks, v. 5. 
Or rather 2. Every Day and'Night renews or repeats theſe Docu- 
ments and Demonſtrations of Gods glory: He that negleQs them 
one day, may learn them the next day: g Or, poureth forth, to wit 
conſtantly and abundantly & forcibly,as a Fountain doth Water,as 
' this Hebrew Verb ſignifies. h Or the Word, or Dilcourle, To wit, 
Concerning God. Ithath as it were a' Tengue to ſpeak the Praiſcs 
| of irs Maker ; 7: e- Ir gives men eccaſion to Magnifie and adore 
him. #7 i: e, Gives us aclear and certain Knowledge or Diſcovery cf - » ----.. 
their Author; IT, HE; , .10 WOOY 
3 There is no ſpeech nor language || F where their V7 


une ont theſe 
voice is not heard &. ' © their woice 


k Or underſtood, as the Verb oft ſignifies, as Gor 11: 7, and 42- 55 beard, | 
23. 2 Kings 18, 26. 1 Cor. 14+ 2+ for the hearing of it, would have + Heb. 


force of the Argumentlyes. The Senſe is, there are diyerſe Nati- ;hejr woes 
ons in the World, which have ſeveral Languages, fo that one caii- ppard, 
nor diſcourſe with, or be underſtood by another, but the Heavens 
are fuchan univerſal and admirable Teacher, that they can ſpeak to 
all people under them, and be clearly underſtood by all. ' Ne Natior 
or People, ſaith that wiſe and learned Heathen, Tuly, is ſo barbarous 
and ſortiſh, as, whin they Iook up to the Heavens, not to perceive that there 
i5 alzod,or to imagines that thoſe things are the Effet of blind Chanceywhich 
are made with ſuch wonderful Art and Wiſdom,that he requires extraerdina« 
ry Art to underſtand their excellent Orders and Courſe ? Bur this Verſe is 
by diverſe Learn<d Men otherwiſe Tranſlated, not without an ele- 
gant Gradation, as ſome cbſerve. They have no Speech nor Word, nor is 
any Yoyce or ſound heard, in or from them. Then follows the nexr 
Verle by way of Oppoſition, yer their line, &c. Or thus, They have 
no Speech, nor Words, ( which is ſuppoſed ro be here faid by way of 
Prelepſis, ro ſoften and explain his former Exprefſions of the Hea=s 
vens, declaring and ſpeaking ) yer ( or, but without them )} their Poyce 
5s heard or unaerſtood. : 536 7 SIP 

4 * |] Their line /is gone out through all the earth =, 
and their works o tothe end of the world:in them hath Aqansog 
he ſet a tabernacle p for the ſun q. 4 $0764 5056 20 

[ Either 1. Their admirable ftruQure made exaQlyzand as it were 2,4, Or, 
by line : fee Job 38; 5. Zech. 1. 16. Or, 2. Their lines, the fingu- y;re0n, 
gular number being put for the plural, for the line anſwereth to che 
Words in the next Clauſe. . And by line or lines he may underſtand 
cheir writing, as this very Word is raken,1ſs: 28: 10, which is made* 
up of ſeveral lines. Andthis Expreflion may ſeemro be very firand' 
proper, becauſe the Heavens do not teach men audibly,or by ſpeak-' 
ing to their Ears,but viſibly by propounding things to their Eyes," 
which is done in lines or writings.” z: e. Is ſpread abroad br drawn 
forth, » Soas tobe ſeen and Read, by all the Inhabitants of the ' 
Earth. 0 7- e. Their magnificent Strufture, and their exquiſite Or« 
der. and moſt regular Courſe, by which they declare their Author, - 
no leſs than if they uſed many Words,or long Diſcourſes to thar 
purpoſe, or no leſs than men diſcover their Minds by their Words, 
See more concerning this Verſe, upon Rom: re: 18. where it is ape ' 
plied co the preaching of the Goſpel by the Apoſtles, in the ſeveral 
partsof the World, p Which is a moveable Habitation,and therefore 
titly applied to the Sun; which is here deſcribed, tobe in conſtanr 
and perpezrual- Motion, v: 5,6. q Which being che moſt Illuſtrious” 
and uſeful of all the H:avenly Bodies, 1s here particuiarly mentions 
5 Which 3sas a bridegroom r coming out of his cham- »-- - 
ber s ; and * rejoyceti asa ſtrong man #to run a race. +p.4, 
'# Gloriouſly adorned with Light as with a beautiful Garment,and _ 
ſmiling upon the Tower World with a ple:ſant Countenance. 5 In. 
which he is Poetically ſuppoſed to have reſted all Night,& thence ' 
to break forth as it were on a ſudden, as both Sacred and profane 
Poets repreſent the Matter. # Who being Conſcious, and Confident - 
ofhis own ſtrength,and promiſing to himſelt Victory and the Glory 


which afcends it, ſets upon bis Work with gre at Pleaſure. 


6 His going forth is from the end of the heaven, ard 
his circuit unto the endsof itu: and there is noching 
hid from the heat thereof x. Yet 

u His Courſe is conſtant from Eaſt ro Weſt, and thence to the 
Eaſt again- x There is no part ofche Exrth which doth not one time 
or other feel che Comfort and Benefic of its Eight and Heat. 


- 
” 


f | 5.The | Jaw of the LORD 7 4s perfet &, || convert- 


ing the ſoul : the teſtimony of the LORD f is * ſure LO 
yi. e. The Dodtrine delivered by God to his Church, whethier ring, 

by 4fſes or by other Prophers, and holy men of God after him : Ruch 4-5; 

for the Title of Law is given not only to the Ten Commandments, Hebi *Pt, 


' for the Moral Law, as itis, Rom. 2: 23, 25,77, 31:but allo to the 1197140, 


whole Word of God, as Pſal: 1: 2. and 119.,*70, &ce Jr. 8: 8. 
Mal. 2, 6, tothe Plalms, as Jobs 10: 34. and 15; 25. Compare with . 
P/al; $2: 6. and 35«19- and to the Wrirings of the Prophers, 1 Coy, 
14. 211 Compare with 7a. 28, 11. 'yea even to the Goſpel it ſele* * 
as I[4;2. 3, and 42, 4; and 51+ 4; 7+ Rom; 3: 27" Gal. a. 21. Ang” 
403 | in 


_-... Pa 


been inſignificant without the underſtanding of it, in which the w;chour © * 


\ 


| 
f 


k 
"1 


{ 


il 
, 
h 


ee nes Sh te er err EY 
IS pn _ 
, 


*Plakit9 


140. 


THeb: 
rruft. 


| Pſal. XIX. - 


quires of Ma 


Ing, and deſpiſing or neglecting the Directions of Gods word, be- 


in this general Senſe it muſt be here underſtood,becauſe the Effets 
here fojlowing do not flow from one but from all the parts of ir, 
Precepts and Counſels, and Threatnings, and Promiſes and Gods 
gracious Covenant made with man therein revealed. Having diſ- 
' couvſed hitherro of the Glory of God ſhining forth in, and demon- 
ſtrated by, the viſible Heavens, and the Heavenly Bodies, he now 
proceeds to another Demonſtration of Gods Glory, which he Com- 
pares with-and prefers before the former. Which he doth partly 
to prevent that Exceſſive Admiration of the ſplendour and beauty 
ofthe Sun and Srars by the Contemplation whereof tie Heathens 
were brought ro adore them, an Error which the Jraehtes were not 
free from the:Danger of Dcut: 4. 19- partly, to make the Jraelires 
ſenſible of their ſingular Obligationsro God, who beſides thar com- 
mon Light and Influence of the Heavenly Bodies, had given them a 
peculiar and a more neceflary and beneficial Light ; and partly, to 
awaken and provoke the Gentiles ( into whoſe hands theſe Pia/ms 
might come) to the ſtudy and love of Gods Law, by reprefenting 
thole excellent Advantages, which they no lefs than rhe Jews might 
obtain by ir- z Withour faulror defet, fully and compleatly dil- 
covering both the Nature and Will of God and the whole Duty 
and Buſineſs of Man, whom and how he is to Worſhip and Serve, 
what he is to believe and praftiſe, and whatſoever is neceffary to 
his preſenr and eterna} Happineſs. Wherein there ſeems to be a 
ſecret Reftz&ion upon the former and natural diſcovery of God, by 
his wotks of Creation as that which is defeQtive and infufficient for 
the great and glorious ends here following, which alchough ir did 
declare f6- much of Gods Beeing and Nature as left all men with- 
out excuſe,Rom 1. 20.yetdid nor fuily nor clearly manrfeſt theMind 
and Will of Go4,nor dire& & bring Men to eternal Salvation.s To 
wit; fromthe Errors of Mind and Converſation, in which Men 
without this Light do generally wander and periſh, unto God,from 
whom all men are naturally revolred. Or. Comforting, or Reviving 
as this Word is uſed, Ruth 4:15. Pſal; 23. 3. Lam: 1: 11, 16, Heb: 
Roftoring or bringing back the Soul, which was drooping and even go- 
ing outof the Body, through grievous Troubles of the outward 
Man, and Terrors ofthe Mind and Conſcience. f 1. e. His law fo 
called becauſe it is a Witneſs between God and Man, what God re- 
n,and what upon the performa::ce ®fthat Condition, he 
will do:for Man. g Heb. Jauchn orirue, which is moſt exccllent and 
proper, and neceſlary in a Witneſs. It will not muſ-lead or deceive 
any. man. that rruſteth ro it orfolloweth it ; But will certainly and 
infallibly bring him to Hzppineſs. + Unto Salvation as is expreſ- 
ed, 2 7im. 3; 15- Which is the only true Wiſdom, # This is added 
Either x. By way of Commendation, or asa qualification of the per- 
ſon whom Gods Word.wiil make wiſe, he muſt be humble and 
fooliſh, and little in bis own Eyes, and willing ro be taughr : See 
Mat. 11, 25. 1Cor. 13 25, ©. For God refiſtech the proud and ſcorn- 
ful, and will not give tais Wiidomto them ; or rather 2. By way 
of Contempr, which ſeems moſt agreeable both to the uſe of the 
Words, Prov: 1, 4. and 9: 6. and 14. I5. and 22. 3.andto the Scope 
of the place, which is ro fer forth the Excellency and Efficacy of 
Gods "pp in the general. withour any Reſtriftion ro this or that 
ſort.of Men.. So it may note the weak and fooliſh even perſons of 
the loweſt Capacities, and ſuch areaprt to miſtake and are eaſily ſc. 
duced, x5 the Word implies. And yet theſe, if they will hearken 
to the Inſtryctions of Gods word, ſhal become . Wiſe, when thoſe 
who profels i hemſeles wiſe, thal by leaning to their own underſtand- 


come and prove themſelves robe Fools Rom. 1. 22. But this is not ſpo- 
ken excluſively, as if no Men of better Abilities were thus made 
Wiſe, but by way of Amplification. to ſhew the uſefulneſsof Gods 
Word to Men of all forts znd fizes. 


8 The ſtatutes & of the LORD are righs /rejoycing 
the heart m: the commandment of the LORD » is 


* pure o, enlightning che eyes pe 

k Another word ſignifying the ſam- thing with Law and Teftimo 
nies; IBoth in themſelves; as being freefrom Crookedneſs or Er- 
ror ; and in-their Effect, as guiding and directing Men ia the righe 
and ready way to eternal Happineſs. Which alſo reflects upon thar 
knowledge of Divine things, which Men have by the light of Na- 
ture and works of God, or by the Doctrines of the Philoſophers or 
others that wanted or neglected the light of Gods word, wherein 
there is a great deal of darkneſs and uncertainty, and Error and 
Danger. m Partly by thar clear and certain knowledge of Divine 
things which it gives; for knowledge is pleaſant to rhe Soal, Pro, 2: 20, 


Pp $S 4L M S. 


| are not here intended ; and that Alteration alſo was foretold in the 
O1d Teftament, and conſequently, the : ccompliſhment of ir did 
not deſtroy,butconfirm the certainty and conſtancy of Gods word, 
This alſo 15 oppoſed to humane Laws,wherein there are,and ought 
to be manifold Changes, according to the ditterence of Times and 
ji, e. Gods Laws frequently called 
his Judgments, beczuſe they are the Declarations of his righteous 
Willand as it were his legal or judicial Sentence by which he ex. 


. and People and Circumſtances. 


peQs that Men ſhould govern . themſelves, and by which he wilt 


judge them ar the Jaſt day. 
Io More to be deſired are they than gold,* yea, than 


honey-comb ts 


and which freely flows from them;whichis ſweeter than the reſt, 


in keeping of them b there js great reward c. 

#I thy ſervant, though a King and a Prophet, and of ſome Re. 
pure for Wiſdom and Knowledge, yer I am daily taught by them, 
On, enl:ghined, as Dan. 12. 3« or clearly admoniſbed, as this word 
lign:fies, Exod. 18. 20, 2 Kings 6. 104. Eccleſ. 4. 13, Exek. 3:17,&c, 
and 33. 3,9- It is a faithful and excelleat Monitor to fhew me my 
Duty in all Conditions,& to preſerve me from falling into fin and 
danger and miſchief, b To thoſe that make it their great Deſign, 
and care to conform their whole Lives to them, For he ſpeaks not 
of a Legal and perfe& keepingof them which no man attaineth to 
in this Life Eccleſ. 7. 20. Gal. 3, 10, 11, 12. 1John 1, 8. bur of do- 
Ing it in an Evangelical Senſe, with the allowances which God 
through Chriſt makes for Humane infirmities, c In this Life, and 
eſpecially in the next. 


me f from ſecret faults g- 

4 This may be here addes Either, 1, As a further Proof of the 
Excellency and necefliry of Gods Law, becaule mens Errors are fo 
many and hard to be diſcovered and prevented, that they indiſpen« 
ſibly need ſuch a Friend and Counſellor as the Law tis,to give them 
the true knowledge of themſelves and of their ſins. Or 2.As a juſt 
and ſorrowful Cenſure of himſelf, upon the Conſideration of the 
exatt Purity of Gods Law, and the Comparing of his Life with ir, 
Thy Law, O Lord, is Holy and Juſt and Good, BurT ama poor 
fintul Wretch falling infinitely ſhort of it, and condemned by it; 
Or 3 As a ſignification of the intufficiency of Gods Law, ſtrifly ſ@ 
called for the healing and ſaving of mens Souls, and of the neceſ- 
tity of further ſupplies of the Goſpel, and grace of God ; whereby 
the eyes of cheir Minds may te enlightned to fee that light which 
ſhines in Gods Law, and their Hearts may be renewed to yield uni- 
verſa] Obedience to ir, for which therefore he prays in the follows 
ing words, And withal he implies, that he did not expeTt thatre- 


| ward which helaſt mentioned as a juſt Recompence to his Obedi- 
 ence,which he confeſſeth toneed aPardon more than todeſerve a Re - 
ward, but only as an <ff:&of Gods grace and- goodneſs. e Either + 
1. His fins of Ighorance, of which this word is uſed, Lev. 4. 2, 224 


27+ Ecclel, 5. 6- Orrather 2, His ſins in general (which afterwards 


Heb: 9: 7. Jam: 5: 20: The Senſe is, I cannot comprehend the 


my ſins. f Both ty Juſtification or the Pardon of my fins,through the 
Blood of thy Son which is to be ſhed for me; and by SauCtification. 
through thy holy Spirir, co-working in and with thy Word, to 
the further Rer.ovation of my Heart and Life; for theſe are the 
rwo ways of :/eanſmg Sinners, moſt frequently mentioned both in 
the Old and Ncw Teſtament. Though the firſt may ſeem tobe 
principally, ifnot only Intended, becauſe he ſpeaks of his paſt fins, 
which could be cleanſed no other way bur by Remiflion. g 7.e, 
From the guilt of ſuch ſinsas were ſecret Either 1. Frcm others ; 
ſuch as none knows but God and my own Conſcience : Or 2, From 
my ſelf; ſuch as never cbſcrved, or did not diſcern the evil of« 
Pardon my unknown ſins, of which I never tepented particularly ,as 
FE ſhould have done. | 


ſins b, * Jet them not have dominion over me 5: then 


and partly by the diſcoveries of Gods Love and Grace to ſinful Men 
in Offers and Promiſes of Mercy therein contained. » i. e. All his 
Commands. o Without the leaſt mixture of Error or Injuſtice or | 
Deceit : Which cannot be ſaid of bumane Laws. p To wit, of the 
Mind, with an evident and compleat manifeſlaticn of Gods Will 
and Mans Duty:both which the works of Nature, and all the Writ- 
ings of Men diſcover but darkly and imperfectly. 


9 The fear of the LORD 9 #s clean r, enduring for 
ever s : the judgments of the LORD # are + true and 


righteous altogether «. 

5 By which he underſtands:not the Grace of Gods fear, as this 
Phraſe is commonly taken ; nor the whole Worſhip of Gog; as it 
is taken, Fſa. 34. 9. 11» Mat. 15. 9. but the Law and Word of God, 
which is the only thing that is here commended, & which is meanc 
by all-the other paraH:1 Titles of his Teftimony and S:#tutes, andComme 
mandments and Judgments;and conſequently by this of his Fear, which 
is as it were hemmed in within them, And this: may well be ſo 
called by an uſual Mztonymy, becauſc'ic is both the Object and 
the Rule and the Cauſe of this Graceof holy Fear;as God himſelfis 
called Fear for the like reaſom, Gen: 31: 53. and inthe Hebrew, Pſs, 
76. 11. 71. e. Sincere; not adulterated with any mixture of Vani- 
ty.or Falſhood, or Vice"; not requiring norallowing any untlean- 
neſs or wickedneſs; as the Religion of the Gentiles did: 5 Conſtant 
and unchangeable, the ſame- for ſubſizrice in all the'Ages of the 
Church andthe World; Whichis mn1ſt crue , both of the Moral 
Law, and of the Doctfine of Gods Grace and Mercy ro finfa) and 
miſerable Man ;- which two are the principal parts of that Law,of 
which he here ſpeaks, as is evident from th- whole Contexr. For 
a5 the difference berween rhe Old and the New Teftament, that 
lyes only in Circumſtancial and Ceremonialzor Ritual things, which 


great tranſgrefiion m. 

h Or, reftrain, or withdraw, 
ſignifies Mans Natural and great proneneſs even to the worſt of 
ſins, and the Neceſlity of Gods grace, ns a Bridle t= keep men from 
ruſhing upon them. Having begged Pardon for his former Errors 
he now begs grace to keep him fromRelapſes for the time to come. 
bh From known and evident Sins, ſuch 3s are committed againſt 
Knowledge and Deliberation; with Deſign and Reſolution, and Ea+« 
_ with Reſiſtance againſt the Checks of Conſcience, and the 

otions of Gods Spirit, and with contempt borh of Gods Com« 
mands and Judgments, and ſo with Pride and Inſolency, which this 
word fig nitics.See Exod, 21:14« And ſucha Sin was that of Davias 
in the Matter of Uriah, to which be ſeems to have an Eye ; and 
prayeth to be kept from ſuch Miſcarriages. z1Ff I be at any tiwe 
rempted to any tuch Sins, Lord ler them nor preyail over me, and 
if I dofall into them, let me ſpeedily riſe again, and not willing-' 
ly giveup my felf ro the Cuſtomary praftice of them. k That will 
be an Evidence of my Sincerity, and I ſhall havethis Comfort,that 
although I am nor abſolutely Perfe&t, but incompaſſed with many 
Infirmicies,yer I am an' upright Perſon, and ſuch as thou wiltis 
accept. I Thou wilcit hold me for Innocent, Or,71 ſha# be cleanſed or 
kept pure, as this Word primarily ſignifies, m i: e. From the guulc 
of ſuch preſumpruous fins, which are indeed very great Tranf= 
greſſions, and ſach' as if accompanied with Obitinacy ard Im- 
penitencys thou wiltſt nor pardon. Burt «s for other ſins of Igno- 
ranceor Infirmiry, thou wiltſt graciouſly remit them for thy Cove 
nants ſake, made with me in and through thy Chriſr, Orh. From 
much Tranſgreſſion,or from innumerable $in;,which uſually follow the 
Commiſſion of one preſumpruous Sinzas David found by his own 


ſad Experience: 
74 Let 


Plal. x1Þ 


much fine gold x;* ſweeter alſo than honey y,and | the * 


r Than Gold of the beſt quality, and in the greateſt quantity, N 
} Which was moſt ſweet in thoſe Eſtern Countries = Than that » pe 
Honey which theBees have moſt diligently wrought in theirCombg ,,. Ig; 


11 Moreover, by them isthy ſervant a warned: and dripping of 
Hony-comby 


12* Who can underſtand 4 his Errors e? cleanſethou *pl.,o;1 


? 
' 
bl 


qRoc 


Sthb-fet 
iakyg 
je, 


he divides into ſecret and preſ.mp:uous ſms) Or all deviations from 
Gods Law, which are thus called, 1 Sam: 26: 1. Pſae 119; 67, 118. 


numbers or the ſeveral kinds, or all the Hainous Aggravations of 


13 Keep back b tby ſervant alſo from preſumptuous , has 


12: 14 \ 


ſhal I be write k,and I ſhall be innocent Z from || the Rm: & 
Which word is emphatical, and LOrgnuc 


£018 


A , N. | 


bl - 
n . 


Stob-let 


pet, 


flenthe 


, 


Fitz, 


tera 
iſe, 
vue 


"eh + 
"the 

frm of 
bi tins [1 


Heb 


Fileſgl 
Win if 

ny 
ind, 


WETY 


wmkigh 


a5 
660342 


. 4 _ i » M. 8S. Plal. Pſal- 
"XX. -P.S.4l4-L. M.-S | Lal. 


Ms ] _ itation cent called 4thnach is put under the word ſave,which is ſuppoſed to 
\.. T4 Let the words of my mouth, and hone + {top the Senſe there, it-is ſuthciently evident,that A4crrach coth not 


of my heart » be acceptable in thy fight 0, 


kl. ev ſtrength p and my redeemer 9. . : 
3 , _ Cad has God would __ him from ſinful AQions,f this may ſeem to be the b:trer Verſion, 


always make ſuch a DiſtinQtion in theſe Poerical Books, as appears 
from Pſal. 11, 5. and 17. 16. and 19, 44 and 22+ 31: and thereat.er 


«thar God would govern, and ſanCific his Words and | | 
nghrs hor he had NG ways offended,as he here implies, Be 7 P'S A E. XXI. ; : 
and oft in this Book confeſſeth and bewaileth.s. And this he the ra- To the chief muſician, a palm of David, 


: « Caution was very neceſſary to preſerve him | The ſubjeC& of this Pſalm is the ſame with the former,both being 
 endqponr imncnnntg oas-x have =" rx firſt rife in od Thoughts| made for the peoples uſe, concerning the King. Only the Pray- 
ant thence proceed to Words and Expreſſions, before they break{ ers there u{cd,are here turned into Pra-fes, for the Bleſſings re- 
forth into Aﬀtions. 0 4. e. Be really good and holy, and to well-{ ceived inanſwer to their Prayers. And as David was an illuſtrious 
pleaſing to thee. FO thou whohaſt hitherto ſtrengehned __ the 
againſt my temporal and piritual Enemies, and whoſe gracious and } look beyond himſe!f unto Chriſt.in whom they are more proper= 
powerful Aſſiſtance, is abſolutely neceſſar to keep me from my own Iy and more fully accompliſhed, and of whom diverſcof the An- 
corrupt Inclinations, and from all Temptations,to ſinful Thou ghrs} cient Hebrew Doors underſtand it, 
and Words and Aftionss 9q This Expreſſion ſeems to be added em- | Day d, out of a ſenſe of Gods anſwering kus Prayers, for all he arked, pro- 
phatically,and with (| pecial reſpeC& to Chriſt, who was certainly much; feſeth his joy and gladneſy in him, 1 
in Davids Eyes, to whom alone this word Goel can here properly 
belong, as may appear by my Notes, on Jeb 19- 25. to which I re- 


fer the Reader, and by whoſe Blood and Spirit alone, David could 
hs did expe the Bleſſings and Graces, for which he here pray- 


m— PSAL XY 


The A RGOMENT. 


His Pſalm contains a Prayer to be uſed by the People, both 

now on the behalf of King David, when he was undertaking 

ſme great Expedition, going forth. as is ſuppoſed, againſt the 

Ammonites, and Syrians, 2 Sam. IO. Or ſome other potent Enemies, 
and hereafter in like Caſes. | : 

The Church prayeth God 70 hear and defend the King, 1. and for a Bleſſing We 
all his Deſizns, 2 - --— 6+ and ſheweth wherein the confidence of jome is; 
biit theirs is in God, 7 -———<x— 9; 

© To the chief mulician, A Pſalm of David- 
He LORD hear thee in the day of troubie 2, the 
name of the God of Jacob b t defend thee. 

# In this time of War and Dangere>+ i» © God himſelf;For Xzmes 
are ofr put for Perſons, as Numb, 26. 53, As 1. \«, and 4« 12. and 
the Narie of Ged, for Gods as Deuts 28, 58, Neh, 9g. 5. Pſal. 44. 98. 
20; Prov, 18- 10: and oft elſewhere» He calls him the God of Faces, 
or Iſrael, partly to diſtinguiſh him from falfe Gods; and partly as an 
Argument to enforee the Prayer, becauſe God had made a League, 


' ora Covenant with Jacob and his Poſterity, whoare called by the 


Name of Jacob, Pſal. 147 19, 20. 1/2. 44! 2. and whoſe Cauſe David 
was now pleading againft their Enemies. 


2 Send j thee help from the ſanfuary c:and i ſtreng- 
then thee out of Zion. 


bp.  c Either 1. From Heaven,as it is expreſſed v. 6, Or rather 2.From 


the Tabernacle in S702, as it isexplained in the next Words, where 
the Ark then was; towards which the Jſrazlites dire&ed their Pray- 
ers, and from which God heard and anſwered them. 

\.2 Remember d all thy offerings e, and faccept f tliy 
burnt-facrifices. Selah. 
' id To wit, with acceptance, as it follows. e Offended either by 
thee, at thy Entrance upon this Expedition * Or by us thy People 
oh thy behalf, or by thine appointment. f Heb, rn to Aſhes, fire 
ſentfrom Heaven, in token of his acceptance, as was uſual;of which 
ſee-Bev. 9, 24+ 1 Kings 18: 38. : 

--4. Grant thee according to thine own heart g, and 
gui all thy counſels h. 

7 i, e, That good ſucceſs which thy Heart deſires. þ Thy preſent 
delign for God, and for bis and thy People. 

5 We will rejoice 7 in thy | falvation, and'* in the 

name of our God &,we will ſet up our banners! : the 


LORD fulfil all thy petitions» 


iHereby they ſhew their confidence in God, and their aſſurance 
ofthe Victory. - k1. e; To the Honour of God, as the Conquerour. 
[n the way of Triumph; which among other ways was celebrated 
by<heſctting up of Banners or Trophies. 
6 Now know I »,,chat theLORD faveth » his anoin- 
tedothe will hear him from his holy hill, F with the ſa- 
ving ſtrength of his right hand p. | 

m We are already. ſure of Victory by the Conſideration of Gods 
power and faithfulneſs and Love to Dav:id4and to his People, They 
peak as one Perſon, becauſe they were unired,and Unanimous in 
this Prayer. - 11, e. Will certainly fave. o Our Lord and King. 
} This ſhews how God will -hear him, even by ſaving him with a 
ſtrong hands ) 7 : 

7 * Some truſt q in chariots,andfome in horſes: but 


hat; WE-Will remernber »the name of che Lord our God. 
by, 


4 Or Remember, which may better be ſupplied out of the next 
Chitſe. r Or make mention of, towir, ſo as ro boaſt of ir, or truſt in 
it;>for ſ1ch things menofr remember or mention. - 
"8: They are brought downs and faln, but we are ri- 
ſen, and ſtand up right ». - [5 

#5 From their Horſes and Chariots, to which chey truſted. Heb. 
They bewed dawp, as being unable to ſtand longer beerfe of rhen 
mortal Wounds: Compare Judg. 5. 27. # Stand firmly upon our 
Legs, and keep the fizld, as Conquerors uſe to do. 

'9 Save Lord,let the king « hear us when we call. 

" viEither 1. David. So the Senſe is, O Lord preſerve or aſſiſt 
the King, that when w2 arc diſtreſſed and Cry rohim for Help, he 
May be able and ready to Help us,or 2. God the Supream Monarc!; 
the King of Kings, and in a peculiar manner the King of 1/raelhear 


and anſwer us, when we pray for our King and People And for | 


the change of perſons'in this Verſe, nothing is more commons Or 
3-: Chriſt called the King both in the Old and New Teſtament. But 
this Verſe is by diverſe learned men rendred thus, Lord ſive the King 
Hel i. e, The Lord ) will hear us ( Or, Let birs hear us ; For the Fu- 
ture Tenſe is of: put Imperatively : ) when we :r;,or call upon him 

nd this verſion is very agreeable to the Hebrew Text, For where 
% the only ground gf the other Tranſlation is,that the Hebrew Ac 


Type of Chriſt, ſo in many of theſe expreſſions he may ſeem to 


6, His Confidence for further 
Scceſs, Tuatha; God will find ou: and conſume his Enemies 8 — (= 12. ji 

He prayeth that God would exalt his Strength, that he might praiſe his it 
| Power, 3. We 


| Wl: 
He king ſhal jey in thy ſtrength 6, O LORD,and in il 
thy ſalvation how greatly (bal he rejoyce. | th 

2 Thou haſt given him his hearts deſire,and haſt not 
withholden the requeſt of his lips. Selahe 


b Conferred upon kim, and put forth by thee, ori his bekalf ab 
g2inſt his Enemies, : 


3 For thou preventeſt bim c with the bleſſings of 


_— d; thou ſetteſt a crown of pure e gold on his 
head, : 


c Or,didſt prevent him, Crowning him with manifold blefſings,both 
more and ſooner, than he either deſired or expe&ed, ſurpriziag him 
with the Gift of the Kingdom, and with many happy Succefles, 
d1.e. With excellent Bleſſings, Or with abundance ( as this Word * 
both in Hebrew and Greek 1s ſometimes uſed, as Pſal. 84. 6. Rome 
15, 29- 2 Cor, 9+ 5 , 6.) of Gd. e Either 1: intoken of Victory. Or 
rather 2. As an Enſign of Royal Majeſty conferred upon him. 


4 He asked life of thee f, and thou gaveſt ic him,even - © _ - 
length of days for ever and everre. ® P[:G1; 6s 
f He asked only the preſervation of that ihort and mortal Life, 

which was oft expoſed to utmoſt Perils. g Either 1.in his Poſteri. 

ty, in, whom Parents are commonly ſaid to live, Thou gaveſt the 
Kingdom not only to himſelf for a feiſon, as thou didft to Saul, bur 

to him, and to his ſeed for ever. © Orrath=r 24 in his Perſon;for this 

giving Anſwers to Davids ackings And the thing which David aske 

ed ot God, was not the Kingdom (wherein God had prevented his 

Prayers, and gratited what David dutſt not have preſumed to ask ) 

but only Life, or the ſaving and prolonging of his Life, which his 
Enemiesdeſigned to take away. Thou gaveſt him a long Life and 

Reign here, and afrer that thou didſt tranſlate him to thy Heaven-* 

ly Kingdom. to live with thee for ever. But this was more emis» 

nently fulfilled in Chriſt,who asked of his Father Life or to be ſaved 

from Death, Heb. 5. 7. though with ſubmiſſion to his Will; But his 

Father, though he taw it fit and neceſlary to take away his Tempo» 

ral Life, yer he inſtantly gxve him anather, and that far more noble 

inſtead of it, even the perfect poſſeſſion of an everlaſting and 

moſt glorious Life, both in his Soul and Body at his right hand. 


s His glory h ;s great in thy falvatioa 5, Honour and 
Majeſty haſt thou laid upon him &. | 

hþ His Fame or Renown in the World, 7 By reaſon of thoſe great 
and glorious Deliverances, which thou haſt wrought both for him 
and by him. & Or fitted ro him,or upon him, as the Hebrew Verb fig- 
nifies, or made it adequate to hm. Thou haſt given him a large and 
nob'e Sou}, very capable of and fit for that high and Honourzb'e e. 
ſrate to which thou haſt advanced him,and thou haſt given him Ho. 
nour and Power, ſuitable to ſo excellent a Perſon, and to ſuch rich 
Endowments. 


6 For thou haſt + made him moſt bleſted I for & 


ver 92: thou hatt Þ made him exceeding glad with thy I Heb ie 

COUNtEnance Ms. . Bleſſmgs. 
I Heb. thou haſt ſer;( or made, as this Verb is uſed, Plal, go. 5,and f Heb: 

89, 42. and gt- 9. Lam. 3.45. ) him Bleſſings, 1. e. Either r. The Au« gladded , 

rhor or Inſtrument of manifo'd Bleſſings to the World, and eſpe. himwith 

cially to thy,People: which David was in a good meaſure,but Chrift joys, 

much mor«truly and eminently. Although this may nor feetn very 

ſuirableto the Context, which only ſpeaks of the Bleſſing conferred 

by God upon this King,and not at all of the Bleſſings flowing from 

him to others, . Or 2. The great axample of all Blef\ings, whom the 

Iſraelites inall Ages ſhal prepound to themſelves, in all their Forms 

and Pronunciationsof Bleſsings, They ſhal ſay, God make thee as bleſ« 

[ed as this King, Either David or the Meſsias. Compare Gen: 12: 2. 

and 48: 20.0r rather mo Bleſſed, as we tranſlate ir, the abftract Form 

and the plural Number being here ufedempiatically, as they come 

monly are, as Ezek: 24: 36. Pſa!: 5.10. and 19: 10and 35.6. tonote 

a man in whom all ſorts of Bleſsings are united and met together, 

filled with Bleſsing and as it were a man of Bleſſings, made up alto. - 

gether of Bleſſings, as Chriſt upon a like Reaſon was called # May of 

Sorrows, Iſa: 53. 3- And poſſibly the Word Man may be underſtood 

here, as it 15 in many other places, as I have ſhewed befor2,and the 

place rendred thus,Thou ha# mace him a Man of Bl:gings,m Of which 

fre onv..4 zTo wi:,ſmiling upon him,as it mn{7 neceſſarily be un « 

deiſtood from the foregoing Words, 1. e By thy Grace and Favour 

manifeſted, and impart. d to his Soul, and by the effects of it, in 

{aving him from all his Enemies and Cal:mities. 


7 For the king truſtech in the LORD, and through 
the mercy ofthe moſt High he (bal not be moved 0. 
o Or removed from his Kingdom, as Sant was. | 
$ Thine hand ſhall find out all thine enemies p, thy 
right hand fhal find out thoſe that bate thee. | 
# When they feek co hide themſelyes or flee away from thee, 
| 40 4 ſhou! 


X 


—_— - 


* (9 
- 


$6 4-249” my ok. 


Pfal. XXL. 


wn ( as this Verb ſometims ſiguifies, as Numb:11: 
for all thine Enemies, To wit, to conquer them; thou ſhalt need 


no forreign Succours tohelp thee. 


Or.Thou ſhalt put them,( as the Hebrew word properly ſignifies) 
as F were wdgeloe kin is only an Elliplis of the Prepolition Beth, 


when- it is caſt in there, is quickly conſumed. » (i. e. ) Deſtroy 


* Job 1b nd their ſeed from among the children ofmen- 


ked race. : - 
11 For they intended evil againſt thee # : they ima- 


performs u. 

e (7. e. Agat 
It was againſt David, whor 
Lords people, whoſe injuric 
Such Supplements are 
1oI: 5. and 139: 6. Iſa, 1. 13: 
ſufficient. Or, but they did not prevail, as this Vecb ſign 
13: 4. and 129, 2. This Cla . 
and neceſſary Leſſon,that Men are juſtly puniſhed by God for their 
wicked Intentions, although they be hindred from the Execution 


ifhes, Pſalm 


taugh 7 
Is Therefore | ſhalt thou make them turn their | back | ,, 


; I2 
[Or, rhex hes thou ſhalt * make ready. thine arrows upon thy 


ſhoot at, as the like phraſe is uſed, Deur: 7: 10, Job 7: 20: and 16. 
132. y Or, againſt them, t 


wiltſt have the whole glory of the work. 


whom (peaketh the Prophet this ( Plalm ? ) of himſelf, or of ſome 
other Man ? It is confeſſed that David was a Type of Chriſt. and 


terally underſtood of David, yet had a further and Myſtical refee 


| pngis in other Prophets, eſpecially in Jiah, who lived not very 


perly and literally to be underſtood of the Meſſins ; rhough witha] 
there may be ſome reſpe& and alluſion ro the ſtate of the Pen-man 


this Pſalm, which is underſtood of the Mefſſtzs, by the Hebrew 


alone it truly and 


Hind of the 


Mornings Of David. 


s Or the hind of the Morning, To note that the perſon here deſigned | 
was like an Hmd, comely and meek and every way Lovely but 


and when the Hunters uſe to go abroad-to their Work. Or this 


46 


- - SSR 
> Pſal-3ic and in whom I truſt ; who artmy Friend and Father, though now 


the Terrors of thy wrath; fo that Fam' ready to ſink under my 


From Regarding, or Pityings or Anſwering my ſtrong Prayers, 
lamentabit Ourt-cries forced from meg by my intollerable Diſtreſſes 
and Miſeries. 


"P 7 4 L M $; 
dif d i-» and deſtroy them: Or, ſha! be ſuffcie | 2 Omy God, Tcry in the day-time, but thou heareſt *Het, Þ 
ſhould diſcover and overtake and defivoy 22. Juages 21.14-) | me not;andin the night-ſeaſon, and tam not ſilent f, therein 


: 7 Or thus, 1 have no ſilence, (1; e: ) No quierneſs or Reſt, as this worg 
9 Thou ſhalc make bim asa fiery oven 9qin the time of | ſignifies, Judge: ae Os I _ Sea and Waves 

El : low them up r in | thereofare ſaid to be ſilent ftill( i: e, ) and quiet, Pſa: 107; 29. Mark 
#Hebiface thine T anger : the LORD ſhall ſwallow th : 4: 39. Andſo his Clauſe anſwers to and expounds the Former; 


#63416 his wrath, and the fire ſhall devour them. Thou heareſt ms not, which is moſt uſual in this Books 


which is moſt frequent ) # fioy Oven, ( 3. c. ) Like Wood, which [Lf erg 


—_ P __- phraſe is oft uſed, as 2 Sam. 20. 19, 29. Pſals 56.142: Prayers and keeping thy Covenant ; a true Lover of Holinels, and 

0002 : of all holy Men. This he adds Either rx. To aggravate his Miſery, 

x0 * Their fruit s ſhall thou deſtroy from the ear th, that ſuch a God ſhould negle&@ and forſake him. Or rather 2. To 

if puny : | ſtrengthen his Faith, and to enforce his Prayers, and prevail with 

g { Either 1, The fruit of their Labours- Or rather 2. Their ſeed ' God for the Honour of his holy Name, to hear and help him. g Ei. 

or Children, as itis explained in the next Branch, oft called a Mans ' ther, z. That dwelleſt in thy- Tabernacle and Ark, which is called 

Fruit, as Deut, 28. 4: Pſa 127: 3. and 132+ IT, Loment: 2: 20. God | Iſracls glory, 1 Sam. 4; 21. and the place where God was praiſed, 1ſa 64. 

will take away both Rootand Branch, the Parents and all that wic« : 11. Or 2. That receiveſt and rightly poſſeſſeth the praiſes of 7/rael ; 

whom thy people are perpetually prailing for one Mercy or another; 

_ NR I truſt, I alſo ſhal have —— _—O w_ Bur 

: ex . : are not able 7g | >ccauſe this Hebrew Verb when it is uſed Tranſitively, and is ta« 

gined a miſchievous device, which they able _— D—_— 1s generally, as far as _— —__ Conſtrued 

with a Prepoſition, which here it is not, this Verte may ſeem to 

aft God, not dircQly but by quency becants be better rendred thus, as it is by diverſe learned Men, But theu g« 

4, whom God had anointed, % (a1 pom ry bideft, or prelerveſt, or continueſt to be ( as this Verb is uſed, Plal.g: 7, 

s God takes as done to = oa %y Pl, "tn, | 22d 55; 19: andio2- 12, ) Holy, ( notwithſtanding thy preſent ne- 

uſual after this Verb, as Exos: 8: we * | gletofmy Prayers and Miſeries ) Orhe praiſes, Or, O thou who art 

Or, for which they were unavie or Me = praiſes, ( Or, and thepraiſes, i. e. the great _ and Obje& of 
- r I: C. ll 

uſe ſeems to be added to teach us this great on egy pong _ ENTRE Oary Puna, 


of them, contrary to what ſome Jewifh Doors, and others have | djqſt deliver them 56. 


ſhalt ſes X, 

them as s ſtrings, againſt the face of them y? | ttuſted in thee, and were not confounded 5. 

+Hib T3 Bethouexalted, LORD,in thine own ſtrength z: | 7 5, e. Not diſappointed of that for which they prayed and hop. *Pſal.z, 
' fo willwe ſing and praiſe thy Power. _ _ 14. ws 

* Pl.7.13), * #6. Flee away at the firſt ſight of thee, whereby alſo they will 6 ButT am a worm k& and no man 5 a reproach of 31: i 

s be a fit mark for thine Arrows. Or, Thou ſhalt ſet them,as a Butt to men, and deſpiſed of the people lL Ifa:49:23; 


he word Face being ofc redundant. & By |, 
: k y appearance for their defence and deliverance, bur I 

thy own power, or by the manifeſtation thereof, whereby thou | j;xe Storm, 3. e. NegleQed and deſpiſed, bork' by th oo w—_ 

not afford me Help, and by the menot my Age and Nation. as ir 


PS AL. XXIL _—_— as _ ng _ 2 25+ 6 1/4. 415 14, I Not only of 
| | the great Men, bur alſo ofthe common People; hich doth nos 
The ARGUMENT. ſo truly agree to David ( who, though he was hated and perfocuted 


Hat queſtion mentioned, 4s 8: 34. is very proper here, of | by Seul and his Courtiers, was Honoured and Beloved by the Bod 
quent T 34 y.P f of the people ) as to Chriſt, Compare 7s: 53: 2, 3. 48h 


| that many Pſalms or paſſages of the Pſalms, though property and li- (hoot out the lips,they ſhake the head o ſaying ?, 


rence to Chriſt, in whom they were accompliſhed. But there are || ch js their ; Hon. 

ſome other Pſalms or paſſages n the Pſalms, as alſo ſome Chapters or forth their nn = Mockery. See Job 16: 10. Iſa; 57: 4. o As 

, Om nother poſture of Scoffers. See Job 16: 4. Plat; ax: p : ELLE 

ong after David, which either by thoſe ſacred P = — or at leaſt I This and the next Verſe are a * la ro chin att, 14 Ln 3 This 

by the Holy Ghoſt inſpiring them,which is oneand the fame thing f$uppjement is very uſual, and here it is neceſſary, becauſe the next 
were dire&ly, primarily and immediately intended for,and are pro- Þ worqs are the Expreſſions of his inſulting Enemies 


himſelf, who being a Type ofChriſt,itis norſtrange if there be in 1; WE . . . . +. gf 
CS SETS £54 chid ike co be the flare of mag _— r;let him deliver bim, || ſeing he delighted in 4 ki 
; roled him 


Doors themſelves, and by Chriſt himſelf, and by his Apoſtles, a : . 
we olfoe. And there wg many paſſages in it, which —_ of only at the thing, bur at the Expreſſion. Their Senſe is, He prerend- 72D, 
literally accompliſhed in him, and cannot in a tolerable Senſe be ed that he did wholly lean and reſt himſelf, and caſt his cares v« | Qr,jf 
underſtood of any other,as we ſhall ſee in the particular Verſes Ang | 292 God, and quietly and confidently commir all his Affairs to his yyjighin 
therefore, I doubt not, thatDevid, though be had an Eye to his Providence, afſuring himſelf of an happy Hue from him. r Or, wn 
own Condition, in diverſe paſſages here uſed, yet was carried forth | "out any Supplement, /er h:m deliver him, as it follows, though 
by theSpirit of Prophecy beyond himſelf and unto Chriſt, to whom the Hebrew words be differing, And ſo the ſame thing is tWiCEe IC 

3 Occk ful Agrees. i _ your = _ _—_ or mane of 4s Ons (hole Confie 

, : ; ::eleth Shaha | ucceſs againſt him. ey thought his Caſe deſperate, 

Tothe chief muſician upon || Ayele | r 4a Pſalm | and paſt ail hope and ren 4 4 sAs he ufeth to alledge and boaſt 

e 


but how vainly the event now 


withal Perſecuted by wicked men, and that oftentimes is in the | thou || didſt make me hope « whes Iwas upon my mo-f Orket 
Morning, when ſhe comes out of her lurking and Lodging place | thers breaſts » i _ 
p aſety 


= 66% poker bee = + 6 wy or Tune, or Song, videwes, And aitkough ns bea Marey witch od grants to jr 
The Prophet as a Type of Chri laineth that God had forſaken him,)  —— — rd. 2 = Y GO ore, ATTY 30t nes. hor 
he "YY wg "y - 4g 16a that he heard his Fa - he phone "rg ry for this great,though common Mercyznothing being more 
red thew,z= -5. But owns himſelf a Worm:6. And the Reproach of Men, » Go 1 nable and uſual than for David: and other holy may 40 P raiſe 
_ He ſheweth the Language of the Enemy againſt him,yet his truſt s in Sy Ga oy ſuch Blefſings ; and partly as an Argument to encourage 
es. teeth olliind &þ arots fow/225--hs.. -He frwcth the Te imſelf lis _— and we prevail with God,to grant him the _—_ 
pineſs of the Meck, 26 And of all the Gentiles, 27 — 311 This doing « ary ANN ROI tar 7 Hee 27> Ort: 
* q: * * 5 : 17. $ «I; 
Mat. 277 Y * God b, my * God c, why haſt thou forſaken 10, But this is applicable te Chriſt in a ſingular manner, not as 2 
. | me 4? hy art thou ſo far | from helping me, and | late learned Writer takes it,that God ſeparated him from theWombs 
Mark x5. from the words of my T0aring e- | but that God did bring him out ( as the word properly ſignifies) of 
b Whom, notwithſtanding rhy forſaking me. I heartily Love, | *** mb, ro wit, immediatly and by himſelf, and without the help 
, j Ofany Man, by the miraculous Operation of the Holy Ghoſt which 
+ H b. thou frowneſt upon me. c The Repetition Notes, the depth of his | Pade him there, orelſe he could never have been brought thence. 
©% diſtreſs which made him Cry ſo earneſtly,and the ſtrugglings of his' #97, TruſF: i: e. Thou didſt give me ſufficient ground for Hope and 
Jom my Faith, with his Fears and Sorrows. «i: e. Left me in 2nde-\ Truſt, if I had then teen capable of acting that Grace, becauſe of 
, | e iy the hands P ng 

| Salvarion, of malicious Men, withdrawn the Lighrofthy Countenance,. and thy wonderful and watchful Care over me,in that weak and helpleſs 
the Supports-2nd Comforts of thySpirit from me,andfilled me with- State, Which waseminently true of Chriſt, whom God ſo miracule 
« ouſly preſerved & provided for in his Infancy;theHiſtory where- 

Burden, his was yx part verified in Dzvid, but much more fully 6f we read Mat: 2-Itis not ſtrange that Hope is figuratively afcr ibe 
in Chrift,. who applies theſe words td himſelf, Mar: 27: 46: ei; e., ©9 Infants,. ſeing even'the Brute-Creatures are ſaid to Hope, Rom 
and | 3:20, and'to wait and Cry ts God, Pſal; 145: 15: and 137: 9. #7 & 

"hy was a ſucking Child, Which may be properly under- 

0 


f( i. e.)I continue praying Day and Night without Intermiſſion, Slencen 


2 But thou art holy g, O thou that inhabiteſt the 


g i.e. Juſt and rrue in all thy ways, and therefore hearing 


4 Our Fathers truſted in' thee: they truſted, andthoy 


þ This he adds forthe Reaſons mentioned in the firſt Note. »: 


5 They cryedunto thee, and were delivered: * they 


& Our Fathers were Honoured by thee and by others, becauſe of Row:$33 


7 * All they that ſee me,laugh me ſcorn »; they Þf , Mat's} | 


m Inſtead of Pitying or Helping, deride me and inſult over me - fi :0þen 
They gape with their Mouths,and put Ons 


8 *fHe truſted on the LORD 9, hat he would de- * Mit: 


q He Rolled himſelf upon the Lord, Where they ſeem to Scoff not Gitmke 


weth. 
9 But thou ers he that took me out of the Womb: 5 


f This is noted as an Effe& of Gods wonderful and gracious p 


- «K 
0A JO = : 


Pſal. x | 


*M 
29. 
Joh: 
39, 


| 
al 


P $ 44h a Pſal. XF 


EL Pfal. XXII. 


* from the womb: thou art | 7 Either the Devil, that raging and roaring Lion 3 who did ma- q 
heat *Pſ.71.6 10 *I was caſt oe _ ny ways aflault and annoy him: Or his Lyon-like Enemies. = ; 
"hs my God from my mothers belly. 14; | - Anſwered and delivered me. a A firong and fierce and un- 

"Y ; I was like one forſaken by his Parent, and caſt wholly upon thy } £,,e.1j Wild beaſt : though the learned are not: agreed about the 


Matte? 
Iebiey 


Jr ket 
mein 


Fl 


4 Heb. 107 


a helper. 


THeb. ope- 
ned their 

mouths a= 
gainff me, 


| Or, ſun- 
dred, 


of. 7. 5. and compare 2 Sam, 14+ 14. 


-- 


' inſatiable Greedineſs, and implacable fury and fierceneſs againſt 


"Markt 5. 


29 
John I9. 
3q, 


p- I. > N 5 - * =: 
THe, me} 90 CHE my" Tow! from the Sword# 3 7 my dar t 7, e. All Nations from one end of the World to the other. So 
Fit ling from the 7 HERA of a dog. : ; this 1s an evident Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles ro the 
K al. 35 72 7, e. From te rage and violence of mine Enemies, as the knowledge of God and Chriſt by the Goſpel, and conſequently a 


providence. I had no Father upon Earth; and my Mother was 
poor and helpleſs, 

11 Be not far from me z, 
there is + non to help 5. 

2 To wit, asto affe&ion and ſuccour. a At hand, and ready to 
ſwallow me up. And therefore if thou doſt not ſpeedily deliver 
me it will be too late. Which is an Argument that David oft u- 
ſ-rh, as Pſal. 6+ 5. and 88 11. &, q Thy help therefore will be 
the more ſeaſonable, becauſe it is moſt neceſſary, and thou wiltſt 
have the more of Glory by it, becauſe it will appear that it 1s thy 
work alone. 

12 Many bulls c have compaſſed me : ſtrong bulls of 
Baſhan 4 have beſet me round. 

c Wicked and violent, and potent Enemies 3 for ſuch are ſo cal- 
Iced, Ezet. 39. 18. Amis 4. Is d i, e. Fat and Luſty, as tue 
Cattel there bred were, Dent. 3. 13. and 32. 14. and therefore 
fierce and furious» : 

i2 They | gaped upon me with their mouths e, as a 
ravening and a roaring lyon. 

e Partly to affright me, and principally to tear and devour me, 
as the following Meraphor explains it. [ 
derſtood of their crying out with loud and earnelt Voices, 
might be condemned and put to death. 

14 1 am poured out like water f, and all my bones 
are || out of joint g : my heart b is like wax # ; it is mel- 
ted in the midſtof my bowels. | 

f My Heart faileth, my Spirits are ſpent and gone like Water 
which once ſpilt, cannever be recovered ; my very fleſh is melted 
within me, and I am become as weak as Water. See the like phraſe 
Job. 14+ 11, g 1am as 
weak and unable to move or help my ſelf, and withal as full of 
Torment, as if I were upon a Rack, and all my bones were dif- 
jointed. Or, ail my bones are ſeparated, one from another ; as they 
were in ſome ſort in Chriſt, by the ſtretching of his Body upon 
the Croſs, b The ſear of Life, and Fountain which ſupplies Spirits, 
and Vigour to the whole Body. # Melted, as it follows, through 
fear and overwhelming grief, compare Pjal. 68, 2. and 97. 5. 

15 My ſtrength is dryed like a potſherd &, and my 
tongue cleaveth to my jaws /, and thou haſt brought 
me into the duſt of death ». | : | 

k T have in a manner no more Radical Moiſture left in me, than ' 
isin a dry Potſheard. 1 Trough that exceſſive thirſt and drought, 
See John 19. 20. » Partly by thy providence, delivering me into 
the power of mine enemies, and partly by thy Terrors in my mind , 
and Soul. 

16 For dogs » have compaſſed me ; 
the wicked o haye incloſed me; they pierced my hands. 
and my feet p. | 


1 So he calls his Enemies for their vileneſs and filthineſs, for their | 


for trouble is near « ; for 


him. o He explains what he means by Dogs, even wicked Men, 
who are oft ſo called, not ſome few of them ingly, but the whole 
Company or Congregation of them 3 whereby may be noted, either 
their great Numbers, or their conſulting and conſpiring tegether, 
aS it were in a lawful Afembly. Which was moſt literally and 
eminently fulfilled in Chriſt. p Theſe words cannot with any pro- 
bability be applied to Davia, nor to the attemnpts of his Bnemies 
upon him ; for their deſign was not to torment his Hands or Feet, 
but to take away his Life. And if it be pretended that it is to be 
underſtood of him in a Metaphorical Senſe, it muſt be conſidered, 
that it is ſo uncouth and unuſual a Metaphor, that thoſe who are 
of this mind cannot produce any one example of this Metaphor, 
either in Scripture or in other Authors, nor are they able to make 
any tolerable ſenſe of ir, but are forced to wreſt and ftrain the 
Words. Burt what need is there of ſuch forced Metaphors, when 
this was moſt properly and literally verified in Chrift, whoſe Hands 
and feet werereally pierced and nailed to the Croſs, according to 
the manner of the Roman Crucifixions, to whom therefore this is 
applied in the New Teſtament. Sec Mar. 27. 35. Mark x5. 24. 
Luke 23. 33. John 19« 18, 23 37- 


17 I may tell all my bones q : * they look and ſtare 


upon me r. . 

\ q Partly through my Leanneſs cauſed by exceſſive grief, which 
15 much more credible of Chriſt than of David ; and partly by my 
being ſtretched out upon the Croſs. r To wit with Delight and 
Complacency in my calamiries, as this phraſe is uſed, Pſal, 35. 21. 
and 37. 34-and 54. 7.and 59s 10, Ohads v. 12. Compare Lykz 23. 35. 


18 They part my garmencs among them, and. caſt 


lots upon my veſture s. 
s This alſo cannor be applyed to David, without an uncouth and 
ſtrained Metaphor, but was literally fulfilled in Chriſt,dar, 7,35. 


John 19, 24- 
19 But be not thou far from me, O LORD; O 
my ſtrength haſte thee to help me. 


next Clauſe exp/ains ity and as the Sword is oft taken in Ecripture, 


+1 ; clear proof, that this Pſalm doth directly and immediately ſpeak 
th b.from Sce Jer. 25. \6, 27» 79- Ezek. 38.21. u Heb: My one, or only Ou? ;| -Chrift; to whom alone, and not to Davis, this and divers 0= 
ny band, to wit, his Soul, as 1c now iaids Which he fo calls, either becaule it ther paſſages of it, do manifeſtly belong. « Ir is not particularly 


was very deat co hun : Or rather becaule ir was left alone and de- 
ſtitutc of it-1ends and Helpers for ſo this word is uſed, Pſal. 
25. GC. ad $5. 179 x Heb. the hand; Which is oft put for Power, 


Otherwiſe it might be un- | 


that he 


the aſſembly of } 


| Poor, as this word is oft rendred ; which ſeems well to ſuit this 


kind of it, See of it, Deut. 33. 17. 0b 39. 9, 10. Pſal. 92. 10. 1/a. 
$4. 7. and my Latin Syopſis on Numb. 23. 22. For it is not worth 
while to trouble the unlearned Reader with ſuch Diſputes. » 

22 * [ will declare b thy name c unto my brethren 4d: Hel 


in the mid(t of thecongregations e will I praiſe thee. *'* 

6 i, e, Publiſh or celebrate itz when thou haſt delivered me, 
thou ſhalt have the glory of it, as now thy honour is eclipſed by 
my Calamities. c z. e. "That power and faithfulneſs and goodneſs, 
and thoſe perfe&tions which thou haſt manifeſted on by behalf. 
4 The ſame whom he calls the Congregation in the next Clauſe, and the 
ſeed of Jacob and Iſrael in the next Verſe. Which alſo doth not 
ſo fitly agree to David, who never to my remembrance gives this 
Title to any, but ſuch as were near a-kin to him, as it doth to 
Chriſt, who extendeth this name to all his Diſciples and Believers. 
Mat. 12, 48, 49. and 25. 49. and 28. 10. and to whom this very 
Text is applied. Heb. 2.11, 12+ e Not only privately, but even 
in the publick Congregation. 


23 Ye that fear the LORD, praiſe him f ; all ye the 


ſeed of Jacob glorify him; and fear him, all ye the 
ſeed of Iſrael g. 


f Partly for my fake, and chiefly for your own benefit received 
by my Deliverance. g The two univerſal Particles ſeem to inti- 
mate that he ſpeaks not only of the Carnal, but alſo of the Spiri- 
tual Seed : whichalſo is more than probable, by comparing this 
; with v. 27, 28. 

24 For he hath not deſpiſed 5, nor abhorred z the 
afliftion of the aflited : neither hath he hid his face 


from him &, but * when he cried unto him he heard. 
þT was deſpiſed by the people, v. 6. but not by God #7 5. ee 
He did not turn away his Face from-it, as men do from things 
which they abhor, but looked upon it with Compaſſion. & To 
wit, for ever : for he did ſo fora rime; But now ſaith he, he hath 

lift up upon me the light of his Countenance. Ont 
25 * My praiſe ſpall be of thee in the great congrega-= $. fat. 
tion /:* I will pay my vows mz before them that fearhim. * pgy, 

7 Either in the general Aſſemblies of the 1aelites, at their ſolemn x 6. 
Feafts : Or in the univerſal Church, made up of Fews and Gentzles, 
as the following Verſes explainit 2 7. e. Thoſe praiſes and Ser- 
vices, which in my diſtreſs, I vowed to return unto thee, when 
thou didſt deliver me. 

26 The meek » ſhall eat and be ſatisfied » : they ſhall 
praiſe the LORD that ſeek him p ; * your q heart tball * Prat. 
live r for ever s. J2s 

x i.e. Faithful or Godly perſons, who are frequently called 
meek ones, as Pſal 25- 9. and 76.9. and 149. 4+ 1/s. 11. 4. and 
G1. I« Zeph. 2, 3. becauſe the Grace of God doth ſoften and ſweeten 
the Hearts of Sinners, and ſubdues their Pride and paſſion, and 
Rebellion againſt God, and their fierceneſs towards men. Or the 


THeb. | 


place, partly, becauſe theſe are oppoſed to the fat ones upon Earth, 
v. 29. partly, becauſe the following Eating and ſatisfaftim may 
ſcem moſt proper and acceptable to fuch as were in want : partly, 
becauſe here is an alluſion to the legal Feaſts, made of the remain- 
ders of the Sacrifices, in which the poor had a ſhare: and partly, 
becauſe this well agrees to the time of Chriſt's coming, when the 
Body ofthe Jewiſh Nation were a poor and afflifted people, and 
the Poor eſpecially aid receive the G-ſpel, Mate 113. 5+ o Which is 
mentioned as a great Blefling, Joel 2. 26. as it is threatned as a 
grievous Curſe that men ſhould Eat and mot be ſatisfied. Levit. 26. 26, 
Mich, 6. 14+ But becauſe it was comparatively a poor and mean 
thing to have ones Belly filled and ſatisfied, with that food which 
peritheth and paſleth away preſently after it is received, this mag- 
nificent promiſe is doubtlets to be underſtood; ſpiritually of thoſe 
ſpiritual Bleflings, that Grace and Peace, and Comfort and full 
Satisfaftion, which all believing and pious Souls have in the Senſe 
of God's Love, and the pardon of their fins, and in the influences 
of God's Spirit into their Souls. p That ſeek his Favour: Or that 
enquire after him, and labour to know and diſcern him. Wherein 
poſſibly the Spirit of God may intimat to us, the neceſlity of ſeek- 
ing, and the difficulty of finding or diſcovering God, when he fhall 
appear in the fleſh, and in the form of a Servant 3 which was like- 
ly to hide him from the Eyes of the Carnal, and Careleſs Jews, and 
not to be diſcerned, but by thoſe that were ſtudious and inquiſt- 
tive concerning the mind of God revealed in the Scriptures, con- 
cerning that matter. q -7+ e. Their : For he ſpeaks of the ſame 
perſons ſtill, though there be a change from the third to the ſecond 
perſon, asis u{tfal in theſe poetical and prophetical Booksof Scrip- 
ture, 7 7. e. Shall be greatly Refreſhed and Comforted; Life be» 
ing oft put for an Happy and Comfortable Life, as r Kings 1. 25+ 
Pſal. 34. 12. in which Reſpe& Zaccbs Heart or Spirit is faid to have . 
revived, Gene. 45, 27. as on the contrary Nabals Heart was ſaid to 
have died within him, 1 Sam. 25+ 37, when- it was oppreſſed with 
great ſadneſs. s Your Comfort thall not be ſhort and Tranſitory, as 
worldly Comforts are, but everlaſting. 
*Pfal.2 


27 * All the ends of the world t ſhall remember « Fakrr 


and turn unto the LORD x3 and all the kindreds y &:g6. g 
of the nations ſhall worlbip before thee. 


exprefſed what they ſhould remember, becauſe there were ſeveral 
things, that ſhouid and would be remembred by them ; which were 
likely to occaſion their turning to the Lord. "They ſhall remember 


and in thar ſenie is atcribed to a Flame, 1/3. 47. 14+ and to Evil. 
Hab. 2.9. ; 
2 i Save mefrom chelions y mouth, for thou haſt heard 
ie z from the horns of the unico;n -, 


thic former and manifold wick<dneſs with grief and ſhame, and 
fear 3 and particularly their iu and folly, in worthiping dead and 
impotent Idols, that never did nor cou:d do them, either good 
or hurt : They ſhall remember that God who did make lively Im- 
« P preſſions 


. XXL. 


reflions vpon their minds, which yet they had ja great meafure 
Flomted our and forgotten, bur now by the preaching of the Goſpel 
they ſhall be revived : They thail remember their great and man?- 
fold obligations ro God, which they had quite forgotten, his patt- 
ence and goodneſs inſparing them ſo long, in the mia:t of all their 
Tmpieties. and in revealing his Goſpel to them, and giving his Son 
for them : They ſhall remember the gracious Words and glorious 
Works of Chriſt, and what he did and ſuffered for them ; which 
poſſibly divers of them had been Eye and Ear-witneſles of in Judea 
( although, with the unbelieving Jews, they diſpiſed and milcon- 
ſirued them, ) and others ha4 heard the fame, and tidings of them. 
x Unto the only true God, and unto Jeſus Chriſt, ro whom this 
Name of Jehovah is oft-times aſcribed in Scripture. Y Heb. all the 
Families. © Which is not to be underſtood ſtriatly, of every partt- 
cular Perſon and family, bur of al ſorts, and of great numbers of 
them 3 asſuch univerſal phraſes are very frequently taken 1n Scrip- 
TuUre- 


28 For the kingdom is the LORDS, and he z- the 


g0vernour among the nations z. 

z This is added as a Reaſon, why the Gentiles ſhould be con- 
verted, becauſe God is not only the God and Lord of the Jews, 
but alſo ofthe Genti/er, and of all Nations, Rom. 3. 29. 39+ And 
therefore, though for a time hethought fir to coafine his Kingdom 
to Iſrael, yer he had reſolved in due time to enlarge his Kingdom, 
 andro ſet up his Throne and Government in the Gentile World, 
which were no leſs created and redeemed by him, than the Jews. 
Compare Zech. 13, 2 and 14+ 9. 


29 All « they that be fat upon the earth b ſhall eat c 
and worſhip 4; all they thatgo down tothe duſt « ſhall 


bow before him, and none can keep alive his own ſoul f. 

a 1. e, Many of them, as the word 2! is oft uſed, as P/al. 72. 
11. Mas. 3. 5- and 17+ 11, Luke 6. 26+» Jolm 3. 26. > Tim. 3. 9. 
b i. e, Kings and princes, and the great Men of the World, who 
are oft deſcribed by this Metaphor, as Pſa. 78. 31. 1/3. 10. 16. 
Compare Job 15. 27+ Pſal. 17. 10. and 73. 7, Whoſe Converſion 
to Chriſt, is alſo foretold in other places, as Pſal. 45+ 12+ and 72. 
1, IT. 1/as 6o. 3, 5, 10. 1 Tim. 2, 1, 2. Rev. 21. 24 Thele are 
oppoſed ro the poor and r-ilerable part of the World, of whom 
he ſpeaks in the next words, as alſo v. 26, where ſee the firit note. 
So the ſenſe of the place is, that both poor and rich ſhould em- 
brace the Goſpel. Bur the Syr:ack Interpreter renders thele words 
otherwiſe, the hungry of the Earth, And another, to the ſame pur- 
poſe, thoſe that are turned to Aſhes ( for which I ſhould rather ſay, 
hoy that ly down in Aſhes, which is an uſual deſcription of poor, 
aflicted, and humbled perions ) on theground, For the firit Hebrew 
word, rend:ed fat, with the change but of one point, ſignifies 
Zſhez. c And be ſatisfied, as it was more fully exprefled, wv. 26. 
ſhall feed upon the bread of Life, Chrift and ali his benefits. 4 This 
1s added to explain the former word, and to ſhew what kind of 
eating he ſpoke of, nor of a Carnal, but of a ſpiritual Feaſt. ec 
They that langu-th and draw nigh to Death, rhrough poverty or 
Miſery, oranguith of Mind and Conſcience: For ſuch are oft ſaid 
to 20 down into, or to ft in the Duſt, as Job 30s 19. Pſal. 44- 25 and 
T13--7. 1ſa. 29. 4-and 47. i» Theſe may be oppoſed ro the far 
ones mentioned in the firſt Clauſe of the Verſe. f This may 
ſeem to bea further deſcription of the ſame perſons, and an ag- 
gravation of their miſerable condition, from this circumſtance, 
that it wasnot in their power to help themſelves 3 their Soul was 
going down to the Duſt, as he ſaid in the laſt foregoing clauce, 
and now he adds that none of them could ftop it, or keep himſe]t 
alive 3 fo that their caſe was wholly deſperar as to themſelves 3 
and this drove them out of themſelves, to 1eek relief from God, 
and to receive Jeſus Chriſt and the Goſpel of Salvation gladly. 
Heb. and he who ( the pronoun Relative being here underſtood, as 
it is in very many places) doth ner, or cannot quicken, or enliven his 
own Soul, 1. e. himſelf, as the Soul is often takenz and quickening 
may be put either for nouriſhing, as Tſa, 7. 21+ or for comforting, 
as here v. 26, or preſerv:ng Life, whether Temporal or Spiritual, 
and Erernal, as Gen. 19. 19. Exek. 13. 19. and 18. 27 Burt theſe 
words are and may be rendred otherwiſe, and that very agreeab!, 
to the Hebrew Text. and the ſcope of the place. Having ſaid 
that all Nations ſhould bow before hin, « e bcifore Chtiſt, and 
unto Chriſt, whom they ſhould own as their Lord and Siviour, he 
now adds theſe words, Either, i. As a Reaſon why they did re- 
ceive him, or believe in him, becauſe ( for {o the particle Yaz is 
frequently rendred, as 1 Kings 1. 21. and 18. 3, 4. Pſal. 60. 12. 
Iſa. 16+ 2. and 64. 5- and oft elſewhere ) he did not keep ale hs 
own ſoul, as he could cafily have done, by his Divine Power in 
ſpighrt ofall that his enemies could do, bur freely gave himſelf to 
Death for them. Becauſe he laid down his life for ſinners, which 
the Father had commanded him, and he had» promiſed to do, 
therefore God loved him, John 19. 17, 18. and glorified him, and 
performed his promiſe madz to him upon that condition, that if 
he did make his Soul an offering for ſm, he ſhould ſee his ſeed, &C. 
I/a. 53 10+ Or, 2. As an amplification or commendetion of the 
Faith of the Genezles, in coming and bowing to Chriſt, although 
{ for ſo alſo the Hebrew Yau is oft uſed, as Pſal. 99. 8. Prov. 26. 24. 
Eccleſ. 9. 16.) he did not keep alive his own Sul, but laid down his 
own Life, and ſuffered himſelf ro be killed by wicked men : 
Which was one principal reaſon, why the Jews would not believe 
on him, as is noted, Mars 27. 40, 42, 43+ and therefore was a 
Juſt commendation to the Gentiles, that notwithſtanding this great 
Numbling-Block, believed on him. Bur this I propoſe with ſub- 
miſſion. Only it may be obſerved;that this laſt clauſe of the Verſe 
in the Hebrew, is in the ſingular number, and therefore more 
likely to belong to h:m, immediately going before it, which is of 
the ſam- number, thn to the other preceeding clauſes, which ace 
all expreſſed in the plural number. And though ] know Enallage 
of numbers, be very uſual, yet they are not to be ſuppoſed with- 
out neceſſity+ 


20 A ſeed g {ball ſerve him; it ſhall be accounted 
tothe LOR D for a generation h. 
g Chriſt ſhall not wani a ſeed or poſterity, Heb. 2. 13. For 


though the Jewiſh Nation ſhould generally reje& and forſake him, 
which may ſeem to be here 1mplycd, Chriit ſhall have many diſci- 


3 #4 AM $. 


pare this promiſe with that, he ſhall ſee his ſeed, Tſa. 53. 10. Or, 
their ſeed, i. e. The ſeed of the Gentzle Worſhippers laſt men. 


tioned. .Chriſtian Religion ſhall not be the buſineſs of cne Age, 
but, as the Gent:l-s ſhall believe in Chriſt, 1o ſhall their polrerity in 
ſucceeding Generations : This being Gods uſual merhod. to take 
Children into covenant with their parents, of which ſc Dur. to, 
15. and 39. 19. Pſal. 69. 36. T/a' 43. 5. and 44. 3. And as when 
the Jews refuted Chriſt, their children weie caſt out of Covenant 
with them ; ſo when the Gentiles embraced the Goſpel-Covenant, 
their Children were admitted with them. + Thar beleving ſeed 
ihall be reputed both by God and men, The Generation, or Chiidy:n, 
or People of the Lord, as the Jews formerly were, But upon the Jews 
contempt of Chriſt and the Goſpel, the Genzzles ſhall come 1n their 
itead, and enjoy their Titles and Priviledges. Compare this place 
with Pſal_ 87. 5. 

31 They 3 ſhall come &, and fhall declare his righ- 
teouſneſs / unto a people that fball be born »:, that he 


hath done #hzs n. 

z? Either, the Converts and Worſhippers, v: 27. 29» Or their 

ſeed laſt mentioned, v. 3o. Orthis may be indefinitly ſpoken as 

ſuch Verbs are oft uſed, they ſhall come, i.e, Some or other ſhall 

come and do the work here mentioned, to wit, the Apoſtles and 

Miniſters of the Goſpel. k To wit, from Judes and Jeruſalem 

(from whence the Goſpel was firſt to go forth) to the Gentle Worid, 

to the ſeveral parts whereof the Apoſtles went upon this Errand. 

! Gods Righteouſneſs : Either, 1. His wonderful grace and mercy 

to mankind, in giving them Chriſt and the Gofpel 3 for Righteoyſ. 
neſs is oft put for Mercy or Kinaneſs, as hath been noted again and 
again. Or, 2. That Righceouſneſs which God hath appointed for 
the Juſtification of ſinners, called the Righteouſneſs of faith. Rom, 
Je 21. 22. Phil, 3. 9. which the Jews were ignorant of and would 
not ſubmit to, Rom. Io. 3. but the Gentiles joyfully embraced; 
or 3. His Truth or Faithfulneſs, ( which is very frequently, and 
firly called R:g/teouſneſs ) in the performance of thoſe exceeding 
great and precious promiſes made, and recorded in the Old Teſta= 
ment, and eſpecially thoſe two, concerning the ſending of the 
Mefſſias, and concerning the calling of the Gentiles. mw Either, 1« 
Spiritually, 7. e Born again; for Regeneration is oft called a 
Birth, as Pſal. 87. 4, 5- John 1« 13. 1 Pet. x. 23. and a Creation, 
P/al. 102, 18. Or rather, 2. Naturally, 7. e Unto ſucceeding 
Generations Whereby David gives us a Key to underſtand this 
Pſa/m, and teacheth us that he ſpeaks not here of himſclf, or of 
the Occurrences of his times, but of things which were to be done 
in after Ages, even. of the ſpreading of the Goſpel among the Gen« 
tiles, in the time of the New Teitament. » 2z. e. They thall de- 
clare that this is the work of God, and not of Man, and carried 
on by his only power in the World, againſt all the Wit and force 
of Men. Or rather, becauſe ( this being added as a proof or De- 


the Lord plnaly underſtood here, and exprefled in the foregoing' 
Verle ) hath eorfe or wrought it, to wit, his Righteouſneſs. :. e. He 
hath executed with his hand, what he ſpake with his Mouth ; he 
hath demonſtrated the Truth of his promiſes by his Aftions, and 
by the Accomplithment of themes 
PSAL. XXII. 
The ARGUMENT. 


HE matter of this P/alm, gives us ſome general Diſcovery of 
the time of its writing ; which was when David was deli- 
vered our of his Diſtreſſes, and quietly ſettled in his Kingdom, 
David deſcr.beth his own Happmeſs, 1» both in Temporal 2 and in Spi= 
ritual thngs 3} —— 5. His confidence in Gods Mercy, and wows to 
awell in his houſe for ever, 6. 


A Pſalm of David: 


wanrtb. 
a He hath ſhewed himſelf to be ſo by his gracious Providences 


and Relation to me, by hisentring into Covenant with me, where- 
by he hath engaged himſelf to rule, and feed, and preſerve and 
heal me, and do all which Shepherds do, or are oblig'd to do to 
their Flocks : which David very well underſtood, and had doubt- 
I:fs carefully performed his Duty to his Sheep and therefore he 
ſtrengthens his Faith by this conſideration, that God was his Shep- 
herd ; and as God was a much better Shepherd than he, or any 
Man could be; ſo he might confidently expe& more than ordina- 
ry Benefits from his condu&. 6 To wit, any thing [which is real- 
ly neceſſary forme, either for this Life or for the next. But fooliſh 
man may think many things to be neceſlary for him, which the all- 
wiſe God knoweth to be not only unneceſſary but hurtful, and 
therefore mercifully denies what men ignorantly deſire to their 
hurt. 


he leadeth me e beſide f the Þ ſtill waters g. 


ting himiclf to mine Infirmities, as Shepherds do to their Sheep, 
Gen. 33: 13. Ie. 40. 11: and 49« 19, f Or, v0, the particle al be- 
ing of pur for el, as Gen, 1. 3o. and 16. 7. g Quiet and gentle 
Waters,cither put intoWatering-Troughs or running in ſmall and 
ſhallow Channels ; which are oppoſed to great Rivers, which both 
affright the Sheep with their noiſe, and expoſe them to the dan- 
ger of being carried away by their ſwift and violent Streams, 
whilſt they are drinking at them. 


paths of righteouſneſs ; for his names ſake &. 


dring. Or, 2 Into the Body, out of which it was even depar- 
ting and fainting away. He reviveth or comforteth me. Compare 
Ruth. 4. 15, 1. Sam. 30. 12. Lament. 1. 11. i In ſtreighs and 


| plain, and ſafe paths, where the Sheep is neither hurt, nor wea- 


ried, nor in danger of wandring. By his Word he dire&s me to 
the right ways of Truth, and Holinets and Righreouſnels, and by 
his Spirit he inclines and inables me to chute them, and ro conti- 


ples or followers, and the Gentiles ſhull come in tae ſtead, com- 


Nnus 


monſtration of that Righteouſneſs of God now mentioned ) He 5. e. . 


Pal. XX 


He LORD is * my ſhepherd «, I ſhall not * 16 4» 
TI 


Jer. 23. 4- 
rowards me, and for me ; and .he hath taken upon him, that Office gens 
il. 
1Pet. 2.25, 
Rev. 7-17. 


2 He maketh me to ly down cin + green paſtures d: + Heb.pos 


ſure of rene 


c To reſt and repoſe my ſelfar Noon, as the manner was in thoſe Yer graſs. 
hot countries, See Cant. 1. 7+ Iſa. 13, 20. Ezek. 34. 15. d Where #Heb.wa- 
there is both-delighr and plenty of Proviſions. e Leſt I ſhould wan- zer of quiet- 
der and periſh. tieb. He leaderh me ſweetly and gently, accomoda- meſs. 


3 * He reſtoreth 5 my foul : he leadeth me in the 4p. 5.8. 
& 19- $. 
h He bringeth it back; Either, rt. From its Errors or wan- & 3'- 3: 


*Pſ: 


118» 


Hel 
bh, 


" tHe 


lengt] 
os, 


*M, 


=, 


| ph1. XXIV. 


P $ A 


nue to walk in them. & Not for any worth in me, but meerly for 
the Demonſtration and Glory of his Juſtice, and Faithfulnels and 
Gocdnelſs. | : ; 

4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the ſha- 


dow of death 1, * I will fear no evil mm: for thou ar: 


with me, thy rod and thy ſtaff », they comfort me 0. 

1 Through a dark and diſmal Valley, full of Terrors and Dan- 
gers, as this Phraſe ſignifies, Job 24+ 17. Pſal. 44. 19. and 107+ 
To, I4. Fer. 2+6. mm I will not give way to my Fears, but conti- 
dently rely upon God. # Two words noting the ſame thing, and 
both deſigning Gods paſtoral care over him, expreſſed by the ſign 
and inſtrument of it, o The conſideration thereof ſupports me, 
under all my fears and Difſtreſles. : 

5 Thou prepareſt a table p, before me, in the pre- 


eb: 1a- ſence of mine enemies p: thou F anointeft mine head 


wh fe» with oy1l q, my cup runneth over 7. : 

p i. e. Thou furniſheft me with plenty and variety of Proviſions 
and comforts. p They ſeeing and envying, and fretting at it, but 
not being able to hinder it. q Or Ointment, asthe Syriack and Ara- 
bick Tnterpreters render it ; with Aromatical Ointments, which 
were then uſed at great Feaſts, Pſal; 92+ 10. Amos 6, 6. Mat. 6. 17: 
Luke 7. 38. The 1enie is, thy comforts delight my Soul, compare 
45.7. r Thou haſt given me avery plentiful portion, ſign.tyed by 
the Cup, given to the Gueſts by the Maſter of the Fealt, 

6 Surely goodneſs and mercy 5 ſhail follow me # all 


the days of my Life «, and I wiil dwell in the houſe of 


* | Heb; #0 

the LORD + for ever - 

nghg s 5. e. Gods Favour, and the bleſſed and comfortable effe&s and 

w benefits of it. : By which emphacical Expreſſion, he ſignifies God 
admirable freeneis and readineſs todo good to his People, and his 
preventing them with Bleſſings. Which he juſtly concludes, 
from the former inſtances of Gods Favour to him, becauſe of the 
unchangeableneſs of Gods Nature, and the ſtability of his Cove- 
nant and promiſes, x Whereas TI have formerly been driven from 
Gods: Houſe, I reſt aſſured that I ſhall now conſtantly enjoy 
that bleſſed priviledge of ſerving and enjoying God in his San- 
Quary, which I prize more than all my Donunions, 


PSATL. XXIV, 


The ARGUMEN T. 

His Pſalm 18 generally and probably thought to have been com- 
T poſed by . David upon that ſolemn Occaſion, of bringing 
the Ari of God from the Houſe of Obed-Edom, into the Taberna- 
cle which David had built for itz 2 Same,6, Wherein he hath a 
further proſpe& even to the Temple which he earneftly deſired, 
and intended to build, and which he. knew would be builr by his 
Son, And when this was done, and the Ark brought into it, this 
Pſalm was to be ſung, and indeed to this time it ſeems chiefly di- 
reed. For Davids Pſalms were not only uſed by himſelf upon 
the firſt Occaſions, for which he made them, bur they were com= 
mitted to the prefe&s of ſacred Muſick, for the uſe of the Church 
in ali ſucceeding times» And being a Prophet, he ſpeaks as the 
Prophets uſed, of things ro come, as if they were already preſent, 
and rurns his Speech to rhe Temple, and its Gates as if they were 
now builr. Moreover; becauſe the Tabernacle and Temple and Ark 
were manifeſt Types of Chriſt;and of his Church, and of the place 
and ſtate of Heavenly Glory, Davidextended his thoughts to them 
alſo, or at leaſt the Holy Ghoſt deſigned to comprehend them un- 


der theſe Typical Expreſſions» 
A Pſalm of David. | 


David arknowledgeth Gods Sovereignty over the World, 1; 2+ A Deſcrip= 
tion of the perſons tha: ſhall be of his ſpiritual Kingdom, 3, 4. Their 
Bleſſmg, 5, 6» An Exhortation to receive it, 7, 8, 9: Who the King 
of Glory is, 10. - | 

HE * earth is the LORDS, and che fulneſs thereof 


#4 : the world, andthey that dwell therein. 

_ 8 All the creatures, and eſpecially the Inhabitants wherewith it 
15 repleniſhed. Gods general dominion over,and intereſt in all per- 
ſons and places, ſeems to be here premiſed and aſſerted, Either, x. 
To ſhew his Right to chuſe any Nation whom he pleaſed, to be 
his peculiar people : which priviledge being conferred upon the 
Iſraelites, was a great ſtumbling-Block to the Heathen Nations. Or 


*Pſ: 3.6: 
118» 6. 


LI 

Ex'9:29% 
& 19. 5. 
Deut, 10. 


14, 
Job41. 11. 
Pf: 504 12. 
1 Cor, 10» 
66, 28, 


who choſe them out of all the Nations of the World to be near 
to him, and to have ſpecial acquaintance with him, although other- 
wiſe he had no other Relation to them, than what he had to all 
mankind, to wit, that of a Creator and Governour. Or, 3, To 
demonſtrat the Excellency of the Jewiſh Worſhip, and Religion 
above all others, becauſe the God whom they ſerved, was the God 
and maker of the whole world, when the gods of the Gent:les were 
ſorry Ido!s, and eſteemed by themſelves to be bur local and con- 
fined Deities. : | 

2 * For hehath founded it þ upon the ſeas c, and e- 


ſtabliſhed it upon the floods ec. 
b Juſtly have T ſaid, that the Earth ts the Lords, for he made it, 


*Job 3s, 
br 104+ 6, 
& 136. 6 

c By the Seas and Floods, he means the whole colleQion of Waters, 


as well the Sea and Rivers running into it, asthat great Abyſs of 
Waters, which is contained in the Bowels of the Earth, of which 


2S an evidence of Gods wiſe and powerful and gracious Provi- 
dence, thar he hath built ſo vaſt a Building upon ſo weaz a foun- 
dation, as the waters are, Mic. 6. 2. and that although the Wa- 
ters are lighter than the Earth, and therefore are naturally inclined 
to be above it, as they were at firſt, yer God hath ſo far over-ruled 
the inclinations of Nature, that the waters ſhall as it were deny 
themſelves and run down into Channels and Caverns of the Earth, 
that ſo the Earth' may be a convenient habitation for men and 
beaſts. See Gen. 1. 9g. Exod. 04 4. Pſal. 104. 6, 

3 * Who ſhall aſcend into the hill of the LORD 4? 
and who ſhall ftand e in his holy place f? _ 

d To wit, Sion or Moriah, the place of Gods SanQuuary and ſpe- 
Cial preſence. This is here ſubjoined, either 1. By way of Oppo: 
ſitio:1, though God is the God of the World, yet he is in a 


"Pf.ig, i, 


2. To ſet- forth the ſingular kindneſs and mercy of God to 1/rael, 


* and laid the Foundation of ir, and that in a wonderful manners | 


ſee Gen. 7. 11. and 49. 25. 2 Pet. 3. 5, This is here mentioned | 


It: | 


' 
"'*F 


. bl 
L M Ss. Pial. XKX1! 


peculiar manner the God of Jael, and to be worſhiped no where | 
and proved Gods Authority and Dominion over all Mankind, and 
conſequently their Obligations to ſerve and worſhip him, he now 
Propoſcth a moſt neceſſary and important Queſtion, eſpecially in 
thoſe times, when all Nations except Iſrael, were under deep Igno« 
rance and Errors herein, namely, where and how, and by whom 
God will be ſerved, and his favour and bleſſing may be enjoyed. 
The place is here deſcribed, and the qualification ofthe perſons in 
the tollowing Verſes. e To wity to miniſter before him, as this 
word is commonly uſed with reſpe& either tro Men, as 1 Kings 1. 2. 
compared with 10. 8. Dan. 1. 5, 19. Or to God, as Dew. 10.8. 
and 18. 79 Dan. 7.10 Zech. 3. 4+ Standing is the poſture of Mi» » 
niſters or Servants. So the Senſe is, who ſhall ſerve God, to wir, 
with Gods accepration, and to his own Advantage. f In the place 
which he hath ſanRified for his Service. 

4 * + He that hath clean hands g, anda pure heart 4;, 
who hath nor lift up his ſoul into vanity 3, nor ſworn ; 
deceirfully &. Hr 
£ Whoſe Ations and Converſations are holy and unblameable. 
It is here very obſervable, that the Character of a right and ac- 
Cceptable Worſhipper of God is not raken from his Nation and Re- 
lation to Abraham ; nor from all thoſe coſtly and laborious Rites 
and Ceremonies of the Law, in which the generality of the 1aelites 
pleaſed themſelves, but in Moral and Spiritual Duties, which moſt 
of them groſly negle&ed, h Purged frem Hypocriſie, and inward 
Filthinels, and careful to approve it ſelf to God, as well as to 
Men, ordering a Mans very taoughts and Aﬀections according to 
Gods word. This is fitly added, becauſe a Man may keep his 
hands clean in good meaſure, upon meer worldly motives, or wi:h 
an evil Deſign, or without any reſpect to God. # Either, 1. Who 
doth not worſhip Idols, which are oft called Yanities in Scripture. 
Or. 2. Who doth nor ſwear vainly or falſely, the phraſe here being 
much the ſame with that in the third Commandment, of raking 
Goas Name in vain, But that ſeems to be a quite differing Phraſe 
and the Nam? of God there mentioned, determines the Senie of that 
general phraſe to Oaths, which, withour that Addition, or ſome- 
thing equivalent, is never, to my knowledge, uſed in Scripture in 
that Senſe, Nor do all thoſe learned men, who ſo expound tkis 
place, give one inftance of that ſignification of this phraſe. And 
tor their orher Argument for that Senſe, rhat this Clauſe is cons 
joined with the next, by the Conjunction Yau, and therefore is to 
be explained by ir, it ſeems to have no weighr, becauie the ſame 
Conjunctioa joins the two firſt Characters together, and yer it is 
contefled rhat clean Hands and 3 pure heart, are two diſtinct and 
; very diflcring things. Or rather, 3: Who doth not immoderately, 
| value and affect, or ardently deſire ( as this very phraſe of lifting 
; #p the jou! doth oft ſignitie, as Deut. 24. 15. Pſal 25.1, Jer, 22. 
' 17. and 44+ 14. Ezek, 24+ 25. Hoſ. 4.8. ) the vain things of this 
- preſent Life and World, ſich as Honours, Riches, Pleaſures, and 
+ the like, which are oft called vain things, or Vanities in —_— 

is 


- 


Hands. 


i as Pſal. 4. 2. and 119. 37. Ecdleſ. 1. 2. and 12. 8. And t 
{ very fitly mentioned as a Character ofa truely good Man, becauſe 
| hereby he is diſtinguiſhed from all ungodly Men whatſoever, whoſe 
i inſeparable Property, this is both in the Old and New Teſtament 
| noted to be, to love Yanity, and to ſet their Hearts chiefly upon the 
Good things of this Life, ſuch as Corn and Wim, Pſal. 4. 2,6, 7, 
and to have their Portion in this Life, Pſal. 17. 14» and to mind 
Earthly things, Phil: 3. 19 and to be Friends of the Warld, Jam. 4, 
4. and to love the World, and the things of the World, 1 John 2. 15. 
Whereas good men are every where deſcribed to be ſuch as make 
| God their porion, Pſal. 16, 5- and prize and delire his Favour 
and Service infinitly more than all the enjoyments of this Life, 
yea, even than Life it ſelf, Job 23.12. Pſal. 4, 6, 7. and 63. 3. and 
119. 52: and fuchas are weaned from Earthly things, Pſal 1371, x, 
2: and have their affettions ſet on things above, not on things of the 
Earth, Col, 3. 2. and lay not up their Treaſure in Earth, But in Hea- 
ven, Matth. 6 19, 20» all whichis dire&ly oppoſite to this hfting up 
the Soul to vanity, k Heb. wnto, or with decers, 1. e. Falſly, or with a 
purpoſe of deceiving or injuring others thereby. Under this Ne- 
gative the contrary Atfirmarive is included, that he is one, who, 
when he 1s called ro ſwear, doth ſwear in Truth, in Judgment, and in 
Rightemſneſs, Jer. 4. 2+ : 


5 He ſhall receive the blefling/ from the LORD », 


and * righteouſneſs » from the God of his ſalvation, cnt 
I 3, e, The Blefling which God hath promiſed to his Church and Iſa-45. 3 

. Peopl;, to wit, Grace and Glory, and all other good things, as they are 

; ſummed up, Pſa/s 84. 11. He and he only ſhall be truely Bleſſed. 

, m Which 1s added ſignificantly, by way of Oppoſition ro;the Bleſ- 

ſings, which men reccived either from the Prieſts or from other 

; men, which were oftentimes given unto, unworthy perſons, and in 

that Caſe were without any efte& or benefit, whereas God's Bleſſings 

are given only to good men, and are always cffecrual for their good- 

2 i, e The bleſſed Fruit or Reward of his Righteouſneſs, as the 

Work is oft put for the reward of it, as Levit, 19. 13. Job, 7. 2. Pſal. 

| 109. 20» Or, kindneſsor mercy, and thoſe benefits which flow frog 

it, which are oft called by the name of Reghreouſneſs, as Jadge 5. 11, 

1 Sam. ls. 7. Pſal. g$. 11. and 112. 9. 


6 This 3s the generation o of them that ſcek him 9, 


that ſeek thy face q, || O Jacob r. Selah. BY : 

o The true Progeny which God regards. . Whereby he reflects | Or,0.. 
upon them, who boaſted of, and truſted to their carnal Generation God of Joe 
or Deſcent from Jacoeb. p To wit, God, mentioned in the end of 
wv. 5. or his Face, as ir is more fully expreſſed in the next Clauſe, 

7. 6. That make it their Care and Study to know him and his Mind 
and Will, and to pleaſe and ſerve him, as this phraſe is uſual- 
uy underſtood. q z. e. His Face, by a familiar change of the 
perſon; of which many Inſtances have been already noted, and 
his Face, ive, His grace and Favour, which is oft called Gods 
Face, as Gen. 4.14. Exod. 33. 14, 15. Pſal. 16. 18. and 17. 2- an 
44: 3» And ſo rhis phraſe is uſed, 2 Chron; 95: 14: Pſal: 27: 8. 
Hoſe 5* 15* r So rhe Senſe is, that ſeck the true Church, here called 
Jacobz that defire the knowledge of ir, and converſation with ir, 
in which Senſe many are faid ro ſee Solomons Face, as the phraſe 
is in the Hebrew, 1 Kings 10; 24+ 2 Chron. 9. 23. and the Harloc 
* to ſeek her Lovers Face, Prov: 7: 15; And lo this is by ſome. . 
4 Þ 2 pounded 


"7 


- 


+ Heb. the | 


clean of iſ 


but in their holy place« Or 2. As an Inference. Having aſſerted if 


6 4 
a1 


bi 


| YC.g8.8. 


RX V. 


pounded of the Gentzler, who enquired after the true Church, and| 
hnding it in Jeceb, were deſireous to become Proſclytes, and to join 
themliclves to the Church of Jacob or I/racl. Bur it muſt be remem- 
bred that the Pſalmiſt is not here ſpeaking of the calling of rhe 
Genriles, but only of the Charatter or qualification of the true Ja- 
cobires or 1ſraelites, who cannot conveniently be ſaid to ſeek rhe 
Faceef Jacob, 7. e. thewr own. And the phraſe of ſeeking rhe Face 
of Jacob, or of the Church, is no where uſed in Scripture. Or, asit 
1sin the Margent, O God of Jacob. Bur that ſeems to be too large 
a ſupplement. Or, this is Jacob, the pronoun #h:s being eaſily 


underſtood out ofthe beginning of the Verſe. Or, the Generation 


( which may in the ſame manner be ſupplied ) of Jacob, Jacob being 
here pur nor for the perſon, but for the poſterity of Jacob, as it 15 
Gen. 49+ 7, Numb. 23. 7, 10, 23. Deut, 32. 9. Pja: 14: 7. or for 
the Church or people of God, which is oft called Jacob or Iſrael, 
as Iſa. 14+ 1. and 41. 8. and 44+ 1, 5, 21+ &c, So theſenie 1s, 
this and this only is the true Jacob or 1rael, or Church of God, and 


' all others areſo only in Name and Title, alchough they be de- 


ſcended lineally from him; Or, in Jacob, the particle iz being here 
underſtood, as it is in Pſa. 2- 12. and 17:12. and in many other 
places. So the Senſe of the place is, this is the true Generation of 
them that ſeek Gods Face in Jacob. +. e. Either in Jacobs Land. 
or Sanctuary, the only place where God was to be ſought : Or, 
among the ſacobites, or Iſraelites. By which he infinuars, what 
is exprefled, Roms 9. 6. that, all are not 1ſracly that are of Jſrael, and 
that all were not I/raelires indeed that were ſprung from Jacob, but 
only thoſe of them who were ſuch as he deiccibed, v. 4. Compare 
Joan 1. 47. Rom. 2. 28, 29. 
7 * Liftup your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift 


up, ye everlaſting doors s, and the King of glory # jhall 


come in. 


s The queſtion, was put; who ſhall aſcend into Gods Hill and 


Holy place, v. 3- To which Anſwer hath been given, and the Per- 


ſons deſcribed. wv. 4, 5, 6. But becauſe there ſtill were impedi- 
ments in the way, and there were Gates and Doors to this Holy 
place, to ſhur out thoſe who- would aſcend thither, therefore he 
poetically ſpeaks of thoſe Gates, to open and let in the King of 
Glory, who would make way for his Subje&ts and Followers, Here 
is a Repreſentation of a Triumphant Entrance of a King into his 
Royal City and Palace; for which the Gates uſe to be enlarged, 


. or at leaſt wide opened. He ſpeaks here of the Gates and Doors, 


Either, 1. Of his Royal Ciry of Sion, through which the Ark was 
at this time to be brought ro the Tabernacle, which Dawid had 
ÞDuilt for it, called EverlaFing ; either from the ſolidity and dure- 
ableneſs of the matter,or from David*'sDefires and Hopes, that God 
would make them ſuch in ſome ſort, becauſe he loved the Gares of 
Sion, Pſa. 87. 2. Or rather, 2. Of the Temple, which by Faith 
and the ſpirit of prophecy, he beheld as already built, and ac- 
cordingly addrefſech his Speech toit, whoſe Doors he calls Ever- 
laſting, not ſo much becauſe they were made of ftrong and dura- 
ble Materials, as in oppoſition of thoſe of the Tabernacle, which 
were removed from place to placc, whereas the Temple and its 
Doors were conſtantly fixed in one place ; andif the Sins of Iſrael 
did not hinder, were to abide there for ever, 7. e. as long as the 
Moſaical Diſpenſation was to laſt, or until the coming of the Meſ- 
ſias, as that phraſe is very commonly taken in the Old .Teſtament, 
Theſe Gates he bids lift vp their Heads, or Tops, either by alluſion 
to thoſe Gates which have a Portcullis at the top of them, which 
may be let down or taken up, and accordingly makes the Entrance 
either higher and lower : Or,that by this figurative Addreſs to the 
Gates, he mighr ſignifis the Dury of the people, to make their 
Gates higher and wider, to give their King a more Magnificent 
Entrance. Bur though this be the literal Senſe of the place, yer 
there is alſo a myſtical ſenſe of it, and that too defigned by the 
Holy Ghoſt. And as the Temple was undoubtedly a Type of 
Chriſt, and of his Church, and of Heaven ir felf 3 ſo this place 
may alſo contain a Repreſentation, either of Chriſts entrance into 
his Church, or into the Hearts of his fairhful peop'c, whoare here 
commanded to ſet open their Hearts and Souls, which are not un- 
fitly called Everlafing Doors, for his Reception ; Or of his Aſcen- 
fion into Heaven, where the Saints or Angels are poctically intro- 
duced as preparing the way, and opening the Heavenly Gates to 
receive their Lord and King, returning to his Royal Habitation, 
with Triumph and Glory. Compare Ya. 47+ 5. and 68. 25. Af#s 
2+ 33» Eph. 4.8, t The glorious King Jehovah, who dwelt in the 
Temple, and between the Cherubims : Or the Meſiias, the King of 
Iſrael, and of liis Church, called rhe King, or L:7d of Glory, x Gor. 
2. 8. Jew. 2. 1. both for that Glory which 1s inherent 1a him, 
and that which is purchafſed by him for his Members. 

8 Whois the King of glocy «? the LORD ſtrong 
and mighty, the LORD mighty in batrel x. 

% This ſeems to be a Prolepſis, or removal of an Obje&ion ; 
You will ſay, what is the caule of this Imperious Call ? and why, 
or for whom muſt thoſe Gates be opened, in ſo folemn and extra- 
ordinary a manner? x This contains an antwer to the Queſtion, He 
is no ordinary perſon, no meaner, and no other than Je-ovah, who 
hath given ſo many proofs of his Almightineſs, who hath ſubdued 
all his Enemies, and isnow returned in Triumph. Here is in this, 
and the foregoing Verſe, a ſacred Dialogue between ſeveral per- 
fons. And ſome ſuppoſe that the ſacred Muſicians, which atren- 
ded upon the ſervice of the Ark and Tabernacle, and were doubt- 
Jeſs employed in this Solemnity, 2 Sam 6. 5+ were divided into 
ar Quires, whereof one ſpake the former, and the other the latter 
Verſe. 


ESSX C MS. 


PSATL. XXV. 
The ARGUMENT, 


His Pſalm ſeems to have been compoſed, when David was un. 
der ſome ſtraits and preſſures, when his outward affli- 
Qions were accompanied with inward horrors of Conſcience for 
his ſins, by which he had forfeited Gods fayour, and procured theſe 
Calamitics to himſelf, 
David being diſtreſſed by his Enemies, taketh his refuge in God, 1 — 6, 
prayeth for the remiſſion of tha Sins of his Youth, 79. He ſheweth the 
Goodneſs of the Lerd to the meek, to ſuch as keep his Covenant, ts 
ſuch as fear him, 8 IS» He prayeth for help in affiitien 
16 18. and againſt bis Enemies, 19--=-21. and i0 redeem bis 
Church from trouble, 22. ? 


| A Pſalm of David. 
Nto thee, O LORD, do I 
{oul a. 
a i.e, ] dire& my deſires and prayers, ( which are expreſſed 
by this phraſe, Pſa. 24+ 4. Jer. 22, 27. Lament. 3- 41. ) with 
—_ or expectation of a gracious Anſwer, which alſo it implies, 
eu. 24. b5. : # 
2 O my God, I* truſt in thee, lee me not be afha- _ omg 5, 


med 56 : let not mine enemies triumph over me. & 34. x 
6 3. e. Diſappointed of my Hope, which will be reproachful to pf, :g_ , 
me, not without Reflection upon thee, of whoſe power and Faith- Rom, 16: 


fulneſs I have made my boaſt. 11, 
2 Yea, let none that wait on thee be aſhamed c ; let 
them be aſhamed 4 which tranſgreſs e* without a cauſe f. *Plal.119, 
c With me and for me : For if I be fruſtrated. all that truſt in 75S: 
thee will be diſcouraged, and upbraided with my Example. 4 Blaſt 
cheir wicked defigns and hopes. e Or, prevaricate, or dealperfi- 
aouſly with me, violating their Faith given tro me. f withour any 
provocation of mine, or without any tufficient Reaſon. 
4 * Shew me thy waysg, O LORD, teach me thy 
paths. —__*"Pfal.58, 
g i. ee The way of thy Precepts, what I ought to do in my & 27. 11: 
Circumſtances and difficulties ; by what Methods I may obtain & 86. 11, 
thy Favour and help. Wharfoever thou doſt with me as to o> &119- 27- 
ther things, grant me this Favour, teach me my Duty, and cauſe & 143. bs 
me to keep cloſe to it, notwithſtanding all temptations to the con» '* 
trary, 
5 * Lead me in thy truth b, and teach me: for thou ars yp, ,,, 
the God of my ſalvation 5,0n thee do I wait all the day, ** *7 
þ 3. e In the true and right way preſcribed in thy Word, which 
is oft called Truth, as Pſa. 119. 30, John 8. 45, 46. and 16: 13. 
&c, Or, by or becauſe of thyTruth, i. e. Becauſe thou art faithful, 
do thou lead or guide me as thou haſt promſed to do» #7 i.e. Who 
haſt ſaved me formecly, and haſt engaged to fave me, and from 
whom alone I expect Salvation. 


6 Remember, O LORD, * + thy tender mercies,and xp, ,. 
thy loving kindneiles &,for they have been ever of old 7. : & 


k O conſider thy own merciful Nature, and thy former manifold & 106, i, 
Favours vouchſafed to me, and to other miſerable Sinners, and do & 109, 1, 
like thy ſelf, 7 Thou haſt been gracious to ſuch as I am, from the Jer.3 3.11, 
beginning of the World to this day, and to me in particular from + Heb. thy 
my very Infancy, ashe oft acknowledgeth in this Book; yea, from bowels, * 
all Eternity thou haſt had a good will to me, and therefore, do | 
not now deſiſt and deſert me. 

7 Remember not w * the ſins of my youth », nor * Jeb, :a/ 
my trauſgreflions s :: according to thy mercy remember 
chou me, for thy goodneſs fake p, O LORD. 

m So as to lay them to my Charge, nu The Sins committed in 
my young, and tender years, Eccle/, 11. 9,to+ which God frequent- 
ly puniſheth 1n riper Age. Job, 1326. Jer. 3. 25. and therefore he 
now prays that God would not deal ſo with him. o nor any of my 
ſucceeding or other ſins, which either have been acted by me, or 
may be imputed to me. p Being a ſinner I have nothing ro plead 
for my ſelf, but thy free Mercy and Goodneſs, which I now im- 
plore. 


8 Good q and upright # is the LORD: 
will he teach ſinners in the way 5. 

q i. e. Bountiful and gracious to Sinners, ready to do good, and 
delighting in it. r Or, Right, . i. 6 Holy and true, fincere in 
making promiſes, and in all his Declarations and Offers of Merey 
to Sinners, and faithful infulfilling ther. s Being ſuch an one, he 
will not be wanting to ſuch poor Sinners as I am, but will guide them 
by his word and Spirit, and gracious providence, into the way of 
Life and peace» By Sinners he doth not underſtand all that are 105 
nor ſuch as are obſtinate and proudgand ſcornful, whom God hath 
declared, that he will not teach nor direct, but will leave them-to 
the Errors and luſts of their own Hearts, and will blind and harden 
them to their Ruine, asis often expreſſed in Scripture ; but only 
ſuch as being truely ſenſible of their Sins, do humbly and earneſtly 
ſeeck God for his Grace and Mercy, or ſuch as are Meek, as the next 
Verſe explains it ; for theſe he will nor fail ro affiſt and relieve. | 
9 The meck # will he | guidein judgment « : and + cb? 
the meek will he teach his way x, cauſe 1030+ 
# 7. e. The humbleand lowly, ſuch as meekly ſubmit themſelves 
to Gods hand and word, and are willing and deſireous to be dire- 
cted and governed by him. «7, e. In the paths of Judgment, or 
in the right way wherein they ſhould walk, as the next Clauſe ex- 


” 
therefore 


9 Life upyour heads, O ye gates, even lift them up,ye pr this; or by the Rule of his word, which is oft called his 


everlaſting doors, and the King of glory ſhall come in y. 
The ſame verſe is repeaced again, partly to ſhame and awa- 

Ken the dulneſs of Mankind, who are ſo hardly brought to a ſeri- 
ous Preparation for ſuch Solemnirties 3 and part)y to ſignifie the 
great worth and importance of the Matter contained under theſc | 
expreſſions. . 

10 Who is this King of glory ? the LORD of hoſts 
2, he is the King of glory, Selah. 
j} z Under whoſe Command are all the Hofts of Heaven and Earth; 
Angels and, Men; and-all other Creatures: | 


udgment, or Judgements Or, with Judgment, 5, e with a wiſe and 
provident cares and a due regard to all their circumſtances See 


Jer. 10. 25- 1 Cor, 19. 13. x Either Gods way, which God pre- 


ſcribes : Or his own way in which he ought to walk. 

io All the paths of the LOR D are mercy and 
eruth y,unto fuch as keep his covenant z, and his teſti- 
monies. 

' y All the dealings of God with them, yea even thoſe that are 
afflictive, and grievous to the fleſh, are donein kindneſs and faith- 
tulneſs to them, as being very neceflary for them, and — ro 

va 


Pal. XXVY 


X lift up my "Pſ.143.8 


"Pal 


{ Heb. 
bring fo 


Pb. 6 


«4+ 
"v1. KXV. 


them by his Covenant 5 or, as it follows, his Teſtimonies z. e his 


and of mans Duty. : 
11 For thy names ſake a, O LORD, pardon mine 

iniquity 2 for it is great b. | 

4 i. c+ For the Honour of thy Goodneſs, and Truth, which is 
concerned herein. b And therefore none but ſuch a God can par- 
don ir,& nothing but thy own name can move thee to do it and 
the pardoning of it, will well become ſo great and good a God, 
and will tend much to the Illuſtration of thy Glory, as the great- 
neſs and deſperatneſs of the Diſeaſe advanceth the Honour and 
Praiſe of the Phyſician. Or this may be urged,nor as an Argument 
to move God, but as the reaſon that moved him to pray ſo carneft- 
ly, and that for God's Name ſake. Or, though ( as this Particle is 
oft rendred, as Exod; 34+ 9. Pſal. 41. 4. and elſewhere ) 37 be great 
Poflibly he ſpeaks of his ſin againſt Uriah and Backſheba, Or, for or 
though is be much or Manifold; For the Hebrew word ſignifies both 
great and much. 


12 What man 3s he c that feareth the LORD? him 


ſhal he teach in the way that he ſhall choole 4. 

c i: e: Whoſoever he be, whether Jew or Gentile, whether more 
innocent, or a greater Sinner, which is my Caſe, dis e: Which 
God appointeth, or approveth, Or, which he, 5. e« ſuch Perſon, 
ſhould chuſe ; for the future Tenſe is oft put Potentially, and ſo as 
to expreſs a Man's Duty, as Gen. 26. 9, Mal. 14 6 and 2. 7o 

12 His ſoul + (hail dwell e at eaſe f; and * his ſeed 


ſhall inherit the earth g. 
e Heb. ſhall Lodge, #. e« Continue as this word ſignifies, Jeb 17. 
1122-29. 2. Prova19+ 23. It notes the conſtancy and Stability of his Hap- 
pineſs, both whiiſt he Lives and when he is-Dead 3 which the next 
Clauſe ſeems to ſuppoſe. f Heb. in Good, 3. e. In the poſſeflion and 
enjoyment of the true Good, g Or, the Land, to wit, Canaan ; 
which was promiſed and given, as an earneſt of the whole Cove- 
nant of Grace, and all its promiſes, and therefore is Synecdochi- 
hoy. 3, ally pur for all of them. The Senſe is, his Seed ſhall be bleſſed. 
"3"  I4 * The ſecretofthe LORD b ;- with them that fear 
" 117. him 5 ||and he will ſhew them his covenant 4, 
| Or, awd h Either, 1. His Word and Counſel, to dire& and guide them 
þ ves in the right way,which he oft mentions here as a ſingular Bleſſing, 
unto ©? 8, 9, 12, to ſhew them their Duty in all Conditions,and the way 
ml them to their eternal Salvation. And ſo this may ſeem to be explained by 
juo it, the following Words, He will ſhew them his Covenant, And this 
though it was revealed, yet might be called a ſecrer,becauſe of the 
many. a::d deep Myſteries in it, and becauſe it is ſaid to be hid 
from many of them, to whom it was revealed, Mat; 1. 25: 2 Core 
3+ 13, 14, 15+ and 4, 3, anditis not to be underſtood to any pur- 
poſe, without the Illumination of their Minds,by God's Spirit, as 
is manifeſt from Pſal, 119. 18, 19. and many other places of Scup- 
ture» Or rather, 2. His Love and Favour which is called his ſe+ 
erer, Job 29! 4. Prov. 3; 32. and that very fitly, becauſe itis known 
to none but him that enjoyeth it, Prov. 14. 10: Rev: 2. 17. Or his 
gracious and fatherly Providence which is here ſaid to be with 
them, Or, as itis in the Hebrew, rewards them, taking Care of them, 
and working for them ; even then when God ſeems to frown upon 
them. i Or, and he will make them to know ( for the Infinitive 1s 
here thought ro be put for the future Tenſe of the Indicative,as it 
is Eccleſ. 3; 14, 5, 18. Hoſea 9: 13: and 12:3.) his Covenant, i. e. 


ULLUER 
Pal. 37- 


p $S 4 L M S. 
their great advantage. t i e. The Laws or Conditions required” of 


Precepts, which are the Teſtimonies or Witnefles of God's Will, 


« Though I have greatly offended thee,yet remember that I have 
dealt honeſtly and ſincerely with mine Enemies, whilſt they have 
dealt falſly and injuriouſly with me; and therefore judge between 
them and me, and deal with me according tothe Righteouſneſs of 
my Cauſe, and Carriage towards them- | 

22 Redeem Iſrael x, O God, out of all his croubles. . 


x If thou wilſt not pity and help me, yer {j h' ple wh 
ſuffer for my lake, and in my ſufferings. La | 


PSAL XXVYVI. 
The ARGUMENT, : 
ff the» Pſalm was certainly made by David, when he was in Di- 
ſtreſs and parricularly when he was faiſly accuſed, and de- 
famed by his Adverſaries,as he frequently was by Saul,and his Cour- 
fiers: and therefore for his Vindication, he makes a ſolemn appeal 
to God. and a Proteſtation of his own Innoccncy, to which he was 
forced by their Clamour and Reproaches. | 
: A P[alm of David. - IT 
David declareth his Integrity and innocency, I, 2, 3» His hatred to the 
Congregation of the Wicked, 4, 5. He publiſheth God's Works, 7, Lyves 
to awell in his houſe, 8. He prays for Deliverance from his Enemies, g. 
IO. and promiſes Thankfulneſs to God, 11, 12. | 
) fr cl ame, O LORD, for I have walked in 
integrity þ: I have truſted alſo in the LORD c: rhere- 
fore I (hall not ſlide 4. TH ; 
4 7. e. Plead my cauſe, or give Sentence for me ; 
commonly uſed, as Pſal- 10: 18: and 43: 1. and 
can obtain no Tight from Men. - The Supream and ſubordinate 
Magiſtrates, are mine implacable and refolved Enemies. Do thou 
therefore do me Juſtice againſt them. 6 For though they accuſe 
me of many Crimes, they can prove none of them and - thou and 
mine own Conſciencc,and theirs too are Witneſſes for me, that my 
Carriage fowards them hath been innocent and unblameable: c | 
have committed my Cauſe and Afﬀairs to thee, as toa juſt Judge 
and mercifuil Father, and my hope and Truſt is fixed upon thee 
alone. d Therefore thou wiltſt not deceive my Truſt, but wiltſt 
uphold me againſt all mine Enemies. For thou haſt Promiſed to 
fave thoſe that truſt in thee, Or, that 1 ſhall nos ſlide or fol 
So this declares the matter of this Truſc. .. 4 wot -\ ng JON 
2 * Examine me, O LORD, and preve me e; try 
my reins and my heart. 
e Becauſe it is poſſible, tharT may deceive my felf, and be partial g- 139. i 
12 my Cauſe, or at leaſt mine Enemies will ſo judge of me,l appeal ch 
to thee, O thou Judge of Hearts, and beg that thou would ſearc 
and try me, by ſuch ways and means as thou ſeef fir,and make-me 
known to my ſelf, and to the World, and convince mine Enemies 
of mine Integrity. | 


3 For thy loving kindneſs 3s before mine e 
I have walked in thy truth g. tl | © 
f I dare appeal to thee with this Confidence, becauſe thou know-- 
eſt that I have a true and deep ſenſe of thy Loving kindneſs to me 
upon mine heart, by which I have bcen obliged,and in a manner, - 
conſtrained tolove and Obey thee,and in all things to approve my, 
Heart and ways to thee,and to abſtain from 3ll ſuch eyil Praftices, 
as mine enemies charge me with, whereby I ſhould have-forfeited 
thy Loving kindneſs, which I prize more than life, Pſal. 63. 32 
and expoſed my ſelf to thy juſt Diſpleaſure. My Experience of, and 


as this Phraſe is 
72:4: Iſa: 17. 


O17 


13- 9- 


yesf: and ' 


He will make them clearly to underſtand ir, both its Duties or 
Conditions, and its Bleſſings or Priviledges; neither of which un- | 
godly Men rightly underſtand : Or, he will make them to know | 
it by Experience, Or, by God's making it good to them 3 as on 
the contrary God threatens to make ungodly Men to know his 
Breach of Promiſe,Num-14.34.Or, as it is in the margentof our Bibles, 
and his Covenant, ( isi: 6: He hath ingaged himſelf by his Promiſe 
or Covenant ) to make them to know it, to wit, his ſecrer, 7; e: That 
he will manifeſt either his Word or his Favour to them. 


} Heb. 
mgfrth. ſhall + pluck my feet out of the net Z. 

k i: e: My truſt 1s in him, and my ExpeQation of Relief is from 
him only. {He will deliver me out of all my Temptations and 
Tribultions, 

16 Turn thee unto me », and have mercy upon me 


for I «1 deſolate » and affliced- os 
- Turn thy Face and Favour to me, O thou who now haſt tur- 
ned thy Back upon me, and forſaken me» »n Deſtirute of all other 
Hopes and Succours ; perſecuted by mine Enemies, and forſaken 
Fpl1. 63 by the moſt of my F riends, as he was in A4bſalom's Rebellion. 
. 68, 2Y af up R 
6, 17 The troubles of my hearto are enlarged: * O bring 


thou me out of my diltreſles. 

oMy outward Troublesare accompanied with grievous Torments 
of my Mind and Heart for my ſins,which have procured them,and 
thy great Diſpleaſure manifeited in theme 

18 Look upon p mine affliction, and my paia, and 
forgive all my ſins 9. | 

. Þ With Compaſſion, as Exod: 3. 7: 8. Pſal. 31: 7: and 106: 44- 

q The procuring and continuing Cauſes of my Trouble. 

19 Conlider r mine enemies, for they are many, and 


Tf vis, they hate me with Þ cruel / hatred. 

"ee, y Heb. Look upon, as v. 18. to wit, with a Revengeful Eye, as 
Exod. 14. 24+ 1 Chron. 12+ 17. Pſal 104. 32, For this general Ex- 
preſſion of Looking upon, is taken ſeveral ways in Scripture, and is: 
to be determined by the Context, { Heb. Yielent or Injurtous, Ei- 
ther without any Cauſe given by me : Or without any bonds, or 
in an implacable manner. ; 

20 O keep my ſoul t and deliver me : let me not be 
alhamed, for I put my truſt in thee. 

# ie, Myſelf or my Life, as that word is commonly taken : 

For his ſoul was out of his Enemiesreach, who could only kill his 

Body, Luke 12. 4+ 

21 Let inte 


FHeb.ba. 


15 Mine eyes are ever towards the LORD &: for he | 


Truſt in thy Goodneſs doth fully fatisfie and ſupport me, that-F 

neither do nor need to uſe any indire&@ or irregular Courſes for my: 

Relief, g1:; e: According to thy word which is oft called Truth, 

as Pſal. 119. '42. 151. John 17. 17, 19. believing its promiſes, :and. 
obſerving its Precepts and DireCtions ; and nor according to the - - 

Courſe of the World, as it follows. . * pfal. 1:1; 


4 "3 have not fat þ with vain Jer.r5.17. 
I go in k with 7 diſſemblers /. Heb. «loſs 
h i.e. Choſen or uſed to converſe with them 2 for ſtring is a poſe 24 _— 
ture of Eaſe and of Continuance. TI have been ſo far from an Ap-- 
| es or Imitation of their wicked Courſes ( wnerewith mine - { 


perſons z, neither will 


nemies reproach me ) that I have avoided even their Company,-: 
and it accidentally Icame into it,yet I would not abide in it. # 4. e. 
With Lyars, or Falſe and decetiful Perſons, as the nextClauſe ex- 
plains it. And vanity 15 very frequzntiy” put for fallbood or Lying, - 
k Into their Compa..y, or with deſign to joyn in their Counſels 
or Courſes, as the fame word is uſed, Job 23. 7. And Converfation : 
is oftExprefſed by going out and comiag in./. Heb. with ſuch as hide 
themſelves, covering their 'Crafry and wicked Deſigns with fair - 
Pretences» I abhor ſuch perſons and pratices 3 though I am ac«. 
cuſed to beſuch an one, p17 

5 I have haced the congre 
will not fit with the wicked. | 

m Either, 2. Their wholeRank or Society. T have an Antipathy 
_— all m__ Torionk br mg _y Exception, Or, 2. To-mect} .- __ 
and joyn with them. in their Afﬀemblics and Conſultations, or- t ww... ...> 
with them, as it follows. ions, or þ ou Exo0-32s 


gation of evil doers m;and 


- . ” 


% a . 


I compaſs thine altar o, O LORD. 


n Or, with Integrity, or with a pure Heart and Conſcience. I will 
not do, as my Hypocritical Enemies do, who content themſelves 
with thoſe outward waſhings of their Hands, or Bodies preſcribed 
in the.Law, Exod» 29. 4. &Cc. Deur. 2. 6. Hebs 9. 10. - whilſt their 
Hearts and Lives are. filthy and abominable:- Bur 7 will waſh of 1 
have waſhed my Hands, and withal purged my Heart and Conſcience 
fromi dead Works. Compare [/s: 1. 15. 16. « Tims2. 8. 6 5, e.. A 
proach to thine Altar with my Sacrifices : which I could not 
with any comfort or confidence, if I were conſcious to my ſelf of 
thoſe crimes, whereof mine enzmies accuſe me. For the phraſe of _ 
Compaſſing the Altar, Either 1. He alludes ro ſome Levitical cuſtom 
of going about the Altary as the Prieſts did in the Oblation oftheir 
Sacrifices, and the people, eſpecially thofe of them who were maſe 
devout and Zealous, who poſlibly moved from place to place, bur - 
ſcill within their own court, that they might betrer diſcern what ; 


oy 


grity and uprightneſs preſerve me # : forT 
Walt on thee, 


) 


wag done eg the fcyeral ſides of the Altar, and 1o bs the more affes! 
4P3 Cicd 


I 


is 
l D 


- Pal. XXV1 


mine *pal. 7.8. | 


& 66. 10, 
23. Zechi. 


- - - . x b "* 4 | 20. | a 
6 I will * waſh mine hands ininnocency » ; fo will #73: $34 


'; $5 as 


4 
* 
l 


# 


fl 
"r 
id 
il ' 


XXVII. P $ A 


Qed with it. Or rather, 2+ He implies that he would offer many 
Sacrifices rogether, which would imploy the Prieſts round about 
the Altar, and fo he is ſaid to Compaſs it, becauſe the Prieſts did 
it in his Name, and upon his Account, as Perſons are very oft 
faid in Scriprure to Ofer thoſe Sacrifices, which the Prieſts offer 
' for them. ; : | Fg 
7 That T may publiſh p with the voice of thankſgiving 
q, and tell of all thy wondrous works. 
p Or, Proclaim, to wit, thy wondrous works, as it here follows. 9 
j Accompanying my Sacrifices,with my own Solemn Thankſgivings 
[| and Songs of Praiſe. 
| 8 LORD, TIhave loved the habitation of thy houſe r 
| and the place F where thine honour /dwelleth. 
{Heb. of »z. e, Thy Sanctuary and Worſhip : which isan Evidence ofmy 
beTaber- Piety to thee, as I have given many Proofs of my Juſtice and 
bee of thy tegrity towards Men. Nothing is more grievous to me than to be 
pour, hindred from ſceing-and ſerving thee there. / Or, thy Glory, Either, 
1. The Ark ſo cailed, 1 Som. 4. 22. Pſal. 78. 61, Or, 2. Thy 
glorious and gracious Preſence, Or the manifeſtation of thy Glory, 
or of thy glorious Power, and Faithfulneſs, and Goodneſs _ 
9 || Gather not my ſoul t wich ſinners « nor my life 


” with + bloody men. ; 

al. 28. 3. * © My life, as it is explained in the next Clauſe. Do not bind 
Hob mm MEuP in the ſame Bundle, nor put me into the ſame accurſed,and 
Blood, miſerable condition with them. Seing L have had fo greatan An- 
* tipathy againſt them, in the whole courſe of my life, v-4. 5. let 
me not die their Death ; as Ba{azm on the contrary deſired to aye 
the death of the Righteour, Num. 23. 10. And ſeing I have loved thy 
Houſe and Worſhip, and endeavoured to ſerve thee acceptavly: 


Heart and Life, v. 6, 7, 8- do not deal with me as thou wilſt with 
thoſe that are filled with ungodlineſs and unrighteouineſs: do not 
deſtroy me with them, the Righteous with the Wicked, Gen. 18. 23. 
but ſave me in the common Calamity, as thou haſt promiſed and 
uſed to doin like Caſes. The Hebrew word 4ſaph, rendred, gather- 
ing, is oft put for taking away, as Gen. 30. 23. 1/a. 4. 1. Jer. 8. 13. & 
16+ 5. and that by Deſtru&ion and Death, as 1 Sam. 15, 6. Iſa. 57. 
I, Jer. 8.13. Ezcks 34.29+ Hoſea 4.3. The ground of which Phraſe 
may be either, becauſe by death mens Souls or Spirits are gather- 
ed and returned to God, Eccleſ. 12. 75- who had diſperſed them all 
the World over: or becauſe the ſeveral ſorts of Men, good and 
bad, which live herz together Promiſcuouſly,are there ſevered,and 
all of one ſort of them gathered together, unto their Fathers or 
Peoples, as it is expreſſed, Gen: 15: 15: Num: 20: 24. 2 Kings 22: 20: 
Compare Heb: 12: 23. u Profligate and Obſlinate ſinners, as the 
following Words deſcribe them, ſuch being oft called ſamers by way 
of Eminency, as 1 Sam* 15; 18+ Pſal: 1:1; and 104: 35+ 7/4. 1, 28- 
and 33. 14. | 
xo In whoſe hand is miſchief: and their right hand 
| is | full of bribes. ; 
Heb. Ts. But as for me, I will walk in mine Integrity : re- 
F* Jeem me, and be mercifull unto me. 

x Who not only imagine Miſchief in their Hearts, but perſiſt in 
it, and execure it with their hands. y Which ſhould be ſtretched 
out to execute Juſtice, and puniſh offend:rs. ; 

' I2 My foot ſtandeth in * an even placez : in the 


*P[.27.11 congregations will I bleſs the LORD ||. 
 z Heb.. in Refitude, or in @ right or Straight, or Plain, or even 
Place, Which may be underſtood, Either, 1. Civilly, or in re- 
gard of his outward Condition, So this is oppoſed to the ſlippery 
Flaces, in which wicked men are ſaid ro be, P/ale 35. 6. and 73. 18. 
Jer. 23. 12. and the Sence is, I ſtand upon a ſure and ſolid foun- 
dation,where I fear no fall,nor to be overthrown by the aſſaults of 
mine enemies, being under the ProteQion of God's promile, and 
his Almighty and watchful Providence. Or, 2. Morally, orin re- 
gard of his Converſation. So the Senſe is, I do and will perſiſt or 
' continue (C which is oft ſignified by ſtanding, as Pſal- 1.1.) in m 
in, and righteous, and Graight Courſe of Life, not uſing thoſe 
rauds and wicked Arts, and perverſe and crooked Paths, which 
mine Enemies chuſe and walk in, or whereof they do falſly accuſe 
. And ſo this is the ſame thing for Subſtance, with his walking 
3 his Integrity, expreſſed in the foregoing Verſe, as alſo v. i. [I 
will not only privately acknowledge. bur publickly, and in the A- 
ſemblies of thy People celebrate thy praiſes, both for thy Grace, 
inabling and — to chuſe and Love,and perſevere in the 
ways of Holineſs and Righteouſneſs,and for thy protetion hitherto 
afforded to me in the midft of all my Dangers and Troubles, and 
for that well-grounded aſffurance which thou haſt given me, of thy 
Favour, and of my future Deliverance. 


PSATL. XXVII. 
The ARGUMENT. 


T is _—_— from the Body of this Pſalm, that D#vid was not 

yet fully delivered from the Trouble which his Enemies gave 

- Him, both by their Slanders and other ways» But whether ir be” 
Jong to that Hiſtory which is recorded, 2 Sam: 21. 15- I6. 17: as 
the Jews.conceive, whom ſome others follow, is wholly uncertain 


and not neceſlary for us to know. 


7420 A Pſalm of David: 
David declareth that God is hir only Comfort and Confidence in all dan- 
- der 1-3 His hearty deſire to be in the Houſe of God, 4. The ad- 
. vantage of it, 5, 6. He prayeth for the Light of God's Face, and his 
+ Salvation, - ———12, and from Experience, exhorts others co wait - u- 
_ pon lum, 11, 14. , | 
#*Mic.y.8. He LORD #s * my light «, and my ſalvation, 
 # PCar8-6, & whom ſhal Ifear? * the LORD {#: the ſirength 
a of my life b, of whom (hal I be afraid ? 
bs = - > When the wicked,even mineenemies,and my foes | 
gainſt me, Came upon meto eat up my fleſh c,they ſtumbled 8 fell, 
4 _  8#1.e, My Counſellour in all my Difficulties, and my comforter 
* and Deliverer in all my Diſtreſſes, 6 ;.e. The ſupporter and pre- 
ſerverof my Life, c Greedy to devour me at one Morſe, Compare 
Job r9,-22. and 31; 3H 


Ins 


not only with Ceremonial 'cieanneſs, but with moral puriry of 


L M 8s. Pſal. XXV11, 


2 * Though an hoſt ſhould encamp againſt me, my *PMl.z. 6. 

heart ſball not fear : though war ſhould riſe againſt me, 
in this 4/7 T be confident. 

d In that which I have now ſaid, that God # my light, &c. wv. 5 
and in the Experience ofhis Favour and ProteQtion, v. 2. 

4 Ove thing have I deſired of the LORD e, that 
will I ſeek after, that I may dwell in the houſe of the 
Lord all the daysof my Life f, to behold || the beauty || or, 


of the LORD g, and to enquire & in his temple z, delight. 
| e ThoughlT am cxerciſed with many Troubles. there is but cne Pſa]. 63.2, 
{ thing tharl am very ſolicitous for, or defirous of, and that is not © 994917, 
, Viftory, 2nd Triumphs over all mine enemies, aſſured Peace and 
Settlement in my Throne, the Wealth and Pleaſure, and Glory of 
enlarging; or Ruling my Empire : Or; ifI have any deſire to any 
of thoſe things, it is chiefly for the ſake of that which here follows, 
Ff ThatTI may not be diſturbed in, or driven from the SanQtuary and ' 
worſhip of God as have been, but may have Opportunity of cons 


i ſtant Attendance upon God. g That there I may exerciſe and De- | 


hght my ſelf, in the Contemplation of thy amiable and glorious 
Majeſty, and of the infinite Wiſdom, Holineſs, Juſtice, Truth, 
Grace and Mercy, and other Perfe&ions, which, though hid in a 
great meaſure from the World,are clearly manifeſted in thy Church, 
and Ordinances. h Or, ail;gently to ſeek, either God's Face and Fa- 
your * Orhis Mind and Will, and my own Duty : Or, rhe Lords 
beausy, laſt mentioned, which is diſcovered more or leſs, as men are 
diligenr, or negligent in ſecking or enquiring into it.# 7.e, Inhis 
Tabernacle 3 which he here and elſewhere calls his Temple, becauſe 
it was the ſame thing for Subſtance; and becauſe his Thoughts 
and AﬀeCtions did conſtantly and eagerly run out upon the Tem» 
ple, and iince he was not permitted to build the Thing, he would 
at leaſt take occaiion ro ſolace himſelf with the Name, and there» 
by to center his Proteſt, of his earneſt defire to build ir, if God had 
ſeen it fit, 

 5ForÞ * in the time of trouble he ſhal hide me & in | Heb. in 
his pavilion : in the ſecret of his tabernacle /ſhal he hide — of 
me ; he ſhal ſet me up upon a rock m- oY _ 

k Or. hath hid me: Or, uſeth to hide me» Juſtly do 1 prize the & 91. L 
Houle and Service of God ſo highly, koth becaule I have ſuch vaſt EY 
Obligations to him for his former proteQion and Favours, and be- 
cauſe all my hope and confidence, and ſecurity depends upon him 
[ In his Tabernacle, into which mine enemies cannot come, and 
in a ſecrer place in it, where, if they come, they cannot find mes 
Or, as it were { for the note of ſimilitude is oft underſtood ) rn ths f 
ſecret of his Tabernacle, i. e. In as ſafe a place as the Holy of Holies, 
which is called Gods ſecret, «Exek. 7. 22. where none might come 4 
bur the High-Prieſt, and he but one day in a year. He alludesto 
the antient Cuſtom of Offenders, who uſed to flee to the Taber« 
nacle or Altar, where they eſteemed themſelves ſafe, 1 Kings 2: 28, _ 
m A*place high ahd inacceſſable, ſtrong and impregnable. 

6 And now ſhall mine head be lifted up above mine 
enemies » round about me : therefore will I offer in his 
tabernacle Sacrifices of joy F o ; I will ſing, yea, I will 
ſing praiſes unto the LORD. | 

7 Hear, O LORD, when T cry with my voice; have 
mercy alſo upon me, and anſwer me, 

= He willadvance me above them, and give me a compleat vis 
Qory over them- o Or, of ſhouring or reſounding ; i e. Of Thankſ- 
givings Which were accompanied with the ſound of Trumpets and 
other Inſtruments, Num. 10, 10. 1 Chron. 16, qr, 42+ Pſal. 33: 3. 

8 [| Fben then [aidft p, Seek ye my face q ; my heart | Or, 
ſaid unto thee r, thy face, LORD, will I ſeek. m 

? Either by thy Word, commanding and inviting me ſo to do ; ſeek ye my 
Or by thy Spirit, direRingand inclining me to it. q::e. Seck my 7 gs 
Preſence and Favour and Help, by fervent and Faithful Prayer, *** ©* 
r My heart readily and thankfully complied with the motion 3 and 
upon the incouragement of this Command. or invitation and pro- 
miſe couched in it, I reſolved I would do fo, and do fo art this 
time. But this Verſe is a little otherwiſe rendred by divers learned 
men. And the words lye in another Order, in the Hebrew Text; 
which runs thus ; To thee my Heart ſaid, "Thou haſt ſaid, (which 
Verb may well be underſtood here, as it is alſo, 1 Kings 20. 34. 
and as divers other Verbs are underſtood in the ſacred Text, as 
Lev. 24+ 8- 2 Sam. 18. 22. and 23.17; Compare with 1 Chron; 11. 
19. and in many other places z which is not ſtrange in ſo conciſe 
and ſhort a Language, as the Hebrew is ) Seek ye my face, ( This 
is thy great Command, ſo oft and fo vehemently urged, as con- 
taining the very Subſtance and Foundation of all true Piety ) 
Thy Face Lord I'will ſeek, I cheerfully do and will obey thy Command 
therein 3 Or the verſe may be thus tranſlated withour any Sup- 
plement, which,where ir can be done, is confeſſedly the beſt way 
of Tranſlation, Concerning thee ( as the Particle Lamed is oft uſed : 
Or, Fx; or, Inftead of thee, as it is unqueſtionably uſed, Ger: t1.3s 
Exod; 13. 16. Pro. 21: 18. 1. e. In thy name and Words and accord- 
ing to thy Mind ) My bear: ſaid, ( To wit, to or within my ſelf. 
as the word ſaid is frequently taken, i. e. I ſeriouſly conſider 
within my ſelf, this following Command of thine oft -1nculcated 
in thy word, and prefs it upon my own Conſcience ) Seek ye my 
Face ; Thy face Ld will Tſeek. Thou commandeſt it, anc I willo- 
bey thee thereins 

9 Hide not thy face [far from me, put not thy ſervant 
away t 1n angers thou haſt been my help,leave me nor, 
neither forſake me, O God of my ſalvation. 

S Which I in obedience to thy command am now ſeeking. tTo 
wit, from thy face or Preſence, or from the place of thy Worlip 
from which he either now was or formerly had been driven: Two 
ways God and he might be parted, either by Gods departure, Or 
withdrawing from him, which he might do even in the place 0 
his Worſhip 3 or by Gods putting him away from his preſence, | Or Los} 
Againſt the firſt he ſeems to dire& his prayer in the firtt Cloule, } Ifa. 49: | 
and againſt the latter in this. 4 ; 

10 || * When my tather and my mother forſake me #, ;j1.y, oil | 


I then x the LORD will cake me up z, gather 1% 


? 


NO rrm_ -0x _ 


+ Heb. if 
ſhouting. 


mf 
ſaid 


unto thee. 


[ Or, fr. 


[ 


! 


al 


5P[.2 
& 86+ 
&119- 
+ Heb 
g way 
plaimne 
tHeb.) 
phich | 
ſav? 7 


"M35 


Was 
| &130. 
| Ih. 25. 
Hab. 2. 
[Or, le 
thine hes 


k frong, 


| Gr, 


tHeb, 


fm me, 
"M143. 


[Or, 16- 
Pargr thy 
Oracle of 
ly Satte 
Cary, 


6. 


if 


ef 


——__— m— 


al, XXVIIL 


ws... 


F 2 
u Or, left mc, 


as being unable to help me, and rather a burden | againſt all truly good Men, and that covered with  pretences of 


L M 8s. 


than an help to me; for which reaſon,David defired them to leave Fiety to God, and of peaceablcnets towards their Neighbours, v. 
him, and diſpoſed of them in another place, 1 Sam. 22: Or, his| 3. which made their wickedneſs more inexcuſable and deteſtable : 
Father and Mother were now Dead Or, by his Father and Mo-| Partly by the inſtin& and direQion of Gods Spirit, by whoſe ins 


ther he may ſignifie his near Relations and Friends, which forſook 
Or, the Words 
may be rendred, Though my Father and Mother ſhould forſake me. Or, 
Jer, as the Hebrew Yau frequently ſignifies: y Or, w!ll receive mes 
to wit, to bimſelf, as this Verb is uſed, Jo 20: 4. Judge 19. 15. 


- him in the time of Trouble, as men uſually do. 


Mat: 23. 37+ | 
11 * Teach me thy way z, O LORD, and lead me 
in + a plain path «, becauſe of F mine enemies 6, 
2 i. ee What Courſe I ſhall tzke to pleaſe thee, and to diſcharge 
my Duty, and ro ſave my ſelf from Ruine. . Of which ſee the 


$P{.25.4- 
& 86. 11- 
&119- 27+ 
+ Heb. 


pg wa) of 


hem any occaſion of Triumphing over me- _. 
[2 Deliver me not over unto the will : of mine ene- 


7 35.11- mies : for * falſe witneſſes are riſen up againſt me, and 


ſuch as breath out eruelty 4d. 
c Or, Lu# or Deſire; Heb. Soul; which is ſo taken, Pſale 41. 2. & 


78.1i; Ezck. 16« 27. d He prefſeth his Requeſt from the quality of 


his Enemies, who were borh falſe and cruel, and in both reſpect. 
hateful ro God and Men: 
12 1 had fainted e, unleſs T had believed to ſee the 
goodneſs of the LORD f in the land of the living g. 
e Theſe words are added to compieat the Senſe 3 For the Speech 
is abrupt and imperfeR, as is ve:y uſual, nor only in the Holy 
Scripture, but in many other Aurhors, in all vehement Paſſions or 
Commotions of Mind, ſuch as David was in at this time. Having 
declared what perfidious and cruel Enemies did now affault and en- 
compaſs him, he now ſubjoyns what itzpreſſion the Thoughts 
thereof made upon him, and ſpeaks like one that wanted Words 
to expreſs. how ſad and deſperate his Conuition would have been 
iſhe had not been ſupported by Faith in Gods promiſes. f To en- 
joy ( which is oft expreſſed by ſzeiug) the Me:cy which God hath 
promiſed me. g#.e. Inthis World, which 1s oft fo called, as Fob 
28.13. Pſal.52.5, and 116.9. & 142-5. Iſa. 38. #1, and 53-8. Jer. 11.19- 
Exek. 32,32, and is oppoſed to the Grave, which is the place of 
the Dead. And David was thus earneſtly defirous of this Mercy 
in this Life, not becauſe he placed his Portion in theſe things, 
which he ſo ſolemnly diſclaims, P/al. 17. 14 vut becauſz the Truth 
and Glory of God, were highly concerned in making good the 
Promiſe of the Kingdom made toghime 
124 14 * Wait on the LORD%: be of good courage and 
k 130. 5: [] he ſhall ſtrengthen thine heart #5 ; Wait, I fay, on the 
Ik, 25. 9. LORD. ; 
—— a" Omy Soul: to which he now turneth his Speech ; as he fre- 
tly doth in this Book, # He will uphold thee, and keep the 


Lone, from fainting and ſinking under thy burcens 
VE S A L. XXVII.. 
The ARGU "NT. 
His Pſalm ſeems to be made upon the ſame Occaſion with the 
former, andis mixed, as many others of his Pſalms are, of 
Hopes and Fears, of Prayers and Praifcs. 
David prayeth earnefly for himſelf, 1, 2. that he wiight not beled away 
with the wicked, 3, 4+ The reaſ'n his Prayer,s.He tleſſcth God for hear- 
ing him, 6 == 8, and prayeth fer the people, 9. 
| A Pſalm ot David. 
: L JNeo thee will I cry, O LORD my Rock, be not} 
_ ſilent « | to me : *leſt if thou be ſilent ro me, I 
"14,9 Pecome like them that go down into the pir 6. | 
a Be notdeaf to my prayers, nor dumb as to thy Anſwers to them. 
b 7. e. Leſt IT bz inthe like or ſame condition with them, 7.e. a 
loſt Creature ; as I ſhall — be, if thou doſt not ſuccour me. 
: 2 Hear the voice of my ſupplications, whenlT cry unto 
Wh, '» thee: when Lift up my hands | |rowards thy holy oraclec. 
_ c i.e. Towards the Holy of Holies, whith is ſo called, 1 K:ngs 
ren 6: 23. Compare with 2. Chron. 3. 10: Compare alſo 1 Kings 6 5. and 
fi, 8: 6. Becaule there the Ark was; from whence God gave Oracular 
)} Anſwers to his People ; and to which they accordingly direted 
their Prayers, not only when they drew near to it, bur whenthey 
were at a diſtance from 1t, as Dan, 6. 104 _ 
2 Draw me not away with the wicked 4, and with 
12 the workers of iniquity : * which ſpeak peace to their 
55, 2 neighbours, but miſchief is in their heart e, . 
6.4 A The Senſe is, either 1, Do not ſuffer me to be drawn away by 
79. *- their Counſelor Example to imitate their evil Courſes. For God is 


oft ſaid to do that which he doth not effe&t, but only permit and 
order, as 2 Sam. 12:12. Or, 2. Do not draw me into the ſame 
ſnares and miſchief with them; do not drag me, as thou doft or 
wiltſt do all theſe Malefa&ors, to execution and deſtruction. Let 
me not dye the death ofthe wicked : Compare Pſal; 26: 9: Thus 
drawing is uſed for drawing to death, Job 21: 33; Ezek: 32: 20+ This 
ſeems beſt to ſuit with the following Context, wherein he 1mpre- 
cateth and foretell:th that deſtruftion upon his Enemies, which he 
deprecateth for himſelf. e Which are Hypocrirical and perfidious 
Perſons, whilſt I through thy Grace am upright and ſincere. Se- 
ing then T am ſo unlike them in diſpoſition and praftice,ler me not 
be made like them in their Ruine» : 

4 Give them according to their deeds, and according 
to the wickedrels of their endeavours f: give thein after 
the work of their hands,render to them their defert. 

f Dxvia uſerh theſe Imprecations partly to vindicate himſelf 
from the ſlanders of his Enemies,who reported him to be as wicked 
as chey were, oaly more clote and cunning therein'z which if he 
had 'been, he had bitre ly curſed himſelf; which it could not rea- 
ſonably be preſumed that he would do : Partly, from his great and 
long Experience of their implacable and incorrigible Malignity, 
not only againit him, bur againſt God, and his declared Wl, and 


Note on Pſal: 26:2: where the Hebrew words ate the fame. 6 That 
I may neither open their mouths. again me or Religion, by my 
Miſcarriages, nor fall into their Hands, by my folly, nor give 


ſniration he uttered this, as well as the reſt of- the Pfalm 3 and 
partly, that hereby he might provoke them to Repentance; for 
this Curſe belongs only to thoſe, who: ſhall obſiinately pertiit in 
their wicked Courſes. Add to all this, that as Verbs of the Impera- 
tive Mood, are oft uſed by the Hebrews for Futures, . fo theſe 
may not be proper Imprecations,but prediQtions of theirDeſtruction 

5 Becauſe they regard not the works of the LORD, 
nor the operation of his hands g, he ſhall deſtroy them; 
and not build them up h. | | | 

£ i. e. The provicential works of God, both for and towards his 
Church and People jn general 3 the ſerious Obſervation whereof 
would have made them afraid of oppoſing them, and deſirous to 
joyn themſelves with them ; and for and towards me in particular, 
concerning whoſe ſuccetlion to the Kingdom, God hath 1o expreſly 
declared his Mind and Will, and to whom he hath given ſo many; 
and ſuch wonderfull preſervations,that they who will not acknow- 
ledge ir, but continue to oppoſe it, may well be preſumed to be 
guilty of Rebellion againſt Gods will, and of the Contempr of his 
Providence. h3,e, Deſtroy them utterly and irreceverably ; be- 
cauſe they wilfully ſhut their Eyes againſt the Light of Gods 
Word and Works. 

6 Bleſled be the LORD, becauſe he hath heard the 
voice of my ſ{upplications, | 
7 The LORD is my ſtrenth and my ſhield, my heart 
cruſted in him, and Iam helped : therefore my hearc 
greatly rejoyceth, and with my ſong will I praiſe him. 
z He ſpeaks of it as paſt, either becauſe God had in part heard, 
and anſwered him already : Or, becauſe God affured him by his 
Spirit, that he had heard and accepted his Prayer, and would af« 
iuredly anſwer him in due time. 
8 The LORD 53s || their ſtrength &, and he 5s |Or, 5; 
the + ſaving ſtrength / of his anoiated »-. OO frirength, 
ki. e, The ſtrength of his people, mentioned in the next verſe: T Heb. 
the Relative being pur before the Antecedent, which is1cft to be /frength of 
gathered out of the following matter, as itis, Num.24.17, Pſal;8q: Saruanion. 
i, Or, hi ſtrength : for the Hebrew Afﬀix Mo, which commonly is 
plural,is ſometimes taken ſingularly, of which ſee my Latine Synoa 
2/es here, and on 1/a. 53.8: And hu, i. e Of his anointed, as the 
next Clauſe explains it. Or, the words may be thus rendred, 
ſtrength #, or belongs to the Lord: Hebs The Lord, frength is his, or to 
him. It is an Hebrew Pleonaſme. 1 Heb. The frength of the Prefer. 
vation, or Deliverances, or Viftories, or Szlvations, i« e« He by whoſe 
ſtrength alone he hath got theſe ViRtories, - &'c. m i:e, Of me 
whom he hath anointed to be King, whom therefore he will de- 
fend, he ſpeaks of himſelf in the third Perſon, which is uſual in 
the Hebrew Tongue. 


9 Save thy people, and bleſs. thine inheritapeey jg, "1 


[| feed them alſo, and lift them up 0 for ever, | 
z Iſrael, for wliom I pray ; partly, becauſe thou haſt in ſome fort 
committed them to my charge ; and partly becauſe Saul! did not 
take due care of theme o Raiſe them out of their low and afflicted 
condition, in which they arc, by reaſon of Sauls weakneſs and ne- 
glett, and by the prevailing power of the Philiſtines, and advance 
chem to a ſtate of ſafety and honour, and that not for a ſeaſon, but 
with Conſtancy and Perpetuity, as it follows. 
FSA i. . AXEX. 
The ARGUMENT. 
T- is ſuppoſed that this Pſalm was made upon the occaſion of 
ſome terrible Tempeſt of Thunderand Rain; which God might 
poſſibly tend in the time of Battel to afſiſt David, and diſcomfit- his 
Enemies ; as he had done formerly uponlike Occaſions. It contains 
an Admonition to the Potentats of the Earth, and eſpecially to thoſe 
who bordered upon the Land of Iſrael, that they would own and 
Worſhip the true God ; which he preſſeth from the great Majeſty 
and Power of 1/r#e!'s God above all other gods, and particularly, 
from that great and glorious inſtance thereot in Thunder 3 which 
hath ſtruck the proudeſt Monarchs with the dread of that God, whom 
at other times they deſpiſed. 
A Pſalm of David. —— 
David exhorteth the Mighty of this World to give Glory to God, 1. 2«. who 
manifeſteth his Power by Thunder, Lightning, and by other Creatures, 
- 10. Heſneweth Gods Proteftion and Bleſſing of his People, 1%, , _ 
gn * unto the LORD, O +|| ye {mighty @, give *; Chr.j6. 
unto the LORD b glory and ſtrength cs» 


' 28,29, 


temn God, and inſolent!y to aſſume a kind of Deiry to themſelves; Þ Heb. ye 
and partly, becauſe their Convittion and Converſion was likely to Sons of the 
have a great and powerful influence upon their people. 6b By an mighty. 
humble and thankful acknowledgment of it; for other ways wecah || Or, of 
give nothing to God, c t: e: The glory of þis flrength or power which God. 

is the Attribute ſer forth in this Pſalm 3 Or, his glorious ftrength. 
2 Give unto the LORD 7 the glory due unto his 
name d: worſhip the LORD || in the beautie of holi: 
nels £, t ; : EY OS WES . ie N 
d i.e: The honour which he deſerves; which is to prefer him be- LO! eohnn 
fore all other Gods, and to forſake all others, and to own him as hiszlorioxs 
the Almighty, and the only true God. e Or, of the Santuary,which Sariduarye 
is commonly called by this name 3 in his Holy and beautiful Houſe, 

as it is called, 1/2.64.11. the only place where he will receive. wo:- 

ſhip. So he exhorts them, to turn Proſelytes to the Jewiſh Religionz 

which was their Duty and Intereſt, 


3 The voice of the LORD 


+ Heb.che 
Honour of 


f is upon the watersg : 


che God of glory thundrech, the LORD 3s upon || m3- y Or gre 


ny waters þ. 


| HS.  , Was. 
fi, e. Thunder, as is manifeſt from the next Clauſe, and the | 


following Effetts :; which is oft called the L'rds voice, as Exd. gg 


4ÞP4 


2 33 


Plal. XA of 


a Ye Potentats and Rulers of the carth. To thoſe he :ddreſſeth Pſal, 96. - ? 
his Speech ; partly, becauſe they are moſt apt to forget and con= 7,8, 9. .+ 1 


| 


—_— ab < ie in ae Re bare ere he rn et 


bl. XXx. P $ A 


23, 28, 29. Job 37: 21, 4, 8. Pſal: 18: 14. and 46:6. 2 Either, 7. 
Upon the Seas 3 where its noi'e ſpreads far and wide, and 1s very 
terrible» Bur the following Veries ſpeak of the Effects of it,upon 
the earth only. Or rather, 2. Above in the clouds, which are 
called Waters, Gen: r: 7+ Pſal. 18: 11. Becauſe they are of a watry 
Subſtance, And this Circumſtance is conſiderable here, to magnt- 
fie the Divine Power, which diſplayeth ir ſelf in thoſe high places, 
which are far above the reach of all Earthly Potentates, and from 
whence he can eafily and unavoidably ſmite all that dwell upon the 
Earth, and will not ſubmir to him. -þ ( 7. e. ) Upon the Clouds, 
in which there are vaſt treaſures of Water, and upon which God 
is aid to ſit or ride, Pſal: 18: 10, 11. and 104. 3» : 

4 The voice of the LORD 7s + powerful : the voice 
of the LORD zs Þ full of majeſty z. 

i Is an evident Proof of Gods Glorious Majeſty. 

5 The voice of the LORD breakerh che cedars & : 


yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon /7. 

k By Thunder-bolts ; which have ofc thrown down Trees and 
Towers. 1 A place famous for ſtrong and lofty Cedars. See 2 Cr. 
2. 8, Cant. 3.9. and 5. 15- ; 
| 6 He maketh them malſo toskip like a calf ; Lebanon 
Veut:3'9 and * Syrion » like a young unicorn 0. 

» The cedars laſt mentioned; which being broken by theThun- 
der, the parts of them are ſuddenly and violently hurled about hi- 
ther and thither, » An high mountain b-yond Jordan joyning to 
L:hanon : of which ſee Deus. 3+ 9. and 4+ 48. Lebanon and Sirion are 
here underſtood : Either, 1. Properly; and ſo th:y are faid to 
skip or leap, both here, and Pſal. 114. 4. by a poerical Hyperbole 
very uſual, both in Scripture and other Authors ; which is fo 
known that it is neetlleſs to give any Initances of it. Or, 2. Me- 
tonymically foc the Trees or People of them, as the Wilderneſs, wv. 8. 
may ſeem to be taken ; and as #he Earth, by the ſame Figure, 1s 
frequ-ntly put for the People, which dwell in it. e Heb. Reezp : 
Of which ſee on Numb, 23. 22. Pſal. 22. 21. 

+ Heb. 7 The voice of the LORD + divideth pthe flames of 
cutteth out. fire: 

| i þ Heb. Heweth out ; (3. e-) Ir breaketh out of the Clouds, and 
thereby makes way for the Lightnings, which are ſuddenly diſper- 
ſed over the face of the Earth. 

3. The voice of the LORD ſhaketh the wilderneſs 9: 
the LORD ſhaketh the wilderneſs of Kadiſh . 

g (i. e.) Either the Trees, or rather the Peaſts of the Wilder- 
nels, by a Mcronymy as beforey v. 6. Compare this with the next 
Verſe. r Which he mentions as an eminent Wilderneſs, vaſt and 
terrible, and well known to the 1/raeliter, Num. 20. 1, 16 nd 


Hebe in 

wer, 

Heb. 
jefty. 


Thunder, as are here mentioneds 


9 The voice of the LORD maketh the hinds || to 
calve ſand diſcovererh : the foreſts: and « in his temple 


] doth every one ſpeak ot bis glory. 

[Though the Terrour which it cauſeth, which haſtens the Birth 
in.-theſe and other places : Sce 1 $219. 4.19. He nameth the Hinds, 
becauſe they bring torth their young with ditficulty, Job 3g. 1, 2. 
t Heb. maketh bare, either of its Trees, which it Either breaks or 
ſtrips off their Leaves : Or, of the Beaſts, which it forceth to run 
into their Dens. « Or, but. Having ſhewed the terrible effe&s of 
Gods power in other places, he now thews the blelled priviledge 
of Gods people, that are praiſing and glorifying God, and receiv- 
ing the comfortable influences of his Grace in his Temple, when the 
reſt of the World are trembling under the tokens of his Difplea- 
ſure. By which he ſecretly invites and perſwades the Gent:!es, for 
their own ſafety and comfort, to own tae true God, and ro Wor- 
ſhip him in his SanQuary, as he did exhort them, wv. 2. Or, there- 
fore, (7. e.) Becauſe of theſe and ſuch like diſcoveries of Gods ex- 
cellent Majeſty and Power, his people fear and praiſe, and adore 
; him in his Temple. 

 *p(4.10, © 39 The LORD ſitteth upon the flood x : yea, * the 
x6. LORD fitreth king for ever. 
**x He moderateth and ruleth (which is oft fignified by Fr:ing,this 
being the poſture of a judge,or Ruler : of whuch ſee P/al.9.7,8,9.8& 
47.9. Jeel 3.12.) the moſt abundant and violent Inundations of Wa- 
ters, which ſometimes fall from the Clouds upon the Earth ; where 
they would .do much miſchicf if God did nor prevent it» And 
thele are here firly mentioned, as being many times the Compani- 
ons of great Thunders. And this may be alledged as another 
Reaſon, why Gods peop'e did praiſe and Worſhip him in his 
- Temple, becauſe as he ſendeth terrible Tempeſts and Thunders, 
and Flouds, ſo he alſo reſtrains and over-rules them. But moſt 
Interpreters refer this to Noahs Flood, to whom the word here 
uſed is elſewhere appropriated And ſo the words may be ren- 
dred,7The Lord, did ſit upon, or at the Flood, in Noahs time when it is 
; Probable thoſe vehement Rains were accompanied with terrible 
Thunders. And ſo having ſpoken of the manifeſtation of Gods 
power, in Storms and Tempeſts in general, he takes 2n occaſion 
to run back to that ancient ard moit dreadfull Example of thar 
kind, in which the Divine Power was moſt eminently ſeen» And 
having mentioned that inſtance, he adds, that as God ſhewed him- 
ſelf to be the King and the Judge of the World at that rime,ſfo he 
doth ſtill f#, and will fit as King for ever, ſending ſuch Tempeſts 
when it pleaſeth him. And therefore his people have great reaſon 
to worſhip and ſerve him, 
11 The LORD will give ſtrength y unto the people; 
the LORD will bleſs his pzople with peace z. 

» To ſupport and preſerve them in the moſt dreadful Tempeſts, 
and conſequently in all other dangers,and againſt all their enemies. 
z Though now he ſees fir to exerciſe them xtith ſome troubles, 

Þ PF 3 & þ.. XXX, 
A Pſalm a»«ſong 4, at the dedication of the houſe of 


David 6. 

# Or, « Pſalm or ſong ; (7. e.) Either, r. A Pſalmto be ſung with 
the Voice to an In{trumear.Or, 2. A Pſalm ef joy and praiſe : 
for ſo this is. And this Hebrew word, $chir,may be here taken 
not ſimply for a Smog, birt for # joyfull Song, as itis, Gen. 3 1: 27. 


|| Or, to be 
 3n part. 
| Orgevery 
whit of it 
 wtercth, 
&Cs 


wherein poſſibly they had ſeen, and obſerved ſome ſuch cftets of 


L M S. 


Exod 15+ 1: Plal: $5: 2. and 42: 8: Pro, 25. 206.1/a. 40. 29. Amos 

8, 3: 10: 6 Either,r, Art the dedicaticn of the Temple, called 

he touſe,or that Houſe,cminently and emphatically. So the Chal. 

d:e Paraphraſt and the Hebrew Dottors underſtand it. And then 

the Jaſt words, of David, are to be joyned with the firſt,s Pſaln 

a1 Song.But this ſeems not probable ; becauſe the Temvle was 
not built by David, nor in his days, although he michr preſcribe 

2 P/alm to be uſed afterwards pon that occaſion. Or, 2.At the 

Dedication of Davids Houſe, which was built, 2 Sam.$;11. and 
doubtleſs was dedicated, as God had commanded : See Dent: 20 
5+ Nehem. 12+ 279% Or, 3» Art the ſecond Dedication of David; 
Houſe, after it had been polluted by 44ſalom and his Concubines, 
But there is no Law of God forany Re Dedication of Houſes in 
ſuch Caſes ; nor any Evidence that David did ſo. Ani indeed 
ir ſeems ſtrange, if this P/alm was made upon this occaſion : or 
upon any of theſe Dedications here mentioned,that there thould 
not be one Line in it ſuitable to that occalion- Others there. 
fore make theſe words, the Dedication of the Houſe, not to note the 
Matter of this Pſalm or Song ; but either, 1. The name of the 
Tune to which this Song was ſung, which. was the ſame thar 
David ujed at the Dedication of his Houſe ; ani fo this gives us 
a Reajon, why the word Sorg is added to that of Pſalm, and why 
this Pſalm was called, rhe Song of the Dedication, Or, 2. The 
time when it was ſung 3 which was at the Dedication of Dayigs 
Houſe. For ſuch Dedications were performed in a very ſolemn 
manncr, with divers Rites and Prayers, and Praiſes to God, ag 
the Nature of that Buſineſs required! And it ſeems probable 
from the Matter of this Pſalm, Compared with the Title, thar 

David had about this time been delivered from ſome eminent 

diſtreſſes, and particularly from ſome dangerous ſickneſs; For 

which he here gives thanks to God, taking advantage of this 
publick and ſolemn occaſion. 

The Pſalmiit praiſeth God for deliverance out of great danger, 1 J. 
and exhurteth others to do the ſame, 4, 5, He acknowlengeth to God, 
that his prayer was heard, and himſclf girded with gladniſs, 6—= 11. 
He will give thanks to G2d for ever | 

will extoll thee, O LORD, for thou haſt lifted me 
up c,and haſt not made my foes to rejoice over me d. 

c Or, drawnup, to wit, out of the deep Pit,or Waters ; to which 
great Dangers Aftlicions arefrequently Compared. d Which they 
both defired, and Conhdently expeC&ted an occaſion to do, 

2 O LORD my God, I cryed unto thee, and thou 

haſt healed me e, 

e( i.e.) Delivered me from the Fears and Troubles of my mind 
which are oft compared to diſeaſes, and from very dangerous Di- 
ſrempers of my Body: % 

3 O LORD, * thou haſt brought up my ſoul from *Pfat. 11. 

+ the grave f: thou haft kept me alive g, that I ſhould **:*#. 

not go down to the pit h. ay _= 
f My deliverance is a kind ef ReſurreQion from the Grave upon Gr. ; 

the very brink whereof I was. g This he adds to explain the for- * Pſyj gr" 

mer Phraſe, which was Ambiguous: h( 7: e-) into the Grave j,, Mi 

which is otr called, the Pit, as Pjal: 28: 1+ and 69: 153 and 88: 4; | Or, to 

Js: 38: 17» : the Meds 

' 4 Sing unto the LORD, O©O ye ſaints of his, and ia 

* give thanks || at the remembrance of his holineſs ; t Hb. 

; Or, at the mention, &c. When you call to mind,or when others *Þcrc1v 
Celebrate, as I do this day, the Holineſs of God's Nature ; which * 799% 
he Demonſtrates by his Works, by his Faithfulneſs,Care,and kind- ”” bs ane 


neſs rowards his holy Ones. ger, * gt 
5 For | * his anger endareth but a moment & ; in his = 1 
Je Jy G0 


favour 3s life /z weeping may endure # for a night,but JG. ,, 
+ joy cometh in the morning m. 17. THebi 
k Commonly the Afﬀfliftions which he ſends upon his People are in the E- 
ſhort ; and latt but for a few moments of their Lives. 1 Or, Life wenn. 
C 7,2. )) Our whole life, is In his Favour, (i- e.) He heapeth his Fa- | Heb. 
vours upon them, for the greateſt part of their preſent Lives, and ſing. 
in the next Life which endures for ever 3 of which the Chaldee Para 
phraſt expounds this place» And indeed without the Conſidarati- 
on of eternal Lifezthe difference between the duration of the AfﬀMic- 
tions, and of the Happineſs of God's people, were neither ſo Evi- 
dent nor Conſiderable, as David here makes it. Life is oft put for a 
long and Happy time, as Pſal; 34. 12: and 133. 3. Prov. 3. 2. and 
for an Eternal and immortal Duration, 2 Tim. r, 10. Jam. 1. 12. 
And in Civil Aﬀairs, Eſtates for Life are oppoſed to thoſe that are 
but for a ſhort time« »» (#4 e,) It comes ſpeedily and in due ſeq- 
ton. 
o . o F 2 
6 And * in my prolperity I faid, I ſhall never be mo- up hy 
ved ». : 
7 I thought my ſelf paſt all Danger of further Changes, forget- 
ting my own Fraiity, and the uncertainty of all Worldly things. 
7 LORD, by thy favour thou haſt + made my # Heb, * 
* mountain to ſtand ſtrong 0; thou * didſt hide thy #4 
£ , ſtrength fi 
face p, and I was troubled 9. ay Mons 
8 1 cried to thee, O LORD ; and unto the LORD 


tain, | 

I made ſupplication. * Pal. 46. 

0 Thou haſt ſo rmly ſettled me in my Kingdom : which he calls 4» 5 E 
his mountain, Partly becauſe Kingdoms are uſually called Moun- 491%: 
tains in Prophetical writings, as Pl: 46. 3, 4. Iſa. 2. 2, Jer. 51:25; $7,5 
Dan: 2: 34» 35» 44, 45- and partly with reſpe& to Mount $107; *Plal-1% 
where he built his Royal PalaceztheDedication whereof is mention- 29- 
edin the Title of the Pſalm: p (ie ) Withdraw thy Favour and 
Help. q I was quickly brought into ſuch Diſtreſſes of Body, and 
Dry of Mind, thatI faw the vanity of all my Carnal Conit- 

ences. 
9 What profit zs there r in my blood /, when 80 +155; 
down to the pitt ? * ſhall the duſt praiſe thee ? ſhal it g 88.15 
declare thy truth ? & 11567 


io Hear O LORD, and have mercy upon me; 


Lord, be thou my helper. 
r To wit, unto thee, as the latter part of the Verſe explains 1t. 
What wilt thou gain by ic? { ( 7.e. ) In my violent Death,as 6/0 
iS 


Pſal. XXX. 


Fa! 


Ia. 


[7H 
my7 
Or, 
Sl. 


, Luk. 
46, 


"Joh. 2 


"Pag. 1 


&18, Ic 


XX, 


[. 1. 
> 89, 


Heb 


6. 5 
8. 10+ 
FolT+ 


fal. 


| oft under the Name of Righteouſneſs. 


XXX1, FT 4 


is frequent!y uſed, as Gem; 37. 26- Numbe 35+ 33. Toſ. 20. 3, I Sam. 
25. 26, 33. Mat. 27- 6, 5 When I die. See above onwv. 3. ſhall 
they that are dead,or gone down into the duſt, Celebrate thy Faith- 
fulneſs and goodneſs in the land of the living ? Or, ſhall my Duſt 
of dead Corps praiſe thee? No Lord, ſhould thou cut me offin the 
beginning of my reign, thy Name would loſe the Praiſes, which 
many will return to thee for my lite, and be expoſed to Reproaches, 
as if thou hadit not kept thy word with me : and I ſhould loſe 
choſe opportunities of prailing thy Name, and ſerving my Gene- 
rations, which I prize above my Lite. EE 

1x * Thou haſt turned « for me my mourning into 


dancing : thou haft put off my ſackcloth x and girded 
me with gladnels y. 


Jv 


Ia. 613+ 


u Having related his Prayer, he now declares the gracious An- 
ſwer which God gave him»  z. e. Given me occaſion to put off 
that Sackcloth, which they uſed to wear in times of Mourning. 
See Efth. 4. 1. Pſal. 35. 13. 1a. 32+ £1. Joel 1.13. y Either with 
Garments of Gladneſs, or Rejoicing : Or, with joy, as with a 
Garment ſurrounding me on every tide; as he is for the like Rea- 

That is ſon, faid to be grrded with ſtrength, 'Pſal, 18- 32. : 
Hein 12 To the end that || my glory 2 may ling praiſe tothee, 
dr, my and not be ſilent; O LORD my God, I will givethanks 


Sl, unto thee for ever. 
z My Soul: Or, rather my Tongue to which both ſiging and 
ſilence moſt properly belong, See on Pſa. 7. 5. and 16. 9. 


PS ATI. XXAL. 
The ARGUME NT. 


His Pſalm was compoſed either, when David was in great 
Diſtreſs 3 Or afterwards in remembrance thereof, and of 


, moſt dryed up with exceſfſii © Grief, 


God's ſingular Goodneſs in delivering him our of it, whence it is 
mixed of Prayer and Praiſes, of Hopes and Fears. Bur whar thoſe 
particular troubles were, which David here ſpeaks, is only matter 
of conjeEure, and therefore I ſhall rather omit, than confidently 
determine | | 
To the chief mufician, A Pſalm of David. 
David prayeth for preſervation, according to his Confidence which he put 
teth in God, 1 ---- 6. that he might rejoice .n is Mercy, 7, 8 
He declareth what he ſuffered from his Enemies and Friends, g- =1,. 
But Magnifieth the care and Tenaerneſs of God, 14+--18. and praiſeth 
him for his goodneſs to h:mſelf, and to the Faithful, 19 WOFY 
N thee, * O LORD, do 1 put my cruſt, let me ne- 
ver be aſhamed a: *deliver me in thy Righteouſ- 
neſs 6, 


a To wit, my Confidence in thy Promiſes. 6 7. e. By or For: 
Or, according to thy Faithfulneſs and goodneſs ; both which come 


Wa.22.5. 
I7.49. 23+ 
* Plal. 


143, Is 


2 Bow down thine ear to me, deliver me ſpeedily c ; 
tHeb. :» be thou F my firong rock, for an houſe F of defence to 


wfrs fave me. : 

Rck of c becauſe of the greatneſs and urgency of my Danger, which is 
fragth. even ready to ſwallow me up. 

_. of 4 For thou art my rock and my fortreſs : therefore 
»+ pl * for thy names ſake 4 lead me, and guide me e. 


4 Pull me out of the net, that they have laid privily 


for me :. for thouart my ſtrengrh. 

d For the Glory of thy Name, z- e. Of thy Power and Truth, 
and Mercy to thy miſerable Servant e Two words expreſling the 
ſame thing with more Emphaſis: Dire& me clearly, and continu- 
ally in a right and ſafe Path: For without thy conduct, I can nei- 
ther diſcern the right way, or continue 1n 1t. 2 

5 * Into thine hand fl commir my ſpirit g : thou | 
haſt redeemed me b6, O LORD God of cruth z. 

f i. e. To thy care and cuſtody. g 7. e. My ſoul or Life, called 
a Man's Spirit, as Eccleſ. 3. 21: and 12. 7. &c. Either, 1. Tore- 
ceive it : for my caſe isalmoſt deſperat, and I am ready to give up 
the Ghoſt. Or, 2.To preſerve it from the plots and Malice of mine 
Enemies. + Thou haſt delivered me formerly in great Dangers, 
and therefore I willingly and Cheerfully commit my 1cIf to thee, 
for the Future. 5 Who haſt ſhewed thy ſelf ro be foto me, in 
making good thy promiles- FE 

6 I have hated them & * that regard lying vanities 


m : but I truſt in the LORD. 

k their very Perfons, not ſimply, but for their wickedneſs. 
Compare Pſa. 139. 21. 22. I Heb. that obſerve, to wit, with Rce- 
ſpect ro them, dependence upon them, or expectation of any 
good from theme m Or, moſt vain wanit:es : ſuch as are foolith and 
deceitful, and fruitleſs. By which he underſtands, Either, - 1. All 
Human or Carnal helps, any Arm of Fleſh 3 for he that truſterh 
therein is pronounced Curſed, Fer. 17. 5- and therefore 15 hateful], 
Or, 2. Idols, which are oft called Yanities, as Deut, 32. 21. Jer. 
2.5. and 8» 19. &c, Or 3+ Curious Arts, and all ſorts of Divinati- 
ons by Stars, or the Motions, or Inwards of living Creatures, or 
by the dead : which practices were common and prevalent amorg 
thoſe Faſtern people, and by their example, were too rife among 
the 1ſraelites alſo, 1ja. 2. 6. of whom he here ſpeaks; for the Gen- 
tiles that obſerved theſe Vanities, he ratber piticd than harcd ; bur 
the I/r2elites thar did 10 were Apoitates from God,and profefled E- 
nemies to him and his Laws, and therefore were the proper Ob- 
jects of juſt hatred. : 

7 I witli be glad, ar.d rejoice in thy Mercy: for thou 
haſt conſidered my troubles ; thou -haft known » my 
foul in adverliities, | 

1 ie. Loved me, and cared for me; for words of knowledge 


*Luk.23. 
46, 


"Job. 2.8. 


p1 
W4or, commonly imply Aﬀection. EE | 
5-19. 8 And hatt not ſhut me up into the hand of the ene- 


my 0: * thou haſt fer my foot in a large room p. Þ 


nor delivered me. See 1 Sam 23.7" p Made way tor me to eſcape, 
when-I was eacompaſled vy them, and iet me ar Jiberry 


9 Have mercy upoa me, O LORD, 


means ſuch as were 
! x With great Arrogancy, and confidence of ſucceſs, and contempt 


o Whereot I was in great and imminent Danger, if thou hadſc Porene and Fugitives, and ſuch whom they can b!ow away with a 


: withſtanding all their falſe Accuſations : . and therefore for thy 
for I am in E9v< to Rightecuinels fave us, and filence our unjuſt Enemies. 


'F 
L M$ Plal. XX 
trouble : mine eye is conſumed with grief q, yea, my 
ſoul r, and my belly 5. | 
q4 With continual weeping. See. on Pja! 6 8. r My ſorrows 
are not counterfeit or ſle:ighr, bur inwaid and hearty ; my Mind is 
oppreſſed, my heart is ready to fink under my Burden. s z. e. My 
Bowels contained in my Belly ; : which are the ſear of the Aﬀecri- 
ons. and fountains of ſtipport and Nourifhment to the whole Body 
Thus the whole Min both Soul and Buly inſide and outlive, are 
conſumed y : [-- x | 
Io For my life t is ſpent with grief, ard my years 
with ſighing : my ſtrength faiiech becauſe of mine ini- 
quity «, and my bones x are conſumed y. 

# i, The time of my Life, as the next Clauſe explains it. « 
Either through my deep and juft Senſe of my Sins ; which have 
provoked(od to alflict me in this manner? Or,fer the puniſhment of 
mine 1n1quity, as this word 1s frequently uſed. x in which my 
chief ſtrength lyes.': y The Juice and! Marrow of them, being al- 


Ii 1 was a reproach z among all mine enemies, but 
* eſpecially among my neighbours a, anda fear b tomine 
acquaintance: they that did ſee me wichout,fled-from me ec, 
Z z. e. The matter of their Reproaches and Scorns.' This, ſaid 
they, is Dawid, anointed to be King of Iſrael, a goodly Monarch 
indeed, forfaken by God and Men, and in a periſhing and deſperat 
Condition ; He pretends great Piety to God, and Loyalty to Saul, 
but in truth he is a great Impoſour, and a Traitor, #nd Rebel to 
his King. 4 Which aggravares their ſin, and his Miſery, partly 
becauſe they were obliged by the Laws of Neighbourhood, to per- 
form all friendly Offices to him; and partly becauſe they were 
daily Witnefles of his integrity, and therefore linned againſt their 
own Knowledge. 6 Or, &@ Terror« - They were: afraid ro give me 
any Countenance 0r afſiitance, or to be ſeen in my company ; be» 
ng warned by Abimelech's puniſhment for it, 1 Same 22. c Either, 
loathing me as a Monſter of Men, and an unlucky ſpeQacle, and 
iach a Villain as mine Enemies repreſented me, and they believed 
me to be; Orto prevent their own danger andRuine, which might - | 
be occalioned by it« E 
12 Iam forgotten d as a dead man e out of mind: I jp; | 


am like a f broken Veſlelf. . . Veſſel th 
4 Wharſoever good Service have done to the King or King- periſheth. 
dom, or to any particular perſons, Neighbours, Friends, or o-- | 
others, which ſometimes they have acknowledged and high'y com- | 
mended, is now quite forgotten by all of them ; or, at lair, rhey- | 
carry themſelves to mes as if it were ſo. e Whoſe name and Me. . 
mory is quite loſt, within a few days. See Pſal, 88. 12. Fcelsſ. 9.5. ' 
f Made of Earth; which is irreparable, and uſeleſs, and th:refore | 
deſpiſcd by all. _—_ 
13 Forl haye heard g the ſlander of many 5h: * fear ; Jer. | 
was On every ſide, while they took counſel together a= Lam. ;} 


me, they deviſed ro take away & my lite.: IJ. 

& Partly with my own Ears; and partly by the Information of 
others. þ Who reproach and defame me, as a turbulent and ſediti= 
ous perſon, an Enemy to the publick Peace, a Confpirator againſt/ 
the King's Life or Dignity, # 5. e. Juſt cauſe of Fear, even of the- 
Toſs of my Life, as appears from the next Clauſe. & To wit, un-- 
juitly and violently ; as this Word is uſed, Gen 34. 2. and 24. 17. 

: 4 Bur I cculted in thee, O LORD: 1 ſaid, thou art 
my God /. | 

{ Mine by paternal Relation and Care, and AﬀcRion, and by 
thy Promiſe or Covenant made with rite | 

15 My times m2 are in thy hand »: deliver me from the 


hand of mineenemies, and from them chat perſecute me. 
-m Either, 1. The time of my Life, how long I thall live. Or, 
2. My Opportynities, or fit ſeaſons, for working our my Deliverance, 
Or rather, 3. All the Aﬀairs and Events ofmy Life : For tims is oft - 
pur for things done, or Accidents happening in time, as 1 Chron, 
29. JO. Job 11. 17. Pal. 37 18. Eccleſ. 9g. 11. Dan. 2. 21+ Atts 17. : 
26. 11.e; Are wholly in thy Power, to diſpoſe and order as thou: 4 
ſecſt fir, and not ar all in mine Enemies Power, who can do no-+ | _ - + 
thing againſt me, unleſs it be given them from above. *Pſal 4.6 
15 * Make thy tace to ſhine upon thy Servant 0: ſave 


me for thy mercies ſake. 
o Manifeſt thy Love and favour to me, by anſwering my Pray- 
ers, and ſaving me from all mine Enemies. > | 
17 *Lert me nor be aſhamed, O LORD, for I have F * I 
called upon thee p: letthe wicked be aſhamed q, and ||,, _ 


let * them be ſilent in the f grave yr. | Or, lt 
Þ And therefore, thy Honour will be eclipſed in my diſappoint- them be 
ment, as if thou didſt not hear Prayers, nor keep Promile, nor of for 
make any difference between good and bad Men. 9 fruſtrated in Grave. - 
their wicked Deſigns, and Carnal confidences. r Seing - they aze fHeb,hel, 
implacable in their Malice and Rage againſt innocent and good 
Men, do thou cut them off by thy juſt judgment ; and* fince ei- 
ther the Righteous, or the wicked muit be cut off, ler Deſtru&i- © : 
on fall upon them, who moſt deſerve it- *Pla 53 


18 * Ler the lying lips s be put to ſilence tr, which t Heb. s 
ſpeak + grievous things «, proudly and contemptuouſly © #45 
x againſt the righteous y. 

5 Slanderous Tongues. # Either. by thy Vindication and diſco 
very of my Integrity : Or, by ſome Eminent Judgment, which may 
either Convince them, or cut them off. -« Hcb. hard Waras, or 
Things, the fingular number being pur for the plural. Of rhis Ex= 
prefſion, See 1 Sam. 2. 3. Pſa. 60, 3. and 94+ 4. Jude wv. 15. He 
grievous, and hard to be born, as bitter Ca« 
lumnies, Cruel Mockings, Terrible Threatnings, and the 1 ke, 


FF © 


of me and mine, whom they look upon as ſew in number, and im< 


Breath. y Againſt us, whom thou knoweſt to be Righteous, not- 


4 Q' 1979 


XXX. FS 4 


644+ 19 * O how great is thy goodneſs z, which thou haſt 
2-9. 11id up « forthem thar fear thee; which thou haſt wrought 
b for them that truſt in thee, before the ſons of men c. 

z No words can expreſs the greatneſs of thy Love and Bleflings: 
a Or, hiddex, to wit, with thy 1eif, or in thy own Breaſt. The 
word is very Emphatica!, and removes an Obje&ion of ungoely 
Men, taken from the preſent calamities of Good Men. His Favour, 
it is true, is not always manifeſted,to or for them, but it is Jaid up 
for them in his Treature, whence it ſhall be drawn forth when 
they needy it, and he fees ir fir. b Or, hoſt prepared, as Exod. 15. 
17. Or, w:Iſ work, the paſt time being put for the Furure, to note 
the certainty of it, as is common in the prophetical Vtritings. © 
3. e. Publickly, and in the viev of the World, their very Ene- 
mies ſeeing and admiring, and envying it, but not being able to 
hinder it» 
&,Por- 20 Thou ſhalt hide them in theſecret of thy preſence 
F &dfcom the || pride of man e: thou * ſhalt keep them ſe- 
Nor Cretly in a pavilion e from the ſtrife of congues f. 
27.56 d Or, as in the ſecret of thy Preſence : Either, 1. As if they were 
in thy preſence Chamber,where thin? own Eye and Hand guardeth 
them, trom all theaſſaults of their Enemies ; called his ſecret, part- 
ly, becauſe the greateſt part of the World are Strangers to God 
and his Preſence: And partly, becauſe it 1s a fafe and jecure place, 
ſuch as ſecret and unknown places are. Or, 2+. As if they were :n 
the ſecret of God's Tabernacle, as it is called, Pſal. 27. 5. the place 
of God's ſpecial preſence, where none might enter fave the High- 
prieſt. Or, 3. withthy ſecret Favour and Providence, which works 
mightily, yet ſecretly for them, and faves them by hidden and 
an Methods. This is oppoſed to thoſe Caves, or other ob- 
ſcure and unſafe places, where David was forced to hide hin:{elf. 
e From their vain-glorious Boaſts and Threats,and from their bold 
and inſolent Attempts. e Or, as in thy Pavilon, Or Tabernacle ; and 
ſo this Clauſe explains the former, and ghe pronoun thy, 1s here ea- 
fily, and aptly underſtood out of the foregoing Branch. 7 #, e- 
from the mitchief of contentious and flanderous Fongues. 

21 Bleſſed be the LORD ; for * he hath thewed me 
©17-7- his marvellous kindneſs in a || ſtrong city g. 
dr, fence g to wit, in Keilah ; wheie God woncerfully preſerved me : 
J- of which ſee 1 Sam. 23. 7. Others, as in # ffrong City, He hath 
kept me as ſafe in Woods and Caves as if I had been in a fenced 


Ciry. ; 
= 16. Is For I ſ2id * in my haſte h, T * am cut off from be- 
. JODam. 


"9% fore thine eyes: nevertheleſs thou heardeft the voice 
ings 7. of my ſuppiicarions & when I cryed unto thee. 
e. Gr. in . h i. e. Ta my haſty flight from Saul, when he and his Men had 
y 4maze- a\moſt encompaſſed me, + Sam. 23. 26. which happened preſent!y 
afrer his Deliverance, in and from the ſcrong City of Kei/ah, *Or, 
Ifa. 38. in myfear or Trembling, when my paſſton too away my confide- 
x,12. La. ration, and weakened my Faith. 5 z. e- Caft our of thy fight, and 
54 out of the care of thy gracious providence; my Caſe 1s deſperat» 
ohn 2.14. Or. cut off whilit thou lookeſt on, and doit not pity nor help me-+ 
| D My Fears were quickly confured by thy gracious Anſwer ro my 
[ayers | 
23 Olove the LORD. all ye his Saints : for the 
LOXD preſerveth the faithful 7, and * plentifully : re- 
94.2, Wardeth the proud doer ». 
I Or, keepeth Faithfulnejs or Faithfuln:ſ*s, i. e. Is fairhful in fulfil- 


IJ 


F 


proud adoer 1n the next clauſe of the Verie. m Heb. Wh ) for to 

the Hebrew a! ſometimes ſignifies ) abunaance. n The Enemies and 
erſecutors of God's faithful ones before mentioned, whom he calis 

ar proud dozrs, becauſe of their Rebellion againſt: God's will, 

and their Contempr of his Threatnings and Judgments, and th. ir 

moſt inſolent and contempruous carriage rowards his people: all 

which procceds ſrom the pride of their heart, Pja. 10, 4 

- 24 * Be of good courage o, and || he ſhall itrengthen 

*Pfal. 27. your heart, all ye that hope in the LORD. 

14: o Or, Be ffrong, in the Lord, and by confidence in his promiſes 
_m_ which will nor fail you 3 as Þ have tound vy Experience. 

your 


P SAL. XXXII. 
: [| 4 Pſalm of David, Maſchil a. 


$----17x. 
Leſled 3s he hoſe * 
fin 15 covered a. 


a Tdid indeed ſay, that they and they only were Bleſſed, 


and med.'tate on Gods Law, Pſp. rt 1, 2. 


the confirmation whereof this Text is juſtly alledged, Rom. 


and abominable in God's ſight, and need covering. 


o John Fs 
47- 


-not feignedly« 


ling his promites : Or rather, the Faithful, who is oppoled to the | 


tranſgreflion is forgiven, whoſe 


that did not walk in the counſel of the ungodly, &c. Bur did delight im, 
And it 1s true, this is the 
only way to Blefſedneſs. Bur if enquiry be made into the cauſe of 
- Mans Blefſedneſs, we muſt feck that elſewhere, All Men having 
"ſinned and made themſelves guilty before God, and fallen ſhort of 
the Glory of God, and of that happin<ſs which was conferred upon 
their firſt Parents, now there is no way to recover this loſt Feli- 
city, but by ſceking and obraining the favour of God. and the par- 
don of our fins. Which is the very Do&rine of the Goſpel: to 
6 
5. Our Sins are Debrs, and they need forgiving ; they are filthy and 


2 Bleſſed is the man unto whom the LORD imputeth 

not iniquity 6, and * in whoſe ſpirit there 5s no guile c. 

b Whom God doth not charge with the guilt of his Sins, as he 

" might juſtly do, but graciouſly accepts and pardons him in Chriſt, 

and deals with him «s if he had nor ſinned. c Who freely con- 

feſſeth all his Sins withour diſembling and concealing of them ; 

which may ſeem to be the main thing here intended, by comparing 

- this with the following Verſes : and whois lincere in his Profeſſions 
of Repentance, turning from Sin to God with all his Heart, and 


L M S$. Plal. XXXII, 


| 2 When I kept filence 4,my bones waxed old ethrough 

my roaring all the day long f. | 

d To wit, from a full and open Confeſſion of my Sins, as ap. 
pears from v- 5, and from pouring out my Soul tro Ged in ſerious 
and fervent Prayers for pzrdon ard peace. Whilſt I concealed my 
ſins : Or, ſ{morhered my Fears, and ſtifled the workings of my own 
Conſcience. e My Spirits failed, and the firength of my Body 
decayed. f Becauſe of the continual horrours of my Conſcience, 
ind ſenſe of Gods wrath, wherewith I was as yet rather oppreſſed 
and overwhelmed, than brought to through Kepentance. 

4 For day and night thy hand g was heavy upon me: 
my moiſture was turned into the droughr of ſummer 4 
Selah. 


£ Thy affliting hand bringing my Sins toremembrance, and £1. 
ling me with thy terrors for them. + My very radical moiſture 
was in a manner dryed up, and waſted though exccflive Fears and 
YOrrOWS., : 

5 1 acknowledged my fin unto thee,and mine iniqui- 
ty have I not hid : * I ſaid, 1 will contels my tranſ- *Prov.28: 
greflions unto the LORD #; and thou torgaveſt the ini- 13 
quiry of my ſin &. Selah. | 

; Ar laſt I rook up a full Reſolution, that I would no longer 
dally nor deal deceittully with Ged, nor vainly feck to hide my 
Sins from the all-ſeeing God, but that I would open)y and candidly 
confeſs and bewail all my Sins with all their Aggravations, and 
humbly implore the pardon of them. k i e. The guilt of my Sin, 
Or, Thou didſt take away the pun.ſbment ( as this Hebrew word oft ſig- 
nifies ) of my ſm; Or, my exceeding ſinful ſm, two words ſignifying 
the ſame thing, being here put rogether by way of aggravation 
according to the manner of the Hebrews. 

6 For this I ſhall every one that is godly pray unto 
thee, | in a time when thou mayeſt be found w ſurely 
in the * floods of great waters », they ſhall not come 
nigh unto him s. Pla.69.13, 

{ 7. 6. Upon the incouragement of my Example, and thy great 11a 55: 6. 
mercy vouchſafed to me, in Anſwer to my humble Confeffion * Pal. 69 
and tupplication. m Heb. in the time of finding thee ; the Pronoun 1» 2+ 
thee being eaſily and fitly repeated our of the next foregoing 
Cauſe, 7. e. While he may be found, as it is expreſſed Iſa. 55. 6. or 
while he is near, Pſi. 69. 13 In an acceptable and ſeaſonable 
time, while God continues to offer Grace and Mercy to Sinners, 
before the decree bring farth, Zeph. 2. 2: and Sentence be paſſed or 
executed upon them, By which clauſe he feems to intimac the 
difterence between the Godly, who pray and cry earneſtly to God 
tor mercy 1n its ſeaſon ; and the wicked, who will do ſo when it 
is too Jate, and the ſeaſon is loſt. »7.e. In the time of great 
calamities which are frequently compared ro great Waters, 6 Ta 
wit, ſo as to overwhelm .or hurt him. Or, God will ſer him in 
an high and ſafe place, out of the reach of them, as he proved an 


Atk tor Nah when the Deluge came3 to which. peradventure he 
alludes in this place. 


7 * Thouarr my hiding place, thou ſhalt preſerve me 
from trou>ie; thou ſhalt compaſs me about with ſongs of 
deiiverance p. Selah. 


p 7. e. With ſuch great deliverances on all ſides, as will give juſt 
occalion to ling forth thy praiſes: 


8 I will inſtruct q thee 7, and teach thee inthe way 


which thou ſhalt go 5: +I willguide thee with mine T _— 
eye r. jorge 

q This and the next Verſe are the words, either, r. Of God 3 eye thallbe 
whom Dav!d brings in as returning this Anſwer to his Prayers, and upon thee, 
the profefiion of his truſt 'in God. Or rather, 2 Of David him» 
telt!: who having received ſingular favours from God, and having 
declared what the Godly would do upon that occaſion, v: 6. he 
now undertakes to inſtru& the wicked what they ſhould do- Which 
he doth, partly ro expreſs his thankfulneſs to God, for delivering 
himſelf, and his Zeal to advance the Honour and ſervice of Godin 
the World 3 partly as an a& of Juſtice, that he might make fome 
amends to thoſe whom he had injured, and provoke them to Re« 
pentance, whom by his fins he had ſcandalized ; and either drawn 
:0 fin, or incouraged and hardened in fin, which he was obliged 
and «id promiſe ro do, upon this, or the like occaſion, Pſa. 51. 
.3- and partly for the diſcharge of his Office and Duty as he was 
»oth a King and a Prophot, and a good Man; in all which capa- 
cities he was obliged no indeavour the Converſion and Salvation of 
Sinners. r Thee O Sinner, whoſoever thou art, who haſt no un- 
derſtanding, but art a wicked man, as the two following Verles 
explain it. He ſpeaks this to the generality of impenitent Sinners, 
as the next Verie ſhews, which begins in the plural number, Be nor 
ye, &c, Only he expreſleth it here 1ingularly, as appealing and ap- 
plying himſelf particularly to the Conſcience of every individual 
perſon, which he thought the moſt effetual way of proceeding, 
as he had found to himſelf, when Nachan applyed his indcfinite 
Diſcourſe to him, ſaying Thou art the Man. 51, e, In which thou 
oughteſt to walk ; the Future Tenſe oft noting a mans duty, as 
Gen. 20, 9. Val. 1.6. t I will lend thee the Eyes of my Mand : 
Or, I will be to thee in Fead of Eyes, as the phrale is, Numb. 10» 31+ 
to adviſe and dirett, and caution thee 3 whichTI am able to do, not 
only by thoſe Gifts and Graces which God hath given me, but alſo 
from my own experience. I will guide thee as the Rider doth his 
Horſe, ro which the perſon to be guided is compared, wv. g. Or, as 
a Maſter doth his Schollar 3 or as a Guide doth him who knoweth 
not the right way. Or, the words may be thus rendred, 1 wif give 
thee Counſel, mine Eye ſhall be upon thee, as it is more fully expreſſed, 
Gene 44+ 21. Jer. 24. 6+ and 4oe 4. I will watch over thee, and in« 
ſtruct or admonifh thee, as I have occaſion. : 

9 Beye not.as the horſe, Or as the mule which-have , pr.26.3; 
no underſtandings: whoſe mouth muſt be heldin with 
' bir and bridle, left they comenear unto thee x. 

« Be not ſuch brutiſh and ſortiſh Creatures as I have been, not 
having Reaſon or Grace to govern your ſelves, nor hearkening to 
the Counſcls and Admonitions of others, x Leſt they ſhould come 

c0S 


{Heb. gs 


time of fin 
ding. 


* Pſag.gi 
& 27+ 5+ 


Pſal. 


»Pſ:94 
| Or, 
be guill 


{Pl.97 


.3, 


Plal. KXXV. 


P $4 
r i.e. All the parts and members of their Bodies, which are 
Synecdochically expreſſed by the Bones, which are the ſtay and 
ſtrength of the reſt. 5 God will not ſuffer any miſchief to befal 
him : though he may be oft afflicted, yer he ſhal not be deſtroyed- 
But theſe words, though they are here ſpoken of the Righteous 
men in general, of whom they are true in a Metaphorical Senſe 3 
yet they had a further meaning in them, being deſigned by rhe 
Spirit of God (which diQated ro David, not oply the matter, but 
the very words and expreſſions ) to ſignifie a great Myſtery, that 
x none of Chriſts Bones ſhould be bruken ; to which purpoſe they 
4P(:94.23-are alledged, John 19. 36. : 
1 Or, jþ#/ 21 * Evilt ſhal ſlay the wicked, and they chat hate 
gully. the righteous «, || ſhall be deſolate. 
t Either, 1. The evil of fin : his own wickedneſs, though de- 
ſigned againſt others, ſhall deſtroy himſelf. Or, 2. The evil of Mi- 
ſery, When the afflitions of good men ſhall have an happy iſſue, 
theirs ſhall end in their total and final deſtruction. » Thar perlſe- 
cute them, and plot their ruinez which is an evidence that they 
zPſ g7:10+hate them, whatſoever they may pretend to the contrary, 
22 * The LORD redeemeth the ſoul of his ſervants 


x ; and none of them that truſtin him ſhall be deſolate. 
x 7, e. Their Lives or their perſons, from the malicious De- 
ſigns of all their Enemies, and from deſolation or utter ruine, as 


it follows. 
PSATL. $XXXV. 


The ARGUMENT. 
Wig Pſalm was Penned by David, when he was ſlandered and 
perſecuted by Saul and his Servants, as is manifeſt from the 
whole body ofit- 
A Pſalm of David. 

David prayeth for his own ſafety, 1, 2, and his Enemies deftruftion, 
3 10. ſheweth their falſhnod, and unthankfulneſs and malice, 
II 24, He prayeth for their confuſion, 42 26. but for 
the preſervation and joy of the godly, 27, 28, 

& 119: Lead * my cauſe, O LORD #4, with them that 

154 + ſtrive wich me : fight againſt them that fight a- 

lan-3:58--2inſt me. 

fHeb.im-" , Seing Iam unable to right my ſelf, and rhe Magiſtrates refuſe 

fd Me. 10 do me juſtice, be thou my patron and proteCtor. 

2 Take hold of ſhield and buckler b, and ftandupfor 
mins help. 

b Therewith to cover and defend me. 
Prov. 2; 7. 

3 Draw out alſo the ſpearc, and ſtop the way d a- 
gainſt them that perſecure me ; ſay unto my foul e,lem 
thy ſalvation. 

c Thy offenſive Weapons. He alludes to the praftice of Soldiers 
in Battel. d In which they are marching dire&ly and furiouſly a- 
gainit me.' But divers Interpreters, both Hebrews and others, take 
this Hebrew word for a Noun, and render it # Sword ; or as the 
word may ſignifie, s cloſe Weapon ; For the pſalmiſt here repreſen- 
ting God as a Man of War, and accordingly furniſhing him with 
other Weapons, it ſeems not probable that he would omit this 
Weapon, which was moſt conſtantly and univerſally uſed. e 3: e, 
Unto me ; either, ». By thy Spirir aſſuring me ofit: Or 2. By 


"P(.43-14 


Compare Pſalm g1. 4. 


L o £ M<- . Pal. XXXY 
» Out of meer malice, without any injury or provocation on a 
my part, and without any neceſlity on their partss They are no ti 
common, bur the worſt of enemies; and therefore I may juſtly 
Pray againfr them, asI do. » Theſe Expreſſions aggravate their 
ftas, and ſignifie that their perſecution of him was nor the effe&t of 
a ſudden Paſſion, bur of a deep and habitual Hatred and Malice, 
and of an evil deſign,carried on in a conſtant and continued courſe 
with deliberation, and cunning, and deceit, and that againſt his 
Soul or Life ; for nothing leſs would farisfie them. * "my 

8 Ler deſtruction come upon him o F at unawares, + Hebs "|| 
and * let his net that he hath hid, catch himſelf : intro which he! 
that very deſtruction let him fall. ——* -* knoweh ot 


0 i: e: Upon each of thine and mine implacable Enemies,of whom 7? ofs {Þ | 
he hath hitherto ſpoken. Pſal. 74k 


w : 

1 : 
1 

l : 


9 And my foul ſhall be joyful in the LORD p: it ſhal ord q | | 
rejoyce in his ſalvation. "+ 2." | | 


p In and for his Glory and Service, which ſhall be advanced by 
this means, and for his favour to me, otherwiſe I am far from re» 


joycing 1n their Calamities. 2 
io All my bones q ſhal fay r, LORD, who +5 like 


unto thee, which detlivereſt the poor from him thar is 
too ſtrong for him, yea» the poor and the needy from 
him that {poileth him. | 
q 7.e. My whole Body, by a Synecdoche, as Pſal: 34+ 20s as well 
as my Soul, mentioned verſe 9. I will glorifie thee, both with 
my Soul and with my Body. r Speechis aſcribed to the Bones fi- 
guratively, as elſewhere they are ſaid ro fear and to rejeyce, Pſalms 
6. 2.and 5r. 8. and as the Lons are faid to bleſs, Job 31. 20, If they 
could ſpeak they would exprefs thy Praiſes, becauſe having been _ 
dryed up with forrow, they are now refreſhed by thy mercy. ”  — "_ 
11 Falſe + wicneſſes did riſe up; | they laid co my 4Heb.wird | 
charge things that I knew not /. n-ſſis of 
JS They accuſed me to Saul of Treachery and deſigns againſt his wrong. 
Crown and Life, and other Crimes whereot I was wholly innocent THeb.? 


DORESES CER I ITESRD CITIES YR 


| 
| 
7 mn 


and ignorant. : a:ked me. 
12 * They rewarded me evil for good 7, to the j *#L,28.908 | 
ſpoiling of my Soul «. + on F | 


t For the good Offices which I did to divers of them when I ,.- 
had Favour and Power in Sawls Court and Camp. «4. e. To the 
ſrripping of my perſon of all my Comforts and Hopes, and of my 
Life it telfe 

13 But #s for me, * when they were ſick x, my clo- «7,4, ., 
thing was ſackcloth y : I || humbled my foul & with 2x.” 


faſting and my prayer returned into mine own boſloms. | Or, *.| 
x Or in any other great miſery. y Which was the Habir of «ffi@ea. 
Mourners, Gen 37. 34+ Mat. 1t. 21. Rev. 11. 3. 2 Heb. I aftlict- | 
ed my Soul ( of which phraſeſee Lev. 16. 29, 31. and 23. 27, 32s | 
&c.) partly with faſting, and partly with Compaſſion and fervenc 
Prayers for them. a According to this Tranſlation the Senſe may : 
be this, And, or But z or, Although my Faſtings and Prayers did” «= 
them no good,neither abated their malice, nor prevailed with God 
for them, ſo far as I delired, but returned ro me without ſucceſs, 
like a Gift fent to an uncivil perſon, who diſtainfully rejects it, 
and returns it to the Giver. But, 1. This is not true, . that his 
Prayers returned empty to him, and did them no good, © for they 


thy providence effeCting it ; for Gods ſaying or ſpeaking is oft 

meant of his doing, becauſe his word is ſufficient for the doing of 

whatſoever he plcaſeth, 
"40153 4 * Lec them be confounded f and put to ſhame, that 
6/8 2 ſeek after my ſoul ; let them * be turned back g, and 
"4*:5-brought to confuſion, that deviſe my hurt. 

f 7. &« Fruſtrated in their wicked deſigns and hopes againſt me. 
Concerning this and the like, and following Imprecations, which 
may ſeem itrange and ſevere, it muſt be conſider:d, 1. That 
they did not proceed from any paſſionate or revengeful Spirit in 
David towards his Enemies ( from which how free he was appears 
not only from his own words here, v. 12; i3, 14. but from the 
whole courſe of his Life, and the frequent Inſtances mentioned in 
his Hiſtory, of his meek and merciful Carriage to his Enemies, 
when they were in his power ) bur from his Zeal for Godgind for 
Piecty and Juſtice, to which they ſhewed themſelves to be conſtant 
and implacable Adverſaries, and by the direftion of the Propheti- 


; both in the foregoing and following words, he is only deltcribing* 


; words otherwiſe. either, 1, Thus, 4nd my prayer in my Bojom reture 


cal Spirit of God wherewith he was indued, which Spirit did ex- 
atly know the condition of his Enemies, and that thoſe againſt ' 
wnom they are levelled, were hardened and incurable. 2. That 
they contain nothing but a Prayer to God, that he would accoms-! 
Plith his own Threatnings, and execute his own Law of Reralia- 
tion, of Eye for Eye, and Tooth for Tuoth, and ſo briog upon them ' 
the Evils which they deſigned againſt him- Which aiſo was of: 
great and good uſe, both to glorifie Gods Juſtice,and to warn and 
reform other ſinners by the terror of their Example. 3'Thar they. 
may be taken only for predictions, as hath been obſerved before 
upon the like occaſion. g Either, 1. Stopped or hindred in the 
execution of their wicked deſign. Or rather. 2. ( which is more 
ſuitable to the Context) diſcomfited and put to flighr,as this phraſe 
1s frequently uſed, as P/al: 9g: 3. and 79. 2. and 78. 9. 1/a: 42. 27. 
Jer: 46: 's5, 21, 


Job 21: 5 * Ler them be as chaff before the wind b, and let 
1... the angel ofthe LORD i chaſe them. 
4. hi;e: Diſperſed and chaſed from place to placey: finding reſt 


19 29:5- and ſafery no where. i Whom God uſeth to defend his people 


R a, 3 and to deſtroy their Enemies. 
tvineſ; 6 Ler their way kbe f * dark and ſlippery /, and let 
ad /2;,.. the angel of the LORD perfecute them. 
"neſs k By which they flee, being chaſed, as was now ſaid. 1 So as 
, they can neither diſcern the righr path, nor be avle to ſtand in it, 
and much leſs to run away,etpectal.y from ſo ſwift a periccutor as 
Jercag,lt 2, an Angel, whereby wy mult unavoidably fall into their Enemies 
; hands, and b« deſtroyed. ' 

| 7 For without cauſe » have they hid for me their net, 


Pat: 
18 = 


| Good or Evil. And this ſenile agrees with the common uſe of this ' 


prevailed with God for their recovery, as appears by the following 
Verſes. 2, This doth not ſeem to ſuit well with the Context 3 for ' 


what he did for them, and not whir the effe&s of it were, which 
he deſcribes in the ſucceeding Verſes, Others therefore render the 


ned. +: e: T did daily and frequently repeat my Prayers for them, , 
and that not only in publick when I joyned with others, in a. Faſt- 

day appointed for them, which might be done in policy. or for. 
oft-nration, bur'alſo in ſecret; between God and my own Soul, , 
and that with a fincere and hearty AﬀeCtion : For what is done 
lecret!y and affeionately, is faid to he done in rhe Boſom, Numb: 

(1; 12+ Pſal, $9. 5o. Prov. 21. 14. although indeed' there is in 
thoſe places another Propoſition ; which'may poſſibly. alter the. 
Caſe. Or, 2. ( which ſeems the trueſt Senſe) and as for. my Prayer- 
( ro wit, which I joyned with my Faſting on their behalf) /:e-i+ 

return (nothing being more frequent than for Future Verbs to be . 
put imperatively ) into my ows Boſom, i. e. If any ſhall think or ſay, * 
that my Faſting for rhem was bur counterfeir or politick. and that - 
I did not pray for them, bur rather againſt them, as I do in' this 

Pſalm, and that unyer all this ſhew I ſecretly wiſhed, their Death 
or Deſtruction ; my earneft deſire is,that the All-ſeeing and Hearte | 
ſcarching God would grant unto me, when I come into their cir- 

cumſtances, the ſame things which I begged for them, wherher . 


phraſe in Scripture, where whatſoever is repay'd to any man,is ſaid” 
ro be render'd into his Boſom, as Pſal: 79. 12. 1js: 65.6, 7. Jer: 42. 
18. Luke 6. 38, as elſewhere it is ſaid, to return upon his Head,  _ 
14 I | behaved my lelif b F as though be bad been my 
friend,or brother: 1 bowed down c heavily,as one. that | 7-2 
mourneth for bis mother 4. "So ae $2 Oo 10k RS 
b Heb. I walked, either to him, to viſit and comfort him; Or, $1017, ay 
about the Streets, whether my Occalions led-me, Thouglr walking is , 3-44; 
oft put for a Mans Carciage or Converſation. c Went hanging zo ze, 
down my Head, as Mourners uſed to do, 1/a: 58. 5. 4 He menri-' S 
ons the Mother rather than the Father; either, becauſe her tender 
Aﬀection and Care, and Kindneſs to him,had more wone upon his 
Hearr,and mad: him more ſenfible of the loſs3 Or, becauſe through 
the depravation of Mans Nature,Children are many times leſs {cn- 
ſible of their Farhers lots or Death, becauſe it is compenſuted with 
ſome adv ntage to tiemſelves; which dorh nor utually happen u- 
pon the Mouthers death. Some render it, 4s 4 wourning Mother, for 
the loſs ofher Son. Bur this doth nor ſcem to ſuit ſo well with the 
orderof the Hebrew words: - +: . 
15 Bur in mine Þ adverſity e they rejoyced,and gathe- ip 
red themſelves cogether f : * yes, the abjes g gathered * Job 20; 


f Heb? 


), 3 4, 


t Heb. 
Fs 1a tt ing A 


in a pit, 2»hich without cauls they digged for my ſoul », 


% 


themſelves together-againſt me,and I knew zt not b; they x, 8, 12: 
did ar me 7, and cated nor &. 4Q:3 e cb, 


"n XXXV. 
e Hebs in my halting, i. e- When I. was in great danger of falling 
*ato miſchief. When I had any Sickneſs, or ill ſucceſs in my At- 
xirs, and was almoſt loſt ; for ſuch are ſaid to hka!r, Mich. 4, 6, 7. 
Zephan. 4.19 See alſo Pſal. 38: 17 Jer: 20; 10. f To wit, 4- 
gainft me, as it is exp» efſed in the next Clauſe 3 either becauſe they 
were ſo full of joy at the Tydings, that they could not contain it 
in their own Breaſts, but ſought to communicate it to others : Or, 
that they mig'rt inſult over me,and pleaſe and recreate themſelves, 
and one ar other with diſcourſes abour it: Or that they might con- 
ſult how to improve the advantage which they now had againſt 
me, to my utter deſiruftion. g Or, wile Pcrſons, either for the 


were worthy to be beaten, as the phraſe is, Deut: 25: 2. Where the 
Hebrew word is of the ſame Root with this» Or, the lame, as this 
very word is rendred,2 Sam:4:4 and 9*3. to wit, of&heir Feet,as it 


ble and pain, were as forward as any to go to theſe meetir.gs u- 
on this occaſion. hþ This may be added to expieſs either their 
Loterie and pretences of reipe& and affetion to him, by reaſon 
whereof he had no ſuipicion of themy nor of any ſuch prattices 
, of theirs; or his own danger, that he cid nor know,and therefore 
could not prevent their Plots and Conſpiracies againſt him. Heb. 
and I knew nat. Which is by others, and well may be rendred thus, 
Even they whom 1 knew not, they whom I was to far from provo- 
king by any injury, that I never ſaw their Faces,nor heard of their 
Names zz. e. My good name with Scoffs and Calumnies, and 
Reproaches and Curſes. k Heb. were not filent, tr. e, did thus un- 

weariedly and continually. 
16 With Hypocritical } mockers mz in + feafts» : they 


&. gnaſhed upon me with their teech o, 

: 1 Or profane, as this word ſignifies, Job 8. 13. and 13. 16. and 
15:34 and 17: 8. and as ſome add, in all other places, m Whoſe 
common prattice it is to ſcoff ar and deride others, and me in par- 
ticular. n Or, efor for a Cake: Or, a Maurſcl of Bread, as this word 
ſignifies, 1 Kings 17.12, 13. and 19-6, By which he further ſhews 
what vile and worthleſs perſons theſe were, that would tran{greſs 
for a Morſel of Bread. as itisfaid Prov. 28. 21. They made themſclves 
Buffoons and Jeſters, and accuſtomed themſelves ro mock and dc- 
ride David, that thereby they might gain Admittance to the Ac- 
quaintance and Tables of great men, where they might fill their 
Bellies 3 which was all that they ſought for, or got by it. o They 
uſed all Expreffions of Rage and Hatred againſt me, among which 
this was one, J6 16. 9. Lam; 2.i6. This they did to curry favour 
with my grear and potent Adverſaries. 

17 LORD, how long wilt thou look on 9? reſcue 
Heb: my my foul from their deitructions, + my darling p from * 
wely One the lions. 
£1257-4+ o Like an idle SpeQator,without affording me any Pity or help ? 
? To wit, my Soul, as it is in the former Claule. Heb. My only one ; 
which isnow leftalone and forſaken by my Friends, and hath none 
to'truſt to but God. See on Pſal; 22; 21. 

18 * I will give thee thanks in the great congregati- 
Pl22.25 gn gs I will praiſe thee among Þ much people 

© 10» a . : 

v4 WE. When 1 ſhall be reſtored to the Liberty of the publick Aſſem- 

* ** blies and folema Feaſts. 

»e. 19 Letnorthem'that are mine enemies | wrongfully 
eb. T&joyce. over me, »eztherlet them wink with their eye r, 
*'that hate me without a cauſe; 

re. Mock me or inſult over me, as this phraſe ſignifies, Prov. 
6; 13: and 10. 10. 

BS :20:For they ſpeak not peace /: but they deviſe de- 

-Z-52+» '"B a5 . . - . | 

| 15. Cceitfal matters t againſt them that are quiet in the lands. 
$. "f They pre enemies to all peaceable Counſels ; they breath our 
nothing but Threatnings and War. : They uſc not ouly open Vio- 
lence” bur Deceit, and ſubril Artifices. » Againſt me and my fol- 
Jowers. who deiire nothing more than to live quietly and peace- 

bly under Sauls Government. : 
: 21 Yea, they opened their mouth wide 2gainſt me 
* PE40.15 X, 49d faid * Aba, abay, oureye hath ſeen ir z. 

-x Either, i: To devour me. It is a Metaphor taken from wild 
Beaſts; when they come within, reach of their prey. Or 2. To 
pour'forth whole Floods of Scoffs and Slanders,and Conrumelies. 
y An expreſſion of Joy and Triumph. See on Job 3g. 25. Pſal. 40, 
a5. | *. Heb. hath ſeen, to! wit, what we have long deſired and hop- 
ed for. Sce the ſame or like Ellipſis, P/al. 54+ 7- and 59. 10: and 
e12.:8:: 

'-22 This thou haft ſeen 4, O- LORD, keep not fi- 
lence b + O' LORD, be not far from me c. 

 # As they fay they have ſeen, ſo my Comfort is, thou alſo haſt 

Teen, and doſt obſerve all their Plots and Threits, and all my Di- 

ſtreſſes and Calamirties, which I ſuffer for thy ſake. þ Or, be not 
deaf, to wit, to my Prayers: The ſame word ſignifies, both robe 
filent, and 70 be deaj, See on Pſals28. 2. c Do not withdraw thy Fa- 
vour and Help from me. 
-.4-- 223 Stirup thiy ſelf and awake to my judgement, even 
unto my cauſe d, my God and my LORD. 
"T5 A. At laſt undertake to plead my Cauſe againſt mine Adverſa- 
_ &, | 
7 re 2A .O LORD my God, according to thy 
kt ouſnels e, and ler them nor rejoyce over me. 
. e Whereby thou uſeſt and loveſt to defend the Innocent, and to 
puniſh their Oppreflors. _ 

25- Let them nor fay in their hearts,j#Ah,ſo would we 
have it fs let them notſay,we have ſwallowed himup. 

Ff Heb, Aha, our ſeul, i. e- Oh our Soul cryeth, 4ba ; an ex- 
preſſion.of mirth as before v. - 21- Or, aha, we have our wiſh or 
Deſire, as the Soul is taken, Pſal. 41. 2. David is now as low as we 
could wiſh him. © 

26* Ler them be ahamed and brought to confuſion 
| *Verſe 4; Together g, that cejoyc2 ar mine hurt z ler them be clo- 
* £40.14. thed with ſhame and diihozcur,that magnific rhew/elwves 
4 againſt m2, | 


” .. 
SD : 


 #teb. 4b, 
| ah, our 
Soul. 


ST SL MSL 


meanneſs of their ccndition,or for their wickednets,for which they 


Pſal. XXXVbþ 


g As they gathered themſelves together to deride and oppoſe 

me, ſodo thou gather them together to deſtioy them. Or, in like 

manner, One &s well as another : Jet the proud and great ones of 

them te diſappointed and aſhamed. as well as the meaneſt among 

them. hþ The iame Ellipſis we havey Pſal: 38: 16; and 55: 12, 

Jer. 48: 26. Or, thir mouth, as it is expreſſed Obad: wv. 12. So 

Ezek. 35. 13. That cxtol themſelves and their power, and look u- 
pon me with ſcorn and contempt, 
Hs Let them ſhout for joy, and be glad, that favour 

+ my righteous cauſe 32 yea, let them ſay continually, f Heb. »y 
Let the Lord be magnified k&, which hath pleaſure in the *. 


proſperity of his ſervant. 
; That wiſh well to it, although they want either Strength or 


is there expreſſed. The Cripples that could not walk without trous ; 


Co'rage to plead it, k7: e: Exalted and praiſed for his Rightcouſ- 
neſs and truth and goodneſs, manifeſted in my deliverance. Mine 
Enemies great deſign is to magnifie themſelves, y: 26. but my chief 
deſire is, that God may be magnified. 
28 And my tongue ſhal ſpeak of thy righteouſneſs, 

and of thy praiſe, all the day long. 

PSAL. XXXVLI. 

The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm ſeems to have been compoſed by David when he 

was perſecuted by Sul and his Courtiers« Upon which cc- 

cation he rnlargeth his Thoughts further, and contemplates the 

ſad ſtate and condition of the World, and of the Church ar that 

time, in which wickedneſs of all ſorts greatly abounded and 

ſeemed to proſper ; and withal. be declares the great Felicity and 

Safety of Gods people, and gives an account of their ſupports and 

- +5" ii under the ſenſe of theſe publick Diſorders and Miſ- 
chicfs. 

To the chief muſician, # P/alm of David the ſervantof 

the LORD «5. 


a i. e. One wholly and reſolvedly devoted to the Service of God, 
both in my private and publick Capacity. 'T his Title is, as Free 
member, buc twice uſed in this Book, Pſal. 18. ( of which ſes 
there) and in this Pſa/m where it ſeems to be prefixed as a pube 
lick proteſtation of his Reſolution, to cleave unto the Lord in | 
"og of general Corruption, of which he is now going ta q 

ea 
ny ſheweth the grievous ſlate of the wicked, 1=——— 4. the excellency of 
Ge and prayeth for favour t0 the children of God 


I'S I 2. . 

T He eranſgreſſion ofthe wicked faithwithin my hearr, 
that there is no fear of God before his eyes b. 

b When I conſider the great and manifold Tranſgreſlions of un- 
godly Men, I conclude with my ſelf, that they have caſt off all 
tear and tenſe, and ſerious belief of the divine Majeſty. 

| 2 Forc * he flattereth bimſelf in his own eyes d,f un- *Dent.:9, 
til his iniquity be found to be hateful e. 29.Pſ.10.3, 

cSo this is the Proof of that Aſſertion, v. 1. Or, although ; and & 49- '8. 

ſo it is an anticipation of an Obje&ion againſt it. .d He deceiverh Heb, » 
himſelf with vain and falſe perſwaſions,either, 1.Concerning God, #9 #' 
thathe doth not ſee or mind his fins, or that he will not puniſh 799% 
them ; Or, 2. Concerning himſelf and his fins, either that they are *#*<- 
not fins; which a Mind bribed by Paſlicn and Intereſt, can eaſily 
believe: Orthatthey are but ſmall and venial fins : Or that they 
will be excuſed, if not. juſtified by honeſt intentions, or by out- 
ward profeſſions and exerciſes of Religion, or by ſome good atti- 
ons wherewith he thinks to make ſome compenſation for them, or 
ſome other way. Oth. thus, He fattereth him (i: e: God) im his Eyes, 
z. e: Openly and publickly makes a ſhew of Religion, as if he de- 
ſigned to deceive or mock God, whilſt inwardly and ſecretly he 
IS JEnng wickedneſs. But it ſeems better to underſtand the 
laſt word reciprocally of his own Eyes, as the ſame word is uſed in 
the end of the foregoing Verſe. ez. e. Until God by ſome dread- 
ful Judgement ungeceive him, and find, z, e. Diſcover or make 
him and others to find and feel by Experience, that itis a fin 
and a very hatcful one roo. Or, Unzil kis abeminable iniquity be found 
out, 7. e. puniſhed, as the ſame word and phraſe is uſed, Numb. 32. 
23. Your ſm ſhall find you out, i: e: bring you to cendign puniſhment. 
In the Hebrew it is, to find out his iniquity to hate, But Adtive 
Verbs are oft taken paſſively, of which there are plain Inſtances, 
Jeſ. 2+ 5. Efth. 6. 6. Pſal: 32; 9. and 51: 6. comp: with Rom: 3: 4.. 
and Pſal: 119: 4, and ſo heie; #0 fixd, is putfor to be found, and 8 
hate for to be hated, or to be hateful. ; 

3 The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit f: 
he hath lett off to be wiſe, a»d to do good p. 

Fi. e. Are wicked and deceitful. g Once he had ſome ſhadows 
or degrees of Wiidom, and ſometimes did ſome things that were 
good in their kind, but now he hath not ſo much as the appea- 
rance of it, and is become an open Apoſtate from that which once 
he profeſſed. _ 

4 * He deviſeth || miſchief upon his bed b; he ſerteth *wic.:." 
himſelf i in a way bat is not good & ; he abhorreth || Or, #** 
not evill. Mit)s 

h Which notes that he doth it, 1+ Conſtantly and unweariedly 
preferring it before his own reſt. 2. Earneſtly and ſeriouflly, when 
his mind is freed from all outward diftrattions, and wholly at lea- 
ſure to attend rhat, buſineſs about which ir is employed ; compare 
Pſal. 4: 4. 3. Freely, from his own inclination, when none are 
bg to provoke him to it. # He doth not repent of his wicked 

evices, but reſolutely proceeds to excute them, and perliſts 
therein. & z. e. Which is very bad, as this phraſe is uſed, 1 Sam. 4 
2. 24. Prov. 20: 23- and 24, 23. and elſewhere. 1 Though he 
ſometimes pretends remorſe, and defitts fiom his violent prattices 
againſt me, as Saul did, yer he doth not truly repent of nor abhor _ 
his fin, and therefore is ready to return to 1c, when any ocecalion 
offers it ſelf. 

5 * Thy mercy ws, O LORD, 5s in the Heavens », 
and thy faithfulneſs o reacheth unto the clouds p. 

-» Though this be the diſpoſition and carriage of mine enemies 
rowards me, and rherefore I can expet no good from them, yet 
thou O Loi, blutted be thy nauic, art of anogher temper , they 

are 


' 


Goas mercy, 5 


*Pſ'57 1 
& 198, 4 


val. 


"Pr, 


/l 


2.1 
[a 


mol. XXXUIL. P $ A 


too near to thee, ſo as to bite or kick thee. But neither 1s thisthe] 
common praQtice of Horſes or Mules, of which he ſeems to iſpea <; 
nor is this the proper uſe of a Bir or Bridle, to keep them from -” | 
doing, but rather to bring them nearer to the Rider for his uſe,, 
and to keep them under his Condut&t and power, from whom they) 
are Otherways apt to run away. Tte words therefore are, and may: 

they do not, or will not come near unto 


be otherways rendred, becauſe . | 
ho : To «of fu thy ſervice, unleſs they be forced to it by a Bit 
or Bridle. And fo all the Ancient Tranſlators underſtand ir. 


Io Many ſorrows ſhall be ro the wicked y: but he 
that truſteth in the LORD z, mercy ſhall compaſs him 


abour. £57 ; 
11 Be gladin the LORD, and rejoice ye righteous: 


{nor only Jews, but Gentiles, who equally enjoy the Benefit of this 


L M Ss. Plal. XXXING 


+» 


fits 
8 Ler all che earth p tear the LORD: ler all the in- 
habitants of tþe world ſtand in awe of him. | 
? All the peop!'e of the Earth, as the next Clauſe expounds this 3 


great and glorious work of Gods 


and ſhout for joy all ye that are upright in heart. =» 

y This is an Argument to enforce the foregoing Admonition, if 
any man will be refrattory and unruly, God hath many ways to | 
ro curband chaſtiſe them, and bring them to his Will. 2 Who re- 
ly upon his providence and promiſe for his preſervation and de- 
liverance, and commits himſelf to Gods care and conduct, waiting 
upon him in his way, and not turning aſide to crooked or fintul 


atis, for ſafety or ſatisfaction. 
TR. " "PSA L. XXXII. 
The ARGUMENT, 

His Pſalm contains a Celebration of God for hts great and 
| 5 gJorious works both of Creaticn and Providence. 
| God is td be praiſed by reaſon of his Goodneſs, 1 -—— 5,of his Power, 6 --11. 

and of his Providence, 12==»=15- And they that fear him ſball find Mer- 
| cy, and rejoice in him, 16 22. X 
"prgt.ts Ejoice in the LORD «, O ye righteous, for * praiſe 
R is comely for the upright 6. 

# Let his excellency diſcovered in his works, be the matter of 
your joy and paile. 6 Ir well becomes them to exerciſe them- 
{elves in this work of praiſing and bleſsing of God; partly, becaule 
they have ſuch ſingular and abundant obligations and occaſions to 
doio; and partly, becauſe they will praiſe God worthily and hear= 
tily, and with due Reverence and thankfulneſs, as God requires, 
and deſerves to be praiſed ; whereas ungodly men do indeed dif- 
parage and pollute the holy name of God, while they pretend to 
praiſe it, and therefore God rejects their praiſes and prayers. See 
P[alm 50. 16. and 109: 7. Prov. 28. 9. : 

2 Praiſe the LORD with harp : fing unto him wich 
the pſaltery, and * an inſtrument of cen ſtrings c. 

c He mentions theſe Inſtruments, becauſe they were uſed in 

_ the publick worſhip and Praiſes of God in the Tabernacle, 
| 2 \ 3 * Sing unto him a new ſong «; play skilfully with 
1 - ' * a loudnoile. 

4+ 10, 4 Eirher, 1- Newly compoſed» As God gives you freſh occa- 
| | ſions, ſodo not you content your ſelves with the Old Songs or 
Pſalms, made by the holy men of God, but make new ones ſuited to 
the occaſions» Bur neither had all the Righreous, to whom he ſpeaks, 
wv, 1. the giftof compoling Sengs, nor was it of any neceſsity or 
importance, that they ſhould make new Songs to praiſe God, at 
Jeait for the works here mentioned, when there were ſo many 
| made by David, and other holy Prophets, for the uſe of Gods Churct: 
* and peop'e., when they had any ſuch occaſion. -Or, 2. Renewed or 
repeated, or ſung again 3 in which ſenſe Job ſaith, his Glory wasnew, 
or frcjh in him, Job 29. 20. 7.e, Renewed or continued from day to 
d1y, and the command of Love is called new, John 13. 34. becauſe it 
was renewed and reinforced by Chriſt. So this Song is here called 
new, not ſo much from the Matter, as from the ſinging of it ; be- 
cauſe it was ſung afreſh, or again- 

4 For the word of the LORD 3s right e ; and all his 
works are done in truth f. | 

e All Gods counſels and Commands, either contained in the 
Scriptures, or given forth in his Providence, for the Government 
of the World, are wiſe and juſt and good, withour deceit or defect. 
f i.e. All his works of Providence agree with his word, and 
are no other than che Accompliſhment of his promiſes or 
Threatnings ; or other declarations of his mind, and will in his 
Word, although ſome times for a ſcaſon, they may ſeem contrary 
£O 1t. | 

5 * He loveth righteouſneſs and judgment g ; * the | 


earth js full of the || goodneſs of the LORD 5b. 


g z.e. Juſt judgement, by a Figure called Henayadis, as Fer. 22. 3. 
Or, Juſtice relates to the ſentence, and Juagment to the Execution ' 
ef it. He not only doth Juſtice to all Men, as was implyed. wv. 
6. but which is more, he loves it, and delights in'ir. h He noton- 
ly doth no man wrong, but he is very kind aad merciful to all 
men in the world, to whgm he gives many Favours and Invitations 
to his Love and ſervice. Sce Mat. 5. 45. 43s 14, 17. Rom 5. 20, 
21, 


, 'of; 92.3+ 


—— 


Pegs:7. 
Pf. 119. 
6, 


— 


Ormercy. 


"Cen.1:6 , 
j.- * made; and all the hott of them &, * by the breath of 
teb.11:3. his mouth 7, 
5 ; Either, 1. By the Hypoſtatical word Chriſt, who 1s oft called 
bbs 4: Gods Word, even by the Ohaldee Paraphraſt ; as alſo John 1 we 1» 
Je 26. 2,3. where he is ſaid to be that Wird, by whom all things were made. 
F So that which is here ſpoken more darkly and doubtedly,according 
ro that ſtate of the Church, is more clearly declared in rhe New 
Teſtamenr- Or, 2. By his Will or Command as this very Phraſe 
is here uizd, wv. 4. and it ſeems to be explained, v.- 9. And ſoit 
hath a great Emphatis in it, that God made this admirable truture 
of the Heavens, and all its glorious Stars; not with great pains and 
time, and help of many Artiſts and Inſtruments, as men do far 
meaner works, but with one ſingle Word, which is much to the 
Glory of the Creator. k The Angels: or the Stars. See on Ger. 
2.1. {1 Either 1. By the Holy Ghoſt, fo called, Job 33.4. And 
' ſo here are all the perſons of the Trinity Jehovahy the Father, 
and the W.rd, and the Spirit; toeach of which this work of Creation 
1s elſewhere aſcribed,as was noted on Gen-1.26. Or,2. By his word, 
as it was expreſlcd in the laſt Claulie, which is fo called Ia. 11, 4» 
2 Theſſ. 2, 8. 


' ſenſible of their dependance upon God By which he {ftrongly 


6 * By the word of the LORD z-were the heavens { 


9 For * he ſpake, and ic q was done . he commanded 
and it ſtood faſt r. | (S ky: | 


9 The work here mentioned, v 6. 7. - r Or, food forth, asa Ser- 
vant at his Maſters Command, or was, or d:d exiſt. 
10 * The LORDF bringeth the counſel ofthe heathen + 
s to nought : he maketh the devices of the people of + Hes. | 
none eftect. | maketh - Wl 
s Or. of the Nations ; though Nations combine themſelves and fruſtrate. kl 
their Counſels together, yet he defeats them when he pleaſerh. | 
Thus he paſſeth from the work of Creation, to the works of pro« 
vidence, and from the Inſtances of his Power, in ſenfleſs and un- 
reaſonable Creatures, to manife!t his- Power in over-ruling the fp 
Thoughts and Wills, and Actions of all Men, whether fingle or * >. Wk 
united. Pro. | 
11 * The counſel of the LORD ſtandeth forever ; rg. 2x: Mi 
the thoughts of his heart F co all generations. Ifa.46. 10. Wl 
; All his purpoſes and Deſigns, and eſpecially thoſe which con-'t Heb. 19 
cern his choſen People, of whom he ſpeaks inthe next Verſe, are al» G-7eratzon dll 
ways ſucceſsful and irreiitable. | and Gene=; 


12 * Blefſedis the Nation whoſe God is the LORD : 7#im Þ 


and the people whim he hath choſen for his own inheri- g, | 
tance «. _* *©".& 144a5 [x 
« Seing the Lord is ſo great and Glorious in Wiſdom and Power, q 
and goodneſs, as hath teen hitherto ſaid, as rhey muſt needs be ves | \1 
ry miſerable, who are Strangers or Enemies to him, ſo thrice happy” | 
is that people of Iſrael, who though they be deſpiſed by the Gen- 
tiles, are choſen by this Almighty God, to be his peculiar Pcrti= 
on, and Friendsand Servants. | | 
13 * The LORD looketh from heaven : he beholdeth . .._ | 
all the ſons of men x. » . Chr It 
14 From the place of his habication he looketh upon , ;. ge 4 
all the inhabitants of the Earth, Job 28:244 
x Although he hath a ſpecial Relation to Iſrael, yer he hath a Pſal.1 14. 
general Care and Inſpection over all Mankind, all whoſe Hearts | 
and ways he deſcerns and and obſerves. Ec 6 -* 
Is He faſhioneth y their hearts alike z : he conſide- 
reth all their works a. | | ”, 
y Or faſhioned, or made, or formeth, For this may relate either, 
1. To the work of Creation. So he proves what le 1aid, v. 13, i4. 
that God b:he!d all Men, becauſe he made them ; yea even their 
Hearts, the moſt ſecret piece of them. Or, 2. To the works of 
his providence. Having faid that God ſees and obſerves all Men, 
he now adds that he cules and governs them ; yea, - even their” 
Hearts, which are moſt Maſterlefs and unmanageable, and yet he 
frameth and dilpoſeth and inclineth them this ways cr that accor-: 
ding to the Ccunſel of his Will, See Exod. 34. 24. Pſal. 105. 25, 
z Or, equally, one as well as another : whether ' they be Jews or 
Gent/les, B:nd or Free, Princes or Peafants ; all are alike ſubjecr 
ro his Juriſdiction &@ Both outward and inward, all the wor-' 
kings cftheir Minds and Aﬀections, and all their Indeavours and 
Actions. : | + ; 
16 There is no king þ ſaved by the multitude of an 


hoſt c: a mighty man is not delivered by much ftrength. 
b He initanceth in theſe, as the moſt potent and uncnntrolable* 
perſons in the World, and moſt confident of themſelves, and leaſt” 


"it 
*P1.148 5 


Ifa.1g. 3 


proves his general Propoſition, of Gods powerful providence over 
all Men. c But only by Gods providence, who diſpoſeth of Vi-- 
ctory and ſucceſs, as he pleaſeth, and that frequently to the weak- 
eſt and moſt foolith fide, Ecl.g. 11. +; 
17 * An horſe dis} a vain thing e for ſafety: neither + PR - 
ſhall he deliver any by his great ſtrength.” * © © ye vo. 
d4 Though he be firong, Job 39. 19. &c. and fit for Battel, Prov. pr. 41-3 1- 
21. 31, or for flight, if need requires. - And ſo this is put for all + Heb, 4 
Warlike proviſioas3 of which Horſes were and are a very conft- Lye. « 
derable part. e Heb. @ Lye; becauſe ir promiſerh that kelp and * © -* 
ſafery which it cannot give. 1 by 19s tn. TIS NB Bi 
18 * Behold the eye of the LORD f is upon therh pr.34. x5. 
that fear him g : upon them thar hope in his mercy þ$. iPer-3.a2. 
f Whoſoever therefore would have ſafery and deliverance, muſt - 
ſeek and expect 1r only from the watchful Eye, and Almighty, Hand 
and Mercy of God. g Theſe ace the chicf Objects of his. Careand * 
Favours þ That place their H-pe and Truſt, and Happineſs nor - 
in any Creature, but only in God; and in his Mercy and B!effings. - 
The Conjunction and Order of theſe rwo Qualifications of the PCre | 
ſon whom God careth for, is obſervable here, they muſt be fuch 
as fear God, and ſo make Conſcience . of keeping his Commands; 
Eccl. 12. 13. and then they may and muſt hope in, or rely upoa his 
Mercy, for their ſafety and happineſs. *: wat #521 | 
19 To deliver their foul ; from death, and to k:ep 
them alive * in famine. rm beer i ore Þ on 
7 i:e. Their Life, when he ſees ir to be expedient for them : 
ſometimes it 1s better for them to die than ro live, as boch good 
and bad Men have declared, and when it is ſo, it is known to vod, 
but not to us. And therefore the conſtant Accompliſhment of 
this and the like. promiles in a literal ſenſe, is nor to be expe&ed, - 
nor ſimply dctired, but with ſubmiſſion to Gods Wiſe and Grace 


ous Will. I 2 
4 Q 3 


* 


TTobg6.7. 


* Job 5: 
29.-: - = 


P{.37- 19. 


Plal. XXX1Y. 


al. XXXIV. PSALM $S. | Pal. 
20 Our ſoul waiteth for the LORD : he is our help | #7. 2- 15: Exek 38. 13. Noh. 2. 13 x Which isneceſſay and 
| & and our ſhield. | ea. gags for — - ae ye conſidered ; ef which God 
I BPR . | aJone is a competent Judge. And therefore, although God doth 
£12 pets toy __— EO ol _ made many Promi- | C11, rake a ſpecial care to ſupply the wants of good Men, and 
21 For 1 our heart ſhall rejoice in him : becauſe we bath oft done it by extraordinaty ways, when ordinary have failed, 
PUT N J . yet ſometimes he knows, and it 1s certainly true, that Wants and 
have truſted in his holy N2me. | Croſſes are more needfu], and uſeful to them than Bread, and in 
22 Let thy mercy, O LORD, be upon us according ſuch aa a is a greater mercy of God to deny them ſupplies than 
as we hope in thee. we ns _ hid h 
I Or, therefore ; For this ſeems to be an Inference, either from 11 Come ye children y, hezrken unto me: I will 
the foregoing, or from the following Sentence. teach you the fear of the LORD z 
| ÞS ALI XXXIV. SW ho ar : _ Go mm pry mts ECTS own me as your Heb 
| | . . , ince ; ſee 2 Kings 5. 13. and as your Spirit : 
| | Ke nh: JOE> wot hen he _— his m_—_—— Father, a Prophet ; For the Diſciples of the bo wo _ jus” 
| Or, A. ELOTE 1melech c; who drove him away, and nc | their Sons, 2 Kings 2. 3- %1.e. The true and principal way of of Gud. 
*hiſh. departed. Worſhipping and ſerving God with his acceptation, and to your M.1- 
Sam. 21, 4 A Pſalm made upon that occaſion, though not at that time. | own Salvation, ? "Job: 
[s, 13- þ Or, his Habit or Pofture, or his Reaſon, as this word 1s taken, 12: * What man 3s he that defireth « life b, and loveth, _ 
i ; 1 Sam, 25s JZo Pſal- 1 190 66+ Prov, 11. 22. When he COUnNTECr- many days that he may ſee good c 2 iPet, Js by 
feired madneſs. Wherein whether he ſinned or not, is matter of jo Mt __ ths ds q RN F os Io, Job7 
: f Diſpute; bur this is undoubred, that Gods Favour, and his De- |; Tags p. h rae good carneft, ſo as to be willing to 1Tim 
*  liverance at that time was very remarkable, and deſerved this 1o- e any indeavours which ſhall be preſcribed ro him : For other- 10, 
> EE CE hdoGncnc. + Cllled b:fb, 4: =5> pond eo _ queſtion were needleſs ; for there is no man bur defires it, 
4 Abimelech ſeems to have been the common Name of the Kings of a. "W — and faintly. 6 Along and happy lite, begun in 
A the Phil:ſtins, Gen. 20. 2, and 26, 1. as Pharach was of the Egyp- this World, and continued for ever inthe nexr And thus Life is h 
6 lpSnins colrefthe Foabonx way : 2 wy uled, as Pal. 16, +. and 3o. 5. c Heb. Loverh days to ſee ( 5. e. fe ; 
David , eh God, 3, 2. end exbbrech owhers there from bis own n pray he ws eng, 5.8. enjcy) goed, ro wit,proiperity or happinefs, 4 ; 
We of Gatr enaeſs, | 3 te fhrderh rher they. ave I; ecp thy tongue from evil d, and thy lips trom R 
bleſſed who truſt in God, 8 — 10. He exhorteth others to learn to ſpeaking gu1:cC e, | 
fear him, 11. and ſheweth the way to Happin $, 2 — 14 Be] a From all manner of evil — from all opprobrious,inju« 
privileages of the Righteous, and the prniſbment of the Wicked, T10UsS, talie and deceitful Speeches . hich,though Men COMmoNe 
IF m—22 ; ly uſe to cate and gratifie their own Minds, or to compaſs their 
Will ble the LORD at all times 4 : his praiſe ſhall deſigns, do frequently fall upon their own Heads, by provocking 
I continually be in my mouth. Mt God 208 200g NO FINALE WRny 06 
> Twill never forget to bleſs God for this miraculons Delive- thy GAP Oi and with a pupoſe of deceiving men by them. 
Verance. f 14 Lepart from evil f, and do good g *: ſeek peacerp; 19.29 
2 My Soul ſhall make her hoaſtin the LORD e: the | # ew pong Feb 12, 
humble f ſhall hear rhereef and be glad g. 7: e. From all fin, and eſpecially from all wicked and injuti= 14: "1.65 
e Shall glory in this, that I have ſo owerfi] and ſo gracious a "n+ are 1 practices againſt thy Neighbour. g Be ready to per= {Heb 
Lord and Maſter. f Or the meek, i. e. the Godly, oft called in a= n NOSE 2H OY Offices to all meas thou haſt Appore wi, 
Scripture by that Title ; and particularly my Friends and Favourers x5 rt ? TUO Dy GE OIONIE 06 eo IIELErILy nate Quaothy "_ 
in 1/rael. whom he thus calls in Oppoſition to his proud and furious kn SN Ct mann; Grudges, Debates, Difſentions, Strites and 11.43 
Adverſaries in Sauls Court and Camp.  g Both for their Jovero me, | £11 WI wg gt only embrace it gladly when itis offered, bur ſx,1 
and'to the publick good of Iſrael, which they know that I celign f at wn it, when it ſeems to flec away from thee, and uſe | 
and ſeek above all things; and for the comfort and benefit of my all pothbe indeayours by fair words, by condeicenſions, and by the 
eample co chem, in like a icand difficultics mediation or afhiſtance of others to recover it, and to compoſe 
EET KL ler us ex | op Eenens which may axle Berwocy thes and. others, Te is hero 
3 * 5 K > C obſcrvable, that whereas he ſaid he would reach them the fear of the 
alt his name. rogether z. — | £74. wv. 11. the Leflons he teacheththem, v. 13. 14. are only ſuch 
| 4 I ſought the LORD, and he heard mo, and deli- | #5 concern men. Not that he meant to exclude Duties of piet 
+ - vered me ftrom all my fears, OD ds ans wie he _ —_— enjoineth and prefleth as m 
-.bTo cet Fogg . | neceflary, bur only to teach us what is oft inculcated, both in the 
fJoynyaur piſs with min, Ol] ye humble ones, * Not in | 01d and New Telamens, tht nccre Religion townrds Gov, 
RE Wokip, but in affeGion af work : Ler 8 ET nd always accompanied with a Conſciencious Diſcharge of our Duties 
Jec our Praifes meet in the Ears of the all-hearing God. Or alike to men ; and to convince the Hypocritical Jraehzes, and particu- 
| Ls with cqual Zeal and Fervendy 3 let none be willing to bt ig larly his Advertaries, that ſo long as it was their daily courſe and 
KK 04 70 er nh ; g pn to pt ae att all manner of Evil againſt him, and other 
: - Sn oifÞ OT Sntd unto him 1, and || were lightned —_ -* The 5 LOND cn the riche _ * Job 46. 
to him- 223 and their faces were not aſhamed ». | eG "5. of 
ÞC 31. 16, + The bumble, v, 2. or they that fear him, v. 7. when they _——— WS 
, were in diſtreſs. Or, it is an indefinitexpreſſion. { Either, r. Un- | @4; is 18 added to prove his laſt aſſertion, to wit that the pra- 1 <t-3.1% 
+ . P ; pI ctice of thoſe Duries, v. 13. 14. is the true and beſt, and i d *Neb..3, 
ro the Lord, expreſſed wv, 4+ 7, e. They ſought and expetted | the only w £ hs dex Elts And indec 
help from him. Or rather, 2. Unto this poor man, as it tollows,v: Ge b - = 7k 8 oe ee that good propoſed and promiſed, ws 21: both 
or unto David_ So he ſpeaks of himſelf in the third Perſon, which ecauſe ſuch righteous perſons, howſoever they may meer with af- 
WE So the re bn when Twas delivertd, v. 4. omen wr I fronts and injuries trom men, are under the 1pecial Care and Fa- 
upon me with wonder 70 4 | ntuaggtey wy ht gg ods. -vour of God, in this Verſe ; and thoſe who do the Fvils there for= 
ions amncr. = 5, e. Comforted an E COOK by ave Ex bidden,, ſball find to their coſt that God is their Enemy, v. 16, 
ample» Bur theſe and the foregoing Words are by the ancient In- ne : The face / of the LORD 5s againft them that* Jer. 44 
terpreters, read Imperatively, as an Exhortation to others, to do evil mz, to cut oftthe remembrance of them fromthe u- 
et he _ addretiecs _ ſpeech, as s 3. 8, 9, 11. Lcok unto earth »». 05 944; 
bim, ( with an Eye of Faith aad Prayer ) and be ye inlightned, i. e | 13i.e. His Anger, oftcalled his Face, as Levit. 1 
| Sus * > . , | ; . 17. 10. and 20 5, 
MIRT Caen? Mary Gahtine And then | Fo. 4x, Lom. 56. becauſe uigr diſorey is fin te Face 
"__ , Jour, , 8. 0: mmon courlſe and ſtudy. and buſineſs it is t m 
þn-' oF: _—_ very oo in wp ex 6 ) mt ſhall nor be a- | vil: Forelſe there is not a juſt man upon Earth, that doth anda fuveth 
__ mg er t diſappointed of their hope, but found _ _ Te a —"— m —_ _ them and their Chil- 
| 1did. -dren of that worldly Happineſs ; which is the only thing that th 
6 This poor man o cryed, and the LORD heard him; | defire, and ſeck, by thole wicked Courſes. POT gs W 
| and faved him our of all his troubles. 17 The righteous cry 0, and the LORD heareth and 
hep!” oh. v ov uy David, of whom they that looked, &c. wv. 5. ſpake theſe | delivereth them out of all their troubles. 
Soc Gen. rath6 ag | 0 Heb: They cry, to wit, the Righteous, as is manifeſt both ſrom 
-4 mk 7 The angel p of the LORD * encampeth round a- _ Nature of the thing, and from v. is: where they areſo cal- 
2 Kings6, bout them 9q that fear him-and delivereth them. _— 4 which this Verſe is to be continued, the 16tþ Verſe 
7  27-e er rap the ſingular number being put for the plu- ora, ng f WHY PIR WOT SORT any places of 
i ral, as it is Pſal. 78. 45 and 105. 33, 40. for it'is both im: ; NTT” p 
: ES 20. abc. we i hd _ yy =— 7 oooger) ger 18 Ihe LORD 3s nigh pF unto them that are of a 
55 men, to one created Angel: And we fiad many Angels employed broken hearr: ard faverh ſuchas be + of a contrite SPI- + Heb. is 
bo in this work, Gen. 32. r, 2. 2 Kings 6. i Guardeth tl fro rit ; FORg 
dangers on every ſide; to whi fs k Uh cnairyre ary th * RI the broted 
G.. Heb_r. "99 y ide; ro which work they are appointed by God, | 19 * Many arc the afflitions of the righteous ; but of Hen 
gy 2 $8 O*® taſte » and ſee that the LORD 3s good 5; * _ P gow m_ vereth him out of them all. —_ ” 
FÞca- 12. bleſſed is the man that truſteth in him of his neva "" DE OR Oo be fevers courſe Spirit. . 
; 7 7: e. Conſider it ſeriouſly and throughly, and' affeftionatly ; | to ſrand or off. a Do mn: wermigg> Fg " _— mon *2 Tim. 
make tryal of it by your own and others Experiences. This 1s op- underſtands, either 1. Thoſe whoſe Spirits are Peet Fx, and even 3* -—_ 
poſed to thoſe ſleight and vaniſhing Thoughts, which” men have of broken with the greatneſs of their Calamities. Bur this may be 
ps ..£ Of Mexcitul and Gracious, to wit, to all his people. and frequently is the lot of wicked Men. And therefore in his 
9 ear the LORD r, ye his ſaints : for rhere is no | Senſe, and to ſuch perſons, this propoſition and promilc is nor true : 
want to them that fear him.- Or rather, 2. Thoie whoſe Hearts or ſpirits are truely and deeply FH, 
B #3 e, Reverence and ſerve him, and-truft in him: For Fear is humbled under the hand of God and the ſenſe of their Sins and draw 
_ .. _commo ohy pul for all the parts of Gods Worſhip. _ a eng gamma Pe Pte Davids Caſe, Pſal. 6. 1. Oc: a le 
95.41?-.. 10 * The young lions « do lack; and , and 32. 3, 4. Whoſe proud and ſelf-willed Hearts are ſubdued, and of 
as 8 Gr. the = Wh wh. Goo _ LORD ra —_ ſuffer hunger - made obedient to Gods will, and ſubmiſſive to his providence. For & : 
s "oe Bog; t want any good to all ſuch, and to ſuch only, this promiſe is veriticd. ; 
« Either 7 Properly ; ſee Job 4.11. Or, 2. Metaphorically ſc ken ”" ITO ow Þ beo- 
p *0 » TIF. UT, 2. OT1Ca O s 
6itted,* the'great Potentates of the Earth, who are of Oo) we "<A "I a 3s #: Al 


Xty. Ih. XX2VI. PS Pſal. XXXVIE 


wi 


2:ccruel and perfidious and unrighteous, but thou art infinite in | Let it not be like a Fountam ſealed, but let it be drawn forth for 
Mercy, and Faithfulneſs, and Righreo+jneſs, and Living-kindn:ſs, as it | their Comfort. n #: e: Sincerely love thee, as it is explained in 
here fo!lows ; and therefore rhough I deſpair of rhem, yer I rruſt j thc next Clauſe : for know:2g implies Aﬀettiony as Pſal. 9. 10. and 


ct. 3+ 


$727 
N 12. 


, 44 


944, 


124 


in thee, as other men do for theſe Reaſons, v. 7. » Or, 
( as the perfix Beth oft ſignifies, as Gen: 11: 4, and elſewhere, and 
as It iS Explained inthe flowing Clauſe) the Heavens, As It 1s 
on the Eaith, of which there was no queſtion, ſo it reacheth 
thenceto the heavens, z: e: it is infinite and incomprehenſible» 0 
The truth both of thy Threatnings againſt thine and mine Ene- 
mies, and of thy promiſes made tu me and other good men. p: e: 
Is far above cur reach greater and higher than we can apprehend 


1 
tHeb. the 
Mounta705 
q God. 


P91, 19. 


[as : 
6 Thy righteouſneſs q js like + the great mountains r; 
thy * judgements / re a great deep et, O LORD, * chou 


preſerveſt man and beaſt «. 
Job11.8- 4 In all thy counſels and ways in the Gorernment of the world. 
tom, 11.7 Either, 1. Stedfaſt and unmoveable. Or 2. Eminent and con!p1- 
"n cuous to all men: Or rather, 3. Very high and our of cur reach : 
ob7-20- For it ſo agrees beft with the toregoing and following expreſſions 
(Tim. 4-/#: e; Thy executions of thy Couniels,or thy adminiſtrations of the 
10, Afﬀairs of the World, and of thy Church. * z: e; Untcarchable, as 
the Ocean is in ſome parts: « The worſt of men ; yea, and the 
Brute-beaſts have Experience of thy Ca:e and Kindneſs, and there- 
Heb. pre» fore I have no Reaſon to doubt of it. 7 ; 
_ 7 How Þ excellenc is thy * loving Kindneſs x, O 
2.10. God ! cherefore the chi:dren of men puc uheic truſt un- 


+ derthe ſhadow of thy wings z. 
x Or, thy Mercy : For it is the fame word which is uſed and ſo 


koned, and the r:ſ{t of them be excellent and glorious, yet above 
all thy Mercy is moſt excellent or precious and amiable, as being moſt 
neceflary and beneficial unto us, poor ſinful milerable Men, 
9 7: e: Cheerfully commir themſelves to thy Care and Kindneſs, 
notwithſtanding their own Sinfulneſs, and the Rage : and Power 
ef their Adveriaries, againſt all which thy Meicy is a ſufficicar 


6+ 8 They & * ſhall be + abundantly ſatisfied a withthe 


«nd. fatneſs of thy houſe 5: and thou ſhalt make themdrink c 


1.529- of the river d of thy pleaſures e. 
11.43- 24” + 5, e. Thoſe children of Men who truſt in thee,as he now ſaid. 
k131:14% 3 Though now they are ſtraitned, opprefſed and perſecuted yet 
they ſhall not be only prote&ed and ſupported for the preſent, 

| bur in due time ſhal have all their wants and defires fully farisfied - 
Heb. ſball be made drunk, i. e. Shall be as 1t were over-whelmed 

with the plenty of it, which they ſhall no more be able to com- 

- prehend, than a drunken man is able perfealy to underſtand and 
judge of things ; and ſhall be free, as drunken men alfoare,from 

all Cares and Fears, either of not obtaining it, or of loſing it, 6 

With thoſe rich and delightful . proviſions, which thou haſt pre- 

pared for them in thy habitation, 7. e. either in the Tabernacle 

where they uſed to feaſt upon the remainders of the Sacrifices ; to 

which alſo he ſeems here to allude, Or rather, 2. In Heaven ; 

which is called Gods Houſe, both in Scripture, as John 14 2. and 

in divers Antient Heathen Authors. hor the Expreſſions here 

uſed are too magnificent to be beſtowed upon thoſe Feaſts, or in- 

deed upon any of the enjoyments of this Life, and do iil become 

him, who profeſſedly diſowns the having of his Portion tn this Life, 

and declares his expcQation of Happineſs in the next Life, P/al.: 7. 

14, 15. And ſeing it is apparent trom Hzb- 11» and from many 

other Scriptures both of the Old and New Teſtament, thit both 

David and Job, and Abrahams, and the reſt of the Holy Patriarchs 

and Prophets,had a firm belief and hope of the future Life, and 


1s unto 


rendred, wv: 5. The ſenſeis, though all th'ne Attributes now rec- 


ſecurity. | | *. not thy ſelf # becauſe of evil doers b; neicher + _ 22.3 


oft elſewhere o Which will appear in giving them that prore&i- 
on and afſiſrance, which thou art by thy Nature inclined, and by 
thy promile engaged to give them. , 
{ 11 Let not the foor of pride p come againſt me 9, and 
let nor the hand of the wicked remove me r. 

p 7: e: Of my proud and infolent Enemies : the Abſcratt being 
' Pur for the Concrete, as Jer. 50. 34, 32. So alſo Prov, 12. 27. and 
13.6, q Or, uy me, to wit, fo as to overthrow, or remove 
me, as 1t1s in the next Clauſe. r Eitner. «. From my truſt in thee, 
or obedience to thee. Or. 2* From my place and iration,from the 
Land of my Nativity, and the place of thy Worſhip. Or, ſbake 
me, Or caft me down, 1. e. Subdue and deſtroy me. 

12 There / are the workers of iniquity fallen ?: they 
are caſt down and are not able to rifc. 
| J Where they come againſt me, and hope to ruine me.He ſeems 
as 1t were to point at the place with his Finger, as if it were alrea= 
dy done, and he could tell 11 the circumſtances of it. Or, then, 
z e. when they thought all ſure, and me irrecoverably loſt. 7 7. e 
They ſhall certainly and ſuddenly fall; which the Prophzrs ule co 
exprels 1n the time paſt. 


Þ S A L. XXXVIL 


The ARGUME NT, 

He deſign of this Pſalm is to defend the Providerice of God, 
and to ſatisfie the minds of men, in that great queſtion, 
co..cerning this ſeeming inequality of Gods diſpenſations, in affli&t- 
ing good Men, and giving proſperity to t1e worſt of men,and to 
intrruct Gods people how to demean themſelves in their preſent 

condition, and what ſupports and comforts they have in ir. 
| . A P{alw of David. | 
The Pſalmi& perſwadeth to Patience and Confidence in God, x mn—n—=—— $_ Arid 
ſheweth the dtfferent flate of the godly and wicked in all thar dealings, 


9 —— 40; 


be chouenvious e againſt the workers of iniquiry. Prov-23.7- 
s Give not away to immoderate Grief or Anger, or Impatience. & 24.1. g- 
b Bzcauſe they Proſper in their wicked Enterprizes, whilſt thou 19. 
art 1orely afflicted. c Efreeming them happy, and ſecrerly wiſhing 
that thou wert in their condition. 
2 For they ſhal ſoon be cut down like the graſs, and 
wither as the green Herb 4. RTE Ss 
4 For their Happineſs,the matter of thy Envy is tut ſhort lived. 
3 Truſt in che LORD e, and do good f, foſha:r thou 
dwell in the land g» and þ verily thou ſhalt be fed b, _—_ 
e Depend upon Gods providence and promiſe for thy proreRtion f Heb. is 
and ſuſrentation for their Infidelity is the root of their wickedneſs, #7482, or | 
f Continue in the praftice of that which is good and wslt-pleating fab leneſs. 
to God. g z. e. Upon this condition ſhall dwell fafety and quiecly 
in Canaan; as God had oft promiſed, In the Hebrew it.is, dwel -n * 
the Land, asit were a command to abide in Canaan when Trou- 
bles come, and not to flze to the Phih#:ncs, or other heathens for 
ſhelter, as he had fooliſhly done- Burt it is rather a promiſe, by 
comp- this with v. 27. 29. ſuch promites being ofr exprefſed by 
Imperative Verbs put for Futures, as Gen: 12, 2. and 42. 18. Pſal. 
128. 6+ 4%05 5. 4. þ Heb. Theu ſhalt be fed i; e: every way provided 
tor ) in Truth ts e. true!y or afſuredly ; or with, or by Faith, as 
chis word ſignifies, #. e: by thy truſting in the Lord 3 thou ſhalt 
live by thy Faith, as is ſaid, Hobok. $4. £6 
4 Delight thy felf in the LORD 5, and he ſhall give 


their fel:city therein 5 it ſeems moſt reaſonable to unlerſtand al] 
thoſe paſſages of David, and the other Prophets of it, which natu- 
rally, an4 withour any foice may be ſo underſtood : Of which 
number certainly this Verſe and the following is one. c Before 
they had Fatneſs, #7; e: Fat Meats; and now, Drink ; to note the 
compleatnefs of their Feaſt. d Which notes both their plenty,and 
their conſtancy and perpetuity. e Which thou prepareſt, and 
which thou enjoyeſt ; whence it is called the jy of the Lord, Mar. 
25. 21+ Or this rotes their great eminency 3 for things moſt ex- 
cellent in thei: kinds are entitled to God, as the goodlieſt Ce- 
dars, Mountains. &s. are call:d Cedars of God, Mountains of 
God, &Cc. 

9 For with thee fis the fountain g of Life þ: in thy 


light ; ſhall we & ſee light /, 

f i.e. In thy power to give it, and in thy preſence to be enjoy- 
ed. g Which notes, 1. Caufality. Ir is in God as a Fountain, 
and from him is derived to us, 2» Abundance, 3. Excellency. 
Water is ſweeteſt in the Fountain ; and Fountains were rare and 
highly prized in thoſe hot Countries. þ Of that glorious and bleſ- 
ſed, and endleſs Life, which alone is worthy of the Name of Life, 


.thee the deſires of thine heart &. eo Sh 
7 In his Favour and Service. and in the itudy of his Word and: 
Promiſes. &k 1. e. Thy juſt deſires, er whatſoever 1s truly deſira-. 

ble and good for thee. Which limirarion is neceſſarily to be un« 
derſtood, both from divers places of Scripture, and from rhe Na- 
ture of the things ; for it is unreaſonable to imagine that GOD 
would engage himſelf to grant their ſinful and inordinate deſires, 
and it would alſo be a Curte to them to have them granted. C 
5 | * Commit thy way / unto the LORD : truſt... 
alſo in him, and he ſhall bring ic to paſs mm. mg © 
i: e: Allthy care and buſineſs, thy deſi:e and neceffities.Com- thy way te. - 
mend them to God by fervent Prayer, referring them'to his good p97 #he 
Will, and expeRting an happy iflue of all from him. mw Heb. H#: LORD. _ 
foall av, or Wark, to wit, for thze, or what is fit to be done 5 or Pl: 55-22. 
what thou delireſt in the Senſe given ON v; 4. . Pro. 16.3. 


6 And he ſhall bring forch » thy righteouſneſs as the Mar, 6.25. 


light 0, and thy judgement Þ as the noon-day. Ke 12. 


» To the veiw of the World ; from which-it hath hitherto ſee- 


ed to be hid or eclipſed by Reproaches, and by grievous Calami- 


this Life being only a paſſage to Death, and a theatr? of greatand 
manif -1d Calamitics. Although it be true, that God. is the foun*- 
tain both of Natural and Spiritual Life. # In the light of thy 
Countenance or glorious prefence, which then ſhall be fully mani- 


1 feſted unto us, when we ſhall ſee thee clearly, and Face to Face, 


and not through a Glaſs, and darkly, as we now ſee, 1 Cr: 13.12. 
Comp. Pſa/: 17: 15. k i.e. Enjoy, as ſeeing frequently ſignifies 3 of 
which ſee on Pſal. 34: 12. 1 The light of Life, as it is called, John 
8. 12. Lightin this Branch being the ſame thing with Life in the 
former, 3. e. Joy and Comfort, and Happineſs, which is oft ſtg- 
nified by Light, as the cntrary is by Darkneſs, See Jeb 29. 3 
Pſal. 27. 1. Iſa 9+ 2. There we ſhall have pure Light without any 
mixture of Darkneſs. The word Light is elegantly repeated in a- 
nother fignification ; in the former Clauſe it is Light diſcovering, 

fHeh. in this Light diſcovered or enjoyed. 

Ar out . 10 O + continue mthy loving kindneſs unto them that 

og know thee ; and thy righteouſneſs o ro * the upright 

6410 . 
& 125, , 1n heart. - 
m As this word fignifies, Pſal: 85. 5. Eccleſ. 2: 3« Jer. 31. 3. 

As thou ha(t begun, io continue the manifteſcation and exhibition 
of ir, both in this Life, and roche next. Or, ex;end, or Draw forth, 


ties, Which moſt men are apt to miſtake for Tokens and punith- 
; ments of grear Wickedneſs, 0 Ir ſhall bz as viſible to men, as the - 
|Lighr of the Sun, and that at Noon-dayas it is in th2 next Branch. 
, So effeCtually will he plead thy Cauſe. p The ſame thing with 
| Righteouſneſs, as this Word is uted here below, v. 28 and 99: 4. 
and ofr elſewhere. 


' 7 tTReſtin the LORD q, and wait patiently for 


' him : frec nor thy ſeif becauſe of him who profpereth t Holt, 
in his way 7 ; becauſe of the man'who bringeth wicked Is 
devices to pals, | te 
9 Heb, Be ſilent unto, or fory or becauſe of the Lord ; i, e: Do' not 
murmure nor repine at his dealings,” but ſilently and quietly ſub-- 
mit to his will, and adore his judgements, aad as it follows, . Wa:s 
for his Help+ This Advice and Command 3s preffed again and a= 
gain to, teach us how hard ir is, to learn and pra&iſe this Leſſon. 
r 4. e, In his evil way, as itis limited in the following words. _. 
8 Ceaſe from anger /, and forfake wrath : Fon not thy 
ſelf in any wiſe, to doevilr, _ - CE : 
ſ Either againſt the ſinner for his ſucceſs; or againſt God, for ſo. 
diſpoſeing of things, es Jerah was, ch. 4. 1. t Or, at leaft ſo far as 
58 0 65h If any luch anger, os Grief, do ſecretly ariſe. 3n thee, 


4 Q4 take 


+Hebs RoB * 


As = = 8 
x Pet: 5.7» 


« XXXVII. 


take care that it do not tranſport thee, either to reproach or di- 


_ or imitation of the wicked praftices of thoſe Men, 1n 
opes of the ſame ſucceſs. 


upon the Lord, they (hal inherit the earrh x. | 
.u To wit, from the earth, by comparing this with the next 
Clauſe, and with Pſal. 34: 16. Their end ſhall certainly be moſt 
miſerable. x According to Gods promiſe oft made to ſuch ; which 
alſo for the moſt part was literally fulfilled in that ftate of rhe 
Church ; and if it was not, it was fulfilled with far greater advan- 
tage Spiritual and Eternal bleſſings. | 
Io For yer a little while y and the wicked ſhall not 


0. and it (ball notbe b. 
20. 9» y Their time and Proſperity is very ſhort, and therefore no mats | 
ter of Envy. z To wit, in the land of the Living, He ſhall be 
dead and gone, as this phraſe is commonly taken. 4 Induſtrioufly | 
ſeeking to find him. bz: e: His place and Eſtate, and Glory ſhall 
be gone, Or, he ſhall nit be, as before. 
11 * But the meek c thall inherit the earth, and ſhall 


Pſ25.9. delight themſelves in the abundance of peace 4. 
at. 5.5 ci; e: The Godly, whoare frequently thus called, as Pſal: 22: 
26: and 149: 4: thoſe who patieatly bear Gods affliting hand, and 
meckly paſs by injuries from ungodly men. &d Partly of outward 
Peace and Proſperity, which God in his due time will give them: 
and principally of inward peace and fatisfa&tion of mind, in the 
IE Gods Favour, and the aſſurance of his own endleſs Haps 
pineſs. 

12 The wicked || plotteth againſt the juſt, and gnaſh- 


eth upon him with his teeth e. 
,e Out of Malice and Rage. See on Pſal: 35; 16. 
""PEPTEIS £ * The LORD thall ſaugh ac him f, for he ſeeth 
that his day g is coming. | 
F #: e: Shall deſpiſe and deride all their hopes and indeavours a- 
gainſt the good, as moſt vain and fooliſh. g Either, 1. Gods day, 
which is an uſual phraſe, as 7: 2: 12. and 13:9: Or, 2. His own 
day, as 1 Sam. 26. 10. Exek. 21, 25, 29. Both ſignifie the ſame 
- thing,the day appointed by God for his puniſhment or deſtru&ti- 
on, as Iſa. 9,4. Jer. 50.27. 
14 The wicked have drawn out the ſword, and have 
bent their bow + to caſt down the poor and needy, and 


+ Heb. :he to lay + ſuch as be of upright converſation 5. 


Or,Pr a« 
F:i/eth. 


pright of h They are furniſhed with all ſorts of Arms, and are ready to 
Way. give the deadly blow. 7 Such againſt whom they have no Quarrel 
: for any injury they have done thzm, but only for their Integrity 


and Righteouſneſs, or becauſe they are better than themſelves,and 
will not comply with theis wicked Counſels and Courſes. 

I Their {word ſhalenter into their own heart &,and 
their bows ſhall be broken. 

- & God will not only defend the upright from their Miſchievous 
Deſigns, but will make them to fall upon their 04-n heads. 

16 A littie that a righteous man hath, is better than 
the riches of many wicked /. 

I Becauſe he hath it with many great and glorious Advantages, 
with God's Favour and Bleſſings, with great Seteniry and Satistac- 
tion of his own Mind, which is infinitely more Defirable and com- 
fortable than all Earthly Poſleſſions, { wick the Conſolarions of 

God's Spirit, and the aſſurance of everlaſting Felicity : ] whilſt 
wicked mens Riches are loaded with many incumbrances, with the 
wrath and-curſe of God, the torment of their own Conſciences 
and Paſſions, and the dreadful} Expettation of an after-reckoning, 
and of endleſs Miſcries+ 

17 For * the arms of the wicked shall be broken : but 


*Pl. 10. the LORD upholdeth the righteous 2. 

IS. m This is a proof of what he ſaid, v. 16. For what the wicked 
have, ſhall ſuddenly be loſt and gone, bat God will maintain the 
righteous in their. happy Eſtate. 


by | 
_ <Big and their inheritance ſbal be for ever p. : 
* » Obſerveth with ſingular Care and affe&ion, 07. e, Their con 
| dition, and all things which do or may befal chem, their Dangers 
.:* _ andFears, and ſuffering from ungodly men; and therefore will 
watch vuver them, and preſerve them from all the Deſigns and At- 
tempts of their Enemies. Days or Years, or Emes, are oft put for 
things done, or Events happening in them, as Deut. 32. 7. Pſal, 
31. 15- and 77-5.and 143. 5. 1a: 63. 11, - p To them and their 
Le _ feed for ever: Comp. v. 29. and when they dye their inheritance 
is not Joit, but p97 Fr for one infinitely b-tter, 
"T9 "They thall beaſhamed q in the evil cime : and * 
in the days of Famine, they{hall be ſatisfied. 
q For the diſapointment of their Hopes, but their Hopes and 
Deſires, ſhall be fatisficd, as it follows. 
20 But the wicked ſhall periſh, and the Enemies of 
__ the LORD <sb#ll be + as the far of lambs r ; they ſhall 
, Conſume, into ſmoke {hall they conſume away. 
r. Which n an inſtant melteth before the fire,  / 7. e. Utterly 
and irrecoverably- 
2.1 The wicked borroweth, and payeth nov again t : 
* PGlicz * but the righteous ſhewerh mercy and giveth. 
9. z Either through covetouſneſs and injuſtice ; Or rather, becaufe 
—$ of that great-penury into which God ſhall bring him ; whilft the 
' righteous is not onely provided ſufficiently for himſelf, bur hath 
abundance'and to ſpare forothers. For he is here comparing the 
wicked and the righteous, not ſo much in their Vertues or moral 
Qualities, as in their outward Conditions, which alſo appears from 
the following Verſe, which gives the reaſon of this. 
.. 22 For ſuch as be bleſſed of him « (ball inherit the 


earth ;.and they rbas be curſed of him ſhall be cut off, 


*p(.33-199 


FS 1 & HM $. 


[ #7. Of the Lord, as appears both from v. 20. where he is 
ſtruſt Gods providence, or to the diſlike of his ways, or to an aP- ; 


i 
* 


* rogative to blets or to Curſe men. And this he mentions, bcth as 


9 Forevii doersihal be cut off «: but thoſe that wal, 


" bez: yea, * thou ſhalt diligently conſider his place a, | 


18 The Lord * knoweth » the days of the upright o, | 


named, and from the nature of the thing, this being God's Pre- 
| the Foundation, and as the Proof of the Certainty of their future 
Happineſs. | 
' 23 The ſteps of a good man x are || ordered y by they q, ,. 
'LORD + and he delighteth in his way =, pliſted, 
x Or, of that Man, to wit, the righteous or Bleſſed Man, ex- 
preſſed, v. 21, 22, y Ory airefed or diſpoſed, i-e. So governed, as 
to attain the end and Happy ifſue at which he Aims. Or, frength- 
ned or eſtabliſhed, ſo as he thall not ſlumble nor fall into Miſchief. 
For ſtill he ſeems to be deſcribing, not their Vertue, but their 
Felicity. z Or, and he favoureth his way, 2.0. Succeeds and proſpers 
his Counſels and Enterprizes. 
24 * Thoughhe fall a,he ſhal not be utterly caftdown »p,,;. 
b ; for the LORD upholdeth him with his hard, ” ek 
4 Either, + Intoſin, as this Word is uſed, Jer. 8. 4.1. 1 Cor. 10. 2 Cor.q4 9, 
12, Or rather, 2. Into Diſtreſs or Trouble, as Michs 7. 8 þ 5. e. 
Not totally, nor irrecoverably Ruined: 
25 I have been young,and now am old,yethave IT not 


ſcen the righteous forſaken,norhis ſeed begging bread e. 

c This aſſertion ſeems to be Contradited by many Experiences; 
nor can it be denied, that both good Men and their Children, 
have ſometimes been reduced to great want» Queſt. How then is 
this true ? Anſ. 1. Some render the laſt Clauſe thus, ner (did 
ever ſee ) his ſeed ( ro wit, forſakeng as was now ſaid ) though 
begging Bread. So the Sence is, I have ſeen him brought to begge. 
ry, yet even then God did nct forſake him. But this Sence agrees 
not with the Context, nor Scope. which is to ſhew the Plenty and 
Proſperity, wherewith God bleſſerh him- 2+ This is to be un-+ 
derſtood of the ſeed of the Righteous, treading in their Fathers 
ſteps from which if they degenerate,they loſe all their Priviledges, 
as many places of Scripture witneſs. 3. Some few Exceptions,do 
not deſtroy the truth of a general Propoſitions 4. Theſe temporal 
Promiſes were more expreſs, and particular tro the Jews in the 
times of the Old Teſtament, than ro Chriſtians in the New, and 
therefore were more litterally fulfillede 5. He ſpeaks nct of any 
kind of wanting or deſiring, or receiving Relief trom others, for 
ſo David himfſelfdid, 1 Sams 21- 3. and 25. 8, bur of the Cuſtoma« 
ry Praiſe and Trade of begging, which was threatned as a Curſe 
to the diſobedient, Deut« 28. Pſal: 109: 10; 6. Not begging, to 
wit, in vain, Or, ſo as to be forſaken, as now expreſſed, and may 
very well be here underſtood, Or, ſo as to be ſuſtained or relieved 
by others. 7. David ſpeaks only of his own Experience, which if 
ſince that time it be Contradited by other mens Experiences, it 
is no more than what happens in all the Concernments of humane 
Lifee« 

26* Heis Fever merciful, and lendeth 4, and his , Pflins; 


ſeed is bleſsed e. + Hcb. af 
d He is ſo far from begging from others. that he hath Ability as the day: 
well as Inclination, to give or lend to ethers, as need requires 
e Not onely with Spiritual,but withTemporal Blefſings.So far ſhall 
he be from waſting his Eſtate, and undving himſelf, and Fami- 
ly by his bounty and Charity, as Coverous Worldings objeRed or 
feared- - ; 
27 * Depart from evil, 
for evermore þ. 
f Having therefore theſe glorious Promiſes and Priviledges, let 
no man do any Evil or unjuſt thing, to enrich or ſecure himſelf, 
nor abſtaining f;om Pious and charitable Attions, for fear of un- 
doing himſelf by them, bur let every man live in the Conſcionable 
diſcharge of all his Duties to God and Men, commutting himſelf 
and all his Afﬀairs to God's fatherly Care and Providence, and Con- 
fidently expeCing his Bleſſing thereupon. g i:e. Thou ſhalt dwellg 
as before, v. 3. ta wit, in the Land, as is expreſſed, v. 3, and 
afterwards in Heaven. h Either Properly : Or for a long time of 

which that word is off uſed. 

_ 28 For the LORD loveth judgement z, and for- 
ſaketh nor his Saints & ; * they are preſerved for evers » pe. (62, 
but the feed of the wicked {hal be cur off. | 28. 

77, 6. Juſt judgement, or Righteouſneſs, as that word is oft 

taken, as hath been ſhewed again and again ; Either, 5. In him- 
ſelf i. &. He loveth to execute judgement npon the wicked, and 
for the Righteous 3 which he doth in the manner expreſſed inthis 
Pſalm. Or, 2, In the Righteous themſelves, whole juſtice and 
Piety, and Charity he ſees and Loves, and will reward it. k Or, 
his Favourites, or they to whom he hath a good will : Or, his bountifull 
Ones, who exerciſe Benignity and Charity ro others. 

29 * The righteous ſhal inherit theland 1 and dwel * p;.., 
therein for ever w. 
I See on v. 3. mSee on v. 18. 

30 * The mouth of the righteous ſpeaketh » wiſdom o * proy; 
and his tongue talketh of judgement o. 10: 31, 
n And that Freely, and Cuſtomarily, and from his heart, as the 
next Verſe ſhews. Having ſhewed in divers Verſes, God's fingu- 


And do good f : and dwellg, Ports 


Jar Care over, and Reſpet& to the Righteous, he proceeds to give 


a CharaQter of them, and withal to affign one Reaſon of the great 

Difference of God's dealings with them, and with other Men. 0 

Either,i, For the manner of it, with Wiſdom and judgement, Or 

rather, 2» For the matter of it, heavenly Wiſdom, & God's Judge 

ment er” Word or Law, as it follows, verſe 31x. When the Diſ- 

courſes of other Men, are either wicked or Vain, and uſeleſs, his 

are ſerious and Edifying, and Pious concerning the Word and 

ways of God. EF * pſ.40-8. 
31 * The law of his God 3s in his heart p; * none of yg, ,;q.98; 

his || ſteps ſhall ſlide 9. Tha. $1. 7- 
p According to God's Command, Deut: 6: 6: and Promiſe, Heb: * Þf y8:17- 

$8: 10. His thoughts and Meditations, and AﬀeRions are fixed up- & 4®, ?- 

on it. He doth not talk Religiouſly in Deſign,or with Oſtentation, |Or,9%%s* 

but out of the abundance ofhis Heart Mat: 12: 35: 9q This paſſage 

deſcribes, Either; i: His ſafety, Conſequent upon his Piety ; God 

will uphold and preſerve him from failing into that Miſchief, 


which wicked men Plot againſt him. Or rather, '2, His Vertue or 
. Piety 


Pal. XXXYIlL 


- 
4 


Js 


"Pl 


* pf 
TH 
Pea 
Hea 


) estgn 


» 24 


l.4 % 


112.9, 
b. al 
oy. 


14.14 


WLAXXV UII. 


Piety + Which is evidenced by his Words, v. 30: by his Heart, in 
the former partof this Verſe, and by his Aﬀtions in theſe Words, #'s 
ſteps or goings ( 4, e. his ations ) ſhall not; ( or rather, do not : For 
this Verb though Future, may and ſhould berendred by the preſent, 
as Futures frequently are in the Hebrew Language, and as the two 
foregoing Future Verbs are rendred, v 3o. ) ſit4? or ſip, or ſwerve, 
to wit, from the Rule, or from God's Law.. Which 1s to be onder» 
ſtood as that Patſage, Pſal: 119. 3. They do no iniquity 3 and ſome 
ſuch Expreffions, not ſimply and abſolutely. as if all good men were 
finleſs 3 which 'is aboundantly Confuted, both 'by many 
Scriptures and by unjrerfal Experience ; but Comparatively, and in 
ReſpeR of his Deſign and Courſe, or Cuſtome* K1s Converſation 15 
ordinarilyRegular and unbleamable. He not only begins well, but 
Conſtantly perſeversin God's ways, and will not be drawn to toriake 
God and Religion upon any Terms. 

22 The wicked watchethrthe rightous, and ſecketh 
toſlay him. 

7 To find out a fit ſeaſon or occaſion to defiroy him; 

23 The LOR D will not leave him in hishand s 


nor condemn him t when he is judged. 
s (%.e. ) Not give him up to his Power and Rage. # ( 1.,e. ) 
Not give his Gonſent to the Sentence of Condemnation, which the 
wicked have pronounced againſt him, but will juſtifie him, and Vin- 
dicate his innocency and deliver him : For ſuch Negatives do oft 
imply the contrary Aﬀirmatives ; as God's net ho/ding a man Guiltleſr, 
_ commonly implies that he will ſeverely puniſh him. 
91,32 F 


; wicked are cut off, thou ſhalt ſee zz y. 

« Secking and truſting to him, and to him onely, for Help and De- 
liverance. x Continue in the Prattiſe of thy Duty, or in thoſe ways, 
whieh God hath preſcribed to thee io his Word, and do? not uſe ins 
dire&Qed and irregular means to deliver thy ſeif. y Thou ſhalt not 
onely eſcape the Deſtruſtion which they Defign tor thee, but ſhalt 
» . Live to ſce their Ruine, 


']05.3. 25 * Thave ſeen the wicked in great power &, and 


. . . j 
Nh Tree ſpreading himſelf « like a || green bay-treeb ; 
tet grow- X Or Formidable: Not only himſelf ou: of Danger, as it ſeemed, 
thin big but terrible to others. « And therefore firmly aud deeply rooted. 
on il; þ Which is continually green and flouritag, yea even 1n the Win- 

ter-ſeaſon, Or, like a green Tree in its own Native ſoil , where Trees 
flouriſh much better than when they are tranſplauted into another 
Sol: 

36 Yet he paſſed away c, and lo, he 2was not : yea, I 
ſought him, but he could not be found &. 

c He was gone in aninſtant, like a Tree blaited and blown down, or 
cut off and rooted out, and carried away in a moment, d There was 
po monument norRemainder of him left, 


37 Mark the perfe& man, and behold the upright, 


for the end of :hat man 7#s peace e. 

e Though he may meet with Troubles in his way, yet all fhall end 
well with him ; he ſhall be happy at laſt. 

38 But the tranſgreſſours ſhall be deftroyed togetherf, 


the end of the wicked fhall be cut off g. 

f Or, alike, one as well as another, all without any excepiion or 
reſp:& of Perſons, gi. e, )He ſhall be cut off a: laſt, or in the end. 
His Proſperity ſhall end in DeftruGion: Or,ehe Poſterity( as this word 
Gegnifies, Pſal; 1097 13: Jer. 31; 17, Exeks 23: 25: Dan: 11. 4i) of the 
wcihed, & -. | 

29 But the ſalvation ofthe righteous is ofthe LORD 5; 
he is their ſtrength in the time of trouble. 

40> And the LORD ſhall help them and deliver them 
he ſhall deliver them from the wicked, and fave them 


becauſe they truſt in him» 
h And tlierefore it ſhall certainly come to them, 


PSAL. XXXVIIL 
The ARGUMENT. 


His is reckoned one of Davids Penitential Pſalms, Tt was Comes 
poſed upon occaſion of ſome ſore Diſcaſe, or grievous Cala- 
mityz which he rightly judged to be inflit:d upon him for his 


Sins; 
1oal.7o, A P/almef David to bring * to remembrance #. 

. # Either, r. To God, that by this humble and mourntull Prayer, he 
might prevail with God, torememb:r and pity him 3 for now he 
ſeemed quite to have forgotten him.Or 2:5jTo himſcl', that by re- 
viewing this Pſalm afterwa:ds,e might call to mind. his former 
danger and miſery, and Gods wonderfull mercy im delivering him 
from them ; which we are very apt to forget. And that others alfo 
mizht remember and confider what God had done to him, 
firſt in chaſtenins, and then in reftoring him, and might 
make uſe of his Example for their benefit 

David being viſeted with fichneſs, rehearſed his woſall conaifion,. 1----3, 

by reaſon of his Sins, 4 --8. Prayeth for forgiveneſs, help "and favour, 

' 9. Locke layes befere God the unfaithfulneſs of his Friends, 11 --- 
18:and the cruelty of his Enemies, i g--22. = 

LORD, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither 


chaſten me in thy hot diſpleaſure 5. 
6 Iconfeſs, | both deſerve Chaſtiſement and need it, and there- 
fore I defire not that thou wouldeſt remove it, but only moderate it. 
* fob 6.4, Sce the ſame expreſſion, #ſal. 6. 1. 
2 For* thine arrows « ſtick faſt in me, andthy hand 


refleth me ſore 4. 
© c (4, e. ) Thy Judgments inflited upon my outward and inward 
Man, oft compared to Arrows, as Deut. 32. 23. Pſal: 7. 13. and 
45: 5. and 91: 5: & Or, comes down. upon me, as when a ſtrong!May 
lifts vp his Hand and Weapon, that it may fall down with greater v1- 
* Pſa;6:2, Olence, and make the deeper ound. 


T Heb, 3 There is nO ſoundneſs in my fleſh becauſe of thine 
ors of anger : * neither is there any Þ reſt 1n my bones e becauſe 
ealth, Dt 


_ of my inf. 


PSALMS 


34 Wait on the LORD #«, and keep his * way x, and. 
he ſhalt exhalt thee to inherit the land ; * when the 


| Pal. XXXvithþ 
e My diſeaſe or grief, hath ſeized upon all the parts of my Body, | 


my very Cones not excepted, ſo that my bed can give me 
# Which hath provocked thee to deal thus ſeverely with me. ny 


4 For mine iniquities g * are gone over my head bh : $5.....z1ll 
as an heavy burden they are* too heavy for me —__ 
E Or, the puniſhment of mine iniquities, as this word is frequent! || 
_ : Which beſt agrees both with the foregoing and following Ver. 
£5, and with the Metaphor here uſed; which in other places of 
Scriptureis generally applyed to AfﬀiRions, and not to Sins: þ Like 
deep Waters wherew:th 'f am overwhelmed and almoſt drowned 
Fſal. 42. 9. and 6g: 2: anfl I24: 4, 5. ; 
5 My wounds ſtink, end are corrupt 5: becauſe of 
my fooliſhneſs k. 


? ihe Bruiſes and Sores cauſed by my Diſcaſe, are not only pai 
- , ainful 
_ NE to = _ _ to others: þ /7,& ) Sin, which aealty 

, 15 commonly called fe// Pſal. 69. s: 7 13s 16; : 
TO y folly, as Pſal. 6g. 5: Prev: 13: 16: and 14: if 

6 Iam F troubled 7, T am bowed down greatly ; FHeb. - "| 
I go || mourning m all the day long. wryeds | 

! Heb. Diſtorted . or depreſied; Or, as it is expreſſed by auother || Or, in 
word, lignifyinz the ſame thing, bewed down, to wit, in my Body, *!acks | 
as Cifcatcd perſons cemmonly are, and withal dejeRted in my Ming Mal:3:14 |} 
m Hed: In black, the ſign of Mourniog which may here figniffe the 
thing, asſignsoftr do: When for my ea'e I tiſe out of my Bed and 
walk, or rath-r creep about in my Chamber, I do it with a ſad 
Heart, and deje&ed Countenance. Or. if he did walk further, his 
Diſeaſe had ſome Intervals and Mitigations, Or going, may be here 
meant of hs languiſhing, or going towards the Grave, as this ſame 
word 15 uſed, Gen. 15; 2, Compare with 25. 32+ Joſ« 23. 14» | 

7 Formy loins are filled with a loathſome diſeaſe », 
and zhere ts no ſoundneſs in my fleſh. i 

n Or, with fulthineſs : Or, with ſcoarching heat, The Diſeaſe might 
be ſome bu-ning Feaver, beiag alſo malignant or Peſtilentia), either 
buraing 1awardly, or breaking forth outwardly in Carbuncles, or 
Boyis. It 15 true, this and the other Expreſſions may be taken Figu- 
ratively, ” _ ge = prot But we ſhould not forſake the 
proper and the ]iteral fenſe of the Words without ich 
ſeems not to be in thisplace. , YI MP 

8 I amfeeble and ſore broken : I have 
reaſon of the diſquietneſsof my heart p. 

o Like a Bear or a Lyon, through, extream Pain and Miſery 
pþ For the great Anxiety and ſorment of my Mind. cauſed by the 
deep ſenile of my (ins, and of Gods wrath, and of the ſad iſſue of 
my Diſeaſe 3 which being added to my bodily pains, wakes them 
more intollerable, 

9 Lord, all my deſires before thee ; and my groan- 
ing is not hid from thee. | 

q I do not utter all theſe Complaints, nor roar 'out that thou 
mayſt hear and know them, for thou heareft and knoweft, even my 
loweſt Groans; yea, mine inward Defires and all my Necefficies. 
And therefore, I pray thee, pity and dcliver me, as I truſt thou 
wiltft do. | 

10 My heart panteth r, my ſtrength faileth me : as 


for the light of mine eyes, it alſofis gone from me «5 + Heb. is 
_ Or, goes round, wanders hither and thither, as the word t:gnifies ; nor with 
1s perplex..d aud tofled with many and various Thoughts, not know- me 
1ng what to do, nor whether to go. s Mine Eyes are grown dim ; 
either through grief and tears, as P/al. 6.7. Or through weakneſ; as 
I Sam. 14: 28. 29 
1: * My lovers and my friends ſtand aloof: from my _ . _ 
f ſore ; and || my kinſmen ſtand afar off. * Pſ.31.tt 
# Either through Neg/e& and Contempt, or diſdain of me : Or Mat. 27, 
througi: Delicacy and Abhorrency, from loathiome and ſaddivg 55. 
Spectacles : Or through fear of Infetion, or ſome other inconveni- 7 Heb. 
encies: : firoke. 
12 They alſo that ſeek after my life, lay ſnares for (Or, 
77eu; and they that ſeek my hurt, ſpeak miſchievous wi 
things, and imagine deceits - all the day long. 
u That if my Diſcale do nor k'll me, chey may deſtroy me ſome 
otlier way» x They deſign milchief, but cover it with fair preten. 
CCSs 
13 But I, as adeaf man, heard not; and I was as 


a dumb man, that openeth not his mouth y; 
y | carried my ſelf towards them, as1ii 1 had no Ears to hear, what : 
they ſaid either to me, or for me, nor a Tongue to Anſwer, or reprove 
them for their Reproaches and Calumnies. Which he did not for 
want of juſt Anſwers to them, but to teſtifie hisHuanliat ion for hisSies, 


—— — 


roared o by 


and his patient ſubmiſſion to, and acceptation of the puniſhment 
ch he had brought upon himſeif. Of which ſee an inſtance, 2 

m+ 16. 1O, 11. 12. Whcerein allo he was an eminent Type of Chriſt: 
ho when he was re: iled, reuiled not again, 1 Pet. 2. 23; : 

. 14 Thus TI was as a man that heareth not, and in 
whoſe mouth are no reproofs z. 

2 Or Arguments, to convitce or coutute thew; or to defend my 
ſelf. 

15 For|| in thee, O LORD, do I hope z : thou 
wilt || hear, O LORD my God. 

a | bore their Carriage fiientiy anc patiently, becauſe I hoped ” ang _—_ 
knew that thou wouldeſtanſwer for me,and plead 5: yCauſe detter than oy "I 
my ſelf 3 which 1 would not prevent by my [mpatienr e, and avenging || Or, dit 
my ſelf. Or. But in the do I hope, ( i. e. ) Though Friends fo;ſike ſwer: 
me, and mine Enemies plot and prattiſe againſt me, yet 1 donot deſ. 
pair, becauſe [ have thee on my fide> 

16 For I faid b Hear me, leſt otherwiſe they ſhould 
rejoyce over mee: when my foot ſlippech 4, they mag- 
nifie chemſelves againft me e. 

b To wit, in my tcart and erayers, I uſed- this Argument which 

[| knew was prevalent. c In my deſtcuction, which alſo will refle& 


||jOr, Thz4 


upon thee 3 who haſt undertaken to defend and ſave me, arid for 
whoſe ſake I ſuffer fo mych from thefe wicked men, 3+ 204 d When 


\.4 


ag tn 


al. 


Pay 
bl 


Ie. 4. To 


+ Heb: be- 
ing living 
are ſtrong, 


FPſ-35412 


++ Heb. for 
my help: 


'* x Chro, 
25. I» 


* Bridle, or 
Muzzle for 


+ Hed. 
| Troubled, 


© 


- 


/ 7 Wes 
? A oe” bs 5 ets eG + 


EPCr19, 
ho 

- | Or,what 

 tmelT have 

Tee 2a 


XXXIX. 


+ Heb. a 


_ any Mouth., A 


” 
2) 


I faileither into any groſs fin, or info any Miſery, or "into both, as 
I have now done. e They triumph in the accompliſhment of their 
deſigns or defires. 

17 For I am ready + to haltf, and my forrow zs con- 


tinually before me gr 
f Juſt falling into utter deſtruftian z ſee Jer, 20. Fro. {and ſthere- 
fore if thou doſt not help me ſpeedily, it will be too late. g I am 
deeply and conſtantly ſenſible of thy juſt hand, and of my fins the 
catſe of it 5 wherewith I ſhall be overwhelmed, if thou doſt not pre- 
vent it. 
18 For Iwill declare mine iniquity & ; I will be ſorry 7 


for wy {in &. 


bEither to thee 3 or publickly to the World, becauſe my fin hatn 
been publick aud ſcandalous. # Heb. I will be (or, I am : Futures be- 
ing ot ſo taken) ſollicitous or anxious, full of Grief for what is palt, 
and of Cares and Fears for the Future ; partly, leſt I ſhould relapſe 
into the ſame folly upon new Temptations 3 and partly, leſt thou 
ſhouldeſt cut me off for my fins. Therefore pity and pardon, and 
ſave me. k Or, by reaſon of my ſin, or upon that occaſion. 


19 But mine enemies Þ are lively /,and they are {trong ; 


and they that bate me wrongfully are multiplied. 

} Heb. Living, (i e- ) Thriving or flouriſhing, or proſperous, as 
Life is uſed, Pal. 22: 26: ahd 34: 12: and elſe where, 

2> They alſo* that render evilfor good m, are mine 


adverſaries : becauſe I follow the thing that good 3s ». 

m They hate and perſecute me, not only without any injury or pro- 
vocation on my part, but as it were in requittal of the good which 
I have done to them. # Becauſe | loye and diligently praQiſe Ju: 
ſticeand Godlineſs, which they hate, and which they take to be a 
reproach tothem, and which I did exerciſe, as I had oppor(uoity in 
the puniſhment of ſuch as they arc. Compare John 15: 19: 1 John 3: 
12, 

21 Forſake me not, OLORD : O my God, be not 
farfroin me. : 

22 Make haſte + to help me, O LORD, my ſalvati- 
On, 


PSAL. XXXIX. 
The ARGUMENT. 

His Pſalm was written by David, when his Mind was much dil- 
$ þ compoſed and diſquieted with the Contemplation of the prol- 
perity of ſinners, and the afflitionsof the Godly '; which being ex- 
emplificd in himſelfand in his Enemies, he ſpeaks of the Caſe not in 
genera); but as in his own perſon: 

To the chief muſician,evento * Jeduthun a, A P/alm 


David. 

_ of the three chief Maſters of the Sacred Muſick : Of whom 
ſee x Chron: 162 41: 42, 2 Chron: 53 12: . 

David tabeth care of his thoughts, words and Works, I 3: He 
conſidereth the brevity and vanity of Mans Liſe, 4=—==6; Puts his hope 
in God, 9; Prayeth for the forgiune|s of his ſins, 8 === 11: and for 
favour in his pilgrimage, 12: 13: 
| Ro b, I will take heed to my waysc, that I fn 

not with my tongue 4 : I will keep F my mouth 
as with a bridle e, while the wicked is before mef. 

b I fully reſolved. c ( i.e.) To order all my Aﬀtions aright, and 

particularly to govern my Tongue, which is very hard todo, and 

eſpecially under theſe provocations. d That if any evil Thoughts or 

Paſſions do ariſe in me. I wiil indeavour to ſupprels'and mortifie them 

and netſ-ffer them to boyl and break forth into finfull and ſcanda- 

lous Reflections upon God and his Providence, as they uſually d, 

upon ſuch occaſions. e (i. e. ) Withall poiſible c:re anddiligence 

The Phraſe implies the great difficulty of ruling the Tongue, f Ei 

ther, z.I8 my Preſence. Or rather, 2. In my Thoughts, as the ſame 

Phraſe is underſtood, Pſa! 51: 3.(8.c. ) whillt I confider the flaucitt « 

ing Eſtate of wicked Men. 

2 I was dumb with ſilence g ; 1 held my peace, ewe 


from good b, and my ſorrow was T ſtirred 5. 

2 1 was ſo long, and ſo obſtinately filent, that I ſeemed to my el: 
and to others to be durib. Two words put together, expreffing the 
ſame thing, to aggravate or increale it" Or. I was dumb withquietneſs, 
(i. e: Not out of ſullenneſs, but with ſubmiſfiveneſs to Gods Diſpen. 
ſations, which is oft noted by filence: b I forbare to ſpeak what 1 
juſtly might uponthat occaſion, left the Flood-gates of Speech being 
once opened, and Speech ſtirring up my Paſſions, 1 ſhould by degrees 
break forth into ſome indecent and finiull Z«preffions, to the diſho- 
nour of God, the wounding of mine own Conſcience, and the «fence 
of others: Or, this may be a.Proverbial Speech ſignifying ſtrict filenc-; 
like thatGen 31: 29: ſreak, to him neirher good nor bad, (3. e. ) No- 
thing atall, to wit, about that matter to perſwade him to return, 
Z My ſilence did not afſwage my Grief but increaſe it, as it naturally 
and commonly doth. : 

2 My heart was hot within me; while I was muſing &, 


the fire burned | : then ſpake I with my tongue 2x. 

k (4. e, ) Conſidering in my own Thoughts, the great wickedneſs 
and ſuccesfulneſs of mine Enemies, and other wicked men ; and 
withal mine own and other good Mens Integrity, attended with great 
troubles and miſeries in this Life. 1 My Thoughts kindled my Paf.- 
fions. ' m To wit, ſuch wordsasI had purpoſed not to ſpeak, v_ 1, 
Raſh and impatient words : Either, 1. Some words not here ex- 
preſſed ; which having wttered to men, he turneth his ſpeech to 
God, v. 4. Or, 2, Thoſe which here follow. 


4 LORD ”, * make me to know » my end p, and 
the meaſure of my days, what itis q, tbat.l may know 


+ how fraill amr. 

n This Verſe contaips either, r, A correqion of himſelf for his 
impatient motions or ſpeeches, and his retirement to God for re. 
liet, under theſe perplexing and ſadding Thoughts. Or.2: A declarg. 
tion of the words which he tpake o Either, 1, PraQtically ſo as to 
prepare for it.Or, 2. Fxperimentaily, as words of Knowledge are oft 
uſed. And ſo thisis a ſceret defice of Death, that he might be free 


P $ 4A L M 5; 


—_— 


Pla). 


from ſuch Torments, as made his Life a burd«n fo him, Or 
By Revelation ; that ] may fhave ſome proſpett or fore-knowicd " 
when my Calamities will be ended : which argued 1ypatience,arnd = 
unwillipgacſs to wait long for Deliverance. p (4, e ) The end of m 
Life, as 15 evident from the following words, q Huw long or ſhort it 
is, or the utmoſt extent or period of the days of my Life. Or, wow 
long ( Or How little, for the word may be, and is by divers Inter re« 
ters taken both ways : ) Time 1 have, or ſha'l continue here. F 

5 Behold, thou haſt made my days as an haid- 
breadth s and mine age 3s nothing # before thee »: 
verily every man *f at his beſt ſtate y js altogethes * va- 
futy z. Selah. | 

s Which 1s one of the leaſt meaſures, (3. e.') very ſhor 
and the following words arc either, 1. A pony of hls nx 
plaict that although his days were of themſelves very ſhort, yet God 
ſeemed to grudge him their natural length, and threa:ned to make 
them ſhorter, and to cut him off before his time, Or rather, 2, A 
Conſolation and CorreRion ofhis laſt words, as if he ſaid ; Why am 
I fo greedy to know the end of my Life, ſeing Ido already know this 
that ry Life cannot laſt yery long, and therefore if my Troubies be 
{tarp, they will be but ſhort.#Next to nothing for ſubſtance and for 
continuance. u(7e _) In thy Judgment, and therefore in Truth 
and Reality 3 Cr, if compared with thee, and with thy everlaſting 
duration. Comp. Pſal. go. 4. 2 Pet.3: 8. x Prince or Peaſant, Wiſe 
or Fools, good or bad; y Heb. though ſettled or eſtabliſhed : When 
he ſtands faſteſt, and likely to continue longeſt, in regard of his 
Health and Streagth, and all poſſible mean: whereby Life may be 
ſecured, ſupported or prolonged. 4 All that he is or hath.is as light 
and yain, and unſtable as vanity it ſelf, there is nothing but vanity 
and uncertainty in all his outward enjoyments, in the Conſtitution 
of bis Body ; yea, in the very Temper and Endowments of his Mir.d 
By wh'ch general condition of all mankind, he 
and coupoic his Mind to bear the common Lot, 

6 ourely every man walketh & in f a vain fhew þ # Heb; 
ſurely they are diſquieted c in vain 4, * he heapeth up 2" ae 
e riches, and knoweth not who {hall gather them fo {732 

a )1 e: ) Paſſcth the courſe of his Life ; 0: gocth avout butily and ” 
reſticlly hither agd chi her, as this Verb in this Conjugation fiznifies, wy 
and a the next Verb moreplainly exprefſ-cth. b Heb- 11 a ſþ 4 eegnhe 
or Image, ( 1;e )In an imaginary rather than a real Life : | 
purſuit of vain Imavinations, in which there is nothing ſolid or ſas 
tisfattory. Or, as ſome readit, Like a ſhadow, to which Mans Life 
1; compared, 0b 14.2: Manand his Lite, aad all his Hippineſs in 
this World, are ratt.er Appearances and Repreſentations and Dreams 
tha 3 Truths and Realities: cOr, troubled : Heb: They make a noiſe, or 
BuSHing, or Tumult, with unwearied Tuduttry ſecking for Riches, as it 
toilows, and troubling and vexing both the :.ſelves and others in the 
purſuit ot them, as this word implies. d To no purpo'e; or without 
any real or conſiderab'e bevefit, to him or his. e For his own uſe, 
2nd for his Potterity after him, f Whether his Children, or Strangers 
or Enemies, ſhall pofſcſs and enjoy them. 

7 And now LORD, what wait T for ? my hope is 
in thee g. | 

g Sciag this Life and all its enjoyments are fo vain 2nd ſaort to 
al, Micp, and eſpecially to me, I will never expe nor ſeek for Hay- 
pineſs here, from theſe Vanities, I will compoſe my ſelf patiently and 
contentedly to bear both my own Afﬀidions, and the proſperity a:d 
glory of urgodly men, for both are vaniſhing and tranſitory things, 
and I will ſeek for Happineſs no where but in the Loye and favour of 


f Heh; 
ſJetiled 
pf. 62, g 


& 144-4; 


endeavours to quiet 


30d, in ſerving and glorifieing him here, and in hope or confident ex- 
peRation of cnjoying him hereafter; and in the mean time, ofreceiy- 
ing from him theic ſuppliesand affiſtances, which my preſent condi. 
tion calls for, 

8 Deliver me from my tranſgreflions þ ; make me 
not the reproach z of the fooliſh kh, | 


h That I may not be diſappointed of my hoves of enjoying thee, 
ind thy favour, which is the only thing thatl deſire, pardon all my 
1105, which ſtand like a chick Cloud b-tween thee and me, and fill 
me with Fears about ;my Condition both hcre and hereafter. j Let 
agt their Proſperity and my Miſery give them occaftion to deride and 
reproach me, for my ſerving of thee, and truſting in thee, to ſo little 
purpoſe or advantage. k (1c. ) Of wicked men, who though they 
profeſs and think themſelves tobe Wiſe, yet ind-c<d are Fools as is 
arifeſt from their eager purſuitof fruitleſs Vanities, v.6. and from 
their groſs negle&t of God, and of his Service, who only is able to 
make them happy. *© 

* I was dumb, I opened not my mouth 1 ; be- 
cauſe thou didſt it m. + Jobgo 
I Towit, in way of murmuring or repining againſt thee, or thy ah 
Providence, as I promiſe I would be, v. x. For though when I looked 
only to Inſtruments; I was d:ſcompoſed, and did at laſt ſpeaka fooliſh 
word, yet when [I did recolle@ my ſelf and looked up to thee, the 
firſt cauſe and ſoveraigo diſpoſerot this, and all other things, I return 
to my former ſilence. m What? Either, x. And particularly :46= 
ſaloms Rebellion ; wherein 1 acknowledge thy juſt hand in .puniſhing 
my fins. Or, 2. And more generally, whatſoever is dore in theſe 
matters 3 all the Events which befall all Men, !whether good or bad: 

All which are the eff=0&s of thy Counſel and Providence, in which All 
Men ought to acquieſce. ; 
10 * Remove thy ſtroke away from me»; I am 


conſumed o by the Þ blow of thine hand. *ob.9:8 


n But although I may not, I will not, open my mouth to complain u w_ 
of thee, yet I may open it to complain and pray to thee, that thou Confl 
wouldeſt take off the Judgment, which thou haſt infliged upon me. 

o Help me therefore, before I be utterly and irrecoverably 
loſt. ; fHeb. that 

17 When thou with rebukes p doſt corre& man for which is 

iniquity q, thou makeſt his beauty r to conſume away :6re* = 


: : I him 2 meb 
like a moth 5 : ®. ſurely every man 5s vanity #, Selah. 


þ ie x Ya, $ 


- 
fa 


0000 | 


| 


fLefe 
q P 

hr 
99 15 
Pl1l 
Heb.1 
z Pet 
of 


b, 
mage 
3:20 
d 29 


of, 24 
6, 
144 


2b40 
Gn 


FLeve 25: 
33- 
zChron- 
99 15s 


” XL 


(i, e: ) With Puniſhment, which are oft ſo called, See Pſal. 
4s tc and 56,6. q(4. e. ) Doſt puniſh him as his iniquity deſerves 
7 Heb. bis deſire, ( 7. e.) his dcfirable things, as this word ſigni: 
fies, Lame 1. 11, Dan. 9. 23+ ad 10. 3 1t;: ig. His Con elineſs, 
Strength, Wealth and Proſrerity. and ail his preſent Excellencies 
or Felicitics, s Either 1. P:fhvely, as a Mouth ts quickly and caf1* 
ly cruſhed to pieces with a torch 3 as this Phraſe is utcd, Job 4. 19+ 
O- 2. Aﬀirely, as a Moth confumeth a Garment, as it 1s, Fob 13- 
28. Iſa $0. 9 to which God c:mpareth himſelf and his Judgments: 
ſecretly and inſenfiblv coofuming a People. Iſa. 51. 8: Hojea: $.12- 
+ And this co:-ficms what | ſaid, v, 5. That every man 1s vanity: Which 
though men in the heizht of their p:ofperity will not believe, yet 
when God contendeth with them, by his judgments they are forced 
toacknowledge it: 


12 Hear my Prayer, O LORD, and give ear unto 
my cry ; hold not thy peace at my tears #: * for 1 am 
a ſtranger x with thee z, anda ſojourner as all my fa- 


p119.19 thers were Zo 


Heb. 11-15 


1 Pets 2» 
vn 


u Joyned with my Prayers, Ke, 5: 7: x Though I be not only a 
Native, but either anointed, or a@ually King of this Land, yet 1n 
Truth I am but a Stranger, beth in re:ard of my very uncertain and 
ſhort continuance here, where T am only in' my Journey or Paſſ:ge 
to my real and long Home, which is in the other World z ard in 
reſpe& of th: many wants, and hardſhips, and contempts, and 10+- 
ries to which I am expoſed, as men uſually are in ſtrange Lands. And 
theretoreI greatly need and defire thy pity and help, Oh thou who 
art the Patron of Strangers whom thou haſt commended to aurcare and 
kindneſs, Exed 12: 48: Lev: 19. 33. and 25: 35, &c, » Either 
x. In thy ſight or Judgment, and therefore truely. We are apt to 
tter our ſelves, and can hardly believe that we are but Strangers 
here, where we ſeem to have ſettled Habitations and Poſſefſions, bur 
thou knoweſt the Truth of the Buſineſs, that weare reaily ſuch, Or 
2. [nthy La"d or Territory, in which ſojourn only by thy leave and 
favour, and during thy pleaſure, as this whole Phraſe is uſed. Levit 
26: 23 wience theſe words are taken, as allo v: 35. 36, 39, 40, 45 
47: where that branch of it, with thee, is ſo meant; And withal thiz 
Phraſe both here and Levit: 25: 23: may have a further Emphatis in 
it, implying that every Iſraclite, and particularly David himielf, in 
reſpe& of men, were the Proprietors or owners of their portions 
of which no other man might deprive or diſpoiſeſs them, and there- 
fore Davids Enemies had done wrongfully in baniſhing him from his 
and from che Lords inheritance 3 but yet in reſpett or God they were 
but ſtrangers, and God was the only Proprietor of it. q B thi 
thy Judgment exprefled Lev 25: 33: and in their own Opinion, Heb: 
x1: 13. &c: Upon which account tnou didft take 4 ſpecial care of them 
and therefore do ſo to me alſo. 


12 Oſpare me || that I may recover ſtrength + before 
I go hence *, and be no more. 

| Or, Ceaſe from me, ( i. e. _) From affliting me, do not deſtroy 
me. My Life at beſt is but ſhort and miſerable, as I have ſaid, and 
thou knoweſt, ſufficient for it 15 the evil thereof : do not add Aft- 
fliFion to the affl ed. f Both in my outward and inward man, 
both which are mvch weakned and opprefled. Or. that I may be re- 
freſhed, or comforted, eaſed of the burden of my fins, and thy terrours 
conſequent upon themy and be'ter prepared for a comfortable and 
happy diſſolution. * Heb. Befere 7 gs, to wit, unto the Grave, as this 
phraſe is uſed, Gen. 15: 2. and 25, 32. Or the way of allthe Earth, as 
the phraſe is compleated, of. 23, 14. or whence I ſhal not return, as it 
is 7ob 10. 21, or which is all one, into that place and ftate 1n which I 
ſhall not be, t wit, amongſt the Living, or in this World, as this 
Phrale is frequently vſed. both in Scripture, as Gen 5: 24: +nd 37 30. 
and 42; 36: and in Heathen Authors : Of which ſee my Latin £y. 
nopſ1s 


PSAL., AL. 
The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm is a Celebration of Geds great Goodneſs and Mercy 
& youchſated unto him, and all his People. It is cerrain arid e- 
vident that David ſpeaks ſomethings 'n this Book of ſal-rs, in his 
own Name and Perſon, and ſoimethi-gs in the Nameand Perſon of 
Chri/t, of whom he was an emivent Type za d that ſometimes he 
ſpeaks in both 'heſe Capacities in the ſame Pſalm 3 as ath been noted 
before, And thi: feemsto be the Condition of this ſulm : wherein 
there are ſome Paſſages which cannot belong to Chriſt, as v 13 and 
ſome which do not properly bel ng to David, or fo that time and 
fiate of the Church, but only to Chriſt, and to the Times of the New 
Teſtament, as v. 6. 7 ' 
To the chief mufician, A P/alm of D:vid; 
David by his own experien.e ſheweth the benefit of truſting in 50d, 1 — 6 
Chriſts « bedience and Sac-tfice 6 --»—— 10 His ſufferings for Sin, his 
jervent Pr ayer, 11 


I7, 
+ Waited patiently « for the LORD, and he inclined 


(tk in | b unto me, and heard my cry, 
wo 2 He brought me up alſo out of + an horrible pit c, 
fied « Fout of the miery clay d, and ſet my feer upon a rock e, 
Tio neije and elabiibed my goIngs f. 

l.6dg, a Heb. In waiting I waited which doubling of the word, notes 
12 


that te waited diligently and earneſtly patiently and perſeveringly, 
untii God ſhuuld pleaſe to help him. + Or, bowed, to wit. himſelf, 
as this very word is rendred, Judg 16 3o or, his Fars as it 1s 
more fully exprefſed, Pſal. 17 6. and 31. 2, Such ellipte: or de- 
feQs are frequent in Scripture. as Pſal. 4.6. and 15, 1, Eccleſ 6: 3 
and 7: 15: ce O;,, out of a ſounding pit, (o called, cjther, from the 
Clamours of Men, or Beaſts falling into it Or, from the 


many Waters which fall down into it, not without a great Nyife | 


I was not only upon the brink, butin the very Dottom of che Pit. 
(3. e. ) In deſparate Dangers and Calamities. as this "hiaſe fignifics, 
P/ſal. 18 16 and 6g. +4, 2, d In which vy feet ſtuck faſt ea 
place of ſtrength and ſatecv. fOr. my ſteps, / f.c: } Krpt me from 
ſtumblingor t-iling 1nto Miſchief, 

2 And he hath put anew ſorg in my mouth g, ever 
praiſe unto our God : many thall {ve iz hb, and fear 5,and 
ſhall cruſt inthe LORD &, 


PSA 


I MS. 


g Partly, by giving me new matter or occaſion for 2 Song ; and 
partly, by inipiring me with the very words of it. bþ (4 e.) Shall 
ob:eryve Gods wonderfull Mercies vouchſafed to me. i( 7 e. ) Shall 
ſtand in awe of that God, who by thisirſtavce they ſee to have ſo 
great Power, either to ſave or to defiroy, and tremble at his Judg- 
ments, and give him that Reverence and Worſhip, 2nd Obedience 
winch he requires, & Tet their Feir ſhall not drive ther fron God 


or bring them into Delpair, but ſhall draw them to God, and be at- 
rended wiih truſting in God. ; 


4 Bleiled 5s that man that maketh the LORD his 
truit /, and reſpecteth not 2 the proud », nor ſuch as 


urn alide o tO lyes p. 


{ (1 e. ) His only trutt or refuge, as appears from the following 
word-, q. 4.1 fatd, many ſhall truſt in the Lord, and they ſhall not 
be i01ers by it, nor diſappointed of their hope, but they are and 
ſhaii be Blefſcd, m Heb. lookerh nit towards, to wit with Love and 
Delight, -and defireto imitate them : Or. with confidence and ex- 
pectation ot relicf from thence, as this Phraſe is oft uſed, as Pſal. 
25, I5: and 65. 3: and 121. 1: and 141:8, and as the oppoſition of 
this Clauic to .he foregoing ſeems :o imply, n Or, the mighty.(i e) 
Tne great and proud Potcntates of the Vorld, ro whom moſt men 
:[C apt tolook and truſt, and in wh..m the Pſalmiſt forbids us to 
put our truſt +ſal.146 3 o To wit from God, in whom alone they 
ougnt to truſt. þ (:.e ) To lying Vanities, ſuch as Worldly Power, 
and Wiſdom, an. Riches. and all other Earthly things, or perſons, 
in which men are prone to truſt : Which are called Lyes here, and 
Pſel: 4 2: aud 62: 9. Mich. 1, 14. and elſewhere, becauſe they pro- 


miſe more than they can perform, See alſo Pſal, y. 14. and g: 
Hof, 10+ 13. and I'2. Is I / + i119. 119: 


5 * Many, O LORD my God, are thy wonder- 
fuil works q which thou haſt done, and *thy thoughts 
r which are tO us-wards : || they cannot be reckoned 


up 1n order unto thee : if 1 would declare and ſpeak 
vt them 7, they are more than can be numbred s. 


avan Piural,us, have aboundant cauſe to praiſe thee, and to truſt in 
.hee, as was ſaid v,g And by which it will appear, that he that 


v. 4+ And this Verſe wherein he paſſert from the ſingular Number to 
che pu; al, may feem to be 1merpoled as a Wall of Partition. between 
chat whicn David ipcaks in his own Ferſon, and that which | 

in the Perion of the Meſlias, in the following Verſes, r(8e.) Th 
gracious Counſels or Contrivances, 5s (1.e ) io me and to the re 
vi thy People, with whom David oft joyns himſelf in this Book, But 
theſe words may be, and are by ſome joyned to the following words, 
and the place thus rendred. it is nor with us, or, in our Power ; + 3.6 g 
t paſſeth our $K1ii (aud reach _) to order or 79 rechen them up in ordev 
unto thee, vecaule 1ndeed they are 1nnumerable, and therefore cannot 
be digelt.6 into any.order, # So the Particle if or when is wancing 
and to be tuppued he-e, as it is Pſal 39. it and in many other 
piaces. Heb Y<t, 1 will declare and ſpeab to wit, fome part of them; 


which accordingly he dothin the toilow,ng Verſes: # Aithouzh I am 
nut able to expreſs or r«ckon th. m all. ; M 


6 * Sacrifice and offering thou didſt nor deſire x ; 
* mine cars haſt thou + opened y : burnt offe;ing and 
tin-offering haſt thou not required. 
x Inte and tie folluwing wores, may in an improper Senſe belong 
to che rerion and time of David; when God might be ſaid. nor to 
deſire or require Lega Saciifices comparatively, as negative Expreſſi- 
ons are frequently underftooe, as Mat. 9. 13, 1 Cor. 1. 19 andin 
this very caſe of Sacrifices as - ſa, 51. 15. Fer. 9. 22. 23 fHhſea 6 
5. So ihe Scnſcis; thou didft defire Obedience more, or rather than 
S$aerifices 45 wasſaid 1 Sam. 15422. But ina pr -per ind literal and 
fult icn c, they belong o.ly tothe perſon and times of the Meſſias in 
wiizoſe Name D@uid uttereth theſe words. And fo the tenſe of the 
Piace i-, Gvd d1d nor deſire or require them, for the ſati-fa&ion of his 
owu juſtice, and the Expiacion ot Mens fias, which 
{idiy be done by the Blood of Bulls or Goats. as is ſaid Heb, 10s 
5,6. Bu only by the Blood of Chriſt, which was 
an.. which Chrift came into the World to ſhed 
Fatyers W1:l, as It here follows, v_ 9,8, So here is a »r<difion con» 
; ccrning the Ceffationand Abolition of the Legal Sacrifces, and the 
| :bſtitution of ao. tter in ſtead of them. y Heb. bored. The ſenſe is 
| ctihcr, 4: Whereas many men have no Ears to hear, asis implycd Rev, 
| 2+. 7, 11, 17, orſtvup their Ears as Pſal: 58: 4. Zech, 7, 11: thou haſt 
given me open Ears to hearand obey thy Precepts, as this . Phraſe is 
uſed, 1ſa. 50 5Although 18..ced there i> another Verb in _ that Text; 
which :nuch alters the Caſe, Or 2. 1 have wholly devoted my ſelf to 
thy pe: petuai Service, and thou haft accepted of me as ſuch and 
figoificd ſo much by the boring of mine Ears, according to the Law and 
Cuſtom 1n that Cale, Exed.21. 5, 6, Deut. 15. 19, And whereas only 
one Ear was then bored, and here it is Ears, this way be either an 
Enaliage ot the Piurai Number tor the Singular 3 whereof diverſe 
inttances have been given; Or elſcit may be io expreſſed Emphati- 
cally, to int'mate that Chriſt was more ſtritly oblidged to a more 
univerſal Onedience, not only ative, to which the Legal Servants 
were bound, but Paſſive alſo, to be obedient even unto the Death, to 
which they were no: oblidged. i heLXX Jewiſh Interpre-ers; whora the 
Apoſtle tollows Heb. 0. 5- tranflate ctheie words, 4 Bed) haſt thow 
prepared me 53> Whe.cin thiugh the Words differ, the Senſe is the 
ſame 3 for the Ears, ſuppcie a Bedy to whom they belon», and the 
preparing of a Body, implie: the preparing or diſpoting of the Ears, and 
ce obiigation of the Ferſon, for whom a Body was prepared, to 
ſerve hum who prepared it ; which the boring of the Ear figni- 
fles. x | | 
7 Then z faid I #s, Lo, Icomeb: in the yolumeof 
the book, i is F written of me 0; | 
z When | undcerftood and corfidered thy Mind and Will therein, 
expreiied v: 6; 4 Eithey within my ſelf, by a arm purpoſe ; Or, 
unto thee by way of promife or engagemen', bþ He may ſeem to 
ſ-cak like aServant, auſwering to the Call of his Maſter, and fig. 
nitzing his read:nefs to obey him; in which ſenſe it may be accom. 
modaicd to David, But the Servants m_—_ is uſually exprefſea 
4 B 2 


!he ſpeaks 


Typified by them. 
» Io purſuance of his 


in 


Pal. Xx. 


g For wnich 1 and che reti of thy people, included in the Pro- | 


. truſteth 1n thee, 1s in a moſt bleſſed and ſafe condition as te ſaid th 


*Ifa, 503 


c2uld not poſs - 


| 


* Jobg-93 

& 9. -10; | 
Pſ 71.154 
& 92.15. 
* Pſ. 139: 
17, 18, 


Or, none 
can order 
them unte 
ee, 


* Pſ.g0.8? 
& 54.16» 
Iſa. 1; x 
& 66: 3, 
Hoſea 6:7 
Matz12:$ 
Heb. 10.g 


+ Heb: 
dizgeds 


l. XL, 


in Scripture by another Phraſe, Here am! 7, and never, to my remem- 
brance, in theſe words. Beſides this Phraſe in that ſenſc, ſeems not to 
be proper in this place, but rather, Lo T hear, which beſt ſuits with 
the foregoing words, mine E415 haff thou opened, But theſe words do 
moſt Literally and truly belong to Chrift, and the Senſe 1s this : Se- 
ing thou requireſt a better Sacrifice than thoſe of the Law, Lo, I do 
offer my ſelf to come, andI will in due time come, to wit, from Rea- 
wen or in the fleh, or inte the World, as this Phraſe is more fully ex- 
prefied, and explained in diversplaces of Scripture, and particular- 
lie Heb, 10. 5. where this place is explained and applicd toChriſt. 
Theſe two words, Volieme and Book arcindifferently uſed of any Writ- 
ing and both words icem here to expreſs the ſame thingy as may ap- 
pear by comparing Jer. 36. where we have the very ſame words, 
and what is called the Roll or Felume of a Buok v, 24 4. is called fim- 
ply a Roll or Yolume,v, 6, 20" 21+ and the Book, v, 10. I3e 8 being 
uſual withthe Hebrews rojoyn two words together in like manner 5 
of which we have an inſtance kere above, v. 2. Miry Clay, Heb. Clay 
of Mire. Now this Volume of the 8eok.is meant, either, 1. Of the Book 
of Predeſtination, in which Chriſt was written, as being fore-ordamed 
before the Foundation of the World, x Pete 1. 20. But that 15 2 ſecret 
Book not to be read by any manliving, and therefore not fitly alledg- 
ed a$an evidence in this matter. Or, 2 Of a Legal Inſtrument, 
wherein the Contra was drawn between God and him, wherein he 
did oblidge himſelfto ſerve God,and to execute his Will in all things 
it being the manner of the Hebrews to write their Contra in a little 
Volume or Book, But 1. We read of no ſuch uſage among tne Hebrews 
in the Cont:aGs between Maſter and Servant, but only of the boring 
of the Servants Ear,Ez 21. 6. So the Foundation ofthisAllufion is dc- 
ſtroyed.2.Atleaſt there was no ſuch contraQtwritten betweenGod and 
him, And if it be ſaid, that he only ſpeaks this by way of Allution, 
that is but a ſuppoſition without ground. And when the words may be 
TY properly underſtood as they ſound,ot a thing really done, why ſhould 
we torſake the piain Senſe without neceſſity 2 3. The Phraſe here u+ 
ſed doth not agree to :his Senſe 3 for then he ſhould have ſaid, 
Tam writtenin the Volume of the Buk, (i. e.) In the Catalogue of thy 
Servants; for is that caſe the 'erſons or their Names are conſtantly 
Taid to be written, as Exodus 32, 32, 33« Pjalm 59, 28. Dantel 12+ 1. 
Luke io, 20, Hebrews 12. 23. Revelation 13. 8.; and 20, 15. and 21. 
27. and not any thing to be written of them as it is here, Or. 2. 
Of the Holy Scriptures, In which ſomethingindeed was written cone 
cerning David : Namely, that he was a man after Gods own Heart, 1 
' Samuel 13, 14. Butit muſt beremembred. that thoſe Books were not 
writtentiil after Davids Death,in whoſe time there was no other Rook 
of Scripture extant, but the five Books of Moſes, unleſs you will ex- 
cept the Book of J6b- And therefore this is meant of rhe Law of Me- 
ſes. which is commonly and emphaticaly called #he Book, and wa: 
made up in theform of a Roll or Volume, asthe Hebrew Books gener- 
ally were. Sce Ezekiel 3. 1, 2, 33 Zechariah 5, 1, 2. Luke 4. 17, 
20, And ſo this place manifeſtly points to Chriſt, and muſt neceſſari- 
ly be underſtood of him, and of him only, concernin? whom much 
is ſaid in the Books of Moſes, as is evident from Luke 24. 27, 44. 
Jobh 5. 46- Aﬀs 3. 22. and 26, 22. and 28. 23, And this Senſe be- 
ing plain and natural and unforced, and exatiy agreeing both with 
the woros, and with the truth of the thing, and with the belief of 
all Chriſtians, I ſee no reaſon why I may not acquieſce 1 1t. 


8 * I delight to do thy will s, O my God: yea, 


92. thy law is F within * my hearte. 
 Kom.7.22, & This though ina generalSenſe.it may be true of David and of all 
+ Heb. in Gods people ; yetif it be compared with the foregoing Verſe, and 
© themidſt of with the explication thereof in the New Teſtament, ( in which thoſe 

my 'owels. Myſteries which were darkly and doubrfully expreſſed 1n theOld Tefta- 
*P1.39.31« men”, arefully and clearly revealed ) muſt be appropriated to Chriſt, 
Jer.31-33+ of whom it is eminently true, and is here obſerved as an AR of Hes 
roical Obedience, that he not only reſolved to do, but d-lighted in 
doing the Will of God, or what God had commanded him, and he 
had promiſed to do, which was to dye, and that a moſt ſhameful and 
painful, and curſed Death S:e Luke 12. $0. Fohn 10. 18. Hebrews 
10. 9. 10. &C 
re it with Clrrieſ Loveand Aﬀettion, delighting both to me- 
ditate of it, and to yield Obedience to 1t. 


9 * Thave preached righteouſneſs f, in the: great 
congregation g : lo haye not refrained my lips þ, O 


LORD, thou knowelſt z, 

f To wit, thy Righteouſneſs, as it is expreſſed in the next Verſe, 
Ct, e, ) thy faithfulneſs, as it is there explained : Or Righteouſneſs 
properly ſo-calledz for both were fully declared and demonſtrated in 
Chriſt . the former in ſending him into the World according to his 
Procoiſe, A#s 13. 23,and thc latter in infiliting Death upon him for 
Mans fin, Remans 3. 25, 26- g In the moſt publick and ſolemn Af- 
ſemblies : not only to the Jews, but alſo to all other Nations; to 
whom Chriſt preached by his Apoſtles, as is obſerved Epheſians 2. 17, 
h To wit, from preachingit, out of Sloth or Fear, or-felf-love, bur 
have preached it publicklie, and even to the Face of mine Encmies, 
though I knew my Preaching would coſt me my Life. 7 I call thee to 
witneſs the Truth of what I ſay, 


To TI have not hid thy righteouſneſs within m 
& ; 1 have declared thy faithfulneſs and thy _— 
]: I have not concealed thy loving kindneſs, and th 
truth from the great congregation. 4 
k I had it there- v. 8. but 1 did not ſmother or ſhut it up there, 


but ſpread it abroad for thy Glory, and the good of the W 
Which thou haſt wrought both for me, and by - ay e Warld. 


11 With-hold not thou thy tender mercies from me, 


O LORD » : let thy loving kindneſs and thy truth 
continually preſerve me. 

» This Prayer is uttered by David, either, «10 the Perſon of Chriſt: 
to whom it may agree,Or,2: In his own Perſon, Having been tranſ- 
ported and carried forth by the Spirit of God to the Contemplation 
and Commemoration of the great Myſtery of the Meſfias, of whom 
he wasan illuſtrious Type, now he ſeems to be led back by the ſame 
_ to the Confideration of himſelf aud his own particular 

aſe, ++ Bhi ic 


-*Pfal.116. 
- 16 24, 479 


S355 DM S$: 


j, e. ) I do not only hear and underſtand it, but 7 


Pfal. 


'I2 For intumerable evils have compaſſed me about 
mine iniquities » have taken hold upon me, s fo that 7 
am notable* to look up:cheyq are more than the hairs 


of mine head, therefore + my heart faileth me. 
n Either, The puniſhment of mine iniquities, as Gen. 4+ 1 


Phraſe cannot be underitood of Chriſt, For although our fi 
o o - n 
tobe laid upen Chriſt, \ſe. 53. and upon that ws, ke is rr plares 
made fin tor us, 2 Cor« 5, 21, yet the Scripture every where repreſents 
him, as one that never knew nordid 2ny fin, as in that place, and n 
Pet; 2+ 22, and clſewhere; and even when his puniſhment is dalerib. 
ed, yet it is expreſly noted, that he did nct ſuffer for himſelf, or for 
his own fins, but only for us, and for our ſins, as ſa. 53. 4. By Dar 
9. 25.1 Pet, 2, 24, Andtherefore it is not probable that the Hol / 
Ghoſt would uſe ſuch an Expreffion concerning the finlefle Chriſt of 
God, as isnever uſcd in Scripture, but cither of a Mans own fins or 
of the puniſhment deſerved by his own fins. o Mens fins are figura- 
tively ſaid to follow them, 1 Tim. 5g. 24, and to find them 0+ Numb 
32. 23. and here to take hold of thei, as a Serjeant takes hold of 2 
Man whom ke Arreſts. p Unto God or Men, with any Comfort and 
Confidence, I am aſhamed and confounded, by reaſon of my nums- 
berlefle fins Or, ſo that I was nt able to ſee, either, becauſe he was 
as1t were drowned or overwhelmed with his fins: Or becauſe his E es 
did tail, or-were conſumed through Grief, as he complains P/al 's: 
7. and 38 1n, Or he means that he could not forſee them, the Sim- 
ple Verb being put for the Compound, as it is frequently among the 
Hebrews. They came upon him unawares, and therefore were the 
more grievous to him. q To wit, mine iniquities here mentioned 
properlie ſo called : For Gods people arc more apt to aggravate their 
fins, = the puniſhment of them, See Ezra g. 13, 14. E 
12 * Be pleaſed, O LORD, to deliver me xz : 
LORD, make haſte to help me. 
r Frommy fins, and the puniſhicents due to them. | 
14* Let them be albamed and confounded 5 
ther, that ſeek after my ſoul ? to deſtroy it « let 
be _—_ backward, and put to ſhame that wiſh me 
EV1 . « 
s For the diſapointment of their Hopes and Deſi z, 0 
Life, as Exod. 4; 19. 1 Sam. 20: x, 4 _ 
I5 Let them be deſolate « for a reward of their ſhame 
x, that ſay unto me, Aha, aha. 
u Or amazed or aifmaicd, or overthrown : Of ſuch Imprecati 
: ens Ih 
rar ue oh Fe arg finful avd ſhameful + om 
is put tor a ſhameful Idol, Hoſea 9. 18, and 
CEE , 9 and as Fear 1s oft put for the 
16 Let all thoſe that ſcek thee, rejoyce and be glad 


in thee : let ſuch as love thy ſalvation » C inual- 
ly, The LORD be — bug n y ſay continual 


» Either, 1, Such as deſire and rejoyce in the $ I ſ- 
verance which thou giveſt to me des anhers of nth ogra 
wasa great Eye ſore and Grief to the wicked. Or 2. Such as exyeR 
| and ſeek for their Salvation and Happineſſe not from idols, nor " com 

their wicked Courſes, nor from any Creatures, as other men do, but 
from thee only, and gladly accept and embrace that Salvation which 
thou haſt promiſed, together with the Conditions required to it, to 
wit, Faith and Repentance. Or 3_ Such as love thy Meſſias upon 
whom both Davids and other Holy Prophets and Saints Thoughts and 
Aﬀettions were much fixed, as is evident from many places of Scripe 
cure, as John $8, 58, Aﬀs 2; 30, 31- 1 Peter x. 10, 1x who is cal- 
led the defire of all Nations, Haggat 2. 75. and the Glory and Conſolation 
of Iſrael, Luke 2« 25, 32e Yea and, by the very Title here uſed, Geds 
Salvatim, I/atah 62. 11, Luke 2, 30, whoſe appearance or comingthe 
Godly of all Agesdid love and long for ; and of whom David had ſo 
lately and clearly ſpoken, v, 6, 7. &c, All which conſidered. this 
cannot ſeem aforced,or very far fetched Interpretation. 2 Let "them 
_ continual occeſion to magnifie God for his Nercies vouchſayed 

o them, 
17 ButT a» poor and needy, yet the LORD think- 
eth upon me : thou art my help andmy deliverer, make 
no tarrying, O my God. 4 
PSAL. -XLT. 


The ARGUMENT. 
—_— Occaſion of this Pſalm was manifeftly ſome ſore 
. fflidtion which God had inflicted upon David, and 


- eqs Opportunity to diſcqver their Hatred and 
nn. -* 


toge- 


Diſeaſe or A- 
which gave his 
Malice agaiplt 


To the chief muſician : 4 P/al 1 

; r alm of D: 

David (oor yr _— of the Peor, 1 X ſo He bed - Sins ard 
complaineth of his Enemies treach aver | 

I eacnery, 4*----9, But fleeth to God for ſuc 
Leſſed 7s he that confidereth + 


LORD will deliverhim c + in 
a Or, That carries himſelf wiſely and prudently, 
not raſhly and fol:;ſhly Cenſures and Condemns hi 


[| the poor c ; the 


as well as wicked thing 3 but conſidereth that it ma in hi 

. . be 
Caſe, and therefore pitieth and helpeth him ; which is the odio 
way to obtain the like pity for himſelf in his Trouble 5 Or rather 
| The Weak, or Sick, or languiſthing Perſon, as may be gathered by come 


7 | paring this with v; 3- where the Mercy which heis ſuppoſed to have 


afforded to him, is returned upon himſelf, and wi 
| Te The poor afflifted man. Though his © as eco his es 
be deſperate, v. 8. God will confute them, and deliver him. Or, 2. 
The Confiderer of the poor of whom alſo this ſame Pronoun him is 
conteſſedly meant, v: 2, 3. And ſo it is a promiſe of Recompeuce 
the wiſe and merciful Man ſhal find Mercy. 25 
2 The LORD will preſerve and keep him alive 4, 
and he ſhall be bleſſed upon the earth ; and [] chou walc 
not deliver him intothe + will ofhis enemies e 
d Heb, qu cken him, (C4. e. ) revive and reſtore him, 8 


% 


* Pſal, 38; 
4,20, 

«2 T Heb. 
Sam. 28, 19. Pſalm31.1e. Or, 2. Theiniquities themſelves 5 This $0 [«&thi 


, '®) TPC.91, I, 
ec. | 


2 


them & 71, 14, 


a r 246 
time of trouble. j:,4 w 
with or towards him, gjch 

im, as my pretended in 
Friends dealt with me, v; 8. nor inſultethoyer him, which » afooliſh ho of 


Evil: 


[| Of, di 

not Fhou dy 

live”. 

Dich f Heb, c 1 

[ ther. | 

| will preſerve 61m, from Trouble 3 of if God ſec Trouble airy Fo m_ 
. he; g FE ; y a ; 


PC, 
6 


XLI, 


35-4 


id 


ji, 


fle 
fim 


FH 
4th 
Bel; 


AG Geo ay copom 
. . ” 


35+ dy 
+ 13» 


. XLI. 


LT P $ A 
gt for him, and therefore ſuffer him fo fall Into it, he will raiſe 
him out of it, e ( 7. e, ) To deftruRtion, which they earneſtly de- 
fire and endeavour to procure. 

2 The LORD will ſtrengthen him upon the bed of 
languiſhing:thou wilt + make all his bed f in his ſickneſs 
Either. 4. Cha:ge or overturn his bed of ſickneſs; which ts 


y— 


and Comfort, which ſick men receive by thehelp of thoſe who turn 
and ſtir their whole Bed, to make it ſoft and eafie for them, For the 
words foregoing and following theſe, ſuppoſe him to be and continue 
in a ſtate of ſickneſs, Thus the Lord elſewhere compares himſelf to 
a Servant.wai'ing upon his people at ſable, Luke 12: 37: as here, to 
one that makes their Bed; Metaphors implying ſtrange condeſcen, 


fio0, 
= I faid, LORD, be mercifull unto me ; heal my 


ſoul e, for I have ſinned againſt thee 6, _ 

2(i-e: ) Either, 1+ My ſelf, to wit, my Bidy; So it is a double 
Synecdoche. And the Swl i+ fo taken, Pſal.-16: 10: Or 2, My 
Soul properly fo called ; which is ſaid to be healed, when it 1 pardo- 
ned and purged, a+ 2 Chron: 30,20. Iſa. 53: 5. compared with 1 Pet: 
2, 24: Mat. 3 15. comp: with Mark 4: 12, James 5. 16, So he 
ſirikes at the root of his miſ.ry, and prays for the removeal of the 
ſin of his Soul. as the Cauſ. of the Diſeaſe of his Bedy, 5 This may 
be added cicher, 1. Asa Reaſon or Motive to God, grant this Re- 
queſt for 1 have ſinned, and therefore thy Grace in healing me will 
be more glorious and admireable: Or, fer I acknowledge that I have 
ſinned 3 for the A& is oft put for the Declaraticn of it, as Exo.us 
33. 13. Pſalm 51, 5 Or 2 A<a Reaſon moving him thus to pray, 
1 ſaid, Lord be merciſull unto me, heal my Soul ; and great Reaſon 1 had 
to ſay ſo, for 3 have ſinned againſt thee, 

5 Mine enemies ſpeak evil of me ;: When ſhall he 
die, and his name periſh ? 

; Veat their ill w:ſhcs azainſt me, in the following words, 

6 And if he come to ſee me &, he ſpeaketh vanity /: 
his heart gathereth iniquity to it ſelf »» ; vben he goeth 


abroad he telleth zt =. 

hk To vific me 1n my fickneſs according to the Cuſtom, } Or, fals- 
head, pretending ſympathy with me, and friendſhip to me, whilſt 
they plot miſchicf in their Hearts againſt me # Even when he 1s 


with me, and pretends hearty affefion to me, hi- Heart canuot for- | 


bear its cuſtomary praQice of meditating and deviſtrgMiſchiet againſt 
me 3 for which he watcheth and ecketh for all occa. ons from mySpee- 
chcs, or Carriage, or the Circumſtances of ty Condition, which he 
obſerves. nPartly to delight his Compaions and partly to encourage 
them to. and direRthem in, their malicious de' gns againſt me. 

7 All that hate me whiſper together againſt me 0: 


wr againſt me do they deviſe + my burrt. ; 
—_ S ( i; e. ) Secretly defame me, and cloſely plot againſt me, 


8 + An evil diſeaſe p, ſay they, cleaveth falt unto 
FHebs 


b him : and »ow that he lieth,he ſhall riſe up no more 9. 

a thing of p Heb: 4 word or thing of Belial, C 1: e. ) Either 1. Some wicked 
_ Caiumny which they had raiſed, and which ſtuck clote to him; Or, 
2. His grea: wickedneſs whereof this is a tign. Or rather 3. This 
ſore Diſeaſe or Miſchief, either ſent upon hin 10 way of Vengeance 
for his horrid Crimes; or ſuch as God uſeth to infli& upo.. tie Sons 
of Belial, to ſhew that he is in Truth ſuch an one, whatſoever he pre- 
tends to the contrary- q Seing God hath begun to puniſh him, he 
will makean cndof him. EE: : ; 

9 * Yea, | mine own familiar friend + in whom TI 


 _ truſted, which did eat of my bread, hath # lift up his 
heel r againſt me» | = 
FHeb; the 1 He —_ either Ahitephel, or ſome other perfidious Counſcllor. 


or Courtier, who wa* a Type of Judas, to whom theretore it is applied 
-- John 13, 18; as David wasa Type ot Chriſt in being thus betrayed, 


_ So theſe words were literally fulfilled in David, and yet the Holy Ghoſt 
Nugnified, which di&ated them, looked further in them, even to Chriſt and J#- 


dar, inwwhom they received a further and fu ler accompliſhment. 
r a phraſe implying Injury, joyned with Inſolency and Contempt 3 
taken from an anruly Horſe, which kicks at him that owns and fceds 
kim. ; 

10 But thou, O LORD, be merciful unto me s, and 

iſe me up that I may requite them z. 
yy —_ me phe yonl dg, ro conclude my Caſe to be deſperate 
but, Lord, do thou viadicate me, and confute them. # Or, and I will 
requite them, (1 e,) puniſh them for their malicious and perfidiou: 
and wicked praQtices;z which, being now a Magiſtrate, he was Obli» 
ged to Revenge, Rom: 13: 4* although when he was a private perſon, 
he was ſo far from revenging evil, that he rendred good for it, as we 
ſee Pſal: 35: 12, 13. and elſewhere, 

11 By this I know that thou favoureſt me «. becauſe 


mine enemy doth not triumph over me *. 

u Beareſt a good Willto me, and art reſolved to make good thy pro- 
miſes to me, and wiltſt plead my righteous Cauſe againſt them. x Be- 
cauſe hitherto thou haſt helped and ſuppo: ted me, and prolonged my 
days to the diſappointmencr of their hopes, and deſigned triumphs, 
This Mercy I thankfully receive as a Toke of furcher Mercy. Com- 
pare 1 Sam: 17: 37. 2 Cor: 1: 9, 10. : 2 

12 And «s for me, thou upholdeſt me in mine 1nte- 


ority y : and ſetteſt me before thy face for ever s, 

/ y As I have kept my Integrity. ſo thou haſt kept me, in and with 
it, Or, for mineintegrity, becauſe thou haft ſeen my Innoceney not- 
withſtanding all the Calumnies of mine Enernies 3 and thou haſt 
p romiſed aud uſeſt to afford thy prote&ion to the innocent and up: 
right. x Or, haſt confirmed, or Eſtabliſhed me in thy Preſence ( 4,e.) 
Fither, under thine Eye and ſpecial Care ; Or, to miniſter unto 
thee, not only in thy Temple, but as a King over thy People, or in 
that Land, where thou art peculiarly preſent _) for ever, either x, 
Properly : And (o this was done ts Davie, cither in his own per. 
ſon, partly here, and partly in the next Life: Or in regard of his 
Poſtcrity, in whom the Kingdom was eſtabliſhed for ever, Or 2, 
For my whole Lite, or for 2 long time, as that phraſe 15 commonly 
_ | 


Jone when a man isreſtored to heaſth: Or rather, 2. Give him Eaſe |, 


L M Ss; T 


13 Bleſſed bethe LORD GOD of Irael, from e- 
verlaſting, and to everlaſting. |} Amen and amen +. 
A [| Or. from Age fo Age, as long as the World lafts, and to all Eterni- 
y. T Amen fignifies an hearty Affent, and Approbation, and withal 
an earneſt Defire and Confidence of the thing, to which it is annexed. 
And as the Pſalms aredivided into five Books, ſo each of them is clo- 
ed with this Word ; the firſt here 3 the ſecond Pſal. 12. the third 
Pſal. 85 the fouith, Pſal. 105. the laſt in the erd of P/al. 150, the 


doubling of the word ſhews the fer > Gate3e On obs 
praiſing God, 2 yency ofthis Spiric, in this work of 


F>AL. XLIL 


; The ARGUMENT. 

Ye Penman of this Pſalm is uncertain, as not being named in the 
I Title. Ir was compoſed, either, r. by David, when he was bas 
niſhed from the houſe of God, either by $..uls Tyrrany, or by Abſa+ 
toms Rebellion: O: 2, by the Sonsof Kerah, in the time of the Cap- 
tivity of Babjlen, Whence ſore read the Words of the Title of this 
P/alm, Maſch | of the Sons of Korah, Bat this is not uſual in this Book, 
to name rhe Author of a Pſalm ſ» obſcurely and indefinitly : For the 
Sons of Korah were a numerous Co pany, and it is not likely, that 
cither all, or diverſe of them did Joyn in the Enditing of this and the 
following Pſalms ſo called. Nor is there any one t/al/m where the 
Author is nam- d, but he isone certain and ſingle Perſon. And there- 
fore 't icems more probable that David penned this, as it is confeſſed 
he did fome other Pſalms which have nothis Name in theTitle. 


«Who were an eminent Order of Singers in the houſe ot God 3 Of givi 

whom ſee , Chron, 6,23. anc 9. 19. and 7 I: CS "O_ 

The \ Jalmift being deprived of Gods ſervice, ardently deſires tobe in his 
Houſe &;A4IN, i wn, Rouzeth wh his Soul unto a firm hepe and con- 8c. See 


A*® the hart F panteth after the water-brooks b, ſo 
panteth my foul after thee c, O God. 

6 The Hart 15 naturally hot and thirſty. And this Thirſt is in- 
creaſed 3 partly, by its dwelling in deſert and dry places, to which 
it retireth for fear of Men and Wild Beaſts 3 and partly, by its long 
and violent running, when it ispurſued by th: Hunters : And ſome 
add, by cating of Serpents. c After the enjoyment of thee in thy 
SanQury, asit appears irom v. 4 


f Heb, 
brayetb, 


when ſhall I come and appear before God f- 

4 Thirſt is more «vehement than Hunger, and more impatient of 
diſſatisfaion. e This he mentionsas a juſt Cauſe of his Thirſt, He 
did aot Thirſt after vain vſelef: Idols, but after the only true and living 
God, who was his Life and the leng: h of his days as is ſaid Deut 30, 20. 
and without whoſe Preſence and tavour, David accounted himielf for 
a dead and loſt man Pal. 143: 7. fn the place of his ſpccial Pre. 
ſence and publick Worſhip.” See Ex5d--23. I5,and 2g, 30. What i; 
called before #he Lord, 1 Chron, 13, 10, is before, ar with the Atky 2 Sam 
6.7 7 

3 My tears have been my meat g day and night, 
while they * continually ſay unto me 3 Where is thy * 2/19: 
God b! 10: & 

8 Which notes both the great abundance and conftant courſe of I15'D 

his Tears, and the ſecret ſatisfaftion and eaſe which he found in 
giving vent to hs Paffion this way. Poffibly his Tears and Grief 
took away his Appetite, and ſo were to him inſtead of Food. h Of 
whom thou haſt ſo often boaſted, as of one fo able and ready to help 
all thattruſtio him, and call upon him ; and particularly, as one in- 
gaged tothee by many great and ſpecial Promites. He is gone and 
departed from thee. and no where to be found of thee. He is ei, 
ther unable or uowilling to help thee, or regardleſs of thee. 


4 When I remember theſe things 5, I pour out my 
ſoul k& in me/ ; for Thad gone » with the multitude », 
I went with them oto the houſe of God ; with the voice 


of joy and praiſe, 23th a multitude that kept holy-day p« 

; Either, 1. Which follow, to wit, my former freedom, Or rather, 
2; Laſt mentioned, my banithment from God's preſence, and mine 
Enemies ſcoffs and triumphs upen that occaſion. k& This Phraſe notes 
either, 1, His ferycnt prayer, as it is taken. 1 Sam: 1: 15: -ſgl. 62: 
38, or. 2, His bitter Sorrows, whereby his very Heart was aimoſt 
mleted, or diſſolved, and his Spirits ſpent, and he was ready to faint 
away 3 asitis uſed Fob 30, 16, Lam 2.12, Comp, Pſal. a2, 14; Or 
rather, 3: Both together ; that he breathed out his Sorrows and [ſad 
Complaintsunto God by fervent Prayers, } (i: e:) Within my own 
Breaft 3 between God and my own Soul ; not openly left mine Ene» 
mies ſhould turn it into matter of rejoyciag and iufu]ting over mes 
m To wit, inthe way to Jeruſalem And my ſorrow was increaſed by 
the remembrance of my former Enjoyments. Comp. Lame 1: 7: 
n Accarding to the Cuſtora, and in the company of Iſraelites, whe 
went thither in great gumbers, Comp. Pjal. 84. 6: 7, o Or, 1 /ed 4 
them, encouraging them by my pretence and forwardneſs þ Or, That 
kept the FeaF, to wit, thethree Solemn Feſiival Solemnities, which 
they kepr holy unto the Lord, *,Pſ: 434 


5 * Why art thou + caſt downg,O my ſoul ! and why THeb: 
art thoudiſquiered within me ? hope thou in God, for I jweg, 5 
(ball|| yet praiſe him || for the help ot his countenance r. down 


of his Face, (1. e: ) For thoſe lupports, Deliverances and Comforts thenks: 
which I doubt notI ſhall er< longenj.:y, both in his Preſence, jand || Or, his 


6 O my God, my fouliscaft down within me : there- 
fore r wiill remember thee s from the land of Jordan, 


and of the Hermonirtes, from || the hill Mizar r. |] Or' the 


infinite Mercy and Puwer, and Faithfulneſs, and thy gracious Pre- 
ſence in the Sanftuary, from whence thou doſt hear and anſwer all , 


thoſe that call upon thee, in all the parts of the Land: & (3. e.) 
4'R 3 From 


A 
+ 
- 


""===» 
Pſa). XLI, 


$! 
-, 
T 
m_ — LS LE 4 DA DICH on. 


To the chief muſician,||Maſchil tor the ſons of Korah 9. ſ] Or, a Pſ. 


ftruF'on of 
the Son 


fidence in God, 5 — 9: His knemies reproach him, 10 His Fatib in Ged, 1Chr, 251 


2 * My ſoul thirfteh « for God, for the living God e: *Pf.63.8 
4, 25 


Y Pſ'80: 5: 
& 102: 9: 


q With cxceffi e Sorrow and Deſpair, y Heb, for the Salvations || Or, give | 


Sanfuary, to which hewill reſtore me, and from his Preſence, and Preſence is 
tire Light of his Conntenance, whieh he will graciouſly afford to PTY Saientfionsd 


r That I may revive my droopipg Spirits. s I will confider thy little hill, 


, 


4.20 
k. 7: 


88.7 


a wan of 
geceit and 
Triquity. 


PC, 42,9+ 


. XLIN., 


"from all 


n, 2, 3. 


a2 pladncl'of the Heart, and the bettering of his Condition. Or 3. Of 


| P'S 4 
1! the places and parts of the Land, to which I ſh21! be driven; : 
whether from-the parts about, or beyond fordan on the Eaſt ; Or the 
Bermonim, '( 4..e.) either the People inhabiting Hermon 3 or the 
Mountain of Hermon, which was in the Northern parts, Numbers 34: 
7: Deut. 3: 8: Pals 89: 12, here called Hermonim in the plural Nume 
ber, becauſc of its great largeneſ(s, and many tops and parts of it, which 
are called by ſeveral Names : Or, the aill Miſſar, an Hill fo cailed 

though not mcntioned elſewhere, which is ſuppoſed to have been 
in the Southern parts of the Land . But peradventure it was in the . 
Eaſt and beyond Jordan: And David might mention theſe places, be | 
cauſe when he was baniſhed by Abſalow, he had been ſucceſſively at 

all of them, and in all of them had remembred God, and dire&ed his 

Prayer to him. 


7 * Deep calleth unto deep « at the noiſe of thy 
water-ſpouts z all * thy waves and thy billows x are 


one over me y. | 
, = (+. _) One Aﬀition corhes immediately after another, as if 
it were called for, and invited by the tormer. Which he exprefſcth 
by a Metaphor taken, either, 1. From the old Flood,. when tbe upper 
deep, or abyſs of Waters ( in the C'ouds _) called for the lower deep, or 
Abyſsof Waters in the Sea and Rivers, that both might unite their 
Forces together to drown the World. And thus the Chaldee under- 
ſtands it, Or 2. from the Sea, whenits Waves rage, and itis full of 
deep furrows, into which Ships and Paſſengers fink down, and then 
riſe and fink again, ſucceſſively and continvallie. But theſe Tem- 
peſts are cauſed in the Sea by Gods mighty Winds, ratherthan by his 
 Water-ſpouts. Or 3. From violent and ſucceffive ſhowers of Rain 3 
which frequentlic come dowa from Heaven, as it were af the Noiſe, or 
Call of Gods ater-ſpouts, to wit, the Clouds ; which by theirratiing 
Noiſes and te:rible ſhunders, do ina manner invite 2nd call forth the 
* Showers which are contained in their Bowels. x Thou haſt ſeatone 


-  fharp Tryalor 4fflition upon me after another, y (2. e.) Are gone 


over my Head, as the ſame Verb is uſed, Pal. 38: 4; They do not 
lightlie ſprinkle me, but almoſt overwheſm me. 


8 Nt the LOR D will command & his loving kind- 
neſs ain the day-time, and * in the night b his ſong bal 
be withme c,& my prayerihal beunto theGoddof mylifee. 


72 (:. e. ) Will effeRually procure or confer upon me, as this Verb 
is uſed, Lev. 25: 21+ Pſal. 7.6, &c. The Verb is Future, bat 
ſome render it by the time paſt: The Lord hath commanded making 
thisRehearſal of his former Experiences of Gods goodneſs, his Argu- 
ment to ſupport himſelf, and to prevail with God in Prayer. Which 
may ſcem to ſuit beſt with the foregoing and following Verſes. But 
we muſt remember that Davids Hopes and Fears were ſtrangelie mixed, 
& hisExpreſſions of them are commonly interweven in theſamePſaim, 
and ſometimes in one and the fame Verſe, as it is here v: 5s, 11. 
And therefore there is no neceſſity of departing from the proper fig- 
nification of the Verb» @-(7 e.) His Bleſſings, the effefts of his Lov- 
ing-kindneſs, which God is oft ſaid to command, as Deut. 28: 8: Pal. 
133. 33 b Both Day and Night. (7, e,) Continuallic, c YI oy 
ſha have conſtant matter of ſinging and praiſing God for his loving 
kindnets. d And therefore | will boldly and believiggly dire my 
Prayers to him, of whoſe readineſs to hear and help me, I have had 
ſuch ample Experience, e The giver and preſerver ofmy Lite from 
time to time. 

9 I will fay unto God f my rock g Why haſt thou 
forgotten me þ? Why go I mourning # becauſe of the 


oppreflion of the enemy ? ; 

f I will expoſtulate the Caſe with him, g Who hath formerlic 
been a ſurc Refuge tome. þ Why doſt thou now ſeem quite to for- 
get and negle& me ? 7 Why doft thou leaye me in this mournful ſtate, 
and not ſuccour me ſpeedilic ? | 

10 As with a || ſword in my bones k, mine enemies 
reproach me : While they ſay daily unto me, Where 35 
thy God 1? | 
| i Or, in my Body, the Bones being oft put for the Body, whereof they 

are a very conſiderable part. Or as a Sword, which picrceth and cut- 
teth my Feſh even to the Bones, and cutteth or breaketh the very 
"Bones alſo. So painful ard vexa:ious aretheir Reproaches, / Of which 
ſce above on v. 3, 

11 Why art thou caſt down, O my ſoul ? and why 
art thou diſquieted within me ? hope thou in God, for 
T ſhal yet praiſe him, ho is the health of my counte- 
nance », and my God ». 

 '-m Heb. the ſalvations of my Face, (i e.) Kither, 1. Which are 


_ preſeritiand mavitecſt, being before my Face Or 2. Which will make 
my Face'to ſhine, and my Countenance cheerful, which ſuppoſcth the 


is Perſon ; asthe Face ſometimes (ignifies, as 2 Sam. 17, It. Iſa. 
"3. 35: Asalſo the Greek word ſignifying Kafe, 15 very frequently put 
for the Perſon whereof the Face is an eminent part, n As he tormerly 
was, ſo he ftillis, and ever will be, and will tuddenly ſhew himſelf 
to be my God, although for a ſcaſon he may hide his Face, or with- 
draw his help from me. 


PSMA IL. XLIIL 
The ARGUMENT. 


| is wh Pſalmſeems to have been Compoſed by the ſame Author, and 


upon the ſame Occafion, with the former. 
David prayeth againſt his fierce and crafty Enemies, 1. and te be reflored 


— + *#0 his Temple, 2, 3. Proziſeth to ſerve bimyjoyfully, 4; He en th 
Z L ot panty his Soul to truſt in God, 5. E we ena 
-- moe from [ Udge me 4, O God, and plead my cauſe againſt an || 


ingodly + nation c : O deliver me 7 from the deceit- 
and unjuſt 4 man e. 

'2 For thou art the God of my ſtrength, why doft 
thou caft me off? * Why go I mourning becauſe of the 
oppfefiion of the enemy ? 

s Or, judge or give Sentence for me, as this Phraſe is uſed Pſalm 26. 
I, and elſwere; b Or unmercifu!, ( 7. e.) Cruel or inhumane ; for it 
is a meioſis, c So he calls the company of his Enemies tor thetr great 
bu.i.bcrs, -and becauſe they were the far greateſt part, 


# 


=y 


; and almoſt the whole Body of the Nation: d Who cover is wi 
l 1 © th S WICK 
_ eddeſignswith fair and falſe pretences :Which ſort of Roy = T— 


>» 2 , 


— 
L M 5s BY Pſal. 


to thee, and to all good men, e Either Saul 
Abſalom. For he he ſpeaks ofthe holy Hill 
not ſo till after Savls time, 
men of that time, 


3 O ſend out f thy lightand* thy truthg; let them 
lead me, Ict them bring me unto thy holy hill b, and to 
ny tabernacles z. | 

(7. e-) Aﬀually impart and diſcover them ; 
ſeemeſt to conceal and with-hold them from me. oo 44 "kw "as 
vour, or the Light of thy Cauntenance, ard the Truth of thy Promi- 
ſes made to me ; as Gods Mercy and Truth oft g2 together, as 2 Sam. 
IS. 20, Pſals 61. 9. and 89. 14.&c, Or this may be a Figure called 
Hendiadis, whereby Light and Truth is put either for the Light of Gods 
Trath ; or rather, for true Light, the Illumination of Gods Spicit, and 
the direQtion of his gracious providence, whereby he might be led 
C as it follows |) in the right way, which would bring him to Gods 
holy Hill. þ Towit of Zt#n, the place of Gods Preſence and Worſhip; 
z (7. e. ) Tabernacle. Which he calls Tabernacles, either, x. Becauſz 
there were now two Tabernacles, one at Zion, where the Ark was : 
and another at Gibeon- 1 Chron, 16. 37, 39, Although he here ſeemsto 
ſpeak bur of one of them, even of that whieb was upon Gods holy Hill 
Or 2. Becauſe of the ſeveral parts of it, the meſt Holy, and the Ho! 
place, and the Church. Theſe indeea were is that of Gibeon, but a 
10 that of Zion. Or rather 3, Bya meer Enallage of the number 
the plural for the ſingular 3 which is frequent as in other words ſo 
in thoſe which belong to this matter, a+ Tabernacles, Pal. 46. 4.and 
Santtuaries, Levit. 26, 21. Pſal. 73. 17: (5c. and 74. 9. Jer. 51. 
5!, Nay the moſtHoly place, though but one ſimple part is by the 
Greeks called Holzes. So in other Authors, we read the Rivers of Ni- 


lus, of that one River; and Right hands, for one Righ : 
many like Phraſes. , 5 » c lp t hand . and 


: 4 Then _ I go _ the altar of God &, unto God f Heb, the 
my exceeding joy /: yea, uponthe harp will I praiſe 44s 
thes, O:Geid, rey Biel. mo pranks Lone 


5 * Why art thou caſt down, O my ſoul ? and why 1 
art thou diſquieted within me ? hope in God, for I ſhal 


yet praiſe him, who zs the health of my countenance 
and my God. Z 


k To offer Sacrifices of Thanksgiving for my Deliverance. 
principal Author and Matter of all wy hoy avd Comfort. 


P SAL. XLIIV. 
The ARGUMENT. 


=O. is no certainty, either concerning the Author,or the particus 
R lar occaſion of this Pſalm. This is evident that it was Compoſed 
with reſpe@ unto the Calamatious Condition of the Church and Peo- 
ple of 1ſrae!, whom it ſuppoleth tobe in a ſtate of Captivity and Per- 
lecution- Bnt whether it was made by David, who forciaw and foret«1d 
by the Spirit of Gad, their futureCaptivity,& framed tor this their uſe 
in that Eſtate zor-by ſome other holy man of God, when they were aCtu- 


aily in this Condition, is not determined, nor necefſarie to know for 
the underſtagding of it, 


Tothe chief muſician for the ſons of Korah Maſchil. 
The Church Commemerates paſt Mercies, 1, 2, The Arm of God, not the 
Sword of i1rael put them in poſieſſion of the 1 and, 3. Their tru$ is in 
God, not in their Bow 4 -—- 8, They complain of divers Troubles, 
9 —16. Toer Sin the cauſe of their groubles, x7, 18, They pre- 
feſs their integrity, 1g - 22, A f.rvent Prayer for help, 23 


— 4 


cr rather Achitephel or 
; of Zim wv. 2 which was 
Or Man may be put colleRive!y for the 


*Pl, 5743s 


Pl. 4215, 
b 


I The 


E have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers 


; have told us, what work thou didſt in their days 
a, in the times of old. 
4 They alledge their former Experiences, as Encouragm 
cop Faith, and Motives to bod. ts continue to be des 
chem. . - | 
; ; Exod, 
2 How * thou didft drive out the heathen 5 with thy 14: 15: 
hand, and plantedſt them c ; how thou didſt afic the P1755 
people, and caſt them out g. TInN 
b The Canaanites, c To wit, our Fathers, cafi! 
from the matter, and from v. 1, where they cn mn" 06a ya 
Pronoun being referred unto the remoter 8antecedent, as it Is Gen. 
10; 12, and 19, 13. Pſalm 18 15, and oft e!ſwhere. d So thew 
muſt be the People or Reathens, But becauſe the comparirg of this 
branch of th: Verſe with the former, #lanteift them, to which this 
anſwers, and with the following, they, makes it more than pro- 
bable, that this them, belongs to the Fathers, this is to be other. 
wiſe rendred, either, x, Thus ſend thew ou?, to wit, free or mas 
numitted out of Egypt, of which this ſame Verb is uſed, Exodus g: I. 
and 12, 33- And then the foregoing People are the E; yptians- 
not the : anaanztes, Which yet ſeems not to agree with the. forego- 
ing aod foliowing patlages, both which ſpeak of the Canaanites only 
nor with the order of the words in the Verſe, it being improper to 
mention their coming out of Egypt, after their bein planted in Cana- 
an. Or rather, 2. Thus make them ſend or ſhoot forth, to wit. Bran- 
ches, as 1t is more fully expreſſed, Pſalm 80, 11, Ezekiel 17 6. 
where this Verb is uſed. And this moſt Naturally and properly fol- 
lows upon and after their */anting mentioned in the former Clauſe. 


3 * Forthey gotnot the land in poſſeffion by their own 
{word 4, neither did their own arm fave them : but thy 


right hand, and thine arm,and the light of thy counte- 

nance e, becaule thou hadft a favour unto them. 
4 [4#, e, ] ty their Arms of Valour. e (j. e.) Thy Favour, as ** $7414 
the next words explainitz thy graciousaud glorious preſence,which 

went along with us, 

4 * Thou art my Kingf, O God, command g deli« 
verances for Jacob. 

f jacobs or Iſraels King ina peculiar manner. The whole Peo- 

ple ſpeak I;ke one Man, as being united together in on Bo- 

dy. 8g C 2, e,) Effcually procuc by thy ecmmandirg 

word, | | 4 T! rovgh W 


K 


Det, ? * 


I7. 
Jol, 24.1% 


XLIV.. 


Yo Rp. ew 


(Org 


2 
4 
*2 
V\ 


53; 


MW. XLI1V- 


| ol, $7» 


5 Th rough thee will we puſh down h our enemies ; 
through thy name z will we tread chem under that riſe 
up againſt us, 

h Heb, Smite with the Horn, ( 7. e. ) Subdue and deſtroy. The 
Phraſe is taken from Dext. 33. 17. & is borrowed from hornedBeafts, 
comp. 1 Kings 22: It (7. e-) B+ the help of thy power, 

6 For I will not truſt in my bow &, neither (hal my 
ſword {ave me. 

k Bur in thee only,as the next verſe implies; and therefore do not 
fruſtrate my Hope and Confidence fixed upon thee. 

7 But thou haſt ſaved us from our enemies, and 
haſt put them to ſhame that hated us. 

8 In God we boaſt / all the day long, and praiſe 


pfal,60- 9 But * thou haſt caſt us off ,, and put us to ſhame 
1,16 - # 3 and goeſt not forth with our armies 6. 
x 14. 1 m But now thy Countenance and Courſe is quite changed tous. 1 


68, 7. 
10 Thou makeſt us to turn back from the enemy p : 
and they which hate us ſpoil for themſelves q. 

p By withdrawing thy Help a2d our Courage, according to thy 
Threatnings, Levi. 26. 36,q (i e.) Take away our Eſtates totiherr 
own uſe, 'and for their only benefit, not in comp'iance with thy Will 
which was to puniſh us fo: our Sins, nor for thy Service and Glory. 
They minded nothing hut their own advintage, 

11 * Thou haſt given us + like ſheep appointed for 
 mear, and haſt ſcattered us among the heathen 7. 
{Heb as 7 Thoſeof us who were not flain are carrizd into Captivity, and 
ler of diſperſed in ſeveral places. 
Jed 12 * Thou ſelieſt thy people + fornought s, and doſt 
t |er. 15+ not increaſe thy wealth by their price t, 


Tom 8, 


PSALM s. 1. Pſl 


| v. 17 m In way of Prayer or Adoration, whereof this is a G. ſture, 


by s For a thing of nought, Or witbout Money, and wy.hout Price. as 
Hed it is ſaid Iſa. 55. +. For a very ſinal, or for - © price for a pair of Shoes, 
as we read Amos 2. 6 t Thon haft not advanced thy Honour and Ser- 
vice thereby , for thy Enemics do not ſerve thee more and better than 
thy people, nor yet ſo much. | 

* Thou makeſtus a reproach to our neighbours : 


a ſcorn and a deriſion « to them that are round about us. 


# They conteman our perſons, and ſport themſelies in our Mile. 
ries 


* Deut, 
Hal79s 4. 


"er. 2 | 
249, 14 * Thou makeſt us a by:word x among the hea- 
then: a ſhaking ofche head y among the people. _ 

x Or a Prove b, Tii-y uied to ſay Proverbially, More deſpicable, 
or miſerable than an Iſraelite, y A geſture of icorn and inſultation, See 
on cſalm 22. 7, 


15 My confuſion /s continually before me&, and the 
ſhame of my face hath covered mea. 

a Before the Evesof :ny Mind and Body too, Thevvilifie me, not 

only behind my Back, bur even before my Face. a (i.e. ) I am fil- 


le4 with ſhame of my Face on every ſide, being aſhame to ſhew my 
Face in any place or Company, 


16 For the voice of him that reproacheth and blaſ- 


phemeth 6; by reaſon of the enemy and avenger c. 

þ That doth not ooly reproach me, + hich I could berter bear, but 
blaſpheme God nd our Religion tor our ſakes 3 which ts intolerable to 
me. c *Vho executeth bath Gods and his own Vengeance upon me, 
perſecuting me with a deſpightfu] hatred and with great cruelty. 

17 All this is come upon us 4; yet havewe not forgotten 
thee, neither have we deair falſly zn thy covenant e. 

d +l the Evils derore-menti-ined, e Althozgh we cannot excu'e 
our ſelves from many other ſins for winch thou haſt juſtly p. vithed us, 
yet this we muſt ſay for our ſelves, that through thy Grace we have 
kept our telves from Apoſtacy aud Idolatrie, notw!i htianding all the 
Examples and Provocations, Rewards propoſed ans vromiſed, or Pu- 
ni:hments threatned foin-uce us thereunto Which w= hope thou 


wilt graciouſly conſider and not ſuffer us to be tempted above what we 
are able t» bear, 


18 Our heart is not turned back f, neither have our 
||] ſteps declined from thy way g. 

fF To wit, rtrom tee, or thy Worthip and Service unto Idols, as it 
follows, v 20. g B<cauſe it is cafie and ordinary faiſly to pretend 
ſincerity of Heart, which men cannot diſcern nor confute 3 


they prove 1t from the u+blameableſs of their Lives and adti- 
ons. 


19 Though thou haſt ſore broken usin h the place of 
dragons z, and covered us with the ſhadow of death &. 
20 If we have forgotten the name of God /, or ſtret- 
ched out our hands to aſtrange God, 
| h Or rather into as others render it; which ſeems much more 
Emphatical, and ſo this Ver> may be ren- ered, thou has humbl-d 
or brought us down, as all che Antients render it, Or this 1s a preg» 
nant Ve: b, as they cait them, or on Verb yut for iwo; of which 
there are many inſtances, as hath been ſhewed, So it may be ren- 
dred, thou ha'i ſore broben us, caſting us ints: Or. thou haſt by ſore 
breaking, broug't us mnce, By inflicting upon us one breach after 
another, thou haſt at laſt brought us te this pa'le. 7 Which f1gn1- 
fies a _ place extreamlie deſolate. ſuch as Dragons love. Iſatsh 13, 
21, 22: and 34: 13: and 35 7. and ther«fore fill of horror. ard 
danger,and milchief Thou haſt thrown us among People as flerceand 
cruel as Dragons. k (i.e. ) With deadly Horrors and Miſeries. 
Sce on Job 3; 5. and Pſalms 23: qz 1 (1. e, ) Either God himfelt ; 
Or his worſhip and Service; which we have denied tiiat we have = 


(Orpoings 


| 


Exod. g: 22; v Kings 8: 22: Pſalms. 142: 6. 
| 21 Shall not God ſearch this cut ? for he knoweth 
the ſecrers of the heart », 


n We appeal to the Heart-ſearchins God, concerning the fincerity 
of this Profeffion of ours. 6 : g the nocerity 


22 * Yea o, for thy ſake p are we killed all the day-* Rom; 
long ; we are counted as ſheep for the ſlaughter. $6: 
0 Or. But: We do not ſuffer for our Apoſtacy, but becauſe we- 
will not Apoſtatize from thee þ Beca''fe we are thy Peop'e, and cons 
tinue conſtantlie and refolutelie in the prof effi.n aud praftice of thy 
Worlkjy, which they abhor, and from which they ſeeck to draw or 
ive us. 
23 Awake, why ſleepeſt theu, O LORD? ariſe, 
caſt xs not off for ever. 


24 Wherefore hideft thou thy face 4? and forgetteſt 
our aftliction and our oppreffion r ? | 


9 (7. e. ) Doſt notregard our M iferies, nor affordeſt us any Pity 


or Help: r Wnen we have no: forgotten thee, This ſeems not 
to become thy faithfulneſſe and coadunks. well 


25 For * our fouls is bowed down to the duſt :; our *ptal.zi9% 
belly cleaveth unto the earth «, : 

s (7, e.) Eitherour Lives, or Perſons ; or rather Bodies, as it is 
explained 1n the next Clauſe, and as the ſoul is oft taken by a Synecs 
doche, as Numbers 11. 6; Pſalms 16: 10; and 105: Is, Ofc, # Ei 
ther to the ground where wely proſtrate at our enemies Feet : Or to 
the Grave, u Weare not onlic thrown down to the Earth, but we 
”s thece Ike dead Carcafſe; fixed to it, without any ability or hope of 
riſing again. 

26 Ariſe | for our help, and redeem us for thy mer- 
cies ſake x. 


x We mentioned our ſincerity and conſtancy in thy Worſhip, on- 
ly as an Argument to move thee to pity, and not as a ground of our 
Truſt asd Confidence, or as if we merited Deliverance by it; but that 
we cxpett and implore only upoa the account of thine own free and 


rich Mercy: 
ES A LL. XIV. 


The RGUMENT. 
He ſubje@ matter of this -jalm is by the Conſcor both of Jewiſh 
and Chriſtian, Antient and Moderao Iuterpreters agrecd to be 
the M-fſias, and his Marriage with the Church of Go, Of which it 
Treats, Either. 1. Remotely, under the Type of Sol»1mon and his Mar 
riaze with Prarao7s Daughter, of whichit is to b: P:imarely and Li- 
teraly underſtood, and then mediately and ultimatclic of Chriſt; Oe 
rather, 2, Immediatelic and dire&lie z although the Wa: ds be fo order- 
cd, that they carry a anifeſt atluſios either to that. or ſome other 
royal Marriage. Which ſeems more than probable from the follows 
ing Ar uments; I From the great Congruity of the matter and Style 
of this -/alm, with that of the Book of Canticles z whereof this ſeems 
tobe a k:nd of +bridgement- 2. From the Magniticent preface. vs 
1. which ſeems too ſublime and ſpirirual, for. ſuch Carnal and Earth 
ly Matters. 3. And eſpecially from the -Matt- r of the +ſalm. For 
h-re ar- many things which do not agree to Solomon ; ſuch as the 
Warlike poſture and exploits, v. 3, 4, 5, andthe Title of God, v, 
6, which is appfopriated to Chriſt, and affi med to be 1incommunica- 
ble to ay meer < reature, Hebrews x, 8. Compare with verſe v. 
s. 4d that numerous Poſterity, and the Amplitude of their 09s 
minion, verſe 16. and divers other Pailages, as we (hal ſee in the Pro. 
grels. 


To the chief muſician upon Shoſhannim #, for the ſans | Or;of ms 
of Korah, || Maſchil. 4 ſong of loves 6, — Sirudion. 
a Which T'tiet: alfo prefixed to Pſalm $9. and with fome ſmall Ad- 
dition, 4ſa/m $8. and with a little Vartztion, P/al. 6a, It ſeems to be 
tnc Name © a Song or Tune. or Inſtrument of Mufick, ft properly 
fgmfies ies or Roſes 3 which ſome apply fo the ſubje of the Pſalm, 
becauſe thole Flowers were uſed in Garlands, or otherwiſe in nuotial 
So:emnirie-, and becauſe Chriſt calls himſelf the Lilly and the Xoſe, 
Cant 2. 1. 6 Towit, of Chriſt and his Church Or, of the beloved Ones, 
'0 wit, the Virgins, who waited upon the Bride, 2s ſome men did 
u->07 the Bridegroom, who thence werecal'ed his Friends, Job. 3. 29. 
In whoſe Na ie and Perſon thi Pjaim may be utrered. 
The jalmiſt fingeth of the beauty of Chriſt above that of the children of men, 
1. 2. »f his terribleneſs an conqueſt over his Encnies., 3 — 5. of 
his evcrlaſting Throne, anFion above his fellows,5,7 and 5, The Church 
1s invited to forſake her fathers houſe, that Chri: might dclight in ber, 
$0---12, her glory and excellency by Ms graces, wh;ch (hat be remem- 
bred andpraiſzd for ever. 13 17s 


gy Y heart c+ isenditing d a good matter e I ſpeak 
of the things which I have made frtouching che 
king g 5 my tongue zs the pen þ of a ready writer 2, 


i 
[| 
| 
Þ 


> | 


+ Heb: 
A heip for } 


me. 


+ Heb. Boys 
teth, of 
Bu'ieth 


c | am about fo utter not vain orraſh, or fooliſh or falfe Words, Or,, 
but ſuch as proceed from my very Heart, and moſt ſerious Thoughts will ſpeak 
and cordial Aﬀettions d Heb, Bojleth, or bub eth up like water ina 


Pot over the tire. Th 's Phraſe notes that the workings of his Heatt 
in this Matter, were frequent and abundant, Feryent and Vehement, 
iree and Chearful, and withall kindled by Gods Grace, and by the 
[:iſprration of the Holy Ghoſt. e Either, 1. Picaſant or Delight vl, 
and fit for the Nuptia! Solemnity here expreſſed; as a Feaſt-day is 
ſometimescalled 4 Good day. Or, 2+ Excellent, as this Word is ofr 
ufed, as Aumb. 24. 5, Dent. 8. 12, Or, Holy and *pirituz), as it 
15 moſt commonly uſed. This is no vain or Carna!, or Wanton Love. 
Song. but Sublime and Heavenly, and full of Majcſty, as is manifeſt 
from the Body of this Pialm, f Which I by Dive foſpiration have 
Compoſed. g Or rather, tethe King : for to him he addrefſeth his 
Speech in the following Verſes : and this H:brew prefix, Laned, ge- 
nerally fignifies, #0 theugh ſomerimes it be rendreo, of or conterning. 
h Or, asthe Pen, Whereby he intimates that he was ovely the Pen or 
[nſtcument 10 utterin2 this Song, and that it had another and an higher 
,riginal, towit, the Spirit of God, by whofe hand this Pen was guid- 


ed and managed. 7 Whereby he underftandsEither, 1. Gods Spirit ,vtho 
writ or ſpoke this by the Pep, or mouth of the Pſalmiſt 3 Or, 2, Him- 
s K 4 felt? 


"4 
* 


wr 


LV. 


ſelf : whom he ſo calls, not out of vain Oftentatioh, or Self.Com- 
mendation' but to teach us, that this Song was not the effett of his 
own deep and ſerious ſtudy, but did freely flow into him by Divine 
Inſpiration, and did as freely and readilic flow from him, 

"2 'Thou art fairer & than the childrenof men /: grace 
is poured into thy lips 7; therefore » God hath bleſſed 


thee for ever. * © 
þ- Or, more Beautiful, (i. 'e- } Lovely andamiable- Heſpeaks not 
kere ſo much of his ourward Beauty, which, thoughit be an Orua- 
ment both'to a Eridegroom and toa King, yet is not very conſiderable 
in either, noris much admired, or applauded by Wiſe men, as of the 
inwardand glorious Endowments of his Mind or Soul, ſuch as Wiſ- 
dom, and Righteouſneſs and Meckneſs, G's. as the particulars of 
this Beauty are declared, verſe 4. 79. 7 Than all other men. Which 
is moſt true of Chriſt ; but not of S«/omem z whom many have excel- 
led, if not in Wiſdom, yet in Holineſs and Righteouſneſs, which 15 
the chicf part of this Beauty, and moſt celebrated in this Pſalm. mt 
God hath plentifully poured into thy mind and tongue, the gift of 
ſpeaking with admirable Grace, (7. e.) moſt Wiſely and Eloquently, 
and therefore moſt Acceptablie. ſo as tofind Grace with, and work 
Grace in thy Hearers. This was is the ſame ſorttrue of Solomon but 
far more Eminently and EffeRually in Chriſt : of which ſee Iſa: 50 
4. Luke; 4+ 22. Jobn 7. 45. The former Clauſe noted bisinward per- 
fe&tions 3 and this fignifies his Ability and Readineſs to Communicat 
them to others. n Which notes not the meritorious cauſe, for that 
Beauty and Gracenow mentioned, are declared to be the free gifts of 
God,and were the EffeRts, and not theCauſes,of Gods bleſſing him, but 
rather the final Cauſe, or the end for which God endowed him with 
thoſe excetlent Qualifications; and fo the Senſe of the place is, Becauſe 
God hath ſo eminently zdorned and qualified th-e for Rule, therefore 
he hath truſted and blefled thee with an everlaſting Kingdom- Or. 
becauſe, as this Particle is uſed, Gen, 38: 25. Pſal: 42. 6: and elſe- 
where. And ſo God's bleſſing him with ſush ſolid and everlaſting 
Bleffings, is noted as the Cauſe of this fingular Beauty and Grace here 
expreſſed. : ; 
3 Gird thy ſword upon thy thigh o, O mf mighty, 
with thy glory and thy majeſty p. | : 
s Either, 1. As an Enſign of Royal Majeſty, But that1s uſvally 
and much better expreſſed in Scripture, by putting a Crown wpon bis 
hea!, Or rather, 2. Asan Inſtrument for War and Battel, to ſmite 
his Enemies, as it is declared, verſe 4. 5. And the Sword 15 here put 
Synecdachically far all his Arms, as it 15 in many other places, as ap* 
ars from werſe 5. where we read alſo of his Arrows, And this 
Sword ofthe Meffias is nothing elſe but the Word of God coming out 
_ of his mouth 3 which is fitly compared to a Sword, as may appear 
- from )ſaiah 49 2. Epþ ſians 6. 17. Hebrews q« 12. Revelations 1_. 
\ 36. which is elſewhere called the Rod of bis Mouth, Iſa* 11. 4. and 
the Rod of his Power. Pſal. xio. 2. p Oc, which 1s thy Gtory and thy 
Majeſty ; Or. magnificence or Beauty : For theſe Words are joyned with 
the Sword, by way ofappoſition. Which Sword or Word 1s the great 
Inftrument ef maintaining and propagating thy Honour, and Glory, 
and Kingdom. : ; 
4. And inthy majefty 9 + ride proſperouſly 7, be- 
cauſe of truth and meekneſs, and righteouſneſs s ; and 


thy right hand ſhall teach thee terrible things r. 

q Being thus gloriouſly, or magnificeatly Girt and £&rmed, r 
March on ſpeedily ( which is fiznified by &zaing ) and fucceſstully 
'avainſt thine Enemies, (7. e. ) Thou ſhalt do fo, as iris in 
the laſt Clauſe hall teach th:e» S5Imperatives are oft put for Fu- 
tures, evd Predictions arc exprefied in the form of Commands 
or Exhortations. s Or, becauſe of thy Truth, 8c. (#. e. Becauſe 
thou art worthy of this Dominion and Succeſs; for thou neither didſt 
obtain nor wilt manage thy Kingdom, by Deceit or Violence 
and unrighteouſneſs, as the Princes of the Earth frequently do, 
but with Truth and Faithfulneſs, with meekneſs and gentleneſs 
towards thy People, and to all that ſhal ſubmit to thee; with im- 
partial Juſtice aud Equity, whereby thy Throne will be eſtabliſhed, 
Proverbs 16. 12. and 20, 28. Or, as it is inthe Hebrew, Word for 
Wo: d. upon the Ward of Truth, 8c. which may ſeem beſt to ſuit with 
the foregoing Words, which according to the Hebrew are, Proſ= 
per thou, Ride thou, and then immediately follows 3 upon the Word 
of Truth, 8&c, To wit, the Goſpel ; wich 1s oft called Truth, 
as Jehn 38. 2, Coletians 1. 5.6). and The Werd of Truth, Eph:ſians 
I. 13. and may no leſs truly be called the Word of Meekneſs, becauſe 
It is not delivered with Terror, as the Law was at Sinai. but meek 
ly and Gweetly by Chriſt, and by his Miniſters, Matthew 21. 5. 2 Tim. 
2, 25, and the word of Righteouſneſs, becauſe it brings in everlaſting 
Righteouſneſs, Daniel 9. 24. and ſtrongly oblidgeth aod exciteth 
all men, to the praQtice of Righteouſneſs and Holineſs, And fo the 
Goſpel is Compared, to an Horſe or Chariot, upon which Chriſt is 
faid toride, when the Goſpel is Preached, and carried about from 
Place to place, Revelation 19. It. And this may be here added, to 
ſhew the great difference between the Kingdoms of the World, that 
are managed with outward Pomp and Glory, and the Kingdom of 
Chriſt, which is a pritual Kingdom and like a Spouſe, verſe 13. all 
Gloriovs withih, as Conſiſting in ſpiritval Virtues and Graces, Truth, 
Meekneſs end Righteouſneſs. # (1. e,_) Thou ſhalt do great and glo- 
rious Exploits, which ſhal be Grieyous and Terrible to thine Enemies, 
as the next Verſc explains it, and this not by great Forces, and the 
Aſſiſtance of others, but by thine own ſingle power. Compare Jſaiab 
63. 3- Which doth by no means agree to Solomen, who was a 
man of Peace, and not ingaged in any martial Actions againſt 


his Knemics 3 and, if he had done any thing Conſiderable in that | 


king, he. could not do it by his own Right hand, but by the help of 
his Seuldiers. But this doth excell-ntly agree to the Meſſras, and 
to him onelys Obj. The things which were done by the Meffias 
t his firft Coming, were rather Comfortable than Terrible. A4nſw. 
y were indeed comfortable to all good Men, but withal they 
were Terrible to the ungodly, and particularly ts the Body of the 
Jewiſh Nation, to whom Chrift was a Stone of flumbling, and Rock 
of offence, and an occaſion of their utter Deſtrution. And upon 
thatand other Accounts, not onely Chrift's ſecond, but even his 
firſt Coming, is repreſented as dreadful, as Jee/a, 30 Mal, 3, 2. 
_ andelſewhere. For the Phraſe, thy Right hand ſhall teach thee, it is 
not to be taken Properly, for ſo he taught his Hand, and not his 


$2 


1 
by 
8 


PS 4 L M 5. 


Pal. 


Hand him, but the meaning is, that his Hatid ſhould ſow him, (i e.) 
Diſcover and work before him : for Verbal words are oft underſtood 
Really, as Calling is put for Being, Iſa. n. 26. and 94 6. fo teaching or 
ſhewing. is put tor doing, as Pſal. 16. laſt and 60. 3 


5 Thine arrows « are ſharp in the heart of the kings 


enemies x, whereby the people fall under thee y. 

# The ſame thing, for Subſtance with zhe Sword, v. $4 both no.. 
ting the Inſtruments by which he Conquers. his Enemies ; which is 
no other than his Word, which is ſharpand powerful, and pierceth 
the Hearts of Men, Heb 4. 12. which alſo firſt wounds Sinners, and 
then heals them 3 and which is for the Fall as well as for the Riſing of 
many, Luke 2+ 34. and for judgment, as well as for Mercy, John 9, 
39+ to ſome a Savour of Death, aud t others a Saveur of Life, 2 Cor,2, 
16. and therefore is fitly Compared to 4rrows ; which Title is ſomes 
times given to words, as Pſalm 64. 4. and frequentlie to God's 
Plagues or Judgements, Demt, 32 23. Pſalm 18 
as the Word becomes to ungodlie Men by their own Fault. And 
theſe Metaphorical Weapons are oft aſcribed to Chriſt ; who hath 
a Bow, Revel, 6, 2* and Weapons of Warfare, 2 Cr. 16. 4. and 
whoſe Mouth God is faid to make a Sword, and an &rrow, Iſaiah 49. 
2.X (fe e._) Of thine Enemies: the third Perſon being put for the 

ſecond, asis uſual in Prophetical Wri:ings ; which here may ſeem to 

have ſome Emphaſis, as deſcribing the Perſons againſt whon ke ſhot 
his Arrows, andthe Reaſons why he did ſo, becauſe they were the E- 
nemies of his Kingdom, and would not have him to Reign over them, Lube 
19. 27,. y Either, a5 flain by thine Arrows 3 Or, as proftrateat thy 
Feet, after the manner of Conquered Perſons. Pſalm 18. 38, and 20, 
8, According to this and many other Travſlations, the Words are 
Tranſplaced, which in the Hebrew lye thus, Thin Arrows are ſharp, 
whereby the people do fall under thee, in the Heart, (Ci. e. ) in the 
midſt, which isoft called the Heart, as Exed. 15.8, Deut. 4. 11, And 
fo it may be here; for the Army, as ſfuch,hath no Heart, Properly fo 

called. And ſo this is fitly alledged, as a P-oof of the ſharpneſs and 
force of his Arrows, that they not onely wound thoſe who march in 
the Front, but even thoſe whoare inthe midſtof the Army, where 
they may ſeem ſecure, and out of their Reach ) of the Kings Enemies. 
But the midle Words may be, and are by many included wichin a Pa- 
rentheſ1s, and ſo they may agree with our Tranſlation thus. Thine 4r- 
rows are (harp ( for the People fall under thee, which is an Evidence of 
their ſharpneſs ) zn the Heart \ or againſt the Heart ; Or, piercing into 
the Heart, Which 1s an eafie and uſual Eilipſis) of the Kings Ene« 
mes, | 


6 * Thy throne, O God s&, 7s for ever and ever 4 


the ſcepter of thy kingdom 3s a right ſcepter h. 

z It is moſt Ey:dent, that the Specch i> ſtill conti:.ue+ to the ſame 
Perſon, whom he calls King, ve I. 14+ ans here God, Which change 
of rhe Title was very expedicnt, and in ſome ſort necetlary to give 
us 2 true underſtanding of this Pſalm, and to aſſure us that he doth not 
ſpeak of Solomon (to whom neither theſe nor the foregging nor the 
following Words agree, becauſe his Reign was peaceable and fhort, 
1nd ſtained with many and great iniquities ) but a far greater Kiog, 
even of the Meſſias, who is not onely a Man, but alſo the mighty God, 
aS he 1s called, 1ſa_ g. 6. and as the Apoſtle ſolidly proves from this 
place, Heb, 1. 8. For though the Name of Elzbiy, or Ged, be { cme- 
times given In Scripture to ſome Creatures, yet in thoſe Caſes it is al- 
ways Clogged with fomediminiſhing Expreſſion, ſignifying that they 
are oncly made or called Geds, and that onely for a certain Time and 
Purpoſe, as is manifeſt from Exod. 4. 16+ and 7. 1. Pſal. $2. 6, and 
it 1s no where put ſimplie aud abſolutelic for any Perfon ,but him, who 
is God bleſ524 for ever, Rom. g. $5. aTo wit, Properly and in thine own 
Perſon, 1n which as he Lives for ever, ſo he muſt neceſſarily Reign 
for ever + whereas David, whoſe Throne is ſaid to be Efabliled for ever: 
2. Sam. 7, 16. was a Mortal mzn. and therefore that Promiſe was not 
intended of, nor conld be fulfilled in, his Perſon, without including 
hisPofteritie, And as he here gives to the Meſſias, the Name of Gad, 
which was never given to David nor Solomon, fo ke aſcribes an ever- 
laſting Kingdom to him, in ſuch a Sence as it was never given to 
them. So Dan' 2, 44» and 9+ 14. b It 1snot ſtrange that thy Throne 
is not liable to the ſame uncertainties, and Caſuaitics with the 
Thrones ot carth!y Princes, becauſe their Scepters are commonly 
managed with great injuſtice and manifold iniquities, which lay the 
Foundation of their overthrow ; whereas thou rulett with Exa&t 
Righteouſneſs and Equity, whereby thy Throne is Eſtabliſhed, grov, 
16, 12. 


7 Thou loveſt righteouſneſs, and hateſt wickedneſs 
c : therefore 4 God, thy God e hath anointed thee 
with the oyl of gladneſs f above thy fellews g. 


c Thou doſt not onely do that which is good, and ayoid that 
which is Evil; Which even bad Princes ard Men may do, and ſome- 
times Afually do for Politick, or Prudential Reaſons, but thou doſt 
this fincerely, and from an inward Principle, even from a true Love 
to Ged, and Goodneſs, and froman implacable Hatred againſt all 
Wickedneſs, ' So this Particle is commonly uſed, And fo it denot- 
eth, Either, 1. Thereward of Chriſt's righteous Adminiſtration of 
his Kingdom. So the Sence is : Becauſe thou haſt given ſo many and 
great Proofs of thy Loye to Righteouſneſs, and of thy Hatred of fin, 
and that not onely by the conſtant Courſejof thy Life, but alſo by thy 
Death and Paſſion, therefore God hath raiſed and czalted thee far 
above all Men and Angels, to a ſtate of Joy and endleſs Glory at his 
right Hand ; which is fitly exprefſed by the 03! of Gladneſs, For a- 
nointing doth not always ſignific the Conferring of inward Gifts or En- 
dowments, but ſometimes onely notes the Deſignation or inaugura- 


| 


tion of a Perſon, to ſome high Dignity or Employment, as £zeb. 
28, 14, andelſewhere: Or, 2, The final Cauſe. or end of Chriſts 
Union, So the Senceis; To that end, (7. e.) That thou mighteſt 
loye Righteouſneſs, and hate Wickedneſs and govern thy ſelf, and thy 
Kingdom accordingly, God hath anointed thee, &e. (i. e,) Hath en- 
dowed thee with all the Gifts, and Graces of thy Holy Spirit, 4&s 10* 
38. inan Eminent and peculiar manner, tothe Comfort and Refreſh- 
ment of thine own, and all thy Peoples Hearts 3 and hath Solemnly 
called thee to be the Prieſt and Prophet and King of atl his People. 
But the former Sence ſeems tobe the trueft, and is for Sabilance the 


ſame thing, whichis ſaid in other Words, Phil. 2, 8, 9, 10, e Ac- 
cording to thy. humane Nature, John 20. 17. though in reſpe of thy 


divine Natyre,thou art his Fellew,Zech, 13, 7, and his Equal, þ bil. Pl 


a4» and 64+ 9, ſuch. 


* * Pſ.9312; 


Heb; 1: 8 


[ 
” 
2 R 
Ya 


LV 


9312: 
0 8 


a 
Fs 
p. 5 iy 4 
a , | v 
_» 
WS. 
4 


LV. 


which is Chriſts great work and delight 1 (7, e.) 


F-4 - 

ith him, John ro, 30. So called here, as alſo Iſa. 61, 
: —_ gh it Zo onely nel Bog Countenance freſh and pl-a 
fant, Pſal. 104. Is but alſo rejoyceth the Heart. Prov. 27. 9. and 
Partly, b*caulc it wasa Token of gladneiſe, and uſed in Feaſts, and 
other Solemn occaſions of Rejoycing : Of which fee Pſal. 43+ 5. Dat. 
19. 3. Ames6. 6. 8 (i e,) Above all them who partake with thee in 
this Union: Either, x. Above all that ever were a:10inted fer Pricſts 
or Prophets, or Kings, Or, 2. Avove all Believers, who alſo have 
received this ſame Union, 1 Fohn 2. 20. 27. and are made Prieſts 
and Kings unto God, Reve Is G- 


8 All thy garments ſmell of myrrhe, and aloes, aud 
caffia þ: out of the ivory palaces i, whereby &they have 
made thee glad /. 


h Wherewitn they uſed to Perfume their Garments ; See Gen, 27. 
27. This may denote thoſe glorious and ſweet ſmelling Vertues,which 
as they were Treaſured up inwardly in Chriſts Heart, ſo did they ma- 
pifeft themſelves outwardlic and viſibly, and give forth a gratetul 


Smell, j2 the whole courſe of his Lifeand Ations 3 his Dg&rine alfo 


was a ſweet Savour unto G 'd and Men, 2 Cor. 2, I4, 15. 7 Which 
may b_ referred : Either, r. To the Garments, which were uſuaily 
kept in and now upon this extraordinarie Solemnity were brought 
out of, Palaces, or Houſes, or Wardrobes of ivory, ſo called here, as 
alſo, 4mos 3- 15. not hecauſe they were wholly made of [vory, but 
becauſe they were adorne?, or covered here and there with it, Or 
cather. 2. Tothe Kiny himſelf, why is heie ſuppoſed to reſide in his 

Ivory Palaces, and his Garments arc fo :ragrant, that they do not on- 
ly Perfume the whole Palaces in which he 1s; but the ſweetSavour theres 
of is perceived by thoſe that paſs by them,or areat ſome diſtance from 
them. All which is poetically ſaid. and with a manifeſt Allufion to 
Solomon's glorious Garments and Palaces. By th: ſc zvory Palace', he 
may mean either, r, His humane Nature, 11 which Chritt awelt as 
in a Tabernacle, as the Greek word ſignifies, John x. 14, in which all 
theſe fraza''t Vertucs were, and from whencethey were diffuiced every 
wheie, Ind-ed the Body is called a Temple, John 2. 19. a3d an Houſe 
or Tubernacle, 2. Cor.5. I, 2, andſoitmight be called a Palace, But 
why it ſhould be called ”alaces, and that of Ivory, ſecms not ſo plain. 
Or rather, 2. Thoſe gloriousand heavenly Manſions, jobn 14.2. which 
may not unfitly be called ivory Palaces, asciſewhere 1n the lame igu- 
rative manner they are {:id to be made of, or adorned with Gold and 
Precious ſtones Revelations 21, 18, 19, from which Mantions Chriſt 
cameinto the World, John 3. 13, and into which Chriſt went, and 
where he ſet'ed his abode after he went out of the World, Zohn 13. 1+ 
AF; 1, 11. an4 from whe::ceChriſt poured forth all the fragraot Gifts 
and Graces of h's Spirit, into the world and Church, 4#s 2, 33. Al- 
though there is no neccflity to firainevery particular Cir. u.vftance 18 


: ſuch poetical Deſcriptions, nor to find out ſome particulas thing | 


Chriſt to which it agrees; for ſome Expreſſions may be uſed, oncly as 
Ornaments in ſuch Caſes, as they are in Parablesz and it may ſuffice 
to know 2nd ſay, that the Glories and Txcellencies of the King Ch-ift 
are deſcribed by ſach thing: in which earthly potentate: do place their 
Glory. k Or from which : Either, 1, From which pl-ce or Palaces. 
Or rather, 2. From which thing, (7. e. ) Fr -m the ſweet ſmell of 
thy Garmen!s out ofthoſe ivory valaces, or from the Effuſion of the 
Gifts and Gracesof thy Spirit from thy Fathcrs right hand, 19 Hea- 
yen ; which as it is a great Bleſſing and Comfort to theſe who receive 
them, io doth it rejoyce the Heart of Chr ſt, both as it 15a Demonſtra- 
tion of his own Power and Glory, «nd as it is the happy Inſtrument 
ofdoing ſo much good i» the World, and of bringing Souls to God, 
Thou art mad: 
glad z ſuch Phraſes being oft uſed indefiaitely and 1mperſonally, as 
Lube 15+ 32- andin many other places. 


9 Kings daughters were among thy honourable wo- 
menm 3; uponthy right hand » did ſtand s the queen in 
gold of Ophur p. 

m (i.e. ) Amongſt them that attend upon thy Spouſe,as the man» 
ner was in NuptialSolemnities 3 as men attended upon the Bridegroom, 
whence they were called Friends, John 3, 29. Inreference to Chriſt, 
as the Spouſe or Queen isthe Church in general, ſo theſe honourable 
Women are particular Believers, whoare daily added 'o the Church. 
Aﬀs 2. 47 and ſubmit themſelves toits And although the Church i: 
made up ofparcicular Believers, yet she is diſtinguiſhed from them, 
for the Decency of the Parable as the whole is oft diſtioguifhed by our 
Minds, from the parts of which it Confifts, and as the Daughters of 
Jeruſalem are diſtinguiſhed from the Spouſe in the Book of the Can. 
ticles, though the Spouſe be wholly made up of them. And theſe Be- 
lievers may be ſaid to be Kings Daughters, Either, becauſe amongſt o- 
thers many perſons of Royal or princelie Races did embrace the Fatth, 
as was propheſied of them, 1ſatah 4g. 7. and 60+ 1c, 41. &c, or be 
cauſe they are in a ſpiritual Sence, Kings unto God, Revelations x, 6, 
n The moſt honourable place next to the Kings. See 1 Kings 2. 19, 
Matthew 26. 64. o Which is the poſture of a ſervant; to ſhew thar 
as the is a Queen, ſhe is a'ſo his SubjeR to ferve and obey him, or, 
is placed or ſeated : Which ſeems more agreeab'e to the perſon of a 
Queen, 1 Kings 2. 19. and ofa Spouſe at the Nuptial Solemnity. 
Clothed in the richeſt Garments made of the choiceſt Gold. By which 
he deſignsthe Graces wherewith the Church is;accompliſhed, 


10 Hearken q, O daughter r, and conſider, and incline 
thine ears s: : forget alſothine own people, and thy 
fathers houſe 7. 

q Theſe Words are ſpoken ; Either, i. In the perſon of the Atten- 
dants upon the Bride or Bridegroom. Or, 2, Of the Bridegroom 
Or rather, 3 By the Prophet hiniſfelf ; who having hitherto ſpoken 
to the Bridegroom, or King, now addrefleth his Speech to the Bride 
or Queen. r So he calls her, partly, in token of his ReſpeR and 
Aﬀetion to her, and partly, becauſe ſhe is ſuppoſed to be young 
and beautiful, and therefore the Prophet ſpeaks like an Elder and 
graver perſon, and as her ſpifitual Father and Counſellor, s He 
uſeth ſeveral Words, ſignitying the ſame thins, to ſhew his ſerious 
and YVehement defire of her good, and the great importance and diffi- 
culty of praQtifing the following Counſel. # Not ſimply, but Com- 
paratively, ſo far as they oppoſe or hinder the diſcharge of thy Puty 
to thy Huzband z or fo far as they are Corrupted in Dofrine os Wor: 


I M Ss. 


ſhip, or praftice, He alludes to the Law of Matrimony, Gen.2. 24, 
and to what Solomon did ſay, or ſhould have ſaid to Pharaohs Davgh- 
ter. to wean her from the Idolatry and other Vices of her Fathers 
houſe. But thi: as well as the reſt of the Pſalm, reſpeRs Chriſt, and 
is a ſcaſonable and neceſſary Advice, and command to all perſons that 
defire to come to Chrift, whether Jews or Gentiles, that they would 
caſt off all their inveterate Errors and prejudices, all thoſe Superſti- 
tious or Idolatrous or wick:d Opinions or praftiſes, which they had 
received by long and antient, and therefore venerable Tradition from 


* Phil XLV 


ing of the goſpel. a Partly to teſtifie cheir Homage, 


10g. 


11 So ſhal the King greatly deſire thy beauty #: for 
he isthy Lord x, and worſhip thou him y. 

# So dolng thou ſhalt be amiable and acceptable to thy Husband ; 
which will abundantly recompence thee, for the loſs of thy Fathers 
houſe, x As he 1s thy Husband, and alſo as he is thy King, and God, 
as he was called, v. 6. And this is added, as a Reaſon not of the laſt 
Words, why the King would defire her Beauty; but of the Advice given 
to her, v. 10. y By which he implies that her Husband was no meer 


lation of that kaowa and immutable Precept of worſhipping God on- 
ly. | 


12 And the daughter of Tyre z ſhal be there with a 


gift a, even * the rich amongſt the people 6 ſhal in- 
treat | thy favour. | 

x ( 7. e. ) The people or Citiz-ns of Tre; as the D ghter of Zion, 
or Jeruſalem, or Babel, 82, are put for their Fahabitadcs. 2 Kings 
19. 21. Pſal, 137: 8 Zech. 9. 9, He mentionerh the Thrians ; Part= 
ly, becauſc they did give Preſents to Solomon, 1 Kinzs 5- 3, &c. to 
whom here 15 a continued alluſion thro-.g4 the whole Plalm 3 and part-= 
iy, becauſe they among others, and betore many others, were to be 
converted to Chriſt, as they were, Sce Mats tte 21, 22. Mark 32 81 
and 7. 24+ Ads 21. 3, 4, 5. But they are here put Synecdochically 
for all the Genziles, whom that City ficly repreſents, as being the 
Mart ef the Nations, as ſhe is called. iſa, 23. 3 and beinga very rich 
and proud, and therefore a ſelf-conceited, and a ſtiff.necked people ; 
their Merchants being Princes, 1/a. 23. 8_ they may in a particular man» 
ner repreſcut all thoſe great and proud Princes and ſtubborn people 
of the Gentile- World, which thould be ſubdued toCheiſt by the preach, 
which was done 
by Gifts or Preſents, as ap»cars trom x Sam, io. 27. 2 Sam; 8. B. 


&c: and partly to procure thins, and conſequently thy Husbands Fa- 
vour, as it here follows, b Of other Nations. 


13 The kings daughter c js all glorious within 4 ; her 
clothing #s of wrougnt gold e. 
Cc (t, e.) The Spouſe ; io cailcd cithergbecauſe 
ter of one King, and the Wife of another : Or be 
Wite 1s ſo netimes called the Hu bands Daughter 
ſuppoſed to be younger than hc ; pai 
ſubjeRion which ſhe oweth to him, and thac Fatherly Care and Aﬀec« 
tton which he oweth to her. See 2 Saw. 12 3, Jer. 3. 4- $0 theBride- 
groom calls his Spouſe his Siſter, Cant 4g. i9 Thus Livia. the Wife 
of Auguſtus is called his Siſter, in anticat Coins. 4 wither, 1. Even 
in her cetiring Chambersia the Kings Palace, and not only when ſhe 
ſheweth her ſel! abroad Or rather, 2 In her Mind and Soul. or in 
{p:ritual Endowments theexccllent Vertues and Graces wherewith ſhe 
is accompliſhed, For 1. This is oppoſed to her outward Clothing. 2; 
This being ſo great and (o neceffary a quaiification of a worthy Spouſe; 
i 1s not likeiy it ſhould be omitted in her deſcription 8& commenda= 
:10n,. eſpecially when the Bridegroom is commended for his inward 
acc mpliſhments, as well as for his outward Glory, v. 4; 9; 3- The 
Church is this Bride, as hath been ſaid and proved before, _ whoſe true 
and chief Beauty is inward and fpiritual, and not conſiſting in outward 
pomp and glory. e Her inward PerfeRions do not reft within herz 
but break torch into vertuous and honourable ARions, wierewith ſhe 
is adorned 1n the view of the World. This ſuits well with the ſtyle of 
the Holy Scriptures, where; the Saiats are oft ſaid to be cloathed with 
Vertues and Vertuous Attioi:s, Sce Pſalm 132: 9, 1 Peter 5, 5? 

14 She fhal be brought unto the king, f in raiment 
of needle-work: the virgins her companions g that fol- 
low her ſhal be brought unto thee. 

f He alludes to the Cuſtom of con{ufting the Bride to the Bride: 
grooms Houſe, g ( 7. e.) Her Bride-maidens attending upon her,cal- 
led her honourable Woren. v. 9. C where ſce the Notes ) and here Vir- 
gins, becauſe of their Spiritual Purity and Chaſtity, 2 Cor. x1. 2. © 

I5 With gladneſs and rejoycing b ſhal they bebroughts 
they ſhal enter into the Kings palace, 

h Full of Joy for the Slory and Felicity of the Bride and Bride« 


groom, and for the comfort and benefit which redoundeth to them< 
ſelyes from it, | 


16 In ſtead of thy fathers ſhal be thy children 
whom thou mayeſt make princes in all the earth 5. 

i Having direftcd his Specch to the Bride, he now returns to the 
Bridegroom, as may be gathered both from the Hebrew words, 
which are of the Maſculine Gender; and from the next Verſe, 
w hich unqueſtionably belopgs unto him : Yet fo that he ſuppoſeth 
the Bride to be concerned, and partakes with him in the privcledge 
here mentioned, and the Children to be comn:0n to them both. 
And therefore this Verſe and P{alm cannot be unde:fiood of Solo- 
men, and his Marriage with Pharaohs Daughter, becauſe he had no 
Children by her, and but very few by all his Wives' and Concu- 
bines; and his Children were ſo far from exceeding their Parents 


ſhe was the Daughs 
cauſe the Spouſe or 
3 partly, becauſe ſhe is 
tly. becauſe ot that reſpe@ and 


the Earth, as is here faid, that they enjoyed but « ſmai part of their 


haewh Dominions, and that with many Tribulations and but 


48S 


their Fathers, and intirely give up themſcives to Chriſt to be infiru- 
ed by him, and to receive his Do@rine, -though it would ſeem new 
to them. And by theſe Words he ſeems to intimate and tacitly to 
fortel that not onely theSuperftitious inventions and Traditions of Men, 
but even the legal Worſhip app»inted by Moſes, and delivered to 
them from their Parents, ſucceſſively for many Generations ſhould 
be relinquiſhed by the believing Jews, and abolifked by Chriſt's com- 


Man, bpt God alſo, and therefore might be adored without any Vio- 


* TP 
3 * 1 Pet? 


in the largeneſs of their Dominions, or being made Princes in alt © 


£5Y , for 


*P(.923 109 
THeb- by 


Face. 


3* an 
Rev I. 6s 
& 5. 10. 
& 20s 6s 


| | t this was mcſt truly ard fully zccompliſhe©] earth p : * he breaketh the kow, and c V 
ro Chriſt: vo fnicad —_— ofthe Jewiſh Nation.rom eo in - ol he burneth the chit 3n gt IE 
1 m he was forſaken and rcj<Re hich | | , 
es iapiies, and elſewhere is expreſly affirmed) had a]. cater 3 oO OY 5g gh 4 Fi = ID 
numerous Pofterity of a Chri noe ht all the or coqg 6 _=_ to the her. 7 He ſpeaks of the Bows, 2nd Spears, A es 7 
Earth, which here and elſewhereare called Princes and Kings, DECAUIET 4 i eties; for he preſerved thoſe which bel x 
of their great Power with-God and with Men, becauſe they ſubdued GE RT P! onged to his peo 


| N '| ple. | 
ns pe ne end flead: | 4450044 i arab to Be ſtill r, and know that T aw» God's : TI will be 


17 I will make thy name to be remembred in all ge- | exalted : among the heathen, I will be exalted in the 
nerations & : therefore ſbalthe people praiſe thee for c- earth» 


verand ever. + 11 The LORD of hoſts 7s with us,the God of Ja- 
'  & As. ke began the Pſalm with the Gelebration of the Kings Praiſes, cob zs our refuge. Selah. : EEE: 
"fo now he endeth withit, and adds this importantCircumſtance,that 7 He ſpeaks cither, I: To the Iraeliets, be flill ( fee.) Do you 
"this Nuptial Song ſhould not only ſerve for the preſent Solemnity, henceforth ſently and quietly wait upon me without Fear or Diffi« 
as others of that kind do, but that it ſhould be rememvred and ſung | denc® Or rather 2, To the Heathen, who had Raged, v, 6. and 
{n all ſucceſſive Generations, Which plainly ſheweth that it was not therefore now he ſcaſonably admoniſheth them to be f/lill, and or ſin 
Compoſed upon ſuch a ſlight and tranſitoric occaſion, as that of Solo-| to ſtir no more againſt Gods people. s The only true and al- Maſcl 
-n00s Martiage with Phardobs Daughter, which was foon forgotten, | mighty God; and your Gods are but dumb and impotent Idols, Plal, 
and the Iſracliets had little cauſe to remember it withany ſatisfa&i-| * (27. e.) I will make my ſelf glorious by my great and wonderful 
on ; but upon that greatand glorious and everlaſting Marriage between | Works. | 


Pf. 75.3, 


jOr, 
ne th 
hath 
fland! 


Chriſt and his Church; of which this is moſt properly and literally ve- P $S A L. AEVH. 
het The ARGUMENT. 
PSA L. XLYL His aes may ſeem to have bee: Compoſed upon the occaſion of 
| ; th at great Solemnity of carying the Ark from the Houſ, 
The ARGUME NT. id 8 Chr 


| Obed-Edom into the City of Zion 3 of which ſce2 Samy. 6. and 1 Chro 

| : : - and 16, But as Zion was a Type of the Church, and t] k 

fthis Pſalm is thought te be that ha ſacceſs and | 13+ 2D : . ; ie AIK a 

x " Rs  pocce hh _— granted to is People of If- Type of Chriſt, ſo this hath been a further reference, even to Chriſts 

- > mY « tao ghee” by his means, 2 Sam, 8 aſcenſioninto Heaven, and asconſequent thereunto 
rae 7 . o_ 


f his Kingdom in all the Parts and Nations of the Terk. ey 
Y : , PP. NY vation: orld. ich is 
L, To the chief muſician || for the ſons of Korah, a ſong | the chief Scope and Defign of the Pſalmiſt, or that leaſtof the Holy 
IJ upon tome _— inthis Pſalm ; as will plainly appear from the words and mat 
Le - $ »,. ter oO it. 
: The confidence and ſafe condition of the Church under Gods care, 1 S. : ; [0r 
| dara in his wanderful deliverance from her Enemies, $ hu—_ 9.| Io the chief muſician, a P ſalm [| for the ſons of Korah. [| Or, of win 
fb - * pie exhorteth all to conſider it, to the magnifying bis name, 10, 11+ Toe Chuvch is exherted to praiſe God, who ſabdueth her Enemies, 1 ===2, of th 
F agier and giveth her an excellent inheritance. q -—=—— 7 A promiſe of calling jle 
Od is a our refuge and ſtrength, a very preſent b | and gathering the Gentiles, 8——— 9, | "m 
help in trouble. 'O Clap your hands all ye people 2 :; ſhout unto God unto 
" a (Ct. 4 ) He hath now manifeſted himſelf to be ſo by the courſe b with the voice of triumph. 2 ppl 
b of his Providence: \ b Or, a ſufficient, asthis word 1s ſometimes uſcd, a Either, i: All the Tribes of Ijrael : For the ſeveral Tribes are - 
as fof. 17, 16: Zeche no, 10. ſometimes called ſeveral People, See Judg, 5 14. Exh 2: 3. 48; 4+ 
2 Thereforewill not we fear, though the earth be 


wg or | or All wg not y Jews, but Gentiles ; for all of them 

IS ved. and though the mountains be carried into Þ | cither had or might bave benefit by the Ark, upon their Addreſſes 

f Heb: the onoquet aft of the -+q4 | to God there, and eſpecially by Chrift and his Aſcenſion, 6 In the 

| —_ + of the c Though there ſhould be nothing but ſhakings and Confufions,and T—__ —— BD. wr God of 11rael. : 

; Deſolations in all the Nations round about us: whice are oft expreſ-| 2 £0 tne O molt high 3s terrible c ; he is a 

ſed by tuch Metaphors, as Jeremiah 51. 25. Haggai 2, 21. 22. Rev. | great King over all the earth . 

6.14 | _ 6 Or, is moſt high (* in himſelf, above all Gods _) and ( which Cons 
2 Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled 2: | jundtion is oft underſtood ) zerrible, to all his Enemies: de The uni« 

;hough the mountains ſhake with the ſwelling thereof e. | ?<r{a! Monarc® of the whole World, and not of only Ijracl, 


Sel 3 He ſhal ſubdue ethe people under us f, and the na- 
4 Though the Sea be very tempeſtuous, and its Waters(" by which | £1075 under our feets Eg : 

2a multitude of People is oft ſignified, as Rev. 17. I, 15. _) rage,to e Or, lead like Sheep 3 or bring ntothe Fold ; as divers render the 

wit, againſt us, as appears from the following Verſes. e Though its word, by comparing Ifa. 5. 17. Mich, 2. 1% He feems to ſpeak of 

raging Waves ailault mighty Princcs and Kingdoms, and make them ſuchaſuvjuga:ion of them,as was for the ood of the people ſu>dued, 

. ſhake and be ready to fall down. becauſe this is matter of rejoycing to them, v. it, Which is trucboth 


. of thoſe people whom David ſubdued, wiio thereby had O-portuniti 
4 There is a river, the ſtreams whereof f ſhal make Ag : Coynad Opportantties, 


F Obligations and Encouragements, to own and worſhip the true God, 
glad g the city of God 5: theholy place of the taberna- | which was the oaiy way to their true and laſting Happineſs; and e« 


cles i of themoſt High. ſpecially of thoſe Gentiles who were ſubducd to Chriſt by the preach- 
=: # He either ſpeaks of, - atleaſt alludes to, the River of Kidron, 2 __ on mag f w/e ts were 1n ſome ſort broughe 
5 Sam. 15. 23. John 18. 1. andits two ſtreams or Rivolets flowing | V24cT ine Jews, gy ney were ſubjected to Chriſt, and to his 
Bong from it, Gihon and Siloah, 2 Chron, 32. 20. 1/a. 8. 6. which being Apoſtles, and to the yeh Church, which were Jews. . Or the 
ſmall and contemptible,or ſtill or gentle Waters, are not unfitly op- Pſalmift may ſpeak this in the Name of the whole Church, which then 
poſed tothe vaſt and unruly Watersof the Sea. He infinuates the weak | © 1 aelites only, bur afterwards were made up of Jews and Gen- 
. condition of Gods Church as to outward advantages, that they had tiles, unto which all particular Believers were to ſubmit themſelves in 
; | notone Sea to oppoſe to another, but only a ſmall River; which | 324 ene Land. . . 
though io it ſelf deſpicable, yet was ſufficient to refreſh and defend «f He ſhal chooſe g our inheritance þ for us, the ex- 
them in ſpight of all their Enemies. And asthe Sea and Waters there- | cellency ; of Jacob k whom he loved 7 Selah, 
of, v 2. 3. arc to be underſtood Metaphorically, as all agree, ſoal-| g (4. e.) He will appoint and beſtow upon us, This Verb of the 
'k ſo in all probability, are this River and Streams: Which therefore may | Future Tenſe may ſeem to agree well with the Gentiles, becauſe this 
= deſign the gracious Preſence and Aſſiſtance, and Bleſſing of the Lord, | Bleſſing was not now preſent but future, and ſo the Senſe deſigned by 
C which is very frequently deſcribed under the Name of Waters, as| the Holy Ghoſt may be this : Though at preſent we are wicked and 
Wa. 11. 9, and 12. 3: Zech, 14; 8. &c.) or the Lord himſelf, who | wretched Creatures, and Strangerstothe Common-wealth of Iſrael, yet 
Is expreſly ſaid to be unto the City of Zion tor its defence, a place of | there is atime coming whereinGod will chuſe or take us into the num- 
broad Rivers and Streams, Iſa. 53s 20, 21. which provably alludesto | ber of his Childrn by gracious Adoption. But Futures are variouſly 
\ this Text, or at leaft explains it, g (7. e.) Shal not barely defend | rendred ; and accordingly the Vulgar Latin Syriack and Arabick render 
it from utter ruin, but preſerve it frcm danger, and give great | this word, He hath choſen. The Chaldee renders this and the following 
occaſionfor rejoycipg and thankſgiving. & (7 e.) Zion or Jeruſalem | words He will take Pleaſure in us, [oe as to give us our Inheritance, b 
ſo called, alſo Pal. 48. 1. I/a. 60. 14.7 (4. e, ) Of the Tabernacle, | Kither the Land of Canaan : Or Heaven ; which was typitied by that 
the plural Number for the ſingular, as ?/al. 43. 3, The place where | Land: Or rather, God himſelf who is called his peoples Portion or in- 
Gods holy Tabernacle 1s ſcttled. heyitance, as P ſal, 16. $. and 73. 26. and e:ſewhere, or the Preſence 
5 God js inthe midſtof her ; ſhe ſhal nor be moved: | pad mon, eo huſeor fer apart tor op adoboſen for the ra 
. , 2 : © Genes, ary 5 
F Heb, God ſhal help her, T and that right > wy ly &. ; wherein Jacob gloryed and excclled all other people See Ezek wy 
when the k Heb. as ſoon as the morning appeareth, ( 1, &« ) Speedily, after a 21: Amos 6, 8. and 8. 7, hk Either r. Of the perſon of Tacob "ate. 
Morning ſhort night of affliftion 3 Comp. # ſal. 309, 5+ and ſeafonably, when though he never had the poſic{ſion of the Land of Canaan ot had j 
appegreth, the Danger 1s greateſt, and the Encmics prepzre to make the aſſault; the Lord and his Preſence, and Blefling for his Inheritance. or ra« 
which 1s comonly done in the Morning. : ther, 2. Of the people of Jac1b, or Iſrael, who are frequent-= 
6 The heathen raged /, the kingdoms were moved; 


0 : ly called Jacob, as Nunbers 23, 7, 10, 23, Pſal, 14+. 7. and 
he uttered his voice /, the carth melted . 44. 4+ &c-. for thele did attaally enjoy the promiſed Inheri- 


7 The LORD of hoſts is wich us,the God of Jacob | face of Canaan, and the preſence of God in his SanRuarie. 1 This 
+ Heb. an is | Our refuge. Selah. he adds ; partly as the reaſon why he cheſe ſuch a noble Ioheritance 
high place | To wit, againſt God, and againſt his People. 7 Either he thun- = _— — way Ek, 9x9 I In them more than in other peo- 
for us» dred 3 or he ipake to them in his Wrath, as isſaid Pſal. 2. 5, m "W - am, hvac = os __ to them, as he declareth, Deut. 7. 7, 
| The Inhabitants of the Earth who were combined againſt Zion, were | ;x and. 9, 5» 4nd partly, as an evidence of the excellency 0 


o 
_—W 


HOE" this Inheritance, becauſe it was choſen tor his beloved people. 
diſpirited and conſumed, - ©, - p 5 6 
* P.66-g, 8 * Come, behold the works of the LORD, || what a 'Y Bl —_ > paſo CO a ſhout ; the LORD 24, 25% 
} or, who deſolations he hath made in the earth ». Hs ap on tananen) og | on EO I0Y | 
= wy, ES £9 Among hole Poe or 00s Barth who were neighbour- | wgh.ch went or-was carried up to the Hill of Zion, where the Taberna- 
yon ET EIIng es Cons prays; and thereyorg were cut off by Da* | cle was erected for ic, and afterwards to the Hill of Morjab into the 
925, vid, and their Lands and Cities an great part waſted. | Temple - which Solemnity was — I 
g He maketh wars to ceaſe o unto the end of the : : m_— 


82 i 8 TY Ms > errno 


Pſal. 63» 
4, 250 


I, 


XLVII. 


pets: but Myſtically it reſpe@s Chriſts Aſcenſion ioto Heaven, as may 
be 2athered by comparing this with Eph; 4. 8. where the like words 
uttered concerning the Ark upon the ſame occaſion, Pſal, 68. 18. are 
dire&lic applied to Chriſts Afcenfion. 
6 Sing praiſes n co Gow ſing praiſes : ſing praiſes un- 
our King o, ſing praules. 
” Theſe 9: Fo gan four times in this Verſe, to ſhew how 
vehementlie deficeous the Flaimift was, that God might have his due 
Praiſe and Glory ; and of how great neceſlity and importance it was 


to men to perform this great, though much negle&ed, Duty. o For 
ſo he is in a ſpecial manner, 


7 For God is the King ofall the earth p, ſing ye praiſes 
[0r, e727) || with underſtanding 9. | 
me tha# p Not only ours, as I now ſaid, but alſo of all the N+tions of the 
batb under- worid ; and therefore he may well require, and doth highlie de- 


farding» ſerve all our praiſes, 4 Not rafhly, or formally and carelcfly, but 
or ſins Feriouſly, conſidering the greatneſle of this King whom you praiſe, and 
Maſchil: . 


what abundant cauſe you have to praiſe and admire him, Which 15 an 
Plal. 45+ jntimation that the matter of this Plalm is moreſubltine and important 
' than ordivary, : 

8 God reigneth over the heathen r:; God ſitteth u- 
pon the throne s of his holinels, : 

7 i, e, Over all heathen Nations, as being the King of all the Earth, 
v. 7. Which was not truein Davids time, but Was tulalied by Chriſt, 
s To wit, as Judgeand King, excercifing Dominion, or Keigning, a5, 
he now ſaid; this being only another expreſſion of the ſame thing. 
And this Holy Throne is eithzr, x. The Ark, upon which God was ſaid 
to fi: ro govern the Iſraelites, Or rather, 2. Heaven 3 which is oft 
called Gods Threve, Pſal: 11. 4. ſa, 66, rt, whence God 1s laid to 
behold and to rule all Nations; of which general Dominion of Jod 
he here ſpeaks, And here Chriſt fits at his Fathers Right-hand, tor 
that purpoſe. 


or. the 9 || Fhe princes of the people 7 are gathered toge- 
ng ther, even the people of the God of Abraham « : for 
the Pev- the ſhields of the earth x belong unto God : he is great- 


fe? ly exalted y. 
_w of Either, - Tie heads of the Tribes of 7/rael who were gathered 
unto the 


o he Tabernacle, or Temple upon ſolema Feaſts, Or ra- 
pyleof the _ bs kw { or the voluntary or willing ones, as this word 15s 
wy rendred, Pſal. 110 3.) of the Genztles, whoare here known by the 
—_—_ People. v. 1, 3+ who were divided in their Pripciples, 

and Intereits, ard Religions, but are now united and gathered roges 
ther urt3 Chritt, laying their Scepters at his Feet, and joyntly oiw- 
ningaud promoting his Worſhip and Service; So he ſpeaks of the 
Converſion of the Gentiles ; although he mentions only their Princes, 
becauſe their Converſion might ſeem tohe molt difficult in ſundry 
reſpetts, and therefore that being affirmed, the converſion of their 
people, with or after them, might very reaſonablic be ſuppoſed, u 
So he explains the former Clauſe, and ſhews what peeple he ſpake of; 
and it is obſcrveable, he doth not ſay the People of Abraham left this 
ſhould be appropriated to the Iſraelites ; but the People of the God of A» 
braham; i. e. which Worſhip the God of Abraham, whether they be 
Jews or Gentiles, $0 this is a Prophecie of the Converſion of the 
Gentiles ; which alſo is intimated by the Name here uſed, which is 
not his Old and firſt Name, Abram, but his new Name, Abraham, 
given to him to ſignifie, that he ſhould be the : ather of many Nat.ons, 
Gene 17+ $+ Or thele words with the former ma; be, and are by di- 
vers learned Interpreters rendred thus : The Princ-sof the People. i. e. 
Of the Gentiles ) are (4. e, Shal be, as is uſual in Prophetick ſtyle ) ga- 
thered unto ( which Particle is ſometimes underſtuod, as P/al. 5. 8. 
Jer. 26. 10, Hoſea 2. 14, ) the people of the God of thraham, i, e, Un- 
to the Jews, and ſo both Jews and Gent les (hal be united in one Re- 
ligion 3 and ſo God (bal reign over the Heathen and be King of all the 
Earth, as ishere (aid v. 7, 8. and all peopleſhalclap their hands for joy, 
asitis v. 1, % Either I. The protettion of the people of allthe 
Earth. Or rather 2. Their Princes or Rulers, who are fitly call: d 
Shields, Boſea 4. 13, becauſe by their Offi-e they are or ſhould be the 
common Pareots and Protettors of all their people, to defend them 
from all Oppreſſions and Injuries. Theſe, ſaith he, are the Lords, 3. e. 
At his diſpoſal, or ſubje& tohis dominion, beth as to their Hearts and 
Kingdoms, And ſothis is convenientlic added, as the Reaſon of thar 
great and improbable Event, forctold inthe foregoing words, that the 
Princes of the People C which ofall others were moſt lofty and wil. 
ful, andincorrigible. _) ſhould joyn and ſubjc& themſelves to the Lord, 
and to his Church. » By this means God ſha] be greatlic Glorified, 
and appear to be far above all the Princes of the World, and above ali 


her Gods. 
NAY PSAL XLVIIL 
The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm was Compoſed upon the Occafion of ſome eminent De- 

liverance vouchſaved by God to the City of Jeruſalem, from 

ſome potent Enemy, and dreadful Danger ;' either that in Fehoſa- 

phats time, 2 Chron. 20. or that under Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18. and 19. 

In both which times there were Holy Prophets, by ſome of whom this 
Pſalm might be made. 


A fong andpſalm 4 || fer the ſons of Korahs« 
a Of which ſee on Pſal. 30+ which hath the ſame Title, 

The Prophet deſeribeth the glory and excellency of the Church, x ; 
preſerved from her potent Enemies, 4--»-8, For which Gd is glorified, 
9, 10. and the faithful invited to take notice of its beanty and firmneſs, 
to tranſmit it to following generations, 11-=--13, 


Reat is the LORD, and greatly to be praiſed 
| in the city of our Cod b, ;jz the mountain of 
hisholineſs c. ; 

b In Jeruſalem, which he hoth choſen for his dwelling place. c }. e: 
In is holie Mountain either Zjon where the ark and Tabertacle was? 
Orrather Moriah; where the Temple now was. Although both of 
them are ſuppoſed by ſome to be but one Mountain, having two tops 


and it is cetcain that both are frequentlie called by one Name, to wit » 


2 * Beautiful fog ſituation, the joy of the whole 


[7, of 


"; 50, 2, 


PSALMS. 


FA ſh-uts and acclimations of the People, and with the found of Irum- 


Pial. Xi VIM 
Dzr, 8. g 
& 11. 14% 
*Mat. $i 
33s q 


earth d is mount Zion, e the ſides of the north e, 
city of the great king f, | 

d Jeruſalem may be ſo called here, as it is alſo Lament, 2; x6. not 
aQtually, as if all people did rejoyce init, or forit 5 but Fundament» 
ally or Caufally, becauſe here was verie great cauſe or ground of re- 
Joycing for the Gentile World, if they had underſtood themſelves, cr 
their true Intereſt ; becauſe here God was gracionfly preſent and rea- 
dic to hear and anſwer the juſt Deſires and Prayers, not only of the 
Iſr aelites, but of any ſtranger of what Nation ſoever, according to So. 
tomons Prayer, 1 Kings 8. 41. &c. and here the Gentiles might find 
That God, whom like blind Men they gropped for, as the Greek 
Phraſe implies, 4&s 19, 29. and here they might he informed of the 
Nature and Properties, as alſo of the Mind and Will of the Almighty 
and Everlaſting God, of which they were fo groſly ignorant, and of 
that Mefſias. who was the deſire of \ and conſequently matter of ;reat 
Joy unto ) all Nations, Hazg. 2. 7 &nd 7, Frophetically, becauſe 
the joyful Dofrine of the Goſpel was to go from thence unto all Na» 
tions: of which ſee !ſa, 2, 2, 3. Mich 4. 8. 2. Yet theſe words 
may be and are by athcrs rendred and underſtood thus the }oy of the 
or th's ( for here is an Emphatical Article ) whole Land. e 3. e.- 
Which 15 on the Northern part of Jeruſalem But becauſe Joſephus.and 
ſome others affirm, that Mount Zjox ſtood Southward from jeruſalerr, 
this Clauſe. poſſibly may be added to fignifie that Zion is not here to 
be underſtocd itridtly and properly for that Mountain, or part «f the 
Mountain fo called, tut for that other Mountain, or part of the ſame 
Mountain upon which the Temple was built, which was ſtriQly cal- 
led Moriah, but is herecalled Zjon, becauſe that Name was far better 
known in Scripture, as being oft put for the Temple, as ſal. 137. 
3» lſaiah 18..7, feremiah g1, xo, Lamen'atins 5. 18. and for the 
whole Citie, and for the Church of Gd, in a multitude of places of 
Scripture» f 7, e- The Citie of God, asit was now called, v. 1. who 


juſtly calls himſelf 2 grea# King, Mal. x. 14. asbeing King of Kings, and 
Lord of Lords. Rew. 19, 16, 


3 God is known g in her palaces þ for a refuge 5. 

g To his peopte by ſenfible and long Experience, ard to all nei; he 
bouring Natio-s, by their own obſervation» h 4. e. In the Habita. 
tions, or to the inhabitant s of that Citie, Pofliblic he may here point 
at the Kings Palace and the Temple, which was the Palace of the 
King of Heaven 3 which two Palaces God did in a ſ1vgular manner 
protett, and by proteRing them, he proteed the whole Citie and 
People. i Under whoſe ſhaddow we art more ſafe and lecure, than 


other Gitics are with their great Rivers and impregnable portificati- 
OBS, 


4 For lo, the kings 3 were aſſembled, they paſſed 
by k together, 

z Either thoſe Rings Confederate againſt Jehohaphat, 2 Chron. 20, 
or the Aſjrian Princesz whom they vain-gloriouſly c-lled Kings, Iſa» 
10, 8. k In their march towards Jeruſalem. Or. they paſied away, 
z. e. Departed without the Succeſ:which they defired and confidently 
expetted, 

5 They ſaw t I, and ſo they marvelled 
were troubled and haſted away ». 


I They did onely look upon it, but nof come into it, nor ſhoot an Ar- 
row there..---nor caſt a Bank againſt it, as is ſaid upon this.or the like oc» 
cafion, 2 Kings 19. 322, m Not ſo much at the ſtruture or ſtrength 


of the Citie, as at the wonderful Works wrought by God on their 
behalf. n See 2 Kings 19+ 35, 


; they 


6 Fear took hold upon them there, azd pain 0, as 
of a woman in travail. 


o Partlie, at the Tidings of T;rhabahs coming againſt them. 2 
Kings 19. 9. and partlte tor that tercibie ſlughtec of their &rmy, 
there V. 35, : 

7 Thou breakeſt the ſhips of Tarſhiſh with an eaſt 
wind p. 

/ Þ This is not reported as a matter of Fa, for we 
in thoſe Expeditions to which this Pſalm relates, nor did any Ships 
come near Jeruſalem, becauſethat was at a great diſtance from the 
Sea, and from any Navigable River running into the Sea; but only 

added by way of illuſtration, or alluſion, The Senſe is, Thou didit 

ao leſs violentlie and ſuddenlie deftroy theſe proud and raging Ene« 

mies of Feruſalem, than ſometimes thou deſtroyeſt the Ships at Sea 

with a fierce and vehement Wind, ſuch as the Eaſtern Winds were 

in thoſe parts, £x97, 14. 21 Job 27, 21, Jer 18, 19. Ezek., 27. 36. 
The Words are and may be rendred, thus : Thou didft break them as 

C ſuch Ellipfis of the Pronoun, and of the nut: of timilitude beins 

very frequent 3 as | haveagain and again ſhewed _) the Ships of ths 

Sea ( tor Ta'(hi/h, though properly the Name of a Maritime place in 

Cilicia, Exek, 27. 25. Jonafn, 3. is uſually put for the Sea, as x 

Kings 10, 22, 2Chron. g.21 Pjal.92. 10.1ſa. 2+ 16. Jer, 10.9. arebro-. 
Ken with an Faſt wind, +ibeit the Encmics of Jeruſalem, which are 

:ompared to the raging Waters of the Sa, in tal. 46. 2, 3, may 
as fitly be compared to Ships upon the Sea. 


8 As we have heard, ſo hav 
of the LO R D of hoſts, 


read of no Ships 


> have we ſeen qin the city 
inthe city of our God: God 


will eſtabliſhit for ever r. Selah. 
q The preditions ofthe Prophets, either 2 Chron. 20. 14. or 2 
King: '9. 20, &c, have bcen verined by the Events. Or we have 


had lat- and freſh exp-rieices of ſuch wonderful works of God 25 
before we only heard of by the Report of our Fathers. r From this 
miraculous deliverance we plainly fce that God hath a ſingular love 
to it, an: care of It, and therefore will defend her i" all ſucceeding 
\ges againft all her Enemies. And fo God would have done. if 7e. 


ruſalem had not for;akea God, and forfeited his favour and protetio 
ON. 


9 We hwethought of s thy loving kindneſs, © God, 
in the midſt of thy temple. 


s TIthath veen the matter of our ſerious and deep Meditation, 
when we have been Worſhipping there in thy Temvle. tor when 
the Prieſts were offering Incenſe or Sacrifice, the Religious People 
excerciſed themſelves in holy Meditation, or ſecret Prayee to God, 
23 may be gathered from Luke 1. 1c; and many other Places of 


| Scripture, and from the Nature of the things 


Or, We have folently 


43 a or 


-v0) XLIX. P S £ 
HER patiently waited for, as ſome Antient and other Interpreters render 


D 10 According to thy name, O God, fo is thy 


L M 5s. Plal XLIX F- 
rine or Sentence, ſee Numb, 23, 7. and 24. 2, 15; Pſal. 78, 2: 
comp, With Mat. 13: 35. @ te. I will not ſmother it in my own 
Breaſt, but publiſh it to the World, f So he juſtly calls the fol» 
lowing Diſcourſe, becauſe the thing in queſtion is and eyer hath been 


! 


| 


| 
| 
| 


| 


+ Heb. ſet 
your heart 


| ups 


 *Pſ.78. 2. 


raiſe t unto the ends of the earth : thy right 


is full of righteouſneſs «. | 

— this 20d 4. like glorious Aions, thou art praiſed and 
acknowledged, and evidently proved to be fuch an one as thou haſt 
affirmed thy ſelf to be in thy Word, God Almighty or All-ſufcient, the 
Lord of Roſfts, the King of thy Church and People,and a ſftrang T)wer t: all 
that tra# in thee, and all other things which thou/art calledinScrip- 
ture» Thy Name isnot an empty Title, but is filled up with honour- 
able and praiſe worthy Works anſwerable co it! # 7+ e. Of righteous 
ARions; by which thou diſcovereſt thy Juſtice and Holineſs in de- 
firoying the Wicked, and incorrigible Enemies of thy People, and in 
fulfilling thy promiſes made to thy Church. 


xi Let mount x Zion rejoyce, 


udah ' y be glad, becauſe of thy j1 
j x —# Ard /narr put for Jeruſalem, y 7. e. The other and leſſer 
Cities, and Towns or Villages ie. all the People) of Judah : for 
ſuch are commonly called Daughters in reſpe& of the Mother Citie,to 
which they are Subje&ts: See Fol. 15. 45. and 17. 16. Plal. 45. 12: 
and 137. 8,' He mentions 7ulah only, and not all Iſrael ; partly be 
cauſe they were more immediatly and eminent)y concerned in Jeruſa- 
lems deliverance ; and principally b:cauſe ten of the Tribes ot !ſrael 
were now cut off from fer»ſalem, and from the Kingdom of Davids 
Bouſe, and poffivly carried away captive, 2 Kngs 18. 9, 10, IeN 
Upen thine and their Enemies. At which they were glad not ſimply, 
| but becauſe it was highly conducible to Gods Honour, and to the pre- 
ſervation and enlargement of Gods Church in the World. 


12 Walk about Zion, and go round about her 2: 


tell the towers thereof b. ; Eg: 
« He ſpeaketh, either, 1; To the Enemies, as triumphing over 
them. Or rather 2. Tothe People of that Citic and Kingdom, who 
had been Eyc-Witneſſes of this glorious work of God, as appears 
from the following Verſes. b He bids them mark well her Towers, 
Bulwarks and Palaces. here andv. 13. notwith vain oftentation, or 
carnal confidence, for he had ſaid that God only was their Refuge, Ve 
3- but with thankfulneſs to God, when theyſhould find upon enquiry, 
that not one of them was demoliſhed, or any way defaced by fo 
potent an Enemy. 
12 + Mark ye well her bulwarks, [| conſider c her 


palaces 3 that ye may tell it to the generation follow- 


to her Bul- ing d 
Wars. © Or Exalt or admire. & That they may be excited to continue 


j| Or, "iſe their Praiſcs to God for this Mercy, by which they hold and enjoy 
all their Bleſſiags, and to truſt in God in the like difficulties for the 
future. | 

14 For this God e js our God for ever and ever ; he 


will be our guide ever unto death f. 
e Who hath done this great Work. f #, e. Whilſt we have a Be- 
ins. Birth and Life, and the ſeveral Ages ofLife and Death, areoft 
' aſcribed te Churches and Common-wealths, both in Scripture and 
other Authors, This Promiſe was made to the Old and Earthly Jeru- 
ſalem, upon condition of their Obedience, wherein they failing ſo groſ- 
ly, loſt the benefit of it, but it is abſolutely made good te the New 
and Heaycnly jeraſalem, the Church of Chriſt. 


P S'A TL. XIDL 


The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm is penned upon the ſame occaſion with Pſal. 39. and 

93. to wit, upon the Contemplation of the affliftions of 

Gods people, and of the proſperity and glory of ungodly men, The 
defign is to juſtifie Gods Providence in this dark Diſpenſation, and 
to ſhewthat all things being confidered, good men have no cauſe 
for immoderate dejcQion of Spirit, nor wicked men for glorying 1n 
their preſent Felicities, 
To the chief muſician ; « Pſalm || for the ſonsof Ko- 


rah. 
The Pſalmift baving ſtirred up all Men to attention, 1 s. ſheweth 
their vain truſt in Kiches, 6 —— 14+ and the contrary truſt of the faith- 
ſul in God, 15. BExhorteth them not to fear the proſperity of the wic- 
hed, for it cannot deliver him from the Grave, 15 ——=20, 
Ear this, all ze people a, give car all ze inhabitants 

of rhe world. 


2 Both * low and high, rich and poor together. 
a Heb All People; Jewsor Gentiles: For ali a-e concerned in this 
matter, as being apt to ſtumble avd mu-mer at it. 


2 My mouth ſhal ſpeak of wiſdom, and the medita- 


tion of my heart ſba/ be of undeeſianding 6. 

b It concerns youdiligently ro attend to me, tor I am about to 
ſpeak not uf vulgar and trivial things, or ſuch as come ſuddenly into 
my Mind, and ruſh as haſtily out of my Mouth, but of ſuch things 
as arc the reſult of my moſt ſerious and conſiderate thoughts, and 
ſuch as, if you obſerve them and lay them to Heart, will make. you 
truly wiſe, ard keep you from thoſe Errors and Follies and Miſchiefs, 
which the generality of Mankind for want of a right underſtanding 
dorun into. | 


4 * I will incline mine ear c to a parable 4 ; I will 


let the daunters of 
judgments 3, 


j Or, of 


* P\ 62.99 


Mat, 13,2 


thought difficult, and hard to be underſtood. 


when the iniquity of my heels ; ſhall * compaſs me a- 
bout ? 


would incline his Ear, v. 4. 7. 8. Learn and praiſe what he was teach- 
ing others; but his meaning is more genera!, that there isno ſuffici. 
ent cauſe, why he or any good man ſhould fear. 
derſtood of exceſſive or immoderate and 
dejetion or deſpondency, or diſtruſt of Gods Providence a 
neſs, or diſcontent with his Condition. 
not to fear, Gen. 50. I9. Mats 28. 5, comp. with Mark 16, 6. Thus 
Gen. 45. 5. Be not grieved, to wit, inordinately : for ot 
ought, and he would have had them to grieve for thei 
lead a man into temptation, Mat. 6. 13+ is #0 ſuffer him to be evercome 
by it. by comparing 1 Cor. 106. 13. And the objeQ or cauſe of this 
forbidden Fear is double, the one. the atflitions of 
following 3 the other the proſperity of the ungodly 
v. 16. and of which he begins to treat in the very next Verſc, and 
continues the Diſcourſe of it to the end of the Pſa 
Of fin: wheniniquitie of ail ſorts abounds ; whi 


5 Wherefore ſhould I feary in the days of evil , 
g *Hol.73 2, ah 
. n 


g He ſpeaks in his own perfon, becauſe he had now ſaid that he 


Which is to be un- 
prevailing Fear, caufing 

; nd Good- 
In which Senſe men are bid 


therwiſe they 
r ſin. Thus 9 


+ Net 
Genera 
al 6G 
tatian, 


good men, here 
z aS1t is declared 
In, + Either, 1, 
ch 1s many ways 
_ Or 2, Of miſery; in 
either publick or private, 
he ſpeaks in all the reſt of 


grievous and vexatious to every good man. 
times of great Diſtreſs and Calamity, 
Rn _ flouriſh, ( of which 
the Pſalm ) and good men are oppreſſed and perſecuted./j 
he underſtands either, 1, Hisaffi:Rions : which he might = Frve- 
the puniſhment of his ſioful a&ions : for iniquity is commonly put 
for the puniſhment of it, and che Heels are put for a Mans Foet-ſteps 
and Metaphorically, for ones wayes or aQions, as Pſal. 56. 6. and 
89* 51. Or 2. The imgquity, 4, e, The violent and injurious deſigns 
and praQtices of his ungodly and malicious Enemies, who as he here 
ſaith, did compaſs him about. Whereby he notes their proſperous ſuc 
ceſs againſt him, and his being indangered and vexed by them, as 
this Phraſe implies, Job £6, 13. Pſal. 19. 9, 11. and 24. 12, and 
140. 9. Habak, 1.4. 2nd withal their intention and eadeavour to 
vex ang perſecute and deſtroy him, as this Phraſe is uſed, Pſal. 17. 
9. and 22, 12, 16, and it many other places. This Senſe is favour- 
cd both by the Syriick and Arabich Interpreters : whereof the former 
renders the words. thus, the iniquity of mine Enem; 


| es hath compaſſed me 
and the latter thus, hen mine Enemies (hal compaſs me oh And 


by the main fcope of the Pſalm which is to comfort himſelf and other 
good men, againſt that great ſcandal ofthe proſperity of the Wicked 

and the oppreſfions and miſcries of the Righteous, But all the diffi. 
culty is, wby or how he calls this, the iniquity of his Heels, For the 
clearing whereof, it is humbly propoſed to Conſideration, that this 
Genitive Caſe, of my Heels, ſeems to note not the efficient or meritoci= 
ous cauſe of this iniquity, or puniſhment of it, but the Obje& about 
which this iniquity is exerciſed ; as Nouns in the Genitive Caſe are 
frequently takeo, Thus the ſpoil of the Poor, iſaiah 3. 14. is not that 
ſpot! which was made by them, but upon them : and the violence of che 
Children of Judah, as it is in the Rebrew Text; Joel 3« 9. is that 
which was done againſt them, as we truly —_— if, Sce alſo 
Dan. 4. 27. Matthew to. 1. Ads 4. 5, In likemanner here, the inj- 
quity of my Heels, is the iniquity wherewith they compaſs and ſeckto 
trip up my Heels ; for we ſhal find David oft ſpeaking of the mali- 
cious praftices of his Enemies, with :cſpe&t to his Heels or Feet 
or Steps So he tells us they pierced his Hands and Feet Pſal, 22 

16. they compaſſed and marked and prepared « Net for his Steps, 
P/al,17. 11. and 56. 6. and 57. 6.as Jeremy alſo complains of his E- 
nemies, that they hid Snares for his Feet. ch. 18, 22, And therefore 
it is nor ſtrange that the iniquitie of his Enemies js here noted to 
be exercited about his Heels or Footfleps, as this word ſtenifies, cither 
becauſe they did malignantly obſerve all his ſteps or ways that they 
might find occaſion to load him with reproaches in order to his Ruinz 
or becauic they purpoſed to trip up his Heels, or to overthrow his goings 
as he complains Pjal 140- 4» Beſides the words may be rendred the 
mniquity of my Supplanzers ; for the Hebrew word rendred Heels, may be 
and 15 by ſome icarned Interpreters, taken for a Particle of that Verb 
which {5gnifies to ſupplant or trip up T 


the Heels or circumvent, from 
whence Jacob had his Name. And this CharaQter fitly agrees to Davids 


Enemies, who were not only moſt malicious, but alſo very deceitful 
and treacherous, as he every where complains, | 


6 They that * truſt in their wealth &, and boaſt them- *ſob: r: 
ſelves in the multirude of their riches, EO 

k As that which can and will ſecure them, from Gods Jadg- Pl. 52-'% 
ments and from the Calamities of humane Life» The Pſalmift hay- Mark 19 
ing ſaid that he and other good men, had no ſufficient cauſe of Fear, 24+ 
from their preſent ſufferings from ungodly men, now he proceeds 1 T' 6, 
on the contrary to ſhew, that his unzodly Enemies had no reaſon to 17» 


be ſecure and confident, becaufe of their preſent Riches and proſ- 
perous ſucceſs : 


7 None of them can by any means redeem 1 his bro- 
ther »2, nor give to God » a ranſom for him. 


{ To wit, from Death, as appears from v. 9, 10, &c. neither 
from the firft Death, nor from the ſecond, which he points at ver: 
14. 19 m Whom he would do his utmoſt to preſerve in Life : 
and conſequently not himſelf. But he ſeems to mention' his Brother 


open e my dark ſaying f upon the harp, 
c This is a nother Argument to perſwade them to hearken to him : 
I will hearken what God by his Spirit ſpeaks to me, and that and no- 


3S+ 


thing elſe will I now ſpeak to you: and therefore it is well worth 


your hearing. I alſo fhal joyn with you ln attending to it, that 
whilſt 1 teach you, I my ſelf may learn the ſame Lefſon. For as 


Miniſters now teach themſelves whilſt they teach others, ſo the Ho- | 


ly Prophets did oft times ſearch into, and ſtudy to find out the 
meaving of their own Prophecies, as appears plainly from 1 Pet. 1, 
1O, 1, The thralc is thought to be taken from the Muſicians, who 
lay their Ear cloſe to the Inſtrument when they tune it, and by 


their Ear try how the Voice ard Inſtrument agree. d Which proper- 
ly is a Figurative ard Allegorical Speech, but is oft more largely tas 
ken for apy excellent and importapt,are wi.haldarkor difficult Do&- 


rather than himſelf, becauſe when his Brother is ſick, he being 10 
| Health hath the full command and free uſe of all his Wealth,and 
| Strength, and Wit, and all other mcans of redeeming his Brother 5 

which he hath not, when he himſelf is dangerouſly or deſperately 


ſick. n The only Lordof Life, and the Judge who hath paſſed 
upon him the Sentence of Death, 


8 ( For * the redemption of the ſoul o is precious p, * 
and it ceaſeth forever g. ) . 
0 7, &. Of their Life, as Soul is commoly uſed, p ( #, e. _) Rates 
as the word is uſed, 1 Sayuel 3, r. Daniel -2, 14. haid to be 
obtaired, But Le doth not cail it fin ply impoſſible, becauſe Chrift 
hath pu:chaſcd £t:i: priyileCge for his true Dilciples, that in ſome _ 

” SIKe 1h ASD D they 


Job 38, 
8, 19. 


| 


K 


3b; I 


o 1 
62.10% 
rk 10, 


Tim, 6, 


\ 


Job 36, 
8, 19. 


Mi. X00x% 


campliſh:d, to wit, by any meer man, for himlelt or for his Bro- 
ther- Ss 
11.89.43, 9 That he ſbould ſtill live for ever,ond * not ſee cor- 
; raption r. : 
; Or zhePit, orthe Grave, i. e. Not dye, as that Phraſe is oft u- 
ſed, as hath been noted before. ; : ; | 
ed, 22 10 For he ſeeth 5 that * wiſe men die, likewiſe the 
th fool and the brutiſh perſon periſh z, and leave their 
wealth to: others «, | =: 
s An imperſonal expreffion: Every man ſees and knows it 3 it 15 
viſible and evident, both from Reaſon and from univerſal Expe- 
rience. # All men die without any difference between wiſe and 
fools, good and bad. uv He ſaith not, to Sonsor Kindred 3 but in- 
definitely, to others, becauſe he is wholly uncertain to whom he 
ſhall-leave them, tro Friends, or Strangers, or Enemies 3 which he 
meations as a great Vanity in Riches, They neither can ſave them 
from Death,nor will accompany him in and after Death, and 


after his Death will be diſpoſed, he knows not how nor to whom, f 


11 Their inward thought 5s x, that their houſes y 
+ cbs 9 ſha continue for ever 2, and their dwelling places t 


6mrrari' 'oQ all generations ; they call rbeir lands after their own 
a6 names 4 | 


_ x [ſhough they are aſhamed to expreſs it, yet it is their ſecret 0- 
pinion and hope, and wiſh, y Either, 1. Their poſterity, oft cal- 
led mens Houſes, as 2 Sam. 7. 11, &c, Pſal. 113. g. and 115. 
x2. Or 2, Their Manfion*»Houſes, as it is explained in the next 
/ Clauſe, which alſo ſerve tor this purpoſe, to preſerve a mans name for 
* eyer. 7 Not tathemin their own perſons. but to them apd theirs 
in ſuccceding Generations, as it follows, a Fondly dreaming by this 
means to immortalize their Names and Memories, 


9182.7. 12 Nevertheleſs + * man being in honour c abideth 


not 4: he is like the beaſts that periſh e, | 
b Notwithſtanding all thele fine fancies and devices, c Living in 
: all the ſplendour and glory above mentioned- d The Hebrew word 
properly ſignifies to loage for a Night, as Gen. 32: 21. Judges 19. 
40. and thence to abide for a lang or conſiderable time, as ?ſal, 25, 13. 
and 55, 7. Prov. I5- Zts All his Dreams of perpetuating his Name 
and iitate. ſhal vaniſh ad be confuted by Experience, e (4, e. 
That are utterly loft and extin, So he is in reference to all his 
Wealth and Honour. of which he here ſpeaks, 
13 This their way f 45 their folly g ; yet their poſte- 
4% de. rity {| Approve their ſayings b. Selah. 
Jed, f i, e. Their Counſel and Contrivance to immortalize themſelyes- 
lg? - £ Though to themſelves and ſome others it ſcem to be wiſdom, yet 
_ in truth it is apparent folly and madnieſs. For they neither obtain 
_ that immortal Name which they ſeek and hope for : Nor if they do 
doth it yield them any comfort or benefit; h Heb therr Mouth, 
C i. e._) their Counſels and Suggeſtions which they gave them 
concerning theſe matters. The Moth is oft put for the words which 
come out of it, as Numb, 35- 30+ Job. 7, 11, 


ab.Bell, 14 Like ſheep i they arelaid in f the grave&; death 
0. 7. ſhal feed on them I, and the * upright m: ſhal have domi- 


w. nion over them in the morning =, and their || beauty o 
Ag ſha) conſume p || in the grave, from their dwelling g. 


i Whcch for a ſcaſon are ted inlarge and ſweet Paſtures, but at 
P -6 2. the Owners pleaſure are put together in cloſe and comfortleſs Folds, 
_ "6 and ledaway to the Slaughters, not knowing nof conſidering whi- 
pay ther they are going, & Or in Hel/+ For the Hebrew word ſignifies 
& 19. 4. both- 1 The firſt Death ſhai conſume their Bodies in the Grave, 
and the ſecond Death ſhal devour their Souls, m Good men whom 
here they opprefled and abuſed at their pleaſure, n Either 1. Sud- 
denly, or within a very little time, as thi: Phraſe is oft uſed, as Pſal. 
non ba» 30» 5+ and 4% S+» and 101. 8. and 143, 8. &c. Or 2. In theday 
lin to of general Judgment, and the ReſurreQion of the Dead, For Death 
ery ne of being called the night, John 9, 4+ and ſleep in many places, that day 
them is fitly compared to the morning, when men awake out of ſleep, and 

p center upon that everlaſting day, But whether this or the tormer be 
the true meaning of the Phraſe, it is ſufficiently evident the thing 
here ſpoken of is not done in this Life, but in the next , For 1- 
This propoſition and priviledge being general, and comm..n to all 
upright perſons is not verified here, it being the lot of many good 
men to be opprefled and killed by the wicked, as is manifeſt both 
from Scripture, as Pſal, 44. 22. Eccleſ, 8. 14, and 9, 2. and from 
the Experience of all ages of the Church. 25 This dominion of the 
juft over the wicked happens after the wicked are lid in their Grave, 
as is here expreſſed, and conſequently ſuppoſeth their future Life 
and Reſurreftion : For when one perſon rules over anuther, both are 
ſuppoſed to exiſt or have a beeing, Nor is their any Argument a- 
gainſt this Senſe, but from a vain aud abſurd conceit which ſome 
men have entertained, that the Saints in the Oid Tcitanrient had no 
firm belief nor expeRation of the recompences of tke Life to come. 
Which is azainſt evident Reaſon;&againſt many clear places of theOld 
Teſtament,that cannot without force be wreſted to any other Senſe ; 
&againſt the expreſs teſtimony of theNewTeſtament concerging them, 
Heb. x1,&in many other places. 0 Or their, Form or Figure, or Image, 
all which come to one, and ſeems to intimate chat all tneir Glory and 
Felicity which they had in this Life, was rather imaginary than real, 
and indeed but a ſhadow, as it is called Eccleſ. 6, 12, and 8, 13s Þ 
Heb. 7s to conſume, or to be conſumed, i. e. ſhal be conſumed : the in- 
finitive Verb being here put for the Future, as it is Pſal. 32. 8 Zeb, 
3. 4- and12. (0. 9q 4. e They ſhal be hurried from their large 
and ſtately and pleaſant Manſions, into a cloſe and dark Grave. But 


b] 
$ ength. 
j0r, the 
Grace be* 


thoſe words are by divers Interpreters readred other viſe, and that | 


peradventure more truly and fitly, to this purpoſe, word for word, 
the Grave ( or rather Hell, as betore, and as this word Sheol is con- 
feſſedly oft uſed in the Old Teftament, but no where more conve- 
niently than here ) ſhal be a dwelling or for « dwelling nnto him, or 
them, or every one of them. _ Which in the Prophets phraſe is called 
welling with everlaſting burnings, Iſa. 33» 14. and in the Phraſe of 
the New Teſtament, to 52 caft info and abide in the [abs of Fre and 
b1,m{1ene, Reve 204 Ip 3 


PS £0 N47 


they ſhul not ſee Dzath, John 9; gt, q i. &. It is never to be ac- | 


2 Pal. 


15 But God will redeem r my ſoul s + from the Heb. fred 
the hand of 
the Grave 
|| Or, Hell 


power of the [|grave t ; for he ſhal receive me # Selah. 
'7 Though no man can find out a Ranſome to redeem himſelf or 
tus Brother, yet God can and will redeem me. s Either properly: 
Or my ſelf or Life; for all comes to one. # Or of Hell : for he ſpeaks 
of that Sheol.in which the wicked are left; The Grave ſhal not have 
power to retain me, but ſhal be forced to give me up into my ka» 
thers hands ; and Hell ſhal have no power to ſeize upon me. # 
Or take me, out of this vain, mortal and miſerable Life, unto -him- 
ſelf, or into Heaven, as this Phraſe is uſcd, Gen, So 24. Fſal. 73: 
24+ Aﬀs 7, 59. | 
16 Be not thou afraid x when one ismade rich, when 
the glory of his houſe is increaſed ; 
_ # 2. e. Diſcouraged or dejetted. The proſperity of the Sinners 
1s oft matter of fear and dread to good men ; partly, becauſe it en- 
ables them to do more miſchief : and partly, becauſe it ſhakes their 
Faith in Gods Providence and Promiſes, and is apt to engender ſuſ- 
Pictons 1n Mens minds, as if God did not regard the aGtions and af- 
airs of men, and made no difference between the good and the bad; 
and conſequently all Religion were vain and unprofitable, See Pſal. 
73. I2, 13. 


[7 * For when he dieth, he ſhall carry nothing a- 
way 7 : his glory ſhal not deſcend after him. | 

» For as he will ſhortly die, ſo all his Wealth and Power, and 
Glory will die with him, and thou wiltſt have no cauſe cit2er to en» 
vy or fear him. | 
13 Though + whiles he lived,he bleſfsed his ſoul z'and 
men will praiſe thee a, when thou do't well to thy {elf 5. 

7 1. e» He applauded himſclf as a wiſe and happy Man, comp: 
Lub? 12. 19+ a Andas hepleaſe:h and fluitereti himſelf, fo he 
mects with Paraſites that applaud and flatter him for their own 
advantage. For he ſtill ſpeaks of the ſare man, as is manifeſt from 
the foregoing and following wards, though there be a ſudden ch.nge 
of the third into the ſecond Perſon ; which is moſt frequent in theſe 
Books, b When thou doft indulge & pleaſe thy ſelf. and advance 
thy awn Wordly Intereſt, For the N:me of good in Scripture is oft 
aſcribed unto the pleaſures and profits of this Life, as Job 21. 14, 
Pſalm 4. 6. Eccleſ. 2. 24. and 4, 8. and 11. 9. 


19 | He ſhal go c to the generation of hisfathers d; 
chey ſhal never ſee « light f. 


19, 


repeated Changes are frequent in this Book. d 7. e. To the Grave 8% 
and Hell, where he ſhal mect with his wicked Parents, who by their 
Counſel and Example, lcd him into his evil Courſes 3 as the Godly 
alſo are ſaid to be gathered to their Fathers, Gen, 15. 1g, Dent. 32. 
50. Judg. 2.10. e 1; e. Never enjoy, as ſeeing is oft taken, f Nei- 
ther the Light of the Living, as it is called Job 33, 3o. Pſal. 56, 13+ 
or of this Life, to which they ſhal never recurn - Nor of the next 


Life, to which they ſha]l never be admitted, but they ſhal b: caſt in» 
to utter darkneſs, Mat, 8, 12. 


is * like the beaſts thae periſh 4. 

2 4. e. Hath not true wiſdom, to know and conſider what he is, 
and what his true buſineſs and intereſt in this World is, and what uſe 
he ſhould make of his Life, and of all his Riches and Honour, and 
Power, and whether he is going, and what courſe to take for the 
attainment of true and laſting Happineſs, þ Though he hath the out- 
ward ſhape of a Man, yet in truth he is a Beaſt, or a brutiſh, ſtupid, 


and unrc-aſonable Creature, and he ſhal perifh like a brute Beaſt made 
to be deſtroyed, 3 Peter 2, 12, 


LESAL' I 
The ARGUMENT. 
ke deſign of this Pſalm is partly to reprove and proteſt a- 


gzinſt the common Miicarriages of many Profefſors of Religion, 
who ſatisfied their own Conſciences, and fancied that they picaſed 


God with their External and Ceremonial Performance, notwitt« 
ſtanding their groſs negle of thoſe more neceſſary and Fandamen- 
tai Duties of Piety, Ce, and Charity : Partly to infirut Men 
concerning the Nature of the true and acceptable Worſhip of God ; 
and partly ts prepare the Iſraelites for, and tacitly warn them of, 
that Change which would be made in the outward form and way of 
Gods Wo: ſhip, unfer and by the Mefſias, aid of the abolition of the 
Legal Sacrifices, which God did not appoint for his own necd,nor fos 
his Peoples perpetual uſe. 


A pſalm |] of Aſaph 2. 
a Who was not only the chjet of the ſacred Singers, 1 Chron, x5, and 
16. and 25, 2, but alſo a Frophet, x Chronicles 25. 1. and 
a Compoſer of ſome Pſalms,as it is apparent from 2 Chron. 29.30. 
and therefore,as is moſt probable,of thoſe that go under his Name. 
God cometh with great Majeſty info his Church, . 1 4+ and gathere 
eth together his Saints, 5, 6. Teftifeth ve has no pleaſure in Ceremonies, 
7-----I3. but in Gincerity of Obedience, 14:---15, Threatneth the wicked 


for conzemning his Word, 16----2 2. and (heweth who it 15 that glorifieth 
him, 23. 


$ Kays | mighty God, even the LORD hath ſpoken, 


unto the going down thereof 5. +: aa_ 
b ts, e. All the Inhabitants of the Earth, from one end to theo. #Heb-. 
ther. Whom he here ſummons to be Witneſſes of his proceedingsin of Gods. 
this ſolemn Judgment, between him and his people, which is here So Gr, 
| pottically repreſented. For here is a Tribunal erefted, the Judge 
coming to it, the Witneſſes and Delinquents tummoned, and at laft 
the Sentence given, and Cauſe determined. | 
2 Out of Zion © the perfeQion' of beauty 4, God 
hath fhined e. | | 
c The place where he was ſuppoſed to reſide, and where he would 
now fit in judgment. Or from whence he would come to a more putb= 
lick & confpicuous place, where all the world might ſee and here the 
Tranſattions. 4 The moſt bea:tiful&amiahle place of the wholeWorld, 
becauſe of the Preſence & Wor ſhip,&Blefſiog ofGod, which was there 


and there only» e 7. e, Hath appeared or manifeſted himſclf.in a glo- 
rious manner as Judges do when they came to the Judgment-ſeat; 
$ 


4 3 3 Oar 


* Job 29, 


+ Heb. in | 
his Life, 


f Heb. the | 
c Now he returns again to the third Perſon, Such ſudden and Soul ſhat ; 


20 * Man zhat is in honour and underſtandeth not g, - 


and called the earth from the riſing of the fun, q or; fi - 


| \ 
. 


al 


E OY _ 
—_— . 28 
- —_—— — = 
tt net ena trees A re 
——_ —— 
ht Re —_—_—_ 


W 
y : 
Wu 


"By 


Work 
h 


Gia 


wa Y + V 
I % 
, 
= * 


f.97: 3» * a fire ſhal devour before him, and it ſhal be very 


*Pſ. 97, 6, 


*Pl,01.8. 


. 2 Our Godf ſhal come g, and ſhal not keep ſilence 6: 


tempeſtuous round abour him 5. | 
Theſe words are uſcd here, as they are alſo Heb, 12, 29: empha- 
tically. The Prophet ſpeaks this in the perſon of the Iſraelites and 
Worſhippers of God, whereof he was one, and thereby takes off 
their fond pretence, as if b:cauſe God was#heir God,in covenant with 
them, and nearly related to them by Abraham his Friend for ever. 
he would bear with their Miſcariages,and would not deal ſo ſeverely 
with them, as ſome fancied : which alſo was their conceit, er. 7+ 4- 
&c, Mat 3. 9, «0. No, faith he, though he be our God, yet he 
will come to ex-cute Judgment upon us, g Either 1. From Heaven, 
his dwelling place, 'o Zim, to fit in Judgment there, 
Or 2. Out of Z on to ſome other plice,as was ſaid on v.2. h So the 
Senſe is, he will no lopger forbear to connive at the hypocrifie and 
prophaneneſs of the Profeſſors of the true Religion, but will now 
ſpeak to them in his Wrath. and will effeQually reprove and chaſtiſe 
them. But becauſe the Plalmiſt is not now deſcribing what God did, 
or would ſay againſt them, which he doth below, v.7, &c- but 
as yet continues in his deſcription of the preparation or coming of 
| the Judge to his Throne, it ſeems more proper to tranſlate theWords. 
as ſome do, he will not ceaſ2 ( for this Verb ſignifies no enly a ceſſa- 
tion from Speech, but from Motion or Aion, as it doth 2 Sam, 15. 
11. Pſal. 83. t- Tſaiah 42,14, 15. ) (Ct e ) Not neglet or de- 
lay to come. So here is the ſame thing expreſſed, both effirimatively 
and negativelic ( as is frequent inScripture, whereof divers inſtances 
have been tormerlie given ) for the greater atiſurance of the truth of 
the thing, 7 Thisis a farther deſcription of that terrible Majeſtic 
wherewith God clothed himſelf when he came to his Tribunal, in to- 
ken of that juſt ſeverity which he would uſe in his proceedings with 
theme He atludes to the manner of Gods appearance at Sina, Exo4. 19. 
and intimates to them, that although Zjan was a place of Grace and 
Bleſſing to all true Ijraelites, yet God would be as dreadful there, 
to the Hypocrites among them, as ever he was at Sinat. Sce 1ſata!) 
33- 14+ 

4 Heſhal call to the heavens from above, and to the 
earth &, that he may judge lis people /. 

k Either to the places themſeives, and ſo it is a Figure called ?re- 
Jſopop#ia : Or tothe inhabitants of them, all Angels and Men, whom 
he calls in for Witneſſes and jndges of theEquity of his preſent pio- 
ceedings, Comp. Deut. 4.26, and 31, 28, and 32, 1, 1 To wit, 
in their preſence and hearing. 

5 Gather m my {aints » together unto me : thoſe 
that have made a covenant with me by iacritice o. 

m O ye Angels, ſummon and fetch them to my Tribunal. Which 
is poetically ſpoken 3 notas if they were attually to do ſo; but on- 
ly to continue the Metaphor,and repreſcatation of the Judgment here 
mentioned. # The Delinquents, the !ſraelites, whom he calls Saints; 
partly becauſe they were all by profeſſion an holy People, as they are 
called Oeat 14 2 par:ly by an Irony, iptimating how unworthy 
they were of that Name: and partly as an Argument or Evidence a- 
gainſt them,becauſeSod had choſen &ſeparatedthem from all theNati- 
onsof the Earth to be an holy & pec»liar people to himſelf, and they 
alſo had ſolemnly and frequently conſecrated and devoted themſelves 
to God, and to his faithful Service 3 all which did greatly aggravate 
their preſent Apoſtacy. » 7. e, Which have entred 1nto Covenant 
with me, and ha-e ratified that Covenant with me by Sacrifice, not 
only in their Parents, Exod, 24. 4, %c but alſo in their own per- 
ſons from time to time, even as oft as they offer Sacrifices to me. 
This Clauſe ſeems to be added here, to acquaint them with the proper 
Nature, uſe and end of Szcrifices , which «cre principallic appointed 
to be Sigos and Seals of the Covenant wade between God and his peo- 
ple; & conſequzatly tro convince them of their great miſtake&wicked- 
neſs in tr»ſt1nz to their outwardSacrifices,when they negſc the very 
Life and Soul of them which was the keeping o! their Covenant with 
God 3 and withall to dimiaiſh thai overweening Conceit which they 
had of Sicrifices and to prepare the way for the abolition of them, 
as bzing only neceffary to confirm the Covenant 3 which being once 
for all confirmed by the Blood of Chriſt, they might w:thout any in- 
convenience be laie afide and abrogated. 


6 And * the heavens ſhal declare his righteouſneſs p : 
for God zs judge himſelf. Selah 9. 

p Which they were called to witneſs, v. 4+ So was the Earth alſo, 
But here he mentions the Heavens only, as 1 humbly conceive, be- 
cauſe they: were the moſt impartial and conſiderable Witneſs in the 
caſe ; f-r men upon Earth might be falſe Witnefles, either through 
J2norance and Miſtake, or through Prejudice and Partiality, and 
Paſſion : But the Angels underſtand things more throughly and cer- 
tainly, and are ſo exa&'y pure and finleſs, tnat they neither can nor 
will tell a lye for God ; and therefore their teſtimony is more valuable. 
Or the meaning i-,that God would convince the people ofhisRighte- 
ouſneſs, and of their own Wickedneſs,by terrible Thunders and Light- 
nings, and Storms or other dreadful Signs wrought by him in the Hea- 
ven or the Air : by which hedid convince his people in two like Ca» 
ſes, Deut. 5. 22, 2., &c, 1 Sam. 12+ 17, 18, 19. 9. In his 
own perſfor., or immediately. God will not now reprove them, or 
covtend with them by his Prieſts or Prophets, with whom they may 
eaſily ftrive, as they ufed to do, but he will do itin an immediate 
and extraor41narie manner from Heaven ; and therefore they ſhal be 


TX UM $ 


: Pſal. 


Covenant made af Sinai; whereby IT avovched thee to be my peculi- 
ar people, and thou didfſt ayouch me to be thy God, Det, 26, 17, 
18, 

8 I will not reprove the * for thy ſacrifices, or thy 
burnt-offerings w«, to have been x continually before 
INCe 

u I do not charge thee, or at leaft this is not the principal matter 
of my Charge, that thou haſt negleRed Sicrifices which thou ſh ulg- 
eſt have offered; for although thou haſt many times omitted thy Du- 
ty 10 thar kind, yet I have greater things than theſe to charge thee 
with. x Or they have been, T confeſs thou haſt been frequent in that 
work, and haſt laid too great a ſtreſs upon it, and ſatisfi:d thy Con- 


ſcience with it, as if thereby thou hadit made me amends for thi Er- 
rors of thy Life. 


9 *T willtake no bullock out of thy houſe, or he- *wic. 5,5 

goats ont of thy folds y. Ads 17, 
y But be not ſo yain and fooliſh, as to imagine that thou doſt lay 159 

any obligations upon me by thysSacrifices ;or that I required them, be- 


cauſe 1 had need of them, or took any pleaſure in them for themſelves, 
or for my own fſatisfation by them, 


io For every beaſt of the forreſt is mine 2 and the 
cattle upon a thouſand hills s. 


{ I would comm-nd or diſpoſe th:m at my pleaſure, without thy 


leave or affiftance, a Which feed upon innumerable Hills, or in Val- 
leysand Fields. 


11 I know 6 all the fowls of the mountains c ; and . 
the wild beaſts of the held are + mine. 

b Where they arezand wheace I can cafily fetch them when I think 7 Hebs 
good. ©c Not only tame and domeſtick Fowls, but even ſuch as are 7/9 =. 
wild and fly up and down upon Mountains z which thouzh ovt of 
mans reach, are at Gods command. - 

12 If I were hungry d, I would not tell thee e, * for , 
the world 5 mine, and the fulneſs thereof f. Bag 
_ # It Iwanted ordeiired any thing, as I do not, being the Allſuff- D *, 
cient God, e That thou mighteſt ſupply my wants, f 7. e. All , ONS. 
tnoſe Creatures wherewith it is repleniſhed, Tai, 
13 Will Tear the fleſh of bulls, or drink the blood of vi, 24. 1, 
goats g ? 1 Cor. 19} 


g If I did want any thing, haſt thou ſuch carnal and profs concep- 26+ 28, 


tions of me, - that I need or delight in the Blood of Brute-Crea- 
tures, 


14 * Offer unto God thanksgiving 5, and pay thy _ 
vows z unto the moſt Highs eng . 
hþ If thou wouldeft know what Sacrifices I moſt prize, and indif- , F 

penſably require, in the firſt place, it is that of Thavkfulneſs and © 
Praiſe proportionable to my great and glorious and numberleſs Fa- 
vours; which doth not confiſt barely in V<rbal acknowledger ents, 
but proceeds from an Heart truly aad deeply affeRed with Gods mer- 
cies, and 15 accompanied with ſuch a Courſe of Life, as is grateful 

or well-pleaſing to God ; all which is plaiply comprehended in Thanks- 
gtving, as that Duty is explained 1n other Scriptures, # Either 1. 
Ceremonial Vows, the Sacrifices which thou haſt vowed to God, Or 
rather, 2, Moral Vows: forthe things here mentioned are direflie 
oppoſed unto Sacrifices, and preferred before them : for having dif 
paraged, and 1n ſome ſort rejeRted their Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings, 

v 8, it 15 not likely that he ſhould have a better opinion of, or 
value for their vowed Sacrificcs ; which were cf an inferiour ſort. 
He ſeems therefore to underſtand thoſe ſubſtantia! Vows and Promi- 
ſes, and Covenants, which were the very Soul of their Sacrifices, 
and to which their Sacrifices were but 4ppurtenaces and Seals, as 
was noted above, on ver, 5« whereby they did avouch the Lord to be 
their God, and to waly in his ways, &c. as it is expreiſed Devt. 26» 
17, and engaged themſelves to love,and ſerve and obey the Lord ac- 
cording to that ſolemn Vow and Covenant which they entred into at 
Sinai Exod, 24+ 3 1, 8. which they oft renewed, and indeed did 


implicitly repeat in all their Sacrifices, which were appointed for 
this very end fo confirm this Coyenznt. 


15 And *call upon me & in the day of trouble I ;I «py; 
will deliver thee, and thou ſhalt glorifie me . 274 

k And make Conſcience of that great Duty of conſtant and fervent 
Prayer to me 3 which is an acknowledgement ot thy (ubjeRion to me, 
and of thy truft and dependance upon me, and therefore is pleaſing 
to me. | Whentrouble comes. do not avoid it by finful ſhifts, nor - 
truſt to Creatures for relief, as Hypoerites generally do, but give 
Glory to me, by relying upcn my Promiſes, and expe help from me 
by hearty and unfeigned Prayer. m This ismentioned ; either, I» 
Asa priviledge 3 thou fhalthave occaſion topraife and glorific me for 
thy Deltverance. Or 2. As a further Duty ; thou ſhalt give me the 
Glory of thy Deliverance, by praiſing me for it, and improving it 
to my Service and Glory, | 

16 But unto the wicked » God ſaith o, What haſt 
thou to do to declare my ſtatutes, or that thou ſhouldeſt 
take my covenant in thy mouth p ? | 

n 7, ce. The ſame ungodly and hypocritical Profeiſſ>rs, whom he 
calleth Saints, v. g$. in regard of their profeſſion, and here wicket 
in reſpe of their prattice, and the truth of the thing. s He told 
them what he would not reprove them for, v. 8, and why, v. 9- 


THoſgs. 6, 


forced to acknowledge his Righteouſneſs; and their own unrighteouſ- 

neſs 3 as they muſt needsdo, when the Conteſt is between them and ' 

that God who is the great Judge of the World, and cannot poſſibly 

do any unrighteous thing, Job. 24, 13. Rom. 3.6. who cxaQtly ' 

knows all their Hearts, avd Works, and cannot be deceived nor con- 
" tradifed. 

7 * Hear, O my people, and I will ſpeak r ; O 1ſ- 
rael, and 1 will zcſtifie againſt thee s : I am God, e- 
ven thy God 7. | 


.r Having brought in God, as coming to Judgment with them, he 
now gives 2n account of the proceſs and of the ſentence of the Judge, 
whoſe words are contained ip this and the following Verſes. s I will 
plcad with thee, and declare my Charge or Inditement againſt thee. t 

' Nat anly.in general, as thou art my Creature,but in a ſpecial manner, 
by maoy ſiogular Favours and Obligations, and by that falemn 


C—_ 


: 


10. &c, now he tells them for what he did reprove and condemn 


; them, even for a vain and falſe profeſſion of Religion. p With what 


confidence dareſt thog make mention of, or boaſt of Gods Grace and 
Favour vouchſaved unto thee, in giving thee ſuch a Covenant and 
Statutes, pretending to embrace them, and to give up thy ſelito the 
obſervation of them ? This concerns not only the Teachers ( Of 
whom (ſome underſtand theſe words _) butall the 7jracl;tes in gene» 
ral: Of whom he rather ſeems to ſpeak, 


7 * Seing thou hateſt inſtruction 4,and caſteſt my 
words behind thee 7. 

q Seing thy prattice contradidts thy profeſſion, and makes thee a 
notorious and impudent Lyar, Though with thy mouth thou (bewe$t 
muchlove (as is ſaidof them, Ezek, 33. 31.) tomy Statutes and 
Counſels, yet in Truth thou hateft them, as they are Curbs to thy 
belgved Lultz, aud Juſtruments of thy juſt Condemnation and , 

map! :. 


*Rom! Y 
21 324 


ſend 


Pſal 1 | 


upon the Pratice of 
Meditations into this 


©. LL P 5' 45 M's 
LF - 


-manifeſt reproach to thy Converſation, Or ſeing thou hateſt Reproof, was gone, David * falls very ſeriouſly 
as this word is oft readred. And this above all other parts of G0ds ſincere Repentance,..'and digeſted his 
Word, is moſt hateful toungodly mea, Prov. 9. 8 and «14, and 15; Plalm. = 

10,12, Amos5, 10. And therefore this is ficly aledged as an evi- | David prayeth to God for the rem'ſſim of his Original and Afual Sins, x; 
. 6 dence of their wickedneſs. » As men do things which they ab-] 2. whereof he maketh a deep Confeſſion, 3 —— 


ſob 331 
ls 


*Rom! 2. 
21. 33 


| 
f 
1 
ſt 


+ Heb- Fly 
tion w* 
Fi Adul- 


fererss 


4 Heb» 
ſendeft 


Wpſeth 
biz Way, 


0 

Sam, 
WU, 
? 11, 2 


FPlal, 69. 
fe. rh to him {Þ that ordereth hjs converſation aright m, will 


her deſpiſe. . 
18 When thou ſaweſt s a thief, then thou conſented- 
eſt with him t, and FT haftbeen partaker with adulter- 


rs *, | 
— Or, didſt otſerve, or conſider: When he came into thy Preſence 
2nd company, and thou didft underſtand and confider his ways and 
his ſucceſs and impunity, and he invited thee to a participation of 
his profit, t Or, as many render it- then then didſt run with him, thou 
did(t readily and greedily aſfociate'thy felf with him, in his unrighte- 
ous Courſes. Thoudidit yield to his motions, and that with great com- 
placency and diligence- « By joyning with them, in their lewd and 
filthy pradtices- . | 

19 Thou + giveſt x thy mouth to evily, and thyton- 


ne frameth deceit &z. 


x Heb, thou ſende# forth, to wit, free; for the word is uſed of 


Mensdiſmiſfing their Wives, or thetr Servants ; whom they left to 
their Freedome Thou haſt an unbridled Tongues and cafteſt off all 
reſtraints-of Gods Law, and of thy own Conſcience, and giveſt thy 
Tongue libertie to ſpeak what thou pleaſeſt, thongh it be offenſive 
and diſhonourable to God, and injuriousto thy Neighbour, or to thy 
own Soul. Which is juſtly produced as a evidence of their Hypo- 
criſie. y Cither to ſiaful or miſchievous Speeches, 7x (z. e ) Utte» 
reth Lycs or fair Words, wherewith to circumvent thoſe who deal with 
them. ; 
20 Thou ſitteft and ſpeakeſt « againſt thy brotherb ; 

chouſlandereſt c thine own mothers ſon. 

4 Thou doft not only ſpeak evil in a ſudden Paſſion, or upon ſome 

reat provocation, but this is thy conſtant and deliberate pradtice and 
buſineis, which thou doft purſue with great facility and complacency : 
all which this phraſe implies. 6 Stridatly ſocalled, as the next Clauſe 
explains it, Which 15 a great a7gravation of the fin, and a proof 
of his inveterate and obſtinate wickedneſſes, c Takeſt away his good 
Name. which is better than all Riches; yea than Life it ſelf, 
Which is contrary to my expreſs and oft repeated com- 
mand:. | 

21 Theſe things haſt thou done, and I kept ſilence d: 

thou thoughteſt that I was altogether ſuch @ one as thy 
ſeif + » but { will reprovetheee, and ſet bem in or- 


der before thine eyes f. ; 
d 1 did net exprels my diſpleaſure againſt thee in ſuch grievous 
udgments 2s thou d1dſt deſerve. Or, I was deaf « I carried my ſelf 
like one that did not hear thy fiofulSpeeches.nor ſee or take anynotice 
of thy wicked ations. f Thou didſt niſconſtrue and abuſe this my 
patience and long-ſuffering, a5 if it had proceeded from my Ignorance, 
or regardleſneile, or approvation of thy evil Courſes, which I ſeem- 
edby my conmvarice t9 juſtifie orallow 3 and thereup -n didf} grow 
more audacious and impudent in fir, Sce Eccle!, 11. 9. Iſa, 26, 10. 
Rom. 2. 4, 5 "Tn 
ſcvere puntihinents, as this word 15 u ed Joo 53- 40, Pſal. 6, 1, and 
38. 1, and 39. 71- and oft el: where. i wil: quickly undeceive and 
convince thee of the contratie to thy coft. f i will bring to thy re- 
membrance, aad lay upoa thy Conlci-nce all thy fias, in full number 
and in their order, with all their circamſtznces ; and thou ſhalt then 
ſee and know that I diligentiy obſerved and hated them all, and that 
none nf them ſhal go unpuniſned. 


22 Now conſider this, ye that forget God g, leſt T 


tear you in pieces þ, and there be none to deliver 3. 

g Ye hypocritical and ungadlie /ſracliets, wino have forgotten ( as 
Moſes tortold you would do, Deut. 32. 18. ) the Go1 that formed yu, 
and made you his People, and forgotten his Mercies and Judgments, 
by which you ſhould have been inſtrufted, and the Covenant which 
you made with him. and by which you ſtand obliged to him. h Leſt 
my patience be turne. 1ato fury.and [ proceed to take Vengeanze on 
you. # Or, for'C as the Hebrew Particie is oft r-ndred _) there js 
none that can, or will deliver you» None can reſcue you from the 
power of mice Anger. | 


23 Whoſo * offereth praiſe 4, glorifiecth me 1: and 


] ſhew » the ſalvation of God 0. 

hk Or, Thanksgtving, a5 this word 15 rendred,v.1 4.Sce the note there, 
I He and he onely gives me the Honour that I rcquire and prize, and 
not he-who loads my Altar with a multitude of Sacrifices ; whereby 
you vajnly and fa.ſly Conceit that you pleaſe and glorifie me, although 
3n ti mean time you live 1a the grots neg'ett of the more important 
Dutics of Piety and Juſtice .aud Charity: whereasin truth you great- 
ly diſhonour me, and my Worſhip and Service by your infamous Lives. 
m Heb, that Compoſeth or diſpoſeth the /iy, or manner of his {| which 
Pro:oun is frequently underttood ] Lite, ( e.) That lives order- 
Iy aad according to Rul::. for Sinners are ſaid to walk diſorderly, 2 
Theſ. 3. 6. 7, Itlgand by Chance, as it1s in the Hebrew Text, Levit. 
26, 21, 23- which is oppoſed to Order : and the Scripture owns no 
Order,but what Go preſcribcs or approves z and therefore this Word, 
arizht, 1s juſtly added in our Tranſlation. n Heb, I wil! make him to 
ſee, (i, e. ) To enjoy, as that Ver" 1s oft uied, as we have ſhewed a- 
gain and again. 09 (1. e.) My Salvation that truc and ererlaſting 
Happinefſe, which 1 have prepared for ali my fai-hful Friends and Ser- 
vants, and for them onely, So falſe is that poſition of ſome © 
the Jewiſh Rabbjes, that every Iſrac'ite hath a Portion in the World t9 


comes 
PSAE I 


To the chiefmuſician a, « P/alm of David ,* when Na- 
than the prophet came unto hini b, after he * had 
i iheb wer 
gORe in to Bathibeba. 

a To be ſung by him, and other ſacred Muficjans publickly in the 
Temple through all Ages 3 that his Repentance m1ght be as mani- 
teit and publick as his Crime and Scandal was_ 6 After his Conſci- 
en:e was ayakened by Nathan s Words, 2 5am, 12, and Nathan 


e Not with verbal, but real R-proofs, (7, e, ) By 


5. and for the renovation 
others, 6-<--14. promiſe 
I $1---17, With a Pray. 


of bis Boly Spirit, to ſupport himſelf, and inflr,8 
ing him alſo unfeigned, and ſincere Thank fulysſs, 


er for the good oj the whole Church, 18, 19' 
[2 ok mercy upon me c, O God, according to thy 
loving kindneſs 7 2 according unto the multitude 
of thy tender mercies e, blot out f my tranſgreflions. 
 C Pity and Help and Anſwer me, in the Defires I am now ſpread* 
ing before thee, d I pretendto no merit, but humbly implore thy 
free Grace and Mercy. e Thy mercies are infinite, and there. 
tore ſufficient for my Relief, and ſuch indeed do I need. F Either 
1, Out of my Conſcicnce and Soul, where'it hath left a ſtain and 
flthy Charafter. Or, Out of thy Book of Remembrance and 
Accounts, in which all mens fins are written, and out of which all men 
ſhall be judged hereafter, Revelations 20, 12. Which is ſpoken of 
God after the manner of men, Sceof this Phraſ: Iſatah 43, 25, and 
44* 22» 
2 Waſh me throughly g from mine iniquity, and 
cleanſe me from my fin. 

2 Heb. Multiply te waſh me. By which Phraſe he implies the greate 
netfe of his guilt 3 and the inſufficiency of all legal Waſhings. and the 
abſolute neceſſity of ſome other and better thing to waſh him, even of 
Gods Grace and the Bloud of Chriſt ; which as Abraham ſaw by Faith, 
fohn 8. 56. fo did David, as is ſufficiently evident ( allowing for 
the darkneſs of the Diſpenſation and Expreſſions of the Old Teſta- 
ment) from divers paſſages of the Pſalms; of which I have ſpoken 
in their proper places; and his eartieft and paſſionate delireofPardonz 
which he defires above all other things. Whereia he ſheweth bim- 
ſelf co be a true Penitent, becauſe his chief Care ard defire was to ob 
tain God's Favour, and the forgiveneſsof his fins, and not the Preven- 
tion of theſe external ſore Judgments, which God oy Nathan threatned 
to bring upon him and his Houſe, 2 Samel 9. 10, r5. about which 
here is not one Word in this Pſalm; whereas the Cares and Deiiresof 
Hypocrites, chieflic are bent towards Wordly things as we ſee in Cain, 
Geneſis 4+» 13, iG, 17. and Saul, x Same I5. 30. and. others, Hoſ. 
7. 14» 

3 For Iacknowledge 5 my traſgreſſions ;: and my 
ſin 3s ever before me &. | 


h With Grief and Shame, and abhorrency of my ſelf and of my 
ſins; which hitherto [ have diflembled and covered. And being 
thus truly penitent, I hope and beg that I may find Mercy with 
th-e, i For it was not a ſingle, but a Complicated Wickednefle, 
Adultery, Murder, Injuftice, Perfidiouſneſs 3 and frequ- at Reye- 
titionof,ard ong8& ſtupid Contiouance in abominable filthin ets and 
that with publick Scandal, kþ That wiich I had caft beiiiad my Back; 
is now Couſtaacly inmy yiew, and fixed in my Thoughts and Memo- 
rs 

4 Againſt thee, thee onely / have I finned, and done 
thisevil in thy ſight : * that thou mighteſt be juſtif- 


ed » when thou ſpeakeſt o ; and be clear when thou 
judgeſt p. | 

{ Which 4s not tobe underſtood ſimpy and abſolutely, becauſe he 
had unqueſtionably finned againſt Bathſheba and Uriah, and many Os 
thers who were either injured by it, or ſcandalized at it, bur Compa- 
ratively, So the Sence 's this, though I hav- finned againſt my own 
Body and Conſcicpce, and againſt others; yet nothing is more grice 
yous and Terrible to me. than to conſider that I have ſinnes a -ainſt 
thee; partly. upon a general Account, becauſe this is the chief Ma> 
lignity, and finfulneſs of fin, that it offends and injures the Glorious 
and Bleſſed God; and partly, upon particular Reaſons 3 Becauſe I 
ſet thee at Defiance, and having uſed all wicked Arts to coatezl my 
{ns from Men, and being free frain Fear of puniſhment from them. I 
went one boldly in fin, caſting off all Reverence to thy Holy and Om- 
niſcient Majeſtic, and atl dread of thy Judgments, and becauſe 1 fin- 
ned againſt thee, to whom 1 had ſuch numerobs and peculiar and emis 
nent Obligations, as thy Prophet Nathan truly ſurgeſted ro we. 2 
Sam. 12- 5. 8, m With groſs Contempt of God, whom I we'l 
knew to be a SpeCtator of my moſt ſecret ations. n The Particle, 
| that, 1s not taken Cauſally, or Intentional'y, as if this was Davids De-+ 
ſizn,but Cyentually,as it is Exofs i 1. g.Pſal.z0.12,H9'8 4, This will be 
the Fruit or Conſequent of my fin, that whatſoever (everitices thou 
ſhalt uſe towards meand mine, it wil: be no b/emith to thy Benignis 
ty, or Righteouſnefs, or Fidelity, but the blame bf a'l will reft upon 
my Head, as I defire it. may, and thy juſtice will be Glorified by all 
Men. 9 Heb. Inthy Words, (1, e.) In all thy Threatnings denoun- 
ced againſt me by Nathan; and in any further Sentence which theu 
ſhalt ſee fit co paſs upon me. p When thou doſt plead or contend 
with me, or execute thy Sentence or Judgment upon me. Or, when 
thou art judged, as it is rendred, Romans 2, 4, for the Word may be 
taken Paſſivelie, as well as Aﬀtivclie, Waen any man ihal preſume 
to 9 we thee, as not keeping thy Covenant and Mcrcic promiſed to 
Davids 

5 Behold, I was ſhapen in 1nquity q; and in ſin did 
my mother F conceive me r. 

g This Verſc is both by Fewih and Chriftian, by Antient and La-> 
| ter Interpreters. generally and moſt truly underſtood 


454 6 Echold; 


*Rom:3 45 


+ Heb. 
Warm Mes 


I, LI. 
>. the 


6 Behold, thou defireſt s truth? in + the inward parts: 


wiſdom y. 


s Or. delighteſt in: Or, requireſt . Heb. willeſt, # Either, r. Sin- 
cerity ip Confeſfing my fins 3 which therefore | have now acknow: 
ledged though hitherto I have praQtiſed much Falthood and Diffi- 

| mulation in 1ndeayouring to conceal them from Men. Or rather, 2 
Integrity or uprightneſs of Heart 3 which ſeems to be here oppoſed to 
that Iniquity mentioned in the laſt Verſe, in which he was, and all 
Men are, tramed and Born. And this may ſeem to be added 3 partly, 
as a Proof or Aggravation, of the ſinfulneſs of Original Corruption, be- 
cauſe it is contrary to the holy Nature and Will of God, which re- 
quireth not enely unblameableneſs in mens Aﬀions, but alio Unt- 
verſal innocency, and ReRitude of their Minds and Hearts : and part- 
ly, as an Ageravation of his aQual fin, wherein he had uſed ſuch 
groſs Deceit ad Treachery. u (4. e.) In the Heart, called tbe hid- 
den Manoj the Heart, 1 Peter 3 4. and the ſecret Part, Romans 2. 16, 
which in the former Branch he called the Reins,or inward Parts, xSo 
declares his Hope that God would Pardon and cure his Folly, which 
he had diſcovered, and make him Wiſer for the Future. But this 
ſeems not to ſeit well with the Context, which runs wholly 10 another 
fitrain : The word therefore is, and may be rendred otherwiſe 3 Thou 
haſt made me to know. Sothis is another Apgravation of h's fin, that 
it was Committ d againſt that Wiſdom avd Knowledge, which God 
had not onely revealed to him outwardly in his Word, but alſo in- 
wardly by his Spirit, writingit in his Heart accordipg to his Promiſe. 
Jeremi:zh 31.33- Or thus, do thou make me to know, the tuture Verb 
being here taken Imperatively, and as a Prayer 3 as the following 
Futures are here Trauflated, ver. y, 8. Having now ſaid, for the Age 
gravation of hi: fin, that God did deſire or require Truth in the inward 
Parts : He takes that Occaſion to break forth 1nto Prayer, which alſo 
he continues in the follow ng Verſes, Onely as he prays there for 
juſtitcation or pardon of fin, ſo here he prays for Renovation or 
SanRification. So his meaning is this, Therefore (C as the Particle, and, 

- is oft uſed. as hath been ſhewed _)in the hidden Part, do thou make me 
to know Wiſdom, Or thus, thou wouldeſt have me know: for Futures 
arc oft taken r<tentially, as Pſalms 118, 6- and Matthew 12, 25. 
Compared with Mark 3 24. and elſewhere. And Verbs which figni- 
fi- making 0: cauſing are ſometimes underſtood onely of the Will or 
Commanud 3 as Fereboam is ſaid to make Iſrael to ſin, un Kings 14. 16. 
becauſe he ' ommanded them to do ſo, Heſea 5. 11 This I propoſe 
wich ſubmiſſion, but if thisSence be admitted, the laſt clauſe of the 
Verſe anſwers very well to the former, as it doth in the foregoing and 
/Foilowing Verſes, and every where in theſe Books: For this, ?h9u 
wouldeſt have me know, Anſwers to that, thou willeft or deſire? ; and in 
the hid'en part Antwers to that, 'n the inward Parts; and Wiſdom, i: 
the 1ame thing for ſubſtance with Truth, onely called by another Name. 
5 (i.e ) True Piety and Integrity, which is called Wiſdom, Job 
23. 28. -/alm 111. 10, and in many otherTexts, as fin on the cone 
trary i-commonly called, as it really is, Folly, And to know Wiſdom, 
is hcre mea''t of knowing it praQically and Experimentally, ſo as to 
approve and love & praQtiſe it 3 asWords of knowledge arc moſt fre. 
quently taken in Scripture. and in other Authors. 

Tlev.14.6. 

_ nd.i% waſh me, and I ſhailbe * whiter than ſnow. 

"I,t,x8* gerttood 45 Lepers and other unclean perſons, are by thy appolot 

ment i-urified by the uſe of Hiſſ-p and other things, Lev. 14. 6+ 

Numb 15 6. ſo do thou cleanſe me, a moſt Leprous and pollutedCrea- 

ture, by thy Grace, and by the Vertue of that Elood of Chriſt, which 
is ſignified by thoſe Ceremonial uſages. 


$ Make me to hear joy and gladneſs.a, that the bones 
which thou haſt broken, may rejoyce-b- 
a Send me glad Tidings of thy Reconciliation to me, and by thy 
Sptr1: ſeal the parden of my fins to my Conſcience, which'will fill me 
with joy. b Thatmine Heart which hath been ſorelie wounded, and 
Terrificd by thy dreadful Meſſage ſent by Nathan, and by the diſmal 
Sentence of thy Law, denounced againſt ſuch Sinners as I am, now by 
this Occaſion brought kome tomy Conſcience, may be revived aud 
Comtorted by the Manifeſtation of thy Favour to my Soul. 


9 Hide thy face from my ſins c,* and blot out 7 all 
mine iniquities. 2% al 
c Do not look upon them with an Eye of indignation and Revenge, 
but forget and forgive them. « Sec verſe 1, 


10 Create in me a clean heart e, O God; and re- 
new f|| a right g ſpirit h within me z. 


e Seing Thave not onely defiled my ſelf by theſe aQual fins, but 
alſo have a moſt filthy Heart, corrupted even from my Birth, verſe ;. 
which nothing but God's Almighty and Creating power can purifie,do 
thouEffeRuallic work in me anHolieframe offleart, whereby both myir. 
ward filth may bepurged away;zXImay be prevented, from falling into 
ſuch aQualand ſcandalous finsfThat good Temper which before this 
Apoſtacy I had in ſome meaſure, be pleaſed graciouflic to reſtore itto 
me with advantage, g Heb. Firm or Conſtant, or ſtedfaſ?, that 7 may 
not be ſo eaſily ſhaken and caft down by Temptation, as I have been, 
but that my Reſolution may be more fixed and unmoveab'e. hþ Tem- 
peror Diſpoſition of Soul or Spirit ; as the Word Spirit is very fre- 
quentlie uſed inScripture, i Heb. In my inward Parts. He wilelic 
firikes at the Root and Cauſe of all ſinful Aftions: 


1x Caſt me not away from thy preſence &, and take 
not thy holy ſpirit ] from me. 
{ 5.e, ) From thy Favour and Care, and gracious Communion 
with thee, - | Thy ſanRifying Spirit, by which aloneI can have Ace 
or, let thy quaintapce and fellowſhip with thee, : 


diy 12 Reſtore unto me the joy of thy ſalvation », and 
Gpirit yp- uphold me » wh thy free o ſpirit. 
bold me» 


[] Or, a con» 
FantSp:rit: 


m The Comfortable Sence of thy ſaving Grace and Help, promiſed 


n A weak and frail Creature. never able to ftand againſt Corruption, 
and Temptation without thy poweriul and gracious Succours, 0 


=, ST WMA 


and in the hidden pert » thou ſhalt make me to know x 


- * Purge me with hyſſop z, and I ſhal be clean : 


z Ui, as wh Hyſſop: the note of ſimilitude being frequentiy un- 


and vouchſafed to me, both for my preſent and everlaſting Salvation, | 


PSALMS. 


Pſal. 
Or, ingenuous, of Liberal, or Princely, Which he ſeems to | 

his own baſe and Illiberal and Diſ-ingenuous and ſervile yur 

he had diſcovered in his wicked and unworthie praQtices; and De 
a better Spirit of God, which may free him from the Bonda 
and inable and incline him freelie and cheerfullic, and confi 
run the way of Gods precepts, See Exod: 35. 21. 
8, Is, 16. 2 C0. 3, I7. 


fires 
&e of fin, 
antlie to 
P/al. 110. 3. Rom. 


13 Then will I teach tranſgreſſors thy ways p, and 
ſinners ſhal be converted unto thee 9. 

þ Either, 1, Thy Will and their Dutic, and the way to their eter 
nal Happineſs: Or rather, 2, The manner of thy dealing with Sinners; 
whom thou doſt fo ſeverely Chaſtiie for their ſins, and yet ſo gracie 
ouſly receive to mercie upon their Repentance, Both which I will ſhew 
them in myown Example, which I will declare unto them, although 
I ſhal therewith publiſh my own ſhame ; which i ſhal moſt willigglie 
bear, that I may in ſome meaſure repair the Injurie which I have dons 
to thee and others by my publick and ſcandalous Crimes. q And1I 
perſwade my ſelf that my Indeavours ſhal not want Succeſs 3 and that 
either thy Juſtice or ſeverity; or thy Goodneſs and Clemency, will 
bring them to Repentance. 2M 

14 Deliver me from + blood-guiltineſs 9, O God 
thou God of my'ſalvation : and my 
loud of thy righteouſneſs s. 

y Heb. from Bloods, becauſe he had been the Cauſe of the Death,not 
onely of Uriah but of others of the Lords people with him, » Sams 
11, 17, £ Either, 1. Thy Faithfuineſsin making good thy Promiſes: 
op _ 2, Thy Clemency and Goodneſs, asthat Word is frequent» 

uſed, : 

i5O LORD, open thou my lips , 
mouth ſhal ſhew forth thy praiſe. 

# Which aze thut with ſhame and Grief and Horror, Reſtore unto 
me the opportunity and Ability, and Liberty which formerly I had of 
ſpeaking to thee with Freedom ard Boldneſs, and Familiarity, as 
this Phraſe ſignifies, Ecekiel 3. 27. and 24. 27. Epheſians 6, 1 95 
20: 


16 For * thou deſireſt not ſacrifice s, || elſe would I 


g1VE 1t x: thou delighteſt not in burnt-offering. Jer, 7. 22 
v Which is not to be underſtood abſolutely, and Univerſally, as Hoſ 6. 5, 

appears from verſe 16, but comparativclie, of whichſce on +ſalms 40» || Or that! 

6. and with particular reſpeR to David's Crimes of Murder and Adul- nals give 

tery, which were not to be expiated by any Sacrifice, but by the Law jp, 

of God were tobe puniſhed with Death. Thou requireſt more and = 


better Sacrifices, which herefollow. x Elſe I ſhould have ſpared 
no coſt in that kind. R 


17 * The ſacrifices y of God & are a broken ſpirit ; *Iſr5715: 


a broken and a contrice heart a, O God, thou wiltnot ® 5: * 
deſpiſe b. 


y Tis 1s inftead of, or of more Value than many Sacrifices; x 
Which God in ſuch Caſes as mine requires, and will accept : in whicte 
Sence we Read of the Work of God, Johe 6: 28. a (4i.e.) An 
Heart cceply afflifted and grieved for fin, humbled under the Sence 
of God's diſpleaſure, and earneſtly ſecking and wiliing to accept of 
Reconcilation with God, upon any Terms, See Iſa. 57. 15- and 
51. 1, and 66, 2, Mat. $4, 28: This is oppoſed to that hard or ſto- 
ny Hears, of which we Read ſo oft, which fignifics an Heart inſ« nfible 
of the Burden of fin, ſtubborn and Rebellious againſt God, impenis« 
tent and 1ncorrigible. b (7. e, ) Thou doſt highly approve ; as 
ſuch Negative Phraſes oft ſignifie as hath been formerly proved. 

18 Do good inthy goodpleaſure ec unto Sion d :; build 
thou the walls of Jeruſalem e. 

c Or, Fer,or according to (" for the Hebrew prefix Beth is frequent- 
ly uſed both thoſe ways_) thy good Grace,or Favour or Pleaſure,(7..e. ) 
Thy free and rich Mercy, and thy gracious Purpoſe and Promilſc,made 
toand concerning Zion : Of which ſee Pſal. 132, 14. and do not re- 
pent of it, nor retra(t it, as I have given thee cauſe todo, d Sy- 
necdochially put for Jeruſalem, as the next Clauſe explains it, and 
both pur for the whole People of Iſrael and Church of God : whom 
I have highly ſc:ndalized and injured already, and expoſed to the 
Danger of utter Deftrution, which thou mighteſt infli& upon them, 
for the fins of their King, as thou uſeſt to do in like Caſes, e Pers 
fet the Walls and Buildings of that City, and eſpecially let the Tem- 
ple be builtand eſtabliſhedin this City,notwitſtanding its Pollation 
by. my fins, which I pray thee to Purge awaye 

*Mal. 34s 


19 Then f ſhalt thou be pleaſed with * the ſacrifices +, $in.1. 
g of righteouſneſs þ ; with burnt-offering, and * whole g, 
burnt-offering : then ſhal they # offer bullocks k upon 
thine altar. 

f When thou haſt granted my humble Requeſts expreſſed in the 
former Verſes, when thou haſt renewed and Pardoned, and/Comfors 
ted me, and reftored thy Favour unto thy People, and this City. g 
Which now for our ſins thou mayeſt juſtly rejet and abhor. h. Which 
I and my People being juſtified and reconciled to thee, ſhal offer with 
fincere and penitent Hearts, Theſe are oppoſe® to the Sacrifices of 
the Wicked, which God abhors, Prov. 15- 8. Iſa; r: 11. &ce i(7 6) 
They who by thy appointment are to do that Work, the Pricſts in 
the Name and on the behalf of thy People: þ The beſt and coſtlicſt 
Sacrifices, and that ia great Numbers in Teſtimony of their gratitude 
to God, for thy great Favour in pardoning mine and their fins. and 


preventing that Total Ruin, which we had reaſon to expe and Fear 
upon that Account; 


+ Heb, 
» Blandss 
congue ſhal ſing a- 


and my 


*PC. $0. 8, 
Ila. 1. 11, 


PSATL LIL * 1$ar2; 


| To the chief muſician Maſchil, « Pſalm of David, * ** ” 
when Doeg the Edomite a came and toid Saul, and 
_ unto him, David is come to the houſe of Ahime- 
6 Socalled ; Either, 1. Becauſe he was born or bred in Edom - Or, 
2. From his Treacherous and Bloody diſpoſition ; for which the E- 


domites are infamous in Scripture « a5 the Jreclites are called Sedom 
and Gonyrrgh, Iſs; 1. 19. Ge 


Dayid 


LIL 


LIL 


b, 
{s8 


r, that! 
ud give 


457.15 
66+ 2; 


fal. 343 
Sam, 7 


1Sara, 
2. 9 


Ed 


T1, 


$ (0r, the 
bitful 


- 


feb. beg 
Wan, 


0; ) Subs 
f, 


| Or, Te 
B ſhall 
Mu 92. 
h 'R 

Ni l4.6 


i , 4+ o » 
F OE raſor, working deceitfully f. od ] : he 
« (i- e) Exprefleth what thy wicked mind had deviſed. Thus | © may very conveniently be joyned with the former Clauſe, 


nd 64, Jo ; F 0 ; : 
Skilfulneſs is aicribed to thoſe Hands, which are governed by a skil- thus, 7 will wair upon thy Name before thy Saints ; Which ſeems beſt to 


. LIL. | P $ 4 


rag _.... mu 


David reprovetss the Inſelency of Doeg, 1 <nn=n 4s. Propheſieth hu De- | and thought tobe ina deſperate condition, ſhall be eſtabliſhed and 


ftrafion, 5. The Righteous rejoyce at it, 6, He ſheweth the firength | flouriſh. z Either, r. In God's Church, 


or among his People. 


and hope of this wicked Man, 7@ But placeth his own Confidence and | Or, 2. In God's Tabernacle, from which Doeg ſhall be plucked a 


Trufl in God, and praiſcth him, 8, 


9. 
H Y boatteſt thou thy ſelf b in miſchief, Q | and Malice of this Man and his Confedera 


way, verſe 5. and from which I am now baniſhed by the Tyranny 
tes; Bur, I doubr nor, 


mighty man c ? the goodneſs of God endurerh | [hall be reſtored to it, and dwel in ir all the doys of my Life, which 


;fleb ll F continually 4. 


is the ons thing that I defire, Pſalm 27. 4. 


b As if thou hadſt done a great Exploit, which none ele durft | . 9 1 "w_ praiſe thee for ever, becauſe thou haſt done 
undertake ; and thereby eſtabliſhed the Crown upon Saul's head, it *: and I will wait on thy name ||, for it 5s g00d be- 


and thy ſelf in his Favour; and broken all David's Deſigns, by fore thy ſaints FT. --- | 
ſtriking a Terror into all his Favourers by this ſad Example. c He * 1 & Deſtroyed Dozg, and all mine and th 


ine itnplacable Ene- 


ſpeaks Ironically. O valiant Captain! O glorious Aion ! To kill | mies, and eſtabliſhed me in the Throne, and in thy Houſe ; OF 
wy 


a few weak and unarmed Perſons in the King's preſence, and unde 


r | which I am no leſs aſſured, than if it were already done. |jI will 


the ProteCtion of his Guards. Surely thy Name will be Famousto | continue in thy way, placeing my whole Truſt and C ; 
all Ages, for ſuch Heroical Courage. 4 God's Love aid Favourto | thy Power and Goodnefſs, i Faithfalneſs, all which —_— 
his People, and in particular to me, is not fading and inconſtant, | God's Name, and not turn afide to any crooked paths for my De 
but everlaſting and unchangeable, and therefore not to be hindred } liverance, as others do, Pſalm 125. 5 & i-e: In the Eyes * thy 


or defeated by any wicked deſign or praftices. And therctore | Saints They, whoſe Judgments only 


though he hath permitted thee, and may do others to Rage for 
ſeaſon, yet he will defend, and in due time deliver his Peopie. 


are to be valued, 
a Þ of this PraQtice, of truſting God, and keeping bis WAY as the iſe 
and ſafeſt Courſe, and have ever found it 1o to: be by their own + 


2 Thy tongue deviſech e miſchiefs ; * like a ſharp | Experience ; However © Daeg and his Complices account it meer 


folly, and the ready way to Ruin. + But the laſt Words of this 


, CE ». | ſuit with the firſt Clauſe, 7 wil praiſe thee : Whi 
ful or prudent Man, Pſalm 78. laſt. This word implies that Doeg's of Praifo uſe, 1 will praiſe thee; Which ſurely was meant 
- Ky Oy ,; G raifing God publickly, or before the Saints : / . 
bras _ _ wes: _ _ — OE HO lows convenient Avel bn the amp eg _ =P _ 
merch unde wt det a anos” in the preſence of thy Saints, who ſhall plainly fee th en yi 
opportunity to execute; And therefore he readily took the firſt , plainly fee that I do fo by the 


occalion which offered it ſe!f f Wherewith a man pretendin 


= whole Courſe of my Life. And thoſe words, for it is good, may be 


/ : incloſed within a Parentheſi : : | | 
only to ſhave off the Hair, doth ſuddenly and unexpe&edly cut the | 1? : S, as 15 very uſual in Scripture, and 
That, So Dorg pretended only to Vindicate himſelf from the may be referred; Either ro God's Name, for thy Name u good ; Oc 


Imputation of Diſloyalty, 1 Sam 22-8, but rea'ly intend<d to ex- 
pole the Prieſts, who were Friends to David, to the King's fury 


and cruelty. 


tO W417 07 2t, for it is good to wait upon it. 


PSAL LINE 


3 Thou loveſt evil more than good g ; and lying 4 i ARGUMENT..--.-. - 


rather than to ſpeak righteouſneſs z, Selah. 


g Evil and Good may be here taken; Either i. Morally. Thou 


loveſt Wickedneſs and not Goodneſs; for ſo comparatively paſſage 


His P/alm,ſome few Words excepted,is wholly the £ : 
þ 2 Pſalm 14. and therefore the Reader muſt x anaghrormateg=c 


. the Interpretation of it. And it is repeated ; Partly, be- 


are oft meant, as P/al- 118+ 8+ 1t is better to frruft in the Lord, than _ _ _—— "= it is ſo important and neceſſary to be known 
to put confidence in man : (i: &) It is good to truſt God, bur it is not "bl apy "9s D rs partly, becauſe there aroſe ſome new and ſuit. 
good to truſt man; for this is abſolutely forbidden, Pſ#lm' 14g. | 23s 0ccation, W ich made David fing it a ſecond time, and that 


3+ Jer, 17. 5- Or, 2. Phyſical.y- Thou loveſt to ſpeak or a&@ to 


with ſome ſmall Alrerations. And the Compiler or Compilers of 


- —_—Y ts - w_ 
the hurt and ruine of others, rather than to their Benefir. Thou | 24v/s s P/alms, had ſo greata Reverence for their Compoler, whom 


mighteſt, withour any danger to thy ſelf, have been ſilent con 


. | they knew to be guided by Divine Inſpiration, thar they would 


cerning Abimelech's Fatt, or have put a favourable couſtruſtion upon. | 29f loſe any of his Fragments, and therefore*repeated rhis Pſalm 


it; but thou haſt choſen rather to. miſeaepreſent and aggravate it. 


with the Variations which he had made. 


He ſaith, Thou loveſt, to imply that he did this not by any con- To the chief muſician upon Mahalath a,Maſchil, a P/alm 
ſtraint or neceſſity, but by choice, and with compl:cency. and of David. | 


'out of alove to miſchicf. þ Whereof Doeg was guilty ; Partly, in | , This alſo ſeems to be the Name of a Muſic 
reporting that he (i- e. Abimelech) enquired of the Lord for him (David) Tune ; Wherein, as in the reſt of them, it is 


al Inſtrument, or 
better to confeſs 


1 Sam. 22. 10+ which he did not, Chap: 21- Where all that Hiftory our {gnorance, as the Hebrew Doors themſelves do, than to 


is recorded; And partly, in putting a falle Interpretation upon ive way to vain and groundleſs conjetures about ther. » 

what he did, in giving him Vittuals, and 4 Sword, as if he had done it | D&id deſcribeth the Atheiſm and Corrado of Men, &c. 7" I Plalm 

knowingly, and in conſpiracy with _—_— and againit Saul, as ap- | 10. and 14 o 
ears by comparing Doeg's an{wer with Saul's enquiry, 1 Sam» 22. 7, ON EWET wn ' "20 

3. ; = The whole and naked Truth, without any ſuch iying, | He fool = _ _ _ heart, There js NO God : *Pſ. 10,44 

or malicious Comment upon it, which was but an A& of Juſtice, | , *, _ rUPT Are They, and nave done abominable in and 14. r, 

due from thee to any Man, and much more on the behalf of ſo In- j 1qUITY : there is none that doth good. - & 


nocent and Sacred a Perſon. 


2 God looked down from heaven upon the children *Ro.3.10. 


4 Thou loveſt all devouring words &, || O hou de- | of men, to ſee if there were any that did underſtand, 


ceitful tongue. 


that did ſeek God. 


k Such as might ſwallow up and deſtroy a whole Family at 3 Every one of them is gone back, they are altogether 


[2 


"> Bad ſhall likewiſe 1 + deſtroy thee for ever; be become filthy ; there is none that doth good,no nor one. 
ſhall cake thee away, and pluck thee » out of thy dwel- | # Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who 


ling place »,and root thee outs of the land of the living | 7% *Þ MY people as they ear bread 5 they have not cal- 


 p Selah. 


led upon God. 


I (i &) Totally and unavoidably, as thou didſt deſtroy the 5 There + were they in great fear, where no fear . 


Prieſts. m (i.e) Violently and Irreſfiſtibly and ſuddenly re- 


' was b: For God hath ſcattered the bones c of him thac #Heb. hey 


move thee, as the Hebrew word ſignifies. #» From thy Houſe | encampeth again#} thee 4: thou e haſt put ihem : 
and Lands, and all the Wages of thy umrighteouſneſs, Or, our ſham 7 "a þ. OS hath de fol ” pres : oO La 


of his (i e- the Lord's) Tabernacle; In which thou didſt ſeek-and 
take the matter of thy Slaunders, and from which thou didft cur 
off the Lord's Prieſts. Therefore God ſhall Excommunicate thee 
from his Preſence, and from the Society of the Faichful- o Though 
thou ſeemeſt to have taken very deep Rooting, and to be the 
more firmly ſettled for this barbarous Cruelry, yet God ſhall pluck 
thee up by the very Roots, and deſtroy thee both Root and 
Branch. p Out of this World, as the Phraſe is taken, 1/as 53+ 8. 
Ezek. 32. 32. and elſe-where. Which was very terrible to him who 
had all his Portion in this Worids, 


6 The righteous alſo ſhall ſee q, and fear r, and ſhall 


laugh ac him 5. | 

4 To wit, thy remarkable downfal, and conſequently ſhall ſur- 
vive thee in ſpight of all thy power and malice againſt chem. 
7 Both reverence God's juſt Judgment upon thee, and be afiaid 
of provoking God to ſend like Judgement upon them. 5 Nor ta- 
king plcatwie in his Ruin as ſuch, bur only in the Glory of God's 
Juſtice vindicated thereby, Rev. 18. 20- and deriding their vain 
and carnal confidence in their wicked courles. . 

7 Lo, this is the man 7 that made noc God his ſtrength 
4: but tiuſted in the abundance of his riches x, and 
ſtrengthned himſelf in his || wickedneſs. 

t Theſe are the Triumphant Words of the Righteous. "This is 
the great and famous Man, take ſpecial Notice of him, and of 
his doleful end. « That truſted and feared Seu! more than God, 
and was willing to purchaſe Saul's Favour with God's Diſpleaſure. 
* Thought bimſelf ſecure in his great and growing Wealth, with- 
out God's Protection or Bleſſing. | ; 

8 But I|| am like * a green olive-tree y in the houſe of 


God z: I crutt in the mercy of God for ever and ever. 
y When Doeg and his Brethren ſhall wicher and periſh, I, who 


have made God my Refuge, I whom he deſpiſed aad perkcuted, ing t# him, G. 


b i e- Where there was no greatnor ſufficient Cauſe of Fear, See | 
; L'v, 26+ 36: Deutero- 28- 65+ Job 15- 21. Prov: 28. 1, They who : 
i defigned ro ſecure themſelves from all Fear and Danger, by their 

; contempt of God, and by the Perſecution of good men, and by o- 

| ther wicked courſes, were by thoſe means filled with the Terrors. 

| which they ſought ro avoid. c Hath nor only broken their 6ones, 

1+ e Their ftrength and force, which is oft noted by Bones, 

as Pſalm 6. 2 and 31: 10 and 51: 8- butalſo diſperſed them hi= 

ther and thither, ſo as thereis no Hopes of a Re-union and Reſtay« 

ration. d i- e. Againſt my People, exprefled verie 4. or 1ſrael, or- 

Sion, as1t 1s in the next verſe. e Thou, O Zion or Jeruſalem, which 

they befiege. f For the great and itrange diſappointment of their 

Hopes and Confidence. It was a great Reproach to them, for ſuck 

numerous and mighty Forces, to be baffled and conquered by thoſe 

whom they thought to ſwallow up at a Morſel & Or R-je#ed. 

them, curſed them. Therefore ic is no wonder if they could not 

ſtand before thee- | 


Zion ! when God bringeth back the captivity of his —_ _ 
people, facob ſhall rejoyce, and Ifrael ſhall be glad. 4 gue. 


Salvat,on;, 
ESAL LIY. _} 


To the chief muſician on Neginoth, Maſchil «P/alm of | 
David, * when the Ziphims came and ſaid to Saul, , 

| Doth not David hide himſelf with us ? a. . 

a Of which he ſpeaks, « Same 23. when they did ſeek to betray 
him a ſecond time- 

The P[almift complaining of hus Oppreſſirs, prayeth for God's Prote#:on ; 
and for the righteous puniſhment of hu Enemies, 1 —— 73. Placeing his 

Hope in God's Help, 4, 5» He promiſuth a fres Sacrifice of Thanksgiv* 


"4's Save 


Sarw.23. 
aad 26. x, 


+a o—_— << dt 


| 


10 


EE 


*PC(.118.7. 


'vered me. 


{Heb theſe them off in thy truth b. 
thatob(erve 


Gre me, O God, by thy Name 6, and judge me c 
by thy ſtrength. 
6 i.e. By thy own ſtrength, as the next Words explain it, 
becauſe I have no other Refuge. Or, for thy Name, i e, For thy 


PSALM 8. 


own Glory, which is concerned in my Deliverance. © i.e. Judge 
or give Sentence for me, or plead my Cauſe, as this Phraſe is oft 
taken, as we have ſeen. 

2 Hear my prayer, O God ; give ear to the words 
of my mouth. 

3 For * ſtrangers 4 are riſen up againſt me, and 
oppreſſors ſeck atter my foul ; they have not ſet God be- 
fore them e. Selah. 

a The Ziphites, whom, though Iſraelites, he calls Strangers in res 
gard of rheir Barbarous and perfidious Diſpoſition, and Carriage 
towards him, by which they ſhewed themſelves ro be eſtranged 
from God, as the wicked are ſaid to be, Pſalm 58. 3. and from the 
Common-wealth of 1-2e!, and from all the Laws of Piery and Hu- 
manity. For which Cauſes he calls ſuch perſons Heathens, Pſalm 
59+ 5. and elſe-where. e They caſt off all regard to thy Preſence 
and Authority, and all fear of thy Judgments. | 

4 Behold f, God is mine helper: * the LORD #s 


with them that uphold my ſoul g. 

f Conſider it, and- ſee the vanity of all your wicked prattices 
againſt me. g He fights for them, and on my behalf, and there- 
fore againſt all mine Enemies. | 

5 He jhall reward evil unto + mine Enemies ; cut 

.k Or, for or according to thy Truth; Whereby thou art engaged to 
fulfil thy Promiſes made to me, and thy Threatnings denounced 
againſt thine and mine implacable Enemies. . 

6 I will freely ſacrifice unto thee ; I will praiſe thy 
name, O LORD, for ic & is good /. | 
_ #3 Not by Conltraiat, as many do, becauſe they are obliged to 
It, and cannot negle& it withour Shame and Inconven.ence to 
themſelves, but with a willing and chearful Mind ; Which thou 
loveſt in and above all Sacrifice. & Either thy Name: Or rather, 
to Praiſe thy Name. 1 i. & An A& of Juſtice, and Picty, and 
Gratitude, | | 

7 For he hath delivered me ou: of all trouble: and 


.mine eye hath ſeen »z his defire u upon mine enemies. 

- He ſpeaks of it as a thing already done; Either, to expreſs 
his Aſſurance of it: Or, becauſe this Plalm was made after it was 
done- » Or, thy Pergeance: Which may be underſtood our of verſe 
5 Burt there is no neceſlity of any Supplement ; the Words in 
the Hebrew run thus, Mzne eye hath looked upon mine Enemies : Either 


_ with delight, as this Phraſe ſignifies, Pſalm 22- 17- and 27+ 4* and 


elſe-where ; Or without fear or ſhame. I ſhall not be afraid to 
look them in the Face, having Ged on my ide, 
PSALIJLY. 
: The ARGUMENT. 
EW Pſalm was certainly compoſed by David, when he was 
greatly diſtreſſed and perſecuted ; Either by Sau/,or rather, 
by Abſalom, and betrayed by ſome pretended or former Friend. 

To the chief muſician on Neginoth, Maſchil, A P/alm 

of David, 

David being ſurrounded and ſurprized with danger and diſtreſs, complaineth 
to God, 1 --—- 8, Prayeth for the fruftrating the praftice of his cruel 
and falſe Enemies, & —— I5. And ftrengtheneth himſelf with God's 
protetFion, 16 —18. and his Enemies utter deſiruftion, 19 — 23. 

67% ear to my prayer, O God: and hide not thy 

ſelf a from my ſupp!ication. 


. 


8s Turn not away thy Face and Ear, as one reſolved not to hear | 


Qor help- 
2 Attend unto me, and hear me : I mourn in my 
complaint, and make a noiſe b. 


b For my Miſery is very great, and forceth Tears and bitter 
- Cries from me. 


3 Becauſe of the voice c of the enemy, becauſe of 


the oppreflion of the wicked : For they caſt iniquity 


upon me 4d, and in wrath they hate me e. 
 E i. e, Their Clamours and Threats, and Slanders and infolent 
Boaſtings; All which are hateful to thee, as well as injurious to 
me. d The 
their wicked and injurious, and miſchievous prafticcs. Or, 2. They 
lay many Crimes to my charge falſly,as if by my wickedneſs I was 
the cauſc of all my Ca!amitics. e Their anger and rage againſt 
me, is no ſuddenand tranſitory Paſſion, but is boyled up into ma- 
lice and hatred. = 

4 My hearrt is ſore pained f within me: and the ter- 


rors of death g, are fallen upon me. 

Ff With pains, like thoſe of a- travelling Woman, as the word 
ſignifies. My heart, which hath-commonly ſupported me in my 
diſtrefſes,is now ready to ſink within me: Therefore Lord pity and 
help me. g Either deadly terrors; ſuch as ſeize upon Men in the 
agonies of Deach: Or fearof Death; which is the more grievous 
to me, becauſe my Death will refle& diſhonour upop thee, and 
bring many miſcrics upon the People 

Fearfulneſs and trembling are come upon me, and 


+ Heb. c- horror hath + overwhelmed me. 
6 And I ſaid, O that I had wings like a dove 4; for | 


then would I fly away and be ar reſt ;. 


Lo then would I wander far off, and remain in the } 


wilderneſs k. Selah. > 
þ Which being fearful, and purſued by birds of prey, flyes 

away, and that very ſwiftly and far, and into folitary p'accs, 

where it hides and ſecures it ſelf in the holes of the Racks, or in 

ſome other ſecret and ſafe place. | | 

preſent diſpoſition and deſire. # Or, that I might, or where I might 

be at reſt, or dwell, in ſome ſertled and ſafe place, and be delivers 


ſenſe is; either 1. They make me the great obje& of 


Plal. Ly, 


ed from thoſe uncertainties and wanderings to which I am now 
expoſed. k Where I might be free from the company and cage, 
and treachery of my wicked Enemies ; who are worſe than the 
wild Beaſts of the Wilderneſs. 


8 I would haſten my eſcape frem the windy ſtorm 
and tempeſt 1. 


/ From the force and fury of mine Enemies, which now highly 
threatens me. 


9 Deſtroy, O LORD, and * divide # their tongues 
2: For T have ſeen o violence and ſtrife p in the city g. 
mn i.e. Deſtroy them by dividing » i- e- Their Speech, as thou 
didſt at Babel, Gen. 11+ their Votes and Opinions, and Countels.*, 
Which was eminently done among Abſalom's followers, 2 Sam, 17. xa, ſs 
0 Or, I do ſee, ot perceive, by certain and general report. p That ,, s & 
Injuſtice and Fraud, and Oppreſſion and Contention bear rule OY 
there, inſtead of that publick juſtice and Peace which I eſtabliſhed 
and maintained init- q Either 1- In Keilah, where Davidthought 
to abide, x Sam. 2z Or 2. In Gibeah, where Saul had his abode. 
Or rather, 3. In Jeruſalem , which is called the City by way of 
Eminency ; and which in 4bſalom's time was the chief Seat of Re. 
bellion, and a meer ſink of all fins. And this Circumſtance is not- 
ed as an aggravation of their wickedneſs, that it was committed 
in that Ciry, where the Throne and Seat of publick Juſtice was 
ſettled ; and where God was in a ſpecial manner preſent and wor= 
ſhipped ; and where they had great opportunities, both for the 
knowledge and pratice of their ſeveral Duties 


io Day and night they 7 go about it s upon the 
walls thereof;r: miſchief alſo and forrow are in the 


midſt of it. 


ri-e The violence and ſtrife laſt mentioned, verſe 10. s Do 
encompaſs it, and are as it were the Garriſon, by which they de- 
ſign to defend it. t In the more outward parts, as allo :n the 
ve:y miaſt of it, as it follows. So that all parts were horribly cor« 
rupted. 

11 Wickedneſfs 7s in the midſt thereof * 
guile depart not from her ſtreets. 

u The places of buying and ſelling, and of publick and common 
Converſation. So their tins were both univerſal and impudent, 

iz For it was not an enemy x that reproached me, 
therr could I have born it y ; neither es it he that hat- 
ed me 2, that did magnifie himſelf againſt me, then I 
would have, hid my ſelf from him a. | 
x Either 1- Not an open and profeiſed Enemy: Or rather, 
2, Not an old and invetcrate Enemy,as may be gathered from the 
following deſcription. y With more patience, becauſe I could 
expe& nothing elſe from ſuch perſons. z With a manifeſt or c1d 
hatred. a I could and ſhould caliiy haye prevented or avoided the 
effc&s of his hatreds 

I 3 Bur 4: was thou, + a man, mine equal b, * my +1g,, 
guide c, and mine acquaintance. Manacards 

b Not in Power and Dignity, which could not be, but in repu- # 0m 
tation for his deep Wiſdom and excellent Condu&, and the great in- !9%. 
fluence which he had upon me, and upon all my People. c Whoſe *Pl. 41.9 
Counſel I highly prized, and conſtantly ſought and followed. All 
which agrees very well to Achitophel. See 2 Sam 15-12,31-and 16:23- 

14 f We took ſweet counſel togecher 4, and we wal- fHeb.vb 
ked unto the heuſe of God e in company f. mon 

d I imparted my ſecret Thughts and Deſigns to thee with great Craſ. 
delight and fatisfa&tion. e We agreed no leſs in exerciſes of Piety, 
than in As of State and Policy. f Or, in conſort, or with con« 
ſent, as all the Antients render it, He ſeemed as forward in Re- 
ligion as Þ 

15 Let deeth ſeize upon them g, and let them go | 
down quick into * || hell 4: For wickedneſs 5s in their 
dwellings 3, and among them K&. 

Z i e Him and all ſuch falſe-hearred Wretches, that pretended 
Religion with wicked defign, and now have manifeſtly Apoſtatized 
both from the profeſſion and pradtice of it, and fallen into all man- 
ner of wickedneſs. For ſuch are the vileſt of men, and moſt ob« 
| NOXIiOUus to the curſe of God h Or, into the Grave, cut them off by 
a ſudden and violent death, as thou didſt thoſe Numb. 16- 32+ Bur 
theſe Imprecations uſed by inſpired Perſons in extraordinary Caſes, 
1s no precedent for our imitation» #3 Or, where they ſojourn, They 
carry their wickedneſs along with them from place to place, and 
leave the impreſſions and effeAs of it whereſoever they come. 
k Heb.1n their Inwards, Wickedneſs is deeply rooted in their Hearts, 
and it breaks forth in all their Houſes and AQtions, 

16 As for me, I will call upon God: and the LORD 
{hall ſave me /. 

I Whilſt he deſtroys them, As they and Idiffer in the courſes 
of our Lives, ſo ſhall we in our Ends 

17 Evening and morning, and at noon »2 will I pray 
and cry aloud ; and he ſhall hear my voice. 

m The three ſtated times of Prayer amongſt the Jews. See Dan. 
6. 10+ As 3+ 1+ and 10. 3, 9, 30. 

18 He hath delivered » my ſoulin peace o,from the bat- 


tel that was againſt me: For there were many wich mep. 

» Either this is an Argument whereby he encourageth himſelf 

now to truſt God, becauſe of former deliverances : Or he ſpeaks 
| of a future dehverance ; as a thing done, becaule of the certainty 
of it» o Or, Inte Peace. He hath reſtored me from the ſtate of 
War, to my former Peace and Tranquility, p For there were more 
with me than againſt me ; even the holy Angels whom God 1m- 
{ ployed to defena and deliver me. See 2 Kings 6. 16+ Pſahn 34. 7- 
1 and 57+ 3- Or, for, (or rather, though, as this Particle is oft ren- 
- dred) there were many with me, or about me, or againſt me, as this 
Particle is rendred, Pſalm 85+ 3- and 94. 16. and in other places. 
So he ſpeaks here of his Enemies ; which ſeems beſt ro ſuit with 


*John », 
40,41, &, 
ohn 19, 


9.20, & 


deceit and 


| Or, the 
Grave 


All which fitly repreſents Davis's | the Context; for of them he ſpeaks implicitly in the foregoing 


words, and expreſly in che following. 


I9 God 


WH 


LVL 


10r with ab 
glam * 'fo f 5 
ere be 
PLAATD 2 
if they VU. 
{yr ut Go 
Gde 


bu 
he 

b 
flati 


que 
Ws. , © 
lit 6.25. ſha 
[12-22 tO 
Itet-5. J© 2 
(0h, Gift. ſen, 
137.24 Got 


ul 574 4* 
al64 3. t 


\ 
! 


Ml. LVL 


[Or with 
glow * '{o 
ere be 
gUha"gers 
F312, 

{ar 10 


Gude 


fleb. he 
buth pro» 
{ad, 


| M[.28, 3þ 
ul 574 4 
ad 64- 3. 


Mts. 
Nt 6.25, 
[124 220 
Ihet: 5. 7 6 
10+, Gife. 
Up.24- 


MMeb:men 
Finds | 
nd deceit; 
"Pal. 5.6; 


W half 
ther days 
Ge Prove 


by, 


(0+, apo. 
@ PG/m 
Dag, 
lam: 


I 


F $4 


19 God (hall hear 9 and afflit them », even he that 
abideth of old 5, Selah : || becauſe they have no changes 


;, therefore they fear not God «. 

qo Either 1. My Prayers againit them, mentioned verſe 1. 5.Or 
2. Their repro«ch-s, v. #2. their deceitful and rreacherous ſpeeches, 
wv, 21. He ſaid God wouid hear hs woice, v. 179, now he adds that 
God will hear his En-mies voice alſo, of wh ch he ſpake v. 3s 
; Or, teſtifie againfl them, or give an anſwer to them ; not in words, 
but really, and by dreadful puniſhments, as this word ſignihes, 

2eke 14. 4. which ſeems beſt to agree with rhe next foregoing 

word, God will hear and anſwer them. s Heb- he that inhabiteth An- 
tiquity or Eternity; who is Eternal, and therefore unchangeable, 
and Almighty ; and conſequently as he ever was, fo he ſtill is and 
will be ready to defend his People, and to deſtroy their Enemies ; 
and none can prevent nor hinder him, in either of theſe deſigns. 
: Either 1: For the better : Becauſe they do not repent nor turn 
from their ſins. But then the next Clauſe muſt be rendred, as it is 
in the Herew, and not fear God, Or rather, 2- For the worſe ; for 
of ſuch deſtruftive Changes, this word when applyed to perſons, 
is generally uſed in Scripture, as Job 10. 17+ and 14. 14+ Oc. Be- 
cauſ: they meet with no croſles nor diſappointments, and hither- 
to all their Counſels ſucceed well, and the People flow in to them 
unanimouſly ; as it was in the beginning and progreſs of 4b/a- 
lom's Rebellion. # Their proſperous ſucceſs makes them go on 
ſecurely and obſtinately in their wicked courſes, without any re- 
gard to God, or dread of his Judgments: There being nothing 
which more hardens men's hearts, and makes them preſumpruous 
and incorrigible, than uninterrupted proſperity. See Pſalm 30+ 6. 
Prov. 1+ 32+ fre 22+ 2To 

20 He x hath put forth his hands y againſt ſuch as be 
at peace with him z : + he hath broken his covenant 4. 

x 1 e- They, the perſons laſt mentioned. Before the ſingular 
number, wv. 13, 14- was ſuddenly changed into the plural, v- 15. 
that the punithment might reach not him only, but his Partners, 
in thoſe treacherous and treaſonable Aﬀtions. And here 1s as ſud- 
den a change, fiom the plural into the ſingular, and he returns to 
that perſon, who was the chief contriver and promotter of this 
Rebellion under Abſalom, even to Achitophel, of whom he ſpoke, 
verſe 13- and though he doth not excuſe the reſt, as we have ſeen, 
yet he lays the chief blame upon him, and here he adds new aggra- 
vations of his Treaſon. y In way of force or violence, as this 
Phraſe is uſed, Ger. 37. 22. 1 Sam. 26+ 9. Neh. 13.21. As 12.1, 
z Againſt me, who gave him no provocation nor diſturbance, 
but lived in great peace, and ſecurity and friendſhip with him. 
a All thoſe ſolemn obligations, by which he was tyed to me, both 
as his King and as his Friend. 

21 * The words of his mouth were ſmoother than 
butter, but war was in his heart. b: his words were ſofter 


than oyl, yet were they drawn {wordsc. 
b He covered his treaſonable and bloody Deſign, with fair and 
flattering Speeches. «c Pernicious in their Deſign and Conſe- 


> *Caſt thy || burden 4 upon the LORD, and be 
ſhall ſuſtain thee: he * ſhall never ſuffer che righteous 
to be moved e. 


a4 Or Portion, Heb. Gift ; Whatſoever affliftion God giveth, or | 
ſendech to thee ; for even the tufferings of good men ate called |; 


God's Gifts in Scripture, Phil- 1- 29+ John 18- 11+ So it is a SyneC- 
dochical Expreſſion. Or whatſoever Gift thou deſireſt from him. 
Although tae following words of the Verſe ſeem to reſtrain it to 
Afﬀi&@ions. The Senſe is: All thy Afﬀairs and Croſles, and Cares 
and Fears, lay them upon the Shoulders of the Almighty, by Faith 
and Prayer, with a confident expeCtation of a good iſſue. He di- 
re&eth this Speech to himſelf, or his own Soul, as he-oft doth in 
this Book, and withal to all good Men in like circumſtances. 
e i- & To be removed, to wit, from his ſure and happy ' eſtate. 
Or, which agrees as well with the Hebrew, He ſhall nor ſuffer the 
Righteous to be moved, or fall for ever, as he doth wicked men. 
Though he may for a ſeaſon ſuffer them to be ſhaken, yer he will 
not ſuffer them to be utterly overwhelmed. 

23 But thou, O God ſhalt bring them f down into the 
pit of deſtruction:+ * bloody and deceitful men g Þ ſhall 


not live out half their days & ; but I will truſt in thee z. 
_ f My wicked Enemies of whom I have hitherto ſpoken. g That 
colour their cruel intentions with ſpecious and deceitful pretences; 


| #kb.fhgp Which are moſt hateful to God, and all Men. h Not half of what 


others live, and they by the courſe of nature might live ; but ſhall 
be cut of by God's juit Judgment, by an untimely and violent 
Death. i And in this confidence I will quietly and patiently wait 
upon thee, for their downfal and for my deliverance. 


PSA kk. +5 


To the chief muſician upon Jonath-elem-rechokim #, 
|| Michtam of David, when the * Philiſtines cook him 


in Gath 6. | 
Which is ſuppoſed to be the Name of a Song. But many render 
it, as the words ſignific, Concerning the dumb Dove a far off. All 
which agrees very well to David in his preſent circumttances. 
He calls himſelf a Dove for his Innocency; and folly (which is 
aſcribed to the Dove, Hoſea 7- 11:) in caſting himſelf into this 
ſnare; and for his vexation and perſecution by his Enemies, 
thoſe birds of prey ; and for his ſad and mournful poſture. S:- 
lent he was, and it was his prudence ſo to be in this place and 
condition; and he was in a place remote enough from his Fa- 
thers Huuſe, and from God's Sanftuary where his Heart was. 
b When being chaſed by Saul's reſtleſs Malice, he had put him- 
ſelf into the hands and power of the Philif#ines at Garth, Where 
when he was, the following M:ditations came into his mind, 
which after his eſcape he d:geſted into this Order and Pſalm. _ 

avid praying to God, complaineth of his ſufferings, and magnifi:th hu 
Word, 1 anno 10, Is confident of Goa's fulfilling is, and promiſeth to 
praiſe lum forit, 11, 12+ 


{ I now am. 


| 

£ & Þ Plal. LVR 

BE merciful unto me, O God, for manc would ſwal- 
_ low me up4: he fighting daily oppreſſeth me. 

c 1. e- Men, weak and miſerable Men, as the word ſignifies, 
whom thou caaſt cruſh in an inftant; Sau! and his Courtiers, who 
have driven me hither; and now Achiſh and the Philiſlines, who 
have oft ſought my ruine. wh ch now they have opportunity to 
effect. d Like wild and ravenous Beaſts, rather than Men. Heb 
hath ſwallowed me up. The thing 15 begun, and in a manner done, 
if thou doe!t not miraculouſly prevent it. 

27 Mine enemies e would daily ſwallow we up: For THebminll 
they be many that fight againſt mef, O thou moſt High g. ejervers. ol 
e Heb. my Obſervers, that narrowly look to all my paths, and 
watch for my Haltings, and for an Opportunity to deſtroy me. 
f They truſt to their great numbers; wherein they know them- 
ſelves to be much ſuperiour to me. g Who from the high place 
wer norigs all cheir plots, and canſt moſt eaſily diſturb and blaſt 

them, 

3 What time I am afraid I will truſt in thee þ. 

þ When I have the greateſt cauſe of Fear, I will rely upon thy 
Providence and Promule for my Deliverance. 

4 * InGod will I praiſe his word zZ; in God I haveput , 
my tra I*will not fear * what fleſh & can do unto me. , | 

7 The Senſe is, either 1. I will praiſe or boaſt in the Lords »pr. ,.9. £\lf 
Word, or the Lord for his Word. Or, 2. With or by the Lord (ie. ba; 
by his favour or help) 1 will praiſe his Word. Or rather, 3s This, | Wi 

It; 
ready in mine hand. k Infirm and mortal men, altogether un- 


as I humbly conceive; There are many things to be praiſed and 

celebrated in God, his Power, and Wiſdom, &c- but amongſt all - 

able to oppoſe thy infinite Majeſty ; called Flgh by way of con- | 
tempt, as Pſalm 78. 39. 1ſa- 31+ 3+ Fer: 17+ 5. | | 


Ver: 10! 


in all their Exigencies, and particularly and eſpecially for that 
promute of the Kingdom made to me ; for which I will now praiſe 


and above all, I ſhall at this time praiſe him for his Word, which 
him, becauſe Iam as ſure of its accompliſhment, as if I had it al- 


he hath magnified above all his Name, as 1s ſaid Pſalm 138- 2 even for 
his Promiſes of Prote&ion and Deliverance made to his People 
5 Every day || they wreft my words }: all their | Or, 9 | 
thoughts are againſt me for evil ». words || 
I They miſconſtrue and pervert my moſt innocent Expreſſions, bring ſor« 
—_——— them _ matter of Calumny, wherewith they may in- 199. 
cenie Sau againſt me. Or. They perplex my Affairs, m It is their 
whole ſtudy to do me miſchief, n 


6 They gather themſelves together », they hide them- 


_ o, they mark my ſteps p when they wait for my 
oul q. 


» After they have ſevera'ly imployed their thoughts againſt me, 
they meet together to compare their thoughts, and to put them in 
execution. 9 They lurk ſecretly; either that they may pry into 
all my moſt private a&ions; or that they may ſurprize me with 
miſchief unawares Compare Pſalm 10- 8- Prov. 1+ 11. fp i. & All 
my goings and doings,that they may find ſome occaſion to reproach, 
or eatangle and-ſo deſtroy me- q Or Life, to wit, to take it a= 
way from me- 

7 Shail rhey eſcape by iniquity r? in 7h;ne anger caſt 
down s the peoples, O God. | — 

7 Shall they ſecure themſelves by ſuch injurious and malicious 
. Practices, whereby they do not only vex me, but provoke and de- 

ipiſe thee? Shall they have ſucceſs inſtead of the puniſhments 
which thou haſt threatned, and they have deſerved ? God forbid. 
But the words may be read without an Interrogation, By their ini- 
quity they hope to eſcape; or, they de eſcape, at preſent : But Lord 
do not ſuff-r rhem thus to eſcape. 5 This is oppoſed to their pre- 
ſent exaltation and triumphs over poor David, and to their hopes 
and confidence of ſafety and ſucceſs: # i- e- Theſe People, of 
whom I am ſpeaking, to wit, my malicious and wicked Enemies, 
as well thoſe followers of Saul, as theſe Philiſtines amongſt whom 


at 


| 
45 
'F 
lþ | 
: 
[4 
t] 
ty 
[4 
13 
| 


8 Thou telleſt my wandrings «, put thou my tears - 
into thy bottle x: * are they not in thy book y ? " Mal: 32 

u Here F have been hunted from place to place, and am now 16; 
driven hither. « Regard and remember, and pity them, » Bur 
why co I pray to God to do that which I am well aſſured he is of 
himſelf inc:ined to do, and hath already done ? 

9 When TI cry «nto thee, then ſhall mine enemies turn 


| back z : this I know, for God 3: for me. SD 
2 When I have no- other Arms or Force, which is my preſent 
caſe, my Prayers ſhall be ſufficient to overthrow mine Enemies. 
10 * In God will I praiſe 4s word: in the LORD 
will T praiſe his word 8. | 
a What I have already engaged to do, wv 4: that I do again and 
again promiſe to do, and I cannot ſufficiently praiſe thy Goodneſs - 
in making Promiſes, and thy Faithfulneſs in keeping them. 
11 In God have I put my truſt ; I will not be afraid 
what man can do unto me. | 5 
12 * Thy vows are upon me 6b, O God: I will ren- * pc; 658 
der praiſes unto thee, = 
b As I have prayed to thee, and am afſured that thou wiltſt de- 
liver me, ſo in confidence thereof I have made Vows to expreſs 
my gratitude to thee, and I acknowledge my ſelf obliged, and do 
reſoive to perform tuem, : Ws 
13 For * thou haſt delivered my ſoul from death c : * pr: iis: 
wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling d, that I may 8, 9+ .-: 
walk before God e in * the light of the living f. © *Job 337 
c Which my Enemies deſigned, and my extream dangers threat- 3% 
ned. d Iam confident that chou wilt deliver, becauſe of thy pro- 
miſes, and my former experience- e i-e- That I may pleaſe, and 
ſerve, and glorifie thee, as this Phraſe implies, Gen- 5- 24. compared 
with Heb» 11- 5+ as alſo, Gen 6- 9- :and 197* 1 1Same 2+ 30. Which 
is the great end for which I defire Life. _ f Either 1. In Heaven, 
| Or cather, 2+ In this Life, which.is here oppoſed to the Deerh Jaſk 
6s 2-0» Mens 


bp 


* Ver: 43 


Ris. np ty=—— = SES, 


OR Fr tin ee ee en Wn Ie > SI EE n > Dor EEE I Ire EI ren 


Lt 
Ox 


« LVIL. F iS 4 


mentioned, as it is Job 33. 30; which is called Zight, Job 3- 20 * 
as Death is called Darkn-ſs, Job 10 21, 22. and oft elſe-where, 
and which is expreſſed, by beholding the Light, and the Sun, Eccle/. 


II. 7, 
PSAL LYVIL. 
To the chief muſician || Al-taſchith 4, Michtam of Da- 
r,deftroy vid, * when he fled from Saul in the cave 6. 
a Gol- , The word ſignifies, deſtroy not. Which ſome think tobe a Preface 
nPſalm. containing the ſum of the Pſalm, and reminding David of his 
Sam. great. diſtreſs, in which he then was ; which obliged him to 
and 24. make fervent Prayers to God, that he would not deſtroy him, 
nor give kim up into the hands of his Enemies, who always de- 
figned and deſired to deſtroy him, and now ſeemed to have a 
fair opportunity to do it. 6b Either r. That of Aaulam, 1 Sam: 
22+ Te or that of En-geat, 1 Sam. 24. I. + 
| The Pſalmiſt, tm Prayer, fleeth to God for proteFion and favour in his dan- 
| gerous condition, x == 5, Deſcribeth the wicked projefts of hu Enemies, 
| 6. And encourageth himſelf from God's mercy topraiſe him, 711. 
E merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto 
me c, for my ſoul truſteth in thee : Yea, in * the 
ſhadow of thy wings d will I make my refuge,until zheſe 


calamities e be over-paſt. 

c The repetition implies both the greatneſs of his danger, and 
the fervency of his Spirit in this requelt, and withal that his whole 
truſt and hope was in God's mercy. 4 i- e- Of thy protettion ; 
to which alone I truſt, and not to the ſhadow of this dark Cave, 
in which I now hide my ſelf. e Or the time of theſe Calamitries, 
which, I know, will ſhortly have an end- 

PL 138.8. 2 ] will cry unto God moſt high: uuto God that * 


| performeth allthings for me f. 

| f Heb. that performeth (or perfeiteth or finiſbeth, as this word 1s 
rendred, Pſalm 138-8- ie will certainly perform or finiſh) for 
or towards, or concerning me- He doth not expreſs what he per- 
formeth, or perfe&eth, or fulfilleth, bur leaverh it to be under- 
ſtood, as being eaſie to be underſtood : He prrformerth, or perfeFeth, 
to wit, all that he hath promiſed, engageth himſelf to perform, 
what he hath begun to do, or what is yer to be performed ; It be- 
ing uſual in the Hebrew Language to underſtand a Verbal Noun 
after the Verb. He implies that God is not like men, who make 
large promiſes, but either through inability, or careleſneſs, or un- 
faithfulneſs, do not perform them, but will certainly be as good 
as his Word. 

3 He ſhall ſend g from heaven, and fave me [| from 
the reproach of him that would ſwallow me up 4: Se- 
him that lah. * God ſhall ſend forth his mercy and his truth z. 
world g Either 1. His Angels, 4s Dat 3. 28+ Or, 2+ His help- Or, 3. 
walw me His hand ; which is underſtood after this Verb, 2 Sam- 6: 6- by 
up. comp. 1 Chron. 13-9. where it is expreſſed: Or rather, 4. His 
Pf. 40.113: Mercy and his Truth, as it here follows, where alſo this Verb is re- 
land go 3- peated, before thoſe words. h 1. e- From that ſhameful deſtru- 
and 6+ 7. Qtion which they deſign to bring upon me. Or rather, as it is ren- 
dred in the Macgent of our Bible, and by many others, and as it 
is in the Hebrew, He hath repreached, (i. et He will certainly put 
to ſhame or reproach ) him that would ſwallow me up,by diſappoint- 
ing his expeQation, and delivering me from his rage. # 1. e. Shall 
ditcover them by rheir proper fruirs, to wit, by affording his gra- 
cious help in purſuance of his Promiſes. 

4 My foul js among * lions & ; Tlye / even among m 
them that are ſet on fire », even the ſons of men o, whoſe 
teeth p «re ſpears and arrows q, and their * tongue a 


ſharp ſword. 

k I live in the midſt of a generation of fierce and bloody men ; 
which both in Scripture and other Authors, are oft called Zyors. 
I T have my abode and converiation. 9» Which Particle 1s eaſily 


Pr G1- 4+ 
kt 73. 28, 


: 
: 
, 


| 
| Or, here- 
proacheth 


| 


*PC.35:17: 
and 58 6: 
{®Pſ55-25. 


as is fully expreſſed James 3- 6- who are meer Fire-brands and In- 
cendiaries, that are continually breathing out their wrath and 
threatnings, and incenſing Sau! againit me« o Whereby he ex- 
Plains what he meant by Lyons, and tells us, they were Beaſts in 
the ſhape of Men. p Which may be conſidered ; Either, 1. As 
Inſtruments of Deſtruftion, as they are in Lyons. Or rather, 2- As 
Inſtruments of Speech, as they are in Men; for it here follows by 

. way of explication, as the manner is, and their Tongue. And both 
ſeem to ſignifie their wicked and pernicious Calumnies, of which 
he every where complains, and particularly in the Hiſtory,to which 
this PGIm ſeems to relate, 1 Same 24 10- and by which they de- 
figned to promote his deſtrution- 9 Io £- They orievoully wound 

*Pſ: 7. 6. my name, andare deviſed to do me miſchief. 

&2158.13. 5 * Be thou exalted r, O God above the heavens s: 


let thy glory be above all the earth 7. 

r Glorifie thy Power, and Goodneſ: s, and Juſtice, and Paithfulneſs 
by my. Deliverance, all which are expoſed to cenſure and reproach, 
whileſt thou ſuffereſt ungodly wretches to oppreſs and trrumph o- 
ver the Innocent and Righreous, that put their truſt in thee- 5 1- e, 
Higher than the Heavens, or to the higheſt degree poſſible ; or a- 
bove all the falſe gods which are ſuppoſed to reſide in Heaven. 
z i-e- Aboveall Men upon Earth, ſome whereof do now audaciouſ- 
ly lift up themſelves againſt thee, and above thee- Or, zhrough (as 
the Hebrew Particle is commonly rendred, and it is no new thing 

'to have the ſame Word or Particle diverfly taken in the ſame 
Verſe, as hath been formerly ſhewed) the whole Earth ; not only a- 
mongſt thine own.people, bur ſo that even the Heathens thall be 

SPC: 7. 16+ forced to acknowledge and admire thy Glorious Deeds: 

| andg: 15. 6* They have prepared a net for my ſteps, my ſoul is 
bowed down # : they have digged a pit before me x,into 
the midſt whereof they are fallen themſelves y. Selah. 


u Or, was bowed down : I was even ready to fall and periſhs Or, 

mine Heart was oppreſſed and almoſt overwhelmed. x Heb, Before 
| my Face: Not in my ſight, for that would have been in vain, Prov. 
*Pfal.108. r. 17- but in my Way, where they thought I would go. y This 
1, &c. was fulfilled inSaul,who by purſuing fell into his hands,1 Sam.24.3. 


| | 
y 
4 
. 
þ 


| Or, Pre- - * My heart is|| fixed z, O God my heart 1s fixed ; | 
gore Twill ſing and give praile, | 


borrowed out of the foregoing Clauſe- z To wit, Of or from Hell, 


L, AM S. 7 
= Or, E/abliſbed, in a full aflurance of thy merciful help; Tr was 

ready to ſink with fear, or bowed down verſe 6. but now I haye 

through thy Grace conquered my Fears, and am fixed in a ſtedfaſt 

belief of thy Promiſes Or, # prepared, to wit, to ſing and give 

praiſe, as it follows. 

8 Awake up my glory a, awake plaltery and harp: . 

I my ſelf will awake early b. " 

a Either I. My Soul : Or rather, 2. My Tongue, the Inſtrument 
of Singing, which he was now about to do. veſes 7, 9. b Iwillrouſe 
up and imploy all the Powers of my Soul and Body, to ſer forth 
God's Prailes, 

9 I will praiſe thee, O LORD, among the people c. 
I will ſing unto thee among the nations. 

c In the great Congregations, amongſt the 1ſ-aelires of all Tribes, 
who are called by this Name, Deut. 33+ 19. and amongſt Heathens, 
as I ſhall have occaſion, as he often had. 

io * For thy mercy is great unto the heavens d, and 
thy truth unto the cluds. 

d re Is moſt evident, and greatly exalted. 

Ix Be *thou exalted, O God above the heavens : let 
thy glory 5+ above all the earth e. 


e Sec the Note 7 on verſe 5: 


PSA. STI 
; The ARGUME NT. 
_— Pſalm was compoſed.as very many others were,upon the 
occaſion cf thole wicked Calumnies, and unjuſt cenſures, 
and ſentences, which were paſſed upon him by Sal and his 
Courtiers. 
To the chief muſician, ||* Al-raſchith, Michtam of [Or,a4fre 

David. nt # Gol. 
David reproving wicked Judges, deſcribeth their Nature, 1-=5. And prays den Pſalm 

eth God to puniſh and deſtroy them, G==--9, For his own Glory, and the of David, 

Joy of the Righteous, 10, 11- * Pal, 57. 

Oye indeed ſpeak righteouſneſs #, O congregation Tit 
b ? do ye judge uprightly, O ye ſons of men c? 

a The queſtion implies a denyal: You cenſure me freely with- 
out any regard to Truth or Juſtice. 6 The word ſignifies a Band 
or Company of Men; and ſeems to point at Sau!'s Judges and 
Counſellors; who met togetver to conſult what they ſhould do 
againſt David; and provably paſſed a Sentence upon him, as guilty 
of Treaſon and Rebellion. «c So he calls them ; Either, 1. In con- 
temptand oppotlition to the ſons of God, or good Men- Or 2- By 
way of admonition. to mind them that they alſo were Men, and 
muſt give an account to (od for all their hard ſpeeches, and un- 
rightcous decrees againſt him. 

2 Yea, in heart d ye work wickedneſs; ye * weigh 
the violence of your hands e in the earth f. 

d Or, with your Heart, with free choice and conſent, and not 
only by conſtraint, and out of compliance with Saul. e Or, you 
weigh violence, or injuſtice with your hands, The Phraſe of weighing 
hath reſpe& ro their Office, which was to adminiſter Juſtice, which 
15 uſually expreſſed by a pair of Ballances. So he intimates that 
they did great wrong under the pretence, and with the formalities 
of Juſtice, and whilſt they ſeemed exattly to weigh and conſider 
the true ant fir proportion berween the A@ions and the Recom« 
pences allotted to them, they turned the Scale ; and partly to cur- 
ry Favour with Saul; and partly from their own malice againſt 
David; pronounced an unjuit Sentence againſt him, f Or, i» this 
Land, where God is preſent, and where you have Righteous Laws 
to govern you, and you profeſs better things. : 

3 The wicked are eſtranged g from the womb; they * 5m tk 
go aſtray ||, * as ſoon as they be born 3, ſpeaking lyes. 3% 

£ To wit, from God. Eph- 4. 18- and from all Goodneſs. þ Ei- 

ther, 1, Hyperbollically ; even from their tender years Or 2. Stri&- 
ly and pr y. So the ſenſe is: No wonder they att ſo unrigh- 
reouſly, for their very Natures and Principles are corrupt, even 
from their Birth: They are the wicked offipring cf ſinful Parents« 
And this hereditary and native corruption, though too common 
to all Men, he particularly aſcribes to theſe men ; Either becauſe 
their immediate Parents were ſuch as did not only convey a cor- 
rupt nature to them, but greatly improved it by wicked Counſel 
and Example: Or becauſe they themſelves had improved that 
ſtock of Original Corruption, and in ſtead of mortifying it, had 
made it their great deſign, and conſtant buſineſs to gratifie and 
obey it || By aQtuel fins, the fruit of their original ſin. ; From 
their Childhood, as ſoon as ever they were capable of the exerciſe 
of Reaſon, and the pradtice of finning, 

4 * Their poiſon & 5s F like the poiſon of a ſerpent 7; 
they are like the deaf || adder that ſtoperth her ear : 

Their virulent and malicious diſpoſition. 7 Partly in it ſelf, 
being natural and inveterate, and incurable ; and partly in its moſt + Heb-a6 
pernicious effetts. : cording t 

5 Which will not hearken to*the voice of charmers, ;;e lik 


[| charming never ſo wiſely m. weſs. 

»m This ſimilitude doth neither juſtifie the pra&ice of Charm- [|Or, Af, 
ing, which in the very word here uſed, is condemned, Dezt. 18. *Jer8. 1: 
1- No more than thoſe which are drawn from. the unjuſt Steward, Or, 6th 
Like 16- 1, &Cc- and 18. 2, &c+ and from #& Thief, Rev. 16. 15. Charm 
nor yet affirm the truth of what is reported, concerning the Aſps never ſe 
or Adders, which are ſaid to lay one Ear cloſs to the ground, and cuuning; 
to cover the other with their Tail, that ſo they may avoid the dan- 

ger of Enchantment; but only was taken from the common Opi- 

nion, which he pvetically mentions to this purpoſe : As they com- 

monly ſay of the Aſps or Adders, &c. ſuch really are theſe Men : 

Deaf to all my Counſels, and to the DifQates of their own Con- 
ſciences, and to the Voice of God's Law. And yet of the charms 

ing or inchanting of Serpents, mention is made both in other places 


*PC: 36. 5 
and 71. 19, 
and 8. 2; 
and ro8.,, 
*Verl. 5, 


YP(18.57 


*Pſ. 140.3: 
Eccleſ#10. 


thors, Antient and Modern, Hebrew and Arabick, and Greek and 
Latin, (Of which ſeemy Latin S20pſir.) And particularly the _ 
| Foe 


ot Scripture, as Eccleſ. 10+ 11+ Jer. 8+ 17. and in all forts of Aue bi 


Pſal. Lv, 


; Pal. 1 


* Job. 
4 19- 


*P[,64: 


[ 


*ob, 
Jo 16. 


+ Heb. 4 
Living 4a 
Wrath. 


Mm 4 «ac a Lb 


Pal. LIX- Pp $ 4 
4 bick Writers to whom theſe Creatures were beſt known) name ſome | 
ſorts of Serpents ; among which the Adder is one, which they call 
deaf, not becauſe they are dull of Hearing, but, as one of them ex- 
preſly faith, becauſe they will not be Charmed. 
6 * Break their teeth », O God,in their mouth:break 


out the great teeth o of the young lions, O LORD. | 
n Their Power and Inſtruments of doing Miſchief. He mentions | 
Teeth ; partly, becauſe the Adders poiſon lyes in its Teeth ; and 
partly, to make way for the following Metaphor. o Called the Grin- 
ders ; Which are more ſharp and ſtrong than the reſt, and more uſ- 
ed in breaking and rearing what they are about to eat. ; 
-7 Let them melt away as waters, which run continu- 


*Pſ64i3- ally p : * when he q bendeth his bow roſhvot his arrows,let 


them be as cut in pieces 7. | 
p As waters ariſing from melted Snow, or great Showers, or 
ſome other extraordinary cauſe, which at firſt run with great force 
and noiſe, and throw down all that ſtands in their way,butare ſud- 
denly gone, and run away and vaniſh, and return no more. 9 To 
wit, any or every one of mine Enemies, as appears from the fore- 
going and following words. 7, e Like Arrows broken aſunder, 
whilſt a Man ſhoots, which can do no hurt. 
8 As a ſnail which melteth 5, let every one of them paſs 
away * : like the untimely birth of a woman, rhat they 


may not ſee the ſun ?. BY 

s Which thruſts forth ; and ſeems to threaten with 1ts Horns, 
but is quickly diſſolved : For when it goes out of its ſhell, 2t ſpends 
its vital Moiſture, until by degree it waſte away and periſh.Which 
indeavouring violently and unſeaſonably to break forth from the 
Womb is choaked in the attempt, and doth not live to fee the Light 
of the Sun. 

9 Before your pots can feel the thorns #, he ſhall 


take them x away as with a whirlwind y, Þ both living, 


and in hss wrath z. 

u i. e. The heat of the Fire. kindled by the Thorns put under 
them for that purpoſe : Before your Pots can be thoroughly heated. 
* To wit, mine Enemies; whoſe ſudden deſtruction he deſcribes 
under this ſimilitude. » 7 e. Violently and irrefiſtibly. z Heb-«s 
living ( i. e Alive, as he did Korah, Numb. 16- the Particle, 4s being 
here not a Note of Similitude, -but of Truth or Aſeveration, as it 
3s John 1. 14. and oftelſewhere, as hath been noted : ) as in ( which 
propoſition is frequently underſtood ) wrath, 5. e. As a Man mov- 
ed with great Wrath aeſtroys his Enemy wirthour Mercy, and is 
ready to devour him alive, if it were poſſible : Or, both that which 
3s raw ( as the Hebrew word Chai ſignifies, Lev. 13. 16. 1 Sam. 2+ 
15. to wit, the raw Fleſh, which is ſuppoledto be put intothe por, 
that it may be boyled ) avd the burning Fire. There is indeed great 
variety of conſtru@ion and interpretation of theſe Hebrew words ; 
which is not ſtrange, eſpecially conſidering the conciſeneſs ofthe He. 
brew Language, and that this 1s a Proverbial Speech ; nor is it of 
any great importance, becauſe it is not in any great point of Faith, 
and becauſe the Senſe of it is agreed, the only difference being 
about the manner and ground of the Phraſe. The learned Reader 
may ſee more upon this place in my Latin Synopſes. 

10 The righteous ſhall rejoyce when he ſeeth the 


vengeance: * he ſhall waſh his feet in the blood of the 


wicked ||» ; | 
* 7. e. The Vengeance of God upon his 1mplacable Enemies: not 
ſimply for himſcW, bur for the bleſſed effeRts of it ; the vindication 
of Gods Honour, and the deliverance of himſelf and of all good 
Men. || 7. e. There ſhall be ſo great a {laughter of bis Enemies that 
he might, if he ſo pleaſed, waſh his Feet in their blood. See the 
ſame or like Expreſſions, P/al. 68. 23. I/a. 63- 3. Revel. 14, 20. 
1x So that a man ſhall ſay, Verily there is fa reward 


for the righteous:verily he is a God that judgeth in the 


earth T7. 

ft And theſe Adminiſtrations of Gods Providence ſhall be ſo evi- 
dent and convincing, that not only good Men ſhall be ſenſ1vle there- 
of, but any man that ſees them, yea, even ſuch as were apr to dif. 
pute or doubt of Gods Providence, ſhall upon this eminent occaſi- 
on, break forth into ſuch Exclamations as this, Nowl ſee that Re- 
ligion is not a vain and uprofitable thing, and that_ there is a God 
who doth now obſerve and govern, and when he ſees fir, judgeth 
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and will hereafter judge the whole 
World in Righteouſneſs, and recompence every man according to 


his works. 
PSAL AX 
The ARGUMENT. 


He matter and deſign of this Pſalm is the ſamein general, and 

for ſubſtance with the former, to wit, a declaration of the 

Cruelty and Treachery of his Enemies ; and a Prayer to God to de- 
liver him out of their hands. 


10;, 4. To the chief muſician,||Al-taſchith,Michtam of David:* 


*Job- 


4 19- 


*Tob, 
Jo 16. 


+ Heb. 4s 
Living 4s 
Wrath. 


t Heb. 
Fruit 0 


they Oc. 


0” ION 


ty we, when Saul ſent & they watched the houſe to kill him. 
len David, in danger, prayeth unto God for deliverance from his Enemies, 1,2. 
of relating his own Innocency and their Cruelty, He truſtethinGod,and pray- 
ood againſt them, 3 <=15, Promiſeth thankfulneſs to God for being his defence 
10am. and refuge, 16, 17. ; | 
Bu Eliver me from mine enemies «, O my God: | 
Te 37 defend me from them that riſe up againſt me. 
"P.18.,9 # He chiefly underſtands Sau!, bur ſpeaks in the Plural Number, 


2 Deliver me from all the workers of iniquity, and 
Gave me from bloody men. 


io 3 For lo, they lye in wait for my ſoul ; the mighty ' 
are gathered againſt me : not for my tranſgreſſion, nor 
for my ſin, © LORD 5; ; 


a 


L M S. | Fial. LI 
6 Without any provocation, or cauſe given them by me, I am | 
a ſinner before thee O Lord, but havedone them no injury. | 
4 They run c and prepare themſelves 4 without my | 
fault: awake # to help mee, and behold. + Heb. 
c To and fro, firſt to receive Sauls Commands, and then fo exe- meet mel 
cute them with all ſpeed and diligence. d Or, diſpoſe themſelves | 
here and there round about my Houſe, that they may catch me | 
| 
| 
| 
| | 


| 


when I go out of it. e Heb. ro meet me, as I come abroad, and to 
condutt me away with Safety. 


5 Thou therefore, © LORD God of hoſts, the God 
of Iſrael f, awake to viſit all the heathen ig : be not 
merciful þ tro any wicked tranſgreſſors 3. Selah, 

F A God in Covenant with all true 1ſ-2eliter, whom thou haſt 
promiſed to prote& and bleſs. g Or, theſe heathens, or Gentiles: Who 
though they are called and accounted 1ſraelites by their Birth ; yet 
in Truth, and in their Diſpoſitions and Manners, are meer Hea- 
thens and Barbarians: In which reſpe& ſuch men are elſewhere cal- 
led Strangers, Pſal. 54. 3. Men of Sodom and Gomorrah, Iſa. 1. 10. and as 
Ethiopians, Amos 9. 7. As among us ungodly Chriſtians, are oft cal- 
led Jews, or Turks, or Heathens, h For indeed thou canſt not with 
thine Honour,nor according to thy Word be merciful to any ſuch 
incorrigible offenders. z Or, perfidious Tranſgreſſrs, ſuch as perſe- 
cute me, and other good men, out of malice,and againſt their own 
Conſciences,which rellthem thatT am innocent,and with pretences 
of Friendſhip, He might well pray ſo vehemently againſt ſuch not | 
only for his own preſervation, but for the juſt and neceffary vindi- | 
cation of Gods Honour, and for the publick good of Mankind ; 
whoſe common intereC& it was, that by Miſcreants ſhould be 

y 


| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
| 


taken out of the way. 

6 They return at evening & : they make a noiſe like 
a dog /, and go round about the city mm. : 

k After they have been buſie all day ; either in plotting againſt 
me, or in hunting after me. In the Evening, when they thould 
compoſe themſelves to reſt,they return to their 01d trade of watch- 
ing for me : Which they did at this time all the Night long; 1 Sam. 
19. 11. { Either when he is hungry and purſuing his prey, and 
howls for meat ; or when he is enraged. and grins and ſnarles 
where he cannot, or dare not bite. » When they did nor find him 
in his own Houſe, they ſought for him in other Houſes, and parts 
of the City; where they ſuppoſed him to lurk. 

7 Behold, they beich our » with their mouth: ſwords 6 
are in their lips ; for * who, ſzy they; doth hear p ? 

nz Or, they pour forth ( to wit, words, for what elſe ſhou'd come 
out of the mouth ? Even ſharp and bitter words, as the next Clauſe 
explaines it ) abundantly and veh:zmently, as a Fountain doth Wa- 
ters, as this word ſignifies, ſee Prov. ig. 28. Fer 6. 7- 04. e. Words 
as keen and miſchievous as Swords, as Pſal. 55+ 21- and 57. 4. 
? David doth not hear us, either to diſcover,and ſo to prevent our 
plots, or to puniſh us for them : and God either doth'not hear, or 
not regard what we fay and do againſt David: And therefore we 
may ſpeak and a& what we think fit. 


8 But chou, O LORD, * ſhalt laugh at them 94;thou 
ſhalt have all the heathen in derifion. 
q Diſappoint their high confidences, and hopeful deſigns, and 


_ deride them, and make them ridiculous and contemptible to 


9 Becauſe of his ſtrength r will I wait upon thee: for 
God z> f my defence. 

r 2. e. Sauls ſtrength : Becauſe he is too ſtrong for me. Or ra-- 1;5h, place; 
ther, O my ftrength, as it is v., 179. And all thole antient and vene= * 
rable Tranſlatois, the LXX, and Chaldee, and vulgar Latin, render 
it, my firengch. In the Hebrew it is, his ſtrength, i. e. Dawids. For 
David ſpeaks of himſelf in the third perſon, as he oft doth. And 
{uch ſudden changes of perſons are utual, both in theſe Poerical 
Books ( as hath been noted before ) and elſewhere, as Dan, 9. 4.Mithe 
oy 8 

10 The God of my mercy s ſhall prevent mer: God , . . , 
ſhall let * me ſee my deſire « upon j' mine enemies. | 

5 7, e. ) The giver ofall that Mercy and Comfort which I either E - 
have or hope for. Heb. of his Mercy. But here alſo there is ( as ap- | * _—_ 
pears by comparing this with ws 17. ) a change of the perſon, as jerocr, 
there was inthe foregoing Verſe. e To wit, w:th the Bleſſmgs of Good- 
weſs, as itis more fully expreſſed, Pſal. 21. 3. Thou ſhalt help me, 
and that ſeaſonably, before it be too late, and ſooner than I expe&. 

% In their diſappointment and overthrow, as it follows : Which was 
very deſirable ro David, no leſs for the publick good, than for his . 
own ſafety and happineſs. | 

11 * Slay them not, left my people y forget z : ſcat- 
ter them 2 by thy power ; and bring them down þ, O 
LORD our ſhield. 


* To wit, ſuddenly, or atonce! . y My Countrey-men; or thoſe 
over whom thou haſt appointed me to be Governour in due time; 
z Their former Danger,and thy Glorious Mercy in delivering them, 
and their own Duty to thee for it. Hereby it moſt plainly appears, 
that David in thoſe and thelike Imprecations againſt his Enemies 
was not moved thereunto by his private Malice, or deſire of Re- 
venge, but by the reſpe& which he hadro Gods Honour,and the ge- 
neral good othis people. # Heb. make them to wander.As they wan« 
dred about the City and Country to do me miſchief, wv. 6. ſo let 
their puniſhment be agreeable to their ſin ; let them wander from 
place co place, to wir, for Meat, as it is expreſſed v. 15. that they 
may carry the Tokens of thy Juſtice, and their own ſhame to a1 
places where they come. 6b From that Power and Dignity in which 
thou haſt ſet them, which they do fo wickedly abuſe ; and from 
the height of their carnal hopes and confidences of ſucceſs againſt 


*PC 10.1 
Se 73-110 
& 94. 7s 


+ Heb m 


® See Gent. 
4- 14, I5e 


me. | | 

12 Ferthe ſin of their mouth, and the words of their 
lips c, let them even be taken 4d in their pride e; and 
for curling and lying f which they ſpeak g. 

c Fortheir ungodly and injurious, and pernicious Speeches, of 
which he ſpeaks ve 7. and in many other places 4 As in a ſnare 
inorder to theirruine. Let thy Judgments overtake them- e For 
their proud and infolent Speeches againſt thee, v. 7. f For their 

6 T 3 / Execra« 


1X 


U oy al 


PC. 44.9, 
b 


P $8 A 


Execrations and lying Reports, "which they have raiſed or ſpread 
abroad concerning Me Z& Which they are ready to utter upon all 


occaſions, 4 
12 Conſume them h in wrath, conſume them, that 


they may not be i: and let them knowkthat God ruleth ]. 


in Jacob”, unto »the ends of the earth o. Selah. 

þ By degrees ; and after thou haſt made them to wander about, 
v.11. 7 To wit, in the Land of the Living any more: As this 
Phraſe is frequently upderſtood : whereof divers inſtances have 
been given- & Experimentally, and to their coſt, / Over and a- 
bove them ; That though Sau! be King, yet God 1s his ſuper:our 
in Power and. Authority, and all things among us ſhall be diſpoſed 
not as it pleaſcth Saul, which his Paraſites are always ſuggeſting to 
him, . but as God will; and therefore I ſhall be preſerved, and in fit 

time Crowaed, in ſpight of al: that Saul or his Forces can do a- 

oainſt me. m In the Land, and over the people of 7re/, whoſe 

King and Governour he is ina peculiar manner. # Or, and wo: 

The ConjunCtion, and, being oftunderſtood, as hath been noted 

before. Theſe words may be referred ; either 1. To Gods Ruling, 

Jet them know that Ged ruleth, not only in Jacob ; but alſo to theends 

of the earth. Or 2. To mens knowing, ler them, or let men know even 

#0 the Ends of the Earth, that God ruleth im-Jacob ; Let thy Judgments 

be ſo manifeſt and dreadful in the deſtruQion of thy wicked Ene- 
mies, that not on!y J#aclites, but even the remote Nations of the 
World may fee it, and acknowledge thy Power and Pros idence in 
it. o Fitherof this Land; or rather, of the World. The Senſes, 
That-by thoſe eminent and extraordinary diſcoveries of thy Power 
<and\Wiſdom, and Juſtice, it may be evizen' both to them, and to 
all that hear of it, that t::ou art ne Puny or Inferiour, or Topical 

God, 'ike the gods of tie:thens, whole Government 1s confined 

to a narrow compaſs but the high and mighty God, and the great 

Ruler of the whole World. 

14 And at evening let them return,ond let them make 
2 noiſelike a dog, and go round about the city p. 

What was their ſin, and their choice to do with evi' deſign, 
ler it be their puniſhment to do it by coniiaint, and for Meat, as 
it follows v. 15. - 

I5 Let them wander up and down 7 for meatq ; || 
and grudge if they benor fatisfied r. | 

q To get a Livelyhood. r When their Bodies are hungry, Jer 
their Minds be diſcontenred. Or as others render the words, Ana 
lodge, or be forced to lodge all Night, when they are not ſatisfied. Let them 
go to their reſt with an empty Stomach. | 

16 But I will ſing of thy power; yea, I will ſing a- 
loud of thy mercy in the morning : for thou haſt been 
my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble. 

17 Unto thee 5, O myſtrength, willI ſing : for God 
is my defence, and the God of my mercy. 

5 i. e, Tothy Honour : Orrather, of or concerning thee; as that 
Particle is ſometimes uſed. 
: S) A EL E 6 : 

To the chief muſician upon Shuſhan-eduth #,]] Michtam 
of David, toteach b ; * when he ſtrove with Aram- 
naharaim c, and with Aram-Zobah 4, when Joab re 
turned, and ſmote of Edom in the valley of falr. 
twelve thouſand e. 


& This, like the reſt, ſeems tobe the Name of an Inſtrument, or 
Song, or Tune, then well known, but now quite unknownand 


forgotten ; it may be, and 1s by ſome rendred. The Lilly, or Roſe of 


the Teſtimos.y, or Oracle : But why it was ſo called, is a matter of 
meer conjeure, and of ſmall importance to us to kaow. 6 To 
wit, in an eminent manner : Or for the ſpecial inſtruftion of 
Gods Church an : People in ſome points of great moment;as,con- 
cerning the grievous Ca!lamities, to which Gods Churchand Peo- 
ple were obnoxaous, V. I. 2, 3. and concerning the certainty 
of Gods promiſes, and of their deliverance out of them, upon 
Condition of their Faith and Obedience. which Do&rines were 
of great moment, eſpecial'y to the Iſraelites, who were and were 
likely to be exerciſed in the ſame manner, and with the ſame va- 
riety and viciflitudes of Condition, under which their Anceſtors 
had been. Or, whereas other Songs were to be learned onls by 
the Levites, or by ſome of them, this poſſibly was one of them, 
which the people alſowere to be taug'r, and were to ſing upon 
occaſion,becauſe of the publick and general Concernment w hich 
they all had in the matter herein contained, c Or, rhe Syrians 
( ſo called from 4ram, the Son of Sem, Gen. 10. 22- ) of the two 
Rivers, or of Meſoporamia, the Country between thoſe two great 
and famous Rivers, Tigris, and Euphrates, a Or, the Syrians of Zo- 
bah, part of riaſo calicd, 2 Sam.6. 5, 12. e This Report ſeems 
not to agree with the Hiſtories to which this P/al2 is ſuppoſed to 
relate, 2 Sam. 8, 13. and 1 Chron. 18. 12. neither in the perſons 
lain, who are Edomites, 1 Chron. 18. 12. but Syrians here, and 
2 Sam. $. 13. nor intheir numbers, which are here only twelve 
thouſand, and there eighteen thouſand ; nor in the perſons to 
whom this ViRtory is aſcribed, who is Joab here, Pawvid,2 Sams. 
13. and Abiſþai, 1 Chron. 18. 12. But theſc Difficulties may eaſi- 
Iy be reſolved by theſe Conſiderations : 1. That David being 
King, and Joab Lord-General of all his Forces, and Abiſhai his 
L'icurenant-General, as to a conſiderable part of his Army, the 
ſame Vi&ory may well be aſcribed to any, or every one of them; 
as it is uſually done in like Caſes in tae Roman and Grecian Hiſto- 
ries. 2, That the Edomires and Syrians were united in this 
War. 3: That twelve thouſand might be ſlain in the pitche bar- 
rel, and the reſt by the purſuers in their flight. 4. That theſe 
ſeveral places may ſpeak of ſeveral Fights. Sec more of this bu- 
ſineſsin the Notes, on 2 Sam. 8. 13. 

The Pſalmiſt complaining of former Jad Judgments, . 13. acknowledgeth 
Gods preſent Mercy, 4. Comforting himſelf in the promiſes, he prayeth for 
help, and therein truſteth, 5 I 2. 

God, * thou haſt caſt us off f, thou haſt + ſcat- 


tered usg, thou haſt been diſpleaſed ; O turn 
thy ſelf co us again: 


L M Ss. 


f Or rej:#ed, or forſaken us, as tothy gracious and powerful pre- 
ſence, not only in the time of the Judges, but alſo during Sauls 
Reign. g Heb. broken us ; partly by that dreadful overthrow by the 
Phil:ſtins, 1 Sam. 31. and partly by the Civil War in our own 
Bowels, between me and I1/bboſheth. 
2 Thou haſt made the earth to tremble b ; thou haſt 
broken it: heal * the breaches thereof ;, for it ſhak- *p,,. 
ethe - 
þ A. Poetical and Hyperbolical Expreſſion, ſignifying great and 
dreadful changes among the people, as Hagg. 2. 7. compe with Heb. 
12. 26, 27- Scealſo r Sam, 14. 15. # Reconcile all thoſe differen- 
ces which our Civil Wars have made among us. 

3 Thou haſt ſhewed & thy people hard things : thou 
haſt made us to drink the wine of aſtoniſhment /. 

k Heb. Made them to ſee, 7. e. to experience or feel, as ſeeing is oft 
put, as Pſalm 49. 10. and oftelſewhere. 1 Thou haſt filled us with 
no Jeſs horrour and trembling, than men intoxicated with ſtrong 
and ſtupifying Drink, which they are forced to drink, Compare 


Iſa. 51. 17, 21. | 


4 Thou haſt given #2 a banner » to them that fear 
thee s : that it may be diſplayed becauſe of the truth 
p. Selah. 


” Either, 1. Formerly. As thou haſt ſometimes afflited thy 
people, ſo at other times thou haſt delivered them. Or rather, 2, 
Now lately by and under me. » Which is a Sign and Inſtrument. 
1. Of union. This pcople who were lately divided and under ſc- 
veral Banners, -thou hait now gathered together and united under 
one Banner, to wit, under-my Government 2. Of Battcl. Thou 


ehaſt given us an Army, and power to oppoſe our Enemiess We 


had our Banner to.ſet againſt theirs. 3. Of Triumph. We have 
not loſt o.ir Banner, but gained theirs, and brought it away 
in Triumph : Compare Pſal. 20. 5. e Or for, or on the behalf of chem 
that frar thee. An emphartical paſſage implying, that God. gave ſo 
great a Bleſſing to the people of 1ael, for the ſake of thoſe few ſin= 
cere Iſraelites which were among them. p Not for any merit of 
ours, but to ſhew thy fairhfulneſs in making. good thy promiſes 
which thou haſt made, both to me, concerning the eſtablithing of 
this Kingdom to me, and to my ſeed for ever, and to thy people in 
general ; whom thou haſt frequent'y promiſed to hear and help 
when they call upon thee in times of trouble. 


5 * Thar thy beloved q maybe delivered, ſave with 
thy right hand, and hear me. 

9 Thy beloved people laſt mentioned. 

- 6.God hath {ſpoken » in his holineſs : T willrejoyce s; 
[ will divide #« Shechem x, and mete out the Valley of 
SUCCOth y. . 

r Having prayed that God would fave and hear him, he now in- 
timates that God had Cone it already, and had prevenred his pray= 
&1S, and had ſpikin to him and of him, about the ſtabliſhing ofhis 
Throne s£ Or, #n th: Sanftuary, or Holy place, to which David uſed 
ro refort to ask Counſe!, and from whence God uſuaily gave out his 
Oracles Or rath-r, by hs Holineſs, as this very Word is rendred, 
P/al. 89. 35. which carries the form of an Oath, and implies that 
God did not ſimply ſpeak, but ſwore by his Holineſs, as it is there ex= 
preſſed. # Therefore | will tuin my prayers into praiſes, and Re- 
joycings for w hat God had already done, and as I am aflured, will 
further do on my benalf « Or, Diftrioute; wi:ich ſuppoſeth poſ- 
{eflion and dominion. » A place within Jordan, in Mount Ephraime 
"ee Gen, 33. 18, Joſ. 20. 7. y A p'\'ce withour Jordan. See Gen. 33: 
'7. Joſ. 13. 27 He mentions Shechem, and Succorh ; either, Synec- 
dochically for a'l the Land of Canaan, within and with: ut Jordan ; 
which having been formerly divided between him and 1hb:ſherh,was 
now intirely in his poliefſion: Or becauſe theſe two places had been 
in 1jbvoſheths hands, and jolfibly were extraordinarily d=vored to 
Sails Houſe, and utrerly averſe from David ; or for ſome other 
Reaſon now unknown. 

7 Gilcadz is mine, and Manaſleh a is mine;Ephraim 
alſo is the ſtrength of mine head b ; * Judah 5 my law- # Gen, 
g1ver c. 10. 

z All their Land beyond Jordan, which was poſſeſſed by Rexben 
and Gad, and halfofthe Tribe of Manaſſeh, Numb. 32. 29, 39, 40. 

D-ut. 3. 10. &c. Joſ. 13 25, &c. a The other half of that Tribe 
within Jordan. b Either, 1. Mine Horns wherewith I ſhall puſh 
mine Enemies, according to Moſes his prophecy of that Tribe, Deur. 
33+ 17+ Or, 2. Thekeeper of mine Head, as Ackiſhſpake, 1 Sam. 28, 2. 
A chief part of my ſtrength, either ro offend mine Enemies, or to 
defend my felt For this Tribe was very numerous, and valiant and 
rich See Gen, 48. 19. D'ut. 32. 1. Pſal, 78 9, c The chief Seat 
of my Throne and Kingdom, and of the inferiour Thrones of 
Judgment, Pſalm 122. 5. the Tribe to which the Royal Scepter and 
Law-giver, are appropriated by Gods appointment, Gen. 49. 


*Pſcj08.6, 
KC, 


8 Moab 3s my waſh-pot d;over Edom e will I caſt out 


my ſhoe f : Philiſtia, || triumph thou becauſe of me g. || Or, ”- 
a Tn which I ſhall waſh my Feet. I ſhall bring them into the low- umph ths 
eſt degree of Servitude.and make them contemptible and miſerable. 997 7% 
Sze 2 Sam. 8, 2, e An old and proud, and inſolent and cruel Ene- ( 55 
my of Iſrael. fi. e I willuſe them like Slaves; either, holding Irony. ) 
forth my Shozs, that they may pluck them off, or throwing my 
Shoes at them ; either in anger or contempt, as the manner of ma« 
ny Maſters was, and is in ſuch Caſes. Or, 1 willtakepoſſeion of them; 
which was done by treading upon their Land. Or, 1 wil tread upon” 
their Necks; as they did in like Caſe, Jof. 10. 24. But theſe Notions 
ſuit not with this phraſe, of caf#/7g or throwing the Shoe. g Or, over 
me, as thou didſt in,former years uſe to triumph and inſult over 
the poor 1/rae/ites, It isan Ironical «exprefiion, ſignifying that her 
Triumphs were come to an end. ; 
9 Who will bring me h into the Þ ſtrong city i ?*who * P(11.io8/ 
will lead me into Edom &? 


{ which 1s uſual. a\ 
| zato their ſtxong Cities ; from whence they hoped to renew the 


10. 
h None can do it but God, as he declareth in the following +[-b. Cit 
Verſes. #7. e. The Cities; the ſingular number for the prey, of firengths 


Having beaten his Enemies out of the Field, an 


War, 


P21, LXIV. 


. 


Plal. L 


+ Heb. 


Galvarion. 


*; Chr. 
19+ 13+ 


| Or, make 
#7 Refuge, 


"#Heb. 


they ſhalt 
add aays to 
the days of 
the Kng, 

? Heb. as 
Cineration 
#nd Gene« 
Fation, 4 


Prov 


W, 28, 


ty 5 HW ,2 & $959 fs 


any 


_ 
a 


D 


pal. LXITL. 


War, he deſires Gods Afſiftancg whereby he may take their ſtrong 
Holds,and ſo ſecure himſelf from further Attempts againſt him. 
k Which was an high and rocky Country, Obad. v. 3. fortified by 
Nature, as well as by Art, and therefore not to be invaded,and ſub- 
dued without a Divine Hand. / 

1oWilt not thou O God,which*hadſt caſt us off? and 
thou, O God,which didſt not go out with our artnies /? 

1 To wit. in former times ; but now haſt graciouſly returned to 
us. He brings to his own and peoples minds, their former Ca- 
Jamities, that they may be more thankful for preſent Mercies and- 
Deliverances. | 

11 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the | help 
of man m. | 

» Though I have ſome Reputation for Volour and ConduR, and 
though my People are very numerous, and now united under me, 
yet all this will avail little or nothing without thy Almighty help. 

12 Through God * we ſhall do valiantly : for he is is 
that ſhall tread down our enemies, 

FSAM LXL 


The ARGUMENT. 
He occaſion of this Pſalm, was ſome great diſtreſs of Davids 
either by Saul, or by Abſalom; though it might be Compo- 
ſed ſome time after it was paſt. : 
To the chief muſician upon Neginah, « Pſalm of David. 
David, :n gre#t danger, fleeth to Goa for deliverance, upm experimnce of 
his former Love, 8 —3. promiſing hum perpetual Service for hearing his 
Prayers, 4, 5» And aſſuring himſelf a long Life, be woweth thankful« 
nejs, 6 8. 
| j Ear my cry, O God; attend untq my prayer. 

2 From the end of the earth . will I cry un- 
to thee, when my heart is overwhelmed : lead me to 
the rock that is higher than I 5b. 

a Or rather, »f the L-zud: To which David was driven by the 
Tyranny of his Enemies. b Convey me into ſome high and ſecure 
Fortreſs, which I could not rea--{: withour thy ſuccour, and where 
mine Enemies cannot come at me. He alludes to their cuſtom of 
ſecuring themſcives in Rocks, | Sam. 13. 6. &c« 

2 For thou naſt been a jtcices for me, and a ſtrong 
tower from the enemy. | 

4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever e: I will 


| truſt in the covert of thy wings 4. . Selah. | 
c I ſhall, ] doubt not, be reſtored to the Tabernac'e from which 
I am now baniſhed, and, according to the delire of my Heart, 
worſhip and enjoy thee ther: al my dayes. ' d In the mean time 
whilſt 1 am in danger and rrouble,[ will caſt my ſelf upon thy pro- 
tcftion with full confidence, 
5 For thou, O God, haſt heard my vows e : thou haſt 
given me the heritage of thoſe that fear thy name f. 

e My fervent Prayers, attended with many Vows znd Promiſes, 
as was uſual, eſpecially in caſes of great danger or difficu'ty, Gen- 
28. 20. Jud 11. 30, 31. f Thou haſt alloted me my portion, with 
and amongſt them that fear and worſhip thee, who are the excellent 
ones, :n whom is all my delight : And upon that account I muſt ac- 
knowledge it to thy praiſe, - that rhe Lines are fallen ts me mm pleaſant 
places : Yea, I have a goodly Heritage, Pſal. 16. 3, 6. Thou haſt gran- 
ted me this fingular Mercy, to live in Gods Land, and to enjoy his 
Preſence and Favour. and to worſhip in his Tabernacke ; which is 
the Heritage that I and allthat fear-thee, prize and deſire above all 
things in the World. IT, p 

6 + Thou wilt prolong the kings life g, and his years 
"FHeb. +4, Þ as many generations 2. . 
thou ſhalt og 5. e. My Life. He calls himſelf King ; either, 1. Becauſe he 
aid days t0 was atually King, thuugh Abſalom Uſarped the Throne : Or 2. Be- 
the days of cauſe he was deſigned and anointed to be King ; and by calling 
the Kng, himſelf King, he ſupports himſelfunder his preſent ſtraits, and de- 
f Heb. as clares his confidence in Gods promiſe of the Kingdom to him. Yet. 
Gneratio» we muſt not think that David did commonly and publickly call, or 
"ml Gene own himſelf ro be K'ng,which had n*ither been true nor convenient 
mim forkis Afﬀairs: But this Pſalm, ' either was not Compoſed whilſt 
Saul lived, of at leaſt was penned only for his private uſe and Com- 


* P1449 
& 108,1 I 


+ Heb- 


vi Chr. 
194 13* 


| Or, make | 
01 Refuge, 


P $ 4 


| ye ſhall be ſlain all of you 4: * 


L M 8s. 


| |  _ Pfal. Lxthþ 
To the chief muſician, F to Jeduthun s, A Pſalm of tHebugj 
David, | 


A famous Muſician; of whom ſee x Chron. 9 16. and 16. 42. 
Heb, Upon Jeduthun. Which might be the Name of a Muſical 
Inſtrument, or Tune invented by that Jeduthun, and therefore 
called by his Name» | | 

David zeſtifieth his ſafety aud quietneſs in Gd, to the diſcouragement of his 
Enemies, 1 '7. but to the encouragement of the Godly, 8. No truft 
to be put In Man, or Worldly things, but in God, g, 10, to whom Power, _, 
Mercy and Juſtice belong, 118, 12. it 

Y "FRY b my ſoul + waiteth c upon God 3 from THeb.Olf 
him cometh my ſalvation «. X _— i 

6 Or, Surely. This is my certain and fixed reſolution. Or, Ne- —__ 

wvertheleſs, as this Particle is oft rendred. So the beginning of this , 

Pſalm is abrupt, as it is in ſome other Pſalms. This ſeems to be the 

Concluſion of a long and hard Conflit, which David had within 

himlelf, as he often had, what courſe he ſhou'd take to get out 

of his trouble. «c Heb. is ſilent, as it is alſo Pſal- 37. 7. 5.; ſilently; 

quietly and patiently looks up to God for deliverance, and that in 

his time and way, without murmuring or deſpair,or uſing indire& 

_w Tg prattices. 4 I have tio bope of deliverance, bur from and 
y him. | | | 

2. He only is my rock, and my ſalvation : be is my + *-* 

+ defence ; 1 ſhall not be greatly moved e. - THeb«hi 
e Though I may be ſhaken, yet I ſhall not be overthrown.Com-. ?/ace- 

pare Pſal. 37. 24. 2 Cor. 4.9. | 

3How long will yefimagine miſchief agairiſt a mang? 
as a bowing wall ſhal ye 


[1 


+ 

file 
| 
\ 


ain all 7 Tfa. 3of 
be, and as a tottering fence 5: 334 "2 
f Mine Enemies ; ts whom now he turneth his Speech. & 5. e. 
Againſt mie, # Man like your ſelves, whom common Humanity ob- 
ligeth you to pity ; a ſingle Man, whois no fir match for you ; a 
poor, contemptible, miſerable and impotent Creature ; as the word 
Man is oft uſed, as Pſal. g. 20. and 82. 7. &Cc. a dead Dog, or a Fles, 
or 4 Partriage, as upon the ſame account he calleth himſelf, 1 Sam. 
24: 14. and 26. 20. whom you cannot thus purſue, without refle&. 
ing diſparagement upon your ſelves, as he there ſaith. þ The miſ- 
chjef which you deſign for me thall fail upon your own heads: 
And accordingly Saul and the generality cf theſe Men were ſlain; 
1 Sam. 31.2 4. e, As ſuddenly and ealily overthrown as theſe 

are. F: : + 280 , : % 
4 They only conſult to caſt 4;*; & down from his ex- : - . 

cellency / ; they delight in iies m; * they bleſs with » pr ,g 
their mouch, but they curſe F inwardly. Selah. - + Heb. 7 
k To wit, . the man mentioned v. 3. 7. e. himſelf ; Of whom he thei» in-' 


continues to ſpeak in the third Perſon. / From the hopes and 2t» 'ward part 
Ration 5s from him. 
of my ſtrength, «nd my refuge is in God. 
| riraes, ye p2ople p ; pour out 
ing what you want or deſire from him. 


| 


ation : 


tainment of that Royal Dignity, to which God-hath deſigned and 

aniointed me. w In ſecret Slanders and Execrations covered with 

Flatteries and fair Speeches, as it here follows. | 

5 My ſoul, waitthou onlyupon God : "F expe- 
6 He only is my rock and my falv is my 

defence ; I ſhall not be moved. _ . _ 
7 In God » is my ſalvation and my glory o:the rock 

. » Heb. wpop or with God. It depends upon him, and his Favour 

and Help.  o Either, 1. The matrerof my Glorying. Or 2. That 

Honour which Ieirher have or hope for. 

8 Fruſt inhim arc all ci 

your heart q before him: God 3s a refuge tor- us. Selah. 
p By my Example be encouraged, and learn ro truft God. 9 5. e:' 

Make known all the deſires, and cares, and griefs, of your Hearts 

to him, treely and frequently, with confident expeQation of obrains 


9 * ourely men of iow degree are vanity r, avd men , © * 
of high degree are a lye 5: to be laid in the ballance, *® f- 39 
they are || altogether lighter than vanity. | | Sn. 4 

hemſctves. 


r /. e. Molt vain, impotent and helpleſs Creatures-in t 
This he dehvers as a Reaſon oc Argument, to enforce his foregoing 
Exhortation, Truſt in God, becauſe there is no other perſon-or- thing 


Or, «like» 


fort, and not committed to the chief 54;cim ; which indeed it could 
not be till David aad the Kingdom,and the inſpettion of the ſacred 
Muſick and Service of the Tabernacle. hi. e. The years of my ' 
Life and Reign. # As long as if I had a Leaſe of it for many Ages. | 
Thus he ſpeaks ; partly, becauſe his Kirgdom was not like Sauls, a | 
matter of one Age, expiring with bis Life, bur eſtabliſhed ro him 
and his Heirs for ever ; and partly, becauſe Chriſt, his Son and 
Heir, ſhould aQtually, and in bis' own perſon polleſs the Krng- 
dom for ever. - 

7 He ihall abide & before God } for ever: O prepare 
” * mercy and truth » which may preſerve him. 

k Or ſi, to wit, in the Thron-, Jer. 13. 13 { Living and ru- 
ling as in Gods preſence, and ſerving God with his Royal Power, 
and Worſhiping him in his Tabernacle. m Or, order or appoint, as 
this word ſignifies, Jonah 1 17 and 4. 6. n Eitier, 8 The Graces 
of Mercy or Compaſſion, and Tryth or Faithfulneſs ; which are the great 
ſupporters of Thrones, Prov. 20. 28. and 29. 14. Or : athef, 2+ Thy 
Mercy and Truth, 7. e. The effe&ts of chem. Thy Trur9 in giving 
me rho{e Mercies which thou haſt promited to me ; and thy Mercy'in 
giving me ſuch turther Bleflings, as Lneed, and thou ſceſt fit to 
give me. 

8 So will I fing preciſe unto thy name for ever, that I 
may daily perform my vows - - : | 

o That ſo I may pay unto thee thoſe Services and Sacrifices, 
which I vowed to thee when I was in trouble. 


PSAL;|' L ALL 


Prov, 
NW, 28, 


— 


| raiſe Mens expeQations, upon conſideration of their great Power 


to which you can ſ-fcly truſt. 5 Becanle they promiſe much, and ' 


and Diguty, bat are not able to perform, and generally deceive 
rhoſe who truſt in them. In- which reſpe& Lying is aſcribed to 4 
Fountain, Jer. 15. 18. to Wine, Hoſea 9. 2 to the Olive, Habak. 3.17. 
when they do not give what they promiſe. 23, 
19Truft not in oppreffion :,and become not vain s.in 
robbery:* if ciches increaſe,ſer not your heart apsn them x.” *Job 31. 
# As you may not truſt any other Men,ſfo neither muſt you truſt 25- 
to your ſelves, nor to your own Wiror Induſtry, or: Courage by Luk. 12.15" 
which you may oppreſs others, and ſo think to ſecure and enrich 1 Tim. 6. 
your ſclves. « Lifting up,and feeding your ſelves with vain Hopes,: 17- 
and Exp:Ctations of ſafety and felicity, from thoſe Riches which 
you take from orhers by Robbery or Violence. x So as ro pleaſe 
your ſelves immoderately in them, tro place your Hope and Truft, 
is chicf Joy inthem, or to grow proud and inſolent becauſe of 
$7 rg PR, EATS NE F 
11 God hath ſpoken once: twice z have I heard this, 1 Or,* * 
chat || power belongeth unto God z. - | . - Strength. 
- y 7.e. Frequently, as Jeb 33. 14. both immediately as at Sir, | 
and by his holy Prophets, from time ro time. « That Power is *Job.34 1. 
God's Prerogative ; and Conſequently all Creatures, either againſt -Pr. 24. 12+ 
or without him, are poor Imporent things, to which no Man can -Jer.3 2.19. : 
truſt without certain Ditappointmenty and God alone is fir to be Fze. 7. 27. 
truſted, | 2 0 TOY > os 3 LPS 0d 33» 20.” 
12 Alfountothee, O LORD, belongeth mercy «;for- Mat.16 :4 
[|* thou rendreſt to every man according to his workj. Rom: a6. 


a * 


. 


The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſ-ln was made in a time of great Danger and Diſtreſs,or 
at leait withreſpeR to it, as1ls manitelt from wv, 3, 4+ 


/ 


, a Reaſon, or Proof of, or an infer-nc2 tre:n, the two foregoing 


a Or, Benignity, or Readineſs to do govd. Thou a:it no leſs wil... Cor. 3-8. 
ling than able, ro defend and preſerve 2/! tr pur_therr Truſt in Þ mm 4 
thee. || Or, therefore. For the foliowing Were ſeem to be either C51 _ 8. 

- *285, 
IPet r 17. 
Re. 2 


4 4 4 F: oper- 


. 
_ 


LXTE. 


Properties of God, Power and Mer:y. God is Almighty, therefore 
he can eatily ſubdue and deſtroy all his and mine ungodly Enenues, 
& Recompence unto them all their Maliciousand wicked PraQGiitcs. 
He is alſo mild and merciful, and therefore will pardon goodMens 
failings, and graciouſly reward me and others of his people accoid- 
ing to our Integrity» f According to the Nature and quality, 
though not according tothe proportion, of their Works, whether 
they be good or bad. And tais as he is obliged to do by his holy 
Nature, and by that Reſpe& which he oweth to his own Glory, to 
heis able ro dot, being Omnipotenr, and willing ro do it to the 
godly ( which was the only thing that might he doubred, becauſe 
of their manifold and grear Corruptions, and ImperfeEtions, and 
Miſcarxiages ) becauſe he is merciful and gracious. 


FSAL LAMEL 


Judah 4. 
a Where he hid himſelf from Saul, 1 Sam. 22. 


5. and 23, 145 I5. 
and 26. 1, 2. 


P'S A M 5. 


- 'A Pſalm of David when he was in the wilderneſs of 


Pſal. LXIVY 


Perſons. Some of their ſlain might be Buried, and others lye un 
buried. Or, 2. Of the ſame Perſons; they did gointo the Earth, 
but not immediately, but were firſt devoured of Foxes, and the 
remainders of them were buried, as is frequently done in ſuch 
Caſes. . Or, this Phraſe may note nor ſo much the Place, as the 
State, of the Dead ; this being univerſally ſaid of thoſe thar dye, 
whether they are butied or unburicd, that they recurn to the Earth or 
D:ft, Job 1. 21. Eccleſ. 12. 7+ 
10 f They (ball fall by the ſword c, they ſball be a THeb.chy 
portion for foxes 4. _ vgs 
& 1. e, Dye in batte], as David foretold, r Sam. 26. 10. and as was "= hn _ 
accompliſhed in Saul, and his followers, who were David's great- j, ;,, Yu 
eſt Enemies, 1 Sam. 31. 4 Their Carkafles ſhall be unburied upon Hands of 
the Earth, and thereby become a prey to Wild and Ravenous Crea- ,,, ted 
tures, and eſpecially to Foxes, which were in thoſe Parts in greax  ® 
abundance ; and which did and do feed not only upon Fruits, Gent. 
2- I5. but alſo upon Fleſh, as Experience ſheweth. Beſides ſome 
very Learned men think that the Word rendred, Foxes, is more ge= 


David in the Wilderneſs complaining bitterly of his Baniſhment from Goa's 
Houſe, thirfeth and longeth for it, 13. His manner of bleſſing God. 
His Experience, H ps and Delight in God, 4 =nann===$, comforterh him- 
Self, that his Enemies ſhall ve deſtroyed, and that he ſball tein Safety, 
g -—= IT. 

God, thou art my God b, early c will I ſeek 
thee : * my ſoul thirſteth for thee d; my flej! 


ſ. 42.2. 
143: 6. 


eb. 
hout 
as 


no water is f. | 

b In Covenant with me. c Heb. ihe Morning. Which implies 
the doing it with greateſt Diligence and Speed, taking riic trſt,and 
the beſt time for ir, as Job 8. 5. Pſal. 58. 34. Prov. 1. :8.. d(ie.) 
For the Preſence and Enjoyment of thee in thine Houſe and *« 1di- 
nances, as the next Verſe declareth its e Or, languiſh:th, or Pinth 


doth of all great Paſſions. f So catied ; Erther, 1. Metaphcorical'y; 
In a Land where I want the refreſhing Waters of rhe SanCtuary. 
Or; 2. Properly : I thirſt not ſo much for Water(which yer I great- 
ly want ) as for thee. 


2 To ſee g thy power and thy glory h, ſo as I have 


ſeen thee 3 in the ſanuary. 

g (5. e. ) To enjoy, as ſeeing is oft taken. þ Either, xy. The 
Ark, which is called God's S:reng:h and Glory, 1 Sam. 4. 21. 1 Chr. 
16. 11. Pjal. 758. 6i. Or ratier,2,The powerful and glorious Effe&s, 
and Evidences of thy gracious preſence there. # Whereof I have 
formerly had great and comfortable Experience ; which makes me 
more ſenſible of my preſent loſs, and more Thirſty after thoſe en- 
joyments. i ; : 

3 Becauſe & thy loving kindneſs / is better than life 
2», my lips ſhall praiſe thee ». | 

k This is the Reaſon ofthe foregoing thirſt after God. / (7. e. ) 

The Diſcoveries and Influences of thy Grace and Favour, which 


durable and comfortable, and ſatisfattory than the preſent Life, 
with all imaginable Advantages belonging ro it, » Both for-my 
former Taſtes and Experiences of this Trurta: and for the Ailurance 
of my Reſtitution to the ſame bleſſcd Enjoyments. 

4 Thus o will I blefs chee while I live: I will lifr up 
my hands p in thy name 9. 

0 ( 4. e. )So asThave done and now do. Or, upon that occaſi- 
on, when [I thall be reſtored. Or, for this Reaſcn, being lo ſenſible 
of the ſweetneſs of thy Favour. Or, cor:ainly : For this Particle 
is ſometimes uſed as a note of Aſſeveration, as it is, Pſalm x29. 2. 
Iſaish 16+. 6. p Towards thee in Heaven, ia Prayers and Praiſes. 

According to thy Command. Or, with Confidence in thy: 


ame. 

5 * My ſoul ſhall be faisfied r as 23th F marrow and 
103.5. fatneſs ; and my mouth (hall praile thee with joyful lips. 
+ Heb. r Whenthou ſhalt fulfil my earneſt Deſire of enjoying thee in 
Farneſs. the SanQtuary : though now in my exile I Groan and Pine away 
| for wait of that Mercy. 

6 When * I remember thee s upon my bed ?, and me- 
*PC. 42.8, ditate on thee in che night-watches «. 
& 119-55, 7 Becauſe thou haſt been my help ; therefore in the 
ſhadow of thy wings will I rejoyce x. 

5s In the mean time, whilſt I cannot enjoy thee,I will Quiet and 
Comfort my ſelf with the Thoughrs, and Remembrance of thy 
Kindneſs to me. t Heb. Upon my beds,implying that he was fi equently 
forced tochange his Bed and Lodging, being driven from place ro 
Place. '« In the ſeveral ſeaſons of the Night, which was divided 


Mark 13. 35. When others ſleep fecurely, my fleep is interrupted 
by my Perplexity and Grief for my abſence from thy Houſe, and 
when I awake, my Thoughts are fixed upon thee, &c. x I will rcett 
ſecurely and joyfully in thy Prote&ion. 

8 My foul followeth hard after thee y:thy right hand 
upholderh me z. 

3 ( #. e,) Purſueth thee Eagerly and Diligently, and Reſolvedly; 
and as it were ſtep by ſt:p, when thou ſeemeſt to run away from 
me; Which is the Emphaſis of this Hebrew word. My Soul and 
Spirit cleaveth to thee, as this Verb ſignifies, Gere 2. 24. Fer. 13.171. 
when my Body is abſent from thy San&uary. z I do not loſe my 
Labour in following hard after thee ; for though I am not yer re- 
ſtored to the Enjoyment of thy Preſence in thy Houſe, yet T have 
preſent ſupports from thee, whereby my Spirit is kept fon! fain- 
ting under my manifold Preſſures, and is enabled with Faith and 
Patience to wait upon thee, till thou feeſt fir to deliver me. 


9 Bur thoſe har ſeek my ſoul co deſtroy it a, ſhall go 
into thelower parts of the earth b. 


longeth e for thee ina dry and þ thirſty land, | where | 


away: The defirevf my Soul after thee, is fo Vehement and in- | 
ſatiable, that my very Body feel- the EfeSs ofit, as it commonly | 


thou uſually imparteſt ro thy people in the Sanftuary- m Is more | 


into three or four Watches ; of which ſee Exod. 14. 24. Judg. 7.19. 


| ncral, znd comprehends, beſides Foxes, another ſort of Creatures. 
i Hhke unto them called Thoes, which” were very Numerous an this 
; Country: Of which ſee on Jud. i 5 
' Ir But the king e ſhall rejoyce in God,every one that 
' \weareth by him f ſhall gloryg : but the mouth of them 
| that{peak iycs þ, ſhall be ſtopped z. 

e I whoamalready anointed King,and who ſhall be aQtuallyKing, 
| when theſe mine Enemies are fallen by the Sword, He ſpeaks of 
himielf in the third Perion, either our of Modefiy ; or out of Pru- 
' Ceace, becauſe it was Ambiguous, and mig:t be underſtood;Either 
; of himielf, or of Saul, whereby he might avoid the Envy of the Ex- 
| preition ; if this Pſalm was Compoſed before he was King. f Either, 
; 2, By the King ; by whomtiey iomctimes did ſwear, as Gen. 42. 
'15. 2 Sam. 15- 21. But they did alio ſwear by ſome other Perſons, 
, of Eminent Place and Authority, though under the King, as 1Sam. 
1.26, and 20. 3. Nor is it likely, that the Pialmiſt would juſtifie 
thoſe kinds of Oaths, this Prattice of iwearing by ones Name,being 
| Accounted a pait of that Wortbip which is proper to God, both in 
the Old and New Teitament, I this were meant of the King, it 
mighr better be rendred, that ſweareth ro ( for 1o the Particle Beth is 
ion:ctimes uſed ) him, as Subjefs uſ-d to ſwear Homage to their 
Prince. So the Senie is: All thoſe that ſhall own rhe for their 
King. Or, 2, By God, who © as laſt mentioned, thar ſweareth by 
the Name of God, to wit, in Truth, and judgment, and Righteouſneſs, 
aS1t 1s expretled, Jer. 4. 2. 7. e. Every ſincere Servant and Wor- 
thipper of Ged ; Swearing, being oft put for the whole Worſhip. of 
God, whereof it is a Con''(derable part, aad Swearers by God for 
Worſhippers of ivim, as Ja. 19. 18. and 45. 23. Compared with 
Rom. 14. 11. and Tia. 65. 16+ g Shall rejoyce in my Deliverance 
and Exaltation, both for their Reſpe& to the Honour and Service 
| of God, which I {hall advance, and for the Benefits which all good 

Men, and the whole Kinglom ſhall feel by my Government ; 
whereas in Sauls time the vileſt Men were exalted, and good Men, 
oppreſſed and perſecuted, and the whole Kingdom Groaned under 
his Tyranny. þ That now make it their Buſineſs to invent or 
ſpread1ying and flanderous Reports concerning me and others 
of God's People. 7 I ſhall ſeverely reſtrain and puniſh ſuch wick= 


| ed PiaCtices. | 
TSA SALTY. 
The ARGUMENT. 
| He Matter ofthis P/alm plain'y declares that it was made in a 
rime when David was greatly Diſtreſſed and Reproached : 
W hich he was both under Saul, and in the time of AbJalem's Rebel- 
lon. 


To the chief muſician, 4 P/a/m of David. 

The Pſalmiſt complaining of his Enemies, and deſcribing their crafty and 
wicked Prattices, prayeth unto God for guard and deliverance, 1 6. 
fortelleth alſo their utter ruine, to the Honour of Gd, and Foy «sf the Righe 
reous, 7 I0. 

Ear my voyce, O God, in my prayer ; preſerve 
my Life from fear a of the enemy. 

# i.e. From Danger: The A& or Paſſion of Fear, being oft put 
_ its Object, Danger, as P/al, 14. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 14. and oft elic- 
where. 

2 Hide me from the ſecret counſel b of the wicked ; 
from the inſurreQion of the workers of iniquity. 

6 :. e. From the ill EffeQs of their Plots againſt me. 

3 * Who whet their tongue like a ſword, and * bend 

their bows to ſhoot their arrows c even bitter words d. 

c Of which Phraſe ſee the notes on Pſal. 58. 7- d Slanderous 
and pernicious Spceches againſt me. 

4 Thar they may jhoot in ſecret e at the perfect f : 
ſuddenly g do they ſhoot at him, and fear not þ. 

e Lying in Ambuſh, or hiding themſelves in ſecret places, as 
Fowlers commonly do. f Or, upright Man ; i. ee At me, who in 
ſpight of all their Calumnies, dare avow that my Heart is pertcCt 
wich God, and that Iam blameleſs as to them, having given them 
nojuſt Provocation. g At the very firſt Opportunity. þ Neither 
men, becauſe they concealit from them, as appears from the fore- 
going and following Words ; nor God, whoſe Judgments they de- 
ſpiſe. | : 

5 They encourage themſelves 3 i» an evil || matter, [Orc 
they commune Þ of laying ſnares privily : they ſay,who | 1/1, 
(hall ſee them &? 

; Reb. They ſtrengthen, or fortifie themſelves, by firm Reſolutions, 
by aſſured Confidence of Succeſs, by uniting their Counſels and || Or, we 
Forces together, and by mutual Encouragements and Exhortations. gre Corj#- 
k Their ſnares are ſo ſecretly laid that David cannot diicern, and wed byih# 


* PC. 11.2, 
* P5744. 


a i.e. Totakeaway my Life. 6 Either. r. Into Hell. Or rather, 
2. Into their Grave, as this Phraſe is uſed, Ezek. 31. 14.18, Bur 
how is this true, when they are ſuppoſed to be devoured by F cx- 
&s, ve 10. Anſw. This may be underſtood ; Either, x. Of divers 


ter, Which they may lay to my Charge, or new Ways and n.cans 
| @ 


therefore not avoid them. | which the} 
6 They ſearch out iniquities 7; || they accompliſh | have 7 
a diligent ſearch m ; both the inward thought of every —_ « 


one of them, and the heart is deep ». + Heb. 4 
I They ſtudy Diligently and Conſtantly, to find out either Mat- part ſearc® 


d. 
OR: ever 


rat L 


eb.thein 
Wand 


ſul be, 


Heb, | 
Wes ang BIc 
Matter of 
Miquities, : hi 
f Heb. at- jet 
'm 0; T10L 
Ute, : pray 
oY 
to 2 


Ag * Ww 


Pol LXV. 


#eb.their 
Wand 


ſul be, 


Feb. i 


tf Heb, 
Wirds and 
Matters of 


Miquitiey, 


ine, Or , 
Nate, 


16, 


f Heb. ar- 


of doing me Miſchief. » They have long and accurately ſearched, 
till at laſt they have Ripened and perfe&ed their Thoughts, and 
found out a very cunning and deep Plot. Or, they ſay, We have 
accompliſhed our accurate ſearch» By long ſearching we have at laſt 
found what we deſired. » Mine Enemies are not only Cruel and 
Malicious, but alſo very Cunning, both to contrive and conceal, 
and to execute their Plots. 

7 Bur God ſhall ſhoot at them o with an arrow, ſud- 


denly p Þ ſhall they be wounded. 

o Thovgh I can neither ſearch out, or prevent their ſubril De- 
vices, yet God can and will certainly doit. p Shortly and unex- 
petedly. 

8 So they ſhall make their own tongue to fall upon 


themſelves q ; all that ſee them, ſhall flee away r. 

q The Miſchief of their hard Speeches and Threats, and Crafty 
Counſels againſt me, ihall be turned againſt themſelves. r Partly, 
through Abhorrency of them ; and Partly, through Fear of being 
involved in their DeſtruQtion. 

9 And all men s ſhall fear, and ſhalldeclare the work 


of God r ; for they ſhall wiſely conſider of his doing «. 
57, e A greater number of thoſe who ſhall ſee theſe Events. 
t 7. e. This admirable work of Divine Power and Wiſdom, and 
Faithfulneſs. « Learning Wiſdom by their Folly and Miſery, and 
avoiding thoſe Evil Courſes, which brought them to Ruin, 


10 "The righteous ſhall be glad in the LORD x, and 


ſhall eruſtin him;and all the upright in heart (ball glory y. 

x Or, for the Lord, i, e. Not out of Malice or ill Will to the Per- 
ſons of their Enemies, but for the Honour of God, which by this 
means is fully Vindicated, and greatly advanced. y To wit, in 
God, as their ture Rock and all-ſutticient Portion. 


PSA L& Fo 
The ARGUMENT. 


He Deſign of this Pſalm, ſeems to be to declare the Great and 
Glorious work of Divine Providence, both towards his 
Church, and the Land of his People, and towards the reſt of Man- 
kind- 
To the chief muſician, « P/alm: and ſong of David. 
David praiſeth God for ſpiritual Bleſſings, as hearing Prayer, and purging 
away ſm, 13. and for the bleſſedneſs of thoſe that dwell in his Courts, 
4. and alſo for temporal Bleſſings, as govering the World, and the abun- 
dance of all worldly Enjoyments, 5 IS» : 
| > ann + waiteth « for thee, O God, in Zion b and 


unto thee ſhall the vow be performed c. 


a Heb. is flent or ſilence, i. e. Quietly waits,as this Phraſe 1s uſed, 


alſo Pſal. 62. 1. And praiſe may be here put for the Perſon or Per- 


P'S 4 HL: M 


ſons, who uſe to praiſe God upon all occaſions, and who are now | 


Prepared and ready to do ſo : as Deceit is put fora deceitful Man, as 
Prove 12: 24. and ſi for the Sinner,Prov. 13. 6. and Dreams for Dream- 
ers, J:r. 27, 9. So the meaning may ſeem to be this, God s people 
Patiently and believingly wait for an Opportunity, to offer their 
Praiſes to God : For at preſent they ſeem to be in ſome ſtraits, as 
divers Paſſages of this Pſalm do intimate. 6 Tho all the People of 


the World have great cauſe to Praiſe thee, yet none pay thee this 
Tribute, but thy People in Si#; and they indeed have many pecu- | 


liar and Eminent Obligations, and Occaſions to perform this Duty. | 


c All the thank-offerings which thy People vowed unto thee in the 


time of their Danger, thall be faithfully paid, to wit,n Zion; Which | 


is to be repeated out of the firſt Clauſe of the Verſe. 
2 O thou that heareſt prayer d, unto thee ſhall all 


fleſh e come. 

d That uſeſt and delighteſt to hear and Anſwer the Prayersof thy 
People in Ziom. Which he juſtly mentions, as one of the chiefeit 
of God's Fayours, and Priviledges vouchſafed to his Church.e 7. e. 
Men of all ſorts and Nations, who wereallured by this and other 
ſingular Benefits, to joyn themſelves to the Jewiſh Church, accor- 
ding to Solomon's PrediQton, 1 Kings 8. 41, 42, 43- Withal this may 
bea Tacit Prophecy of the Converſion of the Gentiles, _ 

2 + Iniquities prevail againſt me f* as for our tranſ- 
greflions, thou ſbalt F purge them away g. 

f They are a burdentoo heavy for me, as he Complains, Pſ 38.4. 
They are ſo many and great, thar for them thou mighteſt juſtly re- 
je& my Prayers, and deſtroy my Perſon. g But this is another glo- 
rious Priviledge granted to thy people, and that,in Anſwer to their 
prayers, thou doſt graciouſly pardon and purge away their fins. 

4 Bleſſed is the man how thou chootelt h,and cauſeſt ; 
to approach wnto thee k,that he may dwell in thy courts /: 
* we ſhall be ſatisfied z with the goodnels of thy houſe 


», even of thy holy temple. | 

h Out of the Lump of Mankind, to be one of thy peculiar peo- 
ple. 7 5. e, Permitteſt and Commandeſt, and - by the diſpoſal of 
thy Providence, and the Influences ' of thy Grace, procureſt and 
ordereſt, k To draw near to God in his Houſe and Ordinances,by 
Prayer and praiſes, and other A&s of Acquaintance and Commu- 
nion with him. 1 In the Courts of thy Houſe. He mentioneth 
Conrts, becauſe the people were permitted to go no further into 
God's Houſe. » For they only get that ſolid Sarisfaftion which 
all Men deſire, but no other perſons or people can find elſewhere. 
» With the ſpiritual and everlaſting Blefings there conferred upon 
thy people, the Grace and Favour and fellowſhip of God,Remittion 
of ſins, Renovation of Hearr and Life, the know'edge of God, and 
of our ſelves, and of our Duty, and true Inteteft, Joy and peace, 
and well-grounded Hopes or afſurance of eternal Life : In Compa. 
riſon whereof all the Enjoyments of this Worid,are but Droſs and 

ung. 


5 By terrible things o in righteouſneſs p wilt thou an- 
wer us q, O God of our ſalvation : who ars the confi- 
dence 7 of all the ends of the earth s, and of them that 
a afar off pox the ſea 7, 


| 


S, 


o Or, In a Terrible manner ; i. e. So as to ſtrike thy people with an 
holy Awe and Reverence of thee and of thy Judgments, and thine 
Enemies with Dread and Horror. Or, i a wondcrful manner,as this 
Word. is rendred in the Chaldee, Deut. 10: 24. things wonderful and 
Terrible, being put together, as expreſſing the ſame thing, Pſal 106. 
22+ þp4,e. By vertue of thy Juſtice, or Faithfulneſs, or Goodne's; 
whereby thou art inclined, and engaged to help thy people when 
they arc in Diſtreſs, and reſort untotheeby prayer. q Thou wilt 
graciouſly Anſwer and grant our prayers and Defires. r i. e. The 
only Objett of a ſafe and undeceiving - Confidence ; for there is 
no other perſon, or thing in the Wor1d, that any man Living can 
truſt ro without Fear and certainty of Diſappointment. Or, Thou 
art the ſtay and ſupport of all Mankind, by thy powerful and gra= 
cious Providence, Pſal. 104. 27+ As 17. 18. Heb, 1. 3- Others refer 
this to the Calling of the Gentiles, But that ſeems not to ſuit with 
the following Verſes, which manifeſtly ſpeak of God's general Pro- 
vidence. s Notonly of thy people Iſrael, but of all perſons and 
Nations, even as far asto the End of the Earth,or of this vaſt Con- 
tinent in which we Live. # Or,in the Sea, 7 e. In the Ilands of the 
Sea, which are here diſtinguiſhed from the Continent ; and under 


thoſe two Heads, - are Comprehended all the Inhabitants of the 
World. 


6 Which by his ſtrength ſetteth faſt the mountains «; 
being girded with power x. 

# That they are not overthrown by Floods or Winds, or Earth- 
quakes, or other natural or violent Cauſes : Which Rability they 
have only from God's Providence, which ſuſtains all perſons, and 
all things. x This our God being able to do it, and that with one 
ſingle Word- 

7 * Which ſtilleth the noiſe of the ſeas, the noiſe of 
their waves, and the tumulr of the People z. 

y When the Sea is Tempeſtuous, and Threatens to ſwallow up 
Ships and Men that are in it, or to overflow the Earth. z And as 
he ſtills the Natural,ſo alſo he quiets the Metaphorical Seas, Tumul- 
tuous and unruly people, for multitudes of people are oft called 
Seas,1p propherical Writings, as 1ſ. 17- 12, 13. Jer. 5 1.42 Revel7.15. 

8 They alſo that dwell in the uttermoſt parts a are 
afraid atthy tokens b3 thou makeſt the out-goings of the 
morning and evening c || to rejoyce. 

a To wit, of the Earth, which is added to this Word, w- 5. b Or 
Signs : Either, 1- At the Sun and Moon and Stars,which are called 
Signs, Gen: 1+ 14. But theſe are not Matter of Terror, but of de- 
light to Men;and the Commonneſs and Conſtancy of their Courſes, 
makes moſt Men neither fear nor much regard them. Or,2. Atthe 
great an d terrible Judgments, which God inflits upon wicked 
Men,and particularly upon the Enemies of bis people. Or rather, 
3. At thoſe terrible Thunders and Lightning, and Earthquakes, 
and Comets, or other ſtrange Meteors.o: Works of God in the Air; 
For he is here ſpeaking of the natural Works of God. c By which 
he underſtands ; Either, 1. The Eaſt, from whence the Morning 
or the Sun, tae cauſe of it, goeth forth, as it is expreſſed, Pſ. 19. 
6. and the Weſt, from whence the Evening or Night, is Poetically 
ſuppoſed to come forth. So the meaning is, That God gives all 
the People of the World from Eaft to Weſt, occaſion to rejoyce in 
the Effects of his Bounty and Goodneſs to them. Burt if the Pſalmiſt 
had meant this, it is not probable that he would have expreſſed ir 
in ſuch a dark and doubtful Phraſe, which is never uſed in that 
Sence, but rather by thoſe known and uſual Expreſſions, from Eaſt 
to We, or, from the riſmg of the Sun, to the going dewn thereof, which 
Phraſe he uieth, Pſal. 50. 1. and 113+ 3. Or rather,2.The ſucceſſive 
Courſes of the Morning and Evening ; Or of the Sun and Moon 
which go forth at thoſe times, thereby making the Morning and 
Evening ; both which are faid to Rejoyce poetically, becauſe they 
give Men occaſion of Rejoycing, which the Sun or the Morning 
doth, becauſe it gives them Opportunity for the diſpatch"of Buti- 
neſs, and for the Enjoyment of manifold Recreations andDelights; 
and the Moon or Evening doth ſo, becauſe it invites men to thac 
reſt and ſleep, which is both refreſhing and neceflary for them. Thus 
this whole Verſe ſpeaks of the natural Works of God, the fors 
mer Clauſe of ſuch as are extraordinary and Terrible, the latter of 
ſuch as are ordinary and delightful, 

9 Thou viliteft 4 the earth e and |] * watereſt itfthou 


greatly enricheſt it with the riverof God g which 3s full 


{o provided for it &. 
ad To wit, in mercy or with thy Favour, as this Word is of: 
uſed. e The whole Earth, which is full of thy Bounty. So he con- 
_— to declare the general Providence of God, to all men and 
eople, 
al Article. And ſo he comes from God's general Providence over 
all places and Nations, to his particular and ſpecial Providence over 


his people inthe Land cf Canaan, whereof he gives one Eminent - 
and Conſiderable inſtance, to wit, his giving them Rain and fruit- 


ful Seaſons, and that after a time of droughr and ſcarcity, to which 
it 1s not improbably ſuppoſed that this Pſalm relates. And this may 
be the particular occaſion, for which the Pſalmiſt ſaid, [that Praiſe 
waited for God in Zion, v. 1. f This is added to determine and ex= 
plain the former general Word, or to ſhew- how or wherein Gcd 
viſitedit. 2 Either, 1. With the Rivers which God hath made in 
the ſeveral partsof the Earth,to make it moiſt and fruitful. Alchough 
the fertility of the greateſt part of the Earth, doth not depend 
ſo much upon the Rivers below, as upoa the Rains from above. 
Or, 2. With the River Jorday, which ſometimes overflowed its 
Banks, But that overflow reached ' only to a ſmall part of the 
Land- Or rather, 3- With ſhowers of Rain, which he very ſigni- 
ficantly calls a River for their plenty, and the River of God, 3. e. O 

Gcd's immediate making and providing when he ſees fit ; which is' 
oppoſed both to thoſe lirtle Rivolets or Channels, which Husband= 
m<n or Gardiners cut for the watering of their Grounds ; and 
to thoſe greater Rivers, which run with a conſtant Courſe, and 
by their little Channels derived from them, or by their overflows 
do Water and inrich the Earth, as Nilus did Egypt ; to which theſe 
Words may ſeem to have a ſpecial Reference, eſpecially if they be 
Compared with Det. 11.- 10, x1, 12, &c., :+þ By this means thou 
prepareſt the Earth,for bringing PR Corn,and Ripeneſt the ar 

4 fa 


2 


Pſal. LKY 


thou hadft 
of water : thou prepareſt hþ them 7 corn,when thou haſt made + 70 
d-ſire Rain. 
87 thor de- 
freft it. 

* PC. 68; 


Or rather the Land, or this Land, for here is an Emphati- 9, 10. 


\ T 
1 
: 
i 


| 
| 
\ 


| 
| 


[| 
[1 
| 


* Pi. 89.8. | 


[|[Or,#o ſong. | 


| Or, afee# 


al. LXVI. ns 4 L 


in the Earth. # Forthem ; To wit, the Tnhabitants of the Earth, 
or Land here mentioned, for thei: uſe and Benefit. & Or, diſpoſed or 
ordered, Or _—_ it, to wit, the Earth, which without this would 
be hard and Barren. 
ee thu 10 Thou watereſt the ridges thereof abundantly || 
:/ 4d. thou ſettleſt / the furrows thereof: + thou makeſtit {oft 
adinto With ſhowers, thou bleſſeſt the ſpringing thereof m. 
be furrows I Towit, in that Condition which is fit for Fruit. Or, #40 
bereof. bringeſt gown : for the Rain diſſolves the high and hard Clods of 
Jeb.thou Earth. m When all is done, the Fruitfulneſs of the Earth, muſt nor 
folveft is. be aſcribed to the Rain or Sun, or any ſecond Cauſes, but to thy 
Bleffing alone. 
Heb.the 11 Thou crowneſt + the year with thy goodneſs », 


ur of thy and thy paths # drop farneſs p. 
vdneſs. # Thou by thy powerfu! Goodneſs,doſt inrich and adorn all the 
2 Seaſons of the Year, with their proper Fruits and Bleſſings. 0 The 
Clouds, upon which God is frequently ſaid to Walk or Ride, as Job 
36. 28. and 38. 26, 27. Pſal. 104+ 3. Nh. 1. 3. Which Sence is fa- 
voured by the next Verſe, where theſe Paths are ſaid to drop, Sc. 
? Makethe Earth Fat and Fruitful 

12 They 9 drop «pos the paſtures of the wilderneſs 


| are r ; and the little hills s + rejoyce on every ſide x. 
Bots 7 God's paths. » Which though negle&ed by Men,are furniſh- 
Joy. ed by God with Food for wild Beaſts, which being his Creatures, 
he careth for by this means. s The Hills of Canaan, which for the 
generality ofrhem, were but ſmall, if Compared with the great 
and high Mountains in divers parts of the World. He mentions 
the Hills, becauſe theſe being moſt dry and parched with the Sun, 
moſt need and are moſt refreſhed with the Rain. * As being moiſt- 
ened and ſatisfied with Rain, in a!l parts and ſides of them. 

13 The paſtures are clothed with flocks, the valleys 


alſo are covered over with corn «, they ſhout for Joy, 


they alſo ſing x. | 
# This is added as the Effe& of theſe Comfortable Rains, that 
they fill the Paſtures with Graſs for Cartel, and the Valleys ( which 
he mentions as the moſt Fruitful places,though he doth nut exclude 
the reſt ) with Corn for the uſe of Man.  7-e, They are abun- 
dantly ſatisfied with thy Goodneſs, and in their manner ſing forth 
the Praiſes, and declare the Goodneſs of their Creator and Bene- 
factor. Compare P/al. 147. 8. ſuch Paſſions or Atons, as theſe 
are oft figuratively aſcribed to Life-leſs Creatures, both in Sacred 
and profane Poetical Writings ; which are ſaid ro Rejoyce or Mourn, 
&c. when their Condition 1s ſuch as calls for Rejoycing or Mour- 
' ning, and would cauſe them to do ſo, ifthey were Capable of ſuch 


AQions. 
| PSALILXYL 
The ARGUMENT. 


fp Author and time of the Compoſing of this Pſalm are un- 

_ Certain, This is manifeſt and tufficient tor our underſtand- 

ing of it, that it was made upon the occaſion of ſome great and 

glorious Deliverance afforded to the 1ſraelires, after and out of 
ſome grievous and general Calamity, and, as ſome not improbaly 
conceive, that out'of Babylos. [ 

» To the chief muſician, a Song or Pſalm. 

The Prophet exhorteth all to praiſe God, for his wonderful Works, 1--==-8 e- 
Specially for delivering h:s Church out of all trouble, 9 —— 12. He 
promiſeth unto God Thankſgiving, andte pay the Vows he made in Trouble, 
13 15. calling to others to ſee God's Goodneſs to his Soul, bleſſeth 
him for it, 16 —— 20, 


LS. = joyful  noife) unto God, + all ye 


lands 4. | 
I # Ye people of all Nations, who have ſeen the wonderful Power 


and Wiſdom,and fideliry,and goodneſs of God in our Deliverance; 
it becomes you to acknowledge it with Admiration and Rejoycing. 
Or, all the Land, or this Land. But the former Sence is more pro- 
bable from ve 4. where this Word is ſo uſed. And it is very pro- 
per in this place, and uſual in other p'aces of Scriptures, to invire 
the Gentile World, to the Contemplation and Celebration 'of God's 
Works, to and for his peop!'e. See Deuteron;zmy 32. 43. 1 Chron. 
16. 23, 24. F : : 
2 Sing forth the honour of his name;make his praiſe 
glorious b. 
b (7, e. ) Praiſe him in anextraordinary and Eminent degree, ſo 
as he may have much Glory from you- : 
3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works c! 
| Or, eild through the greatneſs of thy power ſhall thine enemies || 
; feigned O- - 
5.7:mce, | ſubmit themſelves unto thee 4. 
tHeb.Lye. , © To wit, to thine Enemies, as it follows, « Heb. Lye unto thee, 
- ( 7. e. ) Profeſs ſubjeQion to thee, not ſincerely and treely, but by 
F conſtraint and out of a ſervile Fear. 
4 All che earth ſhall worſhip thee, and ſhall ſingunto 
thee e ; they ſhall ſing to thy Name, Selah. 
e Many people of divers Nations ſhall be ſo affeQed with thy 
Nupendious Works, that they ſhall worſhip and praiſe thee for 
them,and all people ſhaldo ſo and ſhal have juſt cauic to do ſo; and 
the time will come when all Nations will aftually do ſo, to wir, 
in the days of the Mefſſias. * 
5 *. Come and fee fthe works of God; he is terrible 


#n his doing toward the children of men g. 
F Conſider them wiſely and ſeriouſly, for God's Glory, and for 
your own good. g To all his Enemies; whom he calls rhe Children 
Men ; partly, in way of Contempt, to ſhew how unable they are; 
ither, to avoid or reliſt the great God; and partly, in oppoſition 
to his own people, who are frequently called :e Children of God. 
6 * He turned the ſea into dry land ; * they went 


4 PL46. 8. 


*Ex-14.21 
*%Jofh.3 17 


% 


M S$: Pal. 
ſidered as one Body,continued through all ſucceeding Generations, 
United in the Bond of the ſame Covenant and Worſhip, and in the 
poſſeſſion of the ſame Promiſes, and Priviledges, and Bleſſings, and 
Adted by one and the ſame Spirit; and therefore ſeveral and con« 
trary things may reaſonably be aſcribed to them, in regard of their 
ſeveral Parts and Ages, and what wasdone inone Age, may be im 
puted to another by Vertue of their ſtri& ConjunRion with the 
lame Body. 

7 He ruleth by his power for ever 5; * his eyes be. 


hold the nations & ; let not the rebellious exalt them- 


ſelves /. Selah. 

: The ſame Power which God had and put forth for his people 
in Antient time, he ſtill hath in as great Vigour asever, and is not 
at all weakened by Age, and is as able and ready to AQ for them 
now, as ever ke was : which he hith ſhewed by this Late and Glori. 
ous inſtance. k He ſees all their ſecret and 1ubtil Devices,and can 
and will defeat them, when he ſees fit. / Lift up their Hands a- 
gainſt God, or againſt his people. Or, the Rebellious (.7; e, Thoſe 
people which rebel againſt this Almighty Gcd and his Laws ) ſbal 
not exalt themſelves, as they Vainly hope and Deſign to do, but 
ſhall be brought down and deſtroyed, as is hereby :mplyed. 

8 O bleſs our God, ye people m,and make the yoyce 


of his praiſe to be heard. 


m Of other Nations, that have ſerved,or yer do ſerve other Gods. 
9 Which + holdeth our ſoul in life », and fſuffereth 


not our feet to be moved 0. 

» Who by a Succeſſion of Miracles of Mercy: hath kept us alive 
in the midſt ofa thouſand Deaths, to v-hich we were expoſed, and 
hath reſtored us to Life, when we were like Dead men and dry 
Bones ſcatrered at the Mouth of the Grave. o To wit, ſo asto fall 
into Miſchief and utter Ruin, as our Enemies deſigned- 


10 For p * thou, O God, haſt proved us; thou baſt 


tryed us, as ſilver istryed g. 

p Or, Tet or Nevertheleſs. Though thou haſt hitherto helped us, 
and now delivered us, yet for a ſeafon thou haſt ſorely aMiQed us. 
9 z. e. Severely, asasif it were ina burning Furnace ; and with a 
Deſign to try our ſi::cerity, and to purge out the Drofs, or the wic- 
ked from among us. 

11 Thou broughteſt us into the net y ; thou laidſt 
affliction upon our loyns. 

7 Which our Enemies laid for us, and which could never have tae 
ken or heid us, but by the Permiſſion and Diſpoſal of thy Provi- 
dence, which gave us into their hands. 

12 Thou haft cauſed men 5 to ride over our heads 7; 
we went through fire, and through water « ; but thou 
broughteſt us out into a + wealthy place x. 

s Weak and Mortal, and miſerable Men, as the Word ſignifies, 
no better nor ſtronger. than we,if thou hadſt not given them Powe 
er over us» # To Ride upon our Shoulders. By thy Permiſſion 
they have uſed us Jike Slaves, yea like Beaſts,to carry their Perſons 
or Burdens. Compare 1/a. £1 23- u 7. e. Through various and 
dangerous Tryals, and Calamities. See P/al. 32. 6. and 69. 2, 
Ezek, 15. 7. and 30. 8. x Heb. Into a moiſt or Well-watered place, 
ſuch as Canaan was, both in a Proper Sence and figuratively, as be- 
ing repleniſhed with Divine Graces and Bleflings. * 

13 1 will go y into chy houſe with burnt-offerings: I 
will pay thee my yows, 

14 Which my lips have | uttered, and my mouth 
hath ſpoken when I was in trouble. 

151 will f offer unto thee burnt-ſacrifices ofifatlings, 
with the incenſe of rams z : I will offer bullocks with 
goats, Selah. Et 
3 Hitherto he ſpoke in the plural Number, but now he begins to 
ſpeak in the ſingular Number, but ſtill the Speech is continued of 
the ſame Perſon or Perſons: only ſometimes the whole Body 
ſpeaks ; and ſometimes one Man ſpeaks in the Name ofall the reſt. 
z with the fat of Rams, which in theſe Peace-offerings was ' burnt 
upon the Altar, and ſo vaniſhed into Smoke like Incenſe, and 
which is no leſs pleaſing to God than Incenſe. 

16 Come and hear, all'ye that fear God a, and [I will 


declare what he hath done for my: foul b. 

a Whether Jrael:tes or Gentil-s proſelyted to them. Let every 
Iſraelite take notice of what God hath done for the Nation in gene- 
ral, and let the Gentiles obſerve God's goodneſs to the Children of 
Iſrael. b Which he hath held in Life, as he ſaid v. g. in the grea- 
teſt dangers of Death. 

I7 I cryed unto him with my mouth c, and he was 
extolled 4 with my tongue. 

c With a loud Voyce and great Fervency : Or it is a Pleonaſme, 
as Pſal. 44. tv» We bave heard with our Ears. d i. e. Praiſed by me; 
To wit, for Anſwering my Prayers. 


18 If * I f regard e iniquity fin my heart g, the 
LORD will not hear 2 b. AT F - 


e Heb, If I haveor had ſeen, or looked upon, to wit, with approba- 
tion and affeQion, as Job 31. 26. Hab. 1, 83, Men look upon what 
they like, and turn away their Face from what they loath or hate. 
f Any ſin whatſoever, andeſpecially 1dolatry, whick is oft expreſſed 
by this Word, to which the J/raelites were very prone,and to which 
they had moſt powerful Temptations from the Examples,and Coun- 
ſels, and Promiſes, and Threats of the Idolaters, in whoſe Land 


ſelves from that Crime, ſomewhat like that Pſal. 44. 26, 21. and in 
general, from thoſe groſs and Reigning ſins, whereof they had been 
guilty formerly. gs Ifmy Heart was falſe to God, and did cleave 
to Idols, or toany Wickedneſs, although I might for ſome pruden- 
-| tia) Reaſons forbear the groſs and outward As. Compare 2/al. 
| 44- 17, 18. If I had been guilty of that Hypocriſie, wherewith 


through the floodb on foot;there didwe j1ejoyce in him. 

þ Or River, to wit, Jordan. # ie. Our Nation, or our Anceſt- 
ors, in whoſe Loyns we then were, and the Benefit of which An- 
tient Deliverance we at this day enjoy. See the like Expreſſions, 
Pſal, $1. 5. Hoſes 12. 4 Thewhole people of Ira are oft Con- 


mine Enemies charged me, and had been a ſecret Favourer of Wic- 
kedneſs when I pretended great Piety, Or, If I did not Cry unto 
God with my Heart, but only howled for Corn and Wine, &c. 


and whilſt I cryed to God with my Tongue, my Heart was ſet u- 
pon 


LXY1, 


PC. 11.4. 


f Heb. 
putteth. 


PC. 17.4, 


+ Heb: 
Moif. 
PC 68, 6+ 


# Hebe 
opened. 


+ Heb. 
make. 
+ Heb. 


marrly, 


* pr.28.9 
Ifa. 1-15 

oh. 9.36 
Jn 44 
+ Heb 


and Power, they had been. And ſo this is a Purgation of them- 


Pal 


»Pf, 4 6 
+ Heb, 


with us, 


M85ir2, 


A WU. SS oc a... a 


Pal. LXVII. 


Pf, 4 6. 


t Heb, 


pith us, 


} Heb, 
Lead, 


M8542, 


P $ 4 


pon ſin,or T deſired only that which Ireſolved in my Heart to ſpend | 
upon my Luſts. þ Or, Would not have heard me ; as divers learned 
Interpreters tranſlate it, the Future being put Potentially, as is u- 
ſual among the Hebrews. For God heareth not ſinners, John 2. 31. 
nor Hypocrites, Job 27. 8, 9 Prov, 15+ 290 

I9 But verily God hath heard me z;he hath attended 


to the voyce of my prayer. | 

# Which is a publick Vindication, and a divine Teſtimony ofmy 
Integrity, againſt all my falſe Accuſers. 

20 Bleifed be God, which hath not turned away & 
my prayer, nor his mercy | from me. 

k Or, reje&ed or removed, to wit, from his fight and Audience, 
but hath received and granted it. / Though he had now afſerted 
his own Innocency, aud fincere-Piety,yet he imputeth not God's 
hearing of his Prayers to that, but tolely unto Cod's Grace and 


Mercy. 
PSAL LEVEL 
The ARGUMEN T. 


} 


1 
L M $ Pal. LXVIL 
Church, conſiſting of Javeand Gentiles, and that the legal Admini- | 
ſtrations and Aftions were Types of thoſe of the Goſpel, he there- "of 
fore by the Spirit of prophecy, looked thorough and beyond the F 
preſent A&tions and "Types, unto the great Myftcries of Chriſt's 
Reſurre&ion and Aſcenſion into Heayen, and of the ſpecial privi- 
ledges of the Chriſtian Church, and of the Converſion of the G:t- 
tiles unto God, and therefore intermixeth ſome paſſages, which di- 
realy and immedaatly belong to theſe things, aithough the Words 
be ſo ordered, that they carry a manifeſt Alluſion to the preſent 
AQions, and may in ſome ſort be applied to them, though in a 
more obſcure and improper and ſecondary Sence. , Nor is it at all 
ſtrange, that in the ſame Pſalm there is tuch a mixture of things, 
whereof ſome belong only to the Aftions or Events of that time, 
and ſome only to Chriſt, and the Goſpel times ; if it be conſidered, 
that the Pſalmiſt in himſelf doth frequenily expreſs divers, and 
thoſe contrary Paſſions and Diſpoſitions, as Hope and Fear, 8&c- 
in the ſame Pjalm, and ſometimes in the ſame Verte, and eſpecially 
that the ſacred Pen-Men in the Compoſition of theſe Writings were 
Men wholly inſpired and governed, and moved by the Holy Ghofſf, 


i 
1 
' 


His Pſalm contains a Prayer for the Church of 1ſ-ael, as alſo 

for the Gentile-World, whoſe Converſion he Prophetically 
deſcribes. - - 

To the chief muſician on Neginoth, a Pſalm or Song. 

The Church prayeth for the Enlargement of the Kingdom of God, 14 2. to the 

Joy of the Nations, 3— 5, and for the increaſe of Spiritual and Temporal 

Bleſſmgs, 6, 7. 

OD be merciful unto us «, and bleſs us, and * 
cauſe his face to ſhine f upon us b- Selah. 

# Thy People of Iſrael. b As thou haſt hid thy Face and Favcur 
from us, ſo now do thou maniteſt it to us. For the Phraſe ſee Num. 
6G. 25, 26. P/al. 31. 16. 

2 That thy way may be known upon earth c, 'thy 


ſaving health among all nations. 

c Nor do we deſire this Mercy only for our Comfort,but alſo for 
the Advancement of thy Glory, and the Propagation of the true 
Religion among a!l Nations, who by the Contemplation of thy 
Gracious and wonderful Works, to and for us, will be induced to 
Love and ſerve thee, and to liſt themſelves among thy People. By 
God's way he underſtands; Either, 1, That way wherein God 
Walks; or the manner of his dealing with his people, how Gracious 
and bountiful a Maſter thou art to all thy Servants. Or rather, 2: 
That way wherein God requires Men to walk, the way of God's 
Precepts, the way of Truth, or the true Religion ; as the way or 
ways of the Lord, are frequently taken, Gen. 18. 19. Judg. 2+ 22. Pſal, 
18. 2r1-and 119. 1. Atts 18. 25. 26,&c. the ſame whichin the next 
Clauſe is called his Saving Health, Heb Salvation, and both together 
ſignifie the way of Salvation, which the Ptalmiſt deſires may be 
known among all Nations ; which was expeCted by the Antient and 
godly Jews, at the coming of the Meſſas, whois called rhe way, 


2 Pet- 1. 21, by whom they were Variouſly tranſported, as he ſaw 
fir, and ſometimes carried away to ſpeak of the higheſt Myſteries 
of the Golipel, even ſuch things as they themſelves cid not fully un« 
derſtand, as appears from 1 Pes. 1-10, IIs | 
To the chiet muſician, a Pſalm or Song of David. . 
At the removing of the ark, David exhortech to praiſe the Lord, 1===x5, 
for his wonderful Power and Love in delivering his people out of Egypt,6. 
leading 'em through the Wilderneſs, 57 —=1 x. ſubduing their Enemies, 12, 
and chooſmg Zicn for his Habitation, 13 -18. He bl:ſſech God for his 
Judgments on the Churches Enemies, 19- 20. for his prom:ſes to his people, 
21 29. and for his Threats to the Cruel, 30, 31. The Kingdoms of 
the Earth are called to ſing to the Lord, whoſe Power and Majeſty ts 
heard im the Heavvens, and whoſe Strength and Excellency #s over Iſrael, 
2u—_—. X 
Et * Gcd ariſe a, let his enemies be ſcattered : let *»wym. rl 
them alſo that hate him 6. flee + before him. 45. | 
a O that God would ariſe from his Seat, and befſtir himſe!f and Heb | 
go forth to fight with his Enemies, who, if he do ſo, will eaſily his f#6%| 
and ſuddenly be ſcattered. Or, God wil ariſes And ſo the other | 
Verbs following may be rendred,as being of the Future Tenſe:Sha/l | 
be ſcattered, ſhall flee, &c. Aithough the Futures are frequently ren= | 
dred Imperatively ; and: ſo they are truly rendred, Num. 10. 35; ! 
whence this Verſe is taken- 6b All Gods Enemies are here faid to 
hate God, not direQly and formaliy, for there are few ſuch perſons, 
bur becauſe they hate his Laws and Government, and his people 
and Image,and becauſe they fight againſt him and his,which 1s jruſe« * 
ly taken for an Evidence of Hatred. | 
2 As ſmokeis driven away c, ſo drive them away ; as 
wax melteth before the fire, /o let the wicked periſh at 
the preſence of God. | 
c As ſmokeat firft mounts high and fills a great ſpace of Air, but 


| 


' 


John 14, 6+ and God's Salvation, Luke 2. 30. And fo the Sence of the 
place is this, Deal ſo g-aciouſly with thy Peopic 7rael, that thereby 
the Gentile-World may atlaſt be allured to joyn themſelves with 
them, and to embrace their Religion and Meflias ; according to 
that famous Prophecy, Zech. 8. 23s In thoſe days ten Men - 
all a= Nations-===ſball take hold of the skirt of —a Jew; ſaying, We 
will go with you, for we have heard that God 1s with you. 


3 Let the people praiſe thee, O God ; let all the peo- 
ple praiſe thee d, 


a O haſten that time, when all the Gentiles ſhall forſake their 
dumb Idols, and ſerve and Praiſe thee the Living God, as they will 
haye abundant cauſe to do. EY 

4 Oletthe nations be glad and ſing for joy e;for thou 
ſhalr judge f the people righteouſly g, and F govern þ 
the nations upon earth, Selah. 

5 Let the people praiſe thee, O God, let all the peo- 
ple praiſe thee. 


e For thy Tranſcendent Mercy to them, in reſcuing them from 
the Vanities and damnable Erro:s of their Fathers, and in bringing 
them tothe knowledge of the trve God, and of eternal Life, f z. ee 
Rule and govern them, as it is exp:ained in the next Clauſe, and 
as this Phraſe is uſed. g Which t the great Commendation of any 
Government, and the greate!t Argument and Encouragement to 
the Gentiles to put t-emielves uncer it ; the rather Becauſe they had 
found the Mitery of Living under the unrighteous and Tyrannical 
Government of the Devil, and of their Idolatrous and heatheniſh 
Rulers. h Heb. /ead; To wit, gently, as a Shepherd doth his 
Sheep; and not rule them with R:gour, as other Lords had done. 

6 * Then ſhall the earth yeild her increaſe i,anudGod, 


even our own God k hail bleſs us, 

; When the people of the Earth ſhall be Converted to the Wor- 
ſhip and Service of the true God, God will take away his Curſe 
from the Earth, and cauſe it to yield them abundance of all forts of 
Fruits. Under which one Bleffing, promiſed unter the Law to 
them that obey God, all other Bleſſings both Temporal and Spiri- 
tual are Comprehended, as is very ujual in the Old Teſtament. 
k He who is Iſrael's God in a peculiar manner, by that everlaſting 
Covenant which he hath made with us. . 


7 God ſhall bleſs us,and all the ends of the earth ſhall 


fear him. 
PSAL LXVEEL 
The ARGUMENT. 
= occaſion ofthis Pſalm ſeems to have been Davids Tranfſla- 


tion of the Ark to Ziow, which was managed with great 
Solemniry and Devotion, and Celebrated with ſome Pſalms,and this 
among che reſt. For the firſt Words ate the very ſame which Moſes 
appointed for ſuch occaſions, Num. 1o. 35. and the following 
Verſes purſue the ſame Matter with the firſt. Thence he falls into 
a Deſcription of ſome ot the excellent Properties and glorious Works 


— our of; 4 Singunto God ; ſing praiſes to his name :4| extol jo;ce wich 


| fort, and plagued with manifoid Calamities. 


ſpeedily Vaniſherh into Air, or is diſperſed with the Wind. 
3 But let the righteous be giad, let themrejoyce be- 
| fore God ; yea, let them | exceedingly rejoyce d. 


+ Heb 5: 


| him e char rideth upon the heavens f by his name LAH Gladneſs. 
|.£, and rejoyce before him þ. -*_ = 
| & For God's gracious appearance on their behalf, and for his ſets **** F m 
| Ted preſence with them e By praiſing him, of which this Verb is 7 '* 
uſcd, Prov. 4. 8 Or rather, raiſe up or prepare the way for him ; For a 
ſo this Word is commonly uſed, as 14. 57. 14. and 62. 10. andelſe- 30 Uh 
where. And this doubrlefs they did for this Solemnity of bringing 
the Ark to Zion. Compare Iſa. 40. 3. f Which phraſe is uſed, be- 
| low wv. 33- though in differing Words. Or, that did Ride in the 
Deſert, where the Ark was carried, and God marched along with it 
in the Cloudy Pillar. Or, that now Rideth as ( which particle is 
frequently underſtood ) in the Deſert, i. e. That is now carried from 
place to place as it wasin the Deſert, The word here rendred Hea- = 
vens, doth generally ſignifie the Deſert or plain Fields, as Num. 33.48. 
50. and 36. 13. Ioſ” 5. lo. 2. Same 4 7. 1ja. 40. 3. Compared with 
Luke 3. 4. g Whereby he is known and diſtinguiſhed from all falſe 
Gods. For Jah 1s generally conceived to be an abbreviature of the 
Name Jehovah, which the Heathens pronounced 7a0. h Before the 
Ark wherehe is preſent, as David himſelf is ſaid to Dance before the 
Lord, upon this Occaſion, 2 Sam. 6. 14. : | 
5 * A father of the fatherleſs, and ajudge ofthe wi- : ---, .-. 
dows 2, is God in his holy habitation 3z. ' PPſ.146 9g. 
; He now enters upon ſome of the Matters or Reaſons,for which Fer.49.11. 
God is to be extolled : Whereof this is one, that heis the Patron of 
ſuch as are injured and oppreſſed,and have not power to help them- 
ſelves, 7 Either in his Tabernacle : Or in Reaven- Though he 
dwells there, yet the Eyes of his Fatherly Providence and Care run 
to and fro to he!p bis people when they are diſtreſſed. 
6*God ſerteth the lolitary Þ in families &: he *bring- ; --, _.. 
eth out thoſe which are bound with chains 1 but * the P£113-9- 
rebellious 2 dwell in a dry land n. T _- - 
k Such as were ſingle and Solitary, he bleſſeth with a Wife and * pſaj 109 
Children, as he did Abraham. Houſes are oft pur for Poſterity, as ;©& & 1 6 
Exod. 1s 21. Ruth 4, 11. 2 Sam. 7.11. 1 He fſetterh Captives and -: TY 
priſoners at Liberty, as he did the 7ſraelites, &c; m Thoſe who Rebel + Pfal.ro7. 
againſt God, as the Egyptians did. »n Are deprived ofall true Com- 34; 


7 O God, when thou wentett forth before thy peo- 
ple s, when thou didft march through the wilderneſs, 
Selah | 

oIn the Cloudy Pillar, as their Captain leading them out of Ezy7r. 

8*The earth p ſhook, the heavens aiſo droppedq at -_... _ » 
the preſence of God ; even Sinai it ſelf was moved r at Ex 19-18 
the preſence of God, the God of Iſrael. = 5 ud. 
- p Either, r. Metonymically, the Inhabitants of thoſe parts of 


of th: God to whim tiuis Ark belonged. Bur becaute David very 
wel' ka that both hunſelf and the Ark were Types of Chriſt,and 
That the Ciurch and peopl: of [acl were a Type of the Catholick ; 


the Exrth, by Comparing Exod. 15. 14, Or, 2. properly,by Com- 
paring Pſal. -114. 5, 6, 79, There was a great Earthquake, as a to- 
ken of God's dreadful] preſence. q 3. e. Poured down great Showers, 
which accompanied thoſe mighty Thunders, as utually it doth. 
SF £ 7 O 4 


CY 


p 0 


v6 : n-. 
Claufe ; was even melted or diflolved with Fear. Ir isa poetical 
Repreſentation of: the Terribleneſs of God's appearance. _ 

9. 9 Thou, O God, didſt f ſend a plentiful r-'1 s, 
Het, Whereby thou didſt + confirm 7 thine inheritances when 


it, 1C WaS WEATY X. 

s Either, 1. In the Wilderneſs ; where they oft wanted Water, 
and. were by God's extraordinary Care ſupplied with it. Orrather 
2- In the Land of Canaan, which he calls God's Inheritance in the 
next Words; as alſo Exod. 15. 17. and in many other places of 
Scripture, # which God's people are faid to dwe/in the next. Verſe 
of which, and the things done in it, he ſpeaks in the following 
.Verſes; and which, being deſtitute of thoſe Conſtant ſupplies,from 
the overflowings of a great River, which Egypr enjoyed, God took 
aſpecial care to ſupply with Rain as occaſion required ; of which 
ſee Deut. 11. to, 11. 5 Or, ftabliſh, or ſuppore, or ſuſtam, a Either 
thy people * Or rather thy Land, as was now ; ſaid. 'x Dry and 
Thirſty, and parched with exceſſive Heat, and ready to Faint for 
want of Rain ; Compare P/al. 63. 1. | 

10 Thy congregation y .hath dwelt therein : thou, 


'O God, haſt prepared z of thy goodneſs « for the poor 6. 
+ Thy people of Iae!, who are all united in one Body,under thee 
their Head and Governour- For though this Word commonly 
ſignifies Living Creatures, yet ſometimes it ſignifies a Company of 
Men, as here below, v: 31. and 2 Sam. 23. 13- Compared with 1 « 
- Chron, 11. 15. and Pſal. 74. 19- Or, the proper ſignification of the 
* Word may be retained, and it may be rendred, thy Flock: For God 
oft compares himſelf to a Shepherd, and his people to Sheep, and par- 
ticularly, he is faid to have ledd his people like a Flock, by the hand of 
Moſes and Aaron, Pſal. 77. 20. To wit, in the Wilderneſs :; and Con- 
- ſequently he may be here ſaid to have brought his Sheep into, and 
made them tro dwell in Canaan, as in a Green and good Paſture, as 
God ſpeaks of bis people under this very Metaphor, Pſal. 23. 2. z 
Or, prepared it, which pronoun is oft underſtood, and here moſt 
eaſily out of the foregoing Clauſe of this Verſe, where it is expreſ- 
ſed; Preparedit, to wat, this Land for the uſe of thy people: which 
God did many ways ; partly, by deſigning it for them, and expel- 
ling the old Inhabitants ro make way for them; and partly, by fur- 
- niſhing ir with all ſorts of proviſions, both for neceſſity and delight 
and making it fruitful by his ſpecial Bleſſing, in giving Rain in its 
© proper Seaſons @ By thy free and ſingular Goodneſs, Which 
may be-referred both to the Cauſe of this preparation, God did ir 
© not for their Righteouſnes orWorthineſs, but out of his meer Mercy 
 asGod off relieth them ; and to the manner and Meaſure of ir,God 
did wonderfully increaſe the Fruits of it, that it might ſuffice for 
the ſupply of ſuch a numerous people ; which without his extra- 
ordinary Bleſſing it would not do, as appears by the ſtate of that 
Land art this day, as it is Reported by Travellers and Eye-witneſſes 
of it. b To wit, for thy people of [rael, whom he here calls poor , 
partly, to repreſs that pride and Arrogance, ro which they are ex- 
cecging prone ; and to mind them of the Dependence upon God 
for all that they have and Hope. for :and partly, becauſe they re- 
ally were, when God undertook the Condutt of them into Canaan, 
a very poor and beggerly people, and ſo they would have ſtill been, 
if God had not provided for them in a ſingular manner. 
4 Heb. 11 The Lord gave the word c; great was the | com- 


m7. pany of thoſe that publiſhed zt 4. 

c 7. e. The Matter ofthe Word or Diſcourſe here following. He 
put this Triumphant Song into their Mouths ; he gave his people 
all thoſe Succeſſes and Vi&ories, which are here Celebrared. Or. 
gave the matter or thing, which was publiſhed. d The works of 
God on the behalf of his people were ſo glorious and wonder- 
Ful that all ſorts of perſons, both men and women, that heard of 
them, broke forth into Songs of praiſe to God for them. The He- 
brew words of the Feminine Gender, hecauſe it was the manner 
of the Hebrews, that when the Men returned Victorious from the 
Battel, the Women went out to meet them with Songs of Triumph 
V. 25. Exod. 15. 20. Judg. 11. 34. 1 Sam. 18.6. ; 
xb,"di2 72 Kings of armies e | did flee apace : and he that 
did flee, tarriedat home divided the ſpoil f. 

e The Kings of Canaan, and other Nations which came forth a- 
ainſt the 7ſraelites, accompanied with great and numerous Armies. 
E: The ſpoil was ſo much, that there was enough, not only for the 
roper uſe of thoſe who took it, bur alſo to be divided to their 
Wives and Children, when they came home. This Verſe,and that 
34 which follows may be taken; Either, r. For the Triumphant Song 
Mp ſung by thoſe Publiſhers mentioned, v- 11. Or, 2, For the Words 
of David, continuing the Relation of the Victories granted by God 
to J{-acl over their Enemies. 
1 Or,Raw 73 Trough ye g have lien among || the pots h.yer ſhall 
{2 ge be 5 as the wings of a dove covered with filver, and 


Th 
x her feathers with yellow gold &. 
g Ye Iſraclites: to whem he now turneth his Speech. b Like 
Scullions that commonly lye down in the Kitchin among the Pots 
. or Hearth-ſtones, whereby they are very much diſcoloured and de- 
formed : Which is fitly oppoſed to the following Beauty. Though 
ou have been filled with Aﬀfition, and Contempt. # Or,ye have 
een. Which may ſeem more ſuitableto the Context both foregoing 
45 and following, wherein he doth not ſpeak prophetically of things 
2 to come, but Hiſtorically of things paſt. So the Sence of the 
Verſeis ; Though you have formerly been expoſed to great Servi- 
br tude and Reproach, and Miſery, to wit, in Egypr, yet ſince that 
_ time God hath changed your Condition greatly for the better. 
& Beautiful and Glorious, like the Feathers of a Dove, which accor- 
ding tothe Variety of its poſtures, and of the light ſhining upon 
it, look like Silver or Gold. ; 
| JOrfr be 24 When the Almighty ſcattered kingsſſin it /, || it 
bewas,&c.'yras white as ſnow in Salmon m. 
Or, thow 7 In Canaan, at the coming of the 1/ra:1:tes thither.. The Land 
* was as white as Mount Salmon is with the Snow,which falls and lies 
£9 W#. fr 21ong timeuponit; which is oppoſed to the Native obſcurity 
of thar Mountain by the many ſhady Trees which were there,Judg. 
9. 48, But becauſe there is nothing certain ; Either, concerning 


Heb. 


be. 


"75 
P 
” 
b. 
, : 


a, 


dothi + Or, dropped ; which tay be repeated out of the former ' 


L M $: Pal. LXVIEL 


the great height of this Mountain, or, concerning 
we do read ot Szow of Lebanon, Jer. 18. 14. other © Hareboany A 
Hebrew and Chriſtian, and the Chalde: among the reſt, take thi 

Word Salmon fora Common, and not a Proper Name "ſignif 1 ya 
Darkneſs or a Shadow, as the Root from whence it comes _ a - 
ſtionably ſignifies, Nor is ir ſtrange, if this Word be no —_ 
elſe taken in that Senſe, bur here, becauſe that is the Lor 6 vic 
Hebrew Words, or of tome lignifications of them, that they are = 
be found but in one Text of Scripture, This being ,granted wa 
Words are or may be rendred thus, it was Snow-white,or thou mas 7 
it Snow-white in Darkneſs, or as the Chaldee renders this Word - 
the ſhadow of Death; ( i. e. ) Thou didſt cauſe Light to ſhine out of 
Darkneſs ; When the ſtate of thy people; and ofthe Land ofCana; 

which thou hadit given to them, was Dark and Diſmal or Blood E 
by reaſon of the Wars raiſed againſt them by the Canaanitiſh Kings. 
thou didſt quickly change it, and whereas it was Red like 0s ah 
or Crimſon, thou madeſt it whiter than Snow. p 


15 Thehill of God » 5s as the hill of Baſh 
high hill «s the hill of Baſhan. GENT” ST 


 n (7, e. of Zion, the ſeat of Gods Ark. o Equal I I 

in height, as the next Clauſe explains it, which oh Sp Boy Ry he 
underitocd of an external and viſible height, for Zim was a low 

and little Hill, and Baſhan a very high Hi!! ; but of its ſpiritual 

eight, or exaltation in regard of the glorious priviledges of Gods 
ore rom wopage,, _ — conferred upon it ; in which 

elpect the Mountain of the Lords Houſe; 1s ſaid to be e{; 
of the Mountains, aud exalted above the Hills, Iſa. = Y Rn RO 

16 Why leapyep, ye high hills ? + 7his 5s the hill *Pſal87.; 

which God deſireth to dwell in ; yea, the LORD will 3% 
m_—_— in it for ever 9. 

Þ Why do you triumph and boaſt of your height, and 
poor Z:oz- with ſcorn and contempt, 4 an 8-4, 2 yoke 
derable Hill, if compared with you ? He ſpeaks to the Hills by an 
uſual Fj gure called Proſopopeia. q This Hill, though deſpicable in 
your Eyesz is precious and honourable in Gods Eyes, and choſen b 
him for his ſerrled and perpetual refidence. For though the Ark 
was removed from this particular place, in which it was now to be 
placed, to the Hill of Mr:ah, upon which the Temple was built 

yet it muſt be remembred, that Ziomand Moriah ſtood one near to 
the other, being both in Jeruſalew, and are by ſome ſaid to have 
been bur two tops of one and the ſame Hill. 

 I7 © The chariotsof r God are twenty thouſand x, x "9, 
[| | ever thouſands of angels: the Lord is among them : 33 "y 
«5 1n Sinai, in the holy place x. | Dan. 1.16 

7 7. e. The hoſts or Armies ( whereof Chariots were a great and Heb. 12. 

eminent part in thoſe times and places) which attend upon God to 22 

do his pleaſure, and to fight for him and for his people. 5 # e. An Rev. $16 
inumerable company, a certain number being put for an uncertain, || Or, es 
- Pſal. 3. 6. and 91. 7. and in many other places. : Here is not on- 1Pany this 
y the preſence of the Angels,but ofthe great and bleſſed God him. ſan. 
ſelf. Andhere the Pſalmiſt ſeems to be tranſported by the Pro. t Hb. 
pherical Spirit, from the Narration of thoſe external Succeſſes, and Thouſand 
ViRories of which he had been ſpeaking in the former part of the of dublin 
Pſalm, unto the prediQtion of higher and more glorious things,even Or abt 
of the coming of the Meſſiah ; and of the happy and tranicene 0% 
dent Priviledges and Bleſſings accruing to Mankind by it, deſcrib» 
ed in the next Verſe, And the connexion of this new matter with 
the former, is ſufficiently evident. For having preferred Z:62: be- 
fore other Hills, v. 15, 16. he now proves its excellency by an in- 
vincible Argument, becauſe this is the place to which the Lord of 
Hoſts himſelf, the Meſſiah, God manifeſted in the Fleſh, was to 
come, as 1s manifeſt from Pſal. 2.6. and 110. 2. Iſa. 2. 3. and 28, 
16. compared with x Per. 2. 6. Iſa. 59- 20. compared with Rom, 1 to 
26. and many other places of Scripture. And when he did come 
into the World, he was attended with amultitude of holy angels 
which celebrated his Birth, Luke 2. 14. t God isno leſs eriond 
though leſs terribly, preſent here than he was in Sinai, when he 
great God attended with Thouſands of his Angels, ſolemnly ap- 
peared there to deliver the Law. Heb. Sinai is in the Sanfuary .< 
holy place, Which is a Poetical and a very Emphatical Expreſſion 
and very pertinent to this place. For having advanced Zron above 
all other Hills, he now equals it to that venerable Hill of Sinai 
which the Divine Majeſty honoured with his glorious Preſence. 
Here, faith ke, you have in ſome ſort Mount Sm it ſelf, to wit, 
all the Glories and Priviledges of it, the preſence of Jehovah at- 
tended with his Angels, and the ſame Law and Covenant, yea,and 
a greater Priviledge than S/nar had, to wit,the Lord Fehovah deſcen- 
ding from Heaven into an Human Body, as appears by his aſcen= 
ding thither again, which the next Verſe deſcribes, and viſibly 
_ = his own Temple, as it was propheſied concerning 

im, Mal. 3. 1. * Fphigi 
18 * Thou haſt aſcended on high « ; thou haſt led Nr 
captivity x captive ; thou haſt reccived gifts y + for men th: 
2, yea, for the rebellious alſo a, that the LORD God 


might dwell among themb. 

# Having ſpoken of the Lord, and of his preſence upon Earth 
he now turneth his Speech to him, asis moſt uſual in this Book: 
And the Contents ofthis Verſe do not agreeto the preſent occaſion 
of carrying the Ark to Zton, . but have a manifeſt reference to Chriſt 
and to his Aſcenſion into Heaven, in whom, and in whom alone 
they are literally and fully accompliſhed, and to whom therefore 
they are aſcribed, Eph. 4. 8. Although the Expreſſions here uſed, 
are borrowed from the Antient Cuſtom of Princes, or Generals of 
Armies, who, after ſome glorious Atchievments and Vifories,uſ- 
ed to goup into their Royal Cities in triumphant Chariots, being 
attended by their caprive Enemies, and afterward to diſtribure 
divers gifts to their Soldiers and Subje&s, and ſometimes do ſome 
AQts of Grace and Clemency even to their Rebels and Enemies, 
and to receive them into the number of his own people. x Et- 
ther 1. Thoſe who did formerly take thy people Captives, Or 


rather 2+ Thoſe whom thou haft taken captive, as this word is 
moſt commonly uſed, as Numb. 21. 1. Deut. 21. 10. Fudgs 5. 12,0. 
So poverty is put for the poor, 2 Kings 24. 14. This is meant 0 
Death and Sin, and the Deyil, and all the Encmies of Chriſt, 

and 


ml 
# 


Plal 


Numb, 
MW 33» 

* Exod 
l& 22, 


Porg.; 
158.10 
Or, red, 


Pol, LXVIIL. 


and of his People, whom Chriſt led in triumph, having ſpoiled 
them, and making a ſhew of them openly, as it is expreſſed Col. 2+ 15. 
y Though as thou art God thou art uncapable of receiving any 
thing more .than thou haſt, yet according ro thy Manhood thou 
haſt received from God all the Treaſures of Wiſdom and Know- 
ledge, and all thoſe Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, which are 
neceſlary either to the perfe&ion ofrhky Nature, or to the diſcharge 
of thine Office, or to the ſervice and good of thy Church and Peo- 
ple. z Not for thy ſelf, for thou didſt not need them, having the 
* fulneſs of the God-head dwelling in thee bodily, Col. 2.9. but for the 
ſons of Men, or which thou mighteſt give unto Men ; whence for 
receiving for men, the Apoſtle juſtly ſaith, gave unto men, Eph. 4. 8. 
becauſe he received them for no other end but to give them, and 
in ſuch caſes receiving or taking is oft pur for giving, or for taking and 
giving, as Exod.25. 2. Judg. 14. 2, 1. Kings 3. 24, and 17. 10. Oc. 
a Nor didſt thou only receive Gifts for, and gave them to thy 
Friends and People, as the manner of other Conquerors is, bur 
alſo to thy moſt ſtubborn and rebellious Enemies, whether Jews 
or Gentiles, who reſolved to break thy bands aſunder, and to caſt away 
thy cords from them ; as is ſaid Pſal, 2. 3. And would not ave thee to 
reign over them, Luke 19. 14. Who crucified him, and put him to 
open ſhame; and yet to theſe, as well as others, thou didſt give 
thoſe ſaving Gifts and Graces, as we read A4#s 2. and elſewhere» 
b That having received ſuch Gifts, and thereby being made fit ha- 
bitations forGod,he who as man is aſcerided into the higheſtHeavens 
might, as God, come down to them, and dweli with them, not 
only in and by his Ordinances in which he is preſent, bur allo by 
his Spirit dwelling in their Hearts by Faith. Or, that they might 
dwell with the Lord God ; the Particle w:th being either underſtood, 
as it 1s in many places, or being contained in the Hebrew Verb 
Shacan, which, -as ſome Hebrew Criticks obſerve, ſignifies not on- 
ly to dwell, but ro dwell with another ; of which the Learned may 
ſee many inſtances in Forfterus his Hebrew Lexicon. So the ſenſe 
is, that they who were eſtranged,and at a diſtance from God, and 
Enemies to him, might draw near to him, and dwell with him both 
here ana in Heaven. 

19 Bleſſed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with be- 
nefits, c even the God of our falvation 4. Selah. 

c And beſides that great and glorious Bleſſing of his Aſcenſion 
which once he wrought for us, he is daily conferring new favours 
upon uss Heb. Who layeth hold upon us Which may be under- 
ſtood either, 1. Of the burden of Afflictions, for which Gods 
people have cauſe to bleſs God upon many accounts. Or rather 
2+ Of Mercies and Favours, which is more agreeable to the Con- 
text ; wherewith in common ſpeech men are ſaid to be loaded by 
another when they receive them from him in great abundance. 


d The only Author and Finiſher both of our preſent and of our 


Eternal Salvation- ; 
20 He that is our God, #s the God of ſalvation, and 
* unto God the Lord belong e the f iſſues || from death g. 


, 
Rev. I. e (i:e.) They are only in his hand and power to diſpoſe them 


Or of 3s he pleateth. f Heb The out-goings, or evaſions, eſcapes or deli- 
luth, © Sg VETances, as a Greek word of the ſame fignihcation 1s uſed, 1 Cor. 
h : 10. 13. g Or, in ( as the Hebrew Lamed is uſed Plal. 16. 10. and 


31. 17, ) death, (i: e.) the moſt deadly dangers. yea, even death 
it ſelf, in and from which God through Chriſt delivers his people. 

2x But God ſhall wound the head þ of his enemies, 
and the hairy ſcalp ; of ſuch a one as goeth on ſtill in 
his treſpaſles &. | 

h Either 1. The political Head, their Ruler or Rulers,the Devil 
or other wicked Chriſtians : Or rather 2. The Natural Head, as 
appears from the following expreſſion added to explain this and 
the hairy Scalp : And he ſpeaks of the Heads or hairy Scalps not of 
one, bur of all his Enemies, the ſingular number being put for the 
plural, than which nothing is more frequent. # (7 e. ) His moft 
fierce and terrible Enemies. For in antient times many people 
uſed to wear long and ſhaggy Hair, thar their looks mighrt.be more 
rerrible to their Enemies. k Of thoſe who periiſt in their enmity 
and rebellion againſt him. Whereby he opens a door of hope and 
—_— to his very Enemies, if they return and ſubmit themſelves 
to him. 


Numb, 22 The LORD faid J, I will bring again from * Ba- 
+403; ſhan m, I will bring my people again * from the depths 


of the ſea ». 

1 Either within himſelf, he purpoſed or he promiſed ; for ſo he 
had done by divers of his Prophets, though not in the ſame words 
which are here uſed, yet to the ſame purpoſe. m I will repeat 
my ancient favours, and give my people as great deliverances as I 
formerly did, when Ifaved them from that great Giant Og King of 
Baſhan, who came out againſt rhem with all his Forces, Deut, 3. I. 
whom TI deliveced into: their hand, as it there follows. Which 
deliverance is oft mentioned in ſucceeding Scriptures, as one of 
the rhoſt eminent- » From the Egyptians at the Red Sea, and from 
the Red Sea it ſelf, through which I brought them with honour and 
Gfety, when it overwhelmed their Enemies. 


WP,8i0; 23 That thy foot may be || dipped in the blovd of 


0r, red, 3hine enemies,and the tongue of thy dogs in the ſame o. 

o And as it was at the Red $-a, and at Baſjhan before, ſo 'yer a- 
gain thine Enemies ſhall be ſlain in ſuch great numbers, that thou 
mayſt wade in theirblood, and thy Dogs lick it upin the held. 

24 They have ſeen p thy geings 4, O God, even the 
goings of my God, my King, in the ſanctuary r. 

p Itis an indefinite expreſſion, Men ſaw and obſerved it, thy 
people to their comfort, and thine enemies with terror and afto- 
niſhment. q Either 1- How thou didſt march before them through 
the Rea Sza and the Wilderneſs, even untill rhou didſt bring them 
into Canaan, and afterward as occaſion was, and how thou didſt 
ſubdue their Enemies before them. Or rather 2. The proceſſion 
ofrche Ark to Sion, the ſolemnity whereof 1s particularly deſcribed 
in the following. Verſes: r Or, 7n holineſs; for it was not a light 
and carnal. but an holy pom Or, in the holy place ; as the Ark, 
in and with which God is ſuppoſed to go, might very fitly and 
truly be called: Or, into the Sanfuary, or holy Tabernagle prepa= 
xed top it 5; whither the Ark was now going. 


® 


lh. 22, 


PS4A£EMSs 


| the princes of Judah || an their council b, the princes yg, with 


4\ 


| 
f 
25 * The ſingers went before, the players on inſtru- * : chr. ii 
ments followed after s, amongſt them were the damſels py 6." 
playing with timbrels *. - | a. 
s Ot which ſee 2 Szm- 6- 15. 1Chron 13: 8; t According tothe 'i 
—— times. See Exod. 15, Oc. | | 
26 Bleſs ye God in the congregations; even the -1 
Lord, || from the fountain of 1/rae! s. | en of 
# Or, as it isrendred in our Margent, and by many others, ye 5s Foun 
that are of or from the fountain of Iſrael, or Jacob, (4. e. ) All ye tain of 
people of Iſrael, who are called the fountain of Jacob, Deut. 33+ 28. Iſrael. 
and faid to come - forth ous of the Waters of Judah, Iſa. 48. 1- and con= 
ſequently of Jaceb, or Iſrael. See alſo Prov. 5. 18. Iſa. 51. 1. And 
this ſenſe ſeems to be confirmed by the following Verſe, wherein 
this fountain is diſtributed into its ſeveral ſtreams, the Tribes of 
Iſrael, But theſe words may be, and are by ſome joyned with the 
former, either thus, Bleſs - che Lord for the fountain of Iſrael,(i.e.) 
for thar fountain which God hath opened to Iſrael for the purging away 
of fin and uncleameſs, as it is exprefſed Zech. 13. 1, even the Blood 
and Spirit of Chriſt and all thoſe Spiritual Bleffings which God con, n 
crs upon his people in his SanQtuary, and by his Ordinances ; 
which are oft compared ro Waters, as Iſa. 12. 3. Exek. 47+ 1. and 
to a Fountain or Well, as Joel 3. 18. Jokng. 14, See allo Prov. 14. 27» 
Jer. 2. 73+ Orthus, Bleſs the Lord who isof the fountain of Iſrael 
(#. e ) who though he be the moſt high God, yet according ro the 
Fleth is deſcended from 1jſracl, as is noted Rim. 9. 5. Bur the firſt 
ſenſe ſeems moſt natural and eaſe . 
27 There is x little y Benjamin z with their ruler a: 


of Zebulun, and the princes of Napheali c. their chm 
x Preſent in this ſolemn pomp of carrying the Ark to Zion un- pariy: | 
der the condu& of David their King. y har Tribe is called /ittle 
partly becauſe it was the youngett, as being deſcended from Jacobs 
youngeſt Son Benjamin ; and principally becauſe it was exceedingly 
diminiſhed and almoft extinguiſhed under the Judges, Judg. 20, 
and 21. He mentions this Tribe, partly becauſe they were near- 
eſt unto Judah, and to the place whither the Ark was going ; and 
partly to note their reconciliation and ſubmiſſion to David, againſt 
whom they had ſtood out with more obſtinacy thanany other Fribe 
as having been ſo long uſed to govern, and lorth to part with the 
Regal Dignity which was by Gods appointment firlt ſeared _ 
them. a With the Prince of their T'ribe,who marched in the head 
of them, Heb. zhe ruler. ( 5. e, ) the Tribe which had lately ſway- 
ed the Scepter, but now ſubmitted themſelves to David, and wait«= 
ed upon him in this Expedition. Bur the firſt ſenſe ſeems the 
trueſt, becauſe the Princes of the following Tribes are here mentio= 
ned. 6 Their Councellors ; or rather, sheir Company, as it is in the 
Margent, the people of that Tribe who waited upon them in that 
action. Which may ſeem to be here noted to intimate,rhat though 
the Princes anly of the following Tribes be named,yet the people 
are Comprehended under them, and were preſent with them in that 
ſolemniry. c He mentions theſe Tribes, either 1. Becauſe they ex- 
celled in Learning and Knowledge, as is gathered from Gen. 49. 21. 
Deut, 33. igi Juag. 5. 14+ Or 2. Becauſe 'they were more hearty 
and forward in complying with David, and in his ſervice than the 
reſt, as may ſcem from the great numiber of them which came from 
the ends of the, Land ta David in Hebron 1 Chron. 12. 33, 34- Or 
3- Becauſe they lived in the remoteft parts cf the Land of Canaan, 
And ſo by naming two of the neareſt Tribes, and rwo of the fur- 
theſt, he leaves it to be underſtood that the other Tribes alſo did 
come upon this occaſion, as is manifeſt from 2 Sam. 6- 15, 19. and 
1 Chrox. 13. 2, 5, 6,8. and 15+3, 28. | 
28 Thy God 4 hath commanded e thy ſtrength fe , þ. -- 3 
ſtrengthen, OGod,that which thou haſt wrought for us g "59 
d Having ſpoken of 1ſ-ael, and of their ſeveral Tribes, v. 26 , 27. 
he now dire&eth his ſpeech to them. e ( ze. ) Hath ordained or 
effeCtually procured. as this word is oft uſed, as Levit. 25, 21. Deuts 
28. 8. Pſal. 42+ 8.and 44+ 4. f All that ſtrength and pow-r, which 
thou haſt pur forth at any time in fighting with thine Enemies,and 
which is now greatly increaſed by the recolle&ion and union of all 
the Tele ma one head, which is the work of God himſelf, with- hy.” 
out whom all the differences and animoſities which had for many 
years been among them could never have been compoſed and -quie= 
red. g Seing therefore all our ſtrength is in thee and from thee a+ 
lone, we pray unto thee for the continuance and in:reaſe of our 
ſtrength, and that thou wouldeſt proceed to finiſh that good work 
which thou haſt begun among us, by preſerving an | confirming 
and perpetuating this bleſſed union, and by giving us a more full 
and univerſal deliverance from our Enemies, Sl 
29 Becauſe of thy temple 4 at Jeruſalem, * ſhall *PC72;1e! 
kings bring preſents unto thee, | 
þ Either 1- The old Tabernacle which then was ; which is oft 
called by this name. But that was now at Gibeon, nor at Jeruſalem. 
Or rather 2. The Temple which Soom ſhould build. which David 
knew ſhould be very magnfical,of fame'and of glory through1:4t alCountries 
as be ſaith, 1 Chron- 22+ 5+ and ſuch as would command eſteem and 
reverence even from Heathniſh Princesand People, and that not on« 
ly for its moſt ſplendid and glorious Strufture, bur eſpecially for 
the wonderful works of the God of that Temple wrought by him 
on the behalf ofhis people, and in anſwer to the Prayers made 
in the Temple, of which ſee r Kings 8. 41, 42, 43: i Kings of the 
Gentiles: which was donein part in the times of Solomon and Heze 
kiah, 1 Kin. 10. 11, 24, 25, 2 Chron. 32. 23. and afterwards by o- 
thers ; but more fully when the Lord Chriſt was come unto his 
Temple, according to that Prophecy Mal. 3« r. and had built a bet= 
ter Temp!e inſtead of it, even rhe Chriſtian Church, to which the 
Kings and Nations of the Earth were to flow in great abundance; 
according to the tenor of many Prophecies in the Old Teſtament, 
30 Rebuke & || tne company / of ſpear-men m, the 
mulcitude of the buils », with the calves of the people; pn q.. ia; - 
pps Won eget OE 'S [ Or, #hs 
ill every one ſubmit himſelf with pieces of ſilver 0: || ſcat- beaft of , 
ter thou p the people rhar delight in war 9g. «the Reeds, 
_ & To wit, really , humble and chaſtize thoſe that will not brin q Or,.. he 
preſents to thee, as the Kings did, - 29. till they ſee their error /c#ereth. 
4V3 and 


” — 
p 8 . 2 £ 
a AR ls Non. Cn. PE "OTE 


«ur 


» ' 
VFA 


— 0500 MY URN: 
- 6 Eds eb Fd Fon Lo Sh. be BO. a tes Bot Sos 4h * ai; ac fo BE i iid fin ads 3.5 


L LXV1I. 
and ſubmit themſelves, as it here follews. 7 So this word ſignifies 
here above, verſe 11: and 2 Sam- 23- 11. Pſahm 74. 19+ Or, the bea#i, 
or wild beaſt, as this word is elſe-where uſed, 1: c: The Beaſts ; 
the tingular being put for 'the plural ; So the ſenſe 1s the ſame. 
-m Heb. Of the reed, i- e» That uſe Spears or Arrows ; which Say 
be called reeds, either becauſe in length and form they reſemble 
reeds; Or becauſe antiently they were made of reeds. And this 
ſenſe ſeems favoured by the laſt.-words of this Verſe, in which be 
explains this and the other Metaphors of Warriors. Or the reed 
may. be taken properly ; and by the beaff of the reea he may unger- 
ſtand the King of Egypr, who then was a very potent and a moſt 
Idolatrous King, and a great and old enemy to the true Religion, 
and to the People of 1rael, whom therefore he deſires God to re- 
buke and bumble, that he may acknowledge the true God, which 
isforetold that he ſhall do, verſe 31- As for this enigmatical de- 
ſignation of this King, that is agreeable enough both to the uſage 
of che Prophets in ſuch caſes, and to the Rules of Prudence; and 
upon the tame account the Prophet Jeremy threatning deftruftion 
againſt Babylon, calls it enigm@ ically Sheſhack, Jer. 25. 26+ and 51. 
41: ard'S. Paul calls Nero, the Lyon, 2 Tim, 4. 17. But then this 
one King, being eminent in his kind, is by an uſual Synecdoche 
put for all of them which were enemies to Gods people. » By 
which he doubtleſs underſtands Men of War, as the following 
words expound it ; the great and potent and fierce and furious 
Adverſaries of God, and of his Church, as this word 1s uſed Pſal. 
22. 12.Jſa« 34. 7. And conſequent!y the calves muſt be their People 
or ſou!diers dependingupon them, and joyning with them in 
theſe a&s of hoſtility again? thine Iſ-ae/. o This he adds as a I1m1- 
ration of his requeſt, Rebuke them, O Lord, nor to utter deſtrutti- 
on, but only till they be humbled and ſubmit themſelves, andin 
token thereof bring pieces of filver for preſents, as was forrold. v. 
29, For ſubmit himſelf, it is 1n the Hebrew ca# him[elf down, or offers | 
himſelf 20 berrod upon- Bur becauſe this ſupplement may ſeem too 
large, and notneceſſary, the words are and may be rendred other- 
wiic, that tread upm, or walk proudly in, or with fragments or pieces of 
filver, wherewith eminent Captains uſed to adoin themſelves and 
their very Horſes And ſo this beiongs to rhe bulls and calves, 
whoſe pride and wealth and power 1s deſcribed in this manner. p 
Heb. - He hath ſcattered, (i. e. ) He will certainly ſcatter, according 
tothe Prophetical Style. So this may contain an anſwer, or his 
aſſurance ofan anſwer to his prayer; I prayed, Rebuke the company, 

| &c, and God hath heard my prayer, and I doubt not, wil' rebuke 
or ſcatter them. ' q That without any neceſlity or provocation,and 
meerly out of a love to miſchief and ſpoil make war upon others, 
and upon us particularly. Now that thou haſt given thy people 
reſt, and ſetrled the Arkin its place, O Lord rebuke all our ma- 


Pis 4 LM Ss. 


Plal. 


Lord of the whole Heaven and Farth, but in a ſpecial and excel' 

manner, he is the God of 1/racl «© Or. I che Heaven, He hath 
two Dw<llings and Thrones, the one in his Church and People 
and the other in Heaven, See 1/a 57+ 15. | , 
35 O God, theu art terrible d out of thy holy places 

e; the God of Iſrael js he that giveth ftrength and pow-. 
er unto h;s people f: blefſed beGod. | 
4 Or, Vuncrable, deſervedly to be both reverenced and feareq. 

e Or, Senfuaries, He uſeth the plural number ; Either, 1. Ot the 
Sanctuary in Zou, becauſe the Tabernacle and Temple conſiſ!ed of 
three parts, the Court, the Holy Place. and the Holy of Holies 
Or rather, 2. With reſpet& to that twofold Sanftuary here men- 
tioned, one in Zion, and the other in Heaven. And out of both 
on Holy Places God appeared, and pur forth fuch As of his 
ower, as might juſtly trific his Enemies. f The Strength which 
the Ki:gdom of J/rael now hath, is not to be afcrib-d to my Valour 
or Condut, nor to the Courage or numbers of the people, nor ro 

that happy Unionnow made, and eftablithed among all the Tribes 
vur only to the might and grace of God. : 

P > & L.A. 
(EY The ARGUME NT. 

His Pſalm of David conſiſts of his Complaints and fervent 

Prayers, and comfortable predifions of his Deliverance 

and of the ruine of his Enemies. Burt the condition of this Pſalm 
1s hike that of divers others, wherein although the matter or ſub- 
ſtance of it agree in ſome ſort to David, yer there are ſome ſingus 

lar paſſages, which he delivers with a particular reſpe& unto Chriſt 
of whom he was an eminent Type, and upon whom his thoughts 
im —_ Day pg 900; and of whom they are more fitly and 

ully underſtood : And therefore they are juſt] li M1 
the New Teftament, as we ſhall ſee: y OT es 99 Saga 
To the chief muſician upon Shoſhannim, @ Pſalm of 

David. | 
David (as a Type of Chriſt) complaineth of his heavy and manifold Af- 
fliftions, 1 12. Fervently prayeth for help and deliverance 
13 —— 21. Giveth over hu Enemies to deſtruffion, 2229. And 
praiſeth God in confidence of being accepted, 39—43. And Sion ſg« 
ved, 35, 36. | 
Ave me,O God,for * the waters 4 are come in unto 
ny ſoul b. 

a 1 & Tribulations, which are oft exprefſed by Waters: as 
hath been obſerved. 6b i- e- To my Vital Moon io chat I am 


ready to be choaked with them. My Soul i : 
even unto Dearh. y Soul is exceeding forrowful 


licious and bloody Enemies, and giveus aſſured peace that we may 
worſhip the Lord without diſturbance. And withal David may 
ſeemr to utter this for his own vindication- 
have been a Man of War, and therefore have loſt 
building the Temple, and am now forced to lodge the Ark in 
2 mean Tabernacle, which I have ereted for it, but this thou 


and therefore do not lay my Wars to my charge. 


Pt ople ; arge 
: Ecniopia » ſhall 


21 Princes thall come out of Agypt 
ſoon ſtretch out her hands unto God 5. 
r He names only theſe, as the great and Antient Enemies of God, 
and of his Feople, and asa moſt wicked and 1dolatious and i'1COr- 


way of humble ſuppiic:tion and ſub- 
miſſion. begging Mercy of him - Or to offer up the preſents ex- 
prefled v. 29. Bur this Prophecy, as allo the next Verſe. evident- 
ly belongs to the times of the Mcfſiah: when ti:e Gentiles were to 
be broucht in to the knowledge and worſhip of the true Ged : with 
the thoughts and hopes whereof David oft comforteth himielt in 
that confined and afflit:d ſtate of the Church in his time. 

22 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth? ; O 


ſing praiſes unto the LORD- Selah. . ; 
: Not only Egypt and Erhiepia, bur other Kingdoms and Nations 
alſo, who ſhall partake of the ſame Grace with them. 
To him * that rideth upon the heavens « which 


were of old x; lo, he doth | ſend out his voice, end 


that a mighty voice y. 

« Upon the higheit Heavens, as Dert. 10. 14- his trueſt and beſt 
Sanftuary. By which Expreſſions, he prevents all mean and carnal 
conceptions of God, as if he were confined to the Ark or Taber- 
nacle, and Jifreth up the Minds, borh of Jews and Gentiles to Hea- 
ven, and repreſenteth God as dwelling there in infinite Glory and 
Majeſty, and from thence looking down upon all the Inhabitants 
of the Earth, and ruling them by his Almighty Power, and there- 
fore moſt fir to be owned and received by all Kings and Kingdoms, 
as their Lord and Governour. x i: e+ From the very beginning 
of the World ; Whereas the Ark was only ſome hundred years old. 
Or, which are everlaſting ; for this Hebrew word anſwers to Olam, 
which looks not only backward to time paſt, but foreward to the 
furure of which this word is by divers underſtood, Devz.33. 15, 
This is alſo oppoſed to the conditien of the Ark and Tabernacle, 
and Temple; Ail which, as David by the Spirit of Prophecy wel] 
knew, would be aboliſhed and diſſolved. » By which he under- 
ſtands; Either, 1+ The Thunder called God's Yoice, Pſalm 29. 3. 
and elſe-where. Or rather, 2. His Word, to wit, the Goſpel, pub- 
liſhed by Chriſt and byhis Apoſtles, aſſiſted by the Holy Spirit ſent 
from Heaven; which migt:t well be call-d God's Yoice, and that a 
enighty Voice, becauſe it produced ſuch great and wonderful Effes, 
asare here above-mentioned, in converting all the Kings and King- 
doms of the Earth. 

34 Aſcribe ye ſtrength unto God z : his excellency « 


2; over Iſrael þ, and his ſtrength is in the || clouds c. 
z Acknowledge that he 15 mighty and able to do whatſoever he 


like Chara&er - Fither in 


*PC.18. 10, 
\& 104+ 3. 
tHcb.g:ive 


1! Or, Hea- 


| 


It is true, O Lord, I "8g 
the honour of . Overflow me. 


knoweſt, that T have not undertaken any of my Wars out of wan» in the very Mire, which is at the bortr h 
ronneſs, or ambition, or love to War and Miſchief, but only by ' firm and es footing, but I ſink in a my nia gd with- 
conſtraint and neceſſity for the juſt defence of my ſelf and of thy | out thy ſpeedy and almighty Help, ſhall be overwhelmed ind de- 


| 


rigible ſort of men, ſee Jer- 13. 23+ Amos 9. 7. bur by them he , quent cryes. 
Synecdochically underitands all other Nations, and people of the ; hath promiſed, and I confidently expe&ed, bur in vain. 


* = o of -. 
2 ” I fink in + deep mire c, where there is no ſtand- 
d: TI am come into | deep waters, where * the floods 


c Heb. In the Mire of the deep Waters. 1 am not in the Shal- 
lows, or nigh the Bank bur in the middle, and deepeſt parts, and 
ad No 


ſtroyed. 

3 I am weary of my crying e, my throat is dried f : 
mine eyes fail g while I wait for my God. 

e I have prayed and cryed to God, long and fervent! 
yet God ſeems to negle& and forſake me. With loud 4 ng 
g With looking to God for that aſſiſtance which he 


4 They: that * hate me without a cauſe g, are more 
than the hairs of mine head: they that would deſtroy 


me being mine enemies wrongfuily, are mighty: then I 
reftored that which I took not away hþ. 

£ Without any injury or occaſion given them by me. þ Either 
becauſe they unjuſtly and violently forced me to it: Or, becauſe 
p Sa wg 3 todo 4 to wy ata for peace ſake. By this 

e kind of wrong, he underſtands all thoſe injurie 7 
which they praftiſed againſt him. + nar 

5 O God, thou knoweſt my fooliſhneſs, and my + 
ſins _ not hid from thee 5. 

# This is added; Either, 1. Asa proof of his In 1 
he had now aſſerted by way of ot to God ; CT 
Judge between me and them, whether I be guilty of thoſe Follies 
and Sins, which they lay to my Charge. And ſuch Appeals indeed 
David uſeth, Pſalm 7-3, 4. and elſe-where : But then they are de- 
livered in form of a Suppoſition, and not a poſitive aſſertion, as 
this is. Or rather, 2. As an exception to what he laſt ſaid, But 
O Lord, although I have been innocent to mine Enemies and 
have given them no cauſe to hate or perſecute me, as they do, yet 
I muit confeſs, I am guilty of many Sins and Follies againſt thee 
and have given thee juſt cauſe to puniſh me,and to give me up 
into their hands,and to deny or delay thine help unto me. By Fool- 
iſhneſs he means Sin, as he explains it, which 1s commonly ſo cal- 
led in Scripture ; Or by his Foliſbneſs, he means leſſer fins commit- 
ted through Ignorance or Inconſiderateneſs, and by Sins, thoſe of 
a groſler nature. | 

6 Let not them that wait on theef, O LORD GOD 
of hoſts, be aſhamed g for my ſake 4: let not thoſe that 
ſeek thee, be confounded for my ſake, O God of Iſrael. 

f (i- e.) Thy godly people, who relye upon thy promiſes, which 
thou haſt made to all chine in genera), and to me in a ſpecial man- 
ner, wherein they alſo are concerned. g (i-e) Fruſtrated of their 
juſt hopes; Which will make chemiaſhamed, either to look up u- 
pon God, or tolook upon their Enemies, when they ſhall reproach 
them for their Confidence in God. + Either, 1. For the ſake of 
my fins laſt mentioned ; Let not all good Men ſuffer for my ins. 
Or 2. Becauſe of my fad diſappointments. For if they ſee me re- 
jetted and forſaken of God, whom they have eſteemed a great ex- 


pleaſerh for his people, or againſt his and their Enemics? & His 
excellent Power and Goodneſs. b Dwelis among them. and is em- 
ployed for chm, as occaſion requires, - He 15 mideed the univerſal 


_— _— gry 2 al and all Vertue and Piety, they will 
e exceedingly diſcouraged by this Example Whi ill tend 
much to thy diſhonour and diſſervice, hog EO 

7 Bees 


LXIX 


Ton 245; 


* Ver. I, 
f Heb. the 
Mire of 
depth. 
f Heb. . 
depthof 


Waters, 


"PC. 18,4 


* John 15, 
254 


+ Heb: 
Guilrineſs 


"wP{.31+ 


#Pſals1 
139, 

John 2 
*Ro. 1: 


{Heb 
I wept 
the ja/ 
my $0u 
ani th 
&- 


*P(al. 
15, 16 
} Heb 
drinken 
Þrmg | 


"I. 
(ve. 


'vl,s 


Ws < 


val LXIX». 


P s A 


» Becauſe for thy ſake ; I have born reproach: ſhame 
hath covered my face &. 

7 For my truſt in thy Promiſe, and obedience to thy Commands, 
and zeal for thy Glory, and againſt all wickedneſs: All which 
they turn into matter of derifion and reproach. & In which Man's 
Majeſty and Glory is moſt evident, which I am in a manner 
albamed to ſhew amongſt men- 

P[33.11. 8 I * am become a ftranger unto my brethren, and 


an alien unto my mothers children /. 

I My neareſt Kinſmen eſtranged themſelves from me ; partly, 
out of fefr, leſt they ſhould be involved in my ſufferings ; and 
chiefly out of diſlike of his Piety and exceſſive Zeal in Religion, 
as it here follows.n 

*alnr9. g*Formthe zeal of thine houſe » hath eaten me up o, 

139- * and the reproaches of them that reproached thee p, 

pays are fallen upon me 9. 

*R0.15 3' 2 This is the Reaſon of that alienation of my Brethren and 
others from me, becauſe there is a vaſt difference and contrariety 
in our Tempers. They mind not the concerns of God and of Re- 
ligion, but are wholly intent upon Wealth and Honour, and 
Worldly greatneſs. » That fervent Paſſion which I have for thy 
Houſe and Service, and Glory and People, o Exhaufted and walt- 
ed my Natural Moiſture, and Vital Spirits, which is oft effe&ed 
by grief and anger, and fervent Love and Deſire ; Of which Paſſh- 
ons Zeal is compoſed. p That ſpeak contemptuoufly or wickedly 
of thy Name or Providence, or Truth, or Worſhip and Service. 
q Either, 1. By Imputation : They refle& uppn me becauſe I am 
engaged: in the defence of thy Cauſe and Glory, which wicked 
men oppoſe and deſpiſe, and therefore mult needs ſuffer th ir, and 
withit. Or, 2. By Choice and AﬀeQtion. I have been as deeply 
affeted with thy reproaches, as with mine own. This whole verſe, 
tho truly belonging to David, yet was alſo dire&ed by him, or at 
leaſt by the Spirit of God in him, to an higher uſe, ro repreſent 
the diſpoſition and condition of Chriſt, in whem this was more 
truly and fully accompliſhed than in David, ro whom therefore it 
is appli:d in the New Teſtament, the firſt part of it, John 2+ 17. 
and the latter, Rom. I5.3. 


fHeb. and xo + When I wept r, and chaſtened 5 my ſoul # with 


Ivf faſting, that was to my reproach «, 
th Joſs r For their impiety and reproaches, which they caſt upon God 
pu has and Godlineſs. s Which word is here underſtood, out of Pſalm 
" _ 35-13. avit 1s alſo in 2 Chron. 10. 114 14. out of I Kings 12. It. 
” where it is expreſſed. # Either my Body ; or my lelf, the Soul be- 
ing oft uſed both ways. » They derided me for my Piety and 
Devotion, and for my Faith in God's Promiſes, and hopes of afliſt- 

ance from him: 

11 I made ſackcloth alſo my garment x, and I be- 


came a proverb to them y. 

* Wearing it nextto my Skin, in token ofmy Humiliation and 
hearty Sorrow, as the manner then was in days of Faſting. y They 
uſed my Name 'proverbially of any perſon, whom they thought 
vainly and tooliſhly Religious. : 

12 They that ſit in the gate z, ſpeak againſt me, 
Mal..35- and * I was the ſong of the | drunkards 

Few z Either, 1. Vain and idle perſons, that ſpend their time in the 
FE ; " + Gates and Mackets, in which there uſed to be a confluence of peo- 
bn = | ple. Or rather 2. The Judges and Magiſtrates, who uſed to ſit 
mg arms ( which was their poſture, Exed. 18. 14. Prove 20.8, &c: ) in the 
Gates of Cities, the uſual places of Judicature, For David oft com- 
plains of his hard uſage from theſe men, as Pſalm 5 8. 1, 2. and 119. 
23 and elſe-where; which was the more grievous, becauſe theſe 
who were obliged by their Office to prote& and right him, did 
joyn with others in reproaching and oppreſſiing him. #« Of the 
ſcum of the people; of all lewd and debauched perſons. Thus 

both high and low conſpired againſt him. 
I. 49.8- 13 But as for me, my prayef is unto thee 6, O LORD, 
lor.6. » * jn an acceptable time: O God, in the multitude of 


thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy ſalvation c. 

b But whilſt they ſcoffI will pray, and not be driven from God, 
and from my Prayers and other Duties, by all their Reproaches or 
other diſcouragements. c Heb. In a vime of Acceptation, or Grace ; 
or thy good Will, or good Pleaſure. Thele words may be joyned ; 
Either 1. With the following words, by way of limitation : Hear 

| ne in thy accepted time,  e» I do nor limit thee to a day or time, 
but when thou ſeeſt fir, hear and help me. Or rather 2. With 
the foregoing, as an Argument to enforce his Prayer, I pray in 4 
time of Grace or Acceptation, I ſeek thee, when thou wayeſt be found, as 
Pſalm 32.6. Iſa. 55. 6. In a good Day, as they faid,. 1 Sam. 25.8. in 
the Day of Grace and Mercy, in a time of great trouble, which 
is the proper ſeaſon for Prayer, Pſalm 50. 15. and whilſt I have thee 
engaged to me by Promites, which thy Honour and Truth oblige 

thee to perform, I come not too late, and therefdre do thou hear 

ſ me. e Or for, or according to thy ſaving Truth, or Faithfulneſs; where. 
by thou art obliged tro yu? unto me that Salvation which thou 
haſt graciouſly promiſed. 


14 Deliver. me out of the mire, -and let me not ſink: 
let me be delivered from them that hate me «4, and out 
of the deep waters. 

d Whereby he explains his meaning in theſe Metaphors of Mire, 
and Waters, and Deep, and Pit 
Rs 15 Let not the water-flood overflow me, neither let 
2,523. the deep ſwallow me up, and let not * the pit ſhut her 
mouth upon me. 

16 Hear me, O LORD, for thy loving kindneſs zs 

good es, turn unto me according to the nuultitude of thy 


render mercies. | | 74, 
e i. e;: Is eminently and unſpeakably good ; The poſitive degree 
being pur for the ſuperlative, asit is Zuke 1. 28s 1 Cor, 12. 23, &C- 


Ir is moſt ready to communicate it {elf ro indigent and milerable 


Creatures, 


_ 


i 


LM. 
17 And hide not thy face from thy ſervant, for I am 


18 Draw nigh unto my ſoul f, and redeem it: deliver ,,7.. 
me becauſe of mine enemies gp. 

f To ſupport and relieve it, O thou who ſcemeſt to be departed 
far away from me, g Partly, becauſe they perſecute ir, and gree- 
dily ſeck to deſtroy it; And partly, becauſe they are thine as well 
as mine Enemies, and if they ſucceed, will triumph not only over 
me, but in ſome ſort over thee, and over Religion. 

19 Thouhaſt known * my reproach,and my ſhame, an 


b Thou ſeeſt how much of it ſuffer, and that for thy ſake ; as Heb. 12. 
he ſaid verſe 7. # Thou knoweſt them thoroughly, and all their 
injurious and wicked devices, and implacable malice againſt mey 
and all their impiery and contempt of thee ; For which they des 
ſerve to be utterly and ſpeedily deſtroyed. 

20 Reproach hath broken my heare &, and I am full 
of heavineſs: and I looked fer ſome + to take pity, but + Heb. i 
there was none I, and for comforters, but I found none, «mens | 

k For reproach is moſt grievous to the moſt generous and noble Wi" Me 
Souls; And beſides, this was the higheſt degree, and the worſt 
kind of Reproach, being caſt upon him for God's ſake, and upon 
God alſo for his ſake» 1 i-e- Few or none, as that word is fie- 
quently uſed, both in Sacred and profane Writers For whether 
you underſtand it of David, or of Chriſt, there were ſome who | 
pitied both of them. £0M ; | 

2I They gave me alſo gall » for my meat, * and in *Mat: | 
my thirſt they gave me vinegar to drink #. I'D wy 

-» Or, Poiſon; or, bitter Herbs, Hoſea 10+ 4+ See Deut- 29. 18. J eh 
Jerem- 9. I5- Lament+ 3- 19+ In ftead of giving me that piry and —_ J 


4 
w 


comfort which my condition required, they barbarouſly added ro 
my Afﬀiions. = Theſe things were Metaphorically fulfil'ed in 
David, but Properly and Literally in Chriſt, the deſcription of 
whoſe Sufferings was principally intended here by the Holy Ghoſt; 
who therefore direQted David's pen to theſe words, and poſlibly 
informed him, that this ſhould be accompliſhed in Chriſt. Which 
may not ſeem improbable to him that conſiders the following Im- 
precations, which are ſo many and ſo ſevere, that they may ſeem 
toexceed the bounds of Juſtice and Charity, if they be applyed ro 
Davia's Enemies, as a recompence for their Injuries done to him 
whereas they moſt deſcryedly and fitly belong to the enemies, an 
murderers of Chriſt. 


22 * Let otheir table p become a ſnare before them 9: *Rom if 
and that which ſhould have been for their welfare, let it 9, to. 
become a trap r. | | 


s Theſe and the following Words, which are expreſſed-in the 
form of Imprecations, are thought by divers to be the only Pre- 
diftions, and that the Imperatives are put for the Furures, as ſomes 
rimes they are. And accordingly they tranſlate the words thus ; 
Their table ſhall become @ ſnare, &c- But if they be Imprecations, 
here was tufficient Cauſe for them- And beſides, it is apparent, 
that they were not the DiQates of Humane Paſſion, but of Divine 
Inſpiration, and proceeded from a juſt Zeal for God's Glory, as 
hath been obſerved before. p i-e- Their Food and all their Pro- 
viſions for Neceſlity or Delight ; either for Body or Soul; for the 
Curſes here following are Spiritual and Eternal, as well as Tempo- 
ral. And ſo this may comprehend their Sacrifices and other Legal 
Ordinances, and the Word of God: All which became to the Jews 
through their own default, a great occaſion of ſtumbling at Chriſt; 
And this puniſhment ,in their Table, exaQly anſwers to their fin, 
in giving Chriſt Gall for his Meat, verle 21- 4q Heb. Before them, 
te,. Their Table or Meat, which is ſer before them, which is the 
uſual expreſſion in this caſe, as Gen- 18+ 8+ 2 Kings 6 22+) become 8 
Jnare, i. e: The occaſion or inſtrument of their deſtruftion. Is 
isa Metaphor taken from Birds, or Fiſhes, that are commonly en- 
ſnared and taken with their Baits. » Heb. And as for their great 
Peace ( which the Plural Number ſeems to import, all chat Tran» 
quility and Proſperity which they do, or may enjoy) let it be # 
Trap. Or, And their Peace-off:rings ( which Sacrifices may be here 
mentioned, becauſe the offerers did partake of them, and feaſt upon 
them; and ſo this agrees with the Table expprefſcd in the former 
Clauſe) a Trap. And ſo they were to the unbelieving Jews, whoſe 
falſe conceir of the everlaſtingneſs of the Mofſaical Diſpenſation, 
was one cauſe of thfir Reje&ion of Chriſt. Or thus, And for Re- 
compences, (i» e, An'abundant compenſation of all 'their Injuries) 
and for a Trap. For thus it is rendred by divers, both Antient and. 
Modern Interpreters, and which is more conſiderable, by the As 
poſtle, Rom. 11. 9. EE es #8 I, 

23 Ler their eyes s be darkned that they ſee not 2 
and make their loins continually to ſhake r. <4 

5s Not the Eyes of their Bodies (for ſo this was not accompliſhed 
in David's, nor in Chriſt's enemics) but of their Minds, thar they 
may, not diſcern God's Truth, nor their own Duty, nor the way 
of Peace and Salvatian. Puniſh them in their own kind : As they 
that ſhut their Eyes and would not ſee, ſo do thou judicially blind 
them. This was threatned and inflicted upon the Few, 1/s. 6- to. 
Fohn 12: 39, 49+ ft Thisalſo belongs to the Loyns of their Minds or 
Souls; Of which we read Luke 12. 35+ 1 Pet+1- 13: The Loyns of 
the Body are the ſeat of Strength, and the great Inſtrument of Bo« 
dily Motions and Aftions- Which being applyed to the Mind; the 
Senſe may be; Either, 1. Take away their Courage and Alacrity; 
and give them up to Puſillanimity, and Terror, and Deſpair. , Oc 
rather,2. Take away their Strength and Ability for Spiritual ARi-' 
ons. In the fermer branch, he wiſheth thatthey may nor be able 
to ſee, or chuſe their way; And here, that they may not be ablero 
walk in it,nor to execute the good Counſels which others may give 
chem. As on the other ſide, when God giyes men ſtrength, they 
Ire able not only to walk, but to Run in the ways of God, Pſalr 
119. 32. Cant. I. 4: Iſa. 40.31» ; 


24 Pour out thine indignation upon them #, and les 

cy wrathful anger take hold of them. _ _ ____. 

# In ſuch other ways atid judgments, as thou ſha't think fit: of 
4U+;x 25 ® Eet 


' Phi. 1%1% 


in trouble: + hear me ſpeedily. + Heb. . i 


q * Pfal. 23f 
| my diſhonour þ: mine adverſaries are all before thee 3. Ih 53s 16 


ntl OUR WET BE CEE VOY YET EPI RIOT YEP v7 Wb VP Pa 44h 


"GY tt is. nd C , 
" 4 FO 


a 0%, 0 > IDO | 


34 TATE HP OTOL moi we pp wn te: 7 


© 6B 


au LXIX. 


\25.* Let # their -habitation.» be deſolate, and + let 
x" 1: Done y dwel in their tents. | 
be pp; * Heb. cheir Palace, as this word ſignifies, Gen. 25. 16." Numb. 
re 31-10. Cant.'8-'g- Either their Temple in which they place their 
Glory and Safety. Or rather, 2. And more generally, rheir ſtrong- 
eſt and -rhoſt magnificent Buildings, and Houſes, in which they 
dwelt, as it follows in the next Clauſe, which explains this. 
3 Either, 1. None of their Poſterity. Deſtroy them both Root 
and Branch: Or 2»: None at all. Let the places be accounted ex- 
__..___ecrableand dreadful- F 
- hgh Fa +26 For they perſecute * him whom thou haſt ſmit- 
deg, ten 2, and they talk 2to the grief of + thoſe whom thou 


;haſt wounded. | - 

2 Which is an a& of barbarous Cruelty, and inhumane Malice. 
# Reproaching them with, and inſulting and criumphing in their 
Calamiries. - Eel Fg 
Dr, Pu- 27 Add || iniquity to their iniquity þ; and let them 

ſbment of not come into thy righteouſneſs c. 

2%)" — b Give themup to their own vain minds and vile luſts, and to 
a reprobate ſenſe, and take off all the reſtraints of thy Grace and 
Providence, . and expoſe them to the Temptations of the World, 
and of rhe devil, that ſo they may grow worſe and worſe, and at 
laſt may fill up the meaſure of their ſins; as is ſaid Math. 12. 32. 
compare Rom. 1+ 28, 2g. "Or, Add Puniſhment to their Puniſhment ; as 
this Word is oft taken'; Send one Judgment upon them after a- 
nother, withour ceaſing. c Let them never partake of thy Righ- 
rtcouſneſs, i.e- Either, 1. Of thy Faithfulneſs, in making good thy 
Promiſes to them.Or, 2. Of t:iy Mercy and Goodneſs. Or rather, 
3- Of thy Righteouſneſs ; properly fo called, of that everlaiing 
R ghteouſneſs, which the Meſſiah ſhall bring into the World, Dan. 
9: 24. Which is called the Righreouſneſs of God, Rom: *1- 17, Phil, 3. 
9, &c. which is faid to be Witnſſed by the Law, and the Prophets, 
Rom- 3 2:+ by, and for, which God doth juſtifie or pardon 
ſinners, and accept them in Chriſt as righteous Perſons. For 
this was the Righ:couſneſs which the Jews rejeted to their own 
ruine, Rem 10. 3. according to this prediftion. Thus as the firſt 
branch of the Verſe maketh, or ſuppoſeth them guilty of many 
Sins, fo this excludes them from the only remedy, the remiſſion 
of their Sins. And that juſtifying rather than ſanRifying Righte- 
ouſnels is here meant; ſeems moſt probable from the Phraſe, which 
ſeems to be a judicial phraſe, as we read of Coming, or entring into 
Fudgment, Job 22+ 4: and 34. 23+ and into Condemnation, Joh.5. 24+ 
"oppeſite unto which is this phraſe, -of coming into Juft-fication ; or 
Which is all one; into thy Rrighreoufne[s. I 

28 Lerthem be blorted outof the book of the living 4, 
and not be written with the righteous e. 

d Or, of Life. Either, 1. Of this Life: Out of the number of 
living Men ; which anricntly uſed to be written in Catalogues, out 
of which the Names of thoſe who died were blotted: Or rather, 
2. Of Ercrnal Life, as both Jewiſh and Chrifian Interpreters com- 
monly underſtand it. Which agrees beſt, 1. To the uſe of this 


ts 1. 


#11 the Book, Dan. 12: 
Book of Life, Phil- 4+ 3: Rev: 3- 5- and 13: 8. and 17- 8- and 20. 12. 
and 21+ laſt. 2 To the laſt Clauſe of the Verle, which exp/ains 
It, of thar Book, wherein none but the Righteous are written ; 
Whereas this Life, and that attended with health and proſperity, 
is. promiſcuouſly given to and taken from good and bad men. 
'3. Fo rhe qualiry of the perſons of whom this is faid ; Which are 
the malicious enemies of God, and of his people, and the murder- 
ers" of the Lord of Glory ; Who ſha!l be piirfiſhed with eternal 
-Death In this ook Men 'may be fag to be written; Either 1 In 
rewity, by God's Ele&ion or Predeſtimation. Or 2. In appearance, 
when a Man is called by God to the profeſſion and prattice of the 
_ *trite Religion, and into Covenant with himſelf, and profeſſerh ro 
:eompiy with ir; aid ſo is written, in the writing of the Houſe of 
I##4;' which is ſaid of all that are in the 4ſembly of God's People, Ezek. 
rouhy and' ſo ſeems to others, and it may be to himſelt; To be 


really writren in the Book of Life. And when a man renounceth 
this Profeſſion and Religion, he may be ſaid to be blotted our of that 
*Book, -Becauſe his ApoFacy makes it evident, that he was not writ- 
zefi in it, as he ſeemed ro be. For this is a known and approved 
Nule For the undertanding of many Texts of. Scripture, that 
things are oft ſaid to be done, when they only ſeem to be done, 
ard are not really done ;as he is ſaid to find his Life, Mat: 10: 39+ who 
falſly imagined thathe did find it, when in truth he loſt ir; And ro 
have, Mat- 1.3, 12. who only ſeemed to have, as it isexplained in the 
Parallel lace, Luke 8.18 and to /ive, Rom: 7. 9- when he vainly 
conceited himſelf to-be alive And in like manner Men may be 
ſaid to be written in, or blotted out of this Book, when they ſeem to be 
ſo;"by the courſe of their Lives and Aﬀtions, Burt that this blorting 
out is not meant, Properly and poſitively, is clear from the laſt 
brangh of this Verſe; whach, after the manner of theſe Books, ex- 
pounds the former, wherein this doubtful phraſe is explained, by 
one, which is evident and unqueſtionable, even by his not being wric- 
zon.jinjt. For itis impoſſible that a Man's name ſhould be proper. 
Iy blotted out of that Book in which it was never written. 'The 
Senſe of the Verſe ſeems to be this : Let their wickedneſs be ſo no- 
torious, and the tokens of God's wrath upon them ſo manifeſt, that 
all men.may, diſcern that they are blotted our; Thar is, that they 
neves,were Written: in the Book of Life, in which the Righteous 
are;Whitten-; Ce 1 &. In the Book of Life, in which all Righteous 
or holy Perſons, and only they are written, whereby it may appear 
- that whatſoever ſhew or profeſſion they once made, yet they nei- 
ther are nor were truely Righteous perſons. | 
29 But I am poor and ſorrowtul : let thy ſalvation, 
© God; ſet me up on high f. 
? PF Our of the reach of mire Enemies : Or, lifr meout of the deep 
irs. and the Mire; 'in which I was finking, verſe 14. 
"zo 1 will praiſe the name of God with a forg, and 
wil im with thankſgiving. 


P.$Si:4 L - MS: 


£ This ſincere and hearty Sacrifice of Praiſe, is and ſhall be more 
grateful to God, than the moſt Glorious Lega! Sicrifices; For ſo 
tuch Moral Services ever were, 16Sam 15. 22. Hoſea 6 6. and ſuch 
Sacrifices ſhall be accepted when thoſe legal cnes 1} all be aboliſhed. 
h This is added as a deſcription and commendation. of the Sacri- 
fice, or Bullock, which he tuppoſeth to be of tte beſt ſort, both 
render and mature,as it is when the Horns bud fortt:,and the Hoofs 
grow hard. 

32 * The || humble ſhall ſee this, and be glad z, and *rc. 44.:; 
your heart ſhall live & that ſeek God. |.Or, meck, 

; Thoſe pious perſons who ore grie\ ed for my Calamities, ſhall 
have occaſion to rejoyce, and they will heartily rejoyce in my de. 
liverance and exaltation. k Or, be revived, to wit, with Joy, which 
were dejeCted, and in a mariner dead with forrow. Compare Gen. 
45. 27. Pſalm 22. 26. and 109. 21+ 

33 For the LORD heareth the poor, and deſpiſeth 
not his priſoners /. 

{ Thoſe who are in priſon, or any ſtraits and afflitions for his 
ſake ; which is my caſe verſe 7. 

34 Let the heaven and earth 2 praiſe him, the ſeas 
and every thing that | moveth therein. f Heb: 

m Either, 1. Angels and Men. Or rather, 2. The Heaven and mm, 
Earth themſelves, as in the nexr branch, rhe Seas, and every thing *Peth, 
that moveth therein, All which by an uſual Figure, he invites to 
Praiſe God, as he doth elſe-where, becauſe they all give Mcn occa- 
ſion to praiſe God. 

35 For God will ſave Sion », and build the cities of 
Judah : that they o may dwell there p, arid have it in 
poſlefiion. 

» The City of Stow or Jeruſalem ; and his Church and People, 
which are frequently expreſſed under that Title. o The humble 
and poor, verſes 32, 33. or his Servants, as is explained in the fol- 
lowing Verſe. p In the literal Canaan for a long time, and in the 
Heavenly Canaan for ever. 

36 * The ſeed alſo of his ſervants ſhall inherit it 9, *px to, 
and they that love his name ſhall dwell therein. 28. 

q Their poſterity ſhall flouriſh afcer them, and partake of the 
fame Happineſs with them. . 


” > 0 Ko A ho 
The ARGUMENT. 


He Contents of this Pſa/m are almoſt all to be found Pſaim 40: 
13, &c. Nor is it ſtrange that they are here repeatcd, be- 


.phrate in Scripture : For in this ſenſe Men: are ſaid to be written * 
1- Or in God's Book, Exod- 32+ 32+ or inthe 


cauſe the ſame or like Occaſions were oft repeated ; and David's 

returning Diſtreſſes might well make him ſomerimes repeat the 

' ſame Words. And as theſe things were joyned with many other 
paſſages in Pſalm 40. ſo they are diſtin&ly repeated, as a Form of 
Prayer, which himſelf or others might uſe in ſuch 2 Condition, 
What is neceſſary for the underſtanding of this Pſalm, the Reader 

' may find in the Notes on Pſalm 40. 

| To che chief muſician, « P/alm of David, to bring to 

remembrance. 

David prayeth to God for ſpeedy help, to the ſhame of his Enemies, 1-=7, The 

Joy of the Godly, and the magnifying of his Name, 4+ 5. 
 Ake hate, * O God, to deliver me ;make haſte + *pfal: 4, 
to help me, O LORD. 13, &c, 


2 * Let them be aſhamed and confounded that ſeek - ob ng 


after my ſoul : ler them be turned backward,and put to my be. 
confuſion, that deſire my hurt. *pſ: 35. 4 
3 Let them be turned back for a reward of their and 71.13, 
ſhame, 'that ſay, Aha, Aha. 
4 Let thoſe that ſeek thee rejoyce, and be glad in 
thee: and ler ſuch'as love thy ſalvation, ſay continual- 
ly, Let God be magnified. 
5 Bur * 1 azz poor and needy, make haſte unto me, O *pf69.49, 
God: thou art my help and my deliverer, O LORD, 
make no tarrying. 
PSAL EXXT 
The ARGUMENT. 
: | \He matter of this Pſalm plainly ſheweth that it was writtefz 
in a time of David's great diſtreſs, and his Old 4ge, menti- 
oned verſe 9 and 8. which proves that it belongs nor ro Sau!'s 
time ; But rather to the time of 4bjalom's Rebellion, which hap= 
pened in his O!/d Age. 
The Pſalmif in confidence of his Faith, and in experience of paſt favours, 
prayeth unto God to delicucr him, but conſume bu Enemies, 1 I3, 
Promiſmg conſtancy of hope in him, 14 ==—_ 16, Praying for his 
perſevering Strength and Power, 17, 18. Acknowledgeth his Troubles 
to be from God, 19 = 21. Promiſeth thankfulneſs to him for his de- 
liverance, 22—24. 


N * thee, O LORD, do I put my truſt, lee me ne- +py, «;. 


ver be put to confuſion 4. 2, 3.and 
@ This Verſe and the next are taken out of Pſalm 31+ 1, 2. 31-1? 
2 Deliver me in thy righteouſneſs, and cauſe me to 
eſcape : incline thine ear unto-me, and ſave me. 
3 | Be thou my ftrong habitation, whereunto I may _ F 
continually reſort : thou haſt given commandment bto hag al 
ſave me, for thou art my rock and my fortreſs. Fg," 


b By which he underſtands God's purpoſe and promiſe ; and his, Hinge 
Providence, watching to execute them; All which are as certain ;;;,, 


and powerful as a Command. 


4 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand ef the wick- 
ed,our of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man. 

5 For thou art my hope, O LORD God, thou art 
my truſt from my youth. | 


epgrilic hi 
31 * This allo ſhall pleaſe the LORD better than an 
ox o7;bullock g that hath horns and hoots þ, 


—-_ 


5 


6 * By thee havel been holden vp from the womb c; *pſal: 22] 


thou 1a; 1 34 


Plal. LXY, 7 L 


lech-3- 


(Heb» 
Watch or 
deve. 


Wſ. 70. 


Pal. 5 
4, 26, 


'Pſ. 40. 


Verſe 
l3, 24, 


p PC. 6 
& 88 


X, 


2g 
173 


LXXI. 


thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels 4, 


my praiſe ſhall. be continually of thee. 

c i & From the time when I came our of the womb. 4.e. 
Out of her Womb. Which he juſtly mentions as a great and won- 
derful,though a commonand negle&ed work of Gods Power and 
Goodneſs. 

7 *I amas a wonder e unto many, but thou art my 
ſtrong refuge f. | | 

e Or Prodigy 3 either. r. Of Mercy, for the wonderfull prote- 
&ionsand drliverances which God hath given me. Or rather, 2. 
Of Judgment, for my many and ſore Calamities, as appears from 
the next words. They wondred both at the Calamities themſelves 
which befel me ; which were great and various, and ſtrange ; 
and that they ſhould befal me, one who have made it the chief 
care and buſineſs of wy Lif: to p'eaſe and ſerve and glorifie God ; 
and one whom God hath ——_ inſoeminent a degree,and crown- 
ed with ſuch a conſtant ſucceſſion of Bleflings and dehverances 
from time to time That ſuch a Man ſhould be forſaken by ſo 
.graciousa God ; and perſecuted even to Death by his own Son 
wh--m he had ſo tenderly loved; and deſerted by the Body of his 
own people, who h:d generally expreſſed ſo grzat an opinion of 
him, and aff<Qion to him, and had ſo many obligations to him, 
and ſuch fi:gular benefits, by his wiſe and juſt, and pious Govern- 
ment ; this was indeed cauſe of wonder f But although men de- 
ſert me, aad Jook ask:w at me, God is a ſure refuge to me. 

8 Let my mouth be filled 24th ty praiſe g, and with 
thy honour all the day, : 

g Give me occaſion to multip'y my Praiſes to thee, for dehve- 
ring me out of my preſent diſtreſs. 

9 Caſt mie not oft in the time of old age b ; forſake 


me not when my ſtrength failerh. 
þ When I am moſt feeble, and mgſt need thy help, and one who 
15 grown Old in thy ſervice. | 
10 For mine enemies ſpeak againſt me, and they 
that + lay wait i for my ſoul, take counſe! together. 
; Or, Watch it, tha* they may find occaſron to deſtroy it, and 
that it may not eſcap*< their Hands. 
11 Saying, God hath forſaken him & : perſecute 
and take him, for there is none to deliver him. 
k For his Adultery and Murder, and other Wickedneſvses, and 
therefore we ſhal! certainly prevail againſt him. 
12 *O God, be not far from me : O my God, make 
haſt for my help. 


lech-3-8 


Heb | 
Watch or 
fave. 


Wſ. 70. I. 
Pal. 35, 


PSALMS 


13 *Let them be confounded 4,4 conſumed, that 
4, 26, 


reproach and diſhor.our that ſeek my hurt. 

14 But-I will hope continually, and will yet praiſe | 

thee more and more /. | 

I For which I know thou wiltſt yet give me aboundant occaſion. 

15 My mouth hail ſhew forth chy righteouſneſs, and 

T.40. 5. thy ſalvation all the day : for * I know not the num-. 

| bers thereof m. 

m7, e Otthy Salvations and Mercies youchſafed to me, which 
being ianumerable, oblige me the more to celebrate thy Praiſes. 

to I will gow inthe ſtrengthcf the Lord GOD o: ' 

I will mke mention p * of thy righteouſneſs q, even of 


thine only r- 

» I will not fit down in deſpair, but I wil go on or proceed in ! 
my buſineſs couragiouſly and cheerful'y, in making neceſſary pro- , 
vitions for my own defence. o Relying only upon thy ſtrength, | 
and not upon my own military preparations. p Partly to praiſe 
and celebrate it; and partly to ſupport and comfort my ſelf with 
the remembrance otit- q Either, 1- Of thy Mercy and Goodnels : 
Or rather, 2. Of thy Faithfulneſs in making good all thy promi- | 
wy to me, as thi. Word is moſt commonly uſted in this Book. ». 

or of my Subje&s and Friends, who are falſe and perfidious to | 
thee, and to me : Nor of my own ; for I have been moſt unfaith- 
ful to thee, and have broken my Covenant with thee. 

17 O God, thou haſt taught me s from my youth, 

and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. 

s Partly by thy Word and Spirit, convincing and aſſuring me ; 
and partly, by my own Experience. of thy Righteouſneſs laſt mentio- 
ned, the wondrous Effeetts whereof I have received and declared 
from time to time, as it here follows. | 
Feb.un'o 18 Now alſo + when I am old and gray-headed, O 
"4e,ord God forſake me not: until Ihave ſhewed thy ſtrength: 
5/raakk unto this generation, and thy power to every one that 
the 47m 15 CO COME. 7. FR 

* Either, 1- This further A&, or inſtance of thy ſtrength. © Or 
rather, Thy great Power, which will more Eminently appear in 
this, than it hath done in former Deliverances, as my Danger is 
now greater, becauſe this is a Civil War, and the Generality of 
mine own peop]- are ingaged againſt me, and my Forces are very 
inconſiderable to theirs, and wirhourt thy Help, my caſe is deſ- 
perate. # 7- e. To all ſucceeding Generations, to whom I wi'l 
leave a lating Monument of this glorious Example of al-ſufficiency, 
ſuch as this Pſalm is. : : | 

19 Thy righteouſneſs alſo, O God, is very high x, 
who haſt done great things:OGod, who is \ike unto phee? 

x i e Moſt Emin-nt and Evident, as high things are. _ 

20 Tbeu which haſt ſhewed me g: ear and ſoretrouble 

2:63: 9, ſhalt quicken me agiin, ard thait bring me up agatn 

&88. 6 from the * deprhs'of the earth y. Cn 0 LO 
yi-e, From the Grave ; for I was like one Dead and buried, and 

paſt all hope of De'iverance, without thy Almighty aflifiance.- 


Verſe 2+ 
15, 24, 


are adverſaries to my foul : let them be covered with 


' &c. that he may follow thy Example in governing thy people, 


. Glory» f Or. thy affliffed, or oppreſſed ones. for ſuch are thine in a 


| a ſpecial bleſſing of 0d ; .. Or, becauſe. they are dangerous to paſ<- 


21 Thou thalt encrealſe my greatnefs z, and comfort 
ms on every fide. 


zI am aſſured that thou wiltft not only reſtore to me that Roy- 
al Majeſty, which my Son hath invaded, but alſo increaſe my Ho- 
nour and power. | 

22 1 will alfo praiſe + thee with the pſaltery, ever 
thy truth, O my God: unto thee will I ſing with the 
harp, O thou holy one of Iſrael. 


_ 23 My lips ſhall greatly rejoyce when ſing unto thee: 
and my ſoul which thou haſt redeemed. 

24 My tongue alſo (ball talk of thy righteouſneſs all 
the day long : for they are confounded, for they are 
brought unto Shame that ſeek my hurt. 

 P'SAL. LXXAIL. . 

The ARGUMENT... Ms 

0 | \ Hat this Pſalm was made by David is Evident, from v.25. and 
that it was made with r=ipeCt to Solomon, is no leſs certain 

from the very Title of it- And that David, or at leaſt the Holy 
Ghoit which diftated this Pſalm, did look beyond So/;mon, and unto 
the Meſſiah, of whom Solomon was an Illuſtrious and unqueſtionable 
Type, ſeems as manifeſt from divers Paſſages of this Pſalm, which 
do not agree to Solomon, nor to any other King bur the Meſſizh, and 
from the Confeſſion of the Jewiſh Doors themſclves, who ſo un- 
derſtood it. Ir muſt therefore be acknowledged, that, as many o« 
thers are, ſo this P/alm is alſo a mixt Pſalm belonging to Solomon in 
part, and obſcurely and imperfeQly, but unto Chriſt, more clearly 
and fully; divers Expreſſions being delignedly fo ordered, that the 
Reader might beled by rhem to the Contemplation of Chriit, and 
of his Ki::g::om upon this occaſion Which was the more neceſ- 
ſary tor the ſupport and comfort of God's true 1ſrael, becauſe the 
Spirit of God toreſaw Solomon's dreadful Apoſtacy, and the great 
miſcarriages and calamitics of his Succefſors, and of the Kingdom 
under their hands, and therefore was pleaſed to fortifie their Hearts 
with that glorious Condition which they ſhould certainly enjoy 
under the Meſſiah, who. thould certainly come. - | e%. 2 
NOrgoef 


fHeb writh | 


ment of 
Pſaltery, 


A' Pſalm || for Solomon. | 
David praying for Solomon, ſheweth the vleſſed and glorious State of hi 
Kingdom (as Typifying Chriſt's ) in its anration, 1 Jo 
Largeneſs, $8 --—— 1t, And graciouſneſs, 12 I7. And 
concluderh all with a hearty Thanksgiving, 18 — 20. 
G* che king 4 thy judgments &, O God, and thy 
righteouſneſs c unco the kings ſon. | 
a Solomon, who was now anornted King, h.:; Father yet living 
1 Kings 1. 39. And this Pſalm may ſeem to be made for that great 
and folemn Occaſion 65 i e Fither, r- Thy Statutes and Pre- 
cepts, which are oft called God's Judgments; which as thou haſt 
given already in thy Book, ſo give them to him a ſecond, and a 
better way, by writing them upon his Heart, or by giving him a 
folid knowledge of them, and an hearty Love and Obedience to 
them. Or rather, 2. Thy manner of Government or : Admini« 
ſtration, which is oft called Judgment, as Pſalm 94- 15: Iſa» 28. 6 
ws 


thou governeſt them, to wit, in Righteouſneſs, as it follows: He 
ſaith Judgments in the plural Number, becauſe though rhe Office x | 
Judging and Ruling was but one, yet there were divers parts an 
ranches, and Ads of it; As to acquite the Innocent, to condemn 
the Guilty, &c. In all which he begs that Solomon may be dire&e 
to do as (zod doth, or would have him to do in. ſuch Caſes.. c That 
Grace of Righteouſneſs, which is a part of thine Image,and is abſo- 
lutely neceſſary for good Government. - OSS 
-2 He tbail judge 4 thy people e with righteouſneſs, 
and thy poor f with judgment. . ES | 
d To wit, if thou giveft him what I have deſired. And by this 
predittion he doth tacitly admoniſh him of, and oblige him.to the 
performarice of his Duty herein. Or, Les him Judge, the Future 
being pur for the Imperative, as hath been oft obſerved. So it is 
a Praver- e For they are thine more than his; and therefore he 
muſt not govern them according to his own Will and Pleaſure 
but according to the Rules of thy Word, and for thy Service and 


ſpecial manner, thou arr their Judge and Patron, Pſslm 68. 5- and 
haſt commanded all thy People,. and eſpecially Kings and Magi- | 
ſtrates, to take: a ſingular care of them, becauſe they have few or | 
no Friends- | EE. | 
2 * The mountains g ſhall bring peace b to the people ;.  - ki 

and the little hills by righteouſneſs.  _. _. oa . z; 

z He mentioneth the Mountains and Hills, as bringing forth this” * © 27 
bleſſed Fruit : Eirher, becauſe ſuch places are uſually Barren, and 
therefore this was an Evideace of extraordinary Fruitfulneſs, an 


| 


ſengers, in Regard of the Robbers and wild Beaſts, which commons 
ly abide there. ,. Whereby it is implyed, that other places ſhould 
do ſo too, and that it ſhould be common and univerſal. þ All man= 
ner of Proſperity and Felicity, which the Hebrews frequently ex- 
preſs by that word. | | ; '"] 

4 He ſhall judge 5; the poor of the people ; he (ball 
ſave the children of the needy &, and ſhall break in 
pieces the oppreſiour. A, HOO Pod 

# 1, e Vindicate them for their potent oppreſſours, as Judg- 
ing is uſed, Pſa/m 3 1+ and oft elſe-where. k Whom the Rick. 
preoemnenes did leize upon for Bond-men, upon ſome pretence 
or other- - = 

5 They ſhall fear /thee m aslong as the ſun and moon * ral. 3g! 
endure, . * throughout all generations. D 36, 37» 

1 Or, Reverence, or Worſh:p, as this Word is uſed, Iſa 29. 13. 
Compared wich Marth. 15 9g and elſe-where,  » Either, r- Thee, 
O King, to whom he ſuddealy rurneth his Speech- And fo this is 
Hy perbolically true of Solomon, but truly and literally of Chriſt. 
Or rather, 2- Thee, O God, of whom he had ſpoken before, and 
that in the ſecond Perſon, verſes 1, 2: as it is here; whereas he never 
ſpeaks of the King in the whole Pſalm, in the ſecond Perſon,, bug 
conſtantly in the third-: - And fo the Senſe is, This ſhall. be another 
bleſſed Fruit of this —— Government, that together with *' 

4 cace 


Pal. LAX.) 


| / 


j 


the Inflru= | 


: 
4 


Plal. LXXIL 
| Peace true Religion fhall be eſtabliſhed, and that rhroughout al Gene: 
rat:ons, 25 it here follows. Which was'begun in Solomon's days and 
ccntinued, though not without Interruption, in the time of his 
Succeſlors, the Kings of Judah, and afterwards until Chriſt. 1n and 
by whom this predi&tion and promiſe was moſt fully accompli 
ſhed.m Heb With rhe Sun and before the Moon, i. e. Whilſt they con- 
tinue in the Heavens Others expound it thus, both Day and 
Night, as the twelve Thibes are ſaid to ſerve Ged, AQs 26. 75. But 
the former Interpretation ſeems more probable, by comparing this 
Verſe with verſe 17. - 
*Hoſ.6.3. 6 * He ſhall come down n like rain upon the mown 


graſs 0: as ſhowers that water the earth 

» To wit, by the influences of his Government upon his people 
under him. Burt this phraſe dothmuch better agree to Chriit, who 
wasyetro come,ond = did come down from Heaven, and brought 
or ſent down from Heaven his Do&rine, which is ofr comp? red to 
Rain,and the ſweet and powerful Influences of his Spirit. 0 Which 
it both refreſherh and improveth, or cauſeth to grow and flouriſh, 
and therefore was very - acceptable, eſpecially in Canaen, where 
Rain was more ſcarce, and more neceflary than in many other pla- 
ces, becauſe of the ſcorching Heat, and the natural dryneſs of the 
Soyl, and the want of Rivers to overflow, or water the Lznd. 


7 In his days fþall the righteous flourith p, and abun- 


dance of peace + ſo long as the moon endurerh. 
p As the wicked ſhall be diſcountenanced and puniſhed,ſo good 
Men ſhall be encouraged and advanced, ard multiplyed. 9 1. e. 
Aslong as time and the World ſhall laſt. Which neither was nor 
could be true of Solomen, who lived not long, and the Peace of 
whoſe Kingdom was ſadly diſturbed, and in a manner wholly loft 
preſently atter his Death, bur was undoubtedly and eminently ac- 
Contethcd in Chriſt, who brought peace upon Earth, Luke 2. 14+ 
. and left it as his Legacy to his Diſciples, John 14: 27+ 
$ He thall have dominion alſo from ſea to ſea r, and 


from the river 5 unto the ends of the earth *. 
r Either, 1. From the Dead Sca, or the Lake of Sodom, or from 
the Red Sca, -to the Midland Sea. For 1o far did Solomm s Domi- 
'nion extend : But ſo did Davids alſo ;and therefore in that Reſpe&t 
"Solomen hath not that Pre-eminence, which this Promiſe plaioly 
" ſeems to give him above his Predeceſſours. Or 2. More generally 
from one Sea to anorher, or in allthe ie of the habirable World. 
So it was truly and fully accompliſhed in Chriſt, and in him only. 
s To wit, Euphrates: Which was the Eaſtern border of the King- 
dom of Canaan allotted by: God, Exod. 23. 31. Numb. 34 3: but 
enjoyed only by David and Solomon, and afterwards by Chrift. 
Of whoſe Kingdom this may be here mentioned, as one of the 
Borders; Partly, becauſe the Kingdom of Chrift is here deſcribed 
under the Type and ſhadow of Solomon's Kingdom, whoſe bounds 
this was: And partly, becauſe though Chriſt's Kingdom did for a 
time extend it ſelf beyond Euphrates, yet the chicf part, and al- 
moſt the whole Body of it, both did and doth ly on this ſide of 
it ; And things do generally receive their Denomination from the 
reateſt part» # Either, 1. Of the Land of Canaan. Or, 2. Of 


the World. 
9 They that dwell in the wilderneſs « (ball bow be- 


fore him : and his enemies ſhall lick the duſt x. | 
# In ſolitary places: Even rude and barbarous people, who 1i- 
ved withoutOrder andGovernment among themſelves: Of which 
ſort great numbers ſubmitted to Chriſt, and received the Goſpel. 
*'i. e, Shall proſtrate themſelves to the ground, in token of Re- 
verence and Subje&ion, as the Cuſtome of the Eaſtern people was. 

See Iſa 49. 23. Mich. 7.17. : 
10* The Kings of Tarſhi(h and of the iſles y (hall bring 
preſents : the Kings of Sheba and Seba x (ball offer gifts. 
5 Or, Of the Sea ( as Tarſbiſ 1s underſtood, 1 Kings 22. 48. 
Pſalm 48. 7.) and, ( Or, that is:For that ConjunQtion is oft uſed 
* Exegetically) of the 1/5. i» e. Of remore Countries, to which 
they uſed to go from Canaan by Sea; All which are frequently-cal- 
Jed //fes in Scripture, as hath been noted before. The Kings that 
Rule by Sea / area Solomon had no great Power ) or by Land. 
z Two Arabian Countries: Unleſs the one be Arabia, and the other 

Ethiopia bzyond Egypt. k 

b Yea, all Kings ſballfall down before him: all Na- 


; tions ſhall ſerve him 4. ; 

\ s Which cannot be ſaid of Solomon with any Truth or Colour, 
KL] but was unqueſtionably verified in Chriſt ; Of whom therefore thi; 
/ muſt be on For what is ſaid, r Kings 4. 21. that Solon 


" + Heb. ti! 
there be 
ws Moon, 


*Pſ45.1 26 
and 68.29. 


Egypt : Whereas the Expreſſions here are un- 


the River unto 
__* Hmited andaniverſal. & | 
'® Job 29- x2 For he *ſhall deliver the needy when he cryeth : 
42. © the poor alſo, nd him that hath no helper 6. 
\. b. The Fame of his juſt and merciful Government ſhall induce 
| multirudes either to put themſelves under him, or to ſhew great 
- Reſpe& and Reverence to hime 
-.- + I3.: He (hall ſpare the poor 
FE uls c of the needy. 
c Properly ſo called; this being Chriſt's proper Work to ſave 
Souls; Or, the Lives, which Oppreſſours ſhall endeavour to take 
_ aWayYe : Di. 
14 He ſhall redeem their ſoul from deceit and violence 
2 and * precious (ball their blood be in his fight e. 
d The two ways whereby the Souls or Lives of Men are uſually 
deſtroyed. - e He will not be prodigal of the Lives of his Subje&s. 
'* caſting them away meerly to gratifie his own Revenge, or Cove- 
* touſneſs,or inſatiable Deſire of enlarging his Empire, as earthly 
: Kong, commonly do, bur like a true Father of his People, wall 
tenderly preſerve them, and ſeverely avenge their Blood upon thoſe 
. who! ſhed: it-_ b SO F 
 THeb.one,, 15 Andhe ſhall live f, and to him + ſhal ] be given of 
| hal give. the gold of Hhebag ; prayer alſo ſhall bz made for him 5 
| * continually, and daily ſball he bepraiſed. | 
F To wit, long and proſperouſly, as S)omen did ; yea Eternally, 


and needy, and ſhall fave 


- alr16, d 
bs 


Reigned over all Kingdoms, 1s there limited to them that Reigned for: + 


pP $4 LM $ 


as Chriſt did Other Kings muſt loſe both their Lives and King. 


and his Kingdom ſhall have no end. g As a Preſent, or Tribute: 
This was done to Solomon, 1 Kings 10+ 15. and to Chriſt, Marth. +; 
11. and afterwards as need required- Although ſuch Expreflions 
as theſe being uſed of Chriſt and his Kingdom, are commonly un. 
derſtood 1n a Spiritual Senſe. h His SubjeQts hall be obliged and 
excited by his righteous and happy Government, to pray heartily 
and frequently for him ; Either, t. For Solomon. Or, 2. For Chriſt - 
nor ſo much for his perſon, which needed not their prayers, a 
for the prote&tion and propagation of his Kingdom and Goſpe} 
and Intereſt in the World. : 

I6 There ſhall be an handful of corn z in the earth & 
upon the top of the mountains /; the fruit thereof ſhall 
ſhake like Lebanon mm, and they of the city » (ball fou- 


riſh like graſs of the earth 0. 

; Which intimates the ſmall beginnings of this Kingdom; and 
therefore doth not agree to Solomon, whoſe Kingdom was in a man- 
ncras Jarge at the beginning of his Reign, as at the End; Bur it 
exactly agrees to Chriſt and his Kingdom, Match: 13* 31, 32 
k Sown in the Earth: 7 In the moſt Barren grounds; and there. 
fore this was an Evidence of extraordinary and prodigious Ferti. 
lity. 22 It ſhail yield ſuch abundance of Corn, that the Ears being 
thick and high, and full of Corn, ſhall, when they are ſhaken with 
the Wind, mike a noiſe not unlike that which the tops of the 
Trees of Lebanon, ſometimes make upon the like occaſion. Which 
Expreſſions, as well as many others of the like Nature in the Pro. 
phets, being applyed to Chciſt,are ro be underſtood in aSpiritual 
Senſe, of the great and happy Succeſs of the preaching of the 
Goſpel. » The Citizens of Jeruſalem, which are here Synecdochi- 
cally put for the Subje&s of this Kingdom. o Shall both increaſe 
1N number, that there may be mouths to receive the Meart provid« 
cd, and enjoy great Proſperity and Happineſs: 

17 His name pt ſhall endure for ever: + his name ſhall 
be continued q as long as the ſun r,and *m-e ſhall be 


bleſſed in him s ; all nations ſhall call him bleſſed. 

f The flonour and Renown ofhis eminent Wiſdom, and Juſtice, 
and Goodneſs. Which agrees bur very obſcurely, and imperfeQtly 
to Selomen, who tained the Glory of his Reign, by his prodigious 
Luxury and Oppreflion, and Apoſtacy from - God, into which he 
fell in the latter partof his Days. q Or, ſhall be Pripagated, or Tranſ= 
mitted to his Children, which ſuits much better to Chriſt, from 
whom we are called Chriſtians, than to Solomon. r Heb. Before the 
Sun ; Either, 1. Publickly, and in the Face ofthe Sun. Or, 2. Per- 
petually, as a conſtant and inſeparable Companion of the Sun ; as 
long as the Sun it ſelf ſhall continue. £fee before on verſe Go 
s Either, r. As a Patern of Bleſſedneſs. When any Man ſhall 
with well to aKing, he ſhall fay : The Lord make thee like Solomon. 
Sec on Gen. 22, 18. Or rather, 2. As the Cauſe of it, by and 
through his Merits and Mediation. 

18 Bleſſed be the LORD God, the God of Iſrael, 
who only doth wondrous things *. 

# Who hath given to his people ſuch a Glorious and excelle. it 
King and Governour, and ſuch wonderful Bleflings as they do, and 
ſhall enjoy under his Government. 

I9: And bleſſed be his glorious name for ever, and let 


the whole earth be filled with his glory «, Amen and amen. 
# Heb. The whole Earth ſhall be filed with hu Glory. For this may 
- be either a Prayer for, or a Prophecy of the ſpreading of the true 
'Religion in the Gentile-World. Which evidently relates to Chriſt 
and his Kingdom. 
20 The -prayers of David the ſon of Jeſle are 
ended x. 
x This Pſalm is called the laſt of David's Pſalms (which are 
xalled Prayers, becauſe they conſiſt very much of Prayers) Either, 
1. The laſt of that Part, or Book of the Pſalms, which reached 
from the beginning of the Pſalms kitherto, whereof the far great- 
eft number were compoted by David, and all of them digeſted 
into this Order; The reſt of which follow, being Colle&ed by 
ſome other holy Man, or Men of God after Pavid's Death, and 
Compoſed part by Devid, and part by other Prophets. Or rather, 
2. The Jaſt Palm which Pavia Compoſed: For this was done but 
- before his Death, of which ſee the firſt Note on this 
alin. 


SG WEN 
The ARGUMENT. 
He SubjeQ of this P/alm is the ſame with Pſalm 37. concerns 
ing the promiſcuous Carriage of God's Providence towards 
good and bad Mcu. 
i! 4 Pſalm of Aſaph a. 

a Or, For A'ap;, the famous Muſician, to whom divers of Davi7's 
Pſalms were committed, as Pſalm <0, 1, &c. But becauſe Aſaph 
was not only a ski]ful Matician, but alto was Divinely inſpired, 
and the Author of ſome Palms, as is manifeſt from 2 Chron. 29. 
30 and the Style of this Pfalm may ſeem ro be ſomething differs 
wg from that of David, ir may be thonght not improbable that 
Ajaph was the Author or Pen-man of it. 

The Propiies under Temptation by reajon of wicked Mens proſperity, 1=—121 
His d'ffidence thereupon, 17 16, His way t0 overcome ſuc? 
Temptations, 1. &. The knuwledg ec of God's Purpoſe in deftroying the Wits 
hed, 17 mm 25. And that the Fai:lj.:1 might be contented alone with 
God, and communion with him. 5 1 ennwnnas 2, 


+ of a clean heart d. 
b Or, Neverthelzſs. 
intimates that he had a great Conflict within himſelf abour this 
Matter, and that many Doubts and ObjcEions were raiſed in his 
mind concerning it, But at ]iſt he breaks forth like the Sun our 
of a Cloud, and having by God's Grace filenced and conquered his 


| 


{cruples, helays down this following GonTluſion. c Though he may 

ſometimes ſeem negligent of, and harſh and ſevere to his people, yet 

if all things be conſidered it ismoſt certain, and another day will uy 
made 


Plat. LXxwm, L 


doms: But this King, whom Solomon typified, ſhall Live for ever,. 


f Heb, 
ſhall be. 
THeb. ſlut 
be as 8 Sn 
t0 continge 
hu Fathn; 
name. 
*Gen.12.3 
and 22.18, 


| Or, 4? 
Pſalm jw | 
Aſapls | 


& aw b God #5 good ro Irael c, ever to ſuch as arC |g;, jt 
+Heb.c# 
The beginning is abrupt, ang ſ:fciently of Heert: 


( Jot 
Plal 
Jer-4 


tHe 


He 
the 7 
if vt 


Mm, 
fHet 


'Pvf. 
7G 

THeb 
poſt} 
Troug 
the He 


XL 


get 
b cles 
rs; 


| 


Trantxxtt. 


made manifeF, that God 1s Really and Superlatively good, 1- es 
Moſt kind and bountiful, and a true Friend ro thera, and that they 
are moſt happy in him, and have no reaſon to envy ſinners, their 

reſent and ſeeming Felicity. 4 To all true I/rae!;tes, who love 
God with their whole Heart, and ſerve him in Spirit and Truth, 
and Uprightneſs. See John 4: 43: Rom. 2: 28, 29. So this Clauſe 
limits the former, and takes off a great part of the force of the 
Objefion, even all that concerns the Calamities which befel the 
profane or falſe-hearted Iſraelites, which were vaſtly the greateſt 
number of that people. 

2 But as fM me e, my feet were almoſt gone f: my 
ſteps had well nigh4lipt g. 

e Yet I muſt acknowledge this with grief and ſhame concern- 
ing my ſelf, notwithſtanding all my Knowledge of this Truth,and 
my own Experience and Obſervation of God's gracious Dealings 
with me, and other good Men. f My Faith in God's Promiſes and 
Providence, was almoit overthrown by the force of this T<mpration; 
and I was almolt ready to repent of my Piety, v. +3. and to follow 
the Example of ungodly Men. g Heb. Were almoft poured forth, like 
Water upon the ground which is unſtable, and runs hither and 
thither, with great diſorder and uncertainty, till it be irrecoverab- 
ly loſt. So was I almoſt bebo yrs by my own unruly Paſſions, 
into unworthy thoughts of God, and a ſinful courſe of ife. 

© 2 * For 1 was enyious at the fooliſh, when I ſaw the 
'Job2-7 proſperity of the wicked þ. | 
Pat 37*4* þ I grudged and murmured at it, and had a ſecret Deſire to 
Jelhs 7: partake of their Delicates. : 
For there are no bands in their death z, but their 
ſtrength is F firm &. 
#Heb.Fur. # They are not dragged to Death, neither by the Hand and Sen- 
tence of the Magiſtrate, which yet they deſerve ; nor by any ling- 
ring and grievous torments of Mind or Body, which is the Caſe of 
many good Men; but they enjoy a ſweet and quiet Death, drop- 
ping into the Grave, like ripe Fruit from the 'Tree, without any 
violence uſed tot1em- Compare Job 5. 26- and 21- 13+ & Heb. And 
their Strength is Fat, i- e+ Sound and good : The beſt of any thing 
being called Far in Scripture, as Gen, 41 2+ Dan. 1. 15--And in their 
Lifetime they have great Eaſe and Health, and Content, till they 
expire like a Lamp, meer!y for want of Moyſture. 
5 They are not F in trouble as other men /: neither 


Hebe in 
th ads are they plagued Þ like other men. 
forher #1 Either, 1- As good Men frequently are. Or, 2- As Men ge= 
Mm, nerally are. They do by a ſecret and favourable Providence of God, 


fHeb.with elcape even common Calamiries. 
6 Therefore pride compaſſeth them about as a chain 
7; violence covereth them as a garment. NEE 
mw This Phraſe notes both the extent of their pride, which ap= 
pears on every ſide of them, in their Countenances, Diſcourſes, 
Geſtures, &c. and their glorying in it. The like may be ſaid of 
the next phraſe. 


M19. +7 * Their eyes ſtand out with fatneſs » ; they have 
bh 444, NOTE than heart could wiſh. 
s they n As they do in ſome fat perſons, though not in others- The 


Tugke Fmenmngg is: They live in great plenty and proſperity, as the next 
the , Clauſe explains it. : 

#. 8 They are corrupt s, and ſpeak wickedly concerning 
oppreſſion p : They ſpeak lofeily 9. 

o Or, diſſolved in pleaſure. Or, theycorrupt themſelves. 7p Wic- 
kedly boaſting of their Oppreſſions ; Either,of what they have done; 
Or of what they intend to do, in that kind. q Arrogant!y preſu- 
ming upon their own ſtrength,and deſpiſing bothGod and Men. 

9 They ſet their mouci againſt the heavens r, and 
their tongue walketh through the earth 5. S 

r 1 e& Againſt God, blaſpheming his Name, denying or derid- 
ing his Providence, reviling his Saints and Servants. s Uſing all 
manner of Liberty, introducing and reproaching all ſorts of per- 
ſons, not caring whom they diſpleaſe, or hurt by it. 

10 Therefore his people 7 return hicher «: and wa- 
ters of a full cup are wrung out to them x. 

+ Either, 1- The people of thoſe wicked Blaſphemers ; all their 
Children and Servants, and Friends, encouraged by their Example. 
Or rather, 2. The people of God, who is oft under:tood under the 
pronoun Relative, he or hs, though he be nor expr-ſled, as Pſalm 
105- 19. Iſa. 30. 23- See the like, Pſalm $87. r. Cant. 1». 2. But 
then as God's people are of two ſorts, ſome that are ſo really and fin- 
cerely, and others that are ſo only in Profeſſion and ſhew, in 
which Senſe the whole Body of the 729/:tiſh Nation, yea even tte 
wicked among them, are called his People, as Pſalm $1+ 11+ Iſa 1: 3. 
Fer. 2. 11. &c. ſo this may be underſtood;Eirher, r. Of thoſe true 
Iſraelites, verſe 1- Even the Godly were ſtartled and ſtumbled at 
this, as David was, Pſalm 37. and Jeremy chap. 12. Bur although 
they might have ſome murmuring thoughts about this Matter, it 
ſeems bable that they would either give way to ſuch thoughts, 


or break forth into ſuch expreſſions as are here aſcribed to them, * 
verſe 11- nor are ſuch things to be imputed to them without ne- | 


ceſlity 3 Nor did either David br Feremy in their Conflicts, utrier 
any thing of this Narure. | Hyp 
tical 7ſrazlites, who perceiving the impunity and proſperity of thefe 
ungodly wretches, were eaſily drawn to the approbaticn and imi- 
cation of their courſes. And this may ſcem mo# ſuitable ro the 
context ; For the Deſcription of the Condition, and Carriage, 2nd 
words of theſe ungodly men, which begins verſe 4. ſeems to be con- 
tinued to verſe 13: then follows the Plalmiſt's refleftiou and Con- 
ſideration upon the whole Matter, from verſe 13+to the end. « Or, 
turs hither, 1. e. To this wicked Company, or to their courſe. x Wa- 
| Fers in Scripture, do oft-times ſignifice AfiQtions, and as oft Com- 
forts and Mercies. So the Senſe may be; Either, 1. And whilſt 
the wicked proſper, God doth wring out Waters out of th: Cup of 
Tribulation, and cauſeth his holy Ones to drink them up : Com- 
pare Pſalm 75.8. and 80: 5. Iſa 5t- 17. Jer: 25- 15, &c, Or rather, 
2.And thoſe Hypocritical Jraelires find tiemſelves gainers by their 
- Apoſtacy, and they partake of the ſame proſperity with their Lea- 
gers,and God ſeems to give them a full Cup of Conſolation, and ta 


PS4. 3M 6 


Or rather, 2. Of the Carnal Hypocri- | 


Pial. LXXII 
pour forth his Mercies upon them in ſuch abundance, as if he - " 
would wring or ſqueeze out all his Bleflings, out of his Stores, to 


beſtow upon them. And meeting with ſuch ſucceſs to their wic= 
kedneſs,it is not ſtrange if they pur that queitionvesſe 17. 


ir And they y ſay, How doth God know ? and is 
there knowledge in the moſt High > ! 

JEither, x. The Godly. Or rather, 2, Thoſe wicked ones: 
whoſe words and aftions he hath been hitherto deſcribing, or the 
People Confederate with them. For theſe and ſuch like opinions 
are oft aſcribed to the wicked in Scripture, bur never, as far as I 
know, to any good Man- And Job, though he uſed many intem- 
perate Speeches, and though ſome ſuch Expreſſions as this were 
charged upon him by his Friends, as Job 22. 13. yet he utterly 
ditowned them. z Seing theſe curſed and impudent Blaſphemers 
of God, and enemies of all Goodneſs are crowned with to many 
Bleſſings, how Is it credible, that there is a God who ſees and 
orders the Afﬀairs of this lower World ? For if God did know theſe 
things, certainly he neither could nor would ſuffer them to be 
thus managed, 

12 Behold theſe are the ungodly a, who proſper in 
the world, they encreaſe is riches. 

# This is theit Condition and Carriage in it» Theſe ſeem to be 
the Words ofthe Pſalmiſt, ſumming up the Matter, and preparing 
his paſſage tothe other part of the Pſalm. 


13 * Verily I have cleanſed my heart in vain b, and 
* waſhed my hands in innocency c. 


1 Hence I was ſometimes tempted, to think that Religion was a 
vain and unprofitable thing,at leaſt as to the happineſs of this Life, 3 5- 3s 
which yet God had promited as a reward to Piety. True Religion 
is here ficly and fully deſcribed by its two principal parts and works 
the cleanſing ofthe Heart from ſinful Luſts and Paſſions, and of 
the hands, or outward Man from a Courſe of ſinful Aﬀtions. And 
although it be God's work to cleanſe the Heart. yet he ſaith ; I have 
cleanſed it, becauſe every good Man doth Co-operate with {God's 
Grace in c—_— its Compare 2 Cor. 6- 1. and 7. 1: Ci-e, 
Kepr my hands ( the great Inſtruments of Aion, and conſequent= 
ly the reſt of the Members of my Body ) innocent and pure from 
evil Praftiſes. I have waſhed my. Hands, not only Ceremonially 
with water, wherewith Hypocrites farisfie themſelves, but alſo 
Morally, or with the Waters of God's Grace and Spirit, Innocen- 
cy or Purity. 

14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and + Heb.w 

T chaſtened every morning d. Chaſtiſe- 

ad Whilſt their ungodlineſs hath been attended with conftant 779% Was 
proſperity, my pity hath been exerciſed with continual AMiCti- 
ons- 


5 If I fay,l will ſpeak thus e, behold, I ſhould of- 
fend againf the generation of thy children f. 

e I will give Sentence for the ungodly in this manner. f By 
grieving and diſcouraging and Condemning them,and by tempting 
them to revolt from God, and Godlineſs. But becauſe the Hebrew 
| Verb, Bagad, in this Sence is always, ſo far asT have obſerved, 
| conſtrued with the Prepoſition, Beth, which is not here; and, is 

conſtantly put before that Prepoſition and Word which it governs, 
and nor after, as here it is, I rather joyn with them, who render 
the place thus ; which is more agreeable to the Words and Order 
of the Text, Behold the Generation of thy Children, ( or, Behold theſe are . 
the Generation of thy Children, as appears by thy facherly Care of, and 
indulgence and kindneſs to them, whilſt thou doſt at preſent ſeem 
to treat them like Baſtards who are more truly called thy Children, 
dealing roughly and ſeverely with them: ) 7 hal ( or rather, fbould 
to wit, in ſpeaking ſo ) Tranſzreſs or Prevaricate, ſpeak againſt the 
Truth, and againſt my own Conſcience, which afſureth me that 
theſe are the haters of God, and hated and Curſed by him- 

16 When I thoughtto know this g, + it wascoo pain- 

i ful for me þ. 


£ To find out theReaſon of this Myſterious Courſe of thy Pro- 
vidence- g I was gravel'd with the Difficulty. 


17 Until I went into the ſanctuary of God 3, ther 
underſtood I their end &. 


; TillI conſulted with the Oracle, or Word of God, He alludes 
to the Praiſe of thoſe times, which was, in dark and difficult Caſes 
to reſort to (God's Santtuary, and the Oracle in it for ati-factions 
k There I learned that their proſperity was ſhort, and wou! quick- 
ly have an End, and that a moſt diimal and terrible one ; that 
their fair Morn would be foilowed with a black and dreadful E- 
vening, and an everiaſting Night. 

15 Surely * thou didit fer them in ſlippery places / ; pr, 45.6 
thou caſteſt them down into deſtruction ms, 

/ Their Happineſs hath no firm Foundation ; it was very un« 
: ſtable, like a mans ſtanding in very ſlippery ground. m The ſame 
| hand which raiſed them, will caſt them down into the Pit of utter 
: DeſtruCtion, _ 

19 How are they brought into deſolation, as in a mo- 
ment »? they are utterly conſumed with terrors . 

» Their fall is wonderful both for its ſoreneſs, and for its ſud- 
denneſs- e Either, with the Horrors of their own Minds: Or 
wooong with God'S dreadful Judgmeats unexpetedly ſeizing upon 
them, 

20 * As a dream when one awaketh p, ſo, OLORD, ,- : F 
when thou * awakeſt q thouſhalc deſpiſe r their image s. —_ 

p Their Happineis is ike thatin a*Dream, wherein a man ſcems "7" 
to be highly pleaſed and Tranſported with Raviſhing Delights, bur 
when he awakes he finds himlelf deceived and unliatisfied. 9 * e. 
Stirreſt up thy ſelfto puniſh them. Or rather, when they ſhall awake 
out of the pleaſant Dream of this vain ſinful Life, by Death, and 
the Tormenrs following it. ' For this ſeems to agree beſt with the 
Metaphor here before mentioned, And-the Hebrew words being 
only theſe, in awaking, may be applied ; Either to God, or to 
them, as the Context dire&s. » Not ſo much Really, for fg 
God ever did deſpiſe it, in the height Sg all rheir Glory, but de. * 

£ 4 & 2 SETS 


39 
44 


| 


— — — ————— 


f Heb. i 
was labour 
in mincE 


p 708 


hee. 


Or,wa:. 


glory. 
Gr. 


+ Heb. 
Rock. 


aL LXE 1H. 


| Service, 


claratively, things being ofr ſaid to be done: 1n Scripture when 
they appear, orare manifeſted; as hath been moregthan once noted. 
Thou thalt pour Contempt upon them ; retake” them deſpicable 
both to themſelves and to all others ; and raiſe them 70 Shame, and 
everlafing Contempt, as is ſaid, Dan. I2, 2, 5 i. e All their Felicity 
and Glory, which as indeed it ever was, ſo now it ſhall be Evi- 
dently diſcerned to be, no Real or Subſtantial and ſolid thing, bur 
a meer image or ſhadow, or vain ſhew, which can neither abide 
with them, nor yeild ſatisfaftion to them. See Pſal. 39. 6. A4#s 
25. 23, where what 1s rendred, Pomp in the Greek fignifiesa rweer 
Eaucy or Imagination: I- Cor, 7. 3I. | 

21 Thus: my heart was grieved, andT was pricked 


In My reins «. 

. £ So as I have above expreſſed: for this particle ſo taken, doth 
not belong to what he had now wiſely and piouſly ſaid ia thenexr 
foregoing Verſes, but to what he had unadviſedly ſpoken in the 
former Verſes, as is Evident from the following Verſe. Or, Ne- 
wertheleſs, as this particle is oft uſed, Although I knew very well 
that the proſperity of ſinners would have afudden and Diſmal end. 
yet I was ſo fooliſh as to be grieved at it. ' « I was heartily and 
deeply wounded with diſquieting Thoughts, and tormenting Paſ- 
ſions, Envy and Sorrow, and Anger. 


11. 92.6. . 22 * So fooliſh was I, and 7 ignorant: I was as a 
Heb. 7 beaſt x Þ before thee 9. 


x Heb. Beaſts, which may ſignify a great Beaſt ; a moſt ſtupid 


Heb.with and ſotriſh Creature, like one not only void of grace, but of Rea- 


ſon too : For Reaſonit ſelf, eſpecially aſſiſted by the Holy Scrip- 
tures, did ſufficiently diſcover, that all things conſidered, I had no 
ſufficient. cauſe to envy the Proſperity of wicked Men- I minded 


\ only preſent things, as the Brutes do, and did not conſider things 


to Come, as reaſonable Creatures do, and ought to do. y In thy 


fight or Judgments, and therefore in Truth, Rome 2: 2+ howſoever' 


I ſeemed to my ſelf or others, to have ſome degree of Reaſon and 


Diſcretion- ; 
22 Nevertheleſs = I * am continually with thee 4, 


thou haſt holden me by my right hand. 5. 

z Notwithſtanding all my Temptations, and my groſs folly in 
yeilding to them. # Either, r. Ina way of Duty ( Yet I did nor 
depart from thee, nor from thy ways,butdid at laſt Conquer them 
and firmly cleave unto thee by Faith. - Or rather, 2. In a way of 

ercy and Favour, of which he ſpeaks in the next Clauſe of this, 
and in the following Verſe. Although I gave thee juſt cauſe ro 
calt me off, yet thou didſt continue thy gracious Preſence with 
me, and thy care and kindneſs tome. And this phraſe, with thee 
ſeems to have ſome Emphaſis in it, as being oppoled to the other 
with thee, v. 22. T was a Beaſt with thee, ſuch was my folly and 
Wickedneſs : and yet, I was in Favour with thee, ſuch was thy 
goodneſs: thou didit pardon and Cure it. b That my Faith mighr 
not fail, and I might not be overthrown by this,. or any other 


Temptations. 


24 Thou ſhaltguide me « with thy counſel d, and 


1 Or, with afterward receive me || to glorye. 
So 


c As thou haſt kept me hitherto in all my Tryals, ſo I am” aſ- 


ſyred thou wiltſt lead me {till into right paths, and keep me from. 


wandring or {traying from thee, or falling into Miſchief. d Part- 
ly, by thy gracious Providence, executing thy purpoſe of Mercy 
to me, and watching over me : Partly, by thy word which thou 
wilſt open mine Eyes to underſtand, as P/al. 119. 18. and princi- 
pally by thy holy Spirit.ſan&ifying and direfting me in the whole 
Courſe of my Life. e Either, 1. Advance me to honour here. Or 
rather, 2. Tranſlate me to everlaſting Glory in Heaven» For 1. 
Thus God doth for his people moſt conſtantly and certainly,whilſt 
all the Occurrences of the preſent Life, do happen indifferently 
to good and bad ; which was the common Obſervation of Job, and 
David, and Solomon, and other Holy men of God in Scripture. 2. 
This is far more Conſiderable than the former, and the more Sa- 
tisfaory Relief againſt the preſent proſperity of the wicked, and 
the Aﬀflitons of good men. 3. This future Glory 1s that Myſtery 
which was to be learned only in Gods SanQtuary, v, 17. 4. As 
"the deſtruction of the wicked mentioned, wv. 18, 19, 20, looks 
beyond this Life, {ſo doth the Glory of God's people. 

25 Whom have I in heaven f but thee g ? and there is 


none upon earth har I deſire beſides thee. 

f Or, in earth, as it follows. There is no other perſon nor 
thing in the World,from which I can ſeek or hope for Happineſs, 
or which I am willing to accept as my Portion. Let ſinners have 
an earthly proſperity, I am ſatisfyed with thee, and with thy Fa- 
vour. Since thou giveſt me ſupport and Condutt here, and car- 
rieſt me ſafe from hence to eternal Glory, what do I need more ? 
Or what can I deſire more ? g Which words muſt neceſſarily be 
underſtood here from the next Clauſe, where they are expreſſed. 


26 My fleſh and my heart faileth h, but God is the 


+ ſtrength of my heart; and my portion for ever #- 

bh In my ſelf, Iconfeſs Tam a poor weak Creature, and my Body 
and Spirit may fail, and be ready to faint under ſuch Temptations 
and Tribulations as theſe, and I know I ſhall ſhortly return to the 
Duſt, out of which I was taken. z But though I have no ſtrength 
in my ſelf, I have it in God, my never-failing Refuge, to whom 
Lwill truſt whilſt I live, and who will be my Portion to Eternity, 

27 For lo, they that are far from thee f ſhall periſh: 


thou haſt deſtroyed /all them that go a whoring from 


thee m, 

& They that forſake thee, and thy ways, preferring the proſpes 
rity of this preſent evil World before thy Love and Favour, and 
they who eſtrange themſelves from the Love and Life,and 
Acquaintance of God, that ſay ts God, depart from us, we dcſire not 
the Knowledge of thy ways, as they did, Job. 21- 14, 7. Thou willt 
certainly and dreadfully deſtroy them. 2 Thoſe who having pro- 
feſſed SubjeQion to thee, ſhall afterwards revolt from thee and ſell 
themſelves to work Wickedneſs ; which 1s called Wheredom in Scrip- 
ture. For none are more hatefull tc God, than wilful and wicked 
Apoſtates from the Principles and PraQtic of the true Religion, 


which oncethey owned. 


28 But it is good for me to draw near to God » ;I not to ſuic well with che oppoſition berween this work and 


TS = L AMS. 


Fial, 
have put my truſt in the LOR I may 
declare all thy works p. 

» But whatſoever they do, Tam abundantly ſatisfied, that it is a« 
my Duty, fo my Intereſt and Happineſs ito cleave unto thee, by 
Faith and Love, and Obedience, and diligent Attendance upon it; 
thine Ordinances. o I depend upon him alone forall my Comfore 
and Felicity. p From which I know I ſhall have this benefit, thar 
T ſhall have many and great occaſions, to declare Gods Ads of 
Mercy and Kindneſs to me. 


PSAL EZXXLYV. 


[| Maſchil of Afaph #. 

a i.e. Compoſed by 4ſ#ph; Either, 1» By that famous 4ſ#pb, who 
flouriſhed in David's time, and by the Spirit of God foreſaw and 
foretold the things here mentioned. But the clear and exaQt, and 
particular, and moſt patherical Deſcription of the thing} here 
expreſſed, looks more like a Narritive of what is paſt, than a 
Prophecy of what is to come ; which uſually 1s delivered more 
darkly.Beſides ſuch a Prophecy of the Deſtruction ofthe Temple 

- before it was built, would have been agreatdiſcouragement to the 
building of it, and would probably have been taken notice of by 

_ Solomon in his Prayer for it, when it was newly built. Or, 2; 
By fome of his Poſterity, who is called by their Fathers name, 
<aph, as the Children of 1/rael are frequently called, Jacob or 
Iſrael, and Davids Succeſſours, David; as hath been noted. Or, 
3.3y ſome other-perſon of that name,zhough of another Family : 
whothen was aman of Zenown,though now his Memory be loſt 
Or this may be rendred for Aſaph, -e. For his Pofterity ; and ir 
might be ſaid by ſome other Holy man of God. ' But the former 
ſeems more probable, This is Evident, that this Pſalm ſpeaks of 
the Deſtruction of the Temple and of Jeryſzlem and of Gods 
people by the Chaldeans; though ſome thinks it looks further ; 
even to the pollution of the Temple by Antiochus. Alrhough 
the things ſaid to bedone, wv. 6, 7. 8. agree much better to the 
former, and were not done by Anciochus. 

The Church complajneth of the deſolation, which the Enemies had made, in 
the Temple and Synagogue, 1 9. prayeth God to help, by 
his great Power, 10 17. againſt the Reproach and Blaſphemy 
4 the Enemies, 18. He prayeth for God's beloved and covenanted 

nes, 19 2J3- 

Se God, why hait thou caſt us off for ever b? why 

LY Coth thine anger c ſmoke againſt * che ſheep of 

eny paſture d. 

6 So as to leave us no viſible Hopes of Reſlitution- c Or thy 
Noſe. A Metaphor from a man who in a great Rage ſends forth 
Fumes out of his Noltrils. &d Againſt thy choſen and peculiar 
people. 

2 Remember e thy congregation f, which thou haſt 
purchaſed g of old 5: the || rod of thine Inheritance z 
which thou haſt redeemed, this mount Zion & wherein 
thou haſt dwelt: | 

e Shew by thine ACtions, that thou haſt not utterly forgotten 
and forſaken them. f Thy Church or people. g. Or, Redeemed 
as it tollows ; Or bought, as it is Deut, 32. 6. or proczred, though 
without price, as this Word is uſed, Ruth 4. 9, 10. þ When thou 
broughteſt them out of Egypr, and formedſt them into a Common= 
wealth, and gaveſt them Laws, and didſt enter into Covenant with 
them at Sai, # That people which thou haſt meaſured our, as it 
were by Red, to be thy Portion or Inheritance, as they are called 
alſo, Deut. 32.9. See alſo, Pſal.16, 5, 6. Jer. 10.16. Or, the Tribe( as 
this word commonly ſignifies ) of thine inheritance, 7, e. The Tribe 
of Judah, which thou haſt in a ſpecial manner choſen for thine In* 
hexitance, and for the ſeat of the Kingdom, and for the Birth of 
the Mefſiah. And thus here is an Elegant Gradation from the 
general to particulars , Firſt the Congregation conſiſting of all the 
Tribes ;then the Tribe of Fudah ; and Laſtly, Mount Zion. Nor isit 
ſtrange, that he mentions this particularly, becauſe the Calamity 
and Captivity here.remembred, did principally befal this Tribe,and 
Benjamm, which was united with it, and ſubjeC& ro it, and the moſt 
that returned were of this Tribe+ For the generality of -the other 
Tribes, were long befor: 4iſperſed into other Lands, and cone 
rinue in their Captivity to this day. & Which 1s oft pur for the 
Temple, or the Hill of Mor/2þ, on which it was built. 

3 Lifc up thy feet / unto the perpetual deſolations 
ever all that the enemy hath done wickedly in the ſan 
&uary 7s 


{ i,e. Come ſpeedily for our reſcue, and do not fit or ſtand fill 
as hitherto thou ſeemeſt to do. 'm Or rather, Becauſe of (as this 
prefix off ſignifies ) the perpetual Deſolations. So it is a powerfull 
Motive to God, tocome to their Help, becauſe otherwiſe our De« 
ſtruQtion i5 everlaſting and irrecoverable. n» Or, again thy Sanitu« 
ary ; Of which ſee v. 7. 

4 Thine enemies roar 9 in the midſt of thy congre- 
gations p ; they ſer up their enſigns for ſigns 9. 

0 7.e. Make loud Out-cries ; Either, from their R:ge and Fury, 
againſt the Conquered and captivated 1/raelites now-in their power 
Or rather, in way of Triumph for their Succeſs and ViRtoryv. p In 
the places where thy people uſed to aſſemble together for thyWors 
ſhip, whereby they deſigned to inſult not only over us, but over 
thee alſo, as if their Gods had beentoo ſtrong for thee. 9 Or, 
Trophees, or Monuments oftheir ViQories obtained over God, an@ 
over his People, as Conquerors uſed to do in like Caſes, 

5 Amay was famous according as he had lifted up 


axes upon the thick trees r. 

#7 So the meaning is this, The Temple was ſo noble a ftrufture 
that it was a great Honour to any man to be imployed in the mean« 
eſt partof the work,though it were bur in cutting down theTrees 
of Lebanon And this Tranſlation may ſeem to be favoured by the, 
Oppoſition in the next Verſe - But now, &c. But others uaderſtand 
the Words thus tranſlated in another Sence : That every one 0 


D GOD o, that 


the Enemies got Renown, accordingly as they ſhewed moſt bar- 
barous Rage in deſtroying the thick Word-work ( which in the next 
Verſe 1s called the Carved Work ) of the Temple, But this ſeems 


that 


LXXIy 


| Or. A 
Pſalm for 
Aſaph to 
8:Ve mnſtry, 
(ti0n, 


*Pſ 49547" 


||Or, Tribe; 


Pl 


*Pl4, 


'o 


ribe; 


Pal. LXXIV. 


that of the next Verſe, . which is uſhered in by, But vow. The 
words therefore may be ( and in part ace by ſome } rendred thus ; 
it s known ( or manifeſt, Heb. It will be known ; Tt will be publiſhed 
co all Poſterity, as matter of aſtoniſhment and admiration- ) Thar, 
as one lifteth up his Axe ( Heb. Axes, the plural Number for the fin- 
gular, as it is elſewhere ) por thick Trees, to cut them down. This 
3s the firſt part of the ſimilitude, called the Protaſis; Then follows 
the latter part of it, called the Apodoſis, in the next verſe ; So 
( Heb. 41d. Which is ſometimes put for a Note of ſfimilitude, as 
in that paſſage of the Lords Prayer, Mar. 6. 10. as it is in Heaven ; 
and oft in the Book of the Proverbs ) now' ( For though this Pſalm 
was Compoſed after the thing was done, yet he ſpeaks of it, as if 
it were now indoing, as the manner of the ſacred Writers frequent- 
Iy is, that it may be more Lively repreſented to mens Minds) They 
break drwn the Carved Works, &c, The meaning is, they neither re- 
gard the Sacredneſs of the place, nor the exquiſite Curioſity and 
Art of the work, bur cutit down as indifferently, and rathly, as 
men cut down the thick and intangled boughs of the Trees of the 
Forreſt. 
6 But now they break down the carved work there- 


of at once s, with axes and hammers rt. 

5s See the Note on the former Verſe, # It hath been ingeniouſly 
obſerved, that theſe two Words are not Hebrew, but C/alaee or 
Syriack Words, to point out the time when this was done, even 
when the Chaldeans brought in their Language together with their 
, Arms among the !ſraelites, 
P:KingS - *+ They have caſt fire into thy ſanctuary ; they 
Meh they have defiled by cating down the dwelling place of thy 


bv ſerr name tothe ground «. 
thy San= « Firſt they polluted it, and then they burnt it, and broke it in 
fuary into pieces. : 

the fire 8 They ſaid in their heart, Lerf vs deſtroy them to- 
tHeb. gether x ; they have burnt up all the ſynagogues of God 


in the land y. 

x Root and Branch, one as well as another, or all at once. So 
they deſired, and many of them intended, although afterwards, 1t 
ſeems, they changed their Counſel, and carried tome away Cap- 
tives, and left others to manage the Land. y 7. e. All the publick 
places wherein the Jews uſed to meet together to worſhip God, 
every Sabbath day, as is noted As 13. 27. and upon other occaſions: 
That the Jews had ſuch Synagogues,is manifeſt both from theſe and 
other places of Scripture; and from the reſtimony of the Hebrew 
Doors, and other Antient and Learned Writers, who affirm it,and 
particularly of Jeruſalem, in which they ſay there were avove tour 
hundred Synagogues ; and from the nature and necefliry of the 
thing : For ſeing it isundeniable that they did worſhip God pub- 
Iickly, in every Sabbath, and other holy times, even then when 
they neither did, nor could go up to Jeruſalem, both Conſcience 
and Prudence muſt needs dire& them to appoint convenient places 
for that purpoſe. : 
31Sm. 9 We ſee not our ſigns 2; * there is no more any 


Break, 


4.1 prophet «, neither is there among us any that knoweth 
Amo» 8/ how long b.* = 7 : 
ty, z i. e. Thoſe Tokens of Gods gracious preſence, which we and 


our Anceſtors formerly uſed to enjoy ; either,r. Miracles wrought 
for us. which are called Signs, Pſal. 78+ 43. and 135. 9. Or,2, The 
Ordinances of God, the Temple and Ark, and Sacrifices, and io- 
lemn Feaſts, all which were ſigns between God and his peop'e. 
s Either, 1. Any Teacher. We have few or no Teachers left to 
us. Or, 2. Any extraordinary Prophet, who can foret-1 things to 
come, as the next words explain it- Foras for Ezekiel and Jeremiah, 
. they might be dead when this Pſalm was Compoſed ; and Daniel 
was involved in Civil Afﬀairs, and did not teach the people as a 
Prophet, and the Propherical Spur, which ſometimes came upon 
him, and made thoſe great diſcoveriesto him, which we read in his 
Book, might poſſibly at this time ſuſpend his influences- Beſides 
it is not unuſual in Scripture, to fay that there is none of a ſort of 
perſons or things, when there is a very great ſcarcity of them. But 
others make this their great Argument, that this Pſalm ſpeaks of 
that Perſecution in the time of Antrochus, when indeed there was 
ne Prophet at all. + Either, r. How long their Captivity ſhould 


continue : For though ſeventy years were determined, yet there | 


might ariſe doubts among them, as there now are among us, whence 


they were to be computed, which might make their end uncertain. | 
Or, 2+ How long they ſhould lye under reproach, as it follows 
v. 10. whichthey really did, and might foreſee that they ſhould, | 


even after the expiration of their Captivity, Nehem. x. 3+ 
10 O God, how long ſhall the adverſary reproach c? 
ſhall the enemy blaſpheme thy Name for ever ? 

c Underſtand here thy Name, which is expreſſed in the next Clauſe 
of the Verſe, by ſaying that thou art either unkind to thy People, 
or unfaithful in thy Covenant, or unable to deliver thine out of 
their Miſeriess 

ir Why withdraweft thou thy hand, even thy right 
hand d ? pluck zt out of thy boſom e. 

d Why doft thou ſuſpend or forbear the exerciſe of that Power, 
which thou haſt ſo oft put forth on the behalf of thy people? « In 
which thou now ſeemeſt to hide it, as idle perſons uſe to do, Prov. 
19. 4 and 26: 16, Beſtir thy ſelf on the behalf of thy 
people. | 

"rin, I2 For *Godss my kingf of old, working ſalvation 
4 in the midſt of che earth g. | 

F In a ſingular manner : It belongs therefore to thine Office to 
prote& and ſave me g In the view of the World : So ſaving thy 
people, ſo eminently and gloriouſly, that all people round about 
them obſerved and admired it. 

P Exod 13 * Thou didſt + divide the fea by thy ſtrength : 

1421; thou brakeſtthe heads of the || dragons h in the waters z. 

t Heb, h Or, the Crocodiles, He means Pharach and all his mighty Men, 

Break, Who werelike theſe Beaſts in ſtrength and Cruelty. #5 To wit, of 
Or the Sea, where they were drowned. 


Whaly, 14 Thiou brakeſt the heads & of leviathan / inpieces, 


D 
Pos 


Plal!. LAX 


Bgaveſt him 7s be meat to the people inhabiting the 
witderneſs 2. 

& i. e, The Head ; called Hear; partly for the greatneſs of this 
Beaſt, as that great Monſter is called Beaſts,Job 4o. 20. for the fame | 
reafon ; and partly for the ſeveral Heads or Princes, who were and «| 
ated undtt hisinfluence. 1 Pharaoh. m Heb. To the People in, or of ; 
the deſert ; either r. To the Iſraelites, then in the Wilderneſs, to 
whom the deſtru&ion of Pharaoh and his Hoſt, was Meat, i.e. mat- 
ter of great ſupport and refreſhment. Or 2: To thoſe ſavage peo- 
ple to whom they were Meat ; becauſe they lived upon Fiſhes, and 
might eat thoſe very Fiſhes which had devoured Phararbs Hoſt in 
the bottom of the Sea» . Or rather, 3. To thoſe ravenous Birds and 
Beaſts of the Deſert, which after rheir manner fed and feaſted them. 
ſelves upon the Carcailes of the Egyptians, who were caſt uvon tlic 
Sea-ſhore, Exod. 14. Jo. which were properly and immediatly Meat 
unto them. And when wordscan be taken properly, we ought ro 
preter that before the Meraphorical Senſe, as is agreed by Iorerpre- 
ters» And this was a very iuitable puniſhment for this proud and 
infolent people, that thy who were ſo haughry, that they would 
not own nor ſubmit to the Lord himſelf, Exod 5. 2. ſhould be de- 
voured by theſe contemptible Creatures,which wasa great reproach, 

I Sa7. 17. 44, 46. and oft threarned by God as a grievous Curſe, 
as Deut, 28. 26. Jer. 7, 33. and 16. 4. Oc. Neither let any think 
it ſtrange, that the Name of People is given to thele Creatures, for it 
1s given to Connies, Graſhoppers, Piſmires, &c. both in Scripture, 
as Prov. 30. 25, 26. Joel 6. and in Homer, and otherAntient profane 
Writers, Nay, here is an elegancy in the Expreſſion ; for theſe 
Creatures are tignificantly called t/: People of rhe Wilderneſs, becauſe 
they are the only People that inhabited it, this being # Wilderneſs 
wherein was uo Man, as is ſaid Job 358. 26. 

15 * Thou didft cleave the fountain and the flood » ; * py x 
* thou driedſt up F mighty rivers 0. Numb 

2 i» e. Thou didſt by cleaving the Reck, make a Fountain in it, 20+ IN, 
and a flood or ſtream to flow from it, for the refreſhment of thy Pſ. 105. 
Peoplc in thoſe dry Deſerts. "The Phraſe is like that Iſa. 47. 2.Grind If. 48: 
meat, i.e. By grinding the Corn, make Meal. o Either, :. Joraon, * Joſh. 
which was then more mighty than ordinarily, as having overflow. 3+ 13- 
ed ajl his Banks, and therefore may be called Rivers, becauſe it was tf Heb- 
now equivalent to two or three ſuch Rivers ; or it is only an Enal- vers of 
lage of the Plural Number for the Singular, whereof I have given ſirength« 
many inſtances formerly. Or rather, 2. Both Jordan and the Red . 
Sea, for the Seair ſelf; yea, a greater Sea than .that, is called x 
R:wer, Jonah 2. 3, for the Hebrew word is the ſame which is here 
uſed, though there it be rendred Foods. And the ſame Title is ex- 
preſly given tothe Sea, by Homer and other antient Writers. To 
theſe the Antient Chaldee Tnterpreter addeth the Rivers of or 
and Jabbok, in or about which ſomeextraordinary work was wroughr 
yea ſomething which was like Gods work at theRedSea,as may ſeem 
by the conjunttion of theſe together, Num. 27. 24. 

16 The day s thine, the night alſo 5s thine p 3 thou 
haſt prepared q þ the light r and the ſun. 

Þ Ir is notſtrange nor incredible that thou haſt done theſe great f Heb 
and wonderful Works, for thou haſt made the Heavenly Bodies and £7" 
the viciſſitudes of day and night, depending upon them, which 54 *#t 
is a far greater work. q Or rather, Eſtabl'ſbea, as this word oft ſig- *%* 
nifies; not only Creat.d. but ſettled in a conftane and orderly 
courte. r Either, 1. That primitive light, Gen. 1. 3- which afte;- 
wards was condenſed and gathered into the Sun. Or rather, 2 The 
Moon, as divers, both Antient and Modern Interpreters under- 
ſtand it, called here the Light, to wit, the lefler Luminary or 
Light , wherein there is either a Synecdoche of the general for the 
particular, or an Ellipfis of the AdjeCtive, both which Figures are 
very uſual, And thar the leffer Light is here meant, may fe m pro- 
babie, both becauſe it is oppoſed to the greater Light, the Sun here 
following ; and becauſe rhis is to rule the Night, as the Sun is to 
rule the Day, Gen. 1. 16. and fo this Clauſe anſwereth to, and 
explaineth the former, wherein both Day and Night are mention: 
ed 


17 Thou haſt ſet all the borders of the earth s : thou 
haſt F made ſummer and winter. + Heb 
s Thou haſt fixed the bounds, both of the habitable World in ws 


general, ſo as the Seas, though they do encompaſs and affaulr them, wade 


| are fitly alleadged asa motive to God, that he would at this time 


yet they ſhall never be able to remove them, and of all the Coun- — 
tries and People upon Exrth, whom thou haſt confined to ſuch 
bounds as thou ſeeſt fir. Andas this Clauſe of the Verſe ſhewerh 
Gods Power and Government over a'l places, fo the nexr Clauſe 
diſpays his dominion overall times and ſeaſons. And both together 


take care of his poor people,and reſtore them to their antient Land 
and Borders, in which he had been pleaſed to ſet them. 

18 * Remember this, that the enemy hath reproack+ ; <. . J.. 
ed thee, O LORD , and that the fooliſh people # have * V5? 
blaſphemed thy name. x | 

£ Though we deſerve to be forgotten and deſtroyed, yet remem- 

ber thy ſelf. and do nor ſuffer thineand our Enemies to reproach 
and blaſpheme the Name of that great and glorious God, the Crea« 
tor and Soveraign Lord of the whole World, whom they ovght al- 
ways to reverence and adore. » Who, though they think them- 
ſelves, and are thought by others to be wiſe, yer in truth are fools, 
and herein ſhew their ſtupendions folly, that they. vilifie and pro- 
voke that God, whoſe powerful anger they can neither reſiſt, nor 
eſcape, nor endure, 

19 O deliver not the ſoul x of thy turtle-dove y uiito 


[| che multitude of rhe wicked z ; forget not the congre- | Or, vg8 

gation of thy poor for ever. bang 
x zi, e. The Life : Thou haſt delivered thy people into Capti- £25. 

vity ; do notdeliver them to Death, nor ſuffer their Encmies ut- $9 Gf. 

terly to deſtroy them, »y 7. e. Ofthy Church, which is titly com- 

pared to a Turtle-Dove, becauſe of the great reſt:mblance of 

their Diſpoſitions and Conditions, being ſimp!e and barmlefs, and 

meek, and faithfu], and mournful, and expoſed ro manifold Inju- 

ries, and unable to defend its ſelf frony them. z Or, to the wild 

Beaft, as this word off ſignifies: Or, ro the Troop, to wir; of her 

Encnucs, es 

4 A 3 | zo Have 


OOTY TOTP NET Pa ns 


© 
PS 4 


Lo LXXV. 


lacesof theearth b are full of thehabitations of pu . am 

z Made with Abraham, whereby thou didſt give s As mp O "4 
naau to him, and to his ſeed for ever,and thou didſt furt - _ e 
that if thy people were carried captive 4nto {trange Len S, m 
4 did there humble themſelves, and pray and turn _ E, _ 
wouldſtmercifully reſtore them, 1 Kings 8. 46, 47, 4 ; 49, © Whner 
thou therefore now reſtore us to that pleaſant and light _ _ 
which thou haſt given tous. 6 5. e. This dark and diſma hows _ 
which we live, wherein there is nothing but —_— _ ears 
fulion,and all the works of darkneſs. Of whica the Pſalmi ; Pp ” 
in general Terms, out ofa Principle of Prudence ; oy : e ns 
ticular deſignation of the place was unneceſlary, an _ fp wy 
been of ill conſequence. «c Here is nothing but Inju x an ef 

preflion, and Tyranny, under which we groan 1n all the parts 

this great Empire, where we have our abode. 


21 O let not the oppreſſed return 


the poor and needy praiſe thy name. 

a 3 rom thee, and from. the Throne of thy Grace, to which they 
make their reſort in this their diſtreſſed Condition. - 

22 Ariſe, O God, plead thine own cauſe e ; * re- 

member how thefooliſh man reproacheth thee daily. 

e Maintain thy Honour and Worſhip, and Service againſt thoſe 
| that reproach thee, asit here follows, and was noted before, v- 10. 

18. As we are reviled and perſecuted for thy ſake ; ſothou art 1n- 

jured in all our wrongs. : : 

23 Forgetnor the voyce f of thine enemies ; the tu- 


Heb. 2/- mult g of choſe that riſe up againſt thee + encreaſeth 5 


| ontinually* : 

Sam- 5. : f Their faking and reproachful Expreſſions againſt thee, as 
26 well as againſt us. g 7, e. The tumultuous noiſe of the loud Cla- 
mours. + Heb. aſcendeth, to wit, into Heaven, being either direCt- 
ed thither by them ; :h:ir Mouths being ſet againft Heaven, as theirs 
was, Pſal. 73 9. or at leaſt being perceived there by God, whole 
Fars were pierced with the loud cry of their fins. See Gen. 4+ 10. 
and 18. 20. Or aſcending, may be here put for increaſmg, as it 1s,1/a. 
55. 13. Jer. 46. 7. SO the Senſe is; They grow worſe and worſe, 
encouraging and hardening themſelves in their wicked Courſes, by 
their continual ſucceſs and proſperity, and by thy Patience exten- 


hem. 
EE pb 5 AL LXXV. 
or. d;- To the chief muſician, || Al-taſchith, a Pſalm or Song 


py 107. of Aſaph as : 

Or, for Ky the ooo Or, to or for Aſaph ; which may be put by way 

faph, of oppoſition, to the foregoing and general Expreſſion ; to the 
chief Muſician, which is here limited to and explained of 4ſ/aph. As 

Pſal. 6:. having ſaid : 7o the chief Muſician, he adds to Jeduthun;and 

then follows the Author, David, This Pſalm was either Com- 

poſed by David, or by Aſaph in Davids Name and Perſon, as It Is 
not unuſual for Poets to bring in Princes, 1} peaking in their 

Poems. It ſeems to relate to the time when David had entred u- 

pon, but not got full poſſeſſion of the Kingdom. : : 
The Pſalmiſt praiſmg God for his wondrous works, promiſeth to Juage upright- 

ly, x3. Rebuking the proud and fooliſh with Gods Providence,q 8. 

Pulleth them down, but exalteth the righteous, 9, Io. 

Nto thee, O God, do we 6 give thanks, unto thee, 

S do we give thanks ; for that thy name c zs near d, 
thy wondrous works e declare. 

b Tin my own, and in my peoples name. e z. e. Thy ſelf '; or 
thy power. d Is preſent with us, and moſt ready to help us,when 
we cry unto thee, as this Phraſe is taken, Pſal. 34. 19. and 145. 18, 
Thou art not departed from us ; thou doſtnot now ſtand afar off, as 
once thou didit, Pjal. 10.8. e Wrought on my behalf, and for 
| the good of thy people. : [ : 
| Or3#hen . || When I ſhall receive the congregation f I will 
Tjbail rake ;ndege uprightly g. 

8 let time, J _ et #8 Congregation, or Body of thy People, to 
So Gr. wit. all the Tribes; which are now diſtra&ed and diſordered by a 
Civil War, whichis a great hinderance to the Adminiſtration of 
Juſtice. Or, whenT ſhall receive or ebtain the appointment, i. e. What 
God hath appointed and promiſed to me, to wit, the full and firm 
poſſ:ſſion of the Kingdom : Or, he time, or place appointed by God 
for thatwork. Some make theſe and the following paſſages, the 
Words of God concerning his Church or People, which ſeems not 
probable ; partly becauſe he ſpeaks of God in the third Perſon, as 
one diſtin& from him that ſpeaks theſe words, v. 7, 8. and partly 
becauſe it is evident, that one and the ſame perſon ſpeaks from hence 
to the end of the Pſalm,& the ninth Verſe cannot be ſpoken byGod. 
g I willnotuſe my Power tyrannically and wickedly, as Saul did, 
and as moſt other Princes do; but holily and righteouſly for the 

ood of my people. 

My The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are 
diflolved bh ; I bear up the pillars of its. Selah. 

hþ Or melted, conſumed or deſtroyed; partly by the ill Govern- 
ment of Saul and IÞbboſhe:h, and the great Officers of State and War 
under them ; and partly by inteſtine Diviſions and Wars: i How- 
ſoever lam traduced by mine Enemies, as the great diſturber of the 
Land, TI muſt do my ſelfthis right to affirm, that under God, I do 
ſupport and eſtabliſh it, by maintaining Religion and Juſtice, and 
by ſetting up good Magiſtrates, and encouraging good Miniſters. 
and good Men, which are indeed the Pillars of a Nation. 

I faid & unto the tools /, Deal not fooliſhly »»; 
and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn ». 

k With Authority and Command; I charged them. 17. e. The 
wicked, as that is explained in the next Clauſe. m Deſiſt from your 
impious and injurious praCtices, which ſhall not now go unpuniſh- 
ed, as they have done. » D» not carry your ſelves either arrogant- 
ly boaſting of your own ſtrength, or ſcornfully and maliciouſly to- 
wards me, or others of Gods people, 

5 Lift not up your hora on high o;ſpeak not p with 
a ſtiff neck 7. 


d aſhamed ; let 


er. 18, 


* Pſal.6o. 
-2, 3. 
 & $2. 5. 


20 Have reſpe& unto the covenant 4 ; for the Eg | 


EM -$. Pſal. LXXV1, 


o A Metaphor from untataed and fiff-necked Oxen, which will 
not bow their Heads to receive the yoke, but lift up their Heads 
and Horns to avoid it. or, againſt the High, i. e. againſt God, who 
is mentioned under this ſame Title, Pſal. 56. 2. though there it be 
rendred, moſt High, p To wit, againſt m2 and my Government: 
q With Pride and Contempt of my Perſon, and with Rebellion a- 
gainſt Gods Will decjarcd concerning my advancement, of which 
you are not ignorant. See 2 Sam. 3. 17, 18. 

6 For promorion cometh, neither from the eaſt, nor + Heb 
from the weft, nor from the + ſouth 7. 

rFor though you envy and oppoſe my advancement,becauſe T wag 
but a poor Shepherd, and of a mean Family, yet you ought to 
know and conſider what is notorious and viſible in the World, that 
the Dignities and Scepters of the World are not always diſpoſed ac- 
cording to humane expeQations and probabilities ; but by Gods So. 
veraign Will and Providence, as it follows. It is true, men that 
expect Preferment, have their Eyes fixed upon the great Perſons of 
the World, who are thought to have the diſpoſition of them in 
their Hands, and according to their ſeveral inclinations or intereſts; 
ſome look Eaſt-ward, others Weſt-ward, and others Southward, 
expetting afſiſtance from ſome of theſe Quarters ; but all in vain. . | 

7 But God 5s the Judge s ; * ke putteth down one, * 1 Sam, 
and ſetteth up another 7 . 27 

s To wit, the righteous Judge, and ſupreme Lord and Gover- 
nour of all. the Kingdoms ofthe World, giving them to whomſoe- 
ver he pleaſeth. # Itis he who hath rejeQted Sauland his Family,and 
put me in his ſtead ? And who art thou that diſputeſt with God, 
and reſiſteſt his declared Will ? 

8 For «in the hand of the LORD x there is a cup y, 
and the wine is red z, it is full of mixture s, and he 
poureth our cf the fame 6 : but the dregs thereof c all 
the wicked of the earth 4, ſhall wring them out e, and 
drink them. 


« This Verſe 1s added;either,r.As a Reaſon orConfirmation of the 
Aſlcrtion, wv. 7. and to ſhew that God in removing one King to 
mzke way for another, did not proceed in a way of abſolute Sove- 
raignty, which yet he might have done, bur in a way of Jultice and 
Equity. Or, 2. As another Argument to inforce his Advice given, 
V. 4, 5- Which he had now preſſed by one argument, wv. 6, 7. 
x God is here compared tothe Maſter of a Feaſt, who then uſed to 
diſtribute portions of Meats or Drinks, to the ſeveral Gueſts as he 
thought fir. y A Cup in Scripture, is ſometimes taken in a good 
ſenſe, for Gods Bleflings, as P/al. 16. 5. and 3. 5. and ſometimes, 
and more frequently in a bad ſenſe, for Gods Vengeance and Judg- 
ments, as Pſal. 11.6. Iſa. 51. 22. Jer, 49. 12. Mat, 20. 23, @c. 
And fo it is here underſtood, as the following words ſkew, z Such 
as the beſt Wine of Judea was, Deur. 32. 14. Prov, 23+ 31. and ſo 
ſtrong and heady, and intoxicating. Or, #5 Troubled; as the word 
more properly ſignifies, and is rendred by divers. Which may 
note its newneſs, when it is in fermentation, not yet cleared nor 
ſettled, and ſo more intoxicating. So he expreſſeth the powerand 
herceneſs of Gods Wrath and Judgments. a The Wine is mingled 
not with Water, as was ufual in thoſe hot Countries, Prov. 9. 5. 
but with Spices, as Cane 8. 2. Or rather, ftrengthning and intoxi- 
cating Ingredients, which Drunkardsuſed, 1a 5. 22. b To wit,to 
the Children of Men ; promiſcuouſly to good and bad. Whereby 
he removes the ſcandal which his Enemies might take from thoſe 
Troubles which God ſaw fit to inflitupon David and his followers. 
c The worſt and moſt dreadful part of thoſe Tribulations. 4 Or. 
of the Land, to wit, of Canaan, of which he ſpake v. 3. e Which Ex- 
preſſion may imply either, that they ſhall be forced to ſqueeze out 
the worſt for their qwn drinking ; or that this dreadful draught was 
prepared for them, and brought upon them by their own choice 
and wickedneſs. | 

9 ButI will declare f for ever ; 
the God of Jacob. 


f To wit, this great and glorious work of God, or the Praiſes 
duc unto God for it, as the next words imply. 


10 * All the horns of the wicked g alſo will I cut : 
off þ ;. but the horns ef the righteous ſhall be exalted j, * Zech. 
g£ Their Honour and Power, which they made an Inſtrument of 2% 2b 

miſchief to oppreſs good men. A Metaphor from horned and miſ- 
chievous Beaſts. þ When TI ſhall be advanced to the Throne, and 

have Power and Authority to do what now I can only deſire and 

pray for. #7 Good men ſhall be encouraged and promoted, and in- 

truſted with the management of all publick Afﬀairs, which will be 

agreat Bleſſing to all my People. 


PSAL. LXXVI. 


To the chief muſician on Neginoth,a Pſalm or Song ||of | Or, f 
Aſaph a. Afap 


a Or, for Aſaph. Either it was Compoſed by the Prophet 4ſph ; 
or Compoſed by David, or ſome other Holy Prophet of God,and 
commited to 4ſaph, or to hisPoſterity ; it being uſual ro put the 
Parents Name for his Children, of which [ have formerly given 
divers Inſtances» The ſpecial and immediate occaſion of this 
Pſalm was unqueſtionably ſome eminent deliverance vouchſafed 
by God to his people of 1/rael, and eſpecially ro Jeruſalem, which 
the Pſalmiſt thought fitto celebrate : But which and when it 
was, 1s both needleſs to enquire, and bard to determine. 
A declaration of Gods Majeſty and Gracious Preſence m his Church, 
I 5. At his rebuke the Enemy ſpoils, and by his Arm the meek 
are ſaved, Gmmumm=zio, An exhortation to ſerve him with reverence, 
IT, I2»  $pfa8. 0 
* I Judah 5s God known ; his name 5s great c in Mak [40.1 
Iſrael. : 


b Gods People do not worſhip an unknown God, as the 4thenians 
did, 4#s 17. 23. but one who hath made himſelf known, nor only 
by his Word and Ordinances, bur alſo by the glorious effetts of his 
Wiſdom and Power on their behalf, and againit their potent and 


malicious Enemies. & z. e, Famous and renowned, and greatly 
to be praiſed and admired. 


Dclar:, 


I will fing praiſes to 


2 In 


| Pla) 


'2c., 


f Heb; 
the 
a : 


Ne 53, 


! 


- 


of. 46.6, 


oy to 
the ear, 
Gen, 3ls 
Q« 53, 


" phat, LXXVI. 


P $ A 

2 In Salem alſois his tabernacle, andhis dwelling 
place 1n Zion e. | 

d In Jeruſalem, which was antiently called Salem, Gen. 14. 18. 
Heb. 7. 1, e Largely ſo called, as it includes Moriah an adjoyning 
Hill, or another Branch of the ſame Hill. 

'3 There f brake he the arrdws g of the bow, the 
ſhield, and the ſword þ, and the battel 5. Selah. 


f ie e. In Judah ; orat, or near Jeruſalem. g Heb. the Sparks,the 
ſparkling Arrows, bright and ſhining, ſwift and piercing, like 
Tparks of Fire. kh Both offenſive and defenſive Weapons,ſo as they 
could neither hurt Gods people, nor ſave themſelves from ruine- 
7 The force and fury of the Battle, and all the power of the Army 
which was put in Battle-array. 

4 Thou & art more glorious and excellent than the 
mountains of prey 7. | 

k O God: To whom he direQeth his Speech here, as alſo wv. 6 
7, 8. I-Either, 1. Than the greateſt Kings and Empires of the 
Earth, which in Prophetical Writings are oft compared to Moun- 
tains, as Pſal. 46 2, 3+ Iſa. 41. 15. Jer. Fl 25. Habe 3. 6. And 
they are called Mountains of prey; becauſe then they generally were 
eſtabliſhed by Tyranny, and maintained by preying upon their 
own Subjetts, or other inferiour Kingdoms. Or, 2. ( Which a- 
mounts to the ſame thing ) than the moſt powerful Enemies of thy 
People, upon whom they uſed, and now deſired and expe&ed to 
prey ; Such perſons being oft expreſſed by the name of Mountains, 
as Pſal. 144. 5. Zeche 4. 7, Oc. ; 

5 The ſtout-hearted are ſpoiled #2 ; they have ſlept 
their ſleep »:and none of the men of might havefound 
their hands o, . 

» Of all that Glory and Advantage which they either had al- 
ready gotten, or further expeC&ed from the ſucceſs of their pre- 
ſent expedition which t1ey promiſed to themſelves. They became 
a prey to thoſe upon whom they hoped to prey. » Even a per= 
perual /eep, as Jer, 51. 39, 57. or the ſleep of Death, Pſal. 13. 3.cal- 
led their J.ep emphatically, as jbeing peculiar to them, and ſuch 
like men, and nor that ſleep which is common to the good and bad. 
Their Death he ſeems to call Sleep, becauſe they were ſlain in the 
Night, when they had compoſed themſelvesto reſt and ſleep, and 
fo palicd inſenſibly from one ſleep ro another. For it is thought 
by many that this Pſalm was compoſed upon the occaſion of-that 
prodigious ſlaughter of the 4ſhrians in Judah, 2 Kings jig. 35. 0 
They had no more ſtrength in, or uſe of their hands, againſt the 
deſtroying Angel, than they who have no hands. : 

6 At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot 


and horſe pare caſt into adead ſleep. 


Þ The men who rode upon, and fought from Chariots and Hor- 


ſes, who fight with moſt advantage, and uſually have moſt Cou- | 
rage; and much more unable were their Footmen to reſiſt or a- | 


void the ſtroke. 

7 Thou, eves thou rt to be feared, and who may 
ſtand in thy ſight q when once thou art angry ? 

9 To wit, to contend with thee» Standing is here oppoſed to 
flight or falling before the Enemy. See Joſh. 7. 12. Dan: 8. 4. 


8 * Thou didſt cauſe judgment to be heard trom hea- , 


venr ; the earth feared, and was ſtill s. 

r Thou didſt execute Judgment upon thine Enemies, by an An- 
gel ſent from Heaven : which is ſaid 70 be heard, either becauſe that 
was accompanied with terrible Thunders and Earthquakes, which 
was not unuſual in the deſcent of an Angel, as Matth. 28. 2. and 
elſewhere ; Or becauſe the fame of it was quickly ſpread abroad 
in the Land, and inthe World. s The effe& of this terrible Judg- 
ment, was that the reſt of the World were afraid to invade or di- 
ſturb the Land and People of {ſrael, and choſe rather to fit ſtill in 
their own Territories. | 

9 When God aroſe to judgments to ſave all the meek 


of the earth #. Selah. 

t When God, who for a ſeaſon had ſat ſtill, began to beſtir and 
ſhew himſelf againſt his Enemies Or, After God had riſen, &c. 
Or, Becauſ? God did ariſe, &c. u To fave all the godly perſons 
{ whoare oft called »:ek ones, as hath been noted again and again) 
in Iſrael, for whoſe ſakes God wrought this - great Deliverance, 
which reached to all the pevple of the Land. _ 

10 Surely the wrath of man ſhall praiſe thee x ; the 


remainder of wrath ſhalt thou reſtrain y. 

x The blaſphemous Speeches, and furious attempts of thine E- 
nemies, ſhall ſerve thy Glory, and cauſe thy people and others 
to praiſe and magnifie thee for that admirable Wiſdom and Power, 
and Faithfulneſs and Goodneſs, which thou ſhalt diſcover upon 
that occaſion. y Thou ſhalr prevent and diſappoint the ſucceed- 
ing malicious deſigns of thine Enemies,who will meditate Revenge 
for thoſe ſhameful and terrible overthrows. Or, the remainder of 
wrath, thou ſhalt gird thy ſelf with, i. e- Put it on as an Ornament, 
which . the Girdle was ; thou ſhalt adorn thy ſelf with it, as a 
Conqueror doth with the ſpoils of his Enemies: 

11 Vowz, andpay 4 unto the LORD your God ; 
let all that be round about him 6 bring preſents | unto 


him that ought to be feared c. | Ns on 

z Vow a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving ; either at this time, for this 
wonderfull deliverance : Or hereafter in all your future ſtraits and 
troubles : Let this Experience encourage you to make fuch Vows 
to God, with confidence of ſucceſs. 4 But when God hath ac- 
cepted your Vows, and given you the deſired. deliverance, forget 
not to pay your Vows. 6 Either, 1, All the Tribes of /ſreel, who 
have the benefit of this Mercy. Or rather, 2. All the neighbou- 
ring Nations on every ſide, to.whom the fame of this mighty work 
of God thall come, I adviſe them for the future,ifthey love them- 
ſelves, to ceaſe from all Hoſtilities againſt God, or his People,and 
to ſubmit themſelves to the God of 1ſrae!l, ec Whom though they 
do not love, yet they ſee and fecl that they have great reaſon to 
fear and ro ſeek his favour. EY : SEL 
; 12 Hcſhall cutoff d the ſpirit e of princes ; he zs ters 
rible to the kings of the earth, 


: for that work, but alſo by nighr,as oft as they come into my mind, 


L M 8. Pſa. Lxxf| 


[4 
[ 
' 
| 


; 
[ 


PSAL. LXXVIL & 
The ARGUMENT. | 


5 Pſalm was Compoſed upon the occaſion of ſome ſore and 
long Calamity of Gods People: Either the Babyloniſh Cap- 
tivity or {ome other. 


To the chief muſician, f to Jeduthun, « Pſalm || 


of FHeb# 


Aſaph 4a. | . "I 4 | 
s Either that 4ſaph wholived and prophecied in Davids time ; or Afophil 


one of his Succeflors long after him, called, as was uſual, by his 

Progenitors name. FT 
The Prophet ſheweth what great ſiriying and combate ( though by Prayer 
and Watching ) he had with diffidence, 1 9g. By the conſideration 0 
Gods wonderfull works and former Mercies, he is raiſed and ſtrengthned, 
10 —-20. 
| Cried unto God with my voice : evez unto God with 
my voice, and he gave car unto me b. $245 

b This Verſe ſeems to contain the ſum of the whole Pſalm, con- 
ſiſting of two parts, ro wit, his earneſt Cry to God in his Deep 
diſtreſs ; and Gods gracious return to his Prayers, by ſupporting 
him under them, and giving him aſſurance of-a good iflue out of 
them :; of both which he ſpeaks more diſtinaly and *particularly, 
of the firſt from v. 2. tow. 10+ of the latter thence to the end. 

2 In the day of my trouble I ſoughe the LORD ; F 
my fore ran c in the night 4, and ceaſed not ; my ſoul 
refuſed to be comforted e. : | | 

c The hand in the Hebrew Tongue; and Scripture uſe is oft pur 
for a blow or ſtroke given by the harids Heb. My hand or hands 
( the ſingular number being frequently put for the plural ) flowed 
or powred forth, i. e. ſpread abroad to 'God in Prayer- This Phraſe 
he uſeth rather, than were fretched out, which is frequent in like 
Caſes, to imply that his Caſe was low and almoſt deſperate, his 
Spirits and Strength quite gone, ſo that he was not able to ſtretch 
them our, as he had done. d Which to others was a time of reſt-- 
and quietneſs, but to me of torment. e I rejeed all thoſe Con= 
ſolations,which either my Friends,or my own Mind ſuggeſted tome 

3 I remembred God,and was troubled e: I complain= 


ed f, and my ſpirit was overwhelmed g. Selah. _ 

e Yea the thoughts of God, and of his infinitePower and Truth 
and Goodneſs, which uſed to be very ſweet and comfortable to 
me, were now matter of terror and trouble, becauſe they were all 
ingaged againſt me, and God himſelf my only Friend, was now 
very angry with me, ana become mine Enemey, fUnto God in 
| Prayer. g So far was I from finding reliefby my Complaints thar 
: they increaſed my Miſery. 

4 Thou holdeſt mine eyes waking I am fo troubled 
; that I cannot ſpeak 5. | 
: +5 By thoſe ſharp and continual Griefs, and thoſe perplexing and 
tormenting Thoughts and Cares, which from time to time thou 
' ſtirreſt up in me; ; The greatneſs of my ſorrows ſtupifie my mind 
: and make me both lifeleſs and unable to ſpeak ; nor can any words 
ſutficienrly expreſs the extremity of my miſery- ny 
' 5 * I have conſidered & the daysof old Z, Þ the years 'Pſ-147. 
of ancient timess ps Ten 
& If by that means I could get any comfort. 7. i« e. The mighty —_* Gr! 
works of God done for his people in former times. Days are put ,2_* 1 ; 
for Events done in them, as Pſal. 37, 13. and 137+ 7. Obad. wv- j2. 
Mich, 7. 4. ; OS ds 
6 I call to remembrance my ſong in the night»: 3 
commune with mine own heart, and my ſpirit made 
diligent ſearch y. _ | + cs OI 
| » The manyand great Merciesand Favours of God vouchſafed 
' by him to me, and tp his people, which have obliged me to adore 
; him, andſing his Praiſes not only in the day, the time appointed 


+ Feb! 
hang. | 


£#<F3% 


| :What ſhould bethe cauſe of this ſtrange and vaſt Alteration, and' 
how theſe ſore Calamities could come from the hand of fo gracious 
and merciful a God, as ours is, and what might be expeQted as to 
their continuance or removal. £5 | 
7 Will the Lord caftoffs for ever ? and will he be fa- 
vourable no more ? | Rs ny | 
o His peculiar and choſen people ? This doth not ſeem to ae 
cither with Gods Nature, or with thateverlaſting Covenant which 
he hathmade with them. : ER, 
8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever p ? doth his pro- 
miſe fail + for evermore 9? . of ©": > cw 
? Are all the ſtores of his Mercy quite ſpent? Doth he now ,,1 come? 
ceaſe to be what he hath ſtyled himſelf, The, Lord gracious and , ,.-,,, 
merciful, long-ſuffering, and aboundant in goodneſs ? q Will he ” 
never more make good thoſe gracious Promiſes upon which he 
hath commanded us to hope. : 7 
9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious r | hath he it 
anger ſhut up his tender mercies s ? Selah. _ | 
» Becauſe he hath ſolong diſuſed ir. 5 So as they can never flow 
forth, no not to his own people. | . TR j 
10 And I faid 7, This is my infirmity #4: but Twiltre « pf. 4a 
member x * the years of the right hand ofthe moſt High y. +4: 25: , 
t I thus anſwered theſe Qbje&ions. « Theſe ſuſpicions of Gods 
Faithfulneſs and Goodneſs,proceed from the weakneſs of my Faith, 
and from, the miſtake of a diſeaſed Mind. x Which words may 
be underſtood out of the following Verſe, as other words frequent-= 
ly are in like Caſes. y The years wherein God hath done great 


and glorious Works, which are oft aſcribed to Gods Righe hand, 

as ÞJale 17. 7.and 26+ 6. and 45.4: and 118. 15. . But the word 

rendred years doth alſo ſignific changing, and accordingly this 

Verſe is by other Learned M65" and may well — 
+ + $42 


- LXXVIW. 
F dred otherwiſe withoutany ſuch Supplement as is in our Tranſla- 
tion, thus, f1d 1 ſaid, This is my Affiit:en or Grievance, ( the ſum of 
all, and the chicf cauſe of my Trouble and Anxiety is this ) the 
oberge of the right hand of the mt High, that that right hand which 
formerly hath done ſuch great and wenderful things for his people 
5s at this time not only hid in Gods Boſom, and nor drawn forth for 
their defence, bur is alſo ſtretched forth againſt them, and is the 
principal cauſe of all our preſent miſeries. I could bear the malice 
and rage of our Enemies, from whom we could nor expett better 
things, but that our gracious and Covenanted God ſhould forſake 
and perſecute his own people, this is that which makes it intolc- 
, ».. rabje. 


ir 1 will remember the works of the LORD, ſurely | 


; T will remember thy wonders of old z. 
2; And yet upon ſ-cond and,ſerious thoughts of what God had 
- Foriierly donefor his people, many times far above their expeCta- | 
tions, Iwill take comfort in remembrance of them, becauſe God 
"35 ſill the fame thar he was in Power and Goodneſs, and love to his , 


people, and therefore will pity and help us in this preſent Calami- } 
ty, as he hath oft done in others of the 1aine 


Nature. 
2 I will meditace alſo ofthy work, and talk of thy 


doings. | -| 
al. 68. 12 * Thy way «, O Godzjs in the ſanctuary b: who | 
Bu. is ſo great a God as our God c? "I 
s i. e. Thy doings, or the courſe ofthy Providence, which is , 
oft called Gods way ; the various methods and cauſes of thy deal- | 
ings with thy people. + Is there contained and deelared As the | 
proſperity of wicked men, fo alſo the grievous calamities of Gods 
people, are great ridd!es and ſtumbling blocks to the ignorant and 
ungodly World, but a full and fatisfaftory reſolution of them may 
be had from Gods SanQuary, as is obſerved in the former caſe by | 
this ſame Aſaph, P/al. 73. 16, 17. and here in the latrer. Or, Is -In 
Holineſs. So the Senſe 1s, God is holy and juſt, and true in all his 
Works; yea even in his Judgments upon his own people, as will 
evidently appear from the iſſue of them. c And alrtough «ur God : 
at preſentſuipends his Power. and doth not pur it forth to celiver 
- his people our of the hands of their Idolatrous Enemies, who thence 
| take occaſion to blaſpheme his Name, and to exalt their Idol-gods 
above him, yer he 1s ill infinitely Superiour in Power, both to 
- them and to their Gods, and can, and will in his due time, reſcue 
his people from them. 
14 Thou art the God that doeſt wonders ; thou haſt 


declared thy ſtrength among the people #. 
4 By the mighty effeCts of it here following. 


ſ 


P $ AFL M 8: 


tained in them, concerning Gods tranfcendant Goodneſs to an un- 


| things donein antient times, and in a great meaſure worn out of 


15 * Thou haſt with thine arm redeemed thy people 


e, the ſons of Jacob and Jeleph f. Selah. F- 
'e To wit, out of Egypt, after a longand hard Bondage. Which 
he here mentions to ſtrengthen his Faith in their preſentCaprivity- | 
f Whom he mentions; partly as a moſt eminent - portion of the | 
# = Sons of Jaceb, branched forth into rwo numerous Tribes; pait'y 

' becauſe the Sons of Joſeph were born in Egypr, which Jacobs other 
Sons were not ; and partly, becauſe he Jaid the foundation of that 
Redemprion by bringing them into Egypr, and preferving and 70u%- 
riſbing Facob and his Sons there, «s a little Child is nouriſhed, as it 15 ex- 
preſſed in the Hebrew Text, Ger. 47. 12. in which reſpeCt he was 
aſecond Father to them, and they might well be called his Sons ; 
without whoſe Care ( to ſpeak humanely ) there had been no ſuch. 
Redemption, nor people to be redeemed. | 


'Ex. 6. 6 y 


* Exod. '' 16 * The waters ſaw thee fo O God, the waters 
£34: 21- - (aw thee ; they were afraid þ ; the depths alſo were 
EEOU4 3:-coubled 
Hab. 3. $. trou e . 


' Ofc. g They feltthe viſible effeQs of thy powerful Preſence. þ And 
+ Heb, 7h food ſtill as Men, or Beaſts aſtoniſhed commonly do. 
Clouds ; _ 17 f The clouds poured out water, the skies ſent 
| wefepour= Out a ſound : thine arrows & alſo went abroad. 
od forth © ; Whenthe Tſjaelites paſſed over the Sea : In reſpe& whereof the 
with Wa- 1{.,2lites are ſaid to have b:cn baptized in the Cloud ( i, eſprinkled with 
"_ Water, poured forth from the Clouds ) and inthe Sea, 1 Cor. ro. 2. 
| þ Either Hail-ſtones, or rather Lightnings or Thunder-bolts,which 
* are called Gods Arrows, Pſal. 18. 14. & 144-6. 
+ Heb. m 18 The voice of thy thunder was | in the heaven ; * 
the Wheel. (16 lightnings lightned the world, the earth trembled 


= alk and jhook. /.- : SF | 
E-.- I This Tempeſt is not particularly recorded in its proper place, 
. yetir may well be gathered from what is ſaid, Exod. 14. 24, *5.and 
3s in effett acknowledged by Fejephus in his Hiſtory, And this isno 
-. new thing in Scripture, for ſome Circumſtances of Hiſtory omit- 
. tedin the firſt od propereſt places to be ſupplied in following pai- 
ſages; whereof inſtances have been already given. ' 
19 Thy way is 2 in the ſea, and thy path in the 
great waters, and thy footſteps are not known ». 
i © - — m Or rather; was at that time: Thou didft walk and lead thy 
To -* , People in untrodden paths. » Becauſe the waters ſuddenly reruc- 
| ned and covered them. | : 
'®Þxo04.. 20 * Thou leddeſt thy people o like a flock p, by the 
14.19, hand of Moſes and Aaron. 
PC. 78. 5%: 9 Firſt through the Sea, and afterwards through the vaſt howl- 
Heſ.12.13 ing Wilderneſs to Canaan. p With ſingular Care and Tenderneſs, 
«a3 a Shepherd doth his Sheep. And therefore I hope thou wiltſt 
take care of thy poor diſperſed and diſtreſſed Flock,and bring them 
. once again into their own Land- 


k . 
© —X" 


_—_ -PSAL LXXVIII, 

fo nes The ARGUME NT. 
Wo e Scape.of this Pſalm is plainly expreſſed, wv. 6, 7, 8. and 1s 
©. ÞF -this, that the {yaelires might learn to hope and truſt in God, 


C dfaftly to keep his Laws and Covenant. Which great Leſſon 
eh - 4 « from the ſad effefts ofthe contrary prattices 
in their Fore-farhexs, of which he gives a brief, yet full account 
- -in arecapitulation.of the moſt remarkab!s paſſages in the Hiſtory of 


[their Church and Nation» ; 


| turned their backs and fled, as is there expreſſed, which though it 


[| * Maſchil of Aſaph. 
An Exhortation #0 attend to, and inſtruf# others in the word and works of the, Plalm for 

Lord, 1===8, Arehearlal of Gods love and long-ſuffering to the unbelie= Afaph 7» 

wving and obſtinate Iſraelites.9 — 1 10 in. their journey out of Egypt to 8ivelnflzy 

the Land of Canaan, 15a===—=66, Rejefting the reſt of the Tribes, he fin, © 

Re Zion fir a place of Worſhip, \ and David, to the Kingdom * PC. 14, 

7 72. it. 
Ive ear, O my people 4, tomy law 6 : incline your 
. ears to the words of my mouth. 

# If Aſaph was the Compoſer of this Pſalm, he might wellcallthe 
Iſraelites his People, nor-only as he was their Prophet and Teacher, 
but alſo becauſe they were of the ſame Country and Parentage with 
him, upon which account this very Phraſe of my People is uſed of 
them, not only by Queen Eſther, Efth. 7.3, 4. but alſo by the Shunami. 
tb Woman, 2 Kings 4+ 13. bi. e. The Do&rine which Iam about 
to deliver to you, concerning your Duty, and the danger of ne- 
gleCting it. 

2 * I will open my mouth c in aparable 4: I will ut- * pr 49 
ter dark ſayings e of old f: at. 13, 

c Speak to you with all freedom and plainneſs. 4 Uttering divers 35- 
grave and weighty Sentences ( for ſuch are oft called Parables in 
Scripture) or paſſages of great moment for your inſtruftion and ad- 
vantage. e So he calls the following paſſages, not becauſe the 
Words and Sentences are in themſelves hard to be underfiood, for 
they are generally Hiſtorical and eaſie, but becauſe the things con- 


! Or, a 


worthy People, and their unparallel'd ingratitude for, and abuſe of, 
ſuch emineat Favours ; and their ſtupid ignorance and inſenſible- 
nefs, gnder ſuch excellent and conſtant teachings of Gods Word 
ani Works, are indeed prodigious and hard to be believed. f Of 


mens minds. 


3 * Which we have heard and known, and our fa- 
thers have told us. 

4We will nothide them from theirchildren ſhewing to 
the generation to come,the praiſesg of the LORD ; and 
his ſtrength,and his wonderful works that he hach done. 

g i» e. His glorious andpraiſe-worthy Attions, as the following 
words explain it. 

5 For he eſtabliſhed þ a teſtimony 5 in Jacob &,and ap- 

pointed alaw in T/ree/;which he commanded our fathers* » »,,. - 
that they ſhould make them known to their children /. 4.9. | 
_ h This15juſtly pur in the firſt place, as the chicf of all the follow- & 6, 7. 
ing Mercies, and the foundation both of their temporal, and of & 11.19 
their eternal Felicity. - # 7. e. His Law, as it is called in. the Next 
Clauſe ; which is very oft called a Teſtimony, becauſe it is a witneſs 
between God and Men, declaring both the Duties which God ex- 
pets from Man, and the Promiſes and Bleflings which Man in the 
performance of his Duty may expe& from God. k Peculiarly ; 
tor no other Nation enjoyed this priviledge, as is more fully ex- 
prefled, P/al. 147. 19, 20. _ 7 Which Teſtimony or Law God re- 
vealed to them, nor for their own private uſe, but for the benefit of 
all their Poſterity, whom their Parents were obliged to teach, 
D we. 6.7. and all their Children to kear and read, and ſtudy. By 
which we may ſee how contrary to the mind of God thar fooliſh 
ard wickedaſlegtion is, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devoti- 
On. 

6 That the generation to come might know them,even 
the children which ſhould be born : »hoſhould ariſe and 
declare them to their children. 

7 Fhat they _—_ ſet their hope in God »,and not 
forger the works of God, but keep his commandments. 

mM That by the conſideration of Gods gracious Promiles, and 
wonderful Works wrought by God for his People, they might be 
incouraged to truſt in him. 

8 And might notbe as their fathers, *a ſtubborn and , th 
rebellious generation;a generation}rhar ſet not theirheart g agg 
aright », and whoſe ſpirit was not ſtedfaſt with God 0. & 34 9, 

» Who though they outwardly and ſeemingly complyed with the Deut. 9. 
forms of Worſhip which God had preſcribed, yer did not dire#; or 6, 13: 
prepare their Hearts, to the Obedience and Service of God. o Who & 31. 27! 
quickly diſcovered their Hypocrifie by their Apoſtacy from God, t Heb. 
and from the Religion which they had profeſſed. That pres 

6 * Thechildren of Ephraim p being armed and + 29d 


carrying bows q, turned back in theday of battel. op 
? This paſſage concerns; either, r. The Tribe of Ephraim, and m_ 

ſome exploit of theirs, wherein they met with this diſaſter ; whc- +4 Heb, 

ther it were that mentioned 1 Chron. 7, 21. or ſome other not parti= 7/y9win 

cularly related in any other*place of Scripture. For we muſt not £ 

think that all the Aftions and Events ofthe ſeveral Tribes are coed. oy 

ed in Scripture, but only ſome of the moſt memorable ones. Or, 2. 

The ten Tribes, who are very frequently called Ephraim, becauſe 

that Tribe was the chief of them, and'the ſeat of the Kingdom. 

And ſothisis referred by ſome to the Captivity of the ten Tribes, 

2 Kings 179. Although the Hiſtorical references of this Pſalm, ſeem 

not to go beyond Davias time. Or rather, 3. All the Tribes and 

People of 1/rael, who are ſometimes deſigned by the Name of E- 

phraim, as Jer. 31+ 9, 18, 29. Zech. 10. 7, as .well they might be, 

becauſe of the eminenty of this Tribe, out of which came Joſhua 

their firſt Governour in Canaan, and in which the Ark of God con- 

tinued for a long time, and whoſe people were both moſt nume- 

rous,and moſt valiant, and therefore they are fitly named for all, to 

ſhew that this ſlaughter was not made amongſt them for any defe& 

of power or courage ini them, but merely from Gods juft judgment 

upon them for their fins here following. And that Ephraimis here 

put for all Jae ſeems to be evident from the following* Verſes, 

wherein the ſins, upon which this overthrow is charged, are mani- 

feſtly the ſins of all the chiliren of 1/rael, and they who are here 

called Ephraim are called 7acob and Iſrael, v. 2s: And fo this paſſage 

is by divers Learned Interpreters referred unto that dreadful over- 

throw related 1 Sam. 4. Wherein they did-not ſtand to fight, but 


: Pf. 44.1) 


—_— 


reached 


Pal. LXXVny, 


, 10 3, 


*Exod 
14. 2. 
*Exod 
i58.. 
t Exod 
1 21. 
& rg. © 
p{. 104 


J9 

* Exod 
17. 6, 
Numbs 
0, II. 
Pal, r6 
(1. 

iCorz0 


* Exod. 
16, 2, 


*Numb. 
2 T1 4. 

i ticds 
Oraer, 

* Exod. 
ty. 6. 
Numb. 
20, 11, 


f Heb, 
The Skies 


*Exod! 


16+ 4, 1 
Plto $4 
Joh. 6. 
I Cor 


Or,-v 
Me dide 
the brea 
of the 
mighty, 


wal, LXXVIIL. 


Ip 2I. 


F- 5-4 


reached all 1fral, yet Ephraim 1s particularly named, be- 
cauſe asthe Ark ſo the Fight was in that Tribe; and there- 
fore it may be preſumed that the Ephraimites were a very Con- 
ſiderabl? part of that 1ſ-aeliriſh Army. Ani the Pſalmiſt having re- 
lated this amazing Providence and Judgment of God upon his own 
People, he falls into'a large Diſcourſe of the cauſes of it, to wat, 
the great and manifold and continual ſins of that and the former 
Generations, which having proſecuted from hence to ver. 60, he 
there returns to this Hiſtory, and relates the ſad conſequences of 
that diſa'ier, to wit, the Captivity of the Ark, and Gods forſaking 
of Shiloh and Ephraim, and removing thence to the Tribe of Judah 
and Mounr Z:0z, the reaſon of which change of place he deſigned 
to give in the relation of this paſſage. q Which includes Arrows, 
and theſe b-ing then the chicfeſt and moſt common Weapons are 
put for all other Arms. 

to 'Fhey kept net the covenant of God, and refuſed 
to walk in his law ». 

r Their diſobediencewas accompanied with obſtinacy and con- 

tempt of Gods Laws. 

11 And forgate s his works, and his wonders that 
he had ſhewed them. 


s Not hiſtorically, but prafically. They did not ſo remember 
them, as to iove and ſerve, and truſt that God of whoſe infinite 
power and goodneſs they had fuch ample experience. Words cf 
knowledge, ſuchas knowing, rememvring, ©. in Scripture uſe, 
Frequently comprehend affe&ion and praCtice, as hath been oft ob- 
erved. 

12 Marvellous things did he in the ſight of their fa- 


thers in the iand of Egypt; in the field z of Zoan «. 

e 7.e.In the territory or juriſdiftion,not excluding theCity it ſelf. 
In the like ſenſe we read of the field of Edom, and of Moab, Gen. 3. 
3- and 36. 34. Numb. 21, 20, « An ancient and eminent and 
the Royal City of Egypr. See Numb, 13- 22. 1s. 19+ 11. and 30. 


" oy i 
T3 *He divided the ſea,and cauſed them to paſs through, 
and * he madethe waters to ſtand as an heap. 

14 * In the day time alſo he led them with a cloud x, 
and all the night with a light of fire, 


x Which was very comfortable both for a ſhadow from the ſcor- | 
ching heart of the Climate and Seaſon, and for a companion and di- | 


& 14. 24+ reQtor in their Journey- 


mighty, 


Nl. 205. i5 * He clave the rocks y in the wilderneſs, and gave 

Prod them drink as cut of rhe great depths z. | 

17. 6. y He uſeth the plural number becauſe it was twice done, once 1n 

Numbs Rephidim, Exod. 17, 6. and again in Kadeſh, Numb 20. 1, i11.% In 

%. 11, greatabundance. 

Pl. ros. 16 He brought ſtreams alſo out of the rock, and cau- 

Wl ſed waters'to run down like rivers 4. 

Cer19-4 , Which did miraculouſly follow them in all their travels,even to 
the borders of Canaan. See Deut, 9. 21. ſal. tos. 41. 1 Cor. 10. 4. | 

17 And they iinned yer more againſt him, by . pro- 

vocking the moſt High in the wilderneſs 6 ? 

b Where th-y had ſuch ſtrong and ſingular obligations to obedi- 
ence both from the grear things which Lod had then and there done 
for them, and from their dependance upon Gods favour and help 
for their ſafety and ſubſiſtence. This was a great aggravation of 

n their ſin and folly. : : 
Exod. 18 And *they tempted c God in their heart, by af- 
te king mcat for their juſt d. 

c Deſired a tryal and proof of Gods power, as the next Verſe 
plainly ſhewetn. See Numb. 11. 4. & Not for their neceſlary | 
ſubſi*ence for which they had Mans, but out of an incrdinate and 
luxurious apperite. on ; 

"Numb. 419 * Yea, they ſpake againſt God : they ſaid, Can 

14 God þfurnijtha tabie in the wilderneſs. 

omg 20 * Behold, he ſmore the rock, that the waters 

tExod. guſhed out, e and the ſtreams overflowed ; can he give 

7.6. biead alſo? can he provide fleth for his people. 

Numb, e Which, +11 things conſidered, ſeems not ſo wonderful, ſince 

20,11 Fountains of Water ſometimes break forth unexpeQedly from or 
through Rocks. Bur it is far more difficult ro give us bread and 
fleſh, wiich we know not whether he can do. Or at leaſt we have 
ju{i cauſe to doubt of his good will to us. who hath made ſuch a 
penurious proviſi:n for us, and denies us theſe common bleſſings of 
bread and flelh, whick he gives to the worſt of men. | 

21 Therefore the LORD heard 7his,and was wroth; 

ſo afire was f kindled againſt Jacob, and anger alfo 
againſt Iſrae]. ; 

F Either properly, as it was Num. 11. I. or figuratively, the fire | 
of Govus anger, as it follows. : 

22 Becauſe they believed not in God, and truſted 
not in his ſalvation g. 

's That he both could and would ſave them from the famine and 
deſftruftion which they feared. 

Heb, 23 Though he commanded | the clouds from above 
Th Ss, and opened the doors of heaven 6. 
h Which he compares toa Granary or Store-houſe, whereof God 
keeps the Key and cither thuts or opens the doors of it, either gives 
Frog: 0 with-holds proviſions, as he ſees fit. 
4am: 24 * And had rained down manna upon them to 
Pſi25.4o, eat and had given them of the corn of heaven 3. 
Joh. 6. 1, # Which was made in Heaven; or the Air, and ſent down thence 
i Cor. to the Earth. 
7 - 3. 25 || Man did eat angels food &: he ſent them meat 
media.) tO the full, RE | 
the bread k Manna, ſo called, either, r. Becauſe it was made by the Mini- 
of the ſtry of Angels. Or rather, 2. Becauſe of its excellency, ſuck t ood 
as might befit the Angels, if they could eat Food, and ſuch as hath 


ſome reſemblance with the bleiſed Angels in regard of its Hea- 


L: M6 


venly Originals, its pure and ſpirituous ſubſtance, its vigour and 
efficacy 1n preſerving and nouriſhing thoſe who uſed it according 
to Gods ap».ointment.Or this place may be tranſlated as it is inthe 
Margent, Every ene 4:d eat the bread of the mighty, i. e. Even the com- 
mon 1ſrael:res fed upon as delicious food as the greateſt Nobles and 
Princes uſed to do. I Which may belong, either, x1. To the 
Fleſh mentioned in the following Verſes which God gave them 
even to ſatiety or glutting, which he threatned to do, Numb. 11. 
18, 19, 20, Or rather, 2. To the Manna of which he is here 
ſpeaking, which he gave them in ſuch plenty, that their deſire of 
other Food could not proceed from their neceflity,but merely from 
wantonneſs and luſt. 


26 * He cauſed an eaſt-wind + to blow in the hea- * Numb; : 


ven: and by tis power he brought ia the ſouth-wind ms. 11. 31. 

m Either he brought in firſt an Eaſtern, and afterwards a Sou- f Heb» 
thern Wind ; cr the Wind was South-eaſt ; from which Quarter 7 29. 
theſe Quails might come as well as from the Weſt, where their 
more common abode is ; this work being confeſledly miraculous. 

27 He rained fleſh alſo upon them as duſt, and F 
feathered fowls » like as the ſand of the ſea. 

n Heb. Winged Fowl, which isnoted to ſhew that it wasa ſuper- 
natural work, whereby God took away from them the ule of their 
Wings, and made them to fall into the hands of the 1raelires. 

28 And he let zt fall in the midſt ot their camp o round 
about their habications. 

o Heb. Of his camp ; either Iſrael's Camp, or Gods Camp ; for 
ſcing Iſrael! was Gods people, and he dwelt among them, their 
Camp was his Camp. 

29 So they did eat, and were well filled : for he 
gave them their own deſire p, 

þ What they delired both for quality and quantity. 

39 They were not eſtranged from cheir luſt q ; but 
* while their meat was yet in their mouths, 

q The ſenſe is either, 1. Whilſt their greety appetite yer con=.11- 33* 
tinued, and was not fully ſatisfied, before they vegan to loath it, as 
they did afterwards, Numb. 11..20, Or 2. Before they were depriv- 
ed or deſtirute of their defired food, whilſt they enjoyed it, and 
were ftill feeding upon it, as tienext Clauſe explains this. Gods 
patience did not wait upon them till that food was ſpent, bur fell 
upon them inſtantly. 

31 The wrath of God came upon them, and flew 
the fatt=ſt of chemr, and 7 ſmore down the || choſen 
bl f Heb. 
men of Iſrael. 


r The moſt healthy and ſtrong,who probably were moſt deſirous bow. 


+ Heb. 
Fowl of 


wings, 


of this food, and f-d molt eagerly upon it, and grew fatter by it, \| Or, young 


_ and leaſt ſuſpeted their own danger. men. 
| 32 Forallthis * chey tinned ſtill : and believed not þ 


| for his wondrous works. 


| 33 Therefore their days did he conſume in vanity /, 


; p | & 17. 
and their years in trouble z. : 


s In tedious and fruitleſs marches hither and thither, ſometimes 6 


forward, and ſometimes backward, which they knew would never 
bring them in their own perſons ro their promiſcd and much deſi- 
red Land. 7 In manifold diſeafes, dangers, perplexities and hor- 
rors of their own Minds aid Conſciences. 

34 When he ſlew them, hen they ſoug*t him « : and 
they returned x and enquired eariy after God y. 

u They prayed ro him to dcliver them from their dead'y dan- 
gers ; w:ich even Pharaoh frequently did, x To wit, from their 
1dois unto the outward worlhip of Tod : or being moved with fear 
they ceaſed for the preſent from their groſly wicked courſes, which 
tiiey might eaſily do without adram oftrue Repenrance, or hearry 
converſion to God. y Speedily and earneſtly ſought to God for eaſe 


_ ſafery and comfort, as wicked men in ſuch caſes frequently 
O 


35 And they remembred that * God was their rock, » pq; 
and the high God their redeemer z. = 
2 They conſidered that God and God alone had preſerved them 


( 
' 
Ll 


in all their former exigencies,and that he on'y could now he'p them, 
and not thoſe Idols or Creatures which they had preferred before 
him. and therefore being driven by abſolute neceflity they fled to 
| him for relief. 


36 Nevertheleſs, they did flatter him with their 


i #4 They made glorious but falſe profeſſions and proteſtations of = 
. their ſincere reſolutions of future obedience, if God would ſpare 
em. 
37 For their heart was not right with him 5, nei- 
ther were they ſtedfaſt in his covenant c. 
b Alltheir confeſſions and petitions were but hypocritical and for«= 


' ced, and did not proceed from an upright heart truly grieved for 


their former offences, and firmly reſolved to turn unto the Lord. 
c They diſcovered their hypocrific by their Apoſtacy from God as 
ſoon as their danger was patt. 


| 38 But he being fuil of compaſſion + forgave their i- * rae 44: 
, niquity 4, and deftroyed them not ; yea many a time, toned. or, 


turned he bisanger away,&did not ſtir up all his wrathe. Ge 
al. 05-3» 


d Not ſimply and abſolutely, for ſo it isundeniably certain from 
the Holy Scriptures that God pardons none but true penitents,ſuch 
as theſe were not, bur reſpeCtively, and fo far as not to deſtroy 
them at that time which he threatened, and was ai out to do, as 
the next words limitand explain it. He remitred their puniſhment, 
for iniquity 1s oft put for the puniſhment of it. Heb He exprated 
their 1mn:quity He accepted of their arronement, or of their profeſ- 
| ſed repentance ſo far as to compenſate it with a removal of this 
outward and preſent affliftion ; as he did alſo to wicked 4535 upon 
his hypocritical humiliation, r Kirgs 21. 29. Andthis God doth for 


the encouragement of all true penitents, who may hencelearn how 
much greater and better recompences they may expe and ſhall re. 
ceivefrom God. e Bur ſer bounds to it, and though he chaſtened 
them, yet he would not utterly c_ themy as they deſerved. 


4 39 For 


Made to 


umb. 
14 & 16. 


mouth, and they * lied unto him with their tongues #. « pq;7 5 


Pſi. LXXvI.3 


5, 
[i 
7 
4 


* Numb. | 


a Ro 
SLE af Es 


© fl 
= _ 
na... Mu. 


4% COA Pad E 
"B+, 1 


at \ —_— Rn £4 wo i 


\ 
FS .} #4 
Uh. nf. ae ns 3a ” 


4 


” 
ry a, 
———ﬀ - 
n . 
. 
= by ”— $4 


3. lr ak. 


W PITT ' 


OY 027" SEDANS RA 1 EPR OTIS. Wi 5-H AAR OY Eat RG entomreatogret \ 6 FILLS T7 


FE WIRGALT SPY AY 
TY ts bird the of Ca 2G oo Re " 


Plal. LXXVIIE. 
29 For * he remembred that they were but fleſh f; a 


wind that paſſeth away and cometh not again F. 

f Which here noteseither r. The corruption of their natures, 
which was perpetually inclining them to ſin and conſequently ex- 
poling them ro God's wrath, which muſt needs have conſumed 
them utterly and ſpeedily,if God had letlooſe his anger upon them. 
Sce the ſame argument uſed to.a like purpoſe, Gen. 8. 21+ Or ra- 
ther, 2. The frailty or infirmity of their natures, as the next claule 
interpretsthis; which 1s ſuch, hat ifT ſhould not reſtrain my wrath, 
I ſhould quickly cut off the body of this wicked people, and their 
children with them, whomT have promiſed to carry into Ca7a97, 
Numb. 14. 31. g Thatare quickly cut off, and when once they 
- are dead they never return to this life, —_ 
f| Or, 7421 © 40How oft did they || provoke him in the wilderneſs, 
againſt him and grieve him in the deſert ? 

*Nu34.22 7 Yea, * they turned back and tempted God, and 


limited the holy one of 1frael b. 

h They limited either 1. God's power, 2s above, Perſe 19, 20. 
Or, 2. God's will, dire&ing and preſcribing to him what to do, 
and when, and in what manner, and murmuring at him if he did 
not always grant their particular and various deſires. 

42 They remembred net his hand 3, ner the day & 


[| Or, from when he delivered them || from the enemy. 
affi. 3:01. ; The great and glorious works of his hand on their behalf. 
k Nor that remarkable and never to be forgotten day, that ſe!f ſame 
day, as it is called Exod. 12. 41- which God had fixed four hundred 
years before, Gen. 15. 13- 1n which God delivered them from their 
greateſ} enemy, the tyrant Pharaoh = | 

43 How he had + wrought his ſigns in Egypt, and. 
his wonders in the field of Zoan. 

44 * And had turned their rivers / into blood ; and 


their floods that they could not drink. 

1 The ſeveral branches and ſfireams of the river N:us, and thoſe 
many rivulets which they brought from it. ; 
«Ex-8.24. 45 He ſent divers ſorts of flies among them, which de- 
* Ex.8. 6. Voured them m.; and * frogs, which deſtroyed them. 

m Or, d:ftroy:d them ; which they_might-do by their cruel ard 
numerous {tings,for theſe flies were doubtleſs extraordinary in their 
nature and quaitity, and poyſonous and hurtful qualities. And 
the like is to be. tought concerning the frogs here following, v ho 
alſo might deſtroy the people by infeting the air with their ſtink, 
and corrupting their meats and drinks. | 

45 He gave alſo their increale unto the caterpillar, 
*Ex.10.13* and their jabour » * unto the locuſt, - 

» The herbs and grains which were come up by their care and 
diligent labour. 7 : : ; 
""R 47 * He | deſtroyed their vines with hail, and their 
Fir ” ſycomore-trees 0 with || froſt. 
k;ltod. o Or, wild Fig-trees, which were there in great plenty» Under 
| Or. great theſe and the vines all other rrees are comprehended. And this 
hail-fones, hail and froſt did deſtroy the fruits of the trees, and ſometimes the 
trees themſelves. ; : 

+ Heb He 48 + He gave upp alfo their cattel to the hail, and 
ſhur p 


"their flocks to || hot thunder-bolts. 

li Or,light-, » Heb. He ſbut up as ina priſon that they could not eſcape 
__ them. : 

49 He caſt upon them the fierceneſs of his anger, 


wrath, and indignation q and trouble, by ſendingyevil 


angeis among ibern r. | 
9 Orher moſt giievous plagues which were mixed with, and 
were the effects of his anger and wrath ; whereby their miſcries 
were greatiy aggravated and diſtinguiſhed trom the affliftions which 
God ſent upon the 7ſr2elites in Egypt, which were only fatherly cha- 
Rilements and the effefts of God's love and occaſions of their deli- 
VErance 7 Heb. the ſending ( or the operation or effeQs ) of evil As 
gels, or of the Angels or meſſengers of evil things, either of the Angels 
whom God imployed in producing theſe plagues ; or of AMeſes and 
A2ron : who were to the Egyptians meſlengers of evil,and by whom 
\ theſe judgments were ſent to and inflited upon them. 
o + He made a way /to his anger, he ſpared not 
their foul from death 7 bat gave || their life # over to the 


- peſtilence. 


Pf:03::4 


+ Heb. ſet. 


* Ex.7.200 


T Reb, 4n- 


gels of 
evils, 


T Heb* He 


weighed a 


ath. . 
Ar ! Heb. He weighed a path or cauſe-way,i. e. He made a moſt ſmooth 
or . er a even and _ oth as if he had doneit by weight and meaſure, 
_ " * that ſohis anger might paſs ſwiftly 8 freely without interruption. 
+ - 'The phraſe alſo ſeems to note the wiſdom and juſtice of God in 
3 . 


weighing out their plagues proportionably to their ſins, and exer- 
ciſing great ſeverity towards them anſwerably ro their great and 
barbarous cruelty towards his people. # i. e, He puniſheth them 
with death or killing plagues, as the next words explain it. « Or 
their beaſts. So he ſpeaks of the murrain among their cattel. Bur 
our Tranſlation ſzems better to agree with the next foregoing 
and following paſſages which plainly ſpeak of the death of per- 
ſons. 


+ Fr * And {mote all the firſt-born in Egypt.the chief 
*Ex.12-29- of their ſtrength x in the tabernacles of Ham y. 

:Þ x Another expreſſion noting the firſt-born, who are fo called, 
Gen, 42. 3-  » Of the Egyptians, the poſterity of Ham, Gen. 10. g. 
which title he there gives them to intimate that they were the cur- 
ſed children of a curſed parent, Ham, Gen. 9. 25. and therefore 

. were proper objefts for divine wrath and vengeance., 

2 But * made his own people to go forth like ſheep, 

*Pſ.77-20. and guided them in the wilderneſs like a flock. 

| 53: And he led themon ſafely ſo that they feared not: 
z but the ſea * + overwhelmed their Enemies. 

» Bur it is ſaid that they were ſore afraid, Exod. 14 10, Av/. 
x. They were afraid ar firſt, but after Miſes had encouraged them 
they grew bold and ſecure, one evidence whereof was, that they. 
confidently went into the middle of the Sea, and paſſed between 


covered. 1 « vaſt heaps of water which were on both ſides of them, - 2, The 


My 3 £C A Ss, 


Piai. LXXY "I, 


meaning may be that they had no juſt caule to fear : for men are 
oft faid to do not only what they attually do, but alſo what they 
ouglit to do, as Mal. 1. 6. and 2. 7. ©c. _ 

54 And he brought them :o the border of his{an&u- 
ary a, even to this mountain a, * which his right hand 
had purchaſed. 1 

p Or, of his holineſs, or his holy place : Y E. the Land of Canaan, 
which is ſo called, Ezra 9g. 8. Zach. 2. 8. Oc, as being ſeparated b 
God from all other Lands, for his peopleand ſervice, and ſanQtified 
by his preſence and dwelling init. 4 Either 1. The Mountain Us 
pon which the Tabernacle or Temple ſtood. Orrather 2. The 
mountainous Country of Canaan, which is called a Land of hills ud 
valleys,Deute ti. 13. And the word-mo:ntern is oft uſed in Scripture 
for a mountainous Country, asS- Gen: 36. $. Det. nr. Ti Toſ- TIe2T, 

55He caſt outthe heathen alſo before them,and * di- * q,e,,, 
vided them an inheritanceby line, and made the tribes Pl.1z6.y, 
of Ifrael to dwell in their tent. | Oy 

56 Yet they tempted and provoked the moſt high 
God, and kept not his teſtimonies. 

57 But turned back,and dealt uufaithfully like their fa- 
thers 3 they were turned aſide * like a deceitful bow b. 

b Which either breaketh when it is drawn, or ſhooteth awry,and 
fruſtraterh the Archers deſign and expeQation. "So when they pre- 
tended, and both God and men expe&ted obedience and gratitude 
to their great benefaQor, they behaved themſelves undutifully and 
untaithfully towards him. » ] 

58*For they provoked him to anger with their high pla- *Deur3z, 
ces,and moved him to jealouſie with their graven images. 792": 

59 When God heard c this, he was wroth, and great- 
ly abhorred Ifracl. | 

c 2. e. Perceived or underſtood, ( as hearing is oft uſed ) as Ger, 

[T.7. and 41.15, It is ſpoken of God after the manner of men, 

60 * So that he forſook the tabernacle of Shiloch, 4 + , 5,q, 
the tent which he placed among men e. 4. It 

d Which then was placed in $hilob, from whence as the 1ſ-ae/ites Jer: 7.12. 
ferched the Ark, ſo God withdrew himſclf. e Whereby he inſfinu- 14. #14 
ates both God's wonderful condeſce:ſion and favour to tuch 26-6, 9 
worthleſs and wretched creatures, and their ſtupendious folly and 
+ png in deſpiſing and ſfinning away ſo glorious a privi= 

cdges 

61 And delivered his ſtrength f into captivity,and his 
gloryg into the enemies þ hand. : 

F To wit, the Ark, called God's ffr:ngth, r Chron. 16. it. and the 
ark of his ſtrength, Pſal. 132. 8. becauſc it was the ſign and pledge of 
his ſtrength or power put forth on his peoples behalf. g So the 
Ark is called, as being the Monument and ſear of God's glorious 
preſence, andan inſtrument of his glorious works. þ Namely, the 
Philiſtins : Of which ſee 1 Sam: 4. 

62 He gave his people over alſo unto the ſword: and 
was wroth with his inheritance. 

63 * The fire conſumed their young men ; and their *Tu. ig. 
maidens were not + given to marriage 4, Dan.11.33 
z: Becauſe the young men who ſhould have married them were + Heb, 
ſlain. Heb. were not praiſed, to wit, with Marriage-ſongs, which praiſed, 

was uſual at Marriage. Solemnities among the Jews, as appears from 
Jer. 7. 34: and 16.9. and 25. 10. 

64 Their preiſts & fell by the ſword, aud their widows 
made no lamentation /. 

k Hophni and Phinehas and others. 1 No Funeral Solemnities ; ei- 
ther becauſe they were prevented by their own death, as the wife 
of Phtnehas was, or diſturbed by the invaſion of the enemy, or fo 
overwhelmed with the ſence of the publick calamity that the reſent- 
ment of their private loſſes was twallowed up by it. See 506 27.15, 

Ezek. 24 23. 
65 Then the LORD awaked as one out of ſleep m, and 
like a mighty man that ſhouterh by reaſon of wine m. 

m For God by giving up not only his people but his Ark to the 
contempt and inſolency of the Phijiitins might ſcemto be afleep and 
inſenſible of his own honour and intereſt, till by a ſudden and un- 
expetted blow he convinced his enemies of the contrary. m Whoſe 
| ſpirit and courage is revived and inflamed by a liberal draught of 


*ÞPL.44 bl 


* Hoſ.1.16 


generous wine. . Which compariſon is no more injurious to the 

' Divine Majeſty than that of a thiefs coming in the night, to which 

| Chriſt's ſecond coming is compared, 1 Theſ 5. 2. 

66 * And he ſmote his enemies in the hinder parts? * , 5156, 


he put them to a perpetual reproach o. & 6. 46 

2 With the Diſeaſe of the Emerods which was both painful and 
ſhameful. o He cauſed them to perpetuate their own reproach by 
ſending back the Ark of God with their golden Emerods, the 
laſting monuments of their ſhame. 

67 Moreover, p he retuſed the tabernacle off ofeph 4: 
and choſe not the tribe of Ephraim r : 

Þ And as he ſmote his enemies for their fins ; ſo le puniſhed his 
own people for the ſame cauſe. 9 Fither, He reje&ed the King- 
dom of the ten tribes, whereof Ephraim was the Head. But this 
Pſalm reacheth not ſo far as the ereHtion of that Kingdom. Or ra» 
ther, 2. He would not have his Ark to abide longer in the Taber- 
nacle of Shiloþ, which was in the 'Tribe of Joſeph or Ephraim. See 
1 Sam 6. 12. and 7e I, 2+ Jers 7+ 12,14» and 26.6, 9. r The ſame 
thing repeated in other words after the manner. : 

68 But choſe the tribe of Judah /; the mount Zion 
| which he loved, 

ſ Either, x. For the ſeat of the Kingdom. Or rather, ' 2. For 
the ſeat of the Ark and of God's Worthip: Obj. Teruſalom was in the 
Tribe of Benjamin, Joſ. 18. 27, Anſ. 1. It was fo in part and part 
of it was in Judah, as appears from Joſ. 15 63- To which Tribe 


Zion belonged by ſpecial reaſon, becauſe David the Head of that 
Tribe conquered and took it. 2. Benjamin after the diviſion of the 
two Kingdoms was incorporated with Ju, and is oft compuc- 
hended under the name of 7Ju4.z/, 

5 2 And 


[Or, 
Aſaph 


*PC7, 


Nn'® 
eT.14, 
O T 


"M44 


P89. 


*0r, x 
. 3 v 
d Nee 


1, 


7. 


2, 


.16 


32, 


5.6. 
e33 


5.6, 


Pial. [XXIX. 


FM 


69 And he built his ſanctuary * like high places «like 
the earth which he hath + aſtabliſhed for ever x. 


eb 
har £ The temple of $)lomm. u Magnificent and gloriouſly. » Not 
/ now to be removed from-place to place, as the'Fabernacle was, but 
as a fixed- place for the Arks perpetual reſiderice, unleſs the people 
by their Apoltacy ſhould cauſe its removeal. 
+,$4.10- -o *He choſe Davidalfſo his ſervant, and took him 


1.  , frotfthe ſheep-fold, 

| 71 | From following the ewes great with young y,he 

jr. brought him * co feed Jacob his people, and Iſrael his 

F255" inheritance. 

(Chr.1'*  ,, By whichemployment he wasinured to that care and diligence 
and ſclf denial which is neceſſary in a King or Governour ; andin- 
ſtructed to rule his people with all gentleneſs and tenderneſs. 

. - 72 Sohe fed th:m according to the integrity of his 
heart;and guided them by the skilfulneſs of his hands =. 
z He commends David for the two neceſſary ingredients of a 
good Prince, 1. Integrity, whereby he ſincerely ſought the good 
and welfare of his people, avoiding and abhorring thoſe counſels 
and courles which were contrary thereunto. 2+ Skilfulneſs ; where- 
by hemanaged all the publick affairs with ſingular prudence ; which 
is here aſcribed to bi hands, not becauſe it was ſeated in them, but 
becauſe it was ated and diſcovered by them, and appeared in all 
his ations or adminiſtrations. 


FSA EL ELM: 
The ARGU ME NT. 


His Pſalm was doubtleſs compoicd upon the fad occaſion of 

the deſtruttion of Judea and Jeruſalem, either by Anriochus, or 

rather ty the Chaldeans; as may ve gathered from 1 Mac. 7. 16, 17. 

where in the relation of the perſecution of Antfochus the ſecond and 
third Verſes of this Pſalm are cited. 


A Pſalm || of Aſaph a. 


[fe The Pſalmiſt complaining of the deſolation and ruine of Jeruſalem, 1 4. 
expoſtulateth with God about his long anger and jealouſie, 5 — 7. entreat- 
eth for the forgiveneſs of their ſins,and ſpeedy help and mercy, 8 12. 
to the everlafting praiſe of his Name, 03. : : 
7c God, the heathen are come 4 into thine inheri- 
> $474-7+ 


tance b ; * thy holy temple have they defiled c ; 
they have laid Jeruſalem on heaps 4. 

a As Invaders and Conquerors. 6b Into Canamand Jud:a, which 
thou didſt chuſe for thine inheritance. c By entring into 1t, and 
touching and carrying away its boly Veflels, and ſhedding blood 
in it, and burning of it. 4 Made of the ruines of thoſe goodly 
houſes which they burned, or threw down. : 

2 Thedead budies of thy ſervants e have they given 
to be meat unto the fowls of heaven f ; the fleſh of thy 
ſaints unto the beaſts of the earth. 


e Eiriier, 1- Of thy faithful and holy ſervants, who they uſed | 
Or, » Of theJew+s, whom, | 


as cruelly as the worſt of the people. 
though the generality of them were very wicked, he calleth God's 
Servants and Saints, becauſe they were al! ſuch by profeſſion ; and 
ſome of them were really ſuch ; and the Chal#eans did never know 
nor regard thoſe that were ſo, bur promiſcuouſlly deſtroyed all that 
came in their way. f By caſting them out like dung upon the face 
of the earth, and not ſutiering any ro bury them. 

Their blood they thed like water g round about 


141-9. Jeruſalem, * and there was none to bury them h. 
er.14.16 g Plentifully and contempruouſly, valuing it no more than com- 
16. 4, mon water. þ Becauſe their friends who ſhould have done it.were 
either ſlain or fled, or were not permitted, or vuilt not undertake 
to perferm that Othce to them. - 
4 * We are become a reproach to our neighbours ; a 


ſcorn and derifien to them that are round about us z. 

; We who were th. ic terrour and ſcourge are now neither feared 
nor pitied, but become the matter of ther ſcoffs and reproactes. 
See Pſal. 80. 6. and 137. 7. Exzek. 35. 2, 12, &C. 

5 * How long, LORD, will thou be angry for ever? 
ſhall thy jealoutie burn like fire ? 

6 * Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen & that have 
not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not 


called uvon thy name. 

& Though we confefs that we have deſerved thy wrath, yet 
the Heathen, by whom thou haſt ſcoured us, deſerve it much more, 
as being guilty of far greater impicties than we, living in. groſs 
ignorance and contempt of God and of his worſhip. And therc- 
fore we pray transfer thy wrath from us to chem. | 

7 For they have devoured Jacob 1, and laid waſte his 


dwelling place. | 
I The poſterity of Jacob, whom thou didſt love, and with 
whom and nis Seed thou madeſt a ſuredand everlaſting Covenant ; 
whereby thou didſt ingage thy ſelf to be an enemy to their enemies, 
Exod. 23. 22. Beſides thou hateſt cruelty, eſpecially when the 
; wicked devour thoſe who are more righteous than themſelves. 
"Il. 69, Habak_ t. 13. EEE 
[Or, ez. 8 * Oremember not againſt us || former i1n1quities ; 
aq ef let thy tender mercics » ſpeedily prevent us #, for we 
wy # are brought very low p. | 
b, 7 m The ins committed by our Forefathers, and by us who have 
filled up the meaſure of their ſins, for which, we confeſs, thou haſt 
raoft righteouſly brought this deſolating judgment upon us. »Up- 
on which all our confidence is fixed ; for merit and righteouſneſs 
we have none» SeeDane 9.7, 9. o Prevent our utter extirpation 
which we have deſerved; and have great reaſon to expe. p Paſt 
the hopes of all humane help, and therefore the glory of our deli- 
verance will be wholly thine. 


cb. az. 9g Help us, O God, of our ſalvation q, for the glory 


P4413) 


289.46; 


| z As impotent or unfaithful or unme: ciful to his own people. So . 


"1 


I; AM $. Pſ:l. LXXXY 
now expe, ſalvation. r Which isnow obſcured by the inſolency | 


; and blaſphemy of thine enemies, who aſcribe this Conqueſt to their iy 
' Tools, and triumph over thee no leſs than cver thy perple, as one þ 


unable to deliver them our of their hands. See Dan, 3 :5. 4 

10 * Wherefore ſhould the heathen ſay, Where 5s *PC 44.12) 

their God s |! Let him be knew among the heathen, 7 A. I 5. ( 
ED. 


in our ſight, « by the + revenging of the blood of thy ? | 
ſervants which is ſhed. ve == 
s He whom they ſerved, and of whom they boaſted. He is loſt Wi 
and gone, or grown imporent or idle: t by the execution of his q 
judgments upon them according to Pſal. 9g. 16, u That we may q 
live to ſee it and praiſe thy name for it. i 
11 Lec * the lighing of the priſoner « come before | 
thee, according to'thegreatnels of + thy power; + pre- + ns. 
ſerve thou thoſe that are appointed to die x» thine arm 
u Of thy poor people now in priſon, or at leaſt, in captivity. f Heb. re 
x Heb. the children of death, i. e. Which were either deſigned to ſerve the | 
death, or in manifeft danger of it, as being wholly in the power cf children of 
their cruel and barbarous enemies. death, | 
12 And render unto our neighbours ſevenfold into 
their boſom ; the reproach wherewith they have re- 
proached the z, O Lord. 
/ 4. e. Either, 1. Abundantly, as this Phraſe notes, 1/a. 65. 6, 
7. Jer, 32. 18. Luke 6. 38. Or, 2. Senſibly, ſo as it may come 
home to them, and fall heavily upon them in their own perſons. 


| 
bl 


*Pſ.i02.24| 


they intimate that this deſire did'\not proceed from a revengeful 
mind, but from a due ſence of God's favour. 


13 * So we thy people and ſheep of thy paſture will * pc 95.7: 
give thee thanks for ever: we will ſhew rt thy praiſe f Heb. #6 
7 to all generations. Ho 
| ESL LEXXX tim, 
The ARGUMENT. 


/ [ * His Pſalm was Compoſed either -1 Upon the fame occaſion 
with the former, to wit, the deſtruttion of Jeruſalem by the 
Chaldeans, as moſt conceive, Which yet ſeems not prob. ble, be« 


caule here is no mention of the Temple, nor of Jerſalcm, as there 
; 15 in the foregoing Pſalm; nor ofthe Tribe of Judah,which was moſt 
| concerned in that defoJation, bur of Joſeph, Yerſe 1. and of the 
Tribes of Ephra/m and Manaſth, which were carried captive long 
| before that time ; nor do t::e expreſſion of this Pſalm import ſuch a 
deſolating judgment as thoſe of the foremer de. Or, 2. Upon oc- 
cafion of captivity of the ten Tribes, as ſome others think. Bur 
| why then is Benjamin named, which is none cf that number, nor 
went into captivity with them, but was joyned with Juaah > Or, 
3- Upon occaſion of ſome other calamity, or calamities which befel 
the i ribes of Ijrael after their diviſion into two Kingdoms, and be- 
| forethe captivity and deſtruQion ofeither of them. In which time 
all che evils mentioned in this Pſalm d1d befal them, ſometimes in 
one Tribe or part, and ſometimes in another, as is manifeſt from 
their Hiitory. 
To the chief muſician upen Shoſhannim Eduth #, Pſalm 


[| of Aſaph. | Or, for 


a It ſeems to be the name of a Muſica! Inſtrument: though many ſe- Afaphy 


parate the latter part of the word from the former, and expound 

Eduth, ateſtimony, or witneſs between God and kis people, of 

his relation to them, and of their dependence upon him. 

The Pjalmiſt bemoaneth the miſeries and jad Condition of the Church, 

1 =—_—_—, That Ged's paſt manifold Mercies are changed into deſolating 

Judgments, 8 13. He prayeth for deliverance out of them; with 

a promiſe of Thankfulneſs, 14 19. 

Ive ear, O ſhepherd of Iſrael 5, thou that leadeſt c 
Joſeph d like a flock ; thou that dwelleſt betweer 
the cherubims e, ſhine forth F. 

b Thou who haſt undertaken to feed and govern thy people of = 
ra'l, as a ſhepherd doth his flock, now perform thine office, and 
reſcue thy flock from thoſe grievous Wolves which devour and de- 
ſtroy them. c Or,diaſt lead tormerly,though now thou haſt forſaken 
them. @d 7. e. The Children of Joſeph, or of 17ael, as he now ſaid, 
this Clauſe being but a repetition of the former in other words, 
Compare Pal. 77, 15+ And the name of Joſeph, the moſt eminent 
of the Patriarchs both for his dignity and piery and the right of pri- 
mogentture transferred upon him from Reuben, 1 Chron, 5. 1 iselfe= 
where put for all the ten Tribes, as Ezek. 37. 16, 19. Amos 5. 6, 
15- and 6. 6. Zech. 10,6. Aud for all the Tribes, as Plal. 81. 5. 
Obad. v. 18 e Whic' were the Mercy ſear above the Ark 
which title he prudently and pioufly minds the ten Tribes of their 
revolt from God, and of the vanity of their ſuperſtitious Addareſles 
to their Calves at Dan and Be:hel, and of the neceſlity of their retur< 
ning fo the true worſhip of God before the Ack at Jcr»ſalem, if they 
deſired or expe&ed any relief from him. An by this title it ſeems. 
more than probable that this P/a/m was not made upon occaſion of 
the Babyloniſh Captivity, in and afrer wich time there was no 
Ark nor Cherubims, nor do I remember that Daniel or any Prophets 
did then apply themſelves to God by that Tit!e. See Dan. gf Out 
of the clouds wherin thou ſeemeſt ro hide thy ſelf. Shew fo: th thy 
power and goodneſs to and for thy poor opprefled people in the 
face of thine and their Enemies. ; | 

2 Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manaſlch, 


g ſtir up thy ſtrength r, and + come and fave us. 

@ 7. e, Before all the Tribes of 1ſrae!; for whom he mentions 
only theſe three Tribes, either 1. Becauſe of their ſpecial relation - 
to Joſeph kere named, Yerſe 1. Ephraim and Manaſſeh being his Sons, 
and Benjamin his Brother, both by his Father and Mother : Or 2. 
Becauſe theſe were eminent Tribes, Ephraim the Head of the King- 
dom of the ten Tribes; Mmmaſeh was planted and powerful on 
| both ſides of Jordan ; and: Benjamtn, becaute the greateſt part of Je- 
 ryſalem and the Temple was in its lot. Or 3. With reſpet andab 
luſion to the ancient firuation of the Tabernacle in the wilderneſs, 


\ NG POTTY TUONEOO 8367 URINE : % — 


NOT, th of thy name r, and deliver us, and | purge away our 
-” fins for thy names fake. | 
9 From whom we have oft received, and from whom alone we 


where theſe Tribes were placed on the Weſt-ſide of the Taber= 
nacle, Numb. 2.18, &c. in which the Ark was, agree 9m 
was before them. So the ſence is, O thou who.didſt of old go 

. s Y 2 forth 


. LXXBY., 


forth Lef-re theſe Tribes, &*c. do ſo again at this time, Or, 4. 
Becauſe theſe Tribes had a greater ſhare of the Calamities here de- 
ſigned than others ; which might be very true, though it be not 
expreſled in theſacred Hiſtory,in which we have only the ſubſtance 
of things, and ſuch circumſtances are commonly omitted. rWhich 
ſcems now to be aſleep, or idle and uſeleſs. 

3 Turn us again, {O God, and * 
ſhine, and we ſhall be ſaved. 

ſ Either, x. To our former quiet and flouriſhing eſtate : Or, 2. 
To thy ſelf ; from whom Ephraim and Mazaſſeh with the reſt ot the 
ten tribes have apoſtatized. See the like prayer of Elijahfor them 
: Kings 8. 37. ; : 
= 4 O LORD God of hoſts, how long # wilt thou be 
3 i the angry || againſt the prayer of thy people z ? 
prayer. 5 Thou art fo far from anſwering our prayers whereby we ſeek 
to appeaſe thee, that by thy continuance and increaſe of our mi- 
ſeries thou ſeemeſt to be the more incenſed againſt us by theme 

5 Thou feedeſt them with the bread of tears », and 


Pſto2.9. giveſt them * tears to drink in great meaſure. 

« Either with tears inſtead of bread, which they either want, of 
cannor eat becauſe their grief hath taken away their appetites ; or 
with tears as frequent and conſtant as their cating it. See the like 
Phraſe, Pſal. 42. 3+ 

6 * Thou makeſt us a ſtrife x unto ourneighbours y, 
and our enemies laugh among themſelves z. ; 

x 7. e. The obje& or matter of their ſtrife or contention : either 
1. They ſtrive one wi-h another who ſhall do us moſt miſchief, or 
take our ſpoils to themſelves. Or, 2. They are perpetually quar- 
relling with us, and ſeeking occaſions againſt us. y Who uſzdand 
ought to live peaceably and kindly with us. & Inſultover us, and 
take pleaſure in our miſeries. 

7 Turn usagain,O God of hoſts, and cauſe thy face 
to ſhine, and we ſhall be ſaved. 
8 Thou haſt brought a vine « out of Egypt b+ *chou 


#P\. 44-2: haſt caſt out the heathen c, and planted it. 

a2 To which the Iſrael or Church of God is oft compared ; as 
Iſa. 5. 2. Jer. 2« 21, Eck. 17. 6. Mat. 21. 33- b He alludes to 
the cuſtom of tranſplanting trees for their more advantageous 
growth. c The Nations of Canaov. ; 

9 Thou preparedelt roomd before it, and didſt cauſc 


it to take deep root e, and it filled the land. 

d Or, didft purge or cleanſe the Soil, taking out ſtones or ſticks, or 
other roots or plants which might hinder its growth or fruitful- 
fulneſs. Thou didſt roor out thoſe idolatrous and wicked Nations 
which might either corrupt oedeſtroy them. e Thou gaveſt them 

_ a firm ſettlement in that Land. 
Io The hills were covered with the ſhadow of it f: 


and the boughs thereof were Ike + the goodly cedars g. 
f They grew ſo numerous, that they filled not only the fruitful 
Valleys, buteven the barren mountains. g Far differing from or- 
dinary Vines whoſe Boughs are weak and ſmall, and creep upon 

the walls or ground. | 
11 She he out her boughs unto the ſea,and her bran- 


ches unto the river h. 

h They poſſeſſed or ſubdued the whole Land from the Mild-land 
Sea to the River Euphrates ; which were the bounds alloted to them 
: by God, Ger. x5. 18. 

*Pſ.89.4% 12 Why haſt thou thez * broken down her hedges z, 
Ifa. 5.5- fo thatall they which paſs by the way do pluck her &k ? 
© Taken away thy prote&ion, which was to them for walls and 

bulwarks. k Pluck up her grapes and boughs, and ſtrike at her 

very root. | 
13 The boar out of the wood / doth waſte it, and 


the wild beaſt of the field doth devour it. 

I Where Boars uſe to lodge, as it is noted by many Authors. 
By which he underſtands their fierce and furious enemies. 

14 Return, we befeech thee, O God of holts : look 
down from heaven, and behold and viſit this vine ; 

i5 And the vinzyard mz which thy right hand hath 
planted », and the F branch o that thou madeft ſtrong p 
for thy ſelf q. 


m Or, the root, or ſtock or plant, as others render it. = Which 
thou haſt planted or fixed with thy might and power ; whereof the 
right hand is both a ſign or ſymbol and an inſtrument. « Heb. the 
ſon z. e. either 3. The ſon of man, as it is more fully expreſled, 
Perſ- 17. Or rather, >. The branch ; for as yet he continues the 
metaphor ; which is called zheſon, to wit, of the root or ſtock men- 
tioned in the former clauſe, as the Branches are called Daughters in 
the Hebrew Text, Gen. 49. 22. p Either, 1. By ſupporting it 
with ſtakes or walls upon which the vine groweth up : Or rather, 
2. By cauſing it to grow in bulk and thickneſs, and conſequently 
in ſtrength. q For thy own ſpecial delight and ſervice and ho- 
Nour. 

16 Tt 03s burnt with fire, 3t ss cut down : they r pe- 
riſh at the rebuke of thy countenance /. 

o Towit, thy vineyard or branch? + Thy people of 1/-ael ſig. 
nified by the vine, So now he paſſeth from the Metaphor to the 
thing deſigned by it. # Throngh the effe&s of thine anger, with- 
out which _ _ ny do them no hurt. c 

ph | 17 et thy hand be upon z; the man of thy right 
"PL89-21. 1nd « ; Upon the ſon of man x whom thou madeſt 
ſtrong for thy ſelf. 

# To prote& and ſtrengthen him. » Whom thy right hand 
planted, Yerſ. 15- whom thou haſt loved and reſpe&ed even as thy 
right hand, which is very dear to us, Mat. 5. 30. and 18. 8. Com- 
pare Zech. 13. 7. thy Benjamin whom he mentioned, Yerſe 2. to 


fal.4.6. caule thy face to 


PCſ44.14- 


"Pl104.16. 


Heb. ſor. 


IS 3£ M $ 


bliſhed, and ſo thine 7/722! ſhall be ſaved and Celivered ont of all its 
troubles. 
ſafety and welfare the happineſs of the whole nation was wrapt up. 


ſfrong for thy ſelf, is uſed of the root or branch of the J_t 


Or, 2. TheRoyal Family, the Houſe of David,in whole 


Or rather, 3. The people of Jrael who are oft tpoken ofas one per« 
ſon, as God's ſon and frft-born, Exod. 4.22. and here as one vine. And 
ſeing all the foregoing complaints have been concerning the cala- 
mities of the people ot 1irael,it ſeems moit reaſonable to underſtand 
this prayer to be made for them ; the rather becauſe the following 
claute here applyed to the man and ſon of man, whom thou /4 


Verſ. 15. 

18 SO will not we go back from thee 5: quicken us z, 
and we will call upon thy name. 

y This glorious fayour of thine ſhall oblige us to love and ſerve 
thee, and truſt in thee ſo long as we have a beeing, and no more 
to revoltfrom thee to Idolatry or wickedneſs, as we have too oft 


pinels. 


19. Turn us again, OLORD God of hoſts, cauſe thy 
face toſ{hine, and we ſhall be ſaved. 

PSAL EXXXLE 

The ARGUMENT. 
His P/alm ſeems to have been made for the uſe of the Church 
in ſolemn Feaſts ; particularly either upon every firſt day of 
the Month, or upon the firſt day of the ſeventh month which was 
celebrated with a more ſolemn blaſt of Trumpets, Lewvit. 23. 24. 
Numb. 29. r. Becauſe that Month was more lacred than others by 
reaſon ofthe concurrence of divers Religious Solemnitics in it. 
To the chief muſician upon Gittith 2, a Pſalm || of 


Alaph. | 
a Of which Title ſee the Note on Pſal. 8. r. 

An Exhortation to a ſolemn praiſmg of God, 1 3. which he requirethfer 
hrs manifold Mercies, and deliverances, 4 7. and exhorting to Obe« 
dience, and the worſhipping of him the true God, 8 10. complaineth 
of their = which tendeth to their own hurt and affiifion, 
II 16. | 
(QIng aloud unto God our ftrength b : make a joyful 

noiſe unto the God of Jacob, 
b Who is all our refuge and ſafeguard againſt all our Enemies. 
2 Takea palm, and bring hither the timbrel, the 
picafant harp with the pſaltery c. 
c All which Inſtruments were then preſcribed and uſed in their 
ſolemn mectings. 
_ 3 Blow upthe trumpet in the new nioon 4d, in the 
time appointed, on our folemn fealt- day e 

d Which wos a ſacred and feſtival rime, as appears from Num. 
10. 10. and 28. 11, 14. 2 Kings 4. 23. 1js. 66. 23. But this may be 
underſtood cither 1. Generally of every New Moon. Or rather, 
2. Specially of that New Moon, as the word may be rendred, which 
begun the ſeventh month; as may be gathered both from the fol. 
lowing words, and by comparing this place with Levis. 23. 24. 
and Numb. 29. 1. Where this very day is called a day of blowing of 
Trumpets. e Or, for the day, or time of cur jolemn f.tivity ; whereby 
may be underſtood either 1. theday of the New Moon, on which 
the Trumpets were blown for the celebration of that ſolemn time. 
Or, 2. The ſeventh Month, which that New Moon did introduce 
or begin, and in which, beſides other Solemnities, they kept the 
Feaſt of Tabernacles, - which the Hebrew DoQors call the Feaſt by 


way of eminency, and Joſephus affirms to have been the moſt ſacred 
and the chief of ail the Jewiſh Feaſts. 


God of Jacob f. 


f For thisis no humane device but an appointment and command 
of the great God and your Lord. 

5 Ihisg he ordained in Joſeph þ for a teſtimony 3, 
when he & went out / || through the land of Egypt m: 
where I z heard a language that I F underſtood not 0. 

g To wit, the blowing of Trumpets. þ Among the poſterity 
of 7oſeph, to wit, the people of 1ſrael, as isevident both from the 
foregoing Verſe where they are called Jſ-ae!, and from the follow- 
ing words in this Verſe, where they are deſcribed by their coming 
out of Egypt, which was common to all the Tribes of 17ae!,who are 
ſometimes called by the name of Joſeph ; of which ſee on Pſal. $0. 
1. # Either, 1. Fora Law, which 1s oft called a :efimoxy. Or ra- 
ther, 2. Fora witneſs and memorial of that glorious deliverance 
mentioned in the following words. For, 1. That this was a fatute 
and law he had expreſſed, Yerſ. 4. which it is notnort likely that he 
would here repeat, eſpecially in a more dark and doubtful phraſe. 
2. He ſeems to declare the end of that Law, which was to be a jeſtie 
mony. k To wit, God, he whoordained, as was now ſaid. 1! As a 
Captain in the head, or on the behalf of his people. » To execute 
his judgments upon that Land or People. Or, againſt, &c, to de 
ſtroy it. Or, out ef it, as both antient and other Interpreters render 
this Particle a, which is elſewhere pur for meal, and meal is put for 
min, from or out of, as is manifeſt by comparing 2 Kings 21. 8. with 
2 Chron. 33, 8. Sothis Text notes the time when this 2nd the 0» 
ther Feaſts were inſtituted ; which was at, or preſent'y after their 
coming out of Egypt, even at Sinai. n i.e. My progenitors, for all 
the ſucceſſive Generations of 1ae] mzke one body, and are ſome- 
times ſpoken ofas one perſon. o Either, 11 The Language of God 
himſelt ſpeaking from Heaven at. Sinei, which was ſtrange and 
| terrible tome. Or rather, 2. The Egyptian Language, which at 

firſt was very ungrateful and unknown to the I/-ac/ites, Gen. 42. 
23. and probably continued ſofor ſome conſiderable time, becauſe 
they were much ſeparated both in place and converſation from the 
Egyptians through Joſeph's pious and prudent deſign. This Expo« 
ſition 1s confirmed from Pſal. 114. 1. where this very thing 15 Men 
tioned as an aggravation of their miſery ; and from other 
places of Scripture where this is ſpoken of as a curſe and plague to 


whoſe name he ſeems to allude, which ſignifies rhe ſon of the right 


or ſon of Man he underſtands either 1- The Meſſias, oft called in 
Scripture theſon of Man ; let him come, and Ikt his Kingdom be eſta 


hand 3. e. a dearly beloved ſon, as Benjamin was to Jacob. » By man | F 


be with a people of ſtrange Language, as Deus. 28. 49. Jer. 5- 


7 were delivered from the pots 4. 
> 1 dels 


Fo 
6 I removed his ſhoulder from the burden 2:his hands ; 


Plal. LXXXI, 


done. z Revive and reſtore us to our former tranquillity and hap= 


[| Or, fir 
Aſaph. 


4 For *this was a ſtatute for Iſrael, and a law of the *..;:; 


Nu.1o.19, 


[ Or, « 
gainſt, 

f Heb. 
knew wh 


Heb ph 


ſed away, 


pal 


*n2 
and 
|Or, 
haras 
of the 
heart. 
1mag; 
U., 


Fer 


29. 
Ila, 4 


(Or, 
edfeig 
vedir 
THeb 


THeb. 
the fat 
Wheat, 


gfe 


pak 


730 


THcb Gag Ge! ſtandeth « in the congregation of F the migh- 
l 89.7. 


ol, LK XI, "4 8 


p I delivered him from burdenſome ſlavery” 9 As this word is 
taken, 182m 2. 14- 2 Chron. 35- 13- Or, Baskets, as 1t iignihes, 
2 Kings 1o+ 75- Jer. 24, 2- In the general it ſeems to note all thole 
Veſſels wherein they carried water, ſtraw, lime, bricks, &c | 
7 * Thou caliedſtin crouble r, and I delivered thee; 
re, 2.23. T anſwered thee in the ſecret place of chunder 5: I *pro- 
xx0d.17. ved thee at the waters of || Meribah. Selah. 
6 » At the Red Sea, Exod: 14 10, 11, 12+ s From the dark and 
Nu.29-13- cloudy pillar, whence I thundred and fought againſt the Ezyptzans. 
10r,P"i7e. See Exode 13-21: and 14: Ig, 24. Others refer this to the thunder 
at Sinai. But at that time they were not 7» trouble, but in a ſafe 
and glorious Condition. 

8 * Hear, O my people, and I will teftifie unto thee z: 
O Iſrael, if thou wilt hzaken unto me ; 

t Concerning my will and thy duty- I will give thee Statutes 
and Judgments, in the execution, of which thou mayeſt live and 
be happy forever. This God didpreſently after he brought them 
from M:ribah, even at Sinat. | 

9 There ſhall no ſtrange god be in thee : neither ſhalt 
thou worſhip any ſtrange God «. | 

7 re wg {halt renounce all falſe gods and worſhips, and worſhip 
me only. | 

io I am the LORD thy God which brought thee 
out of the land of X#gypt z open thy mouth wide x, and 
I will fill ic y. 

x Either, r- To pray for mercies. Ask freely and abundantly 
and boldly (as this phr:{e oft ſignifies) whatſoever you need, or 
31 reaſon can delfire. Or, 2. Toreceive the Mercies which I am 
ready to give you- y Iwill give or grant them all, upon conditi- 
on of your obcdicnce. 

ii But my people would not hearken to my voice ; 
and Ifrael would none of me z. h 

z Or, did not aſſent to me, or acquieſce in me, or obey me, or my 
commands. 

I2 * So0I gave them up ||unto their own hearts luſt a, 
and they walked'in their own counſels 6. 


'Pl. 50. 7- 


*Atds 7.42 
and 14.16. 


of 


L M$. Pal. LXXXIF 


not note the poſture; but only the being orpreſence of a perſon; ; 
as Ija- 11+ 10. Dan It. 20+ John 7. 29. hence this Hebrew 
Word is ty ſome learned Interpreters rendred #s preſent, and by 
others preſid-th, as thus word is uſed, 'x Sam 19- 20+ and 2+: 9, 
6 Or, of the gods, as it is explained and expreiſed in the next 
Clauſe; The ſingu ar number being here, as it is frequently elſe- 
where, put for the plural By gods, or the Mighty, he underſtands 
Kings, or other chicf Rulers, who are ſo called becauſe they have 
their power and commiſſion from God, and a& as his Deputies in 
his name and ſtead, and muit give an account to him of all their 
Actions. And by their Congreg #tion he underſtands not a convention 
oratſembly of ſuch perſons which ſeldom meet together, bur ei- 
ther 1. AH Congregations or Aſſemblies of People in which Ma- 
giſtrares ſit to execute Juſtice, Or, 2. All perſons whatſoever of 
this high and ſacred Order or Number : For the Hebrew word here 
rendred C-ngregation, doth not alwavs fignifie aa Afembly of Per- 
ſuns met together in one place, but ſometimes notes all the parti- 
cular Perſons of or belonging to 1uch a ſort and body of Men, _ 
though ditperled in divers places, as Pſalm 26. 5. I have hated*the \ 
congregat.on of evil doers, 1. e& all evil docrs, Prov. 21. 16. he ſball re= \ 
main im the congregation of the desd, 1. e&- ſhall be one of that number 
and ſtate. * See alſo Jo 22. 20. Pſalm 74. 19. Some render it as it 
isin the HHebre v, In the Congregation of God, in his own Congregati« 
on, the Noua being pur for the Pronoun, as is uſual in the He- 
brew Texr, i- e. In the Conventioas or Tribunals of Princes or 
Rulers, which he rightly calls hs, becauſe their authority is whol- 
ly derived fr.m him. Bur the former Expoſition ſeems more a- 
greeable both ro the following words, and to the ſcope and whiole 
Body of the Pſalm. c Accurately obſerveth all treir carriages, and 
paſlerh ſentence upon them accordingly. 4 i & Judges and Ma» 
giſtrates, who are called gods below, verſe 6. and Exod. 12. 12. and 
22.28, compared with A#s 23- 5. Pſalm 138. 1. and of whom this 
is expourided, John 10s 34, 35. L : Re” F 
2 How long will ye judge unjuſtly e, and * accept | Deut. 5 
the perſons f of the wicked! Selah. be | 
e The Pfalmiſt ſpeaketh to them in God's Name, arid reproves 19. 7: 
them for their continued and reſolved unrighteouſneſs in their pub- © 
lick adminiſtrations. f By over-looking the Merits of the Cauſe, 
and giving ſ{cntence accor@ing to your reſpett or affeQion to the 
erlon. | 


__ a Upon their obſtinate and oft-repeated Rebellions and RejeCti- 

of their Ns of my Grace and Mercy offered to them, I withdrew all the 

ears oF T<traints of my Providence, and my holy Spirit and Grace from | 

imogingti= them, and whol'y left them to follow their own vain and foolith 
imaginations and wicked luſts. b They praGiled thoſe things both | 

_ in common converſation, and in religious Worſhip, which were 
moſt agreeable, notto my commands or counſels, but to their own 
fancies and inclinations, as appeared in the Golden Calf, and many 
other things. 

Deut.32. 73 * O that my people had hearkned unto me, and 


Is 8.18, Hrael had walked in my ways : 
#1" 14 I would ſoon have ſubdued their enemies c, and 


turned my hand againſt their adverſaries. 

c Thoſe Remainders of the Canaanites whom now for their un- 
pas and apoſtacy, I have left in the Land to be fnaresand plagues 
To them. | 
[Or, yild. IF Thehaters of the LORD &# ſhould || Þ have ſub- 
ufigned mitted themſelves unto him e : but their time f ſhould 


dime. have endured for ever g. 

ttleblied. 4 All the haters and enemies of God's People, as the neighbour- 
ing Nations were ; whom he calls haters of God, partly becauſe they 
hated the Jſraelires for God's ſake, and for the ſingularity of their 
Religious Worſhip, as the Heathen oft declared: And partly to 
{hew the ſtrict League and Union which was betwixt God and them, 
by vertue whereof God had declared all their Friends and Enemies 


to be his own, which was a great aggravation of their wickedneſs. ; 
e Should have profeſſed and owned their ſubje&ion to them. For ; 


the phraſe ſec on Pſalm 18. 44 F 1. e. Iſrael's timez the Relative 
belonging to the remoter Antecc:dent ; as it 1s in many other pia- 
ces of Scripture, whereof I have formerly given Inſtances. By 
their time, he means either, x. Their happy time, as Zife is oft pur 
for an happy Life or Stare, as Pſalm 34. 12. and 49. 18. Deut. 4. T. 
and 5. 33, &. Or, 2. The duration of their Common-wealth. 
g 1.e.-Latted for a very long time; whereas now their latter and 


dolefulend is haſtening towards them. 
© 16 He ſhould have fed them alſo f with the fineft of 
ai the wheat ; and with honey + out of the rock ſhould I 
vic, * Dave ſatisfied thee. 


hþ Either, 1+ Metaphorically, with all pleaſant and prectous fruits 
and with all delights, as all neceſſaries may be expreſſed under the 
name of Wheat. Or rather, 2. Properly : This Land of Canazr be- 
ing commended for its excellent and plentiful honey ; And the 
Bees there did oft-times harbour and make their honey 1a the holes 
of Rocks and ſuch like places, from which it flowed down upon 
the ground. See Deur. 32. 13. 1 Sam. 14. 25,.26. 


PSAL LAXAK 
The ARGUME NT. 

His Pſalm contains an Admonition either 1- To the chief 
Rulers of Jſ-ael, whether Judges or Kings, or their great 
Council called the Sanhedrim. Or rather, 2. To all the Rulers of 
the ſeveral Nations of the World, to whom this word mightcome; 
as may be gathered partly from the cxprefſions here uſed; which 
are general and not peculiar to the Governours of Iſrael, and there- 
fore not raſhly and unneceſlarly to be reſtrained : and partly from 
the laſt verſe, where he mentions the whole earth and all nations, as 

concerned in the Contents of this Pſalm. 


IOr, fo A Pſalm || of Aſaph. 
Aph, The Pſalmif exhorting and expoſtulating with the Judges, 1 —— g. Re- 


proveth their want of Judgment and Negligence, 5 en 7, 


And pray 
eth the Load to Tuadge, 8. 


3 | Defend the poor and fatherleſs g: do juſtice to þ f Heb. | 
the afflicted and needy. Tuage. 

g So far as juſtly you may ; as this Clauſe muſt be limited by 
comparing this with L-vit- :9. I5- hþ Heb» Juſtifie, ro wit, when 
his Cauſe is juſt, and he is oppreſſed by a potent Adverſary. | 

4 * Deliver the poor and needy s: rid them out of the *Pr.24.1 
hand of the wicked. 

7 Theſe he recommends to the ſpecial care and proteQion of 
Magiitrates, becauic ſuch are commonly negle&ed and cruſhed by 
men in liyher place and power, and they are unable to right 
themſelves. | 

5 They & know not /, neither will they underſtand 
mm ; they walk on » in darkneſs e: all the foundations 
of the earth are f out of courle p. Od 

k The Magitltrates of whom this Pſalm treats I To wit, the : 
Truth and Right of the Cauſe, nor the duty of their place. Men 
are oft ſaid in Scripture not #0 know what they do not love and pra« 
tiſe m This their ignorance is wi'ful arid affe&ed ; They will 
not ſearch out tae Truth, and they ſhut their eyes leſt they thould 
ſee what they would not: » They perſiſt and proceed? Ir is not 
one raſh and tranſient aftion, but their conſtant courſe. 0 Either, 
1. In ignorance: Or, 2. Intheir iinful and unrighteous courſes, as 
darkneſs is taken Eph. 4. t7, i8s and 5.8. 1 John r 6. Being 


+ Heb. 


blinded by their corrupt affe&tions and Intereſts, Exod. 23- 8. 
p Tis corruption of the ſupreme Rulers doth flow from them to 
their inferiour Officers and Members, and maniteſtly tends ro the 
diifolution of all Civil Socieries, partly by ſubverring that order 
and honeſty by which they are ſupported ; and partly by prove k= 
ing God the Governour of the World to deſtroy them for their 
wickedneſs. | 

6 * TI have ſaid, Ye are gods 9, and all of you.r are 
children of che moſt High 5. 

q I hive given you my Name and Power to rule your People in 
my ſtead. r Not only the Rulers of 1/rael, but of all other Na- 
tions ; For all powers are ordained by God, Rom. 13.1 5s Repre- 
fenting my Perſon, and bearing both my Name and lively Chara- 
Qers of my Majeſty and Authority, as Children bear the Name and 
Image of their Parents. 

7 But ye ſhall die z 
the princes x. 

: But-lct not this make you inſolent and ſecttre; For though, 
you are goods by nanic and office, yer ſtill you are mortal men, you 
muſt die and give vp your account to me your ſuperiour Lord 
ind Govcrnour; And you ſhall die aid fall! ty the hands vi my 
Juſtice, if you perſiſt in your unjuſt and ungodiy courſes. . = Or, 
like ordinary men, as the Hebrew word Adam fometunes ſignifies, 
as it doth Pſalm 49. 2. Ifirt be objeCted, that there 4cam is op= 
poſed to1ſh, which notes perſons of an higher Rank ; In like man» 
ner it is here oppoſed to the lame fort of men. who are here calle& 
gods, x So the ſenſe. is, Tu (who are eſteemed by your ſelves and 
others, gods upon earth) ſhall fa! ( or aye, as he ſaid in the for- 
mer branch; Falling being oft pur for dying, with this addition, 
that it notes nor an ordinary, but a violent and judicial death, as 
Exod+ 19. 21+ Jer: 39: 18- Hoſea 5+ 5-) like one ( or like other, or 
ethers, as this very word is rendred, Judges 16+ 7, 11, which alſo 
is expounded rhere, verſe 17- like every or any) of the princes, i Co 
as other unrighteous or tyrannical Rulers have done in all toreg9« 
ing Ages, and ſtill do, your eyes ſeeing it; Even in like o anner 
ſhall you, tro whom now I ſpeak, fall and periſh, if you do not 
learn by their Exampless But theſe words are by ſome late Leaz= 


like men s, and fall like one cf 


&. 


ad gs. 4 ty b: he judgeth c among the gods d. 


» As a Judge diligently to obſerve all tha is ſaid or done there ; | 
and to give ſentence accordingly. The Judge fits when he heareth | 
Cauſes, but ttaadeth up when he giveth ſentence, Or ſtanding doth ;, 


ned Interpreters tranſlated otherwiſe, and that very agreeably ro 
the Hebrew words and accents, And you, O ye princes. (or you that 
are princes, before called gods) fball fail ike one or Fre every or 
any of them, 1+ e+ of the ordinary. men laſt mentioned. So there 
3s ouly an Elipgs of #2 Pronoun, whick 1s frequent mm the, Hes 
| "IS 2s. brew 


| 
| 
(| 
$; 
1 


| 
: 


Or, for 
faph. 


* Heb. 
| They have 


dren of 
"Lot. 


22. 

 * Judg 

I5, 24: 
and 5.27 


25. 


LXXXU!. 


Joſ. 13.5. 


been an arm 
| Fo the chile 


* Judg. 7. from 
*4- ſera, 


" for the earth 7. 


'* Judg. 7. 


AS 4 


brew Language. Or, ſha fail together, as the word is tranſlated, 
Ezra 2. 64. and 3. 9. or alike, asit is rendred, Eccleſ. T1. 6. in like 
manner, to wit, as ordinary men do- Your God-head ſhall be ta- 
ken away from you, and your death ſhallſhew you to be but mor- 
tal men as others are. 


8 Ariſe, O God, judge the earth y, for thou ſhalt 


inherit all nations z. 

x Seing the ſtareof the World is ſo univerſally corrupt and def- 
perate, and thy Vicegerents betray their truſt, and oppreſs and 
ruine the Narions of the Earth, whom they were appointed to pre- 
ſerve, do thou therefore, O God, take the Sword of Juſtice into 
thine own hand, and maintain rhe Cauſe and Rights of the Op- 
prefled againſt their potent opprefſors, and let Truth and Jultice 
be eſtaBliſhed in all the parts ofthe Earth. z For as thou waſt the 
Creator, ſo thou £141] art the Supremeand unqueſtionable Lord and 
Poſſeffor and Ruler of all Nations, and therefore do thou gun 
and reſcue them from all thoſe who invade thine and their Rights. 
And although at preſent thou ſeemeſt in ſome ſort to confine thy 
Care to Iſrael, and to negle& other Nations, yet there 1s a time 
coming when thou wilt bring all Nations to the knowledge of thy 
ſelf, and'the obedience of thy Laws, and govern them by thy Son 
and Spirit which thou wilt ſend into the Word for that purpoſe. 
Do thou therefore preſerve them in the mean time till that bleſſed 
day cometh, and haiten the coming of it. 


P'SA L. LXXXIIL 


The ARGUMEN 7. 
He occaſion of the Pſalm is manifeſt from the body of it ; and 
it ſeems to have been a dangerous attempt, and conſpiracy 
of Ayers neighbouring Nations againſt Iſrael or Judah, Probably it 
was that which is mentioned 2 Chron. 20. wherein all the people 
here mentioned migat be ingaged, though all of them be not there 
exprefled ; this being uſual in the ſacred Hiſtorians for the larter to 
record ſome paſſages which the former omitted. Or it may belong 
toſome other Hiſtory. Or it may have a more general reſpeCt un- 
to the ſeveral Enterprizes and Combinations of all theſe people a= 
gainſt chem, ſome, at one time, and ſome at another. 
A Song or Pſalm || of Aſaph. 
The Churches complaint to God of her Enemies conſpiracies, temomas J, Her 
Prayer againſt Oppreſſours, g ===m=—=—=15 That God would fill them wi: h 
ſhame, and make them know that he alone is Jehovah, 16-18, 


E=p not thou ſilence a, O God: -hold not thy peace 


hb. and be not ſtill c, O God. 

@ Plead for us. not by words, but by thine Aﬀtions- b Or, be 
not deaf, to our Prayers, and to the blaſphemies of thine and our 
Encmics. © i. & UnaGive and unconcerned for us. 

2 For lo, thine enemies 4 make arumult e; and they 


that hate chee, have lift up the head f. 


d They are not only enemies to us thy people, bur alſo to thy 
Will, and' Name, and Glory. e Or, make a rumultuors noiſe both 
with their Tongues reproaching thee, and threatning us, and with 
their Arms. f Are grown potent, and inſolent and ſcorntful. 


23 They have taken crafty counſel againſt thy people, 


and con{ulted againſt thy hidden ones g. : 

g i.e. Thy people of Iſrael, as it is explained in the foregoing 
words, and 1n the next Verſe; who are called God's hidden or ſecret 
ones, to intimate the ſingular care and reſpe& which God hath to 
them, as to his peculiar treaſure,. as they are called, Exodus 19. F. 
Pjalni 135. 4. whom he will hide and preſerve in the ſecret of his 
preſence, and under the ſhaddow of his wings; and withal to note 


their folly in ſeeking the deftruQtion of thoſe whom God was in-- 


d and reſolved to proteQ. 
wh They haveſaid, Come, and let us cut them off from 


beinp a\nation : that the name of Iſrael may be no more 
in'remembrance þ. = : 
þ Whereby they ſhewed both their implacable rage and malice, 


2nd their great aſſurance of ſucceſs. ; 
5 For they have conſulted together with one | cen- 


ſent : they are confederate againſt thee 7+ 5 
# They have laid aſide all their private quarrels and animoſities, 


and agreed together againſt thee. : 
6 The rnabies k of Edom /, and the Iſhmaelites 


22, of Moab, and the Hagarenes. 

& Pur for the people dwelling in them, as Job 12, 6. Prov. 14. 
IT, Hab.3. 7. I Called rhe: Children of Seir, 2 Chron, 20. m Some 
of the poſterity of 1bmael, called by their Father's Name, as others 
of them are ſuppoſed by divers to be called Hagarens from their 
Grand-mother Hagar. See 1 Chron. 5. 10. 20. - 

7 * Gebaln, and Ammon, and Amalek, the Phili- 


ſtines with the inhabitants of 'Tyre. ; 

s Either, 1, The Giblites, or Gebalites dwelling near Zidon, of 
whom 1 Kings 5. 18. Exck. 27. 9 Or, 2+ An Arabian people ſo 
called by ancient Writers dwelling in the Southern Border of Ca- 
aan, where moſt of the people here mentioned had their abode. 
Ver ſorne of theſe were in the Northern parts, and not far from 
the other Gebal, as ſome of the Phliſtins and the Tyrians. 

$ Aflur alſo is joyned with thems: Þ they have 


holpen the children of Lot p. Selah. 

o Fa their Counſels, and poſſibly with ſome of their Forces,tho 
not ſo openly and powerfully as afterwards. p Moab and £mmon, 
who were the principal parties in that War, 2 Chron. 20« Called 
here the Children of Lee, to intimate their horrible degeneration 
their pious Progeniters. TD 3 ; 
Do gar them as wnto the * Midianites 8 as to * Sr- 


as ts Jabin, ar the brook of Kiſon. 
ro Whichq periſhed at En-dor: they became as dung 
ther, . 1: The Midianites Or rather, 2+ Jabin and Siſera, 
wks —_ overthrown ncar Taanach and Megiddo, Judges 5. 19. nigh 
unto which places was this Endor, as appears from Joſ. 17. 11. 
» They were trodden under foot, and their Carkaſſes left unburied. . 


Compare 2 Kings 9. 37- Jer. 8. 2 and 16. 4. 
1: Make their nobles like * Orb, and like Zecb ; 


L M Ss. 


yea, all their princes as * Zebah, and as Zalmunn:. 


12 Who faid, let us take to our ſelves the houſes of ? 
God s in poſſeflion : 

5 The Houſes and Lands of the Iſraelites. which their God, as 
they pretend, gave them in Canaan, to which they have no right. 
ful Title. For that we ſee was formerly obje&ed by the Amme. 
mitery Judges 11.13. who were a chief party in this War. So they 
ſeem to call them houſes of God, by way of irony and deriſion, 

13 O my God, make them like a wheel :: as the 
ſtuble before the wind. | 
_ * Whereas they promiſe to themſelves a ſure and firm poſſeſſion 
in our Land, let them be like a wheel, or # round ball, which being 
once tumbled down from the top of an hill, runs down with great 
force and ſwiftneſs, and ſtays not till it comes to the bottom, and 
and there alſo is very-unſtable, and ſoon removed. 

14 As the fire burneth the wood, and as the flame 
ſetteth the mountains « on fire ; 

u Underſtand by a Metonymy the Woods or Foreſts upon the 
Mountains, which in thoſe hot Countries, when they had once 
taken fire, either by Lightning, or by the deſign of Men, or by 
any accident, did burn with great ſpeed and irreſiftible violence. 

IF SO perſecute them with thy tempeſt, and make 
them afraid with thy ſtorm. 


16 Fill their faces with ſhame : that they may ſeck 
thy name x, O LORD. 


_ * That being diſappointed of their hopes, and diſcerning the 
1mpotency of their Idols, they may own and worlhip thee as the 
only true God. 


- I7 Let them be- confounded and troubled for ever : 
yea, let them be put to ſbame, and periſh y, 
) But thoſe ofthem that will not humble themſelves before thee, 
ler them be utterly deſtroyed. 
15 That mes may know z, that thou whoſe name a- 
lone #5 JEHOVAH, art the moſt high ||over all the earth. 
z Or, That theymay know, to wit, by coſtly experience, even by 
their own ruine, what they would not know by information for 
their own good. || The moſt high God, and the God not only of 
his People Iſrael, as the heathen fancied, and as their gods were 
confined to their particular and ſeveral territories, but the God 
and Governour of all the Nations and parrs of the Earth. 
PSAL LXXXIV. 
The ARGUMENT. 
F : \He Author of this Pſalm ſeems to have been David; Partly 
becaule it is aſcribed to no other; and partly becauſe it is 
mott agreeable to his Style and Condition, and the occaſion of it, 
his baniſhment or abſence from the place of God's Worſhip : Either, 
7. In Saws time, which ſuits not with v. 7. for then the Tabernacle 
was not 1f Z/oz Or rather, 2. During Abſalow's Rebellion. 


« 


{ons of Korah. 

The Prophet commending the Sanftuary, x. Longeth for Communion with 
it, 2, 3» Sheweth the bleſſed State and Condition of ſuch as dwell there« 
My 4——-7. Prayeth to be reſtored unto it, 8, 9g. Preferreth one 
aay therein befere a thouſand elſe-where, to. What the Lord u to thi 
that truſt in him, 11, 12, ; 

| = _—_— are thy tabernacles , O LORD of 

ONS. 


# Thy Tabernacle, called Tabernacles ; Either, 1. Becauſe it.con- 
ſiſted of ſeveral parts: Or rather, 2: To note its excellency ; as 
Behemoth or Beaſts 1s put for one eminent Beaſt, Job go. £5. and Wiſe 
dons for excellent Wiſdom, Prov. 1. 20. 


courts c of the LORD:my heart and myfleſh crieth out 
d for the living God. 


b Or. Is conſumed, with grief for want of them, -and with vehee 
ment deſire to enjoy them, and with the deferring and diſappoint 
ment'of his Hopes. See Prov. 13. 12. e To enter into the out- 
ward Court-with the People, and to ſee what is done by the Prieſts 
in the inner Court, and to joyn with them in their Religious Ex- 
erciſes. d With a doleful cry, of which this word is uſed alſo, 
Lam. 2. 19. which elſe-where and commonly ſignifies a joyful 
ſhout. Theſenſe is, my Soul and Body are pained ; or the paſli- 
on of my Heart maketh my Tongue cry out, 

3 Yea, the ſparrow hath found an houſe e, and che 
ſwallow a neſt for herſelf,where ſhe may lay her young, 
even thine altar f, O LORD of hoſts, my King, and 


my God. 

e te. An habitation, to wit, a neſt, as it here followeth. f Or 
nigh ( as this Hebrew Particle eth is elſe-where uſed, and as it is 
rendred by the Septuagint and the Chaldee, Judges 4. 11. ) thine Altar, 
Heb. Alters, that of Burnt-offerings, and the other of Incenſe. Ar, 
or near which theſe Birds might well and truly be ſaid to have 
their Neſts, becauſe they were either in ſome part of the Taber- 
nacle or Temple in which the Altars were; or in ſome buildings 
belonging, or near at leaſt to it. | 
4 Bleſſed are they that dwell in thy houſe g : they 
will be ſtill praiſing thee h. Selah. 
£ That conſtantly or frequently reſort to and abidein thy houſe; 
Either the Prieſts and Levites, who kept continual watch there 3 
Or other devout Jews who were there perpetually, as 41ma, Luke 
2.37: h For they are continually employed in that bleſſed and 
glorious work of praiſing and ſerving thee in the place which thou 
haſt appointed for that end. | 
5 Bleſſed zs the man whoſe ſtrength 3s in thee 7: in 
whoſe heart are the ways of them k, | 
; Who rtruſteth in thee as his only ſtrength and refuge and por= 


tion- Or, Who hath firength in (or rather for, as the Hebrew pre- 
fix Beth is frequently uſed, as hath been nored again and again) 


| zhee, 14 6 Who hath (or who uſeth ; For having is ſometimes pr 
7 e) 


i 


Plal. LXNXX 1? : 


To the chief muſician upon Gitcich, s Pſalm || for the || Or, 


2 * My ſoul longeth, yea, even fainteth þ for the Ok 
L, 
ad. l, 


Judg. s, 


2, 2, 


Ve 


| p ſal. | B+ 4 py % LV p P 


$f 
for ofiz ; ef hich foe Matth, 13. 1te 2x C7. 7.2.) ability of Body 
and Mind {or thee, and for thy ſervice; or {orthat Journey which 
hero he teens ro infinuate,and in the following Words and Verics : 
he particularly defcribes. ior it muft be conſidered that all the 
Males of Iſrael were obliged to come to the Tabernacle or Tempie } 
thrice ina year, Exod. 34. 23, 24+ and that ſome of them lived at | 
a great diſtance, and confequently were to take a long and trouble»; 
{ome Journey, which alſo might at ſome times and places be ac- ! 
companied with hazards and other inconveniences; and therefore | 
ſuch as wanted either courage or bodily ſtrength might be difcous- } 
raged or hindred from undertaking it, and from the enjoyment of | 
God in his ſolemn and publick Worſhip. Which though in ſome ; 
caſes it might not be their fln, yer ſurely it was a great atfliftion | 
and infelicity ; and conſequently it was a bleſſed thing to be freed 
from thoſe Impediments, as the Plalmiſt here obſerves. k1-e- Of 
thoſe men ; for though Man be the ſingular number, it is under- 
ſtood colie&ively of all thar fort or company of Men. Bur theſe 
words of them, arc not in the Hebrew, and as ſome Learned M:n 
have obicrved, ſeem ro diſturb or darken the fenſe Others there- 
fore ſeem to render the words better an:! more agreeably tothe 
Hebrew Text, In whoſe heart are thy (which Pronoun 1s oft un- 
derſtood) ways, to wit, thoſe ways which lead to thy houſe ; Or, 
the ways, ſo called emphatically, or by way of eminency, the ways 
of (or, to) Zion, as they are called, Lament. I- 4) as is evident from 
the ſeventh Verſe of this Pſalm. So the meaning 1s, Bleſſed are they 
whoſe thoughts and affe&ions are much and ſtrong'y fixed upon 
the high ways, and theirJourneys to Z'/on ; who have both ſtrength 
of Body, as is ſaid in the former branche, and readineſs of 
Heart, as is here added, ro go to Zim; which are the two qua» 
lifications requiſite for thar Journzy: Bleſſed are they whoſe Hearts 
are ſet upon Zion, and their Journeys thither ; that are continu- 
ally, or fiom time to time ſtirring up, and beſpeaking themſelves 
and ochers as they did, Jer 31+ 6+ Ariſe ye, let us go up t0 Zion unto 
the Lord our God. As when'a Man's Heart is knit in true Friendſhip 
to one that lives at ſome di!tance from him, he is oft thinking 
with great defire and delight of the place where he dwelleth, and 
1 0c, of of the way leading to at. x 


Mulberry 6 Who palitng /through the valley || of Baca , make 
memake jr a weli n: the rain allo | filleth the pools o. 
him a well, } Or, being uſed topaſs ; for he feems not to ſpeak of one parti- 


Cc, cular a&, but of a common courſe or cutome m2 A place fo called, 
t Heb. co= which ſome fev iſh and othes Writers affirm to have been a very 


vererh, dry place, 4nd thcrefoie incommodious ft r Travellers in thoſe hot 


Countries, and in hot Seaſons. Which place may be here mention- 
ed not exclulively to other ways ani paſſag's, for this high way 
being but one, and on one fide ct Jer. ſa! m, could not be a ge- 
neral way for all the Iſraelites thither, bur Synecdochically for all 
places of like nature, which made their Journey to Jeruſalem un- 
Pleaſant or incoavenient. But their Zeal for God's ſervice did 
eaſily overcome this and other difficulties. Or, The valley of tears, 
as this vallcy might be called for tie trouble or vexation which. 
Travellers found there by reaſon of droughr, or otherwiſe. » Or, 
wells, i- e- They dig divers little pits or welJs in it for their relief. 
This trouble they willingly undertook rather than to negleC& the 
opportunity of going up to Jeruſalem at their ſolemn times. And 
pollibly they did this, not only for themſelves, bur for the benefit 
of other Travellers who came after them ; whereby they ſhewed 
both their Piety and Chariry: o God recompenlcth their diligence 
in making pits, or little pools, or ciſterns, with his Blefling, ſend- 
ing Rain wherewith they may be filled, and the thirlty "Travellers 
refrethed. Poſſibly the words may be thus reridred, which is more 
agreeable to the order of the Hebrew Text, yes, or alſo (and ſo the 
Hebrew particle Gam, hath that emphatis, which, as ſome Learned 
Interpreters obſerve, is not given to it in other Tranſlations. They 
do not only make little pirs or wells, as it was now faid, but alſo) 
pools or cifterns (for this Hebrew word is by the Learned rendred 
both ways) wh:ch, ſo the Relative Particle 15 to be underitood, as 
it is very frequently in many Texts of Scripture) zhe rain filleth, 
or may fil, (i &) Which may receive and keep the Rain which 
God ſendeth for the refreſhment of theſe Travellers, whoſe great 
numbers made the proviſion .of water more neceſſary, Bur it is 
not neceſſary to underſtand this and the foregoing Clauſe of what 
theſe Paſſengers did for their own uſe, as they travelled through 
this or ſuch like places, but it may be meanr of what pious per- 
ſons did tefore that time, who, having their Hearts ſet upon God's 
Houſe, and the path-ways leading to it, as was ſaid verſe 5. and be- 
ing deſirous to advance the Worthip of God, and to encourage the 
people to come to Jeruſalem, endeavoured to make thoſe ways 
(ſome parts whereof were very incommodious) eaſte and conveni- 
ent; and particular'y, becauſe thole Eaſtern Countries were hot 
and dry, and ſprings of water were ſcarce there ; as we may learn 
from Gen- 26» 15- and Judg- I- 15- and many other paſſages of Sacred 
Scripture and other Authors, which was a great annoyance to Tra- 
vellers, they made theſe pits and pools or ciſterns in ſuch places 
where they were moſt neceſſary, and through wiich great numbers 
of people paſſed in their journey to the Houſe of God. 

7 They go || from ſtrength to ſtrength pz} every one of 


[Or, from them in Zion appeareth before God 9. 
>a t0 þ The further they travel onward in that way, inſtead of being 
bo" faint and weary as Travellers in ſuch caſes uſe to be, they grow 
G _ the ſtronger and ſtronger, being greatly refreſhed with the comfort- 
| wh 8045. able end of their Journey expreſſed in the following words. Or, 
it be in They go from company to company, For they uſed to travel in Troops 
T $ or Companies for many reaſons, and ſome Companies were before 
y others,accordingly as they were nearer to the place of Worſhip, or 
more diligent or expeditious in their travel. And ſuch as were 
moſt Zealous would uſe their utmoſt endeavours to out-itrip others, 
and to overtake one company of Travellers after another, that ſo 


; ear, O God of Jacob. Selahe 


they might come with the firſt unro God in Zo. 4 This is here 
added as the blefled Deſign and Fruit of their long and tedious 
Journey, as that wiich pur Life into them, and made them bear all 
inconveniences with great chearfuJneſs, they are all graciouſly ad- 
mitted into the preſence of God in Ze. But the words are and 
may be otherwite rendred, until every one of them appear before 
, the God of gods in Zion. Or, The God of gods ſball be ſeen (or, uſeth 
ro appear, or, manifeſt himſelf s For the Future Tenie oft notes the 
continuance of the Attion) in Zion, Which is mentioned in the 


' turned thy ſelf from the fierceneſs of thine anger. 


} # M .. # | P:41. LAN | 


Wo 1 
cloſe as the reaſon of that aferion and induſtry, which is &cſcri- 
bed in the foregoing paſſages. 


8 O LORD God of hoſts r hear my prayer 5: give 


| 
[| 
$ 


» Who can'lt eaſily remove and ſubCue thoſe enemies of mine, 
who baniſh and keep me from the place of thy Worſhip. s In 
NY me to thy Ilouſe and Service ; which is my chief deſire, 
verſes 2, 3. 

9 Behold, O God our ſhield, and look upon the face 
t of thine anointed s. 

s Do not' turn away thine eyes from him as men do from thoſe 
woom they hate or deſpiſe, bur caſt a favourable eye towards him. 
By Face he means either his perſon, the word Face being oft redun- 
dant, asit is Gen- 43+ 3+ or his ſtate and condition. *s Either, 
1. QF Chriſt, whoſe proper Name is the Mezfiah, or the anointed. 
So the meaning may be, Lord, I deſerve not one good lock from 
thee, becauſe by my great wickedneſs I have procured thy juſt dif 
pleaſure, and this baniſhment ; but look upon thy Chriſt, whoſe 
coming and meritorious paſſion, though future to us, is preſent to 
thee, and for his ſake look upon me. Or, 2. Of me, who, though 
a vile Sinner, am thine anointed King, 2 Sar. 12. 7+ and 23- 1+ | 

to For a day in thy courts is better than a thouſand + Heb. | 
x: T I had rather be a door-keeper y in the houſe of choke 1 


my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedneſs z. ;he ro} 

x Underſtand elſe-wherez which is neceflary to compleat the- as che rh 
ſenſe: Or, 1n the tents of wickedneſs; which may be ſupplied out ſhold. 
of the next Clauſe. Such Ellipſes are uſual in Scripture, as Pſalm 
gf. 7. at thy ſide, (i.e ) Lett fide, Prov. 19. 1, &c- y Which 
was generally he'd a mean and contemptible Office, and belonged 
to the common Levites, 1 Chron- 9+ 19+ and 26. 1+ and therefore 
might ſeem very diſhonourable for David, z Than to live inthe 
greateſt glory and plenty and pleaſure ; which is ordinarily the lot 
of wicked men, as David obſerved before, Pſalm 17- 14. and 73* 6, 
7+ and elſe-where- 

11 For the LORD God 7s a ſun « and * ſhield 5 : the +1, 
LORD will give grace c and glory 4: * no good thing Pal. x 
e will he withhold from them that walk uprightly f, I 4e 

a Toenlighten and quicken and dire& and comfort all his peo- *PiAl. 
ple; whereas they that live without God in the World, Walk m 9» 19: 
darkneſs, and know not whither they go, as is ſaid, John 12- 35- b To 
ſave his People from all their Encmies, and from thoſe dreadful 
and deadly miſeries which attend all other.men. «c His favour and 
friendſhip, which is better than Life, Pſalm 63+ 3- and all the 
blefled fruits of it» @ Not the vain-glory and ſplendour of this 
World, of which David would not have ſpoken ſo magnificently, 
becauie upon all occaſions he expreſſeth a great conrempr of thoſe 
things, but the Honour which comes from God here, and that e- 
ternal and ineffable Glory laid up for God's People 1n the future 
world. e Nothing that is truly good in it (elf, and which is good . 
for them; for ſometimes afflictions, which are evi! in themſelves, 
are good and neceſlary, and highly advantagious to good Men ; 
and the good things of this World would do chem much hurt ; 
which is verified by frequent Experiments. f That worſhip God 
ſincerely, and order their Converſations aright. Which Clauſe Da= 
vid ſeems, to me, to add deſignedly to prevent or remove an Ob- 
jection againſt what he had now ſaid, which might be taken from 
his own Cale, whereby it appeared that God was no ſuch ſun or 
ſhield ro him, but expoſed him to great and ſore calamities. Which 
being certain and evident, David here affigns the true reaſon of ir, 
which was not from any defe& in God's goodneſs and ſufficiency, 
bur only from his own groſs miſcarriages, whereby he had clouded 
this ſun, and caſt away this ſhield, and forfeited theſe priviledges 
by departing from his integrity. - 

i2 O LORD of hoſts, * bleſſed js the man that 
truſterh in thee g. 

g Who, though he be deprived of the opportunity of payin 
that outward Worſhip to os which 1s poo 2 par me Houſe 
yet giveth thee that inward Worſhip which is more valuable in thy 
account, and placeth his chief Truſt and Hope and Hapineſs in 


thee alone. 
FSAL LAXXY; 
The ARGUMENT. ) 
=— Pſalm is thought to have been made after the Peoples re- 
turn from the Babyloniſh Captivity ; wherein he partly gives 

God thanks for that glorious deliverance; and partly implores 

God's Mercy in compleating that work,and reſcuing his People from 

the relicks of their Bondage, and from the vexation which they 

had by their Neighbours afrer they were returned to Canaan, ; 

To the chief muſician. 4 Pſalm || for the ſors of 10r,& 
Korah, 

The Pſalmif o:t of the experience of former Mercies, prayeth for the cont i. 
nuance of them, 1 — 7. Reſolveth to wait on the Lord, 
and hear what he will ſpzak, 8. His Confidence in his Goodneſs, Mercy 
and Truth, g —— 13. Co 

= thou haſt been |] favourable unto thy land @: Or» —_ 

thou haſt brought back the captivity b of Jacob. 72 
a i e Unto thy People, in removing the Ad effe&s of thy diſ- 
pleaſure. b The Caprives, as that word is uſed, Pſalm 14. 7. atd 

68. 18- and elſe-where. 

2 * Thou haſt forgiven the iniquity of thy people ; 
thou haſt covered all their ſin c. Selah. 

c So as not to impute it to them, or to continue the puniſhment 
which thou didſt inflitt upon them for it. | 

3 Thou haſt taken away all thy wrath 4: |} thou haſt p g, ,z, 


haſt turned 
4 Thoſe Calamities which were the effe&ts of thy juſt wrath :hine ange 
conceived againſt us. « from wax= 
4 Turn us e, O God of our ſalvation, and cauſe thine mg bur; 


anger towards us to ceaſs f. es Ha. 
e Either, 1. Convert us. As thou haſt brought back onr Bodies 
to thy Land, fo bring back our Hearts to thy ſelf, from whom ma<« 
ny of them to this day are alienated. Or rather, 2, Reſtore us rg 
4 Y 4 our 


% 


"Pain 


TYP. 32: I 


» 
% 


>. *pf. 67. 6. 


*Pſ.89.14. 

+ Heb. he, 

Peeps in th, 

' way, or hl, 

 flepsin th, 
way. $80 

Gr, 


LXXXV. 


- God of Glory himſeif, even Chriſt, who is-called the brightneſs of 


* and peace r have kiſſed each other 5. 
*>x This isto be underſtood; Either, 1, Of theſe Graces or Ver- 


. Senſe is, That great Work of Redemption by Chriſt ſhall clearly 


" another expreſſion of the ſame thing. 


our former tranquility,and free us from the troubles which we yet 
groa under from our malicious Neighbours and Enemies. For 
this beſt ſuits with the following Clauſe of the Verſe, which com- 
monly exp'ains the former. f He prudently endeavours to take 
away the root and cauſe of their continued miſeries, to wit, God's 
anger procured by their fins. _ 

5 Wilt thou be angry with us for ever ? 
draw out thine anger to all generations ? 

6 Wilt thou not revive us again g, that thy people 
may rejoyce in thee 2? 

£ Thou haſt once revived us in bringing us out of Captivity, 

give us a ſecond reviving in bringing home the reſt of our Bie- 
thren, and in rebuking and reſtraining the remainder of our Ene- 
mies wrath. 


7 Shew us þ& thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us 


thy ſalvation. 

h 1: e. Grant it to us, as the next words explain it, and as 
roy ſignifies, P/alm 4. 6. ſo alſo PJalm 6e. 3. and 71. 20. Or, 
manifeſt thy ſecret purpoſe of mercy to us by thy Providential Dul- 
penſations. | 

8$ 1 will hear ; what God the LORD will ſpeake & : 


for * he will ſpeak peace 7 unte his people, and to hus 


ſaints m: but let them not turn again to folly ». 

7 i. e. Diligently obſerve : And the Pfalmiſt by declaring wat 

he would do, teacheth all the Iraebtes what they ought ro do. Or 
he ſpeaks in the name of all the People of God. & Either by his 
Prophets or Meffengers, or by the works of his Provid:nce; for 
that alſo hath a voice. What an{wer God wi!l give totheſe my Pray- 
ers. [For I am affured from Gods gracious nature and declared 
will and promilſe, that he will give an anſwer of peace. m Which 
Clauſe ſeems to be added by way of explication and reſtrition, ro 
ſhew that this glorious priviledgedid not belong to all that. were 
' called Gods people, bur only to thoſe that were truly and really 
ſuch, even 70 his ſaints or holy enes. n i.e. To ſing which in Scrip- 
ture is commonly called folly» This is added as a neceflary caurt- 
On :; but when God ſhall ſpeak peace to his people, let them nor 
grow wanton and ſecure, nor return to their former wicked 
courſes ;: which if they do, they will provoke God to repent of his 
kindneſs to them, and to infli& further and ſorer Judgments upon 
them. Others render the place, And they will not, or that they may 
not return to foly, Butthe Particle al being prohibitive, our Tran- 
flation ſeems to be better. ; 

9 Surely hisfalvacion o is nigh them that fear him p : 


that * glory may dwell in our land g. 
o That complear falvation and deliverance for which all the 
Iſ-ael of God do pray and wait; even the Redemption of Jſrae! by 


wilt thou 


' the M-ſſiah ; of which not only Chriſtian, bur even Jewiſh W riters 


underitand this place ; and to which the following paſſages do 
moſt properly and perfe&ly belong- And the Plalmiſt might well 
fay of this Salvation that it was nzgh, becauſe the ſeventy weeks 
determined by Danel for this work, chap. 9g. 24. were now begun, 
this Pſalm being written after Daniel's rime. p The true Iſrael of 
God, even all thoſe thar love and fear him. By which words he 
both excludes all hypocritical raelites from this Salvation, and ta- 
citly aſſigns it to all that fear God, whether Jews or Gentiles. 
9 And when that Salvation ſhall come we ſhall be freed from all 
that ſcorn and contempt-under which we now groan, and ſhall re- 
cover our ancient Glory ; and the glorious preſence of God, the 
moſt eminent tokens whereof we have now utterly loſt ; and the 


his Father's glory, Heb. 1. 3- compare John 1 14. and rhe glory of 
Iſrael, Luke 2. 32. ſhall come and viſibly dwell in this now deſpi- 


ſed Land. | : 
xo Mercy and truth are met together: righteouſneſs 


tuesin Men. So the Senſe 1s, when that bleſſed time ſhall come, 
thoſe Vertues which now ſeem to be baniſhed from Humane So- 
Cicties, ſhall be reſtored, and there ſhall be an happy conjunQion 
of Mercy or Benignity ; Truth or Veracity ; Righteouſneſs or Faithful- 
neſs; and Peace or Feaceableneſs and Concord. Or rather, 2. Of 
the Bleflings of God, of which the whole Context ſpeaks. And rhe 


manifeſt and demonſtrate God's Mercy in redeeming his People of 
Iſrael, and in the calling and cohverſion of the Gentiles ; his Truch 
in fulfilling that great Promiſe of the ſending of his Son, which is 
the foundation of all the reſt ; his R:ghteouſneſs in puniſhing ſin, or 
unrighteouſneſs in his Son, and in conferring Righteouſneſs upon 
guilty and loft Creatures ; and his Peace or Reconciliation to ſinners, 
and thar peace of Conſcience which attends upon it. 5s As Friends 
uſe todo when they meet. See Exod, 4+ 27. and 18. 7. So this is 


11 Truth ſball ſpring out of the earth T and righ- 


teouſneſs ſhalllook down from heaven «. 

# Either, 1» Truth among Men, which ſhall be fo common a- 
mongſt all Men, as if it grew out of the earth- Or rather, 2, The 
Truth or Faithfulneſs of God ; which is moſt truly and fitly faid to 
ſpring out of the earth, partly becauſe it hid long been hid and by- 
ried like a root in # dry ground, without any hopes of a reviving ; 
from whence yet God made it to grow, as is noted, 7/a. 53. 2. 
and partly becauſe Chriſt, who is the Truth, John 14+ 6- and a Mi. 
niſter of the Circumciſion, ( i. &+ of the Circumciſed, or of the Jews ) 
for the Truth of God 10 confirm the Promiſes made unto the Fathers, was 
born upon the earth of a Virgin's Womb. « Even God's Juſtice, 
which was offended with Men, ſhall then be ſatisfied, and ſhall 
through Chriſt look down upon ſinful men with a reconciled and 
ſmiling Countenance. 

12 Yea, the LORD ſhall give that which is good x; 


and * our land [hall yield her increaſe. 


T3 8 LM $. 


C p- <- .. Ferns ou 
[Ss þ 0s WS, 
, 4. 


EE Pial. LXXXy3 
ighteouſneſs, he ſhall glorifie and ſatisfie the Righte ; is 
and ſhall advance the praftice of Righteouſneſs Fa | =» 5% Fpakeng 
Men- =-1 e- Shall cauſeusto walk in thoſe righteous Ways whe. 
in he walketh, and which he hath preſcribed to us. Bur this us js 
not in the Hebrew, and may ſeem too liberal a ſupplement. And 
the words may be,& are by almoſt all other Interpreters rendred _ 
therwiſe, He (i- e» God) jhall ſet (which may note his ſtabiliry and 
conſtancy in ſo doing) it (to wit, Righteouſneſs laſt mentioned) in 
the way of bu ſteps, i-e- in the way wherein he walketh. So che 
Senſe of this laſt Clauſe is the ſame for ſubſtance with the former. 
as 1S very uſual in this Book; Righteouſneſs in that Clauſe goes 
before him, and in this it goes along with hims 


PSA L LAXKEVE 
[| 4 Prayer of David 6. 


a Wherein he was in ſome deep diſtreſs, either from Saul, or by 46. 
R _ or upon _ other occaſion. 

avid ſirengthened himſelf in Prayer by the Truth of his Religion, 1 == 1.1 

And by God's goodneſs and his readineſs to hear, 4 » _ Deſirech ge 

the continuance of his Grace, 11====13: Complaining of his proud E- TE 

memies, he entreateth for ſome token of his Lyve, to their ſhame and 

confuſion, 1,—17: 

Ow down thine ear, O LORD; hear me, for I 
am poor and needy 6b, 

b Forſaken and perſecuted by men, and utterly unable to ſave 
my ſelf, and therefore a very proper obje& for thy power and 
gooducis ro work upon: 

2 Preterve my ſoul, for IT a || holy c: O thou m 
God 4, fave thy ſervant that truſteth in thee e. 

c SanEtified in ſome meaſure by thy Grace, and ſincerely devo- 
ted to thy ſervice. This David ſpeaks, not in a way of vain oſten- 
tation, but partly as a powerful Argument to move God to hear 
his Prayers, becau'e he was one of that ſort of men to whom God 
had engaged himſelf by his Promiſe and Covenant ; and partly by 
way of juſt and neceflary Vindication of himſelf from the cenfures 
of his Enemies who repreſented him to the World, as a groſs diſ- 
{embler, and ſecretly a very wicked man; concerning which he 
here makes a ſolemn appeal to God, deſiring audience and help 
from God, upon no other terms, than upon this ſuppoſition, that 
he was an holy Man. Which, 'by the way, ſavoureth of no more 
arrogancy than when he ejſe-where profeſſeth his great Love to and 
longing after God, his ſincere Obedience to all God's Commands, 
and his hatred of every falſe way, and the like. d By thy Cove- 
nant, and my own choice. e Whereby thou ſeemelt obliged in 
Honour, and by Promiſe to help me. 

3 Be merciful unto me, O LORD : for I cry unto pg, , 
thee [| daily. : the dep 

4 Rejoyce the ſoul of thy ſervant : for unto thee, O 
LORD, do | lift up my foul f. 


} The Expreſſion notes ferve +t Deſire joyned with hope or ex- 


| Or, 4 
pra) &, be. 


INg a 


y [' Or, ene 
whim tho 


fawuref. 


— 


pettarion. as appears by comparing Deur- 24. 13. Jer. 22+ 27: 
5 * For thou, OLORD, ar: good and ready to forgive, 
g, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon Jo S 
Elo2. 


thee þ. 

g Herewith he relieveth himſelf under the ſenſe of his guilt 
whereby he had brought his preſent calamities upon himſelf. hTo 
wit, in truth, as it is explained Pſalm 145. 18- or with an upright 
Heart: For if a Man regard iniquity in his heart, God will not hear him 
Pſalm 66. 18. : 

6 Give ear, fi) LORD, unto my prayer, and attend 
to the voice of my ſupplications z. 

z; He repeats and multiplies his requeſts both to eaſe his own 
troubled mind, and to prev2il with God, who is well pleaſed with 
his Peoples importunity in Prayer. Sce Luke 18.1, &Cc. 

7 * Inthe day of my trouble I will call upon thee : 


for thou wilt anſwer me &. 

k Whereof I have aſſurance both from the Benignity of thy Na- 
ture, and from the truth and certainty of thy Promiſes, and from 
my own and others experiences in former times. 

8 Among the gods there 15 none like unto thee 1, O 


LORD; * neither are there any works like unto thy works. 'Exod1s; 
I Either for power or readineſs to hear and anſwer Prayers. 3 24, 
am not now calling upon a deaf and impotent Idol, for then I Deut.3.24 
might cry my heart out, and all in vain, as they did, 1 Kings 18. Pſal.89.6- 
26, &c. but upon the Almighty and moſt gracious God- 
9 All nations whom thou haſt made, ſhall come and 


worſhip before thee,O Lord, & ſhal glorifie thy name m. 
m So true is that which I have now ſaid of thee, verſe 8- that 
the time is coming when all the Nations of the Earth ſhall ac- 
kaowledge it, and, forſaking their impotent Idols, ſhall worſhip 
thee alone. Which beinga Work of thy Power and Grace clearly 
proves that no God is like to thee, and no works like thine. And 
thoſe words, whom thou haſt made, are added to prevent or remove 
ObjeC&ions concerning the inſuperable difficulty & incredibility of 
this Work: The God, ſaith he,that made them can eaſily coavince 
and convert them to himſelf. 
10 For thou art great, 


2: * thou art God alone o. 

n This is added as a reaſon either why the Nations ſhonld own and32-59 
the true God, becauſe they ſhould ſee his wonderful Works; Or x, 51.16, 
why thatgreat Work, verſe 9. wasnot incredible, bur ſhould cer- wn; pes 
tainly be accompliſhed. o And all the Idols of the Heathen are ,; 12.29 
no gods, but vanities ; As the Gentiles themſclves ſhall ſee and ac- |, cqr.8.4. 


*P(.50.15, 


and * doſt wondrous things ' rep 


*Deut.64 


knowledge. Eph 4. 6 
1x * Teach me thy way p, O LORD, I will walk 
in thy truth q: unite my heart » to fear thy name. *pſ 25+ 4 


p Wherein thou wouldſt have me to walk. As thou haſt raught g 1 19-37 


x i. e- All rhat is good init ſelf and for us, all Spiritual and 


T Bleſſings _ 
pes” Righteouſneſs ſhall go before him y, and ſhall 


ſet | us in the way of his ſteps z. 


may. clearly diſcern thy Will and my Dury 1n all Conditions end 
Circumſtances. 9 In the way of thy Precepts which are true and 
right in all things, as he ſaich Pſalm 119. 128. and rhe only true 
Rule of thy Worſhip, and the only true Way to Man 5 Hippinels. 


r Ingage and knit my whole heart to thy ſeit and ſervice, wo 
I 


y As his Harbenger or Attendant, He ſhall work and fulfil all | 


me by thy Word, ſoalſo by thy Spirit enlighten my mind char I 1d 143%} © 


[Or, « 


Pq 


XI 


1 


FE 


et. 


50-15, 


00.15, 


It. 3-24 
89.6. 


(11-18, 
477-146 
Jeut.6-4 


ſ. 254+ 
119931 
d 143% 


WW LXXXVI.. 


 Pf.54-3- 


: 0 | 


aÞ 


« Fl 3 
_” 


P Ss 4 


liver me from inconſtancy and wavering, . that T may nor at any 
time, nor 1n the leaſt degree be withdrawn from thee either to any 
corrupt worſhip, or to the love and purſuit of the luſts or vant- 
ries of this preſent evil world. 
12 4 will praiſe thee, O LORD my God, with all 
my heart: and I will gloritiechy name for evermore s. 
s Either, 1. If thou granteſt my requeſt, verſe 11. Or, 2. Be- 
cauſe thou haſt done what is expreſſed verſe 13. . 
nd Hl , 2.3 For great es thy mercy toward me, and thou haſt 
jmuath. delivered my {ſoul z: from | the loweſt hell «. 
p16. 10- 7 My perſon or life, as in the next Verſe. u Either, 1+ From 
Hell properly ſo called. Or rather, 2. From extreme and deſpe- 
rate dangers and miſeries; by comparing this with Deut. 32. 22. 
and with Pſalm 88. 6. Thou haſt laid me in the loweſt (the ſame word 
In the Hebrew which is here) pir. Where by the pit he means, as 
is evident and confeſſed, the grave, which is commonly called 
i-  Schedl, the word here uſed. 
' 14 O'Gold, * the proud are riſen againſt me, and the 
\Hcb, #67 ; : . F 
or aſlemblies of + violent »zen have ſought after my ſoul, 


"* and have not ſet thee before them x. 
x They have no reverence nor regard for thee, neither for thy 
Word which hath conferred the Kingdom upon me ; nor for thine 
All-ſeeing Eye, which beholds all their wicked devices and pra- 
&ices againſt me; nor for thy Juſtice which will undoubtedly 
' Fxod. bring their miſchief upon their own heads. 
my 15 * But thou, O LORD, art a God full of com- 
Ns.1418. paſſton, and gracious: long-ſuffering and plenteous in 
Neb 917- mercy y and cruth. 
Ml. 103-3 , Towit, to thy people, and to me in particular ; and therefore 
thou wiltit forger and forgive my manifold fins for which thou 
' mighreſt juſtly reje& me, and make me to know thy breach of Pro- 
mie; and therefore thou wiltſt ſave me from my cruel enemies. 
16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me : give 
' thy ſtrength z unto thy ſervant, and fave * the fon of 
thine hard-maid 
z To aſſt}, tupport and ſave me. {| Me, who by thy graci- 
ous Providence was born not of Heathen, bur pof 1jraeliriſh 
Parents, ad therefore was in Covenant with thee from my Birth. 
and whoſe Mother was thy faithful Servant, and did intirely de- 
vote me to thy Service. 
17 Snew me atoken for good, + that they which hate 
me may ſee zr, and be aſhamed : becauſe thou, LORD, 


*haſt bolpen me, and comforted me. 
T Vouchſiafe unto me ſome evident and eminent token of thy 
good will to me, for the conviction of mine Enemies, and mine 


own Comfort, 
PSA I, LAXXVIL 


The ARGUME N T. 

His Pſalm was doubtleſs compoſed after the building of the 

-. Temple; and as Learned Men think, and it ſeems pro- 
bable, when the peop:c were newly returned out of Babylon, and 
laboured under many Diſcouragements, about the return of moſt 
of their Breth:en and the Difficulties which they met with in the 
rebuilding of their Temple and City. 

A ila.m or Song || for the Sons of Korah. 

The Propher ſpeaketh of the Nature and Gl ry of the Church, and God's 
love ro it, 3. Of the Increaſe, Honour and Comfort of the Mem 
bers thereof, + v. 

1 S foundation & is * in the holy moun- 


rains'b. 
a Whoſe Foundation ? Either, r. The Foundation, 1. e. the 
argument or matter of this Pialm or Song. So theſe words are 
thought to be a part of the Title, the words lying thus in the He- 
brew Text, Fir the Sons of Korah a Pſalm or Song, whoſe foundation 
#5 in the koly Mountains, But 1. The Hebrew word rendred founda- 
"fon, is no' where uſed in thar ſenſe. 2. There is no example of a- 
ny ſuch ike Tirle in the Book of the Pſalms. Or rarher, 2. Of 
the City or Temple of God, of which he ſpeaks in the folowing 
Yerſes. And whereas :he beginuing is fome-what abrupr, which 
ſeems to be the only ground «t the foregoing Expoſition, that is no 
unulſual thing in. Scripture, and the Provoun Relative, ſuch as this 
Is, is oft put without any foregoing Antecedent, and the Antece- 
 _dentis to be fetched out of the following words or verſes: As Num. 
f.... 24. 17. I ſball ſce him, or it, to wit, the Star, which follows after- 
-, ward ; Pſalm 105. 19. his word, i. e. the Lords, Prev. 7.8. to her 
houſe, i &. the Harlots mentioned verſe 10. And eſpecially Cant. 
L 2. Let him kiſs, to wit, my beloved, who is there underſtood, 
but nor expreiled till verſe 14. And the ground of that abrupt 
and imperfet& ſpeech there, ſeems to be the ſame with this here: 
For as the Church was there in deep meditation, and a great paſſion 
dbout her beloved, which cauſed that abruptneſs of ſpeech, which 
is uſual in ſuch caſes, ſo the Pſalmiſt's thoughts were ſtrong'y fixed 
upon the Temple and City of God; and therefore this Relative hu 
had a'certain Antecedent in his thoughts, though nor in his words. 
The word fo:ndations may poſſibly ve emphatical, becauſe rhis 
Pſalm might probably be compoſed when the foundations of the 
ſecond Temple were newly laid, and the old Men who had ſeen the 
Glory of the former Houſe were deje&ed at the fight of this, of 
which 1ce Ezra 7 11, 12. And {o the meaning of this paſſage may 
be this, Be not diſcouraged; O ye Jews, that your Temp:e 15 not 
yet erefted and built, bur only the foundations cf it Jaid, and 
thoſe too arc m-an and obſcure in compariſon of the Magnificence 
ef your former Temple, but take comtort in this, that your Tem- 
Ple hath its foundations laid, and thoſe ſure and firm, ſure in 
themſelves, becauſe they are not laid in rhe ſand, nor in boggy or 
nny grounds,but in_the mountains ; and ſure by divine Eſtabliſh» 
Ment, becauſe thoſe Mountains are holy, conſecrated to God, and 
- therefore maintained and eſtabliſhed by him. Or, he may uſe this 
word Frundations in opyolition to the Tabernacle, which was move- 
able,and without foundations,to nore the jtabiliry & perpetuity of 
this Building. þ Or, Among, or within th? holy Mountains, to wit, 1n 
« Jeruſalem, which was encompaſſed wirh' muuntains, Pſaln 125. 2. | 
and in which were two famous Mountains, to wit, Ziez and M- | 


[Or, of 


Pq. L. 


L M Ss. 


| 


do. x (1i.e.) In Zion or the Church _ The 


 Plal. LXXXV 
riah, Orthe plural Number 1s here put for the ſingular, whereof 
we have ſeen examples formerly, and Mauntains are put for the Moun« 
tain ; Either for Mount Moriah, upon which the Temple ſtood : 
Or for Mount Zien, which is mentioned in the next ans; which 
1s often taken in a large and comprehenſive ſenſe, ſo as to include 
Moriah ; in which ſenſe the Temple is faid ro be in Zion, Pſalm 74. 
2. and 76. 2. 1/a.8. 18. 

2 The LORD loveth the gates c of Zion 4 more 
than all the'dwellings of Jacob. e. 

c1.e. The City gates being oft pur for cities, as Deur. 15. 7. and 
16. 5. Pſalm 9. 14. &d Largely ſo called, as was now ſaid, ro wir, 
of Jeruſalem, which was built upon and near Mount Zion. He ſaith 
Zion rather than Jeruſalem, to intimate that he loved Jer»ſalem for 
Zion's ſakey or for the Temple which is oft ſaid to be in Zion; 
which place he Joved and choſe for his peculiar dwelling place. 
e More than all other places of the Land of Canaan in which the 
Iſraelites dwelt. For although the Tabernacle was for a ſeaſon in 
{ome other parts of the Land, yet the Temple, the place of God's 
fixed Reſidence, was no where bur in this City. 
: 3 Glorious things are ſpoken of thee, O city of God 7 

elah. | | 


 f © Jeruſalem, though thou and thy Temple are yet in ſome ſort 
1n your ruines, and aeſolate and contemptible, not only to thine 
enemies, but alſo in the eyes of thine own People, yet comfort 
thy ſelf with theſe great and glorious things foretold concernin 
thee in the Holy Prophets, as 1ſa:ah 62. 1, 7. and 65. 18, &c. an 
C6. 10, &C. Zech 1. 14, &c. and 2. 4, 12. and8. 3, &c. and 12. 
2, &. Among other things, it was foretold that rhe glory of the 
latter houſe ſhould be greater than of the former, Hagg. 2-9. All which 
Propheſies are to be underſtood, as this place allo is, of a Spiritual 
and Evangelical Glory accruing to Jeruſalem ; as by the birth and 
preſence of Chriſt in ir, fo alto by the acceſſion of all People and 
Nations to it, of which he ſpeaks in the next Verſe. 

4 I will make mention g of * Rahab 4, and Babylon z, 'P(:89- 
tro them & that know me / : behold »», Philiſtia and Ifa: 51- 
Tyre, with Ethiopia » : this 92a was born there o. 

g (1i.e.) I will reckon or account them in the number of my 
Children and Subje&s. h (i, e-) Egypt, . fo cal'ed Pſalm 8g. 10, 
Jaiah 51. 9 but wherher from 1ts pride or natural Frength, or fi- 
gure or ſhape, is not material. £ Under theſe two and Philiftia, 
the old and conſtant enemies of I/-ael, he ſeems to underſtand all 
the keeneſt enemies of the 1/rae! orChurch of God, who ſhall now be 
not only reconciled but uvited to them ; which alſo was foretold 
under the fimilitude of the woolfs dwelling with the Lamb, &c. Iſaiah 
x1. 6, k Or, with or among them, as the prefix Lamed is frequent- 
ly uſed. 1 Tow, truly, clearly, affe&ionately and prattically, 
ſo as to love, ſerve and obey me, as this Phraſe 1s very frequently 
uſed in Scripture; And upon this account, not only Heathens 
but wicked Ijraelites are ſaid not ro know God, as 1 Sam. 2+ 12. an 
oft elſe-where. m Take notice of it as a thing new and ſtrange 
and comfortable. » The Nations on every ſide of them, for Tyrus 
was on the North, Erhiopia or Arabia ( for that ſeems rather to be 
meant.by Cuſb, as hath becn before obſerved ) on the South, thoſe 
neareſt to them, and thoſe more remote from them, that lived in 
the uttermot parts of 1he Earth, as this very Land is called, Matth. 
12. 42+ 0 Or, ſaying this man, ©. for this cohereth with the 
firſt words thus, 1 will make mention of Rahab, &c. ſaying, thus man, 
(i. e. theſe Men or People now mentioned, the ſingular number 
put colleQtively for the plural; and the Scripture oft ſpeaks of a 
Nation as of one Man, as Pſalm 25. 22. ard 130. 8.) was born there, 
or, in her, as 1t is expreſſed, verſe 5. to wit, in Zion; born by A- 
doption and Regeneration. See John 1. 12. and 3. 3, 7. Gal. 3. 26. 
and 4. 26. 1 Pet. 1.23. The Gentiles ſhall be ingraffed into the 
Jewiſh Church, and into all their Priviledges. | 

5 And of Zion p it ſhall be ſaid q, This and that 
man r was born in her : and the Higheſt himſelf ſhall 


eſtabliſh her /. | | 

p (i-e.) Of Jeruſalem, or the Church of God. 9 Ir ſhall be 
mention:d by God, as was ſaid, verſe 4: and it ſhall be obſerved 
and acknowledged by Men as a great and wonderfu! work of God. 
r (i. e ) Men of this and that Nation, (1. e. ) of every Nation, 
indifferertly, Jews or Gentiles, accoiding ro that prediQicn thar 
Egypt and 4ſjria and Iſrael ſhould be a'ljoyned together, and bleſ- 
ſ-d and owned by God for his People, I/aiah 19. 24, 25. Heb. 
Mgn and man, (i. e.) every Man, or all forts of Men without diffe- 
rence of Nations; As this very Phraſe, Man and man, Lev. 17. 10, * 
13. is rendred every, or whatſoever man ; And as by day and day is 
meant every day, or from day to day, EF. 3. 4. Pſalm 61.8. \ And 
this thall not be a ſudden and rranfient, but a laſting work; Zzon 
ſhall conrinue in its ſtrengrh and fertility becauſe the Almighty God 
is her Founder and Prote&or, and will finiſh the work which he 


hath begun. . | - oa 
6 The LORD ſhall 'count when he writeth up the 


people r, that this man was born there. Selah. | 
# Or. his People. So it is only a defe& of the Pronoun bis, which 
is very frequent and eaſily underſtood out of the foregoing word, 
the Lord The ſenſe is, when God. the Maker and Governour of 
this City ſhall take a furvey of all his Citizens and Subjeas. Ir isan 
alluſion to Princes or Governours of Cities that uſe to write and 
keep a Regiſter of all their people. Hence holy Men and true 15a- 
elites are ſaid to be written among the living in Jeruſalem, If. 4. 3» Or, 
in the writing of the houſe of Iſrael, Ezek. 13. 9. ; 

7 As well the ſingers as the players on inſtruments s 
ſhall be there ; all my ſprings are in thee x. CE ONE 

There ſhall be great rejoycing and praiſing God both with 
vocal and inſtrumental Muſick, for this glorious and ſtupendious 
work of the Converſion of the Gentiles. _He deſcribes Evangelical 
Worſhip by Legal Phraſes and Cuſtoms; as the Prophets frequently 
e words may be here 
added as the burden or matter of the Song, which theſe ſingers are 
ſuppoſed to have ſung; and that either 1. Intheir own names, and 


in the name of all the Zionites or people of God. So the ſenie is, 


. all our deſires and delights are in thee, all the ſprings Mercy, 
4 = | Grace 
/ 


Sa 


Ui 


114 


IO, | 


| 
9s | 


{ LXXXVIIL 


Grace and Glory flow to us only in and thorow thee: Por Spr.ngs 
or fountains are oft put for all precious or deſirable things, as P/aim 
36. 9. Iſaiah 12. 3. He. r3. 15. Or, 2. In God's name, whole words 
were frequently ſung by tie ſingers in the Old Teſtament. And 1o 
the ſenſe is, all the Springs or Fountains of good things, or of my 
Bleſſing are in Zion, or in the Church, out of which no true Blef- 
ſings are to be expeted or found. And this ſeems beſt to ſuir with 
the phraſe, my Springs; Partly, becauſe it ſeems more proper to ca'l 
them God's Springs, who 1s the Author and Giver of them, than 
men's ſprings, who are only the receivers of them ; And partly, be- 
cauſe this 1s more agreeable to the phraſe and uſage of Scriptuce, 
which every where aſcribes and appropriates them ro God. 
PS A L. LINXXVUL. 
The ARGUMENT. 

4 [ \His Pſalm was compoſed upon a particular Occaſion, to wit, 

Heman's deep diſtreſs and dejettion of mind almoſt to de- 
ſpair. / But though this was the occaſion of ir, it is of more gene- 
ral uſe for the in{truftion and conſolation of all good Men when 
they come into ſuch Deſpondencies, and therefore was by the di- 
re&tion of God's Spirit made publick, and commirted to the Sons 
of Korah. 
IOr,of. A Song or Pſalm || for the ſons of Korab, to the chief 
mulician upon Mahalath @,Leannoth 6, || Maſchil of 


3 #4. M$. 


f I am nor without hopes that thou haſt a true kindneſs for me 
and wilr fairhfully perform thy gracious Promiſes made to me. 
and to all thar love thee and call upon thee in Truth. Bur then 
this muſt be done ſpeedily, or I ihall be utterly uncapable of tuch 
a Mercy. 
12 dhall thy wonders be known in the dark «? and 
thy 11ghteoutiels in the land of forgerfulneſs x? 
s In the grave, which is called the land of darkneſs, Job 10. 2T, 
22. x In the grave, fo called, either firſt atively becauſe there 
Men foreget and neglett all the concerns of this life, being indeed 
bur dead carkafles without any ſenſe or remembrances. Or rather 
ſecondly paſſively, becauſe there men are foregotten, nor only b 
men, as 1snoted, Job 24. 20, Pſalys 31. 12, but by God himſelf, ag 
he complained, verſe 5. 

13 But unto thee have I cryed, O LORD, and in , 
the morning tball my prayer prevent * thee y. 

} (i. e. ) Early come to thee before the ordinary time of Mor- 
ping Prayer, or before the dawning of the. Day, or the riſing of 
the Sun, The ſenſe is, Though I have hitherto got no anſwer to 
my Prayers, yet I will not give over praying nor hoping for an 
anſwer. 

14 LORD, why caſteſt thou off my Soul? why 
hideſt thou thy face from mes ! 

= This proceeding ſeems nor to agree with the benignity ofthy 
nature, nor with.the manner of thy dealing with thy people. 
if lam aftlited and ready to die, from my youth 


up a: while * I ſufferthy terrors b,T am diſtracted. 

# My whole life hath been filled with a ſucceſſion of deadly cala- 
miries. O Lord, take ſome pity upon me, and let me have alittle 
breathing ſpace before I die. 6 Upon my mind and conſcience, 
which do accompany and aggravate my outward miſeries. 


16 Thy herce wrath goeth over me, thy terrors have 
[| cat me oif. Valmoſt cut; 
17 They came round about me || daily like water c, |Or,lth 
they compaſled me about together. aays 


c As the Waters of the Sea encompaſs him which is in themidſi 
and botrom of ir. 


18 Lover and friend haft thou put far from med, aud 
mine acquaintance into darkneſs. | 
a Of which ſec the note on verſe 8. 
P:S AE. EAXAXEL 
The ARG UME NT. 


Heb.& pf 
95. Jo 


* Job 6.4, 


Or, a 
_ * Heman c the Ezrahite. | 
Borabice a Which ſeems to be the name of the tune or inſtrument, as Pſalm 
om $3- #* This may be either the Jatter part of the proper name 
i of the tune or inſtrument: Or an appellative name,and fo divers 
3Chr 2.6 take it and render it, to ſing, or to beſung, to wit, alternatively, or 
te © by turns. «c Probably the ſame perſon who was famous in Da- 
; wid's time, both for his skill in Muſick, and for general Wiſdom : 
Of whom fee 1 Kengs 4. 31. 1 Chron. 6. 33. & As Ethanalfo is 
called, i Kings 4. 31. 
The Pſaimift declares his former praftice of prayer to God, 1. Beggeth pre- 
ſent audience, 2. Acquainteth the Lord with his miſery and frailty, 7, 
4. Which he ſuffereth by God's wrath, and his friends forſaking him, 
Ky 5 —8, His Mourn.,ng and Expoſtulation, < 18. 
LORD God of my ſalvation e, I have cryed day 
and night before thee. | 
e Who haſt to often ſaved me from. former diſtreſſes, and, I hope, 
wiltſt doſo at this time. ; Bok : 
2 Let my prayer come before thee; incline thine ear 
unto my Cry, | 
#Heb.glur= 23 For my ſoul f is | full of troubles, and my life 
red with. draweth nigh unto the grave. 


f Properly fo called; for that he was under great troubles of 
mind from a ſenſe of God's wrath and departure from him 1s evi- 


dent from verſe 14, 15, 16. : ; 
4 I am counted with them that go down into the 


pitg: Iam as a man that bath no ſtrength. 
z 1 am givenup by my Friends and acquaintance for a Joſt man. 
5 Free among the dead b,like the ſlain thati1e in the 
grave, whom thou remembreſt no more i; and they 


fOr.'sy :by are cut off [|from thy hand &. | 

hand. þ Well nigh diſcharged from the warfare of the preſent life, 
and centred as a member into the ſociety of the dead ; as Iſraeliciſh 
ſervants when they were made free were thereby made Deniſons of 
the Common-wealth of IFael, I expe@ no other freedom from my 
miſecries, bur that which death gives, as Jeb 3. 17, 18. 
thou ſcemeſt wholly to neglett and ro bury in oblivion : For he 
ſpeaks of rheſe matrers not as tliey are in truth, for he knew very 
well that foregetfulneſs was not incident to God, and that God did 
remember all the dead, and would caJl them ro an acconnr, bur 
only as to ſenſe and appearance, and the opimion of the World, 
a;.d the ttate and things of rhis-trfe. & From the care and condutt 
of thy providence. Whichisto be underſtood as tiieformer claufe. 


with the foregoing branch wh'ch it explains and improves, and 
with the order of the words; for ir ſeems improper after he had 


they arecur of, to wit, by death. : ; 

6 Thou haſt laid me in | the loweſt pit, * in dark- 
neſs, in the deeps /. ; 

[ Either firſt in the grave ; the ſame thing being expreſſed 
in divers words; Or ſecondly, in hopeleſs and remedileſs ca- 


FHeb. the 

pr? of the 

places ve- 

low. 

*PF 143.3 Jamities. 
+7 Thy wrath »» lieth hard upon me, and * thou haſt 

*PL. 42.7- afflicted me with all thy waves n». Selah: 

m Either firſt the ſenſe of thy wrath; Or rather ſecondly the ef- 
feQs of it; as the next clauſe explains this. » Withthy judgements, 
breaking in furiouſly upon me like the waves of the Sea. 

HR58 8 * Thou haſt puraway mine acquaintance far from 
Tob 19. | { 37. 
5 me ; thou haſt made me an abomination unto them o : 


*Pl142 4. 1 am (hutup p, and I cannot come forth. | 

o I am-ſo ſad a ſpeQacle of thy vengeance, that my friendsavoid 
and deteſt me, leſt by converſing with me, they ſhould either be 
filled with terrors, which men naturally abhor ; or be made par- 
takers. of my guilt or plagues. p Ether in the pit or deep men- 
tioned, verſe 6. or in- my own Houſe or Chamber, being atraid or 
albamed to go abroad. 


9 Mine eye mourneth by reaſon of aflition; LORD 
] have called daily upon thee, I have ſtretched out my 


hands unto thee 9g. 
9g. Underſtand, without effc#: For thou doeſt not hear nor an- 
ſwer me. 
10 * Wilt 
the dead ariſe and praiſe thee s ! Selah. 
r To wit, in raiſing them to live again in th's world, asit is in 


 ®P«. 6. 5- 


i Whom | 


Or 6» thy hand. But our tranſlation ſeems better to agree both ' 


repreſented the perſons as dead, .and in their graves, to add thar ; 


thou ſhew wonders to the dead r 2 fball | 


His Pſalm manifetlly trears of the declining and calamitons 

; Time and ſtate of the Houſe and Kingdom of David, either 

fu tt in Rehoboam's Reign, as alate judicious Interpreter conceives. 

; To which thole expreſſions v. 40, 41, 42. do not agree; Or rather 

{ccondly, in or about the rime of the Babyloniſh Captivity. 

| | Mafchil of * Ethan the Ezrahite 4. 

s Either firit, He who is mentioned 1 Kings 4. 31: And then the 
Pialm is prophetical of things ro come ; which yer, after the 
manner of. the Prophers, he repreſents as preſent. And this Pro- 
phericel Pſalm might be left upon record as a Cordial for David's 
Family. in 'their turure diſtereſſes, which Ethan by the ſpirit of 
Prophecy toreſaw. Or ſecondly, Some other perſon of the fame 
name, and infpired by the ſame ſpirit, who had lived in the 

; Times of which rhe Ptalmiſt here ſpeaketh. 

| The Pjaimiſt praiſeth God for making and keeping Covenant with David 

and hu Seeg, 1 won, For his great Power and Care over his 

Church, 5 ' 18. For his Favours to the Kingdom of David, | 

19 <= 22, The deftruttion of his enemies, 23. The Faithfulneſs of 

God to them in Covenant with him, 24 *—— 37. Complaining of cott« 

trary Events, 38 45. He expoſiulateth with, prayeth unto, \ 


| and bleſfeth the Lord, 46 F2, ; 
| Willing of the mercies of the LORD for ever 6, 


with my mouth will I make known thy faithful- 


; nefs c, f to all generations. 

b Intending to diſcourſe of the doleful eſtate of David's Family, 
and of the Kingdom, he prefaceth this, partly-leſt the following 
complaints of preſent miſecries ſhould argue ingratitude for former ® generds 
Mercies: And partly to move God to pity from the remembrance ##* 
of his former Mercies. c Whatſoever hath befallen or ſhall befal 
David's Houſe, orany other, it proceeded not from thy unfaithful- 
neſs, but from ſome other cauſes. 

2 For I have ſaid 4,Mercy ſhall be built up for ever e: , pp 119 
* . th '« 

thy faithfulneſs (baltchou eſtabliſh inthe very heavensf. gy, 

d Within my ſelf. TI have been aſſured in my own mind. e As 
thou haſt laid a ſure foundation of Mercy to David's Family by 
that everlaſting Covenant which thou haſt made and-eſtabliſhed 
with it; ſo I concluded, That thou wouldſt carry on the ſame pro« 
Je& of Mercy towards it ; that thou wouldſt build it up and not 
deſtroy it. f So the ſenſe may be this, Thou fitteſt in the Hea« 
vens,and there thou diaſt make this everlaſting and unchangeable 
Decree and Covenant concerning Davi4 and his Houſe, and from 
thence thou beholdeſt and ordereſt all the affairs of this lower 
world, and therefore, I doubt not, thou wilt fo order theſe mate 
ters, as to accompliſh thine own counſel and word. Bur the He- 
brew words are by ſome others, and may very well be tranſlated 
thus, rh (as the Hebrew prefix Beth is oft rendred ) the very Hea= 
wvens, (1. e.) as firmly and durably as the Heavens themſelves, as 
with th: ſun in the Hebrew Text, Pſalm. 72. 5. is by moſt Inter- 
prerers rendred, as long as the ſun endureth, as our tranſlation hath it. 
And ſo this phraſe ia this laſt branch of this Verſe anſwers, to far 
ever in the former ; as it is alto in the foregoing Verſe, and ſo 1n 
verſe 4. in both which Verſes for ever in the firſt clauſe is explain« 
ed thus in the latter, zo all generations, ROT 
3 I have made a covenant with my choſen g; I have * 250-11 | 


* ſworn unto David my ſervant. 11, &C 


} 
[Or,ofpſan 
for Ethan 
the Ezra» 
hite t0giud 
inflrufim, 
*1Chzh 


# Heb. # 


generation 


the next clauſe. I know that thou wilt not. And therefore now 
hear and help me, or it will be too late. s To wir, among(t mor- 
tal men in this world. | 

1x Shall thy loving kindneſs be dezlared inthe grave? 


vr thy faithfulnels in deſtruction 7. 


Z With David; whom I have choſen to the Kingdom. | + Heb. 
4 Thy ſecd will EF eſtabliſh for ever, and build up generation 
thy throne ft to all generations h. Selah. =  andgeu'h 


4 I will perpetuate the Kingdom to thy Poſterity, which Was gon; 
promiſed | 


Flal. LXX%Ig, - 


nigh 


I 


, f, 
Pls 


XR, 


ſ.89 Ig, i 
b.&PL, 
»* 2s 


ſob 6g, 


Imoſt cut; 
Yr,all the 
Y' 


: I 
Dr opal 
r Ethan 
be Ezra» 
ite f0grd 
vfrufim, 
1Ch24 


2 Sam: 1 | 


r, &C 


Heb. # 
neration 
d ganrt 
UD 


Pol LXXXIX, 
promiſed upon condition, and was literally and fully acompliſh- 
cd in Chriit who was of the ſeed of David. 

5 And * the heavens 5 ſhall praiſe thy wonders, O 

LORD : thy faithfulneſs alſo &, in the congregation of 
.the ſaints /, 

7 (i. e.) The Inhabitants of Heaven, the Holy Angels, as Job 
15-15. who clearly diſcern and conſtantly adore thy mercy and 
faithfulneſs; when men upon earth are filled with doubrs and 
perplexities about it. k Underſtand, ſha# be praiſed, out of the 
foregoing clauſe ; which ſupplements are moſt uſual in Scripture, 
as hath been already ſhewed by divers inſtances. ! Either firſt of 
thy Saints upon Earth in their publick Aſſemblies ; who always 
acknowledge and celebrate thy Truth, although they cannot al- 
ways diſcern the footſteps of it. Or rather ſecondly, Of the An- 
gels of Heaven, of whom ke ſpeaks in the foregoing clauſe ; who 
are oft called Saints or Holy Ones, as Deut., 33. 2. Job 15. 15. Dan. 4. 
$9, 4. 2000 Trgi - - 
hs For .* who in the heaven can be compared unto 

= p7 the LORD? who among the ſons | of the mighty mz, 

tV5oGr. Can be likened unto the LORD? 

m Either, firſt among the Potentates of the Earth : Or rather 
ſecondly, among the higheſt. Angels; who well may and needs 
muſt admire and adore thee, becauſe thou art incomparably and in- 
finitely more excellent than they. - 

7 God is greatly to be feared » in the aſſembly of the 
ſaints 0; and || to be had in reverence of all them that 
10r,terri- are about him p. | Cf Si TOE 
kghovenl 1 With a fear of reverence : For dread and terrour have no place 
that are #- in thoſe blefſed Manſions and holy Spirits: o To the whole Society 
ku: him. of Angels, called Saints, as verſe 5. p The Angels which are al- 
SG Gr. ways in his preſence and encompaſs his Throne. | 
8s O LORD God of hoſts,# who zs a ſtrong LORD like 
unto thee g? or to thy faithfulneſs round about thee r ? 
o #4 Who is equal to thee in Power, or, as it follows in faithful- 

neis. r Heb. And thy faithfulneſs is round about thee, like a girdle, 
adorning and encompaſſing thee. Ir appeareth in all thy paths and 

' ations, in thy words and works. 

" 9 * Thou ruleſt the raging of the ſea 5: when the 


'P.65:7- waves thereof ariſe, thou itilleſt them. | 
's Giving commands and ſetting bounds to its waves when they 
are moſt impetuous and unruly. 
Er1g.26- To * "Thou haſt broken || Rahab # in pieces, as one 
 Wrigyte that is ſlain #; thou haſt ſcattered thine enemies + with 


gre thy ſtrong arm. 


the arm 0 


(19-1. 


#feb. who 
is frog 
ant0thee 
RD, 


th frengeh. , * Egypt, as Pſalm $7. 4. u. Thou didſt wound them not ſlightly 
but unto death. Sec Exod. 14. 15. : 
(Genr.r. - IT * The heavens are thine, the earth alſo 3s thine : 


Pal.24-1- es for the world, and the fulneſs thereof x, thou haſt 


£5. 12. founded them y. 


. x All the Creatures wherewith it is repleniſhed, as Pſalm 24. 1. 
and 50. 12, y They are all thy Creatures, and therefore wholly 
ſubje& to thy power and pleaſure : And therefore allthe Monarchs 
and Kingdoms of the Earth cannot hinder thee from making good 
: thy Promiſe to the Houſe and Kingdom of David. 
| fllbi-le 12 The north and Þ the ſouth & thou haſt created 


"4-4, them : Tabor and Hermon «ſhall rejoyce b in thy namec. 
z The northern and ſouthern parts ofthe World, yea even the 
remoteſt ends thereof, though not yer known to us, were made 
and are ruled by thee. Or poſſibly he may underſtand the nor- 

, thern and ſouthern Empires and People of the Wor!d, who have 
from time to time annoyed and diſturbed the Kingdom of David 
and of 1ſracl, of which this Pſalm principally treats, ſuch as Syria, 
Chaldes, and 4ſjria; Which in Scripture phraſe are called zhe 
North, in reference to that Kingdom ; And Egypt, and Ethiopia, and 
Arabia, which are ſouthward fromit. Theſe, ſaith he, are all thy 
Creatures, and none of them can withſtand thee, if thou wilt 
undertake to deliver thy People. But this I only propoſe with 
ſubmiſſion. a Two eminent Mountains in the Land of Canaan, 
Tabor in the Weſt, and within Jordan, Hermon on the Eaſt 
without Jordan. By which he may underſtand cither firſt 
ſtern and Eaſtern parts of the World: And fo all the foyr parts of 
the World are contained in this Verſe. ut this may teem an 
uncouth and incongruous deſcription of the Ea 
becauſe the North and the South here ment10 
parts of the Land of Canaan, but of the World with reſpe to it; 
And therefore the Eaſt and Weſt ſhould in reaſon have been ſo too; 
And partly, becauſe theſe places were not ſo ſituated in Canaan, 
for Tabor was not in the Weſt part of Canaan, but rather inthe mid- 
dle ſpace between the Sa and Jordan: And Hermon was not fo 
much on the Eaſt as on the North, being indeed the Northern bor- 
der of the Land without Jordan. Or ſecondly, The ſeveral parts 
of the Land of Canaan, both within Jordan, where Mount Tabor is ; 
and withour it, where H.rmon lyess And the Mountains may be 
named rather than the Valleys, becauſe when their fertility is ex- 
preſſed, the fertility of the Valleys is more ſtrongly ſuppoſed. 
6 (i, e.) Shall be fruitful and proſperous, and ſo give their Inha- 
birants cauſe to rejoyce. Joy and ſinging areoff aſcribed ro Moun- 
tains and Fields, &c. in a poecical Strain. « In or by thy favour 
and the Fruits thereof. b ; 

FH. 13 Thou haſt + a mighty arm : ſtrong is thy hand , 

*nvic4 and high is ethy right hand. 

"it, d Either thy left hand, becauſe thy right had ſeems to be op- 
poſed ro it, or thy right hand, as itis limited and exp/ained 1n 
the next clauſe. e Or, is or fhall be exalted, or lifted up. That 
ſtrength of thy hand hath been, or ſhall be, put forth for thy peo- 
ple as occaſion requireth. | _—_— 

14 Juſtice and judgment f are the || habication g of 

(0, e224. thy throne : * mercy and truth ſhall go before thy face 5. 


P 3 4 


"nent, or F (i. e.) Juſt judgment or juſtice in judging, as Fer. 9. 24+ and 
> A common figure called Hendiadis. g Or, the baſis or foun- 


, . 22-3, 
es. dation, as this word is uſed, Ezra 2, 63. and 3, 3. Pſalm 97.2. and 


L MS 7 | , Pfal. LXXNIB 
104. 5. the GJound-work of all his proceedings ahd the ſtability of | 
his Throne Jnd Government. For God could not be the Judge | 
and Ruler offthe Wor'd if he did not right, Gen. 18: 25. Com- f 
pare Prev, 14-12. , The ſenſe and ſcope ot this Verſe may be this, { 
Though thy preſent diſpenſations in breaking thy Covenant with 
David, and [in ſuffering his Poſterity and thine own People to be 
devoured by ſuch as are much more wicked than theyy be a great 
deep and fekret, yet I reſt ſatisfyed that they are Juſt. - In like 
manner the Prophet fortifies himfe'f under the .like thoughts, 
Fereme 12. 1. \s thy harbengers and Companions whereſvever 
thou gocſt. Thou art acither unmerciful nor unfaithful in any of 
thy dealings. x fog eg 

I5 Bleſſed is the people 5 that know the * joyful 
ſound &: they ſhall walk, O LORD, in the light of 
thy countenance /. ok | NS A 

z: The Pfalmiſt intending to deſcribe the doleful eftate of the 
Royal Family and Kingdom of [/rael, aggravates it by the conſi- 
deration of their former felicity. & (i. e.) Who enjoy the pre« 
ſence of God and his Ordinances, and the tokens ofhis Grace and 
Mercy to them, to which they were called and invited by theſound 
of Trumpets, which upon that only reaſon was very pleaſant and 
grateful to the Iſraelites, See Namb. 1o. 9, 10. So the. ſign 1s put 
for the thing ſignified, as is manifeſt both from the followingclauſe 
of the Verſe, and becauſe otherwiſe the hearing of the outward 
ſound of Trumpets could never make them b'efſed, 1 They live 
under the comfortable Influences of thy Grace and Favour ; wheres 
of at preſent we are bereaved. 

16 In thy name » (hall they rejoyce all the day ; and 
in thy righteouſneſs » ſhall they be exalted. ” 

” In the knowledge and remembrance of thy name, (i. e.) Of 
thy infinite power and goodneſs, revealed and imparted to them, 
n» Whereby thou art both inclined, and in ſome {orr, engaged trq_ 
hear the Prayers of thy people, and to fave them from all their 
Enemies. MY .” | 

' 17 For thou art the glory of their ſtrength 0: and in 
thy favour our horn ſhall be exalted p, _ = 
_ o All that ſtrength in which they do or may glory is not their 
own, bur is a meer vouchſafement of thy Grace, and to thee alone 
belongs the G!ory of all their valiant Archievements. þ i. e« Our 
Power and Honour, which now lies in the duſt, ſhall be raiſed and 
recovered. Re SE 

18 Forqſ|the LORD 3: our defence : and the holy jg, 6: 
one of Hracl ear Kinge. ... ...- -; ſhield is of 

q This verſe give a reaſon of the Pſalmiſts confidence that their :he LORD, 
horn would be exalted. » Having therefore ſo potent a friend, and our 
we have no reaſon to deſpair of our reſtitution to our former X:ng ir of 
felicity. Or, as the words may well be, and are by divets, ren- he holy On 
dred, Of or From the Lord is or was our ſhield, ( to wit, our King, of Ira, 
as it is explained in the next branch of the verſe, compared with 
Pſalm 47. 10.) and of or from the holy One of Iſrael, ( i.e. the Lord; 
who is oft ſo called) is or was our King. He gave us our King and 
Royal Family at firſt, and therefore he can eaſily reſtore it whent 
he ſees it fit. he ets | | 

19 Then s thou ſpakeſt in viſion # tothy holy one «, 
and faidſt, I have laid help x upon one that is mighty y ; 
I have exalted oze choſen out of the people z. 

s (i.e.) Of old: For this Particle is ſometimes put indefinitely, i 

Or, Then when thou didſt ſet David in the Throne. £ Which then 
was the uſual way. by which God ſpake to the Prophets, Numb. 
12. 6. « To thy holy Prophets; the ſingular number being put for 
the plural ; Eſpecially to Samuel and Nathan; for part of the follow- 
ing meſſage was delivered to the former, and part to the latter! 
x I have provided help and relief for my peole which I have pur 
into ſafe hands. y Upon a perſon of ſingular courage and wiſdom, 
and every way fit for fo great a charge. z One whom I have pickt 
and choten out ofall the people, as the fitteſt for the Kingly Office; 
one enriched with eminenc Gifts and Graces, &c. RE 

20 * IT have found 4 David my ſervant: with my , ; bank; 
16. 12» 


oy1 & have I anointed him. | 

8 This is ſpoken of God figuratively afrer the manner of men, 
to imply the great ſcarcity of ſuch Perſons, and the difficulty of 
finding them out. 65 Both with material oy1, 1 Sam. 16. 13. 2 Sam. 
5. 3- and with the Gifts and Graces of my holy Spirit, which are 
oft ſignified by oyl or union, as Pſalm 45, 8. compared with Heb, 


1.9. Iſa 61.3. 1 John 2. 20, 27. | Os 
hand ſhall be eſtabliſhed c: mine *F£89.17 


: 
: 
; 


| 


*Nu.r0.8 | 
PC. 33.198 
Pfal. 29.6] 


21 *With whom my 
arm alſo (ball ſtrengthen him. | 

6 i. e. Conſtantly abide to prote@ and aſſiſt im. , * 

22 * The enemy {ball not exa& upon him 4: nor the +, EY 
fon of wickedneſs afli& him e« | | 5: 20: 

d Not conquer him or make him tributary. Or, ſhall not deceive 
or circumvent him, as this word is uſed Gen. 3. 13. 2 Kings 18. 29. 
e To wit, ſo as to overthrow or deftroy him. : | 

22 And I will beat down his foes before his face, 
forall be with *PC. 6155) 


and plague them that hate him. | 
- 24 But my * faithfulneſs and my mercy 
him f: and in my name g ſhall his horn be exalted. 

f Faithfulneſs in making good all my promiſes to him; and mercy 
either in doing more for him than I have promiſed, or in pardon=- 
ing his ſins, for which I might juſtly make him ro know my breach 
of promiſe. g By my favour and help. Big: 

25 Lwill ſet his hand & alſo in the fea z, and his right 


hand in the rivers &, | | | 

þ (i. e ) Eſtabliſh his power and dominion; # The mid-land Sea. 
k To wit, Euphrates, called Rivers inthe plural fiamber, as Nitus allo 
is. 1/>. 18. 1. Exek 29. 3,4 in regard of divers branches of it, and 
rivers which flow into it. So here isa deſcription of the uttermoſt 
bounds of the promifed Land, Exod. 23. 31- Numb. 34+ 3- to whicly 
the [/raelitiſh power was extended by David and Solomon. 

26 He thall cry unco me, Thou «rs my father /, my 
God, and the rock of my ſalvation, 

4 s..1 


= 


1 He 


{; LEXXIX. 3 WF. 


1 He ſhall find me to be a true and akind Father to him, and 
ſhall familiarly and confidently make his addreſſes to me as ſuch, 
for all neceſſary ſupplies and aſhiſtances, which Parents willingly 
affoord to their children. as need requires. ; | 

25 And I will make him my tirſt-born m, higher than 


the kings of the earth ». | : 
m As he calls me Father, verſe 26. ſo I will make him my ſon, 
ea my firſt-born ; who had divers priviledges above other ſons. 
This and the following paſſage in ſome ſort agree to David, who 
may well be called God's firi-born, as all the people of 1[rael are, 
Exed, 4. 22. and ſo is Ephraim, Jer. 31. 9. Nor can I ſee fit wholly 
to exclude David here, of whom all the foregoing and following 
Verſes may, and ſome of them muſt be, underſtood. Burt this 1s 
more fully and properly accompliſhed in Chriſt, and ſeems to be 
aſcribed to David here as a Type of Chriſt, and that our minds 
might be led through David ro him whom David repreſented, c- 
ven to the Meflias, to whom alone this doth ſtriſtly and literally 
belong. » This alſo was in ſome ſort accompliſhed 1n David, part- 
ly becauſe he had a greater power and dominion than any of the 
Neighbouring Kings, yea than any other Kings of his = and in 
thoſe parts of the world, except the 4ſjrian Monarch 3 Nor 1s the 
expreſſion here univerſal, but indefinite, and if it had been ſaid, 
higher than all the Kings, yet even ſuch univerſal Expreſſions admit 
ot ſome limitation or exception, as is manifelt and confeſſed : And 
partly, becauſe Devid had many priviledges wherein he did excel 
all other Kings of the Earth of his age without exception; which 
probably he did in the honourand renown which he got by hismi- 
litary Archievements; and by that Wiſdom and Juſtice wherewith 
hemanaged all his Dominions, but certainly he did in this, that he 
was a King choſen and advanced by the immediate order and ap- 
pointmenr of God himſelf ; That he' was ſer over Gods own Pe- 
culiar and beloved people; that he was intruſted with the care and 
Patronage of the true Religion and the Worſhip of God in the 
World; and eſpecially that he was nor only an eminent Type, but 


. of lords, and God bleſſed for ever. i 
55:3 28 * My mercy o will I keep with him forevermore, 
and my covenant p ſhall ſtand faſt with him. 
| o Declared and promiſed to him and his Seed, as it here follows. 
p Of which ſee 2 Sam. 7. 12, 13, &C. 

29 His ſeed alſo will I make to endure for ever q, and 


his throne as the days of heaven 7. 
q i. e. To fit upon the Throne for ever, as the next words ex- 
Plain it. This was accompliſhed only in Chriſt, the eternal King 


ding to the fleſh. r i. e. For ever, as he now faid ; as long as the 
World ſhall have a Beeing. It ſhall be as unchangeable and durable 
as the Heavens themſelves, which are of an incorruptible Nature. 
See the like expreſſion, Devt. 11. 21. Jer. 31. 35, 36. 

30 If his children forſake my laws s, and walk not 
| in my judgnents: BS 
FHeb pro- s Of this and the two next Verſes, ſee the Notes on 2 Sam. 7. 
HE I 


4, Is. 
Jane my 31 If they + break my ſtatutes, and keep not my 


ſtatutes. 

commandments ?. 2 
| e By this variety of expreſſions he implies, that God will paracn 
$:S4.7.14." 29t on)y their leſſer bur even their greater 1105. , q 
22 Then * will Lvifictheir tranſgrefiion with the rod, 


*Heb.1wit and their iniquity with firipes. ; 
mot make BY Nevertheleſs my loving kindneſs « * will I not ut- 
rp4 "7 terly take from him, nor ſufter my faithfulneſs # co tail. 


., # My Mercy promiſed to David. . 
_ 34 My bovenlant will I not break, nor alter the thing 
*Heb. If 7 that is gone out of my lips. 
hi. 35 Once have I ſworn by my holineſs x, * that I will 


no lie unto David. 

x Here he gives ſome reaſons why he would not brezk his Cove- 
nant with David, though he ſhould have juſt cauſe to do ſo, and 
though he had upon ſuch juſt cauſe broke his Covenant made with 
others; Firſt, becauſe this Covenant was confirmed by his Oath, which 
adds not only more ſolemnity, but more ſtability and certainty to 
it, as is evident from Heb. 6. 17. wherein he ſheweth thar God ad- 
deth an Oath to his Promiſe or Covenant to make and prove it 
td be immutable; and from Heb. 7. 20, &c. where he proveth the 

! Prieſthood of Melchiſedeck ro be unchangeable, becauſe it was con- 
b firmed by an Oath. And though judgements ſimply threatned have 
4 not always heen executed, but ſometimes were prevented, yet 
thoſe Comminations which were confirmed by Oath were thereby 
\ rendred and declared to be irrevocable, as we ſee Numb. 14. 28, 29, 
2 30. Jer. 44. 26. Secondly, becauſe this is ſaid to be {worn once, 
; which word and phraſe ſometies implies the compleatneſs, certainty 
| and irrevocableneſs of the thing ſaid or done, as Prov. 28. 18. ſhall 
| fall at once. Thus Chriſt is ſaid ro have «ied or ſuffered once, Rom. 6. 
I 10. Heb. 9. 26, 28. Thirdly, becauſe God ſware by his Holineſs, in 
or by which God is but ſeldom read to ſpeak or ſwear, and when 
he is, it conttantly adds more weight and confirmation to the 
| ; ſpeech, as Pſalm 69.6. and ro8. 7, mor 4. 2. ; s 
#*2$5.16. 36 © tis {eed ſhall endure for ever, and his throne 


Luke1.33. as the ſan y before me. 
Joh 12.34 - y In reſpe&of perpetual duration, as appears both from the fore- 
*PL. 72.5, going words, and from the following vere. 

 I7s 27 Ic Jhall be eſtabliſhed for ever as the moon, and 


as a faithfal witneſs in heaven z. Selah. 

& Whereby he underſtands, either, firſt the moon laſt mentioned, 
to which this clauſe may be added rather than to the Sun, ro imply 
that as the Moon, though ſubjef ro Eclipſes and frequent and ma- 
nifold changes, yet doth conſtantly and perpetually remain in Hea- 
ven; AaSa witneſs of my covenant of the night, aS It 1s called Jer. 

3. 20.-f0 ſhall che Houſe and Kingdom of David continue for 
ever notwithſtanding all the change; and calamities which it may 
undergo. Or ſecondly the Rainbow, which theugh in it ſelfir be 
unſtable and tranſient, and doth but ſeldom appear, which learned 


alſo the Progenitor, of the Mefſſias, who is King of kings and Lord | 


of the Church, and of the World, who was of David's Seed acco:- 


L M 8s. 


Men obje& againſt this opinion, yet in Scripture 1s mentioned as 
God's faithful and perpetual witneſs, being called 2 then of Gaa's 
everlaſting covenant between God and every living creature for perpetual 
generations, Gen. 9. 12, 16. And although it do not always appear 
to us, neither do the Sun or Moon do to, yer its appearances are 
doubtleſs very frequent in one or other part of the World, and 
will be repeated from rime to time to the end of the World. 
Add +to this, that the word here rendred Heaven, may as well 
be rendred the Clorrd, . or Clouds, as it 1s uſed Deuteron. 33. 26. Job 
35. 5. and 36. 28. Pſalm. 18. 12. and 77. 17. and 58. 23. Proy. 3. 
20, H/aiah 45.8, And fo the place being thus tranſlated, and as 
_ cw witneſs in the Cloud or Clouds, doth plainly point us to the 
ainbow. 
38 But @ thou haſt caſt off and abhored, thou haſt 
been wroth with thine anointed 6b. 
# Having bitherto declared the certainty of God's promiſes, he 
now proceeds to ſhew the unſuitableneſs of the preſent diſpenſa- 
tions of God's Providence thereunto ; and humbly expoſtulates 
with God aboutit, 6 Thar Perſon and Family which thou haſt 
inveited with the Kingdom. 
39 Thou haſt made void c the covenant of thy ſer- 
vant d: thou haſt prophaned his crown e, by cating it 
to the ground, 
c Which ſeems contrary to thy word given, verſe 34: 4 (i.e) 
Made with him. e By expoſing that facred Perſon and Family 
and Kingdom to contempt, and giving his Scepter and Power in- 
ro the hands of the Uncircumciſed. 
40 * Thou haft broken down all his hedges f ; thou 
haſt brought his ſtrong-holds to ruine. 
7 Allthe means of his proteRion and ſafery. 
41 All that paſs by the way ſpoil him: he is a re- 
proach g to his neighbours. 
g An obje& oftheir ſcorn and reproach. Is this the anointed of 
th: Lord? Is this the everlaſting Family and Kingdom ? 
42 "Thou haſt fer up the right hand of his adverſaries 
hb: thou haſt made all his enemies to rejoyce. 1 
þ Thon haſt given them Courage, and Power and Succeſs. | 
43 Thou haſt alſo turned the edge of his ſword 3, and 
halt not made him to ſtand & in the batcel. 
; So that he can neither offend his Enemies, nor defend himſelf! 
k Bur to flee and fall before his Enemies: For more is underſtood 
than what is expreſſed. 
44 "Thou haft made his + glory to ceaſe, and caſt his ,,_.. 
throne down to the ground. | [ 
45 The days of his youth haſt thou ſhortned 1: thou 
haſt covered him with ſhame. - Selah. 
{ The youthful and flouriſhing eſtate of David's Kingdom way 
very ſhort, and reached not beyond his next ſucceſſor, and it hath 


been Janguiſhing by degrees till this time when it ſeems to be dead 
and buricd. 


46 * How long, LORD, wilt thou hide thy ſelf, 
forever? ſhall thy wrath burn like fire? 


*Pſ.89.15 


*PC. 19. f1 
Job219. 


haſt thou made all men in vain s ! and 5, 6) 
» (i.e.) Our time, the time of our King and Kingdom, in Ia. 45-15, 
whoſe name the Pſalmiſt puts up this petition, and about whom 
he was much more ſolicitous than abour himſelf, as is evident both 
from the following verſes and from the whole body of the Pſalm. 
The ſenſe ſeems to be this, Our King and all his People, and I 
among the reſt, are ſhort lived and periſhing creatures, that of 
themiclves and according to the courſe of nature muſt ſhortly die. 
And therefore there is no need that thou ſhouldſt add further 
afflictions to ſweep them away before their time. » Wherefore 
haſt thou made us andour King (and conſequently all other men 
whoſe condition is in nothing better than ours, and in reſpe& of 
thy Grace and Mercy is much worſe than ours) in vain or toſo 
I;ctle purpoſe? Didit thou raiſe us and him, eſtabliſh us tor thy 
people, ſettle the crown upon Dawid and his ſeed for ever by a ſolemrs 
and unchangeable Covenant, ere& a magnificent and glorious Teme 
ple, and vouchſafe ſo many and great promiſes and privitedges, 
and all this but for a few years,that our Crown andGlory ſhould be 
taken from us within a Jittle time after it was put upon our heads ; 
that our Kingdom ſhould be broken almoſt as ſoon as it was firmly 
eſtabliſhed, that thy Worſhip ſhould be ſo ſoon corrupted, and 
thy Temple quickly robbed, and not long after frequently abuſed, 
and polluted and waſted, and now at Jait utterly demoliſhed ? Jt is 
not ſtrange that ſuch conſiderations as theſe did fill the Pſalmiſt's 
mind with amuſement and ſad and perplexing thoughts. Nor doth 
the Pſalmiſt accuſe or upbraid God herewith, but only uſeth it as 
an argument to move God to repair and reſtore their decayed ſtate, 
that they might live to praiſe and ſerve and glorifie him, and nor 
be ſuch uſelets and inſignificant Creatures as now they were in this 
forlorn eſtate of things, and as they ſhould be if they ſhould go 
into the place and ſtate of the dead before the reſtitution of their 
broken State and Kingdom. #P(. 40.9 
48 * What man #s he that liveth, and ſhall nor ſee te 9.g 
death o ? ſhall he deliver his ſoul from the hand of + the 
grave! Selah. 
0 All Men ar their be? Eſtate are mortal and. miſerable, Kings 
and People muſt unavoidably die by the Condition of their natures; 
and therefore, Lord, do not increaſe our affliction which of it ſelf 
1 is more than enough ; Neither proceed in theſe violent courſes u- 
pon us, who, without ſuch ſeverity, muſt periſh of and from our 
{elves 
49 LORD, where are thy former loving kindneſſes, 
which thou * {wareft unto David in thy truth, p ? 
p Haſt thou forgotten or xepented of all that Mercy and Kind- 
neſs which thou haſt promiſed and ſworn, and ſometimes performe 
ed unro David and his Family and Kingdom ? 
5o Remember, LORD,thg reproach of thy ſeryants ; 
| | how 
Fl « 


j 


q 


q 


*Ifas 55. 3 


Plal. LXXxrx. 


47 Remember how ſhort my time 2 is : wherefore Cant31,1 


=D 3 Hgj== 


eb, 
btnels 


lo 55, Je 


"ph. XC. 


F -3 4 


\Num.1T- hew I q* do bear in my boſom » the reproach of all the 
th mi2ity people s. 

q 1. e. We thy ſervants, as he now ſaid ; our King and his pec- 
ple ; of whom he ſpeaks as of one perſon, asis very uſual in holy 
Scripture. Or, the Pſalmiſt ſheweth how particularly and paſſio- 
natly he reſented thoie reproaches which were caſt upon their 
King and Kingdom, as if they were caſt upon himſelf. » This 
phraſe may denote either firſt the multirude of theſe reproaches, 
things being ſaid to be given orreceived into a mans boſom, which 
are given or received in great plenty, as 1ſa. 65. 6. Luke 6. 38. Or 

b ſecondly their grievouſneſs, that they pierced him to the very 
heart, which is ſometimes called 7he boſom, as Eccl. 7. 9, 5 Of the 
great Potentates and Princes of the World who now reproached the 
Houſe of David with their vain and confident boaſting of the ever- 
laſtingneſs of their Kingdom, which was now in a deſperate and loſt 
condition. Or, al the reproaches of many people. 

51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O 
LORD, wherewith they have reproached, the foot- 
ſteps of thine anointed 7, 


£ Or, of thy M:ſſiah. By whom he ſeems to underſtand either firſt 
the Kings of Judah, the tingular number being put for the plural ; 
and by rheir foerſteps may be meant either their waysor aftions,and 
the ſad conſequences thereof; or the traces or memorials of their 
antient ſpiendor and dominion, wherewith they now upbraid them; 
Or rather ſecondly the Meſſiah moſt properly and eminently > cal- 
led ; of whom nor only many Chriſtians,but the Chaldee Paraphraſt 
and the Hebrew Dottors, underſtand this place. And this ſuits 
very well both with the ſingular number here uſed which points at 
on particular and eminent perſon anointed by God to bz the King 
of his People, and with the matter and occation of this Pſalm. For 
* it was univerſally believed by the Jews, thaf the Meſſiah ſhould 
come of the Seed of David, and that by him the antient glory and 
power of Davids Houſe ſhould be revived and vaſtly increaſed. And 
this coming of the Meſſiah the Jews did continually expe for a 
Jong time together before he did come, and ſupported themſelves 
thzrewith under all their Calamities. All which being well known 
to many of the Heathens; they reproached the Jews with the vani- 
ty of this belief and expeQation. And by thefoorfteps of the Meſſiah 
he may underſtand his coming, as by the feet or foorfteps of Minifters, 
Iſa. 52. 7. their coming and bringing the Goſpel with them is un- 
derſtood. 
52 Bleſſed be the LORD « for evermore. Amen and 
Amen. | 
# Let thine Enemies reproach thee and thy promiſes concerning 
the ſending of the Meſſiah, and the deliverance of thy pople by his 
hand, I do and will heartily bleſs and praiſe thee for them, anden- 
courage my ſelf with them, not doubting but thou wilt conſider 
and take away all our reproaches, and in thine own due time 
; ( which is the beſt ) ſend him who is the conſolation and expeRtati- 
on of Iſrael, and the deſire of all Nations. 
PSAk SG 
| [ Or, 2 [] A Prayer of Moſes the man of God 4. 


Prayer ,be- 3 Who conſidering that terrible but righteous ſentence of God 

ing a Pſalm 

pf M0ſes. derneſs, of which ſee Numb. 14. takes that occaſion to publiſh 
theſe Meditations concerning Mans Mortality and Miſery in this 
Life, which might be uſeful both to that and to all ſucceeding 
Generations. 

Moſes ſetting forth the Eternity and Providence of God, 1, 2. deſcribeth 
the miſery and ſhortneſs of Mans Life, 3 11. Prayeth for Wiſdom to 
to number his days, 12. And for the knowledge and ſenſible Experience of 
Goals good Providence, 13 7. | : 

J ORD, thou haſt been our dwelling-place Þ :n all 


generations 6. 

b Although we and our Fathers, for ſome Generations,have had 
no certain and fixed Habitation,but have been ſtrangers in # land that 
was 20t ours, and aff: #ed for four hundred years, according to thy pre- 
diQtion, Ger. 15. 13- And although we now are, and have been 
for ſome time,and till are like to continue in a vaſt howling Wil- 
derneſs, having ao Houſes, but dwelling in Tents, and wandring 

from place to place, we know nor whither ; yer thou, OLord,hait 

fully ſupplyed this want, and baſt been in ſtead of, and better 
than, a dwelling place to us, by thy watchful and gracious Pro- 
vidence over us in all places and exigences. And Tis 1s a very 
proper Preface to this Pſalm, to intimate that all the following 
miſeries were not to be imputed to God butunto themſelves who 
S by their own fins had brought theſe miſchiefs upon them- 
- ſelves. 

2 Before the mountains c were brought forth, or e- 

thou hadſt formed the earth, andthe world d,even from 


everlaſting to everlaſting, thou are God e. | 
c Which he mentions as the moft fixed and ſtable part of the 


FHeb.in 
generation 
and gente 
ration, 


Earth. 4 3. e. From Eternity ; which is frequently deſcribed in 
this manner, as Prev. 8. 25, 26. Joh. 17. 24 Eph. 1. 4. becauſe 
there was nothing tefore the Creation of th: World bat Eternity. 
And thus the words here following do explain it. And this Erer- 
nity of God is here mentioned, partly thar Men by the conrem- 
plation thereof might be wrought to a deeper ſenſe of their own 
frailty and nothingneſs, which is the foundation of humility and 
of all true piety; and ro a greater reverence and admiration of the 
Divine Majeſty ; and partly for the comfort of Gods peop!e, 
who notwithſtanding all their preſent miſeries have a ſure and e- 
verlaſting refuge and portion. e Or, :o» art the firong God. 
Thou had?ft thy power and all thy perteCtions, not by degrees, as 
men have theirs, but from all Ercrnity. Or, ckou art or waſt, O 
God. 
Thou turneſt man to deſtruction f, and fayeſt g, 


Return ye children of men. | 

y F But as for man, his caſe is farotherwiſe, his time- 1s ſkort, and 
though he was m:de by thee an happy Creature, and ſhould have 
been immortal, yet upon and for his tin thou didſt make him mortal 
and miſerable. es Or, didjt jay, 7. e. pronounce thar {ad ſentence 
here following, Return,O men, to the duſt out of which yau were 
tak-n; Gi. 3. 19. Pjal, 146. 4. Ed, 12. 7. 5 


£ -M & 


concerning the cutting ofFall that ſinful Generation in the Wil- | 


| Plal. XC4 
4 * Fora thouſand years þ in thy fight ; are but as * 2Ter. | 
yeſterday || when it is paſt &, and as a watch / in the 3F | © 
night m, | | — ; 5, Oy 
| 2 hath 
+ If we ſhould now live ſo long as ſome of our Progenitors well- paſſed | 
nigh did. Ashe compared Mans. duration with Gods in reſpe& of chem. © 
ts beginning, v. 2. ſo here he compareth them in reſpe& of the 
end, or continuance. # In thy account, and therefore in. truth ; 
which is oppoſed to the parti! and falte judgment of. men,i who 
think time long becauſe they do,not underſtand Eternity : Or in 
compatiuon of thy endleſs duracion. & Which is emphatically ad+ 
ded ; becauſe time fecms long when it is to come, .but when it is 
paſt, and men look backward upon it,.it tcems very ſhort and con- 
temptible, and men value one hour to come more than a thouſand. 
years which are paſt. 1 Which laſted but for three or four hours ; | 
tor the night was antiently divided into three or four. Watches.See 
Judg. 7. 19. Mark 6. 48. and 13. 35. Luke 12. 38. m Which alſo 
hath irs weight; for the ſilence and ſlumbers of the night makes 
ume ſeem ſborter thanit doth in the day. | MT TRETET 
5 Thou carrieſt them » away. as with a floud o;*they *PC.73.2) 
are as a lleep p: in the morning * hey are like graſs which * PL. 10 
[| growech up 9. | BS Erc-7, Ae + | 
2 7. 6. Mankind, of whom he ſpake, v. 3. o UnexpeSedly, vio- 
lently and irreſiſtibly, univerfally, without exception or diſtin&ion 
f Short and vain, as fleep is, and not minded till it be paſt. Or 
like a Dream, when a Man flecpeth, wherein there may be ſome real 
pleaſure, bur never any iarisfattion, or ſome real trouble, bur very. 
inconliderable, and feldom or never pernicious. Even ſuchan idle 
and inſignificant thing is humane life conſidered in ir ſelf withour 
reipett ro a future ſtate, in which there is but a meer ſhadow of 
dream of felicity, only the calamities attending upon it. are more 
real and weighty. 4 which 7: changed, eicher tuft for the worſe, 
which paſſeth away, asſome render tke word, Which having general- 
ly affirmed here, he may ſeem more particular'y to explain in the 
next Verſe. Or rather ſecondly for the berter, as this word is' 
ſometimes uſed, as Job 14. 7. Ja. 49. 31. which ſprouteth our of 
theEarth,and groweth more apparent and green and flouriſhing. And 
this interpretation is confirmed from the next Verſe, where this 
ſame word is uſed in this ſenſe ; where. alſo the merning is again 
mentioned, and that as the time not of its decay, but of its tious 
riſhing. | ; 
6 inthe morning it flouriſheth, and groweth up; in 
the evening it is cut down and withereth 7. = 
r The whole ſpace of Mans Life is compared to ons day, arid his 
45% perity 1s contined to a part of that day, and ended in the cloſe 
of it. » 
7 For we 5 are conſumed by thine anger 4, and by 
thy wrath are we troubled. | | 
+ Either, 1. We Men: Or rather, 2. We if-azlites in this Wilders 
neſs. # Either naturally by the frame of our bodies, or violently 
by extraordinary judgments. Thou doſt not ſuffer us to live 1o 
long as we might by the courſe of Nature. « Cauſed by our ſinful 
ſtate and lives. 
8 Thou haſt ſet our iniquities before thee x ; our ſe- ;;, 1m: 
- 4 : ; Je 110m 
cret /ins y Þ in the light of thy countenance. ry.of thy. . 
x Thou doſt not now cover or blot out or paſs by our ſins, as countenane 
thou haſt uſually done to thy people 3 but thou doſt diligently | 
ſearch thempnr, and accurately obſerve them, as a ſevere, bur 
righteous Judge, and art now calling us to an account for thenr, 
Y Thou doſt nor only puniſh us for onr notorious and ſcandalous 
fins, which thine honour may ſeem to oblige thee to do, - but even 
for our ſecret Lults, the murmuring and unbelief, and apoltaſic, 
and idolatry of our hearts; which though hid from the eyes ofmen, 
thou haſt ſer before thine eyes, and brought them to light by thy +: : 
Judgments. I | -.” - _— 
9 For all onr days are | paſſed away x in thy wrath 1:4 away. | 
we ſpend our years || as a tale chat 5s told a.  , \ | Or, 45,8 
z Or, turn away themſelves or their face fromus. They do not 
continue with us, but quickly turn their backs upon us, and leav 
us. 4 Which may a little affeQ us for the preſent, bur is quickly 
ended and gone out of mind. Or, as # word, as Jeb 37. 2, which 
inan inſtant is gone, and that irrevocably. Or, as # thought, or 8 
ſigh, or a breath, All which come to one ſenſe. . PET 
10 + The days of our years b are threeſcore years f Heb. as 
and ten c ; and if by reaſon of ſtrength 4 they be four- Fr the , 
ſcore years, yet is their ſtrength e labour and forrow f: ps wn 
for it g is ſoon cut off b, and we flee away if... . Them age 
b Either, 1. Of the [/raelites in the Deſart, who being twenty ſeventy 
years old, and ſome thirty, ſome forty, ſome fifry years old when years. 
they came out of Egypt, and dying in the Wilderneſs, as all of that 
age did, Numb. 14. 29. a great number of them doubtleſs dyed in 
their ſeventieth or eightieth year, as is here implyed. Or rather, 
2. Of the generality of mankind, and the 1/relites no leſs than o-. 
thers, inthatand all following Ages, ſome few perſons excepted,a- 
mongſt whom were Moſer, and Caleb, and Joſhus, who' lived an hun+ 
dred and twenty years ; which is therefore nored of them asathing 
ſingular and extraordinary. This ſenſe ſuirs beſt with the follows, 
ing wcrds, and with the ſcope of Moſes 7 which was to repreſent the 
vain and tranſitory condition of men in this life, and how. much, 
mankind was now ſunk below their Anceſtors, who commonly 
lived many hundreds of years, and that the 1aebites, though 
Go3s peculiar people, and endowed with many priyiledges, yet in 
this were no better than other men.” , All which may be conſidered, 
either as an argument to move God to pity and ſpare them, or as 
a motive to awaken and quicken the 1fraeliter to ferious preparati- 
ons for death, by comparing this with'v. i2. c Which time the 
antient Heathen Writers alio fixeÞ-a$ the uſual ſpace of menslives. 
d i. e. By the ſtrengtly of their Natural Contticution ; which, 
is the true and common cauſe of longer lite. e Their firongelt 
and moſt vigorons old Age. - Or, their excellehicy, or pride ; that old, 
age which is their glory, and in which men do commonly glo- 
ry. F Filled with troubles and griefs frorm the infirmities of Age, 
the approach of Death, and rhe contingencies of Humane Life.' 


! 
j 


+ 11:6. 2 


” 
FY 


2 Eithzc our Age, or our Strength. +þ 1c doth not now dec/ineby 
F3& many 


Oe 


rv 


as it doth in our young and flouriſh- 
ing age, but decayerh apace, and ſuddenly flecth away. i cod 
nor now go to Death, as we do from our ve:y Zirth, nor run,but 
fle: ſwiftly away like a Bird, as this word fignifics. : 

- x1 Who knoweth & the power of thineanger /: even 


according to thy fear m, ſo is thy wrath 
+ Few or none ſufficiently apprehend it, or ftedfaſtly beleve ir, 
or duly conſider it, or are right:y afﬀfe&ed with it For all rhefe 
things are comprehended under this word knoweth. I The great- 
neſs and force and dreadful effe&s of thine anger conceived againſt 
the ſons of men, and in particular againſt thine own people for 
their miſcarriages. m #5. e. According to the fear of thee ; as my 
Fear is put for the fear of me, Mal. 1 6. and his knowl: dg for the knon © 
ledge of him, Ija. 53. 11. According to that fear or dread which 
ſinful men have of a juſt and holy God. Theſe fears of the Deity 
are not vain Bugbears, and the <ff-&s of ignoranceand foily or ſu- 
perſttition, as Heathens and Atheiſts have ſometimes ſaid, bur are 
juſt and builr upon ſolid grounds, and juſtified by the terrible "I 
. lets of thy Wrath upon Mankind. » It bears full proportion to 
it, nay indeed doth far exceed it. It carnor be ſaid of Gods Wrath, 
which 15 ſaid of Death, that the fear of it 1s worſe than the thing it 
ſelf. But this Verſe is by many both antient and Jater Interpre- 
ters'rendred otherwiſe, and that very agreeably to. the Hebrew 
Text, Who knoweth the power of thine anger, and thy wrath according tothy 
fear ? te e. Either, t- According to the fear of thee, or {0 as thou 
art to be feared, or anſwerably to thy terrible diſpleaſure againſt ſin 
and ſinners. Or. 2. So as to fear and dread thee in ſuch manner 


EXCL 


many degrees and ſlow ſteps, 


ded Majeſty of God their Creator and Judge, and Soveraign, and 
thereby to b moved to humble himſelf before thee, and ferventiy 
ro ſeek thy face and favour; which is the only true wiſdom, for 
-which he prayeth in the next Verſe. 

12 * 50 teach us 0 to number our days p, that we 


may + apply our hearts unto wiſdom 4. 

o By thy Spirit and Grace, as thou haſt already tavght us by thy 
Word. Or, Teach us rightly ( as this wor is uſed Numb. 27. 7. and 
2 Kings 7. 9. ) to number, &c. as it follows. p To conſider the 
ſhortneſs and miſcries of this Life, and the certainty and ſpeedineſs 


Pſ-39. 4. 
Heb. P 
pauſe to 
Me. 


- and meaſare as ſinful Creatures ought to fear the infinite and offen-' 


d O thou believing picus Sou?,n ho after my exampleſhalt make 
Gold thy refuge, thou ſhalt partake of the ſame priviledge which I 
enjcy. e From the Peſtilence, which like a Fowlers ſnare taketh 
men ſuddenly and unexpecd:y, and holdeth them f:ſt, and come 
monly delivers them up to Dearth. 

4 * He ſhall cover thee with his feathers, and under »pp __ 
bis wings ſhalt thou cruſt ; his truth f ſhal/ be thy ſhield > 
and buckler. 7 

f Whereby he is obliged to fulfil all his gracious promiſes, and 
amongſt the reſt, that of proteQtion in dangers. : 

5 * Thou ſhalt not be afraid for the terror by night 


g ; norfor the arrow h that fleeth by day :: 

g When evil accidents are moſt terrible and leaſt avoidable. 
bh The Peſtilence, or any ſuch common and deſtrutive Calamity ; 
for ſuch are frequently called Gods arrows, as/Dy4t, 32. 23, 42. Lam. 
3- 12, 13, ©c. #i Which is the time for ſhootfhg of Arrows. The 
ſenſe of the Verſe is, He ſhall be kept ra, Tk and open miſe 
Ccinefs at all times. y 

6 Nor for the peſtilence & that walketh 7 in darkneſs 


73 : nor tor the deſtruction that waſteth at noon day ». 

k 'This Verſe explains the former, and ſheweth what that zerror 
and arrow ſignifies. / That ſpreadeth or maketh progreſs. m Ei- 
ther 1nviſibly, ſo as we can neither foreſee nor prevent it. Or ra- 
ther, by night ; as w- 5- » Thatlike a bo!d Enemy aſlaults us o« 
penly, and though diſcovered cannot be reſiſted. 

7 A thouſand ſhall fall at thy ſide e,and ten thouſand 
at thy right hand : ut it ſhall not come nigh thee p. 

e At thy left fede, becauſe this is oppoſed to the r:z4t ſide here fol 
lowing. See the like EVipſis,, Numb. g. 16. Pſal. 84. iz. p This and 
ſuch like promiſes are not to be underſtood abſolutely and univerſal- 
ly, asif no truly good man could be cut cff by the Plague or other 
common Calamities, which is confuted both by other plain Texts 
of Scripture, and by unqueſtionable experience, but with due li« 
mitations and conditions, either on mans part, as if there be a de= 
feCt in his Faith or Obedience ; or on Gods part, when God ſees 
that Death is more for his good than Life, as it apparently is 
when righteous men are taken away from theevil to come, as is 


* Job. 5, 
19, &Cc. 

Pro, 3.27, 
Ifa. 43. 2, 


hearrily devote our lelvesto the ſtudy and praftice of true wiſdom, 
which is nothing elſe but pity, - or the fear of God. And why fo? 
Not that the 1ſraelites might thzreby procure a revocation of that 
peremprory {enrence of Death patled upon all that Generarion ; 
'Ror thar other men might hereby prevent their Death, both which 
he very well knew to be impoſſible, but thit men might arm and 


D:ath, and might make fure of the happineſs ofthe future Life. Of 
which this Text is a plain and pregnant proof. 


12 Return, O LORD r, bow long s ! and let it re- 


pent thee concerning thy ſervants 7. 

r To us in Mercy ; for thou ſeemeſt to have forſaken us and caſt 
us off, s Underſtand, wilt th:ube angry ; or, it it be ere thou return 
tous, t i e, Of thy ſevere proceedings againſt us, and change thy 
courſe and carriage to us. { 

' 14 O ſatisfie usearly « with thy mercy, that we may 
rejoyce, and be giad all our days. 

# Speedily or ſeaſonably, tefore we te utterly conſumed. 

15Make us glad according to the days whereinthou haſt 
afflicted us, and the years wherein we have ſeen evil x. 

x Our AfﬀMi@ions have been ſharp and Jong, let not our Proſpe- 
rity be {mall and ſhort. 

16 Let thy work appear unto thy ſervants, and thy 
glory unto their children y. . 

7 Let that great and glorious work of giving thy people a com- 
ple: d:liverance, which thou haſt long ſince deſigned and promij- 
ted, be at laſt accompliſhedand maniteſted unto us,and in the fight 
of the World. 

17 And let the beauty of the LORD &z our God be 
pp9N us, and eſtabliſh chou the work of our hands upon 


us 2 ; yea the work of our hands eſtabliſh thou it. 

z z. e. His favourable countenance, and gracious influence, and 
glorious preſence. a Or, inus. Do not only work forus, bur in 
us. And bccauſe the g'orious work of thy bandsis hindred by the 
evil works of our hands, be thou pleaſed by thy Holy Spirit to d;- 
reff or eſtabliſh ( for this Hebrew word ſignifies boti ) che works of 
our hangs, that we may ceaſe to do evil and learn to do well, and 
rurn and con!tantly cleave unto thee,and not revolt and draw back 
from thee, as we have frequently done to our own undoing. 


PSARS. XACT 
The ARGUMENT. 
He Penman of this Pſalm is uncertain. The occaſion of it 
_ ſeemstohave been that great Peſtilence recorded, » Sam. 24. 
The Pſalmiſt repreſenreth the ſtate of the Godly, t, 2. Their ſafety, and 
place of habiration, 3 -lo. Comfortable promiſes of God's preſerving 
them, 11. Of bis ſupport and ſalvation, 12 16, 


of Death, and the cauſes and conſequences thereof. 4 That we may | 
' promiſed, yet he giveth a far greater Mercy inſtead of ir, and ſo 
| fulfills his promite in the beſt ſenſe, and with moſt advantage. 


Prepare themſelves for Death, and for their great account after | 


ſaid 1ſa. 57. 1, In which caſe though God doth not give the thing 


As if one man ſhould tolemnly promiſe to another to give him 
his daily food every day, he not only might but ought, notwith- 
fand'ng this promiſe, ro deny and withdraw this Food when his 
Body is ſo diſtempered, that in the Judgment of the wiſeſt 
+= aq tl.e taking of his Food would evidently endanger his 
ife. 

8 Only * with thine eyes [balt thou behold q, and 
ſee the reward of the wicked r. 

9 Withour any terrour or danger to thy ſelf, and with a delights 
ful and thankful refl:Qion upon Gods goodneſs to thee. x The juſt 
recompence cf their fins, or the vengeance of God upon them. 

9 Becauſe thou haft made the LORD which is my re« 
fuge, even the moſt High thy habitation «, 

s Or, as the words lye in the Hebrew, and others render them, 
Becauſe thou, O Lord, art my refuge, thou O my ſoul ( which is eaſily 
underſtood out of the foregoing words, and to which David oft 
ſuddenly tuineth his !peech ) haſt made the moſt High thine habitation. 
Which is the only ground and reaſon of that ſafety laſt mentioned. 
As for the variation of perſons, that he ſomerimes ſpeaketh to and 
of others, and ſometimes to and of himſelf, nothing is more 
<> 2% in this Book; nor doth it make any alteration in the 
enſe. 

10 There ſball no evil befal thee, neither ſhall any 
plague come nigh thy dwelling #. 

: To wit, ſo as to deſtroy thee, asthenext Verſe limits and ex« 
pounds it. For ſurely this promiſe is not made to all that dwell 
nigh to his Children and Servants,who may poſſibly be wicked men, 
and ſo ſtrangers from Gods Covenantand Promiſes. How far this 
{ecures his own-perſon, fee on v. 7. 

11 * For he ſaall give his angels « charge over thee, « pe ,,j! 


to keep thee in all thy ways x. Mar. 4.6. 
% Thoſe bleſſed and powerful and watchful ſpirits, whom God Luk.4.1%: 
bath appointed to mindthe affairs of this lower World, and to take 
Care of the Heirs of Salvarion, Heb. 1. 14. x In the whole courſe 
of thy life, and inall thy lawful undertakings. 
12 They ſhall bear thee up || in :heir hands y, leſt | Or,» 
thou da(h thy foot againſt a ſtone z. 
y Suſtain or uphold thee in thy goings, as we do a Child or a 
weakly Man, eſpecially in uneven or dangerous paths. Or ſhall 
carry thee aloft as upon Eagles Wings, when it ſhall be needful for 
thee. z Soas to hurt thy foot, or to cauſe thee to fall. 


13 Thouſhalt tread upon the lion z,and || adder : the [| Or, 4þ 


*Pl.47.34 


a The Lyon ſhall lie proſtrate at thy feer, and thou ſhalt ſecure. 


E that * dwelileth in the ſecret place 2 of the moſt 


 "# Or, hiding place He that makes God his habitation and refuge, 
ay he is called below, wv 9. reſorting to him, and relying upon him 
in his dangers and difficulties. b He ſhall not be diappointed of 
his hope,bur ſhall find a quier and ſafe repoſe under the Divine Pro- 
te&ion A ſhadow in Scripture phraſe commonly ſignifies pro- 
tection, See Gen. 19, 8. Judg.g. 15. Pſal. 17. 8, &c. 


' 2 I will ſay of the LORD, He ;s my refuge c, and 
my fortreſs: my God, in him will I truſt, 
c Upon that ground I will confidently commit my ſelf and all my 


afa2re. 


q P "as | High ſhall F abide under the ſhadow of the Al- | 
Es. 20. mighty 6b. | 
4 ec 


Iy pur thy Feet upon his Neck, as the 7{ſraelites did upon the Necks 
of the Canaanitiſh Kings, Joſ. 10. 24+ b By which he ſynecdochi= 
cally underſtands all pernicious Creatures, though never fo ſtrong 
and fierce and ſubtil, and all ſorts of Enemies. 


14 Becauſe he hath ſet his love upon me c, therefore 
will I deliver him 4: I will ſet him on high e, becauſe 
he hath known my name f. © 
c This and the two- following Verſes are the words of God, 
whom the Pſalmiſt here, as oft eliewhere, introduceth as givingan 
account of the reaſons of Gods fingular care of all believing or pi« 
ous perſons, d I will abundantly recompence his love with my fa« 
vour and bleſſing. e In an high and fafe place, where no evil can 
reach him. f With a true and ſaving knowledge, ſo as to love me 


by 
£ 


affairs t9 God. 


2 Surely * he(ball deliver thee 4from the ſnare of the 
fow!cr, and from the noiſom pcltilence e,. 


PC. 124.7. 


and put his truſt in me. Gods zame is here put for God himſelf, 
as it is alſo Dezt. 28. 58. Pſal. 20. 2 and 115. n. 


is * He ſhall call upon me g,and I willanſwer him: *Pſ.g0.15 
7 I will 


a 


young lion & the dragon bſhalt thoutrample under feet. y 


Az 


= 5 
Ih . i bf 
3 


50.1 $ 


}F Fla XCIL. 


P $ A 


T wil be with him in trouble +4 ; IT will deliver him, and 
honour him. PG | 
5 To wit, in trouble, which is expreſſed in rhe following clauſe. 
As he knoweth and loveth me, ſo he will offer up ſincere and fer- 
vent Prayers to me uponall occaſions» þ To keep him from ſink- 

ing under his burden, F | : 
16 With long life ; will I fatisfie him, and ſbew him 


4 Heb. ( k 
lngebof MY alvetion &. 27 : = 
doj6- { Either in this World, when it is expedient for my ſervice and 


for his benefit ; or, at leaſt, in the next World, where he ſhail live 
to Eternity in the blisful ſight and enjoyment of God in glory. 
& Either here or hereafter. 


F$SA LCF 
A pſalm or ſong for the ſabbath-day 4. 
8 To be ſung upon the Weekly Sabbath. To which the matter of 
this Pſalm very well agrees. For it celebrates the works of God, 
both thar firſt and great work of Creation, and that ſucceding 
and no leſs wonderful work of his Providence, by which he up- 
holds and governs all his Creatures,and eſpecially that by which 
he ruleth all ſorts of men, both good and bad, and that by which 
he preſerveth and manageth his Church and People. 
The Prophet exhorteth to praiſe God, 1 3. for hu great works, 4, 5. Hi 
Judgments on the wicked. 6 9. Gracious Promiſes to the righteous, 
10 12. They ſball be fruitful, 13 5. 
PC 147-1- 7 is a * good thing b to give thanks unto the LORD. 
; and to ſing praiſes unto thy name, O moſt 
High. 

b It is a good work and a juſt debt to God. Tp 

2 To thew forth thy loving kindneſs in the morning, 
and thy faichfulneſs + every night e. - 

c T'o adore and celebrate thy goodneſs and truth continually, 
and eſpecially at thoſe two ſolema times of Morning and Evening, 
which on every day, and eſpecially upon the Sabbath-day, were 
devored to the worſhip and ſervice of God. 

2 Upon an inſtrument of ten ſtrings, and upon the 


JOr, »po1 pſaltery ; || upon the harp + with a ſolemn ſound. 


+ Heb. 77: 
the nights . 


' theſolemrn For thou, LORD, haſt made me glad through 
—_— thy work : I will triumph in the works of thy hands 4. 


4 Which thou didſt create by thine Almighty Power, and doft 


rented ſtill govern with Infinite Wiſdom ; one inſtance whereof we have 


y_ in the following Verſes. ' 

*Pſyo.5, 5 * O LORD, how great are thy works ! and *thy 

*Rom. thoughts e are very deep. 

H. 34- e Thy Counſels and Methods in the Government of the World 
and of thy Church. : 

*Pl.948. 6 * A brutiſh man f knoweth not : neither doth a 
fool underſtand this g. 

f Who cannot or doth aot ſeriouſly conſider things, whoſe mind 

is corrupted by his ſenſual atid brutiſh appetites; who is led by 
Senſe, and not by Reaſon and Faith. g The depth of Gods Coun- 
ſelsand Works mentioned, v. 5. or that particular work of God 

Z deſcribed, wv, 7. 

pony 7 * When the wicked ſpring as # the graſs,and when 

er. 12. 


RE. all the workers of Iniquity do flouriſh, z: is that they 
Mal. y.15. {hall be deſtroyed for ever þ. 


$ Heb. h Their preſent worldly proſperity is a preſage and occaſion of 
erbs. their utter and eternal ruine. ; ; 
Pſ.104.14 8 But thou, LORD, «rt moſt High for evermore 3. 


7 So this Verſe is added by way of oppoſition to the former, They 
ſhall periſh, but thou ſhalt endure, as is faid in a like compariſon Pſalm 
102. 26 they flouriſh for a ſeaſon, but thou ruleſt for ever to 
judge and puniſh them. Or, for (as this Hebrew Particle is nor ſcl- 
dom uſed, whereof inſtances have been formerly given ) :hou, Lord, 
art, &c. So this Verſe gives a reaſon of the former, as wellas the 
firſt branch of it, why God ſuffers the wicked to flourith ſo long, 
becauſe he is not like Man, of ſhort and uncertain continuance here, 
to whom a little time is long and tedious, who therefore 1mpatt- 
ently expe&s the time of vengeance, and fears leſt the offender 
ſhould eſcape it ; whereas God is unchangeable and everlaſting,and 
therefore long-ſuffering without any inconvenience, and the longeſt 
time of the proſperity of the wicked is but ſhort and inconſiderable 
in his Eyes, a thouſand years being in his {ht but as yeſterday, when it is 
pa#, Pſal. go. 4. and they can never eſcape out of his hands: as alſo 
of the latter branch ofthe Verſe, why the wicked ſhall be deſtroyed 
for ever, becauſe God lives and reignsfor ever to execute that juſt 
ſentence of everlaſting puniſhment which ns hath pronounced a- 
gainſt them. | 


9 For lo &, thine enemies, O LORD, for lo, thine 


enemies ſhall periſh : all the workers of iniquity ſhall be 
ſcattered. 

k He repreſents their deſtruK&ion as preſent, and as certain which 
the repetition of the words implies: ; 

Io Burt my horn ſhalt thou exalt / like the horn of an 
unicorn #2 : I ſhall be anointed » with freſhoil 0. 

/ But as for me, and other righteous perſons ( of whom he faith. 
the ſame thing, wv. 12. ) we: ſha!] be advanced to the height of ho- 
nour, and true and laſting felicity» m Of which ſee on Deut. 33» 
T7. 7 I ſhall have great cauſe of rejoycing and teſtifying my joy Þy 
anointing my ſelf, as the manner was in Feaſts and all joyful Sv- 
lemnities. o Sweet and uncorrupted- 


1iMine eye alſo fhall ſee my defire p on mine enemies; 

and mine ears ſhall hear q my defire of the wicked that 
riſe up againſt me. 

p To wit, in the ruine of thine and mine incorrigible Enemies. 


q9Whar 1 do nortſee my felf,E thaitunderſtand by the certain reports 
of others 


12 * The righteous ſhall flouriſh like the palm-tree z: 
he ſhalt grow like a cedar s in Lebanon. : 
r Which 1s conſtantly green and flouriſhing, and fruitful, © Car. ! 


'H ofig.. 


| and Glory of thy Houſe. Or it becometh thee who dwelleft in 


| fulfil all thy Promiſes: 


L M $ Pal: 


7- 8. and growing even when it is preſſed down; and- ſo is a fit 
emblem. oft a juſt mans perſon and condition. See Revel. 7. 9» 
s Which ſpreads it ſelf wide, and grows very high and ſtrong, and 
is very durable, and in ſome fort incorruptibles. 


13 Thoſe that be planted # in the houſe of the LORD 
« ſhalt flouriſh inthe courts x of our Gods ... © + 
: Wham God by his Gracious Providence and Holy Spirit hath 
planted or fixed there. - & 7: 8- In its Courts, . which are a part of tlie 
Houſe, and oft come under that name in Scripture. And by this 
Houſe he means the Church. of God, ; whereof -all juſt perſons are 
real and living members., » Which he mentions rather than the 
Houſe, becauie he ſpeaks. nor here of the Prieſts, bur of all juſt 
men, who were permitted to come no further than into the 
Courts. BEET i ing nee | | 
14 They ſhall ſtill brip forth fruit in old agey : they. © +l 
ſhall be fat, and | flouriſhing: _ © - © | + Heb: 
Y Whea their natural ſtrength decayeth, it-ſhall be renewed ; 84%. | 
their laſt days ſhall be their beſt days, wherein as they ſhall grow i 
in grace, ſo they ſhall increaſe in comfort and bleſiedneſs. 

15 To ſhew that the LOR D #s upright z : he js my 
rock, and there is no- unrighteoufneſs in him. | 

z This glorious work of God in compenſating the ſhort proſpe- 
rity of the wicked with everlaſting punithments, and of exchang- 
ing the momentany Aflitons of the Juſt with Eternal Glory and. 
Happinels, doth clearly demonſtrate that God is juſt and blamele(s 
in allthe ditpenſations of his Providence in the World. 


ESAL XCHL 
The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm contains an aflerticn or declaration of Gods ſovers 
raign and univerſal dominion in and over the whole Werld. 
Which 1s here ſer forth, partly for the comfort of Gods Church and 
People againſt all the atfſaults of their numerous and potent Advers 
faries ; and partly to give an intimation and aſſurance of the accom- 
pliſhmenr of that great Promiſe of the Kingdom of the Meflias; 
which was not to be confined to the /ſraelites, bur to be extended 
ro all the Nations of the Earth ; which, though wonderful in ou 
Eyes, . the Supream and Almighty Ruler of the World coul 
eaſily effeft. This and the ſix following Pſalms, according to th 
opinion of the Hebrew Doors, belong to the times of the Meſ. 
fias. £ | 
A deſcription of the Majeſty, 1. and Power of God, 2 
of Gods Word, and neceſſity of Holineſs in Gods Houſe, 5. : 
, Tz LORD reigneth 4,*he is clothed with maje- 
ſty ; the LORD is cloathed with ſtrength þ *PC.96. 
wherewith he hath girded himſelf the worldalſo is eſta- & 97-1 
bliſhed, that it cannot be moved c. © *PC10, 
a He is the King and Governour, not only of !-ae!, but of the | 
whole World, 3s the laft clauſe of the Verſe expounds it : and ace - 
cordingly he will in his due time ſet up his Empire over all Na- 
rions, 1n the hands of his Son the Meſflias. 6 That Majeſty an 
Strengh which he always had in himſelf, ke how hath and will 
ſhortly muck more ſhew it forth in the Eyes of all people. c The 
effe& of Gods Government of the World thall be this, that he will 
order and over-rule all the Confulions, and Diviſions, and Hoſtili- 
ties in the World, ſo as they ſhall end in an orderly, peaceable and 
happy ſettlement, and in the ereCtion of that Kingdom of the Mef- 


flias, which cannever be moved. 


re... | 
abliſhed F of old ; thou art from *PC;s5 
T Heb; 


4. The cortaint) 


2 * Thy throneis eſt 
everlaſting 4. | | 
d And this Kingdom of thine is ho new or up-ſtart Kingdom, as from the 
1t may ſeem to the ignorant World, but the moſt antient of all 
Kingdoms, being from Everlaſting to Everlaſting, although it was 
not always equally manifeſted in the World. —_ 
| 3 The floudse have lifted up, O LORD, the flouds 
have lifred up their voice:the flouds lift up their waves f. 
\ e The Enemies ofthy Kingdom, who are oft compared to flouds 
for their numbers, force, rage, &«c. See Iſs. 8. 7, 8. and 17. 12,13. 
Fer. 46. 7, 8. f Have both by their words and ations made oppo- 
ſition againſt it. ; 
4T he LORD on high is mightier than the noiſe of 
many waters ; yes, than the mighty waves of the ſea g. 
&£ The King of Heaven istoo ſtrong for all Eartbly Porentates, 
and will ſubdue them under his feer. $5 
Thy teſtimonies 4 are very ſure : holineſs becom- 
eth thine houſe 3, O LORD, + for ever. + Heb. 4 
\ + i.e. Thy words ; either, x. Thy Precepts, which are com- ,,, b of 
| monly called Gods tefimonires, And ſo having ſpoken of Gods Fwd 
| Kingdam, he now ſheweth that the Laws of thar Kingdom are juſt, *7** 
and true, and holy ; which is a ſingular commendation 6f it. Or, 
| 2. Thy Promiſes,as may be gathered from the following words, are 
' ſure, or true, or faithful; which Attribute properly belongs, and 
every where in Scripture is aſcribed ro Promifes rather than co Pre- 
| cepts- And the Promſes no lefs than the Precepts are Gods Tefimg- 
| nies, or the witneſſes or declarations of his mind and Will to Man- 
kind. And he ſeems here to ſpeak of thoſe great and precious 
promiſes concerning the ere&ion and eſtabliſhment of his kingdom 
in the World by the Mefſias. Which faith he, are infallibly true, 
and ſhall certainly - de accompliſhed'in thy time. # This is to be 
underſtood, either. 1. Of Gods Church or People, who axe 
ſomerimes called Gods Houſe, and whoſe buſineſs and delight is in 
God Houſe and Service there performed. So rhe ſenſe is, Ir be- 
| cometh thy people to be holy in all their approaches to thee, and 
worſhippings of thee. Or rather, 2, Of God himſelf, who dwelr 
in his tloute, from whence he gave f:xth his Oracles, and where 
all his teſtimonies were kept upon record. This ſeems better to 
ſuit with the Contexr, the buſineſs of this Pſa!m being rather to de- 
{cribe the dominion of God than 'the duty of his Feop'!e. And 
ſo the ſenſe ſeems to be this; Holineſs is rhe conſtant Ornament 


thy Houte to be holy in all thy' words and attions ; ant there- 
fore thy teſtimonies are very ſure, and thou wilt undoubtedly 
For hoiine/s ſeems to be here taken for Gods 
faithfulnels, as jt is £/al. 60.6. and 8g. 35. or which comes fo 
4&6 4 tis 


] 


WHres. 


þ ſbine 


D 


. . 
N. 18. 


fal. 10. 
; I 2. 
59. 7+ 


Pf. 92.6. 


i = 
© 

E - 
10 


D. I2, 


2 Cor- 
3+ 20, 


xav. 


the ſame thing, 
ly uſed. 


ked and cruel Tyrants and Enemies againſt whom he prays for the 
divine aid. . 
The Pſalmiſt calling to God for Juſtice, 1 


pou () 


thy ſelf. 


2. x. proteCor of the Righteous, and the declared Enemy of all wicked- 
* © neſs and wicked men. 


P'.S 4 
for his Jaftice or Righteouſneſs, whereby he is ob- 
iged to make good all his promiſes,as that word is very common- 


PSAL. XCIV. 
The ARGUMENT. 


He matter of this Pſalm plainly declares the occaſion of ir to 
be the oppreſlions and perſecutions of Gods people by wiC 


4. complainsth of _— 
and impiety, 5 7. Teacheth Fools Gods Providence, 8 —11.SHew- 
eth Shebleſſa effets of Affition, 12, 13. and a promiſe of his preſence 
with the afflied, 14, 15. He is their ſupport, 16——23- ; 
LORD + God to whom vengeance belongeth # : 
O God, to whom vengeance belongeth + ſhew 


s Asthou art the ſupreme Judge of the World, the Patron and 


"2 * Lifc up thy ſelfb, thou * judge of the earth: ren- 


der a reward to the proud. 
þ Either, r. Aſcend thy Tribunal to pronounce the Sentence. 
Or 2. Ariſe from thy ſeat, and beſtir thy ſelf ro puniſh thy proud 


Enemies, at it here follows. 
"LORD, im lobe ſhall the wicked, how long (hall 


the wicked triumph : + 
4 How leng (ball they utter c, and ſpeak hard things 
2! andall the workersof iniquity boait themſelves e. 
c Or pour forth freely, conſtantly, abundantly,as a Fountain doth- 


EG M$ 
12 * Bleſled :s the man whom thou chaſteneſt, O *Heb. 
LORD, and teacheſt him outof thy law 4. 12.11, 
q And whereas theſe ungodly perſons eſteem themſelves the only 
happy men, and conclude thy people to be of ail men the moſt 
miſcerable,becauſe of the manitoid peritecutions and afflitions which 
they commonly ſuffer, and upon this account diſpute againft thy 
Providence, ſo far is theiropinion from the truth, that the contra- 
ry is moſt certain, that asthetr proſperity is a real miſchiefto them, 
ſo thoſe afflittions of good men, which are accompanied with divine 
++ png are great and true Bleſſings to them, themſclves being 
JuUdAgese 
13 That thou mayeft give him reſt from the days of 
adverſity, until the pit be digged for the wicked 7. 
7 For their preſent and ſhort troubles prepare them for, and lead 
them to true reſt and bleſſedneſs, whilſt the teeming felicities of the 
wicked make way for thoſe tremendous Judgments which God hath 
prepared for them. 
14 * Forthe LORD will not caſt off his people S, * 1 Sam. 
neitherwill he forſake his inheritance. I2. 22, 
5 Though God may for a time corrett his people, yet he will Rom. 17, 
not utterly deſtroy them. as he will their Enemies, but will in his 1» 2+ 
time put an end to all their Calamiries. 
T5 But judgment ſhall return unto righteouſneſs : : 
and all the upright in heart + (hall follow it «. {Heb. hal 
t Butalthough the World is now full of unrighteous Judgments, # afteri., 
andeven God himſelf ſeems not ro judge and adminiſter things juſt- 
ly, becauſe he ſuffers his people ro be oppreſſed, and the wicked to 
triumph over them, yet the ſtate of things ſhall be otherwiſe orde- 
red, God will declare himſelf to be a righteous Judge, and will ad- 
vance and eſtabliſh Juſtice in the Earth, and eſpecially among his 


waters, as this Hebrew word ſignifies. d Grievous, and inſolent, 
and intolerable words againſt thee and thy people ; blaſphemous, 
malicious, contemptuous and minatory words. c Boat of their in- 
vincible power, and proſperous ſucceſs in their wicked deſigns. 

5 They break in pieces thy people, O LORD, and 
afi& thine heritage f. ; 
_ f Thoſe righteous perſons whom thou haſt choſen for thy portion 
or inheritance. | 


People. « To wit, juſt Judgment reſtored ; they will all approve 


; of ir, and imitate this Jultice of God in all their ations, whereas 
| the wicked will ſtill do wickedly, as is ſaid Dan. 12, 10. and in @ land 


and ſtate of uprightneſs will deal unjuſtly, and will net behold the majeſty of 
the Lord, as itis 1a. 26. 10. Oth. ſball folew him, to wit, the Lord: 
expreſſed v.14. whoſe att it is to bring Judgment to Juſtice. Whilſt 
the wicked forſake God, theſe will cleave to him, as being confi- 
dent that, howſocever he may ſuffer them to be oppreſſed for a ſeaſon, 
yet he will in due time plead their cauſe, and bring forth their 


6 They ſlay the widow and the ſtranger, and mur- 


der the fatherleſs g. £ 
g Whom common humanity oblidged them to ſpare, and pity 
and relieve. 


7 * Yetthey ſay, The LORD (ball not ſee 5: nei- 
ther ſhall the God of Jacob # regard er. 


þ Their impunity and proſperity intheir impious and barbarous 
praQtices makes them ready to doubt of, or to deny the Providence 
"of God in the government of his Church and of the World. i So 
they call him ſarcaſtically, He who taketh that name to himſelf, 
but hath no regard to his people, bur gives up bis Jacob to the ſpoil], 
and to the rage of their Enenyes. , 


8 * Underſtand, ye brutiſh among the people &: and 


ge fools, when will ye be wile ! : 

k You who though you think your ſelves the wiſeſt of men, yet 
in truth are the moſt brutiſh of all people ; for the Hebrews oft ex- 
preſs their ſuperlativesin this manner, as Prov. 3. 30.Cant. 1.8.0. 
You that have only the ſhape, bur not the underſtanding, of a man 
in you. 

9 * He that planted] the ear, ſhall he not hear »» : 
he that formed » theeye ſhall he not ſee ! 

I The word is very emphatical,ſignifying the excellent ſtruQture 
of the Ear, orthe ſeveral Organs or Inſtruments belonging to the 
ſenſe of Hearing, and the exa& poſition and firm fſertlement of all 
tboſe parts in their proper places ; which is juſtly admired by a)l 
that underſtand it. m He muſt neceſſarly hear. 'The truth of the 
inference depends upon that evident and undeniable principle in 
reaſon, that nothing can give to another that which it hath nor et- 
ther formally or more eminently in it ſelf, and that no effett can 
exceed the vertue of its cauſe. » By which word he ſeems to inti- 
mate the accurate and moſt curious workmanſhip of the Eyewhich 
is obſerved by all that write upon that ſubjeQ. 


10 He that chaſtiſeth the heathen, ſhall not he corret 
2n'he that teacbeth man knowledge », ſhall not he know 0 . 
» Hewho, when he pleaſeth, can and doth puniſh the Gentiles 
or Nations oftke World, is he not able to puniſh you for your 
wicked ſpeeches and ations ? Or, He that p ay wr or teacheth ( as 
. this word ſignifies, Prov. g. 7. Iſa. 8. 11, &c. ) thenations ( not 0n- 
Iy the Jews bur all other people, all mankind, as this clauſe 1s ex- 
plained by the next,h+ that teacheth man knowledge) ſball not he correft or 
- reprove ? and therefore muſt not he diſcern and know all your hard 
+ ove gp and wicked aQtions? "Thus the conſequent ſeems to be put 
or the antecedent, as is frequent in Scripture, and that not with- 
out emphaſis, to imply that God does not know their fins with a 
ſimple or ſpeculative knowledge, but ſo as to proceed upon that 
knowledge to judge aud puniſh them. = By giving him under- 
ſanding, and the knowledgeof many excellent things by the Light 
of Nature. « To wit, mens thoughts, of which ſee v. 11. and 
their words and ations, of which he ſpoke, wv. 6, 7. Theſe words 
arenot in the Hebrew Text, but are eafily underſtood out of the 
foregoing clauſe. . And the like defeQs we find elſewhere,as 2Sam. 
5. 8. comp. with 1 Chron, 11. 6. epocially in vehement commoti- 
10n 


ons of the mind, when a mans pa ſtops his ſpeech, as it is here, 
and Pſal.6 3. and in other Authors. p T 


1x * The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man p, 
that they are vanity. 

f This is an Anſwer to the foregoing Queſtion, ſhall not he know? 
Yes, he knoweth all things, yea even the moſt = Spry end a the 
thoughts of men; and in particular your atheiſtica] thoughts, and 
_— _ doth he now youf ted protiicg, 

e did not ſee, v. 6, 7. And he knows that they are lly vai 
and fooliſh, and that whilſt. you mock God 11g rp; ence 
in ſuch thoughts, you do not relieve, but only delude your ſelves 


' Vith them. 


which you ſaid | 


Righreouineſs. = E 
16 Who willriſe up for me x againſt the evil doers ? 


or who will ſtand up for me againſt the workers of ini- 
quity £ 
x To defend and help me. T looked hither and thither and cal- 
led to my triends for their help, ſaying, who will, &. But none 
| = _ appeared, but God alone helped me;as he faith in the next 
erſe. 
17 Unleſs the LORD bad been my help,my ſoul had 
[| almoſt dwelt * in filence y. 

y In the place of filence, to wit, the Grave. 

18. Pſal. 88. 13. and 115. 17. 
1v When I ſaid, My foot ſippeth z, 
LORD, held me up. | 

z Iam now upon the point of falling into miſchief and utter de- 

ſtruction. - | 
19 In the multitude of my thoughts « within me, thy 
comforts b delight my ſoul. 

a Wilſt my Heart was filled with various and perplexine thourkt 
this H®rew word ſignifies, and tormented __ 000% Jaw: 0h © 
bout my future ſtate. b Thy promites centained in thy word,and 
ſer home by thy Spirit upon my Soul, and the remembrance of my 
former experiences of thy care and kindneſs to me. Comp. Pſal. 119 
50, 76. | 
20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowſhip with 
thee c, which * frameth miſchief 4 by a law e ! 

c Wilt thou take parr with the unrighteous powers of the Wor!d 
who oppreis thy people ? Ir is true they apr 2 of thy Name, be- 
ing calcd goas,Pſal. 82, 1. but, I know, thou wilt not afford them 
thy Prote&tion and Patronage, but wilt manifeſt thy juſtice and 
diipleaſure againſt them. This ſeems ro have becn one of thoſe ccem« 
fortablc thoughts wherewith the Pſalmiſt delighted his Soul, as he 
now ſaid. 4 Who deviſe wicked devices, and lay heavy irdens 
upon men thar are more righteous than themſelves. e Fither by 
moe of _— og mn decrees which they have made in form 
of Laws : Or by falle pretences of law. Or, againſt 1 agai 
right and the laws both of God and Men. POT ne mo al 

21 They gather themſelves together againſt the ſoul 
of the righteous, andcondemn the innocent blovd 8. 

f Againſt the Life, asthe Soul commonly ſignifies, and as the nexr 
clauſe explains it. They are not ſatisfied with the ſpoil of their 
Eſtates, but do alſo thirſt after their Lives. g They ſhed the blood 
of thoſe innocent perſons whom they have wicked ly condemned 
Innocent blood 1s here put for the Blood or Life of an innocent perſon, 
aSitisalſo 1 Sam, 19. 5. Mat. 27. 4. P g 


22 But the LORD is my defence : 
the rock of my refuge. 


23 And * he ſhall bringupon them their own Iniqui- + pr, 7.16. 
ty þ, and ſhall cut them off in their own wickedneſs ;; © 
gea, the LORD our God & ſhall cut them off. 

h i. e. The fruit and puniſhment of their Sins. 7. Either in the 
midſt of their Sins : Or, by their own wicked Devices the mil- 
chief whereof he will cauſe ro fall upon their own Heads. & The 


God of Jacob, of whom they ſaid that he did not (ce ne 
but now they find the contrary proved to their 9d of ». DEnH 


SAL KCYV 


The ARGUMENT. 


| He Author of this Pſalm was David as is affirmed Heb.4.7. and 
A&A although this Palm be delivered in general terms as an in- 
vitation to mankind to yield unte the true God that praiſe, and 
woerlhip, and obedience, which he requireth and deſerveth, yet it 
ath 


[| Or, 
quickly. 
*PC,15.17- 


Compare Job 3, 17, 
thy mercy, O 


v Ia. I 0.1, 


and-my God is 


Pſi]. XCvV>+ FT 


. 
4:45: 


"Jp. XCV. 


#4 M S. P/al. 


derneſs, and of deſtroying the Egyptians. For not many more of 

Gods great works were done before they came to Meribah: 

_ 19 Forty years long was I grieved with this genera- 
tion E, and faid, Ir js a pzople that do err in their hearts 
7: and they have not known « my ways x 

5 Or rather, wich that Gen:ration which then lived, who were 
your Anceſtors. £ They do not only ſin through infirmity and the 
violence and ſurprizal of Temptations. bur their hearts ire unſin- 
ccre and inconſtant, and given to backſliding, and therefore there 
15no hopes of their amendments Compare Pal. 58. 8. u Or they 
do not know, to wit, with a practical and uſeful Knowledge, as 
that word commonly notes in Scripture. They did not rightly 
underſtand, nor duly conſider, nor 1eriouſly lay to hearr, They 
remain 1gnorant after all my teachings and diſcoveries of my ſelf 
; fo them. x Either, 1. my, Laws or Statutes, which are freq ently 
; Called Gods ways. Or rather, 2. my works, as it is expreſſed v, 


F-A 


hath a ſpecial reference to th? Days of the Meſſiah; of which 

Chriſtians have no great reaſon to doubt, ſeing it is ſo underſtood 

Ly the Hebrew Dettorsthemfſeives; as alſo by the Apoltle, Heb, 

3.7, ©*c- and eſpecially Heb. 4. 3,4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. where he not on- 

ly cxpounds ir of thoſe times, but proves that it cannor be meant 

of the former times and State of the Church. 

An Exhirtation to praiſe God, 1, 2. for his great Power, Goodneſs, and 
tenderneſs ro his people, 3 7. A caution againſt haraneſs of 
heart, 8. it grieves the Lord, 9, 10. God's threatning agamft it confir- 
med with an Oath, 11. 


Come, ler us @ ſing unto the LORD ; let us make 


a joyful noiſe tothe rock of our ſalvation. 
a He ſpeaks ro the Iſraehbtes, whoſe backwardnefs to this work in 
the times of the Goſpel, was foreſeen by the Spirit of God. which 
{Heb pre- dictated this Pſalm. : 
2 Let us + come before his preſence b with thankſgi- 


vent bis , 
face. ving, and make a joyful noiſe unto him with pſalms. | 9- which alſo are commonly fo called. They did not know, nor 
1.37. 33- 6 which he will then afford us in a ſingular manner in his Son ir es and remember thote great things which I had wroughtfor 
the Meſſiah, in and by whom he will be viſibly preſent with the | © = DT c 7 i +.+ + Heb. | | 
Sons of men. T1 ato whom I ilware in my wratn y, T that the eb. | 
ON _ 2 For * the LORD #s a great God, and a great king | ſhould not enter into my reſt z. - oy enced 
Fo Fo - into myrefil 


*P(868, above * all gods c. q » Being full of juſt wrath againſt them, I paſſed an irreverſible 
c Above all that are accounted and called gods; Angels, and | 2<Rtence, and confirmed it by an Oath ; of which we read Num. 

Earthly Potentats, and eſpecially the falſe gods of the Heathens, ng M Into the promiſed Land, which is called the ref, Deus. 12. 

which upon Chriſts coming into the World were ſtruck dumb, and > ru allo r Chron, 23. 25» Pſal. 132, 14. And this Hiſtory the 

could no more deliver their Oracles, as Pletarch and other Hea- ſ, almiſt propounds to the Men of his Age, not as amatter of meer 

thens obſerved with admiration, nor deceive the World, but were £ eculation, but as an Inſtruction for all atter Ages,and particular ly 

forced to give place to the true God, and to the knowledge and or thoſe Iſraelites who ſhould live in the times of the Meſſastoar 


worſhip of him alone, which was propagated among all Nations _y thould rake heed of falling aſter the ſame example of unbelief, as 
by the Goſpel. the Apoltle infers from this place, Heb, 4. 11. 


\+Heb. 'w 4 Þ In his hand dare the deep places e of the earth :  PSATL. XCVI. 

zlſe, || the ſtrength of the hills f zs his alſo. : The ARGUMENT. 

| Or, the 4 Under his Government.  e Thoſe parts which are far out of b His Pſalm was compoſed by David upon occaſion, or at the 
brights of ens ſight and reach, and much more thoſe that are at Mens dif- time of the bringing of the Ark of God into the Tabernacle 


which. David had prepared for it in Zion, as may be gathered by 
comparing it with 1 Chron. 16. 7, 23, 24, Ov. where almoſt the 
whole Pſalm is to be found, But as the Ark was an evident Type of 
the Meſſiah, which David very well knew, as hath been oft noted 
before ; ſo David's thoughts, or at leaſt the deſign of God's Spirit, 
which indited this Pſalm, was extended beyond and above it, even 
to the timesof the Meſsiah, and to his glorious and uniyerſal Kinge 
dom, in which not the Jews only but the heathen Nations alto 
ſhould worſhip the true God, and kiſs his Son the Meſiah, 


thehils are yofal. t The ſtrongeſt or higheſt Mountains are under his feet 
and at his difpoſal. The ſenſe of the Verſe is, All the parts of the 
Earth, whether high or low, are ſubjeC to his power and provi. 
dence, and therefore it is not ſtrange if all rhe Nations of the Earth 
be brought to the Acknowledgement of him, and if the Gentiles 
receive his Goſpel. : ; 

t Heb. 5 + The Sea is his, and he made it: and his hands for- 


»hye th! ned the dry lands. 


T_ 6 O come, let us worſhip, and bow down: let us | 4! the Inhabirants of the Earth and Sea are called to praiſe the Lord, for. 
kneel g before the LORD our maker, his great Honour and Majefly, 1 7+ for his wiſe governing the 
g By which expreſſions he teacheth, that even in Goſpel- World, 8 ——10. Heaven and Earth are called to rejoice before him, . 
times God is to be glorified and worſhiped as well with the Mem- for 29s righteous Judgment, 11----13. | "0 
bers of our Bodies as with the faculties of our Souls. z () SINg untothe LORD a new ſong & 2 ſing unto 23; _ | 
rags. 7 Forhe 7s our God 6, and * we are the people of his the LORD all the earth 5. + | 
&83.1. & paſture 3, and the ihcep of his hand k; * to day 7 if ye | ' Upon this new and great occaſion, not the removal of the Ark, 


wherein there was nothing new bur an inconfiderable circumſtance 
of Place, and that not yer fixed; but the coming of the Meſsiahg 
and the confirming of the New Covenant by his blood, and the 
| Calling of the Gentiles. 6 All the Nations of the Earth, who 
thall then partake of thole great Bleſdings and priviledges 
which are now peculiar to 1rael. Hog” 
_ 2 Sing unto the LORD, bleſs his name : ſhew forth 
his ſalvation c from day to day. 
c That great work of the Redemption and falvation of the World 
by the Metſsias. h 
3 Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders 


among all people 4. | 
4 You who ſhall be called out cf all the Heathen Nations to the 


100.3 willhearhis Voice ms. 

* Hebr3. + Ina peculiar manner ; and therefore it will be moſt unreaſo- 

1&4. 7- nable ard abominable for us to forſake him when the Gentiles ſub- 
mit to his Law. 7 Whom he feedeth and keepeth in his own proper 
Pafure, or in the Land which he hath appropriated ro himlelf. 
k Which are under his ſpecial Care and Conduct or Government, 
which is oft expreſſed by zhe hand, as Numb, 4+ 28. and 31. 49. 
Judg. 9. 29. 1 i, e Foitiiwith or preſently, as this word ts uſed 
Deut. 4. 4, $: and 37. 9. Joſ+ 22. 16, 18, ©, Orthis day, in this 
ſolemn day of Grace or of the Goſpel; which the Pfalmilt ſpeaks 
of as preſent; according to the manner of the Prophets, And 
this word, though belonging to the following Clauſe, as appears 
from Hz:b. 3. 7. may ſeem to be thus placed, to ſhew rhar it had 


. Pk 33: H 


RC 


: 


: 


| 
l 


1 : 
jt 


Coil - EE BEES. > 504% SE RPE WE WALLET 


_—— 1M 


1 
| 


1Chkt:16 


BOM OS Tc; oe ERIE, 0 WORN 


j 


ſome reſpe& to the foregoing words altvy. For the Senſe of the 


place may be this, We (Jews) are or ſhall be the people of his* 


Paſture and the ſhzzp of his hand, God will ſtill own us for his people 
th:s day, i. e. In the days of the Mcſſhah, if -h:s day, or in that 
time, we ſhall hear his woice, Otherways God will reject us and re- 
ceive the Gentiles in our ſtead. m If you will hearken to his call 
and obey his further Commands. Which may be added as a necef- 
fary caution and admonition to the Ilraelites, rhat they might un» 
derſtand and conlider that Gods preſence and Favour was not ab- 
ſolute!y, necelfarily, and evecrlaſtingly fixed to them, as they were 
very apt to believe, but was ſuſpended upon the condition ot their 
continued obedience, which if they violated, they thould be re- 
jected, and the Gentiles performing it, ſhould be received ro his 
mercy. And this Claule may. b: connected either, 1. with irh& 
former words, as the condition ef rheir intereſt in God as their 


God, as was now faid. Or 2. witch the following Vecle, if you | 
. beauty are in his ſan&nary b. 


are willing to hearken to Gods call delivered by his Son, take the 


Tr 7, following counſel. 


©, - 


eng iln, 


| | 8 Hardennot your hearts n, * as # the F provocation 
Nu 14-22, e, ond as in the day of temptation p in the wilderneſs : 
. 13. | 
+ Du 6. 
? Heb.co the truth of the Goſpel. o As you did in that bold and \ 
conteſt with God in the Wilderneis, Or, As in Mer.bah,which was | 
lez, give unto the LOR D & glory and ftrengt 
was called Maſſah, as is evident from Exid. 17. 7. and Deur. 33» 8, Pies 8 Qory 5 h. . 
pIn the day in which you tempted 12e. Or, as in the day of Maſſah, | 
' it may be intimated. that this great Bleſsing of Sa 
. ſhould not be imparted to whole Nations, but. only to ſome per- 
i-ſons raken 2ut of every pe'ple and Nation, ag it is expreſſed, Rewvel. 
' 5.9, Or 2. more largely for nations, as it is taken Gen. 12. 3. Fer- 


7 By wilful diſobedience and ovRinat unbelicf rebelling againſr 


the proper name of the place where that happened and which alſo 


5. e. when you were'at Mrſſahe 
9 When q your fathers tempted me, 


ſaw r my works s. 

q Or, In whichploace, Which may belong either to Mer:bah and 
Maſſah ; Or to the Wilderneis laſt mentioned. Or, Swre!y, as this 
word is oft uſed in Scripture, as hath been obſerved once nd again, 
r Or, Although, or after that they ſaw or had ſeen, Which is added 
aS a juſt and great aggravation of their unbelief after ſuch a ſenſible 
and evident experience of Gods power and goodnets to them. 5 
Both my works of mercy which gave them abundant cauſe to truſt 
me ; and my works of Juſtice, for which they had rea!on to fear 
and pleaſe me. Heb; my work, to wit, that great and ſrupendous 
wcrk of bringing' my pecple out of Ezyp: with a ſtrong hand, 


proved me, and 


and of conducting them ſately through the Red Sea into the Wil- 


knowledge of God and Chriſt, publiſh this glorious and wonderful 
work among all the Heathen Nations to whom you belong or may 
come, 


4 For the LORD 3s great, and greatly to be praiſed: 
* he 15 to be feared above all gods'e. 

e The Gods of the nations, as the next verſe expounds it. 

5 For all the gods of the nations are idols f 5 but the 
LORD made the heavens. LHR, 

f Or, norhings, as they are called, 1 Cor. 8, 4+ and 10. 19. or 
vain things, as the word ſigniites, and is tranſlated by others. The 
' ſenſe is, Though they have uſurped the name and place of rhe 
' long Majeſty, yet they have nothing of his nature or Power in 
thein. : 

6 Honour and majeſty are befo;e himg : ſtrength and 


g 7.e. In his preſence, like Beams ſhot out from his Face, who 
is the Son of Righteuuſneſs There 15 an unconceivable glory and 
majeſty in his countenance and in the place of his preſence. b Or, 
in his holy place, where he records his name, and affords his preſenc-.. 


16: the light, and reliſting the Holy Ghoſt and his clear diicoveries of There are the manifeſtations of Gods Power and grace, or good- 
wicked i; nefs, and all his perfections- 


7 Give unto the LORD, Q ye kindreds of the peo- 


# Or, O ye families of the peop!z of the World,” , And the word. 
families may be underſtood cither 1. ſtrictly and properly'; and fp 
vation by Chriſt 


25.9. Zech. 14. 18, and ſoit may be implyed, that not only fame 

few of the Heathen peop!e ſhould be brought to the acknowledge, 
ment and worſhip of the true God,as was uſual in the times of 
the Old Teſtament, but that whole Nations ſhould come in rothe 

nay ay of God together. k Afcribed to him, or acknowledged to 

be in him. | | : 


* 


bring an offering and come into his courts 4, _ _, 
Into the Courts . of his houſe. Bur under this- one part 
worlhip he comprekends the 


5 A _ ſpeaks 


8 *Give unto the LORD the glory +4#: »nzo his name: *pr; 2g.7, 


22 Wy 
of + Het: of: 
whole worſhip of God 3 and he #7 #ae, 


HL a FRA SE wa tn.” 


— 


*Pſ: 95: 7 


6 "Ih , 
- WL] ps, A? . 4 5 \ 


, 
wh 


WM. XCVII. PS 4 


| of legal worſhip, a> the prophets elſewhore do, as Mal. 1. 11. and 

C 110.3 elſewhere. : EE 

=. ice. 9 O worfhip the LORD* | inthe beauty 04 holineſs 

our #2 2 fear before him all the earth. 

\fuary. m Either in the holy place which he ſhall appoint co that end : 

| or, clothed with all rhote holy Ornaments, thoſe giits and graces, 

[ which are neceflay and required in Gods worthip. 

Pſ93.1. 10 Say among the heathen », that * the LORD reign- 

197-1. ethos: the world alſo (hall be. eftabliſhed chat it ſhall nor 

be moved p : he ſhall judge the people righteouſly 4. 

» You converted Gentiles, declare thisto thoſe who yet remain 

N in the darkneſs of Heatheniſm. o That God hath now fer up his 

[ Throne and Kingdom in the World. p And as that Kinzdem ſhall 

' neveve deftroyed but ſhall ſtand for ever, a$ is faid Don 2. 44, ic the 
Nations of the World ſhall by the means bf irenjoy an eſtablithed 
and laſting peace ; which is every where mentioned as one of the 
Bleſſings which the Meffias ſhall give to the World, as P/l, 72. 
3, 7. 1ja. 9.6, 7. and 66. 12. Mic. 5-5. Zech, 9 10. 9q He ſhall 
not abuſe his invincible power and eſtabliſhed Dominion to the 
oppretsion of his people, as other Princes frequently do, but ſhall 
govern them by the Rules of Juſtice and Equity, which is the only 
foundation of a true and ſolid Peace» Sce Ys. 32.17. 

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad 


735 * let the ſea roar, and the fulneſs thereof. 

r Tris a figure called Proſopopeia, whereby he ſignifies the great 
feliciry of thoſe times, which thall be ſuch, that even thoſe liveleſs 
Creatures would teſtifie their Joy and thankfulnefs for it, it they 
were in a capacity ſo to do. 

12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein.: 


then ſhall all the trees of the wood rejoice, 
| 13 Before the LORD 5s ; for he cometh, for he co- 
Rev. 19« meth ; to judge the earth z : he* ſhall judge the-world 


” with righteouſnels, and the people with his truth «. 
5 Atthe preſence and approach of their Lord and Maker. © To 
take to himſe:f that power and authority which beiongs to him, to 
ſer up his Throne and Dominion among all the Nations of the 
Eirth. « Or, m his faithfulneſs, r. e. fo as he hath promiſed to do. 
He will certainly and abundantly fulfil all Gods promiſes made 


ro his people. 
PSAL. XCVI.L 
5 The ARGUMENT. 
His Pſalm ſcems to have both the ſame Author and the ſame 
ſcope withrthe former. And although the Plalmiſt mighr 
take occahtion to penit from thoſe ſignal manifeſtations of God's 
power and Righreouſneis on his behalf and againſt his Enemies, 
yet he had a further aim in ir, even at the coming of the Meſvias, 
which he here deſcribes. And whereas there are two comings of 
Chriſt plainly difiinguiſhed in the New Teſtament, theſe are but 
confuſedly mentioncd in the Old Teſtament: and the Prophets 
'ſomertimes ſpeak of his firſt coming in words and Phraſes, which 
ſeem more properly to agree to the ſecond, as Mal. 3. 1,92. and 4. 
I, 2, Burt whatſoever tie Pfalmiſt deſigned or underſtood, this is 
certain, That the Holy Ghoſt meant the laſt Clauſe of ve 7. of 
Chriſt, as is affirmed Heb 1. 6. and therefore it is more than pro- 
'bable, that all the reſt of the Pſalm is to be underſtood of him and 
of his coming and Kingdom, 


"A deſcrivtion of the Majefty of Gods Kingdom, 1 = 6. The Church 
rejoiceth at his Juſtice and Judgment upon T&olaters, 9 ——y. with an 
Exhortation to Godlineſs and ſp:ritual rejoicing, 19 =——— 12. 

HE LORD reigneth 4, let the earth rejoice : let 


the F mulcitude of iſles b be glad thereof. 

a See on Pſal. 96. 10. b The Gentile Nations, as this word be- 
ing uſed, 7a. 42-4. is expounded, Mat.'12. 21 even thoſe which 
are moſt remote from Judza, ( then the only ſcat of God's people 
and worſhip ) from which they were divided by the Sea, or to 
which they uſually went by Sea : ſuch places being commonly cal- 
led 1/tes in Scripture, as Gen. 10. 5. Ta, 11, 11. and 66. 19. Which 
being mentioned, becauſe there might be ſome doubt about them, 
It is ſufficiently implyed,. that thote Countries which were nearer 
to them ſhould unqueſtionably partake of the ſame priviledge. 
*pſ89.14 2 Cloudsand darkneſs are round about him c: *righte- 
JOr, E/a- ouſnels & judgment d are the ||habitation e of his throne. 
biiſhment, © A dark Cloud doth encompaſs him. W herein he ſeems to al- 
"or, place. Jude to that datk Cloud in which God did Anciently ſo often ma- 

_ _nifeſt his preſence for the comfort of his Sain's, and for the terror 
_ and puniſhment ofevil-doers. the deſign of theſe words is to de- 
ſcribe either 1. the depth and unſearctableneſs of Gods Judgments. 
Or, 2. the obſcurity ot Chriſts coming, that the Divine Majelty did 
vail himſeif with tleſh, and came not with that outward ſplendour 
which the Jews expe&ed. Or rather 3. the rerror of his preſence 
and coming to his Enemies, of which he mazifeſtly ſpeaks in the 
following Verlſes.; and of which the Prophets frequently ſpeak 
when they make mention ofhis coming , as Joel 2. 31, 32+ Mal. 4. 
7. 41.e. Righteous Judgment, or Righteouſneſs in Judgment. e 
Or, the foundation or eſtabliſhment ; for the throne is eſtabliſhed ( and 
the Hebrew Verb there is the ſame from v hence this word here 
comes ) by righteouſneſs, Prov. 16, 12. All his decrees and Admini- 
{trations are grounded upon and managed with Righteouſneſs. 

:. A fire goeth before him, and burned up his ene- 
mies round about f. 


f This fire, and Lightning and Earthquake, and the ſad effeQs of 
them mentioned here, and wv 4, 5+ſignifie thoſe dreadful Judgments 
of God, which ſhould be inflicted upon the Jews and others fo, 
their refuſal and contempc of the Melsias ; which was foretold in 
; the 1 pare and ant i0n teRe in the New Teſtament. 

PRE 1s 11ghrnings enlightned the world pg: the earth 
"x 
"PP77-48 Cw and trembled. | 4 
£288 £ This Phraſe ſignifies not ſo much illumination as Terror and 
Judgments, as appears both from the following words, and from 
the conſtant ule of the phraſe in that tenſe, as Pſal: 18, 14, and 
144. 6, Gre ; 


s 


Pſ.98.7- 


tHeb. ma-« 
or great 
A/7es. 


= 


3 - Fpeaks of the worſhip cf the New Teſtament under the expreſſions | 


' LORD:ar the preſence of theLORD of the wholeearth z, Nab. i, 5: 


E 81 $. 


5 * The hills þ melted like wax at the preſenceof the *Mic. 9+ 


b The ſtrongcſt and loftieſt parts of the Earth, Whereby he 
may underſtand the great Potentats of the World, who ſet them- 
ſelves againſt the Metsias. 4 Whoſe Dominion ſhall not then be 
conilined in Canaan, as now iN a Manner It 15, bur ſhall be enlarged 
ove: the whole Earth. 
6 * The heavens k declare his righteouſneſs : and all *PC.rg. x. 
the people ſee his glory /. 50. 6 
k Either 1. the Thurnders and Lightniags and Tempeſts ſent from 
Heaven to plead his righteous caule againſt his enemies. Or 2. the 
Angels, yea God himſelf from Heaven, who gave manifeſt Teſti- 
mony to the Righteouſneſs of the Meſsias. ! Both Jews and Gen- 
tiles ſhall ſee and feel the glorious effeAs of his coming. 
7 * Confounded bers all they that ferve graven ima- *Ex.20.,, 
ges: that boaſt themfelves of idols : * worſhip him all Lev-26: r. 
- "peak | Deur 5.4, 
 Ler them be aſhamed of their former folly herein, and be © "_ 
thereby brought to deteſt and forſake them, and thoſe who will 
obſtinatly periift in thir impiety and Idolatry, let them be brought 
to. confuſion. Or, -They ſhall be confounded 3 for this may be a pre- 
diction, and nor an Tr:precation. » All you whom the Gentiles 
have made the ObjeRs of their Worſhip, and who are capable of 
giving him Worſhip; which two Qualifications agree principally, 
it nor ſolely, to the Angels of God, whem the Heathens man: teſtly 
worſhiped in their images as an inferiour ſort of gods, of whom 
therefore this Text is expounded, Heb. 1. 6. 
8 Lion o heard p. and was glad, and the daughters 
of Judah q rejoiced ; becauſe of thy judgments, O 
LORD, | 


o Thy people dwelling in Zion, or Jeruſalem and Judah, to whom 
Chriſt came, and among whom the Goſpel was firſt preached Or, 
thy Church and people who both in the prophetical Writings are 
oft called Zion. p The fame of thy Judgments, as the following 
words declare ; the ruin of Idolatry, and the ſetting up the King- 
dom of the Meſsias in the World 9 Particular Churches, or rather 
perions memb-rs of Z/oz. r Not that they took pleaſure in the ru- 
in of others, but becauſe that made way tor the Advancement of 
Gods glory and Chritts Kingdom in the World. 

9 For thou, LORD, art high above all the earth : 
thou art exalted far above all gods s. 

s As thou always wert ſoin truth, ſo thou haſt now proved and 
declared thy ſelf to be ſuch in the Eyes of the whole World, by 
ſubduing them under thy feet. 

Io Ye that iove the LORD 7, * hate evil «: he pre. Pf: 34-14. 
ſerveth the ſouls of his ſaints, he deiivered them our 35-'5* 
of the hands of the wicked x. tt 


t O all you wholove and worſhip the true God and his anointed, 
and rejoicc in the eſtabliſhment of his Kingdom. « Shew your : 
Love to him by your ayhorrency of all IdolJatry, which is ſome- 
times called evil or fn by way of Eminency, and of all other wic- 
kedneſs. x And although you that love the Lord Chriſt and his 
Kingdom will meet with many troubles and perſecutions, yet be 
not diſcouraged, for he will preſerve you in troubles, and in his 
time deliver you out of them all. 

11 * Light is fown z10r the righteous, and gladnels xpp,,,. 
for the upright in heart. bs 

 #. e. Joy and felicity, as this word is uſed Efh.8. 16. Pſal. 112. 

4. and oft elſewhere. z Is prepared or laid up for them, and ſhall 
in due time be reaped by them, poſsibly in this life, but undoub- 
tedly in the next. And therefore bear you afftlittions for Chriſt 
with patience and' cheerfulneſs. 


12 Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous : and give 
chanks || at che remembrance of his hoiineſs 4. 

a In conſideration of his holy and righteous nature and govern- 
ment, or of his faithfulneſs in making good that great promiſe of 
ſending the Metsias into the Wold : for holineſs is ſometimes taken 
for faithfulneſs, which is one part or Branch of it, 

P'S AL. AGTH. 
The ARGUMENT. \ 
| hm matter and ſcop of this Pſa/m is the ſame with the former, 
.4 and 1s anevident prediCtion of the coming of the Melsias, and 
of the blelicd effects thereof. 
A Pſalm. 
The Prophet exharteth Jews, Gentiles, and all the Creatures, to praiſe 
God for bis Truth and Salvation, 1 - 9. 
* Sing unto the LORD a new ſong, for he hath, _. 
done marvellous things: his right hand and his *s £334 


holy arm * hath gotten him the victory 4. —_ 
a God by his own only power hath overcome all difficulties and ,g ye. 
Enemies, and hath in ſpight of all ſer Chriſt upon his Throne and 
propagated his Kingdom in the World. -” 
2 * The LORD hath made known his ſalvalvation gt 
b : his righteouſneſs c hath he |] openly ſhewed in the ,, 1, 


ſight of the heathen. 

b The redemption or ſalvation of the World by the Meſsias: 
which was hitherto reſerved as a ſecret among the Jews, yea was 
notthroughly known and believed by the moſt of the Jews them- 
ſelves. c Either his faithfulneſs in accompliſhing this great pro- 
miſe of ſending the Meſsias ; or his goodnels and mercy oft called 
by this Hebrew word : or the righteouineſs of God or of Chrilt re- 
vealed in the Goſpel. 

He hath remembred his mercy and his truth c to- 
ward the houſe of Iſrael : all the ends'of the earth 4have 
icen e the ſalvation of our God. 

c He hathnow actually given that mercy which he had promiſed 
to the Iſraelites. d All the I.habitants of the Earth from one end - 
to another: e 7. e. Enjoyed it, as this word is oft uled, as hath 
been proved again and again. 


4 Makea joyful noiſe unto the LORD all the ma 
make 


[|Or, tothe 


mgmorial, 


Plal. XCV1tr. 


P 


FP, 


| Or 
holy, 


Plal. þ { » » hl 


*wP{.96-13. 


FPl:93.1 
*Pſ. $0.1. 
t Heb, 
ſtagger, 


*Pſ.g8. 6. 


make a loud noiſe, and rejoice, and ſing praiſe. 

f Becauſe you all do now partak2 of the ſame priviledges with 
the Jews, join with them in worſhipping and praiſing of God. 

5 Sing unto the LORD with the harp z with the 
harp, and the voice of a plalm g. 

g The worſhip of the New Teſtament is here deſcribed, in 
PR_cy taken from the rites of the old, as Pſal 92. 3- and oft clſe- 
WIAETE, 

6 With trumpets, and ſound of cornet : make a joy- 
ful noiſe before the LORD, the king. 

7 Let the ſea roar, and the fulneſs thereof &, the 


world, and they that dwell therein. 

þ All tnoſe Creatures wherewith it is repleniſhed, which by a 
poetical ſtrain are invited to praiſe God.. Sce of this and the next 
Verſes the notes on Pſa. 96. 11, 12, 13. : 

8 Ler the flouds clap heir hands : let the hills bejoy- 
ful together. 

9 Beforethe LORD ;- * for he cometh to judge the 
earth : with Righreouſneſs ſball he judgethe world, and 
and the people with equity. 

F-$ A £4. ACS 
The ARGU ME NT. 
His Pſalm is ſuppoſed ro be Dzvid's, and the matter of it 
ſeems to ſuit to his time, and the ſtate of affairs which then 
was : although as Davia was a Type of Chriſt, fo this Plalm may 
look beyond Dawad unto the Mciilias. But it doth not ſpeak io ful- 

Iy nor clearly of the Mefſiis,-as the foregoing Pſalms do. 

The Pſalm jetteth for:h the weighty power of God in Zion, 1, 2+ God's 
Holineſs a reaſon for our praiſing him, 3. Equity and Righteouſneſs exe- 
cuted in Jacob, 4, The Church exhor:ed by the Example of their Fure- 
fathers, 5 == 8, to'praiſe and magn:fie him in h,s holy hill, g. 

M 6 þ HE LORD reigneth, ler the people # tremble ; 

* he litteth berween the cherubims b, let the earch 


c be f moved d. 

a To wit, ſuch as are enemies to God and to his people.b Upon 
the Ark. See 1 Sam. 4, 4 he is preſent with his people to pro- 
te them, and to puniſh their Enemies. c The: people of the 
Earth, by comparing this Clauſe with rhe former. &d to wit, with 
fear and trembling, as in the former clauſe. 

2 Thz LOKD js great in Zion e, and he 3s high a- 
bove all people f. 

e In the Hebrew Text the words ly in this order, The Lora in Zi- 
01 ( i e. which dwelleth in Zn, as is ſaid Pſal, 9. 11. 1ja- 8 18. 
Joel, 3. 21.) is great. f above all the people of the Earth, of whom 
he ſpake v. 1. who thall exalr themlielves againſt him. 

3 Let them g praiſe thy great and terrible name : for 
it zs holy. 

g To wit, at people laſt mentioned. h For itis not only great 
bur holy, and therefore moſt praiſe-worthy. ; 

4 * The kings ſtrength alſoloveth judgment »: thou 
doſt eſtabliſh equity o ; thou executeſt judgment and 
righteouſnels in Jacob p. 

n# Though his Dominion be abſolute and uncontroulable, and 
his power urreſiitable,, yet he doth nor abuſe it to tyranny and op- 


| preſſion, as the princes of the World commonly do, but tempers 


|| Or; it 3s 
baly, 


and manageth it with righteonſneſs,and not only doth judge juitly, 
bur, which is more, loves to do' ſo. The Kings Frength 1s by a 
known Hebraiſm put for rhe ſtrong, or powerful King. o To wit, in 
all thy proceedings. Equity is thy conſtane and ſtable courle. p 
Amongſt thine own people 3 whom, when they do amiſs, he pu- 
nitheth no lefs than other people, as he notes below wv. 8. where- 
by he ſheweth that he is no reſpeCer of perſons, but a righteous 
and impartial Judge to all ſorts of men. ; 
5 Exaltye the LORD our God, and worſhip at his 
foot-ſtool q: for || he is holy r. 
q Before the Ark, which is ſo called, xz Chr. 28. 2. Pſal. 132-7. 
r Or, rather, for zz, ( ro wit, the Ark) 7s holy: it is conſecrated 
to be a pledge of Gods preſence, and the only place of Gods pub= 
lick worſhip, | 
6 Moſes and Aaron among his prieſts, and Samuel s 
among them that call upon his name 7: they called upon 


the LORD, and he an{wered thems. 

s He prefleth them to perform the duty of praiſing and wor- 
ſhipping God by the example of three eminent perſons who pra- 
Eed this duty, ani that with happy ſucceſs. He reckoneth Mes 
among the prieſts not without Caule, partly becauſe before the in- 
fhrution of the Prieithood he executed that office, Exod. 24, 6. 


Num, 7. and partly becauie he oft interceded ro God for the people; | 
which was a very conliderable part of the prieſts work. See Num. ' 


6, 23, Oc. Joel 2, 179, + Who uſed frequently and ſulemnly to 
intercede with God on the behalf of the people. So the general 
expreſſion is here uſed ſynecdochically for this particular kind of 
prayer : ſuch Synecdoche's being very frequent in Scripture. « 
M'fesr, Exod. 32 and ellewhere; Aaron, Numb. 16. Samuel, 1 Sam. 
7: 9. and r2. 19. Compare Jer. 15. Is 

7 He1pakeunmochem xin the cloudy pillar: they kept 
his reſtimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them y. 

x i e. To ſome of them ; for the expreHon is only indefinite, 


and thereforedoth nor neceflarily reach to all of them ; to Mſes fre | 


quently 5 to Aaron, Ex:d4 19, 24. and 33+ 9, 10, If. Numb. 12. 5. 
And for Sew, he anſwered him if not by words yet really and 
by his Actions, thundering againſt the Philiitios, x Sam. 7. 9, &c. 
which ſuppoicth a Cloud, if not a Cloudy pillar. y Thisis added, 
not only tor their commendation,bur for the Inftruttion of the 1- 
fraclires ; to reach them that God will not hear the Prayersof them 


Who do nor keep his Commandments. . 
3 Thou aniweredit them z, O LORD our God: 


theu waſt a God that forgaveit them &@, though chou 


tookzit vengeance of their j11vecirions 6, | to wit, in the performance of that promiſe to me, 


» 8: £ LM a 


. 


z The Interceſſours before mentioned. # Either 1. Moſes and 
Aaron, who did ſin, and whoſe Sins God did pardon, yet fo that 
he did puniſh them with excluſion from the land of Canaan ; of which 
ſce Numb 20, 12. Deut 32+ 50, 51+ Or rather, ' 2+ the people for 
whom they prayed; which though not exprefled, may be ealily un« 
derſtood from the following werds, and from the Hiſtories to which ' 
theſe words relate. for this forgiving was evidently the effect of 
Gods anſwering the Prayers of the perſons above mentioned. And 
therefore as their Prayers recorded in Scripture were not for the 
pardon of their own ſins, but for the pardon of the peoples ſins, 
ſo this forgiveneſs granted, was for the ſins of the people; And 
whereas the people ate not here mentioned ; it muſt be remembred, 
that in Scripture the Relative is frequently put without the Ante» 
cedent, as it is Namb, 7. 89, and 114. 2. Prov: 14. 26. b This 
clauſe limits and explains the former, Thou didſc forgive the fins 
; Of the people not abſolutely and univerſally, for thou didſt puniſh 
them ſeverely, bur ſo far as not to inflict that total and final de= 
ſtruction upon them which they deſerved, and thou. hadſt threat« 
ned. See Exod. 32. 10, 14, 34- 


9 Exalt the LORD our God, and worſhip at his holy 


hill c : for the LORD our God is holy. 
c Either in Zioz ; or in his Church typified by it, and oft called 


Zion, 
FS AL 0G 

Tie ARGUMENT. | 
His Pſalm ſeems to have been compoſed for the uſe of the 
Iſraelites in their thank-offerings, or upon other ſolemn oc- 
cations of praiſing God, as the title ſpeaks 3 but withal ic hath a 
further proſpect even to the days of the Meſſiah, as ſome of rhe 
Hebrew Doctors acknowledge, and to the calling of the Gentiles 
whom he invites to join with them in the praiſes of Ged their 


Lord and maker, A 

' A Pſalm of || praiſe. . fond 

n Exhortation to praiſe God joyſully, 1, 2, for his greatneſs, power, 3, thankſgie 
4+ goodneſs, and faithfulneſs to his Church, 5. | ViNg. 

MA a joyful noiſe 4 unto the LORD þÞ all ye + Heb. 4 


lands 5. | G 
# Partly with Voices and Songs of rejoicing and thankſgiving ; _ 
and partly with Muſical Inſtruments as the manner then was. 6 All 
the Inhabirants of the Farth. Or, a# the land, z, e. all the people 
of Iſrael dwelling in this Land. Although his invitation ſeems to 
be more general, extending alſo to the Gentiles, of whom many, 
even in thoſe days joined themſelves to the Church of God. 


2 Serve the LORD with gladnefs ; come before his 
preſence with ſinging, 

3 Know ye that the LORD he is God ; it is he that , | 
hath made us c, || and not we our ſelves 4 ; * we arehis || Or, # 


people, and the ſheep of his pafture. ny _ | 
c Both by Creation, and by Adoption and Regeneration, where- E 24 
by he made us his People, which alſo is called a creation or making, "7. 3 
as Deut» 32. 6: Iſa 29. 23. and 43. 7. Eph, 2. 10. d Therefore 3%» 37+ 
we owe him homage and ſervice, and him only and not other gods 
who made us not. FA FE arp 
4 Enter into his gates d with ' thankſgiving, and into 


his courts with praiſe: be thankful unto him, and bleſs 


his name. ; 
4 The Gates of his Courts; for the people might enter no fur. 
ther, and the Courts had walls and Gates as well as the Houſe. 


5 For the LORD zs good; his mercy #s everlaſting: 
and his cruth endureth F to all generations. 


F3A LL. CI. generation 
The AR GU ME NT. and gener 
: [ \His Pſalm was compoſed by David between times of God's 750 
promiſing the Kingdom to him and his actual and plenary 
poſleſsion of it, as appe th from wv. 2, and from the contex- 
ture of the Pſalm, wherem he ſpeaks not of his preſent practice, 
bur of his purpoſe for the future, and ſolemnly declares his Refo= 
lution, and obligeth himſelf to theſe things, when he ſhall be in 
a Capacity to pur them in Executions _ 
A Pſalm of David. | 
David maketh a wow to praiſe the Lord, x. to walk pirfefFly for an Ex» 
ample, 2. to deſtroy all the wicked, 3-='=5y and io delight in the faithful of 
the Land, 6--=-8, ; | 
Will ſing of Mercy and judgment a: unto thee, O 
[| LORD, will I ſing. 


s Either, 1. of God towards me ; of Gods mercy towards me, 
and of his juſt judgments upon mine Enemies, Or 2 of mine to- 
' wards my people, I will in my Song declare my obligation and 
| full purpoſe to execute mercy and judgment in my Dominion ; 
which are the two Pillars of Government ; of which he ſpeaks in 
the following Verſes. Interpreters are much divided which to 
chuſee Poſsibly both may be joined together: and the, Senſe may 
be this, I will praiſe thee O Lord, as for all thy o: her excellencies, 
ſo particularly for thoſe two Royal Perfections of Mercy and Juſtice 
or Judzment, which thou haſt ſo eminently diſcovered in the Go- 
vernment of rhe World, and of thy people I/r22!; and I will make 
it my care and buſineſs to imitate and follow thee as in other things, 
ſo eſpecially in thoſe vertues which are ſo neceſſary for the 
diſcharge oft my truſt, and the good Government of thy and my 
people. : - | | 
; 2 I will behavemy ſelf wifely inaperfe& way b; O- 
when wilt thou comeunto me c! I will walk within my 

houſe d wich a perfect hearte. 
| 6] will manage all my Afﬀairs with Wiſdom and Integrity 3 
' which are the two chief Qualifications requilite for all men. Aat.10, 
16. and moſt neceſlary in Princes. cO when wilt thou give me the 
Kingdom which thou haſt promiſed me, that fo I may be capable 
ofexecuting theſe good purpoſes, both for my own comfort, and 
for the benefit of thy people ? Or, withour an Interrogation, as 
this particle is uſed, Exod. 29, 24. whin thou fhalt come to me, 
He ſpeaks not 
exciu- 


Fw « wE* _ 
——————— IS On Oo OH ITT SET © ea 


+ Heb. 


— 


o 


5 A 2 


7 


ay. 


Eiſbed, 


I2- 


. CIL. : 
| excluſively, as if he would not walk wiſely and righteouſly in the 


mean time, but emphatically, 
when he was advanced to the Kingdom, and that he would not 


P S # 


that he would continue to do ſo 


r himſelf to be corrupted by his Royal Power and Dignity, as 
< 117 Sao of the World commodhy were, Withal he may inti- 
mat, that now he could not do as he deſired, and that by the ne- 
ceſſity of his affairs, he was forced to make ule of ſuch men as he 
did not likes and to wink at thoſe miſcarriages, which it was not 
now in his power to reform: God is ofc ſaid in Scripture to com? 
to men when he fulfils a promiſe to them, or confers a favour or 
Bleſſing upon them, as Gen. 18, to. Exod. 20. 24. Pſal. 80. 2. 
Iſa. 35. 4. &c. dn my own Court and Family, as well as in my 
publick Adminiſtrations ; knowing how great an inflaence the 
example of my privat Converſation will have upon my people, 
either to reform or corrupt them- e This Clauſe adds weight to 
the former, I will not only walk in a perfe& or right way ( which 
2 man may do for politick Reaſons, or with evil deſign, but I will 
do ſo) with an upright and honeſt Heart, which is moſt accep- 
table to God. 


eb. 
g of B- T hate the work of them that turn aſide g; it þ ſhall noc 


' Jurious or ſcandalous to my people, 17. e. Not own nor countee 


3, will not I ſuffer. 


Or, per- that they may dwell with me q: he that walketh |] in a 
* in the perfe& way r, he ſhall ſerve me s. 


2 Heb.ſha! 


L210” be cilia 


* Jer: 21. that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the 


1 Or, for, 


I will ſet no + wicked thing before mine eyes f : 


cleave to me. | | 

f To wit, to look upon it with deliberation and deſign, or with 
defire and dejight, as this phraſe here and clſewhere imphes. If 
any ungodly or unjuſt thing thall be ſuggeſted ro me, whatſoever 
ſpecious pretences it may be covered with, as Reston of State, or 
worldly Advantage, I will caſt it out of my mind and thoughts 
with abhorrency, fo far will I be from putting it'in Execution. g 
From God and from his Laws. h to wit, fuch work : Or, the 
Contagion of ſuch Examples. I will neither imitate nor indure ſuch 
works, nor ſuch workers. hs ; 

4 Afroward heart ; ſhall depart from me &: I will 


not know 4 a wicked perſon. . 

i A man of a corrupt mind and wicked life, ſuch as other 
Princes chuſe and prefer as being ſuitable to themielves, and to 
their wicked deſigns. k Shall be turned out of my Court, Icir 
they ſhould tempt me, or infe& the reſt of my Family, or be in- 


Nance. k . 
5s Whoſo privily ſlandereth his neighbour »,him will 


I cut off : him that hath an high look,and a proud heart 


m ſuch as by ſecret and falſe Informations and Accuſations of 
others ſeck to gain my Favour, and advance themſelves by the 
Tuine of others ; which are the common peſts of Courts and King- 
doms. » Theſe he mentions, becauſe pride is the common plague 
of Courts, -and-the Fountain of -many enormities in Courtiers ; 
it makes them imperious and inſolent towards the poor opprefled 
SubjeQs that reſort to them for relief ; it inclines them: to thoſe 
countels and courſes not which arebeſt for the publick good, but 
which are moſt for their own honour and advantage, it makes them 
oppreſſive and injurious to others, that they may have wherewith 
to 1atisfie their own luſts. 


6 Mine eyes ſhall beupon o the faithful p of theland, 


o Either 1. to find them out- Or 2. to favour or encourage 
them, as this phraſe is oft uſed, as P/al. 34. 15. Jer. 39+ 12. and 42» 
4- Þ Mex of truch, juſtice and integrity, who will be faithful firſt 
to God, and then to me and to my people» q Or, te jit or abide or 
corverſe with me, in mine Houſe and Counſels and publick Admi- 
niſtrations. » In the way of Gods precepts which aire pure and 
perteQ. 5 In domeſtick and publick Employments. 

7 He that worketh deceit ; ſhall not dwell within my 


houſe : hethattelleth lies u (ball F not tarry in my ſight x. 

5 Hewho ſhall uſe any frauds or cheats, or fſubtile artifices to 
abuſe or wrong any of my people. Which David's Courtiers were 
more likely to indeavour, becauſe _ not permit any open 
violence. « He that ſhall abuſe me lies, as Courtiers uſually 
do their Princes, cither to defend and excuſe the guilty, or to 
betray the Innocent. x I will certainly and immediatly baniſh 
him from my preſence. 


8 I wii * early y deſtroy all the wicked of the land : 


LORD =. , 


y Speedily and without delay, as ſoon as I ariſe in the Morning, 
or, as ſoon as I am ſeated in the Throne, that fo I may both pre- 
vent all that miſchief which otherwiſe they might do 3 and hinder 
the infe&Qtion of others by their evil example; and diſcourage and 
deter all my Subje&ts from the like practices. Heb. I the mornings, 
# e, every Morning, as the ſame phraſe is uſed alſo, Jeb. 7. 18. 
Pſal. 73.14. Ia. 33. 2. The Morning was the time allotted for 
the exerciſe of Judgment, See Jer. <1. 12. , z Either 1. from 
Jeruſalem, which, though now in the hands of the Jebulites, he 
Jooks upon by an Eye of Faith, as if he had it in polletsion ; which 
he deſigned for the chief and Royal City of his Kingdom, and for 
the ſcat of the Aik and Worſhip of God. And therefore this place 
above all other. was to be purged and preſerved from wickedneſ; 
and wicked men. Or 2, from the whole Nation or Common: wealth 
of Iſrael: for David did intend, and was obliged toreform not only 
that one City, but his whole Kingdom, which alſo may come un- 
der the name ot a Cy, as being combined and united under one 
Government : for which reaſon the name of City is given both to 
the whole Church of Chriſt, as I/a.26. r. Heb. 12. 22. Rewvel. 204 g. 
and to the great Antichurch, theKingdom of myſtical Babylon, Rev. 
21.8, 13. and 17. 18, O@c. | | 


P SJA-L: CIL 
A Prayer || of the affli&ed when he is overwhelmed,and 


L M Ss. 


latter, ſo the Pſalmiſt looks through that mercy of the rebuilding 
of the City of Jeryſalem and the Temple, to the. further progreſs, 
and to the end and perfection of that work, which was in the co« 
ming of the Meſsiah, by whom it was to be compleated, and by 
whom the Gentiles were to be brought to the knowledge and wor. 
ſhip of the true God. 

The Church prayeth for audience, x, 2. and maketh a grievous complaint of 
her heavy affiiions, 3 11. comforteth her ſelf inthe Eter- 
nal Mercy of God, 12 17. which is to be recorded for ſuture gea 
nerations, 18, Deliwerance fromthe Babylonian Captivity, and the re 
fauration of Jeruſalem pred.Fed, 19 


28. 
hs my prayer O LORD, and let my cry come 
& unto thee. 

2 Hide not thy face from me in the day whe» I am 
in trouble, inclining thine ear unto me : inthe day wher 
[ call, anſwer me ſpeedily. 

3 For my days are conſumed [|| like ſmoke b, and my 
bones c are burnt as an hearth d. 

b Which paſfſeth away in obſcurity and ſwiftly and irrecovera- 
bly. Or, znto ſmoke, as Wood or any combuſtible matrer pur into 
the fire, waſteth away in ſmoak and aſhes. c The moſt ſtrong and 
ſolid parts of my body which ſeemed ſafeſt from the fire. 4d Either 
as an Hearth is heated or burnt up by the Coals which are laid upon 


upon it. 


that I forgor to eat my bread f. 

e Which is ſmitten and withered by the heat of the Sun, either 
whilſt it ſtands, or after it is cut down. f Becauſe my mind is 
wholly ſwallowed up with the contemplation of my own miſcrics. 
5 By reaſon of the voice of my groaning, * my bones 
cleave to my || skin g. 

g My fleſh being quire conſumed with exceſsive ſorrows. 

6 * I am like apelican b in the wilderncis : I am like 
an owl of the deſert, 

h Or, bittern, as the ſame word is tranſlated, Tſa. 34+ 11. Zeph. 2. 
14 It isaſolitary and mournful_Bird, as alſo the ow! here follows 
ing 1S» 

7 I watch, arid am as a.ſparrow 7 alone upon the 
houſe-top. 

# Which hath loſtits Mate, and then is very ſad and ſolitary, as 
ſome report, although that be uncertain and improbable. Bur 
this Hebrew word doth not only ſignifie a Sparrow, but in general 
any Bird, as Livit. 14. 4. Deut. 14. 11. Dan. 4. 9,1, 30. And ſo 
itmay here deſign any one or more ſort of Birds, which uſed to fit a« 
lone watching and mourning upon houſe-tops. 

8 Mine enemies reproach me all the day : azd they 
that are mad againſt me, are ſworn againſt me &, 

k Or, and being mad or enraged at or againſt me, they ſwear azainft me, 
they ſwear they will do me yet more miſchief: Or, they ſwear by 
me, they make uſe of my name and miſery in their forms of ſwea- 
ring and imprecation 3 as when they would expreſs their malicious 
and miſchievous intentions againit another, they fwear thar they 
will uſe him or make him as miſerable as a Jew. See the like ex- 
preſsions Numb. 5, 21: 1ja: Git 15: Jer: 29: 22. 

9 For / I have eaten aſhes like bread »z, and * ming- 
led my drink wich weeping ». 

I So this Verſe gives a reaſon cither of his great ſadneſs, ex- 
preſſed v. 6, 7 or why they ſwore by him in the ſenſe laſt given. 
Or, Szrely, as this particle 1s oft uted. Or, Therefore, becauſe of 
thoſe bitter reproaches Iaſt mentioned. » theſenſe is, duſt and 
Alhes are as conftant and familiar to me as the cating of my Bread 
I cover my head with them ; I ſit, yealy down and roll my ſelf in 
them, as Mourners oft did, 2 Same. 13. 19. Job 2; 8, 12. and 
i6. 15. Tja. 47. 1 Mic: 1, 10. by which means the Aſhes mizht 
eaſily be mingled with their meat, as Tears were with their Drink 
in the next clauſe. » He alludes to the cuſtom of mingling their 
wine with water. 

Io Becauſe of thine indignation and thy wrath o ; for 
thou haſt lifred me up, and caft me down p. _ 

o Becauſe I do not only conflict with men, but with the Almigh» 
ty God, and with his anger. . p As a man lifts up a perſon or thing 
as high as he can, that he may caſt it down to the ground with 
greater force. Or, he aggravates his preſent reproach and miſery 
by the conſideration of that great Honour and Happineſs to which 
God had formerly advanced him, as Job did, c. 29, and 30. and 
theChurch, Lame 1. 7. 


11 * My days q are like a ſhadow that declineth r * 
and I am * withered like graſs. 

q Our Hopes and Comforts and Happineſs ; Jays being oft put 
for Happy Days, or an Happy State, as Pſal. 37. 18. Lam, 5. 21.4s 
elſewhere they are put more generally for the events which happen 
in thoſe days : 1a both which caſes it is a Metonymy of the Ad- 
juacr. 7 Or, that is extended or ſtretched out to its outmoſt length, 
as it is when the Sun is ſetting, whenat ſpeedily and totally vani- 


we have, are quickly cut off and diſappointed. 


12 But * thou, O LORD, ſhalt endure for ever 5, 
and * thy remembrance ? unto all generations. 
5 But this is my comfort, although we dye, and our hopes va- 
niſh, yet our God is everlaſting and unchangeable, and thersfore 
invincible by all his and our Enemies, conſtant in his Counſels and 


poureth our his complaint before the LORD 4. 
a This Pſalm contains a form of Prayer and expoſtulation with 
God, compoſed for the uſe of all true Iſraelites, in the name and 
behalf of their Mother the Church of Iſrae/. It ſeems to have 
been compeſed in the time of their Captivity, and near the end 


purpoſes of Mercy to his Church, ſtedfait and faithful in the per- 
formance of all his promiſes; and therefore he both can and will 
deliver his people. # Either, x: the Fame and Memory of thy 
wonderful works. Or rather, 2. Thy Name, Jehovah, mentioned. 
in the former Clauſe, which is called by this very word, Gods re- 
memrance or memorial, and that unto at generations, Exod. 3h P 

g us 


it : or asthe Hearth being ſo heated, burns up that which is put 


Pal. CI. 


of it, wv. 13, 14. But as the literal Jeruſalem wag a Type of the 
ſpiritual, or of the Church of God and of Chriſt, and the rebuil- 
ding of the former, a Type of the reviving and edification of the 


} Or, (a 
lome 


read) intg 
ſmoke. Pr 


37- 23, 


4 My heart is ſmitten; and withered like graſs e; ſo 


E Job 19. 
20, 
Lam. 4.8, 
|| Or, fe 
F Job, JN. 
29, 


Fpſe 243 
& $0. 5. 


* Pf, 109, 
& 144 4 
Ecc1.6.'2- 
fI[{3 40- 6 
Jam-1. 19, 
Pſ.109i5 


ſheth. And jult ſo the hopes of our reſtriction, which ſometimes 


P Lam. 5« 


19. 
* Pf, 135 
13. 


Plal, CIE. 


P-$ 4 


Thus this clauſe exaQly anſwers to the former ; and both of them 
deſcribe the eternity of Gods exiſtence, whereby the Pſalmiſt re- 
lieves and ſupports himſelf under the confideration of his own and 
and his peoples frailry and vanity. | 

13 Thou ſhalt arite, and have mercy upon Zion * : 


for the time to favour her, yea the ſet time x is come. 


, M Ss. 


alas, how ſoon were our hopes blaſted, not long after the begin- 
ning of our ſettlement, is Reh»boams time, and ſo ſucceſſively in the 
courle of cur affairs under the following King<, till at Jaſt thou 
didſt give-us up to ruine and deſolaticn, as at this day- And this 
he doth not alledge to accule Gcd, or excuſe himſelf or his people, 
bur only that he might move the Divine Majeſty ro ſkew them 
ſome pity conſidering the ſhortneſs of their days, and his own E- 


Pſal. C 


u Upon Jeruſalem, or thy Church and people. » The end Of | ternir ! : 
ve. 9% *E *F TE y, as he purſues the Argument in the following Verſes, 
png phy age png thou haſt fixed ; of which ſee Jer: 25. | » The days of my life, or cf my proſperous ſtate, as above 


: . verſe It. tf dveriity i kind of dcath, >< £ # 
14 For thy ſervants cake pleaſure in her ſtones, and Je 11- for advertty is a kind of qcath, and 5s ficquently 


called. 19508 
favour the duſt thereof y, 24 I ſaid, O my God; * take me not away o in the * Job Mi 
» Thy poop value the duſt and rubbiſh of the holy City more F: - Y 5 } Job UW | 


midit of . = 20» 
than all the Palaces of the Earth, and paſſionately deſire thar it any day 5 P thy years ale throughouc all gene Hb. 


may be rebuilt: Fations q 
1550 the Heathen ſhall fear the name of the LORD | . * P9 29 wholly cut off and deſtroy thy people of Irael. p Be- 
— Pet the kings of the earth thy glory z _ they Om to a full age aad ſtature, Su to the plenary poſe 
o ENio f Tt 5 d 1 - f Fi lt = 
x Which was in ſome ſort fulfilled when the rebuilding of the 10 of ey POIs clpocially <2 that great ane NONE 


tal promiſe of the Meſſias, i d by whom alone their happ' 
Temple and City of God was carried on and finithed through ſo P (0 141 17", ocean art Mia ne their happineſs 


| hro! 1s to be compleated, and until whole coming thy Church is in its 
many and great dithculties and oppoſitions, to the admiration en- |nonage ; of which ſee Gal: 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Poffibly the Pſalmiſt 
vy and terrour of their Enemies, as we read Nehem. 6. 16. Com- 


Pſal. 126. 2. but muc! rude and tate 2 nd p ( ns _ learned Interpreters ſuppoſe ” be Daniel ) may have 
pare Pſal. 126. 2. bu uch more truely and Iinlly in building of [refpe& to that Prophecy, Dan:9.24,25. whi bab] bliſhe. 
the Spiritual Jeruſalem by Chriſt, unto whom the Gentiles were 0 rophecy, Dan:9g. 24,25. which probably was publiſh 


cd before this time ; for this time was almoſt precilely the midſt 
gathered, and the Princes of the World paid their acknowledge- | of the days between the building of the A Temple by Sols- 
INents. 


: : m0, and the building ofthe Spiritual Temple or the Church b 
1s When the LORD ſhall build up Zion, he ſhal ap- | the Meſlias 3 there being Sins a thouiand Tn diſtance bevwen 
pear in his glory 4. 


thole two periods, whereof ſeventy Frophetical weeks, or four 
4 His glorious power and wiſdom and goodneſs ſhall be mani- huodred and ninety years were yet to come. And ſo he prays 
felted to all the World. 


mu _ would _ _ o_ out in this Babyloniſh Captivity, 

: . ut would gracioully reſtore them to their own Land,and preſerve 

Kd, _ c ill _ the prayer of the deſtitute v, and them as a Churchand Nation there until the coming of the Meiſiar. 

not.dELlpueC c tneELr Prayer. : : | q Though we ſucceſſively die and periſh, yer thou art the evere 
b i: e: Of his poor forſaken deſpiſed people in Babylon. &c i: e: 

Will accept and anſwer. 


laſting and unchangeable God, and therefore art and wilt ever be 
18 This (bal be written 4for the generation to come e 


able ro deliver thy people, and faithful in performing all thy pro- 
mules ; and theretore we beſeech thee to pity our trail and Jart- 
and* the people which ſhall be created f ſhall praiſethe 
LORDe 


guiſhing ſtate, and give us a more ſettled and laſting felicity than 
| yet we have enjoyed 3 and therefore we truſt that thy people ſhall 

a This wonderful deliverance ſhall not be loſt nor forgotten, but 
carefully recorded by thy people, e For the inftruttion and in- 


continue and be eftabliſhed before, as he ſairh v. 28. becauſe as thou 
art the c— _ ſo thou haſt made an — We KM 
' ; nant with them, Pſal. 105+ 10. Iſa. 55: 3. Fer: 32. 40. To bethei 

couragement of all ſuccceding Generations. The ſingular number] 24 gg. ge. . = therefore a Kd ak vn forſake or rejelh 
put for the plural, as is ordinary» f Which may be underſtood, 
either, 1. Of the Jews which ſhould be reſtored, who were in a 
manner dead and buried in the grave, and meer dry bones, 1/2.26) 
i9. Exzek. 37. and therefore their reſtauration might well be called 
a Creation ; or as it is elſewhere, a Reſurre&ion. Or 2. Of the 
Gentiles who ſhould be converted. whoſe Converſion 1s frequent- 
ly,and might very juſtly be called a tecond Creation. Sce Iſa 27.11. 
and 431 1.7, I5, and65. 18, Eph. 2:10. 15. 

19 For he hath looked down g trom the height of his 
ſan&tuary k: from Heaven did the LORD behold the 


earth. | 
g To wit, upon us not like an idle ſpeQator, but with an eye of 
Pity and relief, as the next Verſe declares. h From his higher or 
upper Sanctuary, to wit, Heaven, as the next Clauſe explains it, 
which is called Gods high and holy place, IJa. 57. 15: ' 
*pf,9.1i, 20 * To hear the groaning of the priſoner z to looſe 


f Heb'the F thoſe that are appointed to death z. 
thildren of j; To releaſe his poor Captives out of Babylon, and, which is 
aeaths more, from the Chains and Fetters of Sin and Satan, and from 
eternal deſtruQtion, 
21 To declare the name of the LORD in Zion, and 
his praiſein Jeruſalem &. 
k That they being delivered might publiſh and celebrate the 
name and praiſes of God in his Church. 
22 When the people are gathered together, and the 
kingdoms to praiſe the LORD 7U. 
I When the Gentiles ſhall gather themſelves to the Jews, and 
Jjoyn with them in the praiſe and worſhip of the true God, and of 
the Meſlias. This Verſe ſeems to be added to intimate, that al- 
though the Pſalmiſt in this Pſalm reſpe&s the deliverance of the 
Jews out of Babylon, yet he had a turther deſign ani a principal 
reſpe& unto that greater and more general deliverance of his 
Church and People by the Meſſias. | 
23 Hem | weakned my ſtrength in the way m: he 


ſhortned my days », 
2 To wit, God, to whom he aſcribes theſe Calamitiess wv; 1o. 


| P(.22331, 


S. 

25 * Ofold haſt choulaid the foundation ofthe earth, * Heb: 
and the Heavens are the worksof thy hands r. I, 

r The Eternity of God looks both backward and forward, it is 
both without beginning and: without end. The former is affirmed 
and 1]luſtrated v.24.26,27-the latter is clearly implyed ia this Verſe« 

Thou hadit a being before the Creation of the World when there 
was nothing but Ererniry, but the Earth and Heaven had a bg- 
ginning given them by thy Almighty Power. 

26 * [hey ſhall periſh {/ bur chou ſhalt endure: yea, *Ifire.6 
all of them ſhall wax old * like a garment « ; asa vel- , Heb. : 
ture ſhalt thou change them, and they ſhal be changed: and. 

[Either 1. As to the ſubſtance of them, which ſhall be annihi- 
lated. Or 2. As to their preſeat nature and uſe. See 1/a: 65. 17. 
and 66. 22, 2 Pete 3+ 7, 10, 11. The Heavens and the Earth, als 
though they be the moſt permanent of all viſible beings, and their 
continuance 1s oft mentioned to fignifie the ſtabihty and immu- 
tability of things, yer if compared with thee are as nothingy they 
had a begining and fhal have an end. & z. e: Decay and periſh. - z 
Which 1s worn out and laid aſfide,and exchanged for another. And 
ſo ſhall this preſent frame of Heaven and Earth be, 

27 But thou «rt the ſame, and hy years ſhall have no 
end. | | 

28 The children ofthy ſervants ſhall continue x, and 
their ſeed fhalibe eſtablithed before thee y. 


x Though the Heavens and the earth periſh, and though we 
thy ſervants pine away in our iniquzties, according to thy righteous 
ſentence and threatning, Lev. 26- 39. and dye in Captivity, yet 
by vertue of thy eternal and unchangeable Nature and Covenant, 
we relt aſſured that our Children, and their Children after then 
ſhall enjoy the promiſed Mercies, an happy reſtitution to, and ſets 
tlement in their own Land,and the preience of our and their Meſ- 
fias, whom, being not to come till after 49o years, , we ſhallno 
live to ſee. The expreſſion here uſed is general, not. without d 
ſign, partly to ſhew that this promiſed bleſſing belongs to the 
Jews not upon the account of any carnal relation to Abraham, but 
to whom therefore he addreflerh himſelf for relic: m Either, 1. }as they are and continue to be Gods ſervants, from whom if they 
In the midit of our expe&ations, Whilſt we are expeCing the ac-' revolt, they loſe this and all their other priviledges ; and partly 
compliſhment of thy promile, either of bringing us out of Babylon, : to imply that ir belongs to all Gods faithful Servants, aad to theiy 
or of ſending the Meſflias, we faint and one of us periſh after ano-| Children, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, of whole coverſion 
ther and our hope is like the giving up of the Ghoſt, Or rather, ' he ſpoke v. 22. y In the place of thy gracious preſence. either 
2. In the midſt of the courſe of our lives. Which ſenſe is confir- | here in thy Church, or hereafter in Heaven, from wh.ch we are 
med, 1, From the following clauſe. Which afrer the manner | now baniſhed, And this phraſe further intimates that their happi- 
explains the former, he ſhortned my days 3 as alſo from the next|neſs did not contift in the enjoyment of rhe ourward Bleſfings of 
Verſe where he begs relief from God againſt this miſery in theſe |the Land of Canaan, but in the preſence and fruition of God there, 
words, take me not away in the mdf of my aays: 2, From the uſe of | which he mentions as the top and upſhor of all his deſires and their 
this word way, Which is uſed for the courſe of a Mans Life, P/al.| feliciries. : 
2+ 12+ and ( which comes to the ſame thing) for the curſe of a 
journey as it is oppoſed to the end of the Journey, - Gen: 24+ 27. 
Exod. 23: 20. and clſewhere ; the life of man being oft compared 
to a journeying or travelling and death to his journeys end. And 
the Pſalmiſt here ſpeaks ( as ether ſacred Writers do elſewhere, and 
as all ſorts of Writers frequent!y do ) of the whole Common-weal!th 
as of one man, and of its continuance as of the life of one man. 
And ſo this ſeems to be the matter of his complaint and hum'e 
expoſtulation with God; O Lord, thou didſt chuſe us out of all 
the world to be thy peculiar people, and didſt plant us in Canaan, 
and cauſe a glorious Temple to be built to thy Name to be the on- 
Iy place of thy publick and ſolemn wo: ſhip inthe World, and didſr 
make great and glorious promiies, that thine eyes and heart ſhould 
be «port Perpetually, 1 Kings 9, 3. and that thy people ſhould be 
Planted inthy land ſo as not to be moved any more or afflicted as 
they had been in the days of the Judges, 2 Sam. 7: 10, 11. From 
whence we promiſed to our ſelves a long and ſertied proſperigy. But 


HABIT yt AIP AN HE PIR DE Ergo Y 97 j 


} Heb. 
offliea. 


PF SAL | CH: 
The ARGUMENT. 
His Pſalm contains a thankful Commemoration and celebra« 
tion of Gods Mercies to the Plalmiſt himſelf, and to the 
people of Iſrael, and to all good men. 

APlalm of David. 
David ftirreth up him ſelf to bleſs God, 1, 2. who forgtueth his Sins, 3, 
Redeemeth and ſatisfieth his Soul, 4, 5. For o:ner manifold Mercies to 
himſelf and the Church, 6 14+ He confidcreth the freilty of Man, 
15. and ſhewerh Gods Everlaſting Mercy to his Coyenanted ones, 17 = 19», 
He exhorteth all Creatures to praiſe him, 20 EE 
Lefs the LORD, O my foul:and all chat is with- | 
in me, bleſs his holy name. = _ =o 
« Let all my thoughts and affeQions be engaged, and united and &* 149; &+ 
ſticred up to the higheſt pitch in and for this work, 
5 A 3 2 Bleſs 


* 


*P[.78.39. 


as Pſ:9o; F. 


FIfa:go: 7: 


3 4 
> Blef the LORD, O my ſoul, and forget not all his 


benefits. 
* Who fergiveth all thine iniquities : who healeth 


all thy diſcaſes 6. | 
r.2.11. & Either, 2. Spiritual Diſeaſes, Luſts or Corruptions which he 
£.7.47, ſubducs and purgeth out by his Grace ; as the phraſe is uſed P/a/. 
41. 4. 1a: 6. 10- and 53- 5* Or 2, Corporal Diſcaſes or Miferics, 
of which this word is uſed, 2 Chroz- 21. 18: 19+ Jer. 14+ 18+ and 
16. 4- ; 

4 Who redeemeth thy life from deſtruction c ; who 
crowneth thee d with loving kindneſs & tender mercies. 

c Both temporal and eternal, from deadlie dangers and muſerics. 
# i. e. Encompaſſeth and adorneth thee, as a Crown doth, 


5 Who fatisfieth thy. mouth with good rhings e,ſo 7hat 


* thy youthis renewed like the eagles f. 

e Who ſatisfieth all thy juſt deſires and neceſſities. F Either, 1. 
As the Eagle reneweth her youth by caſting all her old Feathers 
and getting new ones, whereby it ſeems to grow young again,But 
this being common to all Birds would not bave been appropriated 
to the Eagle. Or rather, 2- Like the youth of an Eagle. As the 
Eagle lives long in great ſtrength and vigour, ſo that the old age of 
an Eozle is uſed proverbially for a lively and vigorous old age. So 
this is a promiſe of a longand comfortable life. 

6 The LORD * executeth righreouſneſs and Judge- 
1.146-7- ment for all tbat ore oppreſſed g. 

g Which being a ſingular perfe&tion, and that wherein moſt of 
the me of the World were and are defeQive, is juſtly celebras 
ted in God. 

7 He made known his ways þ unto Moſes ; his acts 7 


unto the children of 1frael. 
 þ Either r. His Laws, which are oft cal'ed Gods ways. Or 2. 
The manner and methods of his dealings with men, and eſpecially 
with his people, called in the next ciauſe his 4#s ; his merciful 
and gracious Nature and Providence, which is particularly called 
| Gods way, Exod, 33» 13« compared with wv: 18,19. and with Exod. 
34. 6. 7. and which is here deſcribed in the following Verſes. ; 
His marvellous and gracious works. 
$8 * The LORD zs mercitul and gracious, flow to 


» 7. anger k, and Þ plenteous 1n mercy. 
u.14.8, þ Not ſpecdily puniſhing ſinners, but patiently waiting for their 
Jeute5-10 Repentance, | 
eh.9.17-" 9 * He will not always chide /; neither will he keep 
ſ. 86, I5. hi {| 
©3218, 915 anger m for ever. ON 
Heb I Or, contend, by his Judgements with Sinners. but is ready to 
be reconciled to them, to wit, upon their true Repentance, as 1s 
"" manifeſt from innumerable Texts, and from the whole ſcope and 
Þ Iſa» 57. deſign of Scripture. m Which word is underſtood here, as allo 
1 Levit. 19. 18. Fer, 3- 5. Nah: 1: 2. as is evident from the thing 1t 
lic:7:18. ſelf and from the former clauſe. The Hebrew is a concite Langu- 
age, and there are many ſuch Ellipſes in it, as 2 Sam: 6: 6, com- 
pared with Exod.9; 9. and 1 Chron, 18-6, comp. with 2 $41.8: 6. 
Pſal. 3. 7- Eccleſ. 7. 15. ; 
xo He hath nor dealt with us after our ſins » ; nor 
rewarded us according to Our 1niquities. 
» He hath puniſhed us leſs than our iniquities have deſerved, as 
was conteſled Ezrag. 13. 
Hebi az. I For f as the Heaven is high above the earth, ſo 
wording to great # is his mercy toward them that fear him p. _ 
he height o So much above their deſerts and expeRations, and above the 
the Hea= mercy which one man ſheweth to another. p Which clauſe he ads 
. here, as alſo ver. 17. 18. ro prevent mens miſtakes and abuſes of 
Gods mercy, and to daſh the vain hopes of impenirent ſinners 1n 
Gods merc 


12 As far as the eaſt is fromthe weſt ; /o far, hath he 
removed our tranſgreflions from us q. 

q The guilt of our fins from our perſons and Conſciences. The 
ſenſe is, He hath fully pardoned them, ſo as never to remember 
them more, as he promiſeth Jer. 3 1i- 34: H-6. 19. 17, 

I3 Like as a Father pitieth his children, ſo the Lord 
Pitieth them that fear him. 

14 For he knoweth our frame r; * he remembreth 
that we are duſt, 


y Either, 1. The corruption of our natures; which God is plea- 
ſed ſomerimes to make an argument to pity and ſpare men 3 as 
Gen: 8: 21. So the ſenſe is, He conſfidereth that great and con- 
ſtant propenſion to evil, which-is naturally in all mankind, and 
that rherefore if he ſhould deal ſeverely with us, he ſhould imme- 
diately deſt:oy us all. So this clauſe contains one motive of Gods 
Pity, and the next another. Orrather, 2. The weakneſs and mor- 
cality of our Natures, and the frailty and miſery of our condition, 
2Sit ſeems to be explained inthe following clauſe, that we are but 
auf. Yo the ſenſeis, He conſidereth that if he ſhould ler looſe his 


1, CUL. 


Lat 9.2. 


a.40.3T 


Exo- 34. 


reat of 


" 
_ 


L M-S. Pal. Cty. 
future and endlc{ life. » See before on v, ir; z Either his faith- Ire 
tulneſs; or ( that this branch may anſwer to the former his mercy 
or benignity ; this word being trequently uſed inborh theſe ſenſes. 
as hath becn proved before. Bur it is here called righteouſneſs, to 
intimate that Gods kindneſs to the poſterity of his people is not 
only an aQ of his goodnels, bur alfo a diſcharge of his obligatio 
under which he put himſcIf to them, as elſewhere, ſo Exod 20: x 
ro which this place feems to relate. Hence it it is called mes _ 
Avraham, and truth to Jacob, Ac: 7: 22, ” 

18 * To ſuch as keep his covenant ,afnd tothoſe that 
remember his commandments to do them 6. 

a To them that perform the condition of Gods Covenant : th 
ſincerely love and ebey him. Such reſtriQions are oft added ; 5 
the general to overtarow the preſumptuous hopes of ungod] x _ 
ſo particularly ro admoniſh the 7raelices not to reſt too Src 
the priviledges of their parents,or the Covenant mace 
nor to expect any benefit by it,but upon condition of t 
nuance in Gods Covenant. 6That have them much in 
and practiſe them in the courſe of thcir lives. 

19 The Lord hath prepared c histhrone in the Hea- 
vens 4; and his kingdom ruleth over all e. 

c Or rather, efabliſhed, Having celebrated Gods mercy to 1; 
people,he now praifeth him for his excellent Majeſty and ry 
Dominion. 4 Whick notes the eminency. glory,power Rabilie: 
and unchangeableneſs of Gods Kingdom. e Over all Creature b 4 
in heaven and in earth. FIG 

20 Bleſs the LORD ye his Angels f + that excel j 
ſtrength g, that do his commandments b6, hearkenin 
unto the voice of his word 5. 

f Which, though glorious Creatures, are but his Miniſters and 
Meſlengers, as the word ſignifies. And by inviting the Angels t 
bleſs God, he quickens men to the ſame Duty as having Sat d * 
pendance upon Gcd, and obligation to him. g Of which ſee "og 
evidence 2 Kings 19. 35. Youare freed from the impotencies wp; 
infirmities Of mankind. þ Thartlive in an univerſal, conſtant and 
perfe& obedience to all Gods Commands, which the beſt of me 
through the infirmity of the fleſh do frequently violate. 5 Th - 
dil:gently wait for Gods Commands or Errands, and execute th a 
with all chearfuineſs and readineſs. : 444 

21 Blefs ye the LORD, || all ye bis Hoſts & ye mini- 
ſters / of his that do his pleaſure x. : 


k Ye Angels ; to whom he {till continues his addreſs and who 
he more particularly deſcribes by the name of Hofts '< tit] fi 
given to the Angels, as Gen: 32. 2. 1 Kings 22: 19: ® ug ang 
18. Luke 2:13. Revel: 19: 14. in regard of their vaſt numbers, 
mighty power, unanimous concurrence, and exquiſite order. In 
the former Verſe the expreflion was indefinite and general, ye his 
Angels,here it is univerſal and yet particular all ye his ho;. He = 
to apply himſelf ro the ſeveral Orders of Angels, of whom fe 
Ep/3; 3: 10» C97. 1.16. and to cach individual Angel. 1 This He- 
brew word is commonly uſed of the higheſt and moſt honourable 
ſort of Servants. m2 Whole conftant bulineſs and delight it is to 
exccute the will and commands of God. 


22 Bleſs the LORD all his works in all 


| a laces of 
his dominion » : bleſs the LORD, O my foul 0 
n All Crearures both in-Heaven and Earth, 


ru according to yo 
ſeveral capacities o Which thou haſt ſpecial and abundanr ® 6g 


to do. Thus he ends the Pſalm with the £ 
he began it. ame words wherewith 


*Deut;7, 
at 9* 


much upon 
with them, 
heir conti.- 
theirthou ghrs 


Nt Heh, | 
g mighty in 
ftreng5ia 


| TI ſay. 


PSAL CIV, 
. _ wn ARGUMENT. 
the next foregoing Pſalm treats of the ſpecial fav 

A to his Church and People, ſo this Hckes and + ng o 
wonderful and gracious works of God to all Mankind in the Crea- 
tion of this viſible World, and in the wiſe and powerful diſpoſiti- 
on of all things therein to mans uſe and comfort. 
The Prophit flirring up humſelf to praiſe God for his Pwer manifeſted in the 

Creation, 1 -—---— 6. His wonderful Wiſdom and Power in govere 

ning of all things, 7 33- Yoweth perpetuall to praiſe him, 34. 

And curſeth the unthankfulneſs of the Wicked, 35. | 
—_— the LORD, O my ſoul : O LORD my God, *Pſg;;:: 

thou art very great « ; * thou art clothed b with 

honour and majelty c. 

4 As in thy own nature and perfe&ion, ſo alfo in the glory of 
wy works. 6 Surrounded and adorned. c with honourable Mas 
jeity. 

2 Who covereſt d thy ſelf with light e, as witha gar- 
ment: who ſtretcheſt outthe Heavens like a courtain f. 

4 Or adorneſt or clotheſt, e Either, 1. With that light which no man 
can approach unto, as it 1s called 1 Tim. 6. 16. wherewith therefore 
he may well be ſaid ro be eovered or hid from the eyes of mortal 
men, Or rather, 2. With that firſt created light, Gen. 1. 3. whicls 
the Pſalmiſt fitly puts in the firft place, as being the firſt of Gods 


hand upon us, and pour forth all his wrath, we ſhould be ſudden- 
ly and irrecoverably deſtroyed, and therefore he ſpareth us. 

If As for man *, his days are as graſs: * as a flower 
of the field /; ſo he flouriſheth. 

s Which is more expoſed to Winds, and other violences, than 


the Flowers of the Gzrden, which are ſccured by theart and care 
of the Gardiner, 


FJob14. 1, 


2; 
James 7: 
To, 11 


f A blaſting or ſtormy wind bloweth upon it. « There is no 


al _ 
* SY > > #* . . 
_— 7419. more any appearance nor remembrance of it in the place where it 


20; 9- ſtood and flouriſhed. 

17 But the mercy of the Lord is from everlaſting to 
everlaſting x upon them that fear him y ; and his righ- 
teouſne(s z unto childrens children : 

x But though we quickly decay and periſh, yet Gods mercy to 
us doth not die with us, but as it was trom eternity exerciſed in 
gracious purpoſes, 1o it will be continued unto eternity in that 


16 For *the wind paſleth over it ?, and Fit is gone: 
FHeb:irir and the * place thereof ſhall know it no more «. | 


viſible works: f The uſe wherecf it hath, partly in referrence ro 
, that glorious Manſion of the bleſſed God and his holy Angels, 
' which theſe viſible Heavens ( far above which it is, Eph: 4 10s ) 
. do veil and cover; and partly in Teference to the Earth which they 
| encloſe and prote&. 

| 3 * Wholayerh the beams of his chambers in the wa- 


ters g 5 who maketh the clouds his chariots, * who nas of 
' walketh upon the wings of the wind bh. * Pſ:18:196 
8 In the waters above the heavens, as they are called Ger. r. 7. Or, ; | 
| inthe Clouds, as it is explained in the next Clauſe. In which he 
' many times reſides and rides, and manifeſts his preſence, þ Who 
manageth and employeth the clouds and winds in his ſervice. 
4 * Who maketh his Angels ſpirits 3; his miniſters a 
flaming fire &, 


7 7, e: Ofa Spiritual or incorporeal nature, that they might be 
| firrer for their employments. Or, who maketh his Angels winds, as 
this la't word moſt commonly ſignifies, i. e. Who made them like 
| the Winds, powerful and attive and nimblc in executing Gods 
pleature« Or, who uſeth and governeth thoſe glorious Creatures 
at 


YHeb:1:7; 


phat 


#Heb. 
bath fot 
a the 

with / 
her baſ 
*[ob2 
& 38. 
Pl. 24 
& 136 


Gen! 


| Or, 

mount a 
and, 
velleys 


ſcend, 


*PC. 
*Gen 
uu, 1 


Het 
ſender 
{'Hel 
Blk, 


f He 
break, 


Heb 


(| . 
# v0; 


s "F 


7s 


1.4 


phat, CIV. P £ 4 


at his pleaſure, even as he commands the ſenfleſs Winds. k Or, 
like a flaming fire, the note of ſimilitude being h-re underſtood, as 
| and oft eliewhere © to 
which he compares the Angels for their irreſiſtible force, & great 
agility and fervency in the ex<cution of Gods Commands. Or the 
{cnſe is, who ſometimes clotheth his Angels with ſubtil Bodies of 
And the Angels may 
not unfitly be mentioned in this place amongſt and in the cloſe 
of thoſe works of God which were done in the Heavens,of which 
he hath hitherto ſpoken, v. 2- 3+ becauſe they were made at the 
ſame time when the Heavens were made, and for the ſame uſcs 
and purpoſes, and becauſe they are commonly employed by God 
in managing the clouds and Winds 2nd Meteors to accompliſh 
Gods deſign by them. But this Verſe 1s otherwiſe rendred voth 
by Jewiſh and ſome Chriſtian Interpreters, and that very agree- 
ably to the Hebrew Text, He maketh rh: Winds his Angels, and the 
flame o1 flames af fire ( 5. e, the Lightning and Thunder, and other 
Fiery Meteors in the Air ) his minifters, He maketh uſe of them 
no leſs than of the Holy Angels ; and oft-times for the ſame pur- 
poſes, and they do as certainly and readily obey all his Commands 
as the bleſſed Angels rhemſelves do. This interpretation may ſeem 
molt aggreeable to the ſcope of the Pſalm. and to the Context, 
wherein hz is ſpeaking of the viſible works of God. The only di- 
fficulty is, that this ſeems to invalidate the Allegation and Argu- 
ment of the Apoitle, who expounds it of the Angels, Hebz 1. 7. 


if is Gen: 49; 9. Deut: 32: 22+» Pſal: 81. x. 


Wind or Air, or of Fire, as he fees fir. 


Bur indeed it doth not : for ( to ſay nothing of other ſolutions 


given by other men ) when the Pſalmift fairh that God make:h or 


uſeth the winds as his Angels, &c. he plainly ſignifies that the An- 
gels a e Gods miniſters or Servants, no leſs than the winds. And 
that is ſufficient to juſtifie the Apoſtles Argument, and to prove 
the preeminency of Chriſt above the Angels; which 1s the Apoſtles 
deſign in that place. 
#Hb. be 5 | * Who laid the foundations of the earth 7, har it 
tb and ſhould not be removed m for ever ». 
u the I He ha:h founded or eſtabliſh-d the Earth upon its own baſis or founda- 
with up tions, i. e. upon it {elf or irs own weight, whereby it itands as faſt 
br baſes and unmoveable, 2s if it were built upon the ſtrongeſt founuations 
*Job26.7. imaginable. Which 1s a ſtupendious work of divine Power and wif. 
& 38. 4 dom. m Out of its proper place, which is the loweſt parr of the 
Pl, 24. 2 world. n As long as the World continues. 
& 136.6: 6 Thou coveredt it with the deep o as with a gar- 
ment: the waters ſtood above the mountains p. 
o Either, 1 In the general D-luge» Or rather, 


have thought, 
faid Deluge 3 for it is :pparent they were before it, Gen. 7. 19. and 


moſt probably were in the firſt Creation, becauſe this variety of 


Mountains and Valleys is.both ornamental and uſeful to the world. 
7 * At thy rebukeq; they fled rs atthe voice of thy 
thunder [they haſted away. 


q Upon thy ſevere Command, Gen: 1: 9. which he calls a rebuke 
to :mply that there was ſomething in that ſtate of things which 


tGen.3, 1s 


might ſe-m t» need reproof aad corretti"n, even that confuſion of 


Earth and water together, which therefore God amended in his 
ſec-nd vays work, r They immediately went to the place which 


God had allotted to them. / Of thy Soveraign Command, which as 
they could nor but hear, ſo they durit nor diſobey. He aſcribes 


2. In the firſt 
Creation, as we read Gen. I. 2, 9. of which the Pfalmilt is here 
ſpeaking. p The mountains were not made by the Deluge,as ſome 
who for that reaſ[ 1 underſtand this Verſe of the 


L' A S, 


mon abode z-or in the ground nigh unto them; or in the Trees, 
which commonly grow by the Binks of Rivers. 4 Which being 
delighted and refreſhed by the Waters ſend forth their pleatant 
ores. 
13 * He watereth the hills 4 from his chambers e ; * 
che earth is ſatisfied f with the fruit of thy works g- 


d Which moſt need moiſture and have leaſt of it in them. e 


ful. g With the effe&s of thoſe ſweet ſhawers, which he calls 
Gods works, becauſe he alone can and doth give them, as is noted 
Jer. 10. r3. and 14+ 22, 

. 14 * He cauſecth the graſs to grow for the catte!, and 
Herb tor the Service of man 4 : thathe may bring forth 
food out of the earth 7z. 


Prepared or diſpoſed for the production of neceſlary proviſions for 
Beaits and for men, that ſo he (to wit, God ) may bring forth food 


would never yield. 

i5 And * wine & that maketh glad the heart of man 
an4 | oy] to make his face to ſhinc 7, and bread mwhich 
ſtrengthneth mans heart ». 


7 He alludes to the cuſtom of thoſe times and places which was u- 
pon ſo'emn and feſtival occaſions to anoint their Faces with Oyl. 
See P/al, 23. 5. Bur theſe words with the former are by divers 
Learned Interpreters rendred otherwiſe, wiich ſeems more agree- 
able to the order and contexture of Hebrew Text, And ( he giveth 
wine t112t maketh glad the heart of man, to mak? ( or, that he may make, 
1: e; that thereby he may alſo make ) his face to ſhrze more than oyl, 
1: E: More than it thineth when it is anointed with Oyl: Or, as 
with oyl So he ſpeaks only of the wine which he commends from 
two qualities, that it makes the Heart chea-ful, and the Counte- 
nance pleaſant. 2 7; e: Bread Corn, by a Metonymy mn Which 
hath a ſingular faculty to preſerve or renew our ſtiength and vig- 
our : whence it is called the ſtaff of Life. _ 

16 The trees ofthe LORD o are Þ full of ſap p: 


cedars of Lebanon q * which he hath planted. 


pounds this ; which came up and grew, and thrive not by Mans 
Art and Induſtry, but meerly by the care of Gods Provideace. þ 
Heb, Are or ſhall be ſat:5fied, to wit with the Rain, of whovic good 
effeUs he is yet {peaking. 9 Yea even the talleſt and Jargeſt Ce- 
dars, ſuch as theſe were, are ſupported and nouriſhed by ir. | 
17 Where the birds make their neſts ; as for the Stork 

r, the fir-trees [are ber houſe. I 

r Which makes their Neſts not only in the tops of Houſes, bur 
alſo in the Field and in high Trees, as Yarro and others have 
noted: /{ Whichallo are Trees of great height and bigneſs 3 and 
which being here ſaid ro afford the Stoiks 3X Houfe, are thereby 
{:ppoſcd to be preſerved and nourtſhed by the Rain water. 


13 The High Hills are a retuge for wild goats, and 
the rocks for the conies #. 


t So he paſſeth from the Rain to other works of Gods Provi- 


Senſe and Keaton to inanimate Creatures by a Figure called Proſo. dence, as that God hath made {vitcable and ſufficient proviiion for 


popes | 
|Or, the & || They go up by the mountains ; they go down by 
mui? the yalleys t unto the place which thou haſt founded for 


deend, the , © 
veleys ate them #«. 


ſeend, t In that firſt diviſion of the Waters from the Earth, ſome part 
of them by Gods Command, contrary to their own Nature, went 
upwards, and became Springs in the M -untains, and the greateſt 
part went downwards to the Chanels made for them. Others, both 
antient and Jater Interpreters, read the words thus, The Mountains 
aicend, the Valleys diſcena, When the Waters were ſeparated, part 
of the Earth went upwaid and made the Mountains,and part went 
downward and wade the Valleys or low Grounds. But our Tran- 
ſlation ſeems the beſt, as being mo#t aggreable to the Context, be- 
caule he ſpeaks of the Waters both in the foregoing and following 
Verſes. » Unto their proper Chanels and Recepracles which God 
provided for them. 


*Pl33.7. 9 * Thou haſt ſeta bound x, *chat they may not paſs 
a 9, over: that they turn not again to cover the earth y. 

U, 154 x Even the ſand of the Sea-thore, as it is expreſſcd Jers 5. 22. 
which, though in it ſelf contemprib'e, and a very poor defence to 
the Earth againſt that ſwelling and raging Element, yet by Gods 
Almighty power and gracious proviicnce is made ſufficient for 
that pu:pote, Which is noted as a wonderful work of God, Job 
38. 8, &c. y To wit,the whole Earth, as it did in the beginning 
of the Creation. 
Nature ſettled by him. Bur when mea tranſgrefſed their bounds, 
all the Laws of God and Men, it is not ſtrange if the Waters alſo 
tranſgrefſed their bounds, and once again overwhelmed the Earth 
in the general Deluge. 


Io + He ſendeth the ſprings & into the valleys, which 


+ run among the Hills 4. 
2 And the Rivers which come from them: 


FHeb.who 


ſmndeth, 


flow the Land. 


11 They give drink to every beaſt of the field : the 


wild aſſes b + quench their thirſt, 


tak, b-Which he mentions partly becauſe they are dry and thirſty 
Creatures ; and partly becaute they live in dry and de olate Wil- 
derneſſes, and are neither ruled nor regarded by men, and are 


the ſecurity of theſe Creatures againſt their Perſecurors. Although 
this Verſe alſo may havea reference to the former work, and the 
barren and rocky Hills may be mentioned as receiving benefit by 
the Rain, and it may be thus rendered, And zhe h:gh hulls ( under< 
ſrand are ſatisfied, which is expreſſed verſe 16, and may very well 
| be carried hither ) which (that Particle being frequently under- 
ſrood ) are 2 refuge for wild goats, and the rocks ( underitand out of the 


' former branch, according to the uſual manner, which are a ref-ige } 


for the con:es 3 or, as others tranſlate this word, for the mountain- 
mice, 
19 He appointeth the moon for ſeaſons u ; the ſun 
knoweth his going down x. 
« To mezſure and diſtinguiſh the times, both months, and, a= 


This was Gods appointment, and the courſe of 


a Wherewith God 
vale, bath ſhur in the Rivers where he ſaw fir that they might nor over- 


| mongſt many Nations, years alſo 3 as alſo the Seafons of divers 
Natuial Events, as of th& ebbing and flowing of the Waters, andof 
the humours in Mans Body ; and other Seafons for ſacred and ci- 


only amongſt the Jews, but among Hearhens alio, See on Gen. r. 
'4. x To wit, the time and place in which heis to ſet every day 
of the Year which, though varied from day to day, yet he to re« 
gularly and exactly obſerves, as if he had the underſtanding «f a 
Man cr Angel to guide him in obeying the Laws of his Creator. 
See Job 38. 12, Waat is here expreſſed concerning his ſetting, is 
neceſſarily ſuppoſed concerning his riſing alſo; but he mentions 
only his ſetting, as moſt agreeable to the Context, becauſe that 
did uther in the rifing of the Moon, of which he now ſpeaks, and 
the entrance of the Night, of which he ſpeaks in the next words, 
20 Thou makech darkneſs y, and ic 15 night : where- 


in Þ all the beaſts of the foreſt do creep forth z. 


; bliſhed Order. 
they dare nor do for fear of men. $o by this viciflitude of day 
and night God hath wiſely and mercifully provided both for men 
that they may follow their day-labours with-ur danger from wild 
beaſts, and for the beafts that rhey may procure a ſubſiſtence. 

21 * The young itons @ roar after their prey 6, and 
ſeek their meat from God c. bs 

a Which can no more ſubſiſt without Divine Providence than 
thoſe which are moſt old and decrepir, They roar when they 
coine within ſight and reach of their prey, as Naturaliſts obſerve ; 
whereby thisplace may be reconciled with mos 3. 4 c This 154 


moſt ſtupid Creatures, and yr are plentituily provided for by the | x; 1. ative and Poetical Expreſſion : their roaring is a kind of Na- 


care and bounty of Divine Providence. 


- 12 Ey them «c ſhal the fowisof the Heaven have their 


'Heb.give habitation, which + fing among the branches d. 
" # Wices 


tural Prayer to God for relief, as the cryes of Infants are a kind 
of Prayers to their Mothers for the Breaſt, And this is juſtly no« 
ted as an at of Gods ſpecial Providence, becauſe the Lions are 


| 6 Either upon the Waters, where many Fowls have their com- |yery ravenous and need much prey, and alſo are dull in their ſcent 


5 A+ - and 


Pai; CIV: | 


From the clouds, as above werſe 3+ f By this means all th: parts 
of the Earth, the mountains as well as the Valleys, are made fruit- 


_ k Both for delight and for neceſſity either as Food or Phyſick. 
i And this God doth,he watereth the Earth that thereby it may ve 


out of che Earth, which without this bleſſing of God the Earth | 


k He alſo bringeth out of the Earth the Vines which yield Wine. face ſhine ' 


theft Heb.ſha! 
be ſatisfied, 
8;:e; Which the Lord hath planted, as rhe next Clauſe ex- 5 


vil affaics, which were commonly regulated by the Moon, nor 


y Which ſucceeds the Light by vertue cf thy decree and eſta. fe beaſts 
z To look out tor prey, which in the day time thereof dv 


: 
4 
4 


{| 


[i | 


"PC 147.8* 
*Pſ. 65:9" 


29, 30. 
& 3. 18,] 


* Judg. 
> 88 
f Heb. fo 


make his 
with oil, 


or, more 
than oil 


by Gr: - 
*Nu:24-6. 


+ Hebs all - 


tr ample on 
thejoreft« 


* Job 38: 
391 


#7 

41 R108 
| &Y 

rf ' 
i: 


i 
* Gen. 1: iſ 


CE 9 a. ae A Ao ar wy ty £ Yr int a itathit ng Yikes EE APR 
- R "” RT y 2 24-1 24 : l f m 
"> ». "TS PRES 1+ FLY SY. af ® 


5 
4, x 
= 


ws vie 
y_ 
ws 


. CIV. 


and fo difficultly find it, and flow in their motion, and unable to 
reach it * and therefore God hath provided another Creature, of 
quicker ſenſe and motion,which 3s uſually confedecate with them, 
and procures prey for them, partaking of it with or after then 
22 Theſun ariſeth, they garher chemiclves rogether 


d, and lay them down in their dens. 

a Or rather, they retire or betaks themſelves ; for the Lions do not 
commonly go in companies to one place, but feverally, each ro 
his own Den. 

23 Man goeth forthe to his work, and to his labour 
until the evening. 

e With ſecurity and confidence, knowing the Nature and Cu- 
ſtom of wild Beaits, that they hide themſelves by day. 

24 O LORD, how manifold arethy works! in wildom 
haſt thou made chem all : the earth is full of thy richesf. 

f Of excellent and comfortable things, which are the eſtes of 
thy bounty and power: R 

25 So 45 this great and wide ſca,wherein ore things 
hands, Creeping g innumerable, both ſmall and great || beaſts. 
paces. & This wordis common to all Creaturrs that move without feer, 
Dr,living touching with their Belly the Element in which they move, whe- 
eatures, ther they creep pon the earth or ſwim in the Sea. 


Hebiwi: 


> Gr. 26 There go the ſhips ; there is that Leviathan b, 
Heb: 2bom thou hait + made to play therein, | | 
ormed; þ Either the Whale, or the Crocodile, Of which ſez the notes 


on Job 49: and 41, i Who being of ſuch vaſt ſtrength and abſo- 
Jute Dominion in the Sea, tumbles in it with great tecurity, and 
ſports himſelf with other Creatures,which he rakerh and devoureth 
at his pleaſure. I 
27 * Theſe all & wait upon thee /, that thou mayeſt 
give them their meat in due ſeaſon m. | 
k Both Beaſts, and Fiſhes. / Expe& ſupplies only from thy pro- 
vidence. Which is ſaid of them figuratively, and with an alluſt« 
on to the manner of tame Beaſts a Fowls which commonly look 
after and wait upon thoſe Perſons who bring their food to them. 
» When it is neceſſary or convenient for them- By which expre- 
flion he intimates the moderation of the Beaſts in their defires of 
food, and tacitly reproves the intemperance of men who feed 
themſelves in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon. 
28 That thou giveſt them, they gather »: thou open- 


eſt thine hand 0, they are filled with good. 
 # Whatſoever they receive is from thy bounty and gift- o Thou 
provideſt plentifully for them 5 as this phraſe 1mplies, Deuz; 15: 1. 
COmpeProv. 3 i: 29. 
29 Thou hideſtthy face p,they are troubled q; * chou 
takeſt away r their breath,they dye, and return to their 
duſt /. | 
p ina thou withdraweſt or ſuſpendeſt the favour and care of 
- thy providence. q Deje&ted and diſtreſſed. r So this Word is 
uſed, Hoſea 4; 3. Z:ph. 1* 2. and elſewhere. { To the Earth from 
whence they had their firſt original. 
39 Thouſendelt forth thy Spirit z, they are created 


#: and thou reneweſt the face of the earth x. 

t Either, r. Thar Spirit by which they live, which is called the 
ſpirit of a Braſt, Eccleſs, 3: 11+ which is called their breath or ſpirit 
( for the word is the ſame there and here) v 29, and here may be 
called Gods ſpirie, becauſe it was given and preſerved by him. Or 
rather, 2. Thy quickning Spirit ; tor here feems to be an oppoli- 
tion between the r Spirit, v; 29. and zhy ſpirit here, and this latter 
| is mentioned as the creating or produttive cauſe of the former. 
| And this may be underſtood either, x, Of the Holy Ghoſt ; ro 
whom no lets than to the Father and the Son, the work of Crea- 
tion is aſcribed, Jeb 33: 4+ Pſal» 33: 6. Or rather, 2.” That quick- 
ning power of God by which he produceth Life in the Creatures. 
from time to time. For he ſpeaks not here of the firſt Creation, 
but of the continued and repeated produttion of Living Creatures. 
z Either, 1. The ſame living Creatures which were I-nguiſhing and 
dying are ſtrangely revived andreſtored ; which may ncr unficly 
be called a Creation, at that word 3: ſometimes uſed, becauſe it is 
in a manner the giving of a new Life and being to a Creature. Or 
2. Other living Creatures are produced or generat:d ; the Word 
created being taken ia its largeit ſeaſe for the produton of things 
out of indiipoſed matter by ſecond Cauſes, as it is ufed, 1/5.41. 20. 
and 54: 16: &c. x And thus by thy wiſe and wonderful Provi- 
dence thou preſerveſt the uaÞ> A of living Creatures upon the 
Earth, which orherwiſe wou!d be deſolate or without Inhabitants. 


31 The glory of the LORD t ſhall endure for ever: 
the LORD ſhall rejoyce in his works y. 


* Pſ146.4. 
Eccl. I 2.70 


T Heb, 

- ſhall be 
his wiſdom and power and goodneſs in upholding and concinuing 

the works ofhis hands from generation to generation, and he doth 

and will take pleaſure both in the prefervarion and bleſſing. of his 


as he did reſt and delight himſelf in the contemplation of his 
works of Creation, as is noted Gen: 1: 31; and 2: 24 3. Burt the 
words are by divers, as it may ſeem, more agreeably to the He- 
brew Lext, rendred thus, Lez ( for the firſt word is of the Impe- 
rative Mood ) the Glory of the Lord enaure for ever, and let the Lord 
have joy ( or, then ſhall the Lord rejoyce _) m his works. So this is ad- 
ded asa convenient Doxology or Thankſgiving after the comme- 


many fruits of his bounty, ler it be our conſtant deſire and endea- 
vour, that God may be prepetually ſerved and glorified in and by 
them, and that God may be no more grieved at the Remembrance 
of his kindneſs to us, as he was Gen: 6: 5, 6. and thereby be agzin 


cheriſhing of bis own workmanſhip, 
"_ 32 He lookerh on the earth, and ir trembleth ; * he 
144+-5- toucheth the hills, and they ſmoke =. 


all the Creatures, and their dependance upon him : As when hs 


» Sothe ſenſe is, Thus God doth and will advance the glory of ; 


provoked to deftroy us, but may take pleaſure in beholding and 


3 4 £ M $. 


' following covenant and Bleſſings belong. 


works, as alſo in hisreflection upon theſe works of his providence, | 


moration of his great and gracious wocks : and the ſenſe may be_ 
this, Seing therefore God hath enriched the earth and us with ſo 
word & which he commanded / to a thouſand genera- 


T word is taken, Judges 13: 12+ 


z This is a further Illuſtration of Gods powertul providence over ticns 3 a certain number being pur for an uncertaizs He ſcems ©@ 


UW 


affords his Favour to Creatures, they live and thrive, ſoon the 
contrary one angry lock or touch of his upon the Hills or Earth, 
makes them trem:ble and ſmoke, 2s once Sinai did when God ap= 
peared in it. And this conſideration he may pcflibly ſuggeſt to 
inforcc tl e foregoing exhortation cf glorifying God, becaulie if we 
do nor give him the glory due to his name, he can quickly right 
himſelf, and deſtroy us and all his works. 

33 © 1 will ſing unto the LORD « as long as I live ; 
I will ſing praiſe unto my Ged, while I have my being. 

2 But whatſoever others do, I will not fail to give God his glory 
and due praiſes: 

34 My meditation & of him « ſhall be ſweet 4: I will 
be glad in the LORD e. 


6 Or, my ſpeech or diſcourſe, my praiſing of God mentioned werſe 
33- Cc Concerning the glory of his works. d Either, 1. To God, 
be will graciouſly accept it ; praiſe being his moſt acceptable Sa 
crifice, as is affirmed Pſal; 6g; 3oy 3i. Or rather, 2. To my ſelf, 
as may be gathered from the next Clauſe. He implies that he ſhal 
not only do this work, which a man may do unwillingly or by con-= 
ſtrainr, bur that he will do it chearfully and with delight ; which 
1s molt pleaſing to Gods e I will rejoyce in the contemplation of 
Gods works, and in praiſing him for them. 

25 Let the ſinners be conſumed out of the earth,and 
let the wicked be no more f: bleſs thou the LORD, O 


my foul gy: Praiſe ye the LORD. 

F Bur as for thoſe ungodly Creatures who do not regard the 
works of the Lord, which is noted as a moſt grievous fin, and pu- 
niſhed with a grievous-imprecation, like this Pſat: 28: 4, 5. nor 
give him the glory due to his name but diſhenour God and abuſe 
his Creatures, and thereby provoke God to deſtroy the earth, and 
the men and things which are upon it. it is my Prayer for thine 
hor.our ani for the ſafeguard of all mankind, tbat thoſe Sinners 
who obltinately and retolutely continue in this pratice of diſho- 
nouring and difoveying their Creatour may bs taken out of this 
World, that they may no longer infe& ir ner procure its total de= 
{truQtion. Or it may be a prediction delivered in the form of an 
1MPprecation, as hath been noted before in like Caſes. g But thou, 
O my Soul, come not into this wretched ſociety, but employ thy 
ſelfin this great work of bleſſing and praiſing God , and ut is my 
defire and hope that others will follow my Example. 


PSAL CV; 

| The ARGUME NT. 

He Pentman of this Pſalm was David, as is manifeſt fm x 
Chron; 16: 7, Oc. Itis a thankſgiving to God for his Mer- 
cies to his People of 1frael. 

An exhrtation to Praiſe God, and to remember his works and wonders, 
I 6, The Flory of Gods Promiſes to, and Providences over Abra« 
ham, y-----15-. Joſeph, 16—— 22. and Jaccb in Egypt, 23--=25. 
over Moſes delivering the Iſraelites, 26---36. and over them whom 

* he fed in the wilderneſs, und planted in Canaan, 37 55. 

'0 * Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name 

4 ; make known his deeds among his people 6. 

a Or, proclaim his name, i; e: the fame and glory of his Works, 
as it follows. 6 Each of you amongſt his and ycur people, or even 
among the Heatheris, as you have opportunity. 

2 Sing unto him, ting pfalms unto him : talk ye ofall 
his wondrous works. 

3 Glory ye in his holy name 6: let the heart of them * 
rejoyce that feek the LORD c. 


b Glory in the Gold whom you ſerve, as the only true God,and 
one of infinite power and goodneſs, c Thar ſeck his face or pre- 
ſence, as it follows, his acquaintance and favour, atove all the 


World. 
4 Seek the LORD, and his ſtrength d : ſeek his 


face e evermore. 

d z. e: By a Figure called Hendiadis, the Iord in his firength, to 
wit in his Sanfivary, or before the Aik, which is called , GODS 
frength, Pſal: 63: 3. and 78: G1. and the Ark of his trength, Pal. 
132: 8, e7:e: His gracious preſence in his Sanctuary and the 
bleſſed fruits of it» See on Pſal: 27: 8. 

5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; 
his wondets and the judgements of his mouth f, 

f Either, 1+ The Laws delivered from his mouth. Or rather, 
2- The plagues or puniſhments (as this ſame word is uſed here v-7, 
and every where ) which he brought upon Egypt by his meer word 
or command, as 1s oft noted in the Hiſtory of them in Exodus, 

6Oye ſeed of Abraham his fervent, ye children of 
Jacob g his + choſen. 

g To whom he reſtrains the former more general expreſſion, be- 
cauſe theſe were the only branch of Abrahams feed ro whom the 


* PC.146.2. 


* 1Chro, 
17.8, 
Iſa. 12! 4, 


F Heb.ch* 
ſen Ones. 


7 He is the LORD our God ; his judgements are jn 


all the earth þ. 

h Either, 1. The fame of bis Judgements upon the Egyptians is 
ſpread over the face of the Farth. Ory 2. God executes his Judge- 
ments upon all Nations and people. Which may be here nored as 
a foil to magniſie Gods grace to them who were the Monuments 
of his mercy, when all the World beſides them fell under his jult 
ſeverity. 


8 He hath remembred 3 his covenant for ever ; the 


tions m. | 

# Practically, ſo as to perform it ; as that Word is frequently 
uſed in Scripture. k The word of promiſe or the Covenant;as 1s ex- 
plained both in the foregoing and followings words. And 1o the 
Luke 1: 38. {i: e; Eſtabhſhed or 
ordained or appointed. as this word is oft taken, as ?jal. 68: 28- 
and 71, 3. and 133- 3. 1/2.13. 3- and 23. 11, m To allgeneras 


allude to that paſſige Exod, 20. 6. 
bs : 9 * Whigh 


Pal. Cy, | 


tGen 
{4 
FIk 3 


"Cen. 
5.& 0, 
t Gen. 
1, 

| Gen. ; 
201 

f Heb: | 
ſul >a 
ito 3r0n, 


#0 


Phi, CV. 


 &- 


SJ 


FGen-17. 9g * Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his 
2 _. oath » unto l{aac, | 

& 22: 19, ,, Wherewith he ratified the Covenant with Tſaac, Gen. 26: 3. 
6, 2. 1s And confirmed the ſame unto Jacob for | a Law o, 
& 28. 13. and to Ifrael for an everlaſting covenant. | 

& 35. 11- 0 Either that it mighr be as firm and irrevocable as a Law;or that 
Luke 1. it might have the uſe and force of a Law towards God, becauſe 
13 Heb. God did hereby put himſelf under an obligation of making it good, 


6 17- in regard of his own Truth and Righteouinels. 
j Heb. # 11 Saying, * Unto thee will I give the land of Ca- 
yo 13. 2aan Þ the lot p of yourinheritance : 


. f The portion aſſigned to you by lot, and the Deſignation of 

þ Divine providence: See on Dent. 32. 9. Pſial, 16. 6. 

& 15» 78, F : . 
12 * When they were | but a few men in number 9: 

ard, yea, very few, and ſtrangers in it. 


* Gen. 34, q Hebe Mer of number, i.e; few, who could eafily be numbred, 
30, very few, as the next words explain it, : 
Deut. 26: 13 When they went from one Nation to another r, 


from one kingdom to another people : 

r Both in Canaan, where there were ſeven Nations, Deut. 7. 1» 
and in Egypt, &c. 

14 He ſuffered no man to do them wrong : yea, he 
reproved s kings for their ſakes. | 

: Both verbally and really, by his Judgments See Gen. 12. 17. 
and 20. 3. 

15 Saying, touch not 5 mine anointed #, anddo my 


prophets no harm. ; 

£ Hurt not, as this wordis uſed of theſe very perſons, G-ni 26, 
II, 29. and elſewhere. u My Prophets, as the next words explain 
it, to wit, Abraham and Iſaac aud Jacob, as is evident ; who are 
called Gods anonted, becauſe they were eminently bleſſed of God, 
and conſecrated to be his peculiar people, and to be Kings and 
Prieſts in their Families, and repleniſhed with the Gifts and Graces 
of the Holy Ghoſt, in reſpe& whereof many perſons are ſaid to be 
anointed in Scripture, who never had any material Oyl applyed to 
to them, as Pſal. 45.8. 1a. 6 1- 1. 2 Cir, 1. 21. And they are cal- 
Jed Prophets, becauſe God did familiarly converſe with them, and 
revealed his mind and will to them, and by them to others ; and 
becauſe they were inſtru&ers or teachers of others in the true Relt- 

fGen 41. gion. See Gen. 18« 19. and 20. 7. ; , 
16 Moreover, Þ he called for x a famin upon the land: 


{4 
[Ik 3-1. he brake the whole || ſtaff of bread y. 

x i, e, He effe&nally procured, as this word 1s uſed, 2 Kings 8. 
1. Iſo. 47. 1, 5.and 56. 7. Reme 4 17+ y 7, e. Bread which is the 
ſtaff or ſupport of our Animal lives, | See Lev. 26+ 26. Pſal; 104: 
| I5. Exck; 4: 16, 

"Gen 45- 17 * He ſent & a man before them,F even Joſeph who 


ron was ſold for a ſervant. 
if '37* + & By the diretion of his ſecret providence. 
IGen. 29. 28 {| Whoſe feer they huit with fetters : | he was 


201 laid iniron 4. 
+Heb: bis #4 Heb: his ſoul came into iron, Which ſeems to be added empha- 
ſul came tically to aggravat his impriſonment, and ro ſhew how grievous 
in iron, It was to his very ſoul, which muſt needs 1ympathize with his bo- 
dy, and moreover was greatly vexed to conſider both the great in- 
jury which was done to him, and yer the foul and publick ſcandal 
which lay upon him. 
:i9 Until the time b that his word c came : the word 
of the LORD tried him 'd. 

b Till which time, his eminent Prudence, and Innocency, and 
and Piety gave himno relief. c Either, 1 Joſephs word or his Pro- 
phecy concerning the chicf Butler and Baker ; which 1s ſaid to come 
when it was fulfilled, as that word is uſed, Judg; 13: 12, 17. Exzek: 
24: 24, and elſewhere, But the event confutes this ; for Joſeph 
was not delivered at that time, but two years after ity Gen; 41: 1. Or 
Tather, 2. The word of the Lord, as it follows; the pronoun Relative 
being here put before the Subſtantive to which it belongs, as it is 
alſo, Exod; 2; 6. Job 33: 20: Prove 5: 22: and 14: 13. He ſeems 
to ſpeak of that word or Revelation which came firſt to Pharaoh in 
a Dream, Gen: 41, 2, &«, and then to Joſeph concerning the inter- | 
Pretation of it, v: 15, 16. For the word of the Lord is faid to | 
come, not only when it comes to paſs, but alſo and moſt common- 
Iy when'it is firſt revealed, as Jer: 7: 2. and 11; 1. and 18: v and 
God is ſaid to come when he doth reveal ir, as Gen: 20: 3. and 31: | 
24; d Either, 1. Tryed his ſincerity and conſtancy, Bur that was ' 
not done by Gods Word, but by his Red Or rather, 2. Diſ- 
covered him, to wit. unto Pharash and his Courtiers, how innos- ' 
cent, and holy, and knowing a perſon he was 3 or purged him from 
thoſe calumnies which are caſt upon him, and ſo prepared the 
way for his releaſe, which here follows wv: 20: This Verſe may 
well be rendered thus, Until the time that his word eame, even the word 
of the Lord, which tr:«d him 3 ſuch Ellipſes being moſt uſual in the 

"een: g1, Hebrew Text, | 
, 20 * The king ſent and looſed him : eves the ruler of 
'Gen; 41: the people, and let him go free. | 
Hick: we ' 24 || He made him Lord of his houſe,and ruler of all 

kim, * his | ſubſtance g. 
: 4 Heb: of all kis poſſeſſion, 5. e- of his whole Kingdom. | 

22 To bind his princes e at his pleature, and teach | 
his ſenatorsf wiſdom. 

« By his Commands, and if they were refractory, to puniſh them, 

F his wiſeſt Counſe 1Jors, whom he commande to receive inſtructi- 
Gen; 46; 0ns from Joſeph upon all occaſions. 
6, 23 * [frael 
3 4 
' ned in the land of Haw 5. | 


&! 
fHeb men 
of numbers 


| 


here, alfo Pſal. 78. 51. and 106. 22 from that curſed Ham, Gen. 


6. And the Plalmiſt ſeems to call it by this name, ro intimat that 
theywere the people of Gods Curle, and thereby tg gaution the | 


lars, and that without number. 


and there was not one feeble perſon u among their tribes. 35- 


People which had been ſo long and ſo dreadfully oppreſſed as the 

Iſraelites were, was wonderful ; but they ll journeyed on foot, 
{of them x fell upon them, 
; them» 

give light in che night. St. 
alſo came into Egypt: and Jacob ſojour- | and open Country, had otherwiſe been intolerable to them, eſpe= 


g Jacob jn his Perſon and with his Children. + 7. e. Egypt,ſo called | 


9. 22. Who was the farher of Mizraim, or the Egyptians, Gen 10. ; 


W 


L M- « ' Plal. C! 
Iſraelites againſt returning to that Land, which they were par- [ 
ticularly forbidden to do, Deut. 17, 16- . 

24 And t he increaſed hispeople greatly : and made 
them ſtronger 5 than their enemies. ; 

; Not really, but according to their Enemies Apprehenſions and 
expreſſiony, Exod. 1-9. Or, more numerous, asthis word iselſewhere 
uſed. So this latter branch anſwers to the former, And this 
was true 3 for thouga theygwere not ſimply more in number than 
the Egyptians, yet they nMtiplied much faſter. oy lf 

25 | He turned their heart to hate his people k, to [ Ex: "" | 
deal ſubtilly with his ſervants 1.--. . ik 

k Not by putting this wicked hatred into them, which- is nog 
conſiſtent cither with the holineſs of Gods nature, or with the . 
truth of his word, and which was altogether unneceffary, becauſe 
they had that and all other wickednefs in them by Nature; bur 
partly by withdrawing the common Gifts and Operations, of his 
Spirit, and all other reſtraints : and hindrances to it, and wholly 
leaving them to their own miſtakes and Paſſions, .and corrupt afs 
fections, which of their'own accord were ready to take that courſe; 
partly by ordering the affairs of his people in ſuch. manner, as 
might give them occaſion of hatred ; and partly by dire&ing and 
governing that hatred, which was wholly in and from themſelves, 
ſo as it ſhould fall upon the Iſraelites rather than upon other peq- 
ple. 4 To deſtroy them by crafry devices : of which ſee Exod. re 
a . * rp... 

26 * He ſent Moſes his ſervant; and Aaron whom he E*3% 
had choſen m. 1 

-m To be the companion and interpreter of Moſes in this expe 1 
dition, of which ſee Exod. 3e 10. and 14. 12, Oc. This clauſe he | 1 
adds, to ſhew that Aaron was no leſs called and choſen by God to 1 
this work than Meſes, which otherways was nor ſo evident from the 1 
Hiſtory : Or, this clauſe may belong to both Moſes and Aaron. < ' 


d. 


27 || They ſhewed Þ his ftigns # among them, and [Ex0:7: 9 
wonders in the land of Ham. + Heb: ', 
words of his 


7 Heb. The words of his ſigns, an emphatical expreſſion. Firſt, they 
boldly declared the word and will of God. concerning the ſeveral-® ** 
Plagues, and then they actually inflicted them, — 

28 * He ſent darkneſs and made it dark : and they *Ex:0:22} 
rebelled not againſt his word 6. | 

o Either, 1. the darkneſs and other Plagues ; which obeyed Gods 
word, and inſtantly came at Gods call, So this may be a refle« 
ction upon the Egyptians, that thoſe brutiſh or unreaſonable Creas 
tures were more obedient to the will and command of God thary 
they were, Thus diſeaſes are faid to come or go at Gods command, 
Matth. $. 8, Or rather, 2. Msſes and Aaron, mentioned v. 25, anQ 
called rhey, wv. 27. whoſe obedience in denuncing and inflicting 
theſe Plagues, and eſpecially that Plague of darkneſs, is noted and 
commended here as an act of great Faith and fortirude, becauſe | 
they inflicted that plague after Pharaoh had threatned them, Exod. 
IC. 10, as the obedience of their Parents is commended as a great ' 
act of Faith, becauſe they preſerved and hid their Son contrary | 
to the expreſs command of the King of Egypre > Sl 

29 f He turned their waters into blood, and flew TEx:7: 20] 
their Fiſh. | : ; ! '8 & 

30 || Their land p brought forth frogs in abundance, Ex: ph 
in the chambers q of their kings r. | | 

p Their Country : for otherwiſe they were produced by theix 
Rivers, Exod. 8, 3, q Which entred in'0 the Chambers, r Of Pha-= 
raob and his Sons, and his chief Nobles and Governours of Provin- 
ces under him ; for ſuch perſons are oft called Kings in Scripture, 
Jadg. 1. 7. 1 Kings 20, 1+ 12+ Iſa. 19. 2. ER 1 

31 * He ſpake, and there came divers ſorts of flies, Fn 0-bel7« 
and lice in all their coaſts s. | | ” 

s Or, Borders, 7 e. in all their Land, even to the utmoſt ends 
or Borders of it. : IEz.9: 23, 

32 || + He gave them hail for rain : and flaming fire 4 1.4. 2; 
in their land. gave their 

33 He ſ{mote their vines alſo, and their fig-trees,and 74 hail. 
brake the trees of their coaſts. * x16. 4 


34 * He ſpake, and the locuſts came, and caterpil- ,; 


25 And did eat up a!l the herbs in their land : and 
devoured the fruit of their ground. | DE 
26 + He ſmote alſo all the ficſt-born in their land : T Ex. 12, 
the chief of all their ſtrength 2. 2 On 
£ To wit, their firſt-born, as it is in the firſt clauſe, who are ſo 
called Gi. 49. 3+ Pſal: 78. 51. and the beginning of their ſtrength, 
Deur. 21, 17. 


27 ||He brought them forth alſo with filverand gold : | EZ 22: 


# Diſcaſed or unable for his journey : which in ſo vaſt a Body, 
and in a time of fuch Mortality as it had been in Ezypr, and in a 


Exod. 12.737, | hs 

28 *Egypt wasglad when they departed: for che fear * Ex. 22, 
33s 
x 1, e. Of the Iſraelites, leſt God for their ſakes ſhould deſtroy 


29 + He ſpread acloud for a covering z, and fire to t Ex! 133 
7 To protect them from the heat ef the Sun, which in that hot 


cially in fo long a Journey. Ps 
40 * The peop/e asked,and he brought quails z : and « p,._., 
+ ſatisfied them with the bread of heaven g. +,1. 3, @t: «+ 
2 He ſpeaks of the firſt: giving of. Quails, Exed 16. t2. which 4 Pal. 78, 
God gave them asa Refreſhment, notwithſtanding their Sin in de- 24, 25, 
ſicing taem, which he graciouſly 7 amd ; and not ef that ſeeond 
5 giving 


FI 4 4 


of Quails, which God gave them in Judgment, Numb . 17. 
an1 t BS would not 5 tt been numbred here amongſt Gods 
Favours vouchſafed to them. a with Manna which came out of 
the Air, which is commonly called Heeven, 

41 * He opened the rock, andthe waters guſhed out: 


hey ran in the dry places like a river 6. 

b They flowed in Channels which God provided for them, and 
followed the Iſraelites in their March, as is noted 1 Cor. 10. 4. 
Hence they complained no more of want of Water till they came 
to Kadeſb, Numb, 20. which was many years after this time « 

42 For he remembred *his holy promiſe, «nd Abra- 
ham c: hisſervant. | 

.c Or, rather, with ( as this particle is oft uſed ) Abraham ; made 
with or 'to Abraham. : 0 | 
+» -43 Andhe brought forth his people with joy, and bis 


=. Choſen with Þ gladnels : 
deut:6: | 44 * And _ them the landof the heathen: and they 


I. inherited the labour of the people d: _ 
l.3+17* 727 The Fruits of their Labour, their Cities, Vineyeards, Olive+ 


CVI. 
givin 
17.6, 


P OeT I. 
| «10.4 | 


15. 


Jeur. 4. 
40. & 6. 
» v5. 


ards, &c1 : 

: 45 || That they might obſerve his ſtatutes, and keep 

his laws, Praiſe ye the LORD. 

PSA L jCVL. 
The ARGUMENT. 
His Pſalm was unqueſtionably compoſed in the time of the 
Ijraelites Captivity and Diſperſion, as is manifeſt from v.47. 
bur whether it was that of Babylon, or ſome other of a later date, 
is neither cafie nor neceſſary to determin. : 

The Pſalmift exhorteth to praiſe God, 1-=--3. prayeth for the remiſfun of 
his ſim, 4. 5, TheStory of the Iſraelites rebellion, and of God's Mercy, 
in ther Journey from Egypt #0 Canaan rehearſed, 7-=== 46. conclu- 
ding with prayer and praiſe unto the Lord. 47, 48. . : 

+ FJRaiſe ye the LORD; O * give thanks unto the 
elujab. P LORD, for he js good, for his mercy endurteb for 
1Chr.16 

w 4 ; 


'_ © ever a. . 
; ;' «He deſerves our praiſes, notwithſtanding all our ſufferings 
— 7 which are not to be imputed to him, for he is Gracious and Mer- 
136. 7. Ciful, but only to our own Sins. 


2 Who can utter the mighty as of the LORD ? who 


can ſhew forth all his praite 6? 
6 i, e, His praiſe-worthy Aftions, by an uſual Metonymy: 
3 Bleſſed are they that keep judgment c, 624 he that 


doth rigteouſneſs at all times d. 

c That obſerve and praftiſe what is juſt and right towards God 
and Men ; which in the next clauſe he calls doing righteouſneſs. « 
In Adverſity as well as in proſperity. And this clauſe may be- 
Jong either, 1. to the laſt foregoing Words, that doth righteouſneſs at 
all times, conſtantly and perpetually : Or rather 2- to the firſt 
words, they are bleſſed at all times, even in the day of their calamity, 
which therefore oughtnor tb hinder us from this great and juſt du- 
ty of praiſing God. And ſo this verſe coheres with the former. 

4 Remember me e, O LORD, with the favour + rbar 
thou beareft unto thy people f : O viſit me with thy fſal- 


vation g. 
e Or, w: for he ſpeaks here in the name, and on the behalf of 
the whole Nation, as is evident from v 6, 7, 47- of which he oft 
ſpeaks as of one perſon. f With thoſe Favours andBleſſings which 
thou doſt uſually and peculiarly give to thy people; ſuch as the 
pardon of all our fins, by which we have procured our preſent mi- 
ſeries, and a compleat deliverance, and that improved to thy praiſe 
and Glory, as well as to our own comfort, as is clearly 1mplyed 
wv. 47. £ Give me that ſalvation or deliverance which thou haſt 
promiſed, and which none but thou canſc give. | — 
5 That I may ſee b the good of thy choſen 3, that 1 
may rejoice in the ghdneſs of thy nation & : that I may 


glory / with thine inhericance », 
- þ is e Enjoy, as the next clauſe explains it, and as this word 
is frequently uſed. : Of thy choſen people ; which thou uſeſt to 
give to thine Ele&, or to ſuch as are Iſraelites indeed: k With 
' tuch joy as thou haſt formerly afforded unto thy beloved Nation or 
people. / That we may have occaſion to glory in Gods Goodneſs 
towards us. 22 Either in the Congregation of thy people : that 
we thy people may jointly and ſolemnly praiſe thy Name : Or, as 
thy people, who are commonly called Gods inheritance, in former 
Ages have frequently done, for the particle, wich, is ſometimes u- 
ſed as a note of compariſon, as it is in the very next Verſe, and 
Job 9. 26. and 7. 1r. 
6 X We have ſinned with our fathers n : we havecom- 


mitted iniquity, we have done wickedly. 
» As our Fathers did, and have not been made wiſer or better by 
theirexamples, as we ſhould have been. 


7 Ourfathers underſtood not othy wonders in Egypt: 
they remembred not the multitude of thy mercies,F but 


<p eta provoked him at the ſea, ever at the red ſea p. 


| | eb. Hal. 


-4 Heb. of 
thy People, 


*Dan.g-s. 


thy power and Goodneſs in Egyps were but newly done, and frefh 
in memory. 


I Ex. 9.16. 75 [| that he might make his power to be known. 


hated ther /, and redeemed them from the hand of the 
enemy : 


was not one of them left. "I 
12 |[Then believed they his words;they ſang his praiſe. IExu4. au 
*K . . . 
13 *Þ They ſoon : forgat his works; they waited & 15, 1. 
not for his counſel «. Ex.15.24. 
t Even within three days, Exod. 15. 22, 23, w They did not & 17. 2. 


wait patiently and believingly upon God for ſupplies from his hand 
in ſuch manner and time as he in his own counſel had appointed made hafte 


and thought fit, they fergat.. 
14 * But t luſted exceedingly x in the wilderneſs, , 
and tempted God in the deſarrt. Num-re. 
x To wit, for Fleſh, as the next Verſe ſheweth. og 4 
I5 [| And he gave them their requeſt, but ſent lean- 4 1465, 4. 
neſs into their Souls y. fled in luft, 


o Or, conſidered net, to wit, ſo as to be rightly affe&ed with them, 
to give thee that Love and praiſe, and truſt and Obedience, 
which they deſerved and required. p When thoſe wonders of 


8 Nevertheleſs ; he ſaved them for his names ſake 


9q That he might glorifie his Name, and vindicat it from the 
Blaſphemous reproaches, which the Egyptians and others would 
have caſt upon it, if they had been deitroyed. This Argument 


M 8S. 


To And he ſaved them from the hand of him that 


ſ Of Pharach who purſued them with cruel Rage and Hatred. 
11 X And the waters covered their enemies : there 


THeb, chey 


7 Either into their perſons : Or rather their Bodies, which are |Num 1, 
oft underſtood by this word ; of which ſee the Notes upon Pſal. 31: 

16. 10. So their inordinate deſire of pleaſing and pampering 

their Bodies, was the occaſion of deſtroying them ; whilſt God de- 

nied his Bleſſing, which alone makes Food able to nouriſh us, and 

ge" on his curſe, which made their Food as deſtruQtive as poiſon 

to them. 

16 * They envied Moſes alſo in thecamp, «nd Aaronty,, ;c 


the Saint of the Lord 2. 1, Os, 

z So called here not ſo much for his inherent Holineſs, whereof 

Moſes had a greater ſhare,but becauſe he was conſecrated or ſer aparr 

by God for that ſacred Office of the Prieſt-hood, in which reſpe& 

all the Prieſts are ſaid to be holy, Levir. 21. 6, 7, 8. Hereby he in- 

timats, that their envy and Rebellion was not only againſt Asron, 

but againſt God himſelf. 

17 f The earth opened, and ſwallowed up Dathan {Num 
a, and covered the company of Abiram. >> 
a With his company, which is ſufficiently underſtood out of Deu. 11, 
the following clauſe, and out of the Hiſtory, Numb. 16. 16. 

18 || And a fire was kindled in their company 6, the |Num16 
flame burnt up the wicked. 35,46. 

b In their Aſociats or Confedrates, thoſe wicked men, as he calls 
them in the next clauſe, to wit Kerah and his company, who were 
conſumed by a fire from the Lord, Numb. 16. 35« compared with v. 1, 
2,16, 17, 18, 19. ; : 

I9 * They made acalfin horeb c, and worſhiped the * 
molten image. | $3t-4 
c When they were but very lately brought out of Zzypt by ſuch 
wonderful power and goodneſs of God, and had ſeen rhe dreadful 
plagues of God upon the Egyptian Idolaters, and upon their Idols 
ro04 as 1s noted Numb. 33. 4. and when the Law of God was bur 
newly delivered to them in ſuch a ſolemn and tremendous manner 
and the moſt high God was yet preſent, and delivering further pre, 
cepts to Moſer for their benefir upon the top of that very Mount. 

This greatly aggravatedtheir ſin. 


. 20 Thus ® they changed «their glory e into theſimi- q,,,;;, 
litude of an f ox that eateth graſs g. Rom.1.23 
d As far as in them lay, and 1n reſpect of their Worſhip. e 

Their God, who was indeed their glory ; for they had this juſt 
occaſion of triumphing and glorying over all the Nations of the 
Worldz that whereas all other Nations worſhipped ſtocks and 
ſtones, or the heavenly Bodies, or dead Men, they only worſhip- 

ped the living and true God, who was preſent and in Covenant with 

them, and with them only. f Into the Golden Image of an Ox or 

4Calf. g Which is ſo far from feeding his people, as the true 

God did the Ifraclites, that he muſt be fed by them. And yet the 
mage of ſuch a creature was preferred by them, before the all- 
Flufficient and ever-bleſſed God, which was an evidence of their 
_— contempt of God; and alſo of their prodigious folly and ſtue 
pidity. : ' : 

21 They forgat Ged their Saviour, which had done 

great things in Egypt. | 

22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, «nd ter- 

rible things by the Red ſea. FD 
23 Tf Therefore he ſaid hþ thathe would deſtroy them, + Ex. 3% 
had not Moſes his choſen ſtood before him in the breach 1, 11.3% 


;; to turn away his wrath, leſt he ſhould deſtroy rhe. 
þ He declared his intention in expreſs words, as Exod. 32+ 15, 
and elſewhere. i God had made an hedge or wall about them ; 
but they had made a gap or breach in it by their ſins, at which the 
Lord, who was now juſtly become their Enemy, might enter to 
deſtroy them z which he had certainly done, it Moſes by his pres 
vailing interceſſion had not hindred him. See Dear. g« 12. and 10s 
10. Itis a Metaphor from a Beſieged City, where' the Enemy in- 
deavours to make a breach in the Walls, and thereby to enter into 
the City ; which he wil do, unleſs ſome valiant Champion ſtand 
in the gap to oppoſe him. . : 
24 Yea, they deſpiſed & || the pleaſant land /; they [ Heb. 
believed not his'word m: land if i 


k Preferring Egypt and their former Bondage before it Numb.ſ#*: 
14+ 3» 4- and not thinking it worthy of a little hazard and diff- 
culty in taking the poſleſſion of it. / Canaan, which was ſo 
not only in truth, Deut: 11. 11, 12. Jer. 3. 19: Ezek: 20. 6. but even 
by the Relation of thoſe ſpies, who diſcouraged them from entring 
into it. 2 z, e. His promile of giving them the land, and ſubduing 
all their Enemies before them 3 which they knew by late and mas» 


was urged by Mes Numb. 14. 13, &c. 


*EX. 14-21. 
+ PL. 136. 
TJ: Ia.63. 
01,12, 15+ 


derneſs r. 
s As ſecurely asif they had walked upon the dry Land. 


* He rebuked the red ſea alfo, and it was dried up: 
ſo he led them throughthe + depths as through the wil- 


nifold experience, that God was both able and willing to do- 
25 * But murmured in their tents, and hearkned not 
unto the voice of the Lord ». 
» To Gods command, which was; that they ſhould boldly and 
confidently enter ango at: 
26 | Theres 


*Ny, 14 


Flal. Cyt- 


il 


*Nt 
3, 1 


INy 
33: 


[.24 


eb, f 


of db 


g, 146 


| Pſa]. CVI. P 


I 


fNu; 34: 26 7 Therefore he lifred up bis hand o againſt them, 
23, © overthrow them in the wiiderneſs: 


o Hetwore, as this Phraſe is commonly uſed, as Gen, 14+. 22. 


Dent. 22. 4%« Nchem, 9. i5. Revel: ro. 5, 6. of rhis dreadful and 
irrevocable Sentence and Oarh of God, ſee Numbe 14+ 
FOES | 3 ha 4 _ *- {fo y T 
[ Feb: 9 27 || * To overthrow their feed p alſo among the Na- 
make them tIONS, and to {catter them in the lands, 
fall. Þ He ſware alſo ( though not at the ſame time ) that he would 
*P[44:11? punith their Sins, not only in their perſons, bur alſo in their Po- 
Erck: 20: tterity. See Exod. 20. 5.and 32: 34+ Levit. 26. 33. others refer 
230 this to the ſame Oath and Hiſtory, Namb. 14+ becauſe God inten- 
ded at firſt to deſtroy both Parents and Children, even the whole 
Nation, v. 12. 15. though afterwards upon Ms/es his Interceſſion, he 
Imited the Judgment to that Generation. Bur that Deſtruttion 
threatned, was by the PeSilence, wv. 12. not, as here, by Captivity 
and baniſhment. Beſides; God ſaid that v. 18. bur he did nor 
{wear it, but tie Oath came afterward, v. 21, 
*Nu:255 28 * They joined themſelves q allo unto Baal-peor, 
3 © and ate the facrifices of the dead r. 
| Rb 9 Towit, in Worſhip, whereby they had an Union and Com- 
RV32:14. union with him, as Gods people have with God in a&s of his 
Worſhip. And this phraſe feems alſo to note their carnal Copu- 
lation with the Danghrers of Moab in the Temple, or to the Honour 
of Baal peor. r Which were offered to Idols, which he calls dead, 
in oppolition to the true and living God, and by way of contempr, 
and to note the ſottiſhneſs of Jdolaters who worſhipped lifelets 
things, as ſtocks and ſtones, or dead Men. And ſome learned Men 
conceive that this is ſpoken with particular regard to Baal-P-or,or 
the Lurd of Peor, a place ſo called, who had been a perſon of great 
em-nency in thoſe parts, and therefore was worſhipped according 
to the cuſtom of the Heathens, after his Deathy by Sacrifices and 
feaſts appointed for his Honour and Memory, : ; 
2, Lhus they provoked bim to anger with their in- 
ventions : and the plague brake in upon them. 
30 } Then ſtood upPhinehas and executed judgment, 
and /o the plague was ftayed. 
31 And rhat was counted unto him for righteoul- 


neſs s, unto al' generations forevermore. 

s And although thar action of his mig't ſeem harſh, and raſh, 
and irregular, as being done by a private perſon and a Priett, and 
s ajl wing tie Delinquents no ſpace for Repentance, it was ac- 
Ccepred and rewar ied by God as an Act of Juirice and Þiery agree- 
abic to his mind, and proceeding from a ſincere zeal for Gods ho- 
nour, and for the: good of Gods people ; and God gave him a pu- 
blick te:timony of his approbation ro be recorded to all Generati- 
ons and the prieſthood ro be continued to him and his 1n all ſuc- 
ceeding Generations. of al/ which ſee Numb. 25. 

22 * They angered him alſo at che waters of irife,ſo 


har it went ill with Moſes for their ſakes 7. 

: Or, becauſe of them, upon occaſion of their unbelief and mur- 
mouring, wherety he was provoked to ſpeak unadvitedly, as it here 
follows. 


23 Becauſe they provoked his ſpirit, ſo chat he ſpake 


unadviſcdly « with his lips. 

u So this word is thought to ſignifie, Lev. 5. 4. Prov. 12 18. 
Or, he ſpake, as the word commonly ſignifies. Not that it was in 
it ſelf a Sin to ſpeak, but becauſe he ſpake when he ſhould have 
been ſilent 3 or he ſpake to the people, when God commanded him 
only to ſpeak to the Rock, Numb. 20 8. 9, io. or, he ſpake, to wit, 
the provocation of his Spirit, or ſuch w+:rds as were agreeable ro 
It, and mig »t be expected from it. He mentions not here what 
Myſecs ſpake, becauſe rhat was fully known from the Hitrory, and 
bec-uſe he would throw a Vail over Moſes his infirmity, and rather 
1mply than exprels his faulr, 

34 + They did nor deſtroy the nations, || concerning 


tJudg.r. whom x the Lord commanded them. 

21427. x i, ee Concerning whoſe deſtruction : or rather, which thing to 

IDeu;732:; wit, to deſtroy thoſe Canaanirith Nations for in the Hebrew 
there is nothing but 4jher, which ſgnifies only,either whom or which. 


#Nu:25:7, 


*Num;2o 
412, 13. 


FJud:1:21; 
& :2: & Jearned their works. 
J 5, 6, 9 In theic Habitations and Negotiations, as alſo in Marriages. 


36 And they ſerved their idols which were a tnare | 


unto them »&. . 

z Which Idols were an occaſion of their falling both into further 
and greater Sins: as it follows v. 37, 38. and into. utter ruine, as 
this phraſe alto notes, Ex1d. 23. 33. Judge 2- 12, &Cs 

37 Yea, Þ they ſacrificed their fons and cheir daugh- 


rers 4 unto devils þ : 
Iq57;5, 4 Of which Heatheniſh practice, ſee the notes on Levir, 18. 2r. 
Erck. 16, # By which expreſſion he informeth them that they did not wor- 
0; & 20; Ihip God, as they pretended, and ſometimes deſigned, bur Devils 
2, in their Idols ; and that thoſe ſpirits, which were ſuppoſed by the 
Heathen Idolaters to inhabit in their Images, aod which they wor- 
ſhipped in them, were not G«ds or good Spirits, as they imagined, 
but evil ſpirits or Devils. See Levi. 17. 7. Deut, 32.17. 1 Cor. 
10. 20, Revel. 9. 20, 

33 And ibed innocent blood c, even the blood of their 
ſons & of cheir daughters,whom they ſacrificed unto the 


INu: 35: idols of Canaan : and{|the land was polluted with blood. 
3z: c the blood of rheir Ch:Idren, who, though Sinners before God, 
yet were innocent as to them, from any crune deſerving fuch bar- 
barous uſage from them. 
39 Thus were they defiled with their own works, 
and went a whoring with their own inventions d. 
a Committed ſpiritual Whoredom by worſhipping thoſe Idols 
Which were but humane inventions, and that in ſuch an unnatural 
and bloody manner, as they had deviſed. 


40 "Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled 


f2Ki 
16; "0 


35 * Bur were mingled y among the heathen, and | 


L AM $ Pijal. C 


againft his people, infomuck that he abhorred his own 
inheritance. : | 
41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen 
and they that hated them, ruied over them. : 
42 Their enemies alſo oppreiſed them, and they 
were brought into ſubje&ion under their hand. 


voked him with their counſel e,; and were + brought 

low for their iniquity. ned 
e By forſaking Gods counſel and the way which he had appointed, © 

and tollowing after their own inventions and evil inclinations, as 

he charged them wv. 39. See the like Numb, 15. 39. 


; | he heard their cry. 5. 7: 
45 * And he remembred for them his covenant f and zo: 1. | 
repented g according to the multitude of his mereies. 
+ The Covenant made with their Fathers, which notwithſtan- 3- 
ding their horrible violation of ir, he made good unto them, and 
in Conſideration thereof delivered them, g Changed his courſe and 
dealing with them, as penitent perſons uſually do. See the Note 
ON Gen, 6. 6, | 
46 f He made them alſo to be pitied of all thoſe that t 1 King 
g ; 


carried them captives h. . B: 50. | 
h By changing their Opinions of them, and inclining their hearts Jer:42:14 
towards them, which he had alienated from them. See on Pſ.105-25, ! 
47 Save us, O LORD our GOD z, and gather us 
from among the Heathen, to give chanks unto thy Ho- 


ly Name, a» to triumph in thy praiſe k, 

; Orhou who halt ſo often pardoned and faved us, notwithſtan- 
ding our former and manitold provocations, be thou pleaſed once 
more to deliver us. & In thy Praite-worthy work wrought for us; 
Praiſe being put foractions worthy of Praiſe, asit is here above v. 
2, 1 Chron 16. 35. Þjal. 9. 14. Phil. 4. 8. and oft elſewhere. 

48 Bletled be che LORD God of lfracl from ever- 
laſting to everlaſting: and ler all the people ſay, Amen, 
praiſe ye the LORD. : 

FSA L. CYVIL 
The ARGUMENT. 

He moſt of the P/alns have a peculiar Reſpe&tunto-the Church 
or People of God, or to tome eminent Members thereof ; 
but there are ſome few Pſalms which have a more general re- 
ſpe& to all Nations, of which Number this is one. Wherein the Pſal- 
miſt diſcourſerh of the mercifulProvidence ofGod towards all man- 
kind, and of his readineſs to help them in all rheir diſtrefles, fome 
few particular inſtances whereof, he mentionech, and leaveth the 
reſt to be underſtood, there being the ſame reaſon of all, But 
withal he takes notice alſo of Gods Judgments upon wicked perſons 
and people ; and by this Repreſentation of Gods Mercies and judg- 
ments, he invites all Nations to an acknowledgment cf the true 
God, to praiſe him for his favours, and totremole ar his judgments, 

which is their juſt duty aad reaſonable ſervice» 
An E:chor: ation 80 the redeemed 10 praiſe and celebrate the Lord, and to 0b= 
ſerve his manifold Providences, 1 --- 3. to Strangers and captives, 

4 ————- 16, to ſick, and ſea-men, 17 32+ and to all others, 

commend:img them that carefully 9bjerve this, 33, 43- 
* Give thai:ks unto the LORD, for he is good : * pſi06.4 

for his mercy endureth for ever 8. & 1183 1; 

» This whole verſe occurs alſo Pſal; 106. 1, Only there the ad- & 136; 1; 

dreſs is made to the Iſraelites, and here to all mankind. 


2 Let the redeemed of the LORD 5 lay /oc, whom 


he hath redeemed from the aand of the enemy d- 

b All they whom God hath redeemed, as it is expreſſed in the 
next clayſe, or delivered from all the following Calamities. c To 
wit. that the Lord is good, &C. as it 1SV- I: & Of ſuchas had taken 
them Captives. either in Batte], or in their Travels, to which 
they were led by their own Inclinations, or by their neceiliry oc= 


caſtons. 7 
3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the eaſt 


and from the welt, from the north e, and # from the j45,,,,,; 


' ſouth f. the Seas 
e Bringing them into their own land, out of the ſeveral quar. 
ters of the World into which they had been carried. f Heb, from 
theſea, Which in Scripture commonly notes the Wett, becaule 
the great mid lan4i Sea was on the welt of Canaan; but here, as 
it appears fiom the oppoſition of this to the North, it notes the 
South, ſo called from the Red-ſea, which was on the Sourh, and 
which is ſomet:mes called zhe Jes, ſimply, and without addition, 
as Pſal. 72+ 8. and 114. 3. : 
4 They wandredin the wilderneſs g in afolitary way 


they found no city to dwell in 6. | 

g Miſtaking their way, which they might eaſily do in the vaſt 
and ſandy Delarts of 4rabis, h Or rather, n9 City, or Town inhabited, 
where they might refreſh themſelves, as Travellers uſed to do; 
for they did not go into the Wilderneſs to ſeek for a City or Ha- 
biration there, bur only intended ro pais rhrough it, as appears by 
the context, and by the nature of the thing, = 

5 Hungry aud thirity, their foul fainted in them 5, 

i Partly for want of neceſfary proviſiens, and partly through an- 
guiſh of Spirit. : : 

6 Chen they cryed unto the LORD & in their trou-. 
ble, and he delivered them out of their diltreſses /. | 

k Heb. Un:o Fehovah, to the true God. For the Heathens,. of 
whom he ſpeaks, had many of them ſome knowledge of the true 
God, and did in their manner worſhip him with and in their 
Idols ; and elpecialiy in their diftrefſes, when they diſcovered the 
imporency of their Idols, they did dire& their prayer immediatly 
to the true God, of which rhere are many Inſtances of Heathen 


Writers, | In anſwer totheir Prayers, whick he did nor, becaute 
$383 - thor 


43 * Many times did he dcliver them, but they pro- f Or, i 


44 Nevertheleſs, he regarded their atttiction, when ud: 3] | 
c4: 3-18 


*Deurt: 34 


EY =. w wy or 0," I EDD IL 


” ESL A 
4 
- 


O22 Ct i ERA EIT TT WIR. coo > 41 HOPPE 
0, * "agar ow - : & 


1. CVI.. - 


their prayers were acceptable to him, but partly out of the benig- 
nity and compaſſionateneſs of his nature to all his creatures part- 

. ly to encourage and preſerve the uſe of Prayer and Religion among 
the Gentiles, and to oblidge them to a more diligent ſearch after 
the knowledge of the true God, and of his worſhip; and partly 
to give his own people aſſurance. of his great readineſs to hear and 
anſwer all thoſe prayers, which with upright hearts they offered 
tohim according to his word. 


7 And he led them forth mz by the right way, thatthey 
might go to a city of habitation s. 
- m Out of the wilderneſs where they had loſt their way, verſe 4: 
» See before on ve. 4+ | 
Heb. ls $8 + Oh that me» would praiſe othe LORD for his 


memfeſ: zoodnels, and for his wonderful works to the children 


of men p. 
"—_ o Heb. Let thempraiſe. Or, They ſball praiſe, i. e. They are high- 
* ly obliged to praiſe. p Not only to his peculiar people, bur to 
all Mankind, ro whom he is very kind and bountiful, 


9 For he ſatisfieth the longing q ſoul, and filleth the 


hungry ſoul with goodneſs r. | 

. 9 Fither the thirſty, oppoſed to the hugry here following : or 

the hungry, as this general phraſe is limited and expounded in the 

next Clauſe. r Wita the fruits of his goodneſs, with good things, 

Pſal. 103+ 5. with food and gladneſs, As 14. 17. with that good 

which they wanted and deſired, : ' 
10 Such as fit in darkneſs and in the ſhadow of death/, 


being bound in afflition and iron e. 

f In a diſconſolate and forlorn condition, in dark priſons or 
dungeons. #t With afflifting or grizvous irons. Or, in the cords of 
affiition, as they are called Jov 36; 8. and particularly #n Irov 
fetters. 
© 11 Becauſe they rebelled againſt the words of Cod «, 
and contemned the counſel of the moſt High. 

# Againſt Gods commands made known either 1. by his written 
Word delivered to the Jews, of which the Gentiles were not ig- 
norant, which therefore they ſhoul: have diligently enquired after 
and ſearched into, as the Queen of Sheba came from rhe ends of 
the earth to hear the wiſdom of Solomon, and as divers of the Heas 
thens travelled into very remore parts to gain a more perfect know- 
ledge of the Arts and Sciences which will juſtly be Jaid to their 

* charge, and condemn 
dom, which was treaſured up in the holy Scriptures. Or, 2. By 
the Prophets, who tome tim<s were ſent to the Gentiles. 
by the Law and Light of Narure,and by is Interprerers,their wiſe 
and Icarned Philoſophers, who delivered many excellent rules and 
precepts of piety and vertue which were ſufficient,though not for 
their ſalvation without Chriſt. yet for the conduct of their lives 

In a great meaſure, and to leave them without excuſe for their groſs 
diſobedience thereunto. ; 

12 Therefore he brought down their heart x with 
labour y ; they fell down, and there was none to help 2. 

x The pride and rebellion and obſtinacy of their hearts. y Or, 
with trouble or troubles. z They fell into their Enemies hands, and 
into hopeleſs and remedileſs miſeries. 


and he ſaved them out of cheir dilſtreſses. 
* pr68:6, 14 * He brought them our of darkneſs, and the ſha- 
& 146: 7.d0w of death, and brake their bands in ſunder. 

15 Oh that men would praiſe the LORD for his 
goodneſs, and fer his wonderful works to the children 


of men. 
16 For he hath broken the gates of brafs,and cut the 
bars of Iron in ſunder 4. 
| s He reſtored them to liberty in ſpight of all impediments and 
PC: 38: e,0Ppolitions: 
FHeb from 27 || Fools b, + becauſe of their tranſgreflions c, and 
the way ef, becaulc. of their iniquiries, are afflicted &. 

b i e. Wicked men, whom he calls fools, becauſe of the miſchiefs 
which through their own fo'ly they bring upon themſelves. c Heb. 
becauſe of the way of therr tranſgreſſion, i: e: their cuſtom and courſe of 
ſinning, as the word, way, is uted Pſalm 1.1. Prov: 2: 12+ They 
did not fall into ſin once or twice, as good men may do, but it 
was their uſual practice, and therefore they are juſtly puni- 
ſhed. «4 With walting ſickneſs, as appears from v. 18. 20. com- 
pare Job 33, 19, &c. Pſal: 39. 12, &c. 

18 * Their ſoul e abhorreth all manner of meat f, 
20. and they draw || near unto the gates of death. 

VPC. 9313. «© Either themſelves with all their ſoul : or their appetite, as the 

& 88; 3. ſoul is taken, Job 33+ 20- Iſa. 29,8. f Which is an uiual effect of 
great ſickneſs. g. They are ſick well nigh unto death. 


19 Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, 
he ſavech them out of their diſtreſses. 
20 He ſent his word bh, and healed them, and deli- 
vered them from their deſtructions. 
h His command, or his bleſſing, which came with power. - 
21 Ohthat men would praiſe the LORD for his good- 
neſs,and for bis wonderfulworks to the children ofmen. 
*Lev:1:27, 22 And * let them ſactitice the ſacrifices of thankſgi- 
Pf: 50:14. INg i, 2nd declare his works with + rejoycing. 
eb, z Either properly ſo called; or, praiſes and thankſgivings to 


E: » God, which in Scripture are called Sacrifices, becauſe they are no 
PPE leſs acceptable ro God than coſtly Sacrifices, 


23 They chart go down to the ſea k in ſhips ; that do 


buſineſs / in great waters : 

þ He ſaith, go down, either becauſe the Sea or the ſhore of it 
is commonly lower than their habitations from whence they come, 
or than the natural or artificial] banks which are raiſed to prevent the 
inundation of the waters: or becauſe the Sea is lower than the 
Earth, asmay be gathered from the Rivers which run down wto 


PISA L MS. 


them for their neglect of that Divine wiſ- 


Or, 3. 


13 Thentheycryed unto the LORD in their trouble, 


Pſal. CVIL 


it. 1 Whoſe occupation Iyes there, either as Merchants, or as 
Marriners. 


24 Theſe ſee the works of the LORD, and his 


wonders mn in the deep. 
-m His wonderful works, either, 1. of Creation, fiſhes of vari. 
ous kinds and ſhapes, and ſome of prodigious greatneſs, which are 
unknown to other men. Or, 2. of Providence, Ong and 
laying ſtorms, of which he ſpeaks in the following verles- + Heb.mas 
25 For he commandeth, and Þ raiſeth the tormy ;,,z ;; © 


wind » which lifceth up the waves thereof. ſtand, 
2» The winds and ſtorms come not by chance, but by the diſpo< 
ſition of divine providence, 
26 They mount up to the heaven, they go down again 
to thedepths s, their ſoul is melted, becauſe of trouble p. 
0 Towards the bottom of the Sea, p Throughthe perplexity of 
their minds, and fear of ſudden and violent death. 
27 They reel to and fro, and ſtagger like a drunken + Heb os 
.4 


man 9, and Þ are at their wits end. their Wi. 
q Not ſo much from the giddineſs of their heads; which is not ,,, :. ” 
uſual an perſons accuſtomed to the Sea, as through the violent and ſwaltwed 
various motions of the Sea and the Ship. : ; W_ 
28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, 
and he bringeth them out of their diſtreſles. 
29 He maketh the ſtorm a calm, fo that the waves 
thereof are ſtill. 
30 Then are they glad becauſe they be quiet ; ſohe 
bringeth them unto their defired haven« 
x Oh that mer would praiſe the LORD for his good- 
neſs,and fer his wonderful works to the children of men. 
32 Lec them exalt him alſo in the congregation of the 
people r, and praiſe him in the aſſembly of the elders s. 
r Not only in their own hearts and families, but even 1n publick 
Aſſemblies, and before all perſons, as they have opportunity. s 
The Magiſtrates or Rulers ; who are here oppoſed tro the people. 
The ſenſe is, let th:m not be aſhamed nor atraid to ſpeak of Gods 
wonderful works and praiſes before the greateit of men, as mean 
perſons commonly are Compare P/al. 119. 46. Or he mentions 
the Elders particularly, becaule they were moſt apt to negle& and 
forget God, and to exalt themſelves above and againſt him ; and 
; therefore it was meet and neceſſary that they ſhould be acquainted 
with the almighty power and univerſal providence and dominion 
; of God, that they themſelves might learn ſubjection and reverence 
of God, and .might promore it among their people. 
| 23 He turneth rivers 7 into a wilderneſs «, and the 
water-ſprings into dry ground. 
| # Either 1. properly ſo called; which he can divert or dry up | 
| when he plealeth; as ſometimes he hath done. Or rather, 2. thoſe 
: grounds which are well watered, and therefore very truitful, as the 
. next verſe explains this. And ſo the water-ſprings here and v. 35. 
and the fanding water wv. 35. are taken. # Into a dry ground, as it fLeb./af 
follows, which is like a parched and barren Wilderneſs. ah 
24 A fruitful land into t barrenneſs x, for the wic- 


kedneſs of them that dwell therein y. 
x Heb. Into ſaltneſs, which procures barrenneſs. See Deut. 22; 23. 
Juag. 9.42. y He doth nor infli& theſe judgments by choice or 
without cauſe, but for the puniſhment of fin in ſome, and the 
prevention of it in others. #4118] 
35 * He turneth the wilderneſs into a ſtanding water ***" 
z, and dry ground into water-ſprings. 

z Into a well-watered and fruitful land, | 
; 36 Andthere he maketh the hungry # to dwell, that 
' they may prepare a city for habitation ; 

a Poor people who could not provide for themſelves, or were 
baniſhed from their own land by potent oppreſſors, and were dri- 
ven into wildernefles, like them Job 30» 3. which God in pity to 

, them made fruitful. . 

' 37 And ſow the fields, and plant vineyards, which 

may yield 6 fruits of increaſe ec. | 
b Heb. and they ſhall make or procure from their fields and vine« 

yards. &c Such fruits as they uſe toproduce. 

38 He blefleth them alſo, ſo that they are multipli- 


' ed greatly, and ſuffereth not their cattel to decreaſe d. 
d Preſerves them from abortion and deadly diſeaſes, and on the 
contrary cauſeth them to increaſe, as he ſaid in the former branch 
which 1s hererepeated in other words after the ſame manner. 
39 Again they e are miniſhed and brought low f, 
through oppreflion, affliction and ſorrow g. 

e Theſe poor men, who when they are exalted and bleſſed by 
God, kick at him, and grow inſolent and ſecure, as the manner of 
menis. f Are by Gods juſt judgment diminiſhed in their numbers 
and in their Bleſsings, g Or, through wicked oppreſion ( by the 
tyranny of others, whom God ſends to ſpoil them of their abuſed 
+ 4g and by other griefs or grievous calamities which God in- * Tb iD 
flicts. Job t2: 

40 * He poureth contempt upon princes h, and | Or, id 
cauſeth them to wander in the || wilderneſs where there place. 
is hO Way Z. 

h Thoſe who were honourable and adored like Gods by their 
people, and terrible to all their enemies, he renders them deſpi- 
cable to their own Subjects, and to other Nations; and this he 
doth ſuddenly, abundantly, and unavoidably, as this phraſe of pout= 
ring it out upen them ſeems to imply. 7 Either, 1. He giveth them 
up to foolith and pernicious counſels, by which they are expoſed 
ro contempt, and brought to their wits-end, not knowing what 
courſe to take, Or, 2. he baniſhed them from their own Courts 
and Kingdoms, and forced them to flee into deſolare Wilderneſles , |.,, ,,g: 
for ſhelter and ſubſiſtances 


41 * Yetſetteth he the poor on highZ || from affticti- g, 
on and makerh him families iks a flocks. 110, af 


nel. g, 


p 


Pf, oat” 


"" 
8, e 


(0: 


* pf 
F, 


it. 


, al 
7 


as 


i87 


vid 


plal. CVIII, CIX. 


k And whilſt he bringeth down greaf potentates, at the ſame 


I W hich increaſe very much in a little time. ; 
42 + The righteous ſhall ſee is 9, and rejoyce », and 

+ Job 22» Il *; . . 1h ſt h 
ef, all * iniquity oe ſhall ſtop her mouth p. 
#Job 54 m Or rather, .theſe things, as it is expreſſed in the next verſe. 
16, They ſhall diligently obſerve theſe wonderful works of Gods mercy 
and juſtice: » Not only in the mercies of God vouchſafed ro 
them and to other perſons in want and miſery, bur alio in Gods 
Judgements upon his implacable enemies, which afford matter of 
rejoicing to good men, as hath been once and again dec'ared in 
this book, both for the honour which God hath by them, and for 
the ſins and Calamities of otherss which by this means are pre- 
vented» 0 z: e: Unrighteous or ungodly men, the abltratt being 
put for the concrete, as faithfulneſſes tor the faithful, Pal. 12. 2. 
and pride for the proud, Pſal. 36. 12. p Shall be put to ſilence. So 
this or the like phraſe is uſed Judg. 18. 19. Job 5:16. and 21. 5. 
and 29.9. They who uſed to [peak lfrily and wickedly, and to ſer | 
#heir mouth againft the heavens, as they did Pſal:13.8, 2. to reproach 
God and his providence as either negligent or unrighteous in the 
management of the World, thal now be forced to ds his 
power and juſtice in thote judgements which he hath brought u- 


pon them. 
* Whoſo is wiſe, and will obſerve thoſe things 4, 


even they r ſhall underſtand the loving kindneſs of the 
LORD \-. 


9q Or, Who (C for the Hebrew particle, mi, is interrogative ) s 
wiſe! for ( as the conjunttive particle is frequently uſed ) he w:4 
obſerve theſe things. All who are truely wiſe will conſider all theſe 
events. and lay them to heart, as being very uſeful for their own 
inſtruttion » Or, each of them, all ſuch wiſe and conſidering per- 
ſons, s Will ſee and acknowledge that God is kind or good #0 
#ll, and that his tender mercies are over all his" works, as 1t 1s ſaid, 
Pſale 145. 9g. and ſingularly kind and gracious to all wiſe and godly 


men. 
PSAL CGCFRIE 
The ARGUME NT. 


His Pſalm is almoſt word for word taken out of two forego- 

ing Pſalms, the firſt five verſes out of Pſa: 57. 7, 8,9,10,"1, 

and the reſt out of Pſal: 60. 5, &c. to which the Reader muſt 
reſort for the explication of it. This only is obſervable that the 
Pfalmiſt deſigning to take the body of this Pſalm out of Pſalm 60. 
doth induſtiiouſly lay a{ide that mournful Preface v. r. 2, 3, 4, 
and borrows one more pleaſant out of Pſalm 57. The reaſon of 
which change is ſuppoſed t5 be this, that P/a' 69. was compoſed 
'3n the time of his danger and diſtreſs, and the latter after his de- 


liverance, 


Hoſ.14-9 


A Song, or Pſalm of David. 
\ David rouſeth up himſelf to praiſe the Lord, 1 — 4; praying 


P S'& EL M2. 


time he advanceth thoſe who were obicure and contemptible. : 


Plal. Ch 


' typifie or repreſent the enemies of Chriſt, and this particular ad- 
' verſary of his did repreſent ſome ſingular and eminent enemy of 
+ Chriſt, which though David might nor, yet the Spirit of God 
; Which indited this Pſalm, did know to be Judas, and accordingly 
| direted all. rheſe bitrer inve&ives and imprecations againſt him, 
' Who deſerve. and received far worſe puniſhments for his monſtrous 
wickedneſs, than all which axe here me;:rioned. And that he was 
the perſon principally aimed at in this Palm, will ſeem very pro- 
bable to him who conſiders Davids mild and merciful temper even 
towards his enemies,which he both profeſſed in words in this very 
book, as P/3l. 35, 12, 13, 14. and praftiſed in deeds, as 2 Sam. 16. 
10, +1. an 19.22, 23. and withal the ſeverity of theſe impreca- 
tions, reaching not only to the perſons of his enemies, but to their 
chijdren, who yet by the Law of God were not to ſuffer for their 


Parents ſins, Dew#. 24+ 16. | 
To the chief muſician, a Pſalm-of David, 


David complaning of his jalſe accuſers, who requited him evil for good, 
dewoterh them and their Children to all miſery and oblivion, 1-==»..15 _ - 
becauſe of their unmercifulneſs and cruelty, 16 20. Sheweth 
hu grat affiift/on, prayeth for deliverance, and prom:ſeth thankfuineſs, 


21 31. 
OLD not thy peace 6, O GOD of my 


- praiſe b. | 
4 Do not negle& me, but take notice of my extreme danger and 
miſery, and deliver me, which thou canſt do by the ſpeaking of 
one word, b The Author and matter of all my praiſes z who haſt 
Sven me continual occalion to praiſe thee, whom I have uſed to 
praiſe and will praiſe whilſt I livez do not therefore now give | 
me occaſion to turn my praiſes inro lamentations: | 
2 For the mouth of the wicked, and the + mouth of, , | 
the deceitful c F are opened « againſt me : they have yuh of | 
ſpoken againſt, me e with a lying tongue f. deceit. 
e Of thoſe who add hypocriſie and perfidiouſneſs te their malice. fHeb.hav 
4 They ſpeak freely, boldly and publickly, without any fear or opened | 
ſhame &# Or, to or with me, as this Particle cemmonly ſignifies. them- 
f Either, r. With Calumnies, or falte and malicious Reports. Or, ſelves 
wn deep diflimularion and profeſſions of friendſhip and kind- 
neſs, 
3 They compaſſed me about alſo with words of ha- 


tred 2: and foughe againſt me * without a cauſe b. 
S Which though covered » ith ſpecious pretences, proceeded * PC{ 69. 
from dcep malice and hatred, and were deligned to work my de- 
ſtruftion. þ Without any juſt provocation given them by me. 

4 For my love they are my adverſaries ;; bur I give 
my [elf unto prayer &. 

# They requite my love and good will with enmity and miſchief, 
as it is explained v: 5. k Heb: but I prayer, i.e. I am a man of 
Prayer,or I betake my ſelf to prayer. Thus 7 peaceis put for I am 
for Pace, as we render it Pſal: 1120s 7. and thy bread for the men of 


4 
| 


[ 
| 
' 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


| alſo for his aſſiſtance, being fully aſſured of it, againſt his Enemies, 
B+ 13. , . 
God, my Heart * is fixed, I will ſing and give 
praiſe even with my glory 4. 
, 8 Either, 1. with my heart or ſoul, which is fixed for that 
work, as he ſaid in the former branch. Or rather, 2. with my 
tongue, which is called a mans glory, Pſal. 16, 9. compared wirh 
As 2. 26. So the firſt branch deſcribes the fixedneſs of his heart,to 
which this adds the expreſſions of his mouth. 


2 Awake Pfaitery and Harp ; I my ſeff will awake 


early. 

3 I will praiſe thee, O LORD, among the people: 

and Iwill ſing praiſes unto thee among the nations. 
For thy mercy is great abovethe heavens: and thy 


(0c, bis, truth reacheth unto the || clouds. 
5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the Heavens: and 


thy glory above all the earth ; | 
6 * That thy beloved may be delivered : ſave with 


thy right hand and anſwer me. 
7 God hath ſpoken in his Holineſs, 1 will rejoyce, I 
will divide Shechem,and mete out the valley of Succoths 
8 Gilead is mine, Manaſseh 5s mine, Ephraim alſo 7s 


the ſtrength of mine head, Judah is my law-giver. 
9 Moab is my waſh-pot,over Edom will I caſt out my 


ſhoe: over Philiſtia wiil I eriumph. 
10 Who will bring me into the ſtrong city ? who will 


lead me into Edom b ? 

b This he repeats in this place, either becauſe, though the ene« 
mies were defeated and ſubdued, yer there was ſome frong City 
or Cities which were not yet taken 3 or in way of thankful cour- 
memoration of Gods goodneſs in anſwering his former requeſts, 
as if he had ſaid, I remember this day to thy glory an ' my own 
comfort, my former ſtraits and dangers, which made me cry out, 


IWho will bring meg $C- 
11 Flt not thou, O God, who haſt caſt us off ? and 


wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hoſts ? 
x2 Give us help from trouble : for vain 3s the help of 


man. 
I3 Through God we ſhall do valiantly: for he it ;s 


that ſhall tread down our enemies* 
PSA TL. CIX. 
The ARGUME NT. 

T is ſufficiently evident from the body of this Pſalm, that it was 
Compoſed by David when he was in a ſtate of perſecution ei- 
ther by Saul or by Abſalom ; and that amongſt and above all the 
reſt of his enemies he takes very particular norice of. and breaks 
forth into vehement expreſſions of anger againſt one particular per- 
ſon, which whether 1t were Doeg or Achitophel is not certain, nor 
at all neceſſary to know. But as David was, and very well knew 


himſelf to be a Type of Cluiſt, and conſequently his cngmics did 


$927. 


» OT, 


F 
j 


* Þf. 60, 
5, CC» 


thy bread, or, that eat thy bread, OSad. wer. 7- The ſenſe is, whilſt 
they reproach and curſe me, I pray either, 1, for them, as he 
did P/al: 35. 13+. Or, 2. for my elf: I did not render unto them 
evil for evil, but quietly committed my ſelf and my cauſe ro God 
by prayer defiring him to plead my cauſe againſt them ; and Ibad 
no other refuge, ; 

5 And * they have rewarded me evil for good, and 


hatred for my love. *pr 
l Sas & - 


6 Set thou a wicked man / over him »,and let * -12; 
tan ſtand at his right hand »» "Jae je 
{ Heb, the wicked, Which may be underſtood either, » Of ſome þ Ox an 
wicked Tyrant, which may rule him with rigour and cruelry, Or, adverſary. 
2 Of Satan, who is mentioned in the nexc clauſe, Ler him be 
delivered over to Satan, to be a&ed and ruled by him at his plea- 
ſure. m Either, 1. All mine enemies. ; for the ingular number is 
ſometimes uſed in like manner. Or cather, 2. One particular ene«- 
my, who was worſe than any of the ret, more implacable and in- 
exeuſable, whom he thought not fit to expreſs by name, nor was 
it in the leaſt-neceſſary to do ſo, becauſe he was ſpeaking. to God, 
who knew his thoughts, and whom he meant. =» Either, #. To 
moleſt and vex him, and hinder him in all his affairs; for the right 
hand is the great inftrument of aftion. Or rather, 2. To accuſe 
him ; for this was the place and poſture of accuſers in the Jewiſh 
Courts, And as for his condemnation, which is the conſequence 
of this accuſation, that follows in the next verſe. 
7 When he hai be judged o,let him + be condemned, 
and * let his praver become fin p. | + Heb 
os When he ſhall be ca!lzd ti an account, and his cauſe examin- out wile y 
ed before thy Tribunai. 7; e: Be turned into fin or be imputed of — = | 
to him as his ſin, or be as una-ailable with God for his relief as his *p '; 2 pi 
ſins. Whende makes ſuppl:ication to. his Judge, as Job ſpeaks Jeb COZSS2Y 
9. 15. for pity and pardon, Jet him be the more provoked and en-= 


raged by it. 
8 Let his days 9 be few, and * let another take his _ 
*AQs1.20. 


| office r. | h 
| q The days of his life. Let him die an untimely death. » Made Or,charge 
void by his death. He alſo implies that his,enemy was a man of 


power and reputation. 
9 Let his chiidren be fatherleſs 5s, and his wife a 


widow #. 

s Whilſt they are but children, and ſo unable to provide for 
themſelves. * Either mide a Widow by his death ; or conſtantly 
a Widow ; all perſons abhorring her who was related to ſo vile a 
miſcreant. _ L 

10 Let his children be continually vagabonds #, and 
beg x : let them ſeek their bread aiſo out of their deſolats 
places y- 


« Having no certain place of abode. Which is a grievous Curſe 
in it ſelf, Gen. 4. 12, 14. Ja. 16. 2, x This increafſeth their mi« 


ſery. y Into which they are fled for fear and ſhame, as not daring 
to thew their faces amongſt men | ; 
11 Let the extortioner 2 catch z allthat he hath; and 
letthe ſtranger þ ſpoil _ labour «, 
gg 


& Or, 


z Or, uſarer, or creditor. @ Heb. Enſnare, which is an empha- 
tical expreſſion, 5. e. take away not only by oppreſſion and vi1o- 
lence, bur alſo by cheats and cunning artifices, whereby ſuch per- 
ſons entangle, and ſo ruine their debtors. 6 Who hath no right to 


All the fruits of his labours. 


£3440 neither let there beany tofavour his fatherleſs children d. 


4 Let him and his be unpitied and hated as the publick enemics 


of mankind. 
Tob 18. 273 * Let his poſterity be cut off, ard in the genera- 
, tion following e let their name be blotced out. 


e Heb. i another generation, either in the third generation, or in 
the ſecond,or that which next followed the Generation of his Fa- 
thers. So in this clauſe he limits the time of that deſtruftion which 
he imprecates or foretells in the former. 

14 Let the iniquity of his Fathers be remembred f 
with the LORD, and let not the ſin of his Mother be 


blotted out. 
f Againſt him, or puniſhed in him, as God hath threatned to 
cal with great delinquents, Exod. 20. 5+ ; | 
I5 Let them g be before the Lord bcontinually, that 
he may * cut off the memory of them from the earth. 
£ The fins of his Parents laſt mentioned, þ In Gods ſight and 
Q memory to provoke God to puniſh them: let them not be cove- 
+34.16 red or pardoned. 
16 Becauſe that he remembred not z to ihew mercy; 
but perſecuteth the poorand needy man &,that he might 


even ſlay the broken in heart /. 

z; His' duty to God, and his obligation to me for my former 
kindneſs expreſſed wv: 4: 5. k My ſelf. who was deſolate and mi- 
ſerable, whoſe condition required pity and not additions of cru- 
elty- { Whoſe ſpiric was grieved, and even broken with the bur- 
deg of his calamity. 

17 * As he loved curſing m, ſo let it come unto him : 


as he delighted not inblefling »,ſo let it be far from him. 

» Either. 1. Curſed or ſinful courſes. Or rather 2. To curſe 
others, as appears from the bleſſing here oppoſed to it, and from 
the next verſe; to with and to procure miſchief to others, and e- 
ſpecially to me. » In defiring and promoting the welfare of others, 
which indeed was an eye-ſore and torment to him. 
| 18 As he clothed himſelf with curſing like as with a 
Heb. garment so, fo let it come into his bowels like water p, 
ithin him and like oyl, q into his bones. 
. © Which a man wears conſtantly, and that as an Ornament. 
? Which when aman drinks, goes into his bowels, and ſearcheth 
all the inwards of his belly, q Which is more piercing than wa- 
ter, and being applied to outward parts,reacheth even to the bones 
and marrow, _ | 

19 Let it be unto him as the garment whichcovereth 


him, and for a girdle r wherewith he is girded conti- 
nually. 


r Which cleaves cloſer and faſter to a man than a Garment eſpe- 
cially than the Eaſtern Garments did, which were large and looſe. 
'20 Let this be the + reward of mine adverſaries s 
from the LORD, and of them that ſpeak evil againſt 


my 4oul #- | 
5 Of thoſe who were confederate with that arch-enemy in his 
wicked enterpriſe. t With defign to take away my life. 


21 But do thou for me «<, O GOD the LORD, 
for thy names ſake x: becaule thy mercy is good y,de- 


tiver thou me. 

*z To wit, what I deſire, which he exprefſeth in the next clauſe. 
Or, o thou af for me 3 be not ſilent or ſtill, bur ſtir up thy ſelf to 
work on my behalf. x For the glory of thy faithfulneſs, which is 
; highly concerned in giving me the deliverance which thou haſt 
promiſed to me. y 7: e: Gracious, and ready to do good to all, 
but eſpecially to thoſe that love and fear thee. As (#: is faid ro be 
ſenful, Rom: 75:13. ſo Gods mercy may be ſaid to be merciful,towit, 

iR an eminent degree, and above the mercy of all the creatures. 
22 For I am poor and needy =, and my heart 1s 


wounded within me 4. 

z And therefore a very proper objeft for thy pity and help. 
a T am wounded not lightly, butevenrto the very heart with ſoul- 
Piercing ſorrows. \ | 

23 1 am gone b* like the ſhadow,when it declineth c: 


I am toſſed up and down as the locuſt 4. 
Pſal.1o2, | þ Heb: I am made to go, either, 1. from place to place ; which 
LI, was Davids caſe when he was perſecuted by Saul and by Abſalom ; 
4 and Chriſts caſe upon earth. where he had no certain place where 
" zo lay his head, . Matth. 8: 20, Or, 2. into the grave, as this phraſe is 
uſed 1 Chron: 17: 11. Pſal: 58: 9. and oft elſewhere® c Towards 
the evening, when, the Sun ſetting, it vaniſheth inſtantly, and ir- 
recoverably until the Sun riſe again, which it never will doto me 
in this World, when once I am gone out of it & Which of it 
ſelf is unſtable, continually skipping from place to place, and is 
eaſily driven away with every wind, So am I expoſrd to perpe- 
tual;and ſucceſſive changes within my ſelf, and to a thouſand vio- 
lences and miſchiefs from other perſons and things. 
2., My knees are weak through faſting e,and my fleſh: 


faileth of fatneſs. 


e Either with voluntary Faſts, to which the frequency and long 
continuance of my calamities obliged me ; or with forced Faſts, 
ſometimes through want of neceſlary proviſiens,but moſt common- 
ly from that loathing of meat, which was occalioned by his exceſ- 
fre ſorrows and terrors. Sce on P/al: 107; 18. f Or, for want of fat= 
meſs. See the like Hebrew phraſes Gen: 18: 26. FJer:48:45.Lamig.9. 

25 I became alſo a reproach unto themg : when they 


looked upon me, they ſhaked their heads 4. 


ob 18. 


Ezek. 
5. Go 


Heb, 
ory 


2, 49.10. 


his goods, and will uſe no pity nor meaſure in ſpoiling him. c ; 


12 Let there be none to * extend mercy unto him 2 | 


EC Mo. 


g Inſtead of that pity,which either Religion or Humanity ſhould 
. have taught them to a man in extreme miſery, they loaded me 
with reproaches and ſcorns. h A geſture of contempt and deri« 
ſion, of which ſee Fob 16. 4. Pſal. 22: 8. 

26 Help me, O LORD my God: O ſave me ac- 
cording to thy mercy : 

27 That they may know 7 that this zs thy hand : chat 
thou, LORD, haft done it. 


z Being convinced of the eminency and ſingularity and ſtrange. 
neſs of the work. 


28 Let them curſe &, but bleſs thou z when they a- 


riſe / let them be aſhamed, but let thy ſervant rejoyce. 
k I can patiently bear their Curſes, as being cauſleſs, and fully 
compenſated by thy Bleſſing, Or, they do and will curſe, I expe& 
nothing elſe from them. 1 ( 7. e») Beſtir themſelves againſt mes 
Both God and Men are off ſaid to ariſe when they enter upon any 
undertaking, as Joſ: 24* 9. Judg. 8: 21. 2 Chron: 13. 6.and 21: 4, Cc. 
29 Let mine adverſaries be clothed with ſhame m x 
and let them cover themſelves withtheir own confuſion, 


as with a mantle. 

m For the diſappointment of their wicked hopes and deſigns, 
and for that unexpe&ed deſtruction which they have broughtupon 
themſelves. 

391 will greatly praiſe the LORD » with my mouth: 
yea, I will praiſe him among the multirude 6. 

n For that deliverance which I confidently expe&, »« Or, among 
bo my or great men, as this word ſometimes ſignifies. Comp. 
PJat. 119: 46«. 

3 r For he ſhall ſtand at the right hand of the poor p, 


to ſave him + from thoſe that condemn his ſoul q. t Heb. 
Þ To defend him from his adverſary,who ſtood in that place to from: the 

accuſe him, and to procure his condemnation and deſtruction, See j#4g&0ſhy 

above on v. 6. 9q Thar paſs a ſentence of death upon him, ſoul, 


PSA TA 
The ARGUMENT. 


Hat the Pen-man of this Pſalm was nor Eliezer, Abrahams ſer 
vant, who writ it upon the occaſion of Abrahams vitory 

over thoſe Kings, Ger. 14. ( as ſome of the later J-ws have deviſed 
out of oppoſition to Chriſtianity ) nor any other perſon but David, 
1s manifelt from the Tirle of rhe Pſalm, which is a part of tte 
ſacred Texr, That this Ptalm belongs to the Meiah,is abundant- 
ly evident both from the expreſs teſtimony of the new Teſtament, 
AZs 2. 34. 1 Cor: 15.25. Heb. 1. 3. and 10.13, and from the 
con ent of the antient Hebrew DoQors manifeſted implicitly in 
Matth. 22. 44- and expreſly from their own mouths. Ofwhich ſee 
my Latine Synopſis upon this place ; and from the matrer of the 
Pſalin, which can by na means or arts be made to agree to David, 
who was not Davias Lord, nor a Priefft, much leſs a Prieſt for ever, 
or after the order of Melchiſedeck, the Prieſthood of Aaron being in 
Davids time in uſe and force, and in the hands of another perſon 
and family. And whereas divers other Pſalms,though principally 
direed to, and to be underſtood of the MeſFah, yct.in ſome ſort 
may be underſtood concerning D#vid alſo, or at leaſt rook their 
riſe and occafion from David. or from ſomething relating to him, 
this Pſalm is dire&Qly and immediatly and ſolely to be underſtood 
concerning the Meſliah 3 the Spirir of God wiſely ſoordering this 
matter, that it might be a molt expreſs and convincing teſtimony 
againſt the unbelieving Jews cencerning the true Mefſſhah,and con- 
cerning the narure and quality of his Kingdom. 
'  APſalm of David a. 
a Written by David, as is manifeſt both from this Title, which 
being given to this, as well as to many other Palms, whereof 
Dawvid 1s confefled to be the Author, either proves this to be 
Davids, or proves none of them to be ſo, and from Matrh. 22, 
43+ 44. and Mark 12. 36. where alſo David is ſaid to have ſpoken 
this Pſalm 7» or by the Spirir of God, or by Divine Inſpiration. 
An account of the calling the Kinzdom of <hrift, 1 - 3 Of bis ever- 
laſting Prieſthood, 4, Of hu mighty Conqueſt over his Enemies, 5 , 6, 
And of his Sufferings and Triumph, 7» 
] 'HE * LORD 6 faid c unto my LORD A, Sit thou , as 

at my right hand e, until f I make g thine enemies ,, 


h thy f.otftool z. Mack 12. 
b God the Father the firſt Perſon in the "Trinity, to whom acs- 36. 
cordingly the original of all things, and eſpecially of the work of Luke 0. 
Mans Redemption by Chriſt is aſcribed. c Decreed or appointed 42. 

it from eternity, and in due time publiſhed this Decree, as is no- Ads 34 
ted Pſal; 2. 7+ and aQtually execurt:d it ; which he did when he- 1 Cor. 15: 
raiſed up Chriſr fr :m the dead, and brought him into his heavenly 25. 
manſion. d Unto his Son the Meſfſias, whom Dav:d deſignedly Heb. 1-13 
calls his Lord, to admoniſh the Jews and the whole Church, that al- 
though he was his Son according to the fleſh or his humane na- 

ture, As 2 30- Row, 1. 3. yet he had an higher Nature and Qri- 

ginal, and was alſo his Loa, as being by Nature God blcſſed for 

ever, and conſequently Lord of al things, as he is called 4#s 10.36. 

and by Office as he was God-man, the Lord and King of the 

whole Church, and of all the world for the Churches ſake And 

this was a neceſſary proviſion to prevent that ſcandal which the 

Holy Ghoſt foreſaw the Jews and others would be apt to take atthe 
meanneſs of Chriſts appearance in the Fleſh. "The Hebrew word 

Adon is one of Gods Titles, ſignifying his Power and Authority or 
Lordſhip over all things, and therefore is molt fitly given to the 

Mefſias, to whom God hath delegated all his power in the World, 

Matth, 28« 18. « Thou who haſt for marry years been veiled with in- 

firm and mortal fleſh, deſpiſed and reje&ed and trampled upon by 
men,and perſecuted unto the death,do thou now takerto thy felt 

thy great and juſt Power ; thou haſt done thy work upon Earth, 

now take thy reſt and the poſſeſſion of that Soveraign Kingdom 

and Glory, which by right belongeth to thee ; do thou rule with 

me with equal Power and Majeſty, as thou art God ; and with an 
Authority and Honour far above all Creatures, fuch as is next to 


mine, as thou art Man; as this phraſe is expounded in other 
places. See Mark 16: 19. Luke 22. 69. 1 Core 15, 25. Hebrews 1. 3+ 


13 and $, 1 and 10, 12, 13. Eh. f« 20, &c, It is a Metaphor 
from 


Pſal. Cx Ph 


e 


hu 


"Pal, CX. 


| [ Or, give 


E'---- 


from the cuſtom of Earthly Princesg who place thoſe perſons whom 
they honour moſt at their right hand : of which ſee 1 Kings 2.190 
Pſal. 45. 10. Matth: 20 2. Sitting is put for reigning, 1 Kings 3. 6- 
comp. with 2 Chron. 1. 8. and withal notes the continuance of the 
Reign, I Cor. 15:25. f Which word doth not neceſſarily note the 
end or expiration of his Kingdom at that time ; for in other places 
it notes only the continuance of things till ſuch tim?, without 
excluding the time following, as is evident from Gen; 25: 15. Pſal: 
112:8; Mat. ie ult. So here it may fignifie that his Kingdom ſhould 
continue ſo long, even in the midſt ofhis Enemies, and in ſpight 
of all their power and malice, which was the only thing whieh 
was liable to any doubt; for thathe ſhould continue to reign after 
the conqueſt and utter ruine of all his enemies, was out of all 
queſtion» And yet this is a word of limitation, in regard of the 
Mediatorial Kingdom of Chriſt, in reſpe& of which Chrift rules 
with a delegated Power, as his Fathers Vice-Roy, and with the uſe 
of outward means and inſtruments and ordinances, &c. for that 
manner of adminiſtration ſhall ceaſe : which alſo ſeems to be inti= 
mated by this word, as it 15 expounded 1 Cor- 15. 25« g By my 

Almighty Power communicated to thee as God by eternal gene- 
ration, and vouchſafed to thee as Mediator, to enable thee ro the 

full diſcharge of thine Office. b Whichalſo are the enemies of thy 
Church; all perſecutors aud ungodly men, who wil not have Chritt 
to rule over them, Luke 19: 14. Sin and death and the Devil; 1 Cor+ 
15.26. 1*Thy ſlaves and vaſſals to be put to the meaneſtand baſeſt 

ſervices, as this phraſe implies, 1 Kings 5. 3. Pſal- 18: 39. and 

91+ 13, being taken from the manner of Eaſtern Princes who uſed 

to tread upon the Necks of their conquered Enemies, as we read 

Joſ: 10 24. Judges 1. 7. And long after thoſe times Sepores the 

Pertian Emperor trod upon Yaleriau Emperor of the Romans. and 

Tamerlan uſed to tread upon Bajazet the Turkiſh Emperor, whom 


he kept in an Iron Cage for that purpoſe. 


2 The Lord ſhal ſend & the rod of thy ſtrength / out 
of Zion 1: rule thou m in the midſt of thine enemies ». 

k Or, ſend forth, into the World. 1 Thy ſtrong or powei®.l 
Rod, by an uſual Hebraiſm. And the Rod is put for his Scepter,or 
Kingly Yower, as it is 1/a. 10. 24. Jer. 48: 17. Ezeke 7: 10, r1.and | 
19: 11, 12+ But as the Kingdom of Chriſt is not carnal or of this 
Worlg, Jon 18: 36. bur ſpiritual, fo this Rod or Scepter 1s no- 
thing elſe but his Word publiſhed by himſelf, or by his Apoſtles 
and Miniſters) and accompanied with his Spirit, by which the 
Meſlias did his great exploits, and ſet up and eitabliſhed his King- 
dom, converting ſome of his enemies, and confounding and de- 
ſtroying others of them by that ſame inſtrument;,as 1s manifeſt by 
comparing 1/a: 2. 3: and 11; 4. Mich: 4: 2, 2 Cor. 10. 4 2 Theſſ. 
2. 8. Hence this word is called the word of the kingdom, Match. 13. 
19. and the Power of God, Rom. \. 16, David having ſpoken of the 
Meſlias v. 1. now turneth his ſpeech ro him. / From Jeruſalem, 
which is frequently underſtood by the name of Zion, which was 
an eminent and venerable part of it, as P/al. 48. 13» and 87. 2.and 
102. 14, 17, &c- Where the Scepter of the Meflias was firſt to be 
eſtabl:ſhed according to the predi&tions of the Prophers, Pſal: 2 6, 
8. and 48. 3. Iſa. 2.3, &c. to which the event exaltly anſwered, 
Luke 24. 47: Afts 1. 4. and 2. 1, 2, ©, and from whence it was 
to be ſent forth into all the parts and Kingdoms of the World, to 
bring in the Gentiles, which alſo the Prophets had foretold, as 
J/a: 2. 3, and in divers of the foregoing Plalms, as hath been al- 
ready frequently obſerved and proved. m Thou ſhalr rule, the 
Imperative being here put for the Future as it is Gen. 32. 12. Pal. 
37. 27+ and oft elſewhere. For this is not a command, but a pre- 
dition or a promiſe that he ſhall rule. Which he doth partly by 
his Grace. converting ſome, and ſo ruling their Hearts by his 
Word and Spirit, and ſubduing their luſts in them, and their ex- 
ternal enemies for them 3 and partly by his powerful providence, 
whereby he defends his Church and people and ſubdues and puniſh- 
eth all theiradverfſaries. » Who ſhall ſee it, and do what they can 
to oppoſe thy dominion, but flall never be able to hinder it, but 
ſhall iplit themſelves againſt it. 

3 Thy people s|| ſhall be willing p in the day of thy 

ower 9, in the beauties of holineſs 7 * from the womb 

of the morning : thou haſt the dew of thy youth s. 

« Thy ſubje&s. p Heb. willingneſſes, . e. moſt willing, as ſuch 
plural words are frequently uſed, as Pſal. 5« 10 . and 21. 7» Or, 
freewill-offerings, as the word properly ſignifies. Whereby he may 
the mon intimate the difference between the Worlhip of the Old Teſtament 
ing : thou end that of the new. They ſhall offer and preſent unto thee as 
Þil have, their King and Lord, not Oxen or, Sheep or Goats,as they did un» 
&c. * der the Law, but themſelves, their ſouls and bodies,as living facri- 
fices, as they are called Rom: 12? 1, and as freewill-offerings, giv- 
ing up themſelves to the Lord, 2 C'r: 8: 5. to live to him, -and to die 
and be offered for him. The ſenſe is, Thou ſhalt have friends and 
ſubje&s as well as enemies, and thy ſubjects ſhall not yield thee a 
forced and feigned obedience, as thoſe who are ſubje&t to, Or Con= 
quered by, Earthly Princes frequently do, of which ſee on P/al, 
17: 44, 45. but ſhall moſt willingly and readily and chearfully o- 
bey all thy commands without any deſpute or delay or reſervation, 
and they ſhall nor need to be preiſed to thy ſervice, bur ſhall vo- 
luntarily liſt themſelves, and fight under thy banner againſt all chy 
enemies. 9 When thou ſhalt. rake into thy hands zhe rod of rþy 
ſtrength, as it is called v: 2. and ſer up thy Kingdom inthe World, 
and put forth thy mighry Power in the preaching of thy Word, 
and winning Souls to thy ſelf by it.” Or, #2 che aay of thine army, 
or forces, when thou ſhalt raiſe thine Army, conſiſting of Apoſtles, 
and other Preachers and Profeſſors of the Goſpel, and ſhajr ſend 
them forth to conquer the World unto thy ſelf. r Adorned with 
the beautifiil and glorious Robes of Righteouſneſs and true Holi- 
neſs, wherewith all new Men or true Chriſtians are cloathed Eph: 
4:24. compare Revel: 19: 8, 14. with various gifrs and graces of 
Gods Spirit, which are beauriful in the eyes of God and of all good 
men. The laſt clauſe nered the inward diſpoſition, the willing- 
neis, of Chriſts Subjeas,*and this nores their outward habit and 
deportment. Wherein there ſeems to be an alluſion either, 1. to 
' the beautiful and glorious garmenrs of the Levitical Priefts, all 
4 Chriſtians being Prieſts unto God, Rev: 1;6. 1 Pet: 2: 5,9. Or, 2.to 
” the military rodes wherewith Souldiers are furniſhed and . ador-, 

fied, all Chriſtians being Souldicrs in the Chriſtian wartare.But the 


ree-wille 
eferings, 
*Or, more 
than the 
womb of 


L M 5. Pal. CX 


| words are and may well be rendred thus, i» the beauties or glories of 
; the Sanftuary, (is &:) by an uſual Hebraiſm, in the beautiful and 
| glorious Sanctuary, which is called the Holy and beautiful houſe, 1ſas 
' G4: 17. either in the temple at Jeruſalem, which was honoured 
with Chriſts preſence, whereby it excelled the glory of the firſt 
houſe, according to Hagg: 2: 9. in which both Chriſt and the 
Apoſtles preached, and by their preaching made many of theſe 
willing people : or in Jeru[alem, which is oft called the Holy place 
or City, by the ſame word which is here rendred San#uary : or in 
the Church of God and of Chriſt, which was the Antitype of the 
old Sanctuary or Temple, , as is evident from: 1. Cor. 3.16, 17-2 
Cor. 6. 16. Heb: 3, 6- 1 Pet. 2.5- And this place may be mentio« 
ned as the place either where Chriſts people are made willing, 
and ſhew their willingneſs, or where Chriſt exerciſeth and mani. 
teiteth that power 1lijt mentioned. s This place is judge 
4 P s judged. the 
moſt difficult and obſcure of any in this whole Book-. The words 
are diverſly rendred and underſtood.:. They are to be underſtood 
cither, 1. of Chriſt himſelf, and that in reſpe& either, 1.,of his 
divine and eternal generation, which may be called che dew of his 
youth or birth, and which he may be ſaid ro have had from che womb 
of che morning, before the firſt morning or light was created or 
brought out of its Womb; that is, before the world was, which 
15 a common deſcription of Eternity in Scripture. Or, . 2. of, his 
Humane Nature and Birth, and ſo the words may be thus rendred 
From the womb of the morning. (C Or, as it is rendred by divers 0< 
thers, From the womb, from the morning ( i e.) from thy very firſt 
birth ) chou haſt or hadft the dew of thy youth, ( i, e. ) thoſe eminent 
Bleſſings and graces wherewith thou was enriched, or thy youth or 
childhood Was like the dew, precious and acceptable. Or rather, : 2- 
of Chriſts ſubje&s or people, of whom he evidently ſpoke in, the 
former part of the Verle, 5 wherewith theſe words are joyneds 
And it {cems not probable, that the Pſalmiſt after he had diſcour. 
ſed of Chriſts advancement to his Kingdom,and his adminiſtration 
of it, and ſucceſs in it, both as to his enemies and friends, would 
run back to his birth, either Divine o Humane, both which were * 
evidently and neceffarily ſuppoſed in what he had already ſaid of 
hime _But then theſe words may be read cither, 1. ſeparately, as 
two diſtin& clauſes, as they ſeem to be taken by our Engliſh Tran= 
flators, and by the Colon which they placed in the middle. . And 
ſo the firſt clauſe belongs to the foregoing words, as noting the 
time When the people ſhall be willing, which having declared more 
generally in thoſe words, in the day of thy power, he now deſcribes, 
more particularly and exatly, that they ſhould be ſo even from cha 
morning, or in a Poetical ſtrain, which 1s very ſuitable to this Book, 
from the womb of the morning, to wit, of that day of his power, 
( 7.e. ) from the very beginning of Chriſts entrance upon his King- 
dom,which was after his Reſurre&ion and Aſcenſion into Heaven, 
and from the very firſt preaching of the Goſpel after that time, 
when multitudes were made Chriſts willing people by the Preach- 
ing of the Apoſtles, as we read A#s 2: and 3. and 4. and 5, &c. 
And for the'ſecond clauſe, it is to be underſtood thus, thou haſt, 
or as it js in the Hebrew, #0 thee is, the dew of thy youth, or of thy 
childhood, for the word jeled, from which this is derived, fignifies 
ſometimes a young man, and ſometimes a child or Injant, By youth 
or childhood he here ſeems to underſtand thoſe young men . or chil- 
dren which ſhall be born to the Meſſias, who are called his children, 
Heb, 2. 13. and his ſeed, Iſa, 53.10. wherein poſſibly there mighe 
be an alluſion to this dew. Thus the abſtract-is here- pur for the 
concrete, which is very frequent in the Hebrew Tongue, as Cir= 
cumciſion and Uncircumciſun are put for the Circumciſed and the Un« 
circumciſed, &c. And even in the Latine Tongue this very word 
youth is oft uſed for a young man or for a company of young 
men. By the dew of youth he means youth or young men like dew, the 
note of ſimilitude being oft underſtood: And this progeny of Chriſe 
1s compared to the dew, partly becauſe of their great multitude, 
being like drops of dew innumerable, and covering the whole face- 
of the earth ; ſee 2 Sam. 17. 12: and partly becauſe of the ſtrange 
manner of their generation: which like that of the dewz, is done 
{uddenly and ſecretly, and not perceived till it be accemphiſhed, 
and to the admiration of thoſe that behold it 3 of which ſee Iſa: 
49. 21. Or, 2. joyntly, as one entire fentence, The dew of thy 
yourh- (i e.) Thy poſterity, which 1s like the dew, as was noted 
and explained before) is as the dew ( which may very well be 
underſtood. out of the foregoing clauſe, as the word feet is under- 
Nood in like manner, Pſal: 18. 33. He maketh my feet like hinds feet) 
of or from the womb of the morning, 1t is like the morning dew, as it is 
called both in Scripture, as Hoſea 6. 4, and in other Authors.Nor 
is it ſtrange that a womb is aſcribed ro the morning, ſeing we 
read of the womb of the Sea, and of the womb of the ice and froft, Jt 
38. 8, 28, 29. - > 
4 The LORD hath ſworn z, and will not repent, 
* Thou art # a prieſt x for ever y after the order of Mel- *r 1 
chizedek &. | 51 , 
t Which he did not in the Aaronical Prieſthood, Meb: 9. 21, 
but did it here, partly becauſe the thing was new and ſtrange,and 
might ſeem incredible, becauſe God had already ere&ed another, 
and that an everlaſting Prieſth)ody Num. 25. 13. and given it to Aa 
ron and his Poſteriry for ever, and therefore this needed all poſs 
ſible aſſurance : and partly that this Prieſthood might be eſfabliſbed 
pon be.ter promiſes, as is {aid H?3: 8. 6. and made ture and irrevo« 
cable, and ſuch that God neither could nor.would repenr of it, as 
ir follows. : w To wit, by my order and conſtitution : thou ſhale 
be ſo, and I do hereby make thee ſo, x As well as a King-Thoſe 
Offices which were divided before between two Families, are both 
united and inveſted in thee, both being abſolutely neceſſary for the 
diſcharge of thine Office, and fur the eſtabliſkment of thy King. 
dom, which is of another kind than the Kingdoms of the World, 
ſpiritual and heavenly. and therefore needs ſuch a King as is alſo a 
Miniſter of holy. things. This word plainly diſcovers that this 
Pialm cannot be underſtood of David, as ſome of the Jews would 
have it, but only of the Meſſias. And although this word Cohen 
be ſometimes uſed of a Prince or great Perſon in the State, as the 
ik objeQ, yer ir cannot be ſo underſtood here, partly becauſe it 
ignifics a Prieft in Gen: 14.18, from whence this expreſſion is bore 
rowed ; partly becauſe that +word is . never uſed of a. Soveraign 
fangs or King ( ſuch as the Jews confeſs the Mefſſias to be ) but, 
only of inferiour Princes or Miniſters of State, as Gen, 41.,45- 
5B 4 *- gfe 2 Same 


5.6 
&747.2 


bb 
j 
; 

j 


CE EL EY 


BIN OOTY ES Te SEA HORTON 
CEO Od ICS TIED oh : b : b 


-CX, 


never have been uſhered in by ſo ſolemn an Oath, eſpecially after 
far greater things had been faid of him in the ſame kind, wer. 1. 
2, 3- and partly. becauſe the Mefſias 1s called a Pric/?, Zach. 6, 13: 
compare Jer, 20: 21. and 35.15, 18. y Not to be interrupted or 
tran{lated to.another perſon, as the Prieſthood of Aaron was upon 
the death of the Prieſt, but to be continued to thee for ever. z Or, 
after the manner, &c- ſo as he was a Prieft and alſoa King, and 
ba  90_0Y any ſucceſſor and without end, in the ſenſe intend- 

Hebs 7. 3. 

5 The LORD s at thy right hand ſhal ſtrike thorow 


kings $ in the day of his wrath c. 

#s Either, 1, God the Father, whoſe words and oath he laſt 
mentioned, verſe 4. So this is an Apoſtrophe of the Pſalmiſt to 
Chrift, Thy God and Father is at thy right hand,to wit,to defend 
and afſiſt thee, as that Phraſe is uſed Pſal. 16. 8. and 109. 31. and 
elſewhere. S$:ze the Notes on-verſe 1» And he, to wit, God the 
Father, ſbel fr:ke, &c. as it follows. Although this latter clauſe 
may belong to the Mefſias ; and as in the former he ſpake to him, 
ſo in this he ſpeaketh of him ; ſuch changes of perſons being very | 
frequent in this Book. Or, 2. God the Son, or the Lord, who 1s 
at Fhy right hand, as was ſaid before v. 1. ſhall firike, 8&c+ So this is 
an *Apoſtrophe to God the Father concerning his Son. This ſeems 
beſt to agree with the following verſes; for it is evident that it is. 
the ſame perſon who ſtrikes thorow Kings and Fudgeth among the Hea- 
thin, and fileth, &c, Ando this whole verſe, and thoſe which 

| follow, ſpeak of one perſon, which ſeems moſt probable. b Shall 
mortally wound and deſtroy all thoſe Kings and Potentates who 
are obſrinate enemies to him and to his Church, «c In the day of 
batrel, when he ſhal contend with them, and pour forth the floods 
of his wrath upon them. | 


6 Hs ſhal judge d among the heathen ; he ſhall fill 
the places d with the dead bodies e: he ſhall wound the 


great heads f over || many countries. | 

4 Either, r. conquer and govern them ; or rather, 2, condemn 
and puniſh them, as it is explained in the following clauſes, an4 
asSthis word 15 uſed Gen» 15. 14. Rom. 2+ 1, 2. 1 Pet: 4. 6. and 
elſewhere, d Or. the place of battel, which is neceſlarily ſuppoſ- 
" ſed in the fightzand therefore may very well be underſtood. e Of 
his enemies ilain by his hand, and lying in the field in great num- 
bers and heaps, and that unburied ro their greater infamy. f Heb. 
the head. Which may be underſtood either, 1+ of ſome one perion 
and eminent adverſary of Chriſt and of his Kingdom, either the 
Devil by comparing this with Ger. 3. 3. 15. Heb; 2: 24, who was 
indeed the Head or Ruler of many Countries, and indeed of all 
Nations, except that of 1rael: or the Reman Empire, which was 
the great enemy and obſtru&er of Chriſts Kingdom, and therefore 
was to be deſtroyed by him, as is declared Dan: 2: 44+ 45. and 7e 
7: &c, or the great Antichriſt, or the Beaſt afrer which the 
whole World wondered, Revel: 13: 3. Which Chriſt will deſtroy, 
as we read 2 Theſ 2:8, and in divers places of St. John's Revela- 
tion. . Or, +. Ofall thoſe Heads or princes which oppoſe him 
the Singular number Head being here put collectively for Heads, 
as is very uſual in the Hebrew Tongue and Text. And fo the 
meaning is, that none of Chriſts enemies, though never ſo many 
or great, and their Empire be never ſo large and potent, ſhall be 
able to withſtand his torce. or eſcape our of his hand ; and that 
he ſhall not enly deſtroy the common Souldiers, bur alſo their 
greateſt Commanders and Princes, who in ſuch cafes do frequent- 
ly make their eſcape. Bur this and the other like paſſages both 
here and in the Prophets, are not to be underſtood grofſly and car- 
nally,bur ſpiritually, according to the nature of Chriits Kingdom, 
the weapons of Chriſts warfare,by which he accompliſhed his great 
works, being ſpiritual ; and therefore ſuch muſt be his batrels and 
judgements, as is evident from many other Scriptures, although 

theſe alſo are followed many times with temporal plagues. 


7 He ſhall drink of the brook in the way g : there- 
fore b ſhalhe lift up the head 5. 


 £ This may be tinderſtood either, 1. properly, to expreſs the || 


Fervency and diligence of the Meſſhas in the proſecution of his 
buſineſs, who having rooted and deſtroyed the: main body of his 
enemies forces, purſues thoſe that fled with ſuch eagerneſs, that he 
will nor loſe any time in refreſhing himſelf, as might ſeem neceſ[- 
fary afrer ſuch Cor and hard ſervice, bur will content himſelf with 
drinking alittle water out of the brook which he finds in his way, 
that being a little refreſhed therewith, he may proceed with more 
vigour and efficacy in his work: And fo this place alludes to the 
Hiſtory of G:deens 309 men, who only leaped a little of the 
water 3 of whom ſee Jud. 7» Or, 2, metaphorically, to expreſs 
the humiliation and Paſſion ofthe Meſlias, and thereby to prevent 
a great miſtake which might ariſe in mens minds concerning him 
from rhe great ſucceſſes and viftories here aſcribed to him, which 
might induce them to think that the Meſſias ſhould be exempted 
from all ſufferings, and be crowned with conſtant and perpetual 
Triumphs. To confute this conceit, he intimates here, that the 
Meſſias, before he ſhould obtain that power and glory mentioned 
in the foregoing verſes, ſhould have a large portion of afflitions 
in the way to it, or whilſt he was in the way or courſe of his life, 
before he came to his end orreſt, and ro that honour of ſitting at 
his tathers right hand. Waters in Scripture do very frequently 
__ afflictions or ſufferings, as Pſal: 42, 7, &c: To arink of 
them ſignifies to feel or bear them, as /ſa. 51: 17. Jer. 25+ 15. and 
49. 12+ Mat: 20. 22. and in this caſe it may note Chriſts willing 
ſubmiſſion to thems A 6rook or river of water is oft uſed jn Scrip- 
ture to expre's a great abundance either of comforts, as Pſal: 36.8. 
or of tribulations, as Pſal; 18: 4. and 124+ 4.. and therefore may 
be more fitly uſed in this place than a cp, by which the afflitions 
of other men are commonly expreſſed, to intimate that the ſuffer- 
ings of the Meſſiah were unſpeakably more and heavier than the 
ſufferings of other men, and thar he ſhould drink up not a ſmall 
cup, butthe whole river or Sea of his Fathers wrath due to our 
ſins þWhich word may note either the effe& or the conſequent of 
his ſufferings. 2 7.2. Shall be delivered from all his Sorrows and 
ſufferings, and exalted ro great glory and joy and felicity, as this 
phraſe uſually ſignifies, as Pſal. 3. 4- and 27. 6. Jer. 52. 31. and 
oft elſewhere ; as on the contrary, to hang down the Head is a ſigni» 
fication of great gricf and ſhame, as Lament. 2. 30, 


PSALM S. 


PS AL GAL 
The ARGUMENT. 
Z Hh excellency of this Pſalm appears, as from other things, ſo 

from the Pialmiſts care to Gigeſt the ſeveral parcels of it into 

an exact order according to the order of the letters of the Hebrew 
Alphaber, thar ir might be better fixed in the memories of thoſe 
who read it, Ir is a ſhort yet full commemoration of Gods works: 
The Pſalmif by his own Example exhorteth all men to Praiſe God, 1. re« 
hearſeth his glorious and wonderful works, 2 4+ his keeping Cove 
nans with them that fear him, 5 9. wheſe fear is the begin= 
ning of wiſdom, 10. 
ys ary ye the LORD. TI will praiſe the LORD «+ 

with my whole heart, in the afſembly of the up. 
right a, and z» the congregation, 
s Of the ſincere worſhippers of God, of the Iſrael of God, ag 
this very word is explained, Num: 23: 10. where they who are cal. 
led Iſrael in one clauſe, are called righteous or upright in the next. 
And this title he gives to the Aſſembly orCongregation of 1ſ-aelires, 
partly becauſe many of them were ſuch,and he was obliged in cha- 
rity to judge all of them to be ſo, of whom he had no evidence to 


the contrary; partly becauſe upright perſons do moſt exerciſe and 


delight themſelves in this duty of praiſing God ; and hypocrites, 
though ſometim>s they gave themſelves to prayer, yet are very apt 
to negle& the duty of thankſgiving; partly becauſe this*dury of 
prarſe 25 molt comely for the upright, Pſal. 33. 1. and partly becaufe 
Davids heart was moſt united to rhe ſincere Jaelites, and his de- 
fire was, as far as he could, to aſſociate himſelf with ſuch in the 
worſhip and ſervice of God. 

2 The works of the LORD 6b are greatc, ſought 
out d of all them that have pleaſure therein e. 

b Either, ' 1, The works of Creation : or rather, 2- The works 
of his Providence in the World,and eſpecially in and for his Church 
and people ; of which he ſpeaks in the reſt of the Palm. «© For 
the++ inire power and wiſdom and goodneſs manifeſted in them. 
a Highly valued and regarded, as this very word and phraſe is uſed 
Deut: 11: 12, Iſa; 62: 12, Or frequently called to mind, and dili- 
gently meditated upon, when others either never regarded them, 
or inſtantly forget them : or found out, as this word is taken, I/a: 
65. 1- the antecedent being pur for the conſequent, which is fre- 
quent 1n Scripture, as Rom: 12; 2+ where proving or trying ( for ſa 
the Greek word there ſignifies) is put for approving, which follows 
afterit. And, found out, ( 5. e: ) truly and throughly underſtood, 
both as to the nature of them,and Gods counſels and ends in them; 
whereas the works of God are oft-times not apprehended or mind-= 
ed, orare miſtaken and miſconſtrued, by ungodly men, e Of all 
them who take delight in obſerving and conſidering the works of 


God. 
; = work f is * honourable and 
righteouſneſs hb endureth for ever 3. 
F Either all his works, of which ſee the Note on wv. 2. or that 
eminent branch ofthoſe works, his providence towards his people, 
as 1t 1s expreſſed afrerwards. g Becoming the Divine Majeity,and 
bringing glory to him from all that obſerve and conſider it. þ His 
Juſtice or faithfulneſs in performing his word. i Hath always been 
and will ſtill be evident to his people in all generations and in all 
conditions, even when he afflits them, and ſcems to deal moſt 
ſeverely, and to break his promiſe with them. 
4 He hath made his wonderful works to be remembr- 


ed k: the LORD 3s gracious and full of compaſiion 7. 

_& Either, 1. by theſe memorials which he hath left of them in 
his word; Or rather,2.by their own wonderful nature,and the laſt- 
ing effetts and benefits flowing from them,which are ſuch as can«- 
not caſily be forgotten. 1 Towards his people, as appears from 
his works and carriage towards us, in ſparing and pardoning and 
reſtoring and preſerving us when we have deſerved to be utterly 
deſtroyed. 

5 He hath given * meat »» unto them that fear himn: , 

he will ever be » mindful of his covenant 0. 

m Which includes all neceſſary proviſions for their being and 
well-being. The word ſignifies ſpo:l,and ſo may relate to the ſpoil 
of the Zgyptians, granted by God to the Iſraelites ; bur it is ſome 
times uſed for food, as Prov: 31. 15e Mal: 3: 16, 1 To the I/razlites, 
the only people in the world which feared and worſhipped the 
crue God according to his will ; and eſpecially to thoſe among 
them that truely feared God, and, for their ſakes, to the body of 
that Nation, as well in the Wilderneſs, as in their following ſtraits 
and miſeries*« » Or, he hath ever been; for both in the firſt branch 
of this verſe, and in the foregoing and following verſes he is ſpeak- 
ing of the former works of God. So the future tenſe is put for the 
palty as 1t is frequently, and as on the contrary the paſt tenſe 1s 
put for the Future. o Which he made with Abraham and with his 
ſeed for ever ; whereby he obliged himliclf to be their God, and 
to provide all necefſaries for them. ; 

6 He hath ſhewed p his people the power of his 
works q, that he may give them the Heritage of the 
Heathen y. 
_ Þ Note onely by words, but by his ations. 9 His mighty power 
in his works, and eſpecially in that which here follows. » The 
land of Canaan, which had been poſſeſſed and inherited by the 
Heathens. : 

7 The works of his hands s areVerity and Judgment; 


*all his commandments « ore ſure x. 

5 Allthar he doth either on the behalf of his people, or againſt * 
his or their enemies ; of both which ſorts of works he ſpoke un the 
foregoing verſe, # Are exaQly agreeable to his word or promiſes 
and to the rules of Juſtice. « Either, r. his Laws given to the 
{ſraelites, eſpecially the Moral Law conſidered with its ſan&ion, 
the promiſes made to the obſervers of it, and the threatnings de- 
nounced againſt tranſgreſſors. Or, 2. his works,as it is in the firſt 
clauſe, called his Commands, becauſe they were done by virtue 


of his decree, and by his power and Authority ; as in like man= 
ner God is (aid to command (hoſe blefings which he _—_— 


Pſal. Cxx, 


Heb.Hah 
lelujab. 


gloriousg: and his, 


nur and 


gliry, 


Hebert. 


Pſ.19.7* 


' He 
Hol 


Tg7: 


97 


Pl. CXIL. P S A 


to give, and doth effectually procure, as Deut. 28. 8, Pſal. 42. 9. 
and 68. 28. and 133. 3. and to command thoſe creatures which he 
moveth and acteth as*he pleaſeth, as 1 Kings 17: 4. Mat;8. 27. x 
Or faichful or certain, conitant and unchangeable, as his Laws 
are, being grounded upon the immutable rules of juſtice or equity ; 
infa'Hble and irreſiſtible, as his Counſels and ways are. 


.ao. 8. 
= 4 8 * They Þ ſtand faft y for ever and ever, and are 
}Hcb are done & in truch and uprightnels. 


eftabliſþ:4- »y Feb. They are eſtabliſhed upon the ſure foundations of truth and 
uprightnels, as it folows- z Conſtituted or ordered. 
g He ſent redemprion 4 unto his people ; he bath 


conrmandedb his covenant forever c : holy and reverend 


d is his name. 

& That deliverance out of Egypt, which was a type and pledge 
of that greater and h'gher Redemption by Chritt. 5 3. e. Ap- 
pointed or eſtabliſhed firmly by his power and authority, And fo 
this word is oft uſed, as Pſal. 33. 9. and 42. 8. and 105. 31, 34. 
See alſo before on v+ 7. the ground of which ſignification may be 
taken from hence, that the command of a ſufficient authoriry con- 
cerning any thing, doth commonly eſtabliſh and effect it- e 
Through -all ſuccetiive generations of his people to the end of 
the world; for the Covenant is the ſame for ſubitance in all, and 
differed only in circumſtances. 4 Terrible to his ezemies,and venera- 
ble in his peoples eyes, and holy in alli his dealings with all men. 
*eut.46 10 * Che fear of the LORD e« zs the beginning of 
Job:8.:8: wiſdom f : || a good underiranding have all they Þ that 


Prov: 1:7: do his commandmentsg ; his praiſe endureth for ever. 

&g:10. , Piety or true Religion, which conſiſts in the fear or worſhip 
keel: 127 4 ſervice of God. f ls the only foundation of , and introdu- 
ction to all true widdom: Or, 1s the chief part of Wiſdom:; thoſe 


13. 
 NOr, goo! things which are moſt excellent in their kinds being oft ſaid ro be 


ſueeſs, 
tHeb.thnt 
a ther, 
Pl. 19; 


fire, to wit, in dignity, as Num. 24. 20. Deut. 18. 4, Oc. and in 0- 

ther Authors. And the firff command, Mark 12. 28. is called the 

greateſt command, Mas. 22+ 36, g Heb that do them, to wit, Gods 

9* commands, or the things which the fear of God requireth, 
PSAL. CXIL 

The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſalm containeth a” deſcription of a good mans gracious 
diſpoſition and carriage ; as alſo of his bleſſed condition, 

even in this life as well as in the next. 
The bleſſecneſs of them that fear the Lord in this Life, and in that to come, 
9. For which the wicked envy them, and are grieved. to. 


* 1 Raiſe yethe LORD. - Bleiled is the man har fea- 
"7.6 P reth the LORD «, that delighteth greatly b in 


Bildjob, his commandments c. : 

#4 The fear of God, as it is mans only wiſdom, Pſal. trr. 10, 
ſo it is his only way to true happineſs. 6 Who makes it his chief 
delight, care and buſineſs to ſtudy and obey Gods commandments. 
c He intimates that zeal and fervency in Gods ſervice, is eſſential 
to true picty. : 

2 His ſeed ſhall be mighty upon earth : the generati- 
on 4 ofthe upright ſhall be bleited. 
d i. e, The poſterity, as this word is oft uſed, as Lev. 23. 43, 
Numb. g. 10, &c. called hisſecd in the former branch, | 
3 Wealth and riches {hall be in his houſe e ; and his 


righteouſneſs f endureth for ever. 

 Poſſeſſed by - him. whilſt he lives and continued in his family 
after his death, f 7. e. The fruit or reward of his righteouſneſs, 
which is Gods bleſſing upon his Eſtate : for the work is oft pur for 
the Reward of it, as in the Hebrew, Levit. 19. 13. Job 7. 2. Pſal. 
109. 200 And Righteouſneſs may be here taken for his bounty or 
Charity, as it is below wv: 9g. and as this Hebrew word 1s frequently 
taken- 


'-4 Unto the upright there ariſeth * light in the dark- 


neſs g: he h 5s gracious, and fuil of compaſſion, and 
righteous. | | : 

. & Andalthough he is ſubje& to the troubles and calanuties of 
this life, as othersare, yet God will give him ſupport and comfort 
in them, and an happy iſſue out of them, whereas the wicked ſink 
uader their Burdens, and their preſent miſeries uſher in their eter- 
nal deſtrution. ' h Either, rx. God» And ſo this is added asa 
Reaſon why God cauſeth light to ſhine to the upright our of dark 
yels. , becauſe the Lord is gracious, &c. Or rather, 2- the good or 
upright man, of whom he ſpeaks both in the foregoing and follo- 
wing words. So this iseither, | 1+ a reaſon why God dealeth thus 
with good men; it is notfrom a partial and fond affection to them, 
bur becauſe they are ſuch perſons to whom God hath ingaged him- 
felf by promiſe and Covenant to bleſs them, they are g-ac:ors, S&c. 
Or, 2, as an <ffect of their affliction and deliverance out of it ; 
thereby they learn to be more merciful and compaſſionat and ju# or 


bountitul to otheis in want and miſery. 

5 A good man ſheweth favour and lendeth 3z ; he 
Will guide his * affairs & with f diſcretion /. 

i Giveth freely to ſome, and kindly Jendeth to others according 
to the variety of their conditions. & Maintain and manage his Ex 
ſtate or domeſtick affairs ! Heb, with Judgment, ſo as is fit and 
meer, and as God requires, not getting his Eſtate unjuſtly, nor 
caſting it away prodigally or wickedly, nor yet withholding it 
uncharitably from ſuch as need it. Z 
" 6 Surely heſhall not be moved for ever m : the righ- 


tequs ſhall be 1g everlaſting remembrance »» 

7 Though he may for a ſeaſon be afflicted, yet he ſhall not be 
utterly and eternally deſtroyed, as wicked men ſhall, » Though 
Whillt he lives, he may beexpoſed to the cenſures and flanders and 
contradictions of ſinners, yer after death his memory will be pre- 
cious and honourable both with God and with all men, his very 

-.. . . enemies not excepted. | ED ; 
+ * 7 He ſhallnot be afraid of eyil tidings 0: his heart is 
-tixed, cruſting inthe LORD p. 


0 At the report of approaching calamities and judgments of God, 


T99:1 I, 


4 


"Heb. 


Words 
? Heb: 
Mere, 


. . 
EL M S$S. 


8 His heart is eſtabliſhed ; * he ſhall not be afraid, 


until he ſee his deſire upon his enemies 9. 

9 And although his enemies be many and mighty and terrible, 
yer he fhall confidently and cheerfully wait upon God, until he 
{es their Ruine and his own deliverance and ſafety» 

9 * He hath diſperſed r, .he hath given to the poor ; 
his righteouſneſs s endureth for ever : | his horn ſhall Mi! 
* 2 Corll 


be exalted with honour «. | 
r To wit, his goods, and that freely and liberally, to ſeveral 9* 9- | 
perſons, as occation is offered, as this word implies. s i: e. Hig TPE754 
liberality, as this word is uſed, Prov. 10. 2, and 11. 4, Dan. 4. 27, Ul 
2 Core 9. 9, 10, &c. or the reward of it, as before, wv. 3« # Either, it 
1. his charity is not a tranſient or occaſional a&, bur his conſtang k || 
courſe, of which he is not weary, bur perſeveres in it to the end 
of his life, Or, 2. what he gives is not loſt nor caſt away, as co« 
vetous or ungodly men judge of alms, but indeed is the only part 
of his Eſtate, which will abide with him unto all eternity. s 
Though he may be reproached by ungodly men, yet his innocen= 
Cy ſhall be cleared, and his name and honour gloriouſly exalted, 
Io The wicked ſhallſee ir, and be grieved x; he ſhall 
gnaſh with his teeth, and melt away ; the deſire y of 


the wicked ſhall periſh, 

* At the felicity ot good men, partly from envy at the happi« 
neſs of others: partly from his peculiar hatred of all godly men : 
and partly becauſe it is a plain teſtimony of Gods juſtice and pro- 
vidence, and therefore a certain preſage of his own ruine. y His 
defire either of the miſery of good men ; or of his own conſtang | 
proſperity and happineſs in the world. 

PSAL CXIIL | 

The ARGUMENT | 

His Pſalm is a declaration of Gods powerful and univerſal 

providence towards all men, and eſpecially rowards his 
afflicted peoples | 

An exhortation for all men to praiſe the Lord, for his Excellency and Great= 

neſs 1 5. for his condeſcention t6 the poor and humbleminaed, 

6 


* Raiſe ye the LORD. Praiſe, O ge ſervants of 
the LORD a: praiſe the name of the LORD. 

# Ye Levites, who are peculiarly devored to this ſolemn work, 

who ſometimes are called Gods ſervants in a ſpecial ſenſe, and all 


you faithful ſouls. 
2 * Bleſſed be the name of the LORD, from this time 


forth and for evermore. 
3 * From the riſing of the ſun unto the going down 
of the ſame b; the LORD's name is tobe praiſed. 


6 From one end of the world to the other 3 from Eaſt to Weſt, 
which he mentions rather than from North to South, becauſe thoſe 
arts of the world were at this time much aninhabited and un- 
nown. <c For his glorious works of Creation and Providence, the 
benefit of which all Nations enjoy ; and for his gracious purpoſe 
and promiſe of bringing in all Nations to the knowledge of his 
truth by the Meſſias. : 
4 The LORD 3s high above all nations 4, «nd * his 


glory above the heavens e. 

d Superior to all Princes and bodies of people in the world, e 
Whereas the glory of earthly Monarchs is confined to this lower 
world, and to ſmall pittances of it, the glory of God doth not on- 
ly fill the earth, bur heaven too, where it is celebrated by thous - 
ſands and myriads of bleſſed Angels, yea it is far higher than hea« 
ven, being infinit and incomprehenſible, 


5 who 5s like unto the LORD our God, who * dwel- 
leth on high f ? 


f to wit, far above all Heavens, as was now ſaid, being exalted * Heb: ex; 
as in place, ſo in power and dignity, aboveall perſons and things alterh 
viſible and inviſible. = himſelf ts 

6 Who humbleth himſelf to behold the things that are dwels 


in heaven, andin the earth g ? | 
g Who is ſo high, that it is a wonderful vouchſafement and con= 
deicenſion in him to take any notice or care of his Holy and Hea- 
venly hoſt, and much more of ſinful. and miſerable men upon Je any 
earth, which yer he is pleaſed to do. Few. G= 
7 * He raiſeth up the poor þ out of the duſt 3, and go. 
lifteth the needy out of che dunghil : *Pſ:138:6, 
hþ Yea he ſtoops ſo low as to regard and advance thoſe whom all Ifa;57; 15. 
men, and even their own brethren ſlight and deſpiſee # From a * r$a,2:8- 
moſt contemptible and miſerable condition. Beggars and mour- Pſ107:41, 
ners uſed to ly in the duſt, or, as it follows, upon the Dunghi : 


1 Sam. 2. 8, Lament. 4. 5. p ; ; 
 $ That he may * ſet bim with princes & ; even with 


the princes of his people 7. 
k In equal honour and power with them, as he did Joſeph, David, 


and others. / Which in Gods account, and in truth are far more *Jobz6:y, 
honourable and happy than the Princes of Heathen and barbarous 
Natiens, becauſe their Subje&s are more noble, and they have 
Gods ſpecial preſence and providence among them. 
9 * Hemaketh the barren woman # to keep houſe », 


and to be a joyful mother of chiidren, Praile ye the 
LORD. 70 - 39a: 2:55 


m Heb. to dwell in an houſe or Family, or amongſt childven, ro wit, T Heb: 0 
coming out of her own womb, as is clearly —_——— by the oppo 4well in an 
fition of this to her barrenneſs, And the word houſe is ofc pur for houſe. 


Children, as Ex'd. 1. 21. Ruth 4. 11, Pſak r15+ 10, 12+ And fo it Pla. 68. 6+ 


| 
| 


f Heb 
Halelujahe 


* Dan: *s 
20s 


*Mal:1:18 


Pſa: 8; £; 


1 Or, bes 
haldeththe 


& which the wicked arc ſo dilmayed and affrighred. p Caſting | thers at the s C 


isexplaincd un the next clauſe, 
| | A IL. CXIV. 
The ARGUMENT. LR 

His Pſalm is a ſolmn commemoration of !/raels deliverance: 

out of Egypt ; and probably it was to be ſung amongſt o«. 
celebration of the Paſſover, OY 


The 


w* 


+ Joſh 
T3. 16. 


CG 


3, CXV. 


nn. v FT Hen * Iſrael went our of Egypt, the houſe of 


* Fx. 14. 


Pſ: 77. 16. of Egypr. 
» Je 


THab.3.9. 


Ex. 17.6; 
| Nu-20*21: 


Te 79. IO, 
Joeb 2-17» "oy phe, 
. ' fion to ſay or think ſo, by conniving at their wickedneſs, and by 


- *Pfr35.6, 


The Pſalm:ft rehearſing God's delivvering the Iſraelites out of Egypt exher- 
Jeth all Creatures to praiſe him, 1 —#—— 8+ 


Jacob from a people of ſtrange language a; 
a Which was a great aggravation of their captivity and miſery- 
Compare Jer. 5. 15- 
2 Judah þ was 
minion e. | | 
b Or, Iſrael, as it is explained in the next: clauſez one Tribe 
being pur for all ; which is a common Synecdoche. Judah he 
mentions as the chief of all the Tribes, not only in number and 
wer, but alſo in dignity, in which the Kingdom was to be ſeated, | 
en..49: 10, Ofc. as at this time it aftually was, and from which 
the Mefſias was to ſpring- & 4. e. Gods, which is eafily under- 
food from the whole context, and from rhe nature of the thing. 
d Or, helineſ5, the people of God's Holineſs, as they are called, 1/s. 63. 
18. or, his holy people, as. Deut: 26: 29+ ' Dan: 8: 24. ſanRtified or ſer! 
apart from all the Nations of the World to be his peculiar people 
and poſſeſſion. e In a peculiar manner to be governed by hislaws, 
and honoured with his ſpecial preſence and favour, _ 
2*The ſeaſaw it f, and fled; Jordan was driven back. 
f To wit, this glorious work of God in bringing his people out 


his ec ſanctuary 4, «nd Iſrael his do- 


4 The mountains g skipped like rams, and the little 
hils like lambs. 


' g Horeb and Sinai, two tops of one mountain, and other neigh- 
bouring Hills or Mountains. Compare Exe; 199 18. P/al: 68; 8. 
Habak: 3; 6, 10. 

5 * What ailed thee, O thou ſea, that thou fleddeſt 
&? thou Jordan, that thou waſt driven back ?. 

þ What was the cauſe of this unuſual motion ? Such ſpeeches 
direQed to ſenſeleſs creatures, are very frequent both in Scripture 
and in other Authors, and eſpecially in Poctical writings, ſuch as 
This is. : ; | 

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye 
Little hils like lambs ? 
7 Tremble thou earth at the preſence of the LORD 


72 at the preſence of the God of Jacob. 

5 But why do I ask theſe Queſtions ? Ye mountains did no more 
than what was juit and fir ar the approach and appearance of the 
great God 2 yea the whole earth hath reaſon to tremble and quake 


upon ſuch occaſions : 
8 * Which turned the rock izto a ſtanding water, the 


flint into a fountain of waters. 


P S A IL. CXV. 
The ARGUME NT. 


He occaſion of this Pſalm was to manifeſt ſome eminent dan- 

| ger or diſtreſs of the people of Iſrael from ſome idolatrous 

Nations. But whether it was that mentioned 2 Chren. 20, or what 
other, is but matter of conjecture, and not worth our inquiry. 

The Church prayeth te Goal to keep them for bis glorious Name, 1-—- 3, 

the vanity of Idol-worſhip, 4 —— 8. exhorteth t0 confidence in him, 

being aſſured of his bleſſmg, 9 17, they reſolve for ever to praiſe 

the Lor a, 18, ; 


Ot unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy 
N Name give glory 4, for thy mercy, and for thy 


truths ſake. 

# As we intreat thy favour and aid, and that thou wouldſt work 
gloriouſly on our behalf to bring us out of our preſent ſtraits and 
extreamities, ſo we do not deſire this out of a vain glorious hu- 
mour, as uſually men do in ſuch caſes, that we may get Renown 
by the conqueſt of our proud and mighty Enemies, but that thy 
honour may be vindicated from all their contempts and blaſpemies; 
and if thou wilt deliver us, we will not arrogat the praiſe and 
glory of it to our own worth or valour, but only to thy mercy and 
ruth, as it follows: 


2 Wherefore ſhould the heathen fay b, * Where is 


now c their God d ? 
b Why doſt thou ſuffer them, or give them any colour or occa- 


giving thy people into their hands ? c He is nowhere, he is loſt or 
at a loſs, either unable or unwilling, or nor at leiſure ro fave 
them. « Who hath undertaken to be their God and Saviour, and 
and whom they only worſhip, and of whom they uſe to boaſt and 
inſult over us and over our gods. + 

-. 3 * But ourGod e 55 in the heavens f ; he hath done 


whatſoever he pleaſed g. 

e Whom, notwithitanding your reproaches, we are not aſhamed 
to own for our God, f Although he have no viſible ſhape nor bo. 
dily preſence with us here upon earth, as your Idols have, which 
1S a Certain proof of their baſeneſs and weakneſs, yer he hath a 


bis 4 L MY 


' and concerns. 


therefore they ſhould rather, if it were poſſible, worſhip man; as 
their Creator and Lord then be worſhipped by him. 
5 They have mouths but they ſpeak nor ; eyes have 


have they, but they ſee not. 

& For although the blind Heathen are by their idolatrousPrieſts 
made to believe otherwiſe concerning-their idols, in regard of the 
Spirits which they pretend to dwell in them, yet this is the truth 
of the matter, and confirmed by long and conſtant experience, 
that they are but vain and ſenſeleſs things, they can neither ſpeat 
in anſwer to your prayers or inquiries, nor ſee what you do er What 
you want3 nor hear your petitions; nor ſme# your Incenſes and 
{acrifices 3 nor handle or uſe their hands either to take any thing 
from you, or to giveany thing to you ; nor ſo much as muiter, or 
give the leaſt ſignification of their apprehenſion of your condition 


6 They have ears, but they hear not ; noſes have 
they but they ſmell not. 
7 They have hands but they handle not: feet have 
they but they walk not; neither ſpeak they through 
their throat. 
I Or, mutter, or make a miſe, as this word ſignifies Iſa. 15: 14 
They are ſo far from ſpeaking with their throat and other Inſtru- 
ments of ſpeech, as men do, that they cannot make ſuch an inarti- 
Eular and ſenſeleſs ſound with them, as the beaſts do. 
8 They that make them # * are like unto them »; ſox yy, j; 


7s every one that truſteth in them. them be © 
»» Or, they that obſerve or worſhip them. For the Pſalmiſts quarrel like unty 

was not ſo much with thoſe few Artiſts :; who formed the Images, them, 

.asS with all the adorers of them, And the word here rendered make Fo Gr, 

doth ſometimes ſignifie ro worſhip, as ſome underſtand it, not with= 

out probability, Exod; 32: 35+ becauſe they made ( i: e; worſhipped ) 

the calf which Aaron made, and asin other Languages words aniwee 

ring to this do fignifie, as hath been ofc obſerved by learned men; 

and it oft ſignifies to obſerve ; as when men are ſaid to wake ( as it 

is in the Hebrew ) the Sabbath, Deut: 5. 15. and the releaſe, and 

the Paſſover, and the feaft of weeks, as Deut; 15: 1, and 16: 1, 10+ 

3 This is a ſharp Reflection, either x. upon the Idols, whoſe high. 

eſt preferment is to be made like unto Man, a mortal, weak and 

miſerable creature, infinitly inferior to the true God. Or, 2. to 

the makers or worſhippers of them,who by this abſurd and fooliſh 

action, ſhew that they are as ignorant and ſtupid and void of all 

ſenſe and Reaſon as their Images. 


9 O Iſrael o truſt thou in the LORD: he 5s their help 
o and their ſhield. 4 k h 

o Do not thou follow the example of theſe brutiſh Idolaters, but 
ſerve the Lord only. e Who truſt in God, as he now required. Or, 
their is put for your by a change of perſons, which is moſt fre« 
quent in Scripture, and eſpecially in theſe Books. 


10 O. houſe of Aaron p, truſt in the LORD : he 5; 
their help and their ſhield. 
p You Prieſts and Levites preceeding from Aaren, or related tc 
him, who have ſpecial Reaſon and many Obligations to do it, who 
have a more diſtin knowledge of God, whichis the foyndationof 
cruſt, Pſal, 9; 10. and who are to be both Inſtructers of, and ex«= 
amples to the people in this as well as in other duties. 
1x Yethat fear the LORD g, cruſt in the LORD * 
he is their help and their ſhield. 

9 All and every one of you who worſhip the true God, not only 
Aaronites and Iſraelites, but even Gentile-proſelires, who are ſaid 
to come totruſt under the wings of the God of Iſrael, Ruth 2: 12, And 
ſuch there were many at this time in the Church of 1Fael, whom 
therefore he fitly invites to truſt God, becauſe heis no leſs their, 
than the Iſraclites help and ſhield, as it follows. 


12 The LORD hath been mindful of us r ; he will 
bleſs «s, he will bleſs the houſe of Iſrae}, he. will bleſs the 
houſe of Aaron. | 

7 In our former ſtraits and calatnities, and therefore we truſt he 
will ſtill bleſs us, &c, as itit follows. Or, 7s or will be mindful of 
5. Though he hath chaſtned us ſore, yet he hath not yer caſt us 


out of the care of his providence. 
13 He will bleſs them that fear the LORD, both 


ſmall [| and great s. | 
5 Either in age or condition, of whatſoever quality, high and 
low, rich and poor; for he is no reſpecter of perſons. | 


14 The LORD ſhall encreaſe you: more and more, 
you and your children. 

8 In number notwithſtanding all the attempts of your enemies 
to diminiſhand deſtroy you. Or, ſha! add zo yeu, to wit, further 
and greater bleſſings. G 

15 Ye are bleſsed of the LORD, which made hea- 


ven and earth «. 


certain and. glorious place where he relideth, even the higheft 
heavens, where he is clothed with infinit power and Majeſty, and | 
and from whence he beholdeth and governeth this lower world, | 


and all that is in it. g Or, he deth, &c. By his only will and '- 


pleaſure all things were at firſt made, and are ſtill diſpoſed, and 
without this nothing .cometh to paſs. And therefore all your in- | 
ſolencics and injuries and ſucceſſes againſt us do not come from an 
invincible power in you or in your {dols, nor from any deffect of 
ſtrength or goodneſs in our God, but only from hence, that it 


* Deut.g, Pleaſed him tor many wiſc and good Reaſons to afflict us, and to, 
28. give you proſperity for a time. | 


PL 135.15. :: 4 * Their idols arefilver and gold b, the work of mens 
Jer: r0.3, hands 5. 


þ Thus glorious and powerful is our God, O ye Heathens, of 

whom you ſo boldly-ask, who and where he is; bur as for your 
s or idols, they have no power nor worth in them, but what is 
taken from their materials. # Astheir matter .is wholly from the 
earth, jo their form or figure they have from the art of Man; and 


# Who therefore can bleſs you indeed in ſpight of all your ene* 
mies curſes and oppoſitions ; and not of an impotent Idel that can 
do you neither good nor hurt, : 
16 The Heaven, even the heavens are the LORD's 
x 2: but the earth hath he given to the children of men y. 

x Towit, in a peculiar manner, where hedwelleth in that light 
and glory to whichno man can approach, and whence he behold- 
eth and diſpoſeth allperſons and * Fug upon earth. y For their ha« 
bitation, poſſeſſion and uſe. But theſe words may be and are thus 
rendred by ethers, and the earth which ( which particle is very oft 
underſtood ) he hath given, &c, And then as the foregoing ve 
declared that God was the Creator of Heaven and Earth, v 15: fo 
this aſſerts that he is alſo their Loxd and Governour to diſpoſe of all 


Pſal. CXY. 


mad | 


"Pf 


*Mf; 


*aC 


Ro | 


men and things as he pleaſeth. : 
17 * The dead & praiſe notthe LORD, neither any «pg 
that go down into ÞF ſilence 6. x1, i 


z Such as we ſhall nag be, 3f thou doſt not ſuccour us: [rs .M 


- Iato the place of ſilence, F Brave, 38 * Buy 


[ WON 


_—_ 


* Dan» 2. 18 *But we will bleſs the LORD 6, from this time | 
” forth and for ever more. Praiſe the LORD. ; * 

b But we hope for better things,that notwithſtanding our preſent 
and urgent danger, yet thou wilt deliver us, and ſo give us oCca- 
fion to bleſs thy Name ; whereby thou wilt have the praiſe and 
glory of our deliverances 

PSAL CXVLI. 
| The ARGUME NT. Sa 
0 | \ His Pſalm containsa ſolemn thankſgiving to God for a glori- 
ous deliverance from grievous and dangerous calamities ; as 
alſo from great perplexities and terrors of mind ariſing from the 
ſenſe of Gods ditpleaſure. : SE ET 
The Pſalmif refeſſrh his lowe to God for his manifold mercies in delive- 
ring him out of great ſtraits and dangers, 1 8. promiſing to walk 
bolily, prayeth for his futureprotettion, fudieth and promiſeth to be thank- 

= 


: u ) 9 9. pp: x 
Love the LORD, becauſe he hath heard my voice, 
and my ſupplications. | | 
2 Becauſe he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore 


will I call upon him || aslong as I live « . 
'& Heb, in my days; as long as I have a day to live, as this phraſe 
is uſed 2 Kings 20, 19. Iſs. 39. 8. Compare Job 25. 6 
* The ſorrows of death b compaſſed me, and the 


pains of hell c | gat hold upon me 4: I found trouble 


and ſorrow, | 1: 

b Dangerous and deadly calamities,. as bitter as death. Or, the 
cords of death. c Or, of the grave, or of death, either killing pains, 
or ſuch agonies and horrors as dying perſons uſe to feel within 
themſelves. d Heb. found me, i: e. ſurprized me» Having been 
long purſuing me, at laſt they overtook me and ſeized upon me, 
and 1 gave up my ſelf forloſt. | 

4 Then called I upon the Name of the LORD : O 


LORD, I beſeech thee, deliver my ſoul. _ 

$ Gracious is the LORD e, and righteous f: yea, 
our God 3s merciful. OY 

e This he mentions either, 1, as that whith he found by expe- 
rience in anſwer to his prayers: Or, 2: as the argument by which 
he encouraged himſelf to pray. f Therefore he will maintain me 
and my juſt cauſe againſt my unrighteous oppreſlors, and perform 
his promiſes, and ſave thoſe who faithfully terve him and put their 
cruſt in him. 


6 TheLORD preſerveth the fimple g : I was brought 


low, and he helped me. CR | 

g Sincere and plain-heirted perſons,who dare not uſe thoſe frauds 
and crafty and wicked artifices in ſaving themſelves or deſtroying 
their enemies, but wait upon God with honeſt hearts in his way 
and for his time of deliverance. Which was the caſe of David, 
who, though he had the proſpe@ and the promiſe of the Kingdom, 
yet would not make haſte to it by indire& courſes, as by cutting 
off Saul, when he had great provocation and fair opportunity to 
do jt : of which ſee 1 Sam. 24. and 26. Such perſons he calls /ample 
or fooliſh, as this word is commonly rendred, not becauſe they are 
really fo, but becauſe the world eſteems them ſo. 

7 Return unto thy reſt hb, O my ſoul, for * the 

LORD hath dealt bountifully with thee, | 
| k Unto that tranquility of mind and cheerful confidence in Gods 
promiſes and providence, which thou didſt once enjoy. | 
' 8 *Por thou haſt delivered my ſoul ; from death, 


mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling k. 
3 My ſelf. - k To wit, into miſchief and the pit of deſtruftion. 
9 I will walk before the LORD I in the land ofthe 
living ». 
. 1 Or, 1 fha# walk, &c. This is either r. the Pfalmiſts promiſe 
to God in requital of the favour laſt mentioned, I will therefore 
Pleaſe God, as this phraſe is uſed, Gen. 5. 24. compared with H*b. 
II. F. Gen, 17. 1. T will devote my ſe}fro the worſhip and ſervice 
> God. Or, 2. his thankful acknowledgement of Gods further 
avour. Though Ibe now baniſhed from the place of thy preſence 
and worſhip, yet Iaſſure my ſelf that I ſhall be reſtered to it, and 
ſhall ſpend my days in thy houſe and ſervice, which is the one 
thing that T deſired above all other things, Pſ#s. 27: 4. m Amonglit 
living men of this world. See on Pſal, 27. 13, 
: 3 a". _ "We ok NF $ 
aCorrg, I0 * Thelieved », therefore have I] ſpoken 9: I was 
p- greatly afflicted p. _ | 
z To wit, Gods promiſe of deliverance, and of the Kingdom: 
made to me by Samuel, which I was confident he would perform 
in ſpight of diſcouragements and difficulties. o So. theſe wank 
are tranſlated, as by others, ſo by the Apoſtle, 2 Cor. 4. 13. I. 
hve ſpoken, either 1, what I have now ſaid, v. 9+ or 2. what I have 
uttered to others.concerning Gods promiſes made tome. Which 
I was not aſhamed nor afraid to publiſh when I had occaſion, be- 
cauſe T was fully perſwaded that God would make them good. p 
Or, when 7 was, &c, .or, although 7 was, &c. ſuch particles being! 
very frequently underſtood, The ſenſe is, and this I did even in 
the midſs of many and ſore afflictions. ; 


11 I faidg in my haſte r, * All men are liars 5. | 

* .q Yet onceIconfefs [I ſpake very unadviſedly. » Through kaſti- 
nels and precipitation of my mind, for want of due conſideration, 

as the ſame phraſeis uſed, Pſal. 31. 22. Or, in my terror Or amazement 

when I was diſcompoſed and diſtratted with the greatneſs of my 

troubles. - 5 The ſenſe is either, r: All men, yea even my former 

prove deceitful and perfidious, all human 


friends and Companions, 
help faileth me ; ſo that my caſe is deſperate, if God do not help 


ny 
- 


[ Heb:in 
my days, 
*P(.18. 56. 
f Heb: 
found me» 


L 


*PG 53. G. 


"Pf-56 13 


to _-:,- 
Rom!3.4 


| ſpeaks of praiſe rather than of prayer, as appears both from the for« 


| or ſpiritual, who are tro be incorporated together, and made one 


i 

L M 8s. 

12 What ſhall-I render unto 
benefits towards me; ? | 

't Yer notwithſtanding all my dangers and my diſtruſt of God 
roo, God hath conferred ſo many and great blefſings upon me, 
that I can never make ſufficient returns to him for them. 

13 I will take the cup of fſalyation «, and call upon 

the Name of the LORDs. © © 5 31 OO, 

z I will offer the facrifice of thanſgiving to God, as this phraſe 
ſeems to beexplained below, v. 17+ where. the latfer clauſe of che 
verſe is the ſame with that which here follows. ' The phraſe is 
taken from the common practice of the Jews in' their Thank-offe- 
rings, in which a Feaſt was made of the Remainders .of the Sa- 
Critices, and the Offerers, together with the Prieſts, did ear and 
drink before the Lord ; and amongſt other Rites, the Malter of the 
Feaſt took a cup of Wine intg,his hand, 'and folemnly bleſſed God 
for it and for the mercy witich was then acknowledged, and then 
gave it to all the gueſts, who drunk {uccefſively of it, See i Chron, 
I6. 2, 3- To which cuſtom it is ſuppoſed that our bleſſed Saviour 
alludes in the inſtitution of the cup, which alſo is called the cup of 
bleſſing, 1 Cor. 10, t6, wihich is in effect the ſame with the Cup of 
ſalvation, This Mctaphor of a Cup is uſed both of afflictions, as 
PJa.: 11. 6. and 75.9. and of comforts, as Pſa. 2;: 5* Jer; 16: 8. 
x Or. p»bl:ſb or preach in or of the name of th? Lord, i. 6. his gracious 
nature and the great things which he hath done for me. For he 


Plal. CX) 
che LORD fir allh | 


mer clauſe , and by comparing v. 17. 

14 I will pay my vows y unto the LORD, now in 
the preſence of all his people z. © EA 

Y The praiſe and ſacrifices vrhich I vowed to God in the time of 

my diſtreſs. . z That they who lieard my vows, or underſtood 
them by the Report of others,might be witneſſes of my payment of 
them, and not be ſcandalized by my - unfaithfulneſs in that mat. 
ter, | ; ; | 

15 Preciousin the fight of the LORD 5s the death « 
of his ſaints. + +: - "2 2893 £4, 
- .@ Heſets an high price upon it; he will nor readily grant it to 
thoſe thar greedily ſeek it ; and if any ſon of violence procure it, 
he will make him pay very dearly for it, and when the Sainrs ſuf- 
fer it for Gods ſake, as they frequently do, it is a moſt acceptable. 
Sacrifice to God, and hrghly etteemed by him. Thus, the blood 
of Gods people is ſaid to be precious in his fight, Pſa: 72: 14. And, 
in the ſame 1enſe, the Life of a man is ſaid to be precious in his eyes 
who ſpareth and preſerverh it. as:1 Sam: 16; 21, 2 Kings 1: 13. Gods 
people are precious in hjseyes, both living and dying ; for whether 
they live, they live unto the Lord, or whether they die, they die unto the 
Lord, Rom. I 4+ 8: | . 7 ; 

16 O LORD, truely I aw thy ſervant b, T am thy -* 1 
ſervant, and* the ſon of chy handmaid c: thou haſt *P£.86.i6 
looſed my bonds d. | $a | 


+ Thisis either, 1. an Argument uſed in, prayer, it becomerh 
thee to protect and fave thy own ſervants, as m_ good maſter 
doth : or rather, 2» a thankful acknowledgment of his great obli- 
gations to God, whereby he was in duty bound to be the Lords 
faithful and perpetual ſervant. For this ſuits beſt with the context. 
c Either, 1+ the Son of,a Mother who.was devoted and did devote 
me to thy ſervice. . Or, 2. like one born in thy houſe of one of thy 
ſervants, and ſo thine by a moſt ſtrict.and double obligation. 4 
Thou haſt reſcued: me from mine enemies, whoſe captive and Vaſo 
ſal I was, and therefore haſt a juſt Right and Title to me and ro © 2 
my ſervice. hs | EN 

17 I will offer to thee * theſacrifice of thankſgiving, Levi7:1 
and will call upon the name of the LORD. | 

18 I will pay my vowsunto the LORD, now inthe 


preſence of all his people e ; 2 bg 
e And as I faid before, ſol now repeat my promiſe, for the grea- 
ter aſſurance, and to lay the ſtrier obligation upon my ſelf. / 


19 In the courts of the LORD's houſe, in che midſt 
of thee, O Jeruſalem. Praiſe ye the LORD. | 
| PS AL. CXVE.- 

The ARGUMENT. | 


gi IUHis Pſalm contains a Prophecy of the Calling of the' Gentiles, 


as appears borh from the matter of it, and from Rom. x5. 116 


where it is quoted to that purpoſe. 
An Exhortation to all Nations io praiſe God for his mercy and truth's 


loks.: 1, 2 ©; : "#5 
O: Praiſe the LORD # all ye nations : praiſe him * gom.rg. 
all ye people. - + | | : 12. 
a Acknowledge the true God, and ſerve him only» and caſt a- 
way all your Idols. _ 
2 


= 


- 


For his merciful kindneſs is great towards us þ ; 
and the truth of the LORD endurerh for ever. Praiſe 


ye the LORD. 
b Either, :. rowards us Jews, to whom he hath given thoſe pee 
culiar privitedges which he hath denied to all other Nations. Bur 
this may ſeem an improper argument to move the Gentiles to praiſe 
God for his mercies to others trom which they were excluded. Or, 
2+ towards all of us, all the Children of 4braham whether carnal 


body and one fold by and nnder the Mefſias, John 10; 16. Eph. 2. 
14+ which myſtery tcems to be infinuated by this manner of ex- 


preſſion. 
; P SAL CXVIIL, 


| The ARGUMENT. 
His ?/a!m moſt probably was compoſed by David, when the 
Civil wars between the Houſes of Saul and David were en- 
ded, and David was newly ſertled in the Kingdom of all 1/rael, and 


me. 'Or, 2. All men, Gods own Prophets not exce 1 
to'the miſtakes by the condition of hate nature, _ _ To 
therefore may eaſily deceive others; as this might be the caſe of 
Samuel in his promiſe of the Kingdom to* me. Thus he queſtions 
the truth! of .Gods:promites, .yet fo-as he doth not ſtrike direaly | 
at God, but only refle&s upon the Inſtruinent, 


:had newly brought up the Ark of God to his Royal Ciry. Bur 
though this was the occaſion, yet: David, or at Jeair rhe Spirit of 
God, which indited this Pſalm, had a further reach and high 
deſign in it,' and eſpecially in the latrer part of it, which was ts 
carry the Readers thoughts beyond rhe Type to the Antirype, the 
| 5 C2 _ Ncilias 


I we 
ER 7 


— . OY OTE RTE SAL a 
ms. VIE 50 <-> AY LE VERY AA TREE UE TN CIC, FY W 
" FLEE 5 \*x," \ 


-— j 


Meſſias and his Kingdom, who was chiefly intended in it. Which 
is apparent both trom the Teſtimonies produced our of it to that 
purpoſe in the New Teſtament, as Mat 21. 9, 42+ Mark 12: 10, 
11: A#: 4. 11, &Cc. and from the conſent of the Hebrew DoCQtors 
both Ancientand Modern ; one evidence whereof is that in their 

Prayers for their Meſſiah, they uſe ſome part of this Pſalm : and 

from the matter it ſelf, as we ſhall ſee hereafter. The form of 

this Pſalm may ſeem to be dramarical, and ſeveral parts of it are 
ſpoken in the name of ſeveral perſons, yet ſo, that the diſtinction 
of rhe perſons and their ſeveral paſſages is not expreſſed, bur lett 
to the obſervation of the intelligent and diligent Reader, as it 1s 

in the book of the Song of $y/0w0n, and in ſome part of Eccleſiaſtes 3 

and in many profane Writers. David ſpeaks in his own name from 

the beginning to v. 224 and from thence tov. 25. in the name of 
the pzople 3 and thence to v: 28. in the name of the Prieſts; and 
then concludes in his own name. 

The Pſalmift exhorteth all the Godly to praiſe the Lord, wh» had been merci- 
ful to them, 1 ——4. By his own Experience ſheweth how good it is *0 
truft in the: Lord, who had delivered him from his Enemies, 5 — 
Under the Type of the Pſalmiſt, the coming of Chri#t whom the chief of the 
people refuſe, is expreſſed and bl ſſed, 19 - 29: 

* Give thanks s unto the LORD, for he is good : 

8. becauſe his mercy endnreth for ever. 

106. 1. | # All ſorts of perſons, which are particularly exprefled in the 
107. 1. three next verſes, as they are mentioned in like manner and order, 
136. 1. ſal, 115. 9. 10, It. where ſee the Notes. 

2 Letiſrael b now ſay, that his mercy endureth for e- 


VET. i 
b 'Afﬀeer the fleſh, all the Tribes and people of 7/ael, except the 
Levites. | : 


| Jars the houſe of Aaron c now ſay, that his mercy 


endureth for ever. 

.. c The Prieſts and Levites, who were greatly diſcouriged and 
oppreſſed in Sauls time, and ſhall receive great benefits by my go- 
vernment. 


4 Ler them now that fear the LORD 4ſay, that his 


mercy endureth for ever. 
4 The Gentile Proſelytes, whereof there were in Davids time, 
and were likely to be, greater numbers than formerly had been. 


Heb. ow: F I called upon the LORD ft in diitreſs: the LORD 
Faiftreſs. anſwered me, and * ſet me e || ina large place. . 

1.18.19. 4, Which verb is tacitly included in the former, and is eaſily un- | 
Or, W## Jerſtood out of Pſal. 31. 8. where the full phraſe is expreſſed, and 
marZe from the following word. See the like examples in the Hebrew | 
ent. Text, Gen. 12. 15. Pſal. .22. 21, &C. 

PL56.4 6 * The LORD is ||on my ſide, I will not fear : what 
eb. 13.6, Can man'f do unto me ? | 
Heb. for Ff A frailand imporent creature in himſelf, and much more when ' 

A he is oppoſed to tae Almighty God. 5 | 
PC. 54. 4 7 * The LORD taketh my part with them that help 
| me g: therefore (ball I ſee my dire upon them that hate | 


mes As 

 g He isone of the number of my helpers, and enables them to 
detend me. 

| 8 * It is better to'truſt in the LORD, than to put 
*P. 40.4- confidence in man þ. | | 
92. 8,9. b As mine Adverſaries do in their own numbers, and in their 
27-527. g eat confederates. 

9 * Ic is better to truitinthe LORD, thento put con- 
*P{146. 3. gdence in princes. 

| to All nations compaſſedme aboutz ; but inthe Name 


_ of the LORD + willI deſtroy them, | 
| Or. 14s ; The Nighbouring and Heathen Nations, Phzliflins, Syrians, Am- 
deſtroy monites, Moabites, &c. who were ſtirred up, partly by the overthrows 
them. which David had given ſome of them, partly by their jealoutic at Da- 
vids growing greatneſs and fear for themielves, and partly by their 
hatred againſt rhe true Religion. 
11 They compalied me about, yea, they compaſſed 
+ Heb. cus © about & : bur in the name of the LORD I will F 


them off deſtroy _— 7. | FRE, 
k The Repetition implies their frequency and fervency-in this 

aCtion, 2nd thor confidence of ſuccels. 
* Deut.z 12 Tizy compailed me about * like bees / ; they are. 
44: quenched m2 as the fire of thorns » : for o in theName of 
FT Heb. 47 the LORD I will + deſtroy them. 


_ | In great numbers, and with great and potent fury, and tc their 
own ruine, as Bees do whcn they fly about aMan, and leave their 
Stings in him. m So this word is uſed Job. 6. 17. and +8. 5, 6. 
and 21. 17. Or, as the LXX. and Chaldee render it, zhcy burnt or 
flamed, i. e. raged againſt me like fire, as it follows. And this is 
ſuppoſed to bz one of thoſe Hebrew Verbs, which have not only di- 
vers, bur contrary fignifications. = Which flameth our terribly, 
and makes a crackling noiſe, and burneth fiercely, bur quickly 
ſpends it ſejf without any conſiderable or laſting eftett. o Or, bur, 
as this very particle 1s fiequently uſed, and here twice in this very 
Phrate, wv. 10, 11. So as the former part of the verle notes their 
hoſtile attempr, this notes their il ſucceſs and utter Ruine. Here 
is an inve:{ion of words in th's laſt Clauſe, which is not unuſual in 
the Hebrew Text. Although theſe words may be, and are by a 
learned man of our own; rendred as they ly ia the Hebrew, I truſt 
( which word may eaiily be naverſtood owt of v. 8. and 9g.) in the 
name of the Lord, therefore ( tor fo the Hebrew «1; is oft rendred, and 
is ſo taken by the Chaldee in th:s place) 1 ſha deſtroy them, or cur 
them off. 


13 Thou p haſtthruſt ſore at me that I might full: but 
the LORD helped me. 


2 O mine enemy and the head of all mine enemies. poſlibly ke 
underſtandcrh Saul; whom for honours lake he forbears ro name : 
or ſome other chief Commanders of his Enemies. Or the lngular 
word is here pat collectively for all his Enemies, 


- CAVIIL. PIS 4:L M S. Pſal. CXVIT. 


14 * The LORD is my ftrength and ſong 4, and is * Ex.15.2, 
become my falvation r. - PC.12.2, 

94 The Author of my ſtrength, and thereforethe juſt object ofmy 
Song and praife. r 7. e. My Saviour. 

15 The voice of rejoicing and ſalvation s is in the ta- 
bernacles of the righreeus?z: therighthand ofthe LORD 
doth valiantty «. | 

s Of Rejoicing and Thankſgiving for the ſalvation and deliverance 
which God hath wrought for me. # Partly becauſe they clearly 
ſaw\ Geds hand inthe work, and therefore took pleaſure in it: and 
partly becauſe all good men ſuffered great inconveniences under 
Sanls Government, as David complains in divers of the foregoing 
Pfalms, and expected and received fingular Benefits by Davias ad- 
vancement both in their Civil and Religious Concernments. « 
Thele are the words of that Song of joy and praiſe now. mentioned. 

16 The right hand of the LORD is exalted x; the 
right hand of .the LORD doth valiantly. 

x Hath appeared evidently, and wrought powerfully and glori- 
ouſly on my behalf. | 

17 1 jhall not die y, but live, and declare the works 
of the LORD &. 


y To wit, ſo ſoon as mine Enemies deſire, nor by their Sword, 
as they hope and endeavour. z One Branch whereof is the Toral 
Deſtruction of mine Enemies. He implies that he did not deſire 
life, nor ſhould employ ir, as his Enemics did theirs, but for the ſer- 
vice and glory of God. 

18 The LORD hath chaſtened me ſore &, but he hath 


not given me over unto death, 

a By the hands of mine Enemies, whom God uſed to that very 
purpole for my greater good, and their own greater and ſurer Ruine 
and Confulion. 

19 Open to me b the gates of righteouſneſs c: I will 


g0 1n to them, 4andT will praiſe the LORD. 
b O ye Porters, appointed by God for this work. Or it is a fi- 
gurative and poetical manner of expreſſion, whereby he ſpeaks to 
ce Gates themſclves,as if they had Senſe and underſtanding. Or by 
laying, open, he implies that they had been long ſhur againſt him 
in Saul's time. c To wit, the Gates of the Lords Tabernacle; the : 
proper and uſual place ſor the ſolemn- performance of the Duty 
here following, which he calleth the Gates of Righteouſneſs ; partly 
in oppoſition to the Gates of death, of which he ſpeaks implicitly, v. 
18. and exprefly, Pſal. 9. 14. and 107: 18. which may be called 
the Gates of ſin or unrighteouſneſs, becauſe Death is the wages of 


| fin ; partly becauſe there the Rule of Righteouſneſs was kept and 


taught, and the Sacrifices of Righteouſneſs ( as they are called Pſa. 
4. 5. ) were offered, and divers other exerciſes of Righteouſneſs or 
of Gods ſervice were performed : and partly becaule thoſe Gates 
were to be opened toall Righteous perſons ( ſuch as David had oft 
Profefied and proved himfelt to be, upon which account he claims 
this as his juit priviledge ) and only to ſuch, for the unclean and 
unrighteous were to be thut and kept out by the Porters, 2 Chroz. 
23. 19. compare {/a. 26. 2. 


20 This is the gate of the LORD into which the 


11ghteous ſhall enter 4. 

d Theſe may be the words, either, 1. of the Levites, the Por- 
ters returning this anſwer to the foregoing queſtion ; This is the 
Gate of the Lord which thou ſeckeſt, and which ſhall be opened to 
thee according to thy deſire, and thy juſt priviledge ; for thou art 
one of thoſe Righteous ones to whom this of Right belongs : Or, 
2. Of David himliclf, who ſtatids as it were pauſing and contempla«. 
ting, before he makes his entrance, This, this 1s that Holy and 
Bleiſed Gate, which I fo long and earneſtly thirſted for in my ba- 
niſhment, and which is now very beautiful in my ſight, into which 
I will enter, and all other Righteous perſons by my example and * 
encouragement. But as David was a type of Chriſt and the Tem- 
ple of Heaven, ſo this place hath a further proſpect than David, 
and relates to Chriſts aſcending into Heaven, and opening the Gates 
of that bleſſed Temple both for himſelf and for all Righteous men 
or Believers. 


21 TI will praiſe thee, for thou haſt heard me, and 


, art become my ſalvation. 


22 * Theſtone Which the builders refuſed e, is become * Mat. 7h 


the head Fore of the corner f. - HP 
e The Commonwealth of 1/2! and the Church of God are here *'* 
and elſewhere in Scripture compared to a building, wherein, as the Me as? 


| people are the Stones and the Matter, ſo the Princes and Rulers are 


the Builders, whote office ir was to erett and ſupport and improve \- . 4.1, 
the Building, and to uſe their wiſdom and power in chuſing fit Pet.2. 4 
materials for the ſeveral parts and purpoſes of che Building, and 7 
in the Rejection of what was unprofitable and inconvenient. And 7* 
theſe Maſter-builders rejeted David as an obſcure and treacherous 

and rebellious perſon, fit to be not only laid afide and thrown a- 
way, but allo ro be cruſhed to pieces. And ſo their ſucceſſors 
rejected Chriſt, as an Enemy to Moſes, a friend to ſinners, and a 
blaſphemer againſt God, and therefore deſerving death and'dam- 
nation. f The chief Stone in the whole Building, by which the 
ſeveral parts of the building are upheld and firmly united and kept 
rogether. Thus David united all rhe Tribes and Families of 1/raet, 

who had been miſerably diſtracted and divided by the Civil Wars 
between the Houſes of $i! and David, And thus Chriſt united 
Jews and Gentiles together, as is obſerved, Eph. 2. 14, &c. And 
although David alluderh to himſelf and his own condition, yet it 

is not to be doubted, but, that having the Prophetical Spirit, by 
which he foreſaw the coming of Chriſt, and his 111 uſage from the 
Jews, of which he ſpeaks very particularly Pſal. 22. and elſewhere ; 

and having his thoughrs much taken up with Chriſt and the events 

of his Kingdom, of which he ſpeaks in divers of his Pſalms, he 

had his eye principally fixed upon him in theſe and the _—_— 
expreſons. And therefore this place is juſtly expounded of Chri 

in the New Teſtament, as Mark 12. Io. 4#s 4. n. Rom. 9. 32. 

Eph. 2. 20, 1 Pet. 4.6. compared with Tſa. 28. 16. And to him 
indeed the words -agree much more properly and fully than to 
pavia, OM F 23 £05 


FH 
LOR 
God, 
bath 
ed, 
Pl; I 


Pl. CXIX., P20 
{Heb 7% 23 7 This gis the LORD's doing þ ; it 3s marvellous 
g from ti? ; 1 
; 1D, 2N Our eyes. 

PEeY $ This ſtrange event : the Feminine gender being put for the 

Neuter, as it is in other places of Scripture, h Peculiarly,an ef- 
{c& of his Omniporent Wiſdom; done not only without the help 
of inan, bur again all the artifices and forces of men. 7 


24 This is the day which the LORD hath made 3 ; 


we will rejoyce and be glad in it. 

7 Either created ; or exalted and glorified, as this word is uſed 
r Sum: 12, 6. or ſanCtified by his glorious preſence and work and 
by his appointment, as a time or {caſon never to be forgorten,but 
ro be obterved with great thankfulneſs and rejoycing as it tollows. 


2.5 Save now,[T beſeech thee k,O LORD: OLORD, 


I beſeech thee, ſend now profperity. 

& Or, we beſeech thee 5, for the Hebrew words may be rendred ei- 
ther way. Theſe ſeem to be the words of the Levites, to whom 
he ſpake wv. 19. or of the people, uſing thele joyful acclamations 
or prayers to God for the preſervation of their kiag and kingdom. 
This allo is interpreted of and was applied to Chriſt, even by the 
Jews themſelves, Mark. 11.9. John 12. 13. 

26 * Bleſſed be he / that cometh #2 in the Name of 


hey tohg the LORD x: we have bleflſed you out of the houſe of 
Mart: the LORD o. 
ngLuk. #4 We earneftly pray thatGod would bleſs his perſon and govern- 


19.33. Sce ment and all his enterprizes. » To wit, unto us, from whom 
Tech:4.7» be was long baniſhed ; or unto the Throne ; or from his father 


znto the world : the Mefſias, who is known by the name of him d In mind and heart. that carefully and dil; ws . him. Sal 
that cometh or was to come, as Marth. 11. 3.and 2y. 9. Luke 7. 20.and , Preceprs. , y ihgently obſerve. e His al 


33. 35. John 12. 13. and of whom this very word is uſed Gen: 4g. { 
19, Ija. 35. 4. He who is about to come, or will certainly come. 
* By command and commiſſion from him, and for his ſervice ! 
and g'ory. o We who are the Lords miniſters attending upon ? 
him in his houſe, and appointed to bleſs in his Name, Numb: 6. | 
23. Deur. 15. 8. do pray for, and in Gods Name pronounce his | 
blefſing upon thee. So theſe are the words of the Priefts. 


27 | God is the LORD p which hath (bewed us 
light g; bind the fſacritice with cords,even unto the horns 


of the altar 7. | 
? God hath proved himſelf to be the Lord Jehovah by the ac- 
coinpliſhment of his promiſes. See the Notes on Exod. 6. 3. Or 
as it is in the margent, the Lord or Jehovah is God, as it was ſaid u- 
pon another ſolemn occaſion and appearance of God, 1 Kings 18. 
39. or, is themizghty God, as this Name of God 1ignifies, and as he 
ſhewed himſelf to be by this his mighty and wonderful work. 
Who hath cauſed light to ſhine out of darkneſs; who hath ſcat- 
tered our thick and dark clouds,and-put us into a ſtate of peace 
and comfort and ſafety and happineſs; all which are frequently 
ſignified by 1ight in the holy Scripture. Or, who hath diſcovered 
and will in due time ſend the Mefſias, who 1s called the light of the 
Gentiles, or of the world, or of men, Iſa. 42.6. Johnn: 4. and 8, 12. 
and 12, 35, 46. and by whom he will mors clearly and fully re- 
veal his whole mind and will to us, and rell us all zhings, as the 
Jews expeCed, John 4. 25. who alſo will enlighten ur dark minds 
by his Spirit. » Thefe words, as well as thoſe which go before 
them in this verſe, and thoſe which follow after them, v. 28. may 
be the words of David unto the Prieſts, who had now bleſſed him 
in Gods Name, v: 26. And this blefling of God which you wiſh 
me, God hath already given me; and therefore in way of gratitude 
I willoffer Sarritices to him, which do you, OQ ye Prieſts, accor. 
ding to your Office, bind to the horus of the Altar : of which ſee 
Exo4. 27. 2. which horns are fuppoſed by divers learned men to be 
made for tkis very uſe, that the beaſts ſhould be bound and killed 
there. And this may ſeem probable fromExoaus 29. "tr, 12. and 
Icvi:. 4. 7, &c. where we read that the beaſts were to be killed 5y 
the door of the Tabernacle, which was very near the Altar of burnt. 
off:rings; and then immediatc!7 part of their blood was to be pur 4. 
pon the horns of tie Altar, and the reſt poured our at the bottom of ix. 
Alchough theſe words may be thus rend:ed, Bind and bring ( one 
pregnant word being pur tor two, as above v. «. and in many 
other places of Scripture ) the Sacrifice mith cords unto the horns of the 
Fltar, that it may be killed belide ir, and its blood put upon the 
horns after the manner. So they may be Davids words to his ſer- 
vants to go and bring one of his beaſts to be offered to God in his 


Name. ; : 
28 Thou art my God, and I will praiſe thee ; thou 


&rt my God, and I will exalt thee. 
29 O Give thanks unto the LORD, for be is good: 


for his mercy endureth for ever. 
P'S AL. GAEX. 
The ARGUME NT. 
He Author »f this Pſalm was David; which I know none that 
deny ; 2nd of which there is no juſt reaton to dovbr. The 
feope and deſign of ir is manifeſt, to commend the ſerious and di- 
ligent ſtudy an! the ſtedfaft belicf and the conitant prattice of 
Gods Word, as incomparably the beſt counſellor and comforter in 
the World, and as the only way to. tree: blefſedneſs. And this he 
confrmeth by his owneexample, which he propoſeth to them for 
their imitation; and hedeclareth the great and frequent experi- 
ence which he had of its admirable ſweetneſs and manifold benefits 
ut all conditions, and eſpecially in the times of his diſtrefies. And 
becauſe it was an hard thing rightly to underſtand this 'Word 3n 
all irs parts, and harder to pur it in p:aftice, he therefore inter- 
mixeth many prayers to God for his help rherein,thereby directing | 
and encouraging others to takz the ſame courſe. And: becauſe 
this Plalm. v as very lerge, and the matter of it of greateſt impor- 
tance, rhe Pjalmift thought fir ro divide it into two and twenty 


tHeb.T5e 
LORD :zs 
Grd, and 
hath ſhew= 
ed, &c. 
ILSS 


»” 


r 


C 


to he mizhr both prevent tediouſne!s, and fix it in the meniory, Ic 
is furtker obſervable, that the Word of God is here diverſly called 
by the name. of Law, Statutes, Precepts or Commandments, Judgments, ; 
Orc inamces, Righteouſneſs, Teftimonies, Way and Word, By which varie- 

ry be deotigned t «xyrets the nature and the great perfection and 
manifold pacts and uſes of Gods Word. Which is called his 370-4, 
#5 proceeding Fo his mouth, and revealed by lin>to as; kis < 


= 


as not to be partial in my obedience, not to allow my ſelf in the. 
practice of any known lin, or in the neglect of any known dury. 


when TI ſhall have learned F thy righteous judgments e, t Heb. 


ing pur for all, as is frequent in Scripture. 
or hear:, in aright manner, ſo as may be acceptable to thee, and,**% neſs. 


beneficial to my ſelf. e When by thy good Spirit Iſhall be more 


fully inſtructed in the meaning of thy | 
rule of thy Worſhip ; for want ofa ſound knowledge whereof,ma- 


ny perſons run into ſuperſtitious or erroneous Practices 


ly g. 


tocally and finally; for then F ſhall fall into the foulet ſins and, 
greateſt miſchicf. Nor that he was contented to be forſaken in the 
leaſt degree, but this he more eſpecially deprecates,ashe had great 


by taking heed zhereto according to thy word &.. 


impatient of admonirion, full of violent paſſions and ſtrong luſts, - 


and ex 
purge himſelf from all filchineſs of fleſh and Spirit. & By a diligent 


and circumſpect watch over himſelf, and the examination and re- 
gulation of all his actions by the rules of thy 


me not wander »s from thy commandments. 
ly andearneſtly deſired, and laboured to obrain. 9 Heb. do wee. 


drawing thy grace. which is neceſſary to keep me from wandring.Þ. . 


might not ſin againſt thee o. 


Word, but have received it in the love of it, have diligently pon=- 
tered it, and laid it up in my mind and m<mory like a ; choice | 


L M 5$: 


* £'\ ge 

Fay, as preſcribed by him for us to walk in ; his Law, as binding 

us to obedience ; his Satutes, as declaring his Authority and Pow- 

cr of giving us Laws; his Precepts, as declaring and' directing-our 

Duty ; his Ordinances, as ordained and appointed by him ; his Regh+ 

teouſneſs, as exactly agreeable ro Gods right. cus Nature. and Will; 

his 7zagments, as, proceeding from the great Judge of the: World, 
and being his Judicial Sentence to which all men-muſt ſubmit ; and 
his Teſttmonies,as it contains the witneſſes of Gods mindand-will, 
and of mans duty. - And there are very tew of theſe 176 verſes con- 
tained in this Plalm, in which one or other of thoſe Titles is not 

found, | . . 

This Pſalm contains the cormendation of Gods Word :; Davids love to it: 
A Prayer for grace to carry himſelf ac.ording to it : With an account of 
Goas Law, Inflicutions, Commandments, Teftimoni:s, Precipts, . Word, 
Promiſes, Ways, Judgments, Name, Righteouſnijs, Truth, &c. With 8 
Prayer for help and aſſiftance. . | | S: 

ALEPH. EN «oo 
Leflſed are the |} undefiled @ in the way b, who || Or, 5 
bl 
walk in the way of the LORDe. « 


quently fignities 3 ſuch whoſe hearts and courſe of Jife agrees with 
their proſefſion. 6 Either, t, 1n their way or courſe of life, which 
in Scripture is oft called a mans way : ' Or, 2.'in the way of the * 
Lord as it ſeems ro be explained by the next clauſe. c Who order 
their lives according to the rule of Gods Law or. Word. _ % 


chat | ſeek him f with the whole Heart g. will ſeeks 


For the reaſon of this and the other Titles of Gods Gr- 
Word, ſee the Argument or Preface to this Pſalm. f To witzthe 
Lord, expreſſed vir. r. that ſeek his preſence and favour and ac- 
quaintance, g Sincerely, induſtriouſly and fervently, above all 
other things. Thais is oppoſed to hypocrifie and ſloth and luke: 


warmneſs in Religion. EE | 
3 They alfo do no iniquity r ; they walk 5 in his 
ways #. | © 
+ Or, are not workers of iniquity, i, e, do not knowingly and res 
ſolvedly and induftriouſly and cuſtumarily continue in tinful cours. 
ſes- So this phraſe is underſtood Job 31. 3. and 34. 8. Pſal: 5, , 
and 6.8. and 125. 5. Prov: +0, 29. Luke 13; 27. otherwiſe there is 
not a Juſt Man upon the Earth that ſinneth not, Ecdl: 4. 26, $5 This is 
their conſtant praftice,and the general courſe of their lives, which 
is commonly ſignified by walking, as Pſal: 1: 1: and every where. 
£ In the Paths which God hath preſcribed to them. : 
4 Thou haſt commanded'as to keep thy precepts dili- 
cently Hes Rt 7 "EW SY : 
u Nor is itſtrange that thy people do ſo exaftly and diligently 
obſerve and praiſe thy preceprs,becauſe they are commanded fo 
to do by thee their Soveraign Lord. 


5 O that x my ways were dire&ed x to keep thy 


ſtatutes ! | | 
x My deſires anſwer thy commands. y Or, eftabliſhed, to wit, 
by thy. Grace and Holy Spirit ; for the direftion of Gods word he 
had already. : | SY | 
6 Then ſhall I not be * aſhamed z, whenT have te- A 
ſpe& « unto all thy commandments 6, ._ _ .. *Ver.8e; 
z Either of my ans ; or of my profeflion- of Religion ; orof 
my hope and confidence in thy favour. When ſinners ſhall be a«- 
thamed both here, Rom. 6. 21.:and hereafter, Das. 12::2. I having 
the conſcience of mine own integrity ſhall lifr up my heal with 
courage and boldneſs both before men, when they either accuſe or 
perſecute me ; and before God in the day of Judgment, as it is ſaid 
1 John 4. 17, # A due and true reſpect, which implies high valua-. 
tion; hearty affection, diligent ſtudy, and common practice. | b So 


: 
1 
(] 
" 


j 
WS 
[ 


7 I will * praiſe thee c with uprightneſs of Heart &, *ver.172. | 
one eminent duty of Gods worſhip bee j#*4gments.., 


ci: e: Worſhip thee, | us 
& Or,with a right mind of th righ« | 


ord, which is the only. 


8 I will keep thy ſtatutes f: O forſake me not utter- 


: ik is my full purpoſe to do ſo, whatſoever it coſt me. g Noe 


calon to do. | LEE | 
9 Wherewithal ſhal a young man h cleanſe his way 7: 


h Or, ary man. Bur henames the young man, becauſe ſuch are: 
ommonly void of Wiſdom and experience, heady and wilful and. 


ſed ro many and great temptations ' z Reform his life, or. 


Word. 
10 With my whole heart have I fought thee 7; O let 


1 Deny me not thy grace and afliſtarice, which I have ſo fincere-. 


11 * Thy word have I hid in my hearc », thatf "PC. 39.37, 


z | have not-contented my ſelf with bare hearing or reading thy 


TS 7 treatuie, 


. -Pfal: C | | 


a Or, the perfett or ſincere, . as this word properly .and moſt fre- ſincere, | 


| 
| 
'M 


2 Bleiled erethey that keep his teſtimonies e, ' 2nd tHeb.ehll 


WTI HAITI RN TI TER, 0 WR ee PR FOR 
Y +; "0 : 
\ bh : » pen 4 7 _ FY + r of _ 


treaſure, to be ready upon all occaſion to counſel or' comfort or 
quicken or caution me, as need requires. o That by a diligent and 
affeQionate conſideration of thy precepts and promiſes and threat- 
nings, I might be kept from ſinful courſes, againſt which theſe are 
the beſt Antidote: 

I2 Bleſſed art thou p, O LORD: * teach me thy 


Iver: 26. 


4,64,68, ſtatutes qg. 
ÞS, 1244 Þ Thou art infinitely bleſſed, and moſt worthy of all bleſſing 
35. and praiſe, and therefore do thou bleſs me in teaching me, as it 


i follows. Or, Bl:fzd be thou. I bleſs and praiſe thee for that great 
bleſſing of thy word, wer. iz. q Both to know and to practice 
them. better, Few" 
13- With my lips have I declared r all the judgments 
of thy mouth. | ET,” 
r If thou wilt teach me, I will teach others, as I have already 
done ;z and ſo thou ſhalt have glory,and others benefit by It. 
14T have rejoiced in the way of thy teſtimonies s, as 
much as * in all riches. 
5 In the ſtudy and prattice of them- | 
| I5 I will * meditate in thy precepts ?#, and have re- 
ver. 72+ ſpeR unto » thy ways- 
ad 162.  ;1 will diligently and ſeriouſly confider the nature and defign 
VET. 23. and extent of thy precepts, and eſpecially fo far as they concern 
my own duty « Or, {6k unto them, as workmen con:tantly and 
, carefully look to their rule to guide themſelves by it- 
WW . 216 1] will delight my felt in thy ſtatues : I will not 
forget thy word. | 
| 7 2 F- $A DP 
17 Deal bountifully y with thy ſervant, that T may 
lives, and keep thy word a+ 
T plead no merit, but only: thy free Grace and rich Mercy. 
z Safely and comfortably, in ſpighr of all the attempts of mine e- 
nemies to take away my life. @ I do nor defire life that F may 
fatisfie my own luſts, but thatI may ſpend ir in thy Service. 
18 } Open thou mine eyes b, that I may behold * 
Heb.«z- wondrous things out of thy law c. 
- 6 Inlighten my mind by the light of thy Holy Spirit, and diſpel 


C AM $8 


troubles and concerns, in way of humble petition to thee, 
pears from Gods anſwer. 


cepts 2: fo ſhall I calk of thy wondrous works a. 
Y More thorowly and more praftically. Either, 1» The full 


he faith afterwards : Or, 2. The way wherein I may walk accord- 
ing to thy Precepts. = How to demean my ſelf in all the varie- 
tics of my condition, and in all my affairs and aGtiohs. io as is 
molt agreeable to thy precepts. « Even the wonders of the Law 
mentioned before, wiz 18, 

28 My ſoul + melteth þ for heavineſs c : ſtrengthen 


thou me 4d according to thy word. 

b Like wax before the fire 3 
Jeft in it, bur conſumeth or pineth away. c Through gricf, part- 
ly for my extream danger and miſery; and principally for my ſins, 
and thy wrath and terrors f:lowing upon them. d Thar ſo I may 
bear my burdens patiently and chearfully, and vangquiſh all my 
cemprations. 

29 Remove from me the way of lying e; and grant 
me thy law graciouſly f. 

e Or, of falshod : Either, 1. The praftice of lying and diſſem« 
bling and cheating, which is ſo rife in Sauls Court, and in the 
, Courts of moſt princes ; but, Lord, let it nor be ſoin my Courts: 
, Or :ather, 2, Every falſe way of Dofrine 'or Worſhip; for to this 
; way he oppoſerh Gods Law in the next clauſe. And ke juſtly pray= 
eth to God to keep him from Apoſtaſie. Herefie, Idolatry and Su- 
peritition, becauſe his own corrupt Nature of it ſelf and without 
Gods Grace, was prone to theſe errors,and notonly Heathens, bur 
many Ifraclites did frequently fall into them. f Yonchſaf: unto 
me an accurate knowledge and firm belief of thy Word, and that 
I may conſtantly attend and adhere to it, and govern my ſelf by 
It 1n all things. 

30 T have choſen the way of truth g : thy judgments 
have I laid b:fcre we b.- 

g To wit, thy Word or Law. for my portion and the rule of 

my worſhip and wholelife. þ Or, ſet before me, as the Phraſe 1s 


toaimat;z Or as a rule to dire& me. 


ver. 129? 41] Ignorance/and errour. £ Thoſe great and marvellous depths of 
Divine Wiſdom and Goodneſs, and thoſe profound Myſteries of 

Chriſt and of Gods Grace to mankind, and of that future and 
everlaſting ſtate, which are contajned in Gods Law, and which. 
were.not to be known but by divine Ylumination, Matth: 16-17, 
1 Cor: 2+ 11, 14. 2 Cor; 3- 14. and 4. 4, 6. Eph: 1+ 17. eſpecially in 
the times of the Old Teſtament. 
I9 *I am aſtranger din the earth,hide not thy com- 


mandments e from me. | 
. @ Or, ſojourner. Tam not here as in my home, but as a pilgrim 
travelling homeward-in a itrange land : which calls for thy pity 


Gen. 47. 
). 1 Chro. 
29. 15. 

| _ 6 mens minds, reacheth them to ſhew hamanity to ſtrangers, and to 
Jeb 4 . * dire& rravellours. Much more may this be expeQed from thee. 
#P-1-13- 5 Which are my chief ſupport and guide in my pilgrimage: 

20'* My ſoul breaketh f for the longing that it hath 


ye Ts unto thy judgments g at all times. 

- f Fainteth, as it frequently doth, when a thing vehemently de- 
fired: is denyed or delayed. Compare Prov: 13. 12. g Toa more 
ſound knowledge and ſcrious pre&-ce of them. 

21 Thou haſt rebuked þ the proud z hat are || curſed 


pr enrſed x which do erre } from thy commandments. 


th 
tha Me, _ þ Or, deft rebuke, i: 6; ſeverely puniſh and deſtroy: And there- 
> Gr, fore I juſtly long for thy Judgements, as for the love which I 
A have to them, ſo for fear of thoſe terrible judgments which thou 


- ſinners, who ſin with an high hand, and with contempt of God 
and of his Laws, and of his Judgements; all which is the effeQ of 

' pride. & That have the curſe of God upon them, and upon all 
Which they have or do : which is the depth of miſery. / Or 
wander, knowingly and wilfully ar d maliciouſly, as proud ſinners 
uſe to do._ : 
22 Remove from me reproach 


have kept thy teſtimonies ». 
- m Which Iſuffer unjuſtly and for thy ſake 5 as he elſewhere come 
” Plains. z Aad therefore I am innocent from thoſe crimes for 
which they cenſure and reproach me. Or,and therefore thou wilt 
Maintain mine honour and intereſt according to thy promiſe made 
to ſuch as keep thy teſtimonies, and I beg with ſome confidence 
that thou wilt do ir. 


22 Princes alſo did ſit nd ſpeak 0 againſt me: but thy 


ſervant did meditate in thy ftatutes p. 
.e Did you againſt me continually ( for ſiting notes continu- 
ance) and when they: ſate upon their ſears of Judicacure,and when 
_y fate together in companies,” entertaining one another with 
Diſcourſes. p All their Contumelies and Reproaches did not diſ- 
courage nor divert me from the ſtudy, belief and praQice of thy 


”m and contempt, for I 


ord. 
3 24 Thy teflimonies alſo ere my delight q, and | my 
'THeb.men counſellours r. 
| *ud COM 1 My chiief comfort under all their cenſures and perſecutions. 
7 To teach me how to carry my ſclf under them, 
D ALET H. 
oo _ _ 25 My ſoyl cleaveth unto the duſt 5s: quicken thou | 
Pſ.71.209 me 3 according to thy word «. | 
s IT am'in evident danger of preſent death, through the rage and 
power of mine enemies : I am like one Jaid in the grave without 
all hopes of recovery. So this os is uſed Pſal: 22. 15, #& Pre- 
ſerve my lif-, or revive me and raiſe me our of the duſt by thy 
Almighty Power. « According to thy promiſe. 
:26 I have declared my ways x, and thou heardeſt 
me : * teach me thy ſtacutes. 


 Ppſ. 25.4. | 


and help. That Law of Nature, which thou haſt planted in all | 
. thou ſhalt enlarge my heart =. 


ſendeſt upou the deſpiſers of them. 1Obſtinate and preſumpruous-| 


31 I have ſtuck unto thy teftimonies;3: O LORD, 
pur me not to ſhame &. 

7 I have reſolutely perſiſted in the praftice of thy precepts in 
ſpight of all remptations, reproaches. perſecutions and diſcourage« 
ments, to which I was expoſed in and for ſo doing. & Either, r. 
By giving me over to Apoſtafie or Tranſgreflion, which will bring 
ſhame. Or rather, a. By the diſappointment of my hopes and 
confidence in thoſe promiſes of the bleſlings of this life, as well as 
of the next which thou haſt made to the obedient, of which 1 
have niade my boaſt. | 

32 I will run the way of thy commandments /, when 


IT will obey thy Precepts with all readineſs, fervency and dilt- 
gence. wv: Either, 1- When thou ſhalt bring me out of my preſent 
ſtraits or diſtreſſes. This indeed is called enlarging, as Pſal. 4: 2. 
and 18- 36, but never to my remembrance, the enlarging of the 
heart, Or, rather,, 2, When thou ſhalt repleniſh my heart with 
more wiſdom, and love to, and delight in thee and thy Law; for 
this enlarging of the heart in Scripture 1s aſcribed to wiſdom, 1 Kin; 
4' 29. and love, 2 Cor: 11: 6. and joy, Iſa: 60: 5: Whenthouſhalte 
- knock off thole fetters of remaining corruption, and give mea 
more noble and generous diſpoſition towards thee, and ſtabliſh me 
with thy Free ſpirit, as it is expreſſed Pſal: 51: 12: Thus David both 
owns his duty, and aſſerts the abſolute neceflity of Gods Grace te 
*the performance of it. 

H E. 


2; Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy ſtatutes; 

and I ſhall keep it unto the end ». | | 

» Or, that T may keep ir, &c. That I may perſevere; for Apos 
ſtaſie proceeds from the want of a good underſtanding, 


34 Give me underſtanding, and I ſhall keep thy law} 
yea, I ſhall obſerve it with my whole heart. 
35 Make me togo oin thepath of thy commandments; 


for therein do I delight p. Ge rae ge 

o By dire&ing my mind into the right way, by inclining my 
will, and ſtrengthening my reſolution.  Forſake not him who 
delighteth in thee and in thv ſervice ; and as thouhaſt wrought in 
me ro will, work in me alfo to do. 


to covetouſneſs r. 

9 To the Tove and praftice of them. r Not to the inordinate 
love and defire of riches. Which patticular Juſt he mentions, 
partly becauſe this luſt is moſt ſpreading and univerſal,and there is 
ſcarce any man who doth nor defire riches either for the love of 
riches, or upon pretence of neceſlity, or for the ſervice of pride 


or luxury, or ſome other luſt: partly becauſe this luſt is moft op- 


poſite to Gods teſtimonies, and doth moſt commonly hinder men 
from receiving Gods Word, and from profiting by it. See Mar: 
13. 22, Luke 16:14. and partly becauſe this luſt is moſt pernici- 
ous, as being the root of all evil, 1 Tim: 6, 20: and is moſt mif- 
chievous in Princes and Governours, ſuch as David was, and there- 
fore in a ſpecial manner forbidden-to them, Exod; 18. 21. 


and quicken thou me in thy * wayr. 


miration and inordinate affe&ion : for ſuch a ſight of the eyes doth 
uſually affect the Heart, and ſrir up 'mens haſts and Paſſions. 
which ſee Numb, 15. 39. Job 31- x. Prov. 4+ 25+ and 23. 5 6 
Mstth. 5. 28, t AsT deſire that I may be dull and dead in affections 
to worldly vanities ; ſo, Lord, make ine lively and vigorous an 


& 27; Is 


& My fins, in way of confeſſion ; and all my cares and fears and ]- 


in thy work and ſervice. ; 
fervent y work 28 Scabli & 


27 Make me to underſtand y the way of thy pre- 


mind and meaning of thy Precepts, which are exceeding broad, as 


fully expreſſed, Pſal: 16. 8. as a delightful obje& ; or as a mark | 


: 
s The vain things and luſts of this preſent evil world. ſuch as paſs 
riches, honouts, pleaſures : from beholding them, to wit, with ad-% 


6. 
it hath no ſtrength nor conſiſtency droppeth, 


ro 


36 * Incline my heart unto thy teſtimonies q,and not * pſ14ig. 


37 | Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity ** f Heb. 


&re27 


_— —_y 


Plal. Cx;F, 


as ap= 


perh. 


p_—_—  —— 


Pia). 


Or, / 
ſwer him 


 weth me in 
B thing s 


! - FHeb. a? 
Grge, 


L 
4 


FGens 14. 
a2, 23. 


Rxod.6.8., 


® yer. 49. 


ſhall I an- 


that repro- 


following words. 


in puniſhing the ungodly,and protetting and delivering thy faith- 


to others, and cheir own certain ruine. 


CXIX. 


38 Stabliſh thy word « unto thy ſervant, who is de- 


voted to thy fear. 


u Confirm and perform thy promiſes as concerning the kingdom, 
ſo alſo for the giving of gracious afliſtance, direQions and comforts 


to thoſe that fear thee, of which number I am one. 


39 Turn away my reproach x which I fear: for thy 


judgments are good y. 


x Either, r- for the ſhameful diſappointment of my hopes and 
confident boaſtings concerning the truth and certainty of thy pro= 
for my manifold failings, and pacrticulary for that 

ſhameful matter abour Uriah and Bathſheba . ' Or, 3. for my inſta- | 
- bility in or apoſtacy from thy ways; which in reſpe& of mine 
awn weakneſs and folly, I have great cauſe to fear. y This may 


be a reaſon either, 1. why he prayed and hoped that God would 
becauſe Gods word and Statutes 


miſes : Or, 2 


turn away reproach from him, 
were good, and therefore it was not fit for any ro ſuffer reproach 


in and for his diligent obſervation of them: Or, 2+ why he feared 


reproach, becauſe he had, and feared he might hereafter, tranſ- 


gre!s thoſe Judgements or ſtatutes of God which were and he very 
well knew to be goed, 7, e. juſt and holy and excellear, 
fore it wasa ſhameful thing to violate them. 


40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts &: quic- 


ken me 7 in thy righteouſneſs g. 


z Afﬀrer a more ſolid knowledge and conſtant performance of 
thy precepts. p Do thou preſerve and maintain both my natural 
and ſpiritual life. 4 According to thy juſtice or faithfulneſs, which 


obligeth thee to make good thy promites. 
V A U. 


41 Let thy mercies come alſo unto me ry, O LORD 


even thy ſalvation according tothy * word. 
7 Let promiſed mercies be performed to me. 
42 || So all T have wherewithal to anſwer him that 


reproacheth me 5: for I truſt in thy word r. 

s That chargeth me with folly for my piety and truſt in thy pro- 
miles. £ Or, becauſe 1 ruff, &c,; This was the matter of their re- 
proach. | 

42 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my 
mouth z ; for I have hoped in thy judgments . 

t Do rot deal ſo with me, that I ſhall be altogether aſhamed to 
mention thy word,which I have ſo often affirmed to be a word of 
truth and infallible certainty of which I have often made;my boaſt, 
« Either in thy word and. promiſes, or in thy judicial adminiſtrati- 
ons and goverment of the world, which as it is matter of terrour 
to the wicked, ſo it is matter. of comfort and hope to me. 

44 So ſhall I keep thy law continually x for ever 


and ever. 

x So ſhall I be obliged and encouraged to the conſtant and per- 
petual ſtudy and obſervation of thy Laws. 

45 And I will walk + at liberty y: for I ſeek thy 


precepts. | Es 
y Or, 1 ſhall walk at large, as it is in the margent 3 I ſhall be de» 
livered from all my preſent ſtraits both of the outward and inward 

man, and enjoy great freedom and comfort in nt WAYS. 
6 I will ſpeak of thy teſtimonies alſo before kings, 


and will not be aſhamed : | 
z Who commonly entertain all godly diſcourſes with ſcorn and 
Contempt. 


47 And I willdelight my ſelf in thy commandments. 


which I have loved. ; 
a Whereas other Princes place their delight in the glories and 


vanities of this World, and the ſtudy and prattice of Religion is 
generaly irkſome and loathſome to them, thy law ſhall be my chief 
delight and recreation- 


48 *My hands alſo will I lifrup unto thy command- 
ments which I have loved : and I will meditate in thy 
ſtatutes c. | 

6 To lay hold upon them, to receive and embrace thy precepts 
and promiſes by faith ard love, and chearfully and vigorouſly to 
putthent in pratice :. for as the hanging down of the hands 1s a ge« 


ſture of ſloth and liſtleſneſs, as 2 C-rom 15.7. and elſewhere ; ſo | 


the lijting upof rhe hands is the poſture of a man entring upon atti- 
on, as Gen: 41: 44. 2 Sam: 20. 21. c My deepeſt thoughts, as well 


as my hands, ſhall be exerciled in them. 
"= #30 | 
49 Remember the word d unto thy ſervant, upon 


which thou haſt cauſed mero hope e. 
d Thy promiſes: e By thy command requiring it of me, and 


by thy grace working it in me. _ EE 

'5o This f is my comfort in my affliion: for thy 
word hath quickned me g- | 

f To wit, thy word, as is-evident both from the foregoing and 
z Hath preſerved my life in manifold dangers, 
2nd hath revived and cheared my ſpirit, : : 
'- 51 The proud have had me greatly in deriſion þ : yer 
have I noc declined from thy law. 
*, _—_ my godlineſs and truſt in thy word, 
words imply. ; 

52 I remembred thy -- cpm of old 3, O LORD, 

and have comforted my ſelf. 

5 Thy former and antient diſpenſatiens to the 


as the following 


chili fas 


ful ſervants, whoſe experience is my encouragement. | 
Horrour k hath taken hoid upon me, becauſe of 


the wicked that forſake thy law 7. | 

þ A mixed paſſion made up of indignation at their perſons as 
ſinful, and abhorrency of their ſins, and dread and ſorrow at the 
conſideration of the Judgments of God coming upon them. /For 


P SAL M % 


and there- 


| 


1 
Pſa!, CX 
54 Thy ſtatutes have been my ſongs» in the houſe of 


my pilgrimage *s 
m The matter of my ſongs, my delight and recreation. » Ei: 
ther, 1. in this preſent worid, which I do nct own for my home, 
wherein I am a iiranger and pilgrim, as all my fathers were»Pſal.- 
39 13. comp. Gen. 47, 9. Or, 2. in mine exile and in the wilder- 
; hcfles and other places where I have been oft forced ro wander, 
. when I was baniſhed from all my friends, and from the place of 
! thy Worſhip,and had no other ſupport or comfort but the remem.- 
; brance of thy ſtatures. 
{ 55 I have remembred thy names, O LORD, in 
; p4 - - 
; the night p, and have kept thy law 4, 
* Thy holy Nature and Attributes, thy bleſſed Word, and thy 
wonderful Works ; all which come under the title of Gods Namz 
| 2 When darkneſs cauſeth fear in others, I took pleafure in remems 
bring theez and when others abandon all buſineſs, and whol! 
give themſelves up to reſt and ſleep, my thoughts and afe&ion 
were working towards thee. q This was the fruit of my ſerious 
remembrauce of thee. 
56 This r I had, becauſe I kept thy precepts 5. 
. 7 This comfortable and profitable remembrance and contempla. 
tion of thy name and ſtatutes, of which he ſpoke wer. 54, 55, 
5 Which if I had wilfully and wickedly brokengthe remembrance 
of theſe things would have been ſad and frightful to me,as now ir | 
1s comfortable, becauſe I kept them. | 
CHETH | 
57 © Thou art my portion t, O LORD ; T have ſaid *PC,.. 
|, that I would keep thy words. | _ 
5 Whereas other men place their portion and happineſs in world. | 
Ty things, I have choſen the for my portion and chief treaſure, as | 
he ſaid Pſal: 16. 5+ and 93. 26. and thou haſt an all-ſufficienc 
and an excellent portion for me. s [I have not only purpoſtd it 
in my own heart, but have profeſſed and owned it eilicn others | 
and I do not repent of it. , | 
58 I intreared thy F favour x with yy whole Heart | 
be merciful unto me according to thy word. tHeb.fa 
x Thy gracious preſence and merciful aſſiſtance, as it follows. | 
59 1 thought on my ways y, and turned my teerunto | 


thy teſtimonies =, 

7 I ſeriouſly conſidered both my former counſels and courſes, 
that I might be humbled for my paſt errours, and might now 
amend them, and my duty in all my furure aftions. z And find- 
ing that my feet had too often ſwerved from thy rule, I turned 
them toirt. And although the ways of finful pleaſure and advan< 
tage were preſented to my mind yet I rejefted them, and turned 
my ſelf wholly to thy ways. 

60 I made haſte, and delayed not « to keepthy com- 


mandments. 

_# Being fully convinced of the neceſſity and excellency of obe- 
dience, I preſently reſolved upon it, and immediatly pur it in 
execution, 


61 The || bands of the wicked have robbed me 5 : i! Or, « 

but T have not forgotten thy law. Pane. 

b Or, made a prey of ms , done me many injuries, for my reſpe& 

to thy Law, 

62At midnight I will riſe c to give * thanks unto thee; *ver. 26 

becauſe of thy righteous judgements 4d. | 

c Qut of my bed to praiſe thee in a ſolemn manner 3 not being 

contented with thoſe ſhort ejaculations which he might have uſed ' 

lying in his bed. di: e: Laws, which are ſo uſeful to dire& and 

comfort me. 5 OR 

63 1am* a companion of all them that fear the e, * yer; , 

and of them that keep thy precepts. 

e Not excepting the pooreſt and meaneſt, whoſe ſociety other 

Princes diſdain. : : 

64 The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy fx 

teach me thy ſtarutes g. 

f Thou doſt fatisfie the juſt deſires and neceſſities of all men and 

' all Creatures with the fruits of thy goodneſs. g The generality of 

| other men chiefly deſire the bleſſings of this life ; but, Lord, give 
me thy ſpiritual Lieffings, the ſaving knowledge, love and practice 


of thy Law. 
TERTR 
'65 Thou haſt dealt well with thy ſervant,O, LORD, 


according to thy word. 
66 Teach me || good 


$ 


: 


” & rt 


IF FE'S. 4 


WE > warn ang"t 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


PANT SR PRI PE TEE, 4 OAT 2p rs, 4k ye. 92; 4 » © *-”" "200 AA ACNE Rs. 


- 


judgement h and knowledge 3 : [ 


for I have believed thy commandments k. r, Fo 
hþ Whereby I may rightly diſcern between truth and falfhood, "eſs 46 


good or evil, between the mind of God, and my own or others 
inventions; that ſo I may be kept from thoſe miſtakes and errours 
in which many are involved, that I may truly judge what thy 
Law requires or permits, and what it forbids: Heb. the goodneſs of 
taſte, an experimental ſenſe and reliſh of divine things.. Compare 
Pſal, 24. 8, i A ſpiritual and as ene knowledge. And judg- 
men or tafte and knewleage may, by an uſeful Figure called Hen- 
diadis, be pur for judicious or ſolid or prattical knowledge, & I have 
believed thedivine authority of them,and the truth and certainty of 
choſe promiſes and threatnings which thou haſt annexed to them. 


67 * Before I was aftlited 1 went aſtray /: but now's ,,_ 


have I keep m thy word. ; So E- . 
1 As men generally do in their proſperity. See Dexr: 32. 15. 

Pſ#b; 73+ 4s 5, 6, &Cc. Prov. ts 32. Jer. 22. 21. 
68 Thou «rt good »», and doſt good »: teach me thy 


ſtatutes 0. 

» Gracious and bountiful in thy nature. = To all men, bothy 
good and bad, Met: 52 45. and in all things, yea even when thou 
afflicteſt. oe Which is the good that I detire above all things. f Hel 


knewled 
So Gr. 


E 
Py 


69 The proud have + forged a lie p againſt me. but ſewed s 


the difhonour which they bring to God, the ſcandal and miſchief | 


L will keep thy precepts q with my whole Heart. #08 7s 
| 5C4 2 A 


fl. CXIX. 
p A ſlander, charging me with hypocrifie towards God, and re- 

bellion againſt my Prince. q My praGtice ſhall confute their .ca- 

lumnies. : ; : 
70 Their Heart is as fat as greaſe r; but T delight in 


thy laws. 

» The ſenſe is, either r- They are ſtupid and inſenſible and paſt 
feeling, not affeHed either with the terrours or comforts of Gods 
word. So the like phraſe is uſed 1a: 6: 10. compe with John 12. 
40. or 2. they proſper exceedingly and are even glutred with the 
wealth and comforts of this life. s But I do not envy them their 
jollity, and I have as much delight in Gods Law, as they have in 
worldly things- ; 

-1 {t js good t for me that I have been afflited,thar 


T might learn thy ftatutes z. 
et Neceſſary and greatly beneficial. t He repeats what in effect 
he ſaid before, wv: 67. partly to intimate the certainty and Impor- 
tance of this truth, and partly becauſe it 1s a great Paradox to 
worldly men, who generally eſteem afflictions to be evil, yea the 
worſt of evils. 
2 * The law of thy mouth zs better unto me «, than 


thouſands of gold and ſilver. 
P.r9'r0. u Not only thy promiſes, but even thy precepts, which are ſo 
ov:8:11+ unpleaſantand hard to ungodly men, to me tiey are more defira- 
ble and more needful and profitable, becauſe they do not only give 
me abundant fatisfattion and comfort in rhis life, but alſo they con- 
duct me with faf-ty and delightunto that eternal and moſt bleſſed 
life, where gold and ſilver bear no price. 


F O D. 
73 * Thy hands have made me and faſhioned me : 
give me underſtanding that I may learn thy command- 


ments Xx. ; 

x T am thy Creature, and therefore obliged to ſerve and obey 
thee with all my might ; which that I may do arightT beg thy in- 
ftruQtion or aſſiſtance. Or, thou haſt made me once, make me a 
ſecond time, and renew thy decayed image in me, thar I may 
know and ſerve thee better, and that as I was made by thee, fo I 
may be guided by thy Grace to ſerve and gloritie my Creator. 

74 * They that fear thee, will be glad y when they 


ſee mez : becauſe I have hoped in thy word #s. 

7 Partly for my ſake, of whoſe innocency and piety they are 
convinced, and therefore ſympathize with me : and partly for their 
own ſakes, both for the encouragement they have by my example 
to truſt in God, and for the manifold benetits, both ſpiritual and 
temporal, which they expe& from my government. z To wit, a- 
live and in ſafety, notwithſtanding all rhe force and malice of mine 
enemies, and advanced to the Kingdom. # In thy promiſe and 
have not been diſappointed of my hope, which isa great confirma- 
tion of their faith and hope in God, that they ſhall obtain all the 
good things which God hath promited them. | 

75 I know b, O LORD, that thy judgments c are 
Fright, and zhat thou in faithfulneſs 4 haft afli&ed me, 

b By the convictions of my own Conſcience, and by experience. 
e i. e. Thy corrections, as the next clauſe explains this. d In 
purſuance of thy promiles, and in order t» my good, that by my. 
afflictions thou mighteſt purge me from thoſe {ins which mighr pro- 
voke thy wrath againſt me, and prepare me for a better admini- 
ſtration, and more laſting and comfortable enjoyment ofmy king- 


ob 10. 


Ver: 79. 


eb. 
9 couſe 


19-8. 


om. 
76 Let, Ipray thee, thy merciful kindneſs be + for 
my comfort, according to thy word e unto thy ſervant. 
e Yet in Judgement remember mercy, and give me that comfort 
and aſſiſtance in, and that deliverance out of my troubles, which 
thou haft promiſed me. : 
, 77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may 
live f: for thy law is my delight g. 


F That I may be preſerved from that violent and untimely death 


Jeb. to 
yfor; we. 


'expect thy protection, becauſe Iam thy faithful ſervant. 

78 Let theproud be aſhamed,for they dealt perverſly 
with me þ without a cauſe ; but 1 will meditate in thy 
PreCCepts 7. 

h Heb. they have preverted me, either by their Calumnies, where- 
by they have pur falſe and perverſe conſtruttions upon all my word 
and ations; or by endeavouring to overthrow and deſtory me,or 
fo turn me out of the wayof thy precepts. 7 All their wicked 
attempts againſt me ſhall never drive me from the ſtudy and love 
and: practice of thy precepts; 

79 Let thoſe that fear thee,turn unto me &, and thoſe 
that have known ! thy teſtimonies. 

& Either, 7. turn their eyes to me as a ſpeacle of Gods won- 
derful-mercy : Or rather;2; turn: their hearts and affeftions to mry 
which have been alienated from me, either by the artifices and 
calumnies of my adverſaries, - or by my fore and long diſtreſles, 
which made them prone to think that either I had deceived them 
with falſe pretences, -or that God for my ſins had utterly gen} 
me» Which doubtleſs was a very grievous burden to David, who 
had a'greater eſteem and affection for ſuch perſons, than for all o- 
ther men, and deſired above all things toſtand right in their opi- 
nions: {;: e Loved and practiſed them ; as words of knowledge 
are oft uſed.. | 

80 Let my heart be + ſound »: in thy ſtatutes ; that I | 
be not aſhamed ». 

9m Heb. perfe# _— that I may love and obey them ſincerly 
conſtantly and univerſally» » To wit, for my fins, which are the | 
only juſt cauſes of ſhame,and for the diſappointment of my hopes 

- following upoa them. | | 
C A-P H. 


' 8r * My ſoul fainteth o for thy ſalvation :' but T hope, | 
In thy word. + | | 
4-3- * With longing defire and carneft expectation and hope deferred 
and hitherto diſappointed. | , 


b. Pere 


EE FX LI MH i% 


. haſt eftab!iſhed the earth, and it [|abideth 5. 


which mine enemies deſign to bring upon me. g I humbly beg and | q 


82 * Mine eves fail p for thy word ſaying, When * ver. 123 
wilt thou comfort me ! 

2 With looking hither and thither, and to thee for help. 

83 Forl am become like a bottle in the ſmoke q ! yet 
do I not forget thy ſtatutes. 

g Hung up in a ſmoaking Chimney. My natural moiſture is dry. 
cd and burnt up, I am withered and deformed and deſpiſed, and 
my caſe grows worſeand worſe every day. 

84 How many are the days r of thy ſervant ? when 
wilt thou execute judgement on them that perſecute me? 

r Either, 1. the days of my life, as the word days is commonly 
uſed Gen: 6. 3: Job 7. 1, 6 Pſal: 39.5, 6. T have bur a little while 
to live in the world ; give me ſome reſpite before Idie, and help 
me ſpeedily, otherwiſe it will be too late. Or rather, 2. the days 
cf my miſery, as the next clauſe implies, and as days are taken 
Pſal: 37: 13; and 116: 2. and elſewhere. How long, Lord, ſhall 
my miſeries laſt ? forever. 

85 * The proud have digged pits for me s, which tr 
are - » pal thy law. » 
P Have" ſought to deſtroy me by deceit and treachery,as well as 
by violence. 7 Either, 1. which men have no reſpect ro thy Law 
which forbids ſuch things® Or rather, 2» which thing, te wir, 
to dig pits for me, an innocent and juſt man, is not aggreeable to 

thy Law, bur directly contrary to jt. 

86 All thy commandments are f faithful # : they Per-, rx. 
{ecute me wrongfully ; help thou me. faithſyt. 
u They are in themſelves moſt juſt and true, and they require neſre 

juſtice and faithfulneſs from men,promiſing many bleſſings to thoſe 
that perform it, and ſeverely forbid all fraud and falſenefs,threat- 
ning grievous puniſhments to thoſe that uſe it ; and ſuch promiſes 
and threatnings are truey and ſhall certainly be executed. 
87 * They had almoſt conſumed me upon earth x : 
but [ forſook not thy precepts. *vers 109, 

x As to my preſent life and all my happineſs upon earth; where- and 143, 
by he. implies that his immortal Soul andeternal happineſs in hea= | 
ven, of which he ſpeaks, Pſal: 16: 11. and 17+ 15. and elſewhere, 
was fafe and our of their reach. 

88 Quicken me after thy loving kindneſs ; ſo ſhall I 
keep y the teſtimony of thy mouth. 

) Heb, and I will keep. I will teſtifie my gratitude to thee by my 


obedience. 
89 * For ever, O LORD, * thy word is ſetled ins y.,.;;, 
heaven &. | & 160, 
z Although many things happen upon earth which ſeem contra» 
ry to thy word, and at which men take occaſion to queſtion the 
truth of thy word, yet in Heaven it is ſure and certainly true. 
heaven, either, 1. with thee in thy Heavenly habitation, or in thy 
breaſt : as thy nature is unchangeable, ſo rhy Word is infallible, 4 
Or rather, 2. in. the heavenly bodies, which are not ſubje& ta 
thoſe changes and decays which are in this lower world, but con« 
ſtantly continue the ſame in their ſubſtance and order and courſes, 
and this by vertue of that Word of God by which they were made 
and eitabliſhed in this manner ; and therefore Gods Word deli. 
vered to his people upon earth, which is of the ſame nature, muſt 
nceds be of equz] certainty and ſtability. This ſenſe beſt ſuits 
with the foliowing verſes, and with other Scriptures wherein the 
certainty of Gods word is ſet forth by comparing it with the ſtabi= 
lity of the Heaven and the Earth, as Mat: 5: 18. and elſewhere. 
90 'Thy faichfulneſs is F unto all generarions 4: thou, xy, , 
generation 
a Every age gives freſh proofs of the truth of thy Word. b In andgen« 
that place and ſtate in which thou didſt eſtabliſh it. See Tecleſ: ration, 
T: 


Pſc35.7. 


5 4+ || Heb, + 
| 91 They c Þ continue this day according tothine or- fandeth] 
inances 4: for all are thy ſervants e. t Heb, 

£ The Heaven and the Earth laſt mentioned. &d As thou haſt /{#: 
appointed, and by virtue of thine appointment. .e All things are 
_ to thy power and pleaſure,and none can reſiſt thy will, or 
word. 
92 Unleſs thy law had been my delights, I ſhould 
then f have periſhed in mine affliction. 
f At the very inſtant; I could not have out-lived one ſtroke of 
thine affliting hand. : 
93 1 will never forget thy precepts : for with them 
thou baſt quickned me g. 
g Revived and cheared me, when my heart was ready to fink 
and die within me. | 
94 I am thine 6b, 
precepts. 
h By Creation and Redemption, and manifold obligations, as 
alſo by my own choice and deſignation, I have devoted my ſelf | 
to thy ſervice, and committed my {elf to thy care. 
95 The wicked have waited for me to deſtroy me z | 
but T will conſider thy teſtimonies 2. \ 

i As my beſt comforters and counſellours and defenders againſt 


fave me : for I have ſought thy 


96 I have ſeen an end of all perfeRion & ; but thy 
commandment / 3s exceeding broad mm. 
k T have obſerved by my Experience, that the greateſt and moſt 


perfe& accompliſhments and enjoyments in this world, the greateſt 


glory and riches and powerand wiſdom are too narrow and ſhort- 
lived to make men happy. 1 Thy word 3 one part of it being Sy- 
necdochically put for rhe whole. m Or, large, both for extent, 
and for continuance : it is uſeful to all perſons in all times and 
conditions 2nd for- all purpoſes, to inform, dire&, quicken, com» 
fort ſan&ifie and ſave men: it is of everlaſting truth and efficacy; 
it will never deceive nor forſake thoſe who truſt to it, as all 


werldly things will,byt will make.men happy both here and "_ _ 


Pſal. CXIX, | 


all the aſſaults and deſigns of mine enemies. \ 


- Pal. CXIX. 
97 O how love I thy law =! it zs my meditation all 
the day. 


» O Lord, thou knoweſt it, and to thee appeal herein againſt 

all the cenfures and calumaies of mine enemies to the contrary. 

.1:t g8 Thou, through thy commandments, haſtmade me 
tae: Wiſer than mine enemies 0: for F they are ever with'me p. 
mine jo” ©, Becauſe by that means havethy Wiſdom to guide me, and thy 
ver, $OUr. power engaged to protett and ſave me ; which is a more certain 
; and effettual way to obtain my deſires and ends, than all the poli- 
cy and craft of mine enemies 1s to hinder them, as I have found by 
experience: # —_ are continually before mineeyes, as a Rule by 
which to govern all my a&ions, whereby [ am kept from ſplit- 
ting upon thoſe Rocks, whereby others are ruined. 
99] haye more underſtanding 4 than all my teachers 7: 


for thy teſtimonies are my meditations 5. | 


| te 


and experimental knowledge. r Than all or moſt ( for that gene- 
ral word is oft ſo underſtood ) of thoſe who taught:m2 to Y, 
or of the publick teachers.in Sau/s time ; which probably Tb -4 
the generality of them, neither ſo knowing, nor fo "good, ey 
ſhould have been. 5s The matter of my conſtant and-moſt Yiligent 
ſtudy. . J, | 

..,100 TI underſtand more'tha#the an 
keep thy precepts *, . 
£ By which Reaſon he intimates, that the! praftice of Religion 
3s the beſt way to underſtand ir, and that mens vicious chearts and 
lives are the greateſt hindrances of all true. and ſalid knowledge of 
at; "88 24 


357+ 


cients; becauſe I 


. 


ute 


ror T have refrained my feet from every evil way s, 
that I might keep chy word x, | | 

"'u Or, way of evil, which either-is evil or leads to it; fin and the 
temptations or occaſions of ſin. x I did this not for any carna} 
Reaimns, as ſome mer. abain from divers fins for their credit or 


* haft taught me y. 
3 To wit, by, thy blefſed Spirit, illuminating my mind, and 
working upon my heart, which other teachers cannot do. 

Mig:ro 103 How. tweet are thy words unce my Þ taſte! 

Pr:8: u, yea, ſweeter than ioney to my. mouth &. 

t Heb: = The ſtudy and obeaience of thy words yields me more fatis- 

palate, fation and delight than any wocid!ly men find in their ſenſual plea- 
ſures. 

| 104 Through thy precepts I get underſtanding a 3 

Ner:rg therefore b *'I hateevery falle way c. 

; a True and uſeful and powerful knowledge, b Becauſe that 
diſcovers to me, as the wickedneſs, ſo the folly and miſchief of 
ſuch practices. c Every thing which is contrary to that Rule of 
truth and Right, all falſe doctrine and worſhip, and all ſinful or 


Vicious courſes. | 
NUN 
[| a lamp unto my feet 4, and a 


ob 26. 2: 


52, 


[0r, cay. To5 Thy words is 
light unto my path. 

4 To direct me in all my doubts and difficulties, to preſerve 
me from fin and miſery, both which oft come under the name of 
darkneſs, and to comfort me in all my fears and diſtreſles. 

106 I have ſworn e,and I will perform t f,that Iwill 
keep * thy righteous judgments. 

e Obliged my ſelf by ſeri6us purpoſe and ſolemn vow, or by a 
formal oath, which was not unuſual amonglt Gods people, as 
2 Chron. r5. 15. Nehem, 10.29. f I do not repent of it, but by 
Gods Grace I will fulfil it. 

107 I am afflicted very much: quicken me,O LORD, 
according. unto thy word. 

108 Accept, I beſeech thee, the free-will-offerings 
of my mouth g, O LORD, and teach me thy judg- 
ments. | 

g Either, -1. thoſe which I have promiſed with my month, 
though I am not now in a capacity of performing my promiſes, as 
being banithed from. thy houſe. Or, rather, 2. the Sacrifices of 
Prayer and Praiſes, which I do freely and frequently offer unto 
thee ; which are called Sacr:fices, as Pjal. 50. 15. and calves of our 
lips, Hoſ. 14. 2. 

og My foul is continually in my hand h: yet do I not 
forget thy law. 

h Expoſed to perpetual and extream danger, as any precious 
and frail thing is which a man carrieth openly in his hand, 
whence it may ealily fall or be ſnatched away by a violent hand 
See the ſame or like phraſe, Judg. 12. 3. 8 Sam. 19. 5. Job 
#3. 14. 

Ito The wicked have laid a ſnare for me yet Ter- 
red not from thy precepts. 

Peary; 328 Thy reſtimonies haveI taken as an * heritage for 
 *Feveri: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. 
7 T have choſen them for my chief portion, from which I will 
never part. : 
Fa. ,, 722 1 have inclined my heart k + to perform thy ſta- 
#4,  tutes alway, even|[|unto the end. 
IGt:for 2h,  & As I prayed to thee to incline mine heart fo them, above wv. 
Wampnce 36. ſo TI did not neglect my duty, bur cheerfully complied with 
rar, the motions of thy Spirit, and yielded up my mind and heart to 
the ſtudy and practice of them. | 


S AiMEC YH. 


[ 
' T0AS 


> 


| 


; 


| 


| 


| 


PSALM 


q He ſpeaks not here of notional, but ef ſpiritual and--praftical | ,: 


ferring their own wil's and Iuſts before it, trampled upon thy plain 
Commands, and deſpiſed both tiy promiſes and thy threataings, 
They have not only ſinned through ignorance and mnfirmity, bug 
prefumpruouſty and maliciouſly, 


gold, yea, above fine gold. 


are diſliked by the vileſt of men ; partly ourof a juſt indignation 
and oppoſition againſt my ſworn <cnemies ; and partly becauſe the 
great and general Apoitaite of others mak-s this duty more neceſ- 
iary to prevent their own and other mens relapſes. 


S; Plal. CX ; 


Law is oppoſed to theſe, and & ſome both Jewiſh and Chriſtian 
Expoſitors underſtand it, Nor is it unuſual in. the Hebrew Text for 
one and the ſame word to be taken both in a-good and an ill ſenſe in 
ſeveral places : whereef we have one inſtance in a word of the 
ſame fignthcation with this, mezimmah, which ſignifies a_t40ug9t, 
and is tomerimes taken in a good fenſe;' as Prov. 1. 4. and 3, 8. 
and 8. 12. and 13. 16. Fer. 51. 11. but elſewhere in a bad ſenſe; as . 
Job 21. 27. Pſal. 10. x, 4. Prov. 12.2. and 14. 17.-| The like harh 
| been oblerved concerning another Hebrew word ef the ſame or near 
fignification, hormah, which is taken in a good ſenſe; Prov. 1. 4. 
and 13. 16, Q&c. and in an ill ſenſe, as Exod. 21. 14. Joſh. 9.14. Job 
5.13. And the like may be ſaid concerning this word alſo... Bur , 
the Ancient Interpreters underſtand #his wgrd not of rhings, . but 
of perſons, and ſo it may be underſtoad of men that think evil, 1 
that devife wicked devices, or that, have falſe andevil opinions, i 
oppoſite to Gods Law, or tending to ſeduce men from it, ;*_ + 
. [14 * Thou art my hiding place, and my ſhield ; I'*PC gr:4lf 
hope in thy werd. +45 TE TEN * Mat: 5 j 

I15 * Depart from me, ye evil doers; for I will keep-,,. = 7Y 
the commandments of my God ». 5 NE 2 q 

» And therefore will avoid your ſociety and converſation, left” 

I thould be hindred from that which is good, and drawn to ſin by * 
your evil counſel or example. SE EET 

_ 116-Upnotd me accordingunto thy word, that T may, 
live : and let me not be aſhamed of my hope ». = 
* Or, becauſe of my hope or confid:nie" in” thy promiles, of 
tainty whereof I have oft made my boat before others, © 
117 Hold thou” me. up, and I ſhaii be ſafe; and T 
will have reſpe& unto thy ſtatutes continually s. | 
0 And being freed from thoſe diſtractions; and diverſions which 
my preſſing dangers occaſion, I wilt wholly devote-my {elf to the: 
!tudy and practice of thy. bleſſed word. _ has 2 
118 Thou haſt troden down all them that erc from 
thy ſtatutes : for their deceit 3s falſhood p. bib © 
Þ All their crafty and deceitful devices, by which they deſign 
to enſnare and ruine me and other good men, ſhall deceive them - 
and their own expectations, and bring that deftruetion upon them« 
ſelves which they deſign for others. . . ., .,', | IT | 
119 Thou t.putceſt away ,q all the wicked of the +f71cb:caud 
earch like droſs »; therefore I love thy teſtimonies s, ſeit toteaſty. 

9 Thou removett them from thy preſence and from the- Society | 
of thy people and fromthe land of the: living. r Which though | 
for a ſcaſon it be mixed'with Gold br: Silver, is not enly ſeparated | 
from it as an uſeleſs and contemprible-thing,. bue alſo is atrerly | 
coniumed by fire, s Becauſe they are the beſt preſervatives againſt 
wickedneſs, and againſt thoſe dreadful puniſhments attending uport 
It, of which he profeſſerh his fear in the; next verſe. Sol 
_I2o My fleſh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am a- 
fraid of thy judgments 7, | | 
# The obſeryation of thy terrible jaidgments- againſt ungodly 
men, and the conſcience of ny own infirmity and manifold ins, 
makes me fear left thou ſhou!dſt puniſh me alſo, as thou mighteſt 
juſtly do, if thou ſhouldſt be ſtrict to mark what is amiſs in me, or 
leſt i ſhould partake with them in their fins, and conſequently in 
their plagues. 
7 A 1 N. 


121 Thave done judgment and juſtice « : leaye mg 
not to mine oppref{ors. 

« i, e, Jaſt judgment, as Ecclef* 5: 7. to wit, towards mine ops 
preflors, whom I have no way injured. 

122 Be ſucety for thy ſervant x for good y: let not 


the proud oppreſs me. 

x Do thon undertake and plead my cauſe againſt all mine ene» 
mies, as a ſurety reſcues the poor perſecuted debitor from the hands 
of a ſevere creditor. y For my ſatety and comfort.  - 

123 * Mine eyes fail for thy ſalvation, and for the 
word of thy righteoufneſs z. 
z For the performance of thy R 
word or pre mile. : 
124 Deal with thy fervantaccording unto thy mer- 


Cy 4, and teach me thy Statutes, | 

4 Not according to ſtrict juſtice, nor according to my ſins. | 
x25 1 amthy ſervant, give me underſtanding, that T 
may know thy teſtimonies. 

126 It is time b for thee, LORD, to work 6 : for 


they c have made void thy Law 9d. 
b Tr is high time or a fit ſeaſon. 6 To put forth thy power for 
the vindication of thy own 'name and cauſe, and for the Reſtraint 
and puniſhment of evil-doers. c To wit, mine opreffors, or the 
wicked ; whom it was necdleſs to expreſs, both becauſe they had 
been lately and frequently mentioned before, and partly becauſe it 
was evident from the following words, + 4 Or, abrogated rhy law, 
have profeſledly and openly caſt off its authority, retolvedly pres 


the dere 


; 


[ 
4 


* Ver:8f, 
ſ: 123: Iy 
2 


ighteousor Faithful or Merciful 


127 * Therefore I love thy commandments e above *pp, om, 
$19:1g1 


Ver: 722 


e Partly becauſe it is one evidence of their excellency that they Pr:8: ie, 


128 Therefore f I eiteem all z5y precepts concernin 


117 Ihate vain thoughts /: bur thy Law dolT love. 

I This word ſignifies thoughts, Job. 4. 13. and 20, 2, or opinions, * 
T Kings 18. 21. Which being indifferent to good and evil, 1s here 
taken in an evil S-nſe, for vain thoughts, as we reader it, or for 
thoughrs or, opinions or divices of men differing from or oppoſite 
to Gods Law, as may be gacheced from tac next claute, where Gods 


all r1hings to be rights ; and] hate every falſe way, 


prece 
tion of t 1 1116 ; 
their luits and intereſts ; but I approve 21 of rhem without any 


f For the Reaſons now mentioned. g I do not make void all thy 
prs, as they did v: 126. nor yet am [I partial in my approbay 
f them, as others are, who reject all tuch as are oppolite ra 


{2 


- EXCEPtLs. 


PTE” tea 3 ARTS 


Jeb 4 SHORT USO APs, 3 ROO res) 
C4 4 D- * 


. CXIX. FLY 
exception, and that not only in my judgment but in my heart and 
life, as appears by that hatred of ſin which is oppoſed ro it in the 
next claule. 

PE 


129 Thy teſtimonies are X wonderful þ ; therefore 


deth my ſoul keep them. [73 | 
+ Tn regard of the deep and wonderful myſteries, and moſt ex- 
cellent counſels and dire&tions, far exceeding all the Rules of the 
greateſt-Philoſophers, and the exceeding great and precious pro- 
ntiſes of -God contained in them. This is the Reaſon of his high 
eſtimation of them expreſſed in the laſt verſe. : 
39 The entrance of thy words ; giveth light: * it 
giveth underſtanding unto the ſimple &. 
7 The very beginnings and Rudiments of ir; the firſt diſcoveries 
- of thoſe ſacred Myſteries ; an: much more the depths of rhem, in ' 
whick their chief excelkncy conſiſts. Or, as others, both ancient, 
»- -and later Interpreters render the place, zhe opquing of thy words, by | 
which may-be underſtood, either, r. the opening of mens minds 
| by the word of God; bur that'ſeems to be the ſame thing with gi- 
ang He which here follows ; or, 2. the opening or declaration 
of 


Fer. 18. 


19: 7. 


{LE L207 


ods. mind made in afid by liis word. & Tothe moſt 1gnoraut 4 
and unlearned perſons, who are but willing to learn. Se 
2 14k 1 opened my, ; mouth, andpanted / : 
for thy commangmenes. . 

1.1 thirſt after t ) precepts, and purſue them eagerly, as it 
wefe with ogen mouth, ready and greedy to. receive them. Itisa 
Metaphor fxom one that makes'great haſte after another, where- 
by he ts forced ro pantand open his mouth for Airto refreſh him- 
felf. 2 $ | #33 
| +142 Look thou uponrme #1,and be merciful unto me 
rang 70 _ be = a b 

. + as thowaſeſt ro do unto thoſe that love thy Name ». 
to- m To wit, fayourably, as the next clauſe explains ic, and as this 
ards aſe-is commonly ufc : whereby alſo he implies thac God at 
hoſe, &c» preſent did hide his face-. and favour from him. » As thou haſt 
done in all former ages. - Do not deny me the common pciviledge 
of all the faithful. Lv'; 

Prg.13, 33 Order:my ſteps o in thy word p ; 

- * © anyiniquity have dominion-over me q. | 
| o By 'thy Grace dire& and (govern all my Mctions and A&ions. 
p In the way preſcribed'irv thy Word : Or, by thy word, Let thy 
Spirit accompany thy Word, and ingraft it within me, ſo that I 
may be-guided and ruled by it, 9 And although I have evil incli 
nations and: affe&ions within me, let theminot bear ſway in me, 
nor withdraw. me: fromthe counſe of obedience. 

124 Deliver me from the oppretiion of man : ſo will 
x keep thy precepts. 
. r As he, prayed again the inward impediment of his obedience, 
*.-173. fo here he prayerh--againſt an external impediment ot it, 
and a common temprtatior to fin. 
» x25: Make-thy faces to ſhine upon thy ſervant s, and 
teach methy ſtatutes. | 
"5 Look 'upon me with pleaſed and favourlble countenanee. 
-— 6,, Compare Numb. 6. 25. Prov. 16. 15. 
” 136 * Rivers of waters? run dowti mine eyes, becaufe 


Mer. they « keep not thy law, 
& 14. 17. ,_ t Plentiful and perpetual tears, witnefſes of my deep ſorrow for 
"See Ezek. Gods "diſkonour and diſpleature, and for the miſcries which ſinners 
9. 4 bring upon themſelves and others, « To wit, the wicked, as be- 
fore, v. 126. who were not. worthy to be mentioned : for this pro- 
noun is oft ufed in' way of contempt, as Luke 14: 24. and x9.' 27. 
Jolm 7. 11. and 8. 10. . As 16. 36. 
TSHAHDD IL | 

x37 Righteous «7: thou x, O LORD, and upright 
#fe thy judgments. 

x By thine eſſence and Natbre, and therefore it is impoſſible that 
thou ſhovideſt be unjuſt in any of thy Laws or Providences. 
-p 238 Thy teſtimonies hat chou haſt commanded are 
THeb.”2” + righteous, and very ||faichful y, 


for I longed 


. % 


and * let not 


S770 


"ry bg ',p 4 Butthis verle is otherwiſe rendred by all the ancientInterpre- 
Heb.fa: Preters, and by divers ethers, and that more agreeably to the order 
fulweſs. of the words in the Hebrew Text. Thou haft commanded righteouſnefs 


even thy T-Himonies ( or the Righteouſneſs of thy Teſtimonies, or thy righ- 
geous Teftimonies, by a common Hebraiſm, or rather, righteouſneſs in or 
by zky teſtimonies, nothing being more frequent than the Ellipſis of 
the prefix beth which ſignifies in or by: } and truth ( or, and true, 
thy Righteous and true Teſtimonies ; although the other ſeems 
to be the better Tranſlation ) earnefly. So the Senſe is, thou haſt 
ſtrialy and ſeverely, under the higheſt obligations atdpenalties, 
commanded in thy word, that men ſhould be juſt and true in all 
their Actions. And this agrees very well with the next foregoing | 
verſe, wherein he affiumed that God is Righteous, ard doth Righ- 
teous things ; and then here he adds that he requires Righteouſneſs 
and truth from-all men. 

139 * My zeal hath f confumed me z, becauſe mine 
enemics have forgotten thy words 4. 

z I am tormented and cut ro the heart with grief and anger at 


| - © Pf. 69:9. 
John 2:7. 
” tHeb: as 
me off. 


MS4L MS. 


yet thy commandments are my delights. 


e Conſtant and unchangeable, tle ſame inall ages and places and 


to all perſons, of eternal Truth and Juſtice, never to be diſpenced 
with, nor to be made void. f Nothing bur truth; or as true as 
truth it ſelf. 


143 Trouble and anguiſh g havet taken hold on me : 
If _ 
g Outward troubles and anguiſh of Spizit : or, great anguiſh or? TG 


diſtrels. | : GPL 244 
144 * The.righteouſneſs of thy teſtimonies zs everla- —_ i06, 
ſting: give me” underſtanding, and TI ſhall live 4. » 


death. 


þ IT ſhall be kepr from thoſe fins which deſerve and bring 


—_ | KOP AH. 
145 TI cried with wy whole heart, hear me, OLORD: 
I will keep thy ſtatutes. "ry : 
-146 TI cryed unto thee, ſave 


thy agftimonies. | 
Ipreygnted the dawning of the morning #, and 
cried: I hope.in thy word. . 1 | 

# Heb. rhe twilight, to wit, of the morning, by comparing Pſa. . 
88. 13.:: And ſothis word is; uſed -1- $97. 30. 17. 
148 * Mine eyes prevent the night watches &, that I 
mighe meditat- in thy word-+ - 

k Heb.. che watches ; which: were kept only by night. And theſe 
watches were:then three, as hach been more than once obſerved, 
Ani this is notto be underſtood of the firſt watch, which was at 


* PE. 5: 3, 
& 139; & 


6; 


| the beginning of-the night, for the' prevention thereof was very ea 


and frequent and inconſiderable, but of the middle watch, as it 15. 
called Juadg.7. 19. which was ſet in the middle of the night; and 
elpeciaJly of the morning watch, asit is called Exod. 14. 24. which 
was ſet ſome hours before the dawning of the day: id ſo this is any ' 
aggravation atid addition to what he aid v. 147. £ 
149 Hear my voice according unto thy loving kindneſs; - 
OLORD, guicken me according to thy judgment 1. 
According to thy word, which is oft called God's Judgment : or 
according to thy cuttom or manner of dealing with me and with 
others of thy people; as this word is taken above v.13 2. 
Io They draw nigh m that follow after miſchief ; D 
they are far from thy law ». 3 
»m To wit, ro me, or againſt me, as Pſal. 29: 2. They are at | 
hand, and ready to ſeize upon me, n They caſt away far from them 
all thoughts of, and reſpect to thy Law, which forbids ſuch wicked 
Practices. 
151 Thou art near o, O LORD: and alt thy come bo 
mandments p are truth. 
o Tome. Thou arr as ready and preſent to ſuccour me, as they 
are tomoleſt me. p Conſidered with the promiſes and threatnings 
which ate frequently anexed to them. Or, the promiltes, as rhig 
word ſeems to be uſed, Pſal. 111. 7, and elſewhere in this Pſahr, 
And God is ſaid to command not only his precepts, or the obſerya« 
tiof thereof, bur alſo his Covenent, Pſal. 105. 8. and 111. 9. which 
11s acollection or body of the promiſes ; and his/ov:ng kinaneſs, Pſal. 
' 42. 8, which is the Fountain of the promiſes ; and his Bling, Pſal. 
133. 3- Which is the fruit of his promiſss ; and deliverances, 44. 4. 
which are the things promifed. And therefore it is not ſtrange if 
'the promiſes be ſometimies called Commandments, | 
152 f Concerning thy teftimonies, T have known of t Heb ! 
old q, that thou haſt founded them for ever r. cory 
9 By my own long experience, ever ſince I arrivedat any knowe a6 th 
ledge in thoſe matters. » That chou haſt eſtabliſhed them upon ſure got , 
and everlaſting foundations. | Ver bo 


| RESHN PC:111; 7] 
1523 Conſider mineafflicion, and deliverme: for I*: 
53 Conſider mine attiction, anq denvermes Ior 

donot forget thy law. *pC2 45: i 

154 * Plead my cauſe, and deliver me : quicken me zjic}7.g 
according to thy word. | 
r55 Salvation is far from the wicked : for they ſeek 
not thy ſtatutes 5. 

s And therefore on the contrary, I truſt that thou wilt ſave me 
becauſe I do ſeek them. My wicked enemies hall certainly be de- 
ſtroyed, by which means T ſhall be delivered. | — 

156- || Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD : [0r,n8d 
quicken me acccording to thy judgments ?. 

t According to the manner of thy Adminiſtrations towards thy 
peoples as v. 149. | : TA 

i57 Many ere my perſecutors, and mine enemies ; 
get do I notdecline from: thy teſtimonies s. 

« Though they tempt me ro do ſo, and perſecute me becauſe B 
will not do it. | : 

158 I beheld the tranſgreſſors x, and was grieved, 
becauſe they kept not thy word. __— 

x I obſervedand conſidered their ungodly courſes. Vent 


it. # i.e. Deſpiſe and diſobey them ; which in Scripture ule, is 


pur for Joving and practiſing them. 
140 * Thy word is very + pure b: therefore c thy 
"& 48. 3o: ſervant loveth it. 
> Pr: 3b: 5: 6 Withoutthe leaſt mixture of any falſkood or ſin, both which 
THeb.rried are frequent in the words or precepts of Men. «c Becauſc of thar 
or refined. exact purity and holineſs of it, for which very Reaton ungodly 
"$y men either deſpiſe or hate if. : 
141 Lam tmall dand deſpiſed : yet do not I forget 
thy precepts. | 
" 4 Or, # kittleone, nor for age, but in reſpect of my condition in 
the world 5 mean: and obſcure. Bt 
142 Thy rightecouſnels is an everlaſting righteouſneſs 
=» and thy law zs the truth f. 


| *PC: 12:6. 


159 Cenſider how * I love thy precepts : quicken 


oft called a forgetting of them, as the remembring of them is oft 'me, O LORD, according to thy loving kin dnels. 
| y Which was the cauſe of my gricf for their violation of 


them. 


th 
160 + Thy word is true fromthe beginningz: and* e- rs 


100mg 


very one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever. ; jy wel | 


z Either from the beginning. of the world : or ever ſince thou js rrae. 
haſt revealed thy mind by thy word to the ſons of men; all thy * Ver; 8Y 
words have been found to be true and certain, and ſo they will be 
to the end of the world, as is implyed in the next clauſe., Or, as 
it is in the margent, zhe Legiuning ( or, as others render it, the ſumm, 
as this very word is uſed. Exod. 39. 12. Numb. 26. 2. and 31. 26- 
to wit, the whole of it, thero is nor vhe leaft part of it, which 1s 


not ſo ) of thy ward 55 rue. 
SCHIN, 


me, l and ſhall keep Ns tg 


5PE 64h 


{ 


PC: CXIF, EE 


ly, 4 -'Ph!. CXIX, 


*Gen. 49. s 
r8. 


*Or, Werns 


SCHIN. 
:61 Princes a have periccuted me without a cauſe 
but my heart ſtandeth in awe of thy words. 


# Who had power todo it, and who ought to have uſed their au- 
Z20rity to protect me whom they knew to be innocent and ins 
6 But I ftcarcd thine offence and difpicature more than their - 


jured. 
wrath, 

£52 [| Tc 
ſoil. 7 


16; I hate and abhor lying « 


3 


oppoſed to Gods Law. 


of thy righteous judgments. 


d Many times ; that definit number being oft taken indefinite- 
FHeb.rhey Iy, 


shall have 
w ſui. and + nothipg ſhall offend them g. 
e Either outward proſperity and happineſs, which God in his 
Pr. 22+ 5- Law hath exprelly promiſed ro good men ; or at leaſt inward 
peace. fatisfattion and tranquillity of mind, ariſing from the ſenſe 


as Levit: 26: 28. and elſewhere. 
155 Great peace e have they f which love t 


of G::ds love tothem, and watchful care over them in all rhe con- 
cerns of this life and of the next. f Heb. is to them, or, ſhall be 
70 them ; for the Verb being not expreſſed, ir may be underſtood 
either way. Aithough they may mcert with ſome diſturbance, yet 
ther end ſhall b: peace, as 1s ſaid, Pja!. 37: 37. g Heb. they have no 
Aumbling block, to wit, ſuch at which they thall ſtumble and fall 
into miſchief and' utter Ruine, as ungodly men have, before 
whom God doth oft lay ſtumbling blocks, or occaſions of fin 
and deſtru&ion, as it is affirmed by God himſelf, Jer: 6: 21. Ezek, 
2: 20, Rom: 9: 33. our of Iſa; 8: 14. : 
166 * LORD, I have hoped for thy ſalvation, and 


done thy commandments þ. 

h Thus performing the condition which thou haſt required, 1 
juſtly and. confidently hope for thy mercy promiſed. 
107 My ſoul hath kept thy teitimonies, and TI love 


them exceedingly z. 
7 T rave not only obeyed thy commands, which an hypocrite may 
ſometimes and in part do for worldly ends, butT have done it with 
my very ſou}, and from an hearty love to them. ; : 
15 I have kept thy precepts and thy teſtimonies: 
for k all my ways * are before thee. | ; 
k-Or, becauſe. This is added either, 1. as the Reaſon or motive 
of his obedierſce, which was the conſideration of Gods Omnilſcience, 
and his delire to approve himſelfand his ways ty God : or, 2. asa 
' proofanid evidence of it. Whereas this and all his former profeſ- 
| ſions of his piety were charged by his enemies with deep hypocri- 
* fie, ani! might ſeem to ſavour of pride and vain-glory : Here in the 
Cloſe of them he makes a ſolemn appeal to that God, who knew his 
heart and all his ways, and whether theſe things were not true and 
real ; which if they were not, he tacitly imprecates Gods judgment 


upon himſclIf. 
FW 


169 Let my cry come near beforethee 1, O LORD: 


. .give me underſtanding m according to thy word, 
1 Whichat preſent thou ſeemeſt to ſhut out, as the Church com- 
plained, Lam. 3.8. »» WherebyT may both know and perform 
my duty in all particulars. x 
170 Let my ſuppiication come before thee : deliver 


me according to thy word. 
171 *My lips ſhall utter praiſe, when thou haft 


taught me thy ſtatutes. | 
i72 My rongue ſhall ſpeak » of thy word o, for all 


thy commandments p «re righteouſneſs. 
7 Heb. ſhall: pour forth freely and abundantly like a Fountain. + o, 
In praiſe of it, tor its Righreoutneſs; as it here follows, its truth 
and purity and other exceilencies. p Even thoſe which to men of 
corrupted minds ſeem harſh and unjuſt. | 
172 Let thine hand heip me : for * I have choſen 


thy precepts q. | 
q For my guide and companion and chief Joy and Treafure. 


174 I have .onged for thy falvation r, O LORD: 
and thy law 3s my delight. 


r Either, 1. for deliverance from my preſent ſtraits and calami- 
ties, that T may ſerve thee with more ficedom, and may gl: rifie 
thy Name in a more ſolemn and publick manner : Or, 2. that thou 
wouldſt compleatly ſave me, not only from my outward preſſures, 
buc alſo from my 1ins, from my du!neſs and deadnels inthy ſervice, 
from all inclinations and temptations to Apoſtaſic and impiety.and 
| from my other indiſpolitions and corruptions, againſt which he 

prayeth in divers parts of this Pſalm ; and that at laſt chou would. 
eſt crown me with eternal Salvation in thy Kingdom, which it is 
apparent that Daviddid believe and expett, and hath been already 
proved from divers paſſages of this Book. 


175 Lec my ſoul tive, and it ſhall praiſe thee : and] 


let thy judgments s help mes 

s Either, 1. thy providenrial diſpenſation, whereby thou judgeſt 
and ruleſt the world, puniſhing the wick<d, and proteCting and de- 
livering the Godly. Or, 2. thy word or Teſt:monaes, as this word 
moſt commonly ſignifies in this Pſalm, which are the only ground 


P $4 E M26 


joice at thy word, as one that findeth great 


but thy law do Tlove. 

c Or, faiſhood, either 1. in my ſpecch and aGtions; all hypocri- 
crifie and deceit, which 1s the common practice of mine enemies, 
and of all godleſs politicians: or, 2. in doctrine and worſhip, as 
this word ſeems to be uſed v. 29. becauſe both there and here it is 


164 * Seven times d a day dol praiſe thee: becauſe 


hy law, 


Pſal. CM 


the place of thy worſhip and preſence, and forced to wander hither 
and thither hiding my ſeIfin mountains and caves and wocds, ex- 
poled to a thouſand ſnares and dangers. « As the ſhepherd doth 
tus wandring ſheep, and bring me back into thy fold: 
FS.A L' CXX. 
The ARGUMENT. 


His Pſaim ſeems to have been compoſed, either, x. by David 
in the time of his perſecution by Saul, when he expoſed 
both to the ſwords and tothe calumnies of his enemies ; of which 
two eyils he:complains in this Pſalm: Or, 2. by ſome other holy 
Prophet in a time of the Churches perſecution. 
| A ſon * of degrees a. 
z Or, of «ſcents, as others render it, and as the word properly ſig- *Neh.{ 
nittes. This title is given to this and to the fourteen following tl 
Pſalms ; concerning the reaſon whereof,. there are divers ConJe- 
Etures, the chief of which are theſe ; either, 1. becauſe of the 
excellent matter of them, as eminent perſons are called men of 
high degree, x Chron. 17.17, Forin them are contained, as lear. 
ned men have obſerved, many do&trines or inſtruQions of great 
uſe and importance, and thoſe delivered: with extraordinary bre.= 
vity and elegancy : Or, 2. becauſe they were ſung upon the fif- 
teen degrees of ſtairs of the Temple, which the Jewiſh Writers 
mention, or, at leaft, upon ſome high place : or, 3. becauſe 
they were ſung with azvery loud voice : Or, 4. becauſe they were 
ſung by the Jews when they returned from Baby/onand went up 
to Jeraſalem. Which ſome judge the more probable,. becauſe 
It ſuits with the order of thele Pſalms ; whereof the firſt was 
to be uſed by them when they were preparing for their depar-= 
ture, and ſuffered delays in it from- the calumnies of their ene= 
mes; the ſecond, in their Journey ; the third, upon their arri- 
val at Jeruſalem ; thefourth, after the building of the City and 
Temple, &c. And although one of theſe Pſalms is aſcribed ro 
David, and another to Solomon, yet they alſo, as well as the reſt, 
might be applyed to ths uſe 3 and fo right this Pſalm. alſo, 
. though David firſt compoſed it upon another occaltion Or,s.from 
ſomething which was peculiar in'them, either in the Poetry, or 
in the manner of ſinging them. Bur theſe things being now loſt 
and unknown, not only to Chriſtians, but even to fthe Jews 
themſelves, we muſt be contentedly ignorant of this as well as of 
molt other titles of the Pſalms ; and -the rather, becauſe they do 
not at all concern the matter, nor are they neceſflary to the un« 
derſtanding of them. | 
David prayeth againſt lying x and deceitful tongues, 1 — 
and compl ameth that his habitation was unavoudably among wicked and 
unpeaceable men, 5 # th 


N * my diſtreſs I cried unto the LORD, and he heard *Jon: 2 


me. 
2 Deliver my foul, O LORD, from lying lips b,end 
from a deceitful tongue c. 

b From theunjuſt cenſures and malicious ſlanders ofmine ene« 
mies, who traduce'me as an egregious hypocrite, as a Rebel and 
Traitor. c Which covereth miſchievous deſigns with prerence of 
kindneſs, . | | 

3 || What ſhall be given unto thee 4? or what ſhall 


be done unto thee, thou falfe tongue ? 
a Whoſoever thou art whoare gailty of theſe praftices. He ap- 
plies himſelf ſeverally ro the conſciences of every one of them. 
Or, he deſigns Doeg, orſome other perſon in Sauls Court eminent 
for this wickedneſs. The ſente may be this, It 1s true, thou doſt 
me ſome miſchief. But what benefit doit thou ger by it, if all thy 
accounts be caſt up? Foralthough thou mayeſt thereby obtain ſome thee # 
favour and advantage from Sal, yet-thou wilt affuredly bring me ce 

pon thy ſelf rhe curſe and vengeance of God ; and then thou wilt 
be no gainer by the bargain. And to do miſchief to another with- 
out benefic to thy ſelf, is an inhumane and diabolical wickedneſs. 


Tror 4 
ſhall zh 
deceitfh 
fongue þ 
wnts # 


be 
added. 


4 | Sharp arrows of che mighty, with coals of juni- || Or, Te 
PET C. as the 


e So this verſe containsan anfwer to the queſtion, v. 3. and de. 
clares the ſlanderers Recompence : which is the wrath and venge- 
ance of the mighty God, which in Scripture, and particularly in 
this Book, is-cft compared to Arrows, as Pſal, 7. 13, 14, &c. and © 


like ſharp Arrows, &c, | | 
5 Wo is me, that I ſojournin Meſech; that I dwell iri 
the tents of Kedar f. 


f M:ſech and 'Kedar are- two ſorts of people oft mentioned in Scrip<. 
ture, and reckoned amongſt the heathen and þbarbarous Nations, 
Bat their names are nor here to be underſtood properly, { for we 
do not read that either David, or the Uraclites in the Babyloniſh 
Captivity dwelt 'in their-Lands ) but only Metaphorically, as the 
ungodly Iſraelites are-called Sodom and Gomorrsh, Iſa. 1. 10. and 
Amorites and Hittites, Ezek, 16.:3, 45. and as in common ſpeech a= 
mong us, men 6fan evil. charatter 'are called Turks or Jews. d 
ſo he explains himſelf in the next verſe by this deſcription of them, 
him or them that hated* peace, although David' ſought peace with 
chem, v. 7. And ſo he ſpeaks either, -1. of the [Philiſtins, among 
whom he ſojourned for a ttme. 'But he did-nor-ſeek peace with 
them, bur ſought their: Ruine, as the event thewed ; nor did they 


-of my hope in thy help. 
. _ 176 1 * have gone aſtray like a loſt ſheep tr, ſeek thy 
*..ſervant «: for Ido not forget thy commaraments. 
eg” This is meant <ither, 1. of ſinful errors I have foo often 
fwerved-from the parh of thy preceprs through mine own infir- 
Mity, of the power of rempration : Or, 2. of penal er:ors. 1 
have been baniſhed by the power and tyranny or mb'e enemies 
from all my Friends and Rcelations, and, which is tar were,” 777 | 


$A — — 


wage war againſt him, whilſt he lived peaceably among them.. 'Or, 
rather, 2. The Courtiers and Souldiers of $41, and the generality 
of *he Iſraelites, who'to curry favour with Sanl, ſought Daviar 
Ruine, 2n« that many times' by treachery and. pretences of friend-= 
ffiip ; of which he oft complains in this Baok ; whom as he elfe- 
hers 6alls 7rarhe?, as B/o!. 9. 5. and 59. $. it is not firange "nl 
3 2 s 


"ERA © 2ec” uo 


V 2964 > VOIR ERR GO" 5. 


* Tx ws RgwT TUNA, I 44 ts LA cis rg Pe =v"u_ a4 <af, 4 EAR G4. 
py BY > 


v1 CXXI. OXXI. 


he compares them here to the ſavage Arabians. And amongſt ſuch 
erſons David was oft forced to ſojourn in Saws time ; and with 
them he ſought peace by all ways poſſible, but they hated peace, 


andthe more he purſued peace, the more eagerly did they profe- 


cute the war, as it here follows. 


6 My ſoul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace. 


”T o 4 -L 


M S. 


Exod. 26.33, 34. and elſewhere ; becauſe of the Tables of the 


Plal. CXXIIT. CXXIy, 


Covenant laid up in it, which are called Gods Tefimony, and the 


Tables of the Teſtimony, as Exod. 15. 16. and 31. i8, &c. And this 
may well be called the Tefimony of or to Iſrael, becauſe it was given 
by God to them and for their good. Or, by or according to the 
Teftimony of Iſrael, i, e. Gods command given to Iſrael, which may 


 *See 
$+.9- 


23.1 


I6. 


ils 
hence 


PC CY heaven and earth. 


{Heb.were 
| Randing, - falem "'B 
So Gr. 5 5&4 Thither we ſhall come, and there we ſhall make our abode | The ARGUME-NT. 


| * Exod. 
 Deut. x 


be alledged here as the Reaſon which moved them to this journey. 
z To worſhip God; this one eminent part and action thereof being 
put for all the reſt. 

5 For h there F are ſet thrones of judgment 3: the 
thrones of the houſe of David &. 


þ This is added as another Reaſon inviting and obliging them to 
go upto Jeruſalem, and as another commendation of this City, 7 
The tupream Courts of Juſtice for Eccleſiaſtical, and eſpecially for 
Civil affairs, as the next clauſe explains it. k The Royal! throne 
allotted by God to David and to his poſterity for ever, and the in. 
ferior Seats of Juſtice eſtabliſhed by and under his Authority, 
Sce 2 Chron, 19. 8, 9, 10. : | 


6 Pray for the peace of Jeruſalem : they ſhall prof. 


71 am || for peace : but when I ſpeak, they are for war. 
P S A I. CXXI. 


The ARGUMENT. 

He matter of this Pſalm ſufficiently ſheweth, that the Pſalmiſt 
was confliing with great difficulties and oppoſlitions, and 
looking hither and thither for help, as men in ſuch caſes uſe to do, 
and then turning his eyes to God and his Providence, and encou- 

raging himſelf by Gods promiſes made to his people. 

A ſong of degrees. 
The Pſalmift ſheweth that the great ſafety of the godly is from the Lord, 
1——5. who keepeth them, in their out-gomgs and im-comings from all 
evil, 6———$. 


TE Ieb, ao 


Dc, an T [| Will life up mineeyes unto the * hills from whence per that love. 
Age : cbmeth b my hel "y : : { In whoſe proſperity both your civil and your Religions Privi. 
yer 70 197% g Either to Sionand- Moriah, which are called the holy mountains, ledges are deeply concerned. m Or, let them proſper, the future be. 


 Pſal. $7. 1. or rather, 2. tothe hills in general, whereof there were 


ing taken 1 ively, as fi - Th 
many in the land of Canaan, and upon which the Forces, which he ing taken imperatively, as is very frequent e Lord grant them 


proſperity and all happineſs. 


bould WY hoped would come to his aid, might be ſeen art a great diſtance. ; Jo'E - * 1.» 
7 com ? 5 Ge way cane, Heb. wil come ta y beron ” within thy walls », end proſperity within 
Pf. 87. 1. 1 , 

4 2 * My help comerh from the LORD « which WO» bn ol thy dwellings. o Eſpecially in the Court and the dwel- 


lings of the Princes and Rulers, whoſe welfare is apublick bleſſing 
to all the people. 

8 For my brethren and companions ſakes p, I will 
now ſay, Peace be within thee. 
. f And this Idcfire not only nor chiefly for my own ſecurity,and 
for the glory of mine Empire, but for the ſake of all my fellow- 
Citizens, and of all the Iſraelites, whom, though my Subjects, I 
muſt own for my brethren and companions in the chief priviledges 
and bleſſings enjoyed at Jeruſalem. 


9 Becauſe of the houſe of the LORD our God 4, I 


will * ſeek thy good. 
gq Which is now fixed in this City. 


P S & L. 'CAXIIL 
The ARGUME NT. 
His Pſa!m contains a deſcription of the great agony and di- 
ſtreſs of Gods people, and of their carriage under it. 
A ſong of degrees 
The Godly profeſs they patient trufting and confidence in God, 1, 2, And 
withal earneſtly pray to be delivered from the contempt of the proud, 

3, 4+ b 
Neto thee a lift I upmine eyes, O thou * that dwel- *Pſirs.;; 

leſt in the heavens. 

a Unto thee only, becauſe all other perſons either cannot, or 
will not help me. | 

2 Behold, as the eyes of ſervants look unto the hand 
of their maſters b, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the 
hand of her miftreſs: ſo our eyes wait upon the LORD 
our God, until that he have mercy upon us c. 

b Either, 1. for ſupply of their wants, wh:ch comes from their 
maſters hand : Or, 2. for pity, the hand being the inſtrument 
whereby maſters commonly correct their Servants, and looking to 
the hand, may expreſs the poſture of one ſupplicating for Mercy : 

Or rather, 3. for help and defence againſt their oppreflors. For 
Servants were unable to defend -themielves, and were not aHowed 
to wear defenſive weapons, but expected and had protection from 
their Maſters in caſe of injury. For this phraſe of having ones eyes 
rowards another both inthis and other ſacred Books, conſtantly notes 
expectation and deſire of help from them, as P/al. 25. 15. and 69. | 
4. 1ja. 17. 7. Exek, 23. 27.and oft elſwhere. 'And the phraſe of ' 
Gods having mercy upon another, doth moſt commonly ſfignifie that 
| act or effect of his mercy in helping and delivering him. c Until 
45 A ſong of degrees ef David. 2 he graciouſly help and fave us. 7; 
David profeſeth his joy, when he went into che Houſe of the Lord, xn, 2,| 3 Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon 
: ayeth jor the welfare, proſperity and peace of it, 4——9. © us : forwe are exceedingly filled with contempt 4, 

4 Our foul is exceedingly filled with the ſcorning of 


-Was glad when they ſaid unto me, Let us go & into 
-& *the houſe of the LORD. [| thoſe that are at eaſe, avd with the contempt of the || or, # 
proud e. injalent, 


' oy 75 6 yg one another to it. as Deut. 33. 19. Or, we will go 
e ſenſe is, Itdelighteth me much to hear that the people, who d With opprobrious words and injuries. e With the ſcornful 2Kings 9, 
d contempruous carriage of thine and our enemies, who live in % 


had ſo long lived in the neglect and contempt of Gods worſhip, < 
weae'now ready and forward in. it; ; great eaſe and glory, whilſt we, thy people, are overwhelmed with 
manifold calamities. Ek 


2 Our feet | ſhall ſtand b within thy gates, O Jeru-| | 
| PS ATL. CXXIV. 


c From God alone, and therefore to him alone will I turn mine 


” He will not ſuffer thy foot 4 to be moved e : he 


_ that keepeth thee will not ſlumber f. 

d Hz ſpeaketh as it were from God to himſelf, but withal to the 
encouragement of his followers, and of all -good men. e To wit, 
ſo asto fall into miſchief. f Will not overlook, nor negle& any 
thing which is neceſſary for thy preſervation. : | 

'4 Behold, he that keepech Iſcael, (hall neither ſlum- 
ber nor ſleep. | 

5 The LORD 5s thy keeper : the LORD #s thy ſhade 
g upon thy right hand 5. 

.» £2 Both to refreſh thee and keep thee from the burning heat of 
'the Sun, as it is expreſſed in the next verſe, and to prote& thee 
by his power from all thine enemies; for which reaſon God. is oft 
called a ſbadow in Scripture. h Partly to uphold thy right hand, 
which is the chief inſtrument of Adtion ; and partly to defend thee 
in that place where thine enemies oppoſe thee : of which ſee on P/a. 
209. 6. And compare P/al. 16. 8. 109. 31. | 

6 The ſun ſhall not ſmite thee; by day, nor the moon 
& by night. 

; With exceſſive heat. & With that cold and moiſture which 
Comes into the Air by it and with it. Intemperat heats and colds 
are.the two Springs of many diſeaſes. He alludes both to the con- 

gitions of Soldiers or Travellers, who are expoſed to the open air 
by day and by nighr, and alſo to the cloudy Pillar which defended 
the Iiraclites both by day and by night. | The ſenſe 1s, He ſhall 
proteQ; thee from all evils both by day and night. ; 

7 The LORD ſhall preſerve thee from all evil: he 
ſhall preſerve thy ſoul. 

*8 The LORD ſhall preſerve thy going out, and thy 
coming in /,from this time forth, and evenfor evermore. | 

- _»- 5-Shall guard and afliſt thee in all thy expeditions and affairs 
and actions either at home or abroad. So this phraſe is uſed Num. 


27.17, Deut. 28.6, 
* Hh PSAL CXXn. 
The ARGUMENT. 


1 Bo Pſalm ſeems to have been written by David for the uſe of 
- " the people when they came up to'Jers/a/em to the ſolemn 
caſts. ; | | 


F Net. 2] 
10 


- 
* 


z 


.Curing the times of ſolemn worſhip. c In that City, where the d 5 
5p Se, 3 W, 4 Ee: ge Pſalm was compoſed by David in the name, and for the 
Ark is now fixed. We ſhall wander no more from place to place, | uſe of all the Church and People of Tjrael, as a thanksgiving 


2 Sa as the CE Iond bs bedde ur that 10 for their dehverance from ſome eminent danger or dangers from 
ed ut as a City that 15* Compact toge- proud and potent enemies. Many ſuch they had in Davidstime : 
ther gd. ISF-If, ENLE Yo Ms | but which of them is here intended, is hard to determine, and not 
_ # Partly in its Buildings, which are not diſperſed, as they are worth the inquiry. 
In Villages, nor divided into two Cities, as it was before, but u- A ſong of degrees of David. : 
= rarer Neo goarkt bo / Sg pepopatly _ w_ _— The Church ſetteth forth Gods Mercy for @ miraculous deliverance out «f the 
| * $ diſtinct and oppoſite, be 05, 1=——=—5, at eth him for, 
Dovid took the Fort of Zion from the Jebuſites. 444 ons 5 3 NT of powerful Enemies, 1 5. aud bleſſuh him for 
..4 * Whither the tribes e go up, the tribes of the FF ;: had not been the LORD who was on our ſide, * *pizg. 
LORD e, wnco the teſtimony of Iſrael f, to give thanks ow may Iſrael fay : 
v8Y; h of the LORD Fe ding 2nd | 
unto The Name OL "5728 þ | 2 If it had notbeen the LORD who was on our ſide, 
/./..' 6 Not ſome few pious pug of each Tribe, as in Sau!'s time | when men roſe up againſt __. 
I 


and under the Judges, but whole Tribes ; not only one or two of. ? ; P 
.- the Tribes, as it was during the late civil Wars, but all the twelve 3 Then they had ſwallowed us up quick #, when their 
wrath was kindled againſt us. 


© Tribes. © whom God hath choſen to be his people, and whom | 

he hath invited and required ro reſort thither. f Unto the Ark, | a They "27 ſpeedily and utterly deſtroyed us, as Kirah, KC. 
were, Nym#, 16, | 

4 Then 


T- 


- which is oft called he Teſtimony, as Exod. 16. 34. Levit. 16, 13. and 
- and 24. 3. Num. 17,4: and mare fully the Ark of the Tefimony, as 


- Phl. CXXV, CXXVYI. PP & 4 EE SN Pſaj., CXX | 


4 Then the waters had overwheimed us, the ſtream ſorrow, yet afterwards for the moſt part meet with a joyful hor. 
had gone over our ſoul. veſt. And therefore we hope thou wilt not deny this favour to 


5 Then the proud waters 5had gone overour ſoul. ' thine ewn people. And as thou haſt in ſome good meafire granted 


; 40” a : . ittous, ſo we pray thee grant it to our brethren, who are yer 
_ 6 Our enemies comparcd t2 proun waters, for their great multi. exerciſed with hard labours and eriefs, that they and we tocether 
*ude and ſwelling rage and mighty force. = 


, | ; may at Iaft obtain that bleſſed and full harveſt which we Ni 

6 Bleſſed be the LORD, who hath not given us as a ami hope for. guys - n M ws wats _ mm Wo IEIEnY 
prey to their teeth c. | 6 He that goeth forth g and weepeth 5, bearing ||pre- 
cious feed 3, thall doubtleſs come k again with rejoy- 


c A Metaphor from'wild beaſts which tear and devour their prey ons ſes | 
bes yg teeth. | boned * as big Eche i, p cing,bringing his ſheaves wich him "OI 
/ w_ foul 15 E CAPER. a5 @ Uk out OL NE INATE © '£ The Husband man that goeth out into his Field, and walketh 
the fowlers : the ſnare is broken, and we are eſcaped, hither and thither to ſeatter his Seed, as the manner is. þ For fear 
8 * Qur help is inthe name of the LORD, who made | Þt the loſs ofhis ſeed, and ofa bad harveſt, 5 Secd Corn when it 
heaven and carth. | 1s ſcarce and dear. Or, the basket of ſeed, as itis rendred in our 
PSAE CATE Margent,as alſo by the Chaldee Paraphraft,and ſome others. +4 Heb. 
77 ; 4» 2s TT MB NT comin; ſhall ceme. Which manner cf expreſlion may not either the 
De . 


certainty of the thing, or the fervency 2nd cuſtomarineſs of jr. 
His Pſalm was deſigned for the conſolation and efcourage- 


This verſe is only an amplification of the former. 
ment of Gods Church and people in all ages, againſt all the 


plors and malice of their enemies. A PE. of Mor} > on 4 
A ſong of degrees. S g a. : for, off 


*Pro.6.5. 


Fr[.121.2, 


FAV) HNPWPGEECY co” V5 RET... = TOW $7 


my 


ts. 


* ps 


x a Or rather, of Solomon, as this Particle is generally uſed in thi: il 
The fledfaSineſs of ſuch as trutt in God, 1 3- A Prayer for. the Goaly Book. Nor is there any thing in this Pfam which gives us "ſt So | 


ground to, queſtion whether Solomon was the Author of it or no. 
No ſucceſs in City or Family, without Gods Bl. fſmg and Protefion, 1, 2, 
Good Chilaren are his Gifts, 3, 4. Their happineſs that have them, 


5. "oY 
Rep the LORD build the houſe 5,they labourin 


the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. 


70 .do them good, and againſt the ungodly to defiroy them, 4. 5. 
Hey that truſt in che LORD ſhall be as mout Zion, 
which cannot be removed 4, but abideth for ever. 
a Or, overthrown by any winds or ſtorms, partly becauſe of its own 
creatneſs and ſtrength ; and partly becauſe of the divine proteCti- 
on afforded to it. 
2 As the mountains are round about Jeruſalem 6, fo 


the LORD js round about his people, from henceforth 
even forever. 
b By which it was defended both from ſtormy" winds and from 


the afſ:ults of its enemies. 
2 For the rod'of f the wicked c ſhal not reſt 4 upon 


the lot of the righteouse : leit che righteous put forth 


their hands unto iniquity f. 

c Thie power and authority of cruel Tyrantss d Not continue 
for ever, nor too long. e Upon the habjrations and perſons of 
good men. f Leſt though humane frailty and the great weight or 
loag continuance of tneir troubles: they ihould be driven to ime 
patience, or to deſpair, or to ule indirett and finful courſes to re: 
lieve themſelves. 


4 Do good, O LORD, unto 7hoſe that be good g, and 


to them that are upright in their hearts. 

g As thou haſt promiſed to keep thy people from evil, v: 3. be 
Pleaſed alſo to vouchſafe unto them thoſe bleſſings whichare good 
for them. Or thus, Having declared Gods tender care of his peo- 
ple, and his promiſe made to them,he now prayeth for the execu- 
tian of the ſaid promiſes. : 

5 As for ſuch as turn aſide unto their crooked ways þ, 
the LOKD ſhall lead them forth 3 with the workers of 
iniquity & : but * peace ſhall be upon Iſrael 7. 

h But thſe hypocrites, who either tkrough fear of the Rod 
*;,9.6 mentioned w. 3. or for other conſiderations, ſhall turn afide from 
Gals, 16 the ways of God, which for a time they profeſſed and ſeemed to 

own unto ſinful courſes, whom he oppoſerh to the «upright, w: 4. 
; To wit, unto puniſhment, as malefaCttors are commonly led to 
the place of execution. k With the moſt obſtinate and profligate 
ſinners, of whoſe plagues they ſhall certainly partake as they did 
of their tins. 1 Upon the true 1/77el of God. 

PS A L. CXXVI. 

The ARGUME NT. 
His Pſalm was compoſed by Ezra, or ſome other man of God 

at the return of Jjrael from Babylon, 


fHeb.w:c- 
keaneſs, 


cial houſe, the Temple, or the Royal Palice,or any of thoſe nume- *** 
rous ſtructures which Solomon raiſed ; or a natural or civil Hovſe, 
a Family or a State or Kingdom c They will never bring at to 
perfeCtion, nor have any comfort in it. 

2 Iris in vain for you d toriſe up early, to fit uplate 
z, to eat the bread offorrows f: for || ſo g he þ giveth Z 
his beloved k ſleep /. 


a He diretts his ſpeech to the perſons forementioned, the buil- 
acrs, or watchmen, of both which ſorts there are many that nſe the 
following courſe. e To uſe conſtant and unwearied diligence from 
the very dawning of the day unto the dark night, that ſo you may 
accomplith your deſigns. f To eat the bread which you (get by 
exceflive and grievous pains. g To wit, by his blefling, which 
though nor expreſſed, is ſufficiently underſtood out of the former 
verſe, where it is twice expreſſed. As therefore he 1aith it is in 
vain for them to build or watch, if God do not give his bleſſing 
and aſſiſtance, wv: 1- ſo here he adds, that it is in vain to be dili- 
gent 1n their labours and callings, underſtand, without Gods bleſ« 
1ing; for fo, #; e: not ſingly by their, induſtry, but by hs bleſ- 
ſing upon their labours. But the Hebrew word rendred ſo may be 
and it is by others rendred when or whereas or jince ; by others right= 
ly or well, when it is convenient and needful for them ; by others 
as it 15 in our margent, cer: «ily, the ſleep which they have is un- 
doubtedly from Gods bleſſing, without which all poſſible* endea- 
vours would never procure :t= hþ The Lori, expreſſed in the for. 
mer and in the following verſes. 7 To wit, freely, without that 
immoderate toiling and drugery wherewith others purſue it: k His 
people who though hated and maligned by men, are beloved of 
God, over whom his providence watcheth ia a ſpecial manner. In 
this exp:efſion' he ſeems to allude to the name ot Jedidiah, which 
was given to Solomon, and ſignifies the beloved of rhe Lord, 2 Sam: I2. 
35. 1 A quiet reſt both of body and mind - which mary of thoſe 
greedy worldings cannot enjoy, as 1s obſerved Eccleſs 5: 13. 

2 Loe, children, mw are an Heritage of the LORD »: 
and * the fruit of the womb 3s his reward. 


A tong of degrec:s. | 
The Church celebrating and praiſing God for her return out of the Baby« 
lonian Captivity, 4 3. Prayeth to perfe# his work, and farerelleth 
the good ſucceſs ther-of. 4 — 6. 
Hen the LORD + turn<d again the captivity 

THeb. r:- of Zion a, we were like them that dream þ. 
urns the 2 i, e. Brought the Captive Iſraelites out of Basylon into their 
rHurning. own land 6 We were fo ſurpriſed and aſtoniſhed with the report 


Zion, offuch a favour, that we could not beiieve our own eyes and ears, 
but thougat it to be put a dream or deiuſion of our own fancies: 
as is uſual in matters of great joy, as Gen, 45. 26. Luke 24.11. As! 
12:9. : | 

 _ 2 Then* was our mouth filled with laughter,and our 
wet tongue with ſinging : then ſaid they among the heathen, 

9008! The LORD ft hath done great things for them c# 

? c They did ard well might wonder at it, that an Heathen Em- 
fHeb.bazy PEror fhould of his own meer motion ſhew ſo much kindneſs toſo 
magnifies hateful and deſpicable a people as the Jews were. . 

» 4w;i-h 3 The LORD hath done great things for us, whereof 

_ we are glad. : | | 

$.-33.3- 4 Turn again our captivity 'd, O LORD, as the 


"13: 5: ſtreams of the ſouth e. 

d As thou haſt brought us home, bring home alſo the reſt of our 
brethren wo are diſpericd and yet remain captives in Babylon, or in 
any other parts of the world. e As thou art pleaſed ſometimes to 
ſend floods of water into dry and barren grounds, ſuch as the 


: all theſe bleſſings; and partly 


m Which he mentions here, oy becauſe they are the chief of 

ecauſe all the fore-mentioned toil 
and Jabour is in a great meaſure and moſt commonly undertaken 
for their ſakes. » They come not from the power of Nature. and 
fr:-m a mans converſation with his wife, or with a mulritude of 
Wives or Concubines,. which Solomon had, but only from Gods, 
bleſſing. ;even as an inheritance is n-tthe fruit of a Mans own la- 
bour, but the gift of his Father, or rather the gift of God, both 
enabling ahd inclining his Father to give it to him. o Nor are- 
ward of debt merited by good men, bur a reward of grace,of which 
We read Rom: 4. 4+ which God gives them graczouſly, as Jacob ace 
knowledgeth of his Children, Gen: 35. 5. And although God give 
Children and other outward Comforts to ungodly men in the way 
of common providence, yet he gives them only to his people as 
favours, and in the way of promiſe and covenant. 


4 As arrows are itt the hand of a mighty man #4 ſo 


are children of the youth 9: | | | 

Fl When they are ſhot eut of a bow by a man of great ſtrength 
againſt his enemy,which are of great uſe and power both to offend 
the enemy, and to defend himſelf. q Children begotten in youth 
as an Husband or Wife married in their youth are called an hucband 
or wife of youth, Prov. 5. 18. Iſa. 43. 6. Joel 1. 8. and as a ſon Be« 
gotten in old age is called - Jon of old age, Gen. 37. 3. And theſe he 
prefers before other Children in this point, partly becauſe ſuch are 
commonly more ftrong and vigorous than others: and partly be- 
cauſe they live longeſt with their parents, and to their comfort. 
and ſupport, whereas Children born in old age ſeldom come to any 
maturity of years before their parents death. 


> hs 


4 OTF. 


vain Þ that build itc: except the LORD keep HHeb.th | 
are builds 


b i: e: Aſſiſt and bleſs thoſe that build the houſe, either 2n artifi- ®* of it | 


vm AIC EARN WO 5 


[| Or, ce 
rainy. 
” Zec.11; 


wy 


Cott vt UTE FIT CIS POE PT Av. .- 


£0 : 
*Deu: 28 
4+ 


Sothern parts uf Canaan and the parts adjacent were: which is an . | eat So. ad | 

att of thy great power and goodne1s; and no leſs will this reduct- 5 Happen that T att his oy_—_ __ oFchews tH b path 
10n of thy people be, and no lels thall we rejoyce in it, and bleſs] 7 + they (hal nor be albamed s, but they [| ſhall ſpeak 11 - Pr 
God for it. with the enemies in the gate #. [.-- wot a 


r Who hath a riumerous iſſue; which as itis a great bleſſing in it ;3,y 
{-1f, ſo Solomons want of it made it more valuable in his eyes.” 5 Q ſhall 
Such Parents fear not the reproach of barrenneſs, which wag ſubdue & 
grievous; eſpecially among the Jews ; of which ſee Luke 1. 25. ,g 
nor any other ſhame from tneir enemies. * They ſhall couragh- or drflrep 
ouſly plead their cauſe in courts of Judicature, which were in rhe is 
5D 3 gares, 


* They that ſow in tears ſhall reap in || joy f. 

. f This is an Argument wherewith he prefſech the foregoing 
prayer, v. 4: taken from the common courle of Gods Providence, 
towards men of all Nations, to whom he affords viciflirudes of 
ſorrow and comfort, and particularly rowards husbandmen, who 
though oft-times they fow their ſeed corn With care and fear and 


* See Jer. 
31. 9, &c., 
Or, ſing. 
* 


| 
} 


A 


I. CXXVIIL, CXXIX. P $ 


gates, Deut. 21.19. and 25+ 7. not fearing to. be cruſhed by the | 
might of their adverſaries, a5 weak and helpleſs perſons frequently 


are, 
PS AL, CXXVIIL 
The ARGUME NI. 
His Pſalm contains a deſcription of the bleſſedneſs of good 
men. 


A Song of degrees. 

if be Pſalmift ſheweth the happy fate of ſuch as fear God ; in his Labour, T. 

| gotr ofa Children, 3. He 5halls alſo ſee the good of Jeruſalem, and 
peace upon Iſrael, 4 6. 

| os is every one that feareth the LORD ; that 


walketh in his ways. 
2 * For thou ſhalt eat the labours of thine hands # * 


happy ſalt thou be, and zt ſhall be well with thee 6. 

a Thy labour ſhall not be vain and fruitleſs, and the fruit of thy 
1abours ſhal not be taken away from thee,and poſlefſed by others,as 
God threatned to the diſobedient, Deut: 28, but enjoyed by thy 
ſelf with comfort and fatisfation. 6b Both in this world and in. 
the World to come, as even the Chaldee Paraphraſt explains theſc 
Words. 

2 Thy wife ſhall be as a fruitful vine c by the ſides of 
thine houſe 4; thy children like olive plants e round 
about thy table f. 

c Like the Vine for fruitfulneſs : Or, like that ſort of Vines 
known by this name for its eminent fruitfulneſs, as ſome Trees a- 
mongſt us are for the ſame reaſon called the grear bearers, d Where 
the Vines are commonly planted for ſupport andother advantages. 
Which being applied to the wife,may ſignifie either, 1. the Wives 
duty to abide at home, Tit: 2. 5. as the Harlor is deciphered by her 
gadding abroad, Prov: 7.21, 12. Or rather, 2. thelegitimateneſs of 
the children, which are begotten at home by the Husband, and 
not abroad by ſtrangers. e Numerous, growing and flourithing, 
good both for ornament and manifold uſes, as Olive trees arc. 
/ Where they ſhall fit at meat with thee, for thy comfort and 

afety. | 

4 Behold, that thus ſhall the man be bleſſed, that fear. 


eth the LORD- 
5 The LORD ſhal bleſs thee out of Ziong : and thou 
ſhalt ſce:the good of Jeruſalem & all the days of thy life. 


g From the Ark in Zion, and with thoſe Spiritual and everlaſt- 
ing Bleffings which are to be kad no where but in Zion, and from 
the God whodwelleth in Zion, and with all other mercies which 
thou ſhalt ask of God in Zio. h The proſperity of that City to 
which thou belongeſt, and which is the only ſear of Gods ſpecial 
preſence and of his Worſhip, whoſe felicity therefore is very de- 
lightful to every good man, and upon whoſe peace the peace and 
ſafety of every member of it depends, as every Seaman is concern= 
ed in the ſafety of the Ship, in which he is. : 

6 Yea, thou ſhalt lee thy childrens children, and 


Pſ.125.5 peace upon Iſrael z. 


| a, }J.1O- 


£ Not only upon Jerzsſalem and the parts adjacent, but upon all 

the Tribes and people of 1/racl. 

P $S At L.- CXXITIX. 

The ARGUMENT 
, | \ His Pſalm contains a joyful and thankful remembrance of the 
Curches former and. manifold calamities from barbarous ene- 

mies, and of Gods wonderful mercy in delivering them out of their 
hands. 

A ſong of degrees. 

The various and manifold afflitions of the Church deſcribed, but delive- 
red cut of all, 1 4: The haters thereof curſed and devoted to Judge 
ment, 5 8. 2 

Any a time have they  afflited me from my 

youth b, may * Iſrael now ſay. 

a Mine enemies or oppreſſors; which is eaſily underſtood both 
from the nature of the thing, and from v. 3- where they are ex- 
preſſed under the name of plowers, b From the time that I was a 
-people, when I was in Ezyp? and came out of it, which is called 
the time of Iſraeli youth, Fer. 2. 2: Ezck. AL 3 

2 Many a time bave they aflited me frommy youth: 
yet they have not prevailed againſt me. 

3 The plowers plowed upon my back e : they made 
long their furrows 4d. 

c They have not only thrown me down and trod me under foot, 
but have cruelly tormented me, wounded and mangled me, and 
had no more pity upon me than the plowman hath-upon the earth 
which he cuts up at his pleaſure. He ſaith, »pou my back, either 

| becauſe they did literally ſcourge the Captives upon their backs 

' with ſuch cords as are mentioned wv. 4. although we do not read 
that the Ifraelitiſh Captives were thus uſed by any of their enemies; 
.or by way of alluſion to that uſage, which made a ſort of furrows 
In their backs upon which they uſed tolay on their ſtrokes. 4 They 
ofc repeated their injuries and prolonged my torments. 
4 The LORD z5 righteons ez he hath cut aſunder the 
* cords f of the wicked. 


*pr...., © Faithful or merciful, as that word is frequently uſed.f Where- 
"P1499 with the plow was drawn; by which bad wh they God ſtopped in 
their courſe, So he. perliſts in the ſame Metaphor ofa plough.By 

theſe cords he underſtands all their plots and endeavours. 
5 Let them all be confounded and turned backs that 


hate Zion. 

g Forced to retreat with ſhame and diſappointment. 
 6Terchem be as the graſs upon che houſe-tops þ. 
which withereth afore it groweth up 4. 

þ Which there were flar, and therefore more capable of Graſs or 
o_ Corn growing between the ſtones, than ours are. i Which 

aving no deep roor,never comes to maturity. And ſo all their de- 
figns thall be abortive, and never come to perfeRion. 


JOr,much. 
*Pl124.5. 


| 1s good ground of hope for all contrite and. returning ſinners. 


137 Pſal. CXXX, CEXNE- 


7 Wherewith the mower filleth not his band ; nor he 
that bindeth ſheaves, his boſom. a 

8 Neither do they which go by ſay, The bleſfing of 
the LORD beupon youk: we bleſs you in the name 
of the LORD. 


k Which was an uſual ſalutation given by paſſengers to reapers, 
as Ruth 2:4. So the meaning is, It never continues till the karveſt 


Comes. 
P S-A L. CXXX. 
The ARGUME NT. 
£ hem Pſalm was campoſed by the Prophet when he was confliQ. 
ing with horrors of his Conſcience for the guilt of his Sins, 
and imploring Gods mercy and Pardon. 
A ſong of degrees. 
The Pſalmiſt being troubled for, and acknowledging his Sins profeſſth his 
kepe in God, 1 6, and exhorteth [rac] to hope alſo in him, 7, 8; 
OT * of the depths &@ have I cried unto thee, O 
LORD. 


Being overwhelmed with deep diſtrefſes and terrors and ready 
to deſpair. 

2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentiveto 
the voice of my ſupplications. 

3 * It thou, LORD, ſhouldeſt mark iniquities bs, O 
LORD, who ſhall ſtand c ? 


6 Obſerve them accurately, and puniſh them ſeverly, as they de- 
ſerve. c In thy preſence, or at thy Tribunal. No man can acquit 
himſelf or eſcape the ſentence of condemnation, becauſe all men 
are ſinners, Eccleſ. 7, 20. Jam: 3: 2. To ſtand is a judicial phraſe,and 
notes a mans being abſolved or juititied upon an equal tryal, as 
Pſal: 1. 5+ Rom; 14. 4: Where it 1s oppoſed to falling. 

4 But there 3s forgiveneſs with thee d,that thou maveſt 
be feared e. 

d Thou art able and ready to forgive repenting ſinners. e Not 
with a flaviſh, but with a Child-like fear and reverence. his 
Grace and Mercy of thine 1s the foundation of all Religion and 
Worſhip of thee in. the World, without which men would deſpe- 
rately proceed on in their 1impious courſes without any thought of 
Repentance. 


5 1* wait for the LORD f; my foul doth wait, and 


in his word g doT hope. *P(27.ig 
F T hat he would manifeſt his favour to me in the pardon of my & 40. 1, 

ſins. g Whercin he hath declared his merciful nature, Exod 34. 6, 

7 and his gracious purpoſe and promiles for the pardoning of 

ſinners. 

6 My ſoul waiteth for the LORD, more than they 
that wait forthe morning þ: || I ſay more than they that 
watch for the morning. [[Or,whic 

h Whether Souldiers that keep the night-watches in an Army Tt un 
or City, or the Prieſts or Levites who did ſo in the Temple; who ##* mm 
being wearied with hard ſervice and want of convenient reſt, dili« $- 
gently look for and fervently deſire the morning when they may 
be ditcharged. Compare P/al, 119. 148. 

7 Ler Iſrael ; hope in the LORD : for with the 
LORD there is mercy, and with him 5s plenteous re- 
demption &. 

z Every true Ifraclite by the encouragement of mine example: 
k Abundantly wufficient tor all perſons who ſhall accept it upon 
Gous terms, and for the remiſſion ofall his ſins; and therefore here 


*Lam, 3, 
FFo 
Jon. 2.2, 


FPC.143-2 


8 And he ſhali redeem / Iſrael zz from all his iniqui- 
ties ». 4 

I TheLord either God the Father by his Son, or God the Son 
by his own blood. m2 All true Iſraelites, whether of the carnal or 
{piritual feed. » From the guilt and puniſhment of all their ſins« 


PSAL CAXXAL 
| The ARGUMENT. 

: | \His Pfalm ſeems to have been compoſed by Davidduring Sauls 

perſecution When he was charged with boundleſs ambition, 
and a greedy affeQation of the Royal Throne,and that he fought it 
by wicked prattices againſt Sauls life and dignity. And for his 
own jult vindication he is forced to publiſh his own integrity,and 
to declare that as the right of the kingdom. was not ſought or co- 
veted by him,but freely conferred upon him by the unexpeRted and 
undeſired favour of God, ſo that he had no thought or deſign to 
invade the Throne before his time, but was willing to ſtay Gods 
leiſure for it, and in the mean time was reſolved to behave him- 
{cIf towards Saul as became a faithful Subje&, ſeeking nothing but 
to preſerve his own Life from the rage of unrighteous and bloody 
Men. 


A ſong of degrees of David. | 
David teſt;þeth his humility, 1, 2. and exhorteth Iſrael to traft in the 
Lord, 3. | 
| ORD, my heart is not haughty a, nor mine eyes | 
L lofty b; neither do I F exerciſe my {elf in great 7 0 | 
* matters, or in things too | high for me c. *P\ 206 
« Pl.139 

a Or, Lifted up, with that pride whereof I am accuſed, as thou +Yeb.vm- 
the ſearcher of all hearts knoweſt. 6b Which is afign and effeft of derfid. 
pride, Prov: 6. 17. and 2r. 4. ©c Heb. neither have I walked in great 
matters, &c. It neither is nor hath been my courſe to attempt or 
arrogate any thing to my ſelf above my degree and private capact- 
ty, or to affeft worldly glory or domination. 7 

2 Surely 1 have behaved and quieted + my ſelf /* as 
a child that is weaned of his mother e ; my ſoul is EVEN rr, 6 
as a weaned child. c ſoul. 

d When my mind was provoked to irregular praftices cither by *Mat. 18 
my own corrupt heart, or by Sauls implacablz rage and yrannys3, | 
or by the ſolicitation of any of my followers, as 1 Sam. 24; & 26+ x Cor: 14 
I reftrained and ſubdued all ſuch evil motions. e Either, t. 35 204 


v LU 


void of all that ambition and malice wherewith IT am charged er : 
. 1: 


Pſ.27.ig 
& 49. 1, 


Or,which 
patch unts 
he murys 


/L 


Pal, cxx '* 


P 8 4 
Child newly weaned : Or rather, 2. as wholly depending upon 
Gods Providence for the way and time of bringing ine to the King - 
dom, as the poor helpkſfs Infant, when it 1s deprived of its natural 
and accuſtomed food, the Mothers Milk, takes no care to provide 
for 3t felf,but wholly relies upon its Mothers care and Providence 
for its ſupport. , 

3 Let Iſrael hope in the LORD f, | from henceforth 


fbf 1nd for ever. 


jo» F Let all Iſraelites learn by my example to commit themſelves 
” God in well-doing,and to fix all their hope and truſt upon him 
one. 
" Þ S AL” CE 
x ' The ARGUMENT. 


He Petiman of this-Pſalm was either, 1. David, when God 
FE had graciouſly declared his acceptance of Davids defire to 
build an Houſe for God, and his purpoſe of eſtabliſhing the King- 
dom to Dazed and his ſeed for ever : Or, 2. Solomon, as may be ga- 
thered from the whole matter of the Pſalm, which ſeems better to 
aggree to him than to David, and particularly from v. 8. 9, 10. 
compared with 2 Chron: 6. 41, 42: where we have the ſame words 
with no great alteration. 
7 A fong of degrees. 
" David in Prayer comniendeth unto God the care he had fir the Ark, 


: . @ Fither, 1- thy Covenant made with David , Or rather, 2: Da- 
4... -- vids eminent piety and zeal for thy ſervice, amplified by the fo]- 
: lowing clauſe. 6 All his fufferings for thy ſake,all the folicitude 
of his mind, all his hard and weariſome labours for thy ſervice and 
lory, and for.provifions towards the building of thy Temple,and 
ar the eſtibbſhment of thy people in peace and tranquility, that 
ſo way might be made for that great work. 
2 How:he ſware unto the LORD, and vowedc unto 


the mighty God of Jacob 4; + | 
 c He made aſolemn Vow, and confirmed it with an Oath: Which 

he undoubtedly did; although no mention be made of it, 2 Sam: 

7, Thus many hiſtorical paſſages which were omitted in their 
Proper places, are afterwards recorded upon other occaſions z of 
which examples have been formerly noted. d Of 1/rael ; 7acob and 
Iſrael are frequently pur for their poſterity,as hath been frequently 

- :obſerved. . | 
_ 3 Surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my 


Houſe, nor go up to my bed e; | 

e This and the following clauſes are not to be underſtood ftriatly 

arid properly,as if he would never come into his Houſe or Bed till 

this was dene, which is confuted by the Hiſtory, 2 Sam: 17. 2. 

but figuratively, as an hyperbolical expreſſion, ſuch as are uſual 

e; both in Scripture and in all other Authors,toſignifie his paffionate 

deſire of doing this work, which was ſo- earneſt, that neither his 

Houſe nor Bed nor Sleep could givehim atiy content till this work 

was done, or itt ſome forwardnefs. 

4 I will not give ſleep to mine eyes, or ſlumber to 

mine eye-lids : SER 

hy 5 UncilI find ont a place for the LORD f, 4 an ha- 

oeokngs bitation for the mighty God of Jacob. | 

" F Either, 1. until I can underſtand from God what place he hath 

ſj choſen for his houſe to be built in. Or rather, 2. until I have fitted 

or raifed an houſe in which the Ark may be put ; #n habitation, as 

this is explained both In the next clauſe,and in ver. 7. and As 7. 

46. For this and not the former was the matter both of Davids de- 
ſirs, and of Gods anſwer delivered by Nathan, 2 Sam: 7. 

6 Loe, we have heard ofit g at Ephratah b : we 


found it :-in the fields of the wood &. | 
. _ g Of the place or habitation for the Lord laſt mentioned, þ Ei- 
ther, 1. in Bethlehem, which is called Ephratah, Gm: 35. 19, and 
48. 7. Mich: 5, 2« So the ſenſe is Either this, We heard a rumour 
at Bethleherts among Davids Relations, that the Ark ſhould be re- 
moved to a new place, and that David had pitched upon it : Or 
this, We heard that Berhlehem, would be the place for it,becauſe it 
was the City of David, Or rather, ' 2. in the Tribe of Ephraim, 
Which was called alſo Ephratah or Ephrathah, as is manifeſt, becauſe 
the men of Ephraim were called Ephrathites, as Judges 12. 5- in the 
Hebrew Text, though in the Engliſh it be Ephraimite. So Feroboarm 
IS Called an Ephrathite, 1 Kings 11. 26. So the ſenſe is, We heard 
it from our Fathers, that the antient place ofit was Shiloh, which 
was in the land of Ephraim. Whereby he covertly intimates that 
God rejetted and forſook that place, and choſe not the tribe of Ephraim, 
as it is ſaid Pſal. 18, 67. that ſo he might make way for Zn, 
2 which wag the place choſen by God for it, as it follows here wer. 
13. # Afterwards we found it elſewbere. k 5. e. Ina field, or in 
one of the fields of the Wood ; for thar. little ſpor of ground in 
which the Tabernacle or Temple was built, was not likely to be 
in ſeveral fields, Thus Jepthah waz buried in the cities of Gilead, 
Juag. 12, 7. 2: e: in ohe of them. This is meant either, 2. 6f the 
Mount Moriah, which might poſſibly be called the ficld of the wood, 
as being antiently a place full of wood, Gen: 22. 13. or of rhe thre- 
ſhing-floor of Araunah, of which fee 2 Sam: 24. 28. which before the 
building of the Temple is ſaid to have been a woody place. Or ra- 
ther, 2. of Kiriath-jerarim, which ſignifies # city of woods, in thefield 
or territory whereof the Ark was 1cated for twenty years, as we 
read 18a:7.1, 2. And from this place ic was removed to Zion, | 
2 Sam: 6. 1, Kc, : 
5 We will gol into his tabernacle m ; * we will wor- 
ſhip at his foorſtoo) »» 
I Seing the Ark is now fixed in a certain place, we will go to it 
more generally and conſtantly than formerly we did. # Into his 
Tabernacle or Temp, rhe Piural number pur for the Singular,as 


+7 
4 


$%. 
FT, 


FPſ.g9; To 


| have cauſe of rejoycing in the tokens of thy goodneſs : w 


E 'O 7. With his Prayer over it, 8 10. 4 rehearſal of Gods Oath 
ke and Promiſes of the everlafting Kingdom of Chriff, 11———18. 
I OR D, remember David s, and all his aflicti- 


Thave ordained a || lamp g for mine anGinted. 


advantage to that family, the onely place of my preſence and wor- 
ſhip in the World. f His power and glory to flowrifh and increaſe 
and to be propagated to his poſterity» g A ſucceſfor or ſacceſſion 
to continue for ever in-his family, as this phraſe. is expounded x 
Kings 11. 36. and 15. 4. and particularly one emifint and glorious 
light, to wit the Meſſias, who ſhall come our of his loyns, and 
revive and vaſtly enlarge his Kingdom. 


himſelf ; ſhall his crown flouriſh, 


vain hopes and wicked deſigns. i Upon him and his poſterity, 
which are nothing elſe but a mans ſelf multiplied. 
P 


Saut and David. In which having felt the tad effefs ofdiſcord and 
diviſion, both the King and People were more {cnlible of the great 
bleſling of reconciliation and unity. 

David exro!leth the bensfit and excellency of the unity and brotherly com« 


Ty Ehold, how good and how pleafant it ;s a, 
' DD brethren þ to dwell + together in unity. 


bleſſed change with thankfulneſs ro God for it. 5 Fyr us whoare 


7 OT bh I, 
% ; 


0 7:e:Ariſe and come.One word put for twe,as Gen:43-33. marvels 
ed (i: e: marvelled looking) one at another; ard v.34. he took meer, 
1. e. he took and ſent mſſ2s, as our Tranſlation renders it. And this 
word is very proper itt this place. becauſe it' was to be uſed by 
Gods appointment when the Ark was to be removed froin one place 
to another, Numb: 10. 35. as now it was from the Tabernacle in 
Zion to the Temple in Moriah, upon which occaſion this and the 
two following verſes were uſed by Solomon, 2 Chron: 6: 41% 42. p Ts 
ro thy reſting place, the Temple ſo called 7/z: 66.'7.. where thou 
haſt now a fixed habitation. 9 The ſeat of thy powerful and glo- 
rious preſence, from whence thou doſt pnt forth-and mawfeſt thy. + 
ſtrength on the behalf cf thy people when they deſire and need 
It. | 

9 Let thy Prieſts be clothed with * 
and let thy ſaints ſhout for joy /. 


7 Not only with thoſe outward Sacerd tal garments of glory and 
beauty which thou haſt appointed for them, - but eſpecially with 
thoſe inward ornaments of righteouſneſs and true holineſs that ſo 
their perſonsand ſervices may be accepred by thee borh for them« 
{elves and for all thy people, and they may be cloathed with [aluation, 
as it is expreſſed here below v: 16. and 2 Chron: 6. 41, which is 
the effe& or conſequent ofthe former clothing. 5 Let 21 thy people 
1h they 
[25 gia had at the dedication of the Temple; as is noted 4 Kin: | 
-1o For thy ſervant Davids ſake 7; turn not away the 
face « of thine anointed x. > | 

_ tlaregard of thy ſingular kindneſs and promiſes youchſafed to 
David, as this is explained in the following verſes. And this verſe. .: 
makes it more than probable, that Davis was not the Penman of + 
this Pſalm, who never uſed to beg mercies from God for his own }. 
lake, bur conſtantly for his names ſake, and for the ſake of his truth, 
mercy, goodneſs of righteouſneſs, as will be evident to any one that reads + 
this Book. #4 Caſt me not out of thy preſenes, do not reje& or des. - 
ny my requeſt, as this phrafe is expounded, 1 Kings 2,:16. x Of 
me whom thou anointed to be king over thy people. He ſpeaks of 
himſelf in the third perſon, as is utual. | $851 
11 * The LORD hath ſworn 3» truth y unto David, * P4595, 
he will not turn from it, * Of the fruit of + thy body z #33: *6* 


will I ſet upon thy Throne. Fry ho 
y Nor falſly or deceirfully,; as men ſometimes do, bur ſincerely, 2Chr:6:16, 
and faithfully, what he will inviolably obſerve and fulfil,as the nexr Luk: I:6g« | 
claufe expounds this. z Some of thy poſterity. AR. 3: 3s 
I2 If thy children will keep my covenant and my + Heb, y| 
teftimonies that I ſhall teach chem ; their children alſo 99 
(hall fit upon my throne for evermaore. 

13 Forthe LORD hath choſenZion #« : he: hath de- 


fired it for his Habitation. Ya : 

a Not ſtrialy, but largely taken,cither for the whole mountain, 

whereof Zion and Moriah were two parts .or tops ;. or- for Feruſalem, 

which was in a great part built upon Mount Zim, whence i is oft 

called Zion,zs hath been noted again and again. For he ſpeaks here 

of that place which he choſe ro be his ref for everas it follows w:14. 

which unqueſtionably was the Temple : whence alſo it appears that | 
this Pſalm was not written by Davia,nor before the buiiding ofthe 3 
Temple. .. 
14 * This is my reſt for ever: here will I dwell 5,,,- es 


for I have deſired it. = | 
b F will no more wander to feyeral places as I have done, but 

here I have fixed my abode. : &-—- 
15 * E will || abundantly bleſs her proviſion c< 1 will : PC. 1474 
fatisfie her poor with bread, | Or ſuch 
16 I * will alſo cloath her prieſts with ſalvation d ;:Ch.6.4t« 
and her ſaints ſhall ſhonr aloud for joy. 


c T will plentifully provide for Jeruſalem arid all that live'in her 
or reſort to her for worſhip: nor ſhall they ſeck my face in vain. 
a4 With my ſaving graces and bleffings, with righteouſneſs, as thou 
didſt deſire v; 9. and moreover with that proteCtion and benediQi- - , .. 
on which by my promiſe belongs to righteous perſons, = *Ezek.298 
17 * There e will I make the horn of David to bud f : 2 
Luk:1.6 9g 
lOr,candls 
See i Kins 
Iz. 36, 


- FD 
tn EB ren nar nes re 


"IX=> FE 
eee I 
- ———e————————— er 


—_— Em nn. ne i 


— — C 


wn eee 


Ee ee HEIIEY 
$ 
R_— DS mm - _ 


" ibn ing I EIT 5-27 


— — 


« 


righteouſneſs x +” Vac. it; 


4 


le 
———_— 


ome: gn 


% 


e In Jeruſalem, the ſear of the Kingdom, and which 1s no ſmall 


18 His enemies will cloath with ſhame hs but upon 


4 For the ſhameful and unexpeRted- difaPpointment of all their 


S A L. CXXXIIL 
_ The ARGUMENT. | 
F [lis Pſalm was compoſed by Davitupon the happy occaſion of 
the ending of the Civil War between the two houſes of 


ſong of degrees of David. 


munion of the faithful, 1——}. = 
for tHeb.euts 
rogether. - 


s You have been haraſfed by a Civil War, take notice of this 


ma... Pſal: 43. 3. and 46: 4, &c. » Either the Temple : or rather the 
Num:1o, Ark, Z called 1 Chron. 28. 2. Lam: 2.1. becauſe God is oft faid 
: & 6 to [it between the Cherizhims, which were above the Ark. 


41,42, 
NI ark of thy ſtrength 9. - 


brethren not only by nature and blood, bur allo by combination in 
one and the ſame Common-wealth, and by the profeſſion of the 


$ bAriſe 0, O LORD, into thy reſt p: chowagd the fame Religion. 


eD 4 2 1 


ECXXXIV. 3 4 
>. 30. '2 Ir js like the ® precious ointment upon the head, 
30s 
Folor- vent down to the || skirts 4 of his garment. | 
c Ic is no lefs grateful and refreſhing than that oyl which was 
plentifuily ,poured forth upon Aarons head at the time of his Con- 
{eerartiontaitherPricitly oitice, which was exceeding pleaſant,not 
only for the extraordinary fragrancy of ir, but becauſe by this, 
rogether with the other Rites preſcribed, he was initiated 1nto that 
ſacred Ofh-e;: which was ſo acceptable ro God, and ſo comfortable 
and beneficiat to the people; as being the happy in{trument of 
making attonemear to God for them, and of procuring and main- 
; rainiag their peace with God, upon which all their happineſs of 
F*, _7rhis life and:;;of the next depends. | 4 Or, s&rr, for the Hebrew 
word is off of the ſingular number. Not to the lower skirt or bot- 
tom of his. Sacerdoral garment, for that the ſacred oy! was poured 
forth in: fo great plenty is nor probable, nor was it neceflary or 
convenient ; but co the upper skirt of it, or the mouth of it, as 
this Hebrew word openly ſignifies; or to the collar of his upper 
Prieftly ant whic the oyntment failing upon his'beard, might 
ealily reach, wg b 
3 As.the dew of * Hermon e, and as the dew that 
|| deſcended: upon the mountains of Zion f ; for "pH 
r there b the LORD commanderh biefling 5, even lite & 


evit.25 for eVermore. = 
e Ir is no fefs preatefs) than the dew is which falls upon that great 
1.28.8, and godly hill of Hermon, whereby it is both refreſhed and made 
fruitful: :FAnd as the dew which falleth up » the mountains of S:bn, 
7. & either upon the ſeveral paits and ridges or tops of. chat moun« 
tain, wheresf one was peculiarly called Son, and another Moriah, 
or/upon the mountains which are round about Jers/alew. Pſal. r25. 
2» which is oft-called Zion, -as Pſal. 132. 13. And theſe may be 
oppoſed'to Hermon, which was remote and beyond Jordan. But per- 
adventure ( which yet I propoſe with all ſubmiſſion (this dew is 
not tobe taken literally. for the falling of the dew avatled very 
little to the refreſhment or improvement of the hills of Sox and 
_ Miriah, eſpecially asnow they were filled with ouildings, bur Alle- 
31 * gorically, for-the favour or bleſiing of God, which is frequently 
2” .* called and compared t> the dew, as Prov: 19. 12. [a: 18: 4. Hel, 
=* 1.7. "24 5. Aich.5. 7. And thus it may ſeem to be explained in the 


| 


eut. 4+ 


- 


that ran down upon the beard,even Aarons beard c,that 


L M 8. * 2. CXXXY: | 1 


P SA L -CAXXY. © 
The ARGUME NT. 
His Pſalm contains an exhcrtition to all the Tſaclites, and 
eſpecially to the Prieſts and Levites, to praiſe God for his 
great and wonderful works; ſome particulars whereof are here re« 
corded. 

The ſervants of the Lord are exhorted to praiſe him for his Mercy to Jjrael, 
by his Might and Power, 1 7. for his Judgments on Egypc 
and other Nations, 8 14. The wanity of Iaols, and: thoſe thats 
truft in them, 1'5 ——— 18. The Houſe of Aaron and Levi are . 
exhorted to bleſs God, 19——21. ; 

paw ye the LORD, praiſe ye the name of the 

LORD, praiſe him, O ye ſervants of the LORD «©, 

2 Ye that itand in the houſe of the LORD, in rhe * 


courts b of the houſe of our God. . 
4 Ye Prieſts and Levites, as Pſal, 134. r. 6 Either 1hthe Tem. - 

ple or the inner Court, which were appropriated ro the' Prieſts and + 

Levites; or in the outward Court, which was for the people. Sce 

2- Chron, 4. 9. 


; 3 Praiſe ye the LORD, for the LORD 7s good = Wh 
ſing praiſes unto his name, for 3t is pleaſant d. 

* * ©: Bountiful and- gracious, eſpecially to you, and. therefore he 
ns, expeCts and deſerves your praiſes. d The work, it. ſelf of ' 
praiſes to God is pleaſant, as it is. more fully expreſſed, P/al. 147. 


* Ex.i9 5. 


: i : + 1 
: * 4 For * the LORD hath choſen Jacob for . himſelf, Den Ls 


and Iſrael for his peculiar treaſure. 
5 For I know that * the LORD 3s great, . and that * Prggi1; 
our LORD is above all gods e. | 
e Above all that are called Gods, or worſhipped as: Gods by the 
-heathen people. - And therefore ſeing they ccmmonly+praiſe and 
extol their Idols, it becometh you nor'to be ſilent as tothe praiſes | 
of your God. | ICE LY 
6 *.Whatſoever the LORD pleaſed Fe thatidid he in *PC.iigy 
'beavenand in earth g,in the feas,and all + deep places þ. | Heb, 
+ 'f Either in the creation or govetnment of them. | g His power epthe. 
| ao juriſdiction; is univerſal, and nor like that ofthe heathen gods, 
which is confined ro their ſeveral Countries. hIn the viſible Seas, 


»?-* following clauſe: and fo the ſenile of the. place 1s this. it 15 as de- 
: fircable as the natural dew which falls upon mount Hermon, nay 
"which is more, as that blefſed and heavenly dew «cf Gods ordinan- | 
-- ces and graces which: he hath commanded to fall upon the moun. | 
' fains of Sion, 5, e, either upon mount Son, the Plural number be. 
ing pur-for the. Singular, as'it is Pſal. 132, 7+ jand oft elſewhere, 
as I haye obſerved 1a ſeveral places; or upon the mountains of 
Zion p11 Meriah and others which, are round about Fer»ſalem as 
was now ſaid. As if it ſeem ftratrge,that the dew ſhould be taken 
literally 'a the firſt clauſe, and my'tically in the next, we have a 
like in'\\ante Marth. 8. 22. Let the: dead ( ſpiricually) bury the dead 
(narmgilyc)g He now gives the: reaſon cither why. this unity is 
ſo good a"thing; or why the dew deſcending upon Z#.to which 
that is: Compared;is ſo defireable. And ſo up..n this occaſion he 
ſlides into the commendation of Zions felicity,as the ſacred Wrirers 
fr-qyently do upon other like octaſtons. h Either, r. where bre- 
thre\ilive in peaceand ity : 'or rather, 2. in Zo Jait mentioned. 
i Ocdained, promiſed, conferred and eſtabliſhed his blefling ro 
wir, all manner. of blefſednels for his people that ſincerely worſhip 
" h'min that place. & To wir, an happy and pleaſant lite; fer to 
live in mitery is accounted and ofr called 4cath both in Scirpture 
and in other Authors. 


PS A IL. CXXXIV. 
The ARGU ME NT. 


He form of this Pſalm ſeems to be dramarical, In the two 

firft verſes the P.almiit ſpeaks in the name of ſome eminent 

perſon, either the King or chict Prieſt, exho:ting 3nd requiring 

all the Prieſts and Levites to perform the duties of their place and 

- calling; and in the Jait verſe i the name ofthe Prieſts and Levites 
returning him thanks for his god advice, 
A Song of Degrees. 


wvites are exhorted to bleſs the Lord in bis SanFugry 


SDI:O:; 11 
S+> :; 


> 
: 


_ 


© % 
* 


The Prieft and Le 


C—_ 
Ehold, bleſs ye the LORD #« all ye ſervants of the 
LORD 6, * which by night c flandd in the houſe 
+ Chr.g, e of the LORD. - 


3» a Do not and there like ſtatues, dumb and idſe, bur employ 
your hearts and tongues in ſinging forth the praiſes of the Lord. 
b Peculiarly fo called, Pricfts and Levites, whoare ſer apart tothe 
ſervice of God and of the SanQuary, as the next clauſe reſtrains 
this general expreſſion. c Not onely by day, bur alto and efpeci- 
ally by night, when their watch was more neceſlary, See Exodus 
27 24. Levit, 8. 39. 1 Sam, 3- 3» As you watch by night when 
otuers fleep, fodo you utter the praiſes of God when others are 
ſilent, dz. 8. Serve or miniſter, as this word is uſed Deur: ro, 8. 
and 38. 7. and cftclſewhere. e Which word includes both the 
Temple and Courts belonging to ir, as hath been noted before. 
2 Lift up your hands f|| - the ſanctuary g : and bleſs 
the LORD- 


f Unto God in prayer nd praiſes, thus expreſſing and exciting 
your-nward devotion. g In that holy houſe of God where you 
ſtand, v. x. Or, in or with holineſs; Lift up your hands, as it is 
preſcribed, 1 Tim. 2. 8 No nor content your ſelves with lifcing 
4 your hands, bur ſee that this be done with Pure and Holy 

arts: 

3 The LORD that made Heaven and Earth, bleſs 
thee out of Zion 5. | 

h Either, 1. thee whoſoeverthouart who doſt faithfully perform 
the ducy here commanded. Or, 2. thee, O King, or Prieit, who 

dot engage andencourage us in this blefl:d work. e Where God 
dwells, and from whencz he heareth the prayers of his people,and 
£verh $lcm the bxſings which they delice akd nerd, 


Or, in 


and in thoſe inviſible depths both of earth and of the waters which 
are contained inithe bowels of the earth. Hoey 


7 * He cauſeth the + vapours 5 toaſcend from the ends 
of the earth. 4; * he maketh lightnings for the rain/: he 13.&51.16, 
bringeth the wind out of his treaſuries 7, GH, FGr. cond; 

5 Whichare the matter of clouds and rai & Either, ' 3: from the So Provi 
| Sea,; the common, ſonrce of vapours, 1 Kings 18, 44. mos 5. 8. 25.14 
wherewi'th both the earth in general, and ſeveral particular coun- * Job 38. 
tries, are terminated or bounded : or rather, 2+ from all parts of 24» &c- 
the earth from one-end to another; as the borders of a Land are Zecluiod, 
commonly put for the wh:Jc Land from one border to another, as 
Pal: ro5. 31, 33: and i47. 14. and oft elſewhere. For iti this ſence 
this phraſe is generally uſed in Scripture, as Job 28. 24. and 38, 
13+ Pſal; 19+ 4, 6. and 48. 10. and every where. 1 He bringeth 
water even out of the fire : he maketh thick clouds, which being 
broken, produce lightnings, and fo are diflfolved into ſhowers of 
rain, So the {ighrnings are both a ſign and in ſome ſort the cauſe of 
rain. Or, he maketh lightnings with ( as this Particle is uſed Gmn:46, 
26. Pſal: 89. 4.and i19 56, 98. ) rain, 3: e; he cauſethiboth of 
them to come out of the ſame cloud, -» Out of thoſt ſecret 
places where he reſerves them, and whence he bringeth them, as 
he ſees fit. Thus we read of treaſures of ſnow and hail, Job 38.22: not 
that they are formally laid up in any certain places, but to ſigni 
fie that God hath them as much at his diſpoſal, as any man hath 
that which he hath laid up in his ſtores. 


8 * Who ſmote the firft-born » of Egypt, + both of *Exodiz: 


F Ter. 16: 


man and beaſt. +eb.fom 
» From the general works of Nature he comes to Gods ſpecial ,,,y uw 
works of Providence towards his people. beef, 


9 Who ſent tokens and wonders into the midlt of thee, 
O Egypt, upon Pharoah, and upon all his ſervants, 

Io * Who ſmote great nations,and flew mighty kings. ”* wn 7! 

I1 Sihon king of the Amorite,and Og king of Baſhan, 24, 25,26, 


and * all the kingdoms of Canaan. 34) 35. 
12 * And gave theirland for an heritage; an heritage Is 
unto Iſrael his people. PL. 18.55. 


13 Thy * name, O LORD, endureth for ever, and *Pſ102.1- 
thy memorial, O LORD,F throughout all generations o. f Heb. 
0 Theſe wonderful works of thine ſhall never be forgotten, The 8% oo 
land which thou gaveſt us, v. 12. and which we yet enjoy, is an and gentThe 
everlaſting monument of thy power and goodneſs, and an obliga- #9 
tion and encouragement tetrultt in thee in all our preſent or future 
difficulties. SHA 

14 For the LORD will judge his people p, and he 
will repent himſelf concerning his ſervants 9. 

p Will in due time plead the cauſe of his people, or give judg- 
ment for them, as this phrafe is uſed Deut: 32+ 36. Fer. 5, 28. and 
22. 16. 9. He will recal that ſevere ſentence which for their fins 
he had paſſed upon them, and be reconciled to them, 

15 * The idols of the Heathen are ſilver and gold r, 
the works of mens hands. | 

7 Of this and the following yerſes fee the Notes on Pſal: 115. 
5, GC. 

16 They have mouths,but they ſpeak not : eyes have 
they, but they ſee nor, 

17 They have ears, but they bear not: 
there any breath in their mouths, 


18 They that make them Fare like unto them s ſo 3s 


*Pſ115'4 
5,6, 7,8,9* 
19,11, 


neither 1s 


t Heb. lt 


then VER 


&very ons that truſterti in them, & Gr. 


19 Blcts 


48 


7 r9 Bleſs the LORD, O houſe of Ifrael s bleſs the 
LORD, O houſe of Aaron. 
20 Bleſs the LORD; O houſe cf Levi : ye that fear 


the LORD; bleſs rhe LORD. 
2 1 Blefſed be the LORD out of Zion s, which dwel- 


leth at Jeruſalem 7. Praiſe ye the LORD. 

s By the Aſſemblies of his people in Zzow of Jeruſalem. # This 
clauſe may be added either to diſtinguiſh the true God from the 
gods which were worſhipped in other places and countries ; or as 
a Reaſon why they ſhould bleſs God, becauſe he had blefled and 
honoured that place with his gracious and glorious preſence. 


A IL. CXXXVL 
The ARGUMENT. 


He matter of this Pſalm is the ſame with the former, only it 

is a little more fitted ro the uſe and ſervice of the Temple, 

by rhe continued Repetition of that ſolemn clauſe, for thy mercy en- 
dures for ever, which was much uſed by the ſacred ſingers. See 
2 Ghron. 7. 3. and 20. 21, | | 
The Pſalmiſt exhorte:h all to praiſe God, for his power and wiſdom in crea- 


P SAIL MME 


26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven : for his 


mercy endareth for ever. 
PSAL. CXXAXVIL 
The ARGUMEN T. 
He Penman of this Pſalm is uncertain : the occaſion of it was 
unqueſtionably the conſideration of the Babyl- niſh Captivi- 
ty : and it ſeems to have been compoſ:d either during the time of 
that Captivity, or preſegtly aſcer their deliverance ont of it. 

The fad complaint of the Jews in captivity, 1———3. Of the ſeoffing of 
rheir enemies, yet therr conflancy to remember Jeruſalem, 4, 5. Trage 
nents imprecatea upon Edom and Babyion, 6 9. 

Y the rivers of babylon a, there we fat down 6 ; 
yea, we wept when we remembred Zion 6. 
a Either, r. of the City of Babylon, and then the River is 


Euphrates, here callcd rivers for its greatneſs, and by a common E- 
nallaze of the plural for the ſingular, as Zigr:s alſo is, Nah. 2. 6. 
yea and Jordan, Pjal. 74. is, Or, 2. of the Territory of Babylon, 
in which there were many Rivers, as E:phrates, which alſo was 
divided into ſeveral Streams or Rivulets; and 77gris and others, 


Pal, CXXxY 


il 


4 

: 
: : 
30 


"8 
| 


| 
l 
| 
| 
| 


is 
ii 


ting and governing the World, x 
26 


[Le] 


O for his mercy endureth for ever. 
2 Ogivethanks unto * the God of godsa: for his mer- 
Cy endureth for evers 
a Who.is infinitly ſuperior to all that are called gods, whether 
Angels, or Princes, or Idols. 
3 O give thanks unto the LORD of Lords: for his 
mercy eudureth forever. 
4 To him who alone 6 doth great wonders : for his 
mercy endurethfor ever. 
b He and none elſe. Or, he without the help of any other per- 
ſon or thing; whereas no other beeing can'do any thing alone or 
without his help, 
5 * To himthat by wiſdom c made the heavens : for 
his mercy exdureth for ever. 
c To wit, by eminent and admirable wiſdom, far exceeding the 
capacity ofall humane or Angelical creatures. 
6 * To him that ſtretched out the ' earth above the 
waters 4 : for his mecy endureth for ever. 
d OF which ſee on Gen. 1. 9. Pſal. 24. 2. 
» * To him thatmade great lights: for his mercy en- 
reth for ever. 
1 {Heb: for $8 The fun Þ to rule by day e: for his mercy endureth 
ob 38, the rulings for ever. 
'y day. e Of which pliraſe and the like in the next verſe, ſee my Notes 
on Gen 1. 16. | 
5 The moon andſtars to rule by night : for hismer- 
cy endureth for ever. 
10 * To him that ſmote Egypt in their firſt-born : 
for his mercy endureth for ever, 
*Exo. 12. 11x * And brought out Ifrael from among them: for 
5. & 13. his mercy endurerth tor ever. 
"6G 12 * Witn a ſtrong hand, and with a ſtretched out 
arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
12 * To him which divided the Red ſea into parts: 
— for his mercy exdureth for ever. ; 
1413" 14 And made Ifrael to paſs through the midit of itFf: 
for his mercy endureth tor ever. 
f To wit, without fear or danger, by comparing this with the' 


Ol next verſe. : ; | 
*Ex:4:28, 15 * But + overthrew Pharaoh and his hoſt in the 


=p Red-ſea : for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Faig:22, , 16 * To him which led his peopie through the wil- 
"""derneſs g: for his mercy endureth forever. | 
g Through that vaſt howling Wilderneſs, where there was nei- 
ther way nor proviſion ; through which none bur the Almighty 
God could have ſafely condufted them. _ 
17 * To himwhich ſmore great kings: 
endureth for ever. . 
18 * And ſlew famous kings : for his mercy endureth 
for ever. 
11, 19 * Sthon king of the Amorites 
"Num. 21. ygth for ever. : 
: 20. * And Og the king of Baſhgn : for his mercy ew 
* dureth for ever. | . : 

21 * And gave their land for an heritage : for his 

mercy endureth for ever. : 
22 Even an heritage unto Iſrael his 
mercy endureth for ever. 

h He ſpeaks of all that people as of one man, becauſe they were 
united together in one b»dy in the worſhip of one and the ſame 
God, Thus God calleth them all his firfi-born, Exod. 4. 22. 

23 Who remembred us in our low eſtate : for his 
mercy endureth for ever. | 

24 And hathredeemed us from our enemies : for his 
mercy endureth for ever. 


#PCto6:; r. 
& 07 i» 
& 118. x. 
gm *;Chr; 16: 
X95, 41. 
Tſeut :10; 
17. 


*Gen, 1:1. 


*Gen: 1:9. 


Jer: 10: 12. 

F (en 21:14 
Jn 

bod, 


*Ex:12: 2. 


FEx:14:21, 


for his mercy 


for his mercy endu- 


3. 
"Num.25 
Þ 

Joſ 12;7, 


ſervant h: for his 


9g. for delivering the I(- 
raelites out of Egypt, and bringing them to the promiſed land, 


* Give thanks unto the LORD, forhe is good : * 


40 daughter of babylon t who art to be þ deſtroy- 


Here they were either by the appointment of their Lords for the 
making or repairing of the works beſide the River : or by choice, 
retiring themſelves thither from the noiſe and obſervation of their 
enemies, as they had opportunity, that they might disburden their 
oppreſſed minds before tie Lord 6b The uſual poſture of mourn« 
ErS, Ezra 9. 4, &c, Job 2. 12. Iſa. 47.1, 5. c Either, 1. our 
tormer enjoyments in Zion, which greatly aggravared their preſent 
—; Lamen:, 1. 7, Or, 2, Zions pretent deſolations and pollu- 
ions. 
2 We hanged our harps 4 upon the willows e, inthe 
midſt thereof. 
2 Theſe are not without great probability ſuppoſed to be the 
words of ſome holy Levices, who had been accuſtomed to muſick, 
both vocaland inſtrumental, in the ſervice of the Temple. Harps 
are here put by a Synecdoche for all Inſtruments of Mulick. Ir is 
turther to be obſerved, That although the harp was uſed by the 
Grecians in mourning, yet it was uſed by the Hebrews in rejoi- 
cing, as 1s manifeſt from Gen. 31. 27. 2 Chron. 29. 27, 28 Pſal, 
43-4 &c. This paſſage is ro be underſtood either, 1. figuratively, 
iignifying only that they abandoned all ſigns and means of com- 
ort : or rather,. 2. properly, as the foll-wing Songs are, which 
the Babylonians required them to ſing to their Harps And theſe 
Harps they might either, 1. bring from Jer:ſalem, which they 
might deſire to do to preſerve thoſe ſacred utenii!s, and their ene. 
mies might either permit or command-them to do for their own 
delight : Or, 2. procure in Babylon, that they mighr ſ-metimes ſo. . 
lace themſelves with the praftice of ſome of the Temple-muſict, 
which they defired and intended to do; but when they came ro 
the tryal, they were not able to do it, and*herefore laid them oy. 
e which commonly grow upon ghe Banks of Rivers as they cid 
by Euphrates in ſuch plenty, that from thence it is called 5h. Brook * 
of willows, fa. 15. 7. 
3 For there they that carried 'us away captive, re- 
quired of usF aſong; andthey that F * waſted us, requi- f Heb: 
red of us mirth, ſaying, Sing us one of the ſongs of Zion f. 294 of 
f Such Songs as you uſed to ſing in the Temple at Sior. Which 1 __ 
they required either out of curioſity, to delight their ears, or ra- THer: la: 
ther by way of ſcoffing and inſultation over them and their Temple {97 **4p 
and Religion. x Pf: 79. x 
; 4 How ſhall we fing che LORD'sſong g in at ſtrange ro 
and hb? | 2 
. . er, 
Z Thoſe Songs which were appointed by God, and to be ſung Y 
only to his honour and in his ſervice. þ When we are baniſhed 
from our own Temple and Land, and amongſt thoſe who are ftran- 
gers andenemies to God and to his Worthip ? So we ſhould pro- 
{titute and profane Gods Ordinances. And this Anſwer they ei- 
ther expreſſed to their enemies, or kept in their own breaſts when 
they refuſed to comply with their deſire. 


5 If T forget thee z, O Jeruſalem, lee my right hand 
& forget her cunning I. 


7 If Ido not retain a deep and ſorrowful ſenſe of thy Ruineand 
miſery, or if Tindulge my teifin mirth and jollity, as if I had for- 
gotten thee, &k The chief Inſtrument of playing upon muſical In- 
ſtruments.and- of other a&@ions. 1 7. e. Loſe irs Skill of playing. 
In the hebrew it is only , forger, without exprefling what, to in- 
timat the extent and generality of this wiſh, Ler it forget or be 
be diſenabled not only for playing, but for every ation in which it 
was formerly uſed. 

6 IfI do not remember thee m, let my tongue cleave 
to the roof of my mouth » ; if I prefer not Jeruſalem 
above + my chief joy 0. 

» With afection and ſympathy, ſo as to damp my joys. n- Be 
made uncapable of ſinging or ſpeaking or moving» as itis in ſome 
diſeaſes. Compare Job 29s 10. Pfal. 22.16. o If 1do not value and 
defire Jerujalems proſperity more than all other delights, and conſe- 
quently if Feruſalems miſery doth not fo deeply affe& me asto hin= 
der my delight in all other things. : n | 
7 Remember, O LORD, p * the children of Edom Jer:49: 7. 
q, in the day r of Jeruſalem ; who faid 5, + Raſe ir,rafe tags "y 
ir, even to the foundation thereof. Obad: is, 
Þ Soas to puniſh them. q Our conſtant and inveterate enemies, &c. 

who had no regard either to conſanguinity or humanity » In the + Hebs 
rime of its calamity or deltruQtion, which is oft called a day, as make bare. 
ob. 18. 20. Pſal. 37.13. Extk. 30. 9. Hy. 11. 11. Obad.v. 12. tHeb: was 
5 To the Babylonians, whom they afliſted and provoked againſt F:- Sed. 
-uſalem : of which ſee Lam. 4 11. Exzek. 25. 12, Obad. v: 11, 129 [|Heb: that 
recompen= = 
ſeth unto 
thee thy 


| 


+ Heb: ths 
head of my 
Jy. 


25 * Who giveth food to all fleſh ;: for his mercy en- - 


FE Jureth for ever. | 
i Either to all mankind, or to all living creatures. For which | 
God deſerves great praiſes, which the Pialoruſt by his example tea- 
cheth us to render to God for them, becauſe rhote who axe 
concerned, either cannot or do nor perform this duty, 


*P: 16 
27. & 


78 lWig. 


Feke people thereof. « Who art by Gods Righteous and irrevccable 


moſt Sentence devoted to certain deſtryction. # As being Gods irftru- 


:d#: happy ſpall be be «|| that * rewardeth thee, as thou 


haſt ſerved us y. 
+ By which he underſtands the City and Empire of Bbylon, and 


deed which 
thou aiaſt to 


®* Jer* 50: 
5 E mcnt Makes” p 


al. CXXXVIIL. PSA 

| ment to vindicat his honour, andexecute his juſt judgments, and 
| falfil his counſel and word, which Cyrus was to his own great glo- 
ry and advantage, as appears both from ſacred and profanc Hiſtory. 
'F 3 That ſhall uſe thee with equal cruelty. | 
| o Happy fhall he be that taketh and * daſheth thy little 


be.; ones againſt + the ſtones z. 

Ie .z As - didft uſe our little ones. So this was but a juſt retalia« 

bck. cion foretold here, as alſo I/a. 13, -6. _ 

EE S A IL. CXXXVII. 

E- | The ARGUMENT. 

, [ \Frisis a Pſalm of thankſgiving to God for thoſe great dehive- 
rances which he had granted to David from Sul and other 

By the remembrance whereof David ,cncourageth himſclft 

his future difhculties. 

| A:Pfalm of David, 

David praiſeth God for his Goodneſs, and rruth ſhewed to hm, and foretel- 

| leth, that the Kings of the Earth ſhall alſo praiſe him, 1: 6. and pro- 

feſſerh the fruit of his truſting in God in the midi of troubles, 7, 8. 

* PC TA | Will praiſe chee wich my whole heart : * before the 

46. gods 4 will I ſing praiſe unto thee. 

Gr, before @ Either, 1. before the Angels, who were repreſented by the 

gels, Cherubims upon the Ark, who are called Gods, Pſal. 8. 6. and 97 

| - 7. Compare with Hb. 8. 6. and 2. 7. who alſo are preſent in the 

congregations of Gods people, 1 Coy. t1. ro. Or rather, 2. before 

Kings and Princes, by comparing this with v. 4. Al Kings ( provo- 

ked by my example ) ſbal praiſe thee; and with Pſal, 119. 46. I wil 

ſpeak of thy tcftimomes before kings, And theſe are moſt commonly 

called Gods in Scripture, as Exod. 21. 6. and 22; 9, 28. compare 

with Deut: 19917. Beſides,Dav.d mentions this as ſomething ſingular 

and extraordinary, and deſigned by him, whereas the doing of this 

before the Angels, is common to all, and is unavoidably necella- 


enemies. 


| 
t to truſt in God in all 
: 7 


ww: -- | ; 
X 2 I will worſhip towards thy holy temple þ, and praiſe 


for thou haſt magnified thy word above all thy Name c. 
þ Wherethe Ark was. He faith towards it, becauſe he was not 
permitted to enter into it, c For thou haſt glorified thy word or 
promiſe or thy faichfulneſs in fulfilling thy promiſes unto me more 
than any other of thy glorious perfections by which thou art known. 
Not that one of Gods Attributes is really 2nd in it {elf more great 
or glorious than another, or can be made fo, but becauſe one may 
be more celebrated and admired by men than another, as here Gods 
gracious promiſe made ro David,and the wonderful accompliſhment 
thereof in ſpight of all thoſe difficulties which ſtood in rhe way, 
and which ſeemed to men to be inſuperable, was at this time more 
obſerved and admired than any other of his Attributes or actions. 
Bur here we muſt remember, that amongſt the reſt of the promiſes 
made to David, one was, that the Meflias ſhould come out of his 
loyns,. and that thoſe parts of the promiſed mercies which David had 
actually received, were pledges to aſſure him that he ihouJd receive 
the reſt in due time, and eſpecially that great and eminent word of 
romiſe concerning the Meſlias, which might well be {aid to be mag- 

nified aboveall Gods name. . | 
\ 2 In the day when I cried, thou anſweredſt me : and 


ftrenthenedſt me with ſtrength in my foul 4. 


red him ſd ſpeedily,not by giving him the thing which he deſired in 
that very inſtant, bur by giving him inward ſupport and patience, 
to wait Gods time, and to bear all hrs troubles cheerfully in the 
mean time, which was a ſingular mercy, and indeed greater than 
the actual donation of any temporal vleflings | 

4 All the kings of the earth e ſhall praiſe thee, O 
LORD, when they hear the words of my mouth f. 

e Either, 1. All neighbouring Kings: or, 2. the generality of 
Kings and Princes upon earth, And ſo this is a Prophecy oft the 
calling of the Gentiles. Which ſeems to be confirmed by the next 
verſe, which expreſſeth their extraordinary joy, and an eminent ad- 
vancement of Gods glory, which agrees much better to this great 
occaſion, than to that of Davias exaltation to the Throne, where- 
in the other Kings of the earth were not much concerned. f Either, 
s. thy promiſes declared unto them by me: or, 2. the Goſpel preas 
ched among them. | 

5 Yea, they ſhall fing in the ways of the LORD z ; 
for great 5 &the glory of the LORD. 

gs Or, of, or for, or becauſe of the ways of the Lord, i. e. his wonder- 
ful counſel and gracious providences towards themſelves and others. 
h Or, great ſhall be. Ar that time the worſhip and glory of God 


tended to all the parts of the world. 


6 * Though the LORD be high, yet + hath he * re- 


Pe 117. ſpe& unto the lowly z : |] but the proud he knoweth a- 
, 6. far offk. 7 y | D 


2 4 I « » # Unto ſuchasare mean and obſcure in the world; to me apoor 
HED; Ye contemprtible ſhepherd, whom he hath preferred before great Prin- 
eth. ces, and to ſuch asare little in their own eyes & But as for the 
Sam: 4-2: great men of the world, who are lifted up in pride, he looks upon 

Et: 5: 5* them as they do upon others, with ſcorn and contempr, and at a 
Ur, 438: great diſtanze, as difdaining.to admit them into his preſence. Bur 
| = the words may be, and by divers interpreters are rendred otherwiſe, 
** And he who is high or the loftyone from afar, 7. e. from his high and ho« 


- 


thy Name, for thy loving kindneſs and for thy truth :: 


d This laſtclauſe limits and ex eg the former. how God anſwe-. 


* ſhall not be confined to one ſmall land as now it is, but ſhall be ex- | 


ly place, even the higheſt Heavens where he dwells, notwithfan- - 


L M 5$. 
| » To oppoſe and reſtrain their rage, and to ſave me from them as it 
| follows. o 
8 * The LORD will perfe& hat which || concerneth þ 
me p: thy mercy, O LORD endureth for ever q : for- 


{ake not r the works of thine own hands 5. 

p Will finiſh that great work of my deliverance and advance« 
ment, which he hath undertaken and carried on hitherto. ' q Ir is 
not inconſtant ang changeable, as mens affections are, but ever. 
laſting. And this may be either a proof of the foregoing aſlerti. 
on, the Lord will perfetf, &c. or an argument to enforce the fol- 
lowing petition, therefore forſake not, &c. r Or leave no, or do not 
deſiſt from, or give over. s The work of my falvation which: is 
thus far advanced, not by any humane help, but by thine own 
extraordinary power and providence, and therefore it- is not for 
| thine honour to deſert it at laſt. This he calls works in regard of 
; the many and various parts and actions which concurred to this 


work. 
PSATL. CXXXIN, 
The ARGUMENT. 
ff Big Pſalm 1s eſteemed by the Hebrews the moſt excellent in 
the whole Book. The matter of it is noble and ſublime, 
and ſo is the ſtyle. The occafion of it ſeems to have been thoſe 
| heavy cenſures and reproaches wherewith David was loaded by his 
Enemies, who branded him for a notorious hypocrite and impoſtor, 
that pretended R_—_ only for the covering and promoting his 
own ambitious and wicked deſigns againſt his lawful King, whoſe 
life and Crown he ſought ro take away. Againſt theſe he com- 
forteth himſelf with the conſideration of Gods Omniſcience, to 
whom he appeals as the only proper Judge of the integrity of his 


Neart. ] 
To the chief Muſician, A Pſalm of David. 
David magn:'fi.th che A! ſceing Providence of God, 1 16. His great 
and tender Mercies to him before he had a being in the world, 17, 18. 
abhorr:th af c:nverſe with wicked men, 19 22, prayeth for, and 
teſtifieth his fmcerity, 23, 24. 
| LORD, thou halt ſearched me, and known me 9: 
2 Thou knoweſt my down-ſitting, and mine up- 
riting þ; thou underſtandeſt my thought c afar off d. 
a i.e known me exaQtly, as men do thoſe things which they 
diligenrly fearch out. 6 All my poſtures and motions, my A&i- 
ons and my ceffations from aQion. c All my ſecret Countels and 
Deſigns. & Before they are perfectly formed in my mind. Thou 
kyoweſt what my thoughts will be in Cxch and ſuch circumſtances, 
long before I know it, yea from all eternity. 
_ 3 Thou || compaileft my path e, and my lying down || Or, a: 
f, and art acquainted with all my ways. wwe, | 
e Thou watcheſt me on every ſide, and therefore diſcerneſt eve- 
ry ſtep which I take. It is a Metapor either from Huntk.-men 
watching all the motions and lurking places of wild beaſts, that 
they may catch them ; or from Soldiers beſieging their enemies 
in a City, and ſetting watches round about them. f Me when EF 
ly down jn my bed, where men oft contrive what they execute int 
the day time. | 
4 For there 3s not a word in my tongue, bat lo, O 
LORD thou knowelſt it altogether g. | 
£ Thou knoweſt what I ſpeak, and with what deſign and diſpo2 
irzon of mind. Or rather, as others render it, and which is more 
admirable, When there is not a word, &. Thou knoweſt what h 
intend to ſpeak either Jn prayer to thee, or in converſation with 
men, when I have not yer uttered one word of it. 
5 Thou haſt beſet me behind and before þ, and laid 
thine hand upon me 5. 
hþ With thine all-ſeeing and all-diſpoſing Providence, © Thou 
mp me, as 1t were with a-ſtrong hand, in thy ſight and under 
thy power. ck 
6 * Such knowledge js too wonderful for me ; it is E631: 
high, I catinot attein anto it k. 
k I am fo far from equalling thy knowledge, that I cannot ap< 
prehend it, in what manner thou doſt ſo perfetly know all things, 
even ſuch as are moſt ſecret and have yet no Beeing, and ſeem to 
depend upon many caſualities and uncertainties. Re 
7 * Whither ſhall I go from thy ſpirit 12 or whither * Je ** 
ſhall I flee from + thy preſence m. + Heb hy 
2 Either, 1. from the holy Ghoſt, the third Perſon in the Tri- face. 
nity : Or, 2. from thee who art a Spirit, and therefore canſt pe-'$, Gi 
netrat irito the moſt ſecret parts : or, 3. from thy mind or un« 
derſtanding, of which he 1s here ſpeaking, as this word ſeems to 
be taken, 1/a. 40. 13. compared with Rom. 1T. 34. for what there 
is called #heSpirit of the Lord, is here called the mind of the Lord. And 
as the Spirit of God is oft uſed in Scripture for its gifts and graces, ſo 
the Spirit of God in this place may be pur for that knowledge which 
is an aftribute or action of God. » A man can go to no place 
which is out of thy ſight. Y 
8 *IfI aſcend up into heaven, thou art there 3 if *I « gs, 
' make my bed inhell », behold thou art there. 2, 4 
| 2 IfI ſhould or could repoſe arid hide my ſelf in the, grave, or "Pc,rs.H 
in the loweſt parts ofthe earth, which are at the fartheſt diſtance : 
from Heaven. NT 
| 9 If Ltake the wings of the morning, and dwell inthg 
uttermoſt parts of the tea o 2 
o If I ſhould flee as twiftly from thy prefence as the Morning 


Pf: 59: 2: 
hil. x. 6. 
(|Or,for meg 


Pla. CkXxIF, Þ 


Oo, T— EEE "= — 


ding that diſtance ) dorhknow them, or wi!! 9wne them. nf hee 1 
the repetition of the former Sentence, Sy irvery wry "0 3 oat ' light doth, which in an inſtang ſcartereth ir ſelf from Eaſt to Welt: , 
And this ſeems beſt to ſuit'as with the foregoing, ſo alſo with the ' for the Sex being the Weſtern border of Canaan, is oft put for the 
following words, and thus all'will be underſtood of one and the fame | Veſt in Scripture. And wings are poetically aſcribedto the Mor- 
ſort of. p=r{ons, ning or morning light here, as they are elſewhere to the Sun, as 

7 Thougl walk in the midſt of trouble 7, thou wilt Hong > How mw I _— wa It CT IBT 3 008 09-0: 
revive mem: thou ſhalt ſtretch forth thine hand » againſt ; Mo a Ch 


1 : 10 Even there ſhall thy hand lead me: and thy right 

the wrath of mine enemies o, and thy righc hand ſhall hand ſhall hold me 5 - ihe | , y 11g 

ſave me. FE | ' þ I could neither/ go thither without thy conduR, nor ſubfiſt 
F i.e. Be' encompaſſed with dangers. 


l & » Thou wilt cheer my there without thy pow ; s Fogg rc : 
Spirit and- preſerve my lite, » Put forth thy MS Powe, 1ere with y powerful ſupport, and much leſs could I go _ 


QXIX, 


£57: 22 
l. 1.6 
r,for meg 


Ir, 24 
eff, 


1:3 


T pa. CXXXIX. 


Þ Heb.4:13 


IC 


P. $8 A 


of thy ſight ; for a man may ſee many things which are out of his 
ower. 
11 [ItT fay, ſurely the darkneſs ſhall cover me ; even 


the night ſhall be light q about me. 
q Shall be as clear and manifeſt ro God as the light itſelf. 
Job 26.6. 12 Yea, * the darknels + hideth not from thee ; but 
& 34- 22: the night ſhineth 7 as the day: + the darkneſs and the 


; light are both alike to thee 5. | 
r Or, enlightneth, as this word is uſed, Pſal. 19.9. Prov. 29. 13, 
#Heb.as iS &c. diſcovereth me and all mine aftions. s This is repeated ſo oft 
'he dark © reprove and confute the ridiculous conceits of many ungodly 
wh, ſo is Men, who flatter themſclves with hopes of ſecrecy and impunity 

| for thoſe fins which they commur in the dark, See 1/a. 23. 15, 
13 For thou hatt poſſeſſed : my reins « : thou haſt 


covered me xin my mothers womb. 
£ Or, thou doit poſſeſs, thou dwelleſt in them, thou art the owner 
and governour of them, and thercfore muſt nceds know them. 
Or, thou hat formed, as fome of the Ancients and others render ir. 
u The moſt inward and hidden part of the body, ſuppoſed alſo to 
be the ſeat of mens luſts and paſſions. » Either, 1. with that co- 
vering called the afrer-birch, wherein the infant is wrapped and 
preſerved in the womb by the wonderful care of Divine Provi- 
dence. Or, 2. with skin and fleſh, as 1t is expreſſed, Job 10. r1. 
14 I will praiſe thee, for T Iam fearfully and won- 
derfully madey z marvellous are thy works z, and that 


my ſoul knoweth F right well #. 


tHeb dar 


neth u07. 


the light. 


bings [a1 . 
pgs 7 Thy infinite power and wiſdom manifeſted in the rare and curi- | {= [ hate chem with perfe& hatred z I count them 
* drful, ous ftrufture of mans body, doth fill me with wonder and afto- mine enemies x, 
+ Heb. niſhment, and with the dread of thy Majeſty. z Both in the lefler x Iam no leſs grieved with their enmity againſt thee than if 
 peathy. wennd. _—_ o_ in the greater. INS well gps both by thy | they directed it againſt my ſelf. *Job 31:6 
word, and by the contemplation and ſtudy ef rhy works, to which 22 * Search me > w_ 
I have muchadditted my ſelf, that they are wonderful, although | 1 me d know 4 - EG and know my heart: ery PlaL26: 2. 
I do not ſo accuratly underſtand all the particulars of them as I , om ew + | 
bonds op rap ; , mrs whetherI do nor ſpeak this from imy very heart, do thou 
46 is. 1h p. My ſubſtance þ wasnot hid Grow cha e, when 1 J wy ge who art the ſearcher of hearts, and deal with me according- fHeb: way 
s, 10. was madein ſecret c; andcurioully wrought din the le-| 24 And ſee if there be any + wicked way in me £, and part, or, 


Eccl.11.5. weſt parts of the earth e. 

| Or, , b Or, My bone, as the LXX and others render the word. And 

_ OT bone may be here taken colleCively for bones, as is uſual in ſuch 

"_ words, or for the whole Fabrick ot the Bones. Aad the bones may 
be very fitly mentioned here, becauſe they are inward and inviſible, 
as being covered with skin and fleſh and tinews, Or, the bones may 
be put 1ſynecdochically for the whole body, as being the moſt tub- 
ſtantial part of it, as they are Pjal. 35. 10. c In the dark vault of 
my mothers womb. & Heb. embroidered, exquiſitly compoſed of 
Bones and Muſcles and Sinews and Veins and Arteries and other 
parts, all framed with ſuch wonderful Skill, that even the Heathens 
upon the contemplation of all the parts of mans body, and how 
excellently they were framed both for beauty and uſe, have broken 
forth into pangs of admiration andadoration of the Creator of man, 
as Galen particularly did. e Or, asit were in rhe lowes? part of the earth. 
So there is only an Ellipfis of the note of fimilicude, which is ve- 
ry frequent in Scripture, as hath been often ſaid and proved. Ina 
place, as ſecret and remote from humane eyes, as the loweſt parts 
of the earth are, to wit, in my mothers womb. And fo what was 
ſaid in the former clauſe, is repeated in this in other words. 


IHcb:azof _ 16 Thins eyes did ſee my ſubſtance yer being unper- 


tm, featf, and in thy bookg | all my members b were writ- 
[0r, what ten [| which in continuance were faſhioned 3, when as yer 


uy 1 "9 there was none of them &, | 
faſhimed f When I was a meer Embryo, a rude and ſhapeleſs lump, when 
* TI was firſt conceived. g in thy counſel and providence, by which 

thou didſt contrive and effe& this great work and all the parrs 
of it, according to that model which thou hadſt appointed. This 
is a Metaphor taken from workmen ; who when they are to make 
ſome curious ſtructure, they firſt draw a rude draught or deline- 
ation of it, by which they govern themſelves in the buiding of it. 
þ All the ſeveral parts of my ſubſtance. # Which in due time, 
and by degrees, were formed into Bones, fleſhy Sinews, 8c. Or,as 
it isin the margent, what days and the days in which they were or 
ſhould be faſhioned, by what ſteps, in what order and. time each part 
of the body ſhould receive its proper form. Thisalſo was written 
or appointed by Gods k Heb. an not one of them, underſtand either 
yet was, as it is in our Tranſlation ; or, was lacking, to wit, in thy 
book. All my parts without exception were written by thee. But 
then theſe words are not to be joined with thoſe immedaatly fore- 
going, but with the former, and the words are £0 be read thus, i» 
thy book all my members were writt:u ( which in continuance were faſhi- 
oned ) when as yet, &C. | 

17 * How precious alſo are thy thoughts / unto me, 
O God! how great is the ſumm of them »s ? 

I Thy is taken either, 1. paſſively, my thoughts of thee: or rather 
2. actively, , thy thoughts, counſels or contriveances on my b<halts 
which are admirable and amiable in mine eyes. Thou didfſt not on- 
ly fornx me at firſt, but ever ſince my conception ang birth thy 
thoughts have been employed for men preſerving aid providing 
for me and bleſling of me. m Thy gracious deſigns and providen- 
ces towards me are numberleſs, as it follows. : 

18 If I ſhould count them, they aremore in number 
than the ſand : when I awake, I am ſtill with thee ». 

n To wit, by my thoughts and meditations. Thy wonderful 
counſels and works on my behalf come conſtantly into my mind, 
not only in the day time, but even in the night ſeaſon, which is 
commonly devoted to reſt and ſleep, whenſoever I awake eicher in 
the night orin the morning : Thete are my laſt thoughts when E 
ly down, and my firſt when I ciſe. 

19 Surely thou wilt ſlay the wicked o, O Gvd : de- 


I[.zo. 5. 


| and ſociety. I will not partake with you in your ſins, left Tſhould 


L M£& Plal. CXE 


alſo partake of your plagues. ' q Heb. ye men of blood, either, 1. 
P>flively, deſerving Ceath, or guilty of tlocd or of death, as the phraſe 
15, Numb. 35. 27, 31. Mat. 26. £6. Orrather, 2. Actively, blood- 
thirſty, or ſhedders of blood, as this phraſe is generally taken, 
as 2 Sam, 16. 8, Pſal. 26. 9. & 55. 24. & 59. 3. Having called 
them wicked men in general, he now gives a particular account of 
their wickednels, they were unjuſt and cruel rowards men, and - 
iv Profane and impious towards God, as he tells us in the next 
verſe. | | 
20 For they + ſpeak againſt thee wickedly r, and t Heb: 
thine enemies take thy Name in vain s. Jprak of 
r By profane ſcoffs, and profeſſed denial or contempt of thine **** 9,94 
Omniicience and Providence. Or, rhey ſpeak of thee in or unto wickea.. **4995, Ori 
eſs, they make uſe of Religion to cover or further their wicked 72 . 944 
deſigns. Bur our tranſlation is more favoured dy the Contexr keaneſs, 
which ſpeaks of Gods open and profeſſed enemies. s Or, AcCone 
ding to the order of the Hebrew words, and take thy Name :n vain 
and are thine enemies, or haters of thee, as it follows, v. 20, Theſe | 
words, thy Name, are underſtood here, -as alſo, 1/s. 3. 7. out of 
| 
| 


\ 
l 
| 


Exod. 20. 7. where they are expreſſed. They abuſe tby bleſſ; 
Name with helliſh oaths and perjurics and Wi warty Sees 


21 Donor lhate them, O LORD, that hate thee # ? 


and am I not grieved withthoſe that riſe upagainſt thee . 

: I appeal rothee the omnipreſent and omaiſcient God, whether 
I do nor perfectly hate them fo far as they are enemies to God and 
goodneſs. « In open Hoſtiliry and Rebellion againſt thine Authority. 


* lead me in the way everlaſting a. 

_ & Heb. Way of crouble or grief, any courſe of life which is grievous 
either, 1. to my ſelf, as all fin is to the ſinner ſooner or later : or: 
2. to others; as I am accuſed of cauſing much trouble and de- 
ligning miſchief to the King and Kingdom. # In the right and 
good way, whichis laſting, and leads to everlaſting life, whereas 
the way of wickedneſs ro which this is oppoied, will periſh, as is 
ſaid P/al. 1. 6. and bring men into utter deitruction, Or, as others 
render it, in the old way, which is the goed way, as it is called Fer. 6; 
16. in the way of Righteouſneſs and Holineſs, which may well be 
Called the old way, becauſe it was from the beginning of the world 
written in mans heart, whereas wickedneſs isof a later date, Poſlibly 
it may be rendred, inthy way (the ellipſis of the pronoun being 
very frequent, as hath been noted and proved betore : or, in the 
way, to wit, the way of God, which is oft called emphatically the 
way, as Pſal. 25. 8. & 119.1. Prov. 23. 19. & 29. 27. and which 
is ſufficiently underſtood ſrom its oppoſition to the wicked way 
in the former clauſe) for ever, or, as long as I live, as this He. 
brew word Ola without any prefixto it is uſed, 2 Sam. 27. 12. Job 


41. 4+ Pſal, 21, 4, & 45. 7. andelſewhere. But this with ſubmiſfo 


ſton. 
3 AiL. CXE 
The ARGUMENT. 
Th Pſalm was compoſed by David upon occaſion of thoſe 
ſlanderous and reproachful ſpeeches and treacherous deal- 
lings which David had from his enenues in Subs time, of which we 
have an account in the Hiſtory. 
to the chief Mufician, a Pſalm of David. 

The Pſalmift prayeth for deliverance and ſafety from wicked men, 1——», 
for juogment upon them, 8 I 1» and comforreth himſelf with an aſ« 
ſurance of God's righteouſneſs. 12. 13. 

JDEliver me, O LORD, from the evil man «: 

ſerve me from the + violent man. 

# Either Saul or Doeg or ſome other malicious enemy, or rather 
enemies : the word max being taken collectively for men, as appears 
from the next verſe, where he ſpeaks of this man in the plural 
number. 

2 Which imagines miſchiefs in their heart : continu= 


ally are they gathered together for war 5. 

b To execute thoſe bloody enterpriſes which they had deviſed 
in the firſt clauſe of this verſe. 

2 They have ſharpened their tongues c like a ſerpent 
4; * adders poiſonis under thetr lips. *Pf: 58: 4. 

c Their malicious hearts ſtirred up their tongues to utter vile Rom;3:13 
{landers againſt me. d Either whetting their Tongues as Serpents 
are ſaid to whet theirs when they are about tobite :/ or rather, us 
ling words as ſharp and piercing as the ſting of a Serpenr. 

4 Keep me, O LORD from the hands of the wic- 

ked ; preſerve me from the violent man, who have pur- 

poſed e to overthrow my goings f. 

e Whoſe deſign and full Reſolution it is, if thoudoſt not prevent 

it. f Or, my feet or jo.rfeps, «ce. tothrow medown to the gronnd, 

to defear all my hopes and counſels, and bring me to ruine. 

5 * The proud g have hid a fnare for me, and cords; *pr. 45:7. 
they have Goend a net by the way tfide 4: they have & 57:6. 
ſet grins for me. Selah. & 191: 9. 

z My inſolent enemies who deſpiſe me for my meanneſs, and get AG 
exalt chemſelves againſt thee. þ fa which I uſed ro walk. þ oy? : 
6 1 faid unto the TORD, thou «re my God : hear 


T Pſ: 5:8 
& 143: 107 


PICG- +Heb:zwaw 
of yiolencere 


part from ms therefore p, ye bloody men 4. 

e And as thou haſt precious and gracious thoughts rowards me and 
all that love and fear thee, ſo thou hait orher kinds of thoughts and 
purpoſes towards wicked men, fuch as thou knoweſt mine enemies 
to be, even to deſtroy them utterly. p Irenguace your tricndthip | 


- * " 


the voice of my Supplications, O LORD. 
- O God the LORD, the ſtrength of my ſalvation; 
thou haſt covered my head # in the day of barrel. 


; With thy powerful protetion as with a helmet or ſhield. 
PR $ Gran 


4 id 


In 


i 8 Grant not, O LORD, the deſires of the wicked ; 
i Or, 7 £ ther aoc his wicked device &,|| * leſt they exalr them- 


27N u4% DE. 
hem FE DS elves 1. - Selah. 
*D-ut:32: £4 Which is to deſtroy me. 7 Not only againſt me, but againſt 
27. thee alſo, as if by their power and policy they kad fruſtrated thy 
defign and promiſe made to me, 
9 As for th: head mof thoſe that compaſs me about, 


* letthe miſchief of their own lipscover them », 

m Or, heads, the ſingular number pur for the plural, as 1s fre- 
quent. By which he underſtands either, 1. their politick heads, 
their chiefs or ring-leaders, who were moſt malicious, and by whom 
all the reſt were ſupported and ſtirred up : Or, 2. their proper and 
natural heads, as this word is uſed v. 7. and this covering of their 
heads here is oppoſed to rhat covering -of Davias head there. » Ler 
the miſchief which by their Calummes they delign agaialt me, fall 
upon themſiclves. 

10 * Letburning coals o fall upon them, let them be 
caſt into the fire:into deeppits, thar they rife notupagainp. 

o Divine vengeance, which is compared to coals cf fire, as Pſa/. 
18. 12. and elſewhere. p Either to my danger, or their own com- 
+ Heb: # fort. ; . : 
man of 11Letnot + || an evilſpeaker q be eſtabliſhed in the earth: 
gongue. eyil yr ſhall hunc the viotent man to overthrow him. 

'F, 7 &*. 4 Such as flander me and other innocent perſons, to cxa/perate 
evil ſpea- Princes againſt us. ” Either the evil of punithmenr, or. which 
ker, & wic- 
head man of 
eviolence be 


eftabliſhed 


© Pf: 7:16. 
& 94. 23. 
Prov: 12. 
3:& 18: 7. 


*Pſ: x1; 6. 


which ſhall recoil upon themſelves. EE. A 
12 I] know $5 that the LORD will maintainthe cy 


-- :h - Of the afflicted, ard the right of the poor. 
earth: let 5 Both by Gods word which hath promiſed it, and by my own 
him be hun- experience of it in the courſe of Gods providence. 
red ro his 13. Surely the righteous ſhall give thanks unto thy 
overthrow. Names t, the upright (hall dwell in thy preſence «. 

£ Shall have occaſion to praiſe thee for their deliverance. u 
ſhall conſtantly enjoy thy gracious 'and powerful preſence and af- 


fiſtancc. | 
P S AJL. - CXLE 
The ARGUMENT, 
IT His Palm alſo'muſt be referred to the time of Davids perſe- 
| cution by Saul. Ir is an humble prayer that God would de- 
liver him: from the rage and maliceof his enemies, and from thoſe 
fins to which he might be inclined or provoked upon that occa- 


lion. | ; 
A Pſalm of David. 
that he might be h-ard and comforted, 1——-?, that his 


David prayerth 
vid fra) 6. and his lifeſafe from the ſnares of his 


ſerwice might be ſincere, 3 
Adwverſaries, 7 19, | 
OR D, I cry unto thee, make haſte unto me, 


give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee. 


THeb: 4:- 
refed. | - fag: 
cenſe b ;" and the lifring up of my hands c as the evening 
facrifice 4d. | 

s Heb. Be dircf#ed tothy facee Let it not be loſt, but let it come 
unto thee and find audience. 6 Owned and accepted by tice uo ls 
then the Incenſe, which by thy command, Exod. 30. 7, &Cc. is of- 
fered upon thine Altar, from which I am now banifl.ed, and lo vii- 
enabled to offer ir there, and thereforeI truſt thou will accepr my 
prayer in ſtead of ir. ec My prayer made with hands lifred up, which 
was the uſual geſtare. See Joo 11. 13. Pſal. 633 5. & 88. io, &C. 
4 Which was offered every evening, Exod. 29. 39, &c. Whiclt he 
mentions either, 1. by way of oppolition to the Incente which was 

-offered in the morning : or, 2. Synecdochically, fo as to include 
[the morning-facrifice and all the Sacrifices of the day, of which this 
was the clole; ſuck Synecdoches being moſt frequent, as hath been 
already obſerved: Or, 3. becauſe the evening ſacrifice was more 
ſolemn than the morning, and was atcended with more company 
and more prayers, whence the in! hour, which was the time of 
this Sacrifice, 1s called the hour of Prayer, Acts 3. 1. 

2 Seta watch, O LORD, bctore my mouth e ; keep 
the door of my lips f. 

e ThatI may notthrough mine own infirmity, and the great pro» 
vocations of mine enemies, break forth into any unadviſcd 1peeches, 
or any expreliioens of imparience or diſtruſt or envy or malice, &c. 
f My lips which are theedoor ofmy mouth whence words come forth, 

4 Incline not 2 my heart to any evil thing, to pra- 
&iſe wicked works with men that work iniquity ;; and 


let me not eat of their dainties &. 

g Suffer it not to be inclined or laid aſide, either by mv own er- 
Le 4: rors or Juſts, or by the temptations of the World or of the De- 
: vil, Thus God is frequently ſaid to harden mens hearts, not poli- 
tively, for he can do no evil, nor tempt any man to it, Jam. 1.13. 


comes to the ſame thing, the evil of fin, their -own wickedncis, 


2 Let my prayer be # ſet forth before tace « as in- | 


LM 


mine enemies, any of them are made to believe that Tam guilty of 
evil deſigns againſt Saul, or of any other wickedneſs, that they would 
freely adimonith and reprove me for it. And tucir Reproofs ſhall 
pleaſe me berter than the dainties of the wicked laſt mentioned 
v. 4. I thall be fo far from being offended withir as an a& ofen.« 
miry or 11] will, as they may ſuſpect, that I ſhall eſteem it an act 
and lign of true friendſhip. n= Or, it ſhall be as 2h oil of the head, 
25 It 1s in the Hebrew, 2. e. which is poured upon the head, as the 
manner was 1n great Feaſts and Solemnities. 9 not hurt or diſturb 
ic, bur on the contrary, ſhall heal and greatly refreth and delight 
it, which is here underſtood by a known figure called Mezoſis, where. 
by more 1sintended thaa 15 expretled, as Prov. £7. 21. and oftelſe. 
where. p Either, 1. in the calamities of thofe Righteous perſons 
who reproved and.cenfured h:m. So this is an evidence of what 
he laſt 1aid, that he ſhould take their reproofs for a kindneſs, becauſe 
waen th y came into ſuch calamiries as thoſe wherein-he was in- 
volved, as all Righteous men muſt expect ſufferings at one time or 
othcr, he would not inſult over them nor cenſure them, bur pity 
them and pray for them; Or, 2. ia the calamities of his enemies 
ot which he 1peaks in the next words. And fo this may be added 
as a Realon why he did 1o freely offer himiclf totheRighreous to be 
repioved by them, if he or his cauſe were ſo bad as his Enemies 
made them, becauſe he was well aſlured that he was ſincere and his 
cauſe good, and that God would bring him our of all his Calamities 
and bring his Enemies into ſuch Calamities, that they ſhould need, 
and delirc his prayers, which alſo he would willingly grant to them ; 
and then all good men would be fully ſatisfied of the juſtice of his 
perſvn and cauſe. | 
6 When their judges q are overthrownr in ſtony pla- 
ces s, they ſhall hear my words, for they are ſweet 7. 
qTFhe Chief of mine Enemies,their Governours Civil and Military. 
,* Or, ſha4ve overthrown, or caſt down headlong by thine exempla. 
| Fy vengeance, Or, as others, were l:ft free, unhurt by me, whenit 
| Was 1 my power ro deſtroy them : of which ſee 1 Sam. 24. & 26. 
{tO which Hiſtories this place is by divers learned Interpreters 
thought to allude. And then by their Tudges he means Saul, al. 
though he thought n*t fit diſtinctly to mention him, but only to 
int:mat himin an obſcure and general way. s Heb: in the hands 
or by the ſides of he Rock, Which may relate either, 1. to the 
rocky nature ot thoſe places in which Saul fell into David's hands, 
Sce 1 Sam. 24. 2. or, 2. to the ancient manner of puniſhing Male= 
factors, which was by throwing them down from the tops of Rocks; 
of which ſee 2 Chron. 25. 12. or, 3. to agravate their overthrow ; 
for falls in ſtony places are as moſt ealie and frequent, ſo alſo moſt 
miſchicv.-us. s Then they, either the Judges, who will be wiſe 
too Jate ; or the people ſpared by my favour, when others were 
overthrown and warned by that fearfal example, will hear my words, 
7. e heaiken to my Counſels and Offers which now they deſpiſe, 
and then they, my words, will be ſweet and acceptable to them, 
which now they Teje&. Others, thus, then they did hear my words, 
that they were ſweet, Then they acknowledged that my words and 
carriage towards Saul were tull of mecknels and gentleneſs, and 
that 1 was nor ſo falſe and malicious, as they had repreſented me ta 
be 
7 Our bones « areſcattered at the graves mouth », as 


wizen one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth y. 

# My bones and tie bones of my Friends and Followers. Our 
Skin and Flcth is in a manner conſumed, and there is nothing left 
of us buta company of dead and dry bones. Whereby he inti- 
mats that their condition was deſperate. Compare Ezek. 37: 11. x 
Either, 1. Titerally and properly. So barbarouſly cruel were our 
cnemies, that they not only killed us, but left our Carkafſes un-« 
buried, by which means our Feſh and Sinews, ©. were conſumed 
Or torn 1n Pieces by wild beaſts, and our bones diſperſed upon the 
face of the Earth our common grave: or, if any of my followers 
were dead and burzed, they pulled their bones out of the grave, 
and ſcattered them about : or rather, 2. Metaphorically. So the 
ſenſe is, our caſe is almoſt as hopeleſs, as of thoſe who are dead, 
and whoſe bones re ſcattered in ſeveral places. y As much nes 
gktted and deſpilcd by them as the chips which a Carpenter makes 
when lie 1s cutting wood, which he will not ſtoop - to take up. 
Or rather, as the LXX. and Chaldee and Syriack underſtand it, and. 
as it is in the Hebrew, as when one ( to wit, the Husband-man ) 
cr:tteth and cleaveth the earth os in the earth ; which he teareth with*» 
Out any merey. 

8 But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the LORD: _ 
in thee is my truſt, + leave not myſoul deſtitute z, _— 
z Or, naked, as this word ſignifies, Pſal: 137: 7. and as Aaron is 7? ul 
ſaid ro have made the people naked, Exod: 32: 25. 1. e. deprived of thy Ht Be 
favour and proteCtion. Or, as or pour out my ſoul, to wit, unto — , 
death, as this word is uſed, 1/s: 53; 12. ; 2Conſ:2 
9 Keep me from * theſnare which they have laid for ,* © 
me, and the grins of the workers of iniquity, *P(.140!5 
10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets s, whillt & 14: ; 
that I withal þ + eſcape. tHeb:147 
a Heb: Into his nets, either into Gods nets, theRelative benig put ws 


but privatively, by denying ſoftning Grace. þ Keep me not only 
f:om wicked Speeches, v. 3- but from all evil motions of my hearr, 
Which otherwiſe will draw me to many evil ſpeeches and actions. 
5 Either, 1. to joyn with them is their ſinful courſes : Or, 2. to do | 
wickedly as they do. k Let me never enjoy ot deſire worldly com-! 
forts upon ſuch terms as they do, to-wit, with Gods wrath and | 
curſe, as inſtruments of wickedneſs, and of my own eternal des 
ftruftion: My affliftions are more defireable than ſuch proſperity. 
Let none of their iweet morſels, the pleaſures or advantages which 
they. gain by their' wickedaels, tempt me to approve of, or imitate 
rightcous their ways, : 

ſoite me - *[[ Let the righteous ſmite' me 7, 3: ſhall be a kind- 


Pro! 9:8: 
1]0r,ter the 


kindly, and 439 th and let him reprove me zt frall be an: excellent 


pane: oil », which (hall not-break-my head oz for yer my pray- 
[precious oil Er alſoſhall be in their calamiries p. 


break my {t Towit, with his Tongue byReproots,as the next cauſe explains 
head, &c. it, -which are called worms, Prov. 27. 6. ASI pray unto thee rhat 
| thou wouldſt keep! me from ſinful practices, fo I beg ir of all juſt 
men; taat if I do tranſyrels, 'or if by the Acts and Slindus of 


without the Ancecedent, as is uſual inſuch caſes, where it 1s ealt- 

ly underſtood. Or, each into his own nets, to wit, the miſchiefs 

which he deſigns againſt me. b Or, together, ro wit with my fol- 

lowers : or, in {:ke mauner, as T have done formerly. But this word 

may ſeem to be more fitly joined to the foregoing clauſe, to whic| 

it is ncxt placed ia the Hebrew, and the verſe may be and isby di- 

vers both ancient and later Tranſlators, thus rendred, let rhe wicked 

fal., ( Or, he wicked ſhall fall ) mto their own nets together, altogether, 

or alike, one as well as another, Saz! himſelf not excepted, whom s 

though I dare not deſtroy, God willjudge ) whil# that I eſcaps, am 

preſerved from that common calamiry in which mine enemues ſhalt. 

periſh, Which was verified by the event. For David was ſtrange- 

ly kept out of harms way when Seu! and others of Davids enenues 

were cut off by the Philiſtins, 1 Sam. 31. [| Or, A 
P S F 58 CXLILI. Palm of 

[| Maſchil of David ; a prayer when he was inthe cave 4. David 

> Either that of Aaullam, 1 Sam: 22. or that of Engedi, 1 Sam: 14. giving 

There he m:ditated this Pſalm, which ofrerwards he more accu» K&ruction- 

rate!y compoſed and committed to writing. David 1 


Plal. CXL- 


| 


" Fa. CXLIi. 


P 3 A F MI b, i 

David, findinghil ni where in his flrairs and affiiciions, 1 
and comforteth himſelf in pruyer to God, 11. 12. 

[| Cried unto the LORD with my voice 6: with my 


voice unto the LOKD did I make my ſupplication. | 2: t 
6 Either, r. with the voice of my ſoul. Bur fo this addition | 111 the ſame. 
would be ſuperfluous, and much mrre the repetition of it,becauſe follow. 
that 1s neceſ{arily implied in the former word, 7 cried, and in the 
following, 1 make my ſuppliration. Or rather, 2. with mv corporeal 
voice, which the fervor of my ſoul forced me to uſe, when I could 
not do it w thout ſome danger, the enemy being at the mouth of 
the cave. And 1o this addition is emphatical, and therefore is 


4 crieth 


Which he mentions either, «1. as matter of terror to conſider how 
unlike God now wis unto himſelf and to his former deal:ngs : or, 
as matter of ſupport from forr1er experience, becauſe God was 
Either way it drives him to his prayers, which here 


l 7: e: What then haſt done for thy ſervants in former won 
; 


6 I ſtrerch forth my hands unto thee m: * my ſoul 
thirfteth after thee n, as a thirſty land o. Selah 

” | pray to thee fervently. Sec on Pſal. 141. 2. 
vour and help. o To wit, thirſtcth for rain. 


? 


Pal. CXLI 


"PREY 
2 After thy fa- 


$. 


+ Heb. 


from me. 


after my 


[ Or, lt * ;Þ,,e was no man h that would know me ; retuge | 
an the right : 
hand and 


- 88 8. Pſal. 1G. 8. & 109. 31. & 121. 5. h 


periſhed = 
{ Heb. no wich is here implied. 
man ſought 


*P[.16. 5» my portzon to ſupply me with all che good which I need and defire. 
6. ,z Even in this life, wherein I aoubt not to ſee Gods goodneſs, as 


| Jutely juſtifie my ſelf upon a ſevere tryal at the Tribunal of thy 


repeated. 


Saul was entied into the cave, 4 Sam: 24: 4, 


; . : 6, 7* 
2 I'* poured out cmy complaint before him: Iſhewed 


before him my trouble. 


"P, 102» cI did it fully and fervently and confidently. 
Be I When my fpirit was overwhelmed within me, then | to thee. 


thou knewelſt 4 my pathe: * in the way wherein I wal- 
ked f have they priviiy laid a ſnare for me. 

d To wit prattically, ſo as to dire& me to it. e What paths I 
ſhould chuſe whereby T might eſcape Sau/,vwhen I fled hither and 
thither 1n deſarts and mountains and w:ods; and which way I 
ſhould ger our of his hands when he and ll his men were zt the 
caves mouth, which paſſed my skill. f Wherein I uſed to walk, 
or they ſuppoſed that I would walk. 

4 ||] looked on my rigtt hand g, and beheld, but 


failed me : ||no man cared for my foul & 

g The place where the Patron or Afiſtant uſed to ſtand. See 
To wit, in Sauls Court or 
Camp: none of my former acquaintance and friends and relations. 
ji Own me, or ſhew any reſpeit or kindneſs tro me. & Or, for my 
life, to wit, to preſerve it; but they all conſpired to take it away ; 


5 Icried unto thee: O LORD, TI faid, thou art my 
refuge,and * my portion /in the land of the living m. 
1 Thou onely art both my refuge to defend me from «ll evil, and 


he ſaid Pſal: 27: 13, 
6 Attend unto my cry,for I am brovght very law : de- 
liver me from my perlecutors,forthey are ſtronger than 
I. | 
7 Bring my ſoul out of priſon », that I may praiſe thy 
Name: the righteous ſhal campaſs me about o ; for thou 


Jhalc deal bountifully with me. 
n Bring me fafe out of this cave wherein I am impriſoned, ard 
ſet me art perfe& liberty. o Shall flock to me from all parts, part- 
iy our »f curiolity to ſeeſuch a ſpeGtacle and miracle of Gods power 
and mercy; and partly trejoyze and bleis God with me and for 
me,and for all the benefits which they expect from my government. 
P SAL. GAERE 

The ARGUME NT. 
His Pſalm is much of the ſame nature with the former,and 
ſeems to have been compoſed much avout rhe ſame time & 
upon the like occaſion. This :> the laſt of thoſe which are called 
Penitential Ptalms, the former being P/al: 6. & 32. & 38. & 51. 


& 102. & 139. 

A Pſalm of David, 

The Pſalmiſt prayeth that God in faithfulneſs would hear him, and not enter 
zuto Juagment with him, 1, 2. Complaineth of his perſecurihg enemies, 
3, 4 praying alſo for ſpeedy deliverance ; Inſtrufions in Goas wayes ,and 
the deſtrutFion of his Enemies, 5 Iz. 

|=! Hear my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my fup. 

Y plications ; in thy faithfulneſs anſwer me, and 

in thy righteouſneſs -. | 
a Whereby thou art inclined and engaged to favour rigateous 

perſons and juſt cauſes —_ ; . 

2 || A:hd enter not into judgment with thy ſervant 5: 

for * in thy ſight ſhall no man living be juſtified c. 

b But when I appeal to thy righteouſnets, I do ir onely with re- 
ſpe& ro mine enemies, whoſe cauſe as well as their perſons 1s 
worſe than mine, but not in reference to thee, as if I could abfo- 


Juſtice ; for if thou ſhouJdeſt rigorouſly examine all the paſſages of 
mine heart and life, I dread the thoughts and conſequences of ir. 
c To wit, upon tzrms of ſtri& juſtice without thy indulgenceand 
infinite mercy. | 
2 For d the enemy hath perſecuted my foul e;he hath 
{ſmitten my life downrto the ground f: he hath made me 
todwellin darknefhs g,as thote that have been long dead 6. 
a This is not a reaſon of what he laſt ſaid, v. 2. bur an argumeat 
to enforce his p-tition delivered wv: 1. and repeated v: 7, &c. For 
though I am nor faultleſs, if thou ſhou!gdeſt 1ake an exact ſearch 
into me, yet mine enemies are more culpable and highly unjui?, 


and thereforeI hope for thy he p ageinſt them, from thy juſtice as | that paileth away 2. 


well as mercy e z: 6: My I fe ; tor nothing leſs will tarifie him. 
} He hath bearep me down to the ground where I lie ſtrugling tor 
life. g He hath furced the to have mine abode in dark vaulrs and 
caves. h Where I ara our of fight and memory, and in as forlorn 
and hopeleſsa condition in the eye of man, as thoic that bave lain 
long rotting 371 the "grave. LE 
5 Therefore is my ſpirit overwhelmed within me 2 : 
my heart within me is deſolate &. _ 
i See on Pſal: 61. 2. & 142, 3. k Deprived of all hope and com- 


But it 1s probable that David ſpoke with a low voice, | |.; ”y | 
and thar he mighqd»>1o without very great danger,is manifeſt from | hide nor thy face from me *, ||le{t I be like unto chem | Or. for ! 
that diſcourſe with paſſed between David and his men,even when , ©DAt go down into the pit p. | 


or a breath, as Iſs: 57. 13. which is gone in an inſtant. 7 Or, that & 62. 9 


7 Hear me ſpecdily, O LORD, my ſpirit faileth + 


* *P{. 28:7 


am become 
þ That are dead and buried, of whom there is no hope. like, &C. | 

8 Cauſe me to hear thy loving kindneſs in the mor- l 
ning q, for in thee do I truſt : cauſe me to know the l 


way wherin I jhould waik , for * T lift up my foul un- *pC, 2x, rl 
F: 7; 6: Early - as this phraſe is taken, Pal: go 14. and elſe- | 
where; ſcatonably and ſpeedily. r So as to pleaſe thee, and to ſe» | 
cure my 1-]f. | 
9 Deliver me O LORD, from mine enemies : I © flee LA | 
uUnco thee to hide me s. with rhed | 


s Without whoſe care theſe caves and rocks can give me no pro- = 
tection, * PF. 25. | 


| Wo * Teach me to dothy will z, for theu artmy God: 4,.5. &: | 
cliPir It 15 good, lead mewinto the land of uprightneſsx- 139-24 


© continue in faithful obedience to thee, notwithſtanding all 
temptations to the contrary. # Or rather, as it.is exa&tly in the 

Hebrew, and as many both antient and modern Tranſlators render 

1t,Let thy goodSpirit lead me,Leave me not to my own blind and vain 

mind or Corrupt affe&ions, neither give me up to the evil Spirit 

as thou didit Saul, but condutt me in all my ways by thy good, 7. 2. 

gracious and holy Spirit, x Or, in plain or even land or ground, 'in 

a ſtraight and {raooth path, that I may nor fumble nor fall either 

into fin or miſchief. This is oppoſed to the crooked and ragged 

ways 1n which ſinners are ſaid to walk. Sce Pſa!: 125: 5. Prove 2. 

IF. 1/a. 40+ 4- 

Ir Quicken me, O LORD, for thy names fake : 
for thy rightecuſneſs ſake bring tny ſoul our of trouble. 
12 And of thy mercy y cut of mine enemies, and de- , 
{troy all them that aflictmy ſoul: for * I am thy ſervant, = 
3 Out of tify mercy to me, whoſe life they ſeek. "8" 
ES A L CALIY. 5: 
The ARGUMENT. 
= matter of this Pſalm is partly gratulatory for mercies re« 
cerved, and partly petit'onary for further bleſſings.It ſeems 
to nave been compoſed after Savls death, and in the beginning of 

Davias reign, when he was expoſed to many perils borh from his 

own rebell:ons Subjects,and from the Philiitines and other foreign 

enemies, yet ſo that he had a good profpeC and aſfurance of a more 
compleat and eſtabliſhed felicity. | 
| A pfalm of David. 

David bleſſiug God for his mercy to him in his ways, and Government, 
Confefſerh his own, and mans nothingneſs, 1 4. prayeth that he would 
deliver him from his powerful enemies, 5 8 ard promiſeth to praiſe 
him, 9 11. The happineſs of that Kingdoms whoſe God is the 
Lord, '2 -—— I5. 

Run be the LORD + my ſtrength, * which teach- -- 

ech my hands f to war, ad my fingers to fight. + Heb: | 

'a Who haſt given me that kill in military conduE and that 7 rock, 

dexterity in the management of my weapons, which was wholly. SAINe2 

untuitable to and much above my education and former courſe of PHeb ; 
hte. \ 

2 * || My goodneſs and my fortreſs, my high tower _ "AY 

and my deliverer, my [hield; and he in whom TItwuſt:* ; 5 


who {ubdueth my peopie under me c. . 22.4 
b Or, my mercy; or, the God of my mercy, as God is called Pſal: 40» 48. . 
59. 19, 17. The name of God being eaſily underſtood from the || Or, m1 
foregoing verſe: Or, he whois exceeding good or merciful to me, Werey. 
as good as goodneſs it ſelf : the 2bſtra& being pnt for the concrete, 
as 1t is frequently in ſpeeches of God, who 1s called Wiſdom, Truth, 
Goodneſs, &c. and ſomerimes of men, as P/al: 12. 2. Prov. 19. 29. 
where faithfulneſs and uprightneſs are put. for faithful and upright 
men, © Who haſt diſpoſed my peoples hearts to receive and obey 
me as their King. | ; | 
3 * LORD, whatis man &, chat thou takeſt know- - _ 
ledge of him e ! or the ſon of man, that thou makeſt ac- * Job 7. 
cornt of hin f ? | | So 
d He 2ggravates Gods goodneſs to him expreſſed wv: 2. by the Tal, 4 
conſideration of his own meanneſs. Though I am King over my peo. **©?: ©: 22 
ple,yer alas I-am but a man,a baſe,finful, mortal and miſerable crea- 
ture,t compared with thee, leſs than nothing and.vanity. e 7. e. 
Haſt any care and kindneſs for. him, as words of knowledge com- 
monly imply in Scripture j The tame thing repeared in other words, 
4 * Man is like g to vanity þ: his daysareas a ſhadow 


3 OO. TUES _ AE E ag "1 


* Job 14, 
g In his nature and continuance in the world: h Or, to a vapor ÞC 36.8; 


declineth, as Pjal: 102. tr. & 109. 23, that groweth lets and lefs 

tillirt be quite our offighrt and lo}. 

5 * Bow thy heavens, O LORD,and come down +: * pr 13.95 
* touch the mountains, and they thall ſmoke /. * Pl. 104s 
kT» help me, before it be too late, remembring whar a frail 32. : 
and perithing creature I am. / Or, that they may joke : or,omd let 

them ſmoke, as Sinai did at thy glorious appexrance, Exon: 19. 18. 


fort. k Or, is aftoniſhed. ſn: % 
5 I * remember the days of old }, I meditate onallth 


works; I muſe on the works of thy hands, 


This is a figurative and Poerical defcripricn of Gods coming to take 
Vengeance upon his cncinics, which 15 continued 11 the next 


Vcerlc. 
6 * Caſt 


SE 3 


» 14. 


al. I 
Heb. 
nds, 


Or, 
iFory. 


Heb. 
mn kin 


kind, 


Heb. 
ble to 


26. 


& 


Pl. 33 


Or, the 


are 


mp 
b 


wes 


pb. 5.9% 
Be 1@, 


al. CXLV. 
Pal: :$; 


Heb.cur, T PO! 
u 


arburdcns 
r, leaden g, 25 others, with young : but then the foregoing word is notto 


2. & 65, 


#29 Name for ever and ever. 


+ and *® his greatneſs b is unſearchable. 


13S 4 


6 * Caſt forth lightning,and ſcatter thems ſhoot out 
thine arrows ww, and deſtroy them. 
m Thy thunderbolts which oft accompany the lightnings and 
thunder. 
7 * Send thinef hand fromabove,rsd me,and deliver 


5: meout of great waters from the hand of tran gechildren 


z Either ofthe Heathen nations which envy and hate me : or of 


the revellious Hraclires, who, though they profets themſelves to be 
the Lords people, yet in truth and for their carriage to me are like 
the barbarous Heathens. 

8 Whole mouth ſpeaketh vanity o : and their right 


hand p zs a right hand of falſhood 4. 

o Either, 1. vain brags and threatnings which ſhall come to no- 
thing : Or,2. vain and deceitful promiles or profeſſions of friend- 
ſhip. pHere mentioned either, 1. as it is uſed in ſwearing, ro 
note the ir perjury : or rather, 2. as an inſtrument of ation. q De- 
ceiving either, 1. themſelves, by being unable to do what they de- 
figned : or, 2. others, by not giving them that help which they 
promiſed ro them. 

9 1 will * ſing a new ſong uto thee r, O God: upon 


Pal: 33* a pfaltery, and an inſtrumeat of ten ſtrings will I ſing 


praiſes unto thee. | 
+ When thou haſt granted this requeſt of mine, v: 7, 8. which 
I know aſſuredly thou wilt do. 
Io It # hb: that giveth || ſalvation unto kings : who 
delivereth David his ſervant from the hurtful ſword. 
s Who are not nreſerved by their own power or prudence, 
by Gods ſpecial providence, which for the publick good 
world watcheth over them. | «7 
1x Rid me, and deliver me from the handof ſtrange 


children t, whoſe mouth ſpeaketh vanity,and their right 
hand is a right hand of falſhood. 
e And upon theſe accounts grant me the mercy which I deſired 
before, and now again do repcar. 
12 That our ſons may be as plants grown up in their 
youth z« ; that our daughters x may be as corner-{tones 


ſhed after the ſimilicude of a palace y. 
his mercy I beg nor onely for my own ſake,butfor the ſake 
of thy people, that thine and our enemies being ſubdued, and 
peace eſtabliſhed in the land, thy people may enjoy thoſe bleſſings 
which thou hoſt promiſed ro them ; and particularly, that our ſons, 
which are the ſtrength and ſafety and hopes of a nation, may be 
lke plants, flouriſhing and thriving and growing in height and 
ſtrength, as plants do zn th:ir youth, and they onely ; for when they 
grow old, they wither and decay. x Upon whom the hope of 
poſterity depends. y Strong and beautiful, and adorned with all 
the ornaments belonging to their ſex. 

13 That our garners may be full affording Þ all man- 
ner of ſtore : that our ſheep may bring forth thouſands 
and ten thouſands in our ſtreets z. 

z So as they may fill our ſtreets, being brought in hither. for 
food to the Towns and cities. Or # our folds or ſtables, as the 
Chaldece 2nd others render at; or, as the LXX and others, in their 
( or rather. iz our, as it is in the Hebrew ) outlets or outgo.ngs, i: e: 
in the fields where they abide. 

14 That our oxen may be Þ ſtrong to labour a: hat 
#bere be no breaking in b, nor going out c ; that here be 
no complaining d in our ſtreets. 

- 8 Heb. laden, either with fleſh and fat, as many underſtand it: 


but 


* be rendred oxen, but cows, as the ſame word and in the ſame Maſ- 
culine gender is uſed Deut: 7. 13. and fo this agrees beſt with the 
former prayer for the ſheep wv: 13. and he wiſherh the ſame bleſſing 
of fruitfulneſs both for greater and ſmaller cattel. 6 To wit, of 
enemies invading the Land, or affaulrting our Cities, and making 
breaches in their walls. c To wir, of our people,either out of the 
Towas and Cities to fight with an invading enemy : or out of the 
Land into captivity. 4 Or, no outcry, or howling tor any fad tidings, 
or publick grievances or calamities. __ 

t5 * Happy #s that people that is in ſuch a caſe * yes, 
happy #s.that people, whote God is the LORD e. 

e This is a corre&ion of the laft ſeatence. This is a very de- 
ſireable eſtate,but the true and chief kappineſs of our 1/rae} doth nor 
con\ilt in theſe things, which are common to others. with us,but in 
this peculiac priviledge that the true and bleſſed God'is: our God | 
by covenant and ſpecial relation. 

| S A L. JCAXLY. 

The ARGUME NT. 

TX Pſalm & the reſt which follows to the end are wholly lau- 
datory, ſetting forth the praiſes of God. The excellency of 
this Pſalm appears not onely from the opinion of rhe Hebrew Writ- 
ters,but alſo from the care which the Ptalmiſt rook to digeſt it in- 
to ſuch accurate and Alphabetical order,thar ir might be more eaſi- 

ly fixed in the mind and memory of the reader, 

Davids P/alm of praiſe. 

David Magnifsth God for his greatneſs, and terrible As, 1 
his goodneſs and everlaſting Kingdom, 8 
widence over all, 14. 
' fear him. 17. 2T. 


] 


7. for 


13. for his care and pron 


thy name for ever and ever. 
& Or, the King, by way of eminency ; rhe King of kings,the God 


Jeb. and'by whom kings reign,and to whom I and all other kings owe ſub- | earth d: in that very day e his 


jection and obedience. 


2 Every day will I bleſs thee, and I will praiſe thy 
2 Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praiſed ; 


ſing praiſes unto my 


16. and for his ſaving mercies to them chat | man , in whom 7 bere is no 


Will extol thee my God||O King 4,and Lwill blefs | very prone to truſt. 5 Who are utreriy 
you that hclp which they promiſe, and you expeQ. 


kind, Princes not excepted, had their original. 22 As 
he is dead. f All his deligns and endeavours either for hinwelt or 


for others. 


help ; whoſe hope is the LORD his God ; 


& M$ 


4 One generation ſhall praiſe thy works to another c 
and ſhal declare thy mighty acts. 
_ © The people that live in one age ſhal relate them to their poſte- 
rity, and fo ſucceſſively in all ages. 
5 1 will ſpeak of the glorious 
and of thy wondrous + works. 


4 Here are divers words heaped together to intimate that no words T Hb. 
were ſuthcient to expreſs it. eclare it. 


6 Andmen (hal ſpeak of the might of thy terrible acts: | Heb. 
and I will F declare thy grearceſs. FR” 
7 They ſhal || abundantly utter the memory of thy 


? t Heb: 
things, or, 
Ww oras, , 


honour of thy majeſty 4, 


greac goodneſs e, and bal fing ef thy rightcouſneſs, Wn 
e The memorials of thy kindneſs to thy people, thy never to be Num © 


forgotten bleſſings. 18, 
8s The LORD is gracious and fall of compaſſion ; Pial.gs,;, 
flow to anger, and Þ of great mercy. 15 & 103, 
9 The LORD is good to all f,and his tender mercies th h 
are over allhis works. YE 
f Nor to J/rael onely, but to all mankind, whoſ: hearts he fills with mercy 
food and gladncſs, as it is ſaid AG: 14» 17, yea to all his creatures,as 


it is in the next clauſe, to beaſts, as well as men. See Pſal: 39. 6, 
and 147. 9. 0 


10 All thy works ſhal praiſe the g, O LORD, and 
thy ſaints (bal bleſs thee. | 


\£ ObjcRively, they give men and Angels juſt occaſion to praiſe 
thee. 


11 They ſhal ſpeak of the glory of thy Kingdom,and 
talk of thy power. 

12 To make known to the ſons of men his mighty 
acts, and the glorious majeſty of his kingdom. 

13 Ihy kingdom is F aneverlaſting kingdom, and thy 
dominion endureth throughout all generations. 

14 The LORD upholdeth all þ that 
up all hoſe that be bowed down. 

þ Either, 1. all that Jook up to him for help : or, 2. all that are 


upheld : whoſe ſupport is not from themſelves, nor from other 
men, but onely from Gods powerful and -good providence. 


T Heb. » 
kingdom of 

N all ages 
fall,and * raifeth »p* 468: 


' I5 The eyes of all ;|| wait upon thee &, and * thou TOs, li 
giveſt them their mear in due ſeaſon 7. #Pſ. 6, 


z Of all living creatures. & Expe& and receive their ſupplies 25. 
wholly from thy bounty. ExpeQation is here figuratively aſcribed 
to brute creatures, as Pſal: 104. 27. Rom. 8. 22, {When they 
need it. 

16 Thou openeſt thine hand, and fatisfieſt the deſire of 
every living thing m. 

» Or, as divers render it, and which is moſt agreeable to the 
order of the words in the Hebrew Text, - thou [atisfieſt every living 
thing with thy favour or goodewill, i: e: with the fruits of thy 
bounty : the Pronoun thy being eaſily and fitly underſtood out of 
the foregoing clauſe. 


17 The LORD is righteous in all his ways, and ho- I! Or;ner 
ly 2 in all his works, _ 


 n Or rathermerciful,as this word moſt commonly ſignifies. There 
ts a mixture of mercy in the moſt ſevere and terrible works of God 
in this life, Judgment without mercy being reſerved for the next life, 
Jam: 2.13, Rev. 14. Io. "M 
18* The LORD is nigh unto all them s that call u- *Deut.q.7 
pon him 1n truth.p. 

0 To anſwer their. prayers for relief. p Sincerely or with an up« 

right heart, truſting to him, and waiting upon him in his way. 

19 He will fulfil the deſire of them that fear him 

he alſo will hear their cry, and will fave them. 

q So far as it is agreeable to his own will, and convenient for 

their good ; not inordinate defires, which God commonly denies 

to his people in mercy, and granteth to his enemies in anger. _ 

20 The LORD preſerveth all them that love him s 

but all the wicked will he deſtroy 7. 

r Frequently in this world, bur infallibly in the next. | 

21 My mouth ſhall ſpeak the praiſe of the LORD «e 

and let all fleſh bleſs his holy Name for ever and ever. 


PS A TL. CXLVI. 


The ARGUME NT. : 
_—- deſign'of this Pſalm is to perſwade men to truſt in God, 
and in him alone. 

The Pſalmift voweth perpetual praiſes to God, 1 
none put their #ruft in man, but im God, 3 
power, faithfulneſs and ceverlatting Government, 5 
Raiſe ye the LORD, Praiſe the LORD, 
ſoul. = 

2 * While I live will I praiſe the LORD : I will *Pu8.8, 
God, while I have any beeing. ik | 

zor in the fon of ,,..- 


2. and exhorteth,that 
4e in regard of his 


IO. 
O my 


FHeb;Hal 
lelujah. 
* Pf. 104: 


} 


2 * Putnor your erut n _ a, 

[| help. 

a Tn. men of greateſt wealth and power,in whoſe favour men are | | 
unable frequently to give * PC, 104! 


29. 
h c to his Eccl-12:7, 
Heb 

ſpirits 
So Gr. 


4 * His f breath goeth forth, he recurnet 
thoughts f periſh: 


c In his body, Eccl: 12. 7. « To that earth from which all man» 
e As ſoo, as Ever 


5 Happy 5s be that hath the God of Jacob for his 


b In his Beeing Majeſty and Glory, aud all PerteQtions, | 


6 * Which 


Plal. CxLy, | 


| *pf 


k( 


ff 


'E 


fe 


maker 


If, 
THeb 
of whe 


Mera 


41 


Il Pal. CXLVII. 


| na . . & Thy ficength conliſts norin thy walls and gates and bars, but 
is, 32 in his protection. : : 
Fileb. 15; 14 i He maketh peace in thy borders /, and * "_ 


* 


PS8S X k 


6 *« Which tnade heaven and earth, the fea, and all 
that therein is: which keepeth cruth for ever g. 

2 Both becauſe he liveth for ever to fulfil his Pcomiſes,and becauſe 
he is eternally and unchangeably faithful. 


7 * Which execureth judgment for the oppreſſed 


Men, I.I. 


*P[ 103.6. 


| the priſoners. 
*P.68. 6. 8 * The LORD openeth rhe eyes of the blind þ ; 
*Mat.9-3® the LORD raiſeth them that are bowed down ; the 


Join9-7- LORD loveth the righteous 5. 

7 pf 145. Þ Either, 1. the eyes of their mind, which he enlightens and di- 
| re&ts in doubtful and difficult cauſes : or 2. their bodily eyes 
which he did abundantly by his Son Jeſus Chriſt. 7 Even when 
he dorh affli&t them, which alſo he doth out of love, Heb- 12. 6. 
*Neu. 10. 9 * The LORD preſe:veth the ſtrangers ; he relieverh 
18. the fatherleſs and widow : butthe way of the wicked he 


PlL68. 5- turneth upſide down &. | 

k He overthroweth their goings, as the phraſe is Pſal: 140.,4: He 
maketh them to loſe their way ; he not onely fruſtrateth their 
plots and enterpriſes, but turneth them againſt themſelves. This 
and all the foregoing ſentences are ſo many arguments to encourage 
all good men to truſt in God in all their ſtraits and afflitions. 

10 * The LORD ſhall reign forever, even thy God 
O Zion, unto all generations. Praiſe ye the LORD. 
P SAT. CXLVIL 

_ | The ARGUME NT. 
"Ro Pſalm may ſeem from. v. 2. and 13. to have been com- 
poſed by ſome holy Prophet after the return of 1/-4el from 
” the Babyloniſh captivity. Ir containeth an ample celebration of 
GODS praiſes both for common mercies, and for ſpecial fa- 
VOurs. 
The Prophet exhorteth the People to praiſe God for his care over his Church, 
I 14. His Wiſdom and Government over all, 15 18. 
; And for his Salvation to the faithful, ig, 29. 
Pl g2; 1 | © maps ye the LORD : for it * 3s gooda to ling praiſes, 


14 
Luk.13.13- 


'Ex.15.18. 
P( 10, 16+ 


& 145.13. 


Fe anto our God: for i2;s pleaſant, and * praiſe is come- 
41,33» T. ly. 
a Itis acceptable toGod, and greatly comfortable and beneficial 
to our ſelves, ; 
*Deu. 30. 
3 thereth together the out-caſts c of Hrael, 
b It is the Lores own doing, and not mans. «c Or, the baniſhed, 
who were carried captives our of their own land, and diſperſed in 


divers ſtrange countries. ; | 5 
3 He healeth the broken in heart 4, and bindeth up 


f Heb. their + wounds. 

pile. d Either with the ſenſe of their fins: or with their ſorrows and 
rievous calamities- He ſcems to ſpeak peculiarly of the captive 
{ſraclites now returned. 

"6,4, , 4 © He telleth the number of the ſtars e : he calleth 

i6,  * "them all by their names f. 


e Which no man can doy Gen; 22« t7- For thoſe thouſand and 
twenty five which Aﬀtzxonomers number: are onely ſuch as are moſt 
diſtin&ly viſible to the eye, and moſt conſiderable for their influ- 
ences. f This ſignifies. 1. that he exatly knows them as we do 
thoſe whom we can eall by name; he is able to give diſtiact names: 
to each of them, becauſe he accurately underſtands their ſeveral 
natures and operations: 2. That he hath a Sovaraign Power over 
them,as men have over their children or ſervants or ſouldiers whom 
they can call by name ; that he appointeth and governeth all their 
motions and influences to the fulfilling of his own pleaſures and 
purpoſes, : 

5 Great is our LORD, and of great power; Þ his 
{Heb of underſtanding is infinite. 
6 * The LORD lifteth up the meek ; he caſteth the 


' birwnder= 
oy wicked down to the ground. 
4g 20 7 Sing unto the LORD with thankſgiving: ſing praiſes 


9.46.9 upon the Harpunto our God. 
' 8 * Who covereth the heaven with clouds,who pre- 


F Q - - » 
ka 194 paireth rain for the earth, who maketh graſs to grow 
mY upon the moumains. 


-Jobz8. 9 *He giveth tothe beaſt hisfood, || «ndtothe "young 
4. ravens g which cry. . 
Liog,27, g Which he mentions partly. becauſe they were moſt contemp- 


UA &136 tible, eſpecially to the Jews, to whom they were unclean and for- 
5.& 145 bidden for food : partly becauſe they are greedy and voracious : 
10 arid partly becauſe they are not onely neglected by men; but alſs 
> 12 0ven, forſiken by their dams as ſoon as ever they can Hlie, and ſo are 
% 38. wholly left to the care and keeping of Divine providence. 

4 to * He delighteth not in the ſtrength of the horſe; he 


"bf : k 
Hot $15 taketh nor pleaſure in the Jegs of a man 5. 


" b As if he needed either the one or the other for the accompliſh» | 


ment of-his deſigns. ? | : 
11 The LORD taketh pleaſure in them that fear him, 
in thoſe that hope in his mercy 5. 
7 That believingly and patiently expect and ſeek relief & happi- 
neſs from God alone, and from his meer grac2 and mercy;and not 
from any creature, nor' from their own merits. 


12 Praiſe the LORD, O Jeruſalem: praiſe thy God, 


fHeb.vhs O Zion. 
vatech :by 123 For he hath firengthned the bars of thy gates &; 


"is he hath bleſſed thy children within thee. 


which giveth food to the hungry; *the LORD looſeth | 5, 


2 'The LORD doth build up Jeruſalem 5: * he ga-| 


M 8. 
1 Tn all thy land, even to its utmoſt borders, which are moſt 
liable to the incurſion of enemies, | 

. 15 He ſendeth forth his commandment az «por earth; 
his word runneth very ſwiftly =, | 

7W hich is ſufficient without any inſtruments to execute whatſo« 

ever pleaſeth him, either in works of nature or of providence. % 
e thing 3s done withour delay or difficulty. 
16 He giveth ſnow like woolo3 he icattereth the hoar 


4 froſt like aſhes Pp; | | 


0 Not onely in colour and ſhape and ſofrneſs, but alſo in uſe, 
keeping the fruits of the earth warm. p In colour and ſmalneſs of 
parts, asalſo in its burning quality. 


17 He caſteth forth his ice q like morſels z who can 


ſtand before his cold r ? | | 
9 Either, 1: pieces of icey which God may be ſaid to caft forth 
or zo caſt down, becauſe he ſenderh it, and oft-times ſuddenly : or 
2. great hail-ſtones, which are of an icy nature aud ſubſtance, and 
which are very properly caft forth or caft dows out of the clouds, 
and that like morſels or fragments, the particles being congealed in 
them. » The cold which he ſometimes ſends intothe air is ſo ſharp, 
that it would be intolerable, if men did not defend themſelves from 
it by houſes, cloaths, fire, &c. he 
18 He ſendeth out his word, and melteth them * he 


cauſeth his + winds s to blow, and the waters flow t. 

s The Southern or ſome other warm wind ſent with commiſſion 
to diflolve the ice: t The rivers return to their courſe which be- 
fore were bound up by, or turned into, ice. ; 

19 He ſheweth t his word «unto Jacob ; his ſtatutes ! 
and his judgments unto Iſrael. 

# Me fully declared his mind and will by revelation and in his 
word, x To the children or 7aceb or 1j/4el, and to them alone, as 
it follows. 


Vit. 


20 * He hath not dealc fo with any nation y: and as 4c. pyy; | 


for his judgments, they have not known them, Praiſe ;; 1, 2, 
ye the LORD. | | | 
y He left all others to their own native darkneſs and blindneſs, 
and to thoſe dim diſcoveries of God and of themſelves which they 
had from the light of Nature. USP : 
P S A L. CXLVIIL. 
The ARGUMENT. | 
He nature of this Pſalm is for ſ1bſtance the ſame with the for- 
mer eontaining an invitation to all the creatures to praiſe 
God for his manifold bleſſings. 
The Pſalmiſt exhorted all celeftial and terreſtrial creatures, eſpecially 
man, 10 praiſe God for his Favour and Mercy to his Church 


I I4. | 
I) Raiſe ye the LORD. Praife ye the LORD from 
the heavens az praiſe him in the heights b. ed: 
4 All the hoſt of Heaven) which he particularly exprefſeth in 7: 
the following verſes. 6In thoſe high and heavenly places. 
2 * Praiſe ye him all his Angelsc: praiſe ye himall his * P\: 103, 
hoſts d. | 20, 21: 
c He inviteth the Angels here, and the ſenſleſs creatures after * 
ward, to praiſe God, not as if the former needed, or the latter 
were Capable of his exhortition, bur onely by a Poctical rapture, 
the defign whereof is, that men by this means mighr be more pro« 
voked to this duty. d The Angels, called hoſts, here and 1 Kings 
22. 39. for their vaſt numbers, exquiſite order, and perfect ſub. 
Jection to their General, the Lord of hoſts? : , 
3 Praiſe ye him ſun and moon e: praife himall ye 


ſtars of light. _ 

e You which are adored by the blind Heathens for gods, you 
are but his creatures, and therefore were obliged, if you were cap= 
able to worſhip and praiſe him for your glorious light and powers 
ful influences. | | 

4 Praiſe himye heavens of heavens f, and ye waters 
that be above the heavens g. | 

f Ye higheſt and moſt gracious Heavens, the place of GODS 
Throne and glorious preſence, as this phraſe is uſed, Deut: 10. 14. 
1 Kings 8. 27. Neh. 9.6. Pſal: 115. x6. Or ye itarry heavens, whicly 
alſo may well be ſo called, becauſe they are above the air,” which 
is oft called Heaven in Scripture, g Ye clouds which are abovye 2 
part of the Heavens. Of which ſee on Gen: 1. 7. : 

5 Let them praiſe the Name of the LORD : for 
commanded, and they were created þ. 
h They owe their beeing wholly ro Gods good wilt, Pſ.23.9. 
6 * He hath alſo eſtabliſhed them for ever and ever 3: *P:39.37 
he hath made a decree & which ſhallnot pals 7/. 


i Either abſolutely as to the ſubſtance of them, or at leaſt to the Jer 31.35 
end of the world. He hath made then: conſtant and incorruprible EP” . 


| f 
| and following words. .. / Whichdecree ſhall never be made void. 


'-verds and hales of the earth; or, 2. whales of ocher Sea-mo 


—_ thee with the { finelt of che whear, 
«0h; 1Gs 


not changeable and periſhing, as the thingsof the lower world are. 
& Either concerning their ſeveral courſes and influences: orrather 
or their continuance for ever; which belt agrees with the foregoing 


7 Praiſe the LOKD from the earth, ye dragons »s 
and all deeps. 


m Either, 1. dragons and ſerpents, which abide in the deep ca« 
IS, 
which dwell in the depths of the Sea, which are oft called by this 
name, as Jeb 7. 12, Ezek. 29. 3. and elfewhere. as the word here 
rendred dep; 15 moſt commonly uſed concerning the Sea, 
$ Fire » and hail, ſnow and vapour e, ſtormy wind 
fulfilling his word p. | | 
- » Lightnings and other fire-works .of the air. o Or, fumes bor 
exhaltations,asthe word proper)y ſignifies,as cold exhaltations zre 
comprehended under the title of ſnow. And both of them ariſmg 
from the earth, are here fitly mentioned as belonging to it. p Exee 
cuting his commands either for the comtort and refreſhment, or 
for the peniſhment, of the inhabitants of rhe erath, 
9 Mountains and all hills, fruicful Treez and all ce. 


dars 4. #5 4 9 Ad. 


& 119. 9yoz 


! 


Pſal. CXLVII 


q 
i 


*he *Gen. i L 
6 


| 
, 


"1: 


: 


THeb: [pie | 


: 
| 
! 
: 
i 
: 


Ia. 42s 7 | 


+ Heb: bis | 
ords, 1 


6 2] 
tHeb:Hal 


CLIX. P $ 
9 Admirable for your height and ſtrength and uſe, though not 


for your fruit. : 
to Beaſts and all cattel, creeping thing, 


fowl. 
11 Kings of the earth 7, and all people: princes,and 


all judges of the earth. 

7» Who, though you are called gods, and adored like Gods by 
your ſubjects, yet are but men, and the creatures and ſubjects of 
the Soveraign Lord, to whom you owe both your beeing, and all 
your power and dignity. ; 

12 Both young men and maidens, old men and 


children. 
12 Let them praiſe the- name ofthe LORD : for 


* his Name alone is | excellent ; his glory is above the 


earth and heaven £. 

s Not ſo much in place as in excellency, above all the glories 
which are in carth and in Heaven. : 

14 He alſo exhalteth the Horn of his People, r, the 


ſe # of his ſaints, even of the children of Iſrael, a 
people near unto bim x, Praiſe ye che LORD. 


't To wit, above the horns of all the people in the world, in re« 
ſpe& of their ſpirirual and eternal priviledges, as it here follows. 
The horn in Scripture doth commonly nore itrength, viftory, glory 
and felicity. as Deut: 33+ 17. and every where. « Either, 1. He 
is the praiſe, as God 1s called Deut: 10.21. to wit, - the God of their 
praiſe, as 109. 1. the chiefeſt obje& and matter of it: or, 2. which 
1s the praiſe, Which work of God in exalting their horn is their 
glory, and maketh them praiſe-worthy, or obligeth and provok- 
eth them in a ſingular manner to perform this great duty of praiſ- 
ing God, which is ſo generally negle&ted by others. x By ſpeeial 
relation and friendſhip and covenant, and by familiar intercourſes, 
God manifeſting his face and favour to them, and they frequently 
and ſolemnly approaching into his preſence, and worſhipping him 

- at his foottool. 


and i flying 


PS AL. CXIIX. 
The ARGUME NT. 


| Gods people to praiſe him, either, 1. for their deliverance 
out of Babylon, and the promiſes which God had given them of the 
' perfetion of that work and of the enlargement of their power and 
ion in the world, or rather, 2. for the eſtabliſhment of the 
Kingdom of Iſrael in Davids hands, and for that ſafety and glory 
and victory over their enemies which they expeRed by that means. 
But withal, the Pſalmiſt, or the Spirit of God which dictared 
this Pſalm to him had a further proſpect, even to the Mcfſiah,of 
whom David was a Type, and who was to ſucceed David in the 
Throne, and: to bring that Kingdom to its higheſt perfection. 
And ſo divers of the Jewiſh Doctors underſtand this Pſalm 
An exhortation to praiſe God for his love ts his people, 1 5. and for 
enabling them by his power to overcome their enemies 6 9 


+ nn ye the LORD. * Sing unto the LORD a 
new ſong « : «nd his praiſe in the congregation 
3'3- of Saints. : 
_ @ For theſe new mercies conferred upon us, denied to former 
T1MES. - 


#Heb,Hat- 
telujah. 
* Pi 3 


"#Pſ100.3, . 2 Let Iſrael rejoyce in * him that made him 5: let the 
children of Zion be joyful in their king ec. 


+ That made them not only his creatures, but,which is unſpeak- 
ably greater his people : or, that advanced and adorned rhem 
with ſingular priviledges, as this word is uſed, 1 Sam.} £2. 6. and 
cliewhere. © David and his poſterity, and eipecially the chief of 
all of them, the Meſſiah. Let them rejoyce and bleſs God that 
they have ſo potent, ſo wiſe, and fo juſt a King. 

*PC:81.2. . 3 * Lerthempraiſe his Nameſ|in the dance : let them 


Or, with ſing praiſes unto him with the timbrel and harp 4. 
' Fhepipe. giAccording to the uſage of that time and diſpenſation. 
4 For, the LORD traketh pleaſure. in his people e - 


he will-beautifie / the meek g with falvation hb. 

e He loveth them above all people. and rejoycerh over them to 
do them goed, f Heb. adorn or glorifie, make them amiable and 
honourable in the eyes of the world, who now hate and deſpiſe 
them. g.Or, bumble, to wit, his people, as he now ſaid, whoare 
oft in Scripture deſcribed by that CharaQter,becauſe all true Iſrael- 
ites are ſuch, and all Iſraelites profeſs and ought to be ſuch Or, 
the affiited; as that word is oft uſed in Scripture, which hath been 
obſerved before; his poor afflifted and oppreſſed people;to whom 
the following ſalvation is moſt needful and acceptable. h Both 
temporal in the delivering them from, and ſetting them above, all 


He ſcope and deſign of this Pſalm is to ſtir up and encourage 


= © AM 


under them, ſeverely revenge the blood of the martyred Chriſtians 


| Placing his SanQtuary and dwelling place amongſt men. & In his 
| heavenly manſion, there let the bl:iſed Angels praiſe him. Or, 


— — 


| 


their enemies,and afterwards, with everlaſting ſalvation and glory. ly, as was noted before, 


['S. Pſal. CL, 

5 Let the ſaints bezoyful in glory : : let them ſing atoud | 
upon their beds &. 

z For the honour which God puteth upen them. & Either, x, 
for their ſafe and '{weet repoſe and peace, which is ſignified by 
reſting in beds, Iſa: 57. 2. Or, 2. by night as well as by day,even in 
the time devoted to reſt and ſleep, which they ſhall borrow to 
praiſe God for his eminent and extraordinary bleſſings, as David 
frequently did upon ſuch occaſions, | 

6 Let | the high praiſes of God be || in their mouth, THeb. 71 
and a * rwo-edged iword in their hand mw : Forage 

| Heb. z cheir rhroat* Which ſignifies vocal praiſe, and that with x ar" 
a loud voice. #2» Not only to defend themſelves from their ene. *Heh - 
mies, bur, as 3t follows, to revenge themſelves upon them, Rey, _ 

7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen », aud 
puniſhment upon the people. 

» For all their cruelties and injuries towards Gods people. This 
was literally accompliſhed by David upon the Philiſtines, Ammo. 
nites, Syrians, and other neighbouring Nations and Princes,which 
were bitter enemies to Gods people. And the ſame thing wasdone 
afterwards in the Chriſtian world, when God 1aiſed up Chriſtian 
Princes, who did by the help of the Chriftians fighting with and 


upon their cruel Perſecutors and Tyrants in divers ages. It may 
alſo be underſtood of the ſpiritual plagues which Chriſt by the hand 
or miniſtry of his Apoſtles/'and Miniſters did infli& upon the hearts 
and conſciences ofhis incorrigigible enemies, who by Gods word 
and ordinances were either tormented or hardned ro their deſtruc- 
tion, Yea it may have a reſpeC& unto the laſt day of judgment, in 
which the Saints ſhall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2. which will be 
a moſt dreadful execution of this vengeance, &c. 

8 To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles 
with fetters of iron 0. 

o Of which ſce the Note on the foregoing verſe. 

9 * To execute upon them the judgment written p : * Dev. 74 


this honour have all his ſaints q. Praite ye the LORD. ' * 
p Appointed and declared in the holy Scripture, as Deut;12.32/ 
and 29. 19. and 32. 41, 42, 43+ and elſewhere This is added to 
ſhew that they de nor this work to fatisfie their own malicious or 
revengeful inclinations, but in obedience to Gods command, and 
onely in ſuch manner as God hath allowed in his word. q The 
honour of theſe ations belongs to all the Saints, for whoſe ſakes 
God appointed this in his word, and afterwards executed it by his 


providence 
PSA CL 
The ARGU ME NT, 
His ?/alm agrees much with the former ; andis an invitation 
to.all men to praiſe God, and eſpecially to the Levites, or 
thoſe of them who were appointed to this work,as may be gathered 
both from the place in which they are to praiſe hum, which is, ac-» 
cording to our Tranſlation, in his Saufuary, v: 1: and from that 
great variety of inſtruments here mentioned, all which were fre« 
quently uſed in their Temple-ſervice, and ſeldom elſewhere. 
&n exhortation to praiſe the Holineſs, Power, and Kinaneſs of God, with all 
fort of muſical Inftruments, 1 6. 
+ | - Raiſe yethe LORD. Praiſe God in his ſanuary FHeb,A 
4: praiſe him in the firmament of his power þ, 9: 
s In his Temple where this work was to be performed conſtant] 
and ſolemnly. Or, who dwelleth in his San#uary. $0 it deſcribet 
and limiteth the obje& of their praiſes. Or, for ( as this particle is 
uſed in the next verſe) his SantFary, for this great favour of 


who dwelleth in the firmament, or ſpreading ſorth of his power, to wit, 
in the Heavens which were ſtretched our by his great power, and 
in which are the moſt glorious teſtimonies of his infinite power. 
Or, for the firmament, &c. for that glorious and aſtoniſbing piece 
of his workmanſhip. 

2 * Praiſe him for his mighty ads : praiſe him accor- 
ding to his excellent greatneſs c. 

c As his infinite Majeſty deſerves to be praiſed: 

3 Praiſe him with the ſound ofthe || trumpet; * praiſe jo, ur 
him with the pſaltery and harp» | * pſ81.2, 

4 Praiſe him with the timbrel and [| dance;praiſe him & 149-3: 
with ſtringed inftruments and organs. : | Or, p4% 

5 Praiſe him upon the loud cymbals; praiſe him upon 
the high ſounding cymbals. 

6 Let eVery thing that hath breath 4, praiſe the 
LORD. Praiſe ye the LORD. 


d Every living creature in heaven and in Earth, poc. 5. 13. ac* 
cording to their ſeveral capacities, ſome obje&ively, others aCtive« 


* PC. 145 
5, 6. 


T 


other books of Scripture, 


PROVERBS 


E Penman of this Book is expreſſed in the Title, Solomon, who was famous fer his Proverbs, of which he ſpakse 
Three Thouſand, as it is recorded, 1 Kings 4. 32+ the meFt eminent and uſeful of them being doubtle(s collefted in 
this Book. And that the greateſt part of this Book was compoſed by Solomon doth ſufficiently appear becauſe that part of it 
which was collefted and compeſed by other hands is ſo plainly diffinguiſhed from the foregoing part, Chap. 25. 1- The Nine 
fir Chapters contain a Preface or Introduttion te the Book, or an Exhortation to true Wiſdem, and «ll the following Chapters 
contain the Precepts of Wiſdom called Proverbs, Wherein we are net to expe} that order and coherence which is in mn) 


| CHAP. I: 


eb. ths 
ations 
eb, in 
throat 
"wh 
« 1.16, 


Jen. 74 


cb, Hale 
yjah, 


PC. 145 
6. 


Jr ,corneh. 
P(.81.2- 
149. 3- 
Or, ppt. 


9 F Chap I 


| Heb: pris 


F KR 0 © 
E H A P. ; T. 
The uſe of the Broverbs, 1—-—6. An exhortotion to fear God, and belive 
his Word, 7. The glory of thoſe Children that eb: ; the Inflrution of th ir 
Parents, 8, 9. Acaut.on aga'nst nelding to enticing ſomners, lo. The 
contrivance, Ii, 10. Argumen's and Invitation of theſe Sinners, 13, 
14. Reaſons againft a complying with them. 15 19. Wiſqems call 
zo repentance, 20 22. Her promiſe, 23. Her complaints ana Fhreat- 
nings, 2 30. The fruit of ſm, 31 32. Peace to the Pemitent, 


HE * proverbs « ofSolomon 6, the ſon of Da- 
vid, King of Iſrael. 

a Proverbs are ancient and wiſe, and ſhort Sayings 
in common uſe : whereof ſome are plain and eaſfie, 
others areintricate and obſcure. . b Proceeding from 

Solomon, and moſt of them digeſted by him into this Book, See the 
Preface. L ; 
2 To know c wiſdom 4 and inſtruction e, to per- 


ceive the words of underitanding f. 

© Written to help men to know throughly and practically. 4 Both 
humane Wiſdom to conduct our Aﬀaurs in this life, which divers 
of the following proverbs do, and eſpecially Divine Wifdom which 
Solomon chiefly detigned ; or to make men wiſe to know their duty, 
and to fave their Souls. e The Counſels and Inſtructions delivered 
either by God, or by men, in order to the attainment of Wiſdom, 
F Either, 1- Which are the Effects of a good Underſtanding : Or, 
2. Which teach a man true Underſtanding, whereby to diſcern be- 
twecen truth and Error, between good and evil, to chuſe the for- 
mer, and to refuſe the latter. _ Toy 20 

2 Toreccive the inſtruction g of F wiſdom þ,juſtice, 

and judgment, and F equity e. : 

"  g Willingly to receive the Counſels of others, which is a good 
ſtep ro Wiſdom, and a part of it. h Such as is wiſe, and tendsto 
make men wiſe and prudent. This is oppoſed to the Inflrufion of 
Fools and follyy of which Prov. 16: 22.and 9: 27. Forfolly or wicked- 
nels hath its School, and mu'titudes of Scholars, thatare very apt to 
learn its Leflons. ; Which teach men juſt judgment or equity, to 
wit, their whole duty, toth ro God and to others, and to theme» 
{-Ives. Theſe three words ſeem ro fignitte the ſame thing, and are 
heaped together to norte either the neceſſity of the Precept, or the 
exactneſs and: diligence which 1s required in the practice of it. 

4 To give lubtilty & co che ſimple 7, to the young 
man » knowledge and || diſcrerion. 

k Or rather, Prudence, as this word is uſed, Prov. 3. 21. & 5. 2 
& 8. 5, 12. which elſe where is taken in an evil ſenſe for craft or 
ſubcil:y. 1 Such as want W:ſdom, and are ezlily deceived by others, 
and therefore moſt need this bleſſing. » Which wants both expe- 
ricence and Self- government. SE 

5 * A wiſe man will hear », and will increaſe lear- 
ning o ; anda man of underſtanding ſhall attain unto 


wiſe counſels p. | 

2 Is not ſelf conceited,asFools are,but willing tolearn from others; 
and'therefore willattend to the following Inſtructions. 0 And there- 
by will gain this great benefit to grow in knowledge and wiſdom. 
This he adds to ſhew that this Book is uſeful and neceſſary, not only 
to the ſimple, but alſo to the moſt wiſe and knowing Perſons. p 
Not to deep ſpeculations, but practical conſideration ; ro the art 

FOr,on ele. of governing himſelf or others well and prudently. 
quemtſpeech 6 To underſtand a proverb and || the interpretation 
q ; the words of che wiſe, and their dark ſayings r. 

q i. e. The Interpretacion of a Proverb, by a Figure called Hen- 
diadis, or the meaning and uſe of the wife ſayings of God, or of 
men ; to know this practically, ana for his direction and benefit ; 

| for practice is the great defign of this Book. r Such as are hard to 
*Job 28: be underſtood by inconſiderate and ungodly men, but to be found 
58. out by diligent, and humble inquiry. 

Pal: 1217. 


* 1 Kings 


&. 32+ 
Chap. 19. 
1, & 25. 1s 


ſl O r, ads 
viſement, 


fCha.g. 9. 


7 * The fear of che LORD s 3s || the beginning # of 


To. know:edge : but fools u deſpiſe wiſdom and in{tructi- 
Chap 9.10. 1 4 


rage s Reverence and obedience to God, or his Worſhip and Service, 
; > © as this word is commonly uſed: # Either the Foundation, or the 
principal T Et; 62-6 end "rh" Mick all” ooh 
part OP, anu Pci ECt1ON, Or CAIET point, without WAICN all ofnher 
s kn wledge is vain anduielets « Wicked men, called Folsrhrough 
this whole Book; ſuch as do not fear God. x» Are fo far from at- 
taining true wiſdom, t::at they detpiſe it, and all the means of get- 
tingit Which fully proves what he now ſaid, that che fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of Wiſdom. 


8 My ſon y, * hear the inſtruction of thy father z, 


- 
He wp 5 and forfake not the law of thy mother 4. 


y He ſpeaks to his Scholars with paternal Authority andAﬀection | 
Teachers amohg the | 


to make them more attentive and obedient 
Hebrews and others, were commonly called Fathers, and their Scho- 


Jars their Sos. z His good and wholſome Counſels, bur nor ſuch zs | 


are contrary to Gods Law, Prov 19. 27. 4 Thoſe pious inſtructi- 
ons which thy Mother inſtilled into thee in thy render years. See 
Prov. 31. 8. 2 Tim: 1:5. 6 3: 14, '5. This he adds, becauſe 
Children when grown up, are very prone to flight their Mothers 
advice, becauſe of the hr ales of their Sex, and becauſe they have 
not that dependance upon, and expectation irom their Mothers, 
which they have from their Fathers. 

9 For they ſhall be an ornament of grace unto thy 
head, and chains about thy neck 6. 

6 This will make thee amiable and honourable in the ſight of God. 
and of men ; whereas the forfaking of taoſe good Counſels will 
make thee contemprible. 

10 My 1on, it finners c entice thee, conſent thou not. 

c Eminently ſo called. as Gen. 13 13. Pſal. r. x. and 26: 9. ſuch as 
fe!] themſelves to work all ma: ner cf wickedneſs : particularly 
Thieves, arc Robbers, arid Murtherers, as appears from the next 
verie,as alſo opprefiors and cheaters, by comparing this with v.19. 

11 If tiiey fay, Come with us 4, icc us lay wait for 
B_ e ; ler us wrkprivily f for the innocent g without 
Gaule þ 


F Heb: an 
#dajng, 


E R B $. 
d We are numero'ts and Rrong, and ſociable. e To ſhed Blood, 
He expreficth nor their words, which would rather affright than in- 
veigle a young novice, bur the true nature and conſequence ofthe 
Action, and whar lyes at the bottom of their ſpecious prerences: f 
So we ſhall ncither be prevented before, nor diſcovered and puniſhed 
afterward. g Harmlcts Travellors,"who are more carejeſs and ſe- 
cure and unprovided for oppoſition, than ſuch Villains as them- 
ſelves. þ Though they have not provoked us, ner deſerved th's 
uſage from us. This Solon adds to diſcover their malignity and 
batenceſs, and fo deter the young Man from aſſociation with rhem. 


whole, as thoſe that go down into the pit &. 

i Which ſpeedily covers and conſumes dead bodies. Sce Pſal. 55. 33. 
ts. & 124. 3. We ſhall do our work quickly, ealily, and without 
fear of diſcovery. k Into ſome deep pir, into which a Traveller 
falls unawares, and is utterly loſt and never diſcovered. 

i2 We ſhall find all precious ſubltance ; we ſhall fill 
cur houſes with ſpoil /. | 

I As our danger is little, fo our profit will be great. 

14 Caſt in thy lot among us m2 ; let us all have one 
purſe » : | 

m i e, Put in thy Money into our Stock. Or rather, thou ſha!; 
ca5t thy It among(t us, 1. e. Thou thalt have a ſhare with us, and that 
equally and by lot, although thou arr but a Novice and we Vete- 
ranes. This agrees beſt with their deſign, which was toallure him 
by the promile ofadvantage, » Or, we wil have. &c. One Purie 
{ha]l receive all our profits, and furniſh us with all expencess $o 
we ſhall live with great facility and true friendſhip. 

15 My fon *, walk nor thou in the way with them 
o; refrain thy foot from cheir path p. 

o Avoid their courſes, and their converſation, and company. Þþ 
When thou haſt any thought, or inclination, or temptation to fo]- 
low their counſels or examples, ſurppreſs it, and reſtrain thy ſelf as ' 
it were by force and violence, as the word implies. 


ſhed blood s. 


q They make haſte, as it follows without conſidering what they 
are doing. + To do evil to others as was expreſſed, wv. ti, i2. which 
alſo will bring evil upon themſelves. 5s To ſhed innocent blood : 
which is an inhumane and dangerous practice. 

17 Surely in vain the net is ſpread Þ in the ſight of a- 
ny bird x. SE | 

t The deſign of theſe words is to ſet forth the folly of theſe men that hy 
by the {imilitude of a Bird, which yet is very variouſly applied and wing. 
underſtood by divers Interpreters. Bur Iſhall not confound the Rea- 
der with the rehearſal of them. This Clauſe, i vain, upon the un- 
derſtanding whereof the whole depends, may be underſtood, either 
I. 1n reſpett of the Fowler, So the ſenſe is, the Fowler who ſpreads 
his Net in the ſight of the Bird Ioſeth his labour, becauſe the Bird 
perceiving the danger, will not be tempred to come to the Bairt,bur 
flees away from it. But, or yet, th:ſe ( as the firſt words of the next 
Verſe may well be, and by the Chaldee Tranſlator are rendred) are 
more fo0};ſh than the ſilly Birds, and tho they are not ignorant of the 
danger and miſchief which theſe evil courles will bring upon theme 
ſelves, which I have here repreſented, yet they will not take ware 
ning, but 1nadly ruſh upon their own ruine. Or. 2.in reſpe& of the 
Bird. $0 the Senſe is, The filly Bird, although it ſee the ſpreading 
of the Net, yer is not at all inſtructed and cautioned by it, bur 
through the greedineſs of the bait, ruſheth upon it, and is taken by 
it. And theſe men are not one jot wiſer, but albeir they know 
and find that by theſe practices they expoſe themſelves to the juſtice 
cf the Magiſtrat,and to the vengeance of God, the ſad effects where« 
of they daily ſee in the deſtruction of . their Brerhren in iniquiry, 
yer they will boldly and madly run themſelves into the ſame mi 
ſeries. Both ways the ſenſe comes to the ſame. | 

18 Anda they lay wait for their own blood x ; they 
lurk privily for their lives. | 

u Or, But, or Yet, or So, for all theſe ways this Particle is uſeds 
Which is more fully expreſſed in the next verſe. x The deſtru&i- 
on which they deſign to others, falls upen themſelves. 7Theirblood 
anſwers to zheir feet, v. 16. and belongs to the ſame Perſons. 

I9 SOy are the ways Zof every one that is greedy of 
gains which btaketh away thelives of the owners there 
.of c. 

y As is expreſſed both in the foregoing andfollowing words. z The 
ations and courſes, which are ſo in the tendency and event of them. 

a That fecks gain by unrighteous and wicked praftices. b Either 

whi. h greedineſs, or rather, which gam, by comparing the laſt words. 

c Brings fudden and violent death upon thoſe who had made theme 

ſelves Mafters and Poſſcflors of fuch gain. | | 
20 | * Wiſdom crieth 4 without ez ſhe uttereth her #FHeb: 

.voice in the ftreets ; LIE EE 

4 Having expreſſed the counſels and invitations of folly and of 


ſel of God revealed ro the Sons of Men by his Word. Which he 

calls W-ſdems here, as alio Prov. g. r. either to note the excellency 

of this Witdom beyond all other, as the greateſt and chief of Beaſts 
is called Behemoth or Beaſts, Job 40. 15. or becauſe it conſiſterth of a 
| multitude of wiſe Precept3; or becauſe it hath been delivered ta 
Mankind at ſundry times, and in divers manners, and by many per- 
ſ:ns, Prophets and Apoſtles,and Eſpecially by the Son of God, who 
is called the Wiſdom of God, Luke 11. 49. And this wiſdom is ſaid to 
cry waith a loud voice, to intimat both God's earneſinefs ininviting 
{inners to Repentance, and their inexcuſableneſs if rhey do not hear 
fuch loud cries. e Or, abroad, or in the ſtreets or open places, as ma» 
ny others render it, and as it is in the next Clauſe, Not in cor- 


ners and privily, as ſeducers perſwade men to error or wickednels, 
being afraid of the light, bur openly and publickly before all the 
World. 

21 She crierh in the chicf place of concourſe f, in the 
opening of the gates 7 : in the city 4 ſhe uttereth her 
words, ſaying, 


5; F # Where 


12 Let us ſwallow them up aliveas f the grave 5, and +[Tzb. [| 


Num. ; fl 


*Ch;4'4 


16 * For their feet run q to evil r, ard make haſte to +37, 59l 
Rom: 3: 


f Heb: 
the eyes 
every th 


goms, tO 
IS, excells 
wicked men, he now declareth the voice of Wiſdom. By the name oY 
of Wiſdom or Wiſdoms, he ſeems to underſtand the Wiſzom or coun«, WE 


Ch, , | 


| 


' 
{ 
; 


YEA VET AC IDRC a7 4.254% 7 


£45 
"U 


ereis probability of moſt ſucceſs g Where Magiſtrats 
es A eople A aſſembled. So it crieth borh to the 
wiſe and to the unwiſe, as Paul preached, Rom. 1: 14. þ Not only 
in the gate, bur inevery part of the City. Or, in the Cities, the fin- 

gular number being put for the Plural. [ * 
22 How long ye fimple ones 5 will ye love ſimplici- 


ty &? and the ſcorners / delight in their ſcorning, and 


fools w hate knowledge ? 

: Ye ignorant, and eaſie,and credulous Perſons, who are ſo ſoon 
cheated by the World and the Devil, and do not underſtand your 
own Intereſt. & Being unwilling to part with it, or to be made 
wiſer. 1 That ſcoff atall Religion,& contemn the Word and faith- 
ful Miniſters of God. »: Willful and wicked fools, as Prov. 17: 10: 
& 26: 4. 

23 Turn ye nat my reproof o: behold, I will pour 
out p my * Spirit q unto you; I will make known my 
##:3- werds unto you 7. 


mY wy PAOYTERESs. 


» From your evil courſes unto me. o Upon this admonition here 
given to you. p If youwill do fo, I will freely and abundantly im- 
part unto you. 94 Either my mind, as Spirit is taken, Pſal: 77: 6: 
Prov: 29: 11: or the gifts and Graces of my Spirit, which he hath 
promiſed to ſuch Perſons, Luke 11: 137 John 4: 14: & 7: 39. 7 By 
my Spirir I will cauſe you truely and ſavingly to underſtand my 
65.2. Word which is hid from others, 2 Cor: 4: 3+ 
24 * Becauſe I have called s, and ye refuſed ; I have 


+13: ſtretched out my hand ?, and no man 1egarded u; 
8:18 ; By my Miniſters, & by my Judgments upon you or others, 
and by the motions of my Spirit and your own Conſciences. # Ot- 
fering Grace and Mercy to you and earneſtly inviting you to accept 
of it. Leſt through your deafneſs or diſtance from me you thou'd 
not hear, I have beckned to you with my hand, which this Phraſe 
ſignifies, 1ſa: 13; 2: & 65: 2. # Few or none complied with it. 


would none of my reproot : 

7:32 x» Or deſpiſed, or made woid, reſiſted its power and authority. y 
Either, 1. my deſign of doing Sinners good, which you have made 
of none effect to your ſelves. Or, 2. my commands and counſels 
which ſuits better with the next Clauſes 

26 I alſo z will laugh at your calamity @: I will 


mock when your fear b cometh ; 

z As you have ſcoffed at me and my ways.” # 4 e. deſtroy you 
without pity,and take pleaſure therein, Comp. Rewel. 8: 20. b The 
miſery which you do or ſhould fear, The act for the object, as 
Iſa; 8: 12, and elſewhere. | | 

27 When your fear commeth as deſolation c,and your 
deſtruction cometh as « whirlwind 4; when diſtreſs and 


anguiſh cometh upon you. 
> As ſome p—_ ſword or Judgment,which quickly over-runs 
a whole Countrey. 4 Which inſtantly ſp:eadeth it ielf from place ro 
place with great and irreliſtible violence. and doing much mitchief. 
27:9 . 28 * Then ſhall they call upon me, but 1 will nor an- 


x: 15- {wer ; they ſhallſeek me early e, but they thall not find 


11: 11. me : 
+ 12. e& Or, in dhe morning, as the word properly ſignifies, and is here 
* 3* 4+ retdred by others, as ſoon as their calamity comes or rather, with 
7:13. great diligence and fervency, as this phraſe commonly ſignifies, f Be 
cauſe they do nor ſeek me by choice and with ſincerity, bu: only by 
conſtraint, and that they may be freed from their miſcries. 

29 For that they hated knowledge 7, and did nor 


chuſe g rhe fear of the LORD. 


 _ f To wit, the practical knnwledge of God, and of their duty to 
him, asit is explained in the following clauſe. g Not heartily ap- 
prove of it and love it, but only made ſome ſhew of it 


20 They would none of my counſel h:; they deſpiſed 


all my reproof. 
h They refuſed ro be guided by my Counſels or Precepts. 
21 therefore ſhall they eat of the fruit of cheir own 


way zi, and he filled with their own devices &. 
# They ſhall receive puniſhments anſwerable to their ſins, k 


which they have plotted againſt others, ſhall fall upon themſclves. 
22 For the tuining away / of the ſimple ſhall ſlay 
them, and the proſperity of fools (hall deſtroy them m. 


is oppoſed to hearkening unto God, v. 33. Or, as itis rendred in the 
Margent, and by divers others, the eaſe or reſt, the peace or tran- 
quility, as it ſeems to be explained in the next Clauſe m»: Ir cor: 
monly proves the occaſion of their Ruine, by making them preiump- 
tuous, and ſecure, and worldly, and proud, and forgetful of God and 
of their own Erernal happineſs, whereby they provoke God's wrath, 
and bring upon themſelves ſwift and certain deſtruction. Thus he 
meets with the common objection againſt the fear of God, taken 
from the preſent impunity and proſperity of ungodly men. 
But whoſo hearkneth unco me, (ball dwell ſafely 
2», and ſhall be quiet from fear of evil o. | 
s Or, ſecurely, or confidently, reſting himſelf upon the conſcience 
of his own integrity, and upon the promiſes and favour of God. o 
From ſinful and tormenting cares and fears. And asa wicked Man's 
mind is oft full of anxiety in the midſt of all his outward proſpe- 
rity and glory, ſo the mind of a good man is filled with peace and 
joy even when his outward man is expoſed to many troubles. 
CH AP. IL 
Solomon exhorteth his ſon to get Wiſdom, 1 4. Teeth him thebene-' 
fit, he Jbat receive thereby, 5 10: And the evils which he ſhould a- 
'poid, 11, 12. The wicked mans ways are delcribed, 13, -—20« An 
habitation promiſed the righteous, 21. The end of the wicked miſerable,2 2. 


hap:7:i. hide my commandments with thee 6 ; 


107. . 25 Buc ye * have ſer at naught x all my counſel y, and | 


8s Theſe words are ſpoken by Slomon, either, 1. in the name of 
Wiſdom, as before: or rather. 2. in his own name. 6 Lay them. 
up in thy mind and heart with care, as men do rheir choiceſt Trea- 
ures. 

2 -So that thou incline thine ear unto wiſdom, and 
apply thine heart to underſtanding ec 3 

c Give thy ſelf to the ſtudy of it with affection and diligence. 

3 Yea, if thou cryeſt dafter knowledge, and 7 lifreſt f Heb: s;. 
up thy voice for underſtanding ; | vef? thy 

d To wit, unto God, the only giver of it, v. 6. Heb. if chou [9% 
ealleſt, inviteſt it to come unto thee; earneſtly deſireſt its conduct. Mat: r3z 

4 * If thou ſeckelt her as fiiver, andfearcheſt for her, ** 
as for hid treaſures e : 

e With the ſame unwearied diligence and earneſt deſire and pati. 
ent expectation under all delays, difappointments and difficulties 
which worldlings uſe in the purchalc of Riches, or in digging in 
Mines of $11ver. 

5 Then ſhalt thou underſtand f the fear of the LORD 
g, and find the knowledge of God. 

f More perfectly and profitably}; for that very ſeeking and ſtar- 
ching after it, v. 4. ſuppoied ſome underſtanding. g Whichis the be- 
g:inning of this Wijdom, Chap. 1% 7. - 

6. * For the LORD ft giveth þ wiſdom: out of his 
mouth # comerh knowiedge and underſtanding. am 1. 5. 

h Heb. will g ve, hath promiſed to give it, to wit, to thoſe that FHeb; wil 
ſo ſeck ir. Whereby he allo teacheth them not to aſcribe any Wiſ- give 
dom which they may obtain, unto their own Wir and Induftry, 
bur only unto God's favour and bleſſing. i From his Word, or ap« 
p»intment and good will; as the word of God is taken, Dent: 8: 3. 

7 He layeth up found wiſdom & for the righteous : 
* heis a buckler to them / that walk uprightly. 

k Heb. Eſſnce or Subſtance, either, 1. Solid and true Felicity, OP= 
poled tothe vain Enjoyments of this World, which are ſaid ro have 
no Subſtance or Bceing, Prov. 23. 5. Or, 2. true and; fubſtantial 
Wiidom, which is 1atisfaftory and everlaſting, oppoſed to 
woridly Witdom, wh ch is but an empty ſhadow of Wiſdom, and 
peiiſhe:h with us. { To protect and 1ave, them from that miſe 
chicf and ruine which ſhall befall all wicked men. 

8 tHe keepeth * che paths of judgment -», and pre-? __ 

eeps S0 Gr: 
*Pſ:146; 94 


tKings 34 
9, 12, 


*Cha:30.5, 


ſerveth the way of his Saints » 
2m He. guar:ierh and gu deth the paths or ways, #. e. the counſels 
and ations of good men, as the next clauſe explains this, which 
are Calltd Paths of Judgm:nt, or, righteous Paths, Judgment being here 
put for Kigh'eo'ſneſs, as it 1s in Pal. 9g. 4. and oft elſewhere. And 
keeping of Parhs may be put for keeping them in their Paths, ſo as 
they ſha.l neither iwerve from them, tor ſtumbleand fall in them. 
z "The tame thing repeated in other words. 
| 9 Then 0 jhait thou underſtand righteouſneſs, and 
judgment, and equity p; yes, every good path q 
o When thou haſt done thy part expreſſed, v. 1, 2, 3, &c. and God 
in anjwer to thy deſires hath given thee Wiſdom, wv. 6. or when it 
1s with thee, as it follows, v 10. p All the parts of thy dury to 
Man, as well as the fear of God, v, 5. which contains all duties to 
zod. Theſc three words aie uſed here, as allo Chap. 1; 3. to ſig 
1e the ſame thing. qThe prattice of all vertues and Graces. 
10 When wildum c1treth into thine beart r, and 
knowledge is pieaſant unto thy ſoul ; ; 
r When thou doſt true'y love it, and paſſionatly deſire it, and 
aide its precepts in thy Heart, according to P/al, 119 18. 
i1 Litcietion {hail preſerve thee s, underſtanding 
(hal keep chee 
s From wic cd courſes and the miſchiefs which attznd upon 
them :. asis particularly expreiled in the following Verles. 
)2 To dehver thee irom the way of tne evil mart ; 


from the man that ſpeakerh froward things . 

t From following his counſel or example, which others for want 
of Wiſdom cumonly do. « With deſign to corrupt thy mind and 
entice thee to evil Principles or Practices. 


With the fruits or effects of their wicked devices. W hat was ſweet | 
in their Mouths ſhall be bitter in their Bellies, and that deſtruction | 
| Jed darkneſs, as Rom. 13- 12, Ofc. Epheſ. 5. tt, becauſe it comes from 


i To wit, from God and from his Counſels and reproofs ; 1o this 


Y fon a, if chou wilt receive my words, and * 
| unchaſt ations ; one kind being put for all the reſt. 


13 Who leave the paths of upr ightneſs x, tO walk in 


the ways of darkneſs y: 
x The way of God's Precepts. / 7. e. Of fin, which is oft cal. 


darkneſs, igno:ance and error, and loves darkneſs and hates light, 
and leads tro utter darkneſs. 

14 Who rejoice to do evil z, and delight in the fro- 
wardneſs of the wicked a. 

2 Secking and embracing occaſions of fin with diligence and 
grcedineſs, and pleaſing themſelves both in the prattice and remems= 
brance of fin, whereas upright men abhor and watch againſt all oc- 
calions of {in beforehand, and mourn bitterly for it atterwards. 4 
Not cnly in their own fins, but in the fins of other wicked men, 
which ſhews a greater ma'ignity of mind and love to fin.SceRom.1.z 2. 

15 | Whoſe ways are crooked b, and they froward in +fch;who 
their paths. are crooked 
b Or, Who make their ways crooked, is e. whoſe courſe of Life #1 *heir 

ſwerves from the right and ſtraight way of God's Law. | Way. 
16 To deiiver thee from the ſtrange womane; * e-,,, .. 
b p Ch: 5:3 
ven from the ſtranger which flattereth with her words . g,;.:4.& 

c From the Adultereſs or Whore ; called franze, partly becauſe ,.. c, 
ſuch Perſons were commonly Heathens, or are ſuppoſed to be ſuch | 
by reaſon of that ſevere Law againſt theſe practices in Iſraelitiſh wo- 


| men, Deut. 23. '7 or are juſtly reputed Heathens, as being dege- 


nerate {rael:ites, which are oft called #rangers, as hath been noted in 
the book of the Pſalms; and partly vecauſe converſation with ſuch 
Perſons is forbidden to men, as thoſe 1raelites which were not Levites 
are called Strangers, Numb. 1. 51. in reſpet& of the holy things which 
they were prohibited totouch ; and forbidden Fire 1s called frag? 
fire, Numb. 3.4. 4 Which uſeth all arts and ways to allure men ro 


17 Which 


Chap."Il. 


PTY 


2 
Ons 


F Chap. Tit. 


* Jer: 334 17 Which forfaketh * the puide of her youth e, and 
forgetteth f the covenant of her God g. 


e Towit, her Husband whom ſhe took to be her guide and go- 
vernour, and that in her yourh ; which circumſtance is added to 


aggravate her fin and ſhame, becauſe love is commonly moſt fincere / 


and f-rvent between an Hyu5band and W.fe of youth, as they are for 
thar Reaſon emphatically called, Prov. 5: 18. Iſa; 54: 6. Joel: 1. 8. 
Mal: 2: 14, 15. fi. e. Violateth or breaketh, as that word 1s 
commonly uſed in a praQtical ſenſe. e The Marriage Covenantz fo 
called, partly, becaute God is the Author and inſtirutor of that ſo- 
cicty and mutual Obligation :. and partly becauſe God is called to 
be the witneſs and judge of that ſolenin Promiſe and Covenant, and 
the avenger of the tranſgreſſion of it. 


18 For her houle inhclineth unto death +, and her 


paths unto the dead z. 


hb Converſation with her ( which was mot free and uſual in her 


own houſe ) is the ready and certain way to death, which it brings | 


many ways, by waſting a mans viral Spirits, and ſhortning his lite, 
by expoling him to many and dangerous Difcates, which Phylicians 
have declared and proved to be the effetts of inordinar Luſt, as alfo 
to the fury of jealous Husbands or Friends, and ſomer:mes to the 
Sword of civil Juſtice, and undoubted)y, without Repentance, ro 
God's wrath and the ſecond death. This is here mentioned as one 
great priviledge and bleſſed fruit of Wiſdom, to bedclivered from 
this evil. ; Or, as the Chaldee and ſome others render it, unto the Gi- 
ants, to wit, thoſe rebellious Giants, Ger. 6. 4. or, as others,unto the 
damned, or, unto hell. See for this word, Job 7. 9. Pjal. 88. 11. Pro. 
9. 18. & 21.16. 

19 None & that go unto her 7, return again mz nei- 


ther take thy hold of the paths of life ». 

k Few or none. An hyperbolical expreſſion uſed, 1. 64. 7. 1 
That go to her Houſe, or that lie with her, as this phraſe is uſed, 
Gen: 16: 4 & 30: 4 Jok 2: 3. m From her, and from this wickedneſs, 
unto God. Adulterersand Whoremongers are very rarely brought 
to repentance, but are generally hardned by the power and deceit- 
fulnets of that Luſty and by God's juſt judgment, pecyliarly infli- 
cted upon ſuch perfons, Heb. 13; 4. He alludes to the nature of cors 
poral death, from which no man can withour a Miracle return to 
this life. » Ofthoſe courſes which lead to true and eternal life. 

20 That thou mayeſt o walk in the Way of good men 


p, and keep the path of the righteous. 

o This depends upon v: tr. and is mentioned as onother happy 
fruit of Wiſdom, the foriner being deClared from v12. to this verie. 
? Follow the Counſels and Examples of the godly. Whereby he in- 
timats, that it is not ſufficien: to abſtain from evil company and 
practices, but thar we mult chooſe the converſation of good men. 

21 * For the upright thall dwell in the lagdq, and 


the perfect ſhall remain in ir. 

9g Shall have a peaceable and comfortable abode in the Land of 
Canaan, which allo is a Type of their everlaſting felicity, See Pſal. 
37» 3, 9» 18, 29. F 
okay. 22 * But the wicked ſhall be cut off from the earth, 
oi 194 and the tranſgreſſors (ball be || rooted outof it. 


jor, pluck CHAP. 1. 

w: Solomon exhorteth his Son to Obedience, 1 4. To faith, 5,6. andtruſt 
in God, the Benefits that they . ſball recerve thereby, 7, 8. To honour 
God with our Eftates, g. The advantage in ſo doing, 10. To patience un> 
der Gods chaftiſements, tx. 4 reaſon for it, 12, The happineſs of him 
that findeth Wiſdom, i3. Wiſdom ſet out with the benefits that agtend 
her, 14——18. Theefets, lg, 20. Another exhortation to perform 
our duty. 21 26, 27, To charitableneſs, 28. To avaid firife, 29. 
30. Againft envy, 31. The miſery of the wicked and the bleſſings of the 


Jus, 32 35- 


0 ; : 
Fane wy M* ſon,forget not my law @ ; * but let thine heart 
_— keep my commandments #3 
a My doctrine or counſel ; or the Law of God, which might be 
called his Law, as the Goſpel is called Pauls Goſpel. 2 Tim: 2: 8, 
becauſe delivered by him. & By diligent meditation and hearty at- 
« Chap. 4. tection. : 
10, 22: 2 For * length of days, and | long life, and peace 
f Heb. (hall they add tothee c. | 
fear: of life. © God will add theſe Bleſſings which he hath promiſed & the obe- 
1x 13; 9: dient, Deut: 8: 18. & 30: 20. 1 Tim: 4:8. . 
"hun 2 Let not mercy and truth 4 forſake thee * * bind 
. them about thy neck e ; write them upon the table of 


Si 3. 

thine heart f. 
4 Either, r, Gods Mercy and Truth. So It is a promiſe, God's 

Mercy and Truth ſhall not forſake thee. Or rather, 2. That Mercy 
and Truth which is Man's duty. So it is a Precept, which ſeems 
moſt probable both from the form of the Hebrew Phraſe, and from 
the following words of this Verſe, which are plainly preceptive,and 
from the promiſe annex'd to the performance of this precept in the 
next verſe. Mercy and Truth are frequently joined rogether as they 
are in God, as Pſal. 25: 10. & 57: 3, Oc. or in men, as Prov. 16.6. 
and 20; 28. Hof. 4: r. and here, Mercy notes all that benignity, cle- 
mency, charity, and readineſs to do good freely to others ; Truth 
or Faithfulneſs reſpects all thoſe Duties which we owe to God or man. 
to which we have ſpecial Obligation from the Rules of Juſtice. e 
like a Chain, wherewith perſons adorn their necks, as it is expreſ- 
ſed, Chap: 1: 9. which is faſtved there and not eaſily loſt, which alſo 
1s continually in ones view. f Either, r.upon thoſe tablers which the 
Jews are ſaid to have worn upon their Breaſ's, which are always in 
ſight. So he alludes to Deut: 6: 8. Or, 2. in thy mind and heart, in 
which all Gods Commands are to be received and ingraven, as is 
oft required in this Book, and every where. So the Table ofthe heart 
ſeems to be oppoſed to the Tables of Stone in witich God's Law was 
Writfen, as it us Fer: 3»: 33- 2.Cor: 3. Je 

*P(zl:11z: 4 * Ss ſhalt chou find favour g, and || good under- 

"y ſtanding + in the ſight of God ;and man. 

{ Or, gol »& 7 0. Obtain acceptance, or be gracious and amiable ro them. 

Iceeſs, hp \Whereby ro know thy duty, and to ditcern between gogg 2nd cvil 


Pal: 37: 
"I 


P ROY BRBAS. 


| 


Chap. 1 


The ſerious practice df Religion is ah excellent mean to ger aſolid 
underſtanding of it: as on the contrary a vitious life doth exceeding- 
ly debaſe and darken the mind, and keep men from the knowledge 
of Truth, which not only Scripture,but evenHeathen Philoſcphers 
have oft obſerved. - Others render it good ſucceſs. Which ſeams not 
ro ſuit well with the following words, i Grace or fav'ur with God, 
and that under/targing which 1s. ood in Gol's ſight, 1. e. truely and 
really ; as atruely good Man is called good befcre God, in the He- 
brew, Ecleſ. 9, 26. : * RI LY 
5 Truſt in the LORD & with all thine heart, and 


lean not unto thine own underſtanding /.. . | 
k Wholly and ſecurely rely upon God's promiles and providence 
for help and rejief in-all thine affairs and dangers. ! Think nor 
to accomplith thy deſigns by the {trength of thine own Wit with- 
out God's Blefling. - Under this-: one kind; of carnal confidence, 
which is moſt frequent and moſt plauſible, he uaderſtands, and for- 7 
bids all other contidences in bodily ſtrength, wealth, friends, & Ee 
6 * Inall thy ways »z acknowledge hims, and he iChr: al 
ſhall dire& thy paths o. Ef an 3 Ss OM l 
m Deſigns and undertakings for the things of this life or of the N 
next» 3 Heb. know him, to wit, practically ; or, own him, his Wiſe 
dom in following his counſels, his power and goodneſs, in expe | 
cting ſuccels from him, his Soveraignity .in managing all thy Af. | 
fairs ſo as to pleaſe and glorific him. o Afſift and bleſs all thine en< j 
deavours, and keep thee fiom the paths of fin and deſtruction. ww 14 
7 * Benot wiſe in thine own eyes p : fear the LORD — | 
q, and depart from evil. MS, oY i 
p Be not puffed up with vain conceit of thirle own Wiſdom, as | 
if that were ſufficient for the conduct of all thine affairs withour dis | 
rection or aſſiſtance from God, or - without the advice of others. i 
q This he aqds becauſe the reverence and dread of the Divine Ma= x 
jeſty will make a man, when he compareth himſelf with God, lit» h 
tle and vile in his own eyes. Revereace Gods Wiſdom, and thou i 
wilt deſpiſe thine own. | ET Wo 
8 Icſhall be + health to thy navelr, and f marrow s FHeb:mai 
 dicims, | 
to thy bones. - RE 15s +Heb: wa 
r i. e. To thy Body, which is ſignified by the Navel, which is Fo 1 il 
a noble and uſctul part of the Body by which theInfanr receives nous,,,,,oa;ae 
riſhment in the Womb,and which is the ligament or Bond by which | 
the Bowels, a principal part of the Body, are united together and 
preſerved, s Which is the nouriſhment and ſtrength of the bones, 
and a great preſzrver and prolonger of life, as the decay of it is a 
Chief cauſe of the weakneſs and dryneſs and decay of the Body. The 
ſenſe of the verſe is, This Wiſdom or fear of God is not only uſe= 
ful to the Salvation of the Soul, but alſo to the health and welfare of 
the Body, borh as it prevents thoſe Diſeaſes and Diſtempers which 
are oft procured by ſinful Juſts and Paſſions, and as it giveth us an 
Intereſt in all Gods promiſes, and putteth us under the care of his 
ipecial Providence. _ ,* 
9 *Honour the LORD with thy ſubſtance s,and with *Exo. 231 
the ficſt fruits u of all thine increaſe. 9;& 3 
# Or, With thy Riches. Lay out thy Eſtate not only to pleaſe and D i 
advance thy ſelt or Family, bur alſo ro glorifie God ; whith is done "= I 
by the payment of all thole offerings and dues which God hath requi» Mal "Y 
red; by giving according to thy Abilities, whatſoever is neceflary © * 3:1 
for the ſupportand advancement of God's Worſhip and ſervice in the Luk:hs: | 
World ; by free and liberal Contributions to thoſe whom God harh 13 
made-his Deputies, and, as I-may ſay, the Receivers of his Rents, 
to wit, faithful Miniſters and good Chriftians, and all others who 
need and require thy help. The performance of theſe Duties is here 
called an honouring of Goa, partly becauſe that word is ſometimes uſed 
for giving of Gifts, as 1 Tim. 5. 17. and elſewhere; and partly be- 
cauſe it 15 a Teſtimony of our reſpects to God, of our obedience to 
him as our Sovereign Lord, and that in hard and coſtly Duties, of 
our thankfulneſs to him as our chief Benefactor and Donor of all 
that we have, and of our belief of his promiſes made to the faithful] 
Practiſers of this duty ; which if they were believed, the moſt co- 
verous Perſons would be the moſt charitable. » Or, with the chief 
or be, or frf, which anſwers to the firſt-fruits under the Law. 8 


10 * So hall thy barns be filled with plenty x, and gO*® 


thy preſſes ſhall burſt out x with new wine. | 

x This is not the way to diminiſh thy Eſtate, as covetous and 
profane perſons alledge, but rather to increaſe it. y Shall be ſofil. 
ed, that rhey would burſt out if not carefully prevented. 


11 * My ſon, deſpiſe not z the chaſtning of the 


LORD : neither be weary of his corre&ion #. 
; thr | 13. 4 
z Either, s. by making light of it, or not being duly affected p{-1;,..5 
with it; and ſo this is one extream oppoſed to the other in the next Rev. 3.19 
clauſs. Or rather, 2. by accounting it an unneceſlary, and uſeleſs 
and troubleſome thing,but rather eſteem it as a priviledge and favour |, 
from God, and a benefit to thy ſelf ; for ſuch negatives do oft im« 
ply the contrary affirmative by a common figure called M-7ofs, as 
Prov: 19: 21. and oft elſewhere. And this ſenſe ſeems to agree bet«- 
ter both with the following Clauſe, which repeats the ſame thing 
with ſome aggravation, after the manner ; and with the reaſon 
uſed to enforce this and the following command, v. 12. which 
concerns not ſuch as are inſenſible, but rathey ſuch as had too deep 
a ſenſe of the evil of affliction. - Neither eſteem it tedious and ins 
tolerable, bur endure it with patience and chearfulneſs. 
12 For whom the LORD loveth, he correcteth b, * g1. +. 
even as a Father the ſon, i whom he delighterh. | 
b Afflictions are not Infelicities, but Benefits & Comforts, becauſe 
they are Teſtimonies of God's love, which is infinitly more deſires 
able than any evil can be terrible. They ſhew God's purpoſe, and 
deſire, and care to purge us fromour fins, and tomake us fir for his 
Preſence and Kioggdom. Thus 'and the former verſe ſeem to be here 
inſerted in the midſt of his Commendations of Wiſdom ro remove an 
objection againſt the excellency and happineſs of wiſe or pious men, 
taken from thoſe many Calamities to which ſuch perſons are fre- fFHeb. rh 
quent)y.expoſed, the reaton of which providence he here giveth. man tl 
13 Happy is the manc that findeth 4 wifdom, and Þ -rawerh 


the man bat getteth e underſtanding. out under 
c Notwithſtanding all bis afiftions. #4 Which ſuppoſeth (' di. Sandi, 
5 Þ 2 :gent 


1%, ) JUNOOIITR A” OD GL wt DOI it 7 >> 


I" 


*Job 5519 
Pſa.g4.12 


hap. III. PIR 0 Y 
| ligent ſearching for it, expreſſed, Chap. 2. 4+ e Heb: that draw- 
if ethout, Which exoreſſion implies ewo things, IT. thar man hath it 
not n:turally in himſelf, but muſt have it from another, even trom 
God and his word. 2. That men ſhould labour for it, as thoſe do 
that dig and draw forth Merrals out of the Earth- 

74 * For the merchandiſe of it is better than the 
&c. merchandiſe of ſilver, and the | gain thereof than fine 
[:19:10 gold 5, F 

P-3 1,  þ Tris more neceffary and advantagious, becauſe it is ſo, not on- 
|:& 16:16 ]y for this thorr life, bur alſo ro the furure and everlaſting life, in 
Jeb: re- which Gold and Silver bear no price. : : 
% is. 5-55 She is more precious than rubies : and all the things 
p8: 19. 


 £ For true wocth and uſefulneſs. ; : 
i 16 Length of days is in her right hand: and in her 


lefc hand riches and honour d. : 
a Wiſdom is here repreſented as a great and generous Princeſs di- 
ftribnting gifts to her ſubjects. She giverh them long life, &c. un- 


chiefs rothem, as they very frequently do to orhers. 
17 Her ways are ways of pleaſantneſs e, and all her 


paths are peace f. 

e Are exceeding delightful, to wit, to thoſe who know them and 
walk in them. Whoſe judgment is certainly to be preferred before 
the contrary opinion of ungodly men who are groſly ignorant of 
them, and profeſſed enemies to them, f Procure a bleſſed trans 
quillity in a Man's mind and conſcience, proſperity in hisunderta- 
'_ kings; andeternal reſt with God in glory. 

Pit 18 Shes * a tree of life g to them that lay hold vpon 


her b ; and happy 4s every one that recaineth fer 5 
| She is a certain pledge and mean ofeverlaſting life and happ1- 
nels. Healludes to that Treeof life, Gen: 2. 9. & 3. 22. Which ifearen” 
+ - » by Manin Paradiſe before his Fall, ſhould have perpetually preſerved 
him in life and health and vigour 3 and intimars, that thisis the only 
reſtorer of that life which we have Joſt by ſins þ That eagerly 
purſueafrer her, and when they overtake her, do greedily and gladly 
apprehend and embrace her, as the Hebrew word ſignifies. # Thar 
holdeth her faſt, and is conſtantly refolved not to forſake her. 


Pal. 136. ' 19 * The LORD by wiſdom k& hath founded the 
earth]; by underſtanding hath he || eſtabliſhed ms the 


' heavens. 

þ Either, re by Chriſt,the co-efſential and co-cternal Wiſdom of 
God the Father. Or, 2- by that Divine perfection of Wiſdom, 
which is the fountain of that Wiſdom that is in Man,which Solomer: 
hath hitherro commended ; and therefore the commendation of that 
Wiidom tends to the commendation of this whieh is a ſtream flow- 
ing from it» 1 Hath fixed it in the loweſt part of the World. 
m Or, fired or ordered them, framed them in that exquiſite order 
which now they have. 

20 By his knowledge the depths are broken up », and 


Acb.SHe the + clouds drop down the dew 0. 

'—_ _- # That great Abyſs or Depth of waters which was mixed with, 
and contained in theBowels of tbe Earth did break forth into Foun- 
rains and Rivers for the uſe of men and beaſts. Which is juſtly re- 
membred here as an illuſtrious effect of Gods Wiſdom,by which the 
Earth was made habitable, and the waters ſerviceable. o Under 
wh.ch theRain is comprehended as being of the ſame nature and uſe. 

21 My ſon, let them p not deparc fromthine eyes 9: 


keep ſound wiſdom and diſcretion. 

p To wit, wiſdom and diſcretion, of which he hath hitherto diſ- 
courſed, and which are expreſſed in the end of this verſe, and may 
be referred hither by a Figure called Trajection; and the words may 
be put into this order, Let net ſound Wiſdim and Diſcrerion depart from 
thine Eyes, but keep them diligently. The like Trajections are found 
in other Texts of Scripture. q 7. s. From the Eyes of thy Mind, 
Conſtantly and ſcrioully meditate upon them, and upon thoſe ex- 

_, cellent Precepts and Rules which proceed from them, 
Ca. * 22 Sothall they be * life unto thy foul 7, and grace 


to thy neck s. 

. * x Either, 1. to thee or thy perſon. They ſhall prolong and:per- 
petuat thy life, and make it lite indeed, to wit, pleaſant and happy; 
whereas a miſerable life is reputed a kind of death, andis oft ſo cal- 

” led. ' Or, to thy Soul, properly ſo called. They ſhall quicken and 

. delight and fave thy Soul, s Like a beautiful Chain or Ornament 

4, about thy neck, as above v. 3. and Chap. 1+ 9. 
Far 374 * 23 * Then ſhalt thouwalk in thy way # # ſafely «, 

+ 3 © © andthy foot ſhall not ſtumble x. | 

Heb: cou- #5 Manage all thy employments and concerns. « Or, ſecurely or 
ently, or, confidently, without danger or fear ; caſting thy care upon God m 
curely, the diſcharge of thy duty. x At thoſe ſtumbling-blocks and temp= 
overſ.29 fations at which heedleſs Sinners commonly ſtumble and fall. Thou 
3 ſhalr thereby be kepr from falling into (in, and that miſchief which 
j generally attends upon it. 
Chap. 6, 24 © When thou Iyeſt down, thou ſhalt not be afraid: 
iS. yea, thou ſhalt lie down, and thy ſleep (ball be ſweerty. 
al. 3.5. » Free from diſtracting cares and terrors, which oft times haunt 
£ 4.8. Sinners even in their ſleep, becauſe thy mind ſhall be compoſed and 
G ſerene through the ſenſe of Gods favour and providence, and the 
Conſcience of thine own integrity. 


25 *Be not afraid z of ſudden fear s, neither of the 
defolation of the wicked b when it cometh. 

z 5. e. Thou ſhalt nor be afraid. For that it is apromiſe, ſeems 
moſt probable from the context : only it is for greater emphaſis de- 
Jlivered in the form of a Precept ; I allow thee and require thee not 
to be affraid, which is both thy duty and priviledge. a For ſudden 
' and unexpeted evils are moſt frightful and grievous. And fear is 

here pur tor the evils feared, as Provi 1: 26, 27. and oft elſewhere. 
b Either, 1» aGively, which they bring upon thee. Or rarber, 2, paſ- 
ſively, which befals them, when the Lord cometh out of his place 50 
puniſh the Inhabitants of the emth for their Iniquity, as it 1s expreſſed, 
J#: 26: 21. andthou mayeſt be apt to fear leſt thou ſhouldit be in-| 


has $.22 


F.prepa- 


Pal gr.s. 


” 
- 
—-— ww. av> 
* 


— 


unto her c. | 
thou canſt delire, are not to be compared | 3:17. g Heb; from the Lnras or ownars of it ; from thoſe who have 


leſs when the foreſces that theſe things would prove ſnares and mil- , 
| though the former is not to be excluded)by that great and Soveraign 


| Law of Love or Charity, which God hath written in the Hearts of 


B R B $S. 


volved in the common calamity ; but fear not, for God will then 
hid- thee in his Chambers, as he promiſed, 7/3. 26. 20. 

26 Fer the LORD ſhall be thy contidence c, and ſhall 

keep thy foot from being taken &. 
| ©c A ſufficient and ſure ground of confidence to thee. 4 In the 
ſnares either of fin, or of miſchief, 

27 With-hold not e good f from f tnemto whom it is + Heb: :þ, 
dueg, when ir isin the power of thine hand to do zt þ, owner; 
_ e Do notdeny it, but readily and chearfully impart it, which is Foercofs 
implied in the contrary, as above, wv, 1s. and oft in this Book, as 
we ſhall ſee. f Any thing which is good, either Spiritually,as coun« 
ſel, comfort, reproof, &c. or civilly, the good things of the pre- 
lent life, as good is taken, Pal: 4: 6. called 1415 Worlds good, 1 John 


any kindof right to it, either, 1. by the Law of Juſtice and Equity, 
preſcribed both by the aarural and written L:1ws of God, and by the 


; Civil Laws of men. So this place commands the payment of juſt 


debrs, and the reſtitution of things either found or committed to our 
truſt, or taken from others by fraud or violence. Or, 2. ( which 
ſeems to be chiefly intended by comparing this with the next verſe, 


men by nature, and frequently and ſeverely injoincd in his word, 

| whereby every man is obliged according to his ability and oppor- 

tunity, to pity and relieve ſuch as are in ceal want or miſery : who 

in that cafe are here called rhe owners of our goods, not in reſpe& 

of men, as if men in want might ſeize upon the Riches of others, 

but in reſpe& of God who is the Sovereign Lord, and only true Pro- 

Prictary cf all mens Eſtates, who giverh them whenand to whom he 

pleaſerh, and who doth not give away his Right, nor make men ab. 

tolute Lords ofthe, to diſpoſe them as they will, but only allows 

them the uſe & comfort of them upon ſuch conditions & with ſuch 
Reſervations and Rent-charges, as I may call them, as he hath ap- 

pointed, whereof this is one, that men ſhould readily and freely 
communicat them to other men who need and require their helps 
And ſuch aQtions, though they be a&s of Chariry and bounty to 
men, yer, as to God, they are a&ts of Righteouſneſs, as they are cal. 
led, Prov. 11. 18. 2 Cor. 9: 9. and in many other places. þ Either 
1. to witholdit. Or, 2. to do good. And this clauſe may be ad- 
ded, cither, 1. as a limitation, ro intimart that God expetts from 
men according to what they have, and not according to what they have mat, 
as is ſajd, 2 Coy. 8. 12. Or, 2. as an argument to perſwade them 
to take the preſent ſeaſon, ro perform this duty when they are ca« 
pable of ſo doing, becauſe by the changes of this world, and the 
courſe of Divine providence, they may be diſenabled from the per- 
formance of this great and neceſlary duty, and then they will be 
withcur excuſe, 

28 * Say not # unto thy neignbour &,Go, and come »x,,, 
2gain, and to morrow I will give / : when thou: haſt it iz, 
by thee. | Deut: 24 

i The former verſe forbad the denial, and this forbids the delay !5+ 
of this duty, k Unto any man, as the word Netghbour is common-« 
ly uſed in Scripture, as' hath been oft proved, { To wit, what is 
thy due in manner before expreſſed, or what thou needſt : for this 
word 15 generally ufed concerning free or charitable Gifts, and not 
concerning due debts. 

259 || Deviſe aot evil # againſt thy neighbour, ſeing || Or, ys 
he dwelleth ſecurely by thee ». fiſe ne evil 

m Any thing injurious or hurtful Having commanded doing - 
of good, v: 27, 28. he here forbids doing or deſigning any evil. 

» Relying upon thine integrity : do not therefore betray thy truſt, 


which is hateful even to Heathens. : 

30 Strive not o with a man without cauſe p, if he 
have done thee no harm 'q. 

0 Either by wbrds before the Magiſtrate ; or otherwiſe by thine 
ations. p Without juſt and neceſſary cauſe. 9 Whereby he clear- 
Iy implies, that in caſe of injury, a maa may, by all lawful means, 
defend himſelf. 

31 * Envy thou not + the oppreſſor r, and chooſe *PC. y7:i, 
none of his wayss. | f Heb: # 
r For his impunity and ſucceſs in his wicked deſigns, and the 148 of vi 
Wealth, which he gains by his unrigh-eous praftices. 5 For what lence. 
men envy 1n others, they ſeek to obtain for themſelves. 
| 32 For the froward ? js abominationto the LORD 
# : * but his ſecret is with the righteous x. 

? Or, perverſe, who walketh in crooked or ſinful Paths, as the 
Opreſfor laſt mentioned; oppoſed to the upright Man, who is cal- 
led right or fraight, as Deut: 32: 4. Prov: 29: 27. u God hates him, 
and therefore ſooner or later he muſt ne2ds be extremely and eter< 
nally miſerable. x They are God's Friends and Favourites,to whom 
he tamiliarly imparts, as men uſe to do to their Friends, his mind 
and counſels, or his ſecret fivours ahd comforts to which other men 
are ſtrangers. Compare P/al; 25: 14. Johni5: 15. Revel; 2: 17. ES 
23 The curſe of the LORD 3s in the houſe of ehe *Levit6. 
wicked y: buthe blefſeth the habitation of the juſt. < pup 
3 Not only upon his own perſon, but alſo upon his Poſterity and 2 © © 
upon all his domeſtical concerns. . *Jam:4.6. 
34 * Surely he ſcorneth z the ſcorners a: but he gi- 5... -.;, 


veth grace b unto the lowly. 

z He will expoſe them toſcorn and contempt. # Proud and in- 

ſolent Sinners, who make amock at fir, Prov. 14. 9. andat God and 
Religion alſo, and deſpiſe all Counſels and means of amendment. 
Compare P/al: 1: 1. & Prov: 1; 22, 6 To wit, favour, both with 

himſelf and with men, as this word and Phraſe is uſed, Exva, 3.21. 

& 11 3. &12: 36. Ecileſ; 9: 11. Luke 2; 52, Oc. _ 
35 The wiſe ſhall inherir glory c ; but ſhame j ſhall __ "he 
be the promotion of fools 4. fools 

c Shallenjoy it not only for a ſeaſon, as wicked men oft times do,/** 

bur as an Inheritance conſtantly and to perpetuicy. 4 In ſtead of 

that glory which they greedily ſeek, they ſhall meet with nothing 

bur ignominy. Or, as it is in the Margent, ſbame exal:eth or lifeth 


up fools, i, e. It makes them manifeſt and notorious, as this very 
WC<.IC 


I9:; 


*Pſ:25: is 


Chap. 1 p 


| 


II 


d: the 


pro: 
evil 


74 


FN 
tbe 


(F1v. I'V, 


word is uſed, Prov: 14: 29, Or, as the words lie in the Hebrew 


P Rt 0-F 


Text, foels take or carry away ( as this word is here rendred by divers 
berh Ancient and medern Tranſlators, and as it is uſed, Levit: 6: 
ro, 15: and oft elſewhere ) ſhame, ro wit, as his proper Portion or 
Inheritance; which is heie very fitly oppoſed to the Portion or In- 
heritance of the Juſt. And alchough rhe Verb be ſingular, yer ir 
agrees well enough with the Noun plural, becauſe this is taken dil- 
tciburtively,ſuch conſtrudtions being very uſualin theHebrew Text. 
| CH A P. IV. | 
So/omon ſheweth the excellencyof his Dofrine, 1———=4. His counſel to get 
IWiſaom, «6, 6. And Underffanding, 7. The Honour which cometh 
thereby, 8, 9, The good effa#s of it, 10 12. he dehorts from the 
paths of the Wicked, by the evil ron/equences thereof, 13——— 19. And 
exkorteth to keep. ſeveral precepts for the better government of himſelf, 20. 
Concerning Eyes, 21, 22- His Heart, 23. His Miuth, 24. Auld ht 
feet, 25— T7. 
Far, ye children, the inſtruction of a father «, 
and atrend to know underſtanding 
a Of me your Teacher, who have paternal authority over you 
and affeCtion to you. 


2 Fer I give you good dodrine b ; forſake ye not my 


Law c. 

& Not vain or fo2liſh or falfe or pernicious counſels, but ſuch as 
are true and profitable, c Gods Law or Commands delivered to 
you by my mouth. See on Chap. 3: r. 

2 For I was f my fathers ſon 4d, * tender e and only 
beleved f in the ſight of my mother, 


d In a ſpecial manner, his beſt-beloved Son and deſigned to be 
his Succeſlor in the Throne. e Young and tender in years and cap- 
able of any impreflions, and tenderly educated. f Heb, only, or the 
enly Son : Or rather, becauſe Bathſhebs ſeems to have bad other Sons, 
1 Chr. 5. 1. as an only Son, as dearly beloved as an only Son: in 
which ſenſe this Title is given to Iſaac, Gen: 22: 2, 12, 16. though 
he had another Son,and to others, And all theſe circumſtances are 
mentioned to ſhew the neceſſity and great benefit of wholeſome in- 
ſtruftion, which his Royal Parents would not negleR, no not in his 
tender years,and thereby to prepare & excite them by his example 
to receive inſtruftion, © 

4 *He taught me alſo, and ſaid unto me g, Let 
thine heart retain my words ; * keep my command- 
| ments and live þ, 

. g The following Verſes,at leaſt as far as the Tenth Verſe,are pro- 
| pounded as the words of David, that the Name of ſo great a King 
and Holy a Prophet,might add the more Authority and Efficacy to 
his Counſels. hi. e. Thou ſhalt live. Ir is a promiſe in the form 
ofa command, as Chap. 3. 25. : : 
5 Get wiſdom, get underſtanding : forget it not ; 
- neither declinefrom the words of my mouthz, 
; From the beliefand praftice of my Word. 
6 Forſake her not, and ſhe jhall preſerve thee: love 
her &, and ſhe ſhall keep thee. | 
k He intimates, that it is not enough to do whatis good, which 
may. ſometimes proceed from worldly or ſinfulMotives, but that we 
muſt have a ſincere and fervent love to it. | 


7 Wiſdom #s the A thing | ; therefore get wiſ- 


} Heb. # 
Sow 00 mY 
Furher. 
1Ch-29.1: 


*Chr.28.9 
PCh.7:2: 


| Or, ſub- 


faxce. 
(232 £37 


dom: and with all y || getting# get underſtanding. 

I The moſt 'excellent &E all poſſeſſions. m Even with the price 
of all, though it coſt thee the loſs of all which thou haſt. Or,zor. 
among ad, Whilſt you labour for other things,do not neglett this. 

8 Exalt hers, and ſhe ſhall promote thee : ſhe ſhall 
bring thee to honour 9, when thou doſtembrace her. 

# Let her havethine higheſt eſteem and affeFtion. o Both with 


*Ch: 1.9. God and men: which Solomon knew by experience. 
rſs 9 She ſhall give tothine head * an ornament of grace 
wthe Þ 2 || a crown Of glory ſball ſhe deliver to thee. 


vitly s p 17. e. An acceptable or beautiful ornament, ſuchas they uſed ro 


Coonof Put upon their heads. 
Hear, O my ſon, and receive my ſayings: and 


Gley, IO 
the years of chy life ſhall be many. | 
11 I have taught thee in the way of wiſdom q : I 
haveled theein right paths. 
q Either, 1. which procureth Wiſdom. Or 2. which Wiſdom 
x direQeth thee to walk in. h : 
\Hal.91: -x2 When thou goeſt, thy ſteps ſhall not be ftraitned 
Chex: 23:7 * and when thou runneſt, chou ſhalt not ſtumble s. 


7 Thou ſhalt manage thine affairs, with great facility ſafety and 
"Chia: 1g. {uccels. | It is a Metaphor from thoſe who walk in a ſtrait and un- 
P18! cen path,where they are apt to ſtumbe and fall. - Not miſcarry. 
12 * Take faſt hold of inſtruction, let her not go ; 


p - keep her, for (he 5s thy life r. 


t The conduQer, and preſerver, and comfort of thy life; 


not x inthe way of evil mes. | 

>. u Avoid their courſes and company. » Do not proceed further 

If thou haſt unadviſedly entred unto ity do not perliſt in it,but get 

the ſpeedily out of it. 
15 Avoid it, paſs 

away. | - Rs 

y Keep at a great difance from it. Compare Job 22: 23: Prov: 5. 
8. z Shun all occaſions of tins | | 

16 For they {lecpnot « except they have done miſ- 
| 99 : and their ſleep is taken away unleſs they cauſe 

ome to fall. ; 

# They cannot compoſe themſelves to ſleep with quletneſs and 
ſfarisfattion ro their own minds. & Into their own Snares,ceither in- 
to fin, or into miſchief. ; ES 

17 For they eat the bread of wickedneſs c, anddrink 


not by it y, turn fromir s, and paſs 


14 * Enter not into the path of the wicked «, and go | 


E R B & 


c The ſenſe iseither, r. Wickedneſs is as neceſſary and as pleaſant 
to them as their Bread. Which ſuirs well with the former Verie- 
Or, 2. They live whally upon what they ger by wicked courſes. 
Which gives the reaſon of what he laſt ſaid, why they could not 

cep without prey. 4d 7. e. Gotten by violence. See on the for- 
mer Clauſe, | Fo WO Fe 

18 Butthe path of the juſt js as the ſhining lighe e, 

that ihineth more and more unto the perfe&t day fo 

e The common courſe of their lives or a&ions is pure and ſpot= 
leſs, clear and certain, ſafe and comfortable, as light is... f juſt 
men.do daily more and more grow in knowledge, and_ grace. anc 
conſolation,until all be perfefted and ſwallowed up in glory. . 

Ig The way of the wicked is as darkneis g : 
know not at what they ftumble ++ rey BES( bn 

g Ful of groſs ignorance and errour,of uncertainty and confuſion; 
of wickedneſs, of danger and miſery : all- which come under the 
name of darkneſs in Scripture uſe, and ſuit well with the context. 
þ Heb. ſha tumble. Though they are always in danger, yet they 
are always ſecure, and donor diſcern their danger, nor, the cauſc, 
or manner, or time of their ruine,ti!] they be ; urprized with it, _ 

20 My Son, attend to my words: 1ncline thine ear. 
unto my ſayings. 


they 


- 


them in the midſt of thine heart 5. 
; Heartily love them and ſtedfaſtly retain them. . '-:  -— + 
22 For they are life unto thoſe that find them, and 


which are the more immediate and cffeQual cauſe of all mens afti- 
ons. 7From thence proceed all the aQions, as of the natural, ſo.. 
of the Spiritual life, which lead to Eternal life and happineſs ; .as 
on the contrary all evilactions tending to Death ſpring from thenge 
which is here implied. i] 
24 Put away trom thee | a froward mouth 

perverſe lips put far from thee. \ ++ 

m All ſorts of finful words, which proceed from. and diſcover an 
evil Heart. 


»”, and 


lids look ſtraight before thee. 

7 Direct all thine actions by a good intention to a rightend,and ' 
keep thy mind fixed upon that way which leads to-it, ard neither 
look r.0r turn aſide to-the right hand nor to the lefr, as it follows 
os "ID ; h | PFs 
26 Ponder the path of thy feet o, and || let all thy 
ways be eſtabliſhed p. . 

0 Conſider thine actions before thou doeſt them, and ſee that they 
agree with the Rule. p Let thine Actions be uniformly and con- 
ſtaatly good in ſpight of all remptations to the contraty. Or, Let 
thy ways be a:refied or diſpoſed aright, as this Hebrew word fignifies. 
Or, #hy ways ſhall beeftabliſhed. So this is a promiſe to confirm | the 
foregoing Precept. Ifthou doeſt ponder them, thou mayeſt expect 
Gods bleſſing and good ſucceſs in them. hatroaa/oopen 


' 14. 


remove thy foot from evil. $E 
Gods commandsnot taks _ 


q-Fly all extreams, and neither add to 
from them. | 


—S AP. V.: PIE a 

An exhortation to the fludy of Wiſdom, t, 2. To ſbun the company of franga. . 
Women, 3, 4, 5. . The miſchief of Whoredom and Riots, 14. In @ . 
married efiate exhorted to Chaſtity :nthat ſtate, and rejoice ,with . 
the wife of his youth 15. 19. Gods pondering our ways, an £4 £ument 19 -% 
cloſe with the Exhortation, 20, 21: The miſerable end of the Wicked,;. 23... Tu 


” «4 . 
. 


'to my underſtanding. . | (11:0: ani 30 310 
2 That thou maift regard « diſcretion 3, and'rbaf thy 
lips may keep knowledge c.  _ © i i od 
4 Or, keep, i.e. hold faſt, as it is in the next clauſe..:.b Spiritual -- 
Wiſdom or the conduct of thy Life,” as this word is E bp = >> 
1: 4:- and elſewhere in this Book. « That by wiſe and pigus- diff 
courſes thou maiſt preſerve and improve thy Wiſdom for "thine . 
- own and others good. F | +5 < + TH F% AH CORR 
3 * For d the lips of a ſtrange woman drop as ant ho-" 


- 


6: 


 &4Ir concerns thee to get, and fouſe diſcretion, that thou mailt late. 
be able to reſiſt and repel thoſe manifold Temprations . to which 
thou art expoſed. e Her words and diſcourſes are ſweet, and char= _.. 
ming and prevalent. RE | EY ES 
4 But her end is bitter as wormwood f ; ſharp as a + 
two-edged Sword. TR, 7 2 .noubigo 
f Her deſign, and the effect of that lewdneſs to which ſhe -entis «+ 
ceth men, is the ſiners deſtruction. 
5 * Her feet g go down to 
on hell. | | | 
g Her courſe or manner of Life. BE 2s: ISGs 153] 
6Leſt thou ſhouldſt ponder the path of life b,her ways 
are moveable z, hat thou canſt not know them &,  * 
hTo prevent thy ſerious conſideration of the way&manner of re- © 
ſcuing thy ſelf from this deadly courſe of Life. - Various and 
changeable. She transforms her ſelf inco ſeveral ſhipes to accom- / 
modate her ſelf to the humours of her Lovers,and harth a Thouſande 
Arts and Deceits to enſnare them, and hold them faſt.. & Thou: 
canſt not diſcover all her ſubti] practices,” and much lefs deliver 
thy ſelffrom rhum. £02327 G33 Th (1:4 
7 Hear me now therefore, Oye Children, and de- 
part not from the words of my mouth, DIES 
FE $ * Re- 


death : her ſteps take hold 27: 


= 


the wine of violence 4. 


Chap. 


21 * Ler them not depart froth thine eyes: keep * Chez: 


s Ch.3: 


+». 4.0 
+ Heb. - | 
Fowardnus| 
of. mout b | 
and per 


25 Let thine Eyes look right on », and letthine eye- — | 
; bl 


[Or,eZ th1 
ways ſhall 
be ordered | 
aright, | 


27 * Turn not to the right hand, nor to' the lefe 4* 32: & 28; 


M: ſon, attend unto my wiſdom;and bow-thine ear. - ' 


ny-comb e, and her F mouth js ſmoother thanoil.';"" *'-HHeb. pa. 


:. *FChap: 7: 


| 


, 


l} 
'l 


i 
': 


f 
\ 


| 
| 


* + health toall their fleſh, | +4; ee,” of pps BR 
23 Keep thy heart + with all diligence ; for out of dirine. | 
it arethe iſſues of life 1. | 4 1:45, 1» RR 
& Thy mind and thoughts, and eſpecially the will and affeQtions, COS | 


| 


j 


| 


EDS 1d. Sage 


PY 


' ſo 


;F < 


rn Dc A 2H SE CIT Oe TO RAPE rs OT IIS... 
* rhB.ab 6 : Y « 


Yee, 


eb: thy 


*-. 


"IT 


a £ 


"6 
Ls V S 


_. infamous and hateful. j 
*. 15; Drink waters out of thine own ciſtern ; and run- 


ning waters out of thine own well c. 
d. Cc. is Meyaphor contained here, and v. 16, 17, 18. is to be 
unde ;. either, 1. of the free and lawful uſe of a mans eſtate, 


ed to own the Children of Whoredom. 


ed with Children; for Barrenneis was eſteemed a curſe and re- 


$*Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh 


the door of her houſe /. 
I Leſt thine eyes affe& thine Heart, and her allurments prevail 

over thee. : 

9 Leſt thou give thine honour # unro others », and 


thy years ounto the cruel p. 

w Thy Digoity and Repuration the ſtrength and vigour of thy 
Body and Mind, which isan honour to a man,and which are com- 
monly waſted by Adulterous practices. » Unto Whores and their 
Husbands and,Children and Friends. o The flour of thine age, thy 
youthful years. p To the Harlor, who thotigh ſhe pretends ar» 
dent Love and kindneſs to thee, yet in truth is one of the moſt cru- 
el Creatures in the World, waſting thy Eſtate and Body without 
che leaſt pity, and rhen caſting thee off with ſcorn and contempt, 
and when ber Intereſt requires it, taking away thy very life, of 
which there are innumerable examples, and damning thy Soul for 
EVer. 


x0 Leſt ſtrangers 9 be filled with + thy wealth, and 
thy labours r be in the houſe of a ſtranger, 


1 ot only the ſtrange women themſelves, but Bawds, Panders, 
an Adulterers, who are in league with them. r Wealth got- 
ten by thy labours. 


11 And thou mourn at the laſt 5, when thy fleſh, and 


body t are conſumed s. 

5 Bitterly bewailthy own madneſs and miſery when it is too late. 
# Thy. Fleſh, even thy Body 3 the particle, and, being put expoſt- 
tively, s By thoſe manifold diſeaſes which filthy and inordinate 
Lufts bring upon the oy, of which Phyſicians give a very large 
and ſad Catalogue,and the Bodies of many Adulterers give full proof, 
22 And fay, How have I hated inſtruction x, and 
my heart deſpiſed reproof j? 

'x Oh what a mad beaſt have | been to hate and fleight the fair 
watnings which were given me,and againſt mine own knowledge, 
to run headlong into. this pit of deſtruction! Which are not the 
words of a true penitent mourning for, and turning from his fin, 
buit only of a man who is grived for the ſad effe&s of his delightful 
Luſts, and tormented with the horour ofhis own guilty Conſcience. 
7 I did with my whole heart abhor all admonirions: |. 

13And have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers z, 


nor enclined mine ear to them that.inſtructed me. 


& Of my Parents and Friends, and Miniſters, who faithfully and 


; ol + ol informed me of thoſe miſchicfs and miſeries which now 


14 I was almoſt in all evil a, in the midft of the 


congregation and Aſſembly 6. 

s Oh what a miſerable man am I! There is ſcarce any miſery in re- 
ſpet of Eſtate, or Body, or Soul, into which I am not already 
plunged. The words alſoare and may well be rendred thus. In s 
moment 1 am come into all' evil. la how little a time, and for what 
ſhort and momentany pleaſures am I now come into extream and re- 
medileſsmiſery ! 5 I who deſigned and expeQed to enjoy my Luſts 
with ſecrecy, and impunity, am now made a publick example and 

meful ſpectacle to all men,and that in the Congregation of 1ſreel, 
where I was taught better things, and where ſuch Attions are moſt 


both for his own comfort, and for the good of others. Or rather 
2. of the. honeſt uſe of Matrimony, as the proper Remedy againſt 
theſe filthy praftices: This beſt ſuits with the whole context both 
foregoing and following : and thus it is explained'in the end of 
wv. t8." Sothe ſenſe is, Content thy ſelf with thoſe delights which 
Gol alleweth thee, with the ſober uſe of the Marriage Bed. Why 
ſtheufdſt rhou ramble hither and thither, treſpaſſing againſt God 
and tenjito-fteal their Waters which thou mighteſt freely take 
out of thine own Ciſternn or Wel); The ground of the Metaphor 
us ig that raters were ſcarce and precious inthoſe Countries,and 

re men uſed to make Ciſterns and Wells for their own pri- 
vate uſe.. And the ſame Metaphor of Waters, and of a Pit, or Wel 
AS 4 wro things of this nature elſewhere, as Prov: 23: 27: Iſs: 


po os x 


{1,03 t.” x | 
x6 Le: thy fountains 4 be diſperſed abroad e, and r1- 


atersin the ſtreets. 


&- 
-- 
{> 
5 
Us 
Wa, 
22 
PE 
= 
" 
| >] 
"+6 
Q 
© 
9 
i] 
© 
- 
D 
wy 
> 
- 
A. 


given to Children, becauſe as they are Rivers in reſpe& of their 
arents,ſo when they grow up, they alſo beceme Fountains to their 
Children. e They fhall be multiplied, and in due time appear abroad 
In the World to thy Comfort and Honour, and for the good of o- 
thiers: whereas Whores are commonly: barren, and men are aſham« 


17 Let thembeonly thine own, and not ftrangers 

with thee ff EY 

f Hereby thou miyeſt be ſecyred, that thou doſt not father and 
leave thine Eſtate to other mens Children ; whereas the Parents of 
Harlots Children are common or uncertain 

' 48 Let thy fountain g bebleſſed b, and rejoyce with 
the wife 5.of thy. youth &, 

£ Thy Wife, as the next clauſe explains it. þ She ſhall be bleſ- 


35m eſpecially among the Iſraelites. Or, rather, ſhe ſhall be a 
lefling and a Comfort to thee, asit follows,and not a Curſe and a 
Snare, as an Harlot will be. # Seek not to Harlots for thar delight 
which God alloweth thee to take with thy Wife. So here he ex- 
Plains the foregoing Metaphor, and applies it to his preſent deſign. 


PROT E RB 8: 


| 


with whom therefore in all reaſon and juſtice thou art fill to fa- 
tisfy thy ſelf, even when ſhe is old. Or he mentions Nouth, becauſe 
that is the ſeaſon 3n which men are moſt prone to unclean practices, 
_ which men are commonly fortified by the infirmities of 
Md Age. 


thou raviſht o always with her love. 


2. to Princes and great men, who uſed to make them, tame and fa- 
miliar, and to take great delight in them. as hath been noted by 
many Writers ; of which ſee my Latine Synopſis. mn 7. e. Her Loves 
and Embraces, expreſſed by lying between the Breaſts, Cant. 1+ 13: 
Compare Exzek:23:3,8.2i-nAt all convenient times: For that there 
may be exceſs in the uſe of the Marriage- Bed is manifeſt, not on- 
ly from many Scriptures, but from the light of Nature, and thu 
conſent of wile and ſober Heathens, who have laid reſtraints upon 
men in this peculiar. A man may be drunk with his own Wine 
and intemperate with his own Wife. Or, inall ages and conditi» 
ons. Do not only love her when ſhe is young and beautiful, but 
alſo when ſhe is 01d and deformed. 0 Love herfervently. Ir is an 
HypcrbolicalExpreſfſion. 

. 20 And why wilt thou, my ſon, be raviſht with a 
ſtrange Woman p,and embrace the boſom of a ſtranger? 

p Why wilt thou deſtroy and damn thy ſelf for thoſe delights 
which thou maiſt enj-y without ſin or danger ? 


LORD 9g, and he pondereth all his goings r. 
q God ſces all thy fiithy actions, though done with 


grees, numders,and aggravations of all their unchaſt actions. . 


and he ſhall be holden with the cords of his þ ſins s. 

sIn vain doth he think to- diſentangle himſelf from his luſts by 
repenting when he grows in years, and to eſcape puniſhment ; for 

E 1S in perfect bondage to his Lufts,and is neither able nor willing 
to ſet himſelf ar Liberty; and if he do eſcape the rage of a jealous 
Husband, and the ſentence of the Magiſtrate, yet he ſhall be in« 
fallibly overtaken by the righteous Judgment of God. 

23 * He ſhall die without inſtruction *, and in the 
greatneſs of his folly « he ſhalFgo aſtray x. 

8 Becauſe he neglected Inſtruction, Or, withour CorrefFion or 
Amendment. He ſhall die in his ſins, and not repent of them,as he 
deſigned and hopcd to do before his death. « Through his ſtupen= 
dious Folly, wherebyhe cheated himſelf with hopes of Repentance 
or Impunity, and expoſed himſelf to endlcſs.torments for the mo« 


of Life, and from eternal Salvation. 

HA P, VI. 

4 Dehort ation againſt ſ::retyſhip, i. The danger of it, 2. Ana the way 
of delivery, 3 5. Sluggards reproved by a Simnulitude of the Ant, 
C———1 5. The carriage of the wicked deſcribed, 12 ==——= 14, And 
hu ſudden ruin, 15. Of ſeven things which are diſpleaſing to God, 
16 — 19. The benefits of keeping the Commandments, 20——24, 
The Miſchief of Adultery, 2g, 16's evil conſequences, 26 3s. 

M Y ſon, if thou be * ſurety 2 for thy friend ; if 

thou haſt ſtricken thy hand 6b with a ſtranger e: 
« To wit, raſhly, without conſidering for whom, or how far 
thou doſt oblidge thy ſelf, or how thi ſhalt diſcharge the Debe, if 


occaſion repuire it. Otherwiſe ſuretyſbip in ſome caſes may be not 
only lawfu), bur an A of Juſtice, and Prudence, and Charity, 
See Gen: 42: 37: & 43: 8. Philem:ve19, Or, to ( as this prefix moſt 
commonly ſignifies ) # fiend. b Obliged thy ſelf by giving thine 
Hand, or joining thine Hands with another mans, as the cuſtom 
then was in ſuch caſes, Of which ſee Job 19: 3: Prov: 117 8: and 
22:26, £ With the Creditor, whom he calls a Stranger, becauſs 
the Uſurers in J7#el, who lent Money to others for their neceſſary 
occaſions upon condition of paying uſe for it, were either Heathens, 
or were reputed as bad as Heathens, becauſe this practice was for« 
bidden by Gods Law, Deut: 23: 19. Or,toor for a Stranger; for here 
is the ſame prefix which is rendred for in the former clauſe. And 
ſo he may imply, that whether a man be ſurety to, or for, a friend, 
or to, or for; a ſtranger, the caſe and courle to be uſed is much of 
the ſame kind. 

. 2 Thou art ſnared d with the words of thy mouth 5 


thou art taken with the words of thy mouth. 
rigs Freedom is loſt, and thou art now in Bondage to anov 
ther. 

3 Do this now, my ſon, and deliver thy ſelf, when 
thouart come into the hand e of thy friend f, go bum- 
ble thy ſelf g, || and make ſure thy friend þ. 


e Into the Power. f Either 1. of the Creditor, 


whom, as being thy Friend, thou didſt become Surety ; whereby 
thou art not only in the Creditors Power, to exaQt payment, but 
alſo in the Debtors Power, by his neglect or unfaithfulneſs, to cxe 
poſe thee to the payment of the Debt. And this may ſeem beſt ra 
agree both with v. x. where Friend is taken in that ſenſe,and is di- 
ftinguiſhed from the Creditoywwho 1s called a ftranger, and with vhe 
words here following; for this humbling of himſelf was not likely 
to have much power with a Stranger, and a griping Uſerer 3 but 
it might probably prevail with his Friend, either to take effectu« 


Obligation, or to ſecure him againſt it ſome other way. g Heb: 
Offer thy ſelf to be tredgen upm, or Throw thy Jelf down at his feet. 
As thou haſt made thy Self his Servant, bear the fruits of thine own 
Folly, and humbly and carneſtly implore his Patience and Cles 
mency. h Or, and prevail with thy Friend, ſtrive to win him 
by thine inceſſant and carneſt ſolicitations, Or, honour or magnifie 


& Which thou didſk marry in her and thine own yourhtul days, | thy Friend, 


which is fitly and properly oppoſed to,and indeed 
9 


Chap, 


who poſſi- ſhalt th 
bly may be alſo thy Friend ; yet take the following courſe with fr 
him, and much more if he be a Stranger. Or 2. Of the Debtor,for with 


as 


I9 Let her be as the loving hind I. and pleaſant TOC ; fHeb:gz: 
let her breaſts ws + ſatisfie thee at all times = ; and + be te 44, 


Heb. es 


1 Or, as the beloved Hind, Hebs« the Hind of Loves ; as amiable and 77m alway 
delightful as the Hinds are, either x. to their Males, the Harts ; or #” &@ levy, 


21 * For the ways of man arebefore the eyes of the »,q, RY 


Job 31: 
all poſſible & of _ 
cunning and ſecrecy». r He taketh an exact account of all rheir Chap 15, 
doings, that he may recompence them according to the kinds, de. 3. 
Jer:16,194 
22 Hisown iniquities *ſhall take the wicked himſelf, & 32. iy. 


hap.ir, 
3» T 6. 
T Heb: 


* Job 4.29 


& 16% 


mentany pleaſures of ſinful Luſts, x From God and from the way 


150 


0s, 
1 


s 


al care to pay the Debt, or atleaſt to diſcharge him from the , 


Ly on 


« | 


VE 


Vo 


Ch 
& 2 


fHe 
of By 


(kk. 
&% for 


" 


Is 


Y Chap. VF. 


: PROP 
ſom? good meaſure donz by the humbling a mans ſelf before 
him. 

4 Give not ſleep to thine eyes, nor ſlumber to thine 
eye-lids þ, 

bh To wit, untill thou haſt taken care for the diſcharge of this 0- 
bligation.Be nor ſecure,nor negligent,nor dilatory in this matter. 

5 Deliver thy ſeif as a roe from the hand of ;he Hun- 
ter &, and asa bird from the hand of the fowler. 

k With all poſſible expedition, as the Roe runs ſwiftly away. 

6 Go to the ant 1, thou ſluggard ; conlider her ways 
”, and be wile : 

I This 1s another diſtin& precept ; and it is for the moſt part as 
needleſs to ſeek, as hard to find, Coherence in the Proverbs and 
Counſels of this Book. m Her ations and manner of living eſpe 
cially k-r Diligence & Providence, which are the things commend- 
ed in licr, v.7,8. of which Naturaliſts give many inſtances, as that 
the Ants watch the fitteſt ſeaſons for all things, that they provide 
moſtplentifully againſt the rimeof Famine, that they never hinder, 
but always afſitt one another in their work,and unite their force to- 
gether to carry away ſuch things as are too large or heavy for one 
of them, that they prepare fit cells or repoſitories for their Cornin 
the ground,and ſuch as the Rain cannot eaſily reach; and it through 
EXCcive rain their Corn be wet, they bring ir forth to be dried,that 
they bite off the ends of the Grains of Corn that they may nor 
grow, Oc. : 

7 Which having no guide, overſeer,or ruler ». 

» Which might dire& them in, or quicken them to the work, as 
the Bees have their Kings, and many other Creatures have their Lea- 
ders. This heighrens their commendation. 


her food in the harveſt o. 

s When they come forth in great numbers, as in Winter they 
ſtir not out of their holes. 

9g * How long wile thou ſlzep p, O ſluggard ? when 
wilt thou ariſe out of thy ſleep? 

p Wh-n the Ants are watchful and labour not only in the day- 
time, but even bynight, when the Moon ſhineth, 

19 Yet alittle ſleep, a little ſlumber, a little fold- 


ing of the hands s to {leep. 
7 This he ſpeaks in the perſon of the ſluggard, refuſing to ariſe, 
and requiring more ſleep, that ſo he might expreſs the diſpoſition 
and common prattiſe of ſuch perſons. s Which is the geſture of 
men compoſing themſelves to ſl:ep. 
11 * So ſhall thy poverty come as one that travelleth 


'+ f, and thy want as an armed man #. | 
Web 7.00 et Swiftly and unexpeRedly. «Irrefiſtably or unavoidably. 


 T(h, 24. 
33 


8 Provideth her meat in the ſummer, and gathereth 


% 


8: 8 © 


o The law of God which thy Parents have taught thee, and preſ- 
ſed upon thee. p Dire& thee how to order all thy ſteps and ations 
7 It ſhall give thee Counſel and Comforr. 

22 * For the commandment 3s a 
law is light, and reproofs of inſtru&ion s are the way to 
we e2- 

7 Itenlightens thy dark mind, and clearly diſcovers to thee the 
plain and right way, s Wiſe and inſtructive Reproofs or Admc- 
nitions. #* Both to preſerve and prolong this Life, and to procure 
eternal Life to thoſe that obey them. : 

24 * To keep thee from the evil woman « ; from 
the flattery || ofthe tongue of a ſtrange woman. 


« Which 1s mentioned as a great commendation of Gods word, 16.0 F. 3. 


& 7: 5: 
Precepts, nor any other conſiderations,are ſufficient Pr 
——_— this laſt, jo is manifeſt from daily experience, at mo_ 

25* Luſt notafter her beauty in thine heart x 5 Nei- 
ther let her take thee with her eye- lids y. 

x Do not give way to, nor delight thy ſelf with unchaſt thoughts 
or affetions. Compare Mat: 5: 28. y Either with her Beauty, which 
yr mis much in the Eyes; oc rather with her amours and wanton 
glances. 


tongue. . 


[] 
[] 


| 26 For* by means of a whoriſh woman « man is *Ch.:9.3; | 
a piece of bread z: and f the adulcereſs will tHeb. rhe | 
woman of a | 
man, Or 4a 


brought to 


hunt forthe precious life a. 

z To extream Poverty, ſo as to want and be forced to beg 
his bread. @ To take away a mans life ; either by conſuming his 
body and ſpirits, and ſo ſkortning his days; or more dire&ly and 
ſtrictly, when the hath any great provocatien to it, or any proſpe& 
of conſiderable advantage by it. Or, for the precious Soul, which the 
corrupteth and deſtoyeth. Bur I prefer the former ſenſe. 

27 Can aman take fire in his bolom, and his clothes 
not beburnt b? 

b The queſtion implies a denial : he cannot eſcape burning. No 
morecan he who burns in Luſt ayoid Deſtruftion. 

28. Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be 
burnt ? 

29 So he that goeth in to his neighbours wife « : 
whoſoever toucheth her d, ſhall ||not be innocent e. 

c That lieth with her, as the Phraſe ſignifies, Gen: 19: 35. and 
29: 21, 23, &c. 47. e& Hath carnal knowledge of her, as this word 
is uſed, Gen; 20. 6: 1 Cor: 7: 1,and in Terence,and other Writers. e 
Shall be puniſhed as a Mal-faftor either by God or Man. OD 

39 Men do not || deſpiſe f a thief, if he ſteal te ſatisfie |Or/2/. 
his Soul when he is hungry : 

Fi. « Abhor or reproach him, but rather pity and pardon him, 


mans wife, 


[Ort be 
accquitted, 


fi, 22 AT naughty perſon, a wicked man walketh with 


a forward riouth x. , 

x He ſheweth the naughrineſs of his Heart by the wickedneſs of 
his Talk and Diſc-urſes, to which he doth accuſtom himſelf, as; 
walking implies. | : : 

13 He winketh with his eyes, he ſpeaketh with his 
feet, he teacheth with his fingers y. | 

y He vents his wickedneſs, as by his ſpeech, fo alſo by his geſ-, 


tures, whereby he ſecretly ſignifies what he is afraid or aſhamed to; 
expreſs openly to his complices, his intentions or deſires of ſome e- 
vil towards another perſon : which having in the general declared 


who is urged by meer neceflity to theſe practices, 
31 But if he be found, he ſhall reſtore ſeven-fold pg, 
he ſhall give all the ſubſtance of his houſe. 
£ Queſt. How doth this agree with Gods Law, - which required 

only that he ſhould reſtore double, or, at moſt, four-fold,or five- 

fold ? Exod: 24,1,4, Anſw. i. The number of Seven may be here 

pur indefinitely for many times, as it is Gen: 4. 24, Levit: 26. 28: 

and in many other places.2. Some think that as Thefts were multi. 
plied, ſo the puniſhment of it was increaſed in Solomon's time, or 


at leaſt, that ir was the Praftice of ſome Nationsto require this ſe« 
ven-fold reſtitution. 3.' He ſpeaks not of that reſtirution which the 


Chip. Vu 


&,'19.105, þ | 
||Or,candle. WH 


| 1 
i © 

42 '* 
Fl 14 
| 


* Chap, 2% | | 


becauſe neither Worldly Diſcretion, nor civil Education,nor mora] |Or, of che iſh 
, [10 


*Ma.5:28. | 


by the motion of his Eyes or Feet, he points out che particular 
perſon by his fingers. 


z Perverſe or wicked thoughts and defires. @ Either out of ma- 
lice againſt others : or out of a baſe deſign of improving it to his 
own advantage. R 

15 Therefore ſhall his calamity come ſuddenly : ſud- 
denly ſhall he be broken without remedy 5. 

b Heb. and there ſhall be 70 healing : no prevention of it before- 
hand, nor recovery afterward. 

16 Theſe ſix things doth the LORD hate c ; yea, 
[ths f feven are an abomination Þ unto him : | 

Jud, c To wit, above many other ſins, which have a worſe name in 
the World. 


v frth, 


"Pl.18, 1x7 *+ A proud look d, a lying tongue e, and hands 

thy that ſhed innocent blood. Es 

bughty d Pride of heart, which commonly diſcovers it ſelf by a mans 

te, looks and geſtures. Sce Pſal: 101: 5: & 13TI»I: Prov: 30: 13. c He 
that accuſtometh himſelf to lying and deceit 1n his common con- 
verſation. : : LS 

"Rm. 18 An heart that deviſeth wicked imaginationsf* feet 


© that be ſwift in running to miſchief g. | 
f He whoſe praQtiſe it is to deſign and contrive Wickedneſs. 2 
Such as greedily and readily execute their wicked deſigns, without 
any reſtraint or delay. 


| IF, 


14 Forwardnelſs 23s in his heart, he deviſerh miſchief | 
th, ,p. <Ontinually, he Þ ſoweth diſcord 4. j 


Law required, but of that which either the wronged Perſon being 
potent might force the Thiefro make, or which the Thief would 
willingly give rather than be expoſed to publick ſhame; as appears 
by the following Clauſe, wherein he adds to this ſeven-fold reſti- 
tution a? his ſubance, which no Law of God or Man required. See 
on Exod: 22; 4. : 

32 Bur whoſo committeth adultery with a woman 
lacketh + underſtanding h: he that doth ir, deſtroyeth 
his own ſoul 3. 

h Is a burtiſh and filly Man,who madly ruſheth upon theſe filthy 
courſes without any ſenſe or conſideration of the horrid ſhame,and 
certain deſtru&on which attends upon them. iOr, fe: is guilty 
of ſelf-rrurder, and of Soul-murder. » 
3A wound kand diſhonour ihall he get,and hisre- 


proach ſhall not be wiped away /. 

k Civil or Corporal puniſhment from the Magiſtrate, or rather 
from the Womans Husband, as it follows. 1 Althongh it be for« 
given by God, yet the reproach and ſcandal of it remains. 

25 For jealouſie js che rage of a man m ; therefore 
he will not ſpare in the day of vengeance ». 

m Ic enflames a Man with rage and fury againſt the Adulterer, 
7» When he hath an opportunity tg, avenge bimfelf upon the delins 


quent. + Heb. bi 
34 + He willnot regard any ranſom , neither will he | ome age 

reſt content, though thou giveſt many gifts a, tept the 

o He will accept of no other recompence for the injury beneath face of any 


t Heb, 


kears. 


19 A faiſe witneſs that ſpeaketh lies þ, and him that | thy lite, ranſom, 
ſoweth Diſcord among brethren z. CHAP. VIL þ 
t h To wit, in judgment : whereby this differs from the former | $9lomon again perſwadeth to keep his Laws, and delight in Wiſdom,t = 5. 
"Uhar,s, lying. v. 19, i Dear Relations or Friends. A young man woid of Undertanding is inſnuared by an Harlot, 6——9.4 
20 * My ſon, keep thy fathers commandment &,| ae/cription of an Harlot, 10, 11. From her Praftice, 12, 13. Of her 
and foriſake not the law of thy mother /. —_— -—_ B NG fr gate - par nero go pore: 21, 
T5 . I 4 , , 4 
£29 nin pol deſp OC an ! Whom Chil- craveth their attention, 24, And dehorteth from wncleauneſs, > mmars..; & 4 
"jz, 22 * Bind them continually upon thine heart m; and Y Son, keep my words, and * lay up my com- *Ca.2.3 
tie them about thy neck z. mandments with thee. *Levas 
þ Sagan remember, and duly conſider them- »n See on | 2 * Keep my commandments,and live 4 z: and my. law Chap 4.4 
ada Prat ah : | sthe apple of thine eye 6. ; 
22 When thou goeſt, it o ſhall lead thee Þ3 when |* —_ hou ſhalt og promiſe in the form of a command 


it ſhall raik with thee 9. 


thou ſleepeſt, it ſhall keep thee; and when thou awakelt, |; prov 3: 25. 4 With all poſſible care and diligence, as men guard 
that part from all dangers, yea even from the leaſt mote. The Eye 


5F 4 1s 


© "0 RFA ets 
: . 
' ” 
p * F Ra 
* - — 


all 
(| 


FEI bi mo - a - I 
Te 15 er Eg PYRO; WEI . | Bu AE PEEL 2A " AH eS...,.<; 


#% NN Cog ef ad od do aa _— S009 1 
». . y 


dap. VIT. 
is 2 moſt noble and neceſſary, and therefore highly eſteemed and 
beloved part of the Body,and the Apple thereof is the moſt honou- 
Table and beautiful and uſeful part of that part, and it is a moſt 
tender part,ca/ily hurt or deſtroyed,and therefore needs to be dili- 
gently watched, | 

3 * Bind them upon thy fingers c ; write them upon 


the table of thine heart d. 

c As a ring which is put upon them,and is continually in a Man's 
Eye, Conſtantly remember them, and meditate upon them. d4 Fix 
them in thy mind and affetion. See on Prov. 3. 3. 

4 Say unto wiſdom, Thou art my lifter ; and call 


und=r{tanding thy kinſwoman e : 

e When other fooliſh young men ſeek wanton Miſtrefſes, whom 
they frequently call S$:fters or Kinſwomen,let wiſdom be thy Miſtreſs: 
acquain: and delight thy ſelf with her, and let her have the com- 

Ch:2:36. mand of thy heart, and the condutt of thy lite, 

5: 3. 5 * That they may keep thee from the ſtrange wo: 
Or,-rak- man f'; from the ſtranger which || flatcereth wita her 
tb ſmh gods. 

rd. f. This priviledge Solomon doth ſo oft inculcate,either becauſe he, 
* found in himſelf the great power and beſotring nature of luſtful 
inclinations; or becauſe he obſerved theſe Vices ro abound more 
in his time, in which Peace and Proſperity made way for Luxury 
and Uncleanneſs. 

6 For aethe window of my houſe I looked through 
my caſement g. 

g This is either an hiſtorical relation, or rather a parabolical re- 
preſentation of that which frequently happened. 

7 And beheld among the fimplc ones, I diſcerned a- 
mong Þ the youths,a young man 4 void of underſtan- 
ding, | 

hþ Whoſe ſtrength and heat made him mo ſubjeX to luſtful im- 
preſfions,and who wanted judgment and experience as well as grace 
ro keep him from ſuch couilcs. | 

8 Pailing through the itreet i near her corner &, and 


he went the way to her houſe ] ; 

i Hle and careleſs. k Near the corner of the Street in which her 
Houſe ſtood, ſuch places being moſt convenient for that wicked 
purp fe,as giving opportunity either for the diſcovery of Paſſengers 
1 feveral Streets, 1 for the eſcape offuch as might be 1a danger of 
being taken in her Houſe. Comp. v. 12. { Not with intention to 
act groſs filthineſs with her, as may be gathered from tie follow- 
ing p-ſhges,but to gratifie his curioſfity,and to underſtand the man- 
ner of iuch Perſoas, and to pleaſe himiclt withrthe tight of her, or 
diſcourſe of her. : 

+ Heb i 9 In the ewilight + ia the evening w, in the black, 
the ev niug and dark night 7. 
of the day, m When the day labour being ended he was at leiſure for any 
thing; and when fuch Strumpets uſed ro walk abroad for prey. 
» When it begun to be black and dark. 
xo And behold, there met him a woman w:th the 


attire of an harlor s, and | ſubril p of heart. 

0 With an habit and carriage agreeable to her quality and deſign. 
p Or, wary or reſcrved, as ſhe ſhewed in her following diſcourſe, 
wherein ſhe propoſeth all things which might invite him, and con- 
ccals whatſoever might difcourage him. 


11* She is loud 9 and ſtubborn r, * her feet abide 
ter houſe s. 


d2u: 6:3. 
il. 18. 
3: 3> 


G: 21, 


+ Heb.the 
ſons. 


+ Heb: ze- 
ſerved. 


* Ch:9:13. * 
*iTim.s. NOT 1N 
| : q Or, clamorous, or full of talk, which ſerved her deſign. r Re- 


all admonirions of Miniſters or Friends. 5 She minds not her baſi- 
neſs, which livs at home, but gives up her ſelf wholly to idleneſs, 
and p/exſure, which ſhe ſeeks abroad with other men. 
12 Now #s ſhe without 7, now in the itreets &, and 
lieth in wait at every corner x. 
# Standing or waiting without or nigh the Door of her houſe. 
z In places of reſort. x Art the corners of the Streets, where the 
might either conceal or diſcover her ſelf, as ſhe ſaw fir. 
+ Heb: ſhe , 8.3 SO he caught him and kiiled him, and F with an 
* ſirengchens UmMpudent face ſaid unto him. 


ea her face 14 * I have peace-offerings with me 5 this day have 
-x" way I paved my vows y. 


Peace of- y I have paid ray Peace-offerings which I had vowed. W hereby 
8 ferings are ſhe ſignifies either, 1. that ſhe was no common Harlot, but one of 
up me; good repute for Religion. Or rather, 2. that ſhe had plentiful and 
* excellent Proviſions at her Houſe for his entertainment. For the 
Peace-offerings were to be of the beſt Fleſh, Lev: 22: 21. and a con- 
ſiderable part of theſe offerings fell to the Offerers ſhare,. where. 
with they uſed to feaſt themſelves and: their friends. See Lev: 2. 3, 
&c. and 7.-31, Oc. and 19. 6; &c. and 22. 3o, Oc whereas the 
Burnt-offerings were wholly conſumed, and the Fleſh of the Sin- 
offerings, and Treſpaſs-offerings belonged to the Prieſt. 
I5 Therefore came I forth: to meet thee ; diligently 


to feek thy face z, and I have found thee 4. 

z As not being able to take any pleaſure in my Feaſt without 
thy company. a By an happy providence of God complying with 
my deſires. 

116 2 have deckt my bed with coverings of tapeſtry, 
with carved works, with fine linnen of Egypt. 

! 6 She defigns to inflame his luſt by the mention of the Bed, and 
by its Ornaments and perfumes. 


17 I have perfumed my bed with myrche, aloes, and 
Cinnamon. 


ing, let us ſolace our felves with loves. 
19 For the good-man c zs not at home; he is gone a 
long journey ; 
c Whom ſh2 doth not call her Husband,left the mention of that 


ES 7ERSBS 


20 He hath taken a bag of money + with him 4d, and 
will come home ar the || day appointed e. 

d Which is an evidence thar he deſigns ro go far, and to ſtay a 
coniiderable time. - e So that we need not fear any ſurpriſa]. 

21 With much fair ſpeech f ſhe cauſed kim to vield 
g ; with the flattering of her lips ſhe forced him h. 

F Which implies that her alluring words were more effeQual with 
him than her impudent kiffes, which poſlibly had a little alicnated 
his mind from her. g Whereby he ſignifies that no provocation to 
ſin is a ſufficient excuſe for ſin. þ She prevailed over him. Which 
__ that there was ſome reluQancy in his judgment cr conſcience 
againlt it. 

22 He goeth after her + ſtraightway ;, as an ox to tHe ſu, 
the ſlaughter &, or as a fool to the corretion F of the 4h. 
ſtocks. THeb. o's 

; Without delay or conſideration. & Either being drawn and —_—— 
driven to it « Or going to it ſecurely,as if it were going toa good 
Paſture. / Or, which is more agrecable to the order of the words 
in the Hebrew Text, as one in Ferters, or, bound with Ferrers, to 
the correfion of a Fol, i: e: to receive ſuch correction or puniſhment, 
as belongs to fools Which may imply, either, 1. that he hath no 
more ſenſe of the ſhame and miſchief which he is bringing upon 
himſelf than a Fool Or, 2. that he can no more reſiſt the tempta« 
tion, noravoid the danger than a man faſt tied with Chains or fer. 
ters can free himſelf, although his be a moral and voluntary and nor 
a Natural impotency. 

23 Till adart ftrike through his liver ws, as a bird 
haſtech to the ſnare, and knoweth not » that it is for 
his life. 

m 1, e. His vital parts, whereof the Liver is one. Till his Life 
be loſt, asit isexplained in the next Clauſe, » Which may be re. 
ferred either to a fooliſh and inconliderate young man ; 'or to the 
filly Bird to which he is compared, which comes to the ſame thing. 

24 Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, 
and attend to the words of my mouth. | { 

25 Let notthine heart deeline to her ways e; go not 
aſtray in her paths. 

o Eithzr to the Paths which lead to her houſe : or to her manner - 
of living. 

26 For ſhe hath caft down many wounded; yea mas 
ny ſtrong mer p have been ſlain by her. 

? Mea that excel others, either 1. in bodily ſtrength, upon 
which they preſume, which yet is waſted, and by degrees ruined 
by theſe courſes. Or, 2. in wiſdom and fortitude and reſolution. 
Whereby he implies how much more neceflary it is fora weak and 
fooliſh young Man to uſe all poſlivle care and diligence to avoid 
this miſchief. 

27 * Her houſe is the way to hell 4, going down to 


the chambers of death. 

g Or, to the Grave; for the word is ured in both ſenſes : and this 
ſenſe ſeems berrer to agree both with the foregoing and following 
words. Althqugh, without repentance, Hell will certainly be they 
portion, and their firſt death will be followed by the ſecond, 

CHAP. Yah 


IW.ſaom's Fame, Call, and Exhortation, 1 9. Her excellency, Nature, 
and Hatred of evil, 10 13. Her power, '14 16. and Love ta 
the Godly, 17, Her Riches, 18, 19. Her Eternity, 20 30. Her 
Delight im the Ch/dren of men, 31. an Exhortation 80 true Wiſdom, 52. 


t Hebs in 
his hang. 
[| Or, :hs 


new Moc, 


FCh.2:i8: 
& 5.5. 
9; 18, 


- 
Tit: 2; 5. bellious againſt God, and againſt her Husband,and incorrigible by | 


| DR not * wiſdom - cry ? and underſtanding put we 
put forth her voice 6 ! 


way in the places of the parhs 4. 


18 Come, let us take our fill of loves until the morn- | 


33. And the bleſſedneſs of them that are truly Wiſe, 34, 35e« The fruits 
of Sin. 36. 


a It isa great Queſtion what this Wiſdom 1s, of which Swomon diſs 
courſeth ſo krgely and profoundly in this Chapter. Some under« 
ſtand it of that attribute or perfe&ion of the Divine nature which 
is called Wiſdom, whereby God pertettly knoweth all things, and 
maketh known to man what he judgeth neceflary, or expedient 
for them to know. Others underſtand it of the ſecond Perſon in 
the God-head, the Son of God, who is called the W:ſaom of God, 
Luke 11: 49. And it cannot fairly be denied that ſome Paſſages da 
beſt agree to the former, and others to the latter Opinion. Poſſib« 
ly both may be joined together, and the Chapter be under« 
ſtood of Chriſt conſidered partly in tis Perſonal Capacity and partly 
in regard of his Office which was to impart the mindAnd will of 
God to mankind, which he did, 1. by revealing it to, and wri- 
ting it upon the mind of man,at his firſt creation : for it was Chriſt 
who then gave beeing,and life,and light ro mankind,as is undeniab= 
ly evident from John r. 1,2, 3, 4,0. 2 By publiſhing it unto the 
Holy Patriarchs and Prophets in the time of the Old Teſtament ; 
for it was Chriſt who ſpake and diſcovered things ro them from 
time to time, as is manifeſt from 1 Pet: 1: 11. & 3+ 18, 19, 20. and 
from many other Scriptures both of the Old Teſtament, as I have 
formerly noted in their proper places, and in the New Teſta» 
ment, as we ſhall ſce hereafter. 3. By declaring it from his own 
mouth and by his Apoſtles and Miniſters under the Goſpel. 6 Clear« 
ly and audibly inſtru men how to avoid thoſe fleſhly luſts ? He 
oppoſeth the inviting words of Wiſdom tothe ſeducing ſpeeches 
of the Harlot. 


2 She ſtandeth in the top of high places c : by the 


c Where ſhe may be beſt ſeen and heard, not in corners and 1 
the dark, as the Harlot did. 4 Where many paths meet, where 
there is a great concourſe,and whereTravellers may need directions 

3 She crieth at the gates e, at the entry of the City fo 


at the coming inat the doors g. A 

e The places of judgment and of the confluence of People. FS: 
invite Paſſengers at their firſt coming and to conduct them to her q Or, © 
Houſe. g To wit, ofher houſe, 'as the Harlot ſtood at her Door great 1 


to invite Lovers, Cs Pſal:62:9 
O men I call, and my yoice#s || 
meant 


name lhouid awaken his Conſcience or Diicretion, 


\ che ſons of gazn £. 


4 Unto you, | tO Or, # 
h1o 


Chap. VII. | 


; 


0 


Vit, | Chap. V. P R oO V 


b To all men without exception, even to the meaneſt, who are 


eb? in thus called, Pſal. 49. 2. 


and. ? Heb ſubs 


. 0s ; 
Sg mity. 


ders, k, be ye of an underſtanding heart. 


;: Who want knowledge and experience, and are caſfily deceived. 
k wilful and obſtinart ſinners 

6 Hear, for 1 will ſpeak of F excellent :hings I ; and 
the opening of my lips ſhall be right things. : 

1 Heb. of Princely things : worthy of Princes to learn and practiſe 
them. Or, ſuchas excel common things as much as Princes do or» 


dinary Perſons. : 
7 For my mouth ſhall ſpeak » truth, and wickedneſs 


1 Heb *Þ*;; + an abomination to my lips ». 

abominati= 1 Heb: ſhall meditate,i. e. ſhall ſpeak not raſhly, and haſtily, but 
o7 5f YY what I have well conſidered and digeſted. » I hate to ſpeak it ; 
lips. therefore you may be aſſuxed that I ſhall nor deceive you. 

} Heb 8 Ail the. words of my mouth o are in righteouſneſs ; 


'4, there is nothing | froward or perverſe in them p. 
m_ o All my Precepts, Promiſes, Threatnings, &'c. p Nor the leaſt 
mixture of vanity, or error, oc folly in them, as there is in the 
words of the witeſt Philoſophers, &c. 
9 They are all plain q to him that underſtandeth r, 


and right to them that find knowledge s. 

q Evident and clear to their minds : gor, right, juſt and good. r 
Either to him wao with an honeſt mind applies himſelf ro the ſtu- 
dy of them in the diligent ule of all the means appointed by God 
to thatend: or tohim whoſe mind God hath enlightned by his Spt- 
rit, though they ſeem otherways to ignorant and carnal-minded 
ry 5s That are truely wiſe and diſcerning Perſons, and taughr of 
God. 
10 Receive my inſtruction, and not ſilver 5; and 


knowledge rather than choice gold. 

5 5, e. Rather than Silver, as ſuch negative expreſſions are under- 
ſtood, Gen. 45. 8. Exod. 16. 8. Jer. 7: 22. and 16, 14, 15.and in ma» 
ny other places. Though withal he ſeems to intimar the inconſt- 
ſtency of thoſe. two ſtudies and deſigns, and the great hindrance 
which the love of Riches give to the ſtudy of Wiſdom. ; 

11 *For Wiſdom is better than rubies;and ali the things 


I: that may be deſired, are not to be compared to it. 
Plal-tg.10. 12 I wiſdom dwell with. || prudence z, and find out 


&1927: knowledge « of witty inventions x. 

Ch: 3: 145 + T do not content my felf with high Speculations, but my un- 
15;&16: 16: ſeperable companion is Prudence to govern all my own Actions,and 
[| Or, Jub- to direct the actions of others, by good counſels. This he ſaith, 
tity. becauſe ſome perſons have much wit and knowledge, and nothing 
of diſcretion. « 7, e I know them as clearly and certainly as if I 
had found them out by d:ligent ſearching. Or, 7 find out, 1s put for, 
I help men to find out, as the Spirit is ſaid to Zatercede, Rom. 8. 26. 
when it he!peth us to do ſo. x Ofall ingenious deſigns and con- 
trivances for the ſervice and glory of God, and for the good of our 
ſelves and others. But why may it not be rendred of wicked dewrces, 
as this very word is tranſlated, Prov. 12. 2. & 14: 17. & 24. 8. For 
ſurely this is one great work of Prudence to diſcover and fo avoid 
all evil counſels or devices, and the effects of them. But this I 
propoſe with ſubmiſſion, becauſe I have not the concurrence of 
any Interpreter in this Expoſitien, 


12 The fear of the LORD y is to hateevil z; pride 
a and arrogancy, and the evil way b, and the froward 
mouth c do I hate. 

y Which he had before noted to be the beginning of Wiſdom, Chap. 
I. 7. 2 It conſiſts ina careful abſtinence from all ſin, and that not 
from carnal or prudential motives, but from a true diflike and ha- 
tred of it. a Which he mentions firſt as that which is moſt hateful 
to God, and molt oppoſite to true Wiſdom, and to the fear of 
God, which conſtantly produce humility. 6 All wicked Actions, 
; eſpecially ſinful cuſtoms and courſes. c Falſe Doctrines, and bad 

Counſzels and deceits. 


14 Counſel ;s mine, and ſound wiſdom d: I amun- 


+ H:tb. 
princely. 
thine 


&b ſuds 


eb. of 
| or tie, 


TTob 28: 


Ch.2:i8 
e 545. 


. 18, 


fHeb; derſtanding e, F I bave ftrength f. 

Seth is d All ſolid and ſubſtantial and uſeful, yea eſſential Wiſdom is na- 

wne, tural and eſſcnrial to me, for the word properly ſignifies «ſence, e 
By my nature and eſſence, as was now laid, Or, I am the Author 
of Underſtanding ; as Job; 17. 3. This is life eternal, i. e. this is the 
cauſe or means of it. f Courage and reſolution to execute all my 

Counſels. and to conquer all difficulties. : : 
"'Dan:2;2e, I5 * By me kings reign g, and princes decree ju- 


Romag, x. ſtice þ. 
g Either, r. They get their Kingdoms by mine appointmentand 
providence. Or rather, 2. They rule their Kingdoms wiſely, and 
juſtly, and happily by my counſel and affiſtance. For this belt ſuits 
with the next Clauſe, þ Their unjuſtice or wickedneſs is from 
themſelves, but all the juſt and good things which they do, they 

owe to my conduct. { 
16 By me princes rule, and nobles, ewes all the jud- 


ges of the earth. 
17 I love them that love me z, and * thoſe that ſeek 


me early & ſhall find me. 

z I do not deſpiſe their love, though it be but a ſmall and incon- 
ſiderable thing to me, bur I kindly accept it, and will recompence it 
with my love and favour. & 7. e. With fincere affeftion, and great 
diligence, and above all other perſons or things in the world. 
Which he mentions as the effect and evidence oftheir love : for 
Otherwiſe all men pretend to love God. 


Jar, Fo 


| "Che 3: 26, 18 * Riches and honour are wich me : yea, durable 
q Or, © riches and righteouſneſs /. 
rear I Which he mentions here, either, r. as the beſt and ſureſt way | 
Pſal:62:9 to get and to keep Riches, for E:tates unjuſtly gotten quickly va= 
} Or, # Niſh, as is manifcft both from Scripture and from common obſerva j 
mean mt tion. Or, 2. To tignifie that chis Wiſdom gives both worldly, and } , 


Ipiritual or Heavenly bleſſiags together ro its tollowers, wacreas ; 
God gives Riches alone co ungodly men, and they are to expect no : 


other Portion, % 


5 Oyetmple z, underſtand f Wiſdom ; and ye fools | 


4 x 


Chap 
*Chl 
[oc 


__ 


19 * My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; 
and my revenue than choice filver. 
20 I |[lead in the way of righteouſneſs, in the midſt 


of the paths of judgment m. 
Fg Keeping at an equal diſtance from both extreams, and from 
the very borders of them : which is called a pur:/ng away iniquity far 
Jjrom 5, Job 22: 23. 

21 that I may cauſe thoſe that love me, to inherit 


ſubſtance », and T will fill their treaſures. 

z Subſtantial, and true, and ſatisfying happineſs : which is here 
Oppoſed to all worldly enjoyments, which are ſaid net ro be, Prov. 
23. 5- which are bur meer ſhadows and dreams of feliciry. 


22 The LORD poſſeſſed me oin'the beginning þ of 


his way q, before his works of old. 

9 As his Son by Eternal Generarion, who was from eternity w:rh- 
him, as is laid, Joh. 1. 1. and in him as he alſo was in me, Joh, 14: 
10. ; Yca, and before the beginning, as it is largely exp-eſſed in 
the z01lowing Verſes. q Either, 1. of his Counſels or decrees. Or 
rather, 2. of his works of Creation, as it follows. 

23 I was ſetupr from everlaſting, from the begin- 


ning s, or ever the earth # was. 

r Heb: anointed, ordained or conſtituted to be the Perſon by 
whom the Father reſolved to do all his works, firſt to creat, and 
then ro uphold and govern and judge, and afterwards to redeem 
and fave the World ; all which works are particularly aſcribed to 
the Son of God,as is manifeſt from, Joh: r. 1,&c. Col.1. 16, t7.Heb.r. 
3. and many other places, as we may ſee hereafter in their ſeveral 
places. 5 Before which there was nothing but a vaſt Eternity, # 
Which he mentions, becauſe this together with the Heaven , was the 
firſt of God's viſible works. 

24 When there were no depths. «, T was brought 
forth x: whenthere were no fountains abounding with 
Water. 

#u No abyſs or deep waters either mixed wich the Earth, as they 
_ at firſt, or ſepafated from it. x Begotten of my Fathers ef- 

nce. 

25 Before the Mountains were þ ſettled y ; before the 


hills, was I brought forth. 
2 Or, fxed by their Roots in the Earth. | 
26 While as yet he had not made the earth #5, nor | 
the || fields «, nor || the higheſt part þ of the duſt of the | Or, of 


world c. place, | 

Z tee, The dry land called earth after it was ſeparated from the || Or, £4 

atcrs, G:n. 1.10. & Theplain and open parts of the Earth Uiſtin. *P«f par 
guiſhed from the Mountains and Hils, and the Valleys incloſed be. Hebyhe 
tween them. b Or, the fir# part,or beginning: or,che beſt part, Heb the 
Head: that which exceeds other parts in riches or fruitfulneſs* which 
he ſeems to diſtinguiſh from the common Fields. c Of this Lows 
er part of the World which conſiſteth of duſt. 

27 When he prepared the heavens, I was there d : 


when he ſer|] a compaſs upon the face of the depth e. ||Or, 4 

4 Not as an idle Spe&aror, but as a co-worker with my Father, ices, 
e 2. e. Of thar great and deep abyſs of water and Earth mixed to= 
gether, which is called both EZarch and Water and rhe deep, Gen. 1,2. 
When he made this lower world round, or in the form of a Globe 
agrecable to the form of the upper world. 


28 When he eſtabliſhed f + the clouds above ; when 


he ſtrengthnedthe fountainsg of the deep 6. + Heb 2h! 
f Heb frengthned, by his word and decree, which alone upholds **7. 
the Clouds in the Air, which of themſelves are thin and weak Bo« 
dies, and would quickly be diffolved or diſperſed. g When he ſhut 
up the ſeveral Fountains in the Cavities of the Earth, and kept them 
there as1t were by a ſtrong hand for the uſe of Mankind. bþ Which 
have their Original frong the deep, either from the Sea, or from the 
Avyſs of Waters in the Bowels of the Earth. Pp. 
29 * When he gave co the ſea his decree i, chart the w. © 


waters ſhould not paſs his commandment &; when he Jobzs8: io, 


appointed / the foundations of the earth m». WE ES. 
; Or,bus boundor limits, to wit, thoſe parts of the earth which bor. Pſal:104-9 
der upon it, £4. e: Not overflow the Earth. Or, lid, "is Riches 1 3- A 
1. The Center of the Earth : Or, 2. the earth it ſelf which is the | 
fonndation of the World : Or rather, 3. The firm ſtanding of the 
Earth upon its Foundations, notwithſtanding all the Affaults which 
the waters of the Sea, or within the Earth, make againſt it; which 
isa ſingular wock of God's providence. | 
30 * Then | wasby himn,as [ one brought up with him * Joh. ic1. 
0: andI was daily his delight, rejoicing always before | Or. - | 
him p: fofter Child 
» Converſant with him, and united to him, as was ſaid before. 
o As one tenderly and dearly be!ov-d by him. p Heand I had cons 
ſtant and intimat and ſweet conveiſe rug-ther. 
21 | Rejoicing inchehabicabie part of his earth q,and 
and my delights were with the ſons of men yr. 
qg In contemplating the wonderful Wiidom and goodneſs of God 
in the making and ordering of ail his creatures, and of Man efpe- 
cially. r To upbold theta by my Power end Providence, to reveal 
my ſelf and my Fathers mind and will to them from Age to Age, 
to aſlume their Nature, and to redeem and fave them, which I 
would not do for the fallen Aagels. , 
2 Now therefore «hearkenunto me, O ye children 
for * bleſſed are they that keep my ways- I, 25 
et Seing I have ſuch a true love to you, and ſeing IT am ſo rho» & 12:8. re 
rowly acquainted with my Fathers mind, and ſo excellently qua- Lyke11.28 
lificd ro be your Counſeller and Ruler. 


[ 


Ss. 10 
"1 


fHeb:/; 


tH 
ſportings 


} Heb, 
ſport ing f 


** PC. r19- 


ly at my gates, waiting ar the poſts of my doors «. 


33 Hear inſtruction, and be wiſe, and refuſe it note. 
: Or, do 07 make it wid, or unprofitable to you by your own 


floth or wilitulnels. ; ; 
34 Bietſed is the man that heareth me, watching dai- 


& As Servants andClients,and others waits at the doors of Princes 
of 


ce G 


d. IX, P R 0 V 


vr Perfons of eminency for place or power, or Wiſdom, that they 
may be admitted to ſpeak or converle with the! No . 
25 For whoſo findetch me, findeth like, and ſhall * | 
9:11: : | 
:: Obtain favour of the LORD. _ 
d. 365 But he that finneth againſt me x, wrongeth his 

th, own ſoul 5: all chey that hate me z, love death s. 

x By the negle& or contempt of, or Rebellion againſt my Com- 
mmands. y Is guilty of ſelf murder and of Soul-murder. z 2. e. 
Who reje& and diſobey my Counſels, and live wicked)y, which in 
God's account is an hating of him, as is here implyed, and elſewhere, 
as Exod; 20; 5- Deus. 7. 10. & 32. 41. # Not direQHly or 1ntentio- 
nally, bur by conſequence, becauſe they Jove thoſe praftices which 
they know will bring certain deſtruction upon them. 

| | CHAP. 1X. 
Wiſdom's cal to her people unto bleſed communion and f: 

ſet out under a ſimiilitude of making # Feaft, 11 oﬀtder preparation, 2. 

and invitation, 73 5. She dchoyteth from evil company, 6. Her 

Counſels concerning reproof and Inſtrutfion, 7 g. A deſcription of the 

Fear of God, 10. with the Benefits thereof, 11: 12. Toe Nacure of a 

fooliſh Woman, 149——15- Her invitation, i6. and Arguments to eti- 

fuare the ſimple, t7. The miſerable ture of them rhat are deceived by her, 


8 
. {dom hath built her houſe 4 : ſhe hath hewn out 


her ſeven b pillars c. 

& For the Reception and entertainment ofher Gueſts, as appears 
from the following paſſages This Houſe is oppoted to the Har- 
lots Houſe mentioned, Prov: 7. 8. and itis to be underſtood, either 
1. of the Heavenly Houſe, or the Palace of (clory : Or rather, 2. ot\ 
the Church which Chriſt, the wiſdom of the Farther, hath erected, 
and eſtabliſhed in the World, in which this following Feaſt is made 
which is called God's Houſe, 1 Tim: 3+ *5. Heb; 3, 3.4. © 3. & Ma- 
ny Pillars; whereby is intimated borh the beaury and the ſtability 

' of the Church. c Prophets and Apoſtles, and Miniſters of Holy 


Lowſhip with her ſelf, 


(] 
[ 


| where. 

Tt: 220 _ ; 
4 ** 2 * She hath killed + her beaſts 4% ſhe hath mingle 
Heb, hr her wine e ; ſhe hath alſo furniſhed her table f. 
ding. d i- e. Made proviſion for the Gueſts * which is meant of the Or- 
dinances, Gitts, Graces, Comforts and eternal Felicities which God 
doth offer and give ro men in and by the Church. e Either, r. 
with Spices, to make ir ſtrong and delightful, this mixed Wine 

ing mentioned as the beſt, Prov;. 23- 29, zo. Or, 2. with Water, 
ds they uſed to do in thoſe hot Countries. partly for refreſhment, 
and partly for wholſomneſs. Whereby alto may be intimated rhat 
Wiſdom reacheth as temperance in the uſe of our comforts. f 
With all neceſfaries, and now waits for the Gueſts. : 

3 Shs hath ſent forth her Maidens g ; * ſhe crieth u- 
ner of rhe PA | he higheſt places þ of the city: 
igh placer,, E Her ſervants to invite the Gueſts, Minitters of the word whom 

*he calls Maidens, partly for the decency of the Parable; for Wiſ- 
dom being compared to a great Princeſs, was fit to be attended u- 
pon by Maidens3 and partly to ſhew rhat God by his Word did 
work ſweetly, though ſtrongly, and Gid allure and draw, rather 
than drive ſinners to repentance. . þ Either upon the. tops of the 
Houſes which were flat: Or rather from ſuch high ſeats as thoſe 
from which Judges delivered their Sentences, and Officers made 
Proclamations, for the conv<niency of the pron14< better hearing. 
4Who fo 3: ſimple ;,lethim turn in thither; as for him 


that wanteth underſtanding &, the faits ro him, 
; Ignorant, and weak, and ſubject to deluſicn, and willing to 
learn: tO ſhew that Wiſdom rejeQs thofe Scholars, 'who are proud 
_ and ſelf-conceited. k Heb; heart, which fignines underfanding, Fer: 
*Cant, 5-1; 5: 21: Hoſ; 7: 11, 2 
Iſa: 55: 5 * Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine, 


which 1 have mingled. 
6 Forſake the fooliſh 1, and live: and goin the way 


of underſtanding m. 

| i. e. The wicked, and their courſes and ſociety : you muſt ei- 
ther forſake them or me, for weare irreconcilable enemies. m Which 
Kads to it, and is preſcribed by it. : 

7 He that reproveth a ſcorner », getteth to himſelf 
ſhame o : and he that rebuketh a wicked man, gerreth 


himſelf a bior p. y | 

» The connexion may be conceivetthus, Having invited the ſim- 
ple, he forbids the invitation of ſcorners : Or thus, He ſhewerh 
who he meant by the fooliſh, v 6. even ſcorners and wicked men, as they 
are here called, and he preſſeth his laſt advice of forſaking them, be- 
cauſe there wasno good, but hurt to be got by converſation with 
them. o Partly from the ſcorner who will revile and deride him; 
ani partly from others. becauſe he isfruſtrated in hisdelign and hope, 
and by his imprudence hath brought an inconvenience upon him- 
ſelf. p' A cenſure or Reproach, 

8 * Reprove- not a {corner 9, leſt he hate thee r : re- 
buke a wile man 5s, and he will love thee 7. 

q An obſtinat and incorrigible ſinner who ſcornfully rejects and 
deſpiſeth the means of amendment. Thus Phyſicians deny Phyſick 
to perſons in deſpecrat condition. » Whereby thou wilt not only 
expoſe thy ſelf without neceſſity to his Malice and Rage, but alſo 
make thy ſelf utterly uncapable of doing him that good which poſ- 
fibly rhou-mighteſt do by other more prudent and proper means. 5 
Who is oppoſed to the Scorner, ro intimat that Storners, howſvever, 
they are thoughr by themſelves or others to be witty or wile, yet 
in God's account, and in truth are fools. #t Both for that faithful- 
*nels and charity which he perceiveth in thee, and for that benefit 
which he receiveth from thee, 

9 * Give inſtruttiin u toa wiſe man, and he will be 
yet wiſer ;- reach a jult man », and he will increaſe in 


learning. 


d 


Ch: 8: 2: 
Hebe the 


* Mat: 7:6: 


*Chap: 1: 5 


things, whichin Scripture are called Pilars, as Gal. 2. 9. and elfc> 


= 2 & Chap. X, 
10 * The fcar of the LORD s the beginnis of wiſ-* Job 2g; 


dom: and the knowledge of the holy y is underſtan- ** 
ding &. ph ae 
y Either, r. of holy men,whether ſuch as all Saints learn, or ra» ha: B78 
ther ſuch as the holy men of God, the Servants cf this Wiſdom, 
reach from God's word : Or rathec, 2. ofholy things, the Hebrew 
word being here taken 1h the Neuter Gender, as it is Numb. 5. «7; 
and elſewhere : for this ſeems belt to anſwer to rhe fear of the Lord in 
m_ other Branch, z Is the only true and necetfary and uſeful know- 
ECAagee 
ir *For by me thy days ſhall be multi 
the _ of thy life ſhall be increaſed. 
12 It thou be wiſe, thou ſhalt be wiſe for thy ſelf a: 
It tt | y lelt a: 
T bur if thou ſcorneſt, thou alone ſhalt bear it 6. OY 
# Thou doſt not profit me, bur thy ſelf by it : I adviſe thee for 
thy own good, b The blame and nuſchyef of it falls wholly upon 
_ not upon me or my Word or Miniſters who have warned 
13 * A fooliſh woman « 5s Clamorous 4 ; ſhe is fim- 
ple and knoweth nothing e. 
c By which he underſtands, either, 
that Wiſdom of which he 
may include all wick:dneſs 


plied : and *Cho:24 


FCh.7:14 
1. folly, which is oppoſite to 
hath been ſo ak4 diſcourſing oy lo it 
| , Either in principle, as Idolatry, Here« 
ſie, ©. or in practice, Or, 2. The Harlot : which with ſubmiſſion 
ſeems moſt probable ro me," partly becauſe all the following deſcrip= 
tion exactly agrers to her, eſpecially what is faid, wv. 17. as alto v, 
18. which in effect was ſaid of the Hailor before, Ch. 2. 18. and 5 
5. and partly becanſe ſuch tranſitions from diſcourſing of Wiſdom 
to a ducourſe of Harlots are frequent in Su/omon, as we have ſcen 
Chap.2.:6.&5.3:& 77 «c. a Speaks loudly that the may be heard,and 
vehemently, that Perſons might be moved by her perſwaſiens. 8 
o wit, arighr, nothing that is good, nothing for her good, though 
ſhe be ſubril in little artifices for her own wicked ends» 
14. For the ſitteth arthe door of her houſe f ona ſeat, 
in the high places of the city. : 
_ + Which notes her idleneſs and impudence and diligence in watch 
ing tor occaſtons of ſin» 
i5 To call paſſengers, who go right ontheir W2ysSg? 
g Who were going innocently and directly about their buſineks, 
withour any unct:aft deſign ; for others needed none of thoſe invie 
farions or offers, bur went to her of their own accords. And be. 
ſides, ſuch leud perfons rake a great pleaſure in corwpting the in> | 
NOoCcent. oY 
16 Whoſo is ſimple let him turn in hither ; and as 
or him that wanteth umderſtanding, ſbefaith to him. 
; + Which title is not given to them by her ; for ſuch a Reproach 
{ would not have allured them, bur driven them away ; bur ty $4- 
' lomon who repreſents the matter of her invitation in his own words 
that he might diſcover the truth of the buſinefs, and thereby dif- 
wade and deter thaſe whom ſhe invited. 
{ 17 * Stolen watersz are ſweet &, and bread 
In ſecret is pleafant. 
| # By which he underſtandeth, either 1. Fdolatry or other wic« 
' kednetſes, which in Solomon's time, before his fall, were publickly 
forbidden and puniſhed, bur privatly practiſed. Or rather, 2, A- 
d ultery. & Part)y from the difiiculty of obraining them partly from 
the arr which men uſe in coatriving ſuch ſecret ſins ; and partly 
becaute the very prolubition renders it more grateful to corrupt nas 
rure. 
13 But he knoweth not / that the dead are there, and 
that her gueſts arein the depths of hell. 
: - z. e. He doth not conlider it ſeriouſly, whereby he proveth his 
olly. 


FCh. 20417, 
eaten + Heb: of 
ſect 


[i 
; 


CHAP X. 


From this chapter zo the Five and Twentieth, are ſandry obſervations of Mee 
ral Virtues, and their contrary Vices, with excellent Rules fer the Go« 


wernment of our Converſation. cs 
T He'proverbs of Solomon #@. * A wiſe b ſon maketh *Wis# 


a glade fatherc : but a feoliſh fon 5s the heavineſs 


of his mother d. 

a Properly ſo called ; forthe foregoing Chapters, though they had 
this title in the beginning of them, yet in truth were only a Pre« 
face or preparation to them, containing a general exhortation to the 
ſtudy and exerciſe of Wiſdom, to ſtir up the minds of men to the 
greater atterition and regard to all itsPreceprs, whereof ſome here 
tollow. Of which in general theſe things are fit to be obſerved, 
to help us in the underſtanding of them : 1. That theſe 1entences 
are generally diſtin and independent, having no coherence one 
with anorher, as many other parts of Scripture have: 2+ That 
ſuch ſentences being very fhorr, as their naturegrequires, more is 
underſtood in them than is expreſſed. and the cauſes are commonly 
to be gathered from the EffeQts, and the Effects from the Cauſes, 
and one oppoſite from another, as we ſhall ſee. 3. That they are 
delivered by way of compariſon and oppoſition, which for the moſt ' 
part is between Virtue and Vice, but ſometimes is between twa 
Virtues, or two Vices. 6 #. e. Prudent, and eſpecially virtuous 
and godly, as this word is commonly meant in this Book, and'in 
many other Scriptures. c And a glad Mother too ; for both Pa« 
rentsare'to be underſtood in both Branches, as is evident from the 
nature of the thing which affects borh of them, and from parallel 
places, as Ch, 17. 25. & 3o. 17. although one only be expreſſed in 
each Branch, for the greater Elegancy. d The occaſion of her great 
ſorrow, which is decently aſcribed to the Mcthers, rather than to 
the Fathers, becauſe their paſſions are moſt vehement, and make 
deepeſt impreſſion in them, 

2 * Treaſures of wickedneſs e profit nothing f : but 


righteouſneſs g delivereth from death 6. 


ud | 


u In the [Tebrew it is only give: for as receiving is put for lears 
ning, Prov: ': 3. ſo giving is put for teaching both in Scripture and 
in other Authors: of which ſee my Latin Synopſis. x Called a wiſe 
Men jnthe former Branch 4 to intimar good-men- are the only wiſe 
incn. - 


e Either, 1» All worldly Treaſures and Riches, which are cal- 
Jed the Marmen of unrighteouſneſs, Luke 16. 9. of which fee the 
Reaſons there, to which righteouſneſs or Holineſs, which are ſpi- 
ritual and heavenly Riches, may be fitly oppoſed. Or, 2. Suck 
Treaſures as are got by any fort ofunjult or wicked TING 

37 


10:27 


7:16 


h.207; 
Jeb! « 
0G 


15,401 


hard | 


Chap X, Fx OF 


F They do the poſſeſſor no good, but, which is implied from the 
opplice member, much hurt; they do not only nor deliver him 
from dearh, but oft expoſe him to it, either from men, who take 
away his Life that they may enjoy his Wealth, or from God, whe 
ſhortens his days. and makes his death more terrible, as being at- 
rended with gailt, and with the ſecond death. g Either 1. True 
Holineſs of Heart and Life. Or 2. Juſtice and Equity in the get- 
ting of Riches, or an Eſtate honeſtly obtained, which may te hitly 
oppoſed to Treaſures of Wickedneſs., Or 3+ A liberal and charitable 
uſe of Riches, whichis oft called Righteouſneſs, as Pſa.. 112. 9. 
Dan: 4. 27. 2 Cor. 9. 16. &c. and is indeed but an at of Juſtice, 
of which ſee on Pro. 3.27. which alſo is conveniently oppoſed to an 
unjuf! getting of Riches; and ſo this contains a great paradox, yet 
a certain truth,that the charitable laying out of Money is more pro» 


R Rk Ch 


who is flow to hear, and ſwift to ſpeak, who in ſtead of receiving 
good Admonitions, cavils and diſputes 2gainſt them. In the He- 
Mr, he 1s Cad 2 fool of Lips, either becauſe he diſcovers the folly 
of hrs Heart by his Lips, and thereby expoſeth himſelf to tie mit- 
cmet heyc tullowing, or becouic he is without keart, as is ſaid of Er 
ram,Hoſ. 5.11. or, his Heart is little worth, as 1s ſaid here, v 0 
or becauſe he ſpeaks raſbly without any conſideration. Or, it may 
be renared, a fool by is lips, i. e- By his fooliſh and wicked ipeechcs, 
contrary to the Commands of God, by talking much and i;l, when. 
IT 15 more comely and neceflary for him to hear and receive Inftru- 
ction from others. z To wit, into miſchief: or, be punijhed, as the 
word is uſed, Heſ: 4: 14. or, be beaten, as below v. 10. ; 


9 * He that walketh upiightly a waiketh ſurely 
b : bur he that perverteth bis ways c ſhall be known 4. 


fitable to men, than an unjuſt and covetous laying it up. h Oft 
times from temporal death, becauſe men generally love, and ho- 
nour, and will a{lift ſuch perſons in cfes of danger, and God gftes 
them the bleſſing ofa long Life; and always from erernal death, 
when ſuch Charity proczeds from a ſincere and honeſt mind, aud 


a Whois ſincere, and juſt, and faithful in lus dealings with God 
and with men. 6 Or, ſecurely, or confidentty, as the word properly 
lignifies,and is here rendred by all the ancienr Interpreters,and by 
molt of the others, quietly reſting upon God's favour and Eracious 


*PC. 22008 


- a good Conſcience. 
FPſ.33-198 
& 37:29, 


jOr,  :he of the wicked I. 
wicked for 


& og 15. hand 23 but * the hand of the diligent maketh rich 
N.13- 4. 


a Negligently and flothfully, as appears from the diligence op- 


poſed to it in the next branch, and t:om the uſe of this word in 
this ſenſe, Prov. +2. 24, 27, & 9. 15. Jer. 48. to, Heb. with # 
deceitful hana, ſo called, partly becauſe it ſeems and pretends to do 
ſomthing, when in truth it doth nothing ; and partly becauſe ſuch 
perſons uſually endeavour to maintain themielves by d-ceit and 
wickedneſs, which they cannot or will nor do by honeſt labour and 
diligence. » Not by it ielf, nor neceſlarily, as is maniteſt from 
Expericnce, and is noted, Ecclz/. 9- 11+ but through God's bleſſing, 
which commonly is given toſuch, by comparing this verſe with 
Tv. 22. here following. : : 

5 He char gathereth » in ſummer p, is a wiſe ſon : 


but he that fleepeth in harvelit is a ſon that cauferh 


Shame 9g. 

o The fruits of his field. p In harveſt, as it follows, which is a 
part of Summer, He that watcherh for and improveth the proper 
Jeaſons and opportunities of doing good to himielf, and to others. 
9 Both to himſelf for his folly, aud that Poverty and Miſery cauſed 
by it, and to his Parents, to whoſe negligent or evil Education 
ſuch things are oft, and ſometimes juſtly imputed. , 

6 Bieflings «re upon the head of the juſty : but * yi- 


olence covereth the mouth of the wicked s. 

r All forts of bleſſings are wiſhed to them by Men,and confer- 
red upon them by God. He fairh, «por their head, either to ſhew 
chat theſe Bleſſings come from above : and that openly in the fight 
of the World, ſo that he can confidently ſpeak of them to God's 
Praiſe, and to his own comfort and honour ; or becauſe Bleflings 
were commonly pronounced by Men with this Cerem-ny,by lay- 
ing their hands upon rhe head «cf the party biefled. 5 Yolence ( et- 
ther. 1. Their own Viclence or unjuitice, which may be here pur 


KVer. 43. 


nent of Iniquity. Or 2.V iolence,or the violent and injurious, and 
miſchievous pra&ices of others againſt them, deſerved by their own 
Violence committed againſt others, and inflicted upon them: by the 
curſe and Righteous Judgmcnt of God ) ſba# cover che mouth of cha 
wicked, 5. e. ſhall fall upon them. This Phraſe of covering their 
Mouth, is uſed either, «. With alluſion ro the ancient cuſtom of 
covering the Mouths and Faces of condemned Maletactors ; of 
which ſee Efth. 7. 8. Job 9.24. : 
and jade of God m_ them {ſhould be ſo manifeſtly juſt, thar 
their Mouths ſhould be ſtopped,and they nor be able ro ſpeak a word 
againſt God, or for themſelves. Or, 3, To intimate that Gods judg- 
ment upon them ſhould be publick and evident to all that behold 
them, as any covering put upon a mans Mouth or Face 15, as for 
the ſame Reaſon the Bleſſings of the Juſt were ſaid to be upon their 
Heads. And the Mouth may be pur for the Face, or Conntenance, by 
a Synecdoche : Bur this Clauſe 1s otherways rendred by divers lear- 
ned Interpreters, the mouth of the wicked covereth ( z. e. concealeth or 
ſmothererh within it ſelf. and doth not utter that ) violence or 
Injury, which he medirateth in his Heart, and deligneth ro doto 
others, and therefore ſhall be accurfed and miſerable. Bur this 
ſuits not ſo well with theformer Clauſe, wherein the Bleſſmgs of the 


'2 * The LORD will not ſuffer the ſoul ofthe righ- 
reous to famitlh ; : but he caſteth away || the ſubſtance & 


or # Will preſerve them from Famine, according to his Promiſes, 
thir Wie Pſal. 34. :0. and elſewhere, which, as other temporal Promiſes, is 


for the fruit or puniſhment of it, as Þ:quiry is oft put for the punuth- | 


Or, 2. To ſignifie that the curſe | 


Providence for his prote&tion, and being ſupportted by the Teſti- 
mony ofa good Conſcience, and theretore not fearing nor caring 
who knows or obſerves his Actions, which he endeavours to 
2pprove both to God and ro men. c That wa'ks perverſely, or fro- 
wardly, or in crooked and finful paths ; that dealeth hypocriti- 
cally and deceitfully with God, or with men, uſing all pcflible 
crafts to conceal his wickedneſs. d His wickedneſs fball be pub- 


keanelse not to be underſtood ſimply and univerſally, but with this limitati- lickly diſcovered, and ſo he ſhall be expolecd ro all that ſhame and 
on, except this be neceilary for Gods Glory, which in all reaſon | Puniſhment which his fins deſerve, and which he thought by his 
ſhould over-rule the Creatures good, and for their own greater be- | cunning practices to avoid. ] 
_ For ” ur nothing wrtary 6 Fey inns ep m_ P o * He that winketh with the eye e cauſeth ſorrow kn, - 
good mans death, it 1s Certainly 1N me times and Cales, a lets * bu * a MK erl. | 
evil for men to be killed with amine, than to ſurvive to ſee and |! . T_— Fr " 7, fool b | Lo Fall. [|Or,ſhak 
feel thoſe miſeries which are coming upon them, and upon the NO Pei = ecretly and cunningly deſigns miſchiefs againſt others,as beaten, 
Land where they live. &k As this word is uled, Pſal. 52: 7. orthe ws, a mY uſed, Pſal; 35. 19. Prov. 6.13. f To others, and after- i 
Wickedneſs, i, e. the wealth gotten by wickedneſs, as Righteouſneſs, wv. : ards to himlelf. g Or, ana, as It 15 1n the Hebrew : for vice is not 
2. is by divers underſtood of an Ettate got with Righteouſneſs. "cre oppolcdto vertue, as it is in many other Proverbs, bur 16 oh pin 
} Who by that incans ſhal be expoſed to wantarud Famine iS Compared with another. 4 Who is ſo far from ſuch deceits, thar 

« pf vr = 4 none”. ths Seals £ "8 he runs into the other extream, and attererk all kis mind, as is ſaid of 

ed - < & DECOMETN POOrT, " the Fool, Prov. 29. 11. and thereby ſpeaks many things offenſive , 


to others, and m ſchievousto himſelf. 
Ir * The mouth of che righteous man is a well of ife 3. 
Z : but * violence covereth the mouth of ths wicked &. 
z; Continually ſending furth waters of Life, or ſuch good and 
wholſom words, as are very refreſhing and uſeful both ro themſelves 
and others, for the preſerving of their natural Lite, and for the pro 
moting of their ſpiritual and eternal Lite. We have the ſame Phraſe, 
Pſal: 6: 9. k The fame words were uſed before, wv. 6. where ſee 
the Notes; and they may be underſtood in the ſame ſenſe here,and 
the oppoſition of this clauſe to the former, may be conceived thus: 
As the mouth of a g20d man ſpeaketh thoſe things which are good 
& beneficial to himielf and others,ſo the Mouth of'the wicked ut. 
tereth violence, or injury, or things 1-jurious to others, which at 
Jaſt fall upon himſelf, Burt it is no new thing for the ſame words 
and Phrates to be taken in different ſenſes in rhe ſameChaprer,and 
ſomerimes in the ſame verſe, as Marth. 8. 22. and eliewhere ; and 
therefore theſe words may here be, and are, by many tranſlated and 
interpreted thus, the mouth ef the wicked coverethy( i. e. concealeth ) 
violence or miſchief which he plotteth againſt ethers. And ſo here 
is a double oppolirion between the Righteous and the wicked ; firſt 
in the contrary effects, the former cauſeth life, tke latter mifchief 
. and death ; and 1tecondly in the manner of producing them, the 
Righteous doth it by uttering his words, and the wicked doth it by 
concealing his mind. 


F 


all ſins 9. DS «= 
I Upon every flightoccafion, by filling men with ſuſpicions and Per. 
ſurmilzs, whereby they imagine faults where there are none, and 
aggravate every {mall offence. m Either doth not ſeverely obſerve, 

or doth willingly torgert and forgive the Offences or Injuries of o= + 
thers, and ſo preventeth contention and miſchief. 


13 Inthe lips of him that hath underſtanding wiſdom 
is found » : but * a rod 3s for the back of him o that is 


void of f underſtanding p. BS 
» His Wiſdom ſkeweth it felf in his prudent ſpeeches, by wh'ch : 
| he eſcapeth that Rod which fools meet with, and gainerh that Re- 
putation and Advantage to himſelf which Fools loſe» 0 He may ex- 

pect Rebukes and Puniſhments from God aud men. p Which he 
theweth by his fooliſh words. : 


14 Wiſe men lay up qknowledge r : but the * mouth +, 


of the fooliſh is near deſtruction s. 

q To wit, in their minds and memories, to be brought forth 
thence upon fit occaſions. r Whereby they may be cnabled to ſpeak 
both what, and when it is ſeaſonable, for their own or others good. 

s Fools are more froward to lay out thanto lay vp, and for want . 
of knowledge ſpeak much and Foolifhly, whereby they frequently 
bring deſtruction upon themſelves. 


*Ch 
+H 


deftruction s of the poor is their poverty. _ 

t Either, 1. really, as money zs called # defence, Eccl. 7. 12. becauſe 
it oft-times redeems a man from dangers a d calamities.Or, 2. in his 
own conceit, as tis explained ard fully expreffed,Ch. 18. un. It makes 


- 14:1 
* Vet: 


12 Hatred ftirreth up ſtrifes 7; but * love covereth *;ro,. , 


c . 


15 * Thericn mans wealth is his ſtrong city r: the "Ch:18. rx. 


ap. 


CS BA EI I To 39 HORCOEEATIOPUPIRN, B rey Pe nn to 7" 12> PIGS 71 0 GAL ATE WP CORY AVER PEA TART. 7. SPAS Da 7 HIP Wot 


4 


26. 


3.3 


Juſt are not meavt actively of thoſe Bleſſings which they wiſh or 
give to others, but paſſively of thoſe Bleſlings which others with or 
giveto tiem, and conſequently this violence 15 not underſtood of 
that which they do to others, but of that which is done to them by 
. others-" , 
ſtiz.s, 7*The nizmory of the juſt js bleſſed i: but the name 
of the wicked ſhall rot «. : 

: i.e, Honourable and acceptable ro thoſe who mention them. 
Compare Job 3+. 20. Fjal 62: 5- u Shall periſh, and Le curſed and 
detei{iable amongſt men, thall trinkabove ground. 


tHe. , $ The wite in heart will receive commandments x 
70 of lipe but a prating fool y || (ball fail z. 


r, fhal ; 
tbeaten, and of Men, by wh:ch means he ſhall ſtand fat ans live. y One 


him ſecure and confident. w Ir 1s the cauſe of their ruine. Or, the 

contrition, or the terror, or confternation, as others, both ancient and 

m-:dern, ren%er it. Their Poverty takes away their Spirit and Cou- 

rage, and fills them with fear and deſpair. : 

* 16 * The labcur of che righteous renderh to life x : Ch:u- 36 
the fruir y of the wicked to ſin z. 

x Either, 1+ the deſign of his labour is only>this, that he may 


ww 
x Is ready to hear and obey the Countels and Precepts of God | 


have wherewith to live honeſtly, withour fintul ſhifts Or 2, The 
fruit or effect of his labuur or induſtry (as this werd abou 15 mot 
commonly underſtood, and this beit anſwers ro the fo.!owing 
ciauſc, where jruiz is put in fad of this /abow) 1s the pretervatt- 
on, and proiongation of his life, and the obtaining of <rerma] jife, 
to which an honcft and confciercious Diligence un puns Ve orldly 

WI Cailirgs 


Pe Ko 
Callings doth in ſome manner contribute. y The Fruit of all their 
Labours and Endeavours. z Tendeth to fin, ſerves only for Fuel 
to mens pride and Luxury, and workdlineſs, and by that mcans oft 
cauſeth Temporal, and always, without Repentance, Eternal 
Death. 

17 He zs in * the way of life @ that keepeth inſtru- 
ion b : but he that refuſeth reproof, || erreth c. 

Which leadeth to life and Blefſedneſs. & That obſerveth and 
obeyeth the wholſom Counſels of God, and of good men. c To 
wit, from the way of life, or into the way of fin, and ſo of Death. 
Heb; leadeth into error, or ſeduce:h, to wit, himſelf, as appears by 
the oppoſition of this to the former Clauſe ; he wittingly and wil- 
lingly expoſeth himſelf to Temptation and Wickedneſs, becauſe 
he rejeCt:th that Admonition which 1s a proper , Preſervative from 
It. 

18 He that hideth hatred with lying lips 4, and he 
e thar uttereth a ſlander, is a fool f. 

d With flattering words and falſe pretences of Friendſhip. e 
Heb* he, i.e. both of them, one no leſs than the other. So he con- 
demneth two oppolite vices, ſecret hatred, and manifeſt ſlander. f 
Becauſe a ſinner ; and becauſe the miſchief of theſe things will fall 
upon himſe}f. 

I9 In the multitude of words there wanteth not fin 


8: but he that refraineth his lips & is wiſe. 
£ Men that love and commonly uſe much talking, do frequently 
run in many miſcarriages, becauſe ſuch perſons, for the moſt parc 
want Wiſdom'toorder their words aright, Eccleſ. 5. 3. and ſpeak 
haſtily without Care and Conſideration: þ That forbeareth to urter 
what cometh into his mind, before he hath weighed whether itbe 
true, and fit to be ſpoken or not. : 
20 The tongue of the juſt zs as choice ſilver z : the 


heart & of the wicked is little worth. 

; Of great worth anduſe, bringing credit to himſelf, and mich 
ben-fit to others. & And conſequently the Tongue, which ſpeaketh 
out of the abundance of the Heart, Mat. 12. 34. 

21 The lips of the righteous feed many 7; but fools 
Heb. «f die for want + of Wiſdom m. 

I By their wiſe and pious Diſcourfes, Counſels and Comforts, 
'which are ſo many evidences of their Wiſdom. m They have 
_ Wiſdcm to feed or preſerve themſelves, much leſs to feed 0- 
TRErsS. 


6.23. 
, cauſe 
err. 


he addeth no ſorrow with it 0. 

2 Riches are not got by Wiſdom or diligence, but only by God's 
Favour and Bleſſing. 0 z. e, With that Blefling which gives Riches, 
but gives them content and comfort in their Riches, which is a 
ſingular Giftand Bleſſing of God, of which ſee Eccleſ. 2. 24, 26+ & 
3+ 33. & 5.17, 18. whereas the Riches which wicked men get, are 


menting cares and fears, with horrours of Conſcience, and with 
the juſt dread of a ſad account to God for them. : 

h.i4.9. 23 * It is asa ſport pto a fool to do miſchiefq:; but 
15+ 21- a man of underſtanding hath wiſdom r. 

p He doth it with eaſe and delight, and without any ſhame or 
remorſe, or fear. q Or, as others, to work Wickeaneſs; yea, great 
and premeditated wickedneſs, as the Hebrew word properly ſig- 
nifies- » Whereby he is kept from committing Wickedoeſs, and 
eſpecially from ſporting himſelf with it- But his Clauſe is by di- 
vers learned Interpreters render thus, and or ſo j\ Wiſdom to a man 
of Undertanding, itis a ſport or pleaſure to him ro praftiſe Wiſdom 
- Piety. Which Tranſlation makes the Oppoſition more evi- 

Ent. - 

24 The fear s of the wicked it ſhall come upon him: 
but the deſire of the righteous ſhall be granted 7. 

s The evils which he feareth, or hath cauſe to fear, as fear is oft 
taken, # God will not only prevent the miſchiefs which they fear, 
but grant them the good things which they deſire. 

25 As the whirl-wind paſleth «, 1o is the wicked no 


te 12. more x: but *the righteous 5s an everlaſting foundati- 
- 24, 0N Y- . 
= 81618, #® Whichis ſuddenly gone, though with great noiſe and violence. 
x His Power and Felicity is loſt in an inſtant- y Or, hath an ever- 
lafting, &c. His hope and hapoineſs is built upon a ſure and unmo- 
vable Foundation. 

26 As vinegar to the teeth z, and a ſmoak to the 
eyes, ſos the ſluggard « to them that ſend him. 

z Which by its cold and ſharpneſs it offends, s Unſerviceable 
and vexatious. 


Chg.n1:, 27 * The fear of the LORD Þ prolongeth days 5 ; 
Heb, a. but * the years of the wicked ſhall be ſhortned. 


h. b Partly becauſe it gives thema title to the Promiſe of long life, 
Jobe15-32 as well asgro other Promiſes; partlyjbecauſe it gladdeth the heart, 


- 22: 16, which dotb good like a Medicine, Fro. 17. 22+ and preſerves a man 
FE. 55:23, from thoſe wicked prattices which tends to the ſhortning of the 


days. 

| 28 The hope of the righteous ſhall be gladneſsc : but 

Job 8413. the * expectation of the wicked (ball periſh 4. 

| n 4 4 xy c Though art preientit be mixed with doubts and fears,and diſap- 

| '*=* pointments, yt at laſt it ſhall be accompliſhed, and turned jnro 

enjoyment. 4 Shall be utterly fruſtrated, aud ſo end in forrow. 
29 The way ofthe LORD e is ſtrength f to the up- 

right; but deſtruction g ſbal/ be to the workers of ini- 

quity. 

e Either, 1. The way or courſe of Gods Providence in the Go- 
vernment ofthe World. Or rather, 2. The way of Gods Precepts, 
as God's way or way: are moſt commonly underitood in Scripture, 
or walking in God's ways ; for tis 15 oppoſed to working iniquity in 
the next Clauſe. f Gives ſtrength, i. e cither courage and confi- 
dence : or ſupport and protettion from that defiru#ion here following. 
g Or, terror or conſternation, as the word properly ſignifies, and ma- 
ny render it. The deſign of this verſe is to thew that Piety is the 
ouly true Policy 


FO FE R B S. 


Chip. Xl, 


20 * The righteous ſhall never be removed hb: but *P! 37.22, 


I25, I, 


"Pſ.37.36; 


fHeb. $4; 


waradneſſe,, 


22 The bleflingof the LORD, it maketh rich », and 


attended - with God's Curſe, with many diſcontents, with tors ; 


| up in ſtore. 


*Ch.r6. 2 
Ezck,7.19, 
Zephags, 


— 


#Heb, 26 


trfie. 


Ch. 5. 43% 


, 


the wicked ſhallnot ichabic the earth z. 

h They ſhall live long and happily here, when this is moſt expe- 
dient for them, and eternally in heaven. i They ſhall not have ſo 
much as a long and quiet abode vpon Earth, unleſs where this isa 
Curſe and Milchief to them, and much leſs ſhall they have any poſ- 
ſeſſion in Heaven« 

31 * The mouth of the juſt bringeth forth & wiſdom 
I: but the froward tongue ſhall be cut out m. 

k Freely and abundantly, and conſtantly, as the Earth or a Tree 
bring forth their proper Fruit, as the word properly ſignifies. ! Wiſe 
Counſels, by which he dire&eth and ſecureth himſelf and others. m2 
Becauſe it bringeth forth not Wiſdom, bur folly 'and wickedneſs. 

32 The lips of the righteous know » what is accep- 
table o: but the mouth of the wicked ſpeakerh + tro- 
wafdneſs. | 
_ ® To wit, praGtically, ſo as to conſider and ſpeak. Knowledge 
1s here aſcribed to the lips, as it is to the Hands, Plal. 78. 72. becauſe 
they are conducted by Knowledge and wiſdom. o To God and 
good men, or whatis truely worthy of acceptation; for this is oppas 
{ed to what is froward or wicked in the next clauſe. 
| CH AP, XL "_ 
| A * + Falſe balance azs abominationb tothe LORD c: Lev. 1g! 

A but a juſt weight 3s his delight. 2.35. | 

#s The uſe of all falſe weights and meaſures in comerce« bi e, I3, 11 - 
Highly abominable,as the abſtrat ſignifieswhich is oppoſed to the Ch. xy 
falle opinion of men who account it a fineneſs of wit,or, at worſt &29.;, wn 
but a trivial fault. c Partly becauſe this wickedneſs is acted under +Heh, $,j. 
a Colour of Juſtice ; and partly becauſe it is deſtructive to humane 1s, of ” 
ſociety, and eſpecially to the poor, whoſe Patron the Lord own- ge;-;r 
eth himſelf to be. tHeb. per 

2 * When pride cometh then cometh ſhame 4: but fe# jw. 
wich the lowly is wiſdom e. *Ch 15:33 

d Pride, as it is the effect of Folly, ſo it bringeth a man to con- % 16: 18, 
tempt an de truction, ſuch perſons being commw only hated both by & 18; 12, 
God and by all men. e Whereby they are kept from thoſe foolith 
and wicked actions which expoſe men to ſhame. 

3 * The integrity ofthe upright f ſhall guide them g: *Ch.:;:6. 
but the perverſeneſs of tranſgreſſors thall deſtroy 
them h 

f Their ſincere obedience to Gods Laws. g Shall keep them 
from crooked and dangerous courſes, and Jead them in a right and 
ſafe way. h Thoſe wicked devices by which they deſign and expect 
to ſecure themielves, ſhall be the inſtrument of their deſtruction. 

4 * Riches profit nor in the day of Wrath ;: but 
righteouſneſs & d-iivereth from death /. 

z In the time of God's Judgments, when he is executing Wrath 
and Vengeance upon ſinners, k Or, mercy, as this word is oft ren- 

, d:ed, or Charity ro the poor, which is fit!y oppoſed to Riches aid 

! It moverh God to deliver them oft times from teme 

poral Calamities, 'an«! always from eternal death, where ſuch acti- 
ons are cone from a Right Principle. 

5 The righteoutneſs of the perfe& ſhall | dire@ his 
my m ; but che wicked ſhall fall by his own wicked- 
NCIS, 

72 Shall bring all his deſigns and endeavours to an happy iſſue 
by comparing t:.is clauſe with the next. * 

6 The righteouſneſs of the uprightſhall deliver them 
z : but * tranſgreilors {hall be taken in heir own naugh- 
cinels. 

z From many ſnares and dangers. 

7 When a wicked man dieth, his expecation ſhall 
periſh 0; and the hope of unjuſt er p perilheth. 

0 al) his hope and felicity, which he placed wholly in earthly 
things, is loſt and gone with him. p So it is a Repetition of the 
ſame thing in other words: Or, as divers render it, the hope of their 
ſrengths, i. e which they place in their carnal ſtrengths, their 
Riches, Children, Friends, &s, Sothis is added by way of aggra« 
vation. 

8 * The righteous isdeliveredout of trouble, and the *Ch.iit, 
wicked cometh in his ſtead q. 

9g Is by God's providence brought into the ſame miſeries which 
either he deſigned againſt the Righteous, or had formerly inflicted 
upon the Righteous, and now lately removed from them. 

9 An bypoctite with his mouth rx deſtroyeth his 
neighbour : but through knowledge s ſhall the juſt be 
delivered *e. 

r By his corrupt Communication, whereby he endeavours ta 
draw him to error or wickedneſs. s To wit of God, and of his 
wo:d, which makes men wiſe, and diſcovers. and ſo prevents the 
frauds of Deceivers. # From the infection of the Hypocrites evil 
and crafty Counſel. | : 

10 When it goeth well with the righteous «, The ci- 
ty rejoiceth x; and when the wicked periſb, zbere 3s 
ſhouting y. 

u When ſuch men are encouraged and advanced into places of 

Power and truſt, x The Citizens or ſubjects of that Government 
rejoice, becauſe they confidently expect Juſtice, and Tranquillity, 
and many other benefits, by their adminiſtration of publick affairs. 
y A common rejoicing, partly for the juſt vengeance of God upon 
them who have been the inſtruments of ſo much miſchief; and 
partly for their deliverance from ſuch publick grievances and bur- 
dens of the Land. 

1x By the blefling of the upright z the city is exal- 
ted : butitis overthrown by the mouth of the wicked -: 

z Wherewith they bleſs the City, to wit, by their ſincere Pray= 
ers, and wiſe and wholſom Counſels. # By their Curſes, and Oaths, 
and Blaſphemies, and wicked and pernicious Counſels, whereby 
they both provoke God, and miſlead men to their own ruins.] 

12 


E 


8 7-304 


b. {0 


0 neſſes, , 


V. 19! 
36, 

It 25, 
15,16, 
I6. 114 
210,23 


b, bal Pd 


5 of 
A 

b. per 
ſtone. 
-T5:33 
6: 18, 
8; 12, 


13: 6, 


b. 76a 


2148, 


| «b: ſore bro jt + and he that hateth Þ ſuretiſhip 1, is ſure. 


| her honoury or good reputation, with no leſs care and reſolution,than 


P 
= 


Chap. XI. 


+ Heb. dats 
ſipure of 
þcart. 


12 He that is + void of wiſdom deſpiſeth his neigh- | 
bour b : bur a man of underſtanding holdeth his peace c. 
þ Which contempt he ſheweth, eirher 1- by contewptuous or 
reproachtul expreſſions of him ; or 2. by nor asking, or not re- 
garding his. advice, but truſting wholly ro his own underſtanding 
c Either r. He forbeareth all ſuch expreſſions againſt his neighbour. 
Or 2.He ſilently and patiently bears theſeReproaches from his neigh- 
bour, 2nd doth not render one Reproach for another ; wherein he 
ſhewerh true Wiſdom. Or 3. He deſireth and hearkeneth to the 
Countels of others. Any of theſe ways the oppoſition is ſufficient- 
ly evident. | 
+ Heb. fe ' 19 + A tale-bearer d revealeth ſecrets e : but he that 
tha walk 55 of a faithful Spirit f concealeth the matter go 
' off, beg d Or, He that gooth about ( from one place or perſon to another, 
4 tale-bere as the manner of ſuch is) zeVing tales, making it his buſineſs to ſcat- 
ter Reports. e This tatling humour isfo prevalent with him,that 


re. 
he cannot forbear to publiſh, cither his neighbours ſecret faults, or 
ſuch things as were committed to his truſt with a charge of fecre- 
cy. f That hath a ſincere, and conſtant, and faithful mind, which 

' both can and will govern his Tongue.g Sofar as he can lawfully do. 

*; Kin.12: 13, * Where no counſel h 1s, the people fall ; but in, 

$, \2. the multitude of counfellors z there is ſatety. 

ow” Or, No wiſe counſel, as the word properly ſignifies,as Job: 37:12: 
Prov: 1: 5. # To wit, ofwiſe and good Counſellors, forſuch wall 
employ and unite their Counſels together for the publick good. 

+ Heb/bal as He that is ſurety for a ſtranger & 7 thall ſmart for 


hen. k Whoſe condition he doth nor tliroughly underſtand, and 

qHeb.thoſe therefore knows not his own danger. 1 Of which ſee on Prov: 

that frike 6: x. 

Lands, 16 A gracious woman mretaineth honour # : and o 
ſtrong men retain riches. vY 

» Heb. a Woman of grace and favour, i. e. one who by her meek- 

neſs, and modeſty, and prudence, and other Virtues renders her 

ſelf acc::ptable 2nd amiable ro God and to men. » Or, holteth fait 


ſtrong men do Riches,as it here follows, o Or, as; for ſo this con- 
jua&tion is off uſed in this Book, of which we have ſcen ſome, and 


may afterwards ſee morcinſtances. 
I - The merciful man doth good to his own ſoul p : 


but he that 5s cruel q, troubleth his own fleſh 7. 

? i, e. To himſelf, becauſe his liberality ſhall turn to his own 
infinite advantage both in this life, and in the next. q Hard heart- 
ed and uncharitable to others. r Either x. his own Children or 
Kindred, who are commonly expreſſed by this vety word, for 
whoſe ſakes he is thus coverous and uncharirable,that he may hoard | 
it up f:r them : but they, ſaith the wiſe Man, ſhall have nothing 
bur trouble «nd vexation, and Gods curſe with it. Or 2. himſelf 

denominated here from his f-ſ/þ or Body as in the former Branch 
T from h« Soul. But he may ſcem to mention his fleſh rather than 
his Soul, to intimate that the miſchiefs of his covetouſneſsſhall not 
only fall upon his Soul, which he diſpiſeth, but upon his Fleſh or 

Ny outward Man, which is the only thing that he feacech - 
| 18 The wicked worketh a deceitful work s : but to 


him that ſoweth ; righteouſneſs #, (hall be a ſure re- 


ward. 
s A work which will deceive his expeQation of that good for 


| which he worketh- # That worketh it with conſtancy, and dili- 
oy gence,and hope of recompenſe,zs they do who ſow in Seed-time. 
Good works, atts of Piety towards od, a.id Ciarity to men. 

r9 As righteouſneſs zendeth ro life, ſo he that pur- 


Jueth evil x, pur/aerh it to his own death. 

x Who are not overtaken by ſin, as a good Man may be,Gal 6:1: 
but ſtediouſly deſign it, and follow after the occalions of it earneſt- 
Ty, and greedily and —_— 

20 They that are of a froward heart y, are abomi- 


nation tothe LORD = ; but ſ#c> as are upright in zheir 


way &, are his delight. 

+ y Hypocrites, as appears from the oppoſition of theſe to the up- 
| right in the next Clauſe : whoſe Hearrs are falfe to God, and con» 
trary to their own profeſſions. x Though by their cunning Artis 
fices they may deceive men, and gain their good oppinion and fa- 
vour, yet God ſees their naughty Hearts and haterh them. # In 
the courſe of their lives and ations. By which changing of the 
Phraſe, from Heart in the firſt Clauſe, to way here.he intimates that 
the ſincerity and hypocriſie of mens hearts are diſcovered, and to 
be judged by their converſations. 


*Ch16: 52 214 Theugh hand join in hand 6b, the wicked ſhall not 
| beunpunithed c : but the ſeed of the righteous 4 ſhall 


| be delivered e. 

b Though they are fortified againſt Gods judgments by a nume- 
rous Iffue and Kindred,and Friends,and by mutual ſtrong combina- 
tions or confederacies. c They ſhall be puniſhed even in their own 
Perſons as well as in their poſterity. They fhall nor de able either 
totally to prevent Gods judgment, or to delay it from coming in 

| their days. 4 Not only their Perſons, but their Children. e With- 
out any fuch Auxiliaries, by Gods ſpecial Providence. _ : 
22 As a jewel of gold in a {wines ſnout f, /o 35a -fair 


woman which F is without deſcretion 7g. 

f Which would not adorn the Swine, but only be diſparaged it 
ſelf. It was the cuſtom of ſome of the Jews to wear Jewels upon 
their Noſes and ſome of their Neighbours wore them in their 
Noſes. g Which diſgraceth the beauty of her Body by a fooliſhand 
filthy Soul. 

23 The deſire & of the righteous is only good ; bur 
the expectation of the wicked is wrath. 

h Either 1. properly ſo called. So the ſenſe is, His deſires are 


et 


f Heb: dex 
parterh 
mM, 


are to do hurt, and to <xecute wrath and hatred againft them O\ 
rather 2. the objc&, or event, or effect of thei; defire, as app: ars 


F RUE. 


' fibly it is a Metaphor from aFountain,which when it poureth forth 


_ eth empty, and the Water ſceketh another coarſe, Others render 


generally and conitantly to do good to men,as wicked mens deſigns | 


E 'R. Ex Chap. X 


or event of it : And the ſenſe of the Proverb: ſeetns to be this, The 
defires and expeQations of the Righteous ſhall end in their gocd 
and happineſs, but the defires and expe&zations of wicked men ſhall 
be ſadly diſappointed, and end in the wrath of God, and their ut- 
rer ruime, 

24 There is that ſcattereth z;, and yet increaſeth & ; 


and here 5s that withholdeth more than is meet /,but ix 


tendeth to poverty m. | 

3 That giveth liberally of his Goods to the Poor : for ſo this He- 
brew word is uſed, Pſal: 112:9. He hath diſperſed, which is explat= 
ned in the following words, he kath given to the Poor. k Through 
Gods ſecret Blefling upon his Eſtate. 1 Heb. fom what is right or 
juſt, i.e. what by the Law of God, and the Rules of general Juſ- 
tice, he is obliged rogive : of which ſee Prov. 3: 27. m By Gods 
Providence ſecretly blaſting his Eſtate, either in his «wn or his | 
Childrens hands, as it very frequently befals cavetous Wretches., = 

25 * + The liberal ſoul » ſhall be made fat o: and he * 2 Cor 
that watereth ſhall be watered alſo himſelf p.  _ —_ 

» Heb. the Soul of Bleſſing, that man who is a Bleſfling to others, foul of bi 
who bleſſeth them, 7. e. doth good to them, as Bleſſmg is oft uſed 2 . 
for a gift, as Gen: 33* T1: 1 Saw: 25: 27: 2 Cor: 9: 5. oShall be _ 
greatly enriched both with Temporal and Spiritual Bleflings. p Pof- 


— cc . 


its waters is inſtantly filled again,whereas if it be ſtopped it grow- 


it, he ſhall be a Rain, 5. e. he ſhall receive ſuch liberal ſupplies from 
God that he ſhall be able to pour forth ſhowers of good things | 
upon others. | I» | *Amos | 
_ 26 * He that withholdeth corn q, the people Jhall ;, 5; 
curſe him : but blefling r ſhall be upon the head of him 


thatſelleth it s. | 
q Ina time of ſcarcity, when others need and deſire it. » The 
blefſing of God which the people ſhall heartily beg for him. s U- 
pon reaſonable terms. : 
27 He thatdiligently ſeeketh : * good «, procureth *Chtr4:2 


favour x : * bur he that feeketh miſchief y ic ſhall come gff71+4 
, 9:15, it 
unto him 2, ray 


# Which is oppoſed to thoſe who content themſelves with lazy & 57, 5 
defires or cold and careleſs endeavours. . « To 10 good to all men, : 
as he hath opportunity. x With God and Men. »y To do any miſ- 
chief or injury to others, # It ſhall be requited either by mens ma« 


lice and revenge, or by Gods juſt judgmenr. Opn 
_ 38 * He that eruſteth in his riches « (hall fall þ : but Jo 37 
the righteous « ſhall flouriſh as a branch 4. ' Pal: 132 
# As his chief portion, and felicity, and ground of ſafety. b As &92:12,8&c 
a withered Leaf by comparing this claute with the latter. ' c Who Jer:17: 86 | 
maketh God alone, and not riches, his truſt. d To wit, a green 
and flouriſhing branch. | 


29 He that troubleth his own houſe e, ſhall inherit *ch: 19: 5 
the wind f : and *® the -fool ſball be ſervant to the wiſe , 


of heart g. kT, 

_ e He who bringeth trouble and miſery upon himſelfand Children, 
either 1. by careleineſs, flothfulneſs, improvidence, prodigality, 
or any wickedneſs, whereby he conſumeth his Eſtate. So this 
troubl;nz of his Houſe may be oppoſed to a Mans building of his Houſe, 
Jer. 29, 2:8 Or 2. by covetous deſires and reſtleſs endeavours to 
heap up Riches, wherevy he greatly tires and troubles both himſelf 
and all his Family, with exceſſive cares and labours,which is called 
coveting an evil cavetouſnels rohis Houſe, Habak 2. 9. f Shall be as 
unable to keep and enjoy what he gets as a Man is to hold the 
Wind in his Fiſt, or to feed and fatisfie himſelf with ir, / he ſhall be 
brought to poverty. g By which means ſuch a troubleſome, foal 
ſhall through his extreme neceflity be forced even toſell himſelfto 

*Ch:r3:125 


luch as are wiſer. 
30 The fruit of the righteous þ is * a tree of life 3, 00 n_ 
and he that f * wineth fouls & :s wiſe /. | _ 
h i.e. Which he produceth ; his diſcourſes and his whole con« 
verſation. #7 Is lik the fruitof the Tree of Life ; is a great preſe?- 
ver of his life, and a procurer of Eternal Life. not only ro himſelf, - 
but to othersalſo k Heb. thar catcherh Souls, as a Fowler doth 
Birds ; that maketh it his deſign and buſineſs. and ufeth all his skitl 
and diligence to gainSovls to God,& to pluck them out of the ſnare 
ofthe Devil. / Sheweth himſelf to be a truely wiſe and good Man, 
Bur this Clauſe is and may be rendred thus, and he that i wiſe ( the 
ſame with the Righreow in the former Clauſe ) winneth Souls,or brings 
them to life. So this Ciauſe agrees very well with the former. 


31 Behold the righteous ſhall be recompenſed m in the 


Earth »: much more othe wicked and the ſinner p, 

m i e. Puniſhed for his ſins, as appears from the next.Clauſe,the 
general word being here uſed of this one particular,by a Synecdoche: 
1 Whereby he intimates, that all his ſufferings are confined to this 
World, which is an unſpeakable felicity. o They ſhall be puniſh» 
ed more certainly and mores ſeverely, eitherin this life, or in the 
next. f Thoſe who make ſin their great ſtudy, and daily and moſt 
delightful) excerciſe. Compare this Verſe with 4 Pet: 4: 18: which 
is a good Comment upon it. 

C H A P. XII. 
WW Ho!o loveth inſtruction #, loveth knowledge b : * *Ch.is:5: 
but he that hateth reproof, ;s brutiſh c. | 

a Admonition or reproof,as appears from the next Clauſe, which 
1s a ſingular means of getting true and ſound knowledge... 4 Shew- 
eth that he 15 a true lover ofknowledge, becauſe he is willing to 
purchaſe ir upon ſuch unwelcome terms,as reproofs are generally e- 


'teemed. c Ditcovereth himſclf to be a moſt fooliſk and fiupid Grea- 
ture, becauſe he is an enemy to himſcIfand to his own happineſs. 


2 A good man + obtaineth favour 4 of the + Heb. 
L OR D: but amanof wicked devices e will he con- 4#-werh 


Y + - - HFA ABPR EIS Vp owe > Ger, HORA TIP 'Y 


1% rot; VACATED. EY 


G7 4%, 


44 Et 8 AR ets 


*> * 3 Is 
*'Dan2:33 


-— te 


from the next Clauſe, where expeFarion is clearly pur tor the objec | 


-demn fo «" $::" 
5 G 2 # Where 


dap. XII.” PIR O Y 


d Whereby he is and ſhall be acquited 2nd juſtified. e Who de- 
figneth and induſtriouily committeth wickedneſs f When he 
ſtandeth in judgmeat ; howſoeverhe may for the preſent jultific 
kimſclfand decive others into a good opinion of him. 

3 A manſhall not be eftabliiked by wickedneſs g : 
h:10:25: but the * root of the righteous ſhall not be moved b. 

g By any ſinful courſes by which he uſeth to ſecure or ſtab: 
himſelf; whereby he implies that he ſhal! be rooted up. þ To wir. 
ow of its place. He ſhall ſtand faſt & flouriſh like a wel-rooted 

ree. 

4 * A virtuos woman 7s a crown # to her husband : 
bur ſhe that maketh albamed &, 5s as rottennefs in his 
bones /. 

i A ſingular ornament and matter of his glorying and joy. k That 
by her folly or wickednets bringech ſhame to her ſelf and to her 
Tusband. ! Loathiome and vexatious, and pernicious: 


Or: 11:7 


+ 5 The thoughts of the righteous are | right w $ bat 
h:11:18: the counſels of the wicked re F deceit ns 


m His.conftant purpoſe is to deal juſtly and truely with God and 
with men» » His great care and contrivance is ro wrong and de- 
ceive oth=rs by fair pretences and Cunning Artifices. ; 

6 * The words of the wicked areto lie in wait for 
blood o : but the mouth of the upright ſhall deliver 


them p. 

s Are deſigned and ordered to intrap or deceive others, and to 
deſtroy them. p To wit, from thoſe that lie in wair for them : 
which it doth, either 1. by prayer to God for their deliverance : 
Or 2. by pacifying the wicked with ſoft and gentle anſwers, or by 
deverting them from their evil courſe by their good counſels and 
admonitions : Or 3. by pleading their righteous caule in a judicia 
; ar other way. . 
NC:35:37: 7 * The wicked are overthrown, and are notq : bu 
k: 11- * the houſe r of the righteous ſhall ſtand. 

_ 9 Both they and their Families ſhall ſusdenly periſh. 
mily or Poſterity- Et 
8 A man jhall be commendeds according to his wit- 
eb: per domt* buthe that is | of a perverſe heart # thall be 
ie of difpiſed x. | 
* + To wit, by wiſe and good men. t More or leſs according to 
the degree of Wiſdom which his diſcourſes and ations diſcover to 
be in him.» Which he ſheweth by his wicked words and converſati- 
on, x By God and all wile men. : 
wo 9 He that 3s deſpiſed y and || hath a ſervant 2, #s bet- 
iff. 8+ £er @ than he that honoureth himſelf 5, and lacketh 


bread c. 


hap: 7: 
18: 


c 


r The Fa- 


- 


Or, /er- 


ſuch are commonly deſpiſed by men of an higher rank. = Hath 
bur one Servant, Or rather, as it is in the Margent, Servant 70 
hiniſcIf, hath none to wait upon him or work for him but hbmieif, 
thar getterh Bread by his own labours. # Is happier. 6 That glo- 
rieth in his high Birth or gay attire. c Wants neceſſaries for his own 
ſuſtenance. : : 

Io * A righteous mar F regardeth the life of his beaſt 


d : but the || tender mercies of the wicked are cruel e. 


F:ut.25: 


Heb. 
noweth. 
fal: 1: 6! ther by labours beyond irs ſtrength, or by denying to it neceſſury 
Dr, bowels fggd or reſt, or by any other way : and much more will he be p:- 
tiful ro his own S-rvants, and to pcor men. e There is much cru» 
elty mixed even with their moſt merciful ations, when they pre- 
zend or intend to ſhew mercy. Heb.:he Bowels of che,&c. thoic very 
Bowels which inothersare the ſeat of pity, in him are hardned and 
ſhur up, and only ſtir himup to cruclty. In ſtead of that Mercy 
which is natural to other men, he hath nothing bur cruelty. Their 
Mercies are here ſaid to be cruel, as the fooliſhneſs, and weakneſs of God, 
areſaid to be wiſe and ffrong, 1 Cor: I» 25. : 
11 He thattilleth his land f ſhall be ſatisfied with 


bread : but he that followeth vain perſons g 55 void of 
underſtanding 5. 

f That employeth his time and ſtrength in an honeſt calling. g 
That uſeth their ſociery and idle courle of living. h Shall through 
his own folly want Bead. : 

12 The wicked deſireth |] the net of evil men ; : but 


VL :28'19; 


y That liveth in a mean and obſcure condition in the World, for 


4 Which is employed in his Service ; he will not deſtroy it ets | 


I5*% The way of a fool r is right in bis own eyess . *Ch. 3. q. 
bughe that hearkeneth unto &ounſel z js wile. 

r The counſel and courſe which his own mind tuggefts to him 
in ordering of his affairs. s Highly pleaferh him,ſo that henegle&s 
and deipifeth the opinions and advices of others. t Thar difiruſt- 
eth i1s own judgment, and teekerh counſel from others. 

16 A fools wrath is | preſently known # : but a pru- 
dent mar covereth ſhame x. 

_# By his raſh words and indecent ations, whereby he expoſeth 
himſelf ro ſhame, * Eicher 1. the ſhame, or reproach, er Mmjury 
done to him by others, which he concealcth and beareth with pa-« 
tience & paſſeth by,as his duty and intere!t obligeth him ro do.Or 
2. his own ſhame, to which the folly of raſh anger would have be- 
trayed him. | 


T Heb. in 
thit aay, 


17 * He that ſpeaketh truth y, ſheweth forth righte- *Ch: 1;.;, 
oninzf5 z, ; but a falſe witneſs deceit 4. & 1445, 


» Heb. He that wil fþpcak truth, i.e. he who accuſtometh himſelf 
to ſpeak truth in common converſation ; for the future Tenſe in 
the Hebrew tongue oft notes a continued a& or habit. z To wir, 
as a witneſs in publick judgment, he-will ſpeak nothing bur whar 
{15 true and juſt; you may depend upon his Teſtimony. a He 
| who uſeth himſelfro lying in hiscommon talk, will ule falſehood 

and deceit in judgment. | 
18 * There is that ſpeaketh like the piercings of a ?Pſ57. 
ſword 5b : bur the tongue of the wiſe ;s || health c. & 99 7: 
b Hurtful and pernicious words, whereby they either corrupt . my 
mens minds aad manners, or ſcandalize them, or injure them in EW, 
their Reputation, Eſtate, or Life, or otherwiſe. c His i5peech both 
in judgment, and in common &diſcourſe,is found and wholſome in 
it felt, ani tending to the comfort and benefit of others. 
' 16 The lip of crutch thall be eftabliſhed for ever: but 
'a lying tongue is but for a moment . 
4 The ſpeaker of truth is conſtant, and always agreeable to him« 
ſelf, and his words the more and longer they are tried, the more 
, doth the truth of rhem appear ; whereas Liars, though they may 
| make a fair ſhew for a ſeaſon, yet are eaſily and quickly convicted 
: of falthood. 
20 Leceit es in the heart of them that imagine evil : 
| but co the counſellors of peace #5 joy. 
eEither 1. towards others, whom they deſign to deceive, and 
then to deſtroy, whilſt good Counſellers brivg ſafety and joy to 0« 
thers, Or rather 2. to themſelves. So the ſenſe of the Verſe is, 
| They whoſe hearts deviſe miſchief againſt others, ſhall be deceived 
in their hopes, and bring that trouble upon themſelves which they 
deſign again!t others; but they who by good counſels labour to 
promote the Peace and Happineſs of others, ſhall reap the comfort 
and benefit of it to themſelves. a 
21 There ſhall no evil f happen to the juſt: but ths 
wicked ſhall b:filled with miſchief. 


' fEither 1. of fin, orrather 2, of ſuffering or miſchief, as the 
(next Clauſe explains this: No ſuch evil fha]l befall them, as doth 
| commonly befall the wicked, who are filled, or overwhelmed, and 
! utterly deſtroyed by it; whereas good men are ſupported under 
rheir troubles, and ſhall be delivered out of them,aud receive much 
enefit by them. 
22 * Lying lips are an abomination to the LORD ; Heb. « 
but they that 7 deal truely g are his delight. eruth 
Z Thar ſpeak and a fincerely and truely. He implies that al- Jolv 3.31, 
though lying lips alone are ſufficient ro purchaſe Gods hatred, yet ; 
truth in a mans ſpeech is not ſufficientro procure Gods favour,un« 
leſs there be alſo Truth and Juſtice in his actions. 
23 * A prudentman conczaleth knowledge þ : but 


the heart of Fools proclaimeth fooliſhneſs z. 

þ He doth not vain-gloriouſly, and unſcaſorably utter what he 
knows, butkeeps it in his breaſt till he hath a fit occaſion to bring 
it forth for Gods Glory and the good of others. # Whilſt ke makes 
oſtentation of his knowledge, he betrays his Tgnorance and Folly. 
Compare Eccleſ: 1: 3. | 

24 * The hand of the diligent ſhall bear rule & : jg, 4, 
but the || Nothful 7 ſhall be under tribute. '* as 

k Shall procure Wealth and Power. 7! Heb. the deceitful, So he 
calls the ſlothful, becauſe Deceit and Idleneſs are commonly com= 
panions, and ſuch men ſeek to gain by Fraud whar they either 
cannot or willnot get by honeſt Labour. Compare Prov: 10: 4. 


| 
{ 


FCh. 6.1 


FCh.i3i6 
& 154% 


| 


*Ch.io- 


the root of the righteous yieideth fruit &. 

i He approveth and uſeth thoſe cunning and deceitful arts, 
which wicked men uſe, like Nets to enſnare other men,and to take 
their goods to- themſelves. Or, he deſirech the Fortreſs of wicked mea, 
or, z. wickeaneſr, i. e. he ſeeks to fortifie and ſtablith himſelf by 
wicked prattices. & That Juſtice and Piety, in which he js root- 
ed and which is the root of his aQtions, doth of it ſelf, without 
the aid of any indire& and ſinful courſes, yield him ſufficient fruit 
both for his own-need, and to do goo1 to others. But, becauſe 
the word Fu: is not in the Hebrew,and may ſeem to be too great 
a ſupplement,it is, and may be rendred thus, the root of the Righte« 
os giveth it, to wit, that Fortreſs or ſecurity which others ſeek in 
wickedneſs. 2 | 

13 + * The wicked ;; ſnared ] by the tranſgreſlion of 

his\ipsm : but the juſt ſhall come out of trouble ». 
Fj. e. Brought into trouble. m By his wicked ſpeeches againſt 
od and men. = To wit, by his wiſe anQÞholy, and inoffenſive 
ſpeeches, whereby he pacifierh men and gaineth Gods favour and 
protection. 


14* A man ſhall be ſatisfied with good by the fruit of 
his mouth o, and the recompenſc of a mans hands p 
ſhall be rendred unto him 9. 

o By his pious and profitable Diſcourſes. p 7. e. Of his works 
and » Tang of which the hand is the great inſtrument. Whereby 
alſomay be implied that'God will notregard nor recompenſe good 
words, unleſs they be accompanied” with a good converſation. q 
To wit, by God to whom the work of retribution belongs. 


f Heb. the 
ſnere of the 
p.cked is 
the tranſ 
[ſion of 

=: 
| Ch:18:7: 


"Ch: 13: 2: 


. ; q *Chag1;, 
25 * Heavinelſs ia the heart of man maketh it ſtoop ; lac 
but *a good word Z maketh it glad. 
. 1 A comapſſionate or encouraging word from a Friend or Mini» 
EIs 
26 The righteous 7s more [|excellentm than his neigh- 


bour » : but the way of the wicked o ſeduceth them p. 

” Either 1. In his temper and diſpoſition, more juſt, and gene- 
rous, and publick ſpirited, and merciful, &c- Or 2. In his condi- 
tion, more happy, notwithſtanding all his ſufferings and the con- 
trary Opinien of the world concerning them- » Than any other 
men. þ Heb. maketh them to err or wanazr, to loſe that excellency 
or happineſs which they had promiſed to themſelves, in and by 
their wicked pradtices. 

27 The ſlothful man q roſteth nor that which he took 
in hinting yr: butthe ſubſtance of a diligent man 7s 


Precious s, 

q Or, The deceitful man, as wv. 24+ who ſeeks to enrich himſelf by 
fraudulent and unjuſt praftices. r Doth not enjoy the fruit of bis 
Labours or devices, either becauſe he doth nor labour, and ſo hath 
nothing to waſte or enjoy ; or becauſe God oft=times deprives him 
either of ſuch ill-gotten goods, or at leaſt of a quier and comfortable 
fruition of them. s Yields him greatcomforr and ſatisfaction, part. 
ly becauſe-it abides with him, and partly becauſe he hath Gods Fi. 
vour and. bleſſing with it. ; 

28 In the way of righteouſneſs 5s life, and in the 


path-way thereof there is || nodeath x, _ 
f 1aC 


|| Or,obwh 
dent, 


l Or, im 
v6rid l, f ri . 


Te b in 
't day, 


| h; 13.5, 
I 4+F, 


Ch. 6.19 
Heb. 
uth, 

dls 3.31; 


Ch.izi6 


154 & 


lbto4. 
Ir, dot 
= 


>] 


hai, 
ſar F 0:44 


Ir aha 
2 


, is 
ality, 


; The praftice of Juſtice and Godlineſs, though it expoſe a man 
co ſome dangers and inconveniences in the world, yet it will cer- 
tainly lead him to Life 2nd Happineſs, whereas the end of all wic- 


ked courſes is death and deſtruction. 
C H A P. XIIL 


ſcorner hearerh not rebuke c. 


either from his Fath=r or from any other man, | 
2 * A man ſhall eat good 4 by thefruit of his mouth 


e: but the ſoulf of che tratſgrefſors g ſhail eat viol- 


Ence 5, | == 

d Shall receive much comfort, and credit, and benefir to him» 
ſelf. e By his ways and profitable diſcourſes. F 2. e. The perſon,as 
the ſoul is oft uſed. Who. tranigreſs with their Lips, as this gene- 
ral Phraſe may be refrained from the former claute. 


"Chr 2.14: 


off:red to others in word or deed. ts 
*Ch:18:21: 3 * He that keep<rn his mouth 3, keepeth his life & : 
& 21:23: but he that openeth wide his lips / (ball have deſtructi- 


ON 7, ; 

; To wit, ſhut, for this is oppoſed to the Gpening of it : who 
ſpeaks ſparingly, & with due care and caution. & Prevents many 
fins and miſchiefs which others run into. / That takes liberty to 
ſpeak every thing which pleaſeth him, or cometh into his mind. 

_ = From God or men, 
Fh:10:4* 4 * The foul of the ſluggard defireth, and hath no- 
thing =:but the ſoul of the diligent ſhall be made far o. 

n Becauſe he contenteth himſelf with lazy deſire without dilts 
pent endeavours. 0 He ſhall be enriched with the fruit of his own 
Labours. FEES ' 

5 A righteous mas hateth lying p: but a wicked man 


hos, cauſe 9 || is loathlom, and cometh to ſhamer. 
wh ench p Borh in himſelf and in other men, whereby he getteth that 
& ſhame. good name which is like a precious Ointment. 4 Who accuſtom- 
eth himſelf to lying, as may be gathered from the foregoing words. 
r Makes himſelf contemptible and hateful to all thar know him ; 
there being ſcarce any reproach which men more impatiently en- 
dure, and ſeverely revenge, than that of being called or accounted 
a Lyar. : ; ; 
*Ch:r1: 6 * Righteouſneſs keepeth him s thet js upright in the 
$6 ” way : but wickedneſs overthoweth Þ the ſinner fe. 
+ Heb: ſm 5 Either from ſin : or from that overthrow, which befals ſinners 
*" jn the next clauſe. £ Heb. the man of fn, who giveth up himielf 

to wicked courſes» . 

- * Thereis that maketh himſelf rich, yet hath no- 


thing « ; there is rhat maketh himſelf poor, yet hath 


grear Riches : : | 
u Some men who have little or nothing; pretend to have great 
Riches, and carry themſelves accordingly ; either our of Pride and 


TCh: 12:9: 


ro be very poor that they may preſerve and increaſe their eſtates by 
concealing them from,thoſe who would either deſire a fhare in 
them, or take them away by deceit or violence. 

3 The ranſom ot a mans life are his Riches ; 


poor heareth not rebuke y. | 
y This Verſe ſetsforth, Either r. The'ſeveral advantages of Riches 
and Poverty. Riches enable a man to redeem his life when ir is 
in greateſt danger, and Poverty preſerves a man from thoſe Re- 
bukes and Inju:iies which endanger and oft deſtroy the Rich. Or 
4. The convenitnce of Poverty above Riches. Riches frequently 
expoſe men to the peril of loting their Lives by falſe Accuſers, or 
Thieves, or Tyrants, which they are forced to redeem with the 
Toſs of their Riches ; whereas Poverty commonly ſecures men nor 
» only from ſuch kinds of death, but even from Rebukes and Injuries; 
partly becauſe ſuch perſons are cautious, that they may not effend 
or provoke others; and partly becauſe their perſons and aftions 


are negle&ed and ſighted, and they are eſteemed ObjeQs of 


but the 


Job2 2:28; ap" The light z of the righteous rejoiceth 4 ; *but the 


"dy [| lamp of the wicked ſhall be put out 5. | 
Or - F3Y z The Proſperity cr Happines, which is oft Called a Light or 
F 7, ##'” Lamp in Scripture, and ©ther Autliors. # Shineta with a pleaſant | 
% and conſtant Brightneſs and GJory ; for this 1s oppoſed to the put- 
ring out in the next clauſe. Rejoycing 1s here aſcribed to the Ighr as + 
it is-to the Sun, Pſal: 19: 5: both Metaphorically, beczuſe they 
would rejoyce in it, if they were capable of any ſuch paſſions, ard | 
Mertonymically, becauſe rhey refreſh and chear mens Spirits. So 
Mountains and Trees are ſaid to .cjoy Ce, Pſal; 65: 1-: & y6: 12. 
b Their felicity ſhall have a ſudden and a diſmal end. 


10 Only by piide cometh contention c ; but with 


the well-adviſed d is wiſdom e. | : 

cWhich is not to be underſtood excluſively as to all other cauſes; 
fo. cor.tentions oft ſpring from Ignorance, or Miſtake, or Cover- f 
ouſneſs, or other Patſions, but eminently, becaule as Pride blow- 
eth up thoſe coals of contention which «ther iuſts kindle, ſo oft- 
times Pride alone, withour any other cauſe,ſtirreth'up ſtrife ; which 
jt doth by making a man felf-conceited in his opinions, and obſt- 
nate in 6is Reſolutions, and impatient of any oppoſition, and many 
orher ways. 4 Who are not governed by their own paſſions, buf 
by prudent conſideration, and the good Counſel of others. e Which 
teacheth rhem to avoid and abhor all contention. 


aCh: 10: * 12 * Wealth gotten by vavity f, ſhall be dirniviſhedg ; 
HHceb.with but he thac gathererh + by labour þ ſhall increale. , 


—_ —— 
= 


the h By vain, or deceitful, or wicke- praftices. g Becauſe the 
OY edt of God atrends upon it. þ By d ligence in an houeſt Calling 
*Ver 19: 12 Hope deferred; maketh the hearc ſick ; but when 


the detire & cometn, * 5s is a tree OL lite /, 


Wiſe Ton heareth a his fathers inſtrufion b ; but a 


a Which word is underſtood out of the next clauſe,asis frequent 
in the Hebrew text. 6b Or, Rebuke-or Reproof. c He hateth reproof 


5 Shall have 
that violence and injury returned uponthemſelves which they have 


Varity,or witha deſign to gain Reputation with others whom they |! 
Tnrend to defraud- x Some rich men ſeem and profeſs themſelves | 


| but a companion of fools ſhall be deſtroyed. 


drens chiidren, and the * wealth of che ſinner is laid up Job:r: 


men of another Family, who will be more faichful Stewards of it, 


Either 1. For want of diſcretion and convenient care and di:t- 
5 - 
gleQs himſelf, andlcaves to the care of others ; whereas poor men 
are forced by their neceſſities to look to their own concerns,and re 


* Delays in obtaining that good which a man paſſionate)y deſir- 
eth and hop-th for. k The good deſized and expeQed ; Atts being 
__ pur for the ObjeQs. / Ir is moſt ſweet;and fatisfattory,and 1c- 
VINg,. | IE | | : 
13 Whoſo deſpiſeth »2 the word », ſhall be deſtroy- | o:, 
ed 0 ; but he that feareth the commandment þ,}| thall be 4e i ze 
rewarded. | 
m Difobeyeth it wilfully and preſumptnouſly. » The word of 
God, which is called the word by way of eminzncy, Deut: 30: 14. 
Compare with Rom: 10: 18: 1 Tim: 5: 17. and elſewhere, o txcept 
he repent, and return to his Obedience. p That hath a Reverence 
to its authority, and isafraid to violate it. 


14 * The law q 


| of the wiſe » is a fountain of life, to *Ch: 14 
depart from the tnares of death. | 

- 9 The Dottrinez Inſtruction, or Counſel ; as the word, Lew, is 
frequently underſtood 1n Scripture.r Of holy men, who are coms 

monly called iſe, as ſinners are called Fols, in this Book. 

15 Good underſtanding * giveth favour « ; but the 
way x of cranſprefſors is hardy 

e Diſcovering it (elf by a mans holy and righteous praftices and 
ways, as appears from the oppoſition of the way of tranſgreſſers to it; 
and as words of Underitanding in this and other Books of Scripture 
commonly include praftice. « Maketh a man acceprable borh to 
Godand Men. x The carriage or manner of Converſation. y Or, 
rowgh, as this very word is uſed, Deut: 21: 4. offenſive and hareful 
to God and Men, as rough ways are to a Traveller; fierce, and in« 
rraQtable, and incorrigible. : *Y 

16 ” Every prudent 41 dealeths with knowledge; «c1,.15 
but a fool + Jayeth open 4s folly b. | & 15: 3 

z Heb. Aeth, or doth, managed all his affairs. 4 Coriſidetately t Heb-. 
and diſcreetly. 6 By his heady and fooliſh Attions. reader 

17 A wicked meſſenger c fallethinto mifchief 4 ; bur 
a faithful ambaffadocr is healche. 

e Who is unfaithful in the execution of that which is commit- 
ted to his charge, asappears by the oppolite clauſe. 4 Shall not 
eſcape puniſhment from Ged, or from them who ſent him. e Or, 
wholſom, procureth ſafety and benefit, as to his Maſter, fo alſo to 
himſelf, | : | ; 

18 Poverty and ſbameſhall betohimthat refuſeth in- 

ſtruction f; but he that regardeth reproof g ſhall be ho- 
noured h. | . 
f Whereby he might have been kept from deſtrtictive and diſho- 
nourable courſes. g That conſiders it ſetioufly, receiveth kindly, 
and reformerh himiclf by ir. þ And enriched. which is implicd 
from the former branch. Not that it is ſo always,but commonly,& 
when God ſces it good for a Man. Or, if he ao not always gain 
Riches, he ſhall certainly have honour both from God and: Men. 
19 * The deſire accompliſhed is ſweet ro the ſoul 3: 
but & it is dn abomination to fools, to defare from *Ver: x; 
evil. 

5 The ſatisfaction ofa mans deſires by the enjoyment of thethiogs 
deſired is very acceptable ro him. hich may be taken either 1+ 

Ofthe deſire of Fools, which may be underſtood our of the next 
| clauſe. So the ſenſe of the Verie is, It is ſweet to ſinners to iris 
- duJge and fatisfie their defires, which are wholly carnal and ſinful, 
; and for that reaſon they love ſin, and hate rhe thoughts of leaving 
| 1r, becauſe their deſires are wholly and fully ſetupon je. Or 2. 

good deſires, or of the deſires of wiſe and good men,Aas the LXX, 

and Chaldee, and Syriack, and Arabick Interpreters nnderſtand ir; 
. by the oppoſition of Fools in the next clauſe. So the ſenſe may be 
| this, The deſires of good men, are ſet upen what is good, and 
' they rejoice when they atrain to it,and are grieved when they fall 
; hort of it ; byt the deſires of the wicked are fer vpon fin,and it is 
' a pleaſure. ro them to commir it, and an abomination to them to be 
hindred from it. Or rather 3. Of deſires in general. Wharſoever 
men do careſtly deſire, the enjoyment *»f it is very ſweet and grate- 
. ful to them; and therefore ſinners rejoice in the purſuit and fatis« 
' fation oftheir ſinful Luſts, and abhor all Reſtraint and Mortifica« 
tion of them ; For this is certain and confeſſ:d, that many things 
are underſt6od in theſe ſhort proverbial Speeches which are not 
expreſſed. k Or, and,as this particle properly ſignifies ; or,therefore, 
{as 1t 1s frequently uſed. Wu | 
' 20 He that walketh I with wiſe »e, fball be wiſe #7; 

li. e. Commonly-converſeth and affociateth himſelf. , m Shall ors " 
Jearn Wiſdom and Goodneſs both fiom Counſels and Examples. y 
the deſign of this Proverb. is to ſhew the wonderful influence 
Wwhicha mans ſociety hath upon him, Either to fave, or corrupt 
and dgſtroy him. 

2rEvil » purſueth o ſinners p:but tothe righreous good 
7 ſhall be repayed. | nia 

» Evil of puniſkment and proportionable to. their , evil of ſin,as II 
appears from the next clauſe.  o And ſooner or Jatzr ſhall certainly 
overtake them, albeit they pleaſe themſelves with hopes of impus- 
nity. p Obttinate and incorrigible finners. q Gods bleffiogs aad 
true happineſs. | 


22 A good may leaveth an inheritance to his chil- . 


for the juſt r, | | |; 
r Is by Gods powerful Providence oft=times tranſlated ro good ;; pg 


23 * Much food js 5» * the tiliage of the poor 5; but *Ch.rs 
there 15 tbaris deſtroyed tfor wanc of judgement . Ch:az. 
+ Poor and mean'perfons by their diligent labours in rill-ge or 


other employments, and Gods Bleffing upon them oft-rimes grow 
rich. £ Or, cenfumed, .to wit, in his cſtate, brought to poventy. 


rence 1n tilling his Land, and managing. his Affairs which he ne- 


50 4 vl 


IP. XIV. 
| __. uſetheirutmoſt diligence in them. Or rather 2. By Injuſtice, as 
this Phraſe is uſed, Prov: 16: 8: Fer: 17: 11: & 22; 13: Exek: 
22: 29, Nor do I find it in any other Scripture. By his Frauds,Ra- 
pines, and Oppreſſions, and other unjuſt and wicked prattices, 
whereby he ſecks to enrich himſelf,as refuſing and ſcorning to ger 
an Eſtate by honeſt labours. So this agrees with what is ſaid v: 11. 
24 * He that ſpareth x his rod y, hateth his ſon = : 
22:15: bur he that loveth him, chaſteneth him betimes|]. 
23: 13: x Heb. with holdeth it from his Son when it is due to him. » 
9:5,17: That corre&ion which his Sons fault requires, and he as a Father 
is required to give him. z Notdire&ly and properly in regard of 
| his Aﬀe&ion, but conſequently, and 1n reſpett of the event. His 
fond AﬀeQion is as permciousto himas his or another mans hatred 
could be | Either 1. In his tender years, as ſoon as he is capable 
of it. Or 2. Speedily. before he be hardened and inveterate in fin. 
25 * The righteous cateth: ro the ſatisfying of his foul 
but the beily of we wicked {hall want. 
Gods Favour and Blefling gives him a competent Eſtate, and 
an Heart to uſe it, and Comfort and Satisfattion 1n it ; whereas 
wicked men commonly want either all there Bleſſings, or ſome of 


them. 
: CHA P. XIV. 

| Þ £7 wiſe woman a buildethher houſe b ; but the 

| fooliſh plucketh it down with her handsc. : 

# He ſpeaks of the W:men not to'exciude the Man, of whom this 
is no leſs tre, bur becauſe the Women, eſpecially in thoſe times, 
were very induſtrious in managing their Husbands Eſtates ; of 
which ſee Prov 37. b Maintaineth and improveth her Family and 
Eſtate, as this Phraſe is uſed, Exod: 1: 21. 2 Sam: 7: 11: Pſal 127: 
1. c Either by her idlenefs and nor uſing her hands,or by her fool- 
iſh and ſinful courſes. 

2 He thatwalketh in his uprightnefs d, feareth the 
obi2. 4. LORD * ; but he that 5s perverſein his ways, deſpiſerth 
C him +. 

4 Whoſe converſztion is ſincerely pious and righteous. The 
defign of this Proverb and Verſe is ro ſhew, that God dorh, and 
men may judge of mens outward profeſſions and inward diſpoſiti- 
ons by the common courte «+ their lives. e Plainly declares that 
he doth nor f:ar God, but deſpiſe him, and his commands, and 
threatnings. " | : 

2 In che mouth of the fooliſh is a rod of pride ft; 
bur-the lips of che wiſe ſhall preſerve them g. 

f His proud and inſolent ſpeeches as they are like a Rod, offen- 
ſive and 1;jurious ro others,ſo they make a Rod for their own Backs, 
by provoking God and men againſt them. Which ſenſe ſeems moſt 

- probeble Loth from the oppoſite Clauſe,and by comparing this place 
with Prov: 10: 13. & 26: 3: For this Phraſe, The Rod of Pride,it may 
be Tompared with other like Phraſes, as the foot of Pride, Pal: 36: 

22. The ſcourge of the Tongue, Job 53 21; and the Rod of rhe Mouth, Iſa: 
11.4. g From that Rod. 
4 Where no Oxen are, the crib is clean b : but much 

increaſe is by the ſtrength of the oxe 7. | 

bThe Barn or Stable is empty of food for Cattel, and much 
mo'e for Man, whoſe food is more ſcarce and dear. In the ſame 
ſenſe cleanneſs of Teeth is put for Famine; 4morg: 6. i By their Ia- 
bours, or by diligencein Husbandry, which then was p:1ncipaliy 

h - managed by Oxen. ; : 

Ver-25. 5 * A faithful witneſs will not lic &; buta faiſe wit- 

IG. 20ncls will. utter lies]. 

. A & To wit, in common diſcourſe and converſation, whereby he 

map-2-19: ſheweth his love to truth, and giveth aſſurance chat when he i» cal- 

112-275 Jed to be a Witneſs, he will be true and faithful. 1 Or,as the words 

; he in the Heorew, 4nd,or *ut he that will utter lies ( that accuſtom- 

eth himſelf to lying) is or will be a falſe Witneſs, when occaſion re- 
—_ it, Having debauched his Conſcience by daily lying, he is 
Thereby preparcd and diſpoſed to falle-witneſs-bearing. Compare 

» Prov: 12: 17. 

; 6 Alſcorner m ſecketh wiſdom and fndeth ir not » ; 

chap.8.9: but * knowiedge zs eafie unto him o that underſtand- 
 .ethp. 

m A proud, felf-conceited, and profane Perſon, » Becauſe he 
doth not ſeck it aright, to wit, ſincerely, and earneſtly, and ſea- 
ſonably, and in a conſtant and diligent uſe of all the means which 
God hath appointed to thatend, and with an honeſt inrention of 
employing his knowledge to the ſervice of God, and the furthe- 
rance of his pratice of Religion. 0 Is plain and eaſily attained by 
him. p That knowerth and is deeply ſenſible of his own want of 
knowledge, andof the great worth and neceſſity of knowledge, 
which will make him uſe all poſible means to it, and among other 
ways, Pray earneſtly to God for it. Or, that is honeſt and pious : 
for words of knowledge are oftunderſtood praftically,eſpecially in 

x this Book. : 

' 7 Go from the preſence of a fooliſh man 9, when 

thou perceiveſt not iz him the lips of knowledge yr. 

q Avoid the Fompony and converſation of ungodly men. -When 
they break forth into fooliſh or wicked diſcourles, leſt thou either 
be infefted by them,or ſeem to approve them. 

8. The wiſdom of the prudent 5s to underſtand his 

way 5 ; but thefolly of fools is deceit t. 
5 It conſiſts not in vain Speculations, n a curious prying 
_ Into other mens matters, nor in cunning arts of deceiving others, 

: bur in a diligent ſtudy of his own duty ,and of the way to true and 

| eternal happineſs, £ The wit of ungodly men, which, though 

| mY account their Wiſdom, is really their folly, is employed only 
in finding out ways of over-reaching and deceiving others, and- 
themſelves too. 

9 * Fools « make a mock at fin x; but among the 

* righteous y there is favour z. | 
w Wicked men, as appears from their oppoſition to the righteow 


h:19:18* 


1:34.10 


37-3: T5 
+ 


P'ROY ERS Ss. 


God and Men. Or, as others render it, excuſe or cover ſm; ſin a= 
gainſt God or men, and then juſtifie or extenuate their ſins, which 
is to double the injury, Poflibly this Clauſe may be thus rendred, 
Sin deludes or makes a mock of Fools, or finners, 7«e. expoſeth them 
to ſhame and contempt, which is fitly oppoſed to favour in thenexr 
Clauſe. . And thus two Ancient and Learned Interpreters, Aquila 
and Theodotion, render its And this ſuits ex:aly with the Hebrew 
words, wheras in the other Tranſlation the Noun and Verb govern. 
ed by it are of divers Numbers, which though ſomtimes it be al. 


{ lowed, yet is not to be ſuppoſed without neceſlity. But this I fub- 


mit to the Learned and judicious. y Who are fo far from makin 
a mock of ſin, or excuſing it, that they do not allow themſelves 
ro commit it. z They find favour both with God and men, as this 
very word thus generally exprefled is uſed, Prov: 11: 29: becauſe 
they make conſcience of ordering their lives ſo that they offend nei- 
ther God nor men; or if they offend either, they heartily repent + 
of it, ſo far are they from excuſing it or pleaſing themſelves with 
it. Or, there is zood will, as the word properly and uſually is ta- 
ken : they have a real love, andare ready to do all offices of kindneſs 
one to another, and therefore neither fin againſt others,nor rejoyce 
in the fins of others. : 

lo The heart knoweth | hisown bitterneſs a, and + Heb. 


a ſtranger b doth not intermeddle with his joy ec. bitterueſ; of 
a The ſenſe of the Verſe is this, The inward griefs and joys of ## Si, 
mens Hearts,though ſometimes they may be guelled at by outward 
ſigns, yet are not certainly known to any but a mans feit.Compare 
I Cor: 2:11. The ſcope of the Parable may be to heep men from 
murmuring under their own troubles or envying other mens happi- 
neſs, b Any other Perſon without or beſides a Mans ſelf. c Doth 
not partake of it, nor underſtand it. 
11 The houſe « of the wicked ſhall be overthrown ; 


but the tabernacle e of the upright ſhall proſper. 

d Their dwelling and family. e Which is a weak, and poor, 
and unſtable thing, ſoon reared up, and ſoon taken down, and is 
here oppoſed to the large, and ſtrong, and magnificent Houſe of 
wicked men. 

12 * There is a way which ſeemeth right unto a*cyg 

man f, but the end thereof ;s the ways of death g. 

f There are ſome evil a&ions or courſes which men may think to 


| 


be lawful and go: d, either through grols and affected ignorance ; 
lor through partiality, or ſelf-flattery ; or through want of aeceſlary 
diligence in examining them by the rule of Gods will or word : all 
which are culpable cauſes of the miſtake, and therefore do not ex« 
cuſe the error. g The event fheweth that they were ſinful and de- 
{tructive. ; 

13 Even in laughter the heart is ſorrowful,and * the Ch:5-4 

end of that mirth 3s heavineſs hs 

h The outward ſigns of joy are commonly mixed with or end in 
real and hearty ſorrow. The deſign of the Proverb is to declare 
the vanity of all worldly joys and comforts, and to teach men mo« 
_ in them, and to perſwade usto ſeek formore ſolid and du 
able joys: 

14 * the backſlider in heart ; ſhall be * filled with *PC4g.t; 
his own ways &; and a good man ſhall be ſatisfied from *Ch:1:;1 
himſelf /. | & 12! 1+ 

f He who departeth from God and from the way of his Precepts 
with all his Heart, which implies the doing it upon deliberation, 
with free,choice,and full purpoſe, and cuſtomary practice,as ungod- 
ly men commonly do,and is oppoſed to the ſlips of humane frailtyz 
for otherwiſe every fin is a revolt from God: k With the fruit of 
his ways or doings, the puniſhment of his ſins. /7z.e. From his 
wzys,as appears by the oppoſition:from the pious temper of his own 
own Heart which cleaveth to the Lord, when the hearts of ſinners 
rorſake him, and fromthe holy and righteous courſe of his life, 
from which he ſhall receive unſpeakable comfort and ſatisfaction, 
both here and hereafter to all Erernity. 

15 The ſimple » believerh every word z ; but the 
prudent wan looketh well to his going o. 

m Either the harmleſs Man : or rather a fooliſh Man, becauſe 
he is oppoſed to the prudent. = Is eaſily deceived with the ſmooth 
words and fair pretences of falſe and deceitful men. o Either 1, 
to his own going, as this is generally underſtood ; he ordereth his 
converſation and dealings in the World with due circumſpeccion, 
not conſidering ſo much what other men ſay as what he ought to 
do. Or, 2.-to the going of the deceiver, whoſe the word in the 
former clauſe is ſuppoſed to be. So the ſenſe is, he judgeth cf 
mens words and profeſſions by their converſations ; which is a 'Chrr.s 
good rule, my 

16 A wiſe mas feareth p,and departeth from evilq ; 
but the fool rageth.r and is confident 5. 

p Trembleth at Gods judgments when they are either inflicted 
or threatned. q From ſin,which is the procuring cauſe of all cala- 
mities, r Freteth againſt God 3 or is enraged againſt his Meſſen« 
gers who bring the threatning ; or diſquieteth himſelf in vain. Or 
trauſgreſſeth, asthis Verb in its ſimple form and firſt Conjugation 
commonly ſignifies; or, goeth on in ſim conſtantly and reſolutely, accor- 
ding to the Emphaſis which this Conjugation commonly aids to the 
ſimple Verb. And this is moſt fitly oppoſed toldepariing Fom evil ; 
as being confident is oppoſed to fearing. 5 Secure and inſenſible of 
his danger till Gods judgments overtake him. 

'17 Hethat is {(oonangry dealeth fooliſhly f,and a man 


of wicked devices « is hated x. 

t His paſſion hurries him into many rafh and fooliſh ſpeeches 
and ations. « One who ſuppreſlerh his paſſion, but deſigneth and 
meditateth revenge, watching for the fiteſt methocs and oportu- 
nities of executing it. x Both by God and men, as being molt 
deeply malicious and like the Devil, and moſt dangerous and per* 
nic!1ous to humane Society 3; whereas men that are ſoon angry g'Ve 
a Man warning and are quickly pacitied, and therefore piticed and 
pardoned. 


18 The ſimple inherit folly y ; but the prudent are 


in the next Clauſe. x Picale and ſupport themſelves with their own | CI owned with knowledge V. 
and other mens ſins, which is an high offence and proyocetion to 


faſt, 


WR« 


5 They poſf:fs it as their Inheritance or portion, holding ut 


Chap. Xty. |; 


Heb. ths 
treru; of 
Sou, 


chk 26 | 


Ch: 5:4 


22.3 


X1y 


Chap XIV. 


the word is the ſame : withall he may imply that folly is Natural 
and Hereditary to them. z They place their houour and happineſs 
in a ſound and praQica], and ſaving knowledge of God and of their 
own duty, and therefore earneſtly purſue after it, and Heartily em- 
brace it. 

19 Theevil bow before the good a, and the wicked 
at the gates b of cherighteous. 

4 Giving Honour to them, and ſapplicating their favour and 
help, either for ſupply of their wants, as being brought low for 
their ſins, or for Counſel or comfort, or for their Prayers to God 
for them. h As Clients, and Petitioners, and Beggars uſe to wait 
at the Doors and Houſes of great and potent Men. The ſenſe is, 
Good Men hgHare the Pre-eminency over the wicked oft times 
in this Life, When God ſees it expedient, but afſuredly in the next 

9 life. : 
M.i9:7., 29 * The poor is hated c even of his own neigh- 
{cb,ma- bour 4; but Þ the rich beth many Friends, 
yy are the c 7. e. Deſpiſed and abandoned, as hateful Perſons and Things 
Iver: of the are. d Strictly ſo called, who is neareſt to him, either by habitation - 
Rich, or by Relation, and therefore moſt obliged to love and. help him. 
21 He that deſpiſeth his neighbour c, finneth 4: * 


?.112:9. grt.he that hath mercy e on the poor, happy 3s he F 

e-That dothnot pity and relieve thePoor, as this is explained in 
the next Clauſe: the word Neighbour being here generally taken for 
any Man, as it is moſt commonly uſed in Scripture ; which not 
relieving him, proceeds from a contempt of his Perſon. 4 And 
therefore ſhall be puniſhed for his inhumanity, which is oppoſed to 
his being happy in the next Clauſe. e That ſheweth his compaſſi- 
on by his bounty and relief. f He doth a worthy Action, and ſhall 
be blefſed in his deed. ; 

22 Do they not errg thatdeviſe h evil; ? but mercy 

. and truth & ſal be to them that deviſe good /. 

g They do certainly err from the right way, and miſtake their 
mark, and ſhall miſs of that advantage and Felicity which they pro- 
mile to themſelves by ſuch practices, þ That do not only com- 
mit it, but make it their detign and ſtudy, and buſineſs; that are 
Artiſts or Maſters in it, as the word ſignifies. # Either, 1. miſchief 
to men. Or 2. any kind of wickedneſs againſt God or Men; for 
the expreſſion is general : and this ſeems beſt to agree to the fol- 
lowing Clauſe. & Either,1. from Men ; Men ſhall deal truely and 
kindly with them, partly becauſe ſuch Men by their carriage o- 
blige them to do ſo, and partly becauſe God inclineth their hearts 
to ir, Or 2. from God, to whom theſe two properties are jointly 
aſcribed in divers places of Scripture. | That delignedly and in- 
duſtriouſly apply themſelves to the doing ofall good Offices to God 


and men. : 
23 In all labour there is profit ; but tae talk of the 


lips tendeth onely to penury m. 
- Dil1gent labour is the ready way to Riches, bur idle talking, 


wherein too many ſpend moſt of their pretious time, will bring a 


Man to poverty. NO 
24 "The crown of the wiſe is their riches»; but the 


fooliſhneſs of fools 3s folly o. 

» They are a ſingular advantage and ornament tothem, partly as 
they make their Wiſdom more regarded, when the poor Mans Wiſdom 
55 deſpiſed, Eccleſ. g. 16. and parily as they give a Man great op- 
portunity to diſcover and exerciſe his Wiſdom or Vertue by laying 
out his Riches to the honour and ſervice of God, and to the great 
and manifold good of the World ; which alſo highly tends to his 
own Glory and Happineſs. os Bur as for rich Fools, for ro them 
the general word is to be reſtrained from the oppoſite Clauſe, their 
Folly is not cured, but made worſe and more manifeſt by their Rich- 
es. Their Riches find them Fools, and leave them Fools ; they are 
not a Crown, but a Reproach to themzand an occaſion of their greater 

contempt. For the Phraſe, we have the like in the Hebrew Text, 

1Sam. 1. 24. The Child Samuel was a Child . It is an clegant Fi- 
| gure called antanaclaſis uſed in all Authors« 


erl. 
ful witneſs ſpeaketh lies 9. 


p 1:6. Perſons, to wit, ſuch asare innocent from the miſchief of 
falſe Accuſations, by declaring the truth, which is ſufficient for 
their vindication. 9 To the injury and deſtruction of the Inno- 
cent ; which is eaſily underſtood out of the former Clauſe, and from 
the practice of falſe Wirneſles: 


26 In the fear of the LORD #s ſtrong confidence r ; 


and his children s ſhal have a place of refuge. 

r Aſure ground of confidence ; or a ſtrong refuge, as the next 
Clauſe explains it. 5 Either, r. God's Children. Or, 2. the Chil- 
dren of them thatfear God, who are ſufficiently underſtood out of 
the former Clauſe, 


27 * The fear of the LORD 3s a fountain of life, to 
depart from the ſnares of death 7. 
# To preſerve Men from deadly and deſtructive courſes. 
28 Inthe multitude of people zs the kings honour #; 
but in the want of people is the deſtrution of the 


Prince. 

s Becauſe it is an evidence of his wiſe and good Government. 
Under honour he here comprehends alſo ſtrength ad ſafety, ( as 
appears from the. oppoſite Clauſe ) which depends much upon a 
Princes Reputation. | And honour may be here put for ſtrength, 
as ſtrength is put for Honour or Glory, Pſal: 8; 2; and 29. 1. and 

p | 


Cu1g.12, 


96. 7. | 
29 He that is ſlow to wrath is of great underſtanding x: 
Meb:hore but be that is F haſty of ſpirit, exaltech y folly. 


s Mirit, x Sheweth great and true Wiſdom ia conquering his ſinful and 
ſhameful paſſions. y Heb: lifteth wp, like a Banner, makes it known 


and viſible to all men. | : 
30 A ſound heart z is the life of the fleſh a ; but en- 


vy the rottenneſs of the bones 5. 


improving it, delighting and glorying in it. In like manner Da- 
wid took God's Teftimonies for his Heritage, Pſal. 119+ 111: where | commonly called the diſeaſes of the Soul, not only in ſacred, but even 


P ROF EB k BY 


D— 


25 * A true witneſs delivereth Souls p ; buta deceit- 


-ever, and much more of a Father. 


\ 


Chap. 
z Free from envy and ſuch like inordinat Paſſions, which are 


in Heathen Writers. Or, as cthers render it, An healing Heart, 
mild, and merciful, and kind to others, which is oppoſed to en- 
vy. # Procureth and maintaineth the health and vigor of the whole 
Body. 6 It waſteth the Spirits, and conſumeth even the ſtrongeſt 
and moſt inward parts of the Body. | 

31 * He that oppreſleth the poor c, reproacheth his 
maker &: but he that honoureth him e, hath mercy on 
the poor f. 

c That uſeth him hardly, as the Syriack renders it ; that with- 
holdeth from him that which is his due, either by the Rules of ſtri& 
Juſtice, or by the great Law of Charity, of which ſee Prov. 3. 27. 
and ſo it is oppoſed to having mercy in the next Clauſe. 4 Whoſe I- 
mage the poor Man bears, which might challenge Reſpe&; Job: 
31. 15. by whoſe Counſel and Providence he is made poor ; 1 Sam: 
2. 7. Prov: 22. 2, and who hath declared himſelf to be their Prote- 
Qtor and Avenger, e His Image and works, and Laws. f Dothnor 
only forbear oppreſling or injuring of him, buraffoords him his pi- 
ty and help. | 
, ,32 The wicked is drivenaway g in his wickedneſs h; 1 

but the righteous hath hope 7 in his death &. *Job rail 

g Towit, in his Death, as is gathered from the oppoſite Clauſe ; &_ 19: | 
ariven away from God's favour and preſence, and from the Society Ptal 23. 
of the Juſt, and from allhis hopes of happineſs both in this Life and ? Cor: 15\jtl 
in the next. This expreſſion notes that this is done ſuddenly, vio- 2Cor: 1. 
lently, and irreſiſtibly, as the ſmoke or chaff are driven awa by a bil 
ſtrong Wind. h Or, For his wickedneſs, Heb: in his evil, which-may tt 
be underſtood of the evil of puniſhment 


TITTY 


==" ACAD; 


A 


onmmetincedocccots __ —_— _ 
I __ AS LA 

Do = EEE HEE > A. "A 
- — ——— READ oo IB OO —— 


35” CAE 


; ; in the day .of his cala- * 
mity, when he ſhall flee to God for help. # Of deliverance from - 
it, or of great and everlaſting advantage by it. & In his greateſt We 
dangers and diftreſſes, yea even in death it ſelf, which therefore he [1 
can receive with comfort and confidence. —— 
33 * Wiſdom reſteth / in the heart of him that hath *Ci:z, 


underſtanding; but that which is in the midſt ws of fools 


15 made known ». 

'* Is laid upand hid there, and not vainly nor raſbly uttered by» 
him, but only upon neceſſary or fit occaſions. w 3. e, In the heart, 
which is expreſſed by this very word, Pſal. 64.6. and elſewhere. 
That Folly whichis there inſtead of Wiſdem: or, that ſmall de- 
gree of Wiſdom or Knowledge - which theyhave. r They will 
publiſh it in all times and companies, without any conſideration or 
diſcretion, ; 

34 Righteouſneſsexalteth a nation o ; but ſin is a re- | 
proach + to any people p. t Heb; | 
o Maketh it honourable in the eyes of God, and of all other nations, | 
Nations, as it did the ancient Romans. p Brings contempt and 
ruine upon them by provoking both God and men againſt them. 
35 The kings favour is coward a wiſe ſervant; but , 
his wrath is againſ# him * that cauſeth ſhame g. Ch: 17: 
9 Both to himſelf, by his Fooliſh management of the Kings Af. | 
fairs committed to him, and to the King who made ſo fooliſh a | 


choice of a Servant. 
CHAP. XV. 


A * ſoft a anſwer b turneth away « wrath ; - but , | 
grievous words d ſtir up anger e. | Ch:zs: | 
a Mild or gentle. 6 Which may imply a foregoing charge or | 
accuſation, although the word is and may berendred, ſpeech or diſ- 
courſe. c From the ſpeaker. d Fierce and vexatious Replies or 
Speeches. e Kindle it, and cauſeit to flame forth. | 
2 The tongue of the wiſe uſeth knowledge aright f; , 
* but the mouth of fools + poureth out g fooliſbneſs. £2 
f Expreſſing what he knows prudently and gracefully taking & 668 
due care both what, and when, and to whom, and in what manner +H $a : 
he ſpeaks. g Plentifully, continually, promiſcuouſly, and vehe- ;, þ , 
mently, as a Fountain doth Waters, as this word ſignifies. _ 


3-* The eyes of the LORD 5b ore in every place, be- 


holding the evil ; and the good. 
þ His knowledge and providence. 7 


te a A AE LD AERE EL 


* CO ei BENE Ie ABU CES AT 


ee er... ARROrTRy I 2 


22s 
Who are firſt mentiwned, Ch: 5: 2x 


becauſe they either doubt of, or deny God's Providence. Er: 16; x 
4 f A wholſom tongue & js a tree of life / ; but per- & 32: 11 
verſeneſs therein m2 is a breach in the Spirit ». + I ; 


k Which uttereth ſound and comfortable and uſeful Counſels. 
I Is greatly uſeful ro preſerve the preſent Life, and to promote the 
ſpiritual and eternal life, both of the ſpeaker and heaters. m All 
ſorts of falſe or corrupt Speeches. » Ditturbs and wounds, and 
oft-times corrupts and deſtroys the ſpirits or Souls both of the 
Speaker and Heacers. 

5 * A fool deſpiſeth o his fathers p inſtruction ; but hay | 


he that regardeth reproof-q is prudent. V 13-208 
0 Doth not regard nor obey it, whichis an evidence of contempr. i 


?- Who hath both love to him, and Authority over him ; which 
greatly aggravats his Folly. q The reproof of any perſon whatſo- 


healing 
the Tongut 


6 In the houſe r of the righteous 3s much treaſure ; 


but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble 5. 

r Or, Family. Whereby he implies that it is not only enjoyed by 
him, but alſo left to his poſterity. s Though he may obtain great 
Revenues, yet they are-atended with much trouble and vexation ; 
either becauſe they are ſtrangely blafted and taken from them, or 
becauſe they are 1mbittered to them by their own inſatiable defires, 
or tormenting cares arid fears,or the horrours of their guiltyConſci- 
ences, or by divers other wa 


$. 
7 The Lips of the wile diſperſe knowledge ? ; but 


the heart of the fooliſh doth nor ſo «. 

£ Freely communicat to others what they know, as they have 
opportunity. # Either becauſe he hath no knowledge to dGif- 
perſe, or becauſe he hath not an heart to perform his duty, or 
to do good to others, Or, as others render it, and as the laſt He» 
brew word is rendred, Gen. 42: 34 andelſewhere, is net right ;. or, 


the place may be rendred, rhe hears of fooliſh ( underſtaad out of the 
« H former 


4 Ss = 


# 


1: 17 


22 


C: 708. 
hr: 6 


1: 24 


17:22 


:37:16. 


vi 


ſep. 


- 


h:10:23. 
Heb:vod 
heart. 
Chu: 14. 
20; 18, 


2 21:27 


0S5:22 meaneſt ſervices. 


- and they pull down with one hand what they build with ano- 


Dr, in« thirſts after. 


6:26:6, Thing than an harſh reproof. 


us 7: 9, men ? 
44: 2b 


"2+ place and ſtate ofthe damned, of which men know nothing but by 
* 2: divine Revelation. f Whoſe thoughts and affections, though they 


| ©neicher will he go*unto h the wile z. 


hap:16:8- than great treaſure, and trouble 7 therewith. 
n.6:G 9g Which gives a Man Tranquillity and Comfort in what he 


h: 272 6, produce. 


£ er 
LN: 26:21 th 
29; 22* 


ow i thorns x : butche way of the righteous y+ is made plain z. 
Wſed up 4s 


XV. 


knowleage. : 
$ * The facrifice x of the wicked 5s an abomination 


- to the LORD; but the prayer y of the upright z# his 
delight. 


& 20, x All the Religious ſervices; yea, the beſt and moſt coſtly of 


them3 one kind being put for all the reſt. » The cheapeſt and 


9 The way & of the wicked is an abomination unto 
the FORD; but he loveth him that followeth after 


righteouſneſs 4. 

z The converſation or courſe of Life? This verſe ſeems to con- 
tain a Reaſon of the foregoing. God hates wicked mens Religious 
Performances, becauſe they are accompanied with ungodly Lives 


ther. a That earneſtly deſires, and conſtantly and diligently ens 
deavours to be holy and righteous in the courſe of his Life, al- 
though he doth not attain to that perfect Righteouſneſs which he 


Io || Correction 3s grievous b unto him that forſaketh 
the way c, and he that hateth reproof ſhall die 4. 


b He hateth reproof, becauſe it is a Reproach to him, and becauſe 
it ſtrikes at that ſin which he loveth. c God's way, empharically 
called the way here, as alſo Pſal: ng: 1: & 139: 24. Prov: 2: 13. dz. e, 
Be deſtroyed, both here and for ever: which is a more grievous 


11 * Hell and deſtruction are before the LORD; 
how much more then * the hearts f of the children of 


e Put for the place of deſtruction, by an uſual Metynomy ; the 


lie deep, diſcover themſelves by outward figns and actions. 
*- 12 A ſcorner loveth not g one that reproveth him, 


g #: e: Wenth and avoideth it ; for more is here underſtood than 
is expreſſed, as it is Prov: 11: 24+ & 12: 3- and elſewhere. h Seck 
r company and converſation, as his Duty and Intereſt obligerh 
.. £ 5: e: The Godly, becauſe he knows they who are ſo indeed, 
will make conſcience of reproving hum- 

12 * A merry heart maketh a chearful countenance; 


but by forrow of the heart the ſpirit & is broken. 

k Either, 1+» His vital Spirits. Or rather, 2. His Courage and 
Vigor the decay whereof ſhewerth it ſelfin his Countenance, as is 
implyed from the former clauſe. 


14 The heart of him that hath underſtanding ſce- 
keth knowledge ; but the mouth of fools feedeth on 
fooliſhneſs J. 


l gg Hearts are ſet upon wickedneſs, which is meat and drink 
to them. | 
i5 All the days of the afflited w are evil » ; but he 


that is of a merry heart o hath a continual feaſt p. 

mm Of the troubled in mind or Heart, as this general Expreſſion 
may very fitly be reſtrained from the following Clauſe, = Tedious 
and uncomfortable ; he takes no content in any time or thing. 0 
Heb: of a good heart, i: e. compoſed and quiet, and contented. p 
Hath conſtant fatisfaction and delight in all Conditions, yea, even 
in Affliction. 


16 * Better is little with the fear of the LORD 4, 


hath. r Tumultuous Luſts and Paſſhons, vexatious Cares, and Fears, 
Horrours of Conſcience, and expectation of Gods Curſe and Judg- 
ment, which Riches gotten without Gods tear, do commonly 


17 * Betteris a dinner of herbs where love s is, than 


a ſtalked Ox, and hatred therewith. 
s True Friendſhip and Kindneſs between thoſe that eat togee 


18 * A wrathful man ſtirreth up ſtrife * ; but he hat 


;s flow to anger appeaſeth ftrife. x 
c Becauſe he is very apt both to give, and to take all occaſion of 
contention. 


19 The way of the ſlothful man # is as an hedge of 


« The way in which he doth or ought to walk; any good work 
which he pretends or deſires to undertake. x As a way hedged up 
with Thorns, as it is expreſſed, Hef: 2. 6. troubleſom, and perplc- 
xed, and fullof ſuch diftculties as he deſpaireth, and therefore ne- 
ver ſtriveth to overcome, y Who is always diligent in his Calling, 
which is one branch of Righteouſnels, and therefore 1s fitly oppo- 
ſed to the /lothful, who is joined with the wicked, Mat: 25: 26. and 
cenſured as ſuch both in Scripture and Heathen Authors, becauſe 
idleneſs is both in it ſelf a'fin, and it leads the way to many other 
wickedneſſes. = Is cafie and pleaſant to him, notwithſtanding all 
his diſcouragements and difficulties. 

20 A wiſe ſon maketh a glad father a; but a fooliſh 
man defpiſeth his mother b. 

s By giving him that Honour and Obedience which he oweth to 
him. 6b Whereby he maketh her ſad. Sec the notes on Prov. 10. 1. 
where we have the fame Proverb. | 

21 * Folly is joy c to him that x | deſtitute of wiſdom; 
but a man of underſtanding walketh uprightly 4. 


CEE DD EE RB SL 
former clauſe, as 3s very ufual, diſverſeth by his Lips ) that which is 
xc right, foolith and corrupt diſcourſe, which is fitly oppoſed to 


Aer _ multitude of counſellors g they are eſta- 


e When men do not ſeek, or will not receive advice fr 
Oo . . . om 
in weighty affairs. f Their deſigns are ill mnaged, and C—_ 
4 tings. ke g #.e. Of wiſeand good Counſellors, for ſuch only 
pls that name. hz. e, Accompliſhed and brought to a geod 


33 A man hath joy by the anſwer 7 of his mouth ; 

and a word ſpoken | in due ſeaſon k, how good is it1 ? £ 
: _ By a wiſe, or good andſcaſonable Anſwer or Advice, as is fn eb: i 

_—_ eſt both from the oppoſite clauſe, and from the nature of the ſeaſon, 

G e thing, becauſe it 1s manifeſt and undenyable, that a fooliſh An 

wer can be no credit nor comfort to the Anſwerer. Thus above 

V, 10. the way, is put for Gods way ; and ſuch ren por are fre- 


quent in Scripture. k Counſel or comfort give ther in fi 
time and manner. / It is highly veil rnd FT” 

24 * The way of life is above to the wiſe m, that he *Phil:3:17 
may depart from hell beneath ». Cokyy,, 
oo In way and courſe which a wiſe Man taketh to preſerve and 
© _ Life, is to place his Heart, and Treaſure, and Converſation 
"y - ings above,and to manage all his Affairs in this World with due 
" crpect and ſubſerviency to the happineſs of a better life. » Or,frem 
pow hell ; not from the Grave, as this word is elſewhere uſed, 

or no Wiſdom can prevent that, but from hell properly ſo ca 


. . Ile 

as this word is elſewhere uſed, as hath been former] £0} 

1 ſed, y obſerve ; 
25 The LORD willdeſtroy the houſe of the proud "epebget 

0; but * he will eſtabliſh the border p of the widow. pes. on 

. o Of the moſt mighty oppreſlors, who conceit to themſelves to 5, G 7M 

E gm oy fixed. p Either, r» The Eſtate, the Boder being oft ; 

_- , for the Land within the Borders, as Pſal: 105. 31, 33. and 

e htrvoge Or, 2. The Border by which Lands were then bounded 

and diſtinguiſhed, which thoſe proud perſons endeavoured to re- 

move contrary to God's Law, Deut: 19: 14, & 27: 17. 

26 * The thoughts of the wicked q are abomination *Cch: 6:18 


tothe LORD, bur the words of the pure r are + pleaſant n _ 
s words, pleaſants 


7 And much more their words which expreſs their thoughts : ©; 
for rhoughts are ſaid to be free, and wicked Men are ſeldom, ME. but os 
little concerned for the ſins of their Thou ghts. » Which diſcover 
-_ precced from their Thoughts, Mar: 15: 19. 5 Acceptable to 

od, which iS oppoled to abomination to him. *Chi i; 196 
27 © He that is greedy of gain z troubleth his own 
houſe «; but be that hateth x gifts y (ball live z. 
# That ſeeketh wealth by unjuſt courſes, as appears from the 
Oppoſite Claaſe. s Bringeth God's Curſe and deſtruction upon 
himſelf and his Family, whom he deſigned to enrich and eſtabliſh. 
x Whorefuſcth them not with difſimulation, nor enly from pru- 
d-nrtial Reaſons, but from an hearty abhorrency of all unrighteouſ- 
neſs. y 7. e. Biibes given to corrupt Judgement. See Exod: 18: 21, 
& 23: 8. Deut: 16: 19. x Shall preſerve imſelf and ( which is un- 
derſtood out of the former clauſe ) his Family from Ruine. 
28 * The heart of the righteous ſtudieth to anſwet 
4 : but the mouth b of the wicked poureth out evil 
things c.; 
a He anſwers and ſpeaks conſideratly and conſcientiouſly, and | 
therefore profitably, or to the uſe and Edificatioa of the Hearers | 
þ Not the Heart, for he is without heart in Scripture account, and 
he raſhly ſpeaks what comes into his mouth, without the dire&ion 
of his Heart or Conſcience. c Fooliſh, and unprofitable and hurt- 
ful Speeches. 


29 * The LORD zs far from the wicked 4, but * he affre 


heareth the prayer of the righteous. 18 hag 
d To wit, when they pray to him, as the next Clauſe explains, ' 

and therefore doth not hear nor regard them, as he is ſaid to be 

nigh to the Righteous, Pal. 34: 18. & 145: 18: but this farneſs or 
nearneſs reſpeeth not God's Eſſence, which is every where, but 

his gracious and helpful preſence. 


20 The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart e: and 


|| a good report f maketh the bones fat g. 1] Or, gout 
e The light which we ſee with our Eyes, and by the help of nf. 
which, weſee many other pleaſant Objetts, 1s a great comfort and as Ch: 255 
Refreſhment. Compare Eccleſ. 11. 7. Truly the light #s ſweet, and a 251 
pleaſant thing it is for the Eyes to behold the Sun : which isa good Com- 

ment upon this place. f Either, 1. Glad Tidings. Or rather, 2. A 
Good-name, which Is a more _—_ thing, and makes deeper im- 
preſſion. g Not only cheareth a Man for the preſent, bur gives 

him ſuch ſolid and ſtable comfort as doth revive the Soul,and give 
Health and Vigor to his Body. So he compares two Senſes toge- 
ther, Seeing and hearing, with ReſpeQto their ſeveral ObjeRts, and 
prefers the latter before the former. =: 
21 The ear that heareth 6 the reproof of lite z, abi- 


deth * among the wiſe &. | *Ver: Fl 
þ The Man that hearkeneth to it, and delights in it- # That Ghz 13; ts 
Reproof and good Counſel which leads to Life. k Heb: fba/l or 
will abide, 8c. Either, 1. He will thereby be made wiſe, and be 
eſteemed one of that number. Or rather 2. He ſeeketh and de- 
lighteth in the company and Converſation of the wiſe, by whom 
he may be admoniſhed ; as on the contrary, Fools, who hate Re- 
proof, do avoid and abhor the Society of Wiſe Men and Reprovers, 


Amns 5. 10» ; : = 
2 He that refuſeth || inſtrution, deſpiſeth his own || Or rw 


ſoul /; but he chat || heareth reproof,f getteth under- For , | 
ſtanding m. ; ['O oY 
1 Which hereby he expoſeth to the danger of utter Deſtruftion, 13.4, 
y he exp : Heb: 
whereby he ſhews his Folly. mn Whereby he ſaveth his Soul. ſeſſeth #n 


TCh: 16;25 


c He doth not only work wickedneſs, but taketh pleaſure in it. | 
4 Heb, direfeth, or make ſtraight his going, i. e. ordereth all his acti- 
ons by the Rule of Gods word, and delighteth inſo doing, which 


is underſtood from the oppoſite Clauſe. 


22 * Without counſel e purpoſes are diſlappointed # ; 


dom », and * befare honour is o humulity p. 


Heb. Poſſeſeth an heart, which the Hebrews make the ſeat of Wiſe, 
om. Fs 

33 The fear of the LORD is the inſtruRion of wil- , Chcx8a5 
g Doth 


Chap. XV: T 


+4 mw 


" 


ul:3:26 
351, 2, 


- y 
8 1; 196 


16:23 


guid 


: 253 


5& 


+ f) 


| Chap. XVI. 


#Ver.g. & 
Ch: 19, 21: 


& 20. 


Jer. 19.23: 


| Or, 
poingss 


*Ch; 21 2* 


Plali37.5 
3, _ ws thy thoughts ſhall be eſtabliſhed f. 


Luke12.2 2 


iPet. 5. 


tUebs role (he diſcharge of thy own duty depend upon God's Providence for 


Job 21. 


20, . 


Rom.9.22 


*Ch. 6.17. : 
& 8. 13, nation to the LORD ; 


tHeb. held ſhall not be f unpunilbed. 


innocent, 


} Heb. ats 21. 


tmed Or ex= 


piated, 


"PC 33.1 


} Heb. ai 


Vination, 


FF © 3 


» Doth inſtruct men in, or lead them to true Wiſdom ; whence 


it is ſaid to be the beginning of Wiſdom, Prov: 1: 7. & 9.19, 0 5.6. Ir | 


is the ready way to honour, both from God and from Men. p 


W hereby Men tubmit to God, and yield ro Men, which gains them | 
Love and Reſpect ; whereas Pride procures them hatred and con | 


tempt from God and Men. 
CHAP, EXT 


He * }] preparations of the heart in man, and the 


14. anſwer of the tongue is from the LORD a. 
or without divine aſſiſtance. Or, as many orhers, both ancient and 
modern Interpreters render the Verſe, The preparations, or diſpoſirions, 
or orderings of the heart are im or from a man, ( i; e; a man may con- 
ſider 2nd contrive in his owa thoughts whar he wills or dehignsto 
ſpeak. Whiefiis ſpoken by way of conceflion, yet not excluding 
mans dependanceupon God therein, which is evident both from ma- 
ay plain Texts of Scripture, and from undenyable Reaſon. ) But the 
anſwer or ſpeech ( as this word is oft uſed ) of the Tongue is from the 
Lord. Men cannot expreſs their own thoughts without God's leave 
and help, and their Tongues are oft over-ruled by God to {peak whit 
was beſides and above their own thoughts, as he did Balaam, Numb: 
23: and Cajapras, Fohn 117 49, 50, FI. 

2 * All the ways of man are clean in his own eyes b, 


_ but the LORD weigherh « the ſpirits /. 

wc, 6 Many Men can eaſily flatter and deceive themſclves into a good 
Opinion of themſelves, and of their own Actions, though they be 
ſinful. See below, w. 25. and compare 1 Cor: 4: 4. cz: e: Exact- 
ly knoweth, as men do the things which they weigh and examin. 
a The Hearts of Men, trom which both Mens actions, and the 
goodneſs and badneſs of them in a great meaſure, proceeds3 thrir 
ends and intentions, their diſpoſitions and affections, which are hid 
not only from others, but oft-times from a Mansſelf ; whereby he 
is unfit to judge in his own cauſe, and eaſily miſtaken, if he do 
not uſe great diigence and Fidelity. In this laſt clauſe he intimats 
the reaſon why men deceive themſelves, in judging of their ſtate 
and Actions, becauſe they do not tearch their own hearts. 


3 *+ Commit thy works unto the LORD e ; and 


diſ« 


e Heb: roll, &c. as a Man rolls a burden to another, which is 
too heavy for himſelf, imploring his help. Refer all thy Actions 
7- and Concerns to God, and to his Glory, as the end of them, and in 
aſſiſtance and ſucceſs. f Thy honeſt deſires and deſigns ſhall be 
brought to an happy ifſue one way or other. 


4 The LORD hath made g all :hings h for himſelf ; ; 


* yea, even the wicked & for the day of evil /. 

g Or, hath wrought, or doth work; for the Hebrews expreſs the 
preſent as well as the paſt time by this tenſe: he ordereth or diſpo- 
ſeth: for this may be underſtood either of the works of Creation,or 
of Providence» h And eſpecially all men. z For his own ſervice 
and Glory; for the diſcovery and illuſtration of his own Wiſdom, 
Power, Goodneſs, Truth, Juſtice, and his other moſt glorious Per- 
fections. & Wilful and impenitent ſinners. / For the time of pu- 
niſhment, as this Phraſe is uſed, Pſal. 49: 5: Jer: 17: 18. and elſe- 
where; of which the Scripture frequently ſpeaks, both to warn ſin- 
ners of their danger, and to ſfatisfie the minds of them which are a- 
mazed and diſquieted with the conſideration of the preſent impu- 
nity and felicity of wicked Men, Men make themiclves wicked, 
and God therefore makes them miſerable. : 

5 * Every onerhat is proud in heart m, is an abomi- 


though hand join in hand », he 


»» Though he difſemble it in his outward Carriage and Counte- 
nance, as Pſal: 10, 4. Jn whoſe heart Pride rule!s » Though they 
have many Friends and Aſſiſtants. See the ſame Phraſe, Prov: 115: 


6 By mercy and truth o iniquity is purged p ; and 
by the fearof the LORD q men depart from evil r. 

0 Either, 1. By God's Mercy or Grace, and by his Truth in per- 
forming his promiſes made to ſinners in Chritt- Or, 2. By Mens 
Mercy and Truth, as thoſe very words are jointly uſed, Prov: 3. 
3. & 20: 28. and elſewhere ; and as in the following Clauſe, the 
fear of the Lord is a Grace or Diſpoſition in Men : by a merciful 
and juſt and faithful frame of Heart, and courſe of Lite: which are 
here oppoſed to Sacrifices, as mercy is, Hof: 6: 6. by which the hy- 
pocritical Jews expected to obtain the expiation of their Sins. p 
Not meritoriouſly but inſtrumenrally, as they qualitie a man to 
offer up acceptable prayers to God for the Pardon of his fins, and to 
receiveand apply to himſelf that pardon which Chriſt by his Blood 
hath purchaſed for all ſincere Believers, who are filled with Mercy 
and Truth, and other Graces. q By a filial Reverence or reſpecr 
unto God, and by an holy fear of offending God, and by a dread of 
God's Judgments. » They are kepc fram abuſing pardoning Mer- 
cy, and from returning .to folly or wickedneſs. y0 he ſheweth, 
that Juſtification and Sanctification are conſtant and inleparable 
Companions. 


7 Whena mans ways pleaſe the LORD, he maketh 


Even his enemies to be at peace with him 5. 

s By diſpoſing their hearts to kindneſs towards him- 

8 X Better 25 a little with righteouſnels, than great 
revenues without right ?. 

£ This was in effect ſaid before, Prov: 15: 16. and is here repea- 
red, partly becauſe of the great importance and uſetulneſs of rhis 
truth, and partly becauſe men are.very hardly brought to a ſerious 
belief of it+ 

9 * A mans heart deviſeth his way u, but the LORD 
direceth his fteps x. 

« Conſiders and propoſes to himſelf what he will do, x Over- 
ruleth and diſpoſeth all their deſigns and actions as he pleaſeth, and 
and nor as they lift. 


6. 


Wt» = —_— 


S 


Chap. X\ 
XCh-2; 


RR SY 


a; * his mouth tranſgreſſeth not b in judgment. 

» Heb. D:wvination, which is ſometimes taken in a good ſenſe for 
, Prudence, as it 1s 1/a: 3: 3. A great fagacity and piercing Judgment 
to dilcern dubjous and difficult Caſes. z Or, ſhuuld be, for the verb 
15 wanting in the Hebrew, and this may be  ſupplyed as well as #. 


a Men can neither thivk nor ſpeak wiſely and well of themſelves, 


And he ſeems not ſo much to ſpeak of the Matter of Fa&, as if if 
were thus inall Kings, which is nororiouſly and confefſedly untrue 
as of the duty of Kings, in whom Wiſdom is a neceſſary Qualificati. 
ona. For thus the two following Proverbs concerning Kings,v. 12:13. 
muſt be underſtood, otherways they are repugnant ro tommon Ex. 
perience- 4 Either, r. Of witeKings; who only are worthy of tha 
Name and Office; King being here put for a wiſe King, as a Name \ 
1s put for a govd Name, and a Woman fora good Woman, Eccleſ: 7:28 
and then this is rrue in fact, as it was in David, 2 Sam: I4; 1”; 2nd 
in Sclomon, 1 Kings 3: 28. Or, 2. Of Kings in general, in the Conſe 
before given: for ſceing the word is generally expreſſed withour a= 
ny limitation both here and v: 12, r3. it may ſeem preſumption to 
confine it to thoſe few Kings which are or were wiſe and good. 6 
Or, Shall, or ſhouldnt tranſgrejz, or go beyond the bounds of Religi- + 
on and Juſtice. | Lev is: 

11 * A juſt weight and ballance are the LORD's c ; Ch: 11 
7 all the weights 4 of the bag re his work. t Heb: 

c Are God's work,as it follows; made by his direction & appoint= he ſtone 
ment fo as no man can corrupt or alter them without violating 
God's Rights and Authority, and incurring his ditpleaſure. 4 Heb: 
the flones, which they then uted as weights. See on Prov: 1 1. 1. 

12 It zs an abomination to kings to commit wiC- 
kednels e ; for * the throne is eſtabliſhed by righteout- ; -- 
neſs f. ” © Ch, 

e They ſhould not only abſtain from all wicked practices, bur ab- io 
hor them borh in their own perſons, and in all their ſervants and 
ſubjects. Ir is roo plain, that he ſpeaks not of the common practice; 
but of the duty of Kings, as on v. 10 And ſuch affirmative ex. 
preſſions are oft uſed in Scripture to expreſs mens duty only, as 
1 Cor: 6: 19, your body is ( i; e; ſhould be ) che temple, &c. and 7. 32. 
careth, &c i: e: ought to care. f And ( which is 1mplied) weakned, 
and ſometimesoverthrown by unrighteofiſneſs ; and therefore this 
is neceſlary for their own ſecurity and happineſs. 


13 Righteous lips are the delight of kings g, and 


they love him that ſpeaketh right. . 
£ All wife and good Kings do, and all Kings ſhould delight in 
employing ſuch Counſellors, Judges, and Officers under them,: 2s 
are jult and fairhful in their Counſels and Sentences, and Ations 
becauſe ſuch bring great Honour and 2dvantage to them.. 


14 * The wrath of a king isas Metſengers of death h; *Ch ig.i 
but a wiſe man will pacifie it z, | 

þ Is as terrible asif many Meſſengers were ſent to denunce the 
ſentence of death, and to execute tt. # Will uſe a!l prudent and 
lawful means to pacifie it. | 

5 Inthe lighc of che kings countenance #s life &, and 
and * his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain /. 

& His favour and ſmiling Countenance is moſt ſweet and refre- 
ſhing, eſpecially ro himthat was under a ſentence of death, wv. 14 
As acceptable as thoſe Clouds which bring the latter Rain, where- 
by the Fruits are filled and ripened a little before rhe Harveſt : of 
which ſee Deur: 11: 14. Job 29: 23. Jam; 5: 7. | 
16 * How much better » is it to get Wiſdom than *Chap, 
gold » ? and to get unberſtanding, rather to be choſen 1» 95 
than ſilver? | 

m Ir is inexpreſlibly and unconceivably better, as this Phraſe im* 

plies, P/al: 31; 19. & 36: 7. & 92: 5, &c. » Becauſe it brings a man 

more certain, and compleat, and laſting comfort and advantage. 

17 The high-way of the upright o is to depart ' 40 

evil p; he that keepeth his way q preſeriveth his 


{oul r. 
o Their common Road, in which they conſtantly purpoſe and de- 
ſire, and cuſtomarily uſe to walk, although ſomerimes through frail- 
ty or temptation they ſlip into the by-paths of ſin. p From the &- 
vil of fin, and conſequently from the evil of puniſhment. 9q That 
takes heed to walk in that high-way. r From that miſchiet which 
befalls thoſe that walk in the crooked paths of wickedneſs. | 
18 * Pride goeth before deftrucion 5s, and an haugh- *Ch. rr.3 
ty ſpirit before a fall. & 18. 12 
s It is commonly a Forerunner and cauſe of mens Ruine,- be= 
cauſe it highly provokes both God and men. 


19 Better jt 55 ro be of an humble ſpirit withthe lows 
ly, than to divide the ſpoil with the proud 7. 
£ 5 Who will ſpoil and rob others to maintain their own pomp and | 
UxXury. | 
20 || Hethat handleth a matrer wiſely «, ſhall find good ||Or,h- tha 
x ; and wholo * truſteth in the LORD y happy 3s.he z. _ ns” 
u He who orders his affairs with diſcretion. Or, as others, both ge *" = 
ancient and Jater Interpreters take it, He that underifandeth, or at- .p- " 
tendeth to the Word, to wit, the word of God, which is called abſo- & . " W% 
lutely the Word, Prov; 13: 13: and elſewhere, making that the Rule 34. Bs 


*Ch,rg:1 


— 


of his Aftions. x Shall obrain happy fucceſs. y Who doth not x M 5. 
truſt ro his own prudence or diligence, but to God's providence er 37s bY 


and bleflings. Or, who mixeth God's Word with Faith, as the phraſe 
is, Heb; 4: 2. & He ſhall not only find ſome good, bur ſhall cer- 
tainly attain to true happineſs. - 

21 The wiſe in heart ſhall be called prudent a, and 
the ſweetneſs of che lips b increaſeth learningc. 

a The ſenſe 1s either, 8. He who hath Wiſdom or found knows 
lege in his Heart, will ſhew ir by his prudence in orderiag his 
Actions. Or rather, 2- He who is truely wiſe, or prudent,or intel- 
ligent ( all which words moſt commonly ſignifie one and the fame 
thing, both inthis and in other Books of Scripture) ſhall be ſo called 
or accounted by others. 6 Eloquence added co Wiſdom; the facul- 
ty of exprefliing a Man's mind fitly, and freely, and acceprably. 
c Bothin himiclf ; For whilſt a Man teacheth others, he impioverh © 
himſelf; and eſpecially ia ofhers, who by this means are induced'to ; 


10 + A divine ſentence y i: in the lips of the king 


ny 


#80 3 hear 


& 29, 4 


i 


a. > Cd ee ee od 


TAN ag RE REIT, TY PRERL OI III TR eye 


OTST 


% 


of 


F3T,70 
t Heb: 


muſt be 
found. 


hap. XVI. 


Ch:13:14: 
& 14:27. 


fHeb:2:4» 


Eliis5:26: 


Chg: 12 


*Eccl:6:7. ? 
Heb.che for his mouth | cravech it of him #. 

him ,, For his own uſe and benefit. The ſcope of the Proverb isto 

tbat labour-commend and preſs diligence in a Man's calling, and to condemn 
Heb.bow- 

h unts 


91147 of Bru 


| $8. & 26: 
21: & 29; ſeth not God, and is contrary to men, as was ſaid of the Jews, 


*Ch: 17 9. 


4Heb:ſend. 
&h fort hi 


*Ch:20:29 

Tt Heb: :c , 

ſha, or, be found in the way of righteouſneſs c. 

b A great Honour and Ornament as it is a ſingular Bleſſing of _ ———_— among Friends. This Phraſe we had before, Chap; 
16: 28, 


more inſtrumental to do good to others. 
22* Underſtanding is a well-ſpring of life 4 to hi 
that hath ite ; butthe inſtruction of fools is folly fe 


F Theirmoſt grave and ſerious counſels are fooliſh. 


uied. 


to the ſoul,and health to che bones &. 


; The Diſcourſes of the wiſe, laſt mentioned. v: 23. which 
yie1d both profit and delight;their wholeſome counſels and refreſh- 
ing cemforts. k To the body, Synecdochically expreſſed by the 
Bones the ſtrongeſt and greateſt parts of it, and the ſupporters of 


the reſt. 


but the end thereof is the ways of death. 


I This whole Verſe was delivered from Ch. 14. 12. and is here 


repeated partly for its great importance and ulefulneſs ro prevent 
that ſelf deceit, which is ſo common and dangerous;and partly to 
keep men from leaning too much to their own underſtanding, and 


£0 oblige them to ſeck and receive the good counſels of wite and 


holy men. 


26 * + He that laboureth, laboureth for himſelf »», 


idleneſs. » Heb. bowerhto him, as a ſuppliaar; beggeth him to la- 
bour that it may have ſomething to pur inco it for its own comfort 
and for the nouriſhment of the whole Body, _ —_ 
27 + An ungodly man diggeth up evil o, and 1n his 
lips there is as a burning fire p. | 
oInventeth or deſigneth miſchief to others, and proſecuteth his 
evil deſigns with great and conſtant induſtry. p. As his thoughts 
ſo alſo his words are very vexatious and pernicious 3 his Tongue 
is ſet on fire of Hell,and ſets himſelfand others on fue by lyes and 
flanders, and other provoking ſpeeches. : 
28 * Afroward q man t ſoweth ſtrife 7,and * a whi- 


: ſperer « ſeparateth chief friends 7. 
9 Or, perverſe, who perverteth his words and ways; who pleas 


a 


's Theff; 2: 15. r By whiſpering ſuch chings as may provoke one a- 
gainſt another. s Who ſecretly carry Tales from one to another, 
publiſhing thoſe evil words and ations which they ſhould conceal, 
anddetratting from their good aQtions, and perverting ſuch as are 
Innocent with their falſe conſtructions. £ Heb, @ chief Friend, the 
Singular number put for the Plural, as is fiequent in the Hebrew 


Text. E : 
29 A violent man « enticeth his neighbour x, and 


leadeth him into the way that is not good y. | 

u Heb. A Man of violence, i: e. devoted to violent and injurious 
courſes. xInto confelracy with him in his wicked praCtices, as it 
follows. y 5. e. That is very ſinfu), as this Phraieis uſed, Prov:17, 
26. and 18. 5.and oft elſewhere. 


30 He + ſhutteth his eyes z to deviſe froward things; 
moving his lips he bringeth evil co paſs. 

z That his Thovghts may be more free and intent to contrive 
miſchief. s Which is the geſture, either r. of one whoſe Theuz hrs 
are deeply engaged. Or 2: of one that ſpeaketh or maketa ſigns ro 
others to "Me him in executing that wickedneſs which he hath 
contrived. 


$2 * The hoary head jsa crown of glory 6, if + it 


God, a tok-n of great experience and prudence, as if comes neareſt | 
to God, who is called The ancient of 4ays, Dan: 9:9. cIf ic be accom» 
anied with true Piety, otherwiſe an old Sinner is accurſed, Iſa:65;20. 
Heb; it ſbal be found, &c. This is a priviledge promiſed to righteous 
Perſons, Exod: 20 12: Prov: 3: '6 and 4: 22, whereas ungodly men 
ſbal not live out half their days, Pal: 55: 23. 
32 He that is ſlow to anger d, 5s better e than the 


mighty 3 and he that ruleth his ſpirit f, than he thac 


eaketha city. A 
d Not apt to revenge, but ready to forgive injuries. e Becauſe 


both to himſelfand others, which oft cometh fromraſh anger, of a 
more gallant and generous ſpirit, and more valiant and vitorious, 
as it follows. This is opprſed to the perverſe judgment of the 
World, who eſteem ſuch Perſons puſillanimous and cowardly. f That | 
ſubdueth his paſſions ; for his v.Qory is the more glorious, becauſe 
be fights with the ſtronger enemy ,he conquers by his own, and nor - 
by other mens hands, and he getsa greater glory and advantage to 
himſe!f,and that without the injury and ruine of others, wherewith 
the Conqueſts of Cities are commonly attended. 


3 Thelot is caſt into the lap g, but che whole + ' 
aiGoſing thereof zs of the LORD 6b. | 
g As the ancient pratice was individing Inheritances, and deci- | 
ding doubrful things, of which ſee Num; 26: 55. Jofſ; 7:16. 1 Sam: 
10: 20, 21: & 14: 41, 42. Prov: 1: 14+ Aﬀs 1:26, b The event 
though caſual ro men, ig direQed and determined by Gods coun- 
ſol and providence: 


FRE UV # B&B & B S$. 


hear and receive his good inſtruftions. Wiſdom gets a Man repute 
with others, but this faculty of right ſpeaking, makes a wiſe Man 


d Is continually ſuggeſting wholeſome and ſaving inſtruftions, 
e And toothers alſo, as is underſtood from the following clauſe. 


23 The heart of the wile t teacheth his mouth g,and 


#h wiſe, addeth learning to his lips þ. 

£ DireQeth him what, and when, and how to ſpeak, and keepe 
eth him from ſpeaking raſhly and fooliſhly, + i, e. Inableth him 
to ſpeak learnedly and wiſely, Or, increaſeth earning ( in bimſe}f 
and others )by ( as this HebrewParticle ofc ſignifies ,and is Ey ſome 
rendred here ) h:s lips, i.e. by his wiſe ſpeeches ; that rhis may 
agree with the latter clauſe of v; 21. where this ſame Phraſe 1s 


24 * Pleaſant words i are #san honey-comb, {weet 


25 * Thereis a way thatſeemeth right unto a man, 


CHAP. XVIL 


© houſe al of ||ſacrifices « with ſtrife. 
# Ut the remainders of Sacrifices, of which they uſed to 
Feaſts : of which ſee on Prov: 7: 14. O ] _ 
: 7: 14. Or, of /ain Beafts,as th 
1s uſed, Gen: 31: 54+ and elſewhere. SA ; ET 
2 A wiſe ſervant ſhal have rule over a {on thatcauſ. 
eth ſhame b,and fhal have part ofthe inheritance among 
the bretbren <c. | 
S 6 Either as being by his Father appointed Tutor or 
is Son; or being by his Wiſdom advanced to that Eſtate and Dig. 
1” dns the other poſſibly hath loſt by his folly, e Partly as a 
Jut recompence for his faithful Service as Gen; 15: 2,3,&c. and partly 
aS an Obligation ro him,to take care of his Children, 
3 * The fining-pot is for ſilver, and the furnace for Pe2 6s" 
[| gold, but the LORD crieth the hearts d. | 


a The Hearts of men cannot be ſearche 


m 
hear, 


Guardian to 


d and known by any hu- M. 17:0; 


mane art, bur by God only. al:3:3, 
i A wicked doer e giveth heed to 4 falſelips f* and {. Tiemig 
a 114T giveth ear to a naughty tongue g. f Therrut 


: eOr, 4 malicious or miſchievous Man, 
1S fo bring trouble to others. 
counſels or ſpeeches, to falſe 


whoſe praQtice and delight it of 
Heb. zo Lips of Iniquity, to any wicked t Heb:ljy, 
- Accuſations and Calumnies, which of iniqui 
a 1m occaſion and encouragement to do miſchief. g He who ac« - 
-” rg himſelfto falſe and wicked ſpeaking delighterh in the like 
PEcChes of other men. This Proverb contains a com pariſon between 
wy 1 ge and an evil-ſpeaker, and ſheweth their agreement in 
che lame finſu] praftice of being greedy to hear falle and wicked 
{peeches. 
W, * Whoſo mocketh the poor 5, reproacheth his 
aker z ; and he that is glad at calamities &, ſhalnot 
be + unpuniſhed. 
4 Dcrideth or reproacheth him with or for his poverty. 
who by his Pcovidence made him poor.See the ſame aſſertion, Prov; 
14: 3 L k Ar the miſeries ofother men. 
6 * Childrens children ere the crown of old men 2, 
and theglory of children are their fathers m. 
_ ! Their honour and happineſs, becauſe they are in themſelves 
leflings of God and Teſtimonies of God's favour, although ſome. 
umes they may become the ſhame of their Fathers Houſe, 
wn pes _ — aS are wiſe and god!y, as is evident from 
nature of the thing,for wick Ing 1 
Chil 1ing,tor wicked Parents bring infamy upon their 
4 
7 Þ Excellent ſpeech » becometh not a fool o; much #96. 
Jeſs do | lying li psa prince. Hoof cok 
z Either 1, diſcourſe of high andexcellent things far above his 11, 
Capacity. Or, 2. lofty or eloquent ſpeech, which fools oft affe&. THeb:s by 
Or, 3. vertuous & godly Diſcourſe. o Either properly ſo called of lying, 
Or, as this word is moſt commonly uſed in this Book, a wicked 
man, whoſe ations give the lye to his Expreſſions. 
s * A gifcis asf a precious ſtone p inthe eyes of him »c4,;s.5 
chat hath ir q;whitherſoever it turneth r,it proſpereth. + Heb: 5 


*Chz14;3 x 
THeb:leld 


: God inn, 


Pſ.129. 4; 
& 128.31 


an hundred ſtripes into a fool. 


cruet meſſenger c ſhal be ſent againſt him. 


either 1, againſt menin Authority, 
true, for many moſt wicked Perſons are not guilty of that fin.Or ra» 
he is more like to God, more wiſe to foreſee and prevent miſchief _ wi 
| 5, G 
Aairion of the obje& ſeems moſt probably to be meant of the higheſt 
and worſt kind ofRebellion,according to the common rule of In« 
rerpretation in ſuch caſes. c Or, a cruel Angel, the Angel of Deatlt 
the Devil, or ſome bloody men employed by God to avenge his 
quarrel; or ſome dreadful puniſhment;ir being very uſual in Scrip* 
ture to repreſent things under the notion of Perſons, as Row: 7: 
and elſewhere. 


rather than a fool in his folly e. 


or Paſſion, becauſe the danger is greater, all things conſidered, and * Rom:13 
more unavoidable. 


depart from his houſe f. 


þ Pleaſant and acceptable ; and withal dazleth his eyes. q Heb. fone of 
of the Lora or owner of it, either x. of the giver : Or, rather 2. of grace 
the Receiver of it, who by the giver is made Lord of it ; for to 

his eyes it was expoſed, that he might diſcern the beauty and worth 

Of ic, and chrreby be allured ro do what wasdeſired, which accor. 
dingly he did, as it here follows. r To whomſoever it is preſent- 

ed. Bur this, as alſomany other Proverbs are to be underſtood of 

tne Common courſe or eff:& with moſt men, but not univerſally 


Chip. XVI : 


"27; 2 [, 


[2 - * \ . 
Etter 3s * a dry morſel,and quieneſs therewith,than "chas, ” 


Tr, gud 


Ger 


of all men. | 

9 * He that coveretha tranſgreflion 5, || ſeeketh ? 
| ove « : bur he that repeateth x a matter y, ſeparateth 
verv friends z. « 
5 Tharconcealerh, as far as he may, other mens fauſts againſt 
hbimlcif or againit their friends. # 7. & Findeth or obtaineth, as 
th:s word is uſed here below, wer; 19: and Pro: 11: 27. « Either r. 
to himielf. Or rather 2. to the tranigreſſor:or oftendi'g Friend ; 
he m-intains love among Friends, as it may be exp'airned from the 
oppoſite clauſe. x That pub!iſheth and ſpreadeth ir abroad ; that 
recals it to mind after it was paſt and forgo:ten y Or, the matrer 
laſt mencioned. to wit, the tranſgrefſicn. z Either 1. he alic-ate 
eth his Friend from himſelf, Or rather 2. he ' rajſeth jealo»ties 


*Ch;10'12 
j| Orgr+* 
urithe 


10 || A reproof entreth more into a wiſe man &,than [Or 56 
| Ut, 


proof aweth 
more a wil 
man,than 

go firike # 
: fool an ute 


s Is more effeual for his reformation. | 
11 An evil man (ccketh only rebellion b; therefore a 


b Tt is the conſtant ſtudy and buſineſs of wicked men to rebe]! 


bes 


But this is not univerſally ared 1m 


againſt God : For 1, thus it is true of all wicked men. 2. 
rd is uſed of rebellion againſt God, Deut: 31: 27: Exek: 2: 
and 3: 9, &c. 3. This word being put alone without any 


12 Let * a bear robbed of her whelps 4 meet a man, *Hoſz;s 


4d When ſhe is moſt cruel and fierce. e In the heat of his Luſt 


17 
12 Whoſo * rewardeth eyil for good, evil {hal not ; rs 


[:26:y; 
*27;20, 
517:10; 
al:3 3, 
The trig 


he trul 


Teb:lips 
miquity, 


1:14;310 


eb:held 
0668s, 


(129-3; 
128.31 


ſeb;s 
of exit 
y, 

eb:s ly 
[114 


h118:16, 
Teb: s 
ze of 


6 


11 


Jr, are 
of awtth 
re 4 wiſe 
n,than 

frihe 8 
[ an hut 
a $1008: 


Toſ13 


Rom:13 
', 

[ hefl:5: 
et:319 


_ 


hap- XVII. | 
| f From his Perſon and Family ; becauſe ſuch a man is moſt hates 
fal ro God and toall mankind ; God wall puniſh him, and men 

will not pity nor relieve him. 
14 The beginning of ſtrife ;s as when one lettethout 
water g ; therefore * leave off contention before it be 

((:2%3- meddied with þ. 

g By cutting the Bank of a River,in which caſe the Water quick- 
Jy widens the breach and breaks in with irreſiſtible violence and 
fury, and cauſerh great miſchief and deſtruftion, b Avoid the oc- 

3 calions,and prevent che beginnings of contention. 

- 15 * He that juſtifyecth ; the wicked, and he that 
cb condemneth the juſt, even they both are abomination 

5-33. to the LORD. © 

; # Thar acquitteth him as innocent by a judicialSentence,or other- 
wiſe approverh or commendeth his evil prattices.By which we may 
ealily underſtind what it 1s to condemn the juſt. l 

16 Wherefore k is there a price / in the hand of a fool 
to get wiſdom », ſeing he hath no heart to it »? 

k The Queſtion implies that it is unworthily placed, and that it 
is to no purpoſe or benefit of the Poſſeffor: 1 Poſlefſions or riches 
as all the ancient Tranſlators render it, of which this word is uſed, 
Ja: 55.1. and elſewhere,under which all opportunities and abilities 
of getting it are comprehended, m For the obtaining whereof, rich 
Men have many and great advantages above others. » Neither com 
mon diſcretion to diſcern the worth of Wiſdom, and his advantage 
ro get it ; norany ſincere defireto get it ; for the heart 1s commone= 
Iy uſed in Scripture both for the underſtanding, and for che will 
and aff-Qions, 

17 * A friend o loveth atall times p, and a brother 

1Cha8.24 7 15 born for adverſity r. 

. 0 A finczre and hearty Friend. p Not only in proſperity, but 
alſo1ia adverſity, when falſe Friends forſake us: q Who is ſo not 
only by name and Blood, but by brotherly affetion. r Was ſent 
into the World for this among other ends, that he might comfort 
and relieve his Brother in his adverſity. So this Proverb compar- 
eth a Friend with a brother, and ſheweth that a Friend doth that 
freely,and by a choice,which a brother doth by the force and obli- 
gations of Nature. But this laſt clauſe may be, and is by divers 
otherwiſe renqred, and he C to wir, the Friend is Berna Brother (or, 
becrmes, or 25 made a Brother, i: e: puts on brotherly affeCtion, as if 
he had received a ſecond Birth and was born his Brother, ſuch ex- 
prefſions being not unuſual borh in Scriprure,andin other Authors ) 
11 or againſt the time of adverlity. So the ſenſe is, He is a Friend 
at al) times, butin adverliry he is more than an ordinary Friend,even 
a Brother. . : : 

*(h:6:r, 13 * A man void of F underſtanding ſtriketh hands s, 

& 11: 15. and becometh ſurety in the preſence of his friend x. 

+ Heb. 5 In token of his becoming Surety : Ot which Phraſe, and of the 


beg. thing ir ſelf: ſee on Prov: 6:1, & 11. 15. # The Friend here is ei- 


ther 1, b-fore, and to the Creditor. Or rather 2. before,and with 
and for the debror, for whom, as being his Friend, he becomes 
Surety, as the manner of Friends is, See on Prov: 6: 3. And this 
Proverb is ficly placed after that v: 17. to intimate, that alchougd 
the laws of Friendſhip oblige us to love and help our friends in trou- 
ble, as far as we are able, yet they donot oblige us to become Sure- 
ty for them raſhly, and above what we are able to pay, for by that 
means we make our ſelves unable to do good either to them, or to 
others, or to our ſelves, . 

19 He loveth tranſgreflion, that loveth ſtrife « ; and 

| he that exalterh his + gate x, ſeeketh deſtrucion y. 
fOr houſes « Becauſc contention is initſelf a fin, and is commonly accomp1” 
680;28:17 nied or followed with many fins, as detrattion, malice, hatred, 
pride, &c. x Eicher 1. his mouth, 7. e who ſpeakerh loftily : for 
we read ofthe gate or doors of ones Mouth in Michs 7:_5. and elſewhere : 
but then the word Mouth or Tongue is added ro determine the enſs : 
. but the mouth is no where calle.i the gate, ſimply or abſolutely. Or 
2. the Gare of his Houſe, that makerh ic, and conſequently his 
Houle, lofty and Magnificent,beyond what befits his quality, which 
bzing anevidence? and <ffeR of pride and haughtineſs of Spirit is here 
me::rioned for all the ret. So the ſenſe is, He who carries him- 
ſ:IFof.ily and ſcornfully. y He ſeeksrhoſe things which will ex- 
p1ſe nin to deſtruftion, becauſe he maketh himſelf odi-us bot) ro 
G-d an?! Men, Or fndeth deftruFion; ſeeking being pur for fiadiog 

or Procyring, as above v: 9. 

2: + 'He chart hath a froward heart z, findeth no 
go00d 2; and he that hath a perverſe congue b, fallerh 


me into miſchief. | | 
bearts 


z Whoſe heart is not plain ang upright, but falſe towards God oz 
men. # Shall not get thar advantage by his diſſmulation which he 
incends and expeCts, but ſha'l fall into miſchief, as is imp!i-d from 
the oppoſire Clauſe. b That ſpeaks deceitfully or wicked!y. So here 
isa compariſon between anevil heart and anevil Tongue, and the 
ill effes of both of them. ; 

21* He that bepetteth a fool c, doth it to his ſorrow ; 


Ul . 
Chi:1o:ni and the father d of a fool hath no joy e. 
c Not a Natural, but a wilful foo), or a wicked Son, 4 And con- 

ſequently the Mother alſo. e Which Parents uſually have in the 
Birth of a Child, and eſpecially of a Son, but have great cauſe of 
Sorrow, the contrary being implied inthis and ſuch likeexpreſſions, 
as in Scripture. as Prgv:10: 2. &c. ſo alſo in Profane Authors, whoſe 
words ſee in my Latin Synopſis. 

"Thignz, 22 * A merry heart f doth good g || I;ke a medicine ; 

&12: 25, but a broken þ ſpirit drieth the bones z. 

[| Or, 70 « f Chearfulneſs of Soul, eſpecially that which is ſ6lid,and ariſeth 


maicine, from the witneſs of a good Conſcience. z Even to the Body 3; it ' 


contributes very much to the reſtauration or preſervation of bodily 
Health and vigor, as Phyſicians obſerve,and Experience ſheweth. 
þ Sad and deje&ed. £ Waſteth the marrow of the Bones, and the - 
moiſture and ſtrength of rhe Body. 

23 A wicked man k taketh a gift out of the boſom / 
to pervert the ways of judgment . 

k Whether Judge or Witneſs. 4 In feret, as this Phraſe is ex- 


P ROY TREES 


pounded, Prov: 21. 14. being Privily conveyed from the boſom of 


the giver into his own boſom. m To give or procure an unjuſt 
age 


ing ; but che eyes of a fool are in the ends of the 14-&#:3 
earth o. 


n Or, in ( as the particle beth. is uſed, Deut: 2. 7, and is hers 
rendred by divers Interpreters ) the face or countenance. The ſenſe 
is either 1. His Wiſdom appears even in his geſtures and looks, 
Wah are modeſt, and compoſed, and grave. Or 2. Wiſdom is _ 
before him, or in his ſight, as the mark at which he a»ms, or as 
the rule by which he conſtanrly walketh, 2414 ordererh all is ſteps 
from e1me to time minding his preſent dury and buſineſs. o The 
ſenſe of this clauſe alſo is either 1, His fo'ly appears in his light, 
and unſteddy, and diſorderly carriage and !ooks Or 2. His mind 
is wavering and unſettled; he neither propoſe:h a right and cer- 
cain end to himſelf, nor is he conſtant in the uſe of fit means to at= 
tain 1t; he negleQs his preſent buſineſs, and true inters{t,and wan-. 
ders hither and thither in the purſuit of earthly vanities, minding 


_ thoſe things which are remoteſt from him, and leaft concern 


neſs to her that bare him Pp. 'F. 20, 


repeats it as a point of great moment and conſtant nſe, and as a 
powerful motive to oblige both Chi!dren to carry themſelves wiſely 
and dutifully to their Parents, as they would net be thought to be 
unnatural or inhumane, and Parents to educate their Children pru- 


dently and religiouſly, at leaſt thcir own comfort, if nor for the 
publick good. 


trike princes for equity t. 


9 This particle ſeems to have a relation to the next foregoing Pro- 
verb to imply that it isa very evil ching for Children to cauſe grief? * 
o their Parents,asit is alſo todo whar here follows. r For Parents, 
or Princes,or rulers, to whomalone this Power belones to puniſh ins ' 
nocent and good men. 5 Is highly evil and abominable, as is im» 
plied. See above, wer: 20: and Prov, 16: 29. and 17; 10. &c. # Not 
to ſmite M xgiſtrats,cither with the Hand or Tongue,for the execu« 
tion of Juſtice, as condemned perſons are apt to do- Or, as ſome 
learned interpreters render it, Nor for Princes to ſfirike any man for 
equity, or for doing his dury, or what is juſt. So this clauſe beſt 
agrees with the former. Bcſides it belongs to Princesor Magiſtrates 
ro puniſh or ſtrike. : 

27 * He that hath knowledge ſpareth « his words; and *Jam:i:19 
a man of underſtanding is of ſ an excellent ſpiritx. |} Or,s cl 

# Heb: refraineth, as at other times, ſo eſpecially when he ispro-,/£75*. 
voked to paſſion, in which caſe fools utter all their mind. x Which 
he ſhewerth by commanding his p-fſions, and bridling himſelffrem 
haſty and unadviſed ſpeeches. . Or, as others render it,is of a cool Spi« 
rt, calm and moderate, not cafily provoked, humble as the Chaldee 
renders it, patient or long-ſuffering, as the LXX- and Aravick Inter-= 
Preters render the words, Or, as others, ſparing ( Heb: procrour, 
which is pur for rave or ſcarce, 1 Sam: 3, 1. Prov: 25. 17. Iſs: 13: 12.) 
of his breath, i: e: of his ſpe:ch, as this very word is uſed, Prov: 29+ 
It, 1a: 11: 4. corrpared with 27h ff: 2: 8. 


mul or © 


red wiſc y: and he that ſhutteth his lips is eſteemed a man 
of underſtanding. 


y Becaule he is ſenſible of his own folly, and therefore forbears 
ro ſpeak leſt he ſhould diſcoveritz which is a great point of true 


Wildom, 
CH AP. XVIII. | 

[| Hrough deſire a man having ſeparated himſelf 

[ ſeeketh and intermeddleth with all wiſdom 4. bas | 
_ # According to this interpretation the ſenſe is, through defire ( of a 
ir, to wit, of Wiſd>m whichis eaſily underſtood out of the end of - hi ſeeketh 
the Verſe 3 ſuch Ellipſes being frequent in Scripture) a man ha JCI 16 
ing ſ parated himſelf ( being ſequeſtred from the company, and noiſe, hi fr. 
and buſineſs of the Wor'd, betaking himfelf ro retirement and == x. : 
'olirude, as men do that apply themſelves to any ſerious ſtudy) ſcek- tleth 
-th and intermeddleth with all Wiſdom, i: e; wuſeth all diligence, that uns 
ne may ſearch and find out all {clid knowledge and true Wiſdom. ba reſet 
An:i this e-rn- ſt deſire and endeavour te get true Wiſdom within fines. 
: mas ſelf is ficly oppoſed to rhe folls contempt of Wildom.or to 
1:S dzfire of it, nor for uſe and benefit, but only for vain oftenta= 
rion, which is expreſſed in the next Verſe, although coherence is 
-rle regarded by interpreters in the ſeveral Verſes and Proverbs 
of t'14is Book, But this verſe is otherwiſe rendred in the margin of 
o:r Engliſh Bible, and by divers others, He that ſ-parateth himſelf 
( eirner 1, From his friend. Orrather 2. From other men; who 
affeds ſingularity is wedded to his own Opinion and through ſelf 
conceit detpiſeth the opinions and converſatio: of others ſecketh 8c- 
cording to his d-fire ( ſezketh to gratifie his ow:, Iriclinations and Af- 
te&tions, and chnſeth thoſe opinions which moſt comply with 
them ) and intermedleth ( for this word is uſed in a bad ſenſe, Provz 
17: 14« & 20: 3. and itis not found elſewhere, ſave in this p'ace) 
in every buſmeſs, as proud and ſingular perſons are commonly prag- 
matical, delighting-to find faults in others, that rhey may get ſome 
Reputation to themſelves by it. Heb. in every ching that 65, thruſt- 
ing themſelves into the Attions and affairs of orber men. Or, as 
this laſt clauſe is and may be rendred, and contendech ( Heb: minglerh 
himlelf; for words of that fignification are commonly uſed for con- 
tending or fighting, as Deut: 2: 5,9, 19. Iſa: 36. 8. Dan: 11: 19.) with 


or «gainft )for the Hebrew prefix, bech ofr ſignifies againſt) allreaſon - 
or Wiſlom : whatſoever any man ſpeaketh againſt his opinion and 
deſire, though it be never ſo reaſonable and evidenr,he rejeReth it, 
and Wren his own epinion 


2 A fool hath no delight in underſtanding 6, but that 


his heart may diſcover it ſelf. 

b In getting ſound and ſaving kno »ledge,cither by his own ſtudy, 
or by the inſtrutions of wiſe and good men. c Heb.bur ( his delight 
is ) in the diſcovery of his own heart, i; e; in uttering that folly and 

sH 3 wicked- 


' Chap. XVILY 


24* Wiſdom 5s before him » that hath underſtand- * Ece!: =: 


25 * A fooliſh ſon is a griefto his father, and bitter- *Ch:1o, ef 


? This he ſaid before, Prov: I5: 205 and elſewhere, but he here & 2195 13) | 


26 Alſo q + to puniſh the juſt r is not good 5; nor to + Heb: #5 


28 * Even a fool when he holdeth his peace, iscoun- *Job,13:5 


rateth hive 


v6 FAIT, A WOW PIP} YR. 24 + 7? ** GTA WV IP ER Eo OH Ce va 
6 - PR 42 4 "_—_ i .* 


0 

© E 
1 
T7 
1 
x 

- £ 
oY - 


Je 1P XVIII. 
| wickedneſs which is in his heart : being more forward to ſpeak than 
» to hear, which is one badge of a foo). . 
2 When the wicked cometh &d,then cometh allo con 
tempte; and with ignominy reproach f. 

' # Tnto any place or company.* e Either «1. Paſſively ; he 15 
juſtly contzmned and reproached by thoſe who converſe with him 
Or rathzr- 2. AQively ; he deſpileth and ſcorneth all Inſtruction 
and Reproof, neither fearing 50d, nor reverencing Man: For h« 
ſeems here to note his ſin,rather than his puniſhmenrf And he doth 
not only contemn others in his heart, bur ſhewerh his contemptot 
them by ignominious -and reproachful expreſſions and carriages. 

4 * The words of a mans g mouth are as deep wa- 
ters þ, and the well-ſpring of wiſdom #«s a flowing 


brook 5. 

Z i. e. A wiſe mans, as the next clauſe explains this ; who is wor- 
thy of the name, and hath the underſtanding of a man in him. This 
Hebrew word oft-tirhes notes an eminent or excellent perſon, and 
therefore is oppoſed to Adam, which deligns any ordinarie man. + 
Full of deep Wiſdom. 5 That Wiſdom which is in his heart 1s 
continually pouring forth wiſe and good counſels. 
waoas. $.* It is not good &:to accept the perſon 1 of the 
2ut.1.17. Wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment. 

16. 19. & z.e. Itis a moſt wicked and hateful thing. See on Prov. 17. 
h. 24.23. 15, 26, | To favour his unrighteous cauſe. 
6 A fools lips enter into contention m,and his mouth 


calleth for ſtrokes ». 

-m A fool by his raſh and wicked ſpeeches provoketh others to 
quarrel with him, ' and, as it follows, to ſtrike him. n= Procurcth 
| ſtrokes to himſelf. | 
h.19.14. 7 * A fools mouth 5s his deſtrution, and his lips are 


T2. 13» the ſnare of bis Soul. 


h.20'S, 


PlIROVT ER 8B «. 


18 The lot cauſeth contentions to ceaſe o, and part- 
:thp between the mighty 9. 
© By determining the marters'in difference. p Maketh a partition, 
giveth to every one what is right or meet, by the diſpoſition of 
livine Providence» q Soit doth alſo between mean perions,bur he 


j mentions #hemzghty becauſe they are moſt prone to contention, and 


moſt fierce and intraftible in it, and moſt capable of doing great 
miſchief ro themlelves and others by it, and therefore they moſt 
aced this remedy. | 

19 A brother offended r is harder to be won 5s than a 
ſtrong city 7, and 7heir contentions are like the bars of 
a Caſtle «. 

r To wit,by his Brothers unkindneſs or injury. s Or, # ſtronger, 
which is ſufficiently underſtood by the mention of a ſtrong City, to 
which he is compared. ſuch Elipſesbeing frequent in the Hedrew, 
as hath been nored before. 5 Which is hardly to be conquered, 
 Whichare very ſtrong, and nor to be broken,and make the caſtle 
ftrong, and hardly to be won. The truth of this aſſertion is con« 
firmed by the teftimony of Ariſtotle and other learned Authors, who 
affirm the ſame thing; and the reaſon ofit is evident, becauſe the 
nearneſs of the Relation greatly heightensthe provocation, & Love 
abuſed frequently turns to extream hatred. 


20 * A mans belly ſhall be ſatisfied by the fruit of 
his mouth x, and with the encreaſe of his lips ſhall he be 
filled- 

 « Wiſe andedifying diſcourſes tend to the comfort and fotisfac- 
tion of the Speaker, as well as to the good of the Hearers. 

21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue y, 
and they that love it & ſhall eat the fruit thereof a, 

3 Are brought upon men by the good or bad uſc of their tongues, 
2 Either 1. The Tongue ; that love and uſe much ralking, which 


17-3* | 8 ® The wotds of a[| tale-bearer o are [|as wounds p, 


___ li and they go down into the j innermolt parts of the 


£ 26. 22. belly 9. | 
Ar, whiſl= _ 6 Who privily ſlandereth his Neighbour. p Deeply wound the 
erer. Reputation, and afterwards the Heart of the flandered perſon. 
Dr,like as Compare Prov. 12, 18. Or, as others render the word are 4s ſmooth 
'Or, #ut, or flattering, i.e. they really are ſo; the particle as, being . oft uſed 
Mu men toexpreſs the truth of the thing, as hath been noted betore- See 
re wound. alſo Job. 1.14. They are ſofterthan Oil, as is faid P/al. 55.21. For 
T Heb. flanderers uſe to cover and nſher in their calumnies with pretences 
wers, of kindneſs and compaſſion to them whom they traduce. q They 
+ wound mortally, p:ercing to the heart, which js oft meant by rhe 

' belly, as Fob t5. 35. & Z2+ 19, &C-+ : : 

'9 He alſo thac is flothful in his work, is brother to 


him thac is a great waſter r. | 
r They are like, though they take ſeveral paths, yet both come 

to one end, even to Extream want and poverty. 
10 * The name of the LORD s zs a ſtrong tower ? ; 


27.1. & the righteous « runneth into it, and Þ is ſafe. 
$1. 3.&91, 5 7. e. The Lord as he hath revealed himſelf in his works, and 
2-& 434 2, eſpecially in his word by his Promiſes, and the Declarations of his 
Heb. # infinite perfeQions, and of his good will to his People. 7 Is ſuth- 
t aloft, cient for our ProteQtionin cafe of the greateſt dangers. « Which 
| limitation te adds to beat down the vain confidences of thoſe men, 
who though they live in a grols neglect and contempt of God, will 
expe& Salvation from him. ; 

It * The rich mans wealth zs his ſtrong city, and as 


an high wall in his own conceit z. 
u Ale truſts to his Wealth, as that which will either enable him 
to reſiſt his enemy, or at leaſt purchale his favour. 
I2 * Before deſtruction the heart of man is haughty 


x, and before honour is y humility. 
x Pride is a cauſe and preſage of ruine, as 1s noted Prov, 16. 18. 
: 7 Or, goeth. This Clauſe we had, Prov. 15. 33. 
Heb. re 73 He that f anſwereth a matter before he heareth 


«hs 3 2, it is folly andibame 2 unto him. 

wed. . zBefore he hath fully heard and conſidered what another is ſpea= 
king avoutit. # It isa ſhameful folly,though he ſeck the reputati- 
on of a wiſe man by it, as if he could readily and throughly un- 
derſtand all that another can ſay before he hath uttered ir. 


14 The ſpirit 6 of a man will ſuſtain his infirmity « ; 


but a wounded 4d ſpirit who can bear e ? 

_ 63.e. The ſou], to wit, which is unwounded, as appears by the 
oppoſite branch of the verſe ; which is vigorous and chearfu), ſup- 
ported by the ſenſe of God's Love, and the Conſcience of its own 
Iategrity, and the proſpe& of its preſent Peace, and future Hap- 
pineſs, e Will eaſily ſupport him under any bodily or outward 
troubles, as God's people have oft found by experience. d Dejett- 
ed with the ſenfe of its own guilt and miſery. e Itis moſt grievous 
and intollerable without divine aſliſtance« 


15 The heart of che prudent getteth knowledge f, 


and the ear of the wiſe getteth knowledge g. 
F By employing his thoughts and ſtudies upon it. g By a greedy 
and diligent attention to thoſe from whom he may learn it, 


16 * A mans gift maketh room for him 5, and bring- 
eth him before great men 3. 

h Procures him free acceſs to great men. Heb. enlarg:th him, as 
this very Phraſe is rendred, Pſal. 4. 1. and elſewhere ; freeth him 
from ſtraits and oppreſſions. 7 Gets him favour and tree converla- 
gon with them, 

17 He that is firſt in his own cauſe & ſeemeth juſt I ; 


but his neighbour cometh » and ſearcheth him ». 

+ He that firſt pleadeth his cauſe. ! Both to himſelf & to the 
Judge or Court, by his fair pretences. m To contend with him in 
judgment,and to plead his cauſe.» Examineth the truth and weight 
of his Allegations, and diſprovetli them,and dereRterh his weakneſs: 
Or, diſcovers him : for ſeeking or ſearching acre oft put for fndivg, as 
Prove 17. 9, 19+ and elſewhere. 


Ch.to 15, 


Ch 11! 2. 


Ch. 17-8. 
C 21, I4. 


is oft cenſured as a lin, and a cauſe of miſchief, See Prov, 10. 19. 
' Jaman 9. Or, 2. The uſe of their rongue in either of thoſe ways 
| Which are plainly ſuppoſed in the former clauſe ofthe verſe : they 


' 
j 


| who do not only ſpeak well, which a wicked man may ſometimes 
do ; or ſpeakill, wh:ch a good man may poſliby do, but do love, 
and therefore accuſtom themſelves to ſpeak well or ill, a Shallre. 
Clive cither good orevil according to the quality of their Speeches, 

| 22 * Whoſe findetha Wite 6, findeth a good thing c, 


and obtaineth favour of the LORD Ad, 

b Either 1. Simply a Wife; for a Wite, though ſhe be not the 
beſt of her kind,is to be eſteemed a bleſſing, being uſeful both for ſo= 
ciety of life, Gen. 2. 18. and for the mitigation of a mans cares and 
troubles, and for the prevention of ſins. Or, 2. Good Wife; one 
that deſerves the Name, and performs the duty of that relation ; a 
wiſe and worthy Wife, as this w.rd may feem to imply, being 

: deduced from the Hebrew word, i/ch,which ſometimes notes a ran 
, of Eminency. And this limitation and explication of the word 
| May be gatiered both from the following commendations, which 
| would hardly be given toa bad Wife,and from the uſage of Scripe 
; ture in which this Ellipſis is frequent, as a parh or way is put for a 
: good path or way, Pſal. 119- 1. Prov. 15. I». an anſwer for a good an« 
. ſwer, Prov. 15. 23. a King for a good King, Prov. 16. 10. & 29. 4.4 
name for a good name, Prov. 22. «. Eccleſ. 7. 1. &c. c A ſingular 
Bleſſing. 4 Obtaineth her not by his own Wir, or Art, or Dili- 
gence, but by God's good Providence rowards him, which ordereth 
that and all other events as it pleaſerth him. 

23 The poor uſeth intreaties e, but the rich anſwer- 
eth * roughly f. 

e Humbly begs the favour of rich men, as his neceſſities and oc- 
caſions require it, f Speaketh proudly and ſcornfully either to the 
poor. or to others that converſe with him, being puffed up with a 
conceit of his Riches, and ofhis ſelf-ſufficiency. E 

24 A man that hath Friends g muſt ſhew himſelf fri- 

endly ; * and there is a friend :barſticketh cloſer hthan 


a brother, 

g Heb. 4 man of Friends; either 1, Who deſires the friendſhip 
of others. Or 2. Who profezſſeth friendſhip to others. hTo him 
that deſires and needs his help:Who is more hearty in the perfor 
mance of all friendly Officese 

CH A P. XIX. | 
_— is the poor that walketh in hisintegrity a,than 
he that is perverſe in bis lips b,and is a fool c. 

a Who is upright in his words and actions. b Thatuſeth toſpeak 
wickedly,which proceeds from a wicked heart,andis uſually atren- 
ded witn an evil Life, c is an Hypocrite, or a wicked man, for 
this is oppoſed rothe vpright man fn the fornerclauſe, yea,though 
he be rich, which is implied from the ſame clauſe. 

2 Alſo that the foul 4 be without knowledge e,zt is not 
good f'; and he that haſteth with his feer g, finneth. 

d Which is the principal cauſe and director of 31] mens actions. 
e Without Wiſdom or prudence to diſcern his way,and what,and 
how, he ought to act in his ſeveral caſes and concernments. flr 
is very evi) and pernicious. g That rafhly and headily "ruſheth in« 
to actions without ſerious conſideration. So two vices are here 
cenſured, the want of knowledge, and neglect or diſuſe of know- 
ledge in a mans actions. 
3 The fooliſhneſs of man perverteth his way h&, and 
his heart fretteth againft the LORD 5z. 

hþ Either 1. enticeth him to fin. Or, rather 2. Crofſeth and blaſ- 
teth his deſigns and enterpriſes, and brings loſſes and miſeries up- 
on him. # He aſcribes his unhappineſs not to his own fin and fol- 
ly,which is the true cauſe of it, but to God and his providence, as 
gainſt which he unjuſtly murmures: . 

4 * Wealth maketh many friends ; but the poor 1s 


ſeparated from his neighbour &. 


*Ch:r9:146 


| 


Jan, zi 


*Ch1717, 


FCh 28, 6; 


*Ch,14-29 


bl Ver. 9, 
 k Is diſowned and forſaken by thoſe who are moſt obliged to help Þy, 23, 1. 
him: : Deu. 19:16, 
5*A falſe witneſs ſhall not be + unpuniſhed /, and he 1g. Ch.6, 
21-28 


that ſpeaketh lies m2 ſhall not eſcape. 


19- p 
! Though he eſcape the obſervation and puniſhment of men yet + Heb.hola 
he ;nnocent, 


Chap XIX, | 


, 


Chap: 


Heb. 
F Heb. 
man of 
gifts, 


*Ch.14 


{Heb Q 
heart, 


FFEcl.c 
*Ch.3c 
Eccl,u 


| chap. XIX. 


he ſhal not avoid the judgment of God. m 'That accuſtometh him- 
ſelf ro lying, either in judgment, or in common converſation. 
#Heb.face, 6 Many will encreat theF favour ofthe prince »,and 
# Heb. ® every man 5s a friend oto | him that giveth gifts. 
man 0 » Or, as others, of the liberal and bountiful man. which comes to 
gifts, the ſame thing : for Kings were antiently called Benefa#ors, Luke 
22. 25, 0 Notlincerely, as daily experience ſhews, but in ſhew or 
profeſſion, or in the outward expreſſions of it, whereby they may 


oblige hime 
7 * Allthe brethren p of the poor do hate him q, how 


much more do his friends r go far from him? he pur- 


{ueth them with words 5s, yet they are wanting to him e, 

p His neareſt and deareſt Relations, who are oft called Brethren 
in Scripture, by a common Synecdoche. 9 z. e. Deſpiſe and ſhun 
him, as men do any thing which they hate, and as the following 
words explain it» r His former companions, who 1n his proſperity 
profeſſed friendſhip to him. 5 Earneſtly imploring their pity, Or, 
he urgeth ( Heb. purſueth) their words, 1. e. alledgeth their former 
promiſes, and profeſſions of Friendſhip. Or without any ſupple- 
ment, he ſeeketh words, as the Preacher ſought #0 find ous acceptable 
words, Eccleſ, 12: 10. wherewith he might prevail or move them 
eo pity. # Heb. they are not, either 1. His friends are not, to wit, 
what they pretended to be, friends to him. Or, 2. Their words 
are vain, and without effe& ; there is no reality in them. 

8 He that getteth | wiſdom, loveth his own ſoul & ; 


he that keepeth underſtanding x ſhal find good y. 

# Or leveth himſelf,becauſe he procures great good to his Soul, or 
to himſelf, as it follows, as ſinners on the contrary are ſaid to hete 
their Souls, Prov. 29. 24+ becauſe they bring miſchief upon them, 
x Thar obſerveth and carefully practiſeth its precepts, as that Phraſe 
is commonly uſed, y Sha) have great benefit by it, both for his 
conduct in this Life, and for his happineſs in the next. 

9 A falſe witneſs [bal not be unpuniſhed, and be that 


ſpeakethlies ſhal periſh z. 

z This was ſaid before, v. 5- and ſeems to be here repeated, ei- 
ther for its great uſe and weight in humane ſociery, and to ſhew 
how much God abhors ſuch practices 3 or to ſhew the pernicious 
effects of this ſin, and conſequently of all other ſins, one eminent 
kind being pur for all the reſt, and this in oppoſition to the good et- 
fecrs of Wiſdom or Piety, which he declared in the foregoing verlſc 

10 * Delight is not ſeemly for a fool b ; much leſs 


FFcl1o6- ; 
*Ch.z0.22 * fora ſervant c to have rule over princes 4. 

Ecclio,7. # To livein Pleaſure, and Plenty, and outward Glory. 6 It doth 
-- not become him, nor ſuit with him 3 partly becauſe Proſperity cor- 
rupts even wiſe men, and makes fools mad ; and partly becauſe it 
ives him more opportuninty to diſcover his folly, and to do miſ- 
chief both to himſelf and others. He implies thata rod or puniſhe 
ment is fitter for him than pleaſure, as is noted, Prov. 10. 13. & 26. 
3. c Who is of a ſervile condition and diſooſition, not much dif- 
fering from a Fool; who is a ſervant to his Luſts, and wholly unfir 
to rule other men. 4 7. e. Over men of better quality than himſelf: 
for ſervants are commonly ignorant, and when they are advanced 

they grow inſolent, and preſumpruous, and intolerable: | 
*Chi4.29, ix * The ||diſcretion of a man deferreth'his anger, 


lOr, 2r%- and it is his glory to paſs over a tranſgreflion e. 

dence, e This is oppoſed to the perverſe judgment of wordly men who 
account it folly and ſtupidity, not quickly to reſent a provocation, 

n and a diſhonour and reproach not to revenge it. _ 

Ch.16.14 T2 * The King's wrath is as | the roaring ofa lion, 


o——_p 6 but his favour 5s as | dew upon the grals. | 
flrribe 13 A fooliſh ſon is thecalamity of his father, * and 
«. the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping f. 

f Accepta= F Are like rain continually dropping upon.an houſe which by 
ble © com- degrees marreth the Houſe and Huſhold tuff, and driveththe inha- 
firtable 47, bitants out of it. He compareth her to a continual dropping, becaule 
Ch.10- 1. of that inſeparable Union and neceſſary cohabitation of Husband 
&15.20.8 and Wife to rether, notwithſtanding ſuch contentions. 


*Ch. 14.20 


{Heb, an 
heart, 


«(2225 14 Houle and riches are the inheritance of fathers, 
0 &:512 and * « prudent wife is from the LORD g. 


*Ch,18.22 £ Is vouchſaved to a man by the ſingular providence of God, who 


towards another. _. A | a 
DAE 15 Slothfulneſs caſteth into a deep ſleep b, and an, 
Ch.10.4. idle ſoul ſhal ſuffer * hunger. : 
?0, 13» þ Maketha man careleſs and negligent, and like one aſleep in 
his buſineſs, whereby he cometh to want, as it follows. | 
tos, 16 * He that keepeth the commandment s, keepeth ' 
2841.28, hjs own ſoul ; but he that diſpiſeth his ways &, ſhal die. 
ji The commands of God, called by way of eminence the command- 
ment, as the Ward is oft uſed Emphatically for the word of God, as 
hath. been noted before. k Either 1. His own ways, by n-t taking 
heed to his ways, ſo asto order his Converſation aright. Or 2. The 
4, . Ways of God, who is underſtood in the former clauſe. 
Matio, T7 * He that hath pity on the poor, lendeth unto 


2$25:49 the LORD 7, and || that which he hath given will a 


2or,9,6,7 : : 
IOr, zj;, pay him again. Cn | 
dead, ] Who takes what is done to them as done to himſelf, becauſe it | 
is done to them whom God, as to this particular, nath put in his. 
| own ſtead, to be his receivers, and whom God hath in a peculiar 
VOh 12» , INANNET commended ro the care and charity of all other men. | 
32+ 18 * Chaſtenthy fon while there is hope »z, and let ! 


23, bl o 
lOr,zo his not thy ſoul ſpare »|| for his crying 0. : 
Uefrufion, m Before cuſtom in fin, and thy indulgence hath made him hard- 


bimrs dis corre&tion. o Which oft ſtirs up a fooliſh and pernicious pity .nPa- 
points, is uſed in this ſenſe, Iſa. 14. 11. Or, as it is in the margent, 


©o expoſe him to that death threatned to ſtubborn Sons, Veut, 21s» 


P ROY ETD ; 


is the only Searcher and Ruler of hearts, exactlydiſcerning who ate | 
prudent or pious, in which even wiſe mens judgments are come | lin through ignorance, and imprudence,and infirmity, being poſſib« 


monly miſtaken, and inclining the minds and hearts of perſons one ' Iy drawn to fin by the icorners evil counſel or example. 4 A ver. 


the mouth of the wickeddevoureth iniquity 0. 


Or, r6 cauſe hearted and incorrigible- » Forbear not to give him due & neceſfary | Judgment, but in ſpight of all gives in x falſe Teſtimony. o Utter= 


> rents towards them. This word, with ſome ſmall difference in the þ yuan: wt 5 


to his defrufior,intimating that this 1s a cruel pity, .and a likely way, Fr - | 
or the back of fools, 


4 
4 


| 
5 


22 The deſire of a man y is his kindneſs, and a poor 


man 2 5s better than a liar 4. - ET. 
7 Either 1. ofany or every man.All men defire, and it is deſire« 
able to be in a capacity of being kind and bountiful to others, where« 
by they gain love and honour, and many other ' great advantages. 
Or 2. ot the poor man, expreſſed in the next Clauſe, The hearty 
will or deſire of being kind or liberal to others in neceflity is all the 
kindnefle which a poor Man can ſhew,and is accepted by God, and 
ſhould be owned by men as a real kindneſs. Compare 2. Cor. 8. 12; 
Or 3. of therich Man, as may be gathered from the oppoſition of 
this Man to the poor Man in the following Clauſe ; ſuch Elipſes 
being very common in this Book, as hath been nored again and a 
gain. So the ſenſe may be this, There be a ſort of rich men all whoſe 
kindneſs & charity conſiſts in good deſires & well-wiſhes to Perſons 
in miſery, ſaying #0chem depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, but not 
giomg them thoſe things which are neeaful, as it is expreſſed, Jam 2.16. 
And this ſenſe ſeems to agree very well with the following Clauſe: 
Burt being ſingular in this expoſition, I ſubmit it to the judicious 
Reader. z Who is not able to give what he deſires to do. Than 
a rich Man who feeds the poor with good words and fair promiſes; 
but doth not perform what he pretends, and is able todo. 

23 The fear ofthe LORD renderbto life, 8 he that hath 
it ſhal abide ſatisfied 5 ; he ſhal not be viſited with evil c, 

b Shal want nothing, . and ſhal be fully contented with God's fa- 
your and bleſſing. c With any deſtructive afflition, 

24 * A ſlechful mar hideth his hand.in bis boſom 4, 

and will not ſo muchas bring it to his mouth again e. © 5. 

4 Either to keep it warm in cold Weather : Or, to give it reſt, | 
—_ _ ir - with the _— of _ Ic is a far» | 
Caltial Hyperbole. e lo wit, to feed hymielf; he expe it the 
Meat ſhould drop into his Mouth. Ds $: "Y Eg > 

35 * Smite aſcorner f, and the ſimple g + will be- *Ch.2 +, 

ware ; and reprove on that hath uriderſtanding,av4 he t Heb. 
will underſtand knowledge 6. | wu 

F #:n obſtinate and impudentTranſgreffor,who rejeQs and ſcorng. 
all admonitions,and therefore is to be taught with blows. g Who 


4 
'Y 
'F 
©'Þ 
[i 
14 
'F 
'£ 


*Ch.1 5 
& 26, 


al reproof will be more effectual for his reformation than the ſe. 
vereſt puniſhments will be to a ſcorner. - - | F 
' 26 He that waſteth bs father ;, and chaſeth away 
his mother &, is a fon thac cauſeth ſhame, and brings 
eth reproach /, Ew ok x 
z i. e, His Fathers eſtate by unjuſt or riotous courſes. & Cauſeth 
her to avoid and abhor his preſence and ſociery,and to go from the 
Houſe where he 1s. 1 Both to himſelf and to his Parents and Family. 
But this Verſe may very well be rendred otherwiſe, the laſt words 
being made the ſubjeQ of the Propoſition, 2s is uſual in Scripture. 
A Son that cauſeth ſhame an d bringeth reproach ( upon himſelf and his 
friends oy wicked ways ) waſfteth his Fathers ( eſtate and health and. 
comfort ) and chaſeth or drivcth away his Mother. Theſe are the &f 
f:&s of his wickedneſs. 

27 Ceaſe, my ſon,to hear the inftruction that cauſ- 
eth toerr from the words of knowledge m.. . pe 
m If thou haſt formerly, yet do not now any .longer . hearken tg. 
thoſe falſe. DoQrines or evil counſels which tend to withdraw thee j 

from the belief or praftice of Gods holy Word. | : 
q f Heb. | 


28 f An 1ingodly witneſs ſcorneth j mink 
Belial. 


—_ 


| udgment », an 


z Hath no reverence to.the place of Juſtice, - nor to the preſence, 
ef God there, nor to that Sacred and Solemn Work of executing 


eth with as great greedineſs, and delight and eaſe. as they ſwallow 
eats and Drinks. Compare Job 15. 16, * | 
29 Judgments are prepared p for ſcorners,and ftripes 


5H 4 ? Either 


' 
tit 

44 $4 
1 


" 
'T 


. 
XX. 

p Either by men, or at feaſt by God ; although *rhey be deferred 
for a time, yet they are ereaſured up for them, and thal infalibly 
be inflicted upon them. 


CiZSAP. XX. X 
Ine is a mocker #, ſtrong drink is raging b, and 
whoſoever is deceived thereby is nor wiſe c. 

# Wine immoderately drunk makes men mockers or ſcoffers at 
God and men, Compare Ho/. 7. 5. & Makes men full of rage and 
paſſion. «c Is a Fool, or a mad Man, becauſe he depriveth himſelf 
of the uſe of his reaſon, 

2 * The fear ofa King 4's as the roaring of a lion, 


16.i4 Whoſo provoketh him to anger, ſinneth againſt his own 


9, 12- LOUl EC 

d Paſſively taken, the terror which the wrath of a King cauſeth, 
by comparing this with Ch. 19, 12. e Expoſeth himſelt to mani- 
feſt danger of Death. : 

3 * It is an honour to @ man to ceaſe from ſtrife f; 


but every fool will be medling g. 

f Either to prevent it, or, if it be begun, to put an end to it : 
which, although proud and prophanc Perſons eſteem dithonourable 
to them, is indeed their glory, becauſe it is an evidence of their 
great wiſdom and power over their paſſions, and of their reſpe& 8& 
obedience to theirSoveraign Lord,in which their Honour and Hap- 
pineſs conſiſts. g To wit, with matters of ſtrife ; he is always ready 
to begin ftrife, and obſtinate in the continuance of it. 

4 * The ſluggard will not plow by reaſon of the 
[| cold þ ; therefore ſhal he begin harveſt, and have no- 
g 4. 

þ Of the Plowing ſeaſon, which is in Autumn and towards Win- 
ter, He hates and avoids all laborious and difficult work, although 
his own neceſlity and intereſt oblidge him to its 7 And not obtain 

an Alms; notin that time of Plenty and bounty, becauſe mens 
| Hearts are juſtly hardened againſt that Man who by his own {ſloth 
and wilfulneſs hath brought himſelf ro want. 

5 * Counſel & in the heart of man. ;s /ike deep Wa- 


ter /; but a man of underſtanding will draw it out ”. 

k Either r. Wiſdom or ability to give good Counſel. Or 2. De- 
ſigns or purpoſes of doing ſomething of moment : for this word is 
frequently uted in both ſenſes, but the laſt ſeems fitteſt here, / Ei- 
ther 1. isthere in great abundance. Or 2. is ſecret and hard to be 


- 2d 
YL 


7-14. 


10.4. 


» Wine 


18. 4; 


gent Obſervation ofthis words and aGtions. | 
6 Moſt men will proclaim every one his own || good- 
bounty neſs n 3 but a faithful man # who can find p? 
| » Moſt men are forward to profeſs Religion, and to ſpeak of their 
own good deeds. o One who is indeed what he ſeemeth and pro- 
fellerh himſelf ro be» p There are but few fuch to be found. 
7 The juſt mar walketh in his integrity 9 ; * his chil- 
112.» dren are bleſſed afcer him 7. 
 ****  q He proveth himſelf to be ſo not only by his profeſſion, of 
which he ſpoke in the former Verſe, but by his ſincere and unblame- 
able converſation.  » By virtue of that Covenant which God hath 
made with ſuch men, which is not confined to their Perſons, bur 
- entaileth Blefſings upon their Poſterity. : 
| 8 A King thac ſitteth in the throne of judgement 5, 
— ſcattereth away all evil : with his eyes s. 
©*'2 F£ That makes it hisgreat care and buſineſs to executeJudgement & 
Juſtice among his People, eſpecially if he do this in his own Per- 
fon, as was uiualin ancient Times, and ſees things with his own 
/ Eyes.. As for the Phraſe, thu ſign or geſture is here put for the thing 
ſignified by it. £ EffeQtually puniſheth and ſuppretleth all wickeds 
* "nefs. uWith his very looks,or by his diligent inſpeQion into affairs. 
in8.46 9 '*"Who can fay x, I have made my heart ciean, I 
xr-6.36 am pure from my ſin y ? 
14- 4+ x No Man living npon Earth can fay this truly and ſincerely. 
FI. 5. Compare 1 Kings 8. 46. & Job 14+ 4. & 15. 14. Ecdleſ. 7. 20. 1 
4-7-20. Joh. it. 8. y lam perfcQly free from all guilt and filthof fin in my 
>h 1.8. hearrand Life. | F ; 
4 bh * 10 *+ Divers weights, and + divers meaſures z, both 


ar. 25, Of them are aliks abominationto the LORD. 
&c. * z One greiter and true for publick ſhew, and one leffer and falſe 


x. r. for Private uſe, when they had an opportunity of deceiving- 
£.16.1 * Is Even a Child is known by his doings «, whether 


be + his work 6 be pure, and whether js be right. 

me. Young Childrendiſcover their inclinations or diſpoſitions even 
by their childiſh ſpeeches and carriages, as not having yet learnt 
the art of diſſembling. b Or rather will be : for it is nor expreſſed 
in the Hebrew, and therefore may be either way ſupplied. The 
ſenſe is, Thefurure diſpoſition and converſation of a Man may ve- 
xy probably beconjeQured from his childiſh manners. 

4 11.42 * The hearing ear, and the ſeeing eye, the LORD 
9+: 9 hath made even both of them ec. 

-c It is God alone who gives us our Senſes, and Natural Facul- 
ties, and the uſe and exerciſe of them, and eſpecially a power of 
employing themaright to ſee and obſerve the works of God, & to 
hear, & receive his Word and all whoſome inſtruftions. Whence he 
leaves it to-us to gather, that God doth exaQtly ſee and hear all mens 
words, and ations though never ſo ſecret» He names the Eye, and 
Ear, becauſe theſe are the two Senſes by which inſtruftions are cone 
veyed to the mind : but under them he ſeems to comprehend all 
other ſenſes'and powers of Soul or Body, by a Synecdoche. 

+ 13 * Love not ſleep 4,leſt thou come to poverty : 0- 
. pen thine eyes.e; and thou ſhalt be ſatisfied with bread. 
d i.e. Immoderate fleep, or ſloth or idleneſs; Take fleep 'be- 
cauſe neceſfiry requires it, not from any love to it. s Awake out 
of ſleep, ſhake off ſloth and berake thy ſelf ro thy employment with 
diligence and vigor. | 
14 It is naughtf, 
when he'is gone his way þ. then he boaſteth 3. 
f The commodity is but of little worth. g To wit to the Seller : 


Jeb. an 
and 


[Epbah. 


FERMTY7S KBS 


he diſcomends it that he may bring down the price of it. þ With 
the commodity purchaſed. i That by his wit he hath over: reach- 
ed the Seller, and got a great advantage to himſelf, This he notes 
as a Common bur reproveable prittice, _ q ; 
Is There is gold &, and a multitude of rubies, but Ch. xi, 
* the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel 7. 68 6 
& Te wit in the World, in divers mens hands, by whom it is high- 
ly prized, / But wiſe ſpecches proceeding from an underſtand- 
ing or honeſt Heart are of far greater worth and uſe, both to him 
that uttereth them, and to thoſe that receive and improve them to 
their own benekit. "Y 
I6 * Take his garment ” that is ſurety for a ftran- *Ch.22.27 
ger 2; and takea pledge of him s» foraſtrange woman p. © *7: 13: 
m To wit, as a pledge,without which he ought not to be truſted 
becauſe by this a&ion he ſheweth himſelf to be a Fool, and he tak- 
eth the ready way to beggery. Obj. This precept contradi&s that 
Law which torbad the taking of a Garment for a Pledge, Exod. 22. 
26:4nſw. It doth not contradi& it,for the caſes vaſtly differ;for that 
Law concerned only the poor,who were forced to borrow for their 
own neceſlity, and theretore deſerve pity ; whereas this reacheth 
only thoſe who are or would be thought rich and ſufficient Secu- 
rity for others, and who borrow not for their own need, but for a 
meer Stranger: for which folly they deſerve tobe ſeverely puniſhed. 
Beſides, this may be only a PrediCtion, though 1t be delivered in 
the form of a Precept, as many prediCtions are 5 and ſo ſhews what 


diſcovered. m By prudent Queſtions and Diſcourſes, and a dili- 


LORD 


may be expeCted by him that is guilty of ſuch folly, even that he 
| ſhal be ſtripped of his Garments and other neceffaries. »n For a For- 
| Teigner or a Perſon unknown to him- o That is ſurety : which 
| words are to be underſtood out of the foregoing Clauſe. p For an 
' Harlot, who 1s ſo called, Prov. 2: 16. and elſewhere. 

17 * f Bread of deceit q is {weet to a man, 


terwards his mouth ſhal be filled with gravel 7. 
9 Gain or pleaſure procured by unrighteous courſes. r It ſhall bread of ly« 
e bitrer and pernicious at laſt, like gritty Bread which offends the 75; 1 
; Teeth & Stomach: It will certainly bring upon him the horrors of a falſpocd,) 
' guilty Conſcience,& the wrath and judgments of the Almighty God 'Ch 
' 18 * Every purpoſe is eſtabliſhed by counſel s, and "Chas 6 


# * with good advice make war. 

s The way to bring our purpoſes and deſires to a good effeR, is 
to manage them with ſerious conſideration and good advice. t Or, 
therefore, This is neceſſary in every common undertaking,and much 
more in a thing ef ſuch high importance as War is. | 
| 19 * He that goeth about as a tale-bearer, revealeth 
ſecrets « ; therefore x meddle not with him that || flat- 


tereth with his lips z. 

z He that delighteth in and accuſtometh himſelf to the praftice of 
ſpreading Tales or evil Reports, will not forbear to publiſh the 
greateſt ſecrets which are committed ro his truſt. Or, as others 
render it, and as the words lie in the Hebrew Text, He that revealeth 
ſeerets ( contrary to his promiſe or the truſt repoſed in him, you 
| may by that token be aſſured that ) he doth and will go about as 8 
| Tale-bearer, He who divulgeth fecrets cannot or will not forbearto 
| publiſh other things, and ſo is nor fit to be truſted with any thing, 
x To prevent that miſchief, Heb. and So the folfowing Sentence 
isnot inferred from the former, but only added to it. y Avoid 
frequent and familiar fociety and converſation with him. z By which 
artifice he ſeeks to gain thy affe&i-ons, and ſo to fiſh out all thy ſe- 
crets, which he may impart to others whom he may oblidge here- 
by, and ſo render his company more acceptable. 

20 * Whoſo curſeth his father or « his mother, his «py; 
|| lamp b ſhal be put out in obſcure darkneſs c. Lev.20:9. 

a Heb. and ; which is uſed for or, Exod. 12; 5. Levit. 6. 3. and Mat.15,4. 
elſewhere. b His comfortand happineſs, his Name and Memory [|Or, Caz- 
which are oft compared in Scripture toa Lamp or Lightt & Shall dle. 
utterly periſh ; he ſhal die childleſs, and with Tgnominy. 

21 * An inhericance may be gotten haſtily ar the be- +cy, .g.z0 
=inning 4; but theend thereof shal not be bleſſed e. 

d An Eſtate ſometimes is got ſuddenly in the very beginning of a 
Man's labours for it, in which caſe it may be preſumed that ſome 
undire& and unrighteous courſes were uſed, for the getting of it, 
becauſe Riches are. very ſeldom given by God, or gotten by men, 
without mens diligence.But this,as well as many otherProverbs,are 
to be underſtood of the common courſe, although it admit of ſome 
exceptions, For ſometimes Merchints or others get great Eſtates 
ſpeedily by one happy Voyage, or by ſome other proſperous event. 
This Tranſlation follows the Hebrew Marginal reading, butaccor- 
ding to the Textual reading, it may be thus rendred and unders- 
ſtood. An Inherit ance gotten in the beginning ( to wit, of a mans en= 
deavours ) is abominable, to wit, unto God, being ſuppoſed to be 
unjuſtly gotten, as was now faid. c Art laſt it ſhal be curſed and 


but af- *Ch.g.; 
T Heb: 'y 


SEES 


*Ch: 11; 
[|Or, intice 
eth. 


wither by God's juſt judgment. ; *Deur.32, 
22 * Say not thou f, I will recompenſc evil ; but wait =. 
et /< 38 


on the LORD, and he $hal fave thee. "agg 
F In thy Heart © give not way to any ſuch evil Thoughts or R «32.69. 

Purpoſes. g To whom it belongs to execute vengeance, and to |ph.f 5, 

deliver his People from all their Enemies. __ : 

* Divers weights are an abomination unto the |, p«; 3. 95. 


h, and þ a falſe ballance is not good 3, *Ver. 10. 
h Of which ſee above on v. 10. #«. Is very wicked and hateful tHeb-hal- 
to God and men. Lancts 0 
24 * Man's goings & are of the LORD 7; how can cw: 
a man then underſtand his own way w ? 6-4 L 
k All mens purpoſes and aftions. 1 Are ordered and over-ruled 
by God's wiſe & powerful Providence to accompliſh his own counſel 
and good pleaſure, and not what men liſt or intend. #2 Either 1. 
what courte he ought totake; which he cannot know withoutGod's 
dire&ion and affiſtance, Compare Pro. 16. 9. Fer. 10. 23+ Or 2. 
what the iſſue of his deſigns will be, whether they ſhal ſucceed 
or be diſappointed ; the way being taken for the end or event to. 


it is naughe ſaith the buyer g, but | 


which it leads, as it is in many other places, The ſcope of the ' 
Proverb is to ſhew, that all the events of humane life are neither or- 


dered nor foreſeen by Man's, but only by God's Providence, and , 
therefore | 


Chap. XX 


Chap. 


Pl:ro1 
F, @ Go 
Vers 3 


07, lamp 


'Miorr 
(h:29: 14 


(i6:3r. 


Heb: i 
Vrgrn 
hs 
faſt cv;1, 


Os % 
£5 I , 
of © 


Chap. XXT. FF - 

therefore men ſhould only mind the doing of their duty, and then 

quietly depeny UPON God for a good Iſſac to their end-avours. : 
25 It is a ſnare » tO the man who devoureth that which 


is holy o and after vows to make enquiry p. 
1 It brings guilt and God's curſe and vengeance upon him. 0 2: e: 
Thoſe Meats or drinks which were devoted or conſecrated to God, 


Sacre or dedicared things from Gd to a Man's private uſe or bene- 
fir : Of which ſee Lev: 27. 9. Dent: 23: 21, Mal: 3:8, go As 5: 1. 
&c. p Aﬀer man hatii made Vows to conſider whether he can 
poſſibly, or may lawfully keep them and to invent or enquire of 0- 
thers all ways poſſible to break his Vow.and to ſatisfie or deceive his 
Conſcienc? mm fo doing. Which enquiry is juſtly cenſured as a lin and 
{nare,becauſc it is an evidence of a covetous or irreligious Mind,& 
is the ready way and firſt ſtep rowards the open violation of 1t. 

26 * A wiſe King q ſcattereth r the wicked, and 
bringeth the wheel over them s. 

q Who ſeriouſly minds his Duty and his true intereſt. » Breaks 
their Companies and Confederacies,and forceth them to flee levera' 
ways for their own ſafety ; driverh them from his preſence,and from 
the Society of honeſt men,as the Chaff is by the Husbandman lepa- 
rated from the Corn, and driven away by the wind, of which this 
Hebrew word is commonly uſed; and to which the next Clauſe hath 
ſome reference. 5 As the Cart- wheel was anciently turned overthe 
Sheaves to beat the Corn out of them, 1ſa: 28: 27, 28. He puniſheth 
them ſeverely, as their offences deſerve. This or ſuch like puniſh 
ments were not unuſual among the Eaſtern Nations, as we may ga- 
ther from, 2 Sam: 8: 2. & 12; 31. Amos 1. 3. 

27 The ſpirit : of a man zs the || candle « of the 


LORD x, ſearching all the inward parts of the belly y. 

f 1: e; The reaſonable Soul, « Is a clear and gloricus light ſet vp 
in Man for bis information and direCtion. x $o called partly becautc 
it comes from Gud in a more immediate and peculiar manner thar. 
the Body doth, Eccleſ. 12: 7« and partly becaule it is in God's ſteac 
to obſerveand judge all a mansa&ions y» Diſcerning not only his 
outward aftions, which are viſible to others, bur his moſt 1award 
and ſecret thoughts and affeftions, which no other man caa fee, 1 
Cor: 2. 11. The bellyis here pur for the Heart as it is frequently. The, 
Soul can refle& upon and judge of irs own diſpoſitions and ations, 
Which plainly ſheweth thar the H-art is nor ſo deceitful, bur chat a 
Man by diligent ſtudy of it, and the uſe of the means appointed by 
God, may arrive at 2 certain knowledge of its ſtate and condition, 
in reference to God, and to Salvation. 

28 * Mercy & and truth # preſerve the king 6b, and 
his throne is upheld by mercy c. 

z Clemency ro Offenders, and bounty to worthy,and to indigent 
Perſons. # Faithfulneſs in keeping his Word and Promiſes inviola- 
bly. 6 Beczuſe they engage God 70 guard hin,and gain hi." the 
reverence and aff:Qions of his Peop'e, which is a King's greateſt 
ſafety and happineſs. c Which is again mentioned, ro ſh:w taat 
although it be an a& of Grace, and taer-fo-s in ſome ſort tree, yet 
Princ«s are obliged to it bori by their duty,and by their intereſt, ve- 
cauſe it is a ſingular means of their preſervation. 

29 The glory ot voung men 4 is their ſtrength ; and 
* the beauty of old men zs the gray bead e. 

a That wherein they glory as their Privil:dge above old. men. 
e i: e: Their old Age expreſſcd by the outward fign of it, wherein 
they glory as their peculiar Priviledge, as a T<ſtimony of rheir 
Piery and Gods Bleſſing and as a rok=n of their great experienc: 
and wiſdom: The deſign of this Proverb 1s to dec'are the fevers] 
advantages of ſevera] Ages and the murual need they have on: of 
another,and thereby to engage them to mutual love aid aſſiſtince, & 
to friendly converſe,and to make every one contented with his own 
Age and Condition, and not to envy nor yer deipiſe his Brother, 
or the difference of their Ages, as is very uſual among men. 

20 The bluenefs of a wound f F cleanſerh away evil 

g; ſo ds ſtripes þ the inward parts of che belly 3. 

f Grievous wounds which make men black & +!ew,or ſevere pu. 
niſhments.g Are the moſt effeQtual means to reclaim a wicked Ma, 
and to purge out his corruption. þ H-b, and ſtripes, which anſwer 
to the wourd: in the former Clauſe. #i Erther rv. Which pierc2 even 
to the inward. parts of tte Beily, and to ws are ro underſtand out 
of the former Branch, cl:anſe away evil. Or 2. They c!canſe the 
inward parts of the Belly, 7: e: of the Heart So this is an addition 
to the' former Clauſe, and the ſenſe of r1e whole is, Grierous 
wounds or ftripes 4o cleanſe not only the outward Man by keeping 
at from al evi] afti-ns,. bur even -he inward Man, by expeilin 
or ſubduing vile affeQtions. Which is mentioned as a great and bleſ- 
ſed benefit of afflitions. 

CHA P; XXL 
He kings heart « js in the hard of the LORD, as 
the rivers of water b; he turneth it c whitherſo- 
ever he will 4. 

s His very inward purpoſes and inclinations, which ſeem to be 
moſt in a Man's own power, and out of the reach of aii orhers, and 
much more his Tongue and Hand, and all his ourward aftions, He 
names kings not to exclude other men, but becauſe they xre more 
arbitrary and uncontrollable than other men. 5 Which Husband- 
men or Gardiners can draw by little Channels into the adjacent 
grounds as they pleaſe,, and as their occaſions require. - c Dire&:th 
and boweth,partly by ſuzgeſting thoſe things to their Minds which 
have a commanding influence upon their wills, and partly by a di- 
ret and immediate motion of therr wills and aff:Fions, which being 
Gods Creatures muft needs beas ſubje&to his power and pleaſure as 
either mens Minds or Bodies are, and which he moves ſweerly and 
ſuitably to th<ir own Nature, though ſtrongly an! effeQually, 4 
So as they ſhall fulfill his counſels and deſigns, cither of Mercy or 
of Corre&ien to themſelves, or to their People. 


Pal:roT: 
g, © 6e 


Vers 3* 


0, lamp: 


'Mfaour. 
1 (h:29; 14. 


Uhi6:3r. 


Heb: i 
Vurging 
Miting Ae 


juſt cv;1, 


the LORD pondereth the hearts e. 

e This was ſaid, Chap, 16. 2, where it is hereexplained,and is here 
repeated, either for the grear importance and uſcfulneſs of it,cr be- 
Cauſe he perceived thit the I1ſ-aclites were very prone to ſelf-deceit. 


Under which one kind he comprehends and forbidsall alienation of | 


2 Every way of a man is right in his owneyes ; but 


BE R284 


3 * Todo juſtice and judgment f, is more acceptable *:Samgt 
to the LORD than ſacrifice g. ny RANMIY: | 
| f The conſcientious performance of all our duties to men.g Than Chap.1e' yl; | 
| the moſt coſtly. outward ſervices offered to God, joyned with tie a:t1,O gf | 
i neglect of our Moral duties to God or men. The fame thiog is af- £29!: 6 6} 
firined, Tt Sam. "5: 22: Hoſ. 6.6. Mic: 6, 7, 8, &c. - Nl! 
4 * + An high look b, and a -proud heart 3, and ||the —_ We || 
piowing & of the wicked, 3s ſin /. "ol 
þ One geſture or ſign of Pride pur for all the reſt: Prov. 6. 17: of eyes. | 
z Pride lurking and reigning in the Heart. though it do not diff | Or 246 
cover it ſeif to men by outward aCions,but be diſguiſed with a ſhew ,;,», of : | 
of humility, as ir 1s frequently. & Either r. ſtritly and properly 4.4 | 
ſo called : cven their civil or natural Aﬀtions, which in themieives 
are lawiu] and good, are made finful as they are managed by un« 
vodly men, without any regard to the ſervice and giory of God, 
which ought to be the great end of all our aQtions, 1 Cor. 10. 31.and 
with a deſign of ſerving their own wicked Juſts by it. Or 2. Meta- 
phorically, their deſigns and endeayours which are ſaid to be fin, 
><cauſe they are wholly and fully ſet upon ſin, and they make fin 
their trade or buſineſs, which is called Plowing wickedneſs, Job 4. 8. 
Bur all the antient Interpreters, and divers other render the word 
the Lamp or Light, as this Hebrew word, even thus. pointed, is ren= 
dred, 1 Kings 11, 36. & t5.4. 2 Kings 8: 19; 2 Chren: 21, 7. and 
the Lamp of the wicked 18 a phraſe uied in this Book, Chap. 13. 9. 
& 24. 20. asalſo Jeb 21317. whereas the Plowing of the wicked is 2 
Phrate not elſewhere uſed. And this ſeems beſt ro agr:e with the 
Context, for by their Lamp be ſeems to underſtand all their pomp 
ind glory. that worldlyGreatneſs and Proſperity,which is the Few-= 
I of their Pride. and therefore is moſt firly joyned with it. Ir is 
by them turned info fin, and made the occaſion of mvch wicked= 
neſs The whole Verſe may be thus rendred, 4» high look, and a 
proud Heart, which is the Light or Glory of the wicked, :: e: wherein 
they glory, eſteeming it magnanimiry or gallantry of Spirit ) is/# 
z: e: 1S a great and grievous ſim» And in this manner the learned 
Mercer tenders the Verſe, fave only that he tranſlates the Hebrew 
word. Nir, the Plowing. | 
5 * The thoughts of the diligent »2 tend only to 


plenteouſneſs ; but of every one hat is haſty », only to 
want 8, 


» Who carefully and induftriouſly profecutes what he hath wiſe» 
ly contrived and reſolved. » Who manageth his affairs raſhly with- 
out due conſideration, # Is likely ro bring himſelf to poverty. | = 

6 * The getting of treaſures by a lying tongue p is a *Ch:r1o: 2| 
vanity toffed too and fro qofthem that ſeekdeathr., & 23: 113 

p By falle-witneſs-bearing. or by any other filie or deceitful | 
words or ations, whereby many men get riches, 9 Is like the 
Chaffor Smoke, driven away by the Wind ; ir is n«ither farisf &o= 
ry nor durable, but quickly vaniſherh away,as hath been frequent= 
ly obſerves of Eftates ill gotren. r Nor defignedly but eventually, 
that take thoſe courſes which will bring Death or Deſtru&:on upon 
them oc theirs. = 

7 The robbery of the wicked ſhall | deſtroy theri1 /, #Heb. ſaw 
becauſe they refuſe to do judgment x. __—_— 

s The injury which they do te others ſhal either by God or men be twelY HY 
returned upon their own heads. # They wilfully and obſtinatly give ——_ 
up themſelves to unrighteous prathices. 

8 The way «of man x 1s froward and ſtrange y ; but 
as for the pure, his work is right z. 

u The courſe of his Life: x Of everyMan; of Man by Nature 
and im his corrupt eſtate; of a wicked or impure man, to whom the 
pure1s oppoſed 1a the next clauſe. y Eftranged from God and from 
Man's primative Integrity, and from the rule of his attions,Reaſrn 
and Scripture ; in which reſpeC&ts wicked men are called ffrangers, 
Pſal: 54. 3. Exek: 44. 7. and elſewhere. z But he whoſe Hzart is 
pure and upright, his converſation is agreeable to ir. Die | 

9 * Itis better to dwell z ina corner ofthe houſe, top * Verſitg: 
b, than with + a brawling woman in a + wide houſe c, Chi19-13- 

# Towit, alone in quietneſs,as appears from the oppoſite Clouſe, F255 24: 
b Of the roof of the Houle, which in thoſe Countries was flat and & 29. x5: 
plain and habitable, but was expoled to all the injuries of the Wea- \Heb. 
ther. c Or, in s common Houſe, or, an Houſe of  Sccicty, where hus- woman of 
band ar. d Wife live together, or which 1s capable ofmany Friends © f*n10ns.. 
or Companies. 7 Heb. an 

10 The foul of the wicked defirethevild: his neigh "_ of Sve 
bour + findeth no favour in his eyes e, "_ 4.5 

d His Heart is fully and ezrneſtly ſer in him, as it is expreſſed f Heb. is 
Eecleſ: $. 11; to doevil, to work wick:dnefs, ro domiſchief to ortiers, net favou- 
ro fatishe his own 'ufts, though ir be with injury of others. eIfhe red 
either diſſuade him from his wickedneſs,. or itand in the way of his 
Luſts. He ſpares neicher friend nor fee. 

It * When the {corner is puniſhed, the fimple f is x 
made wiſe : and when the wiſe is inſtructed g, he re- 
ceiveth knowledge. 

f The honeſt or plainhearted man, as chap. 19: 25. where this 
whole verſe for the ſub{Fance of it is contained ard expliined. g Or, 
proſper, as this word is uſed, Prov; 17. 8. and elſewhere. So the 
ſenſe of the verſe is, the limple learn Wildom, borh from the pa- 
niſhmenr of wicked men, and from the proſpericy of good men. -- 

12 The righteous men wilely confidereth the houſe of 
the wicked þ; but ; God overthroweth k& the wicked for 
their wickedneſs. | 

b He looketh through its preſent Power and Glory ( which dozleth 
the eyes of others) unto thar ruine ro which it is d:ſigned. #- Or, 
now, orthat, this being che thng which he wiſely confidereth: & 
Or, wil! overthrow in his due time, though for 2 ſeaſon he bear with 


F 
1 
"n 


: 
7 

: 1 
: 1 


* Cho: 4 


a 


? - - , p 7 
I OT &r age «ROI; Wn YALE Bars l 
© 009259,  2—_we FREE Gs © P . . « 
6 ' | ” | p ; ; | SO JOM 
# "Ss o % bo ” RI # +BY 
"BO j74s, Ds + f FA 3 FO =—- CO AT 923 ROS 


Ch.19.2; 


hem. 
_ 13 * Whoſoſtoppeth his ears at the cry of the 
; he alſolhalcry himſelt 9, but ſhailnor be heard. 


1 When they cry out by rezſo1 of Opprefli n or want, and beg 
reliet from him, 2 Unto God or Men, 1a bis ftraics which Gud will 
bring upon him« : 

N, 


poor I, © Mar: 13* 
30, Os. 


14*Aa 


. -. IE. , ; 
Ch:178. 14 * A gift» in ſecret o pacifieth anger,and a reward 
x 18: 16-575 the boſom p, ſtrong wrath. . 

» To 2 p-r{on offended and angry with us,as the following words 
ſhew. » Which makes it more acceptable; for gifcs openly given 
favour of oftentation in the giver,and cauſe ſome ſhame or contempt 
to the receiver. þ Secretly conveyed info his boſom. See on Prov. 
17: 8: & 18: 16. a . E 

15 1r5s joy to the juſt 4 to do juUginent 7; 
ſtruction 5 ſhall be to the workers of iniquity. ; 

He is highly pleaſe4 and delighted with 


q The tenſe is either 1. ight: 
jit.Or 2 He reapeth much comfort and benefit by it, which 150ppo- 
fot matter or caule of joy 


ſed to th: following defrufion : joy 15 put | 0! 

7 To do what is juſt or good, for this is ovp>oſe.1 to working of ini- 
quity. 5 Or, as others render it. ferro? or horror, oppoſite ro Joy» 

16 The man that wandereth out of the way of un- 

h .derſtanding # ſhall F remain in the congregation of the 
fHeb:r2# dead uw. | = 

t That forſaketh the rule of Gods word,and walketh after his own 

Lufts, « Shall, withour R<pentance, be condemned to eternal 


 Dcath or Damnation. 
17 He that loveth || pleaſure x ſhall be a poor man y ; 


he that loveth wine and oil z ſhall not be rich. 

x That gives up himſelſto th2 purſuit and enjoyment of ſenſual 
and immoderare pleaſures. y Takes the ready courſe to Poverty. 
z Which are put for all dzlicious face and luxurious feaſting ; for 
Wine and Oil were much uſed in Feaſts in thoſe parts. 


- 
. 


18 * The wicked (hall be a ranſom for the righteous 


«, and the tranſgreſſor for the upright. pb 
a The wicked ſhall be brought into.thoſe rroubles which were e1- 
ther threatned by God, or deſigned by wicked men again& 
xighteous, and by that means, as by a ranſom, the righteous ſhall 
be delivered, Thus 4chan was a ranſom for Iſrael, Je. 7. 26. and 


Haman for Moraecai. : ; 
19 * It is better to dwell + in the wilderneſs, than 6 


with a contentious and angry woman. 
T7 bþ Underſtand, in a wide houſe, as it is expreſſed above, v: 9. and 
the land of as the: oppoſition kere requires. . 

the d:jart. 25 * There is a treaſure to be deſired, andoil in the 


*Pl:112:3::dwelling of the wiſe c : bur a fooliſh man ſpendeth it up. 
c Wiſe-men' lay up all nec:fAary and defirabie treaſures for their 
own uſe, and” for their Children, and Fainiliess Otis particularly 
mentioned, partly becauſe that was a conſiderable parr of their wealth 
and Treaſures in thoſe C-untrizs, of which ſee Deut: 7 13. & 28:40, 
51, Jug: 9:9: Mich: 7.5. &c. and partly to ſhew that his provi- 
dence reached not only to neceſſaties, buteven 10 matrers of juſt 
and lawful delight. 4 
21 He that followeth after 4 righteouſneſs and mer- 


cy e, findeth f life, righteouſneſs, and honour, | 

d Thir &rvently deſires, and diligently and conſtantly endea- 
vours ro attain to the:n,for ſuch ſhall and will certainly obtain them, 
e Livingvin_the conſtant exerciſe of theſe virtues. fShal obtain from 
'God, what is right and due-to him, either from Gd by vircue of 
his gracious promiſe, or from men, whoſe hearts God will diſpoſe 
co deat juſtly and kindly with him. 

22'* A wiſe man ſcaleth the city of the mighty g, and 
caſtech down the ſtrength of the confidence thereof h, 

z Wiſdom and policy is oft-times more conſiderable and powerfy] 
than ſtrength. hþ The ſtrongeſt forts ro which che Cirizens cruſt 
moſt for their defence. : 

'2 * Whoſo keepeth his mouth and his tongues keey- 
OTE) er fiis-foul & from troubles /. 
38. 2I* ; From offenſive and provoking ſpeeches. & His Perſon. 1 Which 
a licenrious and abuſive Tongue frequently brings upon a man. 
24 Proud and haughty fſcorner is his name », who 


+ Heb. i= dealeth + in proud wrath ». 

the wrath +; Th ſtead of that reſpect and glory which he ſeeks by ſuch cour- 

of Pride, ſes, he ſhall'be branded with the T:tle and Imputation of an arro- 
gant and ſcornſut perſon, which 1s moſt. contemptible and hateful 
to Mankind. » Who in the conduct of his Afﬀairs and dealings 
in the world,is not governed by reaſon and Juſtice, bur by his own 
Pride and Paſſions. 


25 * The defire of the flothful killeth him o: for his 


Ws... 
a hands refuſe to labour, | 
o Either 1, Tormenteth him almoſt to death, whilſt he p:ſfion- 
ately deſires that which he ſees he ſbal] not enjoy, and will not take 
Pains ro' procure. Or 2 Expoſerh-him to extream want, and foto 
death,or to ſuch wicked courſes for the ſupply of his wants,as bring 
kim ro an untimely death, 


26 He p covereth greedily all the daylong 9 : but the 


* righteous giveth and ſpareth not r. | 

p The flothful man mentioned in the laſt verſe. But becauſe the 
Verſes in this Book are for the moſt part independent one upon an- 
ther, this cluuſe is and+ may be otherwiſe rendred, T here is that 
coveteth, &c-. Or, the wick:d ( which may be underſtood from the 
oppoſition of the righteous in the next clauſe) coveteth, &c. 4 Spends 
his whole time in vain and lazy deſires, but will not Jabour to get any 
thing, either ro uſe himſt If, orto give to others. r By Gods Bleſe.' 
ſing upon his 4nduſtry he procures enough, not only for his own 
ſapporr, but alſo for the liberzl relief of others. 

27 * The facrince s of the wicked is abomination x : 
*Pl:5o: 9g, how much more whey « be bringeth 17 with awicked 
Chapas.8. mind x! | | 
Ifi; 66. 3. © 5 All the moſt glorious and c9ſtly ſervices which they offer to God 
Jr: 6: 20. 8 God Teje&s'and abhors them, becauſe they are offered by ſuch 
Amos 5. men, and in ſuch manner as God juſt'y abhors. « Or, becauſe as all 
22. the-untient Tranſliters render ic, the Hebrew particle, ap/, being 
T Heb: in expletive: Or,ever becauſe ; ſo 'ne following clauſe gives the reaſon 

* w.ck:aneſs. of the former Propolition. x With an ypocritical and impenitent 
Hear:.' or with a bad deſign, nor in, obed-ence ro Gods Command, 
and with reſpe& to his honour and ſervice, but enher to'cover, or 


but de- 


lOr, ſpore. 


*C:11:8. 


*Verf. 9. 
y + Heb: in 


* Ec:9:14:; 
&c. 


=, 
& 


*PFE1i2: 9: 


B R B S. 


countenance, or promote ſome wicked intention or courſe, which 
notwithſtanding all his profeſſions of Religion, he 1s reſolved to pros 
ſecure. | 


28 *+ A falſe witneſs y ſhall periſh z:; 


that heareth «a, ſpeaketh conſtantly b. 
» Heb. 4 witneſs of lies. one who is forward to ſwear or ſpeak faiſe 


nor {cen, but deviſed in his own heart. z Shall be feverely punt. 
ſhed either by God or Man, and ſhall be confounded and filenced, 
becauſe none will for the furure regard or credit his teſtimony. , 
He who hears before he ſpe.ik:,ard witneſleth nothing bur whar he 
hath heard or ſeen, and knows to be true. 6 Doth not contragie 
himſelf, but always affirmeth the ſame thing. Or, as moſt other 
Interpreters render the words, ſpeaketh ( or, may ſpeak, dare ſpeak 
freely and boldly _) for ever; when lyars are cur off, he lives, and 
15 in a capacity of ſpeaking and bearing wirnels again and again, ag 
roar oh requires, as long as be lives, and his Teſtimony will bere. 
ceived, | 
29 A wicked man hardeneth his face c : but as forthe 
upright, he || directeth his way d. 7 Or, con 
c Conrinueth in evil courſes with obſtinacy and impudence, in ©: 


the | 


ſpighr of all the Commands of God, or Counſels of Men. & He 
ordereth his ſteps aright, and if at any time he goeth awry,he doth 
not add Rebellion to his fin, nor pertiſt in his errour, bur conſider. 
eth his ways, and turneth his feer to Gods teſtimonies,as David did 
. Pſal. 119: 59. Or, confidereth his way, remembring with grief and 
_ whar he hath done, and taking better heed to himſelf for the 
uture. - 
30 *7here is no wiſdom,nor underſtanding nor coun- 
ſel againſt the LORD e. 
e Which can prevail againſt the Counſel and will of God? 
-- or * The norte 7 againſt the day of bat- . 
"tle: but* || ſafety 55 of che LORD go & ws 
: 217, 
f Under which particularall warlike proviſions are comprehended, * Pf: ,. g' 
£ Tae ſucceſs of rhe battle depends not upon any humane ſtrength [Or;vige. 
or art, but meerly upon Gods Providence, who gives the viftory 7», 
when and to whom he pleaſerh,and oft times to thole that have leaſt 
reaſon to expect it, ' Compare Eccleſ: 9: 1T. 
C 
Ecei 3 


H A P. XXIL 
A * good name a is rather to be choſen than great » 

L riches b, and || loving favour « rathec than filver jo, pak 
and gold. — better : 


a Heb. name put for gred name, as Ecileſ: 7: 2: the word gvod being then, &, 
eaſily underſtood out ofthe next clauſe,in which it is expreſſed in. 
the Hebrew text. A good reputation amongſt wiſe and good men. 6b 
Partly becaufc'ir is a moſt ſpecial bleſſing from God being appropria* 
ted ro worthy Perſons, whereas God commonly throws away Riches 
upon the baſeſt of men ; partly becaule it gives a man that tranquili- 
ty and fatisfaQtion of mind,and that content and comfort in his con» 
ditzon, which noRichescan'purchaſe: and partly becauſe as it is com- 
monly an evidence of a mans Virtue and Piety,ſfoit is accompanied 
with Gods Jove arid favour, whereas Riches are ofc given by God 
in wrath, and to the hurt of the owner. c Or, good Grace or Favour, 
a good Report among men, eſpecially among good men, and that 
hearty love and Kindneſs which attends upon ir. 


2 * The rich and poor meet together 4 ; the LORD "Chg 


z1 the maker of them all e. 
d Either 1.Ina way of hoſtility or oppoſition,as this word 15 ſome- 
times uſed, the rich contemning and opprefling the poor, and the 
poor envying and purloining from the rich, and ſo the following 
| words area reaſon why that hoſtility ſhould ceaſe. Or 2 In the way 
of mutual] converſe, they live together, and need one another. e 
Not only as they are men, but alſo as they are poor or rich,which 
difference comes wholly from Gods Providence. 'They have one 
Common Creator,and Lord,and Jadge, and the one cannot deſpiſe 
nor grudge at the other without a reflection upon God. 
* A prudent man forſeeth the evil f, and hideth 
himſelfg : but the fimple paſs on h, and are puniſheth, 
f The Calamity or Judgement of God threatned,and approaching. 
£ Retireth to his ſtrong Tower, mentioned Prov: 18. 10, by prayer 
and Repentance,putteth himſelfunder the Protection of the Almigh- 
ty. Compare 7/a: 26: 20. h In their former road and courſe of fin, 
careleſly and ſecurely, as Travellers do in a road where they ap- 


prehend no danger. | SAN | 
4 * || By humility 3,and the fear of the LORD &, are W i 
Or,there« 


riches, and honour, andlife/, 

5 Or, becauſe of humility: or,as many others render it, the reward of ward of hi 
humility, that reward which God hach graciouſly promiſed,and will mility.&& 
give to Humility ; which is a grace of great price in God's Eyes.See 
Iſa: 57: 15. Jam:4:6. k By which he diſtinguiſheth true and Chriſti- 
an Humility from counterfeit and moral humility, becauſe that 
ariſeth from a deep ſenſe of Gods greatneſs, and purity,and perfec« 
tion, compared with our meanneſs and filthineſs, and manifold im- 
perfeQions, whereasthis is quite ofanother nature, and from other 
grounds, ! The comforts of this life,and the happineſs af the nexr, 
beth which are promiſed to Godlineſs, 1 Tim: 4: 8. _ E”. 
5 Thorns and ſnares are in the way of the froward mr: 


he that doth keep his ſoul » (hal! be far from them. 

m The wicked by their evil courſes expoſe themſelves to many 
dangers and occaſions both offia and miſchief. » That taketh heed 
ro himſelf,and to his actions, and to the ſaving of his Liſe and Soul. 
0 Either 1, Will avoid the ſociety of ſuch froward' perſons. Or 
2.Shal by that circumſpection preſerve kimſelf from thoſe rhorns,&e, 
with which thepronoun, them, agrees ih number. 
6 || Train upp a child in the way he ſhould go 94, 
and when he is old, he willnot depart from ir r»' 
p'Or, initiate or infliruf#, q Heb. in, or according to his way , 5: e: chiſe. 


*Ter.g:23, 


P fal:20:y 


*Ch;14:16, 


Ch;14:6, 
& 27; 13 


ſ[Or, Py 


either, 1. According to his capacity. Or rather 2. In that courſe t Heb: a 
or manner of life which thou wouldeſt have him chule and follow. his m4). 
Or, as one learned man renders it, mn the beginning of his way, i; 8: 1 

his tender years, as ſoon as he is capable of inſtruction. Heb, #n the 

mouth,” &c. The mouth is oft put for the beginning or entrance of a- 


ny place, as Gen: 29, 2: Jof: 195 18. Prov 8: 3+ Dan: 6:17. 7 10 
wit, 


but the man «q,. i 


9. 
t#H eb:w;2. 


things, or ſuch things as he hath not heard nor learned from cthers ,\; of j;z, 


Chap. XXII A 


b| 


t Hz 
the 
1.1 
6h, 


ob 
= 
0s, 


gith t 


I wif / 


r 


er | 


| lull be 


anſurn 


Nor, 


Ch.16.1 


Or, 4: 


bth gra, 
in his 0 


| Or, th 
mWLers, 


(Ch26:23; 


wr My jos tb Walk cu. __ 


23 


14:16, 
7; 13 


i123 |; 
there I} 
d of hi 
ty,K& 


wit,not eaſily and ordinirily. The impreſſions made in childiſh 
years will remain, as kath bezn oblerved by all forts of learned : 
Wricers, Bat this, as many Proverbs of like 2ature, are not to ve | 
undecf.090 as if this were univerſally and neceſſarily true, which 
Experi:nce confi:tes, bunt becauſe ir is ſo for tae moſt part, except ; 
tome extraordiniry cauſe hinder ir. 

7 * The rich ruleth over th2 poor s, and the borrow- 
Jm.2:6- ex is ſervanc | to the lender x. 
fH3- 9 5 To wit, with rigor and Tyranny, taking advantage of his ne- 
2 m7  cefſiries. t Is ar his mercy, and theretore forced ro compſy with his 


chearfully and confidently truſt in him,which i h 
Hr pangens þ aa y 1m,which is the only way Ws y 


in counſels and knowledge f: 


q'” lena- pleaſure, The deſign of rhe Proverb is partly to correCt his miſca- 
6P, rizge of the rich, and partly to oblige all men ro diligence, where- 
by they may deliver themſtlves from this ſervitude. 


4b 4: 8: 8 * He that ſoweth iniquity # ſhall reapvanity x: ||and 

þſ10:13- the rod of his anger ſhall fail y. 

10;, 474 # Or unrigiteouſneſs whoſe common Prattice it is to wrong Or Op- 

ich he preſs orhers, x Or 1rouble or miſery, as this word is commonly uſed, 
{ ef bis and as divers hererender it. The Miſchief which he hath done to 
| wer be others, ſhal be returned to him by God's righteous ſentence. y That 

jllbe power which he uicd with fury and cruelty ſhall be taken away 


muned. from him. 


«Cor:9-6- 9g * + He that hath a bountiful eye z, ſhall be bleſſed 
fb, 94 ,; for he giveth of his bread to the poor. 
q tf z Heb. 4 good eys, He who looks upon the wants and miſeries of 
others with compaſſion and kin@neſs, as this Phraſe is uſed, Ma:ith. 
20; 15. as an evil eye, js put for on? that beholds others with envy 
and unmercifulnels, Deus: 15: 9. Prov: 23: 6. & 28. 22, @ Both by 
God and Mzn. : 

10 * Caſt out b the ſcorner c, and contention ſhal go 


out ; yea, {trife add reproach d ſhall ceaſe: : 
b Our of your Sociery, avoid converſation with him. c Who ne1- 
ther fears God, nor reverences Man,but ſcorns all admonitions, and 
minds only the pleaſing of himſelf, and the gratifying of his own 
Luſts, which is the chief cauſe of moſt contentions. d Wherewith 
he loads thoſe that either oppoſe or admonith him. 
I1 * He that lovech pureneſs of heartee, 


(£16.13: Of his lips f, the king shall be his friend g. 

10r, axd e Who is plain hearred or ſincere,and abhors diſſimulation- FFor 
uh grace thoſe gracious ſpeeches which naturally and commonly flow from a 
i bis lips, pure heart. Or, and ( underſtand, /overb, out of the former clauſe) 
grace of his lips, Whoſe diſcourſe is gracious and fincere, g The 
greateſt men will, or ſhould deſire, and highly prize the acquain= 
rance and advice of ſuch perſons,rather than of Diſſemblers and Flat- 
terers, wherewith they are moſt commonly peſtered. 


12 The eyes of the LORD preſerve bþ knowledge 7 


107, :&4 and he overtrhoweth || the words & of the tranſgreflor. 

4 ntcrs, h God by the watchful Eye of his Providence maintains and de- 
fends. i To wit,men of knowledge 3 the abſtraft being put for the 
concrete,as Pride is put for a proud man, Pſal: 36: 11- Deceit for the 
| deceitful, as Prov: \2- 17. So here Knowledge for knowing and good 
men, ſuch as the laſt verſe ſpok- of, whoſe hearts are pure, an 
ſpeeches gracious, not only the King ſhal be their friend, ashe ſaid 
there, bur God alſo, which he adds h:re. & Their falſe and flatrer- 
ing ſpeeches, whereby they deſigned and expeCtcd to gain tbe fa- 
vour and friendſhip of great men, which are oppoſedto the ſincere 
and gracious ſpeeches of good men, implied inthe firſt clauſe ofthis 
verſe, and expreſſed in the foregoing verſe, or, as others render 1t, 
and the word is very commonly uſed, rhe matzers, all his Counſels, 
Hopes, Enrerprizes, and Concerns. PASS 

wa 33.7 The flothful man ſaith /, rhere is a lion without 
u2623* ,z: Iſhall be ſlain in the ſtreets o. 


I Alledgeth as his excuſe to them who upbraid him with idlenefs, 
or perſwade him to diligence. m There are extream dangers and in- 
vincible difficulties in my way. » By that lion, or ſome other 
way. o Which is add2d ro ſhew the ridiculouſnels of his excuſe ; 
for Lions abide in the woods or fields, not in the ſtreers of Towns 
or Cities. : 
2:16, 14 * The mouth p of ſtrange women 3s a deep pit 9: 
k3&. he that is abhorred of che LORD r {ball fall therein. . 
kh3.27. . p Her fair and flattering ſpeechzs wherewith ſh: enticerh him to 

groſs filthineſs as it is nored. Prov; 7. 21. q Inco which it 1s eaſle 
to fall, but hard,if not impoſlible,io get out of it. Ir is a rare thing 
for any perſon, once entred into the courſe of W horedom, ſincerely 
to repear of it, and turn from it. See Prov: 2; 19. r To wit,in an 
high and ſingular manner; who by his former impieties, and con- 
tempt of God and of his Grace, hath provoked God to leave and loath 
' bim, and to puniſh one ſin with another: for otherwiſe all ſinners, 
as ſuch, are abhorred by Go3J. 
r5 Fooliſhneſs 5s bound s in the heart of a child ; bur 
* the rod of correction ſhal drive it far from him 7. 
kg. ig, * Is fixed and ſetled there, as being born with him, and rooted 
ky: 14, in his very natvre, and not plucked up withour great difficulty and 
kg 1s, Giligence. # The ſmart ofpuniſhmenr makes him weary of kis ſin, 
1, * and watchful agaiaſt ir. : 

i6 He that oppreſſeth the poor to encreaſe his riches, 
and he that givech to the rich «, ball ſurely come to 
want. 

u That vainly and prodigally caſts away his eſtate upon thoſe who 


Nos 5. 


|| for the grace 


wo 


"az:2 


may affiſt him. in oppreſling the poor, or ar leaſt hinder him in it. 
17 Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the 


wiſe x, and apply thine heart y untomy knowledge z. 
* Of wiſe and holy men of God, y Thirſt after it, and give up 
thy ſelf to the diligent ſtudy of ic. z The knowledge of God, and 
of thy ſeveral duties, which I am here delivering to thee, 
18 For 3t is a pleaſant thing if thou keep them at 

5.35. Wichin thee 6; they ſhal withal be fitted c in thy lips. 

I; 18, _ © The words of the wife, b Heb. in thy belly, i, e. in thine heart, 
Which implies receiving them in love, and retaining them in mind 
and memory, c Bz ficly exoprefled : or, be diſpojed or ordered: The ' 
enſe is, when thou haſt got them intothine hearr,thou wilt be able 

and ready to diſcourle pertinently and prefitably of rhear, 


MN. ; 
wh 5 


do not need it, or gives it to them with evil deſign, as that they } 


to exceſs in eating and drinking. 


ful meat e. 


RE © % & Chap.” XX1It-Y 


19 That thy truſt may be in the LORD d, T have t Them. [ 1180 
macie + known to thee this day, || even to thee. LOr, rruft [8 


4 That knowing God, and his word, and Promiſes, thou mai alla, 


: | + Heb. 
20 Have not I written unto thee+ excellent things et#inzr of, i 
command or |\\\ 


e Orprincely things, as they are called, Prov: 8. 6. the great things FRE: 


Gods Law, as Hof: 8; 12, f Conſiſting of Counſels to dire& thy prac» 
rice, and Kowleage to inform and enrich thy mind, Or by that 
known Figure Henaradie, in counſels of knowledge, i: e: in good coun- 
{cls which proczed from found knowledge, and make a man know- 
ing and wiſe, which are oppoſed to the counſels of the wicked, Prov: 
12. 5. which are without knowledge, 5 WE + |." co 
21 Thar I may make thee know the certainty of the || Or, | 
words.of truthg; that thou mighteſt anſwer the wordsof ihe #h## 
jr [ro them that ſend unto thee z ? |. "+ 
& 1hat I may teach thee, not falſe, or vain, or uncertain things 
” the Teachers of che Heathen nations do,bur the true and infallible 
9 racles of God. h Thar being inſtruQed by me, thou maiſt be a- 
” to give true, and ſolid, and ſatisfatory anſwers. . 5 To wit, for 
, ine advice in great and diſficule matters. Or, to thoſe that ſend 
Yee, 4, e. thatemploy thee in any buſineſs of moment, whereof 
they expeCt an account from theg, e-[ — 
22 Rob nor the poor, becauſe he 7 poor &: *neichen* Zec:7:is il 
opprels the afflicted in the gate /. | 
k This may be mentioned, either 1. As a,motive to this Rob- 
bery, becauſe he was unable to reſiſt him, or to revenge himſelf 
upon him: Do not take advantage of his Poverty. Or, 2. As an Ar- 
gument againſt it, becauſe he is a fitter obje& for thy pity and, 
Charity, than for thy Injuſtice or Cruelty, Ir is baſe and inhumane 
co cruſh ſuch aPerſon, !In the place of Judgwent,or under pretence 
po ' cog and much leſs in ether ways where there is no colour © 
itice. 
23 * For the LORD will plead their cauſe », and *Ch:23al. 
ſpoil the ſoul » of thoſe that ſpoiled them. £e 
wm Which hehath ina peculiar manner undertaken to do. n Tak 
away not only their goods but their lives x00. So fully will he re- 
compence their wickedneſs to them. | | 
24 Make no friendſhip with an angry man, and with 
a —_ mat thou ſhail not go 0: 
o Into his company : not co il 
RO py pi _ nverſe frequently and familiarly with 
25 Leſt thou learn his ways P, 
thy ſoul. 


p Leſt thou be infe&ed by his example,or provoked by his paſſion 
to return the liketo him. q Either 1. A milchief, which is oft the 
effe&t of unbridled rage. Or 2. An occaſion of ſin,cither by draw= 
ing thee to an imitation or requiral ofhis rage; or by tempring thee 
to unfaithfulneſs in performing the great office of a Friend, t0 wit, 
Admonition or reprcof, which, by revſon of his furioas temper, 
chou either canſt nor, or wilrſt nor do. 

26 * Be not thou one of them that ſtrike hands, or of 
them that are ſureties for debts 7. 
r To Wit, raſhly, or unneceſſarily. - A 
27 Ii thou haſt nothing co pay, why ſhould he * take Ch:29/16 
away thy bed from under thee s. 

s Why wilcſt chou put thy ſelf into the hands of ſuch a man,who 
will exat the debt from thee without any compaſſion ? For though 
ger not allow this praftice,covetous Creditors would frequent- 

28 * Remove not theantient ||land-mark t which thy ,— . . 
fathers have ſet. Mary. ; 


< t Whereby the Lands of ſeveral poſſeſſors were diſtinguiſhed and 17s 

vided. Do not enrich thy ſelf with the injury of other men; Ch,21: jos 
Do not invade the rights of othc rs. Or bound. 
-- 29 Seeſt thou a man diligent « in his buſineſs? he ſhal © * 


ſtand before kings x, he ſhall not ſtand before | mean-y 14.4; , 
mens | 


u Or, expeditious, as the word properly ſignifies, one'of quickdiſ- 
patch, vigorous and qo in executing what hath been well and 
wiſely contrived. x He is fit to be employed in the affairs cf the 


greateſt princes. 
CHAP, XXIILI 


v T Hen thou fitteſt to eat with a ruler «, conſider 
diligently what zs before thee b. | 
a When thou art invited to a Feaſt with a great man. 6 Either 
1. Whar perſon or Perſons. Or rather 2. What things, whatplenty 
and variety of Meats and Drinks, by which thou maiſt eaſily be 
tempted to exceſs, and by that means induced ro uſe ſuch ſpeech- 


es Or Carriages, as may be unfit for thee, or many ways hurtful to 
thee, | 


2 And puta knife to thy throat c, if thou be a man 
given to appetite «. 

c Reſtrain and moderate thine appetite, as if a knife, or ſome o« 
ther thing ſtuck in thy Throar, and hindered thee from ſwallowing 
what thou diſt deſire 3 er, asif a man ſtood with a knife ar thy 
Throat ready to kill thee, if thou didſtiranſgreſs; or, though it be 
as irkſome to thee to do ſo, as ifrhou hadſt a knifpur to thy Throat. 
So this is to be underſtood metaphorically, as that Phraſe of cutting 

off the right hand, &c. Matth. 5: 29, 3o. Or, For thou dofſ®s ( or, leff 

thou ſbouldft, 2s the Syriack Interpreter renders it ; or otherwiſe rhou 

wileſ# or ſhouldff) put # knife to thy throat. So the ſenſe is, when thou 

goeſt to their Feaſts, thou doſt expoſe thy ſelf to great and manifeſt 
hazards, co thy own 1ntemperance, ard to all its:dangerous conſe» 

quences, and to the 11 effeCs of other mens intemperance- 4d Prone 


21/472 E. A g > _— 
- Inner IR cnn 
TER 


and get a ſnareq to 


"Ch: 6. r, 
& 11, 15. 


AE OO TIO LN ata ain 


ſeure men. 


3 Be not deſirous of his dainties: for they are deceit= 


5 T1 


QJ 
Do] 


e Either 


= 


ap. XXL P R O Y 


4g « Either becauſe they do not yield th2e that ſatis fection which 
thou didſt expect from them, but rarher load thee with 11! bumors 
and the ſezds of divers diſeaſes: or becauſe they are not provide 
for thee with fſincerityand good Will, but with ſome evil deſign u- 
pon thee, either to diſcover and betray thee, or to enſlave thee. See 
below wv: 6, 7. : 
* Labour not f to be rich: ceaſe from thine own 
h:28:20' wi{dom g: 
111:6:9, f Heb.Do not weary thy ſelf with immoderzte cares and labcurs, 
23 25 many covetous men do. g From that carnal Wiſdom which 1s na- 
tural ro man in his corrupt eſtare, which perſwades men to believe 
that it is their intereſt to uſe all poſſible means to get Riches, and 
thar the happineſs of their Lives conſiſts in the abundance of their 
Poſſeſſions, directly contrary to the aſſertion of our bleſſed Lord ; 
Lute 12: 15. NED 
5 + Wile thou ſet thine eyes upon that 5 which is not 


5? for riches certainly make themſelves wings, they fly 


away as an eagle & towards heaven. | 

h 5; e: Look upon it with earneſtne(s andgreedy defire,cmploying 
the eyes of thy mind and Body about it, # Which hath no folid 
and ſetled keeing ; which is ours ## have, but not to hold; which 1s 
always upon the wing, and oft times gone inthe twinkling of an 
Eye, ſfothat the owner is frequent]y at a loſs, and cannot tell whe- 
ther he hath his Eſtate, or whether he hath loſt it. & Swiftly, 
ſtrongly, and irrevocably. We quickly loſe the ſight and poſſeſſion 
of them. Their flying away from'us is elegantly oppoſed to ou: 
© 7» Byes being ſer, or, as it isin the Hebrew, flying upon them in the 


beginning of the verſe. : R 
' 6 Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye 


I, neither deſire thou his dainty meats. 
"Of the envious or covetous man, who ſecretly grudgeth thee 
the meat which he ſers before thee,as this Phraſe is uſed,Prov: 28:22: 
| Matth: 20! 15. as on the contrary a liberal man is ſaid to havea good 
Eye, Prov: 22: 9. : ] 
'2 For as he thinketh inchis heart, fo 5s he m: Fat 
and drink, faith he to thee, but his heart is not with 


thee 
m You arenotto judge of him by his words, for fo he profcſſeth 
kindnelſs,as it follows,but,þy the conſtant remper of his mind, which 
he hath fully diſcovered to all that know him by the courſe of his 
Life. » He hath no fincere kindneſs to thee, but inwardly grudgeth 
thee that which he outwardly offers to thee. 
$ The morſel which thou haſt earen, ſhalt thou vo- 


mit up 9, and loſe thy {weet words p. | : 

o When thou perceiveſt his churliſh diſpoſition and carriage, his 
meat will be loathſom to thee and thou wiltſt wiſh either that thou 
hadſt never eaten it, or that thou couldeſt vomit it up again, þ Thy 
pleaſint diſcourſe wherewith thou didſt adorn his Table, and deſign 
both to'delight and profit him, is loſt, and of no effect to him, and 
thou wiltſt be ready to repent of it. : 

9 * Speak not in the ears of a fool q: for he will de- 
ſpiſe the wiſdom of thy words 7. = 
* q Caſt not away good counſelsupon obſtinate and incorrigible ſin- 
nerss We have the ſame advice given, Matth: 75:6. 7 He will 
ſcoriifully reje& thy wiſe and good admonitions. 

Io * Remove not the old ||land-mark ; and enternot 
into the fields of the fathe:leſs s: | 

5 Either to take away their goods; or rather to poſſeſs their Lands, 
as this Phraſe js uſed, 2 Sam: 5.6. 


- —P 4 


&-1t 
# cauſe 
h ine eyes 
fy upon, 


Ch: 9: 8: 


\ *Dent:19: 
14: & 27. 


t7. 
Ch: 22.29 
- [Orybourd. 
*Job 31:21: 
 Ch:21:23« 


their cauſe with thee. 

t Heb: their near kinſman, to whom it belongs to avenge their 
wrongs, and to r2cover and maintain their 1ights, of which ſee Lev: 
25.25. Numb: 35: 12, Thus God is pleaſed to call himſelf,ro ſhew 
how much he concerns himſelf for the relief of oppreſſed and help- 
leſs Perſons. : ; : 

12 Apply thine heart unto inſtruction s, and thine 
ears unto the words of knowledge. 

« Content net thy ſelf with outward hearing or reading of it, 
but affeRionately receive it into thine heart, and lay it up there as 
choice Treaſure: : . 

13 * With-hold not correftion from the Child : for 
;f thou beateſt him with a rod, he ſhall not die x. _ 

x Itis a likely mean to prevent their corruption, and the de- 
- which commonly follows it, as the next verſe explains 
this. 

I4 Thou ſhalt beat him with the rod,and ſhalt deliver 
his ſoul from hell. 
15 My ſon, if. thine heart be wiſe, my heart ſhal re- 
joyce y, || even mine. 
tOr,vmT ? In the good ſucceſs of my counſels, and in thy Piety and Hap- 
wiil rejoyce. pine(s, which is as truly defirable and pleaſant to me, as my own. 
16 Yea, my reins ſball rejoyce z,when thy lips ſpeak 


right things. 


*Ch:13:24 
. G& 19; 18: 

\& 22: ls. 

&29:15,17. 


and with all my-ſou]. | 
| 17 * Let not thine heart envy finners a: but be thou 
«PG 7: 1: jn the fear of the LORD b all the day long c. 
7 3» 3* 
Chap:3:31 ty ſtir thee up,cither to envy them, for to approve and imitate their 
' $24. 1. &,;] courſes. 8Reverence the preſence of the Divine Majefty, and 
dread his power and juſtice,and rhoſe judgments which he hath pre- 
pared for finnercy and thou whilſt ſeeno cauſe to envy,bur rather to 
pity them. c Not only when thou art in trouble, but in all times 
and conditions- . 
: 18 *For ſurely there is an || end 4d, and thine expec- 
Ch:24:14 tation ſhall not be cur off e, 
(| Or, r d An expetted and happy end for ſach as f:ar God, which was 
war®. " required v: 17. Or, s reward, as this Hebrew word is rendred, 
Prov: 24: 20. e Thou ſhale certainly enjoy that good which thou ex- 
peQeſt, as the wickzd ſhall loſe that Happineſs which they enjoy. 


Li 


11 * For their redeemer 7 is mighty ; he ſhall plead! 


z Iſhall rejoyce not only in ſhew and profeſſion, but inwardly , 


s Let not the conſiderationof their preſent impunity and proſperi-- 


5 XxX £3 
19 Hear thou, my ſon, and be wiſe f, ard guide 
thine heart g in the way þ. 
| f Reſt not in hearing, but ſee that thou groweſt wiſer and better 
by it. g Order the whole courſe of thine affeQtio:s and ations. 
h In Gods way, oft called the way, as hath been obſerved before. 
20 * Be not amonglit wine-bibbers /; among{t riotous ?Ih: 5:2, 
eaters Þ of fleſh. uk:21:34 

; Avoid their converſation and company, left thu be either in- 3097-13 

fected or injured by them. ur 
2t For the drunkard and the giutton ſhall come to 
poverty : and drowlinefs & ihall cloth a man with rags, 

k Immoderateſleep, and idleneſs, whach is as ready a way to Po« 
verty, as Gluttony or Drunkennels is. 

22 * Hearken unto thy father that begat thee 7, and * cy, ,z/ 
deſpiſe not thy mother when ſhe is old . ; 

{ And therefore deſires ard ſeeks thy good in :1] his counſels, mm 
When the infirmity ofage is added to. that of her ſex, whichis apt 
to bEreed contempr. : 4 

23 * Buy » the truth o, and ſeil j* not.p; alſo wif. Ch:4:5,7 
dom, and inſt-uction, and underſtanding 9. 

2 Purchaſe ir upon any terms, ſpare no pains nor coft to get it; 
0 The True and ſwing knowledge of Gods mind and will concerning 
your Salvation,and the way that leads to it. p Do not forger ir, nor 
forſake it for any worldly advantages, as ungodly men frequently 
do. - you may love and prattiſe the truth known and re- 
ceived. 

24 * The father of the righteous ſhall preatly re- 
Joyce, and he that begetteth a wile c61d, ſhall have joy 
of him. . 

25 Thy Father. and thy Mother ſhall be glad r, and 
ſhe that bare chee 5 ſhall rejoyce. 

y He repeateth this again as a Powerful Argument to prevail with 
all Chidren,rhat are nor void of natural aff:f&ion to labour to be 
wife and good, that ſo they may glad the hearts of their Parents to 
whom they have ſuch high and indelible obligations. s With ſo 
great pain and hazard, and brought thee up with ſach tender care, 
whom thou canſt not better require. 

26 My ſon,give me thine heart ?, and let thine eyes 
obſerve « my ways x- 

et Receive my Counſels with thy whole heart. Solomon ſpeaking in 
Gods Name, and cauſe, requires the heart to be given to him. u 
Let thy mind ſeriouſly and pra&ically conſider. x Either 1. The 
ways in which I have walked, my evil praQices : take warning by 
my ſad example. Or 2. The ways which-*T preſcribe, to you; as 
the Apoſtles called the Goſpel which they preached, their Goſpel x 
T hefl: : 5. 2 Tim: 2: 8+ 

27 * For a whore is a deep ditchyz and a ſtrange 


woman 1s a narrow pit. 
, In which a man is in evident danger of Perdition, and ont ef 
whichit 1s exceeding difficult to eſcape. 

28 * She allo licth in wait [| as for a prey z, and in- *Ch:1412; 
creaſcth the tranſgreſſors among men 9. ES || Or, as 4 
z Watching all opportunities of eninaring young men to their de- 70%6r- 

ſtruftion, # Sheis the cauſe of innumerable finsagainſt God, and 
againft the Marriage-Bed, againſt the Sou] and Body roo,and by her 
oy 39 Example and Arts, involveth many perſons in the guilt of 
: her 1ins, 
29 * Who hath woe b ? whohath ſorrow? who hath : 
contentions? who hath babling c ? who hath wounds *Ifa:s: rr, 


without cauſe 4? who hath redneſs of eyes ? 22, 
b From the ſin of Iuſt he proceeds to that of drunkenneſs, which 
doth frequently accompany it. c The fin of much and impertinent 
talking : or, tumul:uous noiſe 'or clamour, which is uſual among 
Drunkards, See Prov: 21. 1. d Upon every flight occaſion, which 
men epflamed with Wine are very apt to take, 
"$0 They that tarry long art the wine ; they that go 


to ſeekimixc wine e. 
e Either mixed with Water,or with other ingredients to make it 
ſtrong and delicious. Heb. mixturs, mixed drinks of ſeveral ſorts 
ſuited to their Palats. 
31 Look not thou upon the wine f when it is red g, - 
when it giveth his colour in the cup ; when * it moveth *ean: 138 


it ſelf aright þ, 

f Earneſtly, fo as to enflame thine Appetite towards it ; in which 
ſenſe men are forbidden 70 look upon a Woman, Job 3 1.1, Mat: 5: 28: 
g Which was the colour of the beſt Wines in that Country,which 
therefore are ca]led Blood, Gen: 49: 11. D-ut: 32: 14. and ſuch were 
uſed by them in the Paſſover, 4+ Whea it ſparkleth and frisketh, 
and ſees to ſmile upon a Man. ; 

22 At the laſt it bitterh like a ſerpent, and ſtingeth 


like |] an adder 5. 

z Ir hurts the Body in many reſpets, impairs the vigor of the 
Mind, waſtes the eſtate and Reputation, wounds the Coatcience,and 
without Repentance, willdeſtroy the Soul. 


33 Thine eyes ſhall behold & ſtrange women, and 


thine heart ſhall utter perverſe things /. 

k With evil intent, or luſtfully, which is the effe& of drinking 
much Wine, as is noted in Scripture, Gen: I9.31, 35. Hoſ: 4: 184 
and other Authors. ! Thine Heart, which when-thou hadſt theuſe 
| of thy wit, concealed, will then diſcover its wickedneſs, by filthy 


Us» 


their fleſh, 


*Ch: To'; 


I5. 29, 


3 


_ 


FCh:2221k 


_ 


Or, « 
Cockatrieed 


and perverſe ſpeeches. : 
34 Yea, thou ſhalt be as he that lieth down + in 
the midft of the Sea », or as hethat lieth upon the top 
of a maſt o. . 
m To {leep, of which that word is frequently uſed. » In a Ship 
in the midſt of the Sea, This Phraſe notes the temper and condiri- 
on of theDrunkard,the giddineſs of his Brain,the unquitneſs of his 
Mind, andeſpecially his extream danger joy ned with great ſecurity 
oThe worſt part of the Ship,both for its perpetual toſſings, and for 
the hazard of him thar flecps in it. 


+ Heb: i 
the heart 
of the 51h 


35 They 


Chap. XXII. 


4 


# 


f Or, 


' t Heb; 


row, 


"M82: 


(Or. | 
Job 34 


C:62:1 
Jer: 2, 
OM:2, 
Tp 2: 


hd 


gp: It 


1:7: 


Jr, 4 +1 
-katri6n 


Heb: i 
1e ha8rt | 
"+he S08 


CHA 

*0(37:14 F3 E not thou * envious againſt evil men,neitherdeſire 
_—_ tobe with them #. 
Al 31 a Their Company or manner of Life. : : 
£23147: 2 * For their heartſtudieth deſtruction b, and their 
Verſe19: lips talk of miſchiet. 
"Pſ10'7- þ How they may oppreſs and deſtroy others, which yet at laſt 

falls upon their own Heads. 

3 Through wiſdom is an houſe built, and by under- 

ſtanding itis eſtabliſhed c. 

c There is no need that thou ſhouldſt raiſe thy ſelf and Family by 
ruining others. as the manner of wicked men 1s,which thou maiſt 
mare eaſily and effeually do by Wiſdom,and the fear of God. 

4 And by knowledge 4 ſhal the chambers be filled 
with all precious and pleaſant riches. 

d Which in Scripture Phraſe includes the love and praftice of 
that which we know, 

5 * A wiſe man Þ is ſtronge; yea,a man of know- 
ledge f encreaſeth ſtrength. 
*h:21022 eo Is couragious and reſolute, and able by Wiſdom to do greater 


(bap- %X1LV. 
25 They have ſtricken me p, ſhalt thou (ay ; and | was | 
t Hb. 1 not fickgzthey have beaten me,ondÞ 1 f:lt it not: when 
be 17%” T ſhal awake, I willſeek it yer again r. 

p Icimnort deny thit Texpoſed my ſelf by my Drunkenneſs to 
manifo!d abuſes and injuries, q I was not then ſenſible of it, ne1- 
ther do I now find any great hurt by it, it wasbur the effeCt of 2 
preſent frolick,at which I have no cauſe to be much troubled r Ar 
preicntT find ſome 1nconvenience,and mycondition requiresſleep to 
ſ:ttle my ſ-1%,1nd when Iam compoſed and refreſhed, I purpoſe to 
return t my former courſe. Bur that which So/omox here exprefleth 


ſeems rather to be the Langnage of their Hearts or Lives, than of 
their Tongues. Compare Prov: 1: 11. | 
- 
P.. XXIV. 


Eccl:9:16 things than others can accompliſh by their own ſtrength. 
{Heb i: 6 * For by wiſe counſel thou ſhalt make thy war ; 


frngth. and in multitude of counſellors there is ſafety. 

tH _ ;þ F War is better managed by Wiſdom than by ſtrength. So this 
pry f proves what he ſaid in the laſt Verſe, 

"1:14 7 Wiſdom 5s too high g for afool b; he openeth not 


& 15:22. his mouth in the gate z. 

& 20:18. g Either 1. really, it is above his reach or capacity Or, 2.1n 
his opinion;he judgeth it too hard for him, he deſpairs of attaining it, 
he pretends the impoſſibility of it, becauſe he will not put himſelfro 
the charge or trouble of getting 1t;as on the contrary Wiſdom # ſaid 
to be eaſie #9 him that underſtanderh, Prov: 14.6. becauſe he ſeriouſly 
giveth his mind to it, and therefore eaſily and certainly attains to it 
h For a wilful Fool; era wicked Man, whoſe luſts enfeeble and dar- 
ken his Mind,and make it unc-pable of Wiſdom. i Either r. he 
can ſay nothing for himſelf when he is accuſed before the Magie 
ſtrate, for which he gives frequent occaſion. Or 2. he knows not 
how to ſpeak acceptably, and profitably in the publick Aſſembly 
among wiſe men. PE 

8 He that deviſeth to doevil,ſhal be called amiſchie- 
yous perſon &. 


P ROY IE ENS 


over themſelves,and expoſe themſelves to manifold dangers and ca» 
lamities, 


wy 
i 


Cha p.XXIV ( 


Or, as others render it, and as the Hebrew Verb is fre+ 
quently uſed, ke that ebſerveth thy Soul, that feerh all the ſecret 
Thoughts and inward motions ofthe Heart, Which expoſition is 
favoured both by the following words, Doth not he know it ? Which 
agrees better to God's obſerving than to his preſerving 2 mans Seul,and 
by the former cjauſe,to which this Tranſlaticn doth more exaQaly 
anſwer,the ſame thing being here repeated in other words, after the 
manner of theſe Sacred Wricers.y God will certainly deal with thee 
as thou haſt dealt with bim, eithet rewarding thy performance of 
this duty, or puniſhing thy negle& of it. 


13 My ſon, eat thou honey z,becauſe i: is good;and  -  ... 
the honey-comb which is ſweet + to thy taſte. {Heb:upon (NR 
2 This 1s not a command but a conceſſion, and is here expreſſed thy palates 4} 
only to illuſtrate the following Verſe. Honey in thoſe parts was ex- Y 
cellent, and an uſual and an acceptable food. See Deur: 8: 8: Judges 

14418, I Sam: 14' 25. | 

14 *So ſhal the knowledge of wiſdom beunto thy ſoul, 
when thou haſt found it a; * then there ſhal be a re- 
ward6, and thy expectation ſhal not be cut off - 

a Whereby heimplyes, that thereis indeed ſome difficulty and 
trouble in the purſuit of Wiſdom. bur that it is abundantly come 
penſated with the ſweetneſs and advantage of it when a Manarrives 
at it. Heb.and,or,alſo there is a reward. It is not only as good as hc» 
ney, ſweet for the preſent, bur it is infinitely better, bringing a 
ſure and everlaſting reward with it. | 

15 Lay not waitc,O wicked man,againſt the dwelling 
of the righteous d, ſpoil not his reſting place. 

£ Do him no injury either by ſubtile and ſecret devices, or, as it | 
follows by manifeſt violence. d Againſt his Perſon or Family or RK 
Poſſeflion *Job 5.19. | 

16 ?For a juft man falleth e ſeven times f, and riſeth PC 34.194 
up again:but * che wicked ſhal fall into miſchief g. 


"Pſ:19.10 iff] 
& 119.10Ze ii} 
*Ch»23.13 i 


& 37:24. 
e Either 1. Intoſin. Or, rather 2. into calamities, of which *Amos 54 
heevidently ſpeaks both in the foregoing Verſe, and in the oppoſite + 
and following branch of this Verſe, and fo this word is uſed in the 
next Verſe, and P/al:37;24.1ſa. 24:20. Jer- 25:27.Amos 8:14. Mic:7:8, 
&ce And ſo this.is fitly alledged as a juſt reaſon to difſwade wicked 
Men from their unjuſt attemprs againſt righteous Men, becauſe they 
ſhould not ſucceed in them;and although they might by Gods per» 
miffion- bring them into ſome diſtreſs for a time, yer God would de- 
liver them out of their hands,and they ſhould be diſappointed of 
their hopes, f 7, e. Frequently. g Intounavoidable and irrecoverv 
able deſtru&tion,oft- times in this life,and infallibly in the next, 
17 *Rejoyce not when thine enemy falleth b,and let 
nor thine heartbe glad when he ſtumbleths 
£ Towit, into miſchief, as in the former Verſe. Pleaſe not thy 
ſelf in his deſtru&ion. Which plainly ſhews that the love of our c< 
nemies is a Precept of the Old Law as well as ef the Gofpel. ' See 


Exoc:; 23: 4, S« | 

18 Leſt the LORD ſee #,*and + it diſpleaſe him and 
and heturn away his wrath from him. 

; Underſtand, upoz th:e, which is implyed in the Hebrew Phraſe, 


*Job3i.26| 
Pſal:35:15: 
Chap:17: 59 


*Ifa: 58:2: 
+1t be evil 
in his eyes, 


k Heb. a Maſter of miſchief. The ſenſe 1s, Though he cover his 


he ſhal benoted & branded with that infamy which is due to him. - 
9 The thought of fooliſhneſs is fi 2 : + and the ſcor- 
ner mm zs an abomination to men ». 
| Oc,bur. ſpake, v: 8. even before it break forth into a&tion,it is a fin inGods 
1ght,and it is hateful ro God,Or fool:ſbneſs is put for fooliſh or wick- 


ed men,by comparing this with che next clauſe where the ſcorney is 


oppoſed to it. So the ſenſe is, All the Thoughts of wicked men are 
only evil and that continually,as is ſaid of man in his corrupr eſtare 
Gen. 6; 5. and therefore abomniable ro God. m He who not only 
deviſeth and praftiſeth wickednels,but obſtinately perſiſts in it, and 
reje&s all admonitions againſt it. » Is abominable not only to God, 


wicked devices with fair pretences & would be berter eſteemed, «| 


_ | The very inward thoughtor contrivance of evil, of which he | 


ſuch defefts being uſual in that conciſ: Language, Pſal: $4: 11+ Prov.. 
19: 1. and oft elſewhere, This conſideration ſtrikes ar the root of 
that ſinful and inhumane diſpoſition, which is an expeRation ofſafev 
ty oradvantage to himſelf by his enemies downfal, wbich,faith he,by 
this very mean thou ſhalt loſe,for thine enemy ſhal be raiſed, and 


thy danger greatly increaſed by thy provoking both God and him 
againſt thee. 


: '* a9 
19 * ||Fret not thy ſelf & becauſe of evil men 1, neither Ch:a3 a: : 
be thou envious at the wicked, Verſe x. 
k Which Tranſlation ofthe word is confirmed by the Parallez || Or keep 
word in the following clauſe./For their preſent impunity and good 79% compa | 
ſucceſs. ny with the 
20 For there ſhal be no reward to the evil man m, ob g 
* the {] candle of the wicked ſhal be put our ». : 


as all ſinners are, bur to all-ſober men. 


10 If thou fainto in the day of adverſity,thy ſtrength. 
zs Þ {mall p. 

o If thou art impatient and unable to bear ſufferings; if thy reſo. 
lutions flag,& thou giveſt way to deſpondency or deje&ion ofMind ' 
p Heb. is narrow, it lives ina little compaſs; it is as ſtrait as thy 
condition 1s; for there isan elegant alluſion in the Hebrew words, 
The ſenſe is, This is a fizn thar rhou haſt but littleChriſtian ſtrength 
or courage, for that is beſt known by adverſity. | 

rx * If thou forbear to deliver them q that aredrawn 
ut'o deathy and theſe that are ready to be ſlain s : 


q When it 15in thy power to do it lawfully, » To wit, unjuſtly, 
or by the violenc? ot lawleſs men. 5 That are in preſent danger of 


Death or Dzitruction, | 

12 If chou ſfayeſt, Behold, we knew || it not ?, doth 
not he that pondereth the heart conſider it « ? and he 
that keepeth thy foul x, doth er he know it? and ſhall 


not he render to every man * according to his works ? 
Wage # I was 1gnorant either of his innocency,or of his extream danger 
gs of or of my power to relieve him.u Thar this is only a frivolousexcuſe 
2 & that the true realon of thy negle& was thy want of true love to 
V.22-12. thy Brother, whoſe life thou waſt by the Law of God,and of Nature 
obliged to preſerve, and thy ſinful ſejfelove, and a carnal fear of 
ſome miſchief or trouble which might befal thee in the diſcharge of 
thy duty. x God who is the preſerver of men, Job 7: 20. who daily 
doth and whoonlycan k&ep rice bothin and from the greateſt dan» 
gers. And this favour of God may be here mentioned partly as a 
{ſtrong obligation upon him to preſerve him who is made afterGods 
Image, &wiomnGod hath commanded him ro love & preſerve; part- 
ly asan encouragement to the performance of his duty herein from 


| t Heb: 
lwrew, 


82:4; 


IOr;bim; 


Job 44:1 
br 34:11 


02:12. 


m All his hopes and happineſs ſhal quickly and eternally periſh, V » 179. | 
and he ſhal have no ſhare in thoſe ſolid Felicities and bleſſed recom- Ch.13:9. 'A 
pences of a better life which thou ſhalt enjoy- Therefore thou g, ,2--, 
haſt no reaſon to envy him. » All their comfort and glory ſhall Or lamp. 
ceaſe, Rs 


21 Myon, fear thou the LORD,and the king o, and . Heb: | 


meddle not with + them p that are given tochange q. 

o Honour and obey both God and the King,and all in Authority. 
He puts God before the King,becauſe God is to be ſerved in the firſt 
place,and our obedience is to be'given to Kings only in ſub-ordina« 
tion to God, and not in thoſe things which are contrary to the will 
and command of God, as is manifeſt both from plain Scripture, ag 
As 5. 29. and from the judgment and prattice of wiſe and ſober 
Heathens, p Heb. Mix not thy ſelf with chem,either in their counſels 
and praCices, or in familiar converſation. q That love or uſe chan- 
ges ; thatare unſtable in their Obedience ro God or to the King, 
and are prone to Rebellion againſt either of chem. Thoſe men that 
wickedly forſake God,and break his Laws are ſaid to change their 
God, Jer. we 11, and to chavge God's Judgments and Ordinances, Ifas 
24: 5. Ezek: 5: 6, : : 

22 For their calamity ſhalrife ſuddenly ; and who 
knoweth 7 the ruine of them both s ? 

r Whocan conceive how ſore and ſudden it will be! 5 Ofthem 
that fear not God,and of them that fear not the King, for they have 
two potent and terrible enemies & therefore if they will not obey 
them out of Conſcieace,as their duty binds them,yet they ſhould do 
it at leaſt for theirown ſakes,& for tear of thoſe ſevere puniſhments *Lev.1g.is | 
which they will certainly infli& upon Rebe!s. : 'Deurt, 1417 

23 Theſe thivgs alſo t belong to the wiſe, * It i5not & 16:19. 
good F to havereſped of perſons in judgment x. *Ch. 18- 54 

£ Thefe Proverbs or Counſels here following to the end of the & 28:21. 


changerse 


the con{ideration of Gods ſpecial care and watchfulneſs over thoſe 
that do their duty; and partly to intimate ro them the danger of 
thenegleQ of this duty whereby they will forfeir Gods proteRion 


Chapter noleſs than thoſe hitherto mentioned. « Are worthy of —_—_— 
the conſideration, and fit for the uſe of them who are or would be u ; aoealigg 
wiſe ; fqs only ſuch are capable of underſtanding and improving 90% 


51; theſe 1#48*- 


PIR © F: 


7. and elſewhere. 


ap. XXV. 
theſe Proierbs, 3s was noted, Chap. T: $5, 6, 
* For Judyes to determine Controverſies partially, 
the quality ofthe Perſons, and not according to the merits of the 
Cauſe. 
| 24 * He that ſaith 
Ch:17:15 tightzons 2; him ſhall the people cucſe ; 
« 5.23- abhor him. 
y To wit, publickly and in judgment,as he now faid, and as ap- 
pears by the publickneſs of the Curſe following upon 1ty for People 
or Natines do neither obſerve nor hate. every Man who ſaith thus 
privately. 2 That juſtific wicked Mea in their unrighteous courſes. 
@ Partly for the groſſaeſs and oJiouſneſs of the Crime; and partly 
for the great and general miſchief which ſuch praftices bring to Ct- 
vil Socierics. ; - 
25 But to them that rebuke him b (bal be delight c, 
and + a good blefling d ſhal come upon them. | 
b That publickly and judicially rebuke and condemn the wicked. 
e The peace ofa good Conſcience,and the Comfort of a goodName. 
4 Which the People ſhal wiſh, and by their Prayers obtain from 
God for them ; which is fitly oppoſed to rhe Peoples curſe in the laſt 
. Verſes 
Hob.chaos 26 Every man ſhal kiſs bis lips <* that giveth a right 


nſwereth anſwer fe : : : 

ett words e Shal highly reſpe& and love him, of which kiſſing was a ſign. 
r, !ain f Who being called to ſpeak either asa Judge,or Witneſs,or other 
ords,us wile, in weighty matters,ſpeaks pertinently,and plainly,and truly, 
haptg: g.to the convittion and ſatisfaCtion of the hearers. 


27 Prepare thy work without,and make it fit for thy 
ſelf in the field 3 and afterwards build thine houfe g. 
g This is a Domeſtical Precept requiring both Induſtry and Pru- 
dence in the management of a Man's concerns, that he take care in 
the firſt place to furniſh himſelf with Catrel and rhe Fruits of rhe 
Field which are neceſliry for his ſubſiſtence, and afterthar he may 
[_-_ ſuch things as are for Ornament and Comfort, fuch as the 
uilding of a convenient Houle 1s. 


lems 38 Benot witneſs againſt thy neighbour þ without 


ideinthy Cauſe? 3 and fdeceive nor & with thy lips. | 
bps, h Either in judgment or in private converſation. i Raſhly or 
falfly, withour juſt and ſufficient cauſe. & Neither thy Neighbour, 
to whom thou haſt made a ſhew of friendſhip, nor the Judge. nor 
any other bearers with falfe information. Or, this clauſe forbids 
flatrering him to his face, as the former forbids flaadering him be- 
hind his back« 


29 * Say not1, Twill doſo to him as he hath done to 


me: I wiil render to the manaccording to his work mz. 
I Within thy ſelf: give not way to any ſuch Thoughts or Paſſi- 
ons. m [will repay kim all his calumnies and 1njuries. | 


20 I went by the fieldof the ſlothful, and by th 
; vineyardofthe man void ofunderitanding; 
r And lo, it wasallgrownover with thorns, and 
nettles had covered the face thereof, and the ſtone wall. 


thereof was broken down. | 
+ Heb-S_+ 32 Then I ſaw, and + confidered iz well: I looked 


my bart upon it, and received inſtruction ». | 
n I learned Wiſdom by his folly, and by his groſs idleneſs was 
provoked tv greater cace and d.ligence. | : 
33 * Yetalirtle ſleep o, a little ſlumber, a little fold- 


ding of the hands to ſleep: 
o See this, and the following Verſe in Prov: 6: 10, 11. 
34 So (hal thy poverty come,as one that travelleth; 


Fitch s and thy want as f an armed man, 
Shu.LY, EC H AP. XXV. 


obſcruations about Kings, 1--7. A caution againſt Contentions, 8, ag ainſt 
revealing of Secrets, 9, The reaſon of this Caution, 10. With arvers = 

ther Rules, 11 + 28, 
f Pn a are alſo proverbs of Solomon. which the 

. men of b Hezekiah king ofJudah copied ourc. 

#s Which are contain'd in this and the following Chapters. b Cer. 
tain perſons appointed by Hezekiah for thar work, whether Prophets 
as Iſaiah, Hſ:a, or Micah, who lived in his days,or ſome others,it is 
neither evident nor material. Molt of them are p2lirtica] Precepts, 
and ſuch as in a ſpecial manner concerned Hezek:ah,and ocherPrinces 
to know, for the condutt of their Houſe and Kingdom. c Either our 
of other Books or Writings of Solomon, concerning natural or civil 
things, of which we read, 2 Kings 4; 32: Or out of the hiſtorical] 
Records which were then extant concerning Solomon's ſpeeches and 
ations in the Hiſtory of the Kings of Judah, which is ofc mentio» 
ned in holy Scripture. : 

2 * 1tis the glory of God & to conceal a thing e: but 
; *Der: 29% the honour of kings is f to ſearch out a matter g- 

d It is agreeable ro the Nature,and highly conducing tothe Hos 
nour of God, becauſe it is a Teſtimony of his infinite Wiſdom and | 
Knowledg?, of his abſolute Power and Severaignty,and of his other 
tacomprehenitble PerfeQions.e To keep his counſels,and the reaſons 
of his actions in his own Breaſt,rhat he needs not to impart them to 
any other for taeir advice and afliſtance, as being ſelf-ſufficient both 
for the contrivance and execution of whatſoever pleaſerh him, and 
accountable ro none for any of his matters. f But Kings muſt nor 
affe& ro be like God in this reſpe&, becauſe they are Crearures,and 
' therefore ignorant and inſufficient,and accountable to an higherAu- 

chority. gln th: condu& of their great affairs,nor to lean to their 
own underſtandings,nor to be weddzd to their own wills, but to 
communicate their counſels to others, that ſo they may ſearch and 
find our the true and right way,and ro be ready to give a ſatisfaftory 
account of the Juſtice and reatonablenels of them as occaſion ſhall 


: 2 b requires 
| "Y 


unto the . wicked, Thou arr 
nations ſhal 


Heb: a 
efſing of 


Ch.20:22 
a OM; 12: 
17419. 


® chi6;9. 
&c. d 


2VY, 
- Roem:u:33 


according to 


EX 5 © Chap. XXy. 


hb As no Man upon Earth can exactly diſcover the heioht of Hea- 
ven or the depth :fEarth, oc difccrn what 1s ccntatned in them, 
£s Though wiſe Kings will ſe:rch out cther men and things, yet their 
inward thoughts & purpoſes are hardly diſcoverable;partly becauſe 
every Mans Heart lies out of the ſight of others; and r arcly becauſe 
it is the practice of Kings induſtriouſly to conceal rheir imer tions. 

4 Take away the drofs from the ſilver, and there tha! 
come forth a veſſel for the finer &. 

k Then, and nottill then ir is fir for that uſe. 

5 * Takeaway the wicked from betore the king and , (._, 
' his throne (hal be eſtabliſhed 2 in righteouſneſs x. es 
{ From his Court and Counſels. » By removing them who by 
their wicked counſels & prattices provoked Gods diſpleatureagain{t 
the King and blaſted his Repurz-tion, and alienared the hewrrs of his 
People from him. = By ſuch impartial execut:;on of Juſtice | 

6 + Put not forth thy ſeif o in the prelence of the + Hebe; 
king, and ſtand not in the place of great men p. not a 
0 Heb.Do not magnijie,or glorife thy ſelf, by vaunting ſpeech or carri- glory, F 
age, but, which is in:plied, carry thy teIlf humbly and modeſtly, | 
| which is moſt pleafing to Kings,and moſt becoming & ſafe for thee. 
p Do nor afte& nor uſe frequent and familiar Society with greater 
Perſons than thy ſelf, whereby thou maiſt eaſily involve tuy ſelf 
in much guilt,and expoſe thy ſelf ro envy or contempt,and to many 
other inconventencies. 

7 * Forbetter it is q that itbe ſaid unto thee »,Come 
up hither : than thatchou ſhould(t be put lower in the 
preſence of che prince whom thine eyes have ſeen «. 

q Ic is more for thy credit and comfort, r By ſome publick Offia 
cer, or by the King himſelf. s Into whoſe preſence & acqueintance 
thou haſt 1o boldly intruded thy ſelf, who as before he obierved thy 
impudence,ſo now he ſecs and tuffers this publick diſgrace to be cait 
upon thee. 

8 Go not forth haftily * to ſtrive «; leſt :hou know not 
what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath 


put thee to ſhame x. 

£ Without neceſſary cauſe and due conſideration, « Either judici- 

ally or otherwiſe. x For thy folly in undertaking what thou waſt 

_ able to accomplith, and for thy injuſtice in charging him wrong= 

Tully « 

9 Debatethy cauſe with thy neighbour himſelf y;and | Or,diſcra 
[| diſcover not a ſecret z toanother. ms hs 
y If thou haſt any quarrel with him, firſt try to compoſe it by ſecrer of 4 
private diſcourſe with him. Compare Mat. 5: 25« & 18. 15.Luke 12, notheri | 
58+ z Any ſecret. Let no heat of contention provoke thee to dis 

vulge anyof his ſecret counſels commirred to thytruſt,or tOoreproach 

him with any of his ſecrer faults,as 1s uſual ir. Law ſuits, and other 
contentions. Or, rhe jecret,any ſecret difference between thee and 

bim, which therefore is fitteſt ro be ended ſecretly between you,and 

not to be imparted to any other. 


*Lu:14:36 


thine infamy turn not away b. 

a Reproach thee for thy groſs violation of the Laws of Prudence 

and Juſtice,and Chariry,and friendſhip therein. & And that diſgrace 

+2" pag didſt deſign againſt another fall, and be faſtened upoR 

Thy lelf. k 

11 A word-+ fitly ſpoken c 5s like apples of gold in 
pictures of ſilver d. + Heb:/pai 
c For the matter, and ſeaſon, and other circumſtances of ir. £enu90n bij 
d Which it ſcems was uſual in thole times.and was grateful to the Whiels- 
Eye for the beauty and variety both of the Colours and Figures,the | 
golden Apples appearing through Net-work of Silver, or being ens 

graven or pourtrayed upon Tablets of Silver. 

12 Asanear-ring of gold,and ornament of fine golde, 

ſo is awile reprover f upon an obedient ear g. 

e Highly acceprable and a great. Ornament, and not an offence, 

and dithonour, as fools eſteem it. f Thar reproves an offender faith. 

fully. Yer prudently in the fitteſt 'manner and ſeaſon, g To a 

Man that hearkens to it, and is inſtruted and reformed by it? 
13 *As the cold of ſnow b in the + time of harveſt, 

ſo is a faithful meſſenger to them that ſend him: for he *Chz:i7: 
7 refreſheth the. ſoul of his maſters 5. Heb.day 


h Either 1. as drink cooled with Ice or Snow, as was, and is u- Gen: 2:4; 
ſua] in hot Countries. Or,2.as a cool Air iuch 2s is in Snowy ſeaſons. T Heb. 
Or, 3. as drink which is as cold as Snow. # With a true account rt 
mo PErp diſpatch of thoſe important affairs which were commit- —_— 
ted to him, 


14 Whoſo boaſteth himſelf F of a falfe gift &, is like + Heb:i 


* clouds and wind without rain /, » tift of 
k Pretending that he bath glven,or promiſing that he will g1Ve a al its 
Man thoſe gifts, which he neither hath given,nor intendeth to gives Jude 12] 
him. | Like empty Ciouds carried abour with wind,and not afford- 

ing that Rain which by their appearance they promile. 

15 * By long forbearing-m is a prince perſwaded », * Gen:33 
and a ſoft rongue o breakeththe bone p. . 4&1Sam: 
m By patient ſubmiſſion and expeQation. » Or, pacifed, wheres gy 
as his rage is increafed by oppoſition. Compare Eccleſ:10: 4. o A Sg 
mild and humble anſwer. p Softneth an hearr which is as hard as & 16:14. 
Bone or Stone. He alludes to thoſe Oyls which fink through the 

Fleſh to the very Bone. See Pſal. 109; 18. - *Verſe 2} 
16 * Haſt thou found honey q,t eat ſo much as is ſuffi- + onh1 
cient for thee,leſt thou be filled therewich,8& vomit it rg 

q Which in thoſe parts was of: found in Woods or Fields, as ' 

Fuages 14: 8, Oc. 1 Sam; 14: 25. By Honeyhe underſtands, not on- 

ly all delicious Meats, but all preſent and worldly delights, which 

we are heretaughtto uſe with moderation. r Honey exceſhively ta= 

ken diſpoſeth a Man to vomiting. || or,let thy 
17 || Withdraw thy foot trom thy neighbours houſe 5, for: beſel- 


leſt he be F weary of thee,and /o hate thee 7, dom inthy 
s Viſit him not too frequently nor unſeaſonably, ; As men are neighbours 


thereisws 3 The heaven for height,and the earth for depth 4, 
\jearchings and the heart of kings t is unſearchabis z. 


apt to loath thoſe Meats of which they ſurfeir, as was now oblerved 9995: 
V. Go 
18 * A 


10 Leſt he that heareth jr, put thee to ſhame #, and 


4. 4+. 
6h:1 5 


*Fx:2 
Mat. 
Rom; 
20, 


Pas 
$140 


FMBNCEs 


"hig: 
and 21, 
Iv, 


*Veriig 


"The16; 3 


thy 
JA 


ons 


Chap- XXV. 


epſal:129. 
J. 4 
Ghz1 2519: 


Rom: 12- 
40, 


1ſob 37; 


12: 
LOr, the 
North 


Ran: ſo 
ith 8 


fmanuces 


19, 


Yerie, 


£x:23:4- 21 * Ifthine enemy be hungry, give him bread « to 
Ma.5:44'eat : and ifhe be thirſty, give him water co drink. 


Pa:11:6- 
$149; 10- 


"h:ig:13 8 | | 
ind 21, 9, tOP,than witha brawliug woman andin a wide houſe. 


i. 
Ch:16; 


13 * A man that beareth falſe witneſs againſt his 
neighbour, 75a maul,and a ſword.and a ſharp arrow «. 

u Is as cruel and pernicious to him as an inſtrument of Death. 
The defign of the Proverb is to ſhew the wickednefs of flander,and 
thata falſe wirneſs is in ſome reſpeC&-as bad as a Murderer, 

19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in rime of trou- 
ble, is like a broken tooth and afoot out of joint , 

x Iris not only deceirful, but hurtful,as a broken Tooth though 
it may make ſhew ofhelping,yet is not only unhelpfulto Man for 
chewing his Meat, bur alſo iroubletome at.d paintul; ana as a Foot 
oit of Joynt, doth not help but hinder, and pain him that ate 
tempts to walk upon it. PDE 

20 As he that raketh away a garment in cold wea- 
ther y, and as vinegar upon nitre 2; fo is he # that 
ſingeth ſongs to an heavy heart 6. A - 

y When it is moſt ſeaſ-nable and neceſſary, 2 Which diſſolves 
the Nitre; and makes it uſe'eſs and ineffeQual. a He is no leſs abe 
ſurd and impertinents 6 Whoſe grief is nor relieved, but increaſed 


by it, as common experience ſheweth, and divers learned Authors 
have obſerved. | 


 c By Bread and Water he underftands all things neceſſary for his 
ſubliſtence. . | | | | : : | 
22 For d4thou ſhalt heap * coals of fire upon his head 
e, and the LORD (hal reward thee f. Foe 
4 Underſtand, in ſodvzing, which words are exprefſed Rom: 12: -20. 
where this Text is quoted. e Either 1. ina bad ſenſe, Thou fhalr 
hereby aggravate his Sin, and occaſion a more ipeedy and grievous 


Vengeance from God, which, like fire from Heaven, ſhal fail upon ] 


his head and conſume him. Not thar he perſwades him to doa kind- 


P ROY EA RY 


Chap. XXVI{ 


p. Over his Paſſions, and eſpecially his Anger, which 1s ſignified 
by this Word, Prov. 16: 2. Feeleſ; 10: 4. q Expeſerh himſelf to 
manifold Dangers and Miſchiefs. | 

SH AP XXVE_ *© | 
Rules how to carry towards Fools, 1 ——1y. The $lothful Man deſcribed, 
13-——16, The Charatter of # Contentious Man, and of a Buſic-body,and 
Tale-bearer, 17-='23. The Evilof hypocrifie and Lying, ' 24*<=28. _ + 
S ſnow in ſummer, and as rain in harveſt s, ſo 
honour is not ſeemly for a fool b | | 
a Unbecomigng and unſeaſonable. 6 Becauſe he neither deſerves 
It, nor knows how to uſe it, but his Folly is both increaſed and 
publickly manifeſted by it. % 5 | 
| 2 As the bird by wandring c, as the ſwallow by fly- 
ing, ſo the curſe cauſleſs (hal not come 4. | 
© From, place to place, by irs perpetual Reſtleſſneſs it ſecures 18 
ſelffrom the Fowler, that he cannor ſhoot at it,nor ſpread his Net 
over it. f To wit, upon the irinocent Perſon, but he ſhal elcape 
from it like a Bird, &c,  - | | . -- Wt 
3 * A whipforthe horſe,a bridle e for the aſs, and .pp.,,.,. I 
a rod f: for the fools back, - | | Ch:10: 13. i 

e Which was very proper and uſual for an Aſs, when they rode Iv 
upon it,( as the Jews molt commonly did ) though not to reſtrain 
him from running away,which is the principal uſe of it in Horſes, 

ct that the rider mighr rule and guide him,which was very neceſ= 
ary+-for thar ſtupid Creature, Aithough: the ancient Interpreters 
render it s Goad, or Spur, or ſomething of the like Narure and Uſe. 
f Which is moſt proper and neceſlary for him. Not Words, but 
Blows, muſt make him better. 7 C 
4Anſwer not a fool g according to his folly h,Jeſt thou 
alſo be like unto him 3. RR 


. How can theſe contrary Rules be reconciled anſwer him not, and 


[ 


neſs with an evil intent, with an exp2&ation cr defire, or deſign of 
bringing Gods wrath upon him,burt only he forete!'s what wou'd 
heppen,anddiſwades him from taking Vengeance,and provokes him 
to Kindneſs inſtead of ir,becauſe Vengeance 1s Gods peculiar Work 
which he will certainly infli&t upon ſuch perſons;which Argument 
3s uſed to that very purpoſe by St. Parl, Rom: 12; 19. Or,2.in a good 
ſenſe, Thou ſhalt nie!t him into Repentance,and inflame bim with 
Love and Kindneſs to thee for ſo unexpe&ed and undeſerved a Fa- 
vour;he ſha] be as tearrily grieved and rormenred with the Thoughrs 
of his vile and w.cked Carriage to thee,as a man would be that had 
burning Coals of Fire heaped upon his head. Bur if theſe Coals of 
Fire do not melt him, bur ſtil} he hardens his heart againſt thee, 
they wil} conſume him. Thus either by the one or by rhe other 
way thou ſhalt b: ſecured and delivered from him. The Metaphor 
may ſeem to be taken from Founders, who melt rhe. bardeſt; Metals 
by heaping Co.'s of Fire upon rhem. And the Head may be here 
mentiones racher than any other part, becauſe in Scripture-phraſe 
both Bleſſings aid Curſes are ſa:d to fall ugon mens Hs+d5.;:e.upon 
them, Heads being frequent y pur for Perſons f Thy Charity ro him 
ſha) be fu'ly recompenſc: to thee, if not by himzy«<t by God,which 
1s far better. | RED re SS 
23 * || The North-wind driveth away rain : ſo doth 
an angry countenance ga backbiting rongue bh. 
g In the Hearer, who by his Countenance ſheweth his Diſl.ke of 
ſuch Perſons and Practices. 4 Heb. # ſecrct Tongue, woich privily 


nind briti= [andereth his Neighbour, as it is expreſſed P[al.ro1: 5. and as the man» 
geth forth ner of Backbiters is. But this Verte is otherwiſe readred in the Mar- 


gent, and by diverſe others, The North wind brimgeth forth ( as this 
Verb properly and moſt freque.rly ſignifies, and -s it is rendred by 


buckbitrug all the Ancient Interpreters,and by mary others ) Ram: which it 
| Imgue an doth in _Judes, becauſe the Sea lies Northward as weil as Weſtward 
agryCoun-from it, as alſo in A#ica, as Ar:ſtotleg ſerves, though it drive away 


Rain in Countries of another ſituation ) ſo dorh a backbiting- Tong :e 
( cauſe ) an angry Countenance ir cauſet'; nuc': Anger and Miſchief, 


both to the Perſon ſlindered, and ro the Slanderer, and to other |}: 


Perſi:ns who may be concerned with or for cither of taem,as is ma» 
nifeſt from common Experience. 


24 * Itis bercer ro dwell ina corner-of the houſe 


2545 coid waters to a thirlty ſou], /o is 
from a far country 52. | | 
; Becauſe it comes thither more rarely and difficultly,afterir hath 


good news 


been long expecred andearneſtly deſired ; all which Circumſtances || 


make it more acc-ptable, | ns 
26 A righteous man fai'ing down& before the wick- 
ed, 3s a5 a troubied fountain,and a corrupt fpcing. 

k Either 1, int2Sin... So the Senſe is When a juſt Mn is either 
allured or ferrifi:d into any'infulPractice before wicked mcn,or 1t - 
to any baſe and ſervil: Comp'tance with rheir 48, he who by his 
excellent Counſels wis like a Fountain or Wellof Life, as his Mo::th 
is calle Prov; 10; 11. ſending, forth refreſhing Streams for th<« Bzn*» 
fir of many,” is now corrupted and and rendred unter-vice»b'e. Or 
rather, 2. into Miſery, of which kind of falling this Word is cone 
ſtan'ly uſed, and never ro my remembra'ice of falling inro Sin And 
{o tne Senſe js this, when rightzous M-nare oppreſſed and devour- 
ed by the Wicked, the itate of chat Commonwealth is as deplorable, 
as if the pu »Iick Fountains, from whence al! the People fetch their 
Water, vere corrupted, and it is a ſign that the Fountains of Ju: 
ſtice are poitoned. x ep. 

27 * It is not good /to eat much honey ; fo for men 
Mm to ſearch their own glory », is net glory s- = 

I To wit, for the hea'ch ofthe Body. m Which words are eaſi)y 
underſtood both our of the forego-ngCl:uſe, where theHoney is (up- 
poſed to be eaten by M-n,and out f tie following wad. whic' 
are evidently meant of them. » Induſtricufl to ſeek for Honor 
and Applauſe from Men, o Is not only fntu!, bur ſhametul alto 
and a fignofa vain and mean Spirit- T. e Negative Partic e Nor, is 
here underſtood out of the former part of the Verſe, as ic is P/al: x. 
5, and 9 18 i 
28 * He that hath no rule over his own ſoirit p, 3s 
ke a City that is broken down end without walls 9s 


i s14 


anſwer him ? Af. Eaſily, by confidering the difference of Perſons, 
and Times, and P'aces,and ocher Circumſtances and of the manner 
of anſw-cring. And luch teemingly contradifory Precepts are not 
only uſed by,bur are eſteemed elegant in other Authors Anſwer him 
net, when he is incorrigible,or when he is enflamed with Paſſion or 
Wine, &c. or when it is not neceſfary,or likely to 49 ' him ' goods. 
Anſwer him, when he is capable of receiving good by it,or ' when it. 
is neceſſary for the Glory of God, or for the Diſcharge of a Mans 
Duty, or for the good of others. + So as to imitate his Folly, by. 
ſuch paſſionate, or reproachful, or fooliſh Speeches as he uſeth tg 
thee. 7 Shew thy ſelf tobeas great a Fool as he. & ' a 
5 Anſwer a fool according to his folly &, leſt he be + Heb: his 
wiſe 1n+ his own conceic L. - , 0wReJes. 
k So as his Folly needs and requires, convincing him. ftrongly;re= 
proving him ſharply, - expoſing him to juſt Shame, and corretting: - 
him with a Rod,when he deſervesit,and thou haſta juflf power to- 
uſe it. 1 Leſt thy ſilence make him arcogant and preſumptuous, as 
ifhis Words were unanſ{werable, .- _. 8 + 
6 He thatfendeth a meſſage by the hand ofa foot m, 4 
cutteth off the feet, anddrinketh || damage o. : [Or, 7i64 
m He that employeth a Fool upon any important Errand or Buſi- lemce- 
neſs, which 1s roo hard for him. -» To wit, of his Meſſenger; he bids 
one go that wants Legs ; he ſends one who watits' that Diſcretion, | 
which is as neceflary for that Employment as Legs - are for going. 
o He bringeth upon himſelf abundance of Loſs _ Miſchief,nor one: 
ly ſpoiling that buſineſs about which he ſends bim,but making him- + 
ſ:-1f cont<mptible to the Perſon to whom he ſends him, &to others: 
with him,as if he had net commonPrudence to chuſe a firMeſſenger,: 
-and giving accaſion,by the Folly of his Mefſenger,to farther Miſune 
derftandings, and Jealouſies, and Inconveniencies... - For the Phraſe, 
« e may obſerve that Drinking in Scripture frequently notes-the plen«. 
tiful doing or receiving of any thing,as they who multiply Sins are: 
{ard ro drink Iniquity like water, Job 15: 16. and 34:' 7. and they who 
are greatly — commonly ſaid radrink the Cup. ; 
7 Thelegs of che lame Þ ace not equal p, fo is apara- + Hob:a2 
blein the mouth of fools q. | | —_— ified oy 
p H-b.As(which note of Similifude 1s p'ainly underſtood from the ve 
Particle ſo in the following Cauſe.) the legs wd the lame are lifted up, 
to wit,in going, or rather in danCing, which is done with great In- 
equaliry and Uncomelineſs: q No leſs abſurd and indecent are wiſe 
and þ Speecnes from a fooliſh aid ungod'y man, whoſeA ions 
Fgroſly contradit them, whereby he makes taem contemptible, and 


. 


himſelf ridiculous. : 


8 || As he that bindeth a ſtone in a ſling r,ſo is he that 
giveth honour to a fool 5. | | 


[Or, As 
PLES : hee that put 
r Whereby he hinders h's own Deſign of throwing the Stone out teth a pre 
of it. Or,who faſtens it there only for a ſeaſon,thar he may /peedily cious/fene - 
and violently throw it away, Or, as it is rendred in our. Margent, in #»- heap 
and by. many others, 4 he pu:reth.a precious fone ( Heb & ſtone which of ſtones. 
is ofr emp atically uſed for a preciousStone,borh inScriprure,asfxod. 
39* 10, 1 Chron. 29. 8. and ©.ſewhere, and alſo in other Authors) in 
#heap of Stones where it is obſcured and loſt. 5 No leſs abſurd is he 
chat giveth'ro a Fool that Honour and Praiſe which he is not cap» 
ble either. of receiving, ar retaining, oruſingaright, but is quite 
waſted upon him. 2nd doth him more hart than goed. 6. 
9 Asa thorn goethup into the hand of a drunkardz, 
ſo « isa parable in the mouth .of fools. | x 
t Asas Fhornisin a Drunkards hand, which he cannot hold and 
manage cautiouſly, bur employerh to his own andcthers hurt.u As . 
inproper and unproficable, and, by accident, hurtful to him{elf and. 
others. See on Yrſe 5, . - TL aq 
10.]| The great God that formed'all things, bot hre= - _ 
wardeth the fool, and rewardeth'tranſgrefſiors x» - :| Or, 8 
: x God, who is0ft called great, as Pſal; 86: 1c: and 135: 5, &c great man, 
and is deſcribed by the name of rhe moſt high, as Pſal: 9: 2. & 2137, gricveth al 
&c. who created aÞ things, and rher= fore otſerveth and governerh. he hrreth 
al Men and 7 hings, will certainly give that Recompenſe which is the fool he | 
+eet for and deſerved by Foals and Tranſgreſſouvs, i: e. by ſuch as Sin hireth .alſe 


cirhec through Ignorance and Heedleisnef\.or wilfully and wicke's Tranſgreſ> 

ty.Or,zs it is inthe Margenr, 4 great man( a Prince orPorentate,who f-r5: 
are called by this Tutte, Efb, 1. 8. Dan; 1: 3, &c. )grievsth rn 
Vord 


"OY « 


Wear). 


Oc «us 44 
raged.. 


WI 


that ma- 
tkerh hims 
ls mad. 
t Heb: 
flames or 


Parks. 


+ Heb: 
"without 
00d. 
*Ch:;2 2:10 
Os, whe 
eb: is 
ſ.-nt, 
*Ca5.18 
29, 22. 
t Hes: 
chambers.. 


« 


| ] Or, 5 


known. 


THeb:mas 
| keth his 
p Voice £ra- 


crous. _ 

[| Or . ha- 

 gred is © i0- 
ered in 

ſecres.” * 
*Pſ: 7:15, 


57:65 
- Eccles: 
- 10:8, 


Chap. 


2 Pet: 2. 


2. 
Heb: :te- 
aeth his burdenſome and vexatious it was to him. z Such like is the Imp 
dence and Madaeſs of Sinners, who having ſmarted for their Sins, 
and been forced t» forſake them for a time, do afterwards return to 


*ch:29;20 


*c%:19- 24. 


+ Heb. one rows, and deathm : 


neſs ſhal be ſhewed before the whole congregation x. 


+ he thal be brought ro publick Shame and Puniſhment. 


16 & 9:15 that rolleth a ſtone z it will return upon him. 


XXVI- 
Word is uſed, ia: 51.9. and 53: 5 


right or wrong, that they may be rheir Inſtruments in that Work. 
turnech to his folly z. 
y To lickup that which 


the Commiſſion of them. 


there is more hope of a fool bthan of him. 


a W ho, being a Fool, thinks himſelf wiſe,and therefore ſcorneth 
the Counſe!s of others. bþ Of doing good to one who is a Fool, and 


ſenſible of his Folly; and ready to receive Inſtruction. 


13 The flothful men laith b, There is a lion in the 


way, a lions in the {treets. 


b To excuſe his Idleneſs, and keeping himſelf at heme. See on 
{ſo doth 


Chap: 224 13e« : : 
14. Asthe door turneth upon his hinges c, 
the ſlothful upon his bed. 


c Moving hitherand thither upon it, but not removing one Jot 


from its place- 


15 * The ſlot? ful hideth his 


4 He will aot take the leaſt pains for che moſt neceſſary things. 
16 The ſluggard is wiſer in his own conceit e, than 


ſeven men that can render a reaſon f. 

e Becauſe by his Idleneſs he avoids thoſe Troubles and Dangers to 
which other Men by their Aivity expoſe themſelves,forgerting 1N 
the mean time whar Reproach and Lofs,and how much greater Miſ- 
ciiefs, both here and hereafter,are brought upon him by his floth= 
fulneſs f To wit, a fatisfatory Reaſon of all their Ations, i:e.who 
are truly wiſe Men, ; L 

17 He that paſſeth by g, and || meddleth with ſtrife 
belenging not to him b, is like one that taketh a Dog by 


the EA4TsS "Xe 
eWho is going upon the way, and about his buſineſs : But this 
Word is by ſome referred to the laſt clauſe is like one that taketh a 
dog by the ears as he ts paſſmg byhnim,withour any t 10ught of doing him 
herm ; which agrees very well both with the order of the Words 
in th: Hebrew Text, and with the Matter of the other Clauſe to 
whica this Similitude is referred. þ In which he is not concerned 
nor any way obliged to meddle. #Expoſerh himſelf to great and 
nvedleſs Hazards, as a Man that cauſlcily provoketh. a Maſtiff dog 
againſt himſelf. | 
18 As + a mad man k whocaſteth F fire-brands 7, ar- 


" k As one feignerh himſelf mad, that under that pretence he may do 
Miſchief with Impunicy, 1 To hurt his Neighbout's Perſon, or to 
conſume his Houſe or Goods. m Any Inſtruments of Death. 

19 So is the man rhat deceiveth his neighbour, * and 
faith, Am nor I in ſport » ? 

"2 Thatwrongs him under a falſe pretence of Kindneſs and Fami. 
liariry. 

"20. | Where no wood is.there the fire goeth out, fo * 
where there -is no || tale-bearer o, the Þ {trife ceaſeth. 

e To carry ſuch Reports from one to another, as may provoke 
them ro murual Rage and Strife. = 

21 * As coals are to burning coals, and wood to 
fire, ſo is a contentious man p to kindle ſtrife. 

p Heb. a man of Contentions, that loveth and giveth himſelf up to 
Contentions.- if 
: 22: Tne words ofa tale-bearer are as wounds, and 
they go down intothe | innermoſt parts of the belly g. 

9 This was delivered before, Chap: 18: 8, and is here repeated as 
being a Point of great Concernment to the Peace and Welfare of all 
S-"cicties, & fit to be oft and earneſtly preſſed upon the Conſciences 
of Mean,becauſe of their great and general pronenefſs to this Sin, 

* 23 Burning r lips, and a wicked heart,are like a pot- 
ſheard covered withfilver droſs s. 

r Either 1. With Love. Words delivered with fhew of true and 
fervent Aﬀe&ion, Or rather 2. With Malice or Hatred.A flande- 
rous or evil Tongue: For this Werd is conſtantly uſed in a bad 
Senſe, and notes the heat ofRage and Perſecution. 5 Such a Tongue 
and Heart are of no real worth, although ſometimes they make a 
fhew of it, as Droſs doth of Silver. : 

24 He that hateth ||difſembleth » with his lips, and 

layeth up deceit within him. Q 

: Or, carrieth bimſelf like. another man,pretends Love and Kindneſs: 
which Senſe ſeems to agree beſt both with the next Clauſe of this 
Verſe, and with the two following Verſes. : 

* 25 When he 7 ſpeaketh fair, believe him not, for 
there are ſeven abominations in his heart. 

--26 || Fheſe hatred is covered by deceit «, his wicked- 


# With falſe Profeſſions of Love. x Inſtead of that Secrecy and 
Impuniry. which by this Arr he deſizned and promiſed to himſelf, 


27 * Whoſo diggerh a pir y ſhal fall therein, and he 


» That another may fall into ir. It is a Metaphor from Hunters 
who uſed ro vig deep Pits, and then ro cover them ſlightly with 


ED F756. BS, 


. and elſewhere ) all ( to wit, all, 
that are ſubje& ro him,or all that ſtand in his way ) he hireth(as this, 
Word moſt commonly ſignifies ) the fools, he hireth alſo Tranſgreſſors; 
So the Senſe is,It is the manner of many Princes to vex and oppreſs 
their Subje&s, which becauſe they cannot do by themſelves alone, 
they hire others,voth Fools, who do not know or conſider what they 
do, and Tranſzreſſ5rs,, who are ready ta execute all their Commands 


11 * As adog returneth to his vomit ,/o a fool + re- 


he had Jately vomited, forgetting how 
Impu- 


12 * Seeſt thou a man wiſe in his own conceit 4 ? 


hand in his boſom, || it 
| Or, ke grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth 4. 


ſometimes in the heat of purſuit fell ito them themſelves. z To 
wn the Hill with deſign ro do miſchief to fome Perſon or Thins 
with it. 

28 A lying tongue hateth thoſe that are afflicted by it 
|, and a flattering mouth F worketh ruine. 

|| Becauſe by his Calumnies he hath made them KEis Enemies, 
T Which though it be more ſmooth and plauſible than a ſlandering 
Mouth, yer is in truth no leſs pernicious, betraying others either 
to Sin, or to Danger and Miſchief. 
| C H AP. XXVIL 
Counſel againff Selfecon-eitedneſs, 1, 2: The evil Eferof Envy, q The 
Praiſes of a Faithful Friend, 5 lo. The different Fruits of Prudence 
and Folly, 11, 12, Sundry Rules and Cautions, 13, — 27. 

Oaſt not thy ſelf of Fro morrow 4, for thou know- 

. eſt not what a day may bring forth 5, 
#@ Of any good thing which thou purpoſeſt to do,or hopeſt to re- 
ceive to morrow,or hereafter : the time being here put Metonymie 
cally for things done or had in the time, as Deut; 4: 3 2. Eccleſ: 2. 
23. Theſame caution is given, Jam: 4: 13, &c- b What may hape 
pen in the ſpace of one day, which may binder thy deſigns or ex. 
peQtations, Theday is ſaid to bring forth what God by his Almighty 
Power and Providence doth ejther cauſe or ſuffer to be brought 
forth or done in it. 

2 Let another man praiſe thee, and not thine own 
mouth c 2 a ſtranger, and not thine own lips. 

c Except it be really neceſſary,cither for thy own juſt vindication 
or for the honour of God, or for the edification of others, in which 
Caſes this hath been allowed & praQtiſed by wiſe and virtuous men, 
as particularly by St. Paul, 2 Cor; 11: 12. 

3 A itone 3s + heavy,and the ſand weighty;but afaols + 
wratlr is heavier 4 than them both. 

a More grievous and iatollerable, zz being without cauſe, without 
meaſure, and without end. 

4 | Wrath'ss cruel, and anger is outragious,but who + Hes. 
15 able to ſtand before || envy ee Wrath i 
_ e Envy is worſe than both of them,partly becauſe it is more un< 7*lty,and 
Juſt and unreaſonable, asnot cauſed by any provocation, as wrath ger an 
& anger are, but only proceeding from a malignity of mind, wheres V7fewing 
by a Man is grieved for another Mans bappineſs,in which he ſhould || Or, Je» 
reJoyce ; partly becauſe it is more deeply rooted and implacable, ouſie, 
whereas the other paſſiens are common!y allayed ; and partly be- 
caulſs it 15 more ſecret and undiſcernible and therefore the miichie- 
vous effeCts of it are hardly avoidable;whereas wrath and anger dif. 
" ver themſelves, and ſo forewarn and forearm a man againſt the 

aNgCcre 

5 Open f rebuke is better g than ſecret þ love. 

f Heb, which is manifefed or diſtovered, either, 1. Publickly and 
before others, when it is needful,in which caſe though it pur a man 
to ſome ſhame, yet it doth him good. Or, 2. Privately,and to the 
offenders face. a plain and down=rigtt Reproof.* g More deſirable 
and beneficial. þ Which lies hid in rhe heart, and duth not ſhew it 
ſelf by friendly A&ions, and particularly by free and faithful Re- 
proof, whick is a principal End and Benefit of Friendſhip. 

6 * Faithful ares: the wounds k of afriend; but th 


kiſles] of an enemy are [| deceitful ms Fan 
? They proceed from an upright, and truly loving, and faithful ,,g , : 
Soul, and really promote the good cf the perſon reproved. k The Pequent or 
tharpeſt Reproofs which for the preſent wound his Spirit andRepu- depruable } 
tation, 1 All the fair Speeches and outward Profeſſions of Friend» 
ſhip, »: Or, are to be deprecated; are perfidious and pernicious, and 
ſuch things as one may pray to God to be delivered from them.Or, 
are forced, like things which are.procured with great difficulty, and 
many intreaties. 
'7 The full foul s tloatheth an honey-comb o SM 


* to the hungry ſoul every bitter thing is ſweet, res 
» A man whoſe appetite or deſire ( which1s oft expreſſed in Scri« + Job 67, 
pture by the name of Soul ) is fully ſatisfied. o The moſt delicious 

meats: The deſign of this Proverb is to ſhew the inconvenience that 

oft times attends upon plenty, and the advantage of Poverty, that 

the Rich might learn moderation, and the Peor content. 

8 Asabird that wandereth from her neſt p, ſo is a 


man that wandereth from his place q. 

Þ Thar flies very much abroad from place to place, whereby ſhe 
1s expoſed to all the arts of Fowlers, and to Birds of Prey, from 
which the is ſafe whileſt ſhe keeps her N=ſt. q That through vanix 
ty or lightneſs changeth the placz ofhis zbcde,or,hisCailing&courſs 
of Life, the ill effects whereof have been frequently obſerved and 
_ evenin vulgar Prove: bs, as when we ſay, A rolling ſtone gathers 
no Moſs. 


9 Ointment and perfume rejoyce the heartr; ſo deth | 


theſweetneſs of a mans friend + by hearty counſel 5s THeb: 
r By increaſing and comforting the ſpirits. « No leſs grateful and = 

pleaſant is the company and converſation of a true friend,in reſpect counſel of 

of his good and faittful counſel which comes from his very Heart the Jeuls 

and Soul, and contains his moſt inward and ſerious Thoughts, where- 

as deceitful perſons give ſuch counſels,not as they think co be beſt, 


but as moſt lerve their Luſts or Deſigns. 


10 Thine own friend and thy fathers friend t forſake 
not ; neither go into thy brothers houſe. « in the day 
of thy calamity for * better is a neighbour x that is near «qi 
thana brother far off. © &18:246 
: Of whoſe friendſhip thou haſt had long experience. « To wit, 
for comfort and relief, and ſo as to forſake or negl:& thy friend for 
him. x The friend mentioned in the beginning of the Verſe, who 
hath ſhewed himſelfto be a true and good neighbour, y Either 1, In 
place by cohabiration. Or rather 2, In affection, in which reſpect 
God is off ſaid to be neer to the righteous» and far from the Wick= 


ed. 
11 *My ſon, bewiſe,and make my heart glad, that 
I may anſwer him that repfoacheth me z. 


* 


"Jam", 
13. &c, 
T Heb: to 


morrow day 


of E b. heas 
Vneſs, 


© bpprarcg 


f Heb: 


3 


but 


J> 


+ Ch:t0? 
1: & 23:34 


Earth, that wild bcalts paſſing that way, might fall into them,and 


z For being the father of a wicked 1on, as ifI had eiter —_—— 
li 


Chz P.X XVI 


of 6 


20; 


Q 
I9.; 


bear, 


> 
fil 


197 
244 


- 
23:34 


; Chap. 


"Chap 


20:16. 


"Crap, 
3016, 
Aab;2: 5. 


&6 4, 
"Chap, 


3. 


\Heb ſet an 


eart, 


XXVII. 


him as a curſe from God, or made him ſo by my example,or by the 
negleC& of his education. See Ezek: 16; 44: 1 Tim. Z: 4+ ; 

12 Aprudent.wan forſeeth the evil, and hideth him- 
ſelf, bat the ſimple paſs on, and are puniſhed 5. 

a This was delivered Chap. 22.3. andis here repeated to enforce 
the foregoing Exhortation, by repreſenting the great advantage cf 
Wiſdom. 

12 * Take his garment that is ſurety for a ſtranger, 


and take a pledge of him for a ſtrange woman 9». 

b Pcflibly this is here repeated asa part of the Fathers counſel] to 
his Son begun v- 11. to avoid raſh Suretyſhip.to which young Men 
are moſt prone, and by which they are expoſed in the beginning of 
their days ro many ſins and miſeries, which they carry with them 
to their graves. ; . 

14 He that bleſſeth his friend c wich a loud voice d, 
riſingearly in the morning e, it ſhal be counted a curle 
tohim f. 

c Thar Calureth or praiſeth. and applaudeth him to his face, as 
the manner of flatterers is. 4 Thar both he, and others may be 
ſureto tk: norice ofit, e To perform this Office. to ſhew his 
orcat forwardnels, and diligence, and zeal in his Service, which 
was the cuſtom of the Romans afrerward, and poſſibly of ſome of 
the Jews at this time. f His friend will value this kind of bleſſing 
no more thn a curſe, becauſe it plainly diſcovers a baſe deſign, and 
is an high refle&ion upon him, as if hee:ther did nor underſtand 
ſuch grots and palpable flattery, or were ſo ridiculoully vainglori- 
ous as tO be pleaſed wich it. : : 

I5 ” A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and 
a contentious woman are alike g- 

g Are c<qually troubleſome, the firſt not ſufferinga man to go a- 
broad wirh comfort, rheslatter not permitting him not to ſtay at 


home with quietneſs. Hs 
15 Whoſoever hideth her h,hideth the wind z,and the 


ointment of his right hand & which bewrayeth 3t ſelf. 

þ i: e. Attempts tq imother or bridic her paſſon,that it may not 
break forch to her ſhawe,and to his own diſcomfort and reproach. 
i Undertakes that which is impoſſible. k Which being the great 
inſtrument of ation by its much ſtirring diffuſeth rhe ſavour of it. 

17 Iron ſharpeneth iron /, ſo a man ſharpeneth the 
countenance of his friend wm. 

1 Tron Cutting-tools are made bright, and ſharp, and fir for uſe 
by rubbing them againſt the File, or ſome other Iron. m2 So a Man 
who being alone is ſad, and dull,and ur: Aive,by the Company and 
Converſation of hisFriend is greatly refreſh<d,his very wits are ſhar= 
pened, and his Spirit revived, and he is both firred for and provok- 


<dto Action. The Countenance is here put for- the Mind or Spirit, Þ 


who!e Temper or Diſpoſition is commonly viſible in Mens Coun- 
TCenances. 

13 Whoſo keepeth the fig-tree », ſhal eat the fruit 
thereof; ſo he that waiteth on his maſter o ſhal be ho- 
noured p. 

n Which he mentions becauſe they abounded in Canaan,and were 
more valued and regarded then other Trees, o That terves him 
faicrhfully, prudeatly, and diligently. p Shal receive that reſpe& 
and Recompente which he deſerves. 

19 As 11 water face anſwereih tQ face, ſo the heart 
of man to man q, 

q The ſenſe is :1ther 1: As the image of a Mans Face in the wa- 
ter anſwers to i:1s natural Face who looks into 1t;or,as in water one 
Mans Face is like anothers, the Difference of Mens Faces being nor 
there viſiole ſo one Man icſembles another, either in the Temper 
of his Mi 1d or Body, in which many Men are alike one to another; 
or in the Corruption of his Nature, in whichal! are alike. Or 2.As 
a Man may ſeehis own Face if helcok into the Water, which is Na- 
rurzs Looking glaſs,or into any other Looking-glaſs,jo a Man! may 
ditcern his own Heart, if he look into thoſe Glaſſes whereby ic dil- 
covers it ſelfzif he examine his Thoughts and Inclinations, together 
with the general courte of his Acti:ns, Or, 3. As the Face ofa 
Man ſtanding by the Waters, 1s viſible not only to himſelf, bur to 
others,by the Shadow or Image of it in the Waters,ſfo the Heart of 
a Man is in ſome meaſure diſcernible, not only to himſelf, but to o- 
thers allo, who obſerve his Diſpoſition and Carriage. 

20 *Helland deſtruttion are F never full e, ſo * the 


eyes s of man are never ſatisfied. 
r The Graye devours all rhe Bodies which are put into it, and is 


fHcb. not- alwaysready to rec ive and devour more and more without end, 


"Feel; 8.5 5: e, The Defres which work and diſcover themſzIves by the Eyes 


1 John 2. 16. and other Senſes : for otherwiſe che Eyes in themiclves 
are neither capable of Satisfaction nor of Diſfarisfaction. 
21 * As the fining- pot for ſilver :, and the furnace 

for gold, ſo is a man to- his praiſe «. 

tis appointed an4 uſed for the trial of S;1ver, and the Detection 
ad ſeparation of the Drois fiom it. « Or, accoraing to his Praiſe, 
The fenfe is. Soa Man is known by his Praites, -either 1. By the 
quality of thoſe who praiſe and applaud him; and as they are good 
or bad ſois he thought to be.Or 2.By his Carriage under Prailſes; as 
he carries himſeJfeither kumb'y and mod:ſt'y with Thankfuilnefs to 
God, aid a due feofe of his own Infirmittes, which is the Caſe and 
and Temper of a good Man; or aibiticuſly and vaingloriouſly ta- 
king to kimlelf che tonour which he thouid give to God,as ungod- 
ly M-n g:nerally do in that Caiz, | 

22 Though thou (bouideit bray a foolx in a mortar, 
among wheat with a peiti!, yer will not his fooliſhneſs 
depart from him. 

x Not a natural but a moral and wi'ful Fool, who by long con- 
t nuance in Sin is hardened and ſtupified, and ſo incorrigible un 
des all the means of Ameniment. 
23 Be thou diligent ro know che ſtate of thy flock y 
4 + look well zto thy herds. 

y Thar thou may ſt preſerve and improve what thou 13ſt, and take 
Care thag thine Expentes may not exceed thing Incomes: Flocks and | 


P RR OF-E 8 Ras 


Herds are here put for all Riches and Poſſeſſions, becauſe anciently 
they were the chief part of a Mans Riches. x Heb. ſer thine hears, 
Truſt nor wholly to thy Servants, as many do,thart they may give 
up themſelves wholly ro Eate and Pleaſure, bur make uſe of thine 
own Eyes and Reaſon for the Condu& of rhine Afﬀairs, leſt thou 
come to ruin?, as many have done by this very means. 


endure | to every generation? 


take care to preſerve and improve it. 
a condition of the greateſt Fionour and Plenty. If a man had the 
Wealth ofa Kingdom without provident Care and due Diligence, 
ir would quickly be brought ro nothing. Hence the greateſt Kings 
have minded Husbandry, as Solomon, Uzziah, and others. 

25 The hay appeareth,and the tender graſs ſheweth 
itſelf c,and herbs of the mountains d are gathered e. 

c Tn their proper Seaſons. Theſe things may be here mentioned, 
either 1. As the matrer of his Diligence. 
and Graſs may be well managed, and ſeaſonably gathered for the ute 
of thy Cattel. Or rather 2. As another Argument and Encourage- 
ment to Diligence, becauſe God invites thee to it by the plentitul 
. proviſions wherewith he hath enriched the Earth for thy ſake. Thou 

necdeft not compaſs Sea and Land for them, for God puts them in- 
to thy hand if thou will ſt butreceive them. d Even the moſt barren 
parts afford thee their help. e Or, are to be gathered.as ſuch Paſlive 


Verbs are oft ofed; they areRipe and ready for the gathering. So 
this Clauſe ſuits beſt with the former. 


are the price of the field g. 

f By their Wool and Skins, either uſed to cloath thy ſelf with;or 
ſold to purchaſe all manner of Cloathing for thy ſelf and Family. 
z By the Sale whereof thou may'ſt either pay the Rent of the Field 
which thou hiceſt, or purchaſe Fields or Lands for thy ſelf. Either 
Goats are put for all Cattel,or he mentions Geats,becauſe theſe might 
better be ſpared and fold than Sheep, which brought a more certain 
and coſtanr profit to the Owner» | 

27 And thou ſhalt have goats milk enough for thy food 
b, for the food of thy houſhold, and for F maintenance 
for thy maidens z. | 

b Or, If thou chuſeſt rather to keep than to ſe!] thy Goats, the 
Milk of them will ſerve thee for Food to thy ſc!f,and to thyFamily. 
In ancient times men uſed a plain and ſimple Diet,and neither knew 
nor uſed that Curioſity and Luxury in it which Afﬀer- Ages inven- 
ted, i Who are named, becauſe this Nouriſhment was more pro- 
per for the weaker Sex, whereas men required a ſtronger Dier. 

C H A Þ.,  XXVIII. | 

The Charater of the Righteous and of the Wicked, with the bleſſed Fruits 
of Integrity, and evil Effefts of Sin, 1 12. Theevil of Conceal- 
ing, and bleſſednejs of confeſſing Sin, 13- The evil of Oppreſſion and 

Violence, the Benefit. of Induftry and Faithfulneſs, with ſundry other Ob= 

lervations, 5 ——-- 28, 


the righteous are bold þ as a lion. | 
a Becauſe the Conſcience of their own Guile puts themintoa con- 
tinual ExpeQation and Dread of Gods Judgments. b Are couragi- 
ous and teſolure, having the Witneſs of a good Conſcience,and the 
Aſſurance of Divine Favour and ProteQion, and the Supports and 
Conſolations of the Holy Ghoſt. 


knowledge 4 che ſtate thereof ſhal be prolonged e. 


Families, come in their ſtead, which is juſtly threatned as a Curſe, 
becaute ſuch frequent Changes are ſoJdom for the better, and com- 
monly for the worſe, and are frequently atrended with BlooJ4 and 
Slaughter, with the Change and Subverſion of Laws, with heavy 
Taxes and Charges,with the Ruine of inany Families,and with ma- 
ny ocher Miſchiefs, d By a wile and good Man,which may be un- 
derſtood either 1. ColleAively, for Men of Underſtanding, %c. as it is 
rendred in the Margent ; 2. e. when the Men or People:, of a Land 
are wiſe and good, Or rather 2. Singularly, and thateither 1.Ofa 
Wiſe andRighteous Prince,who by the good Governmentof himſelf 
ard bis Family, and Kingdom, by puniſhing and: preventing the 
T:anſgreſhons of the People, turns away Gods Wiath,and faves 
himſelf and People. Or 2. Ofany other man of eminent Wiſdom 
or Picty,who prevents this Judgment, either by his good Counſels 
given tothe Pcince and People, and entertained by: them, or by his 
Interceſſion to God;for God hath ſometimes ſpared a People for the 
fake of one Man, as he did Zoar for Lot, Gen. 19. 20, 21. andthe J{. 
raelites for Moſes, Pfal, 106. 23, e The Land ſhal enjoy its former 
rate and Tranquility, and the Life of their good Prince ſkail be 
prolonged. BE 1 | | 
3 A poor man that oppreſſeth the poor f, 
weeping rain t which leaverh no food g. .. - 


abuſerh it to oppreſs thoſe that are poor and vnable ro reſiſt him» 
gIs like a violentRain or Flood which waſherh away the verySeeds 
which are inthe Earch,and ſpoileth tlie Corn and Fruits which are 
u20N it. He is the worſt of ail Oppreflors, becauſe as he is of a baſe 
Mind, which alio1s made muca worſe by a ſadden Change and E- 
levationinto an high Condition, ſo his own Neceſlities inflame his 
Deſires,and make him greedy to take all, vea,cven the ſmall Advan- 
rages of enriching himſelf. Which che Ancients expreſſed: by the 
Similitude of an empry Horſeleach, which ſuckerh . much more 
| ſtrongly than that which is alrea iy filled 3 *and of a dry Speriye, 
| which licks up fac mere water than that which was wet before» 


4 * They thar forſake che law þ praiſe the wicked 
j : but fuch as keep the law contend with them &. 


5 affociare 


Take care tnar thy Hay - 


26 The lambs are for thy cloathing f, and the goats 


Chap.X XVIII 


24. For Þ riches a are for ever,and doth the crown TY how ll 


+ Heb. #|| 

a Or, Treaſure. The Senſe is, W har thou coſt now poſſcſs,or haſt generati 
laid ups will not laſt always, but will ſoon be ſpent,it thou doſt not and gener, 
6 By which be underſtands zen. 


Heb-lifee | 


b hes * wicked flee when no man purſueth s z but * Lev:26 
17336« 


2 For the tranſgreflion of a land, many « are the ho 
princes thereof : bur [| by a man of underſtanding and derflanding 


and wiſdom 

c Either 1. Together, contending for Supremacy. Or rather 2. ſhal they - 
Succeſſively, as appears from the following . Clauſe, Their Princes {#**® iſe be 
are ſoon cut cf, and other perſons, and oft times perſons of other 279g 


7s like a f Heb» 
Without 
f When a poor Man being advanced into a place of Autkwwy 


F 


.. #Pſc10. 
þ That live in the Contempt of, and Diſobedience ro Gods L:w. Rom. x. 
;Honour thear ha: ns * to P/al; 15, 4. freely and familiarly 32: 


bh 


' 


: 

}| 

x} 
il 


436 


fr 
i! 


: 

j | 
; 

| 

L | 
| 
j ' 


j 


1 
| 
! 
: 


f j : 
's0 F ; 
[ 


— 
PE IS SG 


_— __ : 


lECES CITI EEE: PET URN Ix. EET 


RE ——_ canes ——_— ==> - 
—————_— ca GOIN IIs 


— ——_ £26 
CTCL CE Ee  -lcatrapeakl 
\ 8 - * « . 


ed. 


—_— > 


Yo 


f 


hap. XVII 41. 2d 


from praiſing or applauding them,that they ſeverely rebuke them, 
and to the utmoſt of their power oppoſe them in their wicked En- 


terprizes. 
Evil men underſtand not / judgment #:but* they 


that ſeek the LORD » underſtand all:hirgs o. 

I Becauſe their Minds are naturally blind, and are farther t1inded 
by their own Prejudices and Paſſijons,and by the God of this World 
who rules in and over them» mi. & What is juſt and right ; what 
is their Duty in all Cafes and Conditions, as Jzdgment is frequently 

underſtood, » By diligent ſtudy of his Word, and by fervent Pray- 
ers to him for Advice. o Which are neceilary to be known by 

em, either for thediſcharge of all their preſent Duties to God 

and Men, or for their everlaſting Heppinelss ; 

6 * Better p is the poor that walketh in his upright- 
neſs, than be that 3s perverſe F i» bis ways q, though 
he be rich. L | 

p In a much ſafer and happier Condition, 9 Heb. in two ways, hal- 
ting between two ways, pretending to Virtue,but prattiſing Vice; 
I or, covering his wicked Defigns with good Pretences;or lometimes 

_ erring on one hand, and ſometimes on the other, as wicked Men 


_ - commonly do, ; 
_ 7 * Whoſo keepeth the law, isa wile ſon r : but he 


th gturcens that [| is a companion of riotous men 5, ſhameth bis fa- 


ther ?. 
Y- And conſequently a Credit and Comfort to his Father, as hath 
been oft noted before. 5 Which is both a manifeſt Violation of 
Gods Law, which forbids this Society,and is the ready way to a to- 
tal and fin! Apoſtacy from God, and from his Law.z B:cauſe he is 
a foobſh Son. : ; 
8 * He that by uſury and f unjuſt gains increaſeth 


Ch;19:1 


. 


Chap. his {ubſtance,he ſhal gather it for him that will pity the 
J7222, 

elec. PYOT Xs : 

5. " # Heb. Byuſury and ( cr, 0r ) encreaſe, i: e. by any kind of Uſte 


: , whereby the Poor are opprefſ*ed.as is implied from the oppoſite 
o— Cluſe;or Way Cortethones Profiles: See [0 of theſe Words, 
and of this thi:g on Exod:22: 25, Lev: 35: 3Ge Pſal: 15: 5- Ezek: 18, 
$8. x It ſhall.nor Jong continue with him or his, but ſhal by Gods 
rightecus and powertul Providence be diipoſed into more juſt and 
merciful hands. 2 

* He that turneth away his ear from hearing the 


*F£66:18 law y, even his prayer ſhal be abomination z. 

y That obſtinately refuſeth to yield Audience or Obedience to 
Gods Commands. z To God, whoſe Law he deſpiſed, God will 
abhor and reje& his Perſon, and all his Services. 

Io * Whoſo caufeth the righteous to go aſtray in an 
evil way @, he ſhal fall himſelf inco his own pit ; bur 


the upright (hal have good things in pollefiion 6. 

a That by evil Counſel, or Ex2mple, or Artifice, draws them in- 
to ſuch PraQtices as expoſe rhem to great Danger and Miſchief 
b Skal! by Gods good providence towards him, both keepthe Good 
of which the Wicked ſecks to deprive him,and eſcipe that Miſchief 
which he plotteth againſt himf | 

1t The rich man 7s wile + in his own conceit c: but 


the poor that hath underſtanding fearcheth him out . 

- £ Thinks himſclfco be wiſe when he 15not,being puffed up with 
the Opinion of his Riches, which alſo he imputes to his own Wiſ- 
dom, and wirftthe Admirations and Applauies of Flatterers,which 
commonly attznd upon them. d Knoweth him better than-he know. 
eth li:mſclf, and, looking through a!l his pomp and vain fhew, he 
ſees him to be what indeed he is, a fooliſh and miſerable Man, not- 
withſtanding ofall his Riches, and diſcovers the Folly ofhis Words 
and Aﬀtions, f | 
© >. _ 12 * When righteous wen do rejoyce e there is great 

*Ver,28. glory f; but when the wicked rife g, a man is || hid- 
1 Chop.11: denh. 

—_ e Areencouraged and promoted to plazes of Truſt and Power, 
Eccl:10:6, f In thar Common-wealth. The ſtate of that Kingdom is honourable 

Ts and comfortable,and ſafe, ſo as good Men can ſhew their Faces wich 
Sought for. Courage and Confidence. g Are advanced to Honour and Authori- 
ty- b The ſtate of tat Nation is ſo ſhameful and dangerous, that 
wiſe and good Men, who only are worthy of the Name of Mex, with- 
draw themſelves, or run into Corners and obſure Places; part]y out 


eaſe. 


+ Heb:in 
15 EET. 


ries of wicked Oppreſſors,and the Judgments of God, which com- 
monly follow ſuch perſonsand their Conf:derates in Sin. Or, as 
others, both ancient and later Interpreters render it, a man is ſought 
out. Sober and good Men who had retired themſelves, are ſea: ched 
for, and brought forth like ſheep to the ſlaughter,as being molt ſu- 
ſpetted, and hated, and feared by bl-ody 'Lyrants: 

13 * He that covereth his ſins ; ſhal not proſper & : 
but whoſo confeſſeth and forſaketh *hew 1 ſhal have 


mercy m. 
# That doth not confeſs them ( as appears by the oppoſite clauſe) 
to God, and to Men too, when occaſion requires ir. That being 
convinced or admoniſhed of his Sins, either juſtifieth,or denie:h, or 
E- excuſeth them. & Shal notſucceed in his Dcſign of avoiding Pu. 
: niſhment by ' the Concealment of his Sins;ſhal nor find mercy, as is 
implied fromthe next Claule, ! By hearty Diſlike and Hatred of all 
his Sins and by a reſolved Ceffation from a'finful Courte of Life. This 
is added, to fhew, that although the diſſembling or hiding ones 
Sins is ſufficient for his Damnation,yet meer confeſſion without for- 
ſaking of Sin is not ſufficient for Salvation. » Both from God who 
| hath promiſed, and from Men who are ready to grant Pardon and 
Favour to ſuch pertons, 


14 Happy is the man z that feareth o alway p: * but 
he that hardneth his heart 9g ſhal fall into miſchief. 

» Becauſe be ſhal thereby avoid that Miſchief which befals fear- 
leſs Sinners,which is expreficd in the next Clauſe,and procure that 


Pſ:32.3, 
Ee, 
\ 2 John 1: 


Q, 10g 


Ls. Al 


* Rom'11 
20. 


Eg RK B % 


ments of God, Who having confeſſed and forſaken his Sins, as was 
now ſaid, is afraid to return to them again, and careful to avoid 
them,and all occaficns of them. þ In all Times, Companies, and 
Conditions ; notonly in the time of great troub/e, when even Hy. 
pocrites will in ſome ſort be afraid of inning, butin times of outward 
Peace and Proſperity. q Thar goeth on obſtinately and ſecurely in 
ſinful Courſes, caſting cff due Reverence to God, and juſt Fear of 
his Threatnings and Judgments. 


15 As aroaring lion,and a tanging bear r,ſo is a wic- 
ked ruler s over the poor people. 

r The Lyon and Bear are always cruel and greedy in their natures, 
and eſpecially when they are hungry and want Prey, in which caſe 
the Lions roar Pſal. 1041 21, {/#. 31+ 4.and Bears range abour for it. 
5 Inſtead of bei''g a nurſing Father, avd faithful and tender Shep- 
herd,as he ought to be,he is a cruel and inſatiable Oppreflor & De- 
vourer of them. £ Whom heparticularly mentions, either to note 
his policy in opprefling them on'y who were unable to withſtand 
him, or to revenge themſcIvesof him ; or to aggravate his Sin in 


devouring them, whom the Laws of God, and common Humanity 
bound him to relieve and prote&; or to expreſs the effe& of his 
ill government,in making h15 people poor by his frauds and rapines, 
16 The prince that wanteth underſtanding, 3s alſo 
a great oppreſlor « ; bat he that hateth covetouſneſs x, 
ſhal prolong his days y. 
u The Tyranny orOppreſhon of aPrince,though by ſome account- 
ed Wiſdom, is 1n truth a minifeſt aCt and ſign of g:eat folly becauſe 


| it, 10 971 ſhal ſlay him : none ſhal deſire or endeavour to ſave him 


it altenareth from him theHearts of hisPeople,in which his Honour, 
and Satety,and Riches conſiſt,and off times cauſerh the ſhortning of 
his days, either from Gcd,who cuts him off by fome ſudden judge- 
meut, or from men who are injured by him 3nd exaſperat=&d againſt 
him. » Whichis the chief cauſe of al! Opprefſions and unjuſt pra« 
Qices, y By Gods favour, an{ the peace and fatisfaftion of his 
own mind and the hearty love of his people which makes them 
carefui to preſerve his life by their fervent Prayers to God for him, 
by willingiy hazarding their own Eſtates and Lives for bim, when 
occaſion requires it, and by all other poſſib'e means/ 

17 A man that doth violence to the blood of any per- 


{on 2,ſhal flee to the pit a ; let no man ſtay him 6. 

z That ſheddeth any mans Blood,or taketh away his Life unjuſt. 
ly. a Shal ſpeedily be deſtroyed being purſued by Divine Venge= 
ance,and rhe Horrours of a guilty Conſcience, and the Avengers of 
Blood #5So it is a prohibition that no man ſhould endeavour to ſave 
rhe Life of a wilful Murderer, either by interceſſion. orby offering 
farisf:Qtion,or any other way. Of which ſee Gen: 9, 6. Exod: 21; 144 
Numb. 35.31 Or as the ancientand many other Interpereters render 


from his deſerved puniſhment : He ſhal die without pity, being an 
obje& of publick hatred. 

18 * Wholo waiketh uprightly, ſhal be ſaved c : but 
be that is perverſe in his ways 4, ſhal fall ac once e. 

© To wit,from deſtruction, becauſe God hath vnderteken- and 
promiſedzto prote& him. d Heb. in two ways, cf which phraſe ſee 
above on v, 6. eOnce for all, ſo as he ſhal not need a ſecond thruſt, 
1 Sam; 26. 8, and ſo as he ſha) never r;:ſe more. Or one, to wit, 
of his ways, Though ke hath varions wais aid arts to ſecure him- 
feif yer none of them ſhall fave him, but he ſhal periſh in one or 0. 
ther cf chem,and ſha) be given up by God ro the. miſtake of hi; way 
rhat he ſhal chuſe that courſe which will be moſt pernicious to- 
hi 


*Ch.ro!3; 


ms 
19 * He that tilleth his land ſhal have - plenty of + ,,;u1 
bread : but he that followeth after vain perſons f, hal 


have poverty enough. 

 F Chuſing their Company, .and imitating their Example; who 
gives up himſelf eo vanity and idleneſs, and ſo is fitly oppoſed to 
the diligent man in the former clauſe. 


20 * Afﬀaichful man g ſhal abound with bleflings; but * Ch. jz. 
he that maketh haſte b6 to be rich, ſhal not be || in- 11.& 5 


nocent 4. 21, 0 8 

g Heb, 4 man of truth, or truths, who deals truly and juſtly in all 3 im 6 
his bargains and tranſa&.ons with men.h More than God alloweth 2D 
him ; that takerh the neareit and readieſt way to Riches.whether it 
be right or wrong ; that is unf:itiful and unjuſt in bis dealings, 7 
Shall not obtain the bleſſings which he ſecks,but ſhall bring curſes 
and miſeries upon him inſtead of them. 


l Or ule | 
puniſhed 


of Grief and Shame to behold the Wickedaefs which: he publickly | 
and impatiently committed; and partly to avoid the Rage and Inju-' 


21 * To have reſpec of perſons, 6 not good: for, ' Ch185 
for a piece of bread that man will tranſgreſs &. SETS 
k When a Man hath once vitiated his Conſcience and accuſtomed 
himſelf to take Bribes a very ſmall advantage will make him ſe!) Ju= 
ſtice, and his own Soul into the Bargain. The deſign of the Proverb 
15 to warn men to take heed of the beginnings of that fin, and con- 
ſequently of other ſins. 


22 He that haſfteth to be rich,hath an evileye /,|| and a or 
conſidereth not that poverty ſhal come upon him m. Dd 


tIs uncharitable to perſons in want, envicus towards thoſe who hafteth t 
get any thing beſides him,and covetous or greedy of getting Riches ;,7,;h, 
by all ways pofſible,whether juſt or unjuſt. Thus ay evil Eye is Ta- yerſe 201 
ken Prov. 23. 6« Mat. 20. 15.as a good Eye notes the contrary diſpo- Ch,28.20; 
ſition, Prov; 22+ 9. m And conſequently that he ſhal need the pity 
and help of others,which he cannot expe&either from God or men 
who hath ſo hardened himſelf againſt orhers in miſery. 

23 * Hethat rebuketh a man, afterwards » ſhall find 
more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue» 

» When he comes calmly co conſider the fidelity of the Reprover 
and rhe benefit coming to himſelf yy the Reproof, and withal the 
baſeneſs and miſchief of flattery. 


24 Whoſo robbeth bis tather or his mother, and + 14,6, 4 
faith », Ir is no tranſ{greflion ; the ſame is the COMP2- Mar de- 
nion of f a deſtroyer 0. frreying, 

» In his Heart,ſuppoſing that he hath a right to his Fathers goods Þ 
o Either 1. he hereby ſheweth that he is fallen into ſuch wickea So- 


cicty, from whom he had ſuch counſel or example, Or 2..he wy 
C15 


*Ch, 27:6; 


| aſſociate themſelves with them,and approve of their ſinful Courſes; | eternal Salvation which they loſe, o To wit,the Offence and Judge- | 
all which proceeds from their great Likeneſs ro them. & Are lo far } 


Jatioi 


"Job 
a6 


lor,/ 


Cit J 0n 


511 


Chap. XXIX. 


* leſs guilty thin a Thief who robs and d:?Ttroys men upon the High- 
waiy:hzis a Thief and Robver,b:cauſe he hath no right to the a&tu- 
al poſſeſſion ofhis Fathers goods before his Death or without his 
. conſent. ; 

*Ch. 13- 25 * He that is ofa proud heart p ſtirreth up ſtrife 9: 

_ but he that putteth his cruſt in the LORD -, ſhall be 
made fat 5s. 
p Whoſe property it is to-overvalue himſelf,and to truſt to him- 


ſelf and his own Wit, or Wealth, or Strength, q Becauſe he makes : 


it his great buſineſs to advance and pleaſe himſelf, and hateth and | 
opp>oſeth all that ſtand in his way,and deſpiſeth other men, and is | 
very jeaious of his konour and impatient of the leaſt ſlighting,or af- | 
front,or injury,and indulgeth his own paſſions;and theretore ſhalnor ' 
| be fat, but lean and miſerable,as is implyed from the oppoſite clauſe. 
+ Whichis mentioned as a plain and certain evidence of an humble 
Man,who is mean and vile in his own Eyes,and therefore truſts not 
to himſelf,but to God only,making Gods will,and not his own will 
and paſſion, and Intereſt, the Rule of all his Aﬀtions,and can ea- 
fily deny himſelf,and yield to others,all which are excellent preven- 
tives of ſtrife. s Shalillive happily and comfortably ,becauſe he avoids 
that ftrife which makes mens lives miſerable, 
26 He that truſterh in his own heart # is a fool «:but 


whoſo walketh wiſely x;he ſhal be delivered y. 

£ Who truſts to his own wit,nzgleting or {lighting the advice of 
others,and the counſel of God himſelf. « And thal receive the fruit 
of his folly, to wit,deſtrution: x Diſtruſting his own jJudgment,and 
ſeeking the advice of others,and eſpecially of God, as all truly wiſe 
men do. y from thoſe dangers and miſchiefs which fools bring u- 

\ pon themſelvesz whereby he ſheweth himielfco be a wiſe Man. 

| 27 * He that giveth unto the poor ſhal not lack s : 

t.22.9. bur he that hideth his eyes ||, thal have many a curſe F. 

z Sha'l not impoveriſh himſelf by ir,as covetous men imagine or 
pretend, but ſhall be inr:ched, which is implied. |! Leſt he ſhould 
ſee poor and miſerable men,and thereby be moved to pity or obliged 
to relieve them. So h:cunningly avoids the b<gianings and oCcca- 
ſions,am(} provocations to Charity, teaching us to uſe the ſame cau- 
tion againſt ſin.f Partly from the Poor, whoſe Curſes being not cauſ- 
leſs ſhal come upon him, and partly from God, who will curſe his 
very Bleſſings, and bring him to excream want and miſery. 

28 * When the wicked riſe,men hide themſelves F : 

* Ver.12. but when they periſh, the righteous increaſe ||. 

Cheng. 2s + 44-1. i:e. righteous men, as appears from the following clauſe, 

are aſhamed and afraid to appear puvlickly ; of which ſee on v. $2: 
|| They who were righteous do now again appear in publick, and be- 
ing advanced to that power which the wicked Rulers have loſt, rhey 
uſc thei: Authority to encourage and promote Righteouſneſs,and to 

puniſh Unrizhteoutneſs, whereby the number of wicked menis di- 

miniſhed, and the righteous are multiplied. 

C H A P. XXIX. 

The Excellency of Wiſdom, with Rules for Goyernmnent, 114; The Pa» 
recs Duty to correfF their Children, 15 17. The miſery of them 
that know not Gods [Law, 18- Of Anger, Pride, Thieving, Cowardiſe 
and Corruption, 19 —— 26, The godly and wicked an abominationtoeach 
other, 27. 


FE! E that being often reproved, hardneth h;s neck a, 
FHeb. * f| © hal ſuddenly be deſtroyed, and that without re- 


Man of re medy b. 

Proojis a Is incorrigible and obſtinately perſiſts in thoſe ſins for which 
he is :eproved. 6 Utterly and irrecoverably, 

»Chirco 2 * When the righteous are-[||in authority c, the 


& 28.12, people rejoyce d: but when the wicked beareth rule 
28, the people mourn e. 

5 c:Which interpreration is confirmed from the oppoſite clauſ?, The 
7” Hebrew word fiznifiesto increale either in number, or in dignity 


creaſed. nd power. &d For the bleſſed eff As of their good government, 
e-Both for the oppretions and miſchiefs which they feel, and for the 
dreadful Judgments of God which rhey juſtly fear. 

*Chixozrt 2 * Whoſo lovech wiſdom f, rejoyceth his father : 


& 15.20. * but he that keepeth company with harlots g,ſpendeth 
& 27.11. þjs ſubſtance 6. 
Ch.5.9. f And therefore hateth and eſcheweth all folly and wickedneſs 
L = . g Whereby he plainly diſcovers himleif ro want Witdom;of which 
UK.15-13- fee Prov. 7+ 7, Oc. þ Whereby he not only ruineth himſelf 3 bur 
+ Heb, » alſo grieveth his Father, as is implied from the oppoſite Clauſe, 
Men ofoþ. 4 The king by judgment 3 ſtabliſheth the land: but F 
iazios, he that receiveth gifts &, overthroweth ic. 
; By the free and impartial exerciſe of Juſtice, k& Heb, @ Man 
( for he would nor vouchſafe to call him a King,as being unworthy 
of that Name and Office } of Oblations, or Gifts, i. e. whole delight 
and common prattice it is to take Bribes, and fell Juſtice. | 
A man that flattereth his neighbour &, ſpreadeth a 
net for hisfeer /. 
k That praiſeth or applaudeth another in a ſinful ſtate or courſe: 
IKills him under a pretence of kindneſs: is an occaſion of his fin, 
and conſequently of deſtruttion, which poſſibly he may deſign to ac- 
compliſh by that means. 
6 In the tranſgreflion of an evi! man there is aſnare 
2: but the righteous doth (ing and rejoyce ». 


P ROYERSB% 


and wilfulneſs, by their wicked counſels and courſes whereby they 
ſeduce and infect the generality of the people,by their contempt of 


God, of his juſt Laws and righteous Jud 4 IX 
and Advica of wiſe men. S Judgments,and of the Qpinions 


; Juſt ſeek his ſoul s. 


, 
t 
i 


» Expoſe it to Gols wrath and to de trutionby their ſelf conceit 


; 
+ ' 


s Who do not ſcorn, but hexrken to the 
Counſels of God and of prudent. men- £ The wrath of God or of 
men who were enraged againſt it. 

9 If a wiſe man contendeth with a fooliſh man. «, 
whether he rage or laugh, there 5s no reſt. 

z Either judicially, or otherwiſe debatjog any matter with him, - 
endeavouring to convince him of any error. x Whether he, the wiſe 
man, rageth ( or is angry ) or laugheth, i. e« whether he deal ſharply 
and ſeverely with him, rebuking him for his Folly, or mildly and 
pleaſantly imiling at it,thereis no reſt, no end or fruir of the Debate, 
the Fool willnot be ſatisfied'nor convinced. Or as it is in the He- 
brew, He (to wit, the Fool laſt named,to whom the following Car- 
rlages may ſeem more fitly to agree ) both rageth and laugheth, ( He 
will not yield nor be convinced bur perſiſts in his folly, which he 
diſcovers ſometimes by his furious 8 unbridled Paſſions,and ſome= 
times by fooliſh Laughter and Scorning) and there is no r:ft,he will 
never be quieted. 


Io | The blood-thirſty hate the upright y : 


but the +Heb. well 
y And conſequently ſeek their ruine,as is implyed from the fol- I" 
lowing Clauſe. x Either1. torequire his Soul or Lif: at the hands 
of thole who have taken it away, Or 2: to preſerve it from thoſe 
who attempt to take it away, as this phraſe is taken, P/al; 142; 4, 
though commonly it ſignifie to ſeek to deſtroy ir. in 
11 * A fool uttereth Þ all his mind s: but a wiſe *ch.14.34 

»an keepeth it in till afterwards 6. Heb../? 
_ » All at once, unneceſſarily, and unſeaſonably, without reſerva- b1s (#it« 
tion or caution. 6 Till he have fit occaſion to expreſs it. % 
12 If a ruler hearken toliesc, all his ſervants are 
wicked 4. 


c Dzlight in Flatteries or Calumnies, or any lying words or de- 
ceitfuLand wicked pra@ices, 4 Partly becauſe he chuſeth only 
ſuch for his Service 3 and partly, becauſe they are either corrupted 
by his Example, or engaged by their place and Intereſt to pleaſe 
him, and comply with his baſe Luſts. 

13 The poorand || the deceitful e man meet toge- 3 
ther f: the LORD lightneth both' their eyes g- ||. Or, ths 

© Heb. The Man of Deceits, or of Uſuriery i. e+ who hath enriched UJ*'*- 

himſelf by ſuch practices. f Converſe together, and one needeth 
the other,as Chap: 22: 2. g Either their bodily eyes with the Light of 
the Sun, which promiſcuouſly ſhines upon both; or the Eyes of 
their Minds with the light of Reaſon and Grace, which he indiffe= 
rently gives to them; and therefore the one ſhould not envy norde- 
ſpiſe the other, but be ready to do good one to another,as God doth 
good to both. 

14 * The king that faithfully judgeth the poor þ, his * Ch. 20: 
chrone ſhal be eſtabliſhed for ever. _ 

h And the rich too;but he names zhe poor,becauſe theſe are moſt op- 
prefſed and injured by others, and leafr regarded by Princes, and yet 
commitred to their more ſpecial care by the King of Kings. - 

15 * Therod and reproof 5 give wiſdom : but a | Ver:17- 
* child left to himſelf & bringeth his mother / to ſhame. , _ 
* 2 Correction and Inſtruction going together. k Suffered tro follow Et TY 
his own W1ll or Luſts without reſtraint and chaſtening. 1 And Fa- ** 
ther too ; but he names only the Mother, either becaute her Indul- 
gence oft ſpoils the Child,or becauſe Children - commonly ſtand in 
leaſt awe of their Mothers, and abuſe the weakneſs of their Sex,and 
renderneſs of their Natures. 

16 Whenthe wicked are || multiplied mn, tranſgrefſi- 1Or. A 
on increaſeth »:but * the righteous ſhal ſee their fall o. pr. - 

m Or rather,are advanced, becauſe this is oppoſed to their faling =p. —_ 
in the next Clauſe; and fo this Hebrew word is taken above,verſe 2« g 58.10: 
n Sin and Sinners aboundand grow impudenc by Impunity, and the g, g,.g, 
Example and Encouragement of ſuch Rulers. « The DeſtruQtion of 
ſuch Tranſgreſlors, in due time. 

17 * Correet thy ſon, and he ſbal give thee reſt p ; «cp.13:34 
yea, heſhal give delight unto thy ſoul. 22.15: 
p Satisfa&ion ro thy Mind, and Comfort in his Amendment. +: & 23: 13; 
18 Where there is no vilionq,the people || periſh r,but 14 _ 
he that keepeth the law s, happy zs he. | Or, #-_ 
q i:e» No Prophecy, for the Prophets were anciently «al:d Seers, ——_ 
1 Sam 9. 9. i. e, no publick Preaching of Gods Law or Word ( as ade 
appears by the oppoſite Clauſe ) which is called Prophecy, Rom: 12. 
6. 1 Cor. 14. 1, ©. Where the people are deſtitute of the means 
of InſtruQtion. r Becauſe they want the only means of Salvation. Or, 
is made naked, ſtripped of their beſt Ornaments, Gods Favour and 
ProteCtion, as this Word is taken, Exod: 32. 25. 5s This he faith ra- 
ther than, he that hath viſion, which the Laws of Oppoſition might 
ſeem to requirezto teach us, that aithough the want of Gods Word be 
ſufficieat for Mens Deſtrution, yet tne having,and hearing,or rea« 
ding of it, is not ſufficient for their Salvation, except they alſokeep 
or obey it. 
19 Aſervant # willnot be corre&ed by words « : for 
though he underſtand x he will not anſwer y. 


m His fin will bring him to dreadful horrors and certain ruine: 
x Becauſe he: hath ſweet peace jn his own Conlcicnce, and afſurance 
Job 202 of preſent ſafety and eternal happineſs, 
6 7 * The righteous o conſidereth the cauſe of the 
oor p: z2ut the wicked regardeth notto know 2t 9. 
o Whether Magiſtrate or any private Perſun concerned to know 


it, -and capable of helpinghim in it. p His poveriry neitver hin«, 


ders him from taking pains to examine it, nor from a riguteous De= 

termination of it. q Will not pur himſelf to the rrouvic of fearch- 
| Ing it out} either becauſe it yields him no profic, or becaute he rc» 
ſolves to give away his right. : 
$ Scornfulmen || bring a city jnto a ſnare r ; but wiſe 


#5e7.5 turn away Wrath 7. 


Nor, fer a 
City on fire? 


j without Blows. Compare Prov: 19: 29. x Though he know thy 


£ Who is fo nor only in Condition, but alſo in the temper of his 
; Mind, diſingenuous, perverſe, and ſtubborn. » By meer Words 


Mind, and Words, and his own Duty. y Either by Words,expre(- 
ſing his Readineſs; or by Deeds,ſCeedily and chearfully performing 
thy Commands ; but will negle& his Duty, pretending that he did 
not hear or underſtand thee. 


20 Seeſt thou a man hat is haſty || in his words z2there 10s. 5 

is more hope of a fools, thanofhimb. | Hd te 
z Orrather, in his Buſmeſs ; who is raſh and heady in the manage- | 
m-nt of his Aﬀairs. #s Who is ſenſible of his Folly,and willing to 
hearken to the Advice of others,as this Word is uſed Chap;, 26; 12, 
though commenly it be meant of a - and wicked Fool. 6b Bt= 
5 Rh 2 cue 


hap. XXX. EE OF EE RB S. Chap.XX x. | Ch 


cauſe he is ſelf. confident, and neither conſiders things ſeriouſly with; ceſſity of Inſtruction from Gods Word. and of Illumination from 
in himfelf, nor ſeeks Counſel from the wiſe. | his Spirit, without which they can never underſtand theſe matters, 
21 He that delicately bringeth up his ſervant c from vo oemyes a modeſt & humble apprehenſion of his own Ignorance, 

a child ſhal have him become 4zs ſon 4d at the length. | YHich. hath extorred ſvch like Expreſſions eyen from Heathen 
F I, him 6 k Pc 3 Familiarit s 2-6. Philoſophers; whence Pythagrras rejected the Title of a Wiſe Man 

_c Allowing him too much Freedom» and Familiarity. and Gel urn yas aſcribed to him;and Socrates, though reputed the wi. 

cious Fare, d Will find him art laſt grow infolent and preſumptuous | cr. ax, of his Age, profeſſed that he ag 6 4 fo ; - Hg wiſ: 

Ch: 15.- and forgerfal ofhis ſervile Condition. knew nothing. ; C Ys 


8: & 26, 22 * An angry man ſtirreth up ſtrife : and a furious "26 TI" , 
2 Is tan aboundeth in tranſgreflion e. ledge of the holy = YT ing Ge —_ 


T Heb. 


e Is by his Paſſion eafily tranſported into grievous and manifold . R know, : 
Sins a inſt God, and others, NS himſelf, as Swearing,and Curling, | ,F —obr waa as. _— = = _ = "_ 7 
and lolence, yea ſometimes even to Murder. R the Prophet Ames was, ms 7: 14, 15, Or, I have not "aaar" 't 15. 
Job 2zz 23,* A mans pride ſhal bring him low f: butho- | neither by my own Underſtanding and $tcdy, 069-Fopr he arm Ys wr 
9. __nour ſhal uphold the humble in ſpiric ' : ther Men. f Either 1. of the Holy Angels, who are called Holy t He 
S:15'33- FfBecauſe both God and Man conſpire againſt him and abhor him. by way ofEminency, as Deut. 33: 2 Job 15; 15. Dan: 4: 13, ent he th 


© 1$:12+ . . - . { h and 3. - . . 
..g Or, as othersrender it, without any difterence 1n the Senſe, the 13: 13. But :t was vain to deny that Angelical Knowled 
ut: 23. humble * ni ſhal holg their honour, ſhal be honoured by God and be in him, which no man imagined to be in him, and —_ 
= . Mzn, Thus Honour, like a ſhadow, flees from them that purſue it, | Not in Ada in the ſtate of Innocency.Or 2. Of the Holy Prophets 
| y E gh and follows them who flee from it. l : So the Sznſe is, I have not ſuch Divine Inſpirations as Prophets 
19 4: 24 Whoſoispartner witha thief b, hateth his own | ſtrictly focalled have received, whereby I fhould be enabled to know 
6. ro: foul: he heareth curſing &, and bewrayeth #t not /. Sea _— great Myſteries wherein you deſire Information 
1Pet:5:5;  b By receiving a ſhare of the ſtollen Goods upon condition of his me. Or 3. Of holy things, of the Mind and Will of God 
- 4 . Js *Fhe | <ONcerning Mans Salvation, and the way which leads to it, N 
concealmenr of the Thefr. # He carrierh himſelf towards it as1theſ 4,  , 9's " ; s toit, Not 
hated it ; he woundeth and deſtroyeth it- k He hearerh the woice of | © 11 gue wi _ wg ON - theſe —, bur only 
, . . . ® ad 1 . 

- ſwearing, as is ſaid, Levit. 5: 1. the Oath given to him by a Judge ſuppoſed to wk wg nd pertect Knowlege, which they falſly 


adiuring him and other ſuſpe&ed Perſons to give Information con- : | 
541g ba 1 Which big bound to do both by virtue of his Oath, 6: Whog hath aſcended up into Heaven h, F, or *Joh:3:13 + Hel 
ad for the publick Good, which ought to be preferred before all | deſcended 5? * who hach gathered the wind in his THeb' «1d hurt 1 
private ContraQts or Friendſhips. | | fiſts & ? who hath bound the waters lin a garment? who #:ſcended, with t 

25 The fear of man m bringeth a ſnare n: but who- | hath eſtabliſhed all the ends of the earch mz? what is his ook Foy” 
ſo putceth his truſt in the LORD 0, 7 ſhal be fate. name,and what js his ſons name, if thou canſt tell » ? Prog, 


+ Heb:ſha! : p44 F —__ 
. m Inordinate fear of harmor Miſchief from Men, which is fitly What: me 2 6 « ; 
P - ” . oppoſed to truſt in God, becauſe it comes from a diſtruſt of Gods #7.A I have 5 — by  Gupmaytng had? "_ x. fax - 4 
gh. " Promiſe and Provifſence- n Is an occaſion of many Sins, and of great | to Jearn the Mind of God who dwells th 5 ) ade ere 11a: 40, 
danger. both of Injuries from Men, and of fore Puniſhments from | js from above, « Or ado IE DE Nm which Os 
God. o Keeping Gods 94.5 _ ex-borg upon God to pro- | he had learned above. The meaning of the place is,No Man can ful. 
*Ehrig 6: ret tum from the Deſigns and Rage © "£ _———_ T Iy know and teach vs theſe things unleſs be hath been in Heaven, & 
+ Heb the 26 ; Many ſeck T the rulers Tavour p ; but every | ſent down from thence to the Earth to that end. Whence our Sa. 
face of « mans judgment q cometh from the LORD r. | 
* _ _ o Menſtudy to pleaſe and engage their Rulers by their obliging | *PPropriates this work of declaring Gods Nature and Will,to Men, 
: Carriage, and bumble Peritions, and all other means, ſuppoſing thae | '® himſeif,upon this account, hat he alone was in hisFatbers boſom 
to be the only way to procure either Right or Favour from them,as 7 
they need or deſire it. q The Deciſion of his Caufe, and the Suc- pleaſure? Where 15 there a Man that can do this? And nene but he 
ceſs of all bis Endeavours. r Dependeth wholly upon God who ru- who made and governs a'\the Creatures, can know and teach theſe 
lerh and inclineth theirMinds & Hearts as it pſcaſeth him,Frov:21.1, | *ings ! Thoſe above in the Clouds, and thoſe below,the Sea which 
27 An unjuſt man is anabomination to the juſt « : 


and be that is upright in the way,jis abonunation to the up in the Bowls of the Earth, 9» The whole Earth from one end 
wicked ?. to another, which God upholderh in the Air by the Ward of his Po- 'Ch:6; 

s Becauſe ſuch Men, as fuch,are hated by God,and Haters of, and | wer, and fecureth from the Rage of the Sea,by the Banks and Shores 
Enemies unto God and all Goodneſs, and publick plagues to the | wherewith he hath begirt it for that purpoſe, » The Senſe is, Either 
Church and State in which they live ; and therefore he who loves | 1-ſeing itisapparent that no Man hath this Power,and conſequent* 


theſe muſt needs hate them, as true-Friends hare thoſe who are E-| 1y this Knowledge, but that this is the Prerogative of the great God *7,b 
nemies to their Friends. t Of which ſee above onP/cr: 104 ] declare, if thou art able, his Name, #; e. his Nature and Pertecti- Je | 
HAR XXX, ons, and the erernal Generation, and the Perfecrions of his Son; bf : 2: 
Agurs Prophecy, 1. Wherein he acknowledgeth his own Ignorance, 2, 3. The Orrarher 2. It chou thinkeſt there be any ſuch Man who can do Fg 
Purity of Gods Word, with the happineſs of them that truft in him. 5. theſe things, I challenge thee to produce his Namezor, if he be long Cls 12: 
He dehorts from adding to the Scriptures, by the danger of it, 6,Th? two ſince dead,and gone out of the World, the Name of any of his Po-. 
points of hus Prayer, with ther reaſon, 7 -—— 9, | Four wicked Gene- ſterity that can aſſure us that their Progenttor was ſuch a Perſons 
rations, 10 14. Four things inſatiable, 15. Parents no: ro be de- Which becauſe thou canſt not do, I muſt conclude that none can 
jpiſed, 17, Four things hard to be known, 18, 19- The way of an aulte- throughly underſtand this matter but the bleſſed God and his Son 1 THeb: 
row Weman, 20. Four things intolerable, 24-=23. Four things litcle but Chriſt, and they to whom God ſhal reveal them by Chriſt. vealh, 
w/[e, 24» - 28. Four thing: ſtatcly, 29 ———— 31s ® og Every word of God is | pureo: he is a ſbield *Pſ12:6, 
> JT words of Agur the ſon of Jakeh 5, evez the | unco them that put their truſt in bim p. & 18:30, 
prophecy b: the man ſpake unto Ithiel even un- 0 And therefore you. 1thiel 2nd Ucal, muſt not expect the full & 19: 8 


to Ithiel and Ucal c. knowledge of Divine Myſteries from me,nor frem any Man, but &19.140. 
"'C . from the Word of God,whichis a certain Rule both of your Belief f Heb: 
_ ring _ TE any __ 47 pronto —_—_— and Practice, becauſe every part and parcel of it is Hoy and T rue, p#rifiea, 
Seine; King + : : n &T | and Good, and there is not the leaſt mixture of Falſhood and Fol! 
afrerwards,and was famous in his Generation for Wiſdom, and Pie. |; :. ere is in all the Words and Writings of M Whi 4 
ty, and Prophecyzand therefore his Proverbs werethought fit to be | p22 4h 1 leads ordsand Writing en. p Which 
added to thoſe of Solomen either by thoſe men of Hezekiah mention= ſuppoſerh their knowledge of bim by his Word, Pal. g. 10.and con« 
ed Chap; 25: 1. or by ſome other. But that this ſhould be meant of -— 7 ate ; ag upon his Promiſes, joyned with Obedience to 
Solomon, may eaſily be ſuppoſed, but cannot be proved ; nor is it w %* Agg 'F q leſt 
probable, as being contrary both to the Style of the whole Chapter 6 tnou not unto Nis words 4, 1C he r Cprove *Rev:s:, 
and to the Matter of ſome part of it, as Yer. 7,8,9.which agrees not thee F, and thou be found a liar. 18:190 
to Solommn; and to the Laws of good Interpretation, one of which | q And as the Word of God is pure,do not thou corrupt or abuſe 
is, that all Words ſhould be taken in their moſt natural and proper it,by adding to it thine own or otherMens InventionsandOpinions 
Senſe,when there is no evidence nor neceſlityof underſtanding them and delivering or receiving of them in the Name and as the Words 
improperly and figuratively, which is the preſent caſe, 6 The pro- of God, Hehere forbids only adding fo it,not diminiſhing from it, | 
phetical InſtruQtion ; for as the Prophets were publick prezchers as which yet is equally forbidden, Deut: 4: 2- and 12; 32, becauſe the 
well as Forerellers of things to come,ſo their Sermons, no leſs chan 1/raelizes then and always were, and others are more prone to add 
their PrediQtons, are commonly called their Prophecies. c Two than todiminiſh, becauſe it is more eaſie to add under colour ofin- 
Friends or Diſciples, and Contemporaries of Agr, called by thoſe terpretingzand becauſe it is more agreeable to the humour of Mane 
Names,who having a great and juſt Opinion of bis Wiſdom,defired kind, which is much delighted with its own Inventions,as the expe= i Heb 
his Inſtructions. Others, concerning {thiel and Ucsl, which they un- rience of all Ages {heweth« r By words or deeds;by diſcovering thy - his :h 
derſtand ai) Lone wo Ithiel, which _— _ | ws me, and an. folly and bringing thee to deſerved ſhame and puniſhment. "ps 
ſwers to Immanuel, which is God with us ; and Ucal, which ſignifies ; . c | 32:5, 
| Power or Prevalency. But if he had meant this of Chriſt, why ſhould h U ba _ : required s of thee, | deny me ri 
he deſign him by ſuch obſcure & ambiguous Names, as if he would xr" a Sag ”y C 6 Ity q Ns netfron me 
not be underſtood ? Why did he nor call him by the Name of Shilo #1 90 earneſtly and eſpecially defire.s Heb. Wirhboid chem nor few 
me before I die,i, e. whilſt I live,as things of great and continual ne- 


or Meſiah,or ſome other Scripture-Title belonging and aſcribed to : 
bim ? Beſides, this Interpretation agrees not with the Contents of ceſlity for thy honour and ſervice, and my own good. 


this Chapter, wherein there is only a ſhort and occaſional mention 32 Remove far from me « vani : *ve $ ſat. 61 
Ts | ity x and lies y : give * Mat: 
of Chriſt, bur the Chprer conſiſts in a manner wholly of Counſels : . om 4 | | 
and Sentences ofa quite other kind, angie neither poverty nor riches, ® feed me w : + Heb. f; 
convenient for me s : ny allw«- 


JOr, z 2 Surely I «zz more brutiſh than [ any man,and have ., From my Heart, and from the courſe of my Life. _— the pn 


_— z. not the underitanding of || a man d. firſt of Agurs Petitions. x Either 1. al vainand falſe Opiniony con» 
1 O ' 4+ Ad You come to me with a great opinion of my Wiſdom,and you cerning God or the thingsof God; all Unbelief, Idolatcy,,of Miſs 
Lhd, As expeCt thatTi ſhould inform andioſtruf you in all things,yes, even belief. Or 2, all vanity of Heart and Life: a vain Converſation,an 
mean 143, ; the greateſt Myſteries ; but you are much miſtaken in me; Iam AﬀeQation of the vain things of this World as Riches,PJeaſures, or 
as ignorant and fooliſh as other men generally are, yea morethan Honours,the bewitching power and ſad effefts whereof he had obſcr= ; 
many others. Which he utterseither «5. froma deep ſenſe of the vedin others, and feared in himſelf, as the following Requelt 1ms ga, 
commonCorruption of Humane Nature,and of the blindneſs of mens plies. y AH Falſhood and Deceir in my Words and Carriage to= 


aninds in things concerning God andtheir own Duty, and ofrhe ue» wards God or Men; # This is his ſecond Requeſt, which may feat 
{4 


| 


2, 


Chap. XXX. 


PROVERBS, 
. to have ſome reference to the former, Poverty being commonly the ' to the Crows, or Ravens, 
Occaſion and Temptation to the Sin of Lying, and Rzches being the | particularly to pick out t 


caſions of them, 
c:flities, and to that eſtate and condition of Life in which thou haſt | valley of dead be 
put me, and to that work and ſervice which thou haſt for me to do» | which therefore rhe Ray 


whovuſe to feed upon dead Carcaſes, and l | 


, OT 4 SQ Ce , ; heir eyes, as is noted by all ſorts of Wri= 
great Occaſions and Enticements to Yaniry, Thus as his firſt Peti- | ters; of which ſee my Latin Synopſis. He faith, 


tion was againſt the Sins themſelves,ſo this latter is againſt the Oc- | valley, either becauſe thzy moſt delight in Valleys, or with a partie 

a Moderate and ſuitable both to my natural Ne- | cular reſpe& unto that Valley near Jeruſalem ; which was called che 
dies, Jer: 31: 40. from the Carcaſes caſt out there, 1o 
ens reſorted in great numbers according to 


the ravens of the 


| 
| 


And this Mediocrity of Eſtate is ſo amiable, that it hath been oft 
deſired by wiſe Heathens as more eligible than a ſtate of the greateſt 
plenty and glory» 
*Neut: 8: 9 * Leſt I be full, andjdeny thee b, and ſay, Who is 
12, & 32. the LORD ec? orleſt I be. poor,and ſteal, and rake the 
16. name of my God in vain d. | 

Hoſt 13'6: 4 By truſting to Riches, which is a Denial of God,76b 31:24, 28: 
# Heb. 5 yy unthankfulneſs for, and abuſe of his Mercies, and by Rebellion 
ye thee. againſt him,and divers other Courſes and common PraCtiſes of rich 

M-:n, whereby God is denied in truth, and in Works, even when 
" he is owned in wordsand in ſhew, c Thay I ſhould obey or ſerve 
him. I donotneed him. I can live of my own without him, Leſt 
by degrees I ſhould arrive at downright Atheiſm or Infidelity,which 
is molt incident to rich and great m2n, as is manifeſt from Experi- 
ence. 4d Uſe falſe Oaths either to vindicate my ſelf when I am, 
ſuſpe&ed or accuſeÞof Theft,aad my Oath is required according 
to the Law, Exod; 22; 8, 11: or to gratifie others for filthy lucre 
as poor men frequently do. 

10 f Accuſe note a ſervantfunto his Maſter, leſt he 
curſe thee g, and thou be found guilty þ. 

e To wit,maliciouſly,raſhly,or without juit and ſufficient Cauſe : 
for otherwiſe, in ſome caſes this may be nor only Jawful,bur a Duty 
as when a Servant lives wickedly, or robs his Maſter, or the like, 
f Whoſe condirion is in it ſe]f. mean and miſerable, and therefore 
thou ſhould'it not make it worle without great and apparent neceſ- 
ſity- g D:fire God rocurſe and puniſh thee, which,though it may 
be ſinful in him, yet being deſerved by thee,thou haſt reaſonro fear 
and expet. h By God, who 1s ready to plead the Cauſe of the 
Afflited, and upon ftrift ſearch ſhall find thee guilty, and puniſh 
thze accordingly. : : 

11 There is a generation # that curſeth their father k&, 


and doth not bleſs their mother. 


+ Heb: 
hurt nor 
with thy 
HNgue. 


. neither her Body, 


their manner : Or, as others render, the ravens of che brooks, becauſe, 
they are of an hot and dry remper, and therefore delight in places 
adjacent to the brooks of Water. y Which alſo preyeth upon dead 
Carcaſes,and eſpecially upon their eyes, as the Ravens do, the rea- 
ſon being the ſamein both, whether it be the ſoftneſs of that part 
jr makes it more caſie to them to take,or from the pleaſant taſte 
OT It | : 
13 There be three things whichare too wonderful for 
me y, yea, four which I know not : 
y The way whereof I cannot trace or find our. ; 
I9 Ihe way z of an eagle in the air, the way of 
ſerpent upon a rock 4,the way of a ſhip in the + midſt own 
of the ſea b, and the way of aman with a maid c. 
| 2 Either r- The manner of her Flight, which is exceeding high, 
and ſwift, and ſtrong. Or rather 2, The way or part of the Air 
' through which ſhe paſſeth, without leaving any print or ſign in it, 
which though it be trueof all Birds, yet is here attributed co the 
Eagle,of whom this is more true, becauſe ſhe flies out of ſighr, where 
nor any ſign of it, can be diſcerned. # Where 
ſhe leaves no impreſſion, nar Slime, nor Token where ſhe was, as 
the doth in ſofcer Bodies, and as Birds leave their Feathers there. 6 
Which thoughat preſent it makea Furrow, yet is ſpeedily cloſed 
agains c Either r. The various methods and Artifices which Young 
menuſe to intice or perſwade young Virgins,either to honeſt Love 
, and Marriage, or to unlawful Luſt and Uncleanneſs. Or rather, 
, 2. The impure Converſation of a Man with one who gocth under 
the name of a Maid, but is not ſo in truth, which is managed with 
; fo much Secrecy and Cunning, that it can very hardly be diſcove- 
; red, Which Expoſition agrees beſt with the foregoing Similitudes 
referredto ir, and with the following Verſe. 
20 Such & is the way of an adulterous woman e ; ſhe 


eateth f, and wipeth her mouth g,and fſaith,I have done 


i A ſort of Men, abominable both to God and Men ; which is im- 
plied concerning theſe and the following kinds of Sinners, v. 12: »3, 


12 There is a generation that are pure in their own 
eyes, and yet is not waſhed from their filthinels 1. | 
IW ho not only pretend to others, but conceit within themſelves 
that they are truely Religious Pertons, when they live in a courſe 
of Wickedneſs. : 
13 There is a generation, O how * lofty are their 
his; 197 Yes! andtheireyelids are lifred up&. ; 
k Who are proud and inſolenr, advancing themſelves,and deſpi- 
ſing all others in compariſon of therſelves, and ſhewing the pride 
of their Hearts in their Countenances and Carriages. 
bb » 14 Thereis a generation whole teeth ares as ſwords, 
x + * and their jaw-teeth «s knives,ro devour the poor / from 
xc. 52: 24 offtheearth, and the needy from among men. 
& 57: 4: I Extortioners, and cruel Opprefſors,who grind the Faces of the 
Cl: 12: 18: Poor, . 
15 The horſe-leach » hath two daughters », cying, 
Give, give 0:There are three things p that are never ſa- 
tisfied q, 'yes, four things ſay not r, Þ It 3s enough. . 

m An inſatiable Creature, ſucking blood till it be ready to burſt. 
Which are either 1, The two Forks into which her Tongue is di- 
vided, and wherewith ſhe ſucks. Bur thoſe who have more accu- 
rately obſerved and deicribed the frame of that Crearuregtel] us that 
they have no Tongue, and that they ſuck either by three little 
teeth, or ſeveral parts of the Mouth gathered and compreſſed toge- 
ther, Or rather >. The following things, which reſemble the Horſe- 
Jeach in its unſatiableneſs; nothing being more ordinary than to call 
thoſe Perſons or Things the Sons or Daughters of thoſe whoſe Exam- 
ples they intimate. And whereas ir is obje&ted, tart they are not 
only two, but three, yea, four, as is {aid in the next Clauſe.the An- 
{wer is eafie, That though he begin with two,yet he proceeds from 
thence to three, and four, all which are faid ro be the Daughters of 
the Horſe-leachyif the words be rendred commodiouſly,and as they 
zre in the Hebrew, as we ſhall preſently ſte; o Never filled, and 
always craving, and ready to receive more and more. p Or, yea, 
( which may be underſtosd in this, as it is in our Tranſlation of 
the next Clauſe) they( to wit, the Daughters of the Horſe-leach)are 
three,g Which is added partly to explain the former Claule,give,give 
andto ſhew the cauſe of that exceſſive Deſire of more, becauſe 
they were not contented with whar they had,and partly to give the 
reaſon why he calls them che Dawghters of the Horſe leach. r Or, yea, 
they ( the * Gonna forementione4) are four, which Jaz 20, 

t Heb:hey 216 F The grave, and the barren womb 5,the earth ? 
U27: 20; thatis not filled with water; and the fire « that fſaich 

5253 not, It is enough. | | 

5 For as the Iſraelitiſh Women did generally and vehemently de- 
fire manyChildren,for divers Reaſons elſewhere mentioned fo thoſe 
who were barren amongft them, were moſt eager in thoſe De- 
fires, 2s we ſec in Rachel, Gen: 30; 1 and as in all other cafes, Per- 
ſons moſt prize andthitſt after thoſe good things which they want, 
# Which whea it is dry thirſts for Rain, and in a Intlerime fucks up 
great quantities of Water, and gapes for more, « Which continual- 
ly burns as long as thereis any combuſtible matter left for it. 

17 The eye that mocketh at bis father « and deſpi- 
ſ:th to obey bis mother, the ravens of || the valley ſhall 
pick it out x,and the young cagle y ſhall ear ir, 

« Be thatſcorneth or deriderh his Parents, though it be bur with 
a Lcok or Geſture,and much more when he breaks outinto oppro- 
| brious Words and Aﬀtiens. x He ſhall die an unnatural, and un- 
wu, timely, &ignominious Death,and after Death ſhall lie unburied,& 


f Heb: 


vealþ, 


lOr, h 
uk, 


1:okAnd Mocher too,as it follows;ungrateful and unnaturalMonſters. | eq 


Fo be ex; 0158 to the Birds and Bealty of Yrey, and amonglt others, | 


no wickedneſs h. 


d So ſecret and undiſcernible. e Of her who though ſhe be call. 
and accounted a Maid, yet in truth is an Adultereſs, nota com= 
mon Strumpet ; for of ſuch the following words are not true, but 
one that ſecretly lives inthe Sin of Adultery or Fornication. f To 
wit, the bread of deceit in ſecret, by which is underſtood the a& of 
Filthineſs, Prov, 9; 17: and 20:17. which ſuch perſons do as greedi- 
ly deſire, and as delightfully feed upon.as bungry perſons do upon 
Bread. Thus chaſtly doth the Holy Ghoſt expreſs the moſt filthy 
ations, to teach us to avoid all immodeſt and obſcene Speeches as 
well as Attions. As a Child doth when it hath eaten ſome forbid- 
den food, and would not be diſcovered» þ Denies the Fact, and 
avoweth her Innocency. 


21 For three things the Earth 5 is diſquicted, and for 
four which it cannor bear &. | ; 

# Either 1.The earth it ſelf trembleth and is moved, ſo it is an 
Hy perbole, Or rather 2. The Inhabitants of the Exrth. They do by 
their inſolence and impudence cauſe great and dreadful difturbances 
in the places where taey live. & Which are intolerable in humane 
ſocieries. | cs 

22 * Fora ſervant when he reigneth /, and a fool » nY 19., 
when he is filled with meat = ; | © NOR 

1 When he is advanced to great Power and Dignity ; for ſuch an 
one 15 1gnorant and unfirfor his place, and therefore commits many 
errours ; he is poor, and therfore an inſatiable oppreſlor, according 
tO Prov; 28. 3. heis proud and imperious,and being maligned and ha- 
ted by others he is provcked to hate them, and to be injurious and 
cruel ro them. m A conceited and wilful fool, or an obſtinately 
wicked man. » Either 1. When he is glutted with meat or drink, 
which dulls mens Reaſon, and heatstheir Blood, and ſtirs them up 
to many inſolenciess Or rather 2. When he abounds in Wealth; 
which in that caſe is like a Sword in a mad mans hand,beingan in- 
ſtrumenrt and occaſion of innumerable wickedneſſes and milſchiefs 
as appears from common experience: | | 
23 For an odiouss woman when ſhe is married p, 
and an handmaid that is heir to her miſtreG q, 
o Proud,and perverſe; and full of hatefuland offenſive qualities 
þ For then ſhe diſplayeth, and exerciſeth all choſe ill Humours 
which before for her own ends ſhe concealed;then ſhe is puffed vp, 
and imperious, and becomes intolerable to her own Family.and to 
her Relations and Neighbours. q That pofſeſſeth her Eftate,cither 
by the gift of her Miſtreſs,into whoſe Favour ſhe had infinuated ker 
ſelf by her cunning and officious Carriage: or rather by the Marriage 
of her Maſter, which great and ſudden change tranſports her beſide 
her ſelf, and makes her inſufferably proud, and ſcornful;and injuri- 
ous to all that converſe with her. 

24 There be four things which are little upon the Bs 
earth, but they ref exceeding wile 7: _: tHebiwife, 

r Comparatively to other bruce Creatures. They at very wiſel o wiſe; 
and enencty: not from any reaſon which ons bi by oh ani 
| dire&ion of Divine Providence, which ſecretly guides them to. do 

thoſe things for their own Preſervation which are moſt agreeable to 
the Rules ef Wiſdom. The Deſign ofthis Obſervation is_ either 
1. To commend Wiſdom to us,and to teach us to imitate the Pro. 
vidence of theſe Creatures, as we are provoked to imitate their 
diligence, Prov; 6- 6. . Or 2. to keep us from being proudly con- 
ceired of our ownWiſdom,becauſe we are either equalled or exceed- 

ed therein by the unreaſonable Creatures in the wiſe Condu& of 
their Aﬀairs. Or 3. To dire& usto whom to reſort for Wiſdom 

when we want and deſire it,even to God who is able to inſpire Wiſe 

dom even into the brute Creatures, 


25 * The ants area people s not ftrong, yet they * Ch: 5: 
prepare their meat in the ſummer e. EE 
s Which Title is oft given to the unreaſonable Creatures both in 
; 5K 3 Scrip* 


Oc. 


*" © 


Time, which is one of the nobleſt of them,one way or other to the 
Service of that God to whom they muſt give an account, and te the 


F good of that Community to which they are related and oblidged. 


14 She 1s like the merchants ſhips, ſhe bringeth her 
food from afar a. 
s By theſale of her home-ſpun Commoadities ſhe purchaſeth the 
choiceſt Goods which come trom far Countries, 
15 She riſeth alſo while itis yet night b, and giveth 
meat c to her houſhold,and a portion d to her maidens. 
6 Early inthe morning, to redeem time. c Diſtributeth all her 
neceſſary Proviſions. d Either 1. Of Work, which the allots to 
them. Or rather 2, Of Proviſions for them; for ſo this word is uſed 
Gen: 47; 22, Lev; 10; 13, 14. Prov:30-8; and nc. where, to my re- 
membrance, ofan Allotment of Work. And fo this Clauſe agrees 


beſt with the former, expreſſing the ſame thing in other words, ac- 
cording to the manner. 


=_ a 16 Sheconſfidereth ea field, and | buyeth it ; wich 
bi 


the fruit of her hands f ſhe planteth a vineyard g. 

e Whether it be fit for her uſe, andof a reaſonable price, and 
how ſhe may purchaſe it. This excludes the Raſhneſs. as ber pro- 
ceeding to buy itexcludes the Inconſtancy, which is oft incidentto 
that Sex. f With the effeQ&s of her Diligence. g She improveth the 
Land to the beſt Advantage. 


17 She girdeth her loius with ſtrengeh b,and ſtrengthe- | 70nd being guided by Wiſdom and Grace, and nor by iri= 


neth her arms 7. | 
h She uſeth great Diligence and Expedition in her Employment ; 
for which ead, Men in thoſe times ui'd to gird up their long and 
looſe Garments about theirLoins.i Putteth forth her utmoit ſtrentgh 
in her buſineſs, : | 
"eb. ſhe 18 She perceiveth that her merchandiſe 3s good & : 
uh. her candle goeth not out by night /. 


Wo XXX PROY ERSS © Chap. XXX1-F 


| her ſelf,or the nature of the thing require ſharpand ſevereExpreſii- 
; ONS. 


k She finds great Comfort and good Succeſs in her Labours. 1 | 


Which is not to be taken ſtri&ly, but only ſignfies her unwearied 
Care & Induſtry,,which is oft expreſſed by labouring day and night, 
or continuallye . 

19 She layeth her hands to the ſpindle , and her 
hands hold the diſtaff, | 


-m By herown Example ſe provoketh her Servants to Labour. 
And although in theſe later and more delicate and luxurious rimes, 
ſoch mean Employments are grown out of faſhion among great 
Perſons, yer tey were not ſo in former Ages, ne:ther in other 
Countiies.nor -n this Land ; whence all Women unmarried are to 
this day cailed in the Language of our Law, Spinſters. 


Feb. ſhe 20 + She fſtretcheth out her hand to the poor » ; yea, 


fuith. ſhe reacheth forth her hands to the needy. 
| ; » To relieve their Necſſities. Her Deſigns are generous and no- 
ble 3 far the labours not only to-ſupply her own and her Houfſhold 
Necefliti-s, or ſupport her own ſtate. much leſs to feed her Pride 
and Luxury, but that ſhe may have wherewith to ſupply the wants 
of others who crave or need her Aſſiſtance. - Which alſo procures 
Gods blefſſiag upon her Husband,and Children, and whole Family, 
to whom, by this means, ſhe brings both Honour and Advantage 
| 21 She is not afraid ofthe ſnow o for her houſhold : 
[0r, do; for all her houſhold are cloathed with || ſcarlet p, 
_ « Or of any Injuries of the weather. p She hath provided enough, 
WW, notonly for their neceſliry and defence againſt Cold and other in- 
conven:ences, which is-here ſuppoſ:d, but alſo for their Delight and 
Ornament 3 ſo that not only her ſelf. and Husband, and Children, 
but ſome of the better rank of her Servants, wear Scarlet ; which 
was more cheap and familiar in thoſe Times and Countries than 
now it is wich us. Or, as it is rendred in our Margent, and 


by divers oth2rs, are cloathed with double Garments, which is neceſſary | 


and cuſtomary in cold Seaſons. ; 
22 She maketh her ſelf coverings of tapeſtry q, her 
cloathing is filk and purple r. 


q For the Furniture of her houſe. e Which was very agreeable to: 


her high Qualiry 3 though it doth nor juſtifie the Luxury in Attire 
which 1s now uſual among perſons of far Idwer ranks both forWealth 
and Dignity» : ; 0M 

22 Her husband is known s in the gates, when he 
ſitteth among the elders of the land 2. 

s Obſerved and reſpeted, not only for his own worth,but for his 
wif's ſake ; notonly for thoſe rich Ornaments which by her care 
and diligence ſhe provides for him, which others of his Brethren, 
by reaſon of their wives Sloth or Luxury, are not able to procure, 
but alſo for his wiſdom in chuſing, and bis Happineſs in enjoying' 
ſo excellent a wife, by whoſe prudent care, in the management of 
his domeſtick concerns, he hath perfe& freedome wholly to attend 
upon publick affairs. # In Counſel or Judgment. | 
' 24 She maketh ſine linnen, and felleth i#, and de- 
livereth girdles « unto the merchants. 

u Curiouſly wrought of Linnen and Gold,or other precious Ma- 
terials, Fer 30; 1: Dan; 10: 5: which in thoſe parts were uſed both 
by men, > Sam: 20: 8: and by women, 1/a. 3: 244 Cant: 7; 1: 

25 Strength x and honour y @re her cloathing z, 


 Cafion offereth it ſelf. c Her ſpeeches are not froward and provoking, 


where. For Sitting being commonly the poſture of idleneſs, ten 


( 


i 


and ſhe ſhal rejoyce Þ in time to come 7. f Heb. is 
x Not ſtrength of Boy, which is no ornament of that Sex, ſave the 2a00e8 
only as ſhe preſerves her Health and Strength by Sobriety and Exer- 2): .. n 
ciſe, which other women waſte by Intemperance and ſdleneſs ; but Gr. 55 250 
firength of Mind, Magnanimity, Courage, Reſolution, Aivity. 197.79* 
s Either 11 Her prudent, and pious. and amiable behaviour, in 2Tim: 3: 
which true Honour principally conſiſts. Or 2. That good Name 

and honourable Eſteem which ſhe hath gained amongſt all that know 

her by her virtuous Diſpoſirion and Carriage, z Theſe,and not her 

rich Garments mentioned before,are her great Ornament and Glory. 

a The ſenſe is, either 1. In her old Age ſhe reaps the Comfort and 

Benefit of her youthfull Labours.Or rather 2 She lives in conſtant 
tranquility of mind and a confident and chearful expeQation of all 

future events,how calamitous ſoever; partly becauſe ſhe had laid in, 
proviſions for a rainy daygand chiefly,becauſe ſhe haththe comfort« 

able remembrance of a wellſpent Life,and which follows thereupon, 


a juſt confidence in Gods gracious Providence and promiſes madeto 
ſuch perſons. 


26 She openeth her mouth with wiſdom b, and in 
her tongue ss the law of kindneſs c. | 


b She is neither ſullenly filenr, nor full of vain and impertinent 
talk, as many Women are, bur ſpeaks diſcreetly and picuſly as oc* 


as thoſe of foo'ith Women frequently are, but moſt oblidging and 


ordinate Lutts and Paſſions. And this praftiſe is called # law in her 
tongue, becauſe it is conſtant and cuſtomary, and proceeds from an 
inward and powerful Principal of true Wiſdom, which in a manner 
neceſixates and conſtrains her to diſcourſe like her ſelf,ſo that in a 
moral ſenſe ſhe cannot ſpeak otherwiſe, unleſs ſhe offer violence to 


27 She looketh well to the ways of her houſhold d, 
and eateth not the bread of idleneſs e. 

4 She OO obſerveth rhe management and progreſs of her 
domeſtick buſineſs, and the whole Carriages and Converſations o 
her Children and Servants. Whereby alſo he intimates thar ſke ſpends 
not her time in gadding abroad to other Houſes and idle Diſcourſes 
about the Concerns of other Perſons, as the manner of many women 
1s, but is wholly intent upon her own houſe and proper buſineſss 
e That which is got by Idleneſs, or withont Labour. 7 


28 Her children fariſe up g, and call her bleſſed bz 

her husband alſo, and he praiſeth her. | * 

f Whoſe teſtimony is the more conſiderable, becauſe they have 
been conſtant eye-witneſſes of her whole Carriage,and therefore muſt - 
have ſeen her miſdemeannours, if there had been any,as well as her 
Virtues. g Either 1; In token of Reverence to her, * which agrees 
not to the following Clauſe, wherein the fame Phraſe is underſtood 
concerning her Husband, Or rather 2, That they may ſeriouſly 


and induſtrieuſly apply themſelves to the work of ſetting forth her 
Praiſes, as this Phraſe is uſed, Gen 37: 25: Exod 2: 17, and oftelſe-+ 


that ſet about any work,are ſaid to riſe in order thereunto. +4 Both 
for her own Excellency, and for many happy fruits which - they 


have gathered from her wiſe and godly Education» # In the follows 
ing words, 


29 Many daughters & || have done virtuouſly, but || Or. bevt ' 
thou excelleſt them all /. PRET2 

k Daughters of Men, 7.e. Women, ſo called alſo, Gen: 34: i:Ezek: Fichen 
30: 18. He eftcems it bur juſt, that his Praiſes ſhould bear proc - 
portian to her real manifold perfeCtions, | 


20 Favour m is deceitful » and beauty #s vain : bit a 
woman that feareth the LORD o, ſhe (hall be praiſed. 

m Comlineſs, or, as thenext Clauſe explains it, Beauty: whicl»: 
commonly gives Women favour or accepration with thoſe who be»: 
hold them. Theſe are the words either z. Of her Husband cons 
tinving to praiſe her. Or 2. Of Batbſheba,giving the ſumm of what 
ſhe .had ſaid in few words. » Partly becauſe it gives a falſe repre- 
ſentation of the perſon, being oft times a cover to a moſt deformed ; 
ſoul, and to many evil and hateful qualities ; partly becauſe itdoth i 
not give a man that content and ſatisfation,which at firſt view he 
promiſed to himſelf from it ; and partly becauſe it is ſoon loſt,not 
only by death, but by many Diſeaſes and contingencies. « Which 
chara&er is here mentioned either as the Crown of all her perfe&i- 
ons» O 2. As a key to underſtand the foregoing paſſage of that 
Wiſdom, and Fidelity, and Diligence; which proceeded from;or 
iS accompanied with the fear of God, $5 


21 Give her of the fruit of her hands p, and let her 
own works praiſe her q.in the gates 7. - 

p Ir is bur juſt and fit tht ſhe ſhould enjoy thoſe Benefirs and 
Praiſes which her excellent Labours deſerve, 9 Give her the Praiſes 


© m—— 


which her own works may challenge: Ifmen be filent,the !aſting, 
Eff-&s of her prudence and Diligences will loudly trumpet forth het 
Praiſes. r In the moſt publick and ſolemn Aſſemblies. | 


"ECCLESIASERST 


—— things in general are to be noted concerning this Back. 1. The Author of it ; who wat Solomon, as is manife#t 
both from the common Conſent of Fewiſh and Chriſtian Writers, and from the expreſs words of the firff Verſe. Nor catt © 
any thing be oppoſed to it, but bold andgroundleſs Conjettures. That he wrote it in his Old Age, 3t is more than probable from 
divers Paſiages in it, as, that he did it after his Buildings, Chap 2. 4+ which yet took up Twenty Years cf his life, 
I Kings 9. Io. and after ſome conſiderable enjoyment of 1hem, and planting of Gardens, and Orchards, and reaping the 
fruit of them, chap. 2.wv. 5.6. and after long and much conſideration and experience of all thoſe Methods in which Men ex: 
peed ro find Happpineſs, and after be had been deeply plunged in impure and inordingte Lowes, Chap. | 7. 
27, &C. and from many other places, which may be obſerved by any diligent Reader, And ſo this Book was written 
by him ai g publick Teftimony of his Repentance, and Dete#tation of all theſe vain and wicked Conrſes to which be bad 
5 K 


4 __ aadiicd 


mf 
% 


» 

| 
5 

. 


| © Pf: 392 
" $36:& 62: _ 
 9;& 144:4: NUEY 


Ch:12: 8; 


; THeb:this 


Z tg 2: 
| E339 which he taketh wundec the Sun 3 ? 


, Heavenly places and things, _ | 

Ef ©:4 One generation paileth away, and another genera- | 
PT. 1042 gjom 66meth'k'* bir che' earch + abideth for ever /. 

--. $;: & 119; +> Men\continne but for one, and that a ſhort Age, and then they 


9; 
t Heb. 


* fandcths, 


Jon T 


+ and that Solomon ſpeaks ſome and moſt things in his own N 


 Bogy and Mind in the purivit ofRiches,or Pleaſures,or other earth- 


and-therfore Man in this reſpett is more-murable & miſerable than 
the very Earth upen which be ſtands. And which, together with all 


ra 


ECCLESIASTES, 
addifted himſelf: wherein he followed the example of his Father David, who, after his ſad Fall, penned the Ft; 


75> 4s ; ; 


Plalm. And the truth of this, Qpinion may be confirmed by that Expreſſion, 2 Chron, 11. 17. they walked in the way 


- of Pavid and Selemon, 1. e. wherein they walked both before their Falls, and after their Repentance. 
© pnerhod of ir. For whereas there are ſome Paſſages in it which may ſeem offenſive and impirus, for which ſome 


few ' perſons 


Chap, } 
ty Firſs 
2.. The form or 


have ſuſpeted its Authority, it muſt be conſidered, that it is in part dramatical, as was ſaid before of the Book of Proverbs. 
. I 


7 


&Me, 


but ſome other things in the Names, and according to the 


Opinions of thote worldly and ungodly Men," as is undeniably manifeſt both from the Scope and Deſign of the Bock, as it is ex- 
preſied both in the Beginning and in the Concluſion of it, and from his ſerious and Iarge Diſputaticn againſt thoſe wicked 


Principles and Courſes. Aud this way of writing is not unnſual amengſt both Sacred and Prophane Friters. 


Zo The Deſign 


and Buſineſs of t ; which is, to deſcribe Mans true Happineſs, and the way leading to it. Which he doth Negatively, af. 
ferting and proving, that it is not to be found either in ſecular Wiſdom, or in ſenſual Pleaſures, or in worldly Greatneſs 
andGlory, or in abundance of Riches, or in a vain profeſſion of Religion ; and poſitively, ſhewing that it is to be had only þ 

the Fear of God and Obedience to his Laws, which alove can give a Man a contented and chearful enjoyment of his preſent ” pi 


forts, aad aſſurance of his future and everlaſting Happinels, 
CHAR TI 


All is Vanity ; our Labour great and unprofitable, 1—— 3. The whole 
tourſe of things is always ging and returning, 4. 7. Nothing in Na- 
ture is [arisfied, 8, Nothing new © old things are forgot, 9 — 11. The 

; ſearch aſter Wiſdom is it ſelf a vain Labour; cannot ſupply our natural 
Wants ; nor ſathfie our Deſires ; but encreaſeth Sorrow : all th the 
. Preacher found out by Experience, 12-=-=-18, 

He words of the preaher a, The ſon of 

David, king in Jeruſalem 6. 
a Who was not only a King, but alſo a Teacher 
| of Gods People. which he did both by Words, up- 
on” on ſome folema occaſions, and by Writings, Who 
having ſinned grievouſly and ſcandalouſly in the Eyes of all tte 

World juſtly thought himſelfobliged ro Preach or Publiſh his 

true Reptnrance for all his folly and wick<dneſs, and to give Pub- 


lick warning and wholſom counſels to all Perſons to avoid thoſe | 


Rocks upon which he had ſplit, The Hebrew properly ſignifies 
eirher gathering or gathered, and fo it fignifies, eicher 1- a Preacher, 
aS it 45 commonty rencred, whoſe Office it is to garher in Souls un- 
to God'or his Church, Or 2. A Pemtent or Convert, or, one ga» 
thered, or brought back by true Repentance ro God, and to * his 
Caurch, from which he had ſo wickedly reyolted. b This is added 
partly asa deſcription of the Perſon or Authorof this Book, Solomon, 
who was the only Man that was borh Sor of David, properly fo 
called, and King in Jeruſalem; and partly as an aggravation of his 
ſin, becauſe he was the Son of David,a wile and godly Father ; who 
had given him both excelleat Counſel, and for his general courſe, 
a good Example 3 and for the evil Example wich he gave him in 
the matter of Uriah, that alſo, conſidered with his hearty and effe- 
Qual Repenrance for ir;8 the dreadful puniſhments of it upon his 
Perſon and- Family, was a'fair warning and powerful inftru&t.on 
to him ro lobe by his Fathers Examaple, and becauſe ne was « King, 
notby Birth, for he was not Vavid's eldeſt Son, but by tie ſpecial fa- 
voar & deſignation of thar God whom he had now ſo ill requited, & 
that in Jow/slem, an Holy City, the place 'of Gods ſpecial Preſerice 
a2d of his Worſhip, where he had: daily Opportunities to know, 
and Obligations to pradtiſe berter rhing: qwhich place he had defiled 
by his horrid-ſins, 'and thereby made 1r, and all Goi's People, and 
thetrue'Religion, and the Name ofthe bleſſed God,odious and con- 
temptible amongſt all the Nations round about him. 
2 * Vanity of vanities c, faith the preacher d, va- 

of vanities, f * all e zs vanity f. - 

"c Not only vain, but vanity in Abſtract, which notes extream 
Vanity, eſpecially wh:-re the word is thus doubled,as a Kirg of Xings 


all. ©" 3s the chief of Kings,and # Servant of Serwants is the vileſt of Servants, 
= * Rom: 8: and Song of Songri 1s # moſt excelent Song, d Upon deep conſide- 


ration and long Experience and by divine Inſpiration. This Verſe 
contains the general Propofition, which le intends particularly to 
demoriſtrare in the whole following Book. e All worldly things, 
and all mens Defigns, and Studies,and Works abour them. f Nor 
18'themſeclves'for ſo they are Gods Creatures and therefore good and 
really uſeful 5n their'kinds, but in reference to men, and to that 
IC ekich menſeek and confidently expect to find in them. 
So they are unqueſtionably vain,becauſe they are not what they ſtem 
roibe;and perform not'what they promiſe, content and fatis!/ation, 
butinſtead of rhat are commonly rhe caufes or occaſions of inumera- 
ble cares;and fears, and ſorrows,and miſchiefs,and becaule they are 
altogether unſuiteble to the noble Mind or Soul of Man,both in na- 
ture. or quality, - and in duration, as being anſtable and periſhing 
things, *And this vanity 'of them is here repeated again and again, 
partly becauſe it was moſt deeply fixed,and perperually preſent in 
S»lomon's Thoughts;partly ro ſhew the unqueſtionable cerrainty and 


vaſt:iimportance of this trurh,8& partly thar he mighfmore through- | 
withſtanding all rhe 2bundance of Creature Comforts: ' q Either 1« 7h, Rivers 


' unto the Sea: from whence' they are ſuppoſed to return into their o, thither 


ly awaken the dull and ftupia mindsof men to the conſideration of 
it, and might wean mens Hearts from thoſe rhings upon which Le 
knew they exceflively doted- * $746 ; | 

3 * What profit'g hath a man of all his labour þ 


"x Or, a: others tender it, What remainder? What real and abi- 
ding benefit hath a Man by ir ? Noneart all, All is unproficable as 
to the attainmenit of that happineſs which Solomon here 15,and all men 
in the World are enquiring afcer. þ Heb. his toilſom labour, both of 


ly things # In all ſubiugary or worldly marters, which are uſually 
tranſacted in the day-tiine,or by the light of the Sun. By this Re- 
ſtriction he implies thar thar profit and happineſs which'in vain 1s 
ſought for in this lower World is really and only to be found in 


Jeave all-rheir-p+{:Minns ro the ſucceeding Age,and therefore they 
cannot be happy. here. bec:uſe happineſs muſt needs be unchangeable 
and ererna]; or eiſe tie perpetual f-arand certain knowledge of rhe 
2pproachiag loſs of all rhefe chings will rob a Man of all ſolid con- 


tenement inthem.:7 z. e. Through all ſucceſſive Generationsof men: | 


—Q_ 


- the ſtudy of thei, as is noted hereafrer, Ur 1 : 
ſibly and unconceivably great. s As there are many things 18 tae 


| a perpetual R:ciprocation ; 


} 


are not ſarisfitory, bug Men are conſiantly dcluing 


: the glori-sand comforts which Le enjoyed init he 1 
him to be poſſefled by others. MENG 0100s every behind 


5 The ſun alfo ariſzth, and the ſun goeth down,and 


+ haſteth to his place where he aroſe », 
mTheSun is in perpetual motiop,ſomerimes ariſing,and ſometimes 
ſetting and then ariſing again,and fo conſtantly repeating its Courſes 


+ Heb! 


panteth, 


1n all ſucceeding Days,and Years,and Ages; and the like he obſerves 
concerning the Winds and Rivers,v. 6,7. And the deſign of theſe 
ſimilitudes ſeems to be, either 1, that by repreſenting the conſtanr 
changes and reſtleſs motions of theſe particulzr things he might irti. 
mate thar-it is ſo with all other earthly things;and therefore no Man 
can expett fatisfaCtion from them. Or 2. that by comparing the Sun 
and Wind,and Rivers, as v. 4: he compared the Earth with Man 

he might ſhew thar Man, conſidered as mortal,is in a more unhappy 
condition than theſe things, becauſe when the Earth abides, Man 
goes; and when rhe Sun ſets,be rifeth again, and ſo the Wind and 


Rivers return to their former place and ftate, bur Man when once he 
dies, he never returns again, to this life ; of which compariſon ſee 
Job 143 7, 12+ Or, 3. to ſhew the vanity of all worldly things, and 
that Man's mind can never be ſatisfied with them, becauſe there is 
nothing in the Wo11d bura conſtant repetition cf the ſame things 
which is ſo irkſom a thing,thar the ou armog thereof hath made 
ſome Perſons weary of their lives ; and there is no new thing under the 
Sten, as is added in the foor of the account, v.g. which ſeemsto me 
to be gtven us as a Key ro underſtand the meaning of the foregoing 
paſſages. And this is manifeſt and certain from experience that 
the things of this Wor'd are ſo narrow,and the mind of Man ſo vaſt, 
that there muſt be ſomething new to ſarisfie'rhe'Mind,and even de- 
I;ghtfel thingsby too frequent repetition or long continnance, are 
- far from yielding fatisfaQtion,that they grow tedious and trouble- 
ome. £ Re” | 
6 The wind goeth toward the ſouth, and turneth 

about unto the north » ; it whirlegh about continually, 

and the wind returneth again according to his circuits. 

nTheWind alſo ſometimes blows. from the oneQuarter oftheWorld 

and ſometimes from another 3 all of them being Synecdochically 

comprehended under theſe twoeminent quarters. Bur becauſe this 

Word, the Wind, is not exprefled in the Hebrew, but is only bor= 

rowed or underſtood from the latter C'auſe of the Verſe, this firſt 

Clauſe is by other judicious Interprerers underſtood of the Sun, of 
whom he laſt ſpake;the words being thus rendred according to the 

Hebrew, He ( the Sun) gcerh towards the Seurh ( which he doth one 

half cf the Year ) and turneth about unto the North, which he doth the 

other half, And ſo here is the whole motion ofthe Suntowards the 
four quarters of the Wcr'd particularly defcr.bed;his daily morion 
from Eaſt tro Weſt, and back agair,' v. 5, and his yearly motion 
from North to South, between the - Signs of Cancer and Capricorn, 
o This Clauſe is by all underſtood'of the Wind, which firly mentie 

oned immediately after the Sun, becarſe it hath its riſe from the Sun 

who is therefore called the Father of Winds, and the Winds do uf- 

ually riſe with the Sun, ard are laid when he ſets. Bur then ir is 

rendred thus, and that very agreeable to the Hebrew, the Wind goerh 

continually whirling or compaſſing about, and he r:turneth again to his cir= 
cults, being ſometimes in one, and ſometimes in ancther quarter, 
and ſucefſively returning tothe ſame quarters 1R Which he had for- 
merly been. > See 

7 * All the rivers run into the ſea, yet the ſea is not * 


full p:F unto the place from whence the rivers come 9, ! 


o ” P 
thither they return again. 
Þ To wit, to the brink, or 


Job 38: 
Oy 
{: 104; 


8.9. 
ſo as to overflow the Earth, which } eb. , 


might be expetted from ſuch vaſt Accefſiogs ro it» Whereby alſo yy the 
be 1ntimat<cs che emprineſs and diflarticfattion ef mens minds, not- glacethat 


proper Chanaels,and then,as it is expreſſed, rk:ther (7.e. into the ;þ 


ey 76curn 


Sea ) they return again. Or 2. unto their Springs or Fountains, t0;,py, 


which the Waters retvra by ſecret Paſſages of the Farth,as is mani= 
feſt from the Caſpian Sea, and re:ſonably {uppoſed in other places. 
Or rather, 3. unto' rhe Eartb in general,from whence they come or 
flow into rhe Sez, and'to which they return again by the Reflux of 
the Sea. For he ſcerns to ſpeak of the viſible and conflantmocion 
of the Waters, both to the Sca and from ir, and then to it again in 
which agrees beſt with the former Si- 
militudes, vr. 5: 6. | 

8 All things r ere full of Iabours ; man cannot utter 
itt : theeye is nor ſatisfied with ſecing,nor the ear fil- 
led with hearing #. | 

rNot only the Sun, and Winds, and Rivers,which I kave men- 
tioned, but all other Creatures. s Both ſubjettively, as they are 
in continual Reitleſneſs and C ange,never abiding in the-ſame flare 
or place ; and efficiently, as they cauſe great and fore Labour to 


men, in gerting, and keeping, and enjoying of them, Yea even in 
; Tbe Labour is inexpreſ- 


Mens 'Sehits and Minds, 
acceptable to them 
ſome longer 

Coitinls 


World troublefome ahd vexatious ro 
ſoeven thoſe'things which are comfortable and 


| Or, t 0 
4fh8 they 


@ds Keo#S a FF ITY a... dd fs 


&o 


p 


PF chap. 1. 


* Ch:3.155 
| f Heb: ; 
what 157 

' that hath 
heen [4 the 
fame that 
ſal be, 


Continuance or fuller Enjoyment. of them, or variety in them, and 
they never fay, It isenough, I defire no more. The Eye and Ear are 
here ſynecdochically put for all the Senſes, becauſe theſe are moſt 
ſpiritual and refined, moſt curious and inquiſitive,moſt capable of 
receiving SatisfaQtion, becauſe they are exerciſed with more Eaſe 
and Pleaſure than the other Senſes, whoſe SatisfaQions are oft at» 
tended with greater Wearineſs, and manifold Dangersand Inconve- 
niencies. 


9 * + The thing thar hath been, it is that which ſhall 
be ; and that which isdone,zs that which ſhal be done: 


and.x there is no new thing y under the ſun. 

x There is nothing in the World but a continued and tireſome Re- 
petition of the ſame things. The Nature and Courſe of the Beings 
and affairs of the World,and the Temp?rs of Mens Minds,are gene- 
rally the ſame that they ever were and ſhall ever be; and therefore 
becauſe no Man ever yet received ſatisfa&tion from any worldly 
things,it is a vain and fooliſh thing ſor any Perſon hereafrer to 
exp-& it. y To wit, ia the natnre of things, which might give us 
hopes of attaining that ſatisfation which things have not hitherto 
afforded. For otherwiſe this doth nor reſtrain the God of Nature 
who hath frequently done and ftill can do, new and miraculons 
works,and who can and doth diſcover to particular Perſons new in- 
ventions, when it pleaſeth hint. 

1o Is there any thing whereof it may be ſaid See, 


this is new 22 it hath been already of old time «,which 


was before us. 

z For the proof hereof appeal to the Conſciences and Experien- 
ces of all men. 4 The ſame things have been ſaid and done before, 
though poſſivly we did nat know it, ; : 

' 11 There is no remembrance of former things b ; nei- 
therſhall there be any remembrance of :hings that are to 


come, with thoſe that ſhall comeafter c. 

h This ſeems to be added to prevent this Obje&ion, There are 
many new Inventions and Enjoyments unknown to former Ages. 
To this he anſwers, This Objettion is grounded only upon our ig- 
norance of ancient times and things, which is very great,and which 
if we did exat'y know or remember, we ſhould eaſily find Pzrallels 
ro all preſent Occurrences in former Ages. c This Clauſe tends both 
to illuſtrare and co:rrm the former. The Senſe is, There are 
many thouſands of remarkable Speeches and AQtons done in this 
andthe following Ages which neither are,nor ever will be,putinto 
the publick Records or Hiſtories, and conſequently they muſt un- 
avoilably be forgotten and loſt unto ſucceeding Ages ; and there- 
fore its juſt and reaſonable to believe the ſame concerning former 
Ages ; ſeing the ſame Cauſes are moſt likely to produce the ſame 
effeQs, 

12I the preacher was king over Iſrael inJeruſalem4. 

d This Verſe isa Preface to the following Diſcourſe,that by the 
confierarion of the quality of the Speaker they might be induced 
tos give more Attention and reſpe@ to his words: Having aſſerted 
the Vanity of a/l rhings in the general, he now comes to prove his 
Aſſertion in all thoſe Particulars wherein Men commonly ſeek and 
witi greateſt probability expe ro find true Happineſs, He begins 
with {ecular Wiſdom. And to ſhew how competent a Jndge he 
was of this matter, he lays down his CharaQter,that he was thePreacher, 
whicl: implies eminent Knowledge and Ability to teach orhers, or, 
the Convert, who had lerrt by dear bought experience what he 
now taught them ; and a King. who therefore had all imaginable 
Opporrunities and Advantages for the Attainment of Happineſs,and 

acticularly for the gerting of Wiſdom, by conſulting” all ſorts of 

| Books and Men, by tryi:1g all manner of Experiments, and many 
6 other ways ; and no ordinary King, but King ever Iſrael, God's own 
and only beloved People, a wile and an happy People, Dent.4;6, 7: 


Gr, 


ECCLESIASTES, 


 thered from v. 


| 

bl 
|| 
: 


'Chap. 1 | 


"rh 
13 
#7 4 
i 
i} 


to you: 0 And not only unſatisfying, but alfo troubleſom.and 2 
affliction or breaking to a mans ſpirit or mind. O 
ancient and modern Tranſl itors, render it, s feeding uptn wind, . as. 
theſe very words, (ſave only that there is the verb NO which this 
noun ſeems moſt prey deduced, ) are rendretl; Hof: 12: 1: where | 
alſo it ſignifies a fruitleſs or loſt Iabour," and a+ diſappointment of 
their hopes and deſires of ſatisfaftion, And fo this is a repetition o 
= _ thing in other words, accerding to the manner of theſe 
4 EE hits ©. aa*49 | any iy 

, I5 * That which is crooked cannot be made ſtreight * 
p : andF that which is wanting 9 cannot be numbred 7. 
? All our knowledge ſerves only ro diſcover our diſeaſes and/mi. 
ſeries, bur is oft it ſelf utterly inſufficient to heal or remove themz 
1r cannot reftifie thoſe confutons and diſorders which are either in 
ourown Heartsand Lives, or in the'men and.things in the world; 
q To wit,in our knowledge,and in order ro mans compleit ſatisfaQic 
on and felicity. . r We know little of whar . we: ſhould or might * 
know, or did know in the ſtate of Innocency, or ſhall know in the 
furureLife. .... ., *-. : WE Ee == 

16 I communed with mine own heart s, faying,Lo, I 
I am come to great eſtate t, and have gotten « * more 
wiſdom than all they that hath been before me x inJe- 


ruſalem y : yea, my heart f had great experience z of 
wiſdom and knowledge a. - 8 4 
5 I conſider within my telf in what condition I was, and: 
degrees of knowledge I had gained, and whether 
norance that made me unable to reQifie thoſe errours, and ſupoly 
thoſe wants,and wiſer Men could do it.tchough I could nor. : Heb 7 
am grown great,to wit, in Wiſdom: Or, 1 have magnified, or greatly 
enlarged. u Heb. have added, As T have a large ſtock of Wiſtom 
infuſed into me by God, 1 Kings 3; 12:& 4: 29.:ſo I have greatly 
improved it by Converſation, and Stadie,and Experience. . x Whe= 
ther Governeurs, or Prieits, or private Perſons: Which was no 
vain boaſt. but a known and confeſſed truth, ' and profeſſion hereof 
was neceſſary to demonſtare his aſſertion. - y Which was then the 
moſt eminent place in theWorld for Wiſdom and Knowled ge. zHeb» 
had ſeen much ; which intimates that his Knowledge was clear, and 
certain, and experimental, as that is which we have from our own 
eye-ſight. « Two words ſignifying the ſame thing, : as may be ga« 
18: and from the promiſcuous uſe of them in this 
Book, and in the Proverbs, and elſewhere,and implying all manner 
of knowledge, divine or humane, ſpeculative or prattical, political 
or philoſophical, - * | 
17 *AndI L- my heart to know wiſdom, and to « (y...... 
know madneſs and folly 5 : I perceived that this alſo is 87:23 _ | 
vexation of ſpirit c. | je = 
6 That I might throughly underſtand the natureand difference of 
Truth and Errour,of Virtue and Vice, all things being beſt unders 
ſtood by Contraries, and might decern if there were any Opinicn 
or Praftice amongſt Men which would give him full ſatisfaction. c 
Or, feeding upon wind, 259. 14. : | Wo 
18 Forin much wiſdom is much || grief d: and be 
that encreaſeth knowledge encreaſeth forrow e. 
| 4 Or, maignation, or diſpleaſure within himſelf,. and againſt his 
preſent condition, e Which he doth many ways, partly becauſe he 
gets his Knowledge with hard and weariſome Labour, both of Mind 
and Body, with the Conſumption of his Spirits, and ſhortning and 
imbitterment of his Life ; part)y becauſe he is oft deceived with 
Knowledge falſly ſo called,and oft miſtakes Errors for Truths and is 
perplexed with manifold Doubts,fromwhich ignorant men are whol-' 
ly free;partly becauſe he foreſees,and conſequently feels the terror of 
many Miſeries which are, or are like ro come to paſs, which 


Or, as others, both: 


Ch.q:133| 
+ Hev.ces | 


fee. 


I Kings || 
30: & 188 || 
7, 23- 'N 
t Heb:had || 
TRE Jeen mich. H 
what W 
it wasnor my Ig- 


- *-,, 


|| Or, ins 
 dignatinn. >.4 


and 33; 29. whoſe King he was by God's {ſpecial and gracious Ap= 


pointmentz and furniſhed by God with fiagular Wiſdom for the , 


diict.arge of that great truſt;and whoſe Royal Palace and abode was 
in Feruſalem, where were the Houſe of God and the moſt wiſe and 
learned of the Priefts attending upon it, and the Seats of Juſtice, 
and Colledges or Aſſemblies of the wiſeſt Men of their Nation of 
which ſee 2 Kings 22:. 14: 1 Chron: 25: 8, &c. Pſa: 122: 5. All which 
helps concurring together in him, which very rarely do in any 
other Men, makes the Argument drawn from his Experience more 


convincing and undeniable, *' 

13 And 1gave my hearc e toſeek and ſearch outf by 
wiſdom g concerning all things that are done under hea- 
ven: this fore travel 3 hath God given tothe ſons of 
man &, || to be exerciſed therewith /. pe 
e Whick Phraſe notes his ſerious and fixed purpoſe, his great 


Induſtry and Alacri:y in it.. f To ſeek diligently and accurately- 
g Wiſely, or by the help of that. Wiſdom wherewith God had en- 


IOr, ts 
offi the. 


dowed me: h Concerning a'!l the works of God and Men in this | 


lower World ; ths works of Nature,and their Cauſes, Effefs, Pro- 
perties, and Operations ; the works of Divine Providence,and God's 
Courſels and Ends in them ; the work and depths of humane Policy 
in the condu& of Perſonal, and Domeſtical, and Publick affairs. ; 
This difficult «nd toilſome work of ſearching opt theſe things, & 
God hath inflited this as a juſt puniftinent upon Man for his eat- 
ing of the” Tree of Knowledge, that inſtead of that. ſweer-and Perfe& 
Knowledge which God had freely infuſed into Man at his firſt Crea- 
tion, he ſhculd now grope after ſome ſmall Parcels or Fragments of 
it, and thoſe roo not te be-gorten withour the Swear of his Brows 
and Brains: | To employ themſelves. in the painful ſtndie of thoſe 
things, which now is both their Duty and their Puniſhment. Or, 
as it is rendred in the Margin, and by many others, zo «ffi them 
in or by ic, to Chaſtife their former Curioſity, and to give them 
matrer of continual Humiliation and: Vexation. . And therefore 
Knowledge is ſo far from' making Men happy,that it expoſerk them 
ro Trowble and Infelicity F Br 

done under 


14 I haveſcen mall tho works that are 
the ſun, and behold », all is vanity and vexation of 
ſpirir 0; 


mi, e. Diligently obſerved, and in great meaſure underſtood. 
1 Fer it wass greatfurpriſe ro me, and therefore may ſeem ſtrange 


are unobſerved by lefs knowing perſons, and which poſſibly neves 
happenz partly becauſehe. hath the clearer proſpect into, and. quic= 
ker ſevſe ofhis own Ignorance, and Infirmities,and Diſorders, and 
withal how vain &ineffectual all his Knowledge is for the prevenri. 
on or removal of them;and partly becauſe hisKnowledge is very im= 
perfect and unſarisfying,yer increafing his thirſt after more Know -" 
ledge, and conſequently efter more Diſſatisfact ion, becauſe inſtead of 
that juft Honour, and Delighr, and Advanrage which he experts 
from it, he meets with nothing but Envy,and Oppolicion,and Cone 
tempt, becauſe his Knowledge quickly fades and- dies with him,and 
then leaves him in no better,and poſlib'y in a much worſe Condition 
than the meaneſt and moſt 245 8 Man itz the World. X 
| oP - I . | 7 
Pleaſure and Mirth alſe Vanity, 1, 2. Whether in Wine, or Buildings, 
and Gardens, or Servants, or Cattel, or Siluer and Gold, - or Muſick, 
3— $8. This the preacher ſearched out and found,and none need try 
after hizs, 9g ==—=12. Wiſdom excelleth Folly, 13, 14. but tht like Event 
is 80 both, and b0th are forgotten ; therefore is Wiſdom alſo Vanity, and 
Life hateful, 15 ——— 17; Men labour they know not for whom, but the 
Fool enjoyeth the Wiſeman's dains % this rendred bis Tv'l wrkiame ; that he 
reaped no frut, ana yer 118 days were 1rave: ana Grief,, 18 ——23« 
There us nothing better than to enjoy contentealy what God giuedh is ; 
. and this alſo is of God, who giveth travel to the Sinner 24 —2= 26. - 
Said in mine heart «, Go to.now, I will prove thee 
I 6 with mirth c, therefore enjoy pleaſure-4; and. 
behold this alfo is vanity e., © + : IEEE 


4 


; # Being difapppointed of my hopes from Knowledge, I reſblved 
in my own Mind to try another courſe. b O'my+ Soul T will try | 
whether I cannot make , thee happy. c By: aMowing to my felF the 
free enjoyment of the preſent and ſenſible Delights. of human Lite. , 
d Taks thy fill of pleaſure: and expect fatisfacrian thence. e Is vain: . 
and unable to make men happy, becauſe AE Derive a meant 
and\unſuitable tothe nobleand heaven-born Soul of Man,ahd'if MY 
ceflively uſed, apter to cloy and glut meti, than to ſatisfie. them, and. 
arg frequently. mixed with,and moſt commonly end' in bitterneſs,as 
being the great inſtruments and occafions of fin, and of all irs fatal 
conſequences: +: - 
- 2 I ſaid of laughter 
Wikk doe SEELEY Lois 
: f OF exceſſive Mirth, which diſcovers it ſelf by immoderate 
Laughter, and other outward geſtnres. * g vhis is anact and'ſign of . 
s L - madneſs * 


f, & «mad 2: and of mirth, 


A” 


——_ 


a Ds II. ; 

| madneſs, more fit for fools who know nothing, than for wiſe men 
at leaſt in this ſinful,and dangerous,and &eplorable ſtate of mankind, 
which calls for ſeriouſneſs and ſorrow from all conſiderate perſons, 
in which caſe it isJike the laughter of one in a phrenzy. And none 
bug a Fool, or mad Man, can take fatisfaQtion in ſuch light and fro- 
thy Pleaſures, or expeC happineſs from theme þ What good doth 
it 2'Or how can it make men happy? I challenge all the Epicures 1t: 
the World to give me aſolid and ſatis aftory Anſwer. 
k:itr7; 3 * I ſought in mineheart Þ ro give my ſelf unto wine 
eb: co ;, ( yet acquainting my heart with wiſdom & ) and to 
”7 1ay hold on folly 1, till I might ſee what was that good 
-_ for the ſons of men, which they ſhould do under the 


J: yen + all the days of their lite =». | 
numbe” _— and + my fleſh with delicious meats and drinks, 
the days Synecdochicall expreſſed by Wine here, as alſo Prov: g: 2: Cante 2: 
their 4; &c, 3s olſiry food is by Bread, Amos 7: 12: compared with 8: 
| 11. & Yer reſolving to uſemy Wiſdom.cither 7. To ſet bounds to 
my pleaſures. Or rather 2. That I might try wherher I could not 
arrive at Satisfa&ion, : 
uſcing Wine toſweeten and allay the Toils of Wiſdom, &Wildom to 
revent that Deſtru&tion which many bring upon themſelves by in- 
tmpirate Pleaſures whilſt they ſeek for SatisfaQtion, that ſo I might 
MB have the comfort, without the danger and miſchief of Pleaſures, ] 
| To purſue and addi& my ſelf to carnal Pleaſures, which was my 
Folly. m Till by trying ſeveral methods I might find our the true 
way to Contentment and Satisfa&tion,during this mortal Life: 
I made me great works», I built me houles o, I 


ted me vineyards p. | : | 
pn one mo for - honovr and gelighti o Of which 

ſce 1 King: 6: 1, &c. & 9: 15, &c- þ See Cant 8:11. EX 
5 I made me gardens 9 and orchards,and I planted 


s in them of all kindof fruit 7. 
"Heb. Paradifes,or Gardens of Pleaſure: r Mixing Pleaſure and 


Profit rogether. 
' 6 I made me pools of water s, to water therewith 


that bringeth forth trees 7. 
_ _ the Rain == fell but ſeldom. * The nurſeries of 
| young Trees newly planted in the Orchards, which for the multi- 
| tude of them werelike a Wood or Forrcit. 
THeb: ſem; . > ] porter ſervants and maidens, and had f ſervants 
ef myhouſe: porn in my houſe #; alſo I had great poſſeflions of 


great.and ſmall cattel, above all that were in Jeruſalem 


.- 2: before me. ; 
 ,-*u Of my Bond-ſervants, whichtherefore were a part of my poſ- 

Ex. > ſeſhons, See 1 King: 1© 1: Exzr8: 2: 55e 
*rKin:'9: 8 * [gathered me alſo ſilver and gold, and the pe- 
£ culiar treaſure of kings #, and of the provinces y: I gat 
= hs memen-ſingers and women: ſingers 2, and the delights 
'+ Heb:me- of the ſons of men 4, as | muſical inſtruments and that 
Fol in-- of all ſorts. | | 
Framents, x Eicher 1; Vaſt Riches, anſwerable to the State ofa King. Or 
- or 8 choice , Th. greateſt Jewels and rarities of other Kings, which they gave 
ro. mecither as a Tribute,or by way of Preſent; of which ſee 1 King: 

: 28: & 9: 11: & 10:2, 10+: y Which were impoſed upon or preſen- 
ted by all the Provinces of wy Dontmons. z Whoſe voices were 
| more ſweet than Mens. # Either 1- All other delightful chings. Or 
F _=_ cup- That in which men generally delight, to wit, muſical inflirument:, 
Te as it follows . 
| 9 Sol was great b, and increaſed more than all that 


were beforeme inJeruſalem ; alſo my wiſdom remained 


with me c. 

b In Riches, and Power, and Glory. c AsyetT was not wholly 
beſotted and ſeduced from God by theſe things, as I was afterwards 
Y ill had the uſe of my Reaſon, whereby I was capable of ſearching 
after and finding fatisfaQtion, :if it was to be had in thoſe things. 

x0 And whatſover mineeyes defireds, I kept not 


| choice wo- 
men, Gr, 
en 


a Chiyzv2' for my heart rejoyced in all my labour g, and ® this 
: -— & was my portion of my labour 54. 
ag 4 Whatfoever was grateful to my Senſes, or my Heart deſired. 
> He aſcribes Defire tothe Eyes, becauſe the Sight'of the Eyes is the 
uſual and powerful Incentive of Deſires ; of which ſee 5o': 7: 21: 
Job 31:1; Mat: 5: 28» elI denicd my felfnothing, at leaſt of Jaw- 
Ful Delights, but went to the very utmoſt bounds of theme which 
was the occaſion of his falling afterwards into ſinful Pleaſures. f As 
my Heart was vehemently ſet upon Pleaſure, ſo I'did nct reſiſt or 
curb it therein, but made a!l poſſible Proviſions to gratifie it, g I 
had the Comfort of all my Labours, and was not hindred from the 
free and full Enjoyment of them by Sickneſs or War, or any other 
calamitous occurent. þ This preſent and Temporary Enjoyment of 
them, was all the Benefit which I could expeC or receive from all 
my Labours. So that I made the beſt of them, I had an{keart to 
uf them, which many men through Covetouſneſs bave nor, and ] 
taſted the ſweetneſs of them, which many others cannot do; and 
_— ifany man could arrive at Happineſs by this means, I had 
one it; | 
1x ThenT looked onall the works that my hands 
had wrought, and onthe Jabourthat I had laboured to 


4 Chev do5: and behold, all was * vanity and vexation of ſpi- 
7O- +». Tit k, and there was no|| profic ] under;the ſun. 
eabency #I-made a ſerious Review of my former Works and Labours,and 


; conſidered whether Thad obtained that SatisfaQtion in them which 
I deſigned and expe&ed. KI found my ſelf ſuddenly diſappointed 


| *Cha3: 


and wholly diſſatisfied in this courſe. 1 The Pleaſure was paſt and 
4 & 7: 25: one, and I was never the better for it, but as empty asbefore, and 
4 Or, in d rothing left but ſorrowful Refleftions vpen yr. | 

1 im thing; 12 And I turned my ſelfto behold wiidom, * and 
— ae? ©av* madneſs, and folly m: for. what can the man do » that 


; _—_— cometh after the king o ? [| eves that which hath been 


already Gone p. 


ECCLESIASTES: 


by mixing Wine and Wiſdom together, by” 


” «VT 
4 "a 4 3,F>, d 
- - [f = 
. ' SERIS 
v, So 
"> 
-v 


| we "3d. 
” ” 


C hap. 17. 


» Of which ſee Chap: 1: 15.Beingfruſtrated of my hopes in plea» 
ſure, - I returned ro a ſecond and more ſerious Conſideration of my 
firſt choice,to ſee whether there was not more Satisfaction to be gt 
ten from Wiſdom, than what diſcovered at my firſt view. » To 
find out the.truth in this matter,to diſcover the utmoſt Satisfaction 
wich was pcflibly to be found in Pleaſures: So this is added as a 
Reaſon why he gave over the Thoughts of Plcaſures, and directed 
them to another object, and why he ſo confident)]y aſſerted their 
Vanity from his own particular Boa omg becauſe he had made 
the beſt of them,” and it was a vain thing for any private man to 
expect that from them which could not be found by a King, and 
ſuch a King, who had ſo much Wiſdom to invent, and ſuch vaſt 
Riches ro purſue and enjoy all imaginable Delights, and who had 
made't his Deſign and Buſineſs to ſearch this to the bottom. oThatr 
ſucceeds me in this Enquiry. p As by others in former times, ſo 
eſpecially by my ſelf, They can make no new Diſcoveries as to 
this point. 

13 Then I ſaw q + that wiſdom excelleth folly x, as t Heb. 


far as lightexcelleth darkneſs s. That there 


q Or, yer I ſaw. For this is added to prevent an Objection or E ho 
Miſtake. r Although Wiſdom is not ſufficient to make men truly wiſh a 
and perfectly happy, yet it is of a far greater Uſe and Excell:ncy mg 
than vain Pleaſures, or any other Follies s 7. e. Vaſtly andunſpeak- ;, _ 


_ not do if they were out of his head. 


from them e ; I with-held pot my heart from any joy f: 


'f Becauſe I muſt,and that everlaſtingly, part with them, and leave 


ably. Light is very pleafant and comfortable, and withal of great As. 
neceſſity and ſingular uſe to diſcover the Differences of Perſons and 
Things, to prevent Miſtakes and Dangers, and to dire& alla man's 
paths in the right way, whereas Darkneſs is in it ſelf dolefu], 
and leads men into innumerable Confuſions, and Errers, and Mi- 
cries. | 
14 * The wiſe mans eyes are in his head r, but the * Pror: 17. 
fool walketh in darkneſs « : and x I my elf perceived —D 
alſo, that * one event happeneth unto them all y. * Pſ.4916! 
# In their proper place, and therefore they can ſee, which they Ch: g:2, 3 
He hath the uſe of his 
yes and Reaſon, and ſees his way, and orders all his affairs with 
Diſcretion, and foreſees,and ſo avoids many Dangers and Miſchiefs. 
# Manageth his Affairs ignorantly, rafhly,and fooliſhly,whereby he 
ſheweth that his Eyes are not in his head, but in his heel$or as it is 
expreſſed Prov: 17: 24: in the ends of the earth. x Or, Yet, notwith- 
ſtanding this excellency of Wiſdom above Follygfor our Conduct in 
the matters of this Life, yet at laſt they both come ro one end. 
3 Both are ſubject to the ſame Calamitries,and to Death it ſelf, which 
utterly takes away all difference between them. 
IF Then faid I in my heart, As it happeneth to the 
fool,ſo it F happeneth even to me;and why was I then f Heb: ; 
more wiſe z ? Then I ſaid in my heart, That this alſo _ 
7s vanity. 19 we, 
z What Benefit haveT by Wiſdom ? Or, Towhat purpoſe did I 
deſire and take ſo much pains for Wiſdom ? 
16 For there is no remembrance of the wiſe more 
than of the fool for ever « ; ſeing that which now zs, 
in the days to come ſhall all be forgorten : and how die- 


eth the wiſe man? as the fool b. 

# Their Name and Memory, though it may flouriſh ſor a ſeaſon 
among ſome men, yet it will not laſt for ever,but will ina little time 
be worn out; as we ſce in mcſt of the wiſe men in former ages, 
whoſe very Names, together with all their Monuments, are utterly 
loſt, as hath been ofc obſerved and bewailed,by learned Writers in 
ſeveral Ages. 6 He muſt dieas uncertainly as the fool, and after 
death be as little remembred and honovred. 

17 Therefore I hatedlife c, becauſe the work that 
is wrought under the ſun 5s grievous unto me d: for all 
is vanity and vexation of ſpirit. 

c My Life, though accompanied with ſ@ much Honour,and Plea. 
aq and Wiſdom, was a burden to me,and I wasapt to wiſh either 
that I had never been born, or that I might ſpeedily die. « All 
humane deſigns and works are ſo far from yielding me that ſatisfac. 
tion which Iexpected, that the conſideration of them encreaſed my 
Diſcontent. 

18 Yea, Thated all my labour, which I had # taken + He: 1 
under the ſun e; becauſe * I ſhould leave it unto the toxred. 
man thart ſhall be after me f. *Pl 49610; 

e All theſe Rickesand Buildings, andother fruits of my Labour 
were ths matterof mytRepentance,and Aggravations of my Mitery. 


them all behind mes. 

I9And who knoweth whether he ſhall be a wiſe mas 
or a fool g? yet he ſhall have rule over all my labour 
wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have ſhewed 
my ſelf wiſe under the ſun. This is alſo vanity. 
£ Who will undo all that I have done,and turn the effeets of my 
Wiſdom into Inſtruments of his Folly,and Occaſions ofruine. Some 
think he had ſuchan Opinion of Rehoboam, : 

20 Therefore I went about to cauſe my heart to de- 
ſpair þ of all the labour which I took under the ſun. 

hI gavemy ſelfup to Deſpondency, and deſpair of ever reap« 

ing that Satisfaction which I promited to my ſelf. = 
21 For there is a man whoſe labour ;s in wiſdom, 
and in knowledge,and in _ z : yet toa man that 
hath not laboured therein &, ſhall he Þ leave it for his 
portion. This alſo 5s vanity, and a great evil /. 
i Who uſeth great Induſtry, and Prudence, and Juſtice too in the 
management of his Aﬀairs, and therefore might as confidently ex- 
ect Gods bleſſing, and the comfort of his Labour, - as any other 

an. k Soas I have done: who hath ſpent his days in floth and 
folly. 1 A greatdiſorder in it ſelf, and a great diſgrace to this 
World, and a great torment toa conſidering mind. 
22 * For what hatha man »» of all his labour,and of, Ch: 3: 31 


che vexation of heart wherein he hath Jaboured under g, . «; 


*Heb:givs 


the ſun ? 
|  Whay 


Heh to 


f He 
forth 


*Tob 
16, 1 | 
Prov; 


givs 


þ > 3 
ge 


Chap. VI. 


* Job:14: 7: 


*Ch: 3: 
128 13,225 
& 5.18: 
& 8:153 

j Or, ate 
light his 
ſenſes» 


+ Heb: be- 
fort hims 


*Tob 27; 
16g 17: 
Prov:28.8 


f Heb; fo 


ECCLE 


»m What Comfort or Benefit remains to any Man after this ſhort 
and frail Life is once ended ? Or,whar Advantage hath he by all his 
Labours above him who never laboured, and yet enjoyeth all the 
fruits of his Labours ? ; 
23 Forall his days #re * ſorrows », and his trave 
oriefo ; yea, his heart taketh not reſt in the night p. 
This is alſo vanity. 

Or, Though all his days were ſorrows, i.e. full of ſorrows. For 
this ſeems added to aggravate the Evil mentioned in the foregoing 
Verſe. Though he took great and unwearied pains all his days,yet 
afcer death he hath no more benefit by it than another man hath 
o The toils of his Body are, or were, accompanied with the Vexa- 
tions of his Mind. p Either becauſe his Mind is diſtrated, or his 
Sleep broken, with perplexing Cares and Fears. | 

24 * There is nothing better for a man q, than that 
he ſhould eat and drink, and hat he || ſhould make his 
ſoul enjoy good r in all his labour. This alſo I faw 


that it was from the band of God s. 

q Or, Is there any thing better fir # mat? Which implies that 
there is nothing better, to wit, for mans preſent comfort and ſa- 
tisfaQtion ; this is the chief, and indeed the only conſiderable bene- 
fir of his labours. » Thar he ſhould thankfully take, and freely and 
chearfully enjoy the comforts which God gives him : 5 That this 
alio 1s a ſingular gift of God, and not to be procured by a mans 
own Wiſdom or Diligence, 

25 For who can eat fr, 


unto u more than I ? 


or who elſe can haſten here- 


£ Who can more freely and fully enjoy the Comforts of this Lifg 
than I did? | 
foregning Verſe from his own Experience, which was the more 
theſe matters, none could either have more Creaturz-comforts, .or 
more addi& himſelf to the enjoyment of them, or improve them 
to better advantage than he did 
what wasthe greateſt good to be found in them, and whether they 
were able of themſelves, wichout Gods ſpecial gift, to yield a man 
farisfation, u*To wit, to the procuring and enjoying of them. 
W ho can purfue them with more diligence, or obtain them with 
more ſpeed and readineſs, or embrace them with more gretdineſs 
and alacrity ? + 

26 For Ged giveth to a man that is good | in his 
Gehtz, wiſdom and knowledge y, and joy: but to the 
fiuner he giveth cravel,to gather and to heap up [|, that 
* he may give to him that is good beforeGod F. This al- 


ſo is vanity, andvexation of ſpirit. 

x Who not only ſeems to be good to Men, as many bad Men 
do, bur is really and ſincerely good. Or, who pleaſethhim, as this 
Phraſe is rendred,Ecclej; 7: 26: and oft elſewhere, Whereby he ſeems 
to intimate the Reaſon why he found no more comfort in his La- 
bours, becauſe his ways had been very diſpleaſing to God, and 
therefore God juſtly denied him that gift. y To dire& him how 
to uſe his comforts aright, that ſo they may be bleſſings, and not 
ſnares and curſes to him. - z A thankful and contented Mind with 
his portion» |. He giveth him up to inſatiable deſires, and weart- 
ſom 1bours, to little or no purpoſe. + That he may have no com- 
fort in rhem, bur leave them ro others, yea to ſuch as he leaſt ex- 

<&ed or deſired, to good and virtuous men,into whoſe hands his 
tare falls by the wiſe and all-diſpoſing Providence of God, 
CHAF. MUG 


Every thing hath its time:1n which to enjoy it and therewith do good to others, 
# ourgood, 1 13. God doth all according to his Decree that we ſhould 
fear him, and there 15 nothing new, 14, 15, The Vanity of unjuſt Fudge 
ment ; God 1s the great Juage of all, 16, 17: 
know, that they are here hut as brute Beaſts, 18 22, 


"5 every thing there is a ſeaſon s, anda time to eve- 


ry purpoſe 5 under heaven. | 

a A certain time appointed by God for its being and continuance, 
which no humane Wit or Providence can prevent or alter- And 
by virtue of this Appointment or Decree of God, all the viciſſirudes 
and changes which happen in the world, whether comforts or ca- 
Jamities, do come to paſs. Which is here added partly to prove 
what he laſt ſaid, Chap. 2: 24,26: that both the freeand comfortable 
Enjoyment of the Creatures which ſome have, and the Croſſes and 
Vexations which others have with them, are from the Hand and 
Counſel of Gods partly to prove the principal Propoſition of the 
Book, that all things below are vain, "and Happineſs 1s not to be 
Found in them, becauſe of their great uncertainty, and mutability, 
and tranſitorineſs, and becanſe they are ſo much our of the reach 
and power of Men, and wholly in the diſpoſal of another, to wit 
God, who doth either give or take them away, either ſweeten or 
imbitter them, as ir pleaſeth him: and partly to bring the minds 
of men intoa quiet and chearful dependance upon Gods Providence 
and ſubmiſſion to his Will, and a ſtate of preparation for all events. 
b Or, will or deſire, to wit, of man. To all mens deſigns, attempts 
and buſineſſes. Not only natural, bur even the free and voluntary 
ations of men, are ordered and diſpoſed by God to accompliſh his 
own purpoſe. Butit muſt be conlidered, that he doth nor here 


ſpeak of a time allowed by God wherein all the following things pi 


may lawfully be done, which ;s wholly beſides his Scope and Buſj- 
neſs, but only a time fixed by God, in which they would or ftould 
be done- 


2 Atime Þ to be born, and a time to die c; a time 
to plant 4,and a time to pluck up that which is planted: 

c A certain period unknown to Man, bur fixed by God, in which 
a man muſt unavoidably die ; of which ſee Job 14: 5: Joh: 13: 1, 
4 Wherein-Godenclines a mans heart co planting. 

3- A time to kille, anda time to heal f: a time to 
break-down g, and a time to build up : | 

eWhen a man ſhall die x violent death, either by chance,” as 


This Verle is added co. confirm what he ſaid in the | 


| i war, and a timeof peace. | 
conliderable, becauſe no Man ever was a more capable Judge of : 3 P 


and therefore he could beſt tell - 


And he will make men | 


Al 
i 


STASTES, 


either by the fancy ofthe owner, or by the-rage of other men, or 
otherwiſe. ; 
4 A time to weep, and a timeto laugh s a time to hy 
mourn, and a time co dance : : 
þ When men ſhall have juſt occaſion for weeping and mournings. ' 
F A time to caſt away ſtones i, and a time to ga- 


ther ſtones together : a time to embrace &, anda time | 
7 to refrain from embracing 1: _.. | 1 
{ Which were brought together in order to the building of aWall ons 
or Houſe, but are now caſt away;either becauſe the man whe gathe- 
red them hath changed his mind,and deſiſts from his proje&, or b 
other cauſes or accidents. k When perſons ſhall enter into Friend- 
ſhip, and perform all friendly offices one to another, 1 Either 
thfough alienation of affeQions,or grievous calamities: See Joel 2: 16: 
1 Cor: 7t5, | | L | 
6 Atimeſ| to get, and a time to-loſe ws: a time to 
keep, and a time to caſt away ». | 7 
m When Men ſhall loſe their Eſtates, either by Gods Providence, 
or by their own choice. » When a man ſhall caft away his Goods 
voluntarily, as ina ſtorm to ſave bis Life, as Jonah 1: 5: Af; 27: 
18, 19. orout of Love and Obedience to God, as Matuo. 37, 39iHeb: 
10; 34. 
7 A time to rent 0, and a time to ſew : a time to 
keep ſilence p, and a time to ſpeak : | 
a When men ſhall rend their Garments, as they did in great and 
ſudden griefs, as Gen: 37: 29; Joel 2: 13, p Wherein men will or 
ſhall be filenr, eicher through grief. as 706 3; 12, 13: or by ſickneſs 
or weakneſs, or becauſe God denies a man abilicy to utter his mind: 
8 Atime to love 9g, anda time to hate: a time of 


Chap. 1 


| 
| 
n 
4 
If 


2 When God ſhall ſtir up the affe&ion of Love, or give occaſion 
for the exerciſe or diſcovery of it to others. £7, 
9 * What profit hath he that worketh,in that where- * Ci: 
in he laboureth 7 ? | ; 


7 Seing then all ations and events in the world are out of mans 
power, and no man can at any time door enjoy any thing at his 
pleaſure, bur only what and when God pleaſeth,as hath been now 
ſthewed in many particulars,& it is as true and certain in all others, 
hence it follows,that all mens labours, of themſelves, and without 
Gods help and bleſſing, are unprofitable, and utterly inſufficient to 
make them aPPY- | 

Lo I have ſeen sthe travel : which God hath given to 
the ſons of men «, to be exerciſed in it x : 


5 I have diligently obſerved and conſidered upon this occaſion. 
t Or, the occupation or buſineſs, mens various employments, and the 
differing ſacceſſes of them. u Either 1. Which God hath impoſed 
upon Men as their duty : and therefore Men muſt labour,although 
it brings them no profit, as was now ſaid, Or 2, Which God hath 
inflittcd upon Mankind as a juſt puniſhment for their fingto which 
cherefore Men ought quietly to ſubmit. « That hereby they might 
have conſtant matter of exerciſe for their diligence,and patience,and 
ſubmiſſion to Gods Will and videnen and, for all other Graces. 
Or, that they might be affliFed or humbled therewith ; as the ſame 
Phraſe is rendred by diverſe, Eccl: 1: 13. 


11 He hath made everything beautiful in his tine 7: * Ch:$:i9: 
alſo he batb ſec the world in their heartz, ſo that * no 
man can find out the work that God maketh from the 
beginning to the end a: 


3 This ſeems to be added as an Apology for Gods Providence; 
notwithſtanding all the contrary events and confuſions which are 
in the world. He ( 1. ex God, expreſſed in the laſt Clauſe of the 
verſe } hath made ( or doth make or do, by his Providence in the 
government of the world)everything ( which he doth either imme. 
diately, or by the miniſtry of Men, or other Creatures, for God 
worketh inand with all his Creatures in all their aftions,as is agreed 
by Divines and Philoſophers) beauriful( decently and conveniently, 
ſo that, all-things conſidered,it could not have been done better) ; 
his time, in the time which he had appointed,or which he ſaw moſt 
proper and fit for it 3 or in its rime or ſeaſon, when it was moſt fit to 
be done. Many events ſeem to mens ſhallow and perverſe judgs 
ments, at leaſt for a time, to be very irregular and unbecoming as 
when wicked men proſper in their impious and unrighteous Enters 
prizes, and good men are ſorely oppreſſed and afflicted, and thar. 
tor righteouineſs ſake;but when men ſhall come throughly to under. 
ſtand Gods works, and the whole frame and contexture of them, 
and to fee the end of them, they will then fay, thatall things were 
done moſt wiſely and moſt ſeaſonably ; whereof we have eminenr 
inſtances in Joſeph, and David, and Mordecai, and the Jews of his 
time. Zz1, e. In the Hearrs of men, as the following words ſhew, 
where Man is expreſſed, The ſenſe is either 11 Although all Gods 
works are beautiful,yet men do not diſcern the beauty of them,be- 
cauſe the World is in their Hearts; their minds are fo buſied and 
diſtracted with the thoughts,and cares,andlove, and bufineſs of this 
World, that they have neither leiſure, nor heart, ſeriouſly to ſtudy 
Gods works. | But this inordinate Love of the preſent World comes. 
from Mans own Corruption, and not from God, and therefore it 
eems harth to impure it to God,and improbable that Solomon would 


t:3 


have phraſed it rhus, that God hath ſet or put cheWorld, i. e, world 
ly Luſts in mens Hearts. Or 2. As Gods Works are beautiful-in 
themſelves, ſo Men are capable of diſcerning the. Beauty of them, 
becauſe God hath ſet the World in mens Hearts, he hath expoſed the- 
World, and all his Diſpenſationsin the World, unto the view of 
mens minds;borh becaufe he hath wrought his Works ſo evidently, 
and publickly,thar Men mighr eaſily obſerve. them 3 and becauſe he 
hath given Men Reaton whereby they may diſcover the. Wiſdom, 
and Beauty of all Gods works, if they diligently apply themſelves 
to the ſtudy ofthem. @ So thisis another Reaſon why Mendo not. 
diſcern the Beauty of Gods works, becauſe they do not ſee the 
whole Frame or Courſe of them from 'the Beginning to the End, 
bur only ſome ſmall Parcels or Fragments of them, the eminerr; 


Txod: 21: 13z or by the ſeritence of the Magiſtrate, or by the hands 
Murderers., f When he who ſeemed ro be mortally wounded | 
it be heatcÞ$ and reffored g When honles ſhall be demoliſhed 


works of God: being oft begun in one Age, and finiſhed in another, 

Or yet ſo that,8&c. Orexcept that (as this Phraſe properly ſignifies, 

and is elſewhere uſed”) no Aon can find out, &e, Thus ic 1s an. Exe, 
| 5 L2 ception 


lap. I 


Ob 7: 7: 
} 34:12 


away). 


4 Ver; I; 


|} Or, that” 
they might 
_ clear God 


A 


| " and Fenjoy the good ofall his labour, it 3s the gift of 
Heb: ſee, God g. all curn to duſt again &, 


+ Heb: . , . 
EE which is to be, hath already been /, and God requireth yz  PrafQtical Knowledge, as ſuch words aremoſt commonly uſed. Who 
s driven that which is paſt ». \ ; "_ 

15 ſuch a difference, which alſo is known and believed by wiſe and 


_ allother places. 


and ſee;Scc. | # Andfarther I conſidered with my ſelf. b Concerning their con- | Ce.0 514, So they were utterly unable to deliver themſelves,and 


- ther, devouring and deſtroying one another; Or 2, in their © 
as 4 No ae to deliver not only as theJudgment of theFlefh,or of theSenſe or of 


Il. TT SSSELESIAUSTES Chap 1y 


ception to the next foregoing Clauſe,and the Senſe is,It is true God reſpe the other life. F : 
hath put the World into Mens Hearts,or made them capable of ob- , both theſe re wg gl dry rms rs ming op 9 —_— 280 
rs all —_— _— E God = _ World;but this | followings Verſes. argely in the _ 
to be underſtood with a Limitation becauſe there are ſome more I9 * For that which befalleth the " Plc 99:12 
myſterious works of God, which no man can fully underſtand, be- | 5 "_” of the lons of men be- 20; 
cauſe he cannot ſearch them out through or from the Beginning to 'alleth beafts E, EVEN ONE thing befalleth them : "as the Ch: 2: 16; 
one dieth, fo dieth the other f; yea, they have all one f F*>: . 


the End. 
12 I know þ that there is no good c in them d, but | | breath g, ſo thata man hath ns preemin ; Stivit, 
' for man to rejoyce, and to do good e in his life. [ beaſt hb: for all ;s vanity. P ence above a 


. b By clear Reafon, and my own long and certain Experience. c e They are ſubje& to the ſame Di ' TT 
Noother SatisfaQtion er Felicity which a Man can roy. 4 In f As certainly, nd no leſs Cn, on, and 7s er 
Creatures or worldly Enjoyments. e Eeither 1. to himſelf; as it is | 1512 their Noſtrils ; one and the ſame Iiving Soul, by which the 
fully eipeatied, Pſa: 49:18 Or 2; to others ; to employ them in | Beaſts perform the ſame vital and animal Overations. For he \' eak 
Ads of Charity and Liberality towards others. Or 3. rowards God, | 29 hereof Mans rationaland immortal Spirit, nor of the fa 
ro. uſe them, and to live in the fear of God, which isneceſlary to Life. hIn reſpeCt of the preſent Life and ſenſible things. Na hs 
the Happineſs of thisas well as of the other Life. Beaſts have quicker Senſes than Men, and therefore enjoy or 

13 And alſo that. every man ſhould eat and drink £ —_ = thoſe things, and that withleſs Dangers and Miſchief 
en do. 


20 All gounto one place 7 ; * all are ofthe duſt, and *Gen:zig 


i. C. Heart to uſe what God hath gi ; ; 
: _— toms ry '©h: org 7 Of which ſee the N py ns: , NO _ Earth,as itisexpreſſed. wer: 21: out of which they were 
14 I know that whatſoever God doth, it ſhall befor | [5 Eeetefe 12: Which 15 meaat only of their Bodies,as it isexplain- 


ever þ: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken} 2, wh k Wy Het: 
a - d God doth it, that hhoul O noweth [the ſpirit F of man that T goeth þ eb: of 
from it : and Go ts men Thould fear before | upwar d, andthe ſpirit of the beaſt that goeth down- = 5 


h AllGods Counſels or Decrees are eternal or unchangeable,and af m6 rmeen FORD Ss FO : T Heb i; 
his Providence works effeftually,ſo as Men cannor reſiſt or hinder it. ; yaſt1y differing, becauſe Mans Soi LIAR 54 nk 5 and Beaſts are aſcending, 
5: Men can neither do any thing beſides or againſt Gods Counſel and : a, -: br the Sine ph _ =o 1 _—_ -w God, Chap: 
Providence, 'nor hinder any work or att ofir. k Not that men þogy, ,,q periſherh with T7 h; - __ rogether with its 
ſhould make this an occaſion of deſpair or idleneſs,or diſſoluteneſs, . Which ;s nor = 4 rr J TIEN enewers, ie inewerb this? 
as ſome abuſe this Do&rine,but that by the conſideration of his So- - the thing were ee on ws” ”y 1 no _ _—_— it, O as if 
veraignandirreſiſtable Power in the difpoſal of a)l Perſonsand things pogejy ev olfeens ie ; Ag _ = _ ay Coy or | gen it,and 

. as pleaſeth him, men ſhould learn to truſt in him, to ſubmit ro manner of Expre Mon. gon - bhp ag Tnow EEG e me 
him, 07 open at or roy —_ him, and more carefully and 7g, 53. 1. Who bath believed? &c. Which n * F<. Seer _w + 
induſtriouſly to ſtu + #& aq wing » kk . ,. ficulry, bur not the Nullity or Impoſſibility of the thing. Bu. 

15 That which hath been, 15 now ; and that which fides, he ſcems here to ſpeak not ſo much of a ſpeculative, as of 2 


conſiders or regards this, or layeth it to heart? Trueit is, there 


"7 Things paſt, preſent, and to come, are all of the ſame nature, : 
TIE he manner by dac conftabe counſel, and ow men * bur the generality of Mankind never mind -it ; their 
ſerrled courſe ia all Parts and Ages in the World. There is a con. |; ©2r'S are wholly ſer upon this life, and upon preſept and ſenſible 
tinual return of the ſame motions and influences of the Heavenly things, and they ce el WO EO gn in thee, ang 
Bedies, of the ſame ſeaſons of the Year 3 and a conftant ſuccefſion Woe houghr nor care for thethings of the furure and inviſible 
of new Generations of Men and Beaſts,but all of the ſame quality! World. And as tothem, with whom Solomon hath to do in this mat= 
The ſame thing in ſubſtance was ſaid before, Chap: 1:9. m 3. e. ter,the Argument is ſtrong and good. being,asLogicians call it,on 4-. 
Renewerh, as this word is uſed, Job 3: 4. » That time and thoſe £*77%"* 70 the Man ; and there is no conſiderable difference between 
— ler in theamfhlrds, bur jare as ic ſenſual men and beaſts,becauſe their affeftions are ſet upon the ſame 
Obje&s, and borh of them are partakers of the ſame ſenſual ſatjs- 


were recalled, becauſe others of the ſame kind ariſe and come in l 
their ftead. Heb. that which is driven away, with a mighty force,as faftions, and ſubje& to rhe ſame ſenſual pains and miſeries,and their 
time preſent is violently thruſt away by that which comes afterir. | hopes & felicity periſh together, to wit, at death, and therefore 


moreover o, I ſaw punder the ſun the place - ſuch men are no more happy than the beaſts that periſh. Others un- 
16 And n P Pages ; derſtand it thus, Who knowerh rhis Pro wit, by ſenſe or experience ; 


of judgment g, that wickedneſs Was there 7 ; and the ; or meerly by his qwn reaſon, or without the help of Divine revela- 
place of righteouſneſs s, that iniquity Was there. tion. But, with the leave of ſo many worthy Interpreters,and with 
o This is mentioned,either 1.as another Vanity,to wit,the Vanity ! ſubmiſſion to better Judgments, the former ſeems to be the truer 
of Honour and 7g _ is ſo ns an ney. on ce ſenſe. 
and Oppreſſion. Or rather 2. as another Argument of the Vanir 22 .* 5 - - * Jags 563 
of worldly things,or an hindrance of that Comfort which men <4 © ea beer I pe__ that there ” nothing bet- * Ver: is) 
pe& in this Life;becauſe they are oppreſſed by their Rulers, p T ; TI 1 a ER ould rejJoy ce 1n ns own works 
» ; forthat is his portion 0 2 for who ſhall bring him 


perceive it by Information from others,and by my own Obſervation. 
ſn the Thrones of Princes and Tribunals of Magiſtrates, where | to ſee what ſhall be after him Pp 2 

Judgment ſhould be duly executed. r Judgment was perver ted,the LL To wit, fora Mans preſent ſatisfa&ion, and the happineſs of 

guilty acquired, and the —_— nn. s In I.” Righ- | this life, E That he comfortably.enjoy what God hath given him, 
teouſneſs thould be found and thould dwell,itit were baniſhed from | and nor diſquiet himſelf with cares :bout future Events. He ſeems 
— BE : Z to ſpeak this, not in the Perſonof an Epicureybut as his own judg- 
171 {aidin mine heart :,God ſhall judge the righteous | ment, which alſo he declareth, Ch: 2. 24* & 5: 18, 19:& 8: 15; 

and the wicked « : for there is * a time x there 7, for}? rape IS np as ea; orng wi he _ pa more _ - uſeth, 

- ror What ne leaveth behind him 1S nor his, but another Mans. Þ 
yer # teh ole, and for —_— Works. . . | When once he is dead he ſhall never return into this life to ſee in- 
CIT our wh pope 1 org MF Noo K, att it ! to whoſe hands his Eſtate falls,and how it is either uſed or abuſed ; 

-4 nk d 12 Wicke 4. x Fixed by Go = ren wat ——}” ">> prof nor is he at all concerned in thoſe matters; 

olies.that as this life is the Sinners time in which he doth whatſo- : CHA P » TV. | 

ever ſeemeth good in his owneyes,{o God will have his time to rec- The Vanity of Oppreſſon, by reaſon of which the Dead and the Unborn are 

kon with them, and reQifie alltheſe Diſorders. » In the Prefence better than the Living, 1 3. Of Envy, Sloth, Quarrel, 4=-6: 

or at the Judgment-ſeat of Ged.; which is eaſtly underſtood out of Of Coverouſneſs and Selfſbneſs 7. 8. The Advantage of Society and 

the foregoing words, the Relative being pur forthe Antecedent, as Frienaſbip, 9 12 The Pooy better than fooliſh Kings, 13. Hes ad 

it is Numb.7: 89; Eſth: 9: 25s Job: 18 Z1: Pſa: 14: 5: and 11 4:2. Orir wanced whilſt one boyn King us mae poor, 14, The Peoply never Conveniea 

may be rendred then, as this Particle is uſed Pſa: 14: 5: Heſs 2: 15; but rejoicing in Changes, 15, 16, A * Ch, 58; 
and as it is uſual in other Authors for Adverbs of Place to be put for j & O Ireturned, and conſidered # all the oppreſ- hs - Sug 
| a rag Saha 4 Pray Bag OE as Fon ſions that are done under the ſun b ; and behold © * 
mens PraCtiſes or open Aﬀtions, but alſo all their ſecret Thoughts | ; 

and P fes ; al the evil which they either did,or deſigned, or -_- CORES of /u ch as WEre OPP _ ed,a nd they - ad 8 CO tHebchou 
gefired, or endeavoured todo» The deſign of this Verſe is partly | *OTter c and on the Þ ſide of their oppreſlors :here was *pl.1404: 

powerd, but they had no comforter e. 


to ſtrike a Terrorinto oppreſling Potentates, and partly to ſatisfte 
4 I conſidered again more ſeriouſly. b Whether by Supreme Ma- 


Pro 
16-6 
16:8. 


2:39 


the Doubrs, and ſupport the Spirits of good men who are oppreſſed 
inthis life. : Liftrates or Judges, of which he ſpake, Ch 3; 16: or by any other 
18 I ſaid in my heart 4 concerning the eſtate of the | potent Perſons. c None afforded them either pity or ſuccour,either 
foas of men 6, || thac God might manifeſt them c, and | out of a —_ a ar, diſpoſition, " oo ue - expoling 
- themſelves thereby to the ſame injuries» oth in themſelves, 
that they might ſee thatthey themſelves are beaſts d. and becauſe moſt men were ready to joyn with the ſtrongeſt and 


dition and deportment in this preſenr World. c God (uffers theſe | ,. :. &11ows, none elſe could or would do ir. e Which is repeated 
horrible Diſorders among Men,exprefſed wi 10: that he might aiſ- | _ _ Argument both of the great Inhumanity of Men towardsothers 

cover men to themſelves, and by permitting theſe Attions, ſhew |; C:1:mity, and of the extream miſery of oppreſfed Perſons. 

what ſtrange Creatures they are, and what vile hearts they have 2 * Wherefore Ipraiſed f the dead which are alrea dy * Job T 


which Men would not otherwiſe underſtand or believe. See 2 Kin:8: nee . n 17, &c 
F3, 14.  & Heb: thar they are Beaſts to themlelves,cither 1: one to ano- dead g, more than the living which are yet alive 6. Ga. 6. 3 


f I judged them more happy,or leſs miſerable. Which he ſeems 


Judgment, or themſelves being Judges ; that although God made oniy as T : 
them Men or reaſonable Creatures, yet they have made themſelves | Men inMiſery,as this is commonlyunderſtood ,butas his ownJudg- 
Beaſts by their brutilh pra&ices,and that Menconſidered only with | ment. For this is moſt true and certain,that ſerting aſide the ad- 
reſpe& unto the preſent Life,which 1s the only thing valued and re. | vantage which thisLife gives him for theConcerns of the furure Life 
garded by moſt Men,and the vanity whereof is the principal Subje& which Solomon doth not meddle. with inthe preſent Debate;and con- 
of this Book, are as vain and miſerable Creatures as the Beaſts them= fidering the Uncertainty, and Vanity, and manifold Vexations 6 

felves, the great Differences between Men and Beaſts being ſuch as , 5. ind,and cutward Calanutice vfrhe preſentLife,a wile Man _—_ 


kl 
) 


Chap. IV. ECCLESIASTES, | _—_— 
| © Not account it worth his while to live, and would chooſe Death ra- | o Into which he was caſt for his Poverty and Debt. p The poor 
ther than Life. g Thoſe which are quite dead ; who poſſibly are and wiſe Child.q Is oft=times advanced by his wiſdom to the h:gn* 
F here oppoſed ro them that in reſpett of their deplorable and deſper- eſt Power and Dignity:which was the caſe of Joſ:ph and Aordecar und 

rate Condition, are even whilſt they live, called dead men, Iſa: 26: | many others, r That old King who was born of the Royal Race and 
19, and faidto die &s/ly, 1 Cor. 15+. 3t. þ Which languiſh under had poſſeſſed his Kingdom for a long time. s Is deprived of his 
their Preſſures, of whom we can only ſay, as we uſe to ſpeak of Kingdom, either by the Rebellion of his Subje&s provoked by his 
dying men, they are alive, and that is all, _ Folly, or by the Power of ſome other and wiſer Prince. | 
Job 3* 2 * Yea, better is hethan both they, which hathnot] 15 Iconſideredall the living z which walk under the 
19162! yet been 3, who hath not ſeen & the evil work that is|ſun #, with the ſecond child x that (hal ſtandup yin his 
done under the ſun. ſtead. | 5 193245 GUh 


i Who was never born. How this is true, ſee on the foregoing | * The general Diſpoſition or Humour of common. People 3 all 
Verſe. ki: e. Not felt ; for as ſeeing good is put for enjoying it, | Kingdoms, that they are fickle and-unconſtant, weary of their old 


nn er er EI En an === == 
EE —— — = 
DD enmmpommommm——aea— - 
Wen —O- - —_— 


= 


- DDS SET a nga d = 22x20 Ex” > — 
— _— pas Gs Ge Ne IE 
- - 5 
+ CONES 3 


DECENT 


*Prov: 6: 5 *'T he fool foldeth his hands together #, and eateth reſpe&t of his Father, whoſe Succefſcr he is ro be. Or 2- that wiſe 
wand hjs own fleſh o. and poor Child mentioned wer; 13, who is ſaid to come ts Reign wer: 
- 26 33" » Is careleſs and Idle, which is the ſignification of this Geſture, 


»3 


DE : : bl oF . & . of 
' to ear it through extremity of Hunger. ; that have been before them|[]: they alſo that come after Gr 2.16 
6 * Better is an handful tb quietneſs, than both the |ſhalnor * rejoyce in him : Surely, this alſo 5s vanity 
nd hands full 3th travel and vexation of ſpirit p. and vexation of ſpirit. | ney 
16-*/0 


p Theſe are the words.either 1.0f the Sluggard making this Apo- 
logy for his Idleneſs, That this Little with eaſe,is better than great 
Riches got with much rrouble. Or 2- of Selomen, who elſewhere 
ſpeaks ro the ſame purpoſe, as Prov: 15:16, 17. and 17. 1. and here 
propoſeth it as a good Antidote againſt the Vanity of inimoderate 
Cares and Lybours for worldly Goods,againſt which he induſtricuſ- 
ly dire&s his Speeches in divers places of this Book,and particularly 
as 2 ſ:aſonable precaution againſt the Sin of Covetouſneſs,of which | ſor and Succeſſor, All thoſe who ſtood or deſired to Hand in their 
he ſpeaks in the following paſſage. 


| : Preſence, and waited upon thein, as this Zhraſe is uſed, 2 Sam. 16. 
7 Then I returned and ſaw vanity under the ſun. 19. 1 Kings 10.8.Or rather 2. before the preſent Generation ot Sub- 


8 There is one alone q, and there is not afſecond;yea, | {35 v ho m__—_ deſired and promoted the change of Governe 
he hath neither child nor brother r, yet « there no end | 7** here expreſſed: for theſe are evidently oppoſed to vhem 


. a png k : that come after, which all Interpreters underſtand of the People; not 
of all his labour s ; neicher is his eye # ſatisfied with [of theKings. And ſo here Ces Generations of People ried] 
P:39.6. riches » * neither {aith heu, For whom _ I labour x, = wg of _ __ py I their Parents,and their Chil- 
oul of 200d y 2? This is alſo vanirv- ren,&c all are obſerved ta have the ſame Inclinations in theſe mat- 
and _— = Fong we. J tans {bo terss F They {hall be as weary of the Succeſſor, though a wiſe and, . 
It 25 A101 & UraVeL &. | : | | | worthy Prince, as their Parents were of his fooliſh Predeceſſor. The 
_ q Either 1,who lives by himſeltas grudging that any otherſhould | ..qh whereof is partly from that itch of Novelry and Curioſity 
Parr:k2 of his Proviſions, Or rather 4, who hath none but himſelf which is natural and common to Mankind ; and partly fromtheit 
Io care and :abour for, as the next wards explain it. r To whom he | y,,in and fooliſh hopes of Advantage trom ſuch Changes, 
may leave his vaſt Eſtate. s He lives in perpetual Reſtleſſneſs and ye 
exceſſive Toils. * #, e. His covetous Mind or Defire,fitly expreſſed CRAP. Y. | E 
by the Eye, parcly becauſe thar is rhe Incentive of this Sin, Joſ. 7. | Vanities, in divine matters, 1---7, In murmuring and repining, 8. bt 
F 21. and partly b:cauſe he hath no good by his Riches, ſaving the be- Riches and C:vetoulneſs, 9, For Riches rob Men of Eaſe, 10, 11, Pro« 
ot hold:ng of them with hweyes, asit is affirmed Eccl, 5. 1. compared cure their Death, 13. Fly away, 14. Cannot be carried with them ito 


with 2- 10. 1 John 2+ 16. « Within himſelf ; he conſiders nothing | the Grave, 15. 17. A Contented Life beſt; This js the Gift of God, 
bur how he may get more and more. x Having no Poſterity nor | 18— 20. 


Kindced to enjoy it, as was nowſaid, Shall I take all this pains for TI | : ; & EL] 
A vw Ter, off bly for an Enemy,who will reap the fruit bo: all my The _ Yeu of _ Lapeer are inſerted partly as the only 
Jabou:s ? y Deny my ſelf thoſe Comforts and Conveniencies which — yo mn on Toft ys 0 =_ pany. 
i, 42 t m as 2 heed ity into the Service 0 
wo _ nar ga mz? z A dreadful Judgment and Miſery as God, or of worſhipping God vainly and fooliſhly. «7076 ce 
9 Two a are better thanone, becauſe they have a K Eep thy foot « when thou goeſt to the houſe of ., . 
good reward for theirlabourb. God 6, and be moreready c to hear &,| * than to || Or,thar 
a Who hve together in any kind of Society,and joyn their powers | 51VE the ſacrifice of fools e: for they conſider not that fools to 


16:8 


together inany Enterprizes- Which he oppoleth to that Humour they do evil f. : , of | © SAcrie 
of the covetous Man who deſired to live aione, as was now ſaid. | @ The feet of thy Soul, which are the Tkoughts and Aﬀ:&ions,f — Gram, 
b Both have great beneſit by ſuch combinations and conjunCtions of | by which men go to God and walk or converſe with him. Make es 


their Counſels and Abilities, whereby they do exceedingly ſupport | ſtraight ſteps. See that your Hearts be purged from lin,and prepared pf ts " 8; 
and encourage, and ſtrengthen one another,and effe&t many things Þ and furniſhed with all Graces or neceſſary qualifications, as good p —— pi 
which neither of chem alone could do. intention; reverence, humility, &c. It is a Metaphor from. one thar "ap c þ 

ro For if they « fall d,the one will lifr up his e fel- | walketh ina very Mlippery Parh,in which .there needs more than or- ** © * © 
low : but wo tohim that is alone when he falleth ; for | 4dinary care to keep him from falling b The place of Gods ſolemn & 
| h help h; : publick worſhip, whether the Temple or Synagogue. c Heb: more 
Ill he hath not another to - p dm up. i = near, more forward and inclinable. Prefer this duty before the fol 
oY | c One of them, the Plural being put for the Singular,as Jonah i. 5. |1gwing. d To heark:n to and obey Gods Word,. there Read- and 
Mat. 21: 7. 1 71m: 2:15. Or.both of them tuccefſively.d In-any kind, 


. reached by the Priefts or Prophets; for bearing is very frequently 
ines ny Miles ant Tees, I EY pur in Scriptures for obeying. eSuch as fooliſh and wicked ann als 


read e Hold him up if he be falling,or raiſe bim up if he be fallen. to offer, who vainly think to pleaſe God with the . mulcitude and 
4 11 Again, if ewo lie together,then they have heat f; | coftlineſs of their Sactifices without true Piety or Obedience.fThey 
but how can one be warm alone g g. are not fenſible of the great ſinfulneſs of fuch Thoughts and Pra+ 
f They will be ſooner warm in acold Bed,and cold Szaſon.g Nor ices, bur like Fools, think they do good ſervice;which is implyed 

ſo ſoon nor ſo throughly. ; a$1is uſual in ſuch expreſſions. | d- | CES 

; 12 Andif one prevail againſt him þ,two ſhal with-| 2 Be not raſh with thy mouth g, and let not thine jOr tire. 


ſtand him;and a threefold cord is not quickly brokenz. [heart be haſty 5 to utter any || thing before God 3: for 


þ Againſt either of them. i Ifa Man have noronly one,buttwo | Gog ;s in heaven þ, and thou ypon earth 1 : therefore - 
or more Friends, he is ſo much the ſafer and the happier. let thy words w*be "2 | $ 


13 Better & js a poor and wiſe child /, than an old | £ Speak nor withour good underſtanding and due conſideration: 10.194 
"eb. and foolith king , + who will no more be admoni- |* Do nor give way to every ſudden morion of thine Heart,norſuffer 


» bs. ſhed x it to break om vel ws Lips 430g haſt well weighed it, # Either 
* Longs , | A t. it Prayers directed to him. Or 2, in ſolemn Vows and Promiſes 
*y ano. lbs abgs.. | WWorago- tang rote — Twi. m_—_— made in Gods preſence;which were very much in uſe inthoſe times, 
6. 3 q | 


contemptible, both for his Age, and for his Poverty. m Venerable  c—— moat baryon Us 
borh for his Age and Gravity, and for his Royal Dignity. So that caution us in making them. & Is a God of infaite Majeſty, not to 
the Compariſon is made with the greateſt Dif:dvanrage that may þp. q efpiſed or abuſed;of infinite Holineſs, nor to be polluted or of. 
be. » Who hath neither Wiſdomto govern himlclf, nor to receive tended ; of infinite Khowledge; obſerving all cur words. and carri- 
the Counſels or Admonitions of wiſer men, bur is fooliſh, and wil- ages not to be deceived. 7 Thou art -a poor Earth-worm, infi« 
ful and incorrigible. ; I OL Eros L | nirely below him, and therefors ſhouldeſt ſtand. in + awe of him. 
14 For out of priſon ohe p cometh to teignt q;where- |,,4 fear ro offend him, m Either 1. in . Prayer. - Uſe- not vein. 
—_ alto ge 3has is born in his kingdom r þecomerth poor. | repetitions nor multitude of words in Prayer, as if they were 


5L 3 neceſſary 


» 
. 


ap. V. 


* Prov; 
Io. 19. 


*Deut; 


23:21 22. 
Pſ:50:14. 


* Pſ.66, 
I 3» 14 


ceſſary to inform God of thy ſtate,, or to prevail with God to 
re hy requeſts, or as. if thou ſhouldeſt certainly be heard up- 
on thar very account, as Chriſt alſo cautions us Mat: 6. 7. For 
otherwiſe it is not unlawful, nay ſometimes it is a duty, to uſe 
Jong Prayers and conſequently many words, and to repeat the ſame 
words in Prayer, as is manifeſt from Nehem. 9. 3- Dax: 9. 18, 19t 
Mot. 26: 44: Loke 6. 12, and many other places. Or 2. in vow- 
inge Be nor too prodigal in' making more Vows and Promules 
than thou apt either able oxwilling and reſolved to perform, remem- 
bring that God-looks down from_Heaven,and heareth all rhy Vows, 
and expetts a punQual accompliſhment of them. Compare the 

Notes on v. 3. -F Rk ? | 
For a dream cometh .tkrough the multitude ofbu- 


ſineſs.n, and a * fools. voice is known 0 by multitude of 


words p. | 
» When Mens minds arediſtrated and oppreſſed with too much 
buſineſs in the Day; ' they dream of it in the Night. 0 Ir diſcovers 
the-Manto be a fooliſh and rath,and inconſiderate Man. p Either 1. 
in Prayer. Or, 2-in Vowing,s. e. by making many rafh Vows, of 
which he ſpeaks in'v: 4, 5, 6. and then returnsto the mention of 
multitude of dreams and many words, v. 7ewhich Verſe may bea Com= 
ment upon this, and which makes it probable that both that and 
this Verſe are to be underſtood of Vows rather than of Prayers. 
4 * When thou voweſt avow q unto God, defer 
not to pay it » : for be hathno pleaſure in fools s ; * pay 


that which thou haſt vowed. 
 q Which is a ſolemn Promiſe whereby a Man binds himſelf to do 
ſomething which is in his power to do.r Perform it whilſt the ſenſe 
of thine Obligation is freſh and ſtrong vpon thee, leſt either thou 
ſcem to repent of thy Promiſes, or leſt d<laysend in denials and re- 
ſolutions of Non-performance, See Numb. 30. 2. Dent: 23. 21-Pſal. 
66.13, 14. & 76. 21. 5 In hypocritical and perfidious Perſons,who 
wheti they are in diſtreſs, make liberal Vows, and when the danger 
ispaſt, negle& and break them : whom he calis fo1s,partly becauſe 
it 15t1e higbeſt folly to deſpiſe and provoke, to think to mock and 
deceive the All-ſeeing and Almighty God; and partly in oppoſiti- 
20 ti the contrary Opinion of ſuch Perſons, who think they deal 
Wy 2nd cunningly-in ſerving themſelves of God, by getting the 
rantage or! deliverance which they defire by making ſuch Vows 
Mojdivg the inconvenience and charge of payment, when 
ce. the work is.done, whereas nothing is more impious or ridicu- 
lous than ſuch an imagination. 


-»i- Better is it that thou ſhouldſt not vow s, than chat 
thou, ſhouldſt vow and not pay- 

..s.For-this was no.ſin ; becauſe men are free to make ſuch Vows, 
or.notto-make them, as they think fir. See Numb. 3o. 3, O'c.Deut. 
2H 23. A#s 5: 4. But having vowed we cannot forbear payment 
of chem:without ſin. 


--6 Suffer not thy mouth 7 to cauſe thy fleſh « to ſin ; 
ore the angel x, that it was an er- 


either ſay thou 
Tor:y;;. wherefore ſhould God be angry x at thy voice 
s, and deftroy the work of thine hands 6 ? 

* By uttering any raſh or fooliſh Vow. « z, e. Thy ſelf,the word 
Fleſb being oft put for the whole Man,as Gen: 6: 12, {ſa: 4o: 5-Rom. 
3: 20, &c.And it ſeems to have ſome Emphaſis here,and to intimate 
either 1:that ſuch Vows were made upon flethly or carnal], and not 
upon ſpiritual and religious Motives. Or rather 2.that the Fleſh or 
corrupt Nature of Man, which is oft called Fleſh, was excteding 
prone to ſet it ſelf at eate & liberty from ſuch Bonds and ro neglett 
the chargeable Duties of Religion, « Either 1. The bleſſed Angels, 
the SingularNumber being put forthe Plural,who are preſent in the 
publickAfſemblies,in which theſeVows were generally paid, Pſal.66, 
13.where they obſerve both the marter & manner of mens religious 
pereformances,as appears from 1 Cer: I1: 109. whoas they rejoyce in 
the converſion of a ſinner, Luke 15: 10. So are diſpleaſed with the ſins 
of men,and eſpecially ſuch as are committed in or againſt the Wore 
ſhipof God, Or 2: Chriſt, who in rhe Old Teſtament is frequently 
called an Angel, as bath been oft noted before, and the Angel of the 
Covenant, Mal: 3. 1. becauſe even then be aQted as Gods Meſſenger 


> 10k & ſpeaking to the Parriarchs and Prophets 1n his Fathers |. 


ame, as a preſignification of his future Incarnation ; and who. is, 
and was in a ſpecial manner preſent in all Religious Aſſemblies,and 
being Omniſcient and Omnipreſent, exattly knew and obſerved all 
Ps which men made,and whether they did perform or vio- 
late them. Or rather 3« the Prieſt or Miniſter of holy things, who 
was-ro require of the People the payment of their Vows; to whom 
all Sacrifices for fins of Ignorance or errors about Vows or other 
things were to be brought Lev: 5: 4, 5.For ſuch Perſons are oft cal- 
led Angels, or as this Hebrew word is commonly rendred, Meſengers,as 
Job 33. 23: Mal: 2: 7, Revel: 1: 20+ And this Title ſeems to be given 
to the Prieit here, not without ſome Emphaſis becauſe the Vow 
_ made to God was paid to the Prieſt as one ſtanding and aQting in 
Gods Name and Stead, and-it belonged to the Prieſt as Gods Angel 
or Ambaſlador, to diſcharge perſons from their Vows when there 
was juſt occaſion ſoro do. y I did fooliſhly and unadviſedly in ma- 
king ſuch a Vow,and therefore I hope God will excuſe me, and in- 
ſtead of that which I had vowed, accept of a ſacrifice for my igno- 
ranc?,according to his Law for ſins ofignorance, Levi. 4; 2. & 5, 
15. Aunrb., 15:26. 2 Why wilt thou provoke God to anger? a Either 
1, at the Vows which thou haſt haſtily uttered with thy Mouth, as 
he [aid above. Or rather 2, at theſe frivolous excuſes, wherzwith thou 
deludeſt thy own Conſcience, and vainly imagineſt that thou canſt 
deceive God himſelf. 6 Blaſt all thy contrivances,and Labours, and 
Eſtate gorren by tay Labours, and particularly that work or enter- 
prize. for the ſuccels whereof thou didſc make theſe Vows. which 
being, as thou thinkeſt, finiſhed, thou refuſeſt to pay thy Vows ; 
Tan that God can quickly undo that which thou haſt done, 
and. plentifully repay thine indignities and injuries offered to him 
into. thine own Botom. 


7 For in. the multitude of dreams and many words, 


there are alſo diverſe vanities c : but fear thou God 9. 
c There is a great deal of vanity and folly ,as in multitude of dreams 
ar hich for the moſt part-are vain and inſignificant, ſo alſo in many 
, 


> 4 


EECCLESIASTES. 


words,i, e, in making many Vows whereby a Man is expoſed to ma» 
ny ſnares and temptations. d Fear the offence and wrath of God, 
and therefore be ſparing in making Vows, and juſt in performing 
theme Whereby he implyes that this raſhneſs in vowing,and ſlack- 
neſs in performing Vows proceeds from the want ofa juſt reverence 
and dread of the Divine Majeſtv, who is iwmediatly concerned in 
theſe matters. 

8 It thou feeſt the oppreflion of the poor e, and vio. 


lent perverting of judgment and juſtice in a province, 


higheſt g regardeth 4,and there be higher than they ;. 

e Here is an account of another vanity,and a ſoyereign Antidote 
againſt it» f As if it were inconſiſtent with Gods Wiſdom.and Ju- 
ſtice,and Truth,to: ſuffer ſuch diſorders,or a juſt cauſe for any Man 
to throw off that fear and ſervice of God, which I have now com- 
mended to thee, g The moſt High God who is infinitely above the 
greateſt of men, and therefore. if he /aw meer, could cruſh them in 
an inſtant. h Not like an idle ſpeCtator, but like a Judge, who dili. 
gently obſerves and records all theſe miſcarriages,& wil! ſo effe&u- 
ally puniſh them, that neither they ſhal have any cauſe of triumph 
in their former ſucceſſes,nor good men to be grieved at the remem. 
brance of them. 7 Either 1. the high and holy Angels, who are em- 
ployed by God in the Government of Kings and Kingdoms, as we 
read in th: Book of Daniel, and elſewhere, and for the defence of 
Gods People, Pſal. 34. 7. & 91+ 11. Heb.1: 14. Or 2. God: and ſo 
it 15 an Einpharical reperition of the ſame thing which is frequent 
in Scriprure, there is an higher than they. Or, as the words are by 
others fit'y rendred, the me# High( for Plural words are oft under« 
ſrood of God ſingularly ) is above them. and therefore can controul 
them,and will certain'y call themto an account. 

9 Moreover, the profic of the earth & is for all /:the 
king himſelfis ſerved by the field m 

k The fruits procured from theEarth by the skiland labour of the 
Husbandman. / Are neceſlary and beneficial to all men whatſoever; 
The wiſe man after ſome Interruprion, returns to his former ſubje& 
to diſcourſe of the vanity of great Riches,one argument or evidence 
whereof he ſeems to mention in this Verſe,to wit,that the poor La« 
bourer enjoyeth the fruits of the Earth as well as the greateſt Mo- 
narch,and that the richeſt Man in the World depends as much upon 
them as the pooreſt, 2 Is ſupported by the Fruits of the Field.Or as 
many others render it, ſerves of is # ſervant to the Field, depends up- 
on it, 1s obliged to ſee rhat his Ficlds be tilled and drefled that he 
may have ſubſiſtance for himſelf,and for his Servants and Subje&s; 

Io He thar loveth ſilver, ſhal not be ſatisfied with 
ſilver 2 ; nor he that loveth abundance o with increaſe: 
this is alſo vanity. 

7 The greateſt Treaſures of ſilver do not ſatisfie the covetoug 
poſſeffor of it, partly becauſe his mind is inſatiable and his deſires are 
increaſed by and with gains; partly becauſe ſilver of it ſelf cannor 
ſatisfie his Narural deſires and neceſſities as the Fruits of the Field 
can do, and the miſerable Wretch -grudgerh to part with his Silvec 
though it be ro purchaſe chings needful & convenient for him- : Or, 
that loveth it ( to wit, Silver ) in abundance, that defires and lays up 
great Treaſures. 

1x When goods increaſe, they are increaſed that eat 
them p: and what good isthere to the owners thereof q, 
ſaving the beholding of :herz with their eyes r ? 

p They require and are more commonly attended with a nume« 
rous company of Servants, and Friends, any Retinues to conſume 
them ; which is a greattorment to a covetous Man, of whom he 
here fpeaks. q What benefi: hath he above orkers who feed upon his 
Provitions,and enjoy the ſame comforts which he doth without his 
fears and cares, and troubles about them ? » Either 1. with a refle= 
tion upon his Propriery in them. Or 2. with unlimited freedom. 
He can go and look upon his Bags or Cheſts of Silver as long and 
as ofc as he pleaſeth,whereas other men are ſeldom admitted ro that 
proſpe&, and ſee only ſome few of the fruits or purchaſſes of it, 

12 The ſleep of a labouring man is ſweet s, whether 
he eat little z, or much « : but the F abundance * of the 


rich will not ſuffer him to ſleep. 


t Then his wearineſs diſpoſeth him to ſleep. « In which caſe his 
he:lthfulConſtitution and laborious courſe of life prevents thoſe cru- 
dities and indigeſtions which oft-times break the {leep of rich mens, 
x Heb. the fuineſs either 1. of his Diet, which commonly diſcom« 
poſeth their ſtomachs and hinders their reſt: Or 2, of Wealth;which 
15 commonly attended with many perplexing cares which diſquiet 
men both by Day and Night. The Hetrew word is uſed in Scrip- 
rure both ways,and poſlibly it is thus generally expreſſed to include 
both ſignifications. 

13There is a ſore evil which IT have ſeen under theſun, 


namely,riches kept forthe owners thereof to their hurt yz. 

7 Becauſe they frequently are the inſtruments & occaſions both of 
their preſent and eternal deſtru&ion, as they feed their Pride or Lu- 
xury,or other hurtful Luſts which waſte the Body,and ſhorten the 
Life, and damn the Soul ; and as they are great temptations to T'y« 
rants or Thieves, yea ſometimes to Relations or Servants,or others, 
to take away their lives that they may get their Riches1 


14 But & thoſe riches periſh « by evil travel 3, and 


he begetteth aſon, and zhere js nothing in his hand c. 

z Or, For ; or, Or;.or, Moreover; For this Particle is ſo rendre> 
by divers others both here and ia other places of Scripture.s If they 
be keptzit is to the owners hurt, & if not, they are loſt to his gries. 
b By ſome wicked pratices either his own,or of other men ; or by 
ſome ſecret hand of God curſipg all his Enterprizes. c Either 11 In 
the Fathers power to leave to his Son, for whoſe ſake he underwenc 
211 thoſe hard labours; which is a great aggravation of his grief and 
miſery. Or, 2. In the Sons poſſeſſion after his Fathers death. 


he return to go das he camey and ſbal take nothing of 


Ent® 


his labour, which he may carry away in bis hand 6 


Chap. y. 


marvel not f at the matter:for be thatishigher than the +15, 


the will or, 
Purpoſe, 


+ Heb: js 


turity,0r, 


s Becauſe he is free from thoſe cares and fears, wherewith the fulne 
| minds of rich men are oft diſtrated, and their ſleep diſturbed. \ 


15* As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked (hal , 7, al 
Pia 1.44 
i 7: ig6} 


-c— 


(PP, 


(<1. 


"Ch: 2:2 
& 3.1241 
1&9." 
1149: 
1Tin.C 
IJ 

t Heb. 


| the days 


Ch:2:1 
& 3: 22 
*Ch.6.- 


Dr,thou 
þ give 1 
mich, ye 


4 kremem 


hub &c 


"ob 21; 
Pars 
3:% 


| 
C46 ; x 3 > | | : F 
(hy. VI. ECCLESITASTES, Chap. VI. 


wo: ly of the Exrth,the common Mother of | and he was by all ſorts of men thought unworthy of any teſtimonies 
Fe bo 4re ky Pe han Job 1. 21, Eccleſ, 12. 7. And return of Hnour.either in his Life or after his Dearh, | Thus he deſcribes 
fo go, is pat for return and go;und going is here put for dying, as Job | 2 Man who lives miſerably,and dies igaominiouſly. ' k Which as it 
16. 22. Pſal, 39. 13, eThis is another vaniry. If his Eftate benei- | never enjoyed the comforrs, ſo it never felr rhe calamiries of this 
ther loſt, nor kept to his hurt,but enjoyed by him with ſafety and life, which are far more? conſiderable ran its. comforts, at leaſt to 
comfort all his days,yet when he dies he muſt leave it behind him, Man thatdenyed himſc|f rhe comforts, and plunged himſelf into 
and cannot carry one handful of it with him into another World, the toils and vexations of this life, _ 

16 And this alſo f is a fore evil, zhat in all points as 4 For | he m cometh in » with vanity o, and depart- 


he came, ſo ſhal he go: and * what profit hath he that | eth in darkneſs p, and hisname ſhall be covered with 
'@1:3' hath laboured for the wind þ? darkneſs g. 


f Which I have laſt mentioned and ſhal now repeat, g For Ri 1 Or rather, Although, as this Particle is frequently rendred. For 
cles, which are empty andunſatisfying, uncertain and tranſitory, this Verſe ſeems to contain not ſo much a reaſon of wharlbe laſt ſaid 
fleeing away ſwiftly and ſtrongly, Prov. 23« 5. which no man can that an untimely Birch 1s better than he .as an anſwer to an exception 
ho'd or ſtay in itscourſe,all which are the properties of the Wind. which might be made againſt it. Although all that is here ſaid be 
Compare Prov. I1, 29. Hof. 12, 15 | true of the Abortive, yerir is better than he, m Either 1. the co- 

Allhis davs þ alſo he eateth in darkneſs j,and he | v-rous Man. Or rather 2. the abortive;of whom alone, arid not of 

h Sack "nos and wrath with his ſickneſs &, the former, that pot an ns Me 2arb ans foam oke Suns... 6-30 
+ - þ . 

" To wit of his life. i He hath no comfort in his eſtate, but Lwggiony 7 go ren dy _ - ——— - 

even when he Eats,when other men relax their Minds,and uſe free ]*omtime ar donethe by it, which alſo is i0-2 great meaſure the'cafs 

dom and cheartulneſs, he doth it with anxiety and diſcontent, 25 | of the coyetous wretch- p Dieth obſcurely Vithoutany odfurvacied 

grodgng oven a his own ncelſry expenſes, nd rormentng him | or req omen. 4 Sal frei and unerly orgorem whore 
ES a ; ; 2 | 

k When hs falls ſick _ ins, en or feareth = Death, =—_ won pri pg ot tuck wicked men thall rot, and be remembred to 

with rage, becauſe he js cut off before he hath accompliſhed his de- Moreover | 

ſigns, and becauſe he muſt leave that Wealth ani World in which _ X * us _ not _ the ſun r,nor known {| 

all his hopes and happineſs lies,and muſt go to give up a doleful ac- any thing s* This Bath more relt x chan the other. - | 

count to his Jude of all his ations and acquiſirions. bang us ae -_ i. _ . 1s or grievous to ok = 

1 Kb 54.2 þ , coverous man 1aw that hight was ver ea- 

| Oh: 2224+ 18 Behold tþ#t which I have ſeen [IT tis Re c _ ſan, and therefore the loſs of it was irkſom to ov oy s Hath ha no 

& 31213 — wear oe 9 _ SOm—_ 'h yay c " knowledge, ſenſe or experience ofany thing whether good or evil: 

:&9.7- good of all his labour that he taketh under the lun, a 


: Becauſe he is perf:&ly free from all thoſe incunibrances and vexa* 
Sr the days of his life which God giveth him * z: for it 5] £10ns to which the coverous Man is long expoſed. 


10 his portion ». 6 Yea,though he live a thouſand years twice told u; 


4b. 1.5. e, Learned by ſtudyand experience. m Gudor comfortable | YEt hath he ſeen no good x: do not all y go to one 
vereis & ©O Mans ſelf, and Comely or Amiable 1n the Eyes of other men, as | place Z g : {> 
qud which p=nuriouſneſs is baſe and diſhonourable. » To wit,of worldly goods. u Wherein he ſezms to have a priviledge abovean untiitiely birth. 
i omely, £Or he harh another anda better portion in Heaven, Tibis liberty is x He hath enjoyed little or no comfort in it,and therefore long life 
6 given to him by God, and this is the beſt advantage. as to this life, Þ is rather a curſe and miſchief,than a bleſſing or advantage to him. 
+ Heb.the which he can make ofthem. : : y Whether Born out of and before their time,or in due time, whe= 
wiberof 19 * Every man alſo to whom God hath given riches | ther their lives be long or ſhort, = To the Grave, Andſo after a 
te day. and wealth, and hath given him power 0 to eat thereof wo _ ellare A no this or wo he here , woqgt ns as 
on !*and to take his portionp, and to rejoyce in his labour, eh oy week e tus condition 15 1nfirutely worſe than that of an un- _— 
'c<.6.2 this 5s the gift of God. ; ; 7 * All the labour of manzs for his mouth #, and yet 'Prov.16c 
h o Heb. hath given him th: dom:nion ; who 1s the Lord and Maſter che + appetite is not filled þ 9 26. q 
| of his Eſtate, nor a Slave to it, Ofthis and the former Verſe ſee | © ut into his Mouth, that he m food;and —_ 
| the Notes on Eccleſ, 2 24: and 3. 12. 13« Þ To lis own uſe, to Bread is ofc put for all food,ſo food is ut for hep A. «ff: re Proviſ 
uſe whar God hath giver him. ons for this life, as Prov. 3o, 8; and elſewh wh y f thi ; he 
For he (hal not much remember q the days r of | ..: . + Area rodrgats Faw apgpdice dohrom 
. | brgbouch, , 22 | : p k Chi chief, for which a Man will ſel! his Houſe and Lands, yea the ve 
 \þ ligive nor BIS life : becauſe God anſwereth him s in the joy of his Garments upon his back. 6 Although all that a Man can ger by his 
| | mc, et heart 5. laboursis but neceſſary food,which the meaneſt ſort of men cotm« 
| kremem= &q So as to diſquiet or vex himſelf therewith. » Either 1. the 


monly enjoy, as is obſervedin the next Verſe, yer ſuch is the vani- 
hub &c+ eroules ; days being here pur for evil or ſad days, by an uſual Sy- | ty of this World and the folly of Mankind, that men are inſatiable 


necdoche, as Job 18, 20. Þſal. 137, 7. Obad. v. 12, Mic: 7:4. Or| their deſires,and reſtleſs in their endeavours,xfcer more and more- 
2.th2 time in general;which is irkſom and tedious ro men oppreſſed | and never oy: they haveenough. 
wich diſcontent or miſery,who uiualiy reckon every Hour or Mi- 8 For what hath the wiſe thore than the fool cdwhat 
nure that paſſerh,and have their Minds 8& Thoughts conſtantly fix- | hath the poor,that knoweth to walk before the livingd? 
ed upon the vanity and uncertainty of this life, upon the affliftions | , T9 wit, in theſe matters. Both are equally ſubje& to the ſame 
which they have already endured,and may further expe&; whereas calamities, and partakers ofthe ſame comforrs of this Life. d To 
to men of contenred,and chearful minds ths time is ſhortand ſweer, wit,b:fore the poor that doth not know this > Which wordsare ea- 
and paſſerh over them before they are aware of it. and they enjoy fily underſtood by comparing this clauſe with the fortmer. And ſuch 
their preſent comforts without perplexing themſelves about former | {-&5 are uſual both in Scripture and other Authors, as hath been 
or fu. ure events. 5 Anſwererh, either 1. his labours with ſucceſsas | ggrmerly noted,by a Figure which the Learned call Azantapodoton. 
Money is ſaid to anſwer al things, Eccleſ, 10: 19. becauſe it is equi- | g,q by this Phraſe, char knoweth, &c, he means ſuch a poor Man 
valznt to all,and able to purchaſe all things. Or, 2. his deſires. who is ingenious andinduſtrious;who is fit for ſervice and buſineſs. 
; In giving him thar {olid joy and comfort of his labours which his - 


"cd and deſired and knows how to carry himſelf towards rich men,ſo as to deſerve 
TROANT CAPECIIE BIG GILLES. afid gain their favour, and to procure a livlihood. ER1 | 
CHAP. Vi. 2 Better is the fight of the eyese + than the wandring f Heb. 
The vanity of Riches without uſe, 14, 2. Of Children ani Old age with- ® the deſire; : This g 85 alfo vanity, and vexation of gr of 
out competent wealth ; their obſcurity is worſe than not to have been,3=-6. Spirit h. SIS PETS Th the þ "7 
All labour is for neceſſartes of Life, which one getteth as well as another, 87.0, The comfortable enjoyment of what a Man hath ; for ſeeing ' 
7, 8 It is godd ft us to enjoy what we have. and nt to deſire what we | is oft put for enjoying, as Pſ/al: 34: 12: 


Eccleſs 2: 1: and 3* 13, &c. 
f Reſtleſs and infariable deſires of what a man hath not, wherewith 
covetous rick men are perpetually haunted and tormented. g This - 
wandring of thedefire wherein moſt men indulge themſelves. þ Is 
andit is common among men : not the way to ſatisfaQtion, as rhey imagine. but to vexation- 


2 A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth a, | To That which hath been is named already 6, and it 
56 21:12 honour *, ſo that he wanterh nothing for his ſoul | is known thar it is man#: neither may he contend with 
Feed. but frangere mem ins hls i Feng. # Tipo s dbi apeaotat whe ks kh ah 
LH a4 ] - . F- , a al ON=s 
T5 Fay as — d; x TOC OT TORO I09 LEIOeE TAE cerning the vanity and wandring of inſariable defires;or as a further 
rh wage | inſtance of rhe vanity of all thingsin this Life, That which hath beers 
a All ſorts of Riches, as Gold and Silver, Cattel and Lands, &. ( or, is,for the Hebrew verb may be rendred either way,to wit, Man 
þ Which he doth,or can reaſonably defire. c Eirher becauſe they are | conſidered with all his endowments and enjoyrrents, whether he be 
ſuddenly taken away from him by the Hand & Curieot God,and gi- wiſe or fooliſh rich or poor, Man, who is the chief of all viſible and 
ven to others:or becauſe God gives him uP to a baſe & covetous mind ſublunary bezings, for whom they all were made ) #s named alres "% 
which is both a fin and a plague. d 5. e. Any conſiderable part of it; | tg wit,by God, who, preſently after his Creation, gave him the fol- 
whereas the Stranger eareth not thereof, bur is, 5. e. all of it; de® |1ywing name. ro ſignifie what his nature & condition was or w ould 
voureth ir all inan inſtant. + ; be. Heb. What ir ches which bith been or it it it, or beth bien nomed al= 
3 1f a man beger an hundred children e, and live ma- Ir | | 


; ready. Others underſtand it thus All rhe ſeveral conditions which 
ny years f,to that the days g of his years be many, and | men have had or ſhal have in the Wor'd, Riches or Pove | 


,&c. are 
9 his foul be not filled with good þ, and * alſo har he pore mane, :: c. LR or prangt by Goth unchangeabe 
MS . .. . ountej,and INVIRCIDIC T7 rOVICENCE; DUX Though Thrs be true, it leems 
Jer have no burial s, I ſay, that an * untimely birth & nor to ſuirſs well with the following dre” pk a 
g 3:16, better than he- | | tation doth. #7 This is certain and manifeſt, that that beeing, which 

:58.8, e i:e, Very many Children,to whom he intends to leave his Eſtate. | makes all this noiſe and ſtir id rhe world, howſoever magnified by. 
f Which is the chief thing thar he deſires, and which giveth him | themſelves, and ſometimes adored by Flarterers, and-howſoever dif- 
opportunity of increaſing his Eſtate vaſtly. g He ſairh days becauſe | ferenced from, or advanced above others, by Wiſdom, or . Riches, 

the Years of mens life are but fcw, þ Hath not a conrenced mind | or the like,is but a Man, 4. e. s mean,earthly mortal and rhiſerable 

and comfortable enjoyment of his Eſtate whilſt he lives, s And if | Creature, as his.very. name ſignifies, which God gave him for this ve+ 
after his Death he hath either none, or a mean and diſhonourable.| ry end, that he might be always ſenſible of his vain, afid baſe, anf 
Burial, becauſe his ſordid and coverous carriage made him hateful | miſcrable eſtare in this wor!d, & therefore never expe ſatisfation 

ap4d contemptible to all Perſons, his Chilaren and Heirs not excepted [or happineſs in it, &i.e, With Loladghny God,with whom Met: are 

I Ts SL 4 very 


have net : for our portion is appointed us,and we our ſelves are vain; and 
- other things do but increaſe our vanity, 9 —- 


12, 
Here is an evil which I have ſeen under the ſun, 


——_ 


"Ia; 
10; 


be -4 


Chap. VII. ECCLES 


art to confend upen every ſlight occaſion, and a 
they ore ready to very OX for this Vanity ,and Mortality,and Mi- 
ſery of Mankind, although they brought it upon themſelves by 
their own ſins. So this is ſeaſonably added to prevent the abuſe of 
the foregoing paſlage/ : Th 
11 Scing there be many things that increaſe vanity /; 


what 5: man the better mz ? 

I This ſeems to be added as a concluſion of the Diſputation ma- 
naged in all the foregoing Chapters, ſcing not only Man is a vain 
Creature in himſelf,as harh been now 191d, but there are alſo many 0» ; 
ther things in the world, which inſtead of removing or diminiſhing, ' 
as might be expe&ed,do but increaſe this vanity,as Wiſdom,Pleaſure, : 
Power, Wealth, andthe like, the vanity ofall which hath been fully ; 
and particularly declared. Seing even the good things of this Life 
bring ſo much Toil, and Cares, and Fears. &'c. with them. m To 
wit, by all that he can either deſire or enjoy here: Hence it is ev1- | 
dent,that all theſe things cannot make him happyy bur that he muſt 
ſeek ſor happineſs elſewhere. — 

12 For who knoweth what is good for man » in ?his 


lice, þ all the days of his vainlife o which he ſpendeth 
as * a ſhadow p ? for who can tell a man what ſhal be 


+ Heb: the 
number-of 
the days 0 
eo . 

x ca M afrer him under the ſun 9? | : | 
»Pſ-:10211 # No mancertainly knows what is beſt for him here, whether to 
& 109:23: be highor low, rich or poor, b*cauſe thoſe great things which men 
 & 144:4: generally deſire & purſue,are very frequently the occaſions of Mens 
Ch:8:13: utter Ruine,as hath been noted again and again in this Book. s Life 
Jam;4:14. it fe'f which is the foungaticn of all mens Comforts andEnjoyments 
Z here, isa vain, and uncerrtain, and tranſitory thing, and therefore 
all things which depend upon it muſt needs be ſo roo. p Which 
whilft it abides, hath nothing real, and ſolid, or ſubſtantial in it». 
and doth ſpeedily paſs away, and leaves no ſign behind ir. q And 
2s No man can be happy with theſe things whileſt he liveth and en- 
joyeth them, ſo hecan have no content in Jeaving them to others, 
becauſe he knoweth not either who ſhal poſſeſs them, or how the 
future owners wil uſe or ahuſe them. or what miſchief they may do; 
by them either to others, or even to themſelves, 


} A P- VIE 
' A gotd name deſirable : and the houſe of Mourzing and Rebuke better than | 
bs | Songs and Laughter, 1--=6. Exhortations to Patience and Perſeverance, 


7-10, Wiſdom and Money a Defence, 11, 12. Gods Previgence ſhould 
render us contented ; our anty both in Proſperity and Adverſity, 13, 14» 
Prudence and the fear of God neceſſary in this World, ig---18. The 
praiſe of Wiſdem, 19, All men are fimmers, 20. Other mens Opinions of 
thee not too much tobe minded; The motive thereto, 21, 22: The Prea- 
chers experience thereof, 23---251 An evil Woman more bitter than 
Death, 26---28. God cregted man good, 294 
Having largely diſcourſed of the vanity of all worldly things, and 
having now ſaid in the foregoing verſe,that no man knew what 
was beſt for him, he now proceeds to preſcribe ſome Remedies 
* againſt theſe Vanities, and to dire& men to the right method of 
obtaining that telicity which is not to. be expeCtted or found in 
this World- | : 
* Good name 8 « better than precious ointment 


b : and the day of death c, than the day of ones 


*Prov 5: 
30:& 22:1 
birth. 
s A goodand well grounded report from wiſe and worthy per- 
ſons. b. Aname. which is put for a good name by a Synecdo- 
che, that only being worthy to be called a name, becauſe evil and 
worthleſs men quickly loſe their Name and Memory. Thus a fe 
"Mp — is put for a good W.fe, Prov. 18. 22. and « day for 4 good day» Luke 
24 19. 41, 44. 6 Which was very fragrant, and acceptable, and uſe- 
-” Ful, and of great price,cſpecially in thoſe Countries.See Deut. 33.24. 
Pſal: 92. 10. and 133. 2+ Iſa. 39; 2. c To wit, ofa good man, or 
one who bath lefr a good Name behind him,which is eaſily under- 
ſtood both from the former clauſe,and from the nature of the thing; 
for toa wicked man this day is far worſe, and moſt terrible. Yet if 
this paſſage be delivered with reſpe& only to this Life and abſtra- 
Qing from the future Life, as many other paſſages in this Book are 
to be underſtood, then this may ke true in general ofall men, and 
| Is the conſequent of all the former diſcourſe. Seing this Life is ſo 
full of Vanity, and Vexation, and Miſery, it is a more deſirable 
thing for a man to go out of ir, thanto come into it: Which is the 
- more conſiderable note, becauſe itis contrary to the Opinion and 
PraSice of almoſt all Mankind, to celebrate their own or Childrens 
Birth-days with ſolemn Feaſts and Rejoycings,and their deaths with 
all expreſſions of ſorrowe 
'2 Ir5s better to go to the houſe of mourning 4,than 
to goto the houſe of feaſting : for that eis the end of 
all menf, and che living will lay :# to his heart g. 
d Where Moutrners meet- together to celebrate the Funerals of a 
deceaſed Friend; e To wit, dcath, the cauſe of that mourning, 
F It brings men tothe ſerious conſideration of their laſt end: which 
is thejr greateſt Wifdom and Intereſt, g Will be ſeriouſly affeed 
with it,. and awakened to prepare for it; whereas feaſting is com- 
monly atrended with Mirth,and Leviry,and manifold Temptations 
and, indiſpoſeth mens mindsro Spiritual and Heavenly Thoughts. 
Hence 1t 15 evident that thoſe paſſages of this Book which may ſeem 
to favour a ſenſual and voluptuous Life, are not ſpoken by. Selemen 
in his own Name, or as his Opinion, but in the-perſon of an Epi- 
CUre- 


(for a man to hear the ſong oof fools. 


: nitent ſinners, 


2p 


T4STES © 


and highly profitable, and moſt comfortable to the end, whichevery 
wiſe man moſt regards. » Their minds and affe&ions are wholly 
{er upon feaſting and jollity, becauſe, like Fools and brutifh Crea« 
tures, they regard only their preſent delight, and mind not how 
dearly they muſt pay for them, 
5 Ie ;5 better to hear the rebuke of the wiſe », than « Mu 
i; 


18; 
» Which though it cauſeth ſome gricf, yet frequently rings 3 yo 


great benefit,even Reformation and Sa!vation, beth from temporal Pf: 191; 
and from eterna] DeſtruQion, both which are the portion of impe. ® 
0 The flatteries, orother merry diſcourſes, which 

are as pleaſant to corrupt Nature, as Songs or Muſick, 

6 For as the crackling of thorns p under a pots ſo 
9 is the laughter of the fool : this alſo 5s vanity- f Heb, 

p Which for atime make a great noiſe and blaze, bur preſently ſound, 
waſte themſelves, and go out without any conſiderable eff:& upon 
the meat in the pot. q So vaniſhing and fruitleſs, 

7 Surely oppreſlion » maketh a wiſe man mad,* ard 
a gift 5 deſtroyeth the heart z. *Deutiis 

r Either 1. A&tive. When a wiſe man falls into the praftice of !9- 
this ſin of oppreſſing others, he is beſorred by it, and by the vaſt 
Riches which he by his great wit gets by it. Or rather 2 Paſſive, 
when a wiſe man is opprefled by fooliſh and wicked men, it makes 
him fret and rage, and ſpeak or a& like a mad man ; for the wiſeſt 
men are moſt ſenſible of Indignities and Injuries, whereas fco!s are 
ſtupid,and do not much lay them to heart. 5. A bribe given to a 
wite man- ? Deprives him of the uſe of his underſtanding, which 
1s oft called the heart, as Exod. 23. 8. Deut. 16: 19. Hoſ. 4.18, or 
makes him mad,as was ſaid in the former clauſe.So thisVerſe diſco 
vers two ways whereby a wile man may be made mad, by ſuffering 
oppreſſion from others, by receiving bribes to oppreſs others. Ard 
this alſo isanargument of the vanity of woridiy Wiſdom, that it is 
i _ corrupted and luſt, and fo it ſerves ths main deſign cf this 

ok. 

8 Better is the end of a thing, than. the beginning 
thereof «: and * the patient in ſpirit x is better than *Pro:14'ry 
the proud yin ſpirit. 

u If this verſe relates to that next foregoing, it is an Argument to 
keep mens minds fiom being ditordered,eith-cr by oppreſſion or bri- 
bery, becauſe the end of thoſe pratices wi!l ſhew. that he who op- 
—_ another doth himſelf rsoft hurt by it,& that he who raketh 

ribes is no gainer by themz Burt if this be independent upon the 
former; as divers 0: her verſes here are, it isa genera] and uſeful 
obſervation, that the good or evil of things is better known by their 
end, than by their beginning;z which is true both in evil Counſe!s 
and Courſes, which are pleaſant at firſt, but at laſt bring deſtru&j- 
on ; and in all noble Enterprizes,in the ſtudies of Learning, and in 
the pratice of Virtue and Godlineſs,where the beginnings are difs 
ficult and troubleſome, but in the progreſs»nd concluſion they are 
moſt eaſfie and comfortable;and it is not ſufficient to begin well, un« 
leſs we perſevere to the end,which crowns all.x Who quietly waits 
for the end and iſſue of things,and is willing to bear hardſhips and 
inconveniencies in the mean time. y Which he puts inſtcad of ha#y 
or impatient,which the oppoſition mighr ſeem to require,partly be- 
cauſe Pride is the chief cauſe of impatience, Prove 13, 10« and makes 
men unable to bear any thing,cither from God or from Men, where- 
as Humilty makes Men ſenſible of their own unworthineſs, and 
that they deſerve, at leaſt from God,all the indignities and injuries - 
which they ſuffer from Men by Gods permiſſion, and therefore pa- 
rient under them 3 and partly to cerrett the vulgar error of proud 
Men, who think highly of themſelves,and trample all other, ejpe- 
cially ſuch as are meck and patient, under their feer. | 

9 * Be not haſty in thy ſpiric to be angry z : for an- *Provie- 
ger reſteth @ in the boſom # of fools. pan 

£ Be not angry withany man without due cenſideraticn.and juſt 3* 
and neceſſary cauſe; for otherways anger is ſometimes Jawful, and 
ſometimes a duty, #« Hath its ſetrled and quiet abode, is their con- 
ſtant companionever at hand upcn all occaſions, whereas wiſe men 
reſiſt, and mortifie, and baniſh it. b5In the Heart, the proper ſear 
of the paſſions. | : 

Io Say not thou c, What is rhe cauſe that the former fHebw 


days were better dthan theſe? for thou doſt not enquire 79" 


tf wiſely concerning this es | 

c To wit, by way of impatient Expoſtulation and Compſaint 2« 
mo God, either for permitting ſuch diſorders in the World, or 

r bringing thee into tbe werld inſuch an evil time. and ftate of 
things. Otherwiſe,a man may ſay this by way of prudent and pious 
enquirys that by ſezrching out the cauſe, be may; as far as it is 
in his power, apply Remedies to make them | berter. « Either 1. 
Leſs ſinfal. Or rather 2- More quiet and comfortable. For this 
and net the former, is the cauſe of moſt Mens murmurings againſt 
Gods Providence. And this is an Argument of a mind ditcontent- 
ed and unthankful for the many Mercies, which Men commonly 
enjoy evert in evil times, and impatient under Gods hand. e This 
Queſtion fheweth thy great folly in contending with thy Creator, 
and the Sovereign Lord and Governour of all things, in oppoſing 
wy ſhallow wit to his unſearchable Wiſdom, and thy will co his' 

all, E 
1t Wiſdom ||is good f, with an inheritance ; and | or; 4 


= ${Sorrow b ;s better thanlaughter: for by the ſadneſs 
* J0r,2g* of the countenance 3 the heart is made betcer &. | 
; bh Eicher for ſin, or any, outward troubles. # Which 'is- ſeated. in * 
| the Heart, but manifeſted in the Countenance. k More;weaned 
from the Luſts and Vanities of this World,by:which moſt menare-: 
enſnared: and deſtroyed, and more quickned to ſeek: after, and em- 


in his Word: | n 

4 The heart. of the wiſe is in the houſe of mourning 1 
but the heart of foo]sjs in the hauſe of mirth m7, 

I Even when their bodies areabſent. They: are conſtantly, or 
very frequently mcditating.upon ſad & ſerious things,fuch asDeath 
and Judgment, the Vanity of this Life,and rhe realicy andeternity 
ef the next ; becaule they kapy that theſe thoughts, though they 


| a Mans ſelf, but many others who live with. him in-rhis World. 


by it there 4s profit g tothem that ſee the ſun 5, good as as], 
J i: e. Very good ; the Poſitive being put for the Superlative, as Inher.” 

it is frequently in the Hebrew Text. When Wiſdom and Riches 191% 

meet in one-man, itis an happy. conjunQion;for Wiſdom without bers 5% | 

Riches is commonly contemned, Eccleſ” 9. 16.and wants opportuni- 

ties and inſtruments of diſcovering it ſe]f,andof doing that good:in 


brace that true and everlaſting Happineſs which God offers to them the World which it is both able & willing to. doz and Riches with= 


out Wiſdom are like a Sword in a mad Mans Hand,an occaſion of 
much ſin-2nd miſchief,both to himſelf and others. g By Wiſdom 
joyned: with Riches,there comes great benefit. Heb. axd it 15 an exe 
cellensy, or priviledge, or advantage. hi, e To mortal men,nor only 


Whereby alſo he intimates that Riches bear no price, and have na". 


uſe inthe other VVerldc 
ia For 


Chap. VL. F 


ainſt whom . be not grateful to the ſenſual part,yet they are abſolutely neceſſary, 


Pina 2») Ta AS 


*c 


ArY 
16; 


b af 
ſal 


"Chap. VII. 


} #Hc:byb-» 12 For wiſdom 5s a+ defence i, and money is a de- 


4a MY "7 ——— 


-— "VO ; 
a , % _— 
, p, 0 : 4p 
3X; & ” 
fa 


ECCLES 
gw. 


fence: but the excellency oF knowledge js,that wildom 
]iveth life tothem that hays it &. : 

; Heb. ir aſhadow ; which in Scripture uſe notes both ProteCtion 
and Refreſhment: And thus far Wiſdom and: Money agree. & But 
herein Knowledge or Wiſdom ( which commonly ſignifie the ſame 
thing ) excels Riches,that whereas Riches frequently expoſe Men 
to death or deſtruQion, true- Wiſdom doth ofr-times preſerve a man 
from temporal, and always from eternal Ruine. r 
*Cch:1.15- x3 Conſider the work /of God ; for * who can make 
SeJoi4: || that ſtraight which he hath made crooked m ? 
for im 1 Not of Creation, but of Providence ; his wiſe, and juſt, and 
> Gr ' powerful Government of all Events in the World, which is propo- 
09'* 4{cd as thelaſtand beſt Remedy againſt all murmurings and ſinful 
diſquietments of mind, under the ſenſe of the great and many diſ- 
orders which happen in the World, as is implyed, v. 10. againſt 
which Wiſdom 1s preſcribed as one Remedy, v. 11, 12, and now 
here is another. »» No Man can withſtand, or correQ, or alterany 
of Gods works; and therefore all ſelf-rormenting frettings and dif- 
contents at the injuries of men, or calamities of times, are not on- 
Iy ſinful, but alſo vain and fruitleſs. This reaſon implyes that there 
3s an Hand or Work of God in all mens aQions, either effeCting 
them, if they be good, or permitring them if they be bad, and or- 
derins and over-ruling them, whether they be good or bad. And 
God is here ſaid to make things crooked, as he is ſaid to make the 
hearts of ſinners fat or hard, Iſa. 6. 10, and elſewhere, not poſitive- 
Iy, but privatively,becauſe he denies or withdraws from men that 
Wiſdom or Grace which ſhould make them ftraight, ; 

14 In the day of proſperity be joyful », but in the 
day of adverſity cenfider e:God alſo hath + ſer the one 
over againſt the other p,to the end that man ſhould find 
nothing after him 9. 

» Enjoy Gods favours with chearfulneſs and thankfulneſs. 0 To 
wit, Gods work, which is eaſily underſtood our of the foregoing 
verſe, Conſider that it is Gods hand, and therefore ſubmar to 1t ; 
humble thy ſelf under his hand, be ſenfible of it, and duly affeCted 
with it : conlidr alſo why God ſends it, for what ſins, and with 
what deſign. This is a proper ſeaſon for ſerious conſideration, 
wheras Proſperity relaxeth the mind, and calls it forth to outward 
things. Bur this clauſe may be, and is by ſome rendred thus, and 
look for a day of adverſity. In Proſperity rejoyce with trembling, and 
ſo as to expett a change, p God hath wiſely ordained theſe ,viciſh- 
tudes, thut Proſperity and Adverſity ſhould ſucceed one another in 
the courſe of mens Lives. q Either 1. After man himſelf, or, as 1t 
may be rendred, after ir, #: e. after his preſent condition, whether 
it be proſperous or affliftive. So the ſenſe is, That no man might 
be able to foreſee, or find out what ſhal certainly befall him afrer- 
wards,and therefore might live in a conſtant dependance upon God 
and might neither deſpair in trouble, nor be ſecure or preſumpru- 
ous in proſperity, becauſe of the frequentand ſudden changes from 
one tothe other, Or 2. Aﬀter God, That ne man might come 
after God. and review his works, and find any fault in them or pre= 
tend thar he could have managed things better, becauſe this mixrure 
of Proſperity and Adverſity is moſt convenient both for the Glory 
of Gods Wiſdom, and Juſtice, and Goodneſs, and for the benefit of 
Mankind, who have an abſolute need of this vicifficude, leſt they 
ſhould be either corrupted and ruined by perpetual Proſperity, as 
many have been, or overwhelmed wich uninterrupted Adverſi- 


+ Heb. 
made. 


T'- | : . 
*Ch.8:i4 15 All :biogsr have I ſeen in the days of my vanity 
s :* here is a juſt may that periiheth in his righteouſ- 
neſs t ; and there is a wicked man that prolongeth bis 
life in Is wickedneſs «, 

r Allſorts of events, -both ſuch as have been already mentioned, 
and ſuch as Iam abour to declare. 5 Since I have come into this 
vain and tranſitory Life, #t Either 1, Notwithſtanding his Righre-: 
ouſneſs; whom his Righteouſneſs doth not deliver 11 common ca-. 
Jamities, Exzek: 21: 3, 4. and 33:12. Or 2. For kis Righteoufheſs,. 
which expoſeth him to the Envy: and Hatred.and Rage of Perſecu- 
tors or wicked men. Tn is ſometimes uſed for for ; but it is not ſo 
taken in the next clauſe which anſwersto this,and therefore the for. 
mer ſeerfis to be the truer Interpretation, « Notwithſtanding all his 
wickedneſs, whereby he provokes and deſerves the juſtice toth of 
God and Men; who yet, for many wiſe and juſt r:aſons,is permit- 
ted to live long unpuniſhed and ſecure, 

f Heb, be * 16 Be not righteous overmuch x, neither make thy 
@flate. (elf over-wiſe 5:wby ſhouldeſt thou + deſtroy thy ſelf 2? 
\ x This Verſe and the next have a manifeſt reference to v. 15. 
being rwo inferences drawn from the two clauſes of the obſervation 

there recorded: And this Verſe was delivered by Solowon, either 

s. In the name and perſon of an ungodly man, who taketh"*occaſion 

to dilwade men from the praftice ofRighteouſneſs and true Wiſe 

dom, becauſe of the danger which attends it,and is expreſſed in the 
middie of the former, and the end of this Verſe. Therefore, ſaith 
he, it is not good to be more nice than wiſe, take heed of Stri&- 
neſs, Zeal, and forwardneſs in Religion, And then the next verſe 
contains an Antidote to this poiſonous ſuggeſtion ; yea rather,ſaith 
be, be not wicked or foohiſh overmuch;for that will nor preſerve 

. thee, as thou maiſt imagine, from the laft clauſe of v. 15. but will 
occaſion and haſten thy ruine. But ſeing theſe words are very ca- 
pable ofanother ſenſe, and there is no proof or evidence of this | 
tenſe in chem, as there is in all other places where Solon ſpeaks in | 
the perſon of an Epicure, this Interpretation may ſeem to be dange- | 
rous, and liable to miſconſtrution- Or 2: In his own Perſon, And | 
fo theſe words are a caution to prevent, as far as may be, that de- | 
ftruQion which ofr attends upon righteous Men, as was obſerved ' 

w. 15. Be not righteous overmuch, either 1. By being too ſevere in 

obſerving, cenſuring, and puniſhing the faulrs of orhers beyond the 

rules of equity, wichout giving any allowance for humane infir. 
anity, extraordinary temptations, the {tate of times, and other cir. | 
Cc ances. Or 2. By being more juſt than God requires, cither| 
laying thoſe yokes and burdens upon a mans ſelf, or ethers, which 
God ihath not impoſed upon him, and which are too heavy for him 
afwhich ſec on Mas, 23. 4. or condemning or avoiding thoſe 


} 
} 


TASTES; 


things as ſinful, whiclr God hath not forbidden 
perſtition, bur is here called Righreo 1/neſs abufiv 
1nappearance, and in the opinion of fjuch 
the name, but by adding overmuch, d enies the thing,becauſe Righte- 
ouſneſs, as well as other virtues, av'6ids both the extreams the ex- 
ceſs as well as the defe&, Or 3, By ati:umprudentand unſeaſonable 
oftentarion, or exerciſe of RighteouſneTs, where it is nor neceſſary 
as if a Proteſtant travelling in a Popiſh Country ſhould pub- 
Jickly profeſs his Religion to allwhom he meets with, or when a 
man caſts the pearl of reproof before Swine, againſt .that caution 
Matth.7. 6, So this is 2 precept that men ſhould manage their zeal 
with godly Wiſdom,and with condeſcerfien ro others, as far as may 
be. But this is not to be underſtood,cither 1. Of ſuch prudence as 
keeps a man from the praftice of his duty, but only of thar Pru- 
dence which dire&ts kim in ordering the time, manner, and other 
circumſtances of it : Or 2, As if men could bz too good,or too ho- 
ly,fince theſtriteſt holineſs which any man in this life can arrive at 
falls ſhort both of the rule of Gods Word, and of thoſe examples of 
God and Chriſt, and the Holy Angels, which are propounded in 
Scripture for our imitation, y Be not wiſe in thine own conceit,nor 
above what is written, 1 Cor, 4. 6. nor above what is meet, Which 
he here implyerh ro be the cauſe of being rightews overmuch. z For 
oy thou wiltſt unneceſſarily expole thy ſelf to danger and miſ- 
chief. 4 
17 Be not overmuch wicked a,neither be thou fooliſh ; - -.. 


| 
| 
v: Why ſhouldſt thou die + before thy time c? F 


Chap. ? 
,which really is Su- " 
ely, becauſe iris fo [i 

perſons. So he gives them 


Heb:} 
# Do not take occaſion. either from the impunity of finnersv. 1 5. ** —"_ 
or from the prohibition of exceſſive Righteouſneſs, to run intothe li 
contrary extream,the dete& of Righteouſneſs, or ro give up thy ſelf i 
to the prattice of all manner of wickednets, as the manner of many | 
men 1s, Ch.8$. 11. But this is not to be underſtood as if he allowed a 
lower degree of wickedneſs, no more thar- that prohibition of not 
letting the Sun go down upon a mans wrath, Eph. 4. 26. permits him 
to keep his wrath all the day long;and no more than the condemna< 
tion of exceſs of riot, and of abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4. doth 
juſtific any kind of rioring or Idolatry. þ Which he adds to ſhew 
chat ſuch linners, howſoever they eſteem themſelves wiſe, yer i 
truth are egregious fools, as the following words prove.c Either by 
the juſtice of the Magiſtrate, or by the vengeance of God. For 
thoughlT faid that ſometimes a wicked man prolongeth his days,erc. 
v:15. yet commonly ſuch perſons are cur off,and. thou haſt ſuffici- 
ent reaſon to expe and fear it. 


18 Itis good that thou ſhouldſt take hold of 4 this ez 
yea alſo from this f withdraw not thine handg : for he 
that feareth God h, ſhall come forth of them all 5. 

4 Embrace and praQiſe. e This Counſel laſt given v. 17, f From 
that foregoing advice. wv. 16.It is good to avoid both thoſe extreams 
g From the prattice ofite þ Who ordereth his a&ions fo as to pleaſe 
God, and keep his Commands, and walk by the rule of his Word: 
# Shall be delivered from both theſe and from all other extreams,and 
from all the evil conſequences of them. The word al is ſometimes 
put for both, as being uſed of two only, as Eedef: 2: 14, 


19 * Wiſdom k ſtrengtheneth Jthe wiſe, more than, - .... | 
ten 91 mighty men which are in the city. Wes 
k True Wiſdom which is always joyned with the Fear of God, þ $24: 
and whicl: teacheth a man to keep cloſe to rke rule of | hisdury, "_ 9:16, 
®without turning either tothe Right Hand or to the Lefe. / Support-" , 
eth him in, and ſecureth him againſt troubles and -dangers, m +. e; 
Many, uniting the forces together. | 


20 * For nthere 5s nota juſt man upon earth o that 5 
doeth good,and ſinneth not | 
7 So this is a reaſon either 1. Of the foregoing Counſels v:16, 17, 
19, the 19th verſe being interpoſed only as 2 proof of the !aſt clauſe 
of v; 18. Or 2: To ſhew the neceſlity and advantage of that Wiſe 
dom commended »: 19. becauſe all men are very prone to folly and 
ſin,and therefore need that Wiſdom which is from above to 6ire& 
and keep thena from ic. Bur this particle may be,and elſewhere is 
commonly rendred, Yr, and ſo the ſenſe is, although Wiſdom doth 
exceedingly ſtrengthen a man, yer it doth notſo ftrengthen him as 
if 1t would keep him from falling into allſin; or, 6:zaufe, or, ſernz 
that, and ſo this relates to the following verſe,ſeing all men ſin,we 
ſhould be ready to prrdon the offences of others againſt us, either 
by wordor deed ; or jzrely,. and fo it isan intire ſentence, ſuch as 
there are many,in this book, o Whereby he manifeſtly implyes 
that the juſt in Heaven are perfe& and fin!eſs. þ Who is univerjal- 
ly and perfe&ly good, and tree from all fin. : 
21 Alſo f take no heed q unto all words that are ſpo: --- -... 
ken 7 ; leſt thou hear thy ſervant curſe thee 5s; THeb;give 
q Do not ſeverely obſerve, nor ſtrictly ſearch into them, nor 1i- 27 hine 
ſcen to hear them, as many perſons out of curioſity uſe to do. » To *** 
wit concerning thee, or againſt thee: Under this one kind of Of 
fences of the Tongue, which are moſt frequent, he ſeems to under- 
ſtand all injuries which we ſuffer from others, and adviſeth us thar 
we do not too rigidly examine theminor too deeply reſent them,bur 
rather neglect andforget tkem- 5s Which will vex and grieve thee 
and may provoke thee to vengeance and cruelty againſthim. 
. 22 For oftentimes alſo thine own heart e knowerh, 
that thou thy ſelf likewiſe haſt curſed others «« ]. 
£ Mind or Conſcience, as that word is frequently uſed. s Either 
upon ſome great provocation, and ſudden patlion, or poſſibly upoa 
a meer miſtake, or falſe report. In which c:ſe thou haſt both need- 
ed and defired the forbearance and forgivenneſs of others,and there- 
fore by the Rules of Juſcice, as well as of Piety and Charity, thou 
art obliged to deal lkewiſe with others. 


23 All this x have I proved y by wiſdom z : Ifaid, 
I will be wiſe @ but it ws far from me 6, 

x Or, M1 theſe things ; of which I have berediſcourſed. » I have- 
diligenty examined and found all this to be true. z By the help of 
thar ſingular Wiſdom which God had given me. 4 I determined 
within my felf that I would by all pollible- means ſeek to attain per- 
fection of wiſdom,and Iperſwaded my ſelf that I fhould artain to it. 
bI found my ſelf grearly diſappointed, and the more I knew, the 


1Kin.$ 
46« - | 
2Chr 6:36 
Prov:20 C 
1 Joh 1:8 


morel {aw minie owni folly and ar 


_T u Tf By 
$ | 54 © Tanzt 


"=. 
" 


28. 24 *Thatwhich is far off and exceeding: deep, who 
% can find itoutc? wa 
- ; No humane Wit can attain to perfect Wiſdom, or to the exact 
knowledge of Gods Counſels and Works,and the reaſons of them, be- 
cauſe they are unſearchably deep, and far above our fight,. ſome of 
them being long ſince paſc,and therefore utterly unknown to us and 
others yet tocome which we cannot foreknow. 
25 | * I appliedmine heart d to know, and to ſearch, 
"7. and to {ek out e wiſdom,and|| the reaſon «f things f,and 
ro know the wickedneſs of folly g,cven of fooliſbneſs 


. and madneſs. | 
4 1 was not diſcouraged, but provoked by the difficulty of the 


work to undertake it:which is an argument of a great and generous 
f, fo Soul. « He uſeth three words ſignifying the ſame thing,to intimate 
his vehement deſire, and vigorous, and unwearied endeavour after 
it. f Both of Gods various Providences,& ofthe differing and con- 
trary counſels and courſes of men. g That I might clearly and ful- 
ly underſtand the gteat evil of ſin,and all that wickedneſs,and folly 
or madneſs which is bound up in the hearts of all men by Nature, 
and which diſcovers it ſelf in the courſe of their Lives. 


rOV-22 
man & whoſe heart is ſnares and nets /,and her hands mz 


eb. be 2c bands ». + Whoſo pleaſeth God 0 ſhal eſcape from 


#8 her p ; but the ſinner 9 ſhal be taken-r by hers. 
e God: þ By my own ſad experience: Which $9l9men here records. partly 
as an inſtance of thatfolly and madneſs which he expreſled in gene=- 

ral. v; 25, and partly as a teſtimony of his trueRepentance, for his 

foul miſcarriages,for which he was willing to take ſhame to him- 
ſel£,nor only from the preſent, bur from all ſucceeding generations, 

; More vexatious & pernicious as producing thoſe horrors of Con- 
ſcience, thoſe reproaches, and diſcaſes, and other plagues,both tem- 

poral and ſpiritual,from God, which are far worſe than ſimpledeath 

and, after all thzſe, everlaſting deſtruftion- k The ſtrange woman, 

of whom he ſpeaks ſo muck in the Proverbs. ! Who being /ubrile of 

heart, Prov. 7+ 10. is full of crafty devices to inſnare men. » Either 
byGGifts,or rather by laſcivious Aﬀions.n Wherewith ſhe holds them 

faſt in cruel bondage, ſo rhat they have neither Power nor Will to 
forſak2 her,notwithanding all the dangers & miſchiefs which rhey 
kaow do attend upon ſach prafices. 0 Heb, be that is good before 

God, either 1. whom God loves and favours. Or rather 2. Who is 

g20d lincerely,or in the judgment of God who cannot be deceived; 
whereas Hyp»crites are frequeatly good in the eyes or opinions of 
mn. Which ſenſe ſeems to be confirmed from the oppoſition of the 
ſonner ro him,both here, and Ecclef; 2+ 26, Hereby he intimates that 
neither a good temper of mind, nor great diſcretion,ner good Edu- 
cacion fa, Inſtruction, nor any ocrher thing,except GodsGrace,is a 
ſufficient preſervative from the dominion of this Luft, pShal be 
prevented from falling into that ſin, or, if by ſurpriſal or ſtrong 
tzmpration he be drawn to it, he ſhal be recovered * out of it by 

true Repentance. q The wilful and obſtinate {inner,who gives hime 
ſclfup to the common practice of this or other ſins;he who is's /x- 

ner before the Lord, as the Sodomites are called, Gen: 13: 13,who is fire 

1y oppoſed to him that is good before Godzhe in whom there is not a 
dram of true goodneſs:for otherwiſe all men are ſinnzrs,as was ſaid 

wv: 20. r Shall be intangled and kept faſt in her chains, as is implyed, 
becauſe this is oppoſed to eſcap:ngfom her. * 
Or,veigh 2+ Behold s,this have I ound ( faith the Preacher t ) 

ng || counting one by one «, tofind out the account x. 

Kd 5 Ir is a ſtrange thing, and worthy of your ſerious obſervation, 
: Or, the penitent, who ſpeaks what he hath learned, both by deep 
Study, and coſtly Experiences % Conſidering things or perſons ve= 
ry exactly and diftirictly, one after another; and not only in gene= 
ral and confuſ:d'y,in which caſe a man may very eaſily be miſtake; 
and comparing them together, whereby I was inabled to make rhe 
truer judgment of them. x That Imighr make a true and juſt eſti= 
mate in this matter, Or, asit isin the Margent, and was rendred 
w: 25: thereaſon, to wit, of that which Iam about to ſay. I conſide= 
red the perſons ſevera!ly and critically, that from thencet might 
underſtand thereaſon of the thing. 


28 Which yer my ſoul ſecketh y, but T find not £:one 
man among a thouſand 5 have I found, but a woman 


c among all thoſe 4 haveI not found. 
zIc ſeemed ſo wonderfalto me that] ſufpected I had not made a ſufe 
ficient enquiry, and therefore I returned to ſearchagain with more 
earneſtneis and accuratenels. z Thar it was ſo he found out, as he 
now ſaid, v: 27.but che whole truth and reaſon ofthe thing he could 
not find out, s One worthy of the Name ofa Man;a wile and vir= 
ruous Man. Man is put fora worthy or good Man, as Vame is pur 
for azoed name, above v. 1. and Wife for a good Wifr, a5 wasnored 
before. b With whom I have converſed. H# is ſuppoitd to menti- 
on this Number 4a alluſion ro his Thouſand Wives and Concubi= 
nes, as they are numbred by parcels 1 Kings 11.3» c One wor- 
. thy of that Name 5 one who 15 not a diſhonour to her kind and Sex 
who is not brutiſh in her diſpoſicion and converſation, & In that 
Thouſand whom I have taken into intimate ſociety with my {clF. 
Whereby he alſo paſleth a ſevere cenſure upon himielf that he had 
ſociated himſelf with ſuch Perſons,and not with the virtuons Wo. 
men; which doubtleſs there were in his time,as appears fromProv.31. 
Ge11;27 Ic is not Solomons deſign to diſparage this Sex,norto make a genera) 
compariſon between men and women in all Places, and Ages, but 
ooly to ſuggeſt his own experience concerning it. 


29 Lo, this only havel found e, * -thas God . hath 


ny inventions 7. 

2 Though I could not find out all the ffreams of wickeIneſs and 
their infinite windings and turnings in the World, yer I havediſ 
covered the fountain of it,to wit,Original fin,.and-the corruption cf 
Nature which is both in Men and Women.f God made our firſt Pa- 
rents, Adamand Eve, g Heb. right, without ary imperfe&ion 0: 
corruption, conformable'to his Nature and Will, which is the rule 
of righr,after his own likeneſs underſtanding,and holy, and every 

way good. þ Our firſt Parents,and after them their Poſterity trea« 
ding in their ſteps, # Were not contented with their preſent ſtate, 


26 * And I find h more bitter 5than death, the wo-. 


made man-f upright g ;- but they bhave ſought out ad 


TASTES: Chap. VI1L. 


but aimed at higher things,and ſtudied new ways of. making them- 
icIves more wife and happy, than God had made them, ard readily 
hearkened to the ſuggeſtions of the Devil to.that end. And we their 
ſinful and wretched Children after their example are {till prone to 
forſake the certainrule of Gods Word, and'rhe true way to hap= 
pineſs,and to ſeek new Methods and Inventions of attaining to it,even 
ſuch asSolomon hath diſcourſed of in this Book. 


CH AP. VIIEL” 


Kings to begreatly reſpeFed, 5. Our times uncertain ; Death not tobe 
reſifted, 6 8. tn evil Magiſtrate buried and forget, gy 10+ Mcn 
harden in fm, becauſe not preſently puniſhed £ but they ſhal not eſcape, but 
it ſhall go ill with them, 1——- 13. 85 it doth alſo ſometimes with the 
righteous whilſ# the wicked proſÞ*r, 14. Mirth therefore, and a contented 
Enjoyment of Gods gifts preferable to immoderate care and ſearch, 15, 16. 
Goa's work herein paſt finding out, 17. 


Ho 3s as the wiſe man «? who knoweth the in- 
terpretation of a thing þ? * a mans wiſdom , 
makech his face to ſhine c,and F the boldneſs of his face £494; 
4 ſhall be || changed e. | See Acts 


a Who is to be compared with a wiſe Man ? He is incomparably 6: x5. 
the moſt excellent Man in the World. Or rather,who is truly wiic? + Heb: the 
The Particie, as being here not a Note of fimilitude, bur of reality, ſrength, 
as1t 1S Jopn 1.14,andin many other places as hath been noted,There || Or, dove 
are very few or no rruly wiſe men in this World. This ſeems beſt led, 
to agree with the next clauſe, which is not, is as he that knoweth, 
but whoknoweth, &c b How few are there who underſtand the rea= 
fons of things and can rightly expound the word and works ofGod, 
and inftru& and farisfie himſelf and others in all the dcubrful and 
and difficult caſes of humane a&ions ? c Maketh a Man illuſtrious 
and venerable, chearful, and mild;and amiable in his carriage to 0 
thers.The face is put for the mind or inward frame, becauſe the mind 
diſcovers it ſelf in the Countenance, 4 The roughneſs or fierceneſs, 
the pride or impudence of his diſpoſition as this Phraſe is uſed,Deuz. 

28; 56. Provi7; 13, and 21:29, Dan: 8: 23- e Into gentleneſs and 
humility, 

2 I counſel thee f to keep the king's commandment Lg, 
and *hat in regard of the oath of God hb. 

f Which Verb is neceffarily underſtood to make the ſenſe full and 
compleat. See the like defetts of ſpeech, Þſ: 1204 7. 1ſa: 5. 9, &c/ 
£ Obſerve and obey all his commands. Which is not to be under. 
ſtood univerſally, as if the King ſhould have commanded them to 
deny or blaſpheme God, or to worſhip Idols, in which caſe every 
Chriſtian Man,who reads and believes the Bible,muſt needs confeis 
that the J/raelites eſpecially were obliged to obey God rather than 
Man,bur only offuch commands asarenot contrary to the will of 
God,h Either 1.Becauſe of that Oath which thou haſt taken to keep 
all. Gods Laws, whercofthis of Obedience to Superiors is one, Or 2. 
becauſe of that Covenant or Oath of Fealty and Allegiance whereby 
thou haſt engaged thy ſelf ro him.of which ſee x Chron. 't1: 3, and 
29: 24. Ezek:17 16,18. Though this may alſo be underſtood,and 
is by 1ome learned Interpreters taken s a limitation of their Obedis 
ence to Kings,tke wcrds being thus rendred,as the Hebrew will ve= 
ry well bear,but according to the word of the Oarh of GodzObey theKings 
commands, with this cauticn that. they be agreeable and not con= 


Jcrary to the Laws of God which thou arr obliged by thy own and by 


thy Parents Oaths oft renewed,:o obſerve in the firit place. 


2 * Be not a to go out of his fight # : ſtand not in *Ch:ro; 
an evil thing &, for be doth whatſoever pleaſeth him/. 

# Heb: 7o gofrom hus face, or preſence, to wit, in diſlike or in dif 
content,withdrawing thy ſelf from thy King's ſervice or obedience, 
as malecontents uſe to do 3 for this will both provoke himgand lead 
thee by degrees into Sedition or Rebellion. & If thou haſt offended 
him, perſiſt not in it, but humbly acknowledge thine offence, and 
beg his pardon and favour. 1 His power is uncontrolable in his Do- 
minions,and therefore thou canſt neither reſiſt nor avoid his fury. 


4, Where the word ofa king is, there is power mm; and 
who may ſay » unto him, What doeſt thou ? 

1 Whatſoever he commandeth he wants not power nor .inſtru- 
ments ro execute it. -and therefore can eaſily puniſh thee 45 he plea- 
ſeth, » Heb. Who ſhal ſay ? Who will preſume or dare to.fay ſo? 
He doth nor affirm that it is unlawful to ſay ſo, for Samyel ſaid ſo to 
Saul, 1 Sam; 15« and Nathan to David, 2 S«m: 12. and ſeveral other 
Prophets to the Kings of Judahand Iſrael, but only that it is difficult 
and dangerous. 


5 Whoſo keepeth the commandment o Þ ſhall feel no + Heb 
evil thing p * anda wiſe man's heart diſcerneth both j, 
time and Judgement 9. 

o Either 1. of the King, of which he hath hitherto ſpoken: Or 
2, of God, for the Word, or Commandments,or Law are oft uſed em+ 
phatically for the Word, Law, or Command of Ged,as' hath been for- 
merly and frequently obſerved; and the Commanament 1s put for rhe 
Commandments, as is very uſual. And ſo Selomen paſlerh from his for- 
mer to a new ſubje&;p Shal be delivered from thoſe miſchiefs which 
befal the diſobedient- q Both when, and how far, and in what 
manner he may or muſt keep the commands of the king'or God, For 
the word here rendred judgment doth ofc ſignifie right,as Deut: 21: 17. 
as-alſo a cauſe or contreverſie, as Numb: 27: '5, and the manner or 
rule of ations as Judz. 13: 12. The ſenſe is, A wiſe . Man knows 
both what he ought to do,and what are the fitteſt ſeaſons ' for doing 
it, which he ſecketh and embraceth. ' 


6 Becauſe to every purpoſe there is time and Judge- 


ment r,therefore s the miſery of-man is great upon him. 

ry There isa fit way and ſeaſon for the happy 'accompliſhment of 
very buſineſs which a man defigneth or undertaketh to do, which 
'S known tro God, but for the moſt parr hidden from man, as is1m+ 
alyed and may be gathered from the following words.See the Notes 
on Ch: 3. 1. 5 Becauſe there are very few who have that Wiſdom 


» hich isneceſlary to diſcern this, as was now ſaid, v: 5. and moſt 
men do by their ignorance&loſs of opportunities deprive themſelves 


of many adyantages, and expoſe themſelves to manifold _—_ _ 


fr 


Pico 
laz6 


Pf: 
18119. 
Prov, 
33 

Iz: 


”_ 


Chap. V 'II. 


FProV.24: 
f a6: | &+ 
Or haw it 


ſhaz be, 


#Job 14: = 
[oc,caſting 
off weae 
PoNS« 


#7, 


Pf: $021, 
:2&10, 


PC:37:11 
18,19. 
Prova;3 2 
33d 


7 For * he knoweth not that which ſhal be z : for 


who can tell him « || when it (bal be ? 

: Men are generally ignorant of all future events, and of the ſuc- 
ceſs of their endeavours, and therefore their minds are greatly dif- 
quieted,and their expeQations frequently diſappointed, and they fall 
into many miſtakes and miſcarriages, which they could and would 
prevent if they did foreſee the iſſues of things, # No wiſe Man,no 
Aſtroioger or other Artiſt can diſcover this. ; 

8 Th:re i* no man that hathpower * over the ſpirit x to 
retain the ſpirit y;neither hath he power in the day v of 
death:and rhere is no || diſcharge @ in that war b,neither 


ſhal wickedneſs deliver thoſe that are given to ite. 

x i: e. The Soul of Man, which is ofr called a Spirit, as Job 7. 7+ 
& 10; 12. Pſal; 78; 39+ & 140; 29, &c. y To keep it in the Body 
beyond the rime whicaGod hath allotted to it. This is added avano- 
tacr evidence of Mans miſerys z Or, againſt the day, i.e. to avoid 
or delay that day. # As there is in other Wars, when Soldiers ei- 
ther are Cifmiſſed from the ſervice,or eſcape by flight or otherwiſe. 
b Tn that fa:al conflict between Life and Death,between Nature and 
the Diſeaſe, when a Ma is ſtruggling with Death, though ro no 
purpoſe, for Death ſhall always be Conqueror. c And although 
wicked men, wizo molt fear Death, uſe all poſſible means, whether 
good or bad, to free themſelves from this deadly blow, yet they 
1ha!l not eſcape it. 

s All this 4I have ſeen, and applied my heart unto 
every work e that is done under the fun : there is a time 


wherein one man ruleth overanother e to hisown hurt. 

d Ail theſe things before mentioned. e I have been a diligent 
obſerver of all a&ions and evenrs. There are ſome Kings who ule 
their power tyra:nically and wicked!y, whereby they do not only 
oppreſs their Pcopie,but hurt themielves,by bringing the vengeance 
of God and en upon their own heads. Which is here noted partly 
for tae terrour of Tyrants,and partly for the caution and comfort of 
Suvje&s groaning under thoſe heavy preſſures which they are not 
able to remove,thar they may forbear un'awful or rebel1ious courſes 
and quietly commit themſelves and their cauſe roGod, who juadgeth 
righte-uſly,and who both can and will call the greareſt Monarchs 
to a {ad account for all their impious and unrighreous courſes. 

10 And {of Ifaw the wicked g buried þb, who had. 
come | and gone z from the place of the holy &, and 
they were forgotten /in the city wkere theyhad fo done 
7: this is alſo vanity . 

f In 'ike manner, or ſuch another vanity or diſorder. g Wicked 
Princes orRulers as the next clauſe limits this.þ Die quierly in their 
Beds and afcerward be buried with ſtare and pomp.whereas in truth 
they d-ſerved an untimely end,«no other than the burial of anAlſs. 
; Who had adminiftred publick Juſtice and Government, which is 
frequently ſignified by the Phraſe of :omn7g in and gormg out before the 
People, as Numb. 27; 17. Deut: 31: 2. The LXX Jewilh Interpreters, 
whom ſome others follow,render the word,thcy were praiſed, applaud- 
ed and adored by the variation of one Letter in the Hebrew word, 
which alſo is very like that Lerter which is in the Text. k By which 
he underſtands e:ther 1. the Holy City Jeruſalem, or the Holy Land 
witere Iſrael dwelt; which may be added to aggravate the wicked- 
neſs of ſuch Perſons from the OQbligations,and Counſels,and Exam= 
ples which they had to do better rhings. Or, 2. the ſear of Mzjeſty, 
and Judgment, which may well be called :he place, or ſeat of the Hoe 
ly, i; e. of God, who is called the Holy ove, Habak. 3: 3. and off 
elſewhere, who is in a ſpecial manner pre'enrt in, and preſident cver 
thoſe places, whoſe work, and for whom, and in whoie Name and 
Stead Magiſtrates a&,who therefore are called gods; of all which ſee 
Exod: 22: 28, Deut, 1. 17,1 Chron: 29: 23. Plal: 82:1, &c. And the 
Throne orT ribunal ſeems to be ſo called here,to aggravate their wic- 
kedneſs,who beingSacred Perſons and advanced by God into fo High 
and Sacred a place,betrayed fo great a rruſr, and both praQtiſed and 
encouraged rhat wickedneſs which by theirOffice they were obliged 
to ſupprets and puniſh. 1 Whereas they deſigned to ſpread and per- 
petuate their Names and Memories toſucceeding Ages, Pſal; 49:11, 
9 i:e, Come to and go from the place of the Holy ; where they 
lived in great ſplendor, and were buried with great magnificence: 
which might have kept up their remembrance at leaſt in chat place. 
2 That men ſhould ſo earneftly thirſt after & pleaſe themſelveswith 
worldly greatneſs and glory, which is ſo ſoon exti:Q,and the very 
memory of it quickly worn out of the minds of men. 

1 1*Becauſc fentence agsinFt an evil work o1s not exe- 
cuted ſpeedily,therefore p the heartof the ſons of men 


is fully ſet qin them to do evil, 

o Or, the Decree, &c, Gods determinate counſel or ſentence for 
the puniſhment of Tyrants andall evil doers, p Becauſe Gods for= 
bearance makes them preſumptuous and ſecure,and confident of ims 
punity. 9 Heb, is filled, is carried on with full fail, as the Scuenry 
underſtand it, like a Ship with a ſtrong and violent wind + or, is 
bold or preſumptuous, as the ſame Phrale is underſtood, Eſther 7; 
Fe As 5. 3. : : 

12. Thougha finner do evil an hundred times r, and 
his days s be prolonged, yet ſurely I know that * itſhall 


be well with them chat fear God 7, which fear before 


Ikzuo,i, him «, * 


#4 Frequently and innumerably. 5 The time of his Life and Pro- 
ſperity. £ Whereby he implyes, both that good men mighs for a 
time ſuffer grievous things from ſuch wicked Tyrants, and thar it 
ſhould be very ill with the wicked, which is manifeſt from the con- 
trary courſe and condition of good and bad men, and which isexpreſ= 
ſed in the following words, Compare 2Pſal: 2: 12. u Or, at h:s preſence 
who ſtand in awe of God, and forbear and fear to fin out of a ſincere 
reſpe& and reverence to God. 


13 But it ſhal notbe well * with the wicked, neither 
ſhal he prolong bis days y,which are as a ſhadow z; be- 
cauſe he feareth not before God a. 


* 7, e,It ſhall go very 11] with him;great miſeries are prepared for 
him : which is a Figure of: uſed in Scripture,as hath been formerly 
and frequently obſerved, y To wit, very lopg, or for ever, as he 


ECCLESI4S THE 


defireth, z His life though it may be or ſeem to be longs yet in truth 
1s bur a meer ſhadow, which wilt quickly vanifh and diſappear, and 
be as if it never had been,and many times like a ſhadow, when it is 
longeſt it 15 neareſr to abolition, a This is the puniſhment cf his 
wickedneſs and his caſting cf the fear ar.d tervice of God. For 
although the Lves of good men upon Earth are ſhort, as well as the 
lives of the wicked, yer their daysare not like a ſhadow, becauſe 
they are prolonged far beyond this mortal ſtate, even to all Ererni* 
a, and Death ir ſelf doth but open the way for them to an endleſs 
ife. 


14 There is a vanity which is done þ uponthe earth, 
that chere be juſt z2e» unto whom it * hapneth accord- 
ding to the work c of the wicked: again,there be wick- 
ed men to whom it hapneth according to the work of 
the righteous 4: I ſaid, that this alſo is vanity e. 


b Either by wicked Potenrates who do commonly advance unwor- 
thy men,and oppreſs Perſons of greateſt virtue and merit: Or,by 


Gods Prov idence,who ſees it fit for many weighty Reaſons ſo to ma». 


nag? the affairs ofthe preſent World. c7. e. The merit of their work. 
the work being oft pur for the recompenſe given or belonging to it, as 
Levt. 19, 13 Jeb 7:2, Pſal: rog. 2. The ſenſe is, Who meets with 
ſuch hard uſage as the worſt of men deſerve. 4 Who inſtead of 
thoſe juſt and dreadful puniſhments which they deſerve by the Laws 
of God and men,receive thoſe encouragements and rewards which 
are due to virtuous and worthy men. e This isa very unreaſonable 
and fooliſh thingy if it be confi iered without reſpe& unto another 
life as it is herey where Solomon is diſcourſing of the vanity of the 
preſent life. and of the impoſſibility of finding ſatisfaQion and hap- 
pineſs in it, 

Is * ThenTI commended mirth,becaufſe a man hath 
no better thing under the ſun,than to eat,and to drink, 
and to be merry f : for that ſhall abide with him of his 
labour g. the days of his life, which God giveth him 
under the ſun. | 


f This he ſpeaks, either 1. in the perſon of a ſenſual Man. 
Things being ſo,as was related,v, 14. it is beſt to give a Mans ſelf 
up to eating and drinpking,and all manner of carnal delights.Or, 2, 
in his o -n Name and Perſon. Upon theſe conſiderations I conclu« 
ded that it was mot adviſable for a Man not to perplex & torment 
himſelf wich che Thoughts of the ſeeming inequaliry of i)ivinePro- 
vidence and of the great diſorders which are in the World, or with 
cares and fezrs abour futureevents, or with infinite and inſatiable 
deſires of Worldly things,but quiztt!ly and chearfuily and thankfully 
to enjoy the comforts which God gives him. $ e on Eccleſ. 2, 24 & 
3: 2, 13. g This isthe beſt advantage which he can make of this 
Worlds goods as to the preſent life, 

16 When I applied mine heart to know wiſdom 5b, 
and to ſee the buſineſs z that is done upon the Earth 


( for alſo there is that neither day nor night ſecth ſleep 
wich hiseyes &. ) 

þ This he ſeerns to add as the reaſon of that juggment which he 
had now paſſed, v. 15. becauſe he had diligently ſtudied wherein 
Mans Wiidom did confſiſt,and had obſerved the reſtieſſnheſs of mens 
m:;ds and bodies 1n other courſes, ; Either 1.To find out the work 
of God, as the next veiſe may ſeem to explain ir, and all the Mys 
ſteries of Gods Providence in the Government of this prefent and 
lower World. Or 2. To obſerve mens various deſigns and employ= 
ments, and their toilſome and unwearied tulinefſes or labours 2- 
bout worldly rhings- Which ſenſe ſeems beſt to agree, both with 
the uſe of this Hebrew word wh:ch 1s conſtantly uſed in this fenſe,in 
all the places of Scripture where it is, which are Eccleſ. 1.13, and 2. 
23, 26. & 3-10, & 4+8- & 5: 2, 13-& 8.16. and never concerning 
the works of Ged; and with the foregoing and following words ag 
we ſhall ſee. k The ſenſe of the wordsthus tranſlated and pointed 
ſeems to be this, There is a certainMan whom it is needleſs to name 
( which is a modeſt d-{ignation of hiinſelf.ilike that of St. Paul, > Cor. 

i2, 2. Iknew a man inChrift, &c_ ) who ſtudied tho'e matters Day 
and Niyhrt,and therefore is very capable of paſſing a judgment about 
chem. But, with ſubmiſſion, there ſeems to be. no need of i Paren. 
theſis to cut off theſe words from the former, with whom they have 
a fit connex10n, For having now mentioned the buſmeſs which is done 

or which Main doeth, «por Farth, he farther adds, as an evidence of 
Mans eagerneſs in purſuing his buſineſs, for even by Day and by Night 
he( to wit,the buſie Man, which is eafily und-:ſtood from the fore 
going clanie ) ſeeth no: ſleep with his eyes, 7. e. He grudgeth himſelf 
even neceflary refreſhments,and diſquiets himſelf with endleſs cares 
and labours, the fruir whereof he doth bur little enjoy; and there- 


tore it is better to eat and drink, &c. as I now faid, v, 15. As for 


thePhraſe of ſeeing ſleep 17 15 a figurative expreflion uſ:d in otherAu« 
thors, and 1s like that ot ſeeing acath, Pial., 8g. 48. 

17 Then /I beheld all the work of God , that a 
man * cannot find out » the work the«t is done under 
the ſuns becauſe though a man iabour to ſeek zt out, yer 
he ſhal not find zs ; yea,farther, though a wiſe man 


think to:know 3t,yert thall he not be able to find zr. 

1 Heb. and, or moreover. 21 conſidered the counſels and ways of 
Godzand the various merheds ot his Providence towards good & bad 
men,and the reaſons of them. » No Man,thovgh never ſo wiſe,and 
inquiſitive,and ſtudious, as it follows,is able fully and perfe&ly to 
underſtand theſe things. And therefore ir is beſt for Man not to 
per-lex himſcIfwith endleſs and fruitleſs enquiries about theſe mats 
ters. but quietly ro ſubmit to Gods Will and Providence, and to live 
in the fear of God,and the comfortable enjoyment of his bleſſings. 

CHAP. , 

All things in the hand of God ; his Love or Hatred not viſible in them ; bus 
the ike happeneth to good and bad in thu L:fe, and in death they know 
nothing hereof, and are themſelves forgotten, 1 6. I: is beſt there= 
fire for a Man to enjoy the Gifts of God with chearfulne(s 7 9.To 
be diligent in his Calling, 10, and leavue ths Iſſue to God, n, 12+ The 
praiſe of Wiſdom, 13 — -——18 


Or # all this 5 I conſidered in my heart, even to f Heb. 7 


gave, Or, 


ns fer to my. 
SM 2 wile Heerc. 


declare all this c, that the righteous and the 


Cena a 4 , > ——_ 
CCC NN, - 


©Ch:3: | 
& Fils. | 
9. 7* 
I 

|| 


*Job 5:9; 
Ch:3. in, 
& IT.56 
Romc1ts 


33* 


22,13. 


x5,16, 


P73: 3 


* Ch:2-14 


ap. IX. ECGLES 


wiſe d,and their works e are in the hand of God f: no 
man knoweth either love, or hatred, by all thatis before 


them Fg. 

a -— as the Seventy Interpreters render it. b All that I 
have ſaid concerning the Methods of Divine Providence towards 
good and bad men. c To make this evident firſt ro my ſelfand rhen 
to others,as occaſion required, Whom he mentions norexc]ufively, 
as if wicked men werenotin Gods hand,for the next clauſe relates 
both to good and bad men,bur eminently, becauſe by the courſe of 
Gods providence towards them,they might ſeem to be quite negle- 
Red and forſaken by God. e Either efficiently, all their ations and 
employments ; or objeQively, all things done to rhem, all events 
which befzl them. f Are ſubje& rohis Power and governed by his 
Providence,as this Phraſe is uſed,Prov: 21, 1. John 3: 35- compared 
with Mar, 28:11: And therefore although we cannot fully under- 
ſand the reaſons of all Gods Works,as he now fſaid,Ch:8.17- yet be- 


TASTES, Chap. 1X, 


future rewards after death, 1s afferted by Solomon elſewhere, as we 
have ſeen and ſhal hereafrer ſee. 6 To wit, amongſt living men; 
and even in thoſe places where they had lived in great power and 
glory; as was noted, Chz 8; - 10. 

6 Alſo their love,and their hatred, and their envy is 
now periſhed b ; neither have they any more a portion 
for ever in any thing chatis done under the ſun c. 

b They neither love, nor hate, nor envy any Perſon, or thing in 
this World but are now alrogether unconcerned in all things done 
under the Sun. c In any worldly thing.By which limitation he ſuf 
ficiently inlinuartes his belief of their portion in the other World, 


7 Gothy way d* eat thy e bread f with joy,and drink 
thy wine with a merry heart g; for God now aCcepteth *Ch:8. 15, 
thy works b, 


d Make this uſe of what I have ſaid. e Thine own, the fruit of 
thy own labours, not what thou takeſt unjuſtly from others. f Ne- 


cauſe they are done by his unerring Hand, we may be affured that 


they are done both righteouſly and juſtly, and that no Man yur . fully and thankfully enjoy thy comforts,avoidingall diſtratingcare 


cauſe to murmure at the Proſperity of the wicked, or ar the calami- 


tiesof good rhen.g No Man can judge by their preſent and outward . 


conditions or diſpenſations of Gods Providence, whether God loves 
or hates them,for whom he loves he chaſtens, and permitteth thoſe 
whom he hates to proſper inthe World. And rhis Tranſlation & In- 
terpretation agreeth well with the following Verſe.Bur I muſt con- 
feſs ir differs _ almoſt all other both ancient&modern Tranſlati- 
bns. And theſe words with the foregoing clauſe are tranſlated others 
wiſe, &that word for word according to the Hebrew, Fhe righteous. and 
the wiſe, ani their works are in the hand of God, alſo love and hatred.(un« 
derſtangd out of the foregoing clauſe,sre iz Gods hand. And this may 
be meant,Either 1.Of Gods love and hatred,which ke diſpoſethwhen 
and to whom,and in what manner he pleaſeth. Or,2. Of mens love 
and hatred,alſo their love and their hatred,the Pronoun their being re- 
peated out of the former clauſe as is frequent in Scripture. And ſo 
the ſenſe is, That not only mens works,as he now ſaid,but even their 
inward paſſions or affe&ions which ſeem to be moſt in their own 
power, are as much in Gods diſpoſal as their outward ations. Then 
follows the laſt clauſe in the ſame order in which the words lie in 

the Hebrew. Text ) No Man knoweth all,or any thing which is before him. 

Which I thus underſtand, Whereas all men and all cheir affeQtions, 

and aQions, and the events of them are perfeQly known to God and 

diſpoſed by him,menknow nothing, no not ſuch things as are moſt 

Plain and eaſie and familiar to them, 'and can neither foreſee the 

plaineſt chings,nor diſpoſe of the ſmalleſt things as they pleaſe, bur 

all things are wholly ordered and over-ruled by Gods Providence, 

not 2s men imagine or deſire, bur as he ſees fit. 


| 2* All cbing« comealike to all b:there :s one event to the 


righteous and the wicked, tothe good and to the clean 


2#3.15. z,and to the unclean ; to him that ſacrificeth &, and to 


him that ſacrificeth notzas7s the good,ſo zs the ſinner 1, 
and ke that ſweareth m as he that feareth an oath ». 

h The good and evil things of this World do equally happen to 
good and bad men. # Either 1. morally cleanor holy men, Or, 2, 
legally, who made Conſcience of keeping himſelf pure from ll le- 
gal defilements,according to the Law then in force, and conſequent- 
ly from all other ſins upon the ſame ground. k That worſhippeth 
God ſincerely,though it be to his coft. / As to all outward things. 
m To wit, cuſtomarily, unneceſlarily, raſbly, without due conſide- 
ration and reverence, or falſly and wickedly. For otherwiſe thar 
ſome ſwearing wasrhen allowed,and in ſome caſesrequired none do 
or candeny. n Who isafraid ofoffending God,or abuling his Name 
by vain, orraſh, or falſe Oaths. 

This 5s an evil 0 among all things that are done un- 


der the ſun,that there is * one event untoall; yea, alſo 


' the heart of the ſons of men pisfull of evil 9, and mad- | 


neſs is in their heart r while they live, and after that 
;bey £0 to the dead s. 
0 


great trouble and temptation toa conſiderate and good Man, 

p Of wicked men, ſuch as the generality of Mankind are. q Ei- 
ther 1, of grief, upon this occaſion. Or, rather 2, of wickedneſs, 
as appears from the next clauſe, and by comparing this place with 
Eccleſ. 8. n. r Upon this account they go on madly and deſperate- 
ly in evil courſes without any fear of an afrer=reckoning s After all 
their mad and wicked pranks in the whole courſe of their life, they 
diz in the ſame manner as the beſt men do. So hitherto there is no 


difference. For Solomon here forbears the conſideration of the furure' 


Tife. Only he ſeems to intimate that as the madneſs,ſo the happineſs 
of the wicked is ended by_Death, which is more fully expreſſed in 
the following words. b, | 
4 Forto him that is joyned toall the living s, there is 
hope «: fora living dog isbetterx than a dead lion. 
# That continueth in the Land and Society of living Men: - Or, 
according to the reading of the Hebrew Texr, That is choſen or allot= 


' red to Life, whom God hach appointed yer to live in the World, 
when he hath appointed that many others ſhal die;or who are writ- | 


ren among the Livmg, as the Phraſe is, Iſa; 4: 3. which is borcowed 
from rhe cuſtom of Cities, where men are firſt choſen and then in= 
rolled Citizens. « He hath not only ſome comfort for the preſent, 
but alſo hopes of further & greater bappineſs in this World, which 
men are very prone to entertain and cheriſh in themſelves, Yea,they 
may have the hopes of a better life,if they improve their opportu- 
nitics, But he ſeems to confine himſelf herero the preſent life-x 7:e, 
Muchihappier,zs to the comforts and priviledges of this Werld, 
though in other reſpeQs Death be bercer than Life,as was ſaid, Eccl. 
-- : 
5 For the living know that they ſhal die y: but the 
dead know not any thing z,neither have they anymore 
areward 4,for the memory ofthem is forgotten b. 

y Whereby they are taught ro improve Life, whilſt they have it, 
ro their greateſt comfort and'advantage. « To wir of the ations 
and events in this World,as this is limited in the end of the next 
Verſe, Compare Job 14: 21. 1s. 63. 16. # The rewardor fruit of 
their Jabours in this World, which is utterly loſt as ro them, and 
enjo; ed by others. See Eccleſ: 2; 211 For otherwiſe, that there are 


- 


cellary and convenient food By which he excludes exceſs, g Cheats 


and grief for the occurrences of this World. 41s gracious te thee, 
hath bleſſed thy labours with ſucceſs and alloweth thee a comforta- 
ble enjoyment of his bleſſings. : 

8 Let thy garmentsbe always ; white L; and let thy 


' head lack no ointment J. 

| 7 Inall convenient times and circumſtances; for there are times 

' of mourning, Eccleſ: 3:4; and 7: 2, Compare Prov: 5:19. k Decent 

| and ſplendid, as far as is ſuitable ro thy condition. The- Eaſtern 

| People of the beſt ſortuſed white Garments, eſpecially in times of 
rejoycing, as Eſther 8; 1«: Compare Revel; 3: 4, 5: & 6; 111 But 

by this whiteneſs of Garments,he underſtands a pleaſant and chears 

ful converſation. 1 Which upon joyful occaſions was poured upon 

mens Heads, Amos 6: 6, Luke 75 46. John 12: 3, 

* 9 tf Live joyfully with the wife whom thou loveſt mm, + Heb:(#; 
all the days of the life of thy vanity », which he hath or, jy 
given thee under the ſun,all the days of thy vanity: * #*. 
for that js thy portion 0 in this life p, and -in thy labour x. 

- | 4:& 3:14, 
which thou takeſt underthe ſun. & 5:18, 
7 So he limits him to Jawful delights, Whereby it is evident 
thar Se/omondoth not ſpeak this in the Perſon ef an Epicure, as ſome 
underſtand it, » Of this vain and fraillife, Which exprefſion he 
induſtriouſly uſeth ro moderate mens affeQions even towards lawful p 
pleaſures,and to mind them of their duty 2nd intereſt in making 
{ure of a better life, and more ſolid comforts. « Allowed to thee 
by God, and the beſt part of worldly enjoyments. p By which ad- 
dition he is again admoniſhing him ofſeeking another portion in 
the future life. 
ro Whatſoever thy hand findeth to do 9,do # with all 
thy might 7; for there is no work,nor device, nor know- . 
ledge, nor wiſdom in the + grave s whither thou goeſt. fHeb:keit 
9 What thou haſt opportunity and ability to do in the duties of 996, 
thy calling and in order to thy comfort and benefit. r With unwea- 
ried diligence,and vigour and expeditions Whereby he again diſ- 
covers that he doth not perſwade men to an idle and ſenſual life, 
but only to a ſober enjoyment of his comforts in Gods fear & with 
an induftrious preſecution of his vocation.s Thou canſt neither de. 
gn nor att any thing there tending to thy own comfort or adyan- 
cage: Therefore ſlip not thine only ſeaſon, - 

11 1 returned,andſfaw t under the fun, that the race 
# is not to che {wift,nor the batrel x to the ſtrong; nei- 
theryet bread to the wiſe,nor yet riches to men of un- 
derſtanding y,nor yet favour & to men of skill a,buttime 


andchance hapneth to them all b. 

+ This may have ſome reſpe& to the foregoing Verſe. For hae 
ving prefſed men to labour with all their mighr, he now adds by 
way of caution, that yet they muſt not be confident of their own 
 ftrength, as if they were ſure of ſucceſs by it, but in all, above all 
to look up to God for his bleſſing without which all their endeae 
vours will be in vain. But it ſeems chiefly ro be added,cither x. as 
another inſtance of the liberty and power of Gods Providence in the 
diſpoſal of humane affairs,of which he'ſpake above, wv: x, 2, 3i Or, 
2. as another of the vaniries of this preſent life. « Either ability to 
run, or ſucceſs and v:&ory in running. x« The viQtory in Battel. 
y Who yet are moſt likely to ger and to keep riches. x Good accep- 
tance and love from men, « Who know how to manage themſelves 
and all affairs, whereby they are neceflary and ſerviceable to others, 
and therefore moſt likely to find favour in their eyes. b There are 
ſome times or ſeaſons, unknown and caſual to men, but certain and 
determined by God in which alone he will give men ſucceſs. 

12 For man alſo knoweth not his time c;as the fiſhes 

that are taken in an evil net d,and as the birds that are «p,,.,,s 
caught in the ſnare ; ſo are the ſons of men * ſnared in yk... 


an evil time,wherr it falleth ſuddenly upon them e. 

c To wit, the time of his death, or of ſome other ſore diſtreſs 
which God is bringing upon him. Which is oppoſed to the time 
of ſucceſs mentioned 1n the foregoing Verſe, and man is faid tobe 
ignoran* both of the one and of the other. 4 That whilft they are 
ſporting and feeding themſelves, are ſuddenly and ungxpettedly 
enſnared to thejr ruine, e When they are moſt careleſs and ſecure! 

13 This wiſdom have I ſeen falſo under the ſun,and 
1t ſeemed great unto me g. 

f I have obſerved this among many other inſtances and effeQs of 
Wiſdom, Which he ſeems toaild for the commendation of Wiſ- 
dom,notwithſtanding its inſufficiency for Mans ſafery and happineſs 
without Gods bleſling. g I judged it very praiſeeworthy, though o- 
thers deſpiſed it, as ir follows. oe 

14 There was a little city b,and few men within it;and 
there came a great king againſt it,and beſieged-it, and 
built great bulwarks againit it : 

h It matters not whether it was a real Hiſtory,or only a patable to 
reprenſent the common praCtices of men in ſuch caſes. 

Is Now chers was found in it a poor wile on 
: 16 


* Ch:2:10, 


{ Hel 
if deat 


f Heb: 


bare, 


"Protes' 


be by his wiſdom delivered the city; yer no man re-| 
| membred that ſame poor man 7- ; £2 
| ; He was ſoonneglected and his great ſervice ſo far from being re- 
. compenſed according to its merit, that both ir and he were quite 
forgotten. Which may be nored as another great vanity» 

16 * Then ſaid I, wiſdom 3s better than ftrengrth & : 


neverthelets the poor man's wiſdom 3s deſpiſed /; and 


his words are not heard. ; 
k As was manifeſt in the foregoing inſtance. 7 Becauſe men are 
gen=rally vain and fooliſh,and have a greater value for outward Or- 

naments than for true worth. | | ; : 
17 The words of wiſe men m are heard in quiet 0, 


more than the cry p of him that ruleth among fools q. 

m Though poor, as may be gathered both from the foregoing 
relation,and becaule he is oppoſed to the ruling fool inthe next clauſe. 
nTo wit, bywiſe men:or ſhould be heara,as ſuch words are ofc known 
as Mal. 1: 6; and elſewhere, For that they were not always aC- 
tually heard he declared in the laſt words of the foregoing Verſe. 
o Uttered with 2 modeſt and low voice, to which the tollowing cry 
is oppoſed. p The clamorous and ſenflel[s diſcourſes. q Of a rich 
and potent, but foliſh Man; who hath ſome influence upon fools, 
like himfelf, bur is juſtly neglected and his words diſregarded by 
wiſe men. 

18 Wiſdom 3s beter than weapons of war r : but one 


I ASTES. 
6 Folly is ſer in great dignity p, ahd the rich q ſit in 


low place 7. | 


Chap 


p Fooliſh and unworthy Perſons are ſrequently advanced by the 
favour or humour of Princes into places of Higheſt Truſt and Dig: 
nity which is a great reproach and miſchief ro the Prince, and 2 
ſore calamity to all People. q Wiſe and worthy men, as is evi- 
dent, becauſ theſe are oppoſed to foo!sin the former clauſe : ſuch 
as are rich in endowments of miend « The ground of the expreflion 
may be this, rhar rich men are Capable of all the advantages of 
men or Books for the artzinment of Wiſdom, and therefore are 
ſuppoſed to be wiſe in ſome meaſure. »r NegleRted and diſpiſed, or 
removed from thoſe High places to which their merits had raiſed 
them. ES. Gs 


7 I hays feen ſervants s * upon horſes :, and 
walking as ſervants upon Earth «. 


s Men ofa ſervie condition and diſpoſition, who are altogether 
unfit for places of Dignity. £ Riding upon Horſes, as a Badge of 
their Dignity, as Eff: 6: 8, 9g. Jer. 17: 25. Ezek: 23; 23- s Which 
was the cafe of his own Father, 2 Sam: 15: 39» - ' ©; 

8 * He that diggeth a. pit x ſhall fall into ity ; and 
whoſo breaketh an hedge Za ſerpent aſball bite him. ' 

x With chis deſign that another may unwares fall into it. y Shall 
through Gods juſt Judgment be deſtroyed by his own wicked dee 
vices. z Whereby anorher mans Fields, or Vineyards, or Orchards, 
are diſtinguiſhed and fenced, that he may. either enter upon them 


ſinner 5 deſtroyeth much good r. | 

+ Than armed power, 5s A wicked fool. By which expreſſion and 
oppoſition of a Sinner to a Wiſe Man he gives us a Key to underſtand 
his meaning in divers places of his Books, that by Wiſdom he means 
true Piety. and by folly, wickedneſs: and withal ſhewerh that fin as 
it is the greateſt folly,ſoit is more pernicious to men than meer folly | 
properly {o called. £ By his wicked counſels and courles brings | 
much damage and miſchief both to himſclf and others, 


CHAP. L | 


Obſervations on Wiſdom and Folly, 1——3, Of Rulers, 4 — 7.0f Wrong 
and Injuſtice, 8, = Io, Of Talkativeneſs; Imprudence, and its Miſ= 
chiefs, 11 15: Kings, hurtful, and deffrable,16, 17. Of Slochy 
18. Feaſts 19; The King miſt not be Curſed, 20, 


f Ead flies « cauſe the ointment of the apothecary 
{ Heb: files D to ſend forth a ſtinking ſavour: ſo deth a little 
! death, folly him that is in reputation for wiſdom and honourb. 
a Falling into it and abiding and being putrifed in it, eſpecially 
3n thoſe Countries, where there were more filthy and 'venemous 
Flies. and where the Oyntments were more pure,and where the Air 
was more hot than in theſe parts 6 Which comes to paſs, partly 
becauſe all the Actions, and conſequently the tollies, of ſuch men 
are moſt diligently obſerved and ſooneſt diſcerned and tofſed abour 
in the mouths of men,whereas Fools 8 all their carriages are gene- 
rally diſregarded ; and partly becauſe of that envious and malicious 
diſpoſition of mens minds which makes them quick ſighted to diſ- 
cover, and glad to hear and forward to declare the faults of ſuch as 

by their greater eminency did our-ſhine and obſcure them, 


2 A wiſe man's heart c 5s at his right hand 4; but a 


fools heart is at his left e. 

ci, e. His underſtanding or wiſdom. @ Is always preſent with 
him and ready to dire& him in all hisaQtions, He manageth all his 
affairs prudently and piouſly. He mentions the right hand becauſe 


that is the chief and moſt common inſtrument of ations, which by 
moſt men are done with more ſtrength and expedition and orderli- 
nefs and comelineſs by their right hand than by their left. e His 
inderſtanding and knowledge ſerves him only for idle ſpeculation 
and vain Oftentation, bur is net at all uſeful or effeQual to govern 
his affe&ions and aftions. He acts prepoſterouſly and fooliſhly,like 
one without heart, as it follows 


3 Yeaalſo when he that is a fool walketh by the 
way f, | his wiſdom faileth him g, and he faith to every 


one that he is a fool þ. 

f Not only in great undertakings, but in his daily converſation 
with mengin his looks and geſtures,and common talk. g Orgbe wants 
an Heart, as if he had ſaid, did I ſay, his Heart is at his left hand ? 
I muſt recal it, for in truth he hath no heart in him. +4 He publick- 
ly diſcovers his folly to all that meet him or converſe with him. 


4 If the ſpirit ; of a ruler riſe up againſt thee, leave 
not thy place z; for * yielding & pacifieth great of- 
'Pr025:15 fences m. | | 
; The paſſion or wrath,as it is manifeſt from the following words, 
which is oft called Spir:r, as Judg: 8:3; 2 Chrox: 21: 16. Prov: 
25: 28: Eccleſ. 7:9, i Towirt, in angeror diſcontent. Withdraw 
not thy ſelfraſhly and haſtily from his preſence and ſervice. accor- 
ding to the advice, Chap: 8: 3. Continne in a diligent and faichfu] 
diſcharge of thy duty, as becomes a Subje&; do not return anger 
for anger. bur modeſtly and humbly ſubmir thy ſelf to him, & Heb. 
healing, a gentle and ſubmiſſive carriage, which is of an healing na« 
ture ; whereas pride ard paſſion do exaſperate and widen the breach 
already made. Heb. maketh them to reſt or ceaſe,preventeth or re- 
moveth th:m. m Heb, great ſins, either 1. ſuch fins as the offended 
Ruler might commit in #he proſecution of his wrath againſt thee. 
Or rather 2+ ſuch as poſſibly thou haſt committed againſt him for 
which he is incenſed againſt thee ; or the greateſt offences or inju- 
ries that one Man commits againſt another, and much more thoſe 
flight miſc2rriages of thine towards the Ruler. Let not therefore 
a falſe opinion concerning his unreconcilableneſs to rchee,make thee 
deſperate and draw thee unto Rebellion. * 


f Heb; his 


art. 


5 There is at evil which I bave ſeeri under the ſun », 
Web: om as an error which proceedeth + from: the ruler 0. 
ire 7 F have obſerved another great vanity and miſdemeanour amongſt 
”* men 0 So the ſenſe is like rhoſe errours which Rulers commonly 
commit. Or rather,which ts indeed an errour proceeding from the Ru-| 
ter. For the following miſcarriage muft needs'come from thoſe who 
have Power of conferring Honour and Power, &:. $o the Hebrew, | 


tell what ſhall be; and * 
'catx tell him oF; 


"what he will do, which 


and take away their fruits or by that meaiis enlarge his own adjoyn= 
ing Fields. Poflibly he may have a particular reſpe& unto Magi- 
ſtrates or Rulers, whom God hath hedged or fenced in, both with 
his own Inſtitution of Magiſtracy,and with his Laws,ſtrifly requir- 
ing Obedience from their Subje&s; and fo he notes the danger of ri-, 
ſing and rebelling againſt them.s Which oft lurks in kedge;;and bites 
thole who come within its reach» 4 hp 

9 Wholo removeth ſtones b ſhall be hurt therewith es 
and he that cleaveth wood 4 ſhall be endangered there- 
by e. ; 

b Either r. The ſtones which belong to others, ahd limit or 
diſtinguiſh their Grounds, of which ſee Dent: 27; 17. Or, 2: 
Great ſtones too heavy for them. Which rafhly attempt things too: 
high and hard for them. Whioh ſeems better ro agree with the fol- 
lowing clauſe than the former Interpretation doth. c May eaſily re- 
ceive hurt by the ſtones falling unexpe&edly and violently upon 
him» & With the iron inſtrument,as the manner is,ke being unskil- 
ful in that art. Poflibly he deſigns a man who cauſeth diſorder and- 
miſchief among Friends, or ina Family, or Kingdom. e May per. 
adventure cut himſelf. | - 

io Ifthe Iron e be blunt, and he do not whet the 
edge, then muſt he put tomore ſtrength f; but Wiſdoni 
:s profitable to direc g. | - br” 

e To wit, the Ax whereby he cut the wood in the former Verſe, 
which by the danger there mentioned may beſuppoſed to be ſharp, 
but now ſaith he,if it happen to be blunt. f Which is neceſſary to. 
make it cut, g Heb. and wiſdem, &c. And as Wiſdominftrudts a 
man in the ſmalleſt matters, as in this very matter of cutring of. 
Wood, where it teaches him in this cafe touſe his utmoſt ſtrength, 
ſo it is uſeful for a mans dire&ion in all his great and weighty affairs. 
And ſo he inſenfibly ſlides into the commendation of Wiſdom, and- 
the cenſbre of folly, which is the principal deſign and bufineſs of ._ . 
this Chapter. 

I1 Surely the ſerpent will bite * without inchant- 
ment 4h, and F a babler 7 isno better. | 

þ Tf not ſeaſonably prevented by the Art and care of the Char- 
| mer ; which praQice he doth nor juſtifie, bur only mention by way 

of reſemblance. See on Pſa: 58; 5. #i Heb. a mater of the tongue + 
which may be underſtood, either 1. Of the DetraQor or Slanderer, 
who like a Serpent bites ſecretly ; who may be ſo called,. becauſe 
he takes liberty to uſe his Tongue as he liſts, withour any regard ei- 
ther to the offence of God, or tothe injury of others ; - like them 
who ſaid, Our Lips ave our own; Whe is Lordover w ? Butl do 
not ſee either why this Phraſe ſhould be limited to the DetraRor,, 
which equally belongs ro all abuſers of the Tongue in any ocher way 
or how this particular Vice of Detra&ion comes to be inſerted here 
among things cf a quite differing natures Or, 2. Of an Eloquenr; 
Perſon, who may well be called # Meftr of the Tongue, or, © of Speech, 
nothing being more uſual in' the Hebrew, than tocall a Man Maſter 
of that which he excels in,or hath a full and free power to uſe. And, | 
this.clauſe is and may be rendred thus, And there is no excelency or 
profit to the Maſter of the Fongue, i. e« The moſt Eloquent perſon, who! 
doth not underſtand, and in due time uſe the Charmers Art, cannot 
by all his eloquence afterward hinder the biting of the Serpenr, or. 
miſchievons effeAs of ir. Andſo this agrees with the principal 
ſcope of the Canapter, which is to ſhew the neceſficy and uſcfulneſs 
of Wiſdom, and the miſchief of Folly. . | 

12 * The words of a wiſe mans mouth 


& : but the lips * of a fool will ſwallow up himlfelf 1 
k Heb. Grace 3 as profitable, fo alſo acceptable to others, pro- 
curing him favour with thoſe who hear hime - 7 His diſcourſe 
"+ Es and offenſive to othzrs, and therefore pernicious to him- 
elf. | | | | n 
12 The beginning of the words of his . mouth ;; 
fooliſhneſs z 
madnels m. He mouth. 
m All his talk from the beginning to the-end is fooliſh ang: 
miichievour, and the more he talks, the more doth'his folly an. 
pear ; he proceeds from evil to worie, ,and adds: wilfulneſ; ro, this: 
hs mn never defiſts till he hath done miſchief to himſelf or to - 
OTNers, . « "19 


14 * A foolalſo + is full of words ».: a man cannot *p 


* Jer: 
THebs 


tongue. 


'T Heb. 


"EAR | __ Fipiieth 
* Or 2: Froward to promiſe and brag” P” ds. . 
is the common praCtice of fooliſ;men? he , ©5:3* 


n Either **+ Talkative; 


Cayh, is not a Note of likeneſs, but of reality, as it is, Judg: 13: 23; 
Net: 7; 2: Hof: 4: 4+ & 5: 10s and oft elſewhere, | 


is a man of words, as we uſe to ſay. .o Thete words concaineither & © * *- 
z, A Munical Repreſentation of his folly in ufing vain Reperiti- » 7. 
. 5 M3; : 


£ n c 


+ Heb: i | 
in great | 
' heights, 


- *Pro:19:i0þ | 
— & 39: 223\þ} | 


*Par 7:1 
Pro;26;2 


$:17 
the 


"maſter: of 


are + gracious "Pr _—_— 
12:13: 


S 2rC'*pro.10: 4 


and the end of + his talk is miſchievous + Hb. ts 


TO:15: 2 


what ſaall be after him, © who #Heb:mul- 


"y - 
4- 


j 
4 | 
Q -: : 
Wo's | 
$74 
wy | 


"wt 


\ 


hop. XI. ECCLE 


ons of the ſame words, ſuch as thoſe, # man cannot rell, &c+ and 
who can tell, &c. Or 2- A confutation of folly in promiſing or | 
boaſting of things which are wholly out of his p 
ſhall be, no man can either himſelf foreknow, 


others. 
15 The labour o 
them p,becauſe he knoweth not how togo to the cityg. 
p Fools diſcover their folly, as by their words, of which he 
hath hitherto ſpoken, ſo alſo by their aRions,and by their endleſs 
and fruitieſs endeavours after things which are too high and hard. 
for them, q For he is ignorant of thoſe things which are moſt ea- 
fie and moſt neceſſary for him, as of the way ro the great City 
whither he is going, or obliged by his buſi 
a great and beaten road, 1s known even to 
fools, , 


16 * Wo to thee,O land, when thy 


and thy princes eats in the morning ?. 

r Eicher »- In Age. Or, 2: C Which 1s morea ; 
following clauſe _} in Childith Qualicies, as Ignorance, Inexpert- 
ence, Injudicioutneſs, Rafhnels, Frowardneſs, Fickleneſs,or Wil- 
fulneſs, and the like: in which ſenſe this word is uſed, 2 Chr:13: 73 
compared with 1 Kin: 14* 21s Iſa: 3. 4, 12. 1 Cor. 14. 20. Eph: 4: 
14 5s Give up themſelves to eating and drinking exceſſively and 
intemperarcly as it is explained in the next Verſe, + The fitteſt 
time for Gods ſervice, and for the diſpatch of weighty affairs, and 
for ſircing in judgment, Pſa. 101: 8: Fer 21: 12. Which circum- 
ſtance is added as a plain evidence of men that wholly devote them» 
ſelves to vanity and Luxury ; which muſt needs occaſion groſs ne- 
gic& of the great concerns of the Kingdom, the oppreſſion of the peo- 
ple ro ſupport ſuch extravagancies, and a woful and general corrup< 
tion of the people by their example, and otherwiſe ; which makes 
him ſay, Wo to that people. ; BY 
17 Bleſſed art thou, O land, .when thy king is the 


n of nobies «, and * thy princes eat in due ealon *, 


for ſtrength y, and not for drunkennels 2. [ | 

u Not ſo much by Birth, as even the worſt of Kings commonly | 
are, and have been, as by their noble and worthy ditpoſitions,znd 
endowments. and carriages ; for ſuch an one is oppoſed to the Py 
in the former Verſe. Sons of nobles are put for noble perſons, as rhe 
ſons of men for men, and the ſons of Phyſicians for Phyſicians. So as! 
may further a*:d not hinder their main bufinels. y To refreſh and 
ſtrengthen their Natures,that they may be fir for ation and buſineſs. 
z Nor 0a'y nor chiefly. to pleaſe their Palates, and indulge them- 
ſelves in tenſualicy. 


18 By mug} lothfulneſs the building decayeth, and 
through idleneſs of the hands the houſe droppeth 


through 4. 
s That Houſe which is negle&*d by its owner, and not repaired, 
mult needs come to ruine. Whereby he intimates, that the ſloth 
and careleſneis of Princes in the management of publick affairs,which 
is at uſual attendant upon thatLuxury,of which he hath now diſcour- 
*Pl.roq'r; 106, is moſtdeitruthive both rothemielves, and to their people. 
FHob ina? ' 19 A feaſt is made for laughter, and *X Wine | ma- 


kerh glad keth merry b : but money an{wereth all :bings c, 

the life, b The deſign and effe& of feaſting and drinking Wine, 1s, that 
Mer: may exhilerate their Minds with the fociety of their Friends, 
2nd with the uſe of the Creatures. «c It procures not only Meat and 
Drink for Feating, but for all other things ;as the Heavens are ſaid 
to anſwer the Earth, when they give it thoſe ſhowers which it deſires 
and n-eds to make it fruitful, Hoſ: 2:21- And this clauſe ſeems to 
be added is an aggravation of the fin and folly of Luxury, becauſe 


or learn it from 


Children and 'natural | 


P34. kjng is a child r : 
1; 


| 
greeable to the. 


' 


t 


*Prov: 13: 
n ſo 


ower : For what; 


f the fooliſh wearieth every one of : 


neſs to go, which being ( 


S I A Sg T- E \ C hap. 'C Al 


it 1s our Intereſt as well as Duty, not ſo much to lay th | 
lay them our in pious and charitable uſes; and "ers Fn DS dhe 
frue and beſt uſe of worldly things, for our preſent comfort and 
benehtr, which 1s to enjoy them with a chearfu) and contented 
Mind, he now dareQts us to the beſt improvement of them, for our 
future, and greater advantage ; and having acquainted vs with our 
uty towards our Superiors, he now direAs vs in our cartizve 
towards our Inferiors, and eſpecialiy to ſuch of them as are PCOr: 
Theſen(e of theſe words is either, 1. Caſt thy ſeed ( which is here called 
bread, as it is allo Job 28. 5: 1/e. 28. 28. and elſewhere ) beſide ( for 
ſo the Hebrew particle, al, 1s oft uſed ):he waters, i. e. either by the 
Rivers ſide, or in moiſt ond wateriſh grounds, which uſually are 
very fruirtul. Or 2: C2ft ( freely and liberally beſtow ) hy bread 
1. ex thy Money or Proviſions, whuch are oft ſignified by the name 
of bread, By laying thy bread, he cautions us that we give away Ons 
Iy that whichis our own, and not that which is anothers ; as they 
do who give either what they get from others by fraud or power.or 
what they owe to others, and are unable to pay, and ſo exerciſe 
Charity to the hindrance of Juſtice, or of the payment of their juſt 

ebts. ) upon the waters, 1. e. upon thoſe poor Creatures upon whom 
by reaſon of their unthankfulneſs or inhabiliry ro make any returns 
to thee, it may ſeem to be as utterly loſt as the ſeed which a man 
Caſts into the Sea or River- This ſenſe agrees much better, 1, With 
the words ; for he doth not barely mention *he waters,( for then the 
particle, s/, might have been tranſlated beſide ) but the face, 7, e. the 
{urface or top, of the waters, in which, and ſuch like caſes, al, con- 
ſtantly ſignifies #pov, 2. With the deſign and ſcope ofthe place 
which is to perſwade men to be liberal and charitable, notwithſtan= 
ding the diſcouragements which they meet withiin ſo doing, - of 
which ſee rhenext clauſe,and the next Verſe. 6 Ir ſhall not be loft,as 
covetous men, or thine own corrupt hearr, may ſuggeſt, bur it ſhall 
certainly be reſtored unto thee, either by God or by Men, and that 
with great Honour and Advantage. This is added to prevent an 
objeCtion, and to quicken us to the duty enjoyned, c Nor immedi. 
ately, but in duetime, and when you leaſt expe& it. So you muſt 
be content to wait for it with Patience, as the Husbandman doth 
for the fruits of the Earth. ; 

2 * Give a portion f'to ſeven, and alſo to eight g, 

for thou knoweſt not what evil ſhall be upon the earth. 

f A part of thy Eſtate or Proviſions. He alludes to the ancient 
cuſtom, whereby the Maſter of the Feaſt did diſtribute ſeveral parts 
to each Gueſt, and withall ſent portions to the poor : of which 
cuſtom ſee 2 Sam.6.19.Neh: 8.10,12-Et;9'22:gTo as many as thou art 
able ; a certain number for an uncertain, as Mz, 5. 5. and oft elſe. 
where. h Great calamities may come,whereby thou maiſt be brought 
to poverty, and ſo buth utterly loſe that bleſſed opportunity of do= 
ing good, which'now thou haſt in thine hands, whereby thoy 
maiſt gain unſpeakable Honour, and Comfort,and Advantage to thy 
ſelf, and moreover need the Charity of others,which thou maiſt 
comfortably expe&,cither from Men, or at leaſt from the -power, 
ful P:ovideace of God, diſpoſing the hearts of men to pity and help 
thee, if thou haſt been kind and merciful to others; ason the cons 
trary they can expe& no Mercy from God or Men, whe have ſhew. 
ed no Mercy to others. Thus he not only anſwers but retorts the 
Argument by which the covetous man exculeth his uncharicableneſs 
becauſe he muit lay up againſt a rainy day. : 

3 If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themſelves 

upon the earth ;: and if the tree fall coward the ſouth,or 
toward the north, in the place where the cree fallech 


there it ſhall be & 

; Learn, O man, the praCtice of liberality from the very lifeleſs 
Creatures,. from the Clouds 3 which when they are filled with wa- 
ter, do not hoarditup, or keep it to themſelves, bur plzntifully 


ifl:b; 
(rigit 


PC. 119g 
Luk:6;;0 


Princes d5 thereby wafte that Money and Treaſure which is ſo high- 
ly nec:#ary forthe ſupport and preſervation of themſelves,and of 
their Kingdoms, and are forced to ſqueeze Money out of their Peo- 
plz by oppreſſive and d1iſhonourable and dangerous prattices, that 
they may have more to ſpend in riotous courſes. 


20 *Curſe not the king d, no not in thy || thoughte 3 
and curſe not the rich fin thy bed-chamber g, for a bird 
of the air ſball carry the voice,and that which hath wings 


{hall tell the matter 5. 

d Having ſpoken of the miſcarriages of Kings, he now gives a 
caut 04 to their Subje&s, rhar they thould not thence take occaſion 
to ſpeak irreverentlyor contemptuouſly of them,or wiſh or deſign any 
evil ag-irſt their Perſons or Government : For though vices may 
be condewned, whereſoever they are, yet both Reverence and Obe. 
dicnce aredue to Magiſtrates, as they are Gods Vicegerents and 
Ordinances, notwithſtanding their vices, as is manifeſt from Rom: 
13-3, &c. 1Pet. 2. 13, &c« e In the moſt ſecret manner, by giv. 
ing way to ſuch thoughts or affe&ions ; for theſe will very pro. 
bavly break forth into ſuch words and praftices» f The Princes or 
Governours under the King, who are commonly rich : Or any o- 
therrich men, who can oppreſs or puniſh thee by their Wealth, as 
well as Kings can do it by their Power. g Where thy Wife or Ser- 
vant may hear thee, and afterwards through folly or paſſion dif. 
cover it to thy ruine: þ The King will hear of it by unknown and 
unſuſpe&ed hands, as if a Bird had chanced to be at the window 
when thou didfſt ſpeak the words, and did hear them, and carry 
the report of it unto the King Ir is a Proverbial expreſſion, as 
when we ſay, Hedges have Ears, and the Walls will peak, Hence Kings 
are ſaid tohave long Ears. | 

CHAP. XL 
Liberality to the poor commanded. We know not what we may come to + 
| God giveth Rain plentifully ; and our time of doing good is ſhort : Nox 
too much regarding Difficulties : The Providence of God « full of Myſter;.. 

ous Events; which muſt quicken us to Duty and, Diligence, 1 6, 

Life ſweet ; but the aays of Death ſhall be many, 7, 8. Young Men are | 

Exhorted in the midſt of their delights 10 think of the day of FJudg- 
74 ments 9, 10. 
Pro: 19:17: Aſt thy bread + upon the waters &; for thou ſhalt 
Mat:10:42% find it b after * many days c. 

# Solemon having diſcovered diverie vanities, and amongſt o- 


| *Ex:22:28 
| Or,conſci- 
gence. 


+Heb:1p02: 
the face of 
"fps Waters. 


"*Deu tol5?* 


from the Parents by Propagation ; nor how it is united with, and 


great Myſteries. Others tranſlate it, 
and whether it goerh, as is obſerved Joh: 3: 8: or 
blow, or how long it will laſt. But the former 
agree better with t ke following clauſe, 7 1. e. 


pour it forth for the refreſhment both of the fruitful fie!d and of 
the barren wilderneſs, ' k Theſe words contain either 1. An Argu- 
ment to perſwade Men to Charity, becauſe they muſt ſhortly fall 
ordie, and then all opportunity of being cheritable will be loit,and 
they mult expeCt certainly and eternally to reap whatſoever they 
have ſown, whether it hath been Mercy or Unmercifulneſs, Or 
rather 2. An Anſwer to a common ObjeCtion againſt ir, becauſe we 
are not certain whether the perſon whe deſires our Charity doth 
really need it, orbe worthy ofit. To this he anſwers, As a tree 
when it falls, either by the violence of the wind, or being cut 
down by its owners order, it is not conſiderable whether it falls 
Southward or Northward, for there it lies ready for the Maſters uſe 5 
ſo thy Charity, though it may poſlivly be miſapplied by thee, or a- 
buſed by the Receiver, yet being conſcientiouſly given by thee, it 
ſhall aſſuredly return to thee, and thou ſhalt reap the fruit of ir: 

4 He that obſerveth the wind, ſhall not ſow, and 


he that regardeth the clouds, ſhall not reap /. 

I He who negleQs or delays the neceſſary works of ſowing and 
reaping, becauſe the weather 15 not exaQtly ſuitable to his deſires, 
may poſſibly loſe his Harveit- Whereby he intimates what is 
eaſiely underſtood out of the foregoing verſes, that Men will never 
do good here, which is expreſſed by ſowing,P/a: 112, 9; 2 Cor. 9: 6; 
and ———— not receive good hereafter, which 1s called reaping, 
Gal: 6:-7,8. if they be diſcouraged and hindered from 'it by every 
doubr or difficulty,ſuch as covetous worldlings obje& to themſelves, 
that others either do not want their Charity, or will abuſe it, that 
they may poſſibly need it hereafter. f Or,fths 
5 As thou knoweſt not what is the way || of the ſpi- y,zzjobn 
rit 22,w07 * how the bones » do grow in the womb o of her 3: 8. 
that is with child ; even ſo thou knoweſt not the works IE 

4 1 3 . 


of Godp who maketh all. 
» Of the Spirit or Soul of Man, how it firſt comes into the bo- 
dy of the child in the Womb, whether from God by Creation, or 


Dogs 


ſo fixed in the Body that it cannot get out of it when it would, ngr 
how and whether it goes out of the Body ; all which things are 
of the wind, whence it cometh, 
how violently it will 
Tranſlation ſeems to 
The whole Body, 
343 20; & 35: 19; 

becautec 


which is elſewhere Ggnified by the Bones, as P/s; 


thers the vanity of heaping up Riches, he now teacheth us that | 


Of 


» Re Mn P- Xl. 


119g 
:6;30 


Ka 
I 


becauſe they are a principal part, and the very foundation and ſup- 
por! of the Body» o How it comes to paſs that one and the ſame 
ſmall quantiry of ſeed ſhould diverſific it ſelf into skin, and fleſh, 
and finews, and veins, and bones, and intrals, or how it receiveth 
nouri{h;neutand growth. » What God is doing and will do with 
thee orothers; the Counſels and Methods of Gods Providence in the 
future time of thy Life, what evil God will ſend upon the Earthgv. 
2+ or what weather he will ſend, of which v. 4. how long or how 
litle a while God will continue thy Life or Eſtate, and how ſoon 
God will ca!l thee to an accounts Theſe and many other future 
events thou canſt not foreſee, and therefore thy Wiſdom and Duty 
is to caſt offall diſtratting cares,and diſtruſtful fears about them,and 

 chearfully to commit thy ſelf, and all thy affairs, into the Hand of 
God in well doing. 


6 In the morning 9 ſow thy ſeed r, and in the even- 
ing q with-hold not thine hand s ;. for thou knawelt not 


:b/97 whether { ſhall proſper z, either this or that, or whe- 


i. ther they both ſhall be alike good x. 
q Early and late, -in all ſeaſons and occaſions : do it ſpeedily and 
conrinually, be not weary of it. « Do all good works,and efpecial- 
ly that of Alms-giving, as ſowingis underſtood,2 Cr: 9: 6: Gal: 6; 7: 
s From working or giving. # Which ſhall proſper moſt, as the 
next clauſe explains it ; the poſitive Degree being put for the com- 
arativegor the Superlative,which is not unuſual inthe Hebrew Text. 


hich ſhall beſt anſwer thine end, or do moſt good to others, or | 


which ſhall tend moſt to the comfort of thy great and laſt account : 
for thy Morning-Alms may poflibly be given to an unworthy per- 
ſon, or to one who did not need it,and. will abuſe it,and thy Even- 
ing-Alms way fall upon a perſon of eminent worth,yea,upon an An- 
gel in humane ſhape, which is remembred as a motive to Hoſpitality, 
Heb: 13: 2: or upori one in extream neceſſity, who might poſlibly 


have periſhed both in Soul and Body,ifthou hadſt not comforted and | 


relieved him ; Or, one time thou maiſt give with more fincere In- 
tention, and with more tender compaſſion than another time,and ſo 
one will be more right and more acceptable to God than the others 
Equally ſucceſsful to the receiver, or to the giver. 

7 Truly the light is ſweet, anda pleaſant thing it 3s 


for the eyes to behold the ſun «. 

x It cannot be denied that this preſent Life ( which 1s called gh, 
Job 3: 20. &33z 30: Pſa; 56: 13; & whichis expreſſed Synecdochically, 
by ſeeing the Sun, Eccl: 6: 5: & 7: 11:) is, in it ſelf a | bleſſing, 
and very deſireablez but it is not perpetual nor ſatisfa®ory ; which 
is here implied and expreſſed in the next verſe. : 

8 Bur ifa man live many years y, and rejoyce in 
them all z; yet let him remember &« the days of dark- 


neſs b, for they ſhall be many»c. All that cometh 4 5s 


Vanity, 

y Which is a priviledge granted but to few perſons comparatively 
z And ſuppoſe he enjoy all the comforts,and eſcape all the imbitter- 
ments of humane Lifegall his days : which alſo is a great rarity. Ir 
is his Duty and Intereſtſerioufly to conſider. 5 Of death, or of the 
ſtate of the ded which is oft expreſſed by darkneſs, as Job 10; 21; 
Pſal. $8: 12,&Cc- and here 1s oppoled to the foregoing Light, c i.e. 
Far more than the days of this thort Life, eſpecially if to the time of 

Tying in the Grave be added that greater and utter darkneſs which 1s 
reſerved for impenitent ſinners, and which is everlaſting, Mat: 22:13: 
8: 25: 30. 2 Pet:2317: Jud: v:13- And this is added for the 
caution of Mankind,that they may not rejoyce exceſlively in,nor con- 
[tent themſelves with the happineſs of the preſent Lifegbur' may ſock 
' for ſomthing more durable, and more fatisfattory: 4 All things 
which befall any man belonging only tothis Life, whether they be 
* comfortable or vexatious,they are but vain and inconſiderable, be- 
cauſe they are ſhort and tranſitory, ; 

9 Rejoyce e, O young men f, in thy youth, and 
let thy heart chear thee g in the days of thy- youth, and 
walk in the'way of thy heart, and inthe ſight of thine 
eyes h: but know thou ?, that for all theſe :hings £ God 
will bring thee into judgment 7. 

e This verſe is tobe underſtoed either 1, As a ſerious Advice to 
this purpoie,ſeing Life is ſhort and tranſitory, improve it to the beſt 
advantage, take comfort in it whilit you may, onely do it with mo- 
deration, and the fear of God. Or rather 2. As an Ironical conceſ- 
ſion, ſuch as are uſual both in Scripture, as x Kings18: 27; & 22: Is: 
Ezek: 28: 3, 4: Mat: 26: 45: and in other Authors, For this agrees 
much better with the context, and with the Expreflions' here uſed 
And ſo the ſenſe is, I forſee what evil uſe ſome ment will make of 

. what { have now ſaid : Things being thus, Let ns eat and drink, for 
#9 morrew we ſhall die ; as they alſo reaſoned, 1 Cor: '15: 2. f He 
ſpeaks to young men particularly, becauſethey have both the great- 
eſt ability,and the ſtrongeſt Inclinations to purſue ſenſual pleaſures, 
andare moſt impatienteither ofReſtraint or Admonition. g Indulge 
thy frolick and jolly humour,and take thy fill of delights. þ What- 
ſoever thine Eye or Heart luſteth after;deny it not to them ; asthis 
Phraſe is taken, Num: 15:39; nor is it ever uſed in a good ſenſe. 
Compare Job 31: 7: Pſal. 81: 12: Jer: 18 12: > Pet: 2: 14; 8 Joh: 2: 
16. 7 But in the midſt of thy feaſtings and jolliry it will become 
thee, if thou art a reaſonable Creature, to conſider thy reckoning, 
and* whether thou doſt nor purchaſe thy Gold too dear. , & For all 
thy follies and finful Luſts,which thou ſleighteſt as tricks of youth. 
I Will force thee to appear before his Judgment: ſeat, to give a ſe- 
rious account of all thy youthfFal and exhorbitant courſes, and to 
receive that ſentence which thy own Conſcience will then fay thou 
doft juſtly deſerve, And if chou likeſt thy ſenſuality upon theſe terms, 
much good may it do thee, I do not envy thee,nor defire to par- 

Irs: take of thy delicates. | | 
#7. ro Therefore remove || ſorrow » from thy heart, 
.ahd putaway evil » from thy fleſh o ; for childhood and 


.youth. are vanity p. 
'm i.e. Senſualand diſorderly Luſts, which he elegantly and em- 


.mate, that although ſuch praCtices do at preſenc gratifie and delight, 
'mens Senſes and vain Minds,yet they will ſhortly and certainly _ 
4 man to intolerable and crernal forrows; whack it is thy Wit- 


ee_— ——- ———-—- 


ECCLESIASTES. 


-Phatically calls ſorrow, with reſpe& to the foregoing words, - tomti= | & 


FY 


mm <0 Pavan, m Or asit 1s rendred in the margent,and by di- 
= _ -rs, #1ger ; apaſſion to which men are'moſt prone in the 
-rray” _ Whereby he may underſtand either anger ag:inſt 
fuck Fl Chis tharp admonition ; or rather againſt. God, who hath laid 
atk —_ reſtraints upon them, and threatens ſuch puniſhments to ' 
_ or ollowing their own natural Inclinations. ' $o the fenſe is; 
es = quarrel with thy Judge, but ſubmit and make thy Peace with 
coat - —oaghve War agzinitall thy Sins. » Allevil Concupiicen- 
- : uits, whick though now they ſeem'good to thee, . will ano? 
Er Cay appear ro be very evil and bitter things. o From thy bodi- 
5 Fegrr rig Which hementions not excluſively, as if he would 
_ v them their ſpiritual evils, but Emphatica!ly, becauſe young 
=> re whom he is here ſpeaking, are moſt given to fleſhly cor bo. 
- y _ Þ 1: E, Moſt vain, either 1. in theirtemper and diſpoſi - 
_ oung men ace frothy ,and fooliſh,and inconſiderate,whereby= 
Y run into manifold dangers, and therefore they ſhall dt wel 
w iearken to the Counſels of thoſe who by their greater Wiſdom& 
<APEFIENCE, are more capable Judges of theſe matters. Or 2. In 
- eir Condition. The time of Youth is vaniſhing and tranſitory,and 
Id-age and Death will ſpeedily come, againſt which every man in 


his wits will take care to lay in ſolid proviſions and comforts. 

| CHA P. XI. 
Early Piety recymmended before old age come one, aud death be near : Old 
age deſcribed ; and Death,1 7. The Concluſzon; all « Vanity, 8. 
The Preachers end in this Book, 9 ——12: The ſum of all LearninggEx. 
perience, ane Happineſs is to fear God, and keek bis Commandments 
becauſe God will bring all to Judgment, 1 2-24. 


* 


thy youth ce, while the evil days 4 come not,nor 


; the years draw nigh * when thou ſhalt ſay, I have no * See 
 Plealure in theme ; 


FE, To wit, praQically, or ſo as to fear, and love, and faithfully 35s 
' ſerve and worſhip him, which when men do nor, they are faid to 
forget God, P/a: 9: 17: 8106: 21; and in many other places. bThe 
firſt Author, and continual Preſerver of thy Life and Being,. and of 
all the perfe&ions and enjoyments which accompany it, ro whom 
thou haſt che higheſt and ſtrongeſt obligations to do ſo, and upon 
whom thou haſt 2 conſtant and neceſſary dependance,and therefore 
to forget/him is moſt unnatural, and inhumane,and diſingenuousty 
c For then thou art moſt ableto do it, and thou oweſt the beſt of 
thy Time and Strength to Godzthen thou haſt opportunity to do ir; 
and thou maiſt not live to Old-age : then it will be gaoſt acceptable 
to God, and moſt comfortable to thy ſclf,as the belt evidence of thy 
ſinceriry, and the beſt proviſion for Old age and Death ; and then 
it15 moſt neceſſary for the conquering thoſe imperuousLuſtsandPaſe 
ons which drown ſo many Thouſands of young Men in perdition, 
both in this Lite,and in that to come, 4 The time of Old-age,which 
.1S EV11, 5. e. burdenſome and calamitous in it ſelf, and far more 
grievous and terrible when it is loaded with the ſad remembrance of 
a mans youthful Follies and Lufts,and with the dreadful proſpe& of 
- approaching Death and Judgment, which makes bim ſce that he can- 
not live, and yer dare not die, and with the conſideration and ex- 
perience of the hardneſs of his heart, which in that age 15 rarely 
brought to true Repenrance, and ſo generally expires cither in vain 
preſumption,or in helliſh deſperation, e My Lite is now bitterang 
burdenſome to me, and worie than death :. which is frequently the 
. Condition of Old age, * | 
! 2 While the ſun;or thelight,or the moon, or the ſtars 


be not darkned f,nor the clouds return after the rain g: 
f Heb. While the ſun, and the light, and the mom, &c. Thar clauſe 
and the light, ſeems to be added to ſignific that he ſpeaks of the dark- 
mng of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars,not in themſelves,or ia their 
ownBodies,bur oaly in reſpeCt of that light which chey afford to men. 
And therefore the ſame clauſe which is expreſſed afrer the Sun,is t9 
{ be underſtood after the Moon and Stars,as is very uſual in Scripture 
1n like caſes: * And thoſe Expreſſions are to be underſtood either - 
1- Literally, of the dimſightedneſs of old men, by reaſon whereof 
the lizhrt of the Sun, &c. ſeems dark ro theme Which ſeems not to 
agree with the Context, partly becauſe the dimneſs of their ſight is 
expreſſed in the next verſe, and partly becauſe both this and the fol- 
lowing verſes are wholly Allegorical. Or rather 2. Figuratively, 
and thar either 1. Ofthe outward parts of the Body, and eſpeciaily 
of the Face, the Beauty ofthe Countenance, the lightſome and plea-+ 
{ant complexion of the Cheeks, the livelinefs of the Eyes,which ar= 
compared to the Sun, .and Moon, and Stares,and which are obſcured 
in Old age, as the Chaldee Paraphraſt underftands it. Or 2. Of the 
uiward parts of the Mind, the Underſtanding,rancy, Memory, 
which may notunfitly be reſembled to the Sun & Moon, and Stars, 
and all which are ſenſibly decayed in mo#t old men. Forit may feem 
improbable; that Solomon in his deſcription of che infirmiries of Old- 
age ſhould omit the decays of tbe moſt noble part of Man, whieh 
are comonly incident to Old age. And yet,with ſubmiſſion to thoſe 
worthy Sefton who think otherwiſe, - it ſeems not neceſſary that he 
ſhould here ſpeak of thoſe inward decays, partly becauſe they are nor 
fo general in old Men as the decays of the Bedy are ; partly becauſe 
| he here dire&eth his Speech to: ſenſual men who are more affefted 
with corporal than with intelleQual maladies ; and partly becauſe 
both the foregoing and following paſſages concern the ſtate of Mens 
Bodies and their outward condition. Or rather 3. Of external things, 
and the great change of their joy and proſperity, which they had 
in their youthful time, into ſorrow,and manifold calamitieg,which 
are.uſually the companions of Old age:For this interpretation ſeems 
beſt to agree both with the foregoing verſe,in which he deſcribes the 
miſeries of Old-age, and with the following clauſe, whichis added 
to explain and determine thoſe otherwiſe ambiguous Expreſſions 3 
and with the Scripture uſe ofthis Phraſe, which is the beſt key for 
the nnderftanding of Scripture; for a ſtate of comfort and happineſs 
is ofc deſcribed by the Light of the Sun, ©, Judg, 5: 313.2 Sam: 
23: 4: 1/4.39: 26: & 60: 20, and a time and ſtate of great troudle is 
ſer forth by the darkning-ofthe Light of the Sun, ©. as 1/a: 13; 9: 
&c. & '24: 23+ Joel 2; 10; & 3: 153 Mat: 24. 29: and ofr elſewhere, 
- This Phraſe notes a perpetual Succeſſion, and. REciprocation of 


ee re aanted 


Rain, and Clouds bringing Rain, and then Rain and Clouds again, 

and ſo without end. Whereby he expreſſeth either 1. The Rheums 

5; Deflugions which do _— and inceſGncly flow in and from 
5 9 


C hap3 41. 


- 
F 


Emember a now chy Creator 6b in the days of *Pro:22:6 


P Sam:19: 


| | Or, the 
| grinders 

fail becanſe 
| rbey grind 
| Girtle, 


Chap. X11. 


. Heads ſhall be as full ofgray Hairs, as the Almond-tree is of white 


_ derſtood either 1, The o0!d Man himſelf, who bears ſome reſem- 


Legs and Arms which are flender, the file 
2: 


mend-tree flouriſhed,. in which the ſtrength of rhe Body lay and 


ECCLIE 


od Men,for want of natural heat and frength to preventor remove 
them. "Oc rather 2. The Contintiel viedFeude of Infirmanes, Di- 
ſeaſes znd griefs, in old Men, one Deep calling upon anothier, and 
one Affliction beginning at the end of another ; whereas in young 
en after Rain Te Clouds are diſperſed, and fair weather ſucceeds, 
3 In che day when the keepers of the houſe þ ſhall 
tremble, and the ſtrong men ; ſhal bow themſelves and 
[| the grinders & ceaſe 7 becauſe they are few », and 


choſe that look out of the windows » be darkned. 
bj. e. Ofthe Body,which is oft and fitly compared to an houſe 
as' Fob 4: 19: Pſai ito; 54: 2 Cor; 5:1: Whoſe keepers here are et- 
ther 1. The Ribs and Bones into which they are faſtened, which are, 
the Guardians of the inward and vital parts, whichalſo are much 
weakned and ſhaken by Old-age. Or rather 2, The Hands and Arms, 
which are mans beſt inſtruments to defend his Body from the Af- 
faults of Men or Beaſts,and which in a ſpecia} manner are ſubje& ro 
this zrembling, by paralitical or other like diſtempers, thatare molt 
incident to.old Men; i Either the Back, or the Thighs and Legs, 
in which the main ſtrength of the Body doth conſiſt, which in old 
Men are very feeble, and unable both for the ſupport of the Body, 
and for motion. & The Teeth; thoſe eſpecially which are com- 
monly ſo called becauſe they grind theMear which we eat,/To wit, 


STASTES. 


weakneſs and crookedneſs, 1s a burden too heavy for it ſelf. Ang 
ſome of theJewiſh and otherInterpreters underſtand this word)which 
others retider locuſt or graſhopper,to be ſome part of the Body, either 
the Back-bone,or the head of the Thigh-bone, or the 24 le-bvne any 
of which may well be ſaid to be' heavy or burdenſome to it ſelf,when ir 
moves ſlowly and liftleſly, and' not withour difficulty and trouble 
b Fo wit, of Meats, and Drinks; and Muſick, and other carnal De. 
lights, which are vehemently deſired by men in the heat of their 
Youth, but are unſavery to old nien 3 of which'ſee an inſtanc Ce, 2Sam: 


two next following are proper, and to: be underſtood literally,and to 
may This clauſe alſo. c Is travelling towards it,and every day nearer 
fo it than other, 4 From'tlus place of his pilgrimage into the: Grave 


and place of the future Life, which-1s unchangeable and everlaſting: 
e Eirzer ſuch as were hired to that end;of whom ſee on Jer: 9:17:Mar. 
9; 23: & 11: 17: or true Mourners, near Relations, and: dear Friends 
accompanie the dead Corps through the ſtreets to the Grave. F 

6 Orever the ſilver cord be loofed, or the golden 
bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the foun- 
tain, orthe wheel broken at the ciſtern f. 

f This Verſe is to be underſtood either 1. Literally, of the orna. 
ments of Life, ſuch as Chains, and Jewelr,, and Veffels of Gold and 


to perform their Office- m Heb. becauſe they are diminiſhed, either 
3. Ta ſtrength; Or 2+In' number ; being here one, and there ano- 
ther, and not united together,and one dire&ly againſt another,and 
conſequently unfit for their work. » The Eyes. By windews he un- 
derftands either 1+ The koles in which the Eyes are fixed, Zech. 
14; 12: Or 2: TheEyelids,which like windows, are either opened 
or ſhut, Or 3. Thoſe Humours and Coats of the Eyes, noted by 
Anatomiſts which are the chief Inſtruments by which the Eyc ſees. 

4 And the doors be ſhut in the ftreets o, when the 
found of the grinding is low p, and he ſhall riſe up 4 
at the voice of the bird r, and all the daughters of mu- 


ſick s ſhall be brought low 7. 
o Or, toward: the ftrettr : which lead into the ſtreets. This 3s 
- underſtood either 1. Literally 3 becauſe men, when they are very 
old keep much ar home,and' have neither ſtrength nor inclination to 
£0 abroad. Or rather 2. Allegorically, as all che other Clauſes are 
underſtood. And fv rhe doors are either 1. The ontward' Sen{es, 
which, as doors, let in outward ObjeQs to.the Soul. Or rather 
2- The Mouth, or the two Lips, here exprefſed by a word of the 
dual number, which are oft called a 4»or, both in Scripture, as P/s: 


141: 3s Mich: 


' Silver,and of the inſtruments by which the neceſſary Proviſions and, 
ſupports of Life are conveyed to us,fuch as Fountains of Water,and 
. Pirchers,&c. which may be ſaid ro be looſed or broken becauſe they 
| are negleRed as uſeleſs things to the dead man, Or rather 2. Alles 
gorically,of thoſe inward parrs of Mans Body which are the chief In« 
ftrumenrs of Life, or Senſe and Motion, and of the vital or animal 
. operations, whether ſuch from whict' they firſt proceed, or in which 
[they are firſt elaborated & contained, which may fitly be compared tg 
'a bowl, and fountain,-or ciſtern ; or ſuch by which they are derived or 
| conveyed to the ſeveral parts of the Body, which are very COnvenis 
ently deſigned by the cord, and pitcher. and wheel; all which are try. 
ly faid to be looſed orbroken, i, e, diffolved, or become uſeleſs 2nd ine 
ſufficient for the performance of their ſeveral fun&ions. This in the £e- 
[neral; But it ſeems moſt probable that Solomnn,:who was ſo profound a 
' Philoſopher,and doubtleſs had an aecurate knowledge of all the parts 
of mans Body, and their ſeveral offices and operations,doth by theſe 
ſeveral Expreſſions deſcribe ſo many, particular parts and offices. By 
the filver cord it is generally and moſt probably conceived, that he 
underſtands the pith or marrow of the back-bone,which comes from 
the brain,and thence goeth down to the very loweſt end of the Back. 


7:5: and in other Authors; which like a door, epen | bone, together with the Nerves and Sinews, which, as Anatomiſts 


or ſhut the way whichleads unto the ſtreets or common paſſages of j ©bſerve,are nothing elſe but the produQtion and continuation of the 


the Body, ſuch as the Guller, and Sromach, and all the Bowels, as 
alfo the Wind-pipe, and Lungs; which alſo are principal inſtru- 
ments both of (peaking an 
ſimply and abfolutely, as i | 
bur comparatively,becauſe Men in extream Old-age grow dull and 
liftleſs, having little or no appetite to eat, and are very much indiſ- 
poſed for diſcourſe, and ſpeak bur ſeldory. p Or, becauſe the ſound, 
&c.So this may be added, not as a new Symptom of Old-age. bur 
only as the reaſon of the foregoing Symtom, The Senſe is, When, 
or becauſe the Teeth, called the grinders, v. 3: dre looſe and few, 
whereby both his ſpeech is low.and the noiſe which he makes in eat- 


* Ing. is but ſmall, And this is one great cauſe of his indiſpoſedneſs 


bork toeating and to ſpeaking, Some underſtand this of ConcoQtion, 
which after a ſort doth grind the Meat in the ftomach, and in the 
other parts appointed by God for that work. Bur that is rranſatted 
inwardly,and Witnout all noiſe or ſound, gq To wit, from his 
Bzd, being weary with Lying, and unable to get ſleep. r Either 
1. Upon the ſmalleſt noiſe. Which doth not conſiſt with that deaf. 
els incident to old Men, and deſcribed in the next words: Or ra- 
ther 2. As ſoon asthe Birds begin to chirp, which is early in the 
morning, whereas Children and Young Men, can Ite and ſleep long 
in the moraing. 5s Allthole Senſes or parts of the Body which are 
employed in Muſick and Song; as well thoſe which make it, as the 
arts of and within the Mouth,as thoſe which Teceive it, to wit, the 
ars. - * ſhall be caſt down frem their former excellency ; they are 
become incapable either of making muſick, or cf delighring in ir. . 
5 Alſo when they ſhall be afraid « of that which is 
high =, and fears ſhall be in the way y, and the almond- 
tree ſhall flouriſh z, and the graſhopper ſhall be a bur- 


den &,. and deſire b ſhall fail : becauſe man goeth c to his 


long home d,and the mourners e go about the ftreets : | 


| Marrow. And this 1s moſt aptly compared to a cord, both for its fi- 
gure, which is very long and r8und;and for its uſe,which is ts draw 


d eating. Arid theſe are ſaid to be ſbut,not | and move the parts of the Body,and to filvergboth for its excellency 
f they did never cat, or drink, or ſpeak, i and colour: which is white and bright, even in a dead, and much 


\mere in a living Body. And this may properly be faid to be /ooſed,or 
diſſolved, or broken, or removed,as others render the word,the ſenfe of 
all theſeTranſlations being the ſamegbecauſe it is relaxed,or obſtru&- 
ed,or otherwiſe diſenabled for its proper ſervice. And anſwerably 
hereunto by :he golden vow! he underflands the Membranes of the 
Brain, and eſpecially that innermoſt Membrane which is called by 
Anatomiſts, zhe piow morher, becauſe it doth with a motherly care 
defend the Brain, and afliſt and govern its ations, which infinuates 
it ſelf into all the parts of the Brain,following it in its various wind- 
ings and turnings,keeping each parcel of it in ifs proper place, and 
ditinguiſhing and dividing one part from another,to prevent difor= 
der and miſchief. This is not vunfitly called a bowl, partly becauſz it 
is round;and partly becauſe it receives and contains 1n it all the ſub. 
ſtance of the Brain : anda gelden bow], partly for its great preciouſ- 
neſs and uſefulneſs; partly for its ductility, being drawn out into a 
great thinneſsor fineneſs,as Gold is capable of being drawn ferth irto 
thinner plates than other metals can bear ; and partly for its colour, 
which is ſomewhat yellow, and comes nearet to that of Gold than 
any other part of the Body doth. And this is well ſaid to be brokey,as 
for the reaton above noted. fo becauſe upon the approach of Death it 
is commonly fhrive]'d up,and many times broken. And as theſe two 
former clauſes concern the Brain; and the animal Powers;ſo the two 
following clauſes of this verſe reſpe& the Spring aid ſeat of the vital 
Powers andOperations, and of the Blood, the great inſtrument there- 
of, which hath been commonly conceived,and confequently isfiere 
und:rſtoodyto be tle Liver,but triore truly and certainly is the 
Heart, which is now known and confeſſed to be the ſource of the 
blood. And ſo Solomon here deſcribes the chief Organsor Veflels ap- 
pcinted for the ProduQtion, and Diſtribution, and Circulation of the 


£,-< | = 5 g 
« The paſſion of Fear 1s obſerved to be moſt .mcidenr to o'd Men, ! Blood in Man's Body. For although the Dodririe of the Circulation 


of which divers Reaſons may be given. = Either 1. Ofhigh things, 
leſt they ſhould fall upon them. Or rather 2. Of high places, of 
2'1ng up hills or ſtairs, which is very irkſome to them, becauſe of 
their weakneſs, and wearineſs, and giddzneſs, and danger, or dread 
of falling. And this clauſe,rogether with the nexr may be rendred 
thus, and that agreeably to the Hebrew Text, 4!ſo they ſball be afraid 
and terrified, ( Two words expreſſing theſame thing, which is very | 
frequenr in the Hebrew, ) ef that which is high in rhe way. When 


, * They walk abroad they will dread to go;up any high or ſteep places; 


'y Leſt 25 they are walking, they ſhould ftamble, or fall, or be thruſt 
down, or ſome infirmity or mifchief ſhould befal. them. z Their | 
Flowers. Such Metaphors are not unuſual in other Authors. Hence | 
Sophocles calls a gray or hoary Head fowry, and again, covered with 
white flowers. a If it doth accidentally hop up and reſt upon them, | 
They cannot endure the leaſt byrden,being indeed a burden to them. | 
ſelves. But rhe words may be, and are by others rendred, the locu#'! 
(as the ancient Interpreters, and many otkers renderit ; or, as ours, | 
and ſome others, the graſbopper, which comes to the ſame thing ; for 
theſe tws ſorts of infe&s are much of the ſame nature and " 3,Hy ) 


ſhall be # bu-den to it ſelf. And by the lecuſt or graſbopper may be un: 


blance to it, in ſhape, by reaſon of the bones ſticking out, in the 
conſtitution of the Body, which is dry and withering, and in the 
1S ws being conſumed. Or 
he Back, which firly follows after the Head upon which the Al- 


which formerly was able to bear great burdens,bur now through its 


þ 


of the Blood hath lien hid and unknown for very many-Genefations 
rogether, and therefore the honour of Invention of ic is juſtly aG 
cribed to a famous Phyſician ofour Country; yet it is aot improbably 
ſuppoſed by ſome, thatir was well known to $9010n, although after 
his times it was Iofſt, as doubtleſs mmany other thing were, which he 
wrote concerning Plants,and other things. According to this notion 
the fourttain here is the right Ventricle of the heart which is now ac- 
knowledged to be the ſpring of Life,2nd ofthe vital Spirits,and rhe 
pitcker-is the veins which convey the Blood from it to other parts; & 
eſpecially that arterious Vein, as Anatomiſts call it, by which itis 
tranſmitted to the Lungs, and thence to the Tefr Ventrick of the 
Heart, where it is betterelaborited,and then by rhe Pulſe rhrufk out » 
into the great Artery, called Ac: aorra, and by irs branches dif- 
perſed into all the parts of the Body, to give thein Life and Vigour, 
which being done the reſidue of rhe Blood is carried back by the 
Veins into the right Ventricle of the Heart, whenee it is diſpoled,as 
hath been now mentiened, and foruns in a.perpetualround, unleſs it 
be obſtru&ed by fome diſorder in the Body. And the often 5s the 
left Ventricle of the Heart, and the' wheel ſeerns to be'the great Ar- 
tery which is joyned to it,which is very Tely fo ealted;beeaufe 2t 19 


; the firſt and great inſtrymenr of this Rotation or Circulation of the 


Blood, which by its Pulſe is forcibly thruſt out into all the parts of 
the Body,whence,by various windings and turnings,t returns thither 
again, and (o is ſent againupon the ſame journey ,wkichin)like man- 
ner it perforins again and again,as long as Life and Health contin; 
and when any of theſe parts are diſenabled forthe diſcharge of their 
Offices;then are they fitly ſaid to be broken. Thepirchir may be ſaid 


to bs broken at the fountain,when the Veins do not return the _— 


Cha 


ig* 35. It is true, the former Expreſſions are Metaphorical,but the 


from whence he muſt never rerurn into this world,znd' into the ſtars. 


n 


P- Xt, 


gf 


vs 
is 
3s 
Fo 
op 
x 
© 


* 

, £ 
0 

/ . 


tc 


FHeb 
vwras 0 
light, 


« 4 C a6 44 
<6 4 54 
” F'y - 4 
ol 
81 SP: 
*\ 
by : 


Fa 


ti IM 


/ 


[0r, the 


mire wiſe 
»#.&c. 


2 


_—_ 2 
ww 
, < 
v 


XI. 


bhi; 2» 


*1Kins 


the Heart, but ſuffer it to ſtand Nill and cool within them, whence 
comes thar coldneſs of the outward parts,which is a near forerunner 
of Death. And the wheel may be ſaid to be broken at the ciſtern, when 
the -grear Arteries do not perform their Office of conveying the 
Bload into the left Ventricle of the Heart, and of thruſting it out 
thence into the leſſer Arteries, whence comes that ceaſing of the pulſe 
which is a certain ſign of approaching Death. | ; 

7 * Then thall che duſty return to the Earth as it was 
h: 


and the ſpirit ; ſhall return uaco God & * who gave 


z The Body called duſt,both for its origitial which was from the 
and to fignifie"its vile and corruptible Nature,7ob 4: 19:8c30:19: 
h whence it was firſt taken« He alludes to that paſ- 


eb. 12: 9. | ; 
- EE Vanity of vanities,faith the preacher,all ;s vanity. 

-m This ſentence wherewith he began this Book he here repeat- 
eth in the end of it, partly as that which he had proved in all the 
foregoing diſcourſe, and partly as that,Flich naturally and neccfla- 
cily followed trom both the branches d. ;;he aſſertion nuw. laid down 
Ver. 7. | 
5 And | moreover,becauſe the preacher was wiſe =, 


he ftill taught the people knowledge o, yea, he gave 


tepreacker good heed p, and fought out q, and * {et in order r ma- 


roverbs 5. _ * EE: 

"* Fhick he affirmeth not out of vajn oftentationg*; but partly to 
procure the more credit and acceptance to his Doltrion id CHOng 
here delivered ; and partly to declare his Repenrance for his former 
follies, and Gods grear Mercy in reſtoring his ' Wiſdom to him! 0 As 
God gave him this Wiſdom, that he might be a tezcher of others, 
ſo he uſed ir to thar end. Therefore deſpiſe not his Counſel, p He 
did not raſhly and fooliſhly utrer whatſoever came into his mind,or 
mouth, bur ſeriouſly pondered both his matter and werds., q Borh 
by the exerciſe of his own mind, aud by reading and learning from 
others. r Or,d:reFed or fitted. He felefed ſuch as were moſt uſeful, 
5 Excellent and wiſe ſay:ngs, which are ofc called Proverbs, as was 
noted before upon the Book of Proverbs. 


io Fae F gs ſought to find out f acceptable 
thi" words - _ 
_ ords of truth 7. | : | 
pr of wh Heb. defireable - delightful, worthy of all acceptation, ſuch as 
ſight, would minifter comfort and profit to the Hearers or Readers. u By 


the Preacher in this and his archer -Books, x Heb. right or ſtreight, | 


he Mind or Will of God, which is the rule of right, 
—— perverſe. » Not fables cunningly deviſed to deceive 
che ſimple,butrrue andcertain Dottrines which mend t! 
to mens own Confciences or Reaſons ; wholſom and edifying Coun- 
ſels. ws 
11 The words of the wiſe z are as goads, and as 


nails a faſtened b by the maſters of aflemblies c, which 
are given from one ſhepherd 4. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


| 


commend themſelves Or 


wiſe and holy men of God ; of which, and not of the former, this 
waole context treats. a Piercing into mens dy1] Mir de, ard hard 
Hearts, and. quigkning and provoking them to the practice of al} their 
duties. 6 Which do not only amuſe and fartle mer for the preſent 
2s the wile and grave Counſels of moral Philoſophers frequently do, 
out make powerful and abiding impreſſions in-them : which is the 
peculiar effeft of Gods Word, c By the rezchers of Gods Chureh 
and People, whether Prophets or oiher?, appointed by God for thar 
work: 4 From God,or from Jeſus Cirift, the great Shepherd and 
Teacher of the Church in all Ages,by whoſe Spirit the ancient Pros 
phets, as well as other ſucceeding Teacl.ers were inſpired and taughr, 
Fer. 3:15: 1 Pet: 1,11: & 2 P:t;1: 21, And this claute ſeems to be ads 
ded partly as the reaſon of that admireble Harmony and Agreement 
which isamongſt all the men of God in all ages and places, becauſe 
they are all caught. by one Maſter, and guided by the fame Hand 
ard partly to oblidge us to the greater Attention and Reverence to 
all their DoEtrines and Counſels, which we are to reccive as the 
word of God, and not of men only, as it is ſaid, 1 Theſ. 2, 13. 

x72 And further, by theſe e, my ſon, be admoniſhs 
edf : of making many books there js no end g, and 
much || ſtudy 45a wearinefs to the fleſh z. 

e By theſe Wiſe M 
ſpake in the foregoing verſe. f Take your Inftructions from them 
for their words are right and true, as ke ſaid v. 10: whereas the words 
of other men are falſe,or at beſt doubtful. g I could eaſily write ma« 
ny Books and large Volumes vpon theſe matters, bir that were. an 
endleſs and needJets work;ſeing things neceſſary to be known&done, 
lie in a litt!e compaſs, as he informs us in the next verſe,. þ The 
reading of many Books written by learned Philoſophers about theſe 
things ; which it is morethan probable were then extant, though 
fince Joſt, which alſo Solomon, being fo curious atd inquiſitive a PEIſ= 
ſon, would in all likelihood procure and peruſe as fac as he had op» 
portunity, . : It waſteth a mans ſtrength and Spirirs,and yet (which 
is implied ) doth not fatisfiethe Mind, nor ſufficiently recompenſe 
the 24 Ir and inconvenience to which man is expoſed by it- 

T3 
terk, * FearGod/ 
this is the whole duty n of man. | 

 & The ſum and ſubſtance of all that hath been 


wiſe men,ſo far as it is neceſſary for us to know, 
dochically pur here, 


ſaid or written by 
I Which is Synec- 
at it is very frequently in Scripture, for all the 


Devotedneſs of Heart toſerve and pleaſe God, and a Lotkneſs to of- 
fend him, and-an Aptneſs to tremble at his Word and Judgements. 
'-- This is fitly added as a neceſſiry effe& and certain Evidence of 
the Fear of God. MakeConſcience of prattiſing whatſoever God. re» 


that which was WTIitten un was upright X,even quires, how coſty,or troubleſome,or dangerous,ſcever it be. n In 


the Hebrew it is only, the whole : it is his whole work and . buſineſs, 
his whole perfeQion and Happineſs, it is the ſum of what he need 


either know, or do, or enjoy. 


,and keep his commandments m:; for ad 


PY 
HY 


Ler us hear the concluſion of the whole mat- || Or, 


Chap. Y | 


Were 2s * (Or,reads 
en and their Words or Writings, of which he #ns- | 


v3 


. ) 
pf Fj 
LES) 


of the | 
matier, 0 
wen all ; 
that hath / 
been hear®y 
inward Worſhip of God, Reverence, and Love, and Truſt, . and A Mp9 ah 
3 ' 


x4 For * God ſhall bring every work into judgment *Rem: 2; | 


0, with every every ſecret thingp, whether is be good, 
whether zt beevil. 


the whole of man, becauſe all men muſt give an account to God of all ? 
their works,and this alone will enable them to do chat with joy,and 
not with grief.” Or 2. As another Argument to preſs the'foregoing 
Exhortation, Fear God, and keep bis commandments, for you mult be. 
called to judgment abont it, &c. p Not only outward and viſible 


+ Not ofſecularly or polirickly wiſe men,but of the ſpiritually a&ions, but even inward and ſecret thoughts. 


CT TIrr—_—_ 


CANTICETS 


Pfr I come to the Explication of this Book, ſome things muft be premiſed concerning it. 1. That it was of Divin®: 


_— 


Inſpiration is ſo clear and certain, that as the Fewiſh Writers note, none ever queſtioned it, although ſome. doubted of 


26z . \ 928 
| &. 14: 108 
0 Thisis added either. Asa reaſon of what ke laſt faid, this SIE 


ſome other of Solomon's Writings. And the ſame Arguments which prove the Divinity of other Books, are found bere, © 


| ality of the Pen-man, who was confeſiedly a man inſpired by God ; the Excellency and Uſefulneſs of the 
Ro - the rol fry ſublizze Majeſty of the flile ; and the ſingular efficacy of it upon the Hearts of ſober and ſerious 
Perſon p p who read it with due preparation ; and thoſe other Charatters which are commonly known, and therefore it is 
needleſs here to enumerate. 2. The form of this Book is dramatical wherein ſeveral parts or parcels of it are uttered by, 

or in the Name of ſeveral Perſons, which are chiefly Four, the Bridegroom and the Bride, and the Friends or Com- 
Panions of the one, and of the other. Nor s it declared what or when each of them ſpeak, but that is ſecretly couched, 

and is left to the eb{ervation of the prudent Reader, . as is uſual in Writings of this Natare. 3« The defign of the Book in; 
geheral is to deſcribe the paſſionate Lowes and happy Marriage of two Perſons, and their mutual Satisfattion therein,and 

tbe bleſſed Fruits and Effefts thereof, But» then it is not to be underfioed carnally concerning Solomon and Pharaoh*'s 

Daughter, as ſome have fancied, although the occaſion of this Love and Marriage may be taken from that, or rather 
he maigs an alluſion to that, but ſpiritually concerning God, or Chriſt, and his Church aud People. This is ſufficiently 

evident from the deſcriptions of this Bridegroom and Bride, which are ſuch as could not with any decency be uſed or meant 

concerning Solomon and Pharaoh's Daughter, as when he is brought in like « Country Shepherd,Chap I. 7, and is 

called bis Brides Brother, Chap. 5. 2. Fs che be yr jo” high and exceſſrue Commenaati ns to bimſelf, as we ſhall. 
hen (he 4+ made the keeper of Vineyards ans of Sheep, | | 
Ra Sr a Chap..5. 7. —_ to beterrible as an Army, Chap. 6. 4+ and to be like Pharaohs Horſes, and to. 
have an Head like Carmel,a Noſe like a Tower, Eyes like Fiſhpools, Teeth like a flock of ſheep, &c. Chap. 


7.4, 5. Avd thereare many ſuch like Expreſſions and Deſcriptions, which veing applied ro them, are abſurd and mon- 


flrous, Hence it follows, that this Book is to be underitood Myſtically or Alegorically concerning that ſpiritual Love. and 
Marriage which is between God or Chriſt, and his Church, or every bulieving Souls And this will be more than ? { 
ble to any man who ſhall confider,the following particulars, 1, That the kd both of the Old and New Te amen: 
are full of Myſtical and &llegerical paſſages ; which being known and confe «dit is needleſs to prove. 2. That the Dettrine 
of Chriſt, or the Mefflas, andof bi: being the Head, and Husband, and SAVieur of Gods Church or People, Was well ! 
known #1 leaſt to the Prophets,and the wiſe and pious Iſraelites," in the time of the Old Teftament ; whereof we bave- 
many manifeſt and unqueſtionable evidences; ot only in the New T:fament. but in the Writings of Moles,in the Books 
of Plaims and Proverbs, and in theProphets, @s hath been nored in party and will, God aſſfting be further RO 
i the proper plat 3: hit God comer bimſelf to Bridagroom, and bis Church 10 # Bride a, 62, 5-and call 
=> : b = 


an 


Chap, 1. 6, 8. and is ſaid ts be (mitten and abuſed 


hap I. EE IN EF .1 


> his People, 


29. 2 Cor. rr. 2. Ep. 5.23 


age between Chriſt and his Church ; 


their various diſpoſitions and conditions. 


ſome that arewell acquainted with him, &C, 
Book. 


| CHAP. I. a : 
[: tion of the earneſt longing of the Church after Chriſt, 1 —4. 4 
a dfeuiek - Abo 74 Prayeth for dire#ion, 5 7. Ghriſts direFion 
and command, 8. He ſbeweth his love to Her both for her firength and 
© comoline/s, 9, 10, and giveth her graciow promiſes, ir. The Churches 
commendation of Chriſt borh for the ſweetneſs of Fellowſhip with him, and 
- theexcellency of Oratnances, 12 _. 
He ſong ofſongs a, which is Solomons 5. - 
s The moſt excellent of all Songs, whether com- 
- poſed by prophane or Sacred Authors, by Selomen, or 
by any other. 'So. this Hebrew Phraſe is underſtood 
En. in other caſ*s, as the holy of polies ſignifies the moſt 
* - holy; ard the higheſt King is called King of Kings ; and there are 
7. multitudes of ſuch inſtances,as harh been oft obſerved. And ſo this 
| might well be called, whether you conſider the Author of 1t, who 
bf was 2 great Prince, and the wiſeſt of all mortal Men,the two Adams 
Wh. only excepted 3 or the Subj<& of it,which is not Solomon, bur 4 great- 
- er than Solomon,even Chriſt, and his Marriage with the C! urch, 
as hath been noted; or the Matter of it, which is moſt lofry and-my- 
ſterious, containing in It the greateſt and nobleſt of all the myſte- 
ries contained either inthe Old or the New Teftament ; moſt pious 
and parherical, breathing forch the hotteſt flames of Love berween 
Chrift and his People, moſt ſweer and comfortable,and uſeful to all 
thar read it with :erious and Chriſtian Eyes. Nor is itthe worſe be. 
cauſe prophane and wanton Wits abuſe it, and endavour to faſten 
their abſurd and filthy fenſes npon ſome paſſages init. The truth is, 
this Book requires a ſober and pious,not a laſcivious and fooliſh Rea- 
| der : for which reaſor; ſome of theancient He brews adviſed young 
f men to forbear the reading of it, till they were Thirry years old. 
; þ Which was compoſed by Solomon : but whether before his Fall, or 
| after his Repentance, is not eafje-to derermine, -nor neceſſary to be 


== known. ' | K . . 
*Ch.4.70. 2 Let him kiſs me with the kiſſes of his mouth e : * 


+ ileb. ty for + thy love 4d is better than wine e. . 
 brves. - c Th: beginning of this Book is abrupr, and may ſeem diſorder. 
ly ; but 15,very ſuitable to, and uiual in Writings of this nature, 
wherein things are not related in an hiftorical and exquiſite order, 
bur that which was firſt done is brought in as it were accidentally 
after may other paſſages; as we ſee in Homer, and 77-gil, and in 
the Greek and Latine Comedians. Theſe are the words of the Spouſe, 
as all acknowledge, wh-rein ſhe breatheth forth her paſſionate Love 
to the Brid-oroom, whom ſhe doth not name bur only intimate by 
the Pronoun Relative,him, which is here put withour and for the 
antec-dent, as P/a. 87 1. & 114. 2. John 20.15, Which manner 
.of Expreſſion ſhe uſeth becauſe it was needleſs ro name him, as be- 
ing ſo well kno «n to the perſon, or perſons, to whom ſhe ſpeaks 
| and being the only perſon who was continually in her thoughts and 
3 ſpeeches. By kiſs, which were the uſual tokens of Love and good- 
| will, the means noching elſe but the cemmunicatiens and maniſeſta. 
tions of his Love and Favour to her,as the following clauſe explains 
 echishis Gr:ces and Comforrs breathed into her from the mouth and 
Spirir of Chriſt, 4 This ſudden change of the perſon is frequent, 
eſpecially in {ſuch pathetical! diſcourſes. Firſt ſhe ſpeaks of him as 
abſent, and ata drſtance,bur ſpeedily grows into more acquaintance 
with him,aad by ardenr deſire and faith,embraceth him as preſenr. 
e Than the moſt delicious meats or drinks,or than all ſenſual de- 
lights, this one kind being Synecdochically pur for all the reſt;as it 
is Eft.5. 6. Job 1. 13. Prov. 9.2. Ecel. 2. 3. : 

3 Becauſe of the favour of thy good ointments f, thy 
name g is as ointment poured forth þ, therefore do the 
virgins 4 love thee. 

f B-cauſe of thoſeexcellentGifts and Graces of Gods Spirit where. 
with rhou art repleniſh:d,and which flow from thee upon thy Mem- 
bers. g Either 1. Thou thy ſelf, Names being oft put for Perſons 
as Afts 1. 15. Rev. 3. 4. Or rather 2. Thy fame or report, the very 
mention of thee, and allthoſe things by whichthou makeſt thy {eif 
known to men,thy Word,and particularly thine offers and promiſes 
of Pardon and Salvation made to finners,and all thy works, both ordi- 
nary and miraculous.eſpecially that great work ofRedemption.bMofſt 
lovely-and acceptable,and refreſhing. ; Called the companions of the 

' Bride, Pſa. 45.14. particular believers, who are called Yirgins, 2 Cor. 
b it. 2. Rev. 14. 4. who have their ſenſes exerciſed to perceive this 
JS ſweetneſs and fulneſs :of Chriſt. 

=Foh.6.44. 4 * Draw me &, we 1 will run after thee m:the king 
*P[.45-14,*hath brought me o into his chambers p; we will be x 4 
I5. ,,, and rejoice in thee q ; we will remember r thy love 

lOr *”Y Lore than wine : || the upright love thee. 

love thee k hy G d. holy Spirit effe&tual] lini 

io btly- By thy Grace ang. hoy SPINE oh y enclining my Heart to 
WpY'g come unto thee, as this Phraſe implies, Jer: 31: 3: Hoſs x1: 4: Joh: 
6: 44; 45+ As thoa haſt ourwardly-called and invited me, fg dg 


1 2h;.h Chrift is Expreſly declared ts be the Bridegroom or Husband of his Church, as Mat. 9. 15. & 
in which preſly Rev. 19, ofa 2I, 2. © 22. 17. 4. That the 5 4th Plalm, which is a kindof abridg. 
ment of this Book, although it had its riſe from, or alludes to. the Marriage between Solomon and Pharaoah's Daughter, as 
written concerning the Meſſias, as all Interpreters, bath Ch riffian and Fewiſh agree, and concerning the myſfical 
| of which ſee My notes upon that Pſalm. 
might be ſuggeſted, and which will offer themſelves to our thoughts from ſeveral paſbages of it, it is ſufficiently manifef#, that the 

: main ſcope and buſineſs of this Book is to deſcribe the mutual Love, Union and Communion which is between Chriſt and his 
Eburch in the various conditions to which it is liable in this World as in the ftate of Weakneſs, and Deſertion, and Perſecu. 
tionfrom fooliſh Shepherds, and thel;ke, Chap. 1. 6, 7. & 3. I, 2,34 
Solomon doth bere wary bis Speech, ſometimes ſpeaking of the Church in general, as on Perſon or Body ; and ſemtimes of the 
particular Members of it, or of ſeveral Believers, both of ſuch as really and fincerely are ſo, or ſuch asProfeſs te be ſo,and of 

And bence comes the difference of Perſons here mentioned, the Mother, or Spouſe, aud 

the Children, er Daughters of Jeruſalem, Sixty queens, and Eighty Concubines, ſome that are Strangersto the Bridegroom, and 
Theſe things being premiſed will give great light to the ſeversl paſſages of this 


LG LE $ 


and owns himſelf th: Husband vf his People, Ifa. 54 5. Hol. 2. 16, 19, 20. In which places, by comparing theſe with many 
other Texts of Scripture, by God, or the Lord is meant Chri#F, 
down, and ſince did come from Heaven to Earth, for the conſummation of that eternal projet of Marriage between God and 

which alſo is fully confirmed by writings of the New Teftament which were deſigned for the Explication of the O[d, 


the Second Perſon in the God-head, who then was to come 


22. 2, 


John 36s 


Marrie 


From theſe conſideratiens,and many others which 


& 5. 2,7, &c. Mereover it is to be conſidered, that 


thou inwardly moye me, who am naturally averſcand backward to 
follow thee, 1 Both Ithy Speuſe,and the Virginsmy Companions; 
And this change of numbeOreaches us that the Spouſe in this Book 
1s ene great Body,conſiſting ef many Members,of whom therefore 
he ſpeaks ſometimes in the ſingular,& ſometimes in the plural num. 
ber, » Will follow thee readyly ,and chearfully,and ſwiftly;which 
15 oppoſed to her former ſluggifhneſs and liftleſneſs. We will not re« 
ceive thy Grace in vain, but will improve it, and co-operate with 
it,and ſtir up all our ſtrength to ſerve and obey thee: n Chrift, m 
Husband and Lord, the King of his Church, as he is oft called, the 
King of Kings. &c. o Heb, hath cauſed me to come,by drawing me as 
I deſired. He hath anſwered my prayer. p Where { may moſt freely 
and familiarly converſe with him,and enjoy him. He hath taken me 
pinto intimate communion with himſelf. Theſe Chambers ſeem to 
note either 1. Thoſe heavenly Manſions into which Believers are 
ſometimes ſaid to be brought, even in this Life, as Eph. 2. 6. be. 
cauſe they have a lively Faith,and a well grounded Hope and Af. 
ſurance,and ſome comfortable foretaſtes of that bleſſed State. Or ra- 
ther 2. Thoſe places and conditions upon Earth, in which they en« 
joy. the ſpecial favour and fellowſhip of Godin Chriſt,as the publick 
Aſſemblies in which Chriſt is in a peculiar manner preſent, Mat. 18. 
20, where his Word and Ordinances are diſpenſed, and where he 
poureth forth his Spirit and Bleſſings, and ſpeaks great Peace, and 
gives forth his Loves unto hisPeople.Yea even the private Cloſets, 
wherein Believers enjoy much of Chriſt by Prayer, and Praiſe, and 
Reading, and Meditation, are ſuch Chambers alſo : For it is not the 
Place, but the State,or Priviledge,which 1s here ſignified, and which 
is conſiderable. 9 Or, For thee, 1n,' or for, thy Love and Favour 
to us, which is the principal cauſe of our Joy. r Or, commemoerats 
or celebrate, This ſhall be the matter ofour Thoughts and Diſcourſes, 
s Thoſe chaſte and ſincere Virgins mentioned v. 3. wha are here 
oppoſed to hypocritical Profeſſors. 

5 I am black z, but comely «, O ye daughters ef Je- 
ruſalem x, as the tents of Kedar y,as the courtains of So- 
mon &. ' 

ft It might be obje&ed who art thou, that thou ſhouldeſt have or 
pretend roſucha Royal Bridegroom,and ſuch Honours and Favours? 
To this the Church anſwers,l confeſs,as to my 1ſe!f, and outward 
appearance in the Eyes of the World, 1 kave not that Pomp and 
Beauty which Men admire, but am black, ' contemptible and defor= 
med,both for my own Infirmities and Diforders,and for the ſcandals 
of ſome of my own Members,and for the Reproaches and Perſecuti- 
ons of worldly men.She aludes to the complexion of Pharaoh's Daugh< 
ter, who was black. w Yet I am gloriows within, Pſa. 45: 53: and 
comly through the Beauty which my Husband kath pur upon me, 
by his Gracesand Bleflings conferred upon me,fuch as Juſtification 
and SanCQtification, &c. x By which ſhe underſtands particular Be- 
lievers, whoſe Mother Jeruſalem is called, Gal: 4: 26: who had joyn- 
ed themſelves to her, eſpecially young Converts and weak Chriſti- 
ans,who were ſtartled and offended at the contemplation of her black 
neſs. y 7. e, Of the wild Arabiens, the Poſterity of Keaar, Gen: 
25: 13, who dwelt in Tents, which were black and uncomely ,both 
in themſclves,and by the injuriesof the weather,to which they were 
conſtantly expoſed. z As the Hangings wherewith Selomen's Houſe, 
was furniſhed, 'which none can doubt that they were moſt beautiful 
and glorious. So theſe two laſt clauſes anſwer to the two firſt,and 
that in the ſame order in which they lie. 

6 Look not upon me abecauſe I am black, becauſe 
the ſun hath looked upon me b, my mothers children 
c were angry with me 4; theymade me the keeper of 


the vineyards e,but mine own vineyard have Inot kept f. 


a With wonder and diſdain,becauſe of my blackneſs,as it follows. 
b My blackneſsis nor effential,and inſeparable,but chiefly cauſed by 
' the ſcorching beams of the Sunzs. e. of ſore Perſecutions and Tribu- 
' Jations, which by Gods permiſſion have befaln me,which are repre- 
ſented by the Sun, Mat: 13: 6, 21 c Falſe Brethren, who pretend 
that the Ehurch is their Mother, when their Actions demonſtrate, 
that God, the Husband of the Church, 1s not their Father; hypo« 
critical Profeſſors, who are, and ever were, the keeneſt Enemies 
to the true Church and People of God,1ſa: 66: 5: Gal: 4; 29: falſe 
Teachers, and their followers,who by their corrupt DoErines, and 
Diviſicns, and Contentions, which they raiſe, bring great miſchief 
to the Church: See 2 Cor«11; 26: Gal: 2:4: d Or, fought againſt we, 
as the ancients render it, and ſo marred my Beauty. ez. &- 
their vineyards, for te theſe ſhe oppoſeth her own, in the next 
clauſe. Having prevailed againſt me,they uſed me like a {lave,put- 
ing me upon the moſt diſhonourable andtroubleſom ſervices, ſuch 
as the keeping of the Vineyards was eſteemed, 2 King. 25: 12: 1a: 
G1: 5; Mat: 20: 17. f They gave me ſuch a full and conftant em- 


ploymenr in their drudging work abourtheir Vineyards, that they 
left me a9 time to wind my gown ; they hindred me from doing wy 
-S 


Chap, 'L 


[01 
that 
wail 
291 
30, 


his: 
C6 1 


Feek: I 


12,7 


i, 3B _ Sc; Fra, a(t 


CANTITC 4 


own duty, and from minding my own concerns. And therefore it 


ChaP. | 
(up: I 


that 
wailed, 


30, 


#his:93 
& 6; 1+ 


bo, i}; 


$22: 


& 6: 4: 


Ir, as 079 NOON 2 : for why ſhould I be || as one & that turneth 
r, 


\6ank, 15: T ſuffer for thy foke,and for my Love to thee. Being reproached and 


of theſe capacinies each place is to be undetſtood, is left ro the pru- 


VOhes: 2, 


Ka; 1, 7: 


Fetke16: wits 
V.12,r3. neck x, with chains of gold y. | 


J wonder ; if in this poſture and condition I be uncomely an 
Clicked by the Sun. Roc berxtth Churches or SOCIeries of PO 
of Religion,wherher good or bad,are oft called Yineyaras, _ ws . 
32. 32. Pſal. 80.8. Ja. 5-1, 2, 7. this and the foregoing claule _ 
be thus underſtood, that they endeavour to ſeduce and eorraſie! t 
Church with falſe DoQrines, and Superſtitious, or Idolatrous . Or- 
ſhip, & to oblige her to countenance and maintain them,and r _ 
by diſturbed and hiucred her from her proper work, which was the 
propagation and advancement of the true DoQrine& Worſhip in _ 
ticular Aſſcmblies and Perſons,beJonging,or to be brought 1n to her. 
7 Tell me, O thou whom my ſoul loveth g, where 


thou feedeſt b, where thou makeſt ry flock to reſt at 


] by ms the flocks of thy companions 7. _ : 
ance ek age all cheſeDiſcouragements andAfflictions whach 


-cv;ted by others, I flee to thee,O my only Refuge and Joy,and 
i bes direftion and help from thee. þ Underſtand thy flock, as Gen, 
29. 7. & 37. 16. Seing falſe Teachers and Churches bear thy Name, 
Mark 13+ 21, 22, and thy true Church ſomerimes lies hid, Rev. 12. 
14, diſcover to me which is thy true Church, and which are thoſe 
Aiſctmblies and People where thou art preſent,and where thine Or- 
dinances are diſpenſed in purity and power,and where thou doſt and 
wiltſt command the bleſſing, even L' fe for evermore, as It 15 expreſſed, 
Pſz. 133. 3« that I may joyn my ſelf to them. This 1s the requeſt of 
particular Believers, For it muſt be minded, as that which will be 
uſeſu! to explain many difficuities in this Book, that the Church 
3 this Book is ſometimes conſidered,and ſpeaketh, or 1s ſpoken of 
as.one entire Body,and ſometimes with reſpet unto.andin the name 
of her particular Members,and that promitcuouſly ; and, in which 


gent and viligent Reader to gather out of the words and Context. 


tioned as another viſible part and ſeat of Beauty,Hoſ. 10. 17. But to 
accommodate every part and ornament named in this Book,to {ſome 
particular thing inthe Church,ſeems ro have more of Curioſity and 
Artificethan of ſolidity and uſe. y Whereby,zg well as by the rows 
of jewels, he may ſeem to deſign all thoſe perſons and things where- 
with the Church is made beauriful in the Eyes of God, and of men, 
ſuch as excellent Miniſters, and Saints, righteous Laws, holy Ordi- 
nanCces, and the Gif:s and Graces of GodsSpirit all which are given 
by God to the Church,and are her beſt ornaments. 

Ir We z will make thee borders of gold, with ſtuds 
of ſilver a. 


z I thy Bridegroom, with the co-operation of my Father,and of 
the holy Spirit. Such plural Expreſſions are ſometimes uſed in Scrip- 
ture concerning one God to note the plurality of Perſons in one Di- 
vine Efſence, as hath been noted upon Gen. 1. 26. and elſewhere. 
a Beantiful and honourable Ornaments,ſuch as t::oſe v. 10. Variety 
of Expreſſions are uſed to ſignifie the various kinds and Improve- 
ments of the Gifts & Graces which are beſtowed by Chriſt upon the 
Church, The Phraſe here uſed may be compared with that of Ap- 
ples of gold in plures of ſilver, Prov. 254 1. 

12 Whilethe king 6 /itteth at his table, c my ſpike- 
nard dſendeth forth the ſmell thereof e. - 


b My Royal Husband. « Either 1. With the ſpirits of juſt men 
and bleſſed Angels in heavenly Glory,to which Chriſt was advanced 
afrer his ſufferings,and from which he poureth down his Spirit upon 
his People. Or rather 2, With me in his Goſpel and Ordinances, 
in which Chriſt ertertaineth his People, and is ina ſpecial, and gra- 
cious, and glorious manner preſent witki them, Mat. 18. 20.& 28. :0. 
whichalſo 1s oft repreſented in Scripture under the notion of a Fe: ſt 
or Banquer, of which ſee Prov. 9.1, 2,3, 5: 1/s. 25: 6. Mat: 8: 11: 
& 22: 12;1 Cor:10: 21, 4 The Graces of his Spirit conferred vpon 
me, and drawn forth by his powerful preſence,which is here com- 
pared to thoſe ſweet Ointments which the Maſter of the Feaſt cauſe 


7 In ar of the day,when the Shepherds in rhoſe hot Countries 
Ho _ their flocks into ſhadowy places. W hereby he means ; 
the time of hor peri:cition, when it is hard to find and diſcover the | 
true Church, partly becauſe ſhe 1s deformed by itand partly becauſe ; 
ſhe is obſcured ani driven into rhe Wilderneſs, as 1s ſaid, Rev, 12. | 
14. ki.e Be really one, the particle, as» being here a note of 
trut',as it 15inmany other placessWhy wiltit thou by withdrawing | 
thy ſe:f om me,and denying thy dir-Ction to me, ſuffer me, or } 
#ive occaſion to me to be ſuch a one? / Or,s wanderer, or vagabond, 
like 2 n«gletted and forelorn Creature expoſed both to cenſure and 
Janoer from both which it belongs to thee, my Husband,to prote& 
and fave me. m Or,about, or towards, as this particle 3s elſewhere 
aſed. » The aſſemblies of corrupt and falſ- Teachers and Worſhip- 
ers, by which I am like to be enſnared, if thou doſt foreſake me. - 
Theſe he callsChr:{tsCampanions, partly becauſe they proteſs the name 
of Chri't, and their conjun&ion with him in Gods Worſhip ; and 
partly beczuſe tney ſer themſelves up in Chriſts ſtead,and uſurp his 
Power in delivering and impoſing their own Law's and DoQtrines up- 
on mens Conſciences, and behave ti.emſelves like his equals or Come 
4nio:ns, not as becometh his SubjeCts. 


d fzed thy kids q befide the ſhepherds tents r. 
% To wit, wi So I fd my Sheep. For this is Chriſts anſwer to 
his Spouſe or People. 9 Though thou art black in thine own and 
others Eyes, yet thou art very beauriful and amiable ro me,as being 


waſhed white in my Blood, and beautified with my Gif's and Gra» N 


ſerve and follow the paths which my Sheep had trodden 
Me? Tye my faithful Servants, Abraham, and others, « hoſe Ex» 
? amples are propounded for Our Imitarion, Rom. ” "+ * Heb. 6. 12. 
For che Church in a!l Ages is one and the ſa.ne, and there 1s but 
one way far tie ſubſtance, in which all the Sai-ts from the begin- 
ning to the end of rhe World do wa'k, Chrift veing yeſterday and to 
day, and the [amr for ever, Heb. 13+ 8. and rhe Lamb ſlain fom the 
foundation of the World, Rev. 13.8. 9q Take corc for the feeding or 
reaching of ali,and eſpecially of young and w-ak Chriſtians, who do 
and ſhati aſſociate rhemſelves to thee, whom the Holy Ghoſt Calls 
Lambs, Fohn 21- 15, 16. as here Kids, Foralrhough grown and wan- 
ton Goats arecommon]y uſed in Scriprure in a bad ſenſe, yer rhe 
Kias of the Goats do ſometimes note Bzlievers,:s / ſa. 11, 6. and Kids 
were among thoſe Sacrifices which repreſented Curiſt, Heb, 9. 12, 
i3, 14. r Uader the Condu&, and according to the inſtruction of 
my Faithful Shepherds, or Paſtors, firſt and chiefly choſe who have 
gone before thee, rhe Prophets and Apoſtles, and after, and in ſub- 
ordination to them, and to their Writiags,others whomT hall raiſe 
from time to time to feed my People with Wiſdom and Under- 
ſtanding. | 
9 Thave compared thee s, * O my'love, to a campa- 
ny of Horſes in Pharaohs chariots z. 
s Heb: I have made thee ike ; which may be underſtood either 
1- Verþally;:by comparing. Or 2. Really, by making a real re- 
ſ:mblance in Quality or Condition. * Either r. For comlineſs ; for 


Jok14:15; an Horſe 5s a very ſtately and beautiful Creature, and the Egyprian 


Horſes were preferred before others, 1 King 10. 28. Iſa. 31 to 
and Pharaohs own Charior.Horſes were doubtleſs the beſt of their 
kind Or 2. Fr excellent order and uſefulneſs as thoſe Horſes 
did equally and orderly draw the Chariot, and carry Pharaoh with 
eiſe and ſpe:d whetber he deſigned to go» Or rather 3. Fo 
ſtrength anv courage, to overcome all thine En-mies. For Horſes 
are famous for that property, Job 39. 21, &c And the ſtrenigrh of 

- the Batte] was then thought ro conſiſt very much in Horſes, Prov. 
21. 31 and Chariors, ani eſpecially in a Company or Mulrirude of 
them. ' And the Church in this Book is repreſcnted not only as fair 
and beautiful, but alſo as teyr:ble ro her enemies, Cant. 6 10. Comes 
pare Rev. 19. 11, 14. ' | 


xs *Thy checks are comely with rows of jewels «, thy 


vs Which being faſtened to the Heads of Brides,uſed to hang down 
upon, .and. to adorn their Cheeks, according to th: manner in thoſe 


times. -He mentions the Cheeks as then chief: feat of Beairy : and he 
Intimates thar che Chuxches Beauty is ror datural,ncr from -her ſelf, 
but from the jewels wherewith Chriſt adorns her. x Which is men- 


3 Tf thou knownot », * O thou faireſt among wo- ;#.0 the vineyards of Engedi &. 


men o,go thy way forth by the foorſteps of the flock p, | 


ed to be poured out upon theHeads of the Gueſts,of which ſeeMark 
14: 3. Luke 7: 38: in which Ointments Spikenard was a chief ingre» 
dient. Joh; 12; 2, 3- e Which notes the exerciſe and manifeſtation 
of her Graces, which is a ſweet ſmelling ſavour in the noſtrils of. 
her Husband, and of her Companions. 

I 7 A bundle of mirche fis my beloved unto me g; he 
ſhall lie all night betwixt my breaſts. 

} Or, a bag of myrrhe, in which there was a conſiderable quantity 
of the Gum which droppeth from the Myrrh-Tree. Mycrrhe is bitter 
to the taſte, but ſweer to the ſme!], and ther: fore was ever reckoaed 
amonglt the beſt perfumes. See Exod. 3o: 23: Pſa: 45: 8 Joh. 19: 39: 
g He is moſt precious and comfortable ro me, and the Author of 


. my ſweer ſmell Jaſt mentioned: þ In the place where bundles or 


bags of Myrrhe,or other perfumes hang down, being faſtened about 
their Necks, which yes were taken away,and Jaid aſide by night. But 
the Church intimates that ſhe will not part with Chrift,neit: er day 
nornight, Or this Phraſe may note the Churches intimate Union 
with, and hearty AﬀeRion unto Chriſt. 


14 My beloved is unto me,as a cluſter of 


z Or, Cypreſs, as others render ict. Ir was an odoriferous plant 
growing in Vineyards, and ſome think thar it wasa moſt pleaſant 
kind of Vine, like that which bears Muſcarel'a Grapes ; yea ſome 
very learned men anderſtand ir of that Plant wrich dropped balm, 
which grew in,or near,the place here ſpecified,as is affirmed not on- 
Iy by the Jews,but alſo by Pagan Writers ; as D:odorus and Trogys. 

or are we concerned to know which or what .ir was ; it heing con= 
feſſ-d and evident, that it was ſome pleaſant and grateful Pl-nt, and 
that ir ſets forth that great delight which the Church hath in the en« 
Jjoyment of Chriſt. k A pleaſanc and well watered placein the Tribe 
of Judah, Joſ: 15. 62: Exzeks 47: 193 where there were many pleaſang 
Plants, whence it was called Hezaz0u Tamar,2 Chron: 20: 2, 


15 * Behold,thou art fair, || my love, behold, thou EY 
C2020 


art fair 1, thou ha#f doves eyes m, 


{ This is the Speech of Chriſt. The words are doubled, partly to 1Or, wa 
note the certainty of te thing, norwitaſtanding her mean and mo-. 77990 


det cpinion of herſelf, and partly ro manifeft his higheſteem and 

fervenr affetion for her, and ro aſſure her, that norwirhſranding all 

her infirmitics, he was very wellpleaſed with her. m Which are. 
1. Comely and pleaſant. 2. Modeit and hymble, not lofty, as the 
looks of ſome other Creatures are. 3. Mild and harmleſs,not fierce 

an fiery,nor lnoking and watching for prey,as the Eves of ravenous 

Birds are, 4. Chaſt and faithful looking only ro their Mats: fo 

that if any of h:m coſt 4 luftful eye upon another, her companions are en« 

raged againſt her, and quickly tear her in pieces; asfome variiral Hiſto= 

rian$ write, Andſuch are the Charches Eyes ſaid ro bs And by 

the Eyes he ſeems to d:fign partly her Looks, and ontward behaviour 

or Converſation, and partly and chiefly the inward diſpoficion of her 

Mind, which is commonly diſcovered, and in Scripture is oft ſigni- 
fied by the Eye, in which ſenſe we read of an evil Eye, Prov: 23: 6: 
. Mat. 6: 23: of 4 bountiful Eye, Prov: 22: 9: of 4 ſingle Eye, Luk un: 34: 
of 4 proud or lofty Look, all which fſignifie ſuch tempers of Mens 
| \;1nds. 

16 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved », yea pleaſant 

'o: alſo ourbedp 3s green 9. 


» The Church here again ipeaks, and retorts Chriſts words npon 
i himſelf, if Tam fair, it 1s ooly by thy Grace, and favourable accep- 
{tation 3 thou,and thou only art fair indeed, thy beauty is exquiſite 
and perfet. o As thou art beautiful in thy ſelf, ſo thou art amiable 
and pleaſant in thy condeſcenſion to me, and converſe with me, in 
communicating thy bleſſzd Counſels, and Graces, and Comforts to 
me. p Either 1. upon which we fir at meat, as the manner then 
was, Eff. 8. 5, 6. Ezek; 23: 41: Or rather 2. Upon which we lie, 
our -uptial Bed : for the Union 2nd communion betweey Chriſt and 
his Church is here repreſeated under the norion of Marriage. And 
accordingly the Bed ſeems ro denore the pl:ce or places where the 
nurch enjoyerh ſweer fellowſhip with Chriſt, by his Spiritaccome 
panying his Ordinances, and imparting his Merirs and Graces, and 
Comforts to her. 9qIspleaſant, as that colour is to the Eye ; is pre- 
pared for us, being adorned with green Garlands, or Boughs, and 
Herbs, as the manner ſeems ro have been with Country Brides, ſuc 
a5 the Spouſe in this Book is repreſented to ke: Or, as others, bork 


5 N 2 aACl- 


[ camphire lIOr,cpreſee 


fl ap Hl. 
ancient and later Interpreters, render it, 1s fouriſbing, 7. e. fruitful. 
So it is an happy preſage, that the Church ſhould not be barren,but 


Or, galle- 


ef, 


SS 


+Heb.houſe 


bring forth many Children to Chriſt ; of which ſee Iſa: 54: 1: &c. 
By theſe and the following words, the Church invites Chriſt to her 
Bed and Hoeuſe,where ſhe may freely and fully enjoy ſpiritual Com- 
manion with him. 

17The beams of our houſe ere cedar r,and our || raf- 
ters s of firree. 

r Not only ſtrong and incorruptible, bur alſo fragrant and de. 
lightful. Theugh I am in my ſelfbut amean and ruſtick perſon, 
yet the Houſe to which I invitethee, and where thou and I ſhall 
dwell together, is, by thy favour, built with Cedar. Whereby is 
here ſignified the ſtability of Gods Church upon Earth,which is cal- 
led God's Houſe, x Tim. 3: 15: and the firmneſs and ſureneſs of 
Gods Word and Promiſes. s The leſſer Beams. Or,as itis rendred 
in our Margent, and by others, Galleries, wherein we may walk. 
x Or, as the ancients and others render it, of Cypreſs, which was uf- 
ed in buildings, which alſo was ſtrong and fragrant, and therefore 
ſuits well with Cedars. 

CHAP. IL 
The excellency of the Majeftly of Chriſt, 1, and of his Church, 2. The bene- 
fits which the Church receives from him, 3. Chrif's love to hu Church, 
S; 44 The Church ſick of love ; her Prayer for help, 5. His care for het 
in ths condition 6. The Hope and Calling of the Church, 10 13s 

Chriſt's care of the Church, 14,15. The Profeſſion of the Church, her 

Faith and Hope, 16, 17. ; 

[| Am the roſe ef Sharon ; and the lilly of the val- 
leys as ey 

#s Theſe are the words either 1. Of the Spouſe, continuing her 
diſcourſe. Or rather 2. Of the Bridegroom, drawing forth .the 
Churches Aﬀe&ions to him- He compares himfelfto the Roſe and 
Lily, for fragrancy and beauty. Nor is it in the leaſt degree indecenty 
that Chriſt thould thus commend himſelf, partly becauſe his excel. 
lency is ſo tranſcendently great, that he is free from all ſuſpicion of 
Vanity and Self-flattery;and partly becauſe it is ſuitable to the ſtile 
of ſuch Writings, and to the preſent deſign of recommending him- 
ſelfto the af:&ion of his Spoiſe. He mentions the Roſe of Sharon, 
which was a very fruitful Place, as is evident from x C#ron: 27: 29: 
Iſs; 33: 9: & 65: 10. and famous for Roſes, as may ſeem probable 
from 1/s: 35: 1,2. Or, as others tranſlate it, the Roſe of the field, 
which may note that Chriſt is not only pleaſant and beautiful, bur 
free and communicative, offering himſelf to all rhat come to. him. 

- The Lilyis a beautiful and glorious Creature, Mat: 6; 29; eſpecially 
to one who beholds it through a magnifying Glaſs. He ſaith, The 
Lily of the valleys, becauſe they grew and flouriſhed beſt in ſuch low 
and wateriſh grounds. 

2 As thelilly among the thorns b, ſo is my love a- 

mong the daughters c. 

6 Compared with Thorns,which it unſpeakably exceeds in Glory 
and Beauty. c So far, and much more, doth my Church or People 
excel all other Aſſemblies or People. The title of Daughter, is ofc 
given to whole Nations; whence we read of the Daughter of Babylon, 
and of Egypr, and of Ecem, &c. Is. 47: 1. Jer: 46: 11: Lam: 4: 21; 

'* _ Theſe are Chriſt's words, to which the Spouſe makes the following 

Reply. And it is obſervable here,that as Chriſt is here repreſented as 
2 Shepherd, ard the Spouſe as a Country Virgin, ſo the ſimilitudes 
here uſed are agreeable to that eſtare. 

3 Asthe apple-treed among the trees of the wood c, 

ſo is my beloved among the ſons. + I fat down under 
+Heb. ; Þis ſhadow f with great delight, and his fruit g was 
ekighted {weet to my Þ taſte. | | 

and [at. 4 Whoſe fruit is very pleaſant and wholſome. e Which are either 

down, &c;) barren, or bearungrateful and worthleſs fruir. f Being weary and 

'+ Heb. pa- heavy laden with manifold fins and rroubles, inward and outward, I 

late; confidently repoſed my ſelf under his Prote&tion ( which is com- 
monly ſignified by a {basow, as I/#: 4: 6» & 25:4, &c.) and by him 
was defended from the ſcorching heat of Gods Wrath,and frem the 
Eurſe of his fiery Law, and from the miſchief or hurt of all ſorts of 
diſtrefſes. g The benefits which I received by him, the clear,and 

full, and certain knowledge of Gods Will,and the way of Salvation, 
Adoption, and Remiſſion of Sins, Faith and Repentance, and all 
manner of Grace,and Aſſurance of Glory. Thus he was to me borh 
a Sun, . and a ſbield, as is ſaid,  Pſal: 84: 11. i 

4 He brought me to the F banqueting houſe h,and 

of wine, © His banner over me # was love k, 

: þ Heb, Houſe of wine, or, by a common Synecdoche, of feaſting. 
By which he underſtands the places in which, or the means and in- 
ſtruments by which Believers receive the Graces and Bleſſings of 
Chriſt, to wit, the Holy Scriptures, Miniſters, and Publick Afſem- 
blies, and all Chriſts Inſtitutions. z Or, t9, or towards me, by the 
lifting up or diſplaying whereof I was invired and encouraged to 
come in to him,and to liſt my ſelf under him, as Soldiers are by 

the lifting up of a Banner or Enſign, of which ſee 1/a: 11: 10; and 

49: 22. & The Loveof Chriſt crucified, which, like a Banner, is 
diſplaid in the Goſpel, whereby Sinners ar2 drawn and engaged to 
come to Chriit, ſee Joh, 3: 14: and 12: 32: 2 Cor: 5: 14: The Mot- 

to or Deviee of Chriſts Bannner was not like thoſe of other great 

Generals,a Lion,or Leopard or Eagle, but Love, by which alone 

Chriſt made all his Conqueſts. 


, Heb. 5 Stay me / with flagons w, { comfort me with ap- 
—_ me. ples; for I a» ſick of love 6. 
Wit appies. © | Or, Suppor: me, keep me from ſinking or fainting. The Spouſe 


ſpeaks this ro her Bride-maids, the daughters of Jeruſalem, as it is 
expreſled wv. 7. or to the ſervants or Friends of the Bridegroom there 
waiting, and tothe Bridegroom himſelf; asa perſon ready to faiat 
cries tO any or all that are nearte him, or her, for help. » With 
Wine, which is a'good cordial, Pſal: 104: 15: Prov: 31: 6, 7: and 
which was there preſeat, v. 4+ Flagons are here, and x Chr: 16: 3: 
pur for Flagens of ine, as it is fully expreſſed, Hof: 3: 1. or for the 
Wine contained in them, as the Cup is put for Wine, Luke 22 204 
by a common Metonymy. » With oderiferous Apples, ſuch as 


EN 1ICLE $ 


Chap. jr, 
the Spirit. o Either 1. With tranſports of joy, which ſomtimes x 
cauſes a fainting of the Spirits as Gen: 45. 26. 1 Kin: 50: 5 Oc 

2. With grief for his departure from her, of which we read. Ch: 

3: 1, 2: or for fearof it. Or rather 3. With ardent deſire of a ſtricter 
Union,and clearer diſcoveries of his Love, and perte& anduninter. 

rupted communion with him in Glory. That ſickneſs is ſometimes 

the effe& of Love hath been oft obſerved by Phyſici-ns. 

6 * His lefc hand{| is under my head p, and his right * Cha.s: 33 
hand || doth embrace me. 'Or, was. 
> As a pillow for me to reſt upon. No ſooner did T cry out for l|Or, dig, 
help, but he was at hand to ſuccour me, and did manifeſt his ten. 
der Care and dear Loveto me. 

7 + *I charge you 4,O ye daughters :of Jeruſalem r, + Hebi 
by the roes,and by the binds 5 of the field :, thatye ſtir acjwe wi 
not up, nor awake « wy love x, till he pleaſe y, *Ch. 3.5 

q This verſe is ſpoken either 1. By the Bridegroom, who having & 8: 4; 

repoſed the ſick Church in his Arms, chargeth them nor to diſturb 

her, zl ſhe pleaſe, as the laſtclauſe in this caſe muſt be rendred. Or 

rather 2. By the Bride, as may be gathered, 1.. From the connexion 

becauſe both the foregoing and following wordsare hers. 2. Becauſe 

it was more decent for the Bride than for the Bridegroom to give 

this charge to the Bride-maids,the daughters of Jeruſalem ; and therefore 

in all places in this Book,where they are mentioned,the perſon ſpeak- 

ing to them is the Bride, and not the Bridegroom, and particular 

ly Ch: 3: 5: & 8: 4: where this verſe is repeated, and is confeſſedly 

and evidently ſpoken by the Spouſe, r My Bride-maids, Friends, 

and Members, over whom I have Authority. 5 Either 1. By the 
kindneſs you bave to thoſe pretty and amiable Creatures, as you 

would nor injure nor diſturb them, nor drive them away,bur pleaſe 

your ſelves with the ſight of them, as Shepherds and Country-Dama. 

{els commonly do. Or 2. By the Example of thoſe Creatures,which 

are pleaſant, and loving in their carriage towards one another. x 

Which have their uſual abode in the fields. » That you do not 

diſturb nor cffend him by your miſcarriages,but permit him and me 

fo enjoy a quiet repoſe. Do nothing to grieve him, or moleſt me. 

x My dearly beloved,called Love Emphartically, to expreſs her great 

paſſion for him. So Love is uſed, Cant: 7: 6: and in other Authors. 

) 7.e. Never, as this word, wntil,in ſuch like Phraſes, is commonly 

uſed, as G:7: 28; 15: 2 Sam: 6: 23: 1/a: 22314. For neither can ſin 

ever pleaſe him, nor can the Church bear it, that Chriſt ſhould ever 

be 4 Es that her ſweer Fellowſhip with him ſhould be intere 

rupred. 
8 The voice of my beloved z! behold, he cometh # 


leaping upon the mountains,skipping upon the hills 5. 

z Methinks I hear bis voice. The Spouſe being now refreſhed 

and revived with Chriſts preſence, awakes our of fleep, and breaks 

forth into this joy tv) Exclamation. Chriſts voice is nothing elſe but 

the word of Grace revealed outwardly in the Goſpe),or the Evange- 

Iical paſſages of the old Teſtament, and inwardly to the heart of the 

Spouſe by the Spirit of God. &« Either 1: He is coming, or will 

ſhortly come into the World; which Solomon and the reft of the O1d- 
Teſtament Prophers,and Saints,did earneſtly deſire and confidently 
*xpe&. Or 2. He is coming to me for my ſupport and comforr. 
6 He faith, leaping and :kipping, to note that Chriſt came readily, and 
(wifrly, with great defire and pleaſure ; and he adds, upon the Moun- 
tains 8nd Hills,cirher with reipe& to Mownt Zien or Jeruſalem, in and 
from which Chriſt firſt diſcovered himſelf; or to fignifie Chriſts fix- 
ed reſolution to come in ſpight of all diſcouragements and difficul- 
ries which ſtood in his way zor te ſhew that his coming was mani- 
feſt and viſible to the Eye of her Faith. Or, in his Phraſe he may 
have a reſpe& to the Roes and Herts here following. 
9 * My beloved 7s like a roe, ora|| young hart c: bes * Yer 1, 
hold he ftandeth behind our wall 4, he looketh forth « [|Or, few. 


at the window f, + ſhewing himſelf chrough the lat- THeb. fog- 

teſc, rtſhing, 
c Either 1, In Jovelineſs. Or rather 2. In ſwiftneſs, by compar-' 

ing this Verſe with the former. The ſwiftneſs of roes is neted 

2 Sam: 2: 18.1 Chr: 1:: 8.He is coming to me with allſpeed and will 

aot tarry a moment beyond the appointed and proper ſeaſon. 4 And 

vhilſt he doth for wiſe and juſt reaſons forbear to come;he is not far 

from us. "Though he be net yet come into the door of our Houſe, 

yet he ſtands behind the wall of our Houſe, and is always at hand, 

ro give me that ſuccour and comfort which I door may need and 

deſire. Both this and the following Phraſes ſeem to note the ob- 

ſcure and imperfe& manner and degree of Chriſts manifefting hime 

ſelf ro his People, either 1. Under the Law, in compariton of his 

diſcoveries in the GoſpeLOr 2. In this Life,in compariſon of what he 

will do inthe future Life. eFrom his high and keavenly Palace to- 

wards me, to watch over meand refreſh me with the proſpeC of his 

favour. f This Phraſe and that, rhrough the latteſs, intimate that . 

the Church doth indeed ſee Chriſt, but, as through # glaſs, darkly, | 

aSit is ſaid even of Goſpel-Revelations, 1 Cor: 13: 12: and was much 

more true of legal Adminiſtrations. Ce 27 OEM 

Io My beloved ſpake g, and faid unto me, -Rife 

up 4 my love, my fair one, and comeaway z *' 

g Invited and called me outwardly by his Word,and inwardly by *: * 

his Spirit þ Shake off ſloth and ſecurity, and diſentangle thy ſelf 

more fully from all the ſnaresof this World,and of thy own Luſts,' 

that thou maiſt be more ready to come to me, and more fit for my 

embraces. i Unto me,and with me3 follow me fully, ſerve me more. 

perfely, labourfor a nearer Union, and more ſatisfying communt- 


on with me. : 
1x For lo, the winter & is paſt, 


gone. ; en: 
k Which made the ways in ſome ſort unpaſſible, and ſo might 
ſeem to hinder or affright thee from coming to me, This winter, and 
the following rais, may be underſtood cither r. Of worldly Tris : 


bulations, which he intimates to be paſt and gone,to wit,ſo far that 
they ſhall not deſtroy nor hurt the Church, but on the contrary 09 


the rain is over, and. 


Pomgranates,or the like,the ſmell whereof was grateful and uſeful to | 2. Of ſpiritual Troubles ariſing in the 
perſons ready to faigr. B) theſe Meraphors underſtand the applica- | Sinners,from a deepſenſe of the guilt of Sin,the J 
tion of the Promiſcs,$ the comfortable and quickning influcnges gf ; qi Geo, the Scatenge and Curls of the Laws all 


her much good, both by — her Members; and increa[- * | 


ing her Graces, and prometing her Eternal Happineſs. Ur rather FE 
IY - Fi Minds FP. Confciendzs of : 
aftice = overs . 
ich made fehent 
" .- afraic” 


d) 


"E 


4. 
Lul 
32, 


"Ch. 


*Frek.3s. 
20. 
*Ch.8. 13. 


*Ezek.13 
4. 

Luke 137 
JU, 


\C.6.2, 
Fc 7-10, 


} Heb. 
breathe, 
C.4.6. 


Clap. It. 


6 £ 3 
afraid ro come unto Cod,and deſirous,if poſſible, to run away from 
him. Bur, ich Chriſt, IT have removed this great impediment, 
Gog is ready to be reconciled, and therefore caſt offall diſcourage= 
ments and cxcuſes, and come unto me. 

12 The flowers appear on the earth /, 
the ſinging of birds m is come,and the voice of the turtle 
# is heard in our land o. ES | | 

! This and the following clauſes are here alledged as evidences of 
the Spring-time, which, in the myſtical and principal ſenſe, ſeems 
ro {ignific the day of Grace,or the glad tidings of Salvation propo- 
ſ:d to Sinners in the time of the Law, by Types, and Shadows,and 
Promiſes, but much more clearly and fully in the Goſpel, and all 
the diſcoveries and communications of Gods Grace to Mankind in 
Holy Ordinances, in the Gifts, and Graces, and Comforts of the 
Holy Spirit, vouchſafed unto, and appearing in Believers, as Buds 
and Bloſſoms do in the Spring time. » When Birds ſing moſt freely 
and ſweetly,as they do in the Spring. Or, as the ancient Tranſla» 
tors render it, of cutting or cropping, not Trees, which agrees not 
with thar ſealon, but the flowers laſt mentioned; for Notegays, or 
other uſes. » Which changeth its place according to the feaſon,as 


3s obſerved, Fer. 8. 7. and by all other Writers, whe affirm that it 


diſappears in Winter, and appears in the Spring,as ſome other Birds 
2]ſo do; but this ſeems particularly to be mentioned, becauſe irdoth 
not only give notice of the Spring,bur alſo doth aptly repreſentthe 
Spirit of God, which even the Chaldee Paraphraſt underſtands by 
This Turtle, which appeared in the ſhape of a Dove, and which 
worketh a Dove-like Meekneſs, and Chaſtity, and Faithfulneſs jn 
Believers. 0 In Immanuels Land, as Canaan 15 Called, 1s. 8, 8. in 


the Church. 

13 The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs p, and 
the vines, ith the tender grape, give a good imell q. 
Ariſe my love, my fair one, and come away r. 


the time of 


'l4 


I CL Chap. ml 


; Until the morning of that great 2rd bleſſed day of the general ia 
Reſurrettion and Judgment, when all the ſhadows, nor only of Tg- 
norance, and Sin, and Calamity, but even ofall Ordinances, and 
outward Adminiſtrations, ſhal ceaſe, and make way for the imme= 
diate enjoyment of my Beloved. And this clauſe may be joined ei- 
ther 1. With the foregoing words,and ſo the ſenſe is,Chriſt doth and 
will abide with his Church as long as this Life and. World laſts ; 
which agrees with Chriſts Promiſes of being with his Church to the 
end of the World, Mat. 28, 20. But neither that nor this place im- 
ply that Chriſt willthen forſake his Pedplez but only ſecures Gods 
People againſt that which was the chief, if not only. matter of their 
fear, to wir, leſt Chriſt ſhould leave them,and caſt them off in this 
Life, which ifhedid not, they were aſſured that hereafter, they 
ſhould be ever with the Lord, 1 Theſe 4. 17. for it is well known 
and hath been oft obſerved already, that rhe word, unti/, doth not 
always exclude the time to come Or 2. With the following words. 
Turn thou my Beloved until the day break, &e. k Return to me. For 
although Chriſt had come to her, and ſhe had gladly received and 
embraced him, yet he was gone again, as is here implyed, and evi- 
dently appears from the next following verſe. Which ſudden change 
1s very agreeable bothro the nature and method of ſuch dramatical 
| Writings, and amatorious Tranſattions, and to the ſtate of Gods 
| People in this World, where they are ſubje& ro frequent changes 
, and vicifſitudes of Chriſts withdrawing from them, and returning to 
' to them again. /In ſwiftneſs;make haſte to help me, forT am read 
'ro faint. » A placein the Land of Promiſe, poſſibly the ſame called 
; Bithron, 2 Sam, 2. 29. Where it ſeems thoſe Creatures were in great 
abundance, or where they were commonly bunted, and ſo being 
purſued, they made all poſſible haſre to eſcape. 


CHAP. Il 


p Which it thooteth forth as ſoon as it Goth Leaves, in the Springs 
time, Matth. 24. 32. q Which, though not ſtrong,is pleaſant and 
grateful, and given by it in the progreſs of the Spring. r Theſe 
words are here repeated, to ſhew both the Churches infirmity, and 
indiſpoſition, which neeJs ſo many Calls and 4-guments to preſs fo 
neceſlary and advyantagious a Duty; and Chriſts tender compaſſion, 
to her weakneſs,and fervent deſire of converſe with here 

14 O my dove 5s, that art in the clefts of therock 
f,in the {ecret places of the * ſtairs «, let me ſee thy 
countenance x, * let me hear thy voice y;for ſweet :s 
thy voice,and thy countenance zscomely z. 

s So r1e Church is called, partly for her Dove-like Temper and 
Diſpoſition, becauſe ſhe is chaſte, and mild, and harmleſs,&'c. and 
partly for her Doveelike Condirion, becauſe ſhe 1s weak, and expo= 
ſed to Perſecution, and givento Mourning, as Doves are, 1/3. 38. 
14, and 59. 11. Exzek: 7. 16: and ſubject to many Fears, and there- 
fore forced to hide her ſelf in Rocks, as it follows, £ Where ſhe 
hid her ſelf, either 1. For fear of her Enemies, whom to avoid ſhe 
puts her ſelf inro the ProreQion of the Almighty. Or 2; Our of 
Modeſty, and an humble ſenſe of her own Detormities, and Infir- 
mities, which makes her endeavour to hide her felf even from her 
Beloved; as aſhamed to appear in his preſence, which is frequently 
the caſe of Gods People,efpecially after falls into fin.And this fenſe 
ſeems to be favoured by the following words,in which Chriſt reliev. 
eth her aga:nit tuch diſcouraging thoughts. = In the holes of crage 
gy and broken Rocks which retemble ftaits. So r1eſame thing 1s 
here repeated in other words.x Be not afraid nor aſhame ''to appear 
before me,come boldly into my preſence,and acquaint thy ſelf with 
me. y Thy Prayers and Praiſes. z Tiy Perſon and Services are ac- 
cepted by me, and are amiable in my tight. 

i5 Takes us b * the foxes c, the little foxes d, that 
ſpoil the vines e: for our vines have tender grapesf. 

4 The Bridegroom gives this charge to his Briedemen or Friends 
whoſe Office it is ro attend upon him,and to obſerve his Commands. 
By whom he underſtands thoſe Magiſtrates and Miniſters ro whom, 
under Chriſt, the cuſtody of the Vineyards, to wit, the Churches 
principally belong. Thetz he commands to zake the Foxes, i.e ro 
reſtrain them from doing this miſchief. 6 Heb. forus, F. e at our 
inſtance,and for our common good,as thisfpoiling of the Vines was 
injurious and grievous to.th:m both. c The diſturbers of the Vine- 
yard, or the Church, Seducers or falfe Teachers,whoare fitly com- 
pared to F-xes here, and Ezck, 13. 4- partly to diſtinguith them from 
great T'yrants and Perſccutors,who are compared to wild Boar;,or 0- 
ther wild Beaſts, Pſa]. 80. 13..as to Lions, 2 Tim.4, 17- and partly 
for their fox-like qualities and aCtions,becauſe they are very crafty 
and deceitful, 2 Cor. 11+ 13, 14: Eph. 4« I4r and very miſchievous 
alſo, Ezek. 34. 2, 3. 2 Tim. 2. 17. Tit. 1.10.lte 2 Pet. 2. 2, He 
mentions F-xes, becauſe theſe abounded in that Country,as is mani= 
feſt fronr Judges 15. 4. Pſal. 63, 10, Lam: 5. 18, &c, but under 
them he comprehends all noxious Creatures, upon the ſame reaſon. 


d This he adds, not as if the greatFoxes were exculed or exempred | 


bur for more abundan: caution, ' toteach the Church ro prevent Er- 
rors and Hereſies in the beginnings of them before they ſpread,and 


grow ſtrong and incurable. e Which Foxes do' many ways, as thoſe | 
who write of them have obſerved, by gnawing and breaking the lit= | 


tle Branches and Leaves,and the Bark,by digging holes in the Vine- 
yards,and ſo ſpoiling the Roots, by eating the . Grapes, and other, 
ways. f Which gives ys hopes of .a good Vintage. and which are” 
eaſily ſpoiled, if great care be not aſed to prevenr. it, 
16 * My beloved is mine,and I am 
among the lilies h. 
g Theſe are the words ofthe Bride, . who 


þ Either r. He feedeti his flock in ſweet and lovely Paſtures, where 


there is not only Herbage to fe:d rhem, bur Lilies ro dehght chem. ] 
*Oh.as Or rather 2, He feedeth himſelf; :,e,heabiderh and refreſheth him-"" 
ſclf amongſt his faithful People, which are compared to Lil:et,above 

. , 4 , 


V. 2. and Hof. 14. 5. a$ Chriſt aiſo is here, v. 1. ; 


17 * Until the day j- break, and the. ſhadows flee | 
| 163.14 away ;: turn & my beloved, and be chou *like a ros 


vin or a young hart upon. the mountains || of Bether ”:.| Char6b» Dyk «ll pattigulars 


his g: be feedech 
|  .  .. | her: Fathers Houſe becauſe the Men and the Women had ſeveral and 
. having come to him * 
upon his gracious Invitation, now maketh her boaſt of kim, and of 
that intimate Union and Communion which was. between rheriv: 


The Church ſeeking ChriÞt, 1 3- Her great joy ſhe findeth hire. 4. Her 

charge tothe Daughters of Jeruſalem nat to awake her Beloved, 5. The 
mannzy of Chriſts coming out of the Wilderneſs, 6, His Bed, Guard and 
Chariat, q — 9. Its Maker, Matter, and Furniture, 10. .n in- 
vitation of the Faithful tothe Kingdom of Glory, 11. 


loveth,T ſought him c,butl found him not &, 

s Either 1. In atime of Tribulaticn, which is commonly fienified 
by the N:ghr,and ſomerinies by a Bed,as Revel. 2. 22. Or 2, When I 
expetted ro find kim;for the Husband who by his occaſions is oft 
forced to be abſent from his Wife in the day time, bur at nightree 
turns to her,and beds with her. Or 3. When others compole them- 
ſelves to reſt and ſleep, my Thoughts were troubled, and my Aﬀe. 
tions were working towards him, and 1 was very deſirous to enjoy 
him, 6 I ſought for Chriſts gracious and powerful Preſence, in, and 
by the Word. and Prayer, and Meditation. c This Repetition de- 
notes her perſeverance,and unweatiedneſs in ſeeking him, 4 For 
he had withdrawn himſelf, and the manifeſtations of his Love from 
me, either becauſe I had not ſought him diligently,or becauſe I had 
abuſed his favour, or to try and exerciſe my Faith and Patience,and 
Love, and other Graces. | : % : 

2Now I will riſe e and go about the city f in the ſtreets 
and in the broad ways &-l will ſeek him whom my ſoul 
loveth : I ſoughthim, but T found him north 
_eIwill NY apgry my ſelf ro ſeek him, without whom 
my bed can give me no reſt nor comfort: f The City of God, the 

Church in which Chriſt reſides.g Nor finding him in private Pray; 
er and Meditation,I ſought him in the places of publick Aſſemblies, 
& Ordinances;for the People frequently met together in the ſtreets 
nor only for civi\, but for religious ends, 2 Chron: 3 2: 6: Neb: 8:1, : 
16. Prov: 1: 20, 2t: Luke 13: 26. h He ſaw fit ſcill to delay the diſco= 
veries of his Grace, partly to chaſtiſe my former folly, partly torry 


my ſincerity and conitancy,and partly that he might be more wel- 
come when he came tome, 


3 * Thewatch-menz that go about the city L, found 
me / : to whom I ſaid m, Saw ye bim whom my ſoul 
lovethn? S 6 | 

; The Miniſters of Chriſt, and Rulers of the Church,who are oft 
called Watchemengas 1/a: 62: 6. Ezekz 3: 17, and elſewhere. k To pre 
vent diſorders & dangers by night./Whilſc they walked round about 
the City, accordivg to their duty. m Without either fear or ſhame 
a5 being tranſported and wholly ſwallowed up with Love.- = She 
doth not name him, becauſe ſhe thought it needleſs, as ſyppoſing 
that a Perſon of ſuch rranſcendanrexcellencycould nor be unknown 
to men in that publick capacity. . Their anſwer is not mentioned 
either becatiſe theygave her no anſwer,at leaſt no ſatisfatory anſwer 
or becauſe bytheir filence the gathered that theywere unable or un- 
willing to inform her;and being. eager in tbe purſuit of her beloved, 
ſhe would not loſe time in impertinent diſcourſes with them. 


4 Irwas but A little that I paſſed from them, but T 


would not lethim go p, until Thad brought him into 
my mothers houſe 4z and into the chamber ofher that 
conceived me 7. A ENTREL | | 

o Chriſt mer me, 'and manifeſred his Love to megaccording to his 
\Promiſe made to thoſe that ſeek him conſtantly and diligently, Pro; 
8. 17; Mat: 7; 7, &Cc...p Being taught by my late experience how 
 doleful a thing it was to loſe him, and how. hard it was to find 
and recover him when he was loſt; q That there I might entertain 
and embrace him, and gain my Mothers conſent,and fo proceed to 
che conſummation of the Marriage. She ſaith her Mothers, rather than 


{-parared apartments in the Houſe. For the myſtical meaning whiclr 
is the-priricipal ſenſe intended in this Book,as the Spouſe here,and 
arr ray other places of this Book, ſignifies particular Believers, ſo 
her Mother is the univerſal Church, or the true Jeruſalem, which 
hath its riſe from above, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. in. 
which Chviſt and Believers are united, and have ſweet communion 
rdgether in holy Ordinances, into which Believers are ſaid to bring 
Chriſt by Faith; and Prayer, and the preparation of their Hearts for. 


* 
l 


him,whereby they invite & in'ſome' tort ingage Chriſt to go with 
them into! the publick Afﬀemblies,and there to give them his Loves, 
albhbough otherwiſe it isChrift who properly bringsBelievers into the 
m Altegorical Sgriptyres, are not to be 

5 NN 3 i {triftly 


BY night on my bed @ I fought him 6b whom my ſoul 


found him « whom my ſoul loveth : I. held him, an % Ch. 5.7; 


© 
»þ dI 
I 


Ch.8.s. 


fi Orbea, 


friftly urged, as all learned Interpreters agree, many being added 
only for the decency of the Allegory. r Chriſt isas it were the Fa 
tlier that begets, and the Glhurch the Mother that conceiveth and 
bringeth forth Believers. | 

* T charge you,Oye daughters of Jeruſalem,by the 


' roes, and by the hinds of the field,that you tir not up, 


norawake my love till he pleaſe 5. : | 
5 This verſe is repeated from Ch. 2. 7« where it is explained. The 
Spouſe exhorts her ſelf, and all her Fellow-Members to be very cir- 
cumſpe&, leſt by any unkind or provoking carriage, they ſhould 
give Chriſt-any cauſe to depart from them. He is ſuppoſed to al- 
Jude to the cuſtom of awakening the Bridegroom and Bride by 
Songs and muſical Inſtruments. l 
6 * Who is thiss that comethout of the wilderneſs « 
like pillars of ſmoak x, perfumed x with myrrhe and 
frankincenſe,with all powders of the merchant z? 
£ The perſons ſpeaking ſeem to be the Daughters of Jeruſalem, 
who upon occalion of the Brides Speech to them, make this reply, 
or theFriends of the Bridegroom:The perſon ſpoken of is the Spouſe 
or Bride. « From the Country, which in compariſon of Cities, 1s 
oft called a Wilderneſs, as ſa. 42. 11. Luke 1. 80. & 3. 2. and elfe- 
where, from whence we little expe&ed to ſee ſo beautiful and glo- 
rious a Bride to come, ſuch Perſons being uſually bred in Courts or 
noble Cities. This Phraſe implies that Believers were, and were to 
be called out of the World, which for its barrennefs, and diſorder, 
and repleniſhment with wildBeaſts,may fitly be compared to aWil- 
derne(s, and not only out of the Holy Land,which was as the Gar- 
den of God, bur alſo out of the Gentile-World,which in Propheti- 
calWritings is frequently deſcribed under the notion of a Wilderneſs 
as Iſa. 35. 1. & 43. 19, 20. Withal he ſeems to allude to the People 
of Iſrael, which to the wonder and aſtoniſhment of all thoſe parrs 
came up out of theWilderneſs into Canean.xTo which the Church 
may not unfitly be compared, partlyfor its excellent order and comc- 
ly proportions, partly for its dire&8&conſtant motion towardsHea- 
ven, andpartly to imply that though ſhe was really and inwardly 
glorious, yet ſhe was outwardly obſcure and deſpicable in the eyes 
of theWorld.Poflibly the words may be rendred thus,as with(which 
particle is very frequently underſtood,as hath been ſhewed in divers 
foregoing Texts )Pillars or # Pillar { for the plural number is oft pur 
for the ſingular ) of ſmoak, And ſo the ſenſe may be either 1, Being 
condatted out of rheWilderneſs as by aPillar of fmoak going before 
them, as the Iſraclites were led through the Wildernels to Canaan, 
by s Pillar of Cloud and Fire, 'Exod- 13: 21, 22. Or rather 2. Artend=- 
ed with many Prayers and Praiſes, and other holy performances, 
which'are perpetually aſcending from her, and offered by her unto 
God,So he alludes ro thoſe Pillars of ſmoak which all che day long 
aſcended from thoſe numerous Sacrifices which were offered in the 
Temple,which alſo was a Type of the Prayers of the Saints offered 
by Chrift unto his Father,as may be gathered from Rev, 8. 3, 4, 5. 
Bur this I only propoſe. y This doth not belong to the P:Ulars,as ap- 
pears by the diff:rence of the numbers in the Hebrew words the P:l- 
lars being plurahand this word ſingular, but to the Perſon, to wir, 
.the Spouſe, who isſaid to be thus perfumed, partly *for her good 
Name or Renown, which is compared to perfumes, Eccl.7.1.partly 
for her excellent Virtues and religious Services which are pleaſant 
and acceprable to God,and to Angels, and Men; and partly for the 
Merits and Graces of Chriſt, which are a ſweet ſaveur to God, Eph. 
5. 2..and wherewith ſhe isenriched and beautified. z Which are 
fetched by the Merchants from A4rab:a,or other remote parts of the 
World for the ufe of perfuming- ; 
7 Behold, his bed a,which is Solomons b, threeſcore 
c valiantmen are about it,of the valiant of Ifrael d. | 
& Theſe are the words either 1. Of the Bride=men, who ſpake 
v.6.& here continue their ſpeech, and from the admiration of rhe 
Bride proceed ro rhe admiration of the Brid:zgroom- Or 2. Of the 
Spouſe, who being admired by the Bridemen,turns their Eyes and 
Thoughts to the Bridegroom, and dire&s them tothe ſtudy of his 
excellencies,& intimates that all her comfort and ſafety is from him 
The Bed, the place of reſtand conjugal converſe, ſeems to denote 
the Church, which is comely through Chriſt's Beauty, and ſafe by 
his Prote&ion, in which Chriſt is glorified, & Believers enjoy ſweet 
fellowſhip with him,both kere:in the Church militanr, & eſpecially 
hereafter in the Church triumphane. 5 Which is the Bed, notof an 
ordinary Man, but of a great King,whom Solomon' repreſents or rypi- 
fies, and who is greater than Solomon, Nor is it hard to underſtand 
the Meſſias under the name of Solomon, his Type and Progenirtor, ſe- 
ing, he is upon the ſame reaſon called Davis, Jer. 30. 9. Ezek, 34. 
23. aadelſewhere, eſpecially conſidering that this whole Book is by 
the confeſſion both of Jewiſh and Chriſtian Interpreters ro be myſttz 
cally underſtood. cz, 8: Very many,the certain number being 'pur 
for an uncertain, as is frequent. 4 He alludes to Selomon's Guard or 


Watchmen, whereby he deſigns all thoſe Creatures,whether Angels 


Princes, Miniſters, or others; whoſe Miniſtry God uſeth for rhe 
Prote&ion'of his Church.. : 


8 Theyall hold ſwords, being expert in wars every | 


man hathhis {word upon his thigh e, becauſe of fear in 
the nightf.. | 
e Is prepared and ready to fight,as this Phraſe notes, Exo, 32. 27: 
Pſal. 45. 3* f To prevent-thoſe dangers and miſchiefs which are 
moſt frequent and moſt dreadful in the night ſeaſon: The nighr may 
note either.r, The time of Tribulation, Temptation,or Delertion; 
Or, 2: The whole rime of this Life, which may well be called n:ght 
in reſpect of that Ignorance and Error, and other kinds of Darkneſs 
wherewith ir isatrended,as the future Life-is compared to a day,this 
'Life being the only cime wherein ſuch a Gaardis neceſlary, 


9 King Solomon made himſelf a ||chariot g of the 
wood of Lebanon h. 


4 £4 Chap. 1V, 


for whichLebanon was famous;which wood being incorruptible doth 
firly ſfignifie rhs Wordof t he Goſpel, which endureth for ever, 1 Pet.s, 25; 
and 1s called the everlaſting Goſpel, Rev. 14. 6. in oppoſition to the 
Legal inſtitutions, which were to continue only «nil the time of Ree 
formation, as we read Heb. 9g. '10. 
io He madethe pillars thereof ; of ſilver, the |]bot- 

tom & thereof of gold, the covering / of it of purple m; "m 
the midſt » thereof being payedowith love p, Þ for the j,,j ws 
daughters of Jeruſalem 9. Heb. fom 

; Whereby the Chariot is either ſupported or adorned, Which the daugh. 
may fignitie either cr. Miniſters, who are called P:llars,Gal.2.9 and ters, 
that of ſilver, becauſe they are,or ſhould be, pure and precious like 
ſilver. Or, 2« The firmneſs and certainty of Chriſts Word,both of 
his DoCtrines and Promiſes, which alſo are pure as filver,Pſal. 12, 6. 
Although there is no neceflity that either this or the following par« 
tculars ſhould be diſtia&tly applied ro ſeveral things in or about the 
Goſpel;but this in the general mayſuffice,that as all theſe particulars 
are added to ſhew the perfe&ion & beauty of the Chariot,ſo they do 
imply that Chriſts Word isevery way amiable,and perfe&,and able 
to make the man of God perfe&. & Either r. The couch or ſeat 
which was mad: of,or covered with cloath of Gold.Or 2. The uns 
der & lower part,which was at leaſt covered withpureGold, Where« 
by he may ſeem to underſtand the foundation of the Word & tro. 
miſes,which is eitherGods Covenant,or Chriſts Mediation,jin whom 
all the Promiſes are Yea and Amen. /Either 1. The curtains whereby 
Perſons in the Chariot are covered or hid from the fight of thePeo. 
ple. Or rather 2 The uppermoſt part of it;cither in the outſide or 
the inſide of it. Some render the word,the ſeat or ſeats, m Which rc- 
preſents Chriſts Blood, which is our Propitiatory or covering to ſhel- 
ter us from Gods Wrath. » The inward parts, eſpecially thoſe be. 
tween the upper and lower parts, which have been already menrione 
ed. o Covered and adorned p With beautiful and lovely Ornaments 
luch as curious Embroidery,enriched with Gold and precious ſtones, 
Lwe being here put for lovely ObjeQs as Fear is oft put for terrible 
things, as hath been oft noted. Whereby we may underſtand the 
Love of Chriſt to the Sons of Men, or his lovely Life, and Death, 
and Reſurre&ion, &c. which is the moſt amiable part and matter 
of the Word or Goſpel. q For their delight and comfort, who: are 
all concerned, and bear a part in this Marriage. 

' 11 Go forth », Oye daughters of Zion s,and behold 

king Solomon r with the crown wherewith his mother 
crownedhim# in the day ofhis eſpouſals x, andin the 
day of the gledneſs of hisheart y. 
r The Bride, to wit, the Church, bids particular Believers go 
forth to ſee this ſight. Whereby is implied, that Chriſtians muſt go 
our ot the World, to wit, in afﬀfe&ion,and out of themſelves,by de- 
nying rhemſelves,and putting off the old man,their corrupr Nature, 
if they deſire to ſee and enjoy Chriſt. 5 The ſame with daughtersof 
J-ruſalem ; for Zn and Jeruſalem are oft times promiſcuouſly uſed 
in Scripture. 7 Looking in and through him ppon the Meſſias, who 
1s the King of Peace, ans of whom Solomon was an illuſtrious Type. 
« Wrich being applied rc Solomon, may deſign either 1. Che Crown 
Royal, wherewith h# Mother, Bathſheba, is ſaid to have crowned him, 
becauſe Solomon was crowned. by Davids Order upon her ſuggeſtion, 
and by virtue of his Promite confirmed by an Oach to her, x Kin.r. 
16, &c. Or 2,That Garland or Crown which was uſually worn in 
nuprial Solemnities as may be gathered from Etek. 16. 12. and is ex* 
pr-ſly affirmed oy divers ancientWriters.But being applied toChriſt 
ir nores that Honour and Glory, which was given ro him, which 
trongh principally done by his Father, yet is here aſcribed to his 
Mother. i. e. tothe univerſal Church, or Congregation of Believers, 
which in reſpett of his Humanity may. be called his Mother, partly 
becauſe he was born in, and of her, and one of her Members, and 
therefore was ſubje& ro her Inſtitutions, whence ſhe is repreſented 
as a Wornan in travail, bringing forth a Man child, to wit, Chriſt, 
Rev. 12. 1 5 and partly becauſe in'a Spiritual ſenſe ſhe is ſaid 
to conceive and bring forth Chriſt in particular Believers, Gal.4.19. 
Ard this Mother miy be ſaid to crown Chriſt, both becauſe it is the 
great deſign and buſine!s of rhe Church to advance Chriſts honour 
in the World,and becau'e ſhe brings forth Believers, whom Chriſt 
eltcems as his Crown and Glory, as God calls them, 1a. 62.3. x When 
the Churc\ is betrothed or married to-him, Jer. 2.2,Hoſ. 2.19, 2 Cor. 
Il, 2. whiCh is done when the Covenantis made or conficmed be- 
tween them, or when faithful perſons are converted and uvired te 
Chriſc, and more co. plearly when they arereceived by Chriſt into 
his more full and immediate fellowfhip in the Kingdom of Glory. 
y When he rejoicethover his Bride, as the Phraſe is uſed, Iſa, 62. 5. 
So this is the tame thing expreſſed' in other words, The Convere- 
fion and Salvation of ſinners is the jay of Chriſt, as appears from 
Jia. 53.11, Inke 15. 32 ; _ many other places of Scripture. 


Chriſt commendeth his Church for her beauty, 1——— 7. He callcth her to 
go with him; 8, Manifeſting his Love and Aﬀetion for her, 9. A 

further commendation of her, 10 —— 15. - She frayeth for the effeFual 
*TDEho!d a; chou art fair b6, my love, behold, thou g*. 
E, art fair c, - thou haſt doves eyes d- within thy +ch.6:5,6. 
locks ez thy hair fs as a * flock of goats g, | that ap-|| = - 
;peareth from 4 mount Gilead z. eat 0], 
i"-4 Thefs and the following words are evidently ſpoken by the 
{Bridegroom to;*and concerning his Spouſe. b Notin thy ſelf, but 
by my beauty, being cloathed with my Righteouſneſs,and adorned 
with all the Graces of my Spirir,which I acknowledge to be in thee. 
ic He repeats it both to confirm the truth of his Aﬀertion, znd to 


operation of his holy Spirit on her to make her fruitful, 16. *Ch.1-i5; 


|[ſhew the lincerity and fervency of his Aﬀe&tion to her. d Thou art 


'barmleſs, chaſte,.&'c. as appears by thine Eyes, which commonly 
diſcover the temper of the mind or Perſon. See more of this Phrale 


g In which the Royal Bridegroom and Bride might ride together | Ch.1-15. And whereas the beauty of the Spouſe is here deſcribed in 
in ſtate,as the manner was in the nuprial ſolemnicies offuchPerſons;;] her ſeveral parts, we need not labour much about the Application 


By this Chariot he ſeems ro underſtand the Word of Chriſt diſpenſed 
by his Miniſters in the Churca, whereby borh Chriſt isexalred and? 
rides triumphantly in the World, conquering his Enemies,zad ſub- 
duing the World ro the Obedience of the Goſpe). and all-Believers | 
are carried with ſafety and comforc through ths pretenteyil World 
into thoſe bleſſed Manfions of heavenly Glory» 4 4. e. Of Cedars, 


pf each particular to fome diftinctMember or Grace of the Church, 
this being the chief deſign of this deſcription ofaBride which is bean- 
tiful in all-points,to ſhew that complearneſs and abſolute perfection 
which the Church hath in part received,and ſhal more fully recelve 
from Chriſt in the future Life- Yet becauſe the Church 1s 2 Body, 


conliſting ofdivers Mcmbers,andenriched with varisty of Gifts : oy 


% 


1-15, 
\ 12, 

16:5,6- 
"2 thet 
of, &c« 


AC RT ” 
gg 


* Cki6. 7. 


Chap IV- 


WY OR, 
Graces, T know no reaſon, but the ſeveral parts of this deſcription | 
may have a more ſpecial reg:rd to one or other of them. And 10 her 
Eyes may here netecither 1. Her Teachers,who are zn/tead of Eyes t0 
her, as the Phraſe is, Numb: 10: 31, whencethey are called Szers & 
Guides, &c, Or 2.Th* diſpoſition of her Mind or Heart, which 1s 
compared to the Eye, Mar. 6: 22,23.and is ofr diſcerned in the Eye. 
e Which being decently compoled make the Eyes appear more ami- 
able; withal this intimates the modeſty of her Looks; her Eyes are 
not wanton, and wandring, or lofty, but fober, and humble, and 
confined within their proper bounds, looking dire&ly upon her Hul- 
band, not looking aſquint upon other Lovers, nor minding other 
Gods or Chriſts. If the Eyes ſignifie Teachers, rhe Looks may note 


{ GC £4 mes 


I. Such as are fit and reſerved for thz uſe of mighty Men.Or 2.Such 
as had been uſed either by themſelves, or by their Enemies, from 
whom they took them by force,& were lung up there as Trophies 
or Monuments of Victory. Which is added ro ſhew that the Church 
15 not only beautiful and glorious,burt aiſo ſtrong and viorious o* 
ver all her Enemies, and to intimate the great power & exploits of 
Faith,of which read Heb: u1.and which is compared to aſbe/d,Eph:6. 
16, A thouſand is here put indefinitely for a great number. 


5 K Thy cwo breaſts x are like two young roes that * Ch.7.9 


are twins, which feed among the lilies y. 
| x Another part in which beauty conſiſts, Ezek: 16: 7. By which 


the People afſembled together to hear their Teachers,to whom they 
are a great Ornament when they thrive by his Teaching, f The 
Hair of thine Head, which is a great Ornament to the Female Sex, 
1 Cor. 11, 15, This Hairmay ſignifie either 1,The inward Thoughts 


and Meditations : Or rather 2. The outward Converſation, and | 


viſible fruits of Holineſs, which do greatly adorn the Profeſſors and 
profeſſion of Religion, as Hair doth the Head, as is implied 1 7/m- 2: 
9,10. 1Pet. 3: 3,4, 5: £ Which are comely & orderly in going,Prov: 
39:29,31.and afford a goodly proſpe&@. Or rather, the hair (which 
word is here to be underſtood,:s appears both from the compariion 
it ſelf,and from divers places where Goats are put for Goats=hair,as it 
is in the Hebrew Text, Exod: 25: 4. & 26; 7. & 35; 26. Jof a 
flock of Gonts, which in theſe parts was of extraordinary lengrh, and 
thickneſs, and ſofrneſs, -and comelineſs, and much more like to the 
Hairof a Man or Woman than the Hair of our Goats is, as is evis 
dent both from Scripture, as Gen: 27; 16: 1 Sam: 19: 13. and from 
the Teſtimony of other ancient Writers, as Apule:ts, Martial, &c. 
h That feeding there, or coming dowa thence, or going up this 
ther, ſhzw themſelves evidently to thoſe who ſtand below it,or near 
them, Or, as it is rendced in our margentz,and by others, that eat, 
or gaze of, or upou. i Which he mentions as a very fruitful place, 
and fit for the breeding of all ſorts of cattel,as is manifeſt fromNum. 


. 32. I, Jer: 504 19, Mich. 74 14. and eſpecially of Goars,part!y bes 


cauſe it was an hilly and woody Country,and partly becauſe it a» 
bounded with rofinous,and oily,and gummy Trees,as appears from 
Gen. 37: 25. Jer 8. 22. & 46- 11+ wherewith the Goa's are much 
delighted.as Droſcorides obſerves. And ſome affirm that the Hair of 
theſeGoats was commonly ofa yellow colour,as may ſeem probable 
from 1 Sam: 19, 13,16. compared with 1 Sam. 16.12, and from Cant, 
7. 5: whichalſo was in ancient times eſteemed a beauty in Men or 
Women, as the Learned know. 

2 Thy teeth arelike a flock & of ſheep ] that are even 
ſhorn mz, which came up from the waſhing : where- 
of every one bear twins », and none is barren among 
them o. ; 

k Numerous an1 placedin due order. 1 Which is here fitly ſup- 
plied our of Cart, 6- 6, where it 1s expreſſed, m Smooth and even, as 
alſo clean & white, whereas unſhorn ſheep retain much filth in their 
wool,even after their waſhing. » Which ſeems to note the two rows 
of Teeth,like Twins,one dire&ly anſwering co the other; which is 
a great part of the Beauty or comelineſs belonging to the Teeth.Nor 
let any wonder to hear of ſbeep bearing Fwins, for that there were 
many ſuch in the Eaſtern Countries is apparent, nor only from ko- 
1Iy Scripture.but alſo from the expreſs Teſtimony of 4riſto:le, and 
other ancient Writers. o Not one Tooth is lacking. By the Tech 
ſome underſtand the Teachers, which may be compared to Teeth, 
becauſe they prepare,and as it were chew ſpiritualFood for the Peoe 
ple, and to ſuch Teeth as are here deſcribed for their great number 
and excellent order,and for that purity and fruitfulneſs which is re- 
quired of them, others underſtand ſome gracious qualification or 
ation of the faithful, eirher their Faith, which is compared to eat- 
ing,John 6:41,&c.and elſewhere,which alſo puriiies the Heart&Life, 
and produceth good works in abundance : or their Meditation or 
Study of God,and of his Word, whereby like the clean Beaſts un- 
der the Law,they chew the cud; which alſo much promotes their 
purity and fertility. But, as I ſaid on the firſt verſe, there is no need 
of a diſtin& Application of every particular, as it is in Parables, 
where many things are added for decency,which belong net to the 
main ſcope,& therefore are negleQed in the interpretation of chem 
The ſcope of this place is only to ſer forth the Churches Perfe&ion 
and beauty by the reſemblance of a beautiful Woman, and one parr 
of beauty conſiſts in the colour and order ofthe Teeth, 

3 Thy lips are like a threed of ſcarlet p, and thy 
ſpeech 3s comely 9:* thy temples r are like a piece of a 
pomegranate s within thy locks x. 

p Fine, and ſmooth, and ſofr, and round, and red, in which the 
beaury of the Lips confiſteth. q Which is added parcly as anorher 
ingredient of an amiable perſon;and partly to explain rhe foregoing 
Metaphor. TheCommunication or Diſcourſe of Believers is edifying 
and comfortable, and acceptable to God,and to ſerious Men. Com- 
pare Pſal: 4.5: 2.Col: 4: 6, r Under which doubtleſs he comprehends 
the cheeks, which are joyned to them, and in which a great part of 
beauty lies, which therefore would not have been omitted 1n this 
deſcription. 5 In which there isa lovely mixture of red and white. 
This may note both the Churches beauty and her modeſty, which 
ſheweth it ſelf by bluſhes in thoſe parts when ſhe hath fallen into a- 
ny ſin as the higheſt Believers in this World ſometimes do, 7 a fur- 
ther evidence both of beauty and modeſty. See on v. 1. ; 

4 Thy neck 5 is like the tower of David 7 built for 
an armory, whereon there hang a thouſand bucklers all 
{hields of mighty men «, 

s This may ſeem to repreſent theGrace of F —_— which we are 
united to Chriſt,as the Body is to the Head by the Neck,& through 
which Chriſtians receive their ſpiritual Food,and conſequentlytheir 
ſtrength and ability for ation, # Round, and ſmooth, and white, 
lorrg and ſtraight, and upright, firm, and ſtrong ; and moreover a> 
dorned with chains of Gold or Pear], or the like Ornaments. All 
which things as they ſet forth the beauty of the Neck, ſo they may 
ſignifie the various excellencies and uſes of Faith. By rhis Tower he 
underſtands either 1- The ſtrong hold of $'0n, of which ſee 2 Sam. 
5: 9. Or rather 2, Some other Tower built by David, when he re- 
paired, and enlarged, and fortified his Royal City, x Chr, 11.8.and 
uſed by him as an Armory. See Neb; 3: 19, 25, 26,27. « Either 


; theſe are rather Chriſts than the Church-s Breaſts, 
Churches fervent Love to Chriſt,and ro all the Saints,for the Breaſts 


|; ſome underſtand the two Teſtaments, cr ive two Sacraments ; but 


Others, the 


fgnifie Love, Prev: «; 19. Cant: 1813, Others her fruitfulneſs, both 
11 good works, and in bringing up Children unto Chriſt, like a 
| Nurſe with her Breaſts. But the following ſimilirude ſeemeth not to 
reſpett the uſe of the Breaſts,or the Love which is ſignified or mani- 
feſted by them, bur their comelineſs. And therefore this is generally 
to be und-rſtood of the Churches Beauty in all parts, as hath been 
ſaid. y 7:6 In the fields where Lilies grew,as is evident both from 
Mat. 6. 28. where they are called the Lil:es of the field,and from other 
Scriptures, and from the Teſtimony of other Writers. The Lilies 
being white and ſwelling,and the Roes of a reddiſh colour,and their 
Bodies being hid from fight by rhe Lilies, their Heads only appeare 
ing above them, bear ſome reſemblance to the red nipples appearing 
in the top ofthe Lilie white Breaſts. Bur we muſt remember that this 
| Book is a ſacred Paſtora),& the Bridegroom is repreſented asa Shep= 
! herd,and the Bride as a Country=Maid,and therefore ſuch ſimilitudes 
are uſed as are agreeable to Perſons of that Qualiry, and ſuch are u- 
ſual in prophane Writers of this kind,as the learned have obſerved. 
They are co-npared to Roes for their lovelineſs, of which ſee Prov, 
5. 19. t2 young ones for their ſmalneſs, which in Breaſts is a beauty; 
to Twins for their exatt likeneſs. 


6 * Until the day fbreak,and the ſhadows flee away 
hill of frankincenſe a. 


rurned by the Bridegroom as an. Anſwer to that Requeſt. And this 
place may be underſtood either 1. Of the day of the Goſpel, when 
all legal ſhadows ſhal vaniſh ; Or 2. Of the day of Glory, or of rhe 
general Reſurre&ion,when all manner of ſhadows and Ordinanceg 
thal ceaſe.Till which time either the Spou!e feeds among Lilies, as was 
now faid, wv. 5. or the Bridegroom ge:s him tothe Mountains, &c.as it 
follows. For the words are by moſt joined with rhe foregoing, 
and by ſome with the following clauſc. a Either 1 To the Temple 
at Jeruſalem, which is oft and fitly exprefled by the name of a moun- 
tain or hill, becauſe it was built upon a Mountain,and which may be 


Myrrhe and Frankincenſe which was there uſed & cffered; in which 
place theChurch was to feed,and Chriſt would continue his preſence 
until the dawning of the Goipeleday. Or 2. To my Church upon 
Exrch, which was ty ro by the Mountain of Moriah, and the Tems 
ple upon it, and w 

tain, as Iſa. 2, 2, 3. Mich. 4. 1, 2. and elſewhere, and which may 
well be called a « Mountain of Myrrhe and frankincenſe,both for the ac- 


a ſweet ſmelling ſavour to God and Men,and which there, and rhere 
on'y,are poured forth. Thus Chriſt direCts his Bride, to wir, parti- 
cular Believers,where they may find and enjoy him, namely in his 
Church and Ordinagces. 


thee c. 

b Itis needleſs to mention the ſeveral beauties of all thy parts,for 
in one word thou art wholly beautiful,and it may be ſaid moretruly 
of thee than it ws of Ablalom,z2 Sam. 14. 25. that from the ſole of 
thy Foot to the crown of thy Head there is no blemiſh in thee 
c Which 3s not to be underſtood ſimply and abſolutely,as if the Peo- 
ple of God were really perfe&t, and free from all ſin, bur either x. 
Comparatively, no ſuch ſpot or blemith as is in wicked Men, or, as 
is incoaliſtent with true Grace,of which Moſes ſpeaks,Deur. 32.5. Or 
:.[n cegard of Gods gracious acceprtation,in which reſp-& he is ſaid, 
avt to behold iniquity inJacob, Numb. 23.21. God doth not look upon 
chem with a ſevere Eye,as they are in themſelves, but in & through 
Chriſt in whonrhe accepts them,as if they were perfeQ,parrly, be- 
cauſeir is their chief deſign,defire,and endeavour to be fo, an part= 
ly becauſe Chr {t 1arh undertaken to make them ſo, Eph. 5. 25, 27, 
and they ſhal one day be ſuch. 


8 Come with me 4 fromLebanon e,my ſpouſe f,with 
me from Lebanon:look g from the top of AmanaZ,from 


from the mountains of tte leopatds &. | 
d Unto the Mountains of Myrrhe, &c. mertioned v,6. e A 
known Mountain in the Ncrrhof Canaan, which is ſometimes men. 
tioned asa pleaſantand glorious place, as Cant, 5; x5, Ia. SCE 
Hoſ. 14. 6, &c in regard of its goodly Cedars; and ſometimes as a 
barren Wilderneſs, as 1/a. 29. 17. and feat of Wild Beaſts, as 2 Kin, 
14. 9, &c- Which latter ſenſe ſeems more? agreeable,borh to the OP= 
poſition which is here racitly made between his Mountain and the 
mountainof Myrrhz, and to the quality of the other mountains here 
joyned with Lebanon, and to the laſt clauſe of the verſe. f This is 
the firft time that Chriſt gives her this name, which he now doth 
borh to encourage and oblige her to go with him. e To the place 
co which I invite thee to go,which from thoſe high Mountains thou 
-naiſt eaſily behold, the ſight of which will certainly enflame thee 
with deſire to go thither.He alludes roMoſcs his beholding the promi- 
ſ-dLand from mount Piſgah-h Not thit Amana which divided S)FiS 
from Cilicia, which was too remote from theſe parts, but another 
of that name not far from Lebanon. i Which may be thenames of 
two tops of the ſame Mountain,as Horeb and Sinai ieem to kave been ' 
Or, Shenir, or ( the copulative, and, beiog put disjunively for o 
as if 15 in many places, which have bzen obſerved before ) Hey 
mon, for this Mountain is called both Shenir and Hermon, Dent, z,. gr 


fo the later name, Hermon, may be added to the former, as being 


s N 4 be frer 


called a Mountarn of Myrrhe & Frankincenſe,becauſe of the abundance of 


ichin prophetical Writings is called a Moune 


ceptable ſervices which are there offered to God, and for the Preci= 
ous Gifts and Graces,and Comforrs of the Holy Spirir,which are of 


z, I will getme tothe mountain of myrrhe, and to the *Ch:3 


the cop of Shenic and Hermon 4, from the lions dens, *Deu.3.9- 


17. 


Heb. 
z Theſe words are uttered by the Bride, Ch. 2. v. 17. an4 here res #!e9tbe. 


7 * Thou art all fair b, my love, there is no ſpot in *Epb 5.47 


Chz P. I V. | | 


l Or, taken 
away my 
bearte 


| Ch:r:3. 


| + Heb: 
barred. 


tOr, eye 
preſs, 


Chap. IV. 


- ſee on Ch. 1: 2, 4+ 5 Of the Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit, where- 


- ouſneſs wherewith I have cloathed and "adorned thee. Chriit and 


*ter known to the Iſraelites: From theſe or other ſuch likeMoun- 
ck are inhabired by Lions and Leopards, Which ſeems to 
be added as an Argument to move the Spoute to go with him, be- 
cauſe the places where now ſhe was, were not only barren, butalſo 
dangerous,as being the Habitations of Tyranrs and Perſecurors,and 
wild or ſavage People, who are oft deſcribed by the names of wild 

zaſts, whoſe natures they have and whoſe prafices they imitate, 

9 Thou haſt || raviſhed my heart/, my lifter mm, my 
ſpouſe ; thou haſt raviſhed my heart with one of thy 


eyes », with one Chain of thy neck 0. 

{ Tam overcome with thy beauty,and therefore am ſo deſirous of 
thy company. w2 So he calls her,partly becauſe both he and ſhe had 
one and the ſame Fathers, to wit, God, yea, and Mother too, being 
both at this time born in and of the Common-wealth and Church of 
Iſrael; and partly to ſhew the greatneſs of his Love to her,which iS 
ſach as caanot.be ſufficiently expreſſed by any oneRelation,but muſt 
borrow the PerfeQions and AﬀeCtions of all ro deſcribe it, n With 
one glance of one of thine Eyes. By which phraſe he intimates the 
Modeſty and Humility of the Church,which was aſhamed or atraid 
to look fully and dire&ly upon the Bridegroom with both her Eyes, 
and withal alludes to the ancient cuſtom of Virgins,who uſed to cc- 
ver theirFaces with a vail,& to look out only with one of theirEyes 
for the dire&ion oftheir ſteps. By thisone Eye he ſeems to mean that 
fundamental Grace of Faith, by which Chriftians look upon Chriſt, 
and diſcern his beauty,and which is precious in the fight of God 


and of Chriſt, oWith one of thoſe other Graces and Perfe&tions 
wherewith thou art adorned. How then ſhouldI be raviſhed if thou 
did diſcover both thine Eyes,and thy whole Countenancejandall 
thy excellent Gifrs and Graces, | 

"10 How fair p 5: thy love 9g, my ſiſter, my ſpouſe ! 
* how much better is thy love than wines! and theſmell 


of thine ointments s than all ſpices ! Pp 
: þ How amiable and acceptable to me. q I do not diſdain thylove, 
as I might do, but take it kindly, and priſe it highly. » Of which 


wath chou art anointed... Compare 1/s. 61, 1. 1 John 2. 20,27. | 

* x1 Thy lips,O my ſpouſe,drop «s the honey-comb : : 
honey and milk « areunder thy tongue *,and the {mel} 
of thy garments y is like the ſmell of Lebanon =, 

t# Thy Speeches both to me in Prayer and Praiſes,and to men for 
their Edification,are highly acceptable tome. » Words more [weet 
#ad comfortable thanHoney orMilk.xBy which Phraſe he may poſ- 
ſibly mrtimare;thar her words were nor uttered 1n Hypocriſie, or with 
evil deſign,as many fair and ſmooth Speeches zre, but proceed from 
her very heart which is under her Tongue,as m:ſchief 13 ſaid tro be un- 
ger bis Tongue,Pfal. 10.71who deviſed it in his Heart.y Of that Rightc= 


fre Graces ofthe Spirit are oft compared to Garments,as Rom.13.14+ 
Eph. 4. 24. 1%. 5.5 * Which is alſo mentioned and commend- 
ed. Bf. 14.6: which muſt needs be very ſweet and grateful in re» 
gard ofthe great numbers of ſweet- ſmelling Spicesand Trees which 
grew in that Mountain. | | | 
12 A garden « + incloſed 6 is my ſiſter, wy ſpouſe :| 
a ſpring c ſhut up 4d, a fountain ſealed e. - OE 
s For order and Beauty, for pleaſant Walks, and Flowers. and 
Fruits: 6 Either r. Defended by the care of my Providence: Or, 
2. Reſcrved for my proper uſe. She will not admit of other Lovers, 
either falſe Teachers, or worldly Luſts, but keeps her ſelf clote for 
me* She is chafſt, and pure, and modeſt, as Virgins are or ſhould 
be. «© Either 1. For others, ſending forth the wholſome ſtreams of 
ſaving D»E&rine, for the refreſhing, and healing, and cleanſing of 
thoſe who receive it, Or 2. wichin herſzIf, being well watered, 7. e. 
replenifhed with ſpiritual Graces Had Bleſſings, which are frequently 
compared to Warers.both in the Old and New Teſtament, as 1/a:44:3 
John'q- 10. & 7: 38.for which the Church is compared to a watered 
Garden,or ſpring of water, Iſa. 58, ir. Either 1. To preſerve it 
from all pollution, or injury : Or 2. To reſerve it for the uſe and 
ſervice'of its owner, for which reaſon Springs were ſhut up in thoſe 
Countries where water was ſcarce and precious.as Ger. 29, 3. e The 
ſame thing is here repeated in other words: 
13 Thy plants f are an orchard g of pomegranates, 
with other pleaſant fruits, || camphire with ſpikenard h. 
f The plants of thy Garden, Belivers whichare planted in thee, 
Z Are like the plants or fruits ofan Orchard, # which are pleaſant to 
the Eye and delicious tothe raſte or ſmell,fuch as are here mentioned 
in the following words. W hereby he ſignifies the variery and excel- 
lJency of Gifts and Graces in the ſeveral members of the Church. 
h Which he mentions both here with campiire or cypreſs. and in the 
next verſe with ſaffron, becauſe it is mixed with buth theſezand bes 
ing ſo mixed, yieldeth the more grateful ſmell. 
14 Spikenard and ſaffron, calamus and cinnamon, | 
with ail trees of frankincenſe 3, myrrhe and aloes,with 


all che chief ſpices. 

# Such Trees as produce Frankincenſe? Or as others, both anci- 
ent and modern, render it, Trees of Lebanon, ſuch ſweet ſmelling 
Trees and plants as grew in Lebanon, of which ſec above on v: 17. 

15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters &, 
and ſtreams from Lebanon [. | h 

k Theſe are the words eicher 1 Of the Bride, who returns this 

Anſwer to the Bridegroom, Thou calleſt me a Fountain, but in 
truth thou gnly aretharFountain fromwhence I derive all my ſtreams 
of comfort: Or rather, 2», Of the Brid?groom, who hath hitherto 
been ſpeaking. te-and of the Church,and itill continues his Speech. 
Heſeems to add this by way of correQtion to, or expoſition .of what 
he ſaid, v. 12. Though my Spoulebe in ſome ſort a Fountain ſhut 
up or ſealed, yet that is not ſo tobe underſtood asif ſhe kept herWa- 
ters to her ſelf,for the 1s like aFountain orWell of living or running 
water, which floweth into Gardens, and miaketh its Flowers and 
Plants to grow anc flouriſh; The Church conveyeth thoſe Waters 
of Life which he zeceiveth from Chriſt unto particular Believers & 
Congregations: 1Like thoſe ſweer and refreſhing Rivers which flow 
down from Mount Lebanon, of which Jordan is one. 


16: Awake , Onorth-wind, and come thou ſouth, 


hk — 


FIGS NTICLES Chap. y. | 


blow upon my garden », that the ſpices thereof may 
How out 8; let my beloved come into his garden p,and 


eat his pleaſant fruit 9. 

-m Or, Ariſe, either 1. To be gone, as being . cemmon!y hurtful 
to Plants and Gardens : Or rather 2. To come, as the next clauſe 
explains it;For both the North-wind and the South-wind have their 
ſeveral uſes in Gardens,the former to purge and cool the Air, and 
to bring fair weather, the latter ro warm and moiſften the Earth. and 
cheriſh the lanes, And theſe Winds may ſignifie the ſeveral Diſpen«. 
ſations either of Gods Providence, or rather cf his Spirit, which is 
compared rothe wind, John 3, 8, whereby the following eſfects are 
produced. » This Verſe is ſpoken by the Spouſe, as appears from 
the laſt clauſe cf it- And ſhe calls the Garden both hers and his, bea 
cauſe of that oneneſs which is betwecn them C5: 2:171whereby they 
havea commen Intereſt one in anothers perion and concerns.o That 
my Graces may be exerciſed to thy Glory,the Edification of others, 
and my own comfort. p Let Chriſt afford his gracious preſence more 
and more to his Church. q And let him delight himſelf in thar Ser 
vice and Glory which is given to him, borh by the religious Wore 
ſhip, and by the holy converſations of his Peoples. 

CHA ÞF 
Chriſt an[wereth the Church's invitation, and fheweth her the delight hs 
took in her fruit, 1. She acknowledges hr negligence toChriſt, in not ope= 
ning the da00y, 2 <———- 6, Of the harſh uſage ſhe me: with, 17. She 
rells rhe: Daughters of Jeruſalem ſhe is ſick of Lowe ro Chrift, 8 Their que 
fron concerning him, 9. A deſcription of Chriſt by hs Graces, to» ==1 5, In 

whom ſhe boaſteth, 16. 
|| Am come into my garden a, my fiſter, my ſpouſe, I 

have gathered my myrrhe with my ſpice,l have ea- 
ten my honey-comb with my honey, Thave drunk my 
wine with my milk: eat, O fjiends c,drink, || yea, 
drink abundantly, O beloved. || Or,ond 

# This is the Bridegrooms Anſwer to her Requeſt, delivered in vedrunken 
the next foregoing words. b I have eaten my pleaſant fruits, as thou with hug 
didſt deſire. F have taken norice of, and delight in the ſervice and 
obedience of my People, £ The friends of the Bridegroom. Wheres 
by he underſtands either 1. The holy Angels and glorified Saints, 
who in a ſublime and ſpiritual ſenſe may be ſaid to eat and drink 
in Heaven, the happineſs whereof is frequently repreſented under 
the n:me and notion of a Feaſt: Or rather 2. Believers or Members 
of che Church militant upon Earth,who by the Argument ofChriſts 
gracious prefence with them,and acceptation of their works figni« 
hed in the Jaſt words, are here invited and encouraged with great 
freedom and chearfuineſs to eat and drink their ſpiritual Food, to 
feed upon Gods Hely Word and Sacraments, to eat the Fleſh and 


drink the Blood of the Son of God, who here gives them an hear» 


ty welcome to this Feaſt. 

2 I ſleep d, but my heart wakethe: it is the voice of 
my beloved fthat knocketh g, ſaying,open co me b; my 
ſiſter, my love, my dove my undefiled ;s for my head 


1s filled with dew &, and my locks with the drops of the 


night £ 

4 Heb. I was aſleep, i. e, T was dull, and ſluggiſh, and inſenſible 
of his kind Expreifions;-and offers of Grace, e Yet in my very ſleep 
my thoughts were running upon my BeJoved, as is not unuſuzl in 
fuch caſes, whichar laſt awakened me, Thus ſhe implyes the con« 
fli&t which was between the Flefh and the Spirit, and the Spirits 
Victory in the Combare. f Between ſleeping and waking I fancied 
that I heard his voice. g By his Word,and Providence, and Spirits 
at the door of mine Heart, deſirous that I would receive him by 
Faith and Love: Compare Revel. 3. 20. h Inviting me to accept of 
bis gracious Offers, aud to Jethim inromy Soul. 7 This heap of 
kind compellations ſignifies Chriſts ſincere & fervent Aﬀection to his 
People,nocwithſtanding her manifold imperfections and infirmities, 
The title of Dove ſignihes her Chaſtiry and conſtant Faithfulneſs to 
Her Husband, for which Doves are famons. How ſhe is undefiled 
ſee on: Ch. 4: 7. k Whilſt I wait without thy door. He alludes to 
the cuſtom of Lovers, which oft and willingly ſuffer ſuch incon= 
veniencies for their hopes and deſires of enjoying their Beloved and 
ſignifies his ſufferings for the Churches good. I The dew which 
falls in the end of the night,or towards the morning, whence it is 
called morning dew, Hoſ: 6: 4. 


3 T have put off my coatm, how hal I put it on »2 
ET have waſhed my feet o how ſhal I defile them ? | 

m My day-cloths- as perſons uſe to do when they go to reſt. aTt 
1s:1nconvenient and troubleſome to do it at this time. Thus ſhe 
tacitly reflets upon the Bridegroom for coming to her ſo unſeaſon- 
ably,and giving her ſuch diſturbance, and puts him off to another 
time, and excuſeth her non-admiſſion ofhim by her preſent indif- 
poſition, and the difficulty of the rhing required of her. o Whick 
the Eaſtern people commonly did when they went to Bed, partly 
to cool] their Feer, and partly ty cleanſe them from that duſt and 
{weat which they had contratted in the day-tuime by Labour and 
Travel, as being uſed to go barefoot. 


4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door 


?, and my bowels were moved || for him 9. || Or, (3 
þ He affayed to open thedoor. When his Word would not pre- ſomercad] 

vail, his Spirit which is called the finger of God, Luke 114 20. com- #1, 

pared with Mat, 12, 28. wrought inwardly upon my Conſcience, & 

affeCted mine heart» 4 With compaſſion for him and his ſufferings, 

and with aff:Qtion to him ; for both theſe ways is this phraſe oft u- 

ſed, as jb 37. 8. Phil. 2+ x, 2, &Cc. 


5 Iroſe up to open to my beloved r, and my hands, 4 C 
dropped with myrrhe s,and my fingers with + ſweet fng,orru® 
{melling myrrhe,upon the handles of the lock's. *,;ng abut 

7 I repented of my former drowſineſs and neglet, and went yqah:1is: 
forth to receive him. 5, e. With Oil or Ointment made of Myrrhe, 1, 
which either 1. She had taken our of her own ſtock to prepare her 
ſelf for the entertainment of the Bridegroom : Or rather 2. Drop= 
ped from the Bridegrooms hand upon the doorin great abundance, 
when he pur it into the hole of the door, v. 4. and confequently upon 


her hands and fingers when ſhe touched the door tro apen w hay 


\ 


r,and 
runken 


h love 


|| Or, (43 
Comeread] 
(n me, 


C0 


Chap. V- C 4 82 


which ſhe ſignifies thatChriſt though he withdrew himſelf fromber, 
yet jefca ſweet favour behind him,iafuting into her,and ſtirring uj 
in her the Graces of the Spirit,ſuch as Repentance, which 1s bitter 
as Myrrhe, earneſt deſire afcer Chriſt, ©. ; Heb, with Myrrhe paſ- 
ſing or flowing upon the handles of the lock,which place the Bridegroom 
had touched when he attempted to open it- 

6 Lopened to my beloved, but my beloved had 
withdrawn himſelf KW, and was gone x: my ſoul failed y 
when he ſpake z: I * ſoughthim a, but I could not 


P . 
"ng find him ; I called him, but he gave meno anſwer b. 

- u D:nied me his gracious and comfortable preſence, asa juſt pu- 
niſhmenr for my former negle& and folly. x Either ſhe repeats the 
ſame thing to fhew how deeply ſhe was affeHed with it; Or this 15 
add+d ro 1mply that he had nor only ſtepped aſide, but was quite 
gone away. y Heb. wen? out of me, I fainted and was ready to die a- 
way through exceſſive paſſion, as this phraſe is uſed,Gen, 357 18. & 
42, 28, and eiſewhere» 2 Or, for what he ſpoke,for thoſe endearing 
Expreſſions rclated,vi2, which then I did not heed,but this ſad occa- 
Gon brings them tomy remembrance;as ofr-times that word which 
is inefeQtual when it 1s preached, is afterwards brought to a mans 
Mind and produceth bleſſed effteCts. _ # By diligent enquiry and 
importunate Prayer. 6 That ſo he might both chaſtiſe her folly,and 
qiucken her defires,and prepare the way for a more hearty welcome 
and his longer abode with her. : 

7 The watch-men that went about the city c, found 
me, they ſmote me, they wounded me «d; the keepers 
of the walls e took away my vail f from me. 

c The Governours of the Church, as Chap. 3. 3.who, though by 
their place and office they be obliged to comfort and protett rhe 
faithful,do frequentlydiſcourage and oppreſs them,as they manifeſt- 
ly did both in the days of Iſa:ah,and Jeremiah, and the other holy 
Prophets, and in the time of Chriſt,and his Apoſtles, and in divers 
other Ages. d With bitter Calumnies and Perſecutions. e The 
ſame with the Watch=men, whoſe Office is to keep the Gates and 
W alls of theCity. f Which was an ornament of her Sex, Iſa 3-23» 
and a badge of her Modeſty, Gen. 24, 65. oran enſign of her Rela« 
tion and Subje&ion to Chriſt, Ger. 20. 16. 1 Cor, t1- 5, And fo the 
taking of this Vail away,ſignifies their contemptuous and injurious 
uſage of her, their endeavours to blaſt her Reputation, and to re- 
preſent and treat heras a common and impudent proſtitute, and as 
One that had no Relation to Chriſt. . 

$ Icharge you, O daughters of Jerufalemg, if ye 
find my beloved Þ that ye tell him, chat I am fick of 
love hb. | | 

g Of whom ſee on ch, 1.5,&2. 7. The Church having paſſed the 
Warck=men, and patiently born, and in a manner forgotten their 
injuries,proceeds in the purſuit of her beloved, & enquires of every 
particular Believer or Profeflor whom ſhe . meets concerning him. 

' þ That Iam ready to faint for want of his preſence, and the tokens 

of his Favour, Uſeall your intereſt and importunity with him on 

my behalf, | 
FP 9 What is thy beloved more than another beloved 3. 
* <.1.3. & © thou faireſt among women &? Whar is thy beloved 
more than ezother beloved,that thou doſtſocharge us ? 

; Wherein doth he excel them ? Which Profeſſors of Religion 
might ask, becauſe they were ignorant of Chriſts Excellency, and 


} Heb. 
what. 


true Believers might ask it,thatthey might be more fully - informed : 


of it,and might give the Spouſe occaſion to diſcourſe of that ſubje& 
which was very grateful to them. k& Whoſe Beauty may command 
the ReſpeQts and AﬀeQions of the moſt worthy perſons; and there- 
fore we conclude it muſt be ſome perſon of tranſcendant excellency 
with whom thou art ſo highly enamoured. 
10 My beloved zs white and ruddy /, + the chiefeſt 
þ.wdard. 99 among ten thouſand », 
bearer, Or, 1! Which two colours rightly mixed together,make a Face beauti- 
taller than fu!- Octhe white may note his, pure and ſpotleſs Innocency, and the 
tm they= brightneſs of his Glory and Majeſty,and the rudy colour may inti- 
ſand, «nate his Bloody paſſion,which made him amiable both ro God and 
Men. 
great Eminency,both for Stature,and Courage,and Dignity.» Among 
all perſons, Angels or Men. A certain number is put for an uncertain 
There are other Kings,and Prieſts and Prophets;but none to be com- 
paced with hiriie 
11 His head zs as the moſt fine gold s, 
Or curled. are || buſhy, and black as a raven 4. 
cos 0 l e's like Gold, not in reſpe& of the Hair which is black, as 
it followeth, bur by reaſon of his Crown of pure Gold upon his 
Head. Rev,14» 14. Whereby ſhe implyesthat her Bridegroom was 
a King, which ſhe declared above, ch. 3. 11. p In which a part of 
Mans Beauty confiſts. I ſhal not trouble my Reader with a diſtin& 
application of this and the following particulars, unto ſome ſpecial 
partor excellency of Chriſt,becauſe ſuch things are meer conje&ures 
without any ſolid grounds, and the only deſign of this deſcription 
.eems to be this, to ſet ſorth the Beauty of Chriſt under the notion 
of a rnoſt compleat and amiable perſon,in whom there is no defe& 
nor blemiſh, from the crown of his Head to the ſole of his Feer. 
g Which is mentioned, partly becauſe this was eſteemed a beauty, 
and partly becauſe it was an evidence ofhis Youth and vigor,as gray 
"Oh.rts hairsare chara&ers of age and infirmity, Hoſ. 7. 9. 
| — 3- 12 * Hiseyes are as the eyes of doves r by the rivers 
f Heb. {z. Of waters s, waſbed with milk 7, and Þ fitly ſer x. 
ting in fuls rLovely and pleaſant,chaſte and innocent. s Where they delight 
ner that is to abide,and wherewith they bath themſelves,and waſh their Eyes ; 
fitiy placed where alſo their Eyes are moſt lively and beautiful, both by the re- 
and ſet as fle&tion of the waters, & from that pleaſure whichthey take in ſuch 
@ preccous places. # Which may belong either 1- To the Eyes,which are ſup= 
fe in the poſed to be waſhed with water,as white and pure as Milk. Or 2, 
foilof a Tothe Doves; which are intimated to be of a milk white coleur, 
Ring, which in thoſe parts was moſt eſteemed. which colour alſo made 
the Eyes appear more lovely, u Neither finking into the Head, nor 
ſtanding out too much, but in a moderate and comely ſituation. 
Heb. fitring in fulnels : which may note a full and competently large 
Eyc, which is eſteemed one beauty of che Eye. 


tH:b. # 


his locks p 


1m Heb. the ſtandard bearer ; for ſuch are uſually perſons of. 


7C BE Chip. Vil 


13 Hischeeks x are as a bed y of ſpices z, as || ſweet | is 
flowers a: his lips /ikelilies 'b, dropping ſweet ſmelling 21%") 
myrrhe c. | ' | 
x Nis Face or Countenance, an eminent part whereof is the 
Cheeks, in which the Beauty or Deformity of a Face doth much 1 
conſiſt, y Which being higher than other parts of the Garden ficly " 
repreſents the Checks, which are higher than other parts of the Face. I: | 
2 Not of dry ſpices,for they are not in Beds, but of Aromatical 
Flowers which delight both the Eye with « pleaſant proſpe&, & the 
[mel] with their fragrancy. This may alſo fignifie the down or hair 
upon the Bridegrooms cheeks, which is the evidence of his mature 
and vigorous Age, and may denote thar Chriſts ſweetneſs and 
gentleneſsis accompanied with Majeſty, and Gravity,and juſt ſeve- 
rity. & This may be added to explain the former Phraſe. Or, towers 
of perfumes, i.e. Boxes in which perfumes were put, which by their 
height or form, had ſome reſemblance to a Turret. 6 Beautiful and 
pleaſant. Or this is meant of that ſort of Lilies which were of a 
red or purple colour,as ancient Writers affirm, and fo ſignifie the 
grateful colour of the Lips. This may note that Grace which was 
pouredintoChriſts Lips,& which flowed from them in ſweer and ex« 
cellent diſcourſes. c Nct only graceful to the Eye,as Lilies are,bur 
allo fragrant to the ſmell. 
14 His hands d are as gold-rings ſet with the beryll 
es his belly f 3s as bright Ivory overlaid with Sa- 
phires g+ 

4 The inſtruments of Aion 2nd ofDiftribution;which may de- 
ſign the ations of Chriſt,and particularly his diſtributing Gifts and 
Graces to his Members. e Beauriful,and precious,and richly adorned 
as it Were with Gold Rings ſet with precious ſtones f Which ſeems 
to be here uſed, either 1. Metonimically,for the Bewels which are 
contained in the Belly:Or rather 2. Synecdochically, for the whole 
Body,reaching from the neck to the bottom of the Belly, whichis 
diſtinguiſhed from the Face, and the joints, which are deſcribed in 
the other clauſes.For he ſpeaks here of thoſe parts which are viſible 
to the Eye* Andthus here js acompleat deſcription of Chriſts beau- 
ty 1n all parts from his Head to his Feet,g Ofa pure and bright white 
colour, TOI with blue veias; for ſome Saphires are of a bright 

ue colour. 


I5 His legs þ are as pillars of marble ;, ſet upon 


lockets of fine gold & : his countenance 1 is as Lebanon 
2, excellent as the cedars. 


þ The inſtruments of local motion, & the ſupporters of the bo« 
dy, i White, and ſtraighr,and well ſhaped, and ſcrong. Which may 
note the firmneſs and ſtability of Chritts Kingdom in ſpight of all 
oppoſition, &k Which add borh beauty and ſtrength to them. Theſe 
may note his Feet compared to Gold,either for rheir great price and 
worth,or for their ſingular brightneſs, for which they are com- 
pared to fine-braſs, Rev. 1. 15. or, as others for his golden ſhoes 
wherewith they were covered or adorned,as the Spouſe is commen= 
ded from her ſhoes,Cax#t 7, 1. 1 Heb. his aſpeFor appearance, his fort 
or Perſonas this Hebrew word is elſewhere uſed. m In reſpe& of its 
Cedars, asthe next words explain it, to witzta}l, and upright, and 
ſtately, and withal pleaſant to the 


Eye. 

16 f His mouth js Þ moſt " Hel 2, yea,he is altoge- + Heb.khis 
ther T lovely e. This ;s my beloved,and this is my friend, 2/ste., 
O daughters of Jeruſalem p. jp _— : 

» Which was ſaid before in other words,v. 14; and is here ruſty "Heb i 
repeated, becauſe it was a principal part of Chriſts beauty, &the chief | ron 
inftrument of the SpouſesComfort and Happineſs, which wholly de- Io. 
pends upon his ſweet and excellent Srenchn holy Precepts, and 
gracious Offers and Proiniſes contained in the Goſpel. o Not to run 
out into more particulars, in one word there is no part of him 
which is not exquiſitely beautiful. p And therefore you have no 


cauſe to wonder or to blame me if Iam tranſported with Love to 
ſo excellent a perſonage. 


CHA PÞP., VI. 

An Enquiry after Chriſt, 1. The Churches Anſwer, 21 The Church confeſe 
Jeth her Faith in Chriſt, 3. Chrift ſheweth the Graces of his Church, 4.and 
the Beaury of ſeveral parts, 5 iO. He acquaints her where he had 
been, and what he had been a doing, 11. and js 000A his affeftion to her, 
12. With an invitation of her to return to him again, 13, 


OY is thy beloved gone a * O thou faireſt 


among women ? whither is my beloved tur- * c-i.8. 
ned aſide ? that we may ſeek him with thee c, "1 

a Theſe are the words of the daughters of Feruſalem.laſt mention« 
ed,whom this full and pathetical deſcription of theBridegroomsEx- 
cellency had inflamed with Love to him. 6 To wit,from thee, as 
thy words imply,v.6.8.where doſt thou vſe to look for him and to 
fiad him when thou haſt loſt him ? c O theu who art well ac uain= 
ted with all the places both of his uſual abode,and of his x Pu 
inform us who are ignorant of them,d We ask not with any evil Fs 
ſign, but only becauſe we delire anintereſt in him. 
2 My beloved is gone down into his garden 4, to 


che beds of ſpices e, to feed f in the gardens, and to 
gather lilies g. | 

« The Spouſe had kitherto been at a loſs for har beloved, but has» 
ving diligently ſought ham,& enflamed both ber own & othersAﬀes 
&ions with Love to him by her juſt commendations,now at laſt ſhe 
meets with a gracious Anfwer fromGod,direing her where to find. 
him,which alſo comes very ſeaſongbly, nor only tor ker own relief 
& comfort,bur alſo for the benefit of others, who enquiredafterhim 
The garden ſeems to fignifte the Church Cathohck, and che gardens 
as it follows here,as alſo che beds,may note the particular Aſſemblies 
of the faithful,in whichChriſr affordeth his Preſence,& his bleſſing. 
e In which theGifrs andGraces of Gods Spirir,which are fitly com- 
pared to Spices,or aromatical Flowers,do appear and grow. if To 
refreſh 8& delight humſelf,or to gather the flowers and fruits of it;as 
men uſe to do in their gardens. 5 Which may note either, 1. Par- 
ticular Believers, whom Chrift gathereth to himſelf in his Church 
who are compared to Lilies, Cant. 2. 2. Or 2. The Prayers and 
Praiſes tendered to him by his People in the publick Congregations, 
and 3ll chew gracious diſpoſitions and ations, 


! 


| 
[| 
| | 
t | 
{ 


I = 7 rn. 


nn DA 
—— ———— 


5 O 9 *? 


{1:2:16 
7: IO, 


Dr, they 
e pufe 


me up. 


0u the chan 
riots of wil» 


ling people. 


nap. VI. C HINTL 


> *I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he 


f:edeth among the lilies. f : 
4 Thou art beautiful,O my love þ,as Tirzah z,come- 


ly as Jeruſalem &, terrible ! as an army with banners. 

þ Theſe are the words of Chriſt, who had now again manifeſted 
himſelf ro his Church, whereby he declares, that though he had for 
a ſeaſon hid hisFace from her, yer ſtill he retained a ſincere&fervent 
aff<Qion to her,and that notwichſtanding her manifold infirmitiesſke 
was yet beautiful in his Eyes. i; A very pleaſant City, as 1ts very 
name ſignifies, and therefore made the Royal Seat of the Kings © 
Iſfracl;of which ſee 1 Kings 14. 17. & 15. 21,33.8 16.6,8c. k Which 
was beautiful both for irs-licyation, P/al. 48. 2. and for its goodly 
buildings, eſpecially the Temple. See Lam. 2. 15. / Either 1.To 
ſtrangers, whom by her grave and Majeſtick looks and carriage ſhe 
affrights from rude or bold attempts, whereas fome Women invite 
others to familiarity with them by their loofe and wanton carriage. 
Or 2. To her Enemies, whom God will certainly deſtroy. 

5 Turn away thine eyes from me m,for || they have 


overcome me:thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear 


from Gilead ». | 
m For I can ſcarce bear the Luſtre of them. It is a poetical and a- 
matorious Expreſſion,ſignifying how beautiful the Church was in 
Chriſts Eyes,and how paſſionately he loved her. » This clauſe and 
the whole following verſe are repeated from Ch.4.1, 2. And this re- 
petition is not vain nor abſurd,but very agreeable to the nature of a 
Paſtoral and Song of Love,as being an effe& and teſtimony of vehee 
ment Aﬀe&ion,and beſides it confirms what was ſaid before & ſhew- 
eth that theChurches miſcarriage &Chriſt's deſertion of her upon it 
had not made him change his Opinion of her,or AﬀeRion to her. 

6 Thy teeth areas a flock of ſheep which go up from 
the waſhing, whereof every one beareth twins,and there 
55 not one barren among them. : 

5 As a piece” of a pomegranate are thy temples with- 


in thy locks s: 
o This is alſo repeated from Ch.1.3. 
$8 There are threeſcore queens,and fourſcore con- 


cubines p;*and virgins q without number. 

p A certain number for an uncertain. The ſenſe ſeems to this. 
There are many beautiful Queens and Concubines in the World, in 
the Courts of Princes, & particularly in Solomons Courr, but none of 
them is to be compared with my Spouſe,and my heart is fet upon 
none of them,burt only upon my Spoule,as the following verſe de- 
clareth» Or, the Bueens and Conculinezs may note the particular Con- 
gregati2ns which are called by Cariſt's name, and rhe Virgins may ſig- 
nifie the particular Believers or Profeſlors;all which do make up one 
Catholick Church, as it follows. Compare the notes on Pſa): 45:10, 
14, 15. 9 Either 1. Which wait upen the Queens and Concubines. 
Or 2, Which were reſerved as a Nurſery,out of which Queens and 
Concubines were to be taken. ; : 

9 My dove, my undefiled is but oner; ſhe is the only 
one of her motker 5s 3 ſhe 75 the choice one of her that 
bare hec:the daughters ; ſaw her,and bleſſed her;zea,the 
queens and the concubines,and they praiſed her . 

r The only beloved of my Soul,my only Spouſe, in compariſon 


_ of whom deſpiſe all others. 5 Of Jeruſalem above, which is the Moe 


ther of us all, Gal: 4: 26. Or, if this ſeem to confound the Mother 
and D-ughter, the words may be thus rendred, ſhe is the only one of 
her Mother, i; e. ſhe is as dear and as precious to me as only Chil- 
dren uſe to be to their Parents and eſpecially to their Mothers. $9 
there is only a defe& of the note of ſimilirude, which is frequenty 
underſtood, as hath been formerly noted and proved by undenya- 
ble inſtances. . 7 Called Yirgins, v. 8. u As more beauriful and wor- 
thy than themſelves, which was ſo evident that they were forced to 
confeſs it. - | 

10 Whois ſhe x that looketh forth as the morning y, 


fair as the noon z, clear astheſun a, and terrible «5 a» 


army with banners b. | 

x Theſe are the wordseither 1. Of the Bridegroom ; Or 2 Of 
the Queens and Concubines laſt mentioned,as prailing of her. And 
they are either words of enquiry,or rather of Admiration and com- 
mendation : Who, 7, e.what manner of perſon is this, how excellent 
and glorious! and fo this pronoun, who, is underſtood, Pſal, 24.8. 
Mar: 4; 41« compared with Mat: 8. 27, y AS the morning light, 
which coming after the darkneſs, of the night is very pleaſant and 
amiable, which alſo ſuddenly ſpreadeth it ſelf from the Eaſt tothe 
Weſt: z To wit, when it is full and walking in brightmeſs, as the 
Phraſe is, Job 31. 26 But withal he ſeems to intimate that the 
Church, lke the Moon, may have her Eclipſes, and be in darkneſs 
for a time, @ Without any ſuch ſpots or dark ſpecks as are inthe 
Moon. Which isJto be underſtood in the ſame ſenſe, that ſhe is ſaid 
to be w:thout ſpe. or wrinkle, or blemiſhb, Eph. 5: 27. which ſhe is 
partly by Gods gracious acceptation of her as ſuch in Chriſt, and 
through his Righteouſneſs; and partly becauſe ſhe ſhal be ſuch in 
the future Life. b See above, v: 4. 


'1x I wentdown c into the garden of || nuts 4,to ſee 
the fruits of thevalley e,and * toſee whether the vine 


a2. flouriſhed, and the pomegranates budded f. 


c To wit, when I went away from thee.So this is a1 account of 
the reaſon of his former departure from her. Or, 1am come down 
to viſit thee,y garden, Cant. 44 12. .Either way theſe are the words 
of the Bridegroom. 4 In which Nuts and other fruits are planted. 
By Nuts may be meant either 1. Ordinary Nuts,and fo this is ſup- 
poſed to intimate the mean & contemptible condition of the Church 
in heroutward Efſtate,and that her ſweetneſs is all inward & ſpiri- 
tual. Or 2. Aromatical Nuts,to wit, Nutmegs, and 1o this notes 
how acceptable theChurch and her produGtions are roChriſt.eW hich 
being low, and well watered. is moſt fruitful. f Whar Beginnings 
or appearances there were of good fruits or works among Believers; 


whether their Pra&ices anſwered their Profeſſions, | 
12 f Oreverl was awareg,my foul || made me  /ike 
the chariotsof Ammi-nadibz, | 


: | 


C £8: Chap. VII; 


gl] was furprized with a ſudden and veherent deſire of enjoying 
fy Spouſe, which is to be underſtood figuratively, ard ſo as to as 
gree with the Majeſty and Omniſciency of Chriſt.h F made my ſelf; 
which may ſignifie Chriſts a&ivity in. ſtirring up his AﬀeRions to 
the Church ; or I was made;for rbe attive Phraſe is oft underſtood 
paſſively ; and the Soul is commonly put for the Perſcii. 7 Eager in 
my deſire,and ſwift in my motion towards the Church, Amminaais 
is ſuppoſed to be ſome eminent Charioreer then well known. and 
famous for his ſpeed in driving Chariots. Burt this clauſe with the 
former 1s otherwiſe readred,both in the margent and by others,an# 


f | that very agreeable to the Hebrew words,my ſoul ſet me on the chariots 


of my willing ( or as others, noble or princely ) people, i: e. which mine 
and the Brides friends had prepared to bring me to the Bride with 
more expedition,into which I aicended with all my Soul,as longing 
to come to my Bride. 
13 Return &,return /,O Shulamite m.return, return, 
thatwe may look upon thee »:what will you ſeeo in the ory ugg 


Shulamite?as it were the company p || of ewo armies q, hanain, 
k Chriſt recalls kis Spouſe,who as when Chriſt was gone ſhe purs 

ſued after him,ſonow whenChriſtwas coming or come to her,ſhewas 

ready ro wander and go aſtray from him,according to the common 

and corrupt diſpoſition and cuſtom of Mankind, and therefore he 

ſeeks to ſtop or to reclaim her,and to oblige her to return to herfirſt 

Love and to repent more throughly than ſhe had yet done. / This 

word is here repeated four times to {ignifie both Chriſts paſſionate 

Love to her, and earneſt deſire of her return, and her backwardneſs 

toit, which made ſo many calls neceſſary. m This title ſignifies ei= 

ther 1. Oneborn in, or belonging to Jer/alem, called alſo Salem, 

Pſ[. 76: 2. Or 2. The Wife of Solm2n,thus called after herHusbands 

name, ſee 1(a, 4: 1. Andas Chriſt is called by the name of Solemon, 

Chi 3: 7,9, 11. fo the Church is fitly deſcribed by the title of Solo. 

mm's Wife. n That I and my companions, and friends may conteme 

plate thy Beauty o But what do you my fiiends expett to diſcover 

in her? Chriſt propoſeth the queſtion,that he may give rhe follows 

ing anſwer;and that they ſhould take ſpecial notice of this as a very 

remarkable thing, in her.p Whereby he intimates that this one & on 

ly Spouſe was made up of the whole multitude of Believers.qEither 

1. Oppoſite one againſt theother; and ſo this may note the confli&t be. 

tween the Fleſh and Spirit, which is in all the faithful in this Life, 

Or 2. Confederate together,and ſo this may ſignifie either 1. The re- 

collettion and Union of Jews and Gentiles which fſhal one day te 

under Chriſt as their common head,Fph: 2: 15. Or 2. The ſafety and 

ſtrength of the Church, which is compared to an army with banners, 

above wv: 4, 1o. and here to a numerous Hoſt diſtributed into two | 

Armies. Wherein alſo there may be an allufion to that ſtory, Gen:3 2; 

1: where this very word, here rendred,two armies,is uſed. 


CHAP. YH 

A furthcy deſcription of the Churches Graces, iu=———=7. His deſign to viſt 

the Church, with the Bl:(:& effe# thereof, 8, 9. Sheprofeſſeth her Faith, 

and d:ſire, 10. She inviteth him to eemmunion- with her, 11, The end 

thereof, 12, 13, | 

The Bridegroom who ſpake the laſt words, here continueth his 
ſpeech,and breaks forth into an elegant and particular deſcription & 
commendation of the Spoule,partly from the parts of ker Body, and 
partly from her Ornaments. In which the ſame thing 1s to be ob« 
ſerved whichwas noted concerning her deſcription of theBridegroom 
that there is no neceſlity of a diſtinct application of every parcel of 
it,the deſign being only this,to deſcribe the Beauty and Glory of 


the Church under the repreſentation of a beauritul & nobleWoman 


This alſo is obſervable,that in the deſcription of Chriſt ſhe begins ar 

the Head, and ſo goeth downwardgCh: 5: 11, ©&c. but Chriſt in the 

deſcription of the Spouſe proceedeth from the Feet upwards. 
Ow beautiful are thy feet « with ſhoes b, O princes 
. daughter c ! the joints of thy thighs d are like 


jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman e. 
a Which being the chief inſtrument of our motion from place to 
placegis oft uſed metonimically for the motion ar ſelf,& ſo mayhere 
ſignifie either the inward motions,the workings of the affections, or 
the outward motions; the ſteps or actions of the Life,both which are 
right and amiable in Believers. 6 Which were anciently evidences 
of a free and comfortable ſrate, whereas ſlaves and movrners uſe to 
go barefoot; 2 Sam: 15:30.1ja: 20: 4. which alſo in Women of high 
quality were adorned with Gold & other Ornaments;of which fee 
I/a; 3; 18, Theſe may alſo ſignifie that the Feet of Believers ſhould 
be ſhod with the preparations of the Goſpel of Peace,Eph: 6:15. cBoth by 
Birth, being born of God, & by diſpoſition and deportment agrec= 
able to that quality. d Either 1) The hollow place in which theHip 
or Thigh-bone movethand turneth it ſelf:Or rather 2. The Hip 'or 
Thigh-bone which moveth there-for this is more fitly compared toa 
jewel we!l ſer. Some underſtand this of ſome Ornaments worn by 
Women upon thoſe parts:for the word rendred joints may fignifie 
girales,or any Ornament which encompaſi:th any part of the Body,& 
the ſame words which ſignifie :h/ghs are both in Hebrew, and: other 
Languages,ſnmetimes uſed concerning the /egs. Which being admit. 
ted,this mightſeem to be underſtood of the Brides Garters about her 
Legs, which not unfitly follows the Shoes upon her Feet laſt mentio« 
ned.But this fenſe feems not to ſuit ſo well with the following com« { 
pariſon as the former doth. e Like jewels order'y and excellently 
ſet by a skilful Artiſt, So this ſignifies the uprightnefs and decency 
of her going, which depends very much upon the right ſituation 
of the Hip or Thigh-bone,which when it is diſlocated or diforder- 8 
edcauſeth a lameneſs or. uncomelineſs in going;whereby he under. 
ſrands the orderlineſs and amiableneſs of her converſation. 
2 Thy navel 3s like a round goblet f which wanteth 
notÞ liquor g: thy belly þ is /ikean heap of wheat ;, ſet + 1yeb! 
about with lilies &, mixrure + 
7 To which it is not unfitly compared becauſe it is cf a rovrdform, 
and hollow,and hath windings and circlings in it. g Thy Navelis 
not only comely but fruitful. For the Navel is the proper 1mnitrus 
ment of nouriſhing the Child or Children which are in the Womb. 
And fo this ſeems to ſignifie the Churches fruitfulneſs partly 21 
her ſelf,in cheriſhing & improving all the Graces and good motions 
of Gods Spirit within herzand principally in reference ro thoſe ma« 
ny Children which ſhe bears and feeds in her Womb with the whol. 
ſom 1iquor of Gods Ordinances, þ Ia which thy Chaldren are ove 
ime 


Fond 


au 4 


FIN £moern 
CRE HE au, ES. 


a 


Heb! 


uixtur0i ? 


"CT af» 


VIL. 
rimecontain-d and £1; 77, e, Of wheat corn,round and ſwelling. 
aS it is in Women with Cnild,and full of nouriſhment, not only of 
Liquor,as w:s lait (aid,bur a!ſo of Meat, which may note the variou: 
proviſions which Chriſt hath laid up in. his Church according to 
th2 ſeveral capacities of her Children Malk for Babes,and ſtronger 
Meat for thoſe who are grown up. & Not for defer:c2, which rhe 
Church doth notnzed, having the ſtrong, God for her ProteCtor, 
- but for Ornament and Beaury, Whereby is implyed,rhar the 1s nor 
only fruirful but beautifu),and thar ber Children are not only nume= 
rous and: we!l fed,bur alſo comely and delightful to the Eye,zs Li- 
lies are;and withal pure and innocent,in which. reſpe& both Chriſt 
and the Church are compared to Lilies, Cant. 1. 1, 2: þ | 

2 * Thy two breaſt are like ewo young roes !har are 
twins l. — He 

IWhichis repeated from Ch; 4+ 5. where 1t is expained. 

4 Thy neck m is as a tower of ivory n, thine eyes 
o like the filbpoolsp in Heſhbon 4, by the gate of Bath- 
rabbim: thy noſe r is asthe tower of Lebanon s which 
looketh towards Damaſcus e. 

m Of which ſee on Ch. 4. 4- 2. Clear, and ſmeoth,and long, and 
ftraighr, anderefted, o Ot which ſee on Ch; 1; 15.& 4.1. .p Full, 
and clear, and quier,and pleaſant. Poffibly here were rwo filhpools, 


* Cli4: 5. 


which being c-nveniently ſeated in a large field might bear ſome re- 
ſemblance to the Eyes placed in the Head. q A pleaſant and well| 


watered City, beyond Fordamnas we may guels from Numb. 32,where 

doubtleſs there were ſomeeminent and well known fiſhepools,as fur- 

ther appears bythe exaCt deſcription of the parricular place berefol- 

lowing, in which they were. r The inſtrument of ſmelling and 

diſcerning between pleaſant and loathſome things; which may fig- 

nifie. the Churches 1agzcity in diſcerning between good and evil. 

s Which though ir be not elſewhere mentioned, was in all probabili- 

ty built by Solomon in the Mountain of Lebanon which was theNor- 

thern Border of the Land of 1ſra«l towards Damaſcus, and therefore 

a very fit place for a watch Tower. To this Tower her Noſe is 

compared, not for its greataeſs,bur for its comely and convenient 

proporiions,and beantiful aſpe&,which doubtleſs were in this aswell 

as in the reſt of Solomons Buildings: © Which words ſeem to be added 

to diſtinguiſh this from another Tower or Building, in, or near to 

Jeruſalem, which was called he houſe of the forreſt of Lebanon, 1Kings 

7: 2. : 

"Or. crim. , F Thins head w upon thee x is like ||Carmel y,and the 

bo hair of thine head like purple z ; the king is Þ held in 
the galleries 4. | F- - 

s Which may ſignifie the Churches Mind or Underſtanding which 
is ſeated in the head.x which is uponthee,or above the reſt of thy 
Body.y Eminent and pleaſant to the Eye and fruitful as MountCar= 
mel was,as hath been formerly'noted. Which may note that terMind 
was adorned & repleniſhed with knowledge and other excellentGifts 
of the Holy Gholt. Or, as others render it, ike crimſon or purple, 
which is called Carmel, 2 Chrin, 2.7. & 3- 14.becauſe thoſe fiſhes our 
of which theyhad their purple,weretaken in theSea borderingupon 
Mount Carmel:And ſo the ſame thing is repeated in the next clauſe 
in other words. z Which colour was anciently much eſteemed,and 
commended as by facred,ſo alſo by prophane Writers. # In which 
he walketh,and having once eſpied thee, is captivated by thee,and 
unable or unwilling either todepart,or to take off hisEyes from thee 
as if he were faſt boundand chained to thee. The galleries may note 
either the Ordinances,or rather theChurches,in which Chriſt walk- 
etb, Rev: 2. r. in which Chriſt and Believers converſe together. 

6 How fair and how pleaſant art thou, O love, for 


C 4 NF £6 


delightsc * | 

6 Ir were infinite to reckon up all the particulars of thy Beauty, 
in one word,thou art univerſally amiable beyond Expreſſion. c For 
thoſe various lovely features whichare ia thee ,and for the great and 
omen delights which are or may be enjoyed in converſing with 
TACe, 

7 This thy ſtature is like a palm-tree 4, and thy 


breaſts to clufterse of grapes f. 


ES 4 Ta!l and ftraighr, or upright, as a Tree> And he ſeems to 


mention thePalm-rree.rarher than any other,partly becauſe it grows 
more dire&ly upward than other Trees;and partly becauſe ir is con- 
ftantly green and flouriſhing,and groweth upward n ſpighr of all 
preflures,and therefore was uſed 19 feſtival ſolemnities,Lev. 23: 40. 
fohn 12,13, and wasa ſymbol of ViQory, Rev: 7:9. In all which 
reſp«&s it fitly repreſents the ſtare of Believers. e Large,and round 
and full ofjuice. See on v.z. This particu'ar is added as an evidence 
of her maturity and mar:ied eſtate,and of her fruitfulnefs. f Which 
word may eaſily be ſupp'ied out of thenexrt Verſe; Although the 
fruit of the Palm=-tree alſo is faidto grow in cluſters. 

8 I faid g, I willgo up to the palm-tree b,T will take 
hold of the boughs thereof;: now alſo thy breaſts ſhall 
be as cluſters of the vine,and the ſmell of thy noſe & 
like apples /. | 

g Within my ſelf, I reſolved. h I will climb up, that fo I may 
take hold, as it follows of the boughs, which do nor grow out of the 
ſides, as in other Trees, but only at the rop of ir. 7 Partly to prune 
and dreſs themyand partly to gather the fruit. Whereby 1s ſignifi: 4 
Chriſts care of his Church,and his delight in her. & Of thy breath, 
which i5 ufe called che breathof, or in, 2 mans noſtrils, Gen, 7. 32.1/a. 

* 2, 22, Lam, 4. 20. LEirher 1. Common Apples, which ſometimes 
| Yield a very pleatant ſmell ; Or 2, Odifcrous Apples. .'See on 
* Chap. 2.5% 


*Prov:23 for my beloved »,* that goeth down Þ ſweetly p cauſing 
TY the lips || of thoſe that areaſleep, co ſpeak 9g. ; 
fraight] m Either 1. Thy {p:ech, the palare be'ng one of the principal In” 
lor,sf 4 ſtruwents of Speech.: Or racher 2. Thy raſte, whereofthe Palate or 
®%ient, Roof of the Moi:th 1s rhe moſt proper and principal inſtrument, 
0b 34: 3- Butthe=n this isnor to be underſtood actively of her taſte 
3 bur paſſively ofriie raite!or relith, which her beloved had of her ; 
* as in the foregoing clauſe, he ſmell of her noſew:s rot meant ſubje&i- 
; vely or a&tively of :hat C:nſe of tmelling which was feared in her 
bs t Noſe, bur objectively or paffively of the breath ofhie; Nottrils which 


9 And the roof of thy mouth » like the beſt wines | 


= | 


5&4 Us 


E Chap.V1 ; 
was ſweer to the ſmell of her beJoved, = Grateful and. refrefhing. 
0 Either r. For thee my beioved, who reapeſt the comfort znd be- | 
nefit of that pleaſure which T rake in thez: Or 2. For me thy 
beloved, or according to thy uſual exprefſion,for my beloved. Which 
words Chriſt takes as it were out of her Mouth, . and. repeats them 
emphatically, Which agrees very well to the ſtile and vfage of theſe 
dramatical and amatorious Writings, And this claute furcher intia« 
mates the Churches Loy alry or bairbfuinels ro. Chriſt, that ſhe rea 
ſerves her ſelf, & all herLoves for Ciriſt a/ore.p Whereas bad Wine 
either goeth dewn ſlowly ar.d tedioufly,or is not permitted, to £0 
down.at all.; Heb.tha: walketh direftly, or, char moverh it ſelf arizh, 
which is givenas the: CharaQer of good Wine; Prov:23; 31. q Cau= 
ſing the moſt dull and ſtupid, and fleepy-headed perſons to ſpeaks 
and that fluently and eloquently, which is a commen etfe& cf good 
10.* T am my beloveds r,and his dsfire is cowardsme s. 7Ch:2:188 

- 7 This and the following verſes conrain the - wards of the Bride, © 6:3» [if 
in anſwer to the Bridegrooms. moſt indearing Exprefſions delivered | 
in the foregoing verics: : I perceive, and am fully fatisfied,' rhas 
he heartily loves me.. It is my duty tq have my deſire towards him 
as my Husband,according to Gods Sentence, Gen. 3916, butit is a 
wouderfu] condeſceſion in hjm, that his delire is towards mz. 
.. 11 Come,my beloved,let us go forth into the field t: 
let us lodge in the: villages s: . > $5 ax. 4 ra D 
# Thar being retired from the-crowd, | we may more freely and 
ſweetly converſe together, and may obſerve the Nate of the fruits 
of the Earth. «In one of the villages, as Ciries is put for oze of the 
Cities, Judg, 12,7: .... : | SY os + 
._ 12 Lerus get up early x tothe vineyards y, let us ſee fHeb:ope 
if the vines flouriſh, whether the tender grapes + appear 


and the pomegrantes bud forth z, there will I giveches * 
my loves 4. 1 


x TheChurch having offended and loſt her beloved by herformer 
lazineſs,now doubles her diligence,and diſcovers kew earneſtly ſhe 
was ſet upon the following work. y To particular congregations- 
See Cant, 6: 1. Iſa. 5.1. zLetus inquire into the ſucceſs of our 
Latours, what Souls are brought in and buil: up,how they proſptrc 
and grow in Grace, whether they abound in good Works,&c.s There 
I will diſcover the linceriry and fervency of my aff:&ions to thee, 
angl maintain communion with thee in thy holy Ordinances. 

I3 The mandrakes b give a {mell,and ar our gates 6 
are all manner of pleaſant frairs, new and old 4, which I 
have laidup for thcee, O my beloved, 

_ 6 This Hebrew word is uſed, Gen: 30: 14, 15. and the ſignifica- 
tion of it is very much doubted&diſputed by Interpreters;ofwhich 
ſee my Latin Synopſis on that place. But this 15 cectain that the word 
ſignifies ſweet and pleaſ-nt flowers.and therefore if it be underſtoot 
of Mandrakes, they were of another ſort than ours, as it is to uns 
uſual ching forflowers of the ſame kind in teveral Climates to have 
very differing Naturesand Qualities.c Either 1. Growing thereupon 
the Walls, or in Gardens,or Orchards, near the door of our dwel- 
ling-houſe : Or rather 2. Brought thither by diverſe perſons to con« 
gratulateand adorn.our Nuprials,or laid up for our entertainment, 
as may be gathered from the nature of the fruits, which. were not 
only new,and growing, but aJſoold, and laid up, as it here follows. 
d Fruits of this year, and of the former,that the variery might de- 
light. Which ſeems to be ſpiritually meant of thevariousfruits and 
operations of the Spirit, and degrees of Grace in ſeveral Believers. 
- - noon have been produced by my Miniſtry for thy Service and 

OTY+ a 


? 
- o 


CHA Þ. VIIL | 
The Church expreſſ#th herdefire of familiarity with Chriſt, 1. by the enter 
gainment ſhe'd make him.2,y3. She charges the Daughters of Jeruſalem not 
to diftrb her beloved, g. A commendation of the Church for ker Faith in. , 
Chriſt, 5: Sheprayech for full aſſurance of his Lave, her invincible dew 
fire, 6. Which 15 inſatiable, 7. Thecalling of the Gemiles withcheir intent . + : , Nay 
and h:r condition,s 13. Chrifts coming prayed fer, 1 4, +Heb:5hez 
Oo Thar thou wert as my brother 4 that ſucked the ſtev/dnee.. 
breaſts of my mother 5; when T ſhould find thee dep!ſe me, 
withoar-c, I would kiſs thee 4, yet FI ſhould not be 
deſpiſed e. | i Ong 
a Moſt intimate, and free, and familiar with me, as Brethren 
and Sitters commonly are» + That came out ofthe ſame womb,aad: 
ſucked the ſame breaſts,and conſequently were Brother & Siſter by, ' 
Father and Mother too;for ſuch are moiſt dear to one anorher. See 
Gen: 53:29« Deut, 13: 6. Heb. Sucking the Breaſts, &c. So ſhe wiſhs+ 
eth thar he were asa litcle ſucking Brother, with whom ſhe might 
innocently & inoffenſively delight her ſelf,as Siſters do with ſuch a 
Brother. TheChurch here expreiſth her paſſionate deſire of a ſtricter. 
Union,and cloſer Communion with Chriſt than yet ſhe had attain= 
ed, And in particular,theſe may be the breathings of the ancient 
Jewiſh Church afcer-Chriſts Incarnation, whereby he was to be their 
Brother, Rom: $8: 29, Heb: 2;11, 12. and a ſucking infant, cIn the 
open ſtreets; I might then expreſs my AfﬀeCtions,. to thee, and kiſs, 
thee openly without any ſcandal or contempr;, Or,without, i.e. coms 
forth from the Fathers boſom into the World,Joh. 16, 28.4 I would 
demonſtrate my Reverence, and Subjecrtion, and Afﬀection to thee,, 
of all which kiſſing was a token in thoſe times and places, as hath 
been oft obſerved 1n diverſe foregoing Texts. - e Then ſhould I nor 
be aſbamedor cenſured, as if I had done an indecent or immodesſt 
action,becauſe ſuch Expreſſions of Love are uſual amongſt Perfons 
ſo nearly and dzarly related, Foe 9 
2 I would lead thee, xd bring, theef into my mo- Or, :tos 
thers houſe g, || 25s would inſtrut me 4:T would cauſe «p,, ,; 1; 
thee to drink of * ſpiced wine,of che juice of my pome- 
granate 4, + -* . | ed _ 
f Wirh joy and trinmph, as the Bridegroom was uſually brought 
rothe Brides houſe. See Pſal: 45: 15, 16. g Either x, My Morhers 
in Law, my Hrustands Mother, as the cuirom was, Cen: 24: 56. 
JTudg. 12: 9. Or 2. My own Mothers; to thew her extraordinary, 
Reſpect and Afﬀection rohim. In the myſcical ſeats both come ro 
one;for the univerſal Church was inſoine ſort both his and her Mos; 


5 Q 3 ther, 


hap. VIIL. 
| « ther, þ To wit, how I ſhould behave my ſelf towards thee. Or, 
where ſbe did inſtru or educate me. i 1 would give thee the beſt en- 
tertainment which the Houſe affords. My Gifts and Graces ſhould 
all be employed to ſerve and glorifie thee: 


Zh. 2:6, ga * Hisleft hand sheuld be under my 


| ieht hand ſhould embrace me &. 

= The ſame expreſſions are uſed, cþ. 2, 6, The ſenſe is, He would 
not deſpiſe me for my forwardneſs in ſhewing my affe&ions to him, 
as men commonly do in like caſes,but would kindly accept of my 
Love, and rerurn Love for it, 


27: 4 * I charge you, O daughters of Jeruſalem, # that 


3-5. ye ſtir not up,nor awake m7 love until he pleaſe 7. 
Heb.why 1 This verſe is here repeated again from ch, 2» 7. & 3. 5e where 
ſee the Explication of it. - 
OOF C * Who 5s this that cometh up from the wilder- 
- ' leaning upon her beloved »?) I raiſed thee up # 
mw under the apple-tree p; there thy mother brought thee 


forth q;there ſhe brought thee forth :har bare thee. 

m Theſe words are repeated from «, 3: 6.0f which ſee the notes 
This and the next clauſe are the words either; $8, Ofthe 
£7eruſalem, or the Friends of the Bride and Bridegroom 
d congratulating this happy conjunCtion:Or 2. Of the 

who propoſeth the Queſtion, thar he may give the 

following.» Which imp'yes both great freedom&fami- 
feQion.and a F yu « cp _ _ age be 
ooms words, he ſpeiketh of himlſe!f in the third Perſon, 
wore ot in the os Loca. 0 When thou waſt fallen 
and laid low,and wert dead in treſpaſſes,and in the deprh of miſery, 
T revived thee: pUnder my own ſhadow; for ſhe had compared 
him to an apple-tree,and declared, that under the ſhadow of the 
T'ree ſhe had both delight and fruit, Cant: 2+ 3. which is the ſame 
thing with this raiſmz up. q Under that Tree.either the Univerlal or 
the Primitive Church did conceive and bring thee forth. 
6 Set me as a ſeal upon thine heart, as a ſeal upon 


thine arm r : for love s is ſtrong as death f, jealouſie « 
;s + cruel x as the grave : the coals thereof are coals of 


Pame of the — ee 4, which hath a | moſt vehement flame. 

__ » Theſe are undoubredly the words of the Bride. The ſenſe js, 
Ler thy Mind and thy Heart be conſtantly ſet upon me, let me be 
engraven upon the Tables of rhine Hearr. He ſeems to allude to the 
engraven Tablers which are frequently worn upon the Breaſt, and 
to the fignet on a mans arm Or hand, which men prizeat a more 

. than ordinary rate,as appears from Jer.22: 24.Hag 2:23.and which are 
continually in their ſight. 5 My Love to thee, from whence this des 
fire proceeds. 5 W ich conquers every living thing,and cannot be 
reſiſted nor vanqu-ſhed.u Or,zeal;my ardent Love to thee, which ale 
ſo filisme with Fears and Jealouſics,leſt chou ſhouldſt beſtow thine 
aff:&ions upon ocher5,and cool In thy love ro me, &r withdraw th 
Love from me:for true Believers ar ſuvje& co theſe paſſions. x Heb. 
hard, grievous and terrible and ſometimes ready to overwhelm me, 
and ſwallow meup ; and therefore have pity upon me, and do nor 
leave me. y It burns and melts my hearc like fic2, ; 

Many waters cannor quench love, neither can the 

*Pro'6:35 floods drown it: * if a man would giveall the ſubſtance 
of his houſe-for love,it would utterly be contemned 2,4 

{ris the nature of Love in general;and of my Love to thee,thar 
Tt « mnortbe taken off, neither by Terrors and aftliftions, which are 
| commonly ſignified in Scripture by waters and floods,Pſal:32: 6; and 

L 42: 7. and elſewhere;nor by temptations and allurements. Nothing 

bur the preſence and fayourof tie beloved perſon can quiet and ſa. 

tisfic it, And therefore do nor put me off with other things, bur 

giv! me thy ſelf, without boraSat in compariſon of whom, T 

eſpiſc all orhes perſons and things: 
s We a A a little ſiſter b,and ſhe hath no breaſts c: 


” . _ what ſhal we do forour filter din -the day when ſhe 
| {hal be ſpoken for e ? 


s Theſe afe manifeſtly the words of the Bride, ſtill continuing 
her ſpeech. The preſent Church, which was that of #he Jews,ſpeaks 
of another future Church, which was to conſiſt of theGentiles, which 
ſhe calls little,becauſe ſhe was the younger Siſter,and then ſcarce had 
a bzeing;and ſhe calls her her S:ftcr, parily becauſe ſhe was ſo in the 
purpo'e of Gog, their common Father, though at preſent ſhe was 
a ſtranger to him; and partly to intimate that the Gentile=Church 
ſhould ve admicred ro the participation of the ſame priviledges with 
that of the Jews. c No grown and full Breaſts,asVirgins have when 
they are ripe f:r Marriage, Ezek. 16: 7. This ſignifies the preſent 
golefa) eſtete of the Gentiles, which as yet were not grown up into 
4 Church Eſtate,and wanted the milk or food of Life,as for it ſelf,ſo 
alſo for its Members.d Teach us to know and | os au our duty to. 
them,which istoembrace them with ſincere and feryent affeQions,” 
to promote their coming in to Chriſt,and to rejoyce in it,and not to 
envy it, and murmure at it, as the Jews did in the days of Chrift, 
and of his Apoſtles. e To wit, for bringing ker into the ftate of 
Matrimony 3 when Chriſt and his Apoſtles,and others the firſt Mi- 
riſters of the Goſpel,who were Members of the Jewiſh Church,did 
fpeak and aft for the converſion of the Gentiles. 

g If ſhe be a wall, wewill build upon her a palace of 


head, and his 


there. | 
Daughters © 
admiring an 
Bridegroom, 
Anſwer here 
liariry, and fervent a 


ER£uaNT:;7 CL Ev. 


| Chap. VIII 
ſilver :. and ifſhe be a door, we will incloſe her with pn: 


boards of cedar f. 

f This ſeems tobe Chriſt's Anſwer to the foregoing queſtion of 
the JewiſhChurch concerning theirSiſter Church of theGentiies, for 
which they were, very ſolicitous, Chriſt therefore engageth himſelf 
to take care of her,& to provide for her,as the matter doth require 
and as ſuits beſt wirh her condition. If the Gentiles when they are 
converted ſhal be like a Wa/,ſtrong and firm in Faith,ſtedfaſt againſt 
all Aﬀaults and Temptations, for a Wall in Scripture-uſe ſignifies 
ſtrength, 1/a: 26: 1. Jer. 15: 20 and cliewherez We,my Father, and 
I, and the Holy Ghoſt,as the principal Builders,and my Miniſters as 
workefs with,and under us, will build upon her a palace of ſitver, wilt 
add more ſtrengch and beauty to her, will enJarge & adorn her,make 
her more amiable in mine Eyes,and more viſible and glorious inthe 
Eyes of the World: 4nd if ſhe be as a Door,which is weaker than a Wall, 
and where the Enemy doth or may break'in upon her; if ſhe be weak 
in Faith,and ſometimes overcome by the remprer, yet we will not 
therefore reje& and forſake her, but we will ;ncloſe, or ( as many o« 
thers cender the word ) ſtrengthen or furrifie ker with Boards of Cedar, 
which are not only beautitul,but alſo ſtrong and durable. If ſhe | 
be ſincere,and open the door of her Heart to me,though ſhe be weak. X 
I will come in to her,and make her ironger. 

Io Tamawallg, and my breaſts like towers þ 2 
was Tin hiseyes, as one that found favour 4, 

£ Theſe ſeem to be the words of the Jewiſh Church to Chriſt, O 
Lord, by thy Grace I am what thou wouldſt have my Siſter to be 
2 Wall,and therefore do humbly beg and hope,that according to thy 
promiſe to her in that caſe, thou wiltſt build upon me a Palace of 
Silver. hþ Which ſtand out from and above the Wall,and are an or- 
nament and defence toit. Of the Churches Breaſts, ſee before Ch: g; 
5 - & 7.3, 7- { When by his Grace I was made a wall, he was well 
Pleaſed with me, and with hisown workmanſhip in me. 

11 Solomon had a vine-yard at Baal-hamon&; he let 
out the vineyard unto keepers : every one for the fruit 
thereof was to bring a thouſand pieces of ſilver 7. 

k A place not far from Jeruſalem; where Solomon had, as it ſcems, 
a noble vineyard, 1 Whereby he ſignifies both the vaſt extent of the 
Vineyard which required ſo many keepers,and its ſingular fertilityg 


then # Hey 


peace, 


John 15: 19. but in the Church,the Garden of God,which God hath 


which afforded ſo great a Rent, 
12 My vineyard »s which is mine », is before me 6: 
thou O Solomon, muſt have a thouſand p,and thoſe that 


keep the fruit thereof, two hundred 9. 

m My Church,which is oft compared to a Vineyard, and is here 
oppoſed to Solomon's Vineyard.Ir is much doubred and diſputed whe. 
ther this verſe be ſpoken by Chriſt or by rhe Spouſe; the firſt clauſe 
leems to agree beſt to the former, and the following clauſe to the 
latter.Poſſibly the difficulty may be reconciled by aſcribing the firſt 
clauſe to Chriſt,and the latter to the Spouſe:ſuch interlocutions bee 
ing familiar in this Book,and in other Writings of this kind, » This 
Repetition is not idle, but very emphatical to ſhew that Chriſt had 
amore eminent and ſpecial title to his Vineyard, the Church, than 
S:lomon had to his Vineyard, becauſe it was purchaſed not by bis 
Money, but by his Blood, and becauſe it was his, not only for the 
thort time of this preſentyLife, as So/omor's was,bur to all Eternity. 
0 Is under my own Eye and Care,and is not wholly committed to 
the Care and Management of others,as Solomon's was; 1 the Lord ds 
keep it night and day, as we read, Iſa: 27: 3. Iam with it to the end of 
the worid, Mat. 28. 20. p Theſe are the Churches return to Chriſt, 
who is here called Solomon, as he was: 3: 9. 11. as elſewhere he is 
called Dav:d. Doſt thou,O Chriſt,keep thine own Vineyard, which 
Solomen did not ? Then ſurely it is meet that thou ſhouldſt receive,8& 
thou ſhalt r:ceive as large a Revenue from thy Vineyard, as he did 
from his, q Though the. chief Revenue belongeth, and is ' juſtly gie 
ven to thee, yet thy Miniſters, who ſerve thee in thy Vineyard,ſhal 
have, and are allowed by theeto receive ſome encouragement for 
their ſervice. See 1 Cor. 9. 7» 
| 13 Thou that dwelleſt rin the gardens s, the compa« 
nions 7 hearken to thy voice «** cauſe me to hear ;7 x. 

y The Hebrew word is of the feminine gender, which plainly 
ſheweth that Chriſt ſpeaks here to his Spoute, being about to depart 
from her for a ſeaſon, as the next verſe ſheweth, «s Not in the Wile 
derneſs of the World, for Believers are choſex or called out of the World, 


*Chiztk 


fenced and appropriated to himſelf. He ſaith, Gardens, becauſe of 

the many particular Congregations, into which the Church is divid= 

ed. t The friends ofthe Bride and Bridegroom. « Diligently ob« 

ſerve all thy words and carriages towards me, and all the tranſa&i- 

ons between thee and me. x When Iam gone from thee, let me 

_ ry Prayers,and Praiſes,and the Preaching of my Goſpel in the 
orld. 


14 | * Make haſte, my beloved, and be thou like 
toaroe, or toa young hart upon the mountains of + Bb 
ſpices Je away). 

y Seing we muſt part for a time, make haſte, O my beloved *Revy. 22} 
Bridegroom, and ſpeedily finiſh the work which thou haſt to do in 


the World,that ſo thou maiſt rake me to thy ſelf, that 1 may live 1n 
thine everlaſting embraces. The words of this verſe are borrowed 


I7> a2 


from Ch. 24 x7. where they arc explained, 


HSA 


IL an - 


- 
4 


— _ _— 


Jer 
&. 


er 


f He 


hea 


fHeb 
nated 
ſepara 
Pla, 


+ Hel 
ona ſe / 
wt, 


lOr, 


-——4 
A: 


Chap. I]. Fi v A 


3s firſt inp2ce, and, as may [erm probable, 
riety of his Prophecies, 
{on, and Offices, and Sufferings, and Kingdom of Chrif, 


Prophets, 


= a 


CHAP: L | 
Judih's Sins. 1,4. her Judgments : 5 9. ber Worſhip is vejefFed, TO» 
15. Exhortations to Repentance « Promiſes of Grace and Mercy : threat- 
nings of fore Judgments : and complaints by reaſon of their Backſlidings 
16-31. : 
He Vifion « of Iſaiah the Son of Amoz b, which he 
ſaw c concerning Judah and Jeruſalem &, in the 
days of Uzziab, Jotham, Ahaz, aud Hezekiah e, Kings 
of ſudah. BD 
z Or, The Viſions ; the word being here colleQively uſed, as 1t 1s 
ch. 22. 1. 1 Sam. 31+ The ſenſe is, This is the Book oftne Viſions 
or Prophecies. As Prophets were Called Seers, 1Sam. g. 9. ſo Pro- 
Phecies are called Viſions becauſe they were as clearly and certainly 
repreſented to the Prophets minds, as bodily Objetts are to mens 
eyes. bFither the Brother of AmaziabKing of fudah,as the Hebrew 
; 3h Writers fincy : Or, rather ſome other perion then well known. c 
2 7. e. Forelſaw and foretold. But he ſpeaks,after the manner of the 
Prophets. of things ro come, as if they were either paſt or preſent 
d Pcincipally bur not excluſively. For he Prophetieta allo con- 
cerning Egypt and Babylon, and divers other Countries z which yet 
he doth with reſpe& to Judah. e In the time of their Reign. Whence 
it may be gathered, that 1/aiah exerciſed his Prophetical Office above 
fifty years together, See 2 Kings 15. and 16. 


*Den;32:2 >, * Hear, O Heavens and give ear O Earth f; for the 


up 4 _ Lord hath ſpoken g, Thave nouriſhed and brought up 
Ezzk:36:4; Children þ, and chey have rebelled againſt me. 
fHe dire&eth his ſpeech ro theſe ſenſeclets Creatures, that there- 
by he might more awaken and affe& the 1/raclites, whom he hereby 
proclaimerh to be ſo dull and ſtupid that they were paſt hearing, 
and therefore he gives them over as deſperate, and calleth in the } 
whole Creation of God to bear witneſs againſt them. g This is his | 
Plea againit them, of the equity whereof he 1s willing that all the 
Creatures ſhould be Judges, h1I firſt made thema People, and un- 
til this time I have ſuſtainedand bleſſed them adove all other Na- ; 
tions. 


2 * The Ox knoweth his Owner, and the Afs his 
Maſters Cribs : but Iſrael doth not know &, my Peeple 


doth not conſider. 

; The moſt ſtupid brute beaſts acknowledge and obey their Lord 
and Benefaftor, as experience ſheweth. k To wir, me their Own- 
erand Maſter, which is eaſily and neceſſerily underſtood out of the 
former Clauſe. Knowing 1s here takea praQtically,as it 1s uſually in 
Icripture, and includ-s reverence and obedience. 


4 Ah 1 ſinful Nation, « People + laden with iniqui- 
ty 22, a ſeed of evil-doers », children that are corrup- 
eb, of;e.. (G15 0) they have forſaken the LORD p,they have pro- | 
” 1. O;, Yoked the holy One of Iſrael unto anger q, they are | 
ſnarated, gone away backward r. 
Pal, 58:3 #4 This Particle implies both his wonder, and anger, and grief, 

and ſhame that they were ſuch. » Heb. Of heavineſs of In:qu:ty, 
5.e. of heavy or great ſins, for heavy is commonly put for grea? or 
grievous, as J/a: 2i: 15* and 30: 27. Jaden nortwith the ſenſe of 
ſin,as Mat: 11: 28: but with the guiit and bondage of fin The Chil- 
dren of wicked Parents, whoſe guilt they inherir, and waoſe evil 
Example they follow. 0 Heb. that corrupt, to wit, themſelves or their 
ways, or others by their counſel and example. Or, that deftroy them- 
(ſelves and their land by their wick:dne!s, p Not in profeſſion, but 
in pra&ice and realicy, negleCting or corrupring his Worſhip, refu- 
ſing his yoke and condudt. q They havelived asific were their 
greatdeſign :ad buſineſs to provoke him. r Inſtead of proceeding 
forward and growing in grace, which was their duty, they are 
all faln from their former profeſſions, and grown worſe aad worſe, 
+ Heb, in- 4nd have impudently curn<d cheir backs upon me. 


maſere= 5Why ſhould ye be ſtricken any more s,ye will f re- 
wht, yolt more and more 7 : the whole head is fick, and the 
whole heart faint «. 


sIt is to no purpoſe toſeek to reclaim you by one Chaſtiſement 
after another 3 and therefore I will utterly foriake and deſtroy you 
atonce. f i fre you are incorrigible, and turneven your afflitions 
into ſin. « Your diſeaſe is morral, as being in che moſt noble and 
vital parts, the very head and heave of the- body politick, from 


q 


Fer$:7: 4 


{ Heb: of 


beaw ineſs 


whence the plague 1s derived to all che other Members,as it follows. | 


And this is to be underſtood either, 1. Of their ſins ; or rather, 2. 
Of their miſeries Which beſt ſuits. 1. with the foregoing words, 
this being added as a reaſon why it was in vain to ſtrike them any 
more, or to expe& any amendment that way, becauſe he had ſtric - 
Ken them already, and that very terribly, even in their head and 
heart, whoſe wounds are moſt dangerous,and yet they were not at all 
better for it.2. With werſe 7, 8: where this Metaphor is ſo explained. 


6 From the ſole of the foot even unto the head, rheye 
o ” Q k . 
zs no ſoundneſs in ic x ; but, wounds and bruiſes, and 


Oc, oyte. putrifying ſores : they have not been cloſed, neither 
bound up,neither mollified with || oincment y. 


in time alſo. Put undoubtedly he was contemporary with Hoſea, whom others 
{ſuppoſe to have been before bim, Compare Ifa. x. I. with Hoſea 1. 1. The Fews tell us that hewas of the Blood Royal of 
Fadah, whichis uncertain, But undoubtedly was the Prince of all the Prephets, whether we conſider the great extent and va- 
the excellency and ſublimity of thoſe My/t-vies h::h were revealed to him and by him, the Majeſty and 
Elegancy of his Ayle, or the incomparable Iivelineſs and power of his Sermons. He deth ſo evidently and fully deſcribe the Per- 
that ſome of the Ancientscalled him the fifth Evangiliſt. And it 
3s obſerved that there are more Teſtimonies and Quotations 7t the New Teſtament taken out of Iaiah,than out of all the other. 


| Baby'on it ſelf, Pſal: 139: 8: Iſa: 47: 1: In the ſame ſenſe we read of the 


F# I 


withfire : your land, ſtrangers devour it s in your pre- 
ſence a,and jt is deſojate,F as overthrownby ſtrangers bB9G , | 

z All rhis and what follows was verified in the daysof King haz, oy | 
2 Chron: 28: ia whoſe time, and upon which occaſion, this Prophe- f Heb. & i 
cie ſeems to have bern delivered, as more exaQly agreeing with 792% 990% 
that rime than with any other. It any obje&. That this being the throw of q 
ficſt of bis Prophecies, muſt rather belong to the days of Uzziah, Frangeri. 
they muſt take notice, and it is agreed by Interpreters, and ir is un= | 
deniably true, that che Prophecies of 1/a:ahy as alſo of the other Pra» 
phets, are not ſc# down in the ſame order in which they were de- 
livered. bur ofrentimes the latter are put before the former. # 
Which your eyes ſhall (ee to torment you when there is no power 
1n your hands to dcliver you.  b Heb. As the overthrow of ſtrangers, 
i.e. which ſtrangers bring upon a land which is not theirs, nor Jike= 
ly to continue in their hands, and therefore they ſpare no perſons 
that come in their way, and they ſpoil and deſtroy all thipgs,which 
15 nor uſua)ly done in wars between Perſons of the ſame; or ofa 
neighbour Nation, | 

8 And the daughter of Zion cis left as a cottage in 


a vineyard, asa lodge in a garden of cucumbers 4, as a 
beſieged city. | | 

c 2.2. Zion, or Jeruſalem ; for theſe two names are promiſcuouſly 
uſed of the ſame place. The name of daughter being frequently gi- 
v-n to cities or countries. Thus the daughter of Babylon is pur for 


aargiter of Tyre, Pſals 45: 12: and of Zidon, 1/8: 23: 12: and of Egypt, Jer: 
46: 11: 24; and of Edom, Lam: 4: 21. d Is left folitary,all the neigh» 
bouring villages & country round abour it being laid waſte. 

9 * Except the LORD of hoſts had left unto us a 
very ſmall remnant e, we ſhould have been as * So- qo -| 
dom, «rd we ſhould have been like unto Gomorrah f. , \,. | 

e If God: by bis Infinite Power and Goodneſs, had not reſtrained Rom:9:29:| 
our enemies, and reſerved ſome of us. f The whole nation and - Gen; 19. | 
race of us had been utterly cur off, as the people of Sedom and Go= 24; | 
morrah wers., So great was the rage and power of ourenemies, and 
ſo utterly unable we were to deliver our ſelves. ED 

10 Hear the wordof the LORD g, ye rulers of So- 

om 4 ; give ear unto the law z of our God, ye people 
of Gomorrah. 


£1 ſpeak not my own fancies or paſſions,but the meſſage of yous 
Lord and governour,to whom you owe all reverence and obedience. 
h So called for their reſemblance 'of them in wickedneſs, Comp. 
Deut. 32: 32: Ezek 16: 46, 48. i Or,oDeFrine, as this word is Com- 
monly uſed : the meſſage which I am now to deliver to you from 
God, your great Lawgiver, which ought to have the force of 2 
Law with you. 


11 To what purpoſe &is the multitude of your * ſa- *Pfal:5 6: | 
crifices unto me / 2 ſaith the LORD :-I am full of the 8: 9. | 


| 


burnt-offerings» of rams,and the fac of fed beatts,and ] ©5*15 p 
delight not in the blood » of bullocks, or of lambs,or EY [ 
of + he-goats, Chap.&6.3: 


& They are vain and uſeleſs, being neither accepted by me, nor Jer -6. 20: 
beneficial to you. 1 Who am a Spirit, and therefore cannor be ſa- Am. 5-21; 
tisfed with ſuch carna{ Oblations, but expe& ro be worſhipped in 22. 
ſpirit and truth, and to have your Hearts and Lives,as weil as your Mic.6 7». 
Bodies and S2crifices, preſcated unto me. » I am glutted with # qa THeb.,greaf 
and rherefore loath them. » He mentions the fat and 4lood becauſe he-goats. 
theſe were in a peculiar maziner reſerved Ff r God, Levit. wo 15, 16 
& 37: 31:to intimate: that even the beſt of their Sacrifices were re- 
jeQed by him. WS 

12 When ye come to appear before me o,who hath t Heb " | 
required this at your hands p,to tread my courts q ? be ſeen. | 

0 Upon the three Solemn Feaſts, Exoa: 23: 173 & 34-233 or up= 
on other occaſions. p To wit,in this manner, and upon theſe terms. 
The thing that Icommanldei!, W32$S not only, nor chiefly char you 
ſhould offer external Sacrifices to me, but rhat you ſtould do it 
wirh true repentance for all your fins, with Faith in my Promiſes 
with hearty Love to me, and ſincere Reſolutions of devoting your 
ſclves to my Service, withour which you offer me 2 dead carcaſs in- 
ſtead of a living Sacrifice, q The Courts of my Temple,which were 
rwo, that of the Prieſts, and that where the P:ople aſſembled, 
2 Chron: 4: 9g. So this Reproof ſeems to be dire&ed againſt both | 
Prieſts and People. as unworthy to enjoy this Priviledge. co ll 

I 3 Bring no more r vain oblations 5s, incenſe is an [Orgrief. | 
abominacion unto me ?, the newmoons « and fabbaths, - 
the calling of alſemblies x, I cannor away with y, it is 
alſo || in the ſolemn meeting 4. : 

r I neither deſire nor will accept of any upon theſe terms. 
s Heb. Meat-offerings ; of which ſee Node mf. 153. 4. + is 
far is it from being a ſweet ſavour to me,as you fooliſhly imagine. 
u Which were holy to God, and obſerved with great ſolemnity- Ses 
Numb: 28: 11, 14: Pſal: 81: 3. « All other Solemn times wherein the. 
People wereoblidged to meet together,as the threegreat yearly Feaſts 
and other extraordinary Seaſons, y Heb. 7 canner bear : Ir is bur« 
denſome and grievous to me, x So far is it from pleaſing me,thar. 


x You have been all of you puniſhed, from the higheſt to the low- 
eſt, from the worſt to the beſt. » I have ſuffered you to lie under. 
your maladies for a time, without applying any remedies, to try 


©Deut:282 whether the length and continuance of your affiition might not * 
Ns $22 «< & : MI gÞ 
ch: 5:53 7 * Your countrey #5 deſolate, your cities are burnt? 


work that Cure which the ſtrength of it could nor do,but all in vain.) where 3 although the word be ſometimes more generally uſed of 


it is an offence to me, and inſtead of reconciling me to you, which 
is your delign,it provoketh me more againſt you.s The moſt ſolemn 
Day of each of the three Feaſts,. which was the laſt day, which is 
calied by this very name, Levit: 23: 36; Numb: 29+ 35: and elſe. 


y other So}emn Feſtival-day. 


5O:3 14 Your 


1 PP 


'14 Your new-moons and your appointed feaſts my 
foul hatech: they are a trouble unto me, I am weary 
r0:1:28: 1G bear them- | 
rf 15 And* when ye ſpread forth yourhands 5, I will 
>, mul. hide mine eyes from yec: yea, when ye | make mt 
ply. ny prayers, I will not hear 3 your hands are full of * + 


Jer. bloodd. 
<4 bþ When you pray with hands ſpread abroad, as the manner was; 
F ofwhich ſee Exod: 9: 29: 33: Job 1:13, fc. c Which is a geſture 
of contempt and loathing. I will take no notice of your Pertons 
| or Requeſts. d You are guilty of Murder, and Opprefſion,and c- 
P[.34-14+ ther crying Sins, which'I abhor, and have forbidden, under 'pain 
"37:27: of my higheſt diſpleaſure. 
_ =wdhe 16 Waſhye, make you eleane, put away the 
pt evil - your doings from before mine eyes f; * ceale to 
OCV1 
e Cleanſe your Hearts. and Hands from all filthineſs of Fleſh anc 
Spirit, and do no not content your ſelves with your Ceremon1a] 
Walhings. f Reform your ſelves ſo throughly, that you may nor 
only approve your ſelves co men, but to me, who ſearch your Hearts, 
and try all your Actions. . 
17 Learn todo well g, ſeek judgment þ,|| relieve the 


oppreſſed, judge & the fatherieſs, plead for the wi- 


dow /. 
g Begin and inure your ſelves to live ſoberly, righteouſly, and 
godlily, 4 Shew your Religion to God, by ſtudying and- praQiſing 
Juſtice to Men. and neither give nor procure any unrighteous Judg- 
ment. z Be not only juft, bur merciful. &k Defend and deliver 
them, as this Word is uſed, Pſal: 7: 8,11: & 9:4. and oft elſe 
where. 1 Maintain the righteous Cauſe of poor and helpleſs 
Petſons, againſt their unjuſt and potent Adverſaries; whereby you 
will ſhew your love to Juſtice and Mercy, and that you fear God 
more than Men. 
18 Come now and let us reaſon together »-,ſaith the 


M57; LORDt though your fins be as ſcarlet », * 
_ | gh your ſins be as ſcarlet », * they ſhall 
EE" be my Hm as ſnowse ; though they be red like crimſon 


they (hall be as wool p. 
»mTamwilling to lay aſide my Prerogative, andto ſubmit the Ma- 
ter to a fair and equal Trial, whether I do nct deal juſtly in rejeQ- 
ing all your Services, which are accompanied with ſuch groſs Hy- 
' pocrifie and Wickedneſs, and whether I do not deal very graciouſly 
in off:ring Mercy and Pardon to you upon theſe Conditions » 
Red and vloody, as theirs were, wv. 15. great and hainous. o They 
ſhall be wathed and purged by the Blood of the Mefias. whereby 
you ſhall be made white pure and in Gods fight. Ir is a Metonymi- 
cz] Expreſſion, as fins are {aid to be purged, Heb. 1: 3: when Men are 
purged from their ſis, Heb, 9: 14. pþ Which for the moſt part is 
white, and is compared to Snow for Whireneſs, Revel: 1: 14. 
19 If ve be willing and obedient q, ye ſhall ear the 


good of the land r. 

q If you are heartily willing and fully reſolved to obey all my 
Commands. r Together with ghe Pardon of your Sins, you ſhall re. 
ceive many Temporal and Worldly Bleſlings. 

20 Bur if ye refuſe and rebell s, ye ſhall be devoured 
with the ſword : for the mouth of the LORD hath i1po- 
ken 2t 7, 

« If you obſtinately perſiſt in your diſobedience to me, as hither 
to you have done.z He hath ſaid it, who can as eaſily do it as {peak 
the Words, and who cannot lie, and there fore will do ir. 

2x * How « is the faithlul City x become an harlot 


7 ! it was full of judgment z,righceouſnelis lodged in it «; 


but now murderers 6b. | 
© u A Nireeof Admiration at ſo ſtrange, and ſad, and fudden a 
Change, x Jeruſalem which in the Reign of former Kings was faith» 
ful to God. y Is filled with Idolatry, which is common'y cal- 
led Whoredom, = Judgment was duly and truely executed in all its 
Courts. 2 It was famous for being the Seat of Juſtice, which did nor 
only paſs through it, iike a way faring Man,but had its ſettled abode 
init, 6 Under that one groſs kind, he comprehends all ſorts of 
unrighteous Men and PraQtices as may be gathered by the oppoſi. 
tion. Oaly their Connivance at that horrid Crime of Murger is 
noted, to afſureus, that orher Crimes of Jower nature were not on- 
ly unpuniſhed, but evenencouraged- ; : : 
22 Thy liiver is become drols c,thy wine mixt with 


water d. 
c Thou art wofully degenerated from thy former purity; &d If 
there be any ren:aindecs of Religion and Juſtice iii thee, they are 
*Pro:29:24 mixed with many and great Corruptions: 
*Ez:2512: 23 Thy Princes are rebelliouse, and * companions 
Hof. 4.18: of thieves f: * every one loveth gifts £ and followeth 
Mic: 3:11 after rewards þ : they * judge not the fatherlefs, neither 
Rgere5:2fs doth the cauſe of the widow come unto them 7. 
| wy e Againſt me their Soveraign Lord; they caſt off my yoke, and 
make their own Wills and Luſts the Rule of their Life and Govern- 
ment. . fPart'y by giving them connivence and countenanceg and 
receiving a recompenſe from them for it ; and partly by praQtiſing | 
the ſame Violence, and Cruelty, and Injuſtice that "Thieves uſe. 
5e. Bribes given to pervertJuſtice, which are ſeverely forbiddea, 
Deut: 19: 17. & 27:25. h Purſuing them with all eagerneſs, and by 
all means poſſible. ; They are ſo far from doing them Juſtice, 
that theyw illnot ſo much as give them a fair Hearing of their 
Cauſe,becauſe they cannot make their way to them by Gifes. 


24 Therefore ſaith the Lord, the LORD of hofts, 
" the mighty One of Iſrael, Ah, * Iwill eaſe me & of 


mine adverſaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. 


bap. 1. 


, 


04as« 


Orrighte 


| Jer:2: 214 


- 
« 


ha 


ruine, 


fies ; the Prophecy or Viſion. 


the mountain of the LORDS houſe 4 ſhall be || eſtabliſb-y 0r972% 


Te 
ed in the top of the mountains, and {hall be exalred gm \Ocutil 
bove the hills e: and all nations f ſhall flew g untoit. Ir, bow, 

b Or, Now, as this Particle is renderd 1 Sam: 93 1, Ezra 1: I, Bith ther 
c. cla the times of the Meas or the Goſpel, as the generality Chil ey 
both of Jewiſh and Chriſtian Writers enderftard it, avd as may 71 
further appear both from the uſe of this Yhraſe jn this ſenſe, Jer: 
14: Ho: 3: 5: As 


48:47: and 49: 39: Exek: 38; 8, 16: Dan: 10: 


Aa 
LM 


: ; 
. . a 
liraclites, who, thevoh they have called tl mſelves my Children. 
and Fiiends, yet by their Temperard Cariage towards ite have 
ſhewed rhen:{elves ro be mine Enemies. 


"24 


25 And I will reſtore thy judges o as at thefirſt p, aud 
thy counſellers q as at the beginning : afterward * thou *Zechs.;z | 
(halt be called 9, The city of righteouſneſs, the faithful 
clty, 
_ 0 T will give the ſuch Princes and Magiſtrates, p Heb. 4s thou 
badft in rhe beginning, either, 1, of thy Commcn-wealth ; ſuch as 
Moſes and Joſhua : or, 2. of thy Kingcow, ſuch. as David, q Thy 
Princes {hall have and hearken to wile and faithful Counlelors, 
which is a ſingular blfling to Prince and People. q To wit, juſtly 
and rruly ; thou ſhalt be ſuch : fer, zo be called is ot put for zo be, 
as Iſa: 4: 3: & Gr: 6: Mat: 5: 9. : 

27 Zion r {hall be redeemed s with judgment *, and 
[| her converts « with righteouſneſs x, | Or,chej 

r The Jews that live in or near Zien, and worſhip God in Zion. *#4t returi 
5 Shall be delivered from all their Enemies & Calamities- 7 Or, by *f her, 
Juagment, i.e, by Gods righteous Judgment, purging out thoſe wic= - 
ked and incorrigible Jews, who by their {ins hindred the Deliverance 
of the People, and puniſhing and deſtroying their unmerciful Ene« 
mies, who kept them in cruel Bondage, as he did to the Babylonians, 
whereby he made the way open for their deliverance. « Heb. her 
returxers, thoſe of them who ſhz11 come out of Captivity into their 
own Land, x Or, by righteouſneſs. e. either by my Faithfulneſs, 
in keeping my promiſe of delivering them after ſeventy Years; or 
by my Gooodnels ; for both theſe come under the name of Righte= 
ozſneſs in Scripture-uſe. 
28 Andythe* Fdeſtruction ofthe tranſgreſſors and 
of the ſinners ſhall be together z, and they that forſake 


the LORD ſhall be conſumed, 27. &92- 9s 
y Or rather, Bur, as that Particle is oft uſed; for here is a mani- & 194: 35, 
felt oppoſition. z Though I will deliver my People from the Baby- Heb, 
loniſh Captivity, yet thoſe cf them who ſhall ſtill go on in their 7e#king. 
wickedneſs, ſhall not have the benefit of that Mercy, but are re- 

ſerved for a more dreadful and total deſtruQtion. 

29 For they ſhallbe albamed # of the oaks|| which ye | Or, gods 


ve deſired b, and ye ſhall be confounded for the par- Chap.$7.5, 


Gr, ;aol;, 

dens c that ye have choſen d. 

.#s Not with an ingenuous and penitential ſhame for the Sin, but 
with an involuntary and penal ſhame for the diſappointment{of their 
hopes which they had in their Idols. 6 Which, after the manner 
of the Heathen, you have conſecrated to IdoJatrous Uſes, thar un« 
der them you might worſhip your Idols, as they did Ezek: 6; 13: 
Hoſ: 4: 13: See Ija; 57: 5: Jer, 2: 20. and 3: 6, cIn which,as well 
;$ in the Groves,” they committed Idolatry ; of which we read 1a: 
65: 3: and 66: r79. d To wit,for the Place of your Worſhip, which 
is oppoſed to the Place which God had choſen and appointed for 
his Worſhip. 

30 For yeſhall be as an oak whoſe leaf fadeth ; and 


aS2 garden that hath no water e. | 
e As you have ſinned under the Oaks and in Gardens, ſo you 
'hall be made like unto Oaks and Gardens, not when they are green 
and flouriſhing, but when they wither and decay. 

31 And the ſtrong f ſhall be as tow g. || and the ma-| or, x | 
kerofit þ asa ſpark ; and they (ball both burn together, bi wwk, 


and none fhall quench ther. 

f Either 1. your Idols, which you think to be ſtrong, and able 
to defend you, as appears by your Confidenee in them ; or 2. the 
ſtrongeſtPerſons ameng you,who think to ſecure themſelves againſt 
the threatned danger by their Wealth, or Power, or Wiſdom ; 
and much more they that are wezk and helpleſs. g Shall be as tud- 
denly and eaſily conſumed by my Judgments,as Tow 1s by Fire 
b The Maker ofthe Idol, who can neither fave himſelfnor his Work. 
manſhip. Or, his Work; either all that he doth or can do, or that 
which he hath done, his wicked courſe of Life, ſha)l bring him ta 


CHAP. II. | 
A Prophecy of Chriſts Kingdom, and the Calling of the Gentiles, 1, F 
And Rejettion of the Jews for their 1dolatry and Pride, 6, 9. The grea 
Majeſty and Power of God: and hu Terrours on the Wicked : With an 
Exhortation to fcar Goa, and not totruſt in Man, 10, 22. ; 

He word a that Ifaiah the ſon of Amoz ſaw, con- 


cerning Judah and Jeruſalem. : 
+ Or, the matter or thirg, as this Hebrew word commonly ſign» 


"Jobzi. : 
Pfal.1.6.& 
5.6. & 137 


_— 


"Os 0:1 


4 


7.70 
"2 


*Mi 
in the laſt days c, that gc. 


2 And 6 * it ſhall come to paſs 


17: Heb: 1: 2.1 John2: 18; and from the Converſion of the Gene 


k Heb. I will comfort my ſelf, eaſe my Mind, and ſatisfie my Ju- 
ſtice, by t:king vengeance, as the next Clanſe explains this, The 
ſame Expreſſion is uſed in the ſame ſenſe, Ezek. 5: 13, 1 Of the 


-— 


tiles here promiſed, 
the Nature of the Thing : . X 
State of the Church inthe World '; the Jewiſh Pccagrey Was bs 


which was nct to be till that time ; ard from 
. for this really was the lac Time and 


” 
urh 


ar) 


r prep 


Chap- It. 


Wc 
© 503 hp 
" My bs. 


1 A 

b2 abolifh:d, but Chris Inftitutions were to continue to the end 
of the Worid.a The Temple of the Lord which is upon Mount M- 
riah; which yet is not to be underſtood literally of chat Material 
Temple. but myſtically of the Church of God, as appears from 


the next following Words, which will not admir of a literal Inter- 


a 
J 


K pretation, and from the flowing ofall Nations to it, which was not 


that Temple, nor indeed was fulfilled til! thar Temple was deſtroy- 
ed ; andfrom the frequent uſe of this Metaphor, the Temple, or the 
Houſe of the Lord, concerning the Chriſtian Church both in the Old 
and the New Teſtament. e Shall be placed anii ſettled ina moſt con- 
ſpicuous and glorious manner, being advanced above all other 
Churches and Kingdoms in the World. f Thoſe Gentiles, whom ycu 
now deſpiſe, and judge to be abhorred and quite foriaken by God, g 
Shall comein great abundance, and with great egerneſs, like a Ri- 
ver, as the Word ſignifies. ES 

3 And many People ſhall go h and ſay ;, * Come 
ye,and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD,to 
the houſe of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of 
his ways, and we will walk in his paths & ; for / out 
of Zion ſhall go forth the Law mn, and the Word of the 


LORD from Jeruſalem ». 
; b Shall not only have ſome weak deſires of going, but ſhall be 
ready to take pains, and fhall aftually go. 7 Such ſhall be their 
Zeal, that they ſhall nor only go themſelves,but ſhall perſwade and 
preſs others to go with them. & They ſhew the Truth of their 
Converſion, by their hearty deſire ro be inſtufted in the way or 
method of worſhipping and ſerving God acceprably, and by their 
firm purpoſe of pra&iſing the InftruQtions given to them. /! This laſt 
Clauſe conrains the ReaſIn why the People ſhould be ſo forward to 
, go, and to invite others to go with them 3 and they may be the 
Words either of the People, continuing their Speech 3 or of the 
Prophet ; now returning to ſpeak in his own Name. » The New 
Law, the Doctrine of the Goſpel, which is frequently called a Law, 
becauſe it hath the Nature and Power of a Law, obliging us noleſs 
to the Belief and Practice ofir, than the Old Law did. » For the ac- 
compliſhment of this Promiſe, ſee Luke 24. 47: Atts 1: 8: Rom: 
j©; Ivo 

4 Andhe ſhall judge among the Nations o, and ſhall 
rebuke p many people:and * they ſhall bear theirſwords 


*Ter:31: G6; 
& 594 5+ 
T:ch: 8:21 


P4619: into plow-ſhares,and their ſpeares into || pruning-hooks: 
02: 18: nation ſhall not life up ſword againſt nation, neither 
LECN'O:1C:; A. = | 

0r,5:her Þall they learn war any more q. 


o Chriſt ſhall ſerup and uſe his Authority among and over all 
Nations, not only giving Laws to them, as other Rulers do, bur 
. doing that which no other Powers can do, convincing their Minds 
and Conſciences, conquering and changing their Hearts, and orde- 
ring their Lives. p Eithcr verbally, by his Word and Spirit repro- 
ving or convincing the World of Sinz or really, by his Judgments 
upon his implacable Enemies, which obſtru& the Propagztion of the 
Goſpel. q He ſkallroot out thoſe grear Animoſities and HoſtiJities 
which were berween the Jews and Gentiles, Eph: 2: 13, &c. and 
between ſeveral Nations, ſubduing Mens Pride, and Pafſions, and 
Luſts, which are the Cauſes of all Wars and Contenrions ; and 
working Humility, and Meekneſs, and Self-denial, and true and fer- 
vent Love to all Men, from whence Peace neceſſarily follows. This 
was the Deſign of the Goſpel in all, and rhe Ef.& of it in thoſe that 
rightly received ir. And that War and Diſſenſion wiich was occa- 
ſioned by the Preaching of the Goſpel,as was foretold Mar: 1 0: 21,22: 
3t was wholly accidental, by reaſon of Mens corrupt Intereſts and 
Luſts, which the Goſpel oppoſed ; and it was nor amongſt thoſe 
who received the Goſpel in the love of it, bur berween them and 
thoſe who were either open Enemies or falſe Friends ro them and 
to the Goſpel. Bur if this Place be underſtood of an external and 
general Peace which was to bein the World in the Days of the 
Meſias, this alſo may in due time be verified, when all 1rael ſhall be 


A ſaved,and the fulneſs of the Gentiles ſhall be brought in, and both 


Jews and Gentiles ſhall be united togerher into one Foid, unde; 
Chriſt their great Shepherd ; all which is propheſied and promiſe. 
John 19: 16: Rom: 91: andelſewhere. For it is not neceſſary chat all 
the Propheſies concerning the Kingdom of the Meſſias ſhould be ac- 
complithed in an inſtant or at the beginning of it ; but it is ſifh 
cient if they be fulfilled before rhe end of ir. And ſome of them 
do manifeſtly belong to the laſt days of that Kingdom. And there- 
fore there is no truth nor weight in that Argument which the Jews 
bring from this Place,againſt our Meſias, becauſe of thoſe Wars thar 
bave hitherto been and ſtill are amongſt Chriſtians 3 for this doth 
not prove that theſe Wars ſhall never ceaſe, or thar there ſhall not 
be ſuch a Peace in the World as they underſtand, before the end of 
Chriſts Kingdom. 

O houſe of Jacob, come ye r, and let us walk in 


5 
the light of the LORD s. 


r Seing the Gentiles are thus ready and reſolved to_go to the 
Lords HouſZ, let this oblidge and provoke you, O ye I/-aelires, to 
g0 with them, or before them. Whereby he ſecretly intimares their 
backwardneſs, and'that when the Gentiles did come into the Church 
they would apoſtatize fromit: 5 Take heed that you do not reje&t 
that Light which is ſo clear that even the blind Gentiles will diſ- 
cern it. 


10ers 6, Therefore t thou haſt foreſaken « thy people the 
ln che houſe of Jacob x, becauſe they be repleniſhed || from 
7 , theeaſt y, and * are ſoothſayers z, like the Ptiliſtines 
« *:,, and they [|pleaſe themſelves in thechiidren of ſtran- 


(Or,atoung geTs C. >; 

With thery {  # For the following Reaſons. Or, But, as this Particle is of 
Uildrey, uſed. Bur why do I perſwade the 1/raelites to receive the Lizht 
bo; of the Goſpel ? My labour is in vain; I foreſee they will refuſe j- ? 
and God, for their many and great Sins, will give them up to 
Apoſtaſy and Infideliry. « Wilt certainly forſake and reje&. » The 
Body of that Nation. y Their Land js full of the impious, and lit 
perſtitious, and idolatrous Manners of the Eaſtern Nations, th« 


* ; 
\Upro:17; 


tous Obſervation of the Stars, or Cloyds,. gr Birds, or other ways 


F # M 


of Divination, which God had ſeverely forbidden? See Levit! 
19: 26. a Who were infamous for thoſe YraQticy ; of which ſee 
one Inſtance, 1 Sam: 6: 2, b They delightin their Manners, and 
Company, and Converſation, making Leagues,and Friendſhips, and 
Marriages with them. c Either, 1+ in the Children begotten by them 
upon ſtrange Women ; or rather 2. in ſtrangers; as this Phraſe is 
uſed, Neb: 9:2. 1/a: 60: 10: and elſewhere. | G 
7 Their landalfo is full of filver and gold, neithee' 
is there any end of their treaſures d : their land alſo is full 


of horſes e, neicher is there any end of their chariots, 

4 They have heaped up Riches immoderately, ( which was for« 
bidden even to t{.cir King, Deut: 17: 57: ) and by wicked Praftices ; 
they are never ſatisfied, bur {till greedily purſuing afrer moxe and 
more Wealth, making this their chief Buſineſs and Joy. e Which 
even their King was forbidden to multiply, Dew: 173: 16. much more 
his Subje&s. p | ES 

8 Their land alſo is full of idols : they worſhip the 
work of their own hands f, that which their own fin- 
gers have made. 

f They give that worſhip to their own Creatures which they des 
ny to me their Creator, than which nothing can be more impious 
and abſurd. © 

9 And the mean manbowethdown, and the great 


man humbleth himſelf z : therefore forgive them not þ. 
-# Men of all Ranks fall down and worſhip idols. +þ Cut off theſe 
incorrigible Idolaters. Such an imprecation is not ſtrange, conſide- 
ring the hainouſnes and inzxcufableneſs of the Crime, the ſingular 
Condition of the Prophets, who ſpake ſuch things not from any 
diſorderly Paſſion, bur by Divine Inſpiration, and from a fervent 
Zeal for Gods Glory, which ever was and ought. to be dearer to 
them than all the Intereſtsof Men ; and from a pious Care&Fear leſt 
others ſhould be infe&ed by their Counſel or Example. Yet the 
words may be taken as a Prediftion, Thou wilt nor forgive them : By 
this I know thou haſt determined utterly to deſtroy them; for the 
. Hebrew Particle al is ſometimes taken only for a ſimple denial, as 
Pſalm 121: 3: Prov: 12: 28. 
10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the duſt z, 
tor fzar of the LORD,and for the glory of his majeſty &. 
z This is ſpoken ironically,&with deriſion. The ſenſe is,Suchdread- 
ful Calamitiesare coming upon you, that ye will be ready to hide 
your ſelvesin Rocks and Caves of the Earth, bur all to no purpoſe. 
k For fear of the glorious and terrible Judgments of God. 


the haughtineſs of men ſhall be bowed down 1, and the 
LORD aloue ſhall be exalred in that day m. 

[ Judicially, as they bowed down voluntarily before their Idols, 
So the Puniſhment is very ſuirable ro the Sin. m His Juftice and 
Power ſhall be magnified, and the Vanity and Impotency of all o» 
ther gods {all be deteted. | Es OY 

12 For the dayof che LORD » of hoſts ſba/] be upon 
every one that is proud and lofty, and opon every one 
that is lifted up,and he ſhall be brought low ; | 

n The time of Gods taking vengeance upon Sinners, which is - 
_ Goas day, Iſa: 13: 6, g: Ezek: 13: 5; and 30: 3: and oft elſe» 
where. | 

' 13 And upon all * the cedars of Lebanon, 
high and lifred up, and upon All the oaks of Baſban o. ”** 

o Either. r. Metaphorically, upon the higheſt and proudeſt Sine 
ners ; or, 2. Literally, as may.ſeem probable from the following 
Verſes, where there is diſtin&t mention made of mountains and hills, 

V. 14. Of towers and walls, y. 15. of (hips and piftures, v. 16. Whereby 

he intimates, that the Judgment ſhould be ſo univerſal and terrible, 

that it ſhould not only reach to Men, but to things alſo, whether 

Natural or Artificial, in all which there ſhould be manifeſt Tokens 

of Gods Diſpleaſure againſt the Land. The cedars and ooks ſtanding: 

in the Mountains ſhall be either thrown down'by furious Winds or 

Earthquakes, or torn in pieces by Thunder and Lightning ; and 

| cn16 itately Houſes bui!c with Cedars and Oaks ſhall be deſtroyed. . 
14 And upon all the high mountains, andupon all 

the hills that are lifted up p. t 

p T's which Men ufed to berake themſelves in times of War and' 
Danger. Irs uſual with the Prophets to deſcribe Gods Judgments ' 
upon Men by the ſhaking and ſmoaking of the Mountains,the trem= 
ling of che Earth, and the like, | 2 foes 

15 And upon every high tower and upon every fen- 
ced wall 9. | | | 

1 To which you reſorted and truſted for ycur defence. / 

16 And upon all the ſhips of 

# pleaſant Pictures, ES 

ry The Ships of the Sea, as. that Word is uſed, Pſalm 48: 7* where ſire, 
by you ferch-d Riches and Precious things from the remote Parts 
of the Wor'd. LY | | 
17 And the loftinefs of man ſhall be bowed down, 
1nd the haughtineſs of men ſhall be made lows : and 
th LORD alone hall be exalted in that day. . 

5 This he repeats again, partly roaſſure us of the certainty of it 
:nd parrly to fix :t deeper in mens Minds, becauſe they are very 
backward to believe and conſider things ofthis Nature. . 


18 And || the 1dols he ſhall utterly abolith z.. - 
t God will diſcoverthe Impotency of Idols to ſuccour their Wor- dels ſhall 
ſhippers, and therby deſtroy their Worthip in the World. 
i9 And they «ſhall gointo the * holes of the rocks, 
and into thecaves of + the earth x, for fear of. the 
LORD, and for the glory of his majeſty, when he arif- Rey.5: 15: 
ech to lbake terribly the earch Jo | &9: 6; 


away. 
*Hoſ. 10:8: 
- atk 3:39 


L. The idolatrous Iſraelites. x Their uſua] places of retreat in caſes Heb; 
of D:nger 3 of which ſee Jof: 10: 15: Judg: 6; 2: 1 Sam: ,13: 6... Guſt, 


Syrians and Chaldeans. z Theſe underrook ro dijcover ſecre:] Ether properly, or rather figuratively, to ſegd dreadfu) Judgments 
things, and ro forerel future contingent things, by the ſupertti |upv2 tus lakabitants of the Land. 


5s Q4 


Chap. W 


11 The *lofty looks of a man ſhall be humbled, -ang *Cb: 5: 15. [ 


that are * Zechi11: 


Tarſhiſh r, and upon all; Hebi/Piu 
Fures of Atz 


| Or, SE 
_ Utterly paſt 


; my 
the 


ci 


1 
| 


| 


» 


: & 31: 


Heb.the i= 
ols of his 
Iver, &c. 
Or, which 
hey made 
or him. 


+ Heb: di- 
Viner or 
eſſer s 


BY 


+ Heb: a 
Iman emi- 
 nentin 


; ap.I[l. 
Chap:30: 


: Eccl. 10, 


$8 4 


20 * In that day a man ſhall caſt Þ his idols of ſilver 
and his idols of gold, || which they made each one for 


bimſelf to worſhip, to the moles and to the bats z. 

= Into the meaneſt and darkeſt Places, in which Moles and Bats 
have their abode ; whereas before they ſet them up in high and 
honourable Places, where they might be ſeen and worſhipped. 
This great and ſudden Change proceeded either from true Repen- 
tance, which filled them with ſhame, and grief, and indignation 
againſt themſelves, and all the inſtruments of their Wickednelſs 3 
or from a ConviQtion of the Vanity of their Idols, which afforded 
them no help in the time of their need ; or from a juſt Fear leſt 
Gods Judgment ſhould haye fallen more heavily upon them, if it 


had found them in the PraRtice of Idolatry ; and that by his Pro- 


feſſion ofRepentance, they might, if it were poſſible, either pre- | 


vent or mitigate their Calamity. ; 
21 Toeo into the clefts of the rocks, and into the 


tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and 
for the glory of his majeſty, when he ariſeth to ſhake 


terribly the earth. TS 
22 Ceaſe ye from man « whoſe breath iz in his no- 


ftrils þ: for wherein is he to be accounted of c ? 

aSeing God will undoubtedly bring down the higheſt and proud- 
eſt of the Sons of Men into ſo much Contempt and Miſery, from 
henceforth never admire nor place your truſt in Man. 6 Whoſe 
Breath, upon which his Life and Strength depends, is 1n his No- 
firils, and therefore is quickly ſtop'd and taken away. « What 
one real and valuable Excellency is there in him, to wit, conſide- 


red in himſelf, and without dependence upon God ? 


| CH AP. II. 

Great confuſion on both People and Rulers for their Sin and Impuderice in it, 
1——9. Peace to the Righteous, and Miſery to the Wicked, 10, 31- 
The.Oppreſſion ans Covetouſneſs of the Rulers, 12——15. The Pride of 
Women, and its Judg ments, 16——26. 

| Fg behold 2, the Lord, the LORD of hoſts, doth, 

take away from Jeruſalem, and from Judah, the 
ftay and the ſtaff b, the whole Ray of bread «, and the 
whole ſtay of water. 

# Look upon it as a thing as certain as if it werealready done. 
b All the Supports of their State and Church. c Called elſewhere 
the ſtaff of Bread ; whereby is underſtood, either, 1, rhe Nouriſh 
ing power of Bread, which wholly depends upon Gods Bleſſing ; 
or rather, 2. Bread it ſelf, as this Phraſe is underſtood Lewir: 26: 26. 
Pſal. 105: 16: Exzek: 4: 16: and direQly explained Ezek: 5: 16: Bread 
which is the ftaff of Life. ; 

2 The mighty man dJand the man of war,the judge e, 
and the prophet f,and theftprudent g,and the ancient. 
- 4 Strong and valiant Men. e The Civil Magiſtrates. f Either 
firiMy fo called, the want of whom is matter of grief, ſee Pſalm 
74: 9. or largely, ſo as to include all skilful and faichful Teachers. 
8 Whoſe Wiſdom and Condu& was neceſlary to preſerve them from 
zine. + Whoſe Wiſdom was increaſed by long Experience. 


2 The captain of fifty ;, and the 4 honourable man &, 
and the counſellor}, andthe cunning artifcer w, and 


the f eloquent orator». 
\ 5 There ſhall not be a Man left able to command and manage fif- 


.ty Soldiers, and much leſs ſuch as could command Hundreds or 


Thoufands, which yet were neceſſary. k Men of high Birth, and 
Place, and Power, and Reputation. | Wiſe and Learned Stateſ- 
men. m#» Who could make either Ornaments for Times of Peace, 
or Inftruments for War ; which therefore Conquerors took away 
trom thoſe Nations whom they ſubdued, 1 Sam: 13: 19, 20: 2 Kin. 
24:14. » Heb: The skilfulef charm. Whereby he underſtands either 
x. Charmers, whom he threatens to take away,notas ifſuch Perſons 
were Bl::ilings to a Peaple,or the removing of ſuc h were a Curſe,but 
only becauſe they made great uſe of them, and truſted to them. 
And ſo he ſegnuſics that God would remove all the-Grounds of their 
Confidence, both right and wrong, and make their Caſe deſperate. 
As in like manner, and for the ſame reaſon, God threatens the 1/ael- 
;tes that they ſhould be as without # ſacrifice, ſo without Teraphim, Ho: 
33 4: Or 2. as moſt underſtand it, ſuch as could powerfully per- 
ſwade, and,as .it.were,charm that ungovernable Beaſt the Multirude 
of common People, by their Eloquence, to do thoſe things which 
were neceſſary for their Peace and Safety : For this word may be 
taken in a good ſenſe, as Divination is, Prov. 16: 10. 

--4 AndI will give * Children to be their Princes, 
and babes ſhall rule over theme 

_ © Either in Age. whoſe Minority corrupt Miniſters of State 
commonly abuſe to great Miſchiefs; or, 2. in Underſtanding,Ex- 
.Perience,' and Manners ; fooliſh, froward, unteachable, &c. 

5 And the People ſhall be oppreſled p, every one by 
by another, and every one by his neighbour : The child 
ſhall behave himſelf proudly againſt the ancient, and the 
baſe againſt the honourable q. ” 
; .þ By the command or connivance of ſuch Childiſkh Rulers. 9 Foo- 
I:fh and unworthy Men ſhall by wicked Arts gain the Favour and 
abufe the Power of the Prince, and thereby behave themſelves in- 
ſajently towards their Betters. 

6 When a man ſhall take hold of his brother, of the 
houſe of his father r, ſaying, Thou haſt qputhing / be 
thou'our ruler #,and let this ruine be under thine hand s. 

r Whereas Envy ordinarily reigns in near Relations, when one 
Brothex is advanced far above all the reſt. { We are utterly un- 

and have neither Food nor Raiment; but thou haſt ſome- 
ing yer left to ſupport the Dignity which we offer to thee, and 


" £0 enable thee to execute thine Othce. 5 He ſheweth, that Miſ- 


government ſhould cauſe the Diſſolution of the Government, and 

that the former Governours ſhould be removed either by Foreign 
Force, or by Domeſtick Inſurre&ion. « To wit, to heal ir, as it 
is explained in the next Vorle. Undertake the Charge of this cor 

tering StatEe 


Lo 


: . 


i. 


nÞ the 


be an | healer 5: for in my houſe is neither bread nor te 


cloathing z : make me not a ruler of the People. 

x Heb. he ſhall lift up ; underſtand either 1. his Voice 3 he ſhall 
cry aloud, to ſhew his earneſtneſs in refuſing the Offer ; or 32. his 
Hand, which was the uſual geſture in Swearing, Gen: 14: 22: Deuts 
32: 40, Oc. to ſhew his reſolvedneſs. y A repairer of the Ruines 
of the State. x I have not ſufficient Proviſions either of Food or 
Raiment for my own Fawily ; much leſs, as you fallly ſuppoſe, for 
the Diſcharge of ſo high a Truſt. | 

8 For Jeruſalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen : be- 
cauſe their Tongue and their doings are againſt the 
LORD, to provoke the eyes of his glory a. 


Fe Of his glorious Majeſty, whom they ought to reverence and 
adore, 


der up, 


againſt them 6, and they declare their fin c as * Sodom, +'/$ 


they hid i#not d: wounto their ſoul, for they have re- 
warded e evil unto themſelves. 

6 Their Pride, and Wantonneſs,and Impiezty manifeſtly ſhews it 5: 
ſelf in their very Looks and Carriages, and Will be a ſwift Wit- 
neſs againſt them both before God and Men. c They a& it pub. 
lickly, caſting off all Fear ef God, and Reverence to Men, and 
they glory init. d As men do who have any remainders of Mo. 
deſty or Ingenuity. ez. e. Procured a fit Recompence for their 
Wickedneſs, even utter Ruine. Or, they have gene : for this Word 
is oft ſo uſed, without any ſignification of a Recompence, as Plab: 
7: 4: They cannot blame me, but themſelves: Their DeſtruQtion is 
wholly from themſelves, Compare Hoſ: 13: 9. 

Io Say yef to the righteous, That it fball be well 
with him : for they ſhall eat of the fruit of their doings g. 

f God hath ſaid it, and doth now by me fay it ; and you, O ye 
Prieſts and Levires, ſay it in your Sermons to the People. g Let 
not them fear, for God will be their Safeguard and Portion in the 
common Calamity. 

1: Wounto the Wicked þ, 3t ſhall be ill with him: for 
the reward of his hand ſhall be + given him. 

h Theſe heavy Judgments are defigned againſt them, and ſhall cer. tohim. 
tainly find them out, though here they be mixed with the Righ- 
teOus. 

12 4 As for my people, * children are their oppreſ- * Ver 
ſours, and women # rule over them: O my people, * 


Rulers ; or, 2. weak and effeminate Rulers,ſuch being called Women thee bleſ- 
both in Sacred and Profane Writings k Thy Rulers Civiland Ec- ſed- 


thee, and ſpeak Peaceto thee. / Keep thee from the Knowledge or 
PraGtice of that Way which leads to thy Salvation,and miſlead thee 
into evil Courſes, by their wicked Counſels or Examples. 

13 The LORD ſiandetk up to plead, and ſtand- 
eth to judge the People ». 
9 He will ſhortly and certainly ſtand up as aJudge, to enquire 
into the Cauſe, and to give Sentence. n z7.e. To defend and des» 
liver them, or te judge for them, as this Phraſe is oft uſed» 


14 The LORDwill eater into judgment with the 
ancients s of his People, and the Princes thereof s for Nor, bur 


ye bave || eaten up p the vineyard 9 ;. the ſpoil of the up, 
poor r 15 in your houſes, 

+ The Princes or Rulers,as it is explained in the next Clauſe, who 
are oft called Elders, becauſe ſuch were commonly and-.fitly choſen 
out of thoſe who were ripe in years. p Deſtroyed in ſtead of pre- 
ſerving and dreſſing it, as you ſhould have done. q The Church 
and Commonwealth of rae, which is ofc called God's Vineyard,as 
Pſalm 80: 8,14, 15: Ja: 5: 1: Fer: 2:21, &c. and here the Yineyard, by 
way ofeminency : Or,the Yineyard which was cammited to your care 
ro keep, 7 The Goods which you have violently taken away from 
the Poor. 


15 What mean ye s that ye beat my people to pieces, 
and grind che faces ofthe poor ? ſaith the Lord GOD 
of hoſts. 

s What Warant have ye for it? How durſt you preſume to do 


it ? e Or, batter, as the word is uſed Ezed: 32; 20: Smite them crue- 
ly, See Chap: 58: 4. 


16 © Moreover, the LORD faith, Becauſe the 
daughters of Zions are haughty, and walk with ftretch- 
ed-forth neks x, and f wanton eyes y, walking and 

|| mincingas they go z, and\making a tinkling with ; jy & - 
their feet a; celving , 
w The Women ; as hitherto he reproved the Men. » AfﬀeQing with thei 
Starlineſs, P/a/m75: 5; and to ſeem tall. y Or, as others, rwink- eyes. 
ling with their Eyes ina laſcivious manner. z Afﬀter the manner of || Or, fif- 1 


looſe and wanton Perſons. s By ſome Qraaments which they wore ping & 
ypon their ſhoes. be. 


17Therefore the Lord will ſmite with a ſcab thecrown 
of the head b of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD - 
will | diſcover their ſecretparts c. Tos 
6 Will by ſending Scabs, or by other ways,take off the Hair of a 
their Head, which is a Womans Glory, 1 Cor: 11: 15. and which 
doubtleſs miniſtred to their Pride and Wantonneſs, Others rea- 
der it, He wil! make bald, 8c. c By giving her unto the Power of 
thoſe Enemies that ſhall cither trip her of all her Raimenrs, not. 
leaving her ſufficient to cover her Nakedneſs ; or otherwiſe abuſe 
her, by ſuch immodeſt and contemptuous Aions, Compare //#. 
47: 3; Exekq 16: 37: and 23: 10, 26. 

| £2 Is 


T Hel-done 


|| they which lead thee & cauſe thee to erre, and F de- "ps 
{troy the way of thy paths /. 1 Os, they 


; Either 1. properly ſo called,by their Favour and Power with the whichcall 


clefiaſtical, whoſe Duty it is to ſhew thee the right way. Or, as tHeb:ſwals 
others, They that bleſs thee, 1,es thy falſe Prophets, which flatter 10W up. 


T Heb: bits 


9 T The || ſhew of their countenance doth witneſs | 9, hard. 


21: Oo 19; g 


T0 ES 


> OR _ Chap. lt, [Cha 
7 In that day ſhall he + ſwear x, faying, I will not #45: lift 


| | Or 'Y 
yurks, 


| {Or,, 
I {lb 


{ Heb, 
might, 


(Or, ew 
tied « 

t Heb, 

tunfed, 


fHeb:be. 
t and g 


h, 

THeb. 
the oſcap; 
Ff Iſrael. 


[» 


ts 


ons 


burtk 


1L 1 Chap. IV. 


. this away. 


ak:r;2 5. deſty. 4 Becauſe few Men ſhall ſurvive that dreadful Stroke- They | 


F.4 4 
Fo On”. - 


F323 
18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery 


| lOr,nzts of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their || 
gk, 


cauls d, and their round tires like themoon e. 

4 As for this and the other Hebrew words here following, I judge 
it unre eſſary and improper to trouble the Evgliſh Reader with the 
differing Interpretations given of them by Learned Men, which 
the Curious mayfind in my Latin Synopſis, It is agreed by all that 
they were Ornaments uſed by that People in thoſe Times,and made 
Fewel to their Luſts. And 1t is of no concernment to the Direc- 
tion either of our Faith or Manners, exa&ly to underſtand the Na- 
ture and D.fﬀerences of them. And therefore I ſhall take them as 
they are in our'Tranſl:tion. e There were in ancient Time, and 
at this day there are ſome Jewels or other Ornaments worn, which 
carry a-manifeſt reſemblance to the Moon or Half-moon. Com- 

oe Pare Juag: 8: 21, 26. : 
[fr jo 19 The] chains, and the bracelets, and the ||muflers. 
10r fan 20 The bonnets f, and the ornaments of the legs,and 


'd 0rn#- the head-bands,and the F tablets g,and the ear-rings. 
ments. f Theſe were Oriiaments to cover the Head, common both to 
+Or,houſes Men, as Exod: 39: 28: and to Women, as here, g Heb. th? houſes of 


of excellent Perfumes, which are of great efficacy to revive 
our drooping Spirits, and to that end are ofc applied to ſuch as are 
ready to faint away. : 

21 The rings, and the noſe-jewels h. | 
 & Which were faſtned to the Head, ard hang down upon the 
Forehead to the beginning ofthe Noſe. Of which ſee Ge#: 24: 22 
47: Judg.8. 24,&c. : | 

22 Thechangeable ſuits of apparel, and the man- 
tles, and the wimples, and the criſping-pins z. 

£5 Of Silver or Gold, either uſed to curle the Hair,or rather faſt- 
ned and worn in the Hair ; which Cuſtom is not altogether diſuſed 
at this day. 


23 The glaſſes &, and the fine linen, and the hoods, 
and the vails. 

k The Looking-glafles,as we call them, though in Truth they were 
not made of Glaſs, but of bright and burniſhed Braſs. 

24 And it ſhall come to paſs, that inftead of ſweet 
fell 1,there ſhallbe ftink ”; and in ſtead of a girdle », 
a rent o; and in ſtead of well-ſet hair, baldneſs ; and 
In ſtead of a tomacher,a girding of ſackcloth ; and bur- 


ning p, inſtead of beauty. 
I Thoſe Perfumes mentioned v.20. »» From their Scabs mentioned 
wv. 17: or from other ill ufages of their Enewies, » Which were fine 
- and coſtly, and uſeful to gird their Garments about them; o Either 
the rending of their Garments for grief; or torn and tatered Gar- 
ments, not ſufficient to cover their Bodies. p By the heat of the 
Sun, to which they are now commonly expoſed, from which they 
uſed formerly to guard themſelves with great care; 


Heb, 25 Thy men (hall fall by the ſword, and thy + migh= 
"jt ty men inthe war, 

26 And her gates qſball lament and 'mourn, and ſhe 
[Or, emp- being [1 +.deſolate, ſhall fit upon the ground 7. 
tied, q The gates of Zion or Jeruſalem, which, by a Figure very uſual in 
t Heb, Sacred Scripture, and all Authors, are ſaid to lament, to imply the 


tunſed, great Deſolation of the Place; that there ſhould be no People to go 
out.and come in by the Gates, or to meet together in the Gates, as 
they uſed to do. r Like a mournful Woman bewailing ths loſs of 


her Husband and Children. 
C H A P. IV. 


In the Extremity of Evils, Chriſts Glovious Kingdom ſhould appear to thoſe 

. who ave left alive, 1, 2. They ſhallbe Holy, 3 Purged, 4. £ Glory 
and a Defence upon them, 5, A Sanfuary fromEvils, 6. 

" A Nd in that day a ſeven b womenſhall take hold cof 
'S one man 4, ſaying, We will eat our own bread, 

and wear our own apparele: only Þ let usbe called by 


Heb. Le:thy name ff, || totake away our * reproach g. 

th namebe @ Of which he hath hitherto been ſpeaking, C#ap: 2: and 3: and 
uldupm us frill continueth to ſpeak. In that calamitous Time, 5 Many. A 
|Or, 74k certain nzmber for an uncertain. c Shall ſue to him,and even lay 
hands upon him, contrary to their Cuſtom, and their natural Mc- 


who before were net contented with their own Husbands, are now 
glad of a ſeventh part of a Husband. e We will eaſe thee of rhat 
Charge, which otherwiſe would fall upon thee by Gods Law, 
Exod: 21:10; fOwn us for thy Wives. g Virginity was eſteemed 
a Reproach, eſpecially among rhat People,becaule it was a Token of 
Contempt from Men, and of the Curſe of God ; Children, the uſ- 
ual Fruit of Marriage, being both an Honour to cheir Parents be- 
fore Men, and a great Bleſſing of God,eſpecially to that People,from 
Wk ſome of whoſe Loins the M-ſiah was to ſpring. 
eb:beaus 


9a £"-reautiful and glorious,and the fruit of che earth ſhal be ex- 

fHeb. fs Cellent & and comely | for them that are eſcaped } of 

th deefing Lſrae). OY 

If ſradl. h About and after that time : when the Lord ſhal have waſhed away 
( as this time is particularly exprefſed, wv. 4. ) the filth of Zion, by 
thoſe dreadful Judgments now deſcribed. 7 Either, 1. the Church 


i the ſoul. the Soul, or, of Life, or, of Breath. Whereby he ſeems to mean Boxes | ( 


| promiſed to do to the Jews, Zech: 12: 


| would be their Proteor, and their Glory. « Upon all that Church 


Eyes, but evenin the Eyes of 


2 In thatday bh ſhall the Branch of che LORD #7 be + N 


I 4 H Chap. 


wy ; FFT : 
p © was made barren, upon their Repentatice and return to Chriſt 
ihall recover its former Fertility. Under this one Mercy he ſeems 
to underſtand all Temporal Bleſſings, which, rogether with ſpiri- 
tuaJand eternal, God ſhall confer upon them; and withal ro inti- 
mate the Fruitfulneſs of the People ( the Earth or Lond being oft 

Put for its Inhabitants )in Knowledge, and Grace, and all good 

works, 1 That ſhall ſurvive all the forementioned Calamities. 


3 And icſhall come to pals, that he hat is left in Zion, 
an _n that _—_— in Jeruſalem, ſhall be called holy | 
"> even every one that is written || amo ne Jivi Al 
in Jeruſalem # : | OO — ; 
"17. e. Shall be really holy, as is ſaid Chap: 60: 21: To be called i EY 
herb be, as Gen: Appt [ſa: 1: 26: an 44:5. 7 So this = 
_ ri _ ofthe foregoing indefinice Propofition. Not all that are 
_ ” 2 greatnumber of them, ſhall be holy, even al chat ate 
Chen, £ 5 e. all the Ele&, who are frequently deſcribed by this 
Mag a voy that they are writen in Gods or the Lambs Book, or in the 
of ie, or of the Uving, Plalm 69: 28: Dan: 1 3: 1, Phil. 4: 3: Rev: 
3z $: an op 8: and 17: 8, &c., But this laſt Clauſe ofthe Verſe is 
y ome Learned Interpreters rendred thus, a2 chat are in Jeruſalem 
C5 _ ons Steat number of chem,as ſuch general Expreſſions are 
| _= _ y fue, or the generality of them) ſha be writsen unto Life, 
_ a eſuch as are eleted unto Salvation through San&ification : 
Na wm = deſerve conſideration. So he notes the ſingular Privi- 
edge of this People at this time, above the former Ages, in which 


many were called, but few y | i Wal 
or belonging to Inefalow._ were choſen. o Ofthe People living an 


Ram the Lord ſhall have waſhed away the filth of i 
c - _—_— of Zion 2,and ſhall have purged the blood _ 
4ot Jerutalem from the midft thereof, by * the ſpirit of * chap: 44 | 
judgment;and by the ſpirit of burning r; 15, a6. | 
£ This ſhall be accompliſhed when God hath thorowly cleanſed 
Fon Jewiſh Nation from their Sins. q The Blood-guiltineſs, and 
- pecially that of killing the Lord of Life, their own ' Meſſiah. r 
f _ 1S Oppoſed to the former Legal way of Purification, which was 
RH, ater, By the firit he ſeems to underſtand the Holy Spirit of 
as ” which this waſhing and purging Wark is commonly aſs 
rl : » AS 1 Cor? 6: 11: and elſewhere ; whick Spirit did accompany 
oo reaching of the Goſpel, and did this Work in part in ſome of 
_ fews, and will doitmore fully in the Body of the Nation. 
nd this Spiric may well be called « þirit of Judgment,becaule it exe- 
cutes Judgmenrin the Church, and in the Conſciences of Men, ſe- 
_— che precious from the vile, convincing men of Sin and 
1ghteouſneſs, and Judgment, Joh 16: 8.9. manifeſting the Secrers 
mY mens Hearts,in the Preaching of the Word, r Cor: 14; 25: accuſing 
a } Mrirng and punifhing ſome, witneſſing for and with others, 
_ ling them with Peace & Joy in believing; hardhing ſome,and 
ortningand ſubduing others to God, as this Spirit 1s particularly 
aol 10: And the ſame Spirit may 
- fitly caled the ſpirit of burning,as he iscompared to Fire, Mar: 3: - 
| becauſe he doth burn up and conſume the Droſs which is in the 
Church, andin the Minds and Hearts ofmen,and enflames the Souls 
of Believers with Loveto God; and Zeal for bis Gloty. 


5 And the LORD will create s upon every dwelling 
place of mount Zion,and upon her alſemblies,a * cloud, *p,od:15: 
and ſmeak by day, and the ſhining of a flaming fire by = © 
night : : for || upon all the glory « ſhall be + a defence. || Or,above. 


s Will in a marvellous manner produce, as it were by a ne eb: 5 60 
Work of Creation. #t A Pillar of Cloud and F ire, like char whats vering, 
with the Lord dire&ed and proteted and, honoured the Iſraelites, 
when they came out of Egypr: Whereby he implies, That God 


and People, which God will make ſo glorious, not only in his own 


he _ . 
of ncere Chantiny the World ; upon all holy Aﬀemblics 


6 And there ſhall bea Tabernacle xfor a ſhadow in 


the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, 
and for a covert from ſtorm and from rain, 
x Or,He 7. e. the Lord, ſhall be « Taberuacle,or a tent,to defend them 


from the violent Heat of the Sun, and other Injiur; Wow 
cher, which was the Uſe and Benefic of - ——_———— of the Wea 


CHAP. V. 


Iſrael Gods Vineyard, his Mercies, and their unffuitfulneſs, ſhould be Lid 
waſte, 1 "7. Judgments upen Covetouſnejs, 8 10, Upon Dran- 
kards, andthe Laſcivius, u, 12, The great Miſery of the Jews, 13-<. 
I7. Judgments on Impiety, Stoffers at Gods threatnings, thoſe who C£0r= 
rupt the Nations of geod and ill, Strong-Drinkers, and Unjuſt Jaages 
, CO « Goas Anger, and the Chaldeans Army againſt chem, 
— 3 O, : 1 


*Pſal:$0:8; 
Cant;s:r2:3 
Jer:2:21: 


5 P 2 And 


1aÞP. V, | I S A 
Ty made 2 Ap he [| fenced fit, and gathered out tlic tones 
als>eut thereof g, and planted it wich the choiceſt vine, 2nd 
* bp. Duilt a tower + in the midſt of itz and alſo + made 2 
© wine-preſs therein: &he looked that it ſhould bring forth 
_ grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. | 
# That neither Men nor Beaſts might ſpoil it. £ which otherwiſe 
wou'd have marred the Land ; of which ſce'2 Kings 3: 19; The 
ſenſe is, He removed all Hinderances,and gave them all the Means 
of Fruitfulaeſs. þ For the Reſidence of the Keepers, that they might 
be obliged and encouraged to watch over it with more diligence. 
2-And now, O inhabirants of Jeruſalem,and men of 
Judah, judge I pray you,betwix: me and my vineyard 7. 
;I dare make you Judges in your own Cauſe, it is ſo plain an 
reaſonable. 
Heb.was 4 What + could have been done more to my vine- 
erezode. 2rd, that I have not done in it &? wherefore when 
T looked that it ſhould bring forth grapes, brought it 
forth wild grapes /? : | 
k Whar work is there belonging to the Office ofa Maſter orKeep- 
er of the Vineyard, which I have negleQted ? ! How unworthy and 
inexcuſable a Crime isit, that you have not one!y been unfruitful 
in good Works, but alſo filled with all the Fruits of Wickednels. 
| 5 And now goto ; I will tell you what I will doto 
80:12: my vineyard -; * I will take away the hedge thereof, 
and it ſhall be eaten up : and break downthe wall there- 
of, and ic thall be + trodden down »: 
m He griciouſly warns them before-hand, that they may have 
ſpace and invitation to repent,and ſo to prevent the threatned V' 1- 
eries, »1I will withdraw my Preſence and Proteftion from them. 
and give them np into the Hands of their Enemies. . 
6 And I will lay it waſte : it ſhall not be pruned,nor 
digged o, but there ſhall come up briers, and thorns p : 
T will aiſo command the clouds, that they rain no rain 


Heb for 
treading. 


+ Heb. , for righteouſneſs, but beholda cry s. 

Jeabe y In whom Go4 formerly delighted to dwell and converſe. Com- 

+M pare Prov. 8: 31: Fer: 31: 30. 5 From the Oppreſſed crying to Men 
for Help, and to God for Vengeance. 

4 Mic: $ Wo unto them that join * houſe to houfe, that lay 


t That add new 'urchaſes of Houſes and Lands to their former 
Poſſ:fions. Nor thar this was in it ſelfunlawful, but becauſe they 
did this from an inordinate and inſatiable defire of Riches, and with 
the Injury of their Brethren, as is manifeſt from the foregoing »nd 
following Words. «That they alone may be the Lords &Owners,:nd 
all others only their T<nan's and Servants. 

9 |Inmine ears, ſaid the LORD x of hoſts, + Of 
2 trutl; many houſes ſball be deſolate y, ever great and 
fair, without inhabitant, | 

x I beard God ſpezk what I am now about to utter. Heb. I the 
ears of the Lord, Which may rel2te excher,r. to the foregoing wores ; 
The cry of your fins, and of the oppreſſed,is come into Gods E-rs; 
he hears and ſees it ; and will certainly punith it : O72. to the fol- 
lowing clauſe, which, being of great importance, heuſhers 1+ with 
an Oath ; I ſpezk ir in Gods Ears, as well as in yours; I call God co 
witneſs the rcuth of what I ſay.yTne houſes which you have ſo gree- 
dily covered, ſhall caſt you eut, and become de!ol.te. 

10 Yea,ten acres of Vinevard ſhall yield one bath z, 


and the ſeed of an homer (hall yie:d anephah 4, 

-z To wit,of Wine. The Bath contained abour eight Gallons. Thus 
an Acre didnot yield one G-F on. @ Which was of the ſame quan- 
tity wich the Bath, only the Bath was the meaſure of 11quid things, 
the Ephah of dry things ; and an Ephbah was the tenth part of an 
Homer, Ezek: 4;:11. So in ſtead of that great increaſe which thar 
truitful Land commonly yielded,they ſhould loſe nine parts of their 
Seed. Thus a fruitfal Land was made barren.for their wickedneſs, 
according to Gods threataing, Pſal: 107; 14. and they had as little 
comfort in their Lands, as in their Houſes; which were the two 
kinds of their Purchaſes, v. 8. 


r, thisis 
Inm nee 
—_ the 
ord, &+, 
tHeb'1f nos 
OA 


*Prov: 23: 11 * Wo unto them that riſe up early in the mor- 
«gu | ning b, that they may fellow ſtrong drink, that conti- 
9, #14 ave until night, c, zl wine ||inflam=them 9. 


b Which was unuſual, and ſcandalous in that caſe, Eccleſ, ro: 16: 
AFs 2:15. They made Drinking their daily Trade and Buſineſs. 
£ Thereby waſting both precious time,and Gods good Creatures,and 
the health of their Bodies,as well as of their Souls. d He uſeth this 
word partly to ſhew their folly and miſery, b-cauſe the Wine was 
fo far fromquenciing and ſatisfying their appetites, that it did in- 
deed inflame and increaſe themzand partly to prevent the vain excuſe 
of them whothought themſelves innocent, becauſe they did not drink 
to Drunkenneſs,although they caſt themſelves into an intemperate 
heat through their excels. | 


» : 
-—_ 6 | 12 And*the harp and the viol, the tabret and the 
$003 4:27 pipe,and- wine are in their feafts e: but* they regard not 
Pal: 28: 5: the work of che LORD f, neither conſider the operati- 


-on of his hands. | 
RY give up themfelves wholly to Luxury, and that in a ve- | 


| ways reproving and threatning us, fHe only thinks to affright us 


1 4 it Chap V. 


\ and is yet doing, and abcut to do among them 3 his grievous Jug. 
ments, partly infl:Qted, and partly threatn-d, which required ano. 
' ther courſe of life, even to give themſelves to Faſtirg and Prayer 
and Reformation, that ſo they might remove the incumbent, ind 
prevent the approaching calamitiev 
I3 * Therefore my people are gone into captivity g, « x 
becauſe they have no knowledge þ : 1 ans 
? icdge + : and Þ their hon- + He therp 
ourable men z are famiſbed, and their multitude dried 2/1) are 
up with thirſt, men 0; fax 
 & Either, 1. Are aftually gone, which was true of the Ten Tribes © 
in H-zekiah*s Reign, 2 K:7gs 18: 9: unter whom this P: optec 
might be uttered 3 cf 2. Sh:1! certainl;. and ſhortly go, as t!.c Two 
Tribes afterward did. þ N>» ſerious Corfideration of Gods Works 
and of their oynDuty and Danger, ; Who thought themſelves quite 
wt of reach of Famine. | 
14, Therefore hell E hath enlarged + here ſelf, and o- + Heb: be 
pened her mouth without meaſure / : and their g:ory m, out, | 
and their multitude, and their pomp #; and he that re- 
joycetho, ſhall deſcend into it. | 
t Or, he grave, as this Word moſt commonly ſignifies. 1 To rea 
ce:ve tavie vaſt Numbers which ſhall die by this Famine or other 
wiſe, as is here upplied. m Their Honourable men, as they were 
called. v.13. being diſtinguiſhed both here and there from the mute 
tude, n All their G'ory thall die with rhem.  o That ſpendeth a1l 
_ days in Mirth and Jollicy, and caſteth away all. Cares anq 
ears. ! 


TCha: s: 


15 And * the mean man ſhall bebrought down,and ,,** *% 
the mighty man ſhall be humbled p, and the eyesof the * 7 
lofty ſhall be humbled. 

Þ All of them,both high and low, ſhall bebroughrt-to deftru&ion, 

16 But the LORD of hoſts ſhall be exalted in Judg- | 3 
mentg, and||f God that 1s holy ſhall be ſancified » in Oral 
Righteouſneſs 5. } Heb. the 


9 By the ex«curion of this juſt Judgrent upen his Incorrigible 
Enemies. r Shall appear to be an holy Gud, 
Judgments. 


17 Then #ſhall the lambs. « feed after their manner 
x, and the waſte places y of the fat ones z ſhall ſtran- 
gers acat, |, | 
t When God ſhall have finiſhed that Work of [Judgment 
Ungodly, he will extend Mercy to = Aonar tl This IS _ _y 
ual in this Prophet, in the midſt of his Threatnings, to inſert ſome- 
thing for the ſupport of Believers. » The poor and harmleſs People 
who ſhall be leftin the Land wl:en the Rich are carried into 
Captivity, asit 'ell out 2 Kings 25: 12. x Or, by their Fold, as this 
Word is manifeſtly uſed Mic: 2: 12: the only place of Scripturegex- 
-ept this, in which this Word is found. » The Lands left by their 
Owners, who were either ſlain, or. carried into Captivity, z Of 
the Rich and Great men, ſo called Pſa: 22: 293 and 58: 31: Iſa: 104 
'6, a Thepoor Ilradlites, who were left to be vine-areſſirs and hushand. 
men, 2 Kings 2537 12. who are called frargers, becauſe they were ſo 
1n reference to that Land, not being the proper Owners of it, nor 
related to them zas the 1ſraelites of other Tribes are called frrangers in 
oppoſition to the Levites, as Numb: 1: 5; and elſewhere; yea, and 
the Levites are ſo called, in oppoſttivi: 10 the Seed of Agron 
Numb: 16: 40. : 447 
13 Wo unto them that draw Iniquity b with cords of © 
vanity ec, and fin as it were with a cart-rope d. 
bThat are not only drawn to ſin by the Al'urements of the World 
or by the Perſwaſions of wicked men, b-1ng turpriſed and overraken 
by Sing as ſ-mctimes good men are, Gal: 6. 1, but are ative and 
incuſtrious in drawing Sin to themſelves, or themſelves to Sin ; 
that greedily and ſteadily purſue Sin, and the Occaſions of it, and 
arenor atreſt till they kave overt:ken 1r ; that ſin wilfully, and re- 
ſoJvedly, and induſtriouſly. c Or,w-th cords of Iz:ng, as the laſt Word 
frequently ſignifies, 7. e. with vain and deceitful] Arguments and 
Prerences, whereby Sinners generally draw themſelves to Sin,among 
whic ., one follows in the nex: Verſe, to wit, the Impunity which 
they promiſe ro themſelves Or theſe Cords may note the Means 
which they uſe to accompliſh thatIniquity which they have deviſed, 
ad With all their mighrt,as Beaſts commonly do that diaw Carts with , 
Ropes. 
19 * That ſay, Let him e make ſpeed, and haſten his *Jerqy.tg 
work, that we may fee itf: and let the Counſel of Amos58: 
the holy One of Iſrael g draw nigh and come, that we F533 


may know 1t. 
e To Wir, God, in whoſe Name thov and other Prophetsare al- 


God the 
s By his righteon bel. 
$ 


with Bugbears ; but he either cannor, or will not do us any harms 
we do not fear him, let him do his worſt ; let him begin-as ſoon as 
ſoonzs he pleaſeth. Not thatany of the Iſraelites were ſo impudent 
as to uſe theſe Expreſſions ; but this was the plain Language of their 

Aﬀtions ; they lived as if they were of this © Opinion; | 
their Preſumption and Security ſhewed their deſperate Contempt 


*Cl 


of God,and of all his Judgments. g Who by his Holineſs is engaged ( 
to puniſh us. They ſcornfully repeated the Title uſually given by. | 
the Prophets unto God. 
20 Wo unto them Þ that call evil good, and good e- + Hebzhs: 
vil þ ; that put darkneſs for light, and light for dark- /a -; 
neſs ; thac put bitter for ſweet, and ſweet for bitter. 
þ That take away the difference between Good and Evil ; that ju- he 1d, & 
ſtific and approve wicked Men and Things, and condemn Piety, or 5"? 
Vertue, or righteous Perſons, Compare Prov: 17: 18s. Thus many 

call Serious Godlineſs, Humourous Singularity ; and Juſtice, Moro- 

ſity ; and Meekneſs, Stupidity, &c. as on the contrary, they call 

Pride, Magnanimity 3 and Covetouſneſs,Good-husbandry. And men 

are very apt to follow the Courſe of the World in their falſe Judg. 

ments ofthings: which therefore the Propher ſo ſeverely forbids. 


21 We 


ry unſeatonable time, as it follows, } What God hath lately done 


YE LENS. 


Chip? V. 


f a tt] s 


iS 414 8 


tprov.3:9: 21 Wo,unto them that are * wiſe in their own eyes, 
R912: 16! and prudent Þ in their own fight z. 

Hed» ; That being puffed up with an Opinion of their own Wiſdom 
before their de{piſe the Counſels and Inſtruftions of God by , his Prophets, and 
j#i0. prefer their own vain Fancies before the Judgment of the All- wile 

God, as appears by the Errour b-forementioned. wv. 20. that tar) 
affirmed that to be Evil, which God had declared to be Good. 


22 Wo unto them that are mighty to drink wine &, 


and men of ſtrength to mingle /ſtrong drink. 

k That can drink much withour Inroxication, in which they glo- 
ried, as too many do at thisday. 17. e. To drink : the Antecedent 
being put for the Conſequent; which is uſual : for they mingled 

: it in order to drinking. 
*Pro:17:15 


& 24: 24, 23 Which * juſtife the wicked for reward », and 
' take away the righteouſneſs of the righteous from him ». 

-m Not by miſtake or incegitancy, but wilfully for Bribes. = To 
wit juridically ; tz<v pronounce Sentence againſt him, as if. he 
and his Cauſe were unjuſt. 

24 Therefore as Þ the fire devoureth the ſtubble, and 
the flame conſumeth the chaff, fo their root ſhall be as 
rottenneſs o, and their bloſſom hall goup as duſt p: be- 
cauſe they have caſt away q the law of the LORD of 
hoſts, and deſpiſed the word of the holy one of Iſrael. 


o They- ſhall be like a Tree which not only withers in its Bran- 
ches,but dies and rots at the Roots&rherefore is paſt all hopes of re- 
covery. The ſenſe is,they ſhall be deſtroyed both Root and Branch, 
p Shall vaniſhfor ſo the Ward aſcend or go up is oftuſed,as Exod: 16:14 
Job 5: 26: Jer: 48. 15: Ezek: 11: 23, 24: ) as che Duſt, which is blown 
away With every Wind ; or, {hill be refolved into Duſt, and yield 
no Fruit. q Which implies Di.o-edience joyned with Contempt: 

25 Therefore isthe anger of the LORD kindled a- 
gainſt his people, and he hath ſtretched forth his hand 
againſt them, and hath ſmictenthem : and the hills did 

Jor, &« tremble r, and their carcaſes were ||torn in the midſt 


oo .., of the ſtreets. *For all this his anger is not turned a- 
_ "9% way, buthis hand is ſtretched our ſtill -. : 
_ 4: r A Metaphorical and Hyperbolical Deſcription of a grievous Ca- 
lamitry, familiar in the Prophets, as 1/a: 64: 1, 2: Fer: 4* 24; and in 
other Authors. 5 Ready to give you another and a forer Blow, Thi: 
is nor t:- end, as you vainly imagine ; bur, if you repent not, the 
beginning of your Sorrows,and an Earneſt of furtier Calamiries. 
26 And he will lifr up an entign # to the nations 
from far «, and will * hiſs unto them x from the ends 
of t1e earth y: and behold,they ſhall come with ſpeed 
ſwifcly. 

t To call them together for his Service, as Generals uſe to do for 
the raiſing of Armies. .« Eirher 1. Tothe Afhrians, of whom he 
ſpeaks nore particularly, ch. 10. and thar under this fame Charafter 
of a People thar come Fom far, v. 3. and who did not long after this 
Prophecy invade Judea,and did much miſchief in it, Although that 
parr of the Pre'i&ion, v 29. They ſhall lay hold of the prey, and (ball 
carry it away [afe, andnone ſhall deliver it do not ſeem to agree to them 
nor that Invaiion ; tor the ſjrians were fi rced to retreat with great 
ſhame and 1oſs, and the J-ws were delivered from them. Or, 2. Te 
the Chaldeaxs ; for even Babylon is called a far Countrey, . Tſa: 39: 3; 
And he ſaith Natrons, becaute the Chaldean Army was made up of 
ſeveral Nations. x Or,wil whiſtle unto or for them : Wil gather them 
together by his Word, as Shepherds gather their Siezp, He inci 
mates how eaſily and ſpeedily God can do this Work. y Whict: 1: 
nor to be under{tood ſtriatly bur popularly,ard with a latitude,from 
very remore Placcs 3 although parr of rhe Chaldean Army did come 
from Places nor very far diſtant from the end of that part of tie 
World, ſo far asit was then known» 

27 None ſhall be weary z,nor ſtumble amongſt them: 
none {hall ſlumber nor ſleep 4 : neither ſhall the girdle 


oftheir loins be looſed, nor the latcher of their ſhoes be 
broken 5. 

2 Though their March be long and tedious. As I have called 
them to this Work, ſo I will ſtrengthen and aſſiſt them 1n 1t aThe) 
ſhall all be witchful & diligent to take allOpportunity* and Adyan- 
rages of executing my Judgments. upon my People. © Which oth+er- 
wiſe would hinder, or at leaſt ſlacken them in their March. 1 will 
take all Impediments out of their way. ; 

28 Whoſe arrows are ſharp,and all their bow s benc 
c : their horſes hoofs ſhall be counted like flint 4, and 
their wheels like a whirlwind e. 

c Who are every way furniſhed and ready for my Work, wait- 
ing only for my Command. # Becauſe they ſhall not be broken or 
battered by the lengrh or ſtonineſs and ruggedneſs of the Way. e 
Partly for the ſwiftneſs of their March, and partly for the force and 
violence of their Chariots in Battel, 

29 Their roaring (ball be like a lion, they ſhall roar 
like young lions f ; yea, they (ball roar andlay hold of 


the prey, and ſhall carry ic away ſafe, and none g ſhall 
deliver it, D 
f Which ſignifies both their Cruelty, Md their greedineſs and ea- 
gerneſs to catch and devour the Pr:y. g Neither the Jews them- 
{elves, nor the Egyprians, to whole help they will rruſt, nor any of 
their Confederates. 
z3oAnd in that day. they ſball roar againſt them, like the 
Or. 4;. Foaring of che ſea h : and it one *look unto che land, 
Preſs, behold, darkneſs and || ſorrow 3, ||and thelight is dar- 
| Or, when kened in the heavens thereof k, 
Fir ke h Which is violent and frigkttul. 7 Darkneſs, to wit, Sorrow ; 
5" ra the latter Word explains the former, and the Particle and is put 
ede= expoſitively, as it is frequently. & When they look up to the Hea- 


—_ vens, as men indiſtrels uſually do they fee no Light there 3 their 
eof. 


+Heb. the 


yngue of 
Fre. 


*Ch;7: 18 


* Chap: 8: 
22; 


up of the Ghoſt, 


H Chap. 
CHAP. VI. a 
The Glory of the Lord x mmm 4» Jjaiah is terrified. 5. I Confirmed 
for hus M:ffage. 6 ——8, The People; obſtinacy unto deſolation. 9 — 12+ | 
A Remnant ſhall be ſaved, 13 —_— 
P the year that * king Uzziah died, I * ſaw #@ alſo* King 
che LORD 5 ſitting upon a throne c high and lifted 15:7: | 
up 4, and|| his train e filled the temple f. _ 
# In 2 Viſion or Extaſie. 6 Either, 1. God the Son, who frequent- l Or, the] 
ly appeared to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and that ſometimes in 
the form-of a Man : Or rather, 2. the Divine Majeſty as he fubſiſt= #979 ; 
eth in Three Perſons,as may be gathered both from the Plural Num= | 
ber «s, uſed of this Lord, v, 8. and comparing other Scriptures ; 
for God the Father is deſcribed as ſitting upon a Throne, Dan: 9: 9: 
+3: and elſewhere ; and the Glory of God here manifeſted is ſaid 
to be Chriſts Glory, Joh: 12: 41: and the Words of the Lord here 
following, are ſaid to be ſpoken by the Holy Ghoſt, 4s 28; 25. 
c In the poſture ofa Judge, ro hear Cauſes, and give Sentence. 4 
Towards the Roof of the Temple. e Or, as the Word properly ſig- 
atfties, and is here rendred by divers, the skirts or borders of him, or of 
'#, to wit, his Royal and Judicial Rob ; for he is repreſented as a 
Judge, f His glorious Robes reached down to the bottom of the 
Templ:, and were ſpread abroad in the which 
was an Evidence of a more than ordinary Majeſty. The 
Temple may be here taken either, «. largely, and ſo it includes the 
Courts as well as tne Houſe, asthat Word is oft pſed ; or, 2. ſtrialy, 
-5r the Houſe it felf, or for thar part of the Temple in which this 
V ſion was exhibited, which may ſeemro have been the Porch for 
chat was much higherthan the other Parts. 


2 Above it lteod g the Seraphims þ : each one had Pre.n i 
lix wings ; * with twain he covered his face 3 and with 1 


ewain he covered his feet &,and with twain he did flie 
g As Miniſters attending upon their Lord, and waiting to receive 
and ex:cute his Commands. e Certain holy and blefſed Angels,thus 
called from fire and burni:g, which this word properly fignifics : to. 
repreſent either, 1. their Nature, which is bright and glorious,ſub< 
£1}, and pure, and ſpiritual, like Fire; or, 2. their Property, 
of fervent Zeal forGods Service andGlory ; or,3z.theirOffice and pre= 
tent Fmployment which was toexecute Gods Vengeance upon the 
Jews, and toburn them up like Droſs. i Out of protound Reverence, 
as being fo ſenſible of the infinite diſtance between God and him,that 
he durlt nor preſume to look dire&'y upon him,and judg'd himſelf 
neither able nor worthy to behold the Brightneſs of his Glory, k 
Either, 1. his ſecret Parts, which ſometimes come under that name, 
as Deut: 28: 57: 1ſa. 7: 20: & 363 12: of which ſee more in my Latin 
Synopſis upon Exod:4: 25. And o this is done for our Inſtruction, to 
teach us Modeſty and Chaſtity : Or, 2. their Feet properly to called 
as that Word is generally uſed ; from which uſe we ſhould not de- 
part without neceflity, which, with ſubmiſſion ſeems not to be in 
this place. And fo this may ſignifie a ſenſe of their own natural, 
though not moral Infirmity, and a deſire thar God would not too 
:everely examine all their Ways and A&ions, which the feet com- 
monly ſignifie, becauſe though they did not ſwerve from Gods Com- 
mands, yet they were aot worthy of the acceptation, nor ſuitable to 
th2 Digniry ' of ſo glorious a Majeſty. 1 Which ſignifies 
cheir great forwardneſs and expedition 1n executing Gods Com- | 
ands. Compare Dan: 9: 21. Heb. th 
3 And f onecried unto another w,and ſaid ' * Holy, 94 to thi 


holy, holy » is the LORD of hoſts, + the whole carth Rev:4 3 
0 is full ofhis glory p. a the 
m Singing in Crnſort the Praiſes of their Lord. » This is re- fulnels of 
pear=d thrice, either, x. to intimate the Trinity of Perſons unired ;he whole 
in the Divine Efſence 3 or. 2. that he was moſt eminently and un- ggr;h 
Jueitionably holy in his preſent Work of Judgment, and in all his : 

.Wavs; ſuch R-peritions being verv frequent in Scripture, for the 
reater aſſurance of the thing, as Jer: 7: 4; Ezek: 21: 9. o Not only Ca-= 
naan, to which the Jews did vainly anc arrogan:ly confine the pre- 
"n-e of God, bur all the World : Which iecms to have a reipe& ro 
the Comvertion of the Gentiles, which did accompany the plenary 
and '-ſt Execution of his Judgment here threatned againft the Jew- 
ſh Nition, v. 1e. as isevident by comparing this with Mat: 13: 14, 
15. O& Aﬀs 28: 19, and other places of the New Teſtament, p OF 
ne Eff &s any D-monſtrations of his glorious Holineſs, as well as+ Feb: 
»f his Power. and Wiſdom, and Goodneſs, : threſbbold.. 
4 And the poſts of thefdoor q moved at the voice of 
him that cried ry, and the houſe was filled with 
{moak 5. 


q Together with the Door it (elf, as if the Door was fo be re. 
moved, and the Temple thereby to be expoſed to the view and 
rapine of Profane Perſons. Such violent Motions were commonly 
Tok-ns of Gods Anger. r To wit, the Angel, which cried, v. 3. 
s Which elſewhere 15a Token of Gods Preſence and Acceptance, 
as Exod: 40: 34; I Kings 8: 10: but here of his Anger,as P/al: :8: $; + Heb: cut 
and elſewhere. off. 

5 Then ſaid I, Wo 3s me, for I am f undone, be- 
cauſe I am a man of unclean lips?, and I dwell in the 


midſt of a people ofunclean lips « : for mineeyes have 
{een the king, the LORD ofhoſts x. 
t I am a greatSinner, as many other ways, ſo particularly by 
ny Lips, which being ina ſpecial manner conſecrated to God by 
ny Pr: -phetical Office, ſhould have been intirely devoted to him : 
Bur, alas! my Speeches, 'either ro God in prayer, or from God 
n Preaching and Propheſying to the people, have been mixed and 
icfiled with ſo much irreverence, dulneſs, diſtraftion of Thoughts 
ind Aﬀ-Qions, cirnal Fear, and many other Infirmities, that I 
iread the thoughts of appearing before thy Judgmenr-ſeat, which 
{ ſ-e eretted in this place. For Iſaiaþ has been a Propher before 
this rime, ehap:1:1: and was now called, not in general to bis 
Propherical Office, but to the delivery ofthis ſpecial Meſſage. « 
I am an unclean Branch of an unclean Tree ; and beſides my own 
Uncleanneſ:,I have both by my Omiſſions and Commiſſions involved 


g | 
F 


Temple 


Comforts aie wholly eclipſed, and their Hopes ace like the giving 


my ſelf in the guilt of rheir Sins, and therefore may juſtly fear to 
part-k2 with them in their Plagues. x The fight of this glorious 
and holy God gives me cauſe to fear that he is come to Judgmenr 
againſt me, rogether with others, Whilſt Sinners are ſecure and 
preſumptuous. the hbolieft perſons have ever been filled with great 
$P 32 Revere 


ip. VI 4 4 1 


nary Manifeſtation of Gods preſence. See Gen: 16: 13: 
Juag. 13: 23. 


2m hand 2 live coal & in fis hand, which he had taken with the 


ve cv: ,ongs from off the altar a, 
3 By Gods Command. - z Both a Token and an Inſtrument of pu- 
Tification,as the next Verſe explains ir. « Of Burnt-offering, which 
ſtood in the Court of the prieſts near the '/porch, and which had al- 
ways Coals of Fireupon it, Levit: 6: 12,13. Hence he took it, to 
ſhew that Men areto expe& purification and expiation of ſin only 
by ſuch means as God hath appointed, and particularly by Chriſt, 
whom that Altar did manifeſtly repreſent, Heb. 13: 10, 
7 And he flaid i: upon my mouth 6, and faid, Lo, 
this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken 


Heb. .:. away, and thy fin f purged. 
d,,or, + Slightly, ſo as only to touch my Lips, and not to burn them 3 
Pigred, Which God could caſily effe&. c This isa Sign that I have pardon- 
ed and purged the Uncleanneſs of thy Lips,and do own and accept 

thee as a fit Miniſter for my Service. : 
$ AlſoI heard the voice ofthe Lord, ſaying, Whom 


Gen: 1:26: ſhall I ſend, and who will gofor *us ? Then faid I, + 


Heb. be- here amT, ſend mee. 
8 71.6, 4 To deliver the following Meſſage. The change of the Num- 
ber, Iand ws, is very remarkable ; and both being meant of one 
and the fame Lord, doſufficiently intimate a plurality of Perſons 
in the Godhead. e Gods laſt and great Favour to him did both en- 
courage and oblidge him to be forward in Gods Service. 
9 And he ſaid, Go and tell this peopief, * Hear ||t 
Matz13:14 ye indeed, but underſtand not ; and | fee ye indeed, but 
-4:12: PEICELVE NOT 4 
UE: 8: 19:" F Nor my people, for I diſown them, as they have rejefed me. g 
0h:12:40: The Hebrew Words are Imperative; yet they arenor to be taken as 
Q:28:26: a Command what the people ought to do bur only asa Signiticati- 
OM:11: 8:1 and PrediQtion what by their own Wickednets,and by Gods 
Or, with- aft Judgment, they did and would do, as is manfeſt by Mar: 13:14: 
© As 28: 26: where they are ſo rendred. And Imperative Words a- 
& Se. * mong the Hebrews are frequently put for the furure,as is well known 
Heb. -o the Learned, The ſenſe is, becauſe you have ſo long beard my 
Words, and ſeen my Works,to no purpoſ?, and have hardned your 
; FINESSC. Hearts, and will not learn nor. reform, I wilt puniſh you in your 
7% own kindgyour Sin ſhall be your Puniſhmen:.Iwill{till continue my 
Word and Works to you, not in Mercy, and for your Good, bur 
to aggravate your Sin and Condemnation 3 for I will blind your 
Minds, and wichdraw my Spirit, ſo that you ſhall be as unable, as 
now. you are unwilling, to underſtand or percive any thing that 
may do you good. : , 
' Xo Make the heart of this people fat b,and make their 
Jer:5: 2: ears heavy 5, and ſhut cheir eyes &: * leſt they ſee / 
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and under- 
ſtand with their heart: and convert m2 and be healed x. 
þ-i. e. Stupid and ſenſcleſs ; For the Fat which is in the Body is 
without ſenſe ; and Fatneſs in the Heart, makes it dull and heavy. 
Thus this Phraſe is uſed, Pſa!:119: 750. And this ſeems beſt to a- 
gree with the following Words: This making of their Hearts far, 
Y is here aſcribed to the Prophet, as it isaſcribed to God in the repeti- 
| tion of this Prophecy, Joh: 12: 40: becauſe God inflited this Judg- 
ment upon them by rhe Miniſtry of the Prophet, partly by way of 
Predi&ioo, foretelling thar this would be the effe& of his Preach- 
ing ; and partly by way of Judicial Operation, withdrawing 
the Light and Help of his Spirir, and giving them up to tae 
Power and Arts of Satan, and to their own Miſtakes avd Lufſts, 
whereby they are eaſily and commonly led to turn Gods Word, as 
they do other things, into Occaſions of Sin. i Make them dull of 
hearing, as //a: 59: 1: Zech. 7: 11: asſomerimes the Ears are made by 
an exceiliive Noiſe. k Heb. 4awb their eyes, as the Word is uied al- 
ſo, Iſa: 44: 18. ! Tharthey may not be able, as before tney were 
not willing, to ſee. »» Tura from their ſinfu] Prattic-s unto God. 
n Of Sin, whichis the Diſeaſe ofthe Soul, by Remiſſion and Sanc- 
tification, and of all thedeadly Eff:&s of Sin. 
11 Then fſaidI, Lord how long s ? And he anſwer- 


ed, Until the cities be waſted without Inhabitant, and 
Heb: 2. the houſes without man, and the land be Þ utterly de- 


e with ſolate p, 
olation, o An abrupt Speech, ariſing from the Prophets great Paſſion and 
Aftoniſhment « How ſhall this dreadful Judgment laſt ? þp Unril 
this land be totally deſtcoyed, firſt by the Babylonians, and afterward 
by the Romans. 

12 And the LORD have removed men far away 9, 
and there be a great forſaking in the midſt of the land 7. 

g Hath cauſed his People to be carried away Captive into far 
Countries. r Till Houſes and Lands be generally forfaken of their 
Owners, either becauſe fled - away from the Sword into ſtrange 
Lands, or becauſe they went into Captivity. 


y 
I3 Bur yet in it ſhall be atenth s, || and it ſhall re- 


turn #, and ſhall be eaten « : as ateil-tree, and as ar 
oak x whoſe || ſubſtance is in them, when they caſt their 
leaves :ſo the holy ſeed ſhall be the ſubſtance thereof z. 


s A ſmall remnant reſerved, that Number being pur indefinite- 
ly, as is very uſual. £ To wit, out of the Babyleniſh Capriviry, 
into their own Land. » That remnant ſhall be devoured and de- 
ftroyed a ſecond time, by the Kings of $yris, and afterwards 
more effeually by the Romans. x Or, Yet, as, &c. Or, never- 
theleſs as, &c. ſuch Particles being frequently underſtood in the 
Hebrew, as hath been noted again and again. So the Senſe of the 
following Words of the Verſe ſeems to be this, alrhough the Fewe 
i/þ Nation ſhal undergo a ſecond and greater Defolation by the 
Romans, yet there ſhall be another Remnant, not ſuch an one as 


Heb.cau« 


It t0 
q h, 


| Or, when 
i return- 

d and hath 
een bruiled. 
Or, ſtock 


Reverence, and oft times with Doubts and Fears, atany -<x-00e$ Prophecies relating to that time; 
1 7: « 


” Bo 


but an holy Seed, a number of 
I afterwards look upon him whom 
and mourn over him, as is ſaid Zech; 12: 10: and by 


Ele& and Godly 11raelices,who thall 
[ they pierced, 


&. ard 6 Then flew one of the Seraphims unto me y, F having me be receivedto Mercy: y Who when their Leaves are withered 


and caſt, as it is in Winter, have a Subſtance, or Subſiſtence, or 
ſupport wirhinthemſelves,to wit, a Vital Principal, which preſerves 
Life jn the Root and Body of the Tree, and in due time ſends IT 
forth intoall the Branches. Bur others take the Hebrew Word 
Shallecheth, for the proper name of a place. ro wit, a Cauſeway 
which led from the Palace to the Temple, 1 Chron: 26: 16: and fo 
the place isand may be rendred thus, 4s atezl-rree, ( or, an elm)and 
as an oak ( the Singular Number for rhe Pluralgas is very frequenr) 
As the elms and oaks whith are at orby Shallecheth ( on both ſides of 
which Way ſuch Trees were planted, to beautifie and to ſupport 
that Cauſeway, as ſome have obſerved ) have ſubſifence or ſupport in 
them, either, 1. for themſelves ; they ſand faſt and firm, when 0- 
ther Trees are blown down : or, for the way which they up- 
hold. z Or rather, the ſupport (as the ſame Word ſeems to be taken 
in the next foregoing Clauſe) thereof, to wit, ofthe Land or People, 
which, were it not for the ſake of thoſe Ele& Perſons, ſhould be 
totally and finally rooted out ; or, of chat Tenth part, which ſhall 
be delievered and preſerved for the ſake of that holy Seed,;thoſe true= 
hearred J/raclitzs which are among them, 
C AF. VI 
Ahaz afraid of Rezmmand Pekah is comforted oy Iſaiah. 1=—=g9, 
ro chuſe a fign,Chrift is promiſed for one. 10 16, his judgment 
ſhould come by Aſſyria, 17: 25. 

Nd ir came to paſs inthe days of * AhaZz a the ſon * : Kingy 
+2 of Jotham,the ſon of Uzziah king of Judah, hat 6 5: 
Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the ſon of Remali- ny 
ah, king of [frac], went up towards Jeruſalem to war * © 
againſt it b, but could not + prevail againſt it. 
s A moſt wicked King : Yet no Prophecies are more comfortable 
than thoſe which were delivered in his time ; God ſo ordering it 
partly for the encouragement of the Faithful that lived under his 
ryrannical and impious Reign; and partly to manifeſt the Riches 
and Freeneſfs of his Grace, in conferring ſuch Favours upon a moſh 
worthleſs G-neration. b Which they attempted before in Jetham'g 
Reign, 2 Kings 15: 37: but now more ſeriouſly undertook, though 
without ſucceſs, aS1s noted here, and 2 Kings 16; 5. | 
2 And itwas told the houſe of David c, ſaying, Syria 
7 is confederate with Ephraim 4d And his heart was + Hebep 
moved e, and the heart ofthe people, as the trees of the «hon Boks 


wood (haken with the wind. rai, 
c Ahaz, +nd his Royal Relations and Courtiers, He calls them 
the houſe of David, to intimate that the following comfortable Meſo 
ſage was ient ro 4kaxz, not for his own ſake, but only for the ſake 
of his worthy Progenitor, David, to whom, God had premijſed an 
everlaſting Kingdom. @ The Kingdom of the Ten Tribes, com- 
monly called Ephraim, as Iſa: 28:1: Hoſ; 12: 1, becauſe thar was far 
the moſt numerous and potent of all of thein.e With exceſſive fear 
ariſing part}y from the conſcience of their own guilt,whercby they, 
had put tkemielves our of Gods ProreCtion ; and partly from the 
conſideration of the grear Strength and power of his Enemies, who 
having preva:led againſt him ſeverally, 2 Chron: 28: 5, 8: and hay- 
ing now united their Forces, he, having no Faithin God, nor Con « 
dence to deſire or expe his he]p,concluded his Caſe deſperate and 
deplorable. 


3 Then ſaid the LORD unto Iſaiah, Go forth now 
to meet Ahaz f, thou, and || Shear- jaſhub's thy ſon, at 1765, 


refuſug 


t Heb:fobs 7 


the end ofthe * conduir of the upper pool inthe || high- 7 
way of the fullers field 4 : , mma og 


f Thouyh he do not ſeek nor ſend to thee. as he ought, This is Cha:6: 13; 
N eminent inſtance of preventing Mercy. g Whoſe very Name && 10: 21: 
c:rriedin it a Sign and Pledge of the Promiſed Deliverance. bh *2King:18; 
Whither he'probably went to take care about the Waters which 17: Ehap; 
thence were brought into the City, either to ſecure them to him- 36: 2: 
'cIf orto keep them from the Enemy, as Hizekiah afterward did, || Or,cauſey. 
2 Chron: 32; 3, 4 


4 And ſay unto him, take head, and be quiet z,fear 
not, Þ neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of theſe + Heb. !s 
{moakiog fire-brandsk,for thefierce anger of Rezin with not #6ybean 


Syria, and the ſon of Remaliahl/. » beimar, 
7 See thar thon be quiet, abandon thy Fears, and ſettle thy Mind 
by che belief of that joyful Mefſage and Promiſe which I am now 
to deliver thee from the Lord. k they are not whole Fire-brands 
burning in the Fire, in which there is more Smoke than Fire, ane 
the Fire will be ſpeedily extinguiſhed. They have more of Shew 
and Terrour, than of Strength. Petah King of 1/racl, wv. 1. whom 
here, and in the next Verſe, he calls only the ſon of Remaliah, to in- 
timate, that he was unworthy of the Name of King, as having gor 
that Title and Power by Uſurpation, and the Murder of his Maſter 
and King Pekabiah, 2 Kings 15: 25- 


5 Becauſe Syria, Ephraim, and the ſon of Remali- 


ah have taken evil counſel againſt thee,ſaying. 


6 Let usgo up againſt Judah, and|| vex it, and let us [Or,v4# 


make a breach thereip m for us, and'ſec a king in the 
midſt of it, even the lon of Tabgal ». 


9 Either,1. break and divide that Country into two parts, one for 


thee, and another for me; er rather, 2+. break their Power and King- 


dom, 
Phraſe is ſo uſed, 2 Chron: 32: 1: where there was no ſuch Diviſion j 
intended. | 
of Judah was ſtill to be united under another King, who ſhould pay 


Tribure to them ſeverally, 
able Captain, in whoſe Fidelity both of them had good confidence; 


bur whether he was an 7/7#eire or Sjrien. 15 uncertain, and. not ma- 
terial. 


and ſubdue it ro our ſelves : For, I, the ſame Word and 
2. Becauſe the next Clauſe intimates, that the Kingdom 


as they ſheuld agree. » Some conſider- 


that which came out of Babylon, which tor the moſt part, were | 
corrupt and degenerate, as eppears by the Sacred Hiſtories and 


7 Thus 


Chap. vi, | C 


ll. 


| ods | 
z 


Palle,or 
al 20t by 


tablibeg 


pak 


eas 
a «4 
2; 


7 
I 


Chap. VIL. 


8 
- Thus ſaith the LORD God, Tr o ſhal not ftand, 


neither (hal ic come to pals, 


#H-b fow 
aprople: 


EY 
4 


*Yes 


o Their evil Countel, as it is called, v, $. 


V 


8 For the head of Syria is p Damaſcus, and the head 
of Damaſcus is Rezin ; and within threeſcore and five 
years q (hal Ephraim be broken, Þ that ir be not a 
People. 


p Or, rather ſha! be ; for the Verbis not expreſſed in the He” 
brew Text, and therefore may be either way ſupplied. The ſenſe 


is, Damsſcus ſhal ſtill continue to be the Capital and Chief City of 


the Kingdom of $yria; and therefore Jeraſalem ſhal not be taken,nor 
become apart of Rezjnu's Dominion; but he ſhal be kept within his 
. ywn Bounds, and be King of Damaſcus only, and not as he hopes, 


pf Feruſalem. q To be compured either, 1, from the Prophecy ,of 


Amos, who propheſied in the days of Uzziah, two years before the 
earthquake, Amos 1. 1. which the Jews affirm to have hapned about 
the time of his Uſurpation of the Prieſt's Office. and being ſmitren 
with Leprofie, 2 Cyren, 26. 16, &c, which though it be not proved 
yet it may be admitted, becauſe it canriot be ditproved. And it 1s 
more than probable, that thar Aion and Accident was diyers 
years before his death, during which time Jotham ated as his Vice= 
roy, 2 Chron, 26. 21. And the Prophecy of Ames being expreſs 
and full concerning the Deſtru&ion of the People and Commone 
wealth of 1|rael, being alſo fieſhin the memory of many now liv- 
ing, the Prophet ſaiah might well have reſpe& to it. $9 the ſenſe 
is as if he had ſaid, There thal be bur 65 years between the Delive- 


ry and the Execution of that Prophecy. And ſo the number of 
years may be thus maJleup. Fix the beginning of them ten years 


before Uzziah's death, add the Sixteen years of Jethams Reign, and 
then the Sixteen years of Ahaz his Reign,and then Six of Hezek:ahs 
Reign, in which Jae was carried Captive, 2 Kmgs 18. 10. theſe 
make up 48 years : and for the 17 years, which yet remain of the 


65 they may be taken out of thereſt of Hezekiahs Reign. For Al- 
though the Tranſportation of that People began in the Sixth year 
of Hezekish, yet it might be continued or repeated divers years af- 
ter, and compleated 17 years after, Jer. 52. 28, 29, 3o. Or rather 
2, theſe years may be computed from the time of this Prophecy 
of Iſaiah. And whereasir may be obje&ted againſt this Opinion, 
That the Judgment here threatned was execured in the Sixth year 
of Hezekiah, as was before cored, and therefore within 18 or 19 


years of this Prophecy, which was delivered in the third or fourth 


year of Abaz, Two things may be anſwered, 1. That the Iſraelites 
were nor tranſported i: the Sixth year of Hezekiah : For alrhough 


F 4-3 


ned upen themſelves ; and partly becauſe this was moſt neceſſary 
forrhem, to affright them our of their preſent Security and Infi* 
delity. Os. | 

io | Moreover, the LORD ſpake again unto A- 
haz, ſaying, 


it either in the depth, orin the height above x. 


delivered by me ; yet God is ſo patient and merciful to thee, that 
he gives thee liberty to demand ofhim any Signal or miraculous 
Work, whereby thou mayſt be afſured of the Truth and Certainty 
of this Promiſe. « Both by right of Dominion, and by verrue of 
his graciousCovenant made with all 7-ae),of whom thou art aM-m. 
ter,. and King ; and by thy own Profefſion, for he ſtill worlhipped 
God rogether with his Idols ; and by the continuance of his Care 
and Kindneſs to thee, and to thy People, notwithſtanding all your 
Wickedneſs; whereof this Promiſe and Offer is a clear Demonſtra= 
tion. x Demand ſome Prodigy to be wrought, either in Earth or 
in Heaven, at thy pleaſure. 


12 But Ahaz ſaid, Iwill not ask y, neicher wi 
tempt the LORD &. | 3, neither will I 


3 This Refuſal proceeded not from the ſtrength of his Faith, bur 
from his Contempt of God, and total diſtruſt and diſregard of his 
Word, and inward Reſolution to take another Courſe ; as is manj« 
feſt borh from the following words, and from the Hiſtory of As 
haz, 2 Chron. 28, 7 Either, 1. By asking a Sign, aSif hequeſtioned 
the Truth of his Word : So this was deep Hy pocriſte: Or, 2. By 
negletting any means neceſſary for my preſervation, which were 
indeed a tempting of God. And therefore I fhal not fit fill and 
rely upon God till I be deſtroyed, which will be the eff-& of thy 
Countel 3 but I ſhaldo as becometh a wiſe King, ſeek for Succour 
from Porent Allies, ſuch as the 4ſjrian is. Sg this is flat Rebellie 
on againſt God. 

13 And hefaid, Hear ye now, O houſe of David « 
Is it a {mall thing for youb co weary men c, but will 
ye weary my God alſo 4? 


4 Of whichy ſee above, v. 2: He reproveth them all, becauſe 
they were the King's Counſellours, and promoted the Deſign of 
ſcnding for the AſjrianSuccours. 6 Is not that Wickedneſs more 
than enough ? Muſt you add more toit? c To vex Gods Prophets 
and People, and the generality of your Subje&s, with your Op= 
preſſions and horrid Impieries, d By your curſed Ingratitude and 
Unbelief,and Diſobedience ro his Commands, He ſaith, my God, #, 


Chap. Via 


FHeb. and | 
| the LORD Ii 
11 Ask thee a ſign ofche LORD t thy God «,|| ask _— to | 
[pea b | 


cl ceive thou doſt not believe ( i Or,make| 
perceive thou doſt not believe Gods Word and Meſſ.ge now a ——_ 
ace. | 


Samaria be ſaid ro be taken in the Sixth year of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 
a8. 10. and the Tranſportation of the {raelietes be mentioned imme» 
diately after it, w. 11. yer it doth not thence follow,that it was 
done immediately, and at that one time; becauſe thisis not unuſual 
In Scriprure, in Hiſtorical Relations to mention thoſe things toge- 
ther which were done ata coniiderable diſtance of time one from a- 


the God whoſe Servant and Propher or MeſſengerT am; to intimate: 
thar this heinousOffence was not.commitred againſt a weak and 
fooliſh Man, fuch as they might think the Propher to be,but againſt 
God himſef,who ſentthe Meſſage. Compare Exod. 16, 8. 


I4 Therefore e the LORD himſelf ſhal give you a * Mar. 1: 


mother ; as is recorded, As 7.15, 16+ Jacob=— 


in thoſe few words was done. 
might eaſily be produced, 
was not done at once, but ſucceſſively, and by degrees. 
certainly was in the Tranſportation of Judah, whic 


ated, he and our 
Fathers, and were carried ever into Sychem, and laid in the Sepulchre of 
Abraham, &c. although it was above 200 years c'er all which is faid 
And other inſtances of like nature 
2. That this work of Tranſportation 
Thus ir 
was begun in 


fign f'; Behold g, a virgin 6ſhal conceive, and bear 5 
a ſon, and || ſhal call & his name Immanuel /J. 


e Becauſe you deſpiſe me, and the Sign which I now offer to you 
God of his own freeGrace will ſend you a more honourableMeſſn- 
ger, and give you a n'bler Sign, to try wherher that will cure you 
of your Infidelity, Or, Newerrheleſ, as this 

derſtood, 1/a. 30, 18. Jer» 16. 14.and 


P:riicle ſeems to be un- 


Nebuchadnezzar's Seventh year, continued in his Eighteenth year, 
and perfe&ed in his Three and Twentierh year, Jer, 52. 28, 29,30. 
And thus it might be, and probably was, in this Tranſportation. 
It might be begun preſently after the taking of Samaria, & afterwards 
continued, unril at laſt the whole Body cf the People was remove 
ed. And aas ſoon as that wasdone, and-not before, the King of 
Aſſria brought into their place thoſe new Colonies mentioned 2King 
1. 24. Which that it was not done at the t,me of the taking of 
Samaria, but many years after it, ſeems to me evident, becauſe 
thoſe Colonies were not brought thither by Shalmanezer, who took 
Samaris, 2 Kings 18. 10, no nor by Sennacherib, his next Succeflour; 
but by Eſarhaddon, as is affirmed Ezra 4. 2. who was the Son and 
Succeſſour of Semacherib, 2 Kings19. 37. and reigned above Fifcy 
years ; for beſe:ms to have hegun his Reign about the Fourteenth 
year of Hezekiah's Reign, by comparing : Kings 18- 13. and 19. 3*. 


36,37. and {© he reigned with H:zekiah abour Fif:een years, and 


withManaſih above forty years,as the Learned SirFohbn Marſbam affirms 
in his Chronicus Canon, &c. page 495. And this Work of Tranſpor- 
ting the Remainders of the 1/razlires,and bringing the new Colonies, 
might not be done till afterwards in the en41 of his Reign: Which 


39. 16, Although you deſerve 


no S:1gnnor Favour, yer for rhe comfort 6f thoſe teiv Believers 
which are among you, and to 1:ave you withour excuſe, I ſhall 
mind you of another and a greater Sign, which God hath promiſed 
and will in his due time perform; which allo is a piedge of the 
certain Accompliſhment of all Gocs Promiſes. Or, Surely, as this 
Particle 15 ſometimes uſed, as Gen 4, 15, Jer: 2, 33- and 5 "* Zech 
c1.7 f To wit, of your Delivecuice. 1 
ofa Virgin, which was-not to come till many Ages after, 
their Deliverance from the preſent Danger ? Anſw, 
this was a clear Demonſtration of Gods infinite Power and Good= 
neſs, and Faithfulneſs, and conſequently of the certain Truth of 
all Gods promiſes from timeto time, which can never fa 
as thoſe Attributes of God ſand : And mens F-ith is ej 
or weak, as they believe them or doub: of them. - Of which ſee 
Pſalm 77.8. and 78. 19, 20, Rom: 43 20, . 21e 
proper Remedy for 4haz his Diſeaſe, which was a ſe 
that God either could nor, or would not deliver the 
that Promiſe. I fay nor only the aftual Giving, w 
ter, but even the promiſe of the Meſſiah, which ha 


L24:# How was this Birth: 
aSignof 
1, Becauſe 


11 ſo 'ONng 
cher ſtrong 
And ſo this was 2 
cret Suſpicion 
m. 2. Becauſe 


d been made lon 


hich was long af-. 


delay might be occaſioned by his. Wars, or vrher grert Aﬀ-irs, And 
ould ſeem to be only my own privare ConjeQure, if 
the Reader confu't Sir John Marſban's fourth and laſt Chronological 
Table, inſerred after page 589, of his Work,he will find that Lear- 
ned Chronolog:r to be of the ſame mind and co make above Fitty 
years diſta:.ce betwcen the raking of Samaria, and the Tranſl:tio 
of the new Coionics into thoſe Parrs. And thus theſe Sixry five 
And ſo this Place 
agrees with other Scriptures. and the Difficulties objeQed againſt 


leſt this 


years might well be accompliſhed in his time. 


other Interpretations, ſeem to be avoided. 


' 9 And the head of Ephraim is » Samaria, andthe 
*—_ 20. head of Samaria is Remaliah's ſon * : 
10r,00y. Believe, ſurely yeſtal not be eſtabliſhed. 


Mt believe? 


r Or either, ſhal be ; andathe ſenſe is the ſame asin the forego- 


#4roecauje ing Verſe, Samaria ſhal corffinueto be the Chief City of the King- 


Je ar? nar 
fablc,or 


dom of Iſrael, and Pekah ſhal not conquer Jeruſalem, as he hopec 


and deſigned to do, [If you do not believe this and the other Pro+ 
ſha] #t be miſes of God, but, in diſtruſt of God, ſhal ſeek ro the Afﬀyrians 
Pabiiſbid, for Succour, to which I perceive you are inclined, inſtead of that 
Deliverance and Settlement which you expe&, you ſhal be di- 
fireſſedand conſumed thereby;the accompliſhment ofwhich Threats 
ning is recorded 2 Chron 28: 20. And by this Threatning he im- 


plics, That if they did rely upon Gods Word and Help, they 
ſhould be eſtabliſhed, Only hedelivereth it in the form ofa Threate 


ning, rather thin of a Promiſe, parfly becauſe he foreſaw that 


they would chuſe the worſe part, and bring the Judgment threats 


| If ye will not 


ple, was the Foundation of all Gods Mercies and Promiſes unto 
them, 2 Cor. 1. 20. and a pledge of the Accompliſhment of . them: 
3. Becauſe this promiſed Birth did ſuppoſe and require the Preſer- 
vation of that City, and Nation, and Tribe, in and of which the 
Meſſiah was to be born. ; and therefore there was no cauſe to fear 
rvat urter Ruirie which their Enemies riow threatned robring upon 
them- 4. This is one, but nt the only Sign here given,as we all 
ſce at v. 16.g You who will not believe th.t God alone is able to de- 
liver you from the united Force of Syr:a and Iſrael, rake notice, for 
your full ſatisfa&tion, that God is not only able to do - this Work; 
bur to do far greater and harder things, which. he hath promiſed, 
and therefore both can and will accompliſh. þ Stri&ly and propere 
ly ſo called. The Jews, that they may obſcure this plain Texr,and 
weaken this Proof of the Truth of Chriſtian Religion, pretend that 
this Hebrew Word ſignifies a young Woman, and riot a Firzin. But 
chis corrupt Tranſlation is eaſily confuted, 1. Becauſe this Word 
conſtantly fignifies a irgin in all other places of Scripture where 
it is uſed, which are Gen: 24: 23, compared with wv: 15 Exod: 
2: $8. Pſalm; 68: 25. Canis 1. 3. and 6.8, To which may be 
added Prov: 30: 19: The way of a Man witha Maid, or a Virgin: F or, 
chough ir be ſuppoſed that he did delign._ ad deſire to corrupt her, 
and afterwardsdid ſo ; _ yet ſhe may well be called 2 Virgin. partly 
becauſe he found hera Virgin, and partly becuſe ſhe ſeemed and 
retended to others to be ſuch, which made her.more careful 
co uſe all poſſible Arts topreſerve her Reputation, and ſo mads 
the diſcovery of her impure Converſation wich the Man more dif. 
ficult. whereas the filthy praftices of Comman, Harlots are eofily 
and yulgarly known. 2, —_ the ſcope of this Place, which 
SL 3 1 


ſince, and ofr renewed and was univerſally believed by all the Pere 


5 
iS 


"n 
| 


| 


23, FN , 
Luke r.31 
| Or, thou, 
O Virgia 
ſhalt call. 


*See Ch. 
8. 4. 


/ 


* 1 Kings 
I2. 16, 


Chap. VII. 


\ andevil; w 


; em their Faith by a ſtrange and prodigious Sign, which 
——_ not be, that ds os ould conceive 2 Child, 
but that a Virgin ſhould conceive &-c. i Or rather, bring forth, as 
it is rendred Mat. 1. 23: and as this Hebrew Word is uſed Gen. 16.11, 
and 17. 19- Judges 13: 5- k The Virgin, laſt mentioned, ſbal ca : 
Which is added as a further Evidence of her Virginity,and that this 
Son had no Humane Father, becauſe the Right of Naming the 
Child ( which being a Sign of Dominion, 1s primarily in the Huſ- 
band, and in the Wife only by his conſent or permiſſion, as 1s evi» 
dent from Gen: 5: 29« and 35: 38. Luke 1, 60, 63: and many other 
places of Scriprure ) is wholly appropriated to her. Which fig- 
nifies, God with us, God dwelling among us in our Nature, John 5. 
14. God and Man meeting in one Perſon, and being a Mediator 
between God and Men. For the deſign of theſe Words is nor fo 
much to relave the Name by which Chriſt ſhould commonly.be 
called, as to deſcribe his Nature and Office : As we read thar his 
Name ſhal be called Wonderful, Counſelleur, &c. Iſa. 9; 6. and that chis 
3s ſaid to be his ( the Men's ) Name whereby he [hal be called, The Lord 
our Righteouſneſs, Jer. 23: 6. although he be never called by theſe 
Names in any other place of the Old or New Teſtament 3 but the 
meaning of theſe Places is, He ſhal be Wonderful, and our Coun- 
ſellor, &Fs. and our Righteouſneſs: For, #0 be called is oft put for 


tobe, as Iſa. 1: 26: and 4 3, &«. 
15 Butter and honey (hal he » cat, that he may 


know 9 co refuſe the evil,and chuſe the good p. 
1 The common Food of Children in that Country, where they 
were in great abundance, and of the beſt fort. » The Virgins Son 
laſt mentioned, who, though he be God bleſſed for ever, yer thal 
become Man, and, to ſhew the Truth of his Humanity, ſhall not 
only be conceived and brought forth, bur alſo ſhal be nouriſhed and 
brought up by the ſame means and ſteps as other Children; which 
is july mentioned here as2 ſtupendious and miraculous Work of 
God, o That by this Food he may grow up,and ſo may know,&c. 
Or. until be know,as it is rendred by divers Learned Men,and among 
others, by the Chalace Interpreter,who beſt knew the uſe of this Pare 
ticle among the Hebrews: p To diſcern between things morally good 
hich Childrenare _— of doing in __ meature, 
| e five or fix years o1d.Compare Deut. 1.39. where young 
am, Angra} di this Charatter, that they had no Knowleage 


between good and evil. | 
16 * For q before the child r ſhal know to refuſe the 
evil.and chuſe the good, rhe lands that thou abhorreſt 


; ſhal beforſaken of both her Kings «. 
Or, 7ea; for ſo this Particle is uſed by way of amplification or 


| Addition, 1/#,3 2. 13-Jer+14. 5, 18. So the ſenſe is,Nor only this Land 


of thine ſhal be preſerved until the Virgins Son be born, but thine 
Enemies Land ſhal be ſorely ſcourged, and theſe two Kings de» 
ſtroyed, within a very little time. 7 Heb. this Child, not the Virgins 
Son, but the Prophets Child, Shear-jaſbub,whom in all probability the 
Propher, to prevent miſtakes, pointed aty and who was brought hi- 
ther by Gods ſpecial command, v: 3. and that for this veryuſe ; for 
otherwiſe his | 440 was wholly inſignificant. s The Lands, to 
wit, of Syria and 1(rael,as 1s evident from the next Words, Ir is an 
Enallage of the Singular for the Plural. # For its cruel Deſigns and 
PraQtices agzinſt. Or, which, wexeth or moleſteth thee,as this Word is 
uſed Exod: 1: 12: Num: 224 3, &c.u So far ſhal Pekaband Rezinbe from 
conquering thy Land, that they ſhal loſe their own Lands. and 
their Lives too; which they did within two Years after this Time 
being both ſlain by the King of Aſyria, 2 Kings 15. 29, 30. and 


16G. 9, 


-.17 The LORD ſhal bring « upon thee y and upon 
thy People, and upon thy Fathers houſe z,4days a that 
havenot come,from the day that * Ephraim departed 
from Judah 6b, even the king of Afſſyria c. 


x But although God will deliver you at this Time for his own 
Names fake, yet he will remember and requite all your preſent 
and following Wickedneſs, and hath a dreadful Judgment in ſtore 
for you. y For part of this Aſhrian Storm fell in Ahaz his Rei gn, 
2 Ghrom: 28: 20. £ Upon thy Sons and Succeſſours, the Kings of Judah 
the accompliſhment whereof 1s recorded in their Hiſtory, To wit, 
evil days, by a Synechavche; or Calamities, For days are oft pur for 
the Events which happen in them, and eſpecially for Judgmears 
or Tribulations, as Fob 18: 20. Pſalm 137. 7, Iſa: 9.4. Obat: v: 12. 
b When ten Tribes revolted from thy Father's Houſe, and ſer up a- 
nother oppoſite Kingdom, c Who may well be called their Plague 
or Calamity, as he is called the Rod of God's Anger, Iſa; 10; 5. Or, 
with ( as this Hebrew Particle oft ſignifies ) the King, &c. or by theKing, 
&c. And King is here put for Kings. as Dan. 2.37. and 8: 21. 


138 And it ſhal come to paſs in that day 4, that the 
LORD hal hiſs e for the flie f, that is in the uttermoſt 
part g of the Rivers hb of Egypt, and for the Bee 3 that 


is in the land of Aſſyria k, 

d Known to God, and appointed by him for the Execution of 
theſe Judgments. eSee on Iſs: 5: 26: f The Flies. So he cal's theſe 
Enemies,to imply either tkeir great Numbers,or their ſpeedy March, 
or their unavoidable Aſſault. g In, or near, or towards their Ex= 
tremity or End, wherethey go our into the Sea. h Of rhe River 
Nilus, which may be called Rivers, either for its greatneſs, for which 
cauſe the Title of Rivers is givenalſo to Euphrates, Pſalm 137; 1:and 
to Tigris, Nah; 2:6 : or becauſe, rowards the end of it, it is divis 
ded into ſeven famous Streams, by which it emptieth it ſelf into the 
Midland Sca,1ſs; 11: 15+ He ſeems p/ainly ro deſign and deſcribe the 
Egyptians, who were always dangerous Neighbours to Judah,and did 
probably animate and afſiſt rhe Philiſtines, and Edomites, and others 
againſt them, and ar laſt made a formal Invaſion and Conqueſt of 

eir Land, 2 Kings 23: 33, &c. Beſides, when the Chaldeans had 
in good meaſure ſubdued the Egyptians, it is very probable that great 
numbers of the Egyptian Soldi-rs did liſt themſelves in the Chaldean 
Army, and with them invade the Land of Judah. 7 The Bees, the 
Aſſyrian Army, who are compared to Bces as for their numerous 
Forces and orderly March, ſo for their fiercs Attempts and miſe 


TE 4 ZE. 


chievous Effe&s & In the Empire of 4ſjria, or Babylow , for theſe 
rwo were united into one Empire, and therefore in Scripture are 
promiſcuouſly called ſometimes by one Title, and ſometimes by 
the other, 


19 And they } (hal come, and ſhal reſt all of them 
22 in the deſolate valleys »,and in ths holes of the rocks 


0, and upon all thorhs, and upon all || buſhes p. 

7 The Flies, and eſpecially the Bees m They ſhal have an eaſie 
Viftory; few or none of them ſhal be ſlain in the attempt. n Ei. 
ther 1. Such as were and had long been deſolate. So it ſignifies the 
vaſt Numbers of their Enemies, which filled all places, both ſuch 
aS are well inhabited, and ſuch as were in a great meaſure deſolate : 
Or, 2. Such as they found very fruitful, but made them deſolate. 
0 To which poſlibly the 1ſraelites fled for Refuge. p Which he men- 
tions partly becauſe Flies and Bees uſe frequently to reſt there; 
and partly to intimate, that no place ſhould eſcape the fury of this 
Enemy. 

20 In the ſame day ſhal the LORD ſhave with a * 
raſour q that is hired r,namely by them beyond the Ri- 
ver s, by the King of Aſſyriar, the head and the hair 
of the feet « : andirt ſhal alſo conſume the beard x. 

qi: e, Utterly ſpoil and deſtroy, as ſhaving takes away all the 
Hair, and leaves not any thing of it viſible, as there is when 
the Hair is only cut or polled. r Either, 1. By Ahaz, who did 
hire them, 2 Kings :6: 5,8. And ſo the Prophet notes the juſtJudge 
ment of God, in [courging them witha Rod of their own making 
and by this Threatning he endeavours to prevent that wicked De- 
gn which then was on foot, of hiring Aſjrian Succours : Or, 
2: By God, who did ſtir them up, and fend them upen his Er 
rand againſt Judsh, as he threatens 1/a. 10. 6. and paid them libe=- 
rally tor that Service, as hedid Nebuchadnezzar, of which ſee Jeri 
25: 9. and 27: 6, 7, Dan: 2: 37, 38. s Euphrates, called the River 
vy way of eminency, Plalm: 72: 8. Jer: 2: 18. beyond which 4ſ3- 
rialay. t By the Succeſlive Kings of the 4ſrian Empire, Sennache. 
rib, - Kings18. 13, &c. Eſarhadaen, 2 Chron. 33. 11. and eſpecial. 
ly by Febuchadnezzar , who having ſubdued the 4ſhrian Monarchy, 
from thenceforth was King of 4ſjria as well as of Chaldes, And the 
Prophet rether mentions Aſr:ia than Chaldea,or Babylon, partly becauſe 
the.4/)rian begam,and conrinued to execute this}Judgement,although 
the Babylonian compleated it ; and partly to inform them, that 
they /aid the foundation of their own Ruine, by opening the Door 
to the 4ſrian, who afrerwards entred at his Pleaſure, and lefe 
It Open for Nebuchaanezzar, u Ofthe lower or ſecret Parts, which 
come under that Name, Ezek. 16, 7, 25. and elſewhere, as it 
hath been noted again and again ; and which the Jewiſh Writers 
affirm ro have been ſhaved in the Purification of Lepers and Levites, 
Levit. 14: 8, 9. Numb. 8: 7, x Which they highly eſteemed, as 
a'great Ornament, By theſe Metaphorical Expreſſions ke ſignifies 
t':e total Deſtruttion of their State, from head to toort, from the 
higheſt to the loweſt. 

21 And it ſhal come to paſs in that day, that aman 


ſhal nouriſh a young cow, and two lheep y. 

Y This and the following Verſe contain either, 1. A Mitigation 
of the foregoing Calatyity, or ſori®ECornafort for the Remainders of 
the People, atter che publick Devaſtation; or rather, 2. A further 
Declararion of the threarned Deſolarion ; which beſt agrees not 
only with the forevoing, bur alſo with the following Verſes. So 
the ſenſe ofrhis Verle is this, They wo formerly uſed to keep 
great Herds o* Catte)l, and many Flocks of Sheep, ſhal eſteem it 2 
great happineſs ifthey can keep bur one Cow and two Sheep, to 
keep themicelves from Extremity of Famine. 


22 And itihal come to paſs for the abundance of 
milx that they ſhal give x, he ſhaleat butter « for but- 
rer and honey # ſhal every oneeat that is left F in the 
Land. 


2 Becauſe they ſhal haveexcellentand large Paſtures, by reaſon 
of the great ſcarcity of Catrel ; whereas formerly their Lands were 
oft times over-ſtock:d with Catte]. 4 Which may be here meu. 
tioned, cither, 1. As mean and vulgar Food, beiyg very common 
in thoſe parts; which are oppoſed to that Fleſh and Corn, and o« 
ther excellcnt Fruits of the Earth, wherewith their Land formerly 
abounded ; or 2, As very good and pleaſant Food, which the 
poorer ſort had formerly uſed to fell, ro precure more neceſlary 
and cheaper Food for themſelves : But now the Land ſhould be fo 
deſtitute of People, that there were none to whom they could ſell 
them, and thoſe few whodid ſurvive might freely ear all forts of 
Proviſions. | 


23 And itſhal come to paſs in that day, that eve- 
ry place ſhal be, where there were athouſand vines at 
a thouſand ilyerlings b, it ſhal even be for briars and 


thorns ce : 
b Or, pieces of filver, as the ſame Word is commonly rendred: 
Whereby we may underſtand either, 1. So many Pounds; a Pound 
for each Vineyard, to wit, for the Annual Rent ; Or, 2. So many 
Shekels, which Word is moſt commonly underſtood, when no par- 
ticular kind of Coin is exprefled, as 2 Sam2.18. 11,12. Mat: 26. 15. an 
then the meaning is,not that the thouſand Vineyards were lett fora 
thouſand Shekels, a Vineyard for a Shekel, which is a contemptible 
price ; bur that each of the thouſand Vineyards might have been 
{old or let for a thouſand Shekels, whigh was the yearly Rent of 
ſome excellent Vineyards, as may be gathered from Cant« 8. 11: Ex-« 
cept we underſtand this not of fo many Vireyards, as other Inter- 
preters do, but of ſo many ſingle Vines, as the Word properly and 
generally fignifies, planted together in one large Vineyard, whic 
may be here meant by the place of the River; and then each Vine 
may be valued at a Shekel. Burt this place may poflibly be other- 
wiſe rendred, and that exaQly according to the Hebrew Text,Eve= 
ry place where there are a thouſand Vines, ſhal be for a theuſand pieces of 
Silver, 7, e. Tt ſhalbe valued, or offered, either ro beler, or rather 
to be ſold, at that Price ; which was a very low Price,and therefore 
firly ſignifies the greatneſs of the Deſolation. c Becauſe it ſhal be ut- 
terly negleCted, and therefore overſpread with themes Or, yea ; 


Chzp. VIL 


f Heb: i 
the midf 
of theLand, 


Cha 


[| Orcom; 
mendavile 


Trees, *Ch: 


* 2 Kingy 
I9. 35» 


THet 
proa: [4 
W170. 


Or,” 
zhat is 
fore th 
Kivg 0) 
ſiria Il 
take a 
theric] 


1 &c. 
*2K 
16.9, 


[|Or, 
Piſeth 


Chap. VIIT. F £5 & © 0 Chap.VIIIe 
| ſpal be for Briars and Thorns, No man wall either buy or lure it v_ whom at this time they ſought to deſtroy ; or, rather 2. the Peos 


any terms. ple of I!rael, of whom he laſt ſpske, v. 4. and who are the chief ſub- 
24 With arrows and with bows d ſhal men come} j-& pk - rod in this and theforegoingChaps 
. . e briars and Jr; and who aid rejoyce not only 1n their own King Pekas, but al- 
—_— becauſe all the land ſhal become ſo in theAſſiſtanceotlo powerful anAllie asRez:n was.lOr rather aeſpi> 


: (eth,as theWord properly& moſt frequently ſignifies. » That ſmal} & 

4 Either to hunt, or to defend \ themſelves from Wild Beaſts, contemptibleRiver orBrook which nc by An. aaa fr i» lived {s- 

which commonly abide in ſuch delolate and avergrown Grounds. cretly oppoſed to the great Rivers ofT7:gris and Euphrates, by which 
25 Andon all hills that ſhal be digged e with the 


che Aſhrian Empire was fort ifi2d. Hereby he underſtands rhe mn= 
*Chap:32 mattock, there (hal not come thither the fear of briars [nitions and ſtrength of the Jews, which their Enemies derided and 


19. and thorns f; * bucit (hal g be for the ſending forth of |-<onremned. » Gently, as lictle Rivers do. 
oxen, and for the treading of lefſer catrel hb _ 7 Now therefore « behold, the LORD bringeth 
« Or, that were dizged, to wit, formerly; that uſed to be digged | UP upon them p the waters of the river q ſtrongand ma- 


and drefled for the planting of Vines, or other choice Fruit-trees. | ny, evez the king of Aﬀyria, and all his glory : rand 


f The Words thus rendred, found like a Promiſe : But that doth |, © el-oon ; | 
no way agree with the ſcope of the place. And they may be, and all bis <panray up over all his channels Ss, and go over 


are by ſome, underſtood not of Briars and Thorns =growing 1n , | ; of Fey 
thoſe Grounds, which would hinder the feeding of Carter Meng 0 Becauſe they deſpiſe the Oppoſition which they have from Shi 
(. but of ſuch wherewith they were fenced, and by which the Catre &o3þ and Jeruſalem, they ſhal have a mare potent Enemy. p Upon 
were affrighted or hindred from breaking into them, which cauſe Iſrael. See on the foregoing Verſe. q Of Euphrates, oft called the 
of their Fear being now removed by the general Devaſtation, River, for its eminent greatnels : Whereby he underſtands the 4ſje 
they might now enter there, and feed at pleaſure, as the |744» Forces, as the next Words explain the Metaphor. » His nu- 
next Words imply. Or they may be rendred thus, as they merous and puiſſant Army,in which he gloried.See Js. 10: 8.5 This 
are by a late Learned Interpreter, That there might not come thirher,&Cc, great River ſha] overthrow its own proper Channels. The meaning 
which is mentioned as the Reaſon why they were digged and dref- | 15 This great Monarch ſhal enlarge his Dominions, and add the 
ſed, that they might be freed from Briars and Thorns. So Lands of Syria and Iſrael to them. Some render the Words, he ſhal 
there is only a defe@ of the 5 "i particle aſber, which is frequent | ? with all þ15 channels or ftreams:for the Hebrew Particle al ſome< 
& not onlyas it ſignifies whicMſſar as it is taken finally for that, as | FINES ſignifies with, as Job 38: 32. But it ſeems hard to underſtand 
iſa: 5: 11. and 10. 2. and elſewhere. g Orever ( as this Particle is the ſame Particle one way in this Clauſe, and another in the laſt 
oft rendred ) there ſhal be, to wit, a place ; which Word is under= Clauſe. Beſides, che laſt Clauſe favour s the former 
food, 2 Sam: 7. 1+ 1 Kings 18, 12. Or the Words may be thus ren- the ſame thing being repeated in it, as is uſual in the Sacred Writs 
dred; And all hills that ſhal be digged and thorns, even they or each | 1285+ Or, this may be underſtood of the Channels & Banks of the 
of them ſhal be, the Singular being taken colleQively, as is very u- People or Land of 1jrael. The Enemy being repreſenred under the 
ſual. þ All ſorts of Cartel may fairly enter, and feed there, the Metaphorofa River breaking in upon their Land, may fitly be ſaid 
Fences being broken down, and the Owners generally {lain,or car= to overflow all their Channels and Banks, to wit,all places boch low 
ried into Captivity« and high, ſo that nothing ſhal be able ta withſtand his Fury. 


8 And het ſhal paſs through udah »; he ſhal one HT 

CHAP. VOL flow and go over ; he ſhal reacheven to th : E fulms of | 

Syria and Iſrael ſhould be ſubdued by Aſſyria, 1——4. Judah alſo ſhould + the ſtretchin 3 © ALS ne My the neck x, and 7he on a 

be afflifted, 5 ——8. Gods Judgments irreſiſt:ble and to be feared,g=e-13. 'S out Oras wings 7 al fill the breadth of of thy ia he 
The Lord fs aSanFuary te the :04ly, a Stone of ſtumbling to the Wicked, thy land, Oo Immanuel z. ſhal bet 

14, 15+ The Prophecy ſure, God to be waited on, Necromancers wor to be e Or, zt, to wit, the Riverw: 7. which yet deſigns the ſame Per. 17 *5cfgE 

conſulted, but the Prophecy, their Miſery, 162-22. ſon and Thing, ro wit, the Invaſion of the King of Aſjria. u And our of, þis 

Oreover the LORD ſaid unto me, Take thee a | #Þ<n he ſhal have finiſhed his Work againſt you, won? 


he ſhal invade the A 
a - . - r . . » h. TI Sz 
great r oll «, an d write init with a mans Pen b, Land of Judah as Semnacherib did ſome few years afrer his Conqueſt. Ch.7.14 


.- concerning} Maher-ſbalal-haz-baz es, 2 ng! 28: 9, 13. x Soas they ſhal bein grear danger of 
; n . e pe . 
ths in © Or, A great Volume, becauſe the Prophecy to be written 1n it | ver ſwelling fo high as ch bo ws Mock ji _ 
ph L- . '. was large, and God would have it written in very large and legible | overwhelm him. Such was the danger of Judahs fer On 
Fs + Charafters- 6 With ſuch a Pen as Writers uſe, Pſalm 41. 6. ſer: 8.6. | rib took all the fenced Cities of Judah 2 Kings 18. 13. and ſent his Ar wi 
y w 4s has that fo all may read and underſtand it. c Concerning that thing | againſt Jeryſalem. y Of tis Forces, or of the Wings of his Arm _ 
n +6 the which is ſignified by the Name of thy Child, which is here mentio- | they anciently were and till are called. z Of the Land of fedeh, { 
ſme ned by. way of Anticipation,as nor being given him till w.3. z. e.| called becauſe the M:fah, who is cal!ed by God himſelf Imman: . 
p + hs 4 concerning char which G'd is making haſte to do, the giving up the 7. 14. ſhould certainly be born aod live and die there. And thi $ 
make Jp Kingdoms of Syris and 1/rael for a Prey to the 4ſjrian, as this Name | is added empharically for the Conſolation of Gods People, ro aſſure 
is xpeing, V. 4 | exrhfal wicnefl p — _ noe NON this dreadful Scourge, yet God would 
* Kings 2 Al coOK Unto me raithtul witnelles, to TECOrd | make 2 Crtterence between Iſrael and Judah,and whereas Jjrael ſhould 
foe. þ * Uriah whe Prieſt, and Zechariah the ſon of be Jo broken by the Aſſyrian that they ſhould not be a People,as was threat« 
eberechiah, _ ch: wa yo thould be reſtored and preſerved, for the fake of 
d Perſons of unqueſtionable Reputation; who ſhould bear wit- —— per > brag _—_ and Miniſtry, according to 
neſs that the following Name and Prophecy was written and pub- COT IT 2 


Interpretation, 


Liſhed by me according to Gods Command. 9 Aſſociate your ſelves, O ye people and eſhal | Or, 1h, 
3 AndTI j wentunto e the Propheteſs f,and ſhe con- | be broken in 1eces;and give (a i an of | Apt 1 
br ceived and bare a ſon : then ſaid the LORD co me,Call] b: gird your Advns and ye ſhalbe broken in pieces; gird 


unto his name Maher-ſhatal- haſh-baz. your ſelvesc,and ye ſhal be broken in pieces d. 
k e Heb. Icamenearto her. A modeſt Expreſſion of the Conjugal| a Syrians and Iſraelites. Immanuel's Name infſpireth the Prophet 

AQ. f Socalled, partly as ſhe was the Prophet's Wife, Wives be-f wich new Courage, and makes him ſend a Challenge to all Gods Ea 

ing frequently denominated from their Husbands Titles, as the nemies, and foretell their certain downfall, 4 Whoſvever you be, 

Wives of Mayor, or Door, O's. are commonly called Mayoreſs,Dofo- | whether far or near, who do. or ſhal conſpire againſt Immanuel's 

reſs, &c. and partly bec :uie Ihe did concur with the Prophet co the | Land. « Wirh Sword and Belt. Prepare your ſelves for War. 4 This 

procreation of this Propherica} Child. | 'S repeated for the greater Aſſurance of the thing,and the Comfort of 
4 For betorethe child ſhal have knowledge to cry. 


lOr.' hs Gods Peopls, who are aptto deſpond upon ſuch occaſions. 

12. My facther,and my mother g, ||* the riches of Damaſcus | | | 

jrethe and the ſpoil of Samaria ſhal be taken away h before the | _ '? Take counſel cogether,and it fhal come to nought: 
Kingof 4ſ- king of Aﬀyria #» ſpeak the worde, and it ſhal not ſtand 5 for God 5s 
ſia ſbal g To ſpeak, and to know his Parents;which is within the ſpace of with us f. 

take away gwo years And this agrees with the other Prophecy, Ja: 7. 16. Be-] e Declare an 


d fix your purpoſe, and make your boaſt of it, f The 
Almighty and only true God fighteth for us, and againſt you. He 
gives the Interpretation of the Name Immanuel expreſſed before,v:8. 
for though rhe Word in the Hebrew be the ſame here and there, yer | 
there iz teems to betaken properly, and here appellatively, as 


theriches, forethe child ſbal know to refuſe the evil and chule the good, which requires 
Cc. a !onger time than o diſtinguiſh his Parents from Strangers; which 
'2 Kings ſuits well to Shear-jaſhub, who, being born ſome years before this, 
10.9. wascapable of thar further degree of Knowledges ſoon as this was 
capable of the lower degree, þ The Kingdoms of Syria and Jſrae], j 
here ſignified by their two capital Cities, ſhal be ſtr'pped of their 11 For the LORD ſpake thus tome t with a ſtrong | 
Wealth and Power, as th-y were by T'g/ath-Pil:ſer, within the time handg and inſtructed me. that I ſhould not walk in +Heb. in 
here limited, 2 Kings 15: 29. i In his preſence, and by himſels and h : of chis peonle & {> , firength of 

his Forces:For inScripture-uſe that is ſaid ro be before a Man, which the Way pP&OPie Y, laying, SEE is 

58 inz or is put into 2 mans power, as Gen: 13. 9. and 20: 15, Oc. |, g With a vehement and more than ordinary Inſpiration, ſtrongly 

and men are ſaid to be {mitren before rheir enemies, when they are | 1PPrinting ic 1n my Mind. +4 Ofthe generality of the People of 

ſmirren by them, as Numb: 14. 42. Deut. 1. 42« Judges 20. 39. and Judah 3 whoſe eminent Danger and Calamity he foretells, v: 8. bur 

"FIC oft elſewhere, Others refer tais Phraſe to the ancient Cuitom of withal gives — allurance that God wonld deliver _ them over 

Conquerors, of ſending or carrying their Spoils before them into of it, v; 9, 19+ Which he doth to aggravate the preſent Sin of haz 

their own Country - and his People, _ a5 pe God, and ſeeking to the King of 4ſſ= 

s The LORD fſpake alſo unto me again, ſaying, ris for help, as they aid 2 Kings16: 6, 7,8, 
10 SENG —_—_ ” = yr El —_ = waters| 12 Say ye i not, A confederacy &, to all them to 
L 8 dee - _ mom 20 ſofcly »,and rejoyce in Rezin and} hum __ pong m_ ſay, Aconfederacy : neither fear 
_ , : e their fear /, nor be afraid 
þ Either,1-The People of Jadah,whichate ſuppoſed to have grown mY pes | WE, "YE 

weary of their preſenr ood 19a and —_ diftruſt of Goo, : NROS Lang _ =_ omy Joie 0 | Do not approve of 
proteQion, deſigned to revolt from God,and from the Houſe of Da- a CORE he m—_— ed Deſign of making a Confederacy withthe 
Did, and ro put themlelves under the power and prote&ion of the King 0 NN : hat thing which they fear, thar,if they do not! 
Kings of Syr!a and Ira, Burt thereare no Foor-ſteps of any ſuch call in thy MOR, They: hal —_— be: deſtroyed by 
Def; n or Prattice of that People, And the following Clauſe of re choſe qu et nag againſt them, or thar God either can- 
Joycing in Rein, ©e, cannot with any colour be aſcribed to the Jews, not Gr WIL NO GEE | 


| FP 4 13 Sandifis 


28 16. 


f Heb. 


learned ones 
Chap. F Os, 
4+ 


 *PG-71 
' Zech. 


hap. Vil. 


* Chap. 


Luke 2:34 the houſes of Iſrael q, 
Rom:9:33- 
2 Pet: 2.8. 


*©Mat: 21. 


44. 
Luke 20. 


*Heb.2.13 


-7-racl f, fromthe LORD of hoſts g, which dwelleth in 


3+ 


{Je2N? 


5 4 


13 SanRifie the LORD of hoſts himſelf, and Ver 


:m þe your fear n, and Jet him be your dread. 
1 Give. him the Glory of his Power, and Goodneſs, and faithful- 
neſs, by truſting to bis Promiles for your Deliverance. » Let 
God, and not th: Kings of $1ris and Jrael, be the chief obje& of 


your Fear: - 

114 And he ſhal be your ſanQuary s: but for ® a 
ſtone of ttumbling, and for a rock of offence p to both 
for a gin,and for a ſnare to the 


inhabitancs of Jeruſalem r. : 

o A ſure refuge to all that cruly fear him, and relie upon him. 
p An occaſion of Sin and Ruine, at whom they will take offence 
and tumble, ſo as to fall and be broken, as ir is expreſled, v. 15. 

To the two Royal Families of Iraellargely ſo called; that of 
Judab, to wit, the Houſe of David ; and that of Ephraim; or, to 
the two Kingdoms, that of the Ten Tribes, and that of the T'wo 
Tribes. r Which are diſtin&tly mentioned, as a very obſervable 
and wonderful thing, becauſe Jeruſalem was the Seat of the Tems: 
ple, and of Gods ſolemn Worſhip, where all the Means of Know- 
ledge atid Grace were in greateſt Power and Plenty, where the 
Thrones of Civil & Eccleſiaſtical Judicature were eſtabliſhed, where 
the moſt Wiſe and Learned Dofors had their conſtant or frequent 
abode. And that ſuch a Place and People ſhould reje&t Immanuel, 
or their M:{fiah, when he ſhould appear, was1o great and ſtrange an 
Occurrens;that the Predi&ion of it was highly neceſlary,leſt orher- 
wiſe when it came to paſs, it ſhould ſhake the Faith of all who did 
believe on him ; whereas now the Accompliſhment hereof was a 
notable Confirmation of their Eaith, and an Evidence that Chriſt 
was the true M:ſiab. 


15 And many among them « ſhall * ſtumblers, and 


fall, and be broken,and be ſnared,and be taken. 

| *{Not all; for there ſhal be a Remnant, as was foretold, Iſa. 4.2. 
and 6. 13. t Ar that Scone or Rock, mentioned v. 14. This was 
accompliſhed at the coming of the M:ſias, whom the Jews rejeted 
to their own deſtruQion. 


16 Bind up the ceſtimony, ſeal the law among my 


T diſciples # » 

Theſe are by the conſent of all Gods Words to the Prophet. By 
the teftimony and the law cr dofrine ( for ſo this Word is frequently 
taken ) keunderſtands one and the ſame thing, as he doth alſo, wv. 
26," to wir, the Word of God, and eſpecially that which is the main 
Scope and Subſtance thereof the Do&rine of the Meſizs, which 
though now profeſſed by all the 1/2elitcs, thal be diſowned by the 
generality of them. when the Meſa ſhal come. Bind up and ſeal 
are to be underſtoodProphetically, Declare &propheſie that it ſhal be 
bound vp and ſealed; as 1/aiah is ſaid to make fat and to blind, &c. 
Iſa. 6. 10. and Jeremy to root out and pull down, &c. Jer. 1+ 10, when 
rhey foretell theſe Events. Moreover, bmd up and ſeal deſign the 
fame thing, and thart is, either 1. Security and certainty, as thiogs 
ars bound up or ſealed thatthey may not be loſt. So he ſignifies, 


That although this DoQrine would be loſt among the Body of the 


Iſraelites, yet it ſhould be preſerved among his Diſciples, Or, 2. 
Secreſie, as many things are bound up or ſealed that they may be 
hid from the Eyes of others, And ſo he informeth them, that this 
Do&rine now was and ſhould be hid in a great meaſure among all 
Gods People,even till the accompliſhment of it;and that even when 
it was accompliſhed, it ſhou!d ſtill continue to be as a Secret and My- 
ſtery, known indeed to kis true Diſcip!es, bur hid from the Body 
of the Nation, who would nor ſee it,and therefore ſhould be blind- 
ed by Gods juſt Judgment, that they ſhould not ſee it, as was pro- 
hefred, I. 6.9, 10. Or, 3. both Security and Secreſfie, ſignify- 
g, Thar it ſhould certainly be fulfilled, yet withal kept ſecret 
from the unbelieving Fews. For why may not theſe two be joyned 
in the Expoſition of this Text, as they were in,the Event ? By Gods 
Diſciples he means thoſe who were taught of God, as it is expreſſed. 
Iſa: 54. 13. where this very word is uſed ; or, every one that hath 
heard and learned of the Father, and therefore comecrh unto Chrift, as ts 
explained, John: 45. 


17 And x.I will wait upon the LORD y that hideth 
his Faces from the houſe of Jacob z, and I will look 


for him 6. 

x Or, as this Particle is rendred, Jer: 2. 32, 35: and elſewhere, Yet 
notwithſtanding this dreadful Prophecy concerning the Unbelief 
and RejeCGion of I/rael, 5 I will refer my ſelf and this Matrer un- 
to God, cafring my Care upon him,and expecting the Accompliſhe 
ment of his Promiſe, in ſending the Miah, and in conferring upon 
me and all believing Ifaelires all his Mercies and Bleflings, to be 
procuret by and through his Blood and Merits z That now doth 
and threatneth rhat he will hereafter withdraw his Favour and 


B:effing, as this Phraſe ſignifies, Pal. 10.1. and 27+ 9. and oft elſe- | 


where. 4 From the Family or People of Jradl, b With an Eye of 
| Faith and Expectation, till his time cometh. 


18 * Behold c, T and the Children 4d whom the Lord 
hath given me,are * for ſigns, and for wonders e in If- 


mount Zion þ, 


c It is worthy of your obſervation and admiration. Theſe Words 
are literally ſpoken by Faiah concerning himſelf, but withal myſti- 
cally concerniag Chriſt, of whom he ſpeaks more frequently and 
Fully than any other Propher, and of whomy he was an evident 
Type ; "and therefore they are fitly applyed ro Chriſt, Heb. 2. 13. 
d Either 1, his natural Children, whole very Names were Propheti= 
cal, and Signs of future Evers, c<.7. 3. & 8. 3, 4. Or, 2. his ſpi- 
ritual Children, whom he had either begotren or brought up by his 
Miniſtry. For the Prophets were called Fathers not only with re- 
ſpecc to the young Prophets, who were commonly called the Sons of 
the Prophers but alſo inrelation to others, as 2 Kings 2, 12.07 13s 
14. And rhis ſenſe ſeems more probable than the former, becauſe ir 
agrees beſc,1. with the following Words,which ſeem to be too lofty 


T A B, 


is to ſet forth the Incredulity of the 7/-aelites, and their Contempt 
ani Rej-ction of Chriſt, and of all his faithful Meflengers, both rke 
P:opicts, who were ſent as Harbingers before his coming, and 
the Apoſti'es, who were Witnefles of his coming, 3. with 
Heb, 2.13. where they are expounded of ſpiritual Children, e Are 
a Gazing-ſrock to,and admired by them,' for our folly in believing 
Gods Promiſes ; for ſo the believing Jews now were, to Ahaz and 
the generaliry of the People, who thought it their Wiſdom and In. 
tereir to procure Aid from Aſhria, and eſteemed thoſe Fools who, 
upon pretence of relying upcn God, would neglect ſo great an ad- 
vantage. And ſo the Prophet foretells that they ſhould be when the 
Meſfiah did come; which is the myſtical, as the other is the literal 
ſeaſe; ani ſo both of them may be meant in this place. f Evena- 
mongſt the Iſra:lites, who have been taught and do profeſs better 
things. g Which come to paſs by the wiſe Counſel and Providence 
of God, in which I willingly acquiefce. þ Where the Temple now 
was, and where rhe Meffiah was to ſet up his Kingdom. 

19 
them / that have familiar ſpirits, and unto wizards » 
that *peep,and that mutter»: ſhould not a people ſeek 
unto their God o ? for the living to the dead p ? 

; The J1/-aelizes, to whom I and my Children are Signs and Won« 
ders, wbo are fallen from God, and his true Religion and Wors- 
ſhip, into Superſtition and Idolatry, and will endeavour to ſeduce 
you 1ato the ſame impiety. '& My Children, whom the Propher 
here arms againſt the common Temptation. 1 For Advice and 
Help, and ſeek no more to the Prophets who have hitherto delude 
ed you with vain Words. This was the Counſel of the ungally 
and unbelieving Jews, w Of whom ſee Lewis. 19. 31+ and 20, 27 
& Deut, 18:11, » That ſpeak with a puling and low voice, as 
theſe Words ſignifie; which they affe&ed to do,ſpeaking rather in. 


' wardly intheir Bellies, than outwardly and audibly with theirs 


Mouths and Voice, as the Title of Yentriloquie, commonly given to 
them, {ignifies- 6 This Anſwer the Propher puts into their Mouths, 
to the foregoing Counſel: Doth not every Nation, in Caſes of Dife 
ficulty or Diſtreſs, ſeek to their own gods for relief ? Much more 
ſhould we do ſo. that have the only true God for our God. p Shal 
they ſeek ( which words ar eafily underſtood out of the foregoing 
Clauſe ) for the living, &c. That Living Men ſhould enquire of the 
Living Gol, is proper and reaſonable ; bur it is highly abſurd for 
them to forſake him, and to ſeek to dead Idols, either to the Images 
or to the Spirits of dead Men, which are ſuppoſed to dwell and 
ſpeak in them. 


+ nolight in them -. 

q Let this Diſpute between you and them be determined by 
God's Word, which is here and in many other places called rhe law, 
to ſignifi their Obligation to believe and obey it; and rhe teftimony 
becauſe itis a Witnels between God and Man, of God's Mind and 
Will, and of Man's Duty; and fo theſe two Titles contain two 
Arguments againſt theſe Idolatrous Praftices, r Your Antagoniſts 
thar ſeek to pervert you, vs 19. f This proceeds from the darkneſs 
of their Minds, becauſe they are blind, and will not ſee, and God 
hath ſhut their Eyes that they cannot ſee. But theſe Words are by 
diverſe Learned Interpreters underſtood not as a Declaration of 
their Ignorance, but a Commination and Predi&ion of their Miſe= 
ry, light being moſt commonly uſed in Scripture for Comfort an@ 
Happineſs, and darkneſs for Sorrows and Calamities: And this ſenſe 
ſeemsro be much f:voured by the following paſſages. And then 
the Words may be thus renixzd, 4ſſuredly ( for the Hebrew Particle 
afher 1s frequently uſed as a Note of Afeveration,as 1 Samn. 15. 20. 
Pla, 10.6. & 95.1, Oc. as hath been more than once obſerved be. 
fore Jn light or merning>light ſhal be (for that may as well be undere 
ſtood as #5 ) to them, a Nighr of Miſery ſha] come upon them, and 
they ſhal never havea Morning of Deliverance from it; they ſhal 
be ſwallowed up in endleſs Calamities. 

21 Andthey t ſhal paſs through it « hardly beſtead x 
and hungry y:and it ſhal come to paſs, that when they 
thal be hungry,they (hal frerthemſelves, and curſe thein 
king z,and their God &,and look upward b, 

t The Idolatrous and Apoſtatical [jraclitess u Or, in it, to wit, 
their own Land, which is eaſily underſtood out of the Context,and 
from the Phraſe it ſelf, che Pronoun Relative being put without an 
Antecedent,as it is in other places which have been formerly noted. 
They thal either paſs through it into Captivity, or wander hither 
and thither in it like diſtrated men, nor knowing whitherto go, 
nor what to do ; whereas if they had not forſaken God, they might 
have had aquiet and ſettled abode in it. x Sorely diſtreſſed, as this 
Word is uſed, Gen: 35: 16, & Job 30: 25. y Deſtitute of Food,and of 
all Neceſſaries, which are oft ſignified by Food. z Either becauſe 
he doth nor relieve them 3 or becauſe by his fooliſh Counſels and 
Courſes, he brought them into theſe Miſeries. @ Eirher, 1. the 
Iruz God; orrather 2+ their Idols, to whom they truſted, and 
whom they now find too late unable to help them, b To Heaven 

for help, as Men of all Nations and Religions in great Calamities 
uſe to do. 

22 And * they ſhall look unto the earth c: 
hold, trouble and darkneſs, dimneſs of anguiſh; and 


they ſhall be driven to darkneſs 9. 


andemphartical robe uſed concerning his natural Children; for their 
Prophetic:i Names, which, if they were S:gns, could nor properly 


be called Wners:2. with the Context, and ſcope of the Place, whicy 
| | 


c Finding no help from Heaven,they turn their Eyes downward 
looking hither and thither for Comforr. d Many Words expreſſing 
the ſame thing are put together, to ſignific the variety and extre« 
mity and continuance of their Miſeries. 


CH A Þ, IN 


Toy in the midft of afflition, 1 5. The Birth : Perſon : Office, and 
Kingdom of Chriſt, 6, 7, Juagements for their Pride, &—12. for 
their Impenitency aud Hyocriſte, 173 bk, : 

Evertheleſs, the dimnefs ſhal not be ſuch as was 
in her vexation a, when at the firſt 5 he c 
lightly. afli&ed 4the land of Zebulun, and the land 


ls] 
-—_ 


ot Naphtalie, and afterward did more grievoully _— 
A ict 


and be- Tch; 


Chap.1X, 


And when they 3 ſhal ſay unto you &,Seek unto "Ch:2g.1, 


; ? *Luke! 
20 * Tothe law and to the teſtimony 9: if they » 29. ” 


ſpeak not according to this word, it is becauſe there 3s f Hebad 
morning. 


5:30; 


EEE. 


ry 


Crap. i. 1 $4 £ 4 
(OF, 5» fit her f by the way of theſeag, || beyond Jordan 4 


$5 ye in Galilee|| of the nations 7. 

22 *" a The Words thus rendred contain a Mirigarion of the forego- 
Es ing Threatning : Ani ſo the ſenſe of the Verſe may be this, The 
Calamity of this Land and its Inhabirants ſhal be great, yet not ſuch 
as that which was brought upon the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes 
by the King of 4ſjria, wha at firſt 1ndeed dealr more gently 
with them, but afterwards quite root:d them our, and carried 
them away into a dreadful Captivity, from whence they were not 
to return, no not when the Me{iah came into the World ; for, af- 
ter this Darkneſs, of which I have now ſpoken, there ſhal come a 
glorious Lighr, as it follows in the next Verſe. The Dutch Interpre- 
ters tak? it in the ſame ſenſe, and render the Words thus, But the 
Land that was diftreſſed ſhal not be utterly darkned, To the ſame purs 
poſe they may be thus rendred, according to the Hebrew, But darks- 
neſs ſhal uct be ( i e, ſhal not abide or continue ; for to be is ſome- 
rimes put for to abide os continue to be, as 1 Sam; 12. 1g« Prove 23. 5. 
Mat. 17. 4. Heb. $. 4. ) unto her ( towit, the Land, which by the 
the conſent of Interpreters is underſtood here, as it was c<. 8. 21.) 
to whom this diſtreſs is or ſhal bz. She ſhal be diſtreſſed and darkned, 
as I faid before, c<: 8: 22, but not irrecoverably, nor for ever.Some 
underſtand the Words to be an aggravation of the:Darkneſs or Mt- 
ſery threatned, <<: 8:22. rendring the Words thus, for the dinmeſs ſhall 
zot be, &c. And ſo the ſenſe is, This ſhal not be ſo ſlight an Aﬀi- 
| : Qion as that which befel them by Pul, 2 Kings 15. 19. nor as that 
| which ſucceededit by Tig/ath-7ileſer,whoat the deſire of Ahaz, did 
about this time make another Invafion into the Land of 1ſ-ael,2 Kings 
15. 29- and was an heavier Stroke than the former; bur this ſhal be 
far heavier than either of them. But the former ſenſe ſeems better 
to agree both with the following Verſes and with Mat. 4: 13, 14,15- b 
where theſe Words are expoufided as a Promiſe, and ſaid to be ful= 
filled by Chriſts preaching rhe Goſpel in theſe parts. 6 1n the firſt 
Ivaſion which the King of 4ſhria made upon Jjrael. c To wit,God 
whois oft underſtood in ſuch caſes, and who is here ſuppoſed to 
be the Author or Inflifter of this Judgment. Or, it is an imper- 
ſonal Speech, he affiied for was affiiFed,;than which nothing is more 
common in the Hebrew Language. 4 Either, 1. By Pul; or rather 2 
By Tiglath-Pil:ſer, who at this time invaded and ſubdued theſe parts, 
as is expreſſed, 2 Kings 15:29, e The(e parts are particularly mentio- 


Chap.l < 
more fully, v, 6, 7- q Or, yet not encreaſed therr joy, Which 
might very truly and fitly be ſaid of the JewiſhNation, upon this 
occaſion. partly becauſe they did not rejoyce in the Converſion of 
the Gentiles,as they ſhould have done, but murmured,and grieveds 
and ſtumbled at it ; and partly, becauſe through rieir perverſe- 
neſs and unbelief,that would be unto them an occaſion of their ut- 
ter Ruine, the Converſion of the Gentiles being attended with the 
RejeCtion of the Jews. But becauſe this Tranſlation ſeems not 
to agree with the following Words which aſcribe great joy to 
them, ſome render the Words otherwiſe; eitherthus, and wilc thou 
not encreaſetherr joy > To which Queſtion, the next words give an 
affirmative Anſwer. So the Hebrew Particle lo is put interrogatives 
ly for halo, as it is in many other places which I have formerly ob- 
ſerved: Orthus, and haſt increaſed to it, or him, or them ( to that 
Nation ) their joy. For though the Hebr2w lo be written like an Ade 
verb, yet it may be read like a Pronoun, as it is both by Jewiſh 
and Chriſtian Interpreters acknowledged to be in many places ; of 
which ſee morsin my Latin Synopſis, » In thy Preſence, and in the 
Place of thy Worſhip ; not with a Carnal and Worldly,but with a 
Spiritual and Religious Joy, giving thee the Praiſe and Glory of all 
thy Favours afforded to them, «s When Men receive with great 
Joy, that for which they have laboured much, and long waited-See 
Plalm 125, 5, 6. t When, after a bloody Fight, and a glorious 
Vittory, they come to take the Spoil, 


4 || For thou haſt broken « the yoke of his burden x, jg} ., 


and the ſtaff of his ſhoulder y, the rod z of his oppreſſour uu bred 

2, as in theday of * Midian b, eff. [2 
# This Notes the Matter and Occaſion of the foregoingJoy .xHis Judges} 

urdenſome and heavy yoke, as the Throne of Holineſs is put for the2. Þ} 
Holy Fhrone, Pſalm 47. 8. y Either the Staff wherewith his Shoulders Ch:19: 26 
were ſmitten, or the Staff or Staves by which he was forced to care 
ry Burdens upon his Shoulders. z Wherewith he beat him. Or,che 
Scepter, the Power and Tyranny which he exerciſed over him. # Of 
all his Oppreſſors, but eſpecially of Sin andof the Devil.6 When 
(zod deſtroyed the Midianjres in fo admirable a manner, and by ſuch 
unlikely and conremprible means, by three hundred Men, and 
they not fighting, but only holding Lamps in their Hands, and 


ſounding their Trumpets, Which was an eminent Type of Chriſts 
ned, becauſe this Storm fe1l moſt heavily upon them ; but under | conquering rhe Devil and all his Exemies,by dying upon the Croſs, | 


them the other parrs of the Land are underſtood by a common Fi- and by the Preaching of afew unlearned and deipicable Perſons, 
gure called Synecdoche, f Either 1. By Tiglath-Pileſer,or rather 2. By Oc. 


Shalmaneſer, who took Samaris,& carried 1/rael into Captivity, 2 Kings 
17: 5, 6. Of which Calamity, though yer ro come, the Prophet 
ſpeaks as if it were paſt, as the manner of the Prophet is. g In 
that part of the Land which bordereth upon the Sea, to wit, the 
Lake of Geneſarech, which is very commonly called a S-#,as Mat:4.18 
John 21: 1, &c. and upon which the Portions of Zebulun and Naph- 
zali bordered. h Or, on this ſide Jordan ; for this Prepoſition 1s u- 
ſed both ways, and this Land might be ſaid to beeitaer beyond or on 
this fide Jordan, indivers reſpe&s. 7 Or, Galilee of the Gentiles,to wit, 
the Upper Galilee, ſo called, becauſe it bordered upon the Gentiles, 
But this laſt Clauſe, and the two foregoing Clauſes, are otherwiſe 
rendred and interpreted by divers Learned Men, as a Prophecy 
concerning the Light of the Goſpel tiart ſhould ſhine in thoſe parts. 
As as the firſt time ( towit, in the former Ages of the J1/raelitiſb 
Church and Commonwealth ) he made the Land of Zebulun and rhe 
Land of Naphtali vile or contemprible ( as he might be faid to have 
done, partly by putting thoie People at ſo great 2 diſtance from 
his Sanctuary, partly by expoſing them to ſome Calamities which 
other Tribes eſcaped,and partly by denying them thoſe Honours 8& 
Priviledges which he afforded to other Tribes, of which ſee John 7. 
52, Out of Galilee ariſcth no Prophet; and John 1: 46. Can any good thing 
come 0:t of Nazareth? which was art eminent City of Galilee ; ) fo 
in the latter orlaft time ( to wit, in the days of the Mefih, or of the 
Goſpel, which are frequently ſo called in the Scriptures both of 
the Old and New Teſtament ) he made it, (i: e. he will make it,for 
the Prophet ſpeaks of things to come as paſt, as he doth moſt com» 
monly in this Prophecy ) glorious ( to wit, by Chriſt's firſt preach- 
Ec ingthe Goſpel in thoſe parts ) i or rcowards the way of the 
82a ( to wit, of Galilee or Geneſareth ) beyond or on this ſide Jordan, in 
Galilee ofthe Gentiles. Which Interpretation IT thought fit to proe 
poſe, as deſerving farther Conſiderations. 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
[ 
;: 
1 


5 [| For every battel of the warriour is with confuſed Or wh 
noicec, and garments rolledin blood 4d; || but thisſhall :#e whol 
be with burning and + fewel offire. battel of 

c With the triumphant Exclamatijons of the Conqueror, and the 947719% 
bitter Lamentations of the Conquered, and the differing Cries ofthe 98,84 
ſame Perſons, ſometimes conquering, and ſometimes conquered, |; Or,ong 
d With great difficulty 2nd ſlaughter.e But this Vitory which Gods 1# 245, 
People ſhal have over all their Enemies, ſhal be more eaſfie to them, + Heb: 


and more terrible to their Adverſaries, whom God will ſuddenly 77- 
and utterly conſume, as it were by Fire. | 


6 For f unto us g achild his born ;,unto us a * ſon Jok.44 
k is given 4, and the government m ſhal be upon his 
ſhoulder » : and his name ſhal be called o, Wonderful, 


Counſellor p, The mighty God q, The everlaſting Fa- 
ther r, The prince of peace s. | 


f Having ſpoken of rhe glorious Light, and Joy, and Viftory of 
Gods Pcople: he now proceeds to thew the Ground of it, and by 
what Perſon theſe things are procured. g Unto us Jews, of whom 
Chriſt was born, and to whom he was primarily ſent, Mat, 15. 24. 
for our Uſe and Benefit. þ The Mzſiab by the conſent of Interpre= 
ters, not only Chriſtian, bur Jewiſh : For ſo - the ancient Hebrew 
DoQors underſtood the Place,and particularly theChaldee Paraphraſts 
alchough the later Jews, out of oppoſition to Chriſt, wrelt it to Hes 
zekiah, Which extravagant Conceir, as it hath no Foundation at 
all in this or any other Text of Scriprure,and thefore may be rejec= 
ted without any further reaſon ſo it is fully confuted be the follows 
ing Titles, which are ſuch as cannot withour Blaſphemy and Non- 
ſence be aſcribed to Hezekiah, nor indeed to any meer mortal Man, 
as we ſhall ſee, Bur all the following Particulars do to truly and 
exaUtly agree ro Chriſt, that they canaot without great violence 
be alienared from him, or aſcribed to any other. # For, ſhall beborn 
as the Prophets generally ſpeak. &k So he determines the Sex of the 
Child, Or, the Sor, to wit, of the Virgin, of whom I ſpake before, 
Ch. 7.14« {Is freely and graciouſly given to us by God, Other 


*Mat.4.i6 , * The people that walked / in darkneſs »z, have 
Eph; 5.14: ſeen » a great light : they that dwell in the land of the 
ſhadow of death o, upon them hath the light ſhined. 


k The People of God, 1f-ael and Judah, and eſpecially _ of 
them mentioned in the foregoing Verſe. 1 In Mat.4.i6ait is ate. It ; $ : 
Ne ir pr rr Crntdy they hve | ular allo poem by Co, Bu Fe la 
32bode, nly Waking 1 aarkne $15 More perilous an licting. J-hn 10. m To wit, of Iſrael or of Gods people. © f h ny 
»: The Expreſſion 1s general,and ſo may well comprehend both the -n6e » LEA ric bis hon 1s fe Pie, to whom he 1s 
i 6 hats « > Shoulders 
Duckneſs of Calamity, and-the Decknals of Iynoretice, anc Moone ur"? reat Nao Nh commonly laid upon ———— ny 
: : : - -n5 Should 
try, and Prophaneneſs; in which thoſe Parts were eminent'y in- | _ a If ie. be righely Aeon. -vpove's prom, _ 
volved, by reaſon of their great diſtance from Gods Sanftuary,and very heavy burden, requiring extraorcin-ry Core and a 
by cher Eequent Converſe with he Gentiles, who bordered upon | 157 geſeemial, Poſily here may bealfo Aliſon the wneh 
7 - . » = al inz th ſis: f Go i#1en* befe - 
Fee at the coming ofthe Meſi#h. o Which notes both extream, and | ®igare pon the Shoniders of th ir Officer, ces 00. ahe Cn 
GREG, <r GREY Ds. Chriſt, which was laid upon his Shoulders, Jon 19: 17. which alſo 
was the way to his Kingdom or Government, Luke 24: 26. 6 Eic 
rher, 1, He thal becalled ; for Names are oft put for Perſens, as 
AﬀFs 1: 15, Rev: 3: 4. and 11; 13: or, 2+ His Name ſhal be; for, to 
be called in Scripture is off put for to be, as I have noted before on ch. 
1: 26.and oft elſewhere.Bur this is not to be taken for a Deſcripti- 
of his Proper Name, by which he ſhould be commonly called, but 


ugg 3 Thou haſt multiplied the nation p, and || not in- 
im, creaſed the joy 9: they joy before theer, accordingto 


the joy in harveſt s, and as men rejoyce when they di- 
vide the ſpoil . 


p Thou haſt made good thy Promiſe to Abraham concerning the 
Multiplication of his Seed, Gen: 15. 5. and 22: 17. by adding his 
Spiritul Seed unto the Carnal, by gathering in the Gentiles to 
the Jews, and making them both one People in Chriſt, John 10.16. 
Eph; 2: 14, &c. For in Scripture-account the Believing Gentiles 
are the Seed of Abraham, as well as the Jews; of which ſee Gal: 3: 
7, 8, 9. Or, thou baſt magnificathe Nation, honoured them with pe- 
cular Priviledges above all other Nations, and eſpecially with this 
tranſcendent Priviledge, that the M:/5ah and Saviour of the World 


of his glorious Nature and Qualities. See my Notes on Iſa; 7: 14. 
p Theie Words may be taken either, 1. Severally, as they ar: in our 
Tranſlation, and by many others. This the Jews apply to Hezekin 
4, who, as they ſay, is called Wmaerful, becauſe of the Mira- 
cle which God wrought for him, « Kings 20: 2, &c. . and Counſelour 
becauſe he took Counſel with his Princes about God's Worſhip,and 
the Defence of the City, 2 Chron: 29. 4, &c, and gave good Coun- 
ſel ro others. Which ridiculous Account is ſufficient ro overthrow 
that Expoſition. But they agree moſt eminenrly to the Lord Chriſt, 
who is truly Wonderful, in his Perſon, and Natures, and Words; 


ſhould be bora of them,and live among them ; of which he ſpeaks | 


5 Q and 


FS 3 Ws 


2p. IX. IS 4 
| and Works,being male vp of Wouders, in whom there was not hing 
| which was not Wonderful ; wo alio may weli be cailed Counſelor, 
becatſe he knzw the waole Countel of God. and | fo far as It was 
neceſſary ) r-vealed ir to us, and is the Grzat Counſellor of his 
Church and People in all rhei; Doubts and Difficulties Or, 2« 
Joyntly,Wmnd-rfulCrenſell rc may ſeem beſt to agree both with 
the following Tirl-s, exch of which is made up of two Words, and 
with ſa. 28. 29. where God is called Wonderſul 7 Counſel, and makes 
the Title more fu'l and empharical. Tocall Chriſt ſimply a Coun= 
ſcllor, may ſeem 109 mean a CharaReer, being common to many 0® 
thers with bim ; But to ſay he is a Wonderful Counſellor, is a ſingular 
Commendation. And fo Chriſt is, becauſe ke hath been rhe Coun- 
ſellor of bis Ciurch in all Ages, and the Author and Giver of all 
thoſe excellent Counſels delivered not only by the Apoſtles,bur alſo 
by the Prophers, as is evident from 1 Pet- 1. 10, 11. and hath gather- 
ed, and enlarged, and preſerved his Clucchy by admirable Counſels 
ani Methods of bis Providence, and, in a word, hita in him «/ 


gree to no man but Chriſt, who was God as well as Man, to whom 
the Title of God or Jehovah is given both in the Old and New Teſta- 
ment, as$ Fer; 23: 6. John 1, 1. Rom; 9. 5. and in many other Pla=- 
CES. 
is never ufed in the Singular Number, of any Creature, but only of 
the Almighty God, as is evident by peruling all the Texts where 
this Word is uſed. And although the Title of Elohim, which is of 
the plural Numb:r,be twice or thrice given to ſome Men, yet there 
is c>oſtant'y added ſome diminiſhing Ex preſſion to it, as when they 
are {aid to be afraid, Job 41. 25. 2nd to die, Pſalm 49; 10, wheres 
as here he adds the Epither of Mighty, which 1s aſcribed to the Great 
Gad. Dent: 10; 17. and el:ewhere. r Heb. The Father of Eternity, 
Having called him a Child, and a Son, in reſpeCt of his Humane Na*- 
tur:, le{t this ſhould be miſinterpreteted to his diſparagemenr, he 
add; thar he is a Father aljo, even the Ged and Father of all things, the 
Work of Creation being common and commonly aſcribed to each 
of the Perſons of the Bleſſed Trinity, the Maker and Upholder of 
all Creatures, as he is faid to be John 1,3, Heb: 133, and the Father of 
2'l Believers,w ho are called his Children, Heb. 2: 13. and vhe Fathey 
of Eternity ; Either, 1. The firſt Author ( ſuch Perſons being called 
Fa:hers, as Gen: 4: 20- and elſewhere ) of eternal Salvation, as he is 
called Heb: 5: 9. Or 2+ As werender it, the Everlaſting Father, who, 
though as Man he was th-n unborn, yet wasand is from everlaſting 
ro Everlaſting, They who apply this ro Hezekiah render ity, the Fa» 
ther of an Age, and expound this of his long Life and numerous Po» 
ſteriry ; Which Irherather mention, to ſhew whar abſurd Shifts 
they are forc2d to uſe, who interpret this Text of any other bur 
Chriſt. For, he did not live very long, nor had he, that we 
read of, more than one Son, Manaſſth, And if both theſe things 
had bzen true of him, they were more eminently true of many o« 
ther Men. Bz:ſides, this H-brew Word being uſed of God, as here 
itis of him who was now called che mighty God, conſtantly ſignities 
Eternity, as Iſs: 26:4. and 57: 15» ©. 5 This Title doth nor 
fully agree to Hezekrah, whoſe Reign was not free from Wars, as 
welee 2 Kings 18. but it agrees exaltly to Chriſt, wh is called our 
Peace, Mic.5:5:and Eph: 2:14.and is theonly Purchaſer and Procurer 
of Peace between God and Men, 1/a: 53: 5+ and of Peace between 
M-=n and Men, Jews and Gentiles, Eph: 2: 15. and of the Peace 
of our own Conſciences; and kaves Peace as his Legacy to his Diſc 
ciples, John ' 4; 27. and 16: 23. 
Ot th increaſe of his Government and Peace, * 
»33- . thereſhalbennoendr, upon the Throne of David « 
and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to eſtabliſh i; 
; with Judgment and with Juſticex, from henceforth e 


3!. ven forever y: the * zeal of che LORD of hoſts will pe: - 


P37: form th'sz 

t His pcaceable and happy Government ſhal be enlarged withour 
end ; Either, without end of Duration, for ever; but that is ex= 
preſſed ina following Clauſe of this Verſe: Or, without end of Lie 
mitation, or wWithour Bounds. Ir ſhal not be confined ro a nar 
row ſpot of Ground, the L:nd of Canaan, but ſhal be extended far 
and wide to all the ends of the Earth. « Which was promiſed to 
David, and to his Secd for ever- x Not with Oppreſſion and Ty. 
ranny, by which other Kingdoms are commonly minaged, bnr 
by the Adminiſtration ef Juſtice. y From the beginning of it, un» 
to all Eternity. = This great Work, which ſurpafleth all the Po 
wer and Skill of Men, ſhall be brought ro paſs by Almighty G:d 
out of that fervent AﬀeStion which he hath ro his own Name and 
Glory, and to the Henour of his dearly beloved Son, and unto his 
Church and People. 


8 The LORD ſent a word 2 into Jacob, and it light- 


ed b upon Iſrael c. | 

8s A Prophertical and threatning Meſſage by me : For now the 
Prophet, having inſerted ſome Contolatory Paſſages for the ſups 
port of Gods faithful People, returns ts his formerCommination a« 
gainſt the rebellious I/raelizes, b Heb, it fell, i.e. it ſhal fall, in 
the Propherical Stile, It ſhal certaialy be accompliſhed. c The 
_ with Jacob in the former Clauſe, the Poſterity of Jacob or 1ſ. 
rael. 


9 And all the people ſhalknow 4,ever Ephraim e and the 
inhabitant of Samaria f, that ſay g in the pride, and 
ſtoutneſs of hearr, 
d To wit, by Experience : They ſhal know whether my Word 
be true or falſe ; they ſhall feel the effeQs of it. e The People of 
the Ten Tribes, and. particularly Ephraim, the ſtrongeſt and proud- 
eſt of then all: f The ſtrongeſt Place, and the Seat of the King and 
Court, who were moſt ſecure and prefumptuous. g Within them- 
ſelves, and one to another, They purpoſe and boaſt of it, 
xo The bricks are fallen down, but we will build 
with hewnſtrones þ: The Sycomores 3 are cut down, 
but we will changethem into Cedars k. 
bIt is true, we have received ſome Damages from our Enemies; 
but Rezin and the Syrians being now our Friends and Confederates, 
we doubr nor we ſhal quickly repair them with grear Glory and 
Advantage. # Wild Fig-rrees; a contemptible fort of Tices,if come 
& 


— 


 F 4 ©. 


T3 Chz Pp. LY. 
pared with Cedars,t Kings 10! 274 k Putting CeCars into our Byz!d- 
1NgS Initead of Sycomorts. See Jer. 22, 13, 15. 
11 Therefore / the LORD ſhal fer up the Adverſa. 
ries of Rezin z againſt him s,and | joy np his q encmies f Heb. 
together. 2:ivgle. 
{ To chaſtiſe your Pride, and defeat your Fopesand Reſolutions, 
»” Heb. exalr, advance their Power, and givethcm Succeſs againſt 
him. » The 4ſjrians, who, preſently after this Prophecy, ftoughr 
and prevailed againſt him, 2 Kings 16. 7. He n.enticns Rezin partly 
Lecauſe he was confederate with Ephraim, and ſo liis Enemies were 
their Enemies alſo, and partly becauſe the 7[raelites truſted to his po- 
werful Aſſiſtance. o Either 1. Againſt Rezin Jaſt mentioned ; or ram 
| ther 2. Againſt Ephraim er Iſrael, who may eaſily be underſtood c1- 
ther from the foregoing or following Verie : for aga.nſt them this 


And ir is a moſt true Obſervation, T hat this Hebrew Word El. 


Prophecy is direfted, and of them he ſpeaks both in the next Clauſe 
of this Verſe, andin the next Verſe; and it fecms reaſonable, thar 


the Treoſures of W ſam and Knowledge, Gols 2. 3- q LEE ono | him in this Clauſe, and h:s in the next Clauſe, ſhould be underſiood 


of the ſame Perſons. p Heb- mirgle, i. e, unite them fo that they 
ſhal agree together to fight againſt 1/-ael. and ſhall invade him from 
ſeveral Quarters. q Not Rezz»'s, but Ephra;m's, as appears from the 
next Verſe, which is added to explaia this Clauſe. 


12 The Syrians r before 5, and the Phuiſtines be- 4Heb:with 
hind r, and they ſhal devour Ifrael + with open mouth whole 
'#: * For all this his anger is not turned away, but his 799% 

. . " Che 5. 
hand is ſtrecched our {till x. epgre®. + 
r For although Rezin King of Syria was deſtroyed, yet the Body = 
ofthe Nation ſurvived, and ſubmitted themſelves to the King of _ 
Aſſyria, and ſerved under him in his Wars, and upon his Command 
invaded [ſrael afterwards. 5s Heb. on the Eaſt: For Sriaſtcod Eafte 
ward from {ſrael. t On the Weſtern fide of the Land of [jracl.u Like 
wild and furious Beaſts, with great greedineſs and cruelty. x His 
Juſtice is not fully ſatisfied, but he will yet take further vengeance 
upon them. 
13 For the people turnech not y unto him that ſmit- 
eth them,neither do they ſeek the LORD of hoſts z. 
y From their wicked Courſes unto God, by true Repentance, 
z They do not ſtudy and endeavour to procuie his Favoun, by ſine 
cere and fervent Supplication, and by removing the Cauſes of his 
juſt Ditpleaſure. 
14 Therefore the LORD will cut off from Iſrael, 
head and tail a,branch b and ruſh c in one day 4, 

4 High and low, honourable and ccntewptible. as the next Verſe 
explains it, 6 The goodly Branches of tall and ſtrong Trees, the 
Mighty and Noble, c The Bulrufh, the weakeſt and meaneſt Per- 
ſons. d All together, oneas wellas another, without any di- 
ſtin&tion, 

is The ancient and honourable, he ise the head : 


and che prophet that teacheth lies f,he is the tail] g. 

e l:e. Signifies, as that Word is commonly uſed in the Hebrew 
Tongue, as Ges. 41. 26, 27. and every where. fWhoſe Deſtru- 
ction he mentions, not as if it were a Pvniſhment to them to be de= 
prived of ſuch Pertons, bur partly to ſhew the Extent of the Calae 
mity, that ic ſhould reach all ſorts of Perſons ; and partly to beat 
down their vain Preſumptions of Peace and Proſperity, by ſhewing 
that thoſe falſe Prophets, which had fed their vain Hopes, ſhould 
periſh, and all rteir falſe Prophecies of Peace with them. g Theſe 
I mean by the Tail, as being in Truth the baſeſt part of the whole 
Body of the People. 

15 * For || che leaders h of this people cauſe them to * Chap; 


erre ;,and || they that are led of them are F deſtroyedk. 22: 

þ Tcir Governours both Civil andEcc'eſtaſtical, and eſpecially || Or,che 
the latter, their Teachers, even the falſe Prophers laſt mentioned *hat call 
Or, they rat bleſs or praiſe chew, to wit, the}falſe Prophers, thar flat- them bliſs 
ter them in their wicked Ways, with Hopes and Promiſes of Peace _. 
as their manner was, Jer. 6 14. and 28: 9- Both ways the ſenſe is | Or,they 
the ſame. #5 Either compeiling them by Power, or deceiving them f924# are 
by falſe Do&trines and evil counſels and Perſwaſions. & Shal cer called bliſa 
rainly perith;nor will it excuſe them thatthey followed the Couns.ſed of them. 
{el and ConduGt of their Leaders. . THeb.,ſwa! 
17 Thereforethe LORD (hal have no Joy in their #2 2: 
young men 1, neither ſhal have mercy on their father- 
leſsand widows wm : For every one »isan Hypocrites 
indan evi doer p, and every mouth ſpeakerh || fol- l|Or,vila 
iy q: Forall this his anger is not turned away, but his'7- 


hand is ſtretched out ſtill. 

I Shal not rejoy ce over them to do them good,zs he doth to his 
People. Iſa: 62. 5. Zeph: 3: 17, will not have mercy or pity on 
them, as the next Clauſe explains it, but will abhor and utterly 
deſtroy them ; for more is here intended than is exprefled, as Pro: 

17: 21. # Who are the ſpecial Obje&s of his Care and Pity, Deur. 

16: 11, 14, and 24. 19y 20. and fmuch Jeſs upon others. » Not 
preciſely; for there were ſeven thouſand Ele& Perſons among 
them, when they ſeemed to Elijah to be univerſally corrupt, 1 Kings 

197 18 bur the Body or generality of the People. o For though 

rhey profeſſ-d re worſhip and ſerve the true God, yet indeed they 

had forſaken him. Or, a profane Perſon, as this Word is rendred, Jer. 
23:15.as alſo 1/a: 32; 6. p Elſewhere called, a worker of iniquity, as 

Job 31: 3. Pſa; 5: 5. Mat: 7:23, one that gives up himſelf to 2 
conſtant courſe and cuſtom of Sinning. 9q i; e. Wickedneſs, which / 
is commonly called folly. They are not aſhamed to proclaim their 

own Wickedneſs, and the Corruption of their Hearts breaketh forth 

into ungodly Speeches. 

18 For wickedneſs burneth r as the fire, * it (hal de- + (,," 


vour the briarsand thorns s,and ſhal kindle in the thic- 0:17. 
kers of the forreſt r, and they ſhal mount up like the 
lifring up of ſmoak #. 


7 i: e. Shall burn you, as it follows, ſhal devour. Your Iniqnis 
&y ſhal be your Ruine, as God threatens, Exek: 18; 30: - Either 
1, The Wicked, who are oft compared ro 8riars and 7h'rns, as 
2 Sam; 23: 6 1/8: 27: 4. orrather, 2. The low and —_— 
| ons; 


Wnues 


Re + => of lone, FG 


F:. 
=” 
4 | 
Ch: 


HI 


*<h 


*C 
11: 
ſoal 


Tc 


"Chap. X. 


I RRT < => A lnwor FG 


A 


F.-#-i 

ſ-ns ; for theſe are oppoſed to the thickets of the Forreſt, in the next 

Clanſe. rn rhe Wood, where the Trees are ra!l, and ſtand thick, 

having their Boughs entangled rogether, which makes them more- 

ready br} to catch and to ſpread the Fire. x Sending up Smoak 

like a vat burnacee Heb, with heighth or pride of Smoak, 1.e. with 
aſpiriny Smoak which in rhat caſe riſeth high, and ſpreadeth far 

and fi!]-th all the neighbouring Air, Be 

1,Through the wrath of the LORD of hoſts is *the 

ko land darkned x, and the people ſhal be as the  fewel 
#l{eb:1ear of the fire : no man ſhal ſpare his brother y. _ | 
» Either with the Smoak laſt mentioned, or with Miſery. Or, 

burnt up, as the LXX- Chaldee and Avabick Interpreters render IT» 

3 They ſhal deſtroy one another, as they did in their Civil Wars, 

which were frequent among them, TheName Brother isoft large- 

ly uſed among the Hebrews,even of the remoter Kindred, yea of the 


*Chap:8. 


1} 8-6; 


that the firſt Word is elſewhere taken for a Negatfve Particle. Bur 
the former Tranſlation ſeems more  geauine. © Or rather, in the 
place ( as this Particle ſignifies, and isrendred by Interpreters, Gen? 
30! 2. and 50. 19. Exod: 16; 29. Jo: 5: 8. and ellewhere ) of the 
priſoners, or among the priſoners : And ſs in che next Clauſe, among or 
in the place of the ſlain. | 
5 | O T Affyrian p, * the rod of mine anger 9, and jor, wer 
the ſtaff in their hand is mine indignation y. the Aſſyris 
p So it is Gods Call or Invitation to him'to take the Charge, and ar. 
ſet upon the Work. Or, Wo to the Aſſyrian, becauſe though he do + H-b? 
my Work, yet he doth it in a wicked manner, and for. wicked 45+ uv. 
Ends, as we ſhal ſee. q The Inſtrumene of mine Anger. wherewith * Jer:51*2 
I ſhal chaſtiſe my People. r Mine Anger againſt my People puts the \|or,thoug 


Weapons of War into their hand,and gives them Strength and Suc- 
ceſs in this Expedition. | 


Fellow-members of one City, or Tribe, or Nation: 

20 And he ſhaljſnatch z on the right hand, and be 

hungry, and heſhal cat onthelefc hand, and they ſhal 
not be ſatisfied : * they (hal eat every man the fleſh of 
*h:49:26. his own arm 4. h : 
: z Every one ſhal greedily and violently ſeiſe upon any Proviſi- 
ons thar come in his way. Which implies, either great SCarcitys 
or intatiable Covetouſneſs, as is manifeſt from the next Claule. 
a Either, 1. properly; ſo it notes extream Famine in which caſe 
men are apt to eat their own Fleſh. Compare Jer. 19: 9+ Or, 2. 
Meraphorically, which ſeems beſt to ſuir with the following Verſe 
the Fleſh ovfhis Brethren by Nation and Religion, which are as ut 
were our own Fl:ſh, and are ſo called, 1/a. 58; 7. Zech: 11: 9« and 
conſequently, the Fleſh of their Arm, is in a manner the Fleſh of 
our own Arm. Andone Tribe was to another as an Arm. 7: e. A 
Support or Strength, which iscalled ar arm, 2 Chron;32:8. Jer.17., 5. 
and eiſewhers. ; 

21 * Manaſſeh, Ephraim b, and Ephraim, Manaſ- 
ſch : and they together 5hal be againſt ſudah c. For all 
this his anger is not turned away,bur his hand is ſtretch- 
ed out ſtill. 

b Though more near and dear to one another, than any other 
Tribe, being both Sons of Joſeph. c Which might be accompliſhed 
either before Shalmaneſer took Samaria, or afterwards. For though 
the 1faelites were miſerably deſtroyed at that time, yet they were 
not utterly rootedout. Of which, ſee my Notes on Js: 7. 8. 


CHAP. 24. 


The woe of unjuft oppreſſirs, 14. Of Aſſyria for their Pride and Am- 
bition * His follyin it, 5———19+ 4 remnant of 1raelſhal be ſaved and 
that ſpeeaily, 20 27. Sennacherib marching toward Jerulalem, 
28 31. His judgment, 32 34. 


'TFO unto them that * decree —_— decrees 
2, and|| that write 6 grievouſuels c, which 
they have preſcribed: 

a Unto thoſe Magiſtrates who make unjuſt Laws, and give un- 
juſt Sentences. b Either 1. the Scribes, who were aſſiſtant to the 
Magiſtrates, and oft=times did promote or execute ſuch Decrees ; 
or, 2. the unjuſt Magiſtrates, wnoſe Decrees were uſually wrirten, 
So the ſame thing is repeated in other Words. On'y this writing 
may note their Obſtinacy or Perſeverance in thetr unjuſt Decrees, 
and their proceeding to the Execution of them. « Grievous things, 
ſuch unjuſt Decrees as cauſe Grief and Vexation to their Sube 
jzeQs. 


2 To turn aſide the needy from Judgment 4, and to 
take away the right from the poor e of my people f, 
that widows may be their prey, and hat they may rob 


4 Heb:cut- 


* Chap. 
1: 13. 
ſoal ear. 


Ppſ: 58:1. 
& 94'29- 
I Or,zo the 
priters1hat 
write grie- 
wouſneſs . 


6 I will ſend hims againſt an hypocritical * nation, 
and againſt the people of my wrath « will I give him a 
charge x totake the ſpoil,and to take the prey, and + to + Heb'to 
tread them down like the mire of the ſtreets y. lay them 

5 Not by expreſs Commiſſion, but by the ſecret yer powerful Con- ;reading. 
dut of my Providence, giving him borh occaſion and inclinationro 
this Expedition, # See on ch:9:17. u The Ohje&s of my juſt Wrath 
devored ro Deſtruion, # By putting this Inftin& into his mind. 


» Which ſignifies that he ſhould eafily conquer them, and utterly 
deſtroy them, as he did after this time. 


7 * Howbeit, he + meaneth not ſo z, neither doth 2 
his heart think ſo, but 3 is inhis beart to deſtroy, and *Mic: NE 


cut off nations not a few a. fHeb: wel 


2 He doth not atall defign the Execution of my Will, and the no: mean 
Glory of my Juſtice, in puniſhing mine Enemies; but only to en- nor wil his} 
large his own Empire, and fatisfie his own Luſts. Which is ſea <n- hearr think 
ably added, to juſtifie God in his Judgments threatned to the 4/5 ſq. | 
rian, notwithſtanding this Service. 4 Tofacriftiſe multitudes of ' 
People to his own Ambition and Covetouſneſs; which is abomin- 
able Impiety. | 

8 * Forhe | faith, Are not my princes altogether » 
kings b ? 

b Equal for Power, and Wealth, and G'ory, to the Kings of o- 
ther Nations,though my Subje&s and Servants. See the like Vaunts &c. 
2 Kings 20, 10, &Cc. t Heb:will 

9 Is not Calno, as Carchemiſh c ? js not Hamath as ſay. 
Arpad d ? 5s not Samaria as Damaſcus e? 

c Have notTI conquered one place as well as another, the firon= 

ger as well as the weaker? Have Inot from time to time added n-w 
Cnnquelts to the old ? Calno ſeems tobe the ſame with Calneh, Gen. 
10. 10.mor 6, 2, a great and ſtrong City. Carchemiſhwas a Ciry us 
pon Euphrates,of which 2 Chren;3 5: 20. Fer. 46: 2. d Hamath was an 
eminent City of Syria, not far from Euphrates, called Hemath, or Ha- 
math the Great, Amos 6, 2. of which ſee 2 Kings 14. 28 and 17. 24 
Jer: 49: 23, 27. Arpad ſeemsto have been an obſcure Place, notbe- 
ing elſewhere named. Ts not that as ſoon conquered as this ? e Or, 
Shal not Samaria be as Dawaſcus ? Shal I not take that, as I have done 
this Ciry ? For although Dawaſcus poſſibly was not yet taken by the 
Arian, yet the Prophet ſpeaks of it as aQtually taken, becauſe theſe 
Wordsare Prophetically delivered, and ſuppoſed to be uttered by 
the Ring of Aſſyria, at or about the Siege of Samaria, when Damaſcus 
Was [aKen, 


io As my hand hath found f the kingdoms of the i= 
dols g, and whoſe graven images did excel them þ of 
Jeruſalem; and of Samaria. 

f i; e. Hath taken, as this Word is uſed, Prov: 1; 13. and oft elſe. 
where, the Antecedent being pur for the Coaſequent,becauſe what 


| 
| 
| 


2 Kings | 
18: 24.33 | 
& 19: 10, | 


| 
| 


the fatherleſs, Ws 

a Or, fom their right, as it is in the next Clauſe : or, from ob- 
taining a juſt Sentence, becauſe they eitiier denied or delayed to 
hear their Cauſes, or gave a wrong Sentence. e Whom I have in 
a ſpecial manner committed to your care. f Of Iſraelites who pro- 
feſs themſelves to be my People, and whom I did rake into Cove- 
nant with my ſelf5 and therefore this is an injury not only to them 
but to me alſo, 


And * what will ye do g in the day of viſitationh, 
and in the deſolation hich ſhal come from far; : to 
whom will ye flee for help &? and where will you leave 
] your glory m ? . 

g To fave your ſelves þ When I ſhal come to vifit you 1n wrath, 
as the next Words limit-it, and as this Phraſe is eft uted a!though 
ſometimes it ſignifies a Viſitation in mercy, as Luke 19: 44. and 
elſewhere. # From the 4ſjr:ans. This he adds. becauſe cie I{rae- 
lites, having weakned the Fews, and being in Amicy with the Sy< 
rians their next Neighbours, were ſecure» & To rhe Syrians.r5 now 
you do? But they ſha] be deſtroyed together with you.,as they were 
2 Kings 16. ITo be kept ſafe for your uſe, and to be r«{t-re] to 
you when you ca!} for it. ms Either 1. your Pow?rand Authoriry 
which now you ſo wickedly abuſe; or, 2.your Wealth, got by In= 
juſtice, as glry is taken, Gen: 31. 1, Pſalm 49. 16, 17. &c. 


OY 4 Wirhout me they ſhal bow down » under o the 
Chig!25. priſoners, and they ſhal fall under the ſlain : * For all 


: 12- this his anger is not turned away,but his hand 3s ſtretch- 
ed out ſ#1i1. 


#» Tie Words thus tranſlated ſeem to contain an Anſwer to the 
foregoing Qu-itions ; In-vain do you ſeek for a Refuge and Help 
from others ; for without me, without my Favour and Help which 
you have forfeited, and do not ſeek to recover, and which I ſha] 
withdraw from you ; or, becauſe ” are without me, or forſaken 
by me, you ſhal bow down, notwithſtanding all your Succours. In 
the Hebrew here is a change of the Perſon and Number, which is 
very uſual in Prophetical Writings. The Seventy, and tome others, 
Joyn theſe Words to the foregoing Verſe, and tranſlate them thus 
that you may no: bow down: $o the ſenſe of the place is; What will 
you do to prevent your Captivity or Slaughter 2 And it is true, 


FJob3r; 
I4. 


| ing and laying 1n ſtore. 5 Deprived of their former Glory and Po= 


men find they commonly take to riiemſelves. g Which worſhip= 
ped their own proper Idols,& vainly imag.ned that they could pro- 
te& them from my Power,iJe call the gods of the ſeveral Nations, - 
not excepting fFeruſalem, Idols by way of contempt, becauſe none of 
them could deliver their People out of his hands, as he brags, Iſa: 
37: 11, 12. and becauſe he judged them to be but Petty-gods, far 
inferionr to the Sun, which was the great god of the Aſſrians h To 
wir, in Reputation and Strength. Which Blaſphemy of his pro 
ceeded from his deep ignorance of the T'rue God, 

11 Shail not, as IT have done unto Samaria and her 
idols. {o do co Jeruſalem and her idols 3 ? 

3 I hal certainly do it,and neither God nor Man can hinder me. _ 

12 Wherefore & ir ſhal come to paſs, ther when the * 2 Kings | 
LORN hatA,performed his whole work 1 * upon mount 19: 3x 
Zion, and on Jeruſalem, I will F puniſh » the fruic + of THeb-v5 
the ſtouc hearc of the king of Aflyria, and the glory of FE Heb of 
bis high looks ». | | thegre ts 

& Becauſe of this impudent Blaſphemy.l Of chaſtiſing his People nels of 
ſo long and {© much as he ſees fit and neceſſary for them. » Heb. heart. 
viſit, to wit, in wrath. as before onwv. 3. = His infolent Words and 
Carriages, proceeding from intolerable Pride of heart. 

13 For he- iauths, By the itrengch of my hand Thave 
done #r, and by my wiſdom p ; for Iam prudent: and I 
have removed the bounds q of the people, and have 


| robbed their treaſuresr, and I haveput down s the in- | Or, lite 
habicants [| like a v-cliant man. | many peo 
o Not only within himſclf,bur before his Courtiers and others. pI * le. 
owe all my Succeſſes to my ov'n Power,and Valour,and wiſe Con- 
duR, and to no other Got or Man. 9 F have invaded their Lands, 
andadded them to my own Dominions, as this Phraſe is uſed, Pro. 
22. 28, Hof: 5: 10. Heb: their prepared things, their Gold, and Sils 
ver, and other precious things. whica taey had 101g been prepar- 


wer, | ; | 
14 And my hand hath foundas a Neſt ? the riches of 
the people : and as one gachereth eggs that are lefe « 


have I gathered all che earth. x, and there was none 
that moved the wing,or opencd the mouth or peeped y. 
+ As one finderh young Birds XI 6 the N./# being put _ 

5 Qz che 


| 


O 
fn 


gF wood, 


meljes. 


+ Heb: 


BW wb 7, 


hap. 


2 * f chat ſhaketh it? || as if the rod ſhould ſhakeit felfagainſt 
hem them that liftit up 4, or as if the ſtaff ſhould life up] it 
bat Lift it Telf, "asif it were no Wood b. 


Or, thar bur an Inſtrumeat in Gods hand, and canſt do nothing withour 
hiciis his leaveand help, to blaſpheme thy Lord and Maſter, who hath as 


JHeb: fats 


A pte;.: g To che Aſſrians, who {hal have Heat wirhout Light, as ir is 


tH:'> from 
=_—y (hal be: as when a ſtandard-bearer fainteth ». 
”, 


Joo 14:22 


Jobi6.22, 


Fo 4 


X. 


the Birds in it, as Dent, 32; 11. No leſs eafily do IT both find & take 
u Which the Dam hath leftin her Neſt. This 15 more ea- 
fie than the former ; for the young Birds might poſſibly make ſome 


them. 


faint reſiftance, or flutter away ; but the Eggs conld do neither 
x All the Riches of the Earrn or World, 


and by mourntul Cries. ; 
15. Shal the ax boaſt it ſelf againſt him that heweth 


_ therewith 2? or ſhal the ſaw magnifieit ſelf againſt him 


2 How abſurd and unreaſonable a thing is it, for thee, who art 


great a power over thee, to manage thee as he pleaſeth,as a Man 
hath over the Ax wherewith he heweth ? a Or, as it is rendred in 
.the Margin, and by © her [aterpreters, as zf # rod ſbould ſhake (* ::e. 
ſhal prerend to ſhake, or, ſhou!d boaſt thatit would or couldihake; 
which may eaſily be underſtood our of the foregoing words ) them 
that lift it upþ As if aScaff ih »ld-forget that it was Wood,& ſhould 
Pretend” or. arrempr 7@ I:fr up it ſelf either without or againſt the 
man that moveth it. Which is abſurd in the very ſuppoſition of it, 8& 
were. mach more waircaſonsble inthe prat.ce. Nor are thy Boaſts 
Jeſs ridiculous: 


15 Therefore ſhal the Lord,the Lord of hoſts c, ſend 
ameng his t fat 0n25 leanneſs d,and under his glory he 


ſhal kindle a burning like the burning of a fire e. 
. c The Soveraign Lord and General of thine and all other Ar. 
mies, d Strip hin, 2nd all his great Princes and Commanders, of 
all their Wealth, and M*ghr, and Glory. e He will deſtry his nus 
mecous and victorious Army. and thatſuddenly and irrecoverably 
as the Fire doth thoſe combuſtible things which are caſt into it. 

Which was fulfilled 2 Kngs 19:. 25. 
t7 And the light of Iſrael f ſhal be fora ficeg, and 


' his Holy One for a flame : anditſhal burn and devour 


his chorns and briars h in one daye 
Tat God who is and will be a comfortable Light to his Peo- 


ia H-11. þ His vaſt Army, which 3s no more able to reſiſt God, 
thin dry Thorns and Briars are to oppoſe the Fire that is kindled 


among them. 


- x8 And ſhal conſume the glory of his forreſt ;, and 
of his fruicful field &, + both ſoul and body / : and they 


; Of his great Army, which may not unfitly be compared to a 
Forreſt, either, for rhe multirude of their Spears,which, when lift- 
ed up rogert:1er, | reſemble che Trees of a Wood or Forreſt ; or for 
the numvers of Men, which ſtood as thick as Trees doin a Forreft. 
& Os his Soldiers, which ſtood asthick as Ears of Corn do in a fruit- 
fa! F eld, Heb. of his Carmel. Wherein it is not :mprobably cone 
jecturei by our :at= oft Learned Mr. Gataker, tharthere is an Al. 
Juiioa to that Brag of rhe -ſjria9n, who threatens that he would go 
wp 79 the ſides of ( Iſrael's ) Lebanon, and to the Forreſt of his Carmel, 
and thei= cut down the Tall Cedars there'f, Which though it was nor 
utp:1c4 by the Aſhrion £1] ſome yezrs after this Time, yet was ex- 
att'y for:known to God, who underſtandeth mens Thoughts and much 
more their Words, afar off, Pſalm 139: 2, 3, 4.and therefore might 
dirc& r4e Prophet to uſcrhetame Words, and to turn them a- 
gainſt Limfclf. W here:s thov threarneſt to deſtroy Iſraels Carmel, 1 
will deſtroy thy Carmel 13. 2, Torally, both inwardly arid out- 
wardly, both Strengrh and Life, Heb. Fom the Soul ro the Fl(ſh. 
Which my poſlibly fignifie the manner of their Death, which 
ſhovid be by a ſudden Srrcke of the deſtroying Angel upon their 
mward and vital Parts. which was ſpzedily followed by the Con. 
ſumprion of their Fleſh. Sze Iſa. 37: 35, 36 m The State of that 
Kin:. and of his great and valiant Army, fſhal be. » Like that of 
an Army when th-ir Srandard-bearer either 1s ſlain, or rather flees 
away, which ſcrikesa Panick Terrour intothe whole Army, and 


puts them ro flight, 


19 And the reſt of the treesof his forreſt o, ſhal be 


f few, thata child may write them p. 

o Tae Remainders of that mighty hoſt. p That they may be 
eaſily numbred by the meaneſt Accomptant. A Child may betheir 
Muſreremaſter, 


20 And it ſhal come to pals in that day,that the rem- 
nant of Iſrael, and ſuch as are eſcaped cf the houſe of 
Jacobq, ſhal no more again ſtay upon him that ſmote 
them 73 but (hal ſtay upon the LORD, the holy One 


of 1frael in truth s. 

9g Such Jews as ſhal be preſerved from that ſweeping 4ſjrian 
Scour ge, by which great numbers both of Iſrael and Judah were de- 
ſrroyed and from their ſucceeding Calamites. For that this Place 
looks beyond the Deliverance from rhe 4ſhrisn Army, and unto the 
Times of the New Teſtament, ſeems probable, 1- From the follow- 
ing Verſes, which belong to that Time, as we ſhal fee: 2.From the 
Srate of the Jewiſh Nation, which, after that Deliverance,continued 
to be very {ad and corrupt,and averſe from thatReformetion which 
Hezekiah and Joſiah proſecuted with all their might ; and therefore 
the Body of that People had nor yer learned this Leſſon of ſincere 
Truſting in God alone, 3- From St. Pauls Explication and Appli- 
cation of theſe Words, Rom: 9. 27..of which more may be {aid 
when I come thither. And for the Words in chat Day, which may 
ſeem ro reſtrain thisto the rime of the 4ſhrian Invaſion, they are 


An Hyperbole not unu'- 
ual in the Mouths of ſuch perſons, upon ſuch occaſions. y As Birds 
do, which when they ſee and cannot hinder the robbing of thei: 
Neſts, expreſs their Grief and Anger, by hovering about them, 


E = Ie. 


Jacob, unto the mighty God «. 


« Unto the Meſſiah, expreſly calied themighty God, Ha: 9. 6. 
22 * For though thy people Ifracl x be as 
of the Sea, yet a remnant y + of them (hal return:*The 
Conſumption decreed (hal overflow & || with Righte- 
Ouſnefs a. 
% Or, O Iſrael : 
Speech. 
Threatning in reſpett of ſome, 


to whom by an Apoſtrophe he direQeth his 


them, 
or wth being here underſtcod, 
added. to ſhew, 
ry ſevere, 


aS It 15 every Where. 


Remnant of then, 
And ſo this Word is added as a Reafon why a Remnanr, and 
but aRemnant,ſhould return 
his Juſtice, and manifeſt his Mercy. And in this mixed ſenſe the 
Apoltle ſeems to expound this Place, Rom 9: 27, 28, 


23For theLord GOD of hoſts ſhal make a Conſump- 
tion, even determined þ in the midſt of all the 
Land c. 
6 The ſame thing is repeated in other Words, with ſome addition: 
God will execute his own Decrec concerning the DeſtruCtion of 1 
ral, which he is well able to do, becauſe he is the Lord of Hoſts; 
c In all the Parts of the Land, not excepting Jeruſalem, which was 
to be preſerved in'the 4ſjrian Invaſion, when almoſt all the othey 
tenced Citicsof Judah ſhould be taken; but ſhouid afterwards be 


taken and deſtroyed, as it was, firſt by the Babylonian 
by the Romans. 4 < TOY gn 


24 Therefore 4 thus ſaith the Lord GOD of hoſts,O my 
people that dwelleſt in Zion e,be not afraid of the Ai- 


why 


up his ſtatf againſt thee, after the manner of” Egypt g, 


deſtroyed, and a remnant of my people preſerved and reftored.e In 
Jeruſalem, which is frequently called Sor, as Pſalm 48: 12. and 87, 
2. Ja: 1.8, 27, and 33: 20, «&c. Which he mcntions, becauſe this 
was the principal obj<&t of the 4/jrians deſign and rage, and there 
were the Temple, and Thrones of Juſtice, and the King and his 
Princes; and the multitudes had fled chither from the 4ſjrian, f He 
ſhal aiilict rhee,but not deſtroy thee. Compare 1 Kings 12;11. g As 
the Egyptians formerly did, and with the ſame ill tuccels to theme 
ſelves, and comfortable ifſue to you. 

25 For yet a very little while,and the indignation 6 
(hal ceaſe z,and mine anger in their deſtruction, 

þ Mine anper, as it is explained in the next clauſe; either, 1, tow 
wards my People ; which ſhal weaken the 4ſjrian, whoſe preat 
ſtrength lay there ; of which ſeeabove v: 5. or, 2. towards the/(@ 
ſ[yrian, with whom God was very angry, wv: i2, &c. yea. fo an- 
gry, as not tobe ſatisfied without their deſtrution, as it fellows, 
: As anger commonly doth,when vengeance is fuliy executed. 


{troyed becauſe of the anointing g. 

p Theburden of the Aſryrian ; for ſo it was aQtvely, becauſe 
impoſed by him; though paſſively it was 7ſraels burden, as being 
laid upon him. 4 Our ofthe reſpect which I bear to that Holy Ui. 
ction, which I have eſtabliſhed amongſt you. And fo this may re= 
late either 1. to the Body of the People, who were in fome ſort a- 
nointed, being madeby God a kmgdom of prieſts, and an holy Qation, 
Exod: 19. 6. or, 2. to that ſacred Kingdom which God had, by his 
poſitive Precept, and ſolemn Covenant, eſtabliſhed jn Dzvia and his 
Poſterity for ever. The Jews therefore,and ſome o;hers,underſtand 
this of Hezzkiah, to whom God had a lingular reſpect, and upon 
whoſe Prayers God gave this Deliverance, as we read,7/s: 37. 15,&c. 
Poſſibly it might be better underſtood of David, who is oft men« 
tioned in Scripture by the name of God's anointed, as Pſalm 20: 6. & 
89: 20, and 132:17- and elſewherez and for whoſe {fake God gave 
many Deliverances to the ſucceeding Kings and Ages, asis exprefly 
affirmed 1 Kings 11: 32, 34, 2 Kings 8. 19. And,which is more C0j.» 
liderable. God declareth that he would give this very Deliveranc?z 
from the 4frisn for David's ſake, 2 Kings 19. 34: and 20» 6. Þur 
the Mzſfiah, 1 doubt nor, is here principally incend:d, of whom 1-3- 
vid was but a Type;aid who wasin a peculiar manner anonred 4ÞQVe 


frequently uſed in the Propuets of the times of the Golpel, as 1/o. 
2: 11. and 4. 2. and 61. 10, &c. r Shal learn by this Judgment and 
Experience, never to truſt ro the Aſjriansfor Help, as 4a: and his 
People now did. f Not only by profetiion, but fincerely, 


all his fellows, as 1s ſaid Pſal 45. 7. Forhe 1s the Fuuncation 
of all the Promiſes, 2 Cor: 1. 20. and of all rhe D-11verances 


and Mercies granted to Gods Pcople ia all Ages; waence _ oy 
# 4 Diac 


y Or, a remnant only, as before: For that this is a 
[cniny as well as a Promite in _reſpe& of o- 
thers,is evident from the reſi of this, ard from the following Verſe, 
= The Deſtruftion of the People of Iſrael was already decreed or de- 
rermined ( as it is in thenext Verſe ) by the fixed Countci of Gcd, 
and therefore muſt needs be execured, and like a Deluge overflow 
a As this Word isrendred Rom: 9: 28. the Prepofition in 
And this is 
, that although this Judgment of God may lecm ves 
> yetitis moſt juſt, not only by the Laws of ſtrj& and ri- 
gid Juſtice, bur even by the Rules of Equity and Clemency, as 
this Word oft fignifies, inaſmuch as he hath ſpared a ccnficerable 
when he might have deſtroyed them utterly, 


Chip. X, 
2T The remnant 7 ſhal return, even the remnant of *c> _ 

M4. 

f Or, aremuart, or, but a remnant, or, a reciuant only. Which 

Particles are oft underſtood, as hath been formeriy and fre ucntly 

'bſerved, and may be here ſupplicd from the following Verics. 


27, 


T Heb:iz, 
ON 


,a'nonrf 


*Ch: 28.25 
| Or, :n, 


3 becauſe God would both glorifie 


{yrian : he ſhalſmice thee with a rod f, || and (bal lift LO 
up h:s ſtaff 


a This is an inference, not from the words immediately fores for thee 
going, but from the whole Prophecy. Seing the 4ſjrian Jhal be *Exod:i4 


rock of Orebm: and as his rod was upon the ſea », fo fat 
ſhal he lifr it up after the manner of Egypt. Cheo. dl 


(Or, 
tl 


ey 


q| 


X1. 


Prophet makes uſe of this great promiſe of the Meſſiah, as an Af- 
ſurance that God would make good his promiſes oft peculiar De- 
liverances from their preſenr or approaching Calamities, as 1/s: 7. 
' 14, Oc, and 9. 4, O&c.-And therefore the Propher might well 
ſay, that God would grant this Deliverance for Chriſt's ſake : E- 
ſpecially if it be conſidered, that this was the very Reaſon why 


Chap. 


miſed unto the Tribe of Judah, and unto the houſe of Dywid, until 
the coming of the M:ſiah, becauſe the Meſſiah was to come of the 
Tribe of Judah, and of the Poſterity of David, and was to ſucceed 


David in his Throne and Kingdom ; and he was to bs known by 
this Chara&er : and therefore this Tribe and Houſe and Kingdom 
| were to continue, and that in a viſible manner, cl} Chriſt came. 


28 He is come to Ajath r, he is paſſed to Migron * 
at Michmaſh he hath laid up his carriages /. 

» Here the Propher cerurns to his former Diſcourſe concerning 
the 4ſhrian Tavalion inco Judah ; which he decribes, after the man 
ner of the Prophets, as a thing preſent, and ſers down the ſeveral 
Stages by which he marched towards Jeruſalem, The Places here 
named are moſt ofthem Towns of B-»jamin and ſome of Judah, 
as appears from other Scriptures ; of which it is needleſs to ſay. 
more in this place, He, to wit, Sennacheris King of Aſjria, 1s come 
in his way to Jeruſalem. ſ Leaving ſuch things there as were lels 
neceſſary, that ſo he might march with more expedition. Heb. he 
w1ſiteth his veſſels or inftruments : which may be meant of his taking a 
Survey of his Army and Artillery, to ſee that all chings were rea- 
dy for his Enterpriſe. 


29 They are gone over the Paſſage t : they have ta 
ken up their lodging at Geba, Ramah is afraid, Gibeab 
of Saul is fled #. | 

$ Some conſiderable Paſſage then well known ; Poſſibly that 1 
Sam: 14. 5. The People fled to Jeruſalem for fear of the Afſrian. 

20 fLift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim x ; 

{Heb Cry cauſe it to bz heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. 

ſil with w Jeruſalem was the Mother Ciry, and lefſer Towas are common- 

thy Wice, lyicalled her daughters, as hath been oft noted. : : 

21 Madmenah is removed, the inhabitants of Gebin 
gather themſelves to flee. 

22 As yet ſball he remain at Nob that day : he ſhall 
ſhake his hand y gain the mount of the daughter of 
Zion, the hill of Jeruſalem. 

y By way of Commination, But withal he intimates that he 
ſhould be able to do no more againſt it, and that there his proud 
Waves ſhould be ſtayed, as it is declared in the following Verles, 
and in the Hiſtory. 

33 Behold the Lord, the LORD of Hoſts ſhall lop 
the bough s with terrour 4: and the high ones of ſta- 
ture ſhall be hewn down, and the haughcy ſhal be hum- 
bled. 


z The top-bough, Sennacherib; or, rhe boughs. his valiant Soul- 
diers or Commanders of his Army, which he compareth to a For- 
reſt wer: 18. & 34. a With a moſt terrible and amazing ſtroke by 
an Angel. : 

24 Andhe ſhall cut down the thickets of the forreſt 
with iron b, and Lebanon « ſhall fall [| by a mighty 

(0r,nigh- one d. 
kl, b Or, as with iron, as the Trees of the Forrefts are cut down by 
Inſtrumepts of Iron. c Or, his Lebanon, the P:onoun being ofc 
underſtood in the Hebrew Text: the Aſhrian Army, which being 
before compared to # Forreſt or Wood, aid being called his Carmel 
in the Hebrew Text, v: 18. may very firly, upon the ſame ground 
be called his lebanon here ; eſpecia}ly conſidering that the King of 
Aſyria is called 4 Cedar of Lebanon, Exck: 31. 3. « By a mighty An- 


gel, Js, 37: 36. 
| CHAP. XI. 

Chriſt, = Branch out of the Root of Feſſe, endued with the Spirit of the 
Lord, ſh-uld ſet up a Kinzdom by the Preaching of his word, 1———=5. 
The Memvers of kis Church ſhould live in Peace and Unity. 6 .9 and 
be V:Forious over their enemies : and to him ſhould the Gentiles ſeek, 
L9——i6. 

a ND X* there ſhal come forth « a rod þ out of the 


ſtemm e of * Jeſſe 4, and * a branchlball grow e 
out of his Roots f. 


a The Prophet having diſpatched the /fhrian, and comforted 
: ods People with the Promiſe of their Deliverance from that for- 
' $32 midable Enemy, now he proceeds further, and declares, That God 
&r;23; 5. will do greater things than rhat for them, that he will givethem 
their long-expeCted and much-deſfired Meſiab,and by him w''l work 
Wonders of M:rcy for them. For this 13 rhe manner of the Pro- 

por, to take the occaſion of particular Deliverances, to fix the 

eoples Minds upon ctieir great and everlaſting Deliverance from 

all their enemies by the Mefiah. And having faid that rhe Aſjrian 

yoke ſboul be deftroyed becauſe of the anointing, chap: 10: 27. he now more 
particularly explains who that anojnted Perſon was. 6 Or, Twig, 

called a branch in the next clauſe. Parents are oft compared co Roots, 

or Trees, and their Children to Branches. He ſpeaks of the moſt 
eminent Branch, of that famous Son ofa Virgin, 1/a: 7: 14. of thar 
Wonderful Child,/{/s: 9; 6: not of Hezekiah, as ſome of the Jews and 
Judaizine Chriſtians conceit ; but of the Meſſiah, as will evidently 
appear from the following Deſcription. c Or, trunk ; or rather. 

Fump : for the Word proper'y ſignifies a Trunk cur off from the 

the Root : Or, root, as the LXX here render the Word. and as it is 
explained in the next Clauſe, By which he clearly implies, that 

the Meſſiah ſhould be born of the Royal Houſe vf David, at that 

time when it was in a moſt forlorn and contemptible condition, 

like a Tree cut down,and whereof noting is lefi but a Stump or Root 
under Ground. Which really was the State of Davzd's Family when 

Chriſt was born, as is notoriouſly known; but was in a far better 


Mech: Y 
f1. 

Rev: 5: 5. 
Aﬀn13.2 3.G 


1 8 1 0 


God had promiſed, and did ſo conſtantly perform his Mercy pro- | 


| the ſight of his eyes 9, neither reprove r afcer the hear« 


l 
Citap. X | | 


20. 30, to intimate, that at the time of Chririſts Birth the Roval 
Family ſhou'd be reduced to its Primitive Obſcrrity. e He ſpeaks 
of one not yet born, and therefore not of Hezekiah, who was born 
divers year before his Father 4haz ( in whoſe time this Prophecy 
was delivered } was King, by comparing 2 Kngs 16. 2. & 18. 2. but 
of the Meſſiah, f Our of one «f his Roots, 7: e: Branches, as this 
Word root is ſometimes uſed,by a very uſual Figure called a Metony- 
my, as1t 15 here below, v. 10. Iſaiah 53. 2, Hoſea 14. 


2 And the ſpitit of the LORD g ſhall. reſt up- 
on him h, the ſpirit of Wiſdom and underſtand- 
ing i, the ſpiric of counſel and might & the ſpi- 


rit of knowledge } and of the fear of the 
LORD =: | 


£ The Holy Ghoſt, wherewith he was anointed, 4#s 10. 38.and 
by whom his Mother was overſhadowed, Luke 'i. 35. h Nor only 
come upon him at certain times, as he did upon the Prophets now 
and then at his pleaſure, bur ſhall have its conſtant and ſetled abode 
1a him 3, alchough the ſame Phraſe be ſomerimes uſed of other Pros 
—_ in an inferiour ſenſe, as Numb: 117 19. 2 Kings 2-35. 35 Which 

ath theſe Perfeftions in it ſelf,and confers them wpon him. Ir is 
1cither eafie, nor at all neceſſary, exatly to diſtinguiſh theſe two 
Gifts ; it is. ſufficient that they are neceſſary Qaalificatjons for 
2 Governour, and for a Teacher, both which Offices were to meet 
in the Meſſiah; and as is evident that they ſignifie a praftical and 
perfe&t knowledge of ail things neceffary for the diſcharge ot his 
Truit, and for his own and Peoples good, and a ſound Judgment, 
to diſtinguiſh between things thar differ. k Of prudence, to give 
400d Counſel ; and of might and Courage, to execute it ; which 
ire two neceſſary Qualifications of a Ruler. ! Of the perte& 
Knowledge of the whoie Will and Counſel of God, eſpecially that 
which Concerns the Salvation of Men, the proſecution whereof was 
his grear Work, as alſo of all ſecret and hidden tiings, .yea of the 
Hearts ofmen, the Knowledge whereof is aſcribed to Chriſt, March. 
9. 4, Revel, 2. 23, m Not a fear of Diffidence or Horrour, but 
of Reverence, a Care to: pleaſe him, and lothneſs ro offend him 5 
which well became the Meſſiah towards his Ged and Father, 


3 And ſhal make him of + quick underſtanding » in #Heb fre | 
the fear of the LORD 0, and he ſhall nor judge p after ® gs. | 


ing of his ears /. b- | 
3 Heb. he ſball make him ſmell, 7. e. perceive, as that Word is uſed, 
Jud. 16.9, Job 39. 25. underſtand or judge, as it 15 explained in the 
next Clauſe, Or, his ſmelling ſhall be. Smelling is put for Judging, 
becauſe the ſenſe of Smeiling, where it is quick and good, is more 
exatt and ſure 1n the judging of its proper Obje&s, than the tenſes 
of Seeing and Hearing are. o Which is added, either, 1. as the 
Objett of his Judging : He is moſt perfpicacious and judicious in 
the things which concern the fear, i,e. th: Worſhip and S-rvice of 
God, which he wasto order and eſtabliſh in his Church ; Or rather 
2. as the Rule and Manner of his Judging, as may be gathered 
from the oppoſite and following Clauſe. So the ſence is. He ſhal 
not Judge raſhly and partially, bur conſiderately and juſtly, as-che 
Fear of God obligeth all judges to-do. p Of Perfo:is or Cauſes. And 
Judging ſeems to be here Synecdochialiy put for abſolving or giving 
Sentence for a Perſon, as it is uſed, Pal. 7. 9, 11. and in many 
other places, becauſe this is oppoſed to reprovingin the nzx: Clauſe. 
q According to outward appearances as men muit do;becauſe they 
cannot ſearch mens hearts, 1 Sam: 16: 7, or with reſpz& of Per- 
ſons, bur with righteous Judgment, which is oppoſed to judging by ape 
pearance, Joh: 7. 24: r #8, e. Condemn or pais Sentence againſt a 
Perſon; for Chriſt is here ſuppoſed to be a Judge,and ſo he ſpeaks 
of a Judicial Reproof. [ By falſe or uncertain Rumours or Suggeſ- 
tions, but ſhall thi oughly examine all cauſes, and ſearch out the 
Truth of things, and the very heartsof men. | 


4 But * wich righteouſneſs ſhall he judge the poor ?, *Pſat: 72. 
and || reprove « with equity for the meek x of the earth: 2, 4. 
and he ſhall * ſmite y the earth z with the rod F of his Rev: 19- 


mouth 8, and with the breath of his lips 5 ſhall he lay 
che wicked c. l 


: Defend and deliver them, as judging is oft uſed, as Deut. 32.36. 2Theſ 2.8 
fer: 5. 28, & 22:13, Oc. Or, juage fir the poor, the Prefix, lamed, Rev. 13 16: 
biag underſtood out of the next clauſe, as is uſual in the Hebrew & 2; 16.. 
Languzge, He mentions the poor, partly to fignifie the Juſtice of & 19: 15. 
this judge, becauſe Humane judges commonly negle& and opp:2ts ;Or, word. 
the Poor ; and partly to declare the Nature of Chriſts Kingdon: of his mout 
and the Qua'ity of his Subje&s, who ſhould, for the generality of 
rhem, be the poor and contemptible ſort of men Matth: i 5: 5. Jam. 
2. 5. # Or, asthis word ſeems to be taken, wer: 3. condemn, ta 
wit, their malicious and furious Enemies. - x On their behalf, or 
giving Sentence for them. He calls thera meek whom before he 
called poor, partly to ſhew his juſtice in defending them who are 
moſt expoſed to the Contempr and Injuries of Men ; and partly ro 
ſignifie that his Subj<&s ſhould be poor in Spirir as well as in the 
Word, and not poor and proud, as many worldiy mer: are, » i: 0: 
Slay, as this Word is uſed, 7/a::37. 36. and very commonly, and 
as it 1s expounded in the next Clauſe, = The men of the Earth, zhe 
wicked, as it iS1n the next Branch of the Verſe : fitly called earth; 
either becauſc of their Earthly minds and Converſations, as they are 
called the Men of this World, that have their portion hers upon the 
Earth, Pal: 17: 14. or becauſe the far grearcft parc of che Inhabitants 
of the Earth is wicked : the whole Wnrld lies in wickedneſs, 1 fohn _ 9. 
for which reaſon they are oft celled che World, as john 16; 20, ©: 
17.9. 25, fc, « With his Word, which is his Scepter, and zhe rod 
of his Power, Pſal: 116; 2; which is fharpey than @ ſword, Heb: 4: 12 b 
the preaching whereof he ſubdued the world to himiclf, and will 
Ceſtroy his Enemies, 2 Theſſ. 2. 8. This he adds, further to des 
clare the Nature of Chriſts Kingdom, | that it is not of this 


d 


Ir: 
Or,arcre 
* Job 4: 93 


condition when Hezekiah was born. d He doth norfay of David, but | their Souls 3. or properly, which he doth very frequently by-bi 
of Joſe, who was a private and mean Perſon, r Sam; 18: 18, 23. & | Terrible Judgments execut | es mans «rm 
| a 


World, and that bis Scepter and Arms are not Carnal but Spiris 
tua], as 1f 1s ſaid, 2 Cor: 1o: 4. 6 With his Word breathed out 
of his Lips; whereby he explains what he meant by the forego- 
ing 704, c Either ſpiritually, by infliting deadly Plagues upon 


ed upon many: of them, and will 
5Q3 certainly 


hap. XI. ISAT 


certainly doz and that fully and univerſally, at his coming to Judg- 


MN od righteouſneſs ſhal be the girdle of his Loins 4, 


and f:ithfuineſs the girdle of his reins e, | 
>= 1: ſhall adorn him, and be the Glory of iis Government,as 2 
> Glrdle was uſed for Ornament, Iſa. 3. 24. and as an Enſign of 
Power, Job 12: 18: and it ſhall conſtantly cleave to him, in all his 
Adminiſtrations, «5 s Girdle cleaveth to a mans Loins, which is the 


Prophets Similitude, Jeremish 13.11. e The ſame thing in other 
Words. 


4. 6 * The Wolfalſoſhal dwell with the Lamb, and the 
_ ; ith che kid f: and the Calf 
55: 25, Leopard ſhall lie down with the K1 f: an e ( 
izek. 34. and the young Lion, and the fatling together,andalittle 
*þ child ſhal lead them £- ; ; 
Hoſ: 2:48. f The Creatures ſhal be reſtored to that State of Innecency in 
which they were before the Fall of Man. . But this is not to be 
underſtood literally, which is a groſs and vain Cenceit of ſome 
Jews; but ſpiricually and metaphorically as 1s evident: And the 
ſence of the Metaphor is this ; Men of fierce, and cruel, and ungo- 
vernable Diſpoſitions,ſhal be ſo transformed by the Preaching of the 
Goſpel, and by the grace of Chriſt, that they ſhall become moſt 
humble, and gentle, and traftable, and ſhall no more vex and 
perſecute thoſe meekand poor ones mentioned v: 4, bur ſhall become 
ſuch!as they : of which we have inſtances in Saul being made a Paul, 
and in the rugged Jaylour, 4#s 16: and in innumerable others. But 
how can this be applied to Hezekiah with any colour ? g They will 
ſubmire their proud and Rebelious Wills to the Condutt and Com- 
mand of the meaneſt Perſons thar ſpeak to them in Chrifts Name. 


7 And the cow andthe bear ſhall feed 6, their. young 
ones ſhal lie down together : and the Lion ſhal eat ſtraw 


s like the ox. : 
h Together, as it follows, without any danger or Fear: # The 


Graſs and fruits of the Earth, as they did at firſt, Ger.1:49: 30.and 
ſhall not devour other Living Creatures, as now they do: 


$ And the ſucking child (ball play on the hole of the 
aſp &, and the weaned child ſhal pur his hand on the || 


cockatrice 1 den. 

k A moſt fierce and poiſonous Serpent, Deut: 32: 33: Job 20: 14, 
16. which alſo will not be charmed by any Art of Man. Pſal: 58. 
5. 1 ASerpent of more than ordinary Cunning and Cruelty, Prov: 
23.32. Themeaning is, They ſhall nor fear to be either deceived 
or deſtroyed by thoſe who formerly wacched all Opportunittes to 


do 


f Or, aa- 
ders. 


| it. 
* They ſhal nothurt nor deſtroy in all my Holy 
"w * Cs: + for the earth = ſhal be full of the know- 


a. 354a9. 
"*Hab:2:14 ledge of the LORD o, as the Waters cover the 

SCa p, 

- In Zion, in my Church, Where-ever the Goſpel comes and 
prevails, it will have rhis effe&. » Meronymically pur for the In- 
habitants of the Earth ; and as before it was uſed for the greater 
part, w: 4. ſo here it is uſed for the better part of the world. o Of 
faving and praftical Knowledge. Whereby he intimates, That all 
the davageneſs and Malignity which is in wicked men towards true 
Chriſtians, proceeded from their deep Ignorance, and particularly 
from Iznorance of God ; and witha),that a right Knowledge of God 
will make a marvellous and thorrow Change in the Diſpoſitions 
and Converſations of men. p The Channel of the Sea, the thing 
contained being put for the thing containing, by a Meromymy common 


in Scripture, and all Authors. 
, And in that day there (hal be a root q of Jeſſe, 


which ſhall ſtand for an enſign r of the people /: toit 


*Rom:15: £11 the * Gentiles ſeek rt, and his reſt « ſhal be + glori- 


10. 12. 
_ he R f which 

| A Branch growing upon the Root : of which ſee on wer: 1. » 

| go: & 4 - A and high Tree, ſhall become a viſible 


$h3)l grow up into a gre 
and eminent Enſign. ſ Which not enly the Jews, bur all nations, 


may diſcern. and to which they may, and ſhall reforr. t As the 
Goipel ſha!l be preached to the Gentiles, fo they ſhall receive it, 
and believe in the Meſiah. «u His reſting=place, as this Word fre- 
quently ſignifies, as Gen: 8: 9: & 49: 5: Plal: 132; 8,14: Ja; 34: 
14: Mich: 2: 19. his Temple or Church, the Place of his Preſence 
and Abode. x Shall be filled with greater Glory than the Jewiſh 
Tabernacle and Temple were ; of which ſee on Hag: 2; 9. only 
- this Glory ſhall be Spir;tua), conſiſting in Glorious Ordinances, in 
the picntiful Effuſions of the excellent Gifts, and Graces, and Com- 

forrs of the Holy Spirit, ; 
1t And it ſhall come to paſs in that day, that the 


LORD ſhal ſer his hand again the ſecond time y, to re- 
cover the remnant of his people which ſhal be left, * 
from Afyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and 
from Cuſh, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from 


w7ech:io; Hamath, and from the iſlands of che ſea z. 

10, 11, y The firſt time, to which this Word ſecond releats, ſeems to be 

either, 2. the Deliverance out of Ezypt, as moſt both Jewiſh and 

Chriſtian Jarerpreters underftand it : And then this ſecond NDelive- 
rance mult be thar out of Babylon : Or, 2. the deliverance out of Ba. 
bylen : And then this ſecond Deliverance muſt be in the days of the 

M-ſfiab, Which, with ſubmiſſion to better Judgments, ſeems to me 

more probable; 1. becauſe rhar firſt deliverance is ſuppoſed to be, 

like the ſecond, a Deliverance of the Remnant of this People from 

ſeveral Countries, into which they were diſperſed : whereas that 

out of Egypt was a Deliverance not of a Remnant, but of the whole 
Nation, and that out of Egypt onely : 2: becauſe this ſecond Delive- 
rance was univerſal, extending to the generality of the Outcaſts 
and Diſperſed ones, both of 1/rael, - or the Ten Tribes, and of 
Juadgh or the two Tribes, as is evident from v: 12:13, whereas that 
out of Babylen reach<d only tothe Two Tribes, and to ſome few of 


by Geographers to Promontories of Land which ſhoot forth inta 


of his people, which ſhal be lefe from Afſyria p * like * Chapiy 
asit was to Ifrael in the da 
Land of Fgvpt. 


So the fence i, Thar all Imp*dimenrs ſhali be removed, and a way 
made for tie R-turn of God's 1/rael from all parts of the World?! 
He mentions Aria, becauſe thither the Ten Tiibes were carried, 


ter, ſhall be fulfilled. 


ſtrength and my ſong, he alio is become my fſaivation. 2. 


Almighty Power of God. 


A H 


_— wo CO of the Gentiles, aS is evident fro 
reas tnat out of Babylon was long before the coming of the Me. 
fiah, and the calling of the Gentiles. z From all Places Rack far — 
near, into which either the Ten Tribes or the T'wo Tribes were 
carried poo war for the Places of both their Captivities are here 
named, of which it is needleſs todiſcourſe Particularly, becauſe 
they are well known, and have been conſidered in former Texts. 
Only Pathros was not named before ; and that was a Provinee in 
Egypr, which yet is ſometimes diſtinguiſhed from Egypr ſtrictly fo 
Called. See on Jer: 44: 1, 15. Exzek: 29: 143 & 3o: 14. 
12 And he ſhall ſetupanenſign for the nations «,and 
ſhal aſſemble the out caſts b of Iſrael c, and gather to- 
8Cther the diſperſed of Judah from the four + corners 4 11.9, 
of the earth. wing : 
# All Nations, Jews and Gentiles, who ſhall then embrace the : 
true Faith and the Meſſiah, as was ſaid v: 10, 'b That were driven 
and baniſhed out of their own Land, into Foreign Parts, as the 
Word implies. c Stri&tly ſo called, or of the Ten Trites, as is 
manifeſt both from their oppoſition to Judah in this Verſe and from 
the mention of Ephraim in the next verſe. | 
13 * The envy alſo of Ephraim 4 ſhall depart, e 
and the adverſaries of Judah f ſhal be cut off: * Ephraim « 


(hal not envy Judah. and Judah ſhall not vex Ephraim 8. E: 

d 7: e: Of the Ten Tribes, frequently called by the name of E- 
phraim, as hath been already and frequenrly obſerved, between 
whom and Judah there were great Emulations and Contentions. 
Of Enemies they ſhall be made Friends, and of Wolves, Lambs : 
as was.faid before on wv. 6. they ſhall be united together in one 
Church under the Meſſiah, keeping the unity of the Spirit in the 
Bond of Peace. f N-t the Body of Ephraim, for they are ſuppoſed 
to be reconciled, and they ſhall not be cut off, but live in love with 
Judah, as we ice by the next Clauſe ; but thoſe few of them which 
poſſibly may continue in their Enmity againſt them, togerher with 
all the reſt of their Aciverſaries. g Not only all outward Hoſtilities 
ſhall ceaſe, but alſo their inward Animoſities» 


14 But they ſhall flie upon the ſhoulders & of the 
Philiſtines coward the Weſt, they ball ſpoil F them; of 


m wv: 9: 1o, 


[1 
! 


ek: 37; 
16, 22; 


e *Ch:9;21 


T Heb; :t; 


the Eaſt rogether : | they ſhall lay their hand uponE- _ f 
dom and Moab, andthe children of Ammon fhal obey + Heb: 
them. Edom and 


h Eitherit is a Metaphor from Birds and Beaſts of Prey which 4% ſbalt 
commonly faſten upon the ſhoulders of Cattel ; or from Wreſtlers, ** # la. 


who endeavoured to catch hold of their Adverſaries ſhoulders, rhat #597 of 


they may throw thew down Or, ſhoulder js put for # ſide, as Num: "#7 hands 
34:11. Joſ; 15: 8, 10. Or, for Part or Quarter of a Counrry,as Dev: Heb:the 
33+ 12. 35 They ſhall ſubdue them. Which is to be under ſtond of Pldren of 
the Spiritnal Victory which the Jewiſh A/iah ſhall obrain by his £299 
Apoſtles and Miniſters ovec all Nations, in bringing them to the their 0þte 
Obedience ofhis Goſpel.For itis the manner of #he Prophets to ſpeak 9%. 
ofthe Spiritual things ofthe Goſpel under ſuch Corporeal Repreſen= 
tations. 

I5 And the LORD ſhall utterly deſtroy & the tongue 
of the Egyvtian ſea /,and with his mighty wind ſhall he 
ſhake his hand »s over the Rivers, and ſhal ſmite it inthe 


{even ſtreams 0, and make men gO over T dry-ſhod. ſhows; 
| & Shall not only divide. it,as of old,but will quite dry it up, that it * 
may be an Hi;;h-way,as it is explained in the next Verſe. 1'The Red 
Sea,which may w: i} becelled che Egyptian Sea,both becauſe it borders 


f Heb: a 


upon,Ezypt,& becauſe the Egyptians were drowned in it,which is called 


@ Tongue in the. Hebrew Text, Joſ: 15:2,5. as having ſome reſemblance 
with a Tongue: For which reaſon the name oftongue hath been given 


the Sea,s t +15 Sea did ſhoot out of the Main Ocean into the Land. 
m He alludes t» Moſes bis ſhaking of kis Hand with the Rod of God 
in it over the Sea; » To wir, of Egypr, N:l:s, as appears both from 
the foregoing and from the following words. o For whichN!lus is 
Famous in all Aurhors,and by which it emptieth it ſelf into the Sea. 
16 And * there thal be an High-way far the remnanc 


y that he came up out of che 23- __ 
*Exod:iqz 


p As there was another Highway from Ezypt,in the former Verſe. _ 


ſc Caſe ſeemed to be m«<t deſperate. 
CHAP. Al. 

4 thanksgiving of the Faithfull for their Redemption, T, 

AS in that day «thou ſhalt fay, OLORD I will 
| A Praiſe thee : though thou walt angry with me, 

thine anger is turned away, and thou comforteſt me. 

a When this great Work of the ReduCtion of God's Iſrael, and of 

the Converſion of the Geotiles, promiſed in the foregoing Chap- 


2 Kings 117: 23. Who 


F4 
Us 


2 Behold, God is my ſalvation b: I will truſt, and 
not be afraid ; for the LORD JEHOVAH #s my * +peod:rg 


b My ſalvation hath not been brought to paſsby Man, but by the P{:118:14 


3 Therefore with joy ſhall ye draw * water out of 


the wells of Salvation c. * Joh: 4 
c Your thirſty and fainting Souls ſhal be filled with Divine Graces 14: &7: 
and Comforts, which you may plentifully draw from God, in the 37: 38. 
uſe of Goſpe]-O:dinances, which was off ſignified by warer, bot 

in the O'd ind in the New Teſtament. He ſeems to allude to the 

State of Iſ-ael in the Wilderneſs, where when they had been torment» 

ed with Thirſt,they were greatly refreſhed and delighted with thoſe 


the Ten Tribes which were mixed with them, as is acknowledged 
both by Jews and Chriſtians: 3 becanſe this ſecond Deliverance 
was given them in the days of the M:{ish, and did accompany or 


Waters which God ſo graciouſly and wonderfully afforded them in 
that dry and barren Land, Num: 20: 11: & 21. 16, 17,18. 
4 And 


_ Chap, X11, x 


J er:3:18. 


Hoſ; :: 11: 


[0r,pr 
1 mes 


| ſr. 6, 


fHeb. 
leeſr 6 


1 


gen ple 4, make mention that his name is exalted. 
9 

Vs #1s 
wi. of God for it. 


; Heb. ex = F Sing unto the LORD, for he hath done Þ excellent 
ny things 3 thisis known in all the earth e. 


| hap. XI. F-8: A I : 
«chr.16- 4 And in that day ſhal ye ſay, * Praiſe the LORD ||, ned y in his Poing forth XZ; ani the moon hall not 


call upon his name, declare his doinzs among the peo- 


d In all the earth, as it follows v: 5. unto the Gentile-world who 
. ſhal partake in the Blefling, and will joyn with you in the prailfing 


e The Knowledge of this gloricus Work of our Redemption by 
the Meſia/ ſhal no longer be confined to Jſrael's Land, as it hitherto 
hath been 3 but ſhall reach to all Nations. 


| Clap.54- 6 *X Cry out and ſhout, thou F inhabitant of Zion : 


for great is the Holy One of Iſrael in the midft of thee, 


Fe4h CHAP. XII. 


God's Armies, 1 6. The defiruftion of Brbylon by the Perſians and 


1 h- S. . . y . 
whine Medes: Their great diftreſs and Anguiſh and their utter Deſolation, 


G6 ——27 


HE * burden « of Babylon b which Ifaiah the ſon of 


*Chap.2T. Amos did ſee. : 
»&47.1- a This Title is commonly given to ſad Prophecies, which indeed 


uy |. 50. & are grievous Burdens to thein upon whom they are laid. See 2 


"Y (Chap.1 8: 


hap:i 


od:ig: 
19+ 


| il. Kings 9: 25. Jer, 23433, 36. 5 Ot the City and Empire ot Babylon 


by Cyrus, for their manitold and great Sins, and in order co the de- 
liverance of his People, 


2 * Lift ye up a banner c upon the high mountains d, 
exalt the voice unto them e, ſhake the hand f,that they 


may £89 into the gates of the nobles g. 

c To gather Soldiers together for this Expedition. 4 Whence 
it may bz diſcerned at a conliderable diſtance. Withal he ſems to 
intimate, that their Enemies ſhould come from the Mountainous 
Country of M:4ia. e To the Medes, who are named below, ver: 17 
f Becken to them with your Hand, that they may come to this 
Service. g Thatthey may go and fight againſt Babylon, and take it, 
and ſo enter into the Palaces of the King, and of his Princes, and 
ſpoil them at their pleaſure ; which the Medes and Perſians did. The 
manner of Expreſſion implies how eaſily and expeditiouſly they did 
their work, that, like Ceſar, they might ſay, they only came, and 
ſaw, and overcame. : 

2T have commanded my || ſan&tified ones b, I have 


Drgrepe alſo called my mighty ones ; for mine anger, eve them 


+ 6, 4, thatrejoyce in my. highneſs &, 


h The Medes and Perſians, fitly ſo called, becauſe they were ſolemn- 
ly deſigned and ſet apart by God for his own Service, and for this 
holy Work of executing his juſt Vengeance upon them, ; Thoſe 
whom I have made mighty for this Work. k Or, as others render 
= aa my glory, materially conſidered, to wir, in the doing of that 

ork which tends much to the Advancement of my Glory, 1n 
deſtroying of the Babylonian Empire. For otherwiſe the Mcdes had 
no regard to” God nor to his Glory, bur only to their own carnal 
End 


} 
Ned. the 4 The noiſe of a multitude in the mountains, T like as 
limſr of of a great people: a tumultuous noiſe of the kingdoms 


of nations / gathered together: the LORD of hoſts mul- 


tereth the hoſt of the batrel. 

1 The Medes and Perſians, and other Nations which ſerved under 
them in this War : of which ſee Fer. 25. 14. and 27. 7. and 50. 
41. 

5 They come from a far Country, from the end of 
heaven ms, even the LORD, and the weapons of his in- 
dignation », . to deſtroy the whole land 0. : 

m From the ends of the earth under Heaven,as Mat:24.30.which 
15not to be underſtood ſtriftly and properly, but popularly and hy- 
perbolically, as ſuch Expreſſions are commonly uſed in Sacred and 
Profane Authors. And yet in ſome reſpes this might be truly 
aid of Perſia, which on th& Southſide was bounded by the'Main 
Ocean ; as for the ſame reaſon Sheba, a Part of Arabia, is called he 
utmoſt parts of the earth, Mat. 12, 42. n The Medes and Perſians, who 
were but a Rod in God's Hand, and the Inſtruments of his A_ 
as was ſaid ofthe 4ſrian, Iſa. 10+ 5. o To wit of Babylen,of which 
he is now ſpeaking. 

: 6 Howl ye, for the day of the LORD 3s at hand ; 
| 31. *je ſhall come as a deſtru&ionp from the Almighty 4. 
Joel 5+ p Or rather, « defflru#ion, or devaitai:on ſhall come, as the LXX and 
5 Pulzar Latin render it. For this was nor as @ deftruftion, but was a 
DeſtruQion indeed. And the Particle as is ſeldom uſed to expreſs 
not the likeneſs, but the reality of the thing, as John 1. 14. q Who 
fighteth for your Adverſaries, and againſt you, and therefore your 
DeſtruQion is unavoidable. : 
IO, fa, 7 Therefore ſhall all hands || be faint, andevery mans 
im, heart ſhall melt» 
8 And they ſhall be afraid : pangs and ſorrows ſhall 
take hold of them, they ſhall be in pain asa woman 
Meb.»ex. CHRAC travelleth : they (hal + be amazed Þ one at another 
r; their faces ſhall be as F flames /. 


IHeb.eve- r To ſee ſo pupulous and impregnable a city as Babylon was, ſo 

nan at eaſily and wnexpe&edly taken; ſ Heb. faces of flame, either pale 

ki nigh. with Fear, or inflamed with Rage and Torment, as men in miſery 

; frequently are» Some rend&r it the faces of Lehabim, a People de- 

ltes faces ſcending from Mizraim, Gen. 10, 13. 1 Chron,1. 11. 5: e: blackwith 
pain as men uſe to be: of which ſee Jocl 2. 6. Nah. 2, 10. 


ſong, 9 Behold, the day of the LORD comerh,cruel both | 
Nat with wrath and fierce anger f, to lay the land deſolate ;| 
32 


| - and he ſhall deſtroy the ſinners thereof « out of it, 
$7: Joel + 


1 6z1c , 7 Divers Werds are heaped rogecher, to ſignifie the extremity of 
Nat..." his, Anger. « The Inhabicantsof char Ciry, who were guilty of ſo 


9.Mar1, Puch Idolatay and Crueltyy and all forts of Luxury, 


4H  Ohap, x} 


cauſe her lighe to ſhine. | 
_ * Which conſiſt of many Stars, and therefore give a greater 
Iigtr. » Either, r. properly and really, by an Eclipſe ; for Pro- 
'SICS 1N Heaven do ſometimes go, before or accompany great and 
publick Calamities upon earth: Or, 2. figuratively, and in appea= 
rance: All things ſhall look darkly and diſmally : men ſhall have 
no comfort nor hope, See the like Deſcriptions of a moſt calami- 
rous State, Iſa; 5. 39. and 34.4. Joel 2. 10 3t, Ge. 2 As ſoon as 
he riſeth, when he ismoſt welcome tro meni, and giveth them hopes 
of a pleaſant day. As ſoon 3s they have any appearance or hope of 
amendment, rliey ſhall be inſtantly diſappointed. » - .: "E ” 
11 And I will f puniſh the world 2 for their evil, and tHeb.wiſe 
the wicked for their iniquity ; and I will cauſe the arro- evil up 
gancy of the proud to ceaſe, and will lay low the bogs was? BY 
haughtineſs of the terrible 6, _ .. Br ker arts 74 
4 The Babyloniſh Empire; which is called the world, as the Roman iniquiry. 
Empire afterward was. Luke 2.1, becauſe it was extended. to a great 
part of the World, and becauſe it was vaſtly populous, and Babyles 
it ſelf looked more like a World than one Ciry. 65 Of-them who 
formerly were very terrible for their great Power and Cruelty. ; , 
12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold ; 
even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir c. _ 
c The Ciry and Nation ſhal be fo depopulated, that few men fhal 
be lefr in it. | EE nf OS ; 
13 ThereforeI will ſhake the heavens, and the earth 
(ball remove out of her place 4 in |] the wrath of the ; 
LORD of hoſts, andin the day of his fierce anger. (| Or, 
d A _Poetical and Prophetical Deſcription of great Horrours and **S** 
og as if Heaven and Earth were about to meet toge= 
cnere 4 ; 
14 And it e ſhall be as the chaſed roe f,and as a ſheep 
that no man taketh upg : they ſhall every man þ turn 
to his own people, and flee every one intohis ownland. 
e To wit, Babyln f Fearful ia ir ſelf, eſpeciaily when it is 
purſued by the Hunter. g In a moſt forlorn and negle&ed condi. 
cion. hþ Thoſe Souldiers of other and more warlike Nations whom 
ſhe had hired co aſſiſt her; which ſhe uſed ro doat other times,bur 
eſpecially upon this great occaſion : of which ſee on Jr. 5o. 16, 
Fl. Yo : k 
15 Every one hat 3s found 3 ſhalbe thruſt through * 
w every Ons hat js joyned unts them, ſhall fall by the 
word. 


; In Babylon, at the taking of iti The ExpeQation wkereofmade 
them flee away with all ſpeed. 


16 Their children alfo ſhal be * daſhed to pieces be- » pp, ,,, 
fore their eyes &; their houſes ſhall be ſpoiled,and their g: Nah:3: 
wives raviſhed. ES we | 106 

k As a Juſt Recompence for the like Cruelty ated by them upon 
the Jews, 2 Chron: 36. 17. which alſo was foretold Pſal. 138. 9. | 

17 Behold, * I will ſtir up the Medes / againft then, * Jer; 537 
which ſhall not regard ſilver, and as for gold, they ſhal 11, 
not delight in it 7. | es 25 

I Under whom he comprehended the Perſians wha were their 
Neighbours,and Confederates in this Expedition. m Which is go 
be underſtood comparatively. They ſhall more eagerly purſue the 
DeſtruCion of the People, than the getring of Spoil ; whereby it 
ſhall appear, that they are only the Execuvioners of my vengeance 
againſt them ; they will accept no Ranſom to ſave their Lives. - | 

18 Their bows. alſo (hall daſh the young men to pie- 

ces o,& they hal have no pity on the fruit of the wombs 
their eye ſhall not ſpare children, Re 

x Under which are comprebended their Arrows, and Poſlibly o- 
cher Weapons of War; for ſo gerierally ſometimes is the bow uſed 
in Scriprure, as 2 Sam: I. 18. Pſal: 78: 9. Iſs: qu 2. o Or, ſbatpierce 
the young men through: as the Chaldee renders it» | 
19 And Babylon the glory of Kinzdoms p, the beau- + Heb. 5 
ty of the Chaldees excellency q, ſhalt be fas when God *heover- 
overthrew * Sodom and Gomorrah r. | yen 

p Which once was the moſt noble and excellent of all the King- »* T5 4. 
doms then in beeing, and was more glorious than the fucceeding _ Jer 
Empires, whence it was repreſented by the head of Gold,” Dans 2, 2F = * 
37. 9 The famous and beauriful Seat of the Chaldean Monarcy. 7 je 45" 
Shall be totally and irrecoverably deſtroyed, as is more fully ex+ 
preſſed in the following Verſes; Which yet was not done imme. 
diatly upon the taking of the City by Darius and Cyrus,but was fulfil. 
led by degrees, as is confeſſed by Hiſtorians,and appears this day. , 
20 It ſhal never be inhabitared /, neither ſhal it be 
dwelt in fromgeneration to generation : neither ſhal the 
Arabian # pitch tent there, neither ſhallcthe ſhepherds 
make their fold there. 


{ After the DeſtruQion threatned ſhall be fully accompliſhed4 
t Who dwelt in' Tents, and wandred from place to place, : where 
chey could find Paſture ; bur ſhal avoid this place, either becauſe 
the Land once noted for great fruitfulneſs,' is now become barren z 
or becanſe the Land is accurſed by God, and abhorred by all men ; 
or for fear of the Wild Beaſts, as it follows. 


21 But + wild beaſts of che deſart ſhal lie there es 
and their houſes ſhal be full of + doleful creatures, and fHcb.z/ 
|| + owls ſhal dwell there, and faryrs ſhal dance there x. t Heb. 0- 
u The Land being forſ.ken by Men, ſhall be poſſeſſed by Wild <bim. _ 
Beaſts, which love ſolitary places x What the Hebrew Words yl: l|Or, Oftris 
2d here, and in the next Verſe, ſignifie, the Learned may ſee in m' ches. 
Latine Synopſis ; and for others, ir may ſuffice toknow that in which T Heb. 

211 the Learned agree, that theſe are fiighrful and ſolitary Crea* Haughters 


u, Luk: Io For the ſtars. of heaven, and the conſtellations x| 
25, thereof ſhalt not givetheir light ; the ſun ſhal be * dark- 


tures : Of which if I ſhould Particularly diſcourſe, I ſhould rather of 5he owt. 
perplex than cdifie the Vulgar Reader« 
5 Q4 22 And 


Char. XIV. ES:8# 1 4 H | | 
22 And | the wild beaſts of the iſlands ſhall cry in | 4d Jay whom: thou wouldeſ?, and keep alive whom thou wouldeft Dan 
*heir [| deſolate houſes, and dragons in their pleaſant » Dan. 


laces : and her time is near to come y, and her days 
ſhall not beprolonged z. 


y Soit was, though not according to mans raſh Judgment, and 
impatient ExpeRation, yet according to Gods Eſtimation, and to the 
Eye of Faith, whereby 45raham ſaw Chriſts Day as preſent, many 
Ages before it came: Joh: 8: 56: and comparatively 3 forit hapned - 
within Two hundred years : which is but a ſmall proportion © 
Time, if it be compared either with the foregoing or following A- 
ges of the World, or with the immenſe duration of Eternity, from 
whence it was decreed byGod,and therefore might well be ſaid now 
be near the Accompliſhment of ir. In like manner the Apoſtles 
gment asnear in their time, though it was 
at many Ages diſtance. z Beyond the time prefixed and appointed 


by God. Compare —_ 2; 


ſpeak of the Day of Jud 


H A P. XIV. 
delivered from rhe Babyloniſh Captivity : Their Triumphant 
13. Gods purpoſe againſt &ſria 


Inſultation over Babel. 1 
27. Paleſtina is threatned. 28 


OR the LORD will have mercy 
* will yet chuſe 6 Iſrael,and ſet them in their own 


land : and the ſtranger ſhall be joyned with them, and 


they ſhall cfeave to the houſe of Jacob, 

s God will pity and deliver his People ; and therefore will de- 
ftroy Babylon, wich hinders ir, and ſet up Czrus, who ſhall pro- 
b Will renew his choiceof them ; for he had refuſed and 
rejeted them. c So they did in part at their coming from Baby- 
lm, being thereunto moved either by the favour which the Jews 
had in the Perſian Court, or by the conſideration of their wonderful 
Deliverance, and that exa&ly in the time deſigned by their holy 
But what was then begun, was more fully accompli- 


ſhed at the coming of the Meſſiah. 
2 And the people ſhall rake them, 
to their place: and the houſe of Iſrael ſhall poſſeſs them 


in the land of the LORD,for ſervants and hand-maids 
and they ſhall take them captives, F whoſe captives they 


were, and they ſhall rule overtheir oppreſſors 4. 

h d Which they mighr do literally, and ſometimes did, after their 
$20 £8 Return into their own land, either by their power with the Perſian 
Monar-hs, as'in the days of Cyrus and Darius, and eſpecially of 
Ahaſbuerus; or by their own proweſs,as in the time ofthe Maccabees. 
Bur this was more evidently. and eminently verified in a Spiritual 
Senſe, in the days of the Goſpe], when the Apoſtles and other 
Miniſters, who were of the Jewiſh Nation, conquered a great 
part of the Gentile-world to the Worſhip and Obedience of their 


| nh. 
on Jacob a, and 


and bring them, 


And it ſball come to paſs in the day that the 
LORD ſhall give thee reſt from thy forrow, and from 
thy feare, and fromthe hard bondage wherein thou 


waſt made to ſerve : 
e For beſides their preſent hard Service, they were in perpetual 


ferr of further Severities and Sufferings, at the pleaſure of their 
cruel! Lords and Maſters. f 
| 4 Thatthou * ſhalt take up f this || proverb againſt 
*F1:h:a: 6 the King of Babylon, and ſay, How hath the oppreſ- 
| Or.cawnrs four ceaſed g ? the || golden city þ ceaſed. 

fInto thy Mouth as ir 1s fully exprefled P/al. 50. 16. . g This 
is ſpoken by way of Aſtoniſhment and triumph, who would have 


nejs of gold.. thought this poſſible ? þ As they uſed to call themſelves; which 
ſſcth here in a word of their own Language. 


the ſtaff of the Wicked 


. therefore he expre 


5 The LORD hath broken * 


*pſa.i25:3; and-the (cepter of the rulers 7. | . 
:, 7 This is an anſwer to the foregoing Queſtion. It is God's own 
. Work, and not mans ; and therefore it 15 not ſtrange that it is ac- 


i ho ſmote the people in wrath with f a con- 
inual ſtroke; he that ruled the nations inanger &, is 


firoke mith- perſecuted, and none hindreth 7. 
ew roms” © 1, with Rigor and not with Clemency, as many conquerers have 
done, 1 Neither the Babylonians themfelves, nor their Confederares, 
-- could withſtand the Power of the Medes and Perſians. 
+ The whole earch »» is at reſt and is quiet : they 


break forth into finging. 
91 The inhabitants and Subje 

ed under their cruel bondage. 
8 Yea, the fir-trees rejoyce at thee, end the cedars 


ſaying, Since thou art laid down, no 


Qs of that vaſt Empire, who groan« 


of Lebanon n, 


feller is come up againſt us. 
# Which were felled down for the ſervice of her'Pride and Luxu- feet p. 


ry, but now are ſuffered ro ſtand and flowriſh.Itis a Figure uſual in | 
profane Writers, called Proſopopeia, 

S |] Hell 6 from beneath is moved for thee, to meer 
it ſticreth up the dead for thee, 
of the earth ; 
s of the nations. 

red v: Ie and in innu- 


thee 'at thy com 
+ Heb. lea- evenall the -f [|chiet ones 
- up from cheir thrones q all the kin 
oOr, the grave, as the ſame word is ren 
therable other places; to which he elegantly aſcribeth Senſe and 
Specch, as Poets and Orarours frequently do, p Heb. the he-goats, 
which lead and govern the Flock. q From their ſeveral Graves ; 
which he ſeems to call their thrones by way of Irony or Derifion, 
the onely thrones now left ro them. Thrones both paved and co- 
vered with worms, as is noted ver: 11. inſtead of their former 
. Thrones made of Ivory or Silver, and adorned with Gold and Pre- 


it hath railed ſuffer them to do it. 


- x0 Ail they ſbal ſpeak and fay unto thee, Art thou 
7 become alſo weak as we? ar. thou become like unto us? 


» Who waſt King of Kings, and far ſuperiour to us in Power and 
Authority, that dudſt neither feat God nor reverence Man, that 


5. I9. 
11 Thy pomp is brought.down to + the 

[ | grave {, and 
the noiſe of thy Viols z: the worm is ſpread under Fre 


%, ms n worms cover thee. 

thy Glory is loſt and buried with thee. : All th 

and melodious Inſtruments, which were much uſed in ”— —_ 

3- 5, 7, lo. and were doubtleſs uſed in Belſhazzar's Solemn Feaſt. 

on F. 1. at Which time the city was taken ; to which Poſſibly the 
rophet here alludes. « In ſtead of thoſe rich and ſtately Carpets 

upon which thou didfſt frequently tread. : 

R 12 How art thou fallen from heaven x |] O Lucifer 7 
on of the morning z? how art thou cut down to the 


ground, which did(t weaken che nations ?: 


are ſometimes called gods in Scripture ſo their P laces and 
_— be fitly called their SR » Wiich properly is {wth 
mw eminent Star, which uſhers in the Sun and the Morning ; but 
" ere metaphorically taken for the high and mighty King of By. 
50 And It 1Sa very uſual thing, both in Proptetical ar:d in 
Hog ane Writers, to deſcribe the Princes and Porentates of th- 
: orld under the Ticle of the Sun or ſtars of Heaven. Some un- 
——_ this Place of rhe Devil ; to whom indeed it may be my. 
ically applied : Bur as he is never called by this Name 1n Scrip= 
6g lo it cannot be literally meant of him, but of the King of Ba- 
ye0n, as 18 undeniably evident from the whole Context, which cer- 
tainly ſpeaks of one and the ſame Perſon, and deſcribes him as 
Plainly as words can do it. z The Title of ſon 1s given in Scripture 
_ only to a Perſon or Thing begotten or produced by another 
but alſo 1n general to any thing which is any way related ro another: 
in which ſenſe we read of a ſon of Stripes, Deut. 25. 2. the ſon of & 
night, Jonah 4.10. a ſon of Perdition, Joh. 17. 42. and, which is 
more agreeable to the preſent Caſe, zhe ſons of Arfurus, Job 38; 


Z2. 
13 For thou haſt ſaid in thy heart, T will aſcend into 


b ; Iwill fit alſo upon the mount of the congregation 
c, in the ſides of the North d. 


a I will advance my ſelf above the State of a weak and mortal 
Man. Great Monarchs are eaſily induced, by their own vain Ima. 
g1nations, and the Flattery of their courtiers, to entertain an Opi. 
nion of their own Divinity :. ſo far, that many of them haverecei- 
ved and required divine Worſhip to be paid to them. b Either, 1, 
above all other Kings and Porentates whom he hath ſer up ; or 2. 
above the moſt eminent Perſons of Gods Church and People, who 
are frequently called ftars, as Dar. 8. 10. Rev: 1. 16,20. and 12. tr. 
which tenſe the next words favour. c I will eſtabliſh my Royal 
Throne upon Mount $io, where the Jews meer together to wor- 
ſhip God. @ This is added as a more exact Deſcription of the Place 
of the Temple, which ſtood upon mount Moriah, which was north- 
ward from the Hill of Zion ſtrialy ſo called, and was a part ofthe 
Hill of Zion largely ſo called.See on Pſals 48. 2. 

14 I will aicend above the heights of- the clouds e ; I 
will be like the moſt high f. 

e To wit, into Heaven, as he ſaid ver, 13; f In the uncontrolla« 
bleneſs of my Power, and the univerſal Extent of my Dominion 
over all the earth, 

15 Yet thou ſhalt be brought down to hell, to the 
ſides of the pit. 

16 They that ſee thee,ſhall narrowly look upon thee 
g, and conſider thee, ſaying, is this the man that 
made the earth þ to tremble ; that did ſhake king- 
doms ? 
g As hardly believing their own Eyes,becauſe this Change ſeem- 
ed impoſſible to them. þ All the Nations of the Earth. 


17 That made the world as a wilderneſs,and deſtroys | 0:, 4 
z0t let bs 


priſeners 
* Whereby he ſignifies both his irreſiſtible power, and his conti- oy "_ 


ed. the cities thereof; rbat || opened not the houſe of his 
priſoners * ? 


nued Cruelty. He neither was willing to give them any Liberty 


or eaſe, nor could any force him to do it. ; 
18 All the kings of the nations, eve» all of them 7 lis 


in glory, every one in his own houſe &, 

; Other Kings moſt commonly do, asthe Word 2!! is frequent- 
ly uſed. & Are buried in their own Sepulchres, having ſtately 
Monumeats ereQed to their Honour and Mc<mory. 

I9 But thou art caſt out of thy grave /, like an abo- 
minable branch mz : and as the raiment » of rhoſe that 
are ſlain, thruſt through with a {word,that go down to 
the ſtones of the pit o, as a carcaſe trodden under 


I Or, caft from thy grave or burying-place. Which very probably 
hapned to Belſbazzar, who was flain in the Night, Dame! 5. 39- 
When his People had neither opportunity nor heart to beſtow an 
honourable Interment upon him, and the Conquerours would not 
2” Like an uſeleſs and rotten T'wig ot2 
'Tree, which he that pruneth the Trees cutteth off, and caſteth 

away with abhorrency, and ſuffers to lie rotting more and more 
upon the Ground : Or, like a degenerate Plant of a noble Vine, 
\ which is abominable. » Which, being cut and mangled, and be- 
ſmeared with mire, and defiled with Blood, was caſt away with 
contempt, and abominated asan unclean thing, as it was 1 divers 
reſpe&s, in that Age and State of the Church. 0 Which Perſons 


being ſlain, they, rogether with their Garments, are caſt inro ſoms 
ſuch Bodies are 


Pit. He ſaith, to the Fones of the Pir, either becauſe 

commonly thrown into the next pits, and pits were f.equently 
made by digging Stones out of their Quarries ; OT becaultec _ 
uſually are a great number of Stones in the botcoms of Pits, _ ” 
naturally, or being caſt in thither upon divers occaſions; and when 
dead Bodies are caſt in thither, men uſe to throw an heap of Stones 


f i Carcaſs, Or, this mg4t 
upon them: p Neglefted like fuch a Carcals O ef 


Ch a Ps XN}}- 


x From the height of thy Gloxy and Royal Majeſty, As Kings 


heaven a, I willexalt my throne above the ſtars of God 


Nah: 
TR 


*C] 
VA 


hap. XIV. 


RE 


Ir, ap | 


[| Or, &s 
wot let bs 
prijaners 
lufe ime 
ward, 


"'B VB %, KA. Fon bore Fo rg 


a 
NN 


£2 


w3zq, 


ISA 


''rerally hanpen to Beljhazrors dead Body ,tlrough Military Fury 
and Cont:mpr, or from uther Cauſes. 


2 Thou ſhalt not bs joyned with themq in burial, 
becautſz thou haſt deftroyed thy land, and {lain thy 


People 7: * the ſ:cd of evii doerss ſhal never be renown». 


0 
#JoÞ1®” edjr. 
Naka: q Not in place:for ſo rhe Kings of ſeveral Nations d:d, not uſe 
' 3-25, to be joynedin tie ſam Sepulchre ; but in Condition, riot be 
8:& 109. buried as they are, 7 Fhou haſt exerciſed great Tyranny and 
13 Crueity, nor on'y to thine Enemies, but even to thine own Sub- 


7-6 Cha p. XIV 
1s put Synecdochi-ally for a oreat 6 's ix 
of God executing his « Day ae tem 1 | 
27 For the LORD ef hofts hath * 
who ſhal diſanul ;#? and his hand is ftre | 
who ſhal turn ic back '? | gk 2 
28 In the yea }; K þ fe. J Y D 23:13». 
year that *kittz Ahaz died, was this bur- PC3347. 
den /. Prov:rg.2t | 


. bs py WV Ay 

: This following burdenſome Prophecy concerning the Philiftines, po Eopok pl 
ww O, IN AAR his rime, made 241 Inroad into Judab, nd cook divers .N: 43-13. 

of their Cities and Villages, 2 Chron. 28. 18, | ? Dan: 4:3 ts 


6 
purpoſed, and 2? On 
tiched out, and x,;.q. 


j=&s. Which ir is more than probable Belſhazzar did, and it 45 CEre 
tain that his Parents and Predeceſfors kad done, whoſz Sins con- 
tributed, togerker with his, to bring down Gods jJuagment upon 
that Empire» s Such as Belſhazzar was, being defcended from 
that Nebuchadnezzar who had made fuch horrid Slaughters and Dee 
vaſtations in the World, meerly to gratifie his own unſatiabie 
Luſts, and who had been ſo impious towards God and his Tem» 
ple, and fo bloody towards his Church and People, # Or, ſhall 
not be ren2wied for ever. Although I have long born with thee and 
thy Family, and ſuffered them to ger a great Name in th? 
World, yer I will now put a period to the Renown of thy Family 
and Empire. 


2r Prepare ſlaughter for his children » * for the 
*Fx:20:5- iniquity of their fathers x ; that they do not rile 7, 
Mx:23:35 nor poſleſs che land, nor fill the face of the world with 
Cities 2, | 
4 O ye Nedes and Perſians, cut off all the Branches of the Royal 
Family of Babylon. x In the Guilt whereof the Children arejuſtiy 
involved, partiy becauſe of that Community of Nature and Inte- 
reſt which is berween Parents and Chitdren, which makes them 
for the moſt part bear a ſhare with them, as in their Rewards and 
Advantages, fo alſo in their Puniſhments 2nd Miſeries ; and part- 
Iy, becauſe they juſtified their Sins by their Impenitency,and Imi- 
tation of their wicked Example. y 7. e. Not recover their for- 
me: Splendour and Powei. z Ere&ed by them, either as Inſtru- 
ments of Tyranny, to keep the Countrey round about them in Sla» 
very, oras Monuments of their Power and Riches, as Babylon was, 
Dan: 4: 30. 


22 For I will riſe up againſt them, faith the 
LORD of hoſts, and cut off from Babylon the name 
and remnant «, and ſon, and nephew, faith the 
LORD. 


# The Remembrance of thoſe that are dead, and the Perſons of 
thoſe who yet ſurvive, 


23 * I will alſo make it a poſſeſſion for the 
*Ch:341t bittern b, and pools of waterc ?: and TI will ſweep 
dephs2.14 gr” with the beſome of deſtruction, faith the LORD 
of hoſts. 


b A great WatereFowl, which thruſting its Bill into ſome bro- 
ken Reed, or hollow thing, makes a great noiſe; which aiſo de- 
lights in ſolitary places, as alſo in Wateriſh Grounds, ſuch as 
thoſe were about Babylon, Others render the Word Heage-kog, or 
Porcupine : Butthis being nor conſiderable in it ſelf, nor at all ne- 
ceſſary for the clearing of the Text. I ſhal not trouble the Englſh 
Reader with any Diſcourſe about it : And the Learned may con- 
ſult my LatinSynopſis. c The Ground about Babylon was of it ſelf 
very moiſt and wateriſh, becauſe of the grear River Euphrates run- 
ning by it, which was kept from overflowing the Country with 
Charge and Labour ; which being negletted, as it muſt needs be 
when the City was deſtroyedand diſpeopled,it was eaſily turned in- 
to Pools of Water. 


24 The LORD ofhoſts hath ſworn,faying, Surely 


as K have thought, ſo ſhal ir come to paſs;and as I have 
purpoſed,ſo ſhal it ſtand #, 
4 I will not repent of this Threatning, as I did of that againſt 
Nineveh, Jonah 3. 4, 10. And this ſolemn Oath is added to con- 
firm the Faith of Gods People, becauſe otherwiſe the Deſtruftion 
of this vaſt and mighty Empire might ſeem incredible, Burt 1t is 
to be diligently obſerved, that this Verſe doth not only concern 
this preſent Prophecy of Babylens Deſtru&tion by the Medes and Pere 
fans, but is alſo to be extended unto the foregoing Prophecy con» 
cerning the overthrow of Sennacherib and the Aſſrian Hoſt, ch. 10. 
aS appears by the next Verſe, where the ſum of that Prophecy is re- 
peared. Nor is this any Digreſſion,but very pertinent to the main 
Deſign and Buſineſs ok this Chapter ; inaſmuch as the Overthrow 
of that great Aſjrian Hoſt, and of the Deliverance of Gods People 
at that time, was a Pledge of the certain Accompliſhment of that 
future DeſtruQion of the City and Empire of Babyler, and of their 
Deliverance out of that Captivity» 


Nt. 25 * That Twill break the Aſſyrian e in my land f,, 
vi anduponmy mountains g tread him under feet: then 
ſhal his yoke depart from off them, and his burden 
depart from off their ſhoulders bh. 
e Sennacher:b, and his Aſſyrian Army. F In Judes, which 1s my 
Land in a peculiar manner, being choſen by me, and confſecra- 
ted to my Uſe andService, andinhabited by my People, g In 
ey Mountainous Country, for. ſuch Judea was, Deur: 8: 9. £/al, 
x33- 10. Etek: 6: 2,3. and 39. 2 4+ 17-- efpectally about Jeru- 
ſalem, Bſal: 125: 2. upon: ſome of which probably his Army was 
lodged. b Which Words are repeated from [ſs 10. 27. wherethey 
are explained. 


26 This is the purpoſe rhat is purpoſed, upon the 
»Whole earth 5 . and this is the hand & that zs ſtretched 
out upon all the nations, 


; Upoa this vaſt Empire, now in the hands of the 4ſrians,and 
Kortly to come into the kands of the Babylonignr, The while varth 


; Cong 2,35. - 
29 Rejoyce not thou whole Paleſtina, becauſe the ; Longs | 
rod of #: him that ſmote thee is broken : for out of the 16120. 
ſerpents rootſhal come forth a |] cockatrice,and his fruit || Or,04e 
ihal be a fiery flying ſerpent ». I 

m Noſt underſtand this of Uzziah, who did then much miſchief 
2 Chron 26.-6. Buthe was dead Thirry two years before this time, 
and therefore their Joy for hisDeath was long ſince paſt, Others un= 
derſtand it of 454az; Buthe was io far from ſmiting .rhem, that 
he was ſmitten by them, as was noted on. v. .27\ © Ic ſeems better 
to underſtnd it more generally, of the Royal Race, or foregoing 
Kings of Judsh, who had been a terrible Scourge to them, whole 
Rod might be ſaid. to be broken, becauſe that Srepter was come into 
the hands of florhful and degenerate Princes, ſuch as 4haz was, wins 
hid been lately broken by the P:ibifiiues, and who probably was 
alive when this Prophecy was d-livered, beciuſe he kere ſpeaks of 
Hezekiah not as a preſent but as a future king. Ir is ſaid indeed, that 
Fhis eurden was inthe year that Alex died. But ſo it might be, though 
1t was before his Death, »n From the Root and Race of D.rvid ſhall 


come Hezek:#+h, who, like a Serpenc thal ting thez todcath, is he 
did, 2 Kings 18, 8. 


3-Andrhe firſt horn of the poor s ſhal fed p,and the . 
needy ſhal lie down in ſafety : and 1 wiil kill thy root | 
q with famine,and heſhal flay thy remnanc. 

0 The People ofthe Jews, who are brought to extreme pover- * 
ty by the Cruelty, and the Malice of oth:r Enemies. The Firſt- 
born were the,chief of all the Children. Hence. the Title of  firſt= 
born 1s given to Perſons or Things which are moſt eminent in their 
kinds, asto the People of Iſrael, Exod; 4: 22: to David, Plal:89:27, 
to a grievous Death, Job 18.13. and hereto perfons eminently poer. 
?Shal have plenty of Proviſions, in ſpight of all thine Attempts 5» 
gainfſt them. - 4 I will utterly deftioy thee both Root and Branch, 
ſo that there ſhal notbe a Remnant of thy People reſerved, as it 


follows.. It is a Metaphor from a Tree, which for want of Nou- 
riſhment is dried up by the Roots. - 


31 How], O gate r, cry, Ocity 5s, thou whole Par 
leſtina ar: diflolved *for there ſhal come from the north Or. he 


# a ſmoke x, and {none 5þ9/ be alone in his | appointed £7 ” 
1 alone. 
UMECS Yo 


. . Or, aſſets 
r The gate is put either, 1. Metaphorically, for the Peo ple pal- plies. 
ſing through the Gates, or for the Magiſtrates and others who uſed 
to meet in the Gare for Judgment, or upon other Occaſions, or, 
2. Synecdochically, for the City, as gates are commoniy pur, as 
Jer: 22. 19. and as it is explained in the next Words. 5 City is 
here pat collectively for their Cities,of which ſee 1 Sam, 6.19.t Lieb. 
melted, Which may be underſtood cither, 1. of the fainting of their 
Spirits and Courage, as Exod, 15. 15. Joſh. 2. 9, 24, &c. cr, 2. 
of ths Diſſolution of their State. «Either, 1. frem Judea ; which 
lay Northward from ſome pair of the Philifines Land. Burt in truth 
Jades lay more Eaft th:n North from Paleſtine,and therefore the Phji= 
liftines are ſaid to be on #he weFf, 1/a: 11: 14. and never, fo farasl 
remember, on the North : Or, 2. from Chaldea, as may be gas 


\ deſigns that Countrey, as Jer. 1. 14, i5- and 6. 1, 22, Oc. 2. from 
4 Fer, 47. where Deſtruftion is threatned to the Phils#jnes form the 


thered, 1, from the Scripture uſe of this Phraſe, which general'y 


North, wv; 2« which all underſtand of the Chaldeans under Nebuchads 
nezzar. And whereas it is ſp:ciouſfly objeQed, That this ſuirs not 
wirh the next Verſe,which ſpeaks of Zions ſafety at the time of this 
Deſtruf&ion of the 2hilitines, whereas Ziow and the Land and Pece 
ple of Judah were deſtroyed together with the Philiſtines by Nebue 
chadnezzar; 1 humbly conceive it may be anſwered, That that Verſe 
is added to expreſs the far differing Condition of Govs People, and 
of the Philiftines 1n the Events of that Babylonian War; and that 
whereas thePhil;Fines ſhould be irrecoverably and eternally deſtroy 
ed thereby, and no remnant of them ſhould be left, as was ſaid w. 
30. Gods Pcople, though they ſhould be ſorely ſcourged, and care 
ried into Captivity, yer they ſhould be ſtrangely preſerved, and 
after ſome years delivered, and reſtored to their own Laid & Tem- 

ple ; whereby it would appear, that Zion ſtood upon a ſure Founs 

dation, and, albeit it was grievouſly ſhaken, yer it could nor bg 

utterly and finally overthrown. x A grievous Judgment & Cala- 

mity, which is off fignificed by /moak, as Ger: 15. 17. Deu, 29. 20. 

Feel. 2. 39. either becauſe ſmoke is generally accompanied with 

Fire, oc becauſe it cauſeth a great Darkneſs in the Air; for AMi- 

Qions are frequently deſcribed under the namesof fire and darkueſ7 

y When Gods appointed time ſhall come for the execution of this/ 
Judgment, nor on? perſon of all chat numerous Army, whichis 

ſignified by the ſmoke laſt mentioned, ſhal retire and detert his Co- 

lJours, or lag behind the reſt; But they ſhall march with greaz 

unznimity 2nd alacrity, and none of them fhal withdraw his 

hand till the Work be finiſhed, till the Philifines be utterly des 

ſtroyed» | 


32 What ſhall oze then anſwer the meſſengers «pg.g, 
of the nation Z ? That * the LORD hath founded y, 5. and 
Zion, and* the poor of his people ſhall || eruſt in Lara ; 
it 4- eph:32 
z What ſhal 2 Jew ſay to the people of other Nations, who SD 
ſhal either be ſent or come to enquire concerning the State of - 
Zin in that diy, when not on'y the Ph:fines, but even the Jews 
themſelves, ſhallfall by the hands of one and rhe ſame Enemy ? 
Nation is put colle&ively for Nations, as gate and city for garerand 
5R 636343 


11. 

|] Or, be- 
take theme 
ſelves unt) 
it, 


25:8, 


5. & 48. 
37,38. 


y Chap. XV. | : 
citiecin the foregoing Verſe; « They ſhal give them this anſwer, 
ſent be in a very diſtreſſed and deplorable 
vet ſhe ſtandsup- 


firm Foundation, and God who firſt founded her, will again 
reſtore an be. deſpiſed People ſhal reſort to 


* Ezek: 


Amos2:r.d; becauſe in the nightKir e of Moab is laid waſte, 
LOr,cut of: and brought to ſilence: 


*Jer:47: and over Medeba 3, 


Ezek: 7:18. 


H b: _ 
= their ſtreets », every one ſhal howl F weeping abun- 


zo weeping dantly. 

- aA I This was another praftice of Mourners!; wm Which were made 

weeping flat, Deur: 22: 8. to which Men uſed to go up, either to walk, or 

* tocty to Godin Heaven or to Men for Help. » Publickly,withour 
ſhame ; whereas in ordinary Sorrows men are wont to ſeek ſecret 
Places for their Mourning. 

4 And Heſhbon (bal cry, and Elealeh » : their voice 
ſhal be heard ever unto Jahaz p : therefore the ar- 
med ſouldiers q of Moab (hal cry out, his life ſhal be 
grievous unto himr. 

o Two other MoabitiſhCities ; of which ſee Numb: 21; 25, 26, 
and 32. 3, 37- Þ Another Ciry in the utmoſt borders of Moat 
Numb: 21: 23. Called alſo Jahazah, Jof: 21. 36. q Who ſhould be 
and uſe to be the moſt couragious. r The Moabites ſhal generally 
long for death, to fre? themſelves from thoſe dreadful Calamities 

' which hey perceive unayoidably coming upon them. 

[[Or,to the : Fe 

| dordars 5 My heart ſhal cry out for Moab s, || his fugitives 
thereof, al flee unto Zoar «, an v heifer of three years old « : 
even!'? Fr by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping ſha] 
£ear,as an . p ” 4h F H . 
heifer, they go 1tup 7 for inthe way of Horonaim, they {hal 
+ Jer:48. raiſe up a cry y of # deſtruction 2. 
FA s Their Deftru&ion approaching is ſo dreadful, that although 
"R wo * they are 2moſt vile Nation, and by their implacable Enmity a» 
_—_— gainſt God and his People do abundantly deſerve it, yer the reſpe& 


fv 


wy 


That although Z:0n at pre 
condition, and ſeems to be forſaken by her God, 


reſtore and eſtabliſh her, and his poor 
her, asto a ſtrong and ſure Refuge. 


CHAP. XV. 
The Deſtrufion of Moab, 1——9. 
* 54 He burden of Moab 4: Becauſe in the night 5 Ar 
c of Moab is laid waſte, and || brought to ſilence 


# A Prophecy of the DeſtruQtion of the Moabiter, the inveterate 
and implacable Enemies of the Jews, begun by the 4ſhrian,and fi- 
niſhed by the 8abylorian Emperours, 6 Or, in 8 night, ſuddenly 
and unexpeRedly ; for Men ſleep ſecurely in the Night,and there- 
fore the Evils which then overtake them,are moſt terrible tothem. 
© The Chief City of Moab, Numb: 21. 28. Devt. 2- 9, d Or rather 
& cut off, as the word off ſignifies, as Jer. 47- 5. Hoſ. 10: 9, 15.and 
elſewhere, e Another eminent City of Mob, called more largely 
and fully Kr-heres, and Kir-hareſbeth, Iſa. 16: 7, 11» Jer. 48.31, 
3G! 


2 He is gone up to Bajith f, and to Dibon g, the 
high places, to weep hz Moab ſhal howl over Nebo, 
on all their heads fra be baldneſs, 


andevery beard cut off &. 


Place ſo called from ſome eminient Houſe or Temple of their Idols 
which was in it. It is called more fully Beth-basl=meon, that 15, The 
Houſe of Baal's habitation, Joſ. 13. 17+ g Another City of Moab, as 
is manifeſt from Jer. 48: 18, 22- where alſo was their other eMi- 
nent High-places. To theſe two places they uſed to reſort in caſe 
of great Difficulties and Troubles, h To offer their Svpplications 
with Tears to their Idols for help« # Two conſiderable Cities, ans» 
Cienctly belonging to the Moabires, from whom they were taken by 
the Amorites, and from them by the 7/raelires, and poſſeſſed by the 
Reubenites; Numb. 21; 30. and 32: 2, 38. but were, as it ſeems, 
recovered by the Moabiter, in whoſe hands they now were, as is e- 
vident, for Nebo, Jer. 48: \1, 22. and for Medebs, from this Texts 
& The Hair of their Heads and Beards(which was their Ornament ) 
was ſhaved, as was uſual in great Mournings, as hath been oft 
obſerved upon divers preceding Texts. See on Levis: 19. 27, 28. 


and 21, 5. 


3 In their ſtreets they ſhal gird themſelves with 
ſackcloth! : on the tops of their houſes w, and in 


which Ihave to Humane Nature fills me with Horrour at the very 
thoughts ofit. Compare Iſa. 86. 11. t Or, Þis bars, as others ren- 
derit, and as this Word is frequently taken, as Exod; 26, 26, 27, 
Pal: 107.46, Oc: whereby we may underſtand their valiant Men 
or their Princes and Rulers, who as they are called rhe ſhields of the 
earth, Pſal: 47: 9. becauſe, like Shields, rhey do, or ſhould de« 
fend their People ; ſo for the ſame reaſon they may be called Bars, 
becauſe Bars are the ſtrength of the Gates of Cities or Caſtles, and 
therefore are mentioned as ſuch, Pſal. 147: 13. Prov, 18. 19. Jer, 
5. 30. w Or, ſhal cry unto Zoor; either ſhal cry as they go along 
the way, eventill they come to Zoar 3 or ſhal cry, ſoas they may 
be heard to Zoay : which may exfily be underſtood out of the 
foregoing Verſe. Zoar was a Town bordering upon Meab;of which 
ſee Gen: 19. 20, 21, 22. and Deut, 34, 3+ x Which ſome under. 
Rand of the City of Zeer,ſo called for her Strength and Wantonneſs. 
But ſuch aDeſcription of Zear ſeems very improper and impertinenc 
in this place. The words therefore arc to be tranſlated here, as 
they are by our Tranſlators, Jer. 48. 24. as #n heifer of three years 
old '; and ſs thy belong to their Cry, and ſignifie that it is ſtrong 
and loud, likethat of ſuch an Heifer. y He ſignifies, that the Cry 
ſhould be univerſal, in all places where they come, and reaching 


Ff Which ſignifies an houſe. It is ſuppoſed to be the Name of a } 


4 Ch; 


6 For the watersa of Nimrim ſhal be + deſolate ; {o; 


no green thing 6. 


_ # Either, 1: properly, they fhal be dried ; 
tively, the WateSiſh Mia =. Pg 
Ut: 1. Ia. 32. 20. 
inhabited and cultivated 
dry and barren Grounds, ſhal be deſolate, and without 
6 By the juſt and ſpecial Judgment of God; 


: Th 
conſpire together to deſtroy them. we ame 


7 Therefore theabundance they have gotten, and 
that which they have laid up, ſhil the 7 
[| brook of the willows d. " on —_ 


c To wit, their Enemies ; which js plai Impli 
, es; plainly implied. 4 Unto 
mv ena River having great numbers of Willows growing 
os; yy which they might convey them to ſome eminent and 
ong City built upon the ſame River. Poſſibly he means ſome ſuch 
_ which ran into Euphrazes, and ſo gave them opportunity of 
__s their Spoils by Water into Babylon. Though the Words 
= Ang rendred, 7nto the valley of the Arabians ; whither the Spoils 
ws gh - frſt carried, in order to their Tranſportation into Aſſria 
omg <ag s i of Rl lay — Moab Nan thoſe Coun« 

rmer Tranſlation ſeems better | 

Words are ſo rendred, Levit. 23: 40, op mana pomabat 


8 For the cryis gone round about the borders of Mo 
ab : the howling chereof unto Eglaim, and the howl- 
ing thereof unto Beer.elim. | 
e Their Cry fills all the parts of the Country. 


Fa 9 For the waters of Dimon fſhal be full of blood: 

orT will bring + moreg upon Dimon, lions upon him 

ee elcapethof Moab h, and upon the remnant of the 
nd. 


, F This ſeems to be the ſame place with Dibon mentioned v. 2» 
gore Called Dimon for the great bloodſhed init, as it here follows 3 
_ Lo of a Letter being not unuſual in proper Names, as in 
oy ach for Beroaach, 1ſa. 39.1. g Either, 1. more than upon of 
ther parts of the Country, that being one of their High: places, wv. 
. or rather, 2. more than hath been aJready mentioned. þ Gad 
alſend Lionstofind out thoſe thateſcapethe F ury of Men, 


CHAP. XVL 


The Moabites exkorted to entertain kindly the baniſhed Jews : 1=——=;} They 
are threatned for their pride and arrogance, 6——8. ths Prophet bes 
watleth them, g9—11. their judgment, 12 —— 14s 


QEnd ye thelamb [||ro the ruler of the land «, from 


Chapter » and here turneth his Speech to them, and gives them 
Countel what to do, to prevent, if poſſible, the threatned Deſolas 
tion. In theſe firſt Words he adviſeth them to the Praftice either, 
1 of Juſtice : Pay that Tribute of Lambs and Goats which you obe 
lzged your ſelves to pay unto David, and to his Poſterity, 2 Sam: 
s: 2. and pay it notunto Ijrael, as you have done, 2 Kings 3: 4. bu 
unto the King of Jadah, who is the rightful Heir of Dav:d,andKing 
ofthe Land : Or, 2: of Piety : Send @ Lamb, for a Sacrifice unto 
zod, who is the Ruler of the Land ; to wit, of your Land no leſs 
than of ours. or of #he earth, as the Word is commonly rendred,who 
1S *he God of the whole carth, and he is called 1/s: 54: 5.-the God of all 
the kingdoms of the earth, Iſa: 37: 16. Make your Peace with Ged, by 
Sacritice, for all your Injuriesdone to him, and to his People. Theſe 
Words may be underſtood Ironically, and the Deſign of them may 
be tO repreſent their miſerable and deſperate Condition ; as if ke 
had ſaid, You have tried all other ways, and ſought to your Igols, 
<: 15: 2. andall in vain ; now ſeek to the God of 1/rael,who alone 
can help you Bur als! he is highly incenſed againſt you, and 
coming to deſtroy you Bur this ſeems rather to be a ſerious Ad. 
vice, by comparing theſe Words with v:3, 4. 65 Aneminent City 
of Moab, ſeated upon a Rock, which is here named, either becauſe 
the King and his Court at this time reſided there, or for ſome 
other Reaſonthen evident,though now unknown. c To the Wil- 
derneſs of Moab, of which we read Numb, 21e 11. Dent: 2: 8 and fo 
onward to Zion, as it follows. Or, this may be added as a Deſcrip- 
tion of the place called Sela. Hence ſome render the Words,Sels of 
the ilkracs - and others, Sela which lieth or looketh towards rhe 
wilderneſs. And this Limitation might be the more neceſſary, to di- 
ſtinguiſh this from other Places of Moab called by the ſame name, 
which, ſignifying « rock, might be common to ſeveral places it 
that Rocky Country. 4 Unto the Temple upon Meunt Z7on, 


2 For e it ſhal be that as a wandring bird |] caſt out 


fords of Arnon g. 
e Or, etherwiſe, as this Particle is ſometimes uſed; if you do not 
follow my advice, f Which knows not whither to go, nor whatta 
do. g Which was the Border of the Land of Moab, where they 
were, cither being carried that way into Captivity, or rather with 
deſign to flee out of their own | 


3 + Take counſel þ, 
thy ſhadow as the night & in the midſt of noon» 


day, hide the out=caſts/, bewray not him that wan- 
dreth m. 


from one ſide of the Country to another. Of Lubith, ſee Fer. 48. 
z Such a Cry as Men ſend forth when they are juſt falliog 


4, 5. 
into the Pit of DeſtruQtion, 


prevent your utter Ruiace i Do thoſe thing 


h Conſider ſeriouſly among your ſelves what courſe to take to 
s which are juſt _ 
rig, 


1 « 


of the neftf, ſo the daughters of Moab lſhai be at che [9r,cu} 


AVI 


| iHTzb. dx 


the hay is withered away, the graſs faileth, there ig/9a:ions, 


2. figura® 
Is, as waters ſeem to be taken, E:clef. 
Theſe being very fruitful, are commonly moſt 
; but now they alſo, and much morethe 
Inhabitant. 


ſ Or,valt 
of the Ara. 


bian, 


THeb: ade 


ditions, 


[| F Sela 6 to the wilderneſs c,unto the mount of the rug ” 


daughter of Zion 4: [Or,Perrs, 
s The Prophet continues his Prophecy againſt Moab, in this? Heb. 


Land, although they knew not whi» = 
ther, as the foregoing Metaphor fheweth. 


execute judgmenti, make THeb:vr/# 


er: 
tEp 


eb:brinf 


| w!enger 


- readers 


Chap: XVI- ISA 


right, asto all men, fo particularly tro my People, to whom you 
have bzen moſt unr:ghteous and unmerciful. & Or, as the ſhadow | 
of thenizht, large and dark, as the Shadow of the Earth 1s 1n the 
Night-jeaton, The meaning is, Conceal and prote&t my People in 
the time of their Diſtreſs and Danger, as this Metaphor is explain» 
ed in thereſt of this, and in the following Verſe, / Mine our-ca(tr, as 
it follows wv. 4. thoſe of my People whichare driven out of their 


Land. » Unto their Enemies, as thou haſt treacherouſly dene 1n 
tormer times. 


4 Let mine out-caſts » dwell with thee, Moab, be 
thou a covert to them from the face of the ſpoiler : 
for the + executioner is at an end 0, the ſpoiler 


ceaſeth, + the oppreflours are conſumed out of the 
rand, 


F Heb; 
+ Heb. the 


a0wn. 


n Whom though I have forſsken, and ſorely chaſtened, yet I 
do, and ſtill wilj, own for my People; and Ido obſerve,and will 
requite, both the Kindneſſes and the Injuries done to them. o Sha 
ſbortly be deſtroyed, and my people ſhal c're long bereſtored,and 
then thoa wilt not loſe the Fruit of thy Kindneſs. The preſent 
Tenſe is put for the Future, as it is uſually in Prophecies. 


Ra 5 And in mercy þ * ſhal the throne 4 be [| eſtabliſh- 
Mc:4:7. ed, and he ſhal fit upon it intruth s, in thetabernacle 


Luk-1.33- r of David,judging and ſeeking judgments, andhaſting 
(O27 righteouſneſs x. 
tered, 

p By my mercy. Though they have ſinned, and Iam now pus+ 
nilhing their Sins, yet I will deliver them for my own - Mecctes 
ſake, 4 The Kingdom of Judah, Therefore for thine own fake 
ſhew them Kindnels in this day of their diſtreſs ; for they wiil be 
capable of requiting thee. r Their King, which is eaſily and neceſ= 
{arily underſtood. 5s Which may reſpe& cither 1. the Manner of 
his Government, exerciſing Truth and Juſtice: But that is mere 
plainly and fully expreſſed in the laſt part of the Verſe» Or, 2. 
the Continuance of ir, in truth, 7. e. firmly and conſt:ntly; for 
3-4th is oft put for the ſtability and certainty of a thing, as 2 Chron: 
32e 1. Prov: 11. 18. Ija: 61,8, And this makes the Argument 
more conſiderable to the preſent purpoſe. TheKingdom thal not only 
be reſtored, but firmly ſetrled : Therefore it is your Intereſt, O 
Moatites to be kind to my Peop'-. rt In the Houſe, or Palace,which 
1s called a tent, or tabernacle, cither becauſe Houſes are frequent'y 
ſo called in Scripture, as 2 Sam: 20 1. I Kings $: 66. and 12: 16+ 
F with reſpe&unto the unſettledneſs of Davids Houſe, which now 
indeed was more like a Tabernacle than a ſtrony Palace ; and yet 
notwithſtanding its preſent [mbecillicy' ſhould be firmly eſtablith- 

ed «Searching out the Truth of Cauſes and Things with care and 
diligence, which is the Duty ef a Judge. x Neither denying, nor 
yet delaying Juſtice. And theſe gooa Qualifications tzem to be 
here men:10nea, partly to.teach the Rulers of M.ab their Duty to- 

wards their own People,and the 1raelizes which were among them ; 
and partly as a Reaſon and Evidence of that Stability which he had 
promiled to the Houſe of Davia- 


Jer:48.29 


7cph.zzx0 6 We have heard of the * pride of Moab y, ( heis 


very proud ) even of his haughtineſs,and his pride, and 
his wrath : but his lies ſhal not be ſo z. 


y The Prophet, having ſpoken to the Moabitezss and acquamated 
them with their Duty and Intereſt, now he turneth his Speech to 
God's People, whom he armeth and comforteth againſt their ap- 
proaciing Miſery. Tie ſcope and ſenſe of the Prophet in this 
Verſe Isthis, 1do not expe& that my Counſels will have any good 
e&Me& upon Moab, they will ſtill carry themſelves infolently and 
outragiouſly towards you and they promiſe themſelves that they 
{hal now efte& what they bave long deſired, even fatisfie their Ma- 
lice in your total and final Deſtruftion ; but they ſhal be diſappoin- 
red of their Hopes. Ir is well known to me, and you,and all their 
Neighbours, that they are a havghty and furious People, and there- 
fore they will ſcorn my Advice, and doubr not to ſtand upon their 
own Legs: z His vain Imaginations, ard falſe and crafty Counſels 
{hal not take effe&, Bur the Words are and may be otherwiſe ren- 
dred. Buthis flrength ( as this Word is” rendred Job -8. 13. Heb. 
bais, which are the ſtrength of Gares or Doors ) is not ſo, not equal 
to his Pride or Fury, Or thus exa@ly according” to the Words 
and Order of the Hebrew Text, not ſo lier, A conciſe Speech, ſuch 
as are very common in this and other Prophets And theſe Words 
may_poſſibly be brought inas the Words of the Moab:ires, making 
this fhort Reply to the Prophets Counſels and Threatnings, dirett- 
ed to them in rhe foregoing Verſes of this Chapter : Ir is not or 
ſthal nor be 1o zs thov i3yſt ; thy Words are but Lies, we fear 


not thy Threats againſt us: But this I propoſe with ſubmiſſie 
ON, 


. 7 Therefore ſhal Moab * how] for Moab a, every 
Jeng: one ſhal howl: for the foundations of Kirhareſeth b 
Or, mz. {hal ye || mourn c, ſurely they are ſtricken 4. 

itt, . , 

a For it ſelf; theNoun put for the Pronoun, as is uſual in 
the Hebrew Texr. Or, ro Moab, One Meoabit? ſhal howl or la- 
ment to or for another. 6b An ancient and eminent City of Moab, 
called Kir, chap, 13: r. and Kir-hareſh, v. 11. which ſignifies, 
The city of th? ſun; probably becauſe there was the Temple of 
the Sun: Which City was preſerved when their other Cities were 
ruined, 2 Kings 3: 25. ard therefore the DeſtruQion of it was 
more lamented. c Or, ye ſha! meditate or talk, as this Word 
commonly fignifies, Your Thoughts and Diſcourſes will run 


much upon the Ruine of ſuch a City. 4 Or, broken, overthrown 
or deſtroyed, 


YEN Chap. XVV 


s For the fietds of Heſhbon languiſh e, and the vine 
of Sibmah, the lords of the beathen f have broken 


[ 


( 
l 
| 


þ 


even unto Jazer þ, they wandred through the wilderneſs|!Or,p!u6& 


z, her branches & are || ſtretched out 7, they are gone #4 *? 
over theſea m. | 


e Either for want cfRain, as chap. 15: 6. or becauſe there are 
no men Jefc torill and manure them. f The Afjrians or Chaldeans, 
the great Rulers ofthe Eaſtern Nations. g The choiceſt Vines, 
Under which one Paticular he ſeems ro underſtand nor only all 


1 


other Fruits and Goods, buteven their Perſons and choiceſt Peo- 
ple. + Either, 1. the Lords of rhe Heathen are come as far asJa-+ 
'2er, which 1s the utmoſt Border of Moab ; or 2. the People of Moab 
are going 1nto Captivity,and part of them are already gone as far 
as Jazer. Some underſtaad this and the following Claules of the 
' Vines, which are here commended.to aggravate the Leſs and Ruine 
ofthem, and render the Words, which r:aced even unto Jazer,which 
Vineyards were planted for manymiles together;even as far asJazers 
z Others of the Meabites fled away for theirLives,& wardred hither 
and thither in the Wilderneſs of Moab ; of which fee Numb: 21; 11. 
Deut: 2: 8, k i.e, Her People, cailed pints before. 1 Or,are fpread 
abroad, as this word fignifies Numb: 11: 32. Judges i'5: g- i Sam 30. 
16. are driven from their own Homes, and diiperſed into ſeveral 
| Countries. m Over the Dead Sea, which was the Border of Moab, 


LOIN were forced to flze out of their own Country to fave their 
| LVES, 


9 Therefore T will bewail with the weeping of 
Jazer, the vine of Sibmah »: T will water thee with 


my tears, O Heſhbog, and Elealeh : for | the ſhou 
ting for thy 


1EN 0, 


Alarm is 


ſummer fruics, and for thy harveſt isfal- &c. 


So the ſenſe 1s, I will bewail $:bmah as T did bewail Jazer,which 
t-ey ſay, was deſtroyed before Sibmah ; Or, the weeping of Jazer 
T 1gat be a Proverbial Expreſſion ; for itis uſed alſo Jer. 48:32: like 
that of the mourning of Hadadrimmon, Zech: 12; 11. though the Rea- 
ſon of it be now unknown, as it is in manyother Proverbs. The 
Words are by others rendred, and that more agreeable to the Hes 
brew Texts, 1 will bewail with weeping ( which is an uſual Hebraiſm for 
I will bitrerly bewail ) Jazer, and ( which Particle is oft unfer- 
tood ) the wine of Sibmah. Bat our Tranſlation ſeems to be juſtix 
fied by the parallel place, Jer. 48. 32+ where it is, Owvine 
of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazzy; 
o Thoſe joyful Shouts and Acclamations which were cuſtomary in 
the time of Harveſt and Vintage, Iſa: 9: 3. fer 25; 30. ſhal ceaſe, 
becauſe thy Land ſhal be waſted, and thy People deſtroyed. Or, as 
it isin the Margin, the ſhout or alarm ts falles upon thy ſummeref/ uit; 
and thy Harve#, inſtead of the joyful ſhout which was then uſed, to 
which he here alludes, Which ſeems to be the truer Tranſlation 

not only becauſe this Hebrew Word is elſewhere uſed concerning 
the ſhout of an Enemy falling upon a People,as Jer: 25: 3o. and 51. 
14: buteſpecially by conſidering the parallel Place, Jer, 48: 32, 
where, for the ſhout 1s fallen, it is, the ſpoiler is fallen upen, 8&c. Tf ie 
be objefted, That the next Verſe ſpeaks of the cealing of their Joye 
ful Shouts, and that this Hebrew Word is there uſed for vintage-ſhout= 
ing, Which at firſt made me incline to the former Interpretation: 
thar ſeems to be fully anſwered from Jer: 48: 33: which ſpeaks 
likewiſe of the ceaſing of their Joy and joyful Shouts, but withal 
idds, in the cloſe ofthe Verſe, what may end this Controver = 
fie, their ſhouting ſhal be no ſhouting ; they ſhal indeed have 2 
Shouting, bur not ſuch an bne as they uſed ro have, a joyful 


Shouting oftheir own People, but an inſulting Shout of SS 
Enemies. 


10 And * gladnefsis taken away, and joy © "Jer48, 
the plenciful field,and in the hm thee Gut be - = 
ſinging, neither {hal there bs ſhouting : the treaders Pp 
hal tread out no wine in 7heir prefles;T have made their 
vintage-thouting to ceaſe, 


? Inthoſe times they uſed to ſqueeze out the Juyce of theis 


Grapes by treading them with their Feet, in Veſſels appoji 
that uſe, Judges 9: 27. Neb; 13: 15. ppointed for 


11 Wherefore my howels ſhal ſound 9g like an 


_ for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirha- 
rein. 

q Through compaſſion to them : of which ſee on 7s. 1c: «. 
exceſhive Griefs the Bowels are ſometimes rolled _ - 
gether, ſfoas to make an audible noiſe. Hereby he ſignifies the 


grearneſs of their approaching Calamirie, which being ſy grievous 
co him, nuſt needs be incolcravle ro them. 


12 Andit ſhal come to pals, when it is ſeen that 
Moab is weary * on the high place », that he ſhal *c i5;2 


x_—_ to his Sanctuary /to pray, but he lhal not Pre 
Val fo 


r When it ſhal appear to them and others, that all their other 
Devotions are vain and ineffe&tnal. / To the Temple of his great 
god Chemoſb, Numb: 21: 29. 1 Kings 11.7. Jer, 48, 46. from whom 


he ſhal ſeek and expett Succour, 7t His god ean ncither hear nar 
hclp him. 


13 This zs the word that the LORD hath ſpoken 
concerning Moab Þ ſince that time «. +Heb ont 
4 Since the beginning of God's Revelation to me concerning zþen, that 


Moab, and hitherto, Which Expoſition ſeems to be confirmed by je. beret 
the following Words, But now. : , ” ' pi 


TR 2 


74 But 


[Or, th | 


- fallen upon | 


f 
' 
' 


1 
. KB 
down the principal plants g thereof, they : are - come 1 
[1 
\ 


. 
\ 
| 
[1 n 
i 
b il 
| 
ht 
| Wl 
h 
lis 
| 
q 
| 


1 


"Chap. 


many. 


ha. 


* Jer:49. 
23 


Amos 1.3 


Zech:9;1 


*Ch:21:16 jin three years y, *asthe ygars of an hire 


4 Or, #ot 5 


XVII. | FS £4 
14 But now the LORD hath ſpoken x, ſaying, With- 


ling z,and the 


glory of Moab 4 ſhal be contemned 5, with all that 
reat multitude c; andthe remnant fpal be very {mall 


and|| teeble d. 


x Hath made this further diſcovery of his Mind to me. y To 
be compured either, 1. from the time of Jeraſalems Deſtruction 
by Nebuchadnezzar, who did, as is confeſſed by all, invade tie 
Moabites at or about that time, and execute the Judgment firſt fore- 
rold by this Propher, and afterwards by Jeremy, c, 43. or rather, 
2. from the time of the Delivery of this Prophecy. Which being 
uncertain, leaves us the greater Latitude for the determination of 
Men this was fulfilled. Bur this is certain, from 


the preciſe time w! | 
Iiſa.1.+.that this Prophecy muſt be delivered, at fart neſt, before the 
end of Hezekiabs Reign, And then there ariſeth this great Diftculty 


How this can con/iſt with the Prophecy of Jeremiah, who above or 
about an hundred years afrerthis rime ſpeaketh of Moab as a People 
that had been at eaſe from their youth, and had not gone mto captivity, 
Fer. 48. 11. and prophelieth againſt rhem in the very ſame words 
which Iſaiah uſeth in this Prophecy ? The Anſwer is, That they 
| * the ſame Calamity; but [a:ah 


do not ſpeak of the ſame time, nor of | 
Tribulation, and Jeremiah of their latter Devaſtation. 


f a former 7 

Ic is true, Jeremrah uſeth the ſame words which Iſaiah doth, andſo 
do the later Prophers ſometimes uſe the words of rhe former, to c- 
ther purpoſes than they were firſt delivered, as we {hal ſee h: reafrer 
and as is moſt evident from the Revelation of $7, John, in which the 
ſame words are uſd concerning Myſtical Babylon, which » ere ul d 
by the foregoing Prophets conc-rning the firſt and literal Babylon. 
And although the foregoing Prophecy of Iſaiah fecms to ſpeak of 
the ſameDeſtruttion threatoed byJeremiah,and inflifted by Nevuchad'e 
mexzar 3 yet this Prophecy contained in this Verſe, and uſhered in 
with another Preface, ſ:ems to beof a differing narure,and to ſpeak 
of a more{peedy and leſs grievous Aflition that ſhould befa\lrbem 
which ſhould be as a Pledge to aſſure them of the certiin Accome 
pliſhment of the other Prophccy, and of their utter DeſtruCtion. 
And therefore it is obſervable, that the Prophet doth nor here ſay, 
Within three-years all that I have forerold and threarned ſhal be fulfil= 
led; but only, the glory of Mah ſhal be contermed, &C- which 1s quite 
another thing ; and as the Terms here uſed are much milder, fo 
the Judgment here denounced ſeems much leſs, than inthe forego- 
zng Prophecy- And therefore this Verſe may very well be under« 
ſtood of ſome great Blow given to the M94b:zes, either by Sennache- 
#ib, or by his Son Eſarhadden, from which notwithſtanding they in 
alictle timerecovered themſelves, and flouriſhed again, aad conti- 
nued ſo to do,till Nebuche dnezzar compleared their Deſtruction. And 
this may well enough conſiſt with what is ſaid of Moabs being at eaſe 
fom hu youth, Jer. 48 11. which is not to be underſtood ſimply as 
if they had been wholly free from War and other Calamities ; for 
the coatrary is evident both from Scripture, as 2 Sam, 8. 2. 2 Kings 
3. 24, 25- and from other Hiſtories ; but comparatively,that they 
had not been brought to Deſolation, nor carried away into Cape 
tivity, as it is explained in the following Words, and as Iſrael had 
been at that time, ani Judah wasthreatned to be. z#.e. Wirhin 
three years preciſely accounted ; for Hirelings are very punctual] 
in obſerving the time for whick they are hired; and their Thoughts 
and Defires run much upon it, becauſe then they are to receive 
their Wages : of which ſee Job7. 1, 2. and 14. 6. And this Ex- 
p35ſition is confirmed by comparing this Place with 1/# 21.16, where 
the ſame Phraſe is uſed in one year. So groundleſs 1s that Opinie 
on which the Jewiſh Writers gather from this Place, compared 
with Deut. 15. 18. That three years wasthe uſual and appointed 
time forthe generality of hired Servants. # Their. Strength and 
Wealth, and other things in which they glory. b Shal be made 
contemprible to thoſe who £ rmerly admired them, c With the 
great numbers of their People of which they boaſted. « Compara- 
tively to what they were before. Which might be very true, and 
yet afcerwards,. in an hundred years ſpace, *they might be ſufficie 
ently recruited. 


I 1 WH 


rae), ſfaich the LORD of hoſts. 

e Either Samaria, their chief Fortreſs; or all their Fortrcflcs 
or ftrong Hotds, the Singular Number being pit for the Pjura]- 
or all theirStrength and Glory ; which antwers to rhe K/ngaom in 
the next Clauſe. f Or, anafrom ( which Particle is eafily tndere 
ſtood from the former Claule ) cheremnant of Syria. So the Sente ISy 
Th# Remainders of Damaſcus and $yris ſhal be an Headleſs Body, a 
P:ople withour a King. * An Ironical Speech, implying their con. 
remptible Condition; for their Glory is ſuppoſed 10 be Geparted 
from them, by whar he h:d already fiid ot chem. The tenie js 
Syria ſhal have as much Glory as 1ſrael, 3. c.acither ofthem {hal have 
any at all. 


4 And in that day ic ſhal come to paſs,;has the plos 
ry of Jacob fhal be made thin g, and the futncis of his 
fleſh ſhal wax lean. | 

s Or, ſhall be emptied, as this Word isrendred, 1. ig. 6. 


5 And it ſhal be as when the harveſi-man gathercth 


the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm +þ ; and 
itihal be as he that gathereth cars in the Valley of Re- 
phaim 2+ | 

h Taking care, as far as may be, that all may be gathered in 
and nothing left. So ſhall the whole Body of the Ten Tribes be 
carricd away Captive, ſome few Gleanings only being lef: of them, 
as 115 1n the H arveſt, # Avery fruicful Plice near ferujalew, 7o): 
15. &, and 18, 16. 


6 * Yet gleaning-grapes ſhal be lefein it&, as the 
(haking of an olive-rree, 
top of the uppermoſt bough, 


Iſrael. 


 & Some few 1/aelites were . left after their Captivity, who 
Joyned rhemte]}ves to the Kingdom of Judah, and were carried 
Caprive. ro Babylon with them, from whence alfo they returned 
wita them, as we find in the Hiſtory of their Return in Ezra and 
Nahemi ah. 


7 Atthat day ſbal a man 7 look to his maker w' 


Iſrael. 


[| Thoſe few Men that are lefr. »» They ſhal ſincerely reſpe& 
and truſt, and worſhip ( all which are underſtood by looking to ) 
God, and God only, as the next Verſe explains it. Their AMi- 
Ctions thal at laſt bring them to Repentance. 


8 ' And he (hal not look to the altars », 


fingers have made, either the groves p, or the || is 


mages 9. 

y Not reſort or traſt to them, or to the worſhip offered to I- 
dols upon them. o Their own Inventions; for otherwiſe the Ale 
tars made by Gods Command were -the Work of Mens Hands. 
pþ Which were deviſed and planted by Men, as fit Places for the 
Worthip of their Gods ; and therefore were forbidden, Deut: 16:21. 
1 K:ngs 14: 15. q Worſhipped in their Groves The word Proper= 
Iy ignites :mages of the Sun, either having the Form and Skape of 
the Sun, or at leaſt ere&ed to his Honour and Worſhip; of which 
ſee Dent; 4.19, and 17. 3. 2 Kings 23. 5, It« Jer, 8.2, and 7; 184 
and 44.17, 18. | 


9 In that day r ſhal his ftrong cities be asa forſaken 


CHA BF XVIL 


Damaſcus, Samaria, Iſrael and their Cities to be ruinedby the Afſje 
rians, 1 5.. @ Remnant. ſbal conſider ana Repent, 6 $. the 
Reſt plagued for their impiety, g--=11, the Wee of Iſrael's Enemies, 
I2 I 4. 


f Me burden of Damaſcus a: Behold Damaſcus is 
taken away from being a City, and it thal be a 


er 
8 


ruinous heap b. 


© # Both of that City and Kingdom, as appears from v. 2, 3, 

v6 This was fulfilled by Tiglath=Pileſer, 2 Kings 16: 9g. although 

+ —<-mzgg it was re»cedified and poſſeſſed by another fort of Inha= 
itants. 


2 Thecities of Arqer c are forſaken : they ſhall be 
for flocks which ſhal lie down, and none {hal make 
them afraid 4. 


'c Ofthat part of Syria called Aroer, from a great City of that 
name ; of which ſee Deut, 2, 36. aud 3; i2, Thele Cities were | 
-peſleiTed by the Reubenites and Gaaites, whom Tiglath. Pileſer Carried 
into Captivity, rChron: 5: 26. Theſe he mentions here,as he doth 
Ephraim in the next Verſe, becauſe they were Confederate with 
Syria againſt Judah, d Becauſe the Land ſhal bedeſolate, and deſti- 
gate of Men who might diſturb them. 


3 The fortreſs alſo « ſha! ceaſe from Ephraim, and 
the kingdom from Damaſcus, ani the remnant of Sy- 


- 


bough, and an uppermoſt branch {; which they left? 
becauſe of the children of Iſrael: z and there ſhal be 
deſolation. | 


' 7 In the day of Jaco#'s Trouble, of which he ſpake v. 4. and 
continueth his Speech unto theſe Words, and afterwards: 
J Which he that pruneth the Tree negleQeth, either becauſe he 
eſteems it uſeleſs and inconſiderable, or becauſe he cannot reach 
it. # The ſenſe is, either, 1. Which they, to wit, the Enemies, 
left, or which ſhal be left ( the Aﬀtive Verb being put Imperſonal» 
ly, as it frequently is in the Hebrew Text) becauſe of or for the chil« 
dren of Iſra:l; which God inclined their Hearts to leave or ſpare 
out of his Love to his Iſrael. Thus this is mentioned as a Mercy, 
or Mitigation of the Calamity. Burt this ſcems not to agree either, 
with the foregoing or following Words, both which manifeſtly 
ſpeak of the greatneſs of the Judgment. And that their ſtrong C14 
ries Were nor left for them, but taken from them, ſcems evident 
from v. 3, 4, Or, 2. Asthe Cities ( which Words are eafily uns 
derſtood out ofthe former part of the Verle, where they are expreſ< 
ſed ) whichthzy ( to wit, the Canaanites, as the Seventy Interpree 
ters expreſsit ; and it was needleſs to name them, becauſe the 
Hiſtory was ſo wellknown to them to whom the Prophet writes J 
left or forſeok ) which they did either by departing from them, or 
being deftroyed out of them ) breauſe of ( © © before or for fear of ( the 


' children of Iſracl. And this was a very fit Example, to awaken the 


Iſraelites to a ſerious belief of this Threatning, becauſe God had in» 
flited the ſame Judgment upon the Caxaanizes,and that for the ſame 


Sins of which they were guilty» 


10 Becauſe thou « haſt forgotten the God of thy 


ſalvation, and haſt not been mindful of the rock of |,. un. 


thy ſtrength x : therefore ſhalt thou-plant |} pleaſant yfplcaſmi 
Fruits, 


plants y, and ſhalt fer it with ſtrange = lips 3 


# Oljrail, » That God who was thy oniy ſure Nefence- ow 
Co:4vile 


Chap. * XVI 


ria f : they ſhalhe as theglory * of the children of I{- 


two or three berries in the * Chap.z4 
| four or five in the out. 13: 
moſt fruicful branches thereof, ſaith the LORD God of 


and his eyes ſhal have reſpe&t to the Holy One "7 


1 the work | Orca 
of lis hands o, neither ſhall reſpe&t has. which his image, 


[Or 


dawn 


| *Ch:2 


Ezek:1 
Zeph: 
Fo 


Chap. XVLIL 


HI 4 


ceitenr Flowers and Frutit-tre2s. . 2 Fetched from far countries, and 
rierefore highly eſteemed. - The fenle is, thou ſhalt uſe much In- 
duſtry aad coft, bur to no purpoſe, as it follows. 


11 In the day ſhalt thou make thy plant to grow :; 

and in the morning ſhalt thou make chy ſeed to flouriſh 

1Qr, 1950+ #3 but the harveſt sball be || a heap in the day of grict, 
2: in 192 and of deſperate ſorrow 6. 


day of Ini2. 2 Eo eK : FM ES 
ncc.and 4 Thou ſhalr from day to day, beginning early in the Morning 
here ſhall uſe all Care and Diligence that what thou haſt planted and fown 


may thrive ; and thou ſhall ſee ſome EffeQs of thy Libours, and 
ſome hopes of Succeſs. 5 This ſenſe of the Word thus rendred 1s 
this; Bur in the time of your grief, &c. or when tais grievous 
Calamity ſhall come, all your Harveſt ſhall be bur one heap,which 
in it ſelf is very incon\iderable,and is eaſily carried away by your 
Enemies. But the Place is and may be otherwiſe rendred, and 
that very agreeably both to the Words and Order of the Hebrew 
Text ; But cheh-ap ( or, heaps, the Singular number being moſt 
commonly put for the Plural ) of the harveſt (i:e; in ſteadof thoſe 
Heaps of Corn which thou didſt expe&, and which men uſually 
reap in Harveſt) in the day or fime (C to wit, of the Harveſt ; or i» 
the day of C Jamiry, of which I have ſpoken, v: 4: 9: or, in 4 aay, 
7: e; fpeedily or ſaddealy ) ſhall be ( or, thou ſhalt have) grief and 
deſperate ſorrow. They ſhal be all thy Harveſt, and the Evear of thy 
Labours. 


be dzad!y 


ſari Ow, 
jar 


{Or,,41y, 


| 12 Woc to the || multitude of many people d, which 
or, No&'e. 


make a noiſe like the noiſe of rhe ſeae ; and to the 
ruſbing of nations, that make a ruſhing like the ruſbing 
(0r,»any. Of || mighty waters. | 

« This is a new Prophecy, added for the prefent ſupport and 
comfort of Gods People. d Combined rogether againſt Judah. 
It matters not whether you underſtand this of the Syr:ans and Jj- 
raclizes who were naired again! Judah, or of rhe Aſrlans, whoſe 
Arny conſiſted of vaſt numbers, and of men of ſev:ral Nations. 
The following Words agree to eitherof them. e Which invade 
my Land and Pzople with great foice and fury, as the Sea doth, 
either ia its own Channel, or whea it enters into the Land by a 


Breach. 


13 The Nations ſball ruth like the ruſhing of many 
waters : but God ſhall rebuke them f, ad they jhall flee 
far off, and mal be chaſed as the chaff of the mountains 

10r,;h;81s before the wind, and like|] a rolling thing g before the 


; . Erh:0pians are diſtinguiſhed by Herodotus, and divers other bork anci- 
apn, whirlwind. h ent and latter Writers, into the Eaſtern, which ſeems to be. the 
' f Not in Words, but deeds; ſhall diſcomfit and overthrow t _ Arabians, and the Weſtern, which ſeem to be the Erhiopians undes 
g Which is eaſily moved by every {light touch, and much more YT] £25pt. And itis probably thoughr, that rheſe Cuyjbires were firſt 
A violent Wind. Or, like @ wiſp, to wit, of ſtraw, which 1s lome- planted in Arabiay and, upan their increaſe, part of them paſſed 
times rolled together. over into Africa by croſſing the Red-Ses, which way a very ſhort 
F and an caſte Paſſage, and ſer!ed there. And according to this [n- 
I 4. And behold at evening-tide trouble, and _ oy nr _ the _ the Diſcription of the Land given: in the 
; on; 1 th: this 5s the portion OT | lalt Claule of this verſe agrees either to F:h:opis, or to Fgyps, as ig 
fore the mo1 ning he zs pa he los of want that rob evident from what hath been already ſaid for the clearing of this 
them that ſpoil us, and t dark and difficult verſe, 
us 7. 
- o 
b At Even there is a great Terrour and Conſternation among TS: 
God's People, for fear of their Enemies; and e're GY ye 2 That ſendeth ambaſſadours f by the Sea #, 
merh, their Enemies are cut off by the band of God. 4. | even in Veſſels of bulruſhes þ upon the waters F RES. 
terally and eminently fuifilled in- the Deſtruftion of Sennacherib's ſaving * 0 Guife Me ; . *2 || Or, ozr= 
Army before Jeruſalem. Although the Words may be more general- afing » o ye Iwurt Mcelenger £ to a nation foread and 
ly underſtood of any great and ſudden Change, and unexpeCtted [ {cattered k and peeled L, toa people terrible from poliſhed ; 
Deliverance, granted to Gods People, when their enemies were | thejr beginning hitherto 2; || + a nation metted out » Or, #22 | 
ready todevour them, And this Place may be compared wit that | q £9442, down vo, whole land the rivers have fpoil- 7:97; 2447 
in Pſal; 30' « weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the 4 9 | needeth out | 
morning. iThis is a triumphant Conclulion, utrered by the Prophet | ©0 P+ to 
in the name of God's People. | REP | | eth down; | 
| A That at this time are ſending Ambaſſadours after their tmaniner, T = os 
| to ſtrengthen themſelves with Leagues and Alliances,whereby they 247707 
CHAP. XVIII rain prone thoſe Judgments and Cilamities, which, notwich-{ine, __ 
TR" © Church and puniſhing hw Enemies, will afir.y the | ftanding all their endeavours, . I will bring upon them. The firſt #7477? 
_—_ wo = on _— be to the Church. "4 - part of this Verſe ſeems to contain a further Deſcription of the #"g under 
Eds aa : People ofthe Land, mentioned in the foregoing Verſe. g either by fo#. 
: : - the Midland-Ses, or by the Rer-Sea, or by great Lakes which were. Or, whoſe 
O to the Land «s ſhadowing wich wings b, _ in and nee Land of Egypt ; it being uſual among the He- ns" 
: - -. * d c the rivers 4 of F#thi- | #5 co give the Title of Seas to Lakes, or any great ColleQions vers ac/pi}s- 
*Ch2o!g: : which 15 bey —_- : of Waters, as hath bcen oft obſerved before. þ For both the Xgyp- 
Ezek:30:9 Opi1a e 3 | trans and Ethiopians, as Diodorus Siculus, and Strabo, and Pliny relate, 
rg s Either, x, of Arabia; or, 2. of Erhiopis beyond Ezypt ; or, 3. | 4id commonly ule Boats of Ruſhes or Reeds, which were more 
3; 10s : 


of Ezygt, as ſome both ancicnt and latrer Interpreters judge ; of 
whoi he ſpeaks more darkly inthis Chapter, and then explains him- 
ſelf more clearly in the next Chaprer. But this Controverſic will 
be beſt determined by examining the following Deſcription, 6 The 
Title of wings is oft given, both in Scripture, and in other Au- 
thors, unto divers things which have ſome general kind of reſem- 
blance to Wings, as ro the Battlements of an Houſe or Temple, 
as Mat. 5. 5. to the Skirts of a Garment, as Rurh 3. 9. and ofr 
elſewhere ; to an Army, as Ja 8: 8. Jer. 48. 40: © 49. 22. and 
ta the Sails of a Ship, as this Word is here commonly underſtood, 
and as it is unqueſtionably uſed in other Authors. And ſhadow- 
jn3 with wings is nothing els bur overſpread or filled with ther. 
W hich Title may be given either, to Erkiopia or Egype, in re- 
gard of the great numbers either, 1. of their Araves ; or Ta- 
ther, 2+ of their Ships or Veſſels ſailing upon the Sea or Ri- 
vers: For, #. in ch<(e they exceeded moſt of thoſe Nations 
who had Dealings with the Jews, whereas other Nations ecualled 
or exceeded them in numerous Armies : But they had an innu- 


A merable Company of Ships or Boats, not only becauſe the com- 
modiouſneſs of the River Nzlur, and its many Branches, and 
8 the Red Sea, and the Hidland Sea, for Navigation; butalſo becauſe 


of the frequent Overflowings of the River N,!45 over their Land, 


ik 


- : | TP [| 


#8 


which made them abfolutely neceſſary. 2 This beſt ſoits with the 
next Verſe. 3. Thole ancient and veserable Interpreters, rhe Scz 
very, and che Chaldee, who beſt underſtood the Heirew words and 
phrates, expound it ſo. &« Or, on this fide, as this Particie is rend= 
red Num: 21: 13.and 22. 1, and in inany other pl:ces Or, as 0+ 
thers cranflare ir, beſides, which many comprehend both ſides; and 
to the Land of which he ſpeaks is ſuppoſed to be ſcituated on both 
'tdes of this River orRivers; which 1s moſt true both of Egypr and 
If Ethiopia, d A late Learned Writer underitands this of three or 
tour Rivers of Arabia Chſza, whereof one flows into the Red-Sea, 
anvtner into the M:d/aid-Sea, and a third into a great Like. Which 
being ovicure and very jaccniiderable Rivers, and running in ſo 
diſt:nt Chaanels, ic is not probable thar this Land ſhould receive 
irs Denomination from them. And therefore it ſ:zems more rea« 
tonable ru underſtand this of the great River Nilus, which comes 
from E:90pia,and runs through the length of thac Land,and through 
Egypr, into the Midland Sea ; and which is here called rivers, in the 
Plucal Number, as it is alſo Exod: 7: 19: Iſa: 7: 18. Exek; 29: 3, 4: 
and, nnqu:ftionably, Nahum 3: 8, And { it might well be called 
either for its Greatneſs, or for the many Rivulers that run iato it, 
or for the various ſtreams or Chann<ls into which it is divided ; 
a$ T:gris, upon the ſame Reaſons, hath the ſame Title of Rivers a= 
{cribed ro it, Nahum 2: 6, e Heb: of Cuſh. By which he ſeems to 
underſtand either, +, Arabis, which in many places of Scripture 
comes under that name, though not in all places, as ſome Learn 
ed Men contend. Nor doth thi. Place ſeem to be underſtood here, 
becauſe theſe Rivers were not interpoſed between Jaudea, in which 
Ilaiah wrote this Prophecy, and Aravia; nor were the Rivers of 
Arabis, mentioned before, interpol?d between Judea and Egypt or 


ble, and therefore, as was not:d bef#re, this Land, whatſoever it 
is, would not have been denominated from them, eſpecially when 
© 15 not properly ſituated either beyond them, or on this fide of 
chem. Bur if this Cyſh be Arabia, peradventure it were better to 
underſtand the Rivers, or the River, as it was explained before, of 
che Red Sea, beyond which indeed both Egypr and Erhiopia were, in 
reference to Arabia, And whereas it may be obje&ted, Thar the 
Title of river or rivers is very improperly given to the Sea, it may 
be fairly anſwered, That as Rivers are ſometimes called by the 
name of the Sex, as Eupherates is. Iſa: 21: 1. Fer: 51. 36. fo this ve= . 
ry Word here rendred river, is uſed concerning the Sea in the He- hy 
brew Text, Jonah 2: 3. and indeed may not unfitly be given to the 
Red-Sea, which both for its Length and Breadth hath a 'manif:ſt re- 
ſemblance unto ſome large Rivers which are in the World. And 
!6 the Words may be very truely underſtood either of Egypt, or of 
Ethiopia, both which Countries in this ſenſe are beyond the rivers os 
| pane Arabia. Bur this I only propoſe, and ſubmit ro the Rea» 
lers J1dgement. Or, 2. Erhiopia, properly to called: for the Cuſhites or 


convenient fer them than thoſe of Wood, becauſe rey were both 
cheaper and {wifter, and lighter for carriage from place to Place ; 
for which they had frequent occaſion in thole Yarts: and ſafer, be. 
cauſe of the many Rocks, and Shelves, and Water-falls of N:lus, 
+ Heb. upon the face or ſurface of the waters, Which is properly ex- 
prefled, becauſe ſuch Vellcls being very light, did not fink io deep 
into the Waters as thoſe of Wood do. *. This Word is ſupplied 
here, as it is in many other Places. And the Words here following 
are ſuppoſed to contain the Commiſſion and DireQion given by the 
People hitherto deſcribed,unro their Meſſengers, to go to the Peo- 
ple deſcribed in the following Words. Burt this Word, ſaying, is 
not in the Hebrew 'Text, nor is it ſupplied either by the S:Tenty, or 
by the Chaldeez nordoth it ſeem neceſſary ro be underſtocd. And 
it ſeems very improbable, that the People ro whom the Meſſen- 
gers wereſenr, ſhould be deſcribed in ſuch general and ambiguous 
Terms, and in ſo large a manner, and nora Word ſaid concera- 
ing their M:ſlage. And therefore, with ſubmiſſion, I humbly 
conceive thele to be the Words of the Prophet, who having in 

God's Name pronounced a Wo againſt the Land hitherto deſcrt- 

bed, here continues his Speech, and gives a Commiſſion from 

God to thete mfengers following, togo to this nation ſcattered, Oe, 

5R3 Then 


- = — — - - —_— 
— E =_ 
—_ —_—__ — _—_———_— gg —r_—_Ar_-——— -— 
-— — = =. == _ EE 
En W.- IEEE LE 
= uu oe . 


——— 
b = SES -- WEE 


— 


EE. tt-L. as bpae— <eGye 
SI AED hes 


Ethiopia ; and belides, thoſe Rivers were but ſmall and incontidera- 3 | 


T_T ar CEE 4... 


| 11 Nations to be Wirneſſ:s of the M:ſlage ent 
by eſs Meenge * And then the M-ſſige follows 12 the 


.. s, and [I will|] conſider « in my dwelling place x, like 
Or regard 


NS 4 


by theſe Mefſengers, 
ſaceeeding Verles. 
you my Angels, or Men, whom I have a 
go fpzedily to them, and tell rhem what 
them, or inflift 500h i 
Baniſhment, but in their Habitations. 11 to the 
Cuſhices or Ethiopians, both for the vaſtneſs of che Land inha n ted 
by tnem, to wir, Erhiooia and drabie, and for the manner of their 
Habiration, which is more ſcattered than that of ot 
theſe People may be called [catered Prophertically, : 
were, ſo, but that they ſhould be fo: Or, this Word may Os 
dred, as it is in the Margin, and by ſome others, outſprea: wr 
drawn out at length ; which exaaly ſaits ro Egypr, which 15 muCc 
more extended in length than in breadth. { Either, 1. without 
air 5 for ſo were the Ethiopans ' 
NG wg Country : Or, 2. having their har ſhaven or 
lucked off ; for the Word 
Hair, but a violent taking away of Hair, as appears from Ez: 9. 
3 Nehem: 13, 25. Iſa: 50: 6 And rhis plucking or ſhaving of the 
Hair is Meraphorically uſed in Scripture, to ſignifie ſome great 
Cyamity, whereby Men are ſtripped of all their Comforts, as //a: 
7: 20. and elſewhere. And this Title may be given ro them Pro- 
pherically, to ſignifi rheir future and approaching DeſtruQion. 
» Such were the Egyptians, and Ethiopians or Cuſbttes, as appears 
both from Sacred and Profane Hiſtories. And this may be here ad- 
ded as an Aggravation of their impending Miteries, that they who 
had been for a long time terrible ro others, ſhould now become a 
contemptible and wretched People. n Heb: of line line, s. e. metted 
out as it were with Lines ro Deſtruction; of which Phraſe and 
Cuſtom ſee 2 Sam. 8. 2. 2 Kings 21.13. Pſal. 60: 6. Iſa. 34.11. oBy 
Divine Sentence, and to be trodden ' down by their Enemies. p 
Which may be taken, either, 1. literally, becauſe Egypt and Eth/opia 
were frequently overfl wed by thoſe two great Rivers N ger and 
Nilus 3 although that overflow was rather an Advantage to the 
Land,by making it frui:ful, than a Miſchief: Or, 2. metaphorically 
and prophetic:Ily, of the Aſjrians or Bavyloutans breaking in upon 
them like a River, and deſtroying their Land and People ; of 
which ſee more on Ezek: 30. For Powerful Enemies invading a 
Country, are oft compared to a River, as 1/3: 8: 74 8« © $9. 19: 


Jer, 46. 7, 8. 


And ſe the Coherence ſeems ro be clear, ! 
ppointed fer this Work, 


2 All ye Inhabitants ofthe World, and dwellers on 
the earth, ſee ye q when he lifceth up an eſingn on the 
mountains, and when he bloweth a trumpet 7, hear 


ye /. 


q Take notice of what I ſay, and God will do: Or, 2: ſhall ſee 
it ; you ſhall be Eye-witneſſes of this dreadful Wo or Judgment 
which I am bringing upon the Pcople of whom I have ſpoken- 
The Prophet doth in a manner ſummon all Nations to bear 
witnels of his Prophecy, and of the accompliſhment thereof. 7 
When God ſhall gather together the Nations, as it were by the 
lifting up ofan Enſign, or by the ſound ofa Trumpet, ro execute 
his Judgments upon this People. Heb: as when a man lifts up an 
enfign upos the mountains, which men can eaſily ſee ; and as when a 
man ſounds a Trumpet, they caa hear: no lels viſible and manifeſt 
or this Judgment of God be. / Ye ſhall hear it, as 1n the other 

1anch, 


4 For ſo the LORD ſaid unto me, I wili take my reſt 


aclear heat || upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in 
the heat of harveſt y. 


£ I will fit till, and not beſtir my ſelf,cither to help this Peo- 
ple, or to hinder their Enemies. God is ſaid in Seriprure co ref 
or fit fill, when he doth not work on the behalf of a Perſon or Peo- 
ple ;; as, on the contrary, he is ſaid zo beftir bimſelf, when heaQs 
fer them. « Or, 7will contemplate, or look upon them, to wit, the 
People of whom I am here ſpeaking. So it is only an Ellipfis of the 
Pronoun. Now God's looking in Scripture is variouſly uſed ; 
ſometimes in way of Favour and Mercy, as P/al: 25: 18. 1ſa: 66.2, 
&c. and ſometime in a way of Anger and Judgment, as Exod: 14, 
24. Pſal: 25.19, and,'as I humbly conceive, in this Place, IT know 
ſome learned men render this and the next word, 7 will look upon 
my dwelling place, and interpret the Place of Gods gracious Reſpe& 
to his Church or People, ro preſerve and deliver ic in the midſt of 
all the Confuſions and Cumbuſtions that happen in the Warld. 
Which interpretation ſeems altogether unſuicable to the ſcope and 
buſineſs of the Chapter, which in all the foregoing and following 
Verſes ſpeaks of another ſort of People, even of the Egyptians or 
Ethiopians, of whem therefore this Verſe alſo muſt be underſtood 
or otherwiſe we make a breach in the Context. x In heaven, the 
Place where God dwells, and where he is ſaid to hear Prayers, 
x Kings 8: 30, 32. as here to conſider Men and Things, as elſewhere 
he is faid_ to 4e2ar and to look from Heaven, as 2 Chron: 6: 21. Iſa: 63: 
25.the Hebrew Particles beth,in and mem,from,being put promiſcuouſly 
one for another, as hath been noted before. y The ſenſe is, That 
God would look upon them, as the Sun with clear Heat looks v. 
pon Herbs, &c. But this may bz underſtood either, r. in way of 
Mercy, 2$ moſt take it: And ſo the ſenſe is, That God would 
look out and ſhine forth upon his Church and People,and be as com- 
fortable and refreſhing to them, as the dear heat which ſhines upon 
the Herbs; or, as others render it, after the rain, or, as cloud of 
aew is m the heat of harveſt ; Or, 2. in way of Judgment; And fo 
the ſeaſe is, That Gq4 would look upon them with as uncomfort- 
able an Influence as rhe Sun with a d:ar heat upon the Herbs, which 
are ſcorched and kilked by it ; and #s a cloud of the dew, which brings 
Dew er Rain, 71 the heat of Harvefl, when it is unwelcome and 
hurtful, And this ſeaſe ſeems beſt to agree with the following 


A 


L am about to do with 


following Judsment upon them. & not by 
Which agrees well to the 


ter People. Or, | 
not that tncy 


in a great meaſure, through the 


doth nor fignifie a natural want of | 


EF # i 

5 For afore the harveſt z, when the bud is per- 
fet, and the ſowre grape is ripening in the flower 
a, he b ſhall both cur of the ſprigs with pru- 
nNing-hooks, and take away and cut down the 
branches c. 


2 Before they receive rhe end of their hopes, and finiſh the Work 
which they have deſigned and begun. » When the Bud or Flower 
1s turned into a perfect but unripe Grape, which gives hopes of 
' a good Vintage The Body of this Pcople are compared to a 
; Vine-rre2, b The Lord, who is eaſily underſtood from the fore. 
, Boing Verſe, and who is here repreſentcd nnder the Noticn of an 
' Husband-man or Vine-dreſſer. c In ſtead of the gathering of the 
| Grapes, he ſhall cur down the Body and Branch:s of the Tree, and 
and throw it into the Fire, 


| 


6 They 7 ſhall be left together unto the {owls of the 
mountains, and to the beaſts of the earth : and the 
fowls ſhall ſummer upon them, and all the beaſts of the 
earth ſhall winter upon them e. 


a The Sprigs and Branches being cut down and thrown upon 
the Ground, with the unripe Grapes upen them. e They ſh: lie 
upon the Earth neglected by Men, as being unripe, and unfit for 
their uſe, ſo that eicher Birds or Beaſts may ſhelter themſelves 
with them, orfeed on th:zm, both Summer and Winter. You 
are not to underſtand that the Summer is appropriated to the 
Fowls, and the Winter to the Beaſts; bur this is only an Elegan- 
Cy of the Hebrew 'Language, to uſe ſuch Diſtributions, of which 
we have many Inſtances in Prophetical Writings. 


7 In that day f * ſhall there a preſent be brought /Zep:3i 


unto the LORD of hoſts, of a people g || ſcattered Now _- 
and peeled, and from a people terrible from their be- zuitu, © 


ginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden uns 
der foot, whoſe land the rivers have ſpoiled, to the 
place of the Name of the LORD of boits, the mount 
Zion. 

f Which is to be taken largely and indefinitely, as it is frequent. 
ly mn the Prophets, as we have already ſeen, and ſhall more fully 
ſee hercafter. - Ar or after that time, when the Judgment threat= 
ned in the foregoing verſes ſhall be fully and com pleatly executed, 
whereby that People will be awakened to Repentance. g The 
People of whom I am ſpeaking ſhall preſent and offer themſelves, 
and their Sacrifices, unto the True God. He ſpeaks of their Con« 
verſion ro God and Chriſt, by the Preaching of the Goſpel ; the 
ctr ms of which Promiſe is recorded in the Hiſtories of 
the Church. 


CHAP, XIX. 


The confuſion of Egypt * their Inteftine Diſſention : their Idols deceive them: : 
Cruel Lora's ove* them : Waters fail them : their tread dead : their Prine 
cer and Counſellours made fooliſh: their terrour before the Lord, x, 17. 
the calling of Egypt to the Church, 18 ———— 22, the Covenant of E« 
£)pt, Aſſris and Iſrael, 23 ——z;, 


* TT burden of Fgypts: Behold the LORD 

rideth b upon a ſwift cloud c, and ſhall come * Jer: 46 
into Egypt, and the idols of Egypt ſhall be moved dat 73: Ezek 
his preſence, and the heart of Egypt ſhall melt in the *®E 
midiſt of it e. 


a Some Learned men conceive, that what was ſaid more gene= 
rally and darkly in the foregoing Chapter, is here more particulars 
ly and clearly explained to be meant of &gpt 3 it being uſual for 
the Prophets to mix obſcure and plain Patſages together, and to 
clear the one by the other. Others underſtand that Chapter of 
Ethiopia, and this of Egypt. But this Controverſie muſt be decided 
by an exact conſideration of all the Paſſages of the former Chapters 
b As a General in the Head of his Army ; or, as a Judge riding 
the Circvit to execute Judgment. c Which Phraſe ſheweth, that 
the Judgment ſhall come ſpeedily, unexpectedly, and unavoid- 
ably. And clouds being very unuſual in Kzypr, the Appearance of 
2 Cloud was a kind of Prodigy, and a Prognoſtick of ſome grievous 
Calamity. 4 From their Seats, and from their former Reputation. 
Or, ſhall ſhake or tremble. So far ſhall they be from helping the E-« 
g1ptians, as they expect, that they ſhall tremble for themſelves , 
which divers of the Egyptian Gods, being living Creatures, might . 
properly do. e They ſhall loſe all their ancient Strength and Cous 
rage, for which they had been famous formerly. 


t 


2 And I will # ſet the Egyptians againſt the Egypti- ,,. , —- 
| 2th hits +Hebyiw 

ans f; and they ſhall fight every one againſt his bro- 7. 

ther,and every one againſt his neighbour ; city againſt* * 

city, and kingdom againft kingdom g, 

fI will raiſe Civil Wars among them. gs For although all 

Egypt was now one kingdom, and under one King, yet rot many 

years afcer this time it was divided into twelve ſeveral Kingdoms, 

berween whom there were many and crue] Wars, as is related by 

the Hiſtorians of thoſe Times, and particularly by Herodotus and 

Dioaorus. 


3 And the ſpirit 5 of Egypt + ſhall fail in the midſt 
thereof: and I will + deſtroy the counſel thereof: and #' congoiah 
they thall ſeek to the Idols ;, and to the charmers, + 1g; 
and to them that have familiar ſpirits, and to the wi- ſwalus 
zards. up! 


{Lleb:ſbol 


Verſe, which continueth the Metaphor ofan Harveſt, and mani- 
_ not of refreſhing, bur of the deſtruction of the Fruits 
Tacreor, 


b Either, 1. their Courage : But of that he ſpate ver: 1» Or, 2, 
their widericanding, as it is explained in the next Clauſe ; => 
; 'B 


Chap. XIX, |. 


Pr, wh; 
Wks, 
(Heb-fou 


Gtions. 
IHeds 
Wing 
taings. 


lOr, 2. 


foe of 
Web,corm, 


_] 
Chal. 
% 


| Or, ſhut of 


WT) 


eb:ſboll 
mptith, 
1sb; 
WM 


X1X, #4 


the Word ſp rit is oft put for the Reaſonable Soul, as Eccleſ: 3: 21» 
& 12:7. and forthe Thoughts of che Mind, as Proverbs 29: 11: Ezet: 
13: 3: # As not knowing what todo without the help ofan high- 
Er power, : 

4 And the Egyptians will T|| give over into the hand 
a cruel lord, and a fierce king & ſhal rule overthem, 
faith the LORD, the LORD of hoſts. 

k Either, 4. of the King of Afhris or Chaldea ; 
twelve petty Kings the Singular Number being pur for the Plural ; | 
or, .3« of P(ammetichus,who being at firſt one of thoſe twelve Kings, | 
waged War with the reſt, and ſubdued them, and conqueredall the 
Land of Ezypr, and ruled it with rigour. | 

5 And the waters ſhall fail fromthe ſea /, and the | 


river 2 (ſhall be waſted and dried up s. 

1 Which may be underſtood either, r, Metaphorically, of the ta- 
kingaway of their Dominion or Commerce, &c. or rather, 2. Pro- 
perly, as may be gathered from the following Words and Verſes. 
For as the River Nilus, when it had a full Stream, and free Courſe, 
did pour forth a vaſt quaintity of Wates by its ſeven famous Mouths 


oP. 
or, 2. of thoſe \ 


| errour oc deluſion; a Niſpoſition of mind very apt to miſtake. and to 


E.+ Chap. XI 


Li 
| ; 

King and People depended; or, 4. their chief c ounſellors, the 
Singular number being here pur colleCQively, as it is in many other 
places. hL Of the Provinces, which he calls by a Title borrowed 
from the Hebrews, in whoſe Language he ſpake and wrote this Pro- 


phecy. | | | . wh 
14 The LORD hath mingled 7 + a perverſe ſpirit & + Heb: » ||| 
in the midſt thereof; and they have cauſed Egypt to ſpirit of perdli(| 
Err 1n every work thereof 1, as a drunken man ſtaggereth verfei. ||| 
in his vomit ms. | | 
; Or hath poured out or given them to drink, as appears fron 

their Drunkenefs, expreſl-d in the end of the Verſe. Whick 
alſo ſuits with the Scripture-phraſe, whereby a cup ſignifies God's 
Judgments, as 1Ja, 51: 17, 21, 22. Jer: 25. 15. & Heb. # ſpirit of 
perverfities or crookedneſs; er, as the Seventy and Chaldee render it, of 


millead them into fooliſh & crookedCounſels & Courſes: WhichGod 
could eaſily effeR, partly by laying occaſions of ſtumbling in their 
way. and partly by withdrawing or darkning thar Wiidom which 
he had infuſed, by which alone Men cam diſcern their way. 1 In 


into the S-a, ſo when that was dried up, which is expreſſed in the 
next Clauſe, theſe waters did truely and properly fail from the Sez. 
So there is no need of underſtanding by ſea either the River Nilus, 
or the great Lake of M#erir, which, afcer the manner of the Hebrews, 
eight be ſqcalled. » To wir, N:lus, upon whoſe fulneſs and Over- 
flow both the ſafety and the Wealth of the Land depended, as all 
Authors agree ; and therefore this was 2 very terrible Judgment, 
» Not totally,butin a very great meaſure, as ſuch Phraſes are com- 
monly uſed. 

6 And they ſhall turn the rivers far away o, and the 
brooks of defence p ſhall be emptied and dried up 3 the 


reeds and flags q ſhall wither yr. 

o Which is to be raken Imperſonally, as ſuch Expreſſions are very 
Frequently, for, the rivers (thoſe ſmall Rivolets by which the Wa- 
ters of Nilus were conveyed and diſtributed into ſeveral Partsof the 
Land ) ſhall be turned far away, as they muſt needs he, when the 
greater River Nilus, which fed them, was dried up. p Theſeveral 
Branches of the River Nilus, which were a great Defence to Egy?, 
as is well known q Which were very uſeful to them for making 
their Boats, which were abſolutely neceflary in that Country, 
— divers other things, r As they commonly do for want of 

ater. 


7 The paper-reeds {by the brook, by the mouth of 
the brooks, and everv thing ſown by the brooks : ſhall 


| wither, be driven away, Þ and be no more. 
Micbs and f Which by a Needle, or other fit Inſtrument, were divided into 
bal not be, thin and trad Leaves, which being dried and fitted, were uſed at 
Ip that time for Writing, as our Paper is: and conſequently was 2 

= very good Commodity. 5 And much more what was flown in more 
Ury and unfruitful places: 

3 The fiſhecs alſo ſhal mourn «, and all they thatcaſt 
angle into the brooks ſhall lament and they that ſpread 


nets upon the waters ſhall languith, 

4 Becauſe they could catch few or no Fiſh, by which Trade they 
got their Living. Which alio was a great Plague to the People, 
whoſe common Diet this was,b:cauſe out of Superſtitious Conceits 
they killed and eat butfew Living Creatures, as appears both from 
Sacred and Profane Writers. 

9 Moreover they that work in fine flax x, and they 
that weave || net-works ſhall be confounded. 
os x Thar'make fine Linen, which was one of their beſt Commodi- 
hs wie ties ; of which ſee 1 Kings 10. 28. Prov: 7:16. Ezek: 27: 7: 

Heb ſou 10 And they ſhall be broken in the F purpoſes there- 
wiims, Of y, all that make fſluces and ponds Þ for fiſh, 

| tHeb: of »y 7: e; Of Egypt, or of the Egyprians., They ſhall Joſe their 
buing ends and hopes; for the Fifhes 1a them ſhall die for want of 
thingy. Water. 


I1 Surely the princes of Zoan & are fools, the coun- 
ſe11 of the wiſe counſellers of Pharoah is become bru- 
tiſh a: how ſay ye unto Pharoah 6b, I am the ſon of the 
wiſe c, the ſon of ancient kings d ? 

z The chief Ciry, in which the King and covrt frequently reſi- 
ded. Sce Pa: 78: 12. a Exceeding fooliſh and deſtructive to them» 
ſelves, 6 Why do you pur ſuch falſe and fooliſh Wards into Phe- 
ra0h's Mouth ? c Wiſdom is hereditary and natvral to me. This 
vain Opinion of himlelt 1h:y cherithed by their Fl :r-eries, although 
be uedid himielt and his People by his Folly. & He derides the 
Varity *f rhe Egyptians, who uſed to make grear brags of the Anti- 
quity cfth-ir Nacion, ard eſpecially of their Kings, who, as they 
prerenves, hed reigned fucceſſively for above Tea Thouſand years 
Which num b-r of years they made up by this Craft, by making» 
thoſe Succeſſive Kings, wh.ch reigned together at the ſame time 
in their ſeveral Nori cr Provinces. 


12 Where are they ? where are thy wiſe wen e? and 
let them tell thee now, and let them know what the 
LORD of hofts hath purpoſed upon Xgypt. 

e Who pretended, that either by their deep policy, or by their 


Skill in Aſtrology er Magick, they could certainly forſee things 
£2 come. 


13 The Princes of Zoan are become fools,the princes 
|Or, z,. Of Noph f are deceived, they have alſo ſeduced Egypt, 


np even || | they that are the ſtay g of the tribes 4 there- 
Heb;corm.of 

f Another chief Gity, and one of the King's Seats, fo called 
alſo Jer. 2: 16: & 44. rt. called alſo Miph in the Hebrew Text, Ho: 
9.6. and by other and latter Authors, Memphis, g Heb: even the 
corner, or, the Corner-ſtone, which is the chief Support of the 
Building. Whereby he may deſign, either, r. the King ; or, 
2: {ome eminent Stateſman of that age, upon whoſe Counſels both 


| Egyptians called On, Gen: 41. 45. which wasa very emineat City, 


all their deſigns and Undertakings. » When he is fo 
exceſſively drunk,that he reels to and fo, and vomits up his Drink/ 
+. Neither ſhall there be any work for Egypt; which 
the head or tail, branch or ruſh may do ». 

» All People, both high and low, ſhall be at their Wits en 
not knowing what to do. 


16 In that day ſhall Egypt * be like unto Women o 


| ts 


ih ' 
£ . 
Ip s 
W149 
t : | 
1 
10 
y 1158 


d, 7 Ch:9:14 | 


. *Ter:51:30. | | 


and it ſhall be afraid and fear, becauſe * of the ſhaking Das WW 
of the hand of the LORD of hoſts p, which he ſhaketh 
over it. 


0 Feeble and fearful, as it follows. p Becauſe they ſhall perceive 
that they do nor fight with men only, but with the Lord of Hoſts, 
who now lifcs up his hand againſt them, as be did againſt their 
Forefathers, Exod; 14. the very remembrance whereof is very ter« 
rible to them. | 
17 And the land of Judah ſhall be a terrour unto 
Egypt 4, every one that maketh mention thereof 
(hall be afraid in himſelf ; becauſe of the counſel of 


the LORD of Hoſts, which he hath determined r a- 
gainſt it s. 

9 Either, 1, becauſe of Judah's Calamities and Deſo'/ations : Far 
Judah was their Bulwark againſt the 4ſjrians and Babylonians : and 
when this Bulwark was removed, the Egyptians, their neighbours 

and Confederates, had juſt cauſe to fear: Or, 2. becauſe of rheit 
manifold both former andlater Injuries againſt Judah, for which 
they now apprehend that God is calling them to an account. Which 
Interpretation ſc:msto be favoured by the following Words 3 for 
their fear of mentioning Judah's Name ſeems to have proceeded 
partly from the ſenſe of their Guilt and Miſcarriages towards Jue 
dah, and partly from the apprehenſion and Experience of the irre- 
ſiſtible Power and Juſtice of the God of Judah, whom they 
had provoked, and who was now marching to plead his own and 
Judahs Cauſe againſt them. Compare Jer: 23: 34, &c. y Becauſe 
God 1s now about to execute his appointed Judgments. / Againſt 


pr. | 
18 In that day # ſhall five cities s in the land of 
Egypt ſpeak f the Language of Canaan x, and ſwear } Heb:the | 
to the LORD of Holts y; one z ſhal be called the city | 10: of Ben | 
of deſtruction. 7s, ph of 
| £ Aﬀeer that rime, asthis Phraſe 1s uſed ſz: 4. 2: & 18. 75, and the ſun. 
oft elſewhere. Ia the times of the Goſpel, winch are oft nored 
in the Prophets by that very Expreſſion, s A confiderable num* 
ber of their chief Ciries, a certain number being put for an uncer« 
tain. x Profeſs the Jewiſh Religion, agrec with them in the ſame 
mind, which is fitly ſignified by ſpeiking tie ame Language, bes 
cauſe out of th: abundance of the Heart the mourh ſpeaketh. Thus the 
changing and purifying of z P:opic's Lips, is uſed to ſignifie the 
change of their Hearts and Lives, Zcpb: 3: g. and praiſing God with 
one Mouth, to note their unity or Conſ?r:t in the Faith, Rem: 15:6. 
7 Itis well obſerved by ſome Learned Interpreters, that he doth 
not ſay ſwear by rhe Lord, which is the moſt common Phraſe, and 
which being one eminent part and Att of Worſhip, is put for the 
whole, bur ſwear 7» che Lord; which Phraſe is alſo uſed, 2 Chron: 
15. 14. Pſal: 132. 2. Iſa: 45: 23. and it implies the Dedication, or 
Oblarion, and yielding up of a Perſon or Thing to the Lord. by a 
ſolemn Vow, or Covenant, or, Oath, as appears by the Places 
now quoted. In like manner God is faid to fjweer to a Man, Deus: 
26: 15, and one Man to another, Gen: 21. 23. whea thiey oblige 
themſelves by Oath to doſuch or ſuch 2 thing for them. And theres 
fore what is called ſwearing to God, Iſa: 45, 23. is rendred or ex- 
ounded bowing the knee (which ſignifies the ſubjeQion of a man's 
ſelf) to God, and confeſſng to God, Rom:14: 11, # Nor one of the five, 
for they are ſuppoſed to be ſaved in the foregoing Clauſe ; bur one 
City,or anotherCity,the ſixthEity.As diversCities ſhal be converted 
&ſaved,ſo ſome otherCiries ſhal continue in their impenitency,and 
de d-ſtroyed. Others render this Clauſe thus, One of them ſhall 
ae called ( or, fhallbe; for, to be call:d is oft put for to be ) rhe 
city of the ſun ; or, as the Grecians call it, Heliopolis; which the 


and a chief Seat of Idolatry, being a city of Prieſts, as Strabo 
reports ; and therefore its Converſion to the Faith was ' more 
wonderful. 


19Inthat day ſhall there bean altar «to the LORD 
in the midſt of the land of Egypt, and a pillar 6 ac the 


border thereof c to the LORD. | 
s For God's Worſhip; not a Levitical, but a Spiritual and E- 
vangelical Altar, as appears from hence, becauſe that was confin= 
ed to one place, Deut: 12: 13, 14. The Altar is put for the Wor- 
ſhip of God, as it is in many places both of the O'd and New Tef- 
tament. And nothing is more common in the Prophets than ta 
ſpeak of Goſpel-worſhip in the Phraſes of the Law. 6b A Mornu- 
ment of the true Religion. Here alſo he alludes to the antient 
Cuſtom of creRing Pillars to God of which ſee Gen; 12: 7; & 28, 
5R 4 19; &4 


Chap: XX. {1 $ 4 
18, &e, Yo: 22. 10. & 14. 26; x7; 
it, The meaning is, The 

all Flaces// 


See 5oſ: 4: 
RO, 21. Of 
vn, 27, 


Zegypt : for they ſhall cry unto the LORD becauſc 
of the oppreſfors f, and he fhall fend rhem a Saviou' 
and a great one g, and he ſhall deliver them. 

4 The altar or Pillar laſt menrioned. e To reſtifie that they ow: 
the Lord for their God. ' f Being forely arſtrefſed, and finding tht 


Srear or 
# cloud at 


extraordinary Saviour. 


2r And chs LORD ſhall be known to Fegypt, and 
the Agyptians hall know the LORD þ in that day, 
and ſhall do Sacrifice and Oblation ; ; yea, they 
ſhall Vow a Vow unto the LOR D, and perform 


it &, 


= 


ledse in Scripture commonly include AﬀcRion and Prattice, 
pn en obſerved. s Shall worſhip God ſpiritually ; 
which yer 1s ſignified by Typical Phraſes,as it is Mal; 1:11. and in 
many other Places, & They thall not only profeſs and promiſe 
Piety, bur hall ſeriouſly. and cy pradiiſ® its 
22 And the LORD hall ſmite #gypt, he ſhall 
faite and heal ir 1, aridthey hall return ever to the 


LORD, and he ſhall be intreated of them, and hall 
heal theme _. : 

1 God will 2Mi& them by Oppreſſours, v: 20. and ctherwiſs ; 
and by thoſe Afﬀii&iens he will convert and tave them. 
23 In that day * ſhall there be a high-way out of 
Egypt to- Aſſyria, and the Aſſyrian ſhall come into 
Egypt, and the Egyptian into Ailyria w, and the 
Egyptians ſball ſerve » with the Afſyrians, 

1» They who wereimplacable Enemzes one to another, and both 
to the Church and Peop'e of God,ſhall now be reconciled and uni- 
red together in the ſervice of God, and Love to his Church. = Tos 
wit, the Lord; who is me underſtood from v. 21. & 25. 

24 In chat day ſhall Ifracl be the third o with Egypt, 


and wich Aflyria p, even ableſling 9 in the midſt of the 
land r: : 

o The third Party, to wit, in that ſacred League, whereby all 
of them oblise themſelves tro God, p Theſe People are named, be- 
cauſe they were the moſt obſtinate and malicious enemies to God's 
Church, and therefore in a ſpecial manner accurſed by God , but 
| put Synecdochically for all the Gentiles, q This 15 


® Ch; 7; 
16. 


they are here 
peculiar to I/rs:l, who is not only 2 third Party, as the others are, 
bot is the moſt eminent and bleſſed of rhe three, as being the 


Fountain, or rather the Conduit-Pipe, by which the Blefling is 
conveyed to the other two, becauſe Chriſt was to be born of them, 
| and the Goſpel-Church and Ordinances were firſt eſtabliſhed among 
them, and from them derived to the Gentiles, r Or, of the earth, 
"Which may be added, to imply, that Gog's Blefling ſhou!d be 
conveyed from and by Iſrael, not only to the Egyptians and the 
Afrians, but to all the Nations of the Earth,in the midſt of which 
the Land of 17ae! might well be ſaid to lie. Or, of that Land, of 
which Iam here ſpeaking ; or, the Singular Number being put 
for rhe Plural, of choſe Lands, Egypt and Afjr:a, between which 


ljrael lay. 
Whom the LORD of hoſts ſhall bleſs /, ſaying 
Bleſſed be Egypt my people ?, and Ailyria the work of 


mine hands, and Iſrael mine inheritance. _ 
- \ Wiom i: e: which People ,to wit, Iſrael, Egypt, and Afjria, ex- 
preſſed both in the foregoing Verle, and in the following Clauſe of 


t As before, i the miaſs of 
re ſhall be evidences of their Piery ir. 


20 And * it 4 ſhall be for a ſign, and for © 
witnels unto the LORD e of hoſts in the land of 


weakneſs of their Idols, they hall turn unto the-erue God. gs A 
r mighty Saviour, by a commoa Figure cajled Hendiadtr, as 
{ſmoke is put for # fmokie claus, Iſs: 4: 5. or, « Saviour ana 
z Prince, even Chriſt, who is ſo called A#s 5. 31. as is evident 
from the whole context, which apparently ſpeaks of Goſpel-times. 
And the emphatical Phraſe here uſed, direQed them to look for an 


þ Shall acknowledge, and love, and ſerve them ; for words of 


T i # 


Tod " 2 7» 

\a at Scripture : For no man douus nit ther: we es many creat 
Ctions 12 tuole Umes, Which are wholly omitted in the S:cred 
ritings : 

vs. 


2 Ac the ſame time ſpake the LORD + by Iftigh 
the fon of Amoz, faying, Go, ati looſe d the fick- 
-lorh « from off thy loins f, and pur off thy ſhoe from 
cay foot: And he did fo, * walkin” naked Z and 
2are -foor, i | 

4 Urgird it and put it off; the Anteced-n: put for the Conſe. 
quent, which is very uſual, as hath been of *n noted. God would 
ometimes have his Prophets to add to their Werd a viſible {ion to 
awaken Peoples Mines to a more ſerious Conſideration ef the Mat« 
cers propoſed to them. e Either, 1. his courſe and hairy Garment 
which the Prophers uſed to wear, 2 Kivgs 1:8: Zech:13 .q- as many =o 
14eiſtand irt-Bur that is expreſſcd by anct:;er Word in the places quo» 
ted,and never,to my knowiedge, by rbjis Word ; Or, 2. his mourn« 
fu] Habit. which was commonly made of Sackloarh, and which he 
WOrc 1n token of his hearty grief for the great Calamiries which 
were already come upon Jſra:l, and were either come or coming 
upon Judah, f Upon which the upper (zarments were commonly 
girt, 1 Kings 20. 32. 2 Kings 9. 1. & Net wholly naked, which 
had teen indeccnr and ſcandalous, and wi:hal very dangerous, at 
leaſt ro do ſo for three years, as he did, wv: 3. but without his up« 
per Garment, as Slaves and Priſeners uſed to do, whoſe poſture he 
Was to repreſent. v: 4. And to the wcrd naked is uſed, 1 Sam: 19 
24. 2 581m: 6; 20, John 21. 79, Thus alfo men are ſaid to be naked 
when they arc ill clothed, as Job 22. 6. Mat: 25. 36. 1 Cor. 4.17 
James 2. 15. h Afterthe manier of Mourners, 2 Sam: I5. 30. and 
Captives 7F-r: 2, 25. 

3 And the LORD ſaid, Like as my ſervant Ifaiah 
hath walked naked and bare-foot three years 5 for 


a ign & and wonder upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia. 
# Not conſtantly, but when he went abroad among the People,ts 
whom this was appointed for a ſign. Some think it was only three 
days, a day being uſually put for a year in Prophetical Scriptures,as 
Neumb 141 33, 34. Exch: 4.4, 5, 6. Bur although a day be put ſor 
year, yet a year isnever put fora day. & Either, 1. when thig 
Judgment ſhould come; to wit, three years after this Prophecy. 
Or, 2. how long it ſhould continue; for three yezrs: For ſome 
have obſerved that the Choldeans ſpent ſo much time in Conquering 
Ezypt and Ethiepis. 

- 4 So fhall the king of Aſſyrialead away I the Epyp- 

ans prifoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and 


for a 


covered to the + ſhame of Egypt. 

{ Like Beaſts, of which this word is commenly uſed. m Havin 
their Garments cut off by the middle, te the diſcovery of their But« 
tocks and their ſecrer parts Compare 2 $am. 19. 4. 1/s; 47. 3. 


5 And they » (hal be afraid and aſhamed of Ethi 


their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. 
” All they that ſball truſt to them, and glory in them, as appearg 
from the following Words, the Pronoun they being put Indefinite. 
Iy here, as it is 1s: 2: 19. and elſewhere. But under this general 
expreſſion the 1/reclites not only are comprehended, but ſeem ro be 
principally intended, becauſe to them this Prophecy was delive« 
red, and they were eminently guilty of this Sin; of which ſee 7s. 


JOo1 2- & 31-1. 
6 And the inhabitants of this||iſle o ſhall ſay in that 


day, Echold, ſuch is our expectation p whether we flee 
for help q, to be. delivered trom the King of A 


and how hal! we eſcape r ? 
o Of this Land, in which the Prophet was, and to whoſe Inha. 
bitanrs, theſe words were uttered. For the Title of 1/es or [lands 
in Scripture is frequently given not only to Lands encompaſſed 
with the Sea, butallo ro ſuch Countries, as lay upon the Seaecoſts, 
as Pſal: 72. 10. Exck. 26: 15, 18. as Paleftita or Canaan did, yeato 
ſuch Countries as are remote or ſeparated from that Place in or of 
which the Words are ſpoken, as Eft: 10: 1. 1/s 24415: © 42: 4, 10g 
Oc. as Canaan was from Egypt, or at leaſt from Erhiopia. Add 
to this,that Canean had ſome reſemblance with an 7/e,cither becauſe 


OpIR. 


old, naked and bare-foot, even with their buttocks tn- f Heb: ihi 
a 
5 £6 S 


keawſs, 


flyria : 10:08, 


this Verſe ; of wliom he ſpeaks as of one People, in the Singular 
Number, becauſe they are all united into one Body and Church. 
Or, Fer, or Becauſe ( as this Particle is taken, 1 Sam; 154 15. and 
elſewhere ) rhe Lord of hofts ſhall bleſs him or them. So this is added 
25 a Reaſon why he ſaid, Iſrael ſhould bea Bleſſing to them all. x 
This Title and thoſe which follow, that were peculiar ro the Peo- 
ple of 7ſrael, ſhall now be given to theſc and ail other Nations of 


the Worid. 
| Es CHAP XX. 
Zhe Captivity of Egypt and Ethiopia repreſented : to take of the Jews from 
ſeeking to them for help, 1——6. 
N the year that * Tartan @ came unto Aibded 8, 
( when Sargon c the king of Aſlyria ſent him ) and 


# Kings fought againſt Aſhdod and took is : : 
r8; 27. a A great commander in Sennecherib's Army, 2 Kings 1$« 17+ 6b 

An eminent and ftrong City of the Phil/ſfins, Jof: 13. 3. 1 Som: 
5. 1+ in che armoſt part of the Land of Canaan, towards Exypre c 
What King of 4ſjria this was, is much diſputed. Ir is well 
known, and confciled, that one and the ſame Perfon hath frequente 
ly ſeveral Names, both in Scripture, as hath been obſerved again 
and again, and in other Authors. And therefore this may be either, 
s.  Sa.mancſer, who wten he took Samaris, might alſo by Tartan take 
this Place ; or, 2.Semacherib, who, before he came to Jcruſalem, 
came up againft avd took all the fenced cities of Judah, 2 Kings 18. 13, 
of which 4(b4ed might be reckoned one, as being in the Tribe of 
Judah, Joſs 13. 3- & 15e 47- and taken by Hezekiah fiom the 
Philitines, as it ſenms very probable from that pafſage, 2 Krngs 18. 
8. He ſmote the Piiliſtins even unto Gaza, aud the borders thereof, from 
ehe tower of the watch-mcn t9 the fenced ciry ; Or, 3. Eſarhaddon, Smna- 
cherib'sSon;,, who, by cutting of the firſt Lerter, is called Sarcheaen, 
Febit F.2T, and rhence poſholy, by abbreviation, Sargon *: Who 


it was almoft incompaſſed with the Midland Sea on one fide, and 
with the dead Sea, and the Sea of Galilee or Tiberias and Jordan on 
the other ſide ; or becauſe, as liles are. ſeparated from other Lands 
by the Sea,ſothis Land and People were ſeparated from all the ref 
ofthe World by God's ſpecial providence,and Preſence,and worſhip. 
þ So vann is our hope placed upon ſuch a people as are unable to de« 
liver themſelves, and much more to deliver us. 4 Ts whom we 
now and uſually truſt : for this was the common diſeaſe of the Peo« 
ple of 1/rcl, although Herekiah was ina good meaſure free from it, 
as weread 2 Kings 18. 5. r Either by their help, who cannot defend 
themſelves: or, by our own ſtrength; ſeing they wko were much - 
more potent than we are, could nor eſcape. 


CHAP. XXI. _ 

The Prophets fear and trouble at his Viſion cf Babylons Ruins by the Meal 

and Perfeans, 1 4. be mecketh Babel 5 9* Edom [carning 

the Prophet is called to Repentance, I1, 82. the $114 of Arab i calamity 

Jet, 134——17. 

HE burden of the deſart of the Sea s. As * 
winds in the ſouth b paſs through c, fo it d com- 1G 


eth from the defarte, from a terribie iand f. 

4 Of Babylon, as is evident both from her deſtroyers, the Medians, 
v. 2, and eſpecially from v: 9, where ſhe is named. She ſeems to 
be called Deſorr Propherically, to intimate, that although ſhe was 
now a moſt Pupulous City and Kingdom, yet ſhortly ſhe ſhouls 


be turned into a Defolate Wilderneſs, as was threatned,c/:13 19,0, 


But the word here rendred Deſars ſometimes ſignifies 4 Pain, as a very 
and thus it moſt properly agrees 


learned Interpreter hath obſerved, 

coBabylen and the Land about it, which Geographers note to be Sir 
plain Country, without any Confiderable Mountains 1n 1t- _ Cale 
led the Deſar; ef the Sea, becauſe it is fituate by the Sea, 26 the INes of, 


> 
pm 


mighr do this thing in Hezekish's time, ſome years afcer (is Father's 
Death, and his coming te the Empire, elthough it bs uot recore 


the Sea, Eft:10; 1. are thoſe Countries which were beſidethe Sea.And, - 


the Title ofche Ses might well be given i@ the Waiters of —_—_ 


whirl- * 7gh;4: 


Chap. XX, 


T Heb by 
Foe han , 
[atah, " 
Mich;y 
T1, ; 


4 
» 


8, 


RC —— — EE Ir 


— ev I— 


Pp 
Heb: "a 


{Hcb:wr 
ted. 


[Or , my 
Wd war 
td 


Heb: put, 


none 2M GAG I n 


——— - 


_— 


hi 
of 


(hap- AX 


be:a.le of the great plerty and multirude of them the great Chn- 
ne' of £4p2's'-5, and the ſeveral lefſer Channe's cut out, and the 
vait: L1k:s of Water; in which reſp2&s it is ſaid to fir upom many 
Waters, fer: 51. 13: the Name of Sea being given by the Hebrews to 


ward frm Judea, where there were many and great Deſerts, in 
which rhe Winds have greater force, See Job 1: 19; Fer: 4: 11+ 
c As meeting with no ſtop or oppoſition. 4 The burden or Judge- 
men”, Or, he, the Median, as it is in the next Verfe. e From 
Mein and Perſia; thus exprefled, either becauſe thoſe Countries 
were full of Vefarts;z or becauſc a great Deſart lay between them 
ar. d Chal izs, as Geographers 2nd Hiſtorians report. f From the 
Medes, a warlike and formidable People, as appears both from Sacr- 
ed and Prophane Writers. 


2 At grievous viſion g is declared unto me,the treach- 


Heb;harderous d21ler dealeth treacherouſly, and the {poiler 


ſpoileth 4: * Go up z, O Elam &; Beliege /, O Media; 
all the ſighing thereof wm have I made to ceaſe. 

g A Viſion or Prophecy, containing dreadful Calamities which 
were to fall upon Babylon. þ This is ſpoken either, 1. of the Chal- 
deans, as their Sin, for which God ſends the following Judgment : 
So the ſenſe is, The Chaldeans ſtill perfiit in the praftice of Treache- 
Ty and Rapine, to which they have been ſo long accuſtomed; Or, 
2. of the Medes and Perſians, who are here noted to pay the Babyloni- 
ans in their own Coin, and to uſe the ſame Treachery and violence 
towards them, which they had done to others. To which pur- 
poſe the Words are and may well be rendred otherwite. either thus, 
The treacherous dealet hath found a treacherous dealer, and the ſpoiler 
hath fouud @ ſpo:ler : or thus, O thou that dealeFft treacheronſly with the 
treacherous dealer : and that ſpoileff the ſpoiler, go up, O Elam, &vc. as 
it followeth, Theſe wotds will be much illuſtrated by comparing 
them wirh Ia: 33: 1. There is no doutt to be made, but the Medes 
and Perſians uſed Treachery as well as Force againſt Babylon : 
And beſides other inſtances now unknown, we have orie upon Re« 
cord, of their entertaining thoſe two Traytors, Gadatus and Gobrias, 
and following their Counſel and Condu& in taking the City,which 
made them Partakers of their Treaſon. * To fight againſt her. 
Theſe are Gods Words, either giving them Command and Comiſ. 
fion to doſo, or rather foretelling what they would do ; which is 
oft done 1n this form of Speech. & Perſia, called Elam Sy necdochi- 
cally, becauſe Elam was en eminent Province of P-rſia, bordering 
upon the Medes, I T's wit, Ba"ylon, wv: 9. m Eit:er, 1. Babylons 
ſighing, which ſhall ceaſe, becauſe they ſhall have no time to ſigh, 
or lame*t their Miſeries, being ſuddenly ſurprited, and cur offin 
a moment, as they were. As G d is ſaid to ſeek out the wickean: ſs of 
of wicked men till he find none,Pſal: :o: 15. when he urterly deſtroy- 
eth them in or with their Sins: Or, 2. the ſighing and groanings 
of Gods People, and cther Nations under th: heavy Opp: eſhons of 
that potent and crue] Empire; the Pronoun her, or chereef, being 
taken here not paſſively,as commonly it 15, but aQtively, or effict-nt- 
ly,as ſometimes it is,as Deut: 11: 25: your fear, 3: e: the fear of you ; 
and Job 33:7: my terreur, i: e;, theterrour or dread of me upon thee. 

2 Therefore are my loins » filled with pain ; pangs 
have taken hold upon me,as the pangs of a woman that 
cravelleth os IT was + bowed down at the hearing of zz, 


I was diſmayed at the ſeeing of it. 

n Which he mentions with reſpe& to the following Similitude of 
childbearing, in which the loins are ſorely pained. And this the 
Prophet ſpeaks, either, 1. in the Name and Perſon 0” the Babylonian. 
Or rather, 2- in his own name ; which is moſt natural, aud agrees 
beſt with the laſt clauſe of the Verſe, which plainly ſpeaks of the 
torment which he lad in the meer hearing of the Word,and ſeeing 
the Viſion, and not of that which they had in the feeling of it; al- 
though the latter is implied in the former; and thz Prophet expreſ- 
ſeth his horrocur in hearing and ſeeing, to intimate the dreadful 
horrour which ſhould ſeize upon them when it came upon 
them. o Sharp and grievous pains, : 

[0r, my 4. |] My heart panteth, fearfulneſs afrighted me : the 
ra war night of my pleaſure p hath he q | turned into fear 


"PW 7 Unto ME- 

* p Thenight, in which I uſed to have a ſweet Repoſe and Sleep. 
He ſcems to have had this Viſion in a night. But withal this hor- 
rour of the Prophet by night was Typ:cal, and did ſignihe that 
grievous horrour and deſtrution,which ſhuuld befal the Babylonians 
in a night of great Feaſting and Jollity, 2s it did Dan: 5, 5. 30. 


'Chap: 13 » 
174 


{{cb:wri- 
ted, 


fears 

5 Prepare the table /, watch in the watch-tower ?, 
eat, drink : ariſe, ye princes «, and anoint the ſhield x. 
[Furniſh it with meats ond Drinks, as it foll,-ws. The Propher 
foretells what the Baby/onians would be doing when their Enemies 
were at their doors that they would give up themſelves to Feaſting 
and Security, ft To give us notice of any approaching dar:ger,that 
in the mean time we may more ſecurely indulge our felves in Mirth 
and Pleaſures. « Either, 1 ye Medes and Perfians: Whilſt your Ene- 
mics the Babylenians are feaſting ſecurely, prepare to make your 
Aſfult. Or, 2. Ye Princes of Babylez: Ariſe from the Table and 
run to your Arms. Which ſudden alarm and change of their Poſ- 
ture proceeded from the Tidings out of the Waich-rower,as may be 
gathered from the former Clauſe, and is more fully expreſſed in the 
following Verſes, x Prepare your ſelves and your Arms for the 
Battle approaching. The ſb:eld is put for all their weapons of Offence 
and Defence. They uſed to anoint their Shields with Oy, parcly to 
preſerve and polifh them; and partly to make them ſlippery, that 
their enemies darts might not faſten in them, but ſlide off from them. 


6 For thus hath the LORD faid unto me y, Go, fer 


' a watchman z, and let him declare a what he ſeeth, 

3 I ſpeak not my own fancies, but what God hath made me to 
ſee and hear ina Viſion; the Particulars whereof are related in the 
following verſes. « Either, 1. a Prophet ; ſuch being oft ſo cal- 
led,as Ezek: 3; 17: & 33-2+ Or rather, 2. a Military Watchman. 
For this was now done only ina vilion, which yer did fore«ſignifie 
what ſhould be done really afterwards. & To thee 1a viſion, tg 
them Really. 


11S 4 FR 


e very great Colle&ion of Warers.6 In thoſe parts which lay Svuth- ' 


9 God, who ſhewed himthat Viſion. 7 Into atime and matter of | 


* Chap. X 


7 And he ſaw b a chariot e with a couple of horſe- 
men 4, a chariot of afſes, and a chariot of camels e ; 


and he hexrkened diligently f with much heed. 
6 A ſhort Speech, for he told me thar he aw. «c Not for Bur- 

den, but for wir, in which chariors were then much uſed. 4 At- 
tend2d with two Horſmen.So th-re were both Chariots and Troops 
: of Horſemen. Or, with a couple of Horſes, as this word is ſome= 
' kiimes uſed, as 1 Sam: 8: 1: 2 $#m: 1: 6: The chariot was drawn 

with two horſes. e Two Chariots, one drawn by Afes, ( under 

which Tirle ſome underitand Mules. as being engendred of Aﬀes} 

and the other by Cunmels. Whereby he ſignifies . the Variety and 

Avundance of Warlike Proviſions which the Medes and Perſians 
_ have for this Exredition, and particularly ©f Chariots 

ercof ſome were for the Carriage of Neceſſary Things, and 0= 

tners for the Battle, f He carefully obſerved what he ſaw, and 
what he could further diſcover. 


8 And he|| cried, Aliong: my LORD, Iftandjo, 


and I am fet in my ward || whole nights 2. 


cried out, I ſfcealſoa L'on,ro wit, marching before the Horfe-mens f: 
and Chariots already mentioned : which they ſuppoſe ro repreſent 
Cyrus or Darius marching in the Head of their Armies. Or, as it is 
rendred in the margin, and by divers ochers, he cried as (which Par- ' 
nicle is oft underſtood,as hath been formerly ang frequently noted) 
# lion, with a terrible Cry, as being affrighred with the Viſion, and 
withal ſignifying the dreadfulnels of thar Judgment which was 
here repreſented as coming upon Babylon. h The warciman ſpeaks 
thele Words either to God, or to the Prophet, who by command 
from God had ſet him in this Place and Station; to whom therefore 
he gives the follewing Account of his Diſcharge of the Work 
wherewirh he was intruſted.. According to thy Command Ihave ſtood 
& doyerſtand continually,both day & night,upon my watch-tower. 

9 And behold &, here cometh a chariot of men /, ,- -., 
with a couple of horſemen mm: and he » anſwered and Nd: 
ſaid, * Babylonis fallen,is fallen : and all the * graven 
images of her gods o he 

k The ſum of what I havediſcovered is this. ! Not filled with Jer: 50: 2. 
Goods, as Chariots of Burdef uſe to be; but provided with Men, © 5 1: 444 
to fight from or with them. »» Underſtand, and a Char!o: of Aſſes, 
and a Chariot of Camels; which is eaſily underſtood trom wv 7. where 
they are expreſſed. » The Prophet 1ſa:zas, who ſer the Warchman 3 
or the Lord, by whoſe Command he was ſet, wv: 6: who here gives 
an expiica:1onof the Viſion. es Which 1s men- oned as an Evidence 
rhat ſhe was fully conquered, beczuſe otherwiſe they would not 
have ruffered their Idols to have be-n thrown to the Ground. p 
God, by the hands of Cyrus, his Inſtrumenc, Or, it is an indefinite 
Speech, he hath broken, &c. for they are broken, &Cc. H: 

10 O my chrelhing 9, and the # corn of my floor r Ns 
chat which I have heard of the LORD of hoſts, the 
God of Iſrael, have I declared / unto you z. | 

q Threſbing 1s here put for the Corn threſhed, as it is explained in 
the following words, the A being frequently put for the Objs&, 
as captivity for the Caprives, feer for the thing feared, Oc, as hath 
been nored before. And the Corn threſhed is here metaphoricaclly 
put for People ſorely afflifted znd puniſhed, which is oft expreſſed 
by Threſhiog, as 1(a; 25: 10: & 4:: 15, Mich: 4: 13, Oc. © This is 
ſpoken either, 1- of the Jews, to whom he now turneth his 
Speech, whem God did grievouſly threſh and affli& by the Babyloni- 
ans,and whom he here comforts with theſe Tidings,as if he had fard, 
though thou wilt be threſhed firſt, yet Babylon ſhall be threſhed 
laſt,and moſt dreadfully,and their threſhing ſhall be thy Deliverance 
This Interpretation is thought neceſſary, becaule of the latter clauſe 
of the verie, wherewith this is tobe joined. Or, 2»: of Bebylon. O 
my threſhing : or, thou art my threſhing, whom I have undercaken 
to threſh and puniſh. And fo this is fitly mentioned here, to aſſure 
'them that this Prophecy of Babylon's Fall muſt neceſsarily be accom- 

; Pi:ſhed, becauſe the Almighty was engaged in the Work-And this 

| Inrerpretation ſeems not to be inconſiſtent with the reſt of the 

| verſe, as we ſhall ſee. » The corn which I will cauſe to be threſh- 
'ed upon the Floor. Heb. the ſor of my floor. For the title of ſon is ofc 
given £o lifeleſs things, as Arrows are called 7he ſons of the bow, or 

of the quiver, Job 5: 7:& 14: 28, re. ſ What I have foretold is 
;not my own invention, but the Word of God, and therefore ſhall 
infallibly come to paſs: 7 Either, 1, unto you my People, or 
Hearers ; for all the Prophecies, even concerning other Nations; 
were publiſhed ro them,and for their uſe and Comfort : Or, 2.Un- 
to, ( or, concerning, as this Hebrew Particle is ſometimes uſed, ag 
the Learned know) you Babylonian:, to whem this was in ſome 
ſort declared, becauſe it was publiſhed amongſt the Jews,and by their 
means might e-ſily come to the knowledge of other People, and 
conſequently of che Babylonians. Nor is it unuſual for the Prophers, 
in their Prophecies delivered to Gods People concerning Baby!on,by 
an Fpoſtrephe to turn their Speech to the Babyloni:ms themſelves; of 
which we have Inſtances, Jer: 50. 24, 31,& 51. 13,14, 25, 26. 

Ir The burden of Dumah v. He # calleth to me y 
out of Seirz, Watchman a, what of the night b ? 
watchman, what of the night c 2? 

u Either, 1, ofa part of Arabia, fo called from Dumeh, one of 
Iſhm#e!'s Race, Gen: 25. 14. 1 Chron: 1. 30. Or rather, 2. of Edom 
or 1dumea, as ſeems moſt probable from the mention . of Mount 
Setr, which was a part of Edom ; which may here be called Dumah, 
either by an abbrevtiarion, or cutting off the firſt letrer from 1dus 
mea, as Ram is put for Aram, I Chron: 2. 9. Job 32. 2. or rather 
prophetically and ſarcaſtically ; for Dumah ſignifies filent ; Where- 
by he intimates, That Edom, which was much given to vain boaſt- 
ing and railing againſt Gud, and againſt his People, as we read 
elſewhere, ſhould be brought ro ſilence and utter ruine. And 
ſuch new, and enigmatica)}, and fignificant Names are elſewhere 


4, 
Me 


& 18: 2, 


fo 
a 


= 


given by the Prophets to divers known Places, as Babylon is called 

Sheſhach, Fer: 25, 26. and Egypt, Mazor, Mich: 7: 12, Oc. x To 

wit, Dumsh, qr the people of mo of whom he ſpeaks, or = 
: 5 _ 


off 
continually . upon the * watch-rower in the day-time, a « ln: || 
*Hab: 2:1, 
Z The ſenſe of the Words thus rendred is this, The Watchman | Or, v0: oy. 


» i 
:3) 
"l 
ev:1l F :8, | 


? hath broken unto the ground. 'Ch:46:1: 


is 


[1 
W148 


fi 
1 
i 
[ 


i 


We: 
l 
WR" 
F 
if 


: 
4 


il 

$1.0 
V's 
WA 


{ 
[> 1 
! 
| 
: 
| 
} 
i 
" 
M- 
, 
if 
| 


T3 4 


he name and by the appointment of the reſt. » To the 
Watchman, as appears by the following Words : For the Propher 
delivers his \rophecy in the ferm of a Dialogue berween tie Peo- 
le and the Watchman. » Out of Eco. which is frequently cal 
Fea Sety, as Gen: 3 2: 3. & 36.8. 2 Chron: 20 20, Oc. Of 26. il. 8 
Whereby he means either, 1. the Prophet {a7ah, whom they cal! 
- warehman, either ſeriouſly, or in ſcorn, becauſe the Prophets were 
ſo called by God, and by the People of the J<ws : Or, 2. the 
Watchman of Edom,whom they had fer as People ule to Jo in tune: 
"of great danger. 6 The night 1s taken either, 1. metaphorica ly, fur 
2 time of Tribulation. So rhey ask the Propher whar he ha'h t 
 fay concerning thar nighr of Ca/ami:'y which he had fo long and 
oft threarn-d to them, whereof as yet they ſaw no apPpearar ce: Or, 
2. Properly ; the night: being qu? got, and chieftime in which the 
Watchman's Care 1s mot necell ry becauſe then their Enemies 
had opportunity to do them moſt harm. So the Pevple are \uppol- 
ed to cometo him very early in the morniog, to e:quire what ha 
hapned in the nighr ; which ſh:ws a Stare of great P-rpl-xity anc 
Fear : which might well be cailed a burden, both becanic Fe-r in it 
ſelf is a great Torment,and becauſe this Fear was a Sign or Preſage 
of their approaching Miſeries. c The repetition of the ſame Words, 
ſhews the greatneſs of their Soi:cirude an Fear. 
12 The watchman ſaid, The morning cometh, and 
alſo the night 4: if ye will enquire, enquire ye: return, 
me El. 
pu” The night is paſt without any great miſchief to you, and the 
comforta'1- Ligtt of the Mor::ing 1s approacving, which freeth 
mens Mind» from the rerrouis of -che night; bur aithough the mor- 
ning be coming, it will be gon-, and the Night will return, anc 
your Fears with it. The night ieems 0 be he'< taken properly,2sthe 
morning is ; yet lo, that he alludes 10 the Metaphorical Sgntficari: 
on ofthe Word, and intimares, that the Nig"t of Afﬀition wat 
coming vp9a theme e If this Watchman be rhe Prophet Iſaias,then 
the ſenſe of theſe Wo:ds is this, 1f you w:ll be enquiring: enquire fin- 
cerely and ſeriouſly of G«d by me, conc-rning your Dariger, and 
the way to prevenr it ; r7eturz unto the Lord by true Repenrance, 
who alone can ſecure you, and come unto me for Dire&ion. But if 
it be their own Watchman, which wich ſub fon, I conceive moſt 
roubable, the ſenſe is, If you will enquire, enquire : [ percetve.by what 
have obſerved this Night,that your Danger is not paſt,and there 
wili be occaſion for further Enquiries from time ro r1me ; and there- 
fore return, come, 1: &: either return to then that ſent you with this 
Meſſage,and then come to me for further Tidings; or, come again, 
as return, lie down, is put for lie down again 1 Sam: 3.5. cometo me 
the next morning, as you have reaſon ro do, and ſo from morning 
to morning ; for I ſee every Night is likely to bring ſome evil Ti- 
dings to you. 


12 * The burden upon Arabia, In the foreſt fin 


XXII. 


of them in t 


# Ter, 40; Arabia ſhal ye lodge, O ye travelling companies g of 


Dedanim b. 

f Not, as you uſed to do, in the Houſes or Tents of the 4rabians: 
Whereby he implies, Thar char P:'/paious Country {hou'd be turned 
into a deſolate Wilderneſs. g Inthole Parrs Travellers rhendid,anz 
ftill do go tog=ther in Companies. Se Gen: 37: 25, 28: Jes 6, 19 
h Or. Dedamites; of whom ſee on Gen: 25: 3. Jer:25.23,24:& 49,7, 
$. Theſe were Merciants, and uſed to Trade with Tyre, Ezek 27:20. 
& 38: 13. and their way lay thorow the ſame Parts of Arabia. 


14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema 3 || brought 


Ir, bring ater to him that was thirſty ;they prevented with their 


bread him thar fled &, 

; A part of Arabia; of which ſee Job 6:19. Jer. 25.23. &k Where- 
by he implies, That thoſe other Arabians againſt whom this Prophecy 
is princip:Ily dire&ed, ſhould be reduced to great ſcarcity of al} 
neceſſary Proviſions and forced ro flee for thei: Lives,from a Bloody 
Enemy, as is more fully expreſſed in the next Verſe, 

15 For they fled || 4 from the Swords, from the drawn 


ſword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievoul- 


{Heb from nels of war. 


16 For thus hath the LORD ſaid unto me, Within a 


*Ch:6.14! year 1, * according to the years of an hireling 9, and 


all the glory = of Kedar o ſhall fail. 

I From the time of this Prophecy. m2 To wit, an exaCtt Year; for 
Hirclings diligently cbſerve and wait for the end of the Year,when 
they are to receive their Wages, Their Power, and Riches, and 
all things wherein they uſed to glory. This was executed by the 
Aſſrians. o Of whom ſee on Pſal: 120; 5 Fer: 49. 28. 

17 And the reſidue of the number of + archers p, 


FHeb.bews the mighty men of the children of Kedar, (hall be di- 


minill.ed » for the LORD God of Iſrael hath ſpoken ir. 

p Bows andArrows were their chicf weapons,&they weie expertin 

the ule of them, both againſt Beaſts and M-n, as occaiion required, 
CH AE XXIL 

The Anguiſh of Judah : the Prophet much grieved, 1 5. by the Perſians, 

Mzdes and Aſſyrians,6,7. he r-proveeth their humane Wiſcom, 8 IT 

and prophane joy, 12,13. which God would certainly puniſh, 14. Shebnah's 

deprivation for his Prid-,x 5:19 Eligkim put in his place; his glory,20+-2 5. 

HE burden of the Valley of Vifion a What ail- 

eth chee now,that thou art wholly gone up to the 


houſe tops b ? 

s Of Fudab ; and eſpecially of the City of Jeruſalem, as the next 
Verte ſheweth. Which is called a valley, becaule a great part of ir 
ſtood in a Valley, and comparatively ro thoſe higher mounrains 

' wherewith it was encompaſled 3 of which fee Pſal: 1:1. 1. & 125. 
2. Iſa: 52.7. and the valley of wiflon, becauſe of the many and clear 
viſions or Revelations of God's Mind, in that Place, above all other 
Parts of the World. As the Prophets are called ſeer:, 1 Sam: 9. 9+ 
ſo Prophecy is frequently called ſion, as 1 Sam;3; 1. Iſa: 1; 1. Exck: 
1: 13, 26. a As they uſed 10 do in times of great Confuſion and 
Conſternation, that they might mourn, and look, and cry te Hear 
ven for help. Compare 41ſa; 15. 3: Jer. 48: 38. 3D 

2 Thou art full ofſtirsc: a tumultuous d4 city, a 


joyous city 3 thy {lain wen are not flain with the ſword, 
no; dead in battle. 


8 i: 


c Or, Yhou who waſt full of flirs, or neiſes, to wit, of joyfu) 


as the following words limit it, and as this word is ultd Zcc6: 4:7 


Clan, 


US 


b 


t:.ough elſewhere it be taken for doleful Cries, d Or, þ- frrous full 


of note and Clamovr, through Revelling and Jollity. 
1. Zech, 9: 15, e But cither by Famine or Pcſtilence in the 


both which were inglorious kinds of Death. 

3 All thy rulers f are fled together ; they are bound 
f by the archers g: all that are foundin thee 4 are 
bound together z, which are fled from far &. 

f Zedekiah and his Chief Commanders, whoſe Flight he foretels. £ 
Heb: jrom the bow, i: e ſo as they were diſenabled from uſing the 
Zow: which is an ulual Hibraiſm, as from 8 king is put for from 
6-ing a King, 1 Sam: 15: 23, and from ſceing, Pſal: 69. 23. is rendred 
(hat they cannot ſee, Rom: 11: 10+ But this word is by ſome, and may 
very well be joyned to the foregoing Clauſe ; for the Words in the 
Hebrew lie thus, All thy rulers are fled together from the bow ( cr, bow. 
men, as this wordis rendred, 7/#: 21: 17: they are bound. Which ſcems 
moſt plain and unforced, and ſuits beſt with the following Words 
iS allo with the Prophets uſe of the ſame Phraſe, chap: 21; 5. they 
fed from the bent bow, &o. h that remaineth there with Zedte 
ah in the Siege ; for thoſe who had fled to the Chaldeans ſaved 
cheir Lives and Liberties. 7 In Fetters, Fer: 52, nu. k Which fl:4 ro 
Jeruſal:m from the remoteſt parts of the Land. But te rather 
:praks of thoſe who fled from Jeruſalem, and from their Encmies 
vhereof ſome had fled away, bur were purſued and overtaken by 
their Enemies, and bound,as others had been. And the Words ſcery 
t be well rendred, they fled far away, as this very Word is uſed Iſa: 
23: 7. which may be underſtood either ofthe ſame P<rions who fled 
bur were taken in their Flight, as was now ſaid ; or of others. who 
fled awav, when others abode there and were bound. ; 


4 Therefore ſaid T, * Look away from me 7; +I will 


the ſpoiling of the daughter of my people ». 

{ Take off your eyes and thoughts from me, and leave me alone 
that I may take my fill of ſorrows. m2 For all your Labour will be 
loft, I neither can nor will receive any Confolation, » O' thar ciry 
and Narion where fI an a Member. The Title of daughter is oft 
given both to Cities ar:d Nations, as hath been noted betore. 

5 For zt is a day of trouble, and of trezding down o, 
and of perplexicy by the Lord GOD cf hoſts p in the 
valley of viſion, breaking down the walls 9, and of 
crying to the mountains 7. 

0 In which my Peopleare trodden under foot by their inſolent E- 
nemics. p This is added partly to ſh-w, that this did not happen 
wichout God's Providence; and partiy to aggravate their Calaniiry, 
vecauſe nor only Men, bur God himſelf fought agaiaſt them. g Of 
the ſtrong Cities of Judah ; which was done by Sennachertb, 2 Kings 
25:10. r With ſuci loud and diſma) Outcries as ſhculd reach to 
rhe neighbour:ng Mountaias, and make them ring again therewith. 
6 And Elam / bare the quiver 7: with chatiors of 


men & horſemen #«,and Kir x f uncovered y the ſhield z. 
[ The Perſians, who now, and for a long time af:cr, were ſubject 
ro the Afrian and Chalaean Empercurs, ani were employ'd by them 
11 their Wars. #& B-ing expert Bowen, as appears fiom Jer: 49» 
35. and from Strabo's Te!timony. u As ſome of them fought on 
toot, ſo others fought from Chario's and Horſes. x The Meaes, 1o 
called by a Synecdoche from Kir,an emin-nt City and Region of Media 
of which ſee 2 Kings 16: 9: Ames 1: 5. y Prepared it and themielves for 
"he Battel ; for in times of P-ace Arms were wrapt up and covered 
co preſerve them clean,and fic for uſe. z Their defenhive and offen= 
tive Weapons. | 

7 And it ſhall come to paſs,zhat F thy choiceſt valleys 
ſhall be full of chariots a, and the horſemen {ball {ſer 


chemſelves in aray || at the gate b. | 
a Valleys were the moſt proper Places for the uſe of Chariots: See. 
Joſ: 17:16. 6 To aliſtand defend the footmen whilſt they made their 
Aſſault, & withal to prevent and rake thoſe who endeavour to eſcape 
8 And he c diſcovered * the covering of Judah d,and 
thou didſt look ia that day to the armour « * of the 


houſe of the forreſt f. 

c The Enemy, Semnacherib, of whoſe Invaſion he ſeems to ſpeak. 
4 He took thoſe fenced Ciries,which were a Covering or Safeguard 
both to the People of Judah,who fl:d to rhem,and toJeryſalom, which 
was begirt and defended by them. e Thy hope and Truſt was wholly 
or chiefly placed in the Arm of Fleſh. For although Hezekiah was 
commended for his Truſt in God, yerthe Generaliry ofthe P-ople 
were guilry of Diſtruſt in God, & Confidence in tke Creature. f More 
fully called the houſe of the foreft of Lebanon, 1 Kings 7: 2.not becauſc it 
was built in Lebazon, for it was in Jeruſalem; but either becauſe it was 
builtof the Trees of Lebanon, for which cauſe the Temple is called 
Lebanon, Zcch;11* 1. or for other Reaſons. See my Noteson 1 K'n.7 2, 

9 Ye have ſeen g alſo the breaches ofthe city of Da- 
vid, that they are many : and ye gathered togetherthe 
waters of the lower pool h. 

£1 e. Obſervedor conſidered, as this Word is uſed, Exod: 32:9 
and el{ewhere, in order to the Repararion of them, and co fortific 
the Ciry, as the next words maniteſt. þ That you might both de- 
prive the Enemy of Water, and ſupply the city with it of which 
ſee on 2 Chron: 32: 4, 5. 


10 And ye have numbered the houſes of Jeruſalem 3, 


& the houſes &have ye broken down to fortitie the wall. 
5 That they might exa&tly know their own ſtrength and the num- 
ber of their People, and ſo Jay the Burdens more equally upon them, 
and make ſufficient proviſions for them. k Which ſtood upon or with= 
out the Walls of their city,and ſo gave their enemies any Advantage 
againſt them,& hindred the ſearching or fortifying the walls & city. 
11 Ye made alſo a ditch berween the two walls /, for 

| the water of the old pool»: but ye have not looked 
unto the maker thereof », neither had reſpect unto bim 


that fa(bioned ito long ago p. | Eicher 


See Þ W. 214 


; : Siepez 
as many died, Jer: 14: 18: & 38: 2, or in their flight,as others A 


f Heb, of 


the bow, 


yi er:4:19: 
1 


weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me m-: becauſe of 4 fe. ; 


will be bit« 
tcrin Weehs 
me: 


t Heb: 
Dade Ne 


kad: 


+ Heb: the 
choice ofthe 
valleys, 
|| Or, t49 
wards. 


* Ch:30. 
P I Kings, 
To, 17. 


AXAIF 


» Ch: 
] iCor: 


[ Or, © 


[Or, z 
LORD w 
Merged 

the with 


M exce 


ns ang c| 
ted thee 


$904 
Mfr 


[ 
} Heb: x 
Mvity 
Cz, 


s 


$ 
4 


_- — 


naD- %RXII. TE 

I Either thoſe 2 Kings 25.4. or thoſe 2 Chron: 32. 5. in both which 
Places we read of two wal!'s. 2 To receive the Waters conveyed 
into it by Pipes from the old Pool. » Either, 1. of the Water; for 
both the Springs and the Rain which filleth rhe Pools are from 
God alone ; or, 2, of feruſal?m, expreſſed in the foregoing verſe, 
and eaſily underſtood here,becauſe all theſe Works were undertaken 


for the Pronoun Relative to be put by it ſelf, without any expreſs 
mention of the Perſon or Thing to whichit belongs, which is left 
to the Reader to gather out of the foregoing or following Words; 
of which ſee the Notes on Pſal: 87: 1. Cant: 1.1. o Heb. the former, 
or framer of it , God, who made it a City,and the Place of his ſpecial 
Preſence and Worſhip; which alſo he had undertaken to proteR, if 
the People would obſerve his Commands ; to whom therefore they 
ſhould have reſorted and truſted in this time of their diſtreſs. Pp 
Which Clauſe may be added to aggravate their Sin, in diſtruſting 
that God who had now for a long time given proof of his Care and 
Kindneſs in defending this City. 

12 And in that day did the Lord GOD of hoſts call 
q to weeping,and to mourning;and to baldneſs r,and to 
girding with ſackcloth. 

q Tnvite and oblige them by the Courſe of his Providence, and 
require this by the Precepts requiring theſe things in ſuch Times 
and Conditions. r to make themſelves bald, by plucking or ſha- 
ving off the Hair of their Heads, as was uſual in great Sorrows, as 
Ezrag. 3. Jos 1: 20: Mich: 1: 16. although it was forbidden in caſe 
of the Death of Relations, for a ſpecial Reaſon; of which ſes on 
Lev: 19: 27, *8. @ 21; 5. : 

13 And behold, joy and gladneſs, ſlaying Oxen,and 
killing ſheep, eating fleſb /, and drinking wine ; F let 
us eat and drink for to morrow we lhall die z. 

{ Not only for Neceſlity, but to exceſs and Luxury, as eating and 
drinking are taken Mat:24.38. & The Prophets tell us, that we ſhall 
certainly and ſuddenly be deſtroyed ; it concerns us therefore to 
make our beſt of the preſent time, and ro be merry whilſt we have 
the opportunity. A moſt perverſe and deſperare Conclaſion, pro» 
ceeding from obſtinat profaneneſs,and contempt ofGod's judgments 


14 And it was revealed in mine ears « by the LORD 
of hoſts, ſurely this iniquity ſhall not be purged from 
you, till ye die x, faith the Lord GOD of hots. ; 

u What I am ſaying is not my own Invention, nor uncertain 
Reports; but what I heard with theſe Ears of mine. The like 
Phraſe we have 1 Sam: 9: 15. the Lord hath rolgfSamuel in his ear. x 
You ſhall feel the ſad EffeQsof this wickedffſs, and my juſt di- 
pleaſure for it, as long as you live. This is not ſpoken excluſively, 
as ifit ſhould be purged after their death,which is abſurd and im- 
pious to imagine, at leaſt concerning ſuch as lived and died in this 
deſperate and impenirent Condition; bur empharically,to ſhew that 
God will have no, mercy upon them in that time of Life, in which 
he uſeth and delighteth to give Repentance and Remiſſion of Sins 
unto Mankind. 


15 Thus faith the LORD GOD of hoſts, Go, * get 
thee unto this treaſurer y, even unto Shebna z, which 3s 


over the houſe a, and ſay, 

y Which the Prophet might boldly do, becauſe he had the Pro- 
tection not only of God, who ſent him upon this Errand,bur pro- 
bably of Hezekiah alſo, who at the time of this Prophecy was either 
King,or his Fathers Viceroy, or at leaſt Heir-appareng to the Crown. 
z Who ſeems to have been advanced by wicked 4haz, and to have 
been 2 great Patron of Impiety and Injuſtice in his Reign, and by 
politick Compliance with Hezekiah, thought to gain his Favour; and 
ſo to keep his place and power at Court. 4 Over the Houſe of Da- 
wid, as is more fully expreſſed bellow, v, 22. Poſſibly he was nor 
only the Lord Treaſurer, but alſo the Kings Prime Minifter of 
State, 


16 What haſt thou here>? and whom c haſt thou 
here, that thou haſt hewed thee out a ſepulchre 4 here 


» Ch:56;12 
\Cor:15:32 


FR raveth an habitation g for himſelf in a rock 4, 

h Or, What doſft thou here ? what right haſt thou to this Place and 
Office ? c Either, 1+ Whar friends in whom thou canſt confide ? 
Thou haſt ſo ill managed thy ſelf and thy Afairs,that thou art uni- 
verſally hated. Or, 2, What Kindred or Relations? For the Jews 
ay, he was a Stranger by Birth 3 which is the more probable, be- 
cauſe hisPedegree is not mentioned in any ot thoſe places of Scrip- 
rure where he is named. &d As great and ambitious men uſed to do. 
e Not in thine own country,the proper place for ſuch a Monument; 
but in Feruſalem, which ſhould not be defilled nor diſparaged with 
ir. f In an high andeminent place, as 1/a: 57:7: g Either, x. a 
Sepulchre, which is called a mans houſe, Job 30: 23. or, 2.a dwell- 
ing-Houſe. He ere&ed, or is compared to one that doth ereCt, a 
ſtately Houſe to live in, and a ſtately Sepulcher to receive him 
when he dies. And theſe two are hily joined together, becauſe 
their Sepulchres were commonly builr 1n or near their Houſes. See 
Iſa: 14: 18. Fob: 19:41. þ A fit P:ace both for Strength and State. 
Thus we read of « Sepulchre hewed ous of a Rock, Mat; 27: 60. 


17 Behold, |] the LORD will carry thee away with 


+a mighty captivity z, and will ſurely cover thee &. 
WRD who 4 Will cauſe theeto be carried into Captivity by a ſtrong Hand, 
Mered or by the Hand of a mighty man,from which therefore thou ſhalt 
the wich mot be able to eſcape. Or, will caff the away with the caſting of a migh« 
excels ty man, 1:8. With great force: or, 21 caſting wall caſt thee away, O. 
at cover thou mighty man, k To wit, with confuſion, as is here implied, 
%;,ond clo= and as this phraſe is more fully exprefled, Pſal: 89. 40, & 109. 29* 
thed thee Or, covering may be put for obſcuring his Glory, which he defign- 
$"z-0u//y, ed to publiſh, and to that end erefted ately Monuments, &'c: Or, 
urely, this may be an alluſion to the ancient Cuſtom of covering the Faces 
c of Condemned perſons ; of which ſee Ef/* 7; 8: Compare Job g: 
} Heb: he 24. Ezeck: 12. 6, 12. 


Or, he 


for Jeruſalems Defence and Proviſion, And it is uſual in Scripture , 


| ly Care and AﬀeCion, 


e [| as he that heweth him out a ſepulchre on high f,and']| 


my 


ball / inco a Þ large country ys there Hhalt thou die, fHeb:la1 


! Heb: Wraprng he will wrap hee up like a Ball, which conſiſts of 
Materials wrapped and bound together, that it may be tofſ:d far 2« 
way. Or, Rolling he will Roll thee with the Rolling of a Ball. m Liko - 


; a Ball which is caſt into a large and plain ſpot of Ground, where 


' beingthrown by a ſtrong man it runs far and wide, Or, to a far 
Countrey, which ſeems to be here called large of ſpaces, not ſo much 
in it ſelf, for that was inconſiderable to him, whether the Land of 
his Captivity was large or little as ia reſpe& of its diſtance from 
the Place of his Firth and Abode. » The ſenſe of the Words thus 
rendred, feems to be this, Thy glorious Chariots wherein thou didſt 
ride in great State at Jeruſalem, ſhallthen and there be turned into 
ſhame to thy ſelf, and vo thy Maſter, to whom it is juſt matter of 
reproach, that he was ſo foolith as.to advance and truſt ſuch a 
faithleſs and unworthy Perſon. But the Words are dy divers os 
thers fitly rendred, there the Chariots of &by glory ſhall be, ( or, ſhall 
die or vaniſh, 5: e: That ſhall be the end of all thy pompous Chari- 
ots, and other Monuments of thy Pride) O thou who art the ſhame 
of thy Lord's Houſe, who by thy unjuſt and wicked Pratices haſt ex- 
poſed thy King and Maſter, and the Royal Family, to Reproach 
and Conterapt, | | 
19 And I o will drive thee from thy ftation,and from 
thy ſtate ſhal he p pull thee down. | 
0 The Lord, whole Words theſe are, v: 15. as is manifeſt from 
the following Verſes. p The Lord ; ſuch ſudden changes of Per 
ſons being very uſual in theſe Writings. 


call q my ſervant * Eliakim the ſon of Hilkiah : 


9 By my Spirit fitting him, and by my powerful Providence mos 
ving Hezekiahs heart to call him. 


21 And I will cloth him with thy robe,and ſtrength- 
en him with thy girdle r,and I will commit thy govern- 
ment into his hand, and he ſhall be a father / to the 
Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, and to the houſe of Judah. 

r There was a peculiar ſort of Robe and Girdle which was the 
Badge of his Office, which ſhould be taken from him, and given to 
Eliakim. { He ſhallnot only have the Authority of a Father, which 
thou now haſt, in which reſpe& all Rulers are called Fathers, as 
Exod: 20: #2, Numb: 36: 1, but ſhall alſo govern them with father- 
/ and not with Rigour and Cruelty, as thou 

oft. 


22 And the Key? of the houſe of David will I lay 
upon his ſhoulder #: fo he ſhal * open and none ſhal "Job i2:74 
{hut x, and he ſhal ſhut and none hal open. 

# The Government, the power of opening and ſhutting, of let- 
ting men into it, erputting them out of it, whereof a Key is a fit 
Emblem ; whence the delivering of the Keys of an Houſe or City 
into the Hands of another, is a ſign to fignifie and confirm the gi- 
ving him the Power and Poſſeſſion of it. u He mentions the ſhoulder 
rather than the Hand, in which Keys are commonly carried, either 
from ſome Ceremony then in uſe, of carryiag a Key upon the 
Shoulder, either of the Officer of State himſelf, or of another in his 
name and ſtead; or to ſignifie that this was a Key of greater weight 
than ordinary, and that Government, which is deſigned by this 
Key, is an heavy Burden, and therefore in Scripture-phraſe ſaid to 
be upon # he ſhoulder, as Iſa; 9g: 6. x Againſt his will, or without his 
Commiſſion or Conſent. 

23 And I will faſten him y as * a nail in a ſure places 


z : and he ſhal be for a glorious throne to his fathers 
houſe s. | 

3 I will eſtabliſh the Power in his Hands. = In the ſtrong walls, 
or ſolid Timber, in the Houſe : Which is oppoſed to Shebna's in- 
ſtability, ſignified by a Ball, v: 18. # By his prudent and righteous 
Goverment he ſhall procure great Glory, not only to himſelf, bur *+ 


to all that have any relation to him. This alſo is oppoſed to whas 
 15{aid of Shebns in the end of v: 18. 


| 24 And they ſhal hang upon him all the glory of his 
fathers houſe b, the off ſpring and the iſſue c, all veſ- 
ſels of ſmall 


to all the || veſſels of flagons e. 

b Of his own kindred and Family,;who ſhall all dependupon him, 
and receive Glory from him ; of the Houſe of David, which is c2:- 
led his fathers Houſe, either becauſe Kings are called che fathers of all 

' their ſubje&s,borh in Scripture, as x Sam:24: 12. 2 Kings 5: 13, & 
; 16: 7- and in other Authors; or, as Clvin ingeniouſly conje&ures; 
| becauſe he was of the Blood Royal, Otherwiſe this had been no 
; great Commendation to him, that he ſtudied ſo much the adyance« 
ment of his own private Family. And this ſeems more probable, 
becauſe this Charafter is oppoſed to that of Shebua,who was the ſhame 
of his Lords, to wit, the Kings houſe or Family, v: 18. 7: Great and 
ſmall, the children and Grand-children of his Fathers houſe. &4 
The meaneſt of them ſhall receive a Luſtre and Advantage from 
their Relation to him: e All ſorts of Veſſels, great or ſmall, maan 
or precious, may be hanged upon him, withour any fear offalling; 
whereas ordinary Nails or Pins, if they be oppreſſed with too grear 
weight, are eaſily broken down, and the Vellels fall with them. 

25 In thac day, faith the LORD of Hoſts, ſhall the 

nail that js faſtened in the ſure place f, be removed,and 
be cut down, and fall : and the burden that was upon 


it g ſhal be cur off: for the LORD hath ſpoken 3s. 

f Shebna, who ſeemed to be ſo, both in his own Eyes, and in the _ 
Eyes of others. g All thoſe wicked Officers that were advanced and * Jer. 35; 
ſupported by his Power. 22.047: 4 

CHAP. XXIII. Ezek. 26. 
The deftruFion of Tyre : from God : for their Pride, r=———= 14: the time of & 27. & 
her rifing again, 15—17, and converſion to God, 18. 28: 


of vials, 


"*"Hs0iy f 18 He will ſurely violently turn and toſs thee /ike a 
wan, 


* HE burden of Tyre .. Howl ye ſhips b of Tar- Amos ig; 
T iſh c, for it is laid waſte 4, fo that there is : == 9s 
TE os ao”. 


4 E's — : 


ADE Hy Eng: — ha 


20 Andir ſhal come to paſs in that day, that I will 5. Kingh | 


Ezra:9.t; | 


4 | 


| Chap. XX1TN 

bi. 
and there the chariots of thy glory ſhell be the ſhame of of ſexes, i ; 
thy lords houſe ». i 


o 


- <p 


en err en wr net Gn I rn ren Den ene ES I 
I 


Rev: 3: 7: | 


i 
j 


1 . tis ' 
quantity 4 ; ſrom the veſlels of cups, evenk,On i | 


Bmg_——>————_—__ -_ _-_ - 


bf 
b 
i 
| 
(| 
n ; 
h 


EIT DSS ELD 


EEK EEE CA HT 


—— 


mh 


I 
| 


} 
k 
| 
i 
' 


[! 


+ Heb. 
| fe0r. 


f hap. 


* rers, which ſeems to be more natural and eaſie, and no leſs agree- 


XXUlI. Es 4 


ic is revealed to them f. 


a The Prophecy of the heavy Calamity and Deſtruftion of Tyre 3 
being ſeated in an Ill- 


which now ftood inits Strength and Glory, 
and, upon a Rock, abounding in Riches, mighty in Naval Power, 
having lately conquered that Navy which the Aſjrians brought a- 
2inſt them. Yet this City was, according to this Prophecy, de- 
Ck ; and that twice, firſt by Nezuchadnezzar, and long after- 
ward by Alexander the Great., And although this Prophecy ſeem 
dire&ly and properly to reſpe& the former Deftru&ion, yet ir ſeems 
to have ſome referenc to the latter allo; only at 15 intimated, That 
after ſeventy years Tyrus ſhould recover her former Power and Glo- 
xy,before her {econd and final Deſtruction. b Eicher, 1- properly; 
to which howling and Lamenting is aſcribed by a known Figure 
Called Proſopopeis : or, 2. Metonymically,the Merchants and owners 
of Ships, who had much Commerce with this illuſtrious Mart. c 
Either, 1, of Tarſus, a great part of Cilicia, which antiently had the 
Dominion of thar part of the Sea : Or, 2. Of the Ocean, which is 
ſo called, 1 Kings io: 22. Pſal: 48.8. 1/a: 2: 16. d It ſhall ſhortly be 
laid waſte ; Which was fulfilled notby Shalmanezer, as ſome would 
haveit; for though he ftraitned ir for ſome time, yet he never 
took it; but by Nebuchagnezzar. e So effactually waſted, that there 
is not an houſe left in it, nor any Merchantsor others that gointo 
ic, either ro Trade in it, or to repair it- f The ſenſe of the Words 
thus rendred may be this, [#, :: e: this Burdenor Deſtructien of Tyre, 
3s, i: e: ſhall be revealed, declared or made known, unto chem ; ej- 
ther, 1. tothe Tyrians, to whom this Notice fhould be ſent concern- 
ing the Preparations of their Enemics againſt them: or, 2. to the 
Ships, by which he means their Owners or Merchants, from the land 
of Chittiin: which may be here mentioned either becauſe they firſt 
had and gave them notice of it, as was now ſaid ; or becauſe their 
laſt and foreſt deſtruction was brought upon them by Alexander,who 
was of the Land of Chitrim, as is affirmed by that very antient and 
venerable, though Apocryphal Writer, 1 Maccab. r, 1,0 8, 5, But 
this Place is otherwile rendred, both by antient and latter Interpre- 


zble to the Hebrew Text, either thus, that ſbe is laid waſte, Jo that there 
is no houſe, nor entring or comivg in (to wit, for Traffick ) fromtheland 
of Chittim, is made known to them, to wit,to the Ships or Merchants 
that uſed to refort thither for Traffick : or rather thus, for z# is laid 
waſte, ſo that there is no houſe, ( not ats Houſes lefc for the Citizens 
todwellin ) nor extring or coming in ( to wit, of Merchants) from 
the land of Chittim ; ſbe( to wit, her People) is removed or gone into 
captivity, as this Word properly ſignifies and is rendred, 1/a: 38:12. 
And for the laſt Hibrew Word, lamo which is rendred :0 them (which 
is the only ObjeQion again this Interpretation ) itis only added 
as an Elegancy of the Hebrew Language, and hath no further ſigni- 
fication, as it it alſo, Pſal: 58: 7. and as the Particle /o, which ſigni- þ 
fies the ſame thing, and ſuch other Pronouns, are frequently re. 
dundant and inſignificant in the Hebrew Text, as hath been ofr ob- 
ſerved by Grammarians and Interpreters. He mentions the land of 
Chittim, becauſe this was an eminent Place for Shipping and Trade | 
ing, as is manifeſt from Numb: 2 4: 24 Ezek: 27: 6. Dan: x1: $0. 
and therefore doubrleſs had great Dealings and Commerce with 
Fyre, and may here be put Synecdochically for all other Countries 
which traded with her. Ir is notneceſſary, for the underſtanding 
of this Text, to determine what Chittim is, whether it was was [rs- 
ly, or Greece, or the Iſlands in thoſe Parts; it is ſufficient to know 
that it was a Sea-faring Place in the Mialand Sea, and ſo much ſtar- 
tled and concerned in the Deſtruftion of Tyre. ; 

2 Be 7 ſtill g ye inhabitants of the iſle þ, thou whom 


the merchants of Zidon 5 that paſs over the ſea k, have 
repleniſhed 7. 


# Heb: Be fllent, as one confounded, and not knowing what to 
ſay, or as mourners uſe to be, Job 2. 8, 13. Iſa: 47: 5. boaſt no 
more of thy Wealth and Power, as thou uſedſt rodo. h Heb: of 
Tyrus, which now was an Iſland, Exzek: 27: 3. & 28. 2, till Alex. 
axder joyned it to the Continent, as Pliny reports. Although the 
Title of 1/anaris oft given by the Hebrews to Places bordering up- 
on the Sea. i An eminent City of Paleftins, nigh unto Tyre, much 
concerned with her and for her. k That are a Scafaring People. 
I With Mariners, Ezek 27: 8. and Commodities, ; 

2 And by great waters m the ſeed of Sihor », the 


harveſt of the river o is her revenue p, and ihe is a mart 


of nations q. 

m By the Sea, which is very fitly called the great waters, Pſal:107. 
23. underſtand, comerh; or is brought to her. » The Cora of Ezypr, 
wherewith Egypt abounded, and furniſhed divers other Parts of rhe 
World, whence it was called the Granary of the Roman Empire; 
which alſo was eaſily conveyed by Sea from Egypt to Tyre,and thence 
to divers other Countries. This is called feed bere, as allo Hag: 2, 
10: and'elſewhere, by an uſual Meronymy, and the ſeed of Sihor, be- 
cauſe it grew up the more abundantly becauſe of the Overflew of 
the River, asall ſorts of Authors have noted. For Sibor is nothing 

, elſe but N:lus, as appears from Jer: 2. 18. which is called Szhor, as 
by the Greeks it was called Meas, from its black colour. And this 
and no other River ſeems to be that Sibor, which is ſo oft mentioned 
as one of the bounds of the Land of Canaan, as Numb: 34.5, &c, be- 
cauſe that Land, atleaſt in that extene which God allotted and gave 
it to the 77aelites, though they through negle& or cowardiſe might 
not aftually poſſeſs it, did reach to one of the Branches of that Ri- 
ver: And indeed, if Sihor be not Nilus, that great and neighbouring 
River is not named in all the Scripture, which ſeems very impro- 
bable. o This Clauſe explains the former ; that plentiful Harveſt 
of Corn which comes from the Influence and Inundation of N:lus 
which is emphatically called the river, as here fo alſo Exod: 1: 22, 
Ha: 19: 5. Execk: 29: 3, 9* as Euphrates is in other Texts of Scripture, 
pls as eaſily precured, and plentifully enjoyed by her, as if it grew 
in her own Terricories. 95 A Place to which all Nations reſorc for 
Traffick. ; 

4 Be thou aſhamed, O Zidon r ; for the ſea [hath 


no houſes, no entring in e: from the land of Chittim 


| butuſed to be carried in ſtately chariots, or Magnifizent Veſlels. & 


#4. 4; 


r For Z:aon was a great City near 7hre, and Piono!y wrt, 

her by Commerce and hon ard called by ſome i __._ a9 
Tyre, which they ſay, was tuilt and firſt inhabired ty a Co) 2th 
che S:4onians ; and therefore ſhe muſt needs be greatly conce wn = 
the DeſtruQion of Tyr#s. J That pert ofthe Sea in whitt; 7; = -<anny 
and from which Ships and Men were ſent into all "pet gp 
This isadded to explain what he meant by the ſea, even " waroguaf : 
might be called the ſtrength of the Sea, cither aQtively, i ab 
fended that part of the Sea from Pyracies and Injuries; or © "mg 

ly, becauſe it was defended and ſtrengthned by the Sea which on. 
compaſſed it. And this Title is here given to 7Tjrus, to ſhew m_— 

great cauſe of Confuſion and Fear $:45: had from this Ex2a ” ” 
which for ſtrength was mnch inferiour to Tyrus, #1 who wg > 
exceeding fruitful and populous, that I ſent forth Colonies i £ 

other Countries, ( of which the Famous City of Carthage wa => 

am now become barren andAdeſolate. nn 

F As atthe report concerning Egypt, ſo ſhall they be 

ſorely pained at the report of Tyre x. : 
. * According to this Tranſlation the ſenſe is, All the neighbou 
ing Nations ſhall be no leſs terrified at the Tidings of the Der Q. 
Jon of Tyrus, than they were of old vpon the Report of God's f> 8 

mer and dreadful Judgment, upon the Egyprians ; of which ſee Ba 

I5-14, 15, 16. Jo: 2. 9. 11, Becauſe they ſhall deſpair of refitins 
that enemy againſt whom that vaſt and potent City, which ”— 

eemed 1mpregnable, could not defend it felf. Bur the words oe 
by the Seventy, and other both ancient and latter Interpreters re . 
dred otherwiſe, and that very agreeablyito the Hebrew Texr When 
the report (to wit, of the deſtruction of Tyre ) came, or ſhall com 
(which Word is eaſily underſtood, as it is above, w: 3. and in % 
ther Texts of Scripture before mentioned _) z0 the Egytians, the ſhat 
be ſorely pained according to the Report of Tyre : their Grief ſha]] be af: 
werable to the Report ; as the Report is very dicadful, fo thawe 
Grief and Anguiſh ſhall be very great : or, they ſhall fear leſt the 
ſhould be deſtroyed in like manner as Tyras was deſtroyed. , 
6 Paſs ye over to Tarlbiſh p, howl ye inhabitants of 
the iſle Voz 
3 Flee from your own Country to Tarſus of Cilicis, and their be 
<a CS on — as Others render the Place Paſs 

ver the Sea, which 1s oft call'd Tarſhiſh; 'hi SR. 
liar wr Reagpong Jhiſh; of which ſee on v: r. z OF 
7 1s this your joyous city a, whoſe antiquity is of 
ancient days b ? her own feet ſhall carry her c+ afar off THeb:na 
to ſojourn 4d. — 
# Thar formerly lived in ſo much Pomp, and Pleaſar 
curity. 6 Being built before Joſbua's time, _ IS EE IG 
19: 29. £ Whereas before, hke a delicate Lady, fhe wopld not ſer 
the ſole of her foot to the ground, as the Expreſſion is, Deur. 28:56. 


To ſeek for new Habitations. For, as ſome of FDI 

, a : Mm the Tyrians we - 
ken and Carried Captiveinto Chaldta and other Places, fo fy 
by Sea into ſzyeral Parts of the World, Carthage, and divers other 
Towns of the Midland Sea. as is recorded by antiene Hiſtorians. 
8 Who hath taken this counſel againſt Tyre e, the 
crowning city f, whoſe merchants «re princesg, whoſe 
trathquers are the honourable of the earth ? | 
e Words of Admirations who and where is he that could imagine 
or Curſt atrempr fuch a thing as this ? This is the work of God, as 
1s expreſſed, wv; 9. and not of Man. f Which was a. Royal City, 
Fer; 25: 22. and called a Kingdom, Ezek; 28: 2, 12. and carried away 
the Crown from all other Cities, and Crowned her ſelf and her ci- 
t1zens with Glory and Delights. g Equal to Princes for Wealth, and 
Power, and Reputation. 
9 The LORD of hoſts hath purpoſed it þ, Þ to ſtain 
the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the 


honourable of the earth z. 

h This is the Lord's own doing therefore do not doubt it, nor 
wonder at it. * God's Deſign is by this one Example to abate and 
abaſe the Pride of all the Potentates of the Earth, that they may ſee 
and know what weak and wretched Creatures they are, when God 
- leaves them, and ſers himſelf againſt them. 


10 Paſs through thy land & as a river /, O daughter of + Heb! 


Tarſhiſh 2, there 3s no more | ſtrength ». 

k Tarry no longer in thy own Territories, but flee through them, 
and beyond them, into other Countries, for Safety and Relief. 
[ Swiftly, leſt you be prevented 3 and continually, till you be all 
gone; and in Sholes and multitudes. 2 OZ 7% ; forof her he ſpeaks 
both in'the foregoing and following words. And Drus might well be 
called the daughter of Tarſhijb, i: e: of the Sea, as that word 1s uſed, 
ver: 1. and elſewhere, becauſe it then was an ifland, and therefore 
as it were born of the Sea, and nouriſhed and brought up by ir. # 
Heb. no more girdle : the Girdle, which ſtrengthens the Loins of z 
" Man,is pur for ſtrength as Job 12: 21-& 38. 3. Ir behoveth you, O 
People of Tyrus,toflee away,as Iadviſe you; for your City is unable to 
defend you; your wealth, the Sinews of war, is Joſt; your Walls 
| broken down; the Sea,which,like a Girdle,furrowned and defended 
you,is now in part filled up by your Enemies,who have joyned yau 
co the main land, your fermer Friends and Allies forſake you. 

11 He o ſtretched out his hand p over the ſea g, hey, - 

ſhook the kingdoms r: the LORD hath given a com- ,,,;zy » 
mandment /|| againſt F the merchant city 7, to,deſtroy merch 


the || ſtrong holds thereof. | man. 
o The Lord, ex reſſed, V: 9. P To Nrike it, the Antecedent t Heb 
being pur for the Conſequent. q Or, againift the Sea; 7: e againſt CENA 
Tyrus, the Daughter of the Sea, as ſhe was now called ; and con- | ou 
ſequently againſt all thoſe Ships and Men which uſed to Traffique Srengiita 
with Tyrus, and were enriched by that Trade, and therefore ſuf- 
fered in her Fall. r Heb. He made the' Kingdoms to tremble ; eithery 
- 1- the two Kingdoms of Tyre and Sidon; or ratker, 2+ the neigh- 
bouring and confederate Kingdoms, as appears by comparing this 


+ Heb. vf 


pollue, 


girdle, 


ſpoken, even the ſtrength of the Sea te, ſaying, 1 travel 
not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nouriſh up 


young men, nor bring up Virgins #, 


'$: 


-with Eztk, 26: 15, 16; 17, 18. who might juſtly quake at her Fall, 
partly for the dreadfulge*ts and unexpectedaets of the tlung; pon 
ly 


1 


- 


Chap. XXIIþ 


| 


| 


Pc,oc 


f Heb 


ſelbe # 
Tyres: 
ſm of / 


arlic, 


fu 


Jeb! 
lt, 


Or, «ts 
100718. #. 
erchalt 
"an. 
Heb. 
ganan 


OG... 
rengtths 


"Chap. X KH, 


f Heb, 
ſhelbe uns 
Tyreasthe 
ſom of an 


7: 8-4 


1; tecauſe Tyre waza Bulwark, anda Refuge, and a great Advantage 
t5 them; and partly becauſe her Fall made way for their Ruine, 
as bzing deſtroyed by their common Enemy. s Hath contrived 
and purpoſed it, as was faid, v. 8. 9. hath put this deſign into tae 
Heads and Hzarts of herEnemies,znd given themCourage to atempr, 
and Strength ro execute ſo difficult an Enterpriſe, * Heb. againſt 
Canaan : the Word Canaan being taken either, 1. for a merchant as 
it is uſed, Joh 41, 6. Hoſ. 12. 7. or rather, 2+ for the Proper name 
of a Place or Peop'e, as it is generally. uſed : for the Tyrians and 
3:4onians were deſcended from Canaan, Gen. 10, 15. and were the on- 
ly con'iderable Remainders of that curſed Race whom God had de- 

. Voted to Deſtruction. And ſo this Phraſe may be here uſed, both 
as an Evidence and as an Argument of their intended and approach- 
ing Ruine. 

' 12 And heſaid, Thou shalt nomore rejoyce, O thou 
cppreſſed virgin «, daughter of Zidon : arife paſsover 
coChittim y, there alſoshalt thou have no. reſt z. _ 

4 $0 he calls her, either for her Pride and Beauty, and living in 
great eaſe and pleaſure ; or becauſe ſhe had hitherto never born the 
yoke of a conquering Enerty : though withall he declares, that ſhe 


thould be oppreſſed or deflowred very ſuddenly. x Whereby he uygs 


derſtands either, 1- Zidon her ſelf, who ſuffered in and- with Tyre ; 
for fo thisPhcaſe ſeems generally to be uſed,che daughter of Sion,or of Je- 
ruſalem, or of Babel, or Egypt, ©. being nothing elſe but Son, Jerus 
Salem, Babel, Ezyp:, &c,or rather, 2. Tyrus, as moſt Interpreters both 
Jewiſh and Chriſtian underſtand it, of whom this whole Context 
and Prophecy ſpeaks ; which may well be called the daughter of Zidon, 
becauſe ſhe was firſt built and poſleſſed by a Colony of the Si4onrans ; 
as Pliny calleth Carthage the Daughter of Tyre, becauſe ſherwas built 
by a Colony of Tyrians, And the Title of da1zhter is oft-times given 
in Scripture to Towns or Cities which had their Being from, or Dee 
pendence upon other Cities; in which ſenſe weread of rhe daughter 
of Hejbbon, Numb 21, 25. and of Rabbah, Jer, 49. 2, 3- and of So= 
dom, and of Samaria, Ezik. 16. 46, 49, 53. And the daughter of Tar- 
ſhiſb here above, v 10. isnot meant of Tarſh:ſh it ſelf, but of Tyrus, 
whict had a relation ro, and Dependance upon Tarſhiſh. y Of which 
Place, fee on v. 1. x Thitherthine Enemies ſhal purſue thee, and 
there ſka) they overrake thee, although thou wilt think thy ſelf ſes 
cure when thou art fled ro remote Parts beyond the Sea, | 

13 Behold the land of the Caldeans a; this people 
was not b, tillthe Allycian founded it for them that 
dwell in the wiiderneſs c they ſet up the towers there- 


of, they raiſed up the palaces thereof 4, and he brought 
ic to ruine f. | | 

_ @ You Tyriaus, who think your City impregnable, caſt your Eyes 
upon tie Land and Empire ofthe Chaldeans, or Babylonians; which, 
though now it be a flouriſhing Kingdom, and ſhal ſhortly grow far 
more glorious and potent, even zhe glory of kingdoms, as it 15 called, 
Iſa, '3e 19. yer ſhal certainly be brought to utter rujne : and there» 
fore your Preſumption is moſt vain andunreaſonable. þ The Chal. 
deans at firſt werenot a People,nor formed into any Commonwealth 
or Kingdom. & Till Nimrod, the Head and Founder of the 4ſſrian 
Monarchy, built Babel, Gen. 10: 9. now the head of the Chaldean 
Monarchy, which he built for thoſe People, who then lived in 
'Tents, and were diſperſed here and there in wild and waſte places, 
that he mighr bring them inro Order, and urider Goverment, and 
thereby eſtabliſh and promote his @wn Empire. d The Chaldeans 
being by this means brought together into a Body, fell tothe Work 
of Building their City, and its Towers and Palaces; and thereby got 
Power and Dominion over their Neighbours, till at laſt they grew 
the greateſt of a)l the Monarchies that then were upen Earth. e The 
Lord, who is expreſſed pefore, and is frequenrly deſigned in Scrip- 
ture by this indefinite Pronoun he, as hath been many times obſer- 
ved: Whereby heinſin::ates the rrue Reiſfon why neither the Chal- 
Aeaus nor the Tyrians ſhould be able :0 ſtand, becauſe the Almighty 
God was engaged againſt rhem, Ff Wil infallibly bring that great 
Empire to ruine. He ſpeaks of a future thing as if it were already 
Paſt, as the Prophers ule todo, The Cbaldeans ſhal now return to 
Their firſt Nothing, and become no People again, 


_ x4 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish : for your ſtrength 
g is laid waſte. 
g The City of Tyre, where you found Safery and Wealth. 
x5 And itshal come to pal: in thatday, that Tyre 
Shal be forgorten h ſeventy years, according to thedays 


it of one king k: after the end of ſeventy years þ shal 
Tyre ſing as an harlot /. | 

h Negle&edand forſaken by thoſe who uſed to reſort thither. 
; During the whole time of the Jewiſh Captivity in Bebylon. For 
Tyrus was taken by Nebuchaanezzar,Jer. 27. 3, 8. Exzek. 26. 7. alittle 
afrer the taking of Jeruſalem, and was reſtored by the favour of 
the Perſian Monarchs after the return of the Jews from the Captivi- 
ty of Babylon, k Fither, 1, of the Kingdom of Babylon, which laſt- 
ed ſo long after this time ; the Word king being put for kingaom, as 
itis Dan. 7. 17. &' 8. 21, or, 2. of oneRoyal Race, of Nebuchad. 
nezzar, including his Son,8&his Son's Son. in whom his Family & 
Kingdom were to expire as we read £zek,28, 7. | She ſhal by degrees 
returnto her former Sate of Proſperiry and T raffick, whereby ſhe ſha] 
eaſily entice theMerchants ofthe World to converſeand trade with 


wy as Harlots uſe to entice their Cuſtomers by Laſcivious 
ONgs. 


NroCiy 16 Take an Harp, go about || thecity #, thou har- 
lot » that haſt been forgotten ; make ſweet melody ,fing 
many ſongs, that thou mayſt be remembred 0. | 

»m As Harlors uſe to do, to allure Cuſtomers. 1So he calleth Fre 
partly becauſe ſhe enticed Merchants to deal wich her by various 
Artifices, and even by diſhoneſt Prattices, as Harlots ule : and part- 
ly becauſe of he great and general Uncleanneſs which was both 


committed and tolerated in it. e By thole who had forgotten 
thee, v. 15. | 


17 And it ſhal corre to'paſs abi the end of ſeven- 
ty years, that the LORD will viſit Tyre p, and'she 


arlie, 


1-4 


Shal turn to her kire 9, and 5ha} commit fornication 
with all thekingdoms of the world r upon the face of 
the earth. 


Þ To wit, in mercy, as tis Phraſe is uſed Ruth 8. 6, Pſal, 65. g. 
and elſewhere. 9q The Hebrew Word properly ſignifies, rhe hire f 
an Harlet;, which agrees well with the fornication in the nex: Clauſe: 
alchough theſe Phraſes 2re not to be underſtood properly, but me- 
raphorically, of Trading or Commerce with others, + Shal trade 
promiſcoully with People of all forts of Nations, as Harlots enter= 
tain all Comers, | | | 

18 And her merchandiſe, and her hire ſhal be ho- 
lineſs to the LORD /: it thal not be treaſured nor 
laid up zz: for her.merchandiſe ſhal be for them that 
dwell before the LORD «, to eat ſufficiently, and for 
+ dureable clothing. | 


Jile ſpeaks not here of what the Tyr;au5s would do immediatly after 
their Reſtitution, but ſome time after it, even in the days of the 
M:ſiah; of which even ſome of the Jewiſh Rabbies underſtand it, 
and to which the Prophets have. a ſpecial reſpe& in their ſeveral 
Prophecies, and 1/aiah among and above the reſt of them. So this _ 
is a Prophecy concerning the Converſion of the Tyrians to the True 
Religion, of the Accomplifhment whereof, fomething is ſaid 4#s 
21. 3, 4, 5. and more in other Authors, #7 Either out-of Cove« 
rouſneſs. or for the ſervice of their Pride and Luxury, as they fore 
merly. did ; but now they ſhall freely lay it out upon Pious and 
Charitable Uſes. « For the Support and Encouragement of the Miz 
niſters of Holy Things, who ſhal teach the good Knowledge of 
the Lord, who dwell in God's Houſe, and miniſter in his Preſence ; 
the Support of ſuch Perſons being not only an Att of Juſtice and 
Charity, but alſo of Piety, and of great uſe and neceflity ro maintain 
and propogate Religion in the World. Although this doth notex= 
clude, but rather, imply their Liberality in contrivuting to the Ne» 
csſlities of all Chriſtians. ; 

CHA P. ' XXIV. 

Judgements on Judah fir their defilements and tranſgreſſions, 1 I2: 4 

Remnant ſhal praiſe God, 17, ;«>-15. God, by his judgments on his People 
and their Enemies, will advupnce his Kingdom 16, 2 


B 


= 


uſual with all Writers, when they write of their own Country; 
to call it the land, by way of eminency. There are many things int 
this Prophecy which manifeſtly concern this Land arid People;: and 
nothing, at leaſt before v. 21. which may be taken as a new and ad- 
ditional Prophecy, which is neceſſary to be underſtood of other Nas 
tions. But this I ſpeak with ſubmiſſion, and due refpett to thoſe 
Learned andJudicious Interpreters who take this to be a Prophecy. 
againſt Judez,and all rhe neighbouring Nations. 6 He will ſhortly. 
make it waſte, firſt-by the 4ſjrians, and then by the Chaldeans. 
c Bringeti it into great diſorder and confuſion. 0D 
2 And it (hal bs, as with the people, ſo with the] *q 
prieſt 4 ; as with the ſervant, ſo with his maſter ; as 
with the maid, ſo with her miſtreſs ; 


buyer, fo with the ſeller e; as with the lender, ſo with 1%» 23: 


the borrower ; as with the taker of uſary, 1o with ths 
giverof fſury to hin. | i : 

d The approxthing Calamity ſhall be univerſal, withour any rea 
ſpe& or diſtinQtion of Perſons or Ranks of Men; the Prieſts them-: 
ſelves having been Partakers of the Peoples Sins, ſhal alſo partake, 
with them in rheir Plagues. e The Purchaſer of Lands ſhal haye 
no more lefc than he that hath ſold all his Patrimony ; and all Per» 
ſons ſhal be made equal itt Beggaty atid Slavery. — - _, ., 

3 Theland ſhal be utterly emptied, and utterly ſpoi- 
led z: for the LORD hath ſpoken this word. ET 

4 The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world 
flanguiſheth a»dfadeth away, +} the haughty people g fHeb #7 
of the earth do languiſh, | heighth 


only the Land of Judea, but alſo the neighbouring Countries ; But, 
if the proper Signification of chat word be urge?d, this Prophecy. * 
muſt beexrended to all the Parts of the World, which theſe Learns 
ed Men will not allow. And the world, . both in Scripture and o- 
ther Authors, isoften uſed Synecdochically for that which intruth 
is. but aſmal part of it; ar leaft in compariſon with the Whole; as 
it is not only of the Reman Empire, as Luke 2. 1. AGs11, 28. but: 
alſo of Babylon, Iſa 13. 1t. and which cometh nearer to the 
point, of this very Land of Judeas, asJoh, 12. 19. 18, 204 
and elſewhere.An i therefore it may well be ſo underſtood here,es. 
ſpecially when this Word world is explained by thoſe other Words 
the earth, and the land, which the very next Verſe ſheweth to be 
meant of Iſrael or Judea as we ſhal there diſcover. z Not only 
Common People, who uſe tobe of low Spirits; but rhe: High, 
and Lofty Ones, whouſeto be ſtout ia their Words and Carriages 
towards me, .andto.deride my Threatnings. 
5 * Theearth alſo þ is defiled und 
thereof ;: becauſe they have tranſgreſſed the laws &, 
changed theordinance 2, broken the everlaſting cove- 
nant m7. . | EONS "Jo 
hb Heb. Andthe land, or,, this land; for here is an *mphatical 
Article in the H:brew Text. 7 - By the Wickedneſs of its ' Peo+ 
ple ; of which ſee Levir... f8. 25, 279. Num.35: 33, Oc, & The - 
Laws of God revealed to them, and preffed -upon themiin a firi- 
| gular manner, called fimply the laws, as the Word of Godis off- 
times called che word by way of eminency. / God's Ordinafces 
concerning his Worſhip and Service ; the Singular being put col-; 
leQively for the plural. =. The Covenant made berween God: 
and 4br4ham,- andall his Poſteriry, renewed with the I[raehets at 
Singi, which was everlaſting, -both+ en God's pare, whbo. upon: 
"rhe Conditions therein expreſſed, engaged himſelf ro be a God to 
them and to their Seed for ever; - and on 1ra9!'; part, wha were 
LF 3 g>liged 


| Chap. KX1V 


werteth- the | 
a Or, theland, to wit.: or Canaan, or I[rael, orJudea, Tt 18 face thereef. | 


Or, prince, | 
*Hoſ. 4« 9+ || 
X as with the * Exek:. 7- | 


f From this Word ſome infer, That this Prophecy concerns no: the people, 


er the inhabicants' "Gm."3.19 


I; 


YN 
" 

$i} 
Hh 
v! 
þ 


Li! 
re 
i 


Wl 
Fn 
: 14 


ES 


| 
#1! 
18:1 


XI 


> 


= ILL_—— IC 
I” 


' 
: 
i 


'2 


{ 
{ 
1 
[ 


: 
: 
: 


| 
| 
| 


: 
; 
: 
1 


$ 
| 
| ; 
* : 
4 
: 
i 
1 
: 


: 
i 
q 
b 
{| 


Chap. X X LV. I S A 


rations. All theſe Clauſes clearly prove, 
this Prophecy conc 
6 Therefore 


Deut; 28. 


» The Curſe of God threatned to Tranſgreſſonrs, 


they ſhould not perſiſt in thei [ 's 20 
and elſewhere. o Areconſum'd by the Wrath of God, which 1s 

. commonly compared to Fire. [ 
*Chap:i6: +7 * The new wine mourneth p,the vine languiſheth 


9, all the merry-hearted- » do ſigh. 

p Becauſe there are either none, or none but the Enemies ofGod 
& Iſrael,to drink it. Grief is aſcribed to ſenſeleſs Creatures by 2 F1- 
gure uſual in ali Authors. q Either becauſe there are no People 
left to dreſs it, or gathec its Grapes z or becauſe it is broken down 


\ 8, 9- 
Joel 1:10, 
Fo 


ine, Pſal. 104: 15. l 
8 The mirth * of cabrets / ceaſeth, the noiſe : ofcthem 


Ser:7:34. that rejoyce endeth,tbe joy of the harp ceaſeth. 
16:9'X [Which they uſed in their Feaſts and Revellings. * The Word 


9-00. roperly fienifies a roaring Noiſe and confuſed Clamour, ſuch as 
_ "6x1 We _ make, Pſake 78 65. Zech: 9. I5- : 
Hoſz5, 9 They ſhalnotdrink wine with aſong,ſtrong drink 
ſhal be bitter to them that drink it «. 
# Becauſe of the Fears and Miteries wherewith it is mixed. 
for empri= 10 The city x of || contuſion y is broken down: eve- 
ner. ry houſe is ſhutup z, that no man may come 1n. 


b x Jeruſslem, and other Cities ; for the Singular Word may be 
here taken col!e&ively. » Or, of vanity, or emptineſs, or defolation; 
for this Hebrew Word fignifics all theſe things. And the Ciry may 
be thus called, cither, 1. in regard of the Judgments of God come» 
ing upon it, as if he had ſaid, a City devored to Deſolaticn or De. 
ſtruQion, to be emptied of its Goods and People : or, 2. for its Sin 
a City of confuſion or Diſorder, breaking a1l tne Laws and Orders 
which God had eſtabliſhed among them er a City that walkerh with 
or after vanity, as the Scripture ſpeaks, Job 313 5. Jer 2: 5. thar 
loveth and ſpeaketh vanity, as they did Pſal 4: 2. and 12, 2. And 
this may ſeem moſt conven'ent, that the Sin of the City ſhould be 
noted in this Word, as the puniſhment is exprefled in the nexr. 
z Either for fear of the Enemy who have entred the City; or rather, 
becaule the Inhabitants are either fled, or dead, or gone into Cape 
tivity, and ſo there are none to gointoit, or come out of ic, 
1: There is a crying for wine a inthe ſtreers, all joy 


is darkned, the mirth of the land is gone- 

s For the want or loſs of their Wine, and ſpoil of their Vines, 
whereby they were deprived of the Means both of their Delight 
and Profit. Whereby he incimates their groſs Senſuality and Sot- 
tiſhneſs, that inſtead of crying for their Sins, and humbling them- 
ſelves under Gods Judgments, did only how! for their corn, and wine, 
and oil, as they did Hoſ- 7. 14. A is 

I2 In the city is lefc deſolation, and the gate is{mit- 


ten with deſtruction 6. 
b The Gates of the City are totally ruined, that the Enemy may 
enter when and where they pleaſe. 


123 When thus it ſhal be c in the midſt of the land 4 
among the people, * rhere ſbal be as the ſhaking of an 
' olivestree, and as the gleaning-grapes when thevintage 


15 done e. 

c When this Judgment ſhal be executed d In the land: But withal 
this Phraſe may intimare,that the Judgment ſhould not be {l3ghrand 
ſuperficial,& 1n the Skirts of the Land;bur that it ſhould reach their 
very Heart, their moſt inward and beſt defended Parrs. e There 
ſhal be lefr a Remnant, and that but a very ſmall Remnant; as 
there are ſome few, and bur a few Olives or Grapes left afrer the 
Vintage is over. VVhich by comparing this with the following 
Verſe, ſeems tobe added by way of mitigation, to ſignifie, thar 
God would in Judgment remember Mercy. 


14 They f1hal lift up their voice, they ſhal fing for the 
majeſty of the LORD g, they (hal cry aloud h from the 


ſea 5. | 
f The Remnant preſerved. g For his glorious Power andGood= 
neſs manifeſted in their Deliverance, þ In way of Exultation and 
Thankſgiving to God. #7 From the Iſles of the Sea, as this 1s ex- 
F plained inthe next. Verſe; from thoſe Parts beyond the Sea into 
which they were carried Captive, and in which they were miracu- 

louſly preſerved, : 
15 Wherefore, glorifie ye the LORD & in the || * 


fires 1, eves the Name of the LORD God of Iſrael in 


the iſles ofthe ſea m-. 

k Theſe are the Words either, 1. of the Remnant, who being 
themſelves delivered, do encourage and exhort their Brethren to 
glorific God with them : or, 2. of the Prophet, direQting and ex= 
citing God's People to glorifie God in their AfﬀiQtions, becauſe of 
that Deliverance which he had promiſed, and would aſſuredly 
give to them. When you are in the Furnace of Affliction ; 
although this Word is never uſed in Scripture in this ſenſe. O- 
thers therefore render the Word, 7 the wallezs; and others, :n 
the beles, you that arenow forced to hide your ſelves in the Holes. 
Poſſibly it may be better rendred, for /;ght or illumination ; which 
may be underſtood either of the Light of the Truth which God 
would reveal to them ; or for the Comfort and Felizity which 
God would confer upon them 3 Light being frequently'/raker: both 
ways in Scripture, For this Hebrew Word, in all other Places of 
Scripcure where it is found, ſignifies that Urim which was in the 
High-Prieſts Breaſt-Plate, and which properly ſignifies illumination, 
as both Jews and Chriſtians render it, whereof that was both a Sign, 
and Inſtrument ; of which ſee on Exod. 28. 3o. Add to this, that 
this part of the Prophecy ſeems to concern the i'ays of the Goſpel, 
and that Light which the Jews ſhould then receive by theMeſ/ias, of 


— = SONS 


'Or,valley 
PTEzek.39. 


——— — 


obliged thereby to conſtant&perpetualObedience through allGene- 
| that the earth or {and which 


erns,isno other thanthe Land of J/rael and Judb. 
hath the curſe » devoured the earth, 
and they that dwell therein are deſolate: therefore the 
inhabitants of the eatth are burned o,and few men left. 


15, Oc. and 29: 20. and imprecated by and upon th-mſelves, 1f | 
r Obedience to God, Deur. 27; 26+! much 


and ſpoiled by the Enemy. r That made their Hearts merry with 


L428 = 
p AArF. 
- \ 
| whom the High»Prieſt with his Ephod and Urim was a Tyre. And 
ſo thisis an Exborration to the converted Jews to ble!s God cho 
true Urim, even for Chriſt and the Goſpel, And ſome of the = 
cient Tranſlators hd this ſignification of the Word in their Eye, as 
the Yulgar Latin, who render it, mm dofirines ; and the Ch algee who 
| tranſlate it, when light ſhal come to the juſt, Butthis I propoſe with 
iu>miſſion. »2 In remote Countries,bey ond the Sez,which in Scrin. 
ture are commently called z/es, as hath been formerly and oft obſer 
ved. Whereby he ſeems to imply, that he here tpea'ss not fo 
ch ofa Temporal Felicity which the Jews ſhould receive ang 
enjoy in their own Country, as of a Spiritual Advantage which 
| -—— + pos have by the Meſfas in the Places where they were diC. 


16 From the # uttermoſt part of the earth » have we tHeb:wiy 


' heard ſongs o, even glory to the righteous p;but I ſaid 4, 

1 My leanneſs, my leanneſs r,wo unto me:the treaches f Heb: 
rous dealers have dealt treacherouſly /; yea,thetreache- £m" 
rous dealers have dealt very treacherouſly z, Fro , My 
, #® Fromall the Parts of the Earth or Land in which the Jews are PEI 

Or ſha] be- o Songs of Joy and Praiſe. p Or, zlorybe to the rightee 

ous; which may ſeem to be the Matter of the Song. By therigute= 

0u5 may be here underſtood either, 1 the Generation cf Riohreors 
and Holy Men, who formerly were deſpiſed, but now, upon this 
eminent Deliverance, {hal be highly honcured; cr, 2. the Lord 

whom they were exhorted to glorifie in the foregoing Verſe, ns 
who may well be called the righteous one, as he is frequently {tiled the 
holy one, as Hoſ. 11. 9. Habak. 3. 3, &«. or, 3. the Meſſiah, to whom 
| this Title of juſt or righteous is frequently given, as 7Ja: 53. 18. Jer, 
! 23. 5- Zech. 9.9. &c. Andthe believing Jews call him rightecus 
emphatically, partly to intimate that he is the Author and Procu= 
| rer of aljtruc Righteouſneſs, and partly in oppoſition to rheir urbe- 
living Brethren, who rejeCted and condemned him as a Malefac« 
rior All which the Prophet foreſaw by the Spirit of Prophecy 
9 But inthe midſt of theſe joyfulTidings,I diſcern ſomething which 
interupts my Joys and gives me caule of bitrer complaint and 1: 


mentation. # I faint and pine away for grief, for the followj 

Reaſon. / The Jews,who have Goes guilty of great N_ 

fidec,uſnet's towards God, are now ating the ſame Part, Which he 

ſpeaks either, 1. of thoſe who lived in histime; or rather, 2. of 

choſe who ſhould live when the Meſias was upon Farth, cf whom 

he forfaw by the Spirit, that they would forſake God, and reje&t 

their M:ſiah, and thereby bring utter Deſtru&ion upon themſelyes. 

For ev<ntke Hebrew DoQtors expound this Place of the Perfideouſe * 

nels of ſome fewsin the times of the M:fiah Andit isnot ſtrange 

t at ſo {:d a ſight made the Prophet cry out, My leanneſs, &c. 8 He 

repeats It to ſhew the horridnefs of the Crime, aud how deeply he 

was affefed with it. #77. 
17 Fear, and the pit, and the ſnare xare upon thee, ES 


O inhabitant of the earth, King. 19, 
x Great and various Judgments, ſome aQtually inflicted, and os 17. Ames: 
thers expetted and juſtly feared as the punifhment of their laſt men» 19. 
tioned Ireachery. : 
18 And it (hal come to paſs,zhar he who fleethfrom 
the noite ot the fear y.ſhal fall into the pic z; and he. 
that cometh up out of the midft ot the pit, ſhal be caken ,g,... 
in the ſnare ; for the * windows from on high are OPC= "pſ8: ns 
ned, and the * foundations of the earth do ſhake 4. 
9 Upon the Report of ſome terrible Evil coming towards him; 
the Act fear, being here put for the Obje&, or the thing feared, as 
it 15 112 many places. And thus this very Phraſe is taken, Job. 15. 
21; 2 Whenhe deſigns co avoid one Danger, by ſo doing he ſhall 
p:unge himſelf into another, and a greater Miſchief. a Both Heas 
ven and Earth conſpire againſt him. He alludes to the Deludge of 
Waters which God poured down from Heaven, and to the Earth- 
quakes which he oft-times cauſeth below, 
19 Theearth is utterly broken down, the earth is 


clean difſolved,the earth is moved exceedingly 6. 

6 This is repeated again. partly to ſhew the dreadfulneſs and cer- 
tainty of theſe Judgments, and partly to awaken and affe& the {tu- 
pid 1/raelites, who greatly needed it. 

20 The earth c ſhal * reel to and fro like a drunkard 


4,and ſhal be removed like a cottage e,and the tranſ- 
greflion thereof ſhal be heavy upon it f, and it ſhal fall, 


and not riſe again. 

c The People of the Earth. &d Shal be ſorely perplexed and dif 
treſſed, not knowing whither to go, nor what to do. e Or, like # 
lodge ina Garden, of which this Word is uſed, 1/a. 1, 8. which is 
ſoon taken down, and ſet up in another place, as occaſion requires. 
Or as others render it, /ike a tent, whichis eaſily and commonly 
carried from place to place. f Thoſe Sins which they formerly e« 
ſteemed light and pleaſant, ſhal now be moſt burdentome and grie- 
vous to them, becauſe of rhe dreadful puniſhments which ſhat fol- 


low them. 

21 And it ſhalcome to paſs in that day g, zhat the 
LORD hal + puniſh the hoſt of the high' ones hat are 
on high h,and the kings of the earth; upon the earth. 

g Either when God ſhal puniſh the Apoſtatical Jews ; or, aboutor 
after that time; or, in a time known to God: for this Phraſe js ofc 
uſed indefinitely, and without any reſpe& to the cime deſigned 1a 
the foregoing paſſages. þ The proud and potent Enemies of God, 
and of his People, who poſſeſs rhe High-places of the Earth. 7 Eli- 
cher, 1+ the great Monarchs of the- World, who now ſcorn and 
crample upon God's People; or, 2. the Princes and Rulers of J/rac! 
or Jzaah: for the Name of king is frequently given in ſcripture un- 
ro mean and inferiour Rulers, as Juag: 1. 7« 32 Kings 20. 1, 12. +Heb:with 
Pſal. 119. 46. and elſewhere. the gathi® 

22 And they ſhal be gathered together & 7 as priſo- rh or Bf 


ners are gathered in the || pir;and ſhal be ſbut up inche\q, am 


1Ch:i9:1h 


#Hcb:oif 


2203, 


priſon Land afrer many days ſbal they be || viſited 9. gen. , 
k By God's ſpecial Providence, in order to their puniſhment, . Or, fown 


2s the tollowing Words ſhew. And thus the unbeheving = wanting. 
ere 


* \ i V, 


: 


hits: 
23:1: 


[Chap NXV. 3 $ £ F & © Chap, XXV- 
were generally gathered together at Jeraſalem, to theirdolemn Feaſt, | 5 'Pnuu {halt bring down the noiſe 5 of ſtrangers & 
when T tw c:me and beſieged, and after 1:m2 time rook and de- 245 the heat in a dry »! : 1 wr Ss 
ſtroyed them. Which was a very remarkable Hand of God, as Joje- d fa cl ] - + at regs with the ſha. 
obo and other Hiſtorians obſerved. And I know nothing to the |49W of acloud?; the branch w of the terrible ones ſhal 
conrrary, but this very ching may be meant in this place; ir being be brought low. | 
confeſſed, that divers Paſſ:ges of this Ciavrer concern che times of | #7 Thetumultuous noiſe, as the Word properly ſignifies, which 
; the Mefiah. 1 As Ma efaftors, whici a'e taken in ſeveral Piaces, |he called their b/eft in the foregoing Vertc ; by which he means 
are uſuilly broughc to one common Priſon, where they are reſerve | their Rage and furious Attemprs, which are commonly maraged 
edin ord-r to their Trial and Puniſhment, m Either, x in Judg- | with much noiſ: and clamour. & Of thoſe ſtrange ard Heathen Na» 
ment, as viſing is oft uizd. So the ſenſe is, Aﬀeer they have been | rions thar fought againſt Gots People. 1 Wit: 2s much eaſe as 
punithed with long I:nprifonment, and tormented with Expettati- thou doſt in tne courſe of chy common Providence ailay the Hear 
on and fear, they ſhal be brought forth to receive condign Puniſh- |of a dry Seaſon «nd Place, either by the ſhadow of thy Clouds, or 
ment. Or, rath:r, 2- in Mercy. And ſo the ſenſe may be either, | by the Rain which f:Heth from black and ſhadowy Clouds, w The 
w | 1. After the Jews ſhal have ſuffered many and grievous things from | A:m or Power, as a Branch is tae Arm ofa Tree. Or, the Prince 

the Afſrians, Chaldeans, Perſians, and o hers, at laſt their M:ſſiah and |or Commanders : for the Word brench is ſome. imes put for a pers 

] Deliverer ſhal come into rhe World, &c. Or, 2. After the Unbe- | ſon of eminent place and pow-r, as Pſal: 892; v5. Iſs" 4. 2: Zech: 
| lieving and Apoſtate Jews ſha: have been ſhut up in Unbelicf, and | 3: 8. and 6: 12. Bur others render the Word, the ſong, as it is us 
7 ” : Fa . . . . . . 2 , 

in great Tribulations for many Ages together, they ſhal be convin- |{ed Cart, 2. 12, their jovial and triumphant Song. 


ced of their Sin in crucifying their Meſſiah, and brought home to | 6 And in this mountain » (hal * the LORD of hoſts « Pro:g 


God and Carift by true Repentance. make unco-ail | n | . i 

- people oa feaſt of fatthings p, a feaſt of Mar:22:4- | 
23 Then the * moon (hal be confounded, and the |; .. the lees q, of fat things fuli o #6 He of ©*. Mt! 
ſun aſhamed », when the LORD of holts o ſbal reign |; ... ©. the lees well refined : 
+c.1310jn mount Zionand in Jeruſalem p, and || before his an- 


re 32: Te ,.: . » In Mount Zion, to wit, in Gods Church, which T: very fres 
[2:31 Cents 9 glor touſly F. : : quent!y meant by the Names of Zien ant Jeruſalem, both in the 
op 5 k * n The Sun and moon are here conſidered either, i. as they were a= [Old and in the New Teſtament. o Both Jews and G- ntiles, who 


ca buſed to Idolatry ; for theſe rwo were molt eminent Idols, & moſt |ſhal then be admitted to the participation of the ſame Priviledges 
my 1,.. generally worſhipped,-ſpecially in thoſe Eaſtera Countries, Der: 4: |and Ordinances. p A Feaſt made up of the muſt exquiſite and de- pH 
þut be g'0 19: and 17. 3.Job 31. 26, Oc. and ſo may be put for all Idols, |lic:te Proviſions : Which is manifeſtly meant of the Ordinances, » WW 
mhefore Þi5 hich were confounded by Chriſt at his coming as was foretold in | Graces, and Comforts given by God in and to his Church-q Which A 
Scripture, and verified by the Teſtimony of Ancient, yea even of |have continued upon the Lees a competent t.me,whereby they gain 
Heathen Hiſtorians : Or, 2. as they were the moſt eminent and | ſtrength, and afterwards drawn off from the Lees, and ſo refined, as 
glorious Lights of the World, and were oft uſcd, both in Scrip= | it isexplained in the nexr Clauſe. ; BE: 
cre andother Authors, 1 ſignif the gre Kings and Ptetares | 7 And he will + deſtroy inchis mouncain the face of F Heb', 
an 2 , . 1 . 
ſhal have further occaſion to remember. $o the ſenſe is, That all PR TROY caſt OVET all people, and the vail [{ that _— v4] 
Earthly Powers and Glories ſhould be obſcured with the far greater | 15 *PT cad over all nations. ——. a 
Splendor of Chriſ: the King of Kings, at wioſe Feet even the Kings r Which is put either, r. for the covering of the Face, by an Wl 
of the Earth ſhal fall down and worſhip,as we ſhal ſee in other parts | ©Palage, as ſilver of ſhekels is pur for ſhckels of (ilver, Lev. 5. 15.07, 2. 
of this Prophecy. os The Meſſiah, who, though Man, yet is alſo for the Covering or va:l, as the nexr Clauſe exp unds it, the Word 
God. and the Lord of Hoſts,and is ſo called, Zech: 2: 8, 11.p Shal face being oft ſuperfluouſly uſed in rhe Hebrew Language, as Gen: 1, 
come in the Fleſh, and ſet up his Kingdom, firſt in Jeruſalem, and | *» 29- and elſewhere. / Tae Vail of Ignorance of God, and of the 
afterward in all orher Narions. 9 Before his Miniſters, who are in | fue Religion, which then was upon the Geati'es. and now is upon 
ſome ſort the Courtiers of chis King of Glory, as being continually the Jews, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16. which like a Vail, covers mens 
attending upon him, and enjoying his Preſence, and exccuting the Eyes, and keeps them from diſcerning between things tart differs 
Powers and Offices of his Kingdom ; and eſpecially before his Apo- Ir may bealſo an A'luſion either to the Vail which was put upon 
ſtles, who were the Witneſſes of his Divine Words and Works, & M ſes his Face, Exed: 34: 33, 34+ Or tothe Vail of the SanQuuary, 
particularly of his Reſurre&ion and Aſcenſion, by which he entied | Þy *hich the perſons without it were kepr from the ſight ot the 
upon his Kingdom ; and of this exerciſe of his Royal Power, in ſuv» Ark. Thisis a manifeſt Prophecy concerning the Illumination 
, Seb duing both Jews and Gentiles po The Word ancient - el- — of rm _—_ Pr | ; 
19. der is not a Name of Age,but © ce,as It is in very many Texts &@tw1 waliow up death « in victory x, an | 
of Scripture. And the Ancients are here put Synecdochically for | the Lord GOD will * dnl away tears y rel off a11 * 1 Cor: 
the whole C-urch, in who'e Name, and for whoſe Service they [fc and the reb , T FN | ke 155 54: 
a&. » Heb. in glory ; for that Prepoſition is very frequently un- 3 f | uke Of fis people & ſhal he take Rev:20*145 
derftood. away rom off all the earth a; for the LORD hath *Rev:7.a7: 
C H A P. XXV ſpoken it b. Ep and 21:4; 
God Glorious 1m his Judgments on Babel, x ===. and his Peoples Sals | * The Lord, expreſſed both in the foregoing and fo!lowing 
7:01 wation, 6 = 12. Words, even the Meſizh who is God and Man, « Shal by his death 
; 74 LORD, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I he, ow pou of Death asis ſaid Heb.2. 14. take away the Sting 
| will praiſe thy Names ; for thou haſt done of the Firſt Dearth, and prevent the Second Dcath, and give Eternal 


; : . - | Life to the Wor'd, even to all rhat beji _ —_— 
wonderful things; thy counſels of old are faithfulneſs wvidfory, 7. e. ſo as toovercome it nenP\ maar oe itad 
dxudtruth b. ry Cariſt bath a'read, purchaſ d for, and will in due time aftually 

a The Prophet refletingupon thoſe greatand glorious Prophecies | confer upon his Peop'e, y V'Villtake away from his People all Sut- 
which he had delivered concerning the Deſtrutt.on of his Enemies, | f-11ngs 2nd Sorrows, andallthe cauſes of them; which is begun 
and the ProteRtion and Deliverance of his People, and the ſending of | Pere and perfefted in Heaven. x The reproach and contempr 


the Meſi+h, and the Eſtabliſhment of his own Kingdom in ſpight of all which was daily caſt upon his faitafal People by the ungodlyworld. 
oppolition, interrupteth the Courſe ofthis Prophecies, and breaketh and, among others, by the Apoſtare and Unbelieving Jews, . wha 
forth into a Solemn Celebration of all theſe wonderful Works. 6 Thy | 2<counted. the Chriſtians ro be the ſcuin & oft-ſcouring ofall things: - 
counſels from which all rhy Works proceed,and which thou haſt from | £ Or, fomoeff all chis Land, «i. e. from all the Church and People of 
timetot:ime revealed torhy Prophets and People, which were of old, God, wherefoever they ſhal be, from all their Faces, as was ſaid 
being conceived from all Eternity, and long ſince made known by |? the foregoing Cauſe. b Therefore doubr not of it, though ir 
thy Threatnings and Promiſes, are #rue and firm, and therefore ſhall ſeem incredible to you EP : | 
19:14 ; certainly be accompliſhed. ; 9 And it ſhal be ſaid c in that day, Lo, this zs our 
C:21:9- 2 For thou haſt made * of a City c, an heap; of a de- | God 4, we have waited for hime,and he will ſave us * 
© 23:13: fenced City, a ruine: apalace of ſtrangers d,to be no | this z- the LORD, we have waited for him, we will be 
City, it (hal never be built e, | glad, and rejoyce in his ſalvations 
c Which is pur colle&ively for cities. He ſpeaks of the Cities of | «5 By Gods people. in way of triumph andreply to their Enemies. 
frangers, as the following Clauſe explains it, or ofEnemies ot God, |4 Your godsare ſenſeleſs and impotent Idols;bur our God is Omnis 
and' of his People, And under the Name cities he comprehends their | porent, and hath done theſe great and glorious VVorks which fill 
Countries and Kingdoms, of which cities are an eminent and coma | the V Vorld with Admiration. VVemay well boaſt of him ; for 
monly the ſtrongeſt part. d The Royal Cities, in which were hg |there is 10 god like to him, | 
palaces of ſtrangers, i, e. of the Kings of ſtrange People, or of the 
Gentiles. e Their Cities and Palaces have been or ſhal be utcerly ang |Meſisb or Saviour, long ſince promiſed,and for whom we have waits ' 
irrecoverably deſtroyed. ; ed a long time, now at laſtis come intothe VVorld, bringing Sal 
| 3 Therefore ſhal the ſtrong people glorifie thee,the | vation wich him. : 
cb:viſ city of the terrible nations ſhal fear thee f. To For in this mountain ſhal the hand of the Lord; 

f Thy ſtouteſt Enemies obſerving thy wonderful Works, in ſaving reſt f,and Moab g {hal be || crrodden down under him 5 Or, 
thy People, and in deſtroying orhe:s of thine and their Adverſaries, [EVEN as ſtraw 1s [| crrodden down for the dunghill 5, t hreſh2ds 
ſha) be either converted, or at leaſt convinced,and forced toacknow- | f The powerful and gracious preſence of God ( which is oft fig- }Ors ;. 
ledge thy Power,and ſhal tremble before thee. nified in Scripture byGods hand )ſhal have its coriftant and ſettled a- threſhed in 

4 For thou haft been a ſtrength to the poor,a ſtrength bodezitſhal nor move from pace to p'ace,as it did withtheTabernacle Medmensh 
tothe needy inhis diſtreſs, a refuge from che ſtorm, a mm oy from it, as X 7 _ apts poop 3g centinue _ 
al in hs urch even to the end ofthe World, Mat. 28. 20. |; : 
ſhadow _ the heat 8, " _ = blaſt of che terrible Moabites, which having been conſtant and implacable Foe, Poe 
ee chou haſt deforried thy poorend helplels People; egiiadt the | FAS A  EEED 
erendead t oran els People, ag11nft the |as the Edomrres upon the | ISS > 
Kerceſt Aſfaults of their 3a; B.. þ Or, for ( as his I. 9 com- - PE ENT IeCOnSr Ard, 2X6. 7.0) he PEER 2 


ments. 


4 


| Poſſibly ir may be an intimarion, that 
God ſhould take fleſh,and become viubly preſent amongſt Men.e Our 


. h Under his Feet, as appears by the following Similitude. ; As - 
Teb:with monly ſignifies: orrath-r, thcrefore, as it is frequently uſed, becauſe | eaſily and as -Feltually as © 765 Anna which ET as 2 

; gt 1% thou art their Defender ) the blaſt of the terrible,or ſtrong, or violent one |Ground, and mixed with the Nuns which lies there. is trample 

g of pris __ like a ftorm ( qo” ng 09) i TL ) ha ns, which |upon by the Feet of Men and Beafts. | : 

"OE makes a great and terrible noile, but without any effe&,for the VVall | 4 | oo St WE Gs | 
Or, du ſtands firm inſpight ofur. It is probable rhe P bags res in theſe VVords rney ” wb __ cad canes - " hands 7 in hs ne 
08, had a ſpecialreſpe@ to that miraculousDe'iverance of Jeruſalem from pra A ts , Fe Wimmer preading forth bis han 
Or, fund the Rageand Attempt of Sernacherib; a!theugh the V Vords be gene» |#7? to {wim : andhe ſhal bring down their pride tOge= 
74 ral,and include other Deliverances ofa like nature, cher with the 1; poils of their hands », 7 


; 5.09 - k Either, 


Chap. XXVI. | 7 $S 


hzx6:5 one that ſwimmeth, which is performed in that manner. 


even to the duſt. 


C H AP. XXVI. 


judgments on their Enemies : and favour to his People ; their Chaſti(c= 
ment, Repentance, and Hope, 1 20, 


= ' & that day @ (hal this ſong be ſung in the land of Ju- 
| G, dah b, We have a ſtrong city c, * ſalyation will 


4 appoint forWwalls and bulwarks d. | 
Þ * When God ſha'do ſuch glorious Works for the Comfort of his 
g*ople, and for the Ruine of his and their Enemies, as ke” hath 
_ Efcribed in the foregoing Chapter. 6 In the Church of God, which 
In Scripture is of: ſignified by the Titles of Judah, and Jeruſalem, 
and $:9n, or the liks. c Jeruſalem, or the Church, which 1s off cals 
Jed or cempared to a Gity, as Pſal. 87. 3. Rev: 3: 12. and 11; 2 
and 23. 2. d Gods immcdiate and ſaving ProteQtion ſhal be to his 
Churck inſtead of Wal's, &c. But I conceive with ſubmiſſion, the 

ords may very fitly be thus rendred, He will ſend or put or make 
her walls and bulwarks ſalvation, i. e. as ſafe as S:lvatien it ſelf ; or 
in ſafety, there being only a defe& of the Prepoliczon, which is very 
frequent in Scripture. ; : 
*Pſ.n18. 2 * Open ye the gates e, that the righteous nation f 


which keepeth the F truth g may enter 1n. 

e Ofthe City mentioned v. © f Either, r. thoſe godly Jews,who 
are rerurnng from Baby/onz or, 2 the whole body of righteous 
and holy Men, wherher Jews or Gentiles, For he ſeems to ſpeak 
| here, as he appareotly did in the foregoing Chapter, of the Times 

© of the Goſpel. g Which is ſincere and ſtedfaſt in the Profeſſion 
> Heb: and PraQice of the True Religion. 
Eace, Peace. Thou wilt keep bimin | perfe& peace, whoſe || 
r, - Mind is ſtaid on rhe h:becauſe he truſteth in thee. 
be,or, h Heb. the fixed thought or mind (i. e. the Man whoſe Mind and 
ination Thoughts are fixed and ſettled upon thee by Faith,as the next 
Clauſe explains it, the Qualifications being put for the Perſon ſo 
qualified, as folly and w:i/dom are put for a Fool and a Wile man, 
Prov: 24: 9: Mic: 6. 9. and peace fora Man of Peace, Pſal: 120: 7. 
ehog wilt keep in peace, 7: e. in all manner of peace, in conſtant and 
perfe& peace- In the foregoing Verſe the Righceous were admit- 
ted into the City, and here they were preſerved and defended in it 
| by Gods Almighty Pow:r. | — 
Heb: zh 4 Truſt ye in the LORD for ever 5: for in the 
ackef 2227." | ORD JEHOVAH 3s Þ everlaſting ſtrength &. 
Leu: 32:4 ; Tir all Times and Conditions. k Heb. the rock of ages, a ſure 
Refuge to all thoſe that truſt in him, through all generations 
therefore you may ſafely truſt is him, and thar ſor ever. 
5 For he bringeth down / them that dwe)jl on high 


h: x5: 72, the * lofty city »,he layeth it low, he layeth it low, 
n2:& 32. even to the ground, he bringeth it ever to the duſt. 
19, 1 Heb. he heth brought down, which yet may be put for the future 


ar 


he will bring down, &c. You may truſthim; for he can and doth 
be raiſe ſome,and throw down others,according to his own good plea- 


ſure. m He ſpeaks not ſo much ofheighth of Place, as of Dignity 
and Power; in which ſenſe alſo he mentions zhe lofty city in the 
next Clauſe, » Which may be underſtood either of proud Babylor ; 
or colieQively, of all the ſtrong and ſtately Citics of Gods Enc- 


mies. - 
:6.:The foot hal tread it down, evez the feet of the 


poer, and the ſteps of the needy 0, 
© God will bring it under the Feet of his poor and weak and de- 
ſpiſed People. | 
7.-The way. of the juſt ;s uprightneſs p: thou moſt u- 
»pright, doſt weigh the path of the juſt q. 
7, Þ Or, moſt even orplain, "Heb. evenneſs or plainneſs. Which is 
underſtood either, 1..of the ReCtitude or Goodneſs of his AQtions 
Ry "8 Gaul : or rather, 2- ofthe good Succeſs ofhis Aﬀairs: for this - 
{Wits os wh the Coherence. When the way of the Wicked is 
rugged, in which they eaſily ſtumble and fall inte milchief, of 
which he ſpoke v;, 5: 6: the path of juſt men is plain and ſmooth, 
and they walk ſafely . and comfortably in ir. q The ſenſe of the 
rds thus rendred- 1s, Thou, O God, who art moſt upright in a] 
th "Ways, and therefore a Lover of Uprightneſs, and of all upright 
Mei, deft weigh (7. e. examine ) mw of thejuſt, the courle of 
his Aftions, and, Which is implied, doſt approve of them, and 
therefore dire& them to an happy iſſue, But the Words are 0= 
therwiſe rendred by ſome late Learned Interpreters, to this purpoſe, 
Thog .doft level or anake plain ( as this very. Word ſignifies Pſal: 78:50 ) 
rhepareaf the juſt *exaF#ly;: Heb. with ewvenneſe, or evenly, ſo as to make 
it veryeven; - Thus the firſt Clauſe declares thar ir was even or 


Wealth which they have gained by Rapine, and ſpoiling of God's| ;, ;þ, ,,m ans: RT m_ | 
People, and others. But the Words are otherwiſe rendred by c+| ;, 4 hs wor be was ee. — : mar = - —_ £ _ EO 
thers with or by ( as this Hebrew Particle 15 uſed, Efth: 9: 25. ) rhe of God is here, as it is in many other = <ens at for God him; If as 
arms of his h ands ; which he may mention,becauſc the Strength of a | py hath mage himſelf known by bis Word 5g nan cp . - 
Man, and of his Hands, conſiſteth in his Arms ; whence alſo the gg nc this Clone Ix. Dy Ms a a ens ok abs 
arm 1n Scripture, is oft put for ſtrength : or, by the motion or froke| py, thy Judgments, but we ſtill continue to deſire thy Prefenee a. 4 
of his hands,as all the ancient Tranſlators do in effe&t rendec it-And | ggygyr and we ſupporrand-comorront felves with the remer. 

this ſeems to agree beſt wich the Metaphor here borrowed from | brane of whar thoy te, and IN one, cn wh __ 


12 And the* fortreſs of the high fort of thy wal's o 
(hal he bring down, lay low, 4nd bring to the ground, 


o All thy Walled Cities and Fortifications,to which thou truſteſt. 


A Song of Praiſe and Confidence in Gd : for the bleſſmgs of Righteouſneſs : comparing this with the foregoing Verſe. & Either, 1. figurative- 


#17483 


4 


haſt promiſed to be and to do to thy People, 


9 *With my ſoul z have I « deſired thee in the night x,...... 
x,yea, with mylſpiric within me will Heek theey early z; NOI 
for when thy judgments arein the carth, the inhabi- 
tants of che world will learn righteouſneſs a, 


t Sincerely and moſt affeQionately, as P/al. 63. 1. and elſewere. 
, The Prophet ſpeaks this in the name of all God's People, by 


Iy, inthe time of Aﬀflition, which is often called mght or darkn:ſs : 
or rather, 2. properly, as appears from the next Clauſe, wherein 
early or in the morning is oppoſed ro it. When others are ſleeping, 
my T houghts and Deſires are working towards God. ) By fervent 
Prayer for thy Loving=kindneſs, g Betimes in the morning, as the 
Word ſignifies; & And good reaſon it is that we ſhould thus deſire 
and ſeek thee in the way of thy Judgments, becauſe this is the ves 
ry deſign of thy Judgments, that men ſhould thereby be awaken 
ed to learn and return to their Duty ; and this is a common eff:& 
ofthem, that thoſe who have been careleſs in Proſperity, are made 
wiſer and betrer by Afﬀidtions. The inhabitants of the world ſeem to 
be here taken not in oppoſition to Gods People, as if not they only 

but even the wicked World would do thus ; but in a general Noti- 
on, ſo as to include, yea principally to deſign Gods People as may 
be gathered both from the former part of tuls, and the foregoing 
Verſe, in which he deſcribes their pious Carriage under Afﬀfi@ion: 

as alſo from the two following Verſes, in which he ſpeaks of che 
wicked, whom he ſeems to oppofe to theſe inhabitants of the world 

becauſe theſe learn Righteouſneſs, whilſt thoſe wicked men 
remain 1ncorrigible both under Mercies and Judgements, v. 

10, I. | 


10 * Let favour be ſhewed to the wicked,zer will he * tc:8:11, 
not learn righteouſneſs b: in che land of uprightneſs c | 
will he deal unjuſtly, and will not behold the majeſty 


of the LORD 4. 
b This is the Carriage of thy People; but the courſe of Wick- 
ed men is direQly contrary inallconditions : For if thou doſt ſpare 
them, when thou punifheſt thine own People. they will nor accepr 
of that gracious Invitation to Repentance, nor walk worthy of 16 
=_ a Mercy. c Even in Gods Church, and among his People, where 
ighreouſneſs is profeſſed and taught,and by many praftiſed ; and 
where Unrighteouſneſs 1s diſcountenanced and puniſhed: all which 
things are Aggravations of his Sin. d Although God gives ſuch 
plain and clear Diſcoveries of his Majeſty and Glory, nor only in 
his Word, but alſo in his Works, and eſpecially in this glorious 
Work of his Patience and Mercy to Wicked Men, yet they wilfully 
ſhut their Eyes at it, and will not acknowledge its 


11 LORD, when thy hand is lifred up, they * will Jobz4: 


not ſee e 3 but they ſhal ſee f, and be aſhamed for their 37: ng 


envy || at the people g3 yea, the fire of thine enemies , c;5127 
þ ſhal devour them. [| Or, 2# 
e And they are guilty of the ſame obſtinate Blindneſs when thou wars thy 
doſt ſmite and puniſh them, which is commonly ſignified by /;/t:ng people. 
up the hand, as Exzek: 44: 12. Mich. 5.9. Compare allo 2 Sam: 20.21. 

I Kings 11: 26. Or, as others render it, When thine hand is high or 

exalzed, ti. e. When thy Works are moſt evident and moſt glorious, 

when thou appeareſt moſt gloriouſly for the defence of thy People, 

and for the puniſhment ef thine and their Enemies, they will not ſeen 

f The ſame Word is repeated in another ſenſe : "Fhey fhal feel and 

know that by ſad and coſtly Experience, which they would not 

learn by other and eaſier ways. Secing is oft put for feeling ; in 

which ſenſe Men are faid toſee afli#ion, Lam; 3: 1: and to lee death, 

Pſal. 89: 48- and the like. gOr, at or towards the People, the Pro- 

noun #hy being repeared out of the following Clauſe,as 1t is in many 

other places of Scripture, as kath been before noted. Their Envy 

and Hatred againſt Gods People blinded their Minds,that they nej- 

ther could nor would ſee that God was on their ſide though the To- 

kens of it were moſt manifeſt and undeniable. Which was the caſe 

of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, who were not ſenſible that zhc Lord 

fought for Iſrael again(i the Egyptians, as they ſaid Exed: 14: 25. till it 

was too late. h Not efficiently, but objeQtively : Such Fire or 

Wrath as thou uſeſt to pour forth upon thine implacable Enemies. 

As my wrong, Gen: 16. 5. is not the Wrong done by me, but to me; 

and my violence, Jer: 51: 35. is the violence doue teme, as we tranſlate 


it, not by me. 


12 LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us ;:for thou 


alſo haſt wrought all our works & [| inus 2, ; Or fo 
i As thou wilt deſtroy thine and our Enemies, ſo thou wilt bleſs 
us thy People with Peace and Proſperity. k& Either, r.all the Good 
Works done by us, which are the Effe&ts of thy Grace ; or rather,2. 
all the Good and Great Works which have been wrought for us, all 
our wonderful Deliverancesand ſingular Bleſſings come from thee: 
And ſo the Argument is this, God hath delivered us formerly upon 
all occaſions and therefore he will ſtil] deliver us, and give us Peace. 


plaig.206 this ſhewerh whence or by whom it is made ſuch, even 
#Ch:64z5, $ Yea, *in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, 


Which Inference is frequently made by Holy Men in Scripture. 
1 Heb. to or for ws. #2 Chron 
13 O LORD our God, * other lords belides a 7 12;8. 

| + ave 


Chap. XX ;t- 
& Either, 1. Moab, who being plunged into a Sea of trouble->] have we waited for thee r;the defireof our ſoul is to th 

ſha! endeavour to ſwim out of ir, but to no purpoſe ; or rather, Name,and to the remembrance of thee "s Y 
2. the Lord, whois deſigned by this very Pronoun he, both ng the r As we thy People have loved and ſerved thee whe h 

- latter Clauſe of this Verſe,and in the fo!lowing Verie ; whole Po- made our way plain and eaſe for us ; ſo we have avg © _ oo 
wer they ſhal be no more able to reſiſt, than the Waters can rellil8 une waired npce thee, when thin he ancds © omared ' y en thee 
0 Man that ſwims, who with grear faciliry divides chem hither and {ome by thy Judgments. He ſpeaks of the ſame Te = a6 56k 
thither. /Or, ftretch forth his harcds to che urmoſt, to ſmite and dee though itbe with a change of the Mumaboos NE a '9 iP 6 h 9. 
troy them. » Which he doth to the uttermoſt. » With all thit uſual in Prophetical Writings,the juſt, v. 7. we,v.8$. 1 FR 


{Heb. ſe 
1 ſpeech 


"John. 


621, 


OL 


hron 


Chep- 


{Heb. ſe 
ot ſpeech 


Tobin. 


624, 


% PX F 
DV 'T 


we make mention of thy name p, | 

»» Others befides thee, who art our only Judge and King, an 
Law-giver, 1a. 33: 22. and beſides thoſe Governours who have 
been ſet up by thee, and have ruled us for thee, and in ſubordi- 
ration to thee, even Foreign and Heatheniſh Lords, ſuch as the 
Philifimes, and lately the Aſhrians. » Have exerciſed a Tyrannical 
Power over. us. o By thy Favour & Help,by which alone{and not 
by our Strength or Merits) we have been reſcued from their Ty- 
ranny. Þ We will celebrate thy Praiſe, and truſt in thee for the 
furure. Thou only haſt given us both Ability and Occaſton to 
magnifie thy Name, whereas without thy Succour we had gone 
5:to the place of Silence, where there is no remembrance of thee, 
as is ſaid, Pſal. 6. 5. 

14 They are dead, they ſhall not live ; they are de- 
ceaſed, the ſhall not riſe q : therefore 7 haſt thou 


viſited and deſtroyed them, and made all their memo- 
ry to perilh j. . 

q Thoſe Tyrants and Enemies are utterly and irrecoverably 
deſtroyed, ſo as they ſhall never live or riſe again to moleſt us. 
Poſlibly he ſpeaks of the miraculous deſtruQion of Semacheris's 
Army before Jeruſalem, r That they might be ſo effeQtually de- 
ſtroyed,thou didſt undertake the Work. Or, rather, becauſe (as this 
Particle is uſed Numb. 143 43. P[al. 42: 6.) theu haſt &c. as it follows. 
f Thou haſt deſtroyed both them and theirs, and all the Monu- 
ments or Memorials of their Greatneſs and Glory. 

I5 Thou haſt increaſed the nations O LORD thou 
haft increaſed the nation, thou art glorified « thou haſt 
removed 3t far unto all the ends of the earth x. 

+ Heb. Thou haſt added to the nation. Which may be underſtood 
either, 1 in way of Mercy, of adding to their Numbers, as our 
Tranſlation takes it ; and fo we have in effect the ſame Phraſe, 
2 Sams 24: 3. The Lord add to the People, &c. and Pſal. 115. 14. in 
the Hebrew Text, The Lord ſhall add upon or to you : or, 2. in way of 
Judgment, of adding to their Plagues or Miſeries, of which we 
Tead, Rev 22:18. in which ſenſe the Phraſe is found in the Hebrew 
Text, - Plal: 120: 3» What ſball be add-d to thee ; and in that uſual 
Form of Imprecation, The Lerd do ſo to me and mare, Ruth 1. 17. 
1 Sam: 3: 16, &c. where it is in the Hebrew, The Lord do ſo ro me and 
add. And this ſenſe ſeems to be favoured by the Context as alſo 
by the ancient Greek Tranſlators, who render te Words, add 10 
them evil or puniſhments. And ſo the Word adding may be uſed 
emphatically and {arcaſtically : God indeed will add to them ; but 
what ? Not Numbers, and Power, and Glory, as they expettcd ; 
but Plagues or Judgments one after another. This 74101 1t 15 
ſuppoſed by the Current of interpreters to be the People of 1/racl, 
emphaticaily called the nation. Poſſibly it _ be the 4ſhrians, of 
whom he ſpake in the laſt Verſe. But this I propoſe with ſub- 
miſſion» # Thy Juſtice is glorified in their Puniſhment or De- 
ſtru&ion- x Which may be undeſtood either, 1. of J/rael, and 
that either in a way of Mercy, Thou haſt by deſtroying the 4ſ- 
rians enlarged thy People, who were thut up in Jeruſalem, ſo that 
now they may go to the remoteſt parts of the Land ; or in 
way of Judgment : Thou haſt removed thy people out of their 
own Land, and ſuffered them to be carried Captive to the ends of 
the Earth : Or, 2. of the 4ſiians ; Thou halt removed them from 
Feruſalem, which they had beſieged, and cauſed them to flee into 
their own Country, which in Scripture-phraſe was in the ends of 
the earth ; of which ſee Ia: 5: 26. & 13.5. 

16 O LORD, in trouble have they y viſited thee z, 
they poured out # a | prayer b hen thy chattning was 


upon them c. : 
y To wit, thy People, as appears both from the Matter of this 
Verſe, and from the following Verſes. z Come into thy Preſence, 
with their Prayers and Supplications, as the next Clauſe explains 1t. 
# Which notes the Plenty or rather the Earneſtneſs of their pray=- 
ers, as Pſal. 42: 4: 142: 2. b Heb. a muttering or lowly ſpeech, fuch 
as Charmers uſe, and ſuch as Hezekiah uſed when he was 1n great 
diſtreſs, 1ſa. 38: 14, Like a crane o& ſwallow fo did I chaiter, 
1 did mourn as 4 dove; and ſuch as is uſual in caſe of great 
humiliation and deje&ion of Mind, c When thou waiſt punithing 
them for their Sins. : fo 
17 Like as a woman with child, 7hat draweth near 


the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crierh 
out in her pangs : ſs have we been 4 in thy ſight e, O 


LORD. > ah 

4 Such was our Anguiſh and Danger. | e Whilit thou didſt on- 
ly look upon us like a meer SpeQator, without affording us the 
leaſt degree of Pity or Help. Or, this Phrale notes only the rea- 
lity of the Thing 3 God was Witneſs of this our Miſery, and 
knoweth the Teuth-of what I ſay 


18 We have been with child,we have been in pain, 
we have as it were brought forth wind f, we have not 


wrought any deliverance g in the earth þ, neither have 


the inhabitants of the world z fallen. 

f We have had the Torment of a Woman 1n Childbearing, but 
not the Comfort of a Living Child, John 16: 21. for we have 
brought forth nothing but Wind ; all our Labours and Hopes were 
vain and unſucceſsful. The Prophet here repreſents their deplo= 
rable and deſperate Condition, before God appeared ſo eminently 
to deliver them. g We found that we were utterly unable to 
deliver our ſelves. h Or, in the /and, in our own Country,where 
yet we had far greater Advantages than we could have had elſe- 
where. # The Aſjrians, or our other Enemies; for they are here 
oppoſed to Gods People. ; 

19 Thy dead men ſhall live & ; together with my dead 
body / ſhall they ariſe » : awake », and ſing, ye that 
dwell in the duſt 0: for thy dew p is as the dew of 
herbs q, and the earth ſhall caſt our the dead r. 

& The Prophet here turneth his Speech to God's People, and 
gives them a Cocdial to ſupport them 1a their deep Diſtreſs, ex- 
preſſed in the foregoing Verle. Thy dead Mea are not like thoſe 


IS4#7T85 


have had dominion over us » 2 but by thee only s will | 


, Iy the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and 


| again. 2» Unto Life, as appears from the former Clauſe. 


©. i4. for they ſhall not live, as I there ſaid ; but thine ſhall live. 
ou ſhall certainly be delivered from all your Fears and Dan gers. 


| Nothing is more frequent, both in Scripture and other Authors, 


than for great Calamities to be compared.to death,and Deliverance 
irom them ro life, and reviving, and reſurrefion 3 and particular- 
their Deliv 

out of it, 1s largely exprefled by this very Gmilitude, —_ os wy 
&c. 4 AsI my ſelf, who am one of your tumber, and of theſe 
Dead men, ſhall live again. You ſhall be delivered together with 
mc. Which he might add, to meet with an Obje&ion ; for they 
might think that God would take ſome ſpecial Care of this Holy 
Propher, and would preſerve him when they ſhou!d be deſtroyed. 
No, faith he, As IT am at preſent like a dead Carkafſs no leſs than 
you, ſo you ſhall be reſtored to Life no leſs than I, IF the Sy pple- 
ment of our Tranſlation ſeems to be too, literal, it may be rendred 
to the ſame purpoſe, as my body, the Particle as being oft under« 
{ſrood,as I have divers times obſerved: As my dead Body ſhall riſe 
ſo ſhall theirs alſo ; we are equally dead, and ſhall equally live 
: To e. » Out 
of your ſleep, even rhe fleep of death, as it is called. Pſal. 13: 3. 
Death being oft compared to a Sleep, as John 11:1. As 7: 60. and 
Reſtrauration to Life unto awaking, as 2 Kings 4: 31. o You that 
are dead and buricd in the Duſt, as the Dead are faid to /ep in the 
ar, Dan. 12: 2, p The Favour and Bleſſing of God upon thee 
which is oft compared to the dew, as Hoſ: 14: 5. Mich. 5: 9. The 
Pronoun thy is here taken not efficiently, but objeQively, as thy 
curſe, Gen: 27-13+ is the Curſe coming upon thee. q Which gently 
refreſheth and reviveth them, and maketh them to grow--and 
flouriſh. r As an abortive Birth is caſt out of the Womb, to 
which the Grave is compared, Job 1, 21. But becauſe the Verb 
here uſed doth not fignifie to caſt out, but to caſt dewn,which ſeems 
not proper here, thele words may be and are, op by ancient and 
later Interpreters, rendred otherwiſe, and t ilt caſt down the 
land of the Giants, or of the wiolent ones, of the proud and porent 
Tyrants of the World. For the word here rendred dead, is elſe- 
where rendred giants, as 2 Sam: 21:16,i8. See alſo on Job 26:5. Pro. 
9: 18: © 21: 16. But then the words ſeem to be better rendred, 
and thou wilt caſt the giants down to the ground ; Either 1, thou, O God, 
who is oft underſtood in ſuch Caſes 3 or r&her, 2. thou, O my 
People, to whom he ſpeaks in the foregoing Clauſes of the verſe, 
thy dead body, and thy dew, and here continueth his Speech, - theu 
wilt or ſbalt caſt, &c. thou ſhalt ſubdue even the moſt Giant-like 
and mighty Enemies. Which though it be properly Gods work, 
the Church is oft faid to do, becauſe ſhe by her Prayers engageth 
God to do it. And ſo as the former clauſes of the Verie ſpeak of 
the Deliverance and Proſperity 6f Gods Church and People, ſo 
this clauſe ſpeaks of the Deltrution of their Enemies, which 
uſually accampanieth it» 


20 Tome, my people /, enter thou into thy cham- 
bers, and ſhut thy doors about thee t : -bide thy ſelf as 


it were * for a little moment #, until the indignation * p 


x be overpalt. 
J Having foretold the wonderful Deliverance and 


leſt they thould think they were now entritig into the poſſefiio 

of this Felicity, he adds hot here follows, Tool ret. that 
for the preſent they were to expect Storms, and to Prepare for 
them, and patiently to wait God's time for the Accompliiment of 
lo great a Mercy. # Withdraw thy (elf from the company and 
converſation of rhe wicked World,leſt partaking with them in their 
Sins, thou doſt alſo partake of their Plagues : pour out thy Prayers 
to God in thy Cloſet, as this may be explained by comparing Mat. 
6. 6. pur thy ſelf under the protection of my Providence and Grace 
by Faith and Prayer. He alludes ta the common practice of Men, 
who when there are Storms or Dangers abroad, betake themſelves 
into their own Houſes or Chambers for ſafety ; or;as ſome think,to 
that Hiſtory, Exad.'g: 19. 20. or to that Command of net going out of 
their houſes, Exod: 12; 22. or to the like Charge given to Rabab, as 
the Condition of her Preſervation, Joſ. 2. « Whereby he intimates, 
that all cheir Afflictions, how long and tidious ſoever they may: 
ſeem, are but ſhort and momentany, in compariſon of that happi= 
neſs which is reſerved for them. x The dreadful Effects of God's 


Zo ger, thoſe ſore Judgments of God mentioned in the following 
'Erle. 


iniquity ; the earth alſo ſhall diſcloſe her 
ſhall no more cover her ſlain #. Fs 
y Cometh down, from Heaven ; which God in Scripture is fre« 


"quently ſaid to do, when he undertaketh any great and glorious 


Work, either of Delivering his People, or of Deſtroying their 
Enemies. The Speech is borcowed from the manner of Princes, 
who come out of their Palaces either to fit in Judgment,or to fight- 
againſt their Enemies, which is the caſe here. z All the Enemies 
of God and of his People ; for theſe are here oppoſed to Gods: 
People: Therefore take heed you be not found in the number of 
them. « The innocent Blood which hath been ſpilled upon the: 
Earth ſhall be broughr to light, and ſhall be ſeverely revenged upon 
the Murderers, For the Phrafe ſee on Gen, 4: 16, Joh 16; 18, Exeks 
24» 7. 


CHAP. XXVIL 


Gods care over his Vineyard, 1———6. his chaſtiſements on them,y—9. 
his ſevere judgments again# them, 10 11. their return, 12——j7. 
N that day the LORD with his ſore and great and 

{trong ſword fhall puniſh Leviathan « the piercing 
ſerpent 6, even Leviathan that crooked ſerpent c, and 

he ſhall ſlay * the dragon 4 that zs in the fea. + 
a What kind of Creature the Leviathan is, ſee in my Notes on 

Job 41:1, Oc. Whence it is evident, that it was a very great and 

terrible Sea-monſters. Bur here it is certain that the Expreſſion is + 


metaphorical, and that by this Leviarhan, Serpent and Dragon, ( for 
all ſignifie the ſame thing ) he underſtands ſome: very powerful 


Enemy or Enemies ( for the hs," numbers may be here pur _ 
F'.Z the 


Chap. XXVII 


Chap: 54+ 
reat Happi- 7, 8. _ - 
neſs of Gods People, and the utter Deſtruction of their Fes. 2COr-4:17, 


_ 21 For behold, the LORD * cometh out of his * Mic:zz, 
place y to punilh the inhabitants of the earth & for their 
+ blood, and f _ 
.* . bloudhe 


,* Or, oof. 
ſong like 

a bar. 
Cha; 51.9, 


nt 
CPLLL 
£4 
"25 
'f 
'f 


4 

F 
" 
* 


30252 


- 


Chap. XXVII. 


againſt, 


| be appli 


Ir *+ is in many other places ) of God, and of his 
_>Y pie, which Mis well be called by theſe Names, 
partly for their 'great Might, and partly for the great Terrour and 
Deſtruction which they cauſe upon the Earth, as the Leviathan 
Joth in the Sea. He ſeems to have a ſpecial reſpect to ſome pars 
ticular Enemy and Oppreſſor of Gods People ; eicher the Aſian 
Emperour, who now was ſo ; or rather the Babylonian, who ſhould 
be ſo : Some underſtand this of the Devil 3 Bur alrhough it may 
ed to him in a myſtical fenſe, 1t ſeems to be literally 
meant of ſome potent and viſible Adverſary ; which ſeems more 
aggreeable ro the following Verſes, and to the Uſage of this and 
other Prophets. 6 Which by its ſting pierceth quickly and deep= 
ly into Mens Bodies. Or, zhe bar (as this word 1s elſewhere uſed) 
Jerpent, as this may be called, either for its length, or ſtrength, or 
fwift motion. c Winding and turning it ſelf with great variety 
and dexterity. Whereby he ſeems to ſignifie the Crafrineſs and 
Activity of this Enemy, which being added to his Strength, makes 
it more formidable. 4 Or rather, the whale, as this word is rend- 
red, Gen. 1:21. Jeb 7: 12- and elſewhere ; which agrees better with 
the following words, hat 15 in the ſes, which poſlibly were added 
only to limite that general and ambiguous word to a Sea-monlter, 
and not to deſcribe the Place in which the Enemy ſignified by this 
Dragon hadhis abode. Although the (ea, which here follows, may 


be metaphorically un 


1:15. 
2 In that day e fing ye unto her, A vineyard of red 
WIN f. | | 
e When this potent Enemy ſhall be deſtroyed. #f The words in 
the Hebrew Text lie thus, 4 vineyard ( Behold, 4 vineyard ; or Jacob 
or 1ſ-al, my Church and People, which is ſufficiently underſtood 


. from the next Verſe, and is expreſſed wv. 6. ſhall be a vincyard, 


ſhall be defended and dreſſed, ſhall thrive and flouriſh like a Vine- 
yard) of red wine (3.e. of the choiceſt and beſt Wine,which in thoſe 
parts was Red, as appears both from Scripture, as Prov. 23: 31. 
whence it is called the blood of the grape, Gen: 49: 11. Deut. 32: 14. and 
from other Authors ) ſg ye ( O you faithful Souls, ſing with Joy 
and thankſgiving to God ) to ( or of, or, concerning, as this Preax 1s 
elſewhere uſed) her, or it, to wit, the Vineyard or Church, (which 
is frequently compared to a Vineyard, as Pſal. 80: 8. Iſa; 5: 7. 


and elſewhere ) now delivered from her great knemy, and blelſed | 


with peace and proſperity. . : : 
2 I the LORD do keep itg, I will water ic every 
moment : leſt ayy hurt it, I will keep it night and day. 
z I will ſecure it, that neither Men, nor beaſts, nor Drought 
ſhall ſpoil it ; which alone are the things that Can hurt it, T will 
prote& my Church from all the Aſſaulrs of her Enemies, and fup- 
ply her with all neceſſary Provittons, with my Ordinances, and 

with my Spirit and Grace. | 
4 Fury & is not in me : who would ſet the briars and 


jOr,-rarch thorns againſt me in battel #I would | go through them, 


I would burn them together z. EE 

þ To wit, againſt my Vineyard, or my People ; which is eaſily 
underſtood both from the foregoing and following Verics,T have 
been diſpleaſed with them, and have chaſtiſed them ; bur I am 
not implacable towards them,and reſolved utterly to deſtroy them 
as their Enemies are, and would have me to be. # This is added 
as a Reaſon of the foregoing Clauſe and Aﬀertion ; which may be 
conceived either, r. thus, I rather detire to contend with Brars 
and Thorns, 7. e. with the wicked Enemies of my Church, who 
arc tkus called, 1/a. 10: 17. Ezeck: 28: 24. and if my Wrath was 
now kindled againſt them, as it is againit my Perple, I wwuld be 
firious towards them, and never leave till I had utrerly conf.umed 
them ; but I will deal more indulgently with my people. Which 
Expoſition ſeems to receive ſome light and ſtrength from v. 6, 7, 
8. Or, 2. thus, For I conſider the weakneſs of my People, thar 
if 1 ſhould let looſe my Fury upon them, they could no more 
ſtand before me, than Briars and Thorns ( to which Gods People, 
when they fall into Sing and provoke God, are not unfitly ref:m- 
bled) can ſtand before a devouring Fire,and therefore they would 
in an inſtant be utterly deſtroyed ; which I will not do. And 
this Confideration of Mans Imbecillity is elſewhere alledged as a 


Reaſon of Gods Indulgence, as Pſal, 103: 13, 14, 15, 16. 1/2 57:16 | 


Bur this I deliver with Submiſſion: 
5 Or k let him / take hold of my ſtrength », ha: 


he may make peace with me #, and he ſhall make peace 


wich me, , 

k Or if at any time Fury be, or ſeem to be in me againſt my 
Vineyard or People. 1 My People, as 15 clearly implied from the 
following Words; far, there is no peace to thoſe who are not God's 
People, or to the wicked, Iſa. 57. 21. and is exprefled in the fol- 
lowing Verſe. m 5. e. Take hold of my Arm, which is metonymi- 
cally ſtrength, and ſtay it from giving the Blow, not by Force, 
which is impoſſible,but by humble Submiſſion and earneſt Suppliz 
cation. Or, frength:n himſelf or be ſtrong ( as this Word properly 
ſignifies, and is elſewhere uſed ) by my ſtrength : not by his own 
ſtrength, which he will oppoſe to mine,but by my Strength, which 
he may by humble and trequent Prayers nor only reſtrain from 
doing him hurt, but effeually engage to afliſt him, and do him 
good. He fſcems to allude to that Hiſtory of Jacob's Wreſtling 
with the Angel of God, Gen. 32. 28. which he could never have 
done but by a Strength received from God; » That in ſtead of 
oppoſing me, ke may in this manner reconcile himſelf to me. Or, 
and he jball make peace with me, as the ſame Words are rendred in the 
next Clauſe 3 which may be repeated to afſure them of that great & 
important Favour,that God wou'd make peace with them. Or,the 
Words may be rendred in both Clauſes, let h:m: make peace with me, 
yea let him make peace with me, this Future Verb being taken Im. 
peratively, as the orher is in the former clauſe of the Verſe. 

6 He ſhall cauſe them that come of Jacob to take 
root 0: Ifrael ſhall blofſom and bud, and fill the face 
of the world with fruitp. _- 

e To be firmly ſetled in their Poſleſſions, and not toſſed hither 
and thither, as they have been. p Their Poſterity ſhall be ſo nu- 
merous, that their own Land jhall not be ſufficient for thew, bu 


derſtood ofthe great largeneſs of his Empire, | 
and the multitude of his Subjects, by comparing this with Rev: 17. 


az Chap. Kxvir | 


they ſhall be forced to ſeek Habitations in other Countries, and 
ſhall repleniſh them with People. Bur this ſeems ro be underſtood 
of the Spiritual Seed of Jacob, or of Believers, who are oft called 
God's Iirael, as Rom. 9g; 6. and el{cwhere. 


imote him q? or is he ilain according to the {laughter cirding ts 


of them that are ſlain by him r ? the jrroks 

/ The queſtion implies a Denial ; He hath not ſo ſmitten him, 9 ***{. 

to wit, Jacob, He hath not dealt ſo ſeverely with his People, as 
he hath dealt with his and their Enemies, whom he hath utterly 
deſtroyed. This may look either, 1+ backward upon times paſt. 
If you conſult former Experiences, you will find, that God hath 
done ſo, hath ſpared and reſtored his People, and in Judgment re. 
membred Mercy to thein, when he hath totally ruined their Ene.. 
mes ; or, 2. forward upon the time ro come, of which he peaks 
as of a thing paſt, after the manner of the Prophets, and of which 
he ſpeaks in the next verſe. » of thoſe who were ſlain by Iſrael, 
or rather by God at the Prayer and on the behalf of 1/rael. Heb, 
of his lain ones, i. e, of thoſe of his.Smiters or enemies who were 
ſhin, Which Expolition is favoured by comparing this with the 
foregoing Claſe. 

8 * In meaſure /|| when it ſhooteth forth z, thou *Job 3:6) 
wilt debate with it « : || he ſtayeth his rough wind x in Jer.10-24, 
the day of the eaſt-wind y. & ; D 

J With moderation, in certain Proportions which God meteth | 0. _ 
our and fitreth to their Strength. £ When the Vine ſhooteth forth tho [endef 
its Juxuriant Branches, he, like the Vine-dreſler, cutteth them off. ;; forth ? 
but ſo as not to ſpoil or deſtroy the Vine. Or, as divers Tarer- | Or us 
pretets render it, and the Word properly and frequently ſigaities he —_” 
n or by caſting or diſmiſſmg or ſending her or it out, or, when thou aoſt whit ; 
caſt or ſend her out, to wit, out of her own Land in which ſhe wag as 
planted into Captivity. He alludes to a Man "that divorceth his 
Wife, which is exprefſed by this Word ; but withal intimates, 
that this ſhall nor be peremptory and perpetual, as other Divor. 

Ces were. t# God is ſaid to webate or contend with Men, when he 
executeth his Judgments upon them, as 1/a: 49: 25. & 57. 16. Amos 
7:4 x He mitigateth the ſeverity of the Judgment, But, I muſt 
confeſs, I do not meet with any of the ancient or modern Tran. 
ſlators that agree with ours in this Verſion : nor is the Hebrew 
, Verb ever utcd, fo far as T know, in the fignification of ſaying or 


{ reſtramning : belides, our Tranſlation takes no notice of the He. 
| brew Prepoſition- Bur this Word unqueſtionably ſignifies 70 re. 
move Or take away, as 2 Sam. 20:13. Prov, 25: 4, 5. and thus moſc 
Interpreters underſtand ir. And 1o the place is very fitly thug 
rendred, he ( or, when he,which Particle may eaſily be underſtood 
out of the former Clauſe, as is uſual ) removerh ( underſtand either 
z:, to wit, the Vine; or them, to wit, the Enemies of God and 
his Peoplz. And fo this agreeth with rhe former Verſe, in repre- 
lenting the different way of Gods proceeding againſt his People, 
ad his and their Enemies. Either way there is only a def-& of 
the Pronoun, which I have before ſhewed in divers places to be 
very uſual in the Hebrew Language ( with or by his rough wind, by 
which ſometimes Vines and other Trees are pulled up by the roors, 
as that did, 1 Kg: 19: 11. whereby he underſtands his moſt terrible 
Judgments. y In the time when he ſendeth forth his Eaſt-wind ; 
which ke mentions becauſe that Wind in thoſe Parts was moſt vio« 
lent and molt hurtful ro Trees and Fruits, as hath been oft obſer- 
ved, and therefore is uſed to ſignifie the moſt grievous Calamities. 

9 By this z therefore # thall the iniquity of Jacob be 
purged 5, and this zs all the fruic, to take away his linc: 
* when he. maketh dall the ftones of the altar e as * Kings 
chaik-ſtones f that are beaten in ſunder g ; the groves 18. 38. 
þ and ||. images thall nor ſtand up z. {| Or, Sutt 

z By this manner of Gods dealing with his People. # That the 725% 
difference between Jaceh and his Enemies, in their ſeveral Sufter- 
ings, may appear. c Heb. exp:ared or forgiven upon their true 
Repenrance, which ſhall be the happy effet of their Chaſtiſemenr. 
- The effect hereof ſhall nor be ro deſtroy the Sinner, as it is in 
other Men, but only to take away the guilt and Power of their 
Sins. 4 Which fin of Jacob's ſhall be purged and taken away, and 
che Judmenr removed, when he ſhall truly repent of all his Sins, 
and eſpecially of his Idolatry, ro which they were moſt inclined, 
and for which tlie moſt of God's Judgments which they had hi- 
therto felt had been inilifted upon them. e Which by an uſual 
Enallage may be put for tlic Altars, to wir, their Idolatrous Altars, 
:$ 1s evident from the following Words. Poſffibly he may ſay rhe 
altar with reſpeCt to that particularAlrar which 4haz had let up in 
the place of God's ownAltar ; & this prophecy mighc be delivered 
either to the Prophet, or by him to the People, in 4haz his time 
while that altar itood and was uſed. f When he ſhall break all, 
thoſe goodly Altars in pieces, which God by his Law had enjoy- 
ned. & Which kind of Stones are of themſelves apt to break into 
{mall pieces, and by the Artificer are broken into ſmaller pieces for 
making Mortar. He ſeems to allude to that Fat of Moſes, who to 
thew his deteſtation of Idolatry, rk the golden calf, and burnt it,and. 
ground it to Powdcr ; and intimates, that when their Repentance 
would be lincere, it would diſcover it ſelf by their Zeal in deſtroy- 
ing the Inſtruments of their Idolatry. þ Which were frequently 
erected to the Honour of Idvls, of which we have many inſtances in 
Scripture, which God therefore commanded his People to deſtroy, 
Deut. 7.5. 12+ 3. # Shall be thrown down with contempt and 
Indignation. 


10 Yetk the defenced city 1 ſball be deſolate, and the 
habitation »: forſaken and left like a wilderneſs »: there 
ſhall the calf o feed, and there ſhall he lie down, agd 


conſume the branches thereof p, | 

& Yet before this glorious Promiſe concerning the removal of 
Iſra:s Sin and calamity be fulfilled, a dreadful and deſolating 
Judgmeat ſhall firſt come upon them. 1 Jeruſalem and the reſt of 
the Defenced cities in the Land, the ſingular Number being put 
for the Plural, m The moſt inhabited and Populous places. Or, 
as the Hebrew word properly ſignifies, their pleaſant habitations, whe- 
ther in the city or country, » Which was fulfilled in the time of the 


—_ 


Babyloniſh captivity» 0 Whugh 13 8ynecdochically put £27 all ew, 


7 Hath he ſmitten him, Þ as he ſmote thoſe that + Heb.5. 


od 


4 
- 


fHeb:r 

{Larng 
Heb, 

token. 


Feb: 


Vith for! 


3X 


I Chap- 


* Deut. 
32 28. 


Heb. 
troken. 


FHebs 


Vith fort. 


Chap-1: %. 


fHeb:Yale 
{ fatneſſes, 


XXVAE I $ 


of Cattel, which may ſecurely feed there, becauſe there ſhall 
e no Men left to diſturb or annoy them. p Of cheir pleaſant 
Habitation ; of the young Trees which ſhall grow up in that rut- 
nated Country. : 
11When the boughs thereof are withered q,they ſhall 

be broken off r : the women / come and ſet them on 
fire : for * it 5s a people of no underſtanding 7 : there- 
fore he that made them «, will not have'mercy on them; 
and he that formed them, will ſhew them no favour. 

q When they ſhall begin to wither, as they will when they are 
thus gnawed. and cropped by Cattel. r That there may be no 
hopes nor poſſibility of their recovery. { He mentions women, 
either becauſe it is their uſual Work in the Country to make Fires 
and'to gather Fewel for them ; or to ſignifie, that the Men ſhould 
be generally deſtroyed. * They do not underſtand either me or 
themſelves, either my Word or Works ; they know nor the things 
which concern their own Peace and Happineſs, but like bruit 
Beaſts, made to be deſtroyed, they blindly and willfully go in 
thoſe Couſes which will bring them to certain ruine. « Both as 
they are Creatures, and as they are his people ; for this alſo 1s 
expreſſed by making or form:ng, as Pſal. 100: 3: and 102. 18: and 149. 
2. Thus he overthroweth their falſe & preſumpruous Conceits,that 
God would never deſtroy the Work of his own Hands, nor the 
Seed of Abraham his Friend for ever ; and plainly declareth the 
contrary. . 

12 And it ſhall come to paſs in that day, *hat the 
LORD {hall beat off « from the channel of the river 
unto the ſtream of Egypt y, and ye ſhall be gathered 
one by one z, O ye children of Iſrael. 

x Or, fhall beat out : Which 15 not meant in a way of puniſh- 
ment, which is rather deſigned by threſhing, as Iſa: 21: io: and 25:10. 
than by beating ; but as an A& of Mercy, as is evident from the 
following Clauſe of this, and from the next Verſe. It is a Me- 
taphor from ſome Grains which were beaten out with a Rod or 
Staff, of which ſee Iſa: 28: 27.28. and then were carefully gathe: ed 
and laid up for the uſe of man. y From Euphrates to Nilus, which 
were the two Borders of the Land of Promiſe, Jo. 1. 4: and 13. 3 
All the Iſ-aclites which were left in the Land ; which are here op- 
poſed to thoſe of them thar are diſperſed into Foreign Parts, fuch 
as Aſjria and Egypt. » Which ſignifies either the ſmallneſs of the 
Remnant of that numerous People ; or rather Gods exaT and fin- 
gular Care of them, that not one of them ſhould be loſt. | 

13 And it ſhall come to pals in that day, zhat the 
great trumpet & ſhall be blown, and they ſhall come 
which were ready to periſh in the land of Affyria 6, 
and the out-caſts in the land of Egypt c,and ſhall wor- 
ſhip the LORD in the holy mount at Jeruſalem. 

a Which may be heard even to the remoteſt parts of the Earth. 
God ſhall ſummon them all togerher as it were by ſound of Trum- 
per, to wit, by an eminent Call or A& of his Providence on their 
behalf. He alluds to the Cuſtom of calling the I/-aelires togerher 
with Trumpets : of which ſee Numb. 10: 2, 3 65 Where the Ten 
Tribes were carried Captive. c Where many of the Jews were, as 
is manifeſt both from Scripture, as Jer. 43: 7:and 44:28. Ho. 8; 13. 
Zech. 10: 19. and from other Authors. 


C H A P. XXVIII. 


The Drunkenneſ; of Ephraim bringeth Deſtruition on chem : a Remnant ſhall 
be honourable, 1 8. their unteachableneſs, 9 13. their mock at 
Gods threatnings, 149———15+ Chriſt propheſied for a ſure foundation to 
Believers, 16. and d:ſtruffion to the mockers, who are exhorted t0 amend, 
17 22. Gods Providence, it's work and ſeaſons towards the Church, 

ſet out by @ Husbanaman 23 29, 
O to the crown of pride a, to the Drunkards 
b of Ephraim c, whoſe glorious Beauty 7s a fad- 
ing Flower d, which are e on the head of the Þ fac val- 
leys f of them that are F overcome g with wine, 

2 That proud & inſolent Kingdom; for the Crown is oft put for 
the Kingdom, as ere 13:18. &c. 6 Either r. Metaphorically,drunk 
with proud ſelf-confidence,and ſecurity,and proſperity : Or rather, 
2: Properly, by comparing this with wv, 7: and Hoſ. 7: 5. Amos 6. 6, 
where the Iſraelites are taxed with this fin. For having many and 
excellent Vines among them, they were expoſed ro this Sin, and 
frequently overcome by it. c Of the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes; 
which is commonly called by the name of Ephraim, as hath been 
oft noted before. 4 Whoſe Glory and Greatneſs ſhall ſuddenly 
wither and Periſh. e Which proud and drunken Iſraelites have their 
common and chief abode. Or, which is, #. e. which flower is ; or 
which beauty or glory is. f Either r. in Samaris, which might 
well be called the Head, as being ſeated upon a Mountain, and the 
Head of the Kingdom, and the head of the fat Valleys, becauſe it was 
encompaſſed with many fat and rich Valleys. Or, 2- Upon the 
chief or choiceſt ( as this word ſignifies, Exod. 3o 23. Cant. 4. 14. 
Iſa. 9: 14, 15+ and elſewhere) of the fat or rich Valleys: which they 
made occaſions and inſtruments of Luxury. g Heb. That are ſmitten, 

' or broken, or overthrown, or knocked down 3 all which ſignifications of 

this word fitly agree to Drunkaids. 

2 Behold, the LORD hath þ a mighty and firong 
One 3, which as a tempeſe of hail, and a deſtroying 
ſtorm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, ſhall 
caſt down & to the earch with the hand 7. 

The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, 


ſhall be trodden + under feet . 
þ To wit, at his Command, prepared and ready to execute his 
Judgments. # The King of Aſſria. k Underſtand zt, the Crown 


either by that King's force or ſtrong Hand ; or by the hand of God, 
which ſhall ſtrengthen, and ſuceed him in this work. m The Ex- 
preſſion is emphatical; the Crown which was upon thefr own heads, 


1þall be troden under the feet of others ; and they, whoſe Druns |: 


kennefs made them ſtagger,and fall to the ground, ſhall be troden 
down there, 


A 1 


h Language. 
of pride, or them, the drunkards of Ephraim. 1 Or, by his hand, £OUS oo 


HF 
P 
A: | Chap. XXVi Wh 
4 And the glorious beauty which 3s on the head of Fil 
the fat valley, ſhall be a fading flower, and as the haſty 
fruit » before the ſummer : which when he that lookech fo 
upon it, ſeeth it, while it is yet in his hand, he þ eat- + rev. ||| 
eth it up 0, EOS LOTS ATE OT WeTae ET | ſwalowetl | 
n= Which coming before the Seaſon, and before other Fruits, 1 
is moſt acceptable. o Which, as ſoon as a Man ſees he covets it, 
and plucks it off, yet doth not long enjoy it, but through greedi- 
neſs devours it, almoſt as ſoon as he can get it into his hand. And 
ſo ſhall it be with Ephrain's glory, which his Enemies, as ſoon as 
they obſerve, ſhall covet and 1poil, and devour it greedily, and 
with delight. NE 27 | 

5 In that day p (ball the LORD of hoſts be for a 
crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty 9 unto the 
reſidue of his people 7: WY 

Þ When the Kingdom of 1ſ-ae! ſhall be utterly deſtroyed. q God 
ſhall give them eminent Glory and Beauty. r Unto the Kingdom 
of Judah, who ſhall continue in their own Country, when {rel 55 
carried into Captivity. WI 
6 And for a ſpirit of Judgment to him that ſitteth in Wi 
judgment, and for ſtrength s to them that curn the bat- Wie 
tle to the gate ?. | 

s He explains how, or wherein God would glorifie and beaurifie 
them, even by giving wiſdom to their Rulers, and courage to their 
Souldiers,; which two things contribute mich ro the ſtrength and 
ſafety, and glory of a Nation. tr To their Warriors ; whom he 
deſcribeth by this Phraſe to intimate, That their Valour thould . 
be crowned wich ſucceſs, and that they ſhould not only drive 
their Enemies from their own Gates and Land, but ſhould purſue 
them into their own Lands, and befiege them in their own Cities; 
which Hezek:iab did, 2 Kings 18: 8. 48 : 

7 But they alſo 4 have erred through wine, and 
through ſtrong drink are they out of the way x : the 
prieſt y and the prophet z have erred z through ſtrong 
drink, they are ſwallowed up b of wine : they are our 
of the way through ſtrong drink, they err in viſion c, 
chey ſtumble iz judgment 4. 45 

# But alas ! Judah is guilty of the ſame fins with 1#ael,and there. - 
fore they alſo muſt expe the ſame Calamities; of which he ſpeaks 
afrerward. x They run into the ſame exceſs of Wine and ſtrong 
Drink, whereby they beſot themſelves, and fall into many errors 
and miſcarriages,borh in ſacred & civil Things. The many empha- 
rical Phraſes and Reperitions of the ſame thing in other words, in 
this verſe ſeem to evince, That he here ſpeaks of Drunkenneſs pro- 
perly ſo called, although he afrerward chargeth them with Igno« 
rance, and Error,and Stupidity ; which alſo were the Companions 
and in part, the Eff:&s of that Sin. y To whom ſtrong Drink 
was expreſly forbidden, in the time of their Sacred Miniſtrations 
leſt they ſhould thereby be led into errors in their work, Lev. 10. 
9,10. z The Teach:rs,who ſhould have been patterns of Sobriety 
to the People, and ro whom Sobriety was abſ-lutely neceſfary for 
the right diſcharge of their Office. . 4 In their Converſation, and 
in their holy Adminiſtration. b They are, as we fay, drowned in 
it; their Senſes and Reaſon are ſwallowed up,and lolt in it. They 
deſign only to ſwallow it, but indeed are ſwaſlowed up by it. 
c The Prophets miſcarry in their Sacred Employment of Prophe. 
ſying or Teaching, which is called Y;fon, Prov. 29: 18. and <&ſe.. 


where. d The Prieſts miſtake in pronouncing the Sentence of 
the Law, which was their duty, Dewt- 17. 9, 10, 11. 


8 For all tables e are full of yomit, end filthinefs, [6 
that there is no place f clean. £ | 

e At which the Prieſts. and prophets, and other Jews did eat 
and drink. They hardly made one tober meal : Drunkenneſs was: 
their daily praftice. f No Table, or no part of the Table; no nor 
” much " the holy Places, in which the Prieſts did frequently eat 
their meals. 


9 Whom (ball heg teach knowledge ? and whom 
ſhall he make to underſtand F dodrine? them that are 
weaned from the milk,a»d drawn from the breaſts hb. _ 

# To wit, the Teacher which is eafily underſtood, : out of the 
following Verb; either &od, or his Prophets, or Miniſters. þ Who 
bi there 200g =__ __ w_ _ and willing to be taught 
the good knowledge of God ? A Miniſter may as toon tea 1 
Child. as theſe Men. F TS 

10 For precept || muſt be upon precept 7, precept 
upon precept ; line upon line &, line upon line ; here 
a little, and there a little. | | | 

;/ They muſt be taught, like little children, lowly, and by 
-Jeiſure, the ſame things being oft repeated, becauſe of their great 
'dulneſs. - k One line of the book afrer another, as children are 
taught to read. : | 

11 For / with f * ſtammering lips »s, and another 4 pq; 
tongue || will he ſpeak to this people o. Pakenars... 

1 Or, therefore, as the Particle is oft uſed. For this ſeems to ings of pre 
be the puniſhment of their dulneſs. m Either 1. in the way of * 1Cor. 
condeſcention, as mothers and Nurſes teach children, liſping and 14: 21. | 
ſrammering with them. Or, 2. ia way of Judgment; which fuirs || Or, he », || 
beſt with the next clauſe. » By people of a ſtrange Language, hath ſpoken || 
whom he ſhall bring among them, and 1nto whoſe power He ſaall 
deliver them 3 which is a great aggravation of their Miſery, ſee 
Deut. 28: 49- Jer: 5:15. Exek, 3.5. o Seing they will nor hcar Him 
ſpeaking, by His Prophers and Miniſters, in their own Language, 
they ſhall hear their Enemies ſpeaking ro them in a ſtrange and 


22 To whom he ſaid p, This q is the reſt r wherewith 
ye may cauſe the weary to reſt s, and this zs the re- 
freſhing ; yet they would not hears. .. . _ 
: p To which People the Lord, by his Miniſters, ſaid. - q This 
Doctrine or Precepr, as it is expreſſed, ver.g,1o. or the Word of the ;/ 


+ Heb.chd | 


hearing, 


| Or hath | 


been, 


ee EE ag ar gar r IO Hy ent hn Ls Seng EI ern 


A as it follows, wer. 12. 7 "Che only way, in the obſeryation of.. 
ET 4 which 


hap. XXVIIL 


7 $ £ 


will find reſt and ſatisfaQtion. 5s Heb. Cauſe the weary 
Mews either Sow! or Country ) 10 reſt, As relt is offered to 
you by the Prephers in Gods name. do you embrace it ; which 1s 
7o be d:ne by hearkening to Gods Word, as appears by the fol- 
lowing Cl-uſes. So ſhall this People, which hath been ſo oft,and 
ſo long wearied, and haraſſed by grea” and manifold Calamities, 
find Reſt and Peace. & They are wi!fully ignorant, and obſti- 
nate'y refuſed the very means of inſtruttion 

13 But the word of the LORD was unto them, pre- 


cept upon precept, Precept upon Pprecept line upon 
line, line upon line ; here a little, ad there a little #; 
that they might go and fall backward, and be broken, 


and ſnared, and taken x. | 

u The ſenſe of the Words thus rendred, may be this, They 
ſpake of Gods Word, w:th ſcorn and contempr, repeating the 
Boghets Words in a icoffing manner, and with a ſtammering and 
ridiculous tone, ſaying, Pretepr upon Precepr, &c. as if they had 
faid, It ſeems the Prophet takes us to be meer Children,that need 
to be taught our firſt Rudiments, and that bur lowly. That thee 
were /cornjul men, and mock-rs, is affirmed. wer: 14: 22. and as ſcof- 
fers frequently catch the words out of other Mens Mouths, and 
uſe them in way of deriſion ; ſo it may be thought they did watt 
the Prophets words. But the words may be.and by divers learned 
Men, are rendred a little otherwiſe ; 4nd the word of the Lord ſhall 


- be unto them, precept upon precept, &c. As this method hath been 
uſed by them, and was altoge:her neceſſary for them ; ſo ir ſtill 15, 
and for the future ſhall be. As they were Children in underſtand- 
ing, they hall {till continue to be ſuch ; they ſhall be ever Iearn- 
ing, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth ; as they tor- 
merly would not, ſo now they ſhall not profit by the word ; and 
their fin ſhall be their puniſhment. And this ſeems to ſuit with 
the following Clauſe, which notes the dreadful deſign and effect 
of that judicial blindneſs, That they may, or might go and jall back- | 
ward, &c. x According to the former, which is our Tranſlation, 
this clauſe notes only the event, or conſequent of their Sin : Ac- 

- cording to the Larter, it notes the Judgment of God deſigned and 
infli&ed for it ; that Gods word being 1o horribly abuſed by them, |, 
mighr be an occaſion at which they might ſtumble and fall, and 
that backward, which is the worſt, and moſt dangerous way of |, 
falling ; and 1o be broken to pieces, or by which they might b. 
ſnared and taken. | 

14 Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye |, 


ſcornful mica that rule this geople, which 55 in Jeru- 


ſalem. 
y Which make a mock at fin, and at Gods Words and Threat- 


ning> ; aid doubt nor by your witty Devices,and by your wicked 


next Yerſe. : : 
15 Becauſe ye have ſaid z, We have made a cove- 


nanc with death, and with hell are we at agreement s; 
when the overflowing ſcourge 6 ſhall paſs through c, i: 
ſbal not come unto us ; for we have made lies our re- 


fuge, and under falſbood have we hid our ſelves d. 

z In your hearts. # We are as ſafe from D-ath, and HU, or 
the Grove, as if they had entred into Covenant with us, thar the) 
would not invade us. The word rendred Hel, moſt commonly 
fignifies the Grave ; which alſo ſeems moſt proper in this place, 
that ſo the ſame thing. may be ms In other words, as is moſt 
uſual in prophetical Writings. & the judgment of vod, which is 
called a Scourge,. for its ſharpneſs and ſeverity, and ov -rfowrng for 
its univerſality ; two diff:ring Metaphors being joyned together; 


c To wit, the Land. d We thall fecure our ſelves by lying and 
diſſimulation, by compliance with our Enemies, and with rheii 
Religion roo if it be neceſſary, and many crafty devices. Or by 
bes and faljbood, he means their Riches and ſtrength ro which :hey 
truitcd, ro which he. giveth theſe Titles, not that they called or 
thought them ſuch 3 but that he might ſigniiie whar they really 
were, and would appear to be ; ſee the Notes on Prov. 1.11. 


16 Therefore «e thus ſaith the Lord God, Behold, I 
lay fin Zion g for a foundation b, * a ſtone z, a tried 
ſtone &,a precious /corner-{tone »s, a ſure foundation »: 

*Pſal 118: he that believeth o, * ſhall not make haſte p, 


22. Mar: e The Coherence is ſomething obſcure and dithcult. Ir may 
21:42. be madecither 1. thus, Therefore I will bring moſt teri ible Judy- 


* Act 4:11. ments up-n you ; which are fully expreſſed, wer. 17, :8, 19,-:0 
Rom 9:33 21 But before he comes to the Commination, to which, therefore 
" "Epir 2:28. properly belongs, he fir? propounderth a comtorta»le Promiſe 
x Per: 2» concervring the fending of the Mſi-h, partly for the ſupport of 
6,7,8. Believers, who are ap” ro trembie at God's Word, aid might 
* FHeb:ſfone otherwiſe be apt ro diſpond at the prediion of ſuch dreadful 
tryal. Things ; And partly to aggravate their Miſery by comparing it 
; wow 27. with the ſafery and happineſs, which the Godly, and Bclicving 
” * Rome Jews, whom they diſpit:d and mocked, ſhould find in Zo ; and 
| 16; lh by ſignifying, that that bleſſed and ſure Foundation laid in Z:on, 
ſhould yield them no ſupport nor benefit, nor ſecure them from 
the Vengeance of God. Or,” 2. thus, Becauſe your Rcefuges are 
ſo mean, and vain, and deceitful ; therefore I will dire& you to a 
better and ſurer Refuge, which will never fail rhoſe that truſt to | 
it, which God hath made in Zien. But if you ſhall deſpiſe and | 
reje& thar Refuge, which I now offer to you All if you will Be- 
lieve ; then know, that I will lay judgment to the line, &c. as it 
follows, v. 175 And this ſeems to me, to be the moſt natural. 


w 


will, in the fulneſs of time, aQtually perform it. g In my Church, 
which is commor ly called Zion; and in Feruſalem, where this Stone 
ſhall be firſt laid, which afterwards ſpread further, and filled the 
whole Earth, as it is ſaid of it, Dar. 2: 35. b Upon which I will 
Build my Church, conſiſting both of Jews and Gentiles, the Foun- 
dation of all the hopes, and comfort, and happineſs of my Peo- 
| Ple 3 the Foundation of my Covenant made with my Church,and 
of all my Promiſes. # Not Hezekiah, but the Meſſiah, as appears ; 


met annexcd ro it, z. e, with exactneſs and care. 
be underſtood either, = Thar God would ſo order and ſettle things 
in His Church, that juſtice and Judgment ſhould prevail, and not 
iniquity 25 hitheito it had done: or rather, 2. That as God would 
build up, and preſerve a!l Believers upon that Foundation-Stoney 
'o he would ſeverely puniſh, and utterly defrroy all thoſe unbe- 
lieving Few, who ſhould reject that Stone. For the line and plums 
met, or the plum'-line, was not only uſed in erecting Buildings, 
bur alſo in pulling them down 5 thoſe parts of the Building be« 
ing thus marked our, which were to be demoliſhed ; and there« 
fo-e 1s uſed in Sc:ipture, to ſignifie the Deſtruction of a Place or 
People, as is evidear from 2 Kings 21. 13. 1a. 34 n. Lament: 2: 8, 


7 


2. From the New.7eſtament, where this Text indireQly expounded 
of Chriſt, as Rom: 9. 22, 33. x Pet: 2: 4. 3. From the laſt Claule, 
wherein he requires Faith in this Stone, which is not to be given 
to any meer Man, Jer: 17: 5. and wherein He impli:s. That the 
Stone was not-yet come, nor to come ſpeedily into the World - 
whereas Hezckiah was King at the time of this Prophecy. 4. From 
che uſual praftice of the Prophets, and eſpecially of this Pro. 
phet, which is, to cotnfort and fo: tifie Gods People, againſt the 
dread of approaching Calamities, by that great and fundamenta} 
Promiſe of the Mzſfiah, in whom al»ne all other promiſes a:e,Yea 

and Amen ; whereof we have ſeen ſome inſtances already,and ſhalj 
ſee more hereafter. k Which I have tried, and approved as every 
way ſufficient tro be a Corner-ſtone, and a Foundation-itone. 
Such Stones in Buildings uſe ro be choſen with care, and to be 
throughly examined by the Builder. / Giving not only ſtrength 
but beauty, and glory to the Building, as Corner-ſtones frequently 
do Pſal: 144. 12. m Uniting the ſeveral parts of the Building 
rogerher, making Ephraim and Judah, now ladly divided. one ſtick, 
Ez.k. 37.19, 24 and Jews and Gentiles, now implacable Enemies,one 
Church and People. Eph.2:14, ©c. n Upon whom.you may ſecurely 
Relit ; One who wi!'l not tail, nor deceive you, as your lying Re. 
Fuges will. o To wit, this Promiſe ; or in this Stone, AS it 1S Ex« 
plained, 1 Pet: 2:6. p Shall not make- more haſt than he ought 

Or, as We {ay, more hatt t'.an good tpecd ; ſhall not haſtily and 


greedily catch at any way of eicaping his danger, whether it be, 


right or wrong, but thall paijently wait upon God in His way, till 


ne deliver him. Withal, here isa plain intimation, that the Mercy 
here promiſed was not to be given preſently, but after ſome con- 


Leraole time ; and therefore, that they ſhould quietly, and Pa 


tiently ſubmit to God's W1ll, under their preſent difficulties, and 
expect the accompliſhment of it in Gods due time ; compare Hage 


2.3. The Word here rendred, make haſt, is by the Seventy Tnter-= 


preters rendred, be confounded, whom the Apoſtles follow, Rom. g. 
3 3-and 1 Pet. 2; 6, either becauſe they thought it moſt convenient, 


1 a matrer where the difference was not conſiderable, to follow 


that Tranſlation wh ch was moſt uſed, and beſt underſtood by the 
ge erality of 7ewiſh and Gentile Chriſtians ; or becauſe the ſame 
Word hath both theſe fignifications in the Eaſtern Languages, as 


he moir Learacd, and worthy Dr. Pocock hath proved : or becauſe 


the one follows upon the other; and precipitation or haſt, com= 


nonly expoſeth Men to ſhame and confuſion; which alſo is implj« 


ed mn the following Verſes, wherein the dreadfu! Judgments of God 
are denounced againſt thoſe, who ſhou'd not believe, and would 


nake haſte to p:event or remove their Dangers by any means 
: hatſoever. 
17 Judgment alfo will T lay to the line, and righ- 


:eouſneſs to the plummet q, and the hiil ſhal ſweep 


way the refuge of lies, and the waters ſhal overflow 


Prattices, to eſcape Goa's Judgments, of which we rcad in the | ,j@ hiding place r. 


q I will Execute juſt Judgment, as it were by a Line or Plum- 
And this may 


Amos 7:7, 8. And this ſenſe aggrees beſt with the foliowing Clauſe 


6 and Verſe. 3 My Judgments. which in Scripture are compared 
which is not unuſual, both in Scripture, and in other Authors. |. y Judg P P 


o a ſtorm: «f Hail or Rain, ſhall ditcover the vanity of all your 


crafty and wicked Devices, and ſhail ſweep you away with the 
Beſom of D- ſtruction, in ſpight of them 


18 And your covenant with death ſhal be diſannul- 


led s, and your aggreement With hell thal not ſtand ; 


when the overflowing ſcourge ſhal paſs through, then 
ye ſhal be f troden down by it z, 


Chap. XXVI1E. 


+ Heb. 4 


s Made vo'd or of none effect : it fhall ſtand you in no ſtead- treading 
t Which you flattered your ſelves, that it ſhould not come unto down v 


you, ver: 15, 

19 From the time that it goeth forth, it (ball take 
you «: for morning by morning it ſhall paſs over x, by 
day and by night; and it hall be a vexatien, only |] ro 


underſtand the report y. 

# As ſoon as this overflowing Scourge or Judgment ſhall 
from me into the Land, it ſhall aſſurediy, and with the fiiſt, 
or ſeize upon you ſcoffers, or carry you away,which agrees well, 0 
with the Hebrew word, which 1s frequently taken in that Senſe, 
and with che Mcraphor of a Flood, which is here uſed. Ir ſhall 
not only come to you, contrary to your preſumption, ver: I5. but 
it ſhall abide upon you ; and when it hath paſſed over you, it ſhall 
return again to you, morning after morning ; and ſhall follow you 
day and night, without giving you the leaſt reſpite» y So dread- 
ful ſhall the Judgmenr be, that it ſhall ſtrike you with great hor- 
ror, when you only hear the rumor of its approach, or of the ſad 
effects of ir, upon-other perſons or parts of the Land, 


20 For the bed is ſhorter than that a mar can ſtretch 
himſelf on zr : and the covering'f narrower, than that 


he can wrap himſelf in it z. | 
z For thoſe lying Refuges, to which you truſt, will not be 


take 


from- them; no more than a man can ſtretch himſelf ( as theſe 


narrow for him, or wrap or keep him wa:m, with-a' covering 0r 
bed cloaths, which are not large enough for him: 


21 For the LORD ſhal riſe up - as in mount * Pe- 
razim 6b, he ſhal be wroth as i» the valley of * Gibeon ©, 


1- From thoſe Scriptures of tne Old-T:ſtament, in which Chriſt is 
called a Stone, as Plal;u8. 22. 13. 8: 14. Dan: 2: 34, 35, 45+ 43ch:3-9, 


OI 


chat he may do his work, his ftrange work 4; and bring 
to paſs his a, his ſtrange act. 


= 


|| Or,when 
he ſhall 


+h make you 
go for to undere 


th ſtand Doe 
frine. 


+Heb.nar- 
row when 
be wrapeis 


and eafie Conneftion. f I have purpoſed and promiſed it, and | able to give you that Protection and Comfort, which you expect himſelf * 


* 2 Sam-5s 


luxurious J#aelites uſed to do, Amos 6. 4.) upon a bed which is too , _ | (hy, 


14:11. 


» [oſh.10; 
12.2 Sam! 


5: 25. 
1 Chr. 14 
16» 


# To 


Chap. 


2 22, 23. 


#10r, che 
weat in th 


T pincipal 


Fplice, an 
lley in thy 
qpointed 
Places 


' Or, ſpelt. 
1?Heb. 
Jvder, 
J10r, and 


þ bind. #h 
tin ſuch 
ﬀ#t as 915 
bid dot 
lh him. 


Cap. 


— 


Chap. 10 


Fr 22, 23e 


$10r, che 


wheat in the 


T pincipal 


Pace, and 
ley in the 
qpointed 
Mlaces 


4iOr, pelr. 
fHeb. 


Wwder. 


J10r, and 


þ bind.#h 
tin ſuch 
jt as 1915 
bid dot þ 
lh him. 


- 
” 


XX VII. £ 3 Mi 


a To att and fight © againſt you, as he is ſaid !'ofit fil, when he 
doth forbca: t» att. 6 Where ke fought againſt the Philiſtines 2 Sam. 
5: 20, c Where he fought againit Ho Canaanites, Joſ: -0. 10, &c 
and afrerwards againſt the Philiftines, 1Chron 4” 16 d The execution 
of h's Judgment againſt rael, which he calleth his ffrange work, to 
in-imate, hither 1 That God would puniſh themnot with ordinary 
puniſhments ; but in a moſt dreadfuland ſingular. and extraordinary 
m-nner ; ſuch a Judgment being called a marvelous word, I/a:29: * 4: 
although the Hebrew word there uſed, be not the ſame with this, 
but of a much differing ſignification : Or rather 2. That this work 
ot br:nging total and irrecoverable Deſtru&ion upon Jrael, was 
contrary to the benignity of his own Nature, and to the uſual way 
of dealing with his people, whom he uſed and delighted toprotett, 
and ſpare, and bleſs 3 and whom, even when he is angry with them, 
and puniſheth them, he handleth more gently, than he doth other 
perſ ns, in Judgm-nt remembsing Mercy to them, as was noted, 
Ja; 27- 7, 8: ſee alſo Chap: 26: Ir. 

22 Now therefore be ye not mockers e, leſt your 
bands be made ſtrong f : for ] have heard*fromthe 
LORD GOD of hoſts a conſumption, even determined 


upon the wnole earth g. uh 

e For your own ſakes do not make a mock of Gods Word and 
Threatnings, 2s. you uſe to dv. f Leſt thereby you make the 
Judgments of God, which are oft compared to band, as Pſal: 66: 11: 
and 73: 4. and elſewhere, more ſure and unavoidable, and more 
ſevere and terrible, as bandsare when they are tied faſter, and more 
ſtrongly upon a priſoner. g God hath aſſured me, That he will 
utterly root out, and deſtroy the people of rel; as indeed he did 
in Hezekiah's Reign. $ 

223 Give ye ear, and hear my voice 
hear my ſpeech þ. 


hb Obſerve what I ſay, and do youjudge if it be not reaſonable. 


| 24 Doth the plowman plow all day to ſow ;? doth 
he open & and break the clods of his ground /? 

i; The Plowman doth not ſpendall his time in plowing the Ground, 
in order to the Sowing it, or, as it follows, in opening it, and 
breaking its Clods ; but he hath ſeveral times for ſeveral works, a 
time for plowing, and atimefor ſowing and harrowing, and a time 
for Reaping, and a time for tlireſhing or beating, and bruſing the 
Corn for his own uſe. Which Witdhm God hath pur into him. 
This is the Sum of the ſimilitude propounded here, and inthe fol- 
lowing Verſes. The deſign and meaning whereof ſeems tobe this, 
to teach them, That God had his times and ſeaſons for ſeveral works, 
and that the methods of his providence were various at ſeveral 
times, and towards ſeveral perſins or people ; and therefore that 
thoſe ſcolfing Jſraelites were guilty ot great Folly, in flattering 
themſelves, and deſpiſing Gods Thieatnings, becauſe of Gods long 
Patie::ce towards them, and becauſe of their preſent impunity and 

roſperity ; f-r God would certainly and ſpeed:ly take a time to 

hreih, and break them with his Judgments, as at preſent he plowed 
and Harrowed then, and ſo prepared them for itby his threatnings. 
k Un ierſtand, al day, or continually, out of the foregoing Clauſe, 
{ Which they uſed to do with a kind of Harrow, or other proper 
Inſtrument. See Jer. 4. 3+ Hoſ. 10. 11, 12. 


25 Whenhe hath made plain the face thereofm, doth 
he not caſt abroad the firches, and ſcatter che cummin, | 
and caſt in|| the principal wheat », and the appointed | 
barley o, and the || rie in their F place p ? 

m By breaking the Clods, which made it ragged and uneven. 
n Either 1. The Wheat, which is the principal or chief of all theſe 
Grains: Or, 2. The beſt Wheat. whi-h he p:udently chuſerh for 
Seed. o Thar proportion of Barley which he appointed. Or, as 
others, the marked Barley ; or, the choiſe Barlzy, which they laid aſide in 
a Sack for Sced : and therefore ſet aſide with a peculiar Mark upon ir. 
p Heb in his Border ; each Seed in a ſeveraland proper place. 


26 || For his God doth inſtrukt him to diſcretion, 


and doth teach him q. 

q Thz ſenſe of the Words thus rendred is this, All this he per- 
formeth by thit diſcretion, which God hath pur into him : and 
therefore be aſſured, That God will order all his Afﬀairs with 
Judgment, and will in due ſeaſon execute the Puniſhments which 
now he theatens, and will perfe& his own Works. But the words 
by ſome, are rendred otherwiſe, 41d he beatetht out ( as this word 
may be rendred, 1 Kings 12. 11. Prov. 19. 18. and 29. 17 ) in ſuch 
ſort, as hu God doth teach him, in a diſcreet manner, which being 
generally mentioned here, is particulariy deſcribed in the following 
Verſe. | 

27 For the fitches are not threſhed with a threſhing 


inſtrument r, neither is a cart-wheel s turned about 
upon the cummin': but the fitches are beaten out with 


a ſtaff, and the cummin with a rod ?. 

r Which then and there was made like a Sled ſhod with Iron, 
which was drawn by Men or Beaſts. over the Sheafs of Corn, to 
bruiſe chem ind bear the Grain out of them. 5 A lefler and lower 
Wheel than 4 Cart-wheel, but of the ſame form, upon waich 
prernry the threſhing Inſtrument was drawn. # As being unable to 

ear ha der uſige. FI : | 

28 Bread-cory is bruiſed s ; becauſe x he will not 
ever be threſhing it, nor break it y with the wheel of 
his cart, nor b:uiſe it with bis horlemen z. _ | 

u With a Threſhing Inftriment, by comparing this with the 
foregoing Verſe, and the following Words. x Or rather, but, or 
meverthel:ſs, as the woid is frequently uſed. The Senſe is, The 
Husbandman doth indeed threſh rhe Bread-corn, but he doth it 
with moderation, and only for a time, not for ever. y Underſtand, 
for ever, out of the foregoing Chuſe, asi$uſual in Scripture. x Which 
governed the Horſe or Horſes, that drew the thrething Inſtrument. 
Or, with horſes : For it is evident, and hath been oblerved before, 
that this He:rew word ſignifies, Horſes. as well as Horſemen. And rhis 
was another way of Toreſhing out the Corn, by driving Horſes, 
or other Cattel! over the' Sheayes to tread it out ; of which, ſee 

Dent. 25, 4. Nich, 4. 13. 


: hearken and 


which AR of Gods is called his Sacrifice, Ezek. 39. 1 


:f whiſper out of the duft. 


WF IX: - 
29 This alſo ||cometh forth fromthe LORD ofhoſts 


working Tf. ; KEE 

||"Fhis part of the Husbandmans diſcretion expreſſed, wv. 29 
as. well as that expreſled. wv. 24, 25. : 
Application of the Similitude. The Hucbandman manageth al: his 
Affairs with common diſcretion ; but God governsthe World. and 
his Church, with wonderful] wiidom:; He is great and mecvellou; wiſdom 
_ in the deſign or contrivance of things, and in the Executicn great 
OT TRE ; : 


derful, he 


CHAP. XXIX. 


The Temple and City of Jeruſalem deftroyed, ' 6. her Enemies unſatiable 
7, 8. their ſenſeleſneſs. 9—12. and deep hypocriſie, 13 : 
the ſcorner and oppreſſar berg cut off : the reſt ſhall be converten, 


18 24, 
[ W O to Ariel « to Ariel || the city where David 
; welt 6; add ye year to year ; letthem * 
kill facrifices c. wu : of ; , = —_ 
a "BY ; z FLEW 
4 This Wotd ſignifies, s frong Lien, or the Lien of God ; and is uſed of Ged. 
concerning Lion-like Men, as it is rendred, 1 Chron. 171. 22. and of - Or 


| Or, 04- 


thus called, becauſe it devoured and conſumed the 
upon it, as greedily, and as irrefiſtably, as the Lion doth his 
It the Altar be here meant, ir is pur Synecdochically for the'Tem= 
ple, and the words may be rendred, Wo to Ariel, ts Ariel, of or in 
the City, or, andthe City ; for that conjunRion is ſomerimes under= 
ſtood, as 1/a. 22.6, Hab 3.11. And fo the Threatning is. denounced 
both againſt the Temple, and againſt Jeruſalem. Bur he ſeems rather 
to underſtand it of Jeruſalem, 2s may be gathered ; 1, From ths 
next words, which ſeem to be added by way of Appoſition, to 
explain what he meant by that obſcure and ambiguous Term : Wo 
zo Ariel, to Ariel, even to the City : 2. From the following Verſes 
which plainly declare, That this Ariel is the place which God 
threatens, that he would diſtreſs and fill with h:avineſs, wv. 2. and 
lay ſiege againſt her, v. 3 And that rhe Nations ſhould fight againſt her, 
v.7. All which Expreſſions agree much better to Jeruſalem, than to 
the Altar: And this city might be called Ariel, or che ffrovg Lion : 
Either r. For ifs eminent ſtrength in regard of its Situation and 
Fortifications, by reaſon whereof, it was thought almoſt impreyn« 
able, both by themſelves and others, Lam. 4. 12. Or, 2. For its 
Lion-like Fiercene!s and Cruelty, for whici ſhe is called the blood. 
City, Exek. 7.23. and 22 2. andin effe&t, JG. 1. 15.and 59. 3. an 
Fer. 19. 4 and for which her Princes are called Ziont, Ez. 19. 2 
Z-ph. 3. 3- Or, 3 Inrcſpe& of the Altar of God, which was ere&ed 
in, and confined to that Ciry, and in which the Strength and Glory 
of thar Citv did chiefly conſiſt. b The Royal Ciry, and Seat of 
David and his Poſterity. Which is here mentioned. as the ground 
of their Confidence ; and withal, it is' implied, That their Relation 
to David, and their ſuppoſed Intereſt in- the Promiſes made to him 
and to his Seed, ſhouid not ſecure them from the Deffriidtion here 
maine 2es c Go - in Ano Sacrifices from time to time 
one year after another, where ou think toappeaſe me , 
ſecure your ſelves - But all ſhall B: in vain. TE + 


| 2 Yet 4Iwill diſtreſs Ariel e, and there ſhal be heayi- 
neſs and forrow, and it ſhal be unco me as Ariel #, 

d Notwithſtanding all your Sacrifices. e By bringing and ſtrengths 
ning her Enemiesagainſt her. ' f The ſenſe is, Either 1 I will =- 
her like a ſtrong a1d fierce Lion, which the People among whom it. 
is, endeavour by Ners, or Pits, and all other ways t- take and de. 
ſtroy. Or, 2. | will make Arie! the City, like Arie/ the Aitar, filling 
it with Sacrifices, even with Men. whom I will ſlay in my Anger; 
7, 19. 


2 AndI will camp againſt chee [| cound about, and 1 " with 


will lay ſiege againſt chee'g || wich a mount, and I will 9» arny. -. 
raiſe forts againſt thee. Y | | Or.awb 


g By thoſe En-mies whom I will aſſiſt, and enable to deſtroy thee. ® ſetled - 

This was:fulfilled, Either 1. by Sennacherib as ſome learned Men ©*"Þ, 9 

think. Burt what is here affirmed of - theſe Enemies, is expreſly Leaguers 

denied concerning Sennacherib, Iſa. 37.3. or rather 2. by the Chaldean; 

2 K.ngs 25 |, Oc. ; 

4 And thou ſhalt be brought down, and ſhalt ſpeak, 

out of the ground, and thy ſpeech ſhall be low out of 

che duſt h, and thy. voice ſhall 6e as of one that hath a 

familiar ſpirit our ofthe ground z, and thy ſpeech ſhalt 
3 fHeb.peep, 

or thinp : 

Ch.8. I9. 


þ Thou who now ſpeakeſt ſo loftily, and ſcornfully againſt the 
Lords Prophets and others, ſhalt be humbled and confounded, and 
afraid and aſhamed to ſpeak aloud, and ſhalt in a ſubmiſs manner: 
and with alow Voice, beg'the favour of thine Enemies. z Who. 
that th:y might poſſeſs the People with a kind of Reverence and 
Horror, uſed to ſpeak and deliver their Anfwers with a low Voice 
either. out of their Bellies, or from fome dark Cave under the 

ground. | EY 
Moreover, the multitude of thy ſtrangers 2 ſhall 
be like ſmall duſt 6, . and the muiticude of che terrible 
ones b (hall be * as chaff that paſſeth away : yeait ſhall .; , , 
bec at* an inſtant ſuddenly,  _ | Fg m—_ 
# Either 1. of the Strangers that Encamp and Fight againſt thee, * Cha "N 

Or, 2. of the Egyptians, and other ſtrangers, whom thou haſt hired .... - 
to aſſiſt thee, as indeed they did, whea the Cha!deans came againſt Sia 
them. This expoſition ſeems to agree beſt, as with the phraſe, 
thy ſtrangers, ſo with the ſcope of the place, and with the whole 
Context, eſpecially the foregoing Verſes ; .which plainly ſhews, 
that this 1s not, a Promiſe. to 7eruyſelers, bur a threatning againſt it. | 
6 Quickly ,blown away with the leaſt Wind, by comparing this 
with the following Clauſe b Ofthy great Commaaders, and touteſt. 
| Souldiers- c This diſſipation and deſtruQiion of thy Strangers, and 
terrible cats ſhall come to paſs. FOR = 
5 6 Thou 


i* p 
4 


3 


Chap. XX'X 


Gods Altar, as it is rendred, Exek. 43. 1*, 16. which ſeems to be of the city. e | 


| 
} 


19: 
: | 
- 4 
Y q 
! 


; l 


: - : 9 S Ter. 32.00 
which * f is wonderful in counſel, and excellent in £ ad. 'F 
1. + Heb: he'||/* 


27, 28 hath made, Wl! 
'T Theſe words contain the counſel won!l\\ 


1100 
187! KF 
| 


| 


hath U7ads8 | | 


un 
1 
l 
} 


b 
f 


0 
+ M1 

: 
i 


we | 


\'F 
WT | 


Sacrifices put tf Heb. cu# |||] 
rey. off the heads | 


fe 


14 
hk 
if's ' 
0 


[ 
| 
i 
| 
| 
| 


Chap. XXIX. 18 4 
£ Thou dſhalt be viſited of the LORD of hoſts with 
thunder, and with earthquake, and great noiſe, with 
frorm and tempeſt, and the flame of devouring firee. 

J Thou, O Ariel or Jeruſalem, of, or to whom this whole Context 
manifeſtly ſpeaks. e With dreadful Judgments, which are frequently 
expreſſed in the Prophets, by theſe andſuch like Metaphors: 

7 And the multitude of all the nations chat fight 


againft Ariel, even all that fight againſt her, and her 
munition, and thart diſtreſs her, ſhall be as a dream of 


a night viſion f. 
f Wherein it ſhall be ſo, 


$ It ſhall even be as when a hungry mar dreameth, 
and behold he eateth ; but he awaketh, and his ſoul is 
empty g : or as when a thirſty man dreameth, and behold 
he drinketh ; but heawaketh, and behold be is faint, and 
his ſoul hath appetite : ſo ſhall the multicude of all che 


nations be, that faght _ mount Zion 6. 

g His appetite or deſire ( as #he ſoul is taken, Pſal. 41+ 4. and 78. 
18, and elſewhere ) is unſitished. Or, his ſtomach or body ( as#he 
foul is uſed, Plal: 16: 10. ) is empty: þ No leſs unſatisfied and 
inſatiable, ſhall the Enemies of the Jews be, with all the Cruelties 
which they have committed againſt you ; and they ſhall be always 
thi ſting after more of your Blood, as if they had never taſted any 
of it. : 

9 Stay your ſelves and wonder 3, || cry ye out, and 
cry &: they are drunken, but not with wine } : they 


ſtagger, but not with ſtrong drink : | : 

; Pauſe uponiit, and you will ſee cauſe to worider at the ſtupi- 
dity of this People, of which he isnow about to ſpezk. He direQ- 
eth his Speech, either to the Religious part of the People, or to 
thoſe particular perſons, who heard him, when he d-livered this 
Prophecy. & Cry out again and again, either in way of Supplication 
for them ; or rather through Aftoniſhment and Horror. Or, They 
take pleaſure or ſport themſelves ( as this word moſt commonly ſignifies ) 
and riet ; In the midſt of all theſe Threatnings and Dangers, they 
are ſecure, and give up themſelvesto ſenſuality ; which 1s matter 
of juſt wonder ! But either x. With drinking tbe Cup of God's 
fury, wherewith they are ſaid to be made drunk, 1/a. 51.17, 20. 
And then they are drunk, is put for, they ſhell bedrunk, after the manner 
of the Prophets. Or 2. With the ſpirit of gididnels or ſtupidity, 
which makes them like drunken Men, inſenſible of their Danger, 
and not knowing what to do, 


io For * the LORD hath poured out upon you »- the 
ſpirit of dead ſleep », and hath cloſed your eyes: the pro- 
phets and your f rulers, the ſeers o hath he covered p« 

m Which Phraſe notes the plenty. and vehemency of this Judg- 
ment, #» Hardneſs of heart, and inſenſibleneſs of your danger and 
miſery, which God is ſaid to ſend, becauſe he denies, or withdraws 
his Light and Grace, which alone can cure: thoſe Maladies. o Your 
Magiſtrates and Miniſters, whoſe blindneſs or ſtupidity is a great 
Curſe and Plague ro the People. Or, the Prophets, even the coief 
( for rhe head is oft put for the chief of Perſons or things, as Exod 
30: 23. 1 Chron: 12: 18, and elſewhere ) of your ſeers, p With che 
vail of ignorance and ſtupidicy, or as to their Eyes, which is 
underſtood out of the former Clauſe. And this laſt Clauſe 1s, and 
may be rendred thus, The Eyes ( which may be repeated our of 
the foregoing Clauſe )of your Prophets, and of, or even of your principal 
ſetrs ( or, and of your moſt mielligent rulers ) hath he covered. 


Ir And the viſion of all q is become unto you, as the 
 YOr, #!*r. orgs of a || book that is ſealed r, which me deliver to 


one thatis learned, ſaying, Read this, I pray thee ; and 


he ſaich, I cannot, for it zs ſealed. : . 

12 And tae book is delivered to him that is not learned 
s ſaying, Read this, I pray thee : and be faith, I am 
not learned. 

q Of all your Prophets, whether the true or falſe Ones. » In 
which no- Man can read, whilſt it is ſealed up, as books then 
ſometimes were, 1 Kings 21. 8. Eſfth: 3: 12, 13 being made in the 
form of Rolls, which was convenient for that purpoſe. s Unſealed 
and opened ; as the following Clauſe implies. God ſo orders the 
manner of delivering this Book, that neither the learned noc unlear- 
ned could read and underſtand it. 


LS P-ck. ; 12 Wherefore the LORD ſaid, * Foraſmuch as this 
33 3t- people draw near me t with their mouth,and with their 
at.15-8- jips do honour me, but have removed their heart far 
Mar. 7.6. from me x; and their fear towards me is taught by the 
precept of men y : 
: To wit, in the afts of valgggs * u With outward Devotions, 

- and the profeſſion of Religion. x They do not pay me that Love, 
and Fear, and Ob:dience, which I require, and prefer before all 
Sacrifices, and external Services, y They Worſhip me not in ſuch 
way and manner, as I have commanded and preſcribed, bur accor. 


is explained in the next Verſe. 


V Or, 
take your 
oxy 'e 
8nd ri. 


* Rom. 

11.8. 

T Heb. 
heads. 


and traditions of their falſe Prophets before my Inſtitutions. For 
this wasa common Errour among the Fews, as we learn from Fer. 
9.31: Hoſ: 5: 11- and many other Scriptures, and thus our bleſſed 
Saviour expounds this very place, Met, 15: 7, 8, 9. 

14 Therefore behold, {I will proceed to do a mar- 
vellous work amongſt this people, ever a marvellous, 
work and a wonder, * for the wiſdom of their wiſe 
men ſhall periſh, and the underſtanding of their prudent 
men ſhall be hid =. 

z Shall diſappear and vaniſh; for this atiſwers to, ſhal periſh, in 
the former Clauſe. A vail ſhall be caſt upon the Eyes of their 
Minds : they ſhall give no evidences or proofs of their Wiſdom, 
| {but their folly ſhall be made manifeſt. - And this way indeed a 
wonderful thing for their wiſe men'to be made fools; 


- + Heb. 7 
ill aa8e 
: *Jer.49- 7. 
Obad. wv. 8, 
I Cor. 
| 1, 29- 


ding to their own. and other Mens inventions, preferring the devices : 


TI 4 H. Chap, XX1z; 
15 * Wounto them that ſeek deep # to hide their 
counſel from the LORD 6, and their works are in the he ap, 
dark c, and * they ſay, Who ſeethus ? and who knoweth "pc FE 
'T, 


us 4? 


# Heb. that make deep. A Metaphor from Men, who uſe to 4; 
deep into the Earth, that they may hide any thing —_ 
they would keep ſafe and unknown. 6 Vainly imagining, Thar 
they can keep all their Hypocriſie and ſecret Wickedneſs out of 
Gods ſight, and that they can deceive, not only Men, but God by 
their external Profeſſions and Services, c Their wicked Counſels are 
contrived, and their Idolatry is praQtiſed in ſecret and dark places 
of which, ſee Ezek; 8: 12. d We a& fo cunningly, that neither 
God nor Man can diſcover us. 

16 Surely your turning of things upſide down e ſhall 
be elteemed asthe potters clay f: or ſhall the ® work fay- 
of him that made it, He made me not ? or ſhall the 
thing framed, ſay co him that framed it, He had no 
underſtanding g ? 

e All your ſubrile devices, by which you turn your ſelves i 
all ſhapes ; and turn your Thoughts hither and thick ond es 
the order which God hath appointed. flr is no more to me than 
the Clay is to the Potter, who can not only diſcern it throu hly 
but alter and diſpoſe it as he ſeeth fir- g And no leſs abſurd ang 
ridiculous is your Conceit, that I your Maker, and ſupream Gover.. 

 nour, cannot diſcover, and controul all your Artifices ar my 
' pleaſure. 

17 Lit not yet a very little while, and Lebanon ſhal 
be turned into a fruitful fieid : and the fruitful field ſhall 


be efteemed * asa forreſt þ ? * Pit oo 
h The Forreſt of Lebanon. which was a barren Mountain, and a 16. mY 
deſolate Wilderneſs, ſthall by Gods wonderful providence, become 
| a fruitful and populous place; and theſe places which are now 
; fruitful and populous, ſhall then become as barren and Deſolare, as 
that Forreſt. This ſenſe is confirmed by char parallel place, Iſa. 32. 
I5. And from both places compared together, this ieems to be a 
Prophecy of the reje&ion of the wicked and unbelieving Jews, whoſe 
Sins and marvellous Judgments, and particularly Intatuation, are 
declared in the foregoing Veries; and of the calling of the Genriles, 
of which he ſpeaksin the following Verſe, as appears further by 
comparing that Verſe with 1a: 35: 5. And this Opinion may receive 
ſome Countenance from Matth: 15: 7, &c. where Chriſt expounds 
the foregoing Words, v. 13. upon which theſe have a dependancey 
of his own times. | 


18 Andin that day ſhall * the deaf i hear the words 
of the, book, and the eyes of the biind ſhallſee out of 


obſcuricy, and out of darknels k. 

# Who were deaf before, God by his Word and Grace did open 
their Ears : even the deaf and blind Gentiles, as was now noted. 
Co:npare 1/a:35:5. k Being, by Gods Grace, brought out of that 
groſs, and worſe than Egyprt:an darkneſs of ignorance and wickedneſs, 
in which they formerly lived, unto a clear and faving knowledge 
of the Truth. E 

r9 The meek 1 alſo 5 ſhall increaſe their joy in the 
LORD ms, and the poor » among men ſhall rejoyce in 


the Holy One of Ifrael. 

I The humble and meek Believers, oppoſed to thoſe proud and 
ſcornful Iſraelites or Jews, of whom he ſpeaks in this, and in the 
foregoing Chapter- m Shall greatly rejoyce in this, that the Lord, 
and Holy One of 1ſrae! 1s now their God and Portion. = Either 7. 
Spiritually, of which Mat: 5:3. Or 2. outwardly, mean and deſc 
picable People, ſuch as the G-ntiles were in the Opinion of rhe 
Jews, and ſuch as the greateſt part of the firſt believing Chriltia.is 
were, Mat: 11: 5: 1Cor: 1: 26; Jam: 2:5. 

20 For the terrible one 9 is brought to noughe, and 
theſcorner p isconſumed, andall that watch for iaiquicy 


q are cut off : 

o The proud and potent Enemies of thoſe meek and poor Believers 
now mentioned, ſuch as the unbelieving Fews, and the Heathen 
Potentates were in the ficit Age of Chrittianity. p The ſcornful 
| Oppoſers of Gods Word and People. 9 Thar early and diligently 
_ - — to the pragice of Wickedaels, or to do miſchief 
to OTRErs 

21 * Thatmake a man an offender r for a word s, and 


lay a ſnare for him that reproveth ? in the gate «, and 


curn aſide x the juſt y for a thing of nought z. 

r That condema and puniſh a Man, as if he were a great Criminal. 
s For a verbal R-proot, as appears from the next Clauſe. #7 For 
Gods faithful Prophets and Miniſters, whoſe Office it is to reprove 
ungodly men, ſuch as theſe were. u Publickly ; which they took 
for agreat Aﬀeont and Diſgrace ; although the Reproof ought to be 
publick, where the Sin 1s publick and ſcandalous. He mentions 
the gate, becauſe there the people uſed to aſſemble, both upon Civil 
and Sacred Accounts, and there Prophets uſed to deliver their 
Prophecies ; - of which, ſee Fer: 7:2: and 17: 19. x To witz from 
Fudgment, as this Phraſe is more fully delivered, 1. 10. 2. or from 
kis right ; whichis elſewhere called he perverting, or overturning» 
or overthrowing of s mans right or judgment, as Deut: 27: 19. Prove 
17: 23: Lam: 3:35- 3 Thefaichful Prophets and Miniſters of God, 
and among others Chriſt, who is oft called the juſt or righteous Oney 
both in the Old and New-Teftament. # Not for any great advantage, 
but for a trifle, which is a great Aggravation of their injuſtice. 
Or, with wanity, i.e. withvainand frivolous Pretences ; or withous 
any colour of Reaſon or Juſtice. ; 


22 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, who redeemed 

| Abraham @, concerning the houſe of Jacob, Jacob 5 

| ſhall not now be aſhamed, neither ſhall his face now 
| wax pale. : 

s From manifold dangers, and eſpecially from that _—oy it 

; which his Family and Anceſtors were generally involved, 70: 24: 
2, 3} b The Iſraclites or poſterity of Jacob, who are oft calle 

| 7a in Scripture, who had great cauſe to be aſhamed, for their 


*Ch45.9 


cum. 


*Ch.35.5,! 


} Heb: 
ſhall add, 


*Am.c.20 


continued 


Ctzp 


| feb. 


* bow 144* 
i irſ4097; 


' 


3 


| ? Chap, 
19.15 


| 'th.; I, 


Tex.z. 36. 


X 


7, 


3=4 


x 


-» Aancact__ns os 


(hap. 2d, 


F:$: 4; 


eantipucd infidelity, and for their Perſecutions of Gods prophets, | 
an. Righteous Servants, and for their Rejection of their Own Meſſiah ; 
bur ſhall at laſt be brought back unto the God of their Farhers, and 
to their M:pm. c Through fear of their Enemies, who, from rime 
to time, have moleſted them, bur now they ſhall be delivered from 
them all, and ſhall ſerve God without fear, as 15 ſaid, Luke 1, 74. 

23 But when he ſeeth his children 4, the work of 
mine hadse, in the midſt of him f, they ſhall fanaify 
my name g, and ſanctify the holy One of Jacob, and 


ſhall fear the God of Iſrael. _ 

d When the believing Seed of Jacob ſhall ſee thoſe Children, whom 
they have begotten to God, by the Preaching of the Goſpel, even 
the Gentiles coverted by their Miniſtry. e The children, not of the fleſh, 
but of the promiſe, Rom. 9g. 8. whom I, by my Almighty Power and 
Grace, have Created or Regenerated, of Stones railing up Children 
to Abraham. f Which Gentiles ſhall be: incorporated with the 7ews, 
into one and the ſame Body and Church. g They ſhill not deſpiſe 
and hate the Gentiles,and envy them the Grace of Gad, and an intereſt 
in their Mz{ia{, bur ſhall praiſe and glorify God, with them and for 


» "IE 


{bw w- underſtanding z, and th 
| i-/4v972* doctrine &. 


. 


them, as the believing Jews did, 4#s 11. 18. 


24 They alſo that erred in {pi 


[2 08 
ffleb. ſho zy that murmured, ſhall learn 


h Thoſe Gentiles, whoſe Spirits or Minds were ignorant of and 
erred from Gods Truth ; and who were led aſide by a lying Spirit, 
or by the Spirir of crruur aad deluſion to Idolatry, and all manner 
of Impicry. # Shall come to the knowledge of the Truth. k They 
that would not receive the dottrine of God, but murnmured at Gods 
faithful Proph-ts and Teachers, who delivered it, which was the 
prattice of divers, both Jews and Gentiles, ſhall now leara Doctrine, 
21nd receive Gods Truth in the Love cf it. 


CHAP XX 


The Prophet threatneth the People for their Confidence in Egypt, 1——=7, and 
contempt of Gods word, 8 11. wherefore they jhall be deſtroyed, 
I2 7. Goas mercies towards the Church, 18 26. Gods wrath 
and h:s Peoples joy in the d ſiru.on of A4ſſjria, 27, 33. 


O to the rebellious children a, ſaith the LORD, 
* that rake counltei b, but not of nie c, and that 
cover with a covering 4, but not of my ſpirit e, that 


? Chap4 
29, 15, 


7 Th. 


they may add ſin to lin f: 

a The Jews, who call themſcves Gods Children. though they are 
rebellious Ones, as was ſaid, 1/2, x. b That Conſuit together, 
and reſolve to do what follows, v. 2. c Not following, nor asking 
| my Advice, which they pad command-and encouragement from 

me to do. & That ſeek proreQ&ion. e Nor ſuch as by my Spirit, 
ſpeaking in my Word, I havedireCted, and required them to do; 
but tuchas 1 have ſeverely forbidden to them ; for the contrary 
Affirmarive is frequently implied in the Negative ; of which I have 
formerly given many inſtances. f Thatunto thoſe Sins, by which 
they have deſerved ans procured my Judgments upon them, they 
may add diſt-uſt of my power and Merey to Save them, and con- 
fidence in -n Arm of Fleſh, which alſc is Rebellion againſt my 
expreſs Command to the contrery. 

2 * That walk to gov down into Egyptg( and have not 

31.1 asked at my mouth +) to ſtrengthen themtelves in the 

ſtrength of PHaraoh,and to truſt in the ſhadow ; of Egypr. 

7 That ſent Ambaſſadours to Ezypt for ſuccour, as we read, v. 4. 
which the Jews were forward to do upon all occaſions, and did 
now upon the invalion of the King of Aſ”:a, as is evident from 
I's. 20. 5, 6. anddid tie like againſt the King of Babylon, Jer. 37,7. 
Ezek. 17. 15. h Either by the Prieſts or Prophets, as they were to 
do in weighty caſes; of which, ſee Nums. 27. 21. Jof. 9. 14. 
x Sam. 43.9, 20. I Kings 22, 7, Fer. 21.2, and 42. 2, 20: or by 
ſtudving my Word : which plainl» direAs them to another courſe 
and forbids them this p attice. 7 In their power (3s it is in the 
foregoing Clauſe) and prore&ion, which is oft ſignified by zhz 
ſhadow. as Judges 9. 15. Pjal. 17.8. and gr. 1,4. | 

2 Therefore ſhal the ſtrength cf Pharaohbe your ſhame 
&, and the truſt in the ſhaJlow of Egypt year confuſion. 

& As being not only unprofitable, bur miſchievous to you. 

4 For his princes /wereat Zoan, and his ambaſſadours 
came to Hanes. 2. | 

{ The Princes of Judah. either ſent by the King, or by the appoint- 
ment of their Brethren. »» An eminent City of Egype, called more 
largely Tahepanes, and Tahpanhes, Jer. 2 16. and 43. 3,8. 

%r.2.36- 5 * They » were all aſhamed of a people that could 
not profit them, nor be an helpnor profit, but a ſhame 
and alſo a reproach» | 

= Both the Meſſengers, and they who ſent them. | 

6 The burden » of the beaſts of the ſouth p: into the 
land of trouble and anguiſh q, from whence come the 
young and old lion r, the viperand fiery flying ſerpents: 
they t will carry their riches upon the ſhoulders of young 
attes x, and cheir treaſu1cs upon the bunches y of camels, 
tO a. peopic hat (hail not profit :hemn. | 

o Fithe: . 1. the Prophecy ; which is oft called zhe burden; or 
rather 2. the burden ot riches or treaſures, as it 15 explained in the 
latter part of the Verſe. p Whichis carried upon Afles or Camels, 
as it follows, into Egzp!, which lay ſouthward from 7udea. q Into 
Egypt and Ethiopia, or Cujb; tor both are joyncd together in this 


in 


enguiſb prophetically, bccaule they ſhould aiftrels them, and not 
help them ; as was ſaid of the Aſyrians in the like caſe, 2 Chrone28. 20. 
Some render it, by or through the land, &c. and underſtand it of the 
vaſt Wilderneſs which lay berween Jude and Egypr. Bur it was 
Mare proper, and important to {peak of the Laiid, ro which rheſe 
Men and Beaſts wenr, ran of that, thiough which they were to 
Paſs ; which it was ncedlcsſs fo particularly co detcribe, Nor was 


rit h + ſhall come to 


matter, a. 20. whole Lan jeems to be calied a lana of trouble and | 


#8 FF 


y j a F'® 4 bd] £1 c R 

eg _ Road from 74Jea to Exjd:, ſuch a place as is here Ceſcribed 
7 acnmey vc underſtood properly, becauſe theſe and the follow. 
ng Creatnres did ahonnd, an 


d were very fierceand miſchiey 7 
£3yp* and Eri0Ma i; But withal, ſcems to deſign the crafe _ Erhicley 
of that People, and the danger of their Confederacy with them 
and the harm which they ſhould have from them. © 5s Thar there 
were flying Serpents in thoſe parts, is athrmed,nor only in Scri pture, 
ut alfo by Herodotus, Cicero, Ammienu, and divers other Authors. 
: The Jews deſigned by the ſame pronoun, rhey, wv. «.. 4 Either x. 
to lecure them : or rather 2. to procure their aflifance. * Much 
"_ there _ carrying Burdens, as 1s evident from: Gen. 4+, x; 
and 45. 23, Xc- y Upon the backs, which were ftrenothned wick 
bunches, by a Syn:cav:he. ; T wg 
7 For the Epgyprians ſhall help in vain, and to no - 
purpoſe : therefore have I cryed || concerning 
Their ftrength is to ſit ſtill a; 


z Concerning this Counſel or Pradtice. 
or Judah, 3a Ic is ſafer 


this &, || Or, 28 be. ||; 
*Ch.7:.4. | 
Or, Zo her, to Jeruſalem yer. _ 
oe and better for them to ſir quietly at. home, 
wn ing to me for help, than to go or ſend to Ezypt for help. He 
—_— 1::JDuſtriouſly to uſe an ambiguous word, Rahab, which lignifies 
oth ſtrength, as Job 9, 13, Pſal. go. 10. and Egypt, as Pſal, 87. 24 
ja. 51. 9+ So called fromits ſingular Strength, to. intimare, that 
if they did not goto Rahab; Rahab, or what they expeted from Rakab 
or £2ypr, which was powerful Succour, ſhould come to them. 
S Now go, write it þ before them cin a table, and | 
note 1t in a book &, that'it may be for + the time to * Heb. the |) 
come e, for ever and ever : | Io , __— k| 
6 Write this Prophecy and Wa:ning which I | 
c In their pretence, in the publick Afembly : For the Prophets 
were many times commanded to do ſuch- Aions, as well as to 
deliver their Metſages. 4 So this way to be written twice over: 
once 1n a Table, to be hanged up: in ſome publick place, that all 
rhat were then, and there preſent, might read it ; and again, in a' 
Book, that it might b# kepr for the uſe of Poſterity. e As a Witnefs 
for me and againſt chem, that I have given them fair warning, and 
that they have wilfully run upon their own Ruine. #1 
9 That this is a rebeitious people, lying children f, 
children that will not hear the law of the LORD g © 
. - F, . 
f, Which profeſs one thing, and praQiſc another. g The Commands 
of God, either contained in Scripture, or delivered by my Mouth; 
whereby theſe Praftices areexpreſly forbidden to them. EE: 


To * Which fay to the Seers, See not; and ta the * Jer rr. | 
Prophets, P: opkelie not unro us right things *, ſpeak 22 Amos Ii 
unto us ſmooth things, propheſie deceir þ ; ' © #02 87: Wi 

h He ſpeaks not of the words of their Mouths ; for none could be Mick 2:6; il 


ſo mad or impudent, as to have or profeſs a deſire to be Cheated, but Mich. 2. x. i 
. -* * [ 


wt | 
'! 

= | 
i 

wy 
{yl 


have now delivered, 


Gods faithtul Prophets ; and ſoencourage their own falſe prophets; | 
as if they had rather he deceived to their Deſtruttion, than hear the | 
Truth for their Prefervarionand Salvation. They prefer the plca- 
ing of their Humours, before the ſaving of themſclves, 


1x Ger ye out ofthe way 3, turn afide out of the 
path, cauſe the Holy One of 1/racl ro ceaſe from before 
us &. EE, | | 

; In which you now walk, out of your preſent courſe of Preachs 
ing unſavou:y, and frightful things to us. & Do not trouble us 
with harſh and repeated Meflages from God, as you uſe to- do.” 


12 Wherefore thus ſaith the Holy One! of 1/rae!, | 
Becauſe ye deſpiſe this word, anderuff ia [| oppreflion / | Orfraud. | 
and perverſeneſs m, and ſtay thereon : SEES 7 
[la the Wealth which you have gotten by Oppreſſion, whereby 
' you new think ro procure Egyptian Succours ; of which ſee on v. 6. 
m And in your perverſe and Kebeilious Courte of ſending to Egypt 
for help. | | 
| 13 Therefore this iniquity = {hall be to you Xx 25s a of 
breach ready to fall, ſwelling out ina high wall, whoſe ©5623. 
breaking * comerh ſuddenly ar an inſtant o. © 
z Of ſending and truſting to Ezypr for Succout. o Like a Wall 
which is high, and ſeems to be ſtrong, but ſwelling forth in ſome, 
parts, which, upon the leaſt Accident, falleth down ſuddcnly to 
the Ground. Such ſhall be the iſſue of your high and rowring 
Confidence in Egyp?. | : | WOE 

14 And * he ſhall breakit p as the breaking of + the Jas 
potcers veilel, that is broken in pieces ; he ſhall not'+ Heb. © 
ſpare ; fo that there ſhall notbe foundin che burſting of + barrel of 
ir, a (hread to take fire from the hearth, or to take the porters, 
water withal out of the pit. | Los 
 p He, either God, or he whom God ſhall ſend againſt them : Os, 
It jbabe broken; tor ſuch Phraſes are oft taken indefinitely and paſs 
tively : it, chis iniquity laſt mentioned, v. 13 yoqur carnal confidence, 
and all the grounds of it, and you that lean upon it. £2 4 
15 For thus faith the Lord GOD, the holy One of - 
Iſrael, * In returning q and reſt thall. ye be ſaved ; i 
quietneſs r-and in contidence s ſhall be your ſtrength ; 
andiyo would no 359 ES p 
qEither from your preſent purpoſe of ſending to Egypr ; or unto 
God, as the S-vnsy, and Syriack, and Arabick Tranſlators render it. 
Or, In quzetneſs ; for the Verb, from which this word comes, is 
elſewhere ſed in that ſenſe, 4s Pſal. 23. 3. Fer. 39. 10. and 46. 27. 
7 In fitting ſtill, and quieting your own Minds. 5 To wit, rightly 
placed upon Me, and4my Promiſes for your deliverance. —- 
16 But ye ſaid, No, for.we will flee upon horſes; 
therefore ſhall ye flee: and we will ride upon the fwitt ; 
therefore;thall they that purſue you, be ſwifc.” - 7, 
. + Our of this Land from the King of 4fhris; which it is very: EF 
2robable, divers of the Richer ſort did, having ſent their Treaſures | ow PN 
before them, as we REES. odd ben ag] >. 
17 * Ongthouland pallfce # at the xebuke x of ones. ,7 2 

E& 4 af 


*Ch. 29. e. 


- 


il: 
* 
| 
ol . 07 
: 
TIS! + 
J i 
(18 
C1 
9B | 
Ll 
: 


ot the Language of their Aftions. They do ſodiſcourage and threaten | | 


2 
. 
7 , 
if 
51.''f 
$i : 
114 
$194 
41k? 
4008. 
TI 
1H 
, . 
+ 
1'8T 
; Ins 
4} 
1106 
" 
ji} | 
: T7 
& | 
FE 
[ mn, 
f | 
iF 
. 
: 
FI] 
i 'F 
: 
: 
»* 42 
#4 
Ld 


1a Pp. XXX. LE I S A 
at the rebuke of five ſball ye flee y, till ye be left as || a 
Dr, - tree beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an enſign 


+ 0 . 
on an hill z. 
= ſhag # Which words are 


maſt. 


fitly ſupplied out of the following Clauſe. 
+ Either 1. at his real Rebuke, upon his aſſault or on-ſet : Or ra- 
ther 2. at his verbal Rebuke, upon his meer Threats, as nocing 
that he will proceed from words to blows. » All of you, how 
numerous ſoever. z Till you be generally deſtroyed, and bur a few 
of you left. x h 

18 © And therefore « will the LORD wait 5, that © 
MAal.7.6. may be gracious unto you ; and therefore will he * be 
b-33-3- exaltede, that he may have mercy upon you: for the 
Pſa. 2, LORD 5s a God of Judgment d; * bleſſed are all they 


; & 34. that wait for him e. 
Prova6. aBecauſe of your genera 


pd, Jer. 3 ntioned in Scripture, 
: P hs =. c2emg; # gas? hs many bat places, as hath been of obſerved 


already. But ſome render this Hebrew particle, Tet or notwithſtanding, 
as it i7 ſuppoſed to ſignifie, Iſa. 51. 21. Jer. 16. 14. Ezek. 39. 25, 
Ho. 2. 14. b Patiently expe& your Repentance, and ſtop the courſe 


: :c321 Proceedings againſt you, that you may have an 
of his Judicial Procee w — with Him, and of preventing 


1 Deſtruftion and great Miſery ; which 
asa motive to Gods Mercy, 


e. 
oo on your behalf,as this Phraſe is uſed, Pſal: 21: 13: 
4:33:10. and off elſewhere ; and as the following Verſes 
7 Who carrieth himſelf towards his People ( for of 
he ſpeaks in this place ) not with furious-Paſſion, but 
gment and Diſcretion, or with equity and moderation ; 
is oft oppoſed to Fury and rigorous Juſtice, as Pſal. 

112; 5: Fer- 10: 24: and 30:11. © This waiting upon God, in his 
ways, with Faith and Patience, is a ſurer way to your Safety and 
- Happineſs, than ſeeking to Egyp?, or any other carnal Remedies. 


19 For the people ſhall dwell in Zion at Feruſalem f 
thou ſhalt weep no more : he will be = gracious unto 
thee, at the voice of thy cry : when he ſhall hear it, he 


will anſwer thee g. ; ; 
f For although the time is coming, when this People ſhall be bani- 
ſhed from Jeruſalem, and carried Captives into Babylon : yet after a 
ſettime, they ſhall return to Jeruſalem, and have a fixed and comfort- 
able Abode there. Which was in part accompliſhed upon their 
retutn from Babylon ; but more fully in the times of the Goſpel, 
when many of them were, and the whole Body of them ſhall be 
brought into Chriſts Church, which is oft called Zion and Jeruſalem, 
both in the O1d and New-Teſtament» g Whereas now He ſeems 


to be deafto thy Prayers. 


Y 20 And theugh the LORD give you the bread of 
Or, adverſity, and the water of || afflition þ, yet ſhall not 
#2 * thy teachers be removed into a corner any more /, bur 


thine eyes ſhall ſee thy teachers &. - 

þ And although in thattime and ſtate of the Church, you will 
be ſubje& ro many outward Straits and Aﬀiftions. This Phraſe is 
borrowed from Deut: 16: 3: and 1 Kings 22: 27. Heſeems to allude 
to the condition of beſieged Cities, and particularly of Feruſalem, as 
it was ſtraitned and diſtreſſed by Sennacheris ; and as it ſhould be 
far more ſtraitned by the Chaldeans; of which ſee 2 Kings 25. 3, 
Heb. 4nd the Lord will give, &c. Or, The Lord indeed will give, &c. 
; As they have been in former times, both in J/ree! and Judah, when 
the Godly Prophets and Miniſters were but few, and when they 
were perſecuted and baniſhed by rheir wicked Rulers. Bur in the 
New-Tefamen: God hath made better proviſion for his Church, ſending 
his Son, the great Teacher of the Church, into the World ; and 
pouring forth the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit in abundance, and 
increaſing thenumber of able and faithful Miniſters ; and promiſing 
2 continued Succeſſion of them to the end of the World, Mar: 28: 
19, 20. k Thou ſhalt have their preſence, and their inftruQtion and 

ance. 

2r And thine ears ſhall hear a word 7 behind thee y, 
ſaying, This is theway, walk ye in it, when ye * cur 
to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. 

1 As oft asneed requires thou ſhalt hear the voice of Gods Word 
and Spirit direting . on in thy Courſe. m A Metaphor borrowed 
either, 1. from the cuſtom of Shepherds, who uſe to follow their 
Sheep, and torecall them when they go out of the way. Or 2, from 
Travellers. who, when they are gone out of the qus way, are 
oft times recalled and admoniſhed of their Errout, by ſome other 
Paſſenger or Perſon, who is behind them, and therefore diſcerns 
their miſtake; which he could not ſo eaſily diſcover, if he were 
before thenr. 


.. 22 *Ye ſhall defile » alſo the covering » of + thy 
Ch.2. 2% orayen images of ſilver, and the ornament p ofthy molten 
37: 1, imagesof gold: thou ſhalt caſtthem away as a menſtrous 
cloth q ; thouſhalt fay unto it, Get thee hence. 

n To ſhew your contempt of it, and to make it unfit for your 
own, or any others uſe. » The Leaves or Plates wherewith their 
Heb. wooden Images were frequently covered : of which ſee Exod: 38: 
ters 17, i9. Numb: 16: 38, 39. p Or, the coat or covering. Heb. the Ephod, 
: as this very Word is rendred, Exod. 28: 8: and 39: 5. which was a 

coſtly and glorious Robe. TheTdolaters ſpared no Coſtin the making 
and adorning their Idols : And, among others, the Image of Fupicer 
in Sicily, had a Coat put upon it made all ofmaſſy Gold. q Thou 
ſhalt ſo deeply abhos Idolatry, that thou ſhalt caſt away with indig- 
nation, all the Monuments and Inſtruments thereof. 


23 Then ſhallhe givethe rain of thy ſeed y that thou 
ſhale ſow the ground withal, and bread of the increaſe 


Work gloriouſly 
& 46:10: 
explain it. 
them on] 
with J 
for judgment 


your "gl 


Jofſber. 7. 


« 


graven 

ger of 
#by filver. 
p 


that day ſball thy cacrel feed in large paſtures. 

7 Or rather, as others render it, fo or for thy ſeed, when thou haſt 
newly ſown thy Seed, which was called the former rain ; or ſuch 
as thy Seed requires, which may include both rae former, and the 


merry; od oxy FA will lift up and beſtir himſelf, and will | 


l .& a Their Si h ſe of all Gods J "_E —_ 
atter Rain. eir S1ns, the cauſe of a ods Judgtne S- : 
had befallen them, being removed by their ſincere " = 5=rouhe =_ 
Gods gracious Pardon, God fhowreth down all his Bleſſings upon 
them, 5s Which ſhall be the Fruit of thy own Land ang SLED 
whichisa great Mercy and Comfort. t Thy Bread ſhall be excellent 

for quality, which is called far, Deut: 32; 14. and abundant for 
quantity. : 

24 Theoxen likewiſe and the young aſſes that earthe 
ground ſhall eac || F clean « provender, which hath been || Or, 
winnowed with the ſhovel and with the fan. Javoury, 

u Or, as Learned Mr. Gataker renders it, Threſbed, which agrees 
well with the following Clauſe, Corn being firſt Threſhed, and then 
Winnowed. The Senſe is, There ſhould be ſuch plenty of Corn 
that their very Beaſts, inſtead of Straw, ſhould eat Corn ; and that 
not in the Ear, or with the Straw, but the pure Grain. 


25 And there ſhall be upon every high mountains 
and upon every f _— hill x, .rivers, and ſtreams of f Ht 
waters, in the day of thegreat ſlaughter y, when the}. 
towers x fall. | : ln, 

x Which are commonly dry and barren, and deſtitute of R; 
' When God ſhall deſtroy the Enemiesof His People, He will "rn 
down his Bleſſings upon his Church, = Either properly, the Towers 
of Babylon, for which ſthe was Famous; or Metaphorically, the 
| high and mighty Potentates, which fought againſt Gods People, as 


1/a: 2: 15, 

26 Moreover the light of the moon ſhall be as the 
light of the ſun a, and the light of the ſun ſhall be 
ſevenfold, as the light of ſeven days 5, in the day that 
the LORD bindeth up the breach of his people, and 


healeth the ftroke of their wound c. 

as For conſtancy and brightneſs ; Which, as alſo the following 
Clauſe, is to be underſtood Metaphorically, of the moſt glorious 
and comfortable Condition of Gods Church, far ſurpaſſing whart it 
was in former Ages. And fo this, as well as other paſſages in this 
Chapter, concerns the times of the Goſpel. b As if the Light of 
ſeven days were combined together into one: Its Light ſhal then be 
tranſcendently more bright and glorious, than it hath hitherto been. 
Which magnificent Expreſſions ſeem to be roo high for the delive= 
rance of the Fews, either from Sennacherib, or out of Babylon: And 
do much better agree to the times of th Goſpel, in which the Li ghe 
1s far more clear and the Grace of God much more abundant, 
thaitever it was in former times.- And this expoſition ſeems the 
more probable, becauſe it is the manner of the Prophets.; and 
eſpecially of this, who is rightly called the Evangelical Prophet, to 
take all occaſions to ſpeak of the days of the Meſiah, and of the 
bleſſed Priviledges of that time and ſtate of the Church, among 
which, they conſtantly reckon ' Light, whether you take it for 
Knowledge or for Comfort, tobe one. c When God thall effeQually 
Cure the Wounds and Breaches of his People, firſt making up the 
Breach between Himand them, them making {ſ-ael! and Judah ro be 
one, who now are ſadly divided; and making Few and Gentile to be 
one Fold under one Shepherd, even the Mefiap, which the Prophets 
foretel, thar it ſhall be in the times of the Goſpel. 


27T Behold 4,the name of the LORD e cometh from 
far f, burning wich his anger, || and the burden thereof is ,. - F 
+ heavy g* his lipsarefull of indignation, and his tongue _—_— 


as a devouring fre h. of flame, 
4 Here __ the laſt part of the Chapter, wherein he gives them 5 Heb. 

an earneſt of thoſe greateſt Mercies promiſed for times to come, by heavineſs, 
aſſuring them of the approaching Deſtruttion of the 4ſjrian Forces. 

e The Lord himſelf: For as the names of Men are ott put for the 

Men themſelves, as Numb: 26: 53: As 1: 15: Rev' 3; 4: and 11: 13. 

So the Name of God is frequently pur for God, as Gen: 4: 26. Deut: 

28: 58: Pal 20: 1.7, &- f Froma very remore place ; even from 
Heaven, whence God ſent His Angel to deſtroy them, 1: 37: 36. 
Poſſibly this Expreſſion may reſpett the Judgment of the 4ſjrians, 

who looked upon God as one afar off, not only in his Preſence, 
which they thought to be confined to Heaven, but in his care of, 

and aff-Ctions to the Jews ; and therefore, no more expeRted any 
oppoſition from Him, rhan from them who live in the ends of the 

Earth. g He will inflit heavy Judgments upon them. h He hath 
pronounceda ſevere Sentence againſt them,and will give command 

for the Execution of it. 


28 And his breath z as anoverflowing ſtream &, ſhall 
reach tothe midſt of * the neck 1, * to ſift 2 the nations 
» with the ſieve of vanity o * and there ſhall be a * bridle 


in the jaws of the people p, cauſing them to err 9. 9. 9- 
: Either 1. The breath of hu Noſtrils, as it is called, Job 4. 9. or * Chap. 

The blaſt of the breath of hs Noſtrils; as Pſal: 18: 15. in both which places 37. 29« 

it is mentioned, as a ſign and effe& of Gods Anger, and the cauſe 

of the Deſtruftion of thoſe, againſt whom it is direfed. And the 

Expreſſion ſeems to be borrowed from hence, that Men diſcover 

their Anger by a ſtrong and vehement breathing through their 

Noſtrils. Or 2. The breath of his Lips or Mouth, to which the deſtruQtion 

of Gods Enemies is elſewhere aſcribed, as Job: 15; 3o. 1a: 11, 4. 

which may be the ſame thing with hs L:ps and Tongue in the forgoing 


eb. 
leavencd, 


- hap.8.8, 
*Amos. 


1 Verſe,or many deſign a ſtrong blaſt coming out of his Mouth : for 


God is frequently ſaid to deſtroy wicked Men, by blowing upon 
them, as 1/a: 40: 7, 24: Ezek; 21: 31- and 22: 21+ k Coming from 
Him as vehemently asa mighty Torrent of Waters. 7 Shall bring 
him into a moſt dangerous condition, as a Man, who is in deep 
Waters, whichreach to his Neck, is in danger of being drowned 
and afterwards, as is related in the following Verſes, will utterly 


of theearth s, and it ſhall be fat and plenteous : : in 


| Deſtroy him. And this was fulfilled in Sexnacherib, who was highly 

endangered, when he loſt ſo great a part of his Army, and ſhortly 

after lain by his own Sons- Although theſe words may be added 
; asa deſcription of the everflowing Stream now mentioned, and may 
| be thus rendred, which Reacherh even to the midft of the Neck ; for 
the relative Particle is frequently underſtood in Scripture. #2 To 
ſhake and ſcatter, as it were with a Sieve : or to try and vex, 


as this Metaphor ſignifies, Amos g: gi Luxe 22: 3b S K. hs 
| Bla #5 p 


L 


Ch: 


tHeb 
Dcut: 


+ Heb 
7 


vL.Ce 


fHeb: ex 


J' paſſmg 


the rod 
funded, 
Heb: 


cauſe ro 7: 


J mn hb;m, 


J |Or, a- 


rainfF 
them, 


AE Tau or 0 


1 #Heb rock? 
Pcut: 32:4 


+ Heb" the 
glery of his 


VICE 


fHeb: eve- 

g oaſng 
ly: ro 

funded, 

Heb: 

cauſe to reſt 

J mm him, 

J |Or, a- 

rainfÞ 

them, 


Heb:$r0m 
Merday, 


hay: 
ap: 33. 


Ch2 2 RAR 


FEM 


Aſyrian Army, which was made up of the People of ſeveral Nati- 
= e Not Sick an ordinary Sieve, which caſteth away the Chaff 
only, but keepeth the Corn ; bur with a Sieve, which ſhould ſhake 
them ſo long and ſo res < as to caſt away all together, and 
to make a full end ofthem. # God will reſtrain and over-rule them 
by his ſecret and powerful Providence. q Wherezs other Bridles 
cuide the bridled Creatures into the right way, this ſhall turn 
them out of the way, by giving them up to their own Miſtakes 
and fooliſh Coanſels, and wicked Courſes, which ſhall bring them 


to ſore and certain Ruine, : : | 
29 Ye hall have a ſong r, as in the night, whes a 

holy ſolemnity is kept s, and gladnelſs of hearc, as when 

one goeth with a pipe 7 to come into the mountain 0 


the LORD, to the + mighty one. of Iſrae], 

» You ſhall have occaſion of great Joy, and Songs of Praiſe for 
your ſtupendious Deliverance from that formidable Enemy. $ He 
mentions the Night, either becauſe the Jewiſh Feaſts begun at the 
Evening, and were Celebrated with great Joy in part of the Night- 
ſeaſon, as well as on the following day ; or becauſe He hath a par: 
ticular Reſpe& to the ſolemnity of the Paſſover, in which they ſpent 
ſome conſiderable part of the Night in Feaſting, and rejoicing, 
and ſinging of Pſalms and Songs before the Lord t Like the joy 
of one that is going up to the ſolemn Feaſts with Muſick,, and the 
Voice of Joy and Praiſe, as they uſed to do, Pſal. 42. 4. to cheer 
up themſelves in the way, which to many of them was long, and 
would otherways have been tedious. ; þ 

o And the LORD {hall cauſe + his glorious voice « 
to be heard, and ſhall ſhew the lighting down of his 
arm x, with the indignation of his anger y, and with 
the flame of a devouring fire, with ſcattering, and tem- 
peſt, and hailſtones. 

« His Thunder, which is called God's Yoice, and ſaid to be ful 
of Majeſty, Pal: 29: 4. But then Thunder 1s metaphorically taken 
for ſome terrible judgement, as it is in many places of Scripture. 
x Upon the 4ſjrian, whom he willſmite with a deadly blow in the 
face of the World. The Phraſe is taken froift the geſture of a Man, 
who is about to ſmite another ; who firſt lifts up his hand, and 
then lets it fall with great force upon him, whom he deſigns to 
ſtrike. y With great wrath ; which 1s ſignified by the heaping of 
ſo many words of the ſame ſignification together. 


21 For through the voice of che LORD = (ball the 


Aſſjrian be beaten down, which {mote with a rod a. 

z That voice mentioned in the laſt verſe. # Which was the Rod 
wherewith God ſmote his and other people, 1a. is 5, 6. He who 
uſed to ſmite others, ſhall now be ſmitten himſelf. Or, as the 
words may be, and by others are rendred, He ( the Lord laſt 
mentionea ) ſhall ſmite him with a rod, or with his rod: 


32 And t in every place where the grounded ſtaff þ 


ff ſhall paſs, which the LORD ſhall # lay c upon him 4, 


it ſhall be with cabrets and harps e: and in battles of 
(baking f will he g fight || withit þ. bp 

b Heb: the foundzd rod, the Judgement of God, which 1s frequent- 
ly called a Rod in Scripture, and may be here called 4 founded Rod, 
or the Rod of Foundarien ; either becauſe it was firmly eſtabliſhed, 
and certainly to come by God's immutable Purpoſe and Appoint- 


ment : or becauſe the Rod ſhould nor ſlightly rouch him, and paſs 


over him, but ſtrike deep, and be fixed, and as it were grounded 
or founded in his Eleſh, and made to reſt upon him} as it follows 
in the next Clauie. c Heb ha cauſe ro ref ; which is contrary to 


the manner of God's dealing with his people, upon whom he 
will mot ſuffer the Rod of the wicked to ret, Plal: 125: 3 4 Upon the 
e The ſenſe is. Ei- 


Aſſrian, mentioned in the foregoing Verſe 
-_ 1. their deſtruftion ſhall be ceiebrated by God's People, with 
Joy and Muſick, and Songs of Praiſe, Or, 2. Tho Vidiory ſhall 
be got ; not by Warlike Inſtruments and Atchivements, bur as it 
were by Tabrets and Harps. Wherein he may poſſit-ly allude to 
the Victory which Jehoſhaphat got againſt Moab and Ammon, not t 
fighting, but only by ſinging, and praiſing God with the Voice, 
and with Muſical Inſtruments, 2 Chron. 20 19, 21, 27, 28. God 
being pleaſed to fight for them, by his own immediat Power: 
which alſo was the caſe here, which made the People of God fing 
a Triumph before the t ight; 1/a. 37: 22. f Or, with battles or figh. 
tings of ſhaking, to wit, of ſhaking of the hand, of which kind. of 
Shaking rhis Hebrew word is conſtantly uſed, ſuch as 2Tc perfor- 
med by the meer ſhaking of the hand ; namely, by God's ſhaking 
his Hand againſt :hem, as he threatens to do againſt others, 1/a: 1 1 

x5. and 19. 16. in which laſt place this very word 1s uſed ; and 
in the former, the Verb from whenceit comes. For that this Sha. 
king isan A& of God, ſeems more tran probable and from the 
following Words, Wil he, 1. e, God, as all underſtand it, fight againſt 
it. And to the Senſe of the place may bethis, God wil! tight aga-nit 
them, and deftroy them by his own hands g To wit, the Lord, 
who declareth himſelfto be the Enemy of the Aſjrian, both in the 
foregoing and following Verſes. + With the Army of the Aſjrin 
avs: Or, according to the other Hebrew zeading, w'#h them, with 


the Afrians, | 
22 For Tophet 5 is ordained & Þ of old /: yea, for 


the king m itis prepared, he z hath made it deep and 
large » : the pile thereof 5s fire and much wood o ; * 
the breath of the LORD p, like a ſtream of brimſtone 


9, doth kindle it r. 


; This was a place near - Feruſalem, in which the Idolatrons 1/ 
yaelites uſed cruelly to offer up their Children to Moloch, 2 Chron: 
28: 3. and 33: 6, See alſo Jerem: 7: 31- and 19: 6. And it ma) 
be put Synecdochically, for any place of torment or Miſery : Arc 
particularly it is put for Hellas well in the Writings of the Av- 
cient Jewith Dottors, as 1n Holy Scripture, as Mar. 8.8, 9 ang 
23: 15. Mart 9. 43. 44+ And ſo this place may be underſtood : 
Either, 7. literally of Topher in the Valley of Hinnem, in which the 
Arian Hoſt was, cither flain by the Angel, as Joſephus reports, 
or hn.ried or burnt, For although the 4ſjrians did not make any 
great attempt upon Jeruſalem, 1Ja. 37: 36. yet Rabſhaketh came 
very near it witha great &4rmy, Iſa: 36. 2. Or 2. figuratively of 


1 4 H 
Hell. k Or, was erderes or frepared, And it might be ſaid. ir 
? . 1d, 11 
FR to be prepared by Hezekiah for this S- by the care 
which he took to purge this and other places, abuſed to Idolatry, 
which made them more fit to receive ſo great a Favour and D-l1i- 
verance from God. But for Hell, that doubtleſs was ordained or 
te ag by _ wy ws OR of impenitent Sinners. 2 
. yeſterday : C rale 1 7 I 
bs leh pit, - Js p/n M ſometimes uſed of a time 
time pair, without limitation. 92 For the King of Aſris. F; 
1. for the Kings, the Singular Number being —_ —_ Tor 
whereby he may underſtand the Princes or Chief C:mmanders of 
the Hoſt, by comparing Iſs. 10, 8. Are not my Princes altogether 
Kings, Or, 2. for Rabjhaketh, the General of this Army, who 
according to the Style of Scripture, might very well be callzd King. 
Or, 3. Sennacherib ; for whom this place might be ſaid to be or- 
dained or prepared? partly becauſe it was ordained for the De- 
ſftruftion of his Hoſt ; nothing being more ordinary, both in Sa- 
cred and Prophane Writers, than to entitle rhe King, or General 
ofthe Army, to all the ViQories procured, or loſſes and ſlaughe 
ters ſuſtained by his Army ; And partly becauſe the ſudden De- 
ſtruQtion of the Aſjjrian Army, ſuppoſed to be in this place, was 
the occaſion of the Contpiracy of that King's Sons, and fo of the 
Kings Dezth. Burif this Topher deſign Hell, this is Emphatically 
enunced againſt him, to intimat, Thar alth-ugh he. eſcaped 
that ſudden Plague which cut off his Army, yer there was:a more 
terrible Judgment appointed for him, which he ſhould be uttterly 
unable to eicape. » The Lord. who is oft deſigned. by this Pro. 
nun, as in the next foregoing Verſe, and eiſev here 3 and-who is 
exprefled in the following words, Or, it is an indefinir Expreſ- 
ſon ; for, it » made deep and large. n Capable ofrecei: ing vaik 
Numbers; whereby he intimats, That he deſigned to niake a 
great and general Deſtru&ion of the 4ſhrians ; and w:'tha!, Thar 
ir was a vain and fooliſh confidence which the 4ſjrian: kad in their 
numerous Hoſt, ſeing the greateſt, Numbers ot Gee's Fucmic« are 
wholly unable, either to oppoſe him, or to ſave them'e ves trom 
his wrath and power, o Whereby he further implies, That be in- 
tended to make a great ſlaughter amung them. And he alludes in 
this phraſe, to the Ancient Cuſtom, either of burning Sacrifi- 
ces, and particularly of burning Children to Mooch, or ot Lurning 
the dead bodies of Men. p The immediat hand of God, or his 
word of Anger: See on ver, 28. q He leems to allude $0 that tho« 
wer of Fire and Brimſtone, Gen: 9, 24, r The pile of Fire and 
ood now mentioned. | 
CHAP XXXL .. S72 
The folly and puniſhment of Truſt in Egypt, 1=——3- God wil fght for Je 
ruſalem, 4 5. if they will turn unto him, 6——— 7, the fall of 
Aſſyria 8 9. 
O to them * that g0 down to Egypt for help a, 
and ſtay on horſes b, and truſt in chariots, be- 
cauſe zhey are many, and in horſemen, becauſe they are 
very ſtrong: but they look not unto the holy one of 1- 


ſrael, neither ſeek the LORD ec. | 
# As the Jews did contrary to God's Command, Deut 19. 16. 

and 26.68. b For Egypr had many and choice Horſes. c Their 

confidence in the Creature was, accompanied with, and did produce 

: ris of God, and a negle& ofſeeking to him by prayer for his 
elp. Ye: 

2 Yet he alſo is wiſe 4, and will bring evil e, and 

will not call back his words f: but will ariſe g againſt 


that work iniquity. | 

4 You think you are wiſe, and a& wiſely in iagaging the Egyp- 
f:ans, who are a wiſe and :warlike People, to help you; but God 
1s not inferior to them in Wiſdom nor in ſtrength, but much their 
Superior ; and therefore you have done fooliſhly and wickedly in 
preferring them before him. e Will execute his judgements upon 
you, notwithitanding all that you, or your allics the Egyprians, can 
do to hinderit. f H:s Threatnings deaunced againſt you, but will 


y infali1bly execute them. g Though ar preſenthe ſit ſtill yet he will 


beſtir himſelf and fight. þ Againſt this wicked and rebelhous People 
ofthe Jews, i The helpers, as it is explained in the next verſe. 
The Abſtrat being put for the Concrete. x 


their horfes Fleſh /, and not ſpirit », when the LORD 
ſhall ftretch out his hand, both he chat helpeth ſhall fall 
and he thar is holpen ſhall fail down, and they all ſhall 


fall together. _ | 

k And therefore utterly unable todefend you, either without or 
againſt my will. 1 Weak and frail, as that word ſignifies, P/al: 78, 
39. Heb: 5: 7. and elſewhere, m Not like ſpiritual Subſtances, ſuch 
as the Angels, who are immortal, and inviſible by Men 3 whereof 
we have inſtances, Exod. 12.29, 30. 1s: 37. 36. 

4 For » thus hath che LORD ſpoken unto me, Like 


as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey s, 
whena multitude of ſhepherds is called forth againſt him, 
he will not be affraid of their voice, nor abaſe himſelf 
? for the || noiſe of them, ſo ſhall the LORD of hoſts 
come down ts fight for q mount Zion, and for the hill 


chereof. | 

» Or. But: or, Nevertheleſs, as this particle is elſewhere uſed, as 
harh been proved before. Although you have done evil in ſending 
ro Egyps for help, and they ſhall not be able to help you; yet the 
Lord himſelf will, of his own Grace, and for the Glory of his own 
Name, give you that help and deliverance which you do not de«. 
ſerve and have no reaſon to expe& from him, And therefore de= 
{iſt from thoſe evil Counſels and Courſes, as thoſe which are both 
unneceſſary and pernicious. o When he is ready to ſeize upon it, 


and devour it. p Ir hath been obſerved of Lions, that when they 
; are purſued, they do not run away with all ſpeed, .as other Crea«. 
tures do, but march away flowly, and make an Honourable Retreat. 
7 Althoughthis Hebrew particle might be rendred againft;. and ſo 
this place might be underſtood of God's fighting againſt the Jews and 
5D Ez1pti an: 


- 


RN 


5. 20, and ſometimes of any 


*Ckh : >- 8 ip 


| A 
iN 
| : 


Chap. XXH 


(f Or, mul. 


$:itude. 


— _ —— - SD E 
M —___—— Ie eng Fn ether en COIES —_ 
\ "ACRES... IE > —_ Sw 


» 
= L — I — De; BR -—— _— _ y_ 2©0600 h— SINE RIPINN IE > EIS © — a 
+ eB _ = oi 

by > OCCEIISS— oe DA or ts _ - = - > =_- — _ —  — -w - > 2 _ mam ——_— "I F. he T_T TY T F1 R_— x - KA - 
_ Fenn - == — EE ———— — pe Saga S——S > —— — ch _— mae ae ney ante er _—_ — I — ne Wren => > —— _ _ - 
== = _ 23 Do; - —— —— ——— — >= —4 —_ _ - —— — — — — p: ” T _ > >. rg —_— —_ - 
= rp - — do = - = =>- EX” -——— —z -7 —4zXt.: ———- —- = = o ——_ = -- —_—_ - . "ch gone mn . - S _—_ —<——S_ n—_ = = ——— - 

2 Sms I - my - . JOS - =— ne _ — - _ - = - 
To _ * - tattered © — _ 


t Heb: 144, 
the houſe of evil doers b, and againſt the help ; of them *** | 


3 Now t the Egyprians are men and not God &, and $5 Ex b 


” 


nt 4 


zo? 22. 
Heb: 5he 
fols of bs 


% 


: Kings 
ag. 35 


fea of the 
J | ra,[Or, 
pributary. 
+ Heb: fer 
27 £712, &r 
ribate.” 


't Heb: is 
"rock ſhall 
paſs away 
| for fear. 
4 Or, his 
Rirengih, 


» *» 


 *Pſ-45: 1. 
Tech: 949- 


1 


d. RAR, 

Ezyptians, of which 
as it is taken in many other places, 
wing fi 


3 fend Jeruſalem ; * defending alſo, he will dehver zz, 
and pafling over s he will preſerve ##. 


fly ſwiftly, and ingage themſelves v 
they perce | 
ſeine to allude, and to oppoſe this to thoſe boaſting Expreſſions 
of the Aſſjrians, Iſa: 10: 14. compare Deut: 32: IT, 12. 
5s The . deſtroying Angel ſhal | 
ſhall fall upon the Ariane. He ſeems to_allude to the Hiſtory of 
God's paſſing over, and ſparing the Houſes of the Iſraelires, when 
he flew the Egyptians, in which this word is conſtantly uſed, Exea: 


J _ 'L 


rael « have deeply revolted x. 


repent of your carnal policies, in ſecking and rruſting to Egyp# for 


help, and ſincerely to return to 
ſtrialy ſo. called, who are now utterly deſtroyed for their Apoſta- 


22,20. T5: F 's be hall * caſt hi 
f n that day every man $hall * caſt away his. ry 
7 COT 1N that y y y , and ſcorchey Country, which is called weary here, as alſo P/al: 63: 1. 


r, 07 - 


xelated in the former Chapters. 


314-7 


ie ſpeaks, wer. 3. yet it 15 better rendred, fer 
as is manifeſt from the follo- 


! 


i 


militude and verſe. 


As birds flying r, ſo will the LORD of hoſts de- 


* 


_ 


s 


+ Which come from above, and ſo cannot be kept off ; which 
aliantly and reſolutely, when 


ive that their young ones are in imminent danger. He 


Mat. 23.37. 
| paſs over Jerzſalem untouched, and 


22, 26. 


Turn ye unto bimt from whom the children of 1/- 


es Let the conſideration of this gracious promiſe ingage you to 


God. »« Either 1. the Iſraelites, 


ſie; and therefore take heed that you do not follow their Exams : 
ple. - Or, 2. you Jews who are the Children of 17rael : which Ti- 
tle, he here gives them, partly to admoniſh them of their great 
and many Obligations to Ged ; and partly to aggravate the tin of 
their Apoſtaſie. x In negleRing and fortaking him, and ſecking 


to Egypr for help ; which he calls a deep revolt, partly becaule it 
was 2n hainous fin, being contrary to God's expreſs Command, | 
and highly diſhonourable to God : And partly becauſe it was car- - 


ried on with deep Diſfimulation, and with a publick profeſſion of 


counſel from the Lord, wherewith he charged this People, 1/s: 29. 


idols y of Silver, and Þ his idols of gold,which your own 
hands have made unto you for a lin z. 


the vanity of thoſe Idols to which you have truſted ; and therefore 


to prattiſe his counſel of rurning to God. z Which you have made 
as Inſtruments of your ſin of Idolatry»- Or, Which your ſinful hands 
( by a common Hebraitm, called hands of fin ) have made for yeu. Or 
the ſis (.as an Idol is called, Deat: 9. 21.) which your hands bave 
made for yeu. So there is only a Tranſpoſition of one word, which 
1s very - uſual in the Zevrew Text. 


8 E Then # ſhall the Aſſyrian fall with the {word,not 
of a mighty man and the ſword, * not of a mean man 


b ſhall devour him, buthe ſhall flee || from the {word  c, 


and bis young men & ſhall bz || + dikcomfited e. 
a When you have caſt away your Idols, and ſeriouſly ſought to 
.me for help ; both which things were performed by Hezekiah. 6 


exprefly chargeth him there, wer, 27. 
ly he was: drawn or tempted by ſome of his wicked Princes and 
Counſellors, v-hom the Prophet therefore ſeverely cenfures and 
condemns 1n the two foregoing Chapters. And this ſeems to have 
becn delivered in the time of Ahaz, and to ipeais of Hezekiah, and 
of his righteous 
and his Reign 
dom; ſo this prophecy looks through Hezekieh unto C 
ny other Scriptures in their literal ſenſe do unqueſtionably concern 
David, which yet have a myſtical Senſe, and are alſo meant of 


' rage and violence of evil Men. 


| q A 4 
' Jed pale in other Authors, becauſe it makes men's Faces pale. 


3 For. when the 4ſjr:ans ſhall invade your Land, you ſhall find | 


By the Sword, not of any Man, either mean or mighty, but of an 
Angel. c From, or for tear of, that plague which 1o itrangely and 
Tuddenly deſtroyed his Army. 4Heb: hu chorce yours men, his Guards 
and valiant Commanders and Soldicrs: e Heb. ſha# melt away, a great 
part of them being deſtroyed by the Angel; and the hearts ot the 
reſt meiting for fear. : "ON Pi 

9 And # he ſhall paſs over to || his ſtrong hold f for 
fear, andhis princes ſhall be afraid of the entign g, faich 
the LORD, whoſe fire is in Zion b, and his turnace in 


Jerufalem 5. 

' f Sernacherib ſhall flee away with all ſpeed from Jeruſalem, to his 
ſtrong City of Nineveh, Ifa: 37. 37. Or as it is in the Margenr, 
and as the words ly in the Hebrew Text, his rock (7, e. his Strength, 
the greateſt champions of his Army,to whom he truſted ) ſha# paſs 
away ( ſhall flee with all ſpeed from Jeruſalem ) for fear, leſt the 
Sword of the deſtroying Angel ſhould overtake them. g Ether, 
I. of any enſign. This dreadful Judgment ſhall ſtrike them with 
Juch a Terror, that they ſhall not dare to look any Enemy in the 
Face. Or 2. of the Lord's Enſign, which he hath lifred up againſt 
them. h So the Senſe is, Either 1. whoſe Fire is continually bur- 
ning upon the Altar in Zion ; which ſignifies his preſence and reſi- 
dence there. Or rather 2. who is, and will appear to be in Zn, 
likea fire to defend his People, and to conſume their Enemies ; for 
which end God promiſeth, that he would be unto Jeruſalem s wal 
of fire round about, Zech: 2: 5. And that he would make rhe 
Governeurs of Judah like # hearth of fire among the wood, or like a Torch 
of fire in aſbeaf; and that they ſhoutd devour all the people round about. 
Poſſibly theſe and the following words may be thus-rendred, and 
that very agreeable to the Hebrew words, who will be # fire ( to wit, 
a Conſuming Fire ) ro him ( to the King of 4ſyris of whom he is 
here ſpeaking) in Ze (from whence he will ſend forth that Fire 
which ihall conſume his Army : Or, for Zen, for Z'on's ſake ; for 
the prefix here rendredz», frequently ſignifies for, as hath been pro- 
ved ) and a Furnace to him inor for Jeruſalem: Butthis I only pro- 
poſe, leaving it to the Judgment of the intelligent Reader. 7 'The 
{ame thing repeated in other words. 


| CH A Þ FXXXII. 
Chriff's Kingdtn, and its Bleſſing, x 8. Careleſs Women ſhall be 


troubled, g 11. and the Lond laid waſte, 12 ——14. untill s Res 
foration, 15 20. 
TI Ehold, * a king « ſhall reign & in righteouſneſs, and 


rinces c ſhall rule in judgement, 

& This ſeems to me to be a diſtinct Prophecy from the former, 
and delivered at another time, and probably before thar which is 
For this is certain, and confeſſed 
by all, Thar the Propheites are not always ſet down in that order, 
in which the Prophets delivered, them. The foregoing Prophecy 
ſeems to have been delivered, not in the time of Abaz, for he ſent 
to the 4/riav, and nor to the Egyptian for help ; bur in the days 


# EP. Chap. 


To which courſe it is likes 


and happy Government : but withal as Hezekia/ 
was an eminent Type of Chriſt, and of his King. 
hrift, as ma« 


Chriſt, in whom thoſe things were more fully and eminently ac- 
compliſhed. Hexekiah, a Type of Chritt, and Chriſt Typified 
by him. 6 Therefore Hexekiah was not King when this Prophecy 
was delivered. And whereas ſome ſay, That he ſpeaks of the good 
Government of Hezekiah, after the deſtruction of Sennacherib ; it is 
eaſte to oblerve, that his Government was as good before that 
time as afterward ; and that in the very beginning of his Reign, he 
ruled with Righteouſneſs, 2nd the fear of God, as the Hiſtory plain- 
ly declareth, c The Miniſters of Stare, and Juſtice, and War, un« 
der the King. For a wiſe and good King will take care to have like 
Miniſters. 

2 Anda man ſhall be as an hiding place e from the 
wind f, and a covert from the tempetit : as rivers of wa- 
ter 11 4 dry place g, #s the ſhadow of a | great rock in 
a weary land þ. 

« Either, 1. The Man or King ſpoken of. Or, 2. each or every 
one, to wit, of his Princes. That King ſhall not patch UP an old 
Garment with new Cloth, nor mingle good and bad together ; but 
ſhall take care to purge out all the corrupe Magiſtrates, and as far 
as hecan, to ſettle good onesin all places. Aman is oft putfor eve- 
ry or any mn, as Iſa: 2; 20. and 3.5, 6. and elſewhere. e Unto the 


cleaving to God, and with a deſign of ſeeking deep to hide this ther | P<OPIe under their Government, eſpecially to ſuch as are oppreſſed 


or 1njured by thofe who are more potent than they. f From the 
lence : g No lefs refreſhing and accep- 
table thall this Kingand his Princes be to their Subjects. hIn a dry 
Metonymically, becauſe it makes Travellers weary; as death is cals 


3 And theeyes of them that ſee, ſhall not be dim, 


+ tne part ar and the ear . 
ſhall caſt chem away with indignation, and be forced to ſeek to | E ears of them that hear, (ball hearken z. 


me for help. So this is added as an Argument to perſwade them | 


# this is meant, Either, r. of the Princes or Magiſtrats, who 
are in ſtead of Eyes and Ears, both to the King, and to the Peo-= 
ple, who, by their Office, are to ſee and obſerve all things, and 
ro hear all Cauſes. Theſe, ſaith he, ſhall nor ſhut their Eyes, nor 
iuitcr them to be blinded with Gifts, to favour a rich Man in an 
unjuſt Cauſe ; they ſhall not ſhut their Ears againſt the Complaints 
of the poor opref{cd ones, as wicked Princes commonly do. Or, 


' 23 of the people, they thall not ſhut their Eyes and Ears againſt 


the good Countels and Examples of their Religious King and Ru- 
lers, as they have done formerly : Both Princes and People ſhall 
be reformed. This was done in ſome poor meaſure in Hezckiah's 
time ; but far more fully and eminently in the days of .the Meſiah, 
who, by his grace, changeth Men's Hearts, and cureth them of 
that wilful and obſtinat Blindneſs, whereof they had been guilty 


before. Which clearly ſheweth, That this prophecy looks through 


_— unto Chriſt. And the like may be ſaid of the following 
erſe. 

4 The heart alſo ofthe Þ raſh & ſhall underſtand know- 
ledge 4, and the tongue of the ſtammerers m2 ſhall be 
ready to ſpeak || plainly. 

k Who were haſty and heady in judging of Things ; which is an 
Argument of Ignorance and folly. 1 Shall become more knowing 
and conſiderate mn their Judgments and Aﬀtions. »» That uſed to 
ſpeak of the things of God, darkly, and doubtfully, and unwilling- 
ly. As Men's Underſtandings thall then be enlighrned, ſo their 
Speech ſhall be reformed. Which though it was in part fulfilled 
in Hezekiah ; this Reformation being effected in ſome meaſure by 
his Counſel and Example, and by the powerful preaching of the Le- 
vites, whom he excited and encouraged to teach the good knowledge of 
the Lord, as 1s ſaid, 2 Chron. 30. 22. yet was truely and fully accom- 
plithed only by Chriſt, who wrought this wonderful change in an 
innumerable company both of Jews and Gent/les. 


5 The vile perſon » ſhall be no more called || liberal 


2, nor the churl p ſaid to be bountiful. 

r Baſe and worthleſs Men. Heb: the fool: which in Scripture. 
uſe commonly ſignifies a wicked Man. o Or, Noble, or a Prince, 
or Lord, as this word is uſed, Pſal. 118: 9. and 14C: 3+ and elſe- 
where. The Senſe of the placeis, Either, «, Unworthy Men ſhall 
not be advanced to places of Honour and Power, as -the Seventy, 
and ſome others underſtand it ; for, zo be called, is oft put in Scrip- 
ture for, 70 be, as hath been frequently obſerved. Or, 2. vicious 
and worthleſs perſons ſhall no longer be reputed honourable and 
vertuous, becauſe of their high and honourable places, as com - 
monly they are under wicked Princes, by means of Flatrerers ; 
but wickednets ſhall be diſcovered and puniſhed whereſoever it is, 
and Vertue ſhall be manifeſted and rewarded ; and all things ſhall 
be managed with ſincerity and ſimplicity : which was eminently 
fulfilled under the Goſpel ; by the preaching whereof, and by 
Chriſt's Spirit Hypocrites are detected, and men are enabled to dil- 
cern between good and evil, both perſons and things. p The for- 
did and covetous Man which is a great Vice in any Man, but e- 
ſpecially in Magiſtrats; who therefore muſt be Men hating coverou/= 
zeſs, Exod: 18. 2x, But under this one Vice, all Vices are under- 
ſtood by a Synecdoche, very frequent in Scripture, and in other Au= 
thors ;'as under the oppoſite Vertue of Bountifulneſs, all Vertues arc 
comp rehended. 


6 For the vile perſon will ſpeak villainy q, and his 
heart will work iniquity r, to practiſe hypocriſie 5, and 
to utter error againft the LORDxe, to make empty the 
{foul of the hungry, and he will cauſe the drink of the 


thirſty ro fail «. FD 
q-So this is a Reaſon of the Aﬀertion, ver. c. either thus, Such 
ſhall not be advanced to places of Truſt and Digniry ; for it they 


of Hezekian, who rebelled againft the King of 4ſria, as ts faid, 2 Kings 


» pe j r , * x Ps. . 
18: 17. & was too prone to zrufs ron rhe Raff of Exy77.,95 the 4jrian 


vecre, they would abuſe them by upjuſt Scagences and practices : 


O: 


XXXIF. 
(Or, 
he Joe. 
THeb: hea again! 
Vy F poor 11 
judge 
1 Or, be 
fabliſhea 
; 
F Heb: ba« 
ly, 
[| Or, thn 
ganily. 
| 
Heb:d-ys 
#vve a 
War, 
[[Or,hon04s 
rable» | 
| THeb: #be 
his of den f 
v, 
. 
tap.346 
Hor 
z 9. 6. l 
[Or $ bur. 
vs wor, 


« I fOr, when 
he ſpeaketh 
againſt the 
poor 78 

| ijaagreent. 


| 


Chap. XAT. 


1 NOr, be e- 
fabliſhed, 


- ft 


#34 


Oc thus, Men ſhall no longer be miſcalled; for every one will dif- 
cover what he is by his words and Aﬀions; which alſo ſhall be 
narrowly obterved, Burt theſe and the following words are, and 
may be otherways rendred . Buz ( as this Particle oft ſignifies ) he 
ſhall be called or ſaid to be ( which words are eaſily underſtood out 
of the former Verſe, as is very frequent in Scripture ) a fool, who 
( which Relative Particle is underſtood in very many places ) ſhall 
ſpeak willany, and whoſe heart ſball work iniquity, &c« r He will from 
tim® to time, be deviſing Wickedneſs, that he may execute it when 
he hath opportunity. s to do bad things, but with a pretence of 
Religion and Juſtice, which he ſhall uſe to keep himſelf from the 
disfavour of his Prince, and from the laſh of the Law: Or, topra- 
&iſe prophaneneſs or wickedneſs, as this word, at leaſt ſometimes, ſeems 
ro lignifie» £ To paſs unjuſt Sentences, which is dire&aly contrary 
tothe will and Command of God. « Whereby they take away the 
Bread and Drink of the Poor, and give it to their Rich Oppreſ- 


ſors. 
7 The inſtruments alſo of the churl are evil x, he de- 


viſeth wicked devices y to deſtroy the poor with lying 


words z, even ||when the needy ſpeaketh right. 

x Heb: The Yeſſels, &c. which is a word of a very general figni- 
fication among the Hebrews, and ſignifies any perſon or thing, which 
is employed in a Man's uſe and ſervice, i iy perſow, for the name 
of veſſel 1s given to-ſuch Perſons as are inſtrumental to another, as 
to the Babylonians, who were God's Inſtruments in executing his 
vengeance, 1a: 13. 5. to God's Miniſters, As 9. 15. 2 Cor, 4: 5. 
and to uſeful Chriſtians, 2 Tim: 2.- 20; and to Wives, 1 Pet. 3. 7. 
And ſo it may be here noted, that ſuch covetous or wicked Princes 
moſt willingly chuſe, and employ wicked Men 1n their Afﬀairs, be- 
cauſe ſuch Men will, without any regard to Conſcience or Juſtice, 
ſerve ail their exorbitant deſires or Luſts* But withal, ir ſeems to 
include his Counſels and PraQtices, and Arts, which are here decla- 
rcd to be generally evil. But this Verſe is, and may be otherways 
rendred, as the former was ; nd ( repeat, he ſhall be called) a churl 
( as indeed heisone ) whoſe inframents are evil, and who deviſeth, &c. 
which agrees with the order of the Words in the Hebrew Text, and 
with the order of the foregoing Verſes : For as he ſpeaks of the wile 
perſon,and of the Churl,ver, 5eSo he gives a deſcriprioa ofthe vile Per- 
ſon, ver. 6. and then ef the churl, 1n this Verſe. y He uſeth all his 
Wir and Art to do Injury to others, without any inconvenience 
to himſelf. z Withfalſe and unrighteous Decrees. 4 When their 
Cauſe is juſt and good, | 


$ But the liberal deviſeth liberal things, and by libe- 
ral things ſhall he || ſtand 5. 


4 He who istruely liberal and vertuous, will ſhew it by deſign- 
ing and praGiſing liberal or vertuous Attions: And he who doth 
ſo, will not deſtroy himſelf thereby, as wicked men ſafely ſuppoſe, 
but eſtabliſh and advance himſelf. But this Verſe alſo, as well as 
the former, is, and may be otherways rendred : 4nd ( repear, he 
ſhall be called, as before ) liberal, who dew:ſeth liberal things, and perſiſteth, 
or continueth in liberal things, IF it be thought ſtrange. that ſo many 
Veries ſhould be ſpent in affirming that which in effet, was ſaid, 
wer. 5. it muſt be conſidered,that theſe Verſes do not only contain 
an Affirmation, that they ſhould be called wile perſons, or churls, or 
liberal, that were ſo; bur alſo a Deſcription of their Qualities and 
Praftices, which was uſeful for their ConviQtion, and for the In- 
ſtruction of others. 

9 Riſe upc ye women that are at eaſe 4, hear my 
voice ye careleſs e daughters f, give ear unto my ſpeech. 

c Beſtir, and prepare your ſelves to hear, as it follows ; and ſhake 
off ſloth and careleſneſs, d That indulge your ſelves in Idleneſs 
and Luxury. e Heb: confident or ſecure, who are inſenfible of your 
fin and danger. f The ſame before called women : whom he here 
reproveth, and threatneth for their Sins, as he did the Men be- 
fore, for ſeeking to Egyps for help, and divers other Sins, where- 


of the Men were molt guilry. 


—— 10 + Many days and years f ſhall ye be troubled, ye 
"cg careleſs women : for the vintage ſhall fail g, the gathe- 


ring 4 ſhall not come. 
f Heb: Days above a year, ir e. a year and ſome days : Which 


notes, either, t. the time from this Prophey to the beginning of 
this Judgment : Or rather, 2. the time of the continuance of it ; 
that it ſhould laſt for above one year ; as indeed this did, and no 
longer : For Hezekiah reigned in all but twenty nime Years, 2 Kings 
18. 2. and Sexnacherib came in his fourteenth. Year ; and after his de- 
feat and departure, God promiſed, and added to him fifteen Years 

.. g During the time of the 4/714 Invaſion. 


more, 2 Kings 20.6 : 
And this Commination is here addedto qualifie the foregoing pro- 
miſe, and-to warn them, that although God would give them ſo 


good a King, and there ſhould be ſome Reformation of their for- 


mer abuſes under the Government _— yu as LE ws ma» 
fi hem, not yet repented of, ſo they {hould be ſevere. 
1 chaftifed for the h to wit, of the other Fruits of the Earth; 


haſtiſed for them. ; 
ly chaſtiic gin=ryes was obſerved afrer the gathering of all the 


Fruits, was called #ht feaft of inzgathering, Exod 23: 16. 
ix Tremble ye women chat are at eaſe, be troubled, 


ye careleſs ones: ſtrip ye and make ye bare z, and 


gird [ackcioth upon your loins. | 
' Put off your Ornaments, as God commanded upon a like oc- 


caſion, Exod: 33. 5. that you _ put on Sackcloth in ſtcad of them, 
as Mourners and Penitents uſed to do. 


{Nc 12 They (ball lament for-the teats &, for F the plea- 
hk; of de= Cant fields, for the fruitful vine. : 

hr þ Either, 1. properly, becauſe, through Famine, your Teats are 
deſtitute of Milk for the nouriſhment of your poor Children, Or 
rather 2. Metaphorically, aF the following words explain ir, for 
the pleaſant and fruitful Fields, which like Teats yielded you plen- 
1 tiful and excellent nouriſhment, for which the Land was ſaid zo 
Chap.345 flow with milk, Ezek. 20. 6. And the Earth being compared to the 
s Womb that bare us,Feb 1: 21. itis not ſtrange, it its fruitful Fields 
To 9+ 6. be compared to the Breaſts which nouriſh us. 

Or, buy= 12 * Upon the land of my people shall come up 


* 9%, thorns and briers 1,|| yea upon all the houſes of joy 


in the joyous City ; 


as that Feaſt, 


{ 


#- A 


I Tf any of you think there is not great cauſe forſuch trembling * 
and Lamentation,which ſhall laſt but for a year and ſome days; know 
that this calamity, by the Aſſyrians, is but an earneſt of further and 
forer Judgments: Forthe time is coming, when this land ſhall be 
laid deſolate; and in ſtead of Vines and other Fruits, it ſhall yield 
nothing bur Briers and-Thorns : of which, ſce on Iſa: 7: 23: 24. 1m 
Upon that Ground, where now your Houſes ſtand, in which you 
delight, and take your fill of mirth and pleaſure. | 


14 Becauſe the palaces » shall be forſaken, the mul- 


titude of the city shall be left s, the [| forts and towers || Or, |: fit 
ana wat\ Wt 


towers, |\\ WIR 


Shall be for dens for ever, a. joy of wild afle 
| | SP, A Pa- 
{ture of flocks. 4s RR 
.# Heb: the palace, the King's Houſe, and other magnificent Buil- 
dings in the Ciry. o Or rather ſhall be forſaken, to wit, of God, and 
given up into their Enemies hands. And the verb in the foregoing 
Clauſe, may be rendred, ſhall be left. p Deſolate places, ici which 
wud Aﬀes delight to be, 7ob: 39. 5. Jer: 2. 24. | 
I5 Until che ſpirit be poured upon us from on high 
q, and * the wildernefs be a fruicful field, and the fruit- 


ful field be counted for a forreſt 7. 
9 And this Calamity and Deſolation ſhall, in a manner continue 


until. the time come, in which God will pour, or, as the Hebrew Ml if 


word properly ſignifies, reveal, 3. e. evidently and plenrifully pour 
out his Spirit from Heaven upon his people. which was done in 
ſome ſort upon the return of the People from Babylon, when God by 
nis Spirit ſtirred up the Spirit, both of Cyr» to give them liberty 
of returning to Feruſal:m, and of the people to return and build the 
City and Temple : But was far more clearly and fully accompliſhed 
in the days of the Meſſiah. And indeed the promiſes contained in 
theſe and the following words and verſes, were not fulfilled upon 
their coming out of Babylon, after which time they had bur # litle re- 
viving in their bondage, as is ſaid, Ezra 9; 8. and continued in ſervi< 
tude and diſtreſs under the Perſian Emperors, Nehem: 9: 36, 57. and 
afterward ſuffered many and grievous Calamiries, from the Kings of 
Syria and Egypr, and from the Remans : which ſuits very ill with that 
glorious promiſe here following, ver. 18+ And therefore theſe p10- 
muſes concern the times of the Goſpe),when Goa'sSpiritwas in a moſt 
evident and glorious manner prured forth upon the Apoſtles, and 
other believing Jews, to the Aſtoniſhment of their very Adverſarics; 
and when the following promiſes were in a good Meaſure fulfilled, 


and are more fully to be accompliſhed in God's due time. r Which 
1s allegorically underſtood, The meaning may be this ; Gods peo«- 
ple, who were deſolate and deſtroyed, thall be revived and Flou-« 
riſh, and their flouriſhing enemies ſhall be brought to deſolation 
and Deſtruſtion. It may alſo ſignify, the converſion of the barren 
and deſpiſed Gentiles, and the Reje&ion of the Jews, in the time of 
the Meſſiah, 

16 Then judgment 5s hall dwell in the wilderneſs, 


and righteouſneſs remain in the fruitful field 5. 

5 Juſt Judgmeet, as the next Clauſe explains it. £ Juſtice ſhalt 
be executed in all the parts of the Land, both in the barren ang 
fruitful places, and ſhall be praQtiſed by all my people : whichagrees 
with that promiſe, 1/3 60: 21. Thy people ſhall be all righteous, &c. 


17 And the work of righteouſneſs hall be peace s, 
and che effe& of righteouſneſs, quietneſs x and aſſurance 


7 for ever. 

# The effect of this prevailing praftice of Righteouſneſs ſhall be 
Proſperity and outward Feliciry. x Tranquillity, both of Mind 
and outward Eſtate. y Or, confidence, The obſervation of God's 
Precepts will beget in them a confidence and affuratice of God's 
Mercy, and the fulfilling of his promifes. | 

18 And my people z shall dwell in a peaceable habi- 


tation,and in ſure dwellings,and in quiet reſting places: 
z Either the Gentiles, who then ſhall be my people : Or, the Jews 
to whom this promiſe ſhall be made good upon their Converſion to 
Chriſt in the latter times of the Goſpel. : 
I9 Whenit shall hail, comingdown on the forreſt a, || Or, as 
j| and the city bshail be low in a low place c, rhe city fo 
a Heb: And it ſhall hail, &. As my Bleſſings ſhall be poured a 
down upon my people, who, from a Wilderneſs, are turned into a aboſed. 
fruitful Field, as it is ſaid, wer. 15. So my wrath and Judgments 
( which are ſignified by hail, Iſa: 58. 2, 17. and elſewhere ) ſhalf 
fall upon them, who were a fruitful Field, but are turned into a 
Forreſt, as was ſaid, ver. 15. z- e, upon the unblieving andrebelli- 
ous Jews, who ſeem there to be deſigned under that Notion. b Eij= 
ther, 1. Babylon, the great Enemy and Oppreſlor of God's Peoples 
Or, 2. Jeruſalem, which, though now it was theſeat of God's Wor 
ſhip and People ; yet he foreſaw, by the Spirit of Prophecy, thar it 
would be the great Enemy ofthe Meſriah, and of God's people. « 
Heb. ſba4 be humbled with humiliation : Which, by an ordinary He= 
braiſm ſignifies, ſbaZ be greatly humbled, or brought very low, 


20 Bleſſed are ye that ſow 4 beſide all waters e, chat 


ſend forth hither the feet of the ox and the af f. 

d As the barren Forreſt ſhall be deſtroyed with hail, wer. r9. ſo: 
the fruitful Field ſhall be improved, and bring forth much Fruit ; 
which is ſignified by a Declaration of the blefſedneſs of them thar' 
ſowinit. e Inallmoiſt and fat Grounds, which are like to yield - 
good Fruit. But this Paſſage; as well as others in the foregoing 
verſes, is to be underſtood myſtically, and ſeems to reſpett the 
times of the. Goſpel. The Propher refle&ing upon his own un« 
ſucceſsful Labours, of which he complains, 1/s- 49- 4. andelſewhere; 
and foreſeeing by the Spirit the great and happy ſucceſs of his Suc« 
cefſors, the Miniſters of the Goſpel ; tacitly bewails his own un- 
happineſs, who ſowed his Seed upon dry and barren Ground, by 
congratulating the happineſs of the Apoſtles, who ſowed their Seed 
more generally upon all fit Grounds, without any diſtinction be-. 
tween Jews and Gentiles; and who found the Ground, to wir, the 
hearts ofthe people, more moiſtned and ſottned;/ and berter prepared 
to receive the Good Seed of God's Word. f Which Creatures they. 
employed in plowing and ſowing the Ground, Dev#. 22. 10 Pſa! 


K44. 14. 1 «' 2% 
hs: - -U 2 CHAP. 


th 
is 

| 4 
We | 
: : 


: 


*Chap:! IH 
7.8 34 il 
& 37. Wi} wil 


. 


{ic 
* 
WW 


yy reueV — 
— - ms Ia <a on > nn atone, . _- — mg 
DD : = _ DE nn 
— — WT. Fe We: "EPs = ay” OS OP 


ene 
I Eg 
PRs 4 


= 
—_— 


me rn ere 


Le 
MD 


pe ——_—__ 


—_——— — 
—— 
——— ny - 


11 
\ 
$1.1 
1839 
wv 
[4 
"I 
"tl 
yt 
'y 


2p. XXXIIL 

| CHAP XXXII. 

The deftru#ion of the enemies of the Church : who are derided, 1———13 
which terrifi:th the ſinners in Zion, 14 the ſafety and privileages of the 
Godly, 23 ——- *4- 

O to thee that * ſpoileſt «, and thou ſf# not 
ſpoiled b, and dealeſt treacherouſly c, and they 

dealt not treacherouſly with thee 4; when thou shalr 
ceaſe to ſpoil, thou shalt be ſpoiled e ; and waen thou 

Shale make an end to deal treacherouſly, they $hall deal 


treacherouſly with thee. : 

a To Semnacherib, who waſted the Land of Judeh. 6 Thou didſt 
not meet with any con{iderable oppoſition, dut waſt victorious 0- 
ver all thine Enemies ; of which the 4ſjriatt boaſteth, 1/a: 10: 8, g. 
& 36. 18, 19. c As Semnacherib did with Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18. 14, 
$7 & None of thine Enemies could prevail againſt thee, either by 
force, of which heſpeaketh in the former clauſe, or by treachery, 
as here. Or, when they deait nos, &c, when Hezekiah did not deal 
treacherouſly with thee If it be ſaid, that Hezekiah dealr treache- 
rouſly with him, in breaking his Faith, and rebelling againſt him; 
it may be anſwered, That Hezekiah neither promiſed nor owed him 
any Service or Subjeftion. What was done in that kind,” was done 


0 ap:2 I a 


b: 2. 8. 


work, and payed him well for it, 2 Kings 16. 7, 8. and the King 

” of 4ſjria did not keep his conditions with him; for, he diſtreſſed him, 

but ftrengthned him nor, 2 Chron: 28. 20. .e When thou haſt perfor- 

med the work of chaſtiſing my people, for which I ſent thee, thou 
alſo ſhalt be ſpoiled by thine Enemies. , 

2 O LORD, be giacious unto us d, we have waited 


for thee, be thou their * arm e every moraing f, our 


ſalvation alſo in the time of crouble. 

d The Prophet contemplating the judgement which was now 
coming upon God's People, direfeth his prayer to God for them. 
e OurArm or ſtrength. The change of perſons is moſt frequent 
in prophetical writings. f When we offer the morning Sacrifice, 
and call upon thee : Which yet is not meant excluſively, as if he 


85.7.8 


Morning being put ſynecdochically fer the whole day. The ſenſe 
is, help us ſpeedily and continually. 

At the noiſe of the tumult g the people b fled; at 

the lifting up of thy ſelf the nations ; were ſcattered. 
g Which the Angel ſhall make in deſtroying the Army. þ Thoſe 
of the Army, who eſcaped that ſtroke. # The people cf divers 
Nations, which made up his Army. | 
4 And your ſpoil & shall be gathered /like the gathe- 
ring of the caterpillar »: : as the running to and fro of 


locuſts » shall he run upon them. 


vers people. 1 By the Jews at Jeruſalem, when: you ſhal! be forced 
to flec away with all poſſible ipecd, leaving yoar ipoils b-hind you, 
mM Either 1+ paſſively, with as mucheaſe, and in as great numbers 
as Caterpilla:s are gathered and deſtr 
' as appears from the next Clauſe ; as C 
the word ſignifies either ) gather and devour all the Fruits 0 
Earth ; which was a common Plague in thoſe Countries. 


«from God, come with great force, and run hither and thither, 
devouring all the Fruits of theEarth, whereſoever they find them. 

5 The LORD is exaltzdo ; for he dwelleth on high 
2, he hach filled Zion 9 wich judgment and righteout- 


neſs r. | 
o Will get great Glory by the marvelous defruQtion of ſo proud 
and potentan Army; and by the defence of his People. p For he is, 
and will appear to be ſuperior to his Enemies, buth in place and 
Power. He dwelleth in the Heaven, whence he can eaſily, and ir- 
reſiſtibly pour down Judgments upon his Enemies . Although theſe 
words may be, and by ſomeare joined with thoſe that follow, thus, 
For he that awelleth on high hath filed, &c. q He will fill Jeruſalem. 
7 Either, s. with a glorious Inſtance of his juſt Judgment agiinſt 
the Aſjrians, Or, 2. with the execution of Juſtice by good Hez- 
kiah, as before it was filled with impicty and injuſtice under Ahaz: 
The Ciry ſhall not only be delivered from that wicked Enemy, 
bur ſhall alſo be eſtablithed and bleſſed with true Religion and Righ- 
Heb: the teouſneſs ; which was a great Addition to that Mercy. 
eh of 6 Andfj wiſdom and knowledge s shall be the ftabi- 
Salvation, lity of thy times*, and ſtrength of 1alvacion « ; the fear 


W:/aom of the LORD is his treaſure x. 

ow= 5 To govern thy ſelfand thy People well. : Of thy Reign; times 
being oft put for things done in thoſe times, as 1 Chron. 12. 32. 
Pal: 31. 1. & 37. 18, & He turneth his ſpeech to Hezekiah. 
The ſenſe is, Thy Throne ſhall be eſtabliſhed upon the ſure Foun- 
dations'of Wiſdom and Juſtice. « Thy ſaving ſtrength, or thy 
ſtrong or mighty Salvation. x And although thou ſhalt have great 
Treaſures of Gold and Silver, &«. yet thy chief Treaſure and De- 
light is; and ſhall be in promoting the Fear and Worſhip of God ; 
which ſhall be a great honour and ſafeguard to thy ſelf an people. 
He ſaith, hu Treaſure, for thy Treaſure, by a ſudden change of the 
perſon, uſual in theſe Books, 
IOr M:/3z. 7 Behold y, their || valiant ones z shall cry without a, 


the embaſladors of peace b shall weep bitterly c. 

3 That the Mercy here promiſed might be duly magnified, he 
makes a lively Repreſentation of their great danger and diſtreſs, 
in which it found chem. & Or, their Heraulds or Meſſengers, as the 
Hebrew Doors expound the word : Either 1. thoſe whom the 
King of 4þr:s ſent to Jeruſalem, 2 Kings 18. 17, Or rather thoſe 
whom Hezekiah ſent to treat with the 4ſjr:ian Commiſſioners, 2Kings 

28+ 18. as the next clauſe ſheweth. @. Through grief and fear. 6 
Whom he ſhall ſend ro beg peace of the Aſjrian. c Becauſe they 
| canyor obtain their deſires. - t 

8 * The high-ways lie waſte, the wayfaring man 
#Judg.s.6 ceaſeth d, he hath broken the covenant e, he hath de- 
ſpiſed the cities f, he regardeth no man g, / 


the flabi- 
Ht of thy 
41% "K 


SI 74 E : 


Chap. XXXII, 


a Becauſe the 4ſjrian Soldiers poſſeſſed and filled 
Sermacierib broke his Faith given ws Mobi of wa Faney os 7 ih 
of Money, 2 Kings 18. 14. 17. f The defenced Cities of Judah 
which he contemned and eaſily rook, 2Kings 18. 13. g Either to 
ſpare them, or to fear them, or to keep Faith with them. He nei- 
ther feareth God, nor reverenceth Man. 

9 The earth mourneth h and languisheth, Lebanon is 
aschamed and || hewn down ;: * Sharon k is like a wil- [Or wich, 
derneſs,and Bashan and Carmel !|| shake off cheir fruits m. rod mwg, 

Being deſolat and negle&ed. 7 By the 4ſjrians. Or, as the *Cha 35. 

word ſignifies, and is here rendred by others, withereth or languiſheth, || Or, Yell 
becauſe its Trees are not now uſed by the Jews for their Buildings, Jer: 51.45; 
as they have been: And becauſe they are ſpoiled and deſtroyed by I 
the Aſjriaus. k A pleaſant and fruirful place, as appears from 
TI Chron: 27: 29. Cant: 2: 1; Iſa: 45: 2, | Two places eminent 
for fertility, and eſpecially for good Paſtures, Deut: 32: 14. 1 San. 
253; 2. which are here Synecdochiczlly pur for all ſuch places. m 
Are ſpoiled of their Fruits. Or, as it is rendred in the Mar. 
NG by tome others, ze/l or roar, as this word is rendred, Jer: 
51: 38. 


by 4haz only : And he only begged his affiſtance for a particular ; 


- - ———— — 


did not deſire Gods help at other times; but comprehenliively, the | 


10 Now will I riſe z, ſaith the LORD ; now will I : 
' be m—_— now will I lift up my ſelf. 

z In this extremity, I wi 

S.-> ry ity, I will appear on the behalf of my People 
iT * Ye $hall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth 
ſtubble o, your breath as fire shall devour you p. 

0 In ſtead of ſolid corn. Your great hopes and deſigns, O ye ſa 
ſyrians ) ſhall be utterly diſappointed, _ p Your Rage againſt my 
People ſhall bring Ruine upon your ſelves. 

12 And the people $hall be as the burnings of lime 


"Plal:1,1g 


..q, as thorns cut up shall they be burnt in the hre. 


9 Shall be burnt as eaſily and effeQtually, as Chalk is burned to 
make Lime. ; 


13 Lear ye that arefar off, what I have done,and 
yerhat are near acknowledge my might ». 
r My power and Juſtice in deſtroying the Aſhrisns, ſhall be ſo 


evident, that people, both far and near, ſhall be forced to acknows 


——— — 


ledge it. | 
14 The ſinners in Zjon are afraid s, fearfulneſs hath 


 furprifed the hypocrites; who among us shall dwell wich 


' 


verJaſting burnings z ? by 
5s This is ſpoken, not of the Aſjrians, as ſome would have it,but 


che devouring fire? who amongſt us shall dwell with e- 


; of the Jews, as appears both from the words themſclves, and fiom 


j 


the following verics. The Prophet having f-rerold the Deliverance 


i 5 4 1 . o . . 
of God's People, and the Deſtrucrion of their Enemies, wer. 10, 11, 


& That Treaſure which you have raked together, by ſpoiling di- | 12: for the greate: illuſtration of that wonderful Mercy, here rea 


rur's to the deſcription, and givesa lively Repreſentation of the diſe 
maland frighrful Condition, in which the Jews, eſpecially ſuch of 
; them as were ungodly and unbeleving, were before this Delive- 


oyed. Or rather 2. a&tively, | rance came. Althouga the godly Jews were in ſome meafure ſup« 
aterpillars or Locuſts ( for | ported by the ſenſe of God's Favour, and by Gods Promiles deli- 

f the | vered to them by 1/a;ah ; yet the generality of the People were file 
n As \led with horrors and expectation of utter Deitruction. re How 
Locuſts eſpecially when they are ſent, and armed by Commiſſion ; thall we be able to abide the preſence, and endure, or avaid the 


wrath of that God, who isa conſuming fire ; who is now abour ts 

eſtroy us utterly by the Aſhrians, and will afterward burn us with 
unquencha..le Fire? For ſeing it is ſuiticient'y evident, from both 
07a and New-Tejtament, as hath veen formerly obſerved and proved, 
that the Jews, except the Sadducees, did generally believe the Re- 
wards andPuniſhments of the future Life,and theſe tzmporal Judgs 
' meats, as they did frequently cut Men off from t:.is Life, ſo they 
tran{mirted them info that future and endleſs Life: Ir isnort ſtrange, 
if their guilty conſciences made them dread both the preſent Judg« 
ment here, and the terrible conſequences of it hereafter. Heb: 
who ſhall dwell for us, &c. i. e. in our ſtead ? who will interpoſe 
himſeif between God's Anger and us ? How ſhall we eſcape theſe. 
Mitferics ? That this is the ſenſe of this Queſtion, may be gathered 
from the Anſwer givento it in the following verſe; in which, he 
directs them to the right Courſe of removing God's Wrath, and 
regaining his Favour. 


15 He that * walketh + righteouſly «, and ſpeaketh *Pſfal15.2 


# uprightly x,he that defpiſerh y the gains of |} opprefli- 27975 


ons, that shaketh his hands from holding z of bribes, ,,,;,,uy 
that ſtoppeth his earsfrom hearing of + blood #,qnd shut- neſt. 


teth his eyes from ſecing evil 9. _ tHeb: up« 
, Who is juſt in all his Dealings with Men, of which the fol- rightueſts 

lowing clauſes explain it: which is not ſpoken excluſively, as if Pi- [|Or #ecei! 

ety towards God were not as neceflary, as Righteouſneſs rowards T Heb: 
en ; bur comprehenſively, this being one Evidence, and a con- Bloods, 

ſtant companion of Piety, x who ſpeaks truely and ſincerely, what 

he really intends. y That refuſeth it, nor for politick Reaſons, as 

Men ſometimes may do, but from a contempt and abhorrency of 

injuſtice. z Or, from taking or receiving 3, as this verb ſignifies, Provz 

4:4. &5: 5- & 28: 179. Thar will nor receive, much leſs retain 

Bribes. a Who will not hearke' or afſent roahy counſels or cour- 

ſes, tending to ſhed innocent Blood. & Thar abhorrech the very 


ſight of ſin commitred by others, and guarderh his eyes from beu 
holding- occaſions oi ſin , of which, ſee on Job 31: 1. 

16 He $hall dwell on + high c, his place of defence Feb: 
ſhall be the munitions of rocks, bread shall be given p,;ghr:, or 
him, his waters ſhall be ſure 4. highplacii. 

c Out of the Reach of danger. &d God will furniſh him withall 
neceſlaries. | 

17 Thine eyes shall ſee the king e inhis beauty f, they 
Shall behold + the land that is very far off g. 4 ” 

e Firſt- Hezekiah, ind then Chri#, as before. f Triumphing 9ver land of #7 
all Enemies, and Ruling his own peole with Righteouſneſs; 11 ar ſtance. 
which two things, the Beauty and Glory of a King and King- 


+ Heb: hs 


dom, doth chiefly conſiſt: g Thou ſhalt nor be ſhut up in Jer«- 
ſalem, and confined to thine own narrow Borders, as thou haſt 


h>er 


| CH 


*;Cc 
TI 
weigh 


| barbard 


*Plal.g 
Pig. 


{ JOr, 1 


thrre ( | 


Mow IS 1 


LORD } 
ſha! han 
face, & 
t Heb. 
broad of 
ſpaces O1 


bands, 


))am. 4 
12, 
T.Heb./ 


tueum a) 
|Or, ty 
ave for 
bes thy . 
'uckling, 


| 


_ mn 
- Co CE andrea 


AZ awd 


| hayrbarows. known to thee. 


Chap. p.0,0:0018 ws 7-4 
been, but thou ſhalt: have: free Liberty to go abroad with honour 
and ſafety, where thou pleaſeſt,even into the remoteſt Countites, 
becauſe of the great renown of thy King, and the enlargement of 
his Dominions. CD go SES Þ 

*;Cor.7r. 13 Thine heart ſhall meditate terrour þ; * Where 3s 

20. f Heb. the ſcribe where is the þ receiver ? where is he that 


peighers : 
« counted the rowers i? 
þ This is, Either 1. a Premonition concerning a future Judgment, 


as if he ſaid, before theſe glorious Promiſes ſhall be accompliſhed, 
thou ſhalr be brought into great ſtraits and troubles. Or, rather 2 
a thankful Acknowledgment of deliverance from a former Danger ; 
as if he had ſaid, When thou art delivered, thou ſhalt, with plea- 
ſure & thankfulneſs,recal toMind thy former Terrours and Miſeries. 
# Theſe Words are,Either 1. words of Gratulation, and Infultation 
over the Enemy, Thou ſhalt then ſay,Where are the greatOfficers of 
the Aſjrian Hoſt ? They are no where. they are not, they aredead 
or {lain. Or rather 2. the words of Men diſmayed and confound- 
ed, ſuch as proceeded from the Jews, in the tme of their diſtreſs ; 
and are here remembred to aggravate the preſent Mercy. For the 
Officers here mentioned, ſeem not to be thoſe ofthe 4ſ1rian Army, 
who were aQually fighting againſt the Jews and Jeruſalem ( for then 
he would rather have mentioned the Captains of rhe hot, as the Scrip- 
ture commonly doth in theſe caſes,than zhe ſcribes and receivers, &c.) 
but rather of the Jews in Feru[alem, who, upon the approach of Sen= 
».cheijb, began to make Military preparations for the defence of 
the City, and to chuſe ſuch Officers as were neceſlay and uſual,for 
thatend ; ſuch as theſe were,to wit, the ſcri#e, whom we call Muſter- 
Maſter, who was to make and keep a Liſt of the Souldiers, and to 
call them together as occaſion required : The receiver, who received 
and laid out the Money for the Charges of the War; and he zhat 
counted the Towers, who turveyed-all the parts of the City, and con- 
ſidered what Towers or Fortifications were to be made orrepaired 
or the Secwiity of the City. And unto theſe ſeveral Officers the 
People reſorted, with great diſtrattion and confuſion, to accquaint 
them with allOccurences,or to quicken them to their ſeveralWorks, 

or to tranſact Matters with them, .as occaſion required. 
SE 19 *Thou ſhalt not fee a tierce people &,a * people of 
: Kings a deeper ſpeech thari thou canſt perceive 1; of a || 


I9. 32. : 

Nate 28. ſtammering tongue m, that then canſt not underſtand. 
49. Jer. 5, Kk As Moſes ſaid of the Egyptians Exed. 14.13. Sol ſay of the 4/- 
I5, ſyrians, that fierce and warlike People, whom thou haſt ſeen, with 
| Or, rid;.. great Terrour, near the Walls of Feryſalem,cthou ſhalt fee them again 
culous, or No more. | A forreign Nation, whoſe Language is abſtruſe and un- 
m Of which, ſee cn //s. 28. 81. 

20 Look upon Zicn n the city of our folemnities o, 


Ph1.46.5. thine eyes ſhall ſee * Feruſalemw a quiet habitation, a 
6125.1,2. tabernacle that ſhal not be taken down; notone of the 
ftakes thereof ſhal ever be remoyed,neither Jhal any of 


the cords thereof be broken p. ; 
7 Contemplate Zions beauty and ſafety, and her glorious and 
peculiar Priviledges : it is an obje& worthy of thy deepeſt Meditai- 
on. o This he mentions, as the chief part of Zims Glory ond Hap- 
Pineſs,that God was ſolemnly Worſhipped, and the ſolemn Afﬀem- 
blies and Feaſts kept in her. p Wh:ch was bnt very obſcurely 
and imperfeQly fulfilled in the literal Zion ; but was clearly & fully 
accompliſhed in the myſtical Zzjon, the Church of God in the timesof 
the Goſpel, again\t which, we are aflured, that the gates of Hell ſhall 


{ JOr, but 


| Mw 1s the 


not preva:l, Mat. 16. 18. : : Ps 
21 || Bur there q the glorious LORD wl/ be unto us 


thre ( glo- a place + of broad rivers and ſtreams r, wherein ſhal- go 
3 galley with oars, neicher ſhal gallant ſhips paſs there. 
we 

f Y $. - : 
rag wg 9 Tn and about Zioz. r Though we have nothing but a ſmall and 


[ 
ro - contemprible Brook to defend us; yet God will be as ſure and 
broad of ſtrong a Defence to us, as if we were ſurrounded with ſuch grear 
paces oc Rivers, as Nilus or Enphrates, which were a great ſecurity to Egype 
hand; and Babylon. s But alrhough they ihall have from God, the ſecuri- 
: ty of a great River, yet they ſhall be freed fromthe diſadvantage of 
it ; which is, That the Enemies may come againſt them in Shipsfor 
no Galleys, nor Ships of the Enemies thall be able ro come into 
this River to atinoy them. WE 
22 For the LORD 7s our judge ft, the Lord zs our 
"fan, . * | lawgivers, the LORD zs our king,he will ſave us 
" * eo judge for us to plead our Cauſe againſt our Enemies,as the 
t Heb flas ancient Judges of //rael did, Judg. 2. 16. « Our chief Governour,to 
twemaker, Whom it belongs, to give Laws, and to defend his People. 
||Or, chey 23 || Thy tacklings are looſed x, they y ceuld nor 
bove frſs. well ſtrengthen their maſt, they could not ſpread the 


po ſail : then is the Prey of a great ſpoil divided, thelame 
"3% take the prey &. | 

x He directeth his Speech to the 4ſjrians ; 

deſigned their Army under the notion of a galant S 

here repreſents their broken and undone condition, by the Meta- 

phor of a Ship, toſſed in a tempeſtuous Sea, having her Cables bro- 

ken, and all her Tacklings looſe, and out of order, ſo as ſhe could 

Maſts & Sails; and therefore is quickly 


have no benefit of her ; Di 
broken, or ſwallowed up by the Sea. y The Aſyrianr, of whom he 


and having tacitely 
"ip, ver 21. he 


Came to ſpoil and prey upon my People, ſhall become a prey to 
them, and {hall be Gene on Fae away ſo ſuddenly, that they fhal] 
leave ſo many Spoils behind rhem, that when ftrong' and active 
Men have carried away all that they deſfred, there thall be enough 
Teft for the Lame, who come laſt to the Spoil. The general Senſe 
of the place is,tliat Gods People ſhall be Victorious over all their 


Enemies. 

| 24 And the inhabitant 4 ſhal not fay, T am ſick 6 : 

the people that dwell therein (hal be forgiven their ini- 
uty c. | 

. : ſalem; Gods people. 5 Shall have no cauſe 


£o complain ofany 


Kill ſpeaks, as in the firſt Clauſe be ſpake to them. = They who | 


.intimations and inſtances in Scripture, 


| 


1 4 H. Chap. X AXP 


from all their Enermies afid evil Occutrents ; - ſhall en;oy perfect 

tranquility and profperity.. c This may beadded, Either 5. as tho ll 
Reaſon of the foregoing priviiedge;- Their Sins, the main cauſes 
of all their Diſtreſſes, ſhall bepardoned; and therefore. thei: Suffes 
rings, the effects of Sin, ſhall ceaſe; Or-2. as an addirioral Favour. 
They ſhall not only receive f:om me a glorious Temporal Delive. 
rancczbut, which is infinitely better.the pardon of al] theuSins:ar d all 
thoſe ſpiritual everlaſting Bleſſings, which attend upon that Mers 


cy. 
C H A P. (XXXIVe 


Gods fury and wrath againſt his Churches Enemies, x 
utterly deſolate, 11———15. the certainty hereof : and duration, 
; | 


Wiper near, ye nations,to hear, and hearken ye.peo- + Heb.|| 


ple 2: Tet the earth hear,and Þ all that is therein ;#uzeſ | 
þ thereof 


To, their Land 
16, 


7 
the world,and all things that come forth of it 6. 

# Let the Peple of all Nations take notice of what I am about to 
fay and do, as that wherein they are generally concerned, and by 
the conſideration whereof, they may, if they will,be inſtrucred,and 
ſo delivered from the Calamity here denounced. 6 Heb: AU the off= 
ſprings of 7t : Either 1. all the Trees, and Fruits, and other produc. 
ttions of it ; foritis uſual with the Prophets, by a Figure, ro turn 
their Speech to theſe ſenſeleſs Creatures. Or 2. all the Inhabitants 
of the World, as the Chaldceand other Ancients reſtrain and un< 
derſtand this general Expreflion ; which alſo is Emphartical, and 
admoniſheth the proud and inſolent Sons of Men, of their mean 
and obſcure Original, that how great and gloricns ſoever they may 
ſeem to themſelvesor others; yet in truth, they are bur a berrex 
ſort of Muſhromes ſprining out of the Earth, for Duſ# they are, - and 
unto aufl they muſt return, as was ſaid, Gen, 3. 19. 


2 For the indignation of the LORD 5s upon all 
nations c, andhis tary upon all their armies : he hath ut= 
terly deftroyed them d, he hath delivered them to the 


{langhter. _ 

c Not only upon the 4ſjrians, and .thoſe Nations which were 
Confederate with them in this Expedition, but upon all other 
Enemies of my People whatſoever. d He will infaliibly Deſtroy 
all of them. £05 © KI Es 

3 Their ſlain alſo ſhal be caſt out e, and * their ſtink 

al come up out of their carcaſes, and the mountainsf 


ſhal bemelted with their blood g. 

e Into the Fields, where they ſhall lie unburied, and be left for a 
prey to all revenous Birds and Beaſts : Whereby he implies.cither 
the vaſt Numbers which ſhall be ſlain,ſo as they could nor have time 
or place to Bury: them:Or the curſe of God upon them,& the peoples 
contempr and abhorency of them. fAbour Feruſalew, where they are 
{uppoſed to be gathered to Fight againſt Jeruſalem, as the Aſrians 
now were, and as other Enemies afterward would be, Zech. 12, 2'&r 
I4. 2. g Shell be filled with their Blood, which ſha!l run ' down: 
abundantly from the Mountains with great force, and difſolve-and 
carry down part of the earth of the Mountains with it, as greaf 
thowers of Rain frequently do. PN TDs L 

4 And all.the hoft of 
the heavens ſhal be * rolled together as a ſcroll &, and all 
their hoſt ſhai fall down as the leaf falleth off from 


the vine /, .and as a * falling figm from the fig-tree. 

þ The Sun, and Moon, and Stars.which frequently come under: 
this name in Scripture, as Deute 4. 19. & 17. 3. and elſewhere. 5 
Shall ſeem ro be diilfolved, ſo great thajl be the confuſion and con< 
ſternation of Mankind ,as ifall the frame of the Creation were broken 

into pieces, Some underſtand this of the general Juigment ; which 
ſome pgs here following will not permit. Bur it is a very uſual 
 thirlg tor Propherical Writers;both in the O/d & New-Teſtamient,to re« 
preſent great and general Calamitics, in ſuch words and phraſes, 
as properly agree to the Day of Jucgment ; as on the evntrary, 
{ he glorious Deiiverances of Gods Pcople are ſet forth in ſuch Ex« 
preſſions, as properly agree to Reſurrection from the Dead. See. 
Ezek, 37. 9. Joel. 2. 31. & 3: 15+ Rove 6. 12, 13. kHeb. &s # book; 
tor Books were then writtenin Scrolls, which they uſually rolled. 
' up togetherz and when they were fo, no Man could read any 
word 1n it; and no more ſhall any Man be able to ſee thoſe 
good'y Lights of Heaven, for they ſhall all be'obſcured and cons 
tzunded,. This phraſe isuſed alſo, 1/s. 8. i. & Rev 6. 14. 1 When' 
itis withered. m Which falleth, either through great Maturity, or 
being churſt out by green Figs coming forth, or by any other ac« 


cident- | 


hold, * it ſhal come down upon Idumea p,and uponthe ,;. 
people of my curſe q to judgment. ._. : Fer. 4973 
2 In the Blood of theſe People. Heb. I or ſha# be made drunk. o Ei- 
ther 1.in my Church, which is called Heaven, Dan. 8. 10 Rev. 4. r:; 
& 12. 8. in and againſt which, theſe Enzmies are faid to be ga« 
thered together, Or 2. inthe higheſt Heaven, where, God dwells; 
in which this ſaid tobe dont, becauſe it was there decreed and ap-" 
pointed to be done. p- Upon the Edomires,who, though they were. 
nearly related to the -1jr#e/ites, ard were Circumciled. . as-well as 
they yet were their moſt inveterate... and - implacable Ene« 
'mies, watching all opportunities; and being ready to j-yn-witls © 
all thoſe that attempred to Deftroy them ; whereof we have many; 
But theſe are not: named 
Excluſively, but rather Comprehenſively, and Synecdochically, for 
all che Enemies of Gods Church, of whom they were a conſiderable 
Part, and an eminent Type. q To whom my Curſe belongs; . or, - 
whom I have Curſed, ang deyored to utter Deſtrution, as this 


Hebrew word properly ſignifies. Ds 2h 
6 The ſword'of the LORD is filled with blood 7, it- 

is made fat with fatneſs, and with the blood of lambs*- . 

and goats, With the-fat of the kidneys of cams 5 : for. *. Zeph Zo 

the LORD hath a ſacrifice t in Bozrahs, and a great 

ſfaugi:er in the land of Idumea. 


8s To wit, of Jeru 
7 ſickneſs or calamity ; ſhalt be fully delivered |- 


7 Shall drink” its fill of Blood. Ths Metaphor is Here taken. 
Y SU 3 from 


heaven h ſhal be diffolved 7,and | 
*Rev.6.iq; [ 


*Rev.6.134 


5 For * my ſword (hal be bathed » in heaven's, be- + Je PE 


ry 


| 


ap. XKXXIV. IJ 

| t Glutton or Drunkard, who is almoſt inſatiable with 
_ "I Drink. s By Lambs, and Goats, and Rams, He means Peo- 
ple of all ranks and conditions, high and low, rich and poor. # So 
he calleth this bloody Work, becauſe ic was done by Gods Com: 
mand, and for his Honour ; and therefore was a Service acceptable 
to him.» A chief City of Edem, 7a. 63. 11 Jer. 49.13. and a Type of 
thoſe Cities which ſhould be moſt oppoſite and miſchievous to Gods 


_ People - | 
br, ee 7 And the || unicorns x ſhall come down y with 


423 HZ 
for ever, from generation to generation ſhall they 
dwell therein. 
# He hath divided the Zandto them, as it were, by Lot and 
Line, as Canaan was divided among the 1!/raelites, 
C H A P. XXXV. 
The joy ful flouriſhing of Chriſt”s kingdom, 1, 2. the weak he ftrenothens and 
comforts, 3, 4+ hus Miracles, 5, 6. the profperity and peace of his people, 
7 - dhe . 
He wilderneſs and the © ſolitary place « shal 


* be T Heb. dry 


*79 them z, and the bullocks with the bulls, and their land 


' with fatnelſs 4. 


Beaſt which is commonly called #z Unicorn, which ſeems to be but a 
Fi&ion in the Judgment of the Learned ; or a Rhinoceros, or a 
wild Ox or Bull; it is needleſs to trouble the ordinary Reader 
about it ; and the Learned may conſult my Latin $Sy- 
nopſis upon Numb 23, 22. about it. It is confeſſed, . That it was a 
Beaſt of great ſtrength and ferceneſs ; and it is certain,. that it is 
Mertaphorically uſed in this place, to ſignifie their Princes and Po- 
tentates. y Shall be humbled and caſt down. The Seventy and Sy- 
riack render it, They ſhalfall down, as ſuch Beaſts do.when they have 
received a deadly blow. z With the Lambs, and Goats, and Rams, 
Bhi 63.4, Jaſt mentioned, v.6. s With the Fat of the {lain Sacrifices, which 
' ſhall be mingled with it. 
8 For it z: the day of the LORD'S ® vengeance,and the 
year of recompences for the controverſie of Zion b. 
bThis is the time which God hath long fince appointed & fixed,to 
avenge the cauſe of his oppreſſed and perſecuted People, againſt all 
their Enemies. ; 
22 Deut, 9 * And the ſtreams © thereof ſhal be turned into 


d. 23. itch, and the duſt thereof into brimſtone, and the 


and thereof ſhal become burning pitch 4. 

c Which ſeem moſt fecure from this Danger, and much more the 
Land. 4 Idumea ſhall be dealt with, as Sodom and Gomorrah were, 
even utterly Deſtroyed, as it were by Fire, or burning Pitch and 
Brimfſtone thrown down upon it from Heaven, 

Rev.14: T0 It ſhall not be quenched night nor day, * the 


r= & 18. £510ke thereof ſhal go up for ever ; from generation to 
19.3: encration it ſhal lie waſte,none ſhal paſs chrough it 


or ever and ever e. {TY 
e It ſhall be irrecoverably ruined, and ſhall remain as a ſpeQacle 
of Gods vengeance to all ſucceeding Ages: | 
ph.22 x4 * But the || cormorant and the bittern ſhal poſ- 


+Rev18 ff; it, the owl alſo and the raven ſhal dwell in ir f,and 


;-7 | he ſhal ſtretch out upon it che line of confuſion, and 


Zech 3.9: the * ſtones of emtinels g. h 
I 4 10. f The Inhabitants ſhall be wholly cut off, and it ſhall be entirely 
"ſſeſſed by thoſe Creatures which delight in Deſerts, & waſte places 
e the ſame or like Expreſſions in the like caſe, 1/s. 13. 21, 22. & 
14.23. g He ſhall uſe the Line, or the Stone or Plumet joyned to 
it,not to build them,but ro mark them out to Deſolation and De- 
ſtruction, as work-men commonly uſe them, to mark what they 
are to pull down. | 
12 They ſhal call the nobles thereof co the kingdom, 


| but none ſhall be there h, and all her princes ſhall 


be nothing z. - E 11 

þ They ſhall endeavour to heal their Breaches, but in vain :. The 
remnant ofthe People ſhall ſeek for any fit Perſon, and offer the 
Kingdom to him; but they ſhall not find any ſuch, who {kall be 
willing to undertake the Government. # Either ſhall be loſt and 

* cut off: Or, ſhall have no Courage or Streng:h left in them. 
of.9.6: 13 And * thorns ſhal come up in her palaces, nettles 
ip. 13-2nd brambles in the fortreſſes thereof k,and * it (bal be 


. ofir;. an habitation of dragons, anda court for || f owls. 

hes. 4 k This is another Mark and Evidence of extream Defolarion,as it 
Heb: is alſo, Ho. 9. 6. : 
fda - ky 14FThe wild beaſts of the deſert ſhalalſo meet with 
theowl. + the wildbeaſts of the iſland, and the ſatyr bal cry to 
Heb-Z'= tis fellow 1, the|| ſcrichowl alſo ſhal reſt there m, and 


Heb.7jim. find for her ſelf a place of reſt, 

Ornight= 7 Sec onlſe: 13. 21. 22. m Becauſe there ſhall be no Men left to 
monſter, diſturb or affright them, Ds. 17. 2. 
15 There ſbal the great owl » make her neſt, and lay 


and hatch, and gather under her fſhaddow o, there ſhal 


the vulturs alſo be gathered, every one with their mate. 

» Whether this, or what other Creature is meant by this Hebrew 
Word, the learned Reader may find largely diſcourſed in my La- 
tin Synopſir up5n this place : For others it may ſuffice ro know, what 
all agree in, that,whether it be a Bird qr a Serpent, it is a Creature 
that lives in deſert places. o As fearing no Diſturbancefrom any 


Men. 

16 Seek ye out of the book of the law of the LORD, 
and read p : no oneof theſe ſhal fail, yone fhal want her 
mategq+: for my mouth it hath commanded, and his 
ſpirit r it hath gathered them s. | 

p Whenthis Judgment is execured, if you peruſe this Book of 
holy Writ, and particularly this Prophecy of mine, you will find, 
thar all things ſhall exally come to paſs, as I have told you. q As 
] have ſaid, That the Vulturs ſhould each have their Mate ; ſo ſhal 
it be: And this Prophecy ſhall be exaaly fulfilled, even in its 
ſmaleſt Circumſtances. r My Spirit ; ſuch ſudden Changes of Per. 
ſons being frequent here. And Gods Spirit may be put for his 

ighr-and Power, as it is in many places of Scripture. s Hath 
brought all theſe Creatures rogerher, at he formerly brought the 
wqgngy to Adam, and to Noah, by an inftin& which he pur in- 
to them. 


17 And he hath caſt the lot for them, and his hand 
hath divided it unto them by line: : they ſhal poſleſs it 


+SICLED 


E” ſhal be || ſoaked with blood, and their duſt made far 


glad for them b, and the deſert ſhal rejoyce, and place. 
bloſſom as the roſe. "Chap 52. 
a And as the Land of Gods Enemies which was exceeding Fruit. 9-© 55-124 


x Heb. The Reemim. But what kind of Beaſt this is, whether that ful, ſhall be turned into a deſolate Wilderneſs, as was declared in 


; the foregoing Chapter ; ſo on the contrary, Emanuels Land, or the 
| Seat of Gods Church and People, which formerly was deſerted,and 
| deſpiſed like a Wilderneſs, and which the rage and malice of their 
; Enemies had brought to deſolation, ſhall flouriſh exceedingly. 6 
; For the Wildernets and ſolitary place : or, for theſe things, which 
| were Propheſied in the foregoing Deſtruction, concerning the 
| Ruine of the implacable Enemies of God, and his Church. Bur 
| that Hebrew Letter which is in the end of this Hebrew Verb, and is 
| here rendred for them, is by all the ancient Tranſlators, and by 
divers others negle&ed in their Tranſlations, as if it were only ad= 
ed to the Verb Paragogically, as Grammarians ſpeak ; and therefore 
thoſe two words may well be omitted. : 
2 Ir hal bloſſom abundantly, and rejoyce even with 
joy and ſinging ; the glory of Lebanon ſhal be given un- 
tO it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon c ; they 4 
ſhal ſee the glory of the LORD e, and the excellency of 
our God. 

c The Wilderneſs ſhall be as fruitful and pleaſant as Lebanon, and 
Carmel, and Sharon ; which were eminent parts of the Land of Ca- 
aan, as hath been oft noted. 4 Who are underſtood by the Wilder 
neſs. e The glorious diſcoveries and effe&s of Gods power and 
goodneſs to his People. | 

2 *Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the 
feeble knees f. 0 

f Ye Prophets and Miniſters of God, comfort and encourage 
Gods people,who are now ready to faint,with hopes and aſſurance of 

that Salvation, which, in due time, I will work for them. He 
mentions hands and knees, becauſe the ſtrength and weakneſs of any 
Man, eminently appears in thoſe parts. 

4 Say to them 7hat are of a Þ fearful heart, Be ſtrong, 
fear not ; behold,your God will come g ith vengeance 
h, even God with a recompenſe, he will come and ſave 

Ou. 

£ Though he ſeem to be abſent, and departed from you, he will 
come to you, and abide with you. + He will ſhortly come in the 
fleſh, For although this, and the following Promiſes may be 
Metaphorically taken, concerning the temporal Deliverance of his 
People from Babylonian and other Oppreſſors ; yet they are much 
more Emphatically and Literally underſtood concerning the Re- 
demption of Gods People by Jetus Chriſt, as is ſufficiently mani- 
feſt, both from the Words and Phraſes themſelves, and from di- 
vers places of the New-Teffament, where they are fo expounded by 
Chriſt and the Apoſtles, þ To execute Vengeance upon the Ene- 
mies of God, and of his People : Which alſo was verified in 
Chriſt, who was Ser for the fall, as well as for the riſmg of many in Iſrael, 
Luke 2. 34. and who did accordingly inflit moſt dreadful Judg- 
ments, both temporal ant! ſpiritual,upon the unbelieving & apoſtate 
Jews, who were the great perſecutors of Chriſt,and of his People, 

5 Then ® the eyes of the blind ſhal be opened,and * *chap. 2g, 
the ears ofthe deaf ſhal be unſtopped z. 18.8427 

7 The moſt ignorant and ſtupid Creatures ſhall be forced to Ac- Mar. 9.27, 
knowledge the wonderful Works of God. Or rather thus, The &c. 
poor Gentiles, who before were Blind and Deaf, ſhall now have the & 115, 
Eyes and Ears of their Minds opened to ſee Gods Works, and to & 12-22. 
hear. & recieve his Word.And in token hereof, many Perſons,who & 20, zos 
are corporally blind and deaf, ſhall have ſight and hearing miracul- & 21. 14: 
ouſly conferred upon them : All which being ſo fully and literally Joh. 9.6,7. 
accompliſhed in Chriſt, and applyed by Chriſt to himſelf; it is a *Matw 5, 
plain Proof, Thot this Prophecy belongs to the times of the Goſs _— 
pel, Co 


£ 6 Then ſhal the * lame mar leap & as an hart,and the pg 
| congue ofthe dumb ſing : for in the wilderneſs ſhal * & 2. 14 
waters break out,and ſtreams in the deſerc /, Johs5.8, 9 

7 And the parched ground lhal become a pool, and 4. 3-* 
the thirſty land ſprings of waters : in the habitation of $* 4.8, 


&c& 8.7: 
Dragons where each lay, ſballbe || graſs with reeds and gc.” © 
ruſhes 77. * Mat. 9. 


& For joy, or go nimbly and readily. And this Clauſe alſo, and 32 33 
that which follows are to be underſtood, both Spiritually and Li. 12+ 22-© 
terally, as in the former Verſe. 1 The moſt dry and barren Places 15; 3% 
ſhall be made moiſt and fruitfal : Which is principally meant of Joh 7 
the plentiful Effufion of Gods Grace upon ſuch Pertons and [Nati- 38, 4" 
ons, as had been wholly deſtitute of ir, m Thoſe dry and parched Or,s y" 
Deſerts, in which Dragons have their Abode, ſhall yield abundance #9 79» 
of Graſs, and Reeds, and Ruſhes, which grow only in moiſt &c: 
Grounds, Jo 8. xx, 


_ 8 And anhigh-way ſhall be there, and a way », and 
it ſhall be called the way of holineſs 0, * the unclean nnpept 
ſhall not paſs over it p, || but it ſhall be for thoſe q: the j oc, fort! 
way-faring men,though fools, ſhall not err thereimr, {hall w 
n The high-way, and the way are not to be taken for two diffe- with 5s 
rent Ways, but for one and the ſame Way, even a Cauſey or Caſt- 
way, Which is both raiſed Ground, as the firſt H:brew Word figni- 
 fics, and a Way ; both ſignifying a convenient, prepared, plain, 
and common Road, 
the Goſpel IS, 


YHeb, 126 
I2. 


THcb.hof 


*Toel.3.17 


or path for Travellers,ſuch as the Dottrine of 
which is frequently compared to a Way, both 1n _ 


Chap. KXXY. 


f "I 
| Chap- 
Z 


; 


Ui 


þ 


? 


+ Heb, r0J« 
by of , OL 
| gong 
| beftt, 
| 


| "Chap. 51. 


Il. 


Revy.21.4- 


*Kings16 
13. 2 Clit» 
22.1. 


{ TOr, jecre 


tory, 


} Heb. s 
word of [: 5. 
| Or, but 
qunſel and 
ſhrength are 
for the war 
*Ezek: 29 
6, Tv 


[ Orbofio- 


W, 


[] FX | We * 
| Chap: 
- 


a 


Dd % A jy | # 

trodden by holy Men, and filled with holy p 
king init ) ſba? beat (+. e,a very great number ot 
tires of the Law ) righteous, as 1s de- 
clared & propheſied afterward,//#, 60. 21, k Eicher to diſturb or 
Jefile it.  Unclean Perſons ſhall, in a good meaſure, be kept or 
caſt out of my Church, by the ftri&t exerciſe of good Diſcipline 


an holy way, 
The People ( wal 
them, not ſo few as in the 


Kingdom 9g Bur thjs way ſhall be appropriated unto thoſe Per- 
ſons above-mentioned; the Weak, and Blind, and Lame, wiom 
God will Heal and Save, wer. 3, 4, 5. 6. The pronoun Relative 1s 


| 


| "Chap. 51. 


put withour an Antecedent, as it 15 in many other places. But 
this, and the following Clauſe, is, and may well be rendred other= 
wiſe, and he (to wit, God who is oft deligned by this Pronoun, 
and is caſily underſtood out of the Context ) fhall be 70 or with 
q them walking in the way (their Companion and Guide in their Way, 
| which is a great felicity ) fat fools may net ery therein. Y The way 
ze ſo plain and ſtraight, that even the moſt fooliſh Travellers 

+ Heb, r0J- Fh 
' by of, Or 
| among 
' lf, 
| 5 Tr ſhall not only be a plain but a ſafe Way,fre2 from all annoy- 
ance or danger from mitchievous Creatures. ' This 1s the fame 
Promiſe for tubſtance, with that Ifa. 11,9. They ſhall net hurs nor de- 
ſiroy in all my haly Mountain. 

ro Andthe * ranſomed of the LORD # ſhal return 

and come to Zion « with Songs, and everlaſting joy u- 
pon their heads ; they ſhal obtain joy and gladnelſs,and 


* ſorrow 2nd ſighing ſhal flee away x. 

£ They whom God ſhall. Reſcue and Redeem from their corporal 
Slavery in Babylon, and eſpecially from their ſpiritual Bondage un- 
der Sin and Satan. Shall come again ro Zen, from whence they had 
been carried away Captive. Or, ſharerurn, to wit, to the Lord 
now mentione:!. ana come to Zion, i.e, joyn themſelves to Gods 
Church ard People. * Which Expreſſions are roo magnificentand 
emphatical. to be ſatisfied by th return of the Jews from Ba"ylon ty 
their own Land, which was accompanied and followed with many 
Sighs an Sorrows, as appears, both from ſacred and other Hiſto- 
rias; and therefore muſt neceſſarily be underſtood of Goſpel-times 
and of the Joy and Happineſs purchaſed by Chriſt for his People, 


Il. 


*Rev.21.4+ 


begun here, and continued to all Etermity. 


C--H A F;: AMAFE 
Sennacherib invaded Fudah,1. he ſendeth Rabſbakeb,- whi by his hlaſphem- 
0:15 per[waſions tempreth Hezgkinh to deſpair, and the people to revol:, 


2 


» Bo / 
a + 


Ow * it came to paſs in the fourteenth year of king 
Hezeckiah, that Sennacherib king of Afſyria came 
LP azainſt all che defenced cities of Judah, and took 
them, 
2 And the king of Aſſyria ſent Rabſhakeh, from 
Lachilh to Jeruſalem, unto king Hezekiah, with a great 
army ; and he ſtood by the conduic of the upper pool 
in the high way of che fullers field. 


*Kings18- 
13-2 Cs 
$2.1. 


| TOr, jecrce 


tay, 


2 Then came forth unto him Eliakim Hilkiahs ſon, 
which was over the houſe, and Shebna the ||{cribe, and 
Joah Aſaphs fon the recorder, 

1T And Rabaſhkeh ſaid untothem,ſay ye now to Heze- 
Kkiah, Thus faith che great king, the king of Afſyria, 
What confdence #s this wherein thou truſteſt ? 


5 I fay, [ai thou ( but they are but F vain words ) || I 
on whom doſt 


+ Heb. 4 
word of [:ps. 
| Or, but have counſel and ſtrength for war ; now 


_—_ thou truſt, that thou rebelleſt againlt me? 
vn 6 lo, thou truſteſt in the * itaffof this Broken reed, 
Egypr, whereon if aman lean, it wil! go into his 


*Ezek. 29. ON » 
6, 7s hand and pierce it; fois Pharaoh king of Egypt to all 


that truſt in him, 


7 Bur if thou ſay to me, We truſt in the LORD our 
GOD; 3s it not he,whoſe high places,and whoſe altars 
Hezekiah hath taken away. and ſaid toJudah, and to 
Jeruſalem, Ye ſhal worſhip before this altar ? 

$ Now therefore give |[|pledges, I pray thee, to my 
maſter the king of Aflyria, and I wil! give thee two 
thouſand horſes, if thou beable on thy part to ſet riders 


uponthem. 


| Or,boft a 


W, 


9 How then wilt thouturn away the face ofone cap- 
tain of the leaft of my mafters ſervants, and put thy 
truſt on Egypt for chariots and for hoiſemen ? 

ro And am I now come up without the LORD 
againſt this land todeſtroy it ? the LORD ſaid unto me, 
Go up againſt this land, and deſtroy it. 

1: QY Then ſaid Eliakim, and Shebna, and Joah unto 
Rabſhakech, Speak, I pray thee, urto thy ſervants in 
the Syrian language, for we underſtand it : and ſpeak 
not to us in the Jews language, in the ears of the peo- 
ple that are on the wall. 

12 T But Rabſbakeh ſaid, Hath my maſter ſent me to 
thy maſter and to thee, to ſpeak thele words ? hath he 
not ſent me to the men that lic upon che wall, that they 
may eat their own dung,and drink rheir own piſs with 
you ? 


12 Then 12k2n Rood, and cricd with a loud 


P ah; 


C nie 


P R 0 V BE XX -B 


O14 ard Ne # Toi ament, 48 hath been ofren obſerved. o It _ be | VOICE in the Tews langua 
ra LICCS, | O 


| 


k 


here, and hereafrer not one unclean Perſon ſhall enter into my | 


f the great King, tne king of Aſſyria. . 1 [7 
14 "Thus faith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive ; 
you, for he ſhall not be able to deliver you. ; | 
| 71 Neither let Hezekiah make you truſtin the LORD, : 
ſaying, The LORD: will ſurely, deliver us, this city | 
{ball not be delivered into the hand of the king of Af ; 
yria. : 
j 


ent, and come out to me, and cat ye every one © 


Hezekiah meurneth and (endeth to Iſaiah to pray for them, 1 


er A A IE tans 


Er Chap RXXVI 


e, and ſaid, Hear ye the word 


* 


16 Hearken not to Hezekiah, for thus ſaith the king 
of Aiſyria, [| Make an agreement with me by a "re- | Or, ſj 


f 72 7avoay 
his vine, andevery one of his fg-tree, and drink ye e- Ok 
very one the waters of his own ciſtern. niche 

17 Unctill I come and take you away to a land like #n. || 
your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of 
_—_ and vineyards. | 

13S Boware leſt Hezekiah perſwade you, ſaying, th 
LORD will deliver us, Hath any 6. the —_ iy 
nations delivered hisland out of the hand of the king 
of Aſlyria 2? | 

19 Where are the gods of Hamath, and Arphad? 
where are the gods of Sepharvaim ? and have they de- 
livered Samaria out of my hand. 

20 Who are they amongſt all the gods of theſe lands, 
that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the 
LORD ſhould deliver Jeruſalem out of my hand ? 

21 But they held their peace, and anſwered him not 
a word, for the kings commandment was, ſaying, An- 
{wer him not. | 

22 T Then came Eliakim the ſon of Hilkiah,that was 
over the houſhold, and Shebna the ſcribe, and Joah 
the ſon of Aſaph the recorder, to Hezekiah with their 


Clothes rene,and told the words of Rabſhakeh. 

The Hiſtory related here,and in the three following Chapters, 1s 
For the ſubſtance of ir, and almoſt wholly, in the tame words con- 
tained, 2 Kings, Chap. 18. and 19g. and 20. Tris fitly incerted here 
to explain and confirm ſome of the foregoing Predictions. It may 
(cem to have been firſt Written by this Prophet, and from him 
co have been taken into the Bock of Kings, to compleat that Hil- 


tory. | | 
© i; A P . XXXVIL | 
a 5. he 
comforteth them, 6, 7. Seunacheriv called away againſ# ths King of the 
Eth:opimns ſendeth a blaſphemous Letter to Hezekiah, 8——=173, his 
frayer, 14 20» Tſaiab's Proph:cy 421 35a 4n Angel layeth the 
Lfſyrians, 36. Sennacherib is ſlain at Nineveh by hisown ſons, 37, 38- © 
Nd* jt came to paſs when king Hezekiah heard zz, 
A. that he rent his clothes, and covered himſelf 
wich fackcloth ; and went into the houſe of the 
LORD. | — 
2 And he ſent Eliakim who was over the houſhold, 
and Shebna the ſcribe, and the elders of the priefts co- 
verett with ſackcloth, unto Iſaiah the Prophet the ſon 
of Amoz. : | | , 
3 And they ſaid unto him, Thus faith Hezekiah, [|Or, pro 
This day 3s a day of trouble, and of rebuke,and of||blafſ-- cation. 


phemy : for the children are come te the Þ birch, &zhere 7 Hom 
zs not ſtrength to bring forth, | | | rnd 


4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear. the words pace. tt 
of Rabſhakeh,whom the king of Aﬀyria his maſter hath is, te 


ſent to reproach the-living God, and will reprove the 9h of 
words whnch the LORD thy God hath heard : where- *M Xe 
fore lift up thy prayer for the remnant 7har 5s © left. + Heb, 

5 So the Servants of king Hezekiah came to Iſaiah. Found, | 

6CAnd Ifaiah faid unto them, Thus ſhall ye ſay un- 
to your maſter, Thus ſaith the LORD, Be not afraid of 
the words that thou haſt heard, wherewith the ſervants 
of the king of Aſſyria have blaſphemed me. Wo 

7 Behold, I will || ſend a blaſt upon him, and he ſhal ||, Or,pze 
hear a rumour and return to his own land, and I will firic int 
cauſe him to fall by the ſword in his own land. . , #m 

8 So Rabſhakeh returned, and found the king of A. 
ſyria warring againit Libnah, for he had heard that he 
was departed from Lachiſh. | 

9 And he heard ſay concerning Tirhakah king of 
Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thee, and 
when he heard i#,he ſent meſſengersto Hezekiah,ſaying, 

10 Thus ſhal ye ſpeak to Hezekiah king of Judah, 
ſaying, Lernot thy God in whom thou truſteft deceive 
thee, ſaying, Jeruſalem Chal not be given intothe hand 
of the king of Aſlyria, | | 
Ii — _— _ _ u_ the kings of Aſſyria 
1ave done to all _ lands deſtroying them ute 
and ſhalt thou be delivered?” | EM mY 

12 Have the Gods of the nations delivered then 
which my fathers have deſtroyed, 2s Gozan, and Ha- 
ran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were 
in Telailar ? | 


FU 4 


, 


72 Where 


- Dt. j fe et hr rg WY 
«< \ 4 <5, 9 & 3 4 p 
© ay TYP 2 6. ES 
__ oO % { 


hap. XXXVIT. FS £ 

| 13 Where is the king of Hamath,; and the king of 
Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena 
and Ivah ? | | 

14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand 
of the meſſengers, and read it : and Hezekiah went 
up into the houſe of the LORD, and ſpread it before 
che LORD. ; 

15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, ſaying, 

16 O LORDof hoſts, God of Iſrael, that dwelleſt 
between the cherubims ; thou artthe God, eves thou 
alone, of all the kingdoms of theearth, thou haſt made 
heaven and earth. 

17 Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear ; open 
thine eyes, O LORD,and ſee : and hear all the words 
of Sennacherib;which hath ſent to reproach the living 
God. X; 

18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Aſſyria have laid 
waſte all the + nations and their countreys : 

19 And have þ caſt their gods into the tire : for they 
| were no gods, but the work of mens hands, wood and 
Heb. gi-ftone, therefore they have deſtroyed them. 

_ © 20 Now therefore, O LORD our God, ſave us from 


Jeb.lands 


2, = 


I A B£©. 


38 And it came to paſs as he was worſhiping in the 
houſe of N3froch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer 
his ſons ſmote him with the ſword, and they eſcaped 
into the land of + Armenia : & Eſar-hadden his ſon reign- 
ed in his ſtead. 


For the underſtanding of this, and the foregoing Chapter, the TG 
Reader is deſired to conſult my Notes upon 2 Kings 181 & 19, ang * 


part of 20, 
C H A P. XXXVIII. 
Hezekiah in his ſickneſs recerveth from Iſaiab a meſſage of death, 1 by Praye 
er, 2 3. hath his life lengthened : the Sun goeth backward for # 
fegn thereof 4 8. his Song of Praiſe to God, 9g 20, 


Is * thoſe days was Hezekzab ſick unto death,8& 1/a;ab 

the prophet the ſon of Ames came unto him, and * * Kingy 

faid unco him, thus ſaith the LORD, + Ser thine houſe 3%,” 

in order, for thou ſhalt die, and not live. pr 
2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, a nd tHebgivs 

prayed unto the LORD. charge cow 
3 Andfaid, Remember now O LORD, Thbeſeech;,,*”? 

thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with 2 

a perfe& heart,and have done that which is good in thy 

fight : and Hezekiab wept Þ ſore. 


4 Then came the word of the LORD to 1/aieb, "Ono ng 
ing, 871g, 


his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know, 
that thou «rt the LORD, ever thou only. 

21 Then Iſaiah the ſon of Amoz ſent unto Hezekiah, 
ſaying, Thus faith'the LORD God of Iſraeb Whereas 


Aſſyria 2 

22 This is the word which the LORD hath ſpoken 
concerning him, the virgin, the daughter of Zion,hath 
deſpiſed thee, and laughed thee to ſcorn,the daughter of 

Jeruſalem hath ſhaken her head at thee. 

22 Whom haſt thou reproached and blaſphamed ? 
and againſt whom haſt thou exalted 4 voice,and lifted 
up _ eyes on high ? eves againſtthe holy One of 11- 
rael. 

24 | By thy ſervants haſt thou reproached the Lord, 
and haſt ſaid, By the multit ude of my chariots am | 

I come up to the height of the mountains, to the fides 
_ by * of Lebanon, and { will cut down Þ the tall cedars 
wer. thereof, and the choice fir-trees thereof ; and I willen- 
bans, ter into tbe height of his border, and || the forreſt of his 
"JET*2 2.6, Carmel. 

_—_ 25 I have digged and drunk water, and with the 
£h:ce- foleof my feet have I dried up all the riversof the || be- 
&r5cheref, fieged places» | 

NG £8 26 || Haft thou not heard long ago, hew T have done 
Worce ef *be ; and of ancient times that I have formed it ? now 
bhereef, have T brought it to paſs, chat thou ſhouldeſt be to lay 
'Or,the ' waſte defenced cities znto ruinous heaps. 

rreft and 2 Therefore their inhabitants were | of ſmall power, 
wF yo they were diſmayed and confounded; they were as the 
beced and grals of the field, and as the green herb, as the graſs on 


. || 
ll Or, the houſe tops, and as corn blaſted before it be grown 
a £10# u 
ard 


"—_—_ 28 But'T know thy ||abode, and thy going out,and 
is thy coming in, and thy rage againſt me, 

bus azo, & 29 Becauſe thy rage againſt me, and thy tumult is 
armed it of come up into mine ears; therefore will I put my hook 

into thy noſe, and bridle into thy lips, and I will turn 

| [thee back by the way by which thou camelſt. 

uw bring 430 And this ſball be aign unto thee, Ye lball eat ris 

4 to pane year ſuch as groweth of ic ſelf ; and the ſecond year 
4 :.;. that which ſpringeth of the ſame,and in the third year 

zerro be Tow Ye, and reap,and planc vineyards, andeat the fruit ; 
l thereof, 

aps. 21 And 7 the remnant that is eſcaped out ofthe houſe 
c >a * of Judah, ſball again take root downward, and bear 
Or, f:+ fruic upward. 

" 2 For out of Jeruſalem ſhall go forth a remnant,and 
F Heb. te 4 they that eſcape out of mount Zion : the * zeal of 
bo bou ; the LORD of hoſts fall do this, 

web that, 33 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD concerning the king 
meinch. of Afﬀyria, He ſhall not come into this city, nor ſhoor 
Heb. :he an arrow there, nor come before ic with ſhields, 
> Caſta bank againſt it. 


A 2 : ngs 


. 


nes ? 


'9- 31. 34 By the way that he came, by the ſame ſhall he 
Thi ap-9. 7+ Feturn, and ſhall not come into this city, ſaith the 
2Kngs LORD. 


yo 
"Vs a 


25 For I will * defend this city to fave it, for mine 
own ſake,and for my ſervant David's ſake. 

36 Then the* angel of the LORD went forth, and 
ſmote in the camp of the Aſlyrians a hundred fourſcore 
and five thouſand : and. when they aroſe early in the 
morning, behold they were all dead corpſes. 

37 So Sennacherib king of Aſſyria departed,and went | 

and returned, and dweltat Nineveh. 


2 Kings 
I-35, 


thou haſt prayed co me againſt Sennacherib king of 


NOT | 


5 Go and ſay to Hezekiah, Thus faith the LORD, 
the God of David thy father, I have heard thy pray - 
ers, I have ſeen thy tears: Behold, I will add unto thy 
days fifteen years. | 
6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the 
- hand of the King of Aſſyria,andI will defend this city. 
7 And this ſhall bea ſign unto thee from the LORD, 
that the LORD will do this thing that he hath ſpo- 
ken. 
8 Behold, I will bring again the ſhadow of the de- 
grees which is gone downin the | ſun-dial of Ahaz ten n 
degrees back ward: ſo the ſun returned tea degrees, by — 


q » 3 rees b 
which degrees it was gone down, g wk by or 


9 The writing of Hezekiah # king ofJudah,when he ſu - 
had been ſick, and was recovered of his ſickneſs, 

# Who was a good Man, and full of the Holy Ghoſt, and inſpi- 
red by him to Write this, both as a Teſtimony of his own Grati- 
rude to God, and for the inſtruttion of. after Ages. 

Io Ifaidb in thecutting off ofmy days c, I ſhall go 
to the gates of the Fgrave 4; I am deprived ofthe re- 
ſidue of my years e. | 

b To and within my felf I Concluded it. c When my days were 
cut off by the Sentence of God, related here, wer. 1. 41 perceive 
Thar I muſt die without any hopes of prevention. The Grave is 
called a Man's long home, Eccleſ 12. 5. and The houſe appointed fer 
all living Men, Job 3o. 23. and Death opens the gates of this Houſe, 
We read alio of the gates of death, Pſal. ge 13.& 107. 18. e Which 1 
might have lived according to the common courſe of Nature, and 
of God. diipenſations ; and whichT expeRted,and hoped to live for 
the Service of God, and of my Generation, 

It I ſaid, Tſhall not ſee the the LORD F, ever the 
LORD in the land of the living ; I ſhall behold man 
no more with the inhabitants of the world þ. 

f T ſhall not enjoy him; for ſeeing is put for enjoying, as hath bee 
frequently noted. g In this World, which 1S % « Oy —_ 
t3+ & 116. 9. 1/8. 53. 8. in his SanQtuary. Which limitation is 
prudently added to intimate, That he expe&ed to ſee God in ano- 
ther place and manner, even in Heaven, Face to Face. þI ſhall 
have no more Society with Men upon Earth. 


12 Mine age is departed 5, and isremoved from me 
as a ſhepherds tent & :T have cutoff/ like a weaver » m 
life : he » will cut me off|| with pining ſickneſs o ;|| Or 
fromday even till night wilt thou make an end of mep. i": 

; The time of my Life is expired. k Which is ealily and ſpeedi- 
ly removed. 7 To wit, by my Sins, provoking God todoit, Or, 

I do declare, and have concluded, "That my Life is or wil! be 
ſuddenly cut off: For Men are oft ſaid in Scripture, to do thoſe 
Things which they only declare and pronounced to be done : as 
Men are ſaid to pollute, and to remit and retein fins, and the like when 
they only declare en and things to be polluted, and Sins 'to be 
remitted or retained by God. »» Who cutteth off the Web from 
the Loom, either when it is finiſhed, or before, according to his 
' Pleaſure. » The Lord, who pronounced this Sentence againſt him. 
; With a conſuming Diſeaſe, waſting my Spirits and Life. Some 
| render this Word, fromthe thrum, from thoſe Threds at the 
' end of the Web, which are faſtened to the Beam. So the fimilitude 
ofa Weaver 1s continued. p The Senſe is, Either 1. this Sickneſs 
will kill me in the ſpace of one day. Or rather 2. thou doſt pur- 
ſue me night and day with continual Pains,and will nor deſiſt till 
thou haſt made a full End of me ; ſo that,I expe that every day 
will be my Laſt day. | 

13 I reckon till morning 9, that as a lion, ſo will he 
break all my bones, from day even to night wilt thou 
make anend of me, 

q When I was filled with Pain, and could not Reſt all the Night 
long, even till Morning, my Thoughts were working and pre- 
ſaging, That God would inſtantly break me to pieces, and that 
every moment would be my laſt ; and the like reſtleſs and diſmal 
Thoughts followed me from morning tillEvening, But he menti- 
ons only the time before Morning, to aggravate his Miſery, that 
he was1o grievouſly Tormented, when others had ſweet Reſt and 


Repole. : 
14 Like j 


+ Heb, 
Mat,16.18 


Chap. XXXVII, 


bs. 


| Chap. * 


| Or, eaſe 
me: 


[Or, haft 
neavered 

me, or mad 
weſcrer,&c 


['Or, on m7 
Yace cam 
freat bita 
termeſs, 

T Heb cho 
bat loved 
Wy ſoul fre; 
the pitd 


7 Heb. 27s 
Pls I: 
7, 


Chap. XX&VIIE 

| GE : : 

| 14 Like a crane or a ſwallow 7, ſo did I chatter 5: 

L did mourts as a dove t ; mine eyes fail with looking up> 

iOr, eaſe ward #2 OLORD,Tam oppreſſed x, || undertake for me z. 

—"— r Or, a crane and a ſwallow ; the conjunction, and, bring here, 

aS it is Hb 3. 11. and elſewhere, underſtood, as 15 manifeſt from 

Jer 8.7. where it is expreſſed with theſe very words. 5 My com= 

plaint and cry was like to the noiſe of a Swallow, quick and fre- 

quent ; and like rhar of a Crane, loud and frightful, And this very 

Compariſon is utzd of Mourners, not only in Scriptures but in 0: 

ther Authors; concerning which, the Learn-d Reader may conſult 

my Latine Synopſis. * Whoſe mournful Tone 1s obſerved, Iſa. 59+ 

It. Ezck. 9. 16. and elſewhere. « Whi'ſt I lifr up mine Eyes and 

Heart to Grd for relief, but in vain. x By my Diſeaſe, which like 

a Serjeant hath ſeized upon me, and 1s Faling me tro the Priſon of 

the Grave. y Stop the execution, and reſcus me out of his 
hands. 


15 What ſhall I fay 2? he hath both ſpoken unto 
me, and himſelf hath done it 4: I ſhall go ſoftly 6 all 
my years in the bitterneſs of my foul c. 

2 I want words ſufficient to expreſs my deep Senſe of God's dealings 
with me. a He did foretel it by his Word, and effe& it by his 
Hand. This Clauſe and Verſe is, Either 1. a Conrinuance of his 
Complaint hitherto deſcribed : God hath paſſed this Sentence upon 
me, and hath alſo put it ia execution, and ro HimT muſt ſubmit my 
ſelf: Or 2. a Tranſition or entrance into t},.e Thankſgiving, which 
is undoubtedly contained in the following Verſes. So the Sence 1s, 
God hath ſent a gracious Mcfſage to me by his Propher, concerning 
the prolongation of my Life ; and he, I doubr nor, will make good 
his Word therein. And this Sence ſeems the more probable; 1. 
Becauſe here is mention of his Nears to come, whereas in tys ſick- 
neſs he expeCed not to live to the end cf a day.2.Becauſe theChaldee 
Paraphraſt, and the Seventy, and Syrrack, and Arabick Interpreters ex+ 
pound ir ſb in their Verſions. 3. Becauſe this ſuits beſt with the 
Context and coherence of this Verſe, borh with the former, and 
with the following Verſe. For as he endeth the forgoing Verſe 
with a Prayer to God for Jonger Life, ſo in this Vecle he relates 
God's gracious Anſwer to his Prayer : And if this Verſe be thus 
underſtood, the next Verſe hath a very convenient Connexion with 
this; whereas it ſeems to be very abrupt and incoherent, if the 
Thankſgiving begin there. 5 I ſhal walk in the courſe cf my Life; 
Either 1. Humbiy, with all humble thankfulneſs ro God for con- 
ferring ſo great a Favour upon ſo unworthy a Perſen : Or 2. 
Ealily and peaceably with leaſure, not like one affrighted, or run- 
ning away from his Enemy : Or 3. By flow and gentle paces, 
as Men common'y ſpin out their Days by degrees unto a juſt 
length, which is not unfitly oppoſed to his former ſtate and time 
of Sickneſs, wherein his Days were ſwifter than a weavers ſhuttle, and 
than a poſt, as Job complained upon the ſame occaſions Job 7. 6. 
and 9. 25. and were cut off like a weavers Web, as he complained, 
wer. 12. c Ariſing from the remembrance of that deſperate Con- 
dition, from which God had delivered me: For great dangers, 
though paſt, are oftenrimes very terrible to thoſe that refle& upon 
them. Burt the Words may be rendred. upon or after ( as this pars 
ticle is rendred,1ſa.18.4. ) the bi:tern:ſs of my ſoul, after the deliverance 
from this bitrer and dangerous Diſeaſe. Which may be compared 
with ver. 17. where he ſaith, For or after peace, I had great bitterneſs, 
23s here he preſageth and afſureth himſelf of rhe contrary, That he 
ſhould have peace after his great bitterneſs. The Chaldes Paraphiaſt, 
renders the Words, Becauſe of my deliverance from bitterneſs of Soul ; 


17 48 


A 


birterneſs being put for deliveravce from bitterneſs, as five is pur for 
Pack of five, as we render it, Gex. 18.'28. and fat for want of fat, Pſal. 
109. 24, and fruits for want of fruits, Lam. 4+ 9. And other ſuch 
like Defe&s there are in the Hebrew, which is a very conciſe Lan- 
guage. 


15 O LORD, by theſe things d men live, and in all 


Or, aff theſe things is the life of my ſpirit e: ſo || wilt thou re- 
| wvered cover me, and make me ro live f. 


J m1, or made @ By vertue of thy gracious Word or Promiſe, and powerful 
meſcrer,$Sc. Work ; by thy Promiſes, and thy pzrformances of them, mentioned. 
in the forg;oing Verſe. This place may be explained by comparing 
it with Deut, 8. 11. Man dcth not live by bread, but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord, The Sence is, Not I only, bur 
all Men do receive and recover, and hold their Lives by thy Favour, 
and the Word of thy Power: And therefore it is not ſtrange, 
Thar one Word of God hath brought me back from the very jaws 
of Death. e Andas it is with other Men, ſo harh it been with me 
in a ſpecial manner ; for in theſ: above all other things #s the life 
of my ſpirit or Soul, i, e. either the comfort ( which is ſometimes called 
Life ) of my Sprit : or rather, That Life, which is in my Body, 
from my Spirit or Soul united to it. f Or, and or for thou haſt reco- 
wvered me, &c. to wit, by theſe things. 


17 Behold, || for peace I had great bitterneſs g, but 
ah pa 7 thou haſt in love ro my foul þ delivered jt from the 
wa Pi of corruption; for thou haſt caſt all my ſins behind 
t Heb.rhoy MY back 7. 
baft loved & My Health and Proſperity was quickly changed into birter 
myſoul from Sicknets and Affliftion. Or, as others render ir, My great bitterneſs 
Ie pity was wnto peace, was turned into Proſperity, or became the occafion 
of my ſatery and further advantages: For that drove me to my 
Prayers, and Prayers prevailed with God for a gracious Anſwer, 
ardthe prolonging of my Life. þ In kindaeſs to me, the Soul be. 
ing oft put for the Man. This is an emphatical Circumſtance : For 
ſometimes God prolongs mens days in anger, and in order to their 
greater miſ-ry. 7 Thou haſt forgiven thoſe ſins which brought 
this evil upon me, acd upon that account haſt removed the puiſy- 
ment of them; which ſh-weth that thou didſt rhis in love to me. 
The phraje is borrowed from the cuſtom of men, who when they 
would accurate;y fee and obſerve any thing, ſer it before their Faces 
and when they deiire, and reſolve not to look upoa any thing, turn 
cheir backs upon ir, or caſt it behind them. i 


18 For & the 7 * grave cannot praiſe thee 7, death 


— 


| l' Or, on my 


race came 


7 Heb. He. 
| Pls ] F» 
7, 


v 


" 
s 


cannot celebrate thee 2 they that 
cannot hope for thy truth -. Ty 

k In this andthe following verſe. he declares Gods defign in dc- 
Iivering him, that he might praiſe him in his Church ; which if he 
had died he cou!d not have done. . ! , Thedead are not capable of 
glorifying thy Name among men upon Earth - which, I deiire and 
determine to do. , See the like expreſſions, Pſal.; 6..5. and 30, g and 
88. 10. &c., The Grave is put for the perſons lodged in ir by a Me- 
ronymy. m They cannot expett nor receivethe accompliſhment of 
chy promiſed goodneſs in the Land of the Living. ..:. .., , _ 

19 The Living, the living, he hall praiſe thee », as 
Ldothis day,the tather to the children (hall make known 
thy truth 0. FE: ANTE LIES TELLS © 17; 

n They are eſpecially obliged to it, and they only have this prj- 
viledge. 0 They ſhal nor only praiſe thee whileſt they live, bur 
take care to propagate and perpetuate thy Praiſe and Glory to all 
ſucceeding Generations. , | EI CH, i 

20 The LORD was rendy to ſave me p, therefore 
we q will ſing my ſongs to the ſtringed inſtruments 7, 
all the days of our life, in the: houſe of the LORD, 

p Was a preſent help ro me, ready to hear,. and ſuccour me ups 
on my prayer in my great extremity.. q Both I and my -People, 
who are concerned in me, and for me will ſing forth thoſe ſongs of 
Praiſe which ate due eſpecially for me, for Goa's great mercy to me. 
r according to the cuſtom of thoſe times. 


* Ifajah had ſaid, Let them take a lump of G 2 Fink 1 


Chap. XXXIX xk 


g0' down into thee pic 


- 


21 For ' 
figs, and lay is for a plaiſter upon the boil, and he jhall 2% 7-' + | 
recover s. CZ > OPT RS : 

5 This was rather a ſign appointed by Ged, than a natural means 
of the cure: For if it had a natural faculty to ripen a ſore, yer it 


could never cure ſuch a dangerous and peſtilenrial Diſeaſe ar Jeaſt in 
ſo little time. 


22 Hezekiah alſo had ſaid 7, Whar is the ſign, that] 
ſhall go up « to the houſe of the LORD x .. 

£ Or, For H-zekiah had ſaid, had asked a ſign, which is here ad- 
ded as the reaſon, why Iſaiah ſaid what is related in the foregoing 
verſa : to wit, in anſwer to Hezekiah's queſtion. « Within three 
days, as is more fall related, 2 Kings 20. 5,8. . x For thither ke de- 
ſigned in the firſt place to go, partly that he might pay his vow and 
thankſpgivings to God, and partly that he might ingage the people to 
praiſe Gcd with him, and for him. 


CHAP XAXXIS .-: 

The King of Babel ſendeth Ambaſſadors with Letters, and « Preſent to Hezekie h 
ah: who ſhexeth them all his Treaſures, 1, 2. Iſaiah foretelleth him of ( 
the Babyloniſh Captivityy 4 7. His Reſignation, 8. { 

T * chat tine Merodach- baladan the ſon of Bala- « 
dan king of Babylon, ſent letters and a preſent , 

to Hezekiah : for he had heard that he had been ſick 

and was recovered. 


2 AndHezekiah was glad of them, and ſhewed them. . = 
the houſe of his || precious things, the filver, and the [| Or, $pi« | 
gold, and the ſpices, and the precious ointment, and © it 
the houſe of his || + armour, and all that was found in 0M » Jens- 
his treaſures: chere was nothing in his houſe, nor in + Heb-veſ. 1 
all his dominion, that Hezekiah ſhewed them not. ſlr, or, in- 

3 Then came Ifaiah the prophet unto king Hezeki- f7##i:. 
ah, and ſaid unto him, What ſaid theſe men ? and from 
whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah ſaid, 
They are come from a far countrey unto me, ever from 


Babylon, 


4 Then faid he, What have they ſeen in thy houſe ? 
and Hezekiah anſwered, All that is in my houſe have 


they ſeen: there is nothing among my treaſures that T 
have not (hewed them. | 


5 Then ſaid Ifaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of 
the LORD of hoſts. 


6 Behold, the days. come that all that # in thine houſe. 
and that which thy fathers have laid up in ſtore until 


this day, ſhall be carried to Babylon, nothing ſhall be 
left, ſaith the LORD. | 


7 And of thy ſons that ſhall iſſue from thee, which 
chou (balc beger, ſhall they take away ; and they ſhall 
be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon. | 

$ Then faid Hezekiah co Iſaiah, Good 3s the word 
of the LORD which thou haſt ſpoken : he ſaid more- 


over, For there ſhall be peace and truth in my days. 
The Hiſtory contained in this Chapter is related in the ſame 
words, 2 Kings 20.12, &c, only he who here is called Xrodach is 
there called Berodach, meerly by the change of one Lerter, which 
is very uſual in the Hebrew Language, eſpecially in propzr Names. as 
Dimon +s pur for Dibon, Iſa. 15. 9 and the ſame man is called Ncbu- 
chadnietſar, Nebuchadretſar. * This King is called; Merodach from the I 
dol ſo called, Fer. 5o. 2. and Baladan from his fathers Name. Bur 
whether this man was an A4ſſjrian or a M:de or a Babylonian it is not 
eaſie to determine nor worth whileto enquire. Bur thisis certain 
that abour this time there were Wars between the Hjſprians, and the 
Babylonians, the ulue whereof was, that the latter tubdued the for- 


mer. ©2 Og 0 
CHAP, XL. 

The Prophet having now foretold the Babyoniſh Captivity, chap. 
39. 6, 7+ doth here aras his People againſt it by rhe contideration of 
their cerrain deliverance our of it, and their bletled condition after. 
ir, 2S ia «rher things lo eſpecia)ly in the coming of tle 3/25, and 


che great and glorious priviledges conferred upon Goa's Church 
and People in his days, 
y X 


2 Kings 


8 | 2, Vc. 


The 


), XL 

The Preaching of the Golp:! by Toln Baptiff ard the Apoſiles, 1 ſ F. 
The Power and W. ſaom of God ia governing the World, 12 17. The 
felly.of laolatry, 18———26. God knowerl) the flaze of his People : and 
beth can and will protett them, 27 31. 


| Exp ye, comfort ye my people ay faith your 
God 


a Ye Prophets and Miniſters of the Lord, which now are, or 
hereafcer ſhal be, deliver this comfortable meſſage from me to my 
People, that they may not ſink under their burdens. 

2 Speak ye comfortably to Jeruſalem, and cry un- 
beare. to her b, that her || warfare c is accomplithed, that her 
dr, #- iniquity is pardoned 4 : for ſhe hath received of the 


LORD'S hand * double for all e her {ins. 

b. Proclaim it in my name. & The time of her ſervitude, and 
captivitys and miſery. I am reconciled to her ; I will nor 1m- 
4 ——— ſin to her, to puniſh ber any longer for ir. e Not rwice as 
» Dan. 9* nuch as her fins deſerved, for ſhe her ſelf confeſſed. the contrary, 
1 Ezra 9+ 13+ Lam. 3- 22+ but aboundantly enough to anſwer God's 
deſign in this chaſtiſement, which was ro humble and reform them, 
and to warn others by their example,Dowbleis oft pur for abundant]y, 
a$'1ſs. 61. 7. Jer. I6. 18. and 17. 18. God here ſpeaks of himſelf 
after the manner of men, and compareth himſelf to a tender-hearted 
Farther, who when he hath corre&ed his Child for his miſdemean- 
our relenteth and repenteth of his ſeverity, and caſteth his Rod a- 


Way. . 
: 7 C * The voice f of him that criethin the wilder- 
Mal. 4.t. nels g, Prepare ye the the way þ of the LORD 5, make 


er. 3-3- ſtraight & in the deſert a high way for our God. | 
ark 1 3+ F An abrupt and imperfe& ſpeech, ſuch as there are many in the 
e 3- 4+ Hibrew Language. Methinks I hear a voice: Or, a voice ſhal be 
WI. 23- jeard: g Which words declare the place either, 1» Where the cry 
was made : Or, 2. Where the way was to be prepared, as It 15 
expreſſed in the following Clauſe, which is added to explain this. 
And ſuch places being commonly path-leſs, and many ways 1ncom- 
modious to paſſengers, it was the more neceflary to prepare a Way 
there. But both come to one thing, for the cry was to be 1n that 
place Which was to be prepared. This place ſeems to be under- 
ſtood immediately of the deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon, and 
of ſmoothing their paſſage from thence ro Judes, which lay through 
a'great Wilderneſs; but ultimately and principally concerning their 
Redemption by the Meſſiah, whoſe coming is uſhered in by the Cry 
of John the Baptiſt, who did both cry and prepare the way ia the 
Wilderneſs, as we read, Mat. 3+ 1, &c: Where this Text is dire- 
Qaly expounded of him. | But withal the terms of Wilderneſs and 
Deſert, ſeem to be here chiefly u{cd in a metaphorical ſenſe, to ex- 
preſs the deſolate and forlorn condition of the Jewilh Nation, and 
eſpecially of the Gentile-world, when Chriſt came to redeem them; 
for ſo theſe words are frequently uſed in Prophetical Writings, as 
hath been noted in divers places. þ You to whom this work be- 
Imgs. He alludes to the cuſtom of Princes who ſend Pioneers be- 
fore them to prepare the way through which they intend to paſs. 
The meaning is only chis, That God ſhal by his Spirit ſo ditpoſe 
mens hearts, and by his Providence ſo order rhe Empires and affairs 
of the World, as to make way for the accompliſhment of this Pro- 
miſe. #5 For the Lord, as ir is expounded in the next Claule, that the 
Lord may walk in it : Which though it may be underſtood of their 
" coming out of Babylor, when God might in ſome ſorr be ſaid ro march 
in the head of them, condutting and preſerving them, yet it was 
much more evidently and eminenty fulfilled, whea Chriſt who was 
and is God bleſſed for ever, came into the World in a vilible man- 
ner. & Either gire#, in oppoſition to crooked, or even and level, 
In oppoſition to the Mountains and Valleys mentioncd in the nexe 
verſe. 
4 Every valley ſhall be exalted, and every mountain 
and hill ſhall be brought low : and the crooked ſhall be 


made || ſtraight, and the rough places || plain 7, 

Braight . T This is only a more particular explication of that which was 
place, generally expreſſcd, wvirſe 3. The ſenſe is, All obſtruftions ſhal be 
1 Or,e plainremoved, and the way made in all reipeQts convenient and eaſic for 


F the paſſenger. 
5 And the glory of the LORD ſhall be revealed », 


and all fleſh » [ball ſee ir together ; tor the mouth of che 
LORD hath ſpoken 3: o. 


» $0 it was in ſome ſort, when God brought them out of Baby- 
lon, which was a glorious'work of God, but far more properly and 
eminently, when Chriſt who was the glorious God, was manifeſt 
ed in the fleſh, and gave much clearer and fuller diſcoveries of 
God's glorious wiſdom, and holineſs, and goodneſs, and other 
divine perfe&ions than ever yet bad been imparted to mankind and 
to the Ehurch. z All Nations, both Jews and Gentiles. o Though 
this mayſcem\ incredible, yer God is able to accompliſh ir. 

OY The voice ſaid p, Cry. And he ſaid q, What ſhall 


I cry ? * All flehh is graſs,and all the goodlineſs thereof 


-o 52.1, #5 as the flower of the field r. 


| _  p God ſpeaks unto his Prophets or Miniſters q The Propher 
Sing defires to know God's mind, and his meflage. r» The Prophet ha- 
"2 Pet. L.2 4. ving foretold glorious and wonderful things, which God had de- 
* *" clared and determined to do,and ſuſpeQting that men would hardly 
believe them ; he confirmeth their Faith, and the certainty of the 
thing in this, and the two next verſes, by repreſenting to their | 
minis the vaſt difference between the nature, and word, and work 
of men and of God. All that men are or have, yea their higheſt 
accompliſhments, but are like the graſs or flower of the tield, 
weak and vaniſhing, ſoon nipt avd brought to nothing ; but 
God's word is like himſelf, tmmutable and Irreſiſtible : and 
therefore as the mouth of the Ld, and not of man, hath ſpoken 
theſe things, as was ſaid, verſe 5. ſo doubt not but they ſhal be ful- 
fiiled. 

7 The graſs withereth, the flower fadeth ; becauſe 


| * pſal. 147. * the Spirit of the LORD « bloweth upon it : ſurely 


" 18: Hoſe 13. the people t is grals. 
I5. s Or, Tie breath, 8&5. as this word ts rendred, Pſal. 147. 18. the 


: "Y f0 


1! Or, # 
Y, 


TM I 24 H. 


| 


Chap. XL, 
wind, as it frequently ſignifies, which hath this ef upon graſs 
and flowers, P/2/. 103. 16. Jam, 1, n. # The ſame which te called 
Fl ſb, and faid rhey were Graſs, ver. 6, Which that he miphr prove 
in this verſe, he firſt declares the frail nature of Grafs and F owers. 
and then he applies rhis to the People : Or, this People, the Jews no 
leſs than the Gentiles; for here is an Article 1n the Hebrew Text 
which is frequertly emphatical and reſtrictive. ; 


8 Thegraſs withereth, the flower fad:th, but the * * - * UG. 
word of our God ſhall ſtand for ever «. 34.1 = 
# Whatſoever God hath ſaid ſhal infa'libly come to paſs. J. 25, 


9 [|] O Zion that bringeſt good ridings x, get thee up [|0c,07; 
into the high mountain y: || Oſeruſalem, char bringeſt Fat telleſ 
ood tidings, lift up thv voi ith ſtrength + life jr wp, © ding 
g 1di0gs, litt up thy voice with ſtrength ; lift 3c up, 7% 2:4. 
be not afraid z: ſay unto the cities of Judah a, Behold |Or os; 
your God b. that tele, 
x O Zion, to whom the glad tidings of the coming of Chriſt into £994 tidings 

the World, and of rhe Salvation of Mankind by him wad 917g 70 "83g 
bliſhed by Chriſt and his Apoftles, ar.d by whom they were publiſh» ©» 

ed to all Nations. But the words are otherways rendred in the Mar« 

gent, and by others, O thou ( wholozyer thou art, Prophet or A- 

poſtle ) zhat bring-ſ? good tidings to Zion. So Sion is not the Deliver. 

er butthe Receiver of theſe Good Tidings, as ſhe is in the Parallel 

place, 1/a. 52. 7. Bur our Tranſlation ſeems to agree better with 

the Hebrew Text, -in which the Particle, unto, is not here expreſſed 

as It 1s in the latter part of the Veiſe; by comparing wh:ch Part 
with the former, it ſeems moſt probable, that Zion or Feryſalem is 

the Speaker or Publiſher, and the Cirzes f Judah the Hearexs. y Thatx 

thy voice may be better heard, as appears from the next Branch of the 
. Verſe, See Judges 9. 7+ 1 Sam. 26.13, 14. % Leſt thou ſhouldeſt be 

found a falſe Proph:r; for it ſha} certainly be fulfilled. a To all 
-my People in the ſeveral places of their abode, whether Cities or 
Counrries. Only henames Cirzes to inctimacegthat they alſo, though 
they ſhould be deitroyed, yet ſhould afterwards be rebuilr, and in- 
habirted again. b Take notice of this wonderful Work, and olori- 
ous appearaiice of your God, who will be viſibly preſent with you, 
ſo that men may point at him and ſay, Behold bire ke 55. 
10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come || with [Or,aga;- ? 

ſtrong hand c, and his arms thall rule for him d; be- the frog. 
hold, * his reward js with him e, ||and his work be- * 2-6: 


fore him fo 


c Wirth invincible ſtrength conquering all his Enemies. The rf ure 
word Hand or Arm, may very w<cll bz underſtood out of rhe "ON, pay 


lowing Clauſe. & He thal need no Succours, for his own Power 
tha] be ſufficient to govern his People, and to deſtroy his Adverſa« 
ries- e He comes furniſhed with ICCOMPences as well of Mercy and 
Bleſſings for his Friends and Followers, as of Juſtice and Vengeance 
for his Enemies. f He carrieth on his work or deſign effeftually 
ſo as nonecan hinder him: for that is ſaid in Scripture to be before a 
mas which is in bis Power, as Gen. 20. 15. and 24. $1, &c. Or 
Work is here put for thereward of the Work, as it is, Iſa. 49. 4» and 65, 
7. and elſewhere, And ſothe ſame thing is repeated in other words, 


aSis verv uſual. PET 
11 He jhall ® feed his flock like a ſhepherd, he ſhall * cz. 49, 


gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his 10. Exek. 
bolome, and thall gently lead thoſe || that are with 34 23* 
'oun Joh. 10. ifs 
young, g. [| Or, that 

g He thal perform all the the Offices of a tender and faithful ive ſuck, 
Shepherd towards his People, c:rrying himſelf with great Wiſdom® 
and Cendeſcenſion, and Compatlſion to every one of them according 
ro their ſeveral Capacities and Infirmities. 

12 Who hath meaſured the waters in tke hollow of 
hand 4 ? and meted: out heaven with the ſpan, and 
comprehended the duſt of the earth in + a meaſure, and 
weighed the Mountains in ſcales, and the hills in a bal- 
lance ! 

h i,e. Who can meaſure them ? for indicative Verbs in the Hes : 
brew Language are often raken potentialy; who can do this and the 
following things butGod?And this diſcourſe of God's infinite Power ; 
and Witdom, is here conveniently added ro give them the Creater 
aſſurance that Ged was able, as he had declared himfelt -il- 

Jing, . to do theſe great and wonderful things which he had pro« 
miſed ; and rhart neither men nor falſe gods were able to hinder 
him in it. God is: here compared to a mighty Giant, ſuppoſed 
to be ſo big that he can take up, and hold all the waters of the Sea 
and Rivers of the whole World in one hand, and ſpan the Hea- 
vens, and then take up and weigh the whole Earth with the other 


hand- 

13 5 * Who hath + directed the ſpirit of the LORD, » 4, .j 
or, being Þ his counſellour hath taught him i ? 22. &' 36 
; Who did God either need or take to adviſe him in any of his 2 2; 23. 
Works, either of Creation or the Government cf the World - Were Rom. 11. 34 
they nor all the eff<&s of his own ſole infinit Wiſdom 2 Therefore 1 Cor+2.164 

though a!l the Nations of the World contrive and cenſpire againſt f Heb. 
him, and againſt this Work of his, as indeed they will do, yet his weightds 
own Counicl thal confound all their devices, and carry on his Work Prov. 16. 14 
in ſpight of chem. + Heb. mu 
14 With whom took he counſel, and who + inſtruq- of bis cu 


ed him, and taught him in the path of judgement k,#" b.madi 
and taught him knowledge, and ihewed ro him the way nn 
of } underftanding ? Sand | 
k How to walk and manage all his Affairs with good Judgement + Heb. 
and Diſcretion. wnderfi 


15 Bchold, the nations 1, are as a drop of a Bucket "5" 

22, and are counted », as the ſmall duſt of the balance oz 

behold,he taketh up the Ifles p as a very little thing. 

! All the Nations of the World; » Compared with all the Wa« 

ter in the Bucket wherein are innumberable drops : ſuch are they 

if compared with God. » By him, and in compariſon of him» 

o Which accidentally cleaves ro the Ballance, bur makes no altera« 

rion inthe weight, p Thoſe numerous and vaſt Countrics to which 
they 


# Heb. 


fierce. 


hap 
$/007-4.35* 


| (18:46 5. 
14. 17--9* 


MEIIOER, . 0 


Cth.41-7 « 
; al 45. I 2+ | 
\. 10.3. | 


nds ls on} ſn A ad ws wa 


J+Heb. is 
; of ohla- | 


100e [ 


| 099.41.7. 


f [0r, him 


» fetech, S 
2760 9, $, t 
Jahfog'2. 


44424. © 
ln, 10. 12. 


"Po149 4. 


\ 


Ch-41-7 « 
Joi 44. 12+ 
W I9%3. 


AAS. 


J+yeb. is 
Jr of obla- 
lth 


; (he2.41.7. 


2 [Or, him 
tar ſertesþ, 
lic, 

"0 9.8, 
Jablog'2. 


(is 44+2.4. 
if, IOe 12. 


, 
18:46- 5+ 4 ; ; 
ings likeneſs will ye compare unto him ? 


* XL. | 18 A 


they went from 7uca by Sea,which are commonly called 77ergas hath 
been of: oblerve:. 
i6 And I cbanon 5s not ſufficient to burn, nor the 
beaits thereof tutfcienrt for a burnr offering 4. | 
q And aithong! he is pleaſed ro accepr of poor and ſmall Sacrt- 
fices from his People, yer if men were to offcr a Sacrifice agreeable 
ro his inflaite excclleacy, rhe whole Foreſt of Lebanon could nor af- 
f rd cither a ſufficient number of Beaſts to be ſacrificed : Or, a ſut- 
ficiear quantity of Wood to conſume the Sacrifice. 
17 All nations before him r _ * nothing,and they 


$7=435 are counted to him « lefs than nFfhing r, anc vanity. 


r Either in his eyes;Orc,being fer againſt himgas this Hebrew word 
properly and moſt uſua'ly tignifies. 5 Either in his Judgement : | Or, 
in compariſon of him. t Leſs rhan a rhing of noughr, or of ao ac* 
count or worth : Or, as others render it, For nothing. 

138 To whom then will ye * liken God « ? or what 


& This is a proper inference from the foregoing diſcourſe of God's 
immenſe and intinite greatneſs ; from whence he rakerh occaſion ro 
ſhew both che folly of thoſe that make mean and viſible repreſenta- 
tions of God, as not the Gentiles only but even ſome of the Jews did; 
2n:| rhe utter inability of Men or Idols to give any oppoſition to 
God in the doing of theſe grear Works. And this diſcourſe of rhe 
madneſs of IJolaters proſecuted both here, and in the following 
Chapter, was detigned by God, as a neceſfary antidote whereby the 
Fer s might be preſerved from the contagion of Idolatry, to which 
God ſaw they now had ſtrong inclinations, and would have many 
and great temprations when they were in Captivity. 

19 The. workman melteth a graven image x, and * 
the goldſmith ſpreadeth it over with gold y, and caſteth 
ſilver Chains &. 

x He melteth ſome baſe Metal into a mould, which giveth it the 
form of an Image, which afterwards is graven or carved to make it 
more exact and amiable. Thus the Image owetrh all irs excellency 
to the Earth for the matrer of ir, and ro the art of man for the form 
or faſhion of ir. y Beaten our into Leaves or Plares. z Either 
for Ocnainents : Or, rather for uſe, to faſten ir toa Wall cr Pillar, 
leſt it ſhould fall down, and be broken in pieces, Which is ſpoken 
in way of ſcorn and deriſion of ſuch ridiculous deities as needed 
ſuch ſupports. 


20 He thet Þ 3s ſo impoveriſhed that he hath no ob-. 


lation a, chooſeth a tree that will not rot ; he ſzeketh 
unto him a cunning workman b to prepare a graven 
image that * ſhall noc be moved c. 

a That he can hardly procure Money ſufficient to buy the mean= 
eſt ſacrifice for his god. b He is ſo mad vpon his Idols, that he 
will one way or other find money to procure the choiceſt materials, 
and the help of the beſt Artiſt ro make his Idol. c Which afcer all 
this ccſt and arty cannot ſtir one ſtep out of irs place to give you a- 
ny help. ; 

21 Have ye not known «? have ye not heard? hath 
it not been told you from the beginning e? have you 
not underſtood from the foundation of the earth ? 

d To wir, God to be the only true God, the Maker and Gover- 
nour of the Wor!d, and all its Inhabitants: how can you be igno- 
rant of ſo evident a truth ? He addreſleth his ſpeech to the Idola» 
trous Gentiles, e To wir, of the World, as the next Clauſe explains 
it: Were not theſe infinite perfeQtionsof God manifeſtly diſcovered 
to all Mankind by the Creation of the World. 

22 || I « he that fitteth f upon the circle of the earth 
z, and the inhabitants thereof are as graſhoppers þ, that 
* ſtretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and ſpreadeth 
them out as a tent to dwell in 5. 

f As a Judge or Governour upon his Throne: g Ory above the 
Circle, &c- far above this round Earth, even in the higheſt Hea- 
vens; from whence he locketh down upon the Earth,where men ap- 
pear to him like Graſhoppers. He alludes ro one that looks down 
upon the Earth below him from ſome high place. As here we have 
the Circle of the Earth, ſo elſewhere we read of the Circle of Heaven, Job 
22.14- and of the Circle of the Decp,or Sea, Prov.8.27. becauſe the torm 
of che Heaven, and Earth and Sea. is circular and round, as is Evideat 
both from Senſe, and from the Principles of Philoſophy. ' þ Small 
and contemprible in his ſight. Compare Numb. 13. 33. # For the 
benefir of the Earth and of Mankiad, . that all parts might partake 
of its comfortable influences. See on Job 9. 8. Pſal. 104. 2. 


23 That bringeth the * princes to nothing &, he 


"12.2T1+ maketh the judges of the earth as vanity. 
£107. 40 þ That can at his pleaſure deſtroy all the great Potentates of the 


World. 


24 Yea, they I ſhal not be planted, yea, they ſhall 'If:nds he here means, as he doch Chap. 40. 15. and elſewhere, 


not be ſown m»,, yea, their ſtock ſhal not take root in 
the earth; and he ſhal alſo blow upon them », and 
they (ball wither, and the whirlwind thall take them a- 
way as ſtubble; 

I The Princes and Judges laſt mentioned. »» They ſhal take no 
root, asit follows, for Planting and Sowirg are in order to taking root, 
and are neceſſary to it. They ſhal not continue and flouriſh, as 
they have vainly imagined, but ſha] be rooted up and periſh, as is 
declared in the reſt ofthe Verſe, » Blaſt them, as a vehement eaſt- 
wind doth Plants. 

25 To whom then will ye liken me o, or ſhal I be 
equal ? ſaith the holy One. 


o He repeateth what he {aid wer. 18. that he might oblidge them 


to the more ſerious and frequent conſideration ef the abſurdity of ſtrengthning him to the work, . þ Heb. Righteouſucſs, which is put. 


the Idolarry. 


26 Lift up your eyes on high p, and behold who! 36: 11. and Deceir for a Deceirful Man, Pſal. 10g. 2. For it ises 
| hath created theſe things 9, that bringeth out » their 'vi4ent from the following words, chat he ſpake here of a Per-, 
'2{.145.4. hoſt by number s, hs * calleth chem all by names ; by 


the greatneſs of his might, for that he is ſtrong in pow= 
er z, not one faileth x. | | 

Þ To the high and ſtarry Heaven, as appears from the following 
words. 4 Which you ſee on High, the Hoſt of Heaven as it fol- 
lows. r That at firſt brought them our of nothing, and from day 
to day brings them forth, making them to riſe and ſer in their aps 
pointed & fixed rimes. s Asa General brings forth kis Army into the 
Field,and thereMuſters them. As aMaſter callerh ali theMembers of 
his Family. « Which work is a Certain and evident proof of God's 
infinite power. x Either ro appear when he calleth them ; or to do 
the work to which he ſends them. ' : ©: TRL . ; 

27 Why ſaiſt thou y, - O Jacob, and ſpeakeſt, O If- 
rael, My way & is hid from the LORD, and my judge- 
ment # is paſſed over from my. God 6 ? 

y, Inthy heait : why doſt thou give way to ſuch jealoufies con-" 
cerning thy God, of whoſe infinir Power:-and Wiſdom, and Goods 
neſs, there are ſuch evident demonſtrations given to all Mankind, 
and to thee ina lingularmanner? - z The courſe and conditiors of 
my Life. He takes no notice of my Prayers and Tears and Suffcr- 
ings for his Name, but ſuffers my Enemies to abute me ar their 
pleaſure, . and doth nor attempt to reſcue me out of their. hands« 
This Complaiat is uttered in the name of the People being prophe- 
tically ſuppoſed to be in Captivity. # Eirher-r.: My Puniihment: 
Or, rather 2. My Cauſe, as this word is moſt commonly uſed. 
God hath negleQed to plead my Cauſe, and to give Judgement for 
me againſt mine Enemies, as he hath formerly done. ' þ God bath 
diſmifled it, and left it and me in the hands of mine Enemies, and 
now our Caſe is ſo deſperate that God cannot help us: for which, 
Sony they compared themſelves to dry Bones Jying in the Grave, 

zek. 37. ena 4p hea £ | 

28 Haſt thou not known ? haſt thou not heard, that 
the everlaſting God, the LORD, the Creator of the 
ends of the earth « fainteth nor, neither is weary 4 ? 
* there is no ſearching of his underſtanding e. y 

c Of all the Earth and the Inhabitants thereof from one end to 
another. He ſcems to mention the ends or utmoſt bounds, becauſe 
they might ſeem to be more our of the reach and care of God's Pros 
vidence, as being moſt remote from Jeruſalem, + the only place of 
God's ſolemn and publick Worthip in the World, , aad-being then: 
thoughs to be uninhabired. The Argument is: clear and ſtrong : 

God who matle all, even the moſt deſolate and barbarous parts of the 
Earth, and conſequently takes care of them, will nor negle& his 
own Land and People. & He is not by age or hard Jabour becomes 
weak and unable ro help his People, as men are apt to be. « e His 
Counſels by which he governeth all the World, and in a moſt par 
ticular manner thine affairs, are far above the reach of thy under- 
ſtanding : and therefore thou doeſt ignorantly and fooliſhily in paſ< 
ſing ſo ralh a Centure upon the Ways and Works of the infinitely 
Wite God. ; x49 LPS bn , 

29 He giveth power to the faint, and to bem that 
have no might he encreaſeth ſtrength f _ | | 

f He hath itrength enough not only for himſelf, bur for all, e- 
ven the weakeſt of his creatures, whom he can eaſily ſtrengthen to 
bear all their burdens, aod ro vanquiſh all their. opprefſors. . _ * 

30 Even the youths g (bal faint, and be weary, and 
the young men ſhal utrerly fall : bat 

£ The youngeſt and ſtrongeſt men, left to themſelves, or without 
God's help, or which do not wait upon God ; which is eafily un=- 
derſtood from the oppoſition in the following Verſe. X RET > 

31 Bur they that waic upon the LORD 5, ſhal + 4 Het; 
renew their ſtrength 5, they thal mount up with wings change, 
as eagles &, they thal run and not be weary, and they 
hal walk and not faint /. | | 

þ That rely upon him for ſtrength to bear their burdens, 2nd 
for deliverance from them in due time. ; Shall grow ſtronger and 
ſtronger in Faith and Patience, and Fortitude, whereby they ſhal 
be more than Conquerors over all their Enemies and Adverſities. 

k Which flyes moit i{trongly and ſwifrly, and high our.of the reach, 
of all danger. ! They fhal beenabled io run or walkin their way as 
they pleaſe, without any wearineſs. 

CHAP. AII. 
God call:d Abraham, and was with him : the Nations Idolatrous, 1 $, 

Iſrael encouraged by Promiſes of ſafety and deliverance, 9——20. Tae 

vanity of Idols, 21 24. Redemption by, Chrift, 25—29, 
RE ſilence before me a, O ilands 6, and let the 

7 people renew zheir {trength c 2 let chem come + Heb] 
near 4, then lec them ſpeak e'; let us come near toge- 242%, 
ther to judgement. Fe LH] 

s Attend diligently ro my plea, and then anſwer it if you can. 

b O you Ishabitants of Iflands, as the n:xr Clauſe explains this. By 


x . 


* pſc 149.5) 


——— 


. Countries remote from Judea, inhabited by the Tdolatrous Gentiles; 

with whom he here debaterh his Cauſe! «© Strengthen themſelves 
' to maintain their cauſe ag2inſt me; ler them unite all their {trength 
; together. 4 Unto me that we may ſtand rogerher, and plead our 
Cauſe before any indifferent Judge. _e I will give them fiee liberty 
ro ſay what they can on their own behalf. NEG ET > 

2 Who f raifed up g | the righteous man þ * from f Heb: 

the Eaſt 3, called him to his foot &, * pave the nations 7oſ- 
| before him, and made him rule over kings 1? he gave _ 
hems as the duſt 2 to his ſword, - and as driven itubble to ;,* ;.. 
his bow. . Hp 1 * Seq Gaya, 

f What man or God? Was it not my alone work > The Ido's 14-141&@%» 
were ſo far from aſliſting me, that they did their utmoſt to oppoſe 
me in it. £ Into Beeing and Power, ſtirring up his Spirit, and 


for a man of Righteouſneſs, as Pride is put for a Proud man, Pſal. 


But who this Perſon is, is much difpured by Iaterpreters, 
Soune underſtand it of Chriſt. And doub:icls the Perſon here 


TX 2 ſpoken 


Chap. 46; | 


n 
b 
1 
0 
4/4 
"wr 


1 © 2 ©» WP -/ 7 Chap. XLk 


which ſome of them beat out upon theAnvil,and others ſmoct! cd cr 
poliſhed, as it follows. c That we may put ihe {evcra} Pai ts tOgee 
ther, and ſet it vp to be worſhipped. d Torhe Wa'l or Piiar, 1: | 
it ſhould fall down, or go, or be carried away #1 6m theme Sce 2, | 
40. 19, 20. 

8 But thou Iſrael art my ſervant e, Jacob whemlT have 
* choſen f, the ſeed of Abraham my * fricnd g. 

e Thus the Geniiles ſhew themſelves to be tie Servants of their 
Idols,and own them for their God; but thou arr my People, and I am & : 
and will bethy God. f Ourtof the heap of the Ilolatious Nations pſ wht " 
to be my peculiar People. g With whom I made a ſtri& league of Cþ S : 
perpetual friendſhip ; of which fee Gen. 12. 2,3. ard 15. 1,8. * rpg 

9 Thuu whom [I have taken from the ends of the * Ro hg 
earth h,and called thee from the chief men thereof ;,and 29.7. | 
ſaid unto thee, Thou art my ſervant, T have choſen 7992-2: | 
thee, and nor caſt thee away &. «ol 

hb Thou Iſrael, whom I took to my ſelf, and brought hither in | 
the loins of thy Father Abraham from a remote Count ey; towit 
Chaldea : Or, whom I brought back our « t Baly/ou into. thine —_ 
Land,which though yet to come,he may ſpeak of as of a thins paſty 
as the Prophets ule to do, as was noted before. Bur the ſorn;er In. 
terpretation ſeems to agree better with the foregoing Verſe, i From 
the midſt of many great and noble Perſons among whom he lived in 
Chaldea. So this notes God's ſingular mercy to Abrahaw, and conſe- 
quently to the 1ſraelites deſcended fiom him, rhat he paſſed by ma« 
ny of Abraham's betters, and called him into fellowſhip with hin 
ſelf. & I have choſen thee not for a ſmall moment, but for ever by 
making an everlaſting Covenant with tnee and thy Seed through all 
Generations. Or, the Senſe 1s this: As I have choſen thee at firſt 
ſo I have not ſince that rime caſt thee offi as thou had frequently 
given me ſufhcient occaſion to do. Or, and did net refuſe thee, as 
this word is elſewhere uſed. So the ſame thing is repeated in other "= 
words, not without ſome emphaſis; for he intimates that he choſe 
them when he had juſt cauſe of refuſing them. 

Io Fear thou not,for I a» with thee ; be not diſmay- 
ed, for I am thy God. I will ftrengthen thee, yea, I 


will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right 
hand of my righteouſneſs }. 0 


I Which I do and will manage with Righteouſmeſs, whereby I 
"ho deliver thee, and deſtroy thine and nuae onemine, as it tol- 
OWS« 


11 Behold, all thry that were incenſed againſt thee, 
ſhall be * aſhamed and confounded » : they ſhall be as no- * Exd;. 
thing », and Þ they that ſtrive with thee ſhallperiſh, 22. Chop. 

m Both becauſe their hopes and deſigns ſhal be utterly diſapoint- #3 24. Of 
ed, and becauſc the miſchief which they contrived againſt thee ſha] 22,22? 
fall upon themſelves. 7 Shall come to nothing or periſh, as the Terk, 12.3 
next Clauſe explains it. | ly _ the 

| men of t 

12 Thou ſhalt ſeek them, and ſhale not find them jrjfe . 
0, even | them that contended with thee : + they that+ Heb. tw | 6 
war againſt thee ſhall be as nothing, and as a thing of men of thy 
nought p contention, | 


0 They ſhal beſo totally conſumed, that althovgh thou farchet T Heb: th | 
for rhem, hou ſhalt not be able to find them any where in the World. of thy 
Þ' Shall be utterly brought ro nought. The thing is twice repeated, _ 
to ſhew the cercainty and greatneſs of their Deſtruction. 


1; For F the LORD thy God will hold thy righe 
hand q, ſaying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. 


q Or, will ftrengthen, &c. as this word properly ſignifieth :. wi 
afſiſt andenable thee to vanquiſh all thine comin. - #0 


I 2p. XU. - | 
ſpoken of was ah eminent Type of Chriſt, and bro in a myſtical 
ſente ir may belong to him. Bur the things here ſaid ro be dane by 
this Righteous Man, fſcems ro agree much better unto a Man of 
War; than unto the Prince of Peace. And therefore this place 1s 
:mmediately underſtood either. | 1. Of Abraham, who was a Perſon 
emineatly Righteous, and came our of Chaldea, which ſometimes 
ſeems to be called the Eaf?, as 1/a. 2. 6. Zech. 8. 7, who did tho 
things here mentioned ; partly in his own Perſon, Conquering five 
Kings and che Nations with them, Gen. 14. and following 

* Gecd he knew not whither ; and partly by his Poſterity ; whoſeex 
ploits may well be aſcribed to him, not vnly becauſe they came our 
of his Loyns, but alſo and eſpecially, becaule all their Succeſles and 
ViRtories were given to them for Abraham's ſake, and by the vertue 
of Gcd's Promiſe and Covenant made with Abraham, for the giving 
of Canaan to him and to his Seed for ever. And this Inrerpretatt- 

| on may ſeem to receive ſome contenance from wer. 5. 6. which a= 
grees wel! ro the practice of the Canaanites and Neighbouring Nati- 
ons; who upon Jraels March towards them were tilled with great 
* Conſternation, and uſed all poſſible diligence in ſeeking both co 
their Idols, and ro Men for helpagainſt them, as we read 1n_ that 
Sacred Hiſtory. And thus God's argument againſt Idolatry, 1s ta- 
ken from an illuſtriousexample of God's infinite Power, pur forth 1n 
ſaving of his People, and deſtroying their Enemies before them 3 
and of the impotency of Idols ro hinder him in that work : Or, 2 
Of Cyrus, who might be called # Righteous man: Or, as it is in the 
Hebrew, a men of Righteouſneſs; becauſe he was Raiſed up in Rightronſ- 
weſe, as it is ſaid of him, 1ſa. 45: 13. and was God's great inſtru- 
ment to manifeſt his Righteouſneſs; both his Faithfulneſs,in fulfil- 
ling his Promiſe of delivering his People our of Babylon after ſeventy 
years ( Righteouſneſs being often put for Faithfulneſs ) and his Ju- 
ſtice; in puniſhing the Enemies and Oppreffors of his People, the 
wicked Babylonians ; upon which account the Medes, who ſerved 
under Cyrus in his Expedition againſt the Babylonians, are called God's 
Sanfified Ones, I[ar13+3,17- And all the other Expreſſions here uſcd are 
"ny very-applicablero him, and were verified in him. He came from the 
©”  paft, from Perſia which was direRly eaſtward, both from Judeaand 
froni Babylon, and which is called the Eaft in this very caſe, Iſa. 46. 
11. He was raiſed up by God in an eminent and extraerdinary 
manner, as is noted both by S:cred and profane Hiſtorians; and 
therefore this very word is ufed concerning him and his Army, not 
only here, but eliewhere ; as 1/a. 13. I7. Jer. 50. 9. and*5r. r, 12. 
To him alſo all rhe following paſſages agree, as we ſhal ſee. And 
although this grear Perſon and Attion were yet to come; yet the 
Prophes ſpeaks of them as if they were already paſt, as the Prophets 
moſt fr-quently do. - And as in the Clauſe of theformer Chapter he 
ſpeaks of God's People, as ifrhey were aCtuaily in the Captivity of 
Babylon, wer. 27+ ſo here he ſpeaks of them, as if they were aQtually 
bought out of Babylon by Cyrus, And by this inſtance he pleads his 
Cauſe againſt the Gent:les and their Idols; becauſe this was an evi- 
dent proof of God's Almighty Power, and of the vanity and weak- 
neſs of Idols, which eminently appeared in the Deſtruftion of the 
Babylonians, who were a People mad upon their Idols, as is ſaid, Jer.50. 
38- and yet were deſtroyed together with their Idols, fer. 51s 47. 
; From a Countrey Eaſtward from Judea, as Chaldes was in part, bur 
Perſia more direQly. & To march after him, and under God's Ban- 

 rier againſt Babyloy» Thus Baracks Army is ſaid to be of his feet, Juag. 
4. 10. Compare alſo Gen, 3o. 30. { Subdued Nations and their 
Kings before him. » To be beaten by him as ſmall as duſt, 
as is ſaid, Pſal. 18. 42. Or, to be pur to flight as eaſily as the 
duſt is ſcattered by the wind, as the following Clauſe expounds 
this. 

+ Heb, - 3 He purſued them and paſſed 7 ſafely »; even by the 

i ptime, Way that he had not gone with his feet o. | 

| *. © # Went on in the Purſuit with great caſe and ſafety, and Succeſs. 

o\Which is added as a further evidence of God's wonderful Provi- 


! Chap. 2 


# Chap. 
$5. 33- 


* Bo 
Der * Go 
© 10. 1c 


: f Heb, 
| wuſes0 
1.160 


*Chap. 
3 45.20, 
F 46.10. 
tHeb.ſer 
wr heart 
wu them, 


dznce, 10 encouraging and inabling him to march by unknown 
paths ;- which hath oft proved dangerous and deſtruftive to great 
Armies This alſo was verified both in Abraham, and in Cyrus, as is 
well known» 


14 Fear not, thou worm -r Jacob, and ye |) men of 5. <: 
Iſrael : I will help thee, faith the LORD, my thy i fy 
deemer, the holy One of Iſrael. 


y Who art weak in thy ſelf, and deſpiſed and trodden under foot 
by thy proud and potent Enemies. 


Bos cc fo; © 4 Who hath wrought and done it p, * calling q the 
Ep jun; generations from the beginning 7 2? I the LORD, the 

& 44.6.6 * thirſt, and with the laſt 5, I am he. | 

48.12. p Whoſe work was this but mine? 9g Either 1. Calling them 

Rev. 1-17. our of nothing. giving to them Breath and Beeing: Or, 2. Cal- 


| 15 Behold, I will make chee a new s ſharp threſh- 
ing inſtrument having F teeth : thou ſhalt threſh the 4 Heb; 
mountains #,, and beat them ſmall, and ſhalt make the wwb:. 


& 22+ 23. ling them to his foot, 


as he ſaid above, wer. 2+ diſpoſing and em- 

loying them as he ſees fit, ſending them upon his errands. r All 
>erfoos and Generations of mankind from the beginning of the 
World to the end of it. 5s Who was before all things even from 
Ererniry, and ſhal be unto Erernity ; whereas the Idols, ro whom 
God herein oppoſeth himſelf, were but of yeſterday, being made 


hills as chaff. 

s And therefore ſharper and' ſtronger than another which hath 
been much uſed. # Such as were uſual in thoſe times and places : 
of whith ſee on 1/s. 28. 25,28. u The great and lofty Potentates of 
the World which ſet themſelves againſt thee, ſuch Perſons bing 


frequently expreſſed in Scripture under the notion of Hills and Moune 
fazins, 


by mens hands,and ſhal within a little tune vaniſh, and be deſtroy- 
ed. . 


16 Thou ſhalt fan them x, and the wind ſhall carry 
them away, and the whirlwind ſhall ſcatter them : and 
thou ſhalt rejoyce in the LORD, and ſhalt glory in the 
holy One of Iſrael y. ED 

x When thou haſt beaten them as ſmall as duſt or chaff. » For 
to him, and not to thy ſelf, thou ſhalt aſcribe thy viftory over thine 
Enemies. 

17 VVhen the poor and needy ſeek water, and there 7s 
none, »d their tongue faileth for thirſt, Frhe LORD 
will hear them, 1 the God of Iſrael will not forſakse Ns 
them 2. 

x When my poor people are come to the greateſt extremity of 
danger and miſery; then will I appear for their relief. 

18 TI will open * rivers in high places a,and fountains 
in the midſt of the valleys 5: I will make the * wilder- x gy, ,,; 
neſs a pool of water,and the dry land ſprings of water c. , ,,& 35. 

a Upon the Mountains where by the courſe of nature there are  & 44.3- 

no Rivers 6 Or, in the Yalleys, to wit, in ſuch of them as are* pſal. 197. | 
not well watered: c Theſe People who are like a dry and barren , 5, ; 
Wilderneſs, I will abundantly water with my Bleſſing, and make | 
them fruittul and beaviful,' as the next Verſe ſheweth + which 

may 


5 The iſles t ſaw 3t #, and feared x ; the ends of the 
earth were afraid, drew near, and came y. 
 e Even remot Countries, as ver. 1- » Diſcerned the mighty 
Work of God in delivering his People, and overthrowing their E- 
nemies, in ſo wondecderful a manner. x Leſt they ſhould be in- 
volved in the ſame Calamity, as being conſcious to themſelves, that 
they alſo were enemies to GoB8's People. » They gathered them- 
ſelves together to conſult for their common ſafery, and to maintain 
the cauſe of their Idols, whom by this inſtance they perceived in 
great” Jeopardy. | LOND 

| 6 ® They helped every one his neighbour, and every 
P. Chap.49. foes gt | | 0 
19.6 44. one (aid to his brother, + Be of good courage z. ' 
=P z They encouraged and aſfliſted one another in their Idolatrous 
* + Heb: be Priffices. HT | ; 
| ſtrong. - 7 So the carpenter 4 encouraged the || gold{mith 5, 

y Or foun- ,.1 he that ſmootheth with the hammer || him that 


| !Or :þ; ſfmote the anvil, |] laying, It is ready for the ſodering 
fnitng. e: and he faſtened it d with- nails zhar ir ſhould not be 
$Or,J-ying yoved. ſi” | 

of the ſodrr, . ,, Who brought wocd to compoſe the body of the Idot. þ Who 
it” is got2. qyas.ro prepare golden plates for coveringand adorning of the Image, 


C——— 


# ChaP. 
$5. 13 


f Heb, 


| wuſes0 
Ws 82 87s 


*Chap. 
$5.20; 
46, 10. 
tHeb./zt 


wr heart 


wu them, 


their Idols, vur of ſuch things as ſhould ſhortly come to paſs, which 


? Chap, 
04.9, 
1 Cor. 8. 


6. 
IOr, worſe 1. Paſſively. your workmanſhip, all the coſt and art which is laid 


then 10 


thing, - 


| JOr, worſe nor efficacy in your Aftions. » He that chooſerth you for his gods, 


than of 4 
Uper, 


lor, $ro- 
Uaing. 


XLE 


may be underſtood, either df the Jews who were 1n-a Wilderne!s 
condition, till God brought thera out of it ; Or, of the Gentiles 
converted to rhe true Religion under rhe Golpel. 

i9 * I will plamt in the wilderneſs the cedar; the 
ſhirrah-tree, and che myrtle, and the oyl-tree : I will 
ſet in the deſert the fir-tree, azd the pine, and the box- 
tree together d: = 

a Trces which are both uſcful and pleaſant ro the eye, and giving 
2 good ſhadow to the Traveller, which in thoſe bot and parched 
Countries was very comfortable. Thus much is evident and con- 
F:{ſed : bur what parricular Trees theſe Hebrew words ſignifie, ſeems 
to me improper to diſcourſe here, becauſe ofily the Learned are 
capable of judging in this caſe, and they may conſult my Latin 
Synopſis upon this, and ether places of Scripture where they are men- 
tioned. 

20 That they may ſee e, and know, and conſider, 
and underſtand together, that the hand of the LORD 
hath done this, and the holy One of Iſrael hath crea- 
ted it. | 

e Or, That men may ſee: for it is an indefinite expreſſion. The 
ſenſe is, That all that ſee this henogr c_—_ may conſider 1t, 
and may know that this is the work of God alone. : 

2t F Produce your cauſe f, faith the LORD ; bring 
forth your ſtrong reaſons g, faith the King of Jacob. 

f The Prophet having pleaded Gods cauſe againſt the Idolatrons 
Gentiles, whom he challenged to a diſpute, ver. I. he now _— 
eth the Challenge, and gives them liberty and Invitation to uw 
wharſoever they can on the behalf of their Idols. g To prove the 
the Diviniry of your Idols. 

22 * Let them h bring them forth, and ſhew us what 
ſhall happen # : let them ſhew the former things & what 
they be, that we may | conſider them /, and know # 
the latter end of them » ; or declare us things for to 
COme 0. : REF 

h Either the Idols : Or, which is all one, the 1dolaters 1n the 
name and by the help of their Idols. ! All future Events ; w_—_— 
he divides into two ſorts in the following clauſe, the former and t - 
Jater, as we ſhall ſee. k& Which is not to be underſtocd of ſuc 
things as are paſt, for ſuch things might eaſily be known by Men 
from Hiſtory, much more by the Devils who poſſeſſed and aQed in 


may be better diſcerned, than thoſe rhings which are yet at a 
great diſtance, So he propounds the eaſieſt part firſt, Ler us try 
whether they can foretel thoſe things which are even at the Door, 
and if ſo we will try them further. Let them tell us what things 
ſhall happen, and in what order, which firſt, and which laſt. / Heb. 
ans we will ſet our heart to it; we will allow the Argument its due 
weight, and either fairly-anſwer it, or give up our cauſe againſt 
Idols. m Thar we may know, or let us know by their Informa- 
tion. #» The conſequence of them, whether the Events did anſwer 
to their prediftions : Or, what things happened next after thoſe 
former things. o To wit, hereafter, or after a long tim*; which 
limitation may be eaſily gathered, both from the oppoſition ofthis 
clauſe tothe former, and from the next following clauſe, where it 
is ſo Limited and Explained. 

23 Shew the things that are to come hereafter : that 
we may know that ye are gods : p yea, * do good, or 
do evil q, that we may be diſmayed, and behold #r to- 
gether yr. _ | ; | 

p That we may have, if not a certain proof, yet at leaſt a probable 
argument-of your diety. It may be-objetted that the Devil hath 
forecold future Events by Idols :.but it gay be anſwered, that ſuch 
prediftions were but rare, and oftentimes were falſe, and confuted 
by the Events ; and generally were dark and doubtful, as hath been 
noted ; and when they were verified by the event, that was only 
done by Divine permiſſion and revelation, for the tryal or puniſh- 
mtent of wicked men, of which we have an inſtance, Deuts 13 1, 2, 
3. and therefore doth no more prove them to be Gods, than the 
prediftions made known by God unto the Prophets, proved them 
to be Gods. 9q ProteQ@ and bleſs.your Worſhippers whom I intend 
to deſtroy, and deſtroy my people whom Iintcnd to ſave, and then 
you have ſome colour to afſerr your diety. Bur alas! You can | 
neither do good norevil. r That I and my people may be aſtoni- 
ſhed, and confounded, and forced to acknowledge your god» 
head. 

24 Behold, * ye are{[| of nothing s, and your work 
z || of nought : an abomination zs he that chooſeth you « 

s You lately were nothing, wichout any beeing at all, and now 
you have nothing at all of Diviniry or Vertue in you. # Either 


out upon you. Or, 2. Aftively, allthatyou can do. Your Ope- 
rations are like your beeings, there is no reality in your beeings, 


is moſt abominable for his folly, as well as his wickedneſs. 

25 I have raifed up x one y from the north, and he 
ſhall come : from the riſing of the Sun ſhall he |[call up- 
on my name z, and he ſhall come «por: princes as »pon 
morter 4, and as the potter treadeth clay, _ | 

, x You neither foreknow nor can do ary thing. ButI do now 
forete), and vill certaily eff:& a great Revolution and change inthe 
World, which you ſhall not be able. ro hinder. y Which word 
though not expreſſed in the Hebrew muſt neceſſarily be underſtood, 
as being oft deſizned in the following words by the Pronoun #e. 
He underſtands one people : Or, rather one perton, Prince or Ge- 
eral together with his people or Forces, as appears from the latter 
part of the Verſe. Some conceive that the Prophet in this place 
ſpeaks of two ſeveral Perſons ; in the firſt clauſe of Nebuchagnezzar, 
who in Scripture is commonly ſaid to come from the North, as Jer- 
x. 13, 15. and 4.6. and the next clauſe of Cyrus who came from the 
Kaſt, Iſa. 46. 11. And then the words may be thus rendred, one 


135 Ta 


he ſpake before, ver. 2, &c- who might well be ſail ro come, both 
from rhe North, and from the Eaft; from the N,rth rather, becauſe he 
was a Mede by his Mother, as.he was a Perſian by his Father ; or be= 
cauſe a great part of his Army was gathered out of Media, which 
was, and-1n Scripture is ſaid to be Northward in reference to Tuadea, 
Jer. 50-9, 41+ and 51+ 48. and becauſe Darius the Mede was joyaed 
with him in this expedition : and from the Eaſt, becauſe P.rſis was 
direAly eaſtward from Judea. And peradventure this work of calling 
upen or proclaiming Gods Name, 1s here aſcribed to him as he came 
from the Eaft, rather than as he came from theN .rth, becauſe that 
work was not done by Darius the Mede, but by Cyrusthe Perſian. 2 Or 
rather, as others render ir, who jhallcall upon: Or rather proclaim my 
Name,which Cyrus did in expreſs and emphatical rerms, Ezr2 1. 1, 2, 
a Treading them down; as eaſily as a man tread:ch-down morter. 


26 Who hath declared from the beginning 6b, that 


He is righteouse? yea, there is none f that ſhewerh, 
yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none thar 
heareth your words g» 

6 Which of all your Idols did or could forete] ſuch thingsas this 
from the beginning of the World unto this day ? They never yec 
did nor can foretel any ſuch things, furcher than I think fit to re 
veal it to them. c Either in time paſt : Or,before the things come to 
paſs. d That we may be convinced and forced to acknowledge. 
e His Cauſe now pleaded is juſt and good. : He isa God indeed as 


Surely there 1s none of your gods that hath done or can do this, and 
therefore their claim to the Diety is falſe and fooliſh. g None of 
your Worſhippers ever heard any ſuch thing either from you or- 


are dumb and cannot ſpeak. 


them &, and I will give to Jeruſalem One that bringeth 
good tidings /, | *'s 

h T who am the firſt, as I aid before, wer. 4. and therefore capable 
of declaring or foretelling things to come from the beginning, 
which your Tdol8tannort do, ver. 26. i Do znd will foretel unto 
my people by my* Prophets things to come. & I repreſent things 
future as if they were preſent, and to be beheſd wirh your eyes. 
By them he means either, 1. Theſe things which are to come : Or, 
2: Theſemen: either Cyrus and his Forces who came to deliver the 
Jews out of Babylon; Or, which is theſame thing in eff-&, the Jews 
returning from their Caprivity in Bayblon. I A Meſſ-nger or Meſ- 


good tidings of their deliverance from Captivity. 


I asked of them, could + anſwer a word p» 

m Heb. 4nd 7 beheld, T looked about me to ſee if I could find any 
man of them that could certainly, and of themſelves forete} ſuch tu- 
ture events. » Not any, to wit, of the Idols ; for the word Man is 
ſometimes uſed by the Hebrews of brute creatures, and even of life» 
leſs things, as 1/#. 34, 15. and 40. 26. and elſewhere. o Though 
theſe Idols were oft conſulted, and by the help of the Devildid ſome 
times deliver Oracles, yet none of them were able to give any folid 
and certain advice concerning future things. p When I tryed their 
divinity by this ChataQter, they had nothing to ſay for themſelves. 


29 Behold, they are all vanity q, their works areno- 


thing 7; their molten images s are wind z, and confu- 
lion #. | 


. 9 Thisisthe Concluſion of the whole diſpute,and the juſt Sentence. 


which God paſſeth upon Idols after a fair tryal ; they are vain things, 


and are falfly called gods. r See ver. 24. 5 Which he mentions, 
becauſe their materials were moſt precious, and more Coſt and Art 


was commonly beſtowed upon them, for after they had been mol. 
theſe he Synecdochically comprehends all Images whatſoever. 
ly paſs away and come to nothing 


on, of which this very word is uled, Gen. 1. 2. 


eas, 


y 


ſong to God for his Goſpel among the Gentiles, 10 


16. - The idolatry of 
the Heathen : and obſtinacy of the Jews, 17 


25, 


- 


ele&t d in whom my ſoul * delighteth e: T * have 


ment + to the Gentiles 5. 


more emi: ent and remote exampleof it, and foretelleth the comin: 


of the Meſſiah, and ſeveral great effe&ts or confequences thereof, which 


he rather doth becauſe this was the Perſon by whom the Idols were 
to be utterly aboliſhed, as was forerold, 1a... 2. 18. compared with 
ver. 2. 3, 4. andas itfell our in the event: This having bzen obſer- 
ved not only by Chriſtians, bur every by the learned Heathens, not 
without aſtoniſhment, thar at that time, wken Chriſt cameinto the 
World, Idols were generally ſtruck dumb, and the Oracics ceaſed. 
6b The Perſon of whom he here fpeaketh; is by ſome fuppoſed to be 
Cyrus, and by others 1/aiah himſelf, and by others the people of the* 
Jews. But the moſt and beft Interpreters underftand this place of- 
Chriſt: And although I am ſenſible, that ſome learned Men have' 
done wrong to the ſacred Text, & to theChriftian cauſe,by expounds + 


Fxom the North, and he ſhall come: and one from the riſing of the Sun, he. 
ſhall call, &c. But it {tems more natural and gaſis rg underſtand the 


ing ſome places of Chriſt without ſufficient evidence, yet this 1s 


| ons gt the many places in this TEOPRCcY, which cannot. withous-s 


5 A 3 maniteſt 


Chap. XLIL 


| whole context of one and the ſame Perſon, - even of Cyrus, of whom 


we may know? and before-time c, that we may ſay 4, 


he pretends to be, he claims his Divinity by a good Title. f Heb. 


of you : yor indeed doth any man hear your words, becaule you . 


27 * The firſt þ ſhall ſay to Zion 3, Behold, behold. * ver. 4. 


ſengers- the ſingular namber being here pur for the plural, as ir is 
in many other places, to wit, my Prophets who ſhall forerel the - 


28 For I beheld m, and rhere ivas no man n, even FH; 
amongſt them, and therewas no counſeller s, that when recurs. 


ten they uſed to be Carved or Poliſhed and Adorned : but under -. 


£ Empty and unſatisfying things, which alſolike the wind, de quicks. » 
u Confuſed and deformed and + 
uſeleſs things, like that rude heap in the beginning of Gods Creati= ; 


CHAP. XII. { 
The Perſon and Office of Chriſt appointed by the Father, 1=——=9, A new : 


Ehold a, * my ſervant þ whom F uphold c, mine”, 
.., © : ® *. , I, - 4 s 2 . $. d 

put my Spirit upon! him f, he ſhall bring forth g judg- * March.” 
_# The Prophet, .having in the former Chapter deteQed the va--17- 55 * 
nity of Idols, by their groſs Ignorance of future things, and having Eph. 1+ 6. 
given one eminent Inſtance of Gods certain foreknowledge of things * Chap. 
ro come, 1n the prediQtion of the d:ſtruQtion of Babylon, and the de- 81+ 2+ © 7! 
[liverance of the Jews outofir by Cyrus; he now addeth another Joh- 3-344 


| 


Ih 
in 
$ 
q 


ap. XLII. 


1 1 be 2pp'yed to any other; which is ſo ev:d-nt, 
_— rage Dry of Chriſtians. bur divers of tne _—_ 
learned Jews underſtand it of the Meſſiah, ani of him Tf ; a 

ifs aſevere cenſure upon their Brethren, that pong + _=_ y 
other perſon, and affiim that they are ſmirten with "yy 5 _ 
this matter. Moreover this p'ace 15 exprefly interpretec of _ Wy 
Mat. 1218, &c. And to him,and to him on'y allthe particu © 
following do truly and evicently belong, as we ſhall fee. 1 CN 
LI will affitt and enible to do and ſuffer all thoſe things w wn 
long to his Office todo. 4 Choſen by me to this great _ yo 
diation and Redemption, to which he 1s ſaid ro be ſeale "; x fs 
John 6. 27, 29. and predeftinated, 1 Pet. I« 20. and 4 ar 1 pf 
1 Pct. 2. 4. e Or, as this iame word is oft rendred, 7 w P _ 
both for himſelf and for all his people, being fuily ny jo" w_ 
that Sacrifice, which he ſhall offer up to me: f I have go —_ 
him with thar abundance and eminency of gifrs and pracey _ 
are neceſſ:ry for the diſcharge of his high and hard emp #1 _ 
g Shall publiſh or ſew, as this word 1s tranſlated, Mat- 12+ - No 
bring to light what before was hid in bis breaſt, or in his Fa ” 
boſome. h This word is very ambiguous, and elſewhere 15 put ior 
puniſhment, whic cannot be meant here, becauſe the whole con- 
rext ſpeaks of his mercy and ſweerneſls, and not of his ſeverity: 
bur here it is clearly put for Gods Law, as this very word is re 
Jed bere below, ver. 4. and as it is frequently uſed 1n rhe Ho y 
Scriptures, as Pſal. 119- and elſewhere : which alſo beſt 6599] wit 
the bringing forth or publiſhing of it here mentioned, PR__ eIng 
necſſarily required and conſtantly uſed about Laws. And this uf 
terpretation Is confirmed by the following words, to the _ - 
For the great thinzs which Chriſt publiſhed unto all the Wor , 
both Jews and Gentiles, was norhing elſe bur the Law and Wull, an 
Counſel of God concerning mans Salvation, and the ways and —_— 
of obtaining it. # Not only te the Jews, to whom the knowledge 
of Gods Laws had been hitherto appropriated, but to the Heathen 


| Nations of the Worid- 


2 He ſhall not cry &, nor lift up 7, nor cauſe his 
yoice to be heard in the ſtreet m. 


k Either, 1. In a way of contention, as anger 1s ofc accompanied 
with clamour, Eph. 4.31. Or, 2. In a way of oftentation. It ſcems 
'to be meant both ways, by comparing this place with Mar. 12. 16, 
17, 20. He ſhall neither ere& nor manage his Kingdom, with vio- 
Jence and outward pomp and ſtate, as worlily Princes do, bur 
with meekneſs and humility. 1 His voice, which is eaſily under- 
ſtood out of the following clauſe and from many other Scriptures, 
where that word is added to this verb, to compleat the Phraſe 
m As contentious and vain-glorious perſons frequently do. 


Or dimly 3 A bruiſed reed ſhall he not break »: and the |] 
= d ſmoaking flax ſhall he nor + quench 0 * he ſhall bring 


forth judgment unto truth p. 


» He will not break it to pieces, but rather will ſtrengthen and 
bind it vp, Iris a common figure, whereby more 15 underſtood 
than was expreſſed, and oce contrary is left to be gathered from 
another, of which many inſtances have been given in former . bore" 
The ſenſe is plainly this, Chrift will not deal roughly and rigoroully 
with thoſe that come ro him, but he will uſe all gentleneſs ard 
kindneſs to them, paſling by their greateſt fins, bearing with their 
preſent infirmities, cheriſhing and encouraging the imalleſt be- 
ginnings of grace, comforting and healing wound:d conſciences, 
andthe like. o The ſame thing is repeated in other words, to give 
us the greater aſſurance of the rruth of ir. Thar wiek of a Caudle 
( called Flax metonymically, becauſe it is made of Flax ) which 1$ 
almoſt extin&, and doth only ſmoke and nor flame, he will not 
utterly quench, but will revive and kindl: it again. fp Juagmens may 
be here raken either, 1. For the Law or Wili of God, or the Do- 
Erineof the Goſpel, which he will bring forth, 7. e. publiſh, which 

wiltdo wnto or in or with or according zo ( for this prepoſition 1$ 
ofed all thoſe ways ) truth, 3. e. truly and fairhfully, nor conceal- 
ing nor corrupting it, asfalſe Teachers commonly do. So this 1s 
a CharaQter, like that which is given te Chriſt, Mar- 22. 16- Theu 
art true and teacheft the way cf God in trath: And thus this Phraſe of 
bringing forth Judgment, is taken here asit 1s ver. 1. Or, 2. For the 
Cauſe which is debared, or for the ſentence which is given in the 
Cauſe, as this word is moſt frequently uſed, which he will 6ring 
Forth, 4. e. bring to light, or diſcover or publiſh ; and this he wil! 
do according to truth and equity, and not unjuſtly and partially, 
as corrupt Judges uſe to give Sentence againſt the poor and meek 
Fn this ſenſe this very Phraſe of bring:ng forth judgment, is taken Pſal. 
37- 6: And this ſenſe ſeems to be favoured, both by the conſidera- 
tion of the quality of the Perſons, to whom this Judgment is here 
implied tobe brought forth, who are called bru:ſed Reeds, and ſmoak- 
ing Flax, whereby they are ſuppoſed to be Perſons diſcouraged and 
oppreſſed, and in a conteſt with themſelves, or with their ſpiritucl 
Adverſaries about the ſtate of their Souls ; as alſo by comparing 
this place with Mat, 12. 20. where theſe very words are quoted, 
and thus rendred, 7H he ſend forth Judgment unto Viflory, 3. & till 
| Judgment or Sentence be given for him, in which caſe a man is 
Gaidto be victorious in Judgment. Tf it be ſaid for the former In- 
rerpretation, that ir ſeems moſt reaſonable to underſtand Judgment 


. here as it is underſtood, wer. 1. and 4. and bringing forth Judgment 
. Here as it is. taken, ver. 1, Tr may be truly and fairly anſwered, 
'- tharit.is a very common thing in Scripture, for the ſame words or 


Phraſes to be uſed in ſeveral ſenſes, not only in two neighbouring 
Verſes, but ſometimes alſo in the very ſame Verſe, whereof have 
formerly given divers inſtances. 


| 4 He ſhall not fail, nor be + diſcouraged 9, till he 
have ſet judgment in the earth r : and the iſles s ſhall 
wait for his Law r. 


q Though he be thus meek, and gentle, yet he is alſo couragi- 
ous, and reſolute againſt all the great, and many difficulties and 
confligs, to which he will be expoſed, and will nor give over till 
he have finiſhed his work : Or, as orhers render the words, He ſhall 
*#t be darkened ( This glorious light ſhall not be Eclipſed or obſcured: 
Or, He ſhall ſbine forth brizhtly and gloriouſly, as the Seventy render 
Ship word } nor broken, by all the attempts and vigorous endeavours 


| er t0 be taught and reformed, 


T1184 1 4 EH. | Chap. XLII, 


of his Enemies who Ceſign it, » Till he Fath publifhed and eſt. 
bliſhed his Jaw or dotrize ( as this Judgment 1+ expornd++! if the 

next clauſe) among tie nationsof the Earrb, And this word, 7.!!, 

reſpeQs oniv the rime p:ſt, bur nor the time to come, as if he 

would rhen fail, cr bediſccuraged, when once he had fer Jurlgment 072 

the Earth, which is contrary to reaſon, ard to £ther evident Scrip- 

turcs- And ſo this word is uſed, Gen. 28. 15. Pſzl. 51. 18. Mat. x. 

25- 5s The Countries remere from Judea, to which Gods Law was 

now confined, as this word is oft uſed. #t Shall gladly. receive his 
Do&trine and Commands frem time to time. 

5 Thus ſaith God the LORD, * he that created the * Chap. | 
heavens, and ſtretched chem our ; he that ſpread forth rs 
the earth, and that which comech out of it ; the that _—_ 
giveth breath unto the people upon ir, and ſpirit to 
them that walk therein # : 

« This large deſcription of Gods infinite Power, is here ſcaſon- 
ably added, ro give them affurance of the certain accompliſhent 
of thele great and wonderful promiſes, which otherwiſe would ſeem 
incredible. 


6 I the LORD have called thee in righteouſneſs x, 
and will hold thine hand y, and will keep thee'z,, and 
give thee for * a covenant « of the people b, for * a light * Chap: 
of the Gentiles c ; 49. 8. 

x To declare my righteouſneſs, as is ſaid, Rom. 3. 26. or my * Chap, 
faithfulneſs, which is trequently called Righteouſneſs in Scripture, 49-6. 
according to my promiſe long ſince made. and oft renewed. As Luk. 2.32, 
the former verſe afſ:rted Gods Power, ſo this clauſe declares his will A&.13 47. 
and firm purpoſe and obligation, ro effe& this work, and beth tc 
gether evince the certainty and neceflity of it. y Will give thee 
counſel and ſtrengrh for thine high and hard work. x That thou 
ſhalt nor fail in, nor be hindred by thine enemies, from the ac« 
compliſhment of thy work. 4a To be the Angel cf the Covenant, 
as Chriſt is called, Mal 3.1. or the Mediatcr in and by whom my 
Covenant of Grace is made, and cenfirmed with mankind. 6b Ei- 
ther of my people the Jews: Or, indefinitely or univerſally, of all 
People, nor on'y Jews bur Genttles alſo, as it follows. c To enligh= 
ten them with true and ſaving knowledge, and ro dire& them in 
the right way to true happineſs, from which they had miſerably 
wandred. He alludes to Gods fiery Pillar, which enlightned and 
direfed the 1/raelites in the Wilderneſs. 

7 lo open the blind eyes 4, 2nd to bring out the 
priſoners e from priſon, and them that ſit in * darkneſs * Chap. 
out of the priſon-houſe,  35-5-and 


d The eyes of their minds blinded with long ignorance, and deep on” it; 
prejudice ard jnveterate error, and by the Power and Policy of the Hick.» ' 
god of this World, 2 Cor, 4. 4. which nothing bur the Almighty on” 
power of God could cure. e Sinners who are taken captive by the De= * wk 
vil at his will, as we read, 2 Tim, 2. 26. and as daily EXPerience 
ſheweth, and who are enſlaved and chained by their own luſts, and 
made lree-men only by Chriſt, John 8. 32, 36. Compare this porti= 
on of Scripture with Jſa. 6I. x. and both with Luke 4. 17, 18, 19, 

20, 21. Where 1t isfaid to be fulfilled in and by Chriſt. 
8 Iam the LORD Ffthat is my name g, and my ** Chap! 


glory will I not give to another, neither my praiſe to 48. 12, 
graven 1mapges h. 

f Heb. Jehovah : Who have all becing in and of my ſelf, and give 
bzeing to all my Creatures, and to all my promiſes, as this name 
I1gnifiess The everlaſting, and unchange«ble, and Omniporent 
God, who therefore both czn, and will fulfil all my premiſes, and 
plead the cauſe, and ſetup the Kingdom of my Son inſpighr of all 
Oppoſition, and deſtroy a)] thoſe Iduls which are ſet vp againſt him 
and me. g Which I muſt own and juſtifie to the World He ſeems 
'O allude ro Exod. 3. 14, 15, and 6. 3. h1I will nor any longer tuf- 
fer that Honour and Worſhip, which is peculiar to me, to be given 


ro Idols as it hath been, but IT will by Chriſt and the Goſpel, ab 
liſh Idolatry in the World. ? 6 PE!, abOn 


9 behold, the former things are come to paſs and * * Chap: 


new things do I declare ; : before they ſpring forth ] 43: 9 1* 
cell you of them k. 4 P 5 : & 44- 7» 


; As all thingy, which Thave formerly promiſed or foretol!d, A IR 
have exatly come to paſs in their proper ſeaſons, and not one of © © 
them failed, as was noted Joſh. 23. 14. So you have great reaſon to 
believe, that whar I now promiſe. though it be new, and ſtrayge ta 
you, ſhall infallibly be accompliſhed. & That when they come to 


paſs, you may know that I am God, and that this is my Work. 
Compare Jchn 11. 19. 


10 *Sing unto the LORD a new ſong 1, and his praiſe *pcy: 
from the end of the earth »s : ye that go down to the 33. 3. 


ſea, and Þ all that is therein ; the iſles and the inhabi- tHe th 
tants thereof ». fulneſs 


1 Upon this new and great occaſion, the calling and Salvari rhereds 
the World by Chriſt, 2 All Nations from one od of the Rk -w 
another, who ſhall be ſharers in this Mercy: » You'that go by 
Sea Carry theſe glad tidings from Judea, where Chriſt was born, and 
Lived, and Died, and publiſhed the Goſpel unto the remoteſt parts 


of the Earth, that they may joyn with you in ſinging £ t 
Praiſes for his marvellous kindneſs and Gs Argh pOBg arth God's 


I1 Let the wilderneſs o and the cities thereof lift up 
their veice, the villages that Kedar p doth inhabit: ler 
the inhabitants of the rock ſing, lec them ſhout from 
the aq the mountains g. 

_ © Thoſe partsof the World which are now like a Wilderreſs: not 
literalfy, for he ſpeaks of their Cities in the next clauſe, but ſpiri- 
tually, deſolate and forſaken of God, dry and deſtitute of the wa=- 
ters of God's grace, and barren ef all good fruits. p The Arabians: 
which were an Heatheniſh and Barbarous people, and well known 
to the Jews, and are Synecdochically pur cr all Nations in theſame 
circumſtances. 9 Having mentioned Cities and Villages, he now 
adds thoſe who dwell upon Rocks and Mountains, which are com« 
monly more Savage and Ignorant than others, and therefore hard- 


x2 Let 


{ 
'0r, be- 
mel him 
If migh- 
- 
| 
' | 
!+H:b- 
| valley? Or 
'puþ 
{ 
| 
l 
[ 
q 
| 
F 7 
f Heb, ; 
| ore C 
E 
t 
C 
e 
2 
\ 
1 
( 
; 'PRl 
7. | 
I Cap, 1 t 
2 29. and 
2 4.11.ar:d . 
4 #.16. { 
 « , 
I 
t 
: ( 
| 
1 
y 
J 
{ 
! 
x 
IIs r 
* Chaps 
998, 01 
{ 
- f 
k: 
| 
1 
1 
< 
7 
1 
] 
t 
F 
r 
E 
V 
*Rrm; 
U24 C 
A 
h 
a> Y 


" 
( 


| 
| 
[{Hb- 

1 ſxalo? OT 
LL, 


\fHeb. 


3'2. 


£ 0, T. 
(hap, 1. 
9. and 


TOE > bs 


16.16. 


=2> — > 
» Þ- - 


ap. X LI 
12 Let them give slory unto the LORD, and de- 


or'0 
baightneſs. 


! 4.11.ard 


x4 2 


clare hispraiſe in the 1ſſandsr. | 
r In the remoreſt parts of the World, as well as in ' Arabia 
which was near to then. 2 
13 The LORD ſhall po forths, as a mighty man, 
he ſhall ſtir up jealoutie £ like a man of war : hefhall 
cry, yea, roar # ; he ſhall || prevail againſt his ene- 
mies. | 
s To wit, to war, or battel, as this Phraſe is uſed, Numb, 1. 
\ 18, 2 Sams 11. 1+ & he ſhall fiir up himſelf, and his ſtrength, 
and anger againſt the obſtinate and implacable enemies of his Son 
and Golpel. « As a Lyon doth upon his prey, and as Souldiers do 
when they begin the battle» 
14 I have long time held my peace x, I have been 
{till and refrained my ſelf ; now will I cry like atravail- 


ling woman y, I will deſtroy and f devour at once z. 

x I have for many ages ſuffcred the Devil and his Servants, Ty- 
rants, and Idolaters and Perſecuters to prevail in the World, to 
afflit my people, and to hinder the entertainment of my Dothiine 
and Worlthip in the World. y Now I will bring forth and accom- 
pliſh that glorious work which I have long conceived in my mind. 
z I will ſaddenly and utterly deſtroy the incorrigible enemies of 
my Truth, and of my Sons Kingdom. He alludes fo thoſe wild 
Beaſts which open their mouths wide, and devour all their prey at 
one morſel or at one time. ; ; 

15 I will make waſte mountains and hills a, and dry 
up all their herbs, and 1 will make the rivers iflands, 


and I will dry up the pools 5. 

a Nct dry and barren ones, for theſe were waſte already, but ſuch 
as are clothed with Graſs and Reibs, as the following wordsimply. 
Which is to be underſlood Metaphorically, of God's deſtroying 
his n.oft lufry and flouriſhing enemies, who are cft compared in 
Scripture unto Muntarns and Hills. b I will remove ail impedimepts 
out of the way : which is expreſſed in the Propherical diak&/ by 
drying up Euphrates, that the way of the Kings of the Ea& might be prepa- 
red, Rev. 16. 12. Heſeems to allude to that whith God did 1p d1y- 
ing up firſt the Red Sea, and then Jordan, to give his people p:{lage 
in:0 Canaan, And this expoſition is confirmed by the folowing 
Verſe. 

16 And I will bring the blind c by a way that they 
know not 4, I will lead them in paths that they have 
not known: I will make darkneſs light before them, 
and crooked things # ſtraight e.  Thele rhings wall I 


do unto them, and not forſaxe them f. 

c The Gentiles who were blind and were called ſo above, ver 7. 
and in many ether places of Scripture, and were ſo accounted by 
the Jews, d By the way of Truth, which hitherto harh been hid- 
denfrom them, until by my Word and Spirit I revealed it to them, 
e I will take away all hinderances, and give them all advantages 
2nd conveniencies for their Journey. I will direC& chem in theright 
way. I willenlighten their dark minds, and re&ifie their perverſe 
wills and afﬀfe&tions. f Until I have brought them with ſafety and 
comfort to the end of their Journey. 

17 They ſhall be * turned back, they ſhall be great- 
ly aſhamed that truſt in graven images g, that lay to 
the molten images, Ye are our gods. 

g This may be underſtood ei: her, 1. Of che Converted Gentiles ; 
who ſhall be turned back from. their former ſinful courſe, and ſhall 
ſincerely grieve, and be aſhamed that they did truf, &c. as the word 
may be rendred; that they ſhould ever be guilty of ſuch wicked- 
neſs and madneſs to Worſhip and Truſt in Idols: Or, rather 2. of 
thoſe Gentiles who, when their Brethren embraced the true God and 
Chriſt, perſiſted obſtinitely in their Ido/atrous courſes, who ſhall 
be confounded and deſtroyed : For this Phraſe of being turned back 
is generally uſed in Scripture in a bad ſenſe; or cf them who are 
overthrown, or pur to flighr in battle, as Pſal. 9. 3. and 3s. 4. 
and 7©. 2, 3, ©c. And the like I may ſay of being aſhamed, or, con- 
founded or put t0 jhame, eſpecially where chis Phraſe is joyned with 
the other, as it is in the two places of the Pſalms laſt quoted. 

13 Hear ye deaf,and look ye blind, that ye may ſee þ. 

h O you, whoſoever you are, whether Jews or Gtntiles. which 


= 
MY 


ſhall reſiſt this clear light, and obſtinarely continue in your former | 


errours, attend diligently to my words, and conſider theſe migh- 
ty works of God. 


19 * Who 3s blind but my ſervant z, or deaf as my 
meſſenger & that T ſent ? who is blind as he that 3s per- 
fe& 1, and blind as the LORDS ſervant . 


; Bur no people under Heaven are ſo blind as the Jews who call 
themſelves my Servants and People, who will not receive their 
Meſſiah, though he be recommended ro them, with ſuch evident 
and 11]vſtricus Signs, and miraculous Works, as force be'icf from 
the moſt unbelieving, and obſtinate Gentiles, k My Meflengers, the 
ſiogular number being pur for the plural,as it is common!y in Scrip- 
ture. | The Prieſts and other Teachers whom I appointed to in- 
1tcuct my Peoplein the right way. m 4s the moſt eminent Teach- 
ers and Rulers of the Jews, whom he calleth Perfe#, either becauſe 
It was their duty to know anltl teach the way, and Truth of God 
perf=&ly ; or rather Sarcaſtically, becauſe they pretended to great 
perfe&tion, and proudly called themſelves Rabdics and Maſters, as 
our Saviourobſerved ard deſpiſed the People as curſed ard not know- 
ing the Law, Joh. 7.49. and derided Chriſt, for calling them Blind, 
Joh. 9. 49- m Which title as it was given to the Few;jb pec ple in 
the firſt clauſe of the Verſe ; So here it ſeems to be given to the 
Prieſts, becauſe they were called and obliged to be the Lords Ser- 
vants, in a ſpecial and eminent manner. 


20 Seeing many things, * but thou obſerveſt not 
opening the ears, but he heareth not x. 

7 Thou doſt nor ſeriouſly and impartially conſider the plain word 
ard tl.e wonderful Works of God, of which thine ears and eyes 
have been witneſſes, which are abundantly ſylicient for che Cor- 
vitticn of any couldering man, 


- 


I 4 h 


Chap: XLIE- | 


21 The LORD is well pleaſed 0; * for his righte- * Chap. 


ouineſs fake p, he will magnitie the Law, and make || it 


honeurable 4. 


5 9, I6, y 
ll Or, hits 


o To wit, with you: Or, as this word is moſt commonly uſed; - 


hath 2 goed will, ro you or to this peeple : 


which may be underftood 


our of the following Verſe, as is very ufual in facred Scripture. © 


The meaning ſeems to be this ; Although rt ou art a wick: d peop'e 
chat rebeileſt againſt the cleareſt Iighr, and therefere God mig he 
juſtly deſtrey thee ſvddenly;. yet he is very unwilling to do ir, and 


wili patiently wait for thy Repentarc: that ke may be gracious un- . 


to thee, p Not for thy ſake, for thou deſerveſt noſuchthing from 
him; but for the glory of his own faithfu'nets, in fulfiling, rkac 
Promiſe ard Covenanr, which he made with thy pious Progemiters 
for themſe}ves, and for tl.cir Seed. q He will maintain. the ho- 
nour of his Law, ard therefore is not forward ro deſtroy you, who 
profeſs Goa's Law, and the true Religion, leſt his Law ſhould up« 
on that occaſion be expoſed to conrempr. OE EIS Se 
22 But this 7s a people robbed and ſpoiled r, || they 
are all of them ſnared in holes, and they are hid in 
priſon-houſes s : they are for a prey, . and none delive- 
reth ; for a | ſpoil, and none ſaith, Reſtore z.._. _ ,. 
r But notwithſtanding this great reſpe& which God hath. to hjs 
Law, and to his pecple for the fake of his Law, it is apparent that 
God hath ſeverely ſcourged you for yeur fins: and therefore take 
heed that you do not provoke, him by ycur cbſtinate infidelity; 1:{t 
he caſt you cff ſor ever. 5s They are, or have beer; taken in fnares 
made by their own hands, and by Gods judgment delivered into 


{ Or, 78 -, 
Inarning al? 
the young _ 
men of 
them. 


+ Heb. a 


trending. 


the har:ds of their enemies, and by them caſt intoPits or Dungeons 


and Priſons. : None affoid them either. pity cr help in their ex» 
temities. TOES FEATS Eee ons 

23 Who among you will give ear to this? whe will 
hearken and hear + for the time to come? __. 

# O that you would learn from ycur former and dear-bought ex- 
periences to be wiſer forthe future, znd nor to provoke Godto your 
own toral and final Ruine. * 7 > dex: Seen 

24 Who gave Jacob for a ſpoil; and Iſrael to the 
robbers ? did not the LORD x, he againſt whom wa 
have finned ? for they would not walk in his ways, 
neither were they obedient unto his laws . . 

x Do nor flatter your ſelves with a conceit of impunity, becauſe 
you are a people whom God hath favoured and endowed with ma- 
ny, and great priviledges, which the Jews were very proreto do, 
as we ſee, Jer. 7- 4, Oc. and elſewhere ; for as God hath puniſhed 
you formerly, doubt not, bur if you continue to ſin, he will pro 
ceed in puniſhing you more and more for your fins. . -- 

25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of 
his anger, and the ſtrength of batrel j : and it hath ſet 
him on fire round about, yet he knew notz ; and it 
burned him, yer he laid jt notto hearr. Gs 

y Moſt grievous Judgmen's. z They were ſecure and ſtupid une 
der Gods Judgments, neither fearing them when threatned, nor 
truly ſenſible of Gods hand in them, and ofthe cauſes of Gods dit= 
pleaſure againſt ckem, and of the means of cure. 

CHA Þ. XLIIL 
Promiſes to protef® and enlarge the Church, 1——5, God appealeth T 
them as witneſſes of h's power and knowleage, 6 I2. He foretelleth 
them the defirution of Babylon : and a new deliverance of his people, 

14 21. whoſe ſins, 22 : 4+ againſt God's mercies render thens 

mexcuſable, 25———28, 


Ur now thus faith the LORD #2 that created thee 5, 
O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Ifrae}, Fear 


» 
"0 Fair ; ' 
+ Heb. fir ©! 
the aftere 
£108, 


not : for I have redecined thee c, I have called theeby. 


thy name 4, thou art mines 

s Bue notwithſtanding thy groſs inſ-nſibleneſs under former 
judgments, for which T mighe juſtly tend far heavier ones upon thee; 
yet | will deal mercifully with thee. b That made thee his p20. 
ple, 2nd that in ſo miraculous a manner,as if he had creared thee a 
ſecond time our of nothing; and therefore he will be grzcious to his 
own workmanſhip. c From the Egyptians, and divers other ene-. 
mies ; and therefore I will redeem chee again. 4 By the name of 
Gods people, which was as proper aad peculiar to them; as the name 
of Iſrael. 

2 When thou * paſſeſt through the waters, 7 will be 
with thee ; and through che rivers, they ſhall not 0- 
verflow thee : when thou walkeſt chrough the fire,thou 
(bale not be burnt; neither jhall the flame kindle upon 
thee e. | 

e Though I will chaſtiſe thee for thy ſins, yet I will not ſuffer 
thine enemies utter)y re deſtroy thee, compare Fer. 3o. 1T. | 

3 For I :m the LORD thy God, the holy One of 
Iſrael, thy ſaviour : I gave Egypt fer thy ranſom f, E- 
chiopia and Seba g for thee. 

F This was fulfilled eith r, 1. When God ſmote the Egyptians, 
both firſt-boin and others in Egypt ; and drowned Pharaoh, and his 
Hoſt in the Red Sea, for the 1afery and benefit of his people: Org 
2. When the King of 4fjria, either Sennacherib, as many think, or 
rather Eſar-haodon, who deſigned to revenge his Fathers diigracez 
and Jols before Jeruſalem, upon the Jews, but was diverted and di- 
reed by Gicd roimploy his Forces againſt Epypr, and Erhiopir, and 
Seba, «$ it follows. See the Notes upen 1/a. 20. 1, &c. g The Sz 
beans who were contederare with the Erkiopians, or Cujbiter, 

4 Since thou . waſt precious in my tight, thou haſt 
been honourable, and I have loved thee & ; therefore 


* Plot. 
66s 12. 


will I give men for thee z, and people for thy || + life. |! Or; 
_ hk So the ſenſe 1s, from that time that I choſethee for my pre- perſon. 
cicus and peculiar rreafure and People, I have had a great citeem jHeb. foul 


and affeQtion for thee. Burt the words may well be, and by ſome 
are rendred thus, ce that ( or, For that: or, becauſe ) how 
waſt precicus in my ſight, thou waſt honourable, ( the tfaine thing re- 
peated in Uther words, ) and 7 leve thee. ; As 1 did give up the, 


FA 4 Egypiians, 


—_ IC 
Cs ap. YL. I x 
Egyptians, ſo I am ready to give up others to ſave thee, as occifion 
©1-* Fear not, for I «m with thee; T will bring thy 


* Chap. ' 
44. -Ae® ſeed from the eaſt, and gather thee from the welt k, : 
30: 109. _ þ Although the Jews ſhall for their fins be carried captives outo 
46.27. their own Land Northward and Eaſtward into Babylen, and = bw 
:acent Countries, and others of them ſhall flee Southward an 
Neſtward, and ſhall there pine away in their in1quities, As 4: 
ned ; yet their poſterity I TE HOGS back into Canaan, from all the 
laces where they are diſperſed. ; 
m 6 I will fay to the no:th, Give up I: and to the 
ſouth, Keep not back ; bring my fons from far, and 


my daughters from the ends of the earth. 
! Thou who haſt ſc long had and he'd my people 1n Bondage, re- | 
ſign them to me, and permit them to returnto theirown Land. He 


eaks either to the Countries themſelves by a Proſopopz1a: Or, 
- the Inhabitants of them. - Do not only permit bux aſſiſt and 
further their return. 

7 Even every one that is called by my name » : for 


* Pſal. *] have created him for my glory o, I have formed 


EX 43 U.- 


Chan. XIII 
told if. This French he repeated, becauſe this is the principal ar- 
gument uſed here, and Chapter 41. rodere: mire thisconrre ville 
betwe:n God and Idols. g Ard this I did wi en you did nt wor- 
thip any Idols. and therefore it could not be pretend: d ttatycu had 
this knowledge from them. 
13 Yea, Þ before the day was h, T am he i, and there t Ie) 
7s none & that can deliver out ot my hand /; I will f:,, 
work, and who ſhall + * lett it m + day. 

þ Before all time: Or, which is all cne, from all «tcrr'ty ; Or, 1 ich, 
Srnce the day was, ſince the beginning of time and tl.irgs, in a!] ages 1 it 
ſince rhe Creation ef the Worid. i I 2m God, and I have prov.d each, 
my ſeif to be ſo. k Noneof thoſe which are cali-d pods. 1 Thar Jcb 9.12, 
can fave them whom I willdeſtrov. Therefore th-y ere imprrtent, © aÞr 14. 
and conſequently no gods. 9: Nor can they hinder me ir: zny o- ?7- 5nd 
ther work which I refolve to do. 40, Io, 

14 Thus ſaith the LORD your Redeemer, tbe þ oly 
One of Iirael, For your fake I have ſent to Babylon », 
and have brought down o all their + nobles ?, and the F111, 
Chaldeans q, whoſe cry #5 in the ſhips r. 

2 T bave terit Cyrus, andthe M-des and Perſians with him to war 2. 
gainſt Babyl-n to this very end and purpolc, that he might deliver 


barres, 


TE»; I have made him p. | 
Chyp, 29. gen Ba ne by my Name. IT own them for my people and Chil- 
23.Job. 3+ dren : and therefore-whart kindneſs or cruelty you exerciſe to them, 
we” I take it as done to my ſelf. So it is an argument to move thoſe 
= ahi le to let their Caprives go: Or, it is an argument to contt1m 
_ The faith of Gods people, that God would deliver them, becauſe 
_—_ they are his own. 0 And therefore I will glorifie my Power and 
Goodneſs, and Faithfulneſs in delivering them. p I have not on- 
Iy- created them our of nothing, as I did all other people, bur 7 have 
alſo formedand made them my peculiar people. 

* Chap» 8--Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and 


+. 19- the deaf that have ears 9. LA 

zek.12.2. q The ſenſe jseither, 1. Bring cut of Captivity my people who 
were blind and deaf, but now have their eyes andears opened by 
my grape. So this verſe relates to the foregoing paſſages: Or _ 
2.0 ye Idolatrous Gentiles, produce and bring forth your falſe gods, 
which have eyes but {ce nor, and ears but hear not, as.1s ſaid Pſal. 
TI5+ 5, 6. So this verſe belongs to the following conrext, in wich 
God reneweth his c:nteſt with Idols ; which in this verſe he cal- 
leth blind, and in the next verſe proveth them ſo to be. 


9 Let all the Nations be gathered together, and let 

* Chap. the people be aſſembled r: * who among them can de- 
41. 21,22. Clarethis s, and ſhew us former things #? let them bring 
forth their witneſſes «, that they may be juſtified x; 


or let them hear and ſay, 1: is truth y. n--- 
r To plead the cauſe of their Idols with me: s This wonderful 
work of mine in bringing my people ovt of Capriviry, which I 
have already foretold, and ſhall furcher declare; and thar ſoexaCt- 
ly, that I fhall name the perſon by whom this work ſhall be begun, 
even Cyrus, who is yet unborn, and ſhall be ſo for above 200 years; 
Jet any of your Heathen gods do the like. : Notthings already paſt, 
but ſuch things as ſhall happen long before the return from the Cap- 
tivity, which yet your blind Iaols cannot foreſee. See on 1/a.41. 
22. #u Who can teſtifie the truth and certainty of any ſuch pre- 
ditions of theirs. x That they may be owned for trug Gods, which 
in that caſe I allow them to expe. But of this argument ſee on 1/a. 
4T+ 22, 23- y Or if they can produce no evidence of any ſuch 
- thing, as Tam well affured that they cannor, let them be ſilent, 
and hear me and my witneſſes, as it follows in the next verſe; 2nd 
let them confeſs, that what I ſay is truth, that I only am the true 
God, and that they are but vanity and falthood. 


10 Ye are my witneſſes z, faith the LORD, and my 

ſervant whom [I have choſen a : that ye may know and 

* Chap. believe me, and underſtand that I am he b: * before 
4-4. and me there was ||no god formed, neither ſhall there be 


Oo 


; you our of Cop'ivity; and reſtore you to your Land :ccording to 


promiſe. o From that height of power and glory to which they 
were advanced. þp Their Princes and great Commanders, who as 
they are called Shiclds, Pſal. 47. 9. So here they are ci1'ed Bars, for 
the ſame reaſon, becaulc of thar ſirength and defence which tl ey 
give to their people. 9 The common people of Chaldea, together 
with their g-eat men who had Palaces v1 Babylon, r Who make 
fearful outcries, as they flee'away frcm the Perſians in Ships ; which 
they had opportunity to do, becauſe of their two preat ard f:mous 
Rivers, Eruphretes and Tigris, and the ſevera) branches of them). 
I5 I amthe LORD, your holy One s, the Creator 
of Iſrael, your king- 
5 The koly One of Jſrael, as he frequently ftileth himſelf, who ſan- 
Qifie and gJorifie my ſelf in this and ſuch orher glorious Works, 
with reſpe& to you, or for your ben«fir. : 
I6 Thus faith the LORD, which * maketh a way 
in the Sea, and a* path in the mighty waters : : s 
t Who as he formerly made a path-way tor his pec ple thre - Exod, 
Or y Pp y s pec ple through the 
Red S+a, ſo be will in no leſs wonderful) marner remeve all 2Mpe- 
diments or difficulties out of the way of his people, when they re- +, ſh, 
turn from Babylon. — 8 
17 Which bringeth forth the chariot and horſe, the ” "+ 
army and the power s ; they ſhall lie down together, 
they ſhall not riſe x: they are extin, they are quen- 
ched as tow y. 
u Or rather, Who brought forth the Chariots, 8c. i. e. Pharach and 
his Chrriots and Horſes, and Army: as may be gathered from the 
next Verie, where the things here menticned are called former things 
and things of old» x Org they did lie down together ( to wir, in the bot- 
rom of the Sea, ) they did not riſe ; they ſank like lead, as it is faid, 
Exod. 15. 10. and they never roſe again to moleſt rhe Iſraelites as 
God promiſed, Exod. 14. 13. Theſe rwo Hebrew Vetks are of the 
furure ſenſe, but that ſeems to be put for the Prerer-tenſe, becauſe 
therwo following Verbs, which treat of the ſame thing, and are 
added roexplain theſe, are of the Preter-tenie. y As the wieck of 
a Candle when itis put into the water is who!ly extinguiſhed, and 
not the Jeaſt ſpark of fire left, ſo werethey utterly deſtroyed, and 
not one of chem remained. 


18 * Remember ye not the former things,. neither * Chip; 
conſider the things of old z, 

z Bur although your former deliverance out of Fzypt was in it 
ſelf a moſt glorious work, which you oughr always to remember and 
conſider, yet this other work ot ycur deliverance out of Babylon by 
Cyrus, and thoſe blefiings which ſhall follow upcnir, and particu« 
larly that ineſtimable mercy of ſending the Meſjiab ſhall be to tran« 
ſcendenr a favour,that in compariſon thereof, al] your former delive. 


++ 5 after mec. 

[|Or, 10- z They can produce no witneſſes for themſelves, but you my 
people areable to witneſs for me, that I have given you many plain | 
demonſtrations of my certain forcknowledge of furure events. by | 
my predi&ions and promiſes delivered to you from time to time. 
# Either, 1. Iſaiah, and other Prophets, rheſingular word being pur 
Colle&ively : Or, 2. Cyrus, who is an eminent inſtance and proof 
of Gods forekrowledge: Or, 3. The Meſſiah, as not only Chriſtians 
bur even the Chaldee Paraphraſt underſtands it; who 1s called by 
this very title, 1/a. 42-1. who alſo is the moſt eminent witneſs in 
this caule; and thar both paſſively, as he and the time and place, 
and other circumſtances of his birth, and life, and death were par- 
ticularly foretold by God in Scripture ; and aQtively, as many fu- 
ture things were toretold by Chriſt, ef which we have many exam- 
ples in the New Teſtament. 6 Heof whom the preſent diſpure is, 
or he whom 1 have affirmed my ſelf ro be. That I only am thar true | 
God whom we are now ſeeking in this debate. c The gods of the 
Heathens neither had a beeing before me nor ſhall continue after 
me. herem more is underſtood than is expreſſed, That whereas 
the Lord is God from everlaſting ro everlaſting, theſe falſe preten- 
gers to the Diety are but of yeſterday, and ſhall ſhortly be aboliſhed. 
And withal he caHeth them formed gods, in way of contempt, and to 
ſhew the ridiculouſneſs of their prertence to the Divinity, which 
are formed by the hands of Men- 


11 I, even T * am the LORD, and beſides me there 


is no ſaviour 4. 

d That can and doth favehis Worſhippers ; whereby he implies, 
that the falſe gods were not only weakand unable to ſave their peo- 
ple, bur alſo were the deſtroyers of their peeple, as being the great 
cauſe of their ruine- 


12 T have declared, and have ſaved e, and I have 
ſhewed f, * when there was noſtrange gedamong youg : 
therefore ye are my witnefles, ſaich the LORD, that 


I am God. ] | 
© e 1 firſt foretold your deliverance, and then eff.Qed it. 7 Ifore- 


o Chap. 
45» 21- 
Moſ. 1 3-4. 


* Deuts 
J2. 12, 


rances are ſcarce worth of your remembrance and conſideration. 
Which expoſition is confirmed ty two parallel Texts, Fer. 16. I4, 
15. and 23: 7, 8. Fremall which Texts laid together irappears, thar 
this Jater deliverance, compared with that out of Egyps, js not to 
be confined to their freedom from the Babyloniſh Caprivity, but to 
be extended to the conſequences of ir, and eſpecially ro the Re- 
demprion by Chriſt; becauſe otherwiſe that Egyptian deliverance, 
vhs more glorious and wor:derful in many reſpetts, than the Baby- 
071Aans, 


19 Behold, I will do a * new thing a: now b& it a 
ſhall ſprivg forth, ſhall ye not know it c? I will even og 
make * a way in che wilderneſs, ard rivers in the de- ' Fg 
ſert && 4 Chap: 

a Such a work as was never yet done in the World, even the Re- 42: 16: 
demption of the World by the Mcſfiah. 6 Shortly although is was Jer« 31:# 
not to be done till after ſome hundreds of years. For ſo the Scrip= 
ture oft ſpeakerh of things at a great Ciſtance of time, as if they 
were now at hand, as Hag. 2. 6. Jam. 5. 9. Rev. 22. 20. and elfe- 
where, which it doth to corre@& cur impatience, and. to make us 
willing to wait ti]] God's time come; and to aſſure us that the mer« 
cy ſhall come as ſoon as ever it is fit for us, and we for it; and to 
rake us ſenſible of the inconſiderableneſs of time, and all temporal 
things in ccmpariſon of God, and of the eternal things; upon 
which account it is ſaid that a :hiuſand years are in Gods ſiaht but asone 
aay, Pſal. go. 4. c Certainly you Jews ſhall knew it by experiences 
and ſhall find that I do not deceive you with vain hopes. 4d I will 
give you direQion and proviſion in the Wilderneſs, where there is 
commonly no path, and where all neceſſaries are wanting : which 
as it literally ſpeaks of God's conduRing them in the way from Ba= 
6ylon to Jeruſalem, which lay through a great deſert; fo it is myſti- 
cally meant of thoſe ſpiritual bleſſings,' which Ged in and through 
Chriſt will confer upon all his people, not rhe Jews only, bur alſo 
the Gentiles, who in Prophetical Language are oft compared to the 
Wilderneſs, as Uſa. 35. 1. andelſewhere. 


e, the 


20 The beaſt of the field ſhall honour me 
| Cragons 


Cha 
Or, 


oftric, 

He 
daug 
of rhe 


* Lui 


74, 7 
*iPer 


+ Heb 
bnke, 
kigs. 


{} Heb. 
made 7 
drunk, 0 
8#bundan 
moi fined 


*Mal.2 


'Ezek:3: 


2, &c. 


"Ch.1.18 


"IE WENT 


Chap. XLII. I $8 A 


jOr, dragons fand the || F owls : becauſe I give waters in the 
erg wilderneſs, end rivers in the deferc, togive drink to my 
þ Fane ©, people g, my choſen. J WID : 

owl. . * Shall bave cauſe, if they had abilities, to honour and praiſe me 
ef for their ſhare in this mercy. Poflibly rhe beaſt of the field may my- 
ſtically ſignifie the Gentiles, whom the Jews reputed as Beaſts, and 
who were as deſtitute of all ſaving knowledge, as the Beaſts which 
periſh, yet ſhould become the Lord's People, as _— ſcem to be cal- 
led, wer. 21. f Which live in dry and barren deſerts,and are very 
thirſty, and therefore more ſenſible of this mercy. 5 To whom 
theſe waters were principally deſigned, but the beaſts fared tetter 
for their ſakes. Thus Chriſt was primarily ſent to the Iſt Sheep of 
Iſrael, Mat. 15. 24. yet the Gentiles there compared to Dogs, fared 
berter for the Children, picking up ſome crumibs of their bread ; 
and the Jews generally reje&ing Chriſt, the Gentiles came in their 
ſtead. 

21 * This people + have I formed for my ſelf,* hey 


ſhall ſhew forth my praiſe 5. 

h My People, as he now called them, wer, 20. conſiſting in part 
of the Jews, but eſpecially of the Genriles. i I have created as it were 
out of nothing, I have called them into my Church, that I might 
have glory and praiſe from them for ſo ſtupendious a mercy. 

22 But & thou halt not called upon me /, O Faceb, but 


thou haſt been weary of me, » O Iſrael. 

k Or, For, as this conjunQion is oft uſed. $9 this may be added, 
as a reaſon, why God called the Gentiles ro be his People, becauſe 
the Jews forſook him. 1 Thou haſt groſly negle&ed or very ſlightly 
performed the duties of my worſhip. » Thou haſt not eſteemed 
my ſervice to be a priviledge, as in truth it is, but as a burden 
and bondage. Compare Mal. 1. 13. 

23 Thou haſt not brought me the + ſmall cattel of 


thy burnt offerings », neicher haſt thou honoured me 
with thy ſacrifices s,I have not cauſed thee to ſerve with 


an offering, nor wearied thee with incenſe p. 

xz Either, 1. Becauſe thou didſt not offer thy Sacrifices to tne but 

- to Idols. Or rather, 2. becauſe what thou &didſt offer, was net 
done to me, not for my ſake, not from a principle of love and obc=- 
dience to me, not to pleaſe and honour me with it, but meerly fcr 
thine own ends. Which interpretation ſeems to be favoured by the 
following clauſe, and by comparing this with Zech. 7, 5, 6. Did ye 
faſt unto me, even tome? And when ye did eat did ye not eat for 
your ſelves ? oe Becauſe thou didſt either negle& this work of Sa- 
Crificing to me ; or didſt perform it meerly our of cuſtome or i'] 
deſign, and not with a purpoſe to pleaſe and glorifie me ; or didſt 
diſhonour me, and pollute thy Sacrifices by thy wicked courſe of 
life. p So the ſenſe may be this ; I didnet require theſe wearifome 
ſervices of thee, to wit, upon theſe terms, or to be offered in ſuch 
a manner, as God ſpeaks, Iſa. 1. 11, 12, 13. But the words may 
very well be rendred, Although 1 did not cauſe thee ro ſerve with offe= 
rings, nor weary thee with Incenſe : the Particle Although, being here un- 
deritood, as it is in many other places,as hath been formerly noted. 
And ſo this is an aggravation of their former ſin, of being weary of, 
and negligent in his ſervice ; altkough God hath nor laid ſuch hea- 
vy burthens upon them, nor required ſuch hard ſervices or coſtly 
offerings from them, as might give them cauſe to be weary,nor ſuch 
+ —_ did freely and greedily perform in the ſervice of their I- 

ols. 

24 Thou haſt bought me no ſweet cane q with mo- 
ney,neicher haſt thou f filled me with the far of thy ſa- 
crifices r, but thou haſt made me to ſerve with thy ſins 


s, thou haſt * wearied me with thine iniquities, 

moiſftned. q Or, Calamus, as this word is rendred, Exod. 3o. 23. which was 
*®Mal.2.17 uſcd in the making of that precious ointment, Exod. 30. 34. andas 
a perfume, or for the Incenſe, Exod. zo. 7. See Fer. 6. 20, The 
meaning of this clauſe ſeems to be this, Thou haſt been niggardly in 
my. ſervice, when thou haſt ſpared for no coſt in the ſervice of thine 
Idols,as is ellewhere noted. » Thou haſt offered no more Sacrifices 
than were ſimply neceſſary, thou haſt not multiplied thy thank of- 
ferings and free-will offerings, though I have given thee ſufficient 
occa:ion todo ſo. 5s Thou haſt made me to bear the load and burden 
of thy ſins, which are very grievous and oppreſſive to me, Amos 
2. 13. and great exerciſes of my patience. Yea thou haſt made it 
neceſſary for me, to take upon me the form of a Servant, that I 
might bear and carry away thy ſins. This clauſe and that which fol- 
lows are oppoſed to, and aggravared by what he ſaid, wer. 23. Idid 
not make thee to ſerve or weary thee with offerings, though that 
work was honourable and beneficial to thee, as well as conducing 
ro my ſervice ; but thou haſt made me to ſerve in the vileſt manner, 
wo ſuch things as are not only cffenſive to me, bur alſo pernicious 
to thee, 

25 I, even 1t am he that * blotteth out « thy tranſ- 
oreflions for mine own ſake x, and will not remember 
thy ſins y. | 

: I whom thou haſt thus deſpiſed, and wearied and provoked to 
deſtroy thee. « Out ofmy book in which they were all written,and 
to be read unto thee, and charged upon thee another day. See Jer. 
17. 1. Rev. 20, 12, Sins are oft compared to debts, Mar. 6. 1:, 14, 
&c. which are written in the creditors Book, and crofled or blot- 
ted out when they are paid, x Being moved thereunto not by 
thy merits, but by my own meer gordneſs and free mercy, 
7 2 as to puniſh them and deſtroy thee for them, as thou deſer- 
veſt. | 

26 Put mein remembrance z : *let us plead together: 
declare thou, that thou mayeſt be juſtified. 

z I remember nothing by which thou haſt deſerved my favour 
and the pardon of thy ſins ; if thou knoweſt any ſuch thing, bring 
it to my mind, I allow thee free liberty to plead with me, as it fo]- 
lows,and if thou haſt right on thy ſide, I will juſtifie thee. Ir is an i- 
renical ſpeech, whereby ke infulteth over thoſe, who were puffed 
up-with an opinion of their own innocency, and merit; which 
was thecaſe of many Jews, as $his and other Propticts have oft ob- 
ſerved. | 


* Luke x. 


14, TS. 
*\Per.2 9. 


+ Heb. 
lambs, or, 
higs. 


t Heb. 
made me 
drunk, or 
#tundantly 


'Ezek'36. 
22, &c. 


*Ch.1.18; 


1 #2 I Chap. 


27 Thy ficſt * fachers hath ſinned ;- and thy  teach- 
ers b have tranſgreſſed againſt me. 

# Either, 1. Adam, from whom the guilt and filth of ſin is pro- 
pagated tro thee : Or rather, 2. Abraham, who might well be called 
the firſt father of the Iſraelites, becauſe they all deſcended from him, had 
all their right and title ro God'sOrdinances andPromiſes,and other 
ſpecial Priviledges from God's Covenant made with Abraham, and 
with his Seed, and who is ofr emphatically called their Father, as 
Fojh. 24. 2. 1/a. 51. 2, &c. and the Jews gloried in, and trutted to 
that relation, which they had to Abraham, as weread Mat. 4. þ. Joh. 
8. 33. and elſ:where. And this agrees well with the forego- 
ing context. For having ſufficiently intimated, thae they had no 
merits of their own, he now addeth, that even their Father Abra- 
ham, to whoſe merits they truſted, had nomerits of his own,nor any 
occaſion of boaſting, for he alſo was a ſinful man, and hath left ſome 
inſtances of his failings : Or, the firſt father may be put colleQively 
for their Forefathers ; and ſo he tells them, thar as they were ſinners, 
ſo alſo were all their Progenitors, yea even the beſt ofthem, bras 
ham and David, and dthers, for whoſe ſakes they expe&ed to be 
pardoned and rewarded. And this indeed is uſual wich God to 
upbraid the 1/raelizes with the ſins of their Fathers. . þ Thy Prieſts 
and Prophers ; who were their Interceſſours with God, and who 
were generally preſumed to be the holieſt part of that people, and 
therefore iftheſe were tranſgrefſours, the People had no reaſon to 
fancy themſelves to be innocent. 2s X 

28 Therefore I have profaned c the || princes of the 
ſancuary d, and have given Jacob to the curſe e, and 1 
rael to reproaches f. | | 

c As they have made themſelves profane, ſo I have dealt with 
them as ſuch, without any regard to the ſacredneſs and dignity o 
their funftions. I have expoſed them to contempt and deſtru&ion; 
a4 The higheſt and beſt of your Prieſts, whoſe perſons were moſt 
ſacred, and therefore ſuppoſed by themſelves and others, to be the 
furtheſt from danger. e Ts utter deſtrution, to which perſons or 
thingsaccurſed were devoted, of which this Hebrew word is cons 
ſtantly uſed, f To be the Obje&s of their Enemies ſcorn and res» 


proaches. 
CHA P, XIV. | 
A further Promiſe of Spiritual Bleſſings : 1 6. the vanity of Idols, and 
folly of Idvl-makers, and Worſbippers, 7 20. an Exhortation to praiſe 


«+ |} 

f Or 
Al 

Pyi 


God, 21 23. 0ur Redeemer and Maker, 24. for hit wiſdom, 25. . © 
truth, 26. power, 27, and goodneſs, 28. *Th 

Ec now hear, * O Jacob my ſervant, and Iſrael & 43; 

whomlT have choſen #4. Jer.3e 


» Although I have Chaſtiſed thee for thy Sins, and had juſt eauſe © ®! 
utterly to Deſtroy thee, yet in judgment I will remember Mercy, | 
and will ſtill own thee for my Servant and choſen People. 

2 Thus faith the LORD * that made thee, and for- 
med thee from the womb b, which will help thee, Fear 
not, O Jacob, my ſervant, and thou Feſarun c, whom I 
have choſen. 

b From the time of thy Birth, or coming out of the Womb.From 
thar time that I firſt took thee to be my People, I have been forming 
and faſhioning thee, by giving thee ET and Ordinances, and 
Teachers, by threatnings and corre&ions, and many other ways. 
He ſeems to allude to the praftice of Midwives,who uſe to compoſe 
all the parts of the new-born Infant into a right frame. c Another 
name of Jac:b or Iſrael, given to him, Dent. 32. 15. and 33. 5,26; 

3 For I will* pour water 4 upon bim that is thirſty e, *Ch.z5 
and floods uponthe dry ground : I will pour my ſpirit f Jeel8. 
upon thy ſeed,and my blefling g upon thine off-ſpring : 1#b. 7-1 

4 My Spirit and Bleſſing, whichis frequently compard to Water ; As 2., 
and ſo it is expounded in the latter part of the Verſe. e Either 1.u- 
pon.him that deſires it. Or rather 2. upon him that is deſtitute of 
it; For what is here thirſty, in the next Clauſe it is called dry ground. 
f The gifts and gracesof my Spirit : Which expreſſion heſcems de- 
ſignedly to uſe,to lift up the minds and hearts of the Jews from car- 
nal and worldly Things, to which they were too much addiQeed,; 
unto ſpiritual and heavenly Bleſſings, and thereby to prepare them 
for the better entertainment of the Goſpel g All the Bleflings of 
my Covenant,both Spiritual and Temporal. 

4 And they ſhall ſpring up as among the graſs b, as 
willows by the water-courlſes. 

h They thall increaſe and flouriſh like Graſs, and thoſe Herbs and 
Plants which grow up in the midſt of it. 


5 One ſhall ſay, I amtbe LORDS: and another ſhall 
[| call himſelf by the natne of Jacob, and another ſhall | 
ſubſcribe with kis hand unto the LORD, and || ſirname fOr, nem 
himſelf by the name of Ifrael;. the name 


*Th.4 


5 The Bleſſing of God upon the Jews ſhall be ſo remarkable, that Jacob. 
the Gentiles ſhall joyn themſelves unto them, and accept the Lord aOrg | 
e ae 0 


for their God, and own themſelves for liis People. | 
6 Thus faith the LORD +5 the king of Iſrael, and his Ira. 
redeemer the LORD of hoſts, *1 > the ficſt, and lam , 
the laſt, and beſides me there is no God. - 58 | 
k Here God reneweth his Conteſt with Idols: which he inſifteth Red og 
upon1o oft, andſo much, becauſe his own People were exceeding & pts 
protie to Idolatry. | > if 
7 And whol, as, ſhall call, and ſhall * declare #» * Cha. qr! 
it, and ſet ic in order o for me p, ſince I appointedthe 22. & 451 
ancient peopie q ? and the things that are coming, and | 
ſhall come r? let themſhew unto them «. 

1 Which of all the heathen Gods. » Shall by his powerful C 

or Word cauſe it to'be, and by his infinite ri alt irs o So 
that it ſhall be, Or, Sha# publiſh and declare: Two words expreſſing 
the ſame thing, as is uſual, » Thar which ſhall come to pats 
whatſoever it be ; which is eafily underſtood out of the following 


Clauſe. » Orderly relate all future Events in the ſame manner ag 
they ſhall happen. ? Heb. 0 me, ſoasT may hear it, and thereby 
be convinced of their Divinity. I 4 the time that I appointed 


5 or 


FY , d, >. wat. 0 VYy 
— 4 © 
# % 


= 


'XLIV., tj £19 od 
3 alled the Iſraelites ta be my People, whom he calleth *be anccent 
= —_— they were his Prople long before this time ; or as 
the Words may be rendred, the everlaſting People, becauſe he deter- 
mined, That he would never totally and finally caſt them off and 
deſtroy them, as he would do other Nations. Burt the Words are, 
and may well be otherwiſe rendred, Since I Conſtitutea or maae ( as 
this Word is elſewhere rendred ) The people of the world ; ſince I firſt 
made Man upon Earth, as the Seventy and others underſtand 1t. Let 
them give me-an account of any of their Predi&ions of future E- 
 —m the beginning ofthe World to this day. 7 Such things 

' as are near at hand, and ſuch as are to come hereafter. 5, Unto 
their Worſhippers, who conſu't their Oracles about future Events, 
as T have told them wnto thee, O Faceb, as it follows inthe next Verte. 
So: the Pronoun Relative. is put for the Antecedent, which is left 
to be underſtood out of the;following Clauſe. Clauſe. Or, #o or 
for themſelyes,' in their own: defence. Although theſe Words might 
have been omitted in the Tranſlation, as being inſignificant, ſuch 
pronouns being. oft redundant in the Hebrew Language, as Gen. 12. 1. 
and oft elſewhere, as alſo in the,Greek and Latine. 10197 
-- 8 Fearye nor, neither be afraid : have not I told 
3.10 thee 3 from thattimes, and have declared itx? * ye are 
. 4- even my witneſſes y. Is therea God beſides me z ? yea, 
© * thereis no} God, Iknow not any a phe] 
p "a +; # Thee, ,O Iſrael, whom, he'bids not to fear. The Senſe is, I ca'l 
=: you Iſraelites to bear me Witneſs, whether I have nor, from time ro 
f - time, acquainted. you with things to come, ſuch as'your Sojourn- 
2, ing an ay tua Land for Four Hundred Years, and your deliverance 
354+ nd happineſs after that time, Ger. 15.13, 14+ and many things of 
the like nature ? « From the time when 71 appointed the ancient people, 
as I'now faid; wer. 7, Thele were pregnant Inftances of Gods Pre- 
"dition of things to come, not only from the beginning of the 
Jewiſh common- wealth ; but even from the firſt Ages of the World, 

as unto Exo:h. Jude wer. 14. and unto Noah. Gen. 6,3. To ſay no- 
thing of what other Authors Relate concerning, Adam, and 
Seth; Have publiſhed to the World in my Yacred Records. y 


to: them 2 Judge by this CharaQter, wherher I be. not” only the 
true God. # If any of you be wiſer than I am, I am willing to be 
informed. It is a ſarcaitical Speech. But this Clauſe may be, and 
is, by others taken interrogatively, do net 1 know :t-? Is it not a cer- 
tain and undeniable Truth.chat there is no. other God ? 

- 9. They chat make a graven Image re all of them 


Both of my Predi&ions, and ofthe ExaTt agreea'leneſs of Events : 


T4 Hh Chap. XLIV«+ 
ſuits beſt with the next foregoing Clauſe, He worketh with the ftrength 
'of his arms, i. e. fervently, and putring forth all his might in the 
Work. 2. Becauſe the Prophet in this, and in the next following 
Verſes, is only deſcribing tl:e mechanical part, or the matter of ]. 
mages, and the art and Jabour of the Workmen in making them ; 
and afterwards proceeds to the Theological conlideration of 
"7g thing, and the confutation of theſe PraQtices, as we ſhall 
6c. ; 

13 The Carpenter » fſtretcheth out his rule: hemark- 
eth it with a line 0: he ficteth it with planes, and he 
marketh it out with a compaſs, and maketh it after the 
figure ofa man,according to the beauty of a man p;that 
it may remaing in the houſe 7. | 
. # He here ſpeaks ; Either 1. of the ſame Image. which is ſup- 
poſed to be made of Wood, and then covered with ſome Mctal:Or, 
2. of another iort 'of Images made of Wood, as the former might 
be made of Iron, It is not material which way you underſtand ir. 
o-He meaſureth and marketh that portion of Wood by. his Rule and 
Line, of which the Idol is to be made. þ In the ſame comely Shape 
and Proportions which are in aLiving Man,whom he, Ceſigns to re- 
preſent as exaQtly as is poſſible. q Or ft or dwell, Which implies, 
Either 1. that it cannot ſtir out of its place : Or, 2. that when the 
Image 1s made, it is ſet up and fixed in its appointed place. r Ei- 
ther in the Temple appointed for it: Or in the dwellingHouſe of him 
that made it; that he and his Family might more frequently give 
Worſhip to it, and might receive Prote&ion from it, as Idolaters 
vainly imagined. ; | 

14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cy- 
preſs and che oak s, which he || ſtrengthneth for himſelf 
among the trees of the forreſt : : he planteth an aſb,and 
the rain doth nouriſh #t» | ; 

s Which affoord the beſt and moſt durable Timber. : The Senſe 
of the Words thus rendred is, Thar he planteth,and with care and - 
d:ligence improveth thoſe Tre's, among and above all the Trees 
of the Forreit, that he or his Poſterity may thence have Materials 
for their Images, and thole things v hich belong to them. And this 
Senle ſeems to be favoured by the following Clauſe, wherein it is 
ſaid, He planteth an Aj for this very reaſon: Or the Senſe may be 
this, Which he ſuffers to grow to greater ſtrength and largeneſs, 
than othe: Trees ot the Forreſt, that they may be better and fitter 
for his uſe. Heb. And he ſtrengthueth himſelf, &c. And he uſeth all 
his ſtrength among the Trees of the Forreſt, .in p'anting ſuch as are 


[|Or,zaketh 


courage, 


115. VADUty, b, and their F delectable things c ſhall-not profit, 
z and they-are their own witneſſes d, * they ſee not, nor 
* know e3 that they may be aſhamed f. 
 "SHeteby diſcover themſelves to be vain, empty, or fooliſh Men. 
Or thus. They that make graven images,all of them make ( which Word 
. may fitly be repeated our ofthe foregoing Claufe, as is very uſual 
in Loorpwure ) # wanity or 4 thing of noughr. Which Tranſlation ſeems 
better to agree, 1. With the following Clauſe, which is added to 
explainthis, in which,not the Idol-makers, but the Idols themſelves, 
are {aid to be vain or unprofitable. 2. With the uſe of the Hebrew 
Word in Scripures, which is never applied to Perſons, but con- 
ftanrly to'Things,and ſomerimes to Idols, as 1 Sam. 12. 21. c Their 
Idols, -1n the ſight and worſhip of which, they t-ke ſo much Plea- 
ſure. d They that make them, are Witneſſes againſt themſelves, 
and againſt their els, becauſe they very well know, Thar they are 
not God's, but the work of their own Hands, in v hich there is no- 
thing but mean matter and Man's Art, e Or, that they ( to wit, 
their 7dols ) do not ſee nor know, have neither Senſe nor Underſtanding. 
f Therefore they have juſt Cauſe to be aſhamed of their Folly and 
_ Stupidiry, in worſhipping ſuch ſenſeleſs Things. 


10 Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven i- 
Jab. 2.18 Mage that is * profitable for nothing g ?. 


Hands have formed ; or melt a Graven Image 
the former Clauſe, 70 be his God ) whichis profitable for nothing He 
ſpeaks of melting a graven image, becauſe the Image was firit molten 
and caſt in a Mould, and then poliſhed and graven with a Tool], as 
was obſerved before Oo ; 
meſt a god, or melteſt a graven image to worſhip it, which is pro- 
frrable for nothing ? Come hither and Jer me reaſon the Caſe with 
thee. Which he doth in the following Verſes:So this Verſe is a kind 
of Summons to /dolaters, to come and plead their own Cauſe. 
Pſ97.7. 11 Behold, all his fellows þ (ball be * albamed: and 
-ha-1.29: the work-men, they are of men z. let them all be garhe- 
7 42 17: red together, let them ſtand up ; yer they (hall fear, and 
FT 45.16. + 3 
4 they ſhall be aſhamed together &. 

þ Either - 1. the Workmen, as itfollows, who in this Work are 
Companions or Partners with him, by whoſe coſt and command 
the Work is done. Or 2. thoſe who any way afliſt and enccurage 
him in this Work, and joyn with him in worſhipping the Image 
which he maketh. # They are of Mankind, and therefore cannot 
poſſibly make a god. Or, They are of che meaneſt ſors of Men ; for ſo the 

Hebrew Word Adam, ſometimes ſignifies. k Though all combine 
rogether, and ſtand up with all their might to maintain the Cauſe 
of their falſe gods, they ſhall be filled with Fear and Confulion, 
when God ſhall plead bis Cauſe againſt them. 


12 * The ſmith || with the tongs both worketh in the 
. ey coals, and faſhioneth it with hammers ], and worketh 
Or, with it with the ſtrength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and 
ware. his ſtrength faileth; he drinketh no water,and is faint 7. 
{ Firſt he makes the Metal ſoft and pliable, by putting it among 

| burning Coals, and then he taketh it our, and beateth ir into whar 
form he pleaieth. Ir muſt be here noted, That ſome of theſe Ima- 
es were made of Braſs and Iron, as others were of Gold and Silver, 
po 5. 4. ® This is mentioned ; Either 1. asan Argument of the 
vanity of 1dols, which cannot relieve their poor Workmen, when 
they are ready to faint away through Hunger, and Thirſt, and 
Wearineſs. Or. 2. as an evidence of great Zealand induſtry in car- 
rying on this Work ; ſo that they forget or negle& to eat and 
drink when their neceflities require it. This I prefer, x. Becauſe jt 


"Chap 40. 


I 
& 


£ What Man in his Wits can eſteem Thar a = er” bs gs own 
underitand out of 


Or thus, Who art thou, O Man, that for-: 


proper for this end ; in walking hither and thither to ſurvey which 


15 the beſt of them; in hewing them down, and in other things re- 


lating to them. : 
| 15 Then ſhall it be fora man to burn: for he will 
take thereof and warm himſelf : yea he kindleth it,and 
| baketh bread ; yea, he maketh a god ; and worſhip- 
' peth i# ; he maketh a graven image, and falleth down 
' thereto . 
| u Having related the praQices of Idolaters, he now diſcovers the 
van ty and folly of ! hem, that he makerh his fire and his god of the 
ſame Materials, diſtinguithed only by the Art of Man. 
' 16 He burneth part thereof in the fire : with part 
thereof he eateth fleſh x : he roſteth roſt. and is ſatisfi- 
ed ; yea, he warmeth himſelf, and ſaith, Aha, I am 
warm, TI have ſeen the fire y. 
17 And the relidue thereof he maketh a god, ever 
; his graven image : he fallecrh down unto jt, and wor- 
ſnippeth iz, and prayeth unto it, and faith, Deliver me, 
| for thou art my god. 

x He dreſſeth Fleſh for his eating. » I have fe!t the warmth of 
it. Seeing is oft put tor o: her Senſes, as Feeling, Hearing, &c; as 

hath been ofr obſerved before. 

| 18 * They have not known, nor underſtood z 5 for « cp, 
' he a hath + (but their eyes, that they cannot ſee ; and 45. 20. 
their hearts, that they cannot underſtand, t Heb. 

z This ſheweth, That they want commecn diſcretion, and have daubed, 
not the underſtanding of a Man in them @ To wit, God ; who 
is ealily underſtood, and is ofrexprefſed by this pronoun, He, and 
ro whom this very att is frequently aſcribed in other places of Scripe 
ture: And therefore Men nced not to be ſhy in aſcribing it to God 
here. Which yer is to be ſoberly underſtood , not as if God did 
make Men wicked, but only permits them fo to be, and orders,and 
over-rules their Wickedneſs to his own glorious Ends. And ſuch _ 
paſſages as theſe are added in ſuch caſes, to give an account of the 
prodigious madneſs of Sinners herein ; becauſe, as they wilfully 
thut their own Eyes, and harden their own Hearts, ſo God judici- 
ally blinds and hardens them, and ſends ſtrong deluſionsupon them, 
and gives them up to believe Lies, and then it is no wonder if they 
fall inro ſuch dotages. Ce. : 

19 And none Þ conſidereth in his heart b, neither is : 

| ; ) Heb.ſets 
there knowledge nor underſtanding to ſay, T have burnt ,,;s ;» ji: 
part of it in the fire, yea, alſo I have baked bread upon jear:. 
the coals thereof: I have roſted feth and eaten ir, and 
ſhall I make the reſidue thereof-an abomination ? (ball 
I fall down to Þ+ the ſtock of a tree ? 

6 Whereby he implies, That the true Cauſe of this, as well as 0- 
other abſurd and brutiſh praQtices of Sinners, is the negle& of ſeri-. 
ous and impartial Contideration of things. 

20 He feedeth of athesc : * a deceived heart 4 hath , Ha 
turned him aſide e, that he cannot deliver his ſoul f, nor ©: 
ay, 1s there nota lie in || my right hand g ? | 

c Which is an unſavoury, unprofitable, and pernicious Food,and 
no leſs unſatistying,uncomftortable,& miſchievous is the worſhip of 
Idols. d A Mind corrupted and deceived by long cuſtom, deep pre- 
; judice.groſs errour,&'eſpcially by his own Luſts. e From the way 
| of Truth,from the knowledge and. worſhip of the gy 5 = 

utl 


+Heb.thet 
which 
comes of 
tree. 


WM 
Q s by 
J $5.4 : 
ts 
A 
> 


*Pſ. 96 
11, 12. 
Ch. 42. 
10, & 4 
13.Jer>5 
48. 


i Heb. 


Waſts, 


'Ch.50.1 


*2Chr.36 
22, 23. 
Ezra. 1. 1 
Oc, Cha, 
45. 13, 


Lo 
2 


VU 


ed at 


XLIV. I $ A 
brutich Holatry. f From-the ſnares and dangers of Idolatry.This 


cans is to be underſtood morally, ſo as to note the great difficulty, 
but not the utter imyoflibility ofir ; for if Idolaters would conſt- 
der things, they migit be convinced of, and turned from that groſs 
'* way of Wickedn-(:, as is implied from the foregoing Verſe. gWhat 
is this Idol, which [ have made with my right Hand, z. e. with all 
my *rength, as was ſaid before; the right Hand being the ſtrongeſt 
and rhe chi:f inſtrument of this and other a&ions; which I ſet at 
my riyht Hand, as the true God is faid in Scripture to be a# the 
right hand of his People, Pſal. 16. 8. & 109. 31. & 120. 5. Which - 
I highly honour, for the moſt honourable place was on the right 
Hand, as is known ; to which, I look and truſt for reliefand afſift- 
ance, which Godin Scripture is ſaid to affoord to his People, by 


Chap: 


being at and holaing of their right hand,Pſal. 73. 23. & 110. 5, Whar, 
I fay, is this Idol? Is it not a lie, which though it ſeems and pre- 
tends to be ſomething, and to be a god, yet in truth 1s nothing 
but vanity and falſhood, deceiving all that put their truſt an 
it? 

21 Remember theſe þ, O Jacob and Iſrael ; for thon 
art my ſervant ; I have formed thee, thou art my ſfer- 


vant : O Iſrael, thou ſhalt not be forgorten of me z ? 

þ Either theſe Men: Or, which comes to one, theſe things, the 
deep ignorance and ſtupidity of Idelaters; which may be a warn- 
ing to thee. 7 I will not forget nor forſake thee; and therefore 
thou ſhalt have no need of 1do!s : Or, as the ancient Interpreters and 
divers others render it, 40 net forget me ; what Iam,and whar I have 
done, and can and will do for Thee ; the forgetting whereof 1s 
the ready way to Idolatry. 

22 ] have blotted out as a thick cloud & thy tranl- 


oreflions,and as a cloud,thy ſins: return 1 unto me,for I 


have redeemed thee m. 

k As the Sun commonly diflolveth, or the Wind ſcattereth the 
thickeſt and blackeſt Cloud, ſo as there is no remnant, nor appear= 
ance of it left. {From thine 1alatry, and other wicked prattices:; 
- Therefore thou art mine, and obliged to return and adhere to 
me, 


23 *Sing, O ye heavens ; for the LORD hath done 


*Pſ. 96: - 
— it : ſhout ye lower parts ofthe earth 3 break forth into 
Ch. 42: ſinging ye mountains, O forreſt, and every tree therein 
mw #2 z: for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified 
8 5 himſelf in 1ſrael. 
» By ſuch invitations to the ſenſeleſs Creatures to praiſe God 
with and for his People, he ſignifies the tranſcendent greatneſs of 
. this Mercy and Deliverance, ſufficient to make even the Stones, if 
it were poſſible, to break forth into God's praiſes ; and withal, that 
as the brute Creatures were Sufferers by Man's fall, ſo they ſhould 
- reccive benefit by Man's Redemption. 
' Jae? 1. 24 Thus faich the LORD thy redeemer, and * he 
Pſ 16-4 that formed thee from the womb 's, I am the LORD, 
Ch. 4o. that maketh all zhings, * chat ſtretcheth forth the hea- 


22.0 42. yens alone,that ſpreadeth abroad the earth by my elf p: 

5. &' 45. o Of which Phraſe ſee above on ver. 2. p And therefore I can 

12: & SI. Save thee without the help of any other gods or men. 

13. 25 That fruſtraceth the tokens of the liars q, and 
maketh diviners mad r;that turneth wiſe wer backward 


s, and maketh rheir knowledge fooliſh : 

9 Of the Magicians, and Aſtrologers, and Sorcerers, who were 
numerous, and greatly employed and eſteemed in Badylet, 1/a. 47. 
12, 13. Dan. 2. 2, 48. and who had foretold the long continuance 
and proſperity of the Chaldean Empire. Bur, ſaith God, I will con- 
fute their tokens or prediQions, and prove them to be Liars. r With 
grief for the diſappointment of their hopes and prediftions, and 


their diſgiaceand loſs which followed it. 5 Stopping their way, 


thwarting and blaſting their deſigns, ſo as they can proceed no fur- 
ther, bur are forced to retreat and rake new Counſels, and giving 


them up to ſuch counſels and courſes, as are fooliſh ang pernici+ 


ous to themſelves. ; 

26 That confirmeth the word of his ſervant :, and 
performeth the counſel of his meſſengers 3 that faith 
co Jeruſalem, Thou ſhalc be inhabited, and to the cities 
of Judah, Ye ſhall be built, and I will raiſe up the + 
deeayed places thereof. | 

: Of his Servants, the Prophets,as appears from the next Clauſe, 
which anſwers to this, where he uſeth the plural number, his Meſſen- 


gers ; Iſaiah and other Prophets, whom God ſent upon this Errand, 
to foretll the deſtruQion of Pabylon, and the redemption of his Peo- 


i Heb. 


waſts, 


'Ch.50.2. . 
up thy rivers «, 

# That with a'word can and will dry up the Sea ( Which in 
Scripture is very frequently called the deep, as Pſal. Lo7. 24. Ija. 63. 
13. Jonah 2+ 3, &c. ) and Rivers, and remove all impediments,and 
make the Way plain, that my People may return. Some think theſe 
words relate to that ſtratagem of Cyrus, whereby he diverted, and 
in a great meaſure dryed up the River Euphrates,and made it paſl:ble 
for his Army. Burt he ſeems rather to allude to that great Attion 
of God's drying up the Red-Sea and Jordan, to give paſlage to the 
Iſraelites. 

28 That ſaith of Cyrus x, He is my ſhepherd y, and 
ſhall perform all my pleaſure z, even ſaying to Jeruſa- 
lem, * Thou ſhalt be builc ; and co the Temple, "Thy 


22, 23 foundation ball be laid. 

Ira. 1,1, x Whom God here deſigneth by his proper Name, Two Hundred 
Oc, Cha, Years before he was born, that this might be an undeniable Evidence 
45. 13, of the certainty and exattneſs of God's tore-knowledge, and a con- 
vincing Argumenr, and ſo moit fit to Conclude this Diſpute be- 
between God and Idols. y Him wil fet up ro be the Shepherd 
of my People, to Reſcue them from Wolves or Tyrants, ro gather 
them together, to Rule them gently, and to provide comfortably 
for them. % All that I command himrto do, even to give ave 


":Chr.36. 


le. 
: 27 That faith * to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry | 


- 


a. 
— 


7 2 
and order, for therebuilding of the City and Temple of Jeruſalem, 


as it here follows. 

CH A P. XLV. 
Cyrus his work and ſtrength foreto!4, 1——4. God hath all Power,s 2. 
will aſſiſt Cyrus, 13. 14. the myſtery of Providence, 15. Idols and their 
worſvippers ſhall be deſtroyed : and God fylone exalted, 16 20. the 
Gentiles come in to Chrift, 22, 23. 


Hus faith the LORD to his anointed a, to Cyrus, 
whoſe right hand I have || holden 6, to ſubdue na- || Or, 


tions c before him : and I will * looſe the loyns of kings /7e72#%ne | 
* Dan. W 


d to = before him the two leaved gates e, and the 
gates ſhall not be ſhut. 

2 4. e. His King, whom God hath deſigned, and ſeparated, and 
fitted, in all reſpeQs, for his Work and Service; - in which, and 
ſuch like Reſpe&s, divers Perſons are ſaid.to be Anointed, who ne- 
ver had any matcrial Oyl poured upon them, as the King of Þyrus, 
Ezek. 28. 14« and Chriſt, 1a. 61. 1. and Zerubbabel, Zech. 4. 14. and 
Chriſtians, 2 Cor. 1. 21. 2 Joh; 2. 27. And they are thus called by 
way of alluſion to the praQce of the Jews, whoſe Kings were fre= 
quently Anointed, 1 Sam. 10. 1. and 16. t3, &c. 6 Or, Strength= 
ned; whom I will powerfully affiſt, teaching his Hands to War, as 
the Phraſe 1s,Pſal. 18. 34. ſupporting and dire&ing his right Hand 
to ſtrike home. c The Babylonians, and thoſe other Nations which 
were Confederate with them, and fought for them, as may be ga- 
thered from Jer. 51.9. & 1 will weaken them, for a Man's ſtrength 
conſiſts much in his Loyns : and receiveth ſome advantage by 
the girding of bis Loyns, Or, I will take away their Girdle, 
which was about their Loyns ; to wit, their Power and Authori- 
ty, whereot that was an Enſign, of which, ſee on Jeb 12. 18. 1/a.22, 
21. e The greatand magnificent Gates of their Cities and Palaces, 
which ſhall be opened to him as Conqueror. 

2 I will go before thee f, and make the crooked 
places ſtraight : I will break in pices the gates of braſs, 
and cut inſunder the bars of iron g. 

f Toremove all obſtruQions, and to prepare the Way for thee, 
as it follows. g I will Deſtroy all them that oppoſe thee, and car- 
ry thee through the greateſt difficulties. FE 

3 AndI will give thee the treaſures of darkneſs þ, 
and hidden riches of ſecret places, rhat thou mayeſt 
know 3, that I the LORD, which || cail hee by thy 
name, am the God of Iſrael. 

þ Such as have been ſtored up, and long kept in dark and ſecret 
Places, as well n Babylon, Fer. 50. 37. and 51. 13. as in other Coun- 
tries, which Cyrzs Conquered , and from which he took infinite 
Treaſures, as Pliny and othersrelate. # By the accompliſhment of 
theſe PrediQtions, | 

4 For Jacob my ſervants ſake,and Iſrael mine elec, 
I have even called thee by thy name & : I have ſirna- 
med thee, though thou haſt not known me J. 

k I have called thee to this Honour, and that by name ; not for 
thy ſake, . but for J/raels ſake : Therefore do not deſpiſe them, thou 
wilt find them a poor and inflaved People, neither be puffed up in- 
ro a great Opinion of thy ſelf. 7 I knew, and called thee by thy ; 
name, when thou didft neither know nor think of me ; nay, when | 
thou hadſt no Being. *D 

5 * I amthe LORD, and zhere 5s none elſe, * there is Fs ho: t 
no God beſides me ; I girded thee m, though thou halt 32: 39. 
not known mes Ch. 44. 

1 T made thee ſtrong and aQiive, and fitted, and diſpoſed thee for * Ver. 1 
theſe great and warlike Enterprizes. For theſe were the uſes and 18. 21, 
ſignifications of girding in Scripture : See 1 Kings 20. 11. Pf. 18. 32. 


[Or, 1 
Cha. 44. 


45: 3- 

6 That they may know » from the riſing of the ſun, 
and from the weſt, thar zhere is none beſide me ; Iam 
the LORD, andrhere is none elſe. 


# That all Nations may know it by my fortelling of theſe things 
ſo long before-hand z and by the wondertul Succeſs that I ſhall give 
thee, and by my over-ruling thine Heartand Counſels, and Vitto« 
ries, to the delive:ance of my People according to my Promiſe. 

71 form thelight,and create darkneſs 0:1 make peace, 
and * create evil : I the LORD do all theſe ings. 


o All mens Comforts and Calamities come from my Hand, 

8 Drop down, ye heavens from above, and let' the 
Sktes pourdown righteouſneſs p ; * letthe earth open q, *c 
and let them r bring forth ſalvation s, and let righteoul- 
neſs ſpring up together z : I he LORD have created itz. 
? The righteous and gracious Atts of God for his People, ſhall 
be ſo many and illuſtrious, as if God rained down ſhowers of righ- 
reouſneſs out of Heaven, 'q Open it ſelf either to receive thoſe 
ſhowers of righteouſneſs to be poured down from Heaven ; or ta 
bring forth thoſe Fruits which might be expeCted from ſuch Show- 
ers. 7» The Heavens and the Earth conſpiring together. 5s The Re« 
demption of God's people. # Together with Salvation. Whereas 
Perſons or People are ſometimes delivered from their Troubles by 
unjuſt Courſes , this ſhall be affeted with Righteouſneſs, both on 
God's part, who wall hereby afſert his own Juſtice and Faithful. 
neſs to his People ; and on Cyrus his part, who will do a moſt 
righteous and worthy Attion in re{cuing a righteous and oppre( 
ed Nation from cruel Tyrants and Oppreflors. « This great Work 
of Salvation and Righteouſneſs ; whereof, though Cyrus is the In« 
ſtrument, Iam the chief Author. 

9 Wo unto him that ftriveth with his maker x: let 


the porſherd ſtrive with the potſherds of the earth y : * *Ch.29.16 


*Amo.3. 


lbe51.x 


w 


z This wo is denounced ; Either 1. againſt thoſe Jes who hear. 


ing this and many other Prophecies, and Promites of theireeliver« 
ance our of Captivity, and yet continuing in Captivity, were ever 
prone 0 diſtruſt God, and to murmure at him for puniſhing them 
| ſa 


Chap. XL\ 


thy name 


ſhall the clay fay to him thar faſbionerh ic, What mak- Jer. 18. 6. 
eſt thou ? or thy work z,, He hath no Hands « ? Rom.9.20 


f 


* 


: 


hap. XLV. 
| ſo grievouſly, and for not making more ſpeed to deliver them. Or 
2. againſt the Babylonianr, the great oppolers of Cyrus, and of the 
deliverance of God's Pcople, whom they were reſolved to keep 1n 
Bondage, in ſpight of God and Men. And therefore as God vere 
makes many glorious Promiſes to Cyrus, in order to this Work, fo 
he pronouncerh a Curſe upon them, who ſhould endeavour to hin- 
der it; and admoniſheth the Babylonians, That they did not only 
fightagainſt Cyrus, a Man like themſelves, but againſt God, the Ma- 
ker and Governour of the World. For what Nebuchadnezzar ſpoke 
with reſpe&tochoſe three Jews, Dan. 3. 15. the Babylonians ipoke 1N 
their Hearts, in reference to the People of the Jews, Who is that God 
that ſhall deliver you out of my hands ? y Contend, if you p'eafe, with 
our fellow Creatures, bur not with your Creator. z He turn- 
eth his Speech to the Potter,of whom he ſpake in the Third Perſon 
in the foregoing Clauſe ; ſuch ſudden Changes of Perfons being 
uſual in Prophetical Writings, # The Porter that made me, had 
no hands, 5, e. no ability or skill ro make good Work. 
1 Wo unto him that faith unto his Father, What 


begetteſt thou ? or unto the woman, What haſt thou 
| brought forth s ?. 


b As it were an abſurd and impudent Thing, for a Child to quar- 
re] with his Parents, either ſimply for Begetting him, or for Beget- 
" ting him of this or that Sex, contrary to his delire ; no better 1s it 
for any Perſons to quarrel withGod theMaker and Father of all things, 
\ as God is called, i Cor. 8. 6. for diſpoſing of themand their Afﬀairs, 
| by his Providence, as he ſees fit, and otherwiſe than they delire or 
expe ; as the Jews quarrelled with God, for bringing them into 
Captivity ; and the Babylonians, for Tranſlating the Empire from 
them to the Perſians. 
x1 Thus faiththe LORD; the holy One of 17ael,and 
+ Heb. 4 his makerc ; | Ask me of things to come concerning 
oo ”% my ſons, and concerning the work of my hands com- 
Jo ez. mand ye me d. | | | 
cerning my , © Iraels Maker, who not only Created him, as I did all others, 
Sons. and but made him a new Creature, and a peculiar People ro my elf, 
Gras d The Words thus rendred, contain a conceflion or permiſſion ; 
the work and the Senſe may be this, Although the Potter doth not give an 
of my hands account to the Clay, nor Parents to their Children ; yer I will fo 


3 -” = a” -* 


ly be rebuilt, but the Wealth and Glory of other Countries ſhall be 
broughtto it again, as it was in former times. Whica although it 
was in part verified in Feryſalem, yet it was much more fully ac- 
complithed in the Church of the Goſpe], which is oft expreſled in 
Scripture under the name of Jeruſalem , and in the Acceflion of the 
Genziles to that Church which began in Jeruſalem, and from thence 
ſpread it ſeIfinto all the parts of the World, And this ſenſe ſeems 
beſt to agree wth the latter part of this and with the following 
verſe, as we ſhall ſee. o They ſhall be taken captive by thee, and 
willingly ſubmir themſelves to thee. Which was accompliſhed in 
the Converſion of the Gentiles, whoſe ſubjeCtion to God's Church is 
oft exprefled in Scripture under ſuch Metaphors as this ; as P/. 45, 
5. and 149. 8, &c. P/al. 68. 18. compared with Eph. 4. 8. þ To 
obtain thy favour and ſociety. q Or, with thee. We plainly dif. 


. Cern that God is on thy ſide, or in the midſt of thee ; and there. 


: far condeſcend to you, as to be at your Command in this matter 
__ to give you an account of theſe great Aftions of mine for which 
L " you quarrel with me. As for the Expreſſion,Command ye me,though 
it ſeem to be harſh, yet there are inſtances in Scripture of ſuch 


make his People in Heaven #0 fit down to meat, and will come forth and 
ſerve them, Luk. 12. 17. But the Words ſeem to be berter rendred 
interrogatively, as they are in the Margent. and by ſome other In- 
terpreters, Do you, or, will you ack me of things to come concerning my Sons, 
and concerning the work of mine hanas will ye command me ? Will you nt 
allow me that Liberty which your ſelves take, of diſpoling of my 
own Children and Works ; as I ſee fit? Muſt Igive you an account 
of theſe matters ? Will you ſet Bounds to me by your commands, 
that I ſhall do this, and not thar according to your good pleaſure ? 
This is intolerable boldneſs in you ; and yet I am able to give a 
ood account of my Aﬀions. And the Account 1s given in the 
following Verſe. | 
12 I have made the earth, and created man upon it 
e: I, even my hands have ſtretched out the heavens,and 
all cheir hoſt have I commanded f. 

e They are wholly and ſolely my Creatures, and therefore ab- 
ſolutely ar my diſpoſal. f I have commanded them to be,or made 
them by my Command, gx the Word of my Power : Compare 
> P/al. 148. 5. ; 


E 13 I have raiſed him g up in righteouſneſs h, and I 
| Or, make will || direct all his -waysz: he ſhall * build my city, and 


"Fature, ſo, thine, they ſhall come after thee, in chains they 


£5. ſhall come over 0: and they * ſhall fall down unto thee, 

Go. I» and they (ball make ſupplication unto thee p, ſaying, 

©* x Cor. Surely God is in thee 9, and * there is none elle, there 
25,vr.5. zz no God r. 


I The wealth gotten by their labour. »» A tall and ſtrong Peo- 
ple, who yer ſhall uſe their ſtrength not to oppoſe thee, bur to 
ſerve thee, and to bring their labour to thee. » Either, z. To 
thee O Cyrus : Becauſe thou waſt ſo generous asto diſmiſs my peo- 
ple freely, I will give thee another, and a better recompence, even 
the labour of Egypt, &c. Or, 2. to thee, O my City, or my Capti- 
vity or Caprive People. For it is not ro be neglefted, that there 
are no leſs than ſix pronouns in this Verſe, all which are of the fe- 
minine gender ; which ſeemsnor to, agree to Cyrus. It is true which 
is obje&ed by the moſt learned Author of this parr of the Engliſh 47 
notations, that the Scripture oft ſpeaks of States and Kindoms in the 


wonderful Condeſcentions, as when it is ſaid, that The Lord wil 


feminine gender ; but when it ſpeaks of any particular King orEm- 
perour, it conſtantly ſpeaks of him in the maſculine gender, as it 
doth of Cyrus in this very Chapter, ver. r. and elſewhere. And 
thus the ſeaſenf the place ſeems to be this, Jeruſalem ſhall not on- 


fore we deſire to joyn our ſelves with thee. +» We are now con- 
vinced, that thou art the only true God, and that Idols are vain 
and empty nothings. Which was but very obſcurely fulfilled in 
Cyrus his time, but was moſt evidently and eminently accomplithed 
in the days of the Meſſiah, of whom Cyrus was a Type ; as alſo this 
deliverance of the Jews from Babylon by Cyras, was a '['ype of the Re- 
demption of God's People by Chriſt. 

i5 Verily thou art a God 5 that hideſt thy ſelf z, O 
God of Iſrael the Saviour. 


5 Theſeare the words of the Prophet drawn from him by the 
contemplation of the great and various works and diſpenſitions of 
God towards his Church, and inthe World. * To wit, from thy 
People for a ſeaſon : Thy Counſels are deep and and incomprehen- 
ible, thy ways and carriages are paſt finding out, and full of bezy- 
riful variety : Sometimes thou hideſt thy face, and withdraweſt 
thy help from thy people, and ſometimes thou doſt ſhew thy ſelf to 
be their God and Saviour, as it follows. And therefore it is meer 
that we ſhould patiently wait for the accompliſhment of theſe glo- 
110usthings here promiſed to us. And thisadmonition 15 moſt fitly 
inierted here, to prevent the miſtak=s of God's people, and to in- 
timate, that theſ: promiſes were not to be {pecdily executed, but 
that they muſt expe and prepare for many and ſharp afflitions, 
betoie that time ſhould come, which yet ſhould end in their Salva- 


tion. | 
16 They « ſhall be aſhamed, and alſo confounded all 


of them : they ſhall go to confuſion together that are * 
makers x of Idols. 

# The Idolatrous Gentiles, as it is explained in theend of the verſe, 
Oppoſed to Iſrael in the beginning of the next verſe. x Either the 
artificers, or the chief ma1iers that tet them on work, and confe- 
quently all their Worſhippers ; although the Makers being moſt 
guilty, and the cauſe of rhe fins of others, might juſtly expe a 
higher degree of confulion. 


I7 But Iſrael ſhall be ſaved in the LORD with an e- 
verlaſting Salvation y : ye ſhall not be aſhamed nor con- 
founded world without «nd. 

y Not for a thort time, as it was inthe days of the Judges and of 
the Kings, under whom their dar:gers and calamiries did frequent= 
Iy return upon them ; but unto all ages, as it follows, whence it 
appears, that he ſpeaks nor only nor chiefly of their Deliverance out 
of Babylon, which was far from being compleart or perpetual, as a p= 
pears both from Scripture, as Ezra. 9. 8. and elſe-where, and fiom 


. Other Authors ; bur of their Redemption by Chriſt, by which this 
; was truly and fully verified, unto a great number of Iſraelitcs after 


the Fleih, and eſpecially unto the myſtical,God's Church and Peo- 
ple, who are frequently c:iled in Scripture by that name; as the 
Ordinances and Priviledges of the Goſpel are commonly deſcrib- 
ed in the O.d Teſtament, by expreſſions borrowed from the Levi- 
tical ditpenfation. And thar this is the meaning of the place is evi- 
dent from ver.22.wherein' all che ends of the Earth are faid to be ſharers 


18 For thus ſaith the LORD * that created the hea- »c1, 42-5, 


vens, God himlclf that formed the earth, and made it, 
he hath eſtabliſhed it, he created ir nor in vain, he for- 


n Right-ouſneſs, and Truth, and | med it ro be inhabited, * Iamthe LORD, and rhere is 


z This deſcription "f God is here added, Either r. Todete& the 
vanity of Icols, by afferting,that none wasto be owned as the true 
God, b-ſides that one God who made the Heavens and the Farth, 
and the Inhabitants thereof: Or, 2. To demonſttate God's Suffici= 
ency to fulfill all theie glorious promiſes madeto his Church, be- 
canic he made the World of nothing, and upholds it by the word 
of his Power; a::d withal to diſcover God's goodneſs ro menkind, 
inaſmuch as he did not Create the Earth in vain, but for the uſe 
and comfort of men, that ir might be a fit habitation for them : 


whence it was eaſlie to infer, that God would much more be gra- - 


cious to lus own People. 


Fraight. he ſhalt let go my captives, * not for price nor reward | in this Salvation. 
b © ſ- &, ſaith the Lord of hoſts. | 
_ SB "  g Cyrus, who was named before, ver: T. h Not in a way of ab- 
Ch.44 223 ſolute Soveraignity, as I might have done, bur moſt juſtly, to pu- 
 *Ch.c2.2, Diſh the wicked Babylonans, to plead the Cauſe of the innocent op- 
_ refſed Ones, to manifeſt my ow ; 
Goodneſs. # Guide and affiſt kim in all his Travels and Marches, ; none eiſe z. 
in all his Attemprs, and Barrels, and Steges, crowning him with ; 
g Succeſs in all his undertakings. & Freely withour requiring any | 
Ranſom for or from them, as is uſual in ſuch caſes. Such an exs- | 
a& PrediQion of theſe things wivich depended wholly upon the ( 
Mind and Will of Cyrus, is mentioned here,as an infallible Evidence | 
of the certainty of God's forcknowledge, and of his being the only | 
true God ; becauſe dels could diſcover no ſuch things, at ſuch a 
diſtance of time. : 
fl Or, aut 74 Thus ſaith the LORD, Thel!abour of Egypt /,and 
%;.. merchandiſe of Ethiopia, ||and of the Sabeans, men of 
"ans, men of ſtature m2 (hall come over unto thee x, and they ſhall be 


19 IThave not ſpoken in * ſecret, in a dark place of 
the earth a: I ſaid not unto the ſeed of Jacob, Seek 
ye me in vain b: I the LORD ſpeak righteouſneſs, I 
declare things that are right c. | 

aThe Hearhen Idols deliver their Oracles darkly and Joubtfully, 
in obſcure Cells and Caverns of the Earth, or out of the bellies of 
their Prieſts : but I have delivered my Oracles to 1ſrael publickly 
and plainly, as one that was neither afraid nor aſhamed to utter my 
mind, leſt T ſhould be convinced of folly and falſhood ; which was 
the caſe of Idols. 5 Serve and worſhip me for nought. As I ap- 
pointed them work, ſo I promiſed, and from time to time have 
given and ſhall give them, abundant recompence for their fer- 
vice. Whereas the Gentiles ſeek to their Idols in vain, for they 
can do them no good, as is obſerved in the next verſe. c I re- 
quire nothing of my people which is not highly juſt and good ; 
whereas the Idols commanded their Worſhippers to do many fin- 
ful and ſhameful things, even in their worſhip, as is notoriouſly 
known, 


20 Afemble your ſelves and come ; draw near wr 
gether 


Chap. 


XLV. | 


5 
* 


*Ch.8.19; 


*Ch 44.1) 


Chap. 


*Chap.4 
09, t7, ' 
&c. 


*Chap* 
22.and 4 
9.& 44- 
& 46. | 
& 48. 1 
Wer: 


thy 18, 


"Ch. 5: 
I1. 
*Rom. 1 


« 01, Phi] 
| 2, 19s 


( ory) | 


QS 


{ [Or fure! 
' ki balſa) 


ef me,in t/ 


: LORD :s 


* Ver. $4 


* Deut. 
30. II. 


Ch.48.16e 


al righte= 
wſneſs ana 
frength. 
{Heb. 
Mgbteouſe 
wes, 


| (Or,ar} 


\ 


| Or; Your 


ave 


Bag borg, 


Chap. XI.VI. 3 $i 4 
'Chap.44- gether d ye that are eſcaped of che nations e: * they have 


9,17, 15 no knowledge f that fer upg the wood of their graven 


image, and pray unto a god that cannot ſave. 

4 To debate the buſineſs with me concerning the divinity of 
your Idols, and hear what IT have ſaid, and am now abour to ſay 
again in that matter. e The Remnant of the Gentiles, which ſhall 
ſurvive thole great and many deſtructions, which I am bringing 
upon. the heathen Nations, for their abominable Idolatries and 
other wickedneſs.Let theſe dreadful Judgements upon others, and 
God's ſingular Mercy in ſparing you, awaken you to a more 1m- 
partial and ſerious conſideration of this point, and caſt of thoſe 
do's which have now diſcovered their own vanity and inability to 
help thoſe who ſerve them, and truſt in them. f They hereby 
diſcover their deep ignorance and ſtupidity. g In an high place 
where it may be teen and worſhipped. 

"Chap 4x 21 Tell ye, and bring them near, yea, let them 
| 22and43 take counſel together þ: * who hath declared this 
| 9& 44- 7-5 from ancient time ? Fo hath told it from that 


< wif 


OH 2g time? Have not I the LORD? and * there js no God 
werſe 5, Elſe beſide me; a juſt God and a Saviour &, 7re 25 
14,18. none belide me. 


þ To mantain the cauſe of their Idols. © ; This great Work of 
which I have ſpoken, concerning Babylon's  deſtruttion, and the 
Redemption of God's People. k Whereas the Gods of the Hea- 
thens are neither Juſt nor Saviours to their People, but wicked, 
and the Authors and Abetters of all ſorts of wickedneſs; and fo 
far from being either able or willing ro ſave their worthippers, 
that they are the chief occaſion of their utter deſtruttion. 

22 Look unto me and be ye ſaved all the ends of the 


earth ] : for I am God, and there is none eiſe.. _ 

1 Upon theſe conſiderations, I adviſe all People upon Earth, 
from one end to the other, to caſt away their Idols, and.to turn 
their eyes and hearts ro me,  expeCting Salvation from me, and 
from me only ; and their labour {hall nor be in vain ; for they 
ſhall be ſaved : The Imperative being pur for the Future, as Gen. 42. 
18. and oft elſe-where. And this is not only an Exhortation to 
the Gentiles to tuin from idols to God, but a Prediftion that 
they ſhall turn to him and look upon Chriſt, who ſhall be the Au- 
t0; of Salvation to all that obey him, whether Jews or Gentiles, 
which is confirmed by the following verſe. ; | 

23 1 have ſworn by my lelf », - the word is gone 
out of my mouth #» righteouſneſs », and ſhall not * re 
curn o, that unto me every * knee [ha] bow,every tongue 
ſhall ſwear p. | 

m Which is the higheſt and moſt ſolemn Oath that is poſſible, 
Heb 6. 13. ad theretore ſignifies, that the matter here ſworn 1s 
ofan extraordinary Importance. # lIrt is not a vain word raſhly ut- 
tered, ani afterwards never remembred nor obſerved, bur what I 
ſincerely ſpeak, and will moſt faithfuily and infallibly perfo: m 
o To wit, unto me void, or without effe&, as this Phraſe is more 
fully delivered, 1/z. 55. 11. It is a Metapaor from Ambaſſadours, 
who ſometimes return to their Princes without any ſuccels in thei 
bulinels. þp Not only the Jews, bur a People of all Nations ſhall 
worſhip me, and ſubmit ro my Laws; which is ignified by an ont- 
ward a& the bowing of the Knee, which is a poiture of Reverence 
and SubjeCtion ; I d by one eminent part of God's Worſhip, 
which is «caring by his Name. 

24 || Sureiy, (ball oze ſay q, In the LORD r have I 
 kfbalſay | Tigaceouſneſs 5s, and ſtrength #: ever to him jhali 

(mein che 1280 COMe #, and all that are incenſed againſt him ſhall 


| ID is be aibamed x. ; 
a righte= 4q Or, ſbathe ſay, each orevery one of thoſe, whom he now ſaid, 
uſnſsand that they ſhould bow their knees to God, and ſwear by him, verſe 
frength, 23. Or, :xjball be (aid, ſuch a&ive Verbs being oft uſed imperſo- 
fHeb. nilly » By or from God alone, or the Meſſiah, who is the true 
nghteouſs Jehovah as well as Man. s To juſtifi: me from all things from which 1 
wer, coula not be juſtified by the Law of Moſes, as is ſaid, As 13.39. This 
Plainly points us ro the Miah, wheſe very name is, the Lord of our 
Righteouſnels, Jer. 23. 6. and whoſe great buſineſs it was to bring in 
everlafting Righteouſneſs, Dan. 9 24- and who is made unto us of Goa 
Righteouſneſs, i Tor. 1. ;0 & Support and affittance to bear all my 
burdens, and overcome all my enemies, and perform all my duties. , 
The !enſe, The Gentiles ſhall expe& and obtain from Chriſt botk | 
Juſtification, or Foregiveneſs of fins by his Blood. and SanCifica- } 
cio by his Spirir. #« The Gentiles ſhall come to God and Chriſt, ; 
either i. By conſtraint, or neceflicy to be judged by him at the 
laſt day. Or 2. Willingly by Prayer to feck, and by Faith to re- 
ccive Righteouſneſs and Strength from him : Which ſeems better 
to agree with the foregoing Clauſe, which ſpeaks of true Believers 
only Coming to Cariſt is put for believing on him, Matth. -- 1. 28. 
John $. 50. and 6.55, 56, 57. and elſe-where. x Or, but (as this 
Particle is oft rendred ) all that are, &c. . But all his implacabie 
enemies thall be brought to ſhame and puniſhment. . 


25 In the LORD hall all che ſecd of Iſrael y be ju- 
ftified z. and thall glory ||. 


y AY] Ifraclites indeed, whether Jews or Gentiles ; all Believers, 
who are frequently called God's 1/ra+! in Scripture, as Pſal. 24. 6 
Rom. 9. 6. and 11. 26. Gal. 6. 16. z Acquirted both from real 
guilt before God, and from all falſ: aſperſions before the World ; 
For this Juſtification of the true {/rael is oppoſed to their enemies 
being aſhamed, verſe 24 which ſeems to deſign their publick ſhame 
and confu'ion before God and men _ Shall not only receive him, 
but ſhall rejoyce and triumph in him as their God and portion. 
| CH A P. XLYL 
The ruine of Babylon and her Idols, 1, 2. God's Love and Faithfulneſs 

to the Jews, 3, 4 1aols not to be compared with God. 5 8. For 
F Power, Knowledge, and ſure Salvation, g x, 


3. ” 
EL «4 boweth down #5, Nebo ec: ftooperh, their Idols 


I. 

*Rom. 140 

« 11, Phil» 
2, 10» 


[Or furelie 


{ 
! 


i 
| 
#, 


| (0r,az) 


| 


_— 


' # You who have been guilty of this fooliſh Sin; and therefore 


2 0 Chap. XL 


a The chief Idol of the £2b)/minns, Jer. 50.2. and 51: 44. cale 
ledby prophane Hiſtorians 7rpzter Belus. b As the Babylonians uſed 
to vow down to him to worſhip bim, ſo now he boweth down and 
iubmirs himſelf to the vi&orious Perſians, c Another of the famous 
Idojs, which uſed to deliver Oracles, as his name ſignifies. 4 Were 
taken and broken, and the materials of them, which were Gold, 
and Silver, and Braſs, as both Scripture and ocher Authors witneſs, 
were carried upon Beaſts into Perſia. - e O ye Perſians; to whom he 
ſuddenly turneth his ſpeech, as is uſual. f They lie upon the 
backs of your Catte) like dull and unprofitable and heavy burdens 
to the beaſts, as they had been to Men before. | WI3H 1: 

2 They g ſtoop, chey bow down together h, they lk 
- could not deliver the burden 3, but + themſcives are * Heb. Milli 
gone into captivity. or 

g£ E'!ther, r. The Idols, of whom theſe words are uſed, verſe r. 
Or, 2. The Babylonians, who are ſufficiently implyed in that ex- 
preſſion, their Idols, verſe 1. h Either, 1. One as well as another. 
Or, 2. The Babylonians and their Idols together, neither could 
help the other. 7 Either, 1. The Idols could not deliver them< 
ſelves, who were now a burden to the Beaſts, and carried away 
by them. Or, 2. The Babylonians could n:t deliver t!.cir Idols, 
which he now had called Burgens. And this Senſe ſeems moſt 
probable from the following Clauſe, which clearly ſpeaks of the 
lame perſons or things; but themſelves, &c. Heb. their Souls : 
For although zhe Soul is here put for the Perſon, as it commonly 
1s, yet that Title is never given to any Idol or lifeleſs thing, bur 
only to ſuch Creatures as have or had Souls within their Bodies. 
So the meaning of this and the foregoing Verſe, is this, That 
neither the Babyloiians nor their Idols, could either fave them- 
ſelves or one another; but both are bowed down, and goae into 
Captivity together. : 

3 Hearken unto me, O houſe of Jacob, and all the 
remnant of the houſe of Iſrael 3 * hich are born by me, 
from the belly, which are carried from the womb & . 

z Fitly ſo called, with reſpeC& either, 1. To all the Tribes of 
Iſracl, Ten of which were now loſt and gone. OF, 2. To the ſtats 
of the Jews at their return from Babylon, there being . only a rem- 
nant of the two Tribes which did return, k Whom I have nou« 
riſhed, and cared for from time to time, ever ſince you were a 
People, and came out of Egypt ; and thar as affeCtionately and teri- 
derly, as Parents bring up their own Children, 

4 And even to your 0:d age 1 arms he, andevento hoar 


= 0 a — _ 
CR ———__———_—_—_———_—_—_—_— a SNOOTO 


hairs * will I carry you /. Thave made, and I wilkbear, *Ex. 19- 
I will nd wil deliver you m. Deut.1.3 
even I will carry and wi er / . . al 


And thar care and kindneſs which I have had for you fromthe 
beginning, I will continue to you to the end; never forſaking you, 
unleſs you wilful'y and obſtin=tely caſt me off, as the Jews did 
when their Meſſiah came. » You ace my W-rkmanſhip, - both as 
you are Men, and as you are my peculiar People ; and therefore 
I will preſerve and deliver you. | 

5 * To whom wil ye liken me, and make me equal, 


and compare me, that we may be like » ? | 
n» If you are tempted or inclined at any time to exchange Me 
for an ido), do me and your ſelves this Right, ſeriouſly ro coofider, 
Whether you can find another God, who will be more able, and 
more ready to do you foe than I have been ; Which if you can 
do, I am content you ſhould prefer him before me ; Bur if not, as 
. wil' appear by whar Iam now ſaying, : verſe 6,7. then it is beſt for 
you to adhere to your ancient God and Friend. | $a 
6 * They laviſh gold out of che bag, and weigh filyer *Chap.4o, 
inthe balance, and hire a goid{mith, and he maketh it oo & 47, 
a godo: * they fall down, vea; they worſhip. -_ 
0 Lerus ſuppoſe, a God made with the greateſt Coft and Art. - 
7 They bear him upon the ſhoulder, they carry 
him p, and ſer him in his place, and he ſtandeth ; 
from his place ſhall he not remove 4: yea, * one ſhall 
Ery unto him, yet can he not anſwer, nor fave bim 
our of his trouble. _ GEN 
Þ Either, 1. In Pomp upon ſolemn Occaſions. Or, 2. From 
that place where he is made, unto that place where they intend 
to ſet him up, as !t is expreſſed in the following Words. q_ Or 
rather, he cannot remvye, He can ſtir neither hand nor foot to help 
his People, rn 4 Zh 
8 Remember this r, and ſhew your ſelves mens ; * 
bring is again tomind z, O ye tranſgreſſors #. I 
. . » Conſider theſe things which I now ſpeak. O ye Iſraelites. 
s Att like reaſonable Creatures, and be not fo bruitiſh as to wor- 
ſhip your own works: Be ſa wiſe and couragious as to withſtand 
ali Solicitations ro Idolatry. t Think of this again and againe 


*chap.q9 
I 8, 25. 


12. Jer, 
20. 4 
*Chap.44. 
17. 


*Chrp.455 


20, 


are obliged to take the betrer heed, that you do not relapſe into 
1t again. : : ; L 5 

9 Remember the former things of old, || for I 2m 
God, and there is none elſe, I am Ged, and there is 
none like me. DE: 

[| What I have done for you, and in the World, my evident: 
Predi&ions of future things juſtified by the Event; and thoſe 
oor miraculous Works whereby I have abundantly proved my 

1v1nItY+ : | "1 . : 

to Declaring the end from the beginning x, and 
from ancient times. the, things that are not yer done, » 
ſaying, * My counſel hall ftand y, and I will do ail, 


my pleaſure : 


+ 


Pſal. $3. 
T. Prov. 
| | on \ 19. 24, & 

x Foretelling from the beginning of the World, or from the be- 27. 30. _. 
ginning of your Nation, thoſe future Events which ſhould happen Heb.6. 17, 
in ſucceeding Ages, even to the end of the World, or to theend of 
your Common-wealth ; for ſuch Preditions we find delivered by Mo- 


T Y 


h OBE: were upon the beaſts 4, and upon che cartel : || 
| rp your carriages e, were heavy laden f; they are a burden 


% to the weary beaſt, 
Ver born, 


fHeb. ths 
. Man. of ny 
counſel, 


ſes, the firſt founder of their Common-wealth. y As I will nor, (o 
no other Power can diſappoint my purpoſes and Prediftions, = 
Ix Calling a ravenous bird = from the Ealt a, f the 

| 5 ; man 


i 
I 


man that executeth my counſel bfrom a far country c; 
yea Thave ſpoken #, I will alſo bring it to paſs, I have 
purpoſed it, . I will alfo do it. 


x Cyrus called # bird for his ſwiftneſs and great expedition, and 
ravenous for his fierceneſs, and viQtoriouſneſs over his Enemies. 
# From Perfis, as I/aiah 41. 2. b Concerning the Deliverance of 
my People, and the deſtruftion of their crue! oppreſſors, the Baby 
lon/ans. c From Perſia, which was far from Babylon, but much far- 
ther from Judea. 

12 Hearken unto me, ye ſtout hearted 4, that are 


far from Righteouſneſs e. 
a Or, Ye * hearts are proud or hard or ſtubborn. He ſpeaks El- 
ther, 1. To the Babylonians, you who are ſtout againſt God, ang 
fay or think that neither God nor any Man can deliver my Peopic 
out of your hands Or rather, 2. To #he Houſe of Jacob, expreſled 
verſe 33 Where he beſpeaks them in the ſame Words here uſed, 
hearken to me; And to whom alone he direReth his ſpeech in this 
whole Ch:pter, for though he ſpeaketh of the Babylenians, yet he 
doth not ſpeak to them; And to whom the Prophet, for the moſt 


HA 4 IE 


art, turneth his ſpeech in all his Prophecies, unleſs where there 
is ſomething in the Text or Context, which determineth it to ſome 
other Perſon or People. And this very crime of ſtoutneſs, or hard- 
neſs of heart is molt juſtly and moſt frequently charged upon the 
Jews, by their own Prophets every where, becauſe of their groſs 
contempt of, and incorrigibleneſs under all God's Words and 
Works. And the Prophet 1peaks this, either to the Jews of his Ge- 
neration; Or rather to that Generation which was carryed Captive 
to Babylon, whoſe ſtout-heartedneſs is particularly noted and repro- 
ved, Zech. 7.11, 12. Compare Mal. 3. 13, 14, 75. e That are not 
only yoid of, bur enemies to Righteouſneſs and true Holineſs : 
Thar give up your ſelves to wickedneſs, that deſpiſe my Counſels, 
and Promiles, and Threatnings. ; : 
13 I bring near my righteouſneſs f: it ſhall not be 


far off g, and my ſalvation ſhall not carry; and I will 


place ſalvation in Zion þ for Iſrael my glory s. | 
f Though you are moft unrighteous perſons, and have given me 
Juſt cauſe 70 make you 10 know my breach of Promiſe, as] threatned in 
the like caſe Numbers 14. 34.Yet I will ſhew my ſelf to be a Righte- 
ous and Faithful God, making good my Promiſe of delivering you 
out of Babylon after ſeventy Years ; and although you think the time 
long, and are apt to dittruſt the thing it ſelf, yet it ſhall come, 
' and that ſpeedily,1 will bring it near,or cauſe it ro approach, or come unto 
you, and as it follows, it ſball not tarry beyond the appointed time. 
£ My Work of ſaving you from the Babylon;ſh Captivity. 4 I will 
bring my People from Babylon to Zion, and there I will ſave them 
from all their Enemies. 7 In whom I will once again glory, as 
my Peop'e, and the illuſtrious Monuments of my glorious Wii- 
dom, and Power, and Truth, and Goodneſs; Whom I will mike 
a great and glorious Pcop'e, though now they are mean and con- 


temptible, and in whom:I will once more ſertle my glorious Pre- | 


ſence and Ordinances. 
G HA P. MXEVIL 

God's Fudgements upon Babylon and Chaldea : Fr their cruelty towards 
God's People, 1 6. Their pride and ther fins, 9———10. Their 
Enchantments ſhall not deliver them, 11 15. i 1 
Ome down #a and fit in the duſt 5: Ovirgin daugh- 
ter of Babylon c, ſit on the ground : there is no 
throne d, O dauzhter of the Chaldeans: for thou ſhalt 


no more be called e tender and delicate. : 

a From thy Throne, as it follows. 6 Either neceſſarily, be- 
cauſe thou ſhalt have no higher ſeat : Or, voluntarily, as mourners 
do, bewailing thine approaching calamities. «c So called either, 
1. Becauie ſhe had not yer been humbled and conquered. Or ra- 
ther, 2. Becauſe ſhe was render and delicate, as the next Cluſe 
3nformeth ' us. 4 To wit, for thee. The Empire is taken away 
From thee, and tranſlated to the Perſians. e Either be reputed ſo, 
Or rather be ſo: for to be called is frequently pur for to be, as hath 
been divers times noted: Thou ſhalt be reduced to great hard- 
ſhips and milſcries. | 

2 Take the Milſtones f and grind meal g, uncover 
thy locks 4+: make bare the leg: uncover the thigh z, 


paſs over the Rivers. 

f Betake thy ſelf ro the Milſtones; as we commonly ſay, :2ke 
thy bed, or, betake thy ſelf to thy bed, The meaning is, Thou ſhalt 
be brought down to the baſeſt kind of ſlavery, which grinding at 
the Mill was eſteemed : Of which ſee on Exodus Ir. 5. Judges 16. 21. 
Job 31, 10. Lament. 5. 13. For this work was not performed by 
horſes, as now it is, but by the labour of Slaves and Captives. 
g Grind Bread-Corn into Meal for thy, Maſters uſe. Such Metony- 
mical Expreſſions, we find 1ſaiah 28. 28. Hoſea 8. 7. and elſe-where. 
h Or, thine hair. Take off the Ornaments wherewith ſuch Wo- 
men as welie free, and of good Quality, uſed to cover and dreſs 
their heads. "This and the following Paſſages, though delivered in 
the form of 'a Command, are only PrediQtions of what they ſhould 
be forced to do or ſuffer, as appears from the next verſe. 7 Gird 
up thy Garments cloſe and ſhort about thee, that thou mayeſt be 
fit for ſervice, and for travelling on foot, and as it follows, for 
paſſing over thoſe Rivers, through which thou wilt be conſtrained 
to wade, in the way to the Land of thy Captivity. 

3 Thy nakedneſs ſhall be uncovered &, yea thy 
ſhame ſhall be ſeen /: I will take vengeance w,, and I 


will not meet thee as a man ». 

& Either, x. For want of Raiment to cover it. Or rather, 
2. By thine enemies in way of ſcorn and contumely, by compar- 
ing this place with Ezekiel 16. 37. and 23. 26, I Upon thee for 
thy: many and great injuries done to my People. m As a Man 
'mects. his enemy in the field, to contend with chee. » With mo- 
deration and gentleneſs, as thoſe Men who have nor quite put off 
Humanity . uſe to do, bur like a Lyon tearing thee to picces, to 
which God in ſuch caſe compareth himſelf, as Hoſea ;. 14. and 13. 
7,8. compare Hoſea 18. 14. 


2 As for our Redeemer, the LORD of hoſts ;- his 
' Name, the holy One of Iſrael o, 


_— 


"I 
Chap. XLy1L 


0 According to this Verſion, the Prophet inſerteth this paſſage 
in the midſt of this Propheſie againſt Babylon, as Jacob inferterh a 
like paſſoge in the midſt of his Bleſſings and Prophefies concern- 
ing his Children, Geneſs 49. 18- And this may be here interpo- 
ſed, either, 1. As the reaſon why the Judgement here denounced 
ſhould be certainly inflicted, becauſe he who had undertaken ir 
was the Lord of Hojis, and therefore able to effe& it, and the Holy 
One, and the Redcemer of Iſrael, whom the Baylonians had cruelly 
opprefled, whoſe quarrel God would avenge upon them, and 
whom he had determined and promiſed to deliver out of thcir 
hands, Or, 2. As a pathetical exclamation or acclamarion of 
God's People, for this wonderful Work of breaking the aff of 
their oppreſſors, which they here aſcribe to God, as he is their 
God and Redeemer, whom they here make their boaſt of, and 
whom they Celebrate for this glorious Deliverance. But becauſe 
theſe words, as for, are not -in the Hebrew Text, and therefo.e a- 
nother word may be as conveniently ſupplyed; this verſe may be, 
and is'by ſome learned Interpreters, otherwiſe rendred, and joy- 
ned with the foregoing words thus, 7 wil! take vengeance, and { will 
net meet thee as a man, ſaith our Redeemer, whoſe Name is the Lird of 
Hoſts, the Holy One of Iſrael. For the word, ſaith or ſaying, is fre- 
qu:ntly underſtood, and therefore ſupplyed by Tranſlators, as x 
Kings 20. 34. Pſalm 27.8. and 125. 15. and in this very Prophecy, 
as ſainh 5.9. and 45. 14. and elſe-where. 

5 Sit thou lilent p, and get thee into darkneſs 9, O 


daughter of the Chaldzans: for thou ſhalt no more be 


' called the Lady of Kingdoms 7. 


Þ Through grief and ſhame, and as Mourners uſe to do, Job 
2. 13. Ceaſe thy vaunting, and inſolent ſpeeches : Thou caaſt ſay 


| nothing for thine own juſtification, q Thou ſhalt go into an obe 


' circumciſed and unclean Perſons, 


{cure, diſconſolate, and calamitous condition: r The chief and 
glory of a!l Kingdoms, as 7/aiah 13. 19, the moſt large and potent 
and glorious Empire of the World, as thou haſt been. 

6 I was wroth with my people: TI have polluted 
mine inheritance s, and given them into thine hand :: 
thou didſt ſhew them no mercy # ; upon the ancient 
haſt thou very heavily laid the yoke x. 

5 I caſtthem away as an unclean thing ; I ſtained their glory; 
I removed them from the holy Land, and from the place of my 
Preſence and Worthip, which alone made them an holy and pecu- 
liar People; I baniſhed them into a polluted Land, amongſt un- 
by whom they were many ways 
defiled ; IrejeQed them from being my People, and ſo they were 
in my ſight no better than the reſt of the Heathen Nations. t To 
puniſh them, and deal with them as thou ſaweſt fit. « Thou haſt 
exceeded the bounds of thy Commiſſion,and in ſtead of that com- 
paſſion, which humanity reacheth Men to ſhew to ſuch as are in 
miſery, thou didſt add ro their afflitions. x Who beſides their 
common calzmity were afflited with the miſeries of Old Age, and 
therefore did require both pity and reverence. 

7 And thou fayeſt, 7 ſhall be * a Lady for ever : ſo, 
that thou diddeſt not lay cheſe things y to thy heart, NXv-18.7 
neither did{t remember the latter end of it z. 

y Thy cruel uſages of my People, and the heavy Judgements 
which thou kadſt reaſon to expe& for them. # Of that Lady, or 
of Babylon, and her Glory and Empire, or of thy ſelf; here being 
a ſudden change of the Perſon, of which I have noted many Ex- 
amples in this Prophet. The Senſe is, Thou waſt beſotted with 
the ſenſe of thy preſent felicity, and didft not conſider, as thy 
duty and common diſcretion obliged thee, what might and was 
likely to befal thee afterward ; thou didſt neither expe& a change 
nor prepare for it. 

8 Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to plea- 
ſures, that dwelleſt careleſly, that ſayeſt in thine hearr, 
1 am a, and noneelſe beſides me b; TI ſhall not ſit as a 
widow, neither ſhall T know the loſs of children c. 

a 1 am independent, and ſelf-ſufficient, and unchangeablez as 
that Phraſe implies, which therefore is appropriated ro God, 1/a. 
41. 4.and 43. 10. and elſe-where. The Prophet doth not here uſe 
the very Phraſe which the Babylonians uſed, but expreſſeth their 
Senſe in a Scripture Phraſe. b Which is not either ſubje& to me, 
or far inferiour to me in Power and Glory, ſo that in compariſon 
of me it may be ſaid not to be, becauſe it diſappears like Stars 
at the preſence of the Sun. © I ſhall never want either a King or 
People to defend me from all dangers. | 

9 But theſe ewo * things shall come to thee in a mo- 
ment in one day ; the loſs of children, and widow- 
hood ; they ſhall come _ thee in their perfe&ion 4d, 
for the multitude of thy forceries, and for the great a- 
bundance of thine inchantments e. 

d In the higheſt degree. Thy King and Kingdom ſhall be ut- 
terly and eternally deſtroyed. e For thy ſuperſtitious and magical 
Practices, which were very frequent there, as we ſee below, verſe 
12, I3. and as was obſerved betore. Or, as it is in the Hebrew, In 
the multitude of thy Sorceries, &c. in the midlt of, and notwithſtan= 
ding all thy diabolical Artifices, whereby thou thinkeſt to foreſee 
any dangers, and to ſecure thy ſelf from them. 

Io For thou haſt truſted in thy wickedneſs f: thou 
haſt faid, None ſeeth me g: Thy wiſdom and thy | 

. Rey” Or, c9%* 
knowledge h, it hath |] perverted thee z, and thou haſt -1 theers 
{aid in thine heart, 1am, and none elſe beſides me k. 7,,,y any 

f Confidently expeRing to preſerve thy ſelf by theſe and other 
wicked arts, and policies. g My Coeunſels are ſo deeply and cun- 
ningly laid, that God himſelf can neither diſcover nor prevent the 
execution of them. + In State-policy, and the Arts mentioned a- 
bove and below. #7 Hath mitled thee into the way of Traniſgrefſion 
and Perdition. & Which was ſaid verſe 8. and is hererepeared, to +FHeb.thi 
note their intollerable Arrogancy and Self-confidence. mics gg 

11 Therefore ſhall evil come upon thees, thou ſbalt 


[ 
\ 


Chap. 514 
19. : 


4 : hereoſ. 
not know 7 from whence it riſeth : and miſchief ſhall _ {ite 
fall upon thee, thou ſhalt not be able to { pur it off.” p:are. 


and 


Fiup- 


T7 


tHeb, 


*FL9g of 


heavens * 
tHeb.7 hat 
ra know» | 
lage CON 
ming the ; 
onths, 
Heb.thc2r 


/ 


luls, 


_ 


Ss % Kc 


po hin 2 Ak) CA Ind jt os © A ed os fd 6% A I 


on! 


4 heavens 
'{cb that 
we know 
he (0M 
ming the 
onths. 
Heb.? hi i 
luls, 


: p, XLVIIE 


- on being put for all. 


and deſolation ſhal come upon thee ſuddenly », which 


chou (halt not know. 

1 Or rather, when it ſhall come: Heb. the merning of it, the day or 
time of its approach : And they are juſtly uprbaided and derided 
for this ignorance, becauſe the 4/trolegers,the Star-gazers,and the month- 
ly Prognoflicators, mentioned here, verſe 13. pretended punQtually 
to foretel the particular time of all future Events. And this Ex- 
plication agrees with the Hſtiory, Babylon being ſurprized by Cyrus, 
when they were in deep Security, as is manifeſt, both from Scrip- 
ture, Jerem. .51, 31. Dan. 5, and from other Hiſtories. 92 Or, 
when, thou ſhalt nos know it. Thou ſhalt not apprehend thy danger 
till it be too late. | 

12 Stand » now with thine inchantments, and with 
the mulrcitude of thy forceries, whe rein thou haſt labour- 
ed from thy youth o: if ſo be thou ſhalt be able to pro- 


fit, if ſo be thou mayeſt prevail. 

z This Word notes; Eirher, 1. Continuance” Perſiſt or go on 
in theſe Praftices. Or 2. Their Geſture, For thoſe that enqui- 
red of their Gods by any of theſe ſuperſtitious Prattices uſed ro 
ſtand, this being a poſture, both of Reverence, and waiting for 
an anſwer. Bur this is not a command or conceſſion, but a-facred 
Irony, or ſcoff at the folly of theſe Men, who kaving ſo oft been 
diſappointed by theſe Impoſtures, yet wereas foreward to uſe them, 
and truſt to them, as if they had never deceived them. o From 
the beginning of thy Common-wealth or Kingdom. For the 
Chaldeans in all Ages were famous, or rather infamous, for the ſtu- 
dy and praQtice of theſe Arts. : | 

13 Thou art weatied p in the multitude of thy coun- 
ſe!s: let now the + Aſtroiogers, the Star-gazers, the | 
monthly Prognoſticators ſtand up, and fave thee q from 


cheſe things that (ball come upon thee. 
? Thou haſt ſpent thy time and itrength in going from one to 
another, in trying all manner of Experiments, and all to no pur- 
ole. 9g To Succour thee, or to enquire for thee, 


14 Behold, they (hall be as ituble : the fire ſhall burn 
them, they fhall not deliver + themſelves r from the 
power of the flame s :- there ſhall not be acoal to warm at, 


nor fire to ſit before it. 
r And much leſs thee. 5 They ſhall be totally conſumed, and all 
the corafort which thou didſt expe& from them, ſhall utterly vaniſh. 
15 "Thus : (ball they « be unto thee with whom thou 
haſt laboured,eventhy merchants from thy y outh,they (bal 
wander every one to his quarter: none ſhall ſave thee x. 
£ Such comfortleſs and helpleſs Creatures. « Either r. Thy 
Merchants, as it follows, with whom thou haſt trafficked. Or, 
2. Thy Sorcerers, Aſtrologers, &c. with whom they are ſaid to 
have laboured, both here, and verſe 12. who alſo may poflibly be 
called their Merchants, becauſe they traded fe much with them ; 
and becauſe of their deceitful praices; for which Ephraim 1s cal. 
led a M-rchant, Hoſea 12. 7. And fo the following Clauſe may be 
rendicd, who have been thy Merchants form thy Youth, Or, The 
laſt Clauſe may be underſtood of Merchants, properly ſo called, 
who came from ſeveral Countries to Trade with Babylon, as is not- 
ed in Scripture, and by other Authors: And the Verſe may be 
thus rendred. Thus ( vain and unprofitable ) ſhall crhey ( thy Sorce- 
rers, & ) with whwm thou haſt Iabouted be tmto thee. (So here is on- 
ly a rrantpotition of Words, than which nothing is more uſual in 
Scriprure. Then follows another matrer in the next Clauſe:) Alſo 
Thy Merchants, or they, with whom thou haſt traded from thy Yuth, ſhall 
wander every one to his own quarter. © x-They ſhall all leave thee, and 
flee away with all poſſible ſpeed to ticir ſeveral Countries and Ha- 


birations. 
CHAP FLVEEL | 
God reproveth their hypocriſie and obRinacie by his Propheſies, 1: 8. Hz! 
ſpareth them for his Names ſake: And that they may learn to know him 
aright, 9 11, Gox's powerful Salvation a motive to Obedience, 
12 17. God lamenteth their kackwaraneſs, 18. 19. Dc:liverance 
| out of Babylon, 20, 21. No peace to the wicked, 22. 

Ear ve this a, O Houſe of Jaceb, which are called 
| ] by the Name of Ifrael b, and are come forth out 
of the waters of Judah c: which ſwear 4 by the Name 
of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Ifrael 


e, but not in Truth, nor in Righteouſneſs f. | 

a What I am now going to fay againſt thee, that thou mayeſt be 
aſſured, that that great Deliverance, which I have determined and 
declared to give thee, is not for thy own ſake, but for my Names 
fake. b Which are !ſrselites in name, but not in Truth, as it fol- 
Iows. c From the lineage of your Progenitor, Judah, as waters 
flow from a Fountain, and as the [/-aelites are ſaid to be of zhe 
Fountain of Iſracl; Pſalm 68. 26. Compare alto Deuteron, 33. 28. Prov. 
5.15, &. 4d Which profeſs the truce Religion; one aCt of Religi- 
e Either in Oaths, or otherwiſe: "That own 
-him, and ſeem to glory in him as their God, and call themſelves 
by his name. f Which are the two chief I 9 of a lawful 
Oath, Jerem. 4. 2. They are guilty cf falthood and injuſtice, both 
in Oaths, and in their whole Converſation. : 

| 2 For & they hall call chemſcives of che Holy City 
b, and ſtay themſelves i upon the God of 1ſrael, the 


LORD of Hofts 5s his Name &. 

g Or, as others render it, and this Particle frequently ſignifies, 
Though. And fo this is added as a great aggravation of their want, 
and negl-<& of Truth and Righteouſn-is. þ They glory in this, 
that they are Citizens of Jery/atem, a City ſanCtited by God him- 
ſeIf to be the only Place of his true Woiſhip, and gracious Pre. 
ſence; Which as it is a great Priviledge, fo it laid a great Obiiga- 
tion upon them, to walk more holily than they did. 7 Not by a 
true and well-grounded Faith, but by a vain and preſumptive con- 
fidence, flattering themſelves, as that People commonly d:d, thar 
they ſhould .enjoy Peace and Safery, norwithſtanai':g all their wic- 


kedicſs; becauſe they were the ord's People, and had his Tems- . 


pk and Ordinances among them ; Which diſpolictivn the Prophets 


rs #1 a> 


frequently obſerve, and ſharply cenſure in them. k Or, Whoſe name 
is the Lird of Hoſts. 


| 3 I have declared the former things from the be- 
ginning | 2nd they went forth out of my mouth, and 
I ſhewed them, I did them ſuddenly, and they came 


to paſs FM | | | OS 17h 9-2 w 4 

/ Thoſe things which have formerly come to paſs, which I 
punttually foretrold from time to rime before they came to paſs: 
Whereby I gave you fuil Proof of my God-head. m What my 
mouth forerold my hand effefted. 


thy neck zs an iron ſinew o, and thy brow braſs P- 

2 Therefore I gave thee the more and clearer Demonſtrations of 
my Divine Nature and Providence, becauſe I knew thou waſt an un- 
believing and perverſe Nation, that would not eaſily nor willing'y 
be convinced. o Which will norbow down to receive my Yoke; 
nor to obey my Commands. Ir is a Metaphor raken from untamed 
and flubborn catte]: Of which ſee alſo Nehem. g. 29. Zech. 7. 11. 
£FAs 7.51, The ſenſe is, I conſidered that thou waſt unteachable 
and incorrigible. p Thou waſt impudent, and therefore wouldſt 
bold!y pretend that thou didſt foreſake me, for want of full con« 
v:Ction of my Divine Authority, and of thy duty : Therefore I de. 
termined that I would leave thee without excuſe. PERS 2 

5 T have even from the beginning declared it to 
thee; before it came to paſs I ſhewed ir thee s, leaſt 
thou ſhouldeſt ſay, Mine idol hath done them, and 
my graven imags and my molten image hath command- 
ed them. I er 

q I foretold theſe things, that ir might be evident, that they 
were the effe&s of my counſe!, and not of thine Idols as I knew 
thou waſt very inclinable to believe. | In 

6 Thou haſt heard ; fee all this r, and will not ye de- * 
clare it 5? I have ſhewed thee new things from thistime tr; 


even hidden things, and thou didſt not know them. }. 

5s As thou haſt heard all theſe things from my mouth, from time 
time, ſo now I adviſe thee to ſee, (i.e.) ſeriouſly to conſider 
them, and to lay them to heart. - I call you to witneſs: Muſt 
you not be forced to acknowledge the truth of what I ſay ? Deny 
itif you can: Or, have ye not declared it unto all People as occa« 
ſion required it? Have you not boaſted unto the Genriles. of this 
as your Honour and Priviledge ?t AndI have now given thee new 
PrediQtions of ſecret things, and ſuch as till chis time were wholly: 
unknown to thee, as it follows, concerning thy deliverance out o 
Babylon by Cyrus. | 

7 They are created now «; and not from the begin- 
ning x; even y before the day whenthou heardeſt chem 


not z; leſt thou ſhouldeſt ſay, Behold I knew them a: 

u (i. e.) Revealed unto thee by me; broughr to light, as things 
are by Creation. Things are frequently ſaid to be made or done 
in Scripture, when thev are declared or manifeſted, Job 5. 3. 7 
curſed, j.e. I pronounced it curſed, Pſalm 51. 4. That thou mighteft be 
juſtified, 1. e. declared and acknowledged to be Juſt, Hoſea. 5. 15. 
Till chey acknowledge their offence; Which in the Hebrew is, till theybe 
guilty. ox Feb. Not from thence, not from theſe ancient times when 
other things were revealed unto thee. y Heb. and ( or, or; as this 
Particleis frequently uſed: ) b-fore this day, fuch Pronouns are oft 
underſtood, as we have ſeen: And this day anſwers to ow in the firſt 
Clauſe: And this Clauſe ſeems tro be added as an expoiition of the 
next foregoing Clauſe, which is more general and ambiguous, not 
from then or before this day. mt Heb. And thou didſt not hear th:m, to 
wit, before this time in which God hath revealed them tro thee by 
my Miniſtry. a Either by thine ownSagacity;or by the he!p of thing 
Idols. The ſenſe is, That it might appear, that rhaou hadſt the 
knowledge of theſe things only from me, who made known unto 
thee only, what, and when I pleaſed. 

8 Yea thou heardeſt not, yea thou Kneweft not b, yea 
fom that time that thine ear was not opened c : for 1 
knew that thou wouldeſt deal treacherouily 4, and waſt 
called ea tranſgreſſor from the womb. Bs 

b The ſame thing is repeated again and again, becauſe this was 
ſo illuſtrious a Proof of the infinite Power and Providence of the God 
of Iſrael, and ſo clear and full a diſcovery of the vanity of Idols. 
c Heb. YNes fromthen (of which Phraſe ſ{-e the foregoing verſe) thine 
ear was not opened. 1. e. thou didſt not hear, ro wit, from me; I did 
not reveal theſe things unto thee, for ſo this Phraſe of opening the ear 
is underſtood, 1 Sam.g. 15. 2 Sam. 7. 27. d I knew all theſe cau- 
tions were necefary to cure thine Infidelity and Apoſtacy. e To 
wit, juſtly and truely : Or, thou was indeed ſuch a perſon, zo be 
called pur for to beas we have oft noted. | | 

9 For my Names ſake will I defer mine anger f, 
and for my praiſe g will I refrain &5 for thee, that I cut 
thee not off. | ; 
f And although thou doeſt juſt'y deſerve my hotteſt anger and 
moſt dreadful judgements, which allo, if thou repenteſt nor, I 
will in due time infli&, yet at preſent I will ſpare thee; and de- 


liver thee out of Captivity, nor for thy fake, be it known to thee; 


bur meerly for my own Sake,and for the Vindication of my Name 
and Glory, as it follows, verſe 11. g That I may be praiſed and 
magnified for my Pgwer, Faithfulneſs, and Goodneſs, and other 
Perte&ions. h< To with, mine anger; which is eaſily underſtood out 
of the foregoing Clauſe. | OT \ 
Io Behold, I have refined thee i, but not [| with fl- ; 
ver &, I have choſen / thee in the furnace of affliction. : 
; Or, I will refine thee. Although I will not cut thee off, of 
utterly deſtroy thee, as IT now ſaid, yer I. will put thee into the 
Furnace, nor to conſume thee, but to purifie thee from that 
drois which cleaveth to thee, and needs fuch afflitions to purge 


it away. Or, 706 among Silver: Or, not as Silver, which is 
pur into, and kept in the Furnace fo Jong till all the droſfs be 
purged away from it. I will notdeal fo rigorouſly with thee; for 
thea I ſhould wholly conſume thee : In Judgeinent I will remembes 
" 2S e- Merey. 


Chap. XEVIIE, 


4 Becauſe I knew # that thou art + obſtinate; and + preg; 
hard, 


Zhaps XLVIIL. I S A 


*Ch. 42-8: 


*Ch. 41.4. 
& 44- 6. 

Rev. 1.17. 
& 22. 13. 


!| Or, the 


paimof my 


De feend q Or, dech ſpan, i. e. met out the Heavens with a ſpan, as the Phraſe 


Outs 


1 will chuſe thee, or, I will yet chuſe thee, as it is expreſſed 
Io ps of 4 = I _ Or, I will chuſe thee again, as Zech. 2. = 
tor it muſt be confidered, that God had in a manner reje&ted Iſrael, 
when he ſcar them into Captivity, and given her 4 bil of divvorce, as 
he ſaith, Jercn. 3+ $. ſee alſo Yaiah go. r. and therefore it was _ 
ceſſary that God ſhould chuſe this People a ſecond time, thar t wy 
might be berrorhed to him again, as is expreſſed and promiſed, J: 
2, 19, 20. This ſeems to me the true ſenſe; alrhough it may te 
thus underſtood, I will chuſe thee, (i. &) I will manifeſt by my pon 
age £0 thee that [ have choſen thee: Or, that thou art my _ " 
People. Things be oft ſaid to be done when they are manuteſted, 
as was obſerved onverſe 7. w_ 

11 For mine own ſake, ever for my own ſake wil 


do it m; for how ſhould my Name » be polluted? and 


I will not give my * glory unto another o. 

m This {0m work of delivering my People out of Babylon. » 
my Name is here fitly ſupplyed both our of verſe 9. where it is ex- 
preſſed,and out of the following Clauſe of this verſe, where he ſaith, 
my glory, which is equivalent to it. The ſenſe is, If I ſhould nor 
ſpare and deliver my People, myName would be fadly prophaned 
and blaſphemed,as if I were either impotent or implacable ro them: 
o I will nor give any colour or occaſion to Idolaters, to aſcribe 
the Divine Nature and Properties, which 2re my peculiar, unto 
Idols, as they would do if I'did not reſcue my People out of their 
hands in fpight of their Idols. 

12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob, and Iſrael my called 
p; Iamhe; Tam the* firſt, I alſo am the laſt, 

p Whom I have called out of the World to be my peculiar Peo- 
ple, to ſerve, and glorifie, and enjoy me, and therefore you of ail 
others have leaſt cauſe to foreſake me, or to follow after Idols. 

13 Mine hand alſohath laidche foundation ofthe earth, 
and i my right hand hath ſpanned q the Heavens : #hen 
I call unto them, they ſtand up together 7. 


is, Jajah 40. 12. Although thar be expreſſed there in other Hebrew 
wofds, Or, hath ſpread them out with its palm, or like a palm, when 
the hand is ſtretched our. »r Either they ſto*d up and aroſe out of 
nothing, when I commanded them to do ſo : Or, they are ſtill con- 
tinually in readineſs to execute my Commands. 


1 4 H. Chap. XLy1y, | ©? 


Or, 2, OfGod; and then the Senſe may be this, From the time 
that I firſt ſpoke of it, or foretold it, I am or was there, to take 
care to effett whar I had foretold : I minded ir carefully from thar 
time, as being then more eſpecially obliged to do it, leſt m 
Truth or Power ſhould be queſtioned: Or the Words may bethus 
rendred and explained, From the 11me that this ſhaZ be, when the time 
appointed for the doing of this Work ſhall come, hire I will be, 
to encourage and afliſt Cyrus in the Work. e This is Oppoſed to 
thoſe foregoing Words, from the begining, f God by his Spirit ; 
Or God, even the Spirit or the Holy Ghoſt, to whom the ſending 
and inſpiring of God's Prophets is aſcribed, 2 Pee. r. 21. g To wir 
the Prophet J/aiah; who yer wasa Type of Chriſt, and ſo this may 
have a ReſpeC to him alſo. 

17 Thus faith the LORD thy Redeemer, the holy 
One of Iſrael, 1 aamthe LORD thy God which teact;- 


eth thee to profit þ; which leadeth 3 thee by the way 
that thou ſbouldeſt go. 

hþ Which from time ro time have made known unto thee, not 
vain and frivolous things, but all neceſſary and uſeful Dodrines: 
Which, if believed and obſerved by thee, would have been ink. 
nitely profitable to thee, both for this Life, and that ro come. 
So that it is not my fault, but thine own, if thou doeſt not pro 
fir. + Which acquainteth thee with thy Duty and Intereſt in all 
the parts and concerns of thy Liſe; ſo that thou canſt not prerend 
1gnorance, 

18 O that thou hadſt hearkened to my Command- 
ments & then had thy peace been as a river /, and thy 
righteouſneſs ms as the waves of the ſea ». 

& The failure hath not been on my part, but on thine : I gave 


 diſobeyed them, and to thy own great diſadvantage. Such wiſhes 
; as thele are nor to be taken properly, as if God longed fcr ſome- 

thing, which he gladly would but could not effe&t; Or as if he 
wiſhed that to be undone, which was irrecoverably paſt and done; 
which is a vaia and fooliſh wiſh even in a Man; and much more 
| are ſuch wiſhes inconſiſtent with the infinite Perfettion and Happi- 

neſs of the Divine Nature: But they are only Significations of 
God's good and holy Will, whereby he requires and loves Obedi- 
ence, and condemns and hates Diſobedience. 1 Which runs Sweet- 


14 All ye * afſemble F your ſelves and hear which 
among them hath declared theſe thingss ? the LORD 
hath loved him#; he will do his pleaſure on Babylon 
&, and his arm ſhall be on the Chaldeans x. 


+ Ye Jews, to whom he addreſſed his ſpeech, verſe 12. and con- ' 


tinueth his ſpeech, verſe 16, 17, &c. F I challenge you all to anſwer 


what I have ſaid before and am now a going to ſay agzin. 5 Which | 


of the Gods whom any of you have ſerved or do ſtill hanker after ? 
t To wit, Cyrus, who might eaſily be underſtood out of the fore- 
going Context, in which be is frequently mentioned, The Pro- 
noun is put for the Noun, and is uſual both in Scripture, and in Os 
ther Authors. Now God loved Cyrus, not with a ſpecial, and ever- 
laſting, and complacential love, for he was an Heathen, and had 
ſome great Vices as well as Vertues, but with that general Love and 
Kindneſs, which God hath for all his Creatures, as 1s obſerved, Plalm 
145. 9. and- moreover with that particular kind of Love, which 
God hath for ſuch Men as excel others in any Vertues, as Cyrus did, 
in which ſenſe Chriſt loved the young Man, Mark 10. 21- and with 
a love of Good-will,and Beneficence. God had ſuch a kindneſs for 
him, as to make him a moſt glorious and viftorious General and 
King, and the great inſtrument for the deliverance of his own 
People; which was a ſingular honour and advantage to him, and 
might have been far greater, and extended to the eternal Salvation 
of his Soul, if he had not wanted an heart to uſe the price which 
God hereby pur into his hand. And as anger being aſcribed to God, 
is not meant of the affe&ion, for ſuch paſſions are inconſiſtent with 
the perfe&ion of God's Nature, bur of the effe&; ſo the Love of 
God when it is applied in Scripture, to ſuch Perſons as Cyrus, 15not 
ſo much to be underſtood of an inward affeftion, as of the out- 
ward effeQs of it; And ſo this Love is explained in the follow- 
ing Words, by that proſperous ſucceſs which Ged gave him a- 
gainſt the Chaldeans. u Cyrus ſhall execute that I have appointed 
him to do for the Deſtru&ion of Babylov, and for the Redemption 
of my People; which was in it ſelf a good Work: And therefore 
this isadded, as the reaſon why God loved him. » He ſhall ſmite 
and ſubdue them. 5 

15 I, even Iy haveſpoken, yea I have called him : 
I have brought him, and he ſhall make his way proſ- 
Perous z. . | 

y.Both the forcknowledge and the execution of this great At- 
chievement cannor be aſcribed ro Idols, bur to me only. * God 
will give him good Succeſs in this undertaking» Here is a ſud- 
den change of the Perſon, from 1 to he, which is very uſual. Or, 
as others render it, he ſhall proſper in his way : The Prepoſition zn be- 
ing mot frequently underſtood. - 

16 Come ye near unto mea; hear ye this ; I have 
not ſpoken in ſecret b from the beginning ce: from the 
time that it was d, there am Te: and new the Lord 
GOD and his ſpirit f hath ſent me g. 


+ That you may the better hear me, as it follows. A ſpeech 
of God < aan the vs of Men. .b I have not ſmorhered the 
Counſel and Word of God, but have plainly and publickly decla- 
red it unto you : Or, I have openly Revealed my Mind to you. 
See the Norte on /(ajah 45. 19. where theſe very 'ords are ſpoken 
by God in his own Name, as here by the Prophet in God's Name ; 
and ſo all comes to one. © Either, 1. From the firſt time that I 
began to Propheſie until this time. Or, 2: From the beginning 
ofy taking you to be my People, and of revealing my Mind to 
ou. See on Iaiah 41.26. d Theſe Words alſo, as well as the for- , 
=y are the Words, Either, 1- Of the Prophet; and ſo the Senſe 
ſcems to be this, From the time that I was firſt called to be a 


Iy, Strongly, Plentifully, and Conſtantly; and ſuch had been thy 
; Proſperity. Then thou hadſt never gone into this Babyloniſh Cap- 
tivity, nor needed ſuch prodigies of my Power and Goodneſs to 
| Deliver thee out ofit. m Not properly {o called(or he is not now 
ſpeaking of their Vertues, bur of their Priviledges ) but thy Peace 
and Proſperity, as appears by the foregoing Clauſe, to which 
' this manifeſtly anſwers ; which is called Righteouſneſs here, 
as it is alſo, 1 Sam. 12.7. and. Hoſ. 1o. 12. and elſe-where, by a 
| Metonymy, becauſe it is the Fruit of Righteouſneſs, both of God's 
Righteoutneſs, and of Man's Righteouſneſs ; as by the very ſame 
hgure, iniquity is very frequently pur for the fruit and puniſhment 
ot iniquity. n Infinite and continual. | 
| 19 Thy ſeedallo had been as the ſand o,and the off- 
ſpring of thy bowels p like the gravel thereof : his name 


| q ſhould not have been cut off 7, nor deſtroyed from 
before me <5. i 


e To wit, for multitude, according to my Promiſe, made to 
Abraham: Whereas now I have, for thy Sins, made thee to know 
my breach of Promiſe, as is ſaid, Numb. 14- 24. and greatly di- 
miniſhed thy Numbers. p Which come out of thy Bowels, or 
Belly, or Leins; for all theſe are but various Expreſſions of the 
ſame thing. q Which is continued in a Man's Poſterity, and com- 
monly dies with them; and ſo the Name here is the ſame thing in 
effect with the ſeed and of: ſpring in the former Clauſes, which, 
for the moſt part, are only the memorials of Men, and of their 
Names, when they are dead and gone. r As now it hath been 
ina great meaſure, and ſhould have been totally and finally cut cf, 
if Ihhad not ſpared them for my own Names fake, as he ſaid before. 
s Or, out of my ſight, out of their own Land, the place of my ſpecial 
Preſence and Reſidence. 
20 Go ye forth of Babylon t: flee ye from the Chal- 
atans, with a voice of ſinging u, declare ye x, tell this 
utter 7t even to the end of the earth : ſay ye, The * Exodus 
LORD hath * redeemed his ſervant Jacob. 1941510 
£ The Imperative is here, as it is very frequently, put for the 
Future. Ye jhall go forth, &c. For this is not iſo much-a Command 
as a Promiſe. Although this form of ſpeech may be the rather 
uſed to Ilatimate, That it was their duty to go forth as well as 
God's Promiſe to carry them forth. « With Joy and Songs cf 
Praiſe to the Lord. x Publiſh God's wonderful Woiks on your be- 
half to all Nations. | 
21 And they thirſted not when he led them through , 
the defarts y : he cauſed the waters to flow out of the 
rock for them : he clave the rock alſo, and the- waters ,*;. 
guſhed out. \ 
y This is part of the matter which the Jews are obliged to de- 
clare to all People, as they have opportunity, to wit, 'That God 
took the ſame care of them in their return from Babylon to Canaan, 
which was through many dry and deſolate places, as he did in their 
march from Egypt to Canaan. They thirfed not, &c. i. e, They ſhall 
not Thirſt. He ſpeaks of things to come, as if they were already 
paſt or preſent, as the Prophets commonly do. | *Chap. 57 
22 * There 5s no peace, faith the LORD, unto the... 
wicked z. 
x God having in the next foregoing Verſes, foretold that Peace 
and bleſſ:d Deliverance which he would certainly: give to his ſer- 
want Jacob, verſe 20, He here adds an explication and limitation 
of this Mercy; and declareth, That wicked men ſhould not en« 
joy the benefit of this Mercy. Where, by rhe wicked, he means, 
Either 1. The Babylonians, who well deſerved that Title; who 


been there, (i.- e.) I have diligently purſued my 
Aa ret anion T have hearkned from time to time, to 


kear what God would ſpeak to me, that I might impart it to you. 


ſhall be deſtroyed, when God's Jſrael ſhall be: delivered: Or ra- 

ther, 2. The unbelioring and ungodly Jews; Of whonr theſe very 

words are uſed again, 1257.21, and te whom ſuch a nn 
| i@ 


thee my Counſels and Commands, bur thou haſt negleQed and = 


ks 5 


Chap. XLIX. 


$7 


PIPES IRE HEN 


tion as this, was far more proper and neceſſary, at icaſt in this place 
than to the Babylonians 3 for he had already faid far more and worſe 
things. than this concerning them, havingagain and again declared, 
That Babylon ſhould be deſtroyed, in order to this deliverance of 50d": 
People out of it, But there was great need why he ſhould ſay this tc 
the ungodly Jews, becauſe they were exceeding prone to Cry peace 
peace to themſelves, when there was no ſolid ground of Peace 3 and 
they confidently expe&:d a ſhare in this great Deliverance. This 
therefore was a very ſeaſonable Caution to the Jews in Babylm to 
take heed to themſelves, and to prepare for this Mercy, and to purt- 
fie themſelves from all Wickedneſs; becauſe thoſe of them, who 
ſhould either wickedly tarry in Babylon, when God invited and requi- 
red them to go our of itz and when their Godly Brethren returned 
to their own Land, and to the place of God's Worſhip z .or continue 
in Wickedneſs, when they were reft>red to their own Country, 
ſhould not enjoy that Tranquility and Comfort which they promiſed 
to themſelves. And the neceility of this Commination appears from 
the event; for the Jews that returned to Canaan, did, for the moſt 
part, relapſe ro many of their former Sins, and therefoce fell ſhore of 
that Peaceand Proſperity, which otherwiſe they might have enjoyed. 


CHAP. XLIX 


Chrift being ſent to the Jews complaineth of them, r, 4. 
he is ſent to the Gentiles with gracious -romiſes, $,----12. Ged"s Lowe 
to his Church perpetual, 13,- 17. the ample reftoration of the Church 
and its enlargement, 18 ,----23, powerful deliverance out of « aptivity, 
24--*-26, 


Iſten, O Ifles a, unco me b and hearken ye peo. 

ple from far c The LORD hath called me 

from the womb 4, trom the Bowelsofmy mother hath 
he made mention of my name e. 


a God having in the laft Words ſecretly ſignified the Wickedneſs 
of the Fewilh Notion. after ſo glorious a deliverance, and foreſeeing, 
that, for their Wickedneſs, he ſhould caft them off, he here turneth 
his Speech to the Nations of the Genes, whoare frequently deſcrib- 
edin this Prophecy, and elſewhere under the Title of Jes. as hath 
been formerly noted, and inviteth them to hearken to thoſe Counſe!s 
and DoRrines which the Jews would rejet. 5 Unto Chriſt . for 
it is apparent from ver. 6. andother paſſages of this Chapter, that 


| Iſaiah ſpeaks theſe words in the name of Chriſt, by whoſe Spiric they 


were ditated to him, 1 Pef. t: 11, and unto whoa alone they be- 
long, as we ſhal ſce So this Chapter 1s a Prophecy of Chriſt, which 
alſois very proper and ſcaſonable in this place, TheProphet having 
at large propheſied of the Deliverance of the Jews out of Babylon ; he 
now proceeds further, and propheſieth of the Redemption of the 
World by Chriſt, of which tha' deliverance out of 2abylon was a Type 
and Forerunner. c Which live in Countries far from 7udea, now 
the only Place of God's ſpecial Preſence and Worſhip. It is evident 
from the foregoing Clauſe, and many ether Paſſages following, that 
he ſpeaks of diſtance of Place, notof Time &d& This or the like ex- 
preffion is uſed of Jeremy, chap, 1. 5, and of Paul, Gal. 1, 15. 
but it was far more ©::-inently true of Chrifi, who, as he was choſen 
to this great office of Redemption from Eternity, ſo he was ſepara- 
ted and called to it betore he was born, being both conceived and 
ſanRified by the Holv Ghoſt in his Mothers Womb, and ſent into the 
World upon this Errand 3 of which fee Mat. 1. 21, and Lake 1.31, 
&c, and 2, It, &c, e Called by 'my Namie, and by ſuch a Name 
as ſignified my Office and Work, in the Places now mentioned, 


2 And he hath made my mouth like a ſharp 
ſword f, in the ſhadow of his hand hath he hid meg, 
and made me a poliſhed ſbaft b,in his quiver ; he hath 


hid me. ; 
F As he made me the great Teacher of his Church,and of the World, 


{ſo he aſfiſted me by his Spirit, and made -»y Word or Dorine 


I $$ 4 £ # © 


Quick and powerful Cfharper than any two-edged-ſword,&c. as it is ſaid | 
to be, Heb. 4. 12. killing Men's i uſts, convincing, humbling, and | 
converting their Souls 3 3 Mighty to the pulling down of rong holds, And ' 
every high thing that exalterh it jelf again the knowledge of Ged, and | 
bringing into Gaptivity everythought to the obedience of Chriſt, as we read, 
2 Cor. 10: 4+ $. £ He will Protedt mc by his Power from all mine | 
Enemies, untill I have finiſhed the Work, for whick he ſent me. 
h Like av Arrow, whole point is bright and poliſhed; which theres | 
fore pierceth deeper. It 
the former, Chriſt*s piercing ol Men s Heart by his Word and Spirit. ' 
5 Where Arrows are hid and kept. The Yuiver ſignifies the ſame 
thing with the ſhadow in the foregoing Clauſe, even God's powertul 
and gracious ProteRion of him from Dangers and Miſchiefs. 


rhis Metaphor figaifies the fame thin? with . 


— — 


2 And ſaid unto me ; Thou art my ſervant, O 
Iſrael k, in whom I will be giorified. 

þ &s the name of David is ſometimes given to his Succeſſers, x 
Kings 12. +6, and particularly to Chriſt Jer. 30, 9g. Ezek, 34. 23 
Heſ. 3, 5 and Jacvh is called, as many think, by the name of his 
Grand-#ather, Abraham, 4s 7- 16, and the name of Iſaxc is gi- 
ven to his Poſterity, Amos 7. 9» So here the name of Iſrael ma 
not unfitly be given to Chriſt, not only becauſe he deſcended from 
his Loins ; but alſo becauſe he was the true and the great 1ſael, who 
in a more cminent manner, prevailed with God, as that Name. 
ſignifies, of whom Jacob, who was firſt called 1ſrael, :was but a 
Type: And &. the name of Chriſt, the Head 15 ſometimes given to 
the Body, the Church, as 1 Co. 12. 12. S9 it is not ſtrange 
if, onthe contrary, the name of Jjrazl, which properly belongs 
to the Church. be given to Chriſt the Head of it But this Word 
may be otherwilc rendreds being joyned, Either, 1. with the 
foregoing words; Thou art my ſervant, unto, or in or for Iſrael, 
7, ec, to bring them back unto me, from whom they have revoltes ; 
Or 3 with the following words; it 15 Iſracl is whow I will glorifie my 
ſelf by thee. 

Then I ſaid 1, ' I have laboured in vain, T have 


ſpent my ftrengch for noughtm, andinvain ; yet ſure- 
ly my judgment « #s with the LORD, and|| my work 
with my God, L 


or; ; 
"ward, 


| 24, 25.0 22 21, and being treated by the Rulers both of the Fews., 


' ad:inira'1on and reverences b From their ſeats in token 
| as was uſual, Levi, 19. 32. Judges 3. 


' braiſm. 


Y ' although thou ſhalt be reje&ed by thine own People, 
; their Builders or Rulers, as was Propheiied P/al. 118. 


Chap, XLI 


1 By way of Qbje&tion, Lord, thou ſayeſt thou wilft be elorifi + | 
ed by my Miniſtry , butT find it otherwiſe, 9m Without any Con {RITTER 
fiderable Fruit of my Word and Works among the Iſraelites n My Wt 
right, the reward which by his Promiſe, and my Purchaſe is my " 
right, Fudgment is oft put for #hat which is ju# or rizht, as Exod. If 
23, 6, Job. 8. 3, and in many other places. And fo this Clauſe agrees | 
with the next ; and the Senſe of both is this : Though I (ee no fruit 
of my Labour among the Jews, and meet with nothing but contempt 
and reproach, and ill ufage from them 3 yet God fſces my fidelity 
and diligence in my Work, and he will give Judgment for me, and | 
my reward 1s laid up with and by him, which he will give me in it 
due time. | | q' 

5 And now, faith the LORD that formed me lll yl 


from the womb to be his ſervant, to bring Jacob a- || Or; tha 


. . 
: 
b f , 
* , 
tis / 
1 
" | : 
4 ' ; 
| | l 
: 
; : 


il! 


þ 
| 
i i 

1-181 | 
q 
i 
I 
4 


1 
4 
is } 
: 
£ ; 


' 
| 


gain to him 9, Though Iſrael be [|not gathered p, yet ney | 
thal I be glerious in the eyes of the LORD q, and my ,;4, 
God (hal be my ſtrength r. | ; 


0 To Convert the Wicked and Apoſtate 1ſraelites unto God. þ Not EM PH 
brought home to God by my Miniſtry. This Word infylics, That | 
the I/raclites were divided and ſcattered from God, and divided a- © 
mong themſelves, 25 they were in a high degree when Chrift came 
into the World, and Turned every one to his own way, as is ſaid; laiab 

$3+ 6. and therefore needed to be gatherede Either it is a Meta- 
phor from wandering Sheep, which the good Shepherd diligently 
ſceketh, and bringeth home to the Fold; Or, it is an Allvſion to 
the ſtate of the 1/raelites, who: either now were, or ſhortly were to 

be diſperſed into ſeveral parts of the World. from whence God had 
promiſed to gather them, and bring them into their Land, and un- 

to his Temple, 1/aiah 43. 5, 6. and elſ-where. The Senſe is Though 
Iſrael. God's own and only People, reje& me, which will be an oc- 
cation of great wonder and ſcandal. q God will not deſpiſe me for 
the uniucceſsfulneſs of my Labours, but will honour and glcrifie me, 
both with himſelf and in the face of the World, in crowning my In- 
deavours with glorious Succeſs among other People. r To ſupport 
and ſtrengthen me under this, and all otherdiſcouragements and dif- 
ficulties in the diſcharge of mine Office. 


6 And he « ſaid, ||It is a light thing t that thou ſhould- Naw $. 
eſt be my ſervant to raiſe up the tribes of Jacob «, und #han that 
to reſtore the [|| preſerved of Iſrael: I will alſo ole 
thee for a * light to the Gentiles, that thou mayeſt efty Sc. 


, Or, &« 
be my ſalvation x unto the. end of the earth. * r= 

s The Lord ; cxprefſed both in the foregoing and following ver- *Cha.42.6 
ſess #& This is but a ſmall favour in compariſon ot what follows; 
4 That remnant of them which ſha!) ſurvive all cheir calamities and 
deſolations, x I will make thy labour effeRual for the illumination 
and converſion and ſalvation of the Gentiles in all the parts of 'the 
World : Which canno: be ſaid of Iſaiah with any treth or colour, and 
therefore muſt be underſtood of Chrift, by whom this was literally 
and fully accompliſhed. By my Salvation he mean+ the great Inftru- 
mn" nag Author of that Eternal Salvation which I will give to the 
Gentiles, 

7 Thus faiththe LORD the Redeemer of Iſrael, ||Or,zobim 
and his Holy One y, || to him whom man difſpiſeth z, #hat is «ee 
to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a ſervant of cu- 114 #n 
lers: Kings ſhall ſee and ariſe b, Princes alſo ſhal __ 
worſhip, becauſe of the LORD, thar is faithful c, aud 
the Holy one of Iſrael, and he ſhal chooſe thee 4. 

y The Holy One of Iſrael, as he 15 frequently called. xz To Chriſt, 
to whom, as he was in the days of his Fleſh, cis deſcription doth 
moſt truly and fully agree, being the ſame in effe& with that Iſas 
$3- 3. for men, both Jews and Gentiles among whom he lived, did 
deſpiſe him from their very hearts and Souls, as is here implied; and the 
whole Natim. of which he was a member, and among whom he conver= 
ſed and preached, abhorred both his Yerſon and his DoRrine z and he 
was ſo far from being a great temporal Monarch, as the Jews vainly 
imagined, that he came in the form ota Servant, and was a Servant 
of Rulers, profcifing ſubjeftio1 and paying tribute unto Ceſar, at Ie 


p PET —— _ — -—— 
Wu 6 OE OP IBID — — ——_— 


and the Xomans,like a Servan', bein2 deſpiceiuliy uſed and Crucified., 
which was the proper Puniſhment of Servants. « Though for a time 
thou ſhalt be deſpiſed, yet after a while thou ſhalt be advanced ta 
ſuch Royal Majeſty and Glory, that Kings ſhall look upon thee with 
of reverence, 
ludge 10. Jeb 29. 8,or to worſhip 
thee, as thenext clauſe explains it: ſbal jee and ariſe may be put for 


when they ſee thee they ſhall ariſe to thee: which is a common Hee 
c Becauſe God (hal make good his promiſes to thee con- 
cering the raiſing thee from the dead, and concerning the effafion of 
his ſpiritupon thy Diſcipies, by whoſe aſſiſtance they ſhal preach 
moſt powerfully, and confirm their Dottrine by evident and glorious 
Miracles, and concerning the giving unto thee the Heathen for thine Inhes 
ritance, and the —_— parts of the Earth for thy peſſejſion, as he pro- 
miſed, Pſal, 2, 8, Thele and ſuch lice confiderationswere the great 
motives which prevailed with the Priaces and People of the Gentiles 
to receive thee as the true Meſſiah and Saviour of the World, &d And 


and refuſed by 


22. 
a time, and in ſome reſpefts forſaken by God himſeif, Mat. — - 


yet God will return to thee and chuſec thee again,aud manifeſt unts 
the World, thatthou, and thou @:ly art the Perſon whom God hath 
choſen to be the Redeemer of Mankind, and whom, in ſpight of all 
oppoſition, he will make the head-ſtone of the corner: For the Phraſe 
ſee on Iſa. 48. 10 But theſe wordsare w: 1! rendred by others, who 
will chuſe or hath choſen thee, the conjun@ion, and , being put for the 
pronoun relative, a5 {/a 44> 14. and in many other places, as hath 
been obſerved before. 


8 Thus faiththe LORD ec, * Inanacceptable 
time f have IT heard thee g, and in a day of falvati- 
on h have I helped thee: and I will preſerve thee 5 
and give thee for a covenant & of the people E, || to e- l 
ſtablith the earth », to cauſe to inherit the detolate he- 


Litages #s, 


42 Cor.6, 2, 
Or, raiſe 


s'Z © God 


7 P+ - XLIX. I S <a 
| * God the Father unto Chriſt; f Heb. In # time of good will, in 
that time when ſhal have, and ina ſpecial manner manifeſt my 
good will unto the Sons of men, in the day of my Grace, and of 
"mans Salvation, as this Phraſe is explained in the next clauſe, 1n 
the time of the Goſpel, which is the time of God's geod Will towards 
men, as the Hoſt of Heaven declared at the Birth of Chriſt, Luke 2+ 
- x4. inthe dayrof thy fey, when thou didt offer up Prayers and Snp- 
plications with ſtrong crying and tears, unto him that was able to ſave 
thee from death, as we read, Heb. 5.9. which textis a good com- 
ment upon this place, g Though not ſo 25 to deliver thee from 
death and from the ſenſe of my wrath, * yet ſo as to keep thee from 
fnking under theſe burdens, and ſo as thou ſhouldeft not be holden un- 
..der the. Pains cr Power of Death, As 2. 24+ and ſo as to Crown thee 
7 nth Gloryand Honour, and a bleiſed ſucceſs of all thy labours and 
* "{ufferings. + þ In the titne. of grace and of the Goſpel, which I 
'have yppointed for the working out of mans Salvation by thee. 7 
Upaa:carth till thy work be finiſhed, and unto that eteraal King- 
2 dom and Glory which is prepared for thee. k, To be the Mediator 
pe. * abd Surety of that Covenant, which is made between me and them 3 
. 'a$;Chiriſt is called, Heb: 7. 22, 4nd 8 6» to renew and confirm the 
"Covenant, which the Meſiab is laid to do, Dan 9. 27. by his own 
; LE which God and men are reconciled and united one to the 
"other... And therefore he may well be called the Covenant by. a known 
Meconymy, which is very uſual in ſuch caſes, as upon the ſame ac- 
count Circumcifion, the ſign of the Covenant, is called God's Cove- 
rant, Gen. 17. 10. and the Paſchal Lamb is called the Paſſover, Exod. 
| is ca.led the New Teſtament, Luke 


' 424 LL, and tbe Sacramental Cu 
j 224, 20. and the Communion ef the Bloud of Chriſt, x Cor. 10, 16+ 
"Tndefinitely of all my People, not only Fews, bur alſo the Gentiles, 
"a5 may be gathered from the", ontext, and by compaiing this place 
'Wito Iſa. g2. 6, Where the ſame Phraſe 1s uſed. From both which 

place: it is moſt manifeſt, that the Meſſiah is deſigned, and not 
Z/aiah,.. towhom this and divers other Phraſes here uſed cannot be a- 
ſciibed without gre.it force. m To compoſe and ſettle the Earth 
and the Inhabirauts thereof by making peace between God and men, 

-anif between Jews and. Gentiles, ard by eſtabliſhing Truth and Righ- 
fcouſn:{s and Holineſs upon Earth, and by ſubduing thoſe luſts and 

+ Paſſions, which are che great diſturbers of Humane Society : which 

1. ' wasthe deſign of God in ſending, and of Chriſt in coming into the 

1.54 {Warld, r-That defolate-places may berepaired and rep>flefied. Thar 
IT brit may poſi:1s the Heathen, according to Plal. 2. 8 who were 

2 4 WE {pititual ſenſe in a moſt deſolate and forlorn condition. 


? PP RICTTS : 
FEÞ442-7- > Thatthou mayeſt ſay o* co the priſoners p, Go 
£4.45” Sorth-9-2 to them -that are in darkneſs, Shew your 
elves : they (hal feed in the ways, and their paſtures 
TPal%: in all high places r. 
oo 2: To wit, with power and cffcR, as when God faid, Let there be 
je * &c, p To the Gentiles who are faſt bound by the cords 
"of their ſins, aud taken Captive by the Devil at his will, as thisſame 
Phraſe is underſtood, Iſaiah 42. 7- g Come forth to the light, 
Te*eive Divine illumination and conſolation; r They ſhal hav: a- 
*biin@ant proviſion in all places, yea evcnin thoſe which commonly 
are baprenand unfruitful, and ſuch are both common roads and high 
+ - grounds. | - 
SKev.7-6:. - 20 They ſhall not * hunger nor thirſt, neither (hal 
the heat nor Sun ſmite them 5s 3 for he that hath mer- 
cy on them ſhall lead them 7, even by the ſprings of 


water hal he guidethem. 

s They ſhal be ſupplied with all good and neceſſary things, and 
kept from all evil occurrents. # God who hath magnified his mercy 
to them will conduR them with ſafety and comfort. | 


1z And I will make all my Mountains a way, and 


my high ways ſhal be exalted #. | 

u I will remove all hindrances, and prepare the way for them, 

by levelling high grounds, and raiſing low grounds: of which ſee on 

Iſa. 40. 3. 4+ 

F 12 Behold theſe ſhall come from far x : and lo, 


theſe from the North, and from the Weſt z, and 


theſe from the land of Sinim z, 

* My People ſhal be called and gathered even from the moſt re- 
mote paris ofthe Earth. Ke ſpeaks here, and in many other pla- 
ces of the Converſion of the Gentiles with alluſion to that work of 
gathering, and bringing back the Jews from all parts where 
they were diſperſed, 1nto their own Land. y From the ſeveral 
parts of the world ; which archere ſynecdochically expreſled, as they 
are in many other places. x Either of the Sinites as they are called, 
Gen. 10, 17. who dwelt about the Wilderneſs of Sin, which was 
Southward from Judea: Or, of Sin, a famous City of Egypt, called 
the firength of Egypt, which may be ſynecdochically put for all Egypy, 
and that for all the Southern parts. And ſo he here mentions the ſeve- 
ral quarters of the Wold, where the generality of the Jews were 
diſperſed ; the North, which is every where named as the chiei place 
of th:ir baniſhment and diſperſion, as Jer. 16, 15. and 31. 8. and 
elſewhere ; the Weſt, the weſtern Countries and Iflands; and the 


South. - | 
O Heavens, and be joyful, O Earth, 


13 SINg 
and break forth into ſinging, O Mountains: for the 
and will have 


Lord hath comforted his People 4, 
mercy upon his afflicted. 

a God hath now ſent that long-defired Conſolation of Iſrael, 

14 But Zion ſaid, The LORD hath forſaken me, 
and my Lord heth forgotten me b. | 

b This is an obje&ionagaiuſt all thele £lorious prediftions and pro- 
miſes hitherto mentioned. How can theic things be true, when the 
condition of God's Church 1s pow ſo ſad and deſperate, as it was 
when the Jews were Captives 12 Babylon, in which the Prophet here 
ſuppoſeth them to be ? | ; 

I5 Can a woman forget her ſucking child | that 
be ſhould not have compaſſion on the Son of her 
womb ? yea they may forget, yet will I not for- 


fet thee c. ; 
© Eacthly Parents ſometimes are ſo unnatural and monſtrous; but 


Cohen 


I A H. Chan. 


do not entertain ſuch unwerthy thoughts of me. T will re 
. | : ( 
thee effecttually, to bring thee out of Babylon, and which is renee 
greater, to ſend tny Son into the world to work out eternal redem 4 
tion for thee. of 
16 Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of »y 
hands 4: thy walls are continually before me e. 

d Mine eye and heart is conſtantly upon thee, He alludes to the 
common practice of men who uſe to put figns and memorials upon 
their hands or fingers of ſuch things as they dearly affet, and would 
remember, See Exod. 13. 9g, Deit. 6. 8, Proverbs 6, 21. Cant; 8 
6, Jer. 22, 24» | e My thoughts run continually upon the Walls of 
Jeruſalem, which are now broken down that I may repair them as ſoon 
as ever the ſet time cometh, and then proceed to do far greater things 
for thee, 

17 Thy children f ſhal make haſte ; thy deſtroy- 
ers, andthey that made thee waſte, ſhall go forth 
of thee g. 

f Or, as others render it, thy Builders 3 which is favoured by the 
next clauſe where the deſtroyers are oppoſed to them, Howſoever the 
ſenſe is the ſame, for her children were her Builders, as we tead in 
Ezri and Nehemiah. 2 Shal be ſeparted and driven from among thee 
and ſo {hal neither hinder nor annoy thee, : 


18 * Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold : 
all theſe h gather themſelves together and come to thee. 
as Thve, faith the LORD, thou ſhale ſurely cloath 
chee wich them all, as with an ornament k&, and bind 


tem on thee as a bride doth. 
To wit, the Gentiles, as ſufficiently appeareth from wh 
been already ſaid, and from that which mth, The ſenſe bs 
Thy Church ſhal not only be reſtored and eſtabliſhed in Jeruſalem, but 
it ſhal be vaſtly enlarged and adorned by the acceſfion of the Gens 
tiles to it, i To receive inftruRion from thee, and to be incor- 
porated with thee into one and the ſame Church. k& They ſhal not 
be a burden, as the Gentiles formerly were when they mixed theme 
ſelves with the Jews, but an Ornament in reſpe& of thoſe excellent 
gifts and graces wherewith they ſhal enrich and honour th 
Church, _ - 
19 For thy waſte and thy deſolate places 1, and the 
Land of chydeſtrution m2 ſhal even now be too narrow 
by reaſon of the inhabitants, and they that ſwallow. 
oy thee up, ſhal be far away ». | 
#7 Thy own Land, which is now waſte and deſolate, and wh 
divers parts lay formerly waſte and deſolate for want of app 
<7" m— them. m - rather, Thy Land of Deſtru&ion, 1o 
ca:ied becauſe it 15 devoted and ſhal be expoſed t 
oy yaa [9 's deſtruftion, n To 

20 The children which thou ſhalt have, after thou 
baſt loſt o the other, ſhal ſay again pin thine ears, the 
PLace #s too ſtrait for me ; give place to me that I may 
dwell. 

o Heb. The Children of thine orbity or barren and Childleſ.-lots"? 
Thoſe Children which thou ſhalt have when thou art own ET the 
ordinary age aud ſtate of Child-bearing, as Sarab was made the More 
ther of a moſt numerous Poſterity : to which he ſeems here to allude 
Thoſe Gentiles which ſhal be begotten by thee, to wit by the Mi- 
niſtry —_ Children, Chriſt and his Apoſtles, when thou ſhalt be 
deprived © thige own natural Children, when thou ſhalt become bar- 
ren and unfruitful as to Converſion of natural Jews, when the genes 
rality of the 7ews ſhal cut themſelves off from God and from his true 
Cn. 4 ep mn -"a God ; and by their unbelief, and ob. 

inate refuſal of their Meſſiah. þp Or rather, ſhal yet 
the preſent it be otherwiſe. OTITIS eng The 


21 Then ſhalt thou fay q in thine heart, Who hath 
begotten me theſe » ſeing I have loſt my chiidren s 
and am deſolate z, a captive, and removing to and 
fro « ? . and who hath brought uptheſe x 2 Behold F 


was left alone ; theſe, where bad they been ? 

q Not without admiration. r Whence, or by whon have this 
numberlefſs Iflue 2 s Seing it is not long ſince that I was in a 
manner left childleſs. # Without an Husband, being forſaken by 
God, who formerly owned himſelf for my H:sband, Iſa. 54, « Jers 
3I. 32. and elſewhere, # Which condition-is1n many reſpetts a 
great impediment to the procreation of Children. x The ſame thing 
repeated again to expreſs the miraculouſneſs of this work, and the 
great ſurpriſal of the Jewsat it; which ſheweth that he ſpeaks of the 
Converſion of the Gentiles. 

22 Thus faith the Lord GOD, BeholdI will lifc 
up mine hand y to the Gentiles, and ſet up my ſtan- 
dard & to the people a: and they ſhal bring thy ſons 
b in their Farms c: and thy daughters ſhal be carried f fb. &: 
upon their ſhoulders 9. fame. 

y I will call them to me, and command them to do this work, 
as men commonly ſignifie their calls and commands by this geſture. 
q As Generals do to gather their Forces together, Sce on Iſa, 11, 
12, & Unto thee, or to thy Church and People. b Thoſe which 
ſhal be thine, if not by natural Generation, yet- by adoption, that 
ſhal own God for their Father, and Jeruſulem tor their Mother. c' With 
great care and tenderneſs, as Nurſes carry young Infants. The ſenſe 


is, even the Heathen ſhall contribute to the increaſe and preſeryati-- 

on of thoſe Children which ſhal be begotten to thee, d As ſick or 

infirm perſons uſed to be carried. See Mark 2. 3, Luke 15, 5. 

23zAnd Kingsſbal be thy nurſing fathers, &theirfqueens A 

thy nurſing mothers e : they ſhal bow down to thee 4g 

with their face toward the earth,8*lick up the duit of +ycb,eris 

thy feet f,8& chou ſhalt know that T amzthe LORD : ror eeſfs 

they ſhalt not be aſhamed that wait for me * Pſal.7?, 
e Kings and Queens ſhal have a ſincere affeRtion, and tender- 9+ 

regard unto thee and thy Children, which was in ſome fort ful- 

filled by Cyrus, Ahaſhuerus, and ſome few others of the Perſian 


Kings or Queens, but much more truly and fuily by thoſe many 
; | Kings 


ALIX, 


; he 
; cadtin 


| We Ji 


FHeb 
| captiui 
l, 


L 


Fe, 2 


| TSee 2h 
& I, 


L. 18S 


Kings, and Emperours of the Gentile World, which after Chriſts 
time did both themſelves embrace the tru- Reli-ion, 4nd aifo ſet 1t 
up in their ſeveral Dominions, f They ſhall highly reverence and 
honour thee, and ſhall moſt humbly and readily ſubmit themſelves 
unto thee, which was not verified in any of the Perſian Kings, but 
only in theſe Kings who were converted to the Chriſtian Faith and 
Church. The expreſſions are borrowed from the pratice of the 
Eaſtern People in their P:oftrations and Adorations, when they bowed 
ſo low as to touch and kiſs the ground, whereby they did or fmight 
ſeem to lick up the very duſt of th: ground which was aboutor under 
the feet of thoſe whom they adored;. g Their hopes and expeRtati- 
ons ſhall not he diſappointed, but aboundantly ſatisfied, 

24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty 5, or F 


the lawfull captive delivered z ? 

þ Herc he ſtarteth an objeRion againſt the forementioned pro- 
miſes : How can Gods Church be delivered when ſhe is become a 
prey to, and isin the hands of her moſt potent Enemies ? # He 
who was taken Captive in ajuſt War, as Gods People might 1n ſome 
fort be ſaid to be, becauſe God himſelf had delivered them into their 
Enemies hands, and that juſtly for their fias. So here is a double 
impediment to their deliverance out of their Corporal and Spiritual 
Bondage.the great Powerof the Enemy which kept them in Bondage 
and the Juſtice of God which pleads againſt them and againſt their 
deliverance, 

25 But thus faith the LORD, Even the F captives 
of the mighty ſhallbe taken away, and the prey of the 
terrible & ſhall be delivered : for I 1 will contend with 
him that contendeth with thee, and I will fave thy cail- 


dren. 

k Or, of the vivlent, which is oppoſed to the lLawfull Captive in the 
foregoing verſe : and it is hereby intimated that although God was 
juſt in delivering them into Captivicy, yet their Oppreffors were 
guilty of injaſtice and violence both in deſiring and 1intcavouring to 
keep them in perpetual Bondage, beyond the ſeventy years which 
God had fixed, and in their cruel uſage of them. / I the Almighty 
God will undertake thy quarre), and this work, and thcr-fore it 
muſt neceffarily be accompliſhed, 

26 And I will feed them that oppreſs thee, with 
their own fleſh 22,and they ſhall be drunken with their 
own * blood, as with || ſweet wine : and all fleſh ſhall 
know that I the Lordem thy Saviour and thy Redeem- 
er, the mighty One of Jacob. | 

m I will make themeat their own fleſh, either through hunger. 
as Lev, 26, 29. Iſa, 9- 20* or through rage and madneſs, Or I will 
make chine Enemies to deftroy on another, and that greedily and 
with delight, as the next Clauſe implies. All their Enemies are 
here repreſented as one Bady, and ſo when one part of them deyour- 
ed anather, it was their own fleſh thar was deſtroyed, F 


CHAP i | 
n of the Jews is not of Chriſt : for ke hath Power to ſave, 
4. And was obedient in that Work : and God js preſent 
9. An Exhortation nat to truſt in our ſelves, 
but in God, 10, II. 


f 
Hus faith the LORD #, Where *;s the bill of your 
mothers divorcement b, whom I have put away 

or which of my * Creditors is it to whom I have ſold 
ou c 2 Behold, for your Iniquities have ye fold your 
ſelves, and for your tranſgreſſions is your mother put 


away 4 


| Chap. 


Fo 
i 


| +He bthe 
| captivi') of 


| the Juſt 


& Heb. the 
captrvitY; 


1 *Rev, 14* 
1 20, & 16 
| 6. 
| Or, new 
wine, | 


The Derelizto 
b 
with him, 5, 


FH. 2. 2 


| Tee 2Kin 
& I, 

4 This is another Sermon began here, and continued in the next 
Chapter. The main ſcope of it is to vindicate Gods Juſtice, and to 
convince "the Jews that they were the cauſcs of all their calamities 
which they imputed to God. bGod had formerly eſpouſed the [/rae- 
lite-s to himſelf in a kind of a Matrimonial Covenant, but ſeemed 
to caſt them off when he ſent them to Babylon, and did wholly re 
ze& them afterward from being his People, and took the Genzles into 
their ſtead 3 which greatand wonderfull change was foretold in the 
Old Teſtament, as hath been already obſerved, and we ſhall ſee again 
and accompliſhed in the New. And becauſe God foreſaw that thoſe 
firange diſpenſations would provoke the Je«.s ro murmur and quarrel 
with God, for caſting them off withcut ſufficient cauſe, as indeed 
they were always prone to accuſe Godznd to vindicate themtlelyes, 
he bids them produce . their Bill of Divorce: For thoſe Husbands 
which put away their Wives meerly out of Levity or Paſſion, were 
obliged to give their Wives a Bill of Divorce, which vindicated the 
Wives Innocency, and declared that the Hu:bands Will and Pleaſure 
was the cauſe of the Divorce 3 of which ſer the notes on Devr, 24, t, 
Mats 19,3, c Havel any creditors to whom i was obliged or wil- 
ling to ſell you for the payment of my Dc bt? Produce then the Bill 
of Sale to witneſs againſt me» Parents might, and in ſome caſes 
were forced to ſell their Children to their Creditors: of which ſee on 
Exol 21. 9. and 2 Kings 4. 1. 4 You can blame nove but your 

{elves and your own fins, for all your captivities and miſeri-s. 

2 Wherefore e when I came f, wasthere no man g? 
when I called þ,was there none to anſwer i? *Is my hand 
ſhortned at all, that it cannot redeem ? Or have I no 

power to deliver & ? Behold, * ar my rebuke I, T* dry 
Non. £1, up the fea ; I make the * rivers a wilderneſs »: their 


3, filh ftinketh becauſe thereisno water,and dieth for thirſt 
Gad.5g-1 : e The general Accuſation aelivered in the laſt words he now pro- 
\Nab.1:4; veth by particular Inſtances, f When 7, ficſt by my Prophets, ad 
e121 at laſt by my Son, came unto them, to call them to Repentance, and 
"Jb,3:16; to redeem. and deiiver them, as it is explained in the following 
| Clauſesof this verſe. g That regarded and received me, that com- 

plied withmy Call and Offer of Grace, as it follows, Whereby he 

implies that the generality of the Jews were. guilty of groſs Infideli- 

ty, and © 

je&ed._ h Called them to Repentancy, or to come* unto me, or to 

do my Will, as Maſters call their Servands, z: Tocome at my Call, to 


P 


bſtinate Diſobedience, and therefore might juſtly be re» | 


gbey my Commands: þ What is the reaſolt of this hoccible contempt | ſhamed. 


A F 4% Cnap 


! and Rebellion ? Ts it becauſe you expe n6 good from me, but think 
that I am either unwilling or unable to ſave you ? becauſe you ſee 
no Miracles wrought for you to ſave you from the Babylonians; and 

. becauſe my Son, your Meſſiah, cometh not with Pomp and Power, as 
you cxpeRt, but in the form of a Servant, poor, and expoſed to 
contempt and death 3 do you therefore believe that my power to- 
Ceiiver you 1s leſs than it was? U This Phraſe is borrowed from 
Pſalm 106. 9. and it is uſed Mat, 8. 26, At my Word or Command 
whereby I r<buke and check its proud waves mHed, I will dry vp, 
ori can dry up; the future Verb being put potentially. &s I didit 
once, ſo 1 can and will do it again, when occaſion requires it, n As 
dry atd fit for travel as a Wilderneſs. 

3 1 cloath the Heavens with blackneſs s, and I 

make ſackcloth their covering p. | 

0 Or, I will or cancloth, &c, What | once did in Ezypi, when I 

drew black curtains before all the heayenly Lights, and cauſed an 
unparaliel'd and amazing Dackneſs for three days together, to the 
great terrour of mine Euemies, ſo 1 can and will do ſtill when it is 
neceſſary to ſave my People, And therefore you have no reaſon to 
diſtruſt me. þp I cover them with thick and dark Clouds Black as 

Sacksloath, as 1s ſaid, Rev 6. 12. or as that ſtuff of which the Tents 

of Kedar were made, Cant. 1. 5. From this and ſome other Expreſ- 
fions it appears, that they wore a black ſackcloath, which alſo was 
moſt ſuitable to the ſtate of mourners, by whom it was uſed, 

4 The LORD GOD hath given meq the tongue of [41 
the learned r, that I ſhould know how to ſpeak a » Mat. 120i 
word in ſeaſon to him rhat is * weary { : he wakeneth as, * Will 
& morning-by morning », he wakeneth mine ear to 
hear «as the learned ». | - 

4 God having aflerted his own power,” to ſhew the groundleſneſs 
of the 1nndelity of the Fews, he proceeds to ſhew what excellent 
and «tfcttual means he uſed to bring them to Repentance and Salvati« 
on ; which he mentions as a greataggravation of their unbelief and 

Rebetliov, which by this means was without all excuſe. This and 

the following paſſages may be in ſome ſortunderſtood ofthe Prophet 

Jaiah, though but obſcurely and imperfeRly, but they are far more 

evidentiy and eminently verificd in Chriſt; and indeed ſeem to be 
meant direftly of him. For ſeing there are many other Paſſages in 
thts Prophecy, which are dircly meant of Chriſt and of his Miniſtry, 
and not at all of the Prophet, why may not this be added to the 
number of them ? eſpecially conſidering that there is »nothing here 
which forceth us to underſtand this place of Iſaiah, and leveral of 
theſe paſſages are expounded of Chriſt in the new Teſtament, as is 
confefled, Beſides, this ſeems to ſuit beſt with the coherence : For 
according tothis Expoſition the ſame perſon ſpeaketh here who hath 
ſpoken in all the foregoing Verſes of the Chapter, even the Lord 
himſelf conſidered as Man, becauſe he was both God and Man, as' is 
aboundantly evident from many Scriptures. both of the old and new 
Teſtament, as hath been alreadyproved,and will hereafter be moreful- 
ly evinced.rAn ability. of ſpeaking plainly and convincingly,and per» 
ſuadingiy, and in all pvints ſo as becometh a perſon caught of God, 
and filled with all Divine and Heavenly Wiſdom and. Knowledge.and 
with a fingular :kill of winning Souls, and of workipg upon Mens 
Hearts and Coniciences, { Burdened with the ſenſe ofhis ſad and 
deplorable condition.in which caſe a word of comfort is moſt ſeaſon- 
able and acceptavles This was the proper and principal defign of 
Chritis Miniſtry, to give reſt and comfort to diftretſed Souls, accor- 
ding to what is ſaid, with reſpect to this place, Hat. 11. 28. And all 
the Dodtrines, reproofs and Threatnings of Chriſt were direfted to 
this end, to make men fit for comfort and Salvation. &þ To wit, me 
| the Pronoun being oft underſtood : or as it follows. mine car, # 

From time to time, and continually, « Becauſe humane Nature is 

of it ſelf weak and ſloathful, he by his Divine Power affiſteth and 
ſticreth me up to the obſervation and pradtice of all his Commands 

and my Duties, x Either 1, As learned Men or Teachers uſe - to a- 

waken their Scholars to hear, and learn of them from time to times 

Or rather, 2, As thoſe that are or deſire and endeavour to be learn» 

ed, uſe to hear with all poſſible attention and diligence: For this 

Title of learned is in the former part of the Verſe given not to the 

Teacher, who is ſaid to be God, but to the perſon taught 'by 'him. 


5 The LORD GOD hath opened mine ear y,and I 


was not * rebellious z, neither turned away back a. © #* Job. 14 

» Hathrevealed unto me : Or rather, hath given me a power and : hor 
Will, to hear and receive his commands, as this phraſe is uſed, Fſal, phil. 5. $ 
40. 6. 1a. 35. 5, and elſe where, 4. I readily did 2nd ſuffered p7eþ 10.6, 
what he required of me, a The ſame thing repeated inother words. &c. : 
I did not turn away mine Ear from hearing avy of Gods Commands, © 
nor my feec trom going where God ſent me, how difficult or dange- 
rous ſoever my employment was. He ſeems to allude to the former 
Prophets who had divers of them, ſhrunk back, and for a time re. 
fuicd ſuch work as God called them to, as Moſes, Exed. 3. 1, I3, 
Jo#ah, che 1. 3. and others, 


6 *I gavemy back to the ſmiters 5, and * my cheeks any 26, 
to themthat plucked off the hair e: I hid not my face g 27 .264 


from ſhame 4 and ſpicting e. | *Lams 3, 
b 1 patiently yeilded up my elf, and turned my back to thoſe 30, 

who ſmote mie. I was willing not only to do, but to Tuffer the Will 

of Gad, aud the Injuries of men. This and the following paſſages were 

literally fulfilied ip Chriſt, as isexpreſly affirmed, Mat. 26. 57. 69. 

and 27. 26, 30. and elſe where; but weread of no ſuch things con- 

cerning iſaziah» And theiefore it 15 moſt ſafe and reaſonable te un- 
derſtand it of Chrift ; the rather becaule it is not uſual with thePros 

phets to commend themſelves fo highly, as the Prophet here com- 

mends the perſon of whom he ſpeaketh. c Which was a contumely 

or puniſhmenr inf}i@ted upop MaletaRors, Neb. 13+ 25. 4 From all 
' manner of reproachtull uſages. but did knowingly and willinely ſub- 

mit my ſelf thereunto. e Spitting in a mans Face was uſed in token 

of contempt and deteftation, Numb. 12. 14. Job 30.10. And this was 
- literally fulfilled in Chrift, Max. 26, 67. | 


7 For fthe LORD GOD w: 


; 


SO cc 


v 


Ce en EREIe IIa one AED RAT Gare. 


CC ——— 


will help me g, therefore 
- (hall I not be confounded 5: therefore have I fer my 
face like a fligt 3, and I kgow that I ſhall not be a- 


gZ2 F[+;; 


jap. ' LI. 1s 4 

| f Or rather, But, as this particle is oft rendred. For Gods fa- 
your is here oppoſed to the injuriesof Men, g Though as a man I 
am weak and inconfiderable,yetGod will ſtrengthen me to go through 
my great and hard werk. h Therefore I aſſure my ſelf of ſucceſsin 
my employment, and of viRory over all mine Enemies. 7 I have 
hardened my ſelf with reſolution and courage againſt all oppoſition. 
So this or the like Phraſe is uſed, Exek. 3, 8, 9. which elſewhere 
ſignifies obſtinacy and impudence; as fer. 5- 3: Zech. 7, 12. ſo that 
Roſh, 8. It otes any ſettled and unmovyeable purpoſe, whether good or evil. 

2. 33+ $ * He isnear & that juſtifieth me 7, who will con- 
Heb. #be tend with me ? let us ſtand together : who is | mine 


je adverſary ? let him come near to me my, 
iy cauſe or k God, though he ſeem to be at a diſtance, and to hide his face 
mo. from mc, yet he is in truth atmy right hand, and ready to help me 
I That will publickly acquit me from all the calumnies of mine ad- 
verſaries who ſay that 1 am a tranſgreſfor of the Law, a falſe Teach- 
er and Deceiver, a Blaſphemer, and a Devil, and the like, in which 
opinionthey are confirmed by my Death and Sufferings. But God 
will clear up my Righteouſneſs, and ſhew by many and mighty ſigns 
and wonders, that he is well pleaſed with me and that lived and 
died his faithful Servant. m: T challenge all my Accuſers to ſtand 
and appear before the Judge Face to Face, and to produce all their 
charges againſt me: tor I am conſcious of mine own Innocency,and 
I know:that God will give ſentence for me. ] 
9 Behold, the LORD GOD will help me, who - 
he zhat ſhall condemn me » ? Lo, they all o ſhall wax 


"Ch. $1.8% 014 as a garment : the * moth hall eat them up '# 
£ n That dare attemptit, or canjuſtly do it. o Mine Acculſers and 
Enemies. þ Shall pine away in their iniquity, as God threatned, Lev. 
26.39 ſhall be cut off and conſumed by a ſe-ret curſe andJudgrent of 
God, which is compared to aMoth,Hoſ, 5.12whie:ſt I ſhall ſurvive and 
flouriſh,and thepleaſure of God [hal preſper in my hands.2s is ſaid 1ſa.< 3.10. 
10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD 9, 
$F that obeyeth the voice ofhis ſervant 7, that walketh 
*Cch: 58.8, * darkneſs /; and hath no light z ? let him truſt in the 
L20- & 59 name of the LORD, and ſtay upon his God «. 


_ g ie now turneth his Speech from the unbelievipg and rebellious 
Jews to thoſe of them who were or ſhould be pious. y Of the ſame 
perſon of whom he hath hitherto ſpoken, of Chriſt, who 1s callec 
Gods Servant, Iſa. $2. 13. and $53. 11. partly by way of eminency, 
and partly to intimate that although he was God, yet he ſhould take 
upon bimſelf the form of a Servant, as is ſaid, Phil, 2. 7, He hereby 
fignifics that the Grace of God. and the comfort here following be= 
Iongeth to none but to thoſe that hear and believe this great Prophet 

" of the Church; which alſo was declared by Moſes, Deut. 18 15, 

compared with 4s 3. 22, 23; ſ Not in fin, which isoft called.dark- 

neſs, as walking in darkneſs is put for living in wickedneſs. 1 7obn 1, 

6. but in miſery, which alſo frequently cometh under the name cf 

darkneſs: that liveth in a moſt diſconſolate andcalamitous condition, 

together with great deſpondency or dejettion of Spirit, # Nocom: 
fort nor hope left, « Let him fix his Faith and Hope in the Name te. 
in the moſt excellent and amiable nature, and infinite perfeRions,and 
eſpecially in the free Grace, and Mercy,and Faithfulneſs, of the Lord 
declared in his word, and in his propriety or intereſt in God.who 
by tie mediation of this Servant is reconciled to himand made bisGod 

11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire x, that com- 
paſs your ſelves about y with ſparks z : walk in the light 

of your fire, * and in the ſparks that ye have kind!led 4 
This ſhall ye have of mine hand,ye ſhall lie down in 


ſorrow b. 

'x That you may enjoy the light and comfort of fit, as it is ex- 
plained in the following words. You that rejet the light which God 
hath ſet up, and refuſe the counſel of his Servant, and ſeck for Com- 
fort, and Safety, and the Knowledge of Goes Mind, and the enjoy- 
ment of: hisfavour by your own inventions; which was the common 
errour of the Jews in all Apes, and eſpecially. in the days of the 
Meſſiah, when they refuſed him and that way of Righteouſneſs and 
Saivation which he appointed, and reſted upon their own Traditions 
and devices, going about to eſtabliſh their own Righteouſneſs, and not ſub- 
mizting unto the Righteouſneſs of God, as is expreſſed Rom. xo, 3. yIn 


= 4 
*Fob 9.39- 


> þ ©  Geavouring to warm and refreſh your ſelves on all ſides. 4 Or rather 
with Firebrands, as this very word is fitly rendred, Prov. 26. 18, 

4 which is better than ſparks or fames which is there put in the mar- 
oF gent, becauſe firebrands only, and not ſparks or flames,are capable of 


bein; thrown >y one man at another. And this word isno where 
elſe uſed in Scripture. He mentions fire-brands, either to imply that 
theſe fires yeilded more ſmoak than heat or light : or becauſe theſe 

" were the uſual materialsof a fire. « Uſe your utmoſt endeavours to 
et cowfort and ſatisfation from theſe devices, b This ſhall be rhe 
fruit of all, through my juſt judgment, that in ſtead of that comfort 
and ſecurity which you expe by theſe means, you ſhall receive no- 
thing but vexation and miſcry, which ſhall purſue you both living 
and dying : for this word, which 1s here rendred ie down, is frequent- 
ly uſcd for dying, asGen, 47+ 30. Job 21, 26, and elſewhere, Or it 
is a metaphor froma man that lying down on his Bed for reſt and 

\ eaſe meets with nothing but trouble and pain, as Job complain'd, 


Chap, 7« 13, 14, 

CHAP, LI. 

Abraham our Pattern fo truſt in Chrift « in his Promiſes, and righteous 
Salvation : this is conftant, but men are Tranſitory, 1=n——8, 4 
Prayer of the Godly in Aflifion, g, 11. The Lords Anſwer, 
3 2,— 7, He bewalleth Jeruſalem, 18, ——20, The bitter Cup 
taken from her, and given #0 ber Enemies, 21, 23, 


Earken to me,ye thatfollow after righteouſneſs 4, 

| ye that ſeek the LORD: look unto the rock 

» Were: pbence ye are || hewn, and to the hole of the pit 
by Wares hence ye are || digged c. 

a Now he turneth his Speech again to the believing and godly Jews 
6That make it your chief care and buſineſs toſeck' favour and help 
from God. c Conſider the ſtate of Abraham and Sarah, when they 
procreated 1ſzac, from whom Jacob and all of you ſpravg : For ſo he 
explains the Metaphor in the next verſe, He comparcth the Bodies 


| the earth beneath: for 


a. Chap. 


of Abranvam and Sarah unfoa Feck, or Pit, or Quarry out of which 
ſtones are hewed or digged, thereby implying tiat God in fome ſort 
aQually did that which Chriſt ſaid he was able to do, Mat; 3. c even 
of ſtones to raiſe up Children unto Abraham; it being then as impoſſible 
by the courſe of rature for. Abraham and Sarah in that age toprocreat 
a Child, as it is to hew a living Child out of a Rock, or to dig one 
out of a Pit of Stone. 

2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah 
that bare you; for I called him 4 alone e, and bleſſed 


him, and encreaſed him f. 

d From his own Countric and kindred to follow me to an unknown 
Land, where | promiſed chat I would multiplic and bleſs him, as is 
particularlie <xplained, Gen. 12. rn, 2, 3» e Heb» one, either 
:. Him onlie of all his kindred 3 for though he carried ſome fery of 
them with him, yet I called none but him. So this notes God's fin- 
gular favour to their Progenitors aboye all the reſt of the Wor!d. Or 
2.Him when he was alone or ſolitarie,to wit,asto any Iflze 3 when he 
neither had nor was likelie to have anyChild bySarah, And this word 
alone, ſecs to belong not onlie to this word wherewith it is joined, 
but alſountothe two following words, eſpeciatlie if we conſider the 
order of the words in the Hebrew Text, where they lie thus; for, 
one ( or alone, or when he wasalone, or but one _) I ca'led him. and 
bleſſed him, and encreaſed bim, f Into a vaſt multitude, wien his 
condition was dcſperate in the eye of reaſon, And therefore God 
can as eafilie raiſe and deliver his Church when they are in the moſt 
forlorn condition, and ſeem to be dead, and buried, and conſumed, 
ſo that nothing but drie bones remain of them, as it is declared at 
large, Ezeh. 39. 

3 For g the LORD ſhal comfort Zion þ; he will 
comfort all her waſte places,and he will make her wil- 
derneſs like Eden and her defart like the garden of the 
LORD3z : joy and gladneſs ſhal be found therein, 


thankſgiving and the voice of melody. 

g Sothis ccm:s in as a reaſon why they ſhould look unto, or con= 

ſider that famous example of 4braham and Sarah, becauſe they ſhould 
fad the like wonder wrought on their behalf, Or, Therefore, or for 
the ſake of 4braham, my triend, and of that Covenant which I made 
with him, and by which I promiſed to bleſs him and his ſeed for ever. 
h His Church, which is frequentlic called by that name both in the 
Oid and New Teſtament, 7 Although ſhe ſhal be waſte and deſolate 
I-kea Wilderneſs or deſart for a time, yet ſke ſhal be reſtored, 
and be made as pleaiant and flouriſhing as the Garden of Eden 
was. 
4 Hearken unto me, my peoplek, and give earun- 
to me, O mynation : for a law / ſhal proceed from 
me, and I will make my judgment to reſt 2 for a light 
of the people ». 

k Seing the Gentiles will hearken to me, as'T have formerlic told 
you, take heed that you Jews, whom I choſe to be my peculiar 
people, do not reje& my counſel, nor forſake your own mercies, as 
[ fear you will do, / A new Law, evea the Doftrine of the Goſpel, 
which ought to have the force of a Law with you, and I expe& your 
Obedience to it, no lefſe than to my Law delivered by Moſes. m Judg- 
ment is here the ſame thing with Law in the former clauſe, the word 
of God, which 1s frequentlie called Judgment, as hath been obſerved 
again and again, or the Evengelical Dottrine, 6f which he ſaith that 
ne will make it tore, 4 e- ſettle and cſiablith it : whereby he may, 
voſfiblie intimate the ſtability and perpetuity of thislightin theChurch, : 
that it ſhal not belike the light of the Moſaical Diipenſation which 
was onlie to ſhine for. a ſeaſon,even until the time of Reformation, Heb, 
9. 1o. when all thoſe dark ſhadows were to vaniſh and give place to 
the Sun of Righteouſneſs, and to that Kindom and State that ſhould 
never be moved, as we read, Dan. 2. 44, Heb. 12, 26, 27, 28 
and in many other places. n Heb ef or fo thePeoples,nat oplie to you 
Jews, but unto People ofali forts and Nations, who ſhal receive and 
walk 1n that light which you willreje&, and uſe all poſſible endea- 
vours to extinguiſh, | . 


5 My righteouſneſs s 7s near : my ſalvation is gone 
forth p,and mine arms $shal judge the people 9: the Iſles 


r shal waitupon mes, and on mine arm shal they truſt. 

o My Salvation, as it is expoundedin the next clauſe, the Redempe 
tion of all my people, both Jews ane Gentiles, which is the cffeR of 
his Righteouſneſs, either his Juſtiee, or his Faithfulneſs, or his Mercy 
and Goodneſs,. for all theſe are called by the name of Righteouſneſs 
in Scripture. atd all thele contribuged to the work of Man's Redemp- 
tion. þ Shal ſhortlie go forth : my ſecret and eternal purpoſe of 
ſavirg my People ſhal ſpeedilie be falfilled. 4 Either r. Shall de- 
ſtroy thoſe People who obſirud or oppoſe this work. Or rather, 2 
Shal ſubdue the Gentiles to mine Authority, and rule them by 
my Word and Spirit, which agrees beſt with the fol- 
lowing clauſe, rx The remote Countries of the Gentiles, as 
Iſa, 41. 1. & 42. 4 and elfwhere. s Shal confidently expeR 
and hope for this promiſed Righteouſneſſe & 5alvation from me, and 
from me only, and not from Idols, as they have done, por by any 
other way. | 

6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, 


LI, 


and look uport 

* the Heavens $hal vanish away 

like ſmoak, andthe earth shal waxoldlike a Garment 7, Plal 
and they that dwell therein shal die || in like manner #, r02. 266 
but my falvation shal be for ever, and my righteouſ- 2:t.2435 
neſs shal not be abolished. j| Or, 4s & 


# The heavens and Earth ſhal paſs away, cither 1; Simplie, and by touſe, 
a ſubſtantial corruption or annihilation, which is yet to be anderftood 
comparativelie or conditionallie, that theſe ſhould ſooner vaniſh in- 
to nothing, than God's promiſe of Salvation ſhould not be accomoli- 
ſhed : as whenit is ſaid, Heaven and Earth ſhal paſs away, but my words 
ſhal not paſs away, Mat, 24. 35. It is thus expounded, 7+ js eafi:y for 
Heaven and Earth to pafs, than for one tittle of the Law t9 fail. Or 
2- ln regard of their preſent Satc and Propertics, and Uſe, as Smoak 
1s here ſaid to vantſh, although the ſubſtance of it be not deſtroicd; 


u Asthey ſhal be diſſolved, as we read, 2 P:f. 3_ xx, and death 
is nothing clſe but a diſſolution, | : 
7 Heat k- 


(.nap 


ff. 37 
*)(ab. 1 
28, 


Koh, 59+. 


WI.14- T5 
I 29. 3» 
; (b4 27. 


'Er14,2 


h,35,1 


tp, 7.16 


2 


7 *Pjalm 
4 118, 6, 
7 *Ch.qo, 6 
1 IPeta, 24 


Flebg. 8 
F104. 2 
(40, 22, 
0 42. 5 
0 44s 24. 
Or; mad: 
linſel 
ady, 


- aaa”: Þ 


3 |r, that 
fillth 
the ſea, 
Phen the 


(hap. Lt. 
- Hearken unto me,ye that knows righteouſneſs, the 
| +7]. 37 31: people fin whoſe heartis my law y,* tear yenot the 1C- 
| 21.19 pacoach of menz, neitherbe ye atraid of their revilings, 
28, x That love and praftife it, 25 knowing is commonlie uſed. y 
Who are tacitlie appoted to the carnal Jews that had the Law 
written onlie in Tables. Compare 2 Cor. 3, 3. Heb, 8. 1o. x7 The 
cenſures of the carnal Jews, who will load their believing and godly 
Brethren with a world of Reproaches ; but let not theſe things dif- 
Courage You, 

8 For * 

and the worm ſhal eat them like wool b : but my righ- 
teouſneſs ſhal be for ever, and my ſalvation from ge- 
| neration to generation. 
#* a Your Reproachers ſhal be eafilie deſtroyed, and ſo God will re. 
venge your cauſc upon them, and deliver you from their Reproach- 
es. b Like a woollen Garment, which isſooner corrupted by Moths 
or ſuch Creatures than linnen, 

9 Awake, awake c, put on ſtrength 4, O arm 
of the LORD ; awake, as in the ancient days, in the 
| generations of old. Art thou not ir that hath cut eRa- 


tt. 50:9. 


the moth ſhal eat them up # like a garment, | 


iS 418 


4 ce 


 andelſewhere, 
| 1Nluſtrious manner than ever T have done. 


014-13, hab f, and wounded the * dragon g ? 


u Ecks © Thou who haſt carried thy ſelf 1tke one afleep, and unconcer- 
| lad ned for thy People. and unable to ſave them. The Prophet havirg 
ey foretold what Great things God would do for his Church, and long- 
f 0627. F. ing for the accompliſhment of them, and knowing that Prayer was 
| one means by which God fulfills his Promiſes, he poureth forth this 
Prayer to God in his own name, and in the name of God's People, 
dCloath and adorn thy ſcIf with mightie works put forth thy ſtrength, 
e Heb. hewed with thy Sword. f Egypt, ſo called here, and ”ſalms 
$7, 4. & 89. 10. cither from its Pride or ftrength. or trom the 
ſhape and figure of that Land, g Pharaoh, ſo called, Pſal. 74. 13, 


Exch. 29. 3. & 32, 2. . . : p 
; 10 Art thou not it which hath * dried the ſea 5, 


the waters of the great deep? that hath made the depths 
of the ſea a way for the -ranſomed 3 to paſs over ? 


| h Art not thou the ſame God, and as potent now as then thou 
| waſt. # For thy people whom thou didſt redeem and bring out of 


En 4,21 


(h.35,10. _ Therefore k * the redeemed of the Lord ſhal re- 
and come with ſinging unto Zion, and ever- 
upon their head /: they ſhal ob- 
and ſorrow and- mourning 


turn, | 
laſting joy ſha? be ® u 
tain gladneſs and joy, 
aways 
__ —_ Gb. And. This verſe contains ananſwer to the Pro- 
zher's Prayer. It is true, I did theſe great things, and I will do 
; thelike again. 1 Like a Crown of Glorie, But for tre accomplith- 
ment of this magnificent Promiſe we muſt needs look beyond their 
| return from Babylon intotheir own Land, when they met with ma- 
nie diſcouragements, and troubles, and calamities, and extend it 
unto the coming of Chriſt, by whom theſe great things were procu- 
red, and actuallie conferred upon his People. | 
12 I, even] am he that comftorteth you s who art 


thou », that thou jhouldeſt be afraid * of a man that 


ph, ”. I6, 


2; 


s xy ſhal die, and of the fon 'of man which ſthal be made * 
: Kh, by 6. as graſs n? ; | 
l wer, i a How -unreafonable and diſtruſtful art thou, O my Church ! 


1 1Petita 24s ne, O09, ! 
+ how unlike to thy ſelf ! how unſuitable in t'efe deſpandencics un- 


| | Clap. LU 

protedted thee by my aln.ightie zower. See the ſame Phraſe, 7/z. ; 

49. 2. # Thave given thee theſe Premiſes, :nd this proteRion in 

all thy calamities, to aſſure thee of my care ard kindneſs to thee, 

and that I will reform thee in a moſt glorious manper, and bring thee 

unto that perfc&@ and bleſſed eſtate which is reſerved for the days of 

the Meſfiah, whichin Scripture Phraſe is called a making of new Hea« 

vens, and a new Farth, ta, 65. 17. and 66s 22. 2. Pet, 7. I3, 

x That I may own thee for my People, ia a more 

17, * Awake y, awake, ftand up z; O Jeruſalem, *#-52: 37 | 

which haſt drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of 

his fury a; thou haſt *drunken the dregs of the * cup ML þ 

of trembling b, «nd || wrung them out c. | ES 
» Either 1; Out of the fleep of ſecuritie. Qr 2, Out of the ſleep Or ſuckeg 

of death. Heb. Rouze wp thy ſelſ: come out of that foriorn and dil- them out, | 

conſolate condition in which thou haſt ſo long been. This ſenſe ſuits l 

beſt with the foilowing words, x3 Upon thy feet, O thou who haſt 

fallen, and been thrown down to the ground, a Which haſt been 

ſorely affiiRed ; for fo this Metaphor is uſed, Pſal. 75, 8, Jer. 25. 

Is, Of'ce and 49. 12. b Which firiketh him that. drinketh it 

ny deadlic horrour. c Drupk every drop of it. See on Pſal, 

754 Os | 

18 There 7z5none to guide her amongall the ſons whom 

the bath brought forth: neither js there any that taketh 


her by the hand, of all the ſons :hat ſhe hath brought 


«Hy 
. 


4 
ty 
; 
} 


'up d. 


and not able to £0 Nei. 
, were able or willing to 


4 When thou waſt drunk with this Cup, 
ther thy Princes, nor Prophets, nor Prieſt: 
lead and ſupport thee, ; 


Heb. 
happened. 
+ Heb- 


who ſhalbe ſorry for thee ? deſolation, and + deſtrugi- 
on, and the famine, and the, ſword : by whom ſball 
I comfort thee f ? *. | | 
e Either 1, Thoſe which were now mentioned, x. That ſhe was 

drunk with the cup of God's wrath, v. 19_ 2, That ſhe had none to 
ſupport or comfort her in that conditiov., Or 2, Thoſe which here 
follow, which althouzh they be expreſſed in 4 words, yet they may 
fiilie be reduced to two things, the deſolation or devaFation of the Land 
and the deſtrufion of the People, by Famine and Sword. So Famind 
and Sword are not named as new eviis, but onlie as the particular ways 
or means of bringing the de$irudion there mentioned, and the words 
may be thus rendred, deſolation and deſtra&tim. even C this Hebrew 
particie bc: 1vg oft taken expoſitively, whereof many inftances have 
been given ) famine (C or, by famin-) and Sword, Or, two may be 
put indetinitely tor many, as double is put for abundantlie more, Job 
11. 6, Iſa. 40 2, & 61, 7. Tech. 5, 12. and elſewhere, "& 
cannot fiadauy man who is able to comfort and relieve thee. 


20 * Thy ſons have faintedg : they lie 4 at the head 
of all the ſtreets z ; as a wild bull in a net L 8 they are 
full of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God: 


g Theyare to far from beingable to comfort thee as was ſaid. vy- 
18, That they themſelves faint away for want of comfort and 
chrough Famiuve, h Dead by Famine or the Sword of the Encmie 
: Where men enter tn or £0 out of the ſtreets, where the Evcmy found 
them either oppoiing their entrance, or running out of them to 
make an «ſcape, &þ Thyvſe ofthem who are not ſliin are ſtruggling 
for Life, and although they murmur at God, and fight with men 
yet they cannot prevail or eſcape. 3 


2r Therefore hear now this, thou afMlied, and 


T7 ament, 
241 I, || 2s 


to thy own profeſſions and obligations: n Of a weak Mortal and 


periſhing Creature. | 
12 And forgetteſt the LORD thy maker o,that hath 

* ſtretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations | 
9. 8. of the earth? and haſt feared continually every day, 
- wag 2: |ecauſe ofthefury of the oppreilor,as ithe |were ready 
"= " to deſtroy p? and where is the fury oi the oppreiſour 4 ? 
| O44; Re o And doſt not confider ihe inflaite power of that God. who mgde 
| Ive; made thee, and who will plead thy cauſe, p Asifit were in his power to 
| linſel defiroy thee in a moment, gq What is become of the power and 
ady rage of the Babylenians ? Is it not all gone ? Are not they broken, 
; ang thou delivered? He peaks of the thing as if it were alreacy 
done, becauſe it. ſhould certainly and fſuddenlic be done. Where 
:isit 2 no where, it is quice loſt and gone, as this Phraſe is fre- 

| quentlie uſcd, as Pſal. 42+ 3» Zech. 1, 5. 1. Cor, (5, 55. 

14 The captive exile haſteneth that he may be 
looſed r, and that he ſhould not die in the pit, nor that 
his bread ſhould fail. = 

:« not ſlack, as you think, but maketh haſte to fu is 

hath k, as you think, but maketh haſte to fulfil hi 
promiſe, and to reſcue his captive and oppreſicd People from all 
| their oppreſſions and milſeries. | 
or "8 15 ButT am the LORD thy God || that * divideth 
"yy the ſea, whoſe waves roared ; the LORD of hoſts ;s 

* 
Phen the his name. = 0 

Ip 16 And I have put my words * in thy mouth s, and 
way have covered thee in the ſhadow of mine hand z, thar 
TP 12 I may plant the heavens, and* lay the foundations of 


[n3r,35. the earths, and ſay unto Zion, Thou art my people x: 

«18, s Theſe great and glorious Promiſes which are in thy mouth, are 
806. 49. not the vain words ofMan, a weak.and unconſtant, and unfaithful 
g Creature, but the words of the Almightie, unchangeable, and faith» 


MN T ful God, and therefore they ſhal be infallivly accompliſhed. Theſe 
PY - mnt ge manifeſtlic ſpoken by God, either 1, To 7ſatah, by whom 
5:3. theſe promiſes were delivered :*.Or 2. To Chriſt, of wh-m, and to 


whom many things are {aid in this Prophecy, as we have already 
ſeen, and will further appear. And fuch abrupt and ſudden Apo. 
trophe's to perſons not mentioned in the foregcing werdsare not un- 
uſual in this Prophecie, as hath been obſerved, Or rather 3, To I/ 
7ael, to God's Church and People, to whom he ſpeaks both in the 
foregoing and following verſes. For Gods Word is frequently ſaid 
to be put into the mouths, not only of the Prophets, but of the Peo- 
plc alſoy as 1/a. 59: 24+ 45 allo Dent, 3oy I4+ Jof. 118, &, F Hye 


*X drunken, but not with wine 7. Ns 

{ But with the cup of God's fary mentioned above. wverſ- 17. 

22 Thus faiththy Lord, the LORD, & thy God 1har 
pleadeth the cauſe of his people mz, Behold, Thavetaken 
out of thine hand thecup of trembling, ever the dregs 
of the cup of myfury : thou ſhalt nomore drink it again, 

m Who though he hath fought againft thee, is now recanciled 
to thee, and will maintain thy caule againſt ali thine adverſaries, 

23 But *I will pucit into the hand of them that a= 
Mict thee : which * have faid to thy foul, bow down that 
we may go over »: and thou haſt laid thy body as the 
2round. and as the ſtreet to them that wenr over, * 

n Lie down upon the ground, that we may trample upon thee, ' as 
C-nquerour: uſed to do upon their Conquered Encmies, Sce 7of | 
10, 24 Pſal., LIOs 1s | : 


Tch.29. 9. 


© AP. LIT; 


The Church redeemed andc alled upon fo rejoyce thereint,---6, The Univers 
Jal Preaching of the Golpel glorious: 7,-*-ICs * A Callto free our ſelves 
from bondage. 18,-»-12+ Chriſt's Kingdom jbal be exalted, 13,- «-15+ 


A Wake, awake, put on thy ſtrength #s, O Zion, 
put on thy. beautiful garments b, O Jeruſalem, 
the holy city c: for henceforth tnere ſhal nomore come 


into thee {the uncircumcifed e, and the unclean f. 
a Gud bidveth his Church do that. which ſhe intreated him to do, 
ch. 51, 9. And becauſe God's word is operative, and effeftnal, 
and his ſayings are doings, this is a prediftion and promiſe - 'what 
ſhe ſhould do, that the fhould awake or ariſe out of her tow eſtate, 
and be ſtrong and couragious. b Thy forrows ſhal be ended; and thou 
ſhalt be advanced into a moſt glorious and bleffed condition. + Omy 
Church, which is every where called by the name of Zion or Jervſu- 
lem, d Either to moleſt thee, or to aſfociite themſelves with thee, 
or to defile or corrupt thee. e- Heathens or Infidels, who are coin- 
mon!y cailed uncircunaſed, f Nor any others, who though they 
be circumciſed, as the Fews generally were, are unclean in any 
thipg. Whereby he intimates, that there ſhould be a greater pu- 
rity and Reformation 10 the Church than formerly there had beer, 
which was eminently accompliſhed in the Church afid Kipgdom of 


Ch.g1.17 


Chriſt, 4 
s Z3 2 Shake 


' 
| 
: 


l "n 
4y | 

1 

} ' 
4d li 

1 | 


; TH 1. 

AY | J ' ! 

P/ 1s. 8. I 
I 1 


| 


i9 * Theſe two things e + are come unto thee : *©5. 47.9, Wl 


breaking, , WWW 


4 4% 


1 ap. IL | . 

I 2 Shake thy elf from the duſt g : ariſe, nd fie | 
down 6b, O Jeruſalem ; looſe thy ſelf rom the _] 
of thy neck z, O captive daughter of Zion. 


2g In which thou haſt lain as a Priſorer,or ſate as a Monrner. þll- 
on thy Throne- Or, ſit up, as this wordis rendred, Gen. 27. 19. 
7 The yoke ofthy captivity ſhall be taken off from thees It 1s a 
-- * oo from Beaſts that have the yoke faſtened by bands to their 
necks, 


f. 44-12 2 For thus faith the LORD, *Ye have fold your 
#9. 45-13» ſelves kfor nought 1, and ye ſhall be redeemed without 
"{ money 77» 

k By your fins, into the hands of the Chaldeans. { Without 
any price or valuable conſideration paid by them either to you, or to 
me your Lord and owner. # Without paying any ranfom. 

4 For thus ſaith the Lord GOD, My people went 
s. down aforetime into* Egypt to ſojourn there »,and 0 
* the Aſſyrian p opprefſed them without caule 9. 
© n Where they had proteftion and ſuſtenance, and therefore owed 
ſubjeRion to the King of Fgypf. And yet when he oppreſſed them 
I puniſhed him ſeverely, and delivered them out of his hands. 
Which is eaſily underſtood from the following words, o Or, 6ut 3 
for here is an oppoſition made between theſe two.cates, p The 
The King of Babylon, who is called the King of Aſſyria, 2: Kine 23: 
29. compared with chap. 24. 7. as alſo the Perſian Emperour is called 
Exra 6+ 22. becauſe it was onc and the ſame Empire which was poſ- 
ſeiſed, firſt by the Aſſyrians, then by the Babylonians, and after- 
wards by the Perſians. q Without any ſuch ground or colour; by 
meer force invading their Land,and carrying them away into cap- 
tivity. For although it be ſaid that God gave this Land; and People 
into his hand, 2 Chr. 36. 17- by his Counſel and Providence, yet 
that was neither known to, nor regarded by the King of Babylon, nor 
was it agood and lawfull Title, God's Word, and not his Providerce 
being the Rule by which mens rights are determined 3; otherwiſe a 
Robber hath aright to my purie, which he cannot take from me. u- 
pon the high- way without God 's Providence. 
s Now therefore, what have I here r, faith the 


' LORD, that my people is taken away s for nought 7+ 
they that rule over them «, make them tohowl « ſaith 
the LORD, and my name continually every day 7s 
| FEzeb, 36 * blaſphemed y. 

20, 23» r Heb. What to me here ? Theſenſe 1s either r, What doT here ? 
Rom. 2,24 Why do I ſit ſtill here, and ot go to Babylon to puniſh the Baby- 
lonians, and todeliver my Pepole ? Or 2. What honour have 1 by 
ſuffering this injury to be done to my People? 5s Were icarricd 2- 
way Captive by the Babylonians. # Without any provocation or 
pretence of right- See before on v. 3+ « Who by their Office are 
' obligedto deal juſtly and tenderly with their ſubje&s. * By *their 
- tyrannical and unmercifull uſage of them. » Inftezd of that praiſe 
and ſervice which the Babylonians owe me for all their ſucceſfes and 
Conqueſts, they blaſpheme me as if I wanted either power or good 

will to ſave my People out of their hands. 
6 Therefore my people ſhall know my name z: 
therefore they ſhall kyow a in that day b, thatT am he 


that doth ſpeak, behold zz is I c 
i 2 They ſhall have ſcaſible Experience of my inficite power and 
rene in fighting for them and againſt you : whereby they fhall 
able to put your blaſphemous tougues to ſilence. a Which word 
is underſtood from the foregoing claufe, as is very frequent in Scrip- 
ture. b When I ſhall redeem my People : which Work was be- 
© gun by the return of the Jews from Babylon, and afterwards carried 
on, and at laſt perfe&ed by the coming of the Meſſiah. c Thar all 
theſe promiſesare not the words of a weak, or fickle, os deceitful 
man, but of him who is the Omnipotent, and Unchangeable, and 
Covenant keeping God. Or thus, That I who have formerly ſpoken 
to you by my ſervants the Prophets, C for it was the Spirit of Chyiſt 
aphich was and ſpake in them, 1. Yet.1, 18. )do now ſpeak to you in 
my own perſon, being cloathed with flzſh. Which agrees well, as 
with the Analogy of Faith, and with diverſe other Scriptures, ſo 
; particularly with the next verſe, and} with divers following paſ- 
ſages, which ſo evidently ſpeak of the perſon and Kingdom of Chriſt, 
that they cannot without great force be underfiood of any other. 


7 * How beautifull 4 upon the mountains 'e are the 
feet f ofhim'g that bringeth good tidings, that pub- 
liſheth peace, 'that bringeth good tidings of good, that 
publiſheth falvation 5b, that Pith unto Zion, Thy God 


regpaeed z. 

Theſe arewords of "rejoicing 'and admiration. They are ex- 
ceeding precious and acceptable. e Of Zion, and Moriah, which are 
"ſometimes mentioned as one Mountain, and ſometimes as two, Or, 
in the mountainious Country of Fades, 'to which theſe glad tidings 
were brought, and from which they were ſpread abroad into other 
Countries. f Which carry this welcome meſſenger ; or the meſſen- 
ger himſelf himſelf, g Or, of them, for the ſingular number fs oft 
put for the plural: although it may be here emphatically uſed,to ſig. : 
nifie, that although there were many Meffengers, yet one was the. 
chief, and Lord of the Embaſiy, whoſe ceming was more acceptable. 
than thereſt : which ſuits excellently to the Meſſiah, who is ycalled 
ghe Meſsenger of the Covenart, Mal. 3. I, and is oft ſaid tobe ſent by | 
God, as Fob. 6, 38. & 8. 16.18. &c, to publiſh the glad tidings of 
Salvation, þ Thoſe emphatical and repeated Expreſhons are a ſuf- 
ficient evidence, that ſomething farther and better is here intended 
than their deliverance out of Baby{sn, which init ſelf was but a very 
imperfe& work, and reached at firſt but to a few of that numerous 
People, and was attended with many fears and ſorrows, and rermain- 
ders of their bondage, Exr4 9+ 8, 9. Nebem. x. 3. and that although 
| that was the beginning of theſe glad tidings, yet they extended much 
3 further even to the coming of Chriſt, by whom alone true Peace and 
Salvation were procured. It is true, this might in ſome ſort be ſaid 
when God ſo aver-ruled the affairs of the World, and the heart of 
Cyrus, that his People were freed from the Babyloniſh Captivity and 
reſtored intoand ſctled in their own Land. Although he that con- 
fiders the ſtate of God's People in their own Laud ater their return 


Jen 41. 
*Jer. 5% 
a7: 


 "* Nabum 
5 FT, IF, 
Rom. 10. 
I Fy 


I # 4 4-H. 


| advancement of the Meſſiah, is fitly put in 


——— ——— A es, ans |. Chap, IM LIL, 


will fiod that the reign of God in ard over the War'd was not then 
either very ccnipicucus cr x lorioutes And therefere it ſeems far more 
reaſonable to underſtand it of the days of the F'efiah. when God did 
diſcover and exerciſe his dominion over the Vorid far more emi« 
neptl y than ever he had done from the beginning of the World unto 
that that time, 


8 Ihy watchmen & (ball lift up the yoice 7, with the 
voice together ſhall they ſing:for they ſhall ſee eye 


to eye », when the LORD fhall bring again Zion o; 

k Thy Miniſters who ſhali deſcry the approach and ccming of 
this heavenly King and Kingdom. | partly to give notice to all 
People of theic giad tidings : and partly by way of cxultation, to 
ſing forth the Praiſes of God for this glorious day and Mercy as it 
here follows, m They ſhall underſtand, and ſo be able to teach Di. 
vine Myſteries. n Very diſtinRly and clearly, and familiarly, their 
eyes beholding the Eyes of tis Ring ofGlory,as it is ſaid of Zedekiah 
Jer, 34+ 3+ 4hine Eyes (hall behold the Eyes of the Kirg of Babylon ;, and 
as 1t 15 laid, Meuth 85 Mouth, Numb, 124. 8, and Face to Face. Gen - 
32. 30, Exod. 33. 11, Numb, 14, 14, They ſhall fee with their bo« 
dily Eycs the King of the Church, or the word made Fleſh as they 
are ſaid to haye done, Joh. 1. 14. & 1 Joh. 1. 1. They ſha!l be 
Eye and Ear-witnefſes of the Words and Works of Chriſt, and 
therefore their Teſtimony of theſe things ſhall be imore certain and 
valuable, o When God ſhall compleat the work of bringing his 
Church out of Captivity, which was begun at the return out of 
Batylon, and perfe&ed by Chriſts coming into the World; 


9: Break forth into joy, * ling together, ye waſte *Ch;49.12 
places of Jeruſalem p : for the LORD Rath conkers O 15-12 
his people, he hath redeemed Jerufalem. L 

p For you ſhall be reſtored unto your former, 
fertility 

10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm 9 in 
the eyes of all the nations, and * all the ends of the 


earth (bali ſce the ſalvation of our God 7. 

q Hath diſcovered and put forth his great power, which for a 
long time hath lain hid, and ſeemed to be idle, r All Nations: of 
the World ſhall with aftoniſhment behold the wonderful work of 
ood, firſt in bringing his People out of Babylon, and afterwards in 
their Recenmption by Chriſt, 


It * Depart ye, depart ye,go ye out from thence s $ch.48.26 
touch no unclean rhing 3,g0 ye out of the midſt of her, »5:552? 


be ye clean, that bear the veſſels of the LORD «. Kev.18.4, 

s Make haſte, O ye baniſhed jews, to depart out of Babylon into 
your own Land, that there 1 may mect with you, und bleſs you, and 
perform thoſe further and greater things which 1 have promiſed 
there to dofor you, And this Invitation was the more neceſſ:ry 
becauſe God foreſaw that: a great number of the Jews would upon 
worldly conſiderations continue in thoſe foreign Countries in which 
they were ſetled, and be very backward to return to the Holy Land 
s And when you | Ape 

you go thence, take heed that you carry not along with 
you any of their Superſtitions or Idolatries, but purific and prepare 
your ſelves, that ſo God may return to yeu in mercy, when you re- 
turn 1nto your own Land, & And eſpecially you Prieſts and Les« 
vitcs, whoſe Office it is to miniſter in holy things, and to carry back 
the holy Veſlels of the Temple,keep your ſelves from all pollution, 

' I2 For ye ſhall not go out with haſte,nor go by | 
tight x : for the LORD will go before you ; and the - 
God of Ifreel willf be your rereward y- T Heb. ga+ 

x But lecurely, and in triumph, being condaRted by your great ther joup, 
Capiain the Lord of Hoſts, And therefore you will have both the 
greater Odligation,and the more leiſure and opportunity to cleanſe 
your (elves trom atl filthineſs. y So that none ſhall be able either 
to oppole and ſtop you in your march, or to fall upon you in the rear 
as enemies commonly do, 

_ 12 Behold a,my ſervant b ſhall |]|deal prudently c,he ||r prope! 

al be exalted,and extolled, and be veryhigh g. 

a This is the beginning of a new Prophecy, which is continued 
from hence tothe end of thenext Chapter , and therefore it. is well 
obſerved by divers, both ancient and modern Tnterpreters, that the 
Fifty and Third Chapter ſhould have begun here. b $y. Of whom 
doth the Prophet here ſpeak ? It is apparent that theſe three Jaſt 
veries of this Chapter, and all the following Chapter ſpeak of one 
and the ſame perſon, And that that Perſon is Chriſt is ſo evident, 
that the Chaldee Paraphraſt, and other anticnt, and ſome later Hes 
brew Doors, underſtand it dice@ly of him, and that diverſe Jews 
havebcen convinced and converted to the Chriſtian Faith by the e- 
vidence of this Prophecy. And there is nota verſe in this whole con« 
text which doth not afford a clearand convincing proof of this truth 
aswe ſhal: ſee. And there needsno otherArgument to confirm it,than 
thevaricty&vanity of the pretended Expoſitions of thejews,who uſe all 
poſſible Wit and Art to wreſt all theſe paſſages toother perſons. Thoſe 
who would ſeem wiſer than the reft, and confute- the other Expoſitt- 
ons of their Brethren, underſtand it either of the Jewiſh Pcople in 
genera), or of the Prophet Jeremiah in particular, But both theſe con- 
ceits are ſo groundleſs and abſurd,that there is ſcarce a verſe but cot 
futes them,as we ſhall clearly diſcernin the Expoſition oſ them. And 
therefore other Jews reje@ them both, and underſtand it of Abraham 
or Moſes, or Joſiah, or Ezra, or Zorobabel.; and they might as weil have 
named twenty perſons more, to whom this place might be applied u- 
pon as good grounds as to ary oftheſe. But there is not one clauſe 
inall this context which is not moſt truly and fitly applied to Chriſt, 

25 I ſhall make apparent, ſtep by ſtep. And firſt this Title of God's 
Servant is in an eminent and peculiar manner given to Chriſt in this 
very Prophecy, as Iſa, 424 I. & 49. 6. & 53, 11.& Exeke 34-23. 
Zech. 3+8. c Shall manage his Kingdom with admirable Witdom, 
Or, ſhall proſzer, as it is in the margent, and as this word 1s frequently 
rendred,and particularly in thisfvery caſe,and of this ſee perſon, Jer 
23-5. Which alſo ſeems beſt toagree with thefollowingClauie,and with 
Ch.53.10,11.And this intimation concerning the future proſperity and 
the firſt place to prevent 
thoſe ſcandals which otherwiſe might ariſe from the ſucceeding paſ- 
ſages which largely deſcribe his ſtate of Humiliation and deep afflition 


4 Here are three words ſignifying the ſame thing to expreſs the 
_ Ba Heighb 


—— Js 


and a far greater 


*P(.92. 2 
Luke 3, 6. 


(hap. 


b(h, $34 
F 10, 


x * Romy1 5 


, 


F Job, 12% 


j 3. Rom, 


0, 16. 

| Or, Mo- 
Orine, 

feb, 
ting. 


Gap. LIT, 


4 
UW 


1 A 


Heipnt and 5 "Ip , ants. 
Chriſt but cannot without great force b> applied to Teremab, we 
had _ oreater honour or favour Gone him by the Chaideans at the 
taking of ſeruſalem, than to be left at liberty to go where he pleaſed, 
Jer 40 4. aid who after that time met with great we pn and 
hardſhip from hi: own Countrey-men, Jer. 42- and 43, _ _ wY 
14 As many were aſtonied e at thee f;5 ( his 
ſage was fo marred more than any man, and his form 


ore.than the ſons of men g. ) | | 
Mm Were ſtruck with wonder, either 1, At bis glorious Endows 
ments. and the excellency and Power of his Dodrine, and his mira» 
culous works. Or rather 2« At his great deformity, and ſtupendi- 


b(h, $34 
if 10, 


un ents, CoBicc os ld Cd Ars aire bas = 4 


2umilation and calamity. as may be gathered, both from the fol» | 
mae nagar and from the wſc of this word in Scripture, WY 
generally uſed 1na bad ſ-nſe,or of wondring atzſome extraordinarily | 
evil, as Jer. 13, 16+» & 19. 8 and oft e ſewhcre, ad never 1n 2 
ood ſeaſe. or of wondring at any thing which 15 extraordinarily | 
: d: At thee, O wy Servant, to whom he now turneth his 
Oak and then turncth hisſpeech from him, and ſpeaks of him in 
the next words 3 ſuch ſudden changes of Perſons, and ſpeaking of 
one and theſame mai, ſometimes in one perſon, and then preſently 
in another, being very frequent in the Writings of the Prophets, " 
we have already ſeen in divers inſtances, g He was more deforme 
or uncomely than aiy other man. Which was undoubtedly verified 
:n Chriſt, who in reſpeR of his Birth, and Breeding, and manner 
of Life was moſt obſcure and contemptible, and therefore ſaid to 
be a warm and no man a reproach of men, and deſpiſed of the People, Pſal. | 
22 6. who was more hated and vilified by the generality of t1: Jews; 
than any man upon Earth, and was accounted and called by them a 
Deceiver. a Samaritan, a Blaſphemer, and a Devil, 8c, whoſe Coun- 
tenace alſo was ſo marr<d with frequent Warchings, and raftings, 
and Troubles, tiiat he was thought to be near fifty Years old when 
he wasbut about Thirty, Jobn8. 57. and was farther ſpoiled with 
buffetings. and crowning with Thorns, and other cruel and deſpight- 
ful uſazes from men, and with the deep and contipual ſenſe of the 
burden of mes ſins, and of God's diſpleaſure due unto them 3 all 
which did not onlv oppreſs his ſpirit,but had a great intluence upon 


the verv conſtitution of his Bodye 


o " 6. 1 FAS = , 
©iory of his Exaltation. Which agrees moſt fitly to 


- 'So þ ſhall he ſprinkle 3 many nations, the Kings 
ſhall (hut their mouths at him k : for zhar ® which 


+ ; 
Romy1 5 11d not been told them ſhall they fee 1, and that 


, 


which they had not heard ſhal they conſider m. 

h His Exaltation ſhal be anſwerable ro his Humiliation, 7 Either 
1. With his Bioud, which 15 called. the blood of ſprinkling, Heb. 12. 
24 or, ſhal juftifie them, as it foliows, Iſa. 53. 1. which is fre- 
quently exprelſl[:d by wa(hing, As Pſal. 5, 2, 9+ Ezek, 16, 9, and 
by ſprinkling clean water, Exek., 36, 25. Or 2 With his Word or 
Dodtrine ; which being oft compared to Rain or Waters, asDeut. 32. 
2. Iſa, 55. 1c Il. Habe 2+ 14, & may be ſaid to be ſprinks 
led, as it is ſaid to be dropped, Deut. 32. 2. Ezeh. 20, 46. O 21, 2. 
And this ſenſe ſeen 5 to be moſt favcured by the following words, 
& Shal be filent before him out of a profound Humility, and Reve- 
rence, and Admiration of his Wiſdom, and an eager defire to hear 
and receive Counſels and Or:cles from his Mouth, Compare Job 29, 
9, 10, 11, 21, They ſhal no more contend with him, nor blaſ- 
pheme the true God and Religion as they formerly uſed to do, 


! For they ſhal hear from his Mouth many excellent Dotrines. 


ill be new and ftrange to them, ſuch as men are very 
— = : And particularly they ſhal hear from him that 
comfortable Dofrine concerning the Converſion and Salvation of the 
Gentiles, which was not only new to them, but was ftrange and 
incredible to the moſt of the ſews themfelves. mm Or, they (ball 
underfland, Which 15 addcd to ſhew that the ſeeing in the former 
clauſe was meant of diſcerning theſe things with the Eyes of their 


Minds, 
| CHAP. LIL 

The incredulity of the Jews : the death of Chrit : and che bleſted Effetts 
thereof, 1,— 1, his Exaltation and Glory, 13, == ;, 


Ho hath believed our || F report « and 
to whom is the Arm of the LOR Dbre- 


vealed c ? ; 

a The Prophet having in the three laſt Verſes of the former Chap- 
ter, made ageneral reprot concerning the great and wonderful Humi- 
lation, and Exaltation of Chriſt, of which he intended more largely 
to diſcourſe in this Chapter, before he deſcended to particulars he 
thought fitto uſe this Preface, 1/0, not only of the Gentiles, but 
even of the Jews, will belive the truth of what I have (aid and muſt 
ſay 2 Few or none. The generwity of them will neyerreceive, nor 
belive in ſuch a Meſſias as this. Thus this place is expounded by 
Chriſt himſelf, John 12, 38, and by Paul Rom. 10, 16. And this 
premonition was highly neceſſary, both to caution the Jews that 
they ſhould not ſtumble at this Stone, and to inſtruit the Gentiles 
that they ſhould not be ſurpriſed, nor ſcandalized, nor ſeduced with 
their Example. b Either 1. The Word of God, called therepore 
in the former clauſe ; the Doftrine of the goſpel, which is exprefly 
called the power of God, 1 Cor. 1, 18. becauſe of that admirable V1r- 
tue and Succeſs which accompanied the preaching of it. Or 2. 
The Meſſiah, who alſo is called the arm Or power of God, 1 Cor_ 1.4 
24+ and that moſt fitly, becauſe the Almi-hty power of God was both 
ſeated in him, and declared and exerciſed by him in his powerful 
Words and mighty Deeds, as Simon for ſome great works wrought 
by him, was calied by tre Samaritans, the power of God, Ads 8, jo, 
c Not outwardly, for fo Chriſt was revealed and preached to vaſt 
numbers. both of jews and Gentiles as is evidenr from this Context, 
and from divers other places of Scripture, but inwardly and with 
power to their Minds and Hearts, of which kind of Revelation, See 
Epheſ. x, 17. +8, 19, and conpare it with 2 Core 4. 4, Thus even 
Moſes, though ſifhcrently revealed to the Eyes and Ears of the Jews, 
yet is ſaid to be uirevealed or hid from their Minds and Hearts, 2 
Cor 3+ 14, is. The icmſe of the place is, few or none of the Jews 
will believe the Goſpel, or receive thei 37e//iah when he comesamong 


"06,49. 7, . 
O 52.14. 


? 


em. 
2 * For he ſhall grow up betore him as a tender 


OL SET 


$. 1 
ig 0@, 9.42, pant, 


and as a root out ofa dry ground 4 3 he hath | 


1- &# th. Chap. LIL | 


no form nor comelineſs e : and when we ſhal ſee him, 
there is no beauty that we ſhould defire him f. 

d And the reaſon or cccafion why the Jews will {5 :encrally rejet 
their Meſſiah, 1s becauſe he ſhall not come into the World with 
ſecular pomp, and power, like an carthly Movarch, as they carnal 
ly and groundlefly imagined but he (hal grow up (or ſpring up, Heb. 4« 
ſcend, to wit, out of the ground, -a5 it follows, brougnt forth, and 
brought up ) befor? him, ( before the unbelieving Jews' of whom he 
ipake, v. x, and that in the ſingular number, as here, who were 


' witneſſes of his mean original; and tierefore deſpiſed him, accor. 


Ging. to Chriſt's obſervation, F2hn 4. 14. or,as others, according to his 
face, or outward appearatice, as he was man 3 whereby he ſufficient 
ly irmaplies that he had another, a far higher, and a Divine Nature in 
him, ) as a tender plant ( or, as this very wordis tranſlated, Fzep, 
I7, 4- a young twig, which"1s a ſmall and inconfiderable thing ) and 
as a reos ( as Chriſt is called, Rom. 15« 12: andelfewhere : or as 
a branch, the rot being put Metomynically for the branch growing 
out of the root, as if is apparenily uſcd, where Chriſt is called the 
root of Feſs:, and of David. Iſa. 11. 10; Rev, 5. $5 and in other 
places, as Chr. 22. 10.) out of 4 dry ground, out of a mean and barren 
ſoi!, whoſe produQtions are generally poor and contemptible; either 
1, Out ofthe Womb of a Virgin; but that was no ground of con- 
tempt: Or 2, Ofthe Jewiſh Nation, which was then poor, and deſ- 
piſedz andenſlaved : Or 3. Out of the poor, and decayed, and con- 
tcmptible Family, . ſuch as the Royal Family of David was at that 
time, e His bodily preſence and condition in the World ſhall be 
mean and contemptible, f When we ſhall look upon him, expe@- 
ing to find incompareable Beauty and Majeſty in his Countenance, 
and Carriage, and Condition, we ſhall be altogether diſapointed, 
and ſhal meet with nothing amiable or defircable in him. This the 
Prophet ſpeaketh in the perſon of the carnal and unbelieving Jews, 
we, 2. e. our People, the ſewiſh Nation; | 


3 He is deſpiſed and rejected of men g,a man of ſor- 


! 
rows b6, and acquainted with grief 5 : and || + we pI aan 
hid as it were owr faces from him & ; he was de- his face 
{piſed, and we eſteemed him not /. from us. 


g Accounted as the (cum of Mankind, as one unworthy of the THeb, as 4 
company and converſition of all men. þ Wroſe whole Life was Þiding of 
filled with, and in a manner made up of an uninterrupted ſucceffion faces from 
of Sorrows and Sufferings. 3 Who had conſtant Experience of and 72:n. or, 
familiar converſe with grievous afflitions : for knowledge is oft taken f19M #s, 
praQtically, or for Experience, as Gen. 3, $5. 2 Cor. 5. 21, and 
elſewhere, & We ſcorned and loathed to look upon him Or, as 
others, he hidas is were his face from us, as one afhamed to ſhew his 
Face, or to be ſeen by any Men, as perſons conſcious to themſelves of 
any great deformity do commonly ſhun the ſizht ot men, as Lepers 
did, Lev. 13, 45. 4 Here are divers words expreffing the ſame 
thing, to fignifie both the utmoſt degree of contempt, and how ſtrange 
and wonderful a thing it was, that ſo excellent a perſon ſhould be 
ſo deſpiſed. 

4 Surely * he hath born our griefs, and carried our *Mat. 8. 
ſorrews m2 yet we did eſteem him ſtricken, ſmirten of 27! 
God and afflicted ». 

m And whereas it may ſeem an unreaſonable and incredible thing, 
that ſo excellent and glorious,and ſo innocent and juſt a perſon ſhouid 
meet with this uſage, it muſt be known that his griefs and miſeries 
were not laid upon him for his own ſake, but wholly and ſolely for 
the ſake of ſinful men, in whoſe ſtead he ſtood, and for whoſe fins 
he ſuffered, as it here follows. n= Yet our people, the lew:, were 
ſo far from giving him the Glory and Praiſe of ſuch a prodigious con= 
deſcenſion ane compaſſion, that they made a moſt perverſe conftru&i- 
on of it, and ſo great was their prejudice againſt hiw, that they be. 
lieved that he was thus diſgraced and puniſhed, and at laſt Put to 


death by the juſt j»dgment ofof God, for his Blaſphemy and oth 
Tanitold Wickcdnefles. PNER : 7 


5 Buto he was [| * wounded p for our tranſprefſi- 
ons q, he was bruiſed for our iniquities; the chaſtiſe- 
ment of our peace r was upon hims, andwith his * f 
{tripes we are healed z. 

0 But this was 2 moſt talſe and unrighteous Sentence. 
word comprehends all his pains, and puniſhments, and his Death a- +tHeb. 
mong and 2vove thereſt. q Not by them, which isexpreſled by ano- bruiſe 
ther particle, not by the wickedneſs of the Jews. but for or becauſe | 
of them, as this particle commonly fignifies, for the guilt of their 
fins, which he had voluntarily craken upon himſelf, and for the Expia- 
tion of their fins, whieh was hereby parchaſed and procured of God 
for Men. Which Interpretation is confirmed, 1. By the Oppoſition 
of this truth to the falſe opinion mentioned in the foregoing clauſe 
that he was ſmizt2n of God for the guilt of his own fins. 2. By the 
following clauſe, as we ſhal ſees By the nature of the thing 
this betng evident from Scriptures both from the Old and New Telt2- 
ment, that Chriſt was not to ſuffer for his own, but for other mens 
Sins. Sce Dan: 9. 24, 26. r Thoſe puniſtments by which oue 
Peace, 2. e, our reconcilation to God, and Salvation, or Happineſs, 
was to be purchaſed, s Was laid upon him by God's Juſtice with 
his own conſent, # By his ſufferings we are ſaved from our fins 
and from the dreadful effes thereof A 

6 All we # like ſheep « have gone aſtray x : we 
have turned every one to his own way y, and the 
LORD Þ bath laid = on him the 111QUitY a of us fHeb. hath 


411. | | | made .the 

z All mankind, the Jews no leſs than the Gentiles. uv Which are iniquities of 
ſimple and fooliſh Creatures, and exceeding apt to ſtraggle and #* 4/1 #0 
loſe themſelves, x From God, and from the way of his Pre. er on hire 
cepts, in which he put our firft Parents, - and in which he com. 
mauded us to walk. y In general, to the way and courſe of fin 
which may well be called a. mans own way, as fins are called 
mens own Luſts, James 1, 14. 2. Peter 3. 3. andelſewhere, becauſe 
finis vatural to us, inherent in us, born with us, and very dear to 
us; and in particular, to thoſe ſeveral paths of divers Lufts, which 
ſeveral men chuſe and follow, according to their differing Opinions 
[nclinations, Occaftions, and Circumſtances. 7 Heb. hath made fo 


for, #ors 
mented. 

*Rom. 4628, 
1C0Y7.1 5. 3. 
* 1 Pep. 2, 
> Which 24. 


\ 


meet, as all the Rivers meet in the Sea, a Not properly, for ſo he 
knew no fin, 2 Cor, 5, 21, but the puniſhment of Rr -25 
7: 4&4 that 


\& aP. LITE. 
—— that word is moſt frequently uſed, as Gen. 47 12, Levit. 20 419. &c. 
s That which was due for all the fins of all his people, whether Jews 
or Gentiles, which muſt needs be ſo great and heavy a load,that if 
he had not been God as well as Man, he muſt have ſunk under the 
burden of them- This was aQually verified in Chriſt, And both 
this and divers other paſſages here do as manifeſtly and fully point 
at Chriſt, as if they were not a prophetical Repreſentation of things 
to come, but an hiſtorical Relation of them after they were done. 
Nor do I ſee how they can be excuſed from the fearful wreſting of 
the Scripture. that expound theſe places of the Prophet Jeremiah. or 
any other perſon but Chriſt, 


7 He was opreſſed, and he was afflited b, yet * 
x2, 14. he opened not his mouth ©, he is brought as a lamb to 
© Mar. 14. the ſlaughter, and as a ſixxep before her ſhearers is 


61.#15.5. dumb 4, ſo he openeth not his mouth. ; 
a8, 32. b He was ſorely puniſhed for our fins. But there 1s another 
Tranſlation, which ſeems to be more emphatical apd more agree- 
able to the Hebrew Text 7t ( to wit,our iniquity laſt mentioned, 
or the puniſhment of all our fins _) was exated, or required; ( as 
| this word moſt properly and frequently ſignifies, of which ſce my La- 
tin Synopſis. God's Jutiice expedtedand required ſatisfaftion trom us 
for our fins; which, alas we could not make to him: and he was 
affliSed or puniſhed : he bore the guilt and puniſhment of our Sins in 
his Body upon the tree, as is (aid, x Per. 2. 24- or, as others ren- 
N der this laſt word, and be anſwered, i. e. became our ſurcty, or un- 
f: dertook to pay the debt, and to ſuffer the Law in our ſtead, and for 
cur ſake. c He neither murmured againſt God for cauſing him to 
ſuffer for other mens Sins, nor reviled men for puniſhing him with- 
out cauſe, nor uſed Apologies or endeavours to ſave his own Life 3 
but willingly and patiently accepted of the puniſhment of our Intqui- 
ty. d Bears thelols of its fleece or Life without any clamour or re» 
fiſtance as other Creatures uſe in ſuch caſes. ; 


4 8 |] He was taken from priſon and from judgment e: 
[Orgbewas . a 2 
Zakenawgy 22d who ſhal declare F hisgeneration g? for he was 
hy diſtreſs cut Off b out ofthe land of the living ; for the tranſ- 
and jadg- greflion of my people } was he ſtricken 5. 
nent. e Theſe words arc underſtood either, 1+ Of Chriſts Humiliation or 
but, &c: Suffcrings:: and then the words are to be rendred, He was taken away 
THeb. was C to wit, out of this Life, as this word is uſed, Pſalm 31. 13. 
#he ſtroke Proverbs 8. 49_ and elſewhere : he was put todeath : ) by diſtreſs 
upon hitt, C or vilenceor tyranny,as this word 1s uſed with this Prepoſition be- 
fore it, Pſalm 107. 39. ) and judgement, by oppreſſion 
and violence under a form and pretence of. Juſtice, Or rather, 2, 
Of Chriſts Exhortation, becaule of the following Clauſe , which is 
not unſeaſonably mentioned in the midſt of his Sufferiogs, to take 
off the Scandal which might have ariſen from Chriſts Suffcrings, if 
there had not been a proſpet and aſſurance of his viRoriousneſs over 
them, and his Glory after them : and ſo the words may be rendred, 
' He was taben up ( or taken away, freed or delivered ) from Priſoni, es 
x 7 from the Grave, which being called an Hoyſe, Job 3o- 23. and a 
> Pit, inwhich men are ſbvt up, Pſalm 69+ 15. may fitly be called a 
FR: - Priſon : or from diſtreſs, or affliction, or oppreſſion, from the power and 
2M malice ofhis Enemics, and trom the torments of his own Soul, arif- 
* ing from the ſenſe of Mens fins and Gods diſpleaſure Jand from judg- 
>} ment, iz e. from all the ſufferings and puniſhments inflifed upon 
7 him, cither by the unrighteous judgment of men, or by the juſt 
judgment of God, puniſhing him for thoſe fins which he had volun» 
tarily taken upon himſelf : or, which is the ſame thing, from the 
Sentence of Condemnation, and all the effects of it : For 1n this ſenſe 
| Judgment is very commonly taken both in Scripture and other Authors 
f Who can declare it *? The future being taken potentially, as it is 
frequently :. no words can ſufficiently expreſs it. g Either, r. His 
Axe, or the continuance of his Life, So the ſenſe 1s, That he ſhal 
not only be delivered from death, and all his puniſhments, but alſo 
ſhal be reſtored to an inexpreſſible or endleſs Life, and to an everlaſt- 
Ex. ing Kingdom. Thus great Interpreters underftand it ; with whom I 
cannot comply, becauſe Ido not find this Hebrew word to be ever 
uſed in Scripture of the continuance of one mans Life» Or rather 
] 2. His Poſtcrity 3 and ſs this word 1s unqueſtionably uſed, Gen, 15. 
* 16.Exed. 23. 5:Dcu.23.2, 3,8 &in many other places.And ſo the ſenſe 
| of the place is this. That Chriſts death thal not be unfruitful, &that 
when he is raiſcd from the dead,he ſhal have a ſpiritual ſeed, as 1s pro- 
; miſed, ver. 10- 2 numberleis multitude of thoſe who ſhal believe in 
him, and beregenerated and adopted by him into the number of his 
' Children, and of the Children of God. John 1. 12, Heb. 2, 10, 13, 
14. + To wit, by a violent death, And this may be added as a 
reaſon both of his Exaltation, and of the bleſſing of a numerous po. 
ſterity conferred upon him, becauſe he was willing to be cut off for 
the tranſgreffion of his People 3 and, as it followeth, ver, '10. made 
his Soul an offering for Sin; Chriſts death being Elſewhere declared 
to be the only way and neceſſary means of obtaining both theſe ends, 
Lube 24. 26. 45. John 12. 24. 32, 33. Phil. 2. 8, 9. But theſc 
words may be readred, although h: was cut off ; to fignific that his 
Death ſhould not hinder theſe glorious Effe&s, 7 This 1s repeated 
again. as it was fit it ſhould be, to prevent mens miſtakes about, 
and ſtumbling at the death of Chriſt, and to affure them that Chriſt 
did not dic forhisown Sins, but only for the Sins and Salvation of 


his People. 


 ® Mat. 26. 
63. & 27. 


ww - T4 as ended 


"gI"2/D 


5, gra 


* 4 dv gs = 


fHeb. 9 And he made his grave with the wicked &, 
deaths, and with the rich in his F death 9, becauſe 
* ; Pet, he had done no violence, neither was any * deceit 
2. 2 We 

in his mouth »”. 
x Job.3:5, k And although he did not die for his own, but only for his Peo- 


ples Sins, yet he was willing to die like a Malefattor, or like a Sin- 
per, asall other men arc, and tobe put into the Grave, as they uſed 
to be ; which was a farther degree of his Humilation, He ſaith, he 
made bis Grave, becauſe this was s own AR, and he willingly 


T8 4 T7 £4 }. 


by many to fignifie that Chriſt ſhould be buried in the Se 

Joſeph, who is ſaid tobe both Rich, Mat, 27, 57. and -Sag-9romy ay 
15. 43: which they conecive to be intimated as a token of Favour 
and Honour ſhewed tohim. Which to me ſeems not probable Parte 
ſy becauſe this diſagrees with the former Clauſe, which confeſſedly 
ſpeaks of the diſhonour which was done to him; and partly becauſe 
the burial of Chriſt, whatſoever Circumſtances it was attended with, 
15 eycr mentioned in Scripture as a part of his Humilatiop, A&s 2 
24, 27. And it ſeems more reaſonable, and more agreeable to the 
uſage of the Holy Scripture, that this clauſe ſhould deſign the ſame 
thing with the former, and that by Rich he means the ſame perſors 
whom he now called Wicked, not as if all rich men were, or miſt 
needs be wicked, but becauſe for the moſt part they are fo ; upon 
which ground, riches and rich men do» commonly paſs under an ilt 
Name in Scripture ; of which ſee Pſalm 37. 10, and 49. 6: Lake 6, 
24* and 18, 24, James 1.11. and 5,1, # Heb. in, or at ( or af+ 
zer, 4sthis particle is frequently taken, as hath been already noted_) 
his Deat+s . for ChriſtsDeath might well be called Deaths in the Pluraf 
number, becauſe he underwent many kinds of deaths, and many dead= 
ly dangers and pains, which are frequently called by the name of 
death iq Scripture, of which inſtances have been formerly given ; and 
he might ſay, with no leſs Truth than Paul did, 1 Cor. IS. 3t. 7 
die daily, amd 2 Cor, 11, 23: I was in Deaths off, n This ſome ſup- 
poſe to be added as a reafon of the laſt branch of theforegoing clauſe 
why God ſo over-ruled matters by his Providence, that Chriſt ſhould 
not be buricd in the ſame Grave, or in the ſame ignominious mans 
neras MalefaGtors were, butin a more honourable manner, in Joſephs 
own Tomb, But the laſt part of the foregoing clauſe cannot, with= 
out violence, be pulled aſunder from the former, wherewith it is 
ſo cloſely joyned, notonly by a ConjunRion copulative, and, but 
alſo by being under the government of the ſame Verb ; And there- 
fore this latter ciauſe of the verſe, if thus rendred, muſt be added 
as the reaſon of what is ſaid to be done in the former. And ſo the 
ſenſe of the place may be thus conceived, This was all the reward 
of the unſpotted Innocency ef all his words and aRions, to be thus 
1gnominioufly uſed : But theſe words may well be, and arcotherwiſe 
rendred both by Jewiſhaud Chriftian Interpreters, either thus, al. 
thoub he had done, &c. or rather thus, net for ( as theſe two ſame 
particles placed in the very ſame order, are rendred by our Tranfla- 
tor, and others, Job 26. 17.) any violence (C or injury or iniquity ) 
which he had dene, nor for any deceit which was in his mouth ; not for 
his own Sins, but, as hath been ſaid before, for his Peoples Sins 
In which Travoſlation there is nothing ſupplicd but what is moſt fre- 
quent in Scripturealſo. 


10 Yet it pleaſed the LORD to bruiſe him s, jg, 4, 
he hath put him to grief p : || + when thou ſhalt make hi; ful 
his Soul an offering tor Sin 9 he fball ſee his feed r, ſha! mae 


he ſhal prolong his days 5s, and the pleaſure of the nou 


LORD ſhall proſper in his hand 7. ip. 


o Butalthough he was perfe&ly innocent, it pleaſed God for other Make bis 
Juſt and wiſe Reaſons. to puniſh him. p God was the principal cauſe Ju! fm: 
of all his Sorrows and Sufferings, although mens ſins were the deſery- 2 Cv 5. 
ing cauſes q When thou, O God, ſhalt make, or have made, thy 21 1 Pe, 


Sins. His Soul is here put for his Life, or for himſelf, or his whole 
humane Nature, which was ſacrificed, his Soul being tormented with 
the ſenſe of God's Wrath, and his body crucified, and Soul and Bo. 
dy ſcperated by Death. Or the words may be rendred, #hen his 
Soul (hal make, or have made, it ſelf an offering for Sin : whereby 
it may be implied that he did not lay down his Life by force, but 
willingly, r His Death ſhall be glorious to himſelf, and highly 
beneficial to others, for he ſhal have a numerovs iffac of Believers re- 
nciled to God, and ſaved by his Death. s He ſhal be raiſed to 
mortal Life, and ſhall [ive and reign with God for ever; he ſhall 
die no more, Rom. 6. 9g. and of his Kingdom there ſhal be no end, Luke 
i- 33. F Gods gracious decree for the Redemption and Salvation 
of Mankind fall be cffeGuaily carried on by his Miniſtry and Mcdis- 
ation, , 


11 He ſhal ſee » of the travel of his Soul x, and x1, , , 
ſhall be ſatisfied y : by his knowledge =, ſhall * my & > "Y 
righteous ſervant a juſtifie þ many c : for helhal bear _ 
their iniquities &. 

# He ſhal receive or enjoy, as this word commonly ſignifies x 

The comfortable and bleſſed fruit ot all his hard labours, and griev- 

ous ſufferings. y He ſhal eſteem his own and his Fathers Glory, 

and the Salvation of his People, an abundant recompence for all his 
Sufferings. 3 Either, 1. Adively, by that knowledge of Gods 
Will, andofthe way of Salvation, which is in him in its higheſt per- 
feCtion, and which by him is revealed unto men, and by his Spirit is 
imprinted in the Minds and Hearts of his People, ſo as to produce 
Faith and Obedience in them. Or, 2, Paſſively, by the knowledge 

of him, as my fear and thy fear are put for the fear of me and of thee; 
Plalm 5 7. Jer. 32. 40. Knowledge being here, as it is moſt frequen= 

ly in Scripture, taken praftically for that kind of Knowledge which 
worketh Faith, and Love, and Obedience to him. So the ſenſe is 

the ſame in both caſes* 4 Which title is here givento Chriſt, part- 

ly to vindicate him from thoſe falſe imputations of wickedneſs which 

were faſtnedupon him by his Adverſarics, aud which found the more 
belief becauſe of his moſt grievous and uncxampled Sufferings both 

from God and Men; and partly to ſhew his titneſs for this great 
work of juſtificing ſinners, becauſe he was exatly holy, and harmleſs, 

and undefiled, Heb.'9, 26; and fulfilled all Righteouſneſs according to 

his duty, Mat. 3. 15. and therefore his perſon and perfermance muſt 
necds be acceptable to God, and effeQtual for the Juſtification of his 
People, which was the great deſign of his comming into the World. 6 
Acquit them from the guilt of their ſins, and all the dreadful conſe- 
quences thereof : For Juſtification is here oppoſed to Condemnition, 


yielded up huraſclf to death and burial. And that which follows, with 
the wicked,doth not note the ſamencſs of place as if he ſhould be buri. 


as appears from the following clauſe, and from many other pail:yes 
in this Chapter, and as it 15 uſed in all pjaces of Scripture, one, 


Son a Sacrifice, by givinghim up to death for the attonement of mens 2» 24. - | 


ode PS Ii. Dt» 


or two at moſt, excepted, where it is mentioved, And Chritt is 
faidto juftifie Sinners meritorioully, becauſe he purchaſech ans procur- 
eth it for us, as God theFather 1s commenlyſaid to doit authoritatively 


beeauſc he accepted the price paid by Chriſt for itz5 the proninciation 
> ACCEPLEE ChE pr "a G 


ed in the ſame Grave with other MalefaQors, but the ſameneſs of Con- 
dition: As when David prayeth Pſalm 26. g+ Gather not my Soul 
C co wit, by Bcath \ with Sinners, he doth not mcan 1t o: the ſame 
Grave, but of the ſame ſtate of the Beads # This paſlage is thought | 


4 


Chap. Lin Ch 


*Zeph. 


14. Gal-, 
27, 
Sam. 2. 
G. 49.2c 
TH 


Chap: LIV. 


of the ſentence of Abſolution is referred to him in the Goſpel Diſ- 
enſation. cWhich word is ſeaſonably added, partly by way of Reftri- 
ion, toſhew that Chriſt will nor juſtifie all, bur only ſuch as be- 
lieve in him, and obey him : and partly by way of Amplification, 
ro declare that this bleſſed priviledge ſhall not now be, as hitherto 
it had in a manner been, confined to Judea,and the Fews,bur ſha'l be 
conferred upon an innumerable company of all the Nations of the 
World. 4 For he ſhall farisfie the Juſtice and Law of God for them, 
by bearing the puniſhment due to their fins, and therefore by the 
principles of Reaſcn and Juſtice they muſt be juſtified or acquitted, 
otherwile the ſame debe ſhould be twice required and paid. -: 


s oO 


12 Therefore will 1e divide him f portion g with the 
great b, and he ſhall divide the ſpoil with the ſtrong 3 : 
becauſe he hath poured our his Soul unto death & : and 

* Mar#15. he was thumbred with the tranſgreffors /, and he baretche 


28. Luke (Go of many m, and * made interceflion for the tranl- 


22. 37- 
ke 23. gretjors ». - 1 Es - 
Cm e God thz Father,the Spe&ator and Judge of the Aftion or Com- 
** Heb.7, tar. f Give him his ſhare. Or, impart, or give 70 him ; for this 


25.&9.24. Word is oft uſed withour reſpett to any diſtribution or diviſion, as 
1 joh.2.1. Peut, 4. 19 and 29. 26. and cJ{ewhere. g Whichis very comme- 
| diouſly ſupplicd our of the next clauſe, where a word which anſwers 
to. it, the ſpoil, is exprefled. h Or, among the great ; ſuch as the 
great and mighty Potentates of the World uſe to have after a tharp 
Combat and a glorious Victory. Though he be a very mean and 
obſcure perſon, as to his extra&tion and outward condition 1n the 
World, y<t he ſhall attain to as great a pitch of Giory as the grea- 
eſt Monarchs enjoy. # The ſame thing is repeated in other words, 
after the manner of prophetical Writers. "The tenſe of both clauſes 
15, That God will give him, and he ſhall receive great and happy 
ſucceſs in his glorious undertaking : and he thall conquer all 1s E- 
nemies, and lead Captivity Caprive, as is ſaid Eph. 4. 8. and fer up 
his univerſal and everlaſting Kingdom in the World. &k Becauſe he 
willingly laid down his Lite in Obedience to Gods Command, John 
Io. 17, 8. and in order to the Redemprion of Mankind. Dearth is 
here called a poxring out of the Soul, or Life, either beczuſe the Soul or 
Life, which in living men is contained in the Body, is rurned our 
of the Body by Death ; or to ſignifie the manner of Chriſts Death, 
thar ir ſhould be with the ſhedding of his Blood, in which the Life 
ef Man conſiſts, Levit. 17. 11, 24. 1 He was willing for Gods 
Glory and for Mans Good to be reproached and puniſhed like a Ma- 
lefactor, in the ſame manner and place, and betwixt two of them, 
as is noted with reference to this place, Mark 15. 27, 28. m Which 
was ſaid, wer. 11, and is here repeated to prevent a miſtake, and to 
intimate, that although Chrift was numbred with Tranſgreſlors,and 
was uſed accordingly, yet he was no Tranſgreſſor, nor did ſubmit 
to, and ſuffer rhisuſage for his own Sins, bur for the Sins of others, 
the puniſhment whereof was by his own conſent laid upon him. 
» Either, 1. By way of ſatisfaQion : he interpoſed himſelf between 
an angry God anc ſinners, and received thoſe blows in his own 
Body which otherwiſe mult have fallen upon them. Or, 2. In way 
of Petition,as this word is conſtantly uſed. He prayed upon Earth 
for all Sinners, and particularly for thoſe that crucified him, Luke 
23. 34. and in Heaven he ſtill interceedeth for them, nor by an 
Humble Petition, but by a legal demand of thoſe good things which 
he purchaſed for his ewn People by the Sacrifice of himſelf, which, 
though paſt, he continually repreſents to his Father, as if it were 


preſent. ; 
CH AF LF. 
The Bleſſmgs and Fulneſs of the Goſpel-Church, 1 
ing Chriſts Spuſe : to whom his Loye is everlaſting, 5——10, her Glo« 
ries, n1, 12. the Gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, 13. her ſure Preſervation, 
I | 


| FZeph. 3. * Oleg. O barren », thou that diſt not bear ; break 


LI forth into ſinging, and cry aloud thou :hat didft 
ye not travail withchild: for * more re thechildren of the 
; 25 defolare, than the children of the married wife 6, ſaich 


G, 49.20, 
T6 the LORD. ; 
a The prophet having largely diſcourſed of the ſufferings of 
Chriſt, and of the bleſſed frurts or effe&ts thereof, among which, 
one is, that he ſhould have a numerous ſecd that ſhould believe on 
him, and that when the Fen s reje&ed him, the Gentiles ſhould glad- 
ly receive him, and here foreſeeing by the Spirir of God thar glo- 
rious ſtate of the Church, he rejoiced in it, as Abrahamdid upon the 
like occaſion,John 8. 56. and breaks forth into this ſong of triumph, 
He turneth his Speech to the Church and Spoule of God,or of Chriſt. 


14. Gal-4. 


and from Gal. 4. 27. where itis ſo expounded. Andalthough this 
Chapter is by ſome underſtood of the flourithing condition of the 


their Condition ar that rime, which was full cf uncertainties, and 
us, and far from that Glory and laſting Tranquillity which is here 


the Goſpel in which ali chat is bere ſaid was or will be remarkably 
fulfilled. And therefore as the foregoing Chapter doth dire&ly 
and literally ſpeak of Chrift, ſo dorh this literally ipeak of the 
Church of Chriſt, or of the Kingdom of the Mefſliah, of whom the 
ancieat Hebrew Do&ors underitood it. And this Church,conſiſting 
at firit of the Jews, andafterwards of the Gent:les, who were incor- 
porated with them into the ſame Body, he calleth barren,nor becauſe 
it ow was fo, but becauſe before and until the coming of Chriſt ar 
had been ſo, as Simon is called the leper, Mat. 26. 6. atter he was 
cured. Now this Church of the Fews. might well be called,and had 
been, barren, becauſe the ſincere converts brought forth to God by 
her Miniſtry had been but few among tie,Fews comparatively, and | 
ſimply few among the Gentiles, b The Chureh or Congregation of 
the Gentiles, which in the times of the Old Teſtament was deſolate, þ 
having neither Ausband nor Children, doth now under the Goſ- | 
pel bring forth unto God a far more numerous poſteriry than | 


7 SL 2 £0 


H, If Chap. [] | 
SETS T_T NOTTS 
ſupernatural Power of God, was enabled to bring forth a number: WH\NTER 
leſs 1fTue : or to that remarkable paſſage of Gods Providence concer- WH 
ning Hannah and Peninnah, 1 Sam. 2. 5. the barren hath born ſeven, and 'j 
Jhe rhat hath many Children is waxed feeble. Ee (8EI0TEG 
2 * Enlarge the place of thy tent c, and let them & * Ch. 488i 
ſtrerch forth the curtains of thine habitations: ſpare '9» 39 | 
nor, lengthen thy cords,, and ſtrengthen, thy ſtakes e. ji 
, © Thatir may be capable of the Gentiles, which ſhall flock to thee 
in great numbers,and deſire to aſſociate themſelves with thee.d Thoſe 
ro whom that, work belongs... The meaning is, they, muſt and ſhall 
be ſtretched our. ;. e That they may, be able ro. ſupport that great 
weight which, the Tents thus enlarged, ſhall be upon them. | 
-. 3 For thou ſhalt break forth f on the right hand, and ---, AWNG 
on the lefr g,, and thy feed þ * ſhall inheric the Gentiles * Ch. MII 
z, and make the deſolate cities & to be inhabited. ..., . - - 4 5» $WWImg 
f Thou ſhalt bring forth a multirude of Children; for this word is L414 | 
commonly uſed of any great and, extraordinary propagation of liv= 
ing Creatures, whether B:aſts or Men, Gen. 30. 30. Exod 1. 12. 
g On every ide, in alli the parts of the World.. þ Either, x. Thy. 
ſpiritual ſeed, the Church of the, New Teſtament, ,, which is ac- 
counted Abraham's Seed, or Children, Gal, 3. 7, 8, 9, 29.Qr 2. Thy, 
natural ſeed, Chriſt and his Apoſtles, arid other Miniſters. who 
were Jews, by whom this work was ficſtand moſt eminently done, 
# Shall ſubdue the Gentile World to the Church, and ro the Obedt= 
ence of the Faith. & Thele Cities and Countries which in a ſpi- 
ritual ſenſe were deſolate and forſaken by God. .., : * ,.: « . 
4 Fear nor, for thou ſhalt not be aſhamed 1: neither 
be thou confounded, for thou ſhalt not be put to ſbame: 
for thou ſhalt forger the ſhame of thy * youth .,and ſhalr 
not remember the reproach of thy widow-hood » any 
more. ©) 0 ONE IE PER SE 
I For that Barrenneſs and Widow-hood, which once was the mat= 
ter of thy grief and ſhame,becauſe now thou ſhalt be delivered from: 
it, and God will own thee for his Wife, and begert Children'of 
thee ; as it is explained in the following Words. m It ſhall be for 
gotten both by thee and others: thou ſhalt nor be upbraided with 
thy tormer barrennels in thy youthful ſtare, nor confounded and 
rormented with the remembrance of it ; both remembring and forget« 
ting inScripture uſe connote or comprehend thoſe affections which 
naturally and ufually follow upon them ; ſo great ſhall be rhy fer- 
rility and felicity, that it ſhall cauſe thee to forget thy former un- 


4. the Gentiles become 


| fruitfulneſs and miſery, as Men commonly - co in like Caſes, as 
| Gen. 41. 51. Job 11. 16. Iſa. 65. 16. John 16. 21.. n That time 
and ſtate when thou werrt like a Widow diſconfolate and deſlate, 
forſaken by her Husband, and having in a manner no Children 
which wasa great reproach, eſpecially among the Jews. ; + »- | 
5For thy maker ozs thine husband p,( the * LORD of 
hoſts q zs his-name ) and thy redeemer the holy One of 
Iſrael, the God of the whole earth » ſhall he be called. 


o He who made thee our of nothing, and therefore can eaſily ful- 
fil all theſe Promiſes, how unlikely foever they ſeem to be; and he 
who made thee a People, and, which is far more and better, his 
People, and therefore will nor eaſily nor utterly forſake thee. p He 
will own thee forhis Spouſe, and will do the part of an Husband 
to thee. 9 Who hath the ſoveraign command of all Men and Crea- 
tures, and therefore can ſubdue the Genriles to thee, and can make 
thee to encreafſe and muſtiply in ſo prodigious a meaſure, even in 
thine old age, notwithſtanding thy barrenneſs in the days of thy 
youth, of which he ſpeaketh in the foregoing verſe. » The God 
and Father of all Nations, whereas formerly he was called only the 
God of Iſrael, and the Gentilzs had no ſpecial Relation to him, nor In- 
tereſt in his Covenant and Favour, as was obſerved Pſalms 147. 19, 
20, and clſewhore. 

6 For the LORD hath called thee s as a woman t for- 
ſaken « and grieved in ſpirit x, and a wife of youth y, _ 
when thou * waſt refuſed z, faith thy God a. *Tex 35.1 

s To return and come again to him. # When thou. waſt like 
a Woman forſaken. Or, as an Husband recalleth his Wife. « By 
' her Husband, who hath given her a Bill of Divorce. x For the 
loſs of her Husbands Favour and Society, and for the reproach at- 
tending upon'it. y Or, and, as ( which note of fimilitude is ſfup- 
plied here by the Seventy, and Chaldee Interpreters, and is eaſily. 
underſtoad out of the foregoing clauſe, in which it is expreſſed } 
a Wife of youth, 5. e. as readi'y and affeQionatly as an Husband re- 
calleth his Wife which he married in her and his own_ youth, of 


*Luk.1. 


as is manifeſt from the following words, and eſpecially from wer. 5. | 


Jew:ſh Church and State after their return frem Babylon, yer the 
magnificent and g'oriou»Promiſes here following do ſo vaſtly exceed 
| d, or diſmiſſed, or deſpiſed by me, and thar juſtly, yerT had mer-. 
Diſtractions, and Troubles, as ail rhe Hiſtories of thoſe times aſſure -. fuſe Jn jojed by Y, Jett 


aſſured to her, rhat it muſt nec-flarily be referred ro the times of | 


the Church of the Jews, which had been married to Godfor many |} 
ages, until by her Apoſtacy from God, and trom.her Meſſiah, ſhe 


provoked Go34 to piit her away, He alludeth here either ro the 
Hiſtory of Saraþ, who was long and uaturilly barren, but by the 


s Wirth kindneſs to thee and thy ſed through all ſucceeding Gene= 
{ ratiens, here and unto all Eternity. 


whom ſee on Prov. 5. 18. whom though he might through a ſud- 
den and violent paſſion put away, yet he ſoon repents of it, and his 
affetions work towards her, and he invites her to return to him. 
z When thou waſt in a deſolate Eſtate, and*hadſt been for ſome 
time rejeed by me, then I recalled thee. Or, althoughthou waſt re= 


cy upon thee, and freely offered Reconciliation to thee, # Who 
will again be, and will thew himſelf co be, thy God, and will re- 
new his Covenant with thee. Es 2 
- * Fora ſmall moment b have forſaken thee c,burt - 5. 
with great mercies 4 will I gather thee e. Wd Fo 
þ For the ſpace of ſome few years, as Seventy years in Babylon, : 
and ſome ſuch intervals, which may well be called a ſma# moment in 
compariſon of Gods everlaſting Kindneſs mentioned in the nexr verſe. 
c Withdrawn my favour and help from thee, and lefr rhec in thine 
Enemies hands. 4 Suchas are moſt precious and ſweer for quality, 
25 is hereſaid, and ſuch as are of long continuance, as is ſaid in the 
following Verſe. e From all the places where thou art difperſed, 
from all rhe parrs of the World.” 


$ Ina little wrath Thid my face f from thee, for a 
moment ; but with everlaſting kindneſs g will I have 
mercy on thee, faith the LORD thy Redemer. 


f T removed the means and pledg's of my preſence and kindneſs; 


yz 


I T$ 414 Hf. Chap. LV, 
| A 9 MW this 35 2s the waters of * Noah unto me h: for d Both the Smith that maketh all warlike Inſtruments, and the 


Souldier that uſeth them, are my Creatures, and totally at my 
ate os | have ſworn that the waters of Noah ſhould no more | 6 4, and therefore they cannot hurt you without my leave. 


go over the earth, ſo have I ſworn that I would not be | .”Todeſtroy only whom and when 1 pleaſe. 


- 5- wroth with thee z, * nor rebuke thee. 17 No weapon that is formed againſt thee,ſhall pro< 


I ith thee ſhall be as . - . 
etl cap ET rhe ny padre No#h, that there ſper , and every tengue that (hall riſe againſt thee in 


ſhould never be another flood of waters to drown the World ; of | judgment, thou ſhalt condemn g- This 7s the heritage 
which ſee Gen. 9. 11, 5 To wit, ſo as I have been, orſo asto tor- | þ of the ſervants of the LORD, and their righteouſ- 


fake thee utterly. ] neſs z is of me &, faith the LORD. 
46.2. Io For * the mountains ſhall depart, and the hills be f And as they cannot do any thing againſt thee without my 
-18. removed &, but my kindneſs ſhall not depart from thee, leave, fo I aſſure thee Twill nor ſuffer them to do it: and if any 
neither (ball the covenant of my peace 1 be removed, | Smith fhall make any weapons to be employed againſt thee, he 
ſaith the LORD, that hath mercy on thee m7 thall not ſucceed init. g And I will deliver thee nor only fromthe 
= ch = Math be. MAC 6 rr - Rh em FAR oy” Hills, that fury of the War, but alto from the ſtrife of Tongues, from all the 
I En VETIEE by - TA moved from their threatnings and boaſts, and reproaches of thine Enemies, and from 
by wg np eo 7, b40 Hl I oo cms om- all the claims and pretences which they have of any right and power 
. Places. ur : —_ N \noarer th = Iſa. $1.6. and ſo the tenſe over thee. So thine Enemies {hall neither prevail againſt thee by 
go yy un </ ib Loa Groce theit places, fhak my violence, nor by pretences of Juſtice. þ This bleited condition 
ry; - e Moun - pe pe "when be 35 fi abſotnrily, 7 deicribed in this Chaprer, is the portion allotted to them by me: 
indnels ſhall depart from thce. 7 Either 1. The Reward or Fruit of their Righteouſneſs, as Righ« 


deſired M:rcy and not Sacrifice, it 1s meant comparatively, Tdefired Mer reouſneſs is uſed, Pſal. 112. 3, 9. Or, 2. Their Right or the righte- 
- TS _y obo a4 ag os þ _ —_—_— ous Adminiſtration of all their concerns whereby they are preſerv= 

h ten anong iſed : to thee all manner of happineſs, which ed from all manner of oppreflions, as Righteouſneſs was uſed wv. 14: 
thee, and have promiſed unto the Pp , k I giveit, and Twill continue it to them, and who then can 


frequently comes under the name of peace in Scripture. The ſenſe |... away from them. 
CHAP. LY. 


of the place is, That God ma not calt off - Oo es ChugS, a 

a of the Jews ; and that the New Covenan DEN, as Ca ; © 
TEENS bereer and - ir than the Old, as is ob- An invitation to ſeck for ſpiritual Bleſſmgs from Chriſt : whom the father 
ſerved, Heb. 8. 6, 7, &c. and elſewhere. m Who doth thus with | Jendeth, 1 | 5. to come to him ſpeedily and by Repentance, 6, 7. his 
ho _ © for thine own merits, but meerly for his ewn Grace and _ —_ 8, 9. his Word Powerful, 10, 11. the joy of Belicyers, 
Mercy. b [ my - 

I D Oh thou afflicted, tofſed with tempeſts, and not H® every one « that thirſteth 5, come ye to the *Jch.,.;4 
27. comforted », behoid, I will lay thy ſtones with * fair u waters c, and he that hath no money 4; come ye, 4 7- 37s, 
colours, and lay thy foundations with ſaphires o | PV 6, and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk f, with- S cog 

n Oh thou my poor Church, who haſt frequently been,and wilt | Out money, and without PriCCe. ; Te 
again and again be in a moſt afflicted and comtortlets candition for | # Not only Jews but Gentiles. The Propet having largely dif- 
a time ; be not diſcouraged thereby. o I will make thee excceozng courſed of Chriſt, ch. 53. and of the Church of Chriſt, c. 54. doth 
beautiful and glorious. Which yet is not to beunderſtood of out- here invite all perſons to come to Chriſt, and to his Church 6b For 
ward Pomp and worldly Glory, as is evident from many places of | the Grace of God, and the bleſſings of the Goſpel. This #hirſt im= 
Scripture, which aſſure us that Chriſt's Kingdom is of another na- | plies a vehement, and aQtive, and reſtleſs Deſire after it, not to be 
ture, and that the externa! condition of God's Church 1s, and for | ſatisfied with any thing ſhort of it. c Which are mentioned either 
the moſt part will be, mean and calamitous inthis World ; but of | 2. As the place where they were to buy the following commodities, 
a ſpiritual Beaury and Giory conſiſting in the plentiful effuſion of | 1: being utual to convey proviſions to Cities by Rivers. Or rather 
excellent Gifts, and Graces, and Comforts : although theſe ſhall be } 2- As the commodity ro be bought, the Graces and comforts of 
followed with eternal Glory in Heaven. See the like deſcription of | Gcd's Spirir, which are frequently compared to Waters, as Iſa.12.3. 
the Churches Glory, Rev. 21. 11, &c. and 35. 6, 7. Joh. 7.37, 38. and elſewhere,and which are deſigned 

12 And 1 will make thy windows of agats p,and thy | Þy 2/1 theſe Meraphorical Expreſſions of Waters, Wine, Milk, and 


bf ; Bread, d Even thoſe who are moſt poor, in the World, and thoſ 
i rates of carbuncles, and all thy borders q of plealant who are moſt worthleſs and wicked, if they do bur thirſt, may js 


ſtones. _ | welcome. e 7Z. e. Procure or receive that which is freely offered ta 
p One kind of which fones was tranſparent like glaſs, as Pliny | youit you do but come for it, and aic willing to take it. Thus 
Writes in his Natural Hiſtory, 6. 37, ch. 10. But ſome render this | luying 1s uſed, Prov. 2 3. 23. Rev. 3. 18. Nor can this be under. 
' wore, cry#al, and the Seventy, and ſome other of the ancients, | ſtood of buzing properly, becauſc here is no price paid. f Whichare 
A tranſlate it jaſper. Bur the proper ſignification of the Hebrew names | Synecdochically put for all ſorts of proviſions ; which alſo are to 
0 of precious ſtones is unknown to the Jews themſelves, as hath been | be underſtood of Spiritual and Goſpel-Bleflings, as is evident from 
noted before. It may ſuffice usto m_— that qu _ very | the following words. | 

Clear. and tranſparent, and precious ſtone e utmolt parts »y »- 
or Wille. Th a 4 LED evidently are to a Building, 2 Wherefore do ye | ſpend money e for that which is 6 
whoſe Frundation, Pavement, Gates, and Windows, were named be- | not bread f, and your labourfor that which ſatisfieth not? T Hev, 


-— ->- , "Tre. $-- ' hearken diligently unte me g, and cat ye that which is weigh 
Oh 11.9.5. H And all thy Chi'dren ſet be * taught of the good bh, and let your foul delight it ſelf in fatneſs ;. 
Sos ORD 7, and great ſhall be the peace s of thy children. |  « Alt your time, and firength, and coft in ſeeking it. f For 


*,, 


1.34, LO 
bh 6.45. |» Not only outwardly by his word, which was made known to | thoſe vain or fooliſh things which can never nouriſh or ſatisfie you, 
Cor.2 16 all the Jews under the Old Teſtament, but inwardly by his Spirit, | fuch as worldly goods, or your own Inventions, Superſtitions and 
[Theſ.4. 9 which is poured forth under the New Teſtament, both upon a far | Idolatries. g Uato my Do&rine and Counſel. h That which is 
Joh.2. 20 grearer number of perſons, and in afar higher meaſure, and with | truly, and ſolidly, and everlaſtingly good, and not ſuch things 
4 much more efficacy and ſucceſs than it was under the Old. 5 1.In- | which though they be called, and ſeem to be good, yet really are 
ward Peace of Mind or Conſcience ariſing from the clear diſcove- | evil, and moſt pernicious to men, 7 In this fat and moſt pleaſany 
ries of you's Love "_ ————— us, and woyoght by the | food of Goſpel-enjoyments. 
ſpirit of Adoption which is more abundantly given to Believers . 

Sadler the Bed, whereas the ſpirit of CE ov more common Incline y our car, and come unto me: hear &, and 
and prevalent under the Law- 2. Outward Peace, Safety, | your foul ſhall live /, and I will make an everlaſting co- 


and Happin-ſs, which is more fully promiſed in the following | yenant with you »», .even the * ſure mercies of David ». . _ «1 
werieh, and which God, when he ſees fit, will confer upon his : k —_— —— and obediently to my Counſel ; hearing Cm 
Kon : ceing oft put for obeying, as Deut. 18, 15. 1 Sam. 15. 22, 23. Pſal. 95. \'L. 6.49) 
I4 In righteouſneſs t ſhalt thou be eſtabliſhed : thou 7, &. {1 Towit, comfortably and happily ; whicR vas Tens p, _ 
ſhalt be far from OP reflion u, for thou ſhalt not fear x, | of the name of Life. mM 'That everlaſting Covenant of Grace and ,, 
and from terrour, for it ſhall not come near thee. Peace rg _— ON and = neg Np ongy a I 17. 413 
: Tn am ready to make it with every one of you thirſting Gentiles. 7, 
Dl orb Ent Te per King, | ® Even that Covenant which was made firſt with 4brahom,and then ** 
doms frequently are, but by Juſtice : Or rather 7 Ro lihe fit of with David, concerning the exhibition of thoſe glorious and ſure 
the eſtab}ſhment. Thine affairs ſhall be managed with Righte- Mercies or Bleſſings which God hath promiſed ro his People, one 
ouſneſs, which is the Glory and Felicity of any ſociety, and not and the chief of which Mercies was the giving of Chriſt to die for 
with oppreſſion, as it follows. Juſtice ſhall be freely $a; mparti- their ſins, and to riſe e—_—_ their juſtification. This Expoſition 
ally execured.- « Either by A Yet own Governours, or by forreign may reccive light and rength by comparing this place with  AFty 
Powers. x Thou ſhalt neither have any juſt cauſe of fear, nor be | ? = 93s * a yo mentions David rather than Abraham, either 
Eo - given up to the torment of fear without cauſe. T1. Becauſe theſe romiſes, and eſpecially that great Promiſe, which 
SM 4 cho! d they ſhall ſure) h ; is the foundation of the reſt, concerning Chriſt and his eternal 
"7 y Inall iurely gather togetner y, vt | Kingdom, were far more frequently, and expreſly, and fully made 
- -: Not 74 me 2. whoſoever ſhall gather together a againſt and revealed to David, than they wereto Abraham. Or 2. Becauſe 
 { theeb, ſhall fall for thy ſake c. | David was a more evident and illuſtrious Type of Chriſt than Abra« 
7 It is true, there will not want ſome that ſhall combine and | #977 Was, as being raiſed from a mean condition to the higheſt ho- 
make an attempt againſt thee. z Agthey do this without any ſuch | 20us being made a great and moſt viforious and righteous King, 
commiſſion from me, -as Semacherib and Nebuchadnezzar had, Iſis. ro. and the firſt King of that Throne upon which the Meſiah was to ir. 
G, 7. Jer. 25. 9. ſo they ſhall not have my help in it, without Or 3. Becauſe the name of David is nct here pur perſonally for the 
which all their endeavours will be vain ' and unſaccebful + a King of rhat Name, but patronimically for the Meſſiah who was ro 
battel, as is manifeſt from the following words, of which kind of | Þ< 2-vi4's Son and Succeſſor, and who is therefore called Danid in 
gathering this word is uſed Pſal. x 40. 2. and elfeati ere. b Heb. with the prophetical Scriptures, as Fer. 30. 9. Ezek 34. 23, 24- & 374 
thee. But ro figh with a man is all one with fehting againſt him. | *®? 25. Hy. 3. 5. as Reheboam upon the ſame account is called Ds« 
ec For that Reſpe& and Love which I bear to thee. Or, before vid, 1 Kings 12. 16. And this is the more probable, becauſe the next 


thee, as this particle is ſometimes uſed, fo as thine Eyes ſhall behold verſe, which hath a manifeſt Relation to this verſe, is confelledly 
- underſtood of Chriſt. 


it. 
16 Behold,Thave'created the ſmith that bloweth the | 4. Behold, Lhave given o him p for a witneſs 9 to the . 


coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an inftrument eople r, a leader d comm de 5 to the peo le, 1 
Tor his work,and I have created the walter dto deſtroy e. NE tk VIE PEE ANDRE EE eg '] 


LEP 
« * 


3 fOr,kn 


| ej ne. 


) *PC 32 


f Heb. 7/ 
man of 
iniquity, 

f Heb. hi 
Will mult; 
ply to pare 
407, 


” 


Chi P- LV. 


0 I have already appointed, and will in due time aQtual'y give. 
p The David laſt mentioned, even Chriſt, the Son and Succeſlor of 
David, as is plain and certain from the titles and works aſcribed to 
him in this and in the following Verſe. But of this fee the Jaſt 
Note upon the former Verſe. q To be a Prophet or Teacher, to 
declare the Counſel and Will of God concerning the duty and Sal- 
vation of Men, ts bear witneſs wnto the truth, as Chriſt himſelf afhrm- 
| eth, Joh. 18. 37. to confirm God's Promiſes, Rem. 15. 8. and, amongſt 
others, thoſe which reſpe&@ the calling and reconciliation of the 
Gentiles : to be a witnels for both parties of that Covenant made be- 
| tween God and Men. r Not only to my People of 1/razl, but to 
all People, Gentiles no leſs than Jews, as is evident from the to]- 
lowing Verſe, and from {1ſa. 49. 6. and divers other places. 5 
ſoveraign Prince to give them Laws, and exa&t their Obedience, 
and in caſe of their Obedience to give them ProteCtion and Re- 


wards. 

5 Behold, thou / ſhalt call » a nation that thou [|] 
knoweſt not », and nations that knew not thee 0 thall 
run unto thee p becauſe of rhe LORD thy God q, and 


for the holy One of Iſrael ; for he hath glorified thee 7. 
I Ton, O Meſſiah, of whom he now ſpake, v. 4. and to whom 
he ſuddenly turneth his ſpeech, as is very common inthe Prophers. 
| m To wit, unto thy ſelf, and to the knowledge of thy ſelf, as ap- 
Pears from the following words,and by theeunto acquaintance ai:d 
fellowſhip with God. » Or rather, didſt not know, to wit, with that 
ſpecial knowledge which implies approbation, and tender Care and 
; AﬀeCQtion,as words of knowledge are moſt frequently uſed in Scrip- 
rure : the Gentiles to whom, in former times, thou didit not make 
known thy Law and Covenant, and the way of Salvation, Af 14.16. 
and 17. 39. oe Thithad bur little knowledge of God,and no know- 
ledge of the Mefiah. p Upon thy call ſhall ſpeedily and readily 
come to thee to receive Initriiftions from thee, and to follow thee 
'whitherſoever thou thalt lead them. q Becauſe the Lord ſhall by 
many evident and unqueſtionable rokens, manifeſt himfelf to be 
thy God, and thee to be his Son and faithful ſervant. » Beeauſe 
the God of 1ſrael, who is the only true God, will highly honour 
thee by his ſingular preſence with thee, by his almighty Power ac- 
companying thy Word, and making it wonderfully effeCtual for 
| the converſion of an innumerable company, both of Jews and 
| Gentiles, and by confirming thy Word with illuſtrious Signs and 
miracles, and particularly by thy Refurrefion, and g!orious Af- 
cenſion. Theſe and other like conſiderations were the motives 
which convinced tie Gentiles, that Chriſt was the true Meſjioh, 
and the Religion which he taught was the true Religion: 
b 6 * Seek ye the LORL - while he may be found *r ; 
| -F£326- call ve upon him while he is near «. 

s Having diſcourſed of the Office and Work of Chriſt, and ſhew- 
ed that be thould call People and Nations to himſelf, and to God, 
| he now endeavours to perlivad: che People to hearken to his Call. 

and to ſeek the Lmd, i, e. To labour to get the knowledge of God's 

Will, and toobrtain kis Grace and Favour ; neither of which things 
were to be done but in and through Chriſt. And this Invitation 
er exbortation is general like that v. reaching to all nations,both 
Jews and Gentiles, implyiag, that both of them had loſt him and 
his Favour,and were gone aſtray from him. Seck him ye Gentiles, 
whom he now inviteth ſo to do, and will affiſh in finding him. 


fOr,knew- 
| eſt not. 


you Jews to imitate hem therein, and take heed that you do not 
Teje&t him whom rhey w1il receive and own. ' # In this day of 
Grace, whileſt he offereth Mercy and Reconciliation ro you;which 
he will not always do. Compare Prov. 1. 24, &c. Luke I9. 44. 
2 Cor. 6. 2. # Nearto you by his gracipus preſence and offers, in 
his Ordinances, ready and deſirous to receive you to Mercy upon 
the following conditions. 

; Let the wicked man x forſake his way y, and Tche 
inquiry, BEnrighteous man his thoughts z:and let him return unto 
f Heb. he the LORD a, and he will have mercy upon him, and 


”ilmuli- to our GOD 6, for | he will abundantly pardon c. 
| 7) "0 par= wx Any wicked man, either Jew or Gentile. y His evilor wick- 
— | ed way, as is.evident from the foregoing word, - and as it 1s more 
fully expreſſed, Jer. 18. 11. & 25. 5. which is called hi way, becauſe 
it is natural, and cuſtomary, anddearto him, and in oppoſition to 
God's good way : his ſinful courſe or manner of Life. Let him 
ceaſe to do evil, as it is Iſa. 1. 16. This he adds to intimate that 
Men's ſeeking gnd calling upon God will do them no good without 
Reformation Of their Lives. z The ſinful devices and purpoſes of 
his Mind. Thus he ftrikes at the root of ſinful a&ions,and theweth 
that the heart muſt be purged and changed as well-as the outward 
aftions. a As he hath departed from Gott by ſin, let him turn to 
him-by ſincere Repentance, and the prattice of all God's precepts. 
Whereby he intimates that a meer abſtinence from wicked courſes 
3s not ſufficient, without the exerciſe of the contrary Graces : 
thar we muſt not only ceaſe zo ao evil, but alſo learn to do well, as 
it is preſcribed, 1/a.r. 16. b To the God of [/rael, who is and hath 
thewed himſelf ro be a moſt merciful and gractous God. c He 
uſeth ſo many Words and Arguments to encourage them to Re- 
roms becauſe the perſons here invited were guilty of Ido- 
atry, Apoitacy, and many o: her groſs wickedneſſes : which he 
knew, when they came to themſeh es, and to a ſerious ſenſe of their 
- fins, and of the ju{t and holy Nature and Law of God; would be an 
inſupportable burden to their awakened Conſciences, and make 
them very pron? to conclude, that God either could nor or 
would not pardon ſuch horrid Dilinquences, and therefore 
> ewe rather drive them from: God, than draw them to 
im. 
8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither 
gre Vour ways my ways 4.. faith the LORD. x 
d My diſpoſition and carriage is vaſtly diff-ring from yours, Tf 


{ Heb. the 


frequently and maliciouſly, you are very flow and backward to for- 
give him, andif you door ſeem to forgive, and promiſe to forget, 
and paſSitby,yet you retain a ſecret grudge in your hearts;anduport 
'' the leaſt occaſion, and flight offence, you forget your Promiſe, 
2nd you are ſoon weary with forgiving, and prone to revenge your 


And ſeing the Gentiles feck him earnefſtly,]et their examp'e provoke 


any man provoke or injure you, eſpecially if he do it greatly and | 


113 #£ 8 © 


| and numberlets ſoever their fins be ; and my Promiſes of Mercy 
| and Pardon ſhall be infallibly made gocd ro them. And therefore 


— 


Chap. LVI 


ſelves upon him ; but it is not ſo with me: ForT am flow to an- 
ger, and ready to forgivea!l tive penirents, how many. and great, 


Ti 
«| 
HEE 
ith ti 
} 
\.$ ' 
* j , 
v 
W-: : 
: 


you need not tear to come to me. or to find Mercy and acceptance 
with me. 

9 For as the heavens are higher then the earth-e, - fo 
are my ways Higher than your ways, and my thoughts 
than your thoughts. | | 

e Incxpreſibly and infinitely : for the diftance between the 48 
_— and the higheſt Heavens 1s unmeaſurable by any man upon i if 

vartn, | Willi 
io For *as the rain cometh down, and the ſnow f * Deur. Pld! 

from heaven, and returneth notthither g, but watereth 32: 

the earth, and maketh it bring forth and. bud, that it. 


may give ſeed to the fower, and bread to the eater h. 
f Which in its ſeaſon contributes to the fruitfulneſs of the Earth 
as well as the Rain. g To wit, void or without effeR, as it iscx- 
preſſed in the next verſe: or immediately : it is not drawn up a- 
gain as ſoon as it 15come tlown, but abides for a convenient time 
upon the Earth, until it do that work for which it was ſent.b That 
it may bring forth ſtore of Bread-corn, both for mens preſent ſup- 
plies, and tor ſeed forthe next year. | 
11 50 ball my word 5 be that goeth forth out of my | Wt, 
mouth : it ſhall not * return unto mevoid &, bur it (ball * Ch- 4 
accompliſh that which I pleaſe, and ir ſball proſper in tbe 54... MW 
thing whereto I ſent it /. | BW 
i My promiſes before recited concerning the ſending of the M:ſ- 
ſab, and the bleſſing of his Labours with tuch wonderful ſuccets, 
and concerning the reconciliation and pardon of the greateſt ſinners, 
and concerning the Redemption and Salvation of his People. 
k Without ſucceſs. It is anallulion to an Ambaftador who returns 
without diſpatching that buſineſs for which he was ſent, / It ſhall 
have that efte& which I intended, It fhall certainly be fulfilled in 
manner before expreſled. | 
12 Formye ſhall go ont * with joy, and be led forth 
o with peace p: the mountains and the hills ſhall * break 
forth before you into ſinging, and all * the trees of the 08. 
field ſhall clap their hands q. *, Chr. 
. m Or, Therefore: becaufe God hath promiſed it,and therefore will 16. 33, 
effe& ir. » Ye ſhall be releaſed from the place and ſtate of your 
Bondage. He alludes ro their going our of Egypr, which was a type 
of th-ir ſucceeding deliveranccs,and efpecrally cf their Redemprion 
by Chriſt from the power of ſin and of the Devil. s Or,beled along, 
be conduted by the gracious and powerful preſence of God, as yout 
were in the Wilderneſs. p Safely and triumphantly without fear 
of being retaken and brought back into flavery by your Enemies. 
9 There ſhall be a great and general rejoycing at your deliverance : 
io that even the ſenſeleſs Creatures ſhall ſeem -to rejoice with you 
and for you. | 


-; 


3 * Inſtead of the thorn ſhall come upthe fir-tree, _ _ 
LES . . * Ch: 4r 
and inſtead of the briar hail come up the myrtle-tree : . _ 
and it (hall be to the LORD for a name », for an ever- '” ** 
laſting ſign s that ſhall nor be cut off z. 

q Whereas your Land was filled with Thorns and Briars, as was fore 
told, 2s. 7. 24. they ſhalt be rooted out, and it ſhall be planted 
with Fir-trees and Myrtle-trees, and ſuch other Trees, which are 
uſeful either for Fruit or for Delight. : Or, this Promiſe may be 
anſwerable to that Ezek. 28. 24. Ther? ſhall be no more a pricking briav 
unto the houſe of Iſrael, nor any grieving thorn, &c. but inſtead of them 
ſhall be ſuch Trees as ſhaH yield ſhade and refrefhment. The mean< 
ing ts, The Church ſhalt be delivered from pernicious men and thir gs, * 
and repleniſhed with ſincere and ſcrious Believers,and with all ſorts 
of divine Graces and Bleflings. » This wonderful change ſhalt 
bring much honour to that God by. whom it is wrought. 5 For a 
Monument,or evident and glorions Token of God's infinite Power, 
and Faithfulneſs, and Eove to his People unto all fucceeding Ge- 
nerations. # Which ſhall never be aboliſhed, but ſhall always live 
and flouriſh in the Minds and Mouths of Men. 

| GaHaAP. LVL | 

Bl:ſſedueſs of the Godly : without any reſpe&# of perſons, 1 18. Blind 

watchmen ſhall be deſlroyed, 9—a—12. 


{ Ag ſaith the LORD «a, Keep ye || judgment, and 

do juſtice b: for my ſalvation c js near to come &d, 
and my righteouſneſs e to. be revealed. 

# This verſe and the reſt of this Chapter, until v. 9. ſeems to be. 
long to the foregoing Propheſie, From the conſideration of God's 
Promiſes made tothem he moveth them to perform their duty ro 
him. 6& This Phraſe elſewhere ſignifies the duties which one man 
oweth to another, but here it ſeems to ſignifie the Duties which 
me: owe to God, as it is explained in the following verſes. c That 
eminent Salvation by the M: ſia ſo largely promifed, and inſiſted y- 
pon in the foregoing Chapters : for which ir behoves you to pre« 
pare your ſelves, and in which, without this condition you thell 
have no ſharenor benefit, 4 So the Scripture uſeth to ſpeak of 
things which are at.a great diſtance, as if they were preſent or ar 
hand, See Had. 2. 3. Jam, 5.8, 9g. Rev. 22. 20, e The ſame thing 
which he now called Sz{vaton, and here calleth his Righteouſneſs be- 
cauſe it is an evident demonſtration of God's Righteouſneſs, as in 
the fulfilling of his promiſes, fo in the puniſhment of lin, and in 
the ſalvation of ſinners upon juſt and honourable terms. : 


2 Bleſſed is the man f that deth this g, ang the ſon 
of man bat layeth hold on ith: that keepeth the ſabbath 
from polluting 1t #, and keepethwiis hand & fromdoing 
any evil /. 4 

f Every man, not only Jews, bur Gentiles, or frangers, as it 58- 
explained in the following Verſes, z Jndgment and juſtice, men- 
tioned v. 1. þ Or, that holddth it faſt, that is reſolute and coo- 


*Pſ96. 


W 
+ 


[Or,equiry 


ſtant info doing ; that nor only begins we!], bur perſeveres in ir. 
i; That guardeth the Sabbath from prophanation, and doth nor de. 
fileit, cicher by forbidden praftices, or by the negle& of com- 

SA 2*-- m:nde« 


ap. LVh IS A 


manded duties. And the Sabbath ſeems to be put here, as Szcri- 
fice is elſewhere, Synecdochically for the whole Worſhip of Ged, 
whereof this is an eminent part, and the bond of all the reſt. 
& Which being the great inſtrument of ARion, is put for all the 
kinds and means of Aﬀtion. 1 To wit, to ones Neighbour, as 1s 
inore fully expreſſed, Pſal. 15. 3. " 

3 Neither ler the fon of a ſtranger », that hath join- 
ed himſeifto che LORD», ſpeak, ſaying, The LORD 
hath utterly ſeparated me from his people ; neither let 
the eunuch o ſay, Behold, I am a dry tree p. 


 m "The ſtranger; as the jon of man is the ſame with the man. v. 2.the 
Gentile, who by Birth isaſtranger to God, and to the Common- 
wealth of rat. n» That hath rurned from dumb Idols to the living 
God, and to the true Religion : for ſuch ſhall be as acceptable to 
me as the Itraclites themſelves, and the partition-wall between Jews 
and Gentiles ſhall be taken down, and Repentance and Remiſſi:n of 
ſins ſhall be preached and offered ro men of all Nations. o Who 1s 
here joined with the ſtranger, becauſe he was forbidden to enter in- 
zo the Congregation of the Lord, Deur. 23. 7. as the ſtranger was, and 
by his barrennels might ſeem no lets than the ſtranger to be caſt 
out of God's Covenant, and cut offfrom his People, to whom the 
the blefſing of a numerousPoſterity was promiſed. And under theſe 
two Inſtances he underſtands all thoſe perſons, who either by Birth, 
or by any Ceremonial Pollution, were excluded from the partici- 
pation of Church priviledges, and ſo he throws open the door to 
all true Believers without any reſtriftion whatſoever. p A ſaplels | 
and fraitleſs Tree. accurſed by God with the curſe of barrenn fs, | 

which being oft threarned as a Curſe, and being a marter of Re- 
proach among the Jews wr ealily occaſion ſuch diſcouraging | 
thoughts as are here expreſtc . 


4 For thus ſaith the LORD unto the eunuchs that | 
keep my ſabbarchs, and chooſe rhe rhings that pleafe me 


and take ho!d of my covenant r : 
9 That obſerve my Commands nor by cuſtom, or force, or fear, 
but by free choice, and fuil conſent, with Jove ro them and delight 
in them. r That reſolvedly and ſtedfaitly ke:zp the conditions of 
my Covenant. ; Feb ; 
5 Even unto them will I give in mine houſe s, and 


within my walls t, a place and a name better than of 
' ſons and daughters «: I will give them an everlaſting 


name, that ſhall not be cut off. 

+ In my Temple, to ſerve me there as Pricits, which Eunuchs 
were not allowed ro: do, Lev. 21. 17, &c. Dert. 23. I. t In tie 
Courts of my Temple, which were encompaſſed with Walls. This 
ſeems to be added with reſpe&to the People who were admitted 1n- 
to the Court, but not into the Houle it ſelf. » A far greater Bleſ- 
fingand Honour than that of having poſteriry, which was bur a 
temporal Mercy, and that common to the worſt of men, even my 
Favour, and my Spirit, and eternal Felicity. _ 

6 Alſo the ſons of the ſtranger, that join themſelves 

" to the LORD x, to ſervehim, and to love the name of | 
the LORD y, to be his fervants, every one that keep- 
eth the ſabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of 


my covenant : 

x That with purpoſe of heart cleave unto him, as 1s ſaid, As 11. 
23. » Toſerve him outoflove to him, and ro his Worſhip. 

7 Ever: chem wili 1 * bring to my holy mountain z, 
* Ch.2.2. -ndmake them joyful a in my houſe of prayer 6: their 
| bucnt- offerings and their ſacrifices ſhall be accepred u- 
pon mine alcar c : for * mine houſe thall be called an 
houſe of prayer for all people 4. 


z To my houſe, asit is explained in the following clauſe, which 
ſtood upon Mount Son, largely io cated, including Mount M:r:i2/. 
Formerly the Gentiles neither had any deſire ro come thither, nor 
were admitted there ; but now I will incline their hearts to come, 
and T will give them admiſſion and free liberty ro come into my 
Church. &# By accepting their ſervices,and comforting theirhearrs 
with the ſenſe of my Love, and pouring down all ſorts of Bleſſings 
upon them. 6 In my Temple, in and rowards which Prayers are 
daily male and direfted unto me, 1 Kings 8. 19, 28. c They 
' ſhall have as free acceſs to mine Houfe and Altar, as the Jews them- 
ſelves, and their ſervices ſhall be as acceptable to me as theirs. E- 
vangelical Worſhip is here deſcribed under ſuch Expreſſions 
as agreed to the Worſhip of Ged which then was in uie, as it is 
Mal. 1. 11. and elſewhere. See alſo Rom. 12. 1. Heb. 13. 15. dJews 
and Gentiles ſhall have equal freedom of acceſs to my Houſe, and 
ſhall there cat] upon my Name. Poſſibly he may call it an Houſe of 


d. + 


7, 


"x #4 


* Mat. 

#1. F3. 

Var. 1.17 
uk: 19.46 


S 3 #4. Chap. LVIL 


9 All ye beaſts of che field, ccme to devour, yea, all 
ye beaſts inthe forreſt g. 

£ This invitatien or proclamation 1s a prediQtion of Iſraci's De. 
ſhuQion by their cruel Enemies, which are oft expreſſed in Scri. 
pture under the names of ravenous Beaſts. Burt the great Queſtion 
is, What connexion this part of the Chapter hath with the former? 
Which may be thus conceived : The Propher having Jargely dif. 
courted concerning the Meſſiah, and his Church and Kingdom, and 
particularly of the great acceſſion and converſion of the Gentiles to 
Ir, and of the Infidelity, Apoſtacy, and manifold Wickedneſles 
of the Jewiſh Nation, and having comforted and encomaged the 
Gentiles with God's gracious promiſes mat!e to them, he now pro- 
ceeds to terrifie the unbelieving and ungodly Jews,»nd to ſhew that 
as the Gentiles ſhould believe, and be 1taved, ſo They ſhould reje& 
their M:fiah, and be urterly deſtroyed;although we need not labour 
much about the coherence ; For this may be a new $crmon, and 
theref re many learned Interpreters make this the beginning of the 
57:h Chapter. 

Io His þ watchmen 7 are blind : they are all jgno- 
rant &, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark 7, 
| ſleeping, lying down, loving to ſlumber w. | Or 

h Iſrael's, as is evident from the foilowing verſes : the Pronoun dreaming 
Relative being pur without, and inſtead of the Antecedent ; of or ralking 
which I have given divers Inſtances before. 3; Prieſts and Pro- in their 
phets, or other Teachers, who are commorly called Warckmen, as ſeep. 
Ezek. 3. 17. & 33. 2. Hoj. 9. 8. He mentions only the Teachers, be- 
cauſc Ignorance was moſt ſhameful in them, bur hereby he ſuppo- 


; 1cth the grols ignorance of the People, who neither pretended nor 


deſired to be witer than their Teachers.k Of God's Will and Word, 
and of their own and the Peoples duty,and of the true Meſſiah. They 
are alſo ilothful and negligent in inſtrufting the people, «nd do nor 
faithfully reprove them for their ſins, nor warn them of their dan= 
gers, nor keep them from Errours and Coriruptions in NoEtine, 
and Worthip, and Converſation, asthey ought 10 do. m Minding 
their own eale ard ſafety more than the Peoples benefir. 
11 Yea, they are f greedy dogs which f * can never 
have enough », and they are ſhepherds that cannoc un- } Heb. 
derſt:nd ot they * all lookto their own way p, every "4 
one for his gain from his quarter 9. yy Jeb. 
n Inſatiably covetous. o Heb. that know net to wnderfland, that do kuw ny te 
not care, or love, or deſire ( as knowing is frequently taken ) either þe ſatirfied 
to underſtand the Law, or Word of God themſclves,or to make the * Fxck. 
Pcoplc to underſtand it. p They regard neither God's Command 34. 2 X 
and Glory, nor the Peoples good, bur only the farisfaCtion of their *Ch.33.6 
own baſe Luſts. See on 1ſai. 53. 6. 9 In their ſeveral places and g 57. 17. 
{tztions, as they have opportunity : Heb. from his or their end or 
extremity, i. e; univerſally, or all from one cnd of that Body or So= 
ciery of men unto the other : as the ſame word ſignifies Gen. 19.4. 
from one end of the City to the other, or,as we there render it, from 
every quarter ; and as the ſame word is by diverslearned Men ren= 
dred 1 Kings 12. 31: not of the meareſt of rhe people, bur our of all the 
people, or indifferently our of every Tribe : of which ſee my note 
there. Bur if rhar Phraſe be rightly rendred there, out ofthe me.neſt 
of the pecple, as divers alfo expound the ſame Phraſe,Gen. 47. 2. of thy 
»eaneſt of his Brethren ; why may it not as well be rendred here 
even from the meaneſt or Ava of his flock, which is a great aggrava« 
tion of their covetouſneſs and cruelty, to extort gainsfrom ſuch as 
needed their Charity. 
12 Come ye, ſay they q, I will fetch wine, and we 
will fill our felves 7 wich ſtrong drink, and to morrow 
{hall be as this day, and much more abundant s. 
q Unto their Brethren, by Office, and in Iniquity : unto their 
Fellow-Prie!ts, or other jolly companions. +» We will drink nov 
only to Delight, bur even to Drunkennefs, as the word ſignifies, 
Mic. 1. 10. andeliewhere. s Which ſhewerh their dreadful fcuris 
ty and contempt of God, and of his Judgments, and their total and 
reſolved abandoning of all care of theirown or Peoples Souls. 


CHAP. EVIL 


| The Bl:ſſed death of the Righteour : mot duly lamented by the Fews : whe 


alſo commit Idolatry : and truſted inman : they are threatned, 1t——12, 
Evangelical Promifes to the Penitent, 13, 19, no peace tothe wicked, 
20, 21. 
| home righteous s periſheth, and:no mangs layeth it 
to heartc ; and f * mercifuld men are taken away, 
* none conſidering that the righteous is taken away || 1H: 
from the evil ts come e. of kindnf, 
. orgodlineſs. 


{ Heb.men 


Pray:r, either to imply that Prayer to God, whereof | Thanſgiving 
is a part, is # more conſiderable part of God s Worſhip than Sacri- 
fice, which being conſidered in it {elf is little valued by hirh, as he 
frequently declarerh : or to ſignifie that in the New Teſtament, 
when the Genri'es ſhould be called, a'I other Sacrifices ſhould 
ecaſe, except rhat of Prayer, and fuch like Spiritual Services. 
Which alſo is confirmed from the nature of the thing. For ſeing 
” Sacrifices were confined to the Temple at Jeruſalem, and it was im- 
poſlible that all Nations ſhould' reſort thither to offer up Levitical 
Sacrifices in ſuch time and manner as God' appointed, it was ne- 
ecffary upon ſuppoſition of rhe general convertlion of the Gentiles, 


preſcribed as they were capable of praiſing; 

8 The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcaſts of 
Irael e, faith, Yet will I gather others to him, Þ beſides 
thoſe that are gathered unto him f. 

e Which will gather to himſelf, and bring into their wn Land, 
thoſe poor I{raclites which are, or thall be, caſt our of their own 
Land, and from God's preſence, and diſperſed in divers parts of the 
World. f As there are fome few Gentiles whom I have made Pro- 
ſcl;res, and added to the Jewiſh Church, ſo I ſhall make another 


4 Hcb. 
Porbi 5s ga* 


that that way of Worſhip ſhould be aboliſhed, and' ſuch a way {| 


a Juſt and holy men, who arethe pillars of the place and ftate in »p 1,1: 
which they live, yea, as the Jews call them, the pillars of the xj. ». .. 
World. 6 Few or none of the People. So he ſheweth that the cor- 
ruption was general in the Pepole no leſs than in the Prieſts. « Is 
duly affe&ed with this ſevere ſtroke and ſad ſign of God's diſplea- 
ſure. d Or, godly; theſame whom he now called righreous, whoſe 
duty and pratice it is to exerciſe both Mercy or Kindneſs, and Ju- 
ſtice. e From thole dreadful Calamities which are coming upon 
the Nation. ' : 

2 He (ball || enter into peace f :; they g ſhall reſt in | 0s 


their beds b, each one walking 3 || i» his uprightneſs &. {$i 
f This juſt and merciful rfian ſhall enter into a ſtate of peace and fore him, 

reſt, where he ſhall be our of the reach of the approaching miſe= 5 

ries. Or. be ſha go ( to wir, to his Fathers, as it is fully expreſſed, 

Gen, 15: 15. Or, be ſball die, going being put for dying, as 1 Chr. 17» 

11. compared with 2 Sam. 7. 12. Jeb 12, 21. © 14. 20. Luke 22.22. 

and elſewhere : ) in peace. g Juſt men. Here is a ſudden change 

of the number, which is very frequenr in the Prophets. h Intheir 

. Graves, which are not unfitly called their Beds, or ſleeping Houſes; 

' as their death is commonly called: /eep ty Scripture. # Or that gy, 

> keth' or did walk, i. e. live. k In a ſincere and faithful diſcharge of 

| his duties to God and Men. Or, before him, 7. e. betore God, ac« 


2. p” : 

Or, jr 
Ns which 
is evil. 


and a far more comprenſive gathering of the Gentiles, whom I 
ſhall bring into the tame.Church with the Jews, making both Jews 
and Gentiles one fold under one Shepherd, as It is pronyſed; 5oh, 
M9. 16; _ 


' cording. to the uſual Phraſe of Scripture, as Gen. 17. 1. 1 Kings. 2, 


4. & 8. 25. For God is ofr underſtood where he is not expreſſcd, 
but only deſigned by this or the likes progpun, as Gey, 52. 13. and 
elſewhere, © 

2 But 


# Chap. 1 


h tHcb.with 
gods, Or a- 
mong t/he 
Oaks. 

* 2 King: 
16. 4. 
*Ezek. 16 
20.and 20 


46, 


Pek.16, 
16, 25. 


* Ezek: $ 
lo.and 23 
lg, 
my 
itfor tþ 
Marger 
thantheirs 
*Ezck. 16 
6,28, &+ 
3,12.0%c 
lOr, zhou 
movide# 


I m_ 


VII. FT £1 


3 But draw near hither 1, ye {ons of the forcerels m, 
the ſeed of the adu!tereſs, and the whore ». 

1 To God's Tribunal, to anſwer for your ſelves, and to hear 
what I have to ſay againſt you, and to receive your ſentence. 
2» Not by propagation, but by imitation; ſuch being frequently 
called a Man or Woman's Son. thar learn their Arr, and follow 
their Example: You Sorcerers, either p:operly or Metaphorically 
ſo called; For the Jews were guilty ot it both ways. » Nor the 
genuine Children of Abraham, as you pretend aid boaſt, bur be- 
Sotten in Fornication upon a common Whore. Which 1s not to 
be underſtood properly but figuratively, becauſe their diſpoſitions 
and carriages were far more ſuitable to a baia:dly brood, thin to 
Abraham's Seed. ; 

4 Againſt whom do you ſport your ſelves o ? againſt 
whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue 
f? are ye not children of tranſgreflion, a ſeed of fal- 
thood 9? 


o Conſider whom it is you mock and ſcoff when you deride 
God's Prophets, as they did, Iſaiah 28. 14: 22- and know that 1t'1s 
not ſo much men that you abuſe, as God, whoſe Cauſe they plcad, 
and in whoſe name they ſpeak. p Theſe are the known and com- 
mon geſtures of Mockers, of which ſee Job 16. 10- Pſalm 22. 7. and 
35.21. 9 Either an adulterous brood, as was ſaid before : Or, a 
generation of liars, whoſe pra&ices groſly contradict your prin- 
Ciples and profeſſions, who deal deceitfully and pexfidioufly both 
with God and with men. Ls 

5 Enflaming your ſelves + with idols r *under every 


green tree s * {laying the children 7 in the valleys « un- 


# Chap. L 


tHcb.with 
gods, Or a- 


might pur them in ſome cloſe corner, that they might keep them 
ſecret, it being opprobrious, and oft-times dangerous for th:m to 
worſhip Idols. f Thoſe Images or Monuments and tokens which 
thou didſt make and ſet up there as remembrances of thoſe Idol-gods 
whom they repreſented, or ro whom they belonged. He faith, thy 
remembrance, tm oppoſition to God's remembrances, or to that Writ- 


ing of God's Law upon their. door-poſts, which God preſcribed to 


keep him and his Law in their remembrance, Dew. 6. 9. and 17. 20. 
g Thou liait uncovered thy nakedneſs; i.e. profſtituted thy Body 
(as the Phraſe commonly iigniftes) ro others belides me thine Hul- 
band. Heb. from wich me (departing from me, or, as it were riſing 
our of my Bed) thou haft wicovered or proftitured thy ſelf ro others 
like an impudent and inſatiable ſtrumpet- h Into the adulterous 
bed, as this very word is uicd, Gen. 49. 4. 
many Adulrerers together. Thou haſt multiplied thine Idobs and 
Altars k Ftow hait covenanred toerve them, - and fo expe help 
from them. But becauſe rhe Verb here uſed being thus pur by it 
ſelf, neve? ſignifies 0 niake a Covensn?, it ſeems to be better ren- 
dred' in the margent of our Bible, and by others, baſf hewed it (to 
wit, thy Bed, whictt is expreſſed both in the next toregoing, and 
In the next following words: ) for thy Jelf (for thine Idolarrous 


; That it might receive | 


T-' 4 Bb 


uſes: ) larger than theirs, than their Bed, as it follows: Or thus 
didft hew down (to wit, trees, which is calily underſtood both from 
j the Verb, and fiom the Nature of the thing) to or for thy ſelf (ro 

make Images or other things relating to thy falſe Gotls) more than 
they, more than the Heathens, of whom thou haſt learned theſe* 
praCtices, as God complains, 2 Kmgs 21. 9. Ezekiel 16. 46, 47, 52. 
{ No ſooner d dt thou ſee their Idols, but theu waſt enamuured 
| with them, and didſt fall down and woiſhip them, like an un- 
chatie and lewd Woman, who upon all occaſions, and at the 
very firſt view of any man, is inflamed with luſt towards them. 
Heb. Thou loveſ? their Bed (i. e. their filthy converſation ) in the 
place. ( for ſo this Hebrew word frequently ſignifies, as Dear. 23. 
12. Ja:ah 22.18. and elſe-where,) where thou ſaweſt it. Or thus, 
Thou lovedſt their bed, thou aidſt provide ( as this word ſignifies, Exod. 
18. 21. and ſo doth a word of the very ſame fignification, Get. 22. 
8.) 2 place for it, to receive their Bed, roſet up their Idols in thine 
own houſe. 


9 And||* thou wenteſt 7 to the King m with oint- 


ſendchy meſlengers far off p, 
even unto hell q. 


{ Either by thy ſelf, or, by thy Meſſengers, as it follows. 
thau aiaft look, to wit, earneſtly, with expeQation and vehement 
affection. » Either to Molochk, which was as it were the King or 
chick of their Idols,and which ſignifies a King. Or, to the great 
King of A4jris, called the King by way of Emicency, to whom the 
Iiraclites 1n the days of {ſaiah were very prone to ſeek, and truſt 
and ſend Preſents. Although the word King, may be here taken 
colleCively for the Kings of 4ſjria or Egypr,or any other King from 


Or, 


mnzthe der the clifts of che rocks x? whom they deſircd or expeRed help in their ſtraits. And fo the 
Oaks. r Heb. being enflamed, &c. luſting after them, and mad upon Prophet paſleth here from their Idolarry to another ſin, even 
* 2 Kings them, as the Phraſe is, Ferem. 50. 38. fervent both in making and | 0 their carnal conhdence in Heathen Princes, for which they are 
fy in wortkipping efthtem, a warchidrvad, Iſaiah 44+ 12, &c. It is oft ſeverely reproved ; alchough theſe two ſins were commonly 
*Ezck. 16. a Metaphor borrowed from Whoredom to which Idolatry is oft joined together, and they ealily received Idolatry from thoſe Kings 
20.and 29. compared, 5s Wherefoever you ſee an Idol erected, which was com- whoſe help they deſired. » With Precious Ointments, and parti- 
a6, monly done in Groves, or under great and ſhady Trees, which cularly with Balm, which was of grear price, and was a commo= 
both defended rhe Worſhippers from the heat of the Sun, and diry peculiar to thole parts, and was ſomerimes ſent as a Preſent. 
were ſuppoſed to ſtrike them with a kind of ſacred Horrour and Sec Gen. 43. It. Jerem. 8. 22. and 46. 11. o Didft ſend great quan« 
Rever:nce. See on Deuter. 12« 2- 2 Kings 16. 4. and I7. 10. F In | fities thereof to them to procure their aid. þ Into Afhria, which 
way of Sacrifice to their Idols, after the manner of the barbarous } Was far tram Judea. 9 Thou walt willing to ſubmit co the baſeſt 
Heathens; Of which ſee on Lev. 18. 21. Deut. 12. 3t- 2 Kings 21. 6. , terms to procure their aid. : FE th | 
and 23. 10. # Or, befide the brooks, which run in the Valleys : 10 'Lhou art wearied in the greatneſs of thy Way x» 
ho wrng war molt commedions foe or wi _—_ = ' yet ſaidſt thou not, There is no hope 5s; thou aſt 
allude to the Valley of Hinnom in whic E = | . : i 
ſed, Jer. 7. 31. enagh which alſo the Brook of K:dron is ſuppoſed | found the || life of thine hand #, therefore thou waſt 
to have run, x Which they choſe either for ſhade, or for thoſe |; not grieved , EE 
dark vaults and hollow pl:ces, which were either by Nature or | 7 Thou halt not eaſed or relieved, bur only tired thy ſelf with 
Act made in rocks, and which were convenient for, and frequent- | all thy tedious journeys, and laborious endeavours. _ 5 And yer 
Iy appoint:d to idolatrous uſes. thou waſt ſo ſtupid under all thy diſcouragenients and diſappoint 
6 Among the ſmooch ſtones of the ſtream 3s thy por- | CY _ III ve _ thy AIE06 IO lott, and 
; a | "7 a a as ended, but made worſe a | 
tion y ; they ore thy lot : even to them ating" thelcPrattices. # Thou haff found (i. e. Thou fal nl hy 
red a drink-offering, thou halt offered a meac-oltering , thou haſt found, or ſhalt aſſuredly find by theſe courtes) rhe fe 
a. Should I receive comfort in theſe b ? ; (i.e. the firength and vigour) of chine hand, that thine hand ig 
y Thou haft choſen for thy portion thoſe Idols which were ei- , ſtrengthned by rheſe Pradtices: Or, life by thine hand, i. e. by theſe 
ther made of thoſe ſmooth ſtones,- which were caft up by Rivers; ' endeavours and applications of thy ſelf ro others for help. : Or; 
or which were worſhipped upon Atars made of ſuch ſtones ; or thou haſt ſometimes found ſacceſs intheſe ways. « Thereforethou 
which were worſhipped by the ſides of Brooks or Rivers where | didſt not repent of thy fin and folly herein, but didſt periiit and. 
ſuch ſmooth ſtones commonly le, 2 Thou haſt foreſaken me and * applaud thy ſeif in ſuch courſes. , ET 
choſcn Mole for the-arent objet of thy Worſhip and Truſt a Toe II JOY whom _haft thou been afcaid or feared x; 
the devil is God's Ape, an olaters uſed the ſame rites and ofter- ! that thou haſt lie : yY *, 
ings ia the worſhip of Idols which God had preſcribed in his own, ' noe lid + mo: d - — yr ſt _ — ed the Dy 
N:mb. 15. 4, & b Should I be plcafed with ſuch a people, and : yY a: have not FE held my peace 
ſuch A&ions ? Maſt I not needs be highly provoked, and thew my | EVEN of old b, and thou feareſt ms not c / = ; : 
diſpleaſure by an exemplary puniſhment of ſuch wicked and foolith * x And what or who are they,-the fear of whom drives thee tai 
WPrek 16 ations ? This is an ujual Figure, called Meioſis, or Litotes, when theſe wicked and deſperate courſes ? Are they not men, weak and 
"6 leſs is ſaid, and more is underitood. - { mortal Creatures, ſuch as wholly depend upori me, and can do-no- 
Ag -* Upon a lofty ahd high mountain c haſt thou {et thy | thing to thee eirher againſt me or without me? » That thou haſk 
bed 4: even thither wenteſt thou up to offer ſacrifice. | Jt thus dilloyally and perkidiouſly with me, and ſought tor ſuck 
Pas : as oth oreign aſſtſtances, contrary to my Command, and thy ſolemn 
c In high places, which were much uſed for Religious Worlhip, * Haſt th : 
both by Iiraelites, and by Heath-ns. 4 Thine Altar, as 5h 'I Cen —_ —_ _ ova Soon L206 gone eings _— 
fice her ing, i idtt commit ſpi- | | : , 0 Jr 
ee mots Compare beck. £3, 17,40, | *ochec, andconſtancly performed, when thou haſt nor groſly vio= 
Ezek. 8. :-d * the d G4 he note heftchoe fer! lated the Conditions upon which they were made. @ Or-thusj 
toand 23. 8 Behind * the OOTs alto and tne Þ | * nor ſet me upon thine heart, as theſe very words are rendred, Cans. 8: 
m up thy remembrance f; for thou haſt diſcovered thy ſelf 6. And fo this is a repetition of what is ſaid in the foregoin 
m_—_ to another than me g, and art gone up <4: thou haſt en- _ in RG "aun mw _ is, Top haſten _— ink 
it for th : . «* ; aftectionately confidered what 1 am, how Al-ſufficient, and Faiths 
Marger larged thy bed * and | made 4 ras —_ _—_ k; | ful, and Cris for then thou wouldeſt not have diſtruſted - 
bancigirs, CROU Jovedft their bed || where thou awelr 1t 7. . diſobeyed me.bHave not I foreborn to reprove and puniſk thee for 
*Fzxck.rs &© Which by a Figure called Hendiadis may be put for the doerepoſts, this and for other ſins, from time to timey ever fincs thou waſt my 
16,28, <> a5 If isexpreficd Deur. 11. 20. Behind the polts of the doors of thine People, that by this Goodneſs I might oblige thee to love me, and 
3.12.6-;, Houſe: Where the Heathens are faid to have laced their rutelar | tg cleave unto me? &c Or, Therefore thou deft not fear or regard me. 
IOr, thou gods ro whoſe proteCtion they commirted themſelves and their Hous | Th, thou abuſeft mine indul gence and long-ſufftring raking oce 
mud: tes, that ſo they might have their Eyes and Minds upon them, Þ .£,, £5,054 thence to deſpiie me. : x 
| tm, whenſoever they went out or came in. Here alſo the Iſraelites | | 


12 I will declare thy ri 
e, | for they ſhall not profit thee f.:. 

4 IT will no longer be ſilent and patient towards thee. 

' may be put for the Righteouſneſs of thy Works by taat fo figuce; 
| of which ſee the firſt note on verſe 8. whereby he means their wick« 
edneſs, which he calleth their Righteouſneſs, either Ironically, or, 
becauſe 1t was covered with a pretence of Righteouſneſs, and 
they alledged that this was a juſt and Jawful thing, when, they 
were diſtreiled, to ſeck for h:)p from their Neighbours of Allies. 
The ſenſe is, 1 will diſcover whether thy Works be Righteous, as 
thou pretendeſt they are: My puniſhments ſhall manifeft the 
wickedneſs of thy ations. f Theſe aQtons tha!l do thee no! good 
bur much} hure. | | 

13 When thou crieſt g, let thy companies deltverthee 
þ. but the wind ſhall carry them all away 5; _— hw, 
eakethern | ; but be that putteth his truſt in me, ſhall poſ- 
ſeſs the land, and ſhall inherit my holy mountain m. 

g To wit, unto me for deliverance. þ Expettit not fromme whom 
thou haſt forſaken and deſpiſed, bur from rhoſe forergn rroops 
to whom thou haſt foughr and trufted for ſuccour. # Bur they 
3 ihail 


B 


Chap: 


ment, and didſt encreaſe thy perfumes o, and didft j Or, 
and didſt debaſe hy ſelf reſp«#edf#| 


ghteouſnefs and thy works fHcb.and, 


D Whicls . 


1 
"j 
V 
: : 
1-43 
? : 
« : | 


l 
{| ' 


the King. RMIT! 
*Ch. 30». v7 [ 
Ezek. 1 6h 
33-and 21000081 
10, WHT 


* Hall be ſo far from faving thee, that they ſhall not be able to del:- 
ver themſflves, but Thall be carried away ſuddenly and violentiy by 
the blaſt of mine anger. & A vapour or puff of Breath which quick- 
ly vaniſheth away.. It is the fame thing in cffe& with the Wind. 
1 Or, rake them awsy, as this verb ſignified, Ho). 11. 13. and clle- 
where, m Shall enjoy my favour and preſenc: in my Temple. 

* 14 And ſhall fay », *Caſt ye up, caſt ye up o, pre- 
pare the way, take up the ſtumbling block out of the 
way of my people-p. 

n Heb. And he jhall ſay: Or, and one ſball ſay. God will raiſe up 
a Man who ſhall fay theſe words, and that with authority and et- 
ficacy, 1d as the thing fhall be done. o Make cauteways, where 
it is ne-dful, for their ſafe and eafie paſlage, p Remove all things 
which may hinder them in their return. : ; 

15. For thus faith the high and lofry One that inhabi- 

f 24.8 terh eternity, whoſe name #s Holy q, Idwell in the high 

— thy 12, and holy place; * with him alſo rot zs of a contrite and 

(d 1:3.6. bumble (pirir 7, to revive the ſpirit of the humble, and 

@. 66.2. tO revive the heart of the contrice ones. 

9 Who is omnipotent, everlaſting and unchangeable. holy in 
all his Words and Ways, and therefore both can and will deliver 
his ,People, as he hath promiſed to do. r With ſuch alſo whoſe 
Spirits are broken and humbled by AMiftions, and by a ſenſe of 
their fins for which they were aftlited ; which doubtleſs was the 
caſe of many of the Jews in the Babyloniſh Captivity : Whom there- 
fore he here implies that God would pity and deliver out of their 
Diſtreſles. , : 

x2 86 For * I will not contend for ever s, neither will 

Nom s I be always wroth: for the ſpirit ſhould fail before 

2.Job 34. MC, and the ſouls * which I have made 7. | 

+Hcb.i2. 1 will not conſtantly proceed to the utmoit ſeverity with fin- 

k ful men in this life, and therefore I will put an end to the miſe- 
ries of the Jews, and turn their Captivity. t For then their Spt- 
rits would ſink and die under my Stroke, and I ſhould do nothing 
elſe bur deſtroy the Works of mine own hands. Therefore I con- 
ſider their Infirmity, and ſpare them. Compare P/alm 78. 38, 39. 

and 103. 13, 14. 

17 Forthe iniquity of his covetouſnefs « was I wroth, 

H#:b.twrzs and ſmote him: I hid mex, and was wroth, and he 


ws away, Went on | forwardly in the way of his heart y. 
be, 0 1 which fin the Fews where eminently guilty, as is expreſly 


P1039. 


fins for which God contended with them: x I withdrew my Fa+« 
your and Help from.him, ard left him in great calamities. y Yet 
he was not retormed by corre&ions, bur in his diſtreſles treſpaſſed 


thoſe ſinful courſes which were choſen by, and were molt pleaſing 
to'the luſts of bis own corrupt heart, ; ; 

- 18 Thave ſeen his ways 2, and will heal him5: 1 
will lead him alſo, and reſtore comforts unto him, and 


_ eto his mourners 4d. 

#: T have taken notice of theſe evill ways in which he ſeems re- 
ſolved ro walk, and 'that'be is neither bettered by Mercies nor 
Judgments. 4 Or, yer 7 will heal him... Although I might juſtly 

deſtroy-him, and leave'him to periſh in his own ways, yet of my 
meer Mercy, and for my own Namts ſake, I will piry them, and 
them from their fins, and bring them out of their troubles. 
c Or, to wit, | the copulatiye Conjun&ion being put expolitiveiy, 
& it is frequently: : 4. To -thoſe who are humbled under God's 
Hifd,-thar mourn, in Sion, Iſaiah G1. 2, 3. for their own and others 
fins, Ezekiel 9.4. and for the Calamities of God's Church and Peo- 
'E e,>faiah-66. 10.  - | ; 
*Pro.is.r. ®329*Ierexre'e * the fruit of the lips; peace f, peace g 
_—. E. i .that is far off, . and to him that is near þ, faith 
| ; LORD, and I will heal him. 
£0: I wvill by: my. Almighty power, and in a wonderful manner 
duce-  f Either 2. Praiſe or Thankſgiving, which is called 2he 
itrof our dips, Hoſ,14-2. Heb.13.15. and Peace: Or, rather 2. That 
Peace whictr is not-wrought by Men's hands, but only by God's 
Eips: or Werd, Peace with God, and in a man's own'Conſcience, 
which God hath-promiſed-to. his People, and which he Hath publi- 
ſhed andoffered to all fortsof Men by the preaching ofthe Prophets, 
ind eſpecially 'of the Apoſtles; as may be gathered both from the 
Obje&!of:this Peace iv the following words, and'by the excluſion 
of all: wicked men*from-rthe Peace, v. 20, 21. g The doubling 
of the'word ſignifies -the certainty and abundance of this Peace. 
hk To thei Gentiles who'are far from God, and from Salvation, 4s 
2.38, 59, - Eb; 23512, &c.- as well as to the Jews, who are called » 
people near unto God, Palm 148: 14. - - 
: ---20%Ptir- the wicked are like the troubled ſea, when it 
2 "+ Eannor reſt, whole waters caſt up mire and dirt z. 
E © Theit minds are” re{flefs, being perpetually hurried and tor- 
mented with their own Jafts and paſſions, and with the horrour of 
their guilc, and the" dread of rhe Divine Vengeance : due unto 
them, and' readie to come upon them. ; 
2 * There i5n0 peace, ſaith my God, tothe wicked &. 
« & Though they may kave as great a ſhare of Proſperity as the 
: oe of Men have, as appears from Pſalm 37. 35- and 73. 3, &c. 
Ec:1. 4; and 9. 1- yet tlicy have no ſhare in this Inward, and 
Spititaal and Everlaſting Peace, 
oy . CERAP ELYSLL bi 
i Tews. byporrife :- In their Fafts, 1———5, A true Faft ateſcrivea, 
The Jews by RE to Godlneſs, 4 —; 2. To the keeping of the 


p 


” 


; *Chap.48. 
"Hd 


» Sabbath, 13, 14. ; IM 
- 48cb.wizh { Ry Þ aloud's, ſpare not b, lifc up thy voice like a 
 thethroas, trumpet, and ſhew my people their tranſgreflion, 
and the houſe of Jacob. their ſins. 

a The prophet having im the foregoing Chapter noted and cett- 
ſarcd divers grols miſcarciages of the Jews, proceeds upon the ſame 


- 


: Fer. 6.13. and 8: 10. Bur this is not mentioned excluſively , 
as t0,0ther ſins, bur Synecdochically ſo as to comprehend all thole | 


Moreand more, as was ſaid of 4baz, and obſtinately perſiſted in | . 
| YOu, but attively ſuch as are very grievous and burdenſome to o« 


enter into the Ears ef God, which is a c-ying fin, whether it pro» %: 
| ceed from unmercifulneſs, Exod, 22. 25, 26, 27. Which ſometimes en- h 

' creaſeth to rage, 2 Chr. 28. g.or from injuſtice,, chi 5. 7. or from fraud 

| and deceit, James 5. 4+ The Scripture doth frequently expreſs what- 


| by crying, Gen. 18. 20, 21. Jon. I, 2+ 


Savjz& in this Chapter, and in God's nameexpoſtulares with them 


493 Ww 
e 4. H , Chap. LV11I. 
for other miſlemeanours. 6 Forbear not to ſpeak whatſoever I 
command thee for the conviEion of this people. 
2 Yet they ſeek me daily c, and delight ro know my 
ways d, as a nation that did righteouſneſs e, ar.d for- 
look not the | ordidance of their God f: they ask of 
me the ordinances of juſtice g; they take delight þ in {Heb judge 
approaching to God Z. | "rad 
e They coverall their wickedneſs with a profeſſion of Religion, )©": 
from time to time reſorting to my houſe, prete: dine to ask Countel me 
of me, and to deſire and jeck my Favour and Biefling, & Either 
1, They ſeem to delight in it: Vor men are oft ſaid in Scriprure 
to be, or do, that which they ſeem or prot-1sto be, or do, as Mor. 
13. 12. That which he hath, is thus cxplained in Luke 8. 18. That 
which he jeemeth to have, and Rome. 7+ 9. I was alive, i, e. I falſly 
thoughr my ſelf to be alive. See allo Phite 3. 9. Or 2. They re- 
ally delight; for this is evident, that there are many men who take 
{ome pleaſure in the knowing of God's Will and Word, and 
yet do not conform their Lives to it. e As if they were a Righ- 
tcous and Godly People. f Asif they were not guilty of any Apo« 
ſtacy trom God. or neglect of, or diſobedience to God's Precepts. 
£ As it they delired and reſolved to obſerve them. h Of which ſee 
the ſecond note upon this Verſe. #i In coming to my Temple to 
hear my Word, and to offer Sacrifices. 
3 Wherefore have we faſted,/ay they,and thou ſecſt not 
k ? wherefore have we afflicted our ſoul 1, and thou takeſt [Or,hing; 
no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your faſt »», ye whroith 
find pleafure », and exact all your ||+ labours 0. 6 ms 
k& They complain of hard uſage trom God, that although they wy. 
prayed, and faited, and kept the reſt of God's Ordinances, al} which f Heb, 
are iynecdochically comprehended under the title of Fafing, all their gricf. 
labour was loit, and God neither regarded nor delivered them. 
 Defrauded and pinched our Appctites with faſting, of which 
this Phraſe is uſed, Levit. 16. 29. and 23. 27, 29. m In thoſe ſo- 
lemn days of faſting which I have appointed ; Or, in thoſe times 
when I have called you by the courſe of my Providence, and coun= 
ſis of my Prophets, unto faſting, and weeping and mourning, &Cc. Iſa. 
22. 12. » Either 1. You indulge your ſelves in ſenſuality, asthey 
did 1/a. 22. 13. But this doth not agree with that affifing of their 
Souls which they now profeſſed, and which God acknowledgeth, 
veries. Or rather 2. You purſue and fatisfie your own Jufſts : 
though, you abſtain from bodily food, you do not mortific your 
own (i1ntul concupiſcences, and when you are reſtrained from out= 
ward atts, yet even then your thoughts and affeCtions are ſet upon, 
and working toward thoſe things which gratifie your fleſhly Jncli- 
nations and worldly Intereſts. o Your money got by your labour, 
and Jent to others either for their need, or your own advantage : 


| For Labour is oft put for Wealth, as Deut. 28. 33. 1/a. 45. 14, C&Cc. 


Lieb, Tur griefs, not paſſively, thoſe things which are grievous to 


thers, either hard Service, above the ſtrength of your Servants, or 
beyond the time limited by God for their dervice, of which ſeean 
Inſtance, Jer. 34. 13, 14, 15, 16. or debts, v hich you require either 
withuſury, orat leaſt with rigour and cruelty, when either the ge- 
neral Law of Charity, or God's particular and poſitive Law, com- 
manded the releaſe or at leaſt rhe forbearance of them ; of which 
ice an inſtance, Nehem, 5. 1, 2, &C. | 
4 Behold, ye faſt for ſtrife and debate p, and to ſmite 
with the filt of wickedneſs qe || ye (ball not faſt as ye do 


this day, to make your voice r to be heard on high. |[Or, 
 Þ Your faſting days, wherein you ought in a ſpecial manner to f#f wt 
unplore the Mercy of God, and ro ſhew compaſſion to Men, you Is 4). 
imploy in a great meaſure in injuring or quarrelling with your Bre- 

thren, your Servants or Debtors, or in contriving miſchief againſt 

them, as if the 'd2ſign of your faſting and praying to God, were only 

to obtain alicence'tooppreſs men. Compare Mat, 23. 14. q Or, with 

@ wicked fiſt, a Genitive ofthe Adjun&. To dezl rigoroufly and in- 
juriouſly with your Servants or Debtors, which Servants, it may 

be, had ſold themſelves to the year of Redemption, Exid. 21: 2. 

Lev. 25+ 39, 40, 50, You handle them with an hard hand, the 

word is uſed for fff, Exod. 21. 18. the LXX add the humble, poor, 

or tnferiour perſon, and that not only their Debtors with a ſummum 

jus exatt rigour, which ſeems elſe-where to be. expreſſed by grind- 

ing the face, ch. 3.15. and in that Parable by taking by the throar, 

Matth. 18. 28. but alſo their'Servants out of meer Will and Plea- 

ſure, and in confempt of them, treating them - opprobriouſly, as 

Chriſt was handled in contempt and ſcorn, Matth. 26. 67, 68. Joh. 

18. 22, 7-Either r- In ſtrife and debate, in which Men's Paſſions 

ſhew themſelves by loud clamours. Or 2. So as to cauſe the cry of 

the oppreſſed, by reaſon of.your injuries, of what kind ſoever, to 


ever ſin is againſt Charity in ſpecial, as allo general complex ſins, 
Or 3. By way of Oftenta- 
tion, to note their Hypocrifie, they love to be taken notice of by 0» 
thers, Match. 6. 2,5, 16. Or, their Foy, ſuppoſing that they ſhalF 
be heard for their much ſpeaking, upon which accovnt Baals Prieſts 
are mocked by Elijah, 1 Kings 18. 27, 28. 4. Foice here relates 


' principally to their Prayer, it is a Synecdoche of the kind; So the 


{enſe is, this is not the'way to have your Prayers heard ; Tf you de« 
fire that, you muſt faſt in another manner, and abſtain from all 
kind' of oppreſſion: And this ſeems beſt to ſuit the Conrext, which 
is to ſhew what kind of faſt the Lord reproves, and what he ap- 
proves in the following Verſes. 
5 Is ic * ſuch a faſt that T have choſen s? *[|a day f,g-,- 


for a man to'afflict » his ſoulx? 75 jr, to bow down his+.cy. 6. 
head as.a bulruſh y, and to ſpread fackcloth and aſhes 29. 


under him2? wilt thou call 2 this a faſt 5, and an ac-; Or, Fr 
ceptable day to the LORD c ? f hy 


by a Metonymy, becauſe we 
£ Or, to -atfli& his Soul for a 
cither for 2 

HLIAMA 


s Apprive of, acceps or aelight in, 
delight in what we freely chuſe. 
day, It is an Hypallage, and ſoit may be underſtood, 


bn. 


fl 


a Lois & fel, wh AY Fly rad By bj, yt Px YA ns © 


ah Aa Aw ASS @ co. of «.c 


ffleb. the | 
hudles of | 


I the yoke. 


"Jer 34. 9. 
fHeb, 
ken 


wa do wo aA AO -. A an vi iis ks £©O@/a {\Qwl+ 614 _ Gi4o oa +A©i 


& «as US i= 


*Ezek. 18. 
7, 16, 
Mat. 2 $. 


Js. 
(Heblreak 

r, effi X 
Fea. f 


1p, LVIIE. 


yl 


F the joke. 


*Ezek. 19, 
7, 16, 
Mat. 25. 


Zs. 
THebbreak 


r, 8 J- 


Hig 


34- 9. 


1 $8 


man'to take a"certain time to aflift his Soul in, and that either 

f.om even to even, Lev. 23. 32. or from morning to evening, J44Z. 

20. 26. 2 S»9 3. 35. orelſe, to afflit his Soul for a little rune. 

« Or, keep himſelf low, or chaſtiſe the Body for want of Food, 

viz, outwardly without any inward ſorrow, or compunttion for 

ſin, working a true Humiliation in the ſight of God. » Put here 

Synecdochically for the Body or Perſon, as is uſual in Scripture, 
Gen. 46-18, 22, 25. Lev 2. 2,4. and 7. 20, 21, 27. and 22. y Here 
th2 Prophet ſets down thoſe external geſtuies and poſtures 1n par- 
ticular, which they did joyn with their hypocritical faſts, as he had 
mentioned it before in general. To bow down, bowing 1s the po- 
ſture of Mourners, Pſalm 35- 14. and here it is either, as if through 
weakneſs of Body their Heads did hang down ; or counterteitly, 
to repreſent the poſture of true Penitents, moving ſometimes their 
Heads this way and that way, as the word ſignificth, not unlike 
the ballance of a Clock, as the Bullruſh moved by the Wind bow- 
etl it ſelf down, waving to and fro, in a kind of circular, or femi- 
circular motion, the contrary motion of lifting up the Head being 
ail indication of Pride, Ch. 3. 16. Ir is the guiſe of Hypocries to 
put on affe&ed Countenance:, Marth. 6. 16. 2 The Jew to expiels 
their ſorrow, made uſe of Sack-cloth and Aſhes two ways. 1. Some- 
times by putting on Sack-c!oth upon their Bodies, as 1 Kings 21, 
27. Pſalm 69. 11. and caſting Aſhes upon their Heads, 2 Sam. 13; 
19. And 2. Sometimes by ipreading Sack cloth under them, and 
lying down upon Aſhes, E/th. 4. 3. Fob 2. 8. The Iatent of Sack- 
clotls was to afflidt the Body by its unpleaſing harſhneſs, and of 4ſb- 
e: to repreſent their own vilenefs, as being bur Duſt and Aſhes; 
their puting of them on might note their uneaſineſs uncer ſin, and 
lying on them their ſelf abhorrency, ſhamirg themſelves for it, 
Quer, Are ſuch Rites now convenient on a day of Humiliation to 
help us in our afflicting ofour ſelves ? Anſw. woſpel Services net- 
ther require them, or need them, reſpc&ting more the Inward aft- 
flicting of the Soul with godly ſorrow, and deep contrition 3 Yet 
may they carrry this initru&ion along with them, that our Orna- 
ments, our beſt and gawdy Fpparel, ought ro be laid a'ide, as not 
ſuiting either the ground an cauſe, or the end and deſign of days 
of Humiliation. & 1. e. Canit thou upon a rational account as a 
meer man call it ſo? Canſt thou'th nk, ſupyoſ , or believe it to be 
ſo? b It being ſuch an one as hath not"1ing :n it, bur the lifeleſs 
Skeleton and dumb ſigns of a Fa#, nothing of \cep Humiliation ap- 
pearing in it, or, real Reformation proceeding from it : Not that the 
Prophet blames them for rheſe external Rites in this outward way 
of afflicting themſelves. For this he commands, Levi. 23. 27, 31, 
32. and appoints certain Rites to be uſed. Zevir. 16. 19, 21. And 
theſe particular Rires were frequent in their folema Humilations, 
1 Kings 21. 27. Efth. 4. 3. Dan. 9. 3. uſed alſo by the Heathen, 


A 1 #- 


Jon. 3.5. 6. See Matth. 11. 21. Bur that which he condemns is their 


Hypocriſie in ſeparating true Humiliation from t-em, for bodily ' 


exerciſe profirerh jittle, 1 7Tim.4.8 c A day that God will approve 
of, as before. Heb. a day of accept ance, or that will turn to a good 
account on your behalf. 

6 Is not this the faſt that I have choſen 4? to looſe 


feb. zhe the bands of wickedneſs e, to undo F the heavy bur- 
hndles of 


dens f, and * to let the F oppreſſed g go free b, and 


that ye break every yoke s ? 

d Or, approve, as before wv. 5. or, ought not ſuch a Faſt to be 
accompanied with ſuch thing- as theſe, where he 1 now abour to 
ſhew the concomitants of a truz Faſt, with rcfe: nce ro the thing 
in hand, namely, to exerciſe works of Charity c nſiiting part] in 
as of ſelfdenyalin this Verſe, and part.y in d «:g good to thoſe 
in diſtreſs in the next. In this Verſe he inſtancerti in tome partt- 
culars, and cloſeth witha general. e viz. Th: cruel obligacions 
of uſury and oppreſſian. f Heb.bundles, a Metaphor, poſſibly point- 
ing at thoſe many bunales of 'Writings,as Bills, Bonds, Mortgages, and 
Acknowl:dgements, which the Uſuters had lying by th m. The for- 
mer may relate to unjuſt and unlawful Obligati-ns cxtorted by force 
or fear, which he would have cance'led ; This latter ro juſt Debts 
contrated through poverty and neceflity, the r:gour whereof he 
would have abated, wherh-r by reaſon of loans upon too hard con- 
ditions, called adrawing them into a net, Pal. 10. 9. and ſo much is 
implied, Prov. 6. 5. Or, under tvo hard circumſtances, whether 
thev were 1..ans of Food, or Money, of which the people ſo bitter= 
1Iy complained, Neb 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. and is expreſly forbid, Exod. 22. 
25. For Debts may be called Burdens, x Becaule they ly as a great 
load upon the Debtors Spirits, under which who ever can walk up 
and down eaſily, dot'i no: ſo much excel in fo. titude as in folly, 
2. Becauſe they uſually introduce Poverty, S'avery. Impriſonment, 
&c. & Either in a iage ſenſe. viz. any ways grieved or vexed, 
whether by the grippings of Uſury, or the bondage of Slav-ry, 
accompanied with cruel uſage; Or, more peculiarly (according to 
ſome) relating to their being confined, and ſhut up in Priſons, 
which latter ſenſe the word, Free, may poſſibl- ſeem to favour, the 
former being compriſed in that general Expreſſion that follows of 
breaking every yoke Heb. Broken, 1.e. like a bruiſed Reed, ſo cruſh» 
ed and weakned, that they have no conſi®ency or ability, either to 
fatisfie thei Creditors, or ſupport themſelves, and we uſually call 
ſuch inſolvent perſons, broken, that cannot look upon themſelves to 
be, ſu! juris, but whoily at anothers Mercy ; You have t:.c ſame kind 
of oppreſſion, and the ſame words uſed, Amos. 4. 1. # Namely, 
Thar is grievous, a M-taphor, i. e. free them from all ſorts of Vex- 
ation, whatever it is that held them under any Bondage; The LXX 
refer it toBonds and Writings: Butit ſeems more general: The 
word properly ſignifies that #:cþ or cord that holds both ends of the 
yoke, thar it ipring not out, or fall off from the neck on which ir is 
Jaid, Exod. 25. 14. where the ſame word is uſed for faves, and cal- 
led the bands of the Yoke, Levit. 26. 13. I have broken the bands of 
our yoke, and male you go upright, the ſame thing that Gad would 
have them do here. 

7 Is it knot * to | deal | thy bread » to the hun- 
gry, and that thou bring » the poor 0 that are || caſf 
out p, to thy houſe q? when thou fſeeſt the naked r 


that thou cover him 5, and that thou hide 7 not thy ſeif | 


ed, viz, Mccy, as a manifeſtation of Repentance, Dan. 4 27 Luke 
19. 18, Forthere are two parts of Juſtice, one to dono Man wrong, 
the other to do good ro all. Which rwo qught always to accom- 
pany each other, and cannot be parred, eſpecially in As of Hu« 
mil;iation; And as by thoſe evils mentioned he underitan«s all other 
evil whatſoever, that they are to be abſtained from as the conſe- 
quence of a day of Humiliation, ſo under theſe duties mentioned 
are compriſed all the duries that we are to {et upon as the effect 
of rrue Repentance; And he inſtagceth rather in thoſe of the {e= 
coad Table than thoſe of the firit, not that they are to be neglett- 
ed, but becauſe chearfu! performance cf externa} duties to our 
N-ighbour, is the cleareſt diſcovery and indication of our inwaid 
Picty towards God, 1 Johng. 20. 1 The word propeily ſignifies to 
divide, or bre.k into parts, for the n:ore equalandexpedit.ous doing 
whereof, they were wont of old ro bake their Loaves with currs cx 
Clefrs in them, more or fewer according to the bigneſs of the Loaf, 
nor much unlike that which we o:dinarily call Buns. Ir implies, 
that 25none is obliged to give away al, ſo none is exempred from 
giving ſome, but a diitribution to be made according to tne abili- 
ties of Rich and poor: Or, the meaning is, What thou ipareſt on 
thy ta-ting day from thine own Belly, thou givelt it to retreth the 
bowels of the Hungry : What thou takeſt for tiy ſelf give to ano- 
ther, that ti:y poor Neighbour's Body may be refreined by thar, 
from the ab.tinence whereof thine own is afflicted m2 Bread is ta« 
ken for all neceſlaries for the Support of humane Life, and here for 
all kind of Food ; And it is here limited by a term of propriery, Thy, 
Which may ſeem to have ſome Emphaſis in it; -Sce my Not< on 
Eccleſ. tr. 1. ſpeaking of their grinding and oppreſfling the poor, 
he would have them be ſure to give of their own, not that which of 
rigi1t is anothers,and thou haſt,ir may be, unju'tly gotten. For to 
refreſh ſome poor with that which thou haſt gortcn by the oppreſe 
ſing of others, and thereby poſſibly made them poor, wi 1 turn but 
to a bad account, it will bring a curſe xponthy houſe, or Family, 
Proverbs 15. 27. or will transfer thy Eſtate over to ſuch ſtrangers, 
that will manage it as thou ſhouldit have done, Proverbs 28. 8. 
2% 1, e. Voluntarily, without preſſing. Invite, encourage, freely 
accommodate. o Yiz, That are not only necdy, and neceflitous, 
as to their preſent condition, bur helpleſs, and ſhiftleſs as ro the 
means of getring out of ir, p And thereby become wanderers; 
hiving no abiding place; Or rathe:, ſuffercd to abide no where, 
ſuch are mentioned, Heb. 11. 37, 38- Or, this word coming from 
a root that ſignifies roRebel,it may be applied to ſuch as rave been 
adjudged, whether wrongfully or no, Rebe!s, and therefore caſt out; 
viz. of favour and proteCtion, and ſo b-come as b:niſhed ones, or 
Pilgrims in anocher Country ; Or affi#ed, as in the margent, viz. 
grievouſly opprefled by the cruelty of great Men, whereby they 
are Calt out of their poſſeſſions, and 1o become wanderers, ſceking 
Relicfabroad. 9 That thou be hoſpitable, and make thy houſe a 
ſhelter to them that have none of their own left; Bur, as we uſus 
ally ſay, ca## out of houſe and home; See As 16. 34. - r i. e. Either 
that have no cloaths, or that are ſo meanly cloathed, that they 
have ſcarce enough to cover their nak.dneis, i Cur. 4. «1; where 
naked 1s to be taken as hunger and #hirſt is, not abſolutely ſtarved; ſo 
neither quite ſtripped: But either in a ragged and undecent con+ 
dition, as to others ſight, or ſo thinly and inſufficiently cloathed 
asnot to defend him from the injury of weather, as tohis own \ nſe 
of feeling, 5 1. e. That thou give him raiment ſuired to theſe 
wants,or that wherewith he may procure it, James 2. 15, 16. moſt 
of theſe circumſtances we find were the caſes of the Apoſtles, 
1 Cor, 4-11. # That thou not only ſeck no occaſion to excule thy 
ſelf,cither by abſence,or diſcountenanring, and diſ-wning of him 5 
Bur that our of compaſſion thou app'y thy ſelf heartily ro his ſpeedy 
Relicf; Thatthou beeſt not like that Prieft and Levite, Luke io 31, 
32. but like the good Samaritan, Zuke 10. -3, 34, 35. not 
giving him occaſion to complain as David; Pſalm. 142. 4. u Some 


confine this to our own kindred, and Re'ations, aad Families, and 


this the LXX ſeem to favour, who render it, Thoſe of thine own Houſe, 
of thine ewn ſeed overlook not ; Agreeable to that of - - Tim, F. 8. 
where the Apoſtle uſerh the ſame word that the- LXX doth for 
Kindred: But this would confine our Charity. within too narrow a 
compaſs, in as much as often, nay moſt commonly, the necefiities 
of others are greater than our own; Neither is it congruous' that 
the other words ſhould be taken in the greateſt laritude, and. this 
alone confined within fo narrow a compaſs : *Tis true the Hebrews 
by their own fieſh do moſtly underſtand thoſe who are of the fame 
Stock, or Lineage, and Tribe, as Gen, 37. 27. and 2 Sam. 29. r2, 
13. and thus many underſtand Paul's meaning, Rom.. 11. 14. -But 
here it isto be taken more generally, for every man, he being thine 
own nature; And in this latirude our Saviour iaterp-ets the Rela. 
tion of Neighbour to that Lawyer, Luke 10. 29 30, &c We can 
look on no Man, but there we conremp!ate our own fb, and 
therefore it is barbarous, not only to tear, but not to love and ſuc- 
cour our own fleſh, Nehem.5. 5. In which foever of theſe two ſenſes 
you take it, there 1s a note of fimilitude to be underffood; So that 
the ſenſe is this, Break thy Bread, &c. to them 4s unto thine bado 
Be not more ſevere to them than thou wouldeſt be to thy ſelf; and 
thus it agrees with that of our Saviour, Marth, 22. 39. ind with that 

of the Apoſtle, Epheſe 5. 29. In ſhort, feed him as. thou ,vouldſt 

feed thy ſelf, or Haye it fed; She'ter him as thou wouldeft ſhelter 

thy ſelf, or have it ſheltered; Cloath him as thou wouldeft cloath 

thy ſelf, or be cloathed ; If in any of theſe reſpe&s thou werr in 

his circumſtances. | ; 


8 Then ſhall thy * light x break forth as the morn- 
ing yz, andthine health x ſhall ſpring forrh ſpeedily : and 


of the LORD + ſball be thy rereward 4. 


Chap. 


*70b 11.19} 
- Ch. 50. 19. 
thy righteouſneſs 4 ſhall go before thee b, the * glory c & 59. 9, 
10. . . _ 42 

x Iris putin general for all Happineſs and proſperity ; as all kind HH Fay 


EVI: 


darkneſs ; 


their dark and calamitous condition in the Babyloniſh Captivity ; 
For the like Reaſon Joſephus tells ns, 116. 12. ch. 11+ that the Jews in. 
ſtiruted a Fealt to be obſerved by their poſterity, upon the account 


from thine own fleſh « ? : 
k Viz. The Faſt that pleaſeth me, ſupplied from the former verſe; 
having ſhewed the evil they are to abſtain from in order to an ac- 


of rhe ſervice of the Temple being re=eſtabliſhed, which they called 
The Feaſt of Lights, becauſe, ſaith he, ſo great a Happineſ$ brake forth 
upon them' beyond their hope. y Here is a Meraphorical allufion 
in a Metonimical Expreſſion, viz. of the effc;-nt, deſcribing, the 


4 


ceprable Faſt, viz, Cruelty, he here ſpeaks of rhe duty tha isrequir-| comfortable cited of -44/ } "Panains a Tight Mapper,w > 
7 like 


of Adverlity and Calamity is ſet forth and reſembled b , 
but here more particularly for a comfortable and free Efare after I hed Fr 
dl t 


19 ,4.4% 


4 Fs 
Chap. L 


| Pierceth through a cloud,noring how ready God is to help his People 


"Ve23 


= 
- 


"24 
v8 
2 44 Sy yp »\ 


vill. I'S'A 
like theday light ſhall break forth from the blackneſs of their night 


ofzMittion, and bring with it the joy and comfort of all good rhing:; 
And he doth nor only ſay this light ſhall appear,but break for:h,dait 
it ſelf forth, notwithitanding all difficulties, as the Sun breaks, and 


when they are rightly humbled, how quickly, and how clearly Salva- 
tion ſhall break torth upon them. z Another Metaphor to expreſs 
the ſame thing, unleſs there may be this difference, the Light with 
reference to their outward ſtate, and Health with reference to the 
inward delight of their Minds, in both to deſcribe the compleat ſa- 
tisfaQtion. they ſhould have : Deliverances out of great preſlures are 
often in Scripture repreſented by the recovery of Health,as ch.57.18. 
and Jer.$.22. and this Prophet eſpecially delights in this Metaphor ; 
becauſe all affliction is as it were a fickneſs to the ſou], altering the 
Heart and Countenance. See Neh. 2. 2, 3. and a recovery out of 
this eſtate maketh the Heart glad, and the Countenance chearful, 
Efther 8. 16, 17. Jerem. 33. 6. compare v. 10, 11. Hence the LXX 
render it Medicines, a Either rx. Thy Uprightneſs and Sincerity, 
Gen. 30.'33. Or 2- The Reward of thy Righteouſneſs, by a Me- 
rtonymy, chap. 48. 18. Pſalm 24. 5. and here perhaps it may particu- 
larly relate ro their works of Mercy, and Charity, it being the 
thing m hand, and often ſo called, Pſalm 112. g. and applyed by 
the Apoſtle ro this purpoſe, 2 Cor. 9. 9. It brings temporal, ſpiri- 
tual, and eternal Bleſſings, and all this not of deſert but free Grace, 
aSa Reward, that naturally ſprings forth from the ſaithfulneſs of his 
Promiſes, as the Harveſt from the Earth, when the ſeed is ſown, 
ſee Hof. 10. 12. ſo the Fruit and Reward of our Righteouſneſs ſprings 
not from our deſerts, but from God's Righteouſneſs, Heb, 6. 10. 
Or 3. The Witneſs ofthy Righteouſneſs, by what thou doeſt thou 
wilt appear to be Righteous, Pſalm 37.6. For ſuch a notion as this 
was vulgarly ſucked in, that Adverſity did never befal a perſon or 
people, bur for their fins, and was ſtrongly urged by way of argu- 
ment againſt Job's integrity by his Friends, therefore thy being de- 
lvered ſhall be as a teſtimony of thy Righteouſneſs. Or 4. The 
fruit and effe& of thy Righteouſneſs, viz the due, juſt, and right 
order of thy Government, which, as Calvin faith, isa ſign of God's 


fatherly kindneſs; things that are now in a confuſion he will bring - 


into right order again, 1,e. Juſtice ſhall be duly adminiſtred, and 
men ſhall carry themſelves juſtly all the Land over, ſee 1/a. 32. 16, 
17, 18. Or 5. Chrift's Righteouſneſs, Jer. 23. 6. compare with 33. 
16. Then the meaning 1s, He ſhall go in and out before thee. b As 
it were making way for thy better State, as the break of day, or the 
morning Star goes before the Sun. «© i.e. The Glory of his Power 
and Providence, or his glorious Power ſhall be ſeen in bringing 
thee up from Captivity, and defending thee free from their purſuir; 
Or, as ſome,a glorious State ſhall ſucceed this thy calamitous con- 
dition, and called the Glory. of the Lord to expreſs the greatneſs 
of this Glory, as very great mountains are called the mountains of 
God, -and tall Cedars the Cedars of God : The glorious Lord, by 
a Mctonymy. of the Adjunt, & Heb. Shall gather thee, thus the 

oid-is uſed, concerning Dar,” who was appointed to bring up the 
loop the march of the 1ſraelites, when they marched 
fromthe Wilderneſs of Sinai, Numb. 10. 23. This Office God takes 


5 5 


8 FL 


this place doth properly ſo ſignifie, but becauſe it is moſt agree- 
able ro the matter diſcourſed of, and the Chaldee render it violence, . 
and then the ſenſe is, ſpeaking words ef affliii:n, or that will vex 
and grieve, like thoſe words of Nabal to David's Servants, 1 Sam. 
25. 10, 11. Prov. 18. 23.. And thus it relates to their harth and un- 
juit Commands, wherewith they were wont to burden their Ser- 
vants, a Synecdoche of the kind. 
io And if thou draw out »» thy ſoul » to the hun- 

gry, and fatisfie o the afflicted ſoul p: then ſhall thy 
Iighe riſe q in obſcurity, and thy darkneſs be as the 
noon day r. 

 m Or, open, as when we break open a Store, or Magazine, to ſa- 
tisfie the wants of the needy : Ir implies Bounty and Liberaliry. A 
phraſe contrary to that ot ſburting up of the bowels, 1 Joh. 3. £7. n Thy 
afteCtion, i. e. thy pity and compaſſion, a Metonymy of the Sub- 
ject, as one that condoles with them in their miſery ; affeQionate- 
ly, and with delight, Rom. 12. 8. 2 Cor. 9. 7- God loves a chearful 
Giver, as well asa liberal Giver, not grudgingly, nor of conſtraint, 
not becauſe thou muſt, bur becauſe thou wilt, not out of neceſfſi- 
ty, but of Choice : Compaſſion and Mercy in a Work is more than 
the Work of Mercy it telf ; For this is ſomething only without a 
man, bur the other is ſomething from within, and of himſelf ; 
This argues a Sympathy, wbich the other doth nor, all withour 
this being as nothing, 1 Cr. £3. 3. o Here the Prophet notes the 
Work that is to be done, as in the former Expreſſion the affeQion, 
wherein it is to be done,otherwiſe it would be no more than what 
the Apoſtle James reproves, James 2. 15, 16. and the Pſalmiſt joyns 
them both rogether, Pſaim 37. 21. And then further it implies a 
compleat and proportionable anſwering of his wants, that the ſup- 
ply ani{wer the neceflity, that is, be ſuch as may ſatisfie, not 
barely keep him from ſtarving. p 1. e. The perſon afflicted with 
wants. q This is the ſame promiſe, and expreſſed in the ſame fi. 
gure, as in v.8. See the ſame phraſe opened there. The Hebrews 
delight to expreſs the ſame things often by a little altering of the 
Phraſe ; only here it ſeems to be carried roan highez degree : There 
the 1ighr ſhall break forth, but here Light ſhall be in Objcurity. r In 
the very darkneſs of the affliftion it ſelf thou ſhalt have comfort, 
Pſalm 12. 4. There it ſhall be as the morning ſtill increafing, here 
as the noon-day in its Zenith, and heighr of perfe&ion, which 
{ſhall be withour ſo much as any ſhadow of afflition. 


11 And the LORD jhall guide thee s continually, , 
and farisfie thy ſoul * in F drought z, and || make fat thy + 


Chap. LVIt, 


Or - thee 
Heb, 


bones #: and thou ſhalt be like a watered garden x, aroughte. 


and like a ſpring of water, whoſe waters Þ fail not y. 


| Or, make 


s Viz. Like a Shepherd, Pſalm 23. 1, 2, 3- Or. as the Vulgar, ſhall nimble thy 
give thee reſt, and fo it may relateto the reſt that God would give 997. 
them in Judea, upon their return from Captivity, as anſwering to T Heb. lie, 


their complaints in Babylon, Lam. 5. 5, 
ſhew that his condutt and bleſling ſhall not be momentary, or of a 
ſhort continuance, but all along, as he did to Iſrael in the Wilder= 
nels, not leaving them, till he brought them into Canaan, t Heb. 


z for it argues great skill and courage, and makes much 
forthe Honour and Glory of a. Commander, both to gather up all 
= 


Aranglexs- that noae be pb up by the Enemy, which relates | 


wwword' of eathe#ing; arid to ſecure and cover the Rear 
ob lis. Army £5 Ehus the Angel of his prefence ſecured the 1/raelires 
when they-garte-wp-our of Egypt, Exod: 14. 19, 
& Ihalt thou. call e, and the LORD ſhall anſwer 
ou. ſhalt.cryy andbe ſhall fay, Here I amg: if thou 
Shanayfom'rhe midſt þ of thee, the yoke z, the 
Sing foreh'of the finger &, and ſpeaking vanity. 
| hey made. Ir6 t-complaint, v. 3. that God took no notice of 
KEir Services, which complaint God ſeems now to ſatisfie, 9. d. 
Eg conditions obſerved, call upon me, and thou ſhalt ſee I will 
Bal 34.15. :Sec I/a. 1. 18. f Re will give an effeQual 
e hg, ears thee, by the real anſwer that he will 
0TH. et, Pſalm. 34. 17. & 99. 6. & 118-5, g APhroſe 
z "notes a petfon tobe ready at hand, for Work, as 7ſaiah ch. 6. 8. 
.fpr Help, as Er, and Pſalm 46. 1.or both, Pſalm 145.18,19. 
; Not ometricel: middle, or center, but having a place among 
Ithers:. 11 ge-meaning.is, from among you. 71. e. All thoſe pret- 
grezadng grixvances before mentioned, wv. 6. all that barbarous fla- 
ey broughttheir Brethren into; the particulars cxpreſſed by 
OE word, metah, three times uſed in this Chapter. 
g often. an.indication of a man's mind by the poſtures 
's of the Fg as of Luſt, Malice, Scorn, Revenge: &c. 


56K 


CUILIICET, 
So : 
5 Was 5 Vis 


AY! 19 hg 
x2 : pigeon ee wee." 4234 -<4q* 'y » . 
[ CAUIE hame in another ; and this 1s-reckoned among great af- 
ns, Hebri Th. 3 
+ t TH 


r 


Drough:s, or, drought of droughts; Which being in the plural 
| number, notes extremity of drought, Pſalm 78. 72. Skillfulneſs, that 
is, great Skill: And Prov. 1, 20s Wiſdoms, 1. e. excellent Wiſdom : 
and conſequently great ſcarcity and famine: The meaning is, that 
when thy lot ſhall fall in the extremity ofſuch a condition, either, 
as ro time, or place, be will abundantly fatisfie thy ſoul, i. e. thee, 
by a Synecdoche ; thou ſhalt have plenty, when others are in ſcar= 
city. # Or, Make nimble, and ſo the expreſſion relates to bones full 
of marrow, which cauſeth agility and nimbleneſs, a ſtate of health 
and ſtrength ; See Prov. 15. zo. Or, it notes chearfulneſs, which 
is often the cauſe of bones well covered with fat, therefore a bro- 
ken, or a ſorrowful ſpirit is ſaid to dry up the bones, Prov. 17. 22. 
This may be ſpoken in oppoſition to the ſad effefts of Famine, 
whereby rhe feſb is conſumed away, that it cannot be ſeen, and the bones 
that were not ſeen, ſick our, Job 33. 21. they cleave to the skin, Pſalm 
102.5. And thus it may have reſpe& to their afflited eſtate in 
Babylon, where they complain that their bones were broken, Lam. 
3- 4+ but now in their return their bones ſhould not only be made 
whole, but ſtrong, and in good condition ; See Pſalm 51. 8. Our 
Engliſh Annotations, after divers ſenſes given, chuſe to cloſe with 
the Vulgar Tranſlation, he will delrver, or. ſet free thy bones, and ſo 
the word doth ſignifie, Prov. 11. 8, 9. Some make each exprelli- 
on of theſe promiſes to anſwer as ſuitable and conditional Rewards 
of their ſeveral duties, ex, gr. If thou conduQt the caſt-outs, and 
harbourleſs to thy houſe, verſe 7« God will guide and condu&t 
thee continually : If thou draw forth thy ſoul to the hungry, ſo as 
to ſatisfie them, verſe 10. God will fſatisfie thee in a time of 
drought, and in famine thou ſhalt have ſufficient, Pſalm 33. 19. If 
thou let the oppreſſed go free, and break every yoke, v. 6. and 9, 
then God will make thy bones to rejoyce, by delivering them from 
their burdens, i. e. If thou wilt free them,he will free thee. And if 
thou continue thus to draw forth thy ſoul, that 1t be ever run- 
ning to the refreſhing of the needy, thou ſhalr be as a ſpring of wa- 
rers that ſhall never fail thee, but like the Widows Oil, ever 
flowing : If thou relieve the poor, thou ſhalt never be poor, but as 
2 well wattered Garden, always flowriſhing; See Prov. 3. 9, 10» 
x Like a Garden, for the pleaſure and beauty of it, a Paradiſe; like a 
Garden watered for the continual flouriſhing of thy eſtate, there 
ſhall be no withering, or decay, upon thy proſperous condition, 
Pſalms x. 3, 4. contrary to what is ſaid of the Wicked, Pſalm 37. 25 
ro, 20, 35, 36- And thus Jeremiah ſpeaks ofthe return of this ſame 
People, Jer. 30 12. y Heb: Deceivenct, a Metaphor which further 
notes alſo the continuance of this flouriſhing State, which will not 
be like a land flood, or brooks, that will ſoon be dried up with 
drought; See Job '6. 15. but will be fed with a ſpring of Bleſſing, 
that will never fail; A very ſignificant Metaphor, it being the na- 
tureof ſprings, ſpontancouſly and freely, as it were to pour out 
their bowels to all that upon their wants come to receive it; neither 
isever ſcahty, but flows till like freſh milk ro the Breaſt, the more 
itis drawn; hence God is called a fountain of go6dnefſs. 


Bur it ſeems 


old waſt places a: thou ſhalt raiſe up the foundationsor 
many generations; and thou ſhalt be called c, The re- 
pairexofthe breach 4, the reſtores of pathse to yet t- 

| Ns on” fr ors Tommy 2 46. Either 


And he adds continually to ® aeceive. 


12 And they that ſhall be of thee z, * ſhall build the «g,5, 4 


- 


| \- 
1 . 


thap 


FF T71 
LY i! 


2 
= 


£8 


z 1.e. Either 1. A remnant of thee among the Captivity, that 
i.!l be as perions raiſed from the dead: Or 2. Thy Polierity, 
exprelled thus, becauſ: they ſprang or proceeded from them. 
a Heb. waſts of eternity, i. e» which fave lain long waſte; For holam 
doth not alw:ys ſignifie what is bound:d by no time, but what 
reſpects a long time, looking either foreward, as G-n. 13» I5+» Exod. 
21.6. Or, backward, as here, viz, the ſpace of ſeventy years, and 
i) may truely be rendred the waits of an Age. By wajte places he 
mcans the City and Temple, with Cities and Places adjacent,turned 
as it were ali into a waſte, or wild:rneſs, void nd uarti led, and 
which was done not only by Ne5u:haanezzar King of Babylon, but 
by S:nnacherib alſo, and the other Kings of 4ſjria. They had lain 
fo long deſolate, that the Foxes inhabited them in ſtead of Men, 
Lam. 5.18, And it was turned ſo much into a Deſert, that they 
were forced to fight with the Beaſts chat polleiſed it, ro get their 
food, Lam. 5. 9. 6 Either the founditions that were laid many ge- 
nerations ago, as thoſe of Jeruſalem, which was not only built, bur 
was the Head ofa Kingdom in the days of Melchizedeck, who was 
King thereof in the days of Abraham, as appears Gen. 14+ 18, If that 
Salem were Jeruſalem, as is generally agreed, and Joſephus writes, 
Lib. 1. Antiqu't, Cap, 10. who was born about the. 3ooth year after 
the Tlood : The SuperſtruQtures were now deſtroyed, viz. of Feruſa- 
lem, and divers other Cities ; Or, that ſhall continue for many gene- 
rations yet to come. c Thou ſhalt be honoured with this Title, 
as we uſe toſay, the Fathcr of our Country, 1. e. delervedly fo called, 
becauſe thou art ſo; The like Phraſe, chzp. 48. 8. d Breach 1s put 
here colleCtively for Breaches, which were made by God's Judge- 
meat breaking in upon them in ſuffering the walls of their Towns 
and Cities ro be d:moliſhed,and their ſtate broken, ch. 5. 5. eSuch 
an one was Moſes, Pſalm 106. 23. And thistends to the fame ſenſe 
with the former expreliion, becauſe Men were wont ta make path: 
over thoſe breaches, to go the neareſt way; Or it may more par- 
ticularly point at the recovering of the antient paths, and bring- 
ing them into their wonted courſe, which were either thoſe chief 
Streets through the Gates of the Cities, or other Lancs out of thoſe 
Streets, which were now forg ten and loſt, partly by being co- 
vered with rubbith, and partly by thole ſhorter paths thar were 
trod, and made over the Breaches; Such a Reſtorer of paths was 
Nehemiah, Nch. 6. 1. And we read of the ſeveral Repairers he made 
uſe of, N:h. 3. Or, thoſe paths that led from City to City, which 
being now laid deſolate, and uninhabited, were grown over with 
graſs, and weeds, for want of Travellers, or ſafety of trave'ling (of 
{omething a like caſe we read in the time of the Judg-s, Juag. 5. 
G6, 7.) and ſoloſt as in a wilderneſs, wherein there 1s n» way, and 
by building up thoſe Cities again, the ſeveral paths leading to them 
would be reſtored. f Theſe accommodations being all recovered, 
their ancient Cities might be fit ro be re-inhabired. 

13 If thou turn away thy foot g from the ſabbath 
b, from doing thy pleaſure 5 on my holy day &, and 
call the ſabbath a delight /, the holy of the LORD mz. 
honourable », and fhalt honour him, not doing thine 
own wayss, nor finding thine own pleaſure, nor ſpeak- 
ing thine own words p. 

g This is taken, either properly, 1. e- if thou take no unneceſ- 
ſary journeys, or do any ſervile works either of hand or foot that 
are forbidden on the Sabbath day, the inſtrument beng here pur 
for the work ; or, Metaphorically, 1. e. if thou keep thy mind. and 
affeQtions clear, and reſtrain thy ſelf from whatever may prophane 
it, as David did concerning the word, Pſalm 119. 101. Feet are of- 
ten put for the Afe#ions, Ecclef. 5. 1. becauſe the mind 15 moved 
by the affeQions, as the body is by the feet: If we do not 'er ovr 
thoughts be extravagant either upon impertinencies, or unlawful 
things. The ſum is, if thou be careful not to break the Sabbath 
þ Or for the Sabbath's ſake, whether we underſtand it more Jarge- 
4 of the occaſional Sabbath in ſolemn Humiliations or. otherwiſe 

et apart for ſacred Services, which is called a Sabuath, Z2vz#, 16. 
31. and 23. 32. Days of this Nature were ſet apart before the Cap- 
tivity, Ch. 22. 12. Ferem. 36. 9. and alfo in the Captivity, Zech. 7. 
5. And thus it may be pertinent to the occaſion of this diſcou:ſ:, 
v. 3. And further, though Sabbath be here only mentioned, yet it 
may take in every inſtitution of God, that they were 1n a capacity 
of obſerving during their captivity; Thus I conceive it 1s under- 
ſtood, ch. 56 1, 2. Or, wizether we take it more particularly for 
the weekly Sabbath, ſuch a carriage doth God expe, as doth be- 
come it. # Satisfying thy luits, and the corruption of thy will. 
& i- e. On my Sabbath, whici is an holy day. ! Full of detights 1n 
thy Judgement, not looking on it as a burthen ; and PraQtice, per- 
forming the duties of it with chearfulneſs, delighting in the ordi- 
nances of it, and ſo the Sabbath by a Metonymy is put for the 
works of the Sabbath, the time being pur for the things that ought 
to be done in that time; Therefore Ca/ling here is not only a verbal, 
but af:#:onate calling, the underſtanding aſſenting, the wi conſenting, 
and the a#ioms conforming thereto; This delight appears 1n the 
Saints of God, in their breathings after it, as it did frequently in Da- 
wid, Pſ.21.4.& 36.8.8 42.1. with many more. m Or zothe Lord, i.c. 
dedicated to him, conſecrated to his ſervice. The Jews had a Law 
that no man might take from the Sabbath, ro add to the prophane 
days, but he might on the contrary. iz. The chicf of days, wor- 
thy of all honour, and therefore honourable, becauſe holy; And 
ſo ſhall honour, either 7#, i. e» the day ; Or, him, i« e. the Lord, 
-yhoſe day it iss For to ſantify God, and to ſanQify his day is all 
one, compare c<. 8.13. with Exod. 20. 8. thus eſteem it an honour as 
well as a pleaſure. o Or works, or courſe of life; a Mans whole 
courſe being deſcribed by a way or walk, Ger. 17. 1» Eph. 5,8. 
p Yiz, That are properly thine own, i. e. thine own in oppoſition 
to what God commands, proceeding from the corruption of Na- 
ture, and vanity of the mind, or not ſpeaking words, 1. e. vainly, 
impertinently, and not ſuitable to the work of the day, tending nei- 
ther to thy profit, or pleaſure ; Or rather injurious, revengeful, or 
reproachful words, contrary to reſt, quiet, and ſedate compoſed- 
neſs of the Sabbath. And thus it refers to what was their uſual 
praſtice upon their ſolemn Afſemblies, or Sabbaths towards their 
poor brethren, which they are charged with, verſe 3- and is called 


| ſpeaking vanity, verſe g. Sce there; and accordingly the LXX ren- 


der it, If thou ſpeak nat a word in anger. 


14 Then ſhalr chou delight thy {elf 4 in the LORD, 


# 4 E Chap. LIX 


and T willcauſe thee to*ride upon the high places of the | 
carth r, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob s thy fa- *Deur. za 
ther ; for the mouth of the LORD ' bath ſpoken 3. 4A 
_ 4, This hath reference to the foregoing verſe. If thou wilt de- 
I;ght thy ic1f in the Sabbath, then thou thalt delight in 'the God 
ot the Sabbath ; Or, thou ſhalt have -cauſe to delight in the Lord, - 
viz. in his goodneſs, and faithfulneſs to thee, and ſo ſhalt live by 
faith in him as the fountain ofall good, as Pſalm 37. 4.'in the af< 
ſurance of his love and favour, Pſalm 33. 21. and that in great a= 
Lundance, Pſalm 36. 8. Such delights as no wicked man can have; 
Prov. 14. 10, r "Thou ſhalt be above the reach of danger, chapter 
33-16. Or, it may have reſpeC to their being brought out of Ba- 
bylon, which lay very low in reſpet&t of Judes, called the Earth, as it 
1s elſe-where, Luke 23. 44. and high, both in reſpe& of the fitna- 
tuation of it, as alſo itsmountainouſneſs: Or, the expreſſion way 
1mport the ſubduing of their enemies, as it is Deut. 33. 29. Riding 
is oft uſed for conquering, Pſalm 45. 4, See the Note there, Rev. 
6. 2, The ſenſe is, They ſhall come out of Babylon, not ſneaking- 
ly as on foor, but triumphantly and gloriouſly, riding, © as God 
brought 7'-ael out of Egypt harnafſed, in good order, and with an 
high hand; Or, they ſhall ride to and fro in their Chariots at 
their pleaſure. s i.e. Thou ſhalt enjoy the good ofthe Land of Ca-= 
aan, which God had promiſed as an neritage of Jacob, and his ſeed, 
Gen. 35. 12. and feed on the fruits of it, Que#. Why doth he fay 
of the Heritage of Jacob, and net of Abraham, or Iſaac ? 'Anſw. Be 
cauſe the whole Poſterity of Jacob was within the Covenant, but 
Iſbmael and Eſau, one the ſeed of 1ſanc, the other the ſeed of A4bra- 
ham, were both excluded. 5 This is to exprefs the certainty, 
and indubitableneſs of ir, being from the mouth of him who can- 
not lie: See of the ſame expreſſion of Aſſurance, Chapter 1. 20.' and 
49. 5. And this Calvin refers both to what was 1poken in the- be- 
ginning of the Chapter, that it was in vain for thoſe hypocrites 
ro contend with God; and alſo as the confirmation of his Pro-- 
miſe, if they would rightly obſerve thoſe Promiſes: the month of 
the Lord hath ſpoken it, he ſpeaks of himſelf, as of a man by a Pre 
ſopopzia: Or, it may relate to the Prophet, the Lord, whoſe 
mouth and inſtrument Iam. RE: 
CHAP. LIX. | 
Sin ſeparates between God and vs, 1, 2.. Murther, Theft, Falſhood, Injuſtice, 
Cruelty, 3-0JDD—>-8. Calamity for ſim, 9 I5. Salvation only of God, 
16——19. The Covenant of the Redzemer, 20, 21, ' —_— 
Ehold, the LORDS hand is not * ſhortned «, that Num i 
it cannot fave ; neither his ear heavy x, thatic Ln | 
cannot hear. WS 
, He is not grown weaker, than in former times, as Omnipo= 
tent as ever he was; Hand is here by a Synecdoche pur: for Arm, 
and ſo for Strengrh, becauſe the Strength of a Man doth generally 
pur forth it ſelf in his Arm, and thus it is applyed to God in his 
bringing J1ſrae! out of Egypt, Pſalm 136. 12. x Or thick of hear- 
ing ; He is not like your 1dol gods, that have hands, and cannot 
help, and ears, and cannot hear. The Phraſes are much to the 
{ame purpoſe, ſave only, that they ſeem ro be appropriated to the 
double Cavil, or Quarrel, that the Jews mighr have with God ; 
As 1. Surely if God were not heavy, or hard of hearing, he could 
not but hear thoſe ſtrong cries that we put up in the days of our 
faſt. Or 2. If he did hear, certainly he could nor help us; 
and thus it may have reſpe& to the beginning of the 58th chap. 
Or, the words may be by way of Confirmation and Eftabliſhment;. 
and ſo may relate to the cloſe of it, to let them know, that if 
they ſought him as they oughr, and was before preſcribed, he was 
not inexorable, but willing to hear, and able to make good all 
thoſe Promiſes that he had made from verſe 8. to the end. The 
ſumm is, to ſhew that the fault was not in God, that their faſts 
and cries were not rega:ded, for his Ear was as quick to hear as 
ever; Nor their ſervices rewarded, for his Hand was as able to 
help as ever; But the obſtruction lay in their ſins, which is po-- 
ſirively aflerted, verſe 2. and a more particular account given of 
them 1n the Sequel. | 
2 But your iniquities have ſeparated » between you | 
and your God ; and your fins || have hid his face z from _ 


you, that he will not hear s. | Or, have. 
y Have been as a thick wall between God and you; have ſet him 72-*e hind | 
at a great diſtance, Prev. 15. 29. & This may be put Synecdochi- #4. | 
cally for the whole Perſon, and the Prophet ſpeaking of God by an 
Anthropopathy may underſtand his Preſence, and then it'is, hath 
made him hide, or withdraw hisPreſence, as one that turns away 
his face from ſome noiſome thing: Or rather his Favour, that 
though you cry to be delivered out of Babylon, yet you ſhall not 
find that favour. a i.e. He will not grant it, thus it is uſed, 
Pſalm 45. 12. Hoſ. 5. 15. See on chap. 1, 15. ſee Judg. 10. 13.” (EOEN 
3 For * your hands are defiled with blood b, and *Ck.r.15; 
your fingers c with iniquity, your lips have ſpoken lies 
d, your tongue hath utrered e perverſeneſs f. 
b Here the Fropher comes from a more general, to a more pars 
ticular charge againſt them ; By Blood we are ro underſtand either 
murders, and bioodſhed, properly ſo call:d ; or ways of injuſtice, 
extortion, oppreſſion, and cruelties, whereby Men are deprived 
of a livelihood; Hence hiting our Brother, js called murder, 
1 John 3. 15. and the inhabitants of Jeruſalem called murderers, 
See how the Prophet phraſeth their oppreflion, Mic. 3. 1, 2, 3. 
s This is not added ro protrat the diſcourſe, but to aggravate 
their fin: q. 4. Not only your hands, but your fingers ; You are 
not free from the leaſt part of injuſtice. 4 Not only properly ſo 
called, bur perjuries, and -wronging your Neighbours by flanders, 
and falſe accuſations, wherein he ſhews they did not only offer 
violence by the hand, but they had ways of circumventing with 
theirlips. e The Verb doth properly ſignifie to Muſe or Meditate; 
Then the meaning is, That whar they mutrter, or utter with the 
tongue, they do it out of premeditated malice, from a perverſe 
ſpiritz. You may have a larger comment upon this, Jer. 9. 3, 4, 5,6. © 
"Perverſe words are ſuch as are contrary to God's Word, and it is 
pur herein the ab#raF, to intimate that their words were every way 


13. 


contrary to God's Will, | | 
. 6 B #:Nons 


ob 15. 
alin 

bo 

Fj 


(Orders 
Or, thot 
which is 
ſprinkled, is 
S if there 
brake out a 


 3- i5. 
| + Heb. 
3 breaking. 


b 


2 "9 '' 
n HS 7 - 
A =. 


3 p. LIK, 


| ® Prov. 1. = , ; "BY" 
© 16. Rom. ſſiedinnhocent blood: their thonghts? are thoughts ofini- 


"& 
| : {Or, right» 


” with 4x wth 
UV 0, OT 


18 A 


4 None callech for juſtice z, nor a»y pleadeth for *. 


er. 9.4. truth: they truſt in vanity 6, and ſpeak lies ; * they 3 


conceive miſchicf, and bring forth iniquity &. 

Z i. e. None ſeck to redreſs theſe wrongs, and violences ; they 
comfnitall rapines, and frauds under impunity: Either 1. Becauſe 
the Judges are corrupt. Or, 2. Becaule none will warn the Judg- 
es of ther Duty. Or, 3. Becauſe none ſeek to bring offenders to 
Juſtice. Or, 4 Becauſe none will plead a Righteous Cauſe, or plead 
it Righteouſly, or. couptenance Goodneſs, and this the next expreſ- 
ſion tavours, and ſo Juſtice ſuffers, which the Hebrew word miſpas 
being 1a the paſſive voice, ſeems to intimate ; The ſenſe is the ſame, 
and whereas it is ſaid zone, it is as much as to ſay. very few, as we 
fay few or none; the like, Pſalm 14. 3. Q:.How could this be char- 
ged upon them, when in the time of their Captivity they had no 
Courts? - 4/w. It is pcobable they nad Courts among themſcIves, 
td judge between one anather by leave of the Babyloniſh Kings. 
þ Ether, 4. Relating to their lies, whigh are words empty, and 
void of all conſiſtency, and ſo it is the ſame with the next Expreſ- 
fidn, axd ſpeak lies. Or, 2. In their Idols, which are ſtocks and 
ſtoqes, and fo oft c2led vanity and nothing, 1 Cor. 8. 4- For even 
an Babylon, they worſhipped Idols as appears by Jer. 16. 11, 12, 18. 
Or rather, 3. In their power, and craft, and policy, whereby, 
laying alide Juſtice, my 


can oppreſs others, and ſo he calls it va- 
nity by a Meronymy of the Adjun&, becauſe it would. prove all 
vain in the end, and either, 1, Frultrate their ends. Or, 2..Not 
Juſtifie them againſt God's proceedings with them. Or, 3. Bring 
all into emptineſs and confuſion ; the word is tou, whereby the 
confuſion, aad mingling of all things is expreſſed, before the 
World was brought into Order and Form, Gen. 1. 2. # It mayre- 
fer both co Judges, and to the Lawyers, and falſe Prophets, that 
tell them they ſhall not go into Captivity ; They ſpeak that which 
they know to be, falſe. k Theſe two words of Conceiving, and 
Bringing forth, note their whole contrivance, and perfeQing their 
' wickedneſs : The former nores their plotring,. the latter their exe- 
cution of miſchjcf, whatever is in the mind only out of fight, war- 
med and formed there by cogitating and meditation, is called Con- 
ception, which being ripe, and produced to view, is called a Birth, 
intimating that the wicked ſin not occaſionaly, and accidentally, 
bur  premeditatingly, and profeſſedly ; they grow big with it. 
The Expreſſion is Alegorical, and in the two next verſes compared 
to the Cockarrices Eggs for the wickedneſs of it, and to a Spiders 
Web for the vanity of it. 


5 They hacch || cockatrice-eggs 1, and weave the ſpi- 
ders web m : he that eateth = of cheir eggs dieth, and |] 


that which is cruſhed, breaketh our into a viper 0. 
I Or Adder, or Baſiiick; one kind put for any venemous erea- 


'ture, a proverbial ſpeech ſignifying by theſe Eggs miſchievous de- 


ſig us, and by hatching them their putting them in praftice ; This 
is roſhew; that milchicf is natural re them, and they can do no 
otherwiſe, as poiſon is natural to theſe Eggs. m Another pro- 
verbial ſpzech, whereby is taught, both how by their plots they 
weave nets, lay ſnares indufriouſly with great pains and artifice, 
whereby they may eatangle, and involve their poor Neighbours, 
12 intricacies, =; perplexities, and ſo devour them, as the Spi- 
der weaves her web to catch flies, and then to feed on them: And 
alſo how that they contrive nothing but what will tend to their 


own ruine, as the iſfue of the Viper is the death of the Mother ; 


and they, and their deſigns will come to nothing, and not anſwer 
theirend, as the Spiders web is ſoon ſwept away, and 1s ſeen no 
more; which doth well agree with what fo!lows. » Here is a 

atachreſtical alluſion noting, that he who hath commerce with 
thei, and approves their Counſels, which are te Eggs which they 
hatch, will be poyſoned with them. 0 If and be copularive here, 
then the ſenſe is either, if any ſeek to cruſh, 2nd diſappoint their 
plots, or if they be ſprinkled, or diſperſed abrozd (as the margin 
ſeems to favour) they will ſeek his ruine, will be as Viper to 
him : But if and be Cauſal, as it often is, and may be here, then 
the ſenſe is, 9. d. he dieth, becauſe the Eggs being cruſhed, a poy- 


| ſonous Viper proceeds from it: the more you partake of their 


counſels, the more you are infe&cd there lies ſuch a deadly poy- 
ſon embodied in them. | 

6 * Their webs. ſhall not become garments p, nei- 
ther ſhall they cover themſelves with their works : their 
works are works of iniquity 9, and the adt of violence 


7s 1n their hands r. ] 

Þ i.e. Their contrivances, and deep deſigns ſhall not advantage 
them, they being like a thin, and raw garment, cither through 
which all their wretchedneſs, and malice will appear, as the next 
words intimate; Or, for want of Solidity, and Subſtance, ſhall nor 
be able to defend them from their impending evils. q 1.c. Works 
of juſtice, whereby they grieve and vex their Brethren; which the 
next words do clear. r i. e. They exerciſe themſelves in all aAs of 
violence, and oppreſſhon. 2-| | 

* Their feet s run to eyil, and they make haſte co 


quiry, waſting and + deſtruction are in their paths «. 

5 This ſeems to be taken from Prov. 1. 16. See the note there. 
He had ſpoken of their Hands, Lips, and Heart, Scc. before, and 
now of their Fer, . to ſhew that they, were wholly ſer upon miſ- 


chief. # i-e Their heart, and mind, is ſer upon doing wrong, 
and injury, they not .only do.evil, but do it deliberately. You 
have the wicked deſcribed by this kind of working of their 


thoughts, Pſalm 64 6. They medirate on little or nothin elſe, 
«x A Metaphor pur for the behaviours and carriages of Men ; in 
what way or work ſoever they are engaged, it all rends to ruine 
and deftruftion. A Metaphor taken from an overſpreading torrent, 
or fweeping Plague, or Beaſts of prey, that tear and devour whats 
ſocver comes in their way. | | | I 

8 The way of peace they know not x, and there 5s 
co || judgment y in their goings z: they have made 
theds crooked « paths: whoſoever goeth therein ſhall 
not know þ peace. 


# They arc of ſuck turbulent Spiris, livinglin ſuch continual 


EC 4 H, 
contentions, azd diſ:ords. that, breaking in pieces the very bonds 
of Society, they neither know 1. How to make and keep Peace; 
Neither 2. Do they feel or enjoy the ſweet Fruits of it: And there. 
fore by conſequence 3. They rake not the courſe thar {cads to Pro. 
iperity and Happineſs. They are nor Friends to Peace. y i.e. No 
Juſtice, Equiry, Faith or Integrity, which are the Foundation of 
Judgment. z As Paths did note their habitual way or manner of 
living, ſo Goings do ſignifie their aQtuall progreſs in that way, or 
their works, this Fo . #& They walk by no rule, ' whick 
ſhould diſcover the crooked from the ſtraight; they are full of un- 
evennefles and uncertainties, contraty to what David ſpeaks, Pſalm 
26. 12. The LXX render it Perverſe : Meſes joins them both toge- 
ther, Deut. 32.5. and fo doth Solomon, ſpeaking what Wiſdom ſhall 
deliver from Prov. 2. 15. andir ſtands in oppoſition to them that 
walk uprightly, Prov. 28. 18. It may note 1. Their Hypocrifie 
thar pretend one thing, and do another, that oppreſs under a pre= 
rence of Juſtice. .Or 2: Their profcfſed and owned irregularities 
and deviations from the rule ofJuſtice. 6 i.e. Shall not experience 
it; whoſoever do as they do, will be turbulent, and perverſe, as 
they are, and have as little Peace within, or Happineſs without, as 
they have chap. 57.21. They ſhall be poyſoned by having converſe 
with them, as in verſe 5. which the-next words do intimate. 

9 Therefore is *zudgment far from us c, neither doth 
juſtice 4 overtake us: we wait for light e, but behold ob. 
{curity ; for brightneſs, bt we walk in darkneſs f. 

© This ſ:ems to be ſpoken in the perfon of thoſe Jews that dic 
parfake of theſe ſins, giving the reaſon by way of complaint of 
thoſe evils thar they groaned under. 4 Judgement, and fo Juſtice 
is here taken, for deliverance, J1/aiah r. 27. 9. d. God doth.nor de- 
fend our Right, nor Revenge our wrong, nor d-liver us, becauſe 
of thele outrages, and aQs of violence, inzuſtice,and oppreſſion, that 
are committed among us, ſo that Deliverance is called here Judge= 
ment and Juſtice by a Metonymy of the efficient. 9. d. If we had 
executed Judgement, and Equiry among one another, they would 
not now have been farfrom us; as works are ſometimes pur for the 
reward of works, Job 7. 2. Pſalm 109. 20. So Judgement and Ju« 
ſtice is put for the Reward of Judgement and Juſtice ; or wicked 
men are in Power, and Seats of Judicature,that execute no Judge« 
met or Juſtice in the behalfofthe Oppretied. e How the Hebrews 
uſe Light and Darkneſs; ſee before on chap. 58. 8, ro., f Or, MiF, 
weare in ſuch a thick miſt, thar, which way ſoever we look, we 
ſee no way out, no hope of Deliverance, ,we are till in Captivity, 
and like ſo to be, till we ſee Judgement and Juſtice executed, and 
then we may expe& good days. 


x0 We * prope g for the wall like the blind, and we 
grope as if we had no eyes b : we ſtumble at noonday # 


£ As a blind man that hath no ower Eyes than his Hands, feels 
for the Wall, from whence he expeQs either direQion, or a reſt- 
ing place to lean on, ſo they expe Salvation as it were blindfold, 
nor taking dire&tion from the Prophets, but hoping to obtain 
it by their cries and faſts, though they continued in their ſins, 
and therefore may well be ſaid to grope after it; See Deuteronomy 


put for yes, thereby aggravating the miſery in repeating the ex- 
preſſion, # This notes their exceeding; blindnefs, as it muſt needs 
be with one that can diſcern no more at noen day, rhan if it were 
midnight, Jeb 5. 14. k He compares their Captivity to Men dead 
without hope of Recovery: Their bonds render tacm as free a= 
mong the dead, Pſalm 88. 5, They can ſce the way, or get out of 
their Captivity no more than dead Men can get our of their 
Graves; Thus a calamitous eſtate is fer forth, Pſalm 44. 19. great 
calamity, and deſpair oft going together : They are as men caſt our 
no more to'be looked after. Compare £am. 3. 6. All darkneſs is 
uncomfortable, but that of the Grave terrible. 
1x We roar ] all like bears, and * mourn »» ſore like 
doves: welook for Judgment, bur there is none ; for 
Salvation, but it is far from us ». Nj 
I This ſignifies the greatneſs of their anguiſh, thar forced from 
them theſe loud out-cries, w This notes tome ſenſe of their con= 
dition, that wrought in them theſe iorrowful Lamentations: Or, 
it may relate to the condition, that both ſorts of peaple were in 
under their opprefling Governours. It made the wicked roar like 
Beaxs, and the Godly mourn like Doves: It is thus expreſſed, be« 
cauſe theſe properties are peculiar to theſe Creatures. The Bear,when 
robbed, goes into her den and roars : The Dove,' when abſent from 
her mate, ſits ſolitary, and mourns. = Sce the Expoſition of this 
laſt part of the verſe; wv. Fa + 
12 For our tranſgreſſions » are multiplied before 
thee o, and our fins teſtifie p againſt us : for our tranſ- 
grefſions are with us q, and as for our iniquities we 
know them r. | | 
 n The word here ſignifies fins of an high nature, ſuch as where« 
in there is much of man's will, againſt Light: Rebellious Sns. 
0 9.4. They admit of no excuſe ; for they are ated before, thee, 
and multiplied againſt thee, whereby thou art juſtly provoked to 
deny us all help. p Every fin thar is charged upon us, is like ſs 
many Witneſſi:s produced to prove the guilt of our Conſciences x 
Or, as the Hebrew word, &o anſwer, and ſo ſome make it an ele= 
gant Metaphorical Alluſion to the Eccho, which, as it returns the 
voice. again, ſo hots Fa they cry our of, are but the me« 
ritorious Repercuſlion oftheir fins: They had been cruel to others, 
neither had they execnted Judgment, and Juſtice, and here they 
ſuffer all kind of cruelties, and indignitics from the Chaldeans, as 
the true and juſt Repreſentation or Eccho of their own works 
Sec a perſonal inſtance in Adoni-bezek, Judges 1. 6,7. q i.e. We 
lie under the guilt of them,. they are a burden to us; (God hath 


not yet forgiven them. » We are convinced of them, our guilty 


' Conſciences muſt own and acknowledge them, Pſalm 5r. 3. 


Ic notes either their Convi&ion, or Sorrow, or both, See Jerem. 14. 
7. Or, we know what are thoſe ſins thou art ſo angry with us for: 
And this is fayoured by the ſequel, where they ſeem ro particulare 
ize thoſe bns in the following verlts. 

| 13 In 


*verſe I i; 


and 14. 


*Dent,28. 
28, 29. 


as in the night ; we are in deſolate places as dead wes &. Job 5. 14 


Amos$91 


28.28, 29. Job. 1.25. h As if we were ſtark blind;a:d being here - 


*Clap.38. 
144 


fOr, 7s 


' counted 


med. 

T Heb 
5 ev1] 
bis eyes. 


{ Chap. LIX. 


T3 In tranſgrefling s andlying t againſt the LORD, 
and departing « away from our God, ſpeaking x op- 
preflion and revolt, conceiving and uttering y from the 
heart words of falſhood z. 

He now enumerates ſome. of thoſe particular ſus they pref*ſs themſelves to 
be convinced of, whereby he dgth not mean the ſins of jome particular per- 
ſons, or ſome /ljoht ſins, but a general defefion and corruption of the whole 
Body. 5s Properly we rebel againſt God, ſo the word 1s, chap. 1, 2. 
and have pc1liſicd in our Rebellion. #7 Being true to none of their 
Engagements, Vows, and Promiſes ; ſome make tranſgreſſing here, 


and /y;ng to be one and che ſame thing, inaſmuch as 1n their tranſ- 
greſſing of the Law of God, they dia break their ſolemn Engage- 
ment to God upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 8. and 24 3. and elſe- 
where frequently, whici is a downright lying againſt God ; For 
wherein do we more lye to God, than in a perfidious withdraw- 
ing from him? So dl by tranſgreſſng here he doth mean not a 
breach of one or another of the Laws of God, but there being as 
It were fugitives, that would be under no yoke. u i.e. Turning 
from God to Idols. x As it were talking of !ittie elſe one among 
another, but how to oppreſs their Neighbours, and apoſtatize 
from God. y i.e. Firſt contriving and forging in their heart falſe 
accuſations to the ruine of th-ir Neighbour, and falſe worſhip ro 
the dithonour cf God ; laying the contrivance fo, that it might be 
cff<Ctual ; and then atrering it, or venting themſcives one to ano- 
ther in their diſcourſes, thereby encouraging each other in their 
pe: verſe ways, ſee verſe 3 and whereas it 15 ſaid from the heart, 1t 
notes a retoluteneſ. in thcir wickedneſs, being a great deal worſe, 
than now and then to deai falſly upon ſome occaſion or rempration. 
z They are called words of falſbwd, both with reference to men, 
and 'v {ignific ſlanders, and falſe accuſations ; as alſo to God, aid 


ſo ſignifie their dealing falſly with God, as an Adultereſs doth with 
her Husbans, hec:ce Idoiaters are called the ſeed of frlſhood, chap. 57. 
3, 4,5. and it is ſaid from rhe heart, to ſhew that when they dealt 
with men in ways of fraud, it was from the heart, but when they 
ſpake with God it was but from the lip. 

14 And Judgment is turned away backward 4, and 


Juſtice ſtandeth afar off b: for Truth is fallen c in the 


Sw OS HETSIO Dr II 0 


{treer d, and equity cannot enter e. 

a He ſpeaks here of the Sentences and Decrees in Courts of Ju- 
dicature, which are carried quite contrary to Right and Juſtice: 
God denies you Juftice as you have denied help to others. & It 
notes the ſame rhing with the former, to ſhew that Juſtice and 
Judges are far aſſunder. c A Mc=taphor taken from a feeble perſon, 
that wants ſupport, without which he falls: Thus T-ath hath none 
to ſupport or patronize it: The ſame. only otherwiſe expreſſed, 
with verſe 16. Truth is cait upon the ground, and Juſtice trampled 
under foot 4d i.e. In publick. e No ſuch thing will be admit- 
ted in their Courts; all corrupt, ſo that all Equity and Juſtice is 
violently keept off by the authority of the great ones. 


| for, n 45 15 Yea,Trutn tailezth fand he thar departeth from evil 
nat 2||maketh himtelf a prey 4: and the LORD ſaw is z, and 


f Heb ir: T it difpleaſed him & that there was no Judgment. 

wa: evilin f q. d. Truth is more than fallen, which he bad faid in the for- 

his eyes. 
ſelf again, bur failing notes the loſs of its very Vitals: As being 
every where neglected, in Court, in City, in Country, 1n inferi- 
our as well as ſuperiour Ranks, in the Streets, in the Gates, in the 


Markets, in the Fairs, in all publick places of Commerce, the con- | 


dition much iike that under the Beaſt coming out of the Earth, 
Revel. 13. 11, &c. See Pſalm 10. 7, 8, &. All things are amiſs, 
neither Judgement or $u'!ic:, or Truth is to be found among us, 
but Fraud and Deceit, yet. none troubled at it. g That ſepara- 
teth himſelf from evil things, 3nd Yerſons; will not be as vile 
as others. + Or, is accounted mad, is jaughed at that talks of 


eſtruction of Jeruſalem, it was matter of icorn to be Religious. 
Though there be no ſolid ground for, nor necd of that marginal 
reading, yet isit a Truth : The Tranſlators reach the meaning by 
Prey: The wicked, like wild Beaſts, endeavouring to devour ſuch 
as are not as bad as themſelves; Where Wickedneſs rules Inno- 


that are ſimple, and innocent, are outwitted by the crafry and frau- 
dulent, as nor willing, or rather daring to oppoſe fraud with 
fraud, but to do all things in fincerity. # 1. e. Took netice of it, 
'tis ſpoken of God after the manner of men, as Geneſis 11. 5. and 
18. 21. and many other places. k 9. d. If you would know why 
God is ſo angry with you, it is for ſuch things as theſe: the Lord 
c | takes notice of it, and it is a great evil in hw eye. | 
ag 16 And he ſaw that 1here was no man }, and won- 
*Ch.yz.2; dred »» that there was no interceſſour:; * therefore » 
and 63. 5. his arm brought ſalvation unto him 0, and his * righ- 
ceouſneſs p ir ſuſtained him. 


or no man to help in ſuch a caſe, ro ſhew himſelf, and appear in 
ſuch a corrupt ſtate in the behalf. of equity, as verſe 4. the like 
circumſtances we have Ezek. 22. 29, 3o. or none fit to intercede. 
m Heb. Iiſftomen, ws amazed, aſtonitthed, as it were, not know- 
ing what to do: This notes both Gods ſolicitouſneſs about their 
condition, together with their du'eneſs, and blockiſhnefs, in not 
concerning themſelves about it, eſpecially conſidering they had 
been a People fo well inftrufted, and yer under the guilt of ſuch 
grols ſins, thould be no more ſolicitous about pardon, which God 
would readily have granted, if any ſuch could have been found, 
Fer. 5.1. n Or, Net. as it is uſed,ch. 7.' 14.and51. 28, o This may 
relate 1.To the partic: rhus opprefled : Or2.To God, as that either 
1. He would do his work withour help from any other, ch, 51. 5. 
Or 2. He would avenge himſelf, his own honour ; Thus the word 
is uſed 1 Sa. 25. 26. and this may, and fcems to be the meaning 


of the next clauſs. Or 3. He had made Proviſion for the main- 
raining his own Righteous Cauſe, and Peoples Intereſt ; This ſenſe, 
that phraſe, ſo like this, favours ch. 63. 5. Salvation unto me. p Viz. 
His Juſtice, 9 d. ſecing there could be no Juſtice found among 
them,he would avenge th: Innocent himſelf, «hich agrees with v 8. 
and is juſtified by ch. 63« 5. where ſpeaking of the deitruttion of the 


= 


Hi1mezans, you have the {ame words, only the word Fury caanged 


ISS AM 


Chap. L 


tor R*ghteonuſncls, The literal meaning is God's taking vengeance on 
the Cha'deans for his People's ſake : Phe myſtical is Chriſt's making 
uſe of his own Righreoutneſs for the Redemption of ioit Man, bc= 
ing deltiture of ajl other. 

17 * For be put on righteouſneſs as a breaſt-plate q, 
and an helmet r of faivation upon his head ; and he pur 
on.the garments of vengeance s for cloathing, and was 
clad with zeal t as a cloke. | 

q God, reſolving to appear as a Man of War againſt Babyl:n, 
that did now opprets his People, puts on his Arms, Heb. Wrapt 
himſelf, and particularly his Breaſt-plate, which he calls Righteouſ- 
neſs, to ſhew the juſtne!s of his Cauſe, as alſo his Vairhfulneſs in 
making good his Promiſes to his People. r As the Breafi-plate is 
to detend the Heait and vital paits, whereby God doth itgaifie 
the Innoceucy and juſtice of his Caute, as well as his Faithfulnelſs; 
So the Helmet is to defend the Brain, the fountain of rhe animal 
Spirits, and therefore by this piece of Armour wou'd have us - 
know that he 1s invincible: As by the other, that he defends a juſt 
Cauſe in his Truth, and Faithfulneſs, to by this, that he cannot 
be diſappointed in it by reaſon of his Power, and Invincibleneſs. 
s Or Garments made of Vengeance:- as God is ſaid to pur on the 
former for their ſakes, whom he would preſerve, ſo he puts on 
theſe for their ſakes, whom he will deſtroy, wiz. his Peoples ene- 
mies, the Chaldeans, and other enemies of the Jews, 7t Either 1. Zeal 
to his own Honour,which had been given to Idols. Or 2. Zeal for 
his ownPeople,who were now in diſtreſs. Or 3. Zeal and Indignati- 
on againſt the Babyloiians, who were ſuch grear oppreflors of his 
People,w' ich are the materials, that his Garment of Vengcance,and 
his C!oke of Zc 1 is made of. It may betrifli:g to follow the Mes 
taphor of Garments too cloſe; See of the Phraſe, Judges 6. 34. marg. 
The Summ of all theſe Expreſſions is this, to deſcribe vorh the 
cauſe, an! Fe& rogether, the Cauſe was Rfhteonſneſs and Zeal in 
God, thc. Lifctt Salvation to his People, and Yengeance on his: ene» 


mer verſe ; Ir failzh For being only falen, it may recover it - 


gom_ {o ſome. Joſephus tells us, that immediatly before the 


cency is oppreſſed, in bargaining, as buying, and ſelling. They 7. 


L Viz, To intercede, which is ſuppoſed from the following words; ' ®..- BU ; | 
; ſenſes, to wir, with particular reſpect to Sermacherib, then the ſpirit 


mics, as is evident from the next verte. 
; 15 *According to their | deeds «, accordingly he will 
repay, fury x to his adverſaries, recompence to his ene- 


[ 
mes, to the iſlands y he will repay recompence. 
{ # Heb. Recompences or Deſerts, 'i. e. He will recompence his Ade. 
verſaries with thoſe effets of his fury that they have deſerved. 
| x- A Metonymy of the Efficient ; For the effe&s of his fury. y Or, 
Iflanders, a Metonymy of the containing for the contained, ei- 
; ther Meſopotamia, . and other adjacent iſlands, encompaſſed by 7y- 
{ gris and Euphrates; Or thoſe remoter Nations (for the Hebrews call 
: Nations remore from Judca, I{lands, Gen. 10. 5. chap. 41. 1. See on 
; chap. 20. 6 and the reaſon of it. } under tht King of Babylon, that 


| thought themlſclves ſecure. 


t Heb. WM 
compen{elf{Ntt 


der 


: 
[ 
| 


| 19 So (hall they fear the name of the LORD z from 
the weſt oa, and his glory b from the riſing of the ſun c : * Rey. 
when the enemy & ſhallcome in * like a flood, the ſpirit 15. _ 
of the LORD ſhall || life up a ſtandard e againſt him. 


; _ Z 1.e., Either worſhip the Lord: For the Name of God is pur for ;. 
God himſelf, as hath been often ſhewed, and Fear is pur for his 
! Worſhip. Or, make his Nime renowned. # To wit, the weſt- 
ern part of the World. & Or the glorious God. c To wit, the 
eaſtern partsof the World: The jumm is the whole Word, either a 
Synecdoche of the part for the whole: Or,if you divide the World 
through the Poles, the one half will be Eaſt, and the other-Weſt, 
and ſo compriſeth the whole World. Ir ſhall fear and worſhip 
| God, and make his Name renowned, laying aſide their Idolatries : 
| Whether you refer it to the deliverance of his People out of Baby. 
lon, when they ſha!l hear how God tath executed vengeance on 
his enemics; Or, to the Redemption by Chrift, and his calling of 
' the Gentiles, Malachy 1. 11. d Either againſt the Babylonians, as 
ſome underſtano it, and ſo it is probably meant of Cyrus, who thall 
come like a violent Flood, againſt whom there is no head to be 
' made: Him God would ftir up againſt the Babylonians for the de- 
' liveranc: of the Jews. Or, againit his own People, and ſo it may 
have either 1. A more particular refpe& to Jeruſalem, when Sen= 
nacherib cams up againſt it, which tuits well with what God faith 
i; of him, Chapter 8. 7, 8. Or. 2. More general, at what tine ſo. 
ever the Devil, or his inſtruments ſhall make violent irraptions us 
| pon the Church, Revel :2 15. for powerful Enemies invading a 
Councrey are oft compar:.d toa River. Sec on Chapter 18. 2. Ir is 
an alluſion to the overflowing of Euphrates, which by its violent in- 
undations was wont to do much hurt and damage tothe Babylonians. 
e And here again, if it be taken in the firſt ſcnie, viz. againſt the 
. Babylenians, then the meaning is, God himſelf ſhall as it were car- 
| ry the Standard in the midſt of Cyres his Army, the Medes and Perſe. 
| ans, and that with a great deal of fory, intimated here by the Spiric 


of the Lord ; For Spirit is often uſed among the Hebrews for the 
{ Paſſions of the Soul, as Anger, Wrath, Fury, &c. Or, as a violent 
Blaſt or gale of Wind fhall help foreward the Violence of the Tor- 
rent, and if ſo, then Him, by an Enallage of the Number, which 
is frequent, is pur for Th-m, Bur if in either of the other two 


of the Lord, as with a Blaſt, only ſhall puff him away, which wax 
made god, Iſaiah 37. 7, 36, 37. Or, with more general refe= 
rence to the violence of enemies againſt the Church; Then the 
meaning is, God ſhall wiake known himſelf ro take their part and 
defend them, Pſalm 6. 3,4, 5- and cauſe the Enemies to give back, 
or put them to flight, as in the margin, Iſaiah 17. 12, 13. 14. and that 
without Power,burt by his Spirit alone, as eaſie as by a pefFof wind, 
Zech. 4. 6. Again, if you take this (as fome Learned Men do) 
in a ſpiritual ſenſe, then it notes the ſuddenneſs of the Goſpels 
ſpreading it ſelf by the Spirir in the Miniſtry of the Apoſtles and 
Evageliſts, bearing down like a Flood, all that oppoſes it, the 
Lord Jeſus Chrift being lifted up 1n ir as a Banner or Enſign; But 
this ſenſe, though rrue, ſeems to be more forced, and as ir relates 
ro temporal deliverances, more genuine and natural: However che 
Prophet being about to fpeak of the Spiritual Deliverances, and 
State of the Church by Chriſt, he {ecms to ſlide, as it were, into ir 
by ſuch plain Allufions, and Types, being to ſpeak of it inore di- 


\% 


re&ly in the following Chapter. : 
20 And f * the redeemer g ſhall come to Zion 5, *Romire. 
6 B S and 26, 


+ 
1: 
i 


| 
: 


jap. LX. ; 1% 
SS 3 3 4 HF 
Chap. L% Frhop, 


and unto then 
. 1 that turn 
fakh he LORD & from tranſgreflion in Jacob z, | the Sun f 
orgover, or ro wit A A . 3 n preads it ſel 5 
expolitive. . . And being her refcrs to IC f into ever . 
Een on th a Redemprion with Þ copulative as +- 4 the glorious Goſpel, ty Oy none dark, thus it 
er, chap. 43. 14 od r the eAicient, to wit ower, to wit 2 Forbþ jorious Lis] , I 
y* : C ”; - By - y eho gar, 2 C6 
—_ ” Rom. ow, yy = 4 brings of © an oigr 009 per and gr ofs z, d a Dew darkneſs x ſhall cover t] or, 
afvacials of temporal deliverances phers uſually concludin ry e | ſhall ariſe u eſs the people; b the earth y 
wit —» any of which the _ Promiſes of SiBrirual, thes. pon thee, and his glory oorſy's { ORD a 
ns qs which though C ere evident Types. þ T '| Xx Eith " eleenbu 1 
urs, and the good eff ;yrus came not 1 o er Afflii Pon 
_ — free the Girizens 42 - Hangs 1 berg 5's _—_ © mngrery O_ ”; Poo Tk w —_— Metapho 
3 Aha _ called by the n Fee , c as riſt alſo his Church, polluted which all that are inds of Errours J ; or Igno- 
. t. among th ce © Zion, and 7 1 : [i wy compare Ebb out of the Ch z an Immorali 
and he deſcribes gtheJews, who were th aceb, and Iſrael nſtabitants of th pheſ. 4. 18, 19 -hurch are ſmutted » 
ating ot Sd. nemel 20 tf Children of Facob, | P*1-, Or rath oat of Pe IE, noo ar: a0* Jorme 
, , u ral, 
rargd rokpreolatando come Fro them, exec ao ith wh for pt, ine gh ignornce rj the Gol: _ 
out of Zion by th , Come #0 Son here b ed, an y Cyrus, wh art, 1n that diſi nians, by a $ D | r, 
Deuteronom y the Apoſtle, 15 one and watt the Prophet, a Type of th þ IEG ereby the Jews iſmal condition, bei JnEce | wealth. 
The Duties fn the Hebrew Lamed is = = e thing, ſee on this Text wor rn of God's | Peo ON this "9 g ta * Ch.61 
-- our f Sion: And © yg armyhayfage, of or from oe wy oy oy = ns _ I0 4 gy wy An na. homo CO Mach 
me thing, as hi o be given a Redee ee Sion th dokrrs Cod atk ord le igno at Egyptian dark 
Apoſtle "uot A is coming to 2abe iniqui edeemer to Sion 1s th Luke x atry and all proph gnorance, the inle n dark- 
y this expound quity from Jacrh. A © | nora”. 77, 78; 79. b$ phaneneſs. # (1. t and nurſer 
them worth re, - but to expound hi gan poſtolical Libe being ſeen g aniwers to the dark erful conſpic » Mat. 4.2. 
| and maki this Text, and rty n, anſwers t arkneſs covorin uous ; as th 
| muſt do for us #0 aking them one , o by layin as the tim o that groſs dark g the Earth, © 
"up ; he requi , would teach S | ri ne was, that th arkneſs. The ſenſe is. o the Gloy 
15 in the opinio f quireth of us, 4# us that God | ©: While the! the People of G e ſenſe 1s, th d 
- vagpeeFe- "i n of ſome, he takes th : 5 3. 26. or elſe which be qui 1eIr enemies were 1 od were unde , that where- 
, xts, as Iſaiah ; the laſt clauſe fr » WICH |} Þ, of) te contrary; N e 1n eaſe and der great calami 
Cauſe there isn 4. 4+ IT incline to th om ſome other roſperity Y5 ow theſe ſhall be j proſperity now i = 
——_—— = need of ſearching fv o the former, partly b "2h, F064p a great turn of Provi x1 be in adverticy. w it ſhall 
« , A NI S Ur any other T , y DCs gr of Gra rovidence: 4 wo; Y, and thoſe i f 
which he fre e Apoſtle quoteth it, it 1 ext, and part] all other P ACE 1S a Peculiar ce; and withal impli in [ 
& quently make it, 1t 1S agreeab] _ , roſperit : ro his Peopl . implies th 
aS an Allego t es uſe of; And thi e to the LX peculiar to G Y 1S bur darkneſ: P C, mn reſpe& af 9 Cl at | 
ſhall be converted, gn. chat the Jews rowarc the Apoſtle improves | © 2® oſven, when darkneſs w and miſery; As Li ons | 
ſhall be "omant ogy , and ſaved, when 44 þ ine end of the 4 A «23s. S Was In allthe E Light was 
: - Ineſ* orld 2 And the * . gyPptian houſ 
> cd oþ oleſomeeſtate, when the le old were delivered out 1ngs e tO the brigh all come c to thy 1i 
"Gi ho oh wa of the World the ;h eqonmm as it were extin& bh Eitherto con gheneſs of thy riſl y light, and * 
to : gratulate thy Deli ng. Rev. 21 
thus it is mm God will again brin anent of the Jews, th that ſhould be ſh y Deliverance ; » 
. g home to hi , that Or rath ewn them by oth : ce; orton 24. 
wont to {et down 4 d determined by th imſelf. . k O er, ſha'l be all er Nations ote the reſpe& 
p ſe W y the Lord; th P r, j vellers 1 ured by thy Li upon their Deli P 
curity, or Confi - ords as a ſacred S$ : the Prophets are | vers 1 1 a dark night, and y Light to co eliverance; 
deemer, like t rmation of ſuch ſignal Seal of Certainty, $ ers it ſelf, ro mak , and out of their me to thee; as Tra- 
o thatof the A ga Promiſes as this 1 y, I&- ſo bright > ake to it : So the D way, when a.Li , 4 Ia= 
21 And as fc poſtle, r Tim. 1.1 is of the Re- | thar | andbe made ſo conſpi e Do&trine of the G ight diſco. 
ſaith th or me, this ;s m ny they ſhall not onl niſpicuous by Preachi ofpel thall ſhine 
e LORD. Mv foiri y covenant [ with tl Joy, bur rejo nly congratulate th reaching, and Mi ne 
. tes Phd los 
my words whi % J y {pirit that is upon | c 1CMm, Revel. 27-2» ye” participate with em, and wiſh ors a 
depart ich I have put 1 h thee ,, and which Pro __ plain Prophe them in their H much 
out of thy r n thy mouth ſh XK, miſe was mad phecy of the calli appineſs 
ſeed. n y mouth, nor ©1 7, nall not ings, which was fulfi e to Chriſt, Cha ing of the Genti « 
or out of th x ut of the mouth Egyptian Ki ; folfilted under Gyras, - 49.6. 40 _ 
LOR e mouth oft c of th q ingie @ To ad er Cyrns, Dariu r, yea, Or, even 
7 op nrencrt en --—96LW thy | <a nly by the convertion of mean per - ny pra 
| . age <Sag n e 
to wit, to them ge promiſed, and ſo amen * af | themſelves > Ch IE the I —cngy bur even of re 
_—_ of his Word "he yy jnjairy * _ fulfilled pee thy ——hs ms terand OT Cs and fbmicing 
ccount it is alſo, irit, to abide ip his er, the Pro- | 3 © eSun in i eſs, and how th nt. See on << 
by which is u o, that the Spirit is his Church, upon whi afte: n its aſcending ; I thou ſhalt en 0-2 2- 
« derftood . is promiſed 1 h , Upon which rwards 120 Diſci S.3 n Chriſt's ti creaſe by de 
hecy it ſelf 4 od, either the Gi in the next Word Church > Diſciples, in a ſhort ti ime there w grees, 
p \ given here to If, . ift of Prophec rds, grew into ' Hs . ort time m erent Apoſtles 
here, as in the foregoi aiah, and ſo to the Ch y, or the Pro- £ * Lifrn ongregations, and th any thouſands, th p 
It note, that _ . going Verſe explicative urch, And bein the c ap thine eyes P tnen ſpread to Natio CN the 
viher whinge-e n ordinary way the Spi 2, Not cop ©; wes y gather chemſelv ound about f and { ns. 
_—__ -ever either of them are pirit, and the od go t . thy ſons b ſhall es together the ee; all _ 
of Satan, chat + ep Joh.t4. png tho piry " aber be nurſed at yo from farr, 4 he lane ro thee, "Chip.49. 
wi - c. and 2 Kings 2. I5 Wk Word. m See on CS: apa ad Or in a Circle; into | ——— ys - 
I hong the Chorces ny 1 EC] 4 þ 11.1, | pet into ali parts 7B ce Sa.con ach ne Jy ns 
preſent wich h1 at treature -ITUC © into al! parts of - with their ſu , ems to relat : 
words. and the fu rich bis word , and happineſ: a thing 1 ts of the World: Andi cceſſors. carryi eto 
2 Iflling of - o The ſenſe 15 pinels to 1g incredible, he big : Andinre rrying the Goſs 
ever the mention of thi g of them ſhall be alw is either, theſe behold :- in fone * e bios them life gard it would be as i of 
, : ; | n : : h ; e aS1t w 
ointment, Matth -y s deliverance ſhall co ays talked of, where- os woke iis Viſion,or upon ſo p their eyes, as if the ere 
tual preſence o Ehs .13. Orrather, he | th aS is ſaid of Marie' ker of ch ike expreſſion ch. 49. 18 me Watch-Tower no were to 
and Miniſters 1 Word, and Spirit with bro promyle Ge per * | ſhall hear e Jews flocking trom al g He ſpeaks more Jena 
wad; and Teachers of the Chan the Prophets, rar a Pope; — po their return from B y | parcs to Feruſalem particularly 
Covenant Che have a ſpecial refe urch to all ſuccedin ©, | Gol e r eſpecially, ofthe co OW lon, which ma "%e when they 
foa & riſt. pi. e. F rence to the Goſpel g ages =  þ The me thi ming in of ſom ay e true in the 
pace of time, as it is often uſed. or a long, though _ 4 : heflnitive = He was e urat-ood = 5 mo _ _ ne” gr the 
OO by gy ons of « inenns, $o.ap. 02. wg wy Fol yr Perlons, 
ps. j# s of the New Chu ions of Arms, B bl . V3. where 6 h nrot ce te q ” 
. affiftiom, 1—2 urch after a ſh both, and , Boſoms, and Shoulders, y thy ſide by equi neerly, 
Or, been- A Riſe ; SH=9-4 pe b and may impo ers ſupplied with r vakent expreſe 
lk 9 A 7 OTTIEEES comcg apd © <> Chee oe onto tht Morker, and i Foughe unty the Charch of 
thy light q wad of tis riſen « 5 e | fam © Iva8 culine gender is j 1t may further be ob urch of 
whe” Ber Ste where, nb hag ens deſc 4 lei and Vimeo. be. Allors and Eo ES 
a recovery ou 10N, chapter 47. I. So b ELCTIDER A &rvile arid | but a) ace both thy Sons and nd variety of voc | Mu en-ſingers, 
5" ney : Rouze up, inti , and proſperous one, a g up, | 39- Or. it is the me to > —__ 6 at are not only near 
. ere 1 , 1mating her deli , as may be quarter ame with wh C 14Y far and ne ar, 
\Zeruſalem's Reſt under a type, or hi eliverance to be ru s of the World; at was ſaid befo ar, AQs 2. 
Gentile *Javes auration, is deſpl teroglyphical deſcripti at | #5, at or on thy ſide he rom far, noting the L re round about in all 
. ch und ayed the flouriſhi iption of | before : the Latitud | e Longitud 
_ _—_ eter of bor Pd © +119" ny bes 6-ofron WORE ot GARY 00s WR _ TCA ons peekage wore 
ng be Erengelics r of her Paplelyres; ia th atncfs, for | thine h alt thou ſee i, and _ 
puts Eloon Prophccy, doth A me" whatever he {61 (og. a abund _ _ fear L, and be —_— k together and 
loquence. © » | oft briskly ſpark in other ance of th nlarsed . | 
dark night r Diſcover thy ſelf y ſparkle forth in Di | the || f the ſea n ſhall b 5 m, becauſe 
5 o _ ; - the | 8) FRG. 
ſharp, to ſee or look out, as Men d 25 one breaking forth from a | , * || forces p of the Genti e Converted r, ſhina 
har th Men do at Sea, who ul roma | # Yiz. Wi e Gentiles ſh unto the 
ſon; or be awd h they can diſcover aft , who uſe to look out | 4 z. With a grreat de all com de, 
1 _ . al of deli e unto thee | . 
with Joy, a 994 __— with more Knowled a dark, and flormy "mg yp ey, to thee, k A bh elight the multirudes of i Us Or, wiſe 
to chan e thy |= 20 mg Metonymy of the e fire Or, be thou filled | ve joining Waters, run = when one River meeti es of thy Chil of the ſea | 
Aouriſhin ght, or Salvation thar i y Countenance ; Be ut | they ſhall flock t ance of their united e and the ſame Ri ned toward *Gal.4.26 
&s and prof} is approachin ; chearful | ſtandi ogether to behold ed Joys and Deti i 
when after a dark ſperous Eſtate, an al g. 5 Either, r. Thy | ing amazed to ſee ſuch old ſuch an amazi elights: Or thee, 
he. x The Can night, the Li lr bes Lk luſion to Peoples "IG y | ſee on Chap. 54 1, 2 & uch multitudes come i azing ſight. 1 As 
Thy God, 0 auſer of thy Light, th aks forth, they begi ing, | 4 2.7. Or, © , 2, &- As it were ſurpri intothe Lord Chriſt, 
, or Chriſt, b »- the Efe# for th Degin foriſe; with th r, overwhelmed with ſurprized with i p 
Stun 15d Moon , ecauſe the Fountai r tne Efficient ; T7 WM rhe tvdings of Joſe it the joyful it, as thoſe 
. fall H _ O wit, fion. that , 2 eph, Geneſis \ ſight, as 
76. Thus Chr _ called Lights beiot Happineſs, as the | an q* were with Peter, Aﬀ 45- 26. and thoſc Facob was 
© 4 4 , Atts e of the Ci 8 
7oh. 8. 12. with nr called the true Ligh ey give Light, Ge e | and joy you haye expreſl 10. 45. ſuch , ircumct- 
- ph. 5. 14. got, Joh. 1. 9. : n. 1. | with Chap. prefled, Ferem. 33. a mixtu 
« = purpoſe. 7 .1,e. The and you'll find thoſe = py compare | the oor 49. 18, »» Both with Jo 9. the ſenſe is eng of cg 
the Mewntains of God greateſt Glory rds quoted to enlarged g in of the Gentiles Yo and Love; J TE LANE 
Lard, or the Lord of glory pee ior gy  - gag of PegPeees nn. pre wile was Cher waned outwardly T3 is the 
D iſt, who i . 21. 11. or, the gl "B64 . a eart, the 4 s them. 1 1n the 
0 IS the glory of the wo _ wes wane 7 Ain A —_ Vina ir nn proper 
2 , viz. t 7111 dilate 1 e a fear 
of he Sv, ith Nations, aber ; 4 rap of heel inde 
, or AﬀeCtion ; the _— of the ſubje&; ſhall 


is come unto thee; ; 

— onderfih — ry Supe at hand to make himſelf 

racles, or Work of Re pl Salvation: Either in hi youre in! ſome 

OI is the Pool 02 wi that his glor s Do&rine, or Mi- 
miſts Prayer, Pſalm 85. 6 Apgdy 7* oy thee 

Fae eas when 


.x pe 


hated thee (th 7 
ey that live by the Sea coaſts being uſuall 
ally noted for 


fick 


| Chap. 1.X. I 84 


J ed ARC... 


IG14.26 


fick of tho% that trade by Sca, the Riches of the Merchant, and fo 
poſſi y the Propher may allude toP/. 72. 16. for Tharffs 15 lometimes 
taken tor the Sea as hath been before ſhewed : ſee on 1 K-ng.10.22. 
o Thy traders ſhall not ſo much convert their Rickes to their own 
ule as to thine. p Or wealth, thou ſhalt not have only the wealth, | 
but the ſtrength of the Nations to ſtand by thee, which hath alſo an 
Eye, as inthe type, to that readineſs, and willingneſs that would 
be 1n the Nations ts help them out of Babylon. | 

6 The multicude of camels q ſhall cover thee:the dro- 
medaries r of Midian and Ephah 5: all they from Sheba 
# ſhall come: they ſhall bring {| * gold and incenſe «, 
and they (ball ſhew forth the praiſes x of the LORD. 


q i. e. the abundance of wealth and Treaſure, that is brought U- 
pon Camels, this being the Creature the Eaſtern people uſed for car- 
riag2 of their gold and ſpice, and otherrich Treaſure, which are ſaid 
to cover them, the like phraſe with that Juag. 6. 5. or, whereby 1s 
nnderſtood thoſe people, that diduſe to ride on Camels, as the 4ra- 
bians, and the bordering Countries ; for by theſe, and ſuch like 
figurative and borrowed expreſſions in ſeveral verſes of this Chapter 
1s particularized ſeveral Nations, and by them is implyed the com- 
ing in of all Nations unto Chriſt, and therefore they are brought in 
as preſenting the chicfeit Commodities of their reſpeCtive Countries, 
ſo that we may be the better excuſed from ſpeaking particularly to 
ro them in the1r reſpeCtive places. # or,a!ſoor even the Dromedaries, 
which are a l:fſer ſort of Camel, ſo called from their ſwiftneſs 1n 
running, to which they are the better enabled, becauſe, as Pliny 
oblerves, they can indure thirſt tour days together. q d. They ſhall 
make all the haſte imaginable in bringing theirRiches to thee sBoth 
thuic Midianites, and Ephaites deſcended from Abraham by Keturah,Gen, 
25. 2, 4. they dwelt beyond Arabia, and Camels are mentioned com- 
ing from aence, becauſe of all places they were the moſt numerous 
here, Juag. 7. 12. £ This Sheba deſcended from Cuſh, the Son of 
curſed Ham the Son of Neah, Gen. 10. 6, 7. from whom a certain 
Countey in Arabia Felix took its name, whoſe Queen it was, that 
came to viſit Solomon, 1 Kings 10. 1. and her bringing gifts might 
be a type of this, So/omen being a type of Chriſt, of which the wiſe 
men might be the firit ſruits, Mat. 2. « The Principal Commodi- 
tics with which this Couatry abounded, and by which we are to 
unuderitand whatever is precious ; and Frankincenſfe is only peculiar 
to Aratia. « The motive drawing them thither, being more for 
Religion rhan trade. 

7 Allthe flocks of Kedar y ſhall be gathered together 
unto thee, the rams z of Nebajoth « ſhall miniſter unto 
thee : they ſhall come up with acceptance b on mine al- 
tar, and I willglorify the houle of my glory c. 

9 The People whereof deſcended from Iſhmael, and lived in Ara- 
biz Petrza, who were principally Shepherds. 2 q. 4. Nay the. chief 
of the flock, viz. for Sacrifice, this Neb4jorh being put for the people 
thercof, arid ſprang from 1/hmael alſo, Gen. 25. 13. Rich as the o- 
ther were in flocks, and inhabiting the ſame Country. As the Sabe= 
ans offered tbe Proper Commodities of their Country as Gold, and 
Spice, ſo theſe of cheirs, viz. Cattle, thewing that each Country, 
and ſo each Perſon ſhould bring that wherewith they did moſt excel. 
a This ſhews that Araham's Children according to the fleſh ſhould 
alſo be broughr into the Goſpel, compare Mal. . rt. 6 Being of- 
fered, they thall not now, as her=tofore, be reje&ed, and hereby 
they ſhall be diſtinguiſhed from the profane oblations of the Gen- 
Tiles. #. e. In the name of Chriſt, who 1s the true, and only Goſ- 
pel Altar. © 5. e. The Temple, or my houſe ; Glory being put here 
by a Meronymy of the Adjun# tor God himſelf, who 1s glorious: God 
ſhall become glorious by the nwltirude of Sacrifices, that ſhall be 
offered, and acc-pted here, Pſal. 29: 9. andit isa Type how glo- 
rious his New Teſtament Spiritual Worſhip ſhall be, this Alrar 
pointing at Chriſt, out of waom nothing is accepted, and that his 
Church ſhould be glorious being built of living ſtones, 1 Per. 


2. 5. 

8 Who 4 are theſe that fly as a cloud, and as the doves 
to their windows ? | CE 

d In the 4th v. he ſpake to themas upon ſome high watchTower, 
whereby they might b:hold as in a Circle all the partsof the World. 
Now eipying fron ail parts, he brings them in calling out with 
admiration who are theje ? Partly with reference to the number, or 
partly with reference to the Perſons, ſo ri:e Heb. what are theſe ? 
They being not Jews, bur ſtrangers, and ſo dire&ly intimating the 
Geatijes flocking into the Church that come ſo ſwift'y, and in fo 
great flocks; the ſame thing ſtill ; The former Metaphor of clouds 
imports their number as well as their ſpeed, Ezek.8. 9. thus abun- 
dance of Witneſſes is called a clexd of Witneſſes. Heb. 12. 1. the ſcope 
is to note great confluence of people thar ſhould come into the 


Cs 


4-H oy Chap. L3 


the wiſe men coming the firſt to Chriſt, when ke was born, and as 
the firſt fruits ofthe reſt of the Gentiles. 4 Begotten by the word. 
{ From the remoteſt parts ; this may beunder%oood with reference 
either to place, at how great a diſtance ſocver either in place or. 
ſtate, they ſhall cometo Chriſt, who hath Sonsabroad in God's de- 
cree, not yet called ; other Sheep that he will bring into his fold, Joh. 
10.16. m Their may refer either to the Merchants bringing traf- 
fick with him, as verſe 6: or the Jews, as 1ae! came out of Egyps 
with all their treaſure with them, and what others gave them; Ezr. 
I. 4- AS alſo the veſlels, that were ſent back with them, Ezr. 1. 7, 
% 1. e, To the Lord himſelf, by a periphraſis ; or ts his Temple, 
where his name was placed, the Type of the Church, compare 
2 Sam. 7. 13. with 1 Chren. 17. 12. or in the name of the Lord ; 
or for his ſake, who is the holy one, the like Meronymies having been 
formerly and frequently pointed at, o He will ſpread thy fame, 
and make thee honourable in the Eyes of the World, and that eſpe- 
cially in ſetting up the miniſtry of the Goſpel in the. midſt of thee, 
The name of God, and ſo alſo of Jae! were contemptible among 
the Gentiles before the coming of Chriſt,and ſpreading of the Gofſ- 
pel, bur ( as a conſolation to his people ) it is promiſed they ſhall 
both be: honourable ; and here God by an x£nalage of the Perſon 
ſpeaks of himſelf in the third Peſon. | . 

Io And the ſons of ſtrangers p ſhall build up thy walls, 
and their kings ſhall miniſter q unco thee : for in my 
wrath I ſmote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy 
r on thee. | ; 


p viz. Such as were not 1/-aelites; and he puts Sons of ſtrangers by 
an uſual Hebrai/m: for ſtrangers properly termed alienigene,ſee Ch 56. 3. 
this was literally fulfilled in repairing the walls of Jeruſalem: ; he ſpake 
before of the Temple, now ot the City, and Spiritually in the Mis 
niſters of the Goſpel, who are the walls,and Bulwarks of the Churh 
by Preaching, and writing for her ;. and Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory af 
fords us many inſtances of Kings, and Princes that were great Be« 
nefaGors to her, among whom Conſtantine did greatly excel,nor car4 
ing what he beſtowed on her, Yal-ntiniavand Theodoſrus, &c. q Shall 
adminiſter all neceſſaries to thee ; as they had been demoliſhed by 
the Babyloniani,” ſo they were repaired by the favour . of Cyrus, 
Darius Hyſtaſpes, Artaxerxes, &c. All ſtrangers, Ezy#s 6. 7, &c- or | 
ſtrangers becoming Proſelytes, ſee Chap. 56. 6, r As 1 afflicted [ 
_ 1n my anger, ſo out of my compaſſions I will abundantly bleſs | 
race, Ss - . , * +, _ 

11 Therefore s thy gates * (hall be open continually; *Rey. 4 
they ſhall not be ſhut day nor night,that men may bring 25. | 


unto thee the || forces : 'of the Gentiles, and that their L Or, 
kings may be brought uw. > Fe B72 

s For that end and purpoſe ; or by reaſon of the conflux of peo- 
ple, that ſhall be cofitinually flocking thither; arguing abundance of 
peace and ſecurity, and great enlargement of the Church, and that 
the Chriſtian Church ſhall be always open ta.the Godly, to receive 
all comers freely, # Or wealth, either all wherein they excel ; 
all the prey taken in fight. « As it were Captives in Chains, fach 
as they took in war, being made viftorious, ſo ſay ſome ; but ras 
ther, ſuch as were led, and conduQted in ſtare. 


12 For * the nation and kingdomthat will not ſerve * Zech: 
ood x ſhallperiſh y : yea zheſe nations (ball be utterly wa- 14-.17- 
ed z. | | | 


x Do qffices of kindneſs, ſo is the word uſed, Chap. rg, 23. or 
rather, that will not ſubmir to Chriſt's Scepter. y Shall be no more 
Jui jaris, but ſubdued to thee, and as refuſing ſubje&ion to Chriſt 
thall periſh eyerlaſtingly ; as they all periſhed-in the deluge, that 
- were not in the Ark : they that ſhould be ſaved were added to the 
Ghurch, 4s 2. 47. & Revel, 21. 24. z Heb. Waſting be waſted, 
viz, By the ſword: accordingly we read of many vi&ories it 
Joſephus that the Jews obtained, and in the Book ofthe Macchabees, 
as a fulfilling of this Prophecy ; but this doth Principally relate 
to the Spiritual Jeruſalem, and this ſeems to anticipate an obje&i- 
on, If the gates ſtand continually open, we ſhall -be in danger of 


—_ ; nor ſo, faith he, for they ſhall either ſerve thee, os 
periſh. 


" 


* Ul 


I3 *The glory a of Lebanon ſball come unto thee, the 
fir-tree, the pine-rree and the box together, to beautifie 


b che place of my ſanctuary c, and I will make the place 
of my feet d glorious. ; 


*Ch.35 2% 
& 41. 19, 


# The Box, the Fir, the Pine, and the Cedar, on account wherecf 
Lebanon grew 10 famous, a Metonymy of the Efficient ; Kings, and great 
ones, the glory of the world, and alſo Perſons of a lower rank, the 
Pines, Firs, and Boxtrees, as alſo the choiceſt Perſons, endued with 


Church, that ſhould be begotten by the Apoſtles Dofrine; which | 


the LXX Tranſlation ſeems to point at, who render it as Doves with | 


eheir young ones, unto me : and by flying may be noted their Spiritual : 


ſtates being elevated above the world, as the Cloudsabovethe Earth | 


and Doves when upon the wing. | 


9 Surely the iſles f ſhall wait for me, and the ſhips g 
of Tarſhiſh þ firſt 3, * to bring thy ſons & from far /, their | 
2» ſilver andtheir gold with them, unto the names of the 
LORD thy God: and to the holy One of Iſrael becauſe 
he hath glorified thee o. 

f See Chap. 14+ 1. & 59. 18. g viz to conveigh themi to me. : 
h i. e. Thoſe that Traffick by Sea, as before, ſee Chap: 2. 16. theſe 
lying moſt convenient for that Imployment. In naming this he ims- ! 
Plies by a Synecdoche all thar had commerce with other Nations. 
7 Preferring this before any other buſineſs racy take in hand ; this 
hath undergone the various ſenſes of divers Interpreters, ſuch as are 
not furilous, and vain, 1 conceive, may run into one of theſe two; 
either r. By reading it with a ſupplement of rhe nore of ſimilitude, 
whichis frequent, as at firſt, or formerly, vis. As in the days of $0- 
lomon, who was a type of Chritt, the matter here ſpoken of ſeeming 
to ſuit with ir, 1 Kings 10 i2. See 2 Chron. 9. 2+, &c. Or rather 
2. By taking the word fir#, as the Hebrews mottly do,not.ſo much 
with reference to time, or order, as to.dign'ty, namely they fhall . 
have the precedency, and honour of bringing themielves, and con- 
dyuRing others ; this may be true alto as co time, and fo verifiedin 


[ becauſe, ſuppoſing God after the manner of-man to fit as on 4 
; ſear between the wings of the Cherubims, his feet would reſt uport- 
' the Ark, and therefore called the mercy ſear,- Exed. 25. 17, 18, 19, 


the ſpecial gifts of the Holy-Ghoſt ſhall be the materials, and mem. 
bers of Chriſt's Church, as thoſe alſo of a lower ſize, and meaſure. 
We find the godly called trees, Ch. 61. 3. they ſhall have ſweet 
Commuaion together ; rhe Box ſhall not envy the Pine, hor the 
Pixe deipiie the Byx, they ſhall worſhip. tte Lord together.” þ This: 
is the reaſon and end why the glory of Lebanon is to be brought his 
ther ; by theſe trees underſtand the beauty, and Nobility of the 
Church. Trees being both for building and for beautifying cThe 
Temple wherein was the SanQtuary,this being a Type of the Charc 

both aQtively, as that which his preſence SanCtifieth ; and paſſively 

as that, wherein he is pes, and. SanQtified. & wiz. Tri 


Ark, 1 Chron. 28. 2. deſcribed here by a periphraſis'; fo called 


20. The Temple, and S:on is Called his reſt, Pſal. 152. Rs 
and all this is made good in the Goſpel Church, 2 Cor. 6. 

16. "> 41s. -; Ml MLS Ya TT TE LL I E TY 

- 14 The ſons e alfo of thetni that afflicted thee; ſhalt. 
* come bending f unto thee, and all they that deſpiſe © © i 
thee ſhall * bow themſelves down at the ſoles g of thy, ©4514 } 
feet; and they ſhall call thee, The city & of the LORD, *p *2:*3* | 


= ' FRev.3.9. 
the Zion of the holy One of Irael. :{. —-: 9, RCV.3.9 


 e Either their poſterity acknowledging their Fathers fins in af. 
flicting thee ; or themfelyes, ſor > ok manner of the Hebrews 
am ® Z 9 


24 44 £4 


ro put the Sons of a thing for the thing it ſelf. f Humbling them- 
ſelves, as penitents, this being the ſign of Reverence, and reſpect; 
and that cither for love, or fear, ſubmit to the yoke of Chit ; 
they ſhall b- like Chriſt, of an humble, and meek Spirit. and the 
degree of this is mentioned in the nexr clauſe. g 'This nores that 
great degree ofſubmiſſion that even deſpiters, and enemics ſhall 
yield ro the Church proftrating themſeives as humble ſuppliants. 
See Chap. 49. 23. or rather to Chriſt the Head, King and Hus- 
band of the Church. h They ſhall give her thar honourableritle, 
or acknowledge her to be ſo, and ſo called both from rhe Love 
that God had for her, and from the Temple of God that was 1n her. 

15 Whereas thou haſt been forſaken 5 and hated &,fo 


thac no man went through zhee 4, 1 will make thee an 


ecernal excellency mm, a joy of many generations ». 

5 Both of God, 7. e. As to outward appearance ; and of hcr inha+ 
bitants, being upon rhe matter depopulated & Either lighted, 
and negle&ed, or ſuffering aCtual miſeries, and flaughrers ; rhus 
was ſhe dealt with, Lam. 1. 2. 1 Thy ſtreets were lett deſolate. 
mm The Abre# is put here for the Concrete, whereby the Hebrews 
were wont to expreſs the ſuperlative degree, and in this happy 
eftate we find the Church, Z-ch. 2. per rot. and 9. 9, &c. Which 
refers to the coming of Chriſt; and it is ſaid :o be Erernal. 3. e.For 
a great while, ig being an hyperbolical exprethoa trequent with 
the Hebrews, Ao exprels a long time by cternity. » The Chur- 
ches happineſs ſhould *e the rejoycing and comfort of ſucceeding 
g=nerations ; the wouid be the mattrer of their great rejoycing, a 
Metonymy of the Objef, 

16 * Thou ſhalt alſo ſuck » the milk of the Gentiles, 
Ch. 49. and ſhalt ſuck the breaſt of Kings, and thou (balt know 
- &G6r. that * I the LORD am thy ſaviour and thy redeemer, 
the mighty One of Jacob g. 

0 A M-raph or taken from Children ſucking nouriſhment from the 
breaſt, the ſenſe is chat the Church ſhou)d draw, or drain the wealth 
of Nations, and rhe riches, and power of Kings, and whatever 1s 
moſt excellent, and that it ſhould come ficely, and affcton- 
ately, as milk flows from the breaſt of the Moth-r; rhe ſome thing 
intended, Chap: 49: 21: and in the foregoing verſes. pi e. Experi- 
ence it; knowing is oft put for an experimental knowing. q Styl- 
ed ſo either with reference ro Jocob's Perſon, he being the firſt rhar 
gave God this title, Gen: 49: 24: or with reference to 7accb's poſtet- 
ty, viz. the Jews. Theſe things will certain'y be accompliſhed 
for he is the mighty God, and fſoable,and the God of 7acob, to obliged 
by Covenanr, and Re/ation: 4 

17 For braſs I will bring gold 7, and for Iron I wil 
bring filver, and for wood braſs, and for ftones Iron : 
FE will alfo make thy officers peace s,and thine exactours 


righteouſneſs 7; 
 r Here is the effe& of the former promiſe, thy poverty ſhall be 
furned to riches, all things ſhall bz altered for the beſt ; an alluſi- 
'en to the days of So/omom, when Go:d was as braſs: thus on the 
Contrary, when they change for the worſe in the tate, it uſeth to 
be expreſſed by the like Mc: aphors, Chap: 1: 21, 22.23, $4.8, Lov- 
ing, M-:& and Peaceable, the 4bſtra pur for the Concrete, as is uſual, 
whether you underſtand it of Under-Officers, they ſhall be Officers 
of peace, or, of Goveraours, thou ſhalt have a peaceable Govern- 
ment, as it was made good to them under Ezra, Nehemiah, Zorobable, 
and ſuch like. #: Moſt righteous, as befoi- peace for peaceable. 
The Church is not freed from Taxes, and payments, thar is given 
by Chriſt and Peter unto C2{ar, tur it ſhall be without oppreſlion, 
and grinding ; no more than is neceſfary, and nor exafted rigor- 
ouſly; though all theſe were made good in their return out of Baby- 
Sn, yer doth it more properly relare to the meliorating of the 
Church under th: Goſpel, wherein inſtead of Carna! Ceremonies, 
He had Spiritual Ordinances, which is the ſcope of the Apoſt'e, 
Heb. 9. and larger meafures of the holy Spirit; and ſhould have 
ach Officers as would ſpeak peace to the Confciences, by diſcove- 
Ihg-the compleat, and perfett righteouſneſs of him, who fulfil:ed 
all righteouſneſs. : 

15 Violence « ſhall no more be heard in thy land, 
| .., waſting nordeſtruction within . thy borders x : but 
Ck. 26.1. thou fhalt call * thy walls ſalvation yz, and thy gates 
| -preiſe V. + | 

# That this, and what follows muſt neceſlarily be underſtood of 
the Church Triumphant ( though there only it will be complear ) 
I ſee no neceſſity, neither will obtrude my Judgement, bur leave it 
to the judicious as being more proper in a Comment ; none to offer 
violence to this quier ſtate thou fhall atrain to, either within thee 
to oppreſs by juſtice, Rapine, .or Fraud, or without thee by hoſtile 
invaſoon;,and-this the Propher mentions as the effe& of good Officers 
in the former werfe. , x No havock made among thy people. y They 
ſhall be ſafe; and able to defend thee ; thou ſhalt be as ſafe, as al- 
vation it ſelf can make thee. When a thing is ſaid in Scripture to 
be called ſo, it often ſignifies as much as to be (0,*Ch. 26, 1: 47. 1. 
&+. 65. 7. and it intimates as much as that God will be ſalvation to 
his Church ; when they ſhall be without Gates, and Walls,he will 
be their ſafety, and che-marrer of their praiſe, ſee 1/aiah 26. 1. and 
God's care of his Church isthe matter of that exhortation ro praiſe 
him, Pſal. 147. z A double Metonymy, to wit, of the EffefF, as 
falvation will cauſe praiſe, and of the 4/junF as it is worthy of 
praiſe; ſo that within or upon thy Gates and Walls, thou ſhalt ſing 
praiſes. : 

#Rev. 2x. 19 * The ſun (hall be no more thy light @ by day, 


- 23-&22.5. neicher for brigheneſs ſhall the moon give light unto 

E thee : bur the LORD {hall be unto thee an everlaſting 
| *Tec.ns. light b, and * -hy God thy glory c. 

> Theſe ſhall nor be at all eſteemed in compariſon of the Spiri- 


ah +4 3-3+ 


eual Tight of the Church ; and rhis is laid down as the afſurance of 
the Churches Comfort as the former was for her ſafety, ſo that God 
will not only-be a \hie!d, bura Sun to her, Pſal. 84, 11. not that 
rhey ſhall not have the Sun, and Moon among them, but that the 
light of the godly as ſych, ſhould principally conſiſt in what is Spi- 
ritual. 6 Chriſt ſhall ſcirter all darkaels and 1gnorance,enlightning 


thee withtac do&rines of the Goſpel, and graces of his Spirit ; and 


S232 817,29 


this thall be Everlaſting, not wax, and wane, and ſuffer Ecipſes, and 
ſettings, as the Sun and Mcon do, bur it ſhall be conſtant withour 
ſhadow of change ; no night ; which will be undoubtedly rrue of 
the Church in Heaven, whatever it will be, or, how ncar toever ir 
will come to it here, which I preſume will bear its analogy. « Al- 
ways miniſtring matter of thy glorying in him ; or, thy intereſt in 
this Gcd ſhall be great honour to thee; or elle, itis the ſame thing 
with the ſentence immediarly before in other v ords, that will make 
thee glorious, a Mczonzmy of the Efficient, thus he iy ſaid to eve vlory 
Pjal. 84. 11. ts 

20 Thy ſun ſhall no more go down, neither ſhall thy 
moon withdraw it ſelf: for the LORD fall bethine e- 
verlaſting light, and the days of thy mourning ſhall be 
ended d. 


d Literally he means the Jews mourning in Pabylen; but eſpecial- 
Iy the uninterrupted happineſs ot the Church ; the Hebrew here for 
enaed ſignifies recompenſed, their days of rejoicing ſhall abundantly 
recompenſle all their days of mourning. 

21 Thy people alſo ſhall be all e righteous f: they 
ſhall inheric che land for ever 8, the * branch of my 
planting 6, * the woik of my hands, that I may be glo- 
rified z. 

e i.e, The greater part; the word in this uſe hath been ſhewn fre- 
quent]y ; or, altogether rightcous, complcatiy righteous. f As this 
reſpeCts the Jews, the ſenſe may be, they went into Captivity w.c- 
ked, but mot of them being dead, and many of the Survivors tar= 
rying behind, they that are returned are faiv to be righ'cous, Chap. 
t- 25, 26, 27. © 4. 4. but Principally as it reſpetts, the Church 
they ſhall be all Saints either by profcfſion, as Paul calls them fre- 
quentiy Saints by calling ; orrather by an inherent righteoutnes,or 
perteQtly by the imputed righteoutneſs of Chriſt, fee on Ch. 35. 8. 
Z 7.6. fora long time, as you have many inftances ; and this is ſpo« 
ken, leſt that poor remnant ſhould be atraid of being driven out a 
gain ; but with reference to the Church, that they ſhould for ever 
be continued as God's peculiar people. þ Pur by appoſition, viz. Thy 
people being of my planting, and fo alto the next clauſe, the work of my 
hands, and therefore cannot miſcarry, being what 1 ſhall rake de- 
I'ghr in, and thus the Children of God are faid to be his workmanſhip 
created in Chrift Jeſus, Eph. 2.10, 3 Either that I may make them 
glorious in being thus planted, or, my ſelf glorious in thus plan- 
ting them. 

22 A little one (hall become a thonſand &,and a ſmall 
one a ſtrong nation /: I the LORD will haſtenitin 
his time mm. 

k Though of very ſmall beginning, and contemptible, yet ſhall 
greatly multiply : Though the Church ar firſt wil be bur a very 
fe v.yer willit encreaſe into many thouſands ; this plant or ſeed will 
ſpring up to many ; ſome underſtand ir, that many ſhall be con- 
verted, and brought into the Church by men of very few, low. and 
mean parts; however theſe things ſeem to agree better ro ſome 
ſtate of the Church here, than to the Nate of the Church Trium- 
pbant. 7 If this ſignifie not the ſame wich the other, as probably 
it may, the word ſtrong ſignifying numerous, Joel z. 6. then we may 
underſtand ir, that as rhe former reſpe&ed their »:mber,ſo this their 
ſtrength. m viz In due time, thetime that I have appointed.q.d.Let 
nor this be doubred becauſe I have undertoken it, to v hom nothing 
is difficult. When the time of the promiſe comes, he will make haſt, 
it will be done ſpeedily ; or, as ſoon as it begins, it ſhall haſten a- 
pace, as itdid in Peter's Sermon, 3000 in one day, Afr 2. and 5000 
in another, A#s 4. and ſo toon filled the whole world, and one Pau! 
planted whole Churches, as the people in Egypt increaſed from 70 
verſons to a vaſt multitude. 

CHAP. EAL 

Chriſt and his bleſſed Office, 1——3. the Church's Repair and Increaſs, 

4 6. and joy, j—11. 
He * ſpirit of of the LORD is upon me », becauſe 
the LORD hath annointed ome to preach good 
ridings p unto the meek, he hath ſent me to bind up 4 
the broken-hearted r, to proclaim liberty to the cap- 
tives s, and the opening of the priſon to rhem that are 


bound ?. 

» As it were to accompliſh that which is foretold, and promiſed 
in the foregoing Chapter, whereby this appears to be either the Ho« 
ly-Ghoſt, fee on, 3 King. 18. 12. or the Spirit of Prophecy; z.e. the 
gifc of Prophecy ; ſo we are often ro underſtand by the Spirit, wiz. 
The gifts, as the Spirit upon Sampſon, viz. The gift of valour, and 
courage, and ſtrength,, ſee, 1 Cer. 12. 4, ©&c. Though the Pro- 
phet may ſpeak this of himſelf in Perfon, yet that it is principally 
underſtood of Chriſt, is evident, becaulc he applieth this Texr un« 
to. himſelf, Luke 4. 18. being the firſt text he preached upon after 
his Baptiſm, at which time the Holy-Ghoſt did deſcend upon hiar 
in a viſible ſhape, of which that Joh», who Baptized him, was ant 


ocular wirneſs, Joln 1. 32, 33. and ſo making good the truth of ' 


this Prophecy ; and ir 1s ſaid ro reft upon, and dwell in him, ac- 
cording as it is propheſied, ch. 11. 2. & 42.1. o Set me apart,i.e.both 
capacitating him with Gifts, and commiſſionationg bim with Au- 
thority ; and yet more, as it is applied to Chriſt, a Power to make all 
effeual, from whence he hath alſo the name of M:/iah among the 
Hebrews, and ofChriff among the Greeks;nay Chriſt alone among the 
Prophets hath obtained this name, Pſal. 45. 7. and the Propherſeems 
here to deſcribe, firſt, who Chriſt is, and then what are his Oftces, 
this being the uſual Coromony for the deligning Perſons to the Ots, 
fices of Prophets,Priefts,and Kings,as hath been divers times ſhewn 
in all which reſpe&s it doth moſt eminently belong to Chriſt, ſo 
that the Propher doth kereby intimate borh the final cauſe of 
his unQtion, viz. that he ſhould execute theſe Offices to whicle 
he was anointed ; and the effe& of it : that unftion being upon 
him as the head, it would flow from thence to his members, and 
ſo is an union more peculiar to them, and in a more general way 
ir hath reſpe& unto all the faithful, 2 Cor, 1. 24, 22. 1 John 2. 20, 
27. þ Being meant of Chriſt, this relates to his Propherical 
Office. Literally this points at the good news thar [ais/ RI 
0 


*Ch. 4. 2. 
&61.3.S&e 
Ch.32.16. 
Mar. 15.13 
"Ch.29:23 
& 45. 11, 


te. 


* Cha 
is. *%4 


en 
My 


Chap: [LXI. 


of Cyrus his Being raiſcd up to bring them out of Babylon, now they 
are become meek and humble ; bur if it be thus raken, it muſt be 
underſtood of his Prophecies left behind him, for he died many 
years before the Captivity. Bur they chiefly ſignific the good rid- 
10gs of the Goſpel, that diſcovers Chriſt come in the fleſhro redeem 

oor ſinners from the Captivity of ſin, and Satan, ſuch as are meek, 
and humble, or affi#:d, as rhe word lignihes, becauſe ordinarly 
affliitions make men meek, and bumble; called allo the Poor, and our 
Saviour expreſſeth it by that word, Luke 4. 18. To theſe the Gol- 
pel, theſe good ridings are brought, Mas. It. 5. Whether by Poor you 
underſtand, s. The Gentiles void of all Grace and Salvation, or 
tenders of it till now. Or, 2. Properly ſo called, indigent and needy 
Perſons, of which fort were the greateſt: number that followed 
Chriſt, of which the reaſon might be, becauſe Chriſt preached the 
contempt of the World, and Riches, which the Poor would there- 
fore ſooner embrace, and the Rich more likely to oppoſe. Or, 
3. The Poor in Spirit. 9 Now follow ſeveral particular expreſ- 
fions to deſcribe the ſame thing, that he mentioned before more ge- 
nerally ; a Metaphor taken from Chirurgians, that carefully and 
tenderly roll up a broken bone, Hoſ. 6. 1. and this relates ro Chiſts 
Prieſtly Office. r The heart dejeSed, and, broken with ſorrow. 
I am ſent to eaſe their pains, whoſe Conſciencesare wounded with 
a ſenſe of God's wrath, s Thoſe Caprives ii Babylon, but princi- 
pally to Satan, thar they thall be delivered : and this appertains to 
Chriſt's Kingly Office, whereby he proc/aims liberty from the Do- 


ISA14 68 


minion, and Boridage of fin, and from the Fear, and Terrour of 
Hell. See Ch. 42.7. # 7. e. Suppoling tiem to be in chains, arid 
fetters, yet they ſhould be delivered, chough in the greateit bon- 
dage : the further explication of theſe things will be found upon 
Luke 4. 18. Becauſe there are ſome paſſages expreſſy mentioned 
here. 


2To proclaim « the acceptablexyear y of the LORD, 
and the day of vengance z of our God, to comfort all 


that mourn 4. = | 
« To delare, as it reſpe&ts the Jews, that their liberty is at hand. 
* Viz, the happy age of God's grace, either which will be grateful, 
and welcome .new> to them, or acceptable to God, a time where- 
in it pleaſeth him to favour them; bur this muſt be underſt-ad of 
a further extent than to Babylon, and rather unto Mankind in J«<ſus 
Chriſt, Gal. 4. 4. and Tit. 3- 4. called a time of God's gord will in 
chat Angelical Song, . Luke 2. 14. On the account of thoſe good 
tidings which the Angel brought, v. 10, 17. calledſo poſſibly from 
the arbitrarineſs, and good pleature of God, having no reſpet ro 
any ſatisfaftion from man. y Not preciſe'y, as if Chriſt preached 
but one year,the miſtake of ſome Ancients mentioned, an r:futed 
by Irene, lib. 2. Ch. 38: But for time indefinitely, and may in- 
clude the whole time of preaching the Goſpel. See Rom. 10. 15. 
which I take to be the meaning of that now, 2 Cor, 6, 2. and pro- 
bably hath a pertinent alluſion to the year of Jubrlee, which was a 
general releale proclaimed by ſound of Trumper, which relates al- 
1o here to the word Prociaiming, Lev. 25. Io. 2 Viz. on Babylon, it 
being neceſſary, that where God will deliverhiis People, he ſhould 
take vengeance on their enemies ; but myſtically, and principal- 
ly en the enemies of his Church, and the Spiritual ones chieffy,v:z. 
Satan, Sin, and Death. # Either by reaſon of their ſifferings, or 
of their ſins, Mas. 11. 28, Or, the miſeries of Sim, See on chap. 
. I8, | : , 
m 3 To appoint b unto them that mourn in Zion c to 
give unto them beauty for aſhes 4, the oyl of joy for 
mourning e, the garment of praiſe for theſpiric of hea- 
vineſs, that they might be called frees of righteouſneſs, 
g, the planting of the LORD 5, chat he might be glo- 
rifieds. — 
6 Supplieit, Viz. Comfort, or Joy, or elſe it may refer to thoſe 
Accuſative caſcs following, Beauty, Oyl, Garments, c Put by a Me- 
gonymy for the Jews, q. 4. among the Jews;and they forthe Church 
of God, or, according to the Hebrew For Zion. d By aſhes under- 
ſtand whatever is moſt proper for days of mourning, as Sackctoth 
ſprifikled with Aſhes,and theſe aſhes which were ſprinkled on their 
heads, mixing themſelves with their tears, would render them of a 
woful Aſpe&, which was wont to be the habit of Mourners, as by 
Beauty whatever may be beautiful, or become times of rejoycing. 
e The ſenſe is the ſame with the former, he calls ic Oy! of joy in 
alluſion ro thoſe anointings they were woat to uſe in times of joy, 
Pſal. 104. 15. and alſo the ſame with what follows, wiz. Gladneis 
for heavinieſs, gladneſs brings forth Praiſe to God ; and it. 1scalled' 
a Garment in alluſion to their Feſtiv.l Ornaments, for they . | 
Garmcits appropriated to their conditions, ſome ſuitable to times 
of rejoycing, and ſome to times of movirning ; orelſe an alluſion 
to comely garments ; and the ſpirit of þeavineſs, becauſe heavineſs 
doth opprels, and debaſe the Spirits. Ir is all bur an elegant def- 
cription of the ſame thing by a threefold Antitheſis. f That is, 
that they may be ſo, as it is uſually expreſſed, Gh. 58. 12. & 65. 
18. they ſhall be acknowledged ſo, v. 9, g He aſcribes Righte- 
duſneſs ro Trees, underſtanding thereby Perſons by a Metaphor, 
by which he means, that they ſhall be firm, ſolid, and well rooted, 
being by faith engrafted into Chriſt, and bringing forth fruir 
ſuitable to the Soil wherein they are planted, that had been as dry 
trees, ſee on 1a. 56. 3. viz. the Church, the Vineyeard of God, 
and the hand by which they are planted, as in the next words 
þ Planted by the holy Lord, who being himſelf holy, and 
righteous, would plant none bot ſuch, which notes allo their 
Foundneſs, and ftability, an alluſion to that paſſage in Moſes his 
Song, Exod. 15. 17. i Either in thatglory which he ſhould confer 
upon them, or that glory he may expe& and receive from them, 
ehat ſo it may be evident whoſe handy work it was. See 4&, 60, 


"IP = 
4 And they ſhall * build the old waſtes, they ſhall 

raiſe up'the former delolacions,and they ſhall repair the 

wafte cities the deſolarions of many generations &. 

& See ch. 58. r2.As it is applied to Goſpel times,the meaning may 
be, that Gentiliſm, which was as a wilderneſs overgrown withbriars, 
and Thorns, ſhall be cultivated, and rhofe Cities and Provinces of 
the Gentiles thar lay as if were waſte void of all true Religion, ſhall 
Now 
God 


by the Miniftry of the Word, be edified in the true worſhip of ; 


5 And ſtrangers 7 ſhall ſtand ms and feed your flocks 
#, and the ſons of the allen s ſhall be your plow-men, 
and your vine-drefſers p. 

{ Viz, Gentiles, ſuch as are not of the natural race of the Jews,but 
Gentile Converts. Or; fuch as ſhallhave no more than an outward 
profeſſion, ſtrangers to the true work of Grace, 72 Ready to be at 
thy ſervice, a like expreſſion, ch. 48. r3. » The Churches with rhe 
word of God. » The ſame with ſtrangers, or their tuccetlors. p As 
the words deſcribe the proſperous eſtate of the Jews, the meaning 
of them is, that they ſhould be in ſuch a flouriſhing and proſperous 
condition, that withour their own labour, they ſhould have all in- 
fcriour offices executed, either by flaves taken. ia War, or by Per- 
ſons hired for reward, which they ſhould have Riches and Wealth 
enough to accompliſh ; Bur as they principally relate to the ſpi- 
ritual State of the Church, ſo probzbly by Strangers we. may under- 
ſtand Converted Gentiles with their Succeſſors meant by the Sons 
of Aliens, which ſhould be ready to diſcharge all Offices for the 
advantage of the Church, feeding the Flocks,viz. the Churches of 
Chriſt with the Word of God, and ſhould manage the whole work 
of God's Spiritual Husbandry therein; ſee 3 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. Or; 
by ſtrarigers may be meant Members of the Church only by an out- 
ward Profeſſion, even they ſhall be ſome way ſerviceable to her int 
ordinary and inferiour matters: The Earth ſhall help the W.man, Rev. 
12. 16. j x 


6 Burt ye ſhall. be named the prieſts g* of the LORD: 


men ſhall call you the miniſters of God ; * ye (hall eat r 


—— 


— 


had | 


the riches of che Gentiles, and in their glory ſhall ye 
boaſt s your ſelves. | | 


Maintenance, as the Prieſts of old were plent:fully provided for with- 
otit their labour, ſo ſhall you by thelabour of Strangers : Or,2.For 
Countenance, you hall be every where as greatly valucd as the Prieſts 
were wont to be ; you ſhall be eſteemed as Princes;for ſo the word 


Funttion, but to one that was of great note among the People, andl 
was ſupplied with all neceffaries trom others, withotrt any 1:bour 
of his own, Thus David's Sbns were called Pjiefts, or Princes : Or 
rather, 3. For Priviledge, the whole body of them ſhall now be as 
peculiar, and as near to God as the Prieſts were fo:metly, and ſhall 
be a Royal Prieſthood, i Pet. 2. 9. This is moſt certainly true ofall 
the faithful under the Goſpel, hence they have alſo their Spiritual 
Sacrifices, Rom. 12. 1. Heb. 13. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.5; r Tt relates to 


Or, what you cat ſha]l be purchaſed by the Riches of 
the Gentiles. s You ſhall exalt your ſelves, or be renowned b 
otaers : The LXX render it, you ſhall be wonderſul, or to admir4- 
tion ; or grow high by the acceſs of that glory, which they ſhall 
bing unto you, wiz. in Riches, Parts, Learuing, Chap. 60. 5, 
IT, 

7 For your ſhame ye ſhall have double rt ; and for con- 
fuſion they (ball rejoyce in their portiens : therefore x 
in their Land thy ſhall poſſeſs the double; everlaſting y 


joy ſhall be unto them. a IE ED | 
+ Sceon Chap. 40. 2, Supple hour ; though you have been little 
accompred of among your Enemies, yet fiow you ſhall be great'y 


of hunour, that God will give them, the ſame thing with the for- 
mer; or, in their Inheritance, which God ſhall retlore to them ; 
and that citter, 1. For worth and value through God's blefling upon 
it : Or, 2. For room and ſpace, and that poſſibly by reaſon of the 
few that will return to inhabite there, viz. only a tenth part, Chap. 
6. 13. Or,that which he ſhall give them out of their Enemies Land. 
x Or rather, Becauſe, being rendred as a reaſon of their rejoycing, 
becauſe of the donbbing. of their portion, in which ſenſe it js 
taken, Chap. 16. 14. y Of long continuance here, and everlaſting 
hereafter ; or, to be perpetually remembred on their Anniverſary 
Feſtivals ; though this had its accompliſhment in their 1erurn from 
Babylon, yet was it moſt {ignally made good in that great change for 
the.better, which they ſhould find in the Goſpe'-ſtare in theenlarge- 


" ment of Chriſt's Kingdom, and encreaſe ofhis People, with whom 


they ſhouli ever rejoyce together. | 6257 
8 For I the LORD tove judgment z, * I hate robe 
# for burnt-offerings,and I will || dire& their work in 


.truth b, and I will make an everlaſting covenant c with 


them. _ YI 

z q. d, They have ſuffered a great deal of hardſhip under their E- 
nemies, and I will.do them Right, for I love Juſtice in my ſelf,and 
in them that praCtiſe it : Or; he gives a reafon why he will recont- 
penſe thoſe Strangers that did ſo freely miniſter to his People &# All 


things gotten by injuſtice, though it be for Sacrifice : As God will 


Hot _ r of tharwhich coſt nothing ; ſo much leſs of that- which 
is the E 
of our Abbies and Monaſteries were built, wiz; ro: expiate ſome 
great Crimes. : And thus by making God a Receiver, they did inter- 
prefatively fake htm a Confederar. b Either T will lead, and ouide 
rhem ſo, that they ſhall do all things in fincerity ; they fthall do 
goo works, and to good Ends ; they ſhall now love Truth, ard 
walkin Truth, and ſerve him in Spicit and Truth : Or, I will 
reward them; or, I will make their work- ſtable and firm: - Truth 
notes ſtability ; ſ:e the Notes on Ch.' 16. 5. ( work being here put 
metonymically for the reward of work } proportionably ro their work. 
c 9. d. Though you have broken Covenant with me;. and I 
have ſeemed ro forſake you in giving you up to Captivity, yet] 
will renew my anciear Covenant made with your Fathers, confire 
med with the blogd of Chriſt, and it ſhall be everlaſting,neverto be 
abrogated, wiz. .t ſhall be continued in the Gentiles that ſhall 
come in your rooms, that for breach of Covenant were broken 


off. 
9 And their ſced ſhall be antong the Gentiles 4, and 


cheir off-ſpring among the People: all that ſee them 


jhall acknowledge them, that they are the ſeed which 

the LORD hath blefied e. 
a i. 6. Ennely, a promiſe of the increaſe of the Churc! : 
6 B 4 _ auch 


Chaps 


9 For your part, yeemphatically ſhall be as Prieſts, Either; 1. For 


1s oftett uſed, the word Prieft teing applied not only to the Sacred 


the — of the Gentiles, which did confift moſt in. Flocks, and: 
] Herds : 


in their eſteem, Zech. 9. 12. you ſhall haveAouble damages. u Viz. - 


'Y * Chiirg. 
penſe. 


[|Or,recoms 


Heb. give, | 
Ezek. 7. 3» | | 


& of Rapin, and Oppreſlion ; a foundation, whereon moſt 


ap. LIL. f 
ſuch hall be their proſperity, and multiplying, that they ſhall be 
known abroad by their great increaſe ; or elſe, the meaning is, the 
Church ſhall have a ſeed of the Gentiles, the borders of the Church 
ſhall be enlarged, whereas it hath been confined as it were to one 
corner of the World, now it ſhall remain in one Nation alone no 
more, but thall fill all the Nations of the Earth. e They ſhall be 
known to be the ſeed of Abraham, partly by their holy converſa- 
tion, and partly by their exceeding bleſſings, it being the ſeed 
that the Lord had fo often promiſed to bleſs : There ſhall be ſuch 
viſible Characters of God's love to them, and of God's grace in 
them. E 4 : | 
10 I will greatly rejoyce f in the LORD g, my ſoul 
ſhall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with 
"the garments of ſalvation ;, he hath covered me with the 
robe of righteouſneſs k, as a bridegroom Fj decketh him- 
felf with ornaments, and as a bide adorneth herſelf with 


her jewels. ' 

f This by a Proſopopeeia is ſpoken 1n the Perſon of the Church, 
wherein ſhe doth thankfully acknowledge God's kindneſs to her in 
the forementioned promile, expreſſed here in the greatneſs of her 
aff=-&tion with reference both to her preſent deliverance from Ba?2y- 
bon and to.the happineſs of her Goſpel-ſtate. g Or becauſe of the 
Lord, or of the goodvels ofthe Lord rowards me. an uſual form of 
gratulation. » Sam, 2. I. and Had. 3. 18. and Luke 1, 47. or thus, I 
will not rejo7ce ſo much in my deliverance, as in the Lord. þ This 
clauie is to the ſame purpoſe, ſave only the varies the 'expreſſion, 
g. d. YealI doit with my who'e Soul. 7 Witch Salvation, as with 
a garment, fo in the next with righteouſneſs, as with a Robe, the 
the meaning is the Salvation that wzod will work for me, will ren- 
der me as bcautifu!, and conſiderable, as they are, that are clothed 
with the richeſt garments, as Bridegrooms uſually are, and Brides 
with th-ir Jewels, or as venerable, as Kings 1n their Princely 
Robes, my Sack-cloth will now be turned into Robes, or I ſhall be 
compaſſ.d «bour with glory, as garments do compaſs the body. 
& 3. e. Either with the fruits, and effeRts of his Love, and many 
Favours to the Church, in which ſenſe Righteouſneſs is raken, Pſal. 
312. 3, 4, 9. compar'd with 2 Co-. 9. 9. and ch. 51. 6,8. ſheſhould 
ſee the Righteouſneſs of God in fulfilling all theſe promiſes. Or that 
Righteouſneſs of Chriſt imputed to us, which we are ſaid to pur on, 
Rom. 13. 14. or thoſe graces imparted to us, and atted in an holy 
Ute. 

x 1*For as the earth bringeth forth her bud.and as the 


garden cauſerh the things that are ſown in it to ſpring 
forth 1: fo the Lord GOD will cauſe righteouſneſs » 


and praiſe » to ſpring forth before ali Nations 0. 

I By this and tne other Metapher he ſhewsnot only the reviving 
of the bleſſings of the Church atrer they had been as it were dead 
in the winicr of afflition, bur the great plenty, and abundance 
of bl-flings that ſhould break forth ; that which had been asa wil- 
derncſs, ſhall be as a Paradiſe, pointing at the effeQts of his grace, 
and bounty. m 3. e. His great work of Salvation ſhall break out 
and appear. » As the natural produ&, and fruit ofit,his own glo- 
Iy being the Principal end of making his Righteouinels to appear 

- and maniteit it ſelf. o Theſe things will not be done in a Corner, 
bur will beemin<nt'y con'picucus in the fighr of allthe world, for 
which purpole thoſe Hymns penned by the godly will ever be famous 
in the Churches of Chriſt to all ages, as of Moſes, Hannah, Mary, Ze- 


- chary, Simeon, &C. 
: CS Ay bm. | 
4 Prayer of the Watchmen fer the Church in confidence” of God's Gracious De- 
| fiens and Promiſes to it, 1 12. 
OR Zions p ſake will I not hold my peace, 9 and 
FÞ for Jeruſalems fake I will not reſt, until the righ- 
teouſnels r thereof go forth as brightneſs 5, and the fal- 


vation thereof as a lamp that burneth 7. 

p Yiz. The Churches ſake, S!0n, and Feruſalem being both put for 
the Church, H-b. 12. 22. q Theſe ſeem ro be the words of the Pro- 
pher ſtrongly reſvIving, notwithitand:ng all difficulties, to ſolicit 
God for the Churches happineſs, and conſtantly excite to the be- 
Jief of it by h:s Preaching, though it were Jong ere ir came, for 
Taiah lived near 200 yea's before this was accompliſhed ; but his 
Prophecy lived, an: the tenour of 1t was continued by other Pro- 
phers, whom the Lord ſtirred up to b- ſtilleſtabliſhing his p:ople till 

* this Salvation was wrought ; his meaning might be, as long as he 
lived, he would never hol! his peace; orhe might include himſelf 

' among thoje,who ſhou!d be then alive,as Pauldoth among the other 

' Saints. 1 The. 4. 17 we which are alve. Thus may we alto include 
God ſpeaking theſe words as ſome would have it,viz. By the mouth 
of 1/a/ab,and other of his holy Prophets,that never held'their Peace, 

_ rill they ſaw this bleſſed tate of rhe Church appear. r With re- 
reference to the Batylon;ans, underſtand it of the Righteouſneſs of 

, Ged, who hath promiſed his People deliverance, and he muſt be 

' Righteous, and ſo underſtand Salvation before ; or rather, the Vin- 
dicating of his People's cauſe in the Eyes of the Nations by the ruin 
.of the Babylonians ; he will ſhew that his People have a Righteous 
cauſe : or with reference to the Church, till Chriſt, who is her 
Righteouſneſs hall appear and be manifeſted in the Goſpe].sClearing 

_ wp their miſerable, and dark eſtate which the Church might be ſup- 
poſed to be in before Chriſt's coming, with much joy, and happi- 
neſs. 5 And to that purpoſe is ſet up where it may be ſeen con- 

*rinually, to ſignifie. how eminently conſpicuous this proſperous 
eſtate of the Church ſhould be among the Nations, and as it may 
particularly relate to revealing of Chriſt unto the World. 

2Allthe Gentiles ſhall ſee thy righteouſneſs «, and all 
kings x thy glory : and * thou ſhalt be called by a new 
name, which the mouth of the LORD ſhall name jy. 
"u See what is ſaid inthe foregoing veſe, ſome read thy Juſ# One, 
wiz. Jeſus Chriſt. x Thoſe that were wont to ſcorn thee, ſhall 
now be taken with the admiration of thy Glory. y Not the ſeed 
of Abraham, or the Children of Iſrael, but of God ; that whereas they 
were by nature the Children of Wrath, now by Grace they hall be 
the Children of God . Or, another Name, as it is ſaid of Tongues. 
Compare Mark. 16. 17. with 47s 2. 4. Or, a Naame, the honour 


*Ch.45.8. 


- *Ch 65.15 
ſee wer.l2, 


= £1 x HE 


whereof ſhall make them famous, as Ger. 11. 4. they ſhall be called 
Chriſtizus, Or, The Church ſhall be more renowned than ever,both 
in reſpe@ of her condition, and fo called Hephzibah, and of her Ree. ©. 
lation, and ſo called Beulah,and this new name the Lord gives them 
accordingly, ver. 4. | | 

Thou ſhalt alſo be a * crown of glory z in the « 
hand of the LORD a,and a 
of thy God. 


z An expreſſion to ſet forth the dignity of her ſtate. 7 75. e. Ei 
ther, as placed upon thee by God's hand, rhar he will diſpoſe of or 
diſpenſe to thee , an uſual form of tpecch in Scripture, as Hag.1.5. 
by the hand of Haggai, fo Mal. 1. i. Or, Inthe hand of God: He ſhall 
ſo manage thine honourable eſtate, that thou ſhalt be a Crown, a Cre- 
dit and Honour to him ; and ſo the word Crown may be uſed for 
any kind of ornament, or marter of Honour : Or, preſerved, and 
defended by God's Hand ; a thraſe that exprefleth it ro be eut of 
all danger, as to put a Man's Life in his hands is to expoſe it to dan- 
gers, Judg. 12. 3. Sam, 19-5. © 28. 21. 6 Thelame thing with 
the former for ſub*ance. Or, the Royal Prieſthood, whereof the 
Apolltle ſpeaks, 1 Per. 2. g. 

4 * Chou ſhalt no more be termed, Forſaken c;*nei- *Hoſ1.ro 
ther ſhall thy land d,any more be termed deſolate c: but 2 Pet.2.19 
thou ſhalt be called f|| Hephzi-bah g,and thy land [|Beu- _*2?: 
lah b : for the LORD deiighteth in thee, and thy land i Thar is 
jhall be married z. my delight 

c As a Woman forſaken by her Husband, contemptible, and of # /7 her, 

low eſteem. # 7.e. The Inhabitants of the Land, a Mronymy ©6f [| That is, 
the Subje&. e Though it be now almoſt void of Inhabitants it ſhall Parrice, 
be impeopled again. f7z.e. Be, as you have frequently had ſuch in- 
ſtances. g My delight is inher, anew Name agreeing with her Con- 
diction. h Married, agreeing to her new Relation : ſhe ſhall be as one 
well married, to the great improvment of her ſtate,Jer.z: 14: Boſe 2; 
18, 19, 20, # Thou ſhalr ſee the increaſe of thy Children again in 
thy Land, as the tuirt of thy married condition, which by reaſon of 
thy being forſaken of thy Husband, were in a manner waſted and 
decayed : And this refersto the great inlargement of the Church 
in the Goſpel days : Or rather, ſhall be poſ7ſed, as the word Baal pro= 
perly ſignifies, and fo it anſwers to deſolate, thou ſhalt be no 
more deſolate, but pf ſſed, and this helps to ſolve a difficulty in the 
next verſe, which otherwiſe may ſeem an impropriety, That the 
Sons would marry the Mother. 

5Foras a young man marrieth a virgin &, ſo ſhal! thy + yg. 
ſons / marry thee: and F as the bridegroom rejoyceth with the 
»z over the bride, ſo * thali thy God rejoyce over thee. j9 of the 

k This is delivered as a demonſtration of what was ſaid in the bridegrown, 
cloſe of the 4th werſe, and it is ſaid Tung, and Firgine to note their © Chap. 
ſuitableneſs, nor Old, and Yowng, but ſuch as may delight each in o- 5: 19: 
ther, ſignifying that mutual content chat wou!d be in all parties 
thus it was at the firſt preaching of the Goſpel, A#s 2: 41: to 47: 

[ Whereas it is improbable that theSpir:t of Uod ſhould carry on ſo 


royal diadem 6 in the hand ns 


ſb-uld marry the Mather, the ſcruple is eaſily ſatisfied by taking the 

word 1n its right ſignification fo peſſeſs, as in the foregoing verſe, 
reading it thus, as a young man marrieth or poſ:/*th a Virgin, ſo 

ſhali thy Land be inhabired or peſ ſed by thy Sons ; they ſhall dwell 

with thee as a man dwells with his Wife, and thus the LXX. And 

it is ſaid Sozs to diſtinguiſh them from ſtrangers, by whom ſhe ſhould 

not any longer be inhabired, but by her own natives; and expreſſed 

by marrying to ſignifie not only their unity of affeftion in the even- 

neſs of their living, bur of Faith in their common profeſſion called 

the Common Faith, Tit: 1:4: according to which Paul calls Titus his 

Son. m Taketh delight in her, ſo ſhall thy God, wiz. Chriſt, God 

and Man, 1n thee ; 1ce wer: 4: Chriſt is often called a Pridegroom,and * Ezck 
his Church a Bride, 2 Cor: 11. 2: Rev: 21: 2, , ws te 


6 X. thave fer wa:chmen » upon thy walls, O Jeru- 23. 7. 


ſalem, which ſhall never hold their peace day nor night || 7* that 
o: ||ye that make mention p of the LORD, keep not ®*# 
{il : Lords re- 
lence q ; on 
2EMUT Ale 


» Underſtand by theſe, either r. Angels, as they are called, Dan. ,,,; 
4. 13, 23+ Or, 2. Magiſtrates, ſee chap: 56: 10. Or rather 3. Miniſters, Ch.43 26, 
When once the Church ſhall be reſtored again,God will undertake © © 
for its Safety and ProteCtion, partly by Magiſtracy, -and partly by 
Miniſtry,whom he here by a Metaphorical Allegory calls Watchmen, 
but the next words ſeem principally to intimate Spiritual Watchs 
men, thy ſpiritual ſafety, Heb. 13. 17. and faid to be upon the 
Walls, as being thence able to eſpy dangers at the greater diſtance, 
Cant. 1. 7. oe There fhall be a moſt vigilant, and induſtrious Mini 
ſtry, their conſtancy being intimated by Day and Night, either in 
Praying or Teaching, or warning, this being their Office.  p 5. e. 
Are his ſervants ; To make mention of one is, according to the 
Hebrew Phraſe, to be ſervant to him of whom we make mention, 
ch: 26:13. And here eſpecially are meant his Servants in ordinary, 
his remembrancers, eitherſuch as put God in mind of his Promiſe, like 
ſuch Officers that great Men have about them on purpoſe ro mind 
them of the publick affairs; Or, ſuch as make the Lord to be re- 
membred, putting his People in mind ofhim. q This ſeems-to be 
the charge that he givesto his Watchmen, that they never prove 
remils or negligent. ; 

7 And give him no Treſt 7 till he eſtabliſh, and till 
he make Jeruſalem a praiſe in the earth 5. 

+ The ſame with the foregoing Verſe, and very acceptable to 
God, Luke 11: 8, 9, 10. 5s By ſending the Meſs), and thoſe La- 
bourers into his Vineyard,whereby the Church may be eſtabliſhed, 
and ſettled on ſure foundations, and ſo b:come matter of Praiſe ro 
God. All the Nations may Praiſe him for her, Pſal: 65: 3, 4. Or, 
that ſhe may be praiſed, and become renouned, and: famous in the 


+ Heb. 


ſclente, 


Eyes of the Worid, ſeech. 60.9. © 61.9, 11. f Heb il 
8 The LORD hath ſworn by nis right hand #, and $7 


by the arm of his ſtrength, + Surely «, I will no more* ;, .; 5: 


give thy corn to be meat for thine enemy, and the ſons Jer. 5. 17 
x of the ſtranger ſhall not drink thy wine, for the which 


thou haſt laboured y 3 
# This, 


Chap. LUX. 


ſacred a Prophecy vy a {imilitude ſo abhorrent ro Nature, the Sos k 


Cha 


*Ch 4 
and 1; 


Chap. LXIT. 


#-38 # 
_ e.*Vhis, an4 the next verſe.are mmchto the ſame purpoſe, where- 

. inthe Prophet, to encourage them to their induſtrious Endeavours, 
te!!s them rhat the Lord had ſworr: to ſee to the proſperity of Jeru- 
falem ; Ard he names the Hard, ro fignifie his Faithfulneſs, as the 
giving of our hand nores our Fidelity, and 4rm to fignifie his Pow- 
er, the 41m of 1s ſtrength, 1. e. His ſtrong Arm ; Theſe being emi- 
nently to be engaged, and pur forth for his People, he ſwears by 
them. « Or, j7 1give, an utual Apoſzopeſss, an abrupt form of ſweat- 
ing, implying ſomerhing of an 117 precation, As great as Can be ex- 
preſſed, 9. d. never account me Faithful or Almighty, it Iaccom- 
pliſh not this = See chap. 61. 5. y The meaning is, that Mcar 
and Drink, and all neceffaries, that thou haſt laboured for, the Ba- 
bylonians took away from thee, but now it ſhal} bz {lo no more, 
te will not give thee up to the will of thine enemies. 


9 Bur they that have gathered ic z, ſhall eat ir, and 


*-Deur. Praiſe the LORD # ; and they thar have brought it to- 
 ,2.12.and gether, ſhall drink it * in the courts of my holineſs b. 

14-26.and 2(i.c.) The Wine mentioned in the former verſe, that have 

16411, 14. brought ir from their ſeveral Vineyards, and laid it in their Cel- 

| lars, every one {hall eat the Fruit of his own Labours; Thou thalr 

not ſow, and anorher reap, as formerly. @ They themſelves ſhall 

praiſe him, to wit, for his Bounty, and Goodneſs; and others alſo, 

that ſhall be partakers with them; God will be bountiful, and 

. they ſhall be thankful. +5 As i have commanded, Deut. 14+ 23. in 

| my Courts: Holineſs being put for God himſelf by a Metonymy of 

: the Adjuntt; alluding to thol2 anniverſary Feaſts, and Thank-oftter- 

, ings thar were to be eaten in thoſe places about the Temple, and 

: perhaps in ſpecial to that part which was appropriated to the 

Prieſts; implying herein, that they ſhould be all Prieſts, and, for 

ought Iknow, here may bean alluſion ro the great Goſpel-teaſt, 

or Thank-offering in the Lord's Supper, theſe Promiſes being nor 

| only applicable to, but do point at the Soul-protettions, and the 

Soul-proviſions of the Church of Chriſt. 
10 Go through, and go through the gates c; * pre- 
pare ye the way 4 ofthe people, caſt up, caſt up the 


high way, gather out the ſtones e, lift up a ſtandard f 


for the people g. 

| c It is doubl:d by way of Emphaſis, 9. 4. mike haſte to your 

| own Land, as if Cyrus thould ſay, get you out of Captivity as ſoon 

as you will, chap. 48. 20. Or, it may intimatean invitation iſſued 

out from them at Jeruſalem ro thoſe that were ſcattered about in 

the Captivity, therein poſſibly rypifying the going of Chriſt's Dit 

ciples into the various parts of the World, to bringrthoſe that were 

ſcattered up and down into the Church: Or, go meer the Gentiles, 

whom God purpoſeth to bring into the Church, that by pure Do- 

0; Atrine, and your holy Lives they 'may be the ſooner won. d Let 

© them not have any ob{truftions in their way, he ſeems to call u- 

pon others to prepare the way for them; Thus John was ſent to 

prepare the way for Chriſt, as was propheſied, chapter 40. 3. aCccor- 

dingly it is ordered to be caft up, ice chapter 57. I4- & Thar there 

2 no ſtumbling itone, or offence in their way: Or, 9.4. go to 

and fro, and remove every ſcandal that rhey may boggle at, Rem. 

14. 13. The former nores the c:rtainty of their Deliverance, Harbin» 

gers ſent before; this the ſpeed of ir, no impediment. f An alluſion to 

Soldiers, that uſually fer up their Standard that the Army may 

4 know whether to repair from all Quarters. See chapter 49. 22. and 

| lifting of it up, is that it may be more viſible, ſee chaprer 17. 10, I, 

IN 12. and this is Chriſt held forth in the preaching of the Goſpel. 
| g Or, over the People. 


11 Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed h unto the 
9. 9*. nd of the world, * fay ye to the daughter of Zion 5, 
Jo Behold, thy falvation # cometh, behold, his * reward 


*< 40.10. is With him, and His || work / before him. 
Rev. 2212 + This may be underſtood of Cyrus his Proclamation, being there- 
t9r,recom- unto direed by God, ſee 2 Chr. 36. 22, &C. 3 (i- e.) To Jeruſas 
wmpenſe. lem, or the Church, the ſumm of which Proclamation is in the fol- 
Jowing words. & Either 1. The time of it is come, .ch. 56. 1. and 
6s. 1. Or rather 2. The Perſon that effe&s ir, thy ſaviour, by a 
Metonymy of the Efficient, Luke 2, 30. 1 (i-e.) The Reward due 
to the Work, the ſame thing with the former; ſee of this on chap. 
40.15. Or, his Work is ready cut out for him, which heis to do: 
Or, he will induſtriouſly ſer himſelf about the Work that is before 
him; John 4. 34: and he is ſaid ro bring it wiz him, to wit, the 
Reward that he will give to his true Worſhippers. Or, he brings 
eternal Salvation with him, or the Reward of Redemption which 
is the Subje& of the next Chapter. 
i2 And they ſhall cal! them; The holy people m,, the 


redeemed of the LORD : and thou ſhalt be called, 


ſought out », a city not forſaken e. 

»» Or, they ſhall be called, or they ſhall be a peculiar ſeparate 
People, chap. 4. 3. n Or, one found that was loſt, ſee Ezek*34- 16. 
Or, foughfout, or fer, or one in great eſteem, one that the Genriles 
ſhould tcek ro join themſelves withal, ſo as to be one Church with 
| her : That reproach ſhould be wiped off from her, rhat #445 25 Stor 
whom no man ſeeketh after, Jerem. 3o- 17. Or, carcd for, to wit, by 
God, whom he hath out of infinite Love gathered to himſelf. 
» See verſe 4+ The meaning is, thar thus they ſhall eſteem the Go- 
fpel Church 3 ſhe ſhall be accoſted with ſuch falutations as theſe are, 
the Holy People, the Redeemed of the Lord, QC. 

CHAP LXEEL 
Ehriff's vifory over his Enemies, 1———6. And Mercy towards his Church : 
In Juagement remembring Mercy, 79——I4q+ The Churches Prayer and 
Complaint in Faith, 15 9. | 
"Rez. 19. WK TJ Ho is this p that cometh from Edom 9g, * with F 
43 died r garments from Bozrah s ? this that is F 


*Ch. 49.3- 
and17.14- 


® Zech: 
9. Ou 


ti * P. . . » » » 
ty; glorious in his apparel r, travelling in the greatneſs of 
ed. 1s friren]th wu 2 Þ£ thac ſpeak in righteouinels x, mighty 


« £3 

TO fave Jo 
p In theſe two verſes, either the Propher as in fome Viſion or 
Excatic, is put probably upon enquiry by God {imfelf, rather than 
by Ch;:5 or Michael, or Judas Maccabeus, as tome have thought, and 
the rather, becauie rhbis place doth thus ſuir beit with Chapter 5g. 
16, 17. Or, the Church makes eaquiry, and cat with admiration, 


\ 


who itis thit appears in ſnch a Habit or Poſture, : why at 
verſe 2+ q That isthe Country of [11mmes, where A mein " 
Eſau himſelf was {ſometimes called by this Name, Geneſis 25. 30. and 
It 15 put Synecdochically for all the encmies of the Church, as 
Moa5 1s, Ijaiah 25. 10. See the Notes. r Or, ftained, Thus Chrift is 
deicribed, Revelat. 19. 13.and lo alſo verſe 3. LXX. the redneſs of 
Garments. s- The Capital City of 1dwnes ; ſee further-chapter 3 

6. a parallel Text; ' and Erdom and Boxrah here are mentioacd T 
ther i, Not as relating to the places ſo called, bur by way of allu=" 
hon to the Garments of this Conqueror, Edom ſignifying Red and 
Bozra a Yinrage. The ene relating to his treading the Winepreſs 
and the other to the blood ſprinkied upon his Garments, verſe 2. 
the like manver of ſpe:king you have, Pſalnt 120. 5, Oc rather, 
2. Pur Synecdocaically for all th: enemics of the Church, :amon 
whom, though 417c:2r;t be not particularly deſigned, yet may bs 
reckoned, being one of the chiet of them, thus typifying Chriſt's 
Victories over all the enemies of the Church, Revelar. 19. 119, 20j 
21. and this is uſual; Babylon is pur for any deteſtable City an 
Moab for all that are vile and abominable, 1ſaish 10. ſo Edem 
here for all God's Enemies; And he mentions theſe 1dumeans ra« 
ther than the Chaldeans, who were the Jews chief and particular 
Enemies : 1. Partly to fer forth the greatneſs of the enmity, being 
of o'd ſtanding, and aninbred malignity,- Geneſis 25: 22, 23. and ir. 
reconcilable, and perpetual, Amos 1. 11. and particularly put forth 
when the Babylonians took Jeruſalem, Pſalm 137. 7. : 2. Partly to 
comfort the Jews, both becauſe God would take particular reve 
upon Ex0m, as he had threatned, and propheſied by Obaarah;- which 
is the ſubſtance of that whole Prophecy; And allo theſe being 
their near Neighbours, God dcth give them ſecurity, that they 
ſhall not only be delivered from the Chaldeans, thoſe remoter Ene= 
mies, but trom the Idumears alto, whoſe vicinity and neighbours 
hood might have been troubleſome to them.  - : Such as Generals 
are wont to march before their Armies in, or great Conquerors 
that walk in State and Gallantry from their Conqueſts:-: u I or 
according to the Majeity of his Gate, being an indication of the * 
greatneſs of his Strength, and intimating that he hath throughly 
done his Work, and fears no purſuing Enemy,*as the Lyon that 
keepeth his Majeſtick Gate withkour the fear of any other. Beaſt, 
Proverbs Jo. 3o. This notes the invincibleneſs of his Power and 
that it is his own Strength, he needeth not the help of Armies or 
other Inſtruments, and thus he will travel through all the Couns 
tries of his Enemies. x Here the Lord Chriſt gives an anſwer, 
wherein he borh aſſerts his Fdcliry, that he will faithfully perform 
what he hath promiſed, and that he will truely execute Juſtice 
pate 's ' - and hereby PEN diſtinguiſheth himſelf from all idol 
gods, /jaiah 45. 19, 20. 7 I have Power 11h I! 
as Powerful as Faithful, 1/aiah 19. 20. = EY vations _ | | 

2 Wherefore z * arz :hou red in thine apparel, and *Rey. || 
thy onermngs- I thee treadeth in the wine-fat. 13, | 

z Having enquired of the Perſon, now hz I ; 
of his Habit bei thus ſprinkled. MD "= _ 

3 I have trodden 2 the wine-preſs alone b, and of 
the people there was none with me c :. for I will tread 
them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury 4 
and their blood {hall be ſprinkled e upon my garments, 
and I will ſtain f all my raiment. erty 

2 i.e. I have deſtroyed the Enemies of my People, I have cruſh- 
ed them as Grapes are cruſhed, this being an uſual Metaphor to de= 
ſcribe the ucrer deltruQtion of a People, Pſalm 44. 5. Jaiah 25. r0.. 
Rev. 14. 19, 20. and the eaſineſs of doing it, no more than to cruſh 
a bunch of Grapes. 6 To note his Good-will, and great Power 
the Maſters of Vine-yards are not willing to do this drudgery 
themſelves, neither, if they would, could they be able rq mans ge 2 
whole Vintage by themſelves: But Chriſt was willing to undertake- 
it, and able ro go through it without calling in the help- of any o= 
ther. _ c 1. Not that he excludes the Jews, but the other Nations 
rhar dwelt about them, therefore he ſaith of che People there. was none 
w.th him, but Godand his own People may be reckoned as one Fudg 
5. 23+ Aad though this be true of his Paſſion, in which ſenſe ſome 
would carry it, yet doth it not ſo well ſuite with the deſign : For 
Chriſt is deſcribed here nor as a Prieſt Sacrificing, or ſhedding o 
his own Blood, but as a King, conquering and ſhedding che gk 
of his, and his Churches enemies ; Hence it is ſaid their blood, not 
his own ; to ſhew that it cannor fairly relate to his Paſſion ; Beſides 
Chriſt could expe& no help in that, *for he knew none cou'd ; but. 
here he looked, and wondred that there was none, v. 5. And though 
it may be ſaid, that he makes uſe of Inſtruments both in his Con- 
quering of temporal enemies,and alſo Spiritual,conſider 1. That here 
he ſpeaks as a Genera}, and therefore the whole Vittorie is aſcribed 
to him alone. 2. They do it not only by Commiſſion and Autho- 
rity derived from him, but by Strength conveyed to them from 
him, without which they could do no more than a Watch withour. 
a Spring, or Tool wittout the Work-man's ſtrength and skill: And 
that Chriſt may make it appear they are no Coadjutors that he needs 
he makes them bring abour ſuch things as they never deſigned, as 
he ſpeaks of the 4{jrian, ſee on chap, 10. 6, 7. and this is to be un- 
derſtood in like manner of Chriſt's Conqueſt over Spiritual enemies 
2 Cor, 4. 7. See Aiﬀs 3- 12, 13. d This latter expreſſion is bur ar. 
aggravating of the former ; It implies a kind of inſulting, an allt« 
ſion to Conquerors, who were wont to make the Conquered to lie 
down, that others might trample on them, chap. 51. 23. e Or, was 
Jorinkled. As in treading of Grapes theJuice ſparkles upon the cloths 
9.4. in his anfwer, thus came my Garments to be ſprinkled. fr 
ſhall not be, or it was 07 only ſprinkled, bur perfeUly ſtained, as 
it were rolled in blood, chap. 9. 5. ; | 

4 For the * day of vengeance g is in mine heart 5 a 
and the year of my redeemed 3 is come &. : *Ch.24:3:1 
g D-ſigned and purpoſed by me to take veneeance on the Ene- and 6. 2-M 
mics of my hurch. Or, particularly the Poſterity of Eſau; Day = 
and ear is all one, fave the Jatrer may have ſome reſpe& ro the 
length of their Captivity. + Or, was in my heart a defire of Exc. 
curion, Pſalm 45. 8. T have medirated or Nludied revence, being 
long foreborn hath wroughtin me reſolutions of Revenge therefore 


q- 
- Yo 


— 


: 

i 
ſ 
|, 
35 


34 
[1 
231 
5 
6 
| 


hb ns + 


wonder not that I am to bleody, noting the ſeverity of his Proe 
ccedings againft his Enemies. #7 The 7ovs have this title, becanGe 
6 C : 1 


z 
12 


eee RE _S 


CA 


= -- 3-334 — — 
DSI SHS — ISSN = 2 En RARITY 


Dd le cond 


. 46. 3. 


Ju.ro.16. ah 
Deur. 7. in his Pity a he 
5h dus and carried b them all the lays : 

all the afflitions they endured in Egypt ; 
nores the Sympathy that is in Chriſt, he havi 


Yue _ 
" 


| LX1T. , 


he redeemed thefi out of Ez 


ls at hand ; 
the verſe ſhe 


fer the Execution tilkthe fit time come ; 


of Jubilee.. 


6.16 5 * AndI looked 


7 Not that he needed it, for help implies a defe& of Power, or 
S&c. Bur ro-fee what Mcn 


Arm notes h 


work, chap. g. 4. 
d 1 


6 And 
and make 


down their ſtrength cothe earth | 
he Hebrew often ex prefſeth Calamities by a cup of Wine, or 


(1 
ſtrong drink, by which the diſtrefſcq Perſons are made drunk, ſal. 
75-8. chap. 51. 21, 22. they go as it were to and fro, not knowing | 
what to do with themſelves ; with their own 


JF*,, and wou! 


ſee Pſalm (o2. 13. chapter 34.8 


ws that Chriſt is 


iS People is the ſame chi 


is Strength, 
bur ſee on chap. 59. 1 
will tread down th 


them drunk s in my 


6, T7. 


fury, 
P, 


blood, chap. 49. 26 Rewelg: 16.6. þp Whate 
rength lies, their ſtrong ones, Or, 
.ouniels, &c. he will bring to the very du 
drunken men 


and 


LORD hath beſtowed 


on them, 


the mulricude 


towards:the houſe of Iſrael, 


On 


according to his 


he may all 


» And there was none to he! 


their ſtrong 


Of his loving kindneſſes, 


ſtill abour his Work, though he 
ude to the year 


It, therefore the Nang 


ng with ſtanding 


e people in mine anger, 
and I will bring 


ver It 


x, 


ne hath beſtowed 
and according to 


by way of argument wict; God ro ſhew them mercy, becau 
m 


7hat will not lie ft, fo he 
wittrin himſelf of old," when he made a Covenant 
Covenant, though 
upon them as my 


# To wit, 


our Fathers 


they are unworthy of me, 
Their enemies would perſwade themſelves, O the 
for, or looked af 
ep my Covenant; 
ſach obligitions : 
o after their I 


not God's People, 
ter, but God will 
they will not deal 


r, Ipreſu 


laid r, Surely 
was their 


,and brought them out of Egypr. 


me they will nor, 


prove unfairhful to me in ſerving Ba 


Now T 


5, 6. Pſaim 
. when none 


Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, &c, 
9 * In all their aMiition 
el of his preſence 3 laved 


x Becauſe © of 


+ 


ML30, in him, tha 


the Red-ſez 


ty, he afflied-nor ; 
either way it may be read according t 
ſpelling of Ls, whether by Aleph, or Pat. 


taken our; 


ron, 


a Z/gare, or 


brought them 
”vck was Chrif, 
neis, they were 


Chriſt's Lov 
loved them, 


bare them as a 


ternity, or a long rime paſt, 
aham or Msſcs, 
and it is uſed as an Argument to move 


Warry her, ti! 


their aff. ions no 
ons vere rather favours 


offer to abufe their kin 


of them: Or, he intimates here what they are 


lo be 


9, 9, 10. 
, then he 


to ſave, none to uphold 


them z: 
redemed them, and 


t the Church hath, and her Head 


afflition, 


through the 
th 


Angel, but Himſelf. 


e and Pity ſaved them for all tha 


many Generations paſt 


a3 


him 
11 he bring her unto lis Farher, 


renewed them. « To wir, on theſe 
on theſe Conditions he undertook the charge 
alone wa 


ſo the words may be read; 


By: way of eminericy, hence the LXX 
through the Red-ſea, the Wilderneſs, 


well as to come, 
from their Bondage in Egypt, to the time of Iſaiah, 


they are my people 5, children 


and Afhreroth, 


Ehus Parents are apr 


Or, they wi; 


ſaved 


But Chriſt himſelf. 
he was afflicted 


*1n his loye 
he * 


days of old. 


k 


p/; and 
: therefore 


, Or 


is wherein their 
Places, or deep 


advantages; 
2ggravate their great unkindnefs, or to 
1 diſtreſſes, or 


obliged to 
hopes, 
of them, Exod. 1g. 
s their Saviour: 
them, not Oyrus, 


x, and the 


bore chem, 


T2143 7%y 


d alſo out of BaZy'm. | 
The former part of 


de- 


_ 


ing, 


glve 


ſe he 


with 


y are 
dols, 


&c. 


I not 


and 


tet of it when It 


Chap. LYN 


70 But they rebelled, c and * vexeq his holy ſpirie d >* Exodus 
terefore he was curned to be their cICMy, e and he 15. 24. 
fought againſt them. | pc 

2.78.40, 


c Many of their Rebellions we read of in Exodus and Number; in 7 
their Travels. The Lo:d tells Moſes, that they bad tempted hi: ng 
cen times, and therefore ſeverely threatens them, Numb. 14. 22, we 
1, Were three mes of their Rebellion; 1 7, the ? 
Wilderneſs, Where they murmured for want of bread and Water, 
2. In Ca:amn, in not deltroying, bur on] Fributary fuch 
A 3. Before the Babylo- 
vity, when they ſer themſelves againſt the Prophets, 
whiclz 


- & 
Ys - 


and mind, and walking 

buc 
* the manner of Men, 
their Wiilis croſſed. ; Overthrew them 
nels, Pſalm 7g. 31, 33, $9, 60, &e, fending among them fiery Ser- 
pents, Numb, 21.6. but even in Canaan, Irring UP againſt them 
Adverlaries, ſometimes the Philiflines, anone the Midianites, and then 


the Moabites, &ce. 
I: Then f he remembred g the days + of old, Mo- 
Where 3s he that 


les and his Peopie b, ſaying, 
* brought them UP Out of the lea ;, with the [| ſhep- 
put his holy ſpi- 


f Heb. f 
erernity, 
" Excodug 
14. 30. 
Jer. 2. 6, 
. jl Or, Shepa 
8 This relates either, 1. To the People, and then He herds, as 
taken,and 10 it looks like the language of the People PL. 77. 20, 
muſt be read, he jha// remember. Or, 2.It may look * Neh, 9; 
condition in the Wilderneſs, and thus they may 20, 

ere 15 he? or that God that delivered his People 
1. * £0.90 the like for us now ? there is the like Phraſe uſed by 
Eliſha, 2 Kings 2. 14. Or rather, 3. To God as It were recolle&&. 
ing himlcit in a Patherical Proſopopaia ; is he? Where 
that moved me to help them of old, 
that I would now urn to be their Enemy? Or, is my hand ſhort. 
di verics he gives a 


herd & of his flock? here ;s he thac * 
rit } within him 2? 


Times mentioned, verſe 9. and th 
fel þ Or, whar 


Way of encouragement to them, when 
Ore troubles. Viz, Moſes, that brought our his 
People as a Shepherd doth his Flock; , Doth joyn« 
ed, Plalm 77. 20 1 £47 Lit 

furniſhed Moſes, 


roceedin 
the like agatn, and qualific I; : 


nſtruments for his Work, 


prefſed by the Right Hand, thar being uſually eſteemed the ſtrong. 
| b Or, the Rod in his Right Hand; by whch 


of Moſes, 
God's glorious Arm, as Parentslead their Chil. 
may h in the uſing of his Inſtru. 
ments. o The Red-ſea, 1. and alſo Jorean, 
Is. pÞ With reference both to his Power and Providence, 
ſpeQting either his 7 


g was 
o the different 
ſeems the more 


ind- 


olatrous People, yet 
t; It was becauſe he 


themſelves, 


bur 


3 O'am ſignifies an F- 


frighted, Metaphorically, 
they came to no harm Or, Properly that. though the Sea we bucnex.. 
Ty divided,yet it was ſo dried, thatthe mnd, as alfo the unevenneſs of 
i or theirſticking 
d, and \moothed by the wind, tht God ſeng 
P. 4+ 3, 4 5. RE 
e valley z, the ſpiri< 


fo didſt thong 


ſo the word is uſed, 
Or, alkiGing ta 
their going down from” 
coming out of it is called a going up, il. } now made 
through the Sea, orderly, and compoſedly, not like the Gadaren's 
Swine through conſternation, ready to break rhejr necks for haſte. 
# (i. e.) The Lord himſelf. :» Led them eaſily, that they thou!d 
not be Over-travelled, or fall down, or eome to any uury through 
wearineſs; thus Jeremiah expreſſeth it, ehaprer 31. 2, and thus God 
gave them reſt from ther enemies, drowning of them in che Sea, 
and in their ſafe conduQ, that they could nor annoy or dfturt» 
them, leading them till he found them 2 Place torreſling; che word 
for leading, and refling being much of : ike notion, 7ecp. 10. 6. 
pointing at their ſevera] reſts by the way, Numb, xo. 5 


3. cr It may 
be read” by way of Interrogation, as all the foregoing-words, and 


be the <Jole of that INiquiry, and where is the Spirit, that cartedg 


f 
; - Sq 
t:10 'S | 


SIS) -x 


Ld 


[Or, ; 
redeer 
from t 
| laſting 
' thy na; 


' 
| 


— 


| [Or, hey 
| favepoſeſe. 
ſed thy holy 
; Peoples for A 
| while 
PGIm 
14. 7. 


| Or, thy 
Name was 
Wt called 
Pon them: 


' Chap. LXUIF. 1 S 4 

; them to reſt? Or he 1:d them to Canaay the place of their ref, 

ſo called, D-utcron. 12. 9 and Pjalm g5. 11, y The Prophet here by 

| \ an Apoſtrophe doth only repeat the words in the name of te Jews 

f "that he had ſpoken before, verſe 1, 2. 9.4. as thou didit then, ſo 
mayeſt thou do again if thou pleafelt. 


FR is * Lock down from heaven &, and behold from 


16, 15, The habitation of thy holineſs a, and of thy glory ; 
| jOr, the Where is thy zeal b, and thy ſtrength c, || the found 


4 


| andof thy mercies towards me * 


| multitudes .1ng * of thy bowels 
| Jer. 31. are they reſtrained e? 
| Hoſz1 g _ = Now they, or the Prophet begin to pray, and expoſtulate with 
*** God, and rourgue both from the goodneſs of his Nature, and from 
the greatn-ſs of his Works, that he had done. God {ces every- 
where, and every thing, bur he is faid ro Jook down from Heaven, 
becaule there is his Thione whereon he its in great Majeſty, and 
Splendor. Behold is auded to note, that he would not on!y barely 
lee, and look on, but that he would behold with regard, and re- 
ſpc&@ his poor People in Captivity. 4 A deſcription of Heaven by 
a Periphraſe frequently uſed and explained, Deuter. 26. 15: 6 What 
is become of that Love, which of old would nor lc thee ſuffer 
thy People to be wronged, chapter 37. 32. © That Power of thine 
manifeſted in tho!e valiant A&s, whichthou didſt pur forth for thy 
People, Pſalm 145. 11, 12- and 150. 2. fee Jerem. 14. 9. 4 By the 
ſounding thereof may be underſtood thoſe Sympathizing ſighs, and 
compaſhonar groans, that proceed from the bowels, when they are 
affected, which being thought the ſubje& of Pity are often by a 
Metonymy put for Compaſſion, and hence proceed thoſe rumblings 
of the bowels occaſioned by ſtrong paſſions called Yernings; Ir 1s 
ſpoken of God after the manner of Men ? Is all this ſhut up from 
me? Tt ou that art naturally ſo compaſſionate, doeſt thou lay a re- 
ſtraint upon thy ſelf, that thy bo'vels ſhall not move towards me ? 
e Or canit thou be thus ſtraitned? Pſalm 77. 7, 8, 9. and chapter 
64. 12. an expoſtulation, that agrees very well with the next 
verſe, doubtleſs, Oc How can this come to pals ? 
16 Doubtieſs thou art our Father f, though Abra- 
ham g be ignorant of us, and Iſrael + acknowledge us 
 fOr, ow» Rot, thou, O LORD, art our Facher, || our Redeemer 2, 


redeemer Thy name is from everlaſting k. : 

| from ever- f Thus they urge God with that relation he ſtands in unto them, 
| laſting is Mal. 2. 10. therefore weas thy children expe& the bowels, and 
! thy name. Ccompaſlions ofa Father. g He w:'0 was our Father after the fleſh, 
| though he be dead, and ſo ignorant of our condition. þ Or, Jacob, 
who was alſo our Father, and therefore a vain thing to- call upon 
th-m ; Or if they were not dead, they could not help us out of our 
ſtreignts; Or if they were alive,we are ſo much degenerate,that they 
would not ewn us. Some ſay 4raham, and Iſrael are here me:tiomed, 
and not 1/aac. 1. Becauſe the Covenant was made more ſolemnly, 
and the Promiſes more frequently renewed with them, than with 
Iſaac. 2. Becauſe with 4braham the Covenant was firſt made, and 
the whole 1eed of 1/-ae! was taken int» it, but not ſo of 1aac. Or 
elſc, 3 4aham and Iſrael being named, Iſaac is included.  # This 
is urged as another argument for Pity, and the more becauſe their 
; Fathzr was their Redeemer, Deut. 32.6. k Or, Redeemer is thy name 
from everlaſting, thou haſt been our Redeemer of old. 


: 17 O LORD, why haſt thou made us to err from 
thy ways 1, and hardned our heart from thy fear » # 
Return for thy ſervants ſake », the tribes of thine in- 


heritance 6. 

| I Commandments: Itis the Language of the Godly among them 
| being troubled, and therefore comp-:aining that ſo gracious a Father 
ſhould leave them to ſuch Exigences: Made us to fin by withdrawing 
thy Spi:it, and leaving us to our ſelves, Pjalm $1. 12. It 1s not 
| to be underſtood, as if God did forcz them to it, but either letting 
looſe their hearts, or by giving occaſion to their hearts, being na- 
turally too apt to Apoſtatize by their ſevere affliftions ; lee this 
more cleared in the Latine Synopfis: Or, make us deſperate by 
leaving us ſo long under the Oppreſlion of the Adverfary, thereby 
| caſting off thy Worſhip. 2 Or fear of thee, to wit, as the object, 
Pſalm 5.7. or that we may not fear thee, a$\ſeeing, that they may not 
; ſee, Plalm 69. 23. or thy ſervice, chapter 29. 13. ſo as to go after 
other gods. » Either our godly Fore-fathers, or particularly to 
Abraham, Iſaac, *c. To wit, For the { ke of thy Promiſes made to 
them: Or rather, our ſakes, thar little remnant that are thy Ser- 
vants, be reconciled to us, Pſzim go. 13- for the next words ſeem 
to be put by appoſition to the former. o Either, 1. The People 
themſelves, which were divided into tribes; Or rather, 2. The 
Land of Canaan, which God gave them as an inheritance, as appears 
by the next verſe, 9. 4. Whar will thine enemies ſay if thou ſuffer 
; us to periſh, or thine Inheritance to be deſtroyed; Or rods, meaning 
| [Or. e; the Rulcys, ſee chap» 43. 28. or Heads of their Tribes. 
EE: nol 18 || The people of thy holineſs p have poſſeſſed zz 
ſdthy lol but a little while q : * our adverſaries have trodden 


1 pple for a down thy Sanctuary r. 


a 


\ 


ſet a part for his Servants; Hlj- 


while, p Or thy holy People, as being 

*Plalm neſs being to be underſtood for a Covenant ſeparation from other Peo- 

14. 7. ple. i- e. 1. Comparatively to the Promiſe which was for ever, 
though they had poſleſſed it bur 1400 Years. Or, 2. It ſeeming to 
them ſo, as things, eſpecially ſuch as are deſireable, ſeem when they 
are paſt, Job g. 25, 26. and Pſalm go. 4. Or, 3 They enjoyed bur 
ſmall ſpaces of time in quietneſs, ſo they had ſmall enjoyment of it. 
Or, 4. It may reſpe& the Temple which ſtood bur 490 Years. r The 
Temple called the San#uary from the holineſs of it; this ouradverſa- 
ries the Babylonians have trodden down, 1 Chro 36. 19. and this alſo 

|| Or, :5y implies their ruining 'of their whole Ecclcſtaſlic:l Policy. 

tame was 19 We are thine s, thou never bareſt rule over them 

ur called + + || they were not called by thy name «, 

don them; *; We continue ſo; weare in C-ver:anr, which they never were; 


and thus it is an Argument they uſe with God to look upon them. 
Or, the word thine, veing not in the Texr, ſome do otherwiſe inter- 

ret it; We are even :m the fame condition we vere in at ficlt, 
either in Egypt, or Ur of the Chala.es, before thou broughreſt us into 
Covenant, and are accordingly dealt with ; We are become ever as 


> Ab) 31- 


7 A H. Chap, Lx&i 
awit uever ruled over us of old. # Not in that manner, or in that 1489 
.clation to rh<m, that t! ou didſt over us. ' « Neither owned thee, 1A 
nor owned . y chee ; this P.raſe implies a-near relation in ſome Cir« kl 
cumſtance or other, as Wife, or Servant, or Chiid, &. chap. 4. 1. 
CHAP. UL XTY. 
The Churches Prayer continued: for the illuſtration of Gods Glory, g——=5: 
pri a confeſſun of therr Sins: And complaint of therr Affliions, 
—, | 


h | 
+3 $10 BY: 
THU E1 
l Ta | 
14 : 
14 i 
1! 1 
| 
” i 
| £ 
| # | 
q ' 
} ' 


wou:deſt come down, that * the mountains might Kong 9! 
IC. I.! þ it j 


S 
Oo 
< 
a 
Qu 
© 
cf 
=_ 
© 
=_ 
a 
mt 
QA 
S 
© 
W 
My 
© 
= 
T 
wW 
OD 
f-] 
DPD 
=9 
| 
-y} 
© 
bw) 
Land 
© 
>) 
© 
hay 
O 
a) 
© 
S] 
4 
UT 
Q 
© 
bo] 
5 


cauſeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known # Tb þ MY 
to thine adverſaries, :hat the Nations b may cremble at fre of me\MIING 
thy preſence. 2. -.- + .. ings. Wl 

z Come with ſuch Zeal for thy Peop'e, that the ſolid Mountains 
may be no more before thy breath, than Metal that runs, or Wa- 
ter that boils by the force of a vehement fire; and thus, for the' 
moſt part, when God will take vengeance of his enemies, the 
Scripture expreſſeth him coming with fire. a Thy Power kaown, 
that thine enemies, and perſecutors of thy Church may know thy 
Power, and that thy Name may be dreaded among them 3 Hig 
Name put for his Power, Pfalm 106. 8. 6 Nor the Babylomans enly, 
bur the Nations round atour. WWAu! 

3 When * thou didſt terrible things c which we »x,,4. 

looked not for 4: thou cameſt down, the mouneains 34. ro. i 


flowed down e at thy preſence. _- - --- Judg. 54 
© This may relate to what he did among the Ezyptians, though 5- Pſal.6 
it be not recorded, and aft=rward in the Wilderneſs. 4 Y*. Our 8- Hab. 


Forefathers, of whoſe Race we are : Before we expeQed them; Of 3: 
{ſuch things as we could never expe&t e-q, 4, Scing thou haſt 
made the Mountains thus to m:1r, thou canſt do the ſame again : 
This may alude either, 1. To thoſe ſhowers cf Rain that felt with 
that terrible Thunder and Lightning, and fo ran violently down 
thote Mountains, and the adjacent, as is uſual in ſuch Tempeſts. 
Or rather, 2. The runing along of the fire upon the ground, Exo7. 
9. 23, 24. Tr is poſſible it may alude to thoſe Mountains, that do 
caſt torrh ſulphureous matter, running down into the Valleys a 

Sea, like meJr:d ſtieams of fire. And Kings, Princes, and Pctens | 
; fates, may alſo metaphorically be underſtood by theſe Mountains. | 

4 Por ſince the beginring of the World * men have xp}; 21 
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the x Cor.2 
eye || ſeen f, O God, belides thee, g hat he hath pre- |.Or, ſew 
pared for him that waiteth þ for him. Gre 6 

f Whereas there are but three ways, whereby Men ordinarily m_ | 
come to the knowl-dge of a thing, to wit, by the Ear, eirher our which 
own hearing, or by hear-lay; and by the Eye, and by Reaſon, db fo \ 
which the Apoſtle adds, where he makes uſe of this Text, 1 Cor. 2. hin, Ge I 
9. two of them are mentioned here. g With reference either to 

rhe Gods thar do them, never any other God could do like thee : 
Or, to things done, never any #id:s thee could do ſuch things ag 
were never 1ecn, or hcard of; he r<fers to thoſe terrible things men« 
tioned in the former verſe. I: ſeems to be clear by comparing this 
with Deur. 4. 31, 32,33, 34, 35- Not tobe reſtrained to thoſe, but 
to be applied to ail rhe wonderful Works, that God ar all times 
wrought for his People: And thus they are a Plea with God, thar 
they might well expe&t ſuch things from kim now, that hid done 
ſuch wonderful things fo: their Fatie:'s of old. h The Apoſtle 
tath it, that Love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. To ſhew that none can wart on 
him,that Love him not ; ſo all that Love him will wait on lim. This 
may be taken with reference both to the State of Grace and Glo- 
roy, thoſs incomprehenſible things that are exhibited through. 
Chriſt in the myt'eries ofthe Goſpel, as well as the good things of - 
this preſent life, which the Prophet may here literally aim at, it 
being not unuſual for the Prophets in mentioning theſe temporal 
things to point at Spiritual, ejpecially being things that do ſo well 
ſuit with each other. : 

5 Thou meetreſt ; him that rejoyceth, and work- _ I 
ech righteouſneſs &, *rhoſe that remember thee in thy ways *Ch. 26.2; i 
/: Behold, thou art wroth, for we have ſinned : in t1 
thoſe is continuance », and we lhall be ſaved o. 

; Or, waft wont to meet: Or, thou preventeſt him, ch. 65. 24? 
and Pſalm 21. 2, 3. as the Father the Prodigal. k Viz. That rejoyce 
to work Righteouſneſs, the ſame thing expreſſed by two words, by 
a Figure called Hendiadis. 1 An amplification of the former words, 
9.4. To walk inthy ways, whether of Providence, Preceptor Coun« 
tel, by vertue of the Covenant they have with thee. 22 Or, greatly 
angry, for, or becauſe we have ſinned, and provoked thee to nk 
thereby, 4 Kings 8.46. 21.e. to thoſe that work Righteouſneſs : in 
for to. 0 Viz. In ſo doing, in workiag Righteouſneſs. Or as fome 
by way of Interrogation ; in zhoſe, 1. e. In our fins is continuance, 
and ſhall we be ſaved? Orin thoſe, viz. Works of Righteouſneſs, in 
keeping of them is our continuance, and means to be ſaved ; Or 
thou continueſt to ſhew Mercy, and or therefore we ſhall be faved. 


ticy, whom thou didft not bear Rule over. Or, we are as if thou | 


The meaning of the place is to comfort the Godly, . that though 
they may have provoked God by their fins, yet looking upon the 
ways of God's former proceedings (in which he ſtill continues; 

CT Ci ' _ being 


\ 6. 


Tof. 7.7. 


th.29.16 
FL - 9- 
. 18.6. 


4 © 


-, 


TT 


Palm 
F 9. 8, 


LXIV. 


_ cations; Or elſe, to their Perſons. 


, were cut off. 


0.9. 20, 


being unchangeable) they may find hopes of Salvation, and ths is 
that which is amplified in the three following verſes. 

6 But we are all as an unclean zhing p, and all our 
righteouſneſles 9 are filthie raggs r, and we all do * fade 
asa leaf s, and our iniquities, as the wind, have taken 
us away #. 

p He alludes, either ro things unclean under the Ceremonial 
Law, wherein the Leproſy was found, and wasto be burnt, Levzs. 
T3: 55. or rather to Perfons unclean. They compare their preſent 
Kate with the former. q. «4. Formerly there were ſome that fear- 
ed thee, and walked uprightly beforethee, and were in thy favour; 
But now we are all as one polluted maſs, nothing of good left in 
us by reaſon ofan univerſal degeneracy, Iſaiah 1. 4, 6. 9q This ac- 
cording to the moſt Commentators, reters either to the Obſervances 
of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, wherein they thoughr 
their Riohteouſneſſes did much conſiſt; Or to the beſt work, and 
aQions that can be performed by us; Or to our natural, univerſal 
depravitics: Bur the beſt Interpreters, and ſuch as aim at the pecu- 
liar ſenſe of the place, refer it to the groſs provocations that this 
people were guilty of, cauſing God to caſt them out of their Habi- 
1. e. The meſt Righteous a- 
mong us, and being plural, it raiſeth it up to the higheſt degree, 
the Scripture frequently putting the Abjira# for the Concrete, as Wiſ- 
dems for the greateſt Wiſdom, Prov. g. 1. and many the like inſtances 
formerly given, ſo that the meaning is, the very beſt of us all are 
no better than the uncleaneſt things or Perſons, ſee Micah 7. 2, 3, 
4. and the rather becauſe he lived about the time of Jſaiah. r A 
cloath made up of patches, or ſuch as come from a putrid ſore, or 
are defiled with the menſtruous blood of a Woman, the LXX. as a 
rag of one that fits down, poſſibly alluding to Rachel, Gen. 31. 34, 35- 
or whatever may be molt filthy. s Blown off the tree, and ſo wi> 
thers. #2 Cartied us away to Babylon from our Habitations, as leaves 
hurried away by a boiſterous Wind ; our iniquities have been the 


.. procuring Cauſe. 


- And * there 5s none « that calleth x upon thy name, 
that ſtirreth up himſelf to take hold of thee y: for z 
thou haſt hid thy face from us, and haſt + conſumed us 
8, becauſe of our iniquities 6. 


# Or yet, there is none. i, e. Few, Pſalm 14 3. they are not to 
be de diſcerned among the multitude. x Suchas call upon thee as 
they 'ought, as Jacob, and Moſes, and David, &c. did, which often 
peeyeney the ruine of a State or Kingdom : Ir points our the univer- 

1 Apoſtacy of the laſt times of the Jewiſh State, for which they 
y Either to ſtay thee from departing from us, ſee 
24. 28, 29. or to fetch thee back, whendeparted, Jerem. 12.7. 


_ Or it is an Alegoricol allufion to one ſtruck down and ſtill ſmitten, 
'* but never ftirs to lay hold on the arm that ſmites him, chap. 27+ 5. 


it notes their great ſloathfulneſs, and.careleſneſs, and ſome refer it 
To their lukewarmneſs, and dead heaxzedneſs, relying upon their 
Priviledges before they went into Captivity, and ſo a great Preſage 
vftheir approaching Judgements. z Or when; ſo the Particle 1s 
uſed, Job 5. 21. Pſalm 75. 2. a Or melted; our fins have kindled 
ſuch a fire of thy wrath, that we are melted with it. þ Heb. 7» 7he 
of our iniquities. 1. e, Either, in the place of our 1511quiries, 
the Land wherein they were committed ; or, into the hands of our 
Iniquities to be puniſhed by them, and as it were conſumed, or 
melted down, or our ſtrength exhauſted by them, as wax before 
the fire Levir. 26. 39. Exzk. 33.10. or, as we tranſlate it, our ini- 
quities being rhe procuring Cauſe of it. 
8 But now, O LORD, thou art our Father c: we 


ere theclay «d, and thou our potter, and we all are the 
work of thy hand e. 


e An argument, or pathetical plea for Pity ; or notwithſtanding 
all this,thou art ourFarther both by Creation and by Adoption, there- 
fore Pit us thy Children. 4 A Metonymy of the matrer, clay for 
the eſfels made of clay : Or, we are clay, pointing at our Original 
matter : Or, it may relate to their ſtate, thar God framed them into 
a Body Civil and Eccleſiaſtical our of a confuſed multitude ; They 
plead at the ſame time their own frailty, why they would be piti- 
ed, and God's Covenant-intereſt in them, why he ſhould piry 
them. e Another argument of the ſame nature with the former, 
Pſalm 138. 8. not only as men, but as a Body of Men made thy pe- 
culiar People. | 

9 Be not * wroth very fore, O LORD, neither re- 


member iniquity for ever f: behold, ſee, we beſeech 


thee, we are all thy people g. 

 f To wit, Thou haſt been angry with us a long time, be not ſo for 
ever, but deal with us as may beſt conſiſt with a Father's bowels : 
It hath reference both ro Qyantity and Time, that it might not be ve- 
ry great, nor of Jong durance. See on Pſalm 79. 8. g Thy Pecu- 
Gar People, Chap 63. 19. Another argument to back the former Pe- 
tition, Pſalm 28. 9. Though we are very bad in our ſclves, and very 
badly handled by our Enemies, thou ſuffereſt in our ſufferings, for 
thou haſt no People in Covenant but us, and wilt thou nor leave 
thy ſelf a People in the World? 


Io Thy holy cities b are a wilderneſs, Zion 1s a wil- 


_ derneſs, Jeruſalem is a deſolation 3. 


h Either Sion, and Jeruſalem, being the Cities they inſtance in, 
g. d, Thy holy Cities, wiz. Sion, and Feruſalem : Or rather, other 
Cities alſo in the Land of Judes, beſides theſe two, called Holy, Ei- 
ther, 1. Becauſe they were built upon God's Inheritance, Chap. 63. 
x17. Or, 2. Becauſe they were inhabited by the Jews, who were an 
holy People, Deut. 5 6. Dan. 12.7. Or, 3. Becauſe God had his Sy- 
nagoguesin them, Pſa! 74. 8. For all which reaſons alſo they are cal- 
Jed Thy Cities. i Utterly waſte, not only the ordinary Cities, but 
even Jeruſalem, and Sion themſelves, the one called the Upper Jeruſa. 
lem, or, the City «ef David, becauſe it was built upon Mount Sen; the 
other the Lower City, becauſe it lay under the Hill of $:0# inthe Val- 
ley ; he particularizeth Sioz and Jeruſalem, though he had mentioned 
the other Cities before, b<cauſe the Chiefeſt of the Cities, it being uſu- 
al notwithſtanding the mentioning of Generals, in which all the par- 
ticu/ars, or individuals, are included, to name the particular again ; 
as, and fromthe hand of Saul, Palm 8. Title. 
1x Our holy and our beautiful houſe #, where our 


ZZ = & A 


fathers / praiſed thee, is burnt up with fire: ang all 
our pleaſant things are »» laid waſte. 

& The Temple, ch. 60. 7,q.4. Not only our Cities, and our Princina] 
Ciries, but even our Temple, which we ke Sacred and "behenwarn 
in which we have gloried, becauſe it was Thine, and our Father's, ang 
Ours, the Place where thy holy Service was performed, and thy Glory 
and Preſence was manifeſted. 1 Not preſuming to mention Ro 
felves, they had been ſo every way abominable, but their Farh::s 
m The King's Palace, and the Houles of the Nobles,and other pieces 
of State and Magnificence, 2 Kings 25. 9. Lam. 1. 7, 10. Or, their 
Synagogues: Or, thoſe ſtately Pieces about the Temple. ; 

12 Wilt thou refrain thy ſelf for theſe :bings », O 
LORD ? Wilt thou hold thy peace os, and aflict us very 
ſore p? 

n Viz. That are done by the Babyloniaw; do none of theſe things 
move thee to take vengeance on them? o Wilt thou be as one thar 
regards not? Wilt thou be ſtil}, and ſuffer them? p See verſe yg. 
For theſe our fins, or for theſe our ſufferings ; ſhall we feel the 
1mart of it, that have done no ſuch thing, but have been ſufferers 
under the Babylonians? To which God anſwers in the next Chapter. 

CHAP. LAY. 
The calling of the Gentiles, 1. The Jews for their Incredulity, Liolatry, and 

Hypocriſie, rejefted, 2——7, A Remnant ſhall -be ſaved, 8 ; bo. 

Judgements on the Wicked, and Bleſſings 0n the Godly, 11 16. The 


Flour iſhing and Peaceable State of the New Jeruſalem, 17 26. 


my name. 

That in the primary Senſe of this Text, it is a Prophecy of the Converſion 
of the Gentiles, upon the Reje&ion of the Jews, for their contempt and 
erucifying of Chrift, cannot be aoubted by any, who will not arrogat to them= 
Jelves a greater Ability to interpret the Propheſies of the Old Teftoment, 
than Pau) had, who, Rom. 10. 20. expre/ly ſo interpreteth it, and applieth 
it, which ſheweth the vanity of the Jews in their other Interpretations of it. 

a The word ſignifies properly a diligent Enquiry in things re- 
Jating to God, 2 Cor. 14. 4. Pſalm 34. 4. Jerem. 37. 7. Iam dili- 
gently _—_ of by them. 6b That 1n times before made no en 
quiry after me ; ( as the Gentiles, who are ſaid to be without God 
inche World, Epheſ. 2. 12.) As ſeeking may more ſtriQly relate to 
Prayer, as the word is uſed, Jjaiah 55. 6. 1o - this ws tranſlated 
aked, may alſo be ſo taken, and is ſo, 1 Sam. 1. 20. 1 Sam. 22. 
13. But ( poſſibly ) ic is better interpreted more generally. 
c Yea, I was founi of them before they ſought me, thoſe who fore 
merly did not ſeek me, now ſeek me, but they were found of me 
before they ſought me, 1 prevented them by my Grace, ſending my 
Son to preach Peace to thoſe that were afar off, Epheſ. 2. 17. and my A- 
poſtles to jntreat them ro be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.' 20. and 
my Spirit 8 convince the World of Sin, Righteduſneſs, and Judgement. John 
16. 8, d I invited whole Nations by the preaching of my Goſpel 
to behold me, and I invited them with importunity, doubling my 
Words upon them, and this I did unto a Natiow not called by my Name, 
with whom I was not in Covenant, and which did not profeſs any 
Relation to me, which none of the Gentiles could pretend unto. 
The Prophet ſpeaks of a thing to come many Years after, as if it 
were a thing then done,to ſignifie the certainty of it, God deth the 
ſame thing yer in every ſoul that is Converted. But the Text is ma- 
nifeſtly to be interpreted of the Converſion of the Gentiles. 

2 I have ſpread out my hands e all the day long to a 
rebellious people f, which walketh in a way that was 


not good g after their own thoughts 5. 

e Applicd to the Jews, Rom. 10« 21. 1have ſtretched out my Hand, 
That 1s, I have uſed.all probable means to reduce them, I have 
ſtretched our the Hands of a paſſionate Orator to perſwade them, 
of a tender Mother to protef and defend them, of a liberal Bene. 
fattor to load them with my Benefits; This I have done continual. 
ly in the whole courſe of myProvidence with them. Yer f they are 
a rebellious people ; Paul expoundeth it by & #497 vT4 x3 4178184yore, 
a People not perſwaded, not believing, but contradicting the Will 
of God. g That walketh in a way that i not good, that term, rs nor 
good, often ſignifies what is very bad, ſee 1 Sam. 2. 24. Prov. 28.21. 
and 24+ 23, Pſalm 36. 5, Though all fins be not equal, yet what is 
not good is bad. h After their own thoughts, What is here called after 
their own thoughts, 1s elſe-where called a walking after the imaginations 
of their hearts, an ordinary Phraſe, by which fin (eſpecially ſins in 
the matter of the Worſhip of God) are expreſſed, Eight times in 
the Prophet Jeremiah finning is thus expreſſed, Jer. 3. 17, and 7. 24, 
and 9. 14+and 11.8. and 13. 10. and 16: 12. and 18. 12: and 23.17, 
ſoalſo Deut. 29. 19. Errors in matter of Worſhip are ordinarily 
thus expreſſed, certainly to let us know, that a Worſhip muſt be accor- 
ding to Gods revealed Will, and of ſuch errours this Text ſeemeth 
by what followeth, to ſp*ak, though indeed, the reaſon of all fin is 
mens fondneſs of their own imaginations, in oppoſition to God's 
revealed Will, whence it is that Self-denial is made the Law of a 
Diſciple-ſhip to Chriſt. 

3 A _ that provoketh me to anger z continually 
to my 


incenſe || uponaltars of brick /. 

7 Thar the Jews are the People here intended is without que- 
ſtion; The Propher ſpeaking of the calling of the Gentiles upon 
their RejeQtion, reckons up their ſins, which were the cauſes. For 
though their reje&ion and crucifying of Chriſt, was that ſin which 


| was the proximate cauſe, yet God did but viſit on that Generation 


their Iniquities, and the iniquities of their fathers togeth#, they having 
by that at filed up their meaſure, They had provoked God continu- 
ally to anger to his face, &k Either in his Temple, the place where 
he uſed to manifeſt himfelf: Or (conſidering what followeth) more 
probably the Phraſe ſignificth their impudence, not taking notice 
of God's Omnipreſence, and omniſciencg. 1 The particular pro- 
vocations inſtanced in, are deviations in the matter of divine Wor- 
ſhip. Sacrificing in gardens is one thing inſtanced, and burning 3n- 
cenſe on brick, or altars of brick, is another, Deuteronomy 12« 13. there 
was a Particulas tar of Gold appointed for Incenſe, Exvdur 4: + 

: o 


Chap. LXy. 


am ſought &« of them; that asked not for me b: I am Rom. g: 
found c of them that ſought me not; TI ſaid, Behold 3+ 25 26: 
me, behold me, unto a nation 4d 1hat was not called by Eph. 2. : 


T3. 


ace k, that facrificeth in gardens, and burneth ,, ao 


br ick , 


Chap 


lor,prec 


1 Wd, 


Chap. LXV. 


for, p/ecer, 


Or, agner. 


God commanided, Exod, 20. 24, 25. that his Altars ſhould be made 
of Earth, or rough ffone. This p-ople tranſgreſſed both theſe Laws, 
ſacrificing in gardens, for which the Prophet refle&ed on them, ch. 
1. 29. and again, ch» 66. 17 .whether in gardens conſecrated to Idols, 
or in ſuch Gardens as the Heathens worthipped Idols in,is not much 
material for us to know, and burning Incenſe upon altars of Brick, di- 
re&ly contrary to the divine Rule, Their Worſhip was doubtleſs 
Idolatrous, and theſe Phraſes ſignifie committing Idolatry, but the 
expreſſing that ſin by theſe Phraſes lets ns know that the doing 
contrary to the direCtion of the Divine Rule in God Worſhip is a 
great part of the ſinfulneſs of 1dolatry. , 
4 Which remain amongſt the graves mz, and lodge 1n 
the monuments », which eat {wines fleſi s, and || broth 


of abominable things p is in their veſlels. 

m They remained among the Graves, either there expe&ing Revela- 
tions by dreams, or there conſulting with Devils, who were thought 
ro delight in ſuch places, or to pratiſe Necromancy, all which were 
forbidden, Deut. 18. 11. ch. 8. 19. »n And they lodged in the Monu- 
ments, the Hebrew word hereuſed gives advantage to Interpreters to 
vary in their ſenſes. The word ſignifies only placeskepr, or obſerved, 
ſome Interpret it of Idol 'Temples, ſome of Caves and Denns, in 
which the Heathens uſed to worſhip their Idols, ſome of Tombs or 
Monuments for dead perſons; belides the Idolatry of the thing, 
there was in it a ſinful imitation of the Heathens, avd a ſwerving 
from the Rule which God had given them. o They alſo ate Swines 
fleſh, contrary to the divine Law, Lev. 11. 7. Dent. 14. 8. and they 
indured in their veſſels, p Broth of abom:nable things, ſo the word is uf- 
ed, Jud. 6. 19, 20. others read it parts or pieces of abominable things, 
that is, broth, or pieces of ſuch fleſh as was to the Jews unclean by 
the Law, Levit. 11. Every Creature of God is good, bur Gods Prohi- 
bition had made the fleſh of divers Creatures an abominable thing to 


T$S AI 7 H. Chap. xl 


inicc, ſo will Ido for my ſervants ſake d, that TI may 
not deſtroy them all. 

b Theſe words mutt be conceived as a gracious anſwer from God 
to the Prophet, ſaying as Abraham, Gen. 18. 23, 25. or as Moſes, Exod.' 
32. 11, 12, 13. pleading Gods covenant with Abraham, Iſaac, and 1/- 
rael, To this God replieth, that he intended no ſuch \.verity. the 
unfaithfulneſs ofmen ſhould not m: ke his promiſe of no cffe&t, Row. 
3- 3- His threatning ſhould be made good upon the generality of 
this people, whoſe Yine was of Sodom, and of the fields of Gemorrhs, 
Deut. 32. 32. ©c Bur yer, asina Vineyard, which is generally un< - 
fruitful, there may be ſome particular Yine that brings forth fiuit,or 
as 1n a Yine which is full of luxuriant vranches that bring forth no fiuit; 
there may be here and there a branch, that bringeth forth fiuir, and 
and hath the hopes of nen win in theclufer, -and as ro ſuch, the Gar« 
diner bids his Servant deſtroy :t nor, or them met ; for they are fruitful, 
there is in them what ſpeaketh Gods b/zſmg, or what may be of uſes 
and do us good. 4 So( faith God) wil I av for my Servants ſake, 
that 1 may not deſtroy them all, either for the ſake of my Servants, 4: 
braham,. Iſaac, and Jacob, with whliom I anciently made a Covenant, 
or for my Servant Davids ſake, or for the ſake of ſuch as are my £: 
leF, at thistime amongſt them, ſee Jer. 30 11. Amos. g. 1. ; 

9 And 1 will bring a ſeed out of Jacobe, and out of 
Judah f, an inhericor ofmy mountains g : and mine e- 
lect þ (hall inherit it, and my ſervants ſhall dwell there. 

e No ſeed beareth a proportionto the tree, or plant that it protlus 
ceth, but in compariſon with that is very little, yer it is enough 
through the vertue which the God of nature hath pur into it,to pres 


| 


the Jews, they might nor touch their fleſh, Lev. 11, 28. but they | 
taking the meaſures of their duty from their Appetite, or from their | 
Reaſon, concluding from natural Principles, made no Conſcience | 


of the poſitive Law of God. This was their iniquity which is fur- 


ther aggravated in the next verſe. | 
5 Which ſay, Stand by thy ſelf, come not near to me, 


noſe r, a fire that burneth all the day. | 

9 Though they were ſo exceedingly guilty, yet they pretended 
to a ſingular San&ity, ſo as they would not ſuffer others to come 
near, or touch them.” The Samaritans are uſual'y charged with 
this uncharitableneſs, and the uſe of this form of Words, but as 
ſome do more excuſe the Samaritans than 'the other Jews as te this 
rigour ſo it may be queſtioned wherher they were nor at this time 
carried into Captivity : and certain it is, that amongſt the Jews 
there was ſuch a generation from whom the Phariſees in our Savi- 
ours time were derived, and this was the reaſon of their not eating, 


- except they waſhed, when they came from the Market, Mark 7, 4. leſt per- 


* 
* 

4 
* 


adventure they ſhould there have touched ſome Heathen, or ſome 
perſon who was legally unclean. » Thus they eſteemed themſelves 
holfer than others, though all their holineſs lay in th:ſe rituals, and 
thoſe too ſuch as God never commanded. And indeed thoſe who 
moſt exceed in ſuch ritual Holineſs ( lying meerly in a ſeparation 
from others, by the uſage of ſome unwritten traditions) come moſt 
ſhort in moral and true Holineſs : For of theſe God ſaith, Theſe are 
& ſmoak in my noſtrils, a fire that burneth allthe day ; thatis, a continu- 


; promiſe of God lives in a few,when the generality of a people for their 
{ ſinsare caſt off and deſtroyed. The favour of God to men, an 

the promiſe of God to good men, lived iti one family of Lo#, when 
for I am holier than thou q: Theſe are a ſmoak in || my , the tive Cities were burned, and in the one family of Noah, when 


al provocition to me : as ſmoak is an offence to our, Noſes, Prov.1o. 26. | 


which ſeemeth to be the ſenſe rather than what ſome make, who ' | | l 
. Vally of Achor & a place for the herds to lie down in, 


| ; for my people that have ſought me /, 
6 Behold, it is written for me s, I will not keep fi-| Y - PEOPLE INE INES OUS ME 


make it a threatning of Gods wrath ſmoaking againſt them, which 
is ſufficiently expreſſed in the following verſes. 


lence t ; but will recompenſe even recompenſs inco 


their boſom « 5 

s They may think that I take no notice of theſe things, or if [ 
take any notice, I will forget them, or at leaſt notenter into judg- 
ment with them for them ; bur I as certainly know and will re- 
member them, as Princes or great men that record things in writ- 
ing which they would not forget.And they ſhall know that I know, 
and take norice of, and will remember them ; for : I will not long 
negle& the puniſhment of them, though for a while I havedelayed 
it like a man who bires in his wrath, for ſome wiſe reaſons which 
are known unto himlſe)f beſt. Pſal. 50. 21 » My puniſhment of 
them ſhall be ſevere, and certain; bur yer it ſhall be juſt,bura giving 
them what is their own, as they are obnoxious to my Juſtice, Fer. 
32, 18. Deut. 7. 16. like the payment of an Ox for an Ox,Exod.21.36. 
( where the ſame word is uſed) rhey have been froward againſt me, 
and I will ſhew my ſelf froward againſt them, Pal. 18. 26. 

7 Your iniquities, and th- iniquities of your fathers 
together x( ſaith the Lord ) which have burnt incenſe 
upon the mountainsz, and biaſphemed me upon the hills 
z 3; therefore will I meaſure their former work into 


their boſom «4. | 

* Yea, and when I reckon with them, I will puniſh them, not 
only for their perſonal ſins, bur for the ſins of their Parents, which 
they have teſtined their approbation of, by continuing in them, and 
£ made them their own, by an apilh ſinful imitation. y Their Fa- 
thers burnt Incenſe upon the mountains, there performing to Idols 
that homage which I obliged them to pay unto me, or if any of 
them pretend it was to me, though before an Image, yetit was in a 
way which I dire&ed them nor, who had appointed them the place 
where I would be worſhipped. = So asthat inſtead of bleſſing, they 
indeed blaſphemed me upon the hills, inſtead of ſpeiking well they 
ſpake ill of my name, worſhipping me in a way "#hich I had nor 
appointed, and for which they only took their copy from dolaters. 
s Therefore I will puniſh them, and that ju#ly,as he that rendre:h 
another his due by meaſure, giving meaſure for meaſure, and weight 
for weight, only they muſt expe& thar{ ſhould not only puniſh the 
late ſins that they have committed of this nature, bur the former ſins 


| 


' for the flocks, So Jer. 31. 27. God promiſed to ſow again the houſe of 
| Judah, with the ſeed of man, and with theJeed of beaſt. k The Pally of 
| Achor had its name from the ſtoning of A4chan there, Jeſb. 7. 26. It is 
| thonght to have been the firit place the Jews ſer foot in when they 


| 


, 
. 


3 


of this kind which thoſe in this nation, that went before this pre- 
ſent Generation, did commit, and the preient age hath continued 
in the guilt of. | : : 

8 Thusfaiththe Lord,as the new wine is found inthe 


| «2.14, cluſter, and ove ſaith, deſtroy Itnot 5, for a * bleſling is 


ſerve and uphold the ſpecies to which it doth relate. They are wut 
a remnant ( ſaith God ) that ſhall be ſaved,ſee Reo. rr. 5. but a ſmall 
number that ſhall come out of the Captiviry of Babylon, or ( v hich 
I rather chuſe ) they will be bur a few that ſhall believe in rhy Son, 
yet they ſhall be enough for my promiſeto live in ; this, Paul argu 
eth, Rom. 11. as the plant yer lives in the ſeed, when the reot is 
piucktup, the leaves dropt off, and the Stalk is burnt up, 1o the 


the world was drowned; the favour anc promiſe of God ro Abraham 

Ifaac, and Jacob, and David, lived in the few that returned out of 
Babylon, and inthoſe few who under the Goſpel received Chriſt,and 
believed in him, though the generality of them rejeQed the counſel 
of God againſt themſelves. F God further promiſcth to bring out 
of Judah an inheritor of his Mountains, which rhe moſt, and beſt inter- 
preters do interpret of the Jews return out of the Captivity of 
Bavylon to Hieruſalem, and into their own Country, and particular'y 
to worſhip God in his Temple, upon Mount Sion g the Country of Ju= 
dea was a Mountainous Country, Exzek, 36. 1, 8. The Mountains 
were round about Hieruſalem, Pſa]. 125. 2. See alſo Ezek. 38. 8. God 
calls theſe Mountains his Monntains, becauſe he had- ckoien that 
Countrey before all others, and was once truly worſhipped there. 
h Mine Ele# ſignifieth here Gods choſen Ones, as in Pſal. :c6, 23. <. 
48. 10. The term doth nor always fignify ſuch as belong to the 
Eleiom of Grace, but ſuch asare dignified with ſome ſpecial favour. 
The whole Nation of the Jews are called # choſen people, But poſs 
ſibly this promiſe is tobe interpreted, with relation to the fiticerer 
part of that people,after that the others ſhould be waſted by the Caps 
rivity. | 
10 And Sharon ſhall be a fold of flocks i, and the * , riapacdl 
| OL. 251} 


i Sharon wasa place of great fruitfulneſs for paſtures. Davids 
herds were kept there, 1 Chron. 27. 29. It ws become like a wilder- 
neſs, Iſaiah 33. g. God here promiſeth that it ſhould again be a place 


had paſled Jordan ; hence Hoſ. 2. 14. God promiſed to make it a door 
of hope, and here the text ſaith, the flicks ſhould lie down. 1 But leſt 
the wicked idolatrous Jews ſhould apply this promiſe to themſelves; 
God limiteth it in the laſt words to the People that had ſought him, 
thar is, thar had truly worſhipped him, according to his own inſtiz 
rution, and that the words have the force of ſuch a limitation, aps 
peareth from what followeth, 

11But ye ars they that forſake the Lord m,that forget | 
my holy mountain », that prepare a table for that{] | g, 634 | 
troop o,and thac furniſh p the drink offerings unto their | Octet, | 


[] number. | : | 

# Do not you that are Idolaters,think that theſe promiſes belong 
to you, ye are they that forſake the Lord, that is, the way of the Lord; 
it isa phraſe oppoſed to a walking with God, Our walking with God 
is in the way of his ſtatutes ; firſaking of him, ſignifieth a declining, 
or turning aſide from that way. » To forget Gods holy mountain,(ignifies 
not to regard the true Worſhip of Goa, or riotto mind it. God calleth 
Zim his holy Mountain,” Foel 3. 17. and Jeruſalem is called Gods holy 
Mountain, The hill of Zin is called rhe Mountain of God holineſs, Þſ.48. 
1. as the Temple is called the beauty of holineſs, Pſ. 29. 2. Pl. 96. 9. 
their not regarding the worſhip of God there, but worſhiping God 
or 1dols in Gardens, amongſt the graves and monuments, is what is here 
called, a forgerting his holy Mduntain. Iſziah prophecied in the time 
of Ahaz, ch. 1. r. of whom it ſaid, 2 Chron. 28, 23, 24. that he ſa- 
crificed to the Gods of Damaſcus, that he cut in pieces the weſſels of the Lords 
houſe, ſhut up the doors of the houſe of the Lord, and made him altars inevery 
corner of Hieruſal:m, and in every ſevera! City of Judah he made high 
places to burn incer;ſe to other Gods. See alſs more of his praQtices, v. 2, 
3, 4. of that chap. and 2 Kings 16. 3, 10, 11, 12: and there were 
certainly many of his people that joyned with him, in his worſhip, 
who are all here ſaid to forget Gods holy Mountain, . o And to prepare 
a table for that troop : The Idols of the ten Trides, 2 Kings 16: 3. and 
of the ſhrians, 2 Chron. 28. 23- which were a troop, whereas 
the God of Iſrael was one God. And as God had alratsr, which 
are ſometimes called a table, as in Exek. 41. 22. So they pres 
pared altars for the Iaebs, my be read in the INE 

3 


LXV. 18 A 


haz : though by preparing a table, here ſeems rather te 
Refs they a Hr their ſacrifices in their feſtiva! 
days, which was in imitation of what the true God had commandec 
his people, Deut. 16. 14, 15. Idolaters alſo made in honour to thei, 
Idols; as appears fiom Jud. 9. 27. Ezek. 18. 6, 11. 405 2. 8. 1 Ger 
8. 10. p Nor did they only f:aff in honour to the Idols, bur #-c; 
furniſbed drink offerings unto their N mber. God had appointed Drin 
eff:rings for his honour, and asa piece of homage tro him, Exod. 29. 
40, 41. Levis. 23. 18, 37. theſe people had paid this homage to [- 
dols. See Jer. 7. 18. & 19. 13. & 32. 29. q Whar we rraaflare 
Number in the Heb. is La Meni to Meni, Avenarius tranflates it Mcrcu- 
ry, an Idol whom Merchants worſhipped for good i{ucce's in trading ; 
others underſtand it of the Heſt of Heaven , others of the nmIritud- © 
their ido's ; our rranſlation reads it their number. The word coming 
from an Hb, root, which ſignifiett to mwmb-r,is no where elite tounu 
in Scripture, which makes it hard too poſitively ro aſſert the truc 
meaning of it. 

12 Therefore will I number you to the ſword r,and 
1.24. You ſhall all bow down to che fla. ghter 5, becauſe * 
66,4. when I called t you did not anſwer, when I ſpake,y ou 
7-13- did not hear, but did evii before mins eyes, and did 
chuſe « that wherein I delighted not. 

r You have offended in numb:r, wo:ſhiping a multitude, 2 troop 
of Idols, there ſhall a great number ot you periſh by the ſ'vord ; 
or poſſibly th: term number may r-fer to al in the next phrafe,to Jer 
them know that none of them ſhould eſcape. God faith he will num- 
ber them, tell them out one by one to the Sword. 5 As you have bow- 
ed down toldols, Js. 44. 17. ( which are mine Encmies ) I wil 
make you bow down to your Enemirs Swords. # I called you by my 
Pr phets, Zech. 7.7, 11, -2 you did not anſwer by doing the :hiogs 
which I by them ſp:ke to you for, bur nor confiiering that I Jaw 
40, or if conlideting it, yet uot regarding it, you impudently did 
evil ; yea, u You finned «.cliberatcly, chuſing finful cures, the 
things which 1 hated, which are he-e (' as often ) expreſſed by a 
Meſs, arid cal'ing the things in which God delighrerh nor. In 
matters of Worſhip we ougat ro chuſe nothing wherein God de- 
lighteth nor, and reaſon, as well as Scripture wiil aſſure us, he can 
deligt in nothing of that nature which himſelf bath nor directed. 
It is objervable that ruin is here threatned to this People, not- for 
their immoralities, or lewd lives, bur for their errors, and juper- 
ſtir ons in Divine Worſhip. Other {ins provoke God to wrath, 
bur thoſe of this nature alone, are en-ugh to ruin Sou!s and Na- 
tions. 


12 Therefore thus ſaich the Lord God : Behold my 
ſervants ſhall eat, but you ſhall be hungry x: Behoid my 
ſervants ſhall drink, bur yo"1 ſhall be thi:ſty : Behold my 
ſervancs fhall rejoyce, but ye (ball be aſhamed : 


are the Servants of men, in complying with Idolatry, and ſuperſti- 
tion ; ſol have ſome Servants among t you who have diſtinguiſhed 
themlelves by keeping cloſe to my Inſtitutions from thereſt of you, 
T will dilinguiſhth:m from you in the diſpen/ations of my Provi- 
dence ; thole that have eat bre:d at their Idol Feaſts, ſhall be hun- 
gry, my people that would nor do ſo, they ſhall have enough;thoſe 
who have furniſhed a drink-offering to Meni, or that number of 1dcls, 
ſhall want that drink by which they have fo prophaned my name, 
but my Servants, from whoſe mouths you pull'd the drink, becauſe 
they would only furniſh a drink-effering ro me, they ſhull ari.k. My 
Servants whom now you make to mourn, and upon whom you 
pour ſhame, and contempr, ſhall r:jozce, and yu ſhall be aſhamed ; 
you that now rejoyce, and ſhout, while my Servants that cannot 
comply with you are affi&ed, and by you made ro mourn, ou ſhal 
cry to: ſon1ow, and houl through vexati n, whiles my Servants 
who ke-p c ofe to my iaititutions ſhall ſing for joy of heart. Thoſe 

; Who tia an hour of P<ſecurion for Religion, can have patience un- 
der the Enemies Triumphs an + Rage, will find that the Rod of rhe 
wicked jba!l nor always reſt upon the lot of the righteous. 

I 14 Behoid my ſervants (hall ting for joy of heart. bur 

Breaking. ye ſhall cry for forrow of heart, and jhall howl for |] 

| vexation of Spirir. 

; ' J ; And: ye ſhall leave your name for a curſe unto my 

* Ch. cholſeny ; for the Lord God {hall flay thee z, and *call 


62. 2- his ſervants by another name. | 
7 Your name ſhaZrot, as Prov. 10. 7. or only be uſed when men 
would curſe others, ſaying let them be made like ſuch perſons. As 


vants were uſed in bleſſing : ſo your names ſhall only te uſed in cur- 
ſing, or when men will curſe themſclves, they ſhall uſe your names 
as examples of the eminent wrath of God upon ſinners. z Fer you 
ſhall norperiſh by an ordinary hand, but by the hand of the Lord 
God, and asis the God, fo is his juſtice, ſo is his ſtrength, yea God 
himſcIf ſhall look upon y cur name as accurſed and nor ſuffer his peo- 
plc to be called by it, they ſhall not be cle! Jews, but Chriſtians, 
As 11- 26. The Children of God, John 1. 12 So deteſtable a fin is 
Holarry, that God will nor ſuffer himſelf to be called by a name 
given to [dols, how proper ſoever it be to expreſs his perfetion, Hoſ. 
2. 16, 17. Nor yet ſuffer his own people to be calied by a name by 
which 1do/aters are known. 

.* Deut. 16 That he who bleſſeth himſelf in the Earth, ſhall 
'. 13. bleſs himſelf in the God of truth a, and * he that ſwear- 
4 #5 v: eth'in the Earth, ſhall {wear by the God of truth þ, be- 
*& 45. 23. cauſe theformer troubles are forgorten,and becauſe they 
" Zech.1.5. are hid from mine eyes c. . 

K -.. s I will bring itro paſs, that over a!l the world, if any man Bbleſ* 
himſelf, or bleſs another it ſhall bein God, Amen. So the Heb. ( ve 
tranſlate it theGod of Truth ) Amen 1s a name given to Chriſt, Rev. 3. 

14. Th ſe things ſaith the Amen, the faithful and true witneſs, being here 

applied to God, many think it makes a great proof of the God-head 
of Chriſt, and judge the ſenſe of this text to be : That under the 

times of the Goſpel men thould not bleſs them({c1ves ( as before ) in 
the names of 4braham,and J/aac,and Jacib,but inthe name of Chriſ?,in 
the God Amer, nor is this an improbable ſenſe. Others taking it more 
appellativgly by E/ohim, Amen, here underſtand that God who ſhews 


x As thereare a party amongſt you, who inſtead of ſerving God, 


the names of Leeh and Rachel Ruth 4. 11. and orkers of (zod's Ser- | 


1 4 BD. Chap. LXV, 
himſelf rue and faithful in Lis promiſes, b Tn like manner it j5 Prophes 

icd, that thoſe that ſwear ( by which ſome underſtand worſhip God 

thers calling God to be a witneſs ) ſhould ſwear by the Gor ef truths 

;r in the God oftruth. Either worſhipping God in Chriſt the 4- 

en, or calling the faithful God to atteſt their lincerity, or ſwearing 

»y thar God who hath approved his truth and fairhfulneſs by taving 

.ad delivering his pecple. © becauſe they ſhall ſee what God pro- 

miſcd 1s fulfilled, rhe troubles of his peopleare at an end, and 

acy are hid from God's Eyes, that is, they are at an end. 

i7 For behold c, 1 create ®* new heavens,and 
earth d, and the former ſhall not be remembreg 
come 1nto mind e, 2 Pet. 
c I will tell you yet a more admirable thing, I am about wholly 3: 33: 

to alter and change the ſtare not only of my people, who are now af. REV. 21.1 
dicted, reſtoring them to a more lightſome ttate, more free from T Mb. 
trouble and afflictcns, bur d bringing a new face upon the world.ſen- ſhall come 
ding my Son toraiſe up a new Church, and to inſtitute a new wor. 9 *5y 
ſhip, Jon 4. 21, 24. and giving out my Spirit in a more plentiful 9: 
mauner, As 2. 17. which new ſtate ſhall abide until a new Hens 

ven and Earth appear, in which ſhall dwell nothing but righteouſneſs, 2 Pet, 

3- 13 Rev. 21. 1. and e Thar ſtate of things ſhall be ſuch and fo 
glorious, as the former ſtate of my Veople 1hall not be remem: red 

nor come into mind : whether this zew Heavens and new Earth here 
promited, ſignifies ſuch a ſtate of the Church, wherein Chriſt ſhall 
perſonally reign upon Earth, over his Saints, the wicked being Fang 

ſtroyed ( as ſome have thought he ſhall for a thouſand years) I ver 

much doubt, and do not ſee how trom this, and the parallel Ro 

any ſuch tning can be concluded. _ 

16 But be you glad, and rejoyce for ever f, in that 
which I create, for behold I create Hieruſalem g, a re- 
joycing, and her people a joy. 4 

f You that are my peop'e,though you cannot rejJoyce with that de. 
gree of joy, that artendeth a prelent fruition of good yet be glad 
and rejoyce with the rejoycing of hope, for the thing 1s ceirain what 
I am alieady doing, nor let your preſent ſtate, or the diſcourage- 
ments you have fiom ſeeming improbabilities, ſpoil your joj for ic 
is nut a Work to be produced 1n an ordinary courſe, or by an ordina- 
ry power, butby the power of me who brings ſomething out of no« 
thing, or out of what hath no fittedneſs to ſuch a produttion, and I 
will create g Hieru/alem a rejoycing, and her people a joy ; by Hieruſalem 
here muit be meant the Church, as well under tte Goſpel, as under 
the law, ( becauſe the Goſpel Church is grafred into that Olive) or 
elſe this prophecy, muſt be underſtood as fulfilled in the coming of 
Criſt, Luke 2. 10. Orelſe 1t referieth to a more full Calling of the 
Jews, than we have yet {een or heard of. 

19 And *1 will rejoyce in Hierufalem,and joyin my *Ch.6:.;. 
pee plei, and the * voice of weeping ſhall be no more *Ch.35.0 
heard in her, nor the voice of crying &. * ev.7.17. 

# Thenarure cf joy lying in theſatisfaQtion, and wel] pleaſedneſs & Us. 
of t..e Sou. in the obtaining of the thing it hath willed . agreeth 
unto God, and joy and rejoy cing areapplied to him, ch. 62 5. and 
in this text, ſo alſo, Jer. 32. 41. Zeph. 3. 179. k Such kind of pro= 
mules are to be found, <. 35. to. & 5-. 11, Jer. 31. 12, Rev. 21 
which muſt be underſtood either comparatively, they ſhall indure = 
ſuch m.ſery as formerly; or-( if interpreted to a ſtate in this life ) as 
ſignifying on:y ſome long or eminent [tate of happineſs : If as to another 
lite they may be raken ſtritly, as ſignitying perperuiry, aud perfetion 
of joy ana happineſs. 

20 There (ball be no more thence,an infant ofdays 
nor an old man thac hath nor filled his days /: for the 
C.ild ſhall die an hundred years old, bur the ſinner be- 
ing an hundred years ojd FART be accurſed x. 

I Whereas God hath made many prom ſe: of ions 1; 
they ſhould all be fultilled ro Gods ae among wy To pore 
ſh:u]d be rare abortions among them, Exod. 23. 26. few infants 
ſhould be carried out to buria', nor but few that ſhould not have 
filled up their years ; thoſe thar were now Child:en, ſhould die at 
a great age , 72 yet none of th-ſe things ſthou!d be of any advantage 
to wicked men, but ifany of them ſhould live ro be an handed 
_ _ yet _y ſhould d - accurſed- This ſeemeth to be the plain 
tenſe. It any dehires to read more opinion 7 
find enough A the Engl:ſb ———_ FONG Winds, te _ 


21 And * they ſhall build houſes and inhabit them 
And they (ball plant Vineyards, and eart of the fruit of 
them . 

» Thequite contrary towhat isſaid of the ſlothful man, and 506 
27. 13, 14, I5. 16, 17. Prov. 12. 27. 

22 They ſhall not build, and another inhabit, they | 
(ball not plant, and another eat, for * as the days of a 


tree are the days of my people, and mine elec + ſhall *Pſ92.i2. 
long enjoy the work of their hands 0. f Shall 

0 Duration, and perpetuity are promiſed to them, in their hap make 19m 
eſtate. PY continue 

23 They ſhall notlabour in vain, nor bring forth for _— 
trouble, for they are the ſeed of the bleiſed of the Lora, '**” 
and their off-ſpring with them p. , 

Þ And not only a bleſſing to them, bur alſo to their Offorinoc 
But, what is here promiſed which wicked men do - Favs gs 
Joy, and Gods People oft-times want ? Arſ. 1, Wicked men may 
have them for their good Parents ſake,and good men may ſometimes 
want them for evil Parents ſake. 2. Bad men may have ſome of 
theſe things, but they cannot expe@ them : good men may at pre- 
icent want them, but they may expe& them from the hard of God 
if rhey be good forthem. 3. Bad men may have them in wrath, 
the bleſling of God gives them to good men and adds no ſorrow 
therewith. 

24 And it ſball come to paſs that before they call, E 


will anſwer q, and whiles theyare yet ſpeaking 7 I will 


CTOEW-© Oh, 66 
NOr T 22. 


* Amo$ 
19. 14. 


hear. 


q God promiſed, ch. 58. 9. to anſwer them, when they called 
xe he promileth tg be ſo ready to anſwer, as to anſwer the words 
aſloon 


L 


"0 = 
bE 
x0 


(hap. I 


_— CONTIN ” J Poe 


, 'Ch, I 3» 
6, Je 


b1Kin, 8. 
1 Aﬀs 7. 


48. 49. 
p17. 24. 


"I w—_ a aca. uu -C cow ALAM ww as «6 " wang 


GY Q 
> © 
+> 


AA Ad eu © A Ya ©) Pol ps Poa _ 


1 LOr, Kid. « 


þ 
| Seut, 2J t 
f Hebr, [ 


Wakes a 78 y 


W1;al of c 


———TC—— es wn 
oo +» ZE Bd... 


CO. £ 
_ 


hap. 


Fikin. $. 


91 Aﬀts 7 
4. 49 
p 


' Veuti23 
'18, 


| f Hebr, 


ule a me Yea, they have choſen their own ways m, and theirſoul 


Wiriel of 


Prov. 


ty, 24. 


lOr, Xid. that ſacrificetha lamb ||, as if he * cut offa dogs neck & : 


LXVL. fu 


aflcon a3 they ſhould be formed in their hearts before they ſhould 
g-<t them out of their lips, Pſal. 32. 5. Dan. ro. 12. r Yea while 
tney were ſpeaking, Dan. 9. 20. 23, Afs 1o. 44. nor doth God 


fay only, they ſhall have the things they would have ( for ſo wick- 


ed men may ſometimes have from the bountifull hand of Divine 
Proviaence ) but they thall have them, as an anſwer or return to 
their prayers. 

25 The * wolf and the lamb ball feed together, and 
the lion (ball eat ſtraw like the bullock s, and duſt ſopa# 
be the ſerpents meat r, they ſhall not hurt nor deſtroy 


inal] my holy mountain «, ſaith the Lord- 

s This verſe containeth a promiſe much like that, ch. 11. 6, g. 
And relates tothe ceaſing of perſecution. The People of God for 
their whiteneſs and innocency, are often compared to Lambs, and Sheep 
wicked men to Wolves and Liens, for their antipathy ro the ſeed 
of the Woman ; God here promiſeth ro takeoff the fierceneſs of the 
Spirits of his Peoples Enemies, ſo that they ſhall live quietly and 
peaceably together. #: Wicked men are compared to Serpents, Micah 
7. 17. compared with Pſal 72. 9. God promiſeth a time of tran- 
quility to his Church under the Metaphor of Serpents eating the dſt 
their proper meat, Gen. 3. 14. inſtead of flying upon men : it 
ſignifies ſuch a time, when wicked men ſhould mind their proper 
buſineſs, and not make it their work to eat up the people of God 
like bread. » For the laſt phraſe, ſee cþ. 11. 9g. what is before no- 
ted. But will ſome ſay, Wren jhail cheſe things be > The Scripture 
gives usnO record ofany ſuch period of time yet paſt. And it is 
very probable chat this is a promite yet to be fulfilled, and it is 
not for us io know thet:mes and ſeaſons but in the mean time to ler 
our faith and patience be ſeen; in the mean' time we may learn, That 
it is Gods work to reſtrain the Wolves and Serpents of the World, 
who would elſe be alwile doing what they are ſometimes doing, 
and it is a fad .ign that God is not yet at peace with that people, 
where we ſee Woives devouring Lambs, and Serpents deitroying 
men initead of licking up duſt, nor well pleaſed vith that parr of 
his holy mountain where there isnothing bur #urting and deſtroying, 
biting and devouring one another, when God ſhall be at peace 
with a people theſe things fbali not be found amongſt them. 

CHAP. LA-VLE | | 
God 6 Io with the Spiric, ana not by Ceremonies, 1, 5. the won- 
þ. aerful Birth and benefits of the Goſpel Church, 6, 14. ſevere judg- 
ments againſt the wicked, 15, —-— 17. the Gentiles ſhall be an holy 

Church, +8, 23- the Eternal Pumſbment of the wicked, 24. 

tlus faith the Lord *, The heaven 3s my throne 4, 
and the earth is my footſtol þ : where is the houſe 
that ye build unto me c ? and where is the place of my 


reſt  ? 

# The Heaven, that is, the higheſt heavens, are the place where 
T moſt manifeſt my power and glory, and ſhew my ſelf in my 
Majeſty, So P/al. 11. 4. Pſal. 103. 19. Matt. 5. 34. Hence we 
are taught to pray ; Our Father wh:ch art in heaven. b And the Earth 
£5 my footſtovol, or a place where I ſet my feer,. Matt. 5. 35. « Can 
there be an houſe builded, that will contain me, who can encom- 
paſs the Heavens and the Earth with an houſe ? 4 Or, where 15 the 

lace wherein I can be ſaid to reſt in a proper ſenſe? The Ark is 
andeed called Ged's foorſtool, and the place of his reft, in a figurative 
ſenſe, becauſe there God manifeſted himſelf, though in degrees 
much beneath the manifeſtations of himſelf in Heaven, but pro- 
perly, God hath no certain place of Reſt. 

2 For all thoſe things hath my hand made e, and all 
thoſe rbings have been f, ſaith the Lord : but to this 
- man will look, * even to him hat is poor and of a con- 
rite ſpiric g, and trembleth ar my word 6. 

e The Heavens and the Earth are the work of my hands, Ger. r. 
r. Joh. 1, 3. ( ſome expound it of the Temple. and the Sacrifices. ) 
f They were not only made by God, but ſubſiſted arid were kept in 
being by him. Thele things were not therefore valued by hun, 
nor could he have any need of, or reſpe& to any houſe, which is 
bur a very little part of the Earth : he having made the Heavens 
and the Earth, had them ail ar his command,and how could he need 
a Temple? or, wherein could he be advanraged from it ? & Bur 
God will look with a reſpe&, and with a favourabie Eye ro him 
that hath a broken and contrite ſpirie, whoſe heart is ſubdued to the 
Will of God, and who is poor and low in his own Eyes, Mat. 5.3. 
Luke 6. 20. And þ who tremWeth when he heareth God's threatning 
words, nor ever heareth any revelation of the Divine Will with- 
our a juſt Reverence. ; 

He that killeth an ox ji; is as if he ſlewa man: he 


he that offereth an oblation, as if he :ffered {wines blood: 
he that + burnech incenſe, as if he bletied an Idol 7: 


delighteth in their abominations ». | 

7 Solomon, Prov, 15. 8. gives us a ſhort, but full commentary 6n 
this whole verſe ; The Sacrifice of the wicked is aw avomination to the Lord. 
He that killeth an ox, thar is for Sacrifice,as it is expounded by the 


Ft 


dejighted nor. | 
0 They had made their choice, they choſe not the ways of God, 
but their own ways, that which God delightednor in, as in the lat= 
ter part of this verſe, therefore ( jaith God ) I will alſo chute. Pp 
Their delaſjons, or illuſions, or devices: Mmtanus tranſlites it, adinn 
vent;onibus, it is a Noun derived from a word which ſignifies ro 
Jpeak childiſbly or corruptly, the wotd in this form is only uſed in this 
rext, andin 1 Sm. 25. 3. it ſignifies ftudjes, or works, Pſal. ry. 4, 
Iſa. 3. 4. Hil. 4-9. Iris an ordinary thing for God thus generally 
to declare his juſtice againſt men. Thar he will deal with ſinners; 
as they deal with him, ſo Pſal. 18, 25. 26. Lev. 26. 27. Jer. 34. 17. 
Prov. 1. 24. 28. The meaning 1s, I will be no kinder to them,than 
they have been ro me, They have choſen to ck and delude me, F 
w1ll chuſe to ſuffer them to delude themſelves, or they have choſento 
work wickedneſs, I will chuſe to bring the fiuit of their works upon 
them. Theyhave choſen the cauſe,I will chuſe the effe&.gThar is(fay 
ſome)the rhings which they feared,xnd did theſe things to avoid, av 
Fer 42.16. Ezek. 11, 8.Others by ther fears chuſe rather to underſtand 
ſuch 7errors and afrightments as are natural to men upon the proſpett 
of great evils, as Fer. 20. 4. as God in mercy delivereth his people 
from their fears, Pſal. 34. 4. So in Judgment he cauſeth fears as a great 
judgment to poſſeſs ſinners, Lev. 26. 16. Deut, 28 66. # Becauſe. 
when by my Prophers, I exhorted you to your duty ; very few 
yeilded obedience, ſee Prov.r. 24,ch. 65. 12. Jer. 7, 13.5 Hearing here 
ſignifieth hearkning, or obeying, nor hearing is expounded by doing 
evil, and chuſing that wherein God delighted nor. God accounts thar 
thoſe do not bear, who do not obey his will. 


his words s : your brethren t that hated you, that caſt 
you out « for my names ſake x ſaid, * Let the Lord be 
glorified y bur he ſhall appear co your joy, and they ſhal 
be aſhamed z. | 
5 The Propher rutneth his diſcourſe from denouncing judgment 
againſt the 1do/aters, and formal:ſts amongſt the Jews, to ſuch as fear a 
ea God, whoſe religion is deſcribed by a trembling at his werd, as v. 2. 
ſuch a turning of the Prophets diſcourſe was, ch. 50. 10. c<. 57. 1 
7. The ſame words belong not to Saints and preſuinpruvus Sinners, t Your 
Brethren by Nation, or by external profeſſim in Religion, tho' falſe 
brethren, Gal. 2. 4. Thus Par! calls all th& reje&ed Jews, Brethren, 
Rom. 9. 3. u That either ſhut you out of their intimate ſociety, 
or ( which is more probable ) excommun/cate, and caſt you out of 
their Synagagues, or caſt you our of their City, and ſome of you 
out of the world, Join 9.35, 22. Johni6. 2. x*7.e. Fir my ſake, for 
your owning me, and adherence to my Jaw, ſaid. y Eithermocking 
you as the Jos did Chriſt, when hanging upon the croſs, Mat, 27. 
43. Luke 23. 35- thus they mocked at David Pſal. 42.3. Or, Let the 
Lord be glorified, thinking they did God good ſervice, John 16. 2. 
z There will come a day when God ſhallappear and let them know 
his judgment concerning their violence, and rage, then you ſha] 
have joy, and a ſhall be aſhamed, 2 The/. 4. 16, 17, 18.. 

6 A voice of noiſe from the city #, a voice from the 
temple a voice of the Lord thac rendreth recompence 


ro his Enemies 6. | Ty 7 
a The expreſſion of a Prophetical extaſy, as much as, miethinks 1 
already hear a voice of neiſe, rather a ſad and affrighring noiſe, than the 
noiſe of Triamphers ( as ſome think ) yea, it comes nor from the City 
only, bur from the Temple, wherein theſe formalifs have ſo much 
gloried, and repoſcd ſo much confidence. There is a noiſe of Sol- 
diers ſlaying, and of the Prieſts or poor people fled thither, thrieking or 
crying out. b A voice of the Lord, not in rhunder, which is ſome= 
times Called ſo, Pal. 29, 3, 4, 5, &c. but that rendreth recompence ro 
his enemies, Thus, the noiſe "t Soldiers, the roaring of Guns, the 
ſound of Drums and Trumpets are the waice of the Lord. * Thus the 
Prophet ſeemerh to expreſs the deſtruftion of the Jews by the Ros 
man Armies, asif a thing at thatrime doing. | 
7 Before ſhe travailed (be brought forth, before her 
pain came, ſhe was delivered of a man-child c. : 
c The whole verſe is expreflive of a great and ſudden ſalvation 
which God would work tor his Church, like the delivery of a woe 
man, and that of a man-child, before her travail, and without pain. The 
only doubr is, whether it referreth to the deliverance of the People 
out of Babylon, or the worlds ſurprizal with the Mefiah, and the tud- 
den and ſtrange propagation of the Goſpel, and it is a queſtion nor 
ealily determined. The delivery of the Jews out of Bavz/en, indeed 


next words, He that ſacrificeth # Lamb, k The compariion thewerh j 
God's deteſtation of ceremonial perfirmances from men of wicks= « 
ed hearts and lives. / From hence it is piain, that the Pro«! 
phert is not here refle&ting upon 1aolatrous Worſhip, but Formal Wor- 
fjhi> ; for to ſay, He that burneth Incenje 10 an Idol, is as he that 
bleſſeth an Idol, is but to ſay, he that bleſſerh an Idol bleſſerh an Idol, | 
but upon thoſe who in a formality worthiped the rrue God, andby | 
as which he had appointed, ſuch were offering Szcrihces, O-. 
blation, Incenſe. God by the Prophet declares, that theſe mens ; 
Services were no more acceptable ro hin tian Murther, Idolarry, or 
che molt horrid prophanarion ofthis name. Such would cutting off 2 
dogs neck for Sacrifice, have been, or offering Swines blood ; folittle ' 
do ritual performances, though inftirured by God himſelf, pleaſe ' 
God when they are but meer get as they alwiſe are, » ' 
When thoſe that perform them, live as they liſt, Jeud, and looſe | 
Jives, and chink to ſave themſelves by their prayers, like the Whore 
14, Is. » Not only ſinaing by humane frailey, but taking 


_ 
F &y 


Propagation of the Govt. <Debps aha [ 
Virein May bringing forth Chriſt,is liks other of their fond dreams, 


was without #rug/ings or any pain, not like their deliverance from E-. 
Zypt, after the waiting of therr enemies by ten fucceſſive Plagues, 
bur by the &:ud Proclamation of Cyrus : but it { ecms nor to have been 
ſudden only as to the day, and hour, and manner, for Danicl under- 
ſtood by Books that the time was come, Dan, 9: 2... and the people 
had a profpe&t of it 70 years betore,Jer.25. 72.& 29. 10. The Proph, cy 
therefore ſeems rather to refer to, the coming of Chrift, and theſudden 
»/. The Popith Interpreters app!ying it ro the 


S Who hath neard fv. a thing d ? who hath feen 


; ſuch things e ? ſhall the carth be made to bring forth in 
one day ? or ſtall a Nation bs born at once ? for as 
ſoon as Zion travelled, (be bronghc forth children f 2: 


4 The Prophet callscither ts the whole world, or to ſuch 37 feared 


| God among the Jews, to admire God in his ſtupendious works cf Pro» 
videncs, either in the eaſte manner of the deliverance of rhe 


6C4 | Jews 


Jer. 7, 13, 


5 Hear the word of the Lord, you that * tremble at » vt 22 


*Chus.19, 


— 


1 
p : 


by + | l 
[l 
I | 
4 
. : 
T 


| 


[ 


Il11] 
08 
iq 


: : 
; 


: 
i 
4 


: £ 


_— ES 


romeo g——g 


Allo iii cr CA I EN DE FREE ni FC EC ICS ho 


hap. LXVT. 18 A 14 HE Chap. LXV1, | Chap: | 
| « Captivity of Babylen, without any pain, without ſo fy ceived fome fall, or miſchief. Eieraſalem now mourneth, and you 7 
4 papers ron or "ſe in the erecting of wal Goſoel Church, | mourn with her, bur ſhe tball recover from her affliction and * Foie 
into which all the Jews that reccived Chritt; were gathered as well Þ her ſorrows, and thall be comforted ; and you that mourn for he, 
25 the Gentiles, making both one, Eph. 2. 14. e Which ſeems to be ihall partake of her joys, as you now ſhare witi her in her aMiQtions, 
meant by the Earths bringing forth in one day, as great a work ef Prov | God in the day that he wipeth tears from her Eyes, thall alſo Wipe 
vidence, as if all the women in the world thould have brought | them from yours : and you ſhall have as great an occaſion of joy 
forth in aday ; or as if all the planrs of the Earth had brought | from the happy, as now you have of ſorrow from the afflited ſtare * 
' Forth their flowers and fruit in one day. f As toon as the Chuich | of Hrerujalem. ; 
of the Jews began to move out of the Captivity of Babjlon,God put I 4 And when you ſee this, your heart ſh 1 rejoice, 
it into the hearts of multitudes ro go ap, Exod. 1.5. <. 2. 1,2, &c | and your bones ſhall flouriſh like an herb « : and the 


Or, as ſoon as theVoice of the Goſpel put the Church of the Jews | ,_. : ; 7 
into her Travelin John Baptiſts, Ghriſts and the Apoſtles time, ut pre- hand of the Ford fhall be Known toward his Servants x, 
fently brought forth. In John Baptiſts rime, the Kingdom of Hearven . and his indignation tOwWar d his Enemies ). | 
ſuffered Viclence, and the violent take it by force, Mar. 11. 12. and it u The peace, and tranquillity ofthe Church and the ProPogatie 
continued fo, as 3000 were converted at Peters Sermon, AQs 2. The | on of the Kingdom of Chriſt, 1s alwife the cauſe of an heart-re- 
Gentiles were the Children of Zion, being planted into their ſtock; | joycing to luch as fear God, P/al: 105. 3. the reaſon is becaule ir 
the law of the Goſpel firſt going out of Zion. : is the greateſt object of their detires, which are then ſatisfied, and 
IO 3ve4 9, Shall I bring to the birth, and not || cauſe to bring __ ware me man os _—— are ys of the 
"1,8 forth ? ſaith the Lord g ; ſhall I caule to bring forth, gg apapnge nes, which before are dry and whithe- 


> red, Ezek. 37. 1, 2. and the ſinevs, andthe fleſh, comes again upon the 
and ſhut the womb ? faith thy God þb. > and the kin covers them abuve, fo as they flouriſh gas = in FE 


£ The work before ſpoken of, ſeemeth not after the manner OZ | ſpring, all whoſe verduie and beauty in the winter was concealed 
men, who do things that are great gradually; nor in an ordinary | in theroot hid in the earth. * And in this the power, proteGtion 
courſe of nature, whoſe motions alſo bring things by degrees tO | and influence of God for, of, and upon, ſuch as truly ſerve and 
their perfe&ion, bur you muſt conſider who it 1s that ſpeaketh | qbey him ſhall be made manifeſt and known. » Burt the wicked ſhal 
( ſaith the Lord ) now asis the God, fo ishis ſtrength. Again, men | be under a quite contrary diſpenſation, Pſal. 1. 4. As they have 
may unertake things, and for want of power not bring them to | had a day, which hath been to you the power ef drkneſs ; ſo yeu 
perte&1on, but ſhall Ido ſuch a thing ? I have by many prophecies thall nave a day, which ſhall be to them 7he power of darkneſs ;as Gods 
and promiſes ſecured you in the expectation of ſuch a thing, and | hand thall be upon and toward ſuch as fear me, to cover, and bleſs 
ſhall 1 nor by my providence effe&t ir? that in the ordinary courſe | and influence rhem, fo his indignation ſhall in that day be hand 
of providence ule to give a birth to Women, to whom [have given- | rowards thoſe of your nation who have declared themiclves the e- | 
' a power ro __— hall _ =o Sou n to an, ro PR Pooptc nemies of the Lord. . 
whom by my prophecies,and promiſes I have made to conceive luch i5 For behold the Lord will come with fire z, and 
hopes, and expeQations ? þ Nor ſhall Zion once only bring torti, . I x +: j- _ 
berde ſhall _ on teeming, her womb ſhall not be ſhut, ſhe 112!l e- with gyms _ 6 wharle-wind a, tO render his | 
very day bring forth more and more children, my preſence {hall be anger with fury 6, and his rebukes o with flames of 
with my Churchto that end, to the end of the world. . fice. 
IO Rejoyce ye with Hieruſalem. and be glad with = Here the Prophet Comes more particularly to expound what 
her, all ye that love her : rejoyce for joy with her, all indignation ſhould be thewed rowards his enemies. 'That is, with 
ICY Bone terr:ble Judgments, nothing being more terrible, and waſting than | 
yer at MOUurn } . a; "4 han for friend fire; - or with fire in a proper ſenſe, underſtanding it of the fire with 
. 5 There 1s nothing more ordinary amongit men, t Jan tor iencs | which enemies uſeto contume places brought under their power. 
and neighbours, to mect together withtheir friends recovered from | , With a ſudden ſweeping Judgment thar like a whirle-wind ſhall 
affliction, or brought into aberter Nate, to rejoyce with them, e- deſtroy this people. 6 Wirh fury, that is, with fi = p5 { : 
ſpecially ſuch friends as in their afligtions have mourned with them oe". "the G id", oncgfhracd þ 
P y 4 1 eh Ef ; properly taken 1s not in God, c<. 27. 4. but God ſometimes exen 
Thus Mary, Luk, 7. 40. Went to + hes The ET &h, and Joos | cures juſtice and judgment more ſmartly and ſeverely. « By rebukes 
f.iends came to rejoice with him, Joo 42.11, 1he Prophet in like man- | he meanspuniſhments,for it is ſfaidGod,will execute them withflames 
ner calls to all the friends of Hieruſalem, eſpecially ſuch as in the days of fire. They had contemned the rebukes of his law, now God will re 
of her NE as pany => pln | 10g wy Kay i = o EC bem with fire and; fired: : ” 
with her, upon the proſpett of her better itate aiter the Bavzlonjb Cap- 7 . . 
tivity ; or He leaſt - hs time of the Meſſiah ; for though joy and 1 16 ey on, and by his age ras the Lord plead 
gladneſs be the affe&ion of the Soul chat works upon its union with with ail fleſh e, and the flain of the Lord ſhall be 
its deſirable obje&, and the deliverance of the people out of Babylon | many ff | 
; was not to be for many ygars after this, nor the Mzias to come, for d Thiskind of rebuking is alſo called #a pleading with them, fo he F 
many years after thar, yet faich being the evidence of thivgs \ threatens to plead againſt Gog with Peſtilence, and blood, Exek. 38. 22/ 4 
mot ſeen, there is a rejo)cing of hope, hops giving the Soul an u- | God atficſt p/-ads with ſinners by words, but if he cannor ſo prevail | 
nion with its obje& hoped for, and theſe things were now preſent | he will plead withthem in a way by which he will overcome, by fire 
70 believers who by faith called the things rhar were not as 1t they | peſtilence and blood. e Thus he threatens to do with all nes 
were;decauſe they had the ſecurity of a divine Revelation for them | or with all the wicked Jews. f To the fire he threatens to add the 
and they were already exiſtent in rheir neceſſary Cules, Sword,ſo as the {ain of the Lyrd,that is,thoſe whom God ſhould cauſe 
11 That you may ſuck and be ſatisfied with the & | to be lain, ſhould be many. * Cha. 65. 


breaſt; of her conſolations 7, that you may milk out, | _ 17 * They that ſanctific themſelves,and purifie them- 3, 4. 
and be delighted with the abundance of ber Glory 7. ſelves in the gardensg, || behind on zree in the midſt þ, |" ofter 
" + Hieruſalem is here ſet out as the mother of us all, as indeed ſhe | cating {wines fleſh 3, and the abomination &, and another, 


was, for out of Zion went forth the law, and the word of the Lord frem | the | mouſe. 1h 7 | = | ( Or, 
Hieruſalem, ich 2. 3. Chriſt was of the ſeed of Abraham, he was ſent LOR N. e, thall be contumed rogether + {aith the ! aches. 
ro the loſt Sheep of the heuſe cf Iſrael, and is called Rom. 15. 8. the Mini- - 

fter of the Circumciſion ;, they were the Olive, the Branches; the Gen- 
tiles but a wild Olive, grafted in amongſt them, Rom: 11. 17. we fucked 


£ That the Jews might not think that the Judgment threatned 
concerned only the Heathen, he tells them they concerned them 


it EEE IE © chem, the 18. the 70. the idol Worthippers amongſt them, and not Idolaters only, but 
Rn, 5, It Ce! define was their breaſts of i on = as broke his Jaws ab far ag. which he had prohibited them 
folation. Chriſt was in the firſt place. »» The g/ory of the People of _ by ne 2 Ou ma and rag themſclves in gardens, 
Iſrael, though he was alſo a light to rkeGentiles, Ink. 2. 32. we arc wy CE. expat Y, hand hes wy _ I* 29. CC GF, 3,4. 1Kings 
required to1ejoice with Hieruſalem, That we may ſuck and be ſati:fed, BY I a , I oe peeps bs oy mars, 2 _—_ ſuch as were 
&c. Intimating, that our joy 1aould not be a meer att of charity ro = i; 098 _ ng = The Tdot them, where: they {t 
them, but a proper expreſſion of our ſenſe of Gods goodneſs to our Ki - {fon £ th 3 7 ens n 2 —_—_ called the Grove, 2 
ſelves, who {hould ſuck and beſatisfied with the glad tidings of the ings 23. 6. they hadalſo in theſe Gardens Pools where they waſhed 


. ; tas be talk themſelves in a way of preparation for their Ido!- Worſhip, as the 
dah um phy age earn bao] and our ſelves be inlighrned from Prieſt by Gods Ordinance was to bath himſelf, Num. 19. i hBehind 


; | XZ PO © ; one of che trees, or one by one behind the Trees. Some think that 
 *Ch. 48- wa For thus faith the Lord, Behold I * will extend Achar is here a propzr name ofan Idol,bebind which, or behind ) 
238. 60.5 peace to her like a river, and the glory of theGentiles » | whoſe Temple theſe Idolaters were wont to purifie themſelves. 
_ *Cþ. 60. Hhkea flowing ſtream 0; then (bal ye * {uck p; ye (hal be | Theſe Gardens were places too as well for brutiſh Luſts as Idols 

16 * born upon her ſides,and be dandled upon her knees g. Worſhip, as may be learned from 1 Kin. 14. 24. 2 Kin. 23. 7. and 


* Cho. ag. T . : . | they by theſs waſhings thought to make themſelves clean. 7 Eat 
22.&'60.4 # That this promiſe reſpetts the times of the Meſies ſeems plain, ing Swines fleſh, forbidden, Lev. 1. 7. Deut. 14. 8. k Andthe abomi« 


e conſideration that no hiſtory gives us any account __ . - 

| 519 rea me wn _ b IT Rs hoy Aon =" ny, _ any abominable things, Fg all thoſe Beaſts forbidden 
time,nor indeed then, if we underliand it not of a Spiritual Goſpel- C ns bl 92h, _ VE. $ "*s 1 - ; _ think a particular 

+ peace, which Chriſt preached ro them that were nigh, as well as thoſe ambominable thing Tous ang and x =o it is the Weaſte which 
far of, Eph. 2. 17. 0 Tt alſo appearsfrom the mention of the glo- mw The he ds 3s FE 0 ous, ” uch is here next mentio- 
ry of the Gentiles as 2 flowing ſtream, which can hardly be under- _ - "y Kale x which we tranſlate MoyJe being no where found 
food of any thing but Chriſt and rhe preaching of the Goſpel to = there, and here, 1 Sam, 6,4. 5, 11, 18. ſome think it is not 
the Gentiles. Bur I leave 1t to the iſſues of Providence to expound | © creature We call a Mouſe, ( becauſe a Mouſe is properly no cree- 
and determine, wherher the Prophecy of this rext doth not relate Os thin ; but the word Lev. 11 IP" figaifieth a creeping thing.) 
ey therefore think it rather fignifiech ſome Serpenr. 


to a further converſion and calling of the Jews than hath been yer : : . | 
ſcen-—p When Chriſt was w Rn to the Jews not thoſe only he It is a matter of no great conſequence. The ſenſe is thar God would 1 


es, bur thoſe of the Jews who belonged to Gods Eleft.on ſuck-f not only deſtroy the open and groſs Idolarers and ſuperſtitious per= 
—ed Goſpel dodrine. 9 The Gentiles were S552 upon the ſides o | ſons, bur all thoſe who had made _ Conſcience of yeilding Obe- 
 Hieruſalem and dandled upon her knees, at firſt hearing trom the dience to the Law of God in ſuch things as ſeemed tO them of a 
oftles ( who were ſome ofthe Daughters of Hieruſalem, members of | PRute nature, and ſuch as they eaſily might have yeilded ebediz 
the Jewiſh-Church ) the glad ridings of Salvation. EnCe tO ; he ſaith that they ſhall all periſh together, In the day 
12 r» As one whom his mother comforteth, fo wzll of Judgment the Idolatrous Pager, and Papi}}, and the leud and dit- 3 
rag d fhatl b "<P Jo obedient Proteſtant ſhall fare alike. It will be a hard thing for a 

IT comfort you,and you Na eg comtorted 1n Hiers, ant, thinking Soul to ſee how Baptiſm, and a memberſhip in the Chris. 


+ That 1s, in the moſt tender, and compailionat way imaginable, I ſtian Church, ſhould ſave men from Gods Wrath, without Holinels, 
The husband dothnot comfort his wite with rhat renderneis, and © more than Circumciſion and Memberſhip in the Jewiſh Church. 
rhoſe bowels that the mother comforteth the Ch1d after ir hathre® xx For I &now their works, and their thoughts /, it 


fnall 


—— 


Chap. 


| J'Or, 


f 66h, 


LXVI. 


} E R BE 


ſhall come = that I will gather all nations »,and tongues, 
and they ſhall ſee my glory 0. 


1 The Hebrew is thus, word for word; And I their works, and 
eheir thoughts, coming together all nations, and languages, and they ſhall come 
and fee my Glory. So thar it is neceſſary for Interpreters to ſupply 
ſome words to make out the Senſe. And the ſenſe will differ ac= 
cording to the nature and ſenſe of thoſe ſupplied words, We ſup- 
ply the Verb know, as Amos 5.12. others {npply I have noted. O- 
chers wake it a queſtion. And ſhould endure their thoughts and their 
works? Others, But as for me O their works, and their thoughts! Some 
make thefe words, for 1 know thiir works and their thoughts, 13 ſhall come, 
one Sentence, and to relate to the Judgements before threatned, 
w. &5, 16: and the latter words a new Sentence, and a Promiſe of 
the Call of the Gentiles. If we thus divide the words into two 
Sentences, the former part doth but aſfert the certainty of the 
Judgement that ſhould come upon this People, and the Confirmati- 
on or Reaſon of it from the Omniſcienece and Juffice of God. They 
have done theſe things, and I know it, and am of purer eyes than 


1d iniquity. I know I have marked their thoughts and works 
por gh. 19% ) O the vileneſs of them! Should I ſuffer, 
ſhould I endure them ? No» It ſball come, either the Judgements 
before threatned ſhal come: or it ſthal come to paſs, that I will caſt 
them off, and then 1 will gather all Nations, &c. m $0 4s it ſhall come, 
may either refer to the threatning of Judgements in the former 
part, or the promiſe of calling the Gentiles in the latter part of the 
verſe.Others make the verſe one entire Sentence,and the Senſe thus, 
Jeing 1 know their works, 8c. or when the time ſhal come, that I ſhal 
let them by my vengeance know, that'1 knew their works. 1 well 
gather all Nations and Languages. I will call the Gentiles into my 
Church, and o My Oracles, my holy Inſtitutions and Ordinances, 
have been locked up in the Church of the Jews,Rom. 


ich hithert | 
—_— ſhal be publiſhed to the Gentiles, Pſal. 


3- 2- and been their glory, 

. 6. Iſa. 40-5. : 
Ws I9 gt I will ſet a ſign amonſt them, and I will 
ſend thoſe that eſcape of them unto the nations p, ?o 


| 
| anciently choſe to Minitter before him, was not among them,ſhould 1 Pes. 2. 9 


Tarſhiſh, Pull and Lud that draw the bow, to Tubal ' 
and Javan, to the liles afar off q, that have not heard. 
my fame, neither have ſeen my glory, and they ſhall 
declare my glory among the Gentiles 7. 

p Ic is on all hands agreed that this Verſe is a Prophecy of the 
Converſion of the Gentiles. By ſign here ſome underſtand an Erſign, 
as the word ſignifies, Pſal. 74. 4+ which is a military ſign to gather 
People together; by this may be underſtood Chriſt, Luke 2. 34- 
See Iſa. 11. 10. or as others the miniffry of the Word attended with 
Miracles, ( often called ſigns) theſe were ſet up amongſt the Jews 
firſt, then among the Gentiless Others ( bur leſs probably ) under- 
ſtand by ſign s Mark of DiſtinQion, like that mentioned, Ezek, 9. 4+ 
ſo as, faith he, ſome ſhal eſcape and not be deſtroyed, and for thoſe 
that ſhal eſcape, I will ſnd them to 9 Tarſhiſh, Pull, Lud, Tubal, 
Javan, to Europe, Aſia, and Afica, to all the Quarters of the World, 
( ſee the Latin Syopſir, and the Engl:ſh Anner. large Diſcourſes of theſe 
particular places,) to all Nations that had never before heard of 
God, or his true Worſhip, r And they ſhal every where Preach 
the Goſpel, and fer up my Goſpel-Ordinances and Inſtitutions. 
This was eminently made good upon the Apoſtles leaving the Jews, 
and turning to the Gentiles, 4#s 13. 46. and more ful'y after the 
Deſtru&ion of Jeruſalem, when the Believers among the Jews, as 
well as the Apoſtles, went abour publiſhing the Goſpel toall People, 
which was the declaring of the Lords glory. : 

20 And they ſhall bring ail your brethren 5 for an 


| ſhal have an end. xz 


offering unto the LORD out of all nations: upon hor- * 
ſes, and || in litters, and upon mules, and upon ſwift 
beaſts :,to my holy mountain Jerufalem,ſaiththe LORD ' 
&, as the children of Iſrael bring an offering in a clean | 
veſſel unte the houſe of the LORD x« 


s Thoſe who are the Children of Abraham, not conſidered as the | never dic, and a firey Wrath of God upon their Souls and Bodies, 
Father of the Jewiſh Nation only, but conſidered as the Facher of mas | that ſhal never go out, 4 


dye, andthe Enemies Fire burning up their Habitations ſhal not go 


" wy \\ G 
LEAY | 
y 


5 « <0 6 [ 
MI4 Chap. LYXVINE 
ny Nations, and as the Father of the faithful, or who are the Ch:ldrn of dd 
God, being Believers, and receiving Chriſt ; and ſo are your Brethren, 
( how contemprible ſoever you judge them, ) ſhal be brought out 
of all Nations for an efering to the Lord, God will. have no more 
offerings of Bullocks, and Rams, or Lambs, bur of Men, and Wo- 
men, reaſonable Services, Rom. 12.1. he will have an offering up of 
the Gentiles, Rom. 15.16. 8 And becauſe the Gentiles aie many of 
them far off from Jeruſalem, and as yet further off from Go1,Fph. 2. 
17. God will find out fic means for this end, as Horſes, and Litrers; 
and Mules, and ſwift Beaſts are to bring Men and Women long 
Journeys. « And they fhal be brought into the Church, which bes 
gan at Jeruſalem, and this you may be aſſured of, for the Lord hath 
ſaid it, who cannot ly nor repent. x And they ſhal come with as 
much joy and gladneſs, with as much [##cerity and holineſs, as the 
Godly Jews uſe and exerciſe when they bring their offerings in 
clean veſſels. | 

21 And* I willtake of them for prieſts, and for Le-* :.,z; 
vites y, faith the LORD. . 29% 6. 


7 Leſt the Jews, being aſſured that the Tribe of Levi, which Ged Ch. 61. 6 


F : 
j {; : 
CHIPD IE : 
's.. Y ' 
{ : 
{ 
by 4! : : 
f : 
[4 js 
us 1 
#4 \ 
' 0 
| } sf 
'F | 
Ik 18 
4p 
'x 
ov. : 
[ 

| 
ju . 
Cy : 

4 


ſay, Alas if the Gentiles ſhould be brought inz ' where would they Rev: 1, 6 ||| | 
have Priefis or Levites? God here by his Prophet tells them, he il 
would provide Prieſts, he would take of chem, of theſe Converted 
Heathens, for Prieſts and Levites, that is for Goſpel- Miniſters, to teach 
and inſtru&t People, which was the Prieſts work of old, Deut. 33+ 10. 
2 Chron. 17. 7, 9. Mal. 2.6. ( for they are mightily miſtaken, that 
think the Prieſts amongſt the Jews bad nothing to A but to ſacrifice 
and burn incenſe, which work is ceaſed, ) ſaith the Prophet, God will 
find amongft the Converted Gentiles thoſe who though they be not 
of the Tribe of Levi, or Houſe of Aaron, yet ſhal they de the true 
work of Prieſts and Levires. . 1 
22 For as * the new heavens, and the new earth 2, cb.66.552 
which T will make ſhall remain before me ( ſaith the , þ.; ay 11! 
LORD) fo ſhall your ſeed, and your name remain a: Rev. 1. x3 
This whole Verſe is only a Promiſe of the Perpetuity of the Goſpel- Church,and "Hh 
the net failing of the Additions 10 it of ſuch as ſhall bs ſaved, till the World 
The new State of the Church to be raiſed up un« 
der the Meſſhah. » As I intend that ſhal abide; ſo there ſhal be a 
daily Succeſſion of true Believers for the upholding of it ; for if Be. 
lievers could fail from the Earth, the Church made up of them only 
as the true Members of it, muſt fail alſo. y hal 


23 And it ſhall come to paſsthat from one F new + 5, ::02Ml 
moon to another,and from one ſabbath to another bſhall ory if 


all fleſh come to worſhip before me, ſaith the LORD. new-mnen, (IM 
6 In the Goſpel-Church, there ſhal be as conſtant and ſettled a #4 from |Iij 
courſe of Worſhip ( though of another nature) as everwas in the /#%barh re \IMI 
Jewiſh Church: Chriſtians are not bound to keep the Jewiſh Sab- #5 /#b5a:h.\| 
baths or New-moons, Gals 4. 1o, 11. Col. 2.16. But New Teſtament £*c- 14: 16, "i 
Worſhip is often expreſſed by Old Teſtament Phraſes. The Jews | 
were only obliged ro appear Three times in a year at Jeruſslem, but 
( faith the Prophet ) the Goſpel-Church ſhal Worſhip God from one 
Sabbath to anocher. 
24 And they ſhall go forth c, and look upon the car- 
caſles of the men that have ſinned againſt me 4d: for 
their * worm ſhall not die, neither ſhall their fire be + 


quenched e,and they ball be an abhorring unto all fleſh. 

c Either the Gentiles, or the ſincerer part of the Jews ſhal go 
forth from their places, or from Jeruſalem, or, go out of their graves 
ar the laſt Day. 4 And look upon the vengeance I have taken upon 
theſe vile Idolaters and Formaliſts, for their ſarisfaQtion, Pſal. 58>10, 
they ſhal ſee none of them alive, bur they thal ſee their tart/ſs. 
e For the worms that feed on their lain carcaſſes ſhal not ſuddenly 


Mark. 9. 
44146;49: 


outtill they be whelly conſumed : and after this Life, and at the 
Day of Judgement, they ſhal go into eternal Torments. See Mark 
9. 44, 46, 48.. where they will feel a worm of Conſcience that ſhal 


Annotations on JEREMIAH. 


The ARGUMEN T. 


T was the great Unhappineſs of this Prophet, to be # Phyſician to, but that could not ſave a dying State, their Diſeaſe 
Hill prevailing againſt rhe Remedy ; and indeed no wonder that all things were (o much out of Order, when the Book 

| of the Law had been wanting above Sixty Years. He was called tobe a Teacher in his Youth, in the | 
Jofiah, being ſautiified ond ordained by God to his Prophetical Office from bis Mothers Womb, Chap. I. 5. in a very evil 
time, though rhe People afterward proved much worſe upon the Death of that good King, be ſetting bimſelf ag#inft the Torrem: 
of the Corruptions\of the Times, \was always oppoſed, and unkindly Treated by bis ungrateful Countrey-men, as alſo by falſe 
rieſts, Princes, and People, who encouraged all their Impieties and Unrighteouſneſs ; At length be 

Threatned their Deffruttion and Caltivity by the Chaldeans, which be lived to ſee, but foretells their Return after [eventy 
He doth alſo, notwithſtanding bis dreadful Threatnings, 

the Days of the Goſpel ; 


rophets, and t 


Yeers > All which actordingly came as : 
comfortable Premiſes of the Mefliah, an 


Days of good 


intermix. divers 


he denounceth alſs heavy Fudgemmnts againſt the 


Heathen Nations, thet bed affiitted God's People, beth ſuch as were near, and alſe more remote, as Fgypc, the Philiſtines; 
Moab, Edomites, Ammonites, Damafcus, Kedar, Hazor, Elam, but eſpecially Babylon ber-/elf, that s made (+ 
E--- great a Type of the Anti-Chriſtian Babylon i» tbe New Teſtament. Upon the Murder of Gedaliah, »:bom the Chal- 
BM deans bad made Gevernour of Judea, he was forcibly againſt his Will carried into Egypt, where ( after he had Propeſied 
: from firft to laft between Fourty and Fifty Years ) poobably he died ; ſome ſay be was ſtoned, | 

Whatever elſe we hear mentioned of his Writings, they are either counterfeit as the Prophecies of Baruch, &c. or it 
| likely we have the Sumof them in this Book, though poſſivly ſome of bis Sermons might bave bad ſome Enlargement in that 
| Roll. which, by his Appointment, was Writtes by Baruch, Chap» 36. 2, &c, i 
| - 6 ] 


| 


| 
| 
I 
| 
. 
| 
x 
| 


- 
_—_ 


CHAP, F: 


ud th tion rele MA. 
—— py Mu - 9 Eran _ m_ -— 


— 


Tt 


ms 


E 


Pp I. J _— 
| C H A P, Þ. . 

' The Pedigree, Time, and Calling of Jeremiah, confirmed againft his Ex- 
cuſes, 110. His Viſions of an Almond-Rod and Seething-Pot, 
ji 1——14. His heavy Meſſage againſt Judah, 15——16. God pro- 

 miſeth him his Aſſiſtance, 17 19+ 2 | 
He words 4 of Jeremiah the ſon of Hilkiah 6, of 
the prieſts that were in Anathoth in the land 


of Benjamin <c. 

4 i. e. Sermons, or Propheciess which he received from God 
| (as being his mouth to declare them unto the People ) and com- 

priſed all in the Volume of this Book going under his Name, as the | 

Matter and Subſtance of them. See on Ja. 2. I. b As this ſerves 

et diſtinguiſh him from other Prieſts, ſo his being of 4nathoth ranks 
him among the common Prieſts ; not chat High Prieſt,mentioned , 

2 | Kings 22+ 8. under whoſe Progeny Jeremiah is not named, I Chron. 
6.13. Who, it- is probable, would have been name, being one of, 
Jo much note, and who always lived at Fernſalem, not at Anathoth, 
which was a City three Miles from Feruſalem, lotred out of the 
Tribe of Benjamin for the Prieſts, Jeſb. 21. 18. OF an ordinary 
Teacher hayyas made a Prophet, not 1o the reſt, c 7. e, That part of 

Canaan thatfell ro Benjamin's ſhare. | 

'2 To whom the word of the LORD # came in the 


days e of Joſiah the ſon of Amon f king of Judah, in 
the thirteenth year g of his reign, | 
4 Either that Commiſſion from God that did Authorize him to his 
Prophetical Work, as it may probably be taken, John 10. 35+ was 
aQtually given unto'him Verſe 10. or, Command of God, as "tis uſed, 
1 Kings 12. 24. Or rather, the Materials of which his Prophecies 
were to conſiſt, for the ſpace of 41 years ſucceſſively it: Judea, wvize 
from the 13 Year of Jeſia? to the 11th Year of Zedekiahy beſides the 
time that he propheſied in Egypts See Chap 43- and 44. as 1/a- 2.1 
e i-e. During his Reign, and reformed ſtate of Religion. f Who 
corrupted again that Rejigion by thoſe Idolatries that his Father 
Mazaſſis had in the” latter part of his Reign ſo well Reformed by 
Rooting of them out, 2 Chron. 33. 21, 22. 23. & By which it ap- 
pears x Hh Jeremiah prophcſi:d the laſt 18 Years of Joah's Reign ; 
for he Reigned 31 Years, 2 Kings 22. 1. ee 
+ b It came allo in the days of ; Jehoiakim, the ſon 
-of Joſiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh 
year of Zedekiah & the fon of Joſiah kirig of Judah, 
+ Kings unto the carrying away of Jeruſalem. | captive m * in 
-.8. the fifth moneth ». 
h. 52.12. + Viz. The word of the Lord, as Perſe 2. 


; Called at firſt by 
former Reigned before him, 2 Kmgs 23. 31. the latrer ſucceeded, 
2 Kings 24. 8. are conceived not to be mentioned, becaulc they 
- __—.* Reigned buteach of them three Moneths, and therefore not conſi- 
*-* - © derable, the Scripture often taking little notice of a {mall time, as 
of ſix Months, compare 2 Sam. 5. 5- | Kings 2. 11. k See Verſe 26 
of whom read, 1 Chron. 3+ 15,16, | 7. e. The Inhabitants of Jeruſa- 
Tem, namely under Zedekiah, 2 Kings 25.11. during all which time, 
things ſtanding in that ſtate and condition, Jeremy propheſied. 
» This doth not terminate the time of his Propheſies, for he prophe- 
fied alſo both in Judes, and in. Egypt afterwards, but only relates to 
_ what he propheſied while the City and Temple were ſtanding, the 
' reſt ſeemung rather ro be added asa Supplement, than to be reduced 
unto this general Title of his Prophefies. » Viz. Of that preſent 
Year; for,chough the Year end not at the fifth Moneth,yer it might 
end che Year of Zedckiah's Reign, becauſe he might begin his Reign 
E- at the fifth Monerh of the Year. 
© 4 Theno the word of the LORD came unto me p, 


= : # #. 


Princes, and Nobles. Or, 2. In Experience, being altogether un 


f to deliver thee g, ſaith the LORD. 


\ Joſiah Eliakim, 2 Kings 23+ 34: Jechoahaz and Jehorakin, whereof the| 


Chap. I. 


Skiltul in ſuch Afﬀairs, nc Ng 

therefore in aides "eſpe likes T Er Smeg x On 
7 But the LORD ſaid unto me, ſay not I ama child 

2 ; for thou ſhalt go b to all c that I ſhal ſend thee d 

whatſoever I command thee, thou ſhalt ſpeak, * = 


a Do not plead Excuſes. b This is God's Anſwer to Feremiah 1n 


reſpeCt of his ſenſe of his own Inability ; this may be by way of 


Command, and then it is a check to his Timor 

go, therefore draw not back : or, by —_ es _ 
: 3/090” x80 to _ on both proceeded from a fuſs of 

1 INIUINCIENCY, 9. 4, Fear not, T will make thee Elo 
Couragious. c This relates, either to Perſons or = _ 
£ "A ” all Perſons to whom I ſhal ſend thee ; thou ſhalt baulk non : 
- pc _ the HE _— ſo : R, _o Hebrew, and then it is thou 
Irrands : 

- 06h, gr rn ger ws ellages that I fhal ſend thee. See 


8 Be not afraid of their faces e: for * I 2m with thee * Joſ.r; FR 


| b. 
e Their fierce Looks, Ezek. 3 icati -*Yig 
. » EXER, Jo 9. the Indication 1 5, Ge 
; mms Dan. 3. 19. Neither when thon delivereſt body, - x ms | 
_m nor when thou mayeſt be 'cited before them, Mar. 10 + « 
1s1s God's Anſwer to Jeremy's Fears in reſpe&t of the Perſons | 
_ to deal with, as theother was in reſpe&t of his own Conſciouſ. 
ous of Inſufficiency ; and he mentions their Faces, becauſe the M 4 
je ick = an of Princes and Magiſtrats is apt to ſtrike a _ 
———_ and terrourupon Children. f Te not only ſend thee as as 
ings do their Ambaſſadours, but T will go with thee : Thi God 
promiſes to Moſes, Exod. 3.12. and Dent. 31. 6, 8. g Here God s 
muſes his ProteQion tor Encouragement. METRO 
2 Then the LORD put forth his hand b, and touck- 
- A my mouth, and the LORD faid unto me, Behold 
_ R — —_ in thy mouth. '0 Chap! 
od having before excited the Prophet to hi 
_ _— — _—_ Swear ina V ion nn Oy Com a 
. y the hand of an Angel, as 1/a.6.6, 5. ©  himſ-11 
bas ſome vilible ſhape. 7 Heb- Came upon, as he Wards: nv por 
ww hereby enabling him to ſpeak ; or thou ſhalt be m rs. 
- "tag? my Words; partly to ler Jeremy underſtand as the 
mo od's Words; and partly to intimate, thar they ſhoule bo 
eftectual; and partly, that be ſhould never be without them b . 
continually ſupplied. See thelike kind of Phraſe Chap 5.14. And he 
adds, Behold, q. d. attend to what I am about to ſay ; oy fag 4 
on this outward Sign, and let it aſſure thee of the thing Le 
10 See, I have this day ſet thee over the nations 
_ over _ A—— }, to * root out, and to pull * Oban" 
own 2, and to deſtroy, and to throw 7 w_ 
|» -=-2g6 Sno 3 ane down, tobuild ap32 
{ Having now received his Commiſii is di "Thi 
| 10N, he 1s direQed to w «3 
| $006 gan A — not only ſingle Perfons, Ga _ 6 
a ne Bavylomans, Perſians, and Egyptians, 
21 catneſs of Mind, a5 being lent as afi "1 Vary nney-ry _ 
eliver his Meſſage wirhour Flattery or Cowardice : and that by 
might make that proud People ſenſible of their Folly. that looked 
_ themſelves as above Reproof, he gives unto his Prophet thi 
 eevicy: ” 3. e. To Prophefie, that I will pull - Ioage 
whic #1 will as certainly eff-Qzas if thou hadſt done it thy ſelf: for, 
accorcing to Scriprure-uſage, the Prophetsare ſaid todo that whi ie 
they forere!i] ſhai come to paſs, Gen. 49. 7. Ezck. 43+ 3+ 2.e. to A 
—_ Deſtruftion : hence God is ſaid to flay them by the Words 
of his Mouth, Heſ. 6. 5. and fo are all the foljowing Expreſſions w 


ſaying, | 
| o 4.6. When he was firſt called to his Office, or the Lord then 
n to ſpeak unto me. p A change of rhe Perſon, a thing very 
uſual with the Prophets 


Ws. £9 Before 1 * formed thee in the belly q, I knew 
— ?” thee r; and before thou cameſt forth our of the womb, 
Toke 1» *I ſanRified / thee, «nd I | ordained thee a prophet 


15.4. unto * the Nations. 
* Gal. 1.15- , ;e, Womb, 1ſs- 46. 3. Having ſpoken before of the time of his 
x6. Call, Ycrſ? 4. he now ſpeaks of the manner of it. r z+e; Approved, 
| ul Heb. and appointed thee, as a fir Miniſter for this Work. Words of 
_> Knowledge among the Hebrews note AﬀeRion, as hath been former- 
ly noted. { Viz. Not with taving Grace,though tar necd not to be 
excluded, but accordingly I prepared and ordained thee for this 
publick Service; and thus with Paul, Gal. 1. 15. where toth are 
expreſſed. See the like uſe of the Word, Iſe. 13. 3- He ſpeaks thus to 
Jeremiah, not to the other Prophets, becauſe he ſtc-od in need of 
greater, and more dire& Encouragement tlian they, both in reſpe& 
of the Tenderneſs of his Ycars, and alſo of thoſe inſuperab'e Difh- 
culties, which in thoſe moſt degenerate and corrupt times he muſt 
unavoidably encounter with, which might cauſe kim to decline 
the Work Yeſ: 6: t Either with reference to place to other Nati- 
ons beſides the Jews, as appear Chap 43- and 46. 47. Oc. taking 
the Jews in among them, as Chap. 25.17,18. and ſo Unto may be ta» 
ken for Againſt, as itis often exprefled in thoſe places and elſewhere; 
or with reference to Time, to People of all times, who may be in- 
ſtru&ed by this Book, or whoſe Words are made uſe of, both by ſe- 
veral Prophets of the Old Teſtament, as Daniel, Ezekiel, Nehemiah, 
&c. and by our Saviour in the New, by Matthew, Chap. 2. 17, 18. 
By Paul, 2 Cor. 6- 18. And by Sr. John, Rev. 2. 23. z 
bo 6 Then ſaid I, Ah, x * Lord GOD, Behold, I can- 
b Exod. 6. not ſpeak ”: for I am a child z. 
T2 x An introductory Interjeion making way for his Excuſe in 
a way of Grief and Complaint, endeavouring with all Reverence to 
clear himſelf of undertaking ſuck a work raſhly, it being properly 
the Sigh of one that hath roo great a weight upon his ſhoulders. 
9 Not dumb as Zachary, Luke 1. 20, 22. nor ſtammering as Moſes, 
Exod. 4. 10, 14. but not with that becoming Gravity and command- 


| 


ſelf, from a Conſideration of the weight of the Work, and the ren- 
derneſs of his Age, as in the next Expreſſion. « Either in Years, 
and ſo not ripe, or apt for thedeclaring of great things, and that to 


Rs 


ing Majeſty as is ſuitable.ro a Prophet, he modeſtly excuſeth him- | 


be underſtood. » Metaphors taken from Archi 

Either the former Wards relate to the COS - n/ygronn pr 4 W 
latter to his Friends ; or rather to both conditionally : If the 'R Bu 
pent, he will build them up, 2 e. he will increaſe their Families, 

and plant them, viz. ſettle them in the Land,Chap.24.6. If th ag 

do not, he will root them up, and pull them down. &c "rg 1 

do the contrary. Compare this with Chap. 42+ 1o, and p "The 

reaſon why God uleth ſo many Words to the ſame wth Grg Pike 

co be. part)y to thew how deep'y all kind of Wickedreſs and C . 

cempt of God had t»Ken root ; which poſſibly may be one Re = 

why he placerh Puiling down and Rocoting up, beiore Bu:1din : = 
Plauting, t» ſew what a deal of Rubbiſh there was to be OE war” 

before he couid reform, and repair his Church 2nd Stare ; evi 4 

ther, b-caule th: Propher was to bepin with theſe in hs Bol wa 

as appears by his ſecond Viſions, Yerſe 11, T3. and part] _ Bos 

the Propbers Zeal againſt them, | FE 7 OOO 


x11 4 Moreover, the word of the LORD came o un- 
to me, ſaying, Jeremiah, what ſeeſt thou ? and I ſaid 
I oy - rod of an almond-tree p. i 

o This and the boiling Cauldron, Perſe 12. i o 
the ſame time, and in the fame Viſien, to oth he T—_— nt onde 
to his Work. ? Viz, That had Leaves, and poſſibly Bloſemns on it 
like Aaron's, Numb. t7. 8. for without Leaves ar leaſt, 'tis oflibſ: 
he had not ſo readily gueſſed of what kind it had been. his is : 
Tree that bloſoms early, and ſpeedily, and hence hath its Name == 
Hebrew Scakeds, fignifying watchful, forward, nimble, or 925 a 
and fo it may point at either God's Readineſs to ſinite Vole " 
which is deſcribed elſewhere by Summer-Fruit, Amos 8.1,2. or I} ; 
raels Ripeneſs to be ſmitten, as we have the like Ezek. 7 ba nj A 
both ; this Rod being like a portentous Comer, ſhewing to dig 
-the Miſexies that were at. hand, as the Death of Johah which ſoo 
followed this Viſion, 2 Kings, 23. 29. and the Taxing them b Pha. 
raoh Necho, 2 Kings 23.35+« and preſently after the breakin ny of 
the Chaldees, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonces, 2 Kings 244 2. 6. F then 
the Babylonian Captivity. 2! Kivgs 24. 10, which hapened in the $:h 
Year of Jelviakim, 2 Kings 24. 12. when Nebuchadnezaar taok him 
with others, -and carried them away abour 23 Years from hence : 
_ about the 40h Year Jeruſalem was taken, and the Temple 

urnt, 


12 Then ſaid the LORD unto me, Thou haſt wel 
ſeen q; for I will haſten x my word / to perform it. 
q Or 


7 | Heb: 
| Fom the 
face of th 
wth. 


| & 1. 
| f Heb: B, 
: Wenede 


* Chap: 
- $15» 


[ Or, br 


's pieces, 


Chap. TI: 7 E #8 
'F g Or. thou haſt ſeen and Judged right: or, as the Hebrew, thou 
haſt done » ell to ſecy i. 5. in ſeeing ſo. r Word for Word, I will Al 
mond-tree it, i. e. I wi'l be upon them ſp-edily, in a ſhorr time, and 
ſu./deuly, ere they are aware; or, I will watch, and be ready to 
accowp'iſh this in due time. / 7.e. My Word of Threatning a- 
g:inſt Judab and irs Inhobiraves. | 

12 And the word of che LORD came unto me the 
ſecond rime, ſaying, What ſeeſt thou? and I ſaid, I ſee 
a ſcerhing-por ?, and the face « thereof ;s | towards the 
norih x. 

: After the ſma!ler Puniſhment from the Lord,follows this of the 
Boi(ivg-por, by which underſt-nd Judea and Jeruſalem, as may 2Þþ- 
pear by the 
Scorn ard Deriſfion, 


1 } Heb: 

| Fom the 
face of the 
mh. 


Anger it ſelf, q. 4. I ſee a Pot coming,meaning the Babylmian Army 
flowing in up-n them, like boiling or ſca!ding Water, as ſome in 
terpret it: but this ſ-ems not to be ſo congrous to the Viſton; but 
rathzr thus, the Babylonians fhould Beſiege, as a Fire pl-ys round 
the Furnace, when ir is to be made” Boil, ſo ſhould theſe Caldeans 
b-gurt it, as verſe 15. and reduce the Inhabitants to moſt miſerable 
Ex:remities, with unſpeakable Cruelty, as if they were like fleſh 
xcaſting by the fire, or boiling in a Por, as their Sufferings are de- 
ſcrib:d, Micah 3. 3- u Or front of the Pot, or Furnace, the place 
where the Fire was put in, or blowed up to make it boil : as a Por, 
hanged in the form of a Furnace, ſeems to be all bur one and the 
ſame Pot or Veſſel, the face of which may be eaſily conceived to 
fand toward the North, not the mouth of the Por ; for that looks 
dire&ly upward, unleſs we conceive it to be repreſented in the Viſt- 
on leaning, of which Conceit there is no need, x Indicating from 
whence their Miſery ſhould come,verſe 14+ viz: from Chaldea, which 
lay North from Jeruſalem. 


14 Then the LORD ſaid y unto me,out of the * north 


£ Chap: & an evil ſhall + break forth 4 upon all the inhabitants 
4: 6: and oft the land 6b, 

| & 1. y Ex->lained this Viſion. 2 # e. From Babylov, a Metonymy of the 
| fHeb: Be gybjef ; for though it lie Eaſtward, yet it is North from Feruſalem, 
| eneds as iyirg four Degrees more fr>m the EquineQial. See werſe 13. 
#s I: ſhal be withheid,or reſtrained, no longer in my Treaſure; I will 
J-r it out; 4:2. That evil of puniſhmear repreſented by the Fire. 
þ Though God gave almoſt all the then known World to the King 
of Babylon, yet here he underſtands the Land of Judea, Chap. 25. 


9: 


Seder tres ons 


15 For lo, I will * call c all the families d of the 
kingdoms e of the north, ſaith the LORD: and they 
ſhall come, and they ſhall ſet every one his throne f at 
the entring of the Gates g of Jeruſalem, and againſt all 
the walls þ thereof round about, and againſt all the ci- 
ties 4 of Judah. | 

c Or, I am upon calling, it is at hand, Tam about to incline the 
Northern Countries te joyn together in this Work, Chap. 6. 22. and 
10. 22+ and 25. 9, 26. d Or Kindreds; wiz. thoſe divers Countries 
and Nations, that were under one Lord. as a chief Ruler is called 
the Father of his Country. e Yiz. The Babylonians, and their Afſi- 
ſftants, the M:des alſo being in Confederacy with rhem, whoſe King's 
Daughter Nebuchadnezzar married. f Their Seats, Pavilions or 
Tents ſhal ve pitched, which ſhal be as ſo many Thrones, where I 
will ſee my Judgements executed by the Chaldeans, Chap. 52. 4 
g Ar the <nrring to the Gates, or way leading to the Gates, Judges 
: 9. 35. 2, Kings 7. 3+ Chap. 43+ 9. which Beliegers have always a 
| ſpecal regard to, that there be no going in, or coming out, 1/a. 
| 22.7. h Fhry ſhal begirt it round, noting the great Multirude, 
Power, ani Courage of the Chaldeans, i There were none of them 
ſhould tare any bctter than Jeruſalem. 


16 And I will utter my judgements & againſt them 
touching all their wickedneſs, who have forſaken me }, 
and have burnt incenſs unto other gods 2, and wor- 
ſhipped the works of their own hands »- 


* Chap: 
- $:15» 


Chap. 39+ 5- Or, I will place my Bounty and their Uanworthineſs 
befere them. Or, I will upbraid them with their Ingrat tude, Re- 
bellion, and breach of Covenant, &c. I will ſpeck with them by 
thee Jeremiah, and others of my Prophets. / Either noting thePer- 
ſons againſt whom, or rather the Cauſe for which, becauſe they 
have forſaken me; the ſame Particle being ſo uſed, Chap. 13: 25. 
and elſewhere. Or their Sins whereby, as it is alſo expreſſ-d, Chap. 


E6. 11. and 22. 9- m2 4.e. Worſhipped ſtrange gods, a Synecdoche of 


the ' part fer the whole. » 7. e. Their Idolatrous Images exprefled 
kere by a Pcripiraiis, 1ſa. 2. 8. 


17 C Thou therefore gird up thy loins s, and ariſe 
p, and ſpeak unto them all that I command thee 92 be 
not diſmayed at their faces r,leſt I || confound thee / be- 
fore them 7. | Ts 

o By this Expreſſion God quickens, and haſtens him upon his 
Work, not to ſtand heſitating, but to be doing; prepare thy ſelf; 
for it is a Speech taken from the Cuſtom of the Countries where 
they did wear leng Garments; and therefore they did gird them up 
about them, that they mighr not hinder them in any Work that re 
quired Expedition. See the Phraſe and PraCtice, Exed. 12. 11, 2 Rings 
4+ 29. and in many other Textss Ir implies two things; 1. Speed 
and Diſpatch. 2. Courage and Reſolution: Jeb 38.3. p Another 
Expreſſion to the ſame purpoſe, to ſpeed him abour. his Work : the 
lik- Chap. 13* 4+ 9 Heb. Shall command thee, r Diſcover no Fear, 
and conc:al ro Meſſage, See werſe 8. ſ Heb. Break thee in pieces, 
either l:{t thou prove confuled a: d ſhartered in thy Notions, and 
unable to deliver rhy Met g+,):{t I leave thee,and ſorſak2 thee Or, 
leſt I Terrifie thee wori: than t ey ace «ble ro do, even to run thee. 
See Marth, 10. 28. #8 I: ſeerns to be ſpoken by way of Agyrayarion; 
Go.) wculd ſhame him, or deſtroy him even in tyeir fitht, ro be- 
come th ir Reproachi Or, think not to clcepe any more than Uriah, 
Chap. 26. 23. 


[| Or, break 


ts pieces, 


_ of, and igainſt the people of the land. 


Application that they th:mielves make of it in a way of 


k Cauſe Sentence to be piſſed according to my Threatning. See | 


NICK 


18 For behold «, T have made thee this day * a de-* If: 5o: - I 
ap: 6: | 


fenced city x, and an iron pillar y, and brazen walls 2 Ch 
againſt the whole land a, againſt the kings of Judah, - "m_ 
againſt the/princes thereof, againſt the prieſts there" 


« Heb F:r I, lo, q-. d. for my part, I will not fail to do what T 
have promiſed, to ſtand by thee. x Heb: City of Defence, impreg- 
nable, v-hich the two following Expreſſions do import, it ſhould be 
ſupported with y Pillars, nos of Wood, but of Iron. z And en- 
compaſſed with Wajls, not of Stone but of Braſs, noting hereby 


; both great Uprightnelis, and alſo Strength. #2 i: e: All its Iahvbi- 
; tants 1') genera], none to be ſpared, as he doth particularly rank 


Ot, them in their ſevera! Degrees in the following words, 
Ezck. 11. 3. 7+ Some pur the face of the pot for the | 


Por it ſelf; as the face of the cold, the face of his anger for Cold, and | 


NtIMitio 
hereby, that though Me of all degrees ſhould ſet themſelves rs. 
him, yer God would ſupport h:m againſt them all, . and that he 
would carry bim through his Work,though his Troubles and Tryals 
would nct be only great, but long, wiz. paſſing through ſeveral 
Kings Reigns, therefore poſſibly ſaid Kings here in the plural. | 
19 And they thall fight b againſt thee, but they ſhall . 


not prevail c againſt thee : for I az with thee 4d, faith 
the LORD, to deliver thee. nn 7 

b Make united Attempts upon thee. See Judges 20. 113 c They 
ſhal not be able, by all their Devices, to thoiten thy days, chap: 15. 


20, and 20.10, 1'» & Here is the reaſon given of his Safery, God 
will be his guard. See werſe 8. 2 Tim. 4. 17, 18. 


CHAP. IL 3p ns 
God's numerous and continued Merci:s render the Jews in their Holatry 
inexcuſable, and unparallell'd in any Nation ; and themſelves the Cauſes 
of their Calamities, 1 19+ Their groſs Idelarry, 20——28, . In- 
corrigibleneſs, Blooa®ſheding, and Hypocriſie, 29 37. | 
Oreover, the word of the LORD came unto me, 
e ſaying, : | | 
* Now God begins by Feremy to deal with the Jews,and to put him 
upon his Work, having fitted him for it : This ſeeming to be his 
firſt Sermon, it notes ſpeed, and quick diſpatch abour his buſineſs, 
2 Gof, and cry inthe ears g of Jeruſalem b, ſaying 
thus faith the LORD 3; I cemember & || thee, the kind- 


|| Or, for 


neſs of thy youth 2», the love of thine eſpoufals », when thy ſake. * f 


thou wenteſt after me in the wilderneſs s, in a land 
that was not ſown. 


f Yiz. From Anathoth to Jeruſalem. g Proclaim it ſo, that they 
may hear it. h< Declare God's Wiil to the Inhabitants thereof; a 
M-tonymy of the Subje&. # The Prophet's uſual form of Words in 
this Book, whereby he frequently intimates, that he came with 
God's Meſſage, not his own; and therefore direfts his Sermon here, 
as in God's Name and Perſon, to the whole Rody of the People. 
k I record, orl mind thee of the Kindreſs that was between us; 
though this be ſometimes taken in a way of favour, Neh. 13. 31. yer 
not always fo, as Neh. 13. 29. Pſal: 137: 79. m Either thoſe forward 
and early AﬀeCtions of thine to me 1a thy Youth; or rather, the 
Kindneſs that IT ſhewed thee in thy Youth, 1/a. 46. 3+ for this relates 
to the time of God's bringing them out of Egypr which is ſometimes 
called the Birth of this People, 7/s. 44. 2. Hol. 2. 3. and their Youth: 
Iſa. 54.6. Hoſ: 23 15- The Story ſeems to favour moſt this latter ſenſe. 
Dent: 9: 6, 24. n Vize WheplT entred intro a Covenant-relation with 
thee at the giving of the Law, Exod: 24: 7,8. Deuts 4: 20, 23, 34, 
Ezek: 1628, &c. 0 Either out of thar Love and Aﬀe&ion that thou 
did(t ſhew to me in following my Condu&; or rather, when thou 
wertled by me in the Wilderneſs, and I rook ſuch care of thee, both 
for Prote&tion, and for Proviſion in that howling Wiiderneſs 
though rhou gidſt 11] deſerve it, where nothing neceſſary to thy 
Subliſtence could have been expeQted : and therefore ir is expreſſed 
in the next Words by a Periphraſis, a Land that was not ſown : and 
more enlarged upon verſe 6. for it plainly appears by the Story that 
they did not follow him with entire Aﬀc&ion, bur went a whoring 
from him, Amos 5:25, 26. and which we have a large Account of 
Pſal: 106: 7, OF, 


2 * Ifrael was holineſs p unto the LORD, and the, 
firſt fruits of his increaſe q: * all that devour » him 


- &:-: >; 
ſhal offend /; evil ſhall come upon them #, faith the . Chap: 
LORD. +". 234 
 p Or, Hvly, the AbſtraQt for the Concrete, 7. e. a People dedicated 
to God : thus the Word 1s uſed Levit: 217 7: and 27: 14+ ſer apart 
f:om other People for my ſelf by peculiar Laws and Rites. 9 This 
Supplement and is better left out, it being not in the Text, and 
rendring the Senſe more obſcure ; therefore better read, either, be- 
ing the firſt Fruits. by Appoſition : Or, as the firſt Fruits, 7. e, as the 
firſt Fruits were holy to God, fo was 1/r-axl. r Or rather devoured; 
for ir refers to the time paſt, not to the future; and ſo the follow- 
ing Words, all that were injurious to him, /{ or did .offend, were 
obnoxious, and liable to Puniſhment, as he that devoured that which 
is holy, Prov: 20125. # Came upon them: ſome Evil was inflicted 
on them from the Lord, that was alway wont to ſtand up for the 
Vindication of his People,as upon the Egyptians, Amalekites, Sihon, Og, 
the Midianites, Canaanites, and others, as the fur laſt Books of Moſes 
do abundantly teſtifie : And by th:ſe Expreſſions is infinuared, that: 
now they are like to find it otherwiſe, Chap: 5o: 7. this minding of 
them whar God had done for them,making way for the cloſer ſerting 
home the following Reproofs. | 


4 Hear ye the word of the LORD «, O houſe of 
Jacob x, and all the families y of che houſe of Iſrael. _ 
He beſpeaks their Attention ro what he is about to. ſpeak, as 
unto the Word of the Lord, telling them, that he delivers God's 
Meſſ:ge, and vents not his own Paſſions: . the like 7ſa: 1:10. and 
elſewhere frequently, both in the Old and New Teſtzment,: as; 
r Cor:11:23... 1 Theſſ: 4:15+ x 5.6. His Poſterity, Jacob and Iſrael 
here being rhe ſame 3 ASItT 1S Iſa: 43:1. y Yize Tribes, Chap: yu 1. » 
5 © Thus faith the LORD, whac iniquity & have 
your farhers found in me that they are gone far from 
: 62D 2 inc. 


NE: 
Exod: 19. 


i 3 E RB 


C 


vain b ? 


z God having, : 
, if they knew any thi 
had been, calls upon them to ſpeak now, if they ne hit they can 


as it were on his own behalf, ſhewn how kind > 
ngs 


_ - . ® Severity 

zojury> Either in breach of Covenant, or Sc g 
Kt - have thus Apoſtatized. See on 1/a. 1. 18- 

charge him with, that they have thus p cn manner of Speech his 


\d 5. 3. compare Micah 6. 2, 3, 4+ By 
it ap T ars the more juſtifiable ; he both makes their Con- 
vition the clearer, and the Reproof the ſharper. 4 Viz. Idols, 
ſhewing their Folly in going from God to ſuch vain taings a5 a2 
are, Dent. 32. 21. 1 Sam: 12, 20, 2i. and fer on Iſa. 41. 29. the Ab- 
rat for the Concrete, Eccl. 1. 2- 6 Yis. in following Imaginati- 
ons; Fools, Rom. 1. 21, 22+ as ſenſeleſs 25 the Stocks and Stones 
that they made their Idols of, Pſal. 115- 8. and herein they are ſaid 
to go far from God, and chuſe their deluſions, Jon 2. 8. 


*Ifa. 63. 6 Neither ſaid « they *, where is the LORD that 
9,1 13. brought us up d out of the land of Egypt, that led us 
3-4 through the wilderneſs, through a land of defarts e, 
and of pits f: through a land of drought g, and of the 

ſhadow of death 5, through a land that no man paſſed 


through, and where no man dwelt 5 ? 
© i, « With themſelves, thought note 4 The Expreſſion may 
bave ſome reſpe& to the {iruation of the place, 2s lying lower than 
Canaan ; bur the Deſign is, co reprove their Sloth and Stupidity, 
charging herein their Apoſtacy, not upon their Ignorance, but Wil- 
fulneſs, their Deliverance from Egypt and therefore is it here men- 
tioned being ſuch a Deliverance, as never greater was wrought for 
any People, whercin there was ſo much ofhis Power and Love ſeen: 
they never-regarded the Operations of his hands, never concerned 
themſelves about whet God had done for them, Perſe 8.which ſhould 
have exgaged them to a more cloſe cleaving to him. e Deſolate 
places, Chap 50. 13. and then what follows 1sto amplifie the great- 
neſs of their Dangers in the Wilderneſs, and therein the greatneſs of 
their Deliverance. f Either thoſe narural dangerous Pits that were 
there ; or, put for the Grave, where Paſſengers are ſo ofren buried 
-quick in the heaps of Sand ſuddenly blown up by the Wind; or 
threatning in every reſpe& nothing but Death, which may be 1m- 
plied in that Expreſſion of the Shadow of Death in this verſe, which 
may allude to ſeveral kinds or fears of Death in paſſing through a 
Wilderneſs. See inthe Syopſir g Whereby they had no Water bur 
by Miracle ; the LXX render ita Land with:ut water, þ Seein the 
ord Pits; the LXX render it a Land without fruit, briyging forth 
nothing chat might have a tendency to the Support of Life, there- 
fore nothing bur Death could be expe&ed ; and beſides, ir yielding 
ſo many venomous Creatures, as Scorpions, and Serpents, Ofc. as 
alſo the many Enemies that they went in continual danger of; all 
which could not but Icok formidable, and as the Shadow of Death. 
5 As having in itno Accommodation for Travel, much leſs for Ha- 
bitation : In theſe reſpe&s may it well be called a waſte howling 
Wilderneſs, Deut. 32. 10. 


7 And I brought you ints a plentiful Countrey &,to 
eat the fruic thereof, and the goodneſs / thereof ; but 
*Pſ78.;8. When ye entred, ye * defiled my land mw, and made 


mine heritage » an abomination. 

k Heb. Land of Carmel, Iſa. 29. 17. underſtand Canaan, Numb. 13. 
27. See on {ſa. 35-2+ ! To enjoy all the Bleſſing of it. m2 7. e. Con- 
ſecrated to my Name, Lcv. 25+ 23. and this you havedefiled by go- 
ing a whoring after your Idols, Chap. 3. 1- and many other Abomi- 
nations, Pſal. 106. 29, 35, 37» 38, 39. 3 In the ſame Senſe that is 
aid inthe foregoing Clauſe my Land, and which you received from 
he as your Heritage,the place that I choſe for my Churches preſent 

abitation, and earneſt of their future heavenly one 


$ The prielts faid not, where is the LORD? and 
they that handle the * law knew o me not: the paſtors 
alſo tranſgreſſed againſt me, 2yd the Prophets pro- 
pheſied by Baal q, and walked afcer things that do not 


profit 7. | 
oe 9.4. They that ſhould have taught others, knew as little as they, 
or regard as little to know,H:ſ.4-6.who are faid here to handle or teach 
the Law,viz. the Prieſts and Levites, who were the ordinary Teachers 
of the Law, not that they did fo, but that, eitherthey ought to do 
ſo, or pretended to do ſo. This was their Office, Deus. 33. 10, and 
and their Pra&ice, Neh. 8. 8. The Phraſe is a Metaphor taken from 
Warriours, that are ſaid ira#arebelum, to handle their Arms p Ei- 
ther Teachers as Inſtructors, or Kings and Princes, as ConduQtors- 
Sce 1 Kings 22.17. q They that thould have raughr the People the 
rrue Wo; ſhip of God, were themſelves Worſhippers of Baal, 1 Kings 
18. 22. Or, inſtcad of fetching their Oracles from me, ſayingy Thus 
ſarth the Lord, they would ſay, Thus ſaith Baal, or they did make ule 
of lefſ-r Deities ( for ſo doth Baalor Baalim ſignific ) in conjun- 
Qtion with God, perlwaCirg themſelves, they could honcur God ro- 
gether with them, as the Calves, 1 Kings 12.28, r Viz, Idols, a 
Periphraſis, that were never able ro do them any ſervice, as werſe 5. 
11, Scecn Iſa. 44. 10. Surethe State muſt be very bad when Pricſts, 
Prophets, and Peop!e, were thus corrupt. 


9 © Wherefore I will yet plead / with you, faich 
the LORD, and * with your childrens children c will 
I plead. 

{ This is to be underſtood, either really by his Judgements, Pſal. 
74. 22. and that with great Severities ; or verbally he will go on to 
deal with them, ro convince them by his Prophets, as he did with 
their Fathers, that they may be left withour excuſe, Chap. 7. 25, 26. 
£ Either for the hainouſneſs of their Fathers fins ; for God doth of- 
ren viſic the Iniquiries of the Parents upon their Children, Ex24.20.5. 
or becauſe they do imitate their Parents. | 


10 For paſs || over the iſles of Chittim «, and ſee, 
[| Or, ws and ſend unto Kedar x, and conſider diligently, and fee 


”. if there be ſuch a thing 
« A Synecdochical Expreſſion, extending to #1! Iſles in the Med;- 


* Rom: 2. 
I% 20g 2h. 


*Lev. 20. 
Fo 


M I A H. 


me, and have walked after vanity #, and are become| 
Chittim, 1/a. 23. 1+ x Underſtand Ayabia, 
- ry. Chittim _= more North or North-W 
orth to South, Eaſt to Weſt, and make the Experiment: - 
Chittim the moſt Civilized, or Kedar the moſt "3. "wbanengy gag 


& 
ry @ for that which doth not profit 6. 


naciouſly hold. & Yiz. The tive God, who was their Glory ; 


11 all People, th { d fi h we ” 
all all People, that are ſeparated from them by the Mg; 

ea, Iſlanders, becauſe they come to them by” " colony ane 

that Jay E:ſt South- E:ſt 

cit, 9.4, go from 


her have changed their gods. y Not that they wer 
ocally, or fend Meſlegers thither aQually ; bs 1. $a a 


thicher, and make your Obſervations, by what you h 
or keard, did you ever hear of ſuch . Airman tits 2 if ” 
ſhould either go, or ſend, you will find it fo. ; F 


11 * Hath a nation changed & their gods, which are . 


yet nd gods ? but my people have changed Mich? 


their glo- ,. 5, 
*Chap:16; 

although 20+ 

they tes 


Metonymy of the Adjunf, Pſal. 106. 20. and who always did % Wie 


good, giving them cauſe to glory in him, and rt 
- hime = For _— which en did, or can Jo » wg _ _ 
ave no Eſſence, or Power ; but of wt , 
_—_—_— _ ww = ot whom they muſt neceſlarily be 
Iz * Be aſtoniſhed, O ye heavens c, at this, and * Ifa. t. x; 
x afraid 4; be ye very delolate e, ſaith the 


e Angels ſay ſome, but rather the viſible heave ieS: a Da; 
therical Expreiſion in a Poetical Proſopepeia, as ny i ont NS 
intimating that it is ſuch a thing,that che very inanithate aka _ 
could they be ſenſible of it, would be aſtoniſhed. 4 The Heb ng 
ports as much as Ler your hair be lifted up, ſuch a fright as we ally 
fay, makes our Hair ſtand on end ; ſuch a Trembling, as ſome dre rd 
ful Tempeſt doth ſometimes cauſe in a Man. e Loſe your Brj he. 
neſs, Luſture, and Shining as the Sun, that heavenly Body ks 4 
ro do whien Chriſt ſuffered, Marth. 27. 45+ or melting, the hei = 
neſs of ſuch a thing, as it were, dilolving them. wag 


13 For my people have committed two evils f: t 
have forſaken me the * fountain of ==": ht f - = *Pfal. a6 
hewed them out ciſterns þ, broken ciſterns. a Es 
hold no water. 4 


f Viz. Remarkable ones, as with a witneſs. g A Mer 

from Springs, called vixg here, as Gen. 26. 19. nd TT _ 
cauſe they never ceale, or intermit; ſuch had God's Care and 
Kindneſs been over, and tothem. See on ſa. 58. 11, his Spirit cone 
tinually proceeding frem the Father and the Son to refreſh their 
Conſciencies. Compare John 4. 10, and 7. 38, 39+ h Ir isdouble 
to ſhew the multitude of their Shifts, and brokex js added, to fhew 
the helpleſnels of them, as being able to hold no Water, he cannot 
keep it, but it dries away ; or, it it abide, proves unwholſome : b 

which underſtand cither their 1dols, which are empty vain thin 4 
that never anſwer ExpeRation, or the 4ſhrians and Egyptians, ay __ 
18. which proved but broken Reeds, and as all other Supports or 
Props, Friends, Traditions, Merits, &c. are, that are truſted to 
beſides God; they are but Ciſterns at the beſt whoſe Warer will 
patrifie, or broken, riven Veſlels, through which they will ſoak 
and leave nothing but Mud and Dirt behind them. x 


14 © 1 Ifrael a ſervant? 3s he a home-born ſlave 5? © 
why is he + ſpoiled k? + Heb. 
# Did Iever account him ſo, or did I not rat 

him m firſt-born ? ſo ſome, as verſe 31. But pr efaape rechen Bil, 2 
ro hisſad Condition, and Abuſes from others, as Chap. 49. 1 —_— : 
God or the Prophet doth here enquire info; and Slave is ws 
rightly added to home-born, ( though nor in the Texr ) to expreſ; ” 
baſeneſs of his Service, becauſe the Maſter had Power to _ - le 
Slaves who were born cf Slaves in his houſe : which argues his C mg 
dition very low, whether he were thus born, or had been forc Js 
ſell himſelf to be a Slave. k He ſpeaks, either of the thin tha jo 

to be, as if it were already done, becauſe of the Certainty fie ” 

of that Devaſtation made by the 4ſjrians and Chaldeans who 2M;& 4 

the Remnant of the Jews, or of that Havock that was made of h » 
formerly by Sennacherib, the Aſhrians, and Egyptians; Why is "hy h__ 
Tyranized over Iſa. 42.24. asif Strangers had the ſame Ri hr — 
him as Owners over their Slaves ? | He removes here the fIGC _— 

_ Iſrael's =p __ he may my more aggravare and ſet bots the 
rue, as verſe 17, 19. He was my Son : if 1 
__——— y ;3.1f he now become a Slave, he 


15 The young lions 7 roared upon him, and + yelled + Heb 
m, and they made his land waſte : his cities are burnt geve ” 
grr ore wor yer Nl heir wiiet, 

Underſtand the 4fjrians, Babylonians, and Erypri FN | 

| Lions from their Fierceneſs, and young "—_ their ones bag on wm 
Chaps 4+ 7. and 50.17. m Noting the terrible Voice thar the Li « 
puts forth cither in the ſeizing the Prey, ſome ſay in ſpore. "agg 
7. or the devouring it, 1ſs. 5. 29. A Metaphor, noting the Crueley 
of the _— - - e- So conſumed and waſted. thar they 
are uninhabita EO 

—_ itable, or ſhortly fhal ſo conſume and waſte them, Sce 


16 Alfo the children of Noph and Tahapanes s 
| have broken the crown p of thy head. 
0 Two of the King of Ezyp:r's principal Seats. 
ſometimes called Memphis, now Cairo, 
- Us. Tahapanesy, tee Ezek. 30, 
rom Tahpenes Queen of Egypr, 1 Kings 11. 19. cal i” 02 
nes : Sce on Iſa. 30. 4. And the Inhabitants nd Nations —_— Ila. 8. 8 
Cities are called here their Children, Iſs, 37. 12+ þp They th : 
take the Heb, Word in the notion of Breaking, rfhend his - 
deſtroying whatever is Chief or Principal among them, either 
of Perſons or Things 3 Wounds in the Head being moſt dangerous 
Or, defiling the chief of the Land, either by their corporal Adulre= 
ries, and fo take the Word under the notion of Knowing, as Gen 
19. 5. or ſpiritual, ramely Idolatries, Chap. 44. 17. or ale Ciuet 
Tyranical Oppreſſions, trampling upoa all their Glory, exprefſed 


z 9.4. No,they are unmoveable and fixed to their Idols, 
they are falſe gods: what they receive from their Fathers 


and 


I Jo 
18, 14 


[! Or, feed 
Concerning Neph 97 *#y 
ſee On Iſas Ig. 13s Crown. 
'8. probably taking its Name Deut+ 33- 


ferranean-$ea, Or any other the neighbouring Coaſts ; for the Hebrews | 


by riding oves their Heads, and thas umverſally in a moſt inſuir= 


| 


IS Ae ARM PEI ” 


at Can 9- | 
D Chap: 1+; ff 


i 


ons MT ——— ———  — 


Cha 


*IG. 


TEyod 
Is; 1h: 
Plalig. 
Mar. 


Mi 
nk. 20 
t Deur 


32: Zaz 


, 


Chap. II: 7 BB. 


ing manner: but the word may be better taken in the notion of 
Feeding,” as the word is uſed Chap. 3. I5. 7. 2. They have fed upot 
her m | fruitful ard pleaſant, the top and head ofall her Paſtures, 
that Jay in the Scouthern Borders towards Egypt : Seechap. 13. 18,19, 
20. Thus depriving them of all way of Subliſtence, chaps 12+ 16. In 
ſhort, they ſhall make hayock of a1! rhar is excellent in thee, ſa. 
28. 4. The Sum is, Thy League, O Judea, with Egypr againſt the 
Chalieans, will be the Cauſe of thy total Ruine. For the Kings of 
Judah had nt rebelled agairſt the Babylonians, bur to gratifie the E- 


| 


E M 1 A H. 


£zyptiars in exp=EAarion of help from rhem | Bet) 
17 Haſt thou not procured chis unto thy ſelf q, in 
that thou haſt forſaken r the LORD thy God, when he 
| led thee by the way /? 


 q Here Gol by his prophet ſhews, that they may thank them- 
ſelves for all that is haſtening upon them. See Numbers 32+ 23: 
r Here he ſh-ws wherein, vis. in forſaking God ; not that he left 
them, but tl ey him, and that without any Temptation or Provyo- 
cation ; and therefore were the more inexcuſable. j Viz. By the 
ConJu& of his Providence in the Wilderneſs, keeping thee in fſafe- 
ty frem all dangers, Exod. 13. 2, 22. Iſa. 63. 12, 13- or in the 
way of his Counſels, which the ways of their own carnal Wiſdom 
were ſo oppoliteunto. 


13 And now whathaſt thou to do in the way of E- 
eyprt t, to diink the waters of Sihor « : 'or what haſt 
thou todo in the way of Afſyria, to drink the waters x 
of the river y ? EE 

t What Buſineſs haſt thou there ? or what doſt rhou expe& from 
thence? or what need hat thou to go, or ſend Meſſengers thither, if 
thou would'ſt bur keep cloſe to me. # Yiz. Nlus, it ſignifies Black, 
from wherice called M las by the Greeks, either fromthe Blackneſs of 
the Land it pzſſcd through, or ofthe Soi! ir caſterh up. See on Iſs. 
23- 3. z H:re and by the fame words before is meant, to ſeck help 
From either p'ace noting their ſtrength, 1/a. 8. 6. A Metaphorical Al- 
legory wherein God mindsthem of two of their broken Ciſterns, and 
ſhews them their folly to go ſo far when they might have been ber- 
ter ſupplied nearer home ; as if God were not able to hep them 
Compare v:r. 36. y #. & Euphra'es, often called ſo by way of Emi- 
4 nency, the chief River of Afyria, 1a. 7. 20. 

" +16, 2:9: I9 * Thive own wickedneſs (hall correct s thee 

; k fa. 3: 9: . yo ; W , 

| and thy backſlidings ſhall reprove athee : know 6 there- 
fore and ſee, that it is an evil c thing and bitter, '< 


Ne ECIENAININY k 


thou haſt forſaken the LORD thy God 4d, and that 
fear e is not in thee; ſaith the Lord GOD of hoſts. 


z The meaning is, either 1. There needs no farther evidence a- 
g1inſt thee than thine own evil Ccurſes, Hoſ. 5. 5. or rather might 
corie&t thee, i. e one would rhink ſhould te tufficient ro reclaim 
thee See Hoſ. 2. 7- Or, 2» Thy cwn wickedheſs is the cauſe of thy 
Correction. Or, 3. Thy wigkgdneſs will be an evidence, that 
whatever thou ſuff-reſt is juſt. @ The ſame with the fortner, but in 

other words, afrer the manner of the Hebrews, or a Metonymy of the 
| Effe# for the Caiſe ; thou wilt nor be perſwaded, til] thou cometo 

| ſuffer ; thou wilt not be jnſtrufted, unril correHted ; or rather, as 
before, thy many backſlidings might teach rhee more Wiſdom, and 
convince thee of thy Folly ; ſs doth the Word Reprove lign' he, 
Fob6. 25. b 1. e. Call to mind thy Experienntes, and conſider well 
with thy ſelf, and rhovu car.ſt nor bur be convinced of thoſe things, 
what forſakig of God hath coſt thee. c Yiz. Of puniſhment prin« 
cipally, ſo 1ſa. 45. 7- though it be true alſo of Sin : therefore he 
calls it birt-r, b-cauſe the effe& of it will be ſo; it will be unplea- 
fing, and bitterneſs in the Jatrer end. @ 7.e. Me. e Or the fear 
of me, or thou haſt not my fear in thees this being the groundofall 
chy Sin and Suffeting, Pſal. 36. 1. Rom, 3. 16, 18.” 


20 TC For of old time I have broken thy yoke f, 
ad burſt thy bands g. and thou faideft, 1 will not|| cratiſ- 
greſs hz when 7# * upon every high hill &, and under 
every green tree | thou wandereſt », playing the har- 
lot ». 

f i. e. The Bondage and Tyranny that thou wert under in old 
time in Egypt, as alſo divers rimes beſides, as appears through the 
Book of Judges : The Hebrew Olam, thac ſignifies Everlaſting, is 
ſometim-s uſed for a lng time to comes and alſo for a long time 
paſt; ſo here, and Gen 6. 4 Ia. 57.11. g A double Aliuſion, 
either to the bands and ferters, with which Priſoners are wont ro 
be bound, chap. 40+ 4. or thoſe bards wherewith the ends of the 
Yoke of Beſts were wont to be bound, See cn {/a» 58. 6. þ When 
the Deliverance was freſh, th-u didſt pit on good Reſolutions. 
Heb. Serve, i. & S:rve or worſhip Idols: The Word 1s of the Femi- 
ine Gender, becauſe God ſp?aks of his pecp'e, as of a Woman pro- 
miſing Faithfulneſs, bvr breaking Coven:nr. Some underſtand 


[| Or, ſerve. 
* Chap. 
J: 6; 


Chap. IPF'* 
iſa 5. 1. The Heb. is Sorek, and may refer to the place, or to the 4 
Plant : with reference to the Place it may be taken either for a pros 
per Name, as Carmel for any fruitful place ; ſo here noting, eicher 
the place whence, wiz. A Vine of the ſame kind with thoſe that 
come from Sorek ; poſſibly that Country where Sampſon ſaw Dalilsh, 
Fuag. 16. 4. Or, the place where o/anted, wiz in a fruitfu! Land 
Exod. I5. 17+ See on 1a. t 2» Ifit be referre& to the Plant, then it 
points at the excellency of its kind; and the ncxr Clauſe ſeems to 
favour : and thus it notes both God's care; he had as great a care 
of it as of the choiceſt Plant: See on 1/a. 27. 2, 3} And alſo his 
ExpeCtation, that it ſhould prove ſo," I/a- 5.4. And the ſenſe is, E 
planted thee, that thou ſhould'ſt bring forth choice fruit to me: 
? Aright Seed of true Believers, as inthe days of che Patriarchs, A. 
braham, Iſauc, and Jacob. Or. ſuppoſing With to be underſtood be 
fore Right Seed ( asit often is in the Heb. ) we may underſtand itof 
rhe Ordinances. of his Church, which are ſaid ro be the Plants, of 
Seed, that God furniſheth it withal, Match. 13. 24. and theſe are 
called right, Neh. 9. 13. not falſe, or counterfeir. q Though there 
be only degenerate or declining in the Heb. Texr, yet the Supple- 
mentis neceſſary in regard of the Metaphor, r Thismuſt here be ta= 
ken in a bad ſenſe, as the word degenerate going before intimates; 
though ir be ſometjmes for what is rare and excellent : here it notes 
their Apoſtacy and Infidelity, and other Wickedneſs ; where God 


ſ] _ after the manner of Man, both in a way of wonderand Re- 
proof. 


\ Though Interpreters do greatly vary in deſcribing what fs pat= 
ricularly meant here by Nitre and Soap, and would be ſyperfluous 
to mention here 3 yet all agree, they are ſome Materials that Artiſts 
make uſe of for the cleanſing away Spots from the Skin, Cloaths, or * 
other things: and the ſenſe is plain; that the blot of his people i3 
by no Art ro be taken out z it cannot be covered by Excuſes ; though 
thou wou'deſt diſſemble thy Idolatries,. rhou canſt nor decive mes 
nor expiated by Sacrifices; itis beyond the power ofall ſuperſtiri- 
ons or religious Waſhings to cleanſe away, which may be unders 
ſtood by theſe natural and artificial ways of cleanſing. s The 
Meaning ſeems to be, either thy Filthineſs is ſo foul that ir leaves 
a brand behind it that cannot be hid or waſhed our, bur will abide: 
Jee Jer. 17. 1- Or, according toancther Acceptation of the Word, 
It is laid up with God, See the like Deut. 32+ 34+. Hoſe 15. 12. Purge 
thee, waſh thee, do what thou wilr, rhou. canſt by no means con- 
ceal thy Wickedneſs from me, Joby. 20. They that would ſee grez« 
ter Variety of Interpretations, let them conſult the Synopſis. 


23 How canſt thou ſay «, I am nor polluted, I have Bn 
not gone afcer Baalim x ? ſee thy way ... in the valley y, | fl 
know what thou haſt done = ||: rbots art a ſwift droine- jor, & | 
dary a, traverſing b her ways. ſwift Dro®| 

# with whar face canſt thou go about to excuſe thy ſelf, or medary. | 
deny what is ſo evident, and fo truly charged upon thee, werſe 20. 
x The word 1splural, as ccmprehenſive of all their Idols, Hoſ. 11. i. 
and is a Name uſually given to ſeveral of them, as Baalzebub, 4 
Kings 1. 16- and Baal-peor, Numb, 25. 3-and therefore their worſhips 
ping of many. Beczuſe they had the Temple, and Sacrifices, &c; 
chey ſtill periwaded themſ:1ves, that they worſhipped the true God, 
though they joined their Idolarries with it, as the Papiſts; though 
they make uſe of Idols ia worſhip. yer would not be coconnced Þ- 
dolarers. .*. The filthineſs thou baſt-left behind thee, whereby thou 
may '{t be Traced, where thou lefteſt, as it were thy Foorſteps and 
Monuments of thy frequent Idolatries. y Thy frequent Courſesin 
the Valleys, whether of Hinmon where they burnc their Childrens 
bones in Szcrifice, chap 7: 31: or, in any Valleys where thou haſt 
been frequent itt thy Icolatries ; it ſeems to be thus largely taken. 
z Look on and conſider thy ways, as ve. 19; # Or thou art as, &ci 
or, O Dromedary, a Beaſt much uſed by Carriers in Arabis, being 
rife theres See on 1a. 60: 6. b A Metaphor taken from Creatures. 
that are hunted, that keep no Cire& path, alluding tothe Nature of 
the She Dromedary, which in gendring time 12ns capering this way, 
and croſſing rhat way, cy \ 2 many Vegaries to find out ſome» 
times one Male, ſomerimes arorher withoutany Ruleor Order, ſet- 
ting forth hereby the Diſpoſition of this people, rhat were ſo mad 
upon their Idols, that they ran ſometimes afrer this, and ſometimes 
after that, called Wandring, ver. 20: and thar with preat Eagerneſs, 
fitly termed :raverſng, much like the Deſcription of a Whore, Prov. 
7: 11, 12: The werd being no where fcurd but here, and being de- 
rived from a word thar fgnifies a Shoe-latchet, IF any be curious, 
Jer the Learned conſult Symp. Critic. and the Engliſh Reader, .the 
Eigliſh Annotations on the place. . 


24 || A wild afs c + uſed to the wilderneſs; that 


Thee, I will not ſerve thee; q. 4. which thou madſt appear, when upon 

every hill, &c. And thus he accuſeth them of their Ingratirude, who 
owed themſelves to their Redeemer. But this doth nor fo well agree 
with their Engagement, Exod. 19. 18. # Or, notwithſtanding al] 
thy Promiſes. & Idolaters were wont to ſacrifce upon the tops of 
high Hills, beczuſe there they thought chemſeives nearer Heaven : 


Peru at this day. ! Under theſe Shades Idolaters thought there lay 
ſome hidden Diety, with which they converſed. m Yiz. Changing 
thy way to gad after Idols, »s one that hift broken Coveriant. See 
on Iſa. 57. 8- The Word properly ſingnifies, ro go from ones place; 
as Harlots uſe to do, inftigaced eirh-r by unbridled Luſt, or Cove. 
touſneſs; #. e. making great haſte from one. Tree to another, or 
from one Idol to another: See wer. 13 24. Ochers, Thou lieſt down; 
; or thou ſetteſt thy ſelf = Commirting Idclatry, which is a ſpiritual 
Harlotry, chap. 3 1, 2» This is frequent. Someread thc former 
} IEyoq part of the Texr otherwiſe, making it the daring boaſt of the people, 
* 1: 3». Thou haſt ſaid Thave broken, &c. and ſaidſt, I will not ſerve, i. e. I will 
Plalg4: 2; not obeys But this will not ſuit w2l} with the reſt of the Text, 
Mat. 1: 21 Yet I had * planted thee a noble vine o, wholly 
Me a«3. 4 right ſeed p: how then artchou turned into ÞF the de- 
Lak.20:9; generate plant q of a ſtrange r vine unto me. 

eur. 


' caſion who can || turn her away f? all they that ſeek wild oſs | 
, her will not weary themſelves z; in her moneth 
' ſhall find her. 


nay, ſome have eſtcemed high Hills to be Gods, as th- Indians of | 


32: Zaz 


o An uſual M::4phot for the Church, P/al. 8. 8, 9, &c. Seq an 


ſnufferh up the wind 4 at * her pleaſure e, in her oc-|| Or, & 


T Hebs, | 

they aughs. l; 

e Or, O wild aſs, another Similitude for the more lively Deſcrip- ihe caſo 
tion of the fame thing ; neither need we be {olicitous about the va- gf; pg © 
riety or extravagancies of ConjeCtures abour this Beaſt: or you may þ, g,o. 
conſult as before. It is {aid tobe wild and untamed, as being uſed zo , (5 _—_—_ 
the wilderneſ doth alſo imply ; and as ro farisfying its Luſt, much of +.” ic 
the nzture of the other. 4 This ſnufirg properly appertains r lt 2 
Senſe of Smelling, by which certain Creatures, by anatural ; fon 
city, find our what they miſs, which Huntſmen expreſs by a pro- 
per term of Winding, or having ih the Wind: and thus ic is under- 
ſtood here ; for this Creature, by the Wind, ſmells afar off which 
way her Male is;fer there is another Senſe of ſnffingup the Windyviz, 
for the S«rvice of Health, as allayihg inward Hear andDrought,&c. 
Chaps 14: 6- e As her Deſice or Luſt ſerves whe ir runs out 
after the Male; implying alſo; thac no Choice, or J udgmeor, 
or Meaſure, is oblerved in theſe Beaſts, when carried out after 
their Luſts. f i. e. When ſlhic is ſct upon if, and hath an Oc- 
calion and Opportunity to run impetuouſly to her Male for the ſa. 
risfying her p!eafure, ſhe bears down all Oppoſicion before her ; 
there IS none can ftop, or put a Bd upon her raging Luſt £5, e. 

G | 


3 Either 


Þ 


_ ſelves, ( \ ENT - 
Ei need not weary themſelves, ( ſpeaking of Jeruſamer, 
or uy A reſt alſo is 4 be applied as in an Allegory ; ) they that 
have a mind. to be filthy with her, may eaſily trace her, verſe 23 
ſhe refuſes none : Or rather, they will not beſtow their labour 1n 
vain, 'when ſhe is hot upon ber Luſt, bur ler ber take her __ 
until ſhe be ſatisfied, and wait their Time and Opportunity : _ 
this agrees withthe nexr Words. þ If this relate to the former ſznſe 
of not wearying themſelves, it nores her Impudence, and Untati- 


ableneſs ; you may have her at any time, even in her Moneths, or 


Moons, a ſeaton wherein ſuch As are abhorent even to Na- 
eic felf, Some underſtand this of the Idolatry they committed 
v new. Moon: but it more properly points at the Moneth of 
her Breeding, or growing big and weighty ; Mometh put colle&ively 
for Moneths, ſuch as Job ſpeaks of, Job 39. 1,2. Or mn her laſt Mo- 
neth,: becauſe they grow then unweildly. That this Creature fl-eps 
one Moneth in the Year, and that is the Moneth ſhe may be taken, 
is:generally deemed bur a Fancy: The Senſe of the Verſe 1s T hat 
though Jeruſalem be now madly bent upon going after her Idols, 
and o:her unclean Courſes, that there is no ſtopping or controling 
of her, as inthe next Verſe, and ver. 31. Chap. 22+ 21. yet the time 
way come, in their Afflictions, that they may grow more tame, and 
willing to receive Counſel as verſe 271. and Hoſ. 5. 15. 


25 Withhold thy foot from being unſhod 3, and thy 
throat from thirſt : but thou faidſt, || There is no hope 


'&. No, for I have loved ſtrangers/, and after them 
will I go mn. 

5 Good Counſel given them by the Prophet to tarry at home ; 
either that they donot go a gadding after their fpiritu:1 or ___e 
Adulteries; or ſeek forreign Aids, thereby-to wear cut their ſhoes; 
a Metonymy of the Effe#, Jcſb, g. 13. or that thou pur not off thy 

| Shoes to go into the Bed of Luſt, or uncover thy Feet ; a modeſt 
Hebrew Expreſſion. as alſo of other Languages, for expoſing thy Nakea- 
meſe, Exek 16. 25. or take not theſe Courſes that will reduce thee ta 
Poverty, to go bare foot, and bare legged, and to want wherewith 
ro qu-nch thy thirſt, as in the next Clauſe, Prov. 6+ 26. Iſa. 20. 2. 
4. See-1(a. 5-13. k She ſeems to return a croſs Anſwer, the Word 
pointing'at ſomewhar that is deſparate, Ecct. 2. 20, Ir either expreſ- 
ſeth the Deſperateneſs of their Condition ; 9.4 we are as bad as we 
canbe, and there is no hope that God ſhould receive us wmto 
favour ;.or elſe by way of Interrogation, Is there no hepe? May 
we tot hold on ſtijl, and proſper ? Muſt we deſiſt from our ways? 
No. we will not, but we will go after other gods, and they ſhall 
defend us, 1/o. 57. 10. and Chap. 18. 12+ or the Deſperateneſs of 
their ReſoJution upon it, 9-4. We care notfiace there is no Remedy; 
you loſe your labour to go about to reclaim us ; which agrees with 
the next Clauſe. 1 Yiz. Idols, or ſtrange gods. m Come what will 
of it. 

26 As the thief is aſhamed when he is found » : ſo is 
the houſe o of Iſrael aſhamed p; they, their kings, 
their princes, and their prieſts, and their prophers q. 

| » Not aſhamed of his Sin of Theft, bur that he is found, that his 
Shifts ar d Blinds would ſerve him no longer, eſpecially if be have 
"had the Repurztion of an honeſt Man. o Or Families, the Twelve 
Tribes ; a Metonymy of the Subjeff. p Or confounded, in the Paſſive 
Voice, viz. when they ſhall be taken by Nebuchadnezzar, then their 
'Tdols, which they went a Whoring after, ſhall be diſcovered, and 
'ſo put them to ſhame; in the 4#ive Voice, their Inabiliry ro help 
them, verſe 28. 1. 1. 29, , Hoſ. 4. 19: and their ſhame will be the 
more, becauſe they had the Repute of being my people. q Rulers 
and Teachers, ſuch as ſhou!d bave given better Examples, and bet- 
ter Inſtruction. 


27 Saying to a ſtock, Thou art my father ; and to 
[| Or, be.- a ftone r, Thou haſt || brought me forth /: for they 
© gotten me, have turned Þ their back: unto me, and not their face : 
— t Heb.zbe pt inthe time of their * trouble they will ſay, Ariſe, 


| ofthe 1; and ſave us s. 0D. 
" *Ifa, 26, #7 Idol; a Metonymy of the Matter, ' becauſe Idols are made of theſe 
16 Marerials, Dax. 5 4+ ſ Or begotten me ; ſo is the word uſed, Gen, 
=” 4. 18. This nores the ſottiſh ſtupidity ofthis people, to tzke a life- 
Jeſs Srock or Stone to be their Maker, and to give the Honour of 
God unto them, 1/a. 44. 17. They that make them are like unto them, 
as ſenſcleſs as they, Pſal. 115.8. * They turn their faces wholly 
to their Idols ; it notes the Openneſs of their Apoftacy, Chap. 4 
24. » The uſual Language of God's Children in diſtreſs, P/al. 3. 
7. and often elſewhere, when they found the Vznity of theirIdols, 
and their own felly in relying on them, that cannot he!p, or ſave, 
and rejeQing me, ver. 3r. then they will come to me, Judg. 10. 10. 
Hoſ. 5. 15. the ſame thing with finding her in her Mocth, verſe 24. 
herein . abuſing God's Gentleneſs, making him their neccſhiy not 
their Choice. ; 
{ 28 But where are thy gods x that thou haſt made 
2 thee ? let them ariſe y, if they * can fave thee in the 
© Tſa-45: time of thy Þ trouble : for according to the number of 
20:». thy cities z are thy gods, O Judah- 
X fide x Thy Idols, viz. gods of thy own. making, what do they do for 
—"Y thee ?' Iſa. 31- 3. »y Either by way of Challenge, letthem produce 
their Idolsnow, to help them, it they can, whom they call their 
» Fathers, and their Makers: Or by way of Scoff, as Elijah to Baal's 
Prieſts: See Judg. 10. 14+ Beſides, in this word Ariſe there is an In- 
finuati6h of their Lifeleſneſs & Deadneſs, 1/a: 46. 7. Chap.1o0. 5. And 
farther, there may be a ſecret Reply couched in it, 9. 4. in your 
* Trouble you will fay to me, Ariſe, ſave us: now ſay ſo to them, 
" and ſee if they can ariſe, and ſave you. z 9. d. Thou haſt them near 
- to thee, and enovgh of them, imitating the Heathens, who had ac- 
-* Cording to Yarro, above 30000 Dieties; no marvelifI, whoam bur 
one be ſlighted, when thou haſt 1n every City at leaft one, 2 Kings 
x7. 29, 39, 31. and in Jeruſalem one in every ſtreet, Chap. 11. 13s 
It's a hard cafe ifnone, nor all theſe thy turelar gods can help thee: 
* See Deut. 32. 37, 38, 39. Make trial if any, or all of them together, 
' can help thee. 
' 29 Wherefore will ye plead with me ? ye all a have 


= 4 2. 


a q.9. You are all at my Mercy, why will you conterd 2 At] 
this that 1 charge YCu watts 3s clear and evident, ard all makes Aa. 
gainſt you, wer. 23+ 34. Wherefore do you expoſtulite, and pur me 
to my Procfs ? 'This they were good at, Chap. 16. 10. There is no« 
thing that you can juſtly reply, wer. 19. 6 7. e. Some ofall ſorts - 
there is not any one ſort of ycu innocent. - 


led the Chilaren of ſuch a City, or fuch a Place, Chlaven of Ser, 2 
Chron. 25. 14+ Chilaren of the Province, Ezra 2+ 1. and Chiloren of thy 
people, Lv. 19. 18. :nd abundance more the like: And thus it is c-m+ 
prehenfive both of Parents and Children. @d z. e, The frvit ot Cor- 
reC&tion, viz. Inſtruftion : The ſame word is rendred Corre#ion, Prov. 
23.13. Which ſignifies Iſtru#ion, Prov. 5. 12. and in other places: 
.nd1oto be taken here, it notes their Refra&zrineſs, that though 
they were corretted, yet they would not be inſtrufted ; though God 
did (mite them, yer the Rod prevailed as little with them, as the 
Word. e Either the Sword that I have ſent to deſtroy you hath 
deſtroyed your falſe prophets rogether with you, Hoſ. 4. 5. and fo it 
is both a prophecy and a Threatning ; or rather, you have been fo 
far from receiving Counſel and Inſtru&tion, that you have by the 
Sword, and other ways of Deſtru&ion, ( which is to be underſtood 
by the Sword ) murdered thoſe that I ſent to reprove your Follies 
in the days of Aſa, Joaſh, Manaſſch, &Cc. Neh. g. 26. See Matth. 23. 34. 
35. f Or eaten up; a Meapher : Hence we read of the Eage of the 
Sword, which both in Hebrew and Greek is called the Mouth of the Sword 
chap. 2i. 7. Luke 21. 24. g Without Reſpe& or pity ; with all man= 
ner of ſavage Uſage. See. Pjal. 7.2. Taying aſide all Humanity. 


31 4 O generation h, ſee iye the word of the 
LORD & : haye I been a wilderneſs / unto Iſrael ? a 
land of darkneſs w ? Wherefore ſay » my people, + We 
are lords 0, we will come no more unto thee? 

h Or, Oh ye Men of this Generation, a Note of Admiration: or 
rather, O Generation, a Note of Compellation: it is to you I ſpeak 
z i-e, Look well toir, confiderit ; as the Rod is to teach, and there- 
foreought to be heard, Micah 6. g. fo the word is to be conſidered of 
and therefore ought to be locked into, chap. 2: 19+ & He ſpeaketh 
ere, not ſo much of the DoQtrine of the Word, as of the Thing it 

f 9. 4. You ſhall ſee Thing with your Eyes, becauſe you give 
the DoQrine the hearing only, as we uſe to ſay, 5. e. your Ears are 
ſhut againſt it. / Here God challengeth them again to tell him, what 
Ur:kindneſs he had ſhewed them, as before wer. 5. Have I been like 
the wi'derneſs of Arabia, have not I accomodated you withall Ne- 
ceflaries at all rimes,Deut. 32. 13, 14+ Exek 34. 31 14, 15, nay in the 
wilderneſs it ſelf T was not a wilderneſs toyou ; an Account where. 
of Nehemiah gives, Neh. g. 15.to 23. And you have the Story of it 
P/al. 78. m Divers Interpreters derive this Word from a different 
Root, and accordingly render the Senſe variouſly. S:me from the 
a Root that ſignifies to fade or fall, as a Land where Fruits fa!l off be- 
fore they be ripe, bringing nothing to perfetien; and ſo Tremelius 
and Junius Tranſlate it, Ja. 28, 1, 4. 9. 4. Have you found me to 
fail your ExpeRartions in any thing thatI have promiſed you, 9oſh. 
21+ 45. and 23- 14+ Others derive it from a word that ſignifies Late 
as a Land that brings forth its Fruit Jate in the Year, which either 
ripeneth nor, or ripeneth unkindly, 9. d. Have you found me back- 
ward jn any thing todo you good ? Have I not fed youto the full ? 
Others from Darkneſs, properly thick Darkneſs, Exod. 10. 22. Joe! 2, 
2: And jt is the more ſignificant, becauſe Jah, the Name of God is 
added to it, 9. d. the Darkneſs of Ged, as a Sleep of God, for a deep 
Sleep, 1 Sam. 26. 12. Flame of God, for a vehement Flame, Cant, 8. 6, 
aS if it were a Land uninhabirable, becauſe of the total want of liehe 
q. 4, Have I been a God of no Uie or Comfort to them. that they 
thus leave me? Have they had nothing from me but Miſery and 
Affliction ? as this notion of Darkneſs may import, 1ſa. 8. 22. Lam 
3: 2: Hence the LXX. expreſs it by a Land bringing forth thorns Or 
this Expreſſion, a Land of Darkneſs, may be put by Appoſition ro the 
former. mn 72. c. In theix Heart. 0 Words of Pride and Boafting : 
God had endeavoured to make them ſenſible, that all their Happi- 
neſs they owed to him, andnow 9. d. Yourule as Lords without us 
ſee 1 Cor. 4: 8: now you caft me off; or rather, we are well enough 
eſtabliſhed in our Government by forreign Aids, and CompaQts with 
the Egyptians,and Aſjrians, &c. and have Rulers of our own; we have 
no {uch great need of thee : Hence the LXX render it in the paſſive 
Voice, we will notbe ruled; which agrees with the next words of 
the verſe, Deut. 32: 15, 16: Something of this appeared in Uzziah, 2 
Chron. 26: 15, 16: and Hezekiah, 2 Chron. 32: 25: neither was David 
wholly clear, P/al. 3o: 6. 


32 Cana maid forget her ornaments p, or a bride 
her attireq? yet my people have forgotten me r days 
without number /. 

p How ſeldom is it, and how unlikely, that a Maid ſhould forget 
her Ornaments? q Whether it belongs to the Head, or the Breaſt, 
or Arms, whether Bracelets or Jewels where-ever worn,is not worth 
the diſputing, but underſtand thoſe rich Jewels which the Bride- 
groom was wont to preſent his Bride with, partly for a general Obli- 
gation, and partly of particular Signification, and all of them Orna- 
mental, whatever may render her amiable in the Eyes of her Bride- 
__ Virgins, and eſpecially Brides, will not uſually negle& any 
thing that may make them comely. r 7iz. In the negle& of my 
Worſhip ; me, who was not only their Defence, bur their Glory ,ver/e 
11,&c- that for which other Nations honoured them, P/al. 148: 14: 
Ezek. 16: 10: to 15. ſi. e. For aJong time paſt, time our of mind, 
or as the Hebrew Days, of which there is no number. 


Why trimmeſt # thou - thy way to ſeek love « ? 
4p haſt thou alſo taught x the wicked ones thy 
ways |]. 

e Or, deckeſt, Ezek, 23: 40: thinking thereby to entice others 
to thy help: thus is the Word- uſed, chap, 4: 30s Or why doſt 


tranſgrefſed againſt me 6, faith the LORD, 


thou 


39 In vain have I * ſmitten your children c ; they + x; 

received no correction 4: your own ſword e hath * de- _ _ 
voured f your prophets, like a deſtroying lion g. Chap. 5: 3: 
c Either your Poſterity, that you breed up like your felves; or Matth. 
rather, your Inhabitants in every City, they being frequently cal= 23329,&, 


+ Heb. we 


have domie 


21008, 


ts 


9: Ty: 


nd - _—_ ——> — —_ 


{ Heb. 
digging 


Yo 


* 4 REL 6 ok 


AEEes ©. a; i PR WEFITTY 


- 


oo | 
4 . 


| Chap. INT 


q *Chap. 


| ' them m. 


S-- LORD. 


Or rather, will a Man do ſuch a thing? If the Law were not againſt 


thou uſe ſa much Art and Skil!, -and take ſo much Pains, to 
g0 and ſend here and thereto contralt a Fri:ndſhip with Forreign 
people, and to bring them to rhy Embraces, Ja. 57. 9, 10. Or 
chinking to ſet a good Face or Gloſs vpon the Matter, and excuſe 
thy ſelf, as if thou couldeſt delude Gods Pſal. 78. 36, 37- whereas 
all thou doſt is to get Acquaintance with other Idolaters- »u 2. e. 
To commit Filthineſs with thy Idols ; a Synecdoche of the kind. 2. e. 
Thou art become fſo vile that even Strumpets themſelves may 
cometo learn of thee, 2 Chron, 33. 9- Or by thy Example : Na- 
tions that have been vile enough of themſelves, by thy Example are 
become more vile, {| i. e. Thy A&ions ; a Metaphor. © 

24 Alſo in thyskirts .*. is found the blood of the ſouls 
of the poor innocents y : I have not found it by T ſe- 


cret ſearch z, but upon alltheſe 4. 

. .*. Viz. Of thy Garments; a Synecdoche of the Kind : The tokens 
of thy Cruelty may be ſeen openly there ; or in thy hands, as the 
LXX ; or a M:taphor from Birds of Rapine, whoſe wings are bloody 
with theirPrey ; but not ſo well. yz. e. Inthee is found the Mur- 
ders expreſſed here by blood of innocent Perſons, meant here by 
Souls, comprizing both their, Sacrificing of their little Children to 
their Idols, Pſal. 106. 37, 38- Exek. 16. 20, 20, 36. Murdering 
Souls as well as Bodies; and alſo all thoſe Cruelties, Oppreſſions, 
and Murders, that they executed -upon poor innocent Perſons, 
which were not a few, in what Manaſſch did, 2 Kings 21. I6. Exek. 7. 
23. and 9.9 and in ſpecial the Prophetsy ver. 30. that came 1n Gods 
Name to reclaim them ; which notes their deſperate Malice, as well 
as Cruelty, ro ſlay their Phyſicians. z Heb. by digging ; as if the 
Earth had covered the Blood, or as if they had comrnitted. their 
Wickedneſs in ſome obſcure places. s Upon thy Garments openly 
enough, as expoſed to publick View. There needs no ſuch ſtrict 
Scrutiny to be made. ; 

35 Yet thou ſayeſt b, becauſe Tam innocent c, ſure- 
Iy his anger ſhall turn 4d from me. Behold, I will 
plead with thee e, becauſe thou ſayeſt, I have not fin- 


ned f. 


{ Heb. 
giggt"g . 


| b Or interrogatively, Dareſt thou ſay ? Haſt thou the Impudence 


eo affirmit? c Clear of this whole Charge. d Shall not break out 
againſt me, Ja. 5. 25. e I will proceed in my judgraent againſt 


7 thee, verſe 9. Chap. 25- 31. Or it is a ſoft Expreſſion, wherein he 


ſhev's that he will not a& like a Tyrant, carried on raſhly and fu- 
riouſly, but as a Judge, regularly and righteovſly, Ezek 20 35. 
and it ſhews, that he will convince her. f Becauſe thou doſt juſti- 
fie thy ſelf, as if I had no cauſe to be angry with thee. God is not 
angry with her ſo much becauſe ſhe hath ſinned, as becauſe ſhe will 
not acknowledge her Sin. | | 

26 * Why gaddeſtthou about ſo much to change thy 
way g2 thou alſo ſhalt be aſhamed of Egypt &, as thou 
waſt aſhamed of Aſſyria. 

g i. e. Thy AQtions: a M:taphor. See on Verſe 33. Why doſt 
thou ſhuffle thus with me, to ſeek Auxiliaries any where, rather 
than to cleave to me, wer. r8. See on Jſa. 57. 9, 10, Or, 'tke Strum- 
pets, whoſe love is never fixed, but ſometimes1et on one, ſomerimes 


| JL 22s 


; on another. þ Thou haſt run tro 4ſhria, and then to Egypt, and. 
: they ſhall both make thee zſhamed by their diſappointing of thee: | 


*Jhou ſhalr be aſharhed of Egypr, as others have been, 7/a. 36. 6. Or, 
; rather, Ezypt ſhall ſt+nd thee in no more ſtead than 4ſhria hath done, 
| Iſa. 30. 3» 5» And how 7Tilgath Pilneſer ſerved them, fee 2 Chron. 28» 
20. Brtore Hezckrab's time the Jews made a League with the 4ſ- 
ſyrians, againſt the Syrians, and the Iſraelites, and then againſt the 
Egyptians : neither proſpered; He tells them, they muſt expe& no 
betrer Succeſs from Egypt. ; ; 
27 Yea, thou ſhalt go forth from him #, and thine 
hands upon thine head &: for the LORD hath rejected 


thy confidences /, and thou ſhalt not proſper in 


; Some apply it to the ſad and ineffeQtual Return of the Ambaſ- 
ſ:donrs, being diſappointed in their expeQation from the King of 
Egypt ; but rather, all the help thou canſt procure from abroad ſhall 
nor prevent thy Captivity, but from hence thou ſhalt go. k An 
uſual poſture of Sadneſs and Mourning, 2 Sam. 13 19. ſuited here 
to her going into Captivity, / Refuſed to give Succeſs unto them, 
| 2 Chron. 16. 7. Or reje&ed thee for thy Confidences, or he diſap- 
proves thy Cenfidences, viz. All thyRefuges which thou ſcekeſt 
out of God m2 Yiz. In thy Refuges and Dependencies, 

CHAP. II, 
| God's Forbearance with the Idolatry of Judah, who is worſe than Iſrael, 
| | g-—iI. Both called to Repent, with Goſpel promiles, 12 I9. 
| 


| Miſery by Sin ; Salvation only of God, 20— 2x. ; 
Liens” Þy7 "ow ſay », If a man put away hiso wife, and ſhe 
| ſojing. 20 from him, and becomes another mans, ſhall 
he return- unto her again p? Shall not that land be 
greatly polluted q ? But thou haſt played the harlot 
Th with many r lovers; yet return again to me, faith the 


n Or, Men uſe to ſay. If this, with the four following Verſes, be. 
Jong to the former Chapter, then it ſeems to expreſs God's Conde- | 
ſcenſion to them, 9. d. though, if a Woman forſake ber Husband, 
and be married to another Man, the Law will not permit him to 
receive her again ; yet God would receive thee again upon thy re- 


3.8 R BR. a © 46 


ſhe gave him no juſt cauſe, andſhe ſhould beftow hey ſeif on. anos 
ther, he would not be reconciled to her, neicher might he take her a» 
gain ; but you have gone a Whoring from m-/, and i: icntly pro. 
voked me to rejeCt and turn you off. I will diſpenſe with my own 
Law for. your fakes, and will a& by my prerogative : I 2m ready 
to be reconciled, to follow them that flee from me, as in the cloſe 
of the Verſe ; and Zec 1. 3. and Mal. z. 7. God will pardon Sins of 
Apoſtacy, and fails after Rep:ntance., 9 Heb. Jn being profane be pro= 
faned. Would not ſo great a Sin greatly poliute 2 Stare or N-tion, 
Lev. 18. 27, 28. It muſt needs be po'Juted by ſuch Marriages to 
and fro, and promiſcuous Couplings, Devt. 24. 4. » Not with. 
one only, as being ſufficient to make thee an, Adulrereſs, but a © 
common Strumpet, joyning in Fellowſhip with divers Aſſociats and 
Compan:ons, or many Idols. | : Z | 
2 Lift up thine eyes [unto the high places z, and ſee 
where thou haſt not been lien « with: * in the ways * 6; 
x haſt chou ſat for them, as the Arabian y in the wil- 38, :4- 
derneſs : and thou haſt polluted the land with thy 
whoredoms, and with thy wickedneſs z. 
1 Do but look, and cenſider, whether I do charge thee wrong- 
fully or no. . 5 He dire&s her to the vlaces of her Whoredoms and 
Idolatries, called High Places, being principally upon Hills, 2 Kings 
2T. 3. and diversother places, though ſometimes in Valleys, Chap. 
2+ 23- Which notes alſo her Impudence, that whereas other Whores 
affe&ed privacy, the ſhould be filthy in the open view. « Thy 
Filthineſs has beenevery where ſo frequent, that thou tanſt ſcarce 
ſhew a place that hath been free from thy Pollutions, Verſe 6. 13. 
where there are not the Footſteps of thy Fornications and Idolatries; 
x Viz, To allure Paſſengers, ( ſee Ezek. 16. 24, 253) and waiting 
for them, wiz. thy Aſſociats; not being drawn by others Allure 
ments, but tlrine own Laſciviotſneſs. y An Allufion to the Man= 
ner and Cuſtom of that People, either lying in waic by the way for 
Paſſengers, as Robbers uſe ro do, Hoſ* 6. 9. they being noted for 
Robbers. Or rather, in way of Traffick, that were went to pitch 
their Tents by the way ſides, that they ,might meer with their - 
Cuſtomers ro trade, as they paſſed along, very properly pointing 
out the Prattice of Harlots. See Prov. 7. 11, i2. z Not only thy 
IdolJatries, bur all other thy wicked Courſes. | - 
3 Therefore the * ſhowers have been withholden a, * Chap. 
and there hath been no latcer rain b: and thou hadſt a 9. 12- 
* whores forehead c, thou refuſedſt to be aſhamed. , CO Fl 
s Vize By me. according to my threatning, Lev. 26. 19, and Deut, Ze Y < 138i 
28. 23, 24+ 7. &, A drought ſent upon, thee, either as a puniſhs EY | 
ment of thy Wickedneſs ; thus publick Sins bring, publick Judge- | 
ments: or as an aggravation of it ; and thenir muſt be read though, 
as it often 1s, q+d, notwithſtanding the great drought 3 and this the 
laſt words of the Verſe ſeem to favour. b This added to Showers, 
before mentioned, ſeems to imply, there had been no former noe 
latter Rain, the former for the ſpringing of the Corn, the 7atter for 
the plumping and ripening it; this coming a little before Harveſt: 
c For all this, thou didſt {till remain impudent and obſtinate: as 
aſhamed of nothing, Chap. 6 15. thus proverbially expreſſ.d, be- 


1 
” " 
. . 41 
|| : : 
Cha c I o ' . 
13% 
1 
. m 
ial : 


turning to. him: but thou chuſeſt rather obſtinately to adhere 
F to thy other Confidences, wherein #hou {halt not proſper. Bur if 
we look upon them as beginning anew Argument, then here God : 
declares his Readineſs ro receive them again upon their Repentance, | 
though it be very unuſual for Husbands ſo to do, when their Wives | 
have proved treacherous unto them, in betaking themſelves to o- : 
ther Husbands: And ſo this Chapter may very well begin with 
ſuch a proverbial Speech, they ſay, ormen ſe to ſay, or it iscommons | 
ly ſaid. o Or give her a Bil) of Divorce, Deut. 24 IT. þ 4. d. He; 


cannot take her again according to the Law, Deut. 24+ 1, 2, 3, 4. 


it, would any Mari be ſo eaſily wrought upon, as to take her again? 
No certainly, it is an Argument from theleſs to the greater, to ſer 


forth God's great Lenity towards them, qa d. if an Husband Prophet, from God, 1. Declares 1/rae!s Apoſtacy, and how it fared 
ſhould turn away his Wife meerly begauſs he pleaſed her not, the With them for it. 2. Aggravates Zu434s Sin, for not taking 


cauſe Shame doth firſt and moſtly appear in the Forehead, Thus 
Antichrifts Impudence 1s expreſſed Rev. 17. 5. And ſome ancient 
Hereticks were called Efrontes. SM ; | 
4 Wilt thou not. from this time 4.cry unto me, My 
Father e, thou art the guide of my youth f? 

d Viz. That IT have withbolden Showers. Some refer this, r. To 
the Time tocome: Wilt thou not yet be wiſe ?. and for the future 
ſeekto me, having found all thy other ways ſucceſsleſs, ſs. 9. 13. 
Chap 8.14. 2. To the Time preſent : How canſt thou challenge 
me for my preſent Severity, and continuing it towards thee, wheti 
thou ſti1] retaineſt rhy Fil:hineſs, thy Whores Forchead, Verſe 3 
Thou ſtill continueſt worſhipping Idols, and yer fanſieſt thy ſelf 
faithful ro me. 3. To the Time paſt, 5. e. Haſt thou not all along 
pretended Kindneſs ro me, and as if thou hadſt walked cloſe with me, 

2 Kings 87. 32.33. Exek. 23. 39. e Will thou notas a Child call 
upon me, whom thou haſt thus greatly provoked, and own me as a 
Father, Verſe 19. ferſuchT have been to thee, Pſal. 103. 13 Mal. 1, 
6 and3- 17. f Either on whom Ihave depended, 3s being brought 
up by thee, or the ſubmiſſive Expreſſion of a Wife ſeeking to be re« 
conciled to her Husband, that God would be ro her as he had been 
in the days of her Youth: ſuch a Caſe as is expreſſed 1 Cor. 7. 1x 

words of Flattery uſtal with Hypocrites; or rather, being married 
to thee in thy Youth; a Periphrsſis for Husband, Prov. 2. 17. which 
argues great Tenderneſs towards her, wer. 2. Thus the Tenderneſs 
of this Relation is expreſſed, Mal. 2. 14. and ſo God is ſaid to eſpouſe 
them to himſelf, Ezek. 168. : | ; 

5 * Will he reſerve g his anger for ever ? will he keep , _.- -_ 
it to the end 4 ? Behold, thou haſt ſpoken and done Fog hh 
evil things as thou couldeſt. = rc 

g Here being a D<fe of the Noun, the Jews ſupply it with ry 
Sin, Iſa 43+ 25- but the moſt and beſt, as we do, his anger. Compare ir 
with werſe12+Pſal 103. 9. Nahum 1, 2. in which Texts there is a de« 
fe&t of the ſame word. This may ſeem to be the words of the Pra- 
pher, and ſo the Connexion iscafie with the foregoing words, 9. d. If 
thou wouldeſt do ſo, try me now, &c, would hereferve his Anger? 
Would he not be reconciled? but ct.ou haſt taken quite another 
Courſe: Or, they may be the Words of God, as it were, teaching 
his people how they ſhould accoſt him: God is more forward and 
earneſt for Reconciliation, than Sinners themſelves. þ The ſame 
with the former for ever. # God's Challenge of the people, charge 
ing them, either with their reſolved Wickednels, that they had 
made good all their evil words by their evil A&tions, they hadeven 
done as they ſaid; or rather, with their Hypocriſie, 9. 4. Nots 
withſtanding all thy former Promiſes, yet thou perſiſteſt Nill in thy 
Lewdneſs and Obſtinacy, 1/a. 58. 2. Hof. 7. 14. 

6 © The LORD faid alſo & unto me 1, inthe days 
of Joſiah the. king m7, haſt thou ſeen that which back- 
ſliding Iſrael hath done » ? ſhe is gone up upon every 
high mountain, and under every green tree, ard theres 
hath played che harlot, | 


k Or again, ſhewing that here begins a new Sermons in which the 


6D 4 warning 


| —_ nt. 


th 


Þ 


2 


d 


| |Or, fame. 


+ Heb.in 
falſehood. 


warning. 3: TI 
tance, with a Þ 
the Meſſiah. 4+ KN 
with this Invitation- 
that 7/rael had done when th 


Aſhria, 2 King 


fore heſaith, 
ave her a Bill of Divorce. 
and, and reftored the pure 
Tribes who fell off from Judah, 


expreſſed 
. ope ; 
inſomuch, that all cheir King 
poſſibly it may look as far bac 
5, &C- 


thou unto me 0. 
ereacherous ſiſter Judah p ſaw 


and abominable, yet the 


named, 
Feroboam ; called Iſ-aels Siſter, becau 


the Patriarch Jacob, Ezek. 1 
cherous, or the treacherous one, 


quent renewed Covenants, 
the reſt of the Tribes, Deut. 5+ 2, 3, 23z 
and afterwards, 2 Chrov. 13. 9, 
23. 16- and 29+ 10. 9 7: & 
it, as the word is Pal. 40. 3- 
dealt with [roel. 


backſliding 
away and given 
rous ſiſter Judah feared not #, 


harlot alſo . 
F Qs 
Both 


withſtanding w 
have been her inſtruction; thus God ſpeaks of the notice he took of 
| both, Chap. 23. 13, 14. 
treacherous, becauſe ſhe retained the w 


lickly under Manafſeb and Ahaz, and other wicked Kings. 
notwithſtanding all t 
rael in regard of he 
red her up into th 2 
her theticle of being his Church, 2 King- 17. 5, 
* callshere a Bill of Divorce, not ſuch a one as the Jews were alJow- 
ed to give upon every 
that ever he gave them, and c 
TOs FL 
dultercſs againſt him 
of giving me offence, 
had ſeen the Judgment © 
which made it the more 
by her Siſters ſufferings, Prov. 28. 14. yet fhe went on ſtil!, Ezek. 23. 


Its. 12, Oc. 


whoredom y, that ſhe defiled the land z, and com- 
mitted adultery with ſtones and with ftocks 4. 


rightapplying of it doth 
of the 4 Lightneſs, which co 
woice, and to it may refer, either to the noiſe or fame of it, chat 
would fly abroad, and thus it isappiyed to [ſrael, 7, e. Though 7- 
#acl's Whoredoms were never ſo. much blazed abroad, yet Judah re- 
garded it not. 

crying voice, as 
of fame or notorious W horedoms , 
lightneſs of her Whoredim, noting her impudence init, as we uſe to 
term a common Harlot a light Woman; and thus it is applyed to 
Judah, both the foregoing-and following words ſeeming to be an ag- 
gravation of Judah's refraQtari 
the Imputation of filthineſs. # 7. e. With Idols made of Stone and 


. Wood, a 2k 


dah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, 
but + feignedly, ſaith the LORD. 


full Idolatry of 1/-ae!, and what ſhe had ſuffered, yet ſhe was nor 
warned. ſee verſe 8. but fel] to Idolatry under Manaſeh, who undid 
what Hezetk:ab had done, 2 Chron. 33. 3- though under fair preten- 


neths afrer Joſiahs Death, 2 King. 23. 31, 32. 


See Luke 
latry continued, yet in Judah it was more heinous. 
their unruly headſtrongneſs, that broke the Reins and reſtraint, 
which their external worthip ought to have had upon them: 2. Be- 
cauſe of their ſtupid ſecurity in not being warned by the Judgments 
that they had ſeen befal 7rel-for the very ſame things. 
of their intolerable Pride, boaſting that their ſtate was 
ken. 4 Becauſe of their groſs perfidiouſneſs in making Promiſes, 
and breaking them, which Jae! did not, becauſe ſhe brought nor 
her ſelf under ſuch ſolemn and frequent obligations, ſce verſe 5. Laſt- 
ly, Becauſe they were a great deal more zealous in their Idolatries 


3 E R E 

Maes forth an Invitation of them beth to Repen” 
romiſe of Acceprtation, and re-uniting them under 
Relates the Compliance of the Faithful among them 
1 Viz. By Revelation; for he ſpeaks of things 
ey were carried away by the King of 
long before Jeremiah was born ; there- 
Conſidered wherefore God 
he would have purged the 
Worſhip of God, » Yiz. The ten 
and {ct up a diſtin& Kingdom of 


eir own under Jeroboam : What they did, viz. in their Idolatries 
in the next Words, and Chap. 2. 20. ſee there, when they 
zed from God, and that with one common Conſent; 
s proved wicked and idolatrous, and 
k as Solomen;:DefeQion, 1 Kings 11. 4, 
in remembrance. 

had done all theſe things, turn 


returned not. And her 
it 9. 

Af: 3. 19. Aithough ſhe had been ſovile 
Lord waited in expeQation of her Return. 
d, but.Judah being the chief is only 
her after the other ten Revolted to 
ſe they were all deſcended from 
6. 46. Compare Exek 23. 2, <+ and :rea- 
becauſe of her frequent Revolts, 2 Chron. 
18. and many other times, and after as fre- 
and Promiſes both in conjun&ion with 
&c- and 29. 1o, 11, 12,&c. 
10, &c- and 2 Chron. 15.12, &c- and 
They were not ſtrangers to it but knew 
They could not but know how Ihad 


h. 4 


4 I7. Te ro I3e | ; 
Haſt thou nor ſeen, 5, e. 
» When 


nly Apoftati 


Which may now come 
fter ſhe 


7 And1I ſaid, a 
But ſhe 


o Viz. By Repentance, 


Benjamin 1s alſo here comprize 
theſe two abiding toget 


1.6, &c. and 24. 17, 


8 Andifawr, when for all the cauſes / whereby 
Iſrael commited adultery, I had put her 
her a bill of divorce ?, yet her treache- 
but went and played the 


d. Thar which others diſcern not, I ſaw well enough, viz. 
her Hypociſie and Diſſimulation, and her incorrigibleneſs not- 
kat had been befallen 1ſrae!, whoſe correEion ſhould 


Iſrael is ſaid to be backſliding, but Judzh 
orſhip of God, thovgh ſhe 
and ſometimes pub- 
/ Or 
he ground and reaſon I had to deal ſo with 7- 
r Adulteries, as to put her away. # Delive- 
e hands of the 4ſhrian, where God took from 
6, &c. which he 


id often privately, and cloſely embrace Idols, 


ſlight ground, for ſuch an one God denies, 
hallengeth them to produce it, 1/a. 
{, and great occaſion. viz. her playing the A- 
+: her Idolatries « 7. e. Was neither afraid 
nor of the like puniſhment. x Although ſhe 
fGod executed upon 1ſrael before her eyes, 
ſtupendious,that ſhe won'd take no warning 


) but upon ju 


9 And it came to paſs through the || lightneſs of her 


y Whether of Judah's or of Iſrael's is not agreed upon, but the 
depend much upon the right acceptation 
mes from an Hebrew word that ſinifies 


Or, it may be taken for the heinouſreſs of ir, a 
Gen. 4. 10. and ſo by an hypallage, her Whoredoms 
and is nor 11] expreſſed here by 


————— 


neſs. z Brought the whole Land under 


of the Matter to note the baſeneſs of the Fatt. 


1o And yet for all this b, her treacherous ſiſter Ju- 


þ Though God ſaw what ſhe did, and though the ſaw the ſhame- 


ces ſhe diſſembled with God in the days of Joſiah, 2 Chron 34. 32, 
33- as appeared by her ſudden revolt, viz. in lels than three Mo- 


1: And the LORD faid unto me ; The backſliding 
Iſrael hath juſtified c her ſelf more than treacherous Ju- 


dah. 
c Was leſs vile, hath more to ſay for her ſelf; Juda}/s ſin being 


greatly aggravared compared with Iſrael, Ezek. 16. gr. and 23. 11. 
18. 14. Fer though Fraels fins were more, and their Ido- 


ill unſha- 


and I will not keep anger for ever« 
go to, as is uſual, or it notes ſpeed, go quickly, 


fice addreſs thy ſeIf to them, 


I» Becauſe of 


. Becauſe 


Þ- 


Phets 


= i 4 #, 
than Iſrael was, viz. under Man 
of the «G 7 q 
12 od, and proclaim theſe words toward th 
north e, and ſay, Return thou backſliding Iſrael, ſaich 
the LORD ; ane T will not cauſe mine anger f to fall [ 
upon you: For I a» * merciful þ, faith che LORD, 


aſeh, when they flew all the Pro 


VT TIE 


*Verſe 53 


d It may poſſibly be uſed here as an Adverb of exciting, namely 


out of hand, net 


locally, but ſet thy face, Chap. 2. 2. or feet that way, or by thy of- 
viz, by way of Proclamation crying 
aloud ; poſſibly implying the diſtance of place : This voice may in 
time reach them, though a great way off. Or rather the deafneſs 
of 1/7ael, or the obduratneſs of Judah, that they might hear what 
God faith to Jrael, conceive hope and be reclaimed by their ex« 
ample, andbe excited to emulation. e i- e. To Aſhria and Media 
and the Regions thereabouts that Jay Northwaid from Judea whi- 
ther the ten Tribes were carried by 7iglath-pileſcy, and Salmanezer 
2 Kings Is. 29. and 17. 6 f Upon condition. of returning to their 
former true Worſhip of God, that thereby Judah might be awakes« 
ned, he promiſeth that he will nor Jet his anger, or his face, as in 
the Hebrew, ( becauſe anger principally appears in the face ) his an= 
gr; face or countenance to be upon them, ſo it is uſed, Lew. 17. 10 
P/al. 34. 16. and not be inexorable, viz. for ever, which is to be ſup. 
plyed trom the next words: Forotherwile his anger lay heavy upon 
them at this time. g A metaphor from things on high thar drop 
down to the hurt of whatever is under them, and ſo Chap. 23. 34. 
Compare Gen. 19- 24+ h Here is the ground of this. conditional 
promiſe. taken from the nature of God, that ſinners may not des 
ſpair, Pſal. 86. ig. and 103. 8, 9, &«. | 

13 Only acknowledge 5 thine iniquity, that thou 
haſt tranigreſſed againſt the LORD thy God, and haſt 
—_ thy res the ſtrangers & under every green 
tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice /, faith 
LORD. ; 4 : _ 


; Which will be the. evidence of thy Repentance, without which 
thou canſt not lay claim to any pardon, Prov. 28. 13. 1/a. 55. 7 

This is ſpoken by way of limitation, leſt the 1ſ+ aclites ſhould tanſie 
a too eafie pardon from Gods merciful Nature. Exhortations to Ree 
pentance ſhould always accompany the exhibition of Promiſes 
k Viz. To other Nations, or rather to other gods, or to Idols, rune 
ning here and there up and down like a light Impudent Harlor 
ſometimes to one, ſometimes to another, thus ſucking in divers ſus 
perſtitions, called ſcatrering chy ways, wer. 6. 2 Kings 19. 4, 9, 10. and 
Chap. 2. 23, 25. Feet whereby we go on in ways; 4 metaphorical Me= 
ronymy. I So that your fin is not a fin of Ignorance, but of obſti« 
nacy, ſhutting your ears againſt my Counſels, which I ſent you by 
my Prophets for your reclaiming, 2 Kings 17. 13, &c. 


14 Turn, O backſliding children, m faith the 
LORD ; for I am married unto you : and I will take 
you one of a City, and two of a family, » and I will 
bring you to Zion 6. 
» IT am in Covenant with you, Dewt: 29. 1, lo, 11 
this Covenant notwirhſtanding all your unfaithfulneſs, | = a= 
to renew with you. Hef: 2. 19, 20. #» This word Family is not al- 
ways to be takenſtrialy for an houſhold ; for then the expreflion 
would ſeem to imply more in a Family than in a City ; but fre 
quently for a Country or Nation, compare Gen. 12. 3. with 22. 18 
Sce Chap. 1. 15 orfor a Tribe : and this may partly reſpe& the few 
neſs of thoſe that will be found Penitents and return. God will 
have a ſprinkling in every City, and in every Family, or Tribe, oz 
Country ; bur chiefly it re1pe&s Geds exaCt care of them, that bee 
ing now married tc them, there ſha)l nor be one in a City, or two 
in a Country or Tribe, but he will find them out, if there be bur 
oneor two, he will not overlook them, this ſeems to be intimated 
Ja. 27. 12. a Text that points at the ſame thing. 07. e To Jeru« 
ſalem, a Type of the Church, a double Meronymy of the Subjeft Tt is 
che manner of the Prophets, when they are treating of tem; ora! 
Deliverances, ef] pecially from Bobylon,frequently to break out Sn t 
ly into the ſpiritual Deliverance by Chriſt, and ſo probably he Sch 
here ; and therefore bringing them to Zion muſt be underſtood, ceithe 
of joyning them to his Church, under the Meſſiah, or bringing —_ 
again to Worſhip with Judah at Jeruſalem : as may ſeem to be inti- 
mated Chap, 31. 6. but the Ten Tribes did never return into their 
own Land, and therefore that Text muſt be underſtood of a ſpiritu- 
al going up to Zn, viz. when all Iſrael ſhall be ſaved, Rom. 171. 26 
See Iſa. 56. 7, 8 and 66: 20. and this Chapter wer. 18. Thus we ma 7 
icok upon this part of the Prophecy to have reſpe&, partly co wen 
ah _ - _ _ mo oy this Verſe, and partly what 
e would hereafier do, when they ſhould be ag3i 1 1 
own Land, under rhe Meſfiah, — 17, 18, - _ nk 


Is And 1 will give you * paſtors p according to mine p 
heart q, which ſhall feed you with knowledge and un-, wo 
derſtanding r. 

p Either Civil Magiſtrates, which are ſometime ] 
5. 5. Or, rather Eccleſiaſtical, as appears both <p ns Tug 
God's Judgments upon J/ael, viz. Their Paſtors being general] 
either Thieves, or dumb Dogs; and alſo from the nature of their 
Office in thecloſeof the Verſe, and thus they are called Ephe. 4. 11 
q Such as T will both chuſe for you, and approve off, and that ſhall 
faithfully and skilfuily declare unto you my mind, which intimates 
not only a ſingle at of deliverance, but his conſtant preſervation of 
them. r This notes, either the nature of their food. Sec Neb. 8, 
8. Mal. 2. 7. Or rather the manner of their feeding. See Pſal. 78. 
72. Sec I Pet. 5. 2. ſee moreof this promiſe, Chap: 23. 4+ 


16 And it ſhall come to paſs when veibe 1pli- 
ed /, and increaſed in the tary in thoſe gt 
the LORD, they ſhall fay no more, The ark « of the + Heb: 
covenant x of the LORD : neither ſhall it come + to *2m1 the 
mind, neither ſhall they remember it, neither (hall they {*".... 
viſit ir, neither ſhall || rat be done any more jy. __ 


NL Ee AS as ane 


acted; RI 


CE CEEIESIY 


34+ 23? 


onntin g 


as 


magnified: 
e Aﬀte r the growth of the Church under the Me/ialr 5 P : 


#F Chz 


*Chap. 
1:8, 

| Heb. 
fiubborn: 
BUre 


[Or, to 


[ Or, C41 


ſed your 
fathers to 


” Mts. 


| FHeb.1ay 


of ae re, 
T eb. a 
beritags 
f glory, 


& beauty, 


tHeb. 


frem afte 
Mg, 


- 


F Choy. 


— BLLIAS  ; u8 Se AS Us hens 


* Chap. 
1:8, 

| Heb. 
fiubborn« 
Pere 


at. att hare Dro 


[Or, co 


1 1Or, cau. 
ſed your 

| fatbers to 
* fee. 


4 ' 


* | fHeb.land children þ, and give thee a Þ pleafanc land 5, | a good- 


of deſire, 

t Heb. an 
beritage 

ef glory, 

& beauty, 

1 tHeb. 


om after 
3 


: on of their evil heart c. 


HT. 


at the great work of Converſion, that ſhould be among them. 
eſpecially in the days of the M /fiah, and how greatly the Church 
ſhould be encreaſed by the acceſſion of the Gentiles, a beginning 
whereof we read As 2: 41: and 4: 4 # A Synecdochical expreſſion: 
for all the legal Ceremonies, whereof the Ark was a chief part,thc 
ſenſe is, that whole Worſbip with all the Rites and Ceremonies 
belonging to it ſhould wholly ceaſe, Chriſt being come, who was 
the ſubſtance of whar the Ark, and all other Rires did but ſhadow 
out for a time, he being now our propitiatory, initead of the co- 
vering of the Ark, or Mercy-ſeat, Rom, 3: 25. He anſwers all the 
uſes and purpoſes thereof. In the Ark was laid up the Manna, Aa- 
ron's Rod, and the Tables of the Law, Hcb. 9: 4. He is now the breaa 

of Life, Joh. 6: 35. he is our Rod of Government, Pal. 23: 4. in him 

is the whole Law fulfilled, Rom. 10, 4. and now God ſh3ll reign glo- 
riouſly in his.Church by his Word and Spirit, and ſhall be to wor- 

ſhipped without Ceremony, Jon 4: 21, 23- For if this ſo eminent, 
and comprehenſive a token of God's preſence muſt ceaſe in the 
days of the Goſpel, much more the Temple Service, with all the 

Rites belonging to it, Joh. 1: 17. Col. 2; 17. Heb. 10. 8:9. » Cal- 

led alſo the 4rk of theTeftimony, Exod. 25: 22. and 30. 26: and 31:7. 

and the reaſon is, becauſe the two Tables of the Law, which 

were the Teſtimony, or witneſs of the Covenant were cloſed up 
in it, Exod. 25: 16, 2t- and 49. 20. » #.e, It ſhall be no more in 

uſe, neither thall there be any miſs of it,or any thing like it,there; 
ſhall be no ſuch thing; Men ſhall not trouble their thoughts 
about it, or mention it, compare 1/4. 65: 17. or repair to'it as an. 
Ocacle to receive the anſwers of God; nor for God's 
compare Je#- 16: 14, 15. or to the place of its reſidence, as if no 
where elſe to be had ; in a word,it ſhall not ar >!) be had in hon.. 
nour or reſpe& or made much of. The word "WY Hhaſah, done 


or made, ſignifies to magnifie, as it ſeems to be uled, Deut. 32. 6, 
and r Sam. 12. 6, The whole Church ſhall now be the Throne of. 
God, Yr: 17. to which purpoſe the Ark formerly ferved, now God; 
foreſceing partly how hard a thing it would be to be believed,and 
partly the Pleas that the corrupt Wir,and Invention of Man would- 
tind out for the fetaining of theſe Rites,and by conſequence their 
loathneſs to forgo them, he uſed ſuch an heap, and variety of ex- 
Preſſions to the lame thing, that he may leave no room for doubr- 
ing in a thing ſo plainly, and fully prohibired in Goſpel-times. 
i7 Atrtaat time they ſhal call Jeruſalem the throne: 
z of the LORD *: and all the nations ſhal be gathered 
2 unto it, co the name of the LORD, to Jerufalem b : 


neither ſhal they*walk any more afcer the fimmaginati- 


z Inſtead of the Ark, whereon was the Mercy-ſeat, now the 
Church typified by Jeruſalem, Gal. 4. 26. and Rev. 21: 2. ſhall be 
the place of God's Reſidence, where by his Spirit he will rule and 
a& in his Word and Ordinances, and in ſpecial the Mzſias. See Ch. 
14: 21. and Yer. 16. a Intimating both their readineſs to come in, 
and their numberzaccording to that prophecy of Jacob, Gen. 49: ro. 
Iſa. 2. 2. By Nations here underſtand, either the Fen Tribes who are 
called many people, both Iſrael and Judah united, their diſtance 
being taken away, ſce Yer: 18. or rather ſome of all Nations, that 
ſhall flock into the Goſpel Church ; for when the Prophets foretel 
this ſtate, they generally uſher it in with the return of this People, 
at which time the Church ſhall be greatly enlarged, 6 7. e. Dwel- 
ling in Jeruſalem, or where the Lord placed his Name, viz. of old 
in Jeruſalem, Pſal. 122: 2, 3, &c. but now in the Church, Rev: 21: 
2, 3. without Ark or Temple, Rev. 21: 22+ where he will be known 
AS 1t were. by his proper Name, 1/s. 60: 9: or as manifeſt in the 
fleſh. c Both Few and Gentile ſhall now conform themſelves to the 
Will of God, Iſa. 2.3. The word Imagination here comes from a 


JEREMIAH 


Worſhip. ]' 


hoſts and multitudes of Nations, or Gentiles,that ſhould be joyn« 
ed to them in the Goſpel Church, viz. Of Gods Ele&, and ſo an 
heritage of the greateſt delights, or the deſire of Nations ; a Peo= 
ple to whom all the Nations would 'defire ro flock. See Exzek. 
20: 6, and may be' ſpoken alſo of the heavenly Cansan; 'the LXX 
render it, the Heritaze of God the Ommnipotent Govermur of the Nations. 
m God comes now to a reſolution how he would go it. Either it 
is a direCtion, 9. d. on this condition, that thou wilt ovn'me,and 
not return any more to Idols,this ſhall be done ;or a promiſe,I\ ill 
cauſe thee to own me, and give thee perſeveraiice, that thou ſhalt 
not dpart from me: and this is very applicable to the work of 
Chriſt, tee Joh: 1: 12+ See alſo 2 Cor: 6: 17, 18. and the condition is 
indeed no more, than God promicth to effett in them. 


20 © Surely, as a wife treacherouſly departeth from | 


me, .O houſe of Iſrael, faith the LORD. | 


her former unfaithfulneſs in time 
for the furure.. See 1 Pet: 4: 3. 


2T A. voice was, heard 0 upon the high places p, 
weeping aud ſupplications q of tlic children of Iſrael » : 
for they have perverted their way, and they have for- 
gotten the LORD their God /. 


0 Here the Propher ſeems to expreſs I/-4el; Repentance,and turn- 
ing to God ; and that, which Ne wore at reli CG thn 
ſelves in, (the word being participial,and in the preſent Tenſe) de- 
livered in a Prophetical tile, as that in Chap: 31: 15. and that not 
only out of a ſenſe of their judgments, that they were tnder, but 
chiefly of their fins they were guilty of, and the pardon of which 
they were now begging, which is/intimated by weeping, and ſup- 
phcation. p Fiz. 'That their cry mighr be the more publick, borh 
open and loud, Chop: 22: 20: and Matth: 10: 27: poſſibly alluding ro 
the uſual praQtice, of praying on the tops of houſes in great cala- 
mities, 1/s: IS: 3: and 22. 1. Jer. 7. 29. q Or rather weeping ſup 
plications ſhewing the intenſeneſs of it, praying in weeping, and weep« 
ing int prayer, Zech; 12:10. like Peters weeping, Matth. 26. 75, r The 
end of which might be to provoke Tedek alſo to Repenrance, or 
otherwiſe to charge them upon their ſtupidity, and threaten them 
with the like judgments, if they would not return upon [;jrael's 
example. 5 This expreſſeth, tather the matter of their prayer, 
than the cauſe of it, Law. 5: 16. drawn chiefly from their fins, as alſo 
from their calamities. = 


22 Return ft, ye backſliding children, and IT will 
heal your backſlidings « : Behold, we come unto thee. 
for thou art the LORD our x God. | p 

t Viz. Repent for Sin and from Sin; here God calls upon them, 
and invites them to conſider whether they are going, Na ey a 
ken unto the voice of his Miniſters; Hel: 14: 1. 4s 3:19. See Verſe 
12. God doth as it were bid them hearken to his Meſſengers, and 
then he will heal their backſliding. « 5. e. 1delatries, whereby 
turned from me, and rebelled againſt nie, I will take you into that 
ſtate, as if you had never turned from me, I will make all whole 
again among you, and reconcile you to my ſelf, 1/s. 57: 18. Chep.32. 
40- See Zech. 1.6. and 13.9. I will not only remove your judge 
ments, but your fins ſhall alſo be forgiven ? This is either God's 
framing their anſwer for them, preſcribing the matiner and form 
of their Repentance by a fignre called Mimeſ, Ho, 14. 2, 3. or it is 
their reply to God by way of promiſe, which they ' performed 


paſt, how ſhe oughr to carry it 


. 


root, that ligniftes ro ſee, and thus it is ſomerimes applyed to the 
judgment, P/al: 17. 2. and ſometimes to the affeQion, Pſal. 66: 18. 
bh it may comprehend both, they will follow neither their own 
judgment, or afte&ion, but wholly the word of God. The word 
is thus phraſed, N«mb. 15- 39. and Fecl. 11: g: ſome read it after the 


hardneſs, Deut. 29.19. | 
18 In thoſe days the houſe of Judah ſhall walk |] 4 


with the houſe of Iſrael, and they ſhal come together 
out of the land of the north e, to the land f that I have 
|| given for an inheritance unto your fathers. : 

d Theſe two Kingdoms ſhall become one, that had been ſo long 
divided, the enmity that was between them ſhall be taken away, 
and they ſhall walk hand in hand in a friendly manner one with 
another, which is implyed in this phraſe of walking together, Pſal. 
55 14. Ames 3:3. and this points at their incorporating into one bo- 
dy united by the ſame Spirir, as members of the ſame body 
under Chriſt their Head, and that without diftinftion of Nations. 
See Iſs, 11. 12, 13+ and Ezek. 37:16, 17. Eph:2:14,15,16.and 3:6. e Viz. 
Of the Caprivity,ſee the Place Yerſe 12. f Viz. Canaan both a promiſe 
of their enjoying again their ancicnt poſſeſſion at their laſt conver- 
ſion, and rypifying the Church of Chriſt, which they ſhall be of, 
when brought our of their ſpiritual Captivity. 


19 Bur I ſaid, How ſhall I g put thee among the 


ly heritage & of the hoſts of nations / ? and I faid, thou 
ſhale call me, my father m, and ſhalt not turn away 
t from me. ' | 

g Words that ſpeak; either firſt Gods putting them to their own 
thoughts, how they could think he ſhould bring ſuch a pertidious 
people as they were into the Land, which he had promuiled ? Elie, 
Secondly his conſidering within .himſelf, how or what Couric he 
ſhould rake to bring ſuch a thing abour, and accompliſh it, they | 
had ſo greatly degenerated from him, and diſoblidged him. See | 
Hoſ. 6 4. both implying; that ſuch a thing could nor be brought 
about without Repentance, and true converſion to him, wrought 
by his free grace, Eph. 1: 5, 6. + Eſteem thee as my Child, ill 
thou give ſoine clearer proof, 224 demonſtration of thy. Repen- 
tance. # How fball Fpur thee inro poſſeſſion of thar pleafant Land 
of defire, that I have promited thi:e, Canaan is ſo called, Pſal.106. 
24. Dan. 8: 9. and 11:16, 4t-  k Heb. Hritage of glory, or beauty, ſee 
1Ja. 4: 2. 1 So called cither becauſe poſſeſſed by ſeveral potent Na- 


under Joſiah, 2 Kings 22: and 23. which with their confeſſion, a 
eth to the end of the Chapter. x Words expreſling the rm 
inducements to it imaginable, becauſe God hath right ro them, is 


' willing to accept them and able to ſave them, [ſs. 55. 7. chap. 


I4. 22, 


23 Truely in vain zs ſalvation hoped for from the hillss; 


7 7. e. Either from their 1dols which were worſhipped upon Hills, 


a Metonymy of the Subjef, Chap. 2; 20. Idols of the hills, or from any | 


other external power waatſoever, either of perſons, or things, as 
the ſtrength of Hills, or Forts, High places, and ſtrong places 
and affiſrance from Kings, Hyſ. 14: 3. = Yiz. The abundance of 
them that they have in their Mountains, or the nltirude of Sacri» 
ſices, which they offer in the Mountains, or to multiply Sacrifices,: 
Nueft. But doth nor the Palmiſt hope for Salvation from the Hills, 
Pjal. 121: 1- Anſw. Yes the Hills of the Land of Promiſe,-which 
were a pledge of God's favour to his People, eſpecially thoſe two. 
of Zion and Miriah,where God did peculiarly manifeſt his preſence, 
Pſal.87. a Or our Salvation which we do now acknowledge is only 
in our God, and not in 1s, of which we had ample experience, 
Pſal. 43: 7.and 130. 7,8. See 1/8. 43-10, 11. Hyſ: 13: 4, 9. 
24 For ſhame b hath devoured the labour of our fa- 
thers e from our youth 4 ; their flocks and their herds, 
their {ons and their davghters e. | RE 
_ 6 Either in general put for ſin, which cauſeth ſhare,a Metonymy 
of the Efe# ; tor that brought thame firſt into the World, Gez: 
2: 25. Or, in particular the Idol Bas! called the ſhameful thing, Fer: 
11:13. Hoſz9: 10, & q-d. This hath been the fruit of our Holarry,: 
to have all things go to ruine, both in reſpe& of expence, that 
which our fathers have gor for themſelves,and us by their induſtry, 


| they have expended upon Bas!, and other Fdols, Ezek;..16: 16. to 


21. and alſo of the heavy Judgments that God brought upon us for 
ir, chap: 5: 17. d Either with reference to the, Nation, ever ſince 
they began firſt to be a People unto God, and followed bim in the 
W1lderneſs, chap. 2, 2+ or rather ever ſince we were born, or took 
notice cf any thing, thus it was from time to time : we find from 
our Childhood, that our Fathers have Jaboured in vain, and all 
things have ſucceeded ill with us, becaule of their departure from 
God. e All theſe things are mentioned to thew, that they did 
thrive in nothing, bur either a Blaſt upon all from God, Hoſ.g. 11, 
to the end, Mal: 2: 2,3: or Idolatrous Sacrifices confumed all, Ames 


tions, Nb. 13, 28 and Deut: 4: 38. or rather 1t may note the great 


4- 4, 5. the Idols nor ſparing m their very Children, ?jal: 106: 37- 
E or 


by you - 


and from the multitude of mountains z : * truly in the * P 


LORD our God 3s the ſalvation of Iſrael a. 2.8 


her + husband »,* ſo have you dealt treacherouſly with + Heb. 

friend. 

2 God hereby telling ker what ſhe had formerly been, endea. * Chap- 
vours to engage her to what ſhe ought ro be, namely conſidering $+ 1+ 


zl 


- _ 
=P 
* Chap. 
' 


FToel 2» 
I2. 


* 2 Cor. 
190; 17s 


- Exile. 


IV *'EIR E 
or the Enemy ſpoiled them of all, Chap. 5- 17. and all this as the 
ad effe& of their Idolatries, 

r uy: 'We lie down f in our ſhame, and our confuſion 
covereth us x : for we have ſinned againſt the LORD 
our Sod, we and our fathers þ from our youth goon 
unto this day 5, and have not obeyed the voice ot the 
LORD our God. 


f We are perplexed, and 
ſuch a Reproach both to 


confounded within our ſelves ; we are 
God and Man, that we > a out lifr 
hands for ſhame, even we, that had once an ores Fore- 
head, Perſe 3, bur muſt lie down in our ſhame : An expreſſion to 
ſet forth the greatneſs of their Repentance and Sorrow > Som in 
great perplexity, not knowing what to do, throws him ad oe 
upon his Couch or Bed, 1 Kings 21.4. $ A Metaphor, from 4s _ 
muffl:d up in the Bed-clothes, as aſhamed to be ſeen : The * E 
Expreflion Pſal: 44. 15- þ This notes the Univerſality of — 
Sins, the whole Generation of us, like Fathers, Ike Children. 1 he 
Confeſſion wraps up our own and others Sins. Ezra 9: 7- an _ 3, 
34. Pſal: 106: 6, 7. Chap: 14+ 29. and keeps us from all _ c by 
others Examples, 2. Kings 17: 41. which groſs Guilt of theirs = 
this kind, is deſcrib:d Chap: 44: '7. # As the former ſers Bott 
the univerſaliry of their Sins, ſo this the Contirtuance 0z Ttacm, 


Deut, 9. 9.,'2 Kings 17: 34, 41 
C H A'P.j IV. 


An Invitation to true Repent ance, by Promiſes, 1 4. and Judgments 
coming on them by the Babylonians, contrary to the Prediions of their 
falſe Prophets, for their Sins, 5——18. A grievous Lamentation jor 
the Milerics of Judah, 19 —31. 

F thou wilt return, O Iſrael, ſaith the LORD, * re- 
turn unto me &, and if thou wilt put away thine 
abominarions / our. of my ſight », then ſhalt thou not 


remore 7. | 

k This ſeems to be a Continuation of the former Sermon : So 
that Iſrael having promiſed Repentance, they are here dire&cd 
how it muſt be qualified ;viz.It muſt not be hypocritical & feign- 
ed, bur real and hearty, Chap. 24. 7. as Jofiah's was 2 King: 23. 25. 
and it muſt be unto the Lord, not to this Idol and that Idol, hither 
and thither, ſhifring their way, but unto Me, ſee Chap: 2: 36. or to 
my Worſhip,and as thou haſt promiſed Chap. 3: 22. And this ſence 
agrees beſt with the Coherence: Or it may be an emphatical,ſhort, 
peremptory Expreſſion, Fi thou wilt return, return; make no lon- 
ger Demur or Delay abour it ; like that 1/.21:12. The Hedrew read 
the Words in the Future Tenſe, If thou wilt return thou ſbalt return; 
and ſo they may be taken partly as a Promiſe, and that with refe- 
rence either to their returning into thejr own Land ; and ſo they 
concern Iſ-ael ; thus Deut. 30: 2, 3,4, 5. ſee Chap: 3: 14. Bur if the 
Word be takzn in the Notion of Reſting,nort Returning, as ſome do, 
and as it is taken Iſa. '30: 15- then it rather concerns Judah, q. a. 
thou ſhalt abide quietly where thou art, and fhalr not wander into 
Captivity ; and this may agree with the laſt expreſſion in that Verſe 
20: remove ; or Elſe with reference to the aſſiſtance that God would 
give them to return unto him ; partly, and rhat rather, as a Dj- 
r<C&ion ( for in the' Hebrew, though the Word Return be in the 
Furure Tenſe, yet it is often uſed Imperatively.) E Viz. Idols ; 
a Meronomy of the Asjun#, which are ſo abominable 1n Gods ſight, 
Deut. 27. 15+ Ezek. 20. 7, 8. called Dung God:, Dent: 29: 17, See 
2 Chron. 15.8, m Though God's eye be every where ; and hence 


- implieth, that Idols are no where to be admitred, either in private 


or publick ; yet it doth particularly relate to the place of hi, 
more immediate Preſence, as their Land and Temple, 1 Kings g: 3. 
and ſpiritually to our Hearts, Hypocrites thinking it enough, 11 
they conceal their Wickedneis from Man's eye. ® If this be read 
Imperatively, then it is Remove n0?, as it may be read ; and fo jr 
aggrees with 1ſra!l, Depart notaway from me to thy Idols upon 
the Mountains and Hills : if read in the Future Tenſe, then it 
aggrees with. Judah, Thou ſhalt not go out of thine own Land into 
See the firſt Claufe of the Verſe. 

2\ .And thou ſhale ſwear o, the LORD liveth in 


truth, in judgment, and in righteouſneſs p, and the 


nations ſhall bleſs q themſelves in him, and in him ſhall 
they * glory r. 

o This is to be underſtood, partly by way of Command, as 
Deut. 10. 20. and partly by way of DireCtion jf thou ſwear, or 
when thou ſweareſt : it 1s put here Synecdockicaty, for the whole 
Worſhip of God, hereby acknowledging and owning God as the 
only God. þp Here he preſcribes, 1. the Form of the Oath, viz 
the Lord liveth, or by the Life of God, which was that Form which 
they did uſe in Swearing, 1'Sa. 14. 39, 45. and many other places; 
ſo joſeph tware by the Life of Pharaoh, Gen. 42+ 15, 16, and Eliſha very 
frequently uſeth this form, 2 Kings 2: 2, 4, 6. and 3: 14. and 5 16 
which is alſo to be underſtood excluſively, 9q- 4. not by any Ido], 
as Baa!, &c. or any Creature, Chap. 5. 7. Matth. 5. 34,35, 36. Jam. 
5 i2. but by God alone, 1/a. 65. 16. See Hof. 2. 17. for by this 
indeed we declare the Godhead of him whom we Worſhip, 1/a. 19. 
18. 2. The Qualification of it, in which indeed are comprized 
all the Requilites to a Religious Oath and Worſhip of God, both 
in our general and particular Calling, with reſpe& ro God, our 
Selves, our Neighbours. 1. In Truth, that the Matter and Sub- 
ſtance of it be really true in it ſelf, Rom; 9: 1. that which agrees 
with the Intent of the Mind, Pſal. 24: 4. and with the Intent of 


' him that adminiſters it, not doubtful, feigned, or deceitful,as they 


did, '1/a. 48. 1- and Chap. 5. 2: bur as true as the Lord lives. 2. In 
Judgment, 3. e. Either in Matter or Places of Judicature, for the 
Deciſion of Controverſies deliberately, adviſedly, and reverently, 
well conſidering both of the Form and Matter of the Oath, Lv. 
5: 4. that God's Name bz neither taken in vain cuſtomarily,or in 
Matters trivial, Deu:. 5. 11. nor abuſed by Oaths that are raſh and 
precipitant, ſach as Saul's Was 3$am. 14: 39: and as H:rod's, Matth. 
14: 7. and without Neceſlity.. 3. Ia Rig%tzouſneſs, that none be 
injured by it, that the Thiags we engage be, 1. Both Lawful and 
Poſſible. S2e 1 Sam. 25. 21, 22. and 28: 10, 1 Kings 19: 2, And 
e. That we look to the Performance, Pſal: 15: 4. Matth: 5: 33. the 


want of either of which Circumſtances raake it a Bond of iniquity, | 


my Word ; grub up all thoſe Briers, and Thorns,and miſchievous 


M I 4 H. Chap. Iy-; 


Eccl: 5: 445. 9 Tis ſhall bz a means to work upon the TIcathen 
Nations, and prevail with them to come into the fincg way of 
Worthip, that now ſcorn both you and me, becauſe 1 am forced 
ro make them the Rod of my Anger againlt you, in regard of 
your Provocations, Pſal.47.8,9. Chap. 3. 17. They thall think them< 
ſelves happy to be incorporated with thee, that it mav be with , | 
them according to that Promiſe Gen: 12. 3. and 22. 17, 18. They 
ſhall, as ir were, bleſs themſelves in ſuch like form, rhe Lird 19368 
me and mine as Jjracl ; bleſſed be Ijrael, and the God of Iſrael, Or. ra 
ther, r Whereas before they gloricd in their Idols, now. being 


: 
4 
; 


[MW 


taken into the true Church, among God's 7jra-l, they ſhall glory in 
God alone, Pſal.196: 5. who indeed alone is the glory of his Feo- 
ple, Pal. 89: 17: and 148: 14- 

3 5 For thus faith the LORD to the men / of Judah 
and Jeruſalem ?, break up « your fallow ground, and 
* ſow not among thorns x. * Ma'th, 

ſ Heb. Man, i. e. to each Man ; I ſpeak to every individual 13: 7» 22. 
among you, Ezek. 20. 7,8. # The Lord having ſpoke what he had 
to fay at preſent to Jſ-ael, turns now his Speech from 1/-a2l to Tun 
dah,and ſo continues it ; which confifts of teveral Subjets, and frſr 
begins with Repentance. u z. e, Prepare your Hearts by making 
them ſoft, tender, and pliable fir to imbrace my Word : : az. taphoy 
taken from Plow-men,that do either prepare the ground thar hart; 
Jain ſome time waite and untilled, by tearing up the Surfice of 
the Earth, making it mellow, and ſoft, to receive the Seed - ( for 
the Hebrew word Nr icems to be of larger Extent than bare Prepa- 
ration : God uſcth the fame word when he ſpeaks to the ſame Pur. 
poſe to 1ſrael, Hof. 10: 13. and fo it is ulcd Prov: 13: 23.) or it may 
relate ro both, that every thing that may be injurious to the Seed 
may be ſrubbed up. Or rather, from tuch as plow the ground 
x Rid your Hearts and Hands of what may hinder you of embracing 


Weeds, that will not ſuffer my Countels to take, or my graces to 

thrive with youz ſuch as uſe to over-run the fluggards Fic1d Spams 

24+ 39, 31. Here the Lord begins to call upon them to Repent y * 

The Phraſe ſeems to intimate,thar the Jews had been wont to mix 4 
the Truths of God among their own inveations, as Seed among 
Thorns, and ſo corrupred it : as alfo, that they retained many 

ſecret and hidden Sins, like Hypocrites, which he exhorts them to 
eradicate. 


4 * Circumciſe y your ſelves to the LORD <, and * Dear. 


take away the fore-skins of your heart « ; ye men of 39: 6. 
Judah,and Inhabitants of Jeruſalem : leſt my fury come 
torth like fre, and burn that none can quench 3: 6, 
becauſe of the evil of your doings. 

3 Put away your natural Corruptions ; which was ſignified by 
the Sacrament of Circumciſion, Cel: 2: 1. See 1 Pet. 3. 21. the ſame 
thing with the other, bur expreſſed in other Words. z Or to me 
viz, fo as I will approve. a Let it be inward, not outward. 
viz. in the Fleſh only, ( in which you ſo much glory in the ſight 
of Men ) bur take away that Brawnineſs and Obitinacy that ( hav= 
ing to do with God, who hath reſpe&t unto the heart ) is upon 
your hearts, De«t: 10. 16. Ezek, 44:9. Act. 7: 51. Rem.2, 29, b Not | 
only fierce and conſuming, like Fire, Deuz. 4: 24. but unquenchable ; 
eſpecially when it gets among your Thorns, Yer. 3. which are | 
very apt to kindle, 7/a. 10: 17. leſt you proceed ſo far in your 
Oblrinacy, that I will not be appeaicd, Chap. 21: 12. Amos 5: 6. 


OSA Yr Roe ele Y . 


their be:ng nothing that ſtirs up God to Anger but Sin, as in the 
next clauſe, which 1s an Explication of thoſe Metaphors of Thorns 
and Foresking., 


5 Declare ye in Judah, and publiſh in Jeruſalem, | 


gather together e, and fay, * aſſemble your ſelves, and *Chay, | 
let us go into the defenced cities f. 8: 14. | 
| © The Lord being now about to bring Enemies upon them, he | 
beſpeaks them in martial Language, by ſtirring them to a ſpeedy 
Proviſion, and warning of them of the nature ot their approaching 
Judgment ; not Famine or Plague within them, bur a forei gn Ene« 
my from without, Chap. 6. 1. wiz. the coming of Nsbuchadnezzar 
and the Chaldeans, d That your voice may be heard afar off, that 
all may hear- e Either to unite your forces, or to take counſet 
what to do, that you may be in ſafety : the ſame thing with Aſ« 
Jemble your ſelves ; implying, that the Calamity was general. f To 
ſecure from theſe Invaſions, that are coming upon us. 


6 Set vp the ſtandard g toward Zion ||, retire h, ſtay || Or, _ 
not ; for * I will bring evil from the north ;,and a great {rw 


7 deſtruction. Chap: F. 
g 4. e. Either for them to reſort t6,as is uſual in War, and it is dos IE 


therefore ſaid to be towards Zion or Jeruſalem, as being a Signal to + Heb 
ſhew them whether they ſhould repair : ſee chap. 50: 5. Jeruſalem [ coll 
being their principal Place of Strength, and Zi the ſtrongeſt part ; 
of it, 2 Sam: 5: 6, 7. | þ Or ſtrengthen, fortific or !'rengthen your 
ſelves for the Fighr. Or rather;make haſte away as Men uſe to do 
in a great Fright, viz, for your Security ; ſuch a uſe there is of 
the Word, 1/s. 10: 31. and chap, 6:1, which ſence is confirmed by 
the next Words Stay nor, or as ſome, Stay no? your ſclvcr in $in, where 
you promiſe your ſclves Security. # z- e. I am abour to bring a 
great Deſtruftion upon you from Chaliea, Chap: 1:13,14, 15. ſome 
take this and the former Verſe to be ſpoken Ironically. 


7 * The lion is come up from his thicket &, and the *Dan:7:4 
deſtroyer of the gentiles /is on his way »2, he is gone 
forth from his place * to make thy land deſolate » ; and 


thy cities ſhall be laid waſt, without an inhabitant 0. 
'$X e. Ne 


Pd 


* Chap: 


2, IS. 


and fay, Blow ye the trumpet c in the land : cry d, | 


i ———_— 


SED 


[Or, / 
ky wir 
than th 
tHeb 


Jua'zme 


-buchadnezzar called here a Lion from his fierceneſs, and 
ſtrength, Prov. 30. 30. A Metaphor ; eſpecially in this expedition, 
( ſee 1/a. 5. 27, 28, 29. ) ſhall come up from Babylon where his chief 
ſeat is, Dan, 4. 30. as Lions are principally among rhe thickets 
of the Foreſt, in Coverts; this place being ſo remore, and hid from 
them that they leaſt expected trouble to ariſe from thence. ! Ano= 
ther deſcription of the ſame perſon, of whoſe deſtroying Armies 
the Nations have had woful experience,1ſa. 14: 16, 17. cailed the ham. 
mer of the whole Earth, chap, 50:23. 9. d. and how thall you think 


t@ 


4 
A 


Chap. IV-* 


ET Le a rt eraiatng 
= - wo ——_— 


7 EK 


io eſcape him? m1.e. As It is expreſſed in the next clauſe, he is 
cone torth from his place,he 1s already upon his march. 7! 1. Co With 
a 1-{oJution ſo to do. 0 i.e. A's places uninhabited, ſoon lie waſt,and 
are overgrown with grafs,as the notion of the word ſeems to i1mporr. 

8 For this gird you with ſackcloth p, lament and 


bow! q: for the fierce anger of the LORD is not tur- 


ned back from us r. 

> The uſual habit of mourners, eſpecially in thoſe days, 1/aiah 22. 
12. Chap. 6..26. it is a calling upon them to repent. 9 Probably 
theſe expreſſions do import the ſeveral ways that Men have to ler 
forth their bitter complaints and ſorrows of the mind, both by 
the geſtures of the body, Chap. 2. 37. Luke 18.13. and expreſſions 
of the tongue, Pſalm 32. 3. 1a. 59+ 11. r Neither will it, until 
it have accompliſhed its ends. Chap. 39. 24. 


9 And it ſhall come to pals at that day faith the 
LORD, that the heart of the King ſhall periſh /, and 
the heart of the princes ; and the prieſts ſhall be aſto- 


niſhed c, and the prophets «. ſhall wonder x. 

f The King, viz. of Judah, and the great Men, that ſhould have 
encouraged the People in ſuch a calamitous day, and been their great 
ſupport, ſhall not only be afraid, but their own hearts ſhall melr 
within them, they ſhall be even at their wits end. See Joſh. 5. r. 
They ſhall have no heart at all ro do any thing, they ſhallnor be 
able to help their People, either by their Counſel, or Arms; their 
Courage will utterly fail, and their Counſel periſh. See P/alm 73. 
26. This was fulfilled in Zedekiah, Jeremiah 39. and 52. whoſe flight 
would not advantage him. * Shall be in ſuch a conſternation, that 
they ſhall not know what courſe to take. u Yiz. Falſe Prophets, 
That had nothing bur viſions of peace for them, Ezek. 13. 16. Zech. 
23-3, 4. Chap. 8. 1. See next verſe. x Not ſo much at the diſap- 
pointment of their Propheſies,for they knew well enough they were 
falſe, Ch. 23. 26, 27. as that they ſhould be poſſeſſed with the ſame 
horrour,& frights with the reſt, not knowing where to ſhew,or ra- 
ther to hide their heads for the ſhame that would fall upon them, 
when their lies ſhould be diſcovered, they would be put to ſhame, 
and periſh with the reſt, and whither ſhall they cauſe their ſhame 


76 Then faid 1, Ah Lord GOD y, ſurely thou haſt 


greatly deceived & this people, and Jeruſalem, ſaying, 
Ye (hall have peace 4; whereas the ſword reacheth un- 


to the ſoul 5. = 
3 The Heb. aha, is a word both of admiration and lamentation 


together; they are Jeremiak's words, and complaint breathed out 
my great ox and ſighing'of Soul, which he expreſſeth more 
emphatically, Chap. 23-9. % Either hath ſuffered them to be thus 
deluded by theſe falſe Prophets, 1/s. 63. 17. Ezek. 14. 9. compare 
1 Kings 22. 21, 22,23, and 2 Theſ. 2. 11. or poſſibly, it may beread 
better by way of Interrogation, 9. d. How can it poſſibly be, that 
thou ſhouldeſt ſuffer thy people to be thus deluded by their falſe 
Prophets, Num. 23. 19. thou being a God, that canſt not lie, Titus 1, 
2. 4a Under the word Peace is comprized, and intended all good, 
intimating all things ſhould go on proſperouſly with them, Gen, 37. 
14. and ſeems the rather to be thus expreſſed, becauſe it was the 
common language and phraſe of the falſe Prophets, Chap. 8. 11 and 
23.17. b To perſwade them it ſhould be well with them, when 
the ſword is at the door, not only ready to take away the comforts 
of Life, buteven Life it ſelf, Soul being put for Life, verſe 30. 
Pſalm 69. 1+ Matth. 16. 25, 26. It may intimate alſo a great cut- 
ting off, and ſlaughter among them, eſpecially ther great ones, 
they being, as it were, the Soul of the People. _ 

it Ac that time c shall it be faid to this people, and 


to Jeruſalem 4, A dry wind e of the high places in the 
wilderneſs f toward g the daughter of my people, not 


to fan, nor to cleanſe b. 

c There ſhall be tydings brought both to the Country and City, 
verſe 5. d Viz. When Nebuchadnezzar 1s upon this expedition, verſe 7. 
e The meaning is a drying wind, ſuch as ſhall blaſt, and ſcorch 
where it comes, without any Rain or moiſture, or any other way 
for uſe or refreſhment, as the laſt word inthe verle intimates, and 
ir may alſo allude unto the Coaſt, from whence this wind comes, 
viz from Babylen, or the North which drives away Rainy Prov. 25. 
23. for it points at the ſtormy and furious irruption of the Babyle. 
ni Army, deſtroying all before them, a Metaphorical Alegory, Chap. 
23. 19. and 30. 23, 24 Ff Orin the Plain, where there is no ſtop 
or obſtacle in the way to hinder the wind, or to break its fury, 1/a. 
21, 1, Chap. 13. 24. See on Tia. 63. 13. g i.e. DireGtly, and de- 
fign:dly, coming along in the way leading to my People, for ſo 
we areto underſtand this expreſſion, the Daughter of my People, as the 
Daughter of Zion, 11a. 1. 8. or rather, the Daughter Zim, which is as 
comely and beauriful in my eyes, and tender to me as a Daughrer, 
Chap. 9. 1. hþ Not ſuch a gentle wind, which is made choice of 
to ſeparate the Chaff from the Whear, the bad from the good, but 
ſo boiſterous and violent, that it ſhall depopulate, ſweep away, 
and lay waſte all rogether, Chap. 50. 1. Exek. 21. 3. 

12 Even || a full wind z from thoſe places shall come 


[Or, aful- 7 
Ga unto me & : now alſo will # I give ſentence / againſt 


- wind 
t2mthoſe. 
THeb _ " I F.:ller than they. A wind too ſtrong for them* This is 
rl a farder deſcription of the former wind, it thall be full, even a 
fuller wind, that ſhall do its w_ i ner k Earp are either 
's Words, 9. d. It ſhall preſently come to me eceive my 
Fd oae = be at my Beck, and co my Will, Pſalm 148. 8. 
Or, they relate, as it were, what will be the Language of the Peo- 
ple at that time wnro me, for againft me. I q. d. The coming of 
this terrible wind, ſhall in eff:& ſpeak the execution of my judge- 

ment upon them, which is pointed at by this word now, viz. at the 

time of the coming of this terrible ſtorm from Chaldea, Heb, utter 

iudzement, viz. nor by word, but by deed, my judgements ſhall 

ſpeak, as well as my Prophets. Bs 

I e.58 13 Behold; he shall come up as clouds ms, and * his 


"1b. 1.8. chariors ſþall be as'a whirlwind »: * his horſesare ſwifter 
than eagles's Wo unto us, for we are ſpoiled o. | 
m Lithes noting the vaſt number of them, 1/2. 60, 8. Heb. 12.7, 


or rather, the great ſpeed and ſwiftneſs, with which Nebuchadnez- 


1Y10T 
BRAN, 


, S108 
or the ſuddenneſs of them, when not expeted, Clouds often ri- Wil | 
ling on a ſudden, and overſpread the whole face of the Heavens, "HAAAE 
zar ſhall march againſt them,1ſaiah 19. 1. Yu perbolical deſcri Whit 
the ſwiftneſs of Eagles in this Verſe, Choy! cs. 8. my ror gg wr -JIVÞ 
the ſwiftneſs, notes alſo the confuſion and amazement, that they | 
w1ll cauſe, 1/aiah 66, 15. o The dreadful apprehenſions, that the Wt! | 

People have of their wofull condition, or poliibly the words of the un 
Propher lamenting their miſery. | f, 

14 O Jerutalem, wath thine heart p from wicked- 
neſs q, that thou mayeſt be ſaved »: how Jong ſhall thy 
vain thoughts { lodge within thee? - | 

þ Cleanſe your inward parts, O ye Men of Jeruſal.m, not your 
1ands only, as Hypocrites do, but your hearts, James 4.8. The 
ſame Exhortation with verſe 3, 4- only in another Metaphor of waſh= 
ing, which ſeems to be taken from ſuch Potions, thatPhyſicians give 

to Clear the inward parts from noxious humours. See I/a. 1, 16, 17. 
7 Fiz. From all filthineſs of Fleſh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. James x, 
21. r This hath reference in this place to Temporal Salvation;it 
15 preſcribedas a means to prevent the judgements that are impen= 
ding on them, as is plainly expreſſed, verſe 4. yet not excluſive of 
Spiritual Salvation, 2 Theſ. 2. 13. Ti,'3. 5. $5 Wicked thoughts, 
or rather hopes or 6xpeQation from any helps, Chaps 2. 5, 37. plea» 
fing thy ſelf with vain fancies of ſafety and ſecurity, which thoughts 
of thine will aſſuredly bring ruine and miſery upon thee, which 
1s inevitably coming, as in the next verſe. 

If For a voice 7 declareth from Dan «, and publiſh- 
ech affliction from mount Ephraim. 

. # 1.e. Either the voice of the Prophets, that is fill ſounding it 
in your ears, and declaring it unto you, or rather the rumour and. 
noiſe ofthis Army is already come through your Land, you have the 
heavy tydings of this great affliction, Chap. 8. 16. to note the near 
approach of it. « This is ſaid to come from Dan and Ephraim, be- 
cauſe Dan was thefirſt place theſe Chaldeans muſt come to, it being 
the utmoſt boundary of Canaan Northward, and Ephraim the inner; 
moſt border of 1-ael in the North of Judea, intimating the march 
of the Babylonians through all 1rae! toward Jeruſalem. 

16 Make ye mention to the nations x, behold, pub-! 
liſh 7 againſt Jeruſalem, hat watchers z come a from. 
a far country b, and give out their voice c againſt the 
Cities of Judah. | 

x Theſe are either the Nations in Judes, or theſe words are a 
Proclamation, ſummening in the Nations by the Chaldeans, as it 
were in purſuance ofa Commiſſion from God, to bring great Armies 
together againſt Jeruſalez, or they are the Prophers turning away 
from Judah, as deſpairing of doing any gaod upon them, and cal- 
ling for the Nations to execute God's Sentence. y Let her be ac- 
quainted with what is coming upon her, let her have publick no- 
tice before hand, that ſhe may be warned. z Military Watchers, 
1. Ce. the Chaldean Soldiers, that ſhall ſo carefully ahd watchfally en. - 
compals Jeruſalem, that none ſhall eſcape; poſſibly a Metaphor from 
Hunters, that in hunting their Prey, lay wait at every patlage, that 
the game may noteſcape. See 2 Kings 25. 4, 5. Or poſlibly, there 
may be an alluſion ro Nebuchadnezzar's Name, the Heb. word for 
Watchers being Notſerim, which comes from Natſer, the end of his 
Name, as if they were termed Nebuchadnezzarians, as the Keepers, 
or Guards of his Perſon ; as they were called Ceſareans from Ceſar. 
a They are now at hand, you may as it were ſee them» 6b From 
Chaldza, c They will proclaim War againſt them ; or a ſhout, cis 
ther encouraging Soldiers to the Battle, or triumphing after 
the Victory; or the Outcries that they will make, ſuch as the 
Turks now make in their Onſets, Chap. 2.15. : 

I7 As keepers of a field are they againſt her round 
about d ; becauſe she hath been rebellious e againſt me, 


faich the LORD. ops | 

d They will ſtrialy befiege her, as Keepers of a FieJd will be 
careful whe go in, and who go out, Zcch. 12, 2. they will watch 
that none go inito relielve them, and alſo, that none get out to e- 
ſcape : See 2 Chron. 16. 11 e God doth not threaten his Judgments 
only, but he Jlabours to convince them, thar there is a ſufficient 
Realon for it, both here, and in the next verſe. ee 

18 * Thy way f and thy doings have procured theſe * pin; 
things unto thee g, this is thy wickedneſs, becaulc it is 107% 17, 
bitter þ, becauſe it reacheth unto thine heart. 

f Thy manner of Life, ad particularly thy IJolatries. g 9.4. Thou 
canſt not lay any blame upon me. + Thy wickedneſs hath been 
the cauſe of this thy grievous afflition, 1/2, 50. 1. Chap 2.17, 19. 
of this thy bitterneſs of bringing ſuch a bitter enemy againſt thee, 
a Metonymy of the Efficient, which hath reached unto thy very Heart, 
as the ſword is ſaid toreach unto the Soul, verſe 1>. 2 

i9 } * My bowels, my bowels z, I am pained at + *I. rg.5 
my very heart k, my heart maketh a noiſe in me, I can- 2nd 26-19. 

| | and 21. 3, 
not hold my peace #9, becauſe thou haſt heard, O my | 


and. 22. 4, 
ſoul, the ſound of the trumpet », the alarm of ware Heb. rhe 
z; Here begins the woeful Complaint of, and the great Trouble the walls of my 
Prophet was in, vpon the conſideration of theſe things, crying out heart. 
as one even under great pain and rorment, doubling his words for 
want of vent, thereby expreſling the exceſs of his forrow, which 
in words was inexpreſſible, the like 2 Sam. 18. 33. which ſorrow 
of his he expreſſeth, Chap. 9. 1,10. k& Heb. The walls of my heart, or 
my heart ſtrings, that ſurrounded and encompaſſed my Heart. are 
ready to break; he may poſlibly allude to their encompaſſing the 
Walts of Jeruſalem: Or, the proper meaning is, my Heart is ready 
to break, the LXX rendzreth it doth beat or pant. - | Is diſturbed 
within me, I can have no reſt nor quiet within, . Job 30. 27, Lam. 
1.20, m 7 cannot forebear my Complaints, I am ſo troubled and ' 
grieved, Job, 7. 11. 1/a. 22+ 4. 3 i.e. I have heard in the ſpirit of 
Frophecy ; it is as certain, asifI now heard the Trumpet ſounding, 
and the alarm of War beating up. : "#1596 op TRIES : 
20 * Deſtruction upon deſtruction 9 is cryed, for the » pj, 


whole land is ſpoiled p: ſuddenly are my tents 9 ſpoiled, 42. 7. 


and my courtains in a moments | | 
6 E' 3 * A 


VI. F, 25. 


*Chap. 5. 
20. 18. 
46. 28, 


Jap. IV. 


o A farther expreſſion of his bitter Lamentation, redoubling his 
complaint; the end of one but the beginning of another, 9.9. worſe 
and worle, Deut. 32. 23. Exel. 7. 26. Good Joſeah ſlain, and four of 
his Succeflors carried away, or flain, or both, 2 Chroz. 36. p This 
is more particulary deſcribed, weyſe. 23, 24, 25, 26. q The enemy 
makes no more of overthrowing my ſtately Cities, and magnificent 
Palaces, ſometimes deſcribed by Tents, 1/a. 54. 2. than if he were 
plundering ofa Camp, or overturning of Tents made of Courtains, 
ch. 49. 29. either alluding to thcir ancient way of living, Numb. 24. 
2,5. or their Wilderneſs condition,when they abode in Tents : 9.4: 
We are reduced to as mean a condition as then, and that ſudden- 
Jy ere we are aware, and it is done with as much cafe as overturn- 
ing a poor Shepherds Cottage, Lam. 2. 5,6. Jeremiah poſſibly per- 
ſonating a Shepherd, ſpeaks in the Shepherd's ſtile, and may here 
ſignific the deſtru&tion of their whole Country, even all thoſe PJa- 
ces and Fields, where Shepherds were wont to pitch their Tents. 

21 How long r ſaall I ſee the ſtandard, and hear the 


ſound of the trumpet ? 

» He ſeems to have theſe Concomitants of War, both of Judea, 
preparing for Defence, and eſpecially theſe of the Enemy prepa« 
ring for ruine and deſtrution, always in his Eye and Ear verſe 19. 
and bewailing the countenance of it in taking City after City, with 
the ſeveral ſackings of Jeruſalem under her three laſt Kings. The 
LXX read, How long ſhall I ſee them flying? reading nas a Refuge, for 
nes a Banner, differing only in the Points. 

22 For my peop'e zs fooliſh /, they have not known 
me f, thee are fſottiſh children, and they have none 
underſtanding: they are wiſe to do evil, but to do 


g00d they have no knowledge #. 

{ Though God ſhew them here, that the cauſe of all theſe Cala- 
mities is their folly, Chap. 2. 17, 19. Pſalm 38. 3, 5. yet he owns 
them for his People, Chap. 2. 11,31, 32. © Which is indeed the 
only true Wiſdom ; they have nor ſtudied my Diſpoſition or Mild- 
neſs toward them; they are ſo ſotriſh, that they have neither re- 
garded my Counſels nor Threats, bur utterly ſtupid ; they know 
not what is for their own good, have no underſtanding. «1. e. 
Their knowledge is as bad, or worſe than none, it is very il em- 
ployed in doingevil, only witty here, crafty and ſubti]. Sec 2 $47. 
23. 3+ But how to do any good they know not, Chap. 9. 3. Luke 
16. 8. This the Apoſtle dehorts from 1 Cor. 14. 20- 


22 * I beheld the earth, and lo, #t as without | 
form and void y: and the Heavens, and they had no | 4, 


light z. 
x Either 
framed ſuch an des of it in my mind, it ſeems to be imprefled u- 


. pon my thoughts Graphical, as in a Map, in ſuch a rueful manner; 
\ for in this, and the three following verſes, he doth as on: tranſport- 


ed with ſorrow, elegantly, and hyperbolically deſcribe the Phanomenon, 


ned that he fanſieth it to be like the firſt Chaos, for which reaſon 
poſſibly he .calls Judes the Earth, in alluſion to Gen. 1. 2. and here- 
in implying that Judab's fins were ſuch, that they had even over- 
rutned the Courſe of Nature, being laid waſte and deſolate, not of 
Inhabitants cnly, but of all things that might tend either to 
ornament or uſe, without Men, without Houſes, without Fruits, 
withour Beaſts or Birds for Food or Service, verſe 25, 26. z Some 
ſay being obnubilated, *and darkened by the abundance of ſmcke 
that would aſcend from the deſoliting Fires of Towns and Cities, 
1a. g. 18, 19. of which you may read in the Hiſtory of this break- 
ing in of the Chaldees. Bur he ſeems to proceed rather in his Meta- 
phor of the Chaos, it being an expreſſion, whereby the Scripture 
doth ſer forth the ſaddeſt Deſolations, 1/s. 13. 9, &c. Exzek. 32. 7, 


| &c+ Joel 2. 10, 30,31. every thing above and-below ſeemed to be 


in a mournful poſture, wrapt up in diſmal blackneſs. 
24 T beheld the mounrains, and lo, they trembled 


a, and all the hills moved lightly 6b. 

a He proceeds in his figurative Elegancies, q. 4. Behold how the 
Mountains of Judea tremble ! A like expreſſion, Pſalm 18. 7, 8. 
Ia. 5. 25- as if the very ſenſeleſs Creatures were aſtoniſhed at the 

reatneſs of God's Anger, and he mentions theſe as being the moſt 
Fable part of the Earth, yet ſhake before him. 6b As eafily as if 
they were ſome very light matter, or as duſt, or feathers in a 
Whirl-wind. See Pſalm 114. 4, 6. Or theſe may be ſaid hyperbolically 
to tremble, and move by reaſon of the multitudes of trampling and 
prancing Horſes and Chariots furiouſly paſſing over them. 

25 1 beheld, and lo, there was no man c, and allthe 


birds of the heavens were fled 4d. 
c Quite depopulated and laid waſte, all either ſlain, or carried 


captive, or fled: For after the flight of Men, Women and Chi1- * 


dren into Egypt, upon the death of Gedaliah, ſcarce a Jew was left 
in Judea, d Such Birds as are uſed to inhabited plices, thar live, 
feed and bui!d among Men; (others indeed, both Birds and Beaſts 


would continue, which implies but the greater deſojation, and 
waſte of the Land, as is threatned againſt Babylon, 7a. 13. 19, 20, 
21, 22.) Fed, either to ſeck Proviſions, here being no food left for | 
them, or frighted with the hideous noiſes and clatterings that do ' 


attend Armies ; as we have read, that ſuch hath been the concuſſi- 
onof the Air by the loud clamours and noiſes of Armies, that Birds 
have fallen downto the earth, Chap. 9. 10. Zeph. 1.2, 3. 

26 I beheld, andlo, the fruitful place e was a wil- 
derneſs, and all the cities thereof were broken down 
f at the preſence of the LORD, and by his fierce 


anger g. 

e Heb Carmel, either properly for that part of the Land fo called 
for irs fruitfulneſs, or rather Appeliatively for, not only their moſt 
pleaſant, bur moſt fruirful Lands, that were kept dreſſed and oc- 
cupied for food, borh for neceſlity and-delight, verſe 27. 1/aiah 29. 
17. and 33 9 f No place left for Men to inhabite, Iſaiah 1. 7. 

That which the Enemy could not have done with all his fury 
and fierceneſs, had it not been for rhe anger of the Lord, which by 
their great provocation, they had broughtupon themſelves, 2 Kings 
24. 3- Je. 9. 12, 13. | | 

25 For- thus hath the LORD faid, the whole land 


ſhall be deſolate ; * yer will T not make a full end 5. 


ERIE M1 4 7, 


| 
| 
! 
' 
1 


I. Jeremiah faw all this in a Viſion, or I fanſied and | 


h Some expound it, neither ſhall this puniſhment ſ:Kce, nor 
my tury ſtop here, IT will not thus have done with them : and fo 
look to what they were further to endure i: their long coptivity, 
See Lev. 26. 36, 39. But it ſeems rather to be a word of Comfort, 
that they ſhall nor be utterly extin&, he will preſerve a Remnant, 
Chap. 5. 10. 1j4. 1.9. and 24. 13. 9. d. ThoughlT am greatly mo- 
ved with anger, .,yet I will not be inexorable, I will remember my 
Covenant, Chap. 30. 11. in the midſt of Judgement he will remem- 
ber Mercy, after 7< years Captivity he brought them back again. 

28 For this ſhall the earth mourn, and * the Hea- 
vens above be black ;: becauſe TI k have ſpoken zr, I 
have purpoſed z:, and will not repent, neither will I 
turn back from ir. 

# Expreſſions to ſet forth the dreadfulneſs of the judgement, he 
makes the Elements to perſonate Mourners, a fad face of things 
above and below, a Metaphor, and therein to ſhame the ſtupidiry 
of his People. k q.4, You would not believe, either thar my 
Prophet ſpake, or what they ſaid, now I te!l you I ſpezk my {elf, 
and what I have reſolved upon, I will nct revoke. See Ezek. 24. 
13, '4. and Chap. 15. 6 for I have purpoſtd it, I have not ſpoken 
in my heat or fury, butupon mature deliberation, an Anthro= 
popathy, or what the Prophets have denounced I will ratihe. 

29 The whole city ſhall flee, for the noiſe / of the 
horſemen and bowmen, they ihall go into thickets ms, 
and climb up upon the rocks: every City » ſhall be for- 
ſaken, and not a man o dwell therein. 

{ TheInhabitants of all Ranks and Qualities ſhall ſeek to eſcape 
the fury of this Chaidean Army, Chap. 39 4. wm Either upon the 
Report of their coming, hereby as it were deriding their confidence, 
or rather at the approach of their vaſt Armies, for they were clo 
beſieged before they fled, as appears 2 Kings 25.4 » Such a con« 
ſternation there ſhall be upon them, that they ſhall run in every 
hole to hide themſelves; thus Manaſſeh was taken among the thorns, 
2 Ciron, 33.11, the Heb, 1s abim the clouds, poſhbly alluding to dark 
places on the tops of hills, reaching as it were to the clouds, or 
among the cloudy ſhades of Trees and Groves that uſually grew 
there, the L.XX render it Caves, and ſo the Rocks fer Shelter, or 
the Clefrs, Caves, and hiding Places in the Rocks. See 1ſaiah 2. 2r. 
0 There ſhall be an urterdetolation, their Cities quite forſaken, not 
any to inhabit them, verſe 25, 26. 

3o And when thou art ſpoiled p, what wilt thou 
9: Though thou clotheit thy ſelf with crimſon r, 
though thou deckeſt thee with ornaments { of gold, 
though thou renteſt + z: thy face « with painting, in 
vain x (halt thou make thy ſelf fair, by lovers wiil de- 


ſpiſe y thee, they will ſeek thy life. 


face or appearance of it. y The Land was ſo ſqualled, and ſo rui- | 


p Which will certainly come upon thee, or when this deſtru&i-. 
on ſhall come upon thee, which is very near thee. 9 Towit, 
When thou, O Daughter of Zion, as verſe 31, art beſieged by the 
Babyloniazs, what courſe wilt thou take? Ir is not to be avoided : 
A kind ofan inſulting way of ſpeech, as it were upbraiding them 
with their pride and confidence, q. d. your condition is defperate. 
r Or Scarlet, 2 Sam. 1. 24. See on I1/a.ah 1. 18. { Thouth thou 
doeſt ſuperinduce thoſe Ornaments, or Jewels of Go'd, that may 
render thy Attire the moſt rich and ſptendid, 2 Sam. 1.24. & Itis 
obſerved, that they that paint much make their Skins withered. 
uw Heb. Eyes, the Wantonnels thereof being poſſibly ſer out more by 
Painting. See Jjaiah 3, 16. or rather, Face and Eyes being ſome- 
times put one for the other. See 1 Szmuel 16. 12. and Iſaiah 25« 
8. Compare with Revelar. 21. 4. x All thy tricking up thy ſelf, 
thinking thereby to ingratiare thy ſelf with the Chaldeans, will be 
to no purpoſe; for they. will work thy Ruin, as in the cloſe of the 
verſe, and Chapter 19 7, y They will ſlight thee more than ever 
they that have doted on thee, thy unchaſte Paramours, their Luſt 
being ſatisfied. ſhall abhor thee; See 2 Samuel 13. 15 and the 
Pronoun, being not in the Origina!, it may fignihe that no Loe 
vers at all will look after thee ; thou ſh:1t be caſt off by all. See 
thus of Tyr-, Iſaiah 23. 15,16. Thole that were in Confederacy 
with thee, and thy profeſſed Friends, Hoſea 2. 5. ſhall not only 
foreſake- thee, bur joyn with thinz Enemies to deſtroy thee, 
Lament, 1. 2. And thus is Babylon to be deait withal, Revelat 17. 
'6, '7. TheSenſeis, That notwithſtanding all thy Alluri::gs and 
Enticements, either to obtain the help of thy Friends and Alies, 
the Egyptians, whom thou takeſt to be thy Lovers, and didſt fore- 
ſake me to cleave to them, or to ſtop the fury of thine Enemies, 
the Chaldeans; ( poſſibly alluding to ſezabe!'s praftice in painting 
her ſelf to ſtop the fury of Jehu, 2 Kings g. 30.) yet lhall it advan- 
tage thee notlvng ; Thou ſhalt be no more regarded than a forſaken 
Strumpet, Ezek. 16. 36, 37. and 23s tor. 

31 Forl have heard a voice as of a woman in z tra- 
vail, and the anguiſh as of her that bringeth forth her 
firſt @ child, the voice of the daughter of þ Zion: that 
bewaileth her ſelf, :hat ſpreadeth her hands c, /aying, 
Wo 7s me d now, for my ſoul is wearied becauſe of e 
murderers. 

z When the Scripture would expreſs any exquiſite Sorrow, ex 


| ceeding all other pains, it doth it by a Woman in travail, 1a. 13. 


| 8, 9. Chap. 6. 24. and 30.6, 7. 


{ 


a Which of all ſeems ro te rhe 
moſt painfu], both from natural Cauſes, and becauſe they have leſs 
Patience to bear, having not had former Experience of the like. 
b Viz. Jeruſalem, Iſa. 1. 8. c Inher great Diſtreſs, ſhe either reach- 
eth them out to God for ſome help, 1/a. r. 15. or rather, accor- 
ding to the Ule of Perſons in great Anguiſh, clapping or wringing 
their hands together, as both the former Expreſſions of b-wailing 
her ſelf, ferching of deep Sighs and Lamentations, and the follow- 
ing Wo is me, intimates. See Chap. 2, 37. d Or the time of my 
Woe isat band ; it draws near. e There is no more Spirit lefe with- 
in me, I am ready to ſink under my Diſtreſs, conſidering not only 
that my deſtruQtion is ſo near, bur that thoſe of whom I have been 
ſo fond, and whoſe Iaols IT have fo zealouſly ſerved, ſhould become 
my Murderers, verſe 3o. and that I ſhould fall into the hands of 
ſuch, as will have no Compaſſion. 2 Chror. 36, 17. 
: CHAP. 


T Heb, 
Eyes. 


Chap. Iv, ! Phaj 


> SY <A IO es hee . 
” Rs = ee A 


Y Tfa.9 
TZep.: 


f Fhap. V. 


Kone godly in Judah, 1, 


2 PnIY 


} 
Li 
\ 


| *Icng: 3. 


*Zep. 3-2, 


CHAP. 

They ſwear falſly, though God be @ God of Truth ; 
they are imcorrigible and ſenſeleſs, and know not the Law, or elſe wiltilly 
violate it, 2 6. Their 1dolotry, Adultery, 7 g. Contempt of 
Goa's Word and Prophets, which ſhould be ſadly verified, ro 18. ey 
forſake, forget, and fear not; God, whoſe Power is ſo great, 19 24. 
They are rich through Deccit and Fiolence 5 their Falje Prophets, 
25———3I. | | 

Re» ye « toand fro through the ſtrects ofJeruſalem, 

and ſee now and know, and ſeek in tte b broad 
places thereof, -if ye can find-a c man, if there be any 
that executeth d judgment, that ſeekerh the e truth,and 

I will pardon f it. 
as Whether this begins a new Sermon, or be part of the former, 

3s neither certain nor material ; but here the Prophet is called upon 

to go up and down, and ſearch here and there, in every part ofthe 

Ciry, and to make a diligent Enquiry in every Street, and Places of 

Concousſe ; a Phraſe frequently uſed for ſearching and enquiring 

after a thing, Dan. 12. 4. Amos 8. 12, andit is ſpoken in the Plural 

Number,not reſtrained to Jeremy in particular ; q d. Let who will 

ſearch, they will find it even ſo: it implies the great Scarcity of 

good Men, that muſt be thus ſearched for : God gives leave to all 
the Earth to look into the ſtate of Feruſalem,by which he vindicates 
himſelf in the face of the whole World from all ſeverity towards 
his People, whatever he brings upon them, and ſo ſtops the Mouths 
of the Jews. 6 Even there, where uſually is the greateſt Reſort for 

Merchants and Merchandizes, where Men meet tromall Quarters. 

c It ſcems worſe than Sodom and Gomorrah, for God condeicends to 

pardon Jeruſalem, if there be bur one righteous Man found in it ; 

there he came no lower than ten. But it will be O+jeFed, if it be 
underſtood thus individually, What muſt we think of Jeremiah 
himſelf, and Baruch, aud Ebeamelech, and other few,who were then, 
no doubt, in Jeruſalem ? Anſwer, Either he ſpeaks of the corrupt 


ire MWTreal 


Body of the People, Courtiers, Prieſts, Falſe Prophets, not one, | 
or {care one among them to be found, orif any, ſo few as not to ; 
be diicernsd : A Man might wa'k the Streets of Jer»ſsl-m long e- j 


nough before he cculd meet with any one truly Religious ; which | 
' are obſerved to be moſt ravenous, Hb. r. 8. Poſſibly, becauſe ly- 


Univerſality of Corruption is thus expreſſed in divers Places,Pſalm 
32. 1, 2 and 4@.3; 3. Zcet. 22. 10. A 7. 5, © 
underſtood Hyperbolically fora few. &@ i e. Among the Magiſtracy 
thac rightly adminiſter Juſtice. e 7. e. Among the Common- 
alty ti:at deal faithfully and uprightly, it ſignifies, That among 
th-m all, there are none given toit; ſo far from endeavouring and 
ſeeking it ſincerly with their whole Heart, that they are nor in- 
clined to it, but are given to Oppreſſions, Falſhoods, and deceits , 
they do not ſeek the Truth. f Or h/m, I will not deitroy it for 
the {ake of thoſe few : t::e iike he promiſeth with reference ro thoſe 
fiveCities, Gen. 18. 24, ©c 


2 And though they ſay, the LORD & liveth, ſurely 


they Twear þ falſely. 

£ Though when they ſwear, they uſe the form of an ' Oath, and 
ſay,” the Lord liveth, Chap. 4. 2- or by the living God. By Swearing 
here we may underiiand all their Service of God, by a Synecdoche ; 
Swearing veing a part of God's Worſhip. 4 Yer, or therefore they 
ſwear falſly ; cit'-er they ſwear to that which is falſe ; qr, ifto that 
which is true, they are 1o perfidious to me, that they do it deceit- 
Fully, not in Sincerity, aid in Reverence to that Holy Name by 
which they {wear - poſſibly they may ofcen ſpeak of God, and not 
ſwear. by Falls Gods, Yeyſe 7, but it is all bur Hypocrifte and 
Deccit, 1a. 48- ». Chap. 12. 2. aud 42. 5, 20. 2Tim. 3. 5. It. 1s 
neither in Truth nor Righteouſneſs. two of the principal Qualifi- 
cations ofa lawful Oath : Thus they proſti:ure the Name of God, 
— themſe:ves guiity, not of Hypocrifie only, but Sacri- 
ege. | 
2 OLORD, are not thine eyes upon the z truth ? 
thou haſt * ſtricken them, bur they have nor & grieved; 
thou haſt /conſumed them, but * they have refuſed to 
receive cortection : they have made their faces harder 


than a »« rock, they have refuſed coo » return. 
; The Prophet, obierving the Ob inacy of this People, abrupt- 
Iy turns himie!f ro God, yet emphatically inſinuates their Incor- 


ing Truth from t alit.ood, as being impoſſible that any thing thould 
be hid from him, Pſalm 


Micah 6. 9. but others, better, to Truth and Faithfulneſs, as that 


which God hath a great R-ſpe&for, nd Delight in, Pjalm 51. 6. 


and was not to be found among theſe People. Though nohe,of 
theſe Senſes be improper, this ſeems the moii genuine. & They 
have been under ſore Grievances that God hath laid them under, 
yet they ſeem unco'.cerned, Prov 23. 35. 1/2. 42+ 25. or it 1s pro- 
bable they were griev'd at their Sufferings, but they have not re- 
pented, thereby to turn away the Cauſes of his juſt Diſpleaſure See 
2 Cor. 7. 9, 10. | God 1ad not on'y lightly chaſtifed them, byr 
waſted them by ſeveral Enemies, as the 4ſyrians, Iſa. 10. 5,6. and 
36. 1. and Pharaoh Necho, 2 Kings 23. 33. and the Chaldees, Syrians, 
Mobites, and the Ammonites, 2 Kings 24. 2. and Nebuchaanezzar, 
2 Kings 24. 13, &*c. All theſe he made uie of as the Rod of his In. 
dignation, yet they refuſed to receive Correttion. . See Chap. -2, 
30, a Metonymy of the Efe# ; they have profited nothing by it, not 
at all reformed, 7/a. 1. 5, 16. Am9s 4.6, 8,9, to, 1'. m Noting 
their Ooſtinacy and Impudence laying aſidr al) ſenſe of Judgmeres, | 
as paſt feeling, Prov. 21 29. Zech. 7. 12. " Wilfully reje&ed 


Counſel, and lighted CorreQion, reſolving to perſiſt in their Ob. | p 


ſtinacy.- | 
4 Therefore I ſaid o, ſurely theſe are p poor, they 
are fooliſh : for they know not the way ofthe LORD, 


»or the judgment of .*. their GOD. 


Or it may be. 


--* 


| bad Men generally breeds Fiithineſs : rifing up to play tne Wanron, 


' 1, 2, Hof. 4. 12, 14, e It may be rezd in the Nominative Cale. the 


rigibleneſs. This may refer cirhe. to izod's diſcerning and know- ; doldtry, Then 6 5s their making the 


1. 4. or rather ( more agrecable to the | 
Phraſe ) to God's approving ; and this ſome again refer to Perſons, : 
as, Men of truth for true Men, ſo Man of Wiſdom for a wiſe Man, ! med of nothing. | 


better Skill'd in Fields and Vineyards, thai in the Law - or of leſs 
Conſcience than the better ſort may be, and therefore ſaid to be 
fooliſh, or infatuated, or put upon greater Temptaricn by reaſon 
of their Poverty, Pro. 30. 9. '. The Methods orWays of his Provi- 411Þ 
dence, the uſual manner of his Dealings; fo Judgment is to be taken Mf 
here for the ſame with Ways, I Sam. 2.13. aSItis alſo Chap. 8, 7. v8 
5 I will ger me to the 9 great men, and will ſpeak 
unto them; for they have r known the way ofthe Lord, 
and the judgment of their GOD : but theſe heve alto- 


gether broken the yoke, and burſt the / bonds. 

q i. e. To the Nobles, both Prince and Pricf, that have more time 
to conſider rheſe things, have been better taught and educated 
Prov. 4. 4- Not that Jeremiah had any better Thoughts of theſe, but 
as Carrying a great Probability with it. » Had it been only amons 
thoſe in the former Verſe, it might have been more exculable; but 
it 15 in the very Nobles themſelves: the State is wholly corrupt 
from Head to Foot, who cannot plead Ignorance, therefore the 
more inexcuſable. /{ Theſe are more refraCttary than the other,more 
heady and obſtinate; no Law of God is able to hold them, Pſal.2.2 
3. See Luke 19. 14, 279. There is not one better than another a- 
mong them, whether poor or rich. - Ee 

6Wherefore a t lion out of the forreſt ſhallſlay them. 
* 4 a wolf of the|| x evenings (ball ſpoil them * y, a leo- | 
pard ſhall watch over their cities: every one that go- i Or | 
eth out thence (ball be torn in pieces, becauſe their Deſarrs. {| 
tranlgreflions are many, ard their backſlidings are j xz *Hoſ.:z.4 
increaſed. | |  .|, ; FHebq 

t Nebuchaanezzar and the Chaldtan Army from Syria and Libanus, fi "og. 
woody places, are here pointed at under the Meraphor of Beaſts of 
Prey ot three kinds ; the Malignity thar is proper to each of theſe 
Creatures ſhall be put forth in this Babylonian Army, compared, for 
inſtance, to a Lion, Chap. 4. 7. which notes his great Power, Cou= 
rage, Pride, and inſulting over his Prey. « For their Greedineſs 
and Unſatiableneſs; one Wolf will deſtroy abundance of Sheep 3 
and ſaid to be rhe Wolf of the Evening, or Deſarts, or Plains, they be 
ing the uſual Haunts of the Wolf; or Evening, becauſe then they 


Foe 
4 


ing moſt part of the day intheir Dens for fear of the Huntſmen; 
want of Prey enrageth their Hunger at night, and becauſe vf this 
greedineſs to devour, the Judges among themſelves are ſaid to be 
Evening Wolves, deſcribed Zeph. 3. 3. They gnaw not the Bones 
till the morrow, either through Hunger ._ or Rage, '*x The Chals 
dean Army compared to a Leopard, notfor its ſpeed only, but e- 
ſpecially for its Vigilancy and Subtilty ; they will be fo vigil:nt, 
that ſcarce any ſhall eſcape, according to Verſe :6. y Heb. Stroxg; 
here is the reaſon why God would bring ſuch a Devaſtation upon 
them, becauſe they did, as it were, ſtrengthen themſelves in the 
multitude of their Rebellions 2gaintt him. gf 

7 © How ſhall I z pardon thee for this ? thy a children 
have forſaken me, and ſworn by hems chat are b no 
gods: when TI had fed them to the full, they c then 
commited 4 aduitery, and ailembied themſeives by e 


troops in the harlots houſes. - of; 

z How canſt thou expe that I ſhall bear ſuch Aﬀeronts ? I ſhall 
expoſe my felf, and ſecmro lay aſide my power, 1 ſhall be look'd u- 
pon as one, that either regard nor ſuch Injuries, or cannot avenge 
them, as Yerſe 9. . # Thy Inhabitants both in City and Country. 
6 But by Idols ; Swearing is here pur, nor for. any part cf Worſhip, 
as {omerumes it 1s, but for a religivus Worſhipand Service of them, 
Chap. 4.2. c Here is nored the abuſe of God's Bounty, or the na- 
tural Effe& of our unſanttified Proſperity, Deur. 32. 15. Chap. 2.7. 
Jude 4. That whichin good Men doth oft breed Forgettulneſs, in 


was the Effe&t of 1/rae!'s Eating and Drinking, Exod. 32. 6 and of 
Sodom's Sin, Exek. 16. 49. d Either 1. Metaphorically to be under- 
ſtood of their going a Whoring after their Idols; or, 2. Properly for 
corporal Ungleanneſs, they uſually going boti rogether, Numb. 25. 


Houſe of the Harlos aſſembled themſelves. q. d. the. whole Houie of 1/- 
rael, Jeruſalem, and Judes, are but one Stew ; if it refers to their I- 
| emple a commort 
Houſe of ipiricual Harlotry ; bur rather, as it refers to the corpo-' 
ral Uncleannefs, it ſeems ro intimate that they did not a& the:r A« 
dulteries clandeſtinely or by ſtealth, bur. laying aſide all Modeſty, 
they went to Harlots Houles like brute Beaſts in company, as aſha- 


. 8 They were 4s f fed horſes in the g morning : 
ry one h neighed after his neighbours wife. 
 f To note the Greatneſs and Unrulineſs of their Luft, pampered 
Horſes being moſt wanton, like that Dev. 32. 15. g Ir is queſti- 
oned, whether Morning relates to Horſes, or to Men ; if to Horſes, 
then they are compared to Stallions: that having been fed to the 
tull over night, and lain at- caſe, - in the Morning they are moſt 
luſty : bur rather it ſeems to relate to Men, ſhewing that they were 
very early in-going abour their Filthinefles. Zeph. 3:: 7. following 
their Uncleannets with as great Eagerneſs as it is ſaid that Druh- 
kards follow ſtrong Drink, fs 5. i1. + i.e, With an impetuous 
Earneſtneſs and unwearied: Hunting, they ſought after the Adulte- 
refſes to ſatisfic their beaſtly luſts.. It notes 1. The ſtrength. of 
their Luſt, a thing in Horſes much taken notice of by Authors. 
2. The Unbridledneſs and Uncontroulableneſs of ir, as 1s ſeen in 
the pampered Horſes hunting after the Mare, of which neighing is:a 
Sign, thus expreſſed Chap.-r3- 27. Thus the Grecians would ex- 
refs Men extreamly libidinous | by the Word i760, : and 
47 TeT5pyos, and that they do iTTouays iy, fothe LXX and thus de- 
ſcribed Ezekiel 22. 11. | PE. 2 | 

9 * Shall I not 7 viſit for theſe :hings ? ſaith the Lord: 


and ſhall not my & ſoul be avenged on ſuch a nation as _Ver.298 
this 2 | | - 


»-< 
CVC- 


6 Or perhaps I ſaid with my ſelf, not poſſibly, that hethought ſo, 
but that he might thus expreſs himſelf, as Men uſe to ſpeak. pPoor, 
low-ſpirited, or of the meaneſt rank among the Vulgar, underſtand 
bur little, either Men of grearer Ignorance, John 7 49. and there- 
fore ſaid not to know the way of the Lord. . See Chop. 8. 7. being 


Chap. 9.9. 
; i, e. Puniſh, Pſal. 89. 32. Should I connive at ſuch things, the 
wicked would fay, I did not fee them,or rake notice of them P/ 50, 
21. much to the ſame purpoſe with Yerſe 7. beginn, and Puniſh. 
6 E 3 9721s 


0 V. 7 E R E 


dures, that he firſt ſees and contiders the caſe, before he inflicts Pu- 
niſhment ; as in the caſe of $140m, Gen. 18. 27. ſpoke after the man- 
nerof Man. & For I, it ſpeaks the Greatneſs of God's Diſpiealure, 
Shall not my very Soul be in this work of Vengeance ? Pſal. 11. 5. 

xo \ Go ye | upon her walis, and m deſtroy ; bur 
make not a full » end : takeaway hers battlements; for 


they are not the p LORDS. 

I Ye Babylonians, go now execute my Vengeance on them. I 
give them into your hanis; behold, I give you a Commiſſion. 2 1 
permit and order you not only ro rake the City, bur make havock 
of her Inhabitants, 1/z. 10 6. » Though God give them a large 
Commiſion to deſtroy, yet he purs in a Limitation, that he will 
reſerve a Remnant from Deftru&ion ; he ſers bounds to the moſt 
raging Adverfary, beyond which he muſt not paſs See on Chap. 4. 
27. 0 Lay her and all her Portifications level with the ground , 
take away her Counterſcarp, or high Towers, or wharſoever may 
tend to the Defence ofa Cary ; to let Feruſalem know, that ſhe did 
but in vain truſt to her high Walls and ſtrong Towers ; and Barrle- 
ments may as well be taken for the foundarion of her Walls, which 
ſpread wider than the Wall it ſelf: The Word the Prophet uſeth, 
ſignifies that ſpread: and thus 1t agrees with the Scope, that is de- 
ſcribing the utter Overthrow and eradicating of it : ſo LXX, take 
away her Supports. p T underrake their Defence no longer; Idifown 
them ; take my ProteC&ion from them, and give themup into your 
hands, O ye Chaldeans, though they make their boaſt that they are 
ſheltered under my Wing and ProteQion, becauſe there was the 
Temple and Altar ; but they will find themſelves deceived ; for I 
diſown them. 


Ch3.20, 11 For * the Houſe of Iſrael and the houſe of q Ju- 
dah have dealt very rtreacherouſly againſt me, faith the 


LORD. 
ws Whether 1[rael be put here for the Ten Tribes, and Judah for 
'T 


two, as often they are Chap. 2. 4 and ſundry other places ; or 
ther, whether Juda# here be only explicative,and the Word meant 
of the two Tribes only, read thus, the Houſe of Iſrael, even the Houſe 
of Judah, is not much material. r Have apoſtatized and dealt per- 
'idiouſly beyond meaſure, not only as to the Grofineſs, bur as to 
the Univerſality of it. ; 
| 12 They have / belyedthe LORD, and ſaid, * 7: 5s 
*IC28.15. 4 , # Ge 
3 © not he, neither ſhall evil come upon us ; neither ſhall 


we ſee : {word nor famine. 

JS This may fignifie either a denying, viz. a renouncing making 
' lirtle or norhing of him, as ſome ; or a denying, #. e. not beliving, 
| that theſe Words of the Prophet were God's Words, or God did not 
ſay ſo ; he gavenor the Prophet, nor any other, any ſuch Com- 
miſſion, and poſſibly their Atheiſm might grow to 10 high adegree 
as to deny his Proviience, Power, and Juſtice, Oc. 10 it agrees 
with the following Words, it is nar he, or God did not ſpeak as he 
meant : but he would only fright us, it ſhall nor be thus. & This 
Siege or Famine, or any other ſuch dreadtul Judgments,as Jeremiah 
ſpeaks of, ſhall not befall us. Seeing 1s uſed here tor Feeling, as it is 

in Job 7. 7. ; 
123 And the prophets fhall become « wind, and the 
word 3s not in x them,. thus ſhall it be done y unto 


. them. 
« A proverbial Speech, very frequent, not in common Language 
only, but Scripru:e alſo Jeb. 6. 26. Eccleſ. 5. 16+ and elſe-wherse; z, e. 
all the Propher's Threats thall come to nothing : and thus they icot- 
fed at them, Tuſh, what do they ſignific ? they are but bruta ful- 
mina : ſee 2 Chr. 36. 15, 16. x This poſſibly, they give as the 
Reaſon that they apprehend rhe Propher'sWords to be burasWind, 
bec2ule they are not from God,they ſpeak bur Dreams of their own 
fanſying. » IF thall fall upon their own heads that have thus threat- 
ned us,not upon us; or, we will killthem with the Sword,for thus 
| wvainly threatning us; we will uſe them like Falſe Prophets,as they 
are; and weſhall ſee inthe Sequel of this Prophecy how they uſed 
Jeremiah ; or it may be an Imprecation, q. d. may it fall upon their 
own Heads : thus the Heb. So be it untothem. 
| 14 Wherefore z thus ſaith the Lord G OD of a 
* Ch. 1.9. hoſts, Becauſeye ſpeak this 6 word, * behold, I will 
make my words in thy mouth fire,and this people wood, 
and it ſha] devour c them. 

z Theſe vile Wretches-having now done ſpeaking, God begins 
to ſpeak ; and becauſe they had thus flighted the Prophet, and God 
ſpeaking by him, ( as in'the next Words, Becauſe ye ſpeak this Word ) 
here tells them what he will do ; or rather, turns himſelf abrupt- 
ly to the Prophet, as Menuſually doin a paſſion. s He makes his 
Majeity and Power known, to cloath his Words with the greater 
Terror. b Y;z. At the rate rhey diſcourſed in the former Verſe. 
c 7. e. Tt ſhall rake place ſuddenly, and irreſiſtibly, and fiercely, as 
fire is wont to take in dry Wood to their utter Ruin and Over- 
throw, Pſal.83. 14, 5. Iſa. 9. 18, 19. They ſhall be but Fuel 
to my Wrath which ſhali be executed by the Chaldzmm Army, that 
ſhall conſume, and eat them up like fire;they ſhall find my Words 
to be more than Wind. . 

OT. Lo, I will bring a * nation upon you from dfar, 

ch. 3. 15, © houſe ofe lfrael, faith the LORD : it 5s a mighty f 

and 6. 22, Bation, it is anancient nation, a nation whoſe language 

| ox knowelſt not, neicher underſtandeſt what they g 
ay. | 

d Viz, From Chaliza, e By theſe are meant Judah ; for Iſrael 

properly ſo called, viz. the Ten Tribes, were in Captivity before : 

fee on Chap. 4. 1. called the Houſe of 7Jrael; not only becauſe they 

deſcended fromJarcob, but becauſe they were the chief of that Stock. 

4 fF It is both potent, or, as the Word 15, rough and harſh, and of great 

Antiquity, everſince the Jaying the firſt Foundation of Babylen by 

Nimrod, about 170 Years after the Flood ; and hence it is called the 

Land of Nimred,Mic. 5. 6. And this doth much add ro theirCrue!ty, 

that they have had Dominion and Rule in their hands ſo long,and 

whereby they have not only grown more proud and haughty, but 

having been brought up fo long in ways of Blcod and S'iaughrer, 


m:1t may be termed 7i7ring, 25 implying the Equity of Gad's Proce- | 


1 £B:.- : Chap. V, ; Char 


they muſt needs by this time become skilful to deſtroy. 5 Which 
makes thy caſe much more deiperate. Ir is a great diſadvantage * Pl 
when Pe: fons underſtand not one another ; they will neither un- 104: 
derſtand thy intreaties, nor thou their offers, being both unin- 
telligible, and inexorable, which will render thy condition much | p 
more ſad and perplexed ; ſpeech being that by which the :MeQion 
is readily communicated, and is the bond of humane Scciety ; 
Hence this was patt of the Judgment threarned, Drur. 28. 36 = 
50. the Jews not well underſtanding the Syrian Tongue a. 
the Chald eans ſpake, having had no converſe with them before the 
Captivity. Ir was this puta ſtop to all converſe at the buildino f 
Babel, oo 

116 Their & quiver zs an open 3 ſepulchre, they are all 
mighty & men. | 


h CollcFively expreſſed for Quivers ; a Synccaeche for the whole Mie. 
litary preparations, and a Meronymy of the containing for the contained 
vix. the Arrows, that will be thot our of them, called the ſons of 
the Quiver, Lam. 3. 13. Bow and Arrow being the chief Weapons 
for Warin thoſe Countries, and in thoſe days. i; A Fd, rear 
ſpeech, P/al. 5. 9g. relating to the dreadful havock, and defiruQion 
that will be made devouring the living,asthe Grave doth the dead. 
or making work for the greedy devouring Grave, that never ſaith it 
hath enough, Prov. 5. 12. Or, they ſhall deſtroy many with one 
Quiver, as one Grave will ſwallow many dead, which may note 
_ _ and the A ſhall have,few of their Artows ſhall 

ail of doing execution. k Thele Chaldears are all Ns 
Tong iCall-men of valour fit 

17 And they (hall eat up thine * harveſt, and thy I , | 
bread, hich thy fons and thy daughters ſhould »s car "9p 

they ihall eat upthy flocks, and thine herds, they ball M 


eat up thy vines and thy » figtrees, they ſhall impoye. 
_ thy fenced cities wherein thou cruſteſt, with the # 
word. 


I They ſhall make clean riddance, leavethee no fi i | 
bur bring an utter Famine upon thee, it is thus "2: 96 el an |. 
30, 48, 51. m Or, they ſhall eat up thy Sons and thy Daughters, | 
but this 1s only a Metonymy of the effef 3 but properly this aggravates 
the dreadfulnefs of the Judgment; Parcnts, out of the tenderneſs of 
their affe&ion, chuſing rather to diethcmſelves, than to live to ſe 
their Children ſtarved before their eyes, and they no ways able = 
relieve them, Lam. 2. 10, n. » A part cular enumeration of the De 
ſolation, that would be made, all tending to the greatneſs of the for= 
mer. 04. e. Beſide the waſt that the Famine would make a 
Perſons; their Cities alſo ſhould be depopulared by the ſword of - , 
Enemy ; or rather,poſlibly the Siege ſhould be ſo ſtreight, and firi& _ 
as may be implied in the word impoveriſh,that they ſhould be forced - a. 
to eat one another, tillthey were quite waſted, they ſhould be re 
duced to ſuch poverty and exigencies ; or tlie ſword may relate to 
the mentioned miſchiefs,as the cauſe of them all, the ſwordMall do 
all this. Inall which he doth not ſo much tell them, that the Chal= 
deans thall conquer them, for that is taken as it were for granted,as 
what Cruelties they ſhall uſe when they have conquered. ps 

18 Nevertheleſs in thoſe days, faith the LORD, x 
will not _—_ a full || end with you. n k 
| See this Yerſe explained, Chap. 4. 27. ſave on! h ink, 
here it is taken in the firſt ſenſe there mentioned ; Ke i M = ng 
only, or in that Verſe, I will not make a full end, or a full endo 
you, but a full end with you ; 9. 4. I have not done with you yet 
See Lev. 25. 1g. ad 40. 7 
19 © Andit ſball come to paſs when ye ſhall ſay * p BH 
Wherefore doth the LORD our God all theſe things unto -Ch43.25 
us 2? then ſbalt thou anſwer them, Like as ye have for- nh 
ſaken me, and ſerved q ſtrange gods in your land, ſo 
ſhall ye ſerve ſtrangers in a land, that is not r yours. 

2 This ſpeaks, either their unparallelVd inſolency, in a manner 
challengingGod,as ifthey had nor deſerved ſuch dealing athis hands 
they might have expeRted better uſage from him; the Jews were good 
attheſe kinds of challenging of God, 17/a. 58. 3. Or groſs ſtupidiry,as 
being ſuch Sots asnot to be ſenſible of what they had done to a 
voke him ;-like to that Chap. 16. 10. q Heb. Gods of the ftranger ; he 
doth not ſay firange Gods, but Gods of the ſtranger, which aggravated 
their crime,that while they lived in their own Jand,and the traeGod 
among them, they would precariouſly go fetch in Gods from the 
Heathens. r Here the Prophet 1. oppoſeth #range Lords to rule over 
them, to thoſe ſtrange Gods, that they had ſerved,which God calls 
a forſaking of him, 2.He oppoſes a land net theirs, to their ownland; 
ſo that by this the Prophet ſhews what reſentments God had of their | 
ſin; for itimplys that their ſin was much greater,that they ſerved | 
ſtrange Gods in their own land,than if they had done it in another 
under the Tyrannical impoſition of a ſtranger, and therefore he 
would accordingly ſuit their qr——aggee> that they ſhould ſerve in 
a ſtrange land, which ſhould be worſe, than to be ſervants in their 
own. This is a dreadful but a juſt Retaliation. 

20 Declare this inthe houſe of Jacob, and publiſh ic 
in /Judah, ſaying, 

Jl See of this Chap. 4+ 5. By Judah and Jaceb we are to undere 
ſtand the two Tribes only, as Yer. 11. which ſee. 


21 Hear now this, * O fooliſh people, and without l Or, 
+ t underſtanding; which have eyes and ſee.not;which * If 6.9 { 11«/ewle 
have ears, and « hear not : | —tepE © wag 
5 Heb. Heart, They have no heart to return, or to any thing rs " _ 


of InſtruQtion, or Reformation, bur are ſtupid and- ſottiſh * 

leſs ofall Counſel, Wiſdom, and common ane. xe by ie Ads, & 
is ſaid to be the Symbol, and according to Galen, the ſeat of Wil- 26. ” 
dom : ſo the Poet placeth it, Cor ſapit, &+ pulmo lquitur, fel Row 7 
commovuet iram, &C. u See Chap. 6. lo. They are wilful] blind heart ; 
and obſtinatly deaf, will neither ſee, nor hear the Word, Will os 
Works of God, of which he giveth two inſtances intwo following 

Verſes. Yer. 22. 24. viz. in governing the Sea, and appointing the ſea= 


| 


ſons of the Near, It may be he alludes herein to their Idols,to which 
they were ſo much addiQted. 


22 Fear ye not x me ? faith the LORD; will ye 
not 


Char. V. 


not tremble at my preſence, which have placed the y | 27 Asa |] cage is full of birds, ſoare their houſes full | 
ſind forthe * bound of the ſea, by a z perpecual decree, ; of o deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen * ©": 
and though the waves thereof | p rich. coop. 


* Deut. 
11. 14. 


[ Oc, 

pry as fowler 
lie in wait, 
" Prov.r. 
t7, 18, 


+ K 8 


that it cannor pals it ; 
tols « themſelves, yet can they not b prevail ; 
rey roar, vet can they not pafs over it ? 

x Either a coavincing Argument to perſwade them to ſubmit 
unto him ; will ye not ſubmit to me that can rule the S2a? which 
as unruly a thing as it is, yet quietly yields to my will; or rather, a 
very angry Challenge and Expoſtulation ; do you think, tharl, that 
can tame rhe boiſterous Sea, cannot tame you? »y Thatſtand notin 
need to mak? Rocks for Walls and Bounds unto it, but can givea 
check to it by fo ſmall a matter, as the Sand, that of it ſelf isnor only 
yielding and penetrable, but ſubje& to be blown away with every 
wind. z Either looking backward, that it never could, or forward 
that it never ſhall. Whether this decree have reſpect to the Creation, 
or to the Deluge,it is not mach material; the former of which times 
it could not have been contained within its bounds, neither in the 
latrer could it have exceeded them, without Gods ſpecial order, as 
notime fince. # Though they ſwell, rage, roar, and threaten never 
ſo much,as if they would ſwallow up all before them; though they 
foam againſt the Rocks that ſtand in their way, yet, whea they 
come to their bounds appointed, ſhall tamely yield unto the Sand, 
and retire back. 6 Not getany ground upon or againſt Gods decree 
and appoincment. Either the decree or the ſand, which in regard of 
their form, ſituation, unrulineſs, and fluxibility would overflow the 
whole earth, were it not for the limits, and reſtraints that are laid 
upon it, Job 38. 11. By this inſtance, God may ſhew what he could 
do with reference to that enraged, and raging Army, that is about 
to come upon them like a torrent, if his people would repent. Or 
rather he hereby upbraids the Jews with their unreaſonable ſottithneſs, 
that they are more mad in their Rebellions againſt God, than the 
_ g waters of the Sea, that as boiſterous as they are, yet obey his 

ill, 

22 But this people hath a revolting anda c rebellious 
heart ; they are revolted, and 4 gone. 

c They are not only revolted from me, and gone back, but they 
continue obſtinate, and will not return, P/al. 78. 8. as the next 
clauſe intimates, where God ſhews their obſtinacy by the efe# of 
it. 4 Yiz. From me, they perſiſt in their courſes, no reclaiming 
of them, for they are not only revolted, but they are gone quite 
away, andare irreclaimable. 

. 24 Neither ſay they in their e heart, Let us now f 
fearthe LORD our God, that giveth g rain, both the 
* former and the h latter in hisſeaſon: hereſerveth unto 


us the appointed weeks of the ; harveſt. 

e They are ſo careleſs, that they never trouble themſelves about it ; 
or ſo obdurate, and ſtiff, that they never lay it to heart, or conſider 
that it is God that diſpoſeth of all things according to his own 
pleaſure, both in the Earch and in the great deep. f Or ſerve and 
obey, all ſervice to God being both performed in ir, and proceeding 
from it. g Without which nothing could ſubſiſt. by this the tcue 
God is diſtinguiſhed from all falſe Idol gods, Chap. 14. 22. and in 
this appears not only his power in decreeing, Job 28. 26, and pre- 
Paring it, Pſal. 147- 8. his Soveraignty in withholding it» Amos 4. 7. 
but his general goodneſs in beſtowing it, Deut. 28.12. Mat, 5. 45. 
and his ſpecial providence in the ſeaſonable diſpoſal of it, according 
as there 1s need, and which he gives as a witneſs of it. A&s 14. 17. 
As in the former inſtance God ſets forth his Peoples inſenſibleneſs 
of the works of his greatneſs, and powerin ſo eaſily taming ſuch 
an unruly Element ; ſo here he doth alſo further maniteſt the ſame 
by inſtances ofhis providence and goodneſs, implying, that ſo ſtupid, 
reſolute and obſtinate they are grown, that they are neither afraid 
of him for his greatneſs, which poflibly may be underſtood by the 
former fear, norfear him for his goodneſs, which poſſibly may be 
the ſenſe of the word in this latrer place. + He means not the 
former and latter part of the year, but according to their ſeaſons of 
Sowing and Reaping ; the former to prepare the ground for Sowing, 
and the latrer to prepare the Corn for plumping, and ripening. See 
Ch.3.3.i He gives i{caſnable Harveſts according to his appointment, 
the ſum is, God would let them know by this, what an impudent 
and fooliſh, as well as wicked thing it is for them to ſet themſclves 
againſt that God, that keeps the whole order of Nature at his own 
diſpoſal, which h2 can govern and order as he fees Men behave 
themſelves towards him. 


25 Youriniquities have turned away theſe rhings k,and 


your ſins have wichholden good 7hings from you ... . 

k 9.4. Do not ſay your ground is parched up with drought, or 
your fruits are corrupted and rotted by too much, or unſcaſonable 
Rain ; we have nothing now in ſo due a courſe, as we were wont to 
haveit, would you know the reaſon ofit? You have inverted the 
Ordinances and order of Nature, have put Heaven and Earth out of 
theirregular courſes by your iniquities. .*. That either you have 
been cut ſhort of theſe good things, or denied a bleflingupon them ; 
by this God wou!d not have prophane Men think, that unuſual 
{ſeaſons either for b:tter, or worie, do come by chance, but as he 
ſces convenient cither for the encouragement of the obedient or 
puniſhing the obſtinate. 

26 For among my / people are found wicked mer : 


they [|* lay » wait as he thar ſetreth ſnares ; they fer a 


trap, they catch » men. : 

I TI nced notſearch for ſuch among the Heathen Nations, for they 
are found even among them, that are called by my Name, whereas 
all my people ought ro have been holy. m Or contemplate miſ- 
chievous deſigns, under deceits,as Fowlers do hide themtclves, when 
they watch rhe Birds coming to the ſnare orner, Prov. 1. 11, Mic. 7. 2, 
& therefore rhe next expreſſion, he that ſet :eth Snares is but a peripkraſis 
for a Fowler, the Heb, word being always ſo taken : Pſal. g1. 3. Prov. 
6. 5. andel{ewhere, or they pry, /. e. they narrowly look, wherethey 
may get anadvantage, hence En-mies are called pryers,or obiervers, 
as you may frequeatly find in the Pſa/s3 Pſal. 5, 8. & 27,L1,56,2. 
and 59. 40. and 92. £1. » Intimaring the tuccet> of their wicked 
Policies in' bringing their wicked decrees to paſs, Pal. 37. 7. as 
falle Witnziles and Trapanners uſ2 todo, when tney go about to 
entnare Men that are innocent ; fucha Trap did Jezazel jay tor Navors, 
: Kings 21, 9, 10. - Such in one was that Con!piracy of more than 
40 Men aga:nft Paul, Atl; 23. 13, 14, 15- 


chough 


M14AR Chap. 


P 
0 i.e. They fill up their Houſes with the Goods and Wealth of 


thoſe that they deceive, and overreach ; i1! gotten Goods a M:t9* 
7ymy of the efficient ; as the Fowler carrics his Cage along with him, 
wherein he puts the Birds which he carcheth, to keep ſafe thar 
they ger not away, whien once they are caught, as alſo by tl;cir 
appearance, and tinging to entice others. p Shewing how and in 
what manner they got their riches, therefore, or by this means ; ſuch | 
as are gorren by a lying Tongue, Pr:v. 21. 6. called the rreaſures 
of Wickeaneſs, Mich. 6. 10. | . AM 
| 28 They are waxen * fat, they q ſhine : yea, they , EE | 
overpaſs the deeds of the r wicked : they judge not the 4%; — +81VOAF 
ſ cauſe of the fatherleſs, * yer they # proſper ; and the *ſob «2.0|MM 
righe of the needy do they not judge. _ © Pial. 73. IMO 
q Or, ſo far that they ſhine ; by reaſon of their wealth and riches 12 - 0 
they pamper themſelves till their ezes fand our with farnsſs, Þ[z). Chap 12.1 
73- 7. their wrinkles are filled up with fat, which makes their faces 4 
ſhine, YEither, they go beyond the very Heathens themſelves in 
wickedneſs, Ezek. 5.6, 7, or rather, they eſcape the hardſhips and 
ſufferings that others undergo, Pſal 73.5, 6 7, 8. they '[cape better 
than others ; or they ſlightly paſs aver judgments rhreatned. {Such 
whom even the Law of Narure commits to their parronage, they 
either diſregard them, or wrong art! injure them, either by refuſing 
them a fair hearing, Ja. 8. 23. or giving wrong ſentence again{t 
them in Courts of Judicature, Zech 7. 10. expreſly forbidden, Exod, 
22.22, *t Thingsgo well with them, they live happily according 
to theirdelire, proſperum ſcelus, Job 21.7, &c. Or, that they m 'g5F 
proſper, viz. that God might bleſs them. re | 
29 Shall I not vitit for theſe s things ? ſaith the 
Ge : ſhall not my ſoul be avenged on ſuch a nation 
as this ? 


# Itisexpreflſed as a thing taken for granted, he certainly will. 
Can I be a God, and wink at ſuch things ? Ic cannot be, See this 
explained, Perſe 9g. 

39 [|| A wonderful and x horrible thing is commirted 
in the y land. So  aftoniſhmens | 

x So prodigious, or ſtupendious a Crime, that it is beyond the and fl:his | 
thought or apprehenſion of Man.to conceive, much moreto expreſs, neſs. 
and fo abominable, that a Man would even loath the thoughts of. 

What this is, we have in the next Yerſe. y Heb. Thrs land aggravating 
the greatneſs of the wonder, that ſuch a thing ſhould be in ſuch 8 
land - See 1/2. 26, $0. | 

31 The prophets propheſie z * falſly, and the prieſts * Chap. 
[| bearrule by their means; and my people love to have 14: '4 
ir b10: add what will ye do in the end ec thereof ? Each 

z Either ſpreading and diſperſing abroad the Lyes of their Idols, ” nas os Il 

particularly Baal, chap. 2,8. or venting their Lyes inthe Name of the 4 Or, rake 
true God, chap. 4.10. a By this means it comes to paſs, tha the ;,;q heir 
Princes and Prieſts are encouraged to do all their miſchiefs, whether hands 
it were in corrupting Judgment by Bribes, or countenancing fraud - 
and oppreſſion, and hardening themſelves againſt Gods Threarnings, 
or whatever elſe, they were encouraged by the Lyes of the falſe 
Prophets, they and the Prieſts and Princes combining, and ſetting 
themſelves againſt the true Prophets of God, Chap. 26.8. and thus 
the Prieſts in effe& take the management of all the affairs into their 
own hands; ſo the Heb. rake into their hands, which intimatcs the. 
Authority they uſedin their Miniſtry. 6 They are very well pleaſed 
with the Flatteries and Lyes of the falſe Prophets, nor being able 
to bear the Truths that were delivered them from God, Mic. 2. 11» 
£9. 4, Whither do you think theſe things will tend? You muſt look 
for nothing bur utter ruine as the fruit and eff:& of ſuch doings, 
Mic. 3+1t, 12. when this City, which you look upon to be perpe- 
tuated, ſhall be overthrown, and you utterly periſh in its ruine, 
how miſerably will you find your ſelves to be deluded by your falſe 
Prophets, and diſappointed in your hopes ? A ſad 4pofopaſis concere 
ning the extermunarting of the People by the Chaldeans. 


} Or, . __ [| 


> | 
+. : 


* 
”- 


SH ADP. vi 


God ſendeth and ftrengthneth the Babylonians again Judah, ! 
her Oppreſſion and Spoils, 6 8. and Obſtinacy; which provokes 
God's Wrath and th:ir Deſtrufion, 9g 12: Their Covetouſneſs, falſe 
Confidence, and Impudence ; People and Prieſts refuſe to obey God, 134 —17, 
Their Hypocritical Warſhip ſhall not prevent their [ure Deſtrufion, 18 === 25 
The People called to mourn. 26. The Prophet encouraged under . their 


Wickeaneſs, and the Fruitleſneſs of his Miniſtry among them, 27 30. 
Ye children of a Benjamin, 6 gather your ſelves 


5. ft 


| 

| () to flee out of the midſt of Jeruſalem, and blow 

the trumpet in c Tekoa : and ſer up a fign of 2 fire in 
Bech-haccerem : for evil appeareth out of the e North, 


' and great deſtruction. CE 1 i ER 
; 8 He means, either the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, becauſe part of it 
; ſtood in the lot. of Benjamin, Joſh. 18, 28. or elſe; he means all Judah, 
| becauſe, when the Ten Tribes fell off, . the. Tribe of Benjamin adne=- 
' red to Judah, and was incorporated into them ; If it be. asked why . 
, the Propher rather ſpeaks here to Benjamnm than to Judah, the 
; reaſon probably may be, becauſe he being of Anathoth was of that 
| Tribe, and therefore mentions them as his. own.. Countrey-men. ; 
b Spoken, eather ironically that they ſhould ſet themſelves in. Array, 
and make head againſt rhe Enemy, that is now at hand ; or rather, 
that they ſhould flee away together ar once, make haſte... our of 
Feruſalem in Troops, as the next expreflions intimare, not counſelling 
them what they thould do, w:z. for ſuccour, . Chap'. 4. 5, 6. but 
rather telling them whar they muſt expeR, v:z. robe forged to flee 
out of it, if rhey may eſcape. c 4. 4. Gather your ſelves together 
by the ſound of the Trumpet ac Tekos, poſſibly alluding ro the 
Name, which ſignifies Trumperrng ; or rather, it being one of thoſe 
fenced Cities 12 Miles trom Feruſalem, that Rehoboam buiir, 
and made exceeding itrong _ and with bis warlige Proviſions, 
I 2 ©;ror 


hap. VI. 


2 Chron, tr. 6,7, 12, ant bcing built upon th: advantage ofa Hill | 


«oe 


wards North of Fudea in the way that the Bvylontans were tO 
_— xS nn faraiſh your ſelves out of that Armory, and fee 
if you can make head againſt them. An Trory 3 a place noted in 
Scriprure, where dwelt that Tekozriſh Woman, that interceded with 
Dav'd for Alalom by the ſubornation of Joab, 2 Sam. 14. 2. and alſo 
for the Herdſmen, of whom Amos was, Amos 1.1. and (it 1s probable ) 
a place where in time of danger they were wont, by the ſound of 
the Trumpet, to ſummon the People rogether. d The word uſed 
is of very Jarge extent ; Maſe: is uſed for any thing that 1s lifted up, 
neither is there any more in the Text. The LXX alſo render it 
only a ſign, and the ſign of fire poſſibly is mentioned, rather than 
any other, by a M:towomy of the Subjef, becauſe, partly in time of 
danger of Invaſion, it is the moſt uſua], and commodious ſign, being 
ſeen in regard of its lifring or raiſing up ofir ſelfar once afar 
off. g. d firea Beacon, and a ſign, whereby the Benjamitesthemſelves 
once found they were ſurprized, Juag. 20. 38,40. 2. It is a ſign 
ſooneſt given of any, 3+ Pofſiblys as being a more prayer ſign, than 
any other would be tothe Vine-dreſſers, that they ſhould ſecure 
themſelves in ſome ſafe place, which ſeems to be pointed at by the 
next word Beth-haccerem. It ſignifies the Houſe of the Vineyard, 
probably ſome high Tower built among the Vineyards for the 
eeper, or Keepers of them to watch them, that no damage came 
to them, this ſeeming to be uſual, 7. 5.2. Or, it may be the Name 
of a Town, ſucha one, as ſome report tolie between feraſalemand 
Tekoa, the ſame mentioned, Neb 3-14. though that ſeems to be 
adjoyning to Jeruſalem ; whichſoever it be, it 15 probable, it relates 
to ſome place noted for Vineyards, which were wont to be planted 
upon Hills, and lying in the way that the Chaldeens were to come, 
and by theſe two we are to underſtand all other places that lie in 
that Coaſt. e That they may know whence their Miſery will come, 
he doth as it were point ar out with the finger : See Chaps 1. t4: 

and 4. 6. 
Rag | bave likened the dzughter of Zion,to a|| comely 


and delicate f woman. | 
f This Snpplemenr is nor in the Text, they that approve it render 


the Epithere comely variouſly, for one dwelling at home as the Hebrew 
Navs doth alſo fignifie, Hab. 2. 5- and ſo the word aelicate ſerves to 
explain it, as ſhewing the reaſon of her tarrying at home, not as a 
good Houſwife,diſcreetly guiding and governing her affairs at home, 
asſhe is d:ſcribed, Prov. 31. 16, &c. and 7. 2. 5. butthrough her 
delicacy expoſing her ſelf to all wantonneſs, and voluptuouſneſs, 
tarrying at home to-give entertainment to her Paramours, or ſhe 
through her ſtare and pride, is ſo delicateand nice that ſhe willner 
ſet her foot out of door, Deut: 28. 56. poſſibly occaſioned by the 
great Wealth and Riches that God had blefſed Jeruſalem with - this 
may alſo point at Jedahs effeminacy that will be ſo diſpirited as not 
to have courage to oppoſe the adverſary, but eaſily taken in her 
Dwelling and Habitation- Others, as a beautiful Shepherdeſs ; ſome 
there are,that rather chuſe to ſupply the defe& by the word Land or 
Paſture, as being that, which is greatly deſirable by Shepherds, as if 
ſh2 were ſome comely Shepherdeis ſolacing her ſelf in her delightful 
Paſtures - See Ezek.34.14. andſoit may not be without ſome alluſion 
othe next Verſe, where her Enemies are called by the Names of 
* Lepherds, as being enticed by the pleaſantnelſs of her Land. 


The ſhepherds with their g flocks ſhall come unto 


her ; they ſhall picch heir tents againſt her round about 
©. : they thall feed every one in his þ place. 

g The Prophet here proceeds in his wp and poſſtbly the 
rather, becauſe he chuſerh co ſpezk inthe ſtile of his own education, 
which may alſo give ſome countenance to theSupplement ofPaſture, 
or Land in the former Verſe inſtead of Woman, the meaning is, the 
Chaldean Princes, with their Armies, as fo many Flocks, ſhall come 
into this pleaſant Land : See C#ap. 12. 10. in which expreſſion there 
is ſomething of aScoff, as Chop. 4. 16,17. .. They ſhall fo place 
their warlike Tents, as to fcrm a Siege to begirt her round. Chap 
1. 15. Ezck. 4.2. h Heb. hand, i.e. near hand, or beſide, or near ong 
another ; thus 2 Chron. 21.16. and Job. 1. 14. thus hand is taken for 
place, 3. e. each one in his quarter or ſtation, not a Man, but ſhall 
do his part, and ſhall be Skilful, and powerful to deſtroy wherever 
he comes ; It intimares alſo thar every thing ſhall be ſo much ac the 
Enemies own diſpoſal, that they ſhall be able to chuſe their own 
quarters, they ſhall place their Army in Wings and Troops, and 
Regiments, as they 1ce good, to their beſt advantage, to be helpful 
one unto another; as jb-pheras are wont to do their blocks; or, they 
ſhall fight inſeveral Parties, and each deſtroy his part afligned him 
through the whole Countrey, and they ſhall joyn as it were in one 
body againſt Jeruſalem. ; 

4 Prepare ye i war againſt her; ariſe,and let us go up 
atk noon. Wo unto us, for the / day goeth away, for 
the ſhadows of the evening are m2 ſtretched our. 

i The Prophet now paſſerh From his Meraphor to tell them plainly 
what he means by the Shepherds, viz. Warricurs ; ſome make theie 
the words of the Chaldeans making preparation for their Invaſion,and 
it may be by ſome oftheir accuſtomed Rites, that they uſed before 
War; but they ſeem more probably ro be the Words of God invit- 
ing them, and calling them unto this Work, therefore in the Heb. 
it 15 ſan7ifie Waragainſt her, Chap. 22+ 7. he ſpeaks unto ſuch, as he 
had ſanCtified, or ſer apart for this work, his ſan#ifiedones, 1/a, 13:3, 
& This ſhews how ready they will be to obzy Gods Call ; the like 
we read, £2 21. 5. and therefore they are ſaid to go or march up at 
nn, notonly to note their daringn*fs, as needing no ſtratagems, 
or ſtrength, or needing to ſtay for help, bur rather to ſhew their 
forwardnefs ro March on without ſtop or ſtay, they would not burn 
day light, bur be ſpeedy intheir work, andrthey would take the firſt 
opportunity, whether Morning or Noon, Day or Night, as the next 

erſe The next Words ſeem to ſtrengthen this ſenſe ; Wo unto us, 
the | day goeth away, &c. q. 4. We delay, and tarry too long, andthe 
day ſpends apace, we loſe time, lerus make haſte about our work, 
exprefling their Greedineſs after their Prey, as Soldiers uſe to do : 
or this 1 uato us may be ſome Form of Imprecarion, either againſt 
God or Mev, which kind of Speeches areulual with Soldiers when 
they are chaſed, and going upon ſome ſudden Onſer or Exploit ; 
though not afew make it the Com plaint ofthe Prophetin the Name 
of the People, foreſecing howtheir Night of Affliction haitned on, 
their joyful Days being as it Were gone, Amy 8, 9, 10, But the 


FEREM I 4 H. 


ny 


— 


; 


former ſeemsb:ſt ro agree with the Scope. m They were ſo eagerly 
ſet upoa it, that they watched the very lengrthning of the Shadow, 
which ſhews the Approach of the Evening, Bjal. 1cg. 23. Se 
Hab. 1.8. 


5 Ariſe, and let us go by » night, and let usdeſtroy 


her o palaces. 

n Or, this Night, They were ſetuponit, they would loſe neither 
Day nor Night ; which ſhews that they were extraordinarly ſtirred 
up by God in this Expedition. o This was the Bait or Motive that 
they propounded to themſelves ; wiz. to have the Spoil of all 
the ſtately Palaces, and rich Houſes of the Nobles, and great 
ones. 


6 For thus hath the LORD of hoſts ſaid p, Hew ye 


This 3s the City to be / viſited ; ſhe is wholly r opprefiion 


in the midft of her. 

Þ Yiz. To the Chaldeans : Here God declares whence they have 
their Commiſſion, q. 4. they come not up on their own heads, ſee 
Chap. 5. 14, 15. God would have the Jews to know, that they have 
notio much todo with the Chaldeans as with him ; thar they are his 
Rod to ſcourge them for their Sins, Chap. 1, 15, 16. See 2 Kings 
18. 25, And thus God is ſaid to hiſs for ſuch whom he will em« 
ploy in ſuch Work, ſa. 5. 26. and 7: 18. And he tiles himſelf the 
Lord of Hofts, to ſhew that it is in vain to conterd in Battel with 
them, whom he ſends forth, and will be, as it were, the Captain of 
their Hoſts. 4q Heb. 4 Tree colleQtively taken, q, d, cur them down 
all, as one Tree, not ſparing their very Fruit-Trees, which indeed 
were to be ſpared in ſuch a caſe, Dent: 20.19. Either ſuch as lie in 
the way of your March, or all round about Feruſalem ; or, ſnch as 
you may haveneed of there or elſewhere for your Uſe,cither to raiſe 
-up Works againſt the ſtrong places, Deut. 50. 20. or to make other 
Inſtruments of War. r Throw up one continued Trench, as a 
Mount round about it : ſee on 1/a. 37. 33. Heb. Pour out the Engine, 
of that ſee 2 Sam. 20, 15. { God is ſaid ro viſit ſometimes in Mercy, 
Gen. 50. 14 Zeph. 2.7. and ſometimes in Judgment, as here and 
Chap. 5.9. ind 23. 2. They are ripe forit, Ezek. 7. 10, rr, 12.ſec 
1 Theſ. 2. 16.and it is decreed againit them, and ready to come upon 
them, Chap. 23. 12. Hof. g. 7. All Artzmprs have failed, and now 
there is no remedy» # In the Abfra# ſhe doth nothing but oppreſs : 
there are found in her all kinds of Oppreflion and Injuſtice ; 2 
Synecdoche for all other Cruelties, 2 Kings 24. 3, 4. Exek. 7. 23. even 
in that City, which was once full of Julgment, and Righteouſneſs 
lodged init, a. r. 21. ſwallowed up with Opprefſion. 


7 As a fountain cafteth out her waters, fo ſhe caſteth 
her ; before me continually zs grief and y wounds. 


in the former: a Metaphor, to expreſs how natural all manner of 
Wickedneſs is to her, tow full ſhe is of it, and how unceſlant in it, 
noting her Impudence, a Fountain being not able to retain its 
Water : and the Expreſſion of Cafting it out, ſeems to imply her 
Violence in her Fithineſs, as it is ſaid of the Sea, that it caſteth out 
Mire and Dirt, 1ſa. 57. 20. and favoured by the next Clauſe. x 9. & 
\ This is all ſhe buſieth her ſelfabour, chap: 20. 8. Tris the general 
Complaint of her Inhabitants. y Yiz., That the Poor ſuſtain : where= 
ever I go orlook, I can hear and fee nothing but the ſad Complaints 
and Grievances of the Poor, lamenting over Oppreflion and Cruelties 
that are uſcd againſt them, 77. 69.26. this being ſo expreſly againſt 
Gods Command, Exod. 22. 22, 23, 24, &Cc. 1/a, 3. rg, 15. Jam. 5. 4, 
for this refers rather to their Sin, than to their Sufferings from the 
Enemy, as ſome would carry it. 


8 Be thou & inſtructed, O Jeruſalem, leſt my ſoul 


notbh inhabited. 

z Heb. Corre#ed, q. d. By the CorreQion thou haſt felt, and what 
is threatned, be periwaded to Repenrance before it be too late 
Prov. 29. 15+ God doth here in the midff of Judgment remember Mercy, 
as it were ſuddenly purting a ſtop to his fury, ſeeking, if by any 
means it may yet be prevented by their Repentance, 9.4. I would 
yet willingly ſpare them, if it might be, a Heb. be disjointed, a 
moſt emphatica] Meraphor whereby God would expreſs how great 
Grief it is to him to withdraw himſelf from them, could it poſlibly 
be avoided ; (his great AﬀeQtion to them being here expreſſed by 
Soul which is the Seat of it, Pſal. 42. 1, 2+ ) even like the ſeparating 
one Limb from another : hereby is intimated the near Communion 
that GOD hath with the Faithtul, and how ready ke is to return, 
if they will rerurn. + Leſt he make them nor a People. 


9 CU Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, They ſhall 
throughly c glean the remnant of Ifracl as a vine : turn 
d back thine hand as a grape-gatherer into the e 


baskets. | 
c Though Gleaning be a Term proper for all kind of Harveſt, 
yet the Word uſed here is appropriated to theVintage,and implies 
the through Riddance that the Chaldeans ſhall make, contrary to the 
Law for gathering the Vintage, though it may ſeem to allude to it, 
Lev. 19. 10, Judah ſhall be- gleaned over and over, till there be a full 
End,:none left ; as the 1ſraelites gleaned the Benjamiter, Judg. 20. 45. 
for thus they picked them np atſeveral.times both before, 2 Kings 24, 2. 
and alſoat the time of ZedekiasReign, 2 Kings 25. 6, 7, r1, 18, 19. 
and this ſeems to be intimated in the nzxt words. See Heb. 1. g. 
d As muchas to ſay, they ſhould nor be content with one ſpoiling, 
but they ſhould go back a ſecond and a third tims, again and again, 
to carry away both Perſonsand Spoil, leaving nothing behind chem 
worth carrying away, chad. 52. 28, 29, 30. the firſt carrying away 
being as the Vintage, the ſecond the Gleaning, carrying away firſt 
the principal, and afterwards the more infcriour forc. es As the 
Grape-gatierers do, filling one Basket after another, Whether 
theſe be the Words of the Babylonians, calling upon and ſtirring up 
one another to do it, as fome ; or th; Words of Gigd ta the Babylon 


WAN? 


Chap. VI. 


down 9q trees, and || caſt a r mount againſt Jeruſalem. || Or 


Shot. 


out her « wickedneſs :'* violence and ſpoil is x heard in * pgy, 


& In this Verſe God aggravates their Sin of Oppreſſion, mention'd [** 


depart a from thee: leſt FI make thee deſolate, a lang f Heb: - 
F be unloſed, 


or aicjointel 


rn be > < 


a4 DÞDS — _. 


Chap. VI. 


» Chap« 
1. 26. 


th a tre IS 
<— wm... L 
- 


; *Chap. 
' 1.18 


23o 21+ 


nians, as moſt ; it comes much to the ſame thing : for what they 
did was by God's Commyſlion- 


10 To whom ſhall I ſpeak and give f warning, that 
they may hear? Behold, their * ear is g uncircumct 


ſed; and they & cannot hearken : behold, the word of 


the LORD is unto them a 5 reproach ; they have no 
delight in 1t. SE a OE” 

f Heb. Make Proteſtation; noting with what Earneſtaeſs the Pro- 
phet would beſpeak them in his warning of them : See Chap. 11. 7. 
The Prophet raking notice of their Obſtinacy, ſpeaks as one aſto- 
niſhedy and highly makes complaint, being greatly grieved, that 
he can find none that will take warning ; the like Chap. 7. 23» 24: 
he labours te perſwade, bur all is in vain; they turn a deaf Ear to 
him, as the next Expreſſion intimates. g A figurative kind of 
Speech frequent with the Prophets ; an uncircumciſed Ear ſignifying 
the reje&ing of InſtruQtion ; an uncircumciſed Heart, an obſtinate and 
rebellious Will : Hence Circumciſion was for a Teſtimony of Obe- 
dience ; and therefore the Prophet doth tacitly infinuate their Falſe- 
neſs to GOD, to whom they had promiſed to be obedient, 2 Kngs 
x1. 17. and 23. 3. And the Scripturecalls thoſe that are void of the 
fear of God, and carried out to all manner of Luſts, uncircumciſed, 
Exek. 44. 7, 9. for Uncircumciſion was abominable among the Jews: 
ſo thar it notes both their Sin and their Shame, their Ear being ſtop- 
ped, unfit for hearing, as if it were with a Foreskia or Film over 
it, A#s 7.51, þ The Propher doth not here leſſen their Crimes by 
their Inability and want of Power, bur rather aggravates it, inaf- 
much as they had brought themſelves under that Incapacity by 
therr Obſtinacy and Wilfulneſs: as a drunken Man that hath de- 
prived himſeit of his Reaſon by Exceſs, renders the Waot of his 
Underſtanding the more ine xcuſable. z Either they reproach it in 
the Meſſengers Mouth, Luke 11. 45. or rather they laugh at it, and 
ſcorn ir, they cannor bear Counſel, they look' upon reproving them 
to be reproaching them ; they rake no Delight in hearing ſuch 
things; A farther Reaſon of their Impotency and Obſtinacy, all 
their Admonitions and Inſtru&ions, ſeemed inſipjd, and therefore 
were they ſo ſtupid, according to the next Words, Prov. 15. 12. 
See Chap. 5. 31. 2 Tim. 4. 3» 

11 Cherefore & I am full of the fury of the LORD; 


1 am weary with # holding in ; 1 will » pour it upon 


the children o abroad, and upon the p aſſembly of 
young men togecher : for even the husband with the 


9g wifc ſhall be taken, the aged with him that is r full of 
days. 

Z Heb. And: which ſeems to be a better Connexion ; for that 
which putteth him upon this Work,ſeems rather to be that Spirit of 
Prophecy that is in him, than any Conſideration drawn from them. 
I Tam, as it were, filled with the Fire of GOD'S Wrath, and Cur- 
ſes againſt this People, which I am forced to diſcharge my {elf of ; 
a Metonymy of the Subje#. See Exek. 3. 3. Chap. 4. 19. He doth 
not only complain of their Stupidity, as in the former Verſe, but 
irs up his Indignation againſt them. » But he can contain him- 
ſelf no longer, which implies his great Unwilliagneſs to denounce 
theſe Curſes, q. d. the Wrath of GOD, by the Impulſe of his Spi- 
rit, acting ſo violently with mine, that it will break out : 1ee 
the like, Job 32+ 18, 19 Whereby it appears, the Propher is not 


carried on by !:is own private Spirit,but by the Spirit of GOD : he 


hath no Delight in 1:. bur is forced to be the Meſſenger himſelf of 
his Wrath; therefore if he be ſharp againſt them,they muſt not im- 


Pute it toh:m, but to the Spirir of God, that conſtrazas him thus to 
ſpeak. n Y:iz. In propheſyingy noring the great plenty of it; a 


Mctapher from violent Rains, that we ſay do pour down upon the 
Ea:th, Chap. 7. 20. Rev. 16. 1. o The Streets being the places 


- where uſually litt'e Children are wont to ſport themſelves, Zech. 8. 


5. The ſame Word uſed, Pſal. 8. 2. p Their ſecrer Meetings, 
whether in Harlots Houſes, Chap. 5.7. or for Mirth and Joſliry, 
or ro joyn either their Strength or Counſel together, which Chil- 
dren are not capable of ; for the Hebrews do not only call them 


"Youths, that are paſt their Childhood, poſſibly at Fifreen or Six- 
'feen Years of Age, bur M:n of Twenty or Thirty, grown to their 


full Strength and Maturity. in the flower of their Years ; 


| 


et it ſhal'advantage them nothing. q Heb. Man with Woman ; the 


ife ſhal be taken as. well as the Husband, one Sex as well as 
the other, ſhal-be a Prey to the Enemy. r Not only Men that 
may be termed old, as they may be from 5o to 80, which are 


- then ſaid ro be waxing old, but ſuch as had vpon the Pont filled 
- up the Number of their Days, at the edge of their Grave, Iſaiah 
- G5, 20. Called very aged, as Barzillai, 2 Sam. 19+ 32, 34, 35. 
The Sence is, that. all ſorts, from the Children to the decrepid : 


Old-man, had ſo corrupted their ways, ſee Yerſe 13. that their 


- Condition was deſperate, and GOD would bring an Enemy 


upon them, ſhould ſpare or pity none, of what Scx or Age ſo- , char, though the Prophers had direQted them in the right way, and 


"12 And their houſes ſhall be turned unto / others, 


ith their fields and & wives together: for I will « ſtretch , Favours offered, Ifa.8. 11, 1213. Chap. 18. 11, 12. 


out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, faith the 


. LORD. | 
f i.e. Their Houſes and their Lands ſhal be devolved, or turned : 
- over to Strangers, Chap. 8. 10, even that Land which they thought | 

had been entailed upon them, and they ſo firmly fixed in for ever, ' 
 Pſal. 133+ 13, 14. t Their moſt defirable things, howbeir it need 


not be reſtcained preciſely to Wives, the Heb ſignifying Women large« 
ly, Chap. 7. 18. compriſing Maidr, Wives, or Concubines, and this ac- 


| cording to the Threatning, Deut. 28. 30. and Chop. 8. 10. u Viz. 


to ſmire, to give you a forer Blow, Iſaiah 5. 25+ a Synecdoche of the 
kind, ſpoken after the manner of Men. Here the Prophet gives 


them the Reafon of this their unexpeQed Calamiryy that they might ; 19,21. þ More of their Obſltinacy ſuitabic to their Carriage, Yeſe 


not think it -an Impcſlibility ; namelys becauſe God was become 
their Enemy. ; 

x3 For froth the « leaſt of them even unto the great- 
eft of taem, every one 3s given to y covetouſneſs *, and 
from che prophet even, unto the prieſt, every one dea]- 
eth z falſly.- 


« x-Not reſpefting ſo much their Age, as Degree and Quality, | 


; to ſtand by you, and be a Sanftuary to you, Deur. 33. 12, 29. See 
\ Matth. 11. 29. Yow will find things mend with you; it will be well 
; with you, as it hath been with others; you will be ſatisfied and 
quiet; you will not doubt any longer which way to follow : See x 
Kings 18. 21. m It notes their great Wilfulneſs and Obſtinacy ; 


0 Either the Voice of bis Prophets, which is compared to a Trums 


- minent Danger: for Men do not uſe ro ſound the Trumper till 


{to the ſound of the » erumpet. But they faid, We will 


WAN 
as the reaſon of God's Severity againſt them, as Y:rſe 6. obſerving 
alſo, thatic was even among the greateſt, who ought to have given 
better Examples, no ſoundneſs from Head ro Foot; y In which 
poſſibly, all their Wickednels, as Cruelty, Oppreflion; Injuſtice, 
&c. may becomprized, it being-the Roor of aY-Evil; 1 Tim. 6. 10. 
and -may allo ſpeak the Juſtice of God, in the Chaldeans taking them 
and all their Subſtance away, that had by Violence and Fraud wreſt= 
ed it from others, Mic 2.2, 2 Heb. Doing Falſehiod, a$ if that were 
their whole Work, the proper and peculiar Sin pf the Prieſts and 
Prophets, to deceive the People, and to flatter them by falſe Viſi- 
ons, as in the next Yerſe; not that they were :net alſd guilty of the 
other Sins, 1/4. 56. 11. and the Princes and People of this, Mc. 3. 9. 
Chap. 5. 31. for they were all involved in the-Game Wickedneſs ; 


but the Prophet mentions thoſe Sins that were moſt peculiar to each 
Party. See the ſame, Chap. 8. 10. 


14 They have healed alfo the huict of :he daughter of 
my people 4 lightly, ſaying, 6 Peace, peace, when 
there is no peace. | | 

# This refers peculiarly to the Prophets ; either {lighting or ma- 
king light of theſe Threatnings rending to the Reproach, 1. Either 
of rhe Prophets of God bringing their Meſſage into Contempt; or 
2+ The People deceiving of them, and rendring their hopes vain, 
Chap. $. 1. Or, here the Propher ſhews wherein their Falſe-deal- 
ing conſiſts, viz, in dawbing over their Miſery and Danger that was 
coming on them, by perſwading them, thar ir ſhould nor come, or 
if it did, it would be eaſily cured, as ſome Phyſicians do with their 
Parienrs, that make light of a Wound, and ſo negle& the true Me- 
thod bf Cure ; bur either by Lenitives give ſome Eaſe for the pres 
ſept, by a ſuperficial skinning over a Sore while the Corruption is 
init; or StupefaQtives, making them Senſeleſs, nor feeling their 
Pain, Chap. 23. 14+ Ez-k. 13. 1o, 16, 22. and ſo the Prophet makes 
this the Cauſe of their Jaſt Deſtrution. b The Chaldeans ſhall not 
come, all things ſhal be proſperous with you, all kind of Proſperi- 
ty being included in the Word Peace : They promiſe you Peace,but 
you ſhal come ſhort of ity as in the nexc Words. 


rs Were c they + Jaſhamed when they had commit- , 1x.,; 
ted e abomination? nay, they werenot at all aſhamed, jy uſe, of 
neither could they bluſh z therefore they ſhall f fall a- breach. 
mong them that fall 2 ar the time that I g viſic them, 
they ſhall be caſt down, faith the LORD. 
_ 6 Viz, Thefalſe Prophets. d Some read it Aivzly, as ſometimes 
it is taken, Did they put the People to Shame ? bur thar is not ſo 
proper here : 1t rather notes how bold and confident, or rather im 
pudenrs they were in their Flatreries, and deceiving the People; a 
great Aggravation of their Sin. The Form of the Interrogation 
chargeth them home with the Guilty as do alſo the next Words, 
neither could they bluſh, 9. 4. they had not the leaſt ſhew of ſhame, 
uſually diſcovered by Bluſhing. e Or, the thing to be abominated 
( a Meconymy of the- Efe# ) both by encouraging the People, and 
joyning with them in their Idolatries. Sce Chap 3. 3- Therefore 
they ſhal-periſh with thoſe whom they have deceived, as in the fol- 
lowing Expreſſions. To fall ſignifies to be ſain, Pſal. 63. 10. Liks 


2'. 24. £ Vize Puniſh them, inflift Puniſhment on rhem : See 
Verſe 6. | 


16 Thus faith the LORD, ftand ye in the h ways 
and ſee, and ask for the 5 * old paths, where is the good , Maas: 
way,and walk & therein, and ye ſhall find [reſt for your 511, 54 
ſouls. [But they faid, we m2 will not walk therein. 29. 

þ Having told the falſe Prophets their doom, he now turns his 
Speech to the People, and gives them Counſel ; for he rather pro« 
pounds than commands, by a Metaphor taken from Travellers, t 
being in doubt of their way, do ſtand ſtill, pauſe, and conſider ,whe- 
ther the DireQtion they have received from ſome ignorant Perſon or 
falſe Guide, be righs or not. ; Heb. Paths of Antiquity, ſuck as their 
godly Forefathers of old were wont to walk in, the ancient paths, chap. 
18.15- OrcheOracles of God, what Dire&ions his Words gives, Iſaiah 
8. 20, Or the Providence of God. Obſerve what hath been GOD'S 
Ways and Methods in Times paſt, with referecice to Sin and Pu« 
niſhment, Deut, 4. 3, 4. Judges 5. 6, 8. Chap. 22. 15, 16. and what 
have been wont to be the beſt Courfes, ca!led here the good Way, or 
the belt way ro continue Mercies,and prevent Judgements, Deut. 
32+ 7, Oc. Sce I Theſſ' 5.21, k When you have found what was 
beſt, and moſt proſperous, keep it, ftick to'it. 1 You will find God 


Poor and Rich, the Prophet notes the generality of their Corruption | | [4 
f 


though they knew others had experimented it to be ſo, yet they 
would not be perſwaded to walk in it, but deliberately refuſe theſe 


17 AlſoI ſet » watchmen over you, ſaying, Hearken 


not p heaken. 


z Viz. Prophets and Meſſengers, that ſoughttheir Good, and en« 
deavoured to prevent their Miſeries, by foretelling what was come 
ing upon them, Ezeb, 3. 17. and 33.7. A Metaphoy from Watchmeny 
thar are uſually ſer vp*-n high places to eſpy ont Dangers afar off, 


pet, //a. 58. 1. intimating his loud crying upon the account of im- 
Danger be approaching ; or the Trumper of the Enemy, Chap. 4. 


16, 


18 { Therefore hear, ye 4 Nations, and know, OQ 
r Congregation, what is / among them, 

9 He cal!s upon the Nations round about to be as ſo many SpeQz- 
tors of his Severity againſt Fadah, though they were his owy People, 
rt» Partly to vindicate the Juſtice of his Proagedings, that they may 


6 F not 


y * I'S. 
a 


—p 


* Ia. 1.11. 
and 66. 3. 
> Amos 5- 
KTP 


 &C- 


* Chap. 


$0:41,42, 
43+ 


> 1: oo Vl 
he way bring 
' Beſides, 


| Nations, as 4. wg 


" Proceedings. 

'the xa jerry? LG 
' vecity of their Judgements ; ' 
_ "Aur it is the greatneſs of their Puniſhment, as the effe& of the 


greatneſs of their Sins. 


' upon this people, 


- intimated, that their Sins were not 


. that I ſo frequently 
. Prev. 1: 24 25, 
. ning to be Ruled by me. 


Mich.6.6, , An Interrogation of Expoſtulation, and Contempr, wherein 


. 


* #.e. they have ſent Fire into the City. Or, God doth here compare 


from: the * north & countrey, and a great nation ſhall 


IC. 22. and 
- Judah, this 
- 49: See Iſa 5" ®5, 26, 
[ray as men for war, againſt thee, O daughter of 


- fed for alt ſorts of Weapons. So P/al. 35. 2, 3- 0 Yee chap. 50. 42. 


" EXeCurTe as here proph : . 
violefir, {o it cauſeth great Conſternation by its noiſe, compared to 


os O%, EY Tae 


- L b:n too ſevere. 2. Partly to ſhame them, if thereby he | 
rn ra ie them to ite; and therefore he mak*-s them 
W:rnefſes as well of their Sin as of their Puniſhment, Verſe 19. 
2, It is a ſecret upbraiding them, as if the Nations were 

to underſtand than they. » Either of Jvael, and then 
ords fhuſt be which are among them; or rather, of all 
o them gathered all rogether, Pſal. 7- 7. God is 
Ithe World thould be Witneſs of the Equity of his 
Or, that which is among them, the Relative pur for 
either the height of their Wickedneſs, or the le- 
underſtand it either way,or both ways, 


more read: 
the next 


willing, that a 


O t earth : Behold, I will bring « evil 
even the fruit of their ». thoughts, 
becauſe they have not hearkened unto my y words, nor 
to my Law, but & rejected it. 

' The tnbabjtans of the Earth, or elſe God having ſpoken to the 
Rational, he now ſpeaks to the very {enſeleſs Creatures to obſerve 
his Proceedings, Ezekiel 36. 4. u The Chaldean Army, with all 
the direful Effets of it» x 9. 4. They may thank themſelves for 
what is come upon them, being the fruit of all theſe Contrivances 

and wicked Imaginations that their Hearts were full of, Prov. 1. 29, 
30, 31. See [aiah 59.7. and Chap. 4. 14. by which Phraſe 1s allo 
5avave ſome ſlight 1461 we oy me- 
:rared and d:geſted Wickedneſs ; and therefore Go will bring 
— the juſt Puniſhment for their Doings. y Thoſe Meſſages 
and earneſtly ſent unto them by my Prcphers, 

As it were bidding open Defiance to me, 1cor- 


' '19 * Hear, 


& 


20 * To what « purpoſe cometh there to me incenſe 
fom 5 Sheba, and the ſweet c cane from a far Coun- 
erey ? your burnt-offerings are not e acceptable, nor 
your ſacrifices {weet unto me- 


God by thz Propher meets with their Hypocriic, who pleaſed them- 
ſelves with their outward Oblations and Sacrifices, and thought 
God wow'd be pleaſed with them too ; bur he tells them plainly, 
they are to no purpoſe ; as he ſpeaks particularly in the Clolc of the 
Perſe, Chop. 7.21, 22+ Ezcke 20. 39. 6 That this was the Produtt of 
Sheba, a Countrey in Arabia Felix, to which Countrey F rankincenſe 
was p-culiar.. See on Iſaiah 60.6. c Or Cane, i.e. good, or the 
beſt Cane; the Article I hath the force of a Superlarive for Caine 
that is good ; the Hebrews have no Degrees of Compariſon : the ſame 
that is mentioned as an Ingredi:nt in the holy Oyl, Exed. 30. 23. 
See Iſaiah 43- 24+ 4 Not that it was brought from the remoteſt 
parts of the World, as from India, as ſome ; for it was known to 
the Jews in Myſes's time, Exod. 30. 23- but becauſe it grew not in 
their own Land, bur was fetched or brought to them from Shebs, 
Iſa. 60. 6. where it did grow, as Diodorus teſtifizs, ib. 3» p. 125. and 
Strabo, lib. 16» 1 Kings 10. 2. compared with Joel 3.8. who is cal- 
Jed the Queen of the South, and to come from the uttermoſt parts of the 
Earth, Maith. 12.42. becauſe the South-Sea did bound the Country, 
To what purpoſe art thou at this Trouble and Charge to fetch theſe 
Ingredients for thy Incenſe? e Not likely ro arone me ; they will 
Aor be for Acceptance ; I cannot rake Dclight in them, Ho. g. 4, 
as the next Expreſſion, 9. d. away with theſe childiſh Trifles,where- 
by you! _ ro pacific me. By theſe Spices he underſtands the whole 
legal Worthip. _ | 

2r Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will 


hy ſtumbling f blocks before this people, and the fathers 
and the g ſons together ſhall fall upon them : the neigh- 


bour and his þ friend ſhall periſh, 

f God gives this Name to all the Occaſions of the Jews Ruin, he 
expoſeth them, or ſuffereth ſuch things to be laid in their way, as 
ſhal be the Occaſign of their Deſtruftion ; ſuch rhings which they 
ſhal not get over; or an Hypallage,” T will bring Deſtruion upon 
them ; as the Hebrews ule to ipeak, they have ſent a City inro the Hire, 


his judgements to Traps, wherein they ſhal be taken, which they 
thought eaſily to have evaded: What theſe Scumbling-blccks are, 
ſeem to be expreſſed in the following Verſes. g As well the Fa- 
thers, that have more Prudence and Policy, as the Chi!dren that 
are more inadyertent, or poſſibly may count themſelves lſs guiltyy 
Thal periſh by theſe Stumbling-blocks; no recovering for them- 
ſelves, -Iſaiah 8. 14, 15-. Þ Men of all forts and conditions, the 
reateſt Intimates and Aſſociates, tho all lay their Heads together 
or Counſel, yer ſhal they not be able to help one another, but a 
promiſcuous D:ſtruftion there ſhal be, werſe 11. chap. 13» 14- 


22 . Thus faith the ; LORD, Behold,a people cometh 


be 1 raiſed from the m ſides of the earth. 

; Now the Prophet is ſhewing what theſe deſtru&ive Stumbling- 
blocks hal be; of which he had propeſfied 4o years already, and yer 
they would not be warned. k See verſe 1, I God ſhal ſtir up the 
Chaldent like a great Storm or Tempeſt, cap. 1+ 15. and 25. 32. 
See Ezck. 23+ 22, # The remote and uttermolt parts of the Babylonj« 
an Territories, tho at the greateſt diſtance, yer God will bring 
them ; which may note the greatneſs of God's Diſpleaſure againſt 
Circumſtance being noted among the Curſes, Deur. 28. 
Oc. chap. 5. I5. 

23They ſhal lay hold on bow and » ſpear : they are 
cruel, and have no o mercy: their voice roareth like 


the p ſea, and they ride upon q horſes, ſet in r ar- 


Zion. 
» :Or they ſhal carry ; they ſhal not want Military Ammunition 
of all ſorts for the diſpatch of this great work ; Synecdcchically expreſ- 


not be entreated, or have any pity to Sex or Age, Poor or Rich, 
chap. 21» 7. See the like, Jaiah 13; 17, 18. And this was as duly 
| eſied, 2 chron. 36, 17. p Which as it is very 


5 E-R B M 1 4 H. 


_ Chap. VI. | chap- 
the rearing of the Devils, James 2+ 19. Poſſibly it may intimate, 
they would not hearken to the Voice of his Prophets, now they 
ſhal hear the Terrifying Noiſe of Armies like the roaring of the Sea. 


q Which is a Creature in eſpecial manner adapted by God for War, 


as he is deſcribed, Jeb 3g. 19, 20, &c. implying their $ | F[4.fo 2: 
Strength, and Fliercenefſs,. chap. 50. 42%. r The 45M Nation x G | = refu) 
It were 1N Battalia againſt them, that they may perceive thev have fuer, 

to do with Soldiers. The LXX reading WN eſþ fire tor UR iſh | 

man, render it as Fire to the War. ſ* Or Jeruſalem ; for theſe twa 

Titles are promiſcuouſly uſed fcr the ſame place; and the Term 
Daughter 1s often given to Cities and Countries,as P/al.45.12.and r37 | 

8. 1ja. 23. 12. and 47. 1. : | 

24 We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax 
: feeble : * anguiſh hath taken hold of us, and Pain, As ® Chap; 
of a woman in « travai). | Jl. pa 

# The Prophet perſonates the Peoples AﬀeQion, 9. 4. at the very 24+ & 50, 

Report of the Approach 2nd Fierceneſs of this People, we are dif. 43* | 
mayed, and diſcouraged, onr Hearts melt within us; all warlike 
Courage is taken fiom vs, 2 Sam. 4+ t+ or he modeſtly reckons him- 
ſe}f among the reſt. « A Deſcription of the Exquititeneſs of their 
Sufferings chap. 13. 21» 

25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the 
x ; for the ſword of the enemy and fear is on y eve- 
ry ſide. 

x Expreſſing the great danger that there would be every where, 
there would be no ſtirring out of their fenced Cities or Houſes. 
chap. $ 14. but grear danger to them that go out, and to thoſe thar 
come 11 they would find Death every where; now ſeek out ſome by. 

Way Sy venture not in common Roads, Fudges 5.6.yThe Language of one 
ſpe:king ro another ; ir ſeems to be a proverbial Speech, frequently 
ulcd ro expre$s unavoidable Dangers, Pſal. 31. 13. chap. 20. 3, 10. . 
and 49. 29. All places will be full of Soldiers, ſo that all Attempts | 
will be very difficult, Lam. 5. g. 

26 O daughter of my z people, * gird thee with ſack- . Ch 
cloth, and a wallow thy ſelf in aſhes : * make thee ,- ug x 
mourning ; as for an only ſon; moſt bicter lamentation; * Zech; 
for the b ſpoiler ſhall ſuddenly come upon us. 12, 10, 

z z.e. O my People, that art beloved as a Daughter. a He calls 
vpon them to Mourning in the deepeſt manner wherein they can | 
expreſs it, girding with Sackcloth, cloſe Mourning, chap. 4. 8. wal- Al | 
lowing in Alhes, chap. 25. 34. Mz. 1.10. ly ng low in Humiliation 'Þ 
and proſt:ating themſelves before him, he farther. deſcribes the Na« E 
ture of it 1n the following Expreſſion, ſuch as is for the Death of a 
Chiid, a Son, an only Son, Amos 8- Io. and then ſeems to ſum ir 
up 1n this bitrer, moſt bitter Lamentation, Heb. Watling of Bitterneſs ; 
noting the higheſt degrees of Lamentation: he ſeemsto want Words ; ; 
te expreſsit. See chap 9.17, 18. And itis likely the Prophet doth ] 
not {o defignedly exhort them to repent, as rather deſcribe the ſtate 
of Perſ-ns in a loſt and deſpairing Condition. For here the Pro- h : 
pher t-kes upon himſelf the Perſon of one denouncing War : and * Chap. 18. 
Sackcloth andAſhes is ofren mentioned where there is 1, Hove ofCone 1, & 26, 
_ or Repentance. 6 The King of Babylon and his Army, chap, i 

. s , 
27 * I have ſet thee for a tower, and a c fortreſs a> "lm | 
mong my people,that thou mayeſt know and try 4 their ,, wY | c 
way. | | : 

c Here God ſpeaks by way of Encouragement to the Prophe 
tells him, he had made him a fortified , "ongea} that he wo 
diſcover the Carriages of his People, which is one uſe of an high : 
Tower I/a.21.5, 8. Hab. 2+ 1. and alſo to aſſure him, tho they ſhal c 
make ſeveral Artempts againſt him, yer he ſhal be kepr ſafe, as ina 
Caſtle, or Fortreſs, chap. 15. 20. & Their Courſes, Aftiors, and Man« Gs 
ners, and which way they ſtand affe&ed,thou mayeſt bring all ro thy c 
ſtrict Obſervation and Scrutiny, as Goldſmiths or Refiners do Tr: 
Metals; for ſo is the Word Try uſed, Pſale 66. 10. and elſewhere : Id 
Hereby he ſhal be encouraged to reprove them more freely,and with rl 
Authority, becauſe God doth promiſe to defend him, that they ſhal C 
nor hurt him; God will give him Prudence to ſce what is amiſs, and F 
Undauntedneſs to oppoſe it. d 

28 They are all grievous e revolters, * walking with - 1 
f ſlanders : they are bras and g iron ; they are all 5 cor- * Chap | It 
rupter 5 N . 49 : . 

e Obſtinate, and refraQary, 1a. 31.6. chap. 5.3, 23. f Being thei f 
main Bulinefs to detra&t ar thee,and the "+, wr EA rs gray - 
and 20, 10. a Sin exprefly forbidden, Levie. 19. x6. g This to the F 
end of the Chapter is all metaphorical, either they are impudent, as £l 
Brafs doth ſonierimes ſignifie, or they are obſlinare and inflexible, as A 
Iron notes: feeboth 1ſa. 48. 4-or it ſignifies their corrupt Eſtate ; f: 
they are not pure Metal, as Silver or Gold, but baſe and mean, 2s h 
Braſs and Iron mixed together, Ezeke 22. 18. þ This relates to their BA 
Manners ; they propagate their Corruption. 7. 1. 4. They ſtrength» p 
en one another in wickedneſs. | T 

| £ | of 

29 The bellows are 3 burnt, the lead is & conſumed el 
of the fire; the founder melteth in 1 vain ; for the C) 
wicked are not plucked »z away, lc 

7 The Prophet proſecutes his Meraphor taken from Refining of Meralsg c 
intimating herein, that the Prophets had ſpent cheir Lungs to no ” 
purpoſe. See the like, P(al. 22, 15. and 69. 7. and -their ſtrength 
was conſumed by their fo much Labour and Pains, 9. d. the Terros 
of the Lord is as a Fire in my Throat. & Some read it, the Lead was 5 
entire, Viz. their Droſs did ſtillremain in them, the Lrad pur for their * 
Droſs ; but I ſee no reaſon for, nor need of this reading, but rather 
hereby is underſtood, either that means which was uſed to =_ ail le 
with them, bis Words compared to Lead for the Weight 6f them, th 
and the Uſe of them ; or the Judgements which were heavy, as Lead = 
that God mixed among themythe more eaſily to prevail with them,ir ch 


was all upon them,as Lead is uſed in melting Silver, that it may melc 
the eaſiergit is all waſted, and doth no good. 7 Let the Artiſt uſe his 


greateſt Skill and Induſtery, yet is it all in vain; he can make ng@« c 
thing of it:theProphets did bur loſe theirLabour in all the pains they P 
took, Pſal. 58 5. after they had wearied themſelves. mw Or drawa. | 

| aWay3 £ 


Ch3P* VIL. 


Fifa. 


fo 22» 


7 BE R 


away, as the Word is, Joſh. 8. 16. and Juages 20. 32. Their Drofs 
and Corruption, their Wickednels and Filthineſs, is not removed, 
Iſa. 32. 6. for Wicked may be read Wickedneſs. 


30 * || » Reprobate filver ſhall men o call them, be- 


| Or, refuſe cauſe the LORD hath p reje&ed them. 


| ({veFs 


n Or, Refuſe Silver ; ſuch as will be reje&ed in Payments, they are 
not to be purged or reformed. o Or,be called.i.e. They ſhal be eſteemed 
ſuch as will not paſs for currant before God or good Men, Lam. 
. 45. þ The Prophet gives the Reaſon of their being accounted 
ich refuſe Stuff, viz. becauſe God, who knew their Hypocriſte in 
boaſting of themſelves, had reje&ted themy Lame 5. 22. therefore 
every one elſe would. 


CHAP. Vl. 


A Call to true Repentance, 1 7. Andnet living in Theft, Murder, A- 
dultery,Perjury,8&&. not to truſt in the outward Worſhip and Temple of GOD, 
by the Example of Shiloh, 8 15. The Prophet is forbid to pray for 
them, 16, Their laolatry, and iis Judgement, 17 20. 
fices rejefed, and Obedience required, 21 They are called to 


3 
ſi 


28: 


mourn far their Abominations in Tophet, and their Judgements, 
29—34- f 
T He word that came to Jeremiah from the « LORD, 
ſaying, 


a See Chap. 1, 2. This is the Title of a new Sermon much of the 
nature of the former, which reacheth to Chap. 10. 


2 Stand in the b gate of the « LORD'S houſe,and d 
proclaim e there f this word, and ſay, Hear the word 
of the g LORD, all ye of Judah, that enter in at theſe 


gates to worlhip the LORD. 

b Vize The Eaſt Gate, which was chiefly frequented ; this being 
the publick place of going out and coming in,and where the People 
were then wont to aſlen.ble, Jeremiah 26. 2, 10. and he 1s ſaid to 
fand, becauſe he was to execute the Office of a Preacher, chap -26. 2. 
not ofa Judge,where the Poſture would rather have been ſ:ting. c The 
Temple, wer. 4.10. a e The Place notes the Vanity of their Con- 
fidence, who, notwithſtanding all their Provocations, yet placed 
their Safecy much in the Priviledges of the Temple, glorying much 
in that ; and the Manner, Proclaiming, ſignifies both the Authority 
by which he ſpake, and the divulging of what he ſpake plainly and 
boldly, which, as it wasin a publick place, vize the Court of the 
People, not che Court of the Prieſts, (from which it is diſtinguiſh- 
ed, 2 Chron. 4+ 9. ) and therefore {aid at theſe Gates, viz. the ſeve- 
ral Gates that were in the Wall of the Court, of which there were 
ſix, three on the South-ſide, and three on the North ; ſo poſſibly, 
it might be at ſome publick time of the Peoples reſorting thither 
fcom all Quarters, Pſal. 122. 4, 5- when all the Males were to meet; 
Exod. 23. 17. See Joh. 1.37. and therefore ſaid, Al ye of Judah. f The 
Meſlage that I ſend thee with. g See chap. 2. 4. 

3 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts the God of Iſrael 3 
* Amend your ways, and your + doings; and I will 
cauſe you to dwell in this 5 place. 

h i. e. Mend your Manners, Amending ſignifies both to turn from 
our evil Works, and make our good better. r You ſhal nor go into 
Capriviryg implying, that otherwiſe they ſhould ; he will continue 
their Habitations to them from Age to Age, as wer. 7. Thedoing 
of a thing in Sc:iprure often implies the continuar:ce of it: Levit.26. 
11. I will ſet my Tabernacle, 7. e. I will continue it. 


4 Truſt ye not in lying words, ſaying, The & temple 
of the LORD, the temple of the LORD, the temple of 
the LORD are / theſe. 

k Becauſe this was GOD'S Houſe, wherein he had promiſed to 
dwell, and that for ever, Pſal. 13 2, 13, 14. they flattered thegnſelves, 
that he could dwell no where elſe, and would not depart, and cer- 
tainly would nor ſuffer the Chaldeans to deſtroy this, and therefore, 
that no evil could befal them, as they promiſed rhemſelves, Mic.3.11. 
therefore the Prophet cautions them nor to deceive themſelves 1n 
truſting to the Temple, and its Buildings, as the two Courts, and 
Hou!ie, and Holy of Holies, implyed in the Word :heſe, which he 
doth as it were point to with his Finger ; ( For where the Phrophers 
ſpeaks diſtioly of the form of the Temple, they reckon the Courr, 
where the Peeple did Sacrifice, and the holy place, or houſe where- 
ipto the Prieſts only did enter, and the Oracle, or Holy of Holes, 
wherein was the Ark of the Covenant, and into which only the 
High-Prieſt entred, and thar bur once a Year ) which theſe Hypo 
crites iooked upon themſelves ſecured by,as it were by a treble Wall, 
Fort, or Bulwark,thar they could not miſcarry ; bur he would have 
them to know that neither thzſe,nor the Services belonging tothem 
will be able to ſecure them, wv. 8. chap. 4. 14. and it 1s likely, their 
falſe Prophets did thus perſwade them, whoſe Propheſies he calls 
here theſe lying words ; but God will have them know, that he doth 
not chuſe a Nation for the places fake, bur the place for the Nati- 
ons ſake, the like caution the Apoſtle gives them, 1 Cor. 10. 2, Oc, 
The Emphaſis that may be in this threefold Reperition, ſeems rather 
to relate to the confident, and often reiterated brags and boaſts of 
the Temple, that were in their Mouths, than the worth and excel'/en- 
cy of it, in regard of God's owning it- / The Prophet, ſtanding 
in the Gate at which the People encred, doth as it were point at the 
ſeveral Buildings appercaining to the Temple, viz. the Courts, Houſe, 
Oracle, &Ccs+ 


5 For if ye throughly amend your ways, and your 


» doing ; if you throughly execute Judgement between 


a man and his » neighbour ; 

2 He tells them, it is not their vain Confidence in their Privi- 
ledges, and boaſting of the Temple, but only their ſerious and 
through Repentance in turning to God, bot!t 1n point of piety, and 
equity, that can ſecure them. » 7.e. Impaitial'y amoyg one ano- 
ther, between Man and Man, without favour or hatred 


6 If ye oppreſs not the ſtranger, the fatherleſs, and 
the o widow, and ſhed not innocent p blood in this 4q 
place, neither walk afcer other r gods to your hurt. 


o Here they are cautioned againſt three ſins, that this people were 
generally addiged to, Oypreſſton, Blood and Idolatry ; and he in- 


ws 


Their Sacri- | W 


8 M 4 4 M8 
ſtanceth in the worſt of oppreſſions, viz. of ſuch as Cod hath more 
eſpecially raken into his immediate Prote&icn, becauſe theſe are 
moſt void of help, and moſt obnoxious to injuries. The franger 
Exod, 22. 21. the fatherleſs and widow ; and verſe 22, 23, 24. ſee them 
all three together, Deut. 10. 18, and 27. 19. See on Iſa. 10.1, 2. 
and where God ſpeaks of right adminiſtring of Juſtice, he uſually 
makes mention of theſe three to prove the integrity and impartiality 
of Juſtice ; and though this may more properly reſpe& the Princes 
and great Ones,yet I conceive here the rope doth not ſo reſtrain 
it. p Either by Murder, or unrighteous Sentence, being one of 
rhoſe ſins in ſpecial mentioned, for which God exprefſeth his high 
diſpleaſure, and will ſend the Chaldeans upon them, 2 Kings 24. 4. 
q Either in this City in ſpecial, or the whole Land in general; ſee 
verſe 3. and there he would ſhew what a fooliſh thiog ir is that they 
ſhould boaſt of their ſecurity in this place, and yer ſhed blood, which 
pollutes every place, Numb« 35+ 31, Oc: r Abſtainfrom your Ido- 
latrous courſes, and depart not from my pure and uncorrupred 

orſhip, unto your ſuperſtitious and Hypocritical Service, and he 
adds zo your hurt, or your own hurt ; to ſhew that they will be the on- 
ly Sufferers by it, not God, verſe 19. God is neither benefited nor 
damaged by any thing that we can do, Job. 35. 6, 7,8. 

7 / Then will I cauſe you to dwell in this place #, 
in the land that I gave to your fathers, for « ever and 
EVECTL, 


J i.e. Upon this condition, that you will return unto me, then, 
either I will eftabliſh, and fix you in the Land; or, as anciently,read 
Sachanti in Kal, ] will dwell, viz. amongſt you in this pace, other- 
wiſe not. # Viz. Judea both in Jeruſalem, and the whole Countrey, 
as the next words manifeſt.  #. e. From age to age as your Fatters 
did before you from the days of Joſhua, until now. 


8 x Behold, ye truſt in lying » words that cannot 
profit. 


| x Take notice of ity and think of it ſeriouſly. »y Either flattering 
your ſelves with your own conceits, whereby, in your Diſcourſes, 
you ſtrengrhen one another, or depending upon the deluſions of your 
falſe Prophets, chap. 5+ 31. and 23s 26, 27. or rather, boulſtering 
your ſelves up upon your Priviledges, or bare Ceremonies which 
you ſo much boaſt of as verſe 4 all which he tells them, will profit 
them nothing. 

9 Will ye x ſteal, murder and commit adultery, and 
ſwear falſly and burn incenſe unto Baal, and walk after 
other gods whom ye a know not. 

z Here the Prophet mentions divers of thoſe fins, in which they 
were notorious, they were Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers, perjured 
Idolaters, Oc. q.d. Can you think, that this can be grarefu! unto 
me, or any whit advantageous to your ſelves, to frequent my Houte, 
and yet retain theſe odious fins, as if I were a Companion for Thieves, 
Murderers, &'c- 8a Such as they had ſet up new. and never had any 
experience of, and therefore could have no reaſon to ſerve them, 
therefore called new gods, Dew, 32+ 17. Judges 5. 8. bur of his pows 
er, and goodneſs they had had ample procf, in therr deliverance 
from Egypt, and the wonderful Miracles, and Signs char GOD had 
ſhewn them in the Wilderneſs, and his ViQorious Arm for them in 
Canaan, of which things theſe Jews could not be ignorant, and there- 
fore the more inexcuſible. Four of theſe ſins reſpe& the ſecond 
oma two laſt che firſt, The Name of Baal is here 
all Idols. 


10 And come and ſtand before me in this 5 houſe 


f which is called by my c name, & ſay,we are delivered + Heb. 

"whereupon 
6 In the Temple, either as if they had done no ſuch thing, like the 77 748 17 

Whore that wipes her Mouth, and faith ſhe hath done no wicked- calld. 


to do all theſe d abominations ? 


neſs, Prov. 30. 20. noting their deep Hypocrifie, or elſe that barety 
this wouid -xpiate for ali their Abominations, as;f they could make 
GOD amenas for their ſins by rheir Duties, and cheir poſture of 
ſtanding notes their ſervice, 1 Kings io. 8. Prov. 22.29. c That 
is acknowledged to be my Houſe, and bears my Name, ded:cated to 
me. 4 That is, after they had appeared before GOD with their 
Sacrifices, eirher they thought themſclves ſafe from all danger, and 
freed from Gud's Judgments, Mal. 3 15- Or rather priviledged to 
return to all thoſe wi:kedneſles again, hereby noring their umpu- 
dence» See 1/s. 1.12, ©. LXX read it, we have abained from all theſe 
ns aS it cheſs were the lying words in which they truſt- 
ed. 


11 Is * this houſe, which is called by my name, be- 


come * a den of e robbeers in your eyes ? behold, even 


I have f ſeen ir, faith the LORD. 
e Heb. Breaker through. 


way Men, Dan. 11. 14. Do you look upon this Houſe as a Santtu- 
| ary and refuge for Robbers and Murderers, 4o you eſteem jr ſo, and is 
; ir ſo in your Eyes, ſo ihe Phraſe is uſed Numb. 13.33, &c. hereby 
' making me an Abetter of all your Lewdneſs, Ma:the 21. 13. a Me: a« 
pbory taken from wild Beaſts, and miſchievous Perſons, thar do both 
ſecure themſelves, and hide their prey in Holes, and Cves of the 
; Earrh, Pſal. 10.8, 9. f q-d. As crafty as you are, you cannot hide 
theſe things from me, nor all thoſe workings of your thoughts abour 
them, Pſal.10. 1, 13, 14. Exek. 18. 12. He chek: their fooliſh vain 
i confidences, whereby they deceive themſelves, 1a. 29. 15. GOD 
willnot be blinded by all their vain Oblacions. 


; 12 But go ye now unto my * place which was in g 
' Shiloh, where I ſet my name art the + firſt, ard ſee 


Iſrael. 


| £ A place that did belong to the Tribe of Ephraim. Pſal. 58. 60. 
| comp. 61. The fituation whereof, ſee Fuages 21. 19. and call-d God's 
| Houſe, as the Temple is, » Sa. r. 3, 7. he ſends them hither for 
an Example, which had the ſame Priviledges and holinels with the 
, Temple, not to go thither locally, bur to caſt their thoughts back, 
i 2nd conſider of it, that they might know, rhat GOD'S Preſence is 
{ not tyed to places, 4#s 7. 48. þ Where did at firſt give you the 
i Token and Pledges of my Preſence among you, when you tirſt en- 
tred into the plcaſant Land, noting the antiquity of Shiloh betore 


© Z te 


%? 
118 P. 


put for 


* Mark. 11. 


I'7s 
The word is taken in a large notion for Di k. I9e 
all ſorts of Plunderers whether in Houſe, Ezek. 7. 22. or field, High- 46 


* Toſh. 13, 

I. 

what I did 3; to it, for the & wickedneſs of my people Judg. 18. 
| 3t 


GR” > 


MA 
(100 


*Ia.56. 7. 


Y 11. 


ll; 
"UF 


if 
LTH! 14 - 
th } nur 
31H 
': | 14 d 
[ iT - 
it; | f 
Ti | 
is ; 
| G 
S 


' 


EET EAT Tg DTT ——_ - : ———— 
— oY 4 A ” — 
- a _ - _— - 
— 5 


IEEE II FEI 


— ne 
ERCIDETITEISTRTTT Fr 
—_ moupomo_eano— —_— 


"X. Joo io I — 


bGliha, ov" 
— 


nap. VIE | 
| 'e. i i,e. He utterly forſook it, he did not only deliver 
= cl into the Philiftines hands, but the Ark allo, the roken 
of his Preſence, which never returned to Shiloh more,and afrerwards 
delivered the 10 Tribes wherein Shiloh was ſituate, into Caprivity 
to the Arian. See ver. 14. 15. wherein he upbraids them for their 
folly in thinking that the Ark or Altar in the Tempie Thould any 
more priviledge them than it did Shileh. k He gives them the reafon 
of it i, theſe words, The wickedneſs of his People, and chiefly the Prieſts, 
Hophni and Phineas, Eli's Sons, 1 Sam. 2. 12, Oc. and why ſhould 
they think to eſcapy who did equa], if not exceed them. 


12 .And now, becauſe ye have done all theſe / works, 


--h the LORD, and I ſpake unto you, * rifing up » 
_ and ſpeaking, but ye heard not ; "and * I called 


72. and you, but ye anſwered nor. | | 
4 "yrs $s bad, or worſe than they did at Shiloh, or 
4 1 Eithbe® the ſame, or a r ET atroter Sica Erom 


articularly thoſe mentioned, - 
. ligent in their Buſineſs, they uſe to riſe up early, 
Perkhms that are diligent 11 the! , ny they in lm Name 


g.'d. I did not only ſpeak by my Prophets, 
aſed all diligence ro reclaim you, chap» 11- 7 8. and 25+ 3, 4. cal- 
ling earneſtly unto you, by which he means his Exhortations and 


* which ought to have had ſome efficacy upon them, but 
ay rre-dar and Vaaeded; and would not come at my Cal), 
Prove 1. 24+ See on 2 Chrow. 36-15, i6. and on Iſa. FO». 2. Rs 

14 » Therefore will 1 o do unto this houſe which 1s 


| called by my name ; wherein ye truſt, and unto the 
place which I q gave to you and to your fathers, as I 


ve done * to r Shiloh» 

| ”* Becauſe they bave added this ther obſtinate refuſing of all Ad- 
5g monitions to the reſt of their Provocations. 0 Yiz. Caule the con- 
«LY ſecrated things of the Tempie to be t:ken away by the hand of the 
ha. 26.6- Babylonians. p See wer. Jo 9 Yiz. Upon condition of your obedi- 
| ence, Pal. 105-44 45+ and therefore may juſtly, upon the breach 
of the Condition, take from you again, nay, by virtue of my Sove- 
rejgnity, Job I. 21. 7 See vere 12, | 

--15- And Iwillcaſt you out of my ſight, as I have caſt 


out all your Brethren,even the whole ſeed of s Ephra- 
im. © 

- {_ You ſhal have my preſence with, and watchful eye over you no 
mere, but I wil! ſend you into Caprivity to Babylon, as T did your 
Brethren into Aſjr1a. See on 2 Kings 17.6, 18. and he terms them 
here Brethrengto let them know, thar they, and J/rel proceeded from 
the ſame ſtocks and therefore had no reaſon to expett, bur ir ſhould 
fare aiike with them, ſeing their fins were alike, 2 King 271. 13, 
14, &c. t Viz. Theten tribes, Iſa, 7: 1, 2. compared ; cailed by 
this Name often, becauſe that was the moſt numerous and potenc 
of all of them, Jeroboamn their firſt King was of that Tribe. : 

16 Therefore * « pray not thou for this people, nei- 

ther lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make in- 
rerceſlion to me : forT will not hear thee. 

u God forbids his Prophets to pray for them in any kind, by any 
Cry or Interceſſion ; or running upon me, Which ſhews that God is re- 
ſolved to root them out, ſeing he will admir of no Interceſſion : 
according as he charged Moſes, Exod. 32. 10. and the like, Chap. 11. 
14+ For God had been wont to ſuffer himſeif ro be prevailed with 
by the Mediarion of his Servants, as of Meſes, Exod. 32. 11, 14, Numb. 
14+ 19, 20. But now he would admit of no Iuterccſſion. Sce Ezcke 
14-14, 20. and Chap 15. I. and the next words. This charge ſeems 
to be laid upon the Prophet, , partly to take off the envy of the 
People from him, when they knew he was commanded to yo no 0- 
therwiſe, partly to imboluen him in this unpleaſing work, laying 

_ aſide all Compaſſion. But certainly the Propher did pray that God 
would mind his Covenant in ſaving a Remnant, though nor that 
God would revoke his Decree ; and to fave the body of them. 

27 Seeſt x thou not what they do 1n the cities of Ju- 


dah, and in the ſtreets of y Jeruſalem ? 

x 9. d. How canſt thou paſs along the Streets, but thou muſt 
needs be an Eye-witneiſs of their Abominations ro thy no ſmall 
trouble and ſorrow, as S2dom was to Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 8. therefore how 
canſt thou piead with me on their behalf ? How canſt thou either 
pray for them, or I pity them? » Ia City and Counttey. See 
Chap- 2. 28. and 11. 13. 

18 The & children gather « wood, and the fathers 


kindle the b fire, and the women knead ztheir dough to 
[| Or frame, Make c cakes to the || queen of d Heaven, and to pour 
out e drink-offerings unto other gods, that they may 


provoke me f to anger. 

2 Here God ſhews how buſily they are employed from the 
youngelt to the oldeſt, and how induſtrious for their Idolatry, Chap. 

44. 17« See Matth, 24. 38. every one in the Family doth ſomewhat 

towards it. & Or fticks, for the word is plural, and fo uſed, Numb. 

15. 32, 33+ an employment, if we underſtand ſmall Sticks, proper 

for Children ; it greater Wood, ſuitable to Youth, who excel in 


ao < en” 
CY . 


Ver«24. 


* 1 Sam. 4+ 


* Chap. 
14. 11. 


or, work- 


mmanſhip of 
- Heaven. 


3 EREM IA H. 


Chap. VIE. 
pouring their Drink-Offerings, which might ſeem to be Blood. or 
ar leaſt Blood mixed with them, See on Pſal: 16.4. imitated GOD'S 
Drink: Offeriags, as they did his Meat. Offerings in their Cakes, ag 
in Levit, 2. by theſe they did furniſh the Table mentioned, 1/3. 65. 
It. ſee r2ere. f Noting rather the proper efte&s and conſequences 
of their Idolatries,than rhat they did propound ro themſelves ſuch 
an end in doing it,bur it ſeemed to be a kind of bidding open defiance 
” God, + anpcqogn it appears they were all mad upon their Idolatries 
they were ſet upon it, as Davia's Heart was ſet ! ;Þ of 
_ ooo og et upon the Worſhip of 
19 Do they provoke me to anger ? ſaith the LORD: 
do they not provoke themſelves to the confuſion of theig 
own g faces ? 


g Do they think to grieve me, and trouble my Mind ? They are 
deceived, I am without Paſſion, and can be without their Offerings, 
will not they themſelves feel the ſmart of it, verſe 6? Will they nor 
procure anger to themſelves as an Arrow falls upon the Head of him 
that ſhoors, r Cor. 10. 22. of the Phraſe, ſee Chap. 3. 25. 

20 Therefore thus faith the Lord GOD ; Behold, 
my 4 anger and my 5 fury ſhall be & poured out upon 
this place,upon man and upon beaſt,and upon the trees 
of the field, and upon the fruit of the / ground ; and it 
(ball burn, and ſhall notbe »» quenched, 

h Pur for his Revenge by a Mctonymy of the Cauſe for the Effeft. 
z: This expreſſerh his anger boiled up to the height, Chap 4. 4. k A 
Metaphor taken from violent Rains, See Chap, 6.11. and may in Par= 
eicular allude to thoſe ſhoweis of fire that were poured out upon 
Sodom Gen. 19. 24+ 1! Theſe particulars are enumerated to expreſs 
an utrer Deſolation and Ruin. See Chep. 4. 25. and it is threatned 
againſt theſe Creatures, which are innocent, becauſe they were 
made for the uſe of Man, partly that it might ſhew, how greatly 
God is offended, and thar it ſhould work upon them, not only a 
greater fear of his Judgements, but a greater ſhame for their {in,that 
they ſhould occation tuch ſufferings upon the innocent Creature 
Rom 8. 30,22 m He follows the threatning with ſhewing the irre- 
ſiſtibleneſs of it, his reſolution is nct to be revoked, Chap. 4. 4. and 
this 1s ſuitable to the Charge he gave the Prophet, wer. 16. 


21 Thusſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of Iſrael ; 


* » Put your burnt-offerings unto your o ſacrifices, and *Ifar.1:; 
eat fleſh. Chap. 6. 


» The Ironical words of one that ſeems to be in a great rage, take 
thoſe that are pecul:ar, and to be all burnt to me, Levit. 1:9. and put 
th2m ro your own of what kind loever, eat them, and do what you 
will with tzem, I will have none of them, take it all and fill your 
own Bel'ies, for you ſacrifice not ro me, but to your ſelves. 
See Hoſ. 9.4. where their Mear=offerings are called in ſcorn, Meat for 
their Life to nouriſh their Bodies. o That part of your Sacrifices 
which you are allowed to eat, they are but as prophane food, do not 
you think te be ſanCtified by them, becauſe I accept them nor. 

22 For I ſpake not unto your fathers, nor com- 
manded them inthe day that I brought th:m out of the 
land of Egypt, concerning + burnt-offerings or p ſacri- + Heb. the 
fices, matter of. 

p Some would argue from hence, that Sacrifices were at firſt an 
invention of Men, as Papiſts and Socinians, and becauſe they ſhould 
not be uſed to T\lols, GOD gave way for the introducing them in- 
to his Worſhip; bur ir is evi-ent in S-riprure that they have been of 
Divine Inſtitution ever ſince Adam, Gen. 4. 3, 4- as to the meaning of 
the Words. G:d doth not condemn them, erdeny them, ſave only 
Comparatively in reſp-& of obedience, not ſo much theſe, as obeying 
his Commands, 1 Sam. IF. 22. Hoſ. 6, 6. rt. e. Mercy rather than 
Sacrifice. Negatives are often put for Comparatives, Gen. 45. 8. Exod. 
16. 8. Joh. 5. 45. Hence the Heb. is the matter of burnt-offerings, for 
Sacrifices were not inſtituted for themſelves, bur for other uſes, 
and to be ſigns of Faith in his Promiſes, and obedience to his Com- 
ma:.45,As 1n the nex. verſe, where the Condition,Promiſe and end are 
all ſet ciown. 

23 Burt this q thing commanded I them, ſaying, * 
Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye ſhall 
be my peop'e: and walk ye in all the ways that I have 
commanded you, that it may be r well unto you, 

9 Or word, which is the Rule by which all Obcdience is to be 


290, 
Amoy 5: 
2ls 


*Deur.6-3: 
Exod- 

19. 5+ 
Lev. 2642. 


| tried, viz. what Commands, every thing elſe being but meer Su- 


perftirion. »r He ſhews what would be the good effe&t of their Obe= 
dience, Exod. T:.26. Deut. 5. 29, 33. which implies, that their Suf- 
ferings are from their Perverſneſs, as it is expretled in the next verſe. 


24 But they hearkened not, nor / enclined their 
ear, but walked in the counſels 2nd in the [|f imagina- || Or, f:b- 
tion of their evil heart ; and + * went backward, and mm 
not « forward. Ee + Hebe 
{ It notes ſometing of an higher degree of non attention, than » Chap. 


Ntrength, and may be underſtood by Children and young ones. b They | 
heat the Oven, Hearth or Stone on which they were baked. c Pre- 
pare all the Mat-rials, of which to make Cakes ; probably they | 
were of ſome particular ſhape, or had ſome peculiar Impreſſ}- 
on of ſome of their gods ſtamped upon them, like the Popiſh Wa: | 
fers, ſome ſay ſtamped with Stars, as being offered up to the Hoſt of i 
Heaven, or with ſome peculiar Star, Amos 5+ 26. Ati 7.43, d Or, 
frame, or, workmanſhip of Heaven, this is diverſly interpreted ; ſome | 
take it for the Sun, which is ſignified by a word of the Feminine | 
ender, 1a. 24. 23+ and of a Feminine ufe, Nah. 3+ 17. ſome for the 
| ori as the Sun was looked upon as King, ſo the Moon as the 
Queen of Heaven, becauſe of the largeneſs of her Body, in which ' 
he appears, and of the Light ſhe gives, but eſpecially by reaſon of 
the Government ſhe exerciſeth over Inferiour Bodies; others, more 
probably, for the whole Hoſt of Heaven, Jer. 8. 2. and 19.13. and 
ſo the LXX ;- according to which probably for their ſakes they re- 
ceived divers Stamps and Impreſſions ; they that would ſee more, 
may conſult the Engliſh Amer. and the Synmep. e Yiz, Wine and other 
ſtrong Drinks, Exed. 29. 40, 41- Numb.28. 7. The Devil is GOD'S 
Ape, and raught Idolarers to uſe the ſame Rites and Ceremonies 
that were uſed in God's Worſhip 3 therefore here theſe Idolaters in 


K 


i Days of Jeremiah. 


bare wot hearkening, viz. their not liſtening that they might obey what 

| It 0D 32« 33 
they hear, Chap: 7.26. and 11.8. noting not ovly their ſlightneſs, 
bur their ſtiffneſs. © Or fubbirnneſs, See Chap. 3. 17. u Like 
reſtive Beaſts; ſee Chap. 2. 27. a ſign of thei- Conrempr, implying 
either, I- They were worſe by their Admon'itions and Corr=<&ions, 
and ſo nothing did thrive with them; or, 2. From the very firſt 
they have gone farther and farther from me, as werſe 25, 26. 
3- Orelſe depending upon their outward Services, they ſet not my 
Commands before their Eyes,bur caſt my true Worſhip behind their 
backs, Matth. 23, 23. 

25 Since the day that your x fathers came forth out 
of the land of Egypt unto this day, TI have even y fent 
unto you all my ſervants the prophets, daily riſing up 
early, and ſending them. 

x God ſeems to upbraid them with their ſtock, they came of a 
perverſe kind, their very Fathers were ſo before them, and they 
have coninued in their perverſeneſs, Neh. gs 16, 17. they did por 
now begin tro be rebellious, but ir had been their practice all along ; 
never cealing from the time their Fathers came out of 4g5pr, to the 
y God rce!ls them what care he had taken to 
inform them in their Duty and Happineſs, not once or _ a 

-11Q 122g 


Chap. 


bn 
rn | 
_—_ 

_—- 

&S 


bane 
—_ 
ÞI 
pon) 
b] 


| Or, 1h 


fruition. 


* Chap. 
16. 6, 


= 


of. - ent ny niah ers Þ- ons + = Hg 


1 .*, Kin 
2I: 4- 
2 Chror 
33. 4+ 
Ezek. 
8.5, 6- 


* 2King 
2Jo IO. 
Coap. 
I9- Fo 

t Heb. 
Upon my 
hearty 


— 


we PSII ION 


—— — 


Chap. VII- 


'*# Chap» 
11, 18. 
*Neb. 9. 
17. 29- 
Chap. 16- 
12. and 17. 
23. and 19* 
15.and 25* 


; 


|| Or, 1- 


fruition. 


.* , Kings 


21+ 4: 
2 Chron- 
33. 4* 
Ezek. 

8. 5, 6- 


* 2King. 
23» IO. 
Cap. 
IQ». 5. 

I Heb. 
Upon my 
hearts 


{ending Mcſſ:ngers to them ſeafonably, and conitantly from firſt ro 
laſt, 2 Chron. 36. 15. Neb. 9. 29, 30. Amos 2. 10, 1 1. See on Fer. 13. 
and Chap. 25. 3, 4, &c. The Church of God hath never wanted 
Teachers raiſed up and ſenr by God. 99s 

26 * Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined 
their ear, but * hardenedtheir neck; they did z worſe 
than 2 their fathers. 

z Their Fathers had done bad enovgh, but they were ſo farfrom 
reforming, that they did worſe than their Fathers, Jud. 2. 19. chap. 
9. 3. and whereas he had ſaid before your Fathers 4 Now chang- 
ing the perſon heſaith their Fathers, as it were in grear diſpleaſure 
turning away from them to the Prophet, as one ſpeaking, but in 
vain, to ſuch a ftupid people. | 

27 Therefore thou ſhalt ſpeak b all theſe c words un- 
to them, but they will not 4 hearken to thee: thou 
ſhalt alſo call unto them, but they will not e anſwer 
thee. | 

b Viz. Revive upen them all that thou haſt been ſpeaking to 
them from me theſe qo Years and upwards. c Whereby God fhews, 
that there is nothing wanting on his part ; for notwithſtanding all 
their Perverſneſs, yet he ſtil warns them by his Propher, which 
will leave them the more inexcuſable, Ezek. 2. 5, 7. d This muſt 
needs be a great Trial ro the Prophet chat he is aſſured that be ſhall 
ſpeak to them in vain. Bur this God acquaints him with before- 
hand, partly for Jeremiahs ſake, that he ſhould not be diſcouraged, 
but the more emboldened, though he ſaw no Succeſs, Ezek 2. 7» 
and part]y for the peoples fake, that being fore-told of rheir Obſti- 
nacy they might bethink themſelves and rep-nt, if yet there might 
be hope, Lam. 3- 29. e This ſhews their farther RefraQarineſs, 
that they were not only deaf to Gods Meſſage by his Propher, bur 
though he cried loud, followed one Exhortation with another, yet 
they would make no Return unto it. : 

28 But thou ſhalt ſay unto them, this zs af nation 
that obeyeth not the voice of che LORD their God, nor 
receiveth g || corre&ion : truth is periſhed, and 1s cut 
off from their þ mouth. 

| ec in a way of Conternpr, 9. d. a Nation more than Heathe- 
riiſh though they profeſs themſelves a peculiar people to me, yet 
to be numbred among the Gentiles. g i, e, Anſwer not the Ends of 
Ccrre&ion, viz. ro be inftrufted, Chap. 5. 3. and ſubmit their necks 
to the Yoke, which laid the Foundation of all their Rebellion. 
þ There is no truſting or believing them in any thing they ſay or do; 
no Veracity or Fideliry, but perfidious both co God and men, being 
all filled with Hy pocrifie, Lyes, and Deceits. 

29 * Cut off thine i hair, O Feruſalem, and calt 3: 
k away, and take up alamentation on high / places : for 
the LORD hath reje&ed and forſaken the generation 


of his 9 wrath. 

i It was an uſual Token of Sorrow among the Jews to cut offthe 
hair, Job I. 20. 1/a. 15. 2. Mic: I 16, But here he ſpeaketh either, 
1.. to Feremiah ; for O Jeruſalem is not in the Texr: or, to the In- 
habitants of Jeruſalem; and fo ſpeaks to them, as a Woman, whoſe 
Hair is for an Ornament, 1 Cor. 11. 15. Therefore rhis muſt needs 
ſignifie an higher degree of Sorrow. Cutting the Hair amorg the 
Ancients did ſignifie, 1. Mourning. 2. Bondage. For the cutting 
of the Hair in Servants was a Token of Subje&ion:ſo that this {peaks 
Feruſalems moyrnful Condition in her Captivity. & Ir is not to be 
reſerved, as ſometimes Men and Women both do for ſome uſe, but 
©o be caſt away, and as a thing good for nought. And thus itmay 
agree with the Churches Lamentation, Lam. 5. 16. for it is not here 
exhorted to, as 2 Token of Repentance, but as atlirearing of Judg- 
ments. | See chap. 3. 3 Lift up thy Voice on high in Lamenta'i- 
on, when thou haſt thine Eye or Thoughts upon the high places 
where thou wenteſt a Woring from me, for which thou now goeſt 
into Captivity. » Or of his over-running Anger, as ſome render it, 
z.e, with whom he is extremely vexed, this preſent Generation, that 
by their Provocations bave brought themſelves under his Wrath, 
wer. 18. 20. a Generation defin'd to the wrath of God, called elſewhere 
the people of hrs Curſe, Iſs 34+ 5- and ſuch as the Apoſtle calls Yeſels 
of Wrath, Rom. 9. 22. ſo far as it concerrs the Phcaſe. 

30 For the children of » Judah have done evilin my 
o ſight, ſaith the LORD ; * they have ſet cheir abomi- 
nation in the p houſe which is called by name, to pol- 
lute it. ; 

2 Either Judahs Poſterity, Joſh. 14.6. or Judaks Inhabitants, which 
are often called their Children ; fo chap- 2. 16. 0 i. e, Though th-y 
will not ſee it, yet I ſee it, and they ſhall know, thar it is in my 
ſight, 7. e. that it diſpleaſerh me. p Here he inftanceth in cne 
Species of their Abominations for all rhe reſt, whereby it appears 
they were grown to a great height of Impiety : It was not <n. ugh 
to have their Idols and Superftitions abroad in the Hills and Groves, 
nor in private in their own H- uſes, 1/2. 57.6, 7, 8. chap. 19. 13. bur 
they muſt bring them into Gods Houſe, as Manaſſeh dio, 2 Kings 21. 
4+ God hav-ng bur one Houſe 1n the World, as it were, to confront 
him, 2 Chron. 36. 14. chap. 32. 34 Ezek. 43. 8. 


31 And they have built the * high places of q To- 
phet, which 3s in the valley of the fon of r Hinnom, 
to burn their ſons and their daughters in the / fire ; 
which I commanded 7therws not, neither came ic | into 
my t heart. 

q See on Iſa+ 30. 33+ It comes from Tiph that ſignifies a drum, 
becauſe they did beat Drums ro hinder the Noifc of their Childrens 
Screeches, when they burnt thera in Sacrifice vpon the Altars, ca]- 
led here high places, to Moloch, which is alſo called Melchom. r Tophet 
was ſituate 1n a pleaſant Valley near Jeruſalem a place in the poſ- 
ſeſſion of the Children of one Hinnom, Joſh. 15. 8, watered by the Ri- 
verof Sos. ſ This moſt inhumane Prattice of Burning their Chil- 
dren, even their own Bowe!s, to Molsch, nor thir Sons only, but 
their D:.ughters, who were moſt tender ; they did expreſly againſt 
the Command and Caucion of God : See on Devr. 18. 10, having 
learned it of the LHeatinen, Deur. T2. 30, 3'3 the Devil commanding 
them ſo to dg by his Oracles: They took Pattern from the Sama- 


*EREMEAS 


— 
—— 


Ay. Bt 


— 
Chap. VIlli 

ritans, where thoſe of every Nation make gods of their own, 2 King. 1 

t7. 29, 30, 31. © Which was always ſo far from my approving 

that I never Jet it come into my Thought or Debate, whether I 

ſhould or not: Or, which I abhorred from my Heart: he ſpeaks 

herein afrer the manner of Men, See chap. 3. 16 and 32. 35. * Chap. 

32 Therefore behold, the days * come, ſaith the 16. 6. 

LORD, that ic ſhall « no more. be called Tophet, nor 

the valley of the ſon of Hinnom, but the valley of 

ſlaughter: for they ſhall bury in Tophet till there be 


x No place, | | 

u They were called ſo after this, and are known by thoſe Names 
to this day; but the meaning is, they ſhall acquire a Name from 
another Occaſion, that ſhall ſuit them as well, Yiz. For the great 
Slaughter that ſhall be made there, or rather thereabours, in and 
about Jeruſalem, and therefore called the Yalley of Slaughter, from the 
effe& of Slaughter ; as Judas's Field was called Akeldama, 4s 1. 19. 
being a place for burying of the Slain, as the next Werds ſhew. 
x Either there ſhall be 1o great a Slaughter made upon that Spot by 
che Chatdeans, that they ſhall bury as many. as the Place will con- 
tain, and the reft of the Carcaſes they ſhall throw on heaps, to rot 
above-ground ; for to lie upburied, is frequently uſed. as a Curſe on 
fuchy the Burying of the Dead being accounted as a thing Sacred, 
and a ſignificant Smbol of the Reſurre#ion : Or, thoſe that are ſlain 
in and about Jeruſalem, at the Siege and Taking of it; ſhall be car- 
ri2d thither ro be buried, either becauſe there ſhall be no Burry- 
ing-places left about Jeruſalem. or that Valley ſhall be filled, till 
there be no Place for more; that thereby it may be ſopollured, that 
no Thonghts cf Ho'ineſs may rer ain in it: for a Dead Carcaſe un- 
der the Law was ur ciezn ; and that which before was a Valley of 
Pleaſure and grear Delight, and they had dedicated to God, ſhall 
now be a Yalley of Slaughter. = nts | 

33 And the * carcaſes of this people (ball be meat * Plal 


for the fowls of the y heaven, and for the beaſts of the T,,z. I 


earth: and none ſhall fray chem z away. 9- and. 16, 


1 
| 


3 The Birds and Beafts of Prey ſhall feed on them, being expoſed 4+ and 344 | | 


to open View for want of Interrment, chap. 19. 7. z ( A piece 20. 
of Humanity thar even Narure it ſelf teacheth) Either by reaſon 

of the Enemies Preſcnce, for fear of whom they curſt not, or ra- 
ther, becauſe there w1!] be none lefr to do it : And this is reckoned 
among the Curſes, Deut. 28. 26. 


24 @ Then will I cauſe to * ceaſe from the cities of | _ " 
Judah, and from the ſtreers of Jeruſalem, the voice of Chap, 16 
mirth, and the voice of gladnels, the voice of the bride- 9. and 33 
groom, and the voice of the bride : for the land ſhall 
be b deſolate. Ezek. 


x M * 26. th--: 
# All kind and degrees of Mirth ſhall ceaſe, Rev. 18. 23. all Te? 
ſhail be filed with Tneteions and Woe ; their ſinging Gents Ap 
rurned into ſighing ; | 
comfort of Hurnare Society, which is 70 be underſtood in this Ex. 
preſſion. b There ſhall be ſuch an utcer Devaſtation, that there 
{hall be neither Seaſon nor Plage for theſe Things, 1ſa. 64. 16, 11, 
chap 25. 10, where Marrying ſhall ceaſe, without which Mankind 
cannot ſubſiſt, there muſt needs be Dzſolation 


CHAP. VAIL 


The calamity of the Jews, both dead and alive, 1, ——;, Their brutiſh Im- 
penirency, 43 7. Their vain boaſi of wiſdom : their Cuvetouſneſs, See 
curity, Impudence, 8,—12. Their grievous Judgments, 13, 17» 
Bewailed by the Prophet, 18, 22» 


A T that time, faith the LORD, they ſhall bring 

out the 2 bones of the kings of Judah, and the 
bones of his princes, and the bones of the prieſts, and 
che bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inha- 
birants of Jeruſalem out of cheir graves. 

@ This Chapter being a Continuation of the former, he proceeds 
in carrying on the Threating with higher Aggravations of the Judg. 
ment v/z. That when the time ſhall come ſpoken of chap. 7. 32+ the 
Chaldeans Rage ſhall reach, not only to the 7 pra but even againſt 
thoſe chat are 1n their Graves, and that ſparing. rione of any De- 
gree or Quality ; of the Nobles and Princes, as Manaſh and others, 
poſſibly .ed to it out of Greedineſs, tuppoſing to fiad great Trea- 
ſure 1n their Sepulchres; of the Prieſts and Prophets, principally. 
the falſe ones, as a juſt Judgment of God againſt them for decei- 
ving the pe:;ple; of rhe Inhabitants of Jeruſalem, out of their ſpight 
ind fury kindled againſt them, as Souldiers, or in Cont=<mpte 
and Ignominy ; and this notes the urter Deſolation of the City, nor 
only razing the Walls, bur turning up the very Sepulchres which 
were accounted Sacred, and not to be violated, D , 

2 And they ſhall b ſpread them before the ſun, and 
the moon, and all the hoſt of c heaven, whom they 
have &4 loved, and whom they have ſerved, and afcer 
whom they have walked, and whom they have ſought, 
and whom they have worſhipped : they (hall not be ga- 
thered, nor be buried ; they ſhall be for dung upon 
the face of the e earth. | 

b Not gather them together into Charnel-houfes, as weuſually 
do out ot Humanity, but icatrer them about as it were to be turn- 
ed into Duſt and Dung. « 7Yiz. All the reſt of the Stars, toſhew that 
they ſhould nor lie our in the day-time only, but night alſo, before. 
the Moon and Stars, chap» 36. 30. Their Carcaſes ſhall be caſt to 
their Idols, Lev. 26.30. 2 King. 23+ 14, 29» A kind of Lex Talionis 
that as they had ſerved and worfhipped theſe Creatures, . God doth 
as it were,appornt them as SpeCtatorsand Witnefles of tris Vengeance, 
& what Cont-mpt he pours upon them, their Carcaſcs being brought 
before theix Idols, which will be ſo ſhameful, as if one ſhould draw: 
torth the Adultereſs, with the Adulterer 1nto openview, and expoſe. 
them together, &1t alſo inſinuates the inability. that is in theſe dumb 
Idolsto help themin their miſery. d This and the following terms: 
ſerve to expreis the greatneſs and variety oftheir affe&ion and zeal 
n their worſhipping of rhem, Dcut., 4. rg. 2 Kings 23- 5. chap. 
7. 18, he multiplies words, as ir were implying, that there can 


p hardly 


16 
| , 
I | 
'F 


i 


« 
- 
| 
Wile i! 
bl 


: WA 
x*\jf 


they ſhall lay aſide all things that are for the it! 


4 
$11 


72 Ss 
. 


hap. VII. 


"I Fo PE © "I "Bans... Rat <4 
Pre: . "3% l - aats XA x "F5""7a - — d 
1 | OOTY > -_ 


'v be words enough to expreſs their folly and madneſs, the 
RT wmthipoing theſe Creatures, not only for their beauty and 
luſtre, but according to their ancient Philoſophy apprehending 
them to have been living Creatures, and that a]l events were order- 
ed by them. e On the ſuperficies of it, there ſhall be no care taken 
of them, but they ſhall lie in che open Country in the Air, till they 
rot into dung, or dry into duſt as in the beginning of the Verle. See 
Plal. 83. 10: Chap. 9. 22. they ſhall be ignominous even afrer Dcath. 

And death ſhall be choſen rather than f life, by 


| all the reſidue of them that remain of this evil family, 


which remain in all the places whither I have g driven 


them, ſaith the LORD of 4 hots. I 

f A Deſcription of the unexpreflibleneſs of their miſery, that 
notwithſtanding all rhe barbarilm of rhe Babylonians exerciſed both 
upon the living, and the dead, yet 32 ſmall matter in compariſon of 
what the living would fee], of the greatneſs of which milery there 
was a double cauſe; not only their being led into Captivity, bur 
Gods diſpleaſure following them, even in their baniſhmenr, being 
ſorely eppreſſed, one of thoſe threatnings, Zev. 26. 36, 39- See Job 
3- 20, 2T. Rev. 9. 6. g Some diſperſed among the Movnt«1ns, and 
hiding places of Judea, others in the Deſarr of Moab 'and Idumea, 
whither they fled for fear of the Chalatans, and all other places, 
where God would ſcatter them, an Hypalage, þ He that hath all 
the Creatures asan Army at his Command, can do this againſt thoſe, 


with whom he is diſpleaſed. | 
Moreover, thou ſhalt ſay ;unto them, Thus 


faich the LORD, ſhall they fall, and not & ariſe ? ſhall 


he turn away, and not / return ? 

. c Though poſſibly it be all in vain. yet thou ſhalt keep in thy 
work. k An agition that hath the force of a negative, 2. e. 
Surely none, or will Men, is there no hope ? And are they upon this 

round deſperate ? Or rather will Men tall ard not ariſe? Are they 

uch Fools ? that having fallen by their ſins, anc been foretold all 
that is coming, thot they will not accept of a Remedy, Chop. 7. 27. 
Hoſe 14+ 1. 1 A Metaphor taken from one that 15 out of his way, 
can any imagine, that if one tell him of it, and dire&t him aright, 
that he will not hearken to him, and turn back ? Itiseven againſt 
Nature it ſelf for a Man not to ſeek his own good. : 

5 Why then is this people of Jeruſalem flidden back, 
by a perpetual backſliding ? They hold faſt » deceit, 
they refuſe to return. 

m Either an univerſal backſliding- Or, rather obſtinately re- 
ſolved to hold on, though they ſec they are out of the way ; not 
out of levity or inconſiderareneſs, the Heb. word fſiznifies ſtrengrh, 
the ſame uſed, Pſal. r3. 8. andrranflated for ever, implying a ſtrong 
Nif, ſtout Refuſal. See 1a. 57. 17+ Chap. 5+ 3. 7 Either their In- 
juſtice and Cozenages in circumventing one a:.other, which was fo 
frequent among, them, chap: 9. 4, 5, 6. Mic. 7. 3, 4. Or their Hypo- 
crifie whereby they thought to deceive God, bur they did ince:d 
deceive themſelves ; the great impediment of their Rep-nrance, 1a. 
44. 20. or rather their ſticking cloſe totheir falſe Prophets who dd 
deceive them, thence incouraging themſelves in their wickedneſs, 
and pleaſing themſelves, that their Miſeries ſhould not come upun 
them. See on 1s. 30: 10. chap. 5. 31. and 14+ 13, 14+ 


6 I hearkened and o heard, but they ſpake not p a- 
right, no man repented him of tis wickedneſs, fay- 
ing, What have q I done ? Every one turned to his r 


courſe, as the horſe ruſheth into the barrel. 

0 i e That Imight hear, the words rather of God than of the Pro- 
phet, which the continuance of the Speech ſeems to ſhew in the 
nexr Verſe, in the cloſe whereof it is plain that God ſpeaks, ex- 
preſſi:g himſelf after the marner of Mer, whoare wonttoliſtendi- 
ligenr'y after the things they are very deſirous of. See 1 King. 20, 
32. Mal 3.16. þ Or not ſo asthe LXX, and the word is thus uſed, 
Exod. 10..11. Pſal. r. 4+ not ſoas I would have had them, fo far 
from Repentance, that I do not perceive a word from them rend- 
ing that way. 9q 1 ſe no tendency ro Repentance, I fee none of 
them ſo much as calling themſelves to an account, not recoiling 
upon themſelves, where Repentance uſually begins, 2 Chren. 6. 37, 
as Men uſe upon an inconfiderate a& to {mite upon their Breaſt, 
er Thigh, and ſay what have I done, as 2 Sam. chap. 3+ verſe 24. 
r To their accuſtomed way, committing all wickedneſs without re- 
traint. See on Iſa. 59. 7. the fury and unbridledneſs of their Luſts, 
being ſpurred on by their Wills, . is deſcribed 1p the next expreſſion, 
ſhewing how like a headſtrong Horſe, he runs away with hisRider, 
or compared to the delight, that an Horſe ſeems to take in ruvning 


7-6 *G E _— XX x : Chap. Vil. * Chap. 


8 How doye fay, We are y wiſe, and the law of the - 
LORD is With us? Lo, certainly a || in vain made || Or, the == 
he zt, the. pen of the ſcribes is b in vain. __ 

of the 


» 9.4. Theſe things conſidered where is your wiſdom ? When ©: 

you ſee the very Fowls of the Airare not ſo ſtupid, as you are; he annie tad 
{peaks either to Princes and Prieſts, or to the whole Body ofthe peo- — 
ple. z This may be underſtood either more general of all, or may for falſbood 
have a more ſpecial Eye to the Prieſts, with whom it was intruſted, 

Dem. 33. 10. Mal 2+ 75+ They were wont to boaſt muck of the Law 

as well as of the Temple, chap. 18. 18. Roy. 2. 17, 23. a 9. 4. For 

any uſe they made of it, they had as good have been without it, 

God needed not tohave given them a Law, Hoſ. 8. 12. b Neither 


need ir ever have been copyed out divulged, and conveighed down F Heb. e 
'orhem by the Scribe, Deur. 17. 18. or the prevarications, and col- fulneſs 
luſions theſe Lawyers uſed in the falſe interpretations of the Law, thereof. 


wherein they ſided with the falſe Prophets, ſhould be in vain. A 
9 was a Teacher, one well verſed in the Scripture, or eſteem- 
ed ſo. 


9 * || The wiſe men are aſhamed, they are diſmayed * Chop: 
and c taken ; lo, they have reje&ed the word of the 4g "LOR 


LORD ; and wha: | wiſdom # in d them ? they been 


c They truſted to their refuges of lyes, but when God ſhal) bring aſhamed 
the judgment: threarned the wiſeſt amor g rbem wil) finds that they &Cc. 
ſhall be c:nfounded among themſelves, not knowning what to do + Heb. the 
for al! thei- Wiidom, bur thall be taken with rhe reſt. chap. 4. 9. by wiſdom of 
Wiſemn, he 1w-Ceans the Scrives in the former Verſe. The tame ſaid what thins, 
of Babylon, Iſa. 47.10, d Or what is wiſaem to them? How can they , 
ſay rhey a1- wiſe, when they have no fear of God, which is the be. 
ginning of wi)auom, Prov. I. 7. whenthey have no reſpe& atallrothe 
Word of Gd, as to any holy praftice which is the fountain of all 
wiſaom, Deut. q. 6- Pſal. 19. 7. 2 Tims 3. 15. 

10 Therefore * will I give their wives unto others, ,,, _ 
andtheir fields to them that ſhall e inherit zhem: for every » wo 
one from the leaſt even ynto the greateſt is given to Ames 
* f covetoulneis, from the prophet even untothe prieſt, 5: «1: TE 
every one dealeth g falſly. Zephe * Pſaſs 

e A paraphraſiical deſcription of the Miſeries of War ; God doth 2". $8.4, 5 
here ipfinuzte that their miſery ſhall notbe for a ſhort time, but ſo Ha. 56, 
long, as thet ſtrangers, viz. The Chaldecans ſhall enjcy their Land ry 
by inheritance, ſo far ſhould they be from poſſeſſing their Land for 
ever. f So greedy after their own private gain, that they tock no 
care of equity, or juſtice, in which word 1s compriſed all their 
fraudulent D-alings one among another. g Of this and the two 
next Vertcs, ſee on chap. 6. 13, 14, 15. 


11 Forthey have * healed the hurt of the daughter 
of my people ſlightly, faying, Peace, peace, when there : wa 
& NG PECAace, | Tm 

i2 Were they * aſhamed when they had committed , T Heb, 
abomination ? nay, they were not atall aſhamed, nei- , <P mY 
cher could they bluſh, therefore (ball they fall among 63 In 
chem that fall; in the time of their viſitation they ſhall j 
be TE _ che LORD, | 

12 © ||I wil ſurely 4 conſume them, faith t 
LORD 2: There ſhall be no grapes * on the vine, nor "on 


[] Or, x 


lin RA i rhyme 


on the * fig ;tree, and the leaf ſhall fade, and zhe 1hixgs NT 

that I have given them ſhall & paſs away from them. ſame. | THeb. 
h Or in gathering I will conſume them; q d. T will ſo gather them * Ifa. 5: 1, | eauſe of 

together into ther !everal (.;tics to be beſieged, that it ſhall be no &c- = the coun. 

hard matter to d-ſtroy them, veoſ 16. viz. The Body of the peo- * Matth. | Frey of 

ple, not every oe, for there was a remnant, that did eſcape, 21: 19: them thy 

# Theſe Fruits, Grapes, and Figs, it is probabie, were of Ros 2p" Luke 13: « > waa 

1 of. 


account and uſe a:nong them, 1ſa. 36. «6. and fo may be &C> 
other things, erther for —_— delight, which Cod +” corn - —_— 
will deprive them of by reaſen of the Siege, which a Famine ſhall 
ſucceed, chap. 5- 17. Joel. 1, 7. Hab. 3.175. See the like Zeph. x. 2 

3. Or poſſibly, it may be ſpoken by way of /milituae,- q. d. they ſhall 

be weſted, as when there 15 no Grapes on the Vine, &c. The "Land 

ſhall be Jcfr as bare, as when by Tempeſts or other violence, there 

1s neither Leaf nor Fruit left upon the Tee, Pſal. 78. 47- k If 

this refer to the further puniſhment, as ſome, then itis as much as | ; 


[ 


! 


to ſay, what they have already received from me avd laid vu 

ſhall alſo be deprived of, Hoſ. 2. 8, 9. or though I have a wy 
them, yct they ſhall not enjoy it, it ſhall be raken away by their 
Enemies; if ir relate to the reaſon of the puniſhment, as others \ 


violently, and headſtrongly into the Battel, as it is deſcrib«d, Job then the Copulative is put for the Cauſal, q. d. becauſe the things that b 


39. 21, &« And this word ruſhing, ſignifying properly an inunda- I gave them, wiz.. My Laws, paſs away, 7. e. they have tranſoreſ- 
tionof waters, helps ro ſhew their uncontroulJableneſs in another ſed, 1/a. 24. 4, 5- either ſenſe lies fair, F —_—— F 


Metaphor : See this verified of them, chap. 2+ 23, 24+ It is ſaid every 
one by an hyperbole, as Pſal. 14. 3- and frequently elſcwhere. 


7 Yea, the ſtork in the r heaven knoweth her ap- 
pinted / times ; and the turtle, and the crane, and 
the ſwallow obſerve the time of their : coming ; but 
* my people know « not the x judgment of the LORD. 
r i.e. In the Air, which is often called Heaven, where the Birds 
fly, Pſal. 8. 8. compare chap 7. 33, who poſſib'y obſerve the fir 
time by the temperature of the Air. ſz. e. Obſerverth the ſeveral 
Seaſons of her going and coming by ſome natural inſtin&, and this 
is ſaid of the Srork ; what kind of Fowl is here meant is diſpurable: 
See Engliſh Annot. and Lat. Symp. t The ſame thing diverſified in 
theſe ſevera] Fowls, that know a'ſo their Seaſons. » This notes the 
great ſtupidity of his people, ſeeming nor to have as much ſenſe in 
them, as the Birds in the Air, not knowing their Summer of proſ- 
perity, to made a good uſe of Gods Favour, nor the Winter of Adver- 
fie, either to prevent or remove that Wrath of God that bangs 0- 
ver their heads, ſs. 5. 12. Luke 19. 42, 44- they know not their 
time for Repentance, and making their peace with God, compared 
alſo, on the ſame account, to the Beaſts of the Field, 1/2. r. 3. and 
thus.Chriſt vupbraides the Phariſees, Matth. 16. 2, 3. x Either Gods 
Vengeance in general, or particularly hovering over Jeruſal-w and 
Fudes, or rather the manner of Gods Diſpenſations with them. $o 
the word is uſed, 1 Sam. 2. 13+ and 8, I1, 


14 Why do we ſit] ſtill ? * Aſſemble your ſelves. _ __ 
and let us enter into the defenced m cities, and let ug C44- i 
be » filent there; tor the LORD our God hath put us 
to ofilence, and givenus * water of p || gall to drink, be- * 64,9) 
cauſe we have ſinned againſt the LORD. 23 oF 

1 The people at length ſeem to bethink themſelves, and thus to || Or noiſes; 
beſpeak each other. »: In the ſcattered Villages, there is noſafety _ 
for ns, Jet us retire into places of greater ſecuriry, Matth. 24 
I6, 17, 18. poſſibly they thought they might be ſecured there, as they 
had been before in the time of Sennacheribe n Keep cloſe within our 
walls, ſay ordo nothing to provoke the Enemy, but fit down, and 
bewail the deſparateneſs of our condition, Lam. 3. 28, 29, or trem- 
blingly expe the ifſue of this ſad War, for there is no poſſibility of 
making head againſt ſuch an Enemy, that bears down. all before 
them. o They now begin to perceive, that the Hand of God is in 
all this, and that therefore they have not a word to ſay, as if they 
were wronged, God hath put them toſhame ; much leſs courage, to ! 
oppole the Babylonians, their heart fails them, they are as Men in a 
great terrour and conſternation, God hath put us to filence,let us be ſilent. 

p Or poiſon probably the name of ſome poiſoncus Herb, with the juice 
or infuſion whereof they were wont to kill perſons, as Hemlock, Niche 
ſhade, &c. See Hoſ. 10, 4+ It notes thoſe bitter deſtruQive Judgments 
that God was bringing upon them, chap. $9: i5: which did tpring from 

that 


" Chap. VII. 


© — 2-24 and 


that bitter root of their ſinning 2gainſt him, es in the next words. 
i5 We * looked for peace, but no good came, and 
for a time of health, and behold, 9q troublz. 

q Viz, Upon the perſwaſion of our Prophets, we expetted that 
theſe Troubles would never come, but all would be well, but we 
find our ſelves meerly deluded by them, we looked {o long, tilleven 
our eyes failed us, but we ſee no remedy for us, Lam. 4. 17+ 
Metaphor: Miſeries are often in Scripture compared to Diſeaſes and 
Deliverances to Healing, Deut. 32+ 39. P/al. 103% 3- chap. 33. 6+ 

16 The r ſnorting of his horſes was heard from / 
Dan: the whole land trembled at the ſound of the 
neighing of his # ſtrong ones : for they are come and 
f Heb. the have devoured the land and Þ all that is « in it ; the 


pou x City, and thoſe that dwell therein. 

4 7 The fury of the Chaldeans March is deſcribed by the Mmorting of 
their Horſes, which is anoiſe they make through their Noſtrils, 
when they are chaſed, and fretted; 5 i e. Even to Jeruſalem, 9 d, 
the dreadtulneſs of the noiſe ſhall be heard from far, or rather, tho 
Feruſalem ſeem to be ſecure, yet the furtheſt Coaſts of rhe Land are 
in great conſternation, viz the utmoſt boundary of Canaan North» 
ward, through which the Chaldean Army was to march, See chap. 
4- 15. Or it is ſaid to be heard, eitherthe noiſe it ſelf, or the fame of 
it, chap. 6. 24. t His choice Horſes or Cavelry, or his ſtout and 
ſturdy ones, as the word ſignifies, and expreſfled by their brisk fro- 
lickſomneſs and courage in the word neighing properly applied to 
Horſes, underſtanding here the chief of them, and the word for 
Frong ones is applyed to any thing, thatexcels, as to Man, Job 34. 20. 
to Angels, Pſal. 78. 25. Angels food, or the bread of the mighty. And for 
Horſes as here, and Judge 5. 22+ chap. 47. 3» # Heb. the fulneſs of it, the 
Trees, and Fruits, and wealth of the Land, they are entred upon 
their ſpoil, and will leave nothing in the Land, chap. 4+ 20+ Ir is 
ſpoken in a Prophetical ſtile, who uſe to expereſs the certainty of 
what ſhall be, as if it a&ually were already. » viz. Jeruſalem, or 
rather the Cities with all their inhabitants, as well as the Country, 
the Singular Number being put for the Plural, as Js. 27. 10. 

| 17 For behold, I will ſend ſerpents, cockatrices, a- 

*Plaſls mong you, which will not be y * charmed, and they 

$8. 4, 5* ſhall z bite you, faith the LORD. 


- 3 He proceeds in increaſing of their terrour, q- d. there will be no 
appeaſing, or allaying of their fury by any artor method, therefore 
repreſented by the Cockatrice, called in Latine Regulus, or King of 
Serp:nts, as putting to flight atl other Serpents, but by oppoſition 
to Serpents, ſhewing what kind of Serpents they ſhall be, a ſort 
that cannot be charmed. wit. ſuch an Enemy as by no intreaty can 
be made exorable : See on 1/a. 11. 8; LXKX, deadly Serpents. z They 

ſhall afflit you with ſore puniſhments, not only Stings in their 
Tails,as Scorpions, but in their Teeth, whereby they ſhal, devour 
you, ver. I6, LE , : 
18 hen T would comfort my ſelf againſt a ſorrow : 
my heart is fainr f inme. . | | 
a The language of the people being long ſhut up in their Cities, 
and finding no Relief, at laſt faint, Lam. 4+ 17. But more probably 
the Propher now ſeems toſpeak his own Reſentments, how greatly 
the Calamity of his people did affe& him, the like 1. 22. 4. when 
he would ſometimes Refreſh himſelf with the comfortable Refreſh- 
ments of Nature, the thoughts of his peoples Miſery do ſo affli& 
him, that his Heart is ready to fainty to fivk within him. 
19 Behold, the voice of the b cry of the c daughter 
+ Heb. be. Of my people, + becauſe of them thac dwell in a far 
cauſe of 4d country : 1s not the LORD in e Zien? 57s not her 
the comm. King in her ? why have they provoked me to f anger 
_ DA with their graven images, and with g ſtrange vani- 
are afar tes 5 : ; 
of. b i. e. The greatneſs of their cry, the bitter Cries and Schreeches 
and complaints that methinks I bear : the words are abrupt, becauſe 
the-Propher is to repreſent ſeveral perſons ſpeaking ; himſelf, the 
people, and God. © See chap. 4. 11, poſſibly becauſe Jeremiah loved 
them, inſtruted them admoniſhed thein, as a Daughter. d Yiz., Their 
Enemies the Babylonians, that were to come againſt them from a very 
far Country, chap. 6- 22. or the voice of them that were Captives 
under thoſe of a far Country. now they begin to cry, which would 
not be perſwaded to it before ; the firſt is moſt to be approved of. 
- e Viz, In Jeruſalem, a Metonymy of the Subje&. f Or as King in 
- Zen, or have we not a King of the Seed of David; to whom the 
Kingdom was granted to be perperual ? Either the words of God, 
9. d. was not T among you to provide for-you, and prote& you, but 
on muſt needs repair to Idols ? The like kind of Speechis in 
| Foues {+ 3. and the cloſe of the Verſe ſeems to favour this, or, as 04 
- "thers, an expoſtulatory Lamentation of the people, that the cruel 
Adverſay ſhould prevail over a people, that had God ſo near them, 
Pſal. 48.- 2, 3. and 76 1, 2+ hath God how lefr us? and is the pro- 
miſe of his continuafice here at anend? P/al. 89. 36, 37, 38. g As 
if God ſhould ſeem to reply here ; Let them not think it ſtrange, 
ſeing they have turned their backs upon me, and truſted to Idols, 
which are but vanity, chap. 2+ 11, 13. called vanity, not only becauſe 
Idols are as nothing, but becauſe all the confidence that is pur in 
them is vain, and becauſe Idelators are vain in their Minds, and 
want underſtanding. I bave not forſaken them, bur they me. 
20 The harveſt is b paſt, the ſummer is ended, and 
we are not i ſaved. | 
_ þ And tke Winter no time fot War, the peoples continued com- 
plaint, not unlike that v. 15. the yearis gone, and we are ſtill fruſt- 
rated in our expeCtations, the time that we expeCed help from &- 
£ypt, Iſa. 30. 2,3, 5+ i Viz. By the Egyptians, or any other Confcde- 
Cates. 


21 For the k hurt of the daughter of my people am 


O Chap» 
$4- 1] 9. 


f Heb, 
WP9Ns 


, 


ET hurt, I am Iblack; m aſtoniſhment hath taken hold | 


on me. 
-& The Prophet here ſhews liow deeply he is affeQed with the peo- 
les miſery, he deeply ſympathized with them, it ſignifies Breach, 
am broken in my Spirit, and fo it anſwers ro the Breach that is 
made upon the people. 3 Tamay thofe thay are Glade jan dep Mourne 


* 


; EREMT 


pentine, which is a kind of more liquid Roſ#r, and either flows, or 


teracy and obſtinacy of their hearts, that either. would not come to 


flowing down daily upon them ; can Jeruſalem and Judea be withour 


one water, ſignifying plenty, and that his eyes might diſtil rears 
like a fountain ; the ſame word in the Heb. for Eye ſignifies a Founs 


for z lyes : but they are not valiant for the « truth 


out Arrows, ſo doth the Tongue words, Pſal. 645 3. 
reproachful, falſe, and noxious words, to the damage of one ano- 


'ground of all which is ſaid here to be their nt knowing of God,as in the | 


F {ſlander IP 


b wes , - == a C Iz 
Hf Ng 
. 


| WI) 


L1'S 


4 "ih -..... . _.. Gp 
ing, Pſal, 38. 6. chap. 14, 2: m T am amazed to think that my peo- "ſr 
ple ſhould fin themiclves beyond help, no Remedy for them, asths | 
—_ Verſe, that no threatnings or counſels ſhould prevail with Ll 
c elle . ; : tba 4 j | 11 

22 Is there no * balm in » Gilead ? Is there no oPhyſi- * Gen-37. fk 


cian there ? why then is not the healch of the daugh- 25: <bap* [1 it 
| * 46.7 I. & | 


: 


ter of my people Þ p recovered. 


; 
» Gilead was eminent for Balm, Gen. 43. 11. taken 


| oP: ; r. 8. j 
for Rofin or Tur- } Heb. "al 
drops from certain Trees of its own accord, or thetf juice flows from a 
ſeveral holes peirced into them, as from the Pine, Cedar, Cypreſs, or 
Terebinth Tree, Heb. Teri. Gr. p1T!v1 from 4 to flow, or run. Lat, 

Reſma, Engliſh, Roſin A near affinity of the words in each Language, 

the nature whereof is to diſſolve hardneſs, to clear, and cloſe u 

wounds. o Or Chirurgeon, probably in a Country where were,ſuc 

plenty of Remedies, there could nor want Artiſts, whereby their 

cures mighr be facilitated. by means of which the Gilcadites and 4 

rabians did excel there. p Heb. zone up; the like ex preſſion 2 Chron, 

24+ 13- the work was perfefted, Heb. the healing went upupon the 

work, and ſo Neh, 4. 7- the Prophet expreſſeth his grievous com 

plaint by way of admiration, by a Metaphor, implying the inve- 


the Phyſician, or that they ſhould be thus incurable, where they wan= 
ted not for Prophets and Teachers,. or for any ſpiricual means; 


ſpiritual Phyſicians ? Some underſtand it by way of Sacraſm, q. 
where are your Medicines, your Arms, your Counſels, your: Con- 
federacies? And where are your Phyſicians, your Princes and Prieſts 
that promiſed you Relief? Without God, you ſee, no help in ang 
means; but the former is more natura), and agrees beft with the be- 
ginning of the next Chapter. 
C H A P. IX. . t 
The Prophets Lamentation continueth over their Adultery, Dectit, Idolatry, 
which God would certainly puniſh, and they ſhould be laid waſte, when 
they ſhould ſufficiently lament, x, 22, No truft in Our ſelves, but 
in God, who will puniſh all Nations, 23,——26. , EP | 
H + * that my head were q waters, and tmine eyes t Heb.1 | 
LH a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and */ »i* ||| 
night for the r ſlain of the daughter of my people. #2": | 
q Heb. who will give, &c. by way of enquiry; becauſe the Hebrews * Tis 22-4 il 
do want the Imparative Mooa;the Prophet in thisChapter is principal- Ch = | | 
ly bewailing his poor Country-mens calamity, whom ke therefore Tr 197 ll 
calls rhe Daughter of his people, he expreſleth the greatneſs and exceſs —_—_— 
of his Sorrows, by wiſhing that his Brains were as it were diſſolved | 
$i! 
| 


into water, (for the word is ſingular) as if he wiſhed it were all 


tain; noting the continuance of ir, as not to be drawn dry, expreſ< 
ſed by Day and Night, apprehiending it a Miſery fo atant. as never 
ſufficiently to be bewailed. See Luke 19. 41. r Or that are to bs 
ſlain, viz. by the Babylontans, a prophetical ſtile, as ſure to be ſlain, 
as if they were ſlainalready. 


2 Oh that I had in the wilderneſs a lodging place 
of / way-faring men: thatT mighr leave my people and _ .. .. _ 
go from them : for * they be all + adulterers, an aflem- * Chap, | 
bly of treacherous men. = Sl FRA 
F He proceeds in his Lamentation, which in the former Verſe he 
did by way of Compaſſion, in this in a way of Indignation; wiſhing 
for ſome retiring place or ſorry ſhade, or night cortage : See on1ſs, 
24. 20» though it were but ſome mean and ſorry Hutt in the Wil- 
derneſs, as David, Pſal. 55. 6, 7. ſuch as might but ſhelter him from 
the Injuries of the Weather : LXX. in ſome remoteſt Station or 
Corner, where ke might not be an Eye-witneſs of their Miſeries to 
grieve him ſo ar the heart, Pſal. 119. 136, 158. See 2 Pet. 2. 7,8. and 
where he might hape to find better Entertainment from the favage 
Beaſts, than from his own Country-men. *# i. e. For the moſt parr, 
chap. 5. 8. both properly and Metaphorically, being full of all idg- 
latrous PraQtices ; or there is no Integrity. found among them, 
« That deal perfidioully with God and man in all theConcerns the 
are converſant about, J/s. 1.. 4. And ; fe the Word here for pd 


— : D -_ - _— - «A. 
ne Rr_r=e= PR iz 
I IIS TOE EEE PEP ye — 
a 4 - = 


—_ er Ee Cm a CE a es 


ſembly is moſt otdinarly uſed for an Holy Aſſembly, Levit. 23. 36. Numb... 
29+ 35, Which cauſeth ſome to. underſtand it of their being moſt vile 
when they ſhowild be moſt deyout ;.yet here it moſt naturally figni- 
fies a kind of Combination among them, as ſuch that have conſpired I 
one among another to aR all manner of Villanies. : * 
2 And * they x bend their tongues Jike their 7 bow + Ih. 55 i 
- truth up- ,,s3,15, i 
onthe b earth : for they proceed from evil to c evil, and "OY | 
they know not me, faith the LORD.  _T.J 
x Heb. Tread, becauſe Bows are uſually kneeled or trede upon 
when they are bent, chap. 50..14+ and 5t« 3- 5 Their Tongues are 
here compared to a Bow, and Lyes to Arrows. becauſe as a Bow ſhoots 


z.i.e, AU 


ther : and ſ@ bending may be preparing, framing, and contriving, 
thar Miſchief which they purpoſe to ye with their Tongues, 
Pſal. 52. 2, 3, 4. and 64. 3. as Bending is preparing the Bow: to do 
Execution with the Arrow. 4 Equity, Fuftice, they are as eager in 
che ways of Falſhood as Men engaged-in War, but.ſhew no Valouex 
in maintaining the Truth. + 3. e. No Truth in the Earth in them; 
as we uſe to. expreſs our ſelves, or rather more genuinely. 
in the Land wherein they live, they have no courage in what is 
good. «c Either in kind, orindegree, they goon from bad to worſe, 
2 Tim. 3- 13. which ſpeaks little hopes of cheir Repentance; the 


next Clauſe, Juag 2, no, 11. 1 Sams 2+.12; The heart cannot work 
ſtrongly after God, where there be but mean Apprehenſions of 
him. | | | I 

4 * Take ye heed every one of his [| 4 eighbatir, * Chap- 
and truſt ye not in any brother :, for every brother will =o 
utterly e ſupplant, and every neighbour will walk wich 7. ;, 


6 F 4 


6. | 
4 Betetr £199: 


| 
[ * ; 
, i i 
$ 21 £ 


REMIT 4 H. Chap. IX; | Chap. 1 
4 Briter -endred Friend or Companion, as 2 Sam. 16. 17. andinthe| is not ſo much as the Chirping of a Bird, the bleating of a Sheep, A 


; -ncicn will be fo malirnant, | or Lowing ofan Ox to be heard. See chap. 23. 10, 02, 13. and 50. 
next hes Fun por pow 90 igang Bach - Eriends. e Whol- | 3. They are faid to be fl:d and gone; either the Enemy hath ſwepr 
Foot, one 

y 


* 0. CORN PA MS. 

nt 4. 230 Ss Sas > = 

Ws bi ”s 

Ol , } £ 

y - 
ha I 
_ ry - 
Pe. - wo” 
—=© - 
” 


y 


, ONE £'T1 » 1] fooled treading down tread- | away all, or they have forſaken the Land, becauſe there was no 
: amy _ nagar Ha; Td” os Mod. Oppreſſi-] Food, Jer. 12. 44 A Figurative Expreſſion of an univerſal Deſola- 
« < ith one. exerciſe all manner of ways, as in the next Verſe, | tion. ; | = : 
| borh by Fraud and Force. Like? the Interpretation that Eſau puts 1T AndI will make Jeruſalem by heaps, and a * den + Iſa. 34 
u = Jacob Gen. 27+ 36. not only ſuch as are near 1N Habirarion, of » dragons ; and I will make the cities of Judah + de- 13. | 
pearending Neighbourhood and Friendſhip, oy ow wo —_ {ojare, without an inhabitant. Chap. to, |} 
even a Brother will cxrcumvent, mo a bottom , The Wor dis| * iz. Of Stones, and Rubbiſh, y Noting a deſolate place, net 22: 
to be monſtrous In Nature, putting %; Name from Supplanting ; a any longer fic for the Habitation of Mankind, as the next words t Heb de 
herein Alluſion to  7acob, who had ng wiegasn f Carrying Tales | 4e ſpeak ; bur for hideous Beaſts ; asthey had made uſe of the Tem- J0/atien, 
[ey meg | - unlagAwhoy begs falſe, to the Diſturbance 7% tor a Den of Thieves, Chap. 7+ 11. The ſame alſo he afterwards 
———_— DE nc 4, chap. 6. 28. and againſt the Law of threatens on Babyln her ſelf, Chap. 50. 37: 
of the Peace © 8 eig 12 * Who is the wiſe-man, that may underſtand 
God: Lev. 5H, 20: ill g || deceive every one his neigh- | this ? and who is he to whom the mouthof the LORD 


Or,ock, __ = _ v4 Av ſpeak the truth : they have þ taught hath ſpoken, that he may @ declare it, for what the 


their tongues to ſpeak lyes, and 4 weary themſelves to | land periſheth, azd is burnt up like a wilderneſs, that 


mit iniquity none paſlerh through. 
COm - - : 7 

de ;  þ They have ſo fra- | = /'z. The ground of all theſe Evils, 9. 4 Is there not a wiſe 
£ Heb- TE _ b _ OE ms UE, that Lying is | Man among yeu, rhat will concern himtelf, and ſearch inro the 
_— nar Wo ahons that they cannot leave it: the ſame | Caule of al) theſe rhreatned Judgments, which hath provoked God 
ar pigs Jr the wild Aſs, uſed or taught to the Wilderneſs, to ſo great Diſpleaſure ? See Heſ. 14+ 9. Iris a Queſtion that im- 
_ 5 They "uſe a great deal of Induſtry, Dili- | plies there is none, or very few, that conſider common Calamities 
—_— ns in 1t al. 7. 14. Iſa. 5. 18. They ſpare | 1n the Cauſes of them ; but rather ſay of Judgments, it is a Chance, 


&, an Bſal. 7. __ 
Top ho Labour, and feel no wearinel!s in it, whereby they are become | 1 Sam. 6.9 


13 And the LORD faith, @ Pecauſe they have for- 
Ts Ying habitation # in the midſt of & deceit: |ſaken my b law, which I ſet before c them, and have 


through deceit they refuſe to / know me, ſaith the | noc obeyed my voice, neither walked therein; —_ 
LORD Srl this, and the next Verſe _ to the former, viz, Bee 
< . :nform him, that | cauſe there are none can give the reaſon why the Land periſheth, 
& This oe _ torr? hypo _—_ lung "4 Sorefore therefore God will; or elle they refer to the 15 and 16 Verſes, as 
there 1s fy Pe EE ICooals by the AbſtraQ, Deceit, 4. e. Nothing | ſhewing the Cauſes of thoſe Judgments threatned; for either of the 
he exprefiet % Dec - one to another, znd Hypocrifie towards References do not alter the Senſe : ſee Chap, 5, 19. this Verſe con= 
among them, but LU Td for wake Men, 70b 25. 13. or tO cau- | tains negarive Reaſons. b He chargeth them with their Apoſtaſie, 
me, as Pſal. tog- 2. y " Sri himſelf among ſach a peoples and refuling to obey his Precepts, and conferin their Converſation 
tion and adviſe him, © be not enſoared by them, chap- 12. 6. | © them, <c Leſt they ſhould plead they were obſcure and hard to 
that he be very - +40? mough by their ſeveral weans they be uncerſtood, therefore hetelIs them, he had made it plain to them, 
E Either + 99g} ot 4 . week wg fs i {s of turning tome, or by | hey could not be ignorant of it, except it were out of Wilfulneſs 
hink ro ap tut eh prophets, who have all along deceived and Qbſtinacy : The like Expreſſion, Deut. I1. 32. ; 
: pork ening obſtinately reje& my Ways and Counſels, P/al. 36. 1, 14 But have walked after the [| d imagination of their | or, tubs 
on—_ es, own heart, and after e Baalim, which their f fathers borne{s- 
' 7 Theretore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts ; Behold, | taught chem. 
] will melt them, and m try them : for how ſhall I» do] @ Or, Stubborrneſs and Obſtinancy : ſee chap. 7. 24. e See ch, 2+2Js 
 yogreforoms heb th people Sd The Propher doth not charge them wich nzw Crimes, but with their 
or tne pn LTOUEA 24 chap. 6. 2y try them by melting them, tenacious ſticking to their Idolatry. f See Chap. 7. 18, It ſeems 
m The ſame Merap hat lefſer Aﬀflitions will do, before I do they might partly thank their Education ſor ir, as well astheir own 
os te res. = oY Bax 6. I will bring Judgm —_ upon them, natural Perverſneſs : hence we ſhou!d learn to follow God's Coun- 
utterly de 7y Df che Chald: ans War, that ſhall clear away their ſel in rhe Scriptures, and not blindly follow our Fathers Counſe], 
The Fire on wind them, and purge away thoſe Deceits in which 4 _— or Examples, or our own Will, which is the worſt 
, b ifhed, Dan. 11+ 35. as when / . | 
Com Wet, "the "reſt remains ve. See on | 35 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God 
iJja. 1. 25- * 9. &. There is no Remedy, I have tried all other | of Irael, Behold, I will feed them, cver this F4 people, oY 
©. _ means, and they have been incffcftual, my people will rakeno warn- | with * 4 wormwood, and give them water of gall to * Chap, | 
* -ing; they are grown to fuch an height of Impiety, that T candoſ 7 - 23+ [5 


E | . 6. 4+ d (= . ES A 
| | » -_ though they are my people, Oh. $ * 7 6. 1p crying £ This Supplement even ſhews that it is ſpoken Emphatically, 


k Jon _ | though they be a people that preſume to be my peculiar. h Worms, 
” TS hee fs pe our and whoſe Impieties have re Dutch A plant to purifie and cleanſe them, ſay ſome; but this 
nded 1 | : 


a —_ | 7s 1. | doth not ſeem ro be ſpoken in favour tothem ; therefore rather ſome | 
"2 8 Their tongue zs 4s.an RY row ſhot out ; wt ſpeak- poiſonous Planr, which may agree to any other deſtructive Herb, 
* Pal. 12- eth p * deceit : one ſpeaketh peaceably to his neigh- as well as Wormwo:d, and this the Heb, word doth intimate, to 
'2. and bour with his mouth, but | in q heart he layeth || his which purpoſe the water of Gall is mentioned in the next Words, 
125 » | h _ joyn2d together, Det, 29. 18. poſſibly the _—— at 
% $5 RA EEE ir Drink, the other at their Bread, both Metapherically to be uns 
"3y£ "No Vi »1t WasS COM ared fo a Bow, l1- ©. ready prepared TRE P . , 
5 . _ —_ A Bars conttiving their Wickednels, Pal. 17. derſtood, of which ſee on Chap. 8. 14. (; 
# Heb. in (200 OT an Arrow ſhot out, aftually executing what they have 16 I will ; ſcatter them allo among the heathen, * Toy? 
L = oned: Some tranſlate it, a murthering drrow. p Never ſpeaking | whom neither they nor their fathers have & known: 5; 336 
4c _ "whar they mean, that thereby they may the eafier deceive the Cre-| and ] willſend a ſword after / them, till I have conſu- Devur. 
ET 29 enlous; zdouble Tongue, ſpeaking fair when they mean to de- |, pu ; 2b. 64 
_ troy, Pal. oh ST, as the 9749 Agr Ps "Tix A Enos ; Either you ſhall wander up and down among Strangers, like 
The greaceſt Miſchief when they ſpeak Tatrett. | 7 ; Cain's Curſe; or rather, you ſhall have no Friend abroad, but be 


him, i. c. Tn his very inwards, with bis whole Heart he conrrives ſold as ſo many Slaves from perſon to perſon. k Part of the Curſe 


* Pa). 
TO7, 43? 


3. :ro..c 
* Pſal, x8. Waite 


chief.” *- - = 4, ' threatned, Deut. 28. 64. Z Neither ſhall this ſerve their turn, buc hs 
* Ehall T not viſit them for theſe Ong, faith . the | will tow chew wa the boot, till they be | robab. | | 
Eu | Þ | Fe ed on luch a i= | 1y meant of thoſe that might eſcape our of Jeruſalem, and fly into | 
= LORD ; hall rote d oul be aveng "_ Egypt, the Chaldeans ſhould purſue them thither, and either take or | 
Eat: .'-.- Gras this : = 7 lay them there, i» e. ſuch of them as were appointed for DeſtruQi« 
| .»*,* See Chap. 5« 9, 29: on ; forotherwiſe, they were'not all conſumed, a full End was not | 


on *11 | - de, as 1s promiſed chap» 5. 10. | 

For the mountains will I take up a weeping, and | *o Þe made, as is p pe 5 | | 

* Chap.  Eedog. and ® for the || habitations / of the w "Ider-| 27 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts ; »z conſider ye, | 
12.4-2nd  12mentation, becauſe they are || burnt up, ſo that and cal] for the mourning » women, that -they may 


EHoſ 4 3. none Can pals 3 through zhews, neither can mer hearthe |COMe 3 and fend for e cunning women that they may 


fOr, p-- voice of the # cartel ; | both the fowls of the heavens, | ©OM-: ne, 


| »» Either in how fad a Conditicn you are, what Circumſtances "git 

; Or. deſe- and. the beaſts are fled, they are .gone. 4 | you are under; or rather, bethink your ſelves what Courſe to take: TEM 

MOT, + The Prophet having, ver. 1. taken up a Eamentation for the 
fe. 


- | wd a IT | and therefore he puts them upon mourning and bewailing their | 
"+ Heb, - Slaughter-of the people, 'he now reaſſumes it for the Deſolation of | Con jtion, intimated by the following Expreflion. = A ſort of \ 


” the 'whole Land, every part of it being to be laid waſte : See Chap. | Perſons, and principally Women, as more apt for paſſions in this 
ow + , 26, Anditetther ſers forth the greatneſs of _ an "1 that kind, whichthey had among them, 2 Chrex. 35. 25. whoſe work 
1 reach to the very mountains,” asthe-words may be read, or ra= | jt was, either to compoſe Funeral Elegics, or Panegyricks inpraiſe 


1 __ ther, the Cauſe of his Mourning, becauſe he preſently adds, for | ,Fthe Dead, and to at them in ſome maurnful manner, as tearing 
the Hebiracrons of the Wilderneſs. ſ Plain, or Yalley, as it often ſignifies; | their Hair, and beating their Breaſts, with other mcurning poſtures, 
ſo'the Word 15s uſed Ja. 63. 13, 14. or pleaſant Plains, The Coun- or to ſing them in ſome doleful Tone, thereby artificially to: pro*+ 
* rey of -Jadahb beingMountainous,theſe Plains and Valleys were their | yoke and excite both Paſſions and Expreflions ot Grief in the Friends 
chief places for Paſtorage, which doth greatly qpgravate the Deva- | cf the Deceaſed, rather- wringing out' Tears than ſhedding them, 
fNarion.; theſe ſhall be'durnt up, the Herbage ſo burat, that it ſhall in which probably they made greater ſeeming Eamentations, than 
be left utterly barren, like a parched Heath, v. 12. The Mountains | thoſe that did really mourn, as being moſt concerned, -not thac 
ſhall not be able ro ſecure them, nor the Yalleyi to feed them. ? Ei- | Gedcalls upon them todo this asapproving the Formality, ( though 
ther x Hror being no Path ; the XX. render it, 0 the Paths of the | this fooliſh Cuſtom had obtained in-moſt Agesand:Countries) any 
IWildejnaſs,. or none to paſs to and fro, and ſo leave it deſolate ; or ſo more, than other Cuſtoms that were made ule.of by way-of Illuſtra« 
' parched;-and waſte, that none Can paſs through ir, ſo far are they | ton ; as the Olympick Gamez, and poſſibly that PraQtice mentioned; 
from being inhabited, chap. 2+ 6: u There, where once all ſort of | , Cor. nx. 29. but makes uſe of it, as being cuſtomary, either to 
Cartel and: Fowls in' great plenty were wone to feed and gaze, there ? excite th:m to,and put them upon true Repentance,or to Gs 

| them | 


” 


J Chap. ] 


4 


A 


ET er a CLI LO ne bt ret BO + END EIS IE ” 


DET yes, range as 


X. ; E kt E 
them herebv, that they were net able themſelves ſufficienty to be- 
wail ſo great Calamities 3s were coming upon them, intimating 
hereby, that he would give them occaſion for the moſt unfeigned 
weeping and Lamentatione 9 Such as are moſt skilful inir, 4770s 
5- 16. W:{dom being taken ter Skill in any Arts» as Exod. 31. 3. and 
elſewhere. | ; 

18 And let them make p haſte, and take up a wail- 
ing 9 for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, 
and our eye-lids guſhout with r waters. .. 

2 As by the calling for their Artificial Mourners, he did inti- 
mare the greatneſs of the Miſery that was coming upon them, that 
with all their Art they could not ſufficiently bewail it; ſo here, 
by making haſte, he intimates the near Approach of it, that it was 
even at thedoors. q Pitch upon ſome form of Mourning that may 
be ſuitable to our Condition. » This and rhe former are each of 
them an Hypcrbolical Expreſſion, and yet are too little to bewa1l 
the greatneſs of the Judgment, which ſuits with the Prophers La- 
mentation, Ver. 1. The Prophet would herein intimate, that they 
that were ſo ſtupid as to hear the prophets denouncing their 
Judgments withdry eyes, tho he wiſhed them to have been Foun- 
7ains of tears, ſhall now ſuddenly feel, that they ſhall have cauſe 
enough to ſend for all the Helps, not only real but artifital, to ſtir 
up their Mournings. : . 

19 For a voice of wailing is heard out of t Zion, 
How are we # ſpoiled ? We are greatly x confounded, 
becauſe we have forſaken the land, becauſe our dwel- 


lings have caſt #s out. 

# i. e. Jeruſalem, ſpoken in the preſent Tenſe, after the Prophe- 
tical Stile, being a frequent way of the Prophets expreſling the cer- 
tainty of a thing» « How great isour Miſery ? or how-come we 
to be in ſuch adeſolat Condition ? poſſibly Expreſſions of the Arti- 
fial Mourners or rather their real Senſe of it, now 1t is all too late. 
x Whether this be the complaint of the Country people forced to 
fly from their Habitation to Jeruſalem for ſhelter, or of Jeruſalem it 
ſelf, rhat could expeCt no leſs, it filled them with great Conſterna- 
tion, that thzy who thought their Honſes ſhould have conrinued 
for ever, bec:uſe of Gods promiſe, Pſal.' 132. 10, ©'c. muſt now 
forſ»k- them, Lev. 18. 25. Either their perſons carried our into 
Captivity, or have them utterly d-molithea by the Enemy. 

20 } Yet hear the word of the» LORD, O ye a wo- 
men, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, 
and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her 
b neighbour lamentarion. 

7 Or therefore, i. e. 2 Do not think I ſpeak words out of my own 
Mind or Fancy, but what Iſpeakis from the Lord. &@ Eitherthoſe 
bired Women mentioned before, or rather the Women of the Land, 
for God would have it not a mercenary, but a real Mourning ; and 
he mencionech Women, 1. To upbraid the Men with their Stu=- 

idity; 2+ As being more apt to grieve, thereby to expreſs the 
Reaineſs that he would have the Land to be in for Mourning; 
3- B-cauſe of the decay and want there would be of Men, as 1s ex- 
preſſed :n the nexr Verſe, by reaſon partly of the Slaughter, and 
partly of the Captivity ; therefore here is mention of Women with 
reference to Children in the next verſe, after whom their Bowels 
would yearn, and Daughters, either che Schollars of the mourning 
Womens, or rather, with ceference to Tung-men, unro whom rhey 
.mighr be given in Marriage; 4. Becauſe the Female Sex is leatt 
able to help rhemſc]ves in a common Calamity ; or 5. Becauſe they 
would be leaſt ſolicitous, but would indulge their Delic -cies, Pride, 
Sloch, and Wantonneſs, 1ſa. 32. 9, 11. +6 Heb. 4 woman her Friend, 
nameiy, that the Grief mighr ſpread the farther, and become deep» 
er; for AﬀeQtions and paſſions, of what kind ſoever, are augmen- 
red by Company : it notes how large and vaiverial the Mourning 
ſhould be, Amos 5. 16. 


21 For death is come up c into our windows, an#is 
entred into our palaces, to cut off che children from 


without 4, and the young-men from the ſtreets 

c The Unavoidableneſs of the Ruine is expreſſed wetaphrrically, 
Ezek. 21. 14+ chap, 6. 5. moſt likely alluding to rhe v:oJent and us)» 
verial ſtorming of a City, chap. 5. 10. wherein there 1s no reſpeCt 
had to Sex, Youth, or Age. Several other Alluſions. See Engliſh 
Annit, The Chaldeans are here underſtood by death, as bringin 

:ath where-ever they come ; ; ; 
” within or ni the Eneny ſha'l cur «ff ail, not only thoſe 
at home, bur even thoſe rþ«7 are converſirg Or playing in the 
Strezrs, which moſt commonly Young-mer and Chilaren are, chap, 
G. II. 


22 a Speak, ths faith tke LORD ; even the 6 car- 
caſes of men ſhzil fall as dung upon the open c held, and 
25 the handfu! after re 4 harveſt-man, and none ſhall 


; e them, 

on -_ they ſh-1d think theſe Things would never be, ceaſenor 
to rell them £--72 Me, that they {hall certainly come ro paſs, wiz, 
what was {gi *<fore, and what is ſaid now in this verſe ( theie words 
ſpeak ehy« Jaith the Lord, being beſt read in aParun:h«fis ) b Heb, 
A Carc,? Of a Man, noring here and there a ſcattered ca:cale, c Ag 
Jezp tl was, 2 King. 9. 37. expoſed to all Conrempr, ſtrewed up and 
J-wn on the Superficies of the Exrth. Heb- Face of che Field, and be 
off- :ſive by their ſtench ro all that paſs by, chap. 44- 12. d Eirngey 
Jaid in heaps by death, as the Harveſt-man doth his Cocks of Hay, 
or Sheaves of Corn, or rather, they ſhall be no more regarde( tran 
a few ſcattered Ears that drop our of the Reapers hand, which e- 
ther !ye on the ground and are eaten by Birds, or rrod te dirt by 
B-afts: thus God would pour Contempt upon rhem, which muſt 
needs be grievous to ſo proud a People as the Jews were. e None 
ſhall have ſo much reſpe& ro them, or compaſſion of them, as tg 
afford Burial, chap 8. 2. 


22 T Thus ſaith the LORD ; let not the wiſe ar 
glory in his wiſdom, neither ler the mighty man gloiy 
in his might, nor let the rich man glory in his f riches. 

f The fews did glory in th- Counſel of their Wiſe-men, the ſtrength 
of the Souldiers, and the Wealth of their Cities; but here God 


5 _—_ . 
rommey of che EM. d No rafie, nm for the heathen are / diſmayed ar them, 


M 1 4 H. Chap. 3c. 

s 4 L6- "RES; 

takes tham off from their vain Confidences, that neither their Coun« q 
Jels and Policy, Ecil. y. 11. nor their Forces and arms, Pſal. 43. 16, v7. Ih 
nor their wealth, or Riches, Prev. 11, 4. Exek. 7.19. ſhould be able | 
to deliver them frem being either deſtroyed, or carried Captive 
by the Chaleans, In theſe, or ſome of theſe, Men are apt to pur 
their confidences, and negle& God their enly Succour in diſtreſs ; 
and therefore he puts them upon that in the next verſe. | [1 

24 But * let him that glorieth glory in this, that he * ; Cor. 4 

underſtandeth and g knowerh me, that Tam the LORD 1 31. | 
which exerciſe loving kindneſs, judgmert and righte- 2 Cor» 
ouſneſs in the þ earth : for in theſe rhings I 3 delight, © '7- 
ſaith the LORD. 


£ Whether we make any curious DiſtinQtion Eetwixt underſtands 
ing God, as if that be more ſpeculative, whereby we rightly appre- 
hend his Nature ; and knowing God, as if that be more pra#ical, as 
dire&ing the Converſation, we need not here er:quire; yet cer= 
tainly both center in this, that we ſo know and underſtand God as 
ro truſt in him, and depend on him alone inall Corditions. þ Kind- 
nels, as it relates to his own people, Pſal. 5. 12. Judgment with re- 
ference to his puniſhing the Wicked ; Righteouſneſs, namely, as hs 
deals juſtly and uprightly with both, Pſal. 92. 15, The meaning 
here, I conceive, 1s to ſhew Gods orderly governing and diſpoſing 
of Things in the World in his diſtributive Juſtice, that all Things 
are right and <qual. 3 Both in himſelf and others, Pſal. 14 7. 

25 © Behold the days come, ſaith the LORD, that 
I will X+ puniſh all :bem hich are I circumciſed, with 
the uncircumciſed» 

k Viz. By the Babyloians, 1 q. d. Do not think to inſiſt upon your 
external Priviledge of Circumc:ſion, that you are Atrabams natural 
Seed, and thereby diſtinguiſhed from other Nations, -as you ſome« 
times were wont to do of the Temple, thar you had God inthe midſh 
of you. Do not think that ſhall priviledge you, for you ſhall ſ:e, 
it ſhall not be long ere I bring the Chaldeans upon thoſe other Na« 
rions, which either are circumciſed in the Fleth as well as ycu, «nd 
upon you alſo who are uncircumciled in heart as well as they, or 
whether Circumciſion was loſt as being caſt off by them; and ſo 
they were indeed uncircumciſed : God tells them they ſhall fare 
alike: hence in the next Verſe he ranks Judah next ro Egypt among 
the other uncircumciſed Nations : for te looks tv rhe circvmcifion 
of the Heart, notof the Body ; to :uward Worſhip, ror outward ons 
ly ; therefore ſome read ur the Circumciſied in Uncircumciſton, 


26 Fgypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children 
of Ammon, and Moab, and all rhat are in the utmoſt _ 
m | corners, that dwell in the wilderneſs : for all :he/e + Heb. eur || 


v1 


nations ar? unciicumciſed, and all the houſe of Irae) of #0 cor-Iili 
are » * uncircumciſed in the heart. ye. _ il 

m Some refer this ro the place of their Habitatien, as in Corners, hats. 4 - 
and remote parts of the Wilderneſs, as-it were ſeparated from other Wl! 


Narions; and therefore mightrhink themſelves fartheſt remote from hes bar Mit 


If Heb: 


Viſit upon, 


if 
Ii 
: 
| 
| 


[ 
| 
| 
| 
j 
| 
| 
| 


Danger ; but ſome rather chuſe to refer it to their Manners, as in + L 
cutring the corners of their Hair, which was forbidden the Jews, $ eV 
Levit .9.27 The like Deſcription in chap. 25. 23. n See the þ  *"* 
foregioins Verſe, God regards not the outward Sign, bur priccipal- 
ly reſp<&s the Circumciſion of the Heart. Here ends thar Sermon 
that began at chap. 7. 


T_T HA F.. A. 


They are forbbid to be afraid of the Token of Heaven, and conſult Ilols which 
are V3in, ,——)}. and not to be compared withrhe Majefy ani Power 
of God, who is Ja--b's portion, 6, 16» The Babylenians defroy the 
Temple ; the brutiſh Paſtors and the Flocks are ſcattered, i7, 2. The 
Prophets humble Supplication, 23, ———25. 


Ear ye the word which the LORD ſpeaketh unto 
o you, O houle of p Iſrael. 

o Here . begins another Sermon, 7. 2. moſt 
Jechonias and the Jews, that were already 
Tribes. 

2 Thus faith the LORD, Learn not the way ofthe 


q heathen, and be not diſmayed at the ſigns of r hea- 


Roms- 
2. 28, 29. 


ES nd II nee. 


- 


' 


probably relating to 
in Captivity, þ The ten 


q The J-ws being tro live among the Chaldeans in their Captivity 
where many of tnem were aJr-ady, the Prophet in this Sermon ad. 
moniſherh them againſt the Superſtitions of the Chalaean Idolatries, 
which he underſtands here by Heathen, who were allo much adi&ted 
| ro Aſtrology, and elteemed the Original of Sciences : The Cufoms 

and th-ir Manners he calls here their way, as is frequent: in Scripture, 
Lev. 18. 3. and 20.23. r This was a PraQice and Study ſo comm-n 
among them, that judicial Aftrcl: gers, of what Naticn ſoever, were 
: generally termed Chaldeans; a prattice ſo hareful to Grd, that ſome- 
times he p-ſirively prohibits ir, Der. 18, 10, 14. and ſometimes in 
a way of $.0:a and Deriſion. Sarcafically ſends them to ſuch. 1ſs. 
47+ 1>. and ofren Ja' ours to perſw.de againſt it: for though 4fro- 
nomy be not only lawful, but uſeful, as being ſubje& to reaſon, and 
the rales of Art, whereby many Actions of Humane Life are di- 
| reQ-d and gui''cd, and proporrioned, yet Judiciary Aſtrology is in- 
decd origina:ily Diabelical and Heatheniſh; and though God do ſuf- 
fer th-1r Frediftions ſometimes to fall our right, yet it is to puniſh 
the curioſity of the E:.quirer. | / 9. d. Leave this to Heathens ; ir 
doth nor become Gods people, who do wholly depend upen him ; 
for indeed rhe Heathen, as many ignorant Chriſtians do to this 
day, were more afraid of the Signs of Heaven, and Aſtrological 
P:cdiftions, than of God, and whar is foretold in his Word of Pro- 
phecy; as if Things were governed rather by the Influences of the 
; Stars rhan rhe Providence of God; not bur that we may be affeed 
; with ſuch preternarural Appearances in the World, which God doth 
| extraordinary cauſe to appear, as ſome Tokens of his apprcach:ng 
. Judgments, Joe! 2. 3o, 31. Matth. 24. 7. Luke 21. 11, 


= i \ > , £2 : 
| 3 For' the F cuſtoms of the people are z vain: for 
| * one cutteth a tree out of the « forreſt, the work of the 


| hands of the workman, with the ax, 
6 G 


+ Heb. 
Statutes 
or Ora. 
NANCES Arg 
vanity, 
* Ita. 44. 
. 9, 12, C&C. 
6 


/ , 
: 
'r. 
j 
: 
! 


3 fois 


| 8, 


\ 


= Vo 


. 5J-E R E 
+ 3. e. Such Courſes, Inſtitutions, idolatrous Cuſtoms, and ws 
remonies as theſe, thar many people follow, they are Va, opt 

5s a fooliſh and wicked thing, that any thac profe's the true os 
ſhould give heed to ſuch lying Vainities. « Here he 1 65; meet 1eir 
Taolatry to their Afrology, q. 4. they cur down Timber to make _ 
Images and Repreſentations of theſe Sears and Planets, that _ 
fear and worſhip as Gods, either in memorial of them, when t y 
could not ſee them, or elſe upon a iuperſtitions Conceit Re. tho 
Scars which they worſhipped, did by ſome Mag/c% Art convey o_ 
Vertue or Spirit into theſe Statues or Timages; or rather, he dorh. 
ſer forth the folly of the Heathen, that whereas for rhe gg 
them they are but a piece? of Wood, a Tree our of tbe woe: : 
and as to the form of them, no other than the Carver, a forry an 
is pleaſed to put them into by his Ax, which I ſuppoſe is here put 
For any cutting Tool of the Artiſt, whereby he ſhapes it ; yet they 
are afraid of theſe, as if they were Gods, 1/2. 40 20. See on Jer. 
8 


Chap. Xs 


>" $0 e '2 : 
4 They deck it with filver and with gold ; they 
faſten it with nails and with x hammers, that it move 


- Not. | Fl 
x A farther Deſcription of their Workmanſhip, having no other 


*C meſs what they confer upon ir, and they no greater ſe- 
| = 10pmpet-odadun of ir than as his can with Hammer and Nail 
make it faſt, and fix it to ſome place, the wooden god being not 
able to preſerve itſelf from falling ; therefore it 15 rather to be 
meant of faſtening to ſome Wall, or Pillar, than of faſtening their 
parts together, —_— they ſeem to be cue cut of one entire piece, 
and therefore need 1t nor. 

* Pſal. 7 They are upright as the y palm-tree, * but ſpeak 
Pſal. ns, F y 5 me 
5-and 2 not: they muſt needs be born, becau e they can- 
\ 235- 16- not @ go: be notafraid of b them,for they * cannot do 
*I.46. evil, neither alſo is it in them to do good. ; 
Fa The nature of which is to grow uprightand tall, without any 
Haw Branchings, till it comes to the rop, thereby poſſibly reſpreſenting 
a Majeſty. « Looking as if they were about to ſpeak, ſtanding in a 

' ſpeaking poſture, but have not a word to utter, being only dumb 

Stocks, wooden gods. a They wow 4 Eng or faſter pres you 
7 , either when you go to ſet them up, or upon any oc- 
CE val, as NF as ſtakes, being indeed but ſticks. b They 
can do you no more harm, than the Signs of Heaven could do; 

- they are but dead ſtocks: the Heathens worſhipped ſome Idols thar 

E they might do them good, and others that they might do them no 
| harm; bur God tells them here, they can do neither good or harm, as 

' in the next words; they can neither puniſh nor reward, they can 

"neither hurt their Enetnies, nor help their Friends: by this the 

true God will be diftinguiſhed from Idols, that he alone can fore- 
tell things to come, and he alone can reward or puniſh, 1/a. 48. 5 
"and therefore the Prophet endeavours to turn them off from their 
Idols to the true God. : 

6 For c as much as * there is none like unto thee, O 


LORD 2 thou art great, and thy name #s d great in 


e might. 
4c This Particle {A Mir is to be taken here cauſally, and refers 
either to what goes before, ſhewing there is no Compariſon be- 
tween God and Idols, or rather. tro what follows, as the Ground 
- and Reaſon of all due Subje&tion to God, as inthe next Verſe. 4 Or 
thou art tranſcendently great. e #. e. Though Idols may have ſome 
thing of a Name in thc World among the Heathen, yet there was 
nothing of their real Poweror Might ſcen ; orif the Devil might 
a& ſom:thing through them to delude the World, yet nothing to 
be compared with that Might thar batb manifeſted it ſelf in Gods 
© Works. Pſal. 106. 8. and 1-1. 6. All the works of Idols are either 
none, or feeble and wezk, Ver. 8. : - . 
7 * Who would not fear thee, O king of f nations: 


Hg for || to thee doth it appertain : for as much as among 
Or, i* all the, wiſe mer of all the nations, and, in, all their 


* bketh thee. kingdoms there is none like g unto thee. | 

| 7 He is called a great King, Mal. 1+ 14. 9. d. thou, by whom all 
Nations are governed, and al] Affairs in them diſpoſed ,and by none 
eIſe, who would worſhip any but thee. or be afraid of any bur thee, 
ſeing it is fit for, and therefore can belong to .none betides, as in 
the next words, it is thy right and due, or who can be ſo ſtupid as 
not to acknowledge one ſupream Bzeings and this to be bur one, 
as among the Heathens, Svcrates,- Plato, Seneca, and divers others 
4;d- and therefore it is nor a prodigious thing, that any ſhould ſo 
withhold the truth in Unrighteouſneſs. be ſo groſs as to worſhip 

| many gods? g q.4.1f you earch among all their Wiſe-men and 
Philoſophers, all the great Men and Rulers 1n Rams. For 
theſe the Heathens were wont to worſhip as gods after Deat 1, | iſe- 
men for their Wiſdom, and Kings for their Power, you ] find 
none to compare with God either for Wiſdom or Power: Their 


Wiſe--men are but as ſo many Fools. . ; : 

f But they are + altogether * þ brutiſh and 3 fooliſh: 
 # Heb. i* po þ ſtock is a dodrine of / vanities. 
one, or , The awe that the Idol doth impreſs upon carnal mens minds. 
; and thereby taking them off from a due Apprehenſion of the Ef- 

ſence of God, doth keep them between ſuch hope and Fen”, that 
they become =5 fenſleſs and as inapprehenfive of any true Worſhip, 
* as Brutes. i Notonly ſome of them, bur even al}, both Jews and 
- Hb. 2.18. Gentiles, q- d. I need not ſtand up to particularize, but rake them al. 
 Zecho. *o awhar they are become ſtupid Idolaters, and have drunk in the 
molt arsls Superftitions ofthe Gentiles, as Rom. I. 21, 22. k A Sy- 
necdoche pur for all ſorts of Idols, of what Materials ſoever ; and 
Mcronymy of the matrer, tO render them contemprible, either as 

q Inding the ignorant, Or in theraſelves conſidered ; they are meer 
i footiſh, helpleſs things. 1 The Hebrew Word Mrſar 1s taken 
png 11 Sion, Pro. 16. 22: 4d, Itis an caſte Matter to prove 
one an Fools, and brutifh, when they look upon a ſtock, a piece 
—_ NT ow be their god, which hath neither Knowledge nor Pro- 
Pow is and therefore muſt needs be a Do&rine of Vanity, when 
eats oo ro be taught Devotion by Images, which is a teacher of 

. they - done faith to The dumb ſtone it fhall reach, Hab. 2, 18, 19» 
_— Do&rins of Devils firſt broached by Pope Gregory, who 
- - aun ded Strenus Biſhop of Ma/iia for not perfutting Images 


—_— 


* Exod. 
15. LI. 
Plal. 86, 
8. 10, 


Rom. Ts 
28, 22, 


——— 


to be worſhipped, but reproved him for thre wing them cur of th 
Church, becauſe they ſerve for Oin:mert , rd Lay-mens Books. 
which ſince hath bezn received as a Cathclick Duluriut, that Images 
are Lay-mens Bucks. 
9 »olver ſpread into plates is brought from » Tar- 
ſhiſb, and gold from o Ophez. the work of the work. 
man, and of the hands of rhe ? founder : blue and PUT» 
ple 5s their q clothing : they are all the work of r cun- 
ning men. 


m It was not Wood waſhed with Gold, or maſly Silver or Gold. 
bur covered over with Plates of Silver cr Gold. Exod. 39. 3. n From 
tome remote place, probably from Span, whence ti:e beſt Gold 
came ; Tarſb/ſh is the proper Name of a Sea-town in Cil'cin, Ezeks 
27» 12, 25. Jonah 1. 3. and being a noted Port, from whence they 
had paſſage to Africa, lndin, and other remote Countries, jt is uſually 
put for the Ocean, and may as well fignific from any plice b-yond 
the Sea ; if you rake ir properly, then poſlibly it is noted as the 
beſt Silver coming trom thence, as Uphaz for the beſt Gold ; for 
rhough we reid allo cf Gold coming trom thence, 1 Kg. 10 22. 
2 Chron. 9. 21. yet where the moſt proper Cummodities of it are 
mentioned, we read of no Gold, Ezck. 27. 12, unleſs whatſeems ra. 
ther to be brovghr thither, Verſe. 22. 0 5. e. Proba! ly the beſt 
Gold, comirs trom thence in thoſe days, as the beſt Silver from 
Tarſhiſh, and that ere was the beſt Gold is probable frem Dan. : >, 
5. there are various conjeCtures at whar place this pOINtS at, Wie 
ther the ſame with Phas, or Phez by an Aphereſis, or Ophir a place 
not far from 7arſhiſh, and givers other places are conjectuied, and 
ſome think it refers to no place ar all, but to point at the excel. 
lency of rhe Gold only ; but it is not the deſign, thar this Com« 
ment ſhould ſwell with things rather cenje&ural. than profitable, 
1risenoughro know, that this p!ace intends the pureſt Gold pþ Thus 
faith he, che Artificer takes it, and each according to his Arr, ſhapes 
It, and adorys it; firs the Silver and the Gold for it. q Expcſitors 
differing abcur the Materials, out of which they weie dyed, do 
differ a}fo in the colours, which here are called Blue arid purple, the 
Diſpute is not worth the while in a vulgar Comment, they that 
will may conſult the Engl. Annot. Either this relates to the further 
adorning thoſe rich Idols of Silver and Go'd; or it implies other 
Artiſts. ſuch as ſhape or ſew Silk or Cloth, Woollen or Linen, made 
ule of to make theſeGarments for tho!t Idols of more inferiourMate- 
rials, as Wood orStone, the other being ſufficiently beautified without 
them. r #, e. The cheiceſt Men in their reſpe&ive Arts were picked 
out for this work. that there might be nothing wanting as troexaR- 
neſs, richneſs and curioſity; ali this the Prophet ſpeaks the more to 
ridicule their Idols, as if all this would pur any thing of power, ver- 
rue, or excellency in them, till deeft aliquid intus. 


io For the LORD 3s the + /true GOD, he 7s the + Heb.c 
t living God, and an Þ s * everlaſting King : at his 9 #. 
wrath the earth ſhall x tremble, and the nations ſhall King of 
not be able to abide his y indignation. Eternity. 
J 9. 4. Al! theſe are but falle gods : Jehovah is the alone true Ged; * Plal. is: 
they are bur 1yes, and the teachers of lyes ; God is Truth it {elf, 16s 
ard that, both 1n regard of his Eſinre, as it is aſcribed ro Chriſt, 
1 John 5. 20, and alſo in regard of his Faithfulneſs, Numb 23, Ig. 
Pſal 21.5. t Theſe areal] bur dead ſtocks and ones. Jehovah 1s 
the on)y Living God, having Life in himſelf, and giving Late ta 
all things elſe, Zohn 5. 21, 26. Hence the'e Idols are not only more 
baſe than any other Creature, but even viler than the matter ir ſel6 
of which they ace made « Theſe though accounted Kings, and 
ccunrenanced by Kings, yet both they and their Kings do all periſh; 
time devours them all with worm or Ruſt, orby injuries, and vio= 
Jence offered to them as in the next Verſe, but none of theſe or any 
thing elſe can affe& the true God, he is Everlaſting. * He can 
with his look, or frown make the foundations of the Heaven and the 
Earth to ſhake, whereas theſe ſtocks can move them no more, than 
they can themſelves, which is nor one hairs breadth from their Sta« 
tions. »y Not able either to fop ir, or bear ir, but muſt Foop, and 
fall under it, Pſal. 76, 7. the wicked will not be able to ftand in Judge 
ment, Pſal. r.s5. 


11 Thus (hall ye ſay z unto them, The gods that 
have not made a the heavens and the þ earth, even 


they [ball periſh from the earth, and from under theſe 
heavens, 


, Viz. To your great Lords tt« Baby!mians, when they-ſhall ſolf- 
cite you to Worthip Idols. + This ſeems to have ſome a:luſion to 
a ſaying common annng thoſe Greeks, that held one ſupream Diety, 
Let him that ſaith he 1s a gud make anther Wirld. b Here is noted,both 
how frail they are, they jball yer;ſh, and how weak they are. they 
could nct make the Heaven, o th Earth T ts5 Verſe IS writ in the 
Chaldean Tongue, ana not in the 2p, tha when they came a- 
mong them that did worſhip their 129}, they might openly and 
plainly profeſs the true God in that La:2y4g0 which the Enemies 
underſtood better than they did the Hebrew, 4 thr in ſuch kind of 
bold Language as this;Let all whoſe gods periſh, he Barth 
and under the Heavens, that were notable to mais gj.her Jr isan 
Impre cation upon their Idols. | 


12 He * hath made the c earth by kis 4 POer he FCCon 1.6 
hath e eſtabliſhed the world by his wiſdom, and *\th oe" 
ſtretched out the f heavens by his diſcretion. ' 15, &c. 

In this 2nd the nexc Verſe, the Propher enumerates ſome parti- * Job 5 8- 
culars, wherein he is tranſcendently above all Creatures, which he Pt: 194. = 
bath made, much more above [dels, whichare the works of mans Iſa.q0-22* 
hands. c 4s 14.15. 7.e. This whole Globe conſiſting of Waters, 
as well as Farth. 4 It muſt needs ſpeak an Almighty power to make 
ſuch avaſt body ; where would the [dols have found Materials, of 
which to have compoſed ſuch a Body. and Bulk, the true Gcd was 
notat a loſs, he drew them out of nothing, and commanded them 
into a beeing by the word of his Power, Gen. 1. 1. e Either he hath 
made it firm, ſolid and unmeveable, 7. «, Off from irs Bafis, or ra- 
ther Center, ( for it is out of our Spher: and Province here to med- 
dle either with the fixation, er the motion of it, thar is left to the 
old and new Philoſophers to diſpute among themſelves) or elſe by 
eſtabliſhing we underſtand, he hath appointed it irs uſe, or hath _ 

pate 


[ Or, 2101 


[|Or, for 
Rain 


[| Or, is 
more bru 
tiſh than 
to know. 
* Chap. 
17, 19, 


$1»v.19 


} Heb. 
babitre 


nor en 


pared it to be every wav ſulſervient to the Inhabitants thereof, 
both as to delight in proſpe&, and varieties of Recreation, by its 
ornamental parts in Mountains, little Nijls, Woods, Meadows, 
Fields, &%. And neceſity to accommodate Man and Beaſt with all 
things uſ:fal, both for Habiraticn, and Proviſion to ſuſtain the 
natural Life, and to praiſe, and magnifie the founder of it, Gen. Is 
11, 12. All which cannot chuſe but greatly manifeſt the unſearch- 
able Willom of God. f Thele are ſtretched our, 1, e. expanata, and 
{pread over our head, through the whole circumference of the Earth, 
with all their glorious furniture, and varieties of motions, moving 
regularly in their ſeveral Orbs, 7. e. not varying the leaſt degree, 
either in time or ſpace from the Order and Law that God hath ſer 


; EB REMIT/48 


The Prophet now enters upon another SubjeQ, and probably 
begins another S2zrmon. y 7. e. Every thing thou haſt any advan- 
tage by, not only thy Domeſtick concerns, but all thy Trafique and 
&erchandize, whereever thou haſt any concerns in the Land, as Mer. 
uſe to do in cafe of Invaſion by an Enemy, to ſecure them. Ic 
ſeems to be a Sarcaſm, or kind of Military der://on, 2 This is under- 
ſtood by ſome, as ſpoken to the Babylonians, that they ſhould make 
proviſion for their eſcape, their Idols being not able to fave them 
bur this ſeems to. be remote from the Prophets meaning ; it is ra- 
ther therefore direSted ro the Inhabitants of Feruſalem, that being 
the chief place of Security in Jude, and by a Synecdoche toall other 
places thar they promiſed themſelves ſecurity in; the approaching 


Chap. Il. 


deſtruftion being to paſs through the whole Country- | 

18 Forthus faith the LORD, Behold, I will a * ſling 
out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will 
diſtreſs them, that they may find it /o b. - + 


a It notes with how much violence and freed, and with eaſe thi 
Chaldeans ſhall hurry away the People into Babylon, asthe _ _ 
ſwiftly, and violently paſs, which is thrown out of aSling, with 
fo much eaſe, and therefore it is ſaid at this once, T will not delay, 
but make one through quick work of it, noting not only the time; 
but implying the clear riddance that he would make of them, 
2 Chron. 36. 17, 18, 19- they had been ofren aſſaulted by Enemies, 
and ſometimes they redeemed themſelves, ſometimes delivered by 
God, their Enemies being ſometimes divided; but it ſhould not 
be ſo now, bur all ſwepr away. b That they may ſeeI am in.good 
earneſt, that I have not only aid it. but they ſhall find, that I will 
execute it, and though they would never believe it, yet they ſhall 
aftually find the truth of my Threatnings. See Chap. 5. 12, 13. 
Exek. 6. 10. - - | th 

19 Wois me for my hurt ; my wound is c grievous : 
but I ſaid, Truly this a grief, and I muſt 4 bear it. 

c Here the Prephet doth not ſo much expreſs his own ſorrow: 
though that be great, as perſonate the Sorrow and Complaint that 
the Land, 7. e. The people ofthe Land, manifeſt, or at leaſt ought 
todo; which becauſe they do not, cauſerh no little grief in the 
Prophet himſelf, who cannot bur be affe&ed with their condition 
which he calls not only a hurt, but a wound, and both of them very 
grievous. d Or rather, but I better con{ideredit, and faid within my 
ſelf, I were as good be ſilent, it is indeed a grief grievon: in it ſelF 
and grievius that I muſt ſmorher it, and not complain, bur it is my 
duty to bear 1t patiently. There isin this expreſſion a double necet« 
ſary preparation to Repentancey Yiz. 1. An acknowledgment, that 
they had defervedly brought the Judgment upon themſelves, and 
that therefore, 2. They would patiently bear it, and it doth im+ 
ply ſomething of their ſtupidity, 9. 4. we could not have imagined 
the damnage could have been {ſo very grear, but now we ſee how it 
is, we will patiently bear the indignation of th: Lord becauſe we have 
ſinned againſt him, If this be rot the the meaning, then it is a fur« 
ther obſtinat? perſiſting in their Rebelling. 9. d. ſeing it muſt be ſo, 
_ - is very pie ps _ COIERes now to bear it, and rub 
through it as wellasI can: A further perſiſting i inac\ 
but I incline moſt to the former ſenſe. g ne fe: CM 

20 My tabernacle is ſpoiled, and all my cords are 
e broken ; my children are gone forth of f me, and 


they are g not: there is none to ſtretch forth my tent 
h any more, and co ſet up my curtains. Ih 

e He proceeds in his proſopopais to bring in the Land, or the In- 
habitantrs thereof enumerating their Calamiries, and by a Metaphor 
ſets out the overthrow of the Land, or Zeruſalem, by the breaking 
of the Cords of a Tabernacle, the uſe whereof is to faften it en every 
ſide to Stakes in the ground, which Cerds being broken the-Tobernacte 
falls, implying all the ſupports of City and Country were gone; no- 
thing but defolztion to be expeCted. See Chap. 4. 20. f ither the 
Inhabitants of the Land, or the /eſer Cities, being frequently called 
Daughters, Viz. The Chaldeans have ſnatched them away from me, 
and carried them into Captivity» g Ofthe Phraſe and meaning ofit, 


22 ſee Chap. 31- 15- h 3.e- "Tis irrevocable, I am without - all hel 
15 They arevanity and the work of q errors : in the | ,h.; for Defence or Beauty, or any _ wideter nap wes 


time of their Viſieation they ſhall r periſh» TEE ſtate, which he chuſethto deſcribe hereby, continuing this Mataphor 
 q Either in their riſe, as ſpringiog from Men of corrupt Minds, | rather than any other, of a Shepheres Tent ; poflibly inſinuating rhe 
or the foundation of them : 4 Metonymy of the effe$, Teachers and | ground of it to ariſe principally from their Paſtors, the negle& 
encouragers of Lycs, Hab. 2+ 18. things rather to be ſcoffed at and | beth .of their Civil and Eccleia#ical Governours which thenext Verſe 
derided, than adored and worſhipped, and iris exprefl-d in the plu- | favours: | | | 
ral number tonote the multiplicity of rhem. » When Gnd ſhall have 21 For the Paftors are become brutiſh, 'and have 
a Controverſie with them, ſhall come ro reckon with Babylon and not ſought 3; the LORD & -: theref h C {h | 
her Idols, they and their Worſhippers ſhall be deſtroyed, alluding (; S 4'ol . 3 CONECEOTE Tu all not / 
poſſibly, ro the manner of che Pagan Conqueſts, who were wont | PIO per, and all their flocks ſhall be » ſcatterd. 
To carry away both Perſons, and theIdols of the Country, and ei=|  # Not that the Propher rakes off all blame from the People, but 
that he layeth it ehiefly upon the Ralers of Church and State; for ſo 


ther break them to pieces, or burn them : Thus were they ſer- | * 
ved by the Perſians, ſee on Iſa. 46. 11 This poſſibly may be ſpo- | 15 Paſtor taken frequently. See Chap. 23. 1, 2, 3. k Not ſoughc un- 
to him, and taken him into their Counſels. ! The Prophet gives 


ken by way of Encouragement to the Fews, that took offence at the 3 
the reaſon why nothing went well with them, namely, becauſe 


Chaldean Idols, rhat were ſet up in their ſight, that God may : 
ſtrengrhen their Parience he tells them he viſits chem in Mercy, and there was ne regard had to Gedlineſs, without which wecannot ex- 
pe& a bleſſing upon any thing. 7 5. e. All that have been commit- 


their pang in Judgment ; ve” will GO thoſe Idols. F he: ſhall b ed "rr 
| ortion of Tacob is not li ted to their care, ſhall be carried unto Babyl»z, and div F th 
16 * The F P n J ike them, for he diſperſed abroad unto ſeveral Countries, for their > ooo me 


is the : former of all things, and Iſrael 5s the » rod of : thei Fur ol 
his inheritance, the LORD of hoſts 5s his name. 22 Behold, the noiſe of the bruit is come, and a + 64ap; 


; . | f che north-co M Yo 
A Periphraſis for the true God, who vouchſafeth to be the por- great COMMOTION VC © unery 0, tO 4:6. and 

FRA of his people, and to beſo called, Deur. 32. g. Pſal. 16. 5. "_ make the cities of Judah deſolate, and a den of dras. 6: 23. 
many other places, becauſe he is in Covenant with his people in | 8ONS F- | | : : THE” Smet 4 
the Meſſiah, whoſe Co-heirs are as dear to him asa Portion is, that | » The Prophet had divers times ſounded thisAlarm in their ears 
deſcends to a Man by Inheritance, and he tells you his Name in the | but to very little purpoſe, his words ſeemed bur as idle Tales, they 
cloſe of the Verſe, Ia. 47. 44- one who hath the whole Hoſt of | believed him nor; ke ſpeaks of it pertly,as one conceiving what dread- 
Heaven and Earth at his diſpoſal. # Idols are things framed and for. | ful Commotiens and Concufſions would beupon the Land by theclat- 
med, bur God is the former of all things, the maker of Heaven and \ tering of Arms, prancings and neighings of Hories, ſounding of 
Earth. u So called, becauſe the Portions and Inheritances of 77ae! | Trumpets, and rattling of Chariots, making as it were the Earth 
were meaſured by a Line, Reed, or Rod, and therefore called rhe to ſhake under them, when that vaſt Army ofthe Chaldeans ſhould 
rod of his Inheritance, Deut. 32. 8, g. Pſal. 74. 2, and becauſe th=v/ furiouſly break in upen them. Partly, in inuating an Antitheſes op=- 
were his by a continual Line of Succeſſion ; beſide 1ſ-ael is, UNH |; poſing the voice of God's Prophets, that had ſooften ſpoken of this, 
Schebet the Rod, or Scepter of his Inheritance, becauſe God did ler up i but they would. not hear, againſt this dreadful noiſe, which they 
his Kingdom in 1/rael. ſhould not but hear and ſee and feel roo: ' So that they that would 


| | | IE .. | not learn of God's Prophets, ſhall be ſent ts harder Maſters, that 
{ Heb. Zi. 7 Gather up thy Z Wares Our of the land, O F 1N- | fhall.reach them in a manner as G:geon did the Men of Succath, Jug, 
babirreſs, habitant of the z fortrels, | 


$8.16. 6 See Chap. 1. 10.and 5.15. p See on Chap, 9; ts & 3. -/ 
6 23 TO LORD, 


them, even in thoſe which are more excentrick and erratick, which 
muſt needs argue an unparalle}'d skill, and underſtanding in God, 
which the word a:ſcretion doth here properly tignifie, Exod. 36. I. 
Job 12. 13» all which are his hardy-work, and do declare his glory, 
Pal. IQ. I. Ep : 

12 When he uttereth his g voice zhere is al] multi- 
tude of waters in the h heavens, and he caulſeth the 5 
vapours to aſcend from the ends of the earth : he ma- 
keth lightnings || with & rain, and bringeth forth the | 
wind out of his / treaſures, 

z As in the former Verſe he relates Gods unſpeakeable power | 
and Wiſdom, in his creating and fixing the ſtated order of things, 
fo here he further ſets it forth in his Prcvidential ordering and dif- 
poling their accidents, 5. e« either at his command when heis pleaſed 
rQ call for the Rain, or rather, when he #hundererh in the Heavens, 
ob 37. 4, 5+ Pſal. 17. 18. though it often rains when it thunders not, 
and thunders when it r2ins not, yet when it rains and chunders the Rain 
uſually falls more forcibly from the Clouds, and in more ſudden 
plenty, as it were a more immediate conſequent of it. þ Viz. The 
lowefl Heaven, the Region of the Aire 7 Exhalations, whether wet or 
dry, cauſing Wind or Rain, by the aſcending whereof the Lower 
Heavens gather them into Clouds, which when full and burdened, 
d-ſcend into ſhowers for the conveniencies of the Earth and Springs. 
k Though Fire and water be contrary, yet it opens the Clouds to 
make way for the Rain, and is produced in the midſt of waters all 
which is wonderful, 1 Which partly notes that it is ſecret and 
hidden, as coming from the Caverns and ho]low parts of the Earth, 
no Man knows from whence they come, or whither they go, John 
3.8. andit is wonderful to obſerve how ſuddenly at a calm time 
the Winds will riſe, how they will whirle about, how various, un- 
conſtar, and contrary in their motior:s ; and partly the plenty both 
for vehemency and continuance, ſignified alſo by zreaſures the plen- 
ty of Snow and Hail being thus expreſſed, Job 38. 22. and partly 
that it is at his diſpoſal to bring our of his Treaſure when he pleaſes. 
See Pſal. 135. 7+ 1 

£4 Every man ||is * brutiſh in b;s w knowledge, eve- 
ry founder is » confounded by the graven Image, for 
his molten Image is o falthood, and there is no p breath 


in them. 

m Some limit it to the makers of theſe Idols, that can employ 
their Arts and Wits to no better purpoſe, than to frame ſuch Stocks 
into gods ; this ſuirs the next expreſſion; Men are bewitched, and 
beſotted by theſe rhings, ſoas to ſee no moreinto their Folly, than 
3f they were Brutes, and the reaſon that it hath taken ſuch root 
may be becauſe of Mens fo much admiring the Art of Carving and 
Painting, or rather through their Ignorance, q. 4. It is for want of 
knowledge, and underſtanding that Men are thus brutiſh, 1a. 44. 
#3. 7 Eitherir ſhall rurn to his Reproach, or rather, he ſhall ſee 
his folly and be aſhamed ef it when he ſhall diſcover it, that ever 
he ſhould make ſuch a thing, and truſt in it, and expoſe it to be 
adored by others. o Ir is nor that which it pretends ro be, bur a 
deceitful thing, a Lye ; they turn the truth of God into a Lye, Rom. 1. 
25. þ They have nothing of life in them, nay that very vegeta- 
tive life, that once was in their Stocks, is now loſt, much leſs are 
they Spirirs ſent down from Heaven, 


* 1 Sat. WI"Ne 
25, 298 | 


[| Or, noiſe. 


[|Or, for 
Rain 


[Or, is 
more bru- 
tiſh than 

to know. 

M Chap. Flo 
17, 18, 


emo - 


- — 


>» 
£7 


5 B|R E 


APA O LORD, 9 I know that the * way of man 
| & -u is x5. T himſelf : it 55 not in man that walketh to di- 


" p, Xl 


'F 1 ST. ; : 
—— _ finding that all he could fay prevailed nothing 
F, this people, but they rather grew worſe, he turns himſelf to 
God r How far theſe words concern Pelagiamſm, or Free-will, el- 
ther one way or other, or whether at all, concerns not this _ 
ment ; they ſcem literally te be the words of the Prophet, relating 
eirher to himſelt and other Holy Men, 9. 4. it 1s not1n our x 
neither do we preſume to ſtop this Decree of thine again Fu by ; 
or elſe to the Enemies in genera], or Nebuchadnezzar 1n particular, 
' 4 weknow all their Marches and Deſigns are of thine __ 
ah and all their Atchievements of thine ordering, 1t 15 = 
vidence that dire&severy fep rhey take againlt this Land) __ out 
whom no Counſel ſhall proſper» who alone rurneſt Mens Hearts 
which way thou pleaſeſt, Prov. 21+ 1. who canſt bring Men on; or 
turn them back, as thou ſeeſt good, Iſa. 37. 29. ſo that no Man's 
own, to give h yu what _—_ yl Ab = 
oth tacitly inſinuate, that a 

the peaphy, whereby, : Fm wn by their own ſtrength at 
or Confederacies and Alliances abroad will avail nothing ; 


Men think t 1 cl 
thing ton - or laſtly, as others think, this is by way of 


Petition, 


. 4. Sein 
ft ſins, E it be a Corre&ion only, not a Deſtruftion, and ut- 
ter Ruine» # Let it be in meaſure, in judgment, z. e. in wiſdom, 

roportioning it as a Father toward his Children, Chap. 39. 11. for 
o the Hebrew Miſbpat ſignifies, and thus Judgment 1s taken, 
38. We refuſe not cerre#ion, but we caſt our ſelves upon thee, 
therefore in the midſt of Judgment remember Mercy. u The reaſon of 
this he gives in the next clauſe, leſt if thou ſhouldſt ler out thy 
fury upon me, thou would bring »e 70 nothing, i. e. Thou wouliſt 
utterly conſume me, or make me few, as Heb. that ] ſhould be no 
more a people, never lift up the Head again. 
25 Pour outthy fury upon the heathen x, that know 
thee not, and upon the families, that call nor on thy 
Name y: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured 
him, and conſumed him, and have made his habicati- 


on deſolate z. 

pi This may imply both Petition, that God would doſo, and Pre- 
difion that God will certainly do ſo, which towards the c:ofe of 
the. Prophecy we find was fulfilled, God firſt ſending the King of 
Babylon to overthrow divers of the Heathen Nations, and then Ba- 
bylon it ſelf deſtroyed with a great deſtruction. He will make a dif- 
ference betweenus and the Heathen, ſuch as know hee ner, i. e. Such 
as do not acknowledge and own thee for their God, the Phraſe is 
Frequent: 1 Sam. 2. 12. Job 18.21. 2 Theſ. 1.8. the ſenſe is exprel- 
ſed here in the nextwords. that do not call on thy Name, y ASy- 
necdoche, one part of Worſhip put for the whole, 9. d. If thou wilt 
be pouring out thy fury,the effetts ofit beto thine Enemies, not un- 
to thine own people, who worſhip thee. z Here he gives a reaſon 


minifh me, 


Jained on Pſal. 79.5, 6, 7. wbence they are taken, and poſſiby Je- 
Fs Cn 7 the Author of that Pſalm after the City was de- 
ſtroyed and he carried into Egypr ; and for the Phraſe of devouring 


him, ſee Chap. 8, 16+ 4 AP. XL 


'; Covenant, I=-—7. Their Diſobedience, 8 10. Evils te come 
pale na 11———17. and on the Men of Anathoth, for conſpiring to 

kill Jeremiah, 18——23- . 
 & He word that came to. Jeremiah from the LORD, 

ſaying a ; 

a Wear . "gh and in what mannerthis Revelation came from 
God tothe Prophet is not expreſſed, whether it were in the days of | 
Joſiah or Jehoj achim« : 

E Hear ye, the words of this covenant b, and ſpeak 
unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Je- 


ruſalem. 

b God ſpeaking in the plural number, not hear thu, but hear ye, 
makes ſome conjeQure that this was a charge given to ſome other 
Prophets, either Zephaniah ( if it were in Joſiah time, Zeph. 1. 1. ) 
or Urish ( if it were in the time of Jehojachim. ) The term 7his alſo 
manifeſts, that the Book of the Law was before 7eremiah's time, for 
all conclude, that the Covenant here ſpoken of, was the Covenant 
of th: Law of Gad, $2 wy by Moſer, to which the people more 
than once promiſed obedience. ; 

And fay thou unto them, Thus faith the LORD 
of hoſts, * Curſed be the man that obeyeth not the 
words of this covenant ds 

4 In Deuteronomy 27. 26. it is Curſed be he that confirmeth net all the 
words of this Law to do them, and all the people ſhall ſay, Amen. The 
people ſaying 4men teſtified their aſſent, and made the Law a Cove- 
nant, but they bad beſides formally and explicitly covenanted with 
God, Exod 24. 3, 7. with religious Rites and Ceremonies uſed in ti- 
pulations, and afterwards conſented that God ſhould puniſh thoſe 
that violated that Covenant, Deut. 27. 26. : 

4 Which I commanded your fathers e in the day that 
I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from 
the * iron furnace, f ſaying, * Obey my voice, and do 
them according to all which I command you g, fo ſhall 
ye be my people, and I will be your God þ. 

e Which Law ( that you by your reſtipulation made a forma] 
Covenant ) I that am the Lord, and ſo had a ſoveraign power to 
lay Laws upon wy Creatures, commanded yout Fathers. f And ' 


\ 


. 
7 


* Gal. 
3* I Os 


* Deut. 
4: 1.5, 
a King, 


26. 3-12. 


as a Motive to God, why he ſhould do fo; which words ſee ex- | 


M IT A H. Chap. XI, 


obliged them to obedience before I laid my Law upon them, by 
bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, from the Furnace wheres 
in Iron 1s melted, which may either be taken literally ( probably 
that was a piece of their work in Egypt ) or metaphorically, ſerving 
at Iron Furnaces, being a very hard and ſervile labour. s For 
which kindneſs I required no more of them bur a gentler ſervice to 
mes in obeying my voice as to the things of this Law which Igave 
them in charge. + NordidI only Jay my Commands upon them. 
but I alſoincouraged chem to the obedience of it, by my gracious It 
promiſe, that if they would they ſhould be a people, I would bleſs MY 
protett and defend, and bear the name of my people, and I would 

be their God to own and bleſs them- 


5 That I may perform the * oath, which IT have * ny; S 
{worn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing 1:.&s. 
with milk, and honey, as # is this day 5, Then an- ®: &9. 5; 
{wered I, and ſaid, + ſo be it OLORD &. + Heb, 

7 I required their obedience for their own gecd, I had ſwore to Armen, 
their Fathers that I would give their Poſterity a Land abounding 
with plenty of all good things, the beſt and choiceſt things, upon 
ſuppoſition of their Obedience. I have performed that Oath, I have 
brought them. into ſuch a Land, and ſhewed my ſelf faithful to 
them. & God having ended his Sphech, the Propher ſaith, Amen, 
either aſſerting the wks bd which God had ſaid, or wiſhing that the 
people would do according to their Covenant, or afſenting to the 
Curſe according as God had commanded, Deut. 27. 26. 


6 Then the LORD faid unto me, Proclaim all theſe 
words, in the cities of Judah, and in the ſtreets of Je- 


& | ruſalem, ſaying, Hear ye the words of this covenant 


and do them /. 


{Let it be thy work to call upon this people, not only to hear, 
but ro do the words which I have commanded them, and they have 
ingaged to do. 

7 For I earneſtly proteſted unto your fathers, in the 
day 7hat I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, 


even unto this day, * riling early, and proteſting, ſfay-+ch. , ;; 

ing, Obey my voice 2. | 
m In proteſting I protefted, an uſual way in the Hebrew, by which 

they exprets the ſeriouſneſs, and vehemency of an A&jon: by pro 

reiting be meaneth the ſame with charging, and commanding with 

promiſes annexed toobedience, and thieatnings denounced in caſe of 

diſt b:dience. This God ſaith he had done with a great deal of Pa- 

tience, and diligence even from the time that this people were 

brought by him out of the Land of Egypr. 


8 * Yet chey obeyed not, nor inclined their ear; 


+ $24 
but walked every one in the || imagination of their evil 1G” 46" 
heart »: therefore I will bring upon them all the words bormuſi, 


of this covenant, which I commanded bers to do, but 
they did thezn not s. 


z But had not hearkened unto his Counſels, but every one had 
walked afier the imaginations of his ewn heart. A phraſe by which ſin is 
often expreſſed in Holy Writ, Deut. 29. 19. Chap. 3, 17. and 
7. 24, and 9g. 14. and 13- Ie. and 16. 12. and 18. 12, and 
23. 17- The imaginations of mans heart are only evil, Gen. 6, 
5. and 8. 21. Hence holineſs is ſet out by the notion of ſelf-denyingy 
not plezſing our ſelves, mortifying eur Members, &c. » For this 
God threatneth to bring upon thenr all his words of threatning, an« 
nexed to the Covenant of the Law. 


9 And the LORD faid unto me, a conſpiracy is 


found amongſt the men of Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jeruſalem p. 

? All forts ofpeople, whether of the City or Countrey, have done 
alike, as if they had conſpired together to break my Law, and to pros 
voke me to wrath, they are all alike anda alike. The thing is ma- 
nifeft, it 1s not done ſecretly, nor is it done raſhly bur upon a Con- 
ſpiracy, upon counſel and Cracion, oy 

to They are turned back to the iniquities of their 
forefathers, which refuſed to hear my words q# and 
they went after other gods to ſerve them : the houſe of 
Ifrael and the houſe of Judah have broken my cove- 
nant which I made with their fathers r, 

q They are turned back from me, or they are turned back from 
their own better courſes in the time of David, te the ſins of their 
forefathers that worſhipped the golden Calf, or the many Idols 
which they worſhipped in the time of the Judges r They are all 
alike both the Tem Tribes, which were the Houſe of 1ael, and the 


Two Tribes which made the Kingdom cf Judah, they have all bro« 


ken the Covenant, which I made with their forefathers: 


11 © Therefore thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will 
bring evil upon them which they ſhall not be able + to + prev. 
eſcape /: and * though they ſhall cry unto me I will go forth 
not hearken unto them *#. | | * Pſal. 

Sſ A Judgment frem which they ſhall by no means be delivered, - - ; 
by any Counſels of their own, or afliftance of their Friends and Al- Ch < FA 
lies. * And though Prayer to me hath been their uſual courſe in L "1's 8, 
ſuch caſes, and I have delivered them, yet I will no more hear them Te ge 
chough they cry unto me, Prov. 1. 28, 29. Zech, 7. 11, 13+ God will ME 349 
not hear them crying to him in their Adverſity, who refuſe to heas 
him ſpeaking to them in their proſperity. 

12 Then ſhall the cities of Judah, and inhabitants 
of Jeruſalem go, and * cry unto the gods to whom *peut 
they offer incenſe, but they (ball not faye them at all 32 37:38 
in the time of their f trouble «. Hen HH&bu0vin 

u Shall here ſignifieth Will, and might as well have been ſo tran- 
ſlated, denoting the hardneſs of the Hearts of this people, whom 
afflition would not reduce to God: or rather the Indicative Med 
is here put for the Imperarive, and the ſenſe, Let the Cities of 
Judah, &c. and the phraſe taken Tronically. So it agreeth with 
God's anſwer to the people crying to him, Jug. 10. 14: and what 
this Prophet had before 1gid, chap. 2. 28, But faith the Froghet, 

bucy 


| Chup. 


Cu TD 


| Ch. 7. 1 


| FHeb.ev 


———— — —— LE 


PIG. 1.1 
| Heb. 

what is 1 
my belove 
in my hot 
[| Or,vh 
thy evil ; 


2:1! 00 therh ne good. then they Fral inderfiand their vanity 
that they have beſtowed a divine: 
d chings able todo them no good, 


LID | 
their Superſtition and Idolatry, 
mage upon Lyes and Vanities,an 
r at all ro proht them, 


13 For according oO t 


A 
be 


he number of thy * cities were 


| *Ch2:25- thy gods, O Judah, and according to the number of 
7 tize ſtreets of Jeruſalem, have ye ſet up altars to that 
| + thameful thing «, ever altars ro burn incenſe unt9 
f He Baal 
| (64:36> ED 


Nor that they had juſt ſo many Idols as were Cities in Tudah, 
or Altars as were Streets in Hierrſalem, the meaning is,they had 
very many, and that the People who lived in every Cit and Street 
were gu!Jry. What he calls heir ſhame, or the ſhametut ching, is 
afterwards expounded Baal, called a ſbam'ful thing, becauſe 1t was 
what chey kad reaſon to be aſhamed of, and whar would certainly 
bring them to ſhame and confulion. x Baa! ſignifieth lord, and 
was 3 common Name given to more Idols than one, the Phanicians 
uſed the Name Baal, the Chaldeans, Beff. God Hf. 2. 16. forbad 
his People to call him by this Name, becauſe ſo abuſed to Idola- 
try. Many think that the Sun was whar the Phanicians WOr- 
thipped under .this Name ; ſome ſay Saturn was he, Mznaſſes who 
preceded Joſiah, rearsd up Altars for Baalim, and made Groves and 
worſhipped all the Hoſt of Heaven and ſerved them, 2 Chron. 33: 3. 
Learned M-n ſay, that the Aſzns called the ſame Idol Baal, whom 
thoſe of Eurepe called Jupitcr, Ir is not improbable which learned 
Men judge», That the Heathens acknowledging one ſupream 
B-eing, worſhipped him in ſeveral Creatures; ſome miſtakeing zhe 
S:iz, Moon, and Stars to bs he, others other things; theſe they cal- 
Jed Baolim, lords, as they *called the principal God Baal. The 
Heatt:ens 1dolatry feems to be their Worſhipping God 77 Creatures 
and paying a Divine Homage to Creatures, the Sun, Meon, and, 
S-ars, and other far interiour to them, nor believing that thoſe 
Creatures were the Divine Beeing, bur that the Divine Beerhg was in 
themy and from rhem would hear their Supplicants and do them 
good; which though th: Heathens might a little be excuſed in, 
having no Scripture ſh-wing them the nature of the true God, and 
how he would be worfhipped ; yet in the Jews was inexcuſablegrhey 
having the Oracles of God committed to them, which both ſhewed 
them the true nature of God, and let them know that no Creature 
could be any ſimilitude or repreſenation of him, and that his Will 
was, thar they ſhould pay their Homage to him without ary ſimili- 
tudes, or repreſentariens, exciting them to thar Homage, fit for 
nothing but ro beget in the Minds of People falſe Conceptions, 
and apprehenſions of the Divine Beeing, which is meerly ſpiritual ; 
notwithſtanding which  dire&ion from the Divine Law, the Jews 
afrer the manner of the H-athcns, would pay their Homage to 
God, before the Sun, An, and Stars, and before Images made with 
hands, and make Altars to ſuch Creatures and Images, which was 
the Ido!atry God complains of, and of which he declares a greater 
abhorrence than almoſt of any other ſin. It is !ikely that Baal here 
mentioned was the Sun, becauſe it was near Manaſſes times, who thus 
highly offended God, and it 1s probable that thougi Joſiah had be- 
gun a famous Reformation, yer a great deal of this !eaven was lefr 
in the common People, belides that rhe fins of Manaſſes, 2 Kings 23. 
26. are reckoned up as the ſpecial proximate cavſe of this Wrath of 
God againſt Judah, 
| 14 Therefore * pray thou not for this people, nei- 
' *Ck.7. 16. ther lift up a cry, or prayer 1or them. for I will not 
hear them in-the time that they cry unto me, for their 
f trouble », ; 

y Once befere, and we ſhal find once after this, Chap. 14. 11. 
God forbidderh the Prophet ro pray for this People, hence ariſeth a 
Queſt:oa how the Propner 1s exculed from Sin, 1n praying for them 


| after this Prohibition, eſpecially when Ged had ailred him that he 
| would not hear. Sel. God ( ſay ſome ) ſometimes forbiddeth Pray- 


| tHeb.evil. 


7 Þ 8 EMI AH 


ers for P:r!ons and People to ſtir rhem vp. to more fervent Prayer: 
2. We find the like done by Mſes, Exod. 32. 0. and Samuel, 1 Sam. 
I$+ 35- and 16. 1. Orhers ſay, 3, That ve muſt nor underſtand 
theſe words as an abſolute Prohibition io Fer:my, but for the terri- 
fying of the People. 4- God ſpeaks cnly fa cemporal evil,and wil. 
leth feremiah nat to be too poſitive in his Prayers tor them, that rhey 
might be delivercd from rhat, but he mighr pray for tie pardon cf 
their ſins, aad their deliverance from the eternal Vengeance of God. 
5+ He mizbc not pray for the obſtinate part of this People, bur for 
the Ele& of God among(t them. : 


5 And this the Lord world rather Jo againſt them, bertauſe they 
were not only evil, but gloried in their wickedne$, or at leaſt were 
as full of mirth and jollity, as if they had done no iniquity. 

16 The LORD called thy nate, A green olive- 
trees fair, and of goodly fruit c : With the noiſe of a 
great tumulte, he hath kindled fire upon it, and the 
branches of ic are broken 4, EEE 

c That is, the Lord fixed thee when he brought thee firſt into 
Canaan, ina beautiful flouriſhing ſtate and cond:tion, fo as thou 
wert 1n a CapaCity both to have done thy ſelf much g::0d,and to have 
brought him much glory, like a beauriful fair Olive-Tree, fit to 
bear fair and goodly fruit. d But thou haſt ſo behaved thy ſelf,that 
the Lord is altering the .courſe of his Providence te thee, he that 
planted thee is about to pluck thee up. . God is about to kiodle a 
fire which wilt burn thee up, and to break thy branches ; there is 
nothing more uſual in Prophetical Writings, than to have things; 
yet to come, expreſſed as if paſt, becauſe of the certainty of them ; 
they being what ſhal as certainly be, as if already done. 


17 For the LORD of hoſts * that planted chee, hath 
pronounced evil againſt thee, for the evil of the houſe 


of Iſraeland of the houſe of Fudah,which they have done * 


apainſt themſelves, to provoke me 
incenſe to Baal e. | 


e This Verſe expounds what 'was metaphorically expreſſed in the 
former Verſe, viz. that God vad declared his Will ro his Propher: 
That he would deſttoy his People, the blame of which muſt lie ups 
on themſelves, for they had by 1dolarry moſt highly provoked him 
and had therein done againſt themſelves, as indecd all fiawng is but 
an aCting againſt our ſelves, God is unvulnerable, we cannot hurg 
him, though we may provoke his Juſtice. ro take vengeance up: n us 
for our iniquities. And the Prophct tells them, that the Lord that 
planted them would do thisy thereby hinting to them both his power 
to do it, and elſo that they bad no reaſon to be confident, thar be- 
cauſe God had made them he would not deſtroy them; or becauſe 
he had planted taem in that good Land, therefore | 


e he would not 
pluck thzm up and throw them out of it : Y7d. Iſa. 27. 114, ' 


| 18 © And the LORD hath given me knowledge «ef 
it,and I know 3s, then thou ibewedſt me their doings f. 
f This may be underſtood eitheir more generally as re'ating to alf 
the wicked aQtions.of his Countreymen, to obviate their ſaying How 
comeſt rhou to know our doings? Or elſe ( which ſeemeth moſt 
probable) more ſpecially, with relation: to that Conſpiracy againſt 
him, which is menrioned in the following Verſes. | 
19 Bur I was likea lamb, or an ox that is brought 
unto the ſlaughter, and I knew riot that * they had 
deviſed devices againſt me, [aying. Let us deſtroy 
the tree with the fruit cheretore, 
f. om the land of the living 
more remembred g. + - | 
g We have no other mention of this Conſpiracy in Holy Writ,bur 
it 15 pla'n both from this Verſe, and what fooweth to the end of 
this Chapter, that the Men of 4na:hwh ( which was Feremiah's own 
Town ) were offended at hisProphetying ſo ſharp things againſt the 
Land ot Judah, and had thrcarned to kill him if he would not leave 
off that ſtile, and had Conſpired to thar purpoſe, ſome think to mix 
poyſon with tis M-ar, others by ſtarving of him, others think by 
b-ating ofhim, in'o which variety of ſenſe they interprer thar phraſe 
in this Verſe. Let us deftrey the tree with the fruit thereof - butche ſenſe 
is plain, Ler us nor only pur an end to his propheſying, but to his 
Beeing alt-;let us ct him off ſome way or other,rhat iris Name may 
no more be remer:bred. Of this the Prophet ſaith he was as igno* 
rant, as an Ox or a Lamb rhar is brought co the Slaughcer-houſe,thar 
knoweth nothing what deſign is againſt its life, | OT 
20 Bur, O LORD of hoſts, chat judgeſt righte- 
ouſly, that * crieſt the reins and.the heair, let me ſee 


thy _— on them ; ſor unto thee have I revealed 
my-caule þ. 7 | 

h The Prophet appealeth to Gad, and appeileth to him as one that 
knew both the inzocency of his heart roward them, 
of their hearts, toward him, and uſed to deal out ju 
and committerh his cauſe unco God ( as weare commanded, 1 Pet, 
2-23. ) and delires that God would avepge him, and that he might 


to anger, in offering 


is * | What hath my beloved to do in my houſe, 
ſeing ſhe hath wrought lewdneſs with many ? z and the 
holy fleſh is paſſed from thee # : || when thou doeſt evil, 
my beloved £116N_FNOU rejoycelt 6. 
in my houſe, *% Some make theſe words the words of the Propher, declaring 
| Or,wh \, that God ( whom they ſuppoſe here called the beloved ) was about 
hy evil is. to forſake the Temple. Others make them the words of G:d, ſpeak. 
: " ing of his Prophet, whom he calleth his B=loved. Or rather 
ſpeaking of his People, whom he calleth his Belove, upon the ac- 
count of his ancient Union with them, and Marriage ro them, this 


PIO. rr, 


' ſeemeth moſt probable, and agreeth both with Chap: 7. 9, 10. and 


alſo with the uſual confidence of the Jews, becauſe ot the Temple of 
the Lord, and their formal Service of God in it, my People, faith 


Tewdneſs with many, that 1s, commirted IdoJatry wita many Idols, 
h and now what have they to do more in my Houſe, than a baſe 
| Strumpet which hath turned a Whore, hath to do in the Houſe of 
hep Husband ? a Some by this Phraſe underſtand that God would 
own them no more as an holy People. Others that their Circumci- 
fron was become Uncircumciſion. Others more probably underſtand 
| it of the Fleſh of the Sacrifices they were wont to offer, either rh-y 

had been remiſs in offering the Sacrifices God had commanded them. 


Or ( which is more probable ) the X:ſþ of their Sacrifice, being ſet | againſt them,utretly to confume them, ſo as no remembrance ofthem 


before Idols, as well as before him who was the only true God, be. 
came polluted, and wasabominationto the Lord.. The learned An- 
ther of our Engliſh Annotations, Notes, that the words may very 
fairly be Trandlated, and the holy flefs they ſhall paſs away from thee, to 
the words import a Threatning, that becauſe chey had pollured,and 
prophaned the Sacrifices, God-would make their Sacrifices to ceale. 


Me LR ES HIER Me a me 


| ken not without _— 
not as a Prayer ſo much as a Prophecy. Others, not out of 2 defire of 
, private Revenge, but our of a pure zeal for the glory-of God, ' 


God, though I was formerly their Husband, yet have wrought | 


ſee the Yengeance, which words ſome learned Interpreters thick {pO. 
afſion and mixture of humane frailty. Others 


Prophet he was,and Servant in the delivery of thoſe Preps 


were ſo ingrareful to them. : | 
. 21 Therefore thus faith the LORD of the men of 
Anathoth, chat ſeek thy life,faying, * Propheſie not in 
che name of che LORD, that chou die not by our hand: 
22 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, Be: 


hold, I will F puniſh them; the young men ſhall die 12:& 713- 


by the fword, their 


ſons and their daughters ſhall die 
by famine. | 


22 And there ſhall be no remnant of them, for I will a 


bring evikupon the men 
their viſitation z. - | 


; The Prayers of God's Prophets, though they may ſometimes 
have too mucn paſſion and humane infirmity mixed with them, yet 
are heard of God, and many times anſwered in Righteouſneſs by 
terrible things, as tothoſe againſt whom they ate directed; the ſame 
thing they deſigned to do againſt the Propher, God threatneth to do 


of Anathoth, eves the year of 


ſhould remain. | 


88. 


The Prophet complaineth of the Wickeds Proſperity : _ By Faith ſeeth vheit 


Raine, 1——4. God admmiſherh him of his Brethrens Treachery again 
him, and lamenteth his Heritage, 5———11. 4 return from Capti- 
v.ty promiſed rs the Penitent, 14 17. | | 


G } 


Righteo!s 


Chap. XI | 


» 


and let us cut him off + 4.6.76; 
that his name may be no flalk wich 
| his beard. 


and the malice Pfal. 7. gz 
ſtice imparcially Ca. 17. 10, 


| 


| 


# Chap. || 
MW 


Chap. il 
18. :8. i 


" © Sam. 
16: To 
1 Ciron. 
2849. 


& 20. 12. 
Rev. 2+ 23» 


a . 


* T2.30.10, 
Amos 2. 


ich.2.6. * 
Heb.vi/# 


oe 


+ 


Z 


T 


w—_ 4 


E 


7.5 R 
| Tehteous * art thou, O LORD, when I plead with 
Jr, te R thee 4, yet let me || talk with thee of thy judge- 
| reaſon ents þ, * Wherefore doth the way of the wicked 
,* proſper ! wherefore are all they happy that deal very 


cacherouſly c ? 4 + 
b -< 2 EE Propiat begins here with a Recognition of God's unque- 
"1 wh Rionable Righteouſneſs and Juſtice, in all his Providential Difpen- 

4 5 Gations in the Government of the World. Some read the latter 

part, ſhould 1 plead with thee * But let it be ſbowld I plead? or, although, 
4 Or when I plead, that is, argue with thee, yet the Prophet doth wRng 
without a previous reſolution ro agree rac Lord's Diſpenſations - , 
: whatſoever he ſhould ſay. 5 Yet faith he, let me ralk with thee, 
not by way of accuſing thee, but for my own fatisfaftion concer- 
ning thy judicial Diſpenſations in the Government of the World. 
© Wherefore doth the way of the wicked proſper ? Wherefore are 
all they happy that deal treacherouſly ? by l they, he means many Ll 
them, and is thought to have ſpoken with a ſpecial relation to the 
Prieſts at Anatho:b, that had conſpired againſt his Life. TheProſpe- 
rity of the Wicked hath in all times been a Riddle, and a ſore Temp- 
' tation to the beſt of God's People; to Job, Chap. 21. 7, 13. to David 
Pſal. 37+ 1. and 73. 2, 12. and 94» 3, + Hab. 1.4, 5- Lord, _ 
Jeremy, T know thy ways of Providence are juſt and righteous, but 
they are dark aod hidden from me, I cannor underſtand why thou 


mm T how haſt planted them, yea, they have taken roor, 


+ they grow, yea, they bring forth fruits thou art near 


in their mouth, and far from their reins 4, 
wh Here are a People that indeed talk of thee, and one that only 
obſerveth their Mouths, would judge thou wert near to them,an 
they had Communion with thee, but he that obſerveth their Lives, 
may eaſily diſcern that thou art far from their inward parts, they 
have neither fear of thee, nor love for thee, nor deſire after thee,nor 
delight in thee, norare they obedient to thee; yer thou haſt plant- 
ed them by thy Power, and by thy Providence they thrve, go on, 
and proſper: 
2 But chou,O LORD, * knoweſt me,thou halt ſeen 
me, and tried my heart | toward thee. e Pull them 
out like ſheep for the laughter, and prepare them for 


e of ſlaughter f. 

hy SE NG be Cm underſtood, viz. But Lord, it us 
otherwiſe with me, T am maligned, and my life is hunred after, yer 
Lord thou knoweſt the fincerity of my heart before 'and towards 
thee, thou haſt had experience of me in the diſchayge of my Pro< 
phetical Offices and knoweſt that I have been faithful in revealing to 
the People what thou didſt reveal to me, yet for this it is they ſeek 
my Life and would have my Blood. f Lord, avenge me on this 
wicked Generation, confirm the words againſt them which I have 


1P. XII. 


Heb. 
hey $0 one 


* Bf. r7. 3. 
139. I. 

+T Heb. 
with thee. 


this nature, and the lawfulneſs of putting vp ſuch Petitions againſt 
thoſe who are notonly our Enemies, but God's alſo. See what was 
noted on Chap. 11. Ver. 20. 


becauſe they ſaid, He ſhall nor fee our laſt end 5. 

- g The Prophet ſeems to give a reaſon of his former Paſſhon, and 
Prayer againſt thoſe wicked Men he before reflected on, becauſe 
they were the cauſe of the Nations Ruine, which is alſo aſſerted by 
the Pſalmiſt, Pſal. 107. 34+ ALandis ſaid to mourn metaphorically 


Drought, or Vermine. þ Nay the effefts of their wicked courſes 
reached tothe veryBeaſts and Birds, becauſe they were ſo preſumptu- 
ous as to conclude,that they ſhoud do well enough, neither the Pro- 
pher nor any other ſhould ſee their Jaſt end. 

5 If thou haſt run with the footmen, and they have 
wearied thee, then how canſt thou contend with hor- 
ſes 32? and if in the land of peace wherein thou truſtedſt 
they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in * the ſwel- 
ling of Jordan & ? : 

i That theſe are the anſwer of God to the Prophet, is reaſonably 
well agreed by the beſt Interpreters, as alſo that this is a Proverbial 
expreſſions but as to theapplication of it in this place, there is ſome 
difference : Some make it this. If thou doſt not underſtand what 
is done by the Men of thine owa City, how canſt thou think to fa- 
thom 'my Diſpenſations of Providence in the Government of the 
World 2 Bur this ſenfe ſeemeth not very probable, becauſe the ſenſe 
of the Proverb ſeemeth ro be, If thou beeſt not able te encounter 
lefler dangers, how wilt thou be able to overcome greater ? I rather 
agree with thoſe who make the ſenſe this. Feremy, I have greater 
dangers for thee to encounter than thoſe thou art expoſed to at 
Anathoth, if thou beeſt ſo diſturbed with them, who are but as Foet- 
men, how wilt thou be able to grapple with thoſe far greater Ene- 
mies which thou art like to meet with at Hieruſalem., k Anatheth alſo 
ſeemerh to be underſtood by the land of thypeace, that is, the Land of 
thy Friends wherein thou hadſt a confidence : If thy Enemies thou 
haſt there mer with, tire thee, what wilt thou do 7» the ſwellings of 
Jordan? That is in a place in which thou art like to meet with an in- 
creaſe of greater Troubles, like the ſwelling of Jordan ( which in 
Harveſt uſed to overflow its Banks) Many other things are ſaid by 
Interpreters, both with reference to the ſenſe ofthis Text, and the 
Explication of theſe proverbial expreſſions, but the ſenſe above. 
mentioned ſeemerh to me leaſt ſtrained, and beſt agreeing with what 
went before, and what follows. 

6 For even * thy brethren, and the houſe of thy fa- 
ther, even they have dealt treacherouſly with thee Z, 
yea || they have called a multicude after thee m, * be- 
lieve them not, though they ſpeak + fair words unto 


thee »: | 52, 

1 The Men of 4nath+th, thine own Townand Countrey, and thoſe 
of thy own Family have conſpired Evil againſt thee ſecretly, » Ei 
ther they have expoled thee ro the rage and rudeneſs of a multitude, 


* Toſh. 3. 
IF. 


Ch. 9. 4+ 
|| Or, cried 
. after thee 
wly. 
L Prov. 
26, 25+ 
+ Heb. 
. good things. 


4 |all the beaſts of the field, || * come to devour s. 


M IT A H. ' Chap. X1y. 


or they have accuſed thee to a multitude. » Tho' therefore they 
give thee many fair words, yet repoſe no truſt nor confidence in 
them, but look to thy ſelf. 

7 I have forſaken my houſe o, IT have left mine he- 


ritage p, I have given Þ the dearly beloved of my ſoul  jx.,, | 
into the hands of her enemies 4. 
o God by his Houſe here underſtandeth the Temple, which God 
is {aid here to have forſaken with reſpe& to his gracious manifeſta« 
tions 1n it to the People that came thither to worſhip him. p By | 
his heritage he means the whole Body of the Iſraelites, called God's | 
Heritage not in this Chapter only, but Chap. 2. 7. Joel 2. 19, Mic. 74 

14. whom God threatneth to leave with retpeC& to his ſpecial Provi« 

dence, by which he had taken care of them, upon which account 

Canaan is called the Land which God cared for, Deut. 11. 12, that is 

ſo cared for, as in compariſon with them, he might ſeem to negle& 

all other Countries. 4 That is, he had given that Nation which 

was ence his dearly beloved into the hands or power of their Ene= 

mies. 

8 Mine heritage is unto me, as a lion in the forreſt, 

it [| + crieth out againſt me : therefore have I hated it r. |Oryel:h; 

7 That is, the reaſon why my heart is alienated from them, is, T Hebgi- 
becauſe they arealtered, thoſe that were as my Sheep, following me %## out its 
their chief Shepherd, and the guidance of thoſe Prophets and Paſtors V9. 
whickr I ſect over them, are beceme like Lions in the Foreſt roaring 
againſt me, and rending and tearing the Prophets which I ſent unto 


them. 
ſpeckled bird /; the j os «2; 


the loves 


9 Mine heritage is unto me as a || 
birds round about are againſt her z, come ye, aſſemble /ented 


S The word in the Hebrew ſignifies to die, or colour, and Inter- Le, af 


preters are here divided, whether to interpret it of a Bird coloured by ,,,,, 
Nature, ( fo our Tranſlators underſtood it, and therefore have tranſs » £1. 
lated it ſpeckled ) or by accident,as ravenous Birds are coloured by the 
blood of other Birds killed by them. Hencz ſome interpret the Text 
as a reflection upon the Jews for their Cruelty, coloured by their 
oppreſſion and innocent bloodſhed. Others of their tinQture by 2 
variety of Superſtition and Idolatry, the Jatter ſeemeth to me moſt - 
probable, becauſe of what follows, it being what is uſual and naty. 
ral for other Birds z to flock about a ſtrange coloured Bird, ſuch as 
they have not been uſed to ſeey bur rather to fly from, than to come 
at a Bird of prey, that hath already ſtained her Feathers with the 


Chap. 7. 
33* 


from thee denounced. Concerning the meaning of expreſſions of 


4 How long ſhall che land mourn, and the herbs of 
every field wither, for the wickedneſs of them that dwell 
therein g ? * The beaſts are conſumed, and the birds, 


when it is brought to an ill complexion, and looketh unpleaſantly, . 
the Graſs and green Herbs in it being deſtroyed by Enemies, or | 


blood of other Birds. » But it may be underſtood of either, for 
the Jens were notoriouſly guilty of both, and it is God that 
| -—"qvctin the Birds to come againſt her, and the Beaſts of the field to 
; CEVOULr, 

' Io Many paſtors have deſtroyed my vineyard w, 
; they have croden my portion under foot, they have 


made my Þ pleaſant portion, a deſolate wilder- + 1x6; 
nels x. portion of 


, w By Paſtors moſt here think Civil Perſons, not Eccleſiaſtical Of- deſire» - 
' ficers are m*ant; but they are divided, ſome interpreting it of the 

\ Rulers and Princes of Nebuchaanezzar's Army, who took Jeruſalem, 

and deſtroyed Judah, called God's Vineyard, Ija. 5. 1, 2. others un- 


derſtanding it of the Rulers of the Fews, who by their wicked Go- ; | 


,vernment,and as wicked Example had ruined their Countrey. x And 
, Cauſed God to turn the Countrey which he had choſen for his por- 
(t10n, and declared ſuch a pleaſure in, into a Wilderneſs,and ſuch a 
| Wilderneſs as was nor only thinly inhabited, bur wholly deſolate. 

11 They have made it deſolate y, and being deſolate 
1t mourneth unto me z, the whole land is made deſo- 
late, becauſe no man layeth #r to heart 4. 

» Heb. He hath made it deſolate, but it cannot be meant of God, 
for it is God that ſpeaketh, -and God is he mentioned in the next 
words ; It muſt therefore either be underſtood of Nebuchadnezzar,the 
inſtrumental cauſe ; or ( one number being put for another ) of the 
People or the Rulers as the meritorious cauſe, and in that ruefy} 
ſtate into which their ſins had broughr it, it cried unto God. » And 
one great cauſe of this ſore Judgement upon the Land, was the 
Peoples not laying to heart, not ſeriouſly conſidering what God had 
done, or was doing againſt it. 

12 The ſpoilers are 'come upon all high places 
through the wilderneſs b : for the ſword of the LORD 
ſhall devour from the #ne end of the land, even unto the 
other end of the land: no fleſh ſhall have peace c. 

6 The Prophet ( as very uſually ) ſpeaketh of a thing as already 
done, which was very ſhortly to be done, he ſaith they were come 
up becauſe they ſhould come up, and no places ſhould be ſo high 
but they ſhould climb them ; none ſo ſtrong, but they ſhould ſub. 
due them. c The ſword of the Enemy is called the ſword of the 
Lord, becauſe he ordereth and ſucceeds it, though the Enemy man- 
ageth it, and he ſaith it ſhal be againit al), of all ranks and orders, 


no fleſh ſhould have peace ; by no fleſh, he meaneth no ranks, no 
orders of Men. 


I3 * They have ſown wheat, but they ſhall reap » Micah 
thorns d: they have put themſelves to pain, but ſhall 6. 15. 
not profit e : and || they ſhall be aſhamed of your reve- Hag. 1.6- 
nues, becauſe of the fierce anger of the LORD F. (} Or 96: 

d If theſe words be underſtood literally, they only ſignifie, that 
God would blaſt the Labours of the Husbandman, and curſe them 
in the Field. The Earths bringing forth Thorns and Thiſtles was part 
of the Curſe for the firſt tranſgreſſion of Man : Gen. 3. 18, God's blaſt= 
ing the Labours of Husbandmen is often threatned as a puniſh- 
ment of Sin. id. Lev. 26. 16. Deut. 28. 38. if it be taken meta- 
phorically, is is expounded by the next words. e Thatthey ſhould 
labour 1n vain, all the Works of their hands, all their Counſels and 
Deliberations ſhould be of no profite, or avail unto them, f The ? 
fierce anger of God againſt them ſhal be ſo ſhewed, that the returns 
of their Labours or Eſtates, the profits of their Trades, &c. fhal 
be ſo ſmall that they thal be aſhamed of them. 


14 T Thus faith the LORD againſt all. mine 


090 Ie GIS Og 


evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance Wes 


3 EB RB 


L hav2 cauſed my people Iſrael to inheric-g, Beho!d, I 


* Deut-35. will * pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the 
3. Chap. houſe of Judah from amongſt them 5 ? 


< Ss 3 F* 


” 


g God will nor be angry for ever with his own People, nor ſuffer 
the rod of the wicked for: ever to reſt upon the back of the righte- 
ous, for faith he, for thoſe that are my evil Neighbours, the Nations 
bordering upon Jiuilen, which God calls his Inheritance, upor, which 
2ccount he callcth them his Neighbours, who zexched his Inhert- 
tance, not ſo much by contiguiry of Habitartion, as by rapacious 
Fingers, to do them hurt, inſulting over them when the Hand of 
God was upon them, and contributing to their affliction and miſe- 
ry, by helping their Enemies againſt them, as did the Edomites, Phi- 
liftines, Moabites, &c. + 1 will alfo pluck them out of their Lard, 
T will bring the ſword upon them alfo, and they fhal be led into 
Captivity, and though they may have made ſome Inroads upon my 
Peop!e,and have carried away ſome of them into Captivity,yet 1 will 
fetch them out oftheir Captivity. 

15 And it ſhal come to paſs, after that T have pluck- 
ed them out, I will return and have compallion on them, 
and will bring them again every man to his heritage, 
and every man to his land 2. 

; This ſeemeth not to be a Prophecy only of the Jews return into 
their Land after the fulfilling of the Years of their Captivity, bur al- 
ſo of the bringing back of theſe Nations after that they ſhould be 
plucked upy and teems to relate to tie calling of the Gentiles, but 
this Prophecy muſt be limited by what followeth in the next Verſe, 
and not underſtood of all the Inhabitants of thoſe Nations, 

16 And it ſhal come to pals, if they will diligently 
learn the waysof my people to ſwear by my name, the 
LORD liveth &, ( as they taught my people to ſwear 
by Baal ) / then ſhal they be built in the midſt of my 


people m. | 

k Tho theſe people be Heathens, yet if they will leave their Ido. 
Jatries, and ſuperititious ways of Worſhip, and learn to worſhip and 
ſerve me as my People do, and ought to worſhip me. 1 And ſwear 
by my Name the Lord liveth, that is, pay that Homage which they pay 
to the Divine Beeing to me, the living and true God ; owning me 
alone as the fountain of life,and ſearcher of the hearts ( for there is a 
great Homage payed to the true God in ſwearing by his Name only, 
which ſheweth the great implety and profaneneſs of other Oaths. ) 
22 Then, ſaith God, I will blets and proſper them alſo, and they 
ſhal not only have a portion in the Earth but amongſt my People, 
which was eminently ſufilled in the Converſion of the Gentiles, Rom. 
11.17. they were originally wild Olives, and grafted in amongſt the 
Jews, and with them made partakers of the root, and fatneſs of the Olive- 
zree. 


17 But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up, 
and deſtroy that nation, faith the LORD ». 


x But for thoſe, whether they be Fews or Gentiles, that ſhal conti- 
nue in their Idolatrous, and Superſticious courſes ; that ſhal refuſe 
the Mzſſias, ani] continue in unbelicf, and go on in courſes of Rebel- 
lion and diſobedience ( ſaid God) I will utterly deſtroy that Peo- 
ple. Thus 1/a. 60: 12. The nation and kingdom, that will not ſerve thee, 
ſhall periſh, yea rhoſe nations ſhall be utterly waited. 


CH A P. XIIL 
I the Type of a Linnen-Girdle God prefigureth their DeſtrufFion, 1 II. 
Under the Parable of Bottles filed with Wine, is foretold their Drunken 
neſs with Miſery, 12 14. He exhorteth to prevent theſe Judge 
ments by Repentance from their ſms, which are the cauſe thereof, 
BY 27+ 
Hus ſaith the LORD unto me, Go, and get thee a 
linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put 
it not in water 4» 

a God's deſign, by what 1s recorded in this Chapter, is by two 
Types, as in two Glaſſes, to ler the People underſtand by the Pros 
pher, how he looked upon them, and what they were in his Eyes, 
and alſo what he would do unto them, and they might expett from 
him, ro this purpoſe he directeth the Prophet to procure himſelf a 
Girdle, not woolen bur {ine made of Flax, or the like, and to put 
it not upon his Clothes, bur upon his Loins, to lignifie, ( as ſome 
think ) that this people were a peeple whom God hadfmade near to 
him. He commands him not to put it in watery t& ſoften it, as 
ſome think ; Linen newly made, before it 1s wetted in water, being 
rough ; and this they conceive the Prophet was torbidden, for a 
further Type of the ſtiffneſs and roughneſs, and ſtubbornneſs ef this 
People. Others think,totyprfie that God was no cauſe of this Peoples 
rotting, and growing Corrupt. : 

2 So I got a girdle according to the word of the 
LORD 5, and put zt on my loins: c. 

b That is according to God's Command. c And uſed it as God 
commanded me, never diſputing the reaſon, why God bid me do 
{uch a thing. 

2 And che word of the LORD came unto me the {e- 
cond time, faying, - 

4 Take the girdle that thou haſt got, which 7s upon 
thy loins, and ariſe, go to Euphrates, and hide it there 
in an hole of the rock d. 

d God having commanded the Prophet to procure ſuch a Girdle 
as was before mentioned, and ro tye it upon his Loins, he a fecond 
time comes to him and commanderh him ro take this Girdle and car- 
ry it to Eyphratess This was one of the four great Rivers that the 
River our of the Garden of Eden divided it ſelf into, Gen. 2. 10, I 4s 
Ic was the border of the Promiſed Land, Ger. 15. 18. Dent. x: 7, 11.24. 
1 Chron. 5. 9. Reuben's Lot was bounded by it. The Prophet was com- 
- manded to hide his Girdle, in the hole of a Rock in that River. Bur 
why there 2 Were there not other places nearer, where the Prophet 
mivht have hid it? Ir is judged by ſome, that this Command was 
alſo to fignific unto them, that they ſhould be carried out of their 
own Borders into Captivity, oi rather that they had corrupted, and 
were become rotten, by doing after the faſhions and manners of rhe 
Hea:hens, who lived on the other fide of Evphrates always but having 


M E 4 A H. 
( an hundred years befur2 this } Cuptivated the Ten Tribes, lived 
a!to on this fide of jt. | 


5 So [ went and hid it by Euphrates as the LORD 


commanded me e. | | 

.£ Moſt think that Jeremiah did this but in a Vifian, for it was 8 
very long Journey for the P:opher to take to go f om Anathnth, or 
Hieruſalem as far as Euphrates. fergmiah was obedient to God's Com 
mand, without any diſputing or 25xing God the meaning of this Ir.5 
junttion to him. | | FOE IN 

6 And it came to paſs after many days that the 

LORD faid unto me, Arie, go to Euphrates, and taks 
the girdle from thence, which F commanded thee to 
hide there f. CREEP | 

f God who had bidden the Prophet go 2nd hide the linen Girdle, 
after ſome conliderable time ſpeaks again to him te goand take it a- 
way from the place where he had lodged it. ; 

7 Then LI went to Euphrates and digged, and took 

the girdle from the place where I had hid it g, and 
behold the girdle was marred, and it was profitable for 
nothing hb. , 

£ Whether the Propher really made ſuch a journey,or all this was 
but a Viſion is very uncertain. þ When he came tothe place, or 
in his Viſion, he thought when he came to the place, that be ſaw all 
the girdle rotted, and good for nothing but ro be thrown upon a 
Dunghill. 


8 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, ſay- 


1nN 


9 Thus faich the LORD, Afeer this manner-will I 


_ the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerufa- 
em 3, 


z By this it appears that God commanded Jeremiah todo this, not 
only us a repreſentation of the rotten and corrupt ſtate ofthis People, 
but of his Vengeance which ſhould ſuddenly be brought upon themy 
though they were a proud people lifted up and ſwelled in the Opinion 
of themſelves, from the tavour which God had ſhewed them, in 
making them a People near unto him,and as it were wearing them up- 
on his Lows, yet they having corrupted themſelves by mixing 
their ftreams with the fſireams of Euphrates, corrupting them- 
ſelves with the Superſtitions, corruptions and Idolatries of Heathens, 


and in ſome of thoſe Nations with whom, and by whoſe Example 
they had finned againſt the Lord. This ſente of theſe words is much 
confirmed by the following words. 


10 This evil people which refuſe to hear my words, 


them (hal even be as this girdle, which is good for no- 
thing &. | 

k Hitherto the Prophet had yielded a blind obedience to God, dos» 
ing what he commanded him though he poflibly knew no other 
reaſon for it, but becauſe God bade him do ſo ( which is an Homage 
we owe unto God, though to none but him ) now God expounds 
himſelf what he meant co teach the . Jews by this, viz. That he did 
intend that they ſhould be conſumed by the People beyond the 
River Euphrates, as that Girdle was there marred, and he alſo ſhews 
them, that their own fins in diſobeying his word, and following the 
imaginations of their own hearts, particularly their Idolatry,' was 
what had brought this ſore Judgement upon them. | 

11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, 
ſo have I cauſed to cleave unto me the whole houſe of 
Ifrael, and the whole houſe of Judah, faich the LORD, 
that they might be unto me for a people, and for a 
name, and for a praiſe, and for a glory /: but they 
would not hear wn 

1 Here God openeth to the Prophet, why he commanded him to 
put the Girdle abour his Loins, viz. to ſhew that he of his ſingular 
favour, had uſed the Jews as a Man uſecth his Girdle which hefaſtey- 
eth about his Loins, and as a Man weareth his Girdle, made up of 
ſome coſtly Materials for an honour and praiſe to bim, ſo God's 
deſign in honouring this People, wearing them as a Girdle, was, that 
they might bring him honour and glory, living to his praiſe, inthe 
obedience of his Commands, eſpecially fuch Commands as related ro 
to his Worſhip. m2 But they would not anſwer God's defigns, nor 
hearken to any Counſels of that nature which he gave them, and 
therefore he was reſo)ved to pluck them from his Loins, and to ſuf- 
fer them to rot, and conſume as that Girdle was rotted. See Pſal. 
$1. from Verſe 8, to the end, which the Author of the Znglijh An« 
notations ſaith well, is an excellent Commear on this Texte 

12 © Therefore thou ſhalt ſpeak unto them this word, 
Thus faith the LORD the God of Liſrael, Every bottle 
ſhall be filled with wine, and they ſhalt ſay unto thee, 
Do we not certainly know that every bottle (ball be 
tilled with wine » 2? 

n God by his Prophet ſheweth them their ruine in 2nother G'aſs, 
he bids the Prophet cell them, that every botcle ſhould be filled with wine, 
Wine was what they delighted in, Hoſe 3, 1+ They loved flagons of wine, 
and were for thoſe Prophets that would propheſie ts :h:m of wine and 
&rong drink, Micah 2. 1x. God therefore ſenderh them a Prophecy 


about Wine, bids the Prophet tell them, that every bottle ſhauld be 


| filed with wie. ( Glad News to the Drunkards ameng them ! ) bur 


no very ſtrange thing to them who ofren enough were wont both to 
fill, and to empty Borcles of Wine; but they little underſtocd the 
Wine which God and his Prophet intenged, God therefore openeth it 
to them- : ; 

12 Then- ſhalt thou ſay unto them, Thus faith the 
LORD, Behold, I will fill all the Inhabitants of this 
land, even the kings that fit upon Davids throne, and 


the prieſts, and the prophets, and all che inhabirants of 


Jerafalem with drunkennets o, 


6 G 4 s There 


Chap. A 


God would make uſe of ſome of thoſe Nations to abate their Pride, /\ 
and pluck their feathers, and they ſhould rot amongſt thoſe People, / * 


which walk in the || imaginations of their heart, and jg, z,g. 
walk afcer other gods to ſerve them, and to worſhip burn. 


. ds _ re onmereno nn OO —_ 
econ rt nn FC ere ae ee IIa Im rt eres mens _ - 


—_— 


Rn er NEE REgrn ee IIr ne S Ae 


——_ 


Do ——_ IR. POT. 


ere nee ewe — 


mmm —_—_—__—_—_ 


er RT rn er SY 
— —— 


—— 


cad 


. y - . 6 
— 
er ene ee RIt ye III SE EIIe pn 
Ce ee en erin een ent no ng ec 


a es AG TT 
- - - 


F 


a4 


FE 


7 BR 
1 » OOs J. A 
Wide rhe ene ad inlerh and api 6 rT 
ow ——ob rang —_ Pris Pope _—_ ” cages as = -— 
"cp ogfrber woken upon _ account, nor to the Prieſts 
T 7] tj 
Heb. - res gp TO deck chem + one againſt another, —_ 
n againſt the fachers, and the ſons together, ſaith the LORD : 


vs brother. F will not pity, nor ſpare, nor have mercy, 7 but de- 


© ao, ſtroy them Þ. FE 
—_— ? And I will ſet them one againſt another,raiſing upan evil Spirit 


hap. XIV. 


of diviſion amongſt them, that they ſhal be Jike —_— 
ed one againſt another, which are caſily broken in pieces- 1 
have no pity on them, therefore let them not ar many he per 

| mercy, and pity, and compaſſion, for I am reſolved to ſhew them 
no mercy, but to bring them to utter ru1ne, and deſtruQtion. 


15 © Hear ye and give car, be not proud: for the 
' LORD hath ſpoken 9. 


* q God ordinarily ſubjoyneth exhortation and counſel to his re- 


t cople will change their hearts and ways, 
_— — edSre the Prophet ſpeaketh to them, 
that they would yet hear, and that not formally, but give car, not 
exalting themſelves againſt God, and nouriſhing a vain confidence, 


ſo ofcen calling them to thy aſſiſtance, or by thy 
from them, and other Nations, 


ver thee; thy forrows and afflitions wil! come upon 


iniquity are thy * skirts diſcovered,and thy heels || made 


M TI A H, Chay, XIV, 
Idolatry borrowed 

haſt taught them to be C pra'ns o« 

; | thee ſude 

aenly and terribly as pain cometh upon a Woman in Travail ; yea, 

and as certainly alſo. 


22 And if thou fay in thine heart, * Wherefore 


* Chap. g. 
come theſe things upon me ? for the greatneſs of thine 


19, and I6, 
Lo, 

x 
bare c. Nahum 


c Hypocrites will rarely confeſs their own ſhame and GODS'S ff, j,,, 
Righteouſneſs, but are ready to expoſtulate and diſpute with GOD, ;, wal ol 
and ro call him to account why he hath dealr fo with them,as if God mY 
had dealt unjuſtly. Bur ( ſaith GOD ) if thou ſhouldeſt have any 
ſuch thoughts in thine heart,do but remember thine iniquities, how 
many and how great they have been, thy nakeaneſs is diſcovered be 
cauſe of theſe, and for theſe thou art expoſed to contempr and ſhame; 
probably theſe Phraſesare fetched from the uſual praftice of Soldiers 
when they have conquezed a place and taken Priſoners,to ſtrip them, 
and leave thoſe of either Sex, either no Clothes ro cover their naked- 
neſs, or nothing bur their own Rags, nor fufficient to cover their 
nakedneſs. By Skirts is meant the lower part of their Bodies coyer= 
ed with the lower part of their Garments. 


23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leo 
pard his ſpots 4? hen may ye alſo do good, thar are 
T accuſtomed to do evil e. f Heb: 


tak:n away. 


hopes, and going one in their rebe1lious courſes, 

Cong dim Tov 6 he woes but the LORD'S Prophets and 

his Me Engers unto them. The word which we bring 1s not ours, 
it is the LORD that hath ſpoken by us- 

16 Give glory to the LORD your God r, before 


he cauſe darkneſs, and before your feet ſtumble upon 
*16.59.9. the dark mountains, and while ye * look for light, he 
PL. 449+ turn it into * the ſhadow of death, and make 27 groſs 


els /. 
_— God, by an humble confeſſion of your ſins, Joſh. 7. 19, 


| ittt our ſelves to God, Jam. 4. 7. bumbling your 
ond de Weed, Jam. 4 10. and under his mighty hand, 
- x Pet. 5. 6. f Before God brings upon you his great and heavy 
Judgements before threatned ; as a ſtate of proſperity is fer _—_ 

ten in Scripture by the Notion of Ligh:, which is a pleaſant an 
chearing thing; ſo a ſtate of afflition is often ſer out to us in Scrip- 
ture under the Notion of Darkneſs, Iſa. 8. 22. Joel 2. 2. Amos 5-18, 
&c. and as in the want of Light, which is direQive to our feer, 
Men ate prone toſtumble ar any thing that lies in their way, ſoas 
they know not how to dire&rheir feeror rake their ſteps, ſo in times 
-of affliction, eſpecially great affliftions, Men are ordinarily perplexs 
ed and know not what courſe to take. In the Jatter part of the Yerſe 
he ſeemeth ro threaten God's diſappointment of their expeRations. 
The Jews to the laſt appeared highly confident looking for light, but 

they met with great diſappointment, even groſs darkneſs. 

17 But it you will not hearit z, my foul ſhall weep 
*TLam. x, in ſecret places for your pride «,and * mine eye ſhall weep 
2,16. and fore, and run down with tears, becauſe the LORD'S 


'2. 18. flock iscarried away captive T. | 
£ Thar is, if you will not liſten to what I ſay, take heed ro what 


Ifzy, and obey the counſe] which I give you. « I ſhal ſeriouſly and | 


rn for your rebelljon and obſtinacy which is rooted in 

CG and lifting up your ſelves againſt the LORD'S Moniti- 

ons and Counſels. 7 

it comes upon you, I thal havea perſonal and family concern with 

you, but thar will not ſo much trouble meas to conſider that you who 
are the Church and People of GOD ſhould be led into Captivity: 

18 Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble your 


[|Or, »w ſelves x, fit down ; for your || principalities ſhall come 


head. tires. even the crown of your glory x. 
own bs Author of Holy Writ is diſcernible by this as by other 
things, that the Scripture equally ſpeaks to the greateſt Perions, as 
to Perſons of meaner rank. GOD here calls to the King of Judah, 
whether it was at this time Jehoiakim, or his Son Jehojakin, is uncer- 
; tain. x By Principalities he means both their Digniry, and their Li- 
berty that which he often calierh the Crown of their Glory. Some 
expound it Head-tires, becauſe the word deriveth from a word which 
ionifics the Heads 
, 19 The cities of the ſouth ſhall be ſhut up,and none 


ſhall open them y, Judah ſhall be carried away captive all 


of it, ic ſhall be wholly carried away captive. 
5 Either the Cities of Judah which lay Southward from Chaldea, 
. and therefore their Enemies in the next Verſe are {aid to come fiom 
the North, and this great evil is ſaid ro have come from the North ; 
- or { as ſome would have it) the Cities of Egyp:, which lay yer 
more Seuthward, ſo as the Egyptians ſhould neither come with tuth- 
cient force to raiſe the Siege, nor ſhould there be any Sanfuary or 
Refuge for them in Egypr, but they ſhould certainly be wholly car- 
ried into Captivity. 
_ 20 Lifc up your eyes, and behold them that come 
from the north = : where #s the flock that was given thee, 
thy beautiful flock « ? | | 
z He ſpeaks to them as if their Enemy was even then upon their 
March, that if they did but look they might ſee him coming. + The 
Prophet either ſpeaks ro the King, or to the Rulers, or chief of the 
Congregation © Judah, Prove 14. 28. In the mulitude of the People is 
the King's honour. So in the mulrirude of Subje&s or of Members, 
lies much ofthe honour of a Church or Stare. 


21 What wilr thou ſay when he ſhall + puniſh thee ? 


+ Heb. vi- 
thee. 
.* Chap. 
Ge 2 4+ 


*over thee ) ſhall nor * ſorrows take thee as a woman 


I vail b ? 
That is.thou wilt have nothing to ſay, but be wholly confound- 


d when God ſhal viſit chee with this fore judgement, 

- EE aware: Army ſent by GOD, ſhal viſit thee; for 

thou, either by thy Commerce and trading with them, or by thy 
, 


a In the Hebrew it is, Can the Cuſhite, &c. from whence it is well Faughts 
concluded, as learned Men judge, that the Erhicpians are of the Po- 
ſterity of C:ſh the Son of Cham, Brother to Miſraim, the Father of the 
Egypt. ans, Gen. 10. 6. For theſe were the only People of old not:d 
for their black colour in Scripture, as the Eth.opians are now. 
e God ſheweth thar the Jews by their continued cuſtomary ſinning 
had ſo inured themſelves to wicked prattices, that it was as much 
Jabour in vain to endeavourto reclaim them, as to go about to waſh 
a Blackamore, or to take-out the natural ſpors our of the Beaſts called 
Leopards. 

24 Therefore will I ſcatter them as the ſtubble that 


paſſeth away by che wind of the wilderneſs f. 
f The words cen:ote a great, and clear diſperſion, like that of the 
{ſcattering of Stubble by a fierce Wind. 


+ And I ſhalalſo mourn for your Calamity when ! 


25 This z thy lot, che portion of thy meaſures from 
me, faith the LORD 3 becauſe chou haſt forgotten me, 
and truſted in falſhood g. 

g Th's is what thou ſhalt have at the LORD'S Hand, the dif, pen. 
ſar.on which thou ſhalt meer with, and thu mayeſt thank thy ſe'f 
forir for hadſt t1ou remembred either my f-rmer kindneſs to thee, 
or th? Law that I gavetheey, this had not come unto thee, bur thou 
haſt forgotten me, and truſted in lyes, or in idle, vain and preſum= 
ptuous hopes, therefore I have given thee but a jult lot, and mea« 
tured to thee a juſt mcaſure. 
26 Therefore * will I diſcover thy skirts upon thy +7, , «: 

.T. ve 

face that thy ſbame may appear h. | Exck. 16. 
h Therefore I wil expoſe thee to all manner of ſhame and con- 37.and 23, 
tempt, without any regaid to thy honour. Thoſe that honour God, 29. 
God will honour, bur thoſe that detpiſe and diſhonnour him, ſhal Hol. 2, 10. 
not be able ro maintain their own hocour. 

27 1 have ſeen thy adulceries, and thy * neighings 3, + 
the lewdneſs of thy whoredom, and thine abominati- 5. 8. 
ons * on the hills, in the fields k,: woe unto thee, O- "Ila. 65. 7. 
Jerulatem, wile thou not be made clean? + when ſhall Chap.2.20. 
: Ezek. 6.13. 
it once be }? 


3. af= 
# Sume think the Prophet here refleQs upon them for their Ccorpo- ha WY 
ral A.lulr-ries, and their madneſ* upon them, which he compareth ,,, » 
to the nezghings of Hories, bur thoſe Words on the Hills in the Frelds, 
in the next Ciauſe lecms to inform us. & That he mears hoe nly 
their 1dslatries which are in holy Writ often compared to Adulteries, 
which are the greateſt fins in their kind, the greareſt violations of 
the Marriage Covenant, and provocations of Perſons in conjugal 
Relari«n, and the only cauſe of lawful divorce. 1 He concludes 
with pathetical I'tterrogations, intiwating that yer there was hope 
if they would retorm ; and though giving over their cate almc as 
; deſperat-, and not krowing what would not be, yet he leaves no 
| Means untriedy but asks them if it was nor yet time, or when tuch 
a thing might be hoped for at their hands ? 


Chap. 


( for thou haſt taught them 70 be caprains, and as chief 


CHAP. XIy, 

A grievous Famine propheſied # Its Miſeries, 1———6. The Prophet prays 
eth, but GOD * il not be entreated for them, 7 i2, Lying Proe 
phets no excuſe for them, 13 16. The Prophtt's Complaint, 
17 —22, 


w—_ word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah 
concerning the Þ dearth a. 

a What Dearth we are nit told, nor when it h2 
think that it was 1n the time of the Siege of Hirruſzlum ; others, that ,5, 1,arths 
it was 1n the beginning of the Reign of Zeackiah, but they judge or reſtraints, 
moſt probably, that think it was in the time of Fehoiakim, for we 
read Chap. 36. 9. of an extraordinary Faſt by him proclaimed,which 
| many judge was upon this occaſion: The H:b. Phraſe which is here 


» 


' uſed, {ignifying, The matter of the Reſtraints; gives Interpreters ſome 


f H:b. 
ppened ; ſome ;j, 9-9 of | 


: liberty ro abound in their ſenſes of this Text, but the following 


' words make it evident, Yerſe 4, 5. that the Refiraints here mention- 
ed were GOD'S reſtraining of Water from them, ſo that the Dear: 
was occaſioned from a great Droughr, which is elegantly deſcribed 


!in the five next Verſes,and deprecated, Yeyſe 7, 8, 9. which make 
| indeed but a Preface to the Revelation ofthe Mind and Will of GOD 


| in this Prophecy. 

2 Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languiſh, 
they are black unto the ground, and the cry of Jeruſa- 
lem is gone up 6. 

b By Judah is meant the Men and Women in the who'e Conn- 
'try of Judah. The Gates is put for their Citres, or che M-n of 
| their Cities languithed, for want of moiſture for theme iv: 5 or their 
| Beaſts, They are all in the-Habits of Mourners, or Fog mo 

OOkce 


| Chap. XIV. 


4 
: 
; 
f 


- _— 


205% rs. 


on be, >” ad : Fes of this 
F a "_ : \ nf = 
b, 


looked ſwarthy and ſtarvedly; for want of due and wholſom Nous 
rithment, and the cry of Hirruſalem is gone up, either their cry un- 
to Gol] by their Prayers in his Temple, or their cry by the Reaſon 
of their Miſery and Grief.is goneup to Heaven. 

3 And their nobies have ſent their lirtle ones to the 
waters, they came to the pits and found no water, they 
they returned with their veſſels empty : they were a- 

amed and confounded, and covered their heads c. 
e This ſcarcity of water afflicted not mean perſons only, who 
ave not fo good means toſupply their neceflities as others; but 
their greateit perſons ; ſo as they ſent their little ones ( it were 
berter tranſlated $-yvants, for they are meant to the places made 
to receive and retain water, but finding no water in the Pits,they 
Came back again with their Veſſels empry,like Men aſham<d 8& con- 
founded, & troubled up n the ſecing their ExpeQtations fruſtrated, 
_ 4 Becauſe the ground is chaprt 4, for there was no rain 
in the earth, the plowmen were aſhamed, they cove- 


red their heads e. 

d The Hebrew word ſignifierh more largely than Chapt, broken, 
ſpoiled, turn'd into duſt, as is uſual in gicat droughts e The 
word allo which we tranſlate Plowmen; doth not ftriatly ſfigathe 
Pl!owmen,bu- Husbandmen,thers having been no rain upon the Earth, 
it brought forti little or no Graſs for thoſe that imployed themiclves 
In breeding or feeJing Cattel, and it was ſo hard, and ſo much 
wanted moifture, that they could nor plow nor ſow, but were like 
Men aſhamed and confounded, who knew not what to do. 

5 Yea, the hind alſo calved in the field and forſook 


3t, becauſe there is no grals f. 

F Hinds uſe not to get their Food in Fields, butupon the Moun- 
tains and in Wildernefſes ; but rhe drought was ſuch, that theſe 
wild creatures came into the lower grounds, nearer the H3bitations 
of Men," than they were wont,and there broughrtforth their Young. 
The Hinds are loving Creatures, and as all Creatures by a natural 
inſtin&, love their Young, ſo the Hinds eſpecially, but their mor 
ſture being dri:d up, they could not ſuckle them, but were forced 
to leave them, running about here and there to ſeek Graſs to ear, 


6 And the wild ailes did ftand in the high places, 
they ſnuffed up the wind like dragons g : their eyes did 


flil becauſe there was no gras þ. 

£ The wild Aſſes wanting water, got upon high places, where 
was the freeſt and cooleſt Air, and ſucked in the Wind, and this it 
is ſaid they did like Dragons, of whom Ar:#otle and Pliny report, 
that by reaſon of the great heat of their Bodies, they ordinarily 
ſtand vpon bigh places ſucking in the cool Air, and they tell us 
thoſe Creatures will live upon it for ſome time. The Prophet de- 
ſcribing this great drought, tells us, the wild Aſſes did the like. + 
But for want of Graſs th:ir Eyes were either almoſt ſunk in their 
Heads, they being almoſt ſtarved, or elſe the phraſe ſignifies the 
fruſtration oftheir expeRation, which this Phraſe alſo ſometimes 
ſignifies in Scripture, Pal; 69: 3. _ , : ] 

7 © O LORD ! though our iniquities teſtifie againſt 
us 3, do thou jt & for thy names ſake /z for our back- 


flidings are many, we have ſinned againſt thee x. 

5 The Prophet having deſcribed their miſery, both in the cauſe 
cf it, the Drought for want of Rain, andthe effe&s of it, he appli- 
eh himſelf to thar God, who he knew was hz who alone could 
give the former and the latter Rain ; confefling that their ſins and 
backflidings were very many, and teſtified againſt them, that they 
Had deſerved God's ſevere Scourge, and God was Righteous in what 
of this nature he had done againſt them. Bur yet faith he & do #hou 
& ; that is, do thou what we deſire, and what we ſtand in need of, 

ive us Rain» 1 Though not for our ſake, we deſerve no ſuch 
Lindnefs from thee, yet for thy Names ſake: Thy word, or promiſe, 
or rather here for thine Honour and Glory ſake. So 1s: 43 25. and 
48. 11, where God promiſeth them to ſhew them kindneſs for his 
Names ſake, ſo as Feremiah's Prayer is but a pleading of God's Pro- 
miſes, that he would fulfil his word. m7 For here ſignifies though, 
and might have been better ſo interpreted. 


8 O the hope of Iſrael », the Saviour thereof in 
time of trouble o, why ſhouldſt thou be as a ſtranger in 


the Land, and as a wayfaring man, hat turneth aſide | 


co tarry for a night p ? 


» That is the Obje& of 1/-ae/'s hope, he in whom alone thy Peo- | 


Ple Iſrael have been wont to hope, or hein whom alone J/-ael hath 
juſt Reaſonto hope. o Thou who haſt formerly been their Saviour 
in the times of their trouble, or who alone canſt ſave them in ſuch 
times of trouble, as thou haſt now brought them into. See Pſal: 
9. 9. and 46. 1. p Why ſhouldſt thou be as one that regardeſt thy 
ancient People no more than a Stranger, or a Traveller, who ta- 
keth no farther care for the place, or the Houſe where he lodgeth, 
than for the ſhort time that heis ro ſtay or abide in 1t. 


g9 Why ſhou!dit thou be as a man aſtonied q? as a 
mighty man hat cannot ſaver ? ygr thou, O LORD, 


fHeb: thy ,rt in the midſt of us /, and we are called by thy name 
ame cal- 


liaupon us. 


ft, leave us not. .”, ; | 

q4 The Hebrew word here uſed being found in no place of Holy 
Writ bur this, hath given Interpreters a liberty to tranſlate it vari- 
ouſly, /repy,weak, a(toniſbed, fighted, I:ke a Man in ſuch diſorder 
through ſome great paſſions, that he is able to do nothing- » Like 
2 Man who in his own Nature is ſtrong and mighty enough, bur 
chrongh ſickneſs or Paſſion is ſo weakned, that he cannor pur forth 
any ſtrength forthe ſuccour and relief of his Friends. 5 Yet ( faith 
the Prophet) thou art in the midſt of us, that is, we lave thy 
7:miple ro which thon haſt promiſed thy ſpecial preſence, or rather 
it is to be underſtcod of the whole Land, according to what God 
had declared, Num: «: 3. and, 35: 34. Defile not the Land which ye ſhall 
irhab:t, wherein I dwell : For F the Lord dwell among the Chilarcn f Iſra- 
el, t Thar is, we ate called the Lord's people, and that not only 
by others amongſt whom we have that repute, but by thy ſelf, 
God often calleth his people in Scripture, his peopls, his purizon. ." 
Therefore he begs that God would not leave them ; he means as to 
that ſpecial providence, by which he had formerly warched over 
them, and cared for them, and been a proteCtion to them ; nor as 


JEREMIAH. 


Chap. XIV. 


to his Ordinances, and his ſpecial gracious"preſence with them in his 
Temple. - : 

10 Thus faith che LORD unto this people «, Thus 
have they loved to wander w, they have not refiained 
their feet x, therefore the LORD doth not accept them 


lins z. 

# Here beginneth that Divine Revelation ment'oned, Yer. 1. as 
an anſwer to the Prophets complaint and Prayer in the nine firſt 
verſes. The ſubſtance of which is, that for their manifold tins, he 
was reſolved to puniſhthem, and therefore would n«t be any more 
lolicited on their behalf. w They have gone aſide our of the way 
of my Precepts, and that out of a principle of love and delight, the 
have been fond of their Idols. x And they have perſiſted in thoſe 


ard 9. 9, 


deviations and ſinful courſes, notwithſtanding all Counlels, and Ar- 
guments ule !./ith them-to the contrary, nothing cc uld keep their 
teer to the way of my Teſtimonies. y Thereſore though they pray, 
and cry, and faſt, God will not accept them. z Bur by his punith+ 
ment of them for their fins, he will let them know, that as he hath 
cen and taken notice of, ſo he hathnot fo: got what they have done. . 
11 Then faid the LORD unto me *. Pray not for + Ex0:32- 
this people for heir good a. 10. 
#s Twice before God had given the Prophet this charge, Chap. 5, 
26. and 171. 14. how it could conliſt with the Piety of Jeremiah, af- 
ter thoſe charges to put up the Prayer we have Yer. 7, 8, 9. of this 
Chapter. See th: Notes on Chap: 11; I 4. | | 
. 12 * When they faſt, ] will nor hear their cry b, and *Iſa:58; x, 
when they offer burnt-offerings and an oblation, I] Zcch: 7:7, 
will not accept them c, but* I will conſume them by *Th, a 
che 1word and by the famine, and by peſtilence 4. 20. _ 7. 
6b The like threatning we have, Prov: 2: 28, 1ſa: 1. 15. Chap: 11, 21, 2+, © 
ls, Ezech: 8. 18. Micah 3: 4 c Men may lo long deſpiſe God's calls, * Chap: 9 
Exhorrations and Counſcls, as their caſe may be deſperat as to the 16. ! 
prevention of temporal Judgmenrs by ſuch Religious applications 
ro God asordinarily have their effc&, ro prevent and remove-Judg- 
ments. Sce chap. 15: 1. Exzek: 14,14, 20. d He threatneth to add 
to their plague, three ſore Judgments, ordinarily acompanying one 
another both in God's threarnings, and in the execution of them, 
chap: 29. 17, 18. and 4 17, &c, Wy 
13 Then faid I, Ah LORD GOD ! Behold the pro- 
phers fay unto them, Ye ſhall not ſee the ſword, nei- _ 
ther ſhall ye haye famine, but I will give you + aſſured 4 Heb * 
peace in this place e. Shed TT, P-ace of 
e W have many complaints of this Prophet againſt falſe Prophets truck. 
that contradifted his Prophefies, chap: 4: 10. and 23: 9+ and we ſhall 
hereafter meet with the name- of ſome of them. Corrupt Govern= 
ments never want Prophets to their humor, though a bolder tranſ- 
greſſion can hardly be imagined, than for Men to entitle God to their 
own Imaginations and Fancies, and we ſhall ver: 15: mect with the 
uſual Wages of ſuch Works. | | 
14 Then the Lord ſaid unto me, the prophets prophe- 
fie lies in my namef, *I ſent them not, neither have I *Chap:23. 
commanded them, neither ſpake unto them : they pro- 21. & 25. 
pheſie to you a falſe viſion and divination, and a 15- & 29: 
thisg of nought, and the deceit of their hearr.. 8, 9+ 
f They did not only propheſie falſchoods, but lyes, what the 
knew to be falſe ; for they pretended, that God had reyealed ſack 
things unto them ; for admit the things they ſpake ( as to Men ) 
but future Contingences, which might be true'or falſe, yer jt was 
a lie forthem to pretend that God had rold them any ſuch things. 


| The things were certainly falſe in themfelves, being contrary to 


God's Revelation ; but ſetting that aſide, for them to pretend God 
had revealed that to them which he had not revealed, was a formed 
lie. God denyerh that he ever commanded them to ſpeak any ſuch 
things, or ſent them upon any ſuch E:irands ; they propheſied whar 


came in their own fooliſh beads, and the deceits of their own hearts. 


I5 Therefore thus ſaich the LORD, concerning the 
prophets that propheſie in my name and I ſent them, 
not, yet they ſay, ſword and famine (ball not be in 
this land, by ſword and famine ſhall thoſe Prophets be 


obabbennt 8; EEE io: ns i | 
 & Itis amoſt dangerous thing for Eccleſiaſtical Minifters to de« 
liver that to People as the will of God, which is not.ſo:. God here: 
thfearneth that theſe Prophets in teſtimony of the truth of the Word 
of God delivered by Jeremiah, ſhould die by theſe very Judgments,. 
which they falſly propheſicd to this People as from God an immu- 
nity from, wid: Ch: 6: 1s. and 20: 6. 1 Kings 22. 25. | ; 
16 And the people to whom they propheſie, (hall be 
caſt out in the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, becaute of the fa- 
mine, and the ſword, and they ſhall have none to bury, 
them, their wives, nor their ſons, nor their daughters ; 


for I will pour their wickedne(s upon them o. , _.. 
0 The ſecurity promiſed by theſe falſe Prophets, ſhall be no Ex-. 
cuſe to the people for giving credit to them; the Prophets ſhall pe 
riſh for propheſying faiſly in my Name, and the people that hearken 
to, . and believe what they ſay, and prattiſe aecerdingly, ſhall pe«. 
rilh for their light agd vain credulity.. As the ſinful Commands. 
of Superiors in things civil,. will got free thoſe from Guilt that ex«, 
ecute their Commands ; ſo the Lies and falſe teachings of Miniſters, 
will not excuſe thole that run into Error upon the credit of their. 
words :. both the one and the other owe their firſt homage and Al- 
ledgance to God, by whofe woxd they ought to examin the Pre- 
cepts of the one, and the propheſyings of the other,  '. . - 

17 4 Therefore thou ſhalt fay this word unto them 


* Tet mine eyes run down with tears night and. day, * Ch: g: r.. 
and let them not ceaſe, for the virgin daughter of my and 13:17 
people is broken with a great breach with a very grie- : _——— 
' vous blow, TT ENDIRS es ; 
18 If T go forth into the. field, then behold theſlain 

6 H with 


Wo 
| ; 
| 
| 
| 


),* he will now remember their iniquity, and viſit their *Hoſ8:1, j| 


—_— 


.: 
'4 


, 
: 


% " 
_ got door ae EEE REO IAIN IIA Roto I I IO EI egy I A tyra —— 
— ey nee —_ en TO EITIED rn wn nn ry - _ _ - -— —_ 


” 


_— 


OR RN EE ET ORAL "I —_s Dr ———_— 
R i 


, GE. 6 » 
—» ited. | ne 
ds 


Chap. XIV. 
with the ſword, and if I enter into the city, then 
behold them that are ſick with famine, p yea, both 

Or Mak, the prophet and the prieſt || go about into a land that 
\mercoan-. they know not 9. 
dize againft p The Prophet is by God direQted to ſpeak till of the calmitics 
'@ Land, &> ofthe people as a thing paſt though yer to come ; according to rhe 
\Mez acr- uſual Sryle of prophetical Writings ; and to tell them, that what- 
knowledge ſocver their falſe Prophets told them, yet he ſo certainly knew the 
# 7106, contrary, that he could even wiſh himſelf melred into Tears fer 
them, and had even already before his eyes the doolful ſpeQacle of 
their Miſerizs. Some in the Field flain by the Enemies Sword, 0- 
thers within the Walls almoſt ſtarved to Death. q The word in 
the Hebrew TVND which we tranſlate go about, fignifies ſo primarily, 
and in a ſecond Senſe to Merchandize, becauſe Merchants go about 
Countries to trade. This hath made that variety of Senſe which the 
Margents of our Bibles have ; but our Tranſlation is true enough, 
and the Senſe ſeems to be, that Prieffs and Prophets ( though ac- 
counted ſacred perſons) ſhould be made captives alſo, and wander 
in a Land wherein they were Foreigners. This is thought to re- 
late tothe firſt Captivity in the time of Jeh9akim, when the people 
of the beſt falhion were carried into Captivity. 


19 faſt thou utcerly 1eje&ted ſudah ? hath thy ſoul 
loathed Zion r # why haſt thou ſmicten us, and rhere is 


*Ch:g.15, No healing for us /? * we looked for peace, and there ;s 
no good, and for the time of healing, and behold crou- 


die #8. - 

ry The Prophet again returns to God, expoſtulating with him, and 
humbly imploring mercy for his people, which lets us know that he 
did not underſtand Gods word to him, ver. 1, as an abſolute pro- 
hibition of him to pray for this people. Z'9n was a place whoſe 
gates God loved, and Judah was his pleaſant portion. Lord, ſaith 
the Prophet, is it poſſible thou ſhouldſt loath a place which thou fo 


ned? | He acknowledgeth God 10 be he that had ſmitten rhem, 
and their condition without him to be helpleſs and hopeleſs. 7 
And that all their Hopes and ExpeRQations were fruſtrated. 
| 20 We acknowledges, O LORD, our wickedneſs, 
"PC: ro6:6. and the iniquity of our Fathers, for * we have ſinned a- 
Dan: 9: 8. gainſt thee «. 
W # That is, both we and our Fathers have finned againſt thee, and 
have given theea Right to puniſh and deſtroy us ; we delire nor 
to cover or cloak our Sin, we own and acknowledge it. 
21 Do not abhor «s, for thy names ſake w, do not 


diſgrace the throne of thy glory x : remember, break 


not thy covenant with us y. | 

w Thething which the Propher deprecateth, is, the Judgments 
come already, and farther coming upon this People, the Famine, 
Sword and Peſtilence, with the Drought, under the {ad Conſequents 
of which, they at preſent Jaboured ; bur he prays for the Removal 


in this phraſe, Do not abhor 5; noting to us, that the love of God 
t2 a people is the Root of a'l Good which they can expett ; and 
his hatred and diſpleaſure, the Root of all the evil that can beride 
them. Here are divders Arguments brought to back this Petition. 
1. Fir tky Names jake, that is, thine Honour and Glo:ty ſake, an Ar- 
gumeat often made uſe of in Holy Writ, in the Peayers of God's 
People, .Joſ: 7: 9g, &c. and upon a very good Foundation, whether 


alſo argucth wirh God, from h's former Love and Kindneſs to this 
people. which he had made the Throne of his Glory. The words 
are Either to be underſtood of the Throne of the Houſe of David, 
calle4 the Lord's Throne, 1 Chron: 29: 23. or elle the Temple, and the 
” Arkin it, the more ſpecial Symbol of God's Preſence : hence he is 
faid to have dwelt berwixt the Cherus:ms, Pſal: 80: r. ſo Chap: 19: 
, 72, the Pcophet ſaich, 4 glorious high Throne from the Beginning is ou 
San#uary, Lord (faith the Prophet) we have deſerved all the diſ- 
race thou canſt rhrow upoa us, but do not thou diſgrace the 
Fhrone of thine own Glory. » Remember, br.ak not thy Covenant with 
w. Did not Jeremy then know tha: God could nor break his Cove. 
want ? Anſ, He did know it ; but he alſo knew, thar it is our Du- 
ty to pay to God to fulfil it ; or poſſibly he would extend ir a Jit- 
tle farther, and for God's Covenant, fake made with the Faithful in 
Iſrael, he would have obtained mercy for the whole Body of the 
Nation. : 
22 Are there ay among the vanities of the gentiles 
pſ135:7 that can cauſe rain z ? or can the heavens give lbowers? 
Iſa: 30:23, # * Art not thou he, OLORD our Go09? b therefore we 
Ch: 30:13, will wait upon thee, for thou haſt made all theſe rhingsc. 
= The preſent Judgment under which they groaned, was a 
Drought, which he had deſcribed in the fix firſt Verſes ; the Pro- 
Phet imploring God for the removal of it, argues from the impoſli- 
bility ot help in this caſe from any other way, none of the Idols of 
the Heathens, which he calls vainthings, nothing in themſelves, and 
of no uſe or profit to thoſe that ran after them, could give Rain. 
#& The Heavens indeed give it ; but in the order of ſecond Cauſes, 
if God ſtoppeth thoſe Bottles they cannot run. 6b Lord, art not 
thou able for to do it (faith the Prophet? ) nay, art not thou he 


F--E\-R-E M 1.4 2H. 


8 ' much loved:ſt, or caſt off a peopie which thou haſt ſo much ow- |. 


of theſe Judgments, and the prevention of ſuch as were yet ro come, | 


Hen ſaid the LORD unto me, * Though * Moſes *Exek; 1, 
* and Samuel ſtood before me, yer my -mind could *K 
not bs towards this people a ; caſt them out of my ſight, ,; I. 
and let them go forth b. 7 AY 
s We are ( though in another chapter ) yer in the ſame Prophe- 9. = 
cy, or diſcourſe berwixt God and his Prophet. Jeremiah having 
becn once denyed, follicited God again, as we hadit in the four laſt 
veries of the former chapter. God here replyeth to that Prayer ; 
and the Summ of what he ſaith is, that he was inexorable in their 
cale, Though Moſes who could obtain ſo much of God upon their 
fianing, in the caſe ofthe Golden Calf, Exod: 32: 11, 14. and inthe 
Cale of the peoples murmuring, Numb: 14: 19, 20. and Samuel who 
was ſo prevalent with God, 1 Sam; 9: 9. though theſe two former= 
ly fo potent and prevalent Mediators for a people with me, #00 be- 
fore me, waited (thatis) upon me, 2nd ſoliciced me on the behalf 
of this people, yet I could nor favour this People, b 9. 4d. T am not 
avle to abide the fight of them, and chavefoes for them go forth, 
2 And it ſhall come to pals, if they ſay unto thee, 
Whither ſhall we go forth ? then thou ſhalt rell them, 
Thus faith the LORD, *Such asare for death, to death, 
and ſuch as arefor the Sword, to the ſword, and ſuch 
as are for famine, to famine, and ſuch as are for Capti- 
vity, to caprivity &d. 
_ © Iftheyask thee what thou meaneſt by going forth: which be- 
ing aterm of Metion, implieth a Termto which the Motion ſhould 
be. &d Saith God in the general, it is to Ruine and Deſtruction, 
but they ſhall nor all be deſtroyed one and the ſame way ; ſome 
ſhall be deſtroyed by the Peſtilence, ( for that is here to be under- 
ſtood by death ) others ſhall be deſtroyed by the Famin, others by 
the Sword of Encmi-s, others ſhall go into caprivity, but one way 
or other the Land ſhall be quitted ot the moſt of you. 


. . *L 

, 3 And 1 will * appoint over them four + kinds,ſaith 16. 
ene LORD e, the ſword to ſlay, and the dogs to tear, t Heb: ru. 
and * the fouls of the heaven, and the beaſts ofthe earth os 
to devour and deſtroy f. Ch:7:33: 

e Four kinds of deſtroyers, the Enemies Sword ſhall ſlay them, 
_ {0 mak: meat for the Dogs, who ſhall tear their Carcaſes, and for 
the Birds of prey, who ſhall prey upon their dead Bodies that ſhall 
lic unburied. f And I will allo ſend amongſt them wild Beaſts, 
who ſhall both tear their living Bodies and their dead Carcaſes. 

'4 And FI will cauſe them to be *removed into all fHeb:grvs 
kingdoms ofthe earth g ; becauſe of * Manaſſeh the ſon tho for « 
ot Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in !-wg; 
Hierufalem þ. | C_ 


| | | 25- 
E Thoughthe Body ofthe people were removed into Babylon, yet 


"Chapzqz, 
1. 

:zek: 5:2, 
11 


Zcch.1:9, 


ey: 26: 


] Ch: 24: 
as 1t1s more than probable rhat many of them fled into other Coun» Ezck 23 
"1ES fo fave themſelves. ſo there is no doubt, but the King of Baby- 46, 

9% removed them into ſeveral Kingdoms belonging to his large Em- * 2 Kings 
Pire. þ What Manaſeh did; may be read 2 Kigs 21: 11. He did 24 3: 
wickedly, abve all that the Amorites did that were before him, and made 

alſo Judah to ſin with his idols, Verſe 16. Mywreover, he ſhed innocent blood 

Very much, till be hal filled Jeruſalem from one end to another, beſides hus ſin 
whevewith he made Judah to ſim, &c. Some make a Queſtion whether 


we conſider God's concern for his own Glory, or the Tenor of | 
God's Promiſes, promiſing, Mercy for his own Names fake, x He 


| 


who alone is able to do it ?: ( for ſo much the Phraſe doth imporrt. ) 
The Scripture conſtantly giveth God the Honour of giving Rain, 
F- Gen: 2: 5. Deut: 28: 12. 1 Kings 8:26. 2 Chron: 6: 27, Job 5; 10. 
and 38: 26, 28. Pſal: 147: 8. Ch: 5: 24. and 51: 16. Joel 2; 23. 
Zech: 19: xt. Matth: 5: 45. As 14: 17, c Therefore ſaith the Pro- 
pher, we thy people will wair upon thee by Prayer, and the pay* 
ment of thoſe Homages thou requireſt ; for thou haſt made all theſe 
#hings, that is ( fay ſome ) thou haſt cauſed all theſe Judgments, or 
afflictive .Diſpenlations ; or rather, thou haſt made the Ran, laſt 


mentioned, 
CH A ÞP. XV. 


The Jews R:jeftion and Judgments, eſpecially of four kinds ; the ſins which 
 * . procured them, 1——9. The Prophet complaineth, that the peepic curſe 


God means che perſonal fins of Manaſih and his Miniſters, or only 
the fins of the ſame kind that the Jews ſtill continued. Manaſſch lived 
55 years, hisSor. Joſiah 31 Years, it wasnow the time of Jehoiakim, 
the: Son of Joſiah, who reigned but eleven years, and it is probable 
this was his fifth year, for in that year he proclaimed the Faſt 
for the Drought ( as is ſuppoſed ) chap. 36: 9g, Though the peo- 
pie were bad enough ſtill, yer it is no way probable, that they were 
lo bad as in the time of Manaſeh. We know all Jefiahs time, the Fa« 
ther of this Prince, was a time of Reformation, though it be cer- 
tain, much of their old Leaven of Idolat:y and Superſtition was 
yet in them. Whatever therefore ſome think, God undoubtedly 
meaneth the guilt that Manaſeh and his SubjeAs contraKed, forty 
years before this time : Nor dolI ſee any Reaſon why any ſhould 
queſtion, whether it be conſiſtent with the Juſtice of God, to pu- 
nith the ſins of Parents upon their poſterity, when it is no more 
than we ſee done every day in the puniſhments of Traitors and Fe- 
/on:, by ſeizing the Eitates of their Children and in Wars, upon 
the taking of Cities and fortified places; and itis no more than 
God hath threatned in the ſecond Commandment, Exod: 20. and de- 
Clared it as a piece of his name, Exo: 34. and done in a multitude 

of Scriptural [nſtances Manaſſeh is here named as the Son of Hezekie 
ah for his thame, becauſe of his degeneracy from ſo good a parent ; 
it is expreſly ſaid, 2 Kings 23: 6. that notwithſtanding Joſiah's Re- 
formation, yet the Lord turned not from the fizrceneſs ofhis wrath 
kindled againſt Judah for the provocations of Mzmnaſſh. 

Tiſat; 1.19 


5-For * who ſhall have pity upon thee, O Hieruſa- 411%," 5 
lem ? or who ſhall bemoan thee? or who ſhall go afide 4 of 
+ to ask how thou doeſt ;. peace. 


# The ſumm of this is, That this people ſhould be in a moſt miſe= 
rable pitileſs ſtate and condition ; none ſhould regard them in the 
day of their calamity, nor ſo much as once enquire after them, or 
how they fared, or what they did. \ 


6 Thou haſt forſaken me ſaith the LORD, chou art 
gone backward, therefore will F ftrerech out my hand 
againſt thee, and deſtroy ehee, I am weary with re- 
penting &. 

k God here-by more phraſes of the ſame import with many that 
we have before met with, declareth his ſteady Reſolution to deſtroy 
them, for their Apoſtacy from him; and ſets outhimſelf to them : 
as angry Princes or Parents, that had been often provoked againſt a 
Subje& or a Child, and often reſolved to puniſh the Offender, but 
out of their own clemency, or upon the Meditation and Intercefli- 
on of others for them, had altered their Minds, and reſolved to 
ſpare them, but at laſt met with 1o many freſh Provocations, => 


and perſecute him for theſe Prophecies ; they are threatued, ana he m- 
. " fructed ai:d comforted, 10 21. | 


Ch 6c De XY 


E ta 


' 


| Or,z 
* ſerver 
xear, 


| Or, 
gainst 
mother 
City, f 
Nong- 
ſoil:ng 
Or, "a 
gainſt t 
Mather 
and th 
Young 


1 *Amos 


 - W 


Chap.. XV. J FE KK M I A H. En | Chap» Uk 
hs Eforsiving them any longer ; ſo God declareth Prophets, the Lot of Samuel, of Chriſt, of his Apeſttles, and of all 411 
hindelf weeey of bis paanns bndl_g ck thaw, indreſolyed to bear the faithful Miniſters of the Goſpelever fincs ; !er them carry them- | 
no longer. | c _ ever ſo Ay and obligingly to people, yet if they _ 
. 3 fin in the gates of Þ< faithful, ahd truely reveal unto people the Mind and will o 
| Or,vhar- FL And I will fan them Pw y”; DI a 5 will God, that is enough to anger a people whoſe wills are not ſubjuga- 
Aoder the land /, I will bereave them of || children w, air | ed to the Will of God, and they will curſe them, l 
wr, Ceſtroy my people, /ih they return not from thar| 1; The LORD aid, erily ie ſhall be well with thy yo, 7 || 
ways 7. : _ | remnant s, verily T || will cauſe the enemy to entreat meg: 

i 1 Not a Purging Fan by affliction, to ſeparat their Chaffand Drols ' thee well in the time of evil, and in the time of afi- Em 
| from them, but a ſcattering Fan; ſome tranſlate it into rhe Gares 0 Aon , allll- Kos Y 
| the earth: $0 it is the ſame that God had before ſaid, that he would | a _ | JED | 4 . 

remove them into all Nations, { Gates being put for Cities ; but it - ? The latter words of the verſe expound the former ; for by Rem. 
is more probable, that this is added in puriuit of the Metaphor of 74% 15 here meant the Reſidue or Remnant of Days that Jeremiah- 
Fanning, Men uſually chuting Barn-aoors to fan at, that they may. had yer to live,not theRemant of thePeople who ſhould com: out of 
have the advantage of the Wind. m Of Chilaren is not in the Hee Babyleu, p Twill, by my providence, 1o order it, tha' how crue!= 
brew, and is needleſly ſupplyed ; it may as well be of any, or all; ly and ſeverely ſloever the Enemy deals with thy Countrymen, yet 
their comforts or good things. » Their Priviledge claimed of being | he ſhall uſe thee kindly when he ſhall take the City, See the fulfil- 
my People ſhall not prote& them, ſo long as they go on in their ling of this Prophecy, chap? 39: 11. and 49: 3, 4, 
kd lt cones. I2 Shall iron break the northern iron and the 
$ Their widows are increaſed to me above the ſand | ſteel q2 | 92 I08 | 
9 There isa great variety among Interpreters as to this Verſe alu 


1 Or, 4 of the ſeas o, I have brought FAR chem |] ap = ſo, ſome interpreting this as a Prophecy that none ſhould break th 
Or, 4- ay p : ; interpreting this as a Prophecy that none ſhould break the 
aint the mother of the young men, A 1pOl of Os. OO Prophet, whom God would make as the Northern Iron and Stee] 
7 have cauſed him to fall upon it ſuddenly, and terrors which was the hardeſt of all Iron, the Chalyber ( from whom Steel 
City, - upon the city 9. had its Name Chalybs) being Northern People, and the moſt famous 
of any then known inthe World for tempering Iron to makeit hard 


Young-man o The Prophet ſpeaking in the name of that God who calleth 
ſrilng,8&0 things that are not as if they were, {till continueth his Style, ſpea- and tough: Others interpreting it, as denying that there ſhould 8. 


Or, ms king of things to come as if preſent. In Jehoiakim's time we read | ver be an Agreement betwixt the Jews and the Chaldzans; but to 
gainſt the of no ſuch plenty of Widows ; they were multiplied when the Ci- | me, the word of the next verſe ſeem to give us the ſenſe, that the 
Mi: her ty was belieged and taken in Zedeksal's time, toa great number, hy- | Fews ſhould certainly be over-run, and conquered by the Babyloni= 

ans; for as the Norchern Iron and Steel is the hardeſt, and no Iron 


_ and tha perbolically compared to the Sands of the Sea, p There is a great vas : 
Noung-men. riety among Interpreters, as to their Senſe of this phraſe, about | could break that, ſo God having edged and hardned their Enemies 


which, thole that are curious may conſult the Engliſh Annotations u- | the Chaldeans, all their Oppoſition to them would fignifie no- 
pon this verſe. T4 _ _— at — meant CE thing. ' 
I n f the beſt Interpreters, who came not like a Thze ES , IEF 1 
roo by night to rob _ to ſpoil, but withan Army in the * Fa _ Thy ſubſtance and thy treaſur 5 will I give to the "Sh 
day time : The Queſtion only is about thoſe Words againſt the Mo- | poil without price r, and that for all thy ſins, even * Chap. 
ther of the Toung M-n The Hebrew word, which Our Tranſlation ren- | 1 all thy bor ders /. | ; # "96 
ders Toung Men, is WA, which properly ſignificth a cheice Man, | » All thy Riches and precious things ſha!l be ſpoiled, I will have 
or a perſon choſen, from the Hebrew verb which ſignifieth to.chuſe; | 29 regard, faith God, to loſsor gain in it, or there ſhall be no price 
ſo asit may as well be tranſlated the Mother of the choſen, as the Mother taken for the Redemption of them : for { what ſhall bedone, ſhall 
4 of the Young-men. Becauſe Young men are looked upon as the choice be by me done for all the fins which thou haſt been guilty of in all 
; Men, wherher for Beauty, or Strength and Ability for any thing, the parts, of the country. 
the word often ſignifies a Young man, Deut: 32, 25 2 Sam: 6.1 1. ang Twillmake thee to paſs with thine enemies, 


1. Cant: 5: 15: Pſal: 148: 12. Iſa; 23: 4 Ezek: 9, 6- and in ma- | . netr WT 
ny other , 6 , ns will have the ſenſe ( as in our Margent ) into a land which thou knowelſt not, for a * fire is kind- Deurt. 3 All 
azainft the Mether, a Young Man, meaning by theYoung ManNebuch. | ted in mine anger, which ſhall burn upon you F. 2 Wl! 


aangzar, and by the Mother Jeruſal-m : The Jews are in theCanticles} #t As the former Verſe. ſo this alſo mutt be underſtood not ofthe 
called theDaughters of Hieruſalem,and Hieruſalem which is above,is by the | Prophet, for he was not carried into Babylon, but of the people, whoſe 
Apoſtle called the Mother of 15 al, The Hebrew word is in the ſin. | captivity is threatned inthis place, and the cauſe of it declared, the 
gular Number; how we tranſlate it Tung Men, I underſtand nor, | wrath of the Lord againſt them for their fins, the effe&s of which 
Pagnine tranſlates it Ele#i, the Mother of the choſen. T do think, that | are compared to a Fire which ſhould burn them. 

\ by the Mother is meant Hieruſalem, and that popul? may be un. | I I 7 3 
B derſtood ro Ele#i Hicruſalem was the Mother of the Jewiſh | T5 O LORD, thou knoweſt «, remember me and 
People, or Judes ar leaſt, againſt whom Nebuchadnezzar the Spoiler, | viſit me-w, and revenge me of my perſecutors x, take 


at Noon-day, was ſent ; and we know that the Jews were God's | me h "54, SOR . : 
| choſen people. , q This laſt clauſe is yet more obſcure than the other, thy ro us oy _—_ J: know, that for 


| Word for word, as it is in the Hebrew 3 it 15, 1 have cauled to fall us | : ; | 
{ . i. ths a 1 T, Th d here uſed N? . # Either thou knoweſt my ſincerity, how faithfully T have re. 
| pou #2 Jann, 000 07 ce Toes o word here uſed” "T2 Compman vealed thy will ; ſo Pſal: .139: 1, 23. Or thou tram my ſuffer. 


ly ſignifies a City in Scripture, and is very rarely tranſlated others | ; 
ly ; g5, how wickedly they deal with me ; or thou knoweft what thou - 
ey ay * ”-_ ang = H_ ap — Fit bo halt todo, you is 1N thy etipore and reſolution to do, I will ſay 
| . h gs : no more unto thee; only for my own ſake I beg, w That I may 
{ _ Ferrors 3 roger y - ”"_ _ _— CO ay and | not be out of thy thou «A nor Toy the ſe 96. of thy ns 
errors upon the Cy, r b pEcUre Ngnt- | while this people is under the viſitations of thy Wrath, Nebemtsh 5: 
fies Enemies, and is fo tranſlated, 1 Sam: 28: 16. P/al: 139:' 20, 19. and 13: 14. chap: 18: 20. x Thou haſt commanded me nor 
Dan: 4: 19. In this ſignification ofthe Word, the ſenſe is plain, I | ,G avenge my ſelf, Lord ! dothou avenge me upon my Perſecutors 
will ſendupon it the Enemy and Terrors. The Learned Author of (ſee the Notes on chap: 11: 20. and I7: 18, how the Prophet could 
our Engliſb Annotations obſerves it is tranſlated a Watcher, Dar: 4; 13, thus pray againſt his F Wine" ) , Comfboas thy word E —_— 
37 _ — he er = os _ my degrees eos —_— be taken away into captivity ; though I be a ſinner yetexerciſe ro- 
them ſuddenly. a Watcher that Sringeth Terror; to which purpoſe | y,ard me patience and longſuffering. zLord remember that my Re- 
he tells us, the Chaldean Forces are compared to Watchers, chap; proach, and all that I ſuffer is for thy ſake, becauſe I have Fairbfully 


# 16, 17. and 5: 6. publiſhed thy Truth, and maintained and defended thine Honour . | 
TOW 9 She that hath born ſeven +4 languiſheth ſhe hath | and Glory. = > * Exeks 23 | 
1 8.9. given up the ghoſt, * her ſun is gone down while it | 16 Thy words were found #, and I did * eat them x, .3- | 


was yet day i ; ſhe hath been aſhamed and confounded | 5, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of Rev. 10: 9. | 
&, and the reſidue of chem will I deliver co the ſword, | my heart m, for f I am called by thy name, O LORD } He OY | 


before their enemies, ſaich the LORD IU. | God of hoſts ». ; called upon 

h Seven ſignifies many, 1 Sam; 2: 5, Job 5: 19. The Prophet | @ Either the words which from time to time thou didft reveal ,,, 
complains, that Hieruſalem, or the Country of Judah, that had been | to me, were by me 6 greedily digeſted, and though ſome of them 
very numerous in People, now grew feeble, neither able to main- | were dreadful and terrible words, yet becauſe they proceeded from 
tain thoſe ſhe had born, nor yer to bear more. i In the midſt of | thee, I was glad to hear them, and to be thy Inſtrument to com» 
her proſperity ſhe became thus miſerable k A part ofthem were | municat them to thy people, or ( which, better pleaſeth the Lear= 
confounted by the Judgments of God which came upon them be- | ned Author of our Engliſh Annotations, and poſſibly may be more 
[ES fore thei: Captivity. ! For the remainder of them ( faith God ) | the ſenſe of the place, ) thy word of Commiſſion, ( of which ſee 
EF they ſhall be deſtroyed by the Sword of the Enemy. Chap: x. ) by which I was made thy Prophet, was at firſt very 

R 3. 1, ney s 4 

c I 


o * Wo is me, my mother, that thou haſt born me | grateful and pleaſing to me, I was glad at the heart, when thou at 
any time didft reveal thy will ro me. » Thou art the Lord of Hoſts, 


Ch, 20.14. a man of ſtrife, and a man of contention to the whole 

| , : and ſo able to prote& thy Meſſengers. Lord, I am called by th 
earth »: I have neither lent on ufury, nor men haye Name, I became a Prophet by thy Authority, therefore do thou owk 
lent to me on uſury, yet every one of them doth curſe | prote&, and defend me. 


me 7, 17 *I fat not in the Afﬀembly of the mockers, nor 


The Prophet in this verſe cannot be excuſed from a great mea- . ; : B87 
flv of Paſſion and Humane Infirmity ; he almoſt curſerh the day | * ejoiced o : I ſat alone becaufe of thy hand, for thou 
haſt filled me wich indignation p. 


of his Birth, denouncing himſelf a woful miſerable Man, to be : =" | 
born a Man of Strife and Contention to the whole World, that is | o Some, and thoſe the moſ, interpret theſe words, as an Argu-= 


thoſe Nations in it, againſt which God fent him to denounce his | ment the Prophet uſeth with God to obtain his favour, becauſe 
Judgments ; which Denunciations, how true ſoever, and the truth | though the Country was fall of wicked Men, ſuch as ſcoffed at the 
of which they afterward did effeQually find, yet they were not | Denouncings of God's Judgments, yet he had no ſhare with them, 
| able to bear, and therefore they ſtrove with him, and contended a- | therefore he deſires he might have no ſhare with thoſe wicked men, 

gainſt him ; yet it was not for his Sin. » Uſury was forbidden | in whoſe company he had had no delight, and in whoſe profane 
the Fews, Dut. 23. 19. and ſo was the more odious; but ſaith the | contempt of God he had no ſhare: But the Learned Author of our 
Prophet, I have not followed that Trade, I have neither lent nor | Engliſh Anorations thinks, ( and that very probably, it we conſider 
borrowed upon Ulſury, I have done them *no wrong, nor given | what follows) that the words ſhould rather be tranſlated thus, 7 
them any occaſion againſt me, yet they will not bereconciled tome, ſate not in the Aſſemblies of thoſe that made merry ; intimating, that. 


bur ſpeak of me all manner of evil ; This was the Lot of the Old though he rejoiced in his Heart TO God gave him Commiſſion a. 
| | 6 I1 2 £ 


"Poli x. 


jbap. XVL 


C os 0 Se #9. he" 
BS Fx Soars rb? 


E R 


ET M4 4. EL 


be his Froph , yet God liad all along filled his month with ſuch |! 


dreadful Meſſages to be delivered to his People, that his whole pro- 

Rica] Fife had been'to him a time of mourning and ſolitude. p 
* time when he fat alone, mourning and weeping in ſecret for the 
wrath. of God tevealed'to him againſt his People, and by him to 
* be revealed unto the People. 


Chap 18 Why is my * pain perpetual? and m wound in- 
4s. curable which refuſeth tobe healed 9? wilt, thou be alto- 
—&. gether to me *as aliar, and as. waters | that fail r, 

$4 mor 9 The words are judged tobe the words of Jeremiah, and that 


£ 
= 


$ 


# Chap. 1, 
$8. and 6. 
27. 

; Chap. 20, 


lt, 52, 


* Chas.2. 
F.Ch. 25: 
. Fea.79. 
2. 

Ch. 7. 

33: an 
34-20, 


with relation unto himielf, complaining of the hard Task which 
Godhad pit upon him, continually filling his mouth with ſuch 
/bitter | words of evil againſt the people, as expoſed him ro their 
-moſt implacable Rage againſt him, and perſecution of him, ſo as 
.-his miſery ſeemed like a pain and a wound, for which was no re- 
.medy bur patience. r Jeremiah,though a great Propher of the Lord, 
- was ( as Elijah) a Man ſubje&- to like paſſions with other Men ; 
he here chargeth God with unfoithfulneſs, as if he had deceived 
-his ExpeRations, and had been *o him as a pit of waters that pro-' 
"miſed fair, but failed a Man when he had moſt need of them. "The 
Servants of God have ſometimes been {ſurpriſed with ſuch paſſions 
"and'temptations, 1 Sam: 27: I« Plal: 77: 7, 9. : Itis an hard thing 
Zech. 3» nor to ſee, and yet believe. _ 
119 © Therefore thus faith the LORD, * If thou re- 
K.22* cuarn, th ill bring th in /, a»dthou {halt ſtand 
turn, then I will bring thee again /, ou ſhalt ſtan 
1144.23, before me 7: and if thou * take forth the precious 
from 'the vile, thou ſhalt be as my mouth «: let 
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto 
Ar the firſt reading of theſe words, one would take them to be 
a proniite of God to reſtore this people to their former ſtate, if 
they would:reform ; but upon a more wiſe - and diligent conlide- 
/ ration of what follows both in this and in the following verſe, they 
"  ſcemrather Gods Werds unto the prophet, rebuking his Diftdence 
- and diftruſt in God, and romiſing him, that if he did return from 


E. :- that his diffidence and diftruſt in Gad's promiſe and providence, z 


he would reſtore him to the former favour he had had with him, 
: and;he ſhould be his Prophet to reveal his mind to the People. , « 
| "Andif he would ſeparat the precious Truths of God from the vile 
<conceits of Men, or rather preach ſo as to diſtinguiſh good and 
' bad Meu one from another, then God would continue him as his 
"Prophet," to ſpeak in his Name unto-the pzople. w He chargerh 
the Prophet to keep bis ground, and. not to go over unto wicked 
\Men but to uſe his endeavour to reduce them to that Obedience 
which he yieided to him. 


brazen * wall x, and they ſhall fight againſt the, but 
* they ſhall not prevail againſt thee y, for I am with 


thee, to ſave chee, andro deliver thee, faith the LORD z. 

x Theſe wordsare expounded by thoſe that follow. »y Look as 
Men may throw ſtones or ſtrike at a brazen wall, but do it no hurrt, 
' ſo ſaith God,' though thou ſhalt bave enemies that will be offering 
atthee, yet if thou continueſt ſteady in the doing of thy duty, they 
ſhall do thee no harm. = For thou ſhalt have my power engaged 
for-thee, to deliver and fave thee from their malice. 

2: And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the 
wicked a, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the 
terrible 6, 

4 The wicked Jews. b And the power of the terribie Chaldan 
ans, into whoſe hands thou ſhalt come, but be preſerved from any. 
harm, by the workings of my provadence for thee. 


| CHAP XUYL 
The Prophet is commanded to abſtain from Marriage, from Mourning, or Fe= 
flival Aſſemblies hereby repreſe.ting to them thar aproachmg Miſery, 
1——9. Their ſins which cauſe it, 10 -— 13. Their ''range de- 
liverance from Babylon, 14, 15: After that their iniquity is recom- 
penſed, :6, 18. The Prophei's comfort in the calling of the Gentiles 
19—2 
*x*He word of the LORD came alſo unto me, ſay- 
1 ing, 
2 Thou ſhalt not take the a wife, neither ſhalt thou 
have fons nor daughters in this place 4. 
a It is uncertain whether what we have in this Chapter, be a 
' new Revelation, or a continuance of his former Prophecy. God 
commandeth the Prophet in it under certain Types, to foretel their 
utter Ruine and Deſtruction, Firſt, he commandeth him to marry 


no wife, nor have ſons or Daughters, He expoundeth his Com- 
mand, werſe 3, 4. | 


3 For thus ſaith the LORD concerning the ſons,and 

concerning the daughters that are born in this place, 
and concerning their mothers that bare them, and con- 
cerning their fathers that begat them in this land. 
. 4 They ſhall die of * grievous deaths, they ſhall not 
be * lamented, neither ſhall they be buried ; but they 
ſhall be as dung upon the face of the earth, and they 
ſhali bs conſumed by the ſword, and by famine, and 
their * carcaſes ſhall be meat for the fowls of heaven, 
and for the beaſts of the earth b. 


b Godin theſe verſes opens the Reaſon why he would not have 
the Prophet marry nor multiply Relation. In evil and calamitous 
times, thoſe who multiply Relations do but multiply ſorrows and 
AfiiQtions to themſelves ; the Apoſtle in evil times tells the Cor- 
- riuthians that married perſons ſhould have trouble in the Fleſh. 1 Cor. 

4: 28. and Cirift pronounceth a woe to thoſe that ſhould be with 

Child, and to thoſe that gave ſuck at the time when Hreruſalem ſhould 

be beſieged. God rellsthe Propher, he was reſolved that the peo- 

ple of this La!d, both Young and Old, ſhould die miſerble 
deaths, and die fo taſt, that there ſhould be none to bury 
them. They ſhould dic by the ſword and the Famine, and be de- 


"people, ſaith the LORD, even loving kindneſs and 


20 AndI will make thee unto this people a fenced 


O_—_—_— 


voured by the Fowls and the Beaſts;and. therefore 1t was better for 
him to abide free from Relations, for whoſe Miſeries he would 
be as much concerned as for his own affliftion. _ 

5 For thus ſaith the LORD, enter not into the houſe 
of || mourning c, neither go to lament, nor bemoan E 
them :' for T have taken away my peace from this l|Or, mours 

ning feaft, 
mercies g, 


c MD. 8 There is fo greata difference in the Tranſlation of this 
Word, that Amos 6: 7. the very ſame word ſignifieth a Banquet, and 
is ſo tranſlated, yet is there no contradi&ion, for Banquets are 
now (and probably anciently were ) in the Houſes of mourning, 
as well as in the Houſes of thoſe that rejoiced. It appeareth plain- 
1y by the words that follow, that the Apoſtle was here forbidden 
to go to Funeral Feaſts, or to lament and bemoan any, 4 For 
( ſaith God ) I have, that is, I will take away peace from this peo- 
ple» Poſſibly the meaning of God might be this. Do nor go to 
comfort ſuch'as mourn for any Relations dead, ( for their Feaitings 
-upon thoſe occaſions were upon a conſolacory account ; thence wer. 
7. you read of a Crp of conſolation;) for ſaith God, they have no 
need of it; thoſe that die'are moſt happy, for I will take away the 
peace of this people, and d-prive them of all my Mercy and loving. 
kindneſs which I bave hitherto ſhewed them, _ 

6 Both the great and the ſmall shall die in this land: 
they ſhall not be buried, neither ſhall ze» lament for 


them e,, nor * cut themſelves, nor * make themſelves * Ley, 1g, 
bald for them f. 


28, 

e There ſhall io many of all Ranks and Sizes die in this Land, Deut:14-4. 
that Men ſhall have no time to bury them, or there ſhall not be e. * Iſa.22.12 
nough left living to bury the dead; nor ſhall M:n, for their own 
miſecies have - leiſure to lament for the Miſeries of other Men. -# 
Curring themſelves in their fleſh, and cutring of their Hair, were 
Pagan cuſtoms, which God forbad his own people, but yer it ſhould 
ſeem they praftiſed theſe barbarous cuſtoms, bur ſaith-God, I will 
put an end to that praftice, Men ſhall die ſo faſt and in ſuck Mul- 
titudes, as they ſhall haveno leiſure to cut themſelves, for ſuch as 
are dead,they thall not haveſuch ſolemn mournings as they have had: 

7 Neither shall mer || tear themſelves for them in mour- 
ning to comfort them for the dead g, neither shall mer 


give them the cup ofconſolation to drinkfor their father hem, as 
or for their mother h. Ezck. 24, 


g If weallow our tranſlation here. of the word DB with the 17. 
word ſupplied themſelves, it will be bard to give a tolerable ſenſe 
of theſe words, for then tearing is the ſame with the cutting chemſelves 
mentioned in the former verſe, which though it mighr be as a paſo 
ſionat expreſſion of the perſons ſorrow that didit, yet how itſhould 


= 


[[Or, break 
bread for 


| comfort the friends of the deceaſed, will be very hard to conceive. 


But the truth is, the word h:th but two ſignifications, and we have 
here given it what doth worſt ſute this Text, It hgnifies ro divide" 
and to zear or rend Both in Kal rhe firſt Conjugation, and in Pihel 
the third Conjugation it is uſe... to ſignifie dividing ; in the former, 
Iſa: 58: 7. where we interpret it deal ; to deal, that is, divide thy 
Bread to the hungry ; which is the only Text ( excepting this) 
where it uſed in this Conjugation. In the other conjugation it is 
ſo uſed in many Texts, Lev: 11: 4, 5, &c. Deut. 14, 7. ſo certain- 
ly it ought to have been tranſlated here, Neither ſhall men deal gut 
bread for chem in mourn:ng to comfort them for the dead, and ſeemeth ro 
hint ro us a cuſtom in uſe amongſt them, when they had any friend; 
that had loſt his or her Relations, to ſend them ſome Meat or Vi- 
Quals ( for amongſt the Hebrews all. things that they ate were called 
Bread ) and then to go and dine or ſup with them, to have op= 
poitunity to ſpeak comfortably to them. "This doubtleſs is the 
ſenſe of the words, and ſoit. is plain enough, and this is confirmed 
by rhe next phraſe. h Neither ſhall men drink: he cup of conſolation for their 
father, &c. as in ſuch caſes they were wonr to have ſomething to 
eat, ſo they were alſo wont to ſend Bottles of Wine, or other 
chearing Liquor to drink, that they might forget their ſorrows ; 
this is called The cup of conſolation, from the end for which the ſen- 
ding and drinking of it was intended. God tells them that the 
time ſhou!d come that ſo many ſhould die, and ſo faſt, and che reſt 
ſhould be ſo much upon the brink of the grave, that they ſhould 
have no leiſure for, or heart totheſe ceremonies. 

8 Thou ſhalt not alſo go into the houſe of feaſting, 
to fit with them to eat and todrink z. 

; God did not only forbid this Prophet to go into the houſes of 
mourning, toeat and drink according to their cuſtom, to comfort 
thoſe who had loſt their Friends, but he forbad him alſo ro go 
into houſes, where they were wont to eat, and to drink upon a 
more chearful account, 


9 For thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſ- 
rael, Behold * I will cauſe to ceaſe out of this place in , \ 
your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and * Is *t 
the voice of gladneſs, the voice of the bride-groom HFA, 
l ” » Chap:7.34: 
and the voice of the bride. & & 25. 10: 
k And he declares that he laid this injunQtion upon him as a Type Ezek.26,13 
thathis Countrymen by ſuch his forbearance, might underſtand, 
that Godin his Providence was about to put an end to all their cr- 
vil mirth in their days. | 
10 © And it ſhall! come to paſs when thou ſhalt ſhew 
this people all theſe words /, and they [ball ſay unto 
thee, * Wherefore hath the LORD pronounced all '? 
this great evil againſt us ? or what zs our iniquity ? or 
what is our fin that we have committed againſt the 
LORD our God »:? 
1 Or all theſe things, . when thou ſhalt be obſerved by this peo= 
ple to refuſe Marriage, and to go to the houſes of Mourners, ac= 
cording to the cuſtom, to eat or to drink with mourners, to make 
them to forget their ſorrows, or to go into the houſe of Feaſting 
for Jolity and Mirth. and they ſhali ask the Reaſon of thy ſingula- 
rity in this behaviour, and thou ſhalt givethem the reaſon of it, ac- 
cording as I have inſtiuQed thee,$& they 22 ſhall pretend to be ata loſs 
| to 


* Chap 5-, 
& 131 


Chap. XVI 


j 
: 


Chap: 


*Ch 7.26 
[| Or,Fub- 
bornneſs- 


» Ifa. 47 
18, Cha 


23» 7, $ 


and 53 
Cha.32 


AGREE T9 
- - 


Chap. XVI. TEREMET 4 Chap. -XVIl 
| to know the feaſow why God is ſo ſevere againſt them, for what ſin with their abemimable things,that is practices, or unclean Pcaſ's cffe- 
or iniquity it is, thinking perhaps that Manaſehs or Fehoiakim's com» red to their Idols in Sacrifices,or innocent perſons ſlain by them. 
manding them to worſhip Idols would excuſe them, and only leave 19 O LORD, my ſtrength and my fortreſs, and * Chaps jj 
_ Superiours guilty, for pomatt/ pos _ there wa _ pang my Refuge in the day of affliction, 4 the Gentiles (all 47. 174 Wil 
dolatry amongſt them, they could not be ignorant of cauſe fulh- hy | 1 ot 
Cient her God had, okdoting the multiplied threats in the Lawe raragge coay's thee from the ends of the ways th, and ſhall HI08 
11 Then ſhalt thou ſay unto them, becauſe your ay 5 Fr ely our fathers have inherited lyes and vanity, 
fathers », have forſaken me, faith the LORD,and have _ Tho _ ys oo ones & PEP: 

* ; : et: hearing Gods Reſolution, before he ſhewed this 
walked afcer other gods, and ſerved them, and have People any mercy, to: be avenged on them for their ſins, leaves off 
worſhipped them, and have forſaken me, and have not ſpeaking to him upon that Argument, but applicth himſelf te God 
kept my law. « for mercy for himſelf, and to confirm his. Faith in him, gives him 

n The Idolatrous Kings of Judah that were before Manaſſs his time Names ſuted to his hopes in him,and which might: declare his Faith 

ſince whoſe time there were hardly forty years yet elapſed. in him for the obtaining favour from. him in an evil day. 6 And 
12 And ye e have done * worſe than your fathers porn manga mags wo _ Cn _ good rs hr 
_ (Th RT WEBS: » When not only the Jews ſhould be again refored to their 
= Lara, for behold ye walk every one after the {| imagination Country, but the.Gentiles alſo from all parts of the World (whom 
ends of his evil ia ongy _ _ _ gy _ m_ _ —_— the you ſhould accompany ) ſhould apply them- 
X q o Ye in latter Ages, in the time of Manaſſes, have done worle | lelves to God, confeſſing that both they and their fathers,in thei 
than your Enders did; and now in the time of Jehs:akim, you run | worſhipping dumb arg had but Inbalnd Lyes and Vakieyand 
on much in the ſame courſe of Idolatry and Superſtition, which | things that were unprofitable, - | _— wr 
in this is worſe in you, becauſe for thirty Years together you had 20 Shall a man make gods unto himſelf, and * they * Chap. | 
the better Example of good Joſh the Father of your preſent Kang, I are 16 Go FR: x | I, 
together with what his Authority could do to reduce you ; he . It is dot - : E ABPOM aver, 
hath not been gone now above five years, and you are returned to | | (- .* 1Ou9T 1 whether theſe be to be underſtood as the words 
DS , | 11- | OX God, ſhewing the unreaſonableneſs of the Sin of Idolatry, or 
your old Vomit, and are all of you wars a wy, Gon your | ®5 others who make them,the continued Speech of the Gentiles,who 
wy RO. ſo ſtubborn are you, and relolved againſt obedience ae ro Co ; hould ſee the IS of wor- 
* ; . 8&5 - . | Mpping the Warks oftheir own hands. Whoſo owneth a God, 
w_ 9 3 D Ther efore will I caſt 4 o_ our | of his land, INTO | gwneth an 7nfinite Being,a firſt Cauſe and mover,aCreator of all things. 
266466 ? land that ye know not,zeither ye, NOT your fachers P, | Now can any be ſo ſottiſhly ſtupid as to think that a finite Being, 

9405s and there ye ſhall ſerve other Gods day and night, ſhould give a beeing to an znfinite Bring; . that he who is a 

where I will hew you no favour g. Creature, ſhould make his Creator, that he ſhould be x Caufe 

p You would not hearken to me to obey my voice in that good | ©* the firſt Cauſe? ( rhings which are all contradiRtions to the com- 

- | mon ſenſe of Men ) A Man is:no God himſelf, how can he com- 
Land, which 1 gave oper _ hte chars have known, and __ municate a Divine Nature, which himſelf hath not, to another ?; 
7 ar throw you out 1nt 4 . -X . 7 
ee HOW may Tears, cRereenee. 2 wi IN ER 21 Therefore behold, I will this once cauſe them to 


which you know not. and which your Fathers knew not. q You a S - Gi %.*..34 j j 
would R ſerve me in this Land, but choſe to ſerve other gods in | Know, T will cauſe-them know mine hand, and my — 
| 


o 


I OI © a, OS at 


=o IS - 


- EET > OTE 


my Land ; you thall ſerveother gods in a ſtrange Land, you ſhall | might 4,& they ſhall know that my*name is the Lord. ** if 
there have no ſuch opportunities as you have here at Hicruſalem, 4 Becauſe al) the goodneſs and mercy that I have ſhewed them, ſi, | 
go worſhip me the truc God according to the preſcription and dire- | will nor learn them to know me my power and mighr, Iwill once 1/* 
Qion of my Word, ye ſhall there have no Gods elſe bur Idols to | for all make them to underſtand it, by the dreadtul ſtrokes of my HV 
worthip, and what is now matter of choice ro Youy ſhall then be Vengeance. - They ſhall know, tharmy Name 1s Jehovah; this Ris 1111 
forced upon you, the Governours of ti.oſe Countries into which I am not ſuch a one as their Idols, but one who have my becing 1 
you ſha]] be carried, ſhall force you to fall down, and to worſhip | from my ſelf, and give Life and Being to all other things.and have 
| thcir Idols, which was verified afterward i Nebuchaanezzar;Dan.z.&C. all might and power in my hans, and can do whatſoever I pleaſe ; 
®* Ifa. 43. 14 J Therefore r behoid tie days come, faith the | and one that will make good whatſoever I have ſpoken whether in 
18. Chap. LORD, that it ſhall no more be ſaid, The L OR D| a way of promilt or threatning. | 
3-78: liveth that brought upthe children of Iſrael out of the FI ES EF... AVTIK:;. 
land of Egypt. | The Captivity of Judah for ber ſin, 1 4. Truff in Man Curſed: In 
phe were Gar reonlated NemibNondng, for that is maniftty | God Bed, 58. The Dcifl Here and mi ſs Poie ar 
the ſenſe, God ſweetnerh the dreadful Threatnings precteding, Prophet i of the Mockers of his Pro becres, 1 — Of 
with a comfortable promiſe of _ Cr ns he child keeping the Sabbath, 1g—27 Tn on or 
of > Cory anger ye rare _ "uk the "He fin of Judah js written with * a pen of iron,and * Job 193 I 
4 ERS with the F point of a diamond # ; it is graven u- 24;, | - | 
lands whither he had driven them 53 and I will bring| 1 able ron heart b, and upon the horns off; 
them again into their land that I gave unto their fa- your altars c. = Me Te ' 1, Not 
thers z, | £ Tn There is much arguing amongſt thoſe that are critical about the 
of Which a jp urn me . premp.0 ora got mee oo - true ſignification of rh is | i ſignified by TDW which we 
| ther in regard of the newnels of this Deliverance, Or 1n regard 0 . ; : TI SRATEE. 
te gre Mr they hou bein during the Cope of Bad, | Fog i or core Rr 
wancen ey 1nOU e | | , L . : 8 W-"1 : 
remember their Deliverance from the Houſe of qe in Egypt, _ ro A - wR y_ = _— wean gm fo vans bs 
hm ungs ag _ _— — So : pion devs I ſembling the Claw of a Bird, asthe word ſeemeth to import. blIr is 
: we _ _— Br + pap », a Land which he had given unto | $72Y<n. in their hearts they are ſo accuſtomed to ſin, ſo inured t6 
pt ky , —— rum there is no hope of any —— —_ how 
- , *b +. | can they that are accuſtomed to do evi), do well? ecNor is it a 
16 q Behold I will ſend for many _— —_— thing done in ſecret, bur it is written or painted, or ingraven up- 
LORD, and they ſhall fiſh them ; and atcer 1 will ſend | gn the Horns of their Altars, Gods Altar was fourſquare, and at 


for many hunters, and they ſhall kunt them from every | each corner there was a riſing part made of Braſs ſemething highs 
mountain, and from every hill, and out of che holes of | theſe were called the Horns of rhe Altar. See Exod. 27. 2. Evek, 43. 
» k 15, 16. Now their fin iseither ſaid tobe ingraven, or publiſhed, 
the TOCKS ©. Lo bhef 3s + Promife abt upon the Horns of the Altar, becauſe the Blood of the Sacrifices 
_ u Though ſome Interpreters make © IT e's : f geo E GITRET | which they offered to Idols was ſprinkled there, or becauſe their 
of Gods Reſtauration of this Peopie,and making ule of Cyw who | arc... 1.4 ſome Inſcription upon them, declaring to what Idol that 
erman or Hun:{man by his Proclamation fetched the Jews | a1... ,,. conſecrated, as the Altar of Athens had. 6-55 


asa £ 
, - 9.4 » Hi [ . ph þ: | jr : "KPS9- y4 TY p 
out. of all parts of his Dominions, to return to :ieruſalem: Or of 2 Whilſt their children remember their altars, and 


& by the Apotles, who were Gods Filſher- , LUIT | E , 1 
———_——— oe. | their * groves,by the green trees upon the Righ hills d. - *Jud. 3:7. | 


d wentup and down preaching the Goſpel in all places : - ; : | 
dawg gary 50 woe nideth usto interpret it asa Threatning, | 4 This ſheweth how inveterate they were in this ſin of Tdolatry, Ifa. 1. 29. 
and by theſe Fiſhermen and :untimen, to urderfland all thoſe E. | that they taught it their Children, and their Children remembre 18.8.” 


nemices whom God made uſe cf to deſtroy theſe Zews,hunting them | their Idolatrous Alrars, and the Groves, where they were wont ro Chap.2.20, 
out of all holes and coverts whereſoever they ſhould fly, and take | worſhip Idols by the green Trees, as they did alſo upon the high 
; Sanftuary., 1 the; | hy _ = _ = _ _—_ wn n_ _— 26g Coy. 
*7, "FRE PE onall their ways: they are Jthink that the phraſe rather expreſſcrh heir fondneſs of their- Idols, 
Jobzr, —_ NC aan oo '5 on is their ini py hid Sow and think it afould be read, ON kigs Children, they remember, &c. that 
not hid from my iace, neit «xe is, they loved their Idols, and their Idolatrous Services, as the! 
love their Children, which alſo was true, yea, they that mads 


nd 72" mine eyes s. ', .... - > Hire inks CHAN 
han that he can behold iniquity in any ſo [their Children paſs through the fire to Molech, loved them bettet 


Cha.32. « Godis of purer Eyes t It) 
6, as toapprove ___ therefore though he be l-ng patient, yet he | than their Children. 


will at laſt punith evil doers,for his Eyes behold them, theirfins are 3 O my mountainin the field e,I * will give thy ſub- F Chap. 
open in his(ight,and he particularly obſerverh Mens attions,that he ſtznce, andall thy treaſures to the ſpoil, and thy high I5. 13, 
wy ng 7 ns OY I AER | places for ſin, throughout all thy borders £ 
: EEE : 2% = 4-4 
18 AndfirſtT will r ecompenſe their iniquity, and « O Mount Zion, forthough Jeruſalem ſtood in a Plain, yet it 
their ſin double x: becauſe they have defiled my land y, | yas at the foot of an Hill, and part of it was built upon the ſide 
the have filled mine inheritance with the carcaſes of | of the Hill, upon the top of which Hills, were many Pp'caſant Fields. 
ir deteſtable and 2bominable things Ma Or, O Judah, which was a Country Full of Mountains, God calls 
their deteſtable J ; cd ro it his Mountain, becauſe of the particular favor he had ro this 
, * Before I wal ge nr eg Fry wag = L 4 ve * war hs Country. F Hethreatneth-to give all the Riches of the Inhabitar:rs 
them, I will puniſh them for their ways v yy be (for ( Mm bbs | of Jadah and Jeruſalem as afpoil, and 3ll the High Places where they 
ways of iniquity,and will plentifully punith them, (tor 10 4049/2 had commirted Idolatry throughout all their Countrey into the * 
ho i war. hon —__ Roger Enemies hands. | ooo OS EE EO ENS 
| | .Blood and Crueiry,and Otner Ns, | : NS WP 2 _ . 
by clue Mhokunry, paring. | {onal given them. z And have 4 And thou, even } thy {elf ſhalt diſcontinus wy #by ſelf; 
filled that Country which I have choſen for,& named my Inheritance, H 3 thine 


- - 4 
A F p bo 14 If +. 
ea * £5 
4456 
o 


bap: XVII. 7 E RE 
' thine heritage which I gave thee g, and1I will cauſe 
thee to ſerve thine enemies, in the land which thou 
knowelſt not : for * ye have kindled a fire in my anger, 
which ſhall burn for eyer 6. 


£ In the word diſcontinue there is a ſecret promiſe, that they 
ſkould again come and poſſeſs and inherit their Land, they ſhould 
not loſe their inheritance,but enly diſcentinue their poſſeſſion and 
occupation of it. | Some learned Authors conſidering that the ſame 
word is here uſed,which is uſed, Exod: 23. 11: in the Law concern- 
ing the Sabbatical Reft, when they were to let the Land reſt, and lie 
fill, Lev: 26. 34. think this Text hath a reference to thar, and the 
"meaning is, thou ſhalt diſcontinue thy Ploughing and Tilling the 
Land. + And go into thine Enemies Countrey and ſerve them in 
a Land of which thou haſt no knowledge, becauſe by thine Ido« 
latry and other fins thou haſt increaſed my Wrath into ſuch a fire, 
as Nall burn for a long time, for ſo the word ever is oft taken, Exod. 
21.6. Dewt 15.19. Pſal. 89. 1. 1a. 34. 10, 
} 5-© Thus faith the LORD, Curſed be the man, that 
"eruſteth in man, and maketh fleſh his arm, and whoſe 


heart departeth from the LORD z. 

L - 7 It was the great ſin of this People, for which they are often 
taxed in Holy Writ, 2 Chroz. 16. 17, and 28. 26, 20. Ia, 30-1, 2. 
and 31. 1, 2. when any danger threatned them for their fins, to 
iake Leagues with, and flee to foreign idolatrous Nations to help 
RE) ſuccopr them, and to repoſe a confidence in them, and ſo boul- 
Fer up themſelves in their wicked and ſinful courſes promiſing 
themielves deliverance from the dangers that threatned them, by 
the power of their Confederates, and Allies, 'T his fin the Propher 
here refleteth upon. That while their hearts departed from God, 
they Tr et incourage themſelves, from the hoped for help of 
Men : The Prophet from God declares that ſuch are and ſhall be 
* curſed, and mentioned Man, under the notion of Fleſb, ro ſhew his 
" frailty, and imporency, to help againſt the mighty Power and Wrath 
of G:d; withal ſhewing us, That God alone is the true obje& ot 
our Faith and Confidence, 2s well for the things of this Life, as thoſe 
of another Life, and that none whoſe heart departeth om God, can 

with any ſecurity look for any help from the Creature. 

6 For he (ball be * like the heath in the deſart, and 
ſhall not ſee when good cometh, bur ſhall inhabit the 
parched places in the wilderneſs,z» a {alt land and not 
-inhebiced k&. | 

& The ſum is, he ſhall not thrive, norproſper, but be like the 
Heath, by which is meant ſome barren Shrub or Tree, about which 
the various gueſſes of Interpreters ( which the Reader that is curi- 
ous may fiid in the Engliſh Annotations ) are but incertainties, and 
this planted in the Wilderneſs too whichis a barren ſoil, which Tree 
-or Plant is never the better for all the moifture that comes from 
Heaven,nor for all the Beams of the Sun;bur ſtands in a dry and falt 

lace, not inhabited by Pcople. The ſcope is to let us know, that 
finners who depart from God, and do not place their confidence 
in him in times of danger, but truſt in Creature-aids and aſfliſtan 
ces, ſhall miſs of thoſe very good things which they might have had 
if they had expeted them from him, from whom alone they could 
have een obtained, 


**pplz 12 #7 * Bleſſed zs the man that truſteth in the LORD,and 
& 34 2®- whoſe hope the LORD is /. 
S 125. f. 7} Truſting in the Lord neceſſarily implieth alſo a walking cloſe 
Prov-16. with him,and not in heart departing from him ; for ir is naturally 
20, impoſlible, that any thould repoſe a confidence in another for any 
IQ. 30.18- 920d things, which that other hath promiſed under any condition, 
without ſome ſatisfaction in himſelf, that he h:th in ſome meaſure 
4 - fulfilled the condition upon which the promiſe is made. But that Man 
that truely traſteth and hopeth in the Lord is, and ſhall be a ble1- 
ſed Man. 
**7ob8.16. $ For he ſhall be as a * tree planted by the waters, 
*Pfal. x: 3. and zhat ſpreadeth out her roots by the river, and bal; 
4 not ſee when heat cometh, bur her leaf ſhall be green 
and (hall not be careful in the year of || drought, nei- 


|| Or, r«. ther ſhall ceaſe from yielding fruit -. 

ftraint, m The ſum is, he ſhall be proſperous and ſucceſsful in his Coun- 
ſels, and Undertakings ; like a Tree planted by the ſide of a River, 
which is nor affectedwith drought,but in a time when the leaves of 
Trees ſtanding indry mountainous places parch and wither, its 
leaves hold their greenneſs,and its colour is not altered by drought, 
neither doth it ceaſe from yielding fruit, but bringeth foith much 
Fruit when other Trees are wholly unfruitful 

9 T The heart zs deceitful above all :hings,and deſpe- 
rately wicked s, who can know it ? 

n The words tranſlited deceitful, and deſperately wicked, are very 
variouſly Tranſlated, fraudulent, perverſe, ſupplanting, he ſpeaks 
ro the Jews, that they might not lean too much ro their own Coun- 
ſels, Fanctes or Underſtandings; butit is a propoſition true con- 
cerning the Hearts of all the Sons and Daughters of Men ; there 
is noth.ng ſo falſe and deceirful as the Heart of Man ; deceitful in 
its ppeemaſons of things,in the hopes and promiſes which it nou- 
riſhech, 1n the aſſurance that it gives us, &c. unſcarchable by 0+ 
thers, deceitful with reference to our ſelves, and abominably wick- 
ed, ſo that neither can a Man know his owa Heart, neither can any 
other know our Hearts. | 

19 I the LORD * ſearch the heart, I try the reins, 
even to give every man according to his ways, and ac- 


cording to the fruit of his doings o. 

0 Leſt theſe Hypocrites ſhould pretend that their Hearts were 
/-- not departed from God, or ſhould ſay who then can judge us if 
& _ — none knoweth the Heart?SaithGod,though noCreature knoweth the 
_& 20 1 Heartof another fellow Creature, yet I know the Hearts of all 
, — *27+ Creatures, I ſearch the ſecret Thoughts, and Counſels and Deſigns 
— EV + 2:23. of allmy Creatures, for I will judge them according to their 
Thoughts and the ſecret Motionsand Aﬀections of their Souls,ac- | 


hap! 
: 14. 


cording to all their ways, and the fruit of their doings. You can- 
—_ therefore mock me, and tell me your hearts are not departed 
rom me. Y 


M 1 4 H. 


IT Asthe partridge || ſitteth on eppe, 
them not p: ſohe that getteth riches, and not by right oung 
* (ball leave them in the midſt of his days q, and at his wh jp, 


end be a fool r. hath nat 
p It is no wonder if we cannot be certain as to the ſenſe of theſe ought , 
words ſo far as they concern natural Hiſtory, when we are not cer. j9't?. _ 
tain what Bird it is to which they relate; we tranſlate the word Par- * Pal: 55 
triage. Others will have it the Cuckow ; but certain it is that it is 23+ 
the ſame word which we tranſlate Partridge, 1 Sam. 26, 20: and Cuc« 
kows uſe not to be much hunted after. How the Partridge -is ſaid 
to fit on Eggs and hatch them not, is yet a greater,queſtion. It may be 
occaſioned fo many ways, viz. either ſitting upon Winad-eggs, or 
being killed before the Eggs are hatched, or having is Eggs deſtroyed by 
the Male Partridge,or by ſome Dog, or other Vermine 3 or its Neſt 
being found having her Eggs taken from her, thar it is hard to de- 
termine which the Prophet means ; of all other I leaſt approve of 
that which Hierome makes the ſenſe, though the thing be true. (if 
we may believe Caſſodorws, and ſeveral natural Hiſtorians, Aldrovan- 
aus, &c.) That Partridges have ſuch a love and defire to hatch 
young ones, that having loſt their own Eggs, they will ſteal the 
Eggs of other Partriadges and hatch them, which Birds being hatch 
ed, the young ones knowing the cry of their proper Dams, hearing 
them call, leave the Parrr:age that hatched them; ( which is one 
thing quoted by Aldrovanaus to ſhew the ſagaciry of that Bird ) but 
if this were the ſenſe the words would be as the Partridge fit= 
teth on Eggs, and hatcheth them, but enjoyeth them not, whereas they 
are, hatcherh them not ; that is,having loſt them either by ſome Man 
that hath taken them from her, or by ſome Yermine or wild Beaſt, 
r So he that g=tteth an Eſtate by oppreſſion or any cozenage or un- 
righteous Actions, ſhall loſe it again before he cometh to die, and 
"when he comes to die, ſhall underſtand what a Fool he was to take 
lo wuch pains to no more purpoſe. : 
12 \ A glorious high chrone from the beginning, #5 


che place of our ſanctuary 5s. 
s It is much more hard to give an account of theconnexion of 
theſe words with the former,than of their ſenſe conſidered abſolure- 
ly in themſelves. Some would have them the words of the People, 
reckoning up another vain ground of their confidence,becauſe they 
had amongſt them the Temple of che Lord,which we know was what 
they mighrily gloried in, Others would have them the words of 
the Prophet owning his and the good Jews confidence to be only 
in God, and themſelves to worſhip God-/not in Groves or high 
places, but only in that place which he had choſen to be worſhip- 
ped in, even 1n his Sanctuary or Temple, many other Cenjectures 
there are,but theſe two ſeem to me the moſt probable, * Pſal. 936 
132 O LORD! the hope of Ifracir, * all they that 7: 
forſake thee ſhallbe aſhamed «, and they that depart Iſa r. 28, 
from me ſball be written in the earth «, becauſe they , (, 
have forſaken the LORD, the * fountain of living wa- ,, 22. " 
v&Irs Xx. 
; Thatis, he in whom alone the true 1/rael of God can hope. 
« Thoſe who forſake thy Law, and that rule thou haſt given them 
whereby ro directrtheir Converſations, firſt or laſt will be aſhamed 


and hatcheth | Or, 2«+ 
thereth 


have, as thy Prophet, revealed to them as they Will, ſhall have no 
portion beyond the Earth which they ſeem ſo fond of. Or their 
Names and Memories {hall vaniſh, and periſh, and be preſently ex- 
tinct like words written in Duſt. x Becauſe they bave fortaken 
thee who art the alone certain relief and comfort of any People,the 
fountain and original of all that good they can hope for. 


14 Heal me, O LORD, and I ſhall be healed ; fave 


me, and I ſhall be ſaved : for thou art my praile y. 

y Moſt Interpreters here underſtand the Prophet ſpeaking in theſe 
words to God for himſelf; he repreſents himſelf ro God as a Pers 
ſon wounded or ſick,either with his ſenſe of Gods diſhonour by the 
iins of the People, or with their Reproaches or Threatnings, and 
bezggeth of God ro heal him, he being he, in whoſe hand or power 
't was to heal him, and who could certainly do it. The argu- 
ment is in thoſe words for thou art my praiſe, he whom alone I have 
reaſon to praiſe for mercies already received, to whom alone I owe 
all my good things. 


15 T Behold, they ſay unto me, Where is the word 


of the LORD z ? letit come now #4. ; 

z Scoffing at me as if I had threatned them in thy Name without 
any order or direction from thee, as the Scoffers meiitioned by Perer , 
ſaid 2 Per. 3. 4. where is the promiſe of his coming. This hath beer. the 
practice ef all wicked Men hardned in their ſinful courles, and re- 
ſolved to go on, to put the evil day far from them, and te fcoff 
at all Denounciationsof Gods Judgments, 1/3. 5. 19. Amos 5. 18- 
a Daring the Vengeance of God and challenging God to damn them, 
or to excute the Vengeance with which he threatneth them. 


16 As for me, I have not haſtned from being a paſtor | x5cp; 
+ to follow thee b,neither have I deſired the woful day fter they, 
thou knoweſt c, that which came out of my lips was 
right before thee d. 


b That the words contain the Prophets appeal to God upon ſome 
reproaches caſt upon him by this wicked people, as if he had thruſt 
himſelf into the | water ir; Office, is evidenr, and reſonably well 
agreed bv Interpreters, but they are divided about the ſenſe of the 
word "INR, which yet always in Scripture ſignifies to make hafte,or 


ro urge,or preſs, the ſenſe ſeemeth to be this. Lord! As I did not 
ſeek the Office of a Propher,ſo when thou wert pleaſed ro call meto 
irt,T did nordecline to be a Paſtor after thee-. c Neither ( faith he) 
have I deſired to be a Prophet of theſe ſad Tidings, thoſe woful 
Miſeries which thou haſt made me thy Meſſenger to foretel- 4 
have ſpoken nothing but what was right in thy ſight being what 
thou commandedſt me to deliver as from thee, and ſo I know was 
right inthy ſight: 


I7 Be not a terror unto me 


the day of evil f. 


e Though theſe rebellious wicked Men afright and terrifie me, 
Ve 


* Cha, 
ex thou art my hope in\6.'9- 


of ſuch their diſobedience. u And thoſe that depart from whatT jþ | 


Chap. XVyx. ; 


| 
! 


— " D—_—_— » 


Chir 


* Plal. 
4 & 40 
+ Heb 
hreak - 
with a, 
ble brea 
* Chap 
11; 20, 


* Nch. 
19. 


* Chap. 
Tt; 10. 


* Chap." 
223» 3. 


* Chap. 
32. 44- 


Chip. XVI1.33 


yet, Lord,be not rhou a terrour to me, own and defend me as thy 
Prophet. f For thou alone art he in whom I place my hope and 


truit in a day of trouble. ws 


* Pſal. 35. 


4 £4944. Jet not me be confounded : let them be diſmayed, but 
letnor me be diſmayed : bring upon them the day of e- 


+ Heb. 


[ break them © 8 , 
with a dou. VII, and F * deſtroy them with double deſtruction g. 


ble breach £ That is with abundant deſtruction. 


Fa = A'M 
18 * Let them be confounded thut perſecute me, but 


Concerning theſe Prayers 


Wn 

W 

Chap. XViWf 

CHAP. XVII —_ 

the Parable of a Po'ter God's abſolute Power and D-:ſpolal of Nations is 

ſet forth, | ro. Judah's uzp»ralleÞd Revilt : and her Judgments; 
The Prophet prayeth againft his Conſpirators, 18 =23. 

"= word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord; 

ſaving, | i 

2 Ariſe, and go down to the potters houſe,and' there 

: I will cauſe thee to hear my words 4. | 

a Itis likely there was but one P-tter near the place or at leaſt 


; By 


Ne EC a—m—_— 


1—.7, 


i 


| 
| 


_—— *Y Warr us SAO ER TNT $4427 


| * Chap, ofthe Prophet againſt his Enemies,ſfee the Notes cn Chap. 1:.20. {| #4 LRELR: 
| 1,20, 19 q Thus faith the LORD unto me, Go and ſtand : that there was one more noted and eminent than thereſt, ro whoſe WRNLT1E 
| in the pate of the children of the people, whereby the ; Houſe: the Lord here ſendeth the Prophet, intending there further (HERR 
. 7: . 7 Bs . + tOtel] him his mind what h uld have him publiſh as his Mind 58 
kings of Judah come in,and by the which they go out,in | a1q win to this Pe _ ar he would have him PUbIuh as iis Nun { : 
all the gares of Jeruſalem 6. j 3 Thenl went downto the potters houſe, and be- Aker 
; Moſt think that here'begins a new Prophecy, E a} therefore * hg1q he wrought a work on the || wheels þ : f 18 
this verſe ſhould have began a new Chaprer. The Prophets were : RO ; | . | THIRTY 
oftzn commanded to publiſh ſuch Revelations as they had from —_ 6 red rs : _ and =_ Obedience to the COB a yn. , o | 01488 
God, cither at che Gates of the Ciry,or at rhe Gares of che Temple, - pe NE Tome winch ho fe SIE 
ap. 7. 2. and 19, 2, 1t 1s not agreed What this Particular Gate * aa Font, | J” SET WOEIEE. pg * , 1018 
was,at which the Kings of Judah were wont moſt ordinarily to come | the OY — the form ved ogg nc F _—_ _ _ wr = | lf 
in, and go out, but the Propher was alſo commanded to publith ir + moaned Feynman hs os _ way — wp _ Mll4 
in all the Gates of Ferujalem, that all might take notice - pe | but zccording to the > #7 og Moron Bran 2 _ a pang uv} 
Me And lay unto them, Hea1 ye rE wor y che Engines made fitted to their own fancies and purpoſes. | 
= mk ye Og pd ing and —— _ all the 4 Andthe veſlel || that he made of clay c, was mar- || Gr, 44th 
— icants of Jeruſalem,that enter in by t = oF: red in the hand of the potter, ſo he + made it again he made; {MF 
i The word of the Lord equally concerneth the higheſt, an the | another veſſel as ſeemed good to the potter to make T3 mars W 
* Nch ;, loweſt, the greareſt Princes as well as the meaneſt Subjects. © ene PÞ i age i ad | 
8 ve-13* 2x Thus faith the LORD *, T#ke heed to your it d. Ie "= rid lf 
9. 5 c That which we read of clay may be read({as our Margent tells us) of the pore: | [WRE 
as clay ; that is, while it was yet. clay, 1t was ſpoiled in the Potters + Heb. -e ſi 


ſelves &, and bearno burden on the ſabbath day, nor 


bring z#t in bythe gares of Jeruſalem» 

k The Hebrew is, take hed to your Souls, intimating to us, that 
the San&ification of the Sabbath is a great thing, wherein the wel- 
fare of our Souls is concerned. 

22 Neither carry forth a burden our of your houſes 
on the ſabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hal- 
low ye the ſabbach day,as I commanded your fathers /. 

1 This command for the SanCtification of the Sabbath, was gi- 

| ven, Exod. 20. 8. repeated Chap. 23. 12. and 31- 14, 15. Levit, 1g. 
i 3. and 23. 3. Dert. 5. 12, 15. Exzck. 20. 12. the bearing of burdens 
| forbidden, was ſuch as was for profit ; for in ſome caſes it was Jaw- 
ful to carry burdens for the ſaving of the Lives of Men, or Beaſts, 
and ſome learned Men jultifie the poor ſick Man carrying his Bed 
when he was'cured, not only from the Command of Chriſt alone 
who could authorize him to it, though againſt the Rule of the 
Law,bur becauſe he had no further occaion, himſelf ro be there,& 
was not obliged by the Law of the Sabbath ro leave his Bed be- 
hind him, himſelf going away ; but no unneceflary Burdens,no tra - 
ding Burdens might on the Sabbath day, be either carried out of 
the Gatcs of the City, or out of the Gates of any of their private 


: PR Houles. 6 : : : 
| Rage 22 * But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ears, 
1+ 19. but made their neck ſtiff that they might not hear, nor 


receive inſtruction m. 

m The Jews were a very covetous People, and their Covetouſ- 
neſs as well as their orher Luſts, were temprations to them to pro- 
phane the Lords Sabbaths, Neh. t3- 19. Ezck. 20. 21. 

24 And it ſhall come to paſs, if ye dilligently hearken 
unto me, ſaith the LORD, to' bring in no burden 


_—_ 
| through the gates of this city on the ſabbath day, bur 


| hallow the ſabbth day ro dono work therein 
25 * Then (ball there enter into the gates of chis city, 


kings and princes ſitting upon the thione of David, rid- 
ingin chariots. and on horſes, they and their princes, 
the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jeruſalem,and 


this city ſhall remain for ever. 
26 And they (ball come from the cities of Judah, 


and from * the places about Jeruſalem, and from the 
land of Benj:min, and from the plaia, and from the 
mountains, and from the ſouth, bringing burnt offe- 
| rings, and ſacrifices, and meat-offerings, and incenſe, 
and bringing ſacrifices of praiſe unto the houle of the 


LORD ». ; 


» The ſum of all theſe three Verſes is, that if they wou'd ſan- 
Qifie the Lords Sabbath, they ſhould either continue in, or be re- 
ſtored vnto their Ancient, Civil,and Eccleſiaſtical order.they ſhould 
have Kings and Princes in their former order and ſplendor,and Men 
ſhould come from all parts of the Countrcy bringing their utual 
Sacrifices and Offerings to the Temple,and thoſe of all ſorts. Some 
think this Promiſe is ro be underſtood Syrecd>chically, one principal 
part ofthe Law of God, and ſuch a one as was in thezr power to 
= obey, being putfor the whole Law of God. Thoſe who deſire to 

be ſatisfied in the niceties as to the terms and places here mention. 
ed, may find ſatisfation in the Eng/iſh Anno-atzons upon this Verſe. 
The general ſenſe is no more, than that both their Ciry and rheir 
T-mple, their Civil and Eccleſiaſtical Stare ſhould continue and flouriſh 
in that order wherein it was. | 

27 Butif you will not hearken unto me to hallow 


the ſabbath day, and not bear a burden, even entring 
in at the gates of Jeruſalem onthe ſabbath day,chen will 
I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it ſhall devour 
the places of Jeruſalem, and it ſball not be quencted o, 

'0 A Threatniog quite contrary to the former Promiic,upon their 
ating contrary to the Duty to which that Promiſe was annexed. 
God would deſtroy their City, it ſhould be burned with fire, and 
the higheſt and nobleſt Struftures ſhould be burned. and though 
the hand of the Enemy ſhould do this, yer God ſhou'd order them 
to do it, ſoas it ſhould be a fire of his kindling and therefore nor 
like to be quenched,rill it had effeQ<d that thing for which God ſo 


kindled its 


Hand, ſo as be did not think fir to 71 7 : F 

rag 26s go on with his deſign as to the 2 I 

form of the Veſſel, but made it into another form ſuch as he liked Perrys. | 

beſt. | — ſ! 
5 Then the word of the LOR D came unto me; . 

ſaying, ih 
G O houſe of Iſrael cannot I do with you as this pot-= | il 

tere* faich the LORD : behold * as the clay 3s in the *Ifi 643: 


potters hand,ſo are ye inmine hand,O houſe of Iſrael f. 

e God now expoundeth to the Prophet his deſign in bidding hint - 
goto the Porers Houſe, it was to inſtru or confirm him in the 
power that he had over his creatures. f For, faith he, as is the 
clay to the potter, ſo is the Houſe of Iſrael! ( and indeed ſo are all 
the Sons and Daughters of Men ) unto God, .God hath the ſame 
power over them, that a p:tter hath over the clay,and a greater right 
to do what he pleaſeth with them, than any potter hath relating to 
the clay; The clay is but the Potters Purchaſe, not his creature; 
but Man is Gods creature, God by his Prophet 1/aiah made uſe of 
the ſame ſimilitude, 1/ai. 45.9. So doth the Apoſtle, Rom. g. 20. | 
That God hath an abſolute ſoveraign power to do what he pleaſeth | 
with theWork ofhisHands,can be denied by noMen of ſenſe, whethet ] 
God uſeth this his Soveraignty in the eternal puniſhment cf ſinners ; 
that is another thing ; he hath a ſoveraign power, bur he. aQtet 
as a juſt Judge,rendring to every Man according to his Works. 

7 At wkat inſtant ſhall ſpeak concerning a nation; 
and concerning a kingdom tov pluck up, and to pull | 
down, and to deſtroy it = | . WW 
_ & God thus ſpeaketh concerning Nations, and Kingdoms more [| 
1mmediately in his word, or more mediately by his Prophets and I} 
Miniſters, he told Jeremiah. chap. 3. 10, that he had ſer him over 
Nations, to root out, and to pull down. 

8 * If thac nation againſt whom. I have pronounced, + x;ej;, 
turn fromtheis evil b, I will repent of the evil that I 18. 2. & 


thought ro do unto them 5. | 33* its 
+ If that Nation leaveth off thoſe ſinſul courſes, which I have 

by my P:ophets threatned with Judgments. 71 will alſo turn from 

the methods of my ſevere Providence which I had r:folved in caſe 

of their impenitency to proceed in againſt them. There is a diffe= 

rence betwixt Repentance in Man, and Repentance as it is attribured 

to God, Repentance in Man muſt be, not only a change in AQ@ion, 

but a change of Heart ; Repentance as attributed ro God,' never 

ſignifierh a change of Hearr, or Purpoſe, or Counfels, but only a 

change in a&t.on, an alteration of che courſe of his Providence. 

Hence God in Scripture isfaid to Repent as in this Text, and Jonah 

3 10. Ard iris alſo ſaid of him, that he is not as Man that he 

ſhould lie or repent, Numb .23.19. 1 Sam, I5- 29. God never changeth. 

bis Counſels, or Purpoſes, though he often varieth his ations of 

Providence, according to the Behaviours of his Creatures. 

9 And at whatinftant [ ſhall ſpeak concerning a na- 

tion, and concerning a kingdom to build, and to 

plant zf. | | ; "- 
_ To If it do evil in my ſight,that it obey not my voice; 

then F will repeat of the good wherewith I ſaid F 


| wou!d benefit them .*. | | 
.\, Speaking Verſe 9g. and repenting Verſe 10, muſt be underſtood in 
the ſame ſenſe as in the two former Verſes. The reaſon of this is; 
becauſe in all Gods Threatnings and Promiſes of this nature there is. 
a condition either exprefled or underſtood. Gods Threatnings of 
evil muſt be underſtood with this condition, unleſs Men and. Wo-. 
men repent and turn from their evil ways: And his Promiſes of 
good muſt be underſtood with this co::dition, if r16ſe to whom 
they are made be a willing and obedient Pcople, and keep in the 
way of the Lords Sratur -s. 
11 4 Now therefore go to, ſpeak tothe men of Ju- 
dah, and to the' inhabitants of Jerufalem, ſaying, Thus #*, xs 
ſaich the LORD, Bebold IT frame evilagainſt you; and 17.12, 13. 
devile a device againſt you : * return ye now every one Chap: 7: 3- 
from his evil way, and make your ways, and your do- E = 
ings good þ&. .- £68 EI ISO 
' .k& The Lord fixeth a particular application to the mote general 


——"— _ - 


Dodcrine which he h:& before delivered. God ha@ told this Pco- 
6H 4 ple, 


4 
ry 


KE Be 


Avi. TE RIE 
le, though h2 hal by his Prophzt denounced his Wrath, and 
Bug hy ihe t) luck them up and deſtroy them, yet if 
they turged fron th-ir finful Courſes, he would thew mercy to 
thim and alcer the courſe of his P:ovidence. Now he tells thera, 
that this was their caſe, God had a Work upon the Wheel againſt 
them, and was framing evil again them, and bringing ruine upon 
them, therefo:e it was their wiſdom,now to return from their evil 
ways,. xd to make their doings good. Thoſe who think that theſe 
Exhaitations are vain,if Man hach not a power in him ſcIf ro turn 
from: his.cvil way, ought to con'ider, that none denicth that Man 
hath a power in kimſeif by vectue of t 1at common Grace of God 
which he denieth to no Maa,to turn from ſuch evil courſes as were 
before m:ntioned, wiz. not to carry out Burdens upon the Sab- 
bath day, not:to bow down t-, and worſhip Idols, bat ro worſhip 
the true and living God according to the preſcription of his Word. 
Tn-tho:t;there is noMan but hath a power to do muchmore than he 
doth do,and ſo much as may ſerve to avert temporal Judgment, and 
although no Man withour ſpecial Grace, beyon.| the outward means 
of Grace, hath a power to do whatſoever God requireth in: order 
to his Salvation, yet he hath a power to do ſo much,as if he doth, 
no inſtance can be g venof any to whom, ſo doing.God denied his 
ſp:cial Grace,inabling him to do whatſoever God requizethof him in 
order to Eternal L te. ; : 
ho 12 Andq they ſaid *, There is no hope 7,but we will 
hap. walk after our own devices, and we will every one do 
25. the imagination of his evil heart m. E | 
E I There js no hope of us, thou doſt but labour in vain in talking 
to us. m For we are reſolved to run on in our former Race, Ic 
cannot be imagined that they ſhould call the Imaginations of their 
own Hearts evil,ualeſs it were inderifion. The fum of what they 


. ». 
4 
x 
,C 
. 


> 


to us weare ref Ived upon our Courſe, and if thou calleſt our 
Hearts evil, we cannot help that,acc:1d ng to the Purpoſes, Coun- 
ſels and thoughts of thoſe our evil Hearts we are reſolved to ſteer 
our Courſes, we will not be guided by thee. 


123 Therefore thus faith the LORD, * Ask ve now 
5% amoagt tne heathzn, Who hath heard fuch things? 
* The virgin of Iſrael, hath done a very horrible thing ». 

n God was moved at this deſperate obſtinacy and hardneſs of this 
Peoples Hearrs,he appeals to the World whether ever any Heathens 
behave themſelves ſo toward their Idols which were no Gods, as this 
People had behaved themſelves towards him, He calls Iſrael a Vir- 
gine, it is 4 term given to Z:don, Iſs. 23. 12+ and to Babylon, Iſa: 47+ 1 
The horrible thing which they had done, was their forſaking God, 
: their God,a thing nor uſual amonſt theHeathens, as God tells them, 
ol Chap. 2.11. 


Vrmy 


vulgar Latin tranſlates rhem, Shall rhe $:29w of L-banon fail Fom the 
Rock of the F'ild ? The S-pruagint. Shall the augs fail fom the Rocks ? Or, 
The Snow from Leban!mn. The Syriack Y.rſon followeth them, Th- 
Arsvick Verſion tranſlaterh it, S:ould the Snow fail om the Mountain of 
Breaſts,and from Lebanm. The Chaliee Paraphraft thus gloſleth, Bz- 
hold, as it cannot be, that the \now-water ſh1uld fail from Lebanon, Pag- 
n.ne {ſeems ro make 1.chanon the Nominative Caſe, and renders the 
Senſ. thus, Shall Lrbann l:ave the Snow from the Rock of th: Field. Our 
Tranſta:ors ſupply theſe words # Mz», and ſo make that the Nomi- 
native Caſe,& make Lebanon the Genitive Caſe. Lebanon was amoun- 
rainou: place in which were Rocks it had alſo fruitful Valleys;Snow 
fell upon thoſe Rocks,and upon a a Thaw ran down into the lower 
Places, an:! was gratefu] toriem as it moiſtned them, and made 
them more fruitful. p The latter part of the Verſe ſeems as hard. 
Pagnine traiiſlates them, Shall other cold flowing Waters be forſaken? The 
vulgar Latin,or Can che ether cold flowingwaters be plucked up? The 

_ LXX and th» Syriack, or Shall the water fail, wilently ſnatched up, or 
taken away wi h the wind > The Arabvick, or Should the foreign coo! wa- 
ters dcfift * The Chaldee Paraphraſt gloſſerh, So the ra'n waters that 
come 40wn. and the waters of the fountain that ſpring ſhall not fail. Tn 
this great vari:ty, git is very hard certainly toafſert the Particue 
lar Senſe of thz{e Phraſes, the kn »wledge of which depends upon 
ſome Afettions, or Cuftoms of tho'e Places which we are not ſo well | 
a<quainted with. The next Verſe is the beÞ Guide we have,where the | 
Sinlaid ro the Charge of this People, is their forjaking God ; which | 
Sin is here aggravared by this Topick, That Reaſon teacheth Men 
nor to forſake a _ Gaod for a lefſer, though that greater Good - 
were but a poor CreatureComfort,not to be compared with God. This 
is the general Senſe, Scope, and Sum of this Verſe. So as we ſhall 
not need be very ſolicitous to be able to aſſert the particular Gram- 
matical Senſe- 


 . Me: «0 Becauſe my people hath forgotten * meg, they 


83,zz. hayeburnt-incenle to vanicyr, and they have cauſed 
— 21. themto ſtumb'e in their ways from the * ancient paths, 
pong Sg to walk iz paths, in a way not caſt up z, 


; as the Clauſe and the EffeQ ; for if Men remembred God as they 
6a Mg2t to do. they would not forſake him. r By Yanicy he means 

a Ti ;. who are called: Vanity, not oaly becauſe they are in them- 
ſelves nothing of what they are pretended to be, and becauſe 
the worſhipping.of them-is an higher degree of Sin which is often 
called Yanity in-Scripture, but becauſe the Service of them is of 
no. Uſe-nor Profir, or Advantage ; and any . Exp-#ations from them 
are idle; and vain, for which: there is n2 ground at all. 5s Whe- 
k the Falſe Prophets or che Idols age here ſaid ro cauſe them co 


R 
"4 ” 
b "= 
5 


ſaid wasthis, Jeremy, thou hidſt as good ſay or do n:thing astalk. 


MI # -H. Chap. XVIII 


ſtumble by receding from 'the ancient paths,, is uncertain. The 
rds may either uc tranſl-rted paths of Eternity, or paths cf £n't 
quiry : the m« ſt and beſt tranſlate as we do, fLued verum primum, the 
ways of Truth are the moſt ancient ways, The ways wherein Noah, 
Abraham. 1jaac, and Jaceb, and all the ancient Patriarchs did walk, 
t To walkin Paths,or in a way net caſt up, not fitting for Gods Feo- 
ple to walk in, Prov 15.19. The way of the righteous is ſaid to: be 2 
way made p'ain, Heb. raiſed up as a Cauſiy}, Wicked Men, in 
oppoſition to theſe ways, are ſaid to walk #7 a way not coſts 


» 

16 To make their land * deſolate, anda perpetual 6 229. 
hiffing « : every one that paſſeth thereby ſhall be aſto- ,;.& 50.143 
niſh:d, and wag his head «. 

# Not that this was fnis epcrantis, that End which they aimed at, 
none wiſheth i]l, or doth any thing deſignedly to bring Evil upon 
himſelf;,but it was fin oper.s,the End t 1eſe Courſes would certainly 
i\ſTue in, they would bring the land of Judah to Deſolations, and to 
be a Reproach, u So as Strangers that were wont to admire at the 
Proſperity of this Pcople aboie any orher People, ſhould ſtand aſto- 
niſhed, and wag their Heads at them in Scorn and Deriſion. 


17 * I will ſca:ter them as with an eaſt-wind before »cy,q,,,, 
the enemy x : 1 wiil ſhew them the back and nor the 24, 
face in the day of their calamity y. 

x The Eaſt-wind is ( or was at leaſt in thoſe parts ) the fierceſt 
wind : as the Eaſt-wind {catiers the Chaff, ſo ſaith God I will ſcar- 
ter them. And when they ſhill be in grear Calamity and Miſery, 

I will not hearken to them, I will not turn my face to them, or 
ſhew them my Facz, but I will not turn my Back upon them, I 
will not regard them Crying, nor hear their Prayers. 


18 C Then ſaid they, *Come, let us deviſe devices » cy, ;; 
againſt Jeremiah & z * for the law ſball not periſh from 1g. © 
the pricſt,nor counſel from the wiſe,nor the word from *Malb 2.7. 
the Prophet @ : Come, and let us ſmite him || with the John7.28, 


tongue b,and Jet us not give heed to any cf his words c. iOr for 
z This faithful d-aling of the Propher with them, did only en- zþ, Tongue. 

rege them ( as 1s uſual ) againſt the Prophet; they plot againſt the | 

Prophet, how to be revenged on him, becauſe he would croſs their 

Humours, and would not propheſie as they would have had him. 

a We havethe Church on our ſide ; the Regular Prieſts and the Pro= 

phets they know Gods mind as wel] as he ; for there is a Promife 

that the Law ſhall not periſh from the Prieſt, nor the Word from the 

Prophet : The Prieſts and Prophets tcl! us other things than 

this J:remiah doth, 6b Ler us ſmite him with rhe Tongue, expole him, 

by railing on him, telling Lies about concerning him, repreſenting 

him to be what we know the People hate, abuſing him to his face, 

informing againſt him : or 1s the Tongue, let us filence him, com. 

; mand him to ſpeak no more ; or for his Tongue, for Propheſying at 

this rate. c And for his Words letus not value them at a ruſh, noc 

at all regard them. | 


I9 Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken to the 
voice of them that contend with me 4. 

d Theſeveral following Verſes, to the end of this Chapter,con« 
tain the Prophets Prayer by way of appeil toVod againſt theſe wice 
ked Men ; Lord (faith he) though they are reſolved to take no heed 
to my Words, yet do thou give heed to them, and do thou take 
notice of thoſe Men that contend with me. Take notice of what 
they ſay, nor to confirm, but to croſs their Deſires, and to be re« 
venged on them for them. ; 


20 Shall eviibe recompenſed for good e? For they 
have digged a pit for my foul f : Remember that I 
ſtood before thee to ſpeak good for them g, andto turn 
away thy wrathfrom them þ. 
e To requirs: Good for Evilis divine; God maketh his Sun > 
to ſhine, and his Rain to fall upon the juft and unjuſt» To requite 
evil for evil,or good for geod, is but humane,what the Nature of reaſon- 
able Men prompt them to ; but to requite evil for good is dtabolical, F 
and the CharaQter of thoſe that are the Children of the evil one. 
f Lord, ſaith the Prophet,theſe Men have done thus, they have laid 
ſnares for my life. g Thou knoweſt, that as a Prophet I ſtood bee 
fore thee, both preaching and praying for their good, hþ Their 
Wrath is kindled to a great height againſt me, and thou knoweſt 
my Buſineſs was both in my Preachings to them, and Prayers for 
them, to turn away thy wrath from them. Lord remember this, 
both for Good to me, and for Vengeance uponthem, 


. hn 


21 Therefore deliver up their children to the famine 
z, and + pour out their blood by the force of the ſword, 
and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be 
widows, and let their men be put to deach, Jet their +Heb; 
young men be ſlain by the ſword in battel &. four them 
: Adreadful[mprecation : we meet with more of the ſame nature, + 
Chap. 11. 20 and 15, 15,17, 18, We find alſo ſeveral ſuch Impre- 
cations in the Pſalms, Pſal. 35. 4.and 49. 14. and 69. 22, 23, 24,25, 
27, 28. and 109. 6,7, 8, 9, 10, &c. Hence a Queſtion is raiſed, 
Whether itbe 1awful for Gods Servants to pray for Evilagainſt their 
Enemies. That which makes the Doubr is, Chriſts Command to 
, us, to pray for them that perſecute as, Maith. 5+ 43, 44. his own Ex- 


' ample, and Stephen's, As 7 . 60. See the notes upon the aforemen= 
| tioned Texts. Ir is doubtleſs our Duty, to pray for the Converſion, 
| *Chop. 6. * q F.rgotten and forſaken are much the ſame ting, differing on- ' 


Forgivenneſs, and eternal Salvatim of our worſt Enemies: ſo Chrift 
prayed, and Stephen, but neither of them prayed for their outward 
proſperity in their Perſecution and Rage ; and without doubr we 
may Pray againſt Gods Enemies,that God would tie their hands, wea* 
ken their power,confound their devices. kFor ſuch others Particulars 
as are mentioned in this Verſe, and the beginning of the following 
Verſe, and ſuch as Div-amentions, Pſal 69. we muſt know the 

were both Prophets,and did but pray to God to da that thing whic 

God had revealed to them he would do, 


22 Let 


< ni ates wen 4 


f Heb. 
Swtegatte 


| Chap XIX. 


bn rt CSS TL. 


: 


: 
G 
4 


TO... 


| +1. for neither blot out their ſin from thy ſight », but let them 
' deaths 


22 Let acry be heard from their houſes, when thou | 
ſhalt bring a troop ſuddenly upon them, for they have 
digged a pit to take me, and hid ſnares for myfeet /.) 

I That is, let the Enemy break into their houſes, which are inan 
ordinary Courſe of Providence, Mens Caſtles and SanQuaries, and 
cauſe ſuch Shrieks as uſe to be heard in ſuch caſes, for their mali-þ 
cious ſeeking my life by all ſecret prattices. 


23 Yet LORD, thou knowelſt all their counſel 
againſt me to | ſlay me m : forgive not their iniquity, 


he overthrown before. thee ; deal :hus with them in 


the time of thine anger o, 

mw Lord, thou knoweſt I do not charge them falſly, though their 
Counſels have been ſecret againſt my life. » Obj. Will ſome ſay, 
doth Jeremy here pray for theeternal Damnation of his Adverſaries? 
Is this lawful? Sol. I do not think this is to be granted lawful, be» 
ing ſo highly againſt Charity : nor that Jeremy in this 1s to be ex- 
cuſed as a Prophet,for even Prophets had no ſuch Reve'ations; but T 
take theſe Phraſes to be expounded by the next Words, Let 
ther be overthrown before thee ; and that all which the Prophet pray- 
eth for is God's ſhewing ſome temporal Diſpleaſure and Vengeauce 
againſt them. For forgiving, and wot forgiving ſin, doth not always in 
Holy Writ ſignifie the diſcharging or not diſcharging the perſons 
from the Obligation to eternal Death, undzr which Sin Jayeth 
them; but ſometimes, the qiſcharging or not diſcharging of 
them from the puniſhments in this Life, to which Sin doth expoſe 
the Sinner, and all Jeremy's meaning 1s, That however it ſhould 
pleaſe God to deal with theſe wicked Men as to their erernal 
State, yet he would ſo far not forgive, not blot out their Sins, as 
that he would ſer ſome mark ot his Vengeance on them in this 
Lite, for their Treachery and Ingratitude to him, Wherher we in 
it conſider Jeremy as an ordinary Suppliant in this Cauſe, praying 
in Faith, oras a Propher, foreknowing what God would do, it ought 
to lay a law upon all to take heed of being miſchievous, and treach- 
erous to others. Ir is ſeldom bur God, before they die, repays ſuch 
Men into their own Boſom, eſpecially if ir be againſt ary who are 
God's Miniſters or People 3 and that for their ſpe:king to, or do« 
ing before them the Will of God: It is aSin ſeldom eſcapes with- 
out a temporal Vengeance : and if ſuch Men be faved ar Jalt. it wil 
be as through Fire. God will mind them that he hath ſaid, Touchnor 
mine Anonted, and do my Prophets no harm, 1 Chron. 16. 22. Pſal. t05. is, 


CH 4 PF. Ai 


Under the Type of breaking a Potters Veſſel is foreſhewn the Deſvlation 
of the Jews fir their Sins committed in the Valley of Hinnom and 


elſewhere, 1 IS» 


- J ER BMIT4 


5 They have-built alfo the high places of 4 
burn their ſons with fire for barne-offieings C—- 
which Þ commanded not, nor ipake 5: neither 
came zt into my mind /. y 


k This, and the following Verſe, contai ap Q; os 
this People, with the Puniſhment which ores, Ga 
The Sin in the general was Idolatry, but ſt TE 
of it, mentioned alſ; "Fs a moſt barbarous Species 

n 5 rags ed alſo, Chep. 7. 31. and 32. 35. where it is faid, 
ts Molech , che plſce = = hiners paſs through the bire 

: lace where they 1d 1t 1s called 7! þ 
which alſo mention is made Iſs 30. 3 3. Chap. No Leon, he 
opening of this Text, as alſo of thoſe other Texts that mention C is 
Idolatry, we muſt open what is meant by Baal, Moloch, Topher " 
the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, There is no doubt Enya pn” 
Molech, or Metsch, fignifie the fame thing 3 Beal fignifictha Lord, Klech 
2 King. They ordinarily called their Idols by theſe Ms. | Ie! 
Malchom, Zeph. 1.5, upon which account God would not be call d 
Baal, Hoſ. be I6, though he was called Jehovah, Elohim and 4don hoy a 
which tignified Lord, as Baal did. Botk Bag! and Molech ſe ai, all 
mon Names toall Idols. There was more than one Idol in the (aha 
of Baal, 2 Kings 10. 26. The Ammonites called their rinci eTouſa 
Milcom and Molech, as appears from 1 Kings xx Fo Be's pf Idol 
To this Idol they facriticed their Children: ls was a _ IE TY 
Idolatry, as appears by the veryearly Law of God againſt 5g y yr cg 
31455» Some fay it was derived from Saturs, whom the m Ey 
remporary With Debora and Barak, who, to appeaſe the / = © CON 
imminent Danger, ſacrificed his Son. Others fay it So SIN ar 
time of Servg the Father of Nabor, of whom we read Gez. x g20 in the 

that it had its Original from the Devil, ſpeaking out of the Mes and 
ſome dead perſons, commanding this Homage, poſſibly in ri ly of 
on of God, who, Gen« 22. 2. to try Abraham's Obedience par ny 
ed him to offer up 1/aac upon the Mount Mrrish. We muſt kn woot 
were other Sacrifices they offered to Baal : they burnt 1 ow _ 
| Baal, 2 Krugs 23. F. They offered Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings of B _ 
: Kings 18. 26. 2 Kings 10. 24. only in ſome extraordinar $ eafts, 
to ſhew their great Obedience to the Devil, rhey offered "I be 
ren. What Creature they worſhipped under this Name is - 1d- 
tain, but very probably it was the Sun, from 2 Kings oy at Cere 
ſuperiour Being, which they owned as their ſupreme Lond on Kin , 
which they, ſomeof them, miſtook the Sun, Mom, and Stars x bee 
they being gloriousBeings removed out ofMens Knowledo« - e; 
they had nor ſufficient means to undeſtand their Ra pou 
conlidering their Motions, and vaſt Influence they had n "ug X 
other Creatures, miſtake them for animate and fupr-me Be pen a 1 
which as they paid other Homages,(ſuch as ſwearing b Beings, 4 
I. 5. burning Incenſe, offering Beaſts, praying to ns. ) _—_ pA, 
cation of the Heathens and in a prerence of high Se dn _ 


: | \Hus ſaich the LORD, Go and get a potters earth- 
en bottel a, and rake of the ancients of the people, 


and of the ancients of the prieſts 6. 

a Criticks diſpute the Figure and Faſhion of this Bottel. ( Vid.the ; 
Engliſh Annottatiors,and Mr. Pools Latin Synopſis ) but that 1s not much | 
] 


material, for God s Deſign was only to ſhew the fragility of tvis 
people, how eaſily he could break them, and how certainly he would 
break them in pieces. 6 For the more publick notice of this typical 
Adtion, Fercmy is commanded to take for Witneſles, ſome of rhe 
graveſt of the people, and of the Prieſts; Whether they were Mems- 
bers of the Sanhearim, ( which was made up of thoſe two {ſorts ) 
or nor, the Scripture ſaith not. : 

2 And go forth unto the valley of the ſon of Hin- 


nom c, which 3s by the entry of the | caſt-gate, and 

+ Heb proclaim there the words chat I ſhall tell thee . 

$ 79. , Ad We ſhall hereafter hear why God commanded Jeremiah to go 

Wegatts thither rather thanto another place, ro break this earthen pot. This 
Valley was a place very near ento Hieruſalem, of which one Hinnom 
was Owner in Joſhus's time, Joſ. 15.8. and 18: 16, The Valleyisin 
Scripture ſometimes called Ge-hinnom, fiom Whence came the Greek 
Word Geh:1na, uſed by our Saviour for Hl, Marth, 5.22. 2s Tyv 
eyisryay Ts Tvegs, becauſe of the helliſh Torments they cher? pur 
their Children to when they ſacrificed them, and of the kel'iſh 


Cries they made. d In the H-brew ir 15 the Sun-gate, ſuppoſed ſo to 


be called, becauſe the Sun riſeth in rhe Eaſt. This Valley is ſaid to 
have lien very near to this Gate 4 thither Jeremy 15 commanded ro 
go, and there to proclaim the following Words. 


And ſay, Hear ye the word of the LORD, O 
kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jeruſalem, Thus 
ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of Ifraci, Behold I 
will bring evil upon this place, the which whoſoever 


heareth, his ears ſhall tingle e 
e That is, a very great Evil; it is an Hebrew way of expreſſion , 
which we alſo find, 1 Sam..3, 11. 2 Kings 21. 12. As a very great 
glaring Light affects our eyes, and blindeth them, fo a very great 
Sound affecteth the Ear, and maketh it cingle, and for ſometiine 
deaf: This God commandeth the Prophet to proclaim, as particus 
larly directed to all, both high and low, as well the Kings of 7udah, 
as the inbabitants of Jeruſalem, 
4 Becauſe they have * forſaken me f, and have e- 
*17. 65, ftranged this place g, and have burnt incenſe in it unto 
71, other gods 4, whom neither they nor their fathers have 
Chap. 2. known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this 


_—_ 2 place with the blood of innocents 5. 
and 1743 f Fhe Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances which God had given 
' them, te dire& them both in their religious Behaviour towards 
him, and in their civil Converſations. g Either this City, or this 
Temple, ( whick ſtood very nigh to this Valley ) or this particu- 
lar Valley, which they had turned to an uſe quite contrary fo the 
end for which God gave it them: h for in itttey had paied a Reli- 
gious Homage to Idols, ſtrange Idols which their Fathersknew not, 
s and had filled that place wich the blood of ſuch as had not deſery« 
ed Death, either innocent Men, or Children, that they had there 
ſacrificed to Idols; of which he afterward ſpeaketh more particularly. 


; not burn them 3 and indeed, ſo moſt of 


Homage in ſome ſpecia? Caſes and Straits, they © : TY 
ren. Some think they only made them go br — = phe _ 
the Scrj 3 6 F: 
abominable I1doletry ; but ems Scriptures ſj ns ns 
that they actually burnt. them : the Plalmift Pſal. 106; 37 Gp 
They ſhed innocent blocd, even the blood of their ſons and eabod. = , 
they ſacrificed to the dels of Eanaan, and the land was pollured with roy 
which it could not have been by their Childrens merely paſſi 
through the fire; and it 1s laid to their Charge, Exek y6 jk In 
Theu haſt taken thy Sons and thy Daughters, whom thou baft born unto - 
and thoſe haſt thou ſacrificed to them to be devoured, 21. That thou bf 
flain my Children, and delivered them to cauſe them to paſs through the þþ 
fer them. We read of the Idolatry of Zeroboam, who worſhipped he 
crue God, but by Calves ſet up at Dan and Bethel. 4hab —_— 1 
this, bringing in the zerminative Worſhip of the creatures __ 
ſhipping the Sun, Moon, and Stars, under the Name of Bao! - bue che 
firit in Judah, of whom we read, that he made his Son t9 paſs throu h 
the Fire, was Ahaz, the Father of Hezekiah, 2 Kings lo, 3. He was £0 
lowed by kis Grandchild Manaſeh, 2 Kings 21, 6. Joſiah the good Son 
of a bad Father, defiled the place where this abominable Idolatry was 
committed, 2 Kings 23+ 10+ The place where they commitred this 
horrible Abominartion, was the Valley of the Son of Hinnom.ver near 
the City, and the particular place was called Topher. There = an 
high place built for the Ido], and many think, that the Name To- 
phet arifeth from the uſe of a Drum or Tabret, with whick while the 
poor Children were burning, they made great noiſes to drown the 
iound of the Childrens Ne/linzs, tho others think, the Word Tophet 
originaly ſignifies Hell, or the place of the Damned, of which is 
place, bork for the torments and roatiog in it, was a lively Repre- 
{:ntation. Now ef this barbarous and horrible Idolatry, God faith: 
| He commanded them not, neither came it into his mind, It was far 
ir2m it, that God had moſt ſeverly forbid it, Lev. 20. 2, 3, 4, 5. Mas 
king it a capital Crime for any to do it, and for any to conceal 
others that they knew did it: ſo that here is a Meioſfs, leſs ſpoken 
than was true in the caſe ; but p*fſibly God's expreſling a thing of 
this nature, being an Errour in his Worſhip, under theſe ſofe terms 
1 commanded them nsty neither did it come into my mind, givech no ſmall 
ground to conſiderate Men to ju«ge, that we muſt have 2 Command 
from God, though not for every individual Act of our Worſhip, nor for 
every Circumſtance of humane Action which we do in his Wore 
ſhip, yet for every ſpecifical religious Act, and for any thing wheres 
by we pay any Homage to God ; it beiag indeed the mcſt reaſons 
able thing imaginable, that God ſhould have the ſame Priviledge 
which every Prince er grear Man amengſt Men claimeth as his 
Righr, to preſcribe the Acts, Modes, and Metheds, for his own 


Homage. 


6 Therefore behold, the days come, faith the LORD, 
that this place ſhall no more be called Topher, nor 
the :valley of the ſon of Hinnom, but the yalley of 
ſlaughter m. | 

m Forthis, God by his Prophet threateneth, that this Place an- 
ciently, in Joſhua's time called the Yalley of che Som of Hinnom, and 
more lately Topber, from the noiſe of Drums and Tabrers 


there, whiltt Children were burning, ſhould have 2 new Name, 
6 i and 


Chep: X1xfl 


———— 


( 
- owns og ec nt eu Age, ni a I nc re orien oo et 


" 
” 
NaPe 


* Chaps 
7. 33 
and 16. 4 
ard 54. 
20. 


*Chap. 
2 8. I 6. 4 
and 49.13 
nnd 50, 
'TZe« 


healed. 
* Chap. 
7- 32, 


* 2Kings 
23. I 2» 


29. 
F Chap. 7 
428. 


b. \ 
; | 


XIX. , 


bodies which upon t 
thrown into this Valley. 
ſhall bury in Tophet till there be 

I be 7 for the 
Y ge ſhall fray them away. ' 

7 And 1 will make void the counſel of Judah and 
Jeruſalem in this place », and I will cauſe them to fall 
by the ſword before their enemies, and by the hands 
4 wah that ſeek cheir lives : and * their carcaſes will 


'Tgive to be meat for the fowls of the heavens, and for 
the beaſts of the earth. 


n In this place, amongſt others, I will make void all the Coun- 
ſels that the Men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Hieruſal:m, bave 
taken to eſcape m givers FUR gmaney F will fruſtrate all their 
liccle Arts "a4, Deſigns to avoid the Dirc of my Judgments. I will 
cauſe them to fall by the fword before their Enemies, ſo as there 


ſhall b - F for then. 
S And Twill make his City * deſolate, and an hiſ- 
ſings every ons that paſleth thereby ſhall be aſtoni- 


: ſhed and hiſs, becauſe of all the plagues thereof o. 

o This is no mere than we met with before, Chap. 18. 16. and 
ſhall again meet with 3 Mens Honour and Repuration is ordinari- 
ly very dear to them, it was eſpecially to the Jews, who valued 
themſelves much upon the Repucation their City and their Temple 


had, and the Security they promiſed themſelves from their right in | 


the Holy City and Lend. God tells them, he will make them as much 
a Scornand Reproach as ever they were for an Honour or Praiſe ; 
.as great a Wonderment for the Wrath and Vengeance he would 
execute upon them, as they had been in their flouriſhing ſtate for 
the Mercies which he beſtowed upon them. | 

. 9 And I will cauſe them to catthe fleſb of their ſons, 


and the fleſh of their daughters, and they ſhall eat eve- 
ry one the fleſh of his friend in the ſiege and ſtraitneſs, 
wherewith their enemies, and they thar ſeek theirlives, 


ſhall ſtraiten them p. 

Þ Theſe were the miſcrable effeAsor conſequents of the Famine, 
with which God had often before threatned them ; the juſt fulhl- 
liag of God's Word threatned, Lev, 26, 29. Deut. 28. 43. and the 
accompliſhment of which our Prophet hath recorded, Lam. 4. 10. 

10 Then ſhalt thou break the bottle in the ſight of 


the men that go with thee 9. 

- q The earthen Botcle, which Yerſe 1. he was commanded to car- 
ry with him into the Valley of the Son of Himmom ( where he now 
was ) in the ſight of the ancients of the Prieſts, and of the People, 
the Men who there were appointed to go with the Propher. This 
ſ hobionl, or ſacramental teaching by Signs, was much in uſe by 

rophets. 
1T And ſhalt ſay unto them, Thus ſaith the LORD 


of hoſts 7,” Even ſo will I break this people and this 
City, as one breaketh a potters veſtel, that cannot Þ be 


+ Heb. 4, Made whole again f, and they ſhall F bury them in To- 


phet, till zhere be no place to bury re. 

r A Name ordinarily given to God, here very properly, to let 
them know that he ſaid nothing with his Lips, but what he had 
power by his Hand to accompl.ſh, being the Caprain General of all 
the Armies cf his Cr:atures. / God by erdering the Prophet to carry 
no other Veſl:1 bur one of Earth, had a deſign upon the breaking 
of it, not only to ſhew them that he would bruiſe, wound, or in» 
damnage them greatly, but ſo deſtroy them, as there ſhould be no 
preſent remedy. If a V<ſ[:1 of Braſs, Silver, Gold, ©. be broken, 
it may be mended, bur an earthen Veſlel if broken, cannot be 
made whole. See the like [aiah 30. 14. t He tells them that this 


Children, kili'd tor Idolarrous Sacrifices, ſhould continue for a 
Slaughter-heu'e, but of another narure, even for them that had 
committed ſuch wickedneſs in it, who ſhould be ſlain there in ſuch 
Plenty, that they ſhould wane ground to bury dead Carcaſes in. | 

12 Thus will I do unto this place, faith the LORD, 
and to the inhabitants thereof, and even make this city 


as Tophet «. 
# Thit is a place of Slaughter and Burials, or a baſe, ignomini- 
ous place, or where the noiſe of Drums and Trumpets, and+Cry+ 

ings and Yellings ſhall be heard, as uſcd to be in Topher, 
12 And the houſes of Jeruſalem, and ths houſes of 


the kings of Judah ſhall be defiled as the places of To- 
pher w, becauſe of all the houſes upon whoſe * roofs 


_ Chap. 32, they have burnt incenſe unto allthe hoſt of heaven, and 


* have poured out drink-offerings unto other Gods x. 

- # Under the Judaick Law, perſons and places were defiled by 
touching dead Bodies, or any unclean filthy thing ; God threat- 
neth in this ſenſe to defile Topher, as it was ſaid before, it ſhould be 
filled with dead Bodies which ſhould be buried, or lie wnberied 
there. He ſheweth that the aforementioned Judgment of filling 

laces with dead Bodies, ſhould not be reſtrained to Tophet in the 
alley of Hinnom, but reach to the dwelling-houſes in Hieruſalem, 
both theirKings Houſes, and the meaner Subje&s. x The provok- 
ing cauſe of which ſhould be their Idolatry, which they had alſo 
brought into their dwelling-houſes, for they having flat Roofs, kad 
upon them, though not burn Children in ſacrifice to Idols, yet 
_ out Drink-Offerings to the Sun, Men and Stars, and to other 
ols, 
14 Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the 


LORD had ſent him to propheſie and he ſtood in the 
court of the LORD's houſe z,and laid untoall the people. 

3 Jeremiah had now diſpatched the Errand upon which God had 
ſent him to Topher, coming back by God's dire&tion, he ſtands in 
the' Court, which was commen to all people, where the moſt 


might hear. 
I5 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, theGod of Iſra- 


el, Bzhold, Iwill bciag upon this ciryand upon all 


SEAREMI 4 HE. 


| e Valley of Slaughter, from the multitude of dead 
_ — he rem of the City ſhould be flain and 
It was expounded Chap. 7. 32,33. For they 
no place \ And the Carcaſes of this people 
fowls of Heaven, and for the beafts of the Earth, and 


her towns, all the evil that T have pronounced 2gaink 


they might not hear my words z, 


z He afſureth the people from God, that he would moſt certain. 
Iy juſtifie all his Words, and bring to paſs all his Threats ink 
that City, and that they muſt thank themſelves for it, for harden. 
ing their heart, ſoas all that he had ſaid made no impreſſion upon 


them, nor found any place with them. 


CHAP IX. 


It ; becauſe they have hardened their necks, that 
. 


Clap. XiX, | 


t 


Chap, 
l7. 23. 


Paſhur ſmiting Jeremiah for. this Prophecy receiveth a new Name, and 4 
earful Doom, 1,—6. Jeremiah's Impatience under their Treathes 


ry and Contempt, 7 


Io. Rejoyceth in hope of Vengeance, 1 1 
Curſeth his Birth, 14 _— 


I8. 


17, 


OW Palhur the fon of Immer the prieſt as, who 


was alſo - chief governour in the houſe of the 


LORD 6b, heard that Jeremiah propheſied theſe words c. 


a The courſe of Immer was the ſixteenth courſe of the Prieſts, 


al for us to know, nor ver 

called the chief Governor of the Temple, whether he was Deputy to the 
High*Prieft, or the head of his courſe, which at that time waited in 
the Temple, or had ſome place as Captain of che Temple, to take no- 
tice of any diſorders ſhould be committed there, contrary to the 


have been one of the Courſe of Immer. c Either he heard Feremiah 
himſelf ( which is moſt probable) or ſome body rold him what 
Feremiah had propheſied in the Temple which was within his 
Charge, and Juriſdi&ion. 

2 Then Paſhur ſmote Jeremiah the prophet 4, and 
put him in the ſtocks ethat were in the high gate of Ben- 
jamin, which was by the houſe of the LORD f. 

d It is not ſaid how he ſtruck him, though ſome think it moſt 
probable, that it was with bis ft, as the falte Propher ſtruck Mica. 


whether ſuch an Engine as is in uſe amongſt us to puniſh Offen- 
ders, which we call by that Name. Or as others, an Engine like 
our Pillary, where Malef-Qors are faſtned by the Necks. Or, as 
others, with three holes, one for the Neck of the Offender, one for 
each Hand; or whc-ther meerly a Priſon where he was kept all 
Night a Priſoner ; the H:b. word will not determine us further, 
than that it was a place of reſtraint, and where that will not des 
termine, 'other ConjeQtures are as uncertain as needleſs. f There 
is as much uncertain:y as to the place, where this Priſon or theſe 
Stocks were we are told it was near the T-mple, and in the High 
Gate ef Benjamin. but whether this was a Gate belonging to the 
Temple that opened towards thar pirt of rhe Country which wasths 
Lot of Benjam:n, or « Gate of the City that opened that way, whether 
in the inner Wall, or outer Wali, whether called the H gher-gate, 
becauſe nearer the Temple, or upon {ome other account, are nice 
and curious Speculations, the determination of which, is of no 
moment for us to know. 

And it came to paſs on the morrow, that Paſhur 


brought forth Jeremiah out of the ſfiocksg. Then ſaid 
Jeremiah unto him, tne LORD bath not called thy 


name Paſbur, but || Magor-miilabib bh. 


g Poflibly by this time th? mad brain'd Prieſt, thought he had 
done more than what he could juſtifie by Law, for if he were a falſe 
Prophet, the Judgment of him belonged nor to him bur to the 
Sanhedrim., He had nothing to do to ſnite him, poſlibly he 
brought him forth in order to his bringing him before the Sanhg« 
drim;but it doth not appear that he did ſo,tho' Jerew;ah's following 
words to him might reaſonably be thought provec:rive enough if he 


© Topher, which they had made a place of barbarous Slaughter for the } had deſigned any form:1 cbarge againſt bim. + He had itlcemeth 


no more to ſay to Feremiah, bur Jeremiah, ( to whom God had ap« 
peared in the Priſon that Night, while he was ſeparated from 
Communion with Men, and revealed to him, what end this 
hot-headed Prieſt ſhould come to) bad ſomething to ſay to him. 
God's meaning was, not that he ſhould by Men be no longer cal- 
led Paſhur ( for doubtleſs after this he was called dy the ſame Name- 
he had before ( but his ſtate and condition ſhou'd not anſwer the 
Name Paſhur, which ſign fi:s, as ſome ſay, a-noble flouriſhing Prieſt; 
or, as ethers, one who by his Authoriry maketk otters to tremble; 
but Magor-miſſabib, that is, fear and terror on all ſides. 

4 For thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will make 
thee a terror to thy ſelf, and to all thy friends, and 
they ſhall fall by the ſword of their enemies, and thine 
eyes ſhall behold ir, and I will give all Judah into the 
hand of the king of Babylon, and he ſhall carry them 
captive into BabyJon, and ſhall ſlay .them with che 


{word 5. | 

i God now expoundeth the Name of Magor=miſſabib, threatning 
to fill this wicked Prieſt with Terrors, that he and all his friends 
fhould be affrighted, reflecting upon his moſt miſerable ſtate, and 
condition ; and his Friends from whom ke might pcflibly expecc 
ſome relief, ſhould be as miſerable as he, and it ſhould be an addis 
tion to his miſery, that his Eyes ſhould fee it, and ſee his whole 
Country ruined, ſome being ſlain by the ſword of the King of Baby- 
los, others by him carried into Captivity. : 
5 Moreover, I will deliver * all the ſtrength of this 


city k, and all the labours thereof 7, and all the preci- 
ous things thereof, and all the treaſures of the king 
of Judah »,, will I give into the hand of their enemies, 
which (hall ſpoil them, and take them, and carry 


them to Babylon ». 

k This is but the repitition of what Ged had often threatned, 
viz. The perfect ruine of Hieruſalem, and the Land of Judah, their 
Military Men, or rather their Riches. / And all the fruit of their 
Labours. #» And whatſoever was valuable in their eye<, Or 1n the 
eyes of the greateſt perſons amongſt them, » The Baty/onians 


ſhould make a ſpuil, and a prey of them all. 
6 Ang 


Law. Certain it is he was no Kigh Prieſt, for then he could nor 


iah, 1 Kings 22. 24.e We are as Certain what is here meant by Stocks, 


as we read in 1 Chron. 24. 14. Poſhur was his Son, that is deſcended 
from him through many Generations. 6 Ir isneither much materi. 
eaſie to determine in whar ſenſe he is 


| This'ts, 


fear roxnd 


abont« 


* 2 Kings 


291 17. 


Cha 


$42 eee ode — 


+> 


ſ| Or, 


eticed, 


* Pal. 
39. 3. 

Job. 32. 
18, 


f Heb. 
eVery 74H 
of my 
Peace, 

* Pal. 41. 
13, 14, 


- »2.7< AE 


nn 


Chap. XX, 


| Or, ex 
eticed, 


© Pal. 


39. 3. 
Job. 32. 
18, 


f Heb. 
every man 
of my 
Peace. 

* Pal. 41. 
9.& 55, 
13, 14, 


6 And thou Paſhur, and all that dwell in thine houſe 
Mall go into captivity, and thou ſhalt come to Baby- 
lon, and there thou ſhalt die, and italc be buried 
there, thou and all thy friends, to whom thou haſt 


propheſied lyes 0. 

o Thoſz thar teach others. to diſobey the Commandments of 
God, ſ:ldom eſcape that Vengeance which cometh upon them who 
are ſeduced by them. Paſhyr was one whoſe Office ic was to have 
taught others the Fear of the Lord, and obedience tro his Will, he 
teacheth them what was falſe, and is not patient to hear the Will 
of God. Jeremiab'tel!s him he ſhould feel the Truth of it, for he 
himſelf ſhould be one of thoſe who ſhou!d be carried into Captivi- 
ty, nd ſhou!d die there, out of his own Country, and be buried 
there, and this alſo thould be the portion of all his Friends whom 
he had ſeduced by his falſe and lying Prophecies. 

7 O LORD, thou haſt deceived me, and I was || 
deceived p: thou art ſtronger than I, and haſt prevail- 
edgq: Tam in deriſion daily, every one mocketh mer. 

p The following part of the Chapter ro the end of it, containeth 
a Complaint or Prayer of the Prophet unto God, made ( as ſome 
think ) during his Impriionment by Pa(hur, but the certain time is 
no: known, Our Tranſlators here might have tranſlated the word 
NINA more favourably than thou haft deceived me. It might have 
been thou haſt perſwaded me, or thou haſt ailured, or inticed me, as 
it is tranſlated, Jud. 14. 15. © K'ng. 22. 2Ig 22. £x04, 22, 16, Prov. 
1. 10. and 16. 29. Pſal. 78. 36. The word ſignifies no more than 
by words to remvve a Man from his own Opinion. That is doubt- 
Je(*, the ſenſe here, Lord, I was not fond of this employment as a 
Prophet, by thy words I was removed from my own Opinion of my 
ſelf, which might be ſpoken by the Propner withour any refle&ion 
upon God ; it only ſignifierh his undertaking the Offire of a Pro- 
pher at God's Command, not out of any anbition of his own. 


q But thou prevailedft againſt me, Feremy at firſt excuſed himſelf } 


to God,as we read,Chap. 1. 6. He ſaid, 4h Lord God,be/old I am a child 
and cann-t ſp:ak; but che Lord prevailed upon him, replying, Ver. 
7. Say not, Tama child, for thou ſhalt go to all that I ſhall ſ-nd thee, 'and 
wharſocvcr 1 command thee thou ſhale ſpeak. Ver. 9, The Lord put 
forth his hand, and rouched his mouth, and ſaid, Behold 1 have put 
ny words in thy mouth. This is all that is hear meant by deceiving, 
wvizs Gods over-raling of hin contrary to his own inclicarions. 
r He complaineth that now he was inthis Office, every one mock'd 
him,and derided him, and that for the faithful diſcharge of that 
Office, . to which God had called him. : 

$ For ſince I ſpake, I cryed out /, I cried violence, 
and ſpoil r, becaufe the word of the LORD was made 


a reproach unto me, and a derifion daily «. 


{ If the particle be tranſlated fince, as we tranſlate, It the mean- 
Ing is, ſince I firſt began to be a Prophet, I have faithfully diſ- 


charged my Propherical Office, and that with ſom= warmth and 


zeal. t Some underſtand ir of the violence whic: he himſelf expe» | 


rienced ; :thers underitand it of thoſe Atts of injuſtice and vioe 
Jence which were found amongſt the Pzopie, he cryed out againſt 
them. Others underſtand itas a denunciation of Judgment. He pro- 
hefied that violence and ſpoil was coming up2n tnem.u Becauſe of 
that ſcorn and deriſfion with which they treated him. But others 
think that it were better tranſlated ſurely than bceanſe,as it is in many 
Texts. Iſs 60. 9. and 63. 16, &c. Icis not much material which way 
we tran{late it, for it appearerh from 2 Chron. 36. 16. That this 
Peoples mocking of God's Meſſing:rs, deſpiſing his word, and miſuſing his 
Prephets, was one great caule of riewrarth of God coming upon them 
and it- is certain that Jeremy was made ſuch a ſcorn and deriſion #0 
Zthemy : : 
9 Then I ſaid, T will not make mention of him, nor 
ſpeakany more in his name . Bur his word was 1n my 
heart as a * burning fire ſhut up in my bones, and] 


was weary with forbearing, and * I could not Fay x. 

w This daily ſcorn and reproach which the Prophet ſaw himſelt 
expoſed unto, for preaching againſt rhe ſin and wickedneſs of the 
people, was aſore Tempration upon him to lay down his Imploys 
ment as a Prophet. He did nor ſpeak this openly, bur he ſpake ir 
in his heart, he had ( as he confeiſerh ) many ſuch thoughts in his 
Breaſt, x But heſaith he was not able t» do what he thought to do, 
he found in his heart a conſtraint to go on, that v hen a Revelation 
came at any time from God unto him, it was like a fire in his 
Bones which he muſt quench, by uttering what God had reyealed 
to him ; 
ro © For I heard the defaming of many, fear .on 
every ſide y : Report ſay they, and we will reportit & : 

* all my familiars warched for my halting 4, ſaying, 
Peradventure he will be enriced, and we ſhall prevail 
againſt him b, and we {ball take our revenge 0n him c. 

y The Prophet hererendereth a reaſon why he thought of giving 
over his work as a Prophet,his ears were continually filled with the 
Oblequies and Reproaches of ſuch as reproached him, and beſides, 
he was afraid on all hands there were ſo many Traps laid for him, 


78 & EE if 


ſo many Devices devited againſt him. They did nor only take all 


advantages againſt him, bur they ſought advantages and z invired 


others to raile up falſe Stories of him. They {ſaid to Men like 


ves. Raiſe but you the Report, we will blow it abroad. a 
- —_ Srangers, be rbaſh rhat I might have expeRted the greateſt 
kindneſs from, thoſe that prerended moſt courteouſly, watched for 
opportunities to do me miſchief, and lay in wait for my halting. 
ing morethan that I might be enticed to ſpeak or 


b Deſiring nothi 
do mane Fac which they might make marter of a collourable Ac- 
cuſation. c Thar ſo they might fatisfie their malice upon me. 


This hath always been the genius of wicked Men ; Job and David 
borh made Comp/ainrs much likethis, Job 19. 19. Plal- 31. 13. and 
55. 12,13, 14+ Tous it fared with Chriſt himſelf. The ſame Spie 
1it which yer p-ſſeflech wicked Men, was found 1n wicked Men 
in 411 former times. And this oughr to be a great relief to the peo» 
pic of God n:ader the like meatures. to conſider that the Servants 
are not above their Lord, and wicked Men thus of 01d perſecuted the 


Prophets. 


£4 | | Chap. XMil 
1x Bu: the LORD 7 with me as a mighty terrible | 
one « : therefore my perſecutors ſhall {tumble, and | 
they ſhall not * prevail e, they ſhall be grearly aſbam- Mi 
ede, for they ſhall nor proſper f, * their everlaſting con-* C'-ap.|| 
fulion ſhall never be forgotten pg. . If 


T5. 20. . AR 


4 The Propher recovering himſelf out of his fit of Paſſion, in» x . 7. 18. \Fnng 

courageth himſeJf in his God, whom he calls the mighty and ters '3*-haP, || 

rible one, ſo declaring his Faith in the Power of God, as one able - 3 4% || 

to ſave him andjn the Promiſe ad good Will of God toward him; 

therefore he ſaith, The Lord is with me, ſuch was the promiſe of God 

to this Prophet, when he firſt undertook the. Prophetical Office, 

Chap, 1. 8. Be not afraid of their Faces, for 1 am with thee to deliver 

thee faith the Lord. . e From thence he concludeth, that though he 

had many that purſued after his Life, yer' they ſhould ſtumble 

in their ways of violence, and ſhould nor prevail. + « That, they 

ſhould either be aſhamed of whar they had done, or be brought ro 

thame for what they had done. f For p:oſper they ſhould nor, or 

they ated like Fools, and did nct deal prudently for. themſelves 

( ſo this word is tranſlated, 7. 52. 13.) g They ſhould come to a 

reproach and ignominy, and their reproach ſhould not delike his 

for a time, bur it ſhould be a laſting, perpetual reproach that ſhou!d 

not be forgotten. , This was not only written for that Generation, 

but for all Generations thar are yet to come; and hath been made 

good in the experience of all Ages paſt. 'The-Perſecurers of God's 

Miniſters have found that God hath been with his Minitters a&cor- 

ding to his Promiſe, Marth. 28. 20. and that they have ſ{tumbled'ia | 

their way,and-not at laſt prevailed, that they have not ated prudent» ll 

ly for their own good, and the good of their Families » that-a-per« (iI8WE 

petual ignominy clave to the memory of thoſe who haveibeeneme ; lit | 

ployed in this Work. There ſtands to this day. a blot upon the; | 

memory of them who perſecuted 1ſaiah, Jeremiah, &c. The Apoſtles; 

and ſuch faithfn] Miniſters as have been fince their cine, tad | 
12 But, O LORD of hoſts, tha trieſt the righte- 

ous, and iceſt the rains and the hearth, ler me fee thy 

vengeance on them 3: for unto thee have I opened my 


cauſe &. 2 vo a da coin Te 
þ The Prophet had Chap. 17. 10. ſpoken unto God under this 
notion ; here he appealeth te him as ſuch, who therefore muſk 
needs ſee as well the Prophet's ſincerity, as his Enemies Malice. 5 
For his Prayer againſt his Enemies, it is of the ſame- nature with 
what we met with Chap 17. 29. indeed this whole Verſe is the ſame: 
with that of David, Pſal. 58. 10. propheſying - that, the. righteous 
ſhould rejoyce when they ſee the vengeance which God brings on. his Enemies z 
bur yer the Prophet ſeems in this Petition to have ſhewed himſelf a 
Man ( as the Apoſtle ſpeaks of Eh:ah ) ſubje& to like Paſſions wirhs 
other Men, for although:God ſometimes in his Providence, cauſetla 
Vengeance to come upon his, and his Peoples Enemies 1n- their 
ſight, yer whether they may abſolutely pray for it is a queſtion. 
See the notes on Chap. 118. 20, 
13 Sing unto the LORD, praiſe ye the LORD, for 
he hath delivered the ſoul of the poor, from the hand 


of evil doers /. | 
The Prophet here riſeth higher, from prayer to praiſe; it is 
not certain whether this was arejoycing of Faith or of Senſe; a 
Thankſgiving to God, upon his Deliverance out of the hand of 
Paſhur, or ſome other Enemies, or a rejoycing in the ſure beliefthar 
God would deliver his life out of the hands of theſe wicked men, 
If we take it in the latter ſenſe, it teacherh us our Duty, to give 
God the honour of all our Deliverances from the hands. of wicked 
Men. If in the former ſenſe it ſheweth us the power of Faith, which 
being the ſub#ance of things not ſeen, and evidence of rhings but hoped 
for, theweth us things to come, as if already preſent, and teacheth. 
us to rejoyce in the hope ot thoſe things of which we have no 
preſent poſleſſhon. | b- x ; 
14 Y * Curſed bethe day wherein I was born : let not + Char 
the day wherein my mother bare me be bleſſed m. I5 _ 
» This ſudden change of the Prophet's ſtile, maketh both Mr, © 
Calvin, and ſome other good Interpreters, think that theſe words 
Proceeded from Jeremiah rather as a repetition of a former paſſion, 
into which the Abuſes of his Enemies had put him, than as the im< 
mediate produtt of his Spirit at this time. Whenever they were 
ſpoken, they ſpeak a very extravagant Paſſions to ſhew us, th:r 
though Feremiah was a great Man, yet he was but a Man, encom- 
paſſed with Infirmities, and ſubje& to like Paſſions with other Men. 
We find Job in the like Paſſion, Chap. 3. 3. Theſe great failures of 
God's people ſtand in Scripture, as. Rocks in the Sea appear, ta 
mind Mariners to keep off them, not to run upen them. 
i5 Curſed be rhe- man who brought tidings to my 


father, ſaying, A man-child is born unto thee, making 


him very glad ». ; 
n Parents are uſually rejoyced when a Son 1s Born to them. 


16 And let that man be as the cities which the 
LORD overthrew and repented. not, let him hear the 
cry in the morning, and the {bouring at noon-tide o, 

o By the Cities he means thoſe Cities mentioned, Gen. 19 a5. 
Sodom and Gommorrah 3 by the cry in the morning and ſhouting at 
Noon, he means the thouts, and noiſes that Enemies make when 
they break in upon aplace, in an hoſtile manner. 

17 Becauſe he ſlew me not from the womb: or that 


my mother might have been my grave, and her womb 


to be always great with me p. by 

Theſe various expreſſions do only let us ſee to what a tide paſſion 
Coell:d in this good Mans heart, and teach us how much need we 
have to pray to be delivered from our own paſſions; Feremiah $ leay' 
3s theſe things recorded by bimſelf, is one inſtance of what is 
brought as a rational argument to prove that only Men wrote the 
Scriptures by inſpiration from God, they would never elſe have Te- 
cord their own groſs failings, Men commenly writipg for their 
own honour, not to their own defamacion, 


13 * Wherefore came I forthout of the womb to * Job. 5 


Ads Go Cn <tc eo Soo coo. 


\ G I 2 ice .o, 


hap. XXF. | 
Tee labour and ſorrow, that my days ſbould be conſu- 
- med wich (hame ? 7 : | 
q Theſe words ler us know the Prophet's Po -4 theſe _ 
travagant eruptions of paſſion, it was the reproach and Ihame, an 
afMiftion nr+5. he indured for the faithful diſcharge of his Miniſtry, 
which b>th lets us ſee the goodneſs of God rowards thoſe whom he 
ſpareth as to theſe Trials and what need we have under them to 
keep a watch upon our own hearts. Theſe Records alſo of Holy 
Writ are-uſeful to us, if at any time we beovertaken with ſuch er- 
rors, to comfort us, in that they are nor {uch ſpots, bur have been 
found-in the Faces of Gods faireſt ones : and to make us charitable 
towards ſuch as we may ſee ſometimes overborn with the like 


T zONs. 
emprations CHAP. XXI 


King Zedekiah in the Siege ſendeth 30 Jeremiah ro enquire of the Event, 
 1z.2. He fortelleth a hard Siege and miſerable Captivity, 3, ; 
He counſelleth 'the People to full to the Chaldeans, 8, 10, and 
upbratdeth -the King s Houſe, 11, —— 14. 
He word which came unto Jeremiah from the. 
AE" LORD a, when king Zedekiah ſent unto him 
Paſhur the ſon of Melchiah, and Zephaniah che ſon of 
Maaſeiah-the prieſt, ſaying 5, 3: F 
- 2s God in ſindry times,- and 1n divers manners, ſpake in times 
paſſh-ro-rhe Fathers by the Prophets, Heb. 3. 1, The cwo principa] 
were” vifar and dreams, Numb. 12. 6. How. the following word 
cante'td Jeremiah is not expreſty it is enough that he knew it came 
from:/the Lord. 6 It is apparent, ſome Prophecies in this Book are 
nor put inthe right order; as they were delivered, Chap. 25. we 
weſt en} 


ERIE AM 14 B. 


| exceeding terrible. The ſum of it is, That as they bad not deajr 
with God according to the Woi ks of 1ſrael, an: the fermer Generas 
tion that deſcended from him, or thoie at jeafi who were the true 
[ſrael of God, ſo they muſt not expeQ that God ſhould Geal with 
them according ro his former wondrous Works, but thar as he with 
the pure bad ſhewed himielf upright, ſo with the froward he ſhould 
thew himſelf froward. For God. had determined t9 turn into their 
own Bowels, and againft themſelves, the Weipons they ©:d in 
their hands taken up againſt the King of Babylon and the Chald. ans 
that were now beſieging them, ( bv which we may l:a:n, that this 
Meftsge was ſent during the time cf the Siege, probably abour the 
beginning of ir, for it laſted 18 Months ) es God threarneth tc bring 
the Chalaeans into the midſt of the Holy Ct:y, that tier Ciry ſhoud 
be broken up, their Arms taken from thew, and they kiII:d with 
their own ſwords. Their 1s a great Emphaſs in tle prouwn I, Iris 
not an Enemy that 1sto be feared, but Ged's being our En: my. 

5 And I my felf will fight againſt you b4 with an 
out-ſtretched hand, and with a ttrong arm, cven in 


anger and in fury, and in great wrath 3. 

þ I will fight againſt you (* as a Prince is ſaid to fight againſt a 
Nation, whoſe Captains fight againſt ir, though himſelt ftizzreth nor 
from his Royal Palace; yea more than ſo ) animating ard irfl n- 
cing the Babylonians and Chaldeans, whom I have ſent 10 fight »gainſt 
you, and diſcouraging and difpiriting your Armies. ; With tuch 
an hand and power asI manifeſted fir my ancient fart, Exed. 6, 6. 
God is here ſpoken of in a Diale& wh:ch maketh him more inrel- 
ligible to us. He tath no Hands, no Arms, neither is anger and fury 
in him conſidered as turbulent Paſſions, as they are in us bur as 
Men ſtrerch cur their Hands and Arms when they intend to give 
ſmart and terrible ſtroakes, and are edged to tuch Blows from t=eir 
Paffions and excefſive wrath, fo God is let our to us by expreſſions 


Chap, EXT. 


ave anfacebunt of the word: of the Lord which caine to Jeremiah 
in thefo Year of Jehoiakim, who was the ſecond fon of Fo , 
ſcab 1ade Kihg by Pheraoþ-Necho. purſuing his Viftory ( mentioned 
2 1 3$2;22- ) upon the battle, in which Joſiah was killed, as we 
i thns ne people made Jehoahaz King, bur he reigned bur 
v iths, and' the Conqueror carrying him away, made £l:akim 
his Brother King, changing his Name to Jeho'akim, who reigned 13 
Years, that js 7 after the word of the Lord mentioned, Chap. 25 
Cartie to. Feremiab; afrer whom Jehojskim his Son reigned three 
Months and 16 Days: Zedekiah was his Uncle, the Son of Joſiah, he 
wigned: 11 Yeats. So that it js plain that Jeremioh's Prophecy 
(mentioned Chap: 25. ) was 7 Years and 3 Months before this. be- 
fide the number of Years that - $9 __ re} _ But ſome think 
don JerbeniAbi + 23. 24, 25. doth but MaK- a repetition to Zee 
TY pre —anon, $56. he had before prophelied. This MATige 
was (as-appeareth by the next Verſe ) when Nevuchadnezzar was 
come:up-to make War againſt Hieruſalen,.Jer. 39. 1. Jeremy was at 
liberty, when the werd of the Lord ar this rune came to him, ſo as 
- it-was ſome time before the Ciry was taken. The fata! Siege held 


proper to Men, and in him ſignificative only of his juſt W: 1 tc. be 
revenged ſeverely upon a ſinful people. The ſence 15 no more, than 
chat an end was now come, and God was relolved no Icnger to © 
bear with ſuch a provoking people, bur to bring his utmoſt Wrath 
upon them, andto deal with them no longer according t«. his won- 
drous Works of Merey, but in wondrous Works of Juſtice, which 
in Men would look like the effets of Wrath and Fury. 

6, Ard I will ſmite the inhabirams of this city, 
both man and beaſt : and they ſhall die of a great peſti- 


lence &. 

& Still God proclarmeth himſelf this Peoples Fnemy. Peftilences 
Ire but the uſual conſequents of long Sieges, through the ſcantneſs 
and unwholſomeneſs or Focd, bur G«d is the firſt couſe of ſuch ſore 
Judgments, though there be cther iecond cauſes. The Murrain cf 
Beaſts bears Proportion to the Peſtilerice amongſt Men, and the 
Beaſts are threatnedaswell asMen,no! becauſe of any ſin in them,vut 
- among Men are puniſhed in them, they teing part of their Sub- 
4" ERTIRSY ance z and this is a pait of that Bondage of Corruption, from 
es —— Exngicks == Fad ken, 2 b-4 4g ) Wt which the Creature groaneth to be dcjivered, of that Vazity te 
was the Son of Immer, of the ſixteenth Courſe of the Prieſts : and of j <Þ they are ſubjeft, which maketh the irrational part of the Cre- =Þ 
Tore ragecd I] Temper 4 this was the'Son of Melchish, and fo | ation to be breughr in by the Apoſtle, Row.' 8. 20, 21 22. likeas a ( 
of the 6 *4 Re. Vid : Chien. 24. 94 1h. , Woman rrevaillingin pain, and deſiring the day of Judgment. 
© 2 Enquire I pray thee of the LORD for use, ( for, 7 And afrerwards /, {ſaith the LORD, 1 will deliver 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war againſt Zedekiah king of Judah, and his ſervants and the peo- 
us!) if fo. be that the LORD will deal with us accord- | P15, 2nd ſ«cb as arelefcin the city, from the peſtilence, 
ing to-all his wondrous works, that he may go up from the ſword, and from the famine, into the hand 
from os 4 | of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the 
e Zalekiah as he was none of the beſt, ſo he was non? of the | hand of their enemies, and into the hand of thoſe that 

| ſeek their lif: »*, and he ſhall ſmire them with the 


warſt of the Kings of Judah, he had ſom» convittions and im- 
Jeeſpons ( poſſibly from his Education ) not worn off, and having | edge of the ſword : he ſhall not ſpare them, neither 
0 have pity, nor have mercy ». 


me reverence of God, he ſends to the Prophet to enquire of the 
_ . 1 F 4 1 o 0 

Lora: B:cauſe the King of Babyim was come up to make war againſt | | After that many of the People of this City, ſhall be deſtroyed, 

ſome by the Enemy faulting, and skirmiſhing with them; others 


them, Ie is true, the greateſt nay yo =_ _ = faithful 

Miniſters; wiil ſometimes, in great ſtraits, chuſe ro ſend for them k ; | 

ther thn chlo who in hi proſper pled, them, Hence | bh Famire chat ſb) be among them though a man of Vide 
h . End : als, bein Wi ; ers by r lence. 
we read of Sexl when he went to the Witch at Ender deſiring thar m Zedekish, who that eſcape theie three Judgments, together with 
his Coutrtiers, and the reſidue of the People, ſhall be delivered into 


Samuet might be raiſed up ; but in eng tb I ſtory we read 
no ſuch eminent contempr of God, but a diſobedience to rhe Come the power of the King of Babylon, and into the power of ſuch as will 
notibe content with the plunder of their Houſes, bur thirft after 


mands of God, proceeding rather _ T* ns Sg ruled by 

A En oo ey ren: | her Blood: ano theſe Evie (tony Mhubutcter) ha 
ſpe& ro God's raifingSemacherib's Siege in the time of his Grandfa- ſmite them with the Sword, without ſthewing them any Mercy or 
ther Hezekiah, The remembering of God's former wondrous Works, Pity. This 15 not to be underſtocd of King Zedekiah himſelf, fox 
is of uſe to raiſe in us an hope and confidence in God for further | God let him know, Chap. 34+ 4. that he thould nor dre by rhe ſword, 
Deliverances, ſuppoſing our ſelves under the ſame circumſtances of bur in peace, as he did afterward in Babylon, though in Priſon ; but 
Obedi-nce to God's Will, otherwiſe not, as we ſhel! ſee in the | i© $35 frue of his Sons and Courviers, and a great part of the People, 
caſe of Judab and its King, at this time; therefore Zedekiah ſaith, if Chop. 39. 6, 8. and 524 10. Thoſe who went inte Captivity, wero 
ſo be. .Guilt of fin hinders Confidence, and holy boJdnefs in the beſt; only _ as had r ray = a S —— LINE ne, pg \ rr 

ex gp - . | were Of the poor of the Lands 1 wy 

but as the guilc is greater, ſo the hope or confidence of any is | ihgns ,- ercy ſhewed to them, as may bo ſcen, Chep. 39. and 
52. 2 Chron 36. 17» 


juftly leſs. : | 
4, Then faid Jeremiah unto than, Thus ſhall ye ſay 8 © And unto this people thou ſhalt ſay, Thus ſaith 
the LORD, Behold, I ſet before you, the way of life, 


eo Zedekiab, 


= Nat 


| Chap- 


t Heb, 
Inhab;- 


| freſe. 


"4 Thus faith the LORD God of Iſrael e, Behold, 7 
will turn back the weapons of war that are in your 
hands, wherewith ye fight againſt the king of Babylon, 
and againſt the Chaldeans, which beſiege you without 


and the way of death s. 
0 I tell you the way that you ſhould take, if you wovld ſave 
your lives ; and the courſe, which if you take, you will certainly 


loſe your lives. 


9 He that * 'abideth in this city, ſhall die by the * Chep! 
ſword, and by the famine, and by the peſtilence: but 38: 2. 
he that goeth out, and: falleth to the Chaldeans that, Chap: 
| beſiege you, he ſhall live p, and * his life ſhalt be unto ,,, ;g. 
had no Warrand from God. The Prophet ſtileth God che God of him for a Prey 9. ; and 45: 
Iſ8e;, becauſe the whole Poſterity of Jacob were in Covenant with | ,? But certainly, if ever any Man ſpike High Treaſon, this Pro- 5: 
God, notwithſtanding whey, os _ of twelve were _ this time —__—_ rr Re Ne el 9. uns yas. 
roll ween nod Wer we CEE. jw King, and join with their Enemies. All thar can be ſaid in ex- 
fame brutal wh wes Fan eh, bon [en For he Kg 7 lH Jed eye 
fo that the Prophet by this Name given to God, doth both ailert . : — wn ; 5 
| God's nes £0 — —— 449 wg nd ty « apr ow "ads + wrap - fg > 5 — any mac _—_ _— lg: 
c | nents wh'c is now TA ey, or}B covere 
IEG, wich tay Fart 26] from Death, cr the hand of rhe Enemy, 2 Or a Mans »oycing 18 


ing upon that remnant of 12:1, which yet were in their own Lan tf 1em! 
# Fins Meſſage x#hich Fad the-Prophet ſerdeth to Zedebiah, ig | the ſaving of his life, as if he had got ſyme nct. ble POE 
- O 


the walls f, and I will afſemble them into the md ft 
of this City g- 

e The honour that the King of 7:4sh had put upon the Prophet, 
in ſending theſe ſpecial Meſſengers to him, is no temptation to this 
good Prophet to proph»ſie ſmooth and pleaſing rbiogs, for which 


For 


— 


f Heb. 
Vili: upon 
J0u. 

* Prov. Is 
II. 


"a 


a LK - CC 


©, FWw wa. £4 


a waa A © 4 o A w WwWaik©4y £4 © a © 


| Chap: 


| 
: 


* Chap. 
22- 3. 

f Heb. 
Juage. 


IE 


t Heb, 
Ibabis 


| freſs. 


PRAREY y . 


POT NT Is UI 


f Heb. 
Viſit upon 
J0u. 


SI. 


* Prov. 1- 4 fire in the foreſt thereof g, 


XXL. 


10 For T have fer my face againſt this city, for evil, 
and not for pood r, faith the LORD 2: it ſhall be given 
into the hand cf the king of Babylon, and he ſhall 
burn it with hre /. 

» That is, I will ſer my (eif againſt it, T will be an Enemy to zt. 
See the like Phraſe Lo! 17, lo, and 20. 5. Ir is a Phrate ſignifying 
not only God's Averſion from them, and the taking his Aﬀettion 
off them, but his Determination to bring Ruin upon them, and 
cauſing Methcds of Providence tending and conducive thereunto : 
2nd ſo it is opened in the following Words, which are rather tro be 
underſtood of the Strutture of the Ciry than of the Inhabitants, for 
that not the People were burnt with fire, though probably many of 
The People periſhed in fo great Burnings: : 

11 4 And touching the houſe of the king of Judah, 


Jay, Near ye the word of the LORD «. 

et By the houſe of the King of Judah he means the Houſe of Zedes 
&:ah, the Court, or thole ( as appeareth by the next Verſe) who 
were the Magiſtrates. » Theſe, how great 1ſoever, are not excuſed 
from the common Obligation upon all ta liſten to, and to obey 
the Revelations of the Divine Will, ; 

12 © houſe of David w, thus faith the LORD, 
* f Execute judgment in the morning x, and deliver 
him that is ſpoiled, out of the hand of the oppreſlor y, 
leſt my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can 


quench tz, becauſe of the evil of your doings 4. 

w He calls theſe the Houſe of David, either checking them, who 
were indeed ſo in alineal Deſcent. or minding them what they 
ought te be in imitation of their Father David. «x The only way 
they had to keep off thoſe Divine Judgments which now hang'd 
over their Heads, was to execute Judgment, that is, Jufice withour 
Pertiality 3 the Prophet's Advice to them fo execute Judgment in the 
ering, either lets them know they muſt do it quickly, orelfe it hath 
reipeCt to the time when-the Courts of Juſtice ſate. y One Species 
of Juſtice, was the Deliverance of the opprefſ:d from the hands 
thatis, from the power and malice of the Oppreſſors 3 which if it 
were not done. xz Gd threatneth certain Ruin and DeſtruQion to 


them, which none ſhould be able to hinder, or avoid. « The cauſe | 


of which was, their wicked doings; for that God who doth People 


good, and ſheweth them favour, not for their ſake, bur for his «wn | 


names ſake, yet never puniſheth them, but for a.cauſe found in 


em. 
- £3 Behold, I am againſt thee, + O inhabitant of the 
valley b, and rock of the plain c faith the LORD ; 
which ſay, Who ſhall come down againſt us? or who 


(hall enter into our habitations 4 ? 

b The Inhabitants of the Ciry of Hieruſalem are thoſe here in* 
tended, Pſal. x25. 2. ſount 7 
yea, Hieruſslem is ſelf was buided in part upon the rocky Mountain 
of Zion, but a great paft was 'in the Valley, and the bigher Moun- 
rains, about mount Zion, made that Mountain 3t ſelf, in compari- 
ſon with them, asa Valley. c Though alſs aRock of the Plain, 
that is, nearto the Plain. Which ſiteation of this place, made the 
Few; think it to bs impregnable, and to mock at Dangers, or 
Threats of Enemies, ſaying, Who ſhall, that is, Who can, or Who will 
dare to come againſt vs? Or, Who will be able to enter into our 
City ? ſaith the Lord I am againſt you. I will come down againſt 
you, and I, by ſuch as I ſhall employ, will enter into your Habita- 
tions. No natural poſition or ſituation of Places, no artificial For- 
tifications are ſafficient againſt an Almighty God. _ A 

14 But I will + puniſh you e according to the fruit 
of your doings, faith the LORD f: and I will kindle 

and it ſhall devour all 


things round about it 4, Ts 

« In the Hebrew it is, 1 will viſit upon you 3 God's Viſitations are 
either of Mercy, Plal. 80. 14. and 106. 4. Or of Judgment; thereſore 
the Sence is here rightly given by our Tranſlators, puniſh, f The 
fruit of Mens Doings is the product of their Actionsz God punith- 
eth the fruit of our Doings. In ſhewing Mercy, he acts from Pre- 
roga'ive; inPuniſhments, he doth but fill Men with their own ways, 
«nd give them according to the fruit of.their Doings 3 ſo Yerſe 12. 
g By the Fireft he either meaneth the Foreſt of Z:banon. or their 
Houſes made up of Wood cut out of that Foreſt, or their Idol- 
trous Groves. þ And this Fire he faith ſhould not determine in the 
Deſtruction only of this City, but 1n the total deſtruction c£ all 


the Country adjacent to Hieruſal ems 
CHAP. XXIL 


. | * 

God ſmndeth the Prophet to Court with Promiſes, T, 4. and Threats 
_ the King s houſe avd Jeruſalem, 5, 9. The Judgment 
of Shallum, 10,,——72. of Jehoiakim, 13,——19- 4nd of Cos 


a7” Exh the LORD, Go down to the houſe of the 


king of Judah, and ſpeak there this word 4. 

a Some by tac King of Judah here mentioned, underſtand Jehe. 
ahaz,made King upon the death of Joſiah by the People ( being the 
ſecond Son of Joſiah ) 2 Kings 23. 30. Orhers underſtand Fehoiakim 
whom Pharaoh-Necho made Kings carry11g his elder Brother Feboge 
haz, after a ſhort Reign of threC Months, with him into Zgypr, 2 


Et Fry Hear the word of the LORD, O king of 


Judah, that fitteſt upon the throne of David 6, thou, 


and thy ſervants, and thy people that enter in by 
cle Gates c; 
_ Sa is ſo Great but he is obliged to hear the Word of the 
Lord. The Prophets mentioning him under the Notion of him that 
ſar upon the Throne of Davids boch minds him of God's Faithfulnelfs, 
who had promiſed that Dawd ſhould not want one to ſit on his 
Throne ; and his Duty, ro wa'k 1n che ſteps of him upon whoſe 
Throne he fate ; and alſo of his Errors, he not walking in David's 
Heps, though he ſareupon his Throne. c The Word of the Lord 
concerned net the King alone, bur a'I his Inſtruments in places of 
Ma ziltracy, and allo all the Peoplz of Feruſalem and Jute. ”” 


_ 


FERBMIA H 


The Mountains were round about Hieruſalem, | 


and righteouſneſs, and deliver the ſpoiled out of the 
hand of the oppreſſor: and do no wrong; do no vie- 
lence to the ſtranger, the fatherleſs, nor the widow; 


neither ſhed innocent blood in this. placed. - . ___ 
d That is, Adminiſter Juſtice toall your Subje&s. The Strangey, 
the Fatherleſs, and the Widow, are particularly named, as Perſons 
who have feweſt Friends, and ſb are moſt expoſed: ro the Luſts of 
great Men, who have a Power to oppreſs them. Two things. are 
obſervable; 1. That the Terms upon which God promiſeth Mer- 
Cy to them, are ſuch as were in their power to. perform. 2c 
They are the due performance of relative ; ee pe teach us how 
much lieth vpon Mens juſt performance of the Duties of their Re 
Jations, and miore particularly, how much God loverh Juſtice and 
Judgment, withour the impartial Execution of which, no Princes; 
noMagiſtrates, can promiſe themſelves S:curity from temporal Judg- 
ments: which much commenderh the Love of God to humane Sor 
ctety, Injuſtice being the greateſt Enemy to it, and Juſtice the great 
Foundation and Pillar of it. EE | 
4 For if ye do this thing indeed e, * then ſhall there 
enter ia by the gates of this houſe kings ſitcing F upon 
the throne of David, riding in chariots, and or horſes, 


he, and his ſervants, and his people f, 
Due, and look that inferiour Magiſtrates a&ing under you do ſo.. 


a ſecular, temporal nature, of all Proſperity, and Conhtinuance of 
the Family of David, with great Honour and Splendour ; expreſſed 


Performance of moral As of Juſtice and Mercy, which Men may. 
perform without any ſpecial Grace of God, be not enough to en-, 
citle them tro the Hopes of Spiritual and Eternal goed Things 3 yet 
they may intirle them to the Hopes of outward Proſperity and Hap: 
pineſs in this 'Life, Dan. 4. 27. Which is ſufficient to demonſtrate, 
That Mens outward Infelicities, and Sufferings under the grievous 
Judgments of God upon themſelves, is from their ſelves ; they 
might in a great meaſure avoid them, by doing ſuch Adts as are in 
their power fo do. 

5 But if ye will not hear theſe words g, I ſwear by 
my ſelf, ſaith the LORD, that this houſe ſhall become 
a deſolation þ. 

£ By hearing, the Prophet meaneth hearkning to, and obeying, God 
accaunteth us to hear no more than we prattiſe. þ If ( faith the 
Prophet ) you will not ex:cute Judgment, &c. I give you the great- 


eſt Aſſurance imaginable, that this noble Houſe of David ſhall become 


a Deſolation. The Apaſtle ſaith, that God, becauſe he could ſwear 
by no greater, ſware by himſelf. The End of an Oath, is the Con= 
firmation of a thing where any doubt of the Truth of it, or any 
have Strife about it. Sinners tinding in themſe!ves a Dificulty co 
believe God upon his Word, revealing his Will againſt the Intereſts 
of theic Luſts, the Lord is brought in as ſwearing, nor by 2 greater 
( that is impoſſible ) bur by himſelf, that the Hecſe of David, or this 
Houſe of Iſrael, or his own Houſe, the Temple, ( though the firft ſeems 
moſt probable. to be here meant, which ſeemerh ro be the Houſe 
mentioned 7:rſe 4. through the Gates of which,Kings ſhould enter, 
riding in Chariots and on Horſes ) ſhould be made deſolate. 

6 For thus ſaith che LORD unto the kings houſe 
of Judah, Thou art Gilead unto me 3, and the head of 
Lebanon & : yet ſurely I will make the a wilderneſs, ani 


Cities which are not inhabited 7. LE 

# Interpreters are not agreed in what Sence God faith, that the 
Kings Houſe of Judah was unto him as Gilead. k Or the Head of Le 
banon. Gilead was a Country fertile for Paſtures; upon which ac- 
count the Reubenites and Gadites being Men whoſe Eſtates lay in Cat« 
tz], begged it of Moſs for their Portion, Num. 32. 2. and Moſes gave 
it to the Sons of Manaſſes Verſe 40. It was alſo famous for Spicery; 
Balm, and Myrrhb, Gen. 37. 25. It had init a famous Mountain, Lzs 
banon alſo was a very pleaſant place, famous for Ceders,and indeed 
whatſoever cou'd gratifie the Senſes : they both were in the. Lot of 
Gad and Manaſſth. Some think God compareth the King of Judab's 
Houſe to theſe places, in regard of the Height and Nobleneſsofthe 
$eruQure; others, for the Pleaſantneſs and Delightfulneſs of ir. 
Others conſider Gilead as the principal part ef the Inheritance of the 
Ten Tribes, waſted by Tizlath Pilrzar, 2 Kings I5+ 29. and that God 
telleth them, by this Compariſen, that he would certainly des 
ſtroy them, and make them as Gilead, which was the Head of Leba- 
on, Though Jer:ſalem were 2 noble and pleafant place, yet they 


| might remember ſo was Gilead, which yet tor their Sins was waſte . 


ed, and brought to Ruin. 1 So alſo Jeruſalem, formerly the Garden 
of Judea, and Joy of the whole Earth, ſhould be made a Wilderneſs, 
and the Cities of Judah ſhould not be inhabited. WS 

7 And I will prepare deſtroyers againſt thee, every 
one with his weapons 7, and they ſhall cut down thy 


choice cedars, and caſt them into the fire ». _ 

m They ſhall not only be edged with their own Luſts «nd Ma- 
lice, but commiſſionated and influenced by me, and ſha!l come 
ſufficiently prepared for their work. » And they ſhall cut down 
and burn rhy Buildings, which are made of goodly CeJars.. . 

8 And many nations ſhall paſs by this city, and they 
ſhall ſay every man to his neighbour, wherefore hath 


the LORD done thus to this great city s. | 
» According to God's Threatnings, Deut. 29. 24, 1 Kin. 9. 8. 
Though the Jews would not underſtand that there was a Cauſe, yet 
others would underſtand it, and enquire into 1. . . 
5 Then they ſhall anſwer, Becauſe they have for- 
ſaken the covenant of the LORD their God p, and 


worſhipped other gods, and ſerved them 9. 2 

2 Some ſhall anſwer themy or they ſhall antwer on? another. 
Surely it 1s becauſe they have broken the divine Law, which the 
Iſraelites made a Covenant, Exod. 19. 8, Ch9). 24. 3, 7» Deur. 
3 Fo 278 


_.__-.- , _—_— 
3 Thus ſaith the LORD, * Execute ye judgment, * Chap. 1 


e If ye will not pretendedly, but really, give to every one their on his 


F Then, he doth not ſay you ſhall be ſaved : the Yromiſe is only of. 


by thoſe Phraſes of riding in Chariots, and on Horſes; Though the 


a 
«BH 
. 
Pw 


——— 
” FEI ITIt 
" "— 


kl ( 

i 
' i 
Un FT 
. + 
FI 


— ——— 


-3» 12, 


LS 3. als ka. As 


- - : * ——- LY .. 
ES Ix IE” = 1" ITT 


* Chap. ' MIKE 
I7. 2F. -.M 'f 
f Heb. for [1 Bu: 
David ups |IEF 


Throne, 


. 
— A - a ——— es _ giew—wmtnnci ——_—_ - 
— — > —— - = - = _ 
FT _ vo ————— TITS" C— = 
IG. Fi CEE AA ITE CE A — 


1 


VEE DAE” —E — CZE — 


* 
RE NEE ECO IITR 


DS ERECT Tr ee nn nn 


Y 


XU. 7 E& jR 


I ' faking their Ciuenant. 9q Their Sinning Was not Of an ordinary na- 
xo. bur by Idolatry, worſhipping Images and Idols, which indeed 
were no Gods, but only in the Opinion ef thole Nations that wor: 
ſhi ped them. : 

T0 C Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan 


him r, bat weep ſore for him chat. goeth away /; for 


he ſhall return. no more, nor ſee his native country 7. 
r Not for Joſiah your dead Prince, for whom there was a great 
Mourning, 2 Chron. 35. 25» mentioned, Lech, 12+ 11. Jojiab is haps 
PY, you need not troubleyozr {elves for him ; bur weep for Je 
hrahaz, who is'to go, or 15 gone into. Captivity ; Jehoahaz was {ct 
up upen bis Father's Death by the People, 2 Kings 23. 30- 
2 Chron, 36+ x. bur Verſe 3. put down within three Months, and car- 
ried into Egypt, Verſe 4. where he died, 2 Kings 23. 34- t Soas he no 
more returned into. Judas. The Participle being in the Preſent 
Tenſe, inclineth ime to think, that this Prophecy was long beforc 
that-in the former Chapter, ſoon after, the Death of Joſiah, upon 
the Peoples ſetting up of Jehoahox in his ſtead, or preſently after he 
. was carried away. . Some Interpret this. of the People that were 
' dead, and thoſe that were goiog into Captivity 3 but the next Verſe 


"makes it far more probable that it is to be underſtood of Joſiah and 


Wnt vhoabats © ; | 
3 4 pa ; Boer thus faith the LORD touching Shallum, the 
ſon' of Joſiah king cf Judah «, who reigned inſtead of 
Joſiah his father w, which went forth out of this place x, 


he ſhall not return thither any more. / | 
' u Who this Shallum was is a little deubted : Some think it was 
Jehiahax the Son of Joſiah, 1 Chron, 3. T5. called Johanan:, there is 
ilſo mentioned one Shallum, but he is there mentioned as the fourth 
Son of Jofzh. In the Book of Kings we read only of three Sons 
which Job had, wiz» Jeboahaz, Jehoiakim, and Zcdekiah. Moſt think 
that this Shallum was Jehoahaz or Johanan ( as ke is called 1 Chron. 3. 
15 ) who was indeed the ſecond Son of Joſiah; for itis plain trom 
2 Kings 23, 31. 16. that Jeboiakim was two Years older otterwile 
he could not have been 25 Years o!d when he began to reign, after 
Jehoahaz,, who began to reign at 23 Years of Age, and reigned but 
three Months : but 1 Chron. 3. 15. he is called Jofah's firſt-born, 
betauſe he wasfirſt made King zand here he1s called Shallum for the 
ſhortneſs of his Reign, in Derilion tothe Jews, who ſo called him, 
b- upon the account of their good hopes of Proſperity under him,and 
s in Alluſion to Shallum the.Son of Fabeſh, one of the laſt Kings of the 
TenTribes,mentioned 2King:15.13 who reigned but aMonth;tor this, 
as ſome think, could not be that Shallum mentioned after Zedckzak, 
as the fourth Son of Joſiah, 1 Chron. 3. 15. for that Shallum, they fay, 
never reigned, this as the Text ſaith, did reign three Months.w i- 


from Jeruſalem preſently afrer he was ſer up, 2 Kings 23+ 31, 32, im- 
priſoned at Riblah, and Verſe 34 died in Egyp?. 
12 But he (ball die in the place whither they have 


aid; But others think this, Shallum was Jofiak's fourth Son, that 
Johanan died before his Father, and the People made Shalium his 
youngeſt Son King, calling him Jehoahax, ſo as he reigned immedi. 
ately after Joſiah, . ' 2 
Wo. 0 33 C Wo unto him that * buildeth his houſe by un- 
"__0 righteouſneſs, and his chambers by wrong ; z that uſeth 
= 9. bis neighbours ſ{ervice without wages, and giveth him 
F- not for his work 8s. 
; £ We have not here any certain Guidance, to let ns know whe- 
.ther the Propher intended Jehoahaz or Jehoiakim ; borh of them di 
evil in the ſight of the Lord, as we read in their Story. The Sin here 
zefleQed upon is manifeſtly Injuſtice and Oppreſſion. but poſſibly in 
the' former part of the Verſe, all unju& and oppreſſive Afts, by 
which either of theſe Princes endeavoured to promote their Gran- 
deur, may be underſtood : for we need not take building his houſe in 
aſtriS& lireral Senſe, but ſignifying the promotion of his Family, 
or eſtabliſhing his State and Dignity. 4 Inthe latter parr, a ſpecial 
Oppreſlion, withholding Workmens Wages, is the Sin upon which 
the Woe is denounced, a Sin contrary to the Law, Lev. 19. 13, 
Deut. 24. 14, 15. and againſt which the Judgment of God is alfo 
denounced under the New Teſtament. James 5. 4. An evident De- 
monſtration of God's Love to Mankind, ſecuring by his Law juſt 
Dealing betwixt Man and Man, and revenging A&s of Injuſtice, 
«nd particularly where Men take Advantage of their Greatneſs 
above, and Superiority over others, to trample them under their 
Feet, and to withhold their juſt Rights from them : Though ſuch 
Perſons may be out of the reach of humane Juſtice, yet God hath 
denounced a Woe againſt them» bn 

T4 That faith, I will build me a wide houſe, and 
T large chambers, and cutteth him out || windows, and 


it is Cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion 6b. 
& That is Woe to that Man, who ſuffering Oppreſlion in his 
Government, or making it his Buſineſs himſelf tro Oppreſs, yet 
bnildeth himſelf great Houſes and large Chambers, Cieling them 
with Cedar, promiſing himſelf Proſperiry and Splendour notwith 
nding his wicked Courſes ; for otherwiſe, it is lawful encugh fo 
Princes to build themſelves ſtately Houſes, &c. Yer ſome think 
thar Jeboiakim's Pride, and Luxury, and Magnificence, is here blame 


= 0-17 4 Þ, 


, .” ® . 
e. 27. upon which a-count their Sinning was an Apoſt:cy an: a fors | 


fead of Foſtah his Father; which Phraſe ſeemeth alſo to conclude, that ; 
he immediately ſucceeded his Father Jeſiah. x He was carried away ; 


led him captive, and ſhall ſee this land no more z. | drawn and caſt forth beyond the gates of Jeruſalem mw. 
4 So as he returned no more to ſee his native Country, as 1s here 


c Art thou ſo vain, as fo think that brave Iicuirs wiil contime 
; thy Kirgdom * Thou ait miſtaken ; magnificent Buildings are nor 
thoſz things which <f1:bI'ſh a Prince's Threne. d Hcw was it with 
thy Father? He lived profperouſly, yer kad no- fuch ſtately Edi- 
tices 3 his Throne wes effabliſked by Juſtice and Judgement; thar 
were the right way for thee to fit ſure upin thy Throne. 

16 He judged the cauſe of ihe pcor erd needy e, 
then if was well with him: was not this to know me, 


ſaith the LORD f? | 

e By himſelf in Perſon; for the Kings of 1ſ-acl and Judah often, 
ſar perſonal'y to judge Cauſcs; or by jetting ſuch Judges as did ir, 
adminiftring Juſtice unpactially, particularly ro ſuch as in r=ſpe& of 
their low Conditicn, were moſt expoicd to the Power of others, 
, and doing thus he profpered. f This was for him truly to own and 
acknowlede me. They only truly know Gcd who obey him ; 
and Men vainly pretend to Piety who are r.otoricully defcttive in 
Duties of Juſtice and Ctaiity. 

17 But thine. eyes and thy heart are not but for thy 
covetouſneſs g, andfor to ſhed innocent blood, and for 


oppreſſion, and for || violence to do it þ. 


thy own Grandeur and Riches. b And to make thy ſelf great, thou ©2/% 
makeſt no Difficulty ro deſtroy thy Subj:&s that are innocent, and 
' have nct deſerved Death, and to oPprets others, uſing atl manner 
| of Violence againſt them. Ir is nor v6 te thought that Jehorakine 
' did all this in perſon, but by ſuch corrvpt and unjuſt Judges as he 
 fervp; ſo God accounted that Ahab had Killed and taken poſi jon, 

s Krrg: 21. 19, Though the Elders and Nobles were thoſe thar did ir, 

werſe 11. 12, 13, Prince are reſponlible to Gcd for the ſins of their 
Minitters and Judges, 


18 Therefore thus faith the LORD, concerning Je- 
hoiakim the fon of Joſiah king of Judah 3: They ſhall 
not lament for him, ſaying, Ah my brother, or ah m 
filter: they (ball not lament for him, ſaying, Ah Lord! 
or, ah his glory &. | 


# Avery b:d Son of a good Father, whoſe Name was Eliakin,, 
by Pharaoh Necho turned to Jehoiakim, 2 Kings a3. 34. and by himſer 
up. Hz reigned wickedly. and infinitely oppreſſed the People for 
Money, for Pharaoh Necho that made him King, wve-ſe 35. He reigned 
but cleven Years; but rebelling againſt Nebuchadnezzar King of Bas 
bylon,zs we read,2 Kings 24. 1, 2, he was Carried by him into Babylere 
in fetters, 2 Chron. 36. 6. wherefore ought we read, he died. Jehoj« 
akim, or Jeriah, his Son, ſucceeded him, worſe g: reigning only 
three Months, and ten Days, & He.diednot lamented; for, as it is 
not probable hisEnemies would lament him,fo h: had diſobliged his 
own People by Violence and Oppreſlion to that degree, that it is not 
likely that thoſe of them who were in Babzl:z made any great Law 
mentation for him, 


19 * He ſhall be buried with the burial of an aſs /, a+ 6 


! That is, he ſhall not be buried at all, oc he ſhall be buried in an 
indecent and contemptible manner, none attending him to kis Grave 
nor mourning for him.m The laſt Words of this Verſe incline ſome 
to think that Jchoiakins was buried near to Jeruſalem; but the Scrip= 
ture, which mentioneth his being carried into Ba#ylon, ſaith nothing 
of his being broughr back 3 nor is that veiy probable which ſeme 
fay, that the King of Babylon thought to have carried him to Baby. 
lon, but upen ſecond Thoughts altered his Purpoſes, and cauſed 
him to be lain ar Jeruſalem,and his Body to be 1gnominiouſly drags 
ged cur of the Gates. The Scripture ſairh expreſly, he -was carried 
to Babylon, 2 Kings 24» 15. and if he died there, yet this Text re. 
maineth true, the ſcope of which ſcemeth to be, to ſhew the Vanity 
of this Prince in his great and ſtately Buildings, which he was not 
like long to Enjoy, nor to be buried nigh to them, nor in any des 
gree of Honour proportionate to the Splendour of them. 


20 Go up to Lebanon », and cry, and lift up thy 
voice in Baſhan o, and cry from the paſſages p ; for all 
thy lovers are deſtroyed 9» 


1 The Hebrew Verb being feminine, lees us know, that Jeruſaa 
lem was the Place to whick this Speech is dire&ed : to the Inhabi.- 
rants of which the Prophet here cajleth to go up to Lebanon. o And 
to Baſhan. Both Lebanon and Baſhan were Hiils or Places that looked 
towards Aſſjria, from whence the Jews looked for help, and had 
it ſometimes, 3s 2 Kings 16. 7- he calls to them ironically to go up 
ro the mountainous parts of them ; where ſtanding and crying 
they might be ſooneſt and beſt heard. p What wetranſlate from the 
paſſages, others Tranſlate from the borders, or from the ſides. Others 
from Abarim. which is the Name of a Mountain, as well as 
Lebanon and Baſhan. Vide Numb, 27. 12. and 35. 47. which ſeemeth ta 
me the beſt Interpretation : The Meaning is, Goand cry for Help 
from all Places, but ir will be in vain 3 for q the Egyptians and Afſrie 
ans to whom thou wert wont heretofore co fly. chuſing rather to 
truſt to them than in me, are themſelves in the Power and Danger 
of the Chaldeans, who ſhall alſo deſtroy them. + Heb. 


21 I ſpake to thee in thy # proſperity r, but thou?!92#itic 
ſaidſt I will nor hear /: * this hath been thy manner ,,"gP '* 


from thy youth, that thou obeyedſt not my voicer. 


r I by my Prophets, ſpake to thee while all things went well 


ed which alſo may be, conſidering what Fate he was under, for, 
Judah was reprived only during Joſtah's Life, 2 Chron. 34, 24, 25, 
-26,. 27, 28, And this Prince had ſeen Shallym or Jehoahaz his Bro. 
ther carried into Captivity, and he till walked in the ſame wicked 
Courſes his Brother had done. yet in contempt of the Word of the 
_ Lord by Huldah in his Father's time; be promiſerh himſelf all 
Proſpzrity and Splendour, and accordingly was building 
himielf ſtately Houſes, and adorning them, for this the Woe 
as here denounced. ; 
Is Shalt thou reign becauſe thou cloſeſt :hy self in 


Is Cedare ? did not thy father eat and drink, and do 


Ee, — SR 


with thee, ſo as thou haſt nor ſinned ignorantly or without warn- 
ing, I have not ſurprized thee with my Judgments, but thou re- 
fuſedſt to hearken, and obey my Admenitions and Preceprs. t From 
the time that I brought thee out of the Land of Egypr, thou haſt 
been thus a rebellious People, 

22 The wind ſhall eat up all thy paſtures «, and thy 
lovers ſhall go into captivity , ſurely then ſhalt thou be 


aſhamed, and confounded for all tky wickedneſs x. 

« Either a vain Hope ard Preſumprion ſhall deſtroy thy Rulers, 
and Governours, who flatter thee with Promiſts of Proſperity, 
or & Judgment ſhall ſeize them , that {hall be like a violenc 


judzment and juſtic2, and then i: was well with him ? 


Wind, 


P; 


Chap. XY11IL 


£ All that thou lookeſt after, and thzt thy Heart is ſet upons is || Or, Ita 


av «ver ge? , 
- ERR OF rags. w 


gn i + Lg nr IR 


$4. ns acl d iii tradcet : = 


CY 


+4 Heb. 


habirreſ 


T Heb. 
lift up th 


1nd, 


Chap, XXL 7 0 


Wind, which preſently ſcattercth the Clouds and the Smoak 3 or 
rieey ſhall bz blaſted by my Judgments, as Planrs are blaſted and 
eaten up by Winds. w And thoſe that have been thy Friends and 
Allies, Syria and Egyp:, an whom thou baſt truſted, ſhall chemſelves 
be made Captive- « Surely when thou ſeeft this, thou wilt be 
convinced, and aſhamed of thy wicked Cor.rſes. 

23 O Þ inhabirant of Lebanon y that makeſt thy 
neſt in the cedars 2, how gracio!s ſhalt thou be a when 
pangs- come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in 
travail b. ; 

9 Hieruſalem, which is called an, Inhabitant of Lebanon, either be- 
cauſe their Houſes were built of Wood cur down out of the For- 
xeſt of Lebanon, or becauſe they lived in as great Plenty and Delight 
as if they lived in Lebanonz or, becauſe they thought the Mounrain 
of L:banmn was a certain Refuge to them. » They are ſaid to 
ro make their Neſt in the Cidars; either becauſe their Houſes were 
builc of the Cedars of Lebanon, or becauſe of the Security they pro- 
miſed themſelves from, that Foreſt and Mountain, ſo full of and 
famous for Cedars. # What Favour. wilt thou find b. when my 
Judgments ſhall core upon thee as ſuddenly and as ſmartly as the 
pains of u Woman, in Travail come upon her: a Similitude often 
made uſe of by this Prophet, to expreſs the Suddenneſs, Unavoid» 
ableneſs, and Greatneſs of Judgments Chap. 4. 31. and 6. 24. and 
13» 21. and 70. 6. and 49. 24+ and 50. 43. and fo in other Scrip» 
tures, Pſal. 48. 6. Micah 4. 9+. 1 Tho 5. 3. F 

24 45 I live ſaith the LORD, though Coniah the 
ſon of Jehoiakim King of Judah c were the {igaet upon 


my right hand «, yet wouid I pluck thee thence. 

c By Coniah he meaneth- Jehoiakim, 2 Kings 24. 8. whoſe nams , 
was Jeconiah, 1 Chron. 3. 16. ) for all Joſfah's Sons had two Names, ' 
and ſo had his Grandchild Feconiah ) here in concemprt called Coniah 
4 He ſaith, that though this Contah were as dear to him as his Signet. 
which every Man kcepeth ſafe, yet this ſhould not ſecure him from 
divine Vengeance. 

25 And I will give thee into the hand of them thar 
ſeek thy lifee, of them whoſe face thou feareſt, even 
into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and 


into the hand of the Chaldeans. | 

e That is, into the power of the Chaldeans and Babylonians, whom 
they were atraid of, and juſtly, for they thirſted aftzr their Blood 
and Ruin: 

26 And I will caſt the out, and thy mother that 


bare thee, into another country where Ye were not 
born, and there ye ſhall die f. 

f Fechoniah's Mother was Nehuſhtarn, the Daughter of Elathan 
of Hieruſalem, 2 Kings 24. 8. Verle 12. the fulfilling of the Pro- 


Heb. in= 
habirreſs. 


1 
3 . 
4 

4 


R [7 
: 
: 


M 1 4 HQ. Chap. XXII 
ſal! rule and ſave them, 1,-——8. Hezainſt falſe Prophets, g<=32. 4 WER 
and mockers of the truth, 37, 40» 


'\ \\ T O be unto the paſtors that deſtroy and ſcat- 
ter the ſheep of my paſture, ſaith the LORD #. 

a There is the like Wo againſt the Paſtors denounced, Ezek, 34- 
2. Interpreters judge, that by the Pa#ors, are to be underftood rhe 
Civil Magiſtrates, for verſe 9, He denounceth the Judgments of God 
2gainſt ct:eir Eccleſiaſtical Officers: The Civil Magiſtrates ar this 
time in 7udah were great Tyrants; and whereas God had commit- 
ted his People ( whom he calls the Sheep of his Paſture ) to th:m 
in truſt, rhat they ſhould prote& and govern them, and that they 
might live under them gedly and peaccable Lives, in all Proſperi- 
ty, that they had ated quite contrary to their Truſt, and worried 
the People like Wolves, inſtead of feeding them like Shepherds. 
God rook notice of their Oppreſſions, and by the Propher denoun+ 
ceth this Wee againſt them, to verifie that of Solomon, Eccliſ. 5, 8. 

2 Therefore thus faich the LORD God of Iſrael 
againſt the paſtors that feed my people b,Ye have ſcat- 
tered my- flock, and driven them away, and have not 
viſited them c ; Behold, I will viſit upon you the evil 
of your doings, faith the LORD 47. 

b God calleth them his People, his Flock, the Sheep of his PaRure, 
with reſpe& to the ancient Covenant which God had made wirh 
their Fathers, Abraham, Iſaac, and Jacob. They are ſaid to have fed 
this People, becauſe it was their Duty, and the Buſineſs of theis 
Otfice, 1o to have done, though they had failed in it. c And bad 
done the quite contrary, ſcatrering them by their As of Violence 
and Oppreſſon, and driving them from their places to ſeek ſome more 
ſafe and quiet places of abode ; or by their prodigious Wicked- 
neis, having been the cauſe of their being carried into Captivity, 
not viſiting them, that is, taking any due care of their ' Good and 
Welfire, ſeing what they wanted, and ſupplyed rhein, as good 
Rulers ought ro have done. 4 For which Negle&, God threatneth 
to v1'it. upon them the Evil of their Doings. The Hebrew Werd ſig- 
n:fieth to viſit with a Viſitation of Care and Love, and alſo with 2 
rg of Juſtice avd Severity, and is often ſo uſed in Holy 

rit. 

3 And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of 
all countries whither I have driven them e, and will 
o_ny them again to their foids f, and they ſhall be 
fruicful, and increaſe g. 

e God puts adifference betwixt thoſe that were miſled by the 
examples of others, and the Rulers whe ſer them ſuch an ill exam- 
plez he threatned Jehoiakim and Jehojakin or Jeconish, that they ſhould 
return no more, but for the people, he here premiſcth them' a re- 
turn, at leaſt a remnant of them, when he ſhould have puniſhed the 


ti 
bi 


441 ' 


* Chap, ||| 
lo. "1 i 


N19 7 
SIO RITY. 


ifs $ 


phecy is recorded; and it is ſaid, that Jehoiachim rhe King of Judah | 
went ont to the King of Babylon, he and his Mother, and his Servants, &c. : 
ſo Yerſe 15. together with eight thouſand Pritoners of the meaner | 


ſort, beſides Princes and Nobles. 
+ Heb. | 


On TEES” CUERINIONNES i EE TA 


| ' 275 But to the land whereunto they F deſire to 
pat *hcir ecurn, thither they ſhall not returng.. 
Cs g That is, they ſhall never come again ro Feru/alem. though they 


be fon of it as their Native Country, and may premiſe then; ſerves ; 

ſuch Favour from the King of Babylon, yer there ſhall no ſuch thing 

be their portion. ; | : 
28 Is this man Coniah a deſpiſed broken ido! h? 3s 


he a veſſel wherein is no pleaſure i? wherefore are they 


| ſhall feed them 54, and they ſhall fear no more, nor be ;. «5. 


Goats as he ſpeak-th, Zech, 16. 3- f By their Folds, he meaneth Jeru« 
ſalem, and other Ciries the Towns of Jud#h which they had former= 
ly inhabited. g Where they ſhould once more be inproſperiry. He 
ſpeaks here concerning the recurn of this people our of the Captivis 
ty of Babylon, tho there be ſome that think this Texr i: primarily ta 
be underitood, of the gatherivg together in one, the p-ople of God ſcate 
tered abroad, in and by Chriſt according to the Prophecy of Caias 
phas, John 11. 52. Ss 


4 And I will ſet up * ſhepherds over 


them which cyap, ||| 

diſmaid 5, 

LORD &. | 
h Some think this Prophecy was fulfilled in Nehemiah and Zore- 


z<k. 34 {it 


I, XC. i! 


neither ſhall they. be lacking faith the E 
1 


caſt out, he and his ſeed & ? and are calt into a land 


which they know not ? | 
h The Prophet either ſpeaketh this in the perſch of Ged, or of 


| 


babel, who were pious and goed Governours, and conſulced in their 
Government the good of the people committed to their truſt, Neb, 
2.10 2rd s5- 14, Others rather underſtand it of Chriſtian Princes 


the People, who are here brought in, affirming thar chi: Pr.nce 
who was the Idol of the People, was now through the juſt Ju! ge 
ment of God become like a broken Ido]- i Or lik» a Veale! which 
Men care not for, being eicher 1o crack*d, or fo tain'ed, chat they 
can make n» uſe of it, and admiriug ar this Cataſtr: phe, and en- 
quiring the Ciuſe why it ſo came to paſs. k He, and his ſred, It is 
{aid Yer. 30. that no Man of his S-ed ſhould pioip-r titting upon 
the Throne of David. and ruling any more in Judah 3 nor is there any 
mention made of any of his Children, where his carrying into Cap» 
tivity is recorded, 2 Kings 24. 12. which mak 
by his Seed here is meant the Poſterity of his Grane father Jofah; but 
others think. that he had Children, either *efor: he went into Cap= 
tivity, or born while he was in Babylon : And Marth. x. 12, itis 
ſaid, that after they were brought to Babyl-n, Jechoniuh begat Selath-el. 
29 O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the 


LORD 7. | | 

I By Earth he either means the Ind of Juah, to which he calls 
thrice, to ſignifie the Deafneſs of this People and unw-Ilingneſs 
to hear, and believe what God ſpake by him , or elſe he calls co the 
whole Earth, as he calls H:aven ind Earth to witneſs, Deuteromomy 
30, 19. and 32. r. Iſaiah 1. 2. and 34s (. Fer- 6. 19. : 

30 Thus ſaith the LORD, Write ye this man child- 
leſs m, a man 7bat ſhall not proſper in his days : for no 
man of his ſeed ſhall proſper, fitting upon the throne 
of David, and ruling any more in Judah. 

97 The Word tranſlated Ch:1dleſs is but thrice read in Holy Writ, 
and by various Interpreters tra"iſl:ted barren, not encreaſing, empty, 
full of ſorrow, wanting Children, &c. Ir 1 thought ro be interpreted, 
by the next Words, Ne Man of his ſeed ſhall proſper ſitting upon the 
Throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah ; for there are ſeven of 
his Sons named 1 Chron, 3. 17+ So that he is faid to be Childleſs, 
either becauſe all his Children died beforetheir Father ; or, ( which 
3s moſt probable ) becauſe he had no Child tat fats upon the 
Throne, or ever had any Rulers place in 7u4ah but only ſome that 
lived in a mean condition in Captivity, amongſt whom Salathiel is 

named, M#rth. te 12, 8s a Progenitor of Chriſt. 


CHAP. XXII. 
Po azainſft wicked Paſtors, the ſcatteres Flock ſhall be gathered, Chrift 


\ 


2s ſome taink, rthar * ing of a rime, wuen nv? j#4ab only, but Iſrael alſo ſhouid be ſaved, 


' king ſhall reiga, and proſper, and fhall execute juſtice 


; 


| and Goveracurs under the Goſpel. #5 Under whom they ſtill live 
, peaceably and fecurte'y.. & And none of them ſhall periſh. The 
: ewo laſt paſſages of this Verſe incline Interpreters to think that this 
promiſe doth not ſo much refer to their coming out of Babybn, as 
i to their ſpiritual deliverance by Chriſt, for after their return out 
of Baby/ox they were not ſecure long, but f:ired Sanballas and Tobiah, 
the Grecians and Romans, and other Enemizs; beſides that the laſt 
words exaQtly agrue viti, John 10, 28 when Chriſt faith his Sheep 
, ſhould not pe-iſb, 2nd iravpzars Verſe 6. that the Prophet is ſpeaks 


n 


and th- next Verſe doci manifeſtly refer uaro Chriſt. 
5 © Behod, * cre days come, faith the LORD, that * 1%. »#| 
I wiil raiſe unto David, a righteous branch 1, and a 4% 


i! 
fl 


o 


n 


[» 

: ; hap. 33s 
and judgment 1: the earth bs os. 
{ Tho :gh ſome Interpreters t1ink that Zorobabel may Þe here in- Dan. 9. i 
tended, who was de cerdeo from David and ruled the people 24. þ 
when they came out ct Babylon, yer, even :he Jewiſh Do&ors cheme Joh. 1,454 
; ſejves, zs well as the Chriffian Interpreters, underſtand this as a k! 
; Prophecy ard promiſe of the Meiah; the Prophecies and Promiſes 
| of w om are uiually uſhered in with this Particle Be444, to ſtir up 
Peoples att-n'ion, and who alfſ» was the Son of David, and who is 
cailed the branch, Iſa. 4. 2, and 53. 2. Zech 3, 8. I/a. 11, 1. where 
rhe reaſon 1s allo given he being there called # 70/ out of the ſtem of 

, | th... , 
eſſe, and 8 branch out of his root, beſides that the applicatien to him 
of. the Name King, ordinarily applyed to Chriſt, never given to Ze- 
robabel, and the term Righteous make it eyident. Chap. 33. 15. he'is 
ca'led a branch of Righteouſneſs, which is the ſams with the Righteous 
vranch, here mentioned. He 1s called the Righteous Branch, not only 
| becauſe himſelf was Righreous, therefore called the Righteous One; 
As 3,14. & 13. 35. but becauſe he maketh his people Righteous, ſa, 
453: 10. and 60. 21, wm Jeſus Chriſt anſwering the Type of Melchiſe- 
deck the King of Salem, and who is King of Kings, 1 Tim. 6. 15. ſhall 
reign ſpiritually, and fhall not be like Jeconias of whom God 
ſaid he ſhould not proſper, but he thall proſper, and ſhall 
execute Jufice and Judgment, proteQting the innocent, and 
defending his people throughout the World, judging the Princes 
of the World , and by his Spirit governing his People: 


S174 $o 


F Pe XXII. ; 
So as the Prophet relieveth the People of God under their oppreſ 
ſions, by thele latter Kings of Judah, with the promiſe of che King 
dom of Chriſt, an afual argument made uſe of by tie Prophers to 
comfort the people of God in thoſe days againſt any evils come, or 


5 hem. | 
gs 9 - : - Judah ſhall be * ſaved, and Iſrael ſhall 


dwell ſafely « : and * this is his name whereby he ſhall 
be called} THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS». 
x Duriog the Reign and Kingdom of che M:ſſias ( whoſe King- 


eb. L ; R ified by Judah 
K le of Go1 typified by 
dom is an everlaſting Kingom ) the peopope SS ove inner, (hall 


muah. 

and Iſrael, the true 1ſrae! of God, th 

> he hs with a ſpiritual Salvation, for he was therefore called yo 
ſur becauſe he was to ſave his people from their fins, Marth. 1. 21. _ 
God will be a ſpecial protection to them, w The Name wherewit 
this branch ſhall be called, ſhall be, The Lord our Right eduſneſre | _ 
have applied this to the people, as if the people ſhould be fo ca - 
or ſhould ſay the Lord hath dealt graciouſly with us; or in thc 
Lord we have Righteouſneſs. But this wall appear but the new 
invention of ſome who eicher cannot, or will nor underſtand, how 
Chriſt ſhould be his peoples Righteouſneſs, thoſe who conſider 
not, that it is the branch which was before ſpoken of; and that the 
word people is not to be found going before, there 1s indeed «4 mznti- 


on of Judah and Jrael, but ſurely they were not to be other Mens 
Righteouſneſs, and if that had been the Propher's meaning, he 
wou'd not have faid the Lord 0yr, but the Lord Their Righteonſneſs, 
Nor is this the only place where Chriſt is called Our Righteouſneſs, 
x Cor. 1. 30. This place is an eminent proof of the, Godkead of 
Chriſt, he is here called Jehovah, and what is proper to God alone. 


wiz. to juftifie, is here applycd to Chriſt, The Propher, faith Chriſt, 
ſhall be fo called, that is. by his People, who ſhould believe in him 
and truſt in him alone for that Righteouſneſs, wherein they ſhould 
at the la& day ſtand before God, thus he was to bring in Everl»ſting 
Righteruſueſs, Dan. 9. 24+ He who knew no ſin, was maar ſin ( that is, a 
Sacrifice for ſin ) for us, that we might be made the Righteouſneſs of God 
#n him, | 

7 Therefore behold, the days come, ſaith the 
LORD, that they ſhall no more fay, The LORD li- 
veth, which brought up the children of Iſrael} our of 


Egypt. ; 
8 But the LORD liveth, which brought up, and 
which led theſeed of the houſe of Iſrael out of the north- 

Ountey, and from all countreys whether I had driven 


them, and they ſhall dwell in their own land x. 

x See the Notes on Chap. 16. 14; 15. Where much of the ſame 
words are to be found, The Prophet aggravateth the greatneſs of 
that Salvation, which ſhouli be brought by Chriſt to all the true 
If ael of God, by comparing it with the deliverance of the anc'ent 
If; acl of God out of the Land of Egypt; which be ſaith it ſhould ſo far 
tranſcend and excel,that rhe Deliverance out of Eg yp: ſhould net be 
named, when this Salvation ſhould appear, whica ſhould be after 
their return from Babylen. and when God ſhou!d gather them from 
all Countries, which was fulfilled, when 'by rae preaching of the 
Goſpcl, not the Gentiles only were converied, but many cf the 
Jews allo which were ſcartcred abroad, Fames 1.1. 1 Pet. 1. 1. Po 
ſibly pa:t of thi:Promiſe orProphecy remains yet to be accompliſh- 
ed. for the Jews ars not yet com- to d "el 1n their own Land, unleſs 
that term be ro be expounded ef Chriſtians. who during the times 
of Perſecurion in the primitive Church, were ſcsttered abroad, bur 
upon the ceaſing of thoſe Perſecucions, when Chriſtian Emperours 
came to have the Government, returned to their own Countries, 
where they enjoyed a more till and quiet Habirztion. 

9 © Mine heart within me is broken, becauſe of 


the prophets, all my bones ſhake y; I] am like a drun- 
en man, and likes amars whom wine hath overcome ; 
becauſe of the LORD x, and becauſe of the word of 


his holipeſs a» 

3 The Prophet having denounced the Wrath of God againſt the 
wick:d Rulers cf Judah under the Notion of Pators cometh here 
to diſcharge the like truſt with reference to thoſe orders of perſons 
amongſt the Jews, whoſe Office it was, or at feaſt who rook upon 
Them to reveal the Mind 2nd Will of God to people, and who were 
upon that account call:d Prophets. tor theſe he declares a great 
P:ſſion and trouble ; either for their ſake in proſpe& of that Ven- 
geance of God which he ſaw was like to be poured out upoa them, 
or for the peoples ſake, who had bzen d=c:1ved by their unfaithful 
Revelations of the Divine Will, and 1:d into wickedneſs by their 
vile Examples. For this he faith his heart was broken, his bones 
ſhaked. x And he was even aſtoniſhed and ſtupified, and like a 
drunken Man he knew not what he did ; he was ſo ftricken at the 
apprehenſions of the Wrath of the Lord ready to be revealed againſt 
them. . And to coniider what words the holy God had put into his 
Mouth, to ſpeak againſt them. 

ro For * the land isfull of Adulterers b, for becauſe 


n P of || ſwearing the land mourneth c * : the pleaſant 
wo. places of the wilderneſs are dryed up 4, and their 


Fr, cur= [courſe is evil; -and their force is not right e. 

7 6 Under that term Adulterers, all Species of uncleanneſs are come 
nap. 9- prehended. c By falſe ſwearing, or by idle and profane ſwearing, 
'&12. the Land is brought to ruine. The werd ſignifies alſo aCurſe or 
-+ curſing» Many good Interpreters judge, that the more genuine 
ſence and true Tranſlation of this Text were, for becauſe of the Curſe 
( that is, the'Curſe of God ) the Land is brought to that Miſery 


the Plain, for ſo the word is rendred, Iſa. 63. 13, Lame. 4. 19. The 
Wrath of God was extended to all places whether more or leſs in- 
habired.e The Prophets did not only err ia ſingle A&s,but the whole 
courſe bf their Aﬀtiens was nought, and particularly their Power, 
Rule and Government was not right. If any ſay what were the 
Prophets concerned in the Peoples wickedneſs? vſw. They were 

rofane as well as the people, as we ſhall find, Yer, 11. but be- 
ide this, the people were thus vile through cheir connivan ce, they 
did nor warn the people of their fins, bur ſootied them vp in their 
wicked courſes, and ſo were the cauſe of the peoples wickedneſs, 


i who had not been ſo vile but for them. 


2 81k & M 1 4 


11 For both * prophet f and pricft are profane 8, *0hp. 5 


which is coming upon it, d The Paſtures of the Wilderneſs or of 


*- Ciizp 
s i » 
x 
yea, * in my houſe have I found their wickedneſs 4,73 & 2. 
laich the LORD. ay 
f Thoſe, whoſe Work was to revealthe Mind of God to the Pe9- oh 
ple, and who pretended to that Office. g And thoſe that were ems ; , #Þ ; 
ployed in offering Sacrifices, end other works which belonged ti Eck - 
the Prieſtly Office, according to the Law. The whole Eccleſiaſti- I: & 2. 
cal Order, all their Miniſtry were profane, not meerly aypocritical, 309, 
but lewd, immoral and debauched. & Yea, they were grown to ©? 
that impudence, that they made the Temple, which was the Lord's 
Houſe, a Den of Thieves; a place where they committed wicked- 
neſs. Thus it was in the time GE Ely, 3 Sam. 2. 22, and more ge- 
nerally afterward, 2 Chron. 36. 14» See Chap. 7. to, 11. and Yer. 
14: of this Chapter, There is no more certain lign of a ruining Nati- 
on, than when God ſuffereth in it a lewd and corrupt Miniſtry, 
I2 Wherefore * their way {hall be unto them, 


and fall therein ;: for I will bring evil upon them, even 16. 


the year of their viſitation, ſaith the LORD p. 

z? As their ordinary courſe is wicked and ſinful, ſo they ſhal find 
that it will in the event be tothem pernicious, perilous and full of 
danger, as a ſlippry path is to them that walk in a dark Night, they 
ſhall be driven on till they fall therein. Courſes of fin may look 
ſmooth, bur they always prove ſlippery, p For I am reſolved to 
puzith their wicked courſes ; and to viſit them with my Judgments, 

12 AndT have ſeen || + folly in the prophets of Sa- || Or, -: 
maria q; they propheſiedin Baal, and cauſed my' peo- 9/74 
ple Ifrael to err r. + Hob 

q There was a time, when I ſaw folly in the Prophets that be- Conn 

longed to the Ten Tribes, whoſe chiet City was Samaria» The * Mm 
word travſlated folly ſignifies unſavory, or an abſurd thing. Our Sa» 
viour compareth wicked Miviſters to unſavory Salt, Matth. 5. 13. 
Salr that is turned fooliſh ( as the Greek work ſignifies. ) The Mini- 
ſters of God's word are, or ought to be the Salt of the Earth, to 
ſeaſon People with ſound Do&rine, and by the geod Example of an 
Holy Life ; if they be corrupr in Do&trine, or, Manners, they be- 
come wunſavoury, and the very worſt of men. Such God ſays, the 
Prophets of the Ten Tribes were, before they were carried away 
Captive. r They propheſied, pretending they had their In- 
ſtruQtions and Revelations from Baal, and 1o cauſed the Ten Tribes 
to err, which after the diviſion of the Kingdom in Fereboam's time 
were Called 7[racl in contra-diſtinction to the two "Tribes and half 
cleaving go the Houſe of David, which were called 7:4ah after the 
Name of their principal Tribe. 

14 I have ſeen alſo in the prophets of Jeruſalem 1 Or. 
[] an horrible thing /: * they commit adultery z, and rhineſs. 7 
walk in lyes« : they ſtrengthen go the hands of evil * ch:p. 


doers, that none doth return fr $3 


m his wickedneſs , 29. 2 
they are all of them unto me * as'Sodom, and the inha- SP 


bitants thereof as Gomorrha *:. 

J The word ſignifies filthineſs, ſtench, or an abominable thing, or 
things every whit as bad, in ſome kind worſe than whar I ſaw in the 
Prophets of the Ten Tribes. # They commit not Spiritual Adul- 
tery only, but Carnal Adultery, they are Whoremongers. « And 
they make it their buſineſs to inſti!) falſhoods into people, and er,” 
title me co them, and this is their Trade ; not a ſingle Act, bur 
their ordinary practice. w This 1s the great aggravation of rhe Sin 
of thoſe that occupy the place of Spiritual Guides, that they en- 
, Courage profane Men, either by their falſe Doctrine, extenuating 
' Sin, and putting a fair gloſs upon them ; or at leaſt by their mealy 
mouths fearing or forbearing to rell Sinners of their wicked Cours 
ſes; or by their wicked Examples, the moſt of People thinking 
they may do what their Teachers do, by which means Sinners. in= 
ſtead of being brought to a ſenſe of their Sins, and a repentance for 
them, are hardened in their wicked Courſes, x By this means all of 
them, either of their Prophets and Prieſts, or all of the People, ( the 
firſt ſeemeth chiefly here intended ) are become to me as contemp= 
tible, and abominable as the People of Sodom and Gommerha, though 
they were the Sons of Faron,and of the Prieſtly Order,yetliving lewd 
lives, and acting quite contrary to the end of their Holy Caliing, 
God declares himſelf to value them no more than as the vileſt of 
Men, ſuch were the Sodomites. Or by thoſe words Ged threatens 
that he would deſtroy them with as notorious a deſtruction. as he 
defiroyed Sodom and Gommorrha, Thus the compariſon is uſed, 1/2. x. 
9. and conſonant to this are the words in the next Verſe» 


I5 Therefore thus faith the LORD of hoſts concer- 


wormwood z, and make them drink the water of gall: > ; 
for from the prophets of Jeruſalem is || profanneſs gone || OF, xz 


forth into all the land a. | pocriſie. 
y Underthe term Prophets, he comprohendeth all the Ecclefiaz 
ſtical Guides of Jeruſalem at this time, whether Prieffs or Prop/.cts. 
z He threatens to feed them with wo1mweed, ſome think the werd 
IS better tranſlated Poyſon ; by Weorn:word or Pcyſon, and the watcr of 
Gall, he threatens great and fatal Judgments thar he would bring 
| upon them. a And he gives the reaſon why God would deal fo 
' ſeverly with that Order of Men, who ſeemed by their Office ard 
Imployment to have the neareſt Relation to himſelf, becauic 
they were the Fountain of wickedneſs, thoſe from whom wick- 
edneſs flowed out over the whole Land: This was either by 
their conniving at wicked Mens Sins, for fear of diſpleaſing than; 
or by teaching them Licentious DoQrine, thet gave a liberty to 
the Fleſh 3 or by their vile Lives ſetting the people parterns of Sin. 
and indeed thus it is generally, when Miniſters and ſuch as are to 
teach others, are wicked, either in their DoQrine or Practice, they 
are a Fountain of Wickedneſs; Wickedneſs fleweth from 1h: m 
to the whole City, Town, Pariſh where they are Imp'oyed : Ard 
| on the contrary it is obſerved, that where God gives a place a god 
Miniſtry, Goodneſs in one degree or other floweth from tiiem ro 
, the whole City, Town or Pariſh, 'Thovgh all are not Conve:red, 
| yet the generality are civilized and reſtrained ficm thoſe grojs and 


| brutith Immoralitics which cther p!:ccs abound with. IV] - 
ers 


JT” 2 
% » > 
Cd I” C \ = if 


. 0p, 


26 * Plal.3s. 
ſlippery ways in the darkneſs: they ſhall be driven on Ch p. 13 


ning the prophets y, Behold, I will feed them * with 5 


; ou 


s g*=6 
WAN 


14. 1 


| chip 
14+ & 


BW: 


| Ezck. 


10. £1 
ko. 2. 


| Or, /? 


* boran:ſs 


' *Toh. 1 
8 


| Aetbs 


A+ 47 Wart \ ; F AS . "i 
(haps, ANHTE. «LE : :.: eLÞ« 1s EaRow EracalVlo. obs Ar ; H. Chaps; 7% 


ers mutiook far the ſevereſt. 1ndigyation of God, Others ſin, and Mind unto People, muſt rot. be meerly om their extergal Mifi- £ 
ſhall die an their TY ; buf they reach cthers rd' break God's Cond 1 on (which yet they ou be, to have in a Church,” thir in bidir_) 
mandjhents, and have the 4ins'of many” to anſwer for, wha perith | Þut from the fair ful diſcharge of their Mitiiftry. :*TH6 Whom 
tither by their Phatteries, or loeſo Doctrine; or looſer Lives atid Ex»! Go! ſends, and who are.truly acquainted with his 'Coufiſels,” i 
Emples 1 on od Dana ide brit 964 ge i 10 1 TEaule his people to hears not their own conceits'and invenrions,bu 
cn: © 26 "Thus inh the LORD of hoſts, Hearken not'urt- [ihe Word, of theL5org. (Fol Tzndeth nons upoht any "orher Efrari 
chin 0 the wordeof he prophets thirprdphoſieunip you [5H 100) 86 Wi, yndcel i nd to ple Then ek 
14- > F<. ,n* 78 4 Fa #3 il » '- 4 0-/ 1321ITG! JiCab 15138 fy Yn ad 5 3, . of "9 Put 3 Erre j 7 wage bidet © Bl c | 
Ry be LN on | LEY, would Have made this tlcie ſrops, bubneſs and'end,'to,rur 
own licait, and not our of the'mouth of th& TORD 9. | Sinners from theig Kafol ways, 4nd, cbapgh, boſib'y ch6ir bs 
b People are under.no Religious Obligation ts hear anything but: £,0nlg not have had ſo.geod an 6 bm all,yet't] y wit lavy | " 
. the revealed W1uJl of God, and are not to obey thoſe that callto had an effec uÞ9! 1p E,£O.tUr zt em, rom their, evi "Joibgs:- SR {We 
*lfer for what that derh vor call to them; -:c Norta;liſtewre them, | 23 AmTa CH _ L Gth he LORD '3nd/not Witt 
SUP IEETEPTRTP : . . - - : IS TINT DOT. 99) "2 ad }| Fi'9%7 4---C7 © |FWoru 
the Sgope of whoſe -teaching is but to make: then vain, finfull 2 God-af; rad Ko. Sora nn, po 27:0 | 
| "YiIn;'6r' to'levelye their Souls, ms Mn is anderrin-Obligatith | | a fy LT agnerally; the, Fayadation of ci1-Lafer Men an vv fc NN 
76 Utceive bimſel8 d They pretendto- Viſions, that God hath reveal- | © - % 4 vB Bib Loa: "\ ng Hay FL2aEM Ls ke Men, 189) +7 .q5* 3 THO 
*d his 'Mind to them; #n the fame way as heuſerhite reveal fiineſelF, | s gary nor regard them. Dy. 220 A1 
Til 1444.54 | I id tn ban Colals bi fcncts tn Xa Paget } God at hand, .many underſtand Heavenz Do you mitkthitihy E 
{6 'titue Peophers ; but rhere/ is no/ſuch thing 3-itss but afietien'df; £ ENT Pr x res Cn PraNtie my. : 
ehers Gon our Mat! 7 15. gives ifthefanie was'to kijow: | are -limited/like yours, "tld, T cannot” fee there Praftices though far 
their own; our Mat: 7-'15.'gives us the ame” was to know: 7, e Pia-j- @ 6m THÞ2'" that 2 Brbgr he Ihe of gar aw; ſpits bans 
here, Ver, 0: By thiir fruits ye ſhall know-them, Ler"theirs external * OH z Me - nat 1s, from | the place of my'glorious' Reſiderics? . 
Fhers, Ver, 0: | al: O interpret the Pirticle'With'teſpe@ t& times Amt God of 


pI 


# Fd 


Fa 2 TSWHYELY -— vs A na Ws 134 HAN36/ Rs WATCH 4 9 Were + 


(= 


Mili:n be what, afd which way ie'wil}, if 'what' they reach agree ! ani ha he FLAGS TA bo 4h tie af et CTY: 
7 Vice reve Will of God, they arc if Poophens: any Be Of has MAR et Oe Fo A i 
of theſe Prizfes OC taken'norice of ? D211 4313 ©':35 13 boi 1971] = 'S Sores ant Pr 8 ER! 
regularly enough educated and, conſtituted, yet by!this ſhewed j "> ail un Goode dhe fg 26: WP Fontan tf, "li 
'Skejniſehves Falſe Propherr,. that what they coubliſhred via oe-from | yo 36.08 Joy, bjde. hind Tan ore places *thatJ 1,9 7-8. WE 
God, nbragreed kwirh bis revealed Will; chereforeghe prople were ſhall nockee him, {aich. the 1.0; D 7; .40,g0c; 1,610 hea Amos 9. INE 

| under no Religious Obligation ro hcarken to them. = ;;-.: | verand earth; ſaith: the: LORD, p2;; 50" 253-20, ads lil 

*clup. 6... 17.;Lþey, fay ſtill unto chem that deſpiſe me,, The| -p"What do cheſs Arheiſtical Priefts,/aridProphers,/ and Bedpla, » * Kings || 
= 5 L1ORD hachſaid,;*,YXe ſhall, haye. peace 4; and they. thine 7 Do chey think'chir I, who am + Godrof pare; oycaitboney f...7 " 

Zn, Dyrumes-orery one cha walkethaſcece [moginarion| Man, ltd ee why Doli opp 1119: 

10. Zach. of his ct par f, No.Gvil thgll pomp you you. | gidbas they de.3:(Dgaheraviok afar], do ad Faded Sicqct | 

} Jo. 2. _- .e Lewd andcorrupt Minilters, arcan hatred and. avemination 1n! them ? can any; lijde themſc]ves.out .of.my, ſight? {#11 Han | TT8 

| Or fub- Vis houſe of rhe Lord, to all ferious' good People, and' are” theres} garch, n0t Mi at Jay v7 ode Te Th Of LMI fie y 

' borun:ſs. ore obliged to make themfelves aParty bf thbſe"that'are Nike them-il fameniicy of my Being © which, as it canner — oy tg. I, 

| 5 © Cote Moat are "xe them'f] Immenticy of my Being ;, whigh, 25 it, cannot ed by 

ſelves, whoſe favour they cannot have without indulging them in! 3ny,;19 it is.ſhur our. he ——_ CELEES 
Pn rb oy aleort eu poet of] 1125 have heard what cs prophets Tad, Hig gig 
-Men, iwho:have nb:patience; of:beiny diaily-alarmd! with hearing of! hae: los tt f | Condo I ” -X , wy 
ithie! Wrathrof God: due, :and liks\tro-come upon, them for their |1uns; ” EE 'lyes:in my: name, HY Ngs E LaVe 4 LY dy: 
If Hetice. they promiſe-evil to thoſe that.,walk according tothe Coun- have'dreame EEE + 2:00 43i00t 1jorit 76 roars Sica 
Av14 of ities own'beatt,!that is finfully, for |Gen,. 6,51 Every ime oo Fiſiens 4d "Dream, were riv, ft ways by \which"ander the 
-$itiation of thi: thoughts. of mans. heart, 1i3.91ly,evil,. aud! #hat i aonctunally;:} Law, God made himmftlf'knigwn” fold rs his Br 19; ih ; 
Hence a ſinful courſe is very often expreſſed in Scripture. \under tlic ſometimes, berg ' wake,” t6 hedfiia Voite,; lomievimes; at- 


Eo arwaics 


Ss 4 
a... 
py 


be circtimler! 


ahis Ndtiowof walking | afrer the Ipiaginations pf, cur} owhj haart ;j teaded, with andbproceedingupddy/ſomd vikble Appqarinceſomdy 

Gs Df 395 19el up a 15;eaoft, 4n prophgcy's. Fa, Gb. .3- 37: apd rims not : [a orher tames-capling them, being a fleep, tg dorms  ._.. « 

7..24, and 9-114, and. 13. te. 1d 16. 12, and 18. 1z. Hence'a Re-| and in their 1 £"D, p5v eat tot Fxn aS, 1a dreain, 'wha bs. -£ 1.958 

Ii jos Walid ls called a'$/1 wp 6: ''None” have aworſe guide | Was they ſhould declare 464 publifh 16 ths Peopld: PheAſe File Pro- oP 
Tir actions! in their! lapſed iftate; before Regeneration, 'than | phers ſpeaking/whar cams Gnto/their.owf Beats) land faicedidebtr 


? 


| *Joh. 15. th&ir own hearth; | 0 og oils gu 1h hut i 11114 {| own Luſts, ertte Luſts of a debauched Peoplatts whomabeyrſpokt, 
| 3%. fam 27,28, Dor. 1 cho hah; figod, ap the. [1cpunle]. of the | wad pretend;thae God tad remlcA th chore Shay te golyilhe 
| NOr, fee 7 ORD, and hath perceived and heard, his word? who ed,.3n a, Dreamy, ;not In the,mean tame.confiderivg God rok pogige 

aet, 3 > A of theſe their-little Args by; which, ghay,, cheated; ther People, . Bye 
| hath, marked; his-word,;.and:hgard #g,!1 1.11 +: - || airh. God; I ama Godi:that koow afat; of 45; well, as 2t hand, and 
5-1 g Who: beſides us hath known the 'tounſe] of ;the: Lond ? Arro-|(Ihave;theard whazithey: lays propoeſting Lyes 2s. 1 me, all PIF+ 
rgating'ro themſcives a:fellowſhip, and acquaintance with the Mirid ;tending that 1;had im-,Nreams-xryaled them xoithein.. 1, 2... \ i 
-and\ Will of Gofl- Or ( which! I ſhovJd/rather-judge-the (fence )}..., 1,61 fow: long ſhall. bis be: in:the heart ,.o the _ |. 

th ; 


which of thoſe/P3ophets; that propheſig ſuch. terrible; things again | - - | 

*ebis Ciry-isa PrivyCounſetor to G07 The: words faem: rather rol! P!IETS-hak; UW rear wy evrf, 0 yea; they: are prophets of 

be the words of the: Falſe Prophets, enheriarrogatirig to themſelves deceits ofitheir own heater! (6} Sol nei W601 31217q 

| : zipeculiar acquaintance withi'Godz:and-fellowthip with kim, from * 32, Wil) thafe Prophets aver have dons ;Hive:they nordgcayed 

| whence they knew his Mind; or-mocking at Jeremy,: and other.truef] People long enovgh myth; thear Lyes, and the feepi of Jho gon 
"Prophets, , as arrogating- 16 themſelves, fuck a knowledge)of thelf hearts, and;thas nag. ynwaruly,.and by involintary.miſtake, bur of 
ind, and Coupfelyol, God, ps inflecd. rbey had nar, chen;(.a5 ſoment Tex purpole, 3rbong 18.8 ee Heare, theie porp ard defign to do 

1 | think ) the words of Jeremiah denying them to; have Trood in Godsff it, Some join 1t-t9 the fo A Aa and make the this; 


IE CENTS 


Coonſtls, bets fi! kita bis Mid 1d Will Dhis in all Ages!} Do theſe Prophets, that publiſh Lyes and'thelDe6its6F their H4r't, 
Kith'been the þt:Qice'of corrupt Prophers and Miniſters to/charge for. my revealed? Will, ehink rd CHE4b my Fer I ah ip tk 
thoſe Servants'df Gdd, who ive Fairhfully: publiſhed the Will) : cxule iny People co forgermy Naimie 2 as is folldweth id che nag 


3 1 


” 
_ - 


i 
| 
|! 
I; 
18 2 
LG! 
[f 
if 
#Þ 
: | 
4:18 
nt 
q! 
"N! 
0 
a 
h 
1 
ll 
| 
'PF; 
W 
qt ! 
.'F. 
{i 
| 


| God againſt” Sinners, as, making 'too bold with'God's'Tecret Coun-'f, Varies 1:00 ES Eos te ite tet on I s 
| * chap. 48, though rhey publiſh! nothing ibuv God s'revealed Will. *» |f'"' 27; Which-chink.to'.cauſe my pedpte"te forger' tn} Mie 4 


5. 32- {19 Behold, *'a'whittwind"of the' LORD is gone|} name / byitheir. dreams. which chey..tell.cvery mango 7; 254 
| forth infury b,, even a grievous whichwind,,. it hall falſt-jis'neipubeur ir,” * as cheir- farhers: have forgotten bnay * ?* 


| grievoully upon. the head of che, wicked 4... (51s 211142 [I riamne' de Bad By” ) 19.e2120g17 510m oa 91k Dior i} co 

| : [6A fevere Judgment of God, that ſhouid. r:ſembleoa'wirkwind \Þ Thac is, £0 forget me, and thoſe rhings by which Thave mad 
For the ſuddenand urter deſtruftions. that it; ſhall bringy-SeeChap|Þ my telf known unto them, ray Word; in thy W114.” By the r_. 
30;23524,'\' The jkme word 15, e)ſewarre tranſlated aftorm,: Pfall| Dr s which they, tell abroad «very one,to his Neighbour; - i 
(83. 11 $11. 799 its 54. Ponab 11:44 Tris called a; whichwind of the Lard 1Þ 0 &y pe Revelations whicht had in'their 11-2p\made thro them : 

g .eitheri\ro denote the greatnels of at;as Pſel.26.6.ar-to let us know tha bur & indeed Lyesy and aothing burthe] Deveits of the owh 

! -the Judgment |came-forch' from Grd, and: was, of his fending..s And Hearts. 4Sothatlin effden theycare Baal's Phigfis x for as Beal's Pr  -. . 
(whatever theſe flatrermg: Teacktrs ſaid, it ſhould! fall upon: wifked pers; by, publiſhing: is pretended Revelatians. oh Baal, ſeguced ©! 


{Men, fo as they, ſhould have no. peace, buc:evil fliouid: moſt cer The People; from the;Sexyio6 and; Obedicnce: he. true. God y'fo ff 5? 
| | P A £ JG 7 y : 
:tainky come upon them: HK 21H 63 5-1 CL. SJ OT ON 135 & Fit | - the ©, by telling their pretended Dreams, uc | M- p att ir . 
20 The * Anger of the LORD ſhall not return, un-|. Obedience 40 God in what be rexpaled) ro She y, the ;true, Pro- 
«it he'have executed, and{ till: he have performed the ; phers; they agree'd in x che Eck Sn Spe cing of the Peo e + Heb: 
ny _—_E irc 4 ih the latter days ye ſhall con-'! & , though they differed in'rhe Meat; ! rhis one retending'R5-T - . 
thoughts - his -"_ + 1h the Hatter "days Ye Mall Con; ne hs Bot Bel} the beherfiom:/rhexris/Golb dy rheir Dre: with who® 
Hdericpertealy';7 7 VS PT TED ie COP Mes Dig axgn bas 2m 10 130346) rom excl cog £06 hw 1 Se 
k Ir 1s PROS called a continuing whirlwind, | Chep. 130® 23'7 The 28 The prophet that hath'a ditarh Þ, ee tell | 
!P;opher ſpraks'of the- judgment. as of a "eſſenger,” which. coming |, a dream:;-afid he thathach my word, let him lpeakmy 
| from God, ſhbuld not return till it. bad donelivs Errand,/ and exeeut-} ona Eimchfully x.3mwhbatss the chatt,to-che wheat, faich 
| pd whas: is cars for, jevers whatever. God had refojved je thould ef} ne yp Ew Stir boon aver? ned 
e&t. Men are ready to flatter th-mſelves, tha” they ſhall eith ha TJ 413 10 coTOW 917 DI3197T2q 919 ICE. 
out=ride or out-live che ſtorms of Di joe, Vengeance; nof faith-t ie] » Nota ivine Dream 3 2 Rev? 50g Whic Foe aha £o.him 
 - . Prophet) the Anger bf the Lord Ki bring 't6 paſs wharfeover the | in, his.ilcep, 1.25 appeareth by the fo = yt OF 4 ar CA ES: wh 
$*,0 | 4; God! ie pÞAnd thouph you/will net! iow believe ar, | Drea” and the Word of the Lord, ') butifany [Maa har \ dreamed. 
10 | Juſt Wall of-God 12:3) PAnb afough yowrelll hophonnagiene nh | gs OUT ler bio. tell it 3s 4 Draft 3 fet him. nox elite 
gs ns or ns oe Hs ee then og God ©d it” x And Tet, him to, whom” TRAv8 ravealed' my Wil, 
Shall bg) 00, are: (; which js the utya\ folly of Sinners ). tl IP | publith and. declare That in/all Trurk' add” Faickfilneſs, nor 5d- 
"hey? WONG PONCE. ( hets. vet they 'i4 | Jing bis own Fancies. of Dicams to it, ">'Gir. 2. 17. x Pi,.2. 4. 
39. 246 _--21 *T have not ſent. theſe prophets, yet they ran; ans EO ooiere 4 2s muck, Difereace be- 
Chap. T have, not ſpoken, unto them, Ye. they propheſied. ryan my. Will ard eheir Preis, us rhers is betwixe the Char 
"4 Ma < .\ 223. But if they :had, ſtood. in my {py bo om fe the fork ; The one ty Jus tb. niake Pood for Up Soul, as 
*/- 153 & a / tp: | words mw; then 'they, Wheat doth for the Body; the other 15 or no yalue:” the'one 4 4:2. 
29. 9. cauſed my' people” t6 one ekes it ay — "1F 4 my Word is/of a {olid/abiding. Subſtance's rhe other 35 Tight and 
os uld Re apa them, LOm Envir Evi Way, an ina airy, and caſiely ſcattered by every Wind. , : .. 1970491 ,; 
tne. eV: [s; .T JEIT,C O1NS3 A. 11.47 MJ) y ; 7-1 T7 TLEITS: f "= —— - & 1 ' ', 7 a! * E i 5 
on Theſe falſe. Prophers did, nor, propheſic withoun the, Approba.| 29 15 not ay - ——_ ws ——_ _ gn 1 
Zion. of the. Rulers, ofthe Egcteſiaſiacal Stare, ;amorigdt che rey and like; #9 PRE. . 72.55 ICAL BY uh © £ 
| their gogrupt eſtate, buf 1 they. 8; 300 ye" B9tbe leng of God-! nt f 
| <Ths Judgment of a Divine Miſhog tor the Revelation of God | * 


{ 


— TOE 2 5 3 4 ; 

PIEC85.8 » = "1 - = 1 i * F 4 ; 1 4 : \ | - -— + - 
) Wy Hit) Yi t ; ) Y _ : DTs , F> %..P wel S439 143 Ji% 1 GE - 

- v [ \ ; (ON SE; + 3 y 4 c \Y DS 4 : J p C % FH 


oo 


Shap. XXl11. of 
| 2 Full of Life and Eificacy, Jo» 6 63. Fev. 4. 12. 
thar warmet 


like a Fire 


break:th hard Hearts, Ochers think, 


compared ro 
Fect that ut 


mer, and fo think this Text well expounded by the Apoſtle 2 Cor. 2. 
16 Certain it is, that God s Word is like fire in borh Sences3 no 
Words of Men have an Eff-& and Efficacy like God s Words: nce 
thing bur that takerh hold vpon the Conſcience, and hath ſuch an 
Eff:& upon the hearts of Men. No Word ſhall ſo Certainly and 
Infallibly be juftified and made good. : 

o Therefore behold, * I am againſt the prophets, 


faith the LORD, that ſteal my words, every ons from 


his neighbour #: 

# There are various Opinions, as to what the Prophet meaneth 
here by thoſe Propherts-rhar Fole the Lords Woras from their Neighs 
* bours , ſome, by their Neighbour, underſtanding the true Prophets, 
from whom they. ſtole thoie forms of Speech, Teus jazth the Lord, or, 
the word of the Lord, or, The burden of the Lord. Or ſome of the mat- 
rer which they Proph<ſied, thouga they mixed it with their own 
Lyes'and Deccits. Others by Neighbours underſtanding their Af- 
' Tociates, think that theſe Falſe Prophers conſpired together what to 
- Fay to deceive the People, and ſo ſtole what they ſaid one from ano- 
-* ther. Or, the generality of the People from whom they are ſaid 
© £6 ſteal the Lord's Word, becauſe they withheld it from them 1in- 
* jurioufly. Or;by their Arts and Flarteries brought Men onr of Jove 
' with:ior fear of the Words of the Lord, which had by the true Pro- 

ets'be:n del;-ered ro them. 


** Deur. 
18. 20. 
Chap. 14+ 
Is, 15. 


{| Heb. 

that ſmooth 

their 
Fongue, 


that [| uſe their tongues b, and ſay, He faith c. 

b Some think the H:b. Words were more properly tranſlated 
Pmorth their tongues ; V2. The Engliſh Annotations. ©c Bu: the next 
Words ſeem to aſſure us, that the Crime for which God here by 
the Prophet refl-&erh upon the Falſe Prophets, was not ſo muck 
their fla:tering People, and my torhem ſuch ſmooth things as 
pleaſed them, as their intitl.ng © God to their Lyes, ſaving, He 
that-is, The Lord ſaith, So it may he, though the Word might be 
tranflated, ſmooth, yet ir is here better tranſlated Uſe, 


.+. 32 Behold, 1 am am againſt them that propheſie falſe 
dreams 4, ſaith the LORD, and do tell them, and 
cauſe my people to err by their lyes, and by their 
* lightneſs e, yet I ſent them not, nor commanded 
-them : therefore they ſhall not profit this people art all, 
faith-cthe LORD f: "H þ | 
- 4 Taatis, Falſe things under the notion of things which I have 
"revealed tinto them in their ſl:ep. e By Lightneſs here ſome 
awnd-rftand Volubilicy, and Smoothneſs of tongue and Speech : 
Others, Laciviouſneſs : Others, Levity and Inconſtancy : The laft 
'-ſecrheth moſt probably the Sence» f I ſent them not ( ſaith God ) 
therefore they ſhall nct profi- : None can expe& God's bleſſing upon 
their Miniſtry, that are nct called and ſent of God into the Miniſtry. 
33 T And, when rnis peopie, or the prophet, or a 
prieſt ſhall ask thee, ſaying, What 3s the burden of the 
LORDy ? thou ſhalt then ſay unto them, What burden? 
' I will even forſake you, ſaith the LORD 6. 
£ The true Prophets, to let the People know how little pleaſing 
it was to them to be the Meſſ:ngers of Gods T hreatnings, to des 
 nounce his Judgments, uſually thus began their Propheciesof thar 
nature, calling them Tie burden of the Lord, as may be ſeen Iſa.13. 1. 
and r5., tr, and 22. 1. Hab, 1, 1, Zcch. 9g. 1+ Mal. 1. r. The profane 
People, and falſe Prophets, and corrupt Prieſts, not loving co hear 
their doom, would ordainarily mock at the true Prophets; and in 
deriſion a*k them, what was the burden of the Lora? what 1]]l News 
they had forthem next? bh God bids the Prophet tell them, Thar 
God would forſake them, either as to the Spirit of Propheſie, 
they ſhould have no more Prophets, or ( which is more probable ) 
as fo his ſpecial Providence, by which he had watched over, pros 
rected, and hitherto defended them ; a Burdin heavy enough, Heſ. 
9 12. | | ; 
34 Andas for the prophet, and the prieſt, and the 
people that ſhall fay, The burden of the LORD 3, I 


will even f puniſh that man and his houſe &. 
£ That is, Than fhall in derifion ſay thus, mocking at my 
Threatnings and Jadgments. & 1 will not only puniſh him, bur 
his whole Family. ; : 
35 "Thus ſhall ye ys every one to his neighbour, 
and every one to his brother, What hath the LORD 


anſwered ?. and, What hath the LORD ſpoken /. 

Z I will have you ſpeak more reverently of me ard my Word to 
my Prophets. ' | | 

35 And the burden of che LORD ſhall ye mention 
no more m: for every mans word hall be his burdens: 
for ye have perverted the words of the living God o, of 
the LORD of hoſts our God p. 


" ## Not in Scorn and Deriſion, as not believing there were any 
ſuch Judgments as they threaten, nor hardly as if I ſen you no 
| other Meſſages but Burdens. » Theſe falſe and trreverent Speeches 
| which are in every man's mouth, ſhall be burdenſome to them, bes 
ing ſuch, as ſhall bring down divine Vengeance apon them, »o Be- 
cauſe you have derided, or miſinterpreted the words of God, the 
TivingGod.p The ſim of which is the more aggravated againſt you, be= 

cauſe he is the living,mighty God, arid becauſe he harh been ourGod, 
© 37 Thus ſhalc chou fay to the prophet 9, What hath 


the LORD anſwered thee ? and what hath the LORD 
ſpoken, 7 | 
- 9 Tomy true Prophet. You ſhall ſpeak to them reverent!y, and 
, as becomech you. 


28 Bur ſich ye ſay,the burden of the LORD ; there-' 


, * Zeph. 3. 
; & 


- ABUEERS ST == a4 at Ant vt 


h, and healech. ant m-:Irethy, and conſumeth the Droſs- 


s And like an Hammer that bre:keth the Flints, fo my Word 
that the Word is here 


Fire, and to an Hammer, becauſe ef the certain ef- 
ſhould have upon thoſe that wauld not obey it, 
' to burn them up like fire, and brezk them in piece® like an ham- 


21 Behold, I am againſt the prophets, ſaith the LORD, , 


—_— "” # . PR_ 


the burden of the LORD ». and T have ſent unto you, 
ſaying, ye ſhall not ſay, The burden of th? LORD <.. 

7 Becauſe you go on in your ſcoffing, and deriding my Werd 
and my Prophets. / And that when I havecxprefly forbidden you 
thoſe profane Speeches, or that deriding ſorm of Speech z adding 
further contempt to your former profaneneſs. 

39 Therefore behold, I, even I, will utterly forget 
you?, and I will forſake you «, and the city that Tgave 
you and your fathers w, and caſt you out of my pre- 


ſence. x. | 

£ | will forget you as.to my AﬀeQticn, and that is more than if 
all your friends forgat you. There is a great Emphaſis in the dou- 
bling of the Pronun, 1, even I, « I will forſake you as. to the pre 
ſence of my ſpecial gracious Providence. w And do not flatter 
your ſelves that I will not do it, becauſe of your Fathers, or becauſe 
I gave this City unto your Fathers for that very City I will withdraw 
my ſpecial Providence from, and that Lard, which heretofore was 
cailed, Toe Land which the Lord thy God c urcrh for, upon which the eyes 
of the Lord are always from rhe beginning of the year, even to the end of 
the year, Deut. 11-12. x And I will caſt both City and People out 
of my gracious preſence. So as I will no longer do them gocd as 
I have done. 

40 And I will bring an everlaſting reproach upon 
you y, and a perpetual thame which ſhall not be forgot- 


ten Z, 

3 And you ſhall be a reproack, and that not for a few days but 
for ever. z And a penal ſhame, which neither you, nor theic thay 
fee or hear of it ſhall forget. See ſuch Expreſſiuns, Chap. 20. ir. 


CH AP. XXIV. 


Und-r the Type ef good and bad Figs, 1, 3. He: foreeſheweth the Red 
turn of ſome from Captivity, qq—7. and the Ru:ne of Zedekiah, 
and the reſt, 8, 10. 


HE ſum of what God by his Prophet revealeth in this Chaps 

rer 15, that he would deal more graciouſly with thoſe care 
,ried into Captivity, with Jecoziah the ſon of Jehoiakim ; of which 
read, 2 Kings 24+ 12+. 2 Ehron. 36. 20. than with thoſe that ſhould 
afterward be carried into Caprivitry with Zcdekish, This the Pro« 
phet hath revealed to him ina Viſion of two Baskets of Figs, as fol 
loweth. ' 


1 The LORD (hewed me, and behold, two baskets 
of figs were ſet before the Temple of the LORD «, 
afrer that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had car- 
ried away Captive Jeconiah the ſon of Jehoiakim the 
king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the 
carpenters and ſmiths from Jeruſalem, and had brought 
,them to Babylon 6. 


a Some think theſe two Baskets of Figs were ſuch as the people 
had brought for their firſt Fruits, becaule they are mentioned as ſect 
before the Temple. But this might be no more than a Y:{on, or an 
appearance of rwo Baskets. b The time of this Viſion was ſome® 
time betwixt the carrying away of Jeconiah, of which we read, 
2 K'gs 24. 12, Oc. and - 2-Chron. 36. 10. and the carrying away of 
Zedekish bis Uneley which was 11 Years after: In 2 Kings 24. 16. 
There is a particular mention of the King of Babylen's carrying 
away the Craftſmen and the Smiths- # thouſand. | 

2 One basket had very good figs,even like the figs that 


hgs, which could not be eaten, f they were ſo bad 9g. 

c God afterwards explaineth to the Prophet, and he to the King's mſs 
Houſe, the ſignificancy of this Viſion. The Figs firſt ripe are uſu» * * 
aily beſt : By theſe good Figs, as will appear by the following Verſes 
are intended, Feconiah or Jehojakin, with the 10000 mentioned, 
2 Kings 24. 14+ and the 5000 mentioned, Yer 16. which went with 
him into Captivity. d By the other Figs which were very bad, and 
not to be eaten, are ſignified Zedekiah, and the reſidue of the people 
carried with kim into Captivity. Some may obje&, that Jecon!ah, 
and the People then carried away, were wicked encugh, why elſe 
were they carried away, and being ſc, how are they compared uns 
to good Figs ? Anſw. Though they were bad, yet they might be 
comparatively good, this people for the 11 Years they continued 
in- their own Land, after that their Brethren were carried away, 
not only continuing in their former courſes, but ſtill growing worſe 
and worſe 2. They ſeem nor to be called good or bad Figs with 
reſpe& ro their Manners or Quality, bur in reſpe& to what God 
intended to do ro them, viz. to ule them as bad Figs are uſed, not 
fit ro be eaten. 


3 Then ſaid the LORD unto me, What ſeeſt thou 
Jeremiah e? and I ſaid, Figs; the good figs, very 
good ; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, 
they are ſo evil. 

e Ged having cauſed the Prophet to have ſuch a viſible obje& 
appear to him, ask'd him, what heſaw ? as Fer. 1. 11+ 

: 4 Again the word of the LORD came unto me; 
aying, I 
- Thus faith the LORD, the God of Iſrael g, Like 


————— 


are firſt ripe c ; and the other basket had very naughty + Hed? 
for bads 


theſe good figs : ſo will I acknowledge || them that are || Or 
carried captive of Judah bh, whom I have ſence out 92v4- 


of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for heir 


good 7. 

g Who havepower to do what pleaſe, and who yet am in Coe 
venant with /ſrael, and have a kindneſs fer the Seed of my Servant 
Jacob, hLook as thou approveſt of one of theſe Baskets of Figs, 
ſoI doapprove of thoſe thar were carried away Captive with Fecox 
nia, repenting of their finful Courſesz and accepting of that pu« 
niſhmenc of their iniquity. «s Though Nebuchaduexzar carried 
them away, it was by Commiſſion from me ; ſo that though he 
carried, yer I ſent them, For their grod, which words may either 
refer to the laſt menticned words, intimating that Ged in ſending 
them away aimed at either their Spiritval gocd, to brirg them ru 


fore thus faith the LORD, Becauſe you fay this word, 


Repentance, 


Chan. XXIV f © 


RC RE IE RN RENTS 


as as tb EI. 


WO rams 4 
i Fs Se Ig Ot ATEIOR ay 


a+ 


* Ch: 
29, 1 


* Cha 
43» & 


T Heb 
remov 
07 Vex 


<Zaciphnk NE mt 


ph -— a Kea 7 


+ $O. Go 


ESD: MY 
Ciiey's ak _ 


[ , and a 3:1 452nt of their fins: or their tems 
p 'ra] good, they being only quierty Jed away, withour rhe Mite. 
ries of Famine, Fire and Sword, beſides carrying away ; which 
rhoie who remained, and were afterwards carried away with Zedes 
k:4/2, Experienced: Or elle th:y may be referred to the former 
worus, I will acknowledge them for their good, that is, I will 
ſhew them fevour, being of the number of thoſe who were not lead» 
ers t» fin, tut led away by the 311 Example of others, and who be» 
ing carried away grew ſenſible of their fins by which they provok- 
ed me, and ſa ccepted of the punithment of their Iniquities- 
6 For I] will ſet mine eyes upon them for good &, 
* Chap. and] will bring them again to this land Z, and * I will 
33-7-x build them, and not pull the down; and 2 will plant 
+-+ 1% them, and not pluck the up m. 

k The Soul looking out at the Eye, diſcovereth its Inclinations, 
and affe&tion, whether of Love, or Wrath. Hence we read of 
God's ſetting his Eyes upon people tor evil, Amor 9g. 4. as here of 
his ferting his Eyes upon them for good. Or elſe it may lignifie 
God $1&tt1ag himſelf ro do them good, as a Man when he tets upon 
doing a thing, ſets his Eyes upon it 1n order thereunto- ! Some of 
them probably returned before the end of the Captivity, ſome ar 
the end of the 70 Years 9 The meaning of theſe Metaphorical 
expreſſions is, I will profper them, and provide for them. We read 
2 Kings 25. 27« that Evil-Merodath, King of Babylm, in the 375th 
Year of the Captivity of Jehijekin, lifred his Head up our of Priſon, 
ſpake kinaly to kim, &c. but this Prophecy was alſo fultilled in Da- 
niel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Mordecai, and others, who are thought to be 
carried away with Jeconiah, or the Prophecy may be underſtqod of 
the Poſterity of thoſe wiio wereat rhis time carried away. 

7 And I will give theman heart *to know me, that 
I am the LORD », and they ſhall be # my people, 
Chap, 32. and I will be their Gods: for they ball return unto 


39. me with their whole heart p. 
Ezck. 11 # Under the term know me, is here ( as in many other Texts ) 
19. & 36, comprehend-d Faith, Love, Obedience, all thoſe morions of the 
26, 27 Soul which rationally ſhoutd follow a right comprehending of God 
+ Chap. in Mens knowl:dge. 0 I will be a God in Covenant with them, as 
30. 22,.& IT will fulfil what I have promiſed them, ſo they ſhall do what is 
31. 33+ & their dury to me. p For or when or after that they ſhall return to 
32. 38+ me, nor feignedly, but with their heart, not partially, but with 
their whole heart. This is promiſed asan effeQ of ſpecial grace, 
. not of the meer good inclination of their natural Wills, for to the 
words 1 will give, in the beginning of the Verſe, muſt be unders 
ſtood oth.rwife God gives ſuch an heart no more to one Man 
than to another. 
8 © And as the evil * figs, which cannot be eaten, 


TY LESS 
IKiOw C& 


» - - . A * h, -* \ 
P 272 _il $$; Py 1 vt 


* Deut. 


2 WP» they are ſo evil: ( furely thus faith the LORD ) $0 

; will Igive Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, 
: and the reſidue of Jeruſalem that remain in this land, 
— , and * them that dwell in the land of Egypt 9. 


q Whirher it is probable many of the Jews had fl:d, upon the 
coming or noiſe of the coming of the King of Babylon, as they had 
done before, 1/a. 30. 2- and 31. 1. 

+ Heb. fr 9 And I wijl deliver them 7 ro * be removed into 
removing all the kingdoms of the earth, for their hurt, to be a re- 
or Vexati- proach, and a proverb, a taunt, and a curſe in all 


* D places whither I thall drive chem 7. 
23 _— r The Lord by his. Propher expreſſeth thoſe tremendous Judg- 
' 5 ments which he had d. ſigned to bring upon this wicked Prince 
3 Kin and People in the words of Moſes the Man of God, as well becauſe 
2 S* the Jews had a great Reverence ' pretend=dliy at leaſt ) for Moſes, 
Ly," how little ſever they had for Jeremiah : as to let them fee, thar 
5. 20. What the Lord here threatned, and ſudd<oly would bring to 
Chap. 15. paſs, was but a juſt accompliſhment of what he before had tbrears 
4 P- ” ned in his Law, by which they oughr to have taken warning. The 


ſum is, he would make them a common Scoff, and By-word, that 
their Miſery ſhould be a common Proverb, and when Men woulJd 
Curſe one atother, they ſhould wiſh chem like Zedekiah and the Jews. 
10 And 1 will lend the ſword, the famine, and the 
peſtilence amongſt them, till they be conſumed from 
off the land. that I gave unto them and to their fathers/. 
{ Many of them ſhall not live to b- carried into Captivity, but 
ſhall die miſerably in their own Land, if nor by the Enemies Sword, 
yet by the Famine and the _Peſtilence, which two things ordinarily at- 
tend Jong Sieges. By one of theſe three ſore Judgments of God 
chey ſhall be conſumed out of the Land, and ſhall nor hold it by 
the Title of God s gift of it to ther Fathers. No gifts of God, except 
thoſe of ſpecial Grace, are perpetuities ; but either given, Quame 
aiu bene ſe geſſirint, ſo long as Men behave themſelves well in the 
uſe cf them ; or, Durante bene=placite, during God s good Will and 


Pleaſure. : 
CH A P. XXV. 


Their Diſubedience to the Prophets reproved, 1,—7. The ſeventy Tears 
of Captivity foreteld, 8,—11. and after that the Deſtrution of 
Babylon, 12,,——14. By # Cup of Wine is foreſhewen the De- 
Fruction of all Nations, 15, 33- The howling of the Shepherds 
34» z8. 


THE word that came to Jeremiah the Prophet con- 
cerning, all the people of Judah, in the fourth, 
year of Jehojakim the ſon of Joſiah king of Judah &, 
that was the firſt year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Ba- 


bylon 5b. 

a The fourth Year of Jehojakim, was ſeven Years and odd Months 
before Jeconiah or Jehojakin his Son was carried into Captivity, as 
appears from 2 Kings 21. 36. and Chap. 24. 8, i< and 18 Years 
before the taking of the City, 'and rhe :nore general Captivity ; 
which arguerh that this Propnecy is miſplaced, ..nd ſet after the 
former, whereas in order, of tim? ir was 16 57 15 Years before it. 
b This is ſaid to be rhe firſt Year of Nevuchadnezzar ( caiied by Pro- 
tomy, Nabipsllaſſar. )- Tr is ſaid, Dan. 1+ 1. that t iis  Nebuchadrezzar 
Came up un the third Year of Jehojekim 3 to which isanſwered. Thar 


6 8 EB M 1. 8 


the firſt Year of Neburhadneen as Reign muſt Þ2 underfiocd of his 
abſolute Reign, which concurred partly with the third, partly with 
the fourth Year of Jevojakim; they {ay hz was before a ſharer in tke 
Kingly Goverament with his Father, but this was the firſt Year, 
thar he had the Name of King intirely given unto kim. | 

2 The which Jeremiah the prophet ſpake to all the 
people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jeruſa- 
lem, faying c, | 

c That is the word concerned them all, and he ſpake ir to ſo 
many of them, as he met with in any publick aſſembly at Hieru/a- 
lem, or elſewhere. 

3 From the thirteenth hear of Joſiah the ſon of 
Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that js the 
three and twentieth year, d the word of the LORD | 
hath come unto me, and I have ſpoken unto you riſing. © . WIE 
early, and ſpzaking * but ye have not hearkned e. * Chap. |} MORN 

da We read Chaps 1. 2. that Jeremiah began to propheſie in the 1! 7 8,1 
thirteenth Year of Jofiab. Joſiah reigned thirty one We 2 Kings "4 | 
22, 1+ ſo that taking in the thirteenth Year, Jer:miah propheſicd & 
ninteen Years during the Life of Joſiah, to which adding the four of '* 


(| 

I 
Jehojakim's Reign it maketh twenty three. e Theſe twenty three an - : # 0646 
5 A: | \ 
x 

2 


Years ſaith the Prophet I have been a Preacher to you, and I have 
not been negligent of my Work, but like Men that get up early in | 
the Morning to diſpatch their buſineſs, ſo have I been in che diſs _ 
charge of my Propherical Office. : | 
4 And the LORD hath ſent unto you all his ſervants [0717 
the prophets, * riſing early, and ſending them, but ye * Chaps Bu | 
have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear f.. 7: 3- 25 
f Noram I the only Prophet whom the Lord hath ſenc you, and & 29* 19 
whom you have negle&ed and deſpiſed, God hath ſent you many FLINT 
more, and you have deſpiſed as many as he hath ſent, rhough the 
Lord hath made it his buſineſs to ſend you one after another from 
time to time. This contempt of the Lord's Meſſengers is made the 
proximate cauſe of God's Wrath coming upon this people, till 
there was no remedy, 2 Chron. 36. 16, | r- 
5 They faid, * Turn ye again now every one, from * 2 Kings 
his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and '7- 23- :\WR 
dwell in the land that the LORD hath given unto you Glap, 1h pHOUWAE 
and to your fathers, for ever andeverg. © . - : jc - 351MM 
g The ſubſtance both of their, and my Sermons hath been to Jonah 3« {lil 
perſwade you to leave off thoſe ſinful courſes wherein you have $. Willt.1 
lived, and which you might have amend:d by vertue of that com- © Fil 
mon Grace which I did nordeny you. We have not differed in our 
Do&rine, to the praftice of which you have alſo been incouraged 
both by them and me with an aſſurance from God that if you did 


: 
: 


! 
: 
i 


: 
| 


it, you ſhould enjoy this good Land, which the Lord promiſed and 
gave to you and your Fathers, and you have now poſſeſſed from 
Age to Age. = 

6 And go not afterother gods þ to ſerve them,nor to 
worſhip them z,and provoke me not to anger with the 


works of your hands &, and I will do you no hurt L. 

þ Idols which indeed are ro Geds,but ſo called by Idolaters. i Fo 
pay any divine homage unto them.& And proyoke me net to anger 
by Idols, which are the Work of Mens hands, ( no uncreared Be 
ings.) Or more generally ayy Works which are contrary to the 
Law of God. 1 If you do this I will by my Providence do you ne 
harm, you ſhal! yet enjoy your own Land and proſper. 
7 Yet ye have not hearkned unto me s, faith the 
LORD, that ye might provoke me to anger with the 


works of your hands » to your own hurto,. - : 

1 Ye heard me, and other the Lord's Prophets thus ſpeaking to 
you, bur you did not obey, and hearken. » As if you had done it 
on purpoſe to incenſe me againſt you, who am of my ſelf flow to 
wrath, and muſt be provoked to execute vindicative Juſtice by 
Mens own wicked Works, o Which do not otherwiſe aff:&, or hurs * 
me, bat are to their hurt who do them. x 


8 4 Therfore thus ſaith the LORD: of hoſts, Be- 
cauſe ye have not heard my words p. br. 

> Thar is becanſe you have not hearkned to, and obeyed my 
words ; for it is manifeſt they had heard Jeremiah and the othes 'f 
Prophets | SL | £1 I | 

'9 Behold, I will ſend and take * all the families of * Chap: | 
the north, ſaith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the +: 15+ 
king of Babylon my ſervant q, and will bring them 
againſt this land, and againſt the inhabitants thereot 7, 2 
and againſt all theſe nations round about /, and will « Chip? 
utterly deſtroy them, and * make them an aftoniſh- 18. 16, 
ment, and an hifling, and a perpetual deſolatians. - - 

q I will putit in the heart of ail thoſe Kings, whoſe Tertitories 
lie Northward of Judes, and particularly inte the Heart of Neby-" 
chadrezzar the King of Babylon, who in this Work ſhall beg my Ser= 
vant; though you will not be my Servants in obeying my Com- 
mands, yer he ſhall ſerve me, Chap. 27, 6: and 43. 10. r Twill bring 


# 
i 


' out ef hopes from your Alliances with other Nations, for he: ſhall 


them and their Armies up againit this. people, and 1 will put you 


firſt bring them under his Command, thus we read, 2 Kings 24, 7 
that the King ef Babylon had invaded the. Egyptian Nominjons, and | 
taken from the River of Egypt, unto the River Euphbrates, all chat pars / ti i 
rained to the King of Egypt. { And I will make the Inhabiranrs of Je- 4 Heb, i | 
ruſalem, not only a deſolation, buy a ſcorn, and reproach, and won- .»;1} ak ft 
derment to the World. Vid. Ehap, 19.8. -- 1) 3 fi 5*1,) 26 ain 
10 Moreover, I will f take from them the voice of from chem 
mirth,” and the voice of gladneſs, the voice of the * Chap. | 
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride :, the found of 7 3+. <* 
- ns £ . MRS : & 16, 9. «\ 
the milſtones, and the light of the candle «. : -. Fxek 
z I will rake away all your mirth and jollity, whether pſed 'at ; 3- +2: J 
Weddings, orat any of your merry Meetings « I will leave you Hof. a4 _ 


4+ 


6. 
MM < 


nothing to rejoyce in 3 your very Wedding times, ſhall be times of ;;__  --* 
mourning -and . lamentation. # 'Nay I will not only' depriye.you Rey, 18. 
of your micth, bur of thoſe things which are neceſſary for Tou, as: 1 2. j 

'6-K 2 neceNery 


2 Chron. 
36. 21,22. 


. 2;0 


of) 


s. 2. 
Heb. 
wt u 
i 
19, & 14. 
23. & 21. 
1. & 47.1. 
h.50-40. 


& 51. 25» 


* Chap; 
27. 7. 


* Ezek. 


hap. XXV. 


Tr. 8. I. 


thus he threatens to make the Chaldeans a perpetual deſolation- 


a Viſion. c And bade him to carry it to the Nations to whom he 
ſent him, to ſignifie rothem that his Wrath ſhould be poured out 
on them, and they ſhould drink of it- | 


| Nats wm. becauſe of the ſword that I will ſend among them 4. 


ed, and be mad, and rage ike Men overcome with Wine, becauſe 
of thoſe dreadful Judgments which I ſhall ſend amongſt them. 


made all the nations to drink, unts whom the LORD 
had 


made'the Prophet to travel up and down to all the Nations afters 
ward named, with a Cup of 
18 To wit Jeruſalem and the cities of Judah, and 
the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make 
them 2 deſolation, an aſtoniſhment, an hiffing and a 
curſe, as it is this day f.. 


God 
People, therefore their ſins are higher provocations, and they are 
leſs excuſable. By che Kings here mentioned are to be underſtood 
Fehoiakim, Jehojakin, and Zedekiah, theſe Princes with their People, | 
God threatens to puniſh to aſtoniſhment,and ſo as Men ſhould mock | all thoſe Princes that have Dominions berween the North and Eaſt. 


3 Bjxg 


neceſſary 2s Bread and Light, the Milſtote ſhall nor move, you 


ſhall not have the light ſo much as of a Candle. See the Ike Ex- | 


Mons, Rev. 18+ 22. 1. God here threatens not only to tak= away 
their Superfluities. and what he had hitherto lent them, tor their 
pleaſure and delight, but alſo what they had for their neceſlary 
ſuſtenance, and to capacitate them to do their ordinary Works. 
1x And this whole land ſhall be a defolation, and an 


aſtoniſhment, and theſe nations ſhall ſerve the king of 


Babylon ſeventy years w. 

w This Prophecy is a famous Propecy 1n regard of its fixing the 
particular ſpace of time in which the Jews abode in the Captivity 
of Babylon, wiz. ſeventy Years. When they determined we are plain- 
ly enough told, Ezrs 1. z. in the firſt Year of Cyrus the King of 
Perſia, but when they commenced is more diſputed 3 for we read 
of three carryings into that Captivity, the one in the third and 
fourth Year of Fehojachims when it ſhould ſeem that Nebuchadrez- 
zar, only carried away ſome few perſons to be bred in his Court, 
amongſt whom were Daniel and the Three Children, Dan. 1+ 1, 2, &c 
A ſecond ſeven Years after in *Jeconiah's time, 2 Kings 24. I5, 16. 
The laſt and moſt general eleven Years after, in the xi!th Year of 
Zedekiah, it ſeemeth moſt probable that the ſeventy Nears muſt 
be reckoned from the ſecond, for Jeremiah, Chap. 29. 1, 2, 3. Writ- 
ing to thoſe then in Captivity, tells them 3 That when ſeventy Years 
ſhould be accompliſh, God would bring them back. This is confirmed 
by Ezekiel. Chap. 40 1. Where the fourteenth Year after the taking of 
the City is expreſly ſaid to be the rwenty fifth Yearof their Captivity. 

12 And it ſhall come to pais * when the ſeventy 
years are accompliſhed x, hat T will F puniſh the king 
of Babylon, and that nation, ſaith the LORD, for 


pre 


= a 1 4 BD. Chap. XXy. 


ing what was in the beginning of this Chapter. Others think th; 

he adds theſe words becauſe Carrying _—_ Captivity Sno 0% 
; time begun, though not complicated untill the eleventh Year of 
' Zedekinh. 

19 * Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his ſervants, and *c 
his princes, and all his people g. 46. 
gs The Egyptians being that people whom the Jews moſt truſted 
to tor hep, ar: named as the tirſt to whom the Prophet was ſenr 
with the Wine cup of God's Fury, to let the Jews know, that zf 
they truſted to them, their confidence was vain; for they ſhould 
themſelves be deſtroyed, which was fulfilled within the 12 year 
after the Death of Jofah, unto the time of Jehojakin, as appcars 
from 2 Rings 24. 5. For the King of Egypt: made Jekhoiakim King 
2 Kings 23. 34. ; 

20 And all the mingled people þ, and * all the * ch,p; 
Kingsof the land of Uz z, and all the kings of the land: 47. fy 
of che. Philiſtines k, and Aſbkelon, and Azzah, and 
__— and the remnant of Aſhdod 7. | 

tis of no great moment to determine, whether Go 

mingled People, here mentioned, intended the various N do = 
wards particularly expreſſed by their Names, or ſome people that 
were not native Egyptians, but lived mingled with them, or ſome 
other people of ſeveral Nations, who lived near Judea, or the 4ra- 
bians. i By the Kings of the Land of Uz it is moſt probably 
judged are to be underſtood thoſe Kings who ruled over that people 
who deſcended from Diſhan, Gen, 36. 28. and are judged to have 
inhabited ſome part of Arabia Petra, near to ldumga. k The Cities 
of the Philiſtines are reckoned afterward, 1 Azzah, Ekron, Aſhdod 
and 4ſbkelon, were four of them, the fifcrh which was Gath is not 
here named. V8d. 1 Sam. 6. 17. It had a King in former times to 


ap, 


their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and * 


will make ic perpetual deſolations y- 

x Seven Years 2ccounted from the time that the Jews were cartri 
ed away in the time of Jeconiah or Jekojakiv, 2 Kings 24.15, 16. 
3 This was fulfilled by Darius the King of Perſia, Dan. 4. 31. of theſe 
70 Nebuchadnezzar ;Reigned 36. 2 Kings 25. 27. Evil>Merodach 32. 
and Belſhs zzar at leaſt two, Dar. 8. 1. Tho' God, whoſe all the 
Creation is,:and who is the Lord of all the Hoſts of his Creatures, 
doth often make uſe of Heathens, 'and other wicked Men to puniſh 
his own People, yet he will at laſt puniſh them too, and ordinarily 
when he doth puniſh them, it is with a more ſevere, and-grievous 
deftruQion than that by which he puniſheth his People, 7a. 27. 7. 


13 And I will bring upon that land z all my words 
that T have pronounced againſt it, ever all hat is writ- 
ten in this book, which Jeremiah hath propheſied a» 


gainſt all the nations. 

z The Land of the Babylonians and Chaldeans 
- . T4 For many nations and great kings ſhail * ſerve 
themſelves of them alſo ; and I will recompence them 
according to their deeds, and according to the works 


of their own hands as 

s G4 threatens the deſtruftion of that Monarchy by the Perſe. 
ans, according to the'Prophecy of this Prophet. and declarerhrhar 
their deſtruftion was of themſelves, God d1d but recompence une 
to them their own Deeds, and the Works of their hands. which is 
not to be reſtrain:d to their excefles in executing Divine Venge- 
ance, and the Cruelty they uſed to the /raelices,bur more generally 
interpreted of all their wicked Courſes. 


15 © For thus faith the LORD God of Iſrael unto: 


me, Take the wine-cup of this fury at my hands, and 
cauſe all the nations, to whom ſend thee, to drink itc. 
b God's Judgments are ofcen in Scriprure expreſſed under the 
notion of a Cup of hot and intoxicating Drink. and their Suffering 
is ſet out under the notion of drinking ſuch a Cup as Pſal. 75.8 
Job, 21. 20. 1/a. 51. k7. Pal. 11. 6. and Go. 3. Lam: 4. 21. Ezek. 23, 
32. 34, God made Jeremiah to ſee the appearance of ſuch a Cup in 


16 And * they ſhalldrink and be moved,and be mad, 


d Whether they will or no, they ſhall drink it, and be diſturbs | 


17 Then tookI the Cup at the LORDfs hand, and 
lent me e. 


e That is in the Viſion 3 for it cannot be thought that the Lord 


ine in his Hand. 


f "2 con uſually beginneth at the Houſe of God, 1 Per. 4.17. 


more known them, and done them more good than other 


Saracens did. Vid.Lev.19.27ewhere God forbad hisPeople that Faſhion. 


ars came from Mad; the Son of Japhet, Ger. io, 2, they are uſual- 
ly joyned with the Perſians, Dan. 5. 28, 


one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, 
which are upon the face of the earth c, and the king 
of Sheſhach ſhall drink after them 4. 


whom David fled. 1 Sam. 21. lo, but before this time it was des 
ſtroyed, either by Pſammeticus Father to Pharaoh Necho, or by Tartan 
Captain General to Sargon King of 4ſſjria, of whem read 1ſa. 20, 1, 
that he took 4ſhdod, which may be the reaſon that here mention is 
made of no more than the remnant of Aſhaoa. 

21 Edom m2, and Moab,and the children of Ammon ». 
m The Edomites were the Poſterity of Eſau the Son of. Iſaac, to 
whom God had given a Land which they inherited, and he would 
nor ſuffer the 1/raelttes to make their way through them by force, 
when they denyed them a paſſage through their Country ; now he 
threatens their Ruine, as alſo Chap. 49. 7. and Obadiah's Prophecy 
was againſt rhem, where their triumphing in the Captivity of the 
Jews,is mentioned as one thing that had provokedGod againſt thems 
7 The Moadbites and Ammonites were deſcended from Lon Chap. 48, 
iS an entire prophecy againſt Moab, they had lived in leng Proſperi- 
ry as appears there, Yer. -12, fo had the Ammonites againſt whom alſo 
Jeremiah propheſied particularly, Chap. 49. 1. to the 7th. 


22 And all the kings of * Tyrus o, and all the kings * \ 
ef Zidon p, and the kings of the || iſles which are by omg 
yond the * ſea g. Or, re« 


o Tyrus was a ftreng City upon the Borders of the Tribe of 4jhey, gim by 
Joſh. 19. 29. 2 Sam. 24. 7.8 very rich City, and a Kingdom, with the ſeas 
the King of which ( who was Hyram ) Solomon in his time traded /'**: 
much, 2 Chron. 2+ 3. Iſaiah prophetied its Ruine, Iſa. 23, 1. So did ©P- 
Ezek. Chap. 27, 28, 29. it was deſtroyed by Nebuchaarezzar, Ezck. 29, 49: 23* 
18. p Zidon was nigh to it, therefore we ſhall ordinarily find Tyre 

and Zidon joyned together in Scripture, beth 1ſa/ah and Ezekiel, as 

well as this Prophet propeſied their Ruine. q By the Iles beyond the 

Sea, ſome underſtand Greece and Traly, others Rhodes, Cyprus and 

Ereta, but others think Nebuchadnezzar never conquered theſe, and 

rather underſtand thoſe parts of Syria that coaſted upon the Mids 

land Sea. ” 

23 Dedan, and Tema /, and Buz ?, and all | that + Heb: & 


are in the outmoſt corners «. cut off in= | 
7 We read of a Dedn the iflue of Cham, Gen, 10» 7,The other the *? ©9775» 
Poſterity of Abraham by Jokshen, Gen. 25. 3. It ſeemeth to be a OT» having f 
Ciry of Idumea, Chap, 49.8. ſ Tema deſcended fiom Iſhmael, Gen, 25, the cornerg | 
I5. his Poſteriry inhabited in Arabia, Iſa. 21. 14+ where they are of the ) | 
joyned with thoſe of Dedan. t Buz was one of the Poſterity of N4- hair polled 
hor, Gen, 22,21. Theſe were people mixed with the Saracers or Ara- Chap.g. | 
bians. u That dwell in the corners or furthereſt parts of the World. 2,7 
Some interpret it of the faſhion of their cutting their Bcards,as the np. 49. 


24 And all the kings of Arabia w, andall the kings 
of the * mingled people that dwell in the deſert x. 

w There were ſeveral Kings in Arabia, 2 Chron. 9g. 14, x People Chap. 
of ſeveral Nations that were got together in the Defart, and had 49. 31+ 
made to themſelves ſeveral Kings or Chief Rulers. See Ver. 
25 And all the kings of Zimri y, and all the kings 20» 

of Elam z, and all the kings of the Medes 4. 

7 Thoſe deſcended from Zimram, Abraham's Son by Keturah, 

Gen. 25. 2. ( the Zamarens as ſome think mentioned by Pliny ) z By 

the Elamites are meant the Perſians deſcended from Sem. Gen. 10 22, 

Elam is alſo mentioned Iſa. 22. 6. See alſo Chap. 49. 34. a The Me- 


26 And all the kings of the north, far and near 6, 


b All under the Government of the Chaldeans, or ( as others ) 


E «4 
- 
Z C 


© 2.4098 
, Wo. 
- EE 
"= 
" 


at them,.and curſc them, which expreſſions we have before met 
with in the ſame cauſe. But kere ariſeth « doubt how the Prophet 
Hith(ss 7t is thir day)whereas this Prophecy Yer.r. was in the fourth 
Year of -Jehoiakim, bur Jeruſalem was not made ſuch adeſolarion, 
till the eleventh Tear of Zedakiah, which was 18 Years after. ſome 
" think ?that 'though the thing were yet to come, yer the Propher 
ſpeaketh of it as paſt, becauſe of the certainty of it, which is but 
axwhat is ordinary in the Propherical Writings, Others think that 


; known, with whom there was ordinary commerce. d And the 


theſe words were added after rhe Captivity of Ferem:;ab, writing 
over his former Prophecies. Others from theſe words judge thar 
this part of the Chapter,was a Prophecy at ſome other time follow- 


c That is, in thoſe parts of the World which were at that time 


King of Babylon, who was laſt of all to drink of this Cup of the 
Lord's Fury. That he is here meant is plain from Chap. 51. 41, 
where Sheſhach 1s thus interpreted. But why Babylon is called She- 
ſhach, 1s an harder queſtion and not eaſily reſolved. Thoſe who 
think the Prophet gives Babylo! here another Name to avoid an | 
Odium from the King of Batylen, ar this time their Enemy, nei- , 
ther conſider the uſual Courage of this Propher, nor that he ſpeaks 


plainly enough, Chap. 51, 14. where he mentioneth both __ 
l alt 


* Ha 
16. 


my 11a: 
Is calle 


* Cha 
16. 4. 
* Chap 


A on cocmemn— 


= wort FLARE vs La? 


e2 


J 


and Schach, and expounidctin the latter by. the former. Ir 1s 

thought that Babylon 1s called $S/»4jh2ch from the IName of an [ol 

called S$2acb which they worſhipped, to whoſe honour they yearly 

| kept a Feſtival for five Days rogetiier, which they cal;ed Shace, and 

rhey tay that during this Heſtival Cyrus torck Babylon, But theſe are 

all uncertain gueſſes, it is enough for us to know, that by the King 

of Shejhach is meant the King of Bavel, as the Prophet expounds 
himſelf, Chap. 51. 41. : : . 

27 Therefore thou ſhalt ſay unto them, Thus ſaith 

* [Tab. 2: the LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael * Drink ye and 

16. be drunken, and ſpue, and fall, and riſe no more, be- 
cauſe of the ſword which I will ſend amongſt you. 

28 And it ſhall be if they refuſe to take the Cup at 

thine hand to drink, then ſhalt thou ſay unto them, 

Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, Ye ſhall certainly 


drink e. | 

e The meaning of theſe two Verſes isno more than this; God 
Tet Jeremiah in a Viſion know that it was his Will, that he ſhould 
prophelie a certain, and inavoidable Ruine to all theſe Nations, 
which was brought upon all the reſt by the King of Babylon, whom 
God made his inſtrument to execute his Vengeance upon them); 
And lait of all upen the King of Babylon himſelf by Cyrus King of 
Perſia. This judgment which he t-lleth them ſhould be by the 
Sword, he expreſi:th by the effe&s, falling and riſing no more, and 
commands them to 4rnk it, to comport with the Metaphor ofthe 
Wine cup of God's Fury, mentioned Yer, 15. The drinking of 
Cups of heady intoxicating Wine ordinarily producing ſuch effe&s 
as /puing aad falling, &c. This Cup of the Lord's Fury be aſſures 
th:m, they ſhould not turn by, but ſhould moſt certainly drink 


It. 
29 For lo, I begin to bring evil * on the city which 
is + called by my name, and ſhould ye be utterly un- 
' puniſhed f? ye ſhall not be unpuniſhed : for I will call 
Ezek. 9:6. for a ſword upon all the inhabitants of the earch g, 


Obad. 15. (ith the LORD of hoſts. | 

Luk. 23. f By the Citv called by his Name, or upon which his Name was 
3I. called, he means Jeruſalem. elſewhere called the Hely City, The 
t Heb. up- Apoſtle, 1 Pet 4. 7. Spezketh much ro this purpoſe, The time is 
a” GP ome that judgment muſt begin at the houſe of God, and if is firſt begin 
Ry PANE at us, what ſhall the end be of them that obey not the Goſpel of God. If 
Is called. God ſparetb not the green Tree, how ſhall he ſpare thole that are 
dry and withered? Athieſts, and leud and profane Perſons have 
litt!e reaſon to promiſe thzmſeIves an eſcape trom God's righteous 
Judgment, wien they ſee God nor ſparing rhoſe that moke rhe 
higheſt profefſi;n of him, and ftand in ſome Relation to him. g Ir 


E RK BMITH2 H, 


Chan, wwtied 
= 20 7 nap. KXVIAM 
for; the days of your ſlaughter, and of your diſper- + Heb. Iii 
tions are accomplithed f, and ye thall fall like + a piea- 397 4275. Wn 
fant veſſel 7. | for faughs (WK 
r Shepherds and the princips! of the Tlock, are in this | 
ſame ſignificancy, by both he means the Civil Rulers; fo the werd Vel.1 
1s uſed, Chap. 22. 22. and 23+ 7. Theſe he calls aforehand to be- fr of 
wail their fate. { For the Days were now come, when they ſhould +"Fich 1018 
be flain and ſcattered. t And he tells them their fall ſhould be like 5; F 2 11] WHILE 
the fall of a Chriſtal Glaſs, or ſome delicate render Velſel, which J"g7 ſhal REA: 
when it falleth breaketh in pieces and cannot again be ſet together. apo þ 


35 And 7 the ſhepherds (bal have no way to fle from the 


A te” &, jhepherds | 
nor the principal of the flock to eſcape . : = «caps WARN 
« In ordinary diſpenſations of Judgmenr, there is ſome way lefe 7s from WI 

to eſcape, and if there be any way of eſcape, great Men are !ikelieſ} &c» 
to find it, bur he telleth them that the greateſt Men ſhould find no 
way to flee from, or eſcape this terrible Diſpenſation of God. | 

36 A voice of the cry of the thepherds, and an 
howling of the principal of the flock ſhall be heard w : 
for the LORD hath ſpoiled their paſture | 

w That is, there ſhall be heard a great outcry of the Princes and 
Rulers. When they ſhall ſee how the Lord hath ſpoiled the Cities 
in which, and their people upon which they have lived, and 
amongſt whom they were wont to feed ſecurely. | 

37 And the peaceable habitations are cut down be- 
cauſe of the fierce anger of the LORD y, _ 

} That is, the places where theſe great Men were wont to live 
ſplendidly, and dwell peaceably and ſecurely, ſhall be as ſurely de- 
ſt:oyed through the Lord's An er, as if it were already done, | 

38 He hatch forſaken * his covert as the lion z:-for s 
their land is | deſolate, becauſe of the fierceneſs of the ». 
oppreſſor, and becaute of his fierce anger as oe | s. WW 

z God had before compared himſelf to a Lyon. vey. 39. here he 4cſolation. JI 
declares himſelf to be about ttmove like a Lion, who when he g0- RANDY 
eth out to feek his Prey, leaveth his Covert. wid. Chap. 50 44. 
a TheefteQs of this riſing up of God out of his Covert is the deſo.. 
lation of the Land through the fierceneſs of the Enemy, cauſed from 
the fierce anger of God now ready to be poured our upon this People 


CHA ÞP, XXVI. 

The Prophet, by Gods Command, in the Court of the Temple, threatnath. 
that the Temple ſhall be es Shiloh, and the Land 8 Curſe: Ex- 
horteth to Repentancey 1 7. He tis apprehended and arraigned, 
$, ii. His . Apology, 12, I5. The Princes clear him by the 
Example of Micah, 15, t9. and of Urijah, 20, 23. and, 
by the care of Ahikam. 24. 


: 
4 
: 


place of the t Heb. ; WEIR 


Chap.45 


is In vain for you to promiſe your ſelves an eſcape, for God is 
about ro puniſh all your Neighbours. : 

20. Therefore propheſie thou againſt them all theſe , 
words, and ſay unto them b, The LORD ſhall roar 
from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habi- 
tation 3, he ſhall mightily roar upon his habication &, 
he ſhall give a ſhout, as they that tread the grapes, 
againſt all the inhabitants of the earth 7. 

h Reveal my Will, unto them preſently, to revenge ſelf ups 
on them, in words to this ſence and purpoſe ; tell rfiem that I 
who hitherto have been toward them as a Lamb, will now be to 
them as a Lyon, ſo Joel 3. 16. Amos 1- 2. and 3. 8. and, as aLion 
will roar from Heaven 3 for though the Temple be ſometimes fo 
Called, yet the foregoing words frem on high expound this termin 
this place otherwiſe. k Or, in his habitation, which is more likely 
to be underſtood in Heaven, ( as the former ) than in Jeruſalem as 
divers would bave it, for God is here revealing his Wrath againſt 
foraign Nations, upon ſome of which theſe Judgments came after 
God had done roaring 1n or upon Jeruſalem. I A ſhour, ſuch as 
Soldiers uſe to give when they ſtorm a City, or afſaulc their Ene- 
mies ro incourage their Fellows, and ro d 1ſhearten their Enemies ; 
like the ſhout of thoſe that rread the Grapes, ſinging one to another, 

' or rejoycing and triumphing in the YVintage | 

31 A noiſe (ha'l come even to the ends of the earth, 
for the LORD hath a cont: overſie with the nations m: 
he will plead with all fleſh», he will give them thr 


are wicked to the {word o, faith the LORD. 

-m There ſhall be ſuch Confuſions and Noiſes, as ſhall Ring over 
all che World, for God's Quarrel is not againſt the Jews only, but 
other Nations alſo. Nor will he in any thing he doth, a& in- 
juſtly, if they will joyn Iſſue wich him,he will plead with them,ard 
mak it appear to al! that he afteth Righteouſly. o He will give up 
mary to the Sword, but they ſhall be ſuch onlyas by their wicked 
neſs have deſerved it, recompenſing to them their own Works and 
evil doings. , 

32 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, behold, evil ſhal 

oforth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind 
Jhall be raiſed up, from the coaſts of che earth p. 
p It is much the {ame thing which was ſaid before, only repeat- 


| fourth Year of Jehoiakim, 
; mak«s learned Men thiok. it ought to have been placed before thar. 


| 


| is the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the ſon 
of Joliah king of Judah, came this word from the 
LORD, ſaying a, 

a The Prophecy, .Chap. 


-” 


25. is faid to have been revealed in the 
is in the beginning of his Reign, which 


The affairs of theFewswerethen in a verydeſperate condition, Phararh 
Necho Kin, of Egypt had overcome Joſcah, and killed him in Bartle, 
Fehoahaz or Shallum, being made King in his ſtead, 2 Kings 23. 30, 
he had reigned bur three Months, and Pharaoh N:cho takes himy and 
impritoneth bim, and lays a Tribute upon the Land of 300 Tz 
lents ot Silver, and a Talent of Gold, and makes Eliakim King, 
changing his Name to Jehoiakim, wer. 33. 34, Now in the begin* 
ning of this King's Reign cometh this Word of God to Jeremiah, 
wero-<ugy being ſtill hardened, and going on in their finfull 
prattices, : | 

2 Thus ſaith the LORD, ftand in the court of the 
LORD's houſe, and ſpeak unto all the cities of Judah, 
which come to worſhip in the LORD's houſe, all the 
words that I commanded thee to Tpeak unto them þ ; 
diminiſh not a word c. | | x 

b Tn ihe largeſt Court of the Temple, where the moſt may hear: 
what thou ſaycit, and there fpeak to all thoſe that dwell in any of 
the Cities of Judah, ( from whence-they were wont to come up 
more elpecially thrice in a Year to the Temple to worthip, Pſs. 

122. 4. ) In the Gate or Court of that Houſe wherein they have 
tuch a confidence, do thou favd ( So Chap. 7. 2+ ) and declare 
unto them what I Command thee. « Neither ſmootaing what may 
appear rough, nor ſuppreſſing what may offend them, intirely de-+ 
livering my Will unto them, not thunning to declare unto them 
the whole Counſell of God, as Paul, As 20. 27. N. 

3 If fo be they will hearken, and turn every man _ 
from his evil way d,. that I may *.repent me of the evil + Chaps 
which I purpoſe to do unto them, becauſe of the xs. s, 
evil of their doings e.  _. re ah | 

4 Nor that God was ignorant of their obſtinancy and the hard« 
ening of their hearts, which was the future event.; but tolet us 
know that tieir deſtruftion would be of themſelves, he would give 
them. both a time and ſpace, and alſo means for Repentance, and 
the prevention of the Judgmenrsof God coming on them : He gi 


ed for the greater terror ina variety of expreſſions. He tells them 
that the Judgment ſhould be like 2 Contagion, going from one 
Nation to another, or like a fire catching hold of another Houſe be- 
fore the firſt is burned down, like a Whirlwind that blows from all 
ſides, cometh ſuddenly, and deyoureth dreadfully. 


33 And the ſlain of the LORD ſhall be at that day 
from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the 
earth : they ſhall not be * lamented nor buried, they 
ſhall be dung upon the ground 9. | 
| 9 That thoſe wao ſhould beſlain by Commiſſion from the Lord 

finthis time of his Judgments, ſhould be in al} places. and ſo nu» 
"merous, that there ſhould be none lefr ro lament for, or to bury the 
* Ch 'Dead, but the dead Bodies ſhould lieand rot upon the ſurface of the 
aP- :Farth, and be #s Meck to it» See the like Phraſes, Chap- 16. 4. 
16, 4+. . , 


give them time, for itwas after this elevenYears before theCaprivity 
of Jehoiakim, and two and twenty before that of Zedekiah: and for 
Means, God afforded them the Miniſtry of this Prophet.. e Rev 
pentance appiyed to. Man, fignifieth a change of Heart and Coun- 
ſols,as well as of his courſe of Aftions : In the unchangeable God it 
only ſig1ifiech the turning of the courſe . of his Providence, vot 
bringing thar evil upon them for the evil of their doings, which 
ſuppoling their progreſs and obftinacy in their ſinful Courſes, he 
had fully reſolved to bring upen them. | 2 

4 And thou ſhalt fay unto them, Thus. ſaith the 
LORD, If ye. will not hearken to me to walk in my 


law f, which I have ſet before you g.. - _ 

f A courſe of ARions in Scripture, is ordinarily call'd a way ; in 
which ſence we often read of the way of the Lord, the way'of the 
wicked , the way of the Righteous, &*c. And a motion in this 


* Chap, | 
h- 8, 


I 6 46, Your {elves in the aſhes, ye principal of the flock r ; 
. 20. 


34 © * Howl ye ſhepherds and cry, and wallow | 


-Courſe is uſually called walking, ſal. 1. 1.' Ezek: 18. g.-and ap 
plyed both to God and Mzn, To o_ in God s Law is expounds.; 
6 3 ed 


bn 


SEE AM 17 4 H. Chap. XXy1, jour" 
' fign to ſtir up ſedition, for he had uid nothing but what God bad 

; ſent him ro ſpeak ; and therefore could not prophefis whar was 

falſe, nor was to be charged with any ſeditious detign. 

13 Therefore now * amend your ways and your *chay, 

doings a, andobey the voice of the LORD your God 6, Je 3* 

and the LORD will # repent him « of the evil that he Ver: 1g, 

hath pronounced againſt you. 


s It is not I that have pronounced Evil againſt you, but the 
Lord who made both you and me: You rage againſt me. who am 


| ed by hearkeniog unto them, or (as 1n other places ) by obſerving, 
keeping 2n4 doing them. g God is ſaid to have ſet his Laws be- 
fore them, both in reſpe& of their firſt promulgation ro them 
at Sinai, and writing them in Tables; and the daily Expoſitions 
and urging of them upon their praQtice by his Servants the Pro- 
phets, as it followeth« 
5 To hearken to the words of my ſervants the pro- 
* Chap. 2. Phets 4, * whom LI ſent unto you, both riſing up early, 
and ſending them i, ( but ye have not hearkned. ) 


13. 25. & 

<4 7. & bh Thoſe Prophets who in propheſying were my Servants, re- | bur God's Inſtrument; by whom he lets you know kis Mind and 

25-3- vealing my Will unto you. Hearkintng here 1s the ſame with hear- | Will; it were more adviſable for you to reform your wicked Lives 

kening unto God's Laws mentioned, Yer 4+ i Whom TI have made | and Praftices. b And that by a full obedience re what the Lord 

my bulineſs to ſend unto you 3 and to whom you ought therefore hath commanded you in his Law, and by me ſpeaketh to you. c IF 

to have hearkened, as unto me, but you have not done it hitherto, you do this, the Lord will change the courſe of his Providence, 

2 Chron. 36. 12, 16. : el and do that which in Men is called a repenting, and not bring 

* , Cm. 6 Then will I make this houſe like Shiloh k and | thoſe evil things upon you, which he, by me his Servant, hath 
4-12. Will make this city a curſe to all. the Nations of the | Pronounced againſt you, ; 

14 As for me, behold, I am in your hand d: do with 


Pſale 78. earth þ. : 
\ Go. Chap. þ $};loh was the City where the Tabernacle was pitched, and the 


7- 12, '4. Ark, the Symbol of Gods preſence, was, Juag, 18. 31. & 21. 
19. x Sam; x, 3» 9, 24. and 3. 21. Out of it the Ark was carried, 


1 Sam. 4. 3. when it was taken by the PhiliFines, and was carricd 


me Þ as ſeemeth good and meet unto youe. f Heb, 

4 That is Jam in your Power(as hands often ſignifieth inScripture.) < *t 
Jeremiah doth not by this acknowledge any power they had juſtly, 8994 and | 
thus to reſtrain, and queſtion -him. e Nor doth he dare them, to 772% in 
do what they had a natural power to do, by ſaying, Do with me J0#r «6, 


no more thither, but reſted in Kirjathjeartm, 1 Sam. 7. 2. where it 
reſted 20 Years. David fetched it from hence, 2 Sam. 6, 2.So that as 
the P{almilt tells us, Pſal. 78: 60, Gr. God forſook the Tabernacle of 
Shiloh ; here he threatenerh to do the like as to the Temple, becauſe 
of which they bad ſuch a confidence. Jeremiah, Chap. 7. 12. had 
ſpoken much the ſame thing) it is a threitning that God would de. 


what ſeemeth good unto you;the Phraſe imports no more than that 
he could not hinder their doing with him what they pleaſed. The 
hands in which he was, were the hands of Violence, not of Juſtice, 
for though they had a juſt power againſt falſe Prophets, yer they 
had no ſuch power againſt any Prophet ſent by God, ter the matter 
of his Prophecy be never ſo threatning and ungrateful to them. 


prive them of his Ordinances. ! To which he addeth a threatning 
of deftruttion to the City, to that degree, that when Men ſhould 
curſe any place, they ſhould ſay, God do unto thee as he did to 78s 
ruſalem, We had the like Phraſe, Ghap., 24+ 9. and have it again, 
Chap. 29. 18, 22, Oc. 

7 So the prieſts, and the prophets and all the people 
heard Jeremiah ſpeaking theſe words in the houſe of 
the LORD m». | | 

m- All the People preſent at that time heard the Prophet, who 
according to the Command of God, came into the Court of the 
Lord's Houſe, and diſcharged his Office, ſpeaking rheſe words. 

8 © Now it came to paſs, that when Jeremiah had 


Therefore he addeth, ; 
15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to 


| death, ye ſhall ſurely bring innocent blood upon your 


ſelves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants 
thereof *.* : for of a truth the LORD hath ſent me unta 


you, tO ſpeak all theſe words in your ears f. 

'.* If 5ou make this S2dicion, and put me to Death for ir, you 
have a natural power to do it, but you will get nothing by it, bur 
further bring down the Vengeance of God upon you, by ſhedding 
my Blood without a cauſe, the guilt of which will be added to 
your other guilt, and lie upon you, and upon your City. f For 


made an end of ſpeaking all that the LORD had com- you may think, and talk-what you pleaſe, it isa certain truth, thag tH 
manded 54im to ſpeak » unto all the people, that the | T fpake nothing our of any evildeſign, nor of my own head : but Sons 
only what the Lord ſent me to ſpeak. peep 


prieſts, and the prophets, and allthe people took him, 


ſaying, Thou ſhalc furely die 0. 


God fel} upon them, ſo as they did not interrupt him till he had | 
o Thenthe chief of the Prieſts with of the LORD our God h. 


t Hebs 
_ the Judg- 
ment of 
death is 
for this 
lg 


» Either they had a reverence for the Prophet, or the terror of 


fully diſpatched his Errand. | 
the aſſiſtance of the People apprehend him, and tell him he ſhould 


be pur to Death» 


9 Why haſt thou propheſied in the name of the 


16 © Then aid the princes, and all the people unto 
the prieſts, and to the prophets g, This man zs not 


' worthy to die : for he hath ſpoken to us in the name 


£ The Judge in this caſe with the aſſent of the People acquit the 


; Prophet, and vindicate him jfrom the Charge of Scdition given 


againſt him by the corrupt Prieſts, and falſe Prophets, diſtinguiſh« 


LORD : ſaying, This houſe ſhall be like Shiloh, and 1ng h betwixt one who of his own Head ſpreadeth falſe News, 


thiscity ſhall be deſolate without an inhabitant ? and 
all the people were gathered againſt Jeremiah in the' 


houſe of the LORD 9. 
> They charge him with being a falſe Propher, ſpeaking falſe 
things in the Name of God ; thcir pretence ſeemeth to have been 
from the Promiſes of God; ſuch as thar, Pſal. 132. 13, 14 For the 
Lord hath choſen Zion, he hath deſired it for his habitation, This is my 
reſt for ever, here will I dwell, for I have defired ir. Which they in- 
rerpreted into ſuch a ſenſe as if they could nor by their fin drive 
God away from them, and therefore Jeremiah muſt propheſie falſly 
apainſt the Will of God before revealed. p This cauſed a ſeditious 
Tumult of the People in the Temple, which alarm'd the Civil 
Magiſtrates. ; 
xo T When the princes of Judah heardtheſe things r, 


then they came up from the kings houſe, unto the 
houſe of the LORD /; and ſat down || at the entry of 


the new gate. of the LORD's houſe r. | 
» When the Nobles, and other Civ]l Magiſtrates, heard of the 
Tumulr, occaſioned by Feremiah's unpleaſing prophecy. { They 
came from the King's Court, where the Nobles and great Officers in 
Nations uſually are, to the Temple. t And fat down at the entry 
of the new gate in the Lord's Houſe ; ſome think it was called the 
New Gate, becauſe repaired by Jotham, 2 Kings 15. 35» 2 Cborn 27, 
3. Some ay it was the Eaſtern, others, that it was the Weſtern-Gare, 
It was certainly the place where their Shanedrim, who were to 
judge of falſe Prophets were wont to fits 
11 Then ſpake the prieſts, and the prophets « un- 
to the princes, and to all the people w, ſaying, + This 
man #s worthy to die, for he hath propheſied againſt 


this city, as ye have heard with your eass x. 

# In the corrupt ſtate of all Kingdoms, and Ciries, rhe Eccleſia- 
tical Officers always were the greateſt Enemies to the Faithful Mi. 
niſtzrs of God, as we ſhall find in the whole ſtory both of the Old 
and New Teſtament. x They ſpeak to the Members of the grear 
Court wh? are called Princes, ard alſo to the people who we '» in 
the Court charging Jeremiah with Sedition, by prophſying falſly, 
which was a Capital Crime. It was the charge againit Stephen, Acts 
6G. 13- that he ſpake blaſphemous words againſt the holy place ; to prove 
this they appeal to thoſe of the people that had heard him. 

12 T Then ſpake Jeremiah unto all the princes, and 
to all the people, ſaying y The LORD ſent me to 
propheſie azainſt this houſe, and againſt this city all 


the words that you have heard z. 

5 The Prieſts having given Jeremisb his Charge he makes his 
Defence. z The ſum of which was, he acknowledgeth thar he had 
propheſied againft the Temple, and againſt the oy and tacitly 
acknowledgeth rheir power to take cognizance of ſeditious Perſons, 
and falſe Prophets, and doth not deny bur ſuch Perſons deſerve to 


| 


and threatneth evil to a place, and one who doth it by Authority 
from God, or by Divine Revelation, which is here meant by in the 
Name of our Lord God, Thus the Civil Magiſtrates taught the Prieſts 
and Propnecs a point of Divinity, which they ought not to hays 
been 1gnorart of, Some may enquire how the Princes knew that 
Jeremy ſpake what he ſpake in the Name of the Lord? To which it 
may be replyed, That Jeremy had been a Prophet now about 20 
Years, for he began in the 13th of Joſiah, Chap. 1. 1, 2. Johah reigns 
ed 31 Years, 2 Kings 22. 1, Then Shallum or Jehoahaz reigned 
three Months, this was in the beginning of Jekolakim's Reign, in 
which rime they had had a Jarge Experience both of his Dof#rine,and 
Converſation 3; and though the Prieffs and Prophers, who had bad the 
like Experience, were filled with Malice and Prejudice, yet the 
Princes, and a part of the People were more equal. and though 
the People were many of them led away with the Prieſts, ye hear- 
ing the Prophet's defence, and the Princes Judgment upon ir, they 
concur with them to acquit the Prophet. 

17 Then roſe up certain of the elders of the land, 


and ſpake to all the aſſembly of the people, ſaying z, 

z; Probably theſe Elders were ſome of the Court, or elſe Advo. 
cates for they were wont to riſe up, either to plead or to judge 1/2. 
3. 13. Acts 5. 34. They riſe up and apply themſelves to the People 
ro juſtifie their abſolutory ſentences 

18 Micah the Moraſhite & propheſied in the daysof 
Hezekiah king of Judah, and ſpake to all che people of 
Judah, fſaying/, Thus faith the LORD of hoſts : Zion 
{hall be plowed /ike a field, and Jeruſalem ſhall become 
heaps, and the mountain of the houſe, as the high 


places of the foreſt w9. 

k This was that Micah, whoſe Prophecies are part of holy Writ as 
appeareth by Micah xr. 1. and 3. 12. where are the very words of 
the Prophecy here mentioned. ! The ſubſtance of that Prophecy 
was the ſame yitlt this of Jeremiah,, that Zion ſhould be plowed 
up, and the place where the: Temple ſtood, ſhould become ſo de« 
tolate that Trees ſhould grow there, as in a Wood or roreſt. 

19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put 
him at all to death 92? did he not fear the LORD, 


them o 2 Thus might we procure great evil' againft our 
ſouls p. 


m The Interrogation here hath the force of a Negation ; that is, 
Hezekiah, and the Shanhedrim in his time did not go abour to call 
him in queſtion for his Life, nor put him to death. His Prophecy 
had a quite contrary effe@ on him. » It begat in him an awe and 
dread of that God, in whoſe Name the Prophet ſpake, and quick- 
ened him to apply himſelf ro God by earneſt Prayer, and the 
courſe he took had a very good iſſue. - o The Lord did not do what 
he threatned to do. p Now, jf we ſhould take a quite contrary 


gies but denieth that he was a falſe Propher, or guilty of any de. 


courſe, and put this Man to death, we ſhould do contrary to oo 
Ti24T 


and beſought the | LORD » ? and the LORD repent- | Heb: | 
ed him of the evil whlch he had pronounced againſt f-c« fibs 


4 Heb- 


 & 


that good Prince did, and that with good: ſucceſs ) do- our ſelves 
no good, but procure great evil againſt our Souls ; that is againſt 
our ſelves both Bodies and Souls ſtriftly taken. * : 

20 And there was alſo a Man that propheſfied in 

the name of che LORD, Urijah the ſon of Shemaiah 
of Kirjath-jearim, who propheſied againſt this city ,and 
againſt this land, according to all the words of Jere- 
miah 9. 

9 This is a piece of Story which we have recorded in no other 
part of Scripture. Some judge theſe words were the words of the 
iame that ſpake before, but this is not likely, for then chey had 
brought one inſtance for acquitting him, anorher for the condenn- 
ing of him. They are therefore rather to be interpreted as the 

' words of ſome others, etther of the Court who were Enemies to 
Jeremiak, or of his Acculers, or their Council, urging a later preſi- 
dent, in the time of Jehoiakim the King that at this time reigned, 
who alſo pretended to ſpeak in the Name of the Lord, and whote 
Prophecy was the ſame in ſubſtance with this of Jeremiah, 

21 And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty 
men, and all the princes heard his words, the king 
ſought to put him to death ; but when Urijah heard ic 
he was afraid and fled, and went into Egyptr. 

r When Jehoiakim our preſent King, and all his great Men heard 
of it, ( probably by the information of others ) they judged it a 
Capital crimez and uſed means to apprehend him, in order to the 
putting him.to death, upon which the Prophet being advertiſed of 
it, and fearing the iſſue, fled into Egypr- 

22 And ſehoiakim the king ſent men into Egypt /, 
»amely Elnathan the ſon of Achbor?, and certain men 
wich him into Egypt. 


{ The innocent Prophet conſidered not the King of Judah's Al- 
liance with the King ot Egype, ( obliging him upon demand ro de- 
liver up any of his Subje&s, who being charged with capirsl Crimes, 
ſhould flee-into his. Country for SanQtuary ) and fled rhither, bur 
the King ſent after him one of his grear Men ( m:nrtioned alſo 
Chap. 36. 12.) with ſome others to his aſſiſtance. 

22 And they fer forth Urijah out of Egypt, and 
brought him unto Jehoiakim the king, who ſlew him 
with the ſword, and caſt his dead body into the graves 


of the + common people #. 


Sens of the uy Theſe Perſons ſent by Jehoiakim, brought back the Prophet 


people, 


by force, he was tried and caſt, judged worthy to die, and put to 
death, and ignominiouſly buried, not in the Sepulchres of the Pro- 
phets, or any Men of Repute and Faſhion, but amongſt the vuJgar 
People» Which, as alſo his diligence to ſend for Ur:jah ( fled into 
a foraign Country to ſave his Jife ) ſhewed the great Malice of this 


Prince againſt the Lord's true Prophets ; though it had bur very ill , 


effe&ts. Theſumm is ( if we take theſe words as the Speech of Fe- 
remisb's Enemies ) what do you tell us of what Hezekiah did, you 
have a later inſtance of it in our preſent King's time, the caſes of 
Urijah and of Jeremiah are fully parallelled. So as the caſe is a 


judged caſe. : 
24 Nevertheleſs w, the hand of Ahikam the ſon of 


 Shaphan, was with Jeremiah, that they fhould not give 


him into the hand of the people, to put him to death x. 
w Though Feremiah's Enemies pleaded this inſtance of Ur:j@b, 
which had this advantage of the other, becauſe it was matter of fact 
done lately, and a caſe judged in this very King's Reign 5 yet the 
hand, that is, the power and intereſt of one Ahikem, who as appears 
from 2 Kings 22.12, was one of Joſiah's Counſellors, arid the Fa» 
cher of Gedaliah, Chap. 39.'14. who upon the taking of the City was 
made Governour,Chap. 40. 5» was with Jeremiah, x Soas through 
the good Providence of God, Jeremiah was not delivered into the 
hand: of the People, ſome of whom -were mutable, and malicious 
enough, ready to do any thing the Priefs put them upon. And the 
after advancement of the Son of this Ah:kam to be Governour of 


Judah, may juſtly be interpreted a Reward in this Life, which in the 


God gave him for his kindneſs to his Prophet. 
C H A P. . XXVII. 


The Prophet ſundeth Tokes to frve neighbur Kings, thereby foreſhewing their have their pericds ) which was after ſeventy Tears, 
7 He exhorteth them to yield, | Ch 


Snbje&ion tro Nebuchadonezzar, 1 | 
and not to believe falſe Prophets. 8, ir. The like he doth to; 
Zedekiah, 12, 18. The Remnant of the Veſſels ſhall be carried 
ro Babylon, and continue there till the appointed rims 1 22 


L the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the ſon 
of Joſiah king of Judah, came this word unto Jere- 
miah from the LORD, ſaying 4, 


#s Here is a difficulty ariſeth fiom this Verſe, which there have 
been various attempts to reſolve, and whether any hath been fully 
GtisfaQtory I doubr, It is ſaid this word of the Lord came to Jere- 
miah in the beginning of the Reign of Fehoiakim, and Yer. 3. the Pro- 
phet is bid to ſend the Bonasand Tkes, by the hand of the Meſſengers 
which came to Hieruſalemw unto Zedekiah King of Judah, who began 
not to reign till abour 11 Years after the beginning of the Reign of 
Jehoiakim. To ſolve this difficulty, 1. Some think Jehoiakim was 

a common Name to all the Sons of Foſah, and that Zedekiab is here 
called Jeho:akim, but I ſee no foundation for that eonjeQture from 


EK & M1 a 


Chap. 


| them morefaft ; and ro put fome one of them vron Lis own Neck 


to the 


off their Necks. 


unto. Zedekiah king of Judah c._ . 


ing words. 


Thus ſaith che LORD of hoſts the God of Iſrael 4 
Thus ſhall ye fay unto, your malters. | 

d The Lord of Hofts, who hath therefore a power over all the 
Creatures 3 who though. he be a ſpecial ſenſe the God of Jſ-2e!, yer 
his Dominion is extended $0 your Maſters Countries, as well ag 
unto 1/rael. | Ig | Ep 
5 I have made the earth, the man and the beaſt that 
are upon the ground by my great power, and by my 
out-ſtretched arm, and * have gzven it unto whor it 
ſeemed meet unto mee. 


mindeth them, that he was the firit efficient cauſe of all the Cread 
tures, and made both all Men, and all Beaſts that are upon the 


was at firſt the work of his hands, ard accordingly in the methods 
and workings of his Providence he did daily diipoſe of Kingdoms, 
and Nations according to his pleaſure without being for ſuch dit+ 
Poſal of them accountable unte any Perſon. 

6 And now have I given all theſe lands into the 


hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon my ſervant f, 


and the * beaſts of the field have I given him alſo to 


ſerve him g. 


bis Dominion, and right to diſpoſe of all Creatures, by theſe he 
authorizeth him to reveal his W1ll, concerning the diſpoſal of the 
ands of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre and Sidon, wiz. that hz had d 
poſed of them to Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, whom he cal. 
leth his Servant. Becauſe he did the work which he would have 
him to do; though as God ſaid of the 4ſr1an.1ſa. 10.7, he meaned 
no ſo; he had nothing leſs in his thought than to obey any come 
mand of Gode Wicked Men being God's Servants, as the Hawtk, 
is the prudent Falconers Servant, who maketh uſe of the Ravenoug 
quality of the Hawk to get Game for him: Twice more at leaſt 
| we find Nebuchaduezzar thus called, Chap. 25. 9. and 43. 10. g God. | 
further adds, that the Bea#s ſhould ſerve him, by which he either 
means that rhe Cattel which were in the poſſ:ſfſidn of the Men of 
thoſe Nations ſhonld alfo come into his power 3 or that God had 
alſo given the Horſes and Oxen, and other Beaſts which he ſhould u'e 
in his Wars for Carrizges,or conveniercy,to him, ſo as they ſhould 
be really ſerviceable to him in his Conqueſts of choſe Countries. © | 
'7 And all nations ſhall ſerve him þ and his ſon and 
his ſons ſon 5, * until the very time of his land come &: 


and they many nations and great kings ſhall ſerve them 
ſelves of him /. | | 

h That is, all eheſe Nations; and ſome think that it is expreſſed 
Article uſed here demonſtratively, though nor ſo taken ny* 
rice of by our Tranſlators. i And Evi! Mcr?4ach his ſon, who ſuce 
ceeded him, Chap. 52. 31. and Beljhazzar his Grandchild, Dan. c. 
', 11- k Until the period of his Kingdom ſhall come, ( for Nations 

L ars, according to 
*ap. 29. 10. during which Years ſome tay four Princes ruled in 2s 
bylog, the Scriptures mention but three. / After that he ſhall bime 
ſelf ve Conquered, as it came to pats in Belſhazz.ar's rime, Dan 5 
30, Darius the Emperour of the Medes taking his Kingdom. EF 
8 And it (bail come to pals, that the nation . and 
kingdom which will not ſerve the fame Nebuchadnez- 
Zar king of Babylon mz, and that will not put their 
neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, thac na- 
tion will T puniſh, faith the LORD, with the ſword, 
and with the famine, and with the peſtilence, until I 
have conſumed them by his hard ». 

9 That is, that will not upon Nebu:hadnezzar's coming againſt 
them, freely, ſubmit to his power, and yie'd themſe}ves ro his Subs 
jection, n I will humble them by my fore Judgments of Sword 
Peſtilence and Famine; and make them yield, and they ſhall noe 
avoid what through their ſtyubborneſs they ſtudy to avoid, bur hill 


Holy Writ. 2. Others think it isanerror in thoſe that copied out 
the Frogheties, bur it is dangerous to admit that. ' 3. Others think, 


that the Prophecy came in the beginning of the Reign of 7eho:akim, | to your diviners p, nor to your [[ dreamers a, LOL tO 


but was to be concealed until the Reign of Zedekiah, 4. I had ra- 
ther agree with thoſe who-think that this Command came to the 
Propher firſt in the time of Jehoiakim, but was to be repeated by the 


at laſt be bron = under by his Power. wo | hi 
9 Therefore hearken nor ye to your prophets o, nor 


your inchanters, nor to your ſorcerersr, which ſpeak 
unto you, ſaying, Yg ſhall not ſerve the king Fr 


Prophet often, and accordingly was ſo until, and in the rime of |DY1ON /. 


Zed:high ; nor that he always went about with Bonds and Yokes 


o Ir is uncertzin whether theſe words were part oC the Meſſage 


abour his neck, but that by times he putthem on, and wentabourt which Jeremiah by Command from God, ſent to the Kings abwe 


with them,as a Type of that Bondz ge,wh'ch the Fews were ſuddegly 
to indure. 

2 Thus ſaith the LORD to me, Make thee: bonds 
and yokes, and put them upon thy neck 5; 

þ God commanderh the Prophet to procure, either by his own 
fabour, or with his Money, ſome Yokes with Bonds to make 


mentioned, or the Prophets words to the Jews, for as thoſ: Pagan 
| Nations, had Divine?s, Dreamers, Exch anters and Sorcer-r5; So the Jew: 
' had them alfo, 7s. 47. 2, 13. the meaning is, hearken ro neng 
of them that pretend as from God to forere!l your eſcap2, from 
cthis Judgment, and not teing wo inte Szrvitude to the 

> 6 - "Weg 


4 King 


I 


Earth, and therefore had a ſpecial propriety in them, and an vnis 
verſa] power over them, it being in his power to ditvoſe of what 


f By the tormer words God gave the Prophet Authority to aſl:rt 38. 


ifs - 


* Chap, 


- 25. 38% 


* Leb? 


Dream:. 


XXV 


7 


that therein he might be a Type both to his own People, and alfs 
the People afrerward mentioned, that they ſhould be in Bondage 

ing of Babylm, and their Yoke ſhuuld be fo faſtned with 
Bonds, that they ſhould not be able to flip them, or get them from 


3 And ſend them to the king of Edom, and to the 
king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and 
co the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by 
the hand of the meſſengers, which come to Jeruſalem 


c Ir wasand is the cuſtom of neighbour Princes, to ſend Am- 
baſladors inro each others Countries to reſide there, and maintain 
correſpondence on the behalf of their Maſters. 'Theſe Nations were 
Neighbours to the Jews, and their Princes had their Ambaſſiders 
Ret: dent at Hieruſalem. Jeremiah is directed. to carry each of theſe 
Amba{ladors a Yoke with a Bond, as a preſent from God: ro their 
Maſters : the meaning he 1s alſo ordered ro tell them in the follow. 


4 And command them |} to ſay unto their maſters, 10r , 


cerning . ||| 


their mas\ | 


fters ſay+ | (1 
ing. | if 


* Din, 4l\fil 
17,2543 "HF | 
e To evince to them that his Dominion extendefk to them, he . I} 


* Chap. 11 | 
28, I 4» [1 
Dan. 2. 


"os 


up: xv. 


xretend to on refee tors \« <mgirpe 'Þ a 
rifers he means Soathſayers, of which were” ſeveral ſorts.” 'q By 
yk Br ach as pretend to Revelatiofis in their ſleep; r By Inchan- 

r+ A Spcerdhs, be meanstheit Aﬀrologets,'2hd' ſuch as oſed New 

- cromancy, or by any. unlawful ways and means, pretended to know 
#14 Tof "Pot they" propheſie a'lye unto! you 7, to/' rEMOVe 
you'far from yourtland, 'and''thar I ſhould drive:you 
out; tid ye ſhould 'per ſh #. 2 O45 + Eo ated 6 Wks 
; Let them come by their pretended knowledge which way they 
wilh iwhar they ſay is falſe. And the. iſſue of your belief of what 
hoy: ſay,/ will benothing: but-your carrying, into, Captivity out of 
your:own- Countty, and your: ruine-and defiruCtion. .  .,.., _ 
- ix #+'Dut the nations that bring-theit necks under the 
yoke of the King of Babylon, and ferve him, thoſe 'will 
Hf 3 *>Þ7 0: 34S 63h ; i'1qgs 4 41 »:jyi 4 : ; .D: P 


ex remain, ſtill in their ow 
and they ſhall cill it, and dwell therein w. 4 
WP | w» Thoſe: that upon wig bl mmoſs, (op without moriog any 
--.-», hoſtile, I | yield, elyes Servants ;to the ,King 0 
4 +15. + Ba ral 42 Mal Len FE NAECA efr TT Th Land'to rill ' rhe 
-+-, ...* Ground, and ſhall dwell the ih, Tris the time when God: is reſo). 
(3 Ved to put an chdiro the! Kiigdor of Fildeh for a time, and to the 
© other Naribhns' mentioned for ever: "There is.therefore-no-relifting 
6f Go#'s*Counſtls!" thofe that moſt quietly! meld-will be uy the!ibeſt 
Condition,, , 24-<# BIA MY LX OT 
' 12 © ſpake atfo'ts' Zedekiah king -of Judah atcor- 
| __  difig to Hltheſt words, ſaying, Bring: your necks un-- 
-.-** derithe"yoke of the king of' Babylon; and ſerve him, 
© and his people, andlive x. tt poi ib, 464556 
©'x-Sorne' think this' was at" #nother'time; but 1t-15 moſt probable | 
i& was che fame elite, oo tl oe 
"14 "Why will ye die, thou,” arid 'thy' people; by the 
ſword, by, the famine; and by" the peſtilence, as, the 
LORD -hath ſpoken againſt..the natian that will not | 
ſerve:the king.iof Babylony. ole os bs | 
"7 That 5s; why wilt thou wilfully: mot only! raine thy (elf; bur | 
thy innocent People by the Sword, 'the Famine; and the Peſti]ence? 3 
theiword is ſpoken by! the Lord, that alllNatiods who will hot wil. 
_ lingly yielfl to the King: of Bebyon, ſhall be thus;deſtroyed. , | 
©" /*.,, 14, Therefore, haarken; not.; untp ;the words. of the 
*** _. . prophets that ſpeak unto you, ſaying, Ye ſhall nog 
_., ſerye.the King of Babylon, for they. prophelie ;* ailye 


#3 46ilis ( 


FE 55-4 4 


: F 
6 f 


' 
*:148 Hit) f4'Jis * 


21. 8& = We ſhall find thronghout all the''7twiſh Story," that wicked 

£4 9. Princes never wanted falſe Prophets, - Eccletiaſtical Miniſters wh6 

**  wonld'enritle God to what' they ſpake in humour ito their Gover« 

roars." Snel Miniſters' they would have; '#nd/uſualy rhey proved 

Fara} to them, {b did '#hab's Prophets, ithat' encouraged him to'go 

'to' Ramoth* Gilead, and*Zedekiah's' Prophets, 'who:perſwaded tim 

not to ſubmit ro' the! King” of Babylon 5 Jeremy! petſwades Zrdekroh, 

not” to hearken.to them 5 thar is,- nor' ro believe'them, nor[foflow 

their advice"; and he giverh' bim'a' good reaſon, beckuſe what they 
——_— T7 - 5-1 34.0, . * (rl Tp 5 hi (a aa ad $9:*06 

"xg For have not ſeht' them faith'the LORD, "yet 

Heb. i= $89, Þropheſie 7, a lye, in my, name d&., Fiat T fighs 

# Iye or [y- AFANG., yOu.1Out, .and that:ye: might perl b, ye, and the 

gy. * prophets 'thar-propheſie unto 'you cn VV 

| #” They" thake' fe of my Name;'and pretend to ſay what they 

fay by iGhmnliflion from! the; /ſaith the! Lord; buo there is /no ſuch 

. thing, I never igave themauthprity ro ſpeak any Tuch things, A And 


i. 77 


ON _— _ y, they do*npt deſign your ruine by, theſe praftices, 
A A A Gore Yee he wi 


be the end of it, for by this means your hearts are hardened againſt 
theiRevelationsof my Will, by 'which I ſhall be'proveked 'to give 
you. _ Ruine,' nor thall they eſcape, for they fhall-be rumet } 
with $04.09! ol bends eb oY owe tans aan oof bo 0 90 
- x6" Alſo-Iſpake'to'the prieſts, and to all this people, 
faying,” Thes faick the, LORD: Hearkeh not to the| 
words.of your. Prophets. that: propheſie unto.you, ſaying, 
” Chap, Beholdithe * veſſels of the LORD's houſe ſhall now' 
8. 3» ſhortly be brought apain from Babylon; for' they pro- 
? L 37 14 45 21:0 eToys 4b nds Fs. ©: er Pee i (4 in. Mil *, 
yheſic al © utito —_F Io. .1.; 
# The __, 1 ©. God's faithful Seryant, ſpared none, but | 
fairhfally' gavewarnitig* to all ſ6rts' 'to tak heed' of the falfe. Pro» 
phers, thay undertook toforetel that the Veſſels:of the Temple car- 
ried away; in; he tans; of. Foheakinyjand his ſor Tehgjakinior Jeconiah, 
b we read, 2 Epron; 36.17, 94 ſhould be| brought back again 


cf whic 
ro Hiriale, iN 2 ſhot: time. , - oo WF 
6t utico t Gn ſerve'the'king 'of Baby 
1d this'Gty Be laid waſte? 


+ 1 Hoarkeni' 
lonand live : wherefore ſhould 

e Believe them not, bur fatisfis your ſelves, 35 to, Gold's Provi- 

| \thnt ſubje&to & chu, 


* 1 


[ 


dence With reſpeft fo you, and be contenir to be 
of Bebylts, 1Þ thay you have Your lives for a prey though you b 
pop Sep to You Aceoms ations,and plenteous and, endif way 
ef life" if ye db not, your City wall certaivly be lai walte, and why! 
E ſhould you gull ſucha Judgmenr upon your own Heads? ' | 
"B&G ' "x 8- But 'if they be pro ets," and if the Word of 'the; 
| 4... LORD be with them, let them now "make intefceſ.] 
fion to the ORD'0f bolts, tha the Veſſels Which arelefe 
ir che'hoviſe of the LORD, atid i3 the hbuſe of the king 
of Judah, and at Jeruſalem go not to Babylon g. | '' ''* 
_"FAthe5 be rrus Proghets, giid | 
ih tead of fortelling the bringing back of thp yeſſels carried away. 
DR APoly chrraves to hinder the carrying away of what 
Cee oe che either in the Hcuſe of the Lord, of in 


7 ERBMIA Et 


King of Bal :n,for you ſhall ſerve the King of Bubylor. By prophets | 
he. 1s IS futh, as” By Di- | 


he was wont to deliver his Prop! ies, TP, 


have any Communion with, God, "that rf was there 37 Years- 


." 19 'T'For'thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts concernins 
the pillars, and concetning the ſea;and concerning the 
baſes, and concerning the. reſidue of the veſlels;that re. 
os Kits} Me A parts; of the Temple, or Veſſels uſed init. rid: 

'2b Which "Nebuthadnerzar'kitig of ' Babylon took 
not, when he carried, away * captive Jeconiah the fot * ch: 
of Jehoiakim king of Jydah; from JerulalemcoBabylon, 24 ” 
and all the, nobles of Judah. ang Jeruſalem:;. © ? 


1 - -- Concerning ite perſons. and things which the King.of Babylos 


then carried away; See 2:iKings 244,13, 149 35... *; 
-- 21+Yea, thus faith-the LORD! of hoſts, -the God of 
Iſrael, concerning the'veſlels that remain in the houſe 
of the" LORD, and ig tlie ticuſe of the, Kitg of Judat 
and of Jeruſalem k. [1's #7 > aluafbiin} 5 ny | : - r 
;k The Prophet inlargeth bis prophetical Threatning, iand mote 
2t extend to all other Veſlels of price, inthe Houſes So _ nes 
the Nob es, or more wealthy Citizens... ' OG "Sr 

22 "They ſhall be SG atidthere Chill *, cyro,? 
they be /, untill "rhe day hat * 'T viſit them; ſaith the 35. 2+, 
LORD m, then will Ibrjing theniup, and reſtore them Chzv. 291 
to this..place z..., v.20 ; 44444 feas £104,"-f5 65780 "Ig - = ff , . 
.. I See-the fulfilling pf this: Prophecy, 2. Kings, 25.: 15 IG 
2 Chron. 36. 18. and that they abode in'!Babylen ell "lk. Po _ 
Captivity, appeareth from Dam 54 2:1, Where:we.tead of Belſhazz ar's 
fending forthem.to drink Winej, FiGin fatal Feaſt, \Tharis ug- 
til rhe expiration of the time of the Jewiſh Captivity, which Wag 
70 Years." The fulfilling of that pert of 'the Priphodey- we have 
Ezra I-'7, $8, 9.'' in theſe words; Aſo Cyrus the King 'byought forth the 
veſſels 'of rhe houſe” of the' Lord; ' which Nebuchadnetzay ha" byoight” forth 
our of Hieruſlem 4 ndhad par them tn the Houſe of kis' Gogs ' Ewen choſe 
aid Gyrus King of Perſia bring fatth'by the hand of Mithredugh hb Trepurir 
ans nuwibred thent un '$ bexbazzhy, the Prince bf Tuddh" nd'th;s ;; A 
, number of them, thirty' thitrgets of gold, thouſand targers df fiber, ning 
' and twenry knives, 'thirty'bafens' of $68," file ' baſons of ' a fecohal fort fog 
i hundred and ten, 'iand other wiſſels; @:; thauſand Al the Ueſſils 'of gold and 
of ſilver were fee rhiuſund. and fuur fundred. All theſe: did Sbexboz's 
war bring up wit chem of the Captivity, that we! g brought up from Bak > 
lon, t0 Hieruſalem Se punCtually was Jeremial's Prophecy in (138 Hf 
TY; _ fo exi&tly dgth one' part of Holy Write agree with 
another, 'which are'great'Arguthents'to prove the Diyi Ii 
ty of the” Holy Seriprures.' For morn ifoehien 0s FAUFhOfL: 
T EINE Cofbake Thitd 4i+i 16gnt 'Þ Gazur ir di: 4:5th 4 
bo 38at 4," bs j * 1's CO HA P..: XXVIII, 13-1] ff 


Ca. i! 


bf dials i/ «+ 1 ; | <4] # io 746 BY ; , , a . 
Hannaniah's falſe Prophecy : Jeremiak' S Anſwer, | 1=—9. "Hanania fo 


3 4 


I Ren th» 1 0 Cr 
' AND: it came..to paſs the ſame year;in the- begin 
'4 "ning of the reign'of Zedekial' King of Judah. if 
the fqureh year; 0nd in the fifth month, hap Hapani- 
ah the ſon of Azur the prophet, which 2165 of Gibe. 
on 6, paks untg me, in the houſe ot the LORD, in 
the prelence:o! D 


F5.1 FI ,qi(}14) 50 'th IV3»9Þ -t)Þ& ©} Lb 
nce of the. prieſts, and of allche people, ſayinge 
i... # Here is a great appearing difficulty, wiz. how the fourth Year, 
cquld, be, called che, baginning of Zefekigh's Reign, who reigned in 
all bur . 21,,; Years,,.Which, it they, be divided into; three, parts, the 
four th-Yeor, can hardly, be called in; agy,propriety, be beinning of his 
Reign Many ,things:ars, ſaid .t9,ygne ,chis knor, which by tuchias 
axe curious, may be, xead-borh, in the Enzliſþ Annot ations, andin Mx 
Pools, Sywopſic, IT thall only, repeat, what ſgemeth tq, boch| them, and 
4eemeth jo, 20 me, the, beſt jolutipn, Though it, be taid in the fourth 
Tear, yet 1t.is not {aid,, in the fourth Year of Zedekiab!s Rein: the 
therefore think, that the fourth»Yegr of the Sabbaticsl courſe.is here = 


tended, The; Zews, had.a king of Jubilee SEL. ſeven. Years,. it was'z 


Year when the Land was to,reſh, and, hoc. be Tilled,, Li, as, n,..2 

3, 4. and in that Year they were to releaſe their Debtors and Ser. 
vants, Deuts 15. 1. whith notion ofithis fourth/Year 
if the Year wherein the ry 


'both' in the Names which he giveth unto God; and in the ſpeaking 
'of what God would do, as if already done! tt nn GP 
* 2 Within two! full years will” bring gaiti into + Heb. 


'";] Nebuchadnezzar king of. Babylon, took-away from this ©” 


0, this place, Jecokiah 
e T.cap- f Heb. 


the Kings Houſe, "dr ih" Hieruſalem, which is,'to be dong no othe HV 
Spy; rhag by pl Jaitig wich God to turg ayvay, his Wrarh, and o_ | LORD ; for. I will break che yoke of the king of Baby- 
& vring*thofe forcJudgments which *be is moſt certainly bringing | lon f. it } | jen ot of ofuig nia boa) 0 
vv you, #5 2 & 36:33 x O1 INCH 210.83 3 : Only 


CHIP RX, 


4 Chi 


F Chap. 


27, 2, 


| Chap. XXVIIE. 


F Chap. 
27, 2, 


A Ct Sb 
hs 


FF E k 

f Only 1 15 admifable, that bzivg ſo nigh the King's Court he 
ſhould mentioa the return of Feho!akim, or Jecomiah, which had it 
been true ; muſt have been to the prejudice of Zedekiah, for Jeco- 
2iab was the right Heir to the Crown, being the Son of Jehv:iakim, 
Zedekaih his Uncle was put in by the Conquerour bur it 1s pro- 
bable, he ſaw Jehoiakim was more acceptable to the People, and that 
the Fattion for the Nephew was greater than for the Uncle. Falſe 
Teachers aic always on the greateſt ſide, either for number, or for 
Power. 

5 Then the prophet Jeremiah ſaid unto the pro- 
phet Hananiah in the preſence of the prieſts, and in 
the preſence of all the people that ſtood in the houſe 
of the LORD. 

6 Even the prophet Jeremiah ſaid, Amen g : the 
LORD do ſo, the LORD perform thy words, which 
thou haſt prephelied, to bring again the veſſels of the 
LORD's houte, and all that 1s carried away captive 
from Babylon into this place. 

g The true Prophet Jeremiah, ſpeaks to this falſe Prophet with 
as much bo'dneſs as he had ſpoke to him in impudence, and in the 
ſame preſence of tle Prieſts, and of the People, but with a przface 
of great Chariry and Modeſty, Amen ( ſaith he ) which Farticle 
3s uled in Holy Wrir, either as # Particle of 4 rtion, as it is moſt 
ordinarily uſed both in this ſingle form, and doubled by our Savi- 
our in the Goſpel. Or, as a Particle of wiſhing and praying, upon 
which account it 1s uled in the Lord's Prayer, though t:ere it 
ſignifierh more than here, w:z. a Faith or Belief, that God will grant 
the Petitions, as well as a deſire that he would grant rhemy here it 
ſignifieth no more rai. the larter, and is expounded by the next 
words ; Nor indeed dorh it, or can it here fignifie ſo much as an 
ablolute hear y defire, for Feremiah could not heartily pray for that 
which God had told him he wou'd not do. Jeremy therefore muſt 
be nnderftood here, either to j:a'e fpoken only as a Man, reſtify 
Ing the kindne!s he had for tis Courrry, then the ſence is; If itbe 
the Will of God or may it be the Will of God ; I wiſh what thou 
haſt ſa:d m.ghrt come to pats 5 or eiſe in ſenſu conpoſtio, 9. ad, The 
Lerd give u:.t6 this Peop'e an heart ro refurm and amend their 
ways, that che n ords \v#i11ch rhov hait ſpoken may come to paſs., 

7 Nevertnecets, heai thou now this word that I ſpeak 
in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people h. 

h Tne «or which I am now about to ſpeak concerneth thee, 
and nor thee only, bur all the People, therefore do thou mark ir 
well and I1-t th:m mark 1t alſo. | 

8 The Prophers that have been before me, and be- 


' Fore thee of oid, prophetied both againſt many coun- 
tries, and againſt great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, 


and of p<ſtuence z | 

5 Trat is, rhou and I are notthe firſtProphets that have foretz1d 
to Countries anu Natons the great Judgments of God coming ups 
or: them, Way, Evil, PeFilence, by evil, ſome think is to be under» 
Nood Famine, but it !s 1 t muca material. 

9 Tae prophet which propheſieth of peace &, when 
the word of the propnet ſhall come to paſs, ther (hall 
the Prophet be known that tne LORD hath truly 
ſent him /. 

k By Peace is here meant Proſperity, all good, being by the He- 
brews uſually underſtood under the notion of Peace The Prophers 
eirher prpheſied evil or good, according as God revealed his Will 
unto them; what way was for them to ditcover whether the Pro- 

hers were truly ſent of God, yea, or no? / It was known by the 
| ne this was the Rule God ſer, Deut. 18. 22. When a Prophet ſpeak- 
eth in the name of the Lord, if the thing fo'low not, nor come to paſs, that 
Ts the thing which the Lord hath no: ſpoken. But this was not true on the 
contrary part, for a Prophet might ſpeak athing, which thing 
might come to pals, and yet he be none of che Lord's Prophets, nor 


| fo be hearkn<d to, as appeareth from Deut. 13. 1, 2. Some have 


thought, that Prophecies concerning good things always were 
brought to paſs, if the Prophet were a true Prophet, but it appeir- 
eth otherwiſe from Chap. 18. 9, 10. Prophecies both concerning 
good and evil, might not come to paſs, and yet the Prophet be a 
erue Proph:t, in caſe the Manvers of the People altered ; for in all 
Pri miſ-s or Thiearnings of temporal good or evil, there 1s a Con- 
dition to be un-ler{tood 3 God neither by his Promiſes bindeth tim- 
ſ-If ro do good to wicked Ven, nor by his Threarnings tiethup 
His own hands from ſhewing mercy to ſuch as rurn good ; »u? 
ſome obſerve y-t this d:ffcr-nce, that good things are in Scripture 
never abſotwely promiſcd, but rvey come certainly to paſs, and 
are fulfi!ied, bir God for cerrour often threatzneth evil things, 
without expi-fling any condition, when notwithſtanding a Cond:s 
tion i+ urd-ritod, vpon the tulfilling of which, the threatning 
cometh nor top>ſs, as it was in the caſe of Niniveh, upon te Pro- 
phecy of of Jou#h. Bur the greater difficulty is ro determine by 
whit Rule tiey could judge onea true or falſe Propher, if t:cy 
might not a'ways judge by the event, the coming, or not coming 
to pa's of what h- p:oph-ſied. I anſwer, they were to judge from 
the Word of God, as well as from the Event, 1/s. 8. 20. there- 
fore Deut. 13 1, 2. the P:ople were commanded not to hearke:: to 
that Prophet, which ſhou-d confirm what he ſaid by a Sign oc 
Wonder, if his ſcope were by it to p:rſwade Peopie ro Idlatry. 
So that if a Prophet propheſied good, «nd proiperity to any People 
the People were ro conlider what his ſcop: was, and wheth-r what 
he propheſicd was according t9 the Law of God, which ſpeaketh 
no geoi fo a wicked impenitent Peope; and tho what he ſaid 
came t2 piſs, yet he was to be determ.ned no true Prepher,if what 
he ſaid were contrar» roGod's revealed Will,or his ſcope in ſpeak- 
Ing of it was & ha: den People in ſinful courſes, or roſ duce them 
from ch- right ways of God. Jeremiah here, as to the tryal of the 
rruth of his and Hananiah's contrary Prophecies appea eth to the 
Even”, telling him, that he as a Man, heartily withed that his 
words might prove true. 


10 Then Hananiah the prophet took the * yoke from 
off the Propnet Jeremiah's neck, and brake it m. 

m The Proph:t Jeremy's coming into the Temple, with a Yoke 
upon his Neci, as a Type of the Yoks of tac King ot Babylon, un- 


( 


E M 1 3 
der which the Jews were to come, gave occaſion to the aff ont 
given him by the falſe Prepher; in a further degree of impudence, 
being thus ccnfronted. by 7:remiah, be pulls the Yoke off Feremeh s 
Neck, and breaketh it in an high and impudent contempt of God, 
and his Will revealed by this Prophet, ar d confirmed by this YokE 
as a Sign, adding alſo the following words. 3, : 
11 And Hantniah ſpake in the preſence of all the 
people, ſaying, Thus faith the LORD, even fo will I 
break the yoke" of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon 


} of which his Miniſters are the Stewards and Adminiftrators3 ſo the 
Devil hath his Sacraments, of which his prephers are the Admin- 
| ſtrators, God by his Prophet Jeremy had revealed his Will, as to 
the King of Babylon's ſucceſs againſt many Nations, and bringing 
them into his Servirude z as a Sacrament or Sign of this, he bad 
commanded Jeremiah to put on a Yoke with Bonds; Hananiah, the 
falſe Prophet, cometh in the Name of God, and declares the con- 
trary, that within two Years God would break the King of Baby= 
len,and free theNations in ſubje&ion to him3 «nd as a Sacrament or 
| S:gn to gain credit to this falſhood, he plucks off Feremah's Ycke; 
and bre! ks it, and expo2unds himſelf, that God ſhould fo break the 
King of Babylon", Yoke from the Neck of all Nations, and prerends 
he had a Commiſſion from God to ſay this. 0 Jeremiah not able to 
indure to hzar ſuch Lyes, gocth away in Teſtimony of his diflenc 
from him, and adhcrance to what he had ſaid. | Wh 
12 Then the word of the LORD came unto Jere- 
miah the propher after that Hananiah the propher had 
broken the yoke from off the neck of the prophet 
Jeremiah, ſaying p. | | : 
þ> Sometime after chis, God taking notice cf the affront, put 
upon his Propher Jeremy, for faithfully diicharging the Meſlage 
with which he had eBtruſted him,revealcth his Mind unteJeremiah, 
that he might declare it, unto the Pcople, and particularly to this 
falſe prophet. _. --*: :... | 

13 Go and tell Hananiah, ſaying, Thus ſaith the 
LORD, Thou haſt broken the yokes of wood, bur 
.thou ſhalt make for them yokes. of iron 4. 

q Jeremiah ſeeing the impuderice of Hananieh, and that his fure 
ther diſcourſe with him would do no good, but it may be have 
cauſed more dinger to himfelf, propheſying what was more in- 
grateful to the People, than what the falie prophet propeſied, and 
poflibly deſirous further to know the Will of God, withdrew him« 
tcIlf. Soon afrer God ſends him beck to the People, and ro Hangs 
nah with this M-ſlage: That he by his falſe Prophecy Fad done the 
People no good, but much burr, further inc:nſ-d God agunſt 
them, and provock:d him to m ke their Judgment heavier, giving 
| them iron yokes, initead of thoſe of Wood. 

14 For thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, * I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck 
of ail theſe nations, that they _ 


——— 


r Fur no withſtanding all he had ſaid, God was reſolved to ju- 
Nifie his word, and to bring them urder ſubjeQion to Nebuchad:s 
n:2247, and to give all they bad alſo into his power. 
is Then faid the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah 
the prophet, Hear now Hananiah, The LORD hath not 
{ent thee but thou makeſt this people ro truſt in a lye [; 
ſ Jeremiah being a ſecond time corfirmed in tke truth of hisRe- 
velation, and having bkewiſe a ſpecia! Revelztion relating to this 
falſe Prophet, comes now and teils him his doom, wiz. That he 
ſhould die within a year, becauſe he had taught people to believe, 
and to hope fer, and to truſt to what was falſe, and they were 
never lik» :o ſee. 


16 Tizerefore thus ſaith the LORD, Behold, I will 
caſt thee from off the face of the earth : this year ſhalt 


che LORD xz. 


t And becauſe by this his D-Arince he had mide God a Lyar, 2 


him. 
17 So Hananiah the prophet died the ſame year, 
in the ſeventh month «. | 
u That is, within the compaſs of a year afrer that Jeremiah had 
ſpoken theſe words, within two months afrer that Jeremy had thus 
Propheſi-d, as app=areth from ver. r. ſo dangzrous a thing it is for 
Miniſters to teach People contrary to the revealed Will of God, 


CH AP. XXIX. 


Jeremiah's Letter to the Captives in Babylon, to be quitet their, x, 7 
Not: to believe falſ: Prophets 5 nor expe# to return till after 70 Tears, 
8, 14. The Deftrufion of 4p » who remained in Judah for their 
Diſobedience, 15,——19. The fearfull end of two Lying Prophets, 
20, —23. Shemaiah's Letter againft Jeremiab, 24, 29. why 
readeth his Doom. Jo, 32, 


Ow theſe are the words of the letter, that Jere- 


miah the prophet ſent from Jeruſalem unto the 
reſidue of the eiders, which were carried away capti- 


the peopic whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away 
captive fiom Jeruſalem to Babylon #4, | | 

a3 There were two carryings into the captivity of Babylon, the 
larter about 11 or 12 Years after the former, the firſt was in rhe 
time of Jehctakin,of which we read in 2 Kirgs 24.14, When rheprinces, 
and all the mighty men of valor, evmm ten rhnuſand captives, and all 
the crafirmen and ſmiths were c tried away, as weread ther, amongſt 
whom were ſome Prieſts and P:ophets. 


6 I. 2 After 


* from the neck of all nations within the ſpace of two WR 
full years ». And the prophet Jeremiah went his way 0. Chap. 
n As God hath his Sacraments to confirm the truth of his Word, *7* 7* - 


ves, and to the prieſts, and to the prophets, and toall 


Chap. XXIX 


ſerve Nebuchad- * D-vt- 


. nezzar king of Babylon, and they ſhall ſerve him, anc Fs 
* bave given him the beaſts of the field aiſo 7. 27-64 


thou die, becauſe thou haſt taught *|] rebellion againſt * Deus 
J. Jo 
Chap» 


325 


cont: aditing his Wil! reveal-d by Jeremiah, anÞby it taught Peo- Heb 
pie to hold out againſt Nebuchsdnezzar, and not quietly to yield to Rewole. 


4 


Chap. XXIX. 
2 After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and 
2 Kings || the eunuchs, che princes of Judah and Jeruſalem, and 


:12, 97 the carpenters, and the ſmiths were..departed from Je- ; 
4 r Cham z- 
| rufalem 6. 


at 6 After his Captivity FY | 
t 3 By the hand of Elaſah the ſon of Shapan, and Ge- | 
mariah the fon of Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah king of Ju- 


dah ſent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Ba- 
bylon, ſaying c FEE 
A irHyes' KA, of Judah having ſome occaſion to ſend two 
Meſſengers, named Elaſs and Gemaria to Babylon, whether to carry | 
his Trib.it Monzey, or upon what other errand is notexpreſled, Je- 
remiah knowing, that as there were ſome falſe Prophets at Feruſalem, | 
who fed People with hopes of a ſpeedy return, ſo there were ſome | 
with them in Babylon, who did" the like, '{ two of which he after- ; 
wards in this Chapter refle&erh upon ) writeth the following Let- | 
ter, and ſends it by theſe two Meflengers ro qui=tthe Peoples minds, |} 


i 
| 


' 


- 
LY 


phets, and raiſed up to vain and idle hop 
Ground at all. 


Ifrael, unto all that are carried away captives, whom 
I have cauſed to be carried away from Jerufalem to Ba- 


byloa 9d. | ] 

d So as this Letter was not wrote from himſelf adviſing them 
charitably, buthe had commiſſion from God, by whom he mindeth 
them, as the principalvefficient cauſe they were ordered to be car- 
ried away by, though their own fins were the meritorious cauſe, 
and Neburhadnezzar with his Captains and Soldiers were the inſtru» 


mental cauſe. | 
5 * Build ye houſes, and dwell i» them, and plant 


gardens, and eat the fruis of them, 

6 Take ye wives, and beget ſons and daughters, and 
take wives for your ſons, and give your daughters to 
husbands, that they may bear ſons and daughters, that 


ye may be increaſed there, and not diminiſhed e. | 

e That is, be not uneaſie in your minds, not refolving what to 
do, through the Prophelies of the falſe Prophets, that rell you the 
Captivity thall be but two Years, or atleaſt very ſhort; bur do all 
things which you would do, if Babylon were to be your fixed ha- 
bitation, ( as it is like to be for ſeventy Years ſay the Prophets, 
what they pleaſe) Marry, and give, and take in Marriage, do what- 
ſoever it becemeth prudent Men to do, who would accommodate 
themſelves in a place where they are like ro abide, and preſerve their 
Families, that they might not be utterly extinguiſhed. The words 
muſt not be underſtood as a Precept, obliging all in the Captivity 
to do every of theſe things, which it may be they were nor all a- 
ble to do, but as a conſel and advice not to forbear any thing 
of this nature, which they would do, it they did fully believe 
they were to abide in a piace ſeventy Years: | 

7 And ſeek the peace of the city, whither I have 
cauſed you to be carried away captives f and pray un- 
to the LORD for it g, for in the peace thereof thall ye 


-« have peace 6. 

f Thar is, ſeek to God for it, or rather live peaceably init, and 
by all lawful means ſeek the welfare of it, do not raiſe any Tumuls 
or Seditions, nor take part with thoſe that do. g And while your 
Capiviry laſts, do you pray for it, ( from whence thoſe who think 
that Chritt hath add<d new moral Precepts, and reckon this Pre- 
cept of praying for Enemies as one may underſtand, rhat praying 
for Enemies was but a Branch of that Love to our Neighbour, 
whica Gud required under the Old Teſtament) for it was lawful 
for them to przy againl{t Babylon ar other times, Pſal: 137. 8, Jer. 
5I, 35. but when God hath put a Yoke upon our Necks, we muſt 
patiently waic until he takes it off, The Lawyers ſay, that Prote- 
#ion requireth alledgance t0 Governours; this Text lets us know alſo 
that i: requizeth our Prayers for them, though they be Conquerors 
and Tyrants. s For God having by his Providence, caſt us under 

_ Their power, our peace dependcth upon theirs. 


8 4 For thus ſaich the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Tiracl, Let nor your prophets, and your diviners that be 
*Chap:1g, 18 the midſt of you, * deceive you, neicher hearken 


' 74 & 23. tO your dreams Which ye cauſe to be dreamed 5. 
*t. & 27, # The Lord knows that ye have a company of falſe Prophets, that 
I5, tell you other things, and promiſe you aſudden return out of your 
Captivity, pretending to know it by Revelation from God, or by 
divination, &%«, or to have it diſcovered to them in Dreams. Iris 
the will of God that you ſhould not hearken to them, for they do 
bur deceive you, and ye are acceflary to your own Ruine; they ſee 
you are plealcd to hear ſuch Stories, that cauſeth them to dream, as 
Chap. 5. 31. The prephets propheſie faiſly, and the priefts bear rule by their 
w2uns, and my people love to have it ſo, thus Iſa. 30. 10. They ſaid to 
the ſeers, ſee mot, and to the prophets, propheſie not to 5 right things, ſpeak 
unto us jmooth things, propheſie deceits> Falſe Teachers and Guides of 
Peoples Souls, are the greateſt plague can befal a Nation, People 
from them expeCing to hear the mind of God, and for the moſt 
part,people are acceſlary to their own Ruine in them: Ir can indeed 
hardly bz imagined, what other temptation, perſons whoſe Ofhce 
It 1s to reveal the mind of God, ſhould have to do otherw wiſe, but 
the hbumoring and pleaſing of a corrupt people, who through their 
fondneſs of their Luſts are not patient of ſound Dottrine, ſo as 
though the Church of God hath in all Ages been troubled 
wah dreamers, yet it is a wicked people that cauſeth them to 
ream. | 
5 For they propheſie © falſly unto you in my name; 
have-not ſent them, faith the LORD. 
| ' 10 For thusſaith the Lord, that after ſeventy years 


- © Ver: 28- 


[ 
gel 


=: 

HEE A | 
- + Heb: #n I 
Le. 


# 
o 
Fg 
AF 


s 
_ 

> 

HC 
£ 


—_ 
+ 


3 FIR EB M 1 4 'H. 


and to help to compoſe their Spirits, diſturd'd by theſe falſe Pro- ; 
S for which there wasno | 


Chap. XXIJx. 


k From this Text appears that the ſeventy Years Captivity were 


tobe accounted fi om the firſt carrying into Captivity in the time 


of Jchogakin, fo that 11 Years of it were ecliplcd, before Zedekah 
was Carried away. Whatever, ſaith the Propher, theſe Dreamers 
tell you, you muſt abide 50 Years in Babylon accounted from your 
ficſt going thither, ir is therefore your wiſdom to acquietce 1n the 
will of God, and to compole your ſelves, and ro inccurage you, 
rhe Lord by me afſureth you, that after thoſe 70 Years ſhall be ex- 
pired as he hath now vitited you with evil, ſo he will viſit you for 
tor good, andfulfil the promiſe he hath made to you, and you ſhall 
return again to Jeruſalem 3 we have the fulfilling of this recorded 


' In 2 Chron: 36,21, 22. Ezral, 1, The promiſe was before, Chap. 


25: 12, and 26: 22. Daniel underſtood it from the words of this 
Prophecy, Dan: g. 2. which put him upon Prayer, at the expiration 
of that time. 
11 For I know the thoughts that I think towards 
you, faith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and nor of 41, , 
evil, to give you an Þ expected end /. and expe 
] This Deliverance will nor depend upon your own Merits, but 4ation, 
upon my own Mercy, and kind thoughts and purpoſes I have for 
the Seed of Abraham my Servant, and I am reſolved in my own 
thoughts what to do, I intend not the blotting out ofthe Name of 


4 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the God of | Irael from the Earth, but togive ſuch an end to their trouble as 


themſelves expett and deſire, though nor ſo ſoon as they may ex- 
pett it, being deceived by their Prophets. There ſhall be an end 
of your Captivity in my time, and that is after you ſhall have fuls 
filled 70 Years in that Caprivity. 

12 Then (ball ye * call upon me, and ye ſhall 


pray unto me, and Twill hearken unto you . 
. m I willnot only giveyou a temporal ſalvation and Deliverance, 
and bring you into your own Land, but you ſhall go thither with 
new Hearts, you ſhall worſhip Idols no more, bur you ſhall wore 
ſhip me. and be ſerious and diligent in your Addreſſes and Appli- 
cations to me, andI will liſten to you inthoſe Applications. 

13 And * ye ſhall ſeek me, and find we, when ye 
ſhall ſearch for me with all your heart ». 
 # Thar 1s, ſincerely; as Pſal: 119. 2. 

14 And * I will be found of you, faich the LORD, pe 
and I will turn away your captivity, and * I will gather 047 ge 
you from all the nations, and from all the places, whi- Ifa: 55: 6; 
ther I have driven you, ſaith the LORD, and I will *Chapi2z/ 
bring you again into the place, whence I cauſed you to 3: 


be carried away captive w., 

 w This verſe containeth no more than was #ſaid before, only is 
15 repeated in a litle different phraſe, for the further confirmation 
of their Faith, and the promile is a little inlarged. God faith, he 
will be foundof them; that is, he will anſwer them. Ir is expreſſed 
in this notion to correſpond with the term ſeeking, by which Prayer 
is expreſſed, and to let us know, that thole that will have God's 
favour mult fnd it ; which implyeth a ſeeking and : inquiry after its 
The promite which before mentioned only their return from Baby= 
lon, is enlarged,and made here to extend to all places whither they 
were driven, for though the body of the people were cartied ta 
Babylon, yet it is more than probable,that many of them ſhifted for 
themſelves into other Countries, and were in Exile, but not in 
Captivity, - Cyr his Proclamation, $g Chron: 36: 22, 23. extended 
to his whole Empire. 


15 \ Becauſe ye have ſaid, The LORD hath rai- 
ſed us up prophets in Babylon x. 


» The Prophet here turneth his ſpeech to ſome wicked Jews, 
that were in Babylon, or in Judea, and more believed ſome falſe 
Prophets, whotold them of a much quicker return, than Jeremy 
telling them the truth from the Mouth of God. - 

16 Know, that thus ſaiththe LORD, of the king that 
fitteth upon the throne of David y, and of all the peoe 
ple that dwell in this city,and of your brethren that are 
not gone forth with you into captivity. 
9 The word know is, as ſome think, needleſly ſupplyed, for "the 
following Particle might be as well tranſlated, for, or becauſe, or 
therefore. By the King he meaneth Zedekiah, whom he chuſeth to 
expreſs under the notion of him that ſitteth upon the Throne of 
David, to take away the vain hopes which the Jews conceived from 
the promiſes which God had made to David and to his Seed. 
17 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, behold I wilſend 
upon them the * ſword, the famine and the peſtilence, * Chap. 
and will make them like * vile figs that cannot be eaten, euhap: 14 
they are ſo evil. | a 
18 And I will perſecute them with che ſword,8 with 
the famine, and with the peſtilence, and * will deliver *Deu: 28 
them to be r «moved to a)lthe'kingdoms of the earth, 25 Chils: 


t * to be a curſe, and an aſtoniſhment, aad an hifling, CRIST. 


anda reproach among all the Nations whither I have dris ,,,c. 
ven them z, *Chap:42, 
zTheſe verſes contain no more than the threatning which we have 18; 
had more than once before. He had compared them to vile Figs, 

chap. 24: 8. and Yer;9, and 10, there threatned them with being 
made a Reproach, a Proverb, a Taunt, and a Curſe; and conſuming 
them with the Sword, Famine and Peſtilence ; the ſame thing before 
delivered by word of Mouth to thoſe in Jude, is here repeated in 

in a Letter to that part of the Jews in Babylon, to take them off from 
giving credit to their falſe Prophets whether in Jud or in Babylon, 

who deluded them with the promiſes ofa ſpeedy return. Believe 

it ( faith the Prophet ) you ſhall be ſo far from returning whatever 

your idle Prophets tell you, that your Brethren that are here ſhall 

be brought to you, ordeſtroyed with the Sword, the Famin, and the 
Peſtilence, or ſcattered into other Kingdoms, where they ſhall 

be made, a curſe and an aſtoniſhment,and an hiſſing and a reproach. 


g0 and *Dan:g;3, 
&c. 


*Lev: 26; 


40. 
Deut.3o,x 


*Deut:4:7 


> = 


be accomplithed at Babylon, I will viſit you, and per- 
form my good word towards you, in cauſing you to re- 
eurn to this place &.. 


19 Becauſe they have not hearkned to my words, 


! Cha 


Fee Ge 


:b: 20. 


| FChap: 2 3 


| 
{ 


ſaich the LORD @, which * I ſent unto them by my *Chap:25, 
| ſervants 4. & 3933 


IG Rae LAS et 


! Chap. 


Fee Gen. 


8: 20. 


| FChap: 23. 


On 
ML 


XXIX, 


' wives þ, and have ſpoken Iiying words in my name, 


lem; but we cannot imagine that the Names of all the Towns in 
Judah are to be found in Scripture, he is the.c2 in this chapter cal- 


ſervancs the prophets, riſing up early, and ſending 
them b, but ye would not hear faith the LORD c. 

a Acontempt of the word of the Lord was the cauſe of this peo» 
Ples ruine, and will be the cauſe of ruine to any People. See 
Chap: 7: 26. and 11. 7,8. and 17. 23, b Left they thou'd ſay that 
they only diſobeyed the Prophets, God mindeth rhem, that in not 
hearkning to them, they did not kearken to him. The ſame 
Thing Chriſt ſaith of the Goſpel Miniſters, Luke 10: 16. The nor 
believing, or not obeying, what Miniſters teach not in a due dif- 


Charge of their Office of revealing the will of God, is no contempt 


of God, but of them who for that cauſe deſerve ro be contemned; 
but ſuppoſing thar what Miniſters deliver bethe mind and will of 
God revealed in holy Writ, and but a true explication and applica- 
tion of that, not to hearken to God, and not ro hearken to rhem 
15 the ſame thing- c Ye wilfully r:fuſed to be'ieve them, ſpeaking 
the Truth to you in my Name, and to obey thoſe monitions they 
gave you by my direC&tion, All this was a not hearing God. 

20 C4 Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, all 
ye of the captivity whom T have ſent from Jeruſalem 
to Babylon d. 

d Thoſe Phraſes I have ſent, and I have driven, &c. are diligent- 


to all the people that are ar Jeruſaiem, and to Zepha- 


niah the ſon of Maaſeiahthe prieſt, and toall the prieſts, 


the houſe of the LORD, * for every man that is. mad, 
o and maketh himſelf a prophet, that thou ſhouldft * 
put him in priſon, and in the ſtocks p. © ee 

” That .is High Prieſt, as ſome have thought, but it appears 
from 2 Kings 25: 18. that Seraiah was at this time the High Prieſt, 
and this Zephaniah was the ſecond Prieſt, as he is there tiled 3 as 
alio chap: 52; 24 nor muſt any think, that the Jehoiada here meant, 
was the immediat Predeceſſor .of Zephaniah, for beſides that Jehoiade 
was High Prieſt, which Zephaniab never was ; there were near 200 
Years berwixt the death. ot Jehojads, and this time, inthe fiead 
therefore here ſignifieth, that thou ſhouldiſt be like the good Bigh 
Prieſt Jehoiada, unleſs ſome other Jeh:iaas was meant, who was ture 
ned our, and this Zephaniah Put in his room.” 0 That thou mighreſt 


ly to be obſerved by us There is no evilin Cities or Nations, 
which is an evil of puniſhment ; but whoever be the Inſtruments to , 
bring it, God is the Author of ir. Theie Phralcs alſo ſignified ro | 
thoſe Fews, that God was likziieit ro know beſt how long they 
ſhould ſtay there, becauſe he ſent them chither. 


2: Thus faich the LORD of hoſts, the God of Ifra- 
el, of Ahab the ſon of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the 
{on of Maaſeiah, which propheſie a lie unto you in my 
name, Behold I will dz liver them into the hand of Ne- 
buchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he thall flay chem 


before your eyes e. ; 

e Of theſe two pe: ſons we read no more in holy Writ ; that 
they preteaded co be Prophets, that they abuſed the Name of God, 
A, ro reveal tis will, when as what they ſaid was not the 

1i] of God, but a falthood, we learn our ofthis Verſe, and that 
they wer: both of them burnt by the King of Babylon, we find in 
Per: 22. what the falthods rhey publiſhed were, is not expricſſed, 
but ir 15 molt probable they were ſome of thole that pretended that 
God had revealed to them, that within two years, or a ſhoit time, 
the Caprtives carried away with Jehorakim, ihould return out of Ba- 
bylon, God here tells thoſe thar were of the captivity, that thoſe 
two wretches ſhould tiemſeives be {lain by the King of Babylon. 

22 * And of them ihal! bs taken up a curle by all 
the captivicy of Judah, which are in Babylon, laying, 
the LORD make chee like Zedekiah, and like Ahab, 
whom the king of Babylon rolted in the fire f. 


f As falſe teachers are of the higheit fort of Tranſgreſflors, ſpeaking 
lies in the Name, and unq-r the pretence of the Authority of the 


God of Truth : So God in his proviceace o:dinarily makes them 
the greateſt examples of his vengeance. God thicataech to bring 
them to an end that thould turn 1nro a Proveib, that when Mea 


had amind to curle others, withing them the greateit evils, they 
ſhould pray to God to make them likz 4446 and Zedekiah, whom the 
King of Babylon burnt, or roaſted in the fice, the word 077 ligni- 
fieth voth, Levit: 2: 14. and roaſting ſign. tierh only to butu by de- 
grees, which probably was the ſpecifical puniihment of theſe two 
falſe Prophets, for we learn from the inſtance of che three Childien, 
Dan: 3: 19. that the conſuming of perioasflow!y in a fiery Furnace, 
was a kind of puniſhment ia uſe amongſt the Chal aeans. 


23 Becauſe * they have commitrted villainy in Iſrael g, 
and have committed adultery with their neighbours 


which I have not commanded tiem z, even I know, 
and-am a witnes, faith the LOKD &. 


g The Reaſon here given muſt not be underſtood as the Reaſon of 
the King of Babylwn's puniſhment of them, bur why God gavethem 
up into hi, hands, becauſe they had conmirred Villany or folly in 1 
racl. þ Which is expounded by the next words, they had commurred 
adultery with their neighbours wives, All fin is foly, and fo called in 
Scriprure, uncleanneſs particularly, Gen: 34: 7. here it is called 
Fillainy, to denote the hainoutneſs ot it, elpecially in thoſe whole 
Office it was to teach others that they ougit nor to do it, Rom: 2, 
22. Falitood in diſcharge of a truſt is ordinarily attended with 
debauchery of Life, nor indeed can 1t ve realonably imagined, that 
thoſe, who to humour Men, have debauched their Conlciences, 
and declaied things as the will of God, which they know are nor 
ſo, ſhould be more true and hoaeſt in their Converſation towards 
Men. 5 The ſecond crime of theſe falſe Prophers was, that gave 
them theirdenomination, teaching Pcople what God never b:d them 
ſpeak. k Now this faith the Lord, ſow, and am 2 Wirnes to; 
their Adulteriesare in fec:et, but I ama Witnes to them 5 the poor 
people do nor kaow that they reach them lies, but I know it. God 
will deal with Men not according to what Men like themielves 
know of thzm, and can prove againit them, but according to what 
heknows, and can witacs againit them. 


24 $ Thus ſhalt thou aiſo ſpeak to Shemaiah the |] 


Nehelamite, ſaying /. ; 

1 We have no guidance from any other Scripture, to teach us 
who this Shemaiah was, butir is very p:obable thar he was one of 
thoie who at this time were in the {,uptivity of Ba'-ylo n, and ſo 
came to the knowledge of Jeremiah's Lerter, mentioned 1A the be- 
ginning of the chaptes, and wiore w har tolloweth to Z:phaniah, the 
Son of Maaſciah the Prieſt, and the reſt of the Prieſts; to have Jere- 
miah puniſhed h but why he is called the N-h-lam:re, 1:not 10 evi, 


dent, for that the word is derived from D7\1 1 Dicamer, is nor 
very probable. weread of no ſuch piacein ju24 as N-veiam or Ha- 


Ld 


- ſubſtance, but what we on j 


Jed the Nehelamite; fo as it 15 10bable that tuere was ſuch a plice | 
as Nehelam, from whence he was. 


have a care of Religion, and particularly take care of perſons, who 
being mad or phrenetick, make themſelves Prophets. p The Priecfts 
had a power to. reſtrain ſuch perſons by impriſoning them, or put= 
ting them zn rhe Srocks, by which: moſt agree a pasticular puniſh= 
ment 1s expreſſed, but for the nature and way of it, -it is not deter- 
mined. Thole who in ſo i-certain a thing, have a mind to read 
what hath been ſaid, may find it both in Mr. Pool's S;nopſes Critico= 
rum,and the Eng ijþ Anmorations upon this verſe, but the Learned Au« 
thor of them reciting what Authors have ſaid, concludes it at laſt 
not with any certainty to be determined. - 
27 Now theretore, why haſt thou not reproved Je- 
remiah of Anathoth, which maketh himſelf a propher 
to you 9. | | 
7 He means it of an aQiive real Reproof, as appears by what 
went before, he would have had Jeremiah impritoned, or- put to 
that puniſhment which they called the Stocks, the nature of which 
wecannot determine, concluding him to be but a mad Man, and 
one who was not made a Prophet by any immediat miſſion from 
God, but had only made himlelt a Proper. p 
28 For therefore he ſent unto us i» Babylon, ſaying, 
This captivity is long, build ye honſes, and dwell in them, 
and piant gardens, and ear the fruit of them ». | 
r The matter of fa&t was true, as appeared Yer: 5, 6. but it was 
falſe that it was the effeQ of Phrenzy, or that he ſpake this of his 
own head, withour commiſſion from God ; for he wrot nothing 
of this nature, but by order from God, as appeareth from ver. 4. 
where he began his Letter with ; Thus ſaithrhe Lord of Hojis the God 
of Iſrael. 
29 And Zephaniah the prieſt read this letter in the 
ears of Jeremiah the prophet /: | 
ſ It is incertain whether Zephaniah did this out of kindneſs to Je- 
remiah, for we read he was tent to Jeremiah upon Meſlages, Chap: 
21: 1. and 37: 3. from the K:ng, or becauſe he would not appre- 
hend him, before he heard him, and ler him know that he did no- 
thing againſt him, but upon information, &c. 
39 Then came che word of the LORD unto Jere- 
miah, ſaying, F 
31 Send co all them of the captivity, ſaying, Thus 
ſfaich the LORD, concerning Shemaiah the Nehela- 
mite, becauſe thatShemaiah hath propheſied unto you, 
and I ſent him not, andhe cauſed you to truſt in a lier. 
£ This is the great miſchief of falſe Teachers, they are the cauſes 
of peoptes truſting in lies, and fiom hence the fins of falſe Prophets 


are ordinarily aggravated- . | NE 
32 Therefore thus faith the LORD, Behold I will 


puniſh Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his ſeed «: he 
ſhall not have a man to dwell among this people w nei- 
ther ſball he behoid the good that I will do for my peo- 
ple, faith the LORD x, becaufe he hath taught rebelli- 
on againſt the LORD y. 


# Puniſhmeants of this life ordinarily are extended to«the Children 
of linful parents, for the Parents ſake, who are punithed in their Chil- 
dren, being Res parentum. a conſiderable part of their Parents Goods 
and portion. w He and his whole poſterity ſhall be rooted out, 
x And neither he nor they fhall live to the timg of my peoples re- 
turn from the Captivity of Babylon. y Becauſe by the fajſhoods 
which he hath taughr, he hath been an inſtrument to make people 
diſobey the Commands of God. We had the ſame clauſe, chap. 28. 
16 and ſuch a kind of Threatning we find Amos 7: 17. denounced 
by thit Prropher againſt Amaſiah the Prieſt of Bethel, forbidding 
him to propheſie at Berzel, becauſe it was the King's Court and Chan 
pel. To obſtrut the Revelation of God's Will to people, or ra 
publiſh whar is centrary to it, to ſeduce people from believing it, 
or Yie!'d obedience, are both crimes that have been, and will be of 
fatal conſ<quence to them and their Families, who are ſo hardy as 
ro incur the guilt of them. 

C HAP XXX. 0 
God ſheweth Jeremiah the del-v:rance and return of the Jews, 1——9. 
He comf:rieth Jacob, 10 i'7- Their return ſhall be gracious, Wrath 
on the wicked, 18——=24. | | 
HE word that came to Jeremiah frem the LORD, 
ſaying #, LE Tos 

a This Title is thought to extend to all we have, both in this 
and the next chapter, both which moſtly conſiſt of comfortable pro- 
miſes of the Reſtauration of this people, and teacheth us what ought 
to be the matter of our Sermons ; we ought to ſpeak nothing for 
ifle to come from the Lord, which 
all DoCtrine doth,that is bottomed on Scripture, though opened, & 
made more plain and inte! ligible by words formed in our own minds. 


6 L 2 2 I hus 


4 


9:1 1. Aus | | 


20. 2, 


Chap. XXX. 7 12 KR 
{> 2 Thus ſpeaketh the LORD GOD of Iſrae!, ſaying, 
Write thee all the words that I have tpoxen unto thee 
in a book 5. 

b It is uncertain whether this was a Command from God to Je- 
remiah to record all the Reve'arions which Goi had made to him, 
or only the Revelation contained in this, and theio;:lowing Chap- 
ter, which coafilts chiefly of promiſes of the Peoples reſtauration, 


not be forgotren, bur be ar hand for the People co read during their 
Captivity: to keep up their {aith and hope in God. A Book 1n the 
Heirew Diale&, fignifierh any Parchment or Ro!l; God would 
have them recorded ro teſtific his Trath, a2d the T'cuch of the 
Prophet when chey ſhould ſee the things accompliſhed. 

2 For lo, the days come, ſaith the LORD, that I 


will brinz again the captivity of my people Ifrael and 
Judah c, faich the LORD, and I will cauſe them to re- 
turn to theland that gave to their fathers, and they 
ſhall poſſeſs it -. 

c The reaſon why God wonld have the Prophecy written, was 


for a memorial of God's T ruth in hi» Pronuies, | 
turned asto the Body ofthe Peop!e, butchole of the Ten Tribes 


he Promiſes, Chap. 3- 12. 14.& 23. 3- & 31+ 
d I: is uncertain whether this promite of 
and were fuifilled in thoſe tew of the 

ſe of Judah, after they 


return accoraing tot 
x. 6. Exzet. 37. 21,22. 
returning to their own L v' Lf 
Ten Tribes who joined themſelves witi tho 
were returned from Ba#z/0n, Or remarnerh yet in part to be fulfil- 
Jed. The former is maoit probable, andthar there ſhaſl be no ſuch 
time when tke Jews ſhall return again to Jeruſalem, and poſleſs | 
theirown Land, for it is hard now to give an account where the 
Poſtericy of the Ten Tribes be, by whoſe return, the Promiſe 
ſhould be juſtified. Beſides that rhe Phraje 1n the beginning of 
this Verſe. Fir lo, the days come, icem to 1mport a more ſpeedy 
fulfilling of the Promiſe, than after tome thouſznds of Years, rho 
It is cercain the J-w5 feed rhemfelves with ſome ſuch expettarions. 


4 E And theſe are the words, tharthe LORD ſpake 


concerning [rae], and concerning Judah. | 
5 Forthus faith the LORD, We have heard a voice 


f trembling, || of fear, and not of peace e. 

e Gol here {peaketh, but whether perſonating other Nations, or 
TE theJewiſb Nation,is not agreed,nor yer whetkec this Text refers to 
: the Times of the Heſirh, when the Nations {tould tremble, or the 
time when Darius invaded Babylon, or the times ef Gog and Magog 
( of which read Ezek, 38. } Orche time when the Chaldeans in- 
vaded Judah ; this laſt ſeemeth moſt probable, and that God by 
this inzended caly to rowſe the Jews out of their ſecurity, and 


put them' off from expeQting peace according tothe flatreries of the 
fzlſe Prophers,afſuring them that the Times ther were coming next 
were not times of Peace, but ſuch as {huu!ld make them rremble. 

6 Ask ye now, and ſee whether | a man doth travail 


4 Male; With child ? wherefore do fſce every man with his 
* Chap., hands on his loins, *as a woman 1n travail f, and all 
4. 31.and faces are turned into palencisy ? 

G. 24, The Vvice which I hcar, 1s not che Voice of Women, but of 
Mzn, and thoſe rhe ſtroageſt and ſtoute!t M-n, yer it is a Voice 
lik2 the Voice of Women 1n Travail, roaring out t:rough their 
pains, and the poſture I ſce rhe generality of Men are in, is like 
the poſture of Women in Trava!], v ho hold their hands upon 
their Loins.hoping thereby to abar? thew pin. Was it ever heard 
that Males had the pains that ul2 ro att: nd Child-bearing Women? 
s And all Mens Faces look 325 if th:y had the Y'Cope Jaundice ; or 

' 2reofthe colour of blated Corn as the word fignifteth. Der, 28,2 2, 

|  * Alas, for that day is great, fo that none 3s like ic 

Amos 5, "& : af > "Jr f . 

8 h* Tt js even the time of Jacob's trouble z, but he fhall 

be ſaved out of it &. 

--b It is no wonderthat there is ſucha trembling vpon all hearts 
ſuch a-conſternition and great complaining 3 for it will be aTiwe 
of no ordinary calamiry, bur of great evil and miſery, in the ſame 
ſence 2s it is called a great day, Joel 2. 1, great and terrible; and 
Zeph1gi9e.; there never wasfuch aDay before. & Ir willbe aday 
of trouble to thoſe thar arc the Poſterity of Jacob, both good and 
bad, they ſhall not be delivercd from it, but they ſhall be delive.- 


red out of it. ; : 
- 8 For it ſhall come to paſs in that day /, faith the 


LORDof hoſts, that I will break his yoke from off thy 
neck w, and will burſt thy bonds », and ſtrangers ſhall 


no.more ſerve themſelvesof him o. 

4 Not in that great day before mentioned, but in the day when 
God ſhould deliver the Seed of Jacob ont of trouble, m God threat- 
ens to break the Yoke of the King of Babylon, that is to break. that 
power of his which for 70 Ycars he ſhould exerciſe in keeping the 

| Jewr under. n And be would break the bonds in which they ſhon1d 
be kepr, o And forziga Nations ſhou!d no mores ſerve themſelves 
upon the Jews. 

9 But they ſball ſerve the LORD their God, and Da- 
vid cheirking p, whomT will ratte up unto them p. 

pþ Who is here meant by Devid is not well agreed. Some think 
this Promiſe was fulfilled in the Rule of Zorovabet; and . thoſe after 
the Captivity of Babylon, of the Family of David, who ruled over the 
Jews, though nor under the ft:1e of Kings ; others think that Chriſt 
15 HH aS in the other Parallel Prophecies, Ezek- 34.23. and 37. 
22. H.". 3. 5. andtharthe deliverance here promiſed was ſpiritual ; 
and indeed unleſs we fo underſtood it,it will be hard to afſigna time 
when the Promiſe of the former and this Verſe was made good, 
for vpn the return from the Captivity ro the coming of Chriſt, 
and from his time t5 this day,other Nat'ons have ſerved themſelves 

- upon the Jews, and they have been in perpetual Servitude, firſt to 


{| Or. there 
3s fear ,ond [8] 
not peace. 


: f Heb. 


and ſo God might command them to be writren, that they might | 


Iirael never tee | 


which were God's Pcople did return; we read Luke 2. 36. of one 
A4unz who was of the Tribe cf £ſbr, and many more doubtleſs did ; 


En 4n 
ved themſelves ofthe Jews, Either therefore this Prophecy muſt be 
Unucrined ina fpiritval ſence of the Kingdoin of Chrilt, undcr 
which the Jews thatreceived him were move ſpiritually free : Or 
cle there IS a Tine yt 70 come, when this anticnt peeple of Tod 
!hil] be reſtored to a further Civil Liberty, han tkey have enjcyed 
ever lince the Captiviry of Baylor, and be wires fully converted to 
Chit, than rhey yer are; towards which {nce many Texts of 
SCripture, beſides this, look ; particularly Rim, 10-253, 26, 

10 4 Therefore * fear thou nor, Omy ſerv? bs 7: 

) ear thou nct, Omyicivant Jacch » x, 

r, faith theL OJ neit] > diſmaved O irae} Ao 
» Jalth the LORD, neither bedi{mayed, O ifrael; for:.&z3.5. 
lo, I will fave thee from a far, and ty feed from the & 44- 2, 
land of their captivity /; and Jacob tbal 7ctura, and ſhal ©**P+ 46, 
be. In reſt and quiet, and none fſhal make bim a- ** 
fraid cr, 

r You that are mv Servants, and the Poſterity of 7acob,tho your 
Captivity be Threeicore and Ten Years, yet ke not afraid that T 
_aye qui'E forgotten you, or my prot; ite made to your Fathers. 
iS For I W1ll zfture you that though I have for your fins ſent YOU as 
far off, yet you are not beyond the reach cf my faving Ari. 7 You 
ſhall returg out of the Captivity of Babzion, and be ar relt, as they 
were for 150 Years during the time of the Pcrſian Mer2rchy, Abhort 
Hiſtory of whict we have in, the Books of Ezra and Nelbrnah. 

11 For ] «zz with thee ſaith the LORD :; to ſave, 
thee 4: * though I make a full end of all nations whi- : 
ther I have ſcaitered thee, yet will I zoc make a full *p,,3 FA 
end of thee w : but 1 will corre thee * in meaſure x, Chip. 16 
and will nor leave thee altogether unpuniſt:ed y. 24. & 46, 

s To fave thee, with a Temporal Salvation, and deliverance, 26. 
and thoie of thee who are 1raelires indecd with a Spiritual, and e« 
ternal Salvation ; but the {irtt is what is here principally intenged. 

w God pu:se Gifterence betwixt the Choſtifements of bis People, 

and the Punilkment of their Enemies , the latter he deſtroyeth 
with an uttcr and total deſtruQtion, to make an end efrkem 3 but 
he chaſtens 1s People like @ Facher -for tEcir profic, and will not 


bring 


MOY 


; that is, not in Equity only 
3 . or with Moderation, whereas beis {aid to puniſh 
his Enemies in {ury. There are many texts of Scripture that men- 
tion this dificerence which God pur5 berwixthis punidhing his Peo « 
Ple, and lis prnithing their Enemics, 1s 26. 14, 39. & 29. 3, 8. 
” Bur yer Gud will nor let his own People go altogether UNPpUNI= 
Ihed, rher by it they may be reclaimed, ar:d che World may take 
Notice that (zed is of purer Eyes than that ke can, in any Perions, 
behold iniquity. 
12 For thus faith the LORD, Thy * bruiſe 3s incu- * Chap 
rable, and thy wound is grievous 2. 15-18, 
z Interpretcrs generally urdcrftand by bruiſe or wornd here, the 
ſtare that rhe Jews ſhould ve in, in the Caprivity of Babylon which 
would be miterable, and fo miſerable that ir would be incurable 
ircm any han, except the Hand of God. But IT do nct unders 
ſt:nd why it may nor as well be interpreted of their ſmſull fate, 
Wit retcrence to Gods purpoſe, and interpreted by 2 Chron, 36: 
16. where 1t is ſaid, The wrath of God aroſe againſt them t:ll there was 
w0remedy» They had ſinned ro that degree that God had reſolve 
into Captivity t2ey ſhould go, and there ſhould abide tillthedeter- 
mination o£ 79 Years. 
mT, s = Fog 
12 There is none to plead thy cauſe + that thou + Heb. 
mayeſt be bound up: ? thou haſt no healing medi- fo 5:ndizg 
Cincs 4. up orprefſog 
a Concerning the general deſign of the Prophet in theſe words, dec 
all Inter reters le:m agreed that the ProphetsScope is to bring their , 
uneaſte thoughts to a reſt, and make them reft jatisfied with the 
Providence of Ged ; for their was no rcfiftance of the Will of God 
which he metaphorically exprefſeth under the roticn of one mi- 
ſerably and incurzbly wounded, whem no Phyſician or Chyrurgcon 
could heal; and for whom there was no effcctual Plaiſter ; but con= 
cerning the particular ſenſe of the Hiclrew wer, much is critically 
ſaid, which I conceive not my work to repear, nor is it of much 
moment to us to kacw, whether the wocd more properly ſignifies 
healing Meaitines, or courſes of cure, or Plaifrs ; thoie who are curia 
ous may read ſufficiently about it in the Eg!iſh Anuorations upon 
the Text. Ir may be more material to conſider whether the Pro- 
phets meaning be, there was none would do it, or «there was none 
could doit, or there was none ſhould da it, that is whom God 
would aimir at preſent to de it, as he elſewhere faith, though 
Noah, Daniel and Job, and though Meſes and Sam:el ſtood before kim, 
they ſhould ſave none but their own Souls: The Prophers deſign 
doubtleſs was to ſatisfie this People, that there was no preſent re- 
medy for them bur Patience, though ſore would in charity plead 
for them, and though their falſe Prophers might promiſe a Cure ; 
yet in very deed God would admit now of no Plea for them, and 
all means that could be uſed for their more ſpeedy Reftauration, 
would prove no bealing Medicines, but}ike Medicines that make the 


' Patients worſe,and irritate, in ſtcad of allaying the Diſtemper. 


14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee b;they ſeek thee 
not, for TI have wounded thee with the wound * of an, , , _.. 
enemy, with the chaſtifement of a * cruel one c, for the , ” te 162 
multitude of thine iniquity, * becarſe thy fins were in- g.& 19+ 


crealed d, 1le | 
b In the time of thy proſperity thou hadſt many Friends, bur * Job 3%; 

now they have forgotten thee. Very probably the Egyptians and 23: 

4ſſrians, whoſe help the Jews made often vie of, are the Lovers * Chap, 

here intended, 2 Chron. 28, 24. Hoſ. 12. 1. irdeed the Egyptians were 5» On 

before conquered, or very much brought low, by the King of Bas 

bzlon. cThey ſee the miſerable cafe they are 1n, and now dos not 

covet theeas formerly, they diſcern that I bave wounded thee with 

ſuch a wound, as cruel Men uſe to give their Enemies, 4 Though 

it be in me no a& of cruelty, for it is bur in a juſt punithment of 

your iniquities, which were increaſed to a very gicat multitude, 


the Perſians, then to the Greeians, then to the Roman?, in Servitude to 
whom they were at the comiag of Chrift, and foon after miſerably 
ſubdued by them, and fince that time almoſt all Nations have fere 


i5 Why crieſt 'thou for thine afiliQion ? thy for- 
LOW 


Chip. EXK 


Ch 


*Fx 
22s 


Ee en ts 


: 
: 
| 
i 
[ 


Chap? XXX. T RAR EB 


row 151nCcurable e, for the multitude of thine iniquity 
becauſe thy ſins were increaſed, Ihave done theſe things 
unto thee f. 

e Why complaineſt thou of my dealings with thee ? Or as Chap: 
15.18. The cauicof thy ſorrow is incurab'c, or 2s others, V/hy 
complainet thou that thy ſorrow is incurable. f Though 17 be to, 


yet thou haſt n» reaſon to complain of my dealings,for thy deſtruc- | 
tion 1s of thy ſeif; Tam juſt in whar IT have done, for I have bur, 
given the that Death which is th2 wares of thy Work of fin, nor | 


was I ſuddenly provoked, it is for the multitude of thine iniqui- | 


ries, and in that caſe the living Man hath no juſt reaſon to cem- 
P/ain, Lam: 3. 39. 
: 16 Therefore g all they that devour thee * ſhall be ' 
Exod:23- devoured, and ail thine adverſaries, exery one of them | 
ne ſha!l go into cavtivity, and they that ſpoil thee thail be 
a ſpoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a 
prey bh. | 
g The Particle - 127 is thought here to be i!! Tranſlated zhere- | 
fore, for m:nifeſtly iris not 2 cautal or illative, and rtcſe who 
interpret it therefore, refer mt to what went before, Yerſ; 10. 11. Tt 
were better Trar{l:ted nevertheleſs, or notwitkſtaniing yet, ſo the lear- 
ned Author of rhe Erglijh Annotations thinks 1t ſhould be Tranilated, 
Ija: 7. 14: and 30 8. and 1n many Other Texts. 4 So this Text 
is adec/aiatior: of Go/''s free mercy, though this People had juſtly 
provoked the Lord by their iniquitins ro punith them,yer he would 
at length revenge tiem of their Faemies, and thole that ſpoiled 
them ſhould fe; his Juſtice, and b- themte'ves ſpoiled, fo 1/z: 10, 
T2.and 33. 1. God ordinarily punith<th thoie thit have been Ene- 
mies to his People, more ſeverely than his People have becn puni- 
ſhed by tiem, che Reafors are, becauſe rhough thay ſerve God in 
chaſtiſing his People, yet they do ir not defignedly 3 Iſa: 10:7.and 
commonly they exceed a meature in tac rexecuting Gods vengeance. 
17 For I wil ieftore heaj-h 4 unto thee, and I will 
heal thee of thy wounds, faith the LORD, becauſe 
they called thee an outcaſt, /azi»z, This is Zion whom 


no man ſeeketh after &. 

z As the miſerable ſtate of this People was by the Prophet, Yerſe 
T2. 13. deſcribed under the fimilirude of a man wounded and brue- 
fed and ſick, fo their more proſperous ſtate is deſcribed under the 
notion of health, and God'saCtivn in reſtoring chem, exprets'd un- 
der the notion of healing both here, and in many other Texts, 1ſa: 
G. 10. and 19. 22. and 57. 38, :9. k The Particle here Tranilated 
becauſe may ſo ſignifie here, for often the ſcorn and Contempr of ; 
Goi's Peoples Enemies,cauſerh God ro make haſte to their S4lvati- 
on,and Deliverance,but many think that ir were better Tranſlated 
al:hough, as it is, Joſ: 17: 18. though the Heathens ca!l thee one 
thar I have caſt off, as a man doti his Wile ; yet they ſhall ſee the 
contrary, for I will heal thee cf thy wounds. & Though they 
deriding ſay, this Zion waam nane car's fur : Some think that in this 
they alluded to the original ſigaikcation cf the word Tzion, which 
i5 a dry or waſte place. C 

18 4 Thus faith the LORD, Beho!d, I willbring a- 
gain the captivicy of Jacob's cents, and have mercy on 
his dwelling places 1, and the city (hall be builded upon 
her own || heap, and the palace ſhall remain after che 


manner thereof | 

I This Verſe manifeſtly 1s 2 promiſe of the rebuilding of the CTi- 
ty, and was fulfilled in th- times of Ezra, and the Term Caprivi- 
zy, which in its proper {-nſe relites ro Perſons, not to places,being 
here applyed ro places, ſignifies che miterable State of Jeruſalem, u- 
pon the taking it by Nebuchainezzar, which God promiſeth to 
changeor alter under the notion of bringing again; So we read of 
the Captivity of Job, who yer ſt, &ly was never a Captive, Job 42. 
10. m Whether by the term heap be meant the haap of Rubbiſh, 
into which the Ciry was turned. uponthe takjng of it by tae King 
of Babylom, or th< hill upon which thz City was builded,is not much 
material ; by che Palace is meant eicher tae King's Houſe, or the 
Temple; fo the verſe is a Promiſe of the building again of the Ciry, 
the Temple, and che chief Governours Houſe, all which was ful- 
filled by Ezra, Nehemiah and Zorababel, the Hiſtroy of which we read 
in the Books wrote by Ezra and Nchemiah. 

19 And * out of them fhal proceed thankſgiving », 
and the voice of them that make merry o, and I will 
multiply chem, and they ſhall not be few p; I willalfo 


glorifie them, and they ſhall not be [mall 9. 

# Thankſyiving to'God, as Chap,r7. 26. either Thank-Offerings, 
Lev: 7. 12, 13. or vocal Thanſgiviags, 0 Either 1a a religious ſenſe 
or in a Civil ſenſe; if it be taken in the former 1t fignificth rheir 
Mirth at their Religious Feſtivals,of which we read much 1n Scrip- 
ture, Pſal: 42. 4. and 18. 15, c. if in the latter, 1t ſignifteth their 
happy and joyful ſtats after their reſtauration, p Though they be 
diminiſhed ia the Captiviry, yet I will return to them in my won- 
ted Pcovidences, and multiply them according to my promiſe ro 
Abraham, ſo as they ſhall be for number many. q And as to their 

uality it ſhall be honourable ; though during thoſe 70 Years they 
ſhall bz a People of mean, or norepuration, yet after thar time they 
ſhall recover their ancient reputation, and again be a People great 
for Honour and Glory. : 

20 Their children alſo ſhall be as aforetime r, and 


their congregation ſhal be eſtabliſhed before me /, and 


IT will puniſh all chat oppreſs them #- 

» Their Poſterity alfo ſhall be as happy, and in as much repute, as 
they were before this carrying into Babylon. J Their Church. or the 
B»dy of the Penple of the Jews, ſhall from Generattoa to Generat1* 
on be eſtabliſhed. . £ An41rhough in thoſe times there will be fome 
thar will oppreſs them,” yet they thall. nor eſcape my Vengeance 
thatdo it; for I will prote& and detend them. : 

21 And their nobles ſhall be of themſelves, and their 


_ 


JOr, lite 


*Ia:3 5410; 
*&51. 11, 


| and his Religion. Thoſe that underſiand it of rhe People, make ic 
; to tiEnLte the Religion of the People,and the favour they ſhould be 


| fevour with God,by whomallo the Saiarts have their accets. p Inter 


pove:nour (hall proceed from the midit of chem », and 
I will cauſe him to draw near, aud he (hall appreach 
unto me # : for who is this thatengaged Is heart © ap- 
proach unto me ? ſaith the LOKE p. 


| 
| 
; 


Fad 
FX 
\ 


— 


M1 4 M 


2 This Promiſe was made good in Zorababcl, and other Govers \ 
Ours of the Jews after the retur:2 out of Captivity, tili they came ro *' 
ze ſubdued by the Romans. Some reftrain this unto Chriſt, and 
make it a Prophecy of Cariſt, being born ofrke Jewiſh nation 5 It 
15 he they ſay that was meanc by Da-:id, Verſ. g and it is not ime 
Provabie that the ſenſe ofthe Text may reach unto Cirit, bur ie 
iens literally to b: underſtood of Zorobr5cl, and to be oppoſed ta 
$i anger; ruling over thaem, which was no fma'l piece of taeir Calae 
mity, white they were ia Caprivity. o That is, be ſhall ſerve me, 
and I will favour him, orchis People al ferve me and | will 
t2v6ur them, and not ke as one at diflance, or far off from them. 
59me underſtand this of the Civil Governour that ſhould be aftet 
the Captivity, ſome underſtand ic of the People, tome underſtand it 
or Criſt; theſe chat underſtand it of the Governour, maks it to 
tznific the ſpecial favour that Governour ſhould be in with God, 


Chap. XXXT| 


, 
: 


vt 
(8.4%.4 
[1 


i 


in Wii God, Tho's who underſtand it of Ci:riſt, interpret ir of his 


Preters are yet moze divided abut this Phraſe; fome apply it to 
Chriſt, either as an admiration of his Exczllency, or as denoting 
that none but he could draw n=ar to Gd in that manner as he did, 
nor 12d any ſuch a D-light in the Sons of Men as be ; ſo as for him 
to be a Mediator betwixt Ofengers, and an off-nd:d God: None 
but be durſtlook in the Face of an angry God, Oth=rs underſtand 
ir of Gods People, itimating that in the Day when they ſhould re- 
turn out of Captivity There would be but few, that with any ferious 
P::rpole of heart would apply themſe!ves un:o Ged, or ſignifying 
the 1mpotency that is in Man hea:tily ro draw nizh to God, rill 
( asit is before faid ) God eauſerh him ſo to do; and ſome think 
the words havea reference to the Covenant mentioned in the nexe 


Verſe. *Chan:24. 
22 And ye ſhall be ® my people, and I will beyour 7: & 37, 
I, 33- 


God 9. 
7 God in theſe words declares, That in that day he would res 3* 38. 

new his Covenant with 1ſrarl, ( at Jcaſt the true 1rodices) and they 

ſhoald be his People to ferve, and to obey him, and he would be 

their God, to prore& and bleis thacm, with all temporal, and all *Chap:2y: 

ſpiricul B'eftings, 19, 20. & 
22 Behold * the whirlwind of the LORD poeth forth 25: 32, 


with fury r, a Þ continuing whirlwind / ic ſhall || fall ao 
with pain upon the head of the wicked 7. || Or, re= 


r The Vengeance of God compared to a w/ir!2:zd, for the ſuden- main, 
nefs of it, and becauſe irſhould incompatls them to their ruine a era 
rible whirlwind, ſ Or 4 continuing whirling, not a ſudden blaſt of 
Wind, that iha'l preſently go over, bur a Veageance that ſhaiabide 
£ The miſerable effe&s of which, in deſtroying ſhall be either upon” 
the Heathen,oruponthe wicked Jews taar thall continue in their dife 
obedience and ſtubbornneſs. | 

24 The fierce anger of the LORD ſhall not return, 
untill he have done it, and untill he have performed 
the intents of kis heart s3 in the latter days ye thal con- 
ſider it ws | 

# Heexpoundeth intheſe words the continuing Whirlwind, po 
ken of, Yer: 23. and withal lets them know, that what te falte 
Prophets ſaid of a ſpeedy return out of Babyl:n of thoſe already there 
or of the not going of thoſe which as yet were in Judea was all bur 
falhood 3 for the Lord was angry, and4 was reſolv:d to fuifl the 
purpoſe of his heart in puniſhingthem, w And though at preſent 
they would not conſider, nor believe ir, yet afterward, when they 
ſhould ſee things come to pals according as ke kad ſaid, then they 
ſhouid conſlider what he had told th2m. 


CHAP. XXAL 
The Reſtauration of Iſrael publiſhed, 1——14. Racke! mowning is comfar= 
ted, 15 17. Ephraim repemting is brought home, 18 21 Chrift 

promiſcd, 12 26 His care over the Church, 27 39. 

His New Covenant, 31——34. The Stability and Enlargement of the 

Church, 35 40, | : 

A T the ſame cime, ſaich the LORD, will I be the 
£3 God of all the families of Ifcael, and they ſhal be 
my people 4. ; 4 

a When the Lord's anger ſhall! turn, he having performed all 
the thoughts of his heart upon the wicked Fraelites, he will declare 
himſclf not unmindfal of the Covenant which he male with Abra- 
ham and his Seed, but will bz their God, and they ſhall be rhe Peos 
ple of his Favour whom he will proteC&t and bleſs. Ir 15 uncertain 
whether 1/ae! here is to be taken in a more large ſenſe as is fignifi- 
eth the whole Twelve Tribes, or only Judah, being rhar part of 
Jrael which was before ſpoken of. | | 

2 Thus faith the LORD, The people which were left 
of the ſword, found grace in the wilderneſs ; ever If- 


raet, when I went to cauſe him to reſt 5. ; 
b God confirmeth the afore-mentioned Promiſes, and his Pecples 
hope and faith in them, by minding rkem of whar he had anciently, 
done for this very People. Though God did in the Journey which 
the 1/raelires had from Egypt to Canaan, cut off many of thera by the 
Sword for their Iniquities, ſome by the Amalzkites, Exod: 17.8:1ome 
by the Sword of their Brethren for the Idolacry rhey co:mmitted 2- 
boutrhe Go'den Calf, Exed: 32, 28. yet, thoſe that ſurvived thar, 
and orzec Judgments, found favour in Gods Eyes,while they were 
going to Can-anthe Land of Rei, or white God going before them, 
brought them into Canaan. God parallel:mh his furure Procidences, 
and gracious Purpoſes with his paſt gracious Providences. ,,”.. *... f Heh. 
2 The LORD hath appeared F of old unto me, ſay- from af ey, 
ing c, Yea, T have loved thee with an everlaſting love 
d, therefore with loving kindnels have jj I drawn 


thee e. | 6 WT 
c The word ſaying be not' in the orginal, hath given 2dvan- 
tags to ſome to thinks thar the firſt words, are either rhe words of 
ſome of rhe People owning that the Lord indeed kad of old ap» 
peared to and for them, but doubring whether che kindneis of God 
ſijl.held roward thew. Or elie complaining rhat theſe were o'd 
Stories. To which the Piopber repliss by alluring thew that Gods 
6L 3 ; Love, 


fOr,7 have 
extena-d 
loving kinds 
neſ510 theee, 


XXXT. 7 E R E 


Love was not a temporary Love,manifeſted to a firgle Gen-ration, | 
but it was an everlaſting Love, therefo:e he hai diawn them with 
loving kindneſs, he had all along dealt graciouſly wich them, that 
way atrempting to oblige them to that Dury which they owed to 
him, this drawing with loving-kindneſs he calleth a drawing with 
tbe cords of men, Hoſ. 1. 4 who ordinarily ate little wrought upon 
.._ - by force but wen by Love. 
hap 4 Again * I will build thee, and thou (balt be built f, 


7. Ovirgin of Iſrael g, thou ſhalt again be adorned with 
r, 3m thy || cabrers, and thalt go forth in the dances of them 
N that make merry hþ. Wi 
f As upon theic bing carried into Captivity, both their Civil 
State and Church,which either of them were as a Buildiag framed 
tagerher, were boken and pulled down, and they were ſcattered 
here and there;like che Srones ofa Building pulled down : So God's 
bringing them again together, and cementing them by a Political 
aad Eccleſiaſtical Government, is firly compared to a Building 
g The calling them the Yirgin Iſrael, doth not ſigaifie that the Body 
of that People had nor been deflowred by Idolarry, bur either fig- 
nifies that this Promiſe only concerned ſuch as had kept their 
Virginity : Or elſe ( which it may be is more probable ) Iſracl 1s 
here called a Yrgin with relation to the following words,they being 
4 V.rgins which were wont to yo out with Tabrets, 1 Sam. 18. 6. and 
to Dance in the time of their mirth and jollity, Exod. 15. 20. Jud. 
11.34 h The Virgins are ſaid ro b2 adorned, with their Tabrets,or 
Timbrels, either ( as ſome think ) becauſe they were wont to tie 
Scarfs, or Ribbons abour them, or becauſe th:y looked comeli'y 
with theſe Initruments of Muſick in thuir hands,or ſhould uſe then 
in a more handſome and co:pely manner than they had done b:fore, 
when they uſe4 them at unſeatozavle rimes. That which is here 
Propheſied is, a merry. joyful, plcaſant rime to this People when 
their Mirth ſhouli become them ; or the Rettauration of their Re. 
ligious Feſtivals,at which they ufed Inruments of Mulick ro ex- 
preſs their inward ſpiritual joy and gladneſs. The Prophets, 1 Sam. 
10. 5, cam? from the High-place with a Tabret, &c. 
Is 65.22 5 * Thou ſhalt yer plant vines upon che mountains 
Heb, of Samaria z, the pianters (hal) plant, and ſhall F car 
rojeue them as common things &. 
_ i Samaria was the Mztropolis of tre Ten Tribes, called ſo from 
Shem:r who owned the Hill Oz»; King of Jraz! bought it, and 
built Samaria upon it, Mountains in many places are judzed 
the moſt convenient places for Vineyards, being free from ſhades 
and moſt expoſed ro the Sun. & God promiſcth them a Liberty ro 
plant, and raarthey ſhould enjoy their Plantati-ns, earing th:m 
as common things, which they could not do till rhe fifth Year, as 
appears from Lev. rg. 23. The three firft years it was t5 be ac- 
counted by them, as uncircum-iſed, that is unclean. In the fourth 
Year it was to be holy to the Lord. In the fifth Year they mig nt eat 
the fruit of it, as any common thing that was not unclean, nor 
yet devored and conſecrated to the Lord. 
6 For there ſhall be a day, rbar the watchmen upon 
IG. 2.3. the mount Ephraim ſhall cry 7, Ariſe ye, * and let us 
f ch-4. 2. 80 up to Zion unto the LORD our God mx. 
| | That Mount Ephraim was a part of the Lot of the Ten Tribes 
is out of queſtion. Whether by Watchmen, be to be underſtood 
State Centinels ſet to give warning of cangers approaching, or Keep- 
ers of Vineyards, ſeemerh not much material. mIr is faid they ſhould | 
call upon Men to go up to Zion, that is, tothe Temple of the Lord ar 
Jeruſal:m to worſhip the Lord. The only queſtion is, what time 
this Prophecy was fulfiiled ? For © though Judah returned 
from ' the Captivity of Babylen, yer the Tex Tribes ( that we 
read of) never returned» Some think that it was fulfilled in the 
time of Ezra and Neh:miah, whea though the Body of the Ten 
Tribes returned nor, yet many particular Perſons of thoſe Tribes, 
did return and join themſclves with thoſe who returned out of the 
Captivity of B25ylon, and rebuilt both the City and Temple. Be: 
ſidesit appeareth from Foſephus | :3. cap. 5. 8. That rhe Demetr;: 
gave Samaria, Gal:lee, and Perea to the Jews, But the beſt Inter- 
reters judge that this Prophecy was fulfilled under the Goſpel ; 
hr both Galilee and Samarts received the Goſpel as appeareth from 
As 8.1,5.9,14. and 9. 31. : | 
7 For thus ſaith the LORD, Sing with gladneſs for 
Jacob, and ſhout amongſt the chief of the nations, pub. 
liſh ye, praiſe ye, and ſay », O LORD, fave thy peo- 
ple, the remnant of Iſrael o. 
» This grave, authoritative Preface, Thw ſaith the Lord, ſeemeth 
to be prefixed to put the People of God out of fear of the accom- 
pliſhmeat of the good things he had before promiſed, and prophe- 


uy 


mongſt the Jews, who feared God, or to the Heathen, to ſing and 


ſhew fuch mercy as they would ſig for, before they had it in their 


rejoyce on the behalf of the Jews, to whom God would certainly | forrow any more at all [of 


M 1 4 H. Chap. EXXI- 


vith Chi'd, In re gard of their hcavineſs, arcWemen Travailiirg, 
n regard of thcir pain, awe Perſons more unfit 16 travel jc1 g fours 
neys than any others ; bur ſaith Ged, I wil! mzke ſuch proviſion, 
chat ſome under thoſe Circumſtances ſhall come. That theſejzhiaies 
muſt be Interpreted only into this generl ſenie appears, becaute ſuch 
J erl0Ls 1N a literal ſenſe could not come. And though ſome worthy 
Lnterpreters, underſtand it in a ſpiritual tenſe of ign' rant and im- 
porent Perſcns, and ſuch as are laden with thc turden of their tins, 
and of coming to Chriſt, it ſeems nor to be the primary ſenſe of 


the Text. : 
9 They ſhall come with weeping, and || with ſup-\ i fl 


plications will-I lead them /: I will cauſe them to walk 
by the rivers of waters t, ina ſtraighe way wherein they 
{ball not ſtumble « : for I am a father to Iſrael, and 


Ephraim is mv firſt born w. 

J Some think that ir had been beter Tranſlated, they went weeping, 
for though the Verb be the future Tenſe in the Hebrew, yer that Tenſe 
hath often the ſigfication of the Preter perfe& Tenſe, thus it anſwer- 
cth, Pſal. 126. 5, 6 He that goeth forch weeping. bearing precious ſeed, 
ſhall do:brl:(s come again rejoi ing, &c. but there is no need of it here, 
for there is a weeping for Joy, as well as for ſor:ow, as we have 
it in the inſtance both of Jacob and Joſeph, Gen 29 11. and 43. 30. 
and thus the Text correſponderh with that, Zcch. 12. 10. I wit 
pour upon them th: ſpirit of grace and Jupplications,and they ſhall look upoi him 
whom they have pierced, and mourn,Weeping alſo here may be undertood 
for their paſt fins. £ Andthey ſhall have no want as they had when 
they came out of Egyp*, through the Wilderneſs, where they often 
wanted water. « Neither ſhall they have ary rough Ways, nor 
turn backward and forward, as God made them to do in their Paſ- 
ſage through the Wilderneſs. w For as I have the affeQion of a 
Father for all Jracl, ſo will I ſhew the care and kindneſs of a Fa- 
ther to them, and uſe them as a Man vſcth his firſt-born ; ſo God 
anciently called the Jews, Exod. 4. 22. they being the firſt of all 
Nations, whom God owned, and took into Covenant, and who own= 
God, and Worſhipped the true and living God only. 

io © Hear tne word of the LORD; O ye nations, 


and declare t in the iſles afar off, and fay x, He that 
{cattereth Iſrael will gather him y, and keep him, as 
a ſhepherd doth his flock s. 


x God willeth his Promiſes of good to his People, to be publi- 
ſhed and declared before hand, and that not ro them on'y. bur to 
other People, that the hand of his Providence when he brings them 
to pais may be more conſpicuous. and it may be undeniably own« 
ed to be the Work of God, being no mote than what he had fore« 
told long b:fore. y God is not only the Author of thoſe Judgments 
which come upon his People, but of their Mercies, and his Power 
in ſcattering them is enough to cenfirm us in a belief of his Power 
ro gather them. z He wall not only gather them, but keep and 
proteC& chem when gathered, and thus Gcd ſhewerb himſelf their 
Shepherd ; it is the Work of a Shepherdnor only to call, and gatber 
h's Sheep togerher, but to watch over them, proteCt and keep them, 
when they are ſo gathered together. 


11 * For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob «, and * Iſa.4gf 
ranſomed him from the hand of bim that was ſtronger 3% 35s 


than he 6b, 

a Becauſe cf the certainty of Divine Prophecies and Promiſes, 
things in them :re often ſaid to be already d: ne, which are not to 
be fulfilled of many Years after : The ſenſe is, God will as cer= 
cainly do ir, as if he hadalready done it; for whether itbe under« 
ſtood of aDclieverance from Babylon, or of the Salvation of the Goſs 
pel by Chrif,, which by a Metaphor is often alſo called redeeming 
and ranſoming, tt was to be acccmpliſhed long after this time. b By 
him that was fironger than he, ſome underſtand the Chaldeanr, others 
underſtand the Devil, ( interpreting the Text of the Spiritual Re- 
demption of Gods People by the Blood of Chriſt, being the Ranſom, 
given forthem ) but undoubtedly the the Text 1s lirerally to be 
underſtood of their Deliverance from Babyln, though (as the Apo-« 
ſtle faith ) a rheje things happened to them in a figure. In their Delive« 
rance as well from Babylon as Egypt, they were Types of the De. 


liverance of Gods People from {piritual Babylon,and Egypr by Chriſt, 
as well as in their entring into Canaan, they were ( as the Apoſtle 
proveth, Heb, 3 and 4.) Types of the Saints entring into Heae 
ven, of which Canaan was a Type. 


12 Therefore they (ball come and ſing in the height 


of Zion c, and ſhall flow together to the goodneſs of 
the LORD 4, for wheat,and for wine,and for oyl, and 


mae ing bots Lf peer Ben | -Pa©- | che young of the flock, and of the herd e : and their 
tied of ie Verice in it {clf 1s either an Exhortation to thote a the 2-6 * —_—_— carden f, and they ſhall not * Iſa. 58; 


if, 
c The particular Phraſes in this Verſe muſt not be ſtrained, nor 


E] 


L Chap, 
23: 8. 


hands, they ___ both publiſh the thing tha it ſhould certainly be, 
and alſo bleſs 

would be occaſionffor Prayer as well as praiſe, there would be a 

Remnant of J/rael, that would have at leaſt no preſent ſhare in theſe 

Mercies, through their Impenitency, Unbelief, and hardneſs of 

— Heart. Hereby minding usthat we ought not ſo to rejoyce in our 

; good things, as to forger thoſe whoare no ſharers with us: The 


od for it. o But withal he minds them, thar there 


eſt of God's Peoples Lot, while they are in this Life, is ſuch as 


will ſhew them a need of Prayer as well as Praiſe. 


8 Behold, I will bring them * from: the north-coun- 


try p, and gather them from the coaſts of the earthq,ond 

with them, the blind, ahd the lame, the woman with 

child,and her that rravailleth wich child rogerher,a greac 
--company ſhall return hither 7. 


p By the North-Country; is unquſtionably meant Babylon and the 


Land of the Chaldeans, and thoſe places which were Northward of 
Heeruſalem ; and by the Coafts of rhe Earth, all other parts into which 
any of the Jews had been driven. » Tne meaning of this is, that 
nothing ſhould hinder ſuch from returning as had a mind to rerurn; | when, 
blind Men that could not ſeerheir way, and lame Perſons, who leyes; for in a a trig ſenſe it was rot fulfilled to the Jews, — "8 

S. 


had no ſtrength to walk in ir, though they ſaw it, and Women 


do t! ey need a particular explicatien, alliignifyirg bur one thing, 
viz,the happy and proſperous State the Jews ſhould be in, after 
their return trom the Coptivity,both as to their Rel;gious and Cis 
vil State; The hight of Zion may either ſignifie Hieruſalom,or the Tem- 
ple more eſpecially where thoſe that returned, as wellthole of the 
Ten Tribes, as thoſe ſtrialy of Judah, ſhould come and ing Praiſes 
to God ; 4 And ſhould there come to beg of God good things u- 
pon the account of his Goodneſs, owning him as the Ged of their 
Mercies, whether of a Spiritual or Temporal! Nature. e Such as 
Corn Wine, Oyl, and aa increaſe of their Cattel, both Flocks and 
and Herds. f And they ſhould bz a pr gt a growing 
People,likea watered Garden that looks chearly,and in which things 
grow and thrive ( for Soul doth net ſeem here to be taken for 
Mens ſpiritua} and immortal part. but for the whole Man. } 
g And they ſhall be ſorrowful no more- in that manner as they bave 
been, and for that Age and Generation were ; or many Years, viae 


If. 35. 10. Some think that under theſe Expreſſions, is allſ@ pro» 
miſed the ſpiritual Joy which the true, !ſ-9e! of God ſhould have un- 
der the Gojpel, and the eternal Joy #hey ſhall have in Heaven, 
and not before, all Tears ſhall be wiped from their 


Chap. YXX!, 


th: taking of their City by the Romans, ſixty years after Chriſt,met 
with n ore Sorrow, than they had ever before met with. 


13 Then ſhall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both 
young men and old men together : for I will turn their 
mourning into Joy, and will comfort them, and make 


them to rejoyce from their ſorrow þ. 

h This verſe only containeth a farther variety of Expreſſions, all 
ſignifying the ſame thing, viz, their happy State, for ſome time 
after the Captivity. We may underſtand the Dancings here of all 
ſorts of People, either of their religious rejoicing in their Holy 
Feſtivals,(for under tie Old Teſtament in their religious rejoicing 
they uſed theſe external Expreſſions of Joy, as appears from Pſal. 
150. 4. and from David's dancing before the Ark ) or of their civil 
Joy, where Pancing was more uſual : the laſt words of the Verſe 
expound all the former. | 


14 And I will ſatiate the ſoul of the prieſts with fat- 
neſs ;, and my people ſhall be ſatisfied with my good- 


neſs, faith the LORD &. 

; By Prieſts ſome underſtand the Miniſters of the GoſpeJ, whom 
God here promiſeth liberally ro Provide for ; or rather by giving a 
ſucceſs to their Miniſtry, and letting them ſee the fruit of their la- 
bours, make to rejoice : In which metaphorical ſenſe I ſhould ra- 
ther Interpret it, applying ir firſt to the Prieſts of the Fews after 
the Captivity, of whom it is ſaid, Ezra. 6.16. that they kept the 
feaſt of the dedication of the ſecond Temple with joy ; and verſe 22. the 
Lord had made the people joyful. k Nor were th* people for a ſhort 
time only ſatisfied withthe Lord's goodneſs, In a ſecondary typi- 
cal ſenſe it mayalſo ſignitie the ſpiritual ſucceſs, and rejoicing of 
good Miniſters under the Goſpel,and the ſpiritual joy of Believers. 
This rejoicing is metaphorically exprefled by farneſs, with alluſion 
to the far of the Sacrifices under che Law. Iris an uſual thing for 
God by his Prophets to expreſs New Teſtament Duties and Privi- 
leges, by Phraies borrowed from the Worſhip of God under the 
Old Teſtament. Vide 1/a. 66. 22, 23. 


15 C Thus faith the LORD, A voice was heard in 


*Matth.2+ p mah 7, lamentation and birter weepiag ; * Rachel 


27, 18, 


weeping for her children m, refuſed to be comforted 


for her children, becauſe they were not ». 

I Interpreters are much divided in the ſenſe of theſe words, whe- 
ther they thould referr ro the ſlaughter of the Jews belonging to 
the ten Tribes, upon their being captivated by the A4ſhrians, or to 
the ſlaughter of the Jews, upon che Siege and taking of the City by 
the King of Babylon, or to Hrod's killing the infants in Bethlehem ? 
Certain it 18, the Evangeliſt, Mar, 2. 8. appiyed tham unto the lat- 
ter ; but whether the Evangeliſts application of ir be as a literal ful- 
filling of the Prophecy, or by way of alluſion, or no, is the queſti- 
on. Thoſe that think that it is primarily to be, underſtood of the 
ſlaughter of the infants, urge, 1. That Matthew, chap. 2. 18. ſo ap- 
Plicsit. 2. That womens mourning for children ſeems rather to 
be for the loſs of infants, (as was there)chan expreſſive of the mour- 
ning of all ſorts of people, in a general delolation- 3, That the 
place of the mourning ſeems to hint it;for Ramah wasnear to Bet hle- 
bem, and contained under the Coaſts abour Buhlehem, motioned by 
the Evangeliſt. 4. The words becauſe they were not,chey think make 
for them ; for by being carried into Captivity, they did not ceaſe 
to be, though x fi ceaſed to be in that happy Eſtate they were in 
before. 5. Becauſe they think that this is here propounded as a 
Sign of his coming, upon whoſe coming theſe promiſes of Felicity 
to the Fews ſhould be fulfilled. Theſe reaſns are not unanſwerable; 
for Matthew may apply it only by way of aluſin,ſpeaking of ſuch a 
Providence, when ſuch a thing thould happen as happened before : 
In which Senſe particular Texts of Scripture,are in Scripture often 
aid to be fulfiled, though they had their fulfilling before. 2. Ra- 
chel here doth not ſignific a ſingle Perſon.no, nor a particular Sex, 
but is brought in 2s a common Parent, lamenting: the loſs of her Off 
ſpring. 3- Ramah was indeed near Bethlehem, but it was a City in 
the Tribe of Benjamin, Joj. 18.25, 1 Kings 15+ 17. Rachel was buri- 
ed betwixt it and Bethlehem, Gen. 35. 19. . 1 Sam. 10. 2, and it waz 
alſo the place where Nebuzaradan, afrer he had taken Hieruſalem, 
diſpeſed of his Priſoners, as we read, chap, 40. 1 4 Though the 
greater part of the Jews were nor flain, bur carried into Caprivity ; 

et doubtleſs many were ſlain, and thoſe lefc alive were nor as to her, 

eing now Carried out of Canaan into a ſtrange Land. 5 Although 
the Promiſes in this Chapter, made to rhe Jews, were more eminent- 
Iy and fully made good under the Kingdom of Chriſt ; yet it may 
be doubred whether any of theſe Pomites were me” ar ſole- 
Jy fulfilled to them under the Kingdom of Chriit, bur literally, be- 
tore that time, though more fully and Jargely then, In Rama 
therefore a Voice was heard, that is in Canaan, and particularly in 
Ramah, where Nebuzaradan, chap. 40. 1. diſpoſed of the Priſoners he 
had taken, ſerting ſome at liberty ( as Jerimiah in parricular) order. 
ing others to Death, and carrying the reſt away to Babylon, which 
cauſed a bitter weeping and Jamentation. m2 Rachel is here brought 
in, having been buried near that place, as if ſhe were riſen up 
from the Grave, and lamented the Jewiſh Nation which came out of 
her Loins (for ſo Benjamin did, which was one of the rwo Tribes 
that made the Kingdom of Ju1sh) all the people of which Tribeare 
properly enough called her Children» Rachel here ſignifieth a'l the 
Benjamitiſh Women who deſcended from Rachel. » And like a paſſio= 
nate Woman the refuſeth all Arguments of Comfort, becauſe her 
Children cither were nor abſolurely,being {lain by the Peſtilence, the 
Famine, and the Sword of the King ot Babylon, or were no longer 
her Children, being tranſplanted and removed into Baby/on. So as 
I rake this Text literally and primarily to referr to the lamentation 
for the Miſcries. the People ſuffered, upon the king of Babylor's ta. 
king rhe Ciry : To which Mourning Matthew alludeth, there be- 
ing a lamentation like this, when Herod cauſed the Infants of two 
vears old to be ſlain in Berhishem, and in the Coalts abour Bethlehem, 


of which Ramah Was Ones * 


16 Thus faith the LORD, Refrain thy voice from 
weeping, 


TER E MZ a5 


T- 


| Chap. 
(ball be rewarded, faith the LORD o, "ard itey fall 
come again from the land of the enemy. . | 

0 The Prophet in this and the following Verſes,is brought in ag 
one apointed of God to quiet ar:d comfort the Rachel betore: men. 
tioned,calling to her to quict her ſelf, ai:d nor 1o0 mourn ſo exceſ- 


ſively, for God would recompenſe her fer her AfMiQions, which are 
here underſtood by the Term Work; ( as tome think ) bur the Heb, 


Word ya is hardly found in Scripture raken for Afli&ion : Others 
therefore apply it to Rachel, for whoſe Piery-ſake God would ſhew 
Mercy to her Children, as a Reward of Grace, though nor of Debr. 
The beſt Interpreters think that the Terms cf Work and Reward are 
here uſcd only to. expreſs the ſucceſſion of a comfortable State 
to their miſerable State in Captivity, (as the Wages uſe to follow 
the Work) which ſhould make them amends for their long time of 
Afflition ; and ſo it is expounded by the laſt Words of the Verſe. 
17 Andthere is hope in thine end,ſaith the Lord that 
1by children ſhall, come again to their own border p. 

? And again here, where. by en, is meant the end cf the ſeventy 
years, and the words are but a repetion of the promiſe of the return 
of the Jews our of the Captivity of Bob1lon,ot which the Prophet had 
often before aſſured them, and here only repeats it as an Argu- 
ment why they ſhould not be immoderately atth;&ed ; for their A- 
MiQion was not endleſs, nor their Captivity for ever ; they theuld 
return again unto their own Land. s 
. 18 1 have ſurely heard Ephraimgrbemoaning himſelf 
thus, r Thou baſt chaſtiſed me, and 1 was chaſtiſed as 
a bullock unaccuſtomed 70 the yoke s : * turn thou me; 


and I ſhall be turned?,for thou art the Lord my God «. 

9 The Prophet in this Verſe ſheweth the change that ſhould be 
wrought inthe hearts of the]ſraelirespreceeding this turn out of their 
Captivity. God had made an ancient Promiſe to this People 1n 
their Enemies hands, * Levis. 26. 40, 41. If they ſhat confeſs their Ini« 
quity, and the Iniquity of their Fathers, with their treſpaſs which they 
treſpaſſed againft me, And that they alſo have walked contrary unto me 41. 
And that alſo I have walked con:rary unto them, and have brought them 
into the land of their Enemies ; if then their uncircumciſed hearts be hum« 
bled, and they then accept of the puniſhment of their Iniquity. 42 Then 
will 1 remember my Covenant with Focob, and alſo my Covenant with Iſaac, 
and alſo my Covenant with Abraham, will 1 remember, and Iwill remember 
theland.. The Lord to ſhew his Faithfulneſs ro bis Word, and alſo 
ro mind them of what muſt firit be done before the aforementio 
ned Promiſes could be fulfilled, & made good tothem;& ro quicken 
them to their Duty,ſpeaks of a thing yer to come as of a thing paſt, 
foretelling that before their Deliverance ſhould come he ſhould hear 
Ephraim, that, is, the Ten Tribes,or rather, thoſe of all the Twelve 
Tribes that feared the Lord, r bemoaning, or bewailing their miſ- 
erable State or Themſelves, both for That and their Sins which had 
brought them into ſuch a State, and acknowledging not only what 
God had done unto them, that it was he who had chaſtiſcd them. 
and thar juſtly. For 5 they were as wanton Bullocksnot uſed tothe 
Yoke, which ordinarily are very unruly when they are firſt pur in- 
toit, but by uſe are more quiet under it. # And praying to God, 
that he would both change their Hearts, and alſo their State ; for, 
without him it could never be done,& by him it would bedone caſiz 
ly. « Andto this purpoſe laying a claim to God as their God, and 
owning him as their God, promiſing him that though other Lords 
had ruled over them, yet hereafter he alone ſhould be owned, ac« 
knowledged, worſhipped, and obeyed by them» 


19 Surely after thatT was turned I repented «, and 
afcer that I was inſtructed, I ſmote upen »» thigh x : I. 
was aſhamed, yea, even confounded, becauſe I did 


bear the reproach of my youth y. Ge x 

uWe'muſt conſider that we are not in an Hiſtory or a Narration 
of things done, but in a Prophecy foretelling what ſhould come to 
paſs. The Prophet foretelleth, that before this promiſed Delive- 
rance ſhould come, the Iſra:lites ſhould be in another Temper. thar 
cheir uncircumciſed hearts ſhould be humbled, they ſhoull accepe 
of the Puniſhment of their Sins, co:feſs God's Juſtice, and Righte« 
ouſneſs, and their own Wantonneſs and Unrulineſs, pray unto God 
to change their hearts which would never elſe be changed, and: 
change their conditions, which would depend upon that change of 
their hearts, laying claim to God as their God, who had promiſed, 
Deut, 30.1, 2. That when the Bleſſings and the Curſes ſpoken of 
chap. 28. and 29, ſhould come upon them. ans they ſhould call them to 
wind among all the Nations, whither the Lord had drive them ; if they 
returned unto the Lord their God,and obeyed his voice, according to all that 
be commanded th:m, they and their Chilaren, with all their beart, and all 
their ſoul, that then the Lord their God would turn their Captivity, and 
have compaſſion on them, &c. Now ſaith Ephraim after 1 was turned, 
after God had changed our hearts, we repented and changed our 
Praftices x After that God had inſtrufted us, either by his Pro- 
phets, or by Briers and Thorns by our Afﬀfiitions, or by his Holy. 
Spirit, we ſmote upon our Thighs inteſtimony of our Sorrow and 
Affliction, Erek. 21.12, y Then I was aſbamed and confounded for 
my Sins, underſtanding that I did bur bear the juſt Puniſhment of 
the Sins which I had long ago commirted,in the Time of my Wan- 
ronneſs, Rebellion and Diſobedience to God : This is expreſſed by 
the Term Nuth, becauſe ordinarily Men and Womens Youth is 
their time of Wantonneſs ; Perſons ordinarily growing more con» 
ſiderate and ſober as years increaſe upon them, Thus the Prophet 
foretelleth that God would prepare this people for Mercy . In the 
next Verſes he ſheweth how ready Gods ear would be to hear. 


20 I; Ephraim my dear ſon? js be a pleaſant child 
z, for ſince I ſpake againſt him, I do earneſtly remem- 
ber him ſtills : 


- 


LORD. | 


z Interpreters run into a very great variety in their Explications 


the Hebrews, affirmative Interrogations are notes of the vehement 


and thine Wes from tears 3 for thy work , denial ofthe thing, ast0 which equi is propounded, which 


4 leads 


. Ml! 

: o o 
* Latn, [1 
| Lain; (0 
20, W118 


* therefore my bowels are f troubled for *Deur. 32: | l 
him, I will ſurely have mercy upon him, faith the a6. (i 

a. 63. 15. 
 Hoſ.11,8, 


of thisText,thar which ſeemeth to be the cauſe of ir,is that amongſt Y horny * 
, th 


i 
XXY| 


Bfitr 
MF! : 
f 


ed ” 
a — 5 _ 
= IS DI II - > 
% ps 
\ 4 WES EY $ 


2 =; =z — ES EEG = AZ. : 2 S E EPL 
= — =D —== -2 ————— — — —  — ” 
ZEEERdGs £ > =. Di ICIS - SIT 
- 1 - DR _—_ o mr yg ——— 
IMOIIDHA « C44 9% IgG * 


=== 
- —- 
_— 


— _ — 
IEEE — 4 = 
Pcs. _ a 
_ = = ==, 7 _ *2- = X 
= IG. vor CES > ood Reb ay > Rr > 
CIT” —_— IK 5 Sr 


PIG = — — - - - = _ 
_ EB en 200 VB = Snot — — -——_ 
* VAR ay 9; 0s OI RTP * ES > WR NES Ie wp > Wat 47 <5 545” oe 


, 


' 
1 
$ 


2 erpre ds 1 denial, that Epkraim was of Judah, and in the cities thereof, when I ſhall brir » Cha 
leads ſome to interpret theſe words into a : ; : 1e Ci : all bring 
> «(nt Ehild, and denying the truth of his pro- > TINT, Vet "BY DC Tp 32. 4c 
A his dear Son, or a pleaſe axtby ro ©, hy be ET he. 600 their cap ity, the LORD bieſs thee, O habica- Heb, 
Fell. d Repontance. EEE niorels Archer of che Sg! fb ; 10D of juſtice, and mountain of holineſs zz. < 16. 
WM whole PE = ed. that the affirmative Interrogation tome | k Theſe Prophecies of the Reſtzuration ct ti Jews, are very 
be VOUS wn © doh imply a Negative, or the negative Particle | Ordainarily prefaczd with theſe txo Attributes of Gee, the ere of 
i times 1N 19% (I <q; er RT. & vie os iobreie thy) dear which afſerts his Power to do the thing promited; for what cannor 
3s ſupprefſ-d and '-.1S #4 4K | FE PRs BE 9e-the bives be dore by the Lord of Hoſts? The other aſſerting his Goodneſs 
-$m here, is the ſame wit Z 5. Pp? 115 Pl "Fa di 2h - ws or Good Will to this People, becauſe he is their God, related to 
CES. 75 hoe we hank applied bog bene | 27> in Covenant with them : Abiliry and Love, or Good Will 
with did I no:? So Job 20. 4- Wh J Hef res form? Is j Ge Ro to us, being the two P:1lJars of our Faith, and Confidence in God, 
' thou nt k q OE} neck wah os wy - 5H the chunk _ me no _ _ _ - open be qv that the 
w.th Haff thou 8 « 20+ JO.. \V. 2. ws Ho erilon whom we truſt 15 able and wiliing to do whar we truſt to 
the Particl: prefixed T1, be an affirmarive Parricle, yet 1t 15 often him for, The Particle ")) ſeemeth better rranſ]-red, vir 5 yer 
pur for Pn and ſignificth Negatively the Negarive being ſupprel- | again they ſhall uſe, &c, m Three things the Prophet here forte]- 
ied and to be unde:{to0d. I have alſo ſometimes thought thar even | lerh. «1, "Thar the Cities which formerly had been the Habitat:ons 
here it may be fairly enough interpreted, Is Ephraim now ome ; of bloody, unjuſt, cruel Men, ſhould become the Habitations of 
my dear Son ? Is he a pleaſant Child ? Is his heart turned? Sois ; Men who ſhould do juſtice toall. 2. That the City which ſtood 
woe s For ſince I ſi ON hw. ww with -— Dh &y v> = __ amor Zion, _ _ _— —_ an oe of Ido!a- 
earneſtly remember him, "NAT 7D Ar. Mentanus tranſl: it, fr | Ters, ad other unholy P-rſons, ſhould become a tJace, in which 
: with him; the reaſon of the difference is, |, Men ſhou'd in a duc and holy manner ſerveand wo ſhip the rrue 
foro of Rk it gnifi-s time. I fee no reaſon to vary ' God. 3. That they ſhould be ſo famous bo-h for erend Ho- 
-from our Tranſlation fince or from the time, as the ſame Particle Jlineſs, that Men ſhou'd take notice of it, and wiſh rhem well un- 
Rock, 2 Sow 18. 4 qg21 Kings 14 28. Iſa. 28. 19. Iipake againſt der that notion ; and up>n that account, as they had for their ſins 
bin by ye Thrernings. I do remember him with the affeQtion and been made a Curſe and a Proverb, fo upon their Refo:mat'on they 
compaſſion of a Father. 6 My bowels are troubled for him is as much fhould be for a Bl.fling. By this we may obſerve tht thoſe who 
a$ T have pitied him; as the Bowels of Parents are turned and rrou= Would be bl:fſed by God and Men, muſt be juſt rowaids Men, and 
bled for their Children in C:lamitiesz therefore ſaith God. c I will | holy towards God. : ; 
certainly ſhew him Favour. ; 24 And there (ball dwell in Judah itſelf, and in all 
21 Serthee up way-marks 4, make thee high heaps e: the cities thereof together husbandmen, and they has 
ſet thine heart towards the high-way, ever the way go forth with flocks ». 6: | 
which thou wenteſt f : turn again, O virgin of Iſrael, 7 This whole Verſe is but an Expreſſion of their peaceable State 
turn again to theſe thy cities g. og _ return, they ſhould live innocently and peaceably. So 
d The later part of this Verſe expounds the former, Thou ſhale | "7: 35 12 : 
( faith God ) Gon again to theſe Cities which — _ 12 A S have _— _ a eary foul, and I have | 
therefore takz good notice of the way r10u goclt, ict up ilome | TEPIienUNEd Every LOTFOWTU) TOu!l 7. 
marks by whict thou mayeſt know it again: *s _ __ . #1 I have here is of the ſame ſign:ficancy with 7 will. as ordinarly 
or ſome high heaps of Stone in the wa Bo won he wed th —_ 1N Propherical Promiſ:s,which are the words of him who ca'lerh the [Or, 
agrin when thou comeſt at on j -n == He js; kay x p things raat are not,as if they were, and would have his Peoplelock | ſhould 1 
: Aſſrians and the Babylon'/ans carr ed thee, p | So 5 upon tae things which he hath promiſed to do as certain as if they have con 
. the ſame way, g Farther to aſſure them they ſhould return, he | were already done. The words are only a promiſe to the ſame ſence | rinued ay 
calls ro them to turn again, and doubleth his words, for the far- | as before, that God would give his people abundance of eaſe and 1 busband 
ther confirmation of the thing. picnty, and wipe all tears from their eyes, ; aro” them 
EY « How long wilt thou go about, O thou back- 26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld ; and my ſleep 
fliding daughter 5? for the LORD hath created a new | was ſweet unto me o. 
thing in the earth, a woman (hall compaſs a man z. 0 Either this Revelation was made to Jeremiah in a dream, from 
þ That the Jews are here m2ant by the backſliding daughter is | whence he awaking, look'd about him, and was very wel] pleaſed 


with his ſleep at that tims. becauſe of the graciouſe Promiſes cons 


ou: of queſtion, but what going about is here intend-d, 1s not fo | | - 
cerning Juday which the Lord had in that Dream revealed to him. 


plain. Some interpret it of :h<rr runaing after Idols 3 tome of rheir , 8: : 
ſeeking help from foraign Nations, initead of app'ying them» | Or elſe in a Viſion pon the ſight and hearing of which he was 


ſelves unto God. Others of their wandring up and down in Captis ; as well pleaſed, as a Man that had flepr quietly, and had had noill 
vity. + But the greater difficulty is avout tais zew thing, which rhe | and usp'ealing, bur ſweet and delightful Dreams while he ſlepr. 
Lord faith he will create in the new Earth. a Woman compaſſing a Man. 275 C Behold, the days come , fſaich the LORD, 
cara ASA mnnog _ >» v-caagh>grea of, "ara that* I will ſow the houſe of Iſrael and the houſe ofJu- » xx,x 
agunit trong Men. But the rwo Interpr dah with the ſeed of man, and with the ſeed of beaſt o. > 

: 4 fi 0 2o 2Js 
Paſſage, which ſeem moſt reaſonably co contend for preferznce | oThat is. T will exceedingly multiply them, both with Men, 


5» 


are, 1. The Interpretation of thoſe who think itcontainsa Promile 
both of the Jewiſh Caurch in its time, and of the Goſpel Church, after 
. the Jewiſh Chureh's period, prevailing overall its Enemies, whether 
Temporal or Spiricual ; though, conſidering rhe paucity of the 
Church's M:mbers, wich the multitude of iis Enemies and ther 
power, it ſeemed as ftrangea thing, as for a Woman to prevai! 
againft a ſtrong and mighty Man. This the learned Author of the 
Engliſh Anetations, judgeth the true and g:nuine ſence of theſe 
words. Others interpret this Woman to be the Yirgin Mary, who 
was to incloſe in her Womb the Lord Jeſus Chriſt, ro whom the 
converted Jews were to adhere; which ſence neither Mr. Calvir, nor 
our learned Engliſh 4motator approve of. Burt ir being the receiv d 
ſence of very many Interpreters, it is fit we ſhould hear their Rea- 
ſons, which are 1. Thiey urge the Particle 7, for God, ſay they, 
here gives the Reaſon why the Jews ſhould deſire to return to the 
Country of Judea, becauſe the M:ſſias was to be born there» 2. They 
urge the Term created, the body of Chriſt being not begotten by 
Man, but created by God, though of the Fleſh of the Virgin. 3. 


They ſay this indeed was a nzw thing. It was anew thing for a 


Virgin to become a Mother, ſtill remaining a Virgin, and to be 
the Mother of him who was God bl:fſzd for ever, though not the 
Mother of the D:vine Nature; for ſo Chriſt anſwered the Type of 
Melchiz+deck,withour Father as Man, without Mothtr as Gode 4. All 
other incompaſlings of a Man they ſay,were as well out of Judes as 
In it, this was in Judea only. 5. The word tranſlated Woman in 
Scriprure, they ſay always lignifies a particular individual Woman, 
which could be no other than the Virgin. 6. They ſay the whole 


Contex? referrs to benefits coming by Chriſt, therefore he muſt |' 


Certainly be the Man here intended. 7. They urge that this Pro- 
phecy follows, wer. 15. which Meth. 2. 8. is applyed by the Evan- 

liſt ro Herod's Murder of the Infants upon the Birth of Chriſt. 
But on the other ſide it is obje&ed thar the Verb 22D is never uſed 
in Scripture to ſignifie ſuch an incompaſſing. 2. That the Word tranſ- 
Jated # man,fignifieing a ffreng Man, doth not properly agree to an In- 
Fant in the Mother's Belly. But it is again replied, that it is not 
the only Word in Scripture, that is but once read in the ſame 
ſence. 2. Thar the Word ſignifieth any incompaſſing, and may be 
properly appli:d to the Virgins Vomb incompaſling an Intanr. 
And for the Word tranſlated Man, they ſay it is applied to a new 
born Inf.nt, Job 3. 3. Iſs. 9. 6 That it is applied to God, Dewt. 10. 
37. and co Chriſt, Z-ch, 13. 7. compared wth Marth. 26. 31. In a 
Matter wherein ſo, many learned Men are divided, it is enough 
for me to. give their Opinions and Reaſons, leaving my Reader to 
his own Judgment, in a; Matter wherein neither his Faith nor Ho» 
Tolineſs are much concerned ; for rh: Queſtion is not concerning 
the thing, whether Carift was incompatkd in the Wombcf a Wo- 
man, which is plain enongh from orher Scriptures, but only 
whether chat be the ſence -of the Phraſe here. 

23 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſ- 


rael &, As yer / they ſhall uſe this Ipecch in the land 


and with Catte], they are now Jaid waſte, their Men deſtroyed, 
Or gone into other lands, their profitable Beaſts are deſtroyed, and 
kill'd up, bur it ſhall not be ſo always. I will again plant them, 
and thcre ſhall be as great plenty of either, as if rhpy were ſown: 
> multiplying boch of Men and of Beaſts in Nations is God's 
eſſing. : | 
28 And it ſhall come to paſs, that like as T have 
watched over them to * pluck up, and break down 
and to throw down, and to deſtroy, and to afflit ; fo + 
will I watch over them to bui'd and to planrc, faith 


the LORD. 

? Nothing can produce in God a change of Counſels Purpoſes, 
and Decrees, for he is not as Man, that he ſh:ula lye or repent, he is 
the God that changeth not, but Men's Reformation may produce in 
him a change of Providentia) Diſpenſations. God 1s here ſet oyr 
aSa Man that is vindicative,and his vindicative Nature prompts him 
to watchall opportunities of doing hurt to the Perſon againſt whom 
he is ſer. There Is no Fury nor Revenge in God; but what he 
doth is Juſtice ; but here an angry God is ſet out, as taking all 
opportunities to puniſh ſinners, as if he had watched for them, 
whereas he never ſlumbereth nor ſleepeth : But the time of their 
Reformation, and his Favour being come, God premiſeth to beas 
diligent to do them good,which is here expreſt by the metaphori- 
call notions of Planting and Building them,as he was before to ex- 
ecute his Juſtice upon them. 

29 In thoſe days they ſhall tay no more ; The fa- 
thers have eaten a ſowre grape, and the childrens teeth 


are ſet on edge 9. 

9 That is, we are puniſhed for our Fathers Sins, which yet God 
may juitly do ; and none queſtionerth the Juſtice of Man in the 
Caſe, depriving Children of their patrimenial Eſtates for their Pa- 
rents Treaſon, nor more than God threateneth in th: ſecond Com- 
mandment. God indeed, Ezek 18. 2+ ſeemeth diſpleaſed at their uſe 
of this Proverb; but the reaſon is, becauſe they ſo uſed ir, asto 
acquit themſelves, intimating they were guilcleſs, and ſuffered 
only for the Sins of their Parents, whereas it was falſe otherwiſe 
the Puniſhment of Children fer the Sins of their Parents, were no 
more than God had threatned, Exod. 20. 5. and 34+. 7, Chap. 15. 4» 
Bur, ſaith God, your Captivity ſhall, as to you, expiate your Pa- 
rents Guilt paſt, and you ſhall no more fay ſo. 5 

20 Burt every one ſhall dye for his own iniquity, 
every man that eateth the ſowre grape, his teeth ſhall 
be ſer on edpge 7. 

7 But yet ( ſaith God ) you muſt not think that Sinners ſhall eſcape 
my Vengeance, but if Men commit Iniquity rhzy ſhall die, no Man's 
Teeth ſhall be ſet on edge, but his only,who hath eaten the ſowre 
Grape. 


7 
” Ly ts Be. 
- - 


N 
, 


| 
1 
| 


| ano them differing, as was ſhewed before, and 1s farther declared afterward. 


Chap XX Xl. 7-6 &-U 
x Chap/ 21 J Behold, * the days come, faith the LORD, 
gee that I will makea new covenant with the houſe of 1{- 
16, Tael, and with the houſe of Judah /. 

ſ The Apoſtle's application of this, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. puts us 
out of doubt, that this Promiſe referred to the Goſpel-times, Ir 
was not only made with the F2ws, bur all thoſe who ſhould-be in- 
graiffed into that Olive ; bur it is ſaid to be made with them; either 
as thoſe two Terms ſignifie the whole Church, with whom thar 
Covenant was made, (they being the whole Church which God had 
upon the Earth atchar time ) or becauſe they were the only people 
ti1:r hal broken the firſt Covenant, the Gentile: being Strangers at 
that time to the Covenant of Promiſe, Eph. 2+. 42. Covenants being 
utual'y renewed upon one Parties violation of them, or becaule ir 

' was at firſt made with the Jews, though it concerned alſo thoſe 
that were aff ar off even as many as the Lord ſhould call, AQts 2. 39. Net- 
thieris it called the newCovenant, becauſe it was as to the Subſtance 
new, forit was made with Abraham. Gen. 17. 7. and with the 
Jews, Deut. 26. 17, 18. Andit was then confirmed by the Blood 
of Chriſt, though not aftually ſhed, yet as he was the Lamb flainfrom 
the beginning of the World, whoſe Bloud was typified by the Bloud of 
the Paſchal Lamb, and of all thoſe living Creatures killed for Sa- 
crifice, but upon many other Accounts, thus enumerated by D:» 
vinzs, 1, Becauſeit wasnew in the Notion of a Teſtament, not 
confirmed by the aCtual Death of Chriſt till Goſpe!=Times. 2. Bee 
cauſe it was revealed and preached afcer a new manner, more fule 
ly and particular'y, plainly and clearly. 3. Becauſe it had no 


ſuch mixture of Promiſes of temporal Bl-ſlings, as it had when 
firſt made with the Jews. 4. Nor was the Ceremonial Law any part 
of it, as it was to the Fews, who were oblidged to approve theme 
ſelvcs God's People by a ſtrift obſervance of that. 5. Ic was in the 
Publication extended both to Jews and Gentiles, which the former 
was not. 6. In regard of the efficacy of the Spirit attending the 
Publication of it, in a much fuller and larger manner, with the 
diſtribucion of its Gifts and Graces, inabling Souls to fulfill it, See 
more in the Engliſh 4nmotations upon this Subje&. 


32 Not according to the covenant that I made with 

their fathers in the day that T took them by the hand 

[Or, to bring them out of the land of Egypt t,which my co- 

b:14 1 yenant they brake «, || although I was an husband to 
have © tem, faith the LORD w, 


. b nA .* , . . o Py ” 4 ; 
ras 5 Not in ſubſtance differing fcom it, but in circumſtances vaſtly 


The Covenant which God made with the Fews when they came out 
of the Land of Egypt, was on God's part the Law which he gave 
th:m with the Promiſes annexd totheir obſervation of it ; on their 
part ( which made it a formal Covenant) their Promiſe of Obedi- 
ence to it, of which ſee Exod. 24.7, 8. Dent. 26. 17, 18, This 
Covenant God ſaith he made with them, when they were an im- 
potent weak People, the care of whom he took upon him, and led 
them as 2 Parent leadeth the feeble child by his hand. None muſt 
imagine that this Covenant did not conrain the Promiſe of Pardon, 
through the Bloud of the Meſſiah, upon their application ro him, 
for to what purpoſe elſe was it confirmed by Bloud, Exod. 24« 8. 
# Which Covenant they are ſaid to have broken, not becauſe of 
every Diſobedierice to the Law of God,for ſo every one daily break- 
ethit, bur by their groſs and eminent finnings, ſo oft repeated, 
and continued. in without Repentance, and more particularly by 
their 1olatry, which is compared to Whoredom, which breaketh 
the Covmenint; and Bond of Marriage, and cauſeth God to ſay. unto 
a People, Lo Ammi, you are not my people. w And this Covenant 
breaking is a2gravated from God's Kindneſs to them, and Care of them; 
who had for themthe Love,and declared the Care ofan Husband,and 
gave then no temptation to go a whoring from him. : 
Bur this hal be the covenat that I will make with 
the houſe of Iſrael w, After thoſe days,faich the LORD, 
*F:ek. * I will put my law in their inward parts, and wrice 
1. 9,20jt in thctir hearts x, and will be their God, and they 
= 26, ſhal be my people y. _ 
Cor. 3. 3-, ® That is, ( with thoſe 1-aelites indeed who ſhal be without Guile, 
20 3* 7' (as Chriſt ſaith of Nathanael, John 1. 47. ) with thoſe who are 
( 2s the Apoſtle ſpeaks, Rom: 2. 9.) Jews inwardly, by rhe Circum- 
ciſion of the Heart and Spirit, ſpoken of, and promiſed by God, 
Deut. 35. 6. & In the Times of the Goſpel, God's Law is nor a» 
krogated and made void. Chriſt himſelf came not to deſtroy the 
Law, but to fulfill ir; bur 1t.is written 11 the hearts of God's 
true Iſrael, by the finger ofthe Spirit, not in Tables of Stone only; 
and they become obedient to it, not from compullion and force, but 
from their ſecret approbation of it, and acknowledement of it, as 
holy, juſt and good, the delight rhey take in it, after theinward man, 
Rom. 7. 22. but ſome ma object. How was this a New Cove- 
nant? Did not God of old write his Law in the Hearts of his Peo= 
ple ? Did not David, and other the Servants of God, ( of whom 
wereadin the Old Teſtament) ſerve God out of a principle of Love, 
and delight in his Law? Aſw. Undoubredly David and others did 
ſo, and the Law of God was wrote in their hearts,but it was by ver= 
rue of this New Covenant, from the fre: and efficacious Grace of 
God. Mr. Catvisl think judgeth righr, that the Prophet's deſign 
here is to expreſs the difference betwixr the Law and the Goſpel. The 
firſt ſheweth Vuty, thelatter bringeth along with ir the grace of Re- 
generation, by which the Heart is changed, fitted, and inabled for, 
and unto Duty. Allunder the time of che Law that came to Salva- 
tion were ſaved, not from the Law, or by that, butby the Goſpel, 
- and this new Covenant; but this was nor evidently exhibited, nei» 
ther was the regenerating Grace of God ſo common under the time 
of the Law, as it hath been under the Goſpel, which mak-th itlook 
like s new Covenant with Men, though it was'the ſame Covenant 
which God was always in with. his People 3 for what difference is 
there between the terms of theCovenaur as recited here, Chap. 24, 
7. and 30: 22. and as made with Abra-am, Gen, 17. 7. Deut- 
| go, 6. Itis further obſervable, thit God maketh the writing the 
] Law in Peoples Hearts his own Work. There wereno need of God's | 
putting his Law into Mens inward parts, ifthey had ſuch 'an ins | 
ward power (as ſome talk of ) -of themſelves to doit, and coul, 
write it there with a Pen of their own making. The Paprfts allow 


their order ; theſe are thoſe here ſpoken of. e Which ſhal hold 


= . . .* a w 

pointed. If we interpret it ( as in our Verſion ) for ever,it hs 

be underſtood not of [el according to the fleſh, but, of the Church, 
the true Iſrael of God, which ſhal never fail. : 


M IT 4 H. Chap. XXXIMTIE 
God a ſhare in this Work; only give Man himſelfthe greateſt ſhare. 119% 
Others indeed give God nothing but the Honour of giving Man a 
reaſonable ſoul, furniſhed with ſuch a power, and that he hath done 
to Heathens, as well as thoſe within the Pale of the Church, and 
rhe Preaching of the Goſpel ; and to thoſe withinths Church, -- further 
aid and afſitance ro them than Heathens have, to uſe their natu- 
ral power well, Butler any underſtanding perſon judge whether 
this be probably the ſenſe of this Text,or comprehenſive of all with- 
in the Covenant which God hath made with his People ; or ſuppo- 
ſing this were true, what that is which diftereth, one Man liv- 
ing under the Goſpel from another, bur himſelf, and whether by 
this Do&cine Man be not made a God to himſelf, that is the prin- 
cipal cauſe of all ſpiritual and eternal yood, which how it coms 
porteth with the Honour and Glory of God, or with this Text, 
and many others of like nature, I do not underſtand. : 

34 And they {hal teach no more every man his neigh- 
bour, and every man his brother ſaying, Know the *xq, «$47 
LORD = ; for they * x ——_ 

& ; for they * thal all know me, trom theleaſt 13. - 
of them unto the greateſt of chem, ſaith the LORD a, John6.45- 
for * ] will forgive their iniquicy, and I will remem- 2&9r+ * || 
ber their ſin no more 6. Joh 2.136 | 


z This muſtnor be ſo interpreted as 1f under the Goſ) pel, there *Chap. 
ſhould be no more need of miniſterial teaching, for Chriſt himſelf 33» 8 , 
ſent our hisApoſtles to preach 3 nor yet as if there ſhould be no more Micah 7. 
need of Brotherly Teachings, by Inſtrufion or Corre&ionz the 18, - 
contrary 15 commanded, Col. 3. 16, Its only an expieflion fis- ARS i6 
nifying the increaſe of knowledge; and ofthe fear of the Lord, that 43> 
ſhou!d be after the pouring out of the Spirit ; we have ſuch expreſ- 
ſions, x John 2. 27. The Learned Author ofour Engliſh Armotations 
thinks this Phraſe ſignifies that under rhe Goſpel there ſhould be * 
a greater meaſure of means; of knowledge, and of knowledge got 
by that means andofclearneſs of underſtanding in Perſons, or 
ability to conceive things, revealed, and a greater number ,of Per- 
ſons that ſhould be enlighrned with the ſaving knowledge of God : 
Others ſay, that, by knowing the Lord, is to be underſtood the firſt 
knowledge of God : Chriſtians ſhould not need be taught the firſt 
Rudiments; but the Apoſtle ſpeaksotherwiſe, Heb. 5- 12.- O- 
thers by knowledge underſtand the, fear of the Lord. a God ſaith, They 
ſhould all know him ; but it muſt not be underſtood of the ſame 
degree, and meaſure, butin adepree of ſufficiency for the Duties 
which God expe&ed from them upon their notion and apprehenſion 
of God, b God makes the root of all this Grace to be the fice Pare 
don, and remiſſion of their ſins. | 


35 5 Thus faith the LORD, which giveth the ſun -- 


* for a light by day, ad the ordinances of the moon = " 
and of the ſtars for a light by night, which divideth *16.. 5+; 
the * fea c when the waves thereof roar, the LORD 1s. 
of hoſts is his Name. a 


e The Word "My is here tranſlated divide, which hath led ſome 
Interpreters to think that God here hath a reſpe& to his dividing the 
Red Sca, that the 1/raelizes might paſs over, which ſeemeth not at 
all here ro be intended. The word indeed ſignifieth to divide, but 
it alſo ſignifieth to quiet and bring 1s ref, and is ſo interpreted, Chap. 
50,34.1/2.34.14.&in this very Ch. Fer.2&doubtleſs were better here 
_ was ore, quieteth theSea when theWaves 
atts mentionedzare as ſpeaking the DivineAlmighry power,of him 
who 15 the Lord ofall the Regiments in the Hoſts IFthe "Sexe "g 

35 * If choſe ordinances 4 —_ fromi before me, ,;;: -. - 
ſaith the. LORD, rzhew the ſeed of Iſrael ſhal alſo = yy 
ceaſe, from being a nation before me for ever. os: 


d There are Ordinances of Worſhip, which are God's Laws fe- 


lating to his Worſhip, and Ordinances of Juftice, which are God's 


aws, forthe executing civil Juſtice, and Ordinances of Nat 
which are God's Eſtabliſhments for the working of natural becte ery 


and continue to the difſolution of the World; the continuance of 
which God pawneth as a Pledge of the continuance of 1ſrae! as 2 
Natiori a/! the days ( ſo it is in the Hebrew ) that is many days, or 
all the days they ſhal keep cloſe with him, or which he hath aps 


37 Thus faith the LORD *, If heaven above can be * Chap: 
meaſured, and the foundations of the earth ſearched 33. £24 
out beneath, I will alſo caſt off all the ſeed of Iirael 
for all that they have done ſaith the LORD f © 

F That is, I will never caſt offall the Seed of 17ael, ( which 
promiſe the Apoſtle” Rom, Ix, 1, 2. proveth to have been by 
God made good, notwithſtanding the reje&ion of the great Body 
of that People ) for none but God can either meaſure the Heavens, 
or pierce to the center of the Earth. 


33 © Behold the days come, ſaith. the LORD, 
that the city ſhal be built tothe LORD fromthe tower 
of Hananeel, unto. the gate of the corner g. 

g That is, .it ſhal be buile roundzas largely as ever,we read of thi 
Tower of Hananacel, Neh. 3. 1, and 12. 39.. Zech. 14+ 1o. it 


was in the South, or rather the Eaſtern part of che Ciry, We read 
of the Gate of the corner, 2 Kings 14. 13: Zech. 14. 10. moſt agree 
that it is in the North-Eaſt part of the City. 


39 And the meaſuring line ſhal yet go forth, over 
againſt it, upon the hill Gareb, and ſhall compaſs 
about to Goah 5. 

. kh That is, it ſhal be built round about upon its o1d foundations, 
Vid. Neh, 3. We are ignorant of the Ancient Situation of the 
City, ſo, are the Jews themſelves, therefore ic is vain to pretend 
to an exatt skillin theſe names of places; ſome ſay, Gareb ſignifies 
a S:ab, and the Hill had jts Name from Leprous Perſons lying there. 

49 And the whole valley of the dead bodies 5, and 
of the aſhes k, and all the fields unto the brook Ki- 


6 M dron, 


"Las 
Tt 


's "Irotd 


hap. XXXIL 


MJ} 1-H. Chap. N&$X77 


7--E. R 
6 © And Jeremiah ſaid, The word of che LORD 


. 


* N-hem. dron, unto the corner of che * horſe-gate towards the | 


eaſt }, shal beholy unto the LORD» ; irſhal notbe pluc- 
ked up, nor thrown down any more for ever ». 


i A Viley ſo called (as ſomethink) from the Mulrtitude 
of SenaZFerih's Army fliin there ; or, ( as others think / 
Bolies of MalefaQors put ro Death at: Golgorcha ( which was near) 
caſt, or buried there, & So called - ( as is thought) from the 
aſhes of the Sacrifices carried thither. 1 Some think rhar the Horſe » 
gate had its Name from the King's Horſes Jed our at 14 The ſum 
is, the whole City ſhal be built. - All theſe places ſhal be parts 
of rhe Holy City, and God's Name fſhal be ſanRtified, and be ſha] 
be worſhipped in chem all. » And the Ciry for a Jong time ſhal 
abide, 4nd not b: plucked up, nor thrown down , for we know 
aftzr many Years it was plucked up >y tne Roman. If we inter= 

rer the word for everof a perpetuity,the Church of God muſt here 
be undzrſtood, againt w:uch the Gates of Hell thal never prevail, 
as Chriſt hath promiſed. 
POPC H AP. XXXIL 
Jeremiah in the Siege of Jeruſalem being impr:ſon:d by Zedekiah, buy- 

&th a Ficld, r#keth Wrineſſes, arawdth a IWr.ting, ſealeth and dcli. 

wereth ic ro Baruch to preſerve, as Tokens of. the Peoples Return, 

IJ. 15. He prayeth with admiration of God's Majefty and Works n 

and repreſenterh his own Confli#, 16,--25. God confirmeth the 

Captivity for their ſins, 25, -— 35; but promiſeth @ gracious Re- 

rurn, 36, 44: ; 

He word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, 
in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Jus 
dah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchad- 


TEZZAT 8&4. 

& That is ſomething more thana Year before the Ciry was tak- 
en, for ic was taken in the fourth Month of the eleventh Year of 
this K:ngs Reign, Chap. 39. 2. This renth Year concurred with 
the eighte-nth Year of the King of Babylon's abſolute Reign, who be- 
gan ſo to Reign in the third and fourth Year of Jehoiakim, Dan. 1. 


1,  ſoas Jehojakim's laſt Year was the ſeventh and eighth of Nebu+ 


chadrezzar, who is alſo ſometimes called Nebuch adnezzar and Nabu- 


choTonojor. | : 

2 For then the king of Babylon's army beſieged Je- 
ruſalem 6 : and Jeremiah the prophet was ſhut up in 
the * court of che priſon, which was in the King of Ju- 
dali's hoſe c, 

b The King of Bz)ylmm ( as appears from 2 Kings 25. 1. and Chap. 
39+ 1. ) befieged Hieruſalem in the tenth Month of the niathTear of 
Zedekiah, fo as he had beſieged it ſome time before the Revela- 
tion of chis Prophzcy came to Jeremiah, c 
time ?Priſoner, in a Priſon within the King's Houſe, The King 
could keep him from revealing God's Will to the People, bur he 
could not keep God from revealing himſelf to him. Priſons hinder 
us from Communion with Mn, bur often contribute to God's Peo- 
ple,freer and ſweetzr communion with him. In the mean time the 
de: perate hardneſs of this Prince, and theſe peoples Hearts ap- 
p=ar- in that the fear of an Enemy beſieging them could not awe 
them from ſuch outrageous as of Perſecution : 

'2 For Zedekiah king of Judah, hed (but him up,fay- 
ing 4, Wherefore doſt thou propheſie, and ſay, Thus 


faich the LORD, Behold I wil give this city into the 


- hand of che king of Babylon, and he ſhal take it. 


d We no where read that Zedekiah immediatly commanded Je. 
temiah to be impriſoned, he ſezmeth rather to have been favourable 
to Jeremiah, and judicious Interpreters think his preſent Priſon was 
a favourable Priſon ; but God accounterh Princes to do thac which 
their Miniſters or ſabordinate Magiſtrates do with their connivance, 
and without their hinderance. Though it be wild Divinity for 
any to ſay, that inferiour Miniſters or SubjeQts are excuſed by the 
command of the ſuperior, and the guilt Iyeth only on them ; yer 
itis as wild to ſay, they contraft no guilr by the extravagant a&ts 
of ſubordinate Magiſtrates whom they put in place, and can pu- 
niſh, and remove from their places. 


4 And Zedekiah king of Judah,ſhal not eſcape out 
of the hand of the Chaldeans, but ſhal ſurely be deli- 
vered into' the hand of the king of Babylon, and ſhall 
ſpeak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes ſhal be- 
hold his eyes 

5 And he ſhal lead Zedekiah to Babylon e, and 


* there ſhal he be until T vific him, faith the LORD f, 


Thouph ye fight withthe Chaldeans, ye ſhal not pro- 
per g. 


- e Here the cauſe ofthe Prophet's impriſonment is expreſſed, The | 


things were true which Jeremy propheſied, and fulfilled, Chap. 39, 
5, 6, 7. and Jeremy could nor forbear ſpeaking them becauſe he was 
ſent of God upon the Errand, Chap. 34. 2, 3. yet the King and 
C2urc could nor bear his words, f Interpreters are divided, whe- 
ther the viſtation here mentioned were a viſitation of Jugment, and 
the ſame with untill he die; or of mercy ; it 1s certain Zedekiah was 
no: put to Death, only his eyes put our, and hecarried into Baby- 
Ion, Chap. 39. 7» where ſome think he afterward found favour 
with the King of Babylon ; certain itis that he dyed in Babylmn, and 
had an honourable Burial,but whether he metwith anyother favour, 
or-no, the Scripture ſaith not ; Some will have the words read, 
wntil I viſit this People, and think that Zedekiah lived in Priſon in Ba- 
bylon till the Reſtauration; but he was 21 Years 01d when he be- 
ganto Reign, and reigned 11 Years, ſo as he was 32 Years old 
when he wascarried to Babylon, 2 Chron, 46. 11. and muſt be then 
- 92 Years eld when he died, which is hardly probable, conſidering 
the delicate Education, and Life of Princes. that he having loſt his 

' Byes, and ſeen ſo much miſery, ſhould continue 60 Years longer, 


'g Thongh you make many Sallies out upon the Chaldeans, that are 


now befieging you, yet you ſhal be beaten in all, and not be able 
to drive them from your Walls. Hirberto hath been but the Pre- 
face to the Prophetical Type, and Diſcourſe in tais Chapter which 
aow followeth. 8 


- 


from the: #5 1n Anathorch 'R 


| 


Jeremiah was at that 


cane unto me, ſaying, 

7 B:ho!d Hanameel the fon of Shallum thine ungle, 
ſhal come unto thee, ſaying, Buy thee my field thar 
for the right of redemption #s thine 
to buy it k. 


þ From hence may be concluded the certainty oſfuture contin 
gency in God's Eye; the coming of Hanameel, was a future con- 
ringency, yet certainly known to God, fo as he could tell the Pro. 
pher he would come, # Anathoth ( as appears from Jefb, 21. 18.) 
was one of the Cities of the Lewitrs; herceariſerh a queſtion, how 
it could beſo!d to Jeremah, who by the Law might notpofleſs it, 
Num: 18, 20, being a Levite, Some excule it from the Commard 
of God, who mighr diſpenſe with his own Law, but this ſeemeth 
not enough, becauſe it is ſaid afterwards, 7he Right of Redemption 
ir thme, 2 Others therefore ſay the Lewv:tes might have fome ſmall 
Poſſeſhons, rhough no plowed Land; They might have Houſes 
and Orchards, and Gardens, in Cities and Suburbs. Bur that theſe 
might be ſold ſeemerh contrary to the Law, Levit. 25. 34. It is 
therefore rather thoughr to be meant of ſome ſmall Eſtate left to 
Hanameel from his Anceſtors, k Th? right of Redemption belonced 
ro the nex: of Kin. Lev. 25. 25. Ruth. 4. qi F 

8 So:Hanameel my uncles fon came to mein tle 
court of the prifon, accordirg to the word of the 
LORD J, and faid unto me, Buy my field, I pray 
thee, that 7s in Annathoth, which #s in the country of 
Benjamin; for the righr of inheritance js thine, and 
the redemption 3s thine, buy 3z for thy ſelf; then I 
knew that this was the word of the LORD ms. 

I Hanameel came freely, none drave, or forced him, vet he came 
neceſſarily as to the event, he could not but go, elſe Gcd had not 
rold the Prophet truth. » When I ſaw it came to paſs. knowing 
that God alone knew what was in M*ns hearts. and whar they 
would do, Iknew my former mentioned Revelation was from God. 


9 And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncles ſon 


even ||{eventeen ſhekels of ſilver ». 


Field here mentioned to be but ſome Orchard or Garden; tho we 
muſt allow the price of Land ſtrangely fallen at this time, when 
the Enemy was beſieging the chiet Ciry ofthe Country. It ſhould 
ſeem they were wont there to make their Payments,more by weight 
than by Tale. 

io And Tf ſubſcribed the evidence, and ſealed zz, 


and took witneſſes, and weighed him the money in 


the ballances o. 
o I went through with thePurchaſe,ſetting my hand to, and ſeal 
ing the deed, and taking Wirtnefles to it, (as is uſual ) 

1x So 1 took the evidence of the purchaſe, both that 
which was ſealed according to the law and cuſtom, and 
that which was open þ. 

p Iris moſt probable, that uponſuch Bargains and Sales amongſt 
the Jews, two Inſtruments were made, the one ſealed up, to be 
kept by thePurchaſer, the other open, ro be ſhewed to the Jud- 
ges, and by them ratified, and that this was the Law and Cuſtom 
ordinarly amongſt the Jews upon Purchaſes ; both which Jeremy 
kept, the one for his uſe, the other to produce in Court for Ratifi= 
cation. There 1s no certainty inthe guefles that ſome otkers make 
why there were two Copies: Nothing appeareth but that the Pro- 
phet bought this lictle Purchaſe with the ſame Rites and Circum- 
ſtances that Men ordinarily in that: Country made Purchaſes in 
times of Peace, and civil order. : 

Iz And I gave the evidence of the purchaſe unto 
Baruch the ſon of Neriah, the ſon of Maaſeiah 9, in 


the ſightofHanameel my uncles ſon,and in the preſence 


of the * witneſſes, that ſubſcribed the book of the pur- 


priſons. 

9 This Baruch ( as appeareth from Chap. 36. 4, 26. ) was a Scribe 
and an attendantupon Jeremieh, and one who wrote things for him 
and from his Mouth. r He made this purchaſe with. all che uſual 
Formalities ; to make it publick, he ſigned and ſealed ittefore Wit- 
nefles, and delivered it to Baruch, to kzep in the preſence of them 
all, and in the preſence of the Jews, who caſually were in the place 
when the thing was done, 8 

13 © AndI charged Baruch before them, ſaying, 
14 Thus ſaith the LORD ofhoſts, the God of Iſrae!, 
Take theſe evidences, this evidence of the purchaſe, 
both which is ſealed, and this evidence which is open, 
and put them in an earthen veſſel, that they may con- 


tinue many days. 
i5 For thus faith the LORD ofhoſts, the Godof 
Iſrael, Houſes and fields, and vineyards ſhall be pot- 


{efſed again in this land /. 
JS Here is nothing of any ſeeming difficulty in, theſe Verſes, but 


an Earthen Veſſel, which himſelfalſo expounds,that they might con» 
tinue many days, that is, not defaced ;had they been hid many 
days inthe Earth: they would have beenrotten ; had they been a- 
bove ground in a Box or Cheſt, they might have been loſt, or taken 
away by the Soldier's plundering houſes, or at leaſt bury with fire 
Perſe x 5. The Prophet expounds Gods Mzaning in this Command 
to him, and his own Deſign, in ſo formal a buying of ſo ſmall 
a Purchaſe, eſpecially conſidering, that very probably, Jcren:iah 
was no great Purchaſer, nor very greedy of Purchaſes: Helets 
them know that all this was fora ſign ot rhe Truth of what God 
had revealed to him concerning the Peop!c's Return, though after 


many days ( fixty years from this time )-and alſo of the firm 
| allens 


only why the Prophet commandeth Baruch to put the Evidences in ' 


that was in Anathoth, and weighed him che money, l or ſow 


xkels, and 
» That 1sabout 21. 25.6.4, a ſmall Purchaſe, wh'ch argues the - _ 


of filver. 


+ Heb: 
wrote 7% 


the book. 


chaſe, before all the Jews that ſat in the court of the * See 


« 2% 


_— ATED. _ 


WINTY 


Ute G4) ras 


ale Dir 


CREED = II ME 


for » Ene 
gines of 
ſor, 


® Jol 
20. 

Pſal:; 
Prov: 


Ch 
*Ch:1 


PPx6: ( 
2 Fam; 
23.1Ch 
I7: 2I., 


þ. IS .- 


"Sov, 


AGEL br Ubi Gif nd in. - abr 


Chap. XX XII. 5 


aſſent he gave to that divine Revelation. That Purchaſes ſhou! 
one day be enjoyed again in Judes, and Houſes, Fields, and 
Vines»yards in it, ſhould be again poſſeſſed. 

16 Q Now when I had delivered the evidence of 
the purchaſe unto Baruch the fon of Neriah, I prayed 


unto the LORD, ſaying ?, 
© Whar he prayed for, the Matter of his Prayer in the follow- 
ing Verſes will inform us : but it ſhould ſeem by it, that he :was 
not withour his perplexities ; though he yielded an abſolute Obe- 
dience to God's command, yet he prayeth for a clearer Revelation 
of his meaning in thisthing. 
17 Ah Lord GOD, behold, thou haſt made the 
heaven and the earth by thy great power and ſtretched 
*Gen» 18: out arm, andthere *is nothing || too hard for thee «. 
14.Ver:27- «u He beginneth his Prayer with a Recognition of Gods Omni- 
Luk; 1.37- potency, and the infiniteneſs of his Power, which was ſhewed 1n 
| 2r, hid his ficſt making the Heaven and the Earth, as we read Gen, 1. Pſal. 
from thee. 146. 6. God himſelf uſed this inſtance to confirm his Peoples 
Faith in his ability to do what he pleaſed,Chap.+7.5..It is obſervable 
that the Servants of God in Holy Writ, uſed in their Prayers to | 
give God ſuch Names, as might help to confirm their Faich as 
to what they asked, Nothingcan further be neceſſary to confirm our | 
Faith that we thal have whar we ask,than for 1s to be perſwadedthatr | 
the Perſon is able to do it, and alſo willing. The Proph:rt Leginneth ; 
with a Declaration of his Faith in God as to the firſt, then goes on 
to the ſecond. 
18 Thou ſheweſt loving kindneſs unto thouſands,ard 
recompenſeſt the iniquity of the fathers into the bolom 
of their children after them w, the great, the mighty 


God, th: LORD of boſts 3s his name. 
| w This is the Name which God gave himſelf, Exod. 34. 7. Den. 
5. 9, Io, and of this Jatter clauſe declarative of the Vengeance of 
God in puniſhing Children for their Parents f.:s,are many inſtances 
in Scripture, Joſ. 7. 24. 1 Sam. 2. 33: 34- I Kings 14. 10. 11. and 
21» 24- 
19 Great in counſel x, and mighty in work y, ( for 
thine * eyes are upon allthe ways of the ſons of men * 
to give every one according to his ways, and accor- 


* Job 3+-ding to the fruit of his doings z. ) 

op + x Who doſt nothing but in infinite Wiſdom, as if thou hadſt 

ON 33-3): aken counſe] upon it, and art mighty in thy Works of Provi- 

pos arg dence, by which thou governeſt the World. z. Whoſe Eyes run 

Sn 9507: co and fro the Earth, beholding the evil and the good ; ſo that 

TI all things are naked before thee, and thou art not a meer curious 

and idle ſpe&ator of Mens Aftions, bur lookefi upon them for that 
end, that thou might=ſt reward or puniſh them, according as thou 
ſceſt their ations good or bad in thy ſight. 

20 Which haſt ſet ſigns and wonders in the land of 
Egypt, even unto this day , and in Iſrael b, and a- 
moneſt other men c, and haſt made chee a , name as at 
this day. po IE 

s Who didſt Wonders of Juſtice in the Land of Fgyp. ſuch as 
are remembred and made matrers of aſtoniſhing Diſcourſe even to 
this day, 6 and wroughteſt Wonders of Mercy in Iſrael, bringing 
them out of Egypr through the Red Sea, raining them down Man- 
28 and 2uails from Heaven, and ferching Water out of the Rock 
for them, &*c. c And haſt done alſo many wondrous Works in 
other places, by which thou haſt made thy ſelf a Glorious Name. 

21 And haſt brought forth chy people Ifrael,*out of 
the land of Egypt with ſigns, and with wonders, and 
with aſtrong hand, and with a ſtretched out arm, and 


with great terror 4. 

4 _ The Hiſtory of this we have in the 11 or 12 firſt Chapters of 
Exodus. God ſent 10 Plagues upon Egyps one after another, before 
Pharaoh would let them go, and when he purſued after them, 
divided the Red Sea for them, that rhey might paſs through, and 
then brought the Waters back upon the Egyptians, purſuing afcer 
them through the Sea, : WE 55 

22 And haſt given them this land which thou didft 
Gvear unto their Fathers to give them /a land flowing 
with milk and honey m. I 

1 God owneth this Oath, Ezod. 6.8. » That is abounding with 
all neceſſary things, and all pleaſant things. Canaan.is often thus 
deſcribed, Exod. 3s 8, 17- and 13. 5. and 33. 3, Lev. 20, 24. 
Numb. 14. $8. and 16. 53. 14+ Devt. 6. 3. and I 9. Oc, 

23 And they came in and poſſeſſed ir », but they 
obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law o, 
they have done nothing at all that thou commandeſi 
them to do p : therefore chou haſt cauſed all this evilto 


come upon them 9. | 
2 In s © former 9 he acknowledged God's Goodneſs, here 


he owns his Truth and Faithfulneſs, in ſo conduQting this People 
by his Providence, that they came into the promiſed Land and 
poſſeſſed it. o Having acknowledged Gods Power, Omniſcience, 
Goodneſs, Truth and F 2ithfulneſs, he comes to own his Juſtice, 
confeſſing that this People for whom God had done ſo much, had 
very ill requitted him, not ebey:ng his wvozce, which he expounds by 
wor walking in his law ; for the Law was God's Voice to them. p 
This he aggravatech by ſaying they had done nothing of what he. 
had commanded, not breaking ſome particular Law, but the whole 
Law of God. q Therefore God was righteous in bringing this 
Sword, Peſtilence and Famine upon them. 

24 Behold the || mounts 7, they are come unto the 


city totake it 5,and che cityis given into the hand of the 
Chaldeans, that fight againſt it :,becauſe of rhe ſword, 


*Bx:6: 6: 
2 Sam; 7. 
23.1Ch 
I7: 21, 


fOr, EZne 
gines of 


M 1 4 H. Chap. XX 


# The word ſignifies Ramparts, or rather Battering Rams, Er- 
gines of War which thoſe Nations uſed ro batter Walls, or to ſhoot 
great Stones into places beſizged. 5 They zre already Befieging 
Hieruſalem, and have been for ſome time, £ Ard the City is even 
ready to be taken and cannot ho'd out. « So many diily arc kiiled 
either with the Sword of the Enemy, or by Famine for wart of 
Proviſion, or by the Peſtilence, w Thou art juſt, and righteous 
in all this, and haſt done bur according to what thou threatned & 
to do, to a finfull People that would not obey thy Voice. 

25 And thou haſt ſaid unto me, O Lord GOD, Buy 
thee the field for money,and take witneſſes : || for the 
City 15 given into the hands of the Chaldeans x. 

x In this Verſe ag-in the Particle isil! rran{l-ted 4nd anl For in 
the latter Clauſe, -The Learned Au hor of the Engliſh Annotations 
Judgeth wel], that it 3d been berter tranſlated where as in the ſ-cond 
Place, as Gem 4. 11. Pſal. 102. 5. or albeit, or cho) as it is tranſlas 
ted. Fo. 17.18. Pſal. 23.4. and7et inſt:ad of And in the beginning 
as1t 1s Chap. 23« 21. Loxd! faiththe Prophet, expound thy mean= 
ing to me, why, when theCity is upon the matrer ready to be 
yeilded up to the Chaldzans, and cannot poſſi-ly hold our long, 
thou fhouldſt ſer me to makePurchates for rhineEnemies to poſlels. 

26 4 Then came the word of the LORD unto Je- 
remiah, ſaying, 

27 Behold, I 2m the LORD, the * God of all fleſh : 
Is there any thing too hard for me y 2 

) The Lord beginneth ri:is Revelation for che Prophets fatisf:- 
on, with the Preface -expreflive of his power, and univerſal do= 
minion, from which Feremah might underſtand rhat he could do 
whatſoever he pleaſed, and Man thar was bur fleth, Gen, 6. 3+ 
could not hinder his effe&ting what hz deſigned ro do, God is alſo 
the God of the Spirits of all fleſh, Numb. 16. 22, bur he expreſſ=rh 
Man here only under the notion of fleſh, as Gez 6. 3. todenote his 
vileneſs and inconfiderableneſs as to any grapling with Go4, and - 
incountring hi: Purpoſes. 

28 Therefore thus ſaich the LORD, Behold, I will 
g1ve this city into the hand of che Chalideans, and into 
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he 
ſhall take it. | | 

29 And the Chaldeans that fight againſt this city, ' 
ſhall come and * ſer fire on this city and burn it with WA 
the houſes z, * upon whoſe roofs they have offered in- * Ch.21.is | 
cenſe unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto o-  Ch*p« | 
ther Gods to provoke me.to anger 3. eos 

z Thou judgeſt right this Ciry ſhall be taken, and that by: this. 
very Army of Chaldeans which now beſiegeth ic they ſhall ſer fire 
on 1t, and burn the Houles; I have made allfleſh and I have Power 
to diſpoſe of it, I will give this City into their hands, «: Bur in 
this execution of my Vengeance I ſhall not a& by . Prerogative, but 
as 2 juſt and righteous Judge, vin.iciting the violation of my Laws 
they have polluted their Houlcs, by Idolatry vpon the R-ofs of 
them, they have offered incenſe paid a Divine Homage to the I:tol 
Baal, and in them they have worſhiped orher Gols, therefore Þ will. 
watch over, and proteC& them no longer, bur ſend the Chaldeans 
by their Fires to purge them. ,_ [1-70 

30 For the children of Iſrael, and the children of 
Judah have only dons evil before ms from their youth: 
for the children ot Iſrael, have only provoked me to : 
anger with the works of their hands, ſaich the 


LORDs. : 
b If they had offended me only by ſome particular ſingle a&s, or 
by ſome few Omifſions, or bur for a ſmall time ; I might have 
been judged roo ſevere upon them bur from therime rhey firſt 
began to bea Nation, they have made it their Buſineſs, Courle,and 
Trade, paſſing from one Idolatry toanother, &c, | 

31 For this City hath been to me as Þ a provocation 

of mine anger, and of my fury, from the day that they 

built it, evea to this day c, that I (hould remove ic 


from before my faced. 

c Solomon finiſhed the building of Hirruſalem, and he at leaſt ſuf. 
fered IdolJatry inir, - King, 11-4. 8. Peop'e have alwite been fo fond 
of worſhipping Goa according totbeir own Fancies and Inventicns, 
that even inJudeh, ( except in David's time ) the Worſhip of God 
could hard!y be preterved pure, during the entire Reiga of one 
King. d Asifthey had done it on purpoſe to provoke me to deſt:oy 
che City, and caſt the People of it out. Nothing more eafie than 
for People to keep cloſe to the Divine Rule, as to external Ads in 
Worſhip; nothing is more provocative of God than their doing 
rhe contrary. Yet nothing hath been more rar-ly done in any Nati® 
on, as if Men had ſer themſelves to dare a Jealous God. 

32 Becauſe of all the evil of the children of Iſrael, 
and of the children of Judah which rhey have done, to 
provoke me to anger, they, their Kings, their princes, 
cheir prieſts, and their prophets, and -the men of Ju- 
dah, and the inhabitants of Jeruſelem e. 

e Still God maketh their deſtruQion to be of ttemſelves, as the 
meritorious cauſe, provoking him to that Wrath he executed upon 
them. The whole Head was ſick, the whole heart fainr. All ors 
ders of men were corrupted, fo as there was no bope of their Ree 
formation, or growing better. 

23 And they have turned unto me the + * back, 
and notthe face, f though I taught them, riſing up + Hes: 
zarly, and trezching them, yet they have not hearke-» ot. | 
ned toreceive inſtructiong. I 

f They have behaved rhemtclves againſt me contemptuouſly * 7* __ 
like Men, who when they are ſpoken to, admoniſhed or iaſtruttcd 7: *t' 
:nftead of looking towaras thoſe who iaitrutt, or admon:th them. 
turn their back upon them. & Yettheir fin had not been fo great 


[O:,chavg I 


tHeb: for © 
anger. 1 


and of the famine, and of the peſtilence «, and what 
thou haſt ſpoken is cometo pals w, and behold, thou 


{eelt zr. 


ſhor, 


and hainous, if I by my Prophets h2d nor diligent!y inſtrufted then 
and they as {tubvornly refuted io be taghr, or amended by their 1n- 


ſtruTion- 
6 M 2 34 Bur 


+ 6 
2D 
%,.5 : 


iN G : 
7 : =: 


o. 39. & ghichis called by my name to defileit z, 

=” þ Their Idols, whichabove all things the Jealous God abhorreth 
zck. 8.5. nd therefore he calleth them @bominations in the abſtra& for abo- 
minable things, Deut, 32 16+ 1 Kings 11, 5. 2 Kings 23.13. 2 That 
is, in the Temple, which was ordinarily called the Houſe of the Lord 
and the Temple of the Lord. _ : 

25 And they builtthe high places of Baal which rc 
in the valley of the ſon of Hinnom, to * cauſe cheir 
Chap. 7. ſons and their daughters topaſs through the fire unto 
1. 19. 51, Molech, which I commanded them not, neither came 
"Lev. 28. itinto my mind that they ſhould do this abomination 

b. to cauſe Judah to fin &. 
2 k See the notes on Chap. i9. 5, 6. where all paſſages we meet 
with here are fully opened. : 

26 © And now therefore thus faith the LORD the 
Godof Ifrael, concerning this city, whereot ye fay, It 
(hall bedelivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, 
by the ſword, and by the famine, and by the pefti- 
lence ». | 

» The Jews now began to ſee that the Chaldeans would take the 
City, and to be as dead hearted as before they were full of courage 
| and to give overt::emſelves for ever as loſt. , 

Dent.30 Behold, I will *gather themout of all countreys, 
. Chap. whether I have driven them in mine anger, and in my 
23. 3:and fury, and in great wrath 2 and I will bring 'them again 
2:14:and 1 nto this place, and I will cauſe them to dwel! ſafely o. 
=_— o Though the City ſhall becaken, and you ſhall go into Capti- 
| vity, yet you ſhall not be utterly loſt, I will gather you againy 
and you ſhall have as quiet an habitation as ever. . 
Chap: 38 And they ſhall be * my people,and I will be their 
24: 7 and God p, 4 
g30.22:and pI will renew my Covenant with them, and keep my Covenant 
31: 33: towards them, they ſhall ſ:rve me more faithfully, and I will own 
them, and take care of them, and blels them, | 

39 And I will give them * one heart q, and one 
* Ezek. | 
——_ way 7, thatthey may fear me for + ever /, for the good 
+ Heb. ofthem, and of their children after them #. 
days. g I will give them union and concord, or an oneneſs of mind 
2nd judgment; as to the things of God, they ſhall nor be ſome for 
ſuperſtitious and idolatrons Worſhip, and ſomefor my true Wor- 
ſhip. » They ſhall all Worſhip me according to- the rule I have 
given them. ſ That they may worſhip me in Truth, as a People 
that have a dread of me upon their hearts. + This will be for the 
profit both of them, and their Poſterity, many days, even ſo long 
as they ſhall continue fo ro do. i | wh 
» Chap. 40 And *I will make an everlaſting covenant with 
3i 


"2; . them, thatT wi'l not turn away + from them to do 
$ H:b, them good », bur { will put my fear into their hearts, 


#{ter that they ſhall not depart from me w- 

, is This Promiſe manifeſtly relateth to thoſe Jews that ſhould 
receive the Lord Jcſus Chriſt, or that wer®77elites indeed ; for as 
£5 Others, God did turn away from doing them good, when their 
Ciry was taken by Titus ; unleſs it be to be underſtood of a national 
Converſion of the Jews, not yet effeed. w My ſpirit which ſhal 


Hence ſome conclude well, that when once the Body of the Jews 
ſhall be converted, they ſhall never again apoſtatize from God, It 
may well from hence be concluded that both Converſion unto God, 
and perſeverance in the ways of God are the Gifts of God, we are 
| kepr by the power of God, through faith un!0 Salvation. 

*Zephi— #! Yea, * I will rejoice over them, to do them good 

3.12. Xx, and * I will plant them ia this land F affuredly,with 

*Chap. my whole heart and wichmy whole ſoul ys 

24: 6: x | willnot only do them good, but I will take pleaſure,and de- 

Amos 9: light in doing them good, and I will y cectaialy bring them to his 

$3L  Land,and conftantly and freely do chem good*when they ſhal be there 

5 _ =» 42 For Thus faith the LORD, Likeas I have 

febilicy, brought all this great evil upon this people, ſo will I 

b- bring upon them all, the good that I have promiſed 

them =. : 

z You ſhall find me as true to my Promiſer, as you have found 
me to my — ings. ; 

And fields {hall be bought in this land, where- 
of ye ſay, It is deſolate without man and beaſt. 

44 Men {hall buy fields for money, and ſubſcribe e- 
vidences and ſeal them, and take witneſſes * in the land. 
"» Chap, of Benjamin, and in the places about Jeruſalem, and 
£15; 26. in the cities of ſfudah, and in the Cities of the moun- 
4 tains, and in the cities cf the valley, and in the cities 
+ Chap: of che ſouth, for*LI will cauſe their captivity co return, 
$3: 7: 21: ſgjc; rhe LORD a. | 
iq 26: . 8 Now, Jeremis#, thou underſtandeſt wherefore I commanded 
thze to buy the Field offered thee by Hanamec! in Anarhoth in the 
Lot of Benjamin ; it was to aſſure thee, that though at Preſent the 
Chaldeans ſhall prevail againſt Jeruſalem, and the Jews ſhall be car- 
ried into Captivity, andthe Jews ſhall neither buy nor ſell here ar 
preſent, yet Fields thall here be bought again ; Men ſhall buy 'and 
ſell and ſeal Evidences in all parts ot Judes, as they were wont to 
do if former times, for they ſhall retura again out of the Caprivi- 
ty of Babylon into Cieir own Land, and have Commerce one with a- 
nother as formerly. 

CHAP. XXXIII. 

The taking of Jeruſalem, carrying away the People, their Return, 1 
3; Joyfwll State and ſetled Grovernment, 9 14. Chriſt tho Branch 
of Righteouſneſs ; His everlaiting Kingdom and Priethood ; And Bl:Jcd 
Seed, 15 —26. 


__—T _ 


beget in them a dread of me, ſo as they ſhallnor depart from me: 


'* | | : = IM | 'S 
AAP. XXX1ll. 7 E R E = 4 2. Chap. AK Atl | Cn: 
Chap. + 34 But they *ſet their abominations þ in the houſe | Oreover the word of the LORD came unto Je-_ | 

remiah the ſecond time ( while he was yet * _ ©P- 


ſhut up in the court cf the priſon) ſaying s. I 2, 3: 
# See the Notes on Chop. 32. 2. Jeremiah was forced out of the 

Temple, God followeth him to the Priſon, and there revealeth his 

mind to him onceand again The wickedneſs of the Jews in peri 

ſecuting the Prophet, could not make God's Promiſes of no efte& 

for mercy to be ſhewed to rhe People, afie* the Captivity, which 

though made before, are again conhrmed a ſecond time, for this 

Chapter for ſubſtance contains no more than Promiſes of the like 

nature with thoſe in the foregoing Chapters. 


2 Thus faith the LORD the * maker thereof, the -2E 
LORD that formed ir, to eſtabliſh it, the LORD is | 
his name 6. | : 

b The maker theresf , that is ſay ſome of Jeruſalem ( ſo Mr. Calvin ) | 
or the maker of theſe Promiſes ( ſo others interpret it ) his Name F $4 
is Jehovah, ſo as he hath a ſufficiency in himſelfro make good his word 
to eſtabliſh Jeru[alem, or to eſtablilk the word ſpoken by him for the ; 
eſtabliſhment of it. ' 

3 Call unto me, and T will anſwer the, and ſhew 


thee, great and || mighty things which thou knoweſt 
nor ec, 


c God either ſpeaketh to the People to pray unto him, or to the 
Propitet on the behalf of the People to pray, promiſing bim he 
would ſhew him great things. O6je#. Bur how doth God ſay that 
Jeremiah did not know them, when God before this time kad ree 
vealed them to the Prophet, and the Prophet had revealed them. 
Sol, He did not know them before God had revealed them, and 
though God had revealed them, yer by his Prayer in the former 
Chapter it appears, he did not fully underſtand them; os firmly 
believe them as he ought to have done. 

4 For thus ſaith the LORD, the God of Iſrael, con- 
cerning the houſes of this city, and concerning the 
houſes of the kings 'of Judah, . which are thrown down 
by the mounts, and by the ſword 4. 

- 4 Thar which is in part thrown. down, and ſhall yet further be 
thrown down, by the Engines of War which the Chaldeans uſe to 
batter down the City, - See before chap. 32. 24. ſome read for the *Ch 
mounts, as if they were thrown down by the Citizens to make room 26. 
fyr the Citizens to caſt up defenſive Mounts, the word tranſlated 446 
Sword may teas well tranſlated Hammers or Mattocks; asit is 2 Chron, 

34- 6 Ir1s tranſlated Axes, Ezek. 26. 9. 

5 They cometo fight with the Chaldeans e, but it is 
to fill them with thedead bodies of men, whom I have 
flainin my anger, and inmy fury f, and for all whoſe 
wickedneſs I have hid my face from this city g. 

. e It1s very difficult to determine whether theſe words contain ary 

entiie ſenſcin themfelves, or what connexion they have with the 

foregoing words; not to repeat Mens diverſe apprehenſions, of. 

which a Jarge account is given by the Author of the Eng! .Jb Annet a< | 
tons, I think they judge beſt whothink they havean entire ſepſe 4 
10 themſelves, and judge that theThey here mentioned, are the Jews 
of whom the Prophet ſaith they come, becauſe he knew they woutd 
fally our and fight with their Enemies, but to no purpoſe, bur to fill 
their Houſes with their own dead Bodies, whom he would cauſe in 
his anger to b: ſlain. g For their wickedneſs which they had pro- 
voked God by, and cauted him to hide his face fromthat City which 
had ſo much of his countenance formerly. 

6 Behold, I will bring it health, and cure, and I 
will cure them h, and will reveal unto.them the abuny 


dance of peace and truth . 

þ The latter part of this Verſe expoundeth the former, for by 
hea'th and cure, the Prophet meaneth peace, and truth ; we mer | 
with the like. metaphorical expreſſion, Chap. 30. 17. See the notes on- | | 
that place. The miſerable diſturbed ſtate of a Nation being com- | 
pared to Wounds, and Sickneſs, the reſtoring of it to 2 peaceable | 
proſperous ſtate is firly called irs Health and Cure. # By truth | 
here ſeems te be meant fairhfulneſs, or ſtability, not truth of pro | 
policions ; 9. d. T will after this great wound which I have given 
this People, bring them again into a quiet and peaceable ſtate in 
which they ſhall abide many days. 

7 And I will caufe the captivity of Judah, and the 
captivity of Iſrael to return, * and will build them as * Chap: + Hel 

24:6: and | 
at the firſt &. 1:4: and | Jehow 

k 1a this Verſe the latter part is expounded by the!former : the os — ! Talaks 
reſtoring of them is called bu:lding them, in oppoſition to the © 
throwing them down, by the Mounts mentioned; Yer. 4. unleſs 
by building be to be underſtood not laying the foundation of their 
new State, burthe further proſpering of rhem in that State. 

8 And I will cleanſe them trom all their iniquity, 
whereby they have ſinned againſt me, and I will * «q,,, 
pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have ſinned; z;: 34: 
and whereby they have tranſ{greiſed againſt me . Micah 7? 

m Here is but one thing expreſſed by two Phraſes; the word 18: 
by us tranſlated cleanſe ſignifies to exp:ate or purifie with alluſion ro 
the legal purificaticns, ſo as cleanſing muſt not be underſtood of 
Regexeration, but of that pardon which is mentioned 1a tie Jatrer 
part ofthe Verſe, 

9 T And it ſhall beto me a name of joy, a praiſe 
and an honour before all the nations of the earch, 
which ſhall hear all the good that I do unto them : 

» and they ſhall fear,and tremble, for all the goodneſs, 


and for all the proſperity that 1 procure untoit o. 

2 I will do ſo well by this People, thatother Nations ſhall ho« 
nour and praiſe me for my govdnets to them. o And nor only ſo | 
bur ſhall fear to ingage againſt a Nation fo beloved and favoured ! 
by me Exed. 15. 14, 16. others interpret it of aReligious fear,and 
trembling to which Gods Mercy to the I/raelites ſhould invite thoſe 
People that ſhould fee, and hear of it ; bur I think the former is 
the moſt probable ſenle of che Propher here. 

Io Thus 


PEN USSR 2.4 


| Or, kids 


an, 


410 EAR PERED has 


is 


T7 \” F 1 
AN X 


4 > 


, 580 
To Chus faith the LORD, Again there ſhall be 
heard in this place, which ye ſay p 5hall be deſolate 
wit'out man, and without beaſt, ever in the cities of 
| Judah, and in the ſtreers of Jeruſalem, rhat are deſo- 
: late without man, and without inhabitant, and with- 
out keaxſt, a 
| Þ Thoſe of you who though you find no great difficulty to be- 
live what I have propheſied concerning the Chaldeans taking this 
City, ſ:eing 1t npon the marter already taken, yet find a dificuity 
r> believe what I tell you about the Peoples returning, and the ree 
building of Ir. The Lord ſpeaketh the one as well as the"other, 
#Chap: 7, *bcre ſhall be heard again it, Oc. | 
| 434.& 16, IT The * voice of oy, and the voice of gladnels, the 
| 9: voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride,the 
; * 2 Chro. voice of them thar ſay *, Praiſe the LORD of hoſts, 
7-3: forthe LORD is good, for his mercy endurerh for ever, 
? and of them that ſhall bring the ſacrifices of praiſe 
' into the houſe of the LORD ; for I will cauſe to re- 
p turn the captivity ofthe Land, as at the firſt faith the 
LORD 9g. | | 

2 The ſum of this Verſe is, that thoſe that ſhould be carried into 
captivity ſhould return, and upon their return chey ſhould be in 
their former States, both as to Civil TranſaQtions, they ſhould again 
Marry, and give in marriage, and as to Civil and Spirituzl Joy,they 
ſhould publickly praiſe the Lord as they were wont to do in the 
words of David, Pſal: 106. 4. and 107, 1, and 118, 1. and 136. 1. 
( we have a record in Holy Writ of the fulfilling of this Prophecy 
upon the laying the foundations of theſecond Temple, Ezra;3.11-) 
and offer ſacrifices of thankſgiving. See Nehen: 12. 27. : 

12 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, Again in this 
pes which is deſolate y without min, and without 

eaſt, and in all the cities tuereof, fball be an habita- 
tion of ſhepherds, cauſing their flocks to lie down, 

7 That is a great part of which is, and the other part ſhall foonbe 
deſolate. In all rhoſe places there ſhal be flocks and Herds of Sheep 
and Goats, which the Shepherd hall take care ofasin former times. 

13 * In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of 
the vale, and in the cities of the ſouth, and in the land 
of Benjamin, and in the places about Jeruſalem, and in 
the cities of Judah, ſhall the flocks paſs again under the 
hands of / him that telleth chem, ſaith ths LORD. 

ſ $9 as to keep tale of them, as it is ſaid they were wont to do 
both Morning and evening in thoſe Countries, 

14 Behold, the days come, ſaith the LORD, that I 

will perform that good thing which I have promiſed un- 
to the houſe of Iſrael, and to the houſe of Judah 7. 
Ry 7 The Lord is not yes, and nay, he cannot. Iye nor repet. I ſpeak 
] not of the preſent time, but there shall be a time when God will 
4 Juſtifie every good word of this nature; which he hath ſpoken to his 
| ancient People, 


4. _ 


S320 Faire a 


*Chap:i7. 
26. & J2s 
444 


OE 


: JR I5 T In thoſe days, and at that time will I cauſe the 
; Branch of righteouſneſs to grow up unto David #s, 
Te; and he ſhall execute Judgment and righteouſneſs in the 

land. 


u Whatſoever the Jews and ſame o hers ſay,the Branch ofRighteouſ- 
#eſs here ſpoken of,can be meant of no other but Chriſt, who 1s.cal- 
J:d a Branch out of the Stem of Jeſſe, 1ſa.11.1. The Branch of the Lord, 
Iſa. 4. 2. A Righteous Branch, Chap: 23 5. ( Seethe Notes on thoſe 
Places) Ze#rababel though deſcended from David cannot be meant 
here, but the ſame who is thus called in a!l thoſe paraliel Texts,of 
| whom yet Zorababel (being 2 good Man, and deſcended from the 
| Family of David) may be allowed to have been a Type, -bur this 
Text far more concerneth Chriſt, as he in whom all th: Promiſes 
| are fourided, and in whom they are all 72a, and Amen. The Kings 
E- they had hitherto had of the line of David, were moſt of them un- 
' righteous Men, but God promiſeth. thar after the Captivity, they 
ſhould bave a Branch of David that ſhould execure, Judgment and 
Righteouſneſs in the Land, for the prote&ion and government of 
thoſe that feared him. 


16 In thoſe days, ſbal Judah be ſaved, and Jeruſalem 


LG ſhall dwell ſafely w3 and this zs the name wherewith 
Zzidkems, ſhe ſhall be called F, The LORD our righteouſneſs x. 


w It is the Opinion of ſome thar a ſpiricual Salvation and ſecurj- 
ty is promiſed under theſe expreſſions,but the moſt and beſt Inter- 
preters rather underſtand it ofa temporal Salvation as pr 1Mmar ily Ine 
rended though typical of that Spiritual and Eternal Salvation which 
is ofren promiſed to the true Iſrael of GOD ; as their reſt in 
Canaan typifizd that Rf which remaineth for the People of 
God. *« Our Tranſlation of this Phraſe is ſomerbing ſtrange, the 


words in the Hebrew are PTS mm mM? "RP! "WR mM? 


Pagnine Trarſlateth them, Andihe who ſhall call is the Lord our Righ- 
$-ouſnsſs, ſupplying the Verb ſubſtantive, is. He who ſhall call it 
is the Lord our Righteouſueſs. We Tranſlate it, This the name where- 
with it ſhall be called, &c, that which cauſes the difficulty is, thar 
the Pronoun ill which ſignifieth he, is applied borh to perſons and 
things, and tranſlated heor ir, and the relative WR is of all caſes 
ſo may be tranſlated who, or which, or with which, theſe words 
which our Tranſlators have ſupplicd, 5s the name, are not in the 
Hebrew, This hath made a great doubt amongſt Iaterpreters, whe- 
ther, The L:rd our righteouſneſs be the 2ame of Chr:t, or the name of the 
City. Ido incline to their opinion, who think thar it is here men- 
. tioned as the name of Chriſt. , In that ſence there js nothing to be 
anJerſtood but the Verb ſubſtantive, 5”, which is ordinarily under- 
ſtood ; (fo the words are thus, And he who ſhall cal: it, is, the Lord 
our Righteouſneſs. The context ſeemeth to fivour this, Chriſt being 
that Ruler mentioned, wv; 15. as he who ſhall execute, Juſtice, and 
the Land, beſides that thers is noſuch Name any where 


Judgment in 


given, cather £0 the Jewiſh Os Chriftian Church, as the Lord our Righ- | 


| 


S 


M 1 A H. Chap. XKXXYW8 


r-0uſn:ſs, bur the Full import of that name is ſpoken of Carift, 8 
If4:44.23 which Text is applied to Chriſt, Rom:14: 11: Phil:2:10.heis | 
<a']ed the Juſt King, Zzch:9. 9. and our righteouſneſs, 1 Cor: 1: 30. Fro 
F For thus ſaith the LORD, + David ſhall never , ,,., | 


7 
*want a man to fit upon the throne of the houſe of If ;3ere pd 
rael : 7 ; | : not be 

3 This is apparently a promiſe relating to Chriſt, for David's off frons |flF 
Line had failed long lince,had it not been continued in Chriſt whoſe Davie. | 
Kingdom is. and ſhall be an everlaſting Kingdom. So long as 1/rad © 2 Samijif 
r-mained a Kinydom, thoſe of the Line of David ruled. over it,wben 7: 16. iS 
thar failed ; Chriſt came in the fleh, who ruleth, and ſhall rule #* Kings! 
over the Iſrael of God for ever. 2.4. ii 

18 Neither ſhall the prieſts the Levites want a man 
before me, to offer burnt-offerings,and to kindle meat- 
offerings, and to do ſacrifice containually z. - . | 

z The beſt interpret-rs underſtand this of a Miziftry to abide in 
the Church to the end of the World, according ro Mitrhew 28; 20, 
nor is it unuſual tor God in the O'd Teſtament to expreſs Promiſes 
relating to, and to befultilled under the Goſpel by expreſſions, and 
rerms proper to the Old Teſtament, as 1/a:66:23. and in th's ſenſe 
it muft be expounded, or reſtrained to the times immediatly follovr. 
ing the Captivity;but it is generally underſtood, as a Promiſe fora 
Goſpel Miniſtry to ſucceed the miniſtry in the Jewiſh Church,and to 


abide to the end of the World 0s a | 
15 And the word of the LORD came unto Jere- 


miah, ſaying, no on ; 
20 Thus faith the LORD, * If you can break myco- * :.: :. ali 
venant of the Day, - and my covenant of the Night @, *Uz:54:9 | 
and that there ſhould not by Day, and Night in their 
ſeaſon. _ WES 
a By the Covenant of day and Night here is meant the fame ' with 
the Ordinances mentioned, Chap, 31.35. God's Luv eſtabliſhed in 
the courſe ofnatural Cauſes, by vertue of which the. day and night 
orderly ſucceed one another. Theſe Verſes are but a further con= 
firmation of what was ſaid before, and the ſenſe of them no more 
than this, That the ſucceſſion of rhe Goſpel Miniſtry inthe Chusclv 
of God to abide for ever, ſhould be as certain as the ſucceſſion of 
darkneſs and light, God had eſtabliſhed rhef latrer in a neceſſary 
courſe of natural cauſes, and he would by his Providence take care 
for the other, that the eff:& ſhould be every whit as certain, 
Though the ſecond cauſes are widely different,- yet God who is the 
firſt cauſe of both is the ſame and would as certainly bring theone 
co pals as the other. | | O2e 2 
| 21 Then may alſo my covenant be broken wich Da- 
vid my ſervant, that he ſhould not have a ſon to reign 
upon his throne, and with the Levices the prieſts, my 
miniſters. _ | Ee oh Wee 7 ; 
22 As the * hoſt of heaven cannot be numbred nei- , _-  - :. || 
ther the ſand of the ſea meaſured, ſo will I multiply the yn 73- 
ſeed of David iny ſc d the Levites that mini- ,"4, ,." Mk 
ced O /AV1M MY ervant, and tne LevVites that min1 5. & 22, . 
{ter unto meb.. JE RX | + , 7, Chap. Iii 
6 The former promiſe was for the ſtability, this for the multi- 31 37. 
plication of the Church, - which is here expreffed under the notion 
of the Seed of David, that is the Members of Chriſt, the Fews were 
ordinarily called the Seed of Abraham, Iſaze and Jacob,” but T do not 
remember they are any where called the Sced-of Davis, unleſs it be 
1 Kings tt. 39. where it ſeems alſoto beunderſtood only of the Prin« 
ces that came from David, nor indeed cculd they be fo called in a» 
ny proper ſence; David. being no common- Head: to the whole 
Jewiſb Nation, as both Abraham, Iſaac and Jacob were, but Chriſt 
is often called the Seed of Davia, John 7. 42. As. 13. 23. Rom. 5; 
3. 2 Tim. 2.8. and Chriſt is himſelf called David, whoſe Seed and 
whoſe Levites are multipled in the multiplying of Chriſtians and 
of faithful Miniſters under the Goſpel, which certainly are the 
things here promiſed. . Es EI "4: 6 a 
. 23 Moreover the word of the LORD came to Jere- 
miah, ſayings: ;-. - ene, BL ho 
. 24 Conſfidereſt thou not what this p2ople have ſpo-, 
ken, ſaying c, The two families which the LORD 
hath choſen, he hath even caſt them of 4 ? thus they 
have deſpiſed my people, that they thould be no'more 


a nation before them e. ns” 
c. This People, that is ( ſay ſome) the Enemies of the Jews, bur ie 

may as well bz interpreted eicher of the wicked Fewr, wicked Men 

bzing always full of groundleſs preſumptuous hopes, or ſunk in de- 

ſpair. Or of ſuch amonglit them as were better, but weak in Faith, - 

that knew not how to give any firm aſſ-nt to promiſes, the fulfill. 

ing of which ſeemed to the Eyes of ſenſe and reaſon fo improbable/ 

d By the two Families here mentioned, the Propher either meaneth 

the Kingdoms of Iſrael! and Judah, or, which (cemeth to the muefz 

mere probable. The Families David and of Aaron, mentioned 

before. . e Thus ſaith God they have ſpoken ſcornfully of:my Peo-" 

ple, as if they ſhould never be a Natioa more having Rulers of 

themſelves, and a Miniſtry, . . _ _, GS 
25 Thus ſaith the LORD,. if my covenant be not 

with day and Night, azd if I have not appointed the 

ordinances of heaven and carth, |. ... 
26,Then will I caſt away the ſeed of Jacob f, . and 

David my ſervant g, ſo that { will not take any of his 

ſeed to be rulers over the ſeed of Abraham, Ifaac and > .- 

Jacob ; for *I will cauſe their captivity to recurn and * Verſe 

have mercy on them, ny _— 

f By the Szed of Jacob, and of Abrabam and Iaac are meant 

the Body cf che Jews, to whom theſe three Patriarhs were com» 

mon heads. Z£ By the Seed of David Perſons lineally deſcended 

tiom David, who ſhould rule over the.1/rae! of God. - The ſum 

of theſe two veiſes is plainly.no more than God had ſaid. befor? 


$ a4 


4 
tt 


that a reſturation of them ro their own Land ſhould as certainly: 

{ſucceed their Captivity, as the Night ſucczederh the Day,..,or th®\ 

Day ſucceedeth the Night.:; God had as certainly eftablithed, and 
6 M 3 ordaie 


" aDs 


mon 
bh:s 
i 1d. 


, 


29. 


mouth, 


*. King. 

25. 2,&, bylon, and all his army, 

YT > % 24carth + of his dominion,andail the people fought againſt 
" 


* Ch: 32. with fire. 


b: hi 
_ ſta11chou ſhale go to Babylon 5. 


[peat tothy, b We had all this Chap: 32. 3» 4. 


YXXIV. E iR E 


ordain:d the one asthe other, though nor 3s yer ſo eftablithed the 
one in the order of aatural cues 2s the othe's fzod would c-rtaine 
ly have mercy on them, and in ſh:wing his mercy would raxe care 
that on2of the Seed of David ſhould be heir Ruler which was tul- 
filled in the Mfrah. 
| | CHAP. XXXIY. 
| The Captivity of King Ledekiah, and the City, 1 —, Ty Princes 
and People by Solemn Covenant, according to the Law, aiſmiſs their 
_ Bond-Servan:s, but the Babylonians leaving the Si-ge, they reaſſume 
them, $. — 11. For this God threatneth a Retur of the Enemy, and 
Deſiruf#ion of Jeruſalem, 11 22, 
HF word which came unto Jeremiah from the 
LORD #, * when Nebuchadnezzar king of Ba- 
and all the kingdoms of the 


*TJeruſalem, and againſt all the cities thereof, ſaying, 
& The Revelation of the Will of God to Jeremiab to be publiſke 
ed to the Peop!e, during the time of the Siege. The ſeven firſt 
Verſes are plaialy a diftin& Prophecy from that in the latrer part 
of the Chapter. Ir was ( as ſome think) for this Sermon thatthe 
Prophet was impriſoned (for in this Prophecy the Sermonsare much 
diſordered in the Placing of them ) ſo as this —_— cauſe for 
. which the King impriſoned him, is ſet after others,Chp: 32. which 
were during BE time of his impriſonment. | 
-- 2” Thus fart the LORD, the God of Iſrae}, Go, and 
ſpeak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and cell him, Thus 
Gic-rhe LORD, Behold, I will give this city into the 
hand of the king of Babylon, and * he ſhall burn ic 


And thou ſhalt not eſcape out of his hands, but 
ſhalt ſurely be caken, and delivered into his hand, and 
thine eyes ſhall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, 
+ and he ſhall ſpeak with thee mouth to mouth, and 


See the Notes there, 
-- 4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah 
king of Jadah, Thus ſaith the LORD of thee, Thou 


ſhall not die by the ſword ; 
* 5 But thou ihalt die in peace c,and wich the burnings 


of thy fachers the former kings which were before thee: 
{o ſhall they burn odours for thee, and they will lamenc 
thee, ſaying, Ah LORD! for I have pronounced the 
word, ſairh the LORD d. 


& This only plzce informeth us conc-rning the manner of Zede- 
kish's Death, and that both negatively and politively. Negatively, 
That he did not die by the Sword,the King of Babylon took him,kil- 
led his Sons before his Eyes, then put out his Eyes, and bound him 
in Chains, Chap: 39. 7. but killed him not, as we learn from this 
Text; but he died a natural death, whic' is here meant by dying in 
peace, d and had an honourable Burial, which the King of Babylon 
would not allow Jeho:akim, as we read: Chap: 22.18. he was burried 
with the Burial of an aſs, and his Body was ca#? out of the gates of Jeru- 


'ſelem, and no man lamented for him ; but as to Zedekiah they bur- 


ned ſweet «dur; for him, C afcer the manner of the Burial of Kings, 
2 Chron: 16. 14. ) and made ſolemn Lamentation for him. The Jews 
in their Chronology, called by them Sedar Olam; give us the form of 
their Lamentation thus Mas! Zedekiah is dead; who drank the aregs 
of all Ages : That is, who was punithed for the fins of all former A- 
ges. * : 

6 Then Jeremiah the prophet ſpake all cheſe words 
unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jeruſalem. 
7 When the king of Babylons army fought againſt 
Jeruſalem, and againſt all the cities of Judah :hat were 
teft, againſt Lachiſh, and againſt Azekah ; for theſe 


defenced cities remained ofthe cities of Judah e. 

e The Prophet was not afraid to go anddo the Meſſage God had 
intruſted him with to the King, upon which he was impriſoned as 
we read before, chap: 32. 3+, the time it ſhould ſeem was afcer that 
the king of Babylon had invaded the country, and taken the greateſt 

art of it 3 only three foctified places remained, which he was Be- 
Eving, viz: Feruſal:m, which was the chief Ciry of that Country, 
and Lz:hiſh, of rhe Conqueſt of which we rezd, 7of: ro: 31 diſpoſ- 
ed of ro the Tribe of Judah, J:jb: 15. 39. and Azekah, which wasa 
City of Judah, of which we read in the ſame Chapters. 


' . 8 Zhis is the word that came unto Jeremiah from 
the LORD, after that the kingZedekiah,had made a co- 
"nant with all the People which were at Jeruſalem to 


proclaim liberty unto them f. 
f This Verſe plainly beginneth a new Prophecy, but at what par- 
ticular time, this Revelation, or the publication of 't was, we are 
not told, only the occaſion of it is recorded. Gad made a particular 
Law reſpeQting the Jewiſh Nation. That if any had bought an He- 
brew ſerezant, he ſbould ſerve but ſix years, and in the ſeventh ſhould go out 
free, Exod. 21. 264 Deut. 15. 12. Ir came 1nto Zedekiah's Mind to 
make a Proclamation for the execution of this Law ; what moved 
him to it we have not recorded. The learned Author of the Eng- 
liſh Anxotatimms, obſerveth well that it was their uſual courſe when 


they were in ſome great ſtraits tro make ſome partial Reformation, ; 


Juagi 10 15, 16, Pſal: 78: 34,35. Hoſ: 6 rn. 

9 * That every man ſhould let his man-ſervant, and 
every man his maid-ſervant being an Hebrew, or an 
Hebreweſs go free, that none jhould ſerve himſelf of 
them, 70 2vit, of a Jew his brother g, 

g This was the tenourof Gods Law mentioned in the above nz- 
med Texts, and it ſeemeth Zedekiah taking notice of the common 
; violation of this Law,and the Jews ordinary oppreſling thoſe of their 
own nation this way ; judging that this migh* be ene of thoſe ſins 
for which the weath of Gad' was at this time kindled againk them, 


=: 41 i, 


quired, of which he made Proclamation. 


them any more, then they obeyed and let them go h. 


yielded obedience to it. 


urn, and brought them into ſubje&ion for ſervants and 
for hand-maids 5, 


: Like a company of wretched Hypocrites, 
abuſe, | 


ed again ro their old oppretſion, and in this thing nor the People 
alone, bur the 
their Courts «of Juſtice, ought to hive executed the Law of the 


their State, during the Siege; for Chap: 37.5. we read that the 


to relieve the City, left the Siege for a time, and that the Prophet, 


Chap. XXX&IV» 


he Cauſed the People to makea Covenant, that they would yivethat 
liberty to their Servants ofeither Sex, which the Law of Gud xe- 


10 Now when all the princes, and all the people 
which had entred into the covenant heard that every 
one (ſhouldlet his man-ſervant, and every one his maid- 
ſervant go free, thac none ſhould ſerve themſelves of 


# ThePrincesand the People, having firſt with the King agreed 
to the rhing, upon the iſſuing out of his Proclamation, they ar fiiſt 


1 But afterwards they turned,& cauſed the ſervants, 
and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to re- 


they reformed this 
only to ſerve a turn,which when it was terved, they retur- 


Goverment was to be blamed for their Judges in 
"7 6% and to have reſtrajiacd the coverous and oppreflive humour 
of the People. The learn:d Author of rhe Engliſh tnnotarions think- 
eth thar that which alrered their minds, was a little altexation of 


Babylonians and Chald ans hearing of an Army coming out of Egypt, 


Fer: 21. of this Chapter relates ro that, when he propheſied, That 


; the King of Babylon's Army ſhould return. But thee wretched 
| Men, ſecing rhe Babylontan Army raited from the Siege, coucluded 
Tliey we:e now out of God's hands, and repented of their Repen-= 


| kance in this particular, and would make all their Servants return 
into their former Servicude. 


12 © Therefore the word of the LORD came to 

' Jeremiah from: the LORD, faying, | 
13 Thus faith the LORD the God of Iſrael, I made 

a covenant & with your fathers,in the day that I brought 
them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the houſe 


of bondmen /, ſaying, 

k The Law of God is called often a Covenant, becauſe it contai. 
neth the will of God which he w-u'd have then do,- ro which 
( whether they expreſs their conſent orno) they are bound to con- 
ſent and agree. But to the Fews all Gods Laws given on Mount 
Sinaz were a formal explicite Tovenint, Godexplicitly teiling them 
what he would have them to do, and they as explicitly promſing 
they would do it, Exod: 24. 3. {Here was a double aggravation 
of their ſin, in breaking this Covenant made between God and 
chem, 1. From the conſideration of God's kindneſs, in bringing 
them our of Ezypr. 2, Frem the conſideration of their having been 
Bond-men in Egy>*, which ſhould have taught them to krow the 
Hearts of Bondmen, ſo as to have compaſſionared them whom they 
kept in the like diſtreſs in which they bad been themfelves,and from 
which God had delivered them. We ſtand concerned to remember 
the Vows we make to God in our diſtreſs, for God will nor forget 
them, Gen: 35. 1. asalſoro compaſſionate them, »who fall into the 
ſame Diſtreſſes that we have been in, and out of which God hath 
ſaved us. God expeCteth that we ſhould ſhew the ſame compaſſion 
to others, Matth: 18. 33. 

I4 At the end of ſeven years, Jet ye go every man 


thee; and when he hath ſerved thee ſix years, thou 
(halt let him go free from thee 2: but your fathers 
hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear ». 


4 = This is but a Repiricion of the Law, Exod: 21.2. Deut: ig. 12 


which concerned ſuch Perſons as were ſold by others, or had ſold 
themſelves. God would not have his People take advantage of the 
ſudden and raſh a&s of their Brethren, which were the effe&s of 
Paſſion. » Notwithſtanding this Law the Jews who were always a 
very covetous griping People, did otherwiſe. 

15 And ye were + now turned o, and had done right 


in my ſight, in proclaming liberty every man to his 


in the houſe + which is called by my name 9. 


Servants. q And you male a covenant 1n my Preſence to that 
purpoſe, and that in the Temple, where ir ſeemerh this Covenant wag 


made. 

16 But ye turned, and polluted my name r, and cau- 
ſed every man his ſervant and every man his handmaid, 
whom be had ſet ar liberty at their pleaſure to return, 
and brought them into ſubjeion, ro be unto you for 
ſervants and for handmaids s. 

r You again licked up your Vomit, and profaned my Name 
ſwearing by it to do that which you have nor done, and / forced 
your Servants, though diſmiſſed, to return again unto their former 
Bondage and ſubj:&tion to you. 

17 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD, Ye have not 
hearkend unto me in proclaiming liberty every one to 
' his brother,and every manto his neighbour z: behold, 


| T proclaim a Liberty for you, faith the LORD to the 
ſword, and to the peſtilence, and to the famine, and 
T will make you F to be * removed, into all the king- 


neighbour p, and ye had made a covenant before me ; 


|| Or, Berk 


his brother an Hebrew, which hath been ſold || unto ſold kimſe 


t Heb. 

AYs 
Heb? 

whereupoti 


0 That is, reformed in this particular, in which you had done my name 
the thing which I command you. p prochiming a liberty to your is called: 


doms of the earth «. + Heb, fir 
; They had turned and given a liberty, ver: 20s how doth God "ano ' 
ſay here they had not ? So God accounteth none to have done 6 —_ s 


thoſe good aQts, which they do ina fit, or meerly to ferve them- 
ſclvesof God ; he ſaith, they had nor done it, becauſe they did 
not perſiſt to do ir, in tuch a caſe Mens Righteouſneſs ſhail by God 


never be remembred,but they ſhall die in the fins they have come» 
mitted. 


29. 21. 


PEeY 


OO A TS Na it", ET WE TOELS 


Ch 


® 


33» 
i6. 


—_ 


EO OT Rena is nr EAT Ls 


Chap. XXXV. 


witred. u Seeing you have refuſed to manumiſe your Servants at 
my command, I will manumiſe you, and fer you free from my 
prqteGion and care, You ſhill periſh by the Sword, Famine and 
Peſtilence, and thoſe of you who eſcape rhem,ſhill ſee how pleaſant 
a thing it is to be Slaves, and in Servitude, for you ſhall be ditper- 
ſed in many Nations ; and be Servants to the Rulers of them. 

18 And I will give the men that have tranſgeſſed my 
covenant, which have not performed the words of the 
covenant, which they had made before me, when they 
cut the calf in twain,and paſſed between the parts there- 
of w. 

w This was a Ceremony which they uſed in making of Cove- 

nants,not without ſomething ofa Warrant from a Divine Preſidenr, 
Gen. 15.9, 10. It is ſaid ver: 19. That ſame Day the Lord made a 
Covenant with Abraham (C that Covenant was a Promiſe that Aran 
ham's Seed ſhould poſſeſs the Lind of Canaan) Yer. $8. Abraham 
ſaid unto God, Whereby jball [know thas I ſhall inherit it, V.r, 9, God 
bids him take an heifer of three years old, and a ſhe-got of three years old, 
and a ram of three years old, &c. Ver: 10. it is ſaid, that he took them, 
and divided them in the midſt, and laid each piece one aga:nſt another. In- 
deed we read nothing there of the Parties Covenaating, paſling be- 
twixt the parts of the Beaſts ſo divided, but this was afterwards uſed 
in making Covenants b?twixt Men, which had in it a ſecret impre- 
cation or wiſhing that they might be cut in pieces like thoſe Beaſts, 
if they did not keep the Covenants which they made. Ir ſhould 
ſeem that theſe Jews in the making of their ſolemn Promiſe or Co- 
venant with God abour releafing their Servants uſed this Rite; they 
cauſed a Calf, or Heifer to be cut in pieces, and the parts to be laid 
in the Temple right over againſt one another, then they recited 
this Covenant, and in the way of a ſolemn Promiſe, or confirmati- 
on of their Reſojution ro make their promiſe good, they paſled be- 
ewixt the parts of tie Calf, or Heiter ſo cur; fileatly agreeing 
that God ſhould cut them in pieces like that Beaſt if they did not 
make their words good. Hence is the Hebrew phraſe of cutting a 
Covenant, for making it. This was a Ceremony ordinarily uſed 
alſo amongſt the Heathens, as we are informed by Cicero, Livy,and 
others. 

19 The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jeruſa- 
lem, the eunuches, and the Prieſts, and all the people 
of the land, which paſſed betwixt the parts ofthe calf. 

20 I will even give them into the hand of their ene- 
mies, and into the han. of them that ſeek their life,and 
their * dead bodies ſhall be for meat unto the fowls of 


the Heaven, and to the beaſts of the earth x 

x God doth not threaten all the Jews, but thoſe only, who had 
made this Covenant, and formally confirmed it, by killing a Beaſt, 
and paſſing rhrough the parts of it thus divided, and laid oppoſite 
one to another. Of thoſe he ſpareth none but threatens both the 
King and Nobles and great Courtiers,as well as the People. That 
he would give them into the hand of their Enemies that thirſted af- 
rer their blood, they ſhould be ſlain, and their dead Bodies ſhould 
notbe burried. Herein the Righteouſneſs of God appeared, by do- 
ing to them as they deſired ( by paſſing betwixt the Calf ) that God 
would do in caſe they did not keep ro the promiſe they hade made, 
and called God ro witneſs. and challenging him to deſtroy them if 
they did not fuifi!l what they covenant for. 

21 And Zedekiah king of Juc a, and his princes will 
I give into the hand of their e .emies, and into the 
hand of them that ſeek their lite ; and into the hand of 
che king of Babylons army * which are gone up from 

OU Y}. 
: y " is nothing in this Verſe, but what was ſaid before, ſave 
only in the laſt Clauſe, where mention 1s made of the King of Ba- 
bylm's Army which was gone up from them, the occaſion of which 
we ſhall meet with Chap: 37: 5, becauſe there was an army came 
out of Egypt to aſſiſt the Jews. ; 

22 Behold, I will command, ſaith the LORD and 
cauſe them to return to this city z, and they ſhall fight 
againſt it, and take it, and burn it with fire, and T will 
make the cities of Judah a deſolation without an inha- 
bitant. 

z I will put it into their Hearts to return ſaith the Lord,and they 
ſhall come back again to the Seige, and ſhall riſe up no more till 
they have taken the Ciry and burned it with fire,and made the whole 
Country deſolate.The motions of Armies areunder the Goverment 
of Divine Providence,they are at Gods Command ; when he bids 
them come they come, what he bids them do they do, and ſhall 
certainly effe& what God hath determined. When we come to 
Chap: 39. we ſhall read of the fulfilling of this Prophecy. 

CHAP. XXXV. 
By the Obedience of the Rechabites, 1 11+ God condemneth the 

Jews Obedience, 12 17. The Rechabites are bleſſed, 18, 


Ig. 3, : 

TY word which came unto Jeremiah from the. 
LORD, in the days of Jehoiakim, the ſon of 
Joſiah king of Judah, ſaying #. ; 

s This is another evidence that the Prophecies of this Book are 
notleftus in that order wherein they were delivered,for thoſe which 
we had in the two or three foregoing Chapters being in the time of 
Zedekiah muſt needs be ten or eleven Years after this. 

2 Go unto the houſe of the Rechabites, and ſpeak 
unto them,and bring them into the houſe of the LORD, 
into one of the chambers, and give them wine to 
drink b. : 

b Theſe Rechabites had their Name from Rechab their Father,who 
as appears from 1 Chron.2. 55, deſc:nded from Hemath, who was a 
Kentte, who is alſo called Hobab, Jud; 4- 11. (unleſs-irt may be 
Hameth who was the Son of Hebab. ) This Hobab was Jethro the Father 
in Law of Moſes, as appears from Jud: 4. tt, we read Jud; 1. 16, 
Fhat his Children went up Out of the City of Palm-rrees, with the Chilaren 


* Chap. 7. 
33+ and 
16.4. 


* Chap. 
33-100 


EF REMI 4a, 


| "GEE = 
Chap. XXX) 
of Judah; which lieth in the South of Arad, and they went, and dwelt a« | 
mo0rg the People, The Rechabites here mentioned deſcended from this 
Stock. Jehonadab mentioned, 2 King: 10. 15. was of this Family, a 
Man of ſome note, 2s appeareth by Jehu his taking him there into 
h's Chariot, God commandeth the Prophet to bring ſome of this 
Family into the Temple, into ſome of the Chambers { for in and 
abour the Temple were ſeveral Chambers,f. r the Prieſts. and where 
they diſpoſed of the Holy Sarments and ſeveral Oblations, 1 Kings 


6: 5, 6, 10, 1 Chron. 28: 11. 12.) God commands Jer:miah to brin 
theſe Rechabites into ſome cf theſe Chambers and fo ſer wine befive 
them. This waseitber for the morepublickneſs of the thing, or 


ir may be for the reproof of the Prieſts who drank too much 


INC. , 

3 Then I took Jaazaniah, . the ſon of Jeremiah, the 
ſon of Habaziniah, and his brethren; and all his ſons 
and the whole houſe of the Rechabites. 


4 And I brought them into the houſe of the LORD, 
into the chamber of the ſons of Hanan, the ſon of \\t|'Þ 
Igdaliah a man of God c,which was by the chamber of Wl} 
the princes, which was abLove the chamber of Maafeiah . | "IF 
the {on of Shallum, the keeper of the + door d. + Hebs || if 
& This term, the man of Go1, doth in Scriprere ſignifie a Prophet threſhold... " 
ſometimes, bur whether ir ſo ſignifieth here,and 1f ir doth, whether or wveſ#| 4 | 
it relateth to 1z1aliah or Hanan is a queſtion. 4 Probab!y by the WIN: 
Cnamber of the Princes is meant ſome Chamber where the Princes 
were wont ro meet in a Court, or for Counſel, Thither Jeremiah 
brings theſe Rechabites, and ſets Veſſels of Wine before them, not 
commanding them to drink it, but only inviting rhem, 


5 And [ ſer before the ſons of the houſe of the Rec- 


habites pots full of wine,and cups,and I ſaid unto.them, 
Drink ye wine. 


6 But they ſaid, we will drink no wine : for Jonadab 
the ſon of Rechab ourftather e commanded us, ſaying, 
Ye ”Y drink no wine, neither ye, nor your ſons for 
ever f. 


e Ic is nncertain whether Father here ſignifies their immediat P2- 
rent, or ( which is more Probable) their Progenitor 3 it is moſt 
likely ifrefereth to that Jonadab of whom we read » Kings 10: 18, 
who was the Father ( thar is the Progenitor of this Family of rhe 
Rechabites, at 3os Years diſtance.) f The reaſon why he lef: his 
Poſterity this charge is uncertain, probably ro warn them agai:ſt 
the Luxury which he ſaw began to abound in 17acl, and being de- 
fireous, that they ſhould inure themſelves ro a more hardy ana la- 
borions Life ; being originally K:n;tes, and uſed to Husb:ndry, and 
keeping of Sheep and other Cattel,he deſired they ſhould live accor- 
ding to their Quality. 

7 Neither ſhail ye build houſe, nor ſow ſeed, nor 
plant vineyard, nor have ay: but all your days ye 
ſhall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the 
land where ye be ſtrangers g. | 

£ The laſt Words of the Verſe probably give us a reaſon of the 
former, they were no Native Fews, but ſtrangers amongſt themy 
who commonly are invied, when they are obſerved to thrive too 
much, or to live ſplendidly ; and that envy of the Natives of the 
place where they ſojourn, expoſeth them to their Hatred and M1- 
lice, ſo as their Lives are made uneaſie to them, Jonadab therefore 
cautions his Sons toavord theſe inconveniences by a thrifty, ſober 
laborious life,to which they 6ad been bred, in. keeping Flocks, and 
to avoid any thing might expoſe them to envy or Hatred or Malice 
of the People amongſt whom they were come to ſojourn. 

8 Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab'the ſon 
of Rechab our father, in all that he hath charged us, 
to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, nor our 
ſons, nor our daughters. | | 

9 Norto build houſes forus to dwell in: neither have 


we vineyard, nor field, nor ſeed. 


10 But we have dwelt in tents b, and have obeyed, 
and doneaccording to all that Jonadab our ficher com- 
manded us. 

h Moveable Habitations, which they could with little 1abour re- 
move from Place to Place, as they had convenience to feed their. 
Flocks, this was their ordinary way of living untill neceſſity com- 
pelled them to come and live in Jeruſalem, 


17 But it cameto paſs when Nebuchadrezzar King 
of Babylon, came up into the Land z, that we ſaid, 
Come, and let us go to Jeruſalem, for fear of the army 
of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Sy- 
rians ; ſo we dwell at Jeruſalem. | 

i When the Chaldean Army came into the Land, they ſaw there 
would be no quiet abode for them any where but in ſome fortified 
place. The Syrians joyned with the Chaldeans in this War, as we 
read 2 Kings 24, 2: This they tell the Prophet was the reaſon why 
they who never uſed to dwell in Cities, nor fixed Houſes, came ts 
dwell at Jeruſalem, to prevent being deſtroyed by the Foragers for 


theie Armies. , 
12 © Then came the word of the LORD unto Jere- 
miah, ſaving, | | | 
13 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts,the God of Iſrael, 
Go, and tell the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of 
Jeruſalem, Will ye not receive inſtruction to hearken to 
my words ? faith the LORD, | | 
14 The words of Jonadab the ſon of Recheb, that 


Wl {6 
vp 
£ 


Down 
X 


ng ni ogg 
i — EI ANT TEC nn 
—_—_— - —_— 
7 Oe 


A 
CESS 


Io er ro 


y — 


— 


DE I I—_— 


mn —__ 


pra ——_—— HO 


= ED = EEE EEE 
CT _— 


DEED CI I IT 


Co 


RD —  — —  ——  — 


— - Ce —_ — pa 
prey —_—  —— O__- O_ —__. . -o<I—— 


' 


"i 
| 
t 
k 
| 
| 
: 
I 


he commanded his ſons not to drink wine, are perfor- 
med ; for unto this day they. drink none, --but- obey 
their farhers commandment : notwithſtanding I have 


6 M 4 ſpoken 


«25. 


Chap: 


* I1, 
©F, 


he 


S Wi ny 
2A 7 


of 


_—— 


4 
or 4 


the 
- 


TH 
yy 
= = 
3 
« 3Þ, 


hep. XXXV. 
Chap:7. ſpoken unto you, * rifing early, and {peaking, but ye 


Jona- 


b &c+ 


= © 18- 


| hearkened not unto me. 

I5 I have ſent alſo unto you all my ſervants the pro- 
phets, riſing up early and ſending them, ſaying, * Re- 
curn ye now every man from his evil way, and amend 
your doings, and go not after other gods to ſerve them, 
and ye ſhall dwellin the land, which I bave given to 
you, and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your 


'ear, nor hearkened to me &. 

k God in this Revelation of his mind to the Prophet expoundeth 
to him, why he had ſet him to bring the Rechabires into the Tem- 
ple, and commanded him to ſet Wine before them,and invite them 

rodrink of it, wir.. that by their refuſual of doing according to the 
invitation, in obedience to their Father Jonedab ; he might convince 
the Jews of their Diſobedience to his Commands, though God's 
Commands were more advantaged, than the Commands of Jenadab 
in that, 1. Jonadab was but an earthly Parent, and fo had no abſo- 


_ Jute univer/al Soveraginity over his Children, bur God was rhe Lord 


of hofts the God of Iſrael. 2. Jonadal's Command was not for the per- 
formance ef a moral Duty, bur the doing of a thing which they 
might do, or leave undone. God required of them what was but 
their moral Duty, and for which was the higheſt reaſon, 3. Jora- 
dab's Command had no promiſe annexed, God's Precept had a pre- 
miſe annexed, yet they had not yielded him that obedience which 
the Sons of Jonadab had yielded him : He was their Father, bur 
where was his Honour? 


16 Becauſe the ſons of Jonadab the ſon 'of Rechab 
have performed the Commandment of their Father, 
which he commanded them, but this people hath nor 
hearkened unto me. 

17 Therefore thus ſaith the Lord GOD of hoſts, the 
God of Iſrael, Behold, I will bring upon Judah, and u- 
pon all the inhabitants of Jeruſalem, all the evil that 
I have pronounced againſt them: becauſe I have ſpoken 
unto them, and they have not heard, I have called un- 
to them, - and they have not anſwered /. 

] This is but the ſ:me threatning confirmed, which we have of- 
ten met-with before, concerning the ruine of this People, only the 
meritorious cauſe of it is further amplified, their not paying that 


Homage to God which theſe Rechavites paid fo an Earthly Parent, 
and had been ſteaJy in the Payment of, now for three hundred 


| years together. 


18 And Jeremiah ſaid to the houſe of the Rechabites, 
Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, .the God of Iſrael, be- 
cauſe you have-obeyed the command of Jonadab your 
facher, and kept all his precepts, and done according 
to all that he hath commanded you. 


-- I9 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts,the God 
of Iſrael, + Jonadab the ſon of Rechab ſhall not want a 


man to ſtand before me for ever m. 

m For ever here ſignifies the ever of the Jewiſh State, or Church; 
whether the Promiſe relates to the abiding of Jonadab's Family, when 
many Families of the Jews were quite rooted out, cut off, and ex- 
tinQ, , or to ſome ſpecial favour that God would ſhew them, or to 
fome place of Office, they ſtould have in, or about the Temple (as 
ſome judge becauſe, 1 Chron; 2: 55. it appears they were Scriber ) is 
Uncertain : But it is a queſtion of more Moment. How God pro- 
miſerh'a Reward to thete Sons of Jonadab for obeying the come 
mand of their Father, and whether they had ſinned if they bad nor 
obeyed this Command of Jonadab, which brings in anorher Queſti- 
on : Waether Parents have a power to oblige their children in matters which 
God hath left at liberty. ' To which, I anſwer. 1. Goa mght reward 
theſe Reehabites, for their reverence and obedience to Jonadab their Fa- 
ther, though they were not ftriily by the Divine Law, obliged thus far to 
have obeyed him: as he rewarded David for his thoughts in his hearr 
ro build him an Houlſe,thongh'ir was not Gods W1llthar he ſhould 
do it, ſo as God's promile of the Reward doth not prove their O« 
bedience in this Particular to have been their Duty, Admit that ic 
remained ſtill a matter of Liberty, yet the Genera] Honour,and Re- 
verencethey teſtified might be rewarded by God. 2, Unqueſtion- 
ably Parents have nit a Power to - determine Chilaren in all things as to 

which God hathl:ft them & liberty,for then they have a'-power to make 
their Children Slaves, and to take away all their natural Liberty. 
To Marry ornor, and to this, or that Perſon, is matter of Liberty. 
Parents cannot in this caſe determine their Children, Bethuel Gen: 
24. 58. axketh Rebeccah rf ſhi -would go with Abrahams Servants before 
he would ſend her: 3. In mattersof- civil conernment they have a far 
greater power than in matters of Religzon: All Souls are Gods, and con- 
{ſcience can be under no other Dominion than that of God. 4. In 
civil things Parents have a great pawer, during the Nonage of children, 
and after alſo m matters which concern their Parents good,as co command 
them to afiſt them, to help to ſupply their Neceſſities, &c. 5. Pa- 
rents being ſet over Children, and infiead of God to them, as it is their Du- 
ty te-adviſetheir Childrento the beſt of their ability for their good : So it 
is the duty of Childrmn to receive their advice, and not to depars from it, 
unleſs they ſee circumfances ſo miſtaken by, Parents, or ſo alter:d by the Pro» 
widetce of God, 'as they may' reaſonably judge; their Parents, had they 
known or foreſeen it, would not have ſo adviſed, But that Parents have 
an abſolute power to determine Childrenin all things as to which 
God hath not forbidden them, and that Children by the Law of 
God areobliged-to an Obedience to all ſuch Commands however, 
they may ſee their Patents miſtaken, or God by his Providence 
may have altered Circumſtances, I ſee no reaſon to conclude Joxa- 
deb had prudently adviſed. his Sons as before mentioned ; they were 
things they might do,and which by experience they foundnot hurt- 
ful ro-them, buc vi gruraeoſs and advantage, and that with refe- 
rence to all the ends of Man's Life ; Herein they, yield Obedience, 
and pay a reverence to their Parent; this pleaſeth God, he promi- 
ſeth ro reward them with the continuance of their Family, accor- 


\ 


M 1 4 H. 


ding to what he had ſaid, Exod: 20: 22. in the fifth Command- 
_—_ which the Apoſtle calleth the firſt Commandment with p10 
ml ©, 


CH A-P, NNE 
Jeremiah cauſerh Baruch ts write his Prophecy; and publickly to read 
86, 0 ro. the Princes ſend to fetch the Roll and read it, 11-18. 
They adviſe Baruch and Jeremiah to hide themſelves, 1g. The King 
Jehoiakim zearerh part of che Roll, and burneth it, 20 26. - |Jere= 
miah denounceth his Judgment, 27- 31. Baruch writeth @ new Co 


PY, 32- 
A ND it came to paſs in the fourth year of Jchoia- 


kim, the ſon of Joſiah king of Judah, zhar this 


word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD ſaying «, 
a Jehoiakim was three Years a Tributary to Nebuchadnezzar, as we 


read, 2 Kings 24: 1. then he rebelled, which three years are judged 


to be the 6, 7, and 8th Years of his Reign, for Phara0h Necho ſet 
him up, to whom he was firſt a Tributary as we read, 2 Kings 23. 
35. Pharaoh Necho having conquered him, Jehoiakim became S:rvant 
to the conquerour three years, then rebelled ; upon which the Are 
mies of the Chaldeans with the Syrians, @«c. came up againſt him 3 
and carried him away. This word of the Lord came to Jeremiah 
the firſt year that he was Tributary to the King of Baby/ou, which 
was the fourth year of his Reign, 

2 Take thee a * roll of a book b and * write there- 


in all the words that have ſpoken untotbee, againſt *If.s. ;, 
"Chap.3o. 
from the day I ſpake unto thee, from the days of *Joſi- 7 


Iſrael and againſt Judah, and againſt all the nations 


ah even unto this day c. 

bBy a Roll of a boook 1s to be underſtood Parchments, which anci< 
ently were their Books, the art of binding Books being not then 
known. c The Precepr is for recording all the Revelations he had 
from God for 22 Years Jaſt paſt ; for he began to propheſic in the 
thirteenth Year of Joſisb, who reigned one and thirty years, ſo as 
he propheſied 18 Years, during Jefiah's Life,and this was the fourth 
year of the Reign of Feho:akim. God would have them recorded, 
that there might be a Memorial of them, that ſo the truth of them 
might appear, when God ſhould bring them to paſs the time of 
which now drew very near. 

3 It may be that the houſe of Judah will hear all the 


evil 4 which I purpoſe to do unto them, that they may 
return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive 
cheir iniquity, and their fin e. 


d What we tranſlate ir may be 1918 others tranſlate if perhaps, 
which better expreſſeth the ſenſe. God knew whar would be, bur 
yet he would not be wanting io means by which they might be in+ 
formed in his will, and ſo believe the thing, for believing and re- 
forming are here meant by hearing, as the next words in part ex- 
pound this term here. e Forgiveneſs of ſin in Scripture ſometimes 
ſignifieth theaccquirring of a ſinner from the obligation fin laycth 
the ſinner under to Eternal Death, ſometimes the remiſſion of a 
temporal puniſhment ; it may here well be underſtood as compre. 
hending toth, rhough I think the latter ro be what is here princi« 
pally intended. 

4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the ſon of Neriah, 


and * Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah,all the * 


upon a roll of a book f. 

f We ſhall find this Barach,being one of Jeremia#'s Diſciples more 
than once thus employed as Jeremiah's Secretary of Amanuenſis:. None 
ſhall need ask how Jeremiah could remember all the Prophecies he 
had propheſied for 22 Years before paſt, that conſidereth who it 
was rhat con.manded him to do this God undoubredly revived the 
Prophets memory, or he could not have called all to mind. 

5 And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, ſaying, I am 
ſhuc_ up, I cannot go into the houſe of the LORD. 

6 Therefore go thou and readin the roll whichthou 
haſt written from my mouth, the words of the LORD 
in the ears of the people in the LORD'S houſe upon 
the faſting day g : and alſo thou (balt read them in the 


cars of all Judan, that come out of their Cities. 


 £ We do not read that Jeremiah was a Priſoner in the fourth year 
of Jehoiakim, and therefore it is very uncertainly gueſſed in what 
ſenſe he here ſaith he was ſhut up. Some think 7ehoiakim had impri- 
ſoned_him, or at leaſt reſtrained him to his Houſe, tho' we do not 
read of ir. Others think he reſtrained himſelf, but in what ſence 
he was ſhut up, 1s not certain ; that he was ſo, is certain ; heknew 
that. God -had not commanded his Prophecies to be written for any 
other end, bur that the People might” have them recalled to their 
Memories: he being not in capacity himſelf at preſent to ſpeak any 


thing to the People in ſo-publick a place, ſendeth Barxch to do it in 


' his ſtead, chuſing for it a day of publick Faſt, not the day of the 
' Yearly Faſt mentioned Levir. 23. 27. but on a Faſt day ( of which 


we ſhall read more, wer. 9.) proclaimed by Jehvatim, probably to 
avert the Vengeance hanging over them from the Chaldzans, or ras 
ther from the drought.It was undoubtedly,becauſe of the Concourſe 
of the People which the Prophet knew would that day be in the 
Temple, that he choſe that day, when ſome would be preſent from 
all parts of Judah. : 

.-7 It may be + they will preſent their ſupplication 


Chap. AX at 


Chap.z2s. 


words of the LORD, which he had ſpoken unto him, op 45. 


before the LORD, and will return every one from his. * Heb. 
evil way, for great is the anger, and the fury, that the 7/47 


LORD hath pronounced againſt this People þ. 

hþ We had an expreſſion like this, Yer: 3. it teacheth us that the 
only means to turn away God's fierce anger ready to fall upon Peo« 
ple, is Prayer and Reformation. 


8 And Baruch the ſon of Neriah, did according to all 


that Jeremiah the Prophet commanded him, read- 
; ing- 


plication 


ſhall fall. 


mee 


ren ea G27 


# 


ER EAGER ew 


Þ > BEI a aa Earn” - 


prog 


_ ret Wert," 


| Clap. XXXVI. 


* Chap. 
26. iO. 


l|Or, door. 


| Baruch the ſon of Neriah, took the coll in his hand, | 


*. 


ing in the book the words of the LORD 
LORD's houſe. | 

9 And itcame to paſs in the fifth year of Jehoiachim, 

the ſon of Joſiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, 
that they proclaimed a faſt before the LORD to allthe 
people in Jeruſalem, and to all the people that came 
from the cities of Judah unto Jeruſalem 5. 
_ 7 This Faſt was appointed upoa a Particularemergency,whether 
it was'for a Famine which was then in the Land, or to avert the ru- 
ine which they juſtly feared'from the King of Babylon, who had late- 
ly brought them under his Servitude,. is not certain; the yearly Faſt, 
Levit. 23.27, was to:be kept in the' ſeventh Month, nor did God e- 
ver ordainany Faſt to bekept in the ninth Month. 

10 Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jere- 
miah in the houſe of the LORD, in the Chamber of 
Gemariah, the ſon of Shaphan the ſcribe, in the high- 
er court,at the * || entry of the new gate,ofthe LOR Ds 
Houſe in the ears of all the people &. I 

k This Verſe only atteſteth Baruchs Obedience to the Command 
of the.Propher Jeremy,not only as to the thing,his reading it in the 
Temple, bur as to the circumſtance in as publick a manner as he 
could in the Chamber of Gemariah, &c. moſt likely out of ſom- 
Window, or in ſome Balcony, the People being below, and hearing 
it, 

11 When Micaiah the ſon of Gemariah, the ſon of 
Shaphan had heard out of the book all the words of the 
LORD. 

12 Then he went down into the king's Houſe, into 
the ſcribes chamber, and lo all the princes ſate there, 
even Eliſhama the ſcribe, and Delaiah the ſon of She- 
maiah, and Elnathan the ſon of Achbor, and Gemari- 
ah the ſon of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the ſon of Hana- 
niah, and all the princes 7. 

1 Ir is uncertain whether this Micaiah went to make this Relation 
to the Princes who fate in the Secretaries Chamber, as a piece of 

ews only, or out of a malicious deſign to accuſe the Propher,and 
Baruch for what was done as a ſeditious praftice, 

I3 Then Micaiah declared unto them all the words 
that he had heard when Baruch read the book in the 
ears of the people m. 

#2 That 1s the ſubſtance of all the words, for none can imagine 
That an hearer could remember every word which ſhews the vanity 
of thoſe who overſtrain fuch univerſal Particles to ſignifie every 
particular word or perfon. ; 

14 Therefore all the princes » ſent Jehudi the ſon of 
Nethaniah, the ſon of Shelemiah che fon of Cuſhiun- 
30 Baruch, ſaying, Take in thy hand the roll, wherein 
thou haſt read inthe ears of the people, and come. So 


. im Hs 


and came unto them. 

z» That is, all the Princes that at that time fate there mn Council, 
Tent a Meſſenger with a Command ro Baruch to appear before them 
and to bring the Roll which he had read in the Ears of che People. 

I5 Andthey ſaid unto him, Sit down now, and read 


it in ou; ears, $0 Baruch read it tn their ears p. 

p The couri1g2 of Baruch is admirable, he was now before the 
Counci), 1n the Kings Houſe, the ſubſtance of the Prohecies, were 
threzrning both to the King and Court, and to all the People.The 
King as appears by all Hiſtory, was of no good Temper, we read 


Chap: 26. Ver: 23, of his ſending for Urijah the Prophet out of Egypt, 


when he fled rhither for fear of the King, and ſlaying him, and we 
{hall find that at ris time, the Princes adviſed both Jeremy and Ba- 
rzch ro hide themſeives, yer Baruch 1s not afraid, but reads the Pro- 
phecy in their Ears. 

16 Now it came to paſs, when they had heard all 
the words, they were afraid both one and another q,and 


ſaid to Baruch, we will ſurely tell che king of all cheſe 


words ry. 


q Ir is hardly to be imagined that all theſ- Counſellours ſhould 
fir {till cil! they had heard all Feremiahs Prophecies for 22 Years 
read, bur all ſignifies many, or the ſence and ſabſtance of all rhe 
Prophecies. r They were all of them afraid Jeremiah had now 
been above twenty Years a Prophet to ti:is People, and doubtleſs 
in great eſteem for 18 Years of it, while Joſiah was alive, and one 
whoſe Prophecies rhey could not but obſerve had been ofc accom- 
Pliſhed, therefore th-y could not bur be afraid that they ſhould ſee 
theſe words allo fulfilled, and rook themſelves bound in Duty to 
acquaint the King with them. Some, if not all of theſe, probably 
had been great Men in Joſh's time, which was but four or five 
Years before, and from him ſucked in ſome good and Religious 
Principles, which begat ſome awe of God in them. 

17 And they asked Baruch, ſaying, Tell us now, 
How didſt thou write all theſe words ar his mouth s ? 

5s This now ſeemed but a reaſonable Queſtion, conſidering they 
were the ſubſtance of what he had been propheſying for ſo many 
Years, The rhing ſeemed ftrange to the Princes, Prophets being 
not uſed to ftudy and pen their Diſcourſes, bur to ſpeak them exs= 


Fempore. 
13 Then Baruch anſwered them, He pronounced all 


theſe words unto me with his mouth, and I wrotethem 


with ik in the book 7. 

# This could not but add to the Princes fear and amazement. 
They muſt needs conceive thar rhe thing was done from God, for 
without a ſpecial influence of God, it had beea a thing impoſſible, 
that Jeremiah ſhould have called to mind all rhat he had ſpoken ar 
ſeveral times in ſo many years ; and proceeding from the God of 


'Teuth, they muſt needs fear, that thy would have their certain 


* and ju(t accompliſhment in their ſeaſon, 


J E R E M 1 4 Ht. 


1 


19 Then faid the princes unto Baruch,Go,hide thee, 
_ and Jeremiah, and let no man know where ye 
C Hu. | 
# This ſpeaketh theſePrinces to have beeriMen of a' tmuch- gentler 
Temper, and better Diſpoſirion, than thoſe who ſucceeded them in 
Zedekiabs time; they were not willing that any harm ſhould come 
to the Propher, nor to Baruch, and knew the fierce Temper of Fe- 


holakim, and therefore adviſed Baruch, that both he and the Prophet - 


ſhould hide themſelves. 

20 And they went in to the King, into the court, 
bur they laid up theroll in the chamber of Eliſhama che 
ſcribe, and told all the words in the cars of the king w. 

w They were obliged by their Office as Councellors to the King, 
to accquaint him with what they heard; which mighrc be prejudicial 
to him, and his Nation ; and indeed this was the very end,” wh 
God had commanded the enrolling of thefe Prophecies, that bor 
the King, and Princes, and people might take notice of them, bur 
they did not carry the Book with them, but laid it up inthe Secre- 
caries Chamber. 


21 50 the king ſent Jehudi to fet the roll, And he 
took it out of Elifſhama the {ſcribes chamber, * And Je- 
hubi read it in the ears of the King, and in the ears of 
{I the princes which ſtood belide the king x. | 


monly 1mplolyed by the king and Council , him the King ſends td 
_ the Roll ( before called a book) then he employeth him to 
read it. 


' 22 Now the king ſate in the winter-houſe in the 
ninth month, and there was & fire on the hearth burning 


| before him 7. 


Y The ninth Month with them, anſwered Part 6f ottr November 
and Decembe, , which was a time of the Year called for Fires, | 
23 And itcame to paſs :hat when Jehudi had read 
three or four leaves, he = cut it with the pen-knife, 
and caſt jr into the fire, that was on the hearth, until 
all the roll was conſumed in the fire that as on the 
hearths ; 

z Thatis, the King not having patience to hear aboye three or 
four Columns, or Periods, or Titles, took che Pen-knife, thar (ir 
'S like J) Jehudihad, and cut it in pieces, and burned it in the fire 
that wasbefore him, not conſidering it was the Revelation of the 
Will of God, but exalting himſelf above all that was called God: 
This thewed borh the wickedneſs, and paſſionate Temper of this 
Prince, and his high coatempt of God and his Prophets. 

24 Yetthey werenot afraid,nor * rent their garments, , 


theſe words 4. 

#s So hardned were this peoples Hearts, that though they knew 
that Jeremiah was a Prophet of the Lord, upon the experience now 
of more than 29 Years, andthe whole ſcope of his Prophecies had 
beento denounce the Juſt Judgments of God that now were coming 
upoa this People, and they could not bur underſtand, thar God 


matter of which he could nor otherwiſe have kept in mind ſo 
many years, yet they bad no ſerious fear of God upon theirhearrs; 
working upon the hearing the dreadful matter oftheſe Prophecies, 
nor ſhewed any ſign of remorſe, or ſence of their ſins, or God's 
Judgments'coming upon them as indications of his Wrath. 

25 Nevertheleſs Elnathan, and Delaiah, and Gema- 
riah, had made interceflion to the kiog, that he would 
not burn the ro]l, but he would not hear chem 5. 

b Theſe three Princes ſeemed ro have had a grearer dread of God 
upen their kearts than the reſt, for ſo far as they durft, they inte:s 
poſed, and beſought the king nor to burn the Roll ; but he would 
not hearken to their advice» 


the ſon of Abdeel, to take Baruch che ſcribe, and Jere- 
miah the Prophet c: But the LORD hid them 2. 

c The king was not ſa:isfied with burning the Roll. bur gives 
order to apprehend- both Jeremiah and Baru:h, and commandeth the 
three Perſons named in this Verſe to do it: 4But God by his Provi- 
dence kept them borh our of their hands ; how the Lord hid them 
we are not told, the Princes ( as we read before) adviſed Baruchz 
that they ſhould both hide themſelves. This Phraſe ( probably } 
imports no more: than that God dire&ed them to find ſuch a Place 
of receſs as the Kings Meſſengers could by no means find our, nor 
underftand where they were, rill the kings Paſſion was a litcle over. 


27 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah 
after that the king had burnt the roll, and the words 
which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, ſay- 
the Take thee again another roll, and write in it all 
the former words that were in the firſt ro}l which Jehoi, 
akim the king of Judah hath burn. . 

29 And thou ſhalt ſay to Jehoiakim, king of Judah, 
Thus ſaith the LORD, Thou haſt burne this roll e, ſay- 
ing, why haftthou-written therein, ſaying, the king of 
Babylon ſhall certainly come, and deſtroy this land,and 
ſhali cauſe to ceaſe from thence man and beaſt f ? 


e Ir ſpeaketh nothing but the impotency, and Paſſion, and des. 
bauchery of humane nature, to ſwell againſt any Revelations of 


the Divine Will, the Counſels of the Lord ſhall ſtand, and Men on= 
ly further entangle themſelves by ſtruglng in the Lord's Net, Jee 
loiakim burns one Roll, God will have the ſame thing wrote 1n a- 


here both what was the matter of Feremabs 
nother;, f We learn here wy arrrag 


Chap XXXVI-| 


I As Ee Ee no 


x It appeareth by Yr: 14. that this Jehud; was a Meſſenger com«. 


either the king nor any of his ſervants that heard all ,, 


muſt be greatly affiſtant to Feremish in writing this Roll, all the . 


26 But the king commanded Jerameel the fon of Ham-l! Or, if 
melech and Seraiah the ſon of Azriel, and Shelemiah *#* $3: 


—_ PLES a a on When utah SS ——— 
an te = WE 2mm, Wriin = I T= 
a = I os - "IS = > - 
a4 Cer 34 
© 4 þ LT HS EO hs oat b 


OCCURRING EEPNE WER 


cauſe of the King's anger ; he had propheſied 
take Jeruſalem, and Jay the 
was fulfilled within fix 


Princes can 


XXXVII. 


Prophecy, and the 
that the King of Babylon, ſhould come, 
- Country waſte, which as-to Jeho/akim's part, 
ears after this, more fully in 18 Years, bur corrupt 
indure nothing that ſhall make their Lives vneafie., 
30 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of Jehoiakim the 
king of Judah,He ſhal have none to ſit upon the throne 
"of David f, and his dead body ſhall be * caſt our in the 
TChap:22. - Ah : : he froſt 
29. day to the heat, and in the night to the Irolt g. 
f That is, none that ſhall be King any conſiderable time, Feconiah, 
- or Jehoiachin his ſon'was ſent up, but kept bis Throne bur three 
Months, 2 Kings 24. 8, 9, 10. g Weno where read of the time, 
or manner of this King's Death, but that he had an 1gnominious 
Burial, Chap. 22. 19. like the Burial ofan 4s; none accompany- 


ing his Corps, none mourning for him, and it appears from this 
ext, that wherever he dyed, his body lay for a time unburied. 


- 3x AndI will f puniſh him, and his ſeed, and his 


+ Heb.vieſervants, For their iniquity,and I will bring upon them, 
 f# wen, and upon the inhabitants of Jeruſalem, and upon the 
men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced a- 
gainſt them, but they hearkened not 5. 
h As to the People God threatnerh, they ſhould f:el, what they 
* were not willing to hear, even all the evil which God by his Pro- 
phet had pronounced againſt them. ; 
-" 22 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to 
Baruch, the ſcribe, the ſon of Neriah,who wrote there- 
in from the month of Jeremiah all the words of the 
book, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah, had burnt 
in the fire, and chere were added belides unto them 
many Þ like words 5. 
5 Wicked Men get nothing by oppoſing themſelves to the reveal- 
ed Will of God, how. ungrateful ſcever it be to them, bur the addit1- 
-on of guilt to their Souls, and. the increaſe of Divine Wrath,God's 
Counſels hel] ſtand, and what he ſpeaks ſhall moſt certainly be ac- 
- compliſhed. Here is another Roll written with additional Threat- 
nings confirmative of what God had- before ſaid. | 
| CH AP, XXXVII. 

D The Egyptians raiſe the Siege of the. Chaldeans : And King Zedekiah ſend- 
F, i . eth ro Jeremiah, to pray and enquire of the Lord for them, 1——5: He 


. F Heb. as 
Thy 


2 propbeſieth the Chaldeans Return and Viftory, 6—10. He is apprehen- 
"by ded-for a Fugitive, beaten, and put into Priſon, 11——=15. He aſſureth 
Zedekrah of the Captivity ; and, intreating for Liberty, obraineth ſome 
Favour, 16——2T. 


F ; A ND king Zedekiah the ſon of Joſiah «, reigned 
- in ſtead of Coniah b the fon of Jehojakim, whom 
+ * _ - Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made king in the 
& land of Judahc. | 
*Y s The Hiſtory of this Succeſſion we have, 2 Kings 24, 17. 2 
=. - Chrone 36; 10, Zedekiah's Name was Mattaniah, the King of Babylon 
= Changed his Name to Zedekiah. b He reigned in ſtead of Fehojachin, 
BY the ſon of Jehojak:m who reigned but three months, 2 Kings 24,8. 
we.” his Name'was Jeconiah, 1 Chron: 3.16. and and in deriſion or con- 


tempt, is here called Coniah. c The king of Babylon made this Ze- 
Aekiah King, who is here called the Son of Foſiab, and 2 Kings 24. 
27. Jehoiakims Father's Brether, to diſtinguiſh him from another Ze- 
dekiah Son of Jehoiakim, as appears from 1 Chron 3. 16. 
2 But neither he, nor his ſervants, nor the people 
F Heb: by of the land, did hearken to the words of the LORD 


P _— - f which he ſpake by + the Prophet Jeremiah d. 

d This Zedekiah was little better than Jehoiakim, he ſeemeth by 
his Story to be of a little betrer Temper, not ſo cru?), and bloody; 
but he no more regarded God's Word by his Prophet thanJehoachm 
had done. 

3 And Zedekiah the king ſent Jehucal, the ſon of 
Shelemiah, and * Zephaniah the ſon of Maaſeiah the- 
prieſt, to the prophet Jeremiah, ſaying, Pray now un- 
to the LORD our God for us e. 

e This wasapparently in the time of the Siege 3 for wer: 5. we 
read of Phargoh's Army being come to relieve the beſieged, whether 

- 1t was before the Babylonians. were departed, or no, 1s uncertain ; 

but ir is plain, fif they were departed, the king was afraid they 
would come back again, That which is moſt obſerveable for us 
from hence, is this, That wicked mea of all ranks are deſireous of 
the prayers of thoſe Miniſters in their Diſtreſſes, whoſe Counſels 
and Admonitions they never regard, while they are ina time of 

Proſperity; which is an evidence of their ating contrary to the 

convictions of their Conſciences,in obedience to their Luſts, in their 

contempr of their inſtru&ions and admonitions, When affliction 

hath cooled their Luſts, then their Conſciences can be heard in di- 

| | Rating their duty to ther. 
. 4 Now Jeremiah came in, and went out amongſlt the 

people, for they had not put him into priſon f. 

f We ſtallread afterward, wer: 15. that he was impriſoned; and 
we have heard, chap; 32. of two Revelations he had while he was 1n 
priſon, but as yet he walked at liberty. 

|. 5 Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of E- 
* Chap: 8Y Pt, and * when the Chaldeans thar belieged Jeruſa- 
34-21: Jem, heard tidings of them, they departed from Jeru- 


falem g. 
£ Zedekiah was ſet up by the King of Babylon, in ſtead of Jehojatn, 
whom the King of Babylon, had carried into Babylon, Zedekiah ( as 
is uſuil in thoſe caſes,and as it appeareth,Ezek:17:16 ) had taken an 
Oath of Allegiance to the King of Babylon, bur brake it, and the Co- 
' venant which he made with him, wer: 16. and'ver: 15. rebelled againſt 
him, and ſent bus Ambaſſadour unto Egypt for Horſes, and much People. 
Now the King of Egypt came:in Perſon no more after the great O- 
verthrow given him, in Cerchemiſh,by the River Euphrates, of which 
we read, Chap. 46. 2, which was thirteen or or fourteen years be- 
fore this ; yet he ſent an Army at Z:dekials requeſt to relieve bin, 


_ *Chapo2g. 
- 25. & 52. 
34, 


= 4 #. 


a* this time beſieged by the Armies or the King of Babzlov, The 
Chaldeans that were in the Siege of Jeruſalem hearing of it, raiſed 
the Stege for atime, during which time ( probably) it was that 
Zeackia) ſent to the Prophet to pray for them. 

6 Then came the word of the LORD to the prophet 
Jeremiah, ſaying, 

7 Thus faith the LORD, the God of Ifrael, Thus 
ſhall ye ſay to the king of Judah that ſent you unto me, 
to enquire of me h, Behold Pharaoh's army which is 
come forth to help you, ſhall return tro Egypt, into 
their own land z. 

h The word Enquire let us know that Zedekiah did not ſend to the 
Prophet only to pray for him, but to enquire of God what the iſſue 
would be of the future contingency ; it may be more defireous to 
know that, than that Jeremiah ſhould intercede with God for them. 

z: The Prophet tells them from God that the King of Ezyp!'s army 

ſhould do them no ſervice, it is expounded Ezek 17 179. He ſhould 

x0t make for him in the war, by cafting up mounts, and building forts, to 

cut off many perſons. Probably the Egyptian Army upon the ſight of 

the ſtrengrh of the Chaldeans, and the weak and impotent ſtare of 

the Fews, were diſcouraged, and would not adventure to fighe 

them, but by and by returned to their own Land. 

8 And the Chaldeans ſhall come again, and fight a- 

gainſt this city, and take it, and burn it with fire, 

9 Thus faith the LORD, Deceive not your + ſelves + He, 

ſaying the Chaldeans ſhall ſurely depart from us, for Souls, 
C | 

they ſhall not depart. 

1o For though ye had ſmitten the whole army of the 

Chaldeans, that fight againſt you, and there remaineq 


Chap. XXXV1 


T but wounded men amongſt them : get ſhould they { Heb- 
riſe up every man in his tent, and burn this city with theagh 


fire & 

& The ſubſtance of the Anſwer returned by the Prophet t 
King is this, That whereas they pleaſed themſelves Vick ab 
that the Babylonian Army now withdrawn to meet with the Army 
of the Egyp:ians would return no more to the Siege, it was a Dream 
He'aſſares them from God they ſhould return, beſiege the City, 
and take it, and burn it, and therefore they did but deceive theme 
ſelves to think otherwiſe ; though they were gone, yet it was bur 
fora very ſhorttime, He farther aſſures them, that the potency or 
Impotency of the Chaldesns was inconſiderable ; for if their whole 
Army were made up of wounded men, or if they could prevail fo far 
as to wound all their Souldiers, or thruſt them through, ( as the 
Word is tranſlated, Chap: 5 1.4. } yet they ſhould do the Work. 
When God is reſolved upon an Effe&, the Inſtruments are very 
little to be regarded. Ir is not the Arm of fleſh, but the Power 
of God which is in that caſe alone to be conſidered. 

11 < Andit came to paſs, that when the army © 
the Chaldeans was | broken up from Jeruſalem for fear t Heb: 
of Pharaoh's army. vw 
12 Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jeruſalem to ' 
g0 into the land of Benjamin, || to ſeparate himſelf [|Or, top 
thence in the midſt of the people /, away from 
1 PMN The Word we tranſlate ſeparate ſignifieth to divide, ſof. **1nths 


. e 
ten, or make ſlippery, which hath made interpreters vary in the Ex- avs ag 


poſition of it, But the general uſe of ir, eſpecially in Pihcl, ( the n. 
conjugation in which it is here uſed ) being to ſignific a diving or 
ſeparating ; and the latter fignification being ſecondary, it ſeemeth 
moſt reaſonably here tranſlated to ſeparate, or ro withdraw : Jere- 
miah had no farther Revelation from God, which he was under an 
obligation to communicate ; and knowing the City would ſudden- 
ly be taken, and that he could be no farther uſeful ro the People, 
taking advantage of the withdrawing of the Chaldean Army, re. 
ſolves to provide for himſelf, deſigning to go to his own Country 
to Anathoth, which was in the Land of B:»jamin ; and becauſe he 
was a noted Perſon, who might probably be ſtopt ( as he was ) if 
known, he attemprs to lip out in the crowd of People that were 
going out : This ſeemeth to me the moſt probable ſence. 

13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin », a 
captain of the ward was there, whoſe name was Irijah, © 
the ſon of Shelemiah. the fon of Hananiah », and he 
took Jeremiah the prophet, ſaying, thou falleſt away 


to the Chaldeans. 

m The Gate of Benjamin was ſome Gate that looked toward the 
Inheritance of that Tribe: Or where thoſe uſed to go out wha 
went that way, we read of it, Chap: 37.7.. » This man was a Cap= 
tain of the Guard that was ſet to watch atthe Gates, to keep Peo- 
ple from going out, or at leaſt ſome Perſons ; for it ſhould ſeem by 
Jeremiak's endeavour to go out in the crowd; they ſuffered many 
to go out, as is uſual in Sieges, when V:Qtuals grow ſcarcez and 
though the Chaldeans were at preſent gone, yet they were not out 
of fear of their coming back. This Captain apprehends Jeremiah, 
as one who was about to deſert the City, and tall off to the Chal. 
deans, That Hananiah the Grand-father of this 1rijah, was the falſe 
Prophet we read of, Chap: 28. who died according to Jeremiah's 
P:ophecy, and this his -Grand-child apprended Jorem/ah in ſome 
revenge of his Grandefather, is but uncertainly gueſſed. But Jere- 
miah's {o frequent propheſying that the Chaldeans ſhould take rhe 
City, expoſed him to this ſuſpicion probably. 


14 Then ſaid Jeremiah, #t :s Þ falſe, I fall not away t H:b- 


falſbod & | 


to the Chaldeans s : But he hearkened not unto him, OT. 
Je. 


ſo Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the prin- 


CES, 
o Though Jeremiah, as the Lord's Prophet, faithfully revealed 
the Will of God, that the Chaldeans ſhould take the City; to warn 
the people ( if poſſible) to prevent it by ifolemn Addreſſes unto , 
God, or at leaſt to prevent what miſchief might be prevented by a 
timely Surrender to the King of Babylon, yet he had no deſign to 
fly tothemz he was ſo far from delighting in their company, _ 
WIHED 


» 


1 


ICE Aw be; 


Ct 


10 


+ He 
my ſu 
Catien 


* Ch 


22: 3 


SCSI. RIAA ew HAS 


. s 


q Or,cels. 


+ Heb. 
my ſuppli- 
cation fall 


* Chap. 


$2: >, 


Chap. XXXVII. 


5 E R E 


when the City was taken,& the Captain of the Guard offered hin 


eith-1 to go along with him to Babylon, promiſing to /ook well :o him, | q,,,;.0, Propheſyeth ; 


Chap. 40: 4, 5- or to go back to G-daliah, whoin the King of Baby» 
lon had left as Deputy Governour in Jd:a, hs chole rather io go 
and dwe!l under Gedaliah's Government in a poor condirton, than 
to md his Commons in an Idolatrous Count: y, but the Captain 
wou!d not believe him but carrieth him before the Princes: 

15 Wherefore the princes were wroch with Jere- 
mianh, and ſmote him, and put him in priſon, in the 
houſe of Jonathan the ſcribe ; for they had made thar 
the priſon p. 

p Theſe Princes ſeem more fierce againſt the Prophet than thoſe 
that- were in the time of Jehoiachim, for they proceed here upon 
the Captain's Information,cauſe the Prophet to be beaten,and fend 
him to Priton, a-Priſon within the compaſs of the Court, bad e- 
nough,as appeareth by Feremiah's complait of his condition there 
to the King, wer. 20, and by what followeth in the next Verſe- 

16 4 When Jeremiah was entred into the dungeon, 
and into the || cabins,and Jeremiah had remained there 
many daysq. .. GN 

g The Hebrew words which we Tranſlate Dungeon, lignifie the 
hoz.ſe of the lake ; they certainly ſignifie ſome Pit, or deep hole, or 
place in the Priſon, where were ſome Crlls or Apartments, in 
which they were wont to keep thoſe whom they judged great Ma- 
lefators, or againſt whom they had ſome ſpecial anger, how ma- 
ny days the prophet was forced to abide in this miſerable place it 
is nor ſaid, but it ſhould ſeem by Yerſe 19. that it was until the 
Chaldean Army was returned to the Siege. ; 

17 Then Zedekiah the king fent,and took, him out. 
and the king asked him ſecretly in his houſe, and faid, 
Is their any word from the LORD r, and Jeremiah 
=_ There is ; for, ſaid he, thou ſhalt be delivered 
mro the hand of the king of Babylon. 


r That is, hath God revealed any thing to thee, concerning 
whas will be the iſſue of the return of the Chaldean Army to th. 
Siege of the City ? What needed Zedetiah to have asked this, tc 
whom God by this Prophet had ſo often revealed his Will in thi: 
caſe ? wicked Men are always more curious to know,than carefu 
to believe, obſerve, and obey the Will of God. { But God fel- 
dom or never ſpeaketh good unto them ; Jerem:ah tells him there 
was, but it was a ſad word, viz. That God would certainly deli- 
ver him in-o the hand or power of the King of Babylon. 

18 Moreover, Jeremiah ſaid unto king Zedekiah. 


What have I offended againſt thee, or againſt thy ſer- 
vants, or againſt this people, that ye have put me in 


priſon 7 ? 

£ Thar is, what have I done worthy of Bonds ? I have faithful- 
ly heretofore revealed to you the Mind and Will of God, if this 
hath offended you, I am not to be blamed, I could not but exe- 
cute God's Commands. 

19 Where are now your prophets, which propheſied 
unto you, ſaying, The king of Babylon ſhall not come 
againſt you, nor againſt this land « ? | | 

# You now ſee what kind of Prophets they are, who fed you 
with hopes, that the King of Babylon's Army ſhould return no 
more to the Siege of the City. I told you they would return,you 
had:other Prophets that told you they ſhould not,judge,now who 
were the true Prophets. The Divil in all Ages had ſome that con= 
tradifed the true prophersof theLord: Three hundred falſeProphets 
contradifted one: Micaiah, as to 4ab's going up to Ramoth Gilead, 
and proſpering in that Expedition. There were many that con- 
tradicted 1/aiuh and Jeremiah, and other true Prophets, as to the 
King of Babylon's coming to beſiege H':ruſalem,and his return again 
to that Siege when he had riſen up from it, to meet the Egyptian 
Army ; and as to the length of time in which the Jews thould be 
in Captivity 3 yer, ( to let us ſee Mens madneſs upon their Lults) 
as there ſtill have riſen up in other Generations, falſe Teachers, 
and Flatterers, ſo they have always found more favour than thoſe 
that have dealt more faithfully in revealing God's Will, 

20 Therefore hear now I pray thee, O my lord the 
king w, Þ+ let my ſupplication, I pray thee be accepted 
before thee ; that thou cauſe me nor to terturn to the 


houſe of Jonathan the ſcribe, leaſt I die there x. 

w Though Jeremiah had dealt very faithfully with the King and 
Princes, and they had dealt very hardly and cruelly with him, caſt- 
ing him for no juſt cauſe into the naſty Priſon, and Jeremiah knew 
well enough, that Zedekiah was very ſoon to be difarmed of his 
power, yet (to learn us our duty) he ſpeaks with ail due reſpe& & 
reverence to his Soveraign, though a very bad Man, and one who 
had dealt very ill with him. x This Petition of Jeremiah, ſpeaks 
the Priſon he was in, was in a very inconvenient place, where he 
was in danger of his life.. 


2r Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they 
ſhould commir Jeremiah into*checourt of the priſon y, 
and that they ſhould give him daily a piece of bread 
out of the bakers ſtreet, until all the bread in the city 
were ſpent z. Thus Jeremiah remained 1n the court 


of the priſon a. | 

Go as he was a Priſoner ſtill, but in a freer Air, where he did 
not ſuffer thoſe inconveniencies which he indured in the Hole or 
Dungeon. = Ir is of no great moment to know whether rhe por- 
tion of Bread allowed the Prophet by the” King, were a Loaf ( as 
ſome think ) or a piece of a Loaf ; it was ſuch a proportion as 
could be allowed according to the Proportion which others had, 
and the ſtraits which the Ciry was 1n, and ſo much as ſerved 
to keep him alive. 4 Jeremia# remained here tilk. upon the ſug- 
geſtion of the Princes, he was removed to a worſe place, as we 
{hall read in the ſixth Verſe of the next Chapter ; where he ſraid 
not long, but was again removed to the Court of the Priſon,as we 
read there, verſe 13. where (as it followerh there verſe 28.) he con- 


tinued unmil the City was taken, 


M 1 A HQ 

CH A P. XXXVIII. 

3 is by the Princes, with the K'nos Pevmi 
zr:t0 4 Dungeon ; but is by Ebed-melech, with the pg 1s on 
again, 13. He hath a ſecret conference with the King, in which 
he counſelleth kim by yielding to ſave his Life, 14 23. By che Kings 
command he concealeth the conference from the Princes 24 279: He 
abideth mn Priſon till Jeruſalem is taken, 28. OS 
fe Shephatiah the ſon of Mattin, and Gedaliah 
: the ſon of Paſhur,and Jucal the ſon of Shelemiah, 
and Pafhur the ſon of Malchiah, heard the words that 

Jeremiah had ſpoken to all the people, ſaying a, 
a Here are four of the great Men, Counce!lors, or great Offi- 
as to Zedckiah named, of whom we have no further mention in 
oly writ, nor are they worthy of much inquiry after ;; Jeremiah 
_ now removed into a little freer Air, where his Friends,or 
uch as had a deſire to ſee him, came to him, and it is very likely 
were inquiſitive to know what God would do with the City, hz 
could not bur tell them what he knew of the Mind of God in the 
caſe,and adviſe them the beſt he could. Some of them go to theſe 
Princes,and inform them of what they had heard from the Prophet 


| 2 Thus faith the LORD, He that remaineth i 

this city ſhall die by the ſword, by the Caniack an 

by the _—_ = oy m__ goeth forth to the Chal- 
eans Inall hive: for he ſhall have his li 

and ſhall live 6. , | OT 


b As to what is verſe 3.it is no more than had fo {{ | 7 
been the conſtant tenour of this Propher's Propietivn The Crime 
ſcemeth ro lie in this, that in ſuch a time of extream danger, he 
ſhould repeat this Prophecy, and alſo adviſe the People to leave the 
City, and ſhift for themſelves,by going our to. the Chaldeans,telling 
them thart if they did ſo,though the City would be loſt,and their 
RE it loft, yet - = * comet their Lives, which words 
might 1ncourage many of low and Cowardly Spirits to deſc 
Poſts ; which indeed had been Crime rd Fa bo Jaoparoi nn 
and under ordinary Circumſtances,but- was no Crime now tharGod 
had revealed his Will to the King, Princes and People, that the 
City ſhould be loſt ; there lay now no further Duty upon any to . 
contribute to its defence,but they were obliged to make as good 
proviſions for themſelves as they could ; but theſe wicked Princes 
believed no ſuch thing, therefore they make this a great charge. . 

| 3 Thus faith the LORD, This cicy ſhall ſurely be 
given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army 
which ſhall take it. s 

4 Therefore the princes ſaid unto the king, we be- 
ſeech thee let this man be put to death : for thus he 
weakeneth the hands of che men of war that remain in 
this city, and the hands of all the people, in ſpeaking 
ſuch words unto chem : for this man ſecketh n 
j welfare of this people, but the hurt c. 

c The Prophet now ſeemeth under ſad circumſtances, the Prin- 
ces ſeeks his Life, though for delivering no other Do&rine than 
he had been preaching for: 20 Years ; their pretence was, his dif- 
couraging and weakening the military part of the Ciry,letting them 
know that they laboured in vain, for the City was aot defenſible. 
This they interpret a ſeeking not the welfare of the People, but 
their hurt, though indeed their welfare was that alone which he 
ſought, knowing that there was no other way for any of them ro 
ſave their Lives, but by ſubmitting to the Chatdeaus ; though the 
great Men ( being Perſons God had determined to ruine ) would 
not believe it, and would have the welfare and hurt of the place 
derermined by their Opinions. 

5 Then Zedekiah the king ſaid, Behold, he 3s in 
your hand &,for the king 5s not he :hat can do any thing 
againſt youe, | 

4 That is in your power, either by the Eſtabliſh-d Law againſt 
falſe Prophers, or elie I yield up my power to you, I ſurrender 
him into your hands. Bur neither ot theſe ſecmeth very protable 
for here is no mention of the fitting of the Sanhedrim to judge him . 
as a falſe Prophet, nor of any judicial proceedings of chat Nature: 


' And it ſhould ſeem by Z:dekiah's relieving of him ſoon after from 


the Dungeon, into which they threw him, that he had n - 
dred Jeremiah \o into their <AAx- but he reſerved to _—_ afar 
PE III upon them to corrett their too ſevere dealings with 

im. The meaning ſeems rather to be, if you will do any ſuch 
thing, I ſhall not oppoſe you, but I will not be the Author of ir. 
e I ſee Tam as it were no King, I can do nothing againſt you, you 
will do what you pleaſe.I incline to this ſenſe from the conſidera- 
_ of the favour thewed him by Zedekiah, both before, and after 
TRIS. 


6 Then took they Jeremiah, and caſt him into the 


dungeon of Malchiah te ſon of || Hammelech that was q 5 
in the court of the priſon 4: and they let down Jere- ;þe Los. 


miah with cordse. And in the dungeon there was no 
water but mire, ſo Jeremiah ſank in the mire f. 

d A place much of the ſame nature with that of which we read 
Chap 37: 16- but in another Priſon. e It ſhould ſeem there was no 
paſſage into it by Stairs, ſo as they were forced to let him down 
with Cords. f And in the bottom was nothing but Mire, into 
which the Prophet ſank, in reſpe& of which circumſtances, it was 
a much worſe place than the Dungeon in the Priſon, in Jonathan's 
Houſe appeared to ke, though Jeremiah feared that he ſhould die 
there. Ir is probable thele Princes thruſt him into this place,de- 
ſigning he ſhould die in this hole a miſerable Death, but God 
otherwiſe provided for him. 

7 5 Now when * Ebed-melech the Ethiopian g,ene , 
of the eunuchs which was in the kings houſe þ, heard ; 
that they had pur Jeremiah in the 'dungeon z,(the king 
chen ſicting in the gate of Benjamin) &. 

£ Ebedmelech was unqueſtionably the name of the Perſon; 
though ſome interpret ir + 8" 8 (ervant of the Kings It is 

6 2 


particularly 


Chap. XXXVLUtk 


ot the + Heb: 


Peacss 


'E 


So =7 5 


manger A 
09s CEE am erat bo. 4 AG Cree JI. s os _ 


_ mr een gg = 


SAI 4 clE— Ge EA ne eos ae 


IF 


_ 
8 
Ces > - 
+a &7 


| + Heb. he 
will die. 


Chap. XXXVII:. 
 ftranger,tha 


' but yet the noiſe 


 Feremiah into this miſerable place : 


_ them that Jeremiah would be 


7 E RE 


particularly noted that he was an Erhiopian or a Cuſbite, to Jet us 
know that this Prophet of the Lord found more kindneſs from a 
t was a Native Heathen, than from his own Country- 
e wont to keep Eunuchs in their Houſes 1n 
thoſe Countries, 2 Kings 9-32. Dan. 1.9. As 8.27.1t ſhould ſeem 
the Princes had privately put Jeremiah into this miſerable place, 
of it came to Ebedmelech's Ear,who was attending 
in the Court. & The Gates of the City were places where Prin- 
ces were wont to ſit to execute Juſtice, and to receive Petitions, 
and give Anſwers, 2 Sam. 19. 8. Prov. 31: 23, - 

$ Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's houſe, 


and ſpake to the king, ſaying, i. 

9 My lord the king, theſe men have done evil in all 
that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom 
they caſt into the dungeon, and # he 1s like to die for 
hunger in the place. where he is, for there is no more 


bread in the city /. | 

1 The courage of this good Exnuch was very remarkable, he did 
not ſtay till the King came in, but went to the King, as he was {it- 
ting in the gate of Benjamin, adminittrating Juſtice, or receiving 
ow anſwering Petitions, where doubtleſs he was not alone,and pro- 


bably was attended there,by ſome of thoſe Princes, who had thrown 
Eb:dmelech was not afraid of 


of their cruelty to the King,and tells 
ſtarved to death, thoſe who were alive 
in the City could nor long ſubliſt, for the Stores were almoſt all 
ſpent, and though the King had appointed the propher an allow= 
ance.yet being in ſuch an hole,and there being ſo little Bread lefr 
in theCity,it was not likely there would be much care taken of him. 


10 Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the E- 
thiopian, ſaying, Take from thence thirty men T wich 
thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the 


dungeon before he die m9. 

m There are ſeveral gueſſes why the King commandeth Ebedme- 
lech to take thirty men for the doing of that tor which three or four 
were ſufficient. I think they judge beſt, who think it was to 
guard him againſt any oppoſition- Things are now in a great diſ- 
order, the City being upon the matter taken,and the King himſelf 
was much in the Government of his Princes, and, as may eaſily be 
judged by what went before,& what we ſhall thereafter meer with, 
could not rule them, but was in ſome fear of them, and he did 
not know but ſome of the moſt boiſterous of them, mighr oppoſe 
the execution of this Command of his. The King in his whole 
Story ſeemeth to have been of a much better humour than his 
Predeceſſors,and to have had a kindneſs for the Prophet,though he 
ſuffered himſelf to be miſerably over-ruled by his Courtiers, who 


.men. + Princes wer 


them, but openly cemplains 


were of a much-fiercer temper,and worſe affe&ed to the Prophet. | 


11 So Ebed-melech rook the men with him, and 
went into the houſe of the king under the creaſury, 
and took thence old caſt clouts, and old rotten rags, 
and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jere- 
miah. | | | 

12 And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian ſaid unto Jere- 
miah, put now zheſe old caſt clouts, and rotten rags, 
under thine arm holes, under the cords. And Jere- 
miah did fo. 

12 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took 
him up out of the dungeon,” And Jeremiah remained in 


the court of the priſon ». | 
# The ſence of theſe Verſes is obvious, EbSedmelech having re» 


* ceived a Commiſſion from the King preſently purs it in Execution, 


only becauſe the Dungeon was deep, and full of mire, and the 
Prophet poſſibly not over well cloathed, he prudently takes \.me 
old Clouts, and Rags, and lets them down with Cords, that Jere. 
mah to prevent the galling and macerating his fleſh, mighr pur 
them under the Cords,by which they drew him up : Thus he was 
reſtored to rhe Courr of the Priſon, where he was before this ſug- 
geſtion of the Princes. and where he did abide until the Ciry was 
taken. The reſt of the Chapter is ſpent in a private Conference 
berwixt King Zedekiah and the Prophet, after he was reſtored to the 
Court of the Priſon. ; 

' 14 { Then Zedekiah the king ſent, and took Jere- 


miah the prophet unto him into the || third entry that 


' 55 in the houte of the LORD o; And the king ſaid unto 


Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing : hide nothing from 
me p. 

o Some think that this were better Tranſlated, that is, near the 
houſe of the Lord, and that this third entry or principal entry, was that 
aſcent out of the Kings houſe into the Temple, mentioned 1 K'ngs 10: 5. 
which was one of the things the Queen of Sheba admired, tor it is 
hardly probable that Jeremian being in a Priſon within the com- 
pais of the King's Houſe, the King ſhould, eſpecially at ſuch a 
time. £0 our of his Houſe to ſo publick a place as the Temple, 
for a private Conference with the Prophet. p The King deſires 
him faithfully to tell him what he knew in a buſineſs he ſhould 
inquire of him. | 


15 Then Jeremiah ſaid unto Zedekiah, If I declare 


#t unto thee, wilt thou not ſurely put me to death q ? 


and If I give thee counſe], wilt thou not hearken unto 
mer? 

- 9 Jeremiah had reaſon to caution with the King for his Life, 
confidering the ealje anſwer of the King to the Princes, movin 
for his De-th, verje 4, 5- We muſt imagine Jeremah at this time 


 pnderfno Divine Command, to reveal God's Will in this cale unto 


the King. r Wilt thou net, 1s here, as much as rhou wile not hear- 


" ben unto me. Zedekiah had often been advited by the Propher, bur 


would never take his advice, and the Propet knew it would ve the 
ſame caſe fill, that the King would be over-ruled by a corrupt 


, K = . ; 
Court. and his own averſion, to change his ſlate, as a King, tor 


the Nate of a Priloner. ns 


— —__ 


= 7 4 Þ. Chap. XXXVY1. 


16 So Zedekiah the king ſware ſecretly unto Jere- 
mah, ſaying, As the LORD liveth, * that made us *Ifu. 5+ 
this ſoul, I will not put thee to death,neither will ] give 16. wo 


thee into the hand of theſe men thart ſeek thy life /. 

J Zedekiah ſaith nothing ro the latter part of Jeremiah's Speech 
promifing norhing as to his hearing and obeying his Counſz : As 
to the former he gives him the ſecurity of his Oath, that he would 
neither himſelf ſlay him,by giving any immediate command from 
himſcif, nor'{urrender him up into the hands of thoſe malicious 
Princes, who he perceived ſought his life: The form of his Oath 
1S what was uſual), as the Lord liveth, with an addition, the Lord 
that gave me my life, if I pus thee te death, and if I deliver thee 
: 1 torm carrieth with it a concealed imprecation, Lt the Lord 

o ſo ro me, and more alſo, or let the Lord that gave me this Soul 
take it from me, if I do either of theſe things. Thus he ſecures 
- ang -x to any hard meaſure for his telling him the truth, 
= 5" ould be what might be interpreted a capital crime to 

17 Then ſaid Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus ſaich 
the LORD, the God of hoſts, the God of Iſrael, if 
thou wilt aſſuredly go forth unto the king of Bibylons 
Princes, then thy foul ſhall live z,and this city ſhall not 
be burnt wich fire,and thou ſhalt live and thine houſe . 
: ? That is, thou ſhalt live. « And thou ſhalt ſave the City from 

eing burned with fire, and thy Wives and Children from Death 
God did certainly know that Z:dekiah would not do this, thouoh 
7 - S 


xhort him to do it, and to an 'omitſe ; ; 
as left inexcuſable,in his not favin ge nk rag ar Cy he 
I8 Buc if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Ba- 
bylon's princes, then ſhall this City be given into the 
hand of the Chaldeans, and they ſhall burn it with fice, 


and thou ſhalt not eſcape out of their hand w. 

w As he before had uſed Exhorations and Promiſes, ſo here he 
uſeth Threatnings to perſwade him to that which indeed wis in 
his power to do, but God infallibly knew that he would not do 
The end of God in which could be no other than to leave him with 
out excuſe, in not obeying what God commanded, 
| 19 And Zedekiah the king ſaid unco Jeremiah, F 
; am afraid of the Jews, that are fallen ro the Chalde- 
ans, leſt they deliver me into their hand, and they 
mock me x. 

x But if Zedekiah went out according to the Prophet's advice, 
_ delivered himſelf, what needed he to tear his Subjetts fear 
_ deſerted the City ) delivering of him ? Ir ſeems rather there= 
- 96g to be the ſence, leſt the Chaldeans when I have vielded my 
= to them, ſhould deliver me into the hands of thoſe Jews which 
—_ fallen to them, and they ſhould mock me, ſo as he ſeems to 

e more concerned for his Honour than for his own Life, and his 
Families, and the whole City ; thus often great Perſons are more 
patient of Death, than of Reproach and Dithonour, 

20 But Jeremiah ſaid, They ſhall nor deliver zhee y; 
Obey, I beſeech thee, the voice of the LORD, which 
I ſpeak unto thee: ſo it ſhall be well unto thee,and thy 


ſoul ſhall live. 

y The Chaldeans ſhall not do ſo baſe an at, but deal with thee 
as with a Prince. z Let not this therefore be a Temptation to thee 
ro diſobey the Command of God, - which if thou docſt thou ſhale 
live,though not in that ſplendor jn which thou now liveſt, yet in 
a much more comfortable ſtate, than thou wilt do if they take the 
City by ſtorming. 

21 But if thou refuſe to go forth, this is the word 

chat the LORD hath ſhewed me : 

 22\ And behold all the women that are left in the 
king of Judah's houſe, ſþ2/7 be brought forth to the king 
of Babylon's princes z, and thoſe women ſhall ſay, 
f Thy friends have ſer thee on, and have prevailed + Heb. 
againſt thee, thy feet are ſunk in the mire a, and they 2 of 


Ire turned away back b. | Ps - 
2 Thou that art afraid of the inſultings of Men that are thy 
>SubjeCts,ſbalr fall under the Inſultings and Taunts of the Women ; 
either the Court Ladi:s who were left when Fehojakin was carried 
away, or the Women belonging to thine own Court ſhall be taken 
and brought forth to the King of Babylen's Princes, to be diſpoſed 
of at their pleaſure, and theſe Women ſhall deride thee, and 
tell thee, for this thou maiſt thank thy hearkening to thy Prieſts 
and falſe Prophets called in the Hebrew, the Men of thy peace, be- 
cauſe they ſoothed up the King with the promiſes of peace. a Now 
they have left thee in evils out of which thou canſt not eſcape. 
b And as for them whom thou believedſt and truſtedit to, and by 
whoſe words thou art brought into theſe Snares, they have for. 
faken thee, every one ſhifting for himſelf. 
23 So they ſhall bring out all thy wives and thy chil- 
dren to the Chaldeans, and thou ſhalt not efcape out 
of their hands, but ſhall be taken by the hand of the 
king of Babylon : and Þ thou ſhale caufe this cicy,to be + jq,s. 


Hurnt with fire c. thou ſhalt 
c This is no more than wht was ſaid b:fore,only here repeated, burn, &c- 

as an Argument to periwade his obedience in furrendring himſelf, 

if not for the Cities 1ake, yet for his own ſake,and for his Childrens 

ſake, for he aſſures the King thar not himſclf only, but his Wives 


Nor in his power to do it, yet he doth not judge it vain for him to 


— 


8 | and Children alſo would otherwiſe fall into the hands of the Babylo= 


1ians.& their Reffle&ion upon him tor the Mitery he had brought 
apon them, would be no ſmall aggravation of his AfliQtion. 
24 CT Then ſaid Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no 


man know of theſe words, and thou ſhalt not die 9. 
4 Theſe words ſufficiently let us know that Zedekiah ſtood in 
wwe of his Courtiers, and we might probably think, that had ir nor 


been for them, he would have 'done better. "This is the righteous 
judgment 


Ch 


+ He 
They 
(lent 
him, 


a 
19 0,Q.4 Le etets Akbar AT Ware ILL Cs 


Chap XXXIX. 


+ Heb. 
They were 
(lent from 
him, 


T7ERME 


Judgment of God, thoſe that will not ſanfifie the Lord of Hoſts, 
and make him their fear, ſhall fear Men whom to fear is much more 

baſe and ignoble. 
25 Butif che princes hear that I have talked with thee, 


and they come unto thee, and ſay unto thee, Declare 
unto us now what thou haſt ſaid unto the king, vide it 
not from us, and we will not put thee to death ; alſo 


what the king ſaid unto thee e. 

e It could hardly be imagined that Zedckiah ſhould have this 
private Di:courſe with Jeremia-, but ſome or other of his Courtiers 
would take notice of it, but yet it argues that this poor Prince was 
in a m:ſerable ſubje&ion to them, that he could diſcourſe with no 
body, but they muſt come and inquire what he ſaid. 

26 Then thou ſhalt ſay unto rhem, 1 preſented m 
ſupplication before the king, that he would not cauſe 
me tO return to Jonathans houſe to die taere f. 

f The King inſtrufs the Prophet in caſe the Princes ſhould be 
inquiſitive to know what diſcourie piſſed betwixt the King and him, 
to tell them, that he petitioned him that he might be ſentno more 
to the Priſon in the Houſe of Jonathan, of which he complained, and 
petitioned the King to be freed from it, Chap. 37. 20. 

' 27 Then cameall the princes to Jeremiahg, and asked 


him h, and he told them according to all theſe words that 


the king had commanded 3: So they lefc # off ſpeaking 


with him,for the matter was not perceived &. 

g As the King ſuſpe&ed ſo it came to paſs; the Kings private 
Diſcourſe with the Prophet took wind, h and all the Princes then at 
Court came and inquired of Feremiah what was the ſubſtance of his 
Diſcourſe, i Jeremiah anſwered them according as the King had 
dire&ed. A Man is not bound in all caſes to ſpeak the whole truth, 
much lefs to thoſe who have nothing to do to inquire of us which 
theſe Princes had not. & By this means the Princes never knew the 
matter of this Diſcourſe. 

28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the priſon, 


until theday that Jeruſalem was taken, and he was zhere 


when Jeruſalem was taken /. 

I Thus God hath ſeveral waysto hide his People in an evil day ; he 
hid Joſiah from it in the Grave, he hid Noah in an Ark, Lot in Zoar, 
Jeremy in a Priſon, which in probability was a ſafer place for him, 
than the Land of Benjamin, whether he would have gone, had not 
I:jah ſtopt him, chap. 37.12, 13+ Conquerours have commonly the 
ereateſt kindneſs, for thoſe whom they find under the frowns of 
the conquered, eſpecially when that which hath made them ſo hath 
been ſomething ſpoken, or done in the favour of the Conquerors, 


CHAP. XXXIX. 


Teruſal:m is taken : Zedekiahs Sons are /tatn ; His Eyes put out : He is ſent to 
Babylon : All the Nobles of Judah are ſlain : The City s burnt, and the 
Chief of the People carried Captrve, 1 to. Nebuchadnezzars Charge 
concerning Jeremiah, 11 I4. Gods Promile to Bdeb-melech, 


15—18. X 


N the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the 
tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Baby- 
lon 4, and all his army, againſt Jeruſalem, and they 


beſieged it. | 
s This exaly agreeth with the Hiſtorical part of Scripture, 
2 Kings 25+ 1. and with the repetition of it, Chap. 52. 4 This 
Month was called Tebeth, Efher 3. 16. and anſwers to part of our 
December and January. Princes are ſaid to do that which is done 
by their great Officers by their Order, yet ſome think Nebuchadrezzar 
came firſt in Perſon, though he quickly left his Army, and was not 
there at the taking of the City. EE 
2 Andin the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth 


month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken 
up 9. 

; The Siege laſted a year and half, for it was the fourth Menth 
of Zedekiahs eleventh year before it was taken, it is ſaid here to be 
broken up, becauſe their way of taking fortified places then, 
was by beating down the Walls of the Belieged with Iron Rams 
and Engines, as we now do with great Guns. This Kingdom had 
now held 380 years, from Rehoboam rheirfirſt King, in which they 
had had twenty Kings ( velides Arhaliah.)) The Ten Tribes had 
been now in Captivity 130 years, ſo as the Kingdom of Iſr a!l ſtood 
but 250 years after the diviſion, in which time they had had 18 
Princes, but of ſeveral Families ; all the Kings of Judah were of the 
Houſc of David, lineally deſcended from him. 

2 Aud all the princes of the king of Babylon came 
ir, and fate in the middle gate c,ever Nergal-ſharezer, 
Samgar-nebo Sar-ſechim; Rab-ſaris, Nergal-ſharezer, 
Rab- mag, with al! the relidue of che princes of the king 
of Babyion 4. : > 

c All the great Men of 2:5ylor, that were imployed iti the condut 
of the Babylonian Army ( the City being taken by Storm, or ſurprize) 
entred into ir, but rcited at che miadle Gate, 'T he City they lay was 
incompa!l-4 with two Walls, before they came to the Wall of the 
Temple; the Gate in the inner Wal!, is C:pnoſed to have been thar' 
which is called the middle Gate, they woutd not at ficſt, adventure in 
further, the City being large and well fortified, there might have 
been ſome Traps ijaid for them, they would therefore have their 
Soldiers firlt clear the Stre2rs, and ſearch all places, that they might 
enter further into the City withour hazarding their p-rſons, « Some 
Interpreters have examined the lignification of the Names of theſe 
Princes, bu: I kaow of no uſe it can be to us whether they were the 
Names of the perſons, or ſignificarive of the Offices they bare. 


4 \ And it came to p.1s, that when Zedekiah the king. 
of Judah ſaw them, aud allche. men of ware, then they.. 


fled. and went forth ourof the city by nightf, by the way 
of the &ings garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls, 


and he went out the way ot che plain g. 


| weakned, as on a ſudden they might dig it through : poſſibly, theſe 


M : : " H. Chap RYAN! l; 
; © It Mould ſeem that the City was taken by a Sarprize, the | 
; Coaldeans battering th: Walls as Pas with _. as: a Fi q | 
re War, on a ſudden made ſuch a breachas gave them a liberty | 
- _ in. f The King either heard of it, or poflibly might be in 
: my acc where he might ſee it, then he begins to think of eſcaping, 
ut ror greater privacy ſtayeth till he had the covert of ths N;obr. 

g md then goeth out towards the plains of Jericho, for there the 
Chaideans overtcok him, as weread in the next Verſ. ) he 15 ſaid here 
to have gone by the way of the K'ngs Garden by the Gate b:twixt the rwo 
Walls. It is very hard for usat this diſtance of time to pretend to 
any certainty in determining the way by which he made hiseſcape 

They ſeem to judge moſt probably, that think that the King had 
Prepared for himieIfa private paſſige out of his Garden betwixt two .»\| 

Walls, leading to the Wall of the City, which they had befare ſo ſl; 


: 
: 


- 


particulars are the rather ſet down, to ſhew us how 
what he had revealed in this matter to the Prophet, dee 
God ſet the Prophet, Y-r. 3, To prepare fuff for r2moving and to 
remove by day 71 the ſight of the p-oplc from his own place to another 
place, and Per. 4 To goout at even in their ſight, as they that goout inty 
Capt.vity. To dig through the wall in their ſight, and to carry out 
thereby : In their fight to bear it on is ſhoulders. and carry it forth in the 
twilight ; to cover his face, fo as not to ſee the ground, and Yer. 6. he 
t>1d him, that in all this he was to be a fign ; and Yer. 10. tells im 
Tow burden concerneth the Prince in Jeruſalem ( who was that Zedekiah ) 
Per. 12. Aud the Prince that u among them, ſhall bear upm his ſblder 
in the twilight, and ſhall go forth, they ſhall dig through the Wall, to go W 
thereby he ſhall cover his face, that hz ſee mt the ground with his eyes. 


5 But the Chaldeans army purſued afier them, and 
overtook Zedekian\ in the plains of Jericho, and when 
they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchad- 
rezzar king of Babylon, toRiblah in the iand of Hamath; . 
where he f gave judgment upon him h. | f Heb: 
X h Fe God by his providence fulfilled his Tbreatning by his ſake with 

ropiet Ezekiel, Chap, 17. 12 Riblah was upon the Borders of Canaan #1 jitdg: 
7 ame from Numb. 34. Ir. it was in the Land of Hamah of ems: 
w ich we read, 2 Kings 17. 24. beingone of thoſe Provinces in the 
omunion of the King of Aſfjria, from whence he brought Meri 
” place them in the Land of 1/ael after that he had conquered the 
en Tribes. It is not uſual for Princes upon Conqueſts to fit iri 
Judgment upon princes conquered, but the reaſon of it inthis caſe 
—_ becauſe Zedekiah, was a Tributary to the King of Babylon, and 
"x ubjett to his power, having made a Covenant with him, and 
ecured his Allegianceby his Oath to him, and then rebelled againſt 
him, as we read, Ezek 17. 13, 14,15, 06, 17, 18. 


6 Thenthe king of Babylonſlew the ſonsof Zedekiih 
in Riblah before his eyes : alſo the king of Babylon flew 
all the nobles of Judah 3, | 


; Thus the ſtubbornneſs of this prince, and his Nobles, proved 
the Ruine of his Family, and of themſelves, and of thz whole 
people The Nobles were great Authors of this miſchief ws 
brought Zedekiah into that obſtinacy which he ſhewed to the pro» 
phets Admonitions and Exhortations upon them, therefore a more 
exemplary puniſhment is taken. The Hebrew calls the Nobles white - 
Men, erther from their white Garments, or from that Canary of Spirit 
which ſhould be found in perſons of their Quality. gs 

_ 7 Moreover he put out Zedekiahs eyes, and bound _ 
him T with chains to carry him to Babylon &. f Heb! 

k Thus the two Prophecies were fulfilled, that of this Prophet, with two 
Chap. 34. 4. that Zedekiah ſhould not die-by the Sword: and that of brazen 
Ezekiel, that he ſhould not ſes Babylon, though he ſhould die there, Ezek. 12 chains or | 
13: Riblah was at great diſtance from Babylon, where the King was fetrers. 
at this time probably to be nearer his Army, while the Siege laited at 
Jeruſalem, and to give orders about it, and to divert himſelf, the 
place being a pleatant place, and the King not willing to trouble 
himfelf abour the Siege to go thither in perſon, but the Siege being 
ouer, he now removeth to Babylon, and carrieth Zedekiah and the 
reſt of the priſoners along with hin. 


8 4 And che Chaldeans burnt the kings houſe, and 
the houſes of the peopte with fire; and brake down the 
walls of Jeruſalem 7. 


IStill it 1s obſervable, how punftual the Holy Ghoſt is in recors 
ding the fulfillings of the words of the Lord. This Prophet, had 
at leaſt four times foreteld, that this would be one conſequent of 
the Kings and Nobles ſtubbornneſs, in not ſubmitting to the King 


of Babylon. See Chap.37- 8. and 38. 18, 23. | 

9 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard, ; 5 
carried away captive into Babylon the reninant of che C rs 
people that remained in the city, and thoſe that fell pro” BY 


away, that fell co him, wlth the reſt of the people that + Heb: 
remained m. chief of the 

m This Nebuzar-adan was in that place, which we call the Provoſt- **ecutioners} 
Marſhal, with then it was call'd the Captain of the Guard, and here are QI/iaughter\ 
rwo ſorts of Priſoners reckoned up, whom he carried away: 1. Such 22, and 
as after the Armies were come into Judea had yielded themſelves. {2 V. 168%, 
2+ Such as when they took the City,zremained. in it not being T7: ; 
before conſumed by the Sword, Famine, and Peſtilence ; and ſo i |} 
were taken upon the ſtorming or ſurprizal of the City. Both ſorts p- 
were carried away Pciſoners althcugh it 1s probable that the Con« 
querour treated the fo:mer much mors gently than he treated the 
jatrer, as is uſual in tholt Calcs. 

10 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard, lef 
of the poor of the people which had nothing, in the 
land of Judah, and gave them vineyards; and fields ,.. 

+ ac the ſame time ». | IE | & TE 
' # This is uſual. with Conquerors, for whoſe profit it is not that F Heb. _ 
the Countries conquered by them. ſhould lie waſte, like Wilder- 7 the ſam 
neſſes, but be peopled, and manured that they may render ſome © 
Tribure.to them ; withal the Tuſtice of God is ofcen feen in this, 


.* 
© 37D. Ate” I, ERIE - A —_ EET —Y 3 
age TITS n Mind "4 —_ > Fe bh 
ws een ea ca eG er rata A SAC AA A Eto Deer IS Cer ern oro : : —x EN : 
ry — —— A on Ti = S go _ — = <-— _ = 
LSY © .  W—_— Cw ww OA wy mw 7 
” 


wee - * 
KI" D3; = AGES LG m— a -$5:xx; 
00 C__ —_ = OB. 
—_— — - 


—_ 
OY 


—— 


© ou wGwwy owe nn 
— 9 os 2” a 14 7 


Ro __—_— ES > 0 


%- CM 


. » 
*. Y » at >» 
ha 
b pemynypur om mtr mr DI NT CIAL TY 0 
—— — —  —. — 
- =_- —_ _ 


| thus reſtoring to them ofr-tua:-'s om advantage by rhe hands of 
& 7 Enna" 


-LiES 


Heb. 


Heb, 
thine 


2 


1aP. XL, 


the hand captain of the guard, ſaying, 


| ſome of the Jews, that had eſcaped our of the City 


_ findiclated more fully, 


 Afairs, though the Princes at firſt f:eed him from Priſon, the 


- of this Man, and ſo cannot tell how otherwiſe God dealt with him; 


3 B R.E 


Enemies that prove Conquerors, thoſe Eſtates which in corrupt | 
times their proper Magittrats by violence and oppreſſion took 
from them, or at leaſt more than compenſating their loſſes by atts; 
of Violence and Injuitice. : 

1z Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, gave 


charge concerning Jeremiah fF to Nebuzar-adan wal 


12 Take him, and | look well to him, | 
harm, but do unto him even as he ſball fay unto thee 0. 
o It is more than probable, that Nebuchadnezzar had been informed 


ſome of the chief Commanders of his Army, who had it from 
to the Chaldean 


Army, that Jeremiah had conſtantly rold the King, and the Nobles, 
that the Chaldeans ſhould rake the City, and as ſtedily perſwaded 


by 


= i 4: i. 


aTheſe words refer to the forty ſecond Chapter,where ber ins the 
Revelation which Jeremia: had from God, for all this Chapter wy : 24 
next are no Prophecy, bur only an Hiſtorical Narration of ſome 
Paſſages after the taking of the City, and ſo cannot be oO 
Prophecy, but are a piece of Hiſtory previous to that tec 
b Rama was a City intne Tribe of Benjamin near Gibeon od 
31. 15. Cc Jeremiah was by miſtake and expreſly contrary to the 


Kings Orders, Chap. 39.11. manacled and carried away amongſt the 


and do him no | other Priſoners ; probably the Captain of the Guard at thar p'ace 


call'd over his Priſoners, and amongſt them he f . her 
_— to his ExpeQarion. s ET ORG Taaphet 
2 Andthe captain of the guard took Jeremi 
: l tah, and 
ſaid unto him, The LORD thy God hath pronounced 
| this evil upon this place. 
3 Now the LORD hath brought iz, and done accor- 


both the King and Princes and +46 16 to ſurrender it to them, and 
prevent the effuſion of Blood, and that he was impriſoned for this, 
and had been a great ſufferer that way, and that this made this Heas- | 
then Prince ſo kind to the Prophet, as to give this order. In the ' 


mean time the Hand cf God is to be taken notice of, who undoubt- | 


edly put this into the Heart ef this Pagan Prince 3 and we may learn, 
that none ſhall loſe any thing at laſt by being fairhful to the Com» 
mands of God, though they may be for the preſent loſers. What we 
t anſlate, look well to him, is in the Hebrew, ſet thine eyes upon him ; and 
expounded by the following words, commanded kim to do himno 
harm, and togive or grant to him, whatever he deſired. 

12 So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard ſent, 
and Nebuſhasban, Rab-ſaris and Nergal-ſharezer, Rab- 
mag, the king of Babylons princes, 
they ſent, and cook Jeremiah out of the court 


n of Anikam, the ſon of Shaphan, that he ſhould 


carry him home : So he dwelt among the people p. 

> The King of Babylows Officers were very Religious to their 
Princes order, and rake the P:ophet out of Priſon ; for the. latter 
part of the 4th Verſe it ſeems by an anticipation of what we ſhall 
and particularly Chap. 45. orelſe ſo ought 
to be-rranſlared yer, as appearerh- from the tirſt Verſe of the next 
Chapter, from whence it 's plain that che P. opker was alfo bound in 
chains, amongſt them that were carried away captive - and not diſcharged 
until he came at Kamah, which probably might be in that hurry of 


under Officersnort ſodiligently obſerving their ſpecial chargerelating 
to Jeremiah, the negle& of which th: Captain of the Guard obſerving 
when he came as far as Ramah, himſelt took care in it, as we ſhall 
find,ch.40.after which,upon his choice,he was committed to Geaal:ah 
the Son of 4hikam, whom the King of Bebylon made Governour over 


the Countrey. 
IF Now the word of the LORD came unto 


Jeremiah, while he was ſhut upin the court of the priſon, 
ſaying 9, | 

9 Theſe words let us know that theſe four Verſes ( which con- 
tain moſtly a Promiſe to Ebedmelech for his kindneſs to Jeremiah 
while he was in the Dungeon of Mal.hiah of which' we read, 
Chap. 38.6, 7, 8,9, 10, t«. 
the things mentioned in the foregoing Verles. 


16 Go and ſpeak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian 7, 
ſaying, Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
Iſrael, Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for 
evil and not for good, and they ſhail - be accompliſhed in 


that day before thee /. | 
r Ezedmelech is here again called the Ethi-pian to the reproach of the 
Jews, that a ſtranger ſhould ſhew more kindneſs to a Prophet of 
the Lord than any of that Nation ro whom he was ſpecially ſent ; 
which was a Typ: of the calling of the Gentiles, and rej-&tion of the 
Jews. [God affures Ebedmedech, the Ciry ſhould be takenand burnt, 
and the People carried into Captivity. 
17 But I wiil deliver thee in that day, faith the 


LORD, and thou ſhalt not be given into the hand of 


the men of whom thou ar: afraid r. 

+ But promiſerh Ebedmelech he ſhould be delivered in thatevilday, 
and, whether he fearzd the Chaldeans, that he ſhould loſe his Lite 
by them when they ſhould break up the City, or the Princes whom he 
had anger'd by complaining to the King oftheig hard uſage of the 
Prophet, he ſhould come into none of their Power. 

18 For I will ſurely deliver thee, and thou ſhalt not. 


fall by the ſword «4, but * thy life ſhall be for a prey 
unto thee w, becauſe thou haſt put thy truſt in me, 


faith the LORD x. 

« For God would deliver him, ſo as he ſhould not die by the 
Sword. w But how little eIſe ſoever he ſaved, he ſhould fave his Life. 
x Becauſe he had put hisrruft in God, not fearing the wrath of Men in 
the doing of what was his Duty. Weread no more in Holy Writ 


only may be aſſured that he was nor ſlain by the Chaldeans. And 
from this we may obſerve, r. How kind God hath always declared 
himſclfro thoſe who have ſhewed the leaſt kindneſs, ro thoſe thar 
have been his true and faithful Miniſters. 2 Thar the root of ſuch. 
good Works as God rewardeth muſt be Faith, atruſting in the Lord: 
3. That thoſe who do good Works out of a principle of Faith, ma 
yet be incumbred with {laviſh fears. | 
CHAP. ML 
Jeremiah. being ſet free by Nebuchadnezzar, go*th to Gedaliah, 1 6. 
To whom theremaining 7ews repair, 7 —=12. Johananrevealing lſhmaels 


Conſpiracy, 1s not believed, 13 16. 


of the piiſon, and committed him unto Gedaliah, the |. 


mentions a matter that happened before | 


ding as he hath ſaid, becauſe ye have finned againſt the 
LORD, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this 
thing 15 come upon you &. 
d This Pagan Commander could ſee that which the bj 

would not underſtand ; they ſaid, wherefore us = ——_— - _ 
upon us ? Nebuzar-adan knew wherefore and gives God the glor af 
his Maſters Vi&ory,as alſo of his own fairhfulneſs,ſaying God 7 
but done what he ſaid, brought the evil which he had pronounced 
againſt that City, he alſo acknowledgeth Gods Juſtice, that this evi1 
was come upon them, becauſe of their fins. Thus, the Men of 
Tyre and Siam, and of Nineveh ( and according to our Saviours 
| words ) ſhall riſe up in Judgment, againſt the Jews that lived in our 
; Saviours time ; and Nebuzar-adan another day ſhall riſe up -in 
Judgment againſt thoſe Fews that lived in Jeremiah: time and ſhall 
condemn them. 1 7 


4 And now behold I looſe thee this day from the 
chains which || were upon thine hand : if it ſeemeth good 
unto thee, to coine with me into Babylon, come, and 
7 I will look well unto thee : bur if it ſeem ill unto thee 
to come with me into Babylon, forbear : behold, all the 
land is before thee : whither it ſeemeth good and con- 

venient for thee to go, thicher go e. wo 

e Nebuzar-adan, like a faichful Servant, remembers his Maſters 


greater favour rhan to any others of his Priſoners ; he 
others by his righr of Conqueſt to what they ſhould do, Haw bs _ 
the Prophet a liberty ro chuſe whether he would go to Babylon, or 
ſtay at Jeruſalem in his own Councrey, he promiſed him that if he 
would goto Bebylon, he would take a particular care of him. 


5 Now while he was not yet gone back f, he ſaid, 


of Shaphan g, whom the king of Babylon hath made 
governcur over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him 
among the people : or go whereſoever it ſeemeth con- 
venient for thee rogo. Sothe captain of the guard gave 
" victuals and a reward, and let him go þ. 

rt 1s not much material whether we interpr 
| tioned of Jeremiah or G:aaliah: if we Kron bag ; brewery * ; 
{ ſenſe is, That before Jeremiah was gone out of the preſenee of 
. Nebuzar-adan, he either by his ſilence or by ſome declaration of his 
: Mind that is not here recorded; declaring that he was more inclined 
' to ſtay in his own Countrey, Netuzar- adan bid him Go back &c 
{If we underſtand it of Geds44h, the ſenſe muſt be, becauſe Gedaliah 
1s not to come back any more to me Gozhou to him &c, g Weread 
! that the King of Babylos left Gedaliahas his Vice-Roy or Depur in 
Judah. What he was, more than the ſon of Ahikam, and Rs 
' child of Shaphan, the Scriprurertells us nor, only that he was leftby 
' the King of Babylon as Ruler over the people he thought fit to bs, 
; 2 Kings 25. 22. probably he was one of them, who, during the 
| Siege, had gone out to the Kingof Babylon, to him the Captain of the 
; Guard direQterh the Prophet, bur gives him liberty, to dwell where 
; he pleaſeth. þ So ſends lim away. with ViRtuals and a Reward 
Ie is more than probable that the King of Babylon had heard from 
! ſome of the Jews, who, during the Siege had made an eſcape to his 
Army, that the Scope of the Prophets Prophecies were for the 
+ +7 a of the City, and the Jews: ſubmiſſion to him as was before 
ſaid. 
6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the ſon of 
 Ahikam, co Mizpah i, and dwelt wich him among the 
| people that were left in the land, 
| # Mizpah was built by 4ſa, 1 Kings 15. 22. or rather enlarged o 
! further builr, for we read of it. as a Cit £ p 
| 0 logos dr ue | y belonging to the Tribe of 


;the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the fon of 
Ahikamgovernourin the land, and had committed unto 
; him, men, women and'children, and ofthe poor of the 
tend, of chem that were not- carried away captive to 
'Babylon. 


8 Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ith- 
| mael the ſon of Nethaniah,, and Johanan and Jonathan 
'the ſons of Kareah, and Seraiah the ſon of Tanhumeth 
and the ſons of Ephai the Netophathice, and Jezaniah 
ithe ſon of a Maachathite, they and their men &. 

k Ttis moſt likely that theſe Captains wich their Forces, were no 


He word which came to Jeremiah from the LOR Da, 
after that Nebuzar-adan the capcain of the guard 
had lethim go from Ramah þ, when he had taken him 
being b-un4 in || chains among all that were carried 
away captive of Jeruſalem and Judah which were carried 


away captive into Babylon «, | 


'newly raiſedand formed Companies, for to what purpoſe ſhould that 
be when their Ciry and whole Countrey was loſt ? But ſome Com- 
manders of Parties, - which either were within the City till it was 
taken, and thenefcaped our; or-were about before ſome were in the 
Countrey,and were not ſa much regarded by the Chaldeans, who were 

: more intent upon the Conqueſt of the Ciry,than purſuing theſe little 


' Parties, who they knew could do themrnv hurt, Theſe hearing thar 
the 


Ch er | 


orders to him about the Propher, Ghap. 39. 11. and offers Feremiah/ 


Go back alſo to Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, the ſon 


!! Or, azz 
upon thine 
hands, 

T Heb. 


I will [es 


mine eyes 
upon thee, 


| 7 5 Now: when all the captains of the forces which'® 2 Kings 
' were in the fields, even they and their men heard that. 25- 23e 


ALS at el 4 L 


Sm. AS RA A. 


NN CES ABKCBISSES 


EY Eo II 


ana 4 


ai; we CS 


ES 3 Lawn. hs 


bs OGDLD n eat to OR 


< I 4 Inpoitlss wr 3 


Chap. XL, 


+ Heb. 
To ſtand 
before, 


T Heb. 
20 frike 
thee 1n 


7-0 
the buſineſs was over, and a Deputy Governour ſet up, who was 
of their owa Country, and a man of a good ingnuous Temper, 
out. of the love they had to their Native Countrie come unto him. 
Of :!1eſe Captains weread little ſave 1hmae!, ( of whom we ſhall 
afterwards read more ) nor are we at all concerned to ſeek their 
Genealogy. 

9 And Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam. the ſon of Sha- 

phan,ſware unto themand to their men, ſaying /, Fear 
not to ſerve the Chaldeans, dwell in the land, and 
ſerve the king of Babylon, and it ſhall be well with 
you 7. 
_ IThey might reaſonably ſuſpe& tharthe Chaldeans would have 2 
jealous Eyeupon any conflux of People to Jeruſalem eſpecially Mi- 
litary Men, and therefore be ſomething ſuſpicious of him who 
was the Chaldean Deputy Governour. the ſecuring of them from 
fears on this account was the caſe of this voluntary Oath taken by 
Geaaliah, m He incourageth them to be Servants to the Chaldeans 
and to dwell in the Land, aſſuring them that if they would, they 
fhould fare well, he was well enough aſſured of the Chaldeans fan 
vour,that if they would livepeaceablyin their ownLand,theyſhould, 
they would not come any more to carry them away Capiive. 

ro As for me, Behold I will dwell at Mizpah, f to 
ſervethe Chaldeans, which will come unto us » : but 
ye, gather ye wine and ſummer-fruits, and oy], and 
put zhem in your veſlels, and dwell in your cities that 


ye have taken o, 

» Thatis, I have made choice of M:zpah, a City upon the Fron- 
tiers, where I intend to make my reſidence, it being a conventent 
place for me to receive orders from the king of Babylon, and to ma» 
nage State matters» o But doye live in the Country, and gather 
ſuch Fruits as the Country aftordetf, do not fear being ſtript or 
Tpoiled of them, but do as you uſeto do in the times of greateſt 
Peace, and Security. | 

1t Likewiſe when all the Jews that were in Moab, 
and amongſt the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that 
werein all the countries, heard that the king of Baby- 
lon had left'a remnant of Judah, and that he had ſet 
over them Gedaliah the fon of Ahikam, the ſonof 


Shaphan. 

12 Even all the Jews returned out of allplaces whither 
they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to 
Gedaliah unto Mizpah, and gathered wine, and ſum- 


mer fruits very much. 

p Probably upon the King of Babylon firſt invading Judah, many 
fled, and more as he went on tin his Conqueſts over -running the 
Conntry, and it is likely at the taking of the City many eſcaped, 
and fl:d into ſeveral Countries as they had opportunity, or judged 
this or that Country would be ſafeſt, ſome fl:d to Moab ; ſome to 
Ammon ſome to Ed'm, ſome one way ſome another : But when they 
heard that the King of Babylon had tet a Governour of their jown 
Religion and Country over them they came baek to him. and there 
being few People lefc in the Land, which-was of it ſelf wonder- 
fully fruitful, they gathered a great plenty of Grapes, and other 

ummer-frnits which the Country produced. 
13 CMoreover, Johanan the ſon of Kareah, and all 
the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came 


to Gedaliah to Mizpah g. 

q They had been with him.before,Yer. 8.9.but now they come 
to diſcover a conſpiracy againſt his Life. 

14 And ſaid unto him, Doſt thou certainly know 7 
that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath ſent Ithmae! 
the ſon of Nethaniah [|to ſlay thee 2 { But Gedaliah 


th: ſon of Ahikam believed them not ?. 

r Doeft thou for doeſt thou not, for not is plainly underſftond ay 
the ſence makes evident. { Whether this Baat/; bz a proper name 
of the King of the Ammonites, or as fome thing an appellativeName, 
ſignifying the Lady or the 2uccn Regent, 1s incertain. What mace 
the Prince of the 4mmonites do t'11s, can be but gueſſed, probably the 
old hatred they had to 1/rael, or hopes that they ſhould have tie 
better fiſhing in theſe Waters when they were troubled. 7 Gedaliah 
ſeems a Man of a good Humor, not roo credulous and belieycs 
not the Information. 


15 Then Johanan the ſon of Kareah ſpake to Geda- 
liah in Mizpah ſcreetly, ſaying, Let me go, I pray the 
and I will ſlay Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, and no 
man ſhall know it: wherefore ſhould he ſlay thee, that 
all the Jews bi:h are gathered unto thee ſhould be 


ſcattered, and theremnant of Judah periſh #. 

« Diſcerning that Gedaliah took no great notice of his words 
ſpoken to him in the preſence of the other Captains, he goeth tc 
him ſecretly, offereth him his Service to prevent the ſtroke, if he 
might have Commiſſion from him.; mindeth him that if he dio 
not value his own Life, yet he ought to confider what a conditi» 
on the People would be in, in cafe he were cut off, they were 
now but a {mall Remnant, and then that Remnant alſo would periſh 

16 ButGedaliah the ſonof Ahbikam, ſaid unto Joha- 
nan the ſon of Kareah, Thou ſhalt not dothis thing, 


for thou ſpeakeſt falſly of Iſhmael . 
w Thus God dementates thoſe whom he deſigneth to deſtroy 
Gedaaliah in this ſheweth an excellent Temper not to be over credu- 
lous and ſuſpcious, Charity: thinks no ill, but not thar prudence 
which became a Chief Magiſtrate, He ought ro have been watch- 
fal againſt one, againſt whom he had received ſuch an information 
which weſhall in the nextChap. find he was not,but was ſlain by him 
| CHAP. XLI 

Iſhmael, under # collour of friendſhip killeth Gedaliah ans others, both 
Jews and Chaldeans, r,-<-9. He purpoſeth to carry the Reſidue Captive 
ro:he Ammonites, but they are reſcued from him by Johanan, who in= 
rende:b tofles into Egypt, 1c==+18, [4 


EET 


Chap. XL} 
2 K'ng 
25s 25, Ul! 


E MT AH 


2 N OW it came to paſs in the ſeventh month a,7hat 

Iſhmaelthe ſon of Nethaniah theſon of Eliſhama 
of che ſeed royal b, and the princes of theking, even 
ten men with hime, came unto Gedaliah the fon o 
Ahikam to Mizpah, and there they did eat bread to- 
gether in Mizpah d. 

a That is three Months after the City was taken, Chap 39. 2. 
b The ſame 1/bmael that came to Gedaliah, Verſe 8. 9. to whom be 
ſware ProteQion ; only here we are told that he was of the Royal 
Blood, which might both raiſe his Spirits, as having 2 More legal 
pretence to the Government, and rendred him a fitrer inſtrument, 
tor Baalis the King or Queen of the Ammonites to make uſe of. 6 
Some of the Princes, who had eſcaped the Army of the King of Bas 
bzlon, they and their Retinue came in pretended Complement to 
Gedaliah. Who treated them kindly,they Dined or Supped with him 

2 Then aroſe Iſhmael the fon of Nethaniah, and the 
ten mea that were with him, and ſmote Gedaliah the 
ſon of Ahikam, the ſon of Shaphan, with the ſword, 
and ſlew him e, whom the king of Babylon had made 
governour over the land f. BE. 

e Theſe ten Men with their retinue fall upon Ged2l:ah and bar 
barouſly murder him. f Their Quarrel againſt him was, that he 
was Deputy Governour to the King of Babylonz ſo deſperatly hard= 
ned were theſe Jews,that they wou}d not yet ſee that God had gia 
ven their Countrey into the hand of the king of Babylon, who hav= 
ing now a right of Conqueſt over them, had authority ro ſet whonme 
he pleaſed a5 his Yice-Roy or Deputy Governour over them, to whom 
they ought ro have yeilded all ſuvjeCtion and obedience. 

3 Iibmael alſo flew all the Jews that were with him 
gz, even with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans 
:hat were found there, and the men of war, . - _. 

g It appeareth from Yer. 10. that by all che: Jews here muſt be 
tnderſtood only all thoſe who were about the Court of Gedalish,for 
it is thereſaidthat he carried away manyrthat were with him, + 

4 And it came to paſs the ſecond day after he had 
ſlain Gedaliah, and no man knew 3t þ, 

þ That is, no Man who lived at any great diſtance from Mizpah, 
tor 1bmael was concerned what in him Jay to keep this ſlaughter 
privatefor fear the News of it ſhould have reached the ears of the 
King of Babyloy, or the Commanders of ſome of his Forces, ſo as 
he thould not have had time to make his eſcape. - 

5 That there came certain from Shechem, from Shi- 
lo, and from Samaria z, eve» fourſcore men, having 
their beards ſhaven, and their clothes rent, and hav- 
ing cut thernſelves &, with offerings and incenſe in their 
handsto bring hem to the houſe of the LORD 7. | 

7 Samaria was the Name both of a City and aProvince,Shechem 
was a City within that Province, within the limirs of the Tribe 
of Ephraim, Joſ. 20 7. Theſe places were now inhabited by a mixt 
People, partly Jews p-rtlv ſuch as the king of 4ſhris had upon 
11s Conqueſt of the Ten Tribes brought to inhabic there; from 
thence came 80 Men, k who poſſibly had not heard of the Temple 
being burnt, at leaſt when they came our, or if they had heard of 
it, yet thought. hearing ſome Jews were left, that they might have 
ere&ted ſome Altar for Sacrifices, or it may be thy brought no 
Beaſts. 7 For the Text ſpeaks only cfincenie and Offerings, they 
came with all indications of mourning uſed in thoſe Countries, 
ſhaven Beards, Cloths rent, and having cur themſelves in a barbarous 

-ſhion uſed by the Heathens, and forbidden the Jews, but yet pra- 
t11cd by many cf them. | 

6Andlſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, went forth from 
Mizpahto meet them, + weeping all along as he went: f Heb. 
and itcame to paſs as he met them, he ſaid unto them, *” [ee 
come to Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam ». oo wee" ht 

m He cometh out weeping, the better to deceive them into his ** | 
Trap, that they might believe he was as they equally affeQed with 
Gods diſpen(ations, and inviteth them to the new Governour for 
ProteCtion ; as if he had been one of his Courtiers, and Friends; by 
thoſe Arts he concealeth his bloody deſign again them. | 

7 And it was ſo when they came into the midft of 
the city that Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah ſew them, 
and caff them into the midit of the pit, he, and the men 
that were with him ». | \ 

» When he had thus enticed them into Mizpah, he, and his fol- 
lowers ſlay them, and throw their dead Bodies into a Pir, with the 
aſhſtance of choſe bioody Men that were with him. 

8 But ten men were found amongſt them, that faid 
unto Iſhmael], Slay us not, for we have treaſures inthe 
held, of wheat, and of barly, and of oyl, and of ho- 
ney : So he forbare, andſlew them not amongſt their 
brethren o. 

0 He flew 70 of them, but ten of them p'e:ding for their Lives, 
urged that they had Eſtates in the Country, both of Corn, Oyl and 
Honey; His covetouſneſs prevailed over his Crue'ty, he ſpared their 
Lives to become Maſter of what they had. | 

9 Now the pit wherein Iſhmael! had caſt all the 
dead bodies of the men'( whom he had ſlain || + becauſe 
of Gedaliah p ) was it which Aſa the king had made l 
for fear of Baaſha king of Iſrael, a»d Iſhmael theſon of + jjep, 
Nethaniah, filled it with themthat were ſlain q. by th 


pThe word which we tranſlate beca1ſe of VA ſignifieth in rhe hang codes $- 
G:daliah, which hath given Cr:#ic&s a ſcope ro vary in their noti- *7 724 ae 
le of it, and to tranſlate ir, ;n the power of. By occaſeon of, c. Bur the of Gedaliah | 
earned Author ofour Engliſh Amotationsfaiththe lence of the place 
is plain enough, Cap. 38. to we have the ſame term twice, where 
we have m——__ it, with the-, ſo here it doubtleſs fignifies thoſe 
who were with Gedaliah under his power Or charges q 
W hat Pit this was is not ſo well agreed, that 15 upon wha c 
6N 4 OCI- 


ED IE 


. 
_ —_—_—_— - - - . — * EIRET'S Ee _ = X - 

__ —— ——_—_ = by — —_— " _— -— — CMM >> > G — yr _ oamm——m—m— _ . -—_ __ 
err rr en ERIC Pu nn IT mn Pr TY CAAFI SS -- — = DAT - Di ELIT "> = = Ei Y : 
== ET _ AED WV ns AI OE IEEE + - =g TAZX< CE II DIC IIS — TELL CESSES > cant ear eo mo —— 
ra NNN) at _ ICSIDBS ITS In —_— = wa - =_— IST == = JI — on nz . . 

24S —_ —__— "_ 
" " v3 "% "= OY I. » AW $.,nt 5 5 SI Ag hy - . MF bw i OR OO ID | . 


IEEE 


1 


_—_— g - 8 4 . 
fg "8 : 


FE RjE 4M 1 4 ZH. Chap. XLix Ich! 


rhey accordingly did, and there fe] in with the Tdolarry of the 
Egyptians, for which God by his Prophet threatneth them with an 
utrer ru'ne, 

1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan 
the ſon of Kareah, and ſezaniah the ſon of Hoſbaiah, 
and all the people from the leaſt even to the greateſt 
Caine NCAT 4s» 

a After thartthis Captain Johanan ( who now had made fumſelf 
head of the Jews ) had fixed their abode in the Habitation of Chime 
ham in the way to Egypt, with thoughts of going down to inh:« 
bit there for fear of the Cha!d: ans, coming to revenge the Death of 
Geaaliah upon all the remainder of the Jews ; both theſe Ca tains 
and many of the People, or ſome of all ſorts of the Peeple, for ir 
cannot be 1magined that every particular perſon came ) made their 
Addreſs to the Propher Jeremiah, who provably was with them, 
carried away by 1/bmael and reſcued by rhis Captain. 

2 And ſaid unto Jeremiah the Prophet, || Let we Or, les 
beſeech thee our ſupplication be accepted before thee b, our ſuppli- 
and pray for us, unto the LORD thy God, ever forall 54% toll 
this remnant, ( for we are left bus a few of many as 


- 
Map. XU! 
dccafion made, the Texttelleth us it was digged by 4s King of 
Judohb, and that it was made for fear of Baaſba the King of I/ral, but 
Whether it was torceive water, or to hinder Baaſhs's coming near fome 
weak part of the City, we are not told, and iris but in vain to gueſs 
We read 1 Kings 15. 22. of 4ſa's fortifying Mizpah wich the Stones 
ofRamah, but of this Pir weread nothing. 
to Then Iſhmael carriedaway captiveall the refidue 
of the people, that were in Mizpah, even the Kings 
daughters,and all the people that remained in Mizpah, 
whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard,had com- 
mitted to Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, and Iſhmae! the 
ſon of Nethaniah, carried them away captive, and 


departed to go over to the Ammonites h. 

hb By this Verſe appeareth that AZ the Jews, Yer. 3» muſt be un- 
derſtood ina reſtrained ſence concerning all thoſe abour Geas/iah 
Fort he carried many away as Priſoners, as alſo Zedekiahs Daughters 
who either had concealed themſelves at the taking of the Ciry, or 
were leftbehind by the Conquerors,as not like much to hurt them 
and having done this, he knew there was no abiding for him Jong 
there, ſo he haſtneth away OE who( as we had it be» 
fore ) imployed him in this Murder. thine eyes do behold us c. ) 

1x 9 Bur whenJohanan the ſon of Karea h, and all| , Theſe Men ( though wretched Hypocrites ) yet come to the 
the. captains of the forces that were with him,heard of Prophet with great reſpe&, and reverence, firſt deſiring that he 
all the evil that 1ſhmael the fon of Nethaniah had done | would allow them ro make their requeſt to him; probably the 


"hi ent to fight | ©vidence they had ſo lately of his being a Prophet of the Lord, b 
12 Then they took all the men, and w 5 the. fulfilling of 11 that he h-d foretold againſt both the Ciry od 


with Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah, and found him by the Temple, mighr in ſome meaſure occaficn this. c Their requeſt 


the great waters that are in Gibeon z. | was, that he would putup his Prayer to God for the remnant, for 
# Theſe great Waters are ſuppoſed tobe a Lake; or ſome great | now there was but a ſmall Remnant of Jews left, a few of many. 


Pool in Gibzon, the very ſame that is mentioned, 2 Sam. 2: 13.1 2 Thar the LORD chy God may ſhew us the way 
where Joob & the Servants of David met Hnerthe onekeeping on One | herein we may walk,and the thing that we may do &d. 
ſide of the Pool, the other on the other ſide. { f The thing ticy would h k3 God f : 

-12 Now it came to paſs, that when all the people | a;,,. whit they 0 mitt, oo mn rence ig I 
WE : | 5 10n, what they ſhould do in this detolate ftate into which God 
which were with Iſhmael ſaw Johanan the ſon of Ka- had brought them. What could be!more Pious ? A PraQtice foun- 
reah, and all the captains of the forces that were with oo _ _ _ rs er and — eh a bes Pr0Vs 
ME hey were clad £. 3- 6. Acknowleage him mm all thy ways, and he ſpall direft thy fleps. But 

k To fre 2 probability of their eſcape our of the hands of this _ may wcll apply here what Gecd had {aid to their torefathers, 

: ; | et, 5-29 When they had ſo freely promiſed their obedience to the 
bloody Man, who had lain ſo many of thei: Brethren. . 
is "I the people + Thmacd had carried away Law of God. O tha: there were ſuch an beart in them, &c. 


F 4 Then Jeremiah the Prophet ſaid unto them, I have 
- captive from Mizpah, caſt about and returned, and |, : , 
wene undo Johanan che fon of Karehh. Y eard youd, behold, I will pray unto the LORD your 


x5 But Ihmael the ſon'of Nethaniah eſcaped f:om God, according to your words, and it ſhall come to paſs | 


that whatſoever thing the LORD ſhall anſwer you, I 
ohanan with eight men,and went to the Ammonites / | _.. : , YOu, = 
J 1 When the Peogic whom "Ibmael had carried away Priſoners, will declare iz unto you, I will * keep nothing back _ 


faw Johanan coming with great Forces, they contrived and whecs from you e- : 


LP 
; 106 


outs oth On at era 


e And Ads 200 | 


led about and went to him, only Jbmaeland eight Men eſcaped and 
weat to the Land of Ammon, 
16 Then took Johanan rhe ſon ef Kareah, and all the 


captains of the forces that were with him,all the remnant 
of the people whom he had recovered from Iſhmael the 
fon of Nethaniab, from Mizpah, ( after 12x he had 
ſlain Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam ) even» mighty men 
of war, and the women and the children, and the 
eunuchs whom he had brought again from Gibeon- 

t7 And they departed, and dwelc in the habitation 
of Chimham, which is by Bethtehem, to go to enter 
into Egypt m. 


m When Johansnhad ( as was before expreſſed ) recovered the 
Jews whom Iſhmael had carried as Priſaners, he came and dwelt 
with them in the habitation of Chi/mbam. Concerning this Chime 
hamall that we read in Scripture is, 2 Sam. 19, 37. 38. 40. he was 
the Son of Barzillai, whom David would have had to have gone 
along with him ro his Court, bur he being 80 years old excuſed 
himſelf, and deſired thar his ſonCkimbam might be accepted in his 
ſtead, Yer. 38. David agreeth it, and promiſeth to do for him 
whatſoever his Father ſhould deſire on his behalf; poſſibly David 
having an Eſtate near thereabouts might givea portion of it to him 
which though itrerurned ro the Family of David in the year of 
Jubilee, yer from Chimbam's Houſe there, might Ferain the name 
of the Habiration of Chimbam ; into thoſe parts Johanan retired with 

a further delign.to go into Egypr. 
18 Becauſe of the Chaldeans ; for they were afraid 


of them, becauſe Iſhmael the ſon of Nethaniah had ſlain 
Gedaliah the ſon of Ahikam, whom the King of Ba- 


bylon made governour inthe land ». 

» H:re was one {lain whom the Conqueror Nebuchadnezzar had | 
made Governour. in the Land of Judah, and it was but 'reaſonable 
forthem to think thar Nebuchadnezzar wou'd tak:s the Afront done 
ro himſelf, he veing coniruted Governour by him ; and though 
Johanan had nothing ro do in that Murder, yer he did not know bur 
that th: King of Babylon being ignorant of any partics amongſt the 
Jews, might lo:k upon them all as guilty who were Jews, and re- 
venze Gedalia®s Bluod upon all the remainder of that Nation ; he 
th:s:fore chuſerh them an Habiration for the preſent, from whence 
they might ia a ſhort time go down into Egypr, which was Joho- 
nans deſi.;n, as we ſhall read in the nexr Chaptcr. 

CHAP. XLIL 
Johanan and the People deſire Jeremiah to enquire of God, promiſmg O- 
bedience to his Will, 1,——5. Jeremiah afureth them of Safety in 

Judea, 7, 12. and deſtruftiom in Egypt, 13, --»-18. Reproverh 

their Hyporiſs: and Obſtinacy, 19: --= 22+ 

HE thc-e following Chaprers give usan account of what hap- 

pened ro Johananthe Son of Kareah, and the reſt, after the 
ſlaughter of 1/bmael, and their going to dwell in the Habitation of 
Chi/mbam, in ord:r to their go1ag into the Land of Egypr. Their 
coming to Jeremiabro go and enquire of the Lord for them, his 
Enquiry of God, with theRevelation of the Divine Will unto him; 
that they ſhould nor go into Egypr, promiſing God's Prote&ion of 
them, if they did not go, threatning their DeſtruQtion if they did 
go. Taeir proud anſwer to Jeremiah, and reſolution to go, which 


4 That isI will do for you according as you deſire. 


ro me tobe his Will on yout behalf, They called God Jeremah's 
God, here Jeremish calls him their God both tomind them of God's 
relation to them, and their Duty towards him. 

5 Then they ſaid to Jeremiah, The LORD be a 
true and faithfull witneſs berween us, if we do not ac- 
cording to a!l things, for the which theLORD thy God 
ſhall ſend thee to us, 

6 Whether it be good, or whether 7t be evil f, we will 
obey the voice of the LORD our God to whom we 


obey che voice of the LORD our God g. 

| £ Thepreceeding wordsare a perf<& Oath, the form of which 

liesin a calling of God ro witneſs the fincerity of the heart of thoſe 

that ſwear, for a ſecurity to thoſe ro whom the oath is given, 
whica alſo inciudeth a ſecret challenging God, to take Vengeance 
upon the Perſons that give that ſecurity, if tzey ſhould not do 
accordiugly as they promiſe ; which ſpeaketh the Atheiſm of the 
heart of the falſe Swearer, for did a Mau believe that there is a God 
and that the Divine Being is infinite in power. anda true & faith» 
ful witneſle, it were impofſibie that ke ſhould challenge him to be 

revenged on him for not doing what he never ſeriouſly intends to 

do,which was the caſe of theſe wicked Men. The thing they pro= 

miſe is a perfe@ Obedience toGod's Will, whether grateful or ingrate« 

ful to them,and they further declare a convittion, thatifthey did it, 

it ſhou!d be well with them according to that, Deut, 5, 29. which 

ſhewerth the mighty power of Luſts mn unregenerate Hearts, and 

the mighty operations of the evil Spiritin the Children of Diſobe- 

dience, Eph. 2. 2. That although they be convinced that if they 

did obey the voice of God, ir would be well with them ; yet they 

willnordo it in things which they have a power to do. 

7 4 Andirt cameto paſs after ten days, that the 


word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah h. 
þ The word mentioned, Chap. 40+ 1. To which all that we 
have met with from the beginning of Chap. 49. is but an Hiſ- 


torical Preface, 


8 Then ca!led he Johanan the ſon of Kareah, and 


all the captains of the forces which were with him, and 
all che people from the leaft even to the greateſt. 


9 And ſaid unto them, Thus faith the LORD, the 
God of Iſrael, unto whom ye ſent me co preſent your 


{upplication befote him # 
; The Prophet after ten days, all which time ſome (but upon 
what ground I know not ) think he ſpent in Prayer, receiverh an 


anſwer from God, which he preſently communicates to the prin=- 


ces and People,with a Preface thar containerh int many arguments 
to have induced their compliance with 1t. 1.Becauſe it came from 
the Lord, 2. From that God who as he was in Covenant with 


Iſ-azl, ſoin all the courſe of his Providence had ſo carried himſelf 


tothem, as they had no juſt reaſonto 1uſpe& either his kindneſs 
or his power. 3. From their imploying of him to ſeek God upon 
their behalf. _s 


1O If 


ſend thee ; * that it may be well with us, when we # 


Iw;ll be faichfull in giving you an account of what God ſhall reveal 9: 


Chap, 


7 13. 


ates. 


42 $602 AIG. LY 


TI 
17. 


! chap: XLII. 2 FtREM 1 4 H. 
ro If ye will ſtill »bide in this land &, then will I 

build you and not pull. yy down, and [ will plane you, 

and not p'uck yz& ap 1: for I repent me of the evil thar 


I have done unto you m. . 

k Thar isif you wili not go unto the Land of Egypr, as you are 
think':1g,bur abide where you are, or in- any part of Judah, under 
ſ:vjcQ104 ro the King of Babylon,into whoſe power Ihave given you. 
| Then I will ſecto your det and proſperity, and make} you 
ai happy Puople. The Happineſs and Proſpericy of People 1s in 
Scripture often ſet out undet the notion of building, and pl-nting, 
as ou th< contrary their miſery or deſtruQion is expreſſed under the 
meraphorical notions of puiling down and plucking up. » For I 

| am ſatisfied with the Puniſhment your Nation hath unde: gone, and 
as to the remainder, if they do not deſtroy themſelves by new dil- 
obedience, I will change the courſe of my Provicence. 

11 Be not afraid of the kirig of Babylon,of whom ye 
are af;aid :; be not afraid of him, faich the LORD » 
for I am with you to fave you, and todeliver you from 


his hand o. | 

n I know whom you are afraid of; you fear that the King of Baby. 
lon will come and utterly root you out,becauſc one of your Nation 
hath murdered his Yice-Roy Gedaliah, tuffer not your pion of fear 
to riſe too high 1n this caſe,and to make you fly into Egypr. o For 
you ſhall have my preſence with you, to preſerve and deliver 


you from his power ; it {hall not bc in his power co do you any Prophertſpeaking they had l:tcly f. en the words of the Lord ſpoken, 


harm. . 6 by the fame Prophet verified, and 'Ould rake ; 
12 And I will * ſhew mercies unto you, that he may | 7. ;:-0 the fams fo of Ucbdice 2 OY cake. no. warning,but: 


28 
lairh God, for thoſe who drive on this defigh, and go with £49 
whole heart retolvedly againſt the contrary. retires? = fee | 
NT EY of them ceſcape,one or other of my ſore Judgmicars,; 

wo:d, Peitilence or Famiae. ;..Thcy ſhall aoti be :of: 
two, but ofall ſuch Perſons ,* # TREO OT 7p 

1s For thus ſaith the LORD. of hoſts, . the. -God:of 

Ifrael, As mine anger and' my fury- hath been poured 
forth upon che Inhabitancs of Jeruſalem"; ſo ſhall my fu- 
ry be * poured forth upon you, . when ye ſhall enter in-s * Ch 7.20. 
Egype : n_— ws" &.an EXECrarion;!: and:awaſto>t - Zech. 
1:11hment, and a curle, and a reproath ant ye (haltfes Wes 
chis place no more x. ny Ge rac ous 

x if you would ſee your Doom in a Glaſs, Todk upon TJeuſulan.” 
whicn according to my word I have dealt 1 Lp Ron, Joel -—_ 
mongſt Men it would be calted fury, though in me it was bug delis- 
berare Juſtice, that my wrath declaicd againſt it,(like liquid chidgs, 
melted ) diffuſed it ſelf into al! the paits of it; I wall dal ſo with. 
you ſoon after you ſhall haveentred into that Land, where you pros: 
mite your felves ſo much eaſe, reſt, and proſperity, and ks x __ 
ned to make Jeruſalem a Curte, an Aſtouiſhment, and a Reproach,. 
Ch.24. 9. and 29. 18, ſo I will deal with you,andia this Lwill (faith. 
God ) deal worſe with you, that whereas thoie of your Brethien,. 
thit were carried from Feruſalem to Babyl-nſhall ſome of then»come 
back again afrer 60 Years, you fhall ſee this place no more. © There: 
was this aggravation of the Jews fin, tro whom Gol was now by. his 


1 * Pfal. ; oepoger if 
| 106. 46, have ra p,and cauſe you co returnto your | 19 © Tye LORD hach ſaid concerning you, © ye 
: | remnant of Judah | 7 : f 
2 Weare beholden to God for all the pity, and compaſſion which | £4; that Jt y + j - Je Fat ipepes Egy Pt: know ee 
we meet with from Men, God inclineth their Hearts, tho' we re- , 4 Pan MONINed youtiys day J- 22 f Heb. 
ceive the kindneſs from their hands, q The mercy which God here 12 Wh Prophet-knowing how much it concerned this Pegs teſtified a- 
promiſcrh theſe Men, is that the King of Babylon ſhould give them | P/©.30 Tien unto him, andro believe and obey whar hs ſaid,repears gainſ? you 
a liberty to go every one of them to their own Inheritances, for at Ry h | Lord, _ ich he had ſaid be fore, aſſurin them that 
preſent they were baniſhed by their own fear,from their own Houſes, rm _— wy ER him ro ſay this ro them. Crinicks nor 
chough not from their own Country. : ng roeciaey bet Ic Wi. -— ag #amoniſh, in this form, 6gnifiech 
13 But if ye ſay, we will not dwell in this land,nei- 46" Boe | 'e diflerble 43cm > ſigh Of 
ther obey the voice of the LORD your God r ; hs LORD our G F C. Carts z,when ye ſent [| Or, hove 
7 Our Tr1nflation a little darkens the ſenſe, tranſlating the Hed. your w0d, iaying,. Pray for us -uns ed deceir 
Particle N72 n:ither, which ſignifies no more than nor, or by no || ©© the LOR D our God, and according toall that the ail, ny 
aneans, Numb. 14. 16. 1am. 2. 2. and 20. 26, Ho. 13.4. and it is | LORD our God ſhall fay, fo declare unto us, and we __ 
| certain wk bur one thing ”m—_ of, for the thing wherein they | will do it 4. | | 
diſobeyed the Voice of the Lord, was not continuing in their own s Or ws 4 e's ES SMILE = 
; Ex 5 you have uſed deceit, either towards God, dealing falſl 
Land, but going into the Land of Egypt HE him, calling him tobe a witneſs to your ſincerity in ers n=. Saw 
; 14 Saying, No, but we will go into the land of E- ir.tended any lincerity in ; or toward me, ſending me toenquire of 
; gy pt, where we ſhall ſee no war, nor hear the ſound | God for you, and promiſing to do according to what I ſhould Ie 
of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread, and there veal to you from God as his Will, when as you hever intended ir; 
will we dwell [. or towards your own Souls, as every ſinner doth but deceive kis 
. : - + .. | own Soul. You mad: a pretence of what was not in your heaft$ 
_ f The ſence of the words is obvious,they thought that theirLife- | , When you ſent me to pray God's direCion for you, and made me 
in the Land of Judah, would be ar beſt an aneaſfie Life, where they | fuch a firm promiſe ro do whatſoever I ſhould 5 thin a __ po 
Jhouid be continually ears the noiſe - War, and tho'they | God as his Will in this caſe ogg" 
could not fear the want of Bread in a Land that flowed with Milk and ES ab 4. : + 
Honey, yet they alſo conſidered, that Egypt was a very fruuful 21 And ow I have this day declared it to you 6, But 
Coun ry, by the overflowing of N.lus, and the proſpeSt of this made ye have not obeyed the VOICE of the LORD your God, 
them quit that uſual fondneſs which People have of their Native | NOF any thing for the which he hath ſent me unto 
Country. From whence appears that their great fin was wnbelief, | yOu c. 
they would not take the Promiſe of God for a ſecurity tothem for a b I have been faithful to you, I went according to your defire to 
quict and peaccable a>ode injudah,but would fancynoiſes of Drums, | enquire of God for you, I had his Will revealed to me in your caſe 
and Trumpets, and fear where no fear was ; the P ropher ſaw,they | and now I have as faithfully rold you what it is. c But ye have not Fe 
vere refolved, into Egypt they would go, to live a more certain | þzyz4, How did Jeremiah know this, for they had nor yet deelared 
ealic Life ( as they fanſicd ) he therefore tells them, rbat it after | their Minds to him?He had either learned it from their Ditcourſes 
their ſending him to God to inquire tor them,and promiſing a com- | quring the ten Days which God had made him to wait for the Re- 
pliance with his Will, and hearing now wiat that will was, this | yelation, or he had learned it from tome conremptuous Behaviour 
were their reſolution, he had another word from God to them. of them, when he delivered ir, or ( which is moſt probable )} God 
15 ( And now therefore hear the word of the Lord,ye | had aforchand told ir to him. | 
remnant of Judah, Thus faich the LORD of hoſts, the 22 Now therefore know certainly, that ye ſhall die 
* Deur God of lirael, if ye * wholly ſer your facesto enter in- | by the ſword, by the famine, and by the pettilence, 
17. 16. fo Egypt, andgoto ſojourn there z. ) in the place whither ye deſire || to go, and to fo- 
FEI # This Verſe is wholly prefatory to what followeth. If, Caith journ d. | {| Or, t9 29 
God, all your mind be upon Egyps, and you be reſolved thither you. © 4 The Prophet aſcertaineth that doom unto them, which Yer.14, #9 Jojurn. 


ST ES 


will go. 
16 Then it ſhall come topaſs, that che ſword which 
ye teared ſhall overtake you there,in the land of Egypt, 


+Heb haz and the famine whereof ye were afraid + (ball follow 


15, *6. he had threatned them with, in caſe they were reſolved to go 
into Egypt ; we muſt expeCtt nothing buc utmoit diſappointments u= 
pon actions done in diſobedience to rhe revealed Will of God : You 
think to avoid Dearth by going thither fora little time to ſojourn, bur 
you ſhall die there, and that by thoſe very D.aths which by going 


cleave af- cloſe afrer you there in Egypt, and there ye hall | (1;cher you ſeck roavoid. 
wk an CH AP. XL. 

4 In the general the Prophet threatneth them, that in Ezype they | Tyhanan and the Commanders diſcredit Jeremia'hs Prophecy, 1t——3, 
ſhould meet with rr hey y ſame wh ils,the _ betray; _ __ and with the People, carry him and Raruch into Egypr, 4 7. He 
flce out of their own Countrey, tne Sword ana Famine. 'l he Swor belyeth b Type, the Congue: Eg y br - the Batrotoms 
of Mebuchadnezzar, who after this fully conquered Egypt ; and a Fa- Se J 4. e Conqueſt of Egype by the Baby ON. 
mine through want of Bread; for although Egyps was a fruitful N D it came to paſs that when Jeremiah had 
Country, yet we know there was a Famine there, againſt which A ad Salk ki x60 all the nooute alt eb 

. Joſeph provided, beſides that ſcarcity of Viftuals commonly follow- made an cnd Or Ipeaking te PCOPIC All The 
eth great Armies. Thoſe who ſhun dangers or thinkto thun them | words of the L O R D their God a, for which the 
by acts of Diſobedience to God, ordinarily are ſuffered by God to | LO R D their God had ſent him to them ever all thels 
rake ſuch courſes as they fall into the ſame or worſe dangers than | yo.qc 
what they labour ro avoid. | | i The Hebrew word, which we tran{late words. ;fierh alſo chi 

4 + : . ; { .fignifieth alſo things. 
f Heb. 6 *7 1So ſhallic be with all the men that ſer their faces The Prophet is very <xatt in lctting us kaow that he had from fs 


ſral al;he to gO into Egypt to ſojourn there, they (hall die by the 


Lord what he dclivercd to them, he therefore rwice repeats it, #-e 


men be. {word, by the famine, and by the peſtilence,and *none | words of the Lord n_ —_ and for _ the Lord had _ _ - mY 
See 5 . . ; not thar the Prophetsalways limited themielves to thoſe 1yllabic 

Chap. 44. of them ſhall remain, or elcape from the evil, chat] words they had revealed ro; them, bur ro the matter only of the 
14. 28. Will bringupon them . 'Revelation ; which every Miniſter of the Goſpel is ſtill bound ro 


Thoſe words that ſet their facesto go may reaſonably be interpre- 
ted as a limiration of the univerſal Particle a#; tor as eventually we 
can hardly conceive that every individual perton that went into 
Ez ypt did thus periſh, 1o it can hardly be thought that the juſt God 
ſhould order an equal puniſhment to thoſe who were the King-lea- 
d-rs in this deſign,and thoſe who were forced or over-rulcd by them, 


or perphaps knew not how to live when the reſt were gone; bur, | 


do, delivering to the people only whar they have received from the 
Lord, as 8 Cor. 11. 23. as to the matter and ſubſtance of what they 
deliver, though they clothe ir with words, and phraſes of their 


wn. 
y . Then ſpake Azariah the ſon of Hoſhaiah, and Jo- 


hanan the ſoa of Kareah,and all the proud mea b faying 
6 O unto 


LR * 
. 
7 


: 


FR * 


.* 


 #Iſat30.4. 
. called 
- Hanes, 


= +M S > a9s 


unto Jeremiah, Thou ſpeakeſt falſely : che LORD our 


 -: + painſt us, for codeliver us into the handof the Chalde- 
1 ans; that they*might put us to death,and carry us away 
\-*. Exptives into Babylon g. 


© +14 $0. Johanan- the ſon of Kareah,and all the captains 
* of the forces, and all the people obeyed not the voice of 
the LORD, to dwell in the land of Judah e. 


- The King ot Egypt made his Reſidence,or at leaſt had a Palace. Thi- 


==—__ 


oo 


*» 


noc.ſent. thee to ſay, Go not into Egypt to 
n there'c. - Abe 
> Of. Fohanan we- liave before heard, but not of Azariah, unleſs 
under the Name of Fezaniah, Chop. 42, 1: bur that 15 incertain, T heſe 
Mer are called provd Mes, erther becauſe'they were the grear men, or 
becauſe #hei# conceit of chemſebves led chem. into this fatal errour. Pride 
is nothing elſe bur. a los Mind ſwelling in anOpinion of himſelf, 
andabways takes its riſe from ſome higher ground the perſon poſ- 
ſcſſed' of ir'thinks he: ftands upon, and a very little hillock will 
ſerve= the turn; thoſe i who having nothing elſe of pretence will 
manga filk-Coat, ;or a-piece- of ſilver Lace.terve their! turn, One 
a's Spirit twellsupon account of his Deſcent, another upon ac- 
un ofhis Riches, a third upon the account of his Learning,Parts, 
ant Wir, a fourth upon” the account of his or her Beauty ; theſe 
Men ate called proud Men; poſſib'y upon account of their greatneſs, 
thiey were Captains, and the chief of the Jews now left; bur chiefly 
tor account of the good Opinion they. had of their own Reaſon 
ava Wit, by which they judged they knew better how to guide 
themſelves for their own ſecurity, than Jeremiah could reach them; 
whictPride or god Opinion Men have of themſclves, 1s a great 
root of Diſobedience; all Men fin either through Paſſion» or Pride, 
or both, cither to gratifie their ſenſirive apperite, or their rational ap- 
petite; as it is in Man ſince the Fail. © Becau'e it had been down 
righe Pgſictim, and a diſcalaiming of God, to have ſaid, They knew 
better what to do; than God cou.d tell them, tney only rell the 
Propher God had nor ſent him. As in theſe times Hypocrites, 
whoſe Lu*s will not allow them to-do the Will of God, rhink to 
ſecure+hemſelves by denying that to be the Will of God, and 
finding out other ſenies to put upon Scripture than are according 
ro truth. + | 
3 But Baruch the ſon of Neriah ſerteth thee on a- 


-*'& Baruch was but a Clerk or Secretary to Jeremiah, ſo not very 


ropable to aver-rule the. Propher to a falſifying of his truſt, and a 
Being of his Countreymen into the hands of their Enemies; bur 


-, fo fond are wicked Men of their Luſts, that they will ſay any thing 
** in juſtification of them, . rather than deny themielves in them, ana 


become obedient to the Will of God. 


;*-e._ That is, they reſolved not to obey the Meſſage God had ſent 
them by Jeremiah. 


2+» F/ But Johanan the ſon of Kareah,and all the captains 


of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah that were 


returned fromall. nations whicher they had been driven, 


to dwell in the land of Judah f: 

- F This reſolution they preſently put in-praftice. Though it 1s 
certain that Jeremiah and Baruch were not willing to go along with 
th:m, and probably that many of the People were nor willing, yet 


theſe rebeilious Captains forced them all along with them,ſo as ma- 


ny of them were now a kind of Priſoners to their own Countrey= 


"Men, 


6 Even men, and women, and children, and the 
kings daughters g, and every perſon that Nebuzaradan 
the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the fon 
of Ahikam, the ſon ofShaphan ; and Jeremiahthe Pro- 
pher; and Baruch the ſon of Neriah. 
 £ Ofthe King's Daughters here mentioned, ſee Chap. 41. 10. 
"7 SO they came into the land of Egypt bh, for they 0- 
beyed nor the voice of the LORD, thus came they ever 
to* Tahpanhes 5z. 
hb Egypt at this time,though it was humbled by the King of Baby- 
, by an inroad he had made into it, of which we read, 2 Kings 
24. 7. yet it was a diſtin Kingdom,and being near to Canaan,the 
Jews often fled thither for San tuary,and borrowed afliſtance againſt 
their Enemies from them. Of this City we read little but in Holy 
Writ, 1 Kings 11. 19. we read of a Queen of Egy;t called Tubpenes, 
in honour to whom probably this Ciry was builded, after whoſe 
name this City was called, of which the Scripture faith nothing, 
but in this Prophet, Chap. 2. 16. in this Chapter, and Chap. 44.and 
46. 14. it appears by Yer. 9, that it was at this time the place where 


- 


ther theſe Captains and the Jews came, forcing Jeremiah and Baruch 
along with them. 

8 © Then came the word of the LORD to Jeremiah 
in Tahpanhes, faying, 

9 Take great ſtones in thy hand, and hide them in 
the clay in the brick-kiln, which 5s at the entry of Pha- 


arg houſe, in Tabpanhes,inthe ſight of the men of Ju- 
ah &. 


k God commandeth rhe Prophet to take theſe Stones, and to place 
them in the Clay,&c. for a ſign of what we ſhall meet with expoun- 
ded in the next Yerſe; it is plain from hence that the King of Egypr, 
Called Pharaoh, either reſided, or at leaſt had a Royal talace in 
Tatpanhes, Jeremiah is dire&ed to fix theſe Stones at the entrance in- 
to this Palace. This hath made Interpreters divided about rhe true 
ſenſe of the word, which is here tranſlated a Brick-kiln. Thar the 
word ſo ſignifies is out of doubr, and is ſo tranſlated, 2 Sam. (2.31. 
All that troubleth ſome, is, that they fancy there ſhould not be a 
Brick-kiln ſo near the King's Place ; but poflibly- thoſe Learned 

*M<n do nor enough conlider the difference of times and Places : 
"Great Princes Sons and Davghters, do not uſe in our Age to keep 
"Sheep, which yet we know Jacob's Sons and Laban's Daughters did ; 


M 15; &x H. | Chap. XLIV, 


place called by the Name ofthe Palace. Others think it might bean 
Houfe uſed not for making, but poliſhing Earthen Ware. Bur the 
greateſt” offenfiveneſs offuch Kilns with us, is from the Smoke, of 
which they had none, drying their Bricks in the Sun, Bur it is a 
nicety not worth to many gucſles. 
10 And fay unto them, Thus faith the LORD of 
hoſts che God of 1frael, Behold, IT will ſend and take 
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon * my ſervant 1, * See 
and will fethis throne upon theſe ſtones. that I have higq Eze-29.8, 


2», and he ſhall ſpread his royal pavilion over them. 

{ Now God expounds his meaning in his former Command, he 
ordered Jeremiah to take Stones and hide them in a place near the 
King of Egypt's Palace ; now he tells them, that this- was for a ſign 
that N-buchadnezzar ſhould ſet bis Throne, and ſpread his Pavilion 
in that place. This Nebuckadnezzar God calls his Servant, becauſe 
he was to obey him in whar he ſhould do, though he intended nor 
ſo Thus Aſyris is called, the Rod of his anger, Iſa. 10. 5, and 
Nebuchadnezzar is ſo called, Chap. 25.9. and 27.6. m God owneth 


the _— to be laid by himſclf, becauſe they were laid at his Com. 
mand. 


11 And when he cometh, he ſhall ſmite the land of 
Egypt, and deliver * ſuch as are for death to death, ſuch 
as are for captivity to captivity, and ſuch as are for the * Zech 
Iword to the ſword ». Its 7, 
» He propheſicth the certain ruine of the Egyptians by the King 
of Babzlon, tome of whom the King of Babylon thould {lay, others 
of them he thould lead away into Captivity as Priſoners of War. 
See the like Phraies, Chap. 154 2. 
12 And1 will kindle a fire in the houſes of the gods 
ofEgypte, and he bail burn them, and carry them a- 
way captives p, and he ſhall array himſelf with the land 
of Egypt 9, as a ſhepherd putterth on his garments 7, 
and he thall go forth fiom thence in peace 5. 


» God by his Prophet declares a particular hatred to the Tdols of 
Egypr, that he would burn up their Temples. 3. e. by the hands of 
Nebuchaanezzar, p He fhall carry away both the 1dois, and the In= 
habitaiits of Egypt Captives. q That 1s with the Spoils and Plun« 


. der of the Lau of Egypr, the King of Babyien ſhall clothe his Army. 
: FOU unacquaintedne:s with rhe tafſhions of Shephers cauſeth dt- 


vers gucflcs at the icnce of this Phiaſe ; that which the beſt Inter 
Prerets fix 1a as the bei} is, That as a Shepherd that while he hath 
becn attending his F.ocks, goes n any Rags, and is careleſs of his 


+ Clothes, but when he goes home at Night he put on his Coat; ſo 


the Babzlomyb Soldiers, when they have finilhed their Work in the 
Conquelt ot £gypr, ihall go home clothed in the better tabirs ofthe 
Egyptians. j :nd the Armies ſhall go home in Peace, as Conque-= 
rors not foiled in their unvertaking. 

13 He ſhali break allo | the images of [| Bethſhemeſh, | 
that zs in the land of Egypt ; and the houſes of the f Heb. 
guds of rhe Egyptians (hail he burn with fire «. - ae og 

£ Beth-jhemejb 1gnifies the houſe of the Sun, and it is alſo the Name 20 Ag 
of a City in &gyp:,to moſt rake it here, as the Name of a Ciry, which _— 


had its Name trom a fainous Temple build:-dinir to the honour of bn of, 
the S.n. This Idol is called On, Gen. 41. 45. By this it appears the San 


that the Egyprians, as well as other Pagans, paid Divine Adoraticn to 
the Creature. u God threat: ns not only the deſtruttion of the 140. 
latrous Temples, but the Houſes of the Inhabitants of Egypr, by the 
King of Babylon; fiom whence theſe Jens, would they have believed 
might have underſtood,that they would not have the ſecurity which 
they promiſed themſelves in the Land of Egypr. 


C H A P. XLIIV. 


Jeremiah repreſenteth to the People in Egypt, the former Sins and Puniſh 
ment of Judah, » lo. He Propheſyeth their Deftrafion in Egypr, 
11 14. Their Obſtinacy, is 19. Threatned, 20 28. For 
a Sign, the Deſtruftion of Egypt # foretold, 29, 30. 

HE word which came to Jeremiah concerning all 
che Jews, which dwell inthe land of Egypt a,which 
dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph,and 

in the country of Pathros, ſaying 6, 

@& The Patience and Goodneſs of God to this Remnant of his an« 
cient People is very remarkable ; he leaveth them not even in their 
Rebellion, but lendeth Jeremiah, whom he had before ſent to pre= 
vent their going into this Idolatrous Country,to try 1f in Egypt they 
would be brought to a better mind. & It ſthould ſeem that the ge- 
nerality of the Jews that went into Egypt had planted themſelves at 
theſe four places, Of Migao! we read Exod. 14. 2. and Numb, 33.7. 
from which places we may learn, it was a City or Town upon the 
Borders of the Red-Sea, We ſhall read of it again, Chap. 46. 14, 
It was a place which might have minded them berter of their Duty 
and Obligations to God, for upon their removal from thence, God 
divided the Red-Sea for their fore-fathers. Noph was another Cuy 
in Egypt, of which we read, 1/a. 19. 13. Chap. 2. 16. and 46. 14. 
Ezek. 30. 13. 16. The Greeks and Latines call it M:mphis ; it 1s 
thought to be that City, which is now called Cairo, Pathros was a 
Region or Province, ſome think it derived its Name from Pathry- 
ſom the Son of Mizraim, Gen.10.14. It is the ſame ( as ſome thiak ) 
which is ſince called Thebazs. 


2 Thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael, 
Ye have ſeen all the evil that I have brought upon Je- 
ruſalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and behold, 
this day, they are a deſolation, and no man dwellerh 


therein c. : 
© He referreth to the late deſtru&ion of it by the King of Babylon; 
this Remnant of the People, was a Brand pluck'd out of that fire, 


the Grandeur of Princes was not ſo great, but ic might admit of as 
-Plain a thing as this. Others ſay the Palaces of their Princes were! 
- very vaſt, ſo that the Brick-kiln might be at a diſtance from the en- 


try into the Dwelling-Houſe, though it was at the entry of the; 


and their Eyes had been Witneſles,to the Deſolations that God had 


| he. 
| "2 Becauſe of their wickedneſs which they have com- 


mitted to provoke me to anger, in that they went to 
burn 


— 


OE ON I EY IE 4 


MD. - 


LIV, 


29.12, 


CO OT INT IIEY 


v VERSA It WTF 9b 3d *R o 


+ ana." 


—_—— OO 


Chap: XKLIV. 


* 2 Chr. 


36 15. 


ICh.42.18 7 


+ Heb. 


Out of the 
midſt of 


Judah. 


t Heb. 
wicked 
neſſes or 
puniſhe 


ment. s 


T Heb: 


Contrite. 


* Lev.17. 
19 Chap. 


Zl, 


Jo. 


7 © KK 
burn incenſe, and to ſerve other Gods d, whom they 
knew not, zeither they, you, nor your fathers e. 


d As they were eye-witneſſes to the effe&, ſo-it was nothing but 
their unbehefmade them ſtrangers to the cauſe; for God by his 


Prophets had told them that the great moving cauſe was their paying | 


a Divine Homage to Idols. e The fin of whichis aggravated from 
this, that they were as much Strangers to the Idols, as to the Peo- 
ple with whom they joyned in the Worſhip of them, neither they 
nor any. oftheir Fathers having had any experimental knowledge of 
what they had done, nor could do for ſuch as adored them. 

4 Howbeit *I ſent unto you all my ſervants the pro- 
phets, riſing early and ſendingthem, ſaying, Ohdo not 
this abominable thing that TI hate. | 

5 Bur they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to 
turn from their wickedneſs, to burn no incenſe unto 


other gods f. 

f Theſe two Verſes contain another aggravation of this Peoples 
ſin, viz. That they did this againſt light, and admonitions to the 
contrary. God had by his Prophets let them know that this was 
an abominable thing, a thing which he hated, and thar not 
with an ordinary degree of hatred, yet they would not hear, ſoas to 
ield Obedience to God, but went on in their Idolatries. 

6 Wherefore * my fury and my anger was poured 
forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah, and inthe 
ſtreets of Jeruſalem, and they are waſted and deſolate 


as at this day p. 

g For theſe very Reaſons, their Idolatry, and contempt of my 
Word by my Prophets, the very ſins you are now committing, -I 
have given Judah and Jeruſalem into the hand of the King of Babylon, 
and it is ( as you at this Day ſee it ) waſte and deſolate. 

7 Therefore now thus ſaith the LORD, the God of 
hoſts, the God of Iſrael, whereforecommit ye 1hjs great 
evil againſt your ſouls ? to cut off from you man and 
woman, child and ſuckling f out of Judah,to leave you 


none to remain þ. 
| þ What prudence can guide you to do ſuch aGtions as theſe, by 
which you cannot hurt God, butyour ſelves only ? You are now 
but a few of many, what love have you for your Country,in taking 
courles which will certainly tend to the utter extirpation of thoſe 
few, ſo as there ſhall be neither Man, nor-Woman, nor Child, no 
Suckling remaining of all the Jews. | 
8 In that ye provoke me unto wrath, with the works 


of your hands z, burning incenſeunto other gods in the 
land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye 
might cut your ſelves off, and that ye might be a curſe, 
and a reproach amongſt all the nations of the 


earth &. 

; Tdolsare uſually thus defamed, and indeed nothing can argue a 
greater ſtupidiry than for any to pay an Homage ( confefledly due to 
the Supreme Being ) to what is the Work of Mens hands,and there- 
fore muſt be made by one Superiour to that order of Beings in which 
Tdols are. But how doth the Prophet ſay, that they worſhipped 
the Works of Mens hands? For it is apparent from Yer. 77. that 
they paid this Homage to the Queen of Heaven, which is not the 
Work of Mens Hands. So. It was before Images which are but the 
Works of Mens Hands. And this certainly was the Idolatry of the 
generality of the Heathens, they worſhipped an unknown Divine 
Being before a Creature, either as repreſenting it, orrather putting 
them in mindofit. k The term that doth not denote the Idolaters 
end of intention, for none ever did any at intentionally to ruine 
themſelves, it only ſignifies the end of their Work, that their ut- 
ter ruine would be the certain conſequent of their Work 

9 Have ye forgotten thef wickednels of your fathers, 
and the wickedneſs of the kings of Judah, and the wic-. 
kedneſs of their wives, and your own wickedneſs, and 
the wickedneſs of your wives, which they have com- 


mitted inthe land of Judah, and in the ſtreets of Jeruſa- 


lem /? 

1 God accounteth Men and Women to have forgotten that, the. 
ſight and :efleftion upon which hath made noſuch impreſſion upon 
taem, as to produce a praftice ſuitable to thoſe notices, according 
to the condu& of a reaſonable Soul, which teacheth every Man, 
having notice of a great evil brought upon a Man by ſuch or ſuch 
praices, to avoid running into the like danger. It was the aggra- 
vation of this Peoples ſins, rhat they were committed in the Holy 
Land, and in a City which God had more favoured than any other 
place, to have done theſe things in any place had been guilt enough, 
but more to do it in the Land of Judah, and in the Streets of Jeruſa- 


lem. | 
xo They are not | humbled evcn to this day, neither 


have they feared mz, nor walked in my law, nor in f 


my ſtatutes that I ſer before you, and before your fa- 
thers. 

m Neither they nor you are humbled ; for the Prophets paſſing 
from che ſecond Perſonto the third, and by and by from rhe third 
Perfon again to the ſecond, lets us know, that he intendeth what 
he ſpake as well of them to whom he ſpake, as of them concerning 
whom he ſpeaks ; from whence we alio learn, that Reformation and 
Obedience is the firſt fruits of Contririon, or true Humiliation. God 
accounteth thoſe not humbled, bur haraned who are not reformed, 
and become obedient to his Will let their pretended At7rron, 
Contrition, or Humiliation be in outward appearance what it 
wall. . : 

11 \ Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts the 
God of Iſrael o, Behold * I will ſer my face againſt you 
for evil, and to cut off all Judah p. / 

» Theſe Names are frequently given to God, in threatning Pro- 

hecies, partly to lt this Prop'e know thar God 1s able ro make 
good lis Word and to bing the tircatned Evils upon them ; and 


M I = p 


partly to Jetth?m know that the dealing thus with them would not 
maks him-quite his relation to 1ael, tut he was and fill would 


- approve himſeFfthe God of thoſe who were his'true Iracl. p The 
| meaning 1s, my 4ull deſign againſt yon is ro bring Evilupon you 3 


this is expreſſed under the notion of ſetrinir hi 
ſerting his eyes againſt them. F / _d roans, _ wo PSs 
x ye _ L will rake the remnant of Judah, that have 
e | < 
t the1r Tacesto go into the land of Egypt, to ſojourn 


there, and they ſhall all be conſumed, andfall in the 


and by the tamine ;. they ſhall die-trom the leaſt even 
unto the greateſt, by the ſword, and by the famine: and 
they ſhall be anexecration, 'and an aſtoniſhment, and a 
curſe, and a reproach q. 2 RI 

7 This is no more than the Prophet had told theſe very Perſons 


words for the confirmation of the truth' of them to them now thacr 
they were there, "y .n | ; TING 
13 ForI will puniſh them that dwell in the land of 
Egypt, as I have puniſhed Jeruſalem, by the ſword,by 
the famine, and by the peſtilence. . Pn 
14 So that rioneof the remnant of Judah, which are 


gone intothe lane of Egypt'to fojourn there,ſhalleſcape 


or remain, that they ſbould return into the land of Ju- 
dah, to-the which they + have a deſire to return, ' to 
dwell there: for none ſhall return but ſuch as ſhall e- 
{cape 7. | 
n Thereis a great variety in the reading of w wil vs 
ſome reading beſides ſuch 2 have a deſire pay dro dagy = " os 
they have a delire to return. Others, for they have 4 deſire fo return 
The words fcem to hint that theſe Jews went into the Land of £- 
gypt, not with a deſign to live there always, but ro ſtay for a while 
rill the heat of the Chaldeans in enquiring after the Blood of Gedal:ah 
ſhould be over, then thinking to return into their own Country ; 
which one ſhould think were true, conlidering it notonly as wr fi 
Native Soil but alſo a place where was now room enough,and the 
might live in much greater plenty than they could in Feypr. Ti 
only difficulty is in the laft words,compared with what in the ſame 
Verſe went before; it is ſaid in the beginning of the Verſe that 
none of them ſhould eſcape, and in the cloſe, none jhall return but ſuch as 
ſhall eſcape. But reafon will guide us to interpret the firſt none in a 
reſtrained ſenie, 7. e. none of thoſe who have been the Authors of 
this Counſel and Rebellion againſt God, and who went into Zeyp: 


ruch who were in Egypt ( at leaſt the firſt of them ) in the 
niſhment with which he puniſhed the len Jin 6 OR _ 
of thoſe who in Egypt have burnt incenſe to Idols, and defiled them< 
ſelves with the Idolatry of Egypr, but there ſhall ſome eſcape, ſuch 
as have been forced into Ezypragainſt their Wills; and ſuch as being. 
ſo forced when they came here did not fall in with the .Idolatry of 
the Egyptians ( for we may gather from the next Verſe, that all of 
them did not ) theſe Men thall again return into the Land of Judah 
20 to me ſ{eemeth the faireſt and moſt probable ſenſe of the 
words. | 

15 © Then all the men which knew that their wives 
had burnt incenſe to other Gods /, and all the women 
chat ftood by, a great multitude, even all the people 
that dwelt inthe land of Egypt, in Pathros, anſwered 
Jeremiah, ſaying t, | | 

J The burning of Incenſe was a Religious Rite, which God had 

appointed theJews as a piece of Divine Homage to be paid to him a- 
lone,and by an orginary figure is put for Worſhip. So as burning 
Incenſs to other Gods, is the ſame with worſhipping other Gods, 
# It ſhould ſeem that all the Jews had not been thus tar guilty, and 
thoſe that did it were moſtly Women, or at leaſt they were the 
Leaders in this Idolatry, and one would think the Phraſe implyethy 
that thoſe who were thus culpable did it with ſome privacy, {o as all 
their Husbands did not know of it, but thoſe that did were as bad 
as their Wives, conniving at them,and juſtifying them in their Ido- 
latry, and joyning with them in the following peremptory anſwer 
to, and contempr of the Prophet. 

16 As forthe word which thou haſt ſpoken vnto us in 


name of the LORD, we will not hearken unto thee. s. 


u Weread Ch. 43. 5. Johantan and the reſt only denied that God had 
ſpoken ſuch things,and told Jeremiah, he had ſpoken falſely;bur now 
theſe Women and Men riſe higher, they acknowledge Jeremiah had 
ſpoken to them inthe Name of the Lord, bur tell him in-p/ain and 
dirett terms they would not obey it. And indeed this is\in the hearts 
of all ſinners that are ruled by their Lufts, though they will ſome= 
times pretend, that what they hear 1s not the Will of God, but ſpo- 
ken out of Malice and prejudice ; yet they are pre-reſolved they 
will not do it, let their underſtandings be never 1o well informed. 

17 But we will certainly do * whatſoever thing go- 


rings unto her, as we have done y,we andour fathers,our 
kings 'andour princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the 
ſtreets of Jeruſalem z : for. :h:» had we plenty of 
vicuals, and were well, and ſaw noevils. - . __ 

w Here is the root of all ſinners diſobedience, . their reſolation to 


| pleaſe and humour themſelves, nor knowing how in any thing to 
deny themſelves ; hencteir is that denying our. ſelves is by Chriſt 


made the firſt Law or Condition of his Diſciples. . x By the Queen 
of Heaven ſome here underſtand the Sun, which notion is favoured. 
from the words beiag of the Feminine;Gender, which fignifieth the 


Sun in Heb. others reading it not the Qzeen, but the frame of beaven, 


by it underſtanding the Sur, Moon and Stars. y Drink-offerings were 


a Divinz Homage which God had commanded to be paid to him, Lev. 


23. 13. Nam. 6.47. % RE Ear for it were, 1. Cuſtom. . 


Q 2 and 


Chap. KL] 


land of Egypr,they ſhall eve be conſumed by theſword, -- 


before they went unto Egypr, Chap. 42. 16, 17. here he doubleth his © 


| ſouls. 


willingly ; for none can think that God involved Jeremiah and Bas * 


eth forth out of our own mouth w, to burn incenſe un- »xq4,q; 
tothe ||* queen of heaven x, and to pour out drink-offe- 12. See 


tHeb..;fi\f 


up their 


$47 
141 


Verſe 25.6 
Or, frans 
of heaven. 
© Chap» | 

7. 18. ; 
T Heb, TiN 
bread. | 


"od 
es, : 


Hap ; XLIV. FEREM 1! 4 AH. Chap. XLy, 


; RA 4 their Fathers had uſed to do it. 2. The g Scing you are ſo fixed and peremptory, God is as reſolved as 
obanty - by Kings and Princes. # 3. The Plenty and Pro- | you are, andas you think you muſt be Religious to your wicked 
ſperity they had while they did ſo. as if their Idolatry had been the | Vows, ſo be aſſured God will be as Religious to his Oath, becauſe 
cauſe of it c (E _ _ by no | argu he _ CES. C. 13.16, 

| . . to the queen or ſo Name ſigniheth here. ere not any be left ofthe 
: 18 But _ we left off wes poo er y : "LT "ve Jews that are in Egypt, to ſwear The Lord God liverh,( for it ſhould ſeem, 
of heaven, and to pour © oy 4 » | that the Jews yer retained ſomething of the Religion of their Coun. 


we have wanted all :binps, and have been conſumed by try, and ſware by the Name of the living God, according to the 


the ſword, and by the ine b. Precept, Deus. 6. 13. and 10. 20. ) God threatneth there fhould be 
| ! po | : the aueen of | 2one of them left alive to do it ; he would not have his holy Name 
Chap. , 19 * And when we burnt incenſe to q polluted by thoſe Mouths that had been uſed to bleſs Idols.” 


. 18. heaven, and poured out drink-offerings unto her, did 25 Behold, * I will watch over them for evil | 
- - "= and * : 
JOr, Hur- we make her cakes to worſhip her, and pour out drink- not for goods, and ail the men of Judah that arein the TR - 


offerings unto her without our || men ? 
b Thi laſt Argument is drawn url] the evils that had befallen land of Egypt, ſhall be conſumed by the ſword, and 


124 left. worſhipping the Sun, Moon and Stars ; by the famine, until there be an end of them k. 
yn + bregth aber of that, the cauſe of their ſuf- ; God here either ſets out himſelf as one who would be induftri« 
ferings, their former doing of which was indeed the true cauſe , | 915 and ſolicitous to bring evil upon them, as Men who are-ſo in 
they had loſt their Husbands in the Siege, and in Battels; and had | 22 y buſineſs, watch opportunitiestodo it ; or elſe he derides their 
ſuffered famine and Hunger, and all becauſe they had burnt Incenſe | vain confidence as to his proteCtion of them, and eare for them 
ro other Gods, they interpret theſe Providences: as a puniſhmenr ( faith God ) I will watch over them, but not to buildand to plant, 
of them for not doing it as they bad formerly uſed to do. So bad | a5 Chap, 31. 28. butasit is in the former partof that Yerſe, to pluck 
Interpreters are thoſe of God's Providences, who indulge their Luſts | #?, and to throw down,and to deffroy, and tv affii. k For fo it follows, 
in oppoſition to God's Law. chey ſhall be anſuncd by the ſword and by the famine. 
20 © ThenJeremiah ſaid unto all the people, to the] 28 Yet * a ſmall number that eſcape the ſword, ſhall *ye.. , 4; 
men, and to the women, and to all the people which | return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah 
had given him hat anſwer, ſaying, 7; and all the remnant of Judah that are gone into the 
21 The incenſe that ye burnt in the cities of Judah, | land of Egypt to ſojourn there,ſhall know whoſe word « 11,s, 
and in the ſtreets of Jeruſalem, ye and your fathers, | ſball ſtand, + mine or theirs w. Sow ms 
your kingsand your princes, and the people of the land, by d Tu _ —_— _ _— _— the remnant, or from j 
: . er.. 14. ior here it 1s plainly ſaid, that ſeme ſhould eſcape and re- them. 
did not the LORD remember them, and came irc ##},, ,, p- or ths reſt {As "Bas 3 oth _—_—— them 
into his mind ? would appear whether God's Word or theirs ſhould ſtand, and have 
22 So that the LORD could no longer bear becauſe | its accompliſhment; they promiſing themſelves ſecurity, God 
of the evil of your doings, and becauſe of the abomi- HE o _ = om? ruine and deftruQion. : 
nations which ye have committed : therefore is your | , I? nd this ſhall be a ſign » unto you, faith the 


je . LORD, thac I will iſh you in this pl h | 
| ſtonilbment, and le p puniſh you in this place, that ye 
INES, end _—_ 149" wag ane 4 CE | may know that my wordsſhall ſurely ſtand againſt you 


. for evil. 
2 Becauſe you have burnt incenſe, and becauſe ye|, < R . 
have ſinned againſt the LORD, and have not obeyed ' word is raken _ ST __ wm 
the voice of the LORD, nor walked in his law, Nor | attend the thing ſignified by it, as Exed. 3. 12. beſides though their ] 
in his ſtacures, nor in his teſtimomes, therefore this e- | deſtru&Qion, and the deſtrution of Pharach Hophra were things ime 


vil is happened unto you, as at this day -Þ | pommy following one another, yet the latter was in order before 
c There is in theſe Verſes nothing of difficulty, nor any new | 


Phraſes to be opened. That which is obſervable is, that though the - 30 Thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will give Pha- 
Prophet was but one againſt many, yet he feareth not their Faces: T aoh-hophr a king of Egypt into the hand of his ene- 
"The ſubſtance of what he ſaith is this ; That they interpreted God's mies,and into the hand of them that ſeek his life, as E 


_ * "Voice in his Providences toward their Country dire&ly contrary . . - 
"to the true ſence of it. They concluded thattheir omiſſion of late gave Zedekiah king of J udah into the hand of Nebu- 


to burn Incenſe to the Sun, Moon and Stars was the cauſe why chad nezzar king of Babylon his enemy that ſought his 
it was ſo ill with them : as if theſe were animate Beings, and the - life P. 
| ſupreme Being, whereas they were but Creatures. Or as it it were 0 Pharaoh was a Name common to all the Egyptian Kings, as may 
"the Will of the ſupreme Being to be adored and worthipped in be learned from Gen. 12. 15. and 41. 1. Exod. 1. 8. 81. butthey had 
' them, or before Statutes and Images reprefented by them,whereas beſides that Name another peculiar to them. Whether this Hophra 
the Will of God was direftly contrary, - and as he in the ſecond was Yaphres or .4pries, is not much materia), nor is there any Cer- 
Commandment had forbidden any ſuch Worſhip, becauſe he was a tainty when this Prophecy was fulfilled. Whether Pharach Hephrs 
jealous God ; ſo he had for the breach of that Commandment by were ( as Herodvtus ſaith ) flain by Amefis, one of his SubjeQs who 
:their burning Incenſe to theſe Creatures, burned ” their Houſes rebelled againſt himand flew him ( as the aforementioned Author 
and Temple, and brought their Nation into that miſery into which tells us ) or Nebuchadnezzar who Jeſephus ſaith came about five Years 
- they were come : From whence may be obſerved how ill an Ar- after he had taken Jeruſalem,and over-ran Egypr,& flew this Pharaoch 
"gument for any Religious Worlhip Antiquity is, unleſs we by it Hophrs, whoſe overthrow wasa certain ſign of the Jews DeſtruQtion, 
mean what is moſt ancient ; as alſo, that Preſcription in that which it being not likejthar the King of Babylon ſhould ſpare theſe Jews 
is falſe, in the Worſhip of God juſtifieth none. Nor is it a good who had fledro this King of Egypr for ſhelter ; conſidering alſo 
concluſion that thoſe who lived neareſt to the primitive Inſtitution thar the Jews had ſlain Gedaligh his Deputy Governour in Judes. 
are moſt likely to have done beſt, as having the beſt meansto know p How God delivered Zeaekiah into the hand of the King of Baby- 
whatis truly Primitive. Idolatry wasas old as Laban, and the worſt Jon, we read Chap. g. Here now ends the Story of theſe Jews that 
| of Idolatry ( offering Children to Molech was older than the Levici-. had fled into Egypr. . 
cal Law, if not as old as Serug. In matters of Worſhip the Word C H A P. XLYV. 
of God is a ſufficient rule, we need not plead antiquity nor the Jeremiah inftru#erh ani! comforteth Baruch, 1,um=——= , 


pratice of our fathers. Error is not capable of being juſtified by Tra- H E word that Jeremiah the prophet ſpake unto —"__ 
ap. 


, . wo *'y 
LM Ce REcede ow dt. waa EPA YE... 


dition or Preſcription. | | ; | 

24 Moreover, Jeremiah ſaid to all the people, and Baruch the ſon of Neriah, * when he had written ,6, 3, 6 

to all the women, Hear the word of the LORD, all theſe words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah a,in the | 

Judah that are in the land of Egypt #. fourth year of Jehoiakim, the ſon of Joſiah king of Ju- | 

d That is, all you Men and Women that belong to Juash, and dah, faying 6, | 1 
are now come to inhabit in the Land of Zgypr. aThis Chapter ought to have been annexed to the 36 Chap. or 

MN 25 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael, immediately to have followed it, for the writing of J5remia}'s Pra. 


, & . : hecies we read of there. b It was 18 Years before this time that 
er. 15. ſaying, * Ye and your wives have both ſpoken with = Prophetthus ſpake to Baruch _ the writing of thoſe Prophe= 


your mouths, and fulfilled with your hands,ſay ing, We cies which as we read there brought both Jeremiah and Baruch into 
will ſurely perform our vows e that we have vowed » tO] a great deal of danger, which probably gave Baruch the occaſion of 
"burn incenſe to the queen of heaven, and to pour out | the Complaint we ſhal read of, Yer. 7. | 
drink-offerings unto her : ye will ſurely accompliſh your | _ 2 Thus ſaith the LORD,the God of Iſrael unto thee, | 
vows, and ſurely perform your vows f. O Baruch c. | | 
« "Thoſe words have ſpoken are in the Hebrew of the Feminine Gen- | _ © Jeremiah had in his former. Diſcourſes revealed the Will of 

der which giveth good reaſon to ſome Interpreters to conclude the | God, concerning Nations, here he revealeth it as to Barxch his 

Women were firſt and principal in this Idolatry,and the Mens guilt | Secretary or Clerk,upon which account ſome compare him to Paul, 

lay in coniving at them, and ſuffering themſelves to be ſeduced by | writing to Philemen as well as to Chur ches. 

them. | Ye, faith the Propher, have ſpoken it, and ye have been as 3 Thou didlt fay, Wo 15 me now, for the LORD 

big as your words, and for a cover you pretend the Religion of a | hath added grief to my forrow, I fainted in my ſighing, 

Yow, as if a Yow could be a bond of iniquity, , and it were poſlible and I find no reſt 4. 


by a Vow to oblige your ſclvetmo a forſaking of the true God,and neſs . | 
wen . , ad Upon Baruch's reading the Prophecies after he had wrote them 
Tian wor” os of Idolatry : pen his - rg mical, ſoas to from f gx Mouth of Jeremiah, both he and Jeremiah were ſent for bee 
oy Ore, Fou - © anda ret-aaddex. fore the Princes, and adviſed to hide themſelves, as we read Chap. 


you from your reſolution, God hath reſolved too. oo Trameobibly Sheds | - 
_ Is, 19. y diſturb'd Baruch, and made him lament 
26 Therefore hear FE the word of the LORD, all his en in (ch like expreſſions, of which the Prophet had 


Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt, Behold I have | heard, probably by Revelation frem God. 

ſworn by my.greatname, faith the LORD g, chat my | 1 "| Thus (balt thou ſay unto him, The LORD faith 

name ſhal no more be named in the mouth of any man.” thus, Behold, :har which I have built will E break down, 

of Judah, in all the land of Egypt, faying, the LORD| and thar which I have planted I will pluck up, even 

God liveth ho this whole land. es FR 
s An 


— 4 


. + wo * w- 4 
A ove a eu Eteccc@adl nunca... 


Chap. XLVI. 


* Chap. 


21. 9. and 


38. 2.and 
39. 18, 


- to flight, which the Prophet here publiſheth. God made a fear to 


5 And ſcekeſt thou great things for thy ſelf*ſeek them 
not e; For behold,, I will bring evil upon all fleſb, faith 
the LORD f: but thy life will I give unto thee * for a 


prey, inall places, whither thou goeſt g. 

e What great things Baruch was ſeeking is not expreſſed, and 
impoſlible to be determined with any certainty ; "They could not 
be Honour, or Riches; The time of Fehoiakim's Reign was no 
time for any Pious Rational Man, to expe& any thing of that na- 
rure: He might expe& to have been a Propher, as Eljbs was, who 
firſt was but a Servant to Elijah. Or at leaſt he might expe reſt 
and proteQion, when ethers met with diſturbance, but it may be 
the meaning is no more than, Doeſt thou expe& what,none meet- 
eth with, or is like to mcet with who feareth God ? Never think 
ofit. f Iam bringing Calamities, and Miſery upon the whole 
Nation wherein thou liveſt- g I will preſerve thy Life, that 1s all 
thou art to expe&, and thou ſhalt live to ſee the time, that thou 
wilt judge that a great Booty, that thou ſhalt have lent thee, whi- 
therſoever the Wind of my Providence ſhall happen to drive thee. 
This Meſſage of God to Baruch teacheth us that God expeQs from 
his People a Spirit ſuited to his Diſpenſations, and that they ſhould 
keep their Spirits low in a time of publick Judgements, not making 
to themſelves any great promiſes of freedom from their ſhare in 
the publick Calamities of that Nation or Kingdom in which they 
are ; but contenting themſelves with ſuch allowances as God pro- 
Portioneth to them at ſuch a time without diſcontent or murmur» 
ing, and bleſſing God for any Marks of gracious Providence which 
he in ſuch times will pleaſe to ſet upon them; being thankful for 
them, and ſatisfied with them. 


CHAP. XLVLI 


The Overthrow of Pharaoh's Army, 1=——12. The Conqueſt of Egypt 
by Nebuchadnezzar, 13——26. Gos's People comforred,27, 28. 


HE word of the LORD which came to Jeremiah 
the prophet againſt the Gentiles 4. 


' & This Verſe contains the Title to all the enſuing Diſcourſes of - 
this Propher, for, though there be ſome particular Verſes in theſe 
Chapters that relate to the Jews, yet they are all concerning their 
Reſtauration. The Prophecies of Judgements from the beginning 
of this Chapter to the 524. Chapter are all againſt foreign Nations, 
which are called Gentiles, As to whom God revealed his Will for 
the puniſhment of them, for the relief and fatisfaQtion of his Peos | 
ple to whom the moſt of them had been bitter Enemies. The 5 24. 
Chapter is by moſt concluded not to have been wrote by Jeremiah, | 
who, it is not probable, wou'd have repeated what he had related 
before, Chap. 39. but it was wrote (as is ſuppoſed) by ſome of the 
Captives in Babylon, as a Preface to the Book of Lammentations. 
This particular Chapter containeth the Revelation of the Will of | 
God, concerning Egypt whither ſome of the Jews fled for refuge | 
after this time, and which had been a great occaſion of ſin to the 
Jews before, not only through the Jews too many Leagues with 
them, and confidence in them, but from their communicating in 
their Idolatry with them, Jer. 2. 16. The children of Noph and Tah- 
panhes, brake the crown of their head. : 

2 Againſt Egypt, againft the army of Pharaoh Ne- 
cho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates 
in Carchemiſh, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Baby- 
lon ſmote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the ſon of 


Joſiah king of Judah 5. : 
b Phargoh Necho was King of Egypt in Jefiah's time, it was by his 
Army cat Joſiah was killed at Megidao, 2 Kings 23. 29. it was he 
that made Jehoiakim King of Judah taking away Jehrahaz, verſe 34. 
but though he coveileg at that time, and that was one time when 
he came. out againſt Carehemiſh, 2 Chron. 35. 20. yet he was over- 
thrown by Nebuchadnezzar in a Battel with him afterwards as appears 
from 2 Kings 24. 7, and Jehoiakim was made Tributary to Nebuchad- 
nezzar, as we read 2 Kings 24, 1. and the King of Egypt was brought 


* E REMHIAN 


ſolow by thatVifory that he firred ns more out of Egypt,for the King of 
Babylon had'taken all from Nilus, the great River of Egypt ro Euphrates, 
and this, ſaith.this Verſe was the fourth Year of Jeheiakim. *' This 
Prophecy muſt be before that time. GCarchemifh appeareth from 1/#. 
10.9. to have been a placein $Syris where the Eyptian Army had 
been in Joſiah's time, and then went away Conquerors, as appears 
from 2 Chron. 35 20, &Cc. : | 

3 Order ye the buckler, and the ſhield, and draw 

by 


near to battel. 


4 Harneſs the horſes, and get up ye horſemen, and 
ſtand forth with your helmets, furbiſh the ſpears, and 
put on the brigandines c. - = 

c Art hath ſo much improved all things, in latter Ages, that it 
is very hard to determine of what form the ſeveral Weapons, and 
pieces of Armour, whether offenſive or defenſiue in uſe at this time 


| 
werez the moſt here mentioned ſeem to have been defenſive, and | the 


the whole Speech of the Prophet dire&ed to the Egyptians, ſeems to | 


be Tronical, calling tothis Army of Parach Necho to get ready to de- | or they (flying) for haſt ſtumbling one upon another, ſo as both 
fend res, the hey es encounter with an Enemy would | thoſe that went before, and thoſe who followed after, 


put them very hard to it, ſo as they had need to have their Helmers ' 
and Bucklers, and Shields, and Brigandines, all in a readineſs, and 
know the uſe of them well, the Horſes for War had need be Har- 
neſſed, the Spears furbiſhed, and the Riders gotup. 

5 Wherefore have I ſeen them diſmayed, and turn- 
ed away back ? and their mighty ones F are beaten 
down, and are+ fled apace, and look not back for fear 
was round about, faith the LORD 4. 


4 God had either in a Viſion ſhewed Jeremiah this Army of the | 


Egyptians flying, or elſe had revealed to him that they ſhould be put 


fall upon the Egyptians, ſo as when the King of Babylon came to joyn 
Battel with them, they were not able ar all to ſtand, bur turaed 


| day of vengeance,that he may avenge him of his adverſa- 


; try, by the river Euphrates ». 


| already paſt, becauſe 


— 


their Backs, and their greateſt Commanders were either kill'd, or 
fled away as faſt as they could. ; 
6 Let not the ſivift flee away, nor the mighty man 


| | Chap. 
eſcape, they ſhall ſtumble and fall toward the north by 
the river Euphrates e. | 
e That is, it is in vain for the ſwift to flee away, the mighty 
Men ſhall not eſcape, but they ſhall ſtumble, and fall at Carehemi 
which was near the River Euphrates, and Northward from Beypr. 
7 Who is this that cometh up as a flood, whole wa« 
ters are moved as the rivers f. | 
f The next Verſe expoundeth this. 
8 Egypt rifeth up like a flood, and bis waters are 
moved like the rivers, and he faith I will go up, «nd 
will cover the earth, I will deftroy the city, and the 


c 


inhabitants chereof g. 


5 The Prophet compareth the Egyptians fleſhed with their for- 
mer Vittory obtained againſt Jefish at Meg:ade, and now preparing 
to another Expedition, to a Floed (with alluſion probab] ; the 
River Nilus, whoſe Waters uſetl ts riſe to a great height) both for 
the multitude of their Soldiers, and for their rage ; they were re= 
ſolved to carry ſuch numbers. as ſhould cover the Earth, and to 
take Carchemiſh, or ſome other City which their deſign was againſt. 
It ſhould ſtem both by this Text, and that Exod. 15. 9, to. That 
the Egyptians were a People much given to vaunt and boaſt of 
the great things they would do, boaſting when they were puttiag 
on their Harneſs, as if they were putting it eff, not conſidering 
how uncertain the events of War were, nor yet that wherein they 
talked proudly there ws one that could be above them. 

9 Ceme up ye Horſes, and rage ye chariots, and let 
the mighty men come forth þ, + the Ethiopians, and 
the  Lybians that handle the ſhield 3, and the Lydi- Cuſh. 
ans * that handle and bend the bow &:. t Heb. 

h Their ancient way of fighting was with Chariots, and Bows, P«*. 
the Prophet calls in the Name of the Commanders of the Egyptian * If 
Armies, to the Horſes and chariots to come oh, and ingage in the 19- 
Fight. 5; The Ecthioprans were the Cuſbires, who were Neigh« 
bours to the Egyptian, ſo were the Lybians, both of them it ſhould 
ſcem were famous for handling the Shield, the Lybi#ns were 
deſcended from Put, both the Cuſbites and the Putites or Lybiens 
were deſcended from Ham, Get. 10. 6. k The Lydiaris were as 
famous for the uſe of the Bow in War, they were deſcended from 
Mijraim or Shem, Gen. lo. 13. 22. the Lydians here meant are 
thought to be thoſe deſcended from Miſraim, and ſome think theſe 
were Ethipians, They were all Auxiliaries to the Egyptians in this 
Expedition. 


Io For this is the day of the Lord GOD of hoſts, a 


3 


+ Heb. i 


res /; and the ſword ſhall devour, and it ſhall be fa- 
tiate, and made drunk with their blood #2: For the 
Lord GOD of hoſts * hath a ſacrificein the north coun- 


1 Or, Bur this is the Day of the Lard, &e. Pharadh is miſtaken in 
accouning this day his owti, becauſe of the multitude of his For 
ces, this is the Day of the Lord, who as he is the Lord of all the hoſts 
of his Creatures, ſo hath a particular Rule and Government over 
hoſts of Men ; This is further explained by the next Words, s 4ay 
of vengeance, which God hath ſer apart, in it to be ayenged upon 
his Enemies. m» Theſe Phraſes only metaphorically ſignifie, the 
great ſlaughter God would make that day amongſt the Zzyprians 
» This the Prophet declares that God would do for his honour 
and glory, therefore he talls it 4 Szcrifite, by which alſo he decla« 
reth his Juſtice in this puniſhment of the Egyptians, and for the fur- 
ther repute and credit of his Prophecy, telleth them to whom he 
ſpake of the place it ſhould be in, viz. near the River Euphrates, 
where Joſiah was flain by him, 2 Rings 23. 29. ns 

Ix Go up into Gilead and take * balm, O virgin, * Chap, 
the daughter of Egypte: in vain ſhalt thou uſe many 8. 22. 
medicines : for} thou ſhalt not be cured p. RE... 

o Great States are ordinarily in Scripture called Y:7gins for their 
Beauty, and pleaſant State ; Gilesd was a moſt famous place for 
Balm : The Prophet ironically calls to the Egyprans to goto Gilead 
for Balm. p Bur tells them it would be to no purpoſe, God was 
about to wound them beyond all help of Medicines. : 

12 The nations have heard of thy ſhame q, and thy 
cry hath filled the land, for the mighty mian hath 
ſtumbled againſt the mighty, «nd they are fallen both 
together #. | | 

q The Prophet keepeth to hisold Prophetick Stile, ſpeaking of 
things that were to come to paſs ſome Years after, as ifthey were 
the certainty of them; in this fenſe lie 
ſaith other Nationg had ſeen; becauſe they ſhould ſee the ſhame 
and confuſion of the Kgyptiaps upon their overthrow, and the ery 
of their ſlain and wounded Men would fill other Lands. r For 
12rians ſhould certainly be overthrown, either by the Chaldt- 

mbling upon the Babylomians, or the Babylenians on them, 


m0 cure | 
ſhall be uni | 
thee. 1 


ans 


ſhould both 
fall together. 


13 \ The word that the LORD ſpake to Feremiah 
the Prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar the king of Baby- *6, 
loh ſhould cotite «xd * ſmite the land of Egypt /. 

[ A Revelation different from the former in this, that the former 
only foretold the overthrow of the, King of Kgp? in, a particular 
Battel in Carchemiſh near Euphrates, of which we read that the thing 
wasdone, 2 Kings 24 7. This foretells the King of Babylen's over- 
running all the Land of Zgypr, and was not fulfilled till ſome Years 
after Zedekiah was carried away iy 5; g- but prepheſied of Chap. 

43. 10, and 44. 38, to come to paſs in the time of Pharaoh Hophra 
as we heard befor® and more Jargely foretold by the Prophet E- 
zekiel, Ezck. 29. and 3o, and 32. to happen after the overthrow of 
Tyrus, Ezek. 29. 18, 19. RE Ee ae 

14 Declare ye in Egypt, and publiſh in Migdo!...,., 
and publiſh wNopd, m in Tahpanhes : fay Ye, Stand belt; 


3 feſt, 


[2 
Ry in 
- WEGS 
»5h 
I9:T. 
$3 35% 
f 


” by - RY 


and prepare ye, for the ſword f1all devour round 

thee «. "5M 2 | 
4, . ®ncerning theſe three Cities of Egypr, ſee the notes on C/ap. 
*.T. the meaning is, publiſh this Prophecy over all the Land of 
EzYpr, or perhaps theſe three were the chief Places whither the 
Fews that went with Johanen the Son of Kareab, &c. went, and 
where they fixed themſeives, many more places 1n Ezyp? are named 
by Ezekiel, Chap. 30. 14, &c. u Look to- your ſelves and prepare 
your ſelves for Battel, for the Nations are deſtroyed round about 
you, (fo iris in the Hebrew) ,and,you have reaſon to expet that 


x XLVE 


abou: 


the Sword ſhould come next unto your Countries. *F 
15 Why are thy vallant me ſwept away ? they 
ſtood not, becauſe the LORD did drive them 7. 
£ The Prophet firſt propoundeth a Queſtion, then returneth an= 
fwer to himſelf. Egypt wasfull of valiant Men, yer faith the Pro- 
pher they ſhall be Pn away,, or broken down as fruit, or graſs 
is beaten down with. 4 violent Rtorm of Hail, ({9 the word is uſed 
Prov, 28. 3.) How comes this to paſs? ( faith the Prephet ) He an- 
{wereth himſelf, becauſe it was of God to deſtory Egypr, who work- 
eth and none can le! him, when he ſtrikes none can ſtand before 
him; none can ſtand up againſt him. 
* 16 He + made mavy to fall, yea, one fell upon a- 
nother «, and they ſaid, Ariſe, let us go again to our 
own people, and tothe Land of our nativity from the 


oppreiling ſword w. 
"2 "The Prophet had before ſpoken of Nebuchadnezzar, as an In- 
firument in the hand of God, who being armed with his Commiſ- 
| fron and Power, made many to fall, yea God cauſed ſuch a fear to 
IJ fall upon them, that in their flight they fell upon one another. 
w And though they. had many Soldiers that came to help them 
from Cuſb and Pat, and Lybia, yet all was too little, the Prophet 
foretels they ſhould all be glad to go home again, and ſhould 
* ſpeak to one another to that purpoſe, for the ſucceſs of the King 
of Babylon's Sword ſhould be ſuch, as they ſhould quickly fee there 
would be no ſtanding before it. 


17 They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt 5s but 


a noiſe x, he hath paſſed the time appointed /. 

x That is, the Ethiopians and Lubims that ſhould come to help the 
King of Egypt ſhould cry, or the Chaldeans, or the Egygtians them- 
ſelves ſhould cry, Pharaoh is but a noiſe, that is, hath made a great 
noiſe, bur it cometh to nothing ; Others make the ſenſe, Pharach 
is a Man of noiſe, or tumu't, that hath made a great deal of di- 
fturbance to himſ{clf and us- y Thar is, fay the moſt, he bath 
paſſed the time himſelf fixed whereat he would come, and fight 
the Chaldeans, But theſe words compared with the next Verſe, 
incline others to think, that eirher Pharaoh's Soldiers, or his Allies 
are here brought in mocking at Pharaoh, promiſing himſelf that 
the King of Babylon would not come, and laughing at Jeremia/''s Proe 
phecy, ſaying, Tie time appointed was paft, that is, the time of his 
coming mentioned by Jeremiah was paſt. Feremiah foretels that 
Pharazh's Army and Confederates would ſee reaſon to cry our, 
Pharaoh, in ſaying ſoy was but a noiſe. 


18 As I live, ſaith the King, whoſe name zs the LORD 
of hoſts, ſurely as Tabor is amongſt the mountains,and 


as Carmel by the ſea, ſo ſhall he come xz. 

z Thar is, he ſhall as certainly come and encompaſs you with 
his Armies, as Tabor is encompaſſed with Mountains, and as Car- 
mel is by the Sea, or as Barak going down from Mount Tabor de- 
ſtroyed Siſera's Army, or as ſurely as the Rain came which £/1ah 
firſt diſcovered from Mount Carmel, 1 Kings 18. 41, 42. there are 
other gueſſes at the ſenſe of this Compariſon, bur the ſenſe is un- 
doubtedly no more than that Nebuchadnezzar ſhould certainly 
come againſt Egyp:, how vainly ſoever the Egyptians. flattered 
themſelves to the contrary, ſuppoſing the time paſt which the Pro- 
pher ſpke of. 3 6 
+ Hb. 19 Oh thou daughter dwelling in Egypt «a, ÞT fur- 
make thee niſh thy ſelf ro go into captivity b: For Noph ſhall be 
#nftraments graſte and deſolate without an inhabitant c. 

of captivi= , That is, O you Inhabirants in the Land of Zgypr. b Make 
F- ready to go into another Country as Priſoners of War, for your 
Cities ſhall be deſtroyed. Noph particularly ſhall be wholly depo- 
pulated, and laid waſte and have none to dwell in it. 
20 Egypt 3s like a very fair heifer; but deſtruction 


cometh : it cometh out of the north 4. 

d That is, Egypt is now in a thriving proſperous Condition, ha- 
ving not uſed to be under any Yoke like an Heifer, that is fair, 
and fat, bur ſhe will not be fo long, ſhe is but as aBeaſt fatted for 
the Slaughter, and there are Slaughter-men, coming out of Chal- 
dea that will kil! this fair Heifer, and make her a Sacrifice to the 
Juſtice of God. : 

f Heb. "2s Alſo her hired men are in the mid of her, like 


bullo.ks of + fatred bullocks e, for they alſo are turned back, azd 
we Sel. are fled away together ; they did not ſtand f becauſe 
the day of their calamity was come upon them, and 


the time of their viſitation g. 

e The mercegary Soldiers allo which the Egyptians have hired 
from Cuſb and Put, and other parts are at preſent in a flouriſhing 
proſperous State. Ff We have tranſlated \J here ll, it had been 

etter tranſlated Bur, for that is manifeſtly the ſenſe. Though 
they at preſent lying in Garriſons be fat and flouriſhing, like Bul- 

Jocks in the Stalls, yer when it cometh to it they ſhall not ſtand 
but turn back, and flee as well as the reſt. g Becauſe the time is 
come when God reſolverth to puniſh them, and bring calamity upon 
them. When the rime is come which God hath ſet in his Coun- 
ſels, wherein he will punith Perſons or Nations ; no probabilities 
to the contrary are much conſiderable, | 
22 The voice thereof ſhall go like a ſerpent þ, for 
they ſhall march with an army, and come againſt her 


with axes, as hewers of wood z. 
h Egypt is now like an Heifer that makes a great bellowing, but 
the time ſhall come when ſhe ſhall make a Iefltr noiſe like the hif- 


Jcb.mul- 
ved the 
Mrs, 


ERJEM7 4 4. 


. ſing ofa Serpenr, when it ſecth it ſelf ſet upon. 


Chap. XLYI1L: 


; FI Fo I FT. = 
deans ſhali come with a greet Army, armed with ior f andre ” on 
they came to fell own tome Wood in a Forreſt, or Wood. © 

23 They (ball cut down her forreſt, {ich the LORD 
though it cannot be fearci,ed &, becauls they are more 
than the gralboppers, and are innumerable /; 

; k Egypt is compared to a Forreſt either fer the multitude of Ci- 
ties, or of People in that Country, and to a thick Forreſt, becauſe 
as 1t 15 an'hard thing to make enes way through a Forreſt, fo it was 
judged as hard for an Enemy to make his way into that Country ; 
in humane probability Egyp# could not be ſearched, yer (ſaith G: d) 
the Chaldeans ſhall cut down this Forreſt, and ir thall be no more 
to them than for Hewers of Wood, with Tools fittcd for the PUTre 
poſe, to make their way through a Forreſt. / For the Army ofthe 
Chaldeans ſhall be as numerous as the Inhabitants of Egypt, more 
than the Graſhoppers which come in ſuch Troops, as in a ſhort 
time they devour every green Herb in a place. 

24 The daughter of Egypt (ball be confounded, be 
(ball be delivered into the hand of the people of the 
north mz. | 

m That is, into the hand or power of the Chaldeans, it is the 
ſame thing which the Propher had before ſaid again and again, and 
repeats 1t {o oiten only for the turther confirmation of the truth 
of the Prediftion, notwithſtanding the appearing improbability 
of any ſuch thing. 

25 The LORD of hoſts, the God of Iſrael ſaith », *, HET 
Behold, I will puniſh thee [| multicude of No ec, and »;jper. 
Pharaoh, and Egypt, * with their gods, and their kings, t Heb. 
even Pharaoh, and all them that truſt in him p: _— 

7 Thefe Names are often in conjunCtion given unto God, the Chap. . 
firſt ſignifying his Power, or Ability ro do what ke either promi- #3 722 73» 
ſeth ,or threatncth,the other ſpeaking his Kindneis and near Relati- "——— 
on to the Jews. o There are gicat critical Diſputes about this Phraſe, !3* 
whether the word tranſlated Mulrirude, ſignihes ſo (as it doth, Chap. 
52. 15) andif ſo whether it ſhould nct be the Mulrirude from No, 
Or whether it ſignifies the Nouriſher, (as ſome would have it) be 
cauſe No (which moſt think is the ſame City with thatat this time 
called Alexandria, being a great place of Merchandiſe) nouriſhed all 
the adjacent Parts ; but it is no cafie thing to reſolve the Queſtion 
nor is the reſolution of it of much moment to us. - p By thoſe 
that truſted in Pharaoh the Jews are moſt probably meant, who all 
along In their Proſperity put too much confidence in Egypt, and 
after that Hieryſalem was taken, ſome of them (as we heard before) 
fled into Egypr for SanQtuary, 

26 And I will deliver them into the hand of thoſe 
that ſeek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchad- 
nezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his ſer- 
vants: And afterwards it ſhall be inhabired, as in the 
days of old, faith the LORD g. 


q The former part of this Verſe is but the ſame which the Pro- 
phet hath often betore ſaid. The Iatter part is a Promiſe for the 
Reſtauration of £gypr to ſome degrees of its former Proſperity and 
Liberty. Thedeterminare time for the fulfilling of this Prophecy 
15told us, Ezek. 29. 13, 14. viz.at the end of forty Years: This we 


are told by Civil Hiſtorians fell out in the time of amaſes a King of 


Egypt coxvous with Cyrus, who was overcome by Crus his Son Cam= 
byjes, who broughr Egyps to be a Province belonging to the Medes 
and Pe/jians, by the fulfilling of which Prophecy the truth both of 
Feremiah's and Ezekiel's Prophecies are juſtified. 

27 4 * But fear notthou, O my ſervant Jacob, and "IG, ir 
be nor diſmayed, O. Iſrael; For behold, I will ſave ng get 
thee from a far off, and thy ſeed from the land of * Ka nf 
their captivity, and Jacob ſhall return, and be in reſt 
and at eaſe, and none ſhall make him afraid. 

28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my ſervant, faith the 
LORD, for I am with thee, for 1 will make a full 
end of all the nations, whither I have - driven thee 
but T will not make *a full end of thee, but corre& thee * Chan: 
in meaſure, yet will I || not leave thee wholly unpu- 10. 5-4 


niſhed 7. | os, nog 

7 See the Notes on Chap. 30. 10, 11. where is the ſubſtance of *7*79 4. 
what is ſaid in theſe two Verſes,and almoſt the very words _—_— thee off. _ 
peated : The great thing to be obſerved by us, | is the difference Or,in mae 
which the juſt and righteous God maketh betwixt his Puniſhments king thee ; 
of his Church and own People, and his Puniſhments of wicked men ©2") 7 
who are their enemies, as there is a great difference in the root of ®'*,"® . 
ſuch Diſpenſations, God dealing them out to his People our of Love make thih 
thatthey might not be condemned with the wicked, ſo there is a ©2't* 
great deal of difference in the meaſure and duration of their Puniſh« 
ments, the Rod of the wicked ſhall nor always ly upon the backs 
of the Righteous, and they are corre&ed in meaſure. 


C H A P. XLVIL 


The Deſtrufion of the Philiſtines, Tyrians, Zidonians, and the others 

by the Sea-ſide, To ; 
HE word of the LORD, that came to Jeremiah | 

the Prophet * againſt the Philiſtines, before that «+ Chap? 

bl 


Pharaoh ſmote + Gaza a. IG 
a In the former Chapter the Prophet foretoid the Judgementsof + Heb, 
God upon the Egyptians,who were the Jews ſeeming Friends,but their 4zzoh. 
real enemies, asthey were occaſions to them of Idolatry, and ofa ſin- 
ful confidence in them. He comes 1n this Chapter to foretel the : 
Judgements of God upon the Philiſtines who were inveterate enemies 
ro the Jews, againſt whom alſo 1/aiah, Chap. 14. 29. of his Pro. 
phecy, and Ezekiel! and Amos prophelied, Ezekiel 25. 15. Amos 1.6. 
And alſo Zephaniah in Chapter 2.4, 5. of his Prophecy. When 
the King of Babylon took Gaza, one of the five Cities of the 
Philiſtines the Scripture doth not tell us. Some think it was either 
in his way to Cerchemiſh, or as he came back a Conquerour from 
the 


Ff — 


IA OW eowwt) 4 as ——_ 


Gn er nd 
MIO ISAS. 


Chap. XLVIII. 


I. 14. 

T Heb. 
the fulneſs 
thereof. 


+ Heb. 
the iſte.| 


Ts —————_ 


*Mic. 1.16. 

* Chap. 
25. 20. 
* Chap. 
16. 6. and 
48. 37. 

j- 

2g 
THeb. ga- 
they thy 
ſelf. 

f 

u8 

| f Heb. 

vAe | haw canſt 

e . thou. 

« 

p | 

"" 

b, 

þ 


7 E R E 


the Battel at M-:i4do where Joſiah was ſlain. The time when Jere 
miah had this Re: e/ation 1s. ſet down, to fet us hnow, that it was 
in the time oh the Phji:ftines Proſperity, when the Prophet could 
ſee no ſuch effe& exiſtent, or probable in its cauſes. 

2 Thus faith the LORD, Behold * waters riſe up 
* out of the north b, and iball be an overflowing flood, 
and (hail overflow the Land, f and all that is there- 
in, the city, and them that dwell thein c, then the 
men s cry, and all the inhabitants of the Land ſhall 
houwl 4d. 


b Calamities and AfMiCtions are often in Scripture ſet out under 
the notion of Waters ; and as the miſeries of Egypr were ſet out by 
the overflowings of their great River Nilus, ſo the Calamities of 
the Philiſlines are expreſſed by the overflowings of the great Ri- 
ver Eiphrates, theſe miſeries coming upon them by the Chaldeans, 
which were a Northern People, their Waters are ſaid to riſe up our 
of the North. « It is ſaid to be an overflowing Flood that ſhould 
overflow the Land, becauſe it was to be a ſweeping Judgement, 
which like a Flood ſhould carry all before it. d Which ſhould 
produce amongſt the Inhabitants of Gaza a great howling and la- 
mentatione : 

3 At the noiſe of the ſtamping of the hoofs of his 
ſtrong horſes, at the ruſbing of his chariots, and at the 
rumbling of his wheels, the fathers ſhall not look back 


to their children for feebleſneſs of hands e. 

e This is all but the deſcription of the march of an Army, ſo 
terrible as ſhould make Parents forget their natural affe&ion, and 
flee away to ſave themſelves, looking upon themſelves as loſt, and 
unable to proteC& their Children. 

4 Becauſe of the day that cometh ts ſpoil all the 
Philiſtines f, and to cut off from Tyrus and Z:idon e- 
very helper that remaineth g: For the LORD will 


ſpoil the Philiitines, the remnant of + the country of 
Caphtor ||. 

f The day which God hath ſet, and appointed for the Ruine of 
the Phil:ſftines, g Tyre and Sidon were neighbouring to the Phili- 
fines, as appears from Gen. 10. 14, 15. Joel 3, 4+ and ſo were of- 
ten called to their help. God threatneth both to deſtroy them, 
and alſo thoſe that helped them. |; It appeareth from Gen. 10. 14. 
that the Philiſtines and Caphtozims were rejated, for their firſt Pro- 
genitors Philiftm and Caphtorim, were both the Sons of Mizraim 
the Son of Ham one of the Sons of Noah. Ir appears from Dent, 
2. 23. that they expelled the Avites, and dwelt in Hazerim to Az- 
zah, whether their Country be what was afterwards called Cappa- 
docia or Damigata is not much material for us to know, they were a 


r_—_— confederate with the Philsſtines, whom God here threatneth | 
to 


eſtroy with them. 


* Baldneſs is come upon Gaza, * Askelon is cut 


off with the remnant of their valley g: how long wilt 
thou * cut thy ſelf þ? 

g Both Gaza and Akelon were two principal Cities belonging to 
the Phil:ſtines taken by Judah,Judges 1. 18. we read of them, 1 Sar; 
6..i7. both Amos, Zephaniah, and Zechariah, propheſied their ruine, 
Amos 1. 8. Zephaniah 2. 4,9. Zechariah 9. 5. as well as this Prophet, 
by the Remnan: of the Valley, moit underſtand thoſe who lived in the 
Vallies near about Askelon. kh Concerning the Jaſt Clauſe in this 
Verſe there is ſome difference, whether the words ſhould be joy- 
ned with the next Verſe,and read, How long wilt thou cut thy ſelf,O thou 
Sworg of the Lord, or as they ly in our Bibles, and then the ſenſe is, 
Why will you in ſo deſperate a caſe afflict your ſelves, when all 
your mourning will do y:u no good. 

6 O thou ſword of the LORD, how long will :t be 
ere thou be quiet, Þ put up thy feif into thy ſcabbard, 
reſt, and be ſtill z. 


; Some make the words of this ſixth Verſe to be the words of 
the Philiſtines in their mourning and cutting themſelves, crying to 
God to ſtop the Sword drawn againſt them, and to return jt again 
into its Scabbard: Others make them the words of the Prophet; 
lamenting the havock which he by the eye ofthe Prophecy ſaw was 
like to be made amongſt the Philiſtines by the Chaldeans, (for good 
Men are affz&ed with the Miſeries even of the worſt of Men ) 

7 F How canit be quiet, ſeing the LORD hath 
given ita Charge againſt Aſbkelon, and againſt the ſea- 


ſhore ? there hath he appointed it &; 


k The latter Verſe muſt be expounded according to the former; * 


for if the words of the former Verſe be underſtood as tie words of 
the Philifines, thoſe of this Verſe mult be underſtood as the words 
of the-Prophet, puting them out of hopes of the Swords ſtopping, 
becauſe what it did was by Commillion from God, which it muit 
execute. If the words of the former Verſe be to be underſtood as 


the Prophet's words, the words of this Verſe are cither the Pro- 


phet's words correfting himſelf, and concluding that this Sword 
could not be quiet, becauſe it was edged by God himſelf, who 
had given it his Commiſſion, which it muſt execute : Or the 
words of God, letting the Prophet know that he had given this 
Sword its Commiſſion, and therefore it could not ſtop till Akelor 
and the People onthe Sea-ſhore were deſtroyed by it. 
CH A P. XLVIIL | 
The Jugdement of Moab, 1———6. Fer their Pride, 7 10. For their 
' ſecurity and humane Confidence, 1 1——— 2x. Eſpecially for their con- 
tempt of God, and inſolence cowards his People, 26 —— 46. Their 
Reſtauration, 47. 
| yr Paper having Chapter 46. denounced God's Judgement 
again Egypr, and again the Philifines, Ch. 47. in this Chapter 
he cometh to do the like againſt the Moabites, Moab the Father of 
theſe Moabites was the Son ot Lot, Gen 9. 37. The Moabites Coune 
try lay in the way the 1/rael:tes went to Canaan, Num. 21. 11, 13.ncar 
the Country of the Ammonitcs, Balak was King of it when the 7- 
raelites paſſed by it, who ſent for the Sorcerer Balaam to curſe them, 
Numb, 22. 4. who Chap. 24. 5, &c. bleſſed them. They ſeduced the 
Iſraelites te Adultery and Mdulatry, Chap. 25+ I, 


M 1 A HM. Chap. XLY 
1 Againſt * Moab, thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, *x,, .| 
the God of Iſrael Wo unto Nebo a, for it is ſpoiled : 127 þ 
Kiriathaim is confounded, and taken, {| Miſgab is con- chap. 
founded and diſmayed. 27. & if 
.® Moab was a large Country and had may Cities; we ſhall have 3* Ez 
divers of them named in this Chapter ; the firſt that we read of Ne. 25: 9: 
bo in Holy Write is, Numb. 32. 3, 38. Reuben built both that and x3: m5 Ih 
riarhaim as may be read; there, Verſes 38, 39. It was alſo the | 0: "i 
Name of a Mountain, Deut 34. 1. It ſhould ieem tht in_Jerem;- high plalhy 
ah « time, the M:abites had got both the poſſeſſion of Nebe, and Ki- Þ 
riathaim and Miſgah, of wh:ch we read no more in Scripture. Ir 'F 
ſeems to be a City built upon ſome Hill or High place. The Pro- : 
pher threatnerh ruine to all theſe three Cities. j 
2 There ſhall be no more praiſe of Moab: Tn Heſhbon Ml 
they have deviſed evil againſt it b6: Come, and let. us Or, 6 
cut it off from being a Nation c: Alſo thon || ſha't 2995 | 


- 
Y 
. 


be cur down, O Madmien, - the ſword ſhall + purſue {$957 Þ 
thee 4. # purſue 5Heb.z|f 


b H:-ſhbon was formerly the City of S/hon, Numb. 21. 26 it b:came 
afrerwa:ds one of the principal Cities of the Motbites, as 2Ppeareth 
from 1/aiah 15. 4 which maketh the I-arned Author of eur Engliſh 
Annotations, think our Tranſlation not ſo good, for why ſhould 
they deviſe evil in Heſbbon againſt Moab, unleſs the Enemies fare 
there 1a Counſel, when they had taken it, againſt the other parts of 
the Country ? But poſſibty the ſenſe is, They ſhall no more in Heſh- 
bon magnifie Moab, *or Moa» ſhall no more Glory of Heſbbon, for the 
Enemies had contrived the Ruine of it. d Madmen was another Ci 
in the Country of Mzab. Some think the ſame with Prolomy's Madi- 
ama. To thar City alſo the Prophet threatneth Ruine, and Deftru- 
&1on by the Sword, | ; 

. 3 A voice of crying ſhall be from Horonaim e, ſpoj- 
ling and great deſtruction. | 

e Another City of M'a4b, mentioned only in this place, and iri 
_ I5. p.. _ think wg ſame with Heron, where Sanballat 
was born, Nehem.-2. 10, and 13. 28. The Prophet threatens allo 
Ruine and DeſtruQtion to this City S F : p Ks 

4 Moab is deſtroyed, her little one have cauſed a 
cry to be heard /. 

Moab was both the Name of the whole Country, . and of a prin- 
cipal City in it. Some by it here underſtand the City ; by her 
Little Ones, ſome underſtand little Children; others, inferiour Mas 
giftrates, or the common People. _ 

5 For inthe goingup of Luhith, + continual weeping 
ſhall go up; For in the going down of Horonaim the + 
; enemies have heard a cry of deſtruction g. 


Heb; + 


it! * 

'hþ 

fe . 

*n : 
p 4 

' : 


weepmg Wi 
g Of Luhith we read only in this place, and 7/aiah rs. 5. It was with _ 
; a City of M:ab, and fituated upon an Hill, as appears both here PP*"8- | | 
and where it is mentitioned in {aiah; Some think that to this City . '4 
the M»abires fled for SanQtuary from the Chaldeans, and flying Lt | 
made ſo great an out-cry, that their Enemies who purſued them 
heard their cry. 
6 Flee, fave your lives, and be like [|che *heathin _ || 
the wilderneſs þ. 3. RG || Or, # || 
þ It is of no great moment whether we underſtand theſe as the naked rreiyi! 
words of the Moabrtes, calling one to another to flee, and fave their * Chap. | 
Lives, though they .loſt all they had, and left themſelves as bare 17+ 6. |} 
asa naked Tree; Or as the words of the Prophets ſpeaking to the | 
Moabites to the ſame ſenſe. nt 
7 © For becauſe thou haſt truſted in thy works and | 
in thy treaſures, thou ſhalt alſo be taken 5, and Che- 
moſh ſhall go forth into captivity with his * prieſts and 
his princes together k. | 
; Whether by Works in this place be meant their Riches got by: 
| the labour of their hands ; or their Idols which often are cajl:d by 
; way of Defamation, the works of their own hands, or their Fort: 
| ficarions, 1s not much conſiderable ; a confidence if Creatures, op= 
. poſed to a confidence in God is doubtleſs the fin here intend: d; 
whatever the ground of it was, whether their Idols, or Riches, or 
fortified places. k Chemoſh was their principal Idol, as appears by 
Nemb. 21. 29. Judges 11. 24. 1 Kings 11. 7.33. 2 Kings 23. 13, God 
; ſheweth them the vanity of this Idolatry, by telling them that 
. this Idot ſhould go into Captivity, and bez fo far from being able 
to protett them, that he ſhould not be able to prote@ hinuelf or 
his own Prieſts, orthe Princes that favoured him. _ PE 
8 And the ſpoiier ſhall come upon every city, and no 
city ſhall eſcape: the valley alſo ſhal periſh, and the 


plain ſhall be deſtroyed, as the LORD hath ſpoken /. 

1 Thar is, all the parts of rhe Country of Moab, and ail the Ci- 
ties, as well thoſe that ſtool upon Hills, and mountainous places; 
as thoſe that ſtood in Valleys; becauſe or for the Lord had taid ir; 
(for ſo the Particle we hems” A as, 1s better tranſlated. ) 

9g Give wings unto Moab, that ft may flee, and get 
' away w: For the cities thereof ſhall be deſolate, wich- 
out any to dwell therein ». 

-m That is, the Moabites had need of Wings like a Bird th eſcape 
that Ruine whichis coming upon them, =» Yea, ifthey had wings. 
they ſhould nor eſcape, for ti:e Lord is reſolved that the Cities of 
Moab ſhall all be brought to deſvlation, 1o as no Inhabitants ſhall be 
left in them. ; 5 | 

Io * Curſed be he that doth the work of the LORD »g,s ||} 
[ 0, and curſed be he chat keepeth back his Juag.1.24\\ 

word from blood p. W7,  ,.,.._ YOr, negldj 

» Theſe words ſeem like the words of the Prophet to the Cha! gently. 
deans, inciting them to go on valiantly againſt the Moabizes, cal- 
ling it the Work of the Lord, which he would have done, and to 
which he had called them. p There is a time to with-hold our 
hands from ſhedding Blood, and that is always when we have not 
a ſpecial Authority, and ca'l from God to it; and there is a time 

6 O 4 When 


«. 7 


» 
L 


gs 


1. 16.6. 


eD, the 


:, 


6 XLVIIL 


= 


when God will curſe thoſe that do ſo. withhold their hands, that 
time is- when God doth require the ſhedding of-1t. | 

11 © Moab. hath been at eaſe from his youth q, and 
he hath * ſettled on his lees 7, and hath not been emp: 


: tied from vellel to veilel, neither harh he (gone 1nto 


captivity 5: therefore his taſte | remained in him, and 
his ſcent-is not changed 7. 

9 The Meabites ever fince they began to be a People, have been 
a quiet People, not exerciſed with Wars, ard Encmies making 
Inroads upon them, r Like to a Cask of Wine that hath nor 
been Rack'r, but hath continued in the ſame State. «s He follows 
the Metaphor of Wine which is drawn out from Veſſel to Vellc], 
when it is drawn off the Lees. Ir is expounded by the next words, 
Neither hath he gone into Captivity, #t And this is the Reaſon why 
they retain tlcir old fins, Pride, Preſumption, Luxury, and old 


. Wickedhefles; as Wine while it remainerh in the Lees retains more 


irs Nature, Strength, and Co'our, thah when it isonce Rack't. 

12 Therefore behold, the days come, faith the 
LORD, that I will ſend unto him wanderers, that 
ſhall cauſe bim to wander », and (ball empry his vel- 


| fels, and break his bottles 0- 


:n By the Wanderers here mentioned, the Chaldeans are moſt cer- 
tainly underſtood, who wandred from their own Country to con- 
quer other People, the word is variouſly tranflated, Yagrants, Tra- 
wellers, -Removers, &c. who ſhall conquer the Moabites, and carry 
them into captivity: o He had before comparetl the Moabzter, ro 
Wine ſertied upon the Lees, here he faith, that God would ſend 
thole thar ſhould not only diſturb and and rowl them, but rune 
and deſtroy them. 

13 And Moab ſhall be aſhamed of Chemoſh p, as 


the hoafe of Iſrael was aſhamed of * Bethel their con- 
hdence q. 


p leis a natural, and a penal ſhame which is here ſpoken of, we 
are naturally athamed when we have repoſed a great coafidence 1n, 
and. made great boaſts of a thing, which when it comes to be tried, 


roveth ot no uſe, bur Mmiichievous to us. 


dol, or. for this Idol. q As tve Ijrael tes, that is the Ten Tribes 
were aſhamed of, or for the Golden Calves, which Jeroboam ſer up 
at Dan and Bethel, which wee the cauſe of ruine to thoie Tribes. 
Confidence in any thing but in Gcd alonein a time of danger,wall 
bring both narural and penal thame. ; 

14 4 How ſay ye, * We are mighty and ſtrong men 


for the war r. 
» How can you juſtifie what you ſay, or why ſay you ſo, orto 
what purpoſe do you brag of your valour. - 
i5 Moab is ſpoiled 5s, and gone up oat of her cl- 
ties ?, and Þ his chofen young men are gone down to 
the ſlaughter «, ſaith the King whoſe name 3s the 


LORD of Heſts w. 

5s Your Country will be waſted and ſpoiled. # The Inhabitants 
of it ſhal! all be driven out of their Cities. The Heb. 1s and her ci- 
ries, it or he is gone up. So the ſence may be Moab and her Cities 
are al) ſpoiled, and he (that is) the Enemy is gone up. « And the 
ſtrong and mighty M-n ibe boaited of, and gloried 1n, are gone to 
the Battel, as Oxen or Shcep to a Slaughter-houſe. w I do not 
ſpeak this of my 1elf, I cannor of my icif tell rhings that ſhall come 
to paſs hereafrer, bur the words I ſay are the words of him who 
is the Lord of all the Armies of Heaven and Earth, wio both 
knoweth what ſhall be, and is able to eff-& what he ſaith. ; 

16 Thecalamity of Moab is near to come, and his 


affliction haſtech faſt x. 

x Foſephus tells us this deſtruftion came upon the Moabites five 
Years after the Siege of Jeruſalem ; bur if it were longer we muſt 
conſider that he who ſpeaheth is that Gud ro whom a thouſand 
Years is but as one day. 

17 Allye thatare about him bemoan him y, and all 


e that know his name, ſay, How is the ſtrong ſtaff 


roken, and the beatiful rod z ? 
3 The Prophet having ſpoken of Meab's Calamity, as already 
come upon h m, or at lcaſt very near, calls to bis F: iends to come 
and condole with him, as is uſually done in caſe of fome Calamity 
befallen to a Friend. # All ye that know how terrible Moab hath 
been to others, and how Tamous for mighty and ſtrong Men. Say, 
How is this potent Nation, aid this People that been 1uch a Rod 
againſt others, or he h ruled over ſo many oth-rs, broken ; For 
both a Staffand a Rod are as well Enſigns of Power aad Govern- 
ment, as inſtruments ro puniſh Offenders. — __ 

138 Thou daughter thac doeit inhabit Dibon, come 
down trom thy giory «, and fit in thirſt 6: For the 
ſpoiler of Moab halt come upon thee c, and he ſhall 


eſtroy thy ſtrong, holds. 

a Of this D.bin we read, Numb. 21.30. It was a Land for Cat- 
tle, Numb. 32-3. both Dibon and Aroer. and Atarob were built by 
the Children of Gad, to whole Lot it fell, verſe 34. as alſo to the 
Reubenites in part, Joſb, 13. 17. Ir ſhould ſeem that rhe Moab:zes 
were now come into the poſſeſſion of it, eirher by Conqueſt, or 
upon the 4ſſrians taking the Ten Tribes. 6 It was a place well wa- 
tered, otherwiſe it had not been fit for Catre]: God threatneth 
that ſhe ſhould be i» thir#, that is, driven in-o ſome dry barren 
Countries. «c For the King of B:byloz whom God had appointed to 
ſpoil all Moab, and fhall deltroy thee alſo, and thy ſtrong holds 

all nor ſecure thee. 


19 O f inhabitant of Aroer 4, ſtand by the way 
and eſpy, ask him that fleerh, and her char eſcapeth, 
and ſay, Whar is done e ? 

d Aroer was a City in the Lot of Gad and Reuben, Numb. 32. 34, 
In Devid's rime it was in the hand of the Jews, 1 Samuel 30. 28. 


but in 1ſaiab's rime, it belonged tre $4716, a. 17. 2. and here 1t is : 


— 


— — 


__ 


TERM EAA 


— 


reckoned to the Monbiter, e The Inhabitants of ir, are called to 
tand by the way, and ſeeing the Moabites flying, to ask whag 
News ? Others think that rozy was at this time a City of the 41 
monites ; and here called unto to ſee their Neighbours the Moatbrtes 


flying before their Encmies, 

, 20 Moab is confounded, for it is broken down : 
howl and cry, tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab jc 

ſpoiled f. | 
f Arnon was the Name of a River, 

Joſ. 12, 1. Ir was the border of Moab whither Blok went to meet 


Balaam, Numb. 22. 36. probably the. adjacent * = . 
NY Oe 2., 30. jacefr 'Coun 
migit take its Name from the River. IT way 


21 And judgement is come upon the plain coun- 


try; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Me- 
phaath. | 
22 And upon Dibon, 
Bzth-dibiathaim. 
22 And upon Kiriathaim, and 
and upon Beth-meon. 


24 And upon Kirioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon 
all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near g. 
£ God threatneth Vengeance to come upon all Moab, which had 
great Plains, Numb 31. 12. and 33. 48. For the Names of theſe 
Cities, and thoſe m-ntigned, Verſes 22, 23, 24. Some of them we 
read of in other places of Holy Writ Others we read nor of nei. 
ther is ir material for us ro know their Situation, they are not at 
this day to be known by their o)d Names, they are a'] here men- 
tioned as Cities at this time belonging to the Moabires, ro whom 
this Vengeance is threatned, and not to them only but to all o- 
ther Cities of the Land of Moab where-ever ſituate. | 
25 The horn ot Moab is cut off, and his arm is bro- 
ken, faith the LORD 5. 
h That is the Beauty and the Strength of Moab. So theſe 
often ſignifie in Ho'y Writ, The pe frocon much the Beaury of 


upon Beth: gamul, 


Chemoſh was their great | {om= Beaſts, and that part of th-ir Bodies by « hich they both do. 


dol, in which the Moabites had great confidence, and of which they ' others. God here de 
, | , : ET ; clares that Moab ſhould both loſt 
boated, the Prophet tclis them they ſhould be aſhamed of this I- | Beauty, and alſo all the Power it formerly had ro def.nd it ſelf, 


injuiy to others, and defend themſelves from the aifaults of 


Its Glory and 


; or offend others. 


26 * Make ye him drunken i: For hemagnified him- 
ſelfagainſt the LORD &: Moab alſo ſhall wallow in his 


, Vomit, and he aiſo thall be in derifion /. 


z Either make ye him to ſtagger like a drunken Man (rhe cauſe 


| being pur for the effe&) or fl] him with the intoxicating Wine 


Cu p of God's Vengeance, with the effe&s of God's Wrath, &k Be- 
cauſe of his Prid:, and exalri: g himſelf againſt rhe Lord, as if he 
had been ſtronger than h<, and ſo out of the reach of God's Power 
{ As drunken Men vomir, ard ſtagger, and fall, and wallow in 
their Vomur, ſo let the Mvabites fall iy the Sword, wallow in 
their Blood, and like drunken M<-n be mockt at, and had in deri.- 
ſion by all thoſe who tec what their Vaunts come to, and what 
Vengeaiice they tave pulled upon themliclves. 

27 For * was not Iſrael a derifion to thee a? was he 


found among thieves » ? For ſince thou ſpeakeſt of him, 


 [|chou skippedſt for joy o. 


2 It is an ill thirg to m-ck at the miſeries of others, eſpeci 
ſuch as we have ko Relation to; The Moabites were orpeclally 
from Lot who was nearly related to Abraham the Father of the Jews 
and ought not to have mocked at them, bur to have pitied their 
Neigi.bours and Kindred; They either mocked at the Ten Tribes 
when they were carried into Captivity by Salmanaſar, or at Judah 
captivated by the King of Babyiov. God threatneth the Ammonites 
Ezek. 25.6. and the Edomites by Obadiah tor the fame mitdemeanour. 
n» Why didſt thou deal by 1ſ-ae! as Men deal by Thieves, when 
they are broughr to ſhame ? Ought not he t6 have been by thee 
accounted 1n a better rank than that of Thieves? o Inſtead of 
compaſſtonating the Jews in their Calamity, thou never ſpeakeſt of 
them bur with joy and triumph. Others make a quite other ſenſe 
viz. For thoſe words againſt him, thou thy ſelf ſhalt wander. Bur the 
learned Author of the Ergliſh Annotations obſerves well, that the 
Word in the form here uſed will not fo well bear ir, though the 
Verb doth 1n its primary ſenſe ſignifie to wander. 

28 Oye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and 
dwell in the rock p, and be like the dove hit maketh 
her neſts in the ſides of the holes mouth g. 

p Still the Propher ſpeaks of the Moabites, as a People whoſe Ar. 
mies were routed, and calls to them to leave their Houſes in Cities 
not promiſing themſelves any ſecurity, either to or from their 
Heutles, or from the Walls of their Cities, bur to get them to Rocks 
which are naturally fortified, and fiom whence (if from any place) 
ſecurity might be promiſed. q And ke commends to them, the 
natural Sagacity of a Dove, which being a feeble Creature, and not 
able ro encounter an Hawk or Fagle, makes her ſelf a Neſt in the 
ſides of ſome Rock where ſhe may be at ſafety. 

29 We have heerd che pride of Moab, (hs is excee. 
ding proud ) his loftineſs and his arrogancy, and his 
pride,and the haughtineſs of his hcatt 7, 
 r There is a Paſſage, 1/z. 16. 6, &c. concerning M--}, very little 
differing from this; ſarah lived ſome Years before this Fropher 
who yer complainerh of them for the tame fins, ſo as they were nor 
at all reformed. God faith he had heard of their Pride and Arro« 
gancy; A Vice which commonly attenderh eaſe and proſperiry 
and is exceeding odious in the fight of God, to as a wicked Man bs 
often in Scripture ſet out under the notion of a proud Man. 


Numb, 2x. 14. Deut, +. 36. , 


Chap. XLVtjy; 


*I&a.6.7. | 


_ and upon Nebo, and upon. 


* Chap. 
25. 27. 


* Zeph. 
2. 8. 
| Or, thou 


moveaſt 


thy ſelf. 


30 I know his wrath, faich the LORD's, |but ;z ſhall lOr,! _ 
nor be ſor, || his lies ſhall nor ſo effect 7: s. he ftays. 


f 1 know bis Rage, either againſt 1raz!, or other People, 8 But (Heb. his 
he ſhall never exccure it, . or bring to paſs what he thinks to do. /isr:) do 
' u there isno truſting to whar he ſaith, his Boaſtings and his Con+ nt right. 


fidence are but Lyes, and ſhall never effeUt his deſigns. 
21 There. 


TO 


- WL det en 


DD SO » Kt 


F/d 


PIR 


ahh oxi AC hah II 


Chap. XLVIL. 


21 Therefore will T howl for Moab, and I will cry 
out for all Moab, mine heart ſhall mourn for the men 
of Kir-herez w. 

w Though wicked Men rejoyce, and triumph in the ruine of 
good Men,yet their Charity ſuffereth them not to do the like, but 
ingageth them to mourn for them in the day of their Aﬀflition. 
J.r:my declareih his compaſſion toward theſe AMoabizes, tho they 
derided theJews when they were carried away into captivity:Nay,he 
mourns upon the proſpect of their Miſery at ſome diſtance, when 
the ſight of the Jews preſent Calamity would not affect the Moabites 
with any compaſſion at all. We find the like compaſſion in another 
Prophet, 1aiah, chap. 16. 11. ver: 7. there it is called Kir-haraſeth, 
which was a City of M46, as we read, 2 Kings 3: 25+ 

232 O vine of Sibmah x, I will weep for thee with 
the weeping of Jazery; thy plants are gone over 
the ſea 2, they reach even to the fea of Jazer s, the 
ſpoiler is faln upon thy ſummer fruits, and upon thy 
Vintage. 

x We read of this Vine of $:bmah alſo, Iſa: 16. 8, 9. both Sibmab, 
and Jahaza were places in the portion of Rerben, Joſ. 13.18, 19. 
Sibmah was doubtleſs a place famous in thoſe days for Vines, and 
Vineyards. y This Jahaza or Jazer was as it ſhould ſeem firſt 
taken, and carried into captivity, which cauſed a great Lamenta- 
tion. The Prophet foretells ſuch a weeping for Sibmah, as was 
for Fazer. » By plants he means the Inhabitants of S:bmah, which 
he propheſieth thould be carried into captivity over the dead Sea. 
s As an Aggravation of the Judgment that ſhould come upon 
them, God by his Prophets tells them that the ſpoiler ſhould come 
upon them in their /:n:age and Harveſt time. 

23 And * joy and gladnefs, is taken from the plen- 
tiful field, and from the land of Moab, and I have cau- 
ſed wine to fail from the wine-preſſes, none ſhall tread 


with ſhouting, their ſhouting (hall be no ſhouting 6, 

b The time of Harveſt and Vintage being times when the Hus- 
bandmen were wont to reap the fruit of all their labours the pre- 
ceeding Year, were times of great joy ordinarly, but the Prophet 
fortlels them of a Year when there ſhould be no ſuch rejoycirtg,for 
they ſhould have no Wine from the Wine-prefles, there thould be 
no ſhouting as uſed to be in the time of Harveſt and of Vintage. 

34 From the cry of Heſhbon even unto Elealeh, 


and even unto Jahaz have they uttered their voice, 
*Ifa; 15. * from Zoar even unto Horonaim,as an heifer of three 


F Ta: 16. 


IO, 


4,5,6. years old c: for the waters alſo of Nimrim ſhall be 
T Heb. 5+ deſolate | 
geſolations. 


c Vid. Iſa. 13: 5- d Heſbbon, and Elzaleh, and Jahaz, and Zoar, 
and Horozaim ; were all Cities of Moab who are here all threatned 
with ruine ; with the Country about Nimrim, which Nimrim is 
mentioned no where in Scripture, but here, and in 2.-15: 6. nor 
are interpreters well agreed, whether in this place it be the Name 
of a River, or a Lake, ora City. The ſenſe is, the whole Country 
of Mab ſhall be deſtroyed, the Cry ſhall reach from one part of the 
Country to another, either the Cry of the Inhabitants, or of their 
Enemies purſuing them with a great noiſe. _ : 

35 Moreover, I will cauſe to ceaſe in Moab, faith 


*Ifat;: 2. the LORD, * him that offerech in the high places, and 


and 16:12. him that burneth incenſe to his gods e. 

- e That is every one, or ſome of all orders, for the Moabites gee 
nerally were Idolaters ) though the exprefling it under this notion 
may hint to us alſo one great cauſe of thisJudgment scoming upon 

. them, wiz. their Idolatry. 
26 Therefore * mine heart ſhall found for Moab like 
pipes, and mine heart ſhall ſound like pipes for the 
*Ifa:15:7. men of Kir-heres : becauſe the * riches that he hath 

gotten, are periſhed g. 

£ The Prophet means ſuch Pipes as they were wont to uſe at 
Funerals, and other ſad occaſions, to play doleful Leſſons upon. 
See Iſa. 15: 5. becauſe of the great change in the ſtate of this 
poor People, which had got together a great deal of Wealth which 


*Tfa:16:11. 


OV 


þ Theſe Phraſes are expounded in the beginning of the follow- 

' ing Verſe, There ſhall be Lamentations generally upon all the houſe 

zops of Moah, Shaving the Hair, and clipping the Beards, and 

cutting themſelves, were Rites and Ceremonies of Mourning uſed 
by thele Heathens. : 

18 There (hal! be lamentation generally upon all the 
houſe-tops of Moab, and in the ſtreets thereof : for ] 
have broken Moab likz a veſſel, wherein is no pleaſure, 
faich the LORD z. 

i We met with the ſame Phraſe applied to Coniah, Chap. 22: 27. 
The meaning is, I have broken Moab all pieces, as people uſe to do 
Veſſels they care nor for, they never go about ro mind ſuch a 
Veſl:1, but dah it in pieces againſt ſome Stones or Walls. 


39 They ſhall howl, /azivg, How 1s it broken down? 
how hath Moab turned the back + with thame &? ſo 
{ſhall Moab be a deriſion, and a diſmaying to all them 


about him /, 

k Thoſe that formerly lived in Moab, when it was in its Glory, 
ſhall lament to ſee how the cale is altered with it,that all irs Glory 
is broken down, and they that were wont to conquer their Ene- 

p mies, turn their backs with ſhame upon their Enemies. 1 And 
Devr.23: 1, that was wont to be the praiſe and admiration of all People 
49. Chap. was become an aſtoniſhment, and an object of deriſton and ſcof- 
fing to them. 


: 42 For thus faich the LORD, Bet old, * he mz ſhall 
Hab.i:s. fly as an cagle,and ſhall ſpread his wings over Moab w, 


F Heb. 


neck. 


* E REMTIEN 


| the Jews and Anmmonites, the Land of Gad and Reuben which lay be- 


| Moab, which were upon the diviſion of Canaan, in the 
and Rewben ) This Prophecy cannot be well underſtood withour 


faith, Harh 1/rae! no Sons ? God had given that Country of Gilead 


Chap. XL) 


m Nebuchadnezzar ſhall com? upon Moab ſwiftly, and as an 


| 


' 
: 
: 


41 || Keriorth 1s taken, and the ſtrong holds are 
ſurpriſed », and the * mighty mens hearts in Moab at 1 Or, che 
thar day ſhall be as che heart of a woman in her pangs o. ©: 

n Whether Kerio:h hers be the proper Name of a City, as it is. Chap. 


J:trer feems beſt to agree to this place, The Cirres and the frrong 
holds are all taken, and « though Moab hath in it many mighty and 
valiant Men, -yer their hearts will be full of fear, or ready to fail 
them, Jike a Womans who is in her Travail and hath great and' 
ſore pains. 

42 And Moab. (ball be deſtroyed from. being a peo- 
ple p, becauſe he hath magnified himſelf *againſt the 
| LORD 4, 


f Thar 1s for a time ; ſee wer. 479. Or being ſuch a People as it 
hath been, ſo full of ſplendor and glory. 9q The reaſon 7b i 
the ſame with that wer. 26. 


—— 


thee, O inhabicant of Moab, faith the LORD. 

r Theſe three words, Fear, Pit, Snare, ſignifie no more than a 
variety of dangers that ſhould be on all .fides of them, ſo as if 
any eſcaped one danger, he ſhould preſently meet with another, 
for this.was the time when the Lord was reſolved to punith all the 
Inhabitants of the Land of Moab, 

' 44 He thar fleeth from the fear, ſhall fall into the 
pit, and he that getteth up out of the pir, ſhal be caken 
in the ſnare : for I will bring upon it,eves upon Moab, 
the year of their viſitation, ſaith the LORD. 

45 They that fled ſtood under the ſhaddow of Heſh-" 
bon, becauſe of the force 5 : but a fire (hall come forth 
out of Helbbon, and a flame from the midit of Sihon. 
and ſhal devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of _ 
the head of the f tumultuous onest. * © + Heb: 

s Heſbbon was a great City, and as it ſhou!d ſeem,a place of ſome *bilaren 
force, the War being in the Country, they made Hejbbon the place of noiſe. 
of their SanQuary. # But the Propher applying ro the Chald:ans 
what was ſaid in Moſes his time, Numb. 21. 28. prophelicth, That 
Heſbbon alſo ſhould be deſcroyed and the fire thould devour ths 
crown of the Head, that is the glory of the brave rebelling Gallants, 
called in the Hebrew the Children of No{{(e. 

46 * Wo be unto thee, O Moab, the people of Che- * Numb. 
molh periſhech, for thy ſons are taken + captives ; —_ 
and thy daughters captives «. r pas. 3 

« The Prophet cloſing the threatning part of his Prophecy a- 2 ng 
gainſt Moab, repeaterh the ſame thing, which he had often faid, © Je 
that the Moabites ſhould be carred into Captivity by the King of - 
Babylon, and denouncerh a woe unto rhem upon thar account. 

47 ©} Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab 
in the latter days, faich the LORD w. Thus far is 
the judgment of Moab x. 

w Some think this Prophecy was fulfilled upon the return of 
the Jews out of Babylon, when the Jews inhabited the Land of Moab, 
Zeph. 2« 9. but this doth not ſeem to be the bringing again the Cap< 
tivity of Moab, but of Judah ; beſides in that place it is ſaid that 
Moab ſhould be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gommorah, even 
the breeding of Nettles and Salt-pits, and a perpetusl deſolation. Ir is 
therefore rather to be underſtood of a ſpiritual reduQion of them, 
by calling ſome of them under the Kingdom of the Meſſiah as the 
Jewiſh DoQors themſelves interpret it. Some think this a promiſe 
rather reſpecting the Fews than the Meabites,it is ſaid wer. 2, 9. That 
the remnant of the Lords People ſhould poſſeſs Moab, and wer. 11. 
that all the 7/es of the Heathen ſhould worſhip Ged, x Theſe laſt words 
are doubtleſs to be_interprered rather as a concluſion of this Pro- 
phecy againſt Moab, than ( as ſome would have it) as a limitation 
of the rime how long this Judgment on Moab ſhould indure, as if 
thus far, were as much as thus long. 


17,18, 


CHAP. XIIX. 


The Judgment of the Ammonites, 1——5, Their Reſtauration, 6. The 
Tudgement of Edom, 7 22: Of Damaſcus, 23 27. Of 
Kedar, and Hazor, 28 33- Of Elam and its Reſtauration 
34 39- | 

l $7 the * Ammonites 4, thus ſaith the 

LORD, Hath Iſrael no ſons ? hath he no heir b? 
why then doth || their king inherit * Gad c, and his * Ezck» 

people dwell in their cities d. 252 
a The Ammonites were the Potterity of B:n- Ammi,Tot's inceſtuous and 25:2. 

Child, by his younger Daughter, Gen. 19. 38. Their Country was £<PÞ- 2- 

near the Jews country,the Jews in their Journey from Egypt ro Ca- © 9 

2aan to polleſs it, pailed by their Country, bur were by God for- |! Or, Met 

bidden ro meddle with it becauſe he had given it to theChildren of ©” 

Lot, Deut. 2: 19. but they proved bad Neighbours to the Jraelites 

when in Canazn, They affiſted the King of Moab againſt them, Fud. 

3: 13. and made War againſt them Judg. 10: 9. and 1. 4+ Nahaſb 

theirKing made an inroad upon them,1Sam.12:12.David fought with 

them in his time, 2 Sam. 8: 12. and deſtroyed them, 2 Sam. 11. 1- 

Fehoſhaphat alſo, and Jotham fought with them, 2 Chron. 20: r. and 

27: 5- During the long traGt of time that there were Wars betwixt 


|| Or,, 
againſt, 


yond Jordan,fell into the hands of che Syrians, Moabires and Ammonites 
(whence it is that in the formerChapter we read of many Cities of 
ot of Ga 


a previous underſtanding this. 6 Hence it is that the Propher 


to Manaſſeh and Reuben and Gad, Num. 32: 39. Jof. 13: 29, 30. 
c And as Mens Eſtates ought ro deſcend to their Heirs, 1o this. 


Land jhould have continued and deſcended to rhe Poſterity of 
| 6 P theſe 


Eagle covererh the Prey which he hath taken with his Wings, ſo | 
N:buchadn:zuar, {ball iprezd himielf over Moab. | 


14 
if 


4 
| 


© 
'Þ 


; 
# 2 
' 
, 
a 
L 


| 
[1 


ver, 24. Or an appellative Noun lignifying Cities, is doubtful. The #9 225" : 


| 
[| 
| 


43 * Fear, and the pit, and the ſnare r, ſhall be upon * If: 34: | 


» n= 197 > as ng IS he HA : vp 


PO IO 


_ SI<ﬀ=LRECXE XIY WL Inc —_—_ - = ASRTY &<: 
OT. 094 wb. tad. ad woe .a "> we I've ”M 


__—_— 


OUTIOIREes os — WI ones 


”% 


in; 
Dx ae ag 


WE Z $ 
i +: wh "F" . Ei) 
ſu $4 "'l .* 
bY ” 
x 


* Ia. 32. 
41. chap. 


4: 8- aad 


6: 26. 


XLIK. 
- theſe Tribes, 


- God threatens a War to Rebba 


PET EAy 2) 
Pn fa _ 438 "00, "p 


but the 4mm ts hid by force taken away a part 
M tom is their King, or the Name of _ 
2 - of King, as other Feathens 

lol to whom they gave the Name of . | 
called their Idol Baal, that is Lord. 4 And the People of the 
King of the Ammoniter, Or. of Melcom the Idol of the Ammontes, 
dwelt in the Cities belonging to Gaa, which was one of the T1ibes 


l. . 
of ror herefore beho!d, the days come, faich the LORD, 


that T will cauſe an alarm of war to be heard in Rab- 
bah e of the Ammionites, and ic ſhall be a deſolate heap, 
and ber daughters ſhall be burnt with fire: then ſhall 
I{rael be heirs unto them that were his heirs, {aich the 
LORD f. 
e Becauſe the 


the Jews Land, an 
the women with Child 


and Melcom poſt:i{{cd 1t. 


Anmonites had violently ſeized upon ſome part of 
d ( as we have it Amos 1: 13, 14. ) cruelly rips up 
in Gilead, that they might enlarge their border. 
h, Amos x. 14. calls it a fire which 
Of this Rabbab, as the Head City 


of the Ammonites, we read Deut. 3* 11. Fo). 13:25. and 15: 60. It 
was there, where in Davids time, Uriah was flain, 2 Sam 11. 1,17. 
Chap, 13: 26, It is threatned by Jeremiah in this Chapter, and Ezck: 
28: 5. and Amos 1. 13g 14. WE read nor, how or when this Propbecy 
was fulfilled, whether by the Maccabees, 1 Mac. 5. 6. or rather after 
the coming of Chriſt, when molt of theſe Nations were deſtroyed, 
f God threatens not only their metropolis which was Rabbah their 
Morher City, but all th other Cities belonging to the Ammonites 
which were as it were Daughters to Rabbay. Bur how the laſt 
clauſe of this Prophecy was ever fulfilled if 1t were not in the rime 
of the Maccabees I cannot underſtand ; for though they were ſwal- 
lowed up afterward by the R»man Empire,yet lirael being alſo ſub- 
dued by them, and ſcattered into all parts, 1t 1s not likely that 
many of them were ſuffered ro abide in any conſiderable numbers 
in a Country ſo near their own. 


2 Howl, O Hethbon, for Ai is ſpoiled g, cry ye 
dauzhters of Rabbah 6b, * gird ye with ſackcloth : la- 
ment, and run to and fro by the hedges 3, for their 
[| king ſhall' go into captivity, rd * his prieſts and his 


ſhould make Rabba' an heap. 


| Oc, xz-princes together &. 


£01, 
* Chap. 
45. 7- 
Amos r. 


IF. 


= ” Chap. 
49:39: 


© Obab: 
Ver. 8 


g Heſbbou was formerly a City of the Amorites of whom Sihon was 
King who reſided here ( but it appears by Yer. 26. thar it was taken 
from Moab ) it is probable that was at this time a City of Moab ; 
the Prophet calls ro them to how! for 4; a City of the Ammonites, 
not the ſam2 mentioned, Jo. 7. 2. for that was on. the other ſide 
of Jordan. b It is uncertain whether by the daughters of Rabbah be 
to be underſtood other lefſer Cities, or the younger Women that 
inhabited Rxbbah, he calls ro them all ro mourn. # And for all 
the indications or ſigns of mourning, ſuch as girding with fack- 
cloth, running up aad down like Perſoas diſtraed, by the Hed- 
ges, where they might be hidden, and not fo cafily ſcen. 
they ſhall all go rog-ther in captiviry,theirMelcom which may figni- 
fie their Idol ro whom they gave that Name or their King, or elſe 
their ſupream Magiſtrate, with their Prieſts and Nobles, all orders 
of Perſons. , o 

4 Wherefore giorieſt thou in the valleys, [| thy flow- 
ing valley /, O backſliding daughter »» ? that cruſted 
in her treaſures, * ſaying, Who ſhal come unto me » ? 

{ It ſhould ſeem that chis Countrey was full of very fruitful Val- 
leys, wiuch we kaow are always the molt fertile places, lying low- 
Erand at a greater diſtance from the Sun than Mountains, and alſo 
receiving at ſecond haad the moiſture that fal!s upon the Hills,and 
being uſually watered with Rivers, from whence they may bz cal. 
Ied fwine Pall.ys either as flowing with receptacles of Water, or 
plenty of Corn, and Graſs, though ſome read ir ( and ir ſeems ra- 
ther more azgreable to the Hebrew) thy Valley floweth, either with 
the blood of Men lain, or flaweth away. the fertility of ir ceaſeth or | 
decayeth. Or, Floods of waters ſhall deſtroy the fruit of thy rich * 
Vallies, &*c. m Ammon having never been in Covenant with God, 
the word in the Heb. (though it comes from AMU which ſignifies $0 
return ) ſeemeth 41 tranſlated back-/iaing,thou that halt rurned thy 
ſelf away from God. » Thou that truſtedlt in thy Riches,or in thy 
Valleys full of Riches, and promiſedſt thy ſelf ſecuriry from the 
ſituation of thy rich Country thinking none could come at thee. 


5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, ſaith the 
Lord GOD of haſts, for all thoſe that be about thee w, 
and ye ſhal be driven out every man right forth x, and 


none ſhal gather up him that wandereth y. 

w As ſecure as you think your ſelves, I will cauſe you to be 
afcaid,and your enemies {hall be all thoſe that are round about you. 
x And you ſhall be driven out every Man, either right forth into 
ſome Country oppoſite to you,or apart one from another,or ſo that 
you ſhall be glad to flee right forth,and never look back, bur only 
forward, for any place of tafety that appeareth next before you. 

And when you are wandring,being driven by your Enemies you 
ſhall find none who will be willing to receive or entertain you. 


6 And afterward I* will bring again the captivity of 
the children of Ammon, faith the LORD =. 
* £ Such a promiſe we read of chap. 48: 47+ concerning Moab, bur 
when this was fulfilled the Scripture ſaith nor « Joſephus tells us 
ſomething, bur it is rather thought ro refer to the converſion of 
fome of D. Awrmonites as well as other Heathens unto Chriſt. 

7 © Concerning Edom, thus faith the LORD of 
hoſts a, 1s wiſdom no more in Teman 6 ? is counſel 

riſhed from the prudent? is their wiſdom vaniſhed *? 

& The Edvnites were the Pofterity of Eſau the eldeſt Son of 
I/aar, but difinherited, the Blcflin-3 being given to his younger 
Brother Jacob who was the head of the twelve Tribes of the 1/rs- 
elites, Gen. 27: 29. God there Yer. 39- promiſed him rhat he ſhould 
have a fat, and Plentiful country, though his Brother ſhould be 
his Lord, and foretold, that he hould break his brother's Yoke 


* HIRE MI 4 H. 


. 


k For | 


Chap. 


by their Coaſts to go into Conan, their way lay through £4m,but 
their King refuſing io ſuffer them to go through, God ordered 
them ro £co another way. Bealaam prophett-d their yuine, Numb, 
24: 18: they were Enemies to the Iſraelites in Suul's time, 1 Sam: 
14, 47. and in Dav:i4's time, 2 Sam. 8. 14. and in 4maziahs time, 
2 Kings 14: 7. who flew of them ten thouſand, and took Selah cal. 
ling it Joktee!, many of the Prophets forerold their ruine, Ferc= 
m2 in this place, Ezek. 25:12,13,14. Foerl 3:19, Amos 9.12. Ozaciah 
i: 8, Mal. 1. 4. 6 Feman was a City of Ed»9m mentioned allo Ezck, 
25: 13. Amos 1.12. Obad. g. Elphaz, Job's Friend was of this place 
Job 211, It was a place famous for wiſe and prudent Men,of which 
Eliphaz was not the meaneſt. c The Prophet asks what was become 
of #11 -rheir Counſel and Wiſdom, for wh'ch the Arabians,the Tema. 
n:tcs 1n particular, were ſo famous ? Now they were at their wits 


Dedan,for I will bring the calamity of Eſau upon him, 
cae time that I will vitite him e. | 

a Dedan was the fon of Jokjhan, 1 Chr0n. 1. 32. from which it is 
probable that the Ciry Dedan had its Name, it is reckoned chapter 
25: 23. with T?maand B:z, and is mentioned Ezekiel 27:15: 20, and 
38; 13. Ir was a Ciry of Arabia joyning on Idaumea, 1/a. 21: 13. they 
being Neighbours to the Edomites are called to flee, and to get into 
caves and holes of rac Earth, where they might dwell deep in the 
Earth and te in ſome ſecurity, which they would not be in their 
own City ſo near to the Edomires country, for fzo0d was reſolved to 
bring mitery upon the Exomites, a time of calamity in which he 
would viſit them with his Judgments: There are other critical 
- Sg of theſs words, bur this ſeemeth to be the plain ſence of 

em. 


9 If grape-gatherers come to thee, would they not 


will deſtroy Þ till they have enough f. 

 f We have much the ſame 0529/2h 5. the ſcope of the Prophet 
in this place is only to ſhew thar Edom ſhould be totally deſtroyed, 
their deſtruion thould not be like the gleaning of Grapes, where 
the gatherers content themſelves with taking the principal cluſters 
bur tor ſingle Grapes,or ſome ſmall cluſters they leave them : Nor 
yet like the robbings of Thieves, who take for their hunger, and 
when they have got enough leave the reſt. 

10 But I have made Eſau bare g, I have uncovered 


his f:crer places 6, and he ſhall nor be able to hide 


his neighbours, and he #s not /. 

£ Bur the Edomites ſhould be left bare. þ And though they 
ſought ro hide rhemſelves in ſecret places, yet5od would there find 
them out. i And there ſhould be no place ſufficient ro hide 
them. k Al their children ſhould be deltroyed / and the Moabites 
their Kinſmen, and the. Ph:lifines their Neighbours ſhould be rus» 
ined as well as they, | 
| It Leave thy fatherleſs children, I will preſerve 
them alive ; and let thy widows truſt in me m. | 

m The only queſtion upon this Verſe is whether in the whole 
of it,it bz a promiſe, or a threatning ; if it be a promiſe the ſence 
'1S that though this great deſtruction ſhould come upon the Body 


of the Edowxres, yet God would take care of ſome of their fetherlejs 
children, whoſe Parents being carried into captivity they had none 
to provide for them : if it be taken as an ironical threatning it ſounds 
eth ruine tv thoſe as well as the reſt, and 7 will is as much as I 
w2ll nor ;. but othets think that theſe are rather to be underſtood 
with the ſupply of ſome other words, There is net, or there ſhall be 
none to ſay, leave thy fatherleſs children, &c. and whoſo confiderethe 
thoſe words in the tenth Verſe, his Seed ſhall be ſpoiled, will ſee rea 


ſon to judge it rather a threatning ( whether by way of Irony of 
no ) than a promile. 


ALIN, 


| Or, zhey 


end. 
8 Flee ye ||, turn back, dwell deep,O inhabitants of -re rurned 


back. 


leave ſome gleaning grapes ? if thieves by nighc, they + Heb 
co, 


their ſuf. 
ficiensy. 


himſelf ;: his ſeed is ſpoiled &, and his brethren and * 


. 12 Fos thus faith the LORD, * Behold, they whoſe + cap; 
judgment was not to drink of the cup », have aſſuredly 25: 20. 
drunken, and art thou he hat ſhalt altogether go un- Obad, 16 


puniſhed, thou ſhalt not go unpuniſhed, but thou ſhalt 
ſurely drink of it. 
7 That by the cup is meant the Wine cup of the Lords Wrath, 


and that by thoſe whoſe Judgment was nor to drink of it,are meant 


the Jews is not to be doubted ; but the Queſtion is how the Pro- 
pher ſaith, that it was nor the Judgment of the Jews to drink of 
this cup? The word here uſed is of ſo various ſignifications as 
makes the fixing the ſenſe of it here difficult, it cannot here ſignifie 
Juſiize, for in that ſenſe it was the Jews Judgment to drink of it, nor 
Can it here (as it often doth-) ſignifi the effe& of Juſtice, God's 
judicial diſpenſation ; for they had drunk of it, ſo it was their 
judgment. Ir muſt be taken in the favourableſt ſenſe imaginable. 


lation to them might have looked upon it as none of their portion, 
yet have drunk of it: Or they who in compariſon with others did 
nor delerve to drink of the cup, yet have drunk of it, and can you 
think to eſcape, no' thou ſhalt nor eſcape, bur moſt ſurely drink of 
it, 1 Pet: 4:17, The time is come, that judgment is begun at the houſe of 
God, and if it firſt begin with that where ſhall the end of others 
be? When an Ifrachte hath not eſcaped the Juſtice of God, an 
Edomite muſt not expett it. 


13 For I have ſworn by my (elf, faith the LORD, 
that Bozrah ſhall become a deſolarion, a reproach, a 
waſte, and a curſe, and all the cities thereof ſhall be 


perpetual waſtes 0. 

o As Men when they would confirm their promiſe or threatning 
to do any thing, add an Oarh to it, ſo doth God, who, having na 
greater to ſwear by,ſwears by himſelf, chap 44+26. that which God 
would here confirm was his threatning againit Edom,expreſt under 
the notion of Bezrah,(a part for the whole ) Bozrah being its princi- 
pal city, Iſa. 63: 1- as well as a city of Moab, (as we found in the 
foregoing chapter ) and:that which he threatens it with was not 


from off his Neck ; the Land of Scir was his country, Gen: 32: 3» 
The Edewites coated: ſouthward upon Cana97 the 1r3:lites patled 


being a reproach, a waſte, and a curſe for atime, but for cver. 


14*k 


Either they who in regard of their relation to God, and God's re- 


fp WO OED ns ett =. <> rag, at B42, 4 
in” 


TI 


» - ef, 5 & PI 


+ hy WH GED. 4 wg 


£1 Ci. Is 


. 
hon mac uw. 44; > 


- weedy Sea. 


Chap. XLIX. 7 E RE 


" Obad, 14 * I have heard a rumour from the LORD p, 
and an Ambaſſador is ſent unto the heathen q, ſaying, 
Gather ye together, and come againſt her, and rife to 
the batrel r. | 
p Obadiah beginneth kis Prophecy much with ſuch words God 
hath revealed his Will ro me in a Viſion,or a Dream. q He ſpeaks 
after the manner of earthly Princes, who uſe to ſend their Amoal\- 
ſadors to oth-r Princes to declare their minds to them. The mean- 
ing is, God hath made ſuch impreſſions upon other Nations, he 
hath inclined them,or ſer them oaWorkzto get together in Armies 
to come againſt Edm in Batte]. | h 
i5 For lo, 1 will make thee ſmall amonglt the 


heathen, and diſpiſed among men /- 

f OSadiah in his Prophecy againſt Edom, Ver. 2, hath much the 
ſame words importing that God would bring the Eaemites very 
low, and maks them very contemptible. 

16 Thy terribleneſs hath deceived thee, and the 
pride of thy heare 7, O thou that dwelleſt in the 
clefcs of the rock «, that holdeſt the height of the 
hill ; though thou ſhouldeſt make thy neſt as high as 
the eagle, { will bring thee down from thence, faith 
the LORD w. 


t Obadiah in his Prophecy againſt Edom uſeth much the ſame ex- 
preſſions, Yer. 3, 4. The word that is here uſed being of the num- 
ber of thoſe which are but once found in Scripture hath given In- 
terpreters liberty to abound in their ſences of it ; ſome tranſlating 
it Arrogance, ſome, thine 14l, but the beſt Interpreters underſtand 
by it their terribleneſs to others,their being ſo potent that others 
were all afraid of them, this deceived them, meking them to con- 
clude themiclves ſecure, and out of danger ; to which is alſo ad- 
ded the pride of the heart. u The Countrey of Edom being moun- 
tanious they are ſaid to dwell in the clefts of the Rocks, that 15, 
in places impregnable, and inaccefſivle as they thought in the 
heights of the Hill. w Burt the Lord lets them know no place was 
20 his power inacceſſible, or impregnable, for if they dwell as high 
as the Eagle, which the Scripture tells us, Job 39. 27, 28. Maketh 
her neft on high, and dwelleth and abideth upon the rock, upon the crag of 
the rock, yet he would bring them down. 

17 Aifo Edom ſhall be a deſolation : every one that 
gocth by it, ſhall be aſtoniſhed, and ſhall hiſs ar all the 
plagues thereof x. 

x The like is ſaid of Babylon, Chap: 50: 13+ it appears from 1 Kings 
9: 8. that it was a kind of Proverbial expreſſion, when they would 
expreſs a great deſolation, or great Plagues, rhat thoſe who paſſed 
by ſuch a place, ſhould be aſtoniſhed, and hiſs ar it. 

* Gen19. 18 * As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomor- 


me _ rah and the neighbour cizies thereof, ſaith the LORD: 
y 4. No Man ſhall abide there, neither ſhall a ſon of man 
II. dwell in it y. | 
7 Sodom and Gommorah, and the Neighbour Cities were utterly 
deſtroyed, and therefore are ſet down both here and Chap: 50; 40. 
as patterns of an utter ruine and delolation- ; 

Chap. i9 * Behold, he ſhall come up like a lion from the 
$4, * ſwelling of Jordan, againſt the habiration of the 
wn. ſtrong 2: but I will ſuddenly make him run away 

from her a, and who 3s a choſen man that IT may ap- 


* Exod. point over her b ? for * who is like me c?and who will 

| <<xges , [| appoint me the time ? and who zs that ſhepherd that 

| Oc, cor. Will ſtand before me 4? 

went me in % The Verſe is very variouſly interpreted, fome by he under- 

judgmen;, ſtand the Jews, ſome underſtand Nebzchadnezzar, ſome underſtand 
the Edomites, I think the laſt is moſt probable to be here meant, 
becauſe of the next words. The Ezomites thall come out againſt the 
Chaldeans, like a Lion, as Lions lurking about Jordan when it over- 


floweth,come out to take their Prey. # Theſe words are variouſly | 


underitood, thoſe who by he in the former part of the Verſe un- 
derſtand Nebuchaanezzar, interpret the running here mentioned, of 
his running over the whole Country of Edom ; to me 1t appeareth 
a much more probable ſence to interpret it of the Edomites run- 
ning away from Nebucha#nezzar out of their own Country, which 
ſeems to be underſtood by her ; all that makes a difficulty is the 
particle from, which yet makes the ſence good enough, if by her 
we underſtand the Edomites own Land. In the Heirew it js, I will 
break th:m, or 1 will quie: them, and make them to rn. 6 Whom 
ſhall I ſer over £49 ? Into whoſe hands ſhall I give that Countrey 
that he may rule over it ? 6 For I can do whatloever I pleaſe. 
c And who will appoint me a time to plead with Men, fo 7ob g, 
19. or a time to fight. d What is that King or Pocencate of the 
Earth that will ſrand before me ? 

20 Therefore hear the council of the LORD, that 
he hath taken againſt Edom, and_ his purpoſes that 
he hath purpoſed againſt the inhabicants of Teman e : 
Surely the leaſt of the flock ſhall draw them our Ff, 
ſurely, he ſhall make their habitations deſolate with 
them g. | 

e Evom and T:man in this Verſe fignifie both the ſame thing, 
God calls ro Men to hear the reſolutions he had raken up againſt 
the Edomites, Refolutions as wiſe and fready as if they had been: ta- 
ken upon the wileſt counſels, and deliberation. f God is reſolved 
ro drive out the Edomites; and the leaſt of Neouchadnezzar's Forces 
thall drag them out of their Jucking places, and God will make 
the place where they dwell a delolation. _ 

21 The carth is moved at tie noiſe of their fall : ar 

i Heb. the crv,t'c noiſe thereof was heard in the 7 Red-ſea h. 
b That is, the ruine of the Edo»ites ſhall be fo grear, thar all 

Nations round about it fhall be attccted at the noiſe of their fall, 

and though the Red-Seza, or the weeay Sea be at a great diſtance 

v Chap. from thin, yet thcir noiſe ſhall reach thither, : 

4; 13- 22 Echold, * he ſhall come up aud flie as the eagle, 


#148 x - Chap. RL 


and ſpread his wings over Bozrah : and at that day 
ſhall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the 
heart of a woman in her pangs #:- 

z See the Notes on Chap. 48: 40, 41- where the very ſame thing, 
and under the ſame Phraſes, was ſpoken againſt Moab. That 
what is threatned in the Enemies coming {wiftiy upon the Edon zcs 
and preying upon them, and the fear that {þould furprize them 


which ſhould make their hearts faint as the heart of a Woman that 
hath an hard labour. 


dings, they are f faint-hearted, there is forcow || on the 
ea, it cann2t be quiet m. 


of Syriz, 1/a.7. $. and 17:3. or 4ram (as in the Heb) becauſe it was 
a Country inhabited by the poſterity of Aram one of the Sons of 
Sm, part of it lay betwixt Bbylon and Arabia, and was called Me- 
Jopotamia, lying betwixt the two Rivers of Tigris and E-phrates. 


2 Sam 8: 5: and 10. 18, So had Ahab, 1 Kings 29: 20. and Joram 
2 Kings 8' 28. And Abaz 1[5. 7: 2. after God's long patience with 
them he threatens them with ruine, as by Jercmiah in this place, 
ſo by Ames 1: 5. Damaſcus being the head of this Country, is tome- 


were two Cities alſo of Syria, 2 Kings 18: 34. m The Prophet 
foretells that they alſo ſhou!d hear of ill News, an Enemy thar is 
coming againſt them,and that they ſhould be melted through fear, 
and their courage ſhou!d fail them, they ſhould be as troubled as 
the Sea is in a Storm, or their Inhabitants that lived near to the 
Sea ſhould be troubled. | 


24 » Damaſcus is waxed feeble, and turneth her ſelf 


valour ; it was wont to be a formidable Country to its Neighvours. 
0 But now they flee before their Enemies. p They are {e:zed.and 
overpowred by their own fears, q Great ſorrows are ordinarly in 
Scripture expreſſed by the fimilitude of the pains of a Woman in 
Travail, we have met with it often in this Prophecy, chap. 6:24. 
and 22+ 23. ſo Pſal: 48:6. Micah 4: 9. 
_ 25 How1s the city of praite not left, the ciry of my 
joy r2 

r It is called the City of Phraiſe,becauſe it was a Ciry ſo much 
praiſed, a City of great renown, which the Prophet ſceing like to 
be deſtroyed, lamenreth either in the Perſon of the K.ng of Syria, 
or of the Syrian Inhabitants,wondering that the Conquerours ſhould 


not ſpare ſo famous and renowned a City in which fo many did 
rejoyce. 


faith the LORD of hoſts [ 


{ The Hebrew Particles are not always well rendred in our Tran- 
flation, and our Learned Engl:ſh Annorator hath rightly obſerved 
this place, as one inſtance, for 127 cannot be here an 1llative, but 
is much better Tranſlated /ureiy' as the Note of affertion. God 
threatneth the Syrians with a certain ruine, and deſolation. 


27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damaſcus, 
and it ſhall conſume the palaces of Benhadad ». 

# I will bring a judgment that ſhall burn in Damaſcus like a con= 
ſuming Fire. &« and it ſhall reach to the Royal Scat of Brnhadad, 
either that which was the Royal Seat of Benhadad, 2 Kings 8: 7. or 
ſe Ben-hadad, ( fignifying the Son of Hadad) ( which was their 
[dol ) was the common Name of all the Kings of Syria, as Pharaob 
was to the Kings of Egypt, Amos 1; 4, | 

28 9 Concerning Kedar w, and concerning the 
kingdoms of Hazor x, which Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon ſhall ſmice, thus ſaich che LORD z, Ariſe ye, 
g0 up to Kedar, and ſpoii the men of the eaſt z. 

w Keaar, Gen. 25: 13. was one of the Sons of 1hmael, whoſe 
Poſterity inhabited part of 41abia Petres. See Iſs. 21. 13, 17. We 
read of it, Pjal. 120. 5. Cant. 1. 5. Ezek; 27: 21» x We read of 


Kingdoms in Joſbua's time, Jabin was King of it in the times of 
Deborah, Judg. 4: 2. y The Prophet foretells that Nebachainezzar. 
ſthould alſo conquer theſe Kingdoms. z And faith he heard the 
Lord call to Ne5uchadnezzar to go up againſt him. 

29 heir tents and their flocks thall they take away a, 
they ſhall take to themſelves their curtains and all their 


veſle!s, and their camels 6, and they ſhal cry unto them, 
Fear zs on every ſide c. 


& Thar 1s, the Chaldeans ſhall take away the K:darens T:nts, for 
they being a Pcople whoſe Cattle were their livelyhood, had no 
fixed Houſes but Tents,which were moveable Habitations, cover= 
ed with Skins of Beaſts. b And the Courtains which they uſed to 
draw before thoſe Tents, and ſerved them as ſides, as gable ends 
of Houſes ſerve us, and all the Furniture of their Tents or Taber- 
nacles,and their Cattel,and either their Enemies ſhould fright them 
with terrible noiſes and outcries, or thzy ſhould themſelves cry 
out that they were ſurrounded with obje&s of fear. 


30 7 Flee, + get you far off, dwell deep, O ye in- 


rezzar king of Babylon hath caken counſel againſt you, 
and hath conceived a purpoſe againſt you e. 

4 The words ſeem to be the Prophet's words of advice to this 
| People, to make ail che haſte they could away, and to ſecure theme 
. ſelves as well as they could, becauſe the King of Babylon had cer- 
: tainly been taking countel againſt them, and was reſolved to di 


; fturb them. See wer, 8, where the like counſel is given to the 
, Egomites, | 


, 


| 2 31 Ariſe, 


23 9 * Concerning Damaſcus Z: Hamath is con- * Zech. 

founded, and Arpad /: for they have heard evil ti- : Bk 

4 ICU, |} 

melte d. 4 p 

| Or,as of 

kThe Propher comes to denounce the Judgements of God againſt z4e Sea. 
S;ria, another Nation of the Gentiles, Damaicus was the head City 


Laban and Naaman were of this Country,David had War with them, - 


rimes put ( as here) for the whole Country. 1 Hamath and Arpad 


to flee o, and fear hath ſeized on her p: * anguiſh and * Clap: © |F 
forrows have taken her, as a woman in travailg. © 431. and | 
n Syria whoſe head is Damaſcus, hath loſt her old courage and 3%: 6. 


26 * Therefore her young men ſhall fall in her ſtreets, * Chap. 
and all the men of war ſhall be cur off in that day, 5* 3* 


Huzor, foſb. 11: 1. Verſe 10. it was the Head City to ſeveral * 


Heb. - 
habitants of Hazor, ſaith the LORD 4; for Nebuchad- L_ 


AE PAGAN 7 % 


penn = I 
- NR ———— = $0 urs 3 m2 


{| 
jj 


ms © 
a it 
F' 


ji! 
j! 
| 

# \ . 
| 


: 
- 
| 
tf 
bs 4 | 
þ 
30h 


1 
: 
t 


i! d 


CE nr ne nn neem 
- AX _- y C 
One 4 . KK Y o 


.K $* 


hap. L. 7 E RK E 
or, ib: 2: Ariſe, get you up to the || wealthy nation that 
tion 2447 Ayelleth without care, ſaich the LORD, which have 
5 #t eaſe» \\eicher gates nor bars, which dwell alone f. 

f The ſuppoſed reſult of Nebuchadnezzar's Counſels, giving 
charge ro his Armies to march againſt the Kedarers, which lived at 
eaſe and quiet, and took no cire. That had no Cities,nor Gates, 
nor Bars to n_ their Enemies out,nor were near any Neighbours 


that could afſiſt them, nor very near to one another living in 
Tents, ſo might eaſily be over-run, and conquered, and made a 


prey to Enemies. 
22 And their camels ſhall be a booty, and the mul- 


titude of their cattel a ſpoil g, and I will ſcatter into all 
F Chap. Winds * them that are | in the ucmoſt corners,and I wil: 
: 26-and bring their calamity, from all ſides thereof, {ſaith che 


cb. Theſe words ſound like a part of the King of Babvlen's ſup- 


275, Or, get,which ſhould be a great multitude of Camels and other Cattel. 
Ve 7 The latter words are the words of the Prophet, in the Name of 
Fe corners 1. Lord, threatning ruine to theſe Kedarens and Hazvrites, tho 
F their they lived in corners, and might upon that account think them- 
* ſelves ſecure ; God faith,he would ferch them out of their utmolt 
| corners, and bring calamities from al! parts upon them. 

Chap: 33 And Hazor *ſhall be a dwelling for dragons, and 
Io: 22. a defolation for ever ; there ſhall no man abide there, 


nor any ſon of man dwell in it z. 
"  # That is, the whole Country ſubje& to the King of Hazor, fhall 
be deſolate. See I/a: 34: 13. Chap 9: 17. 
| 24 { The word of the LORD, that came to Jere- 
chip. miah the prophet againſt * Elam, in the beginning of 
5:25- the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, ſaying &, | 
| þ Elam was the Son of Sem, Gen: 10: 22. his poſterity were cal- 
p ' Jed Elamter, theſe were the Perſians as is moſt probable, tho' ſome 
judge that the Perſians were at too great a diſtance from the Jews to 
be the People meant here,burt we read of no other Elam in Scripture 
but in Perſia, Dan: 8 2. and though they were indeed at a great 
diſtance, yet it is probable that Nebuchadnezzar having conquered 
the Aſjr:ans, might allo make ſome inroads into Perfis, the Emper- 
our of which afterward conqueced Babylon. This Prophecy being 
in the firſt Year of Zedekiah muſt needs be Jong before the thing 
was done, for it was ten Years before the King of Babylon took 
Hieruſalem, F | 
25 Thus faith the LORD of hoſts, Behold, I will 
break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might 6. 

5 All thoſe Eaſtern People were famous for the uſe of the Bow, 
the Elamizes in ſpecial, Iſaiah 22: 6. thoſe Bows were the chief of 
their offenſive Armour, tho by the chief of their might may alfo be 
meant their moſt mighty & ſtrong Warriours. ThisProphecy 1s pros 
bably judged to be fulfilled when the Perſians made a defettion from 
the King of the Medes,who was Son-in-law to N-buchadnezzar. Others 
think that this Prophecy was accompliſhed by Alrzander the Emper- 
our of Greece, or rather by his ei {es : ; 

26 And upon Elam wili I bring the four winds,from 


the four quarters of heaven, and will ſcatter them to- 
wards all thoſe winds ; and there ſhall be no nation 


whether the outcaſts of Elam ſhall not come c. | 

c The Prophet threatzeth the deſtruQtion of rhe Perſians, by a 
Confederacy of Enemies, ſuppoſe Babylonians, Meaes, Ke. which 
ſhould aſſault chem oa all ſides,as when the wind blows at the ſime 
time from all Quarters, which cauſeth a Whirlwind which driveth 
the Duſt every way hither, and thither, ſo he ſaith the Perſtans 
ſhould be ſcattered into all Nations. 

27 For I will cauſe Elam to be diſmayed before their 
enemies, and before them that ſeek their life : and ] 
will bring evil upon chem, even my fierce anger, faith 
the LORD, and L will ſend the {word after them, ill 
T have conſumed them 4. 

d We met with the like threatnings, Yer: 5, 24, 29, as to fear 
and as to their deſtruction we have otten met with the like threat- 
nings- : | 
28 And I will ſet my throne in Elam e, and will 
deſtroy from thence the king and the princes, faith the 
LORD f. | 
| e God here calls the Throne of Nebuchadnezzar, or Cyrus, or 
"Alexander ( whoever he was that conquered the Perſian: ) his 
Throne. 1+ Becauſe God gave it the Conquerour. 2. Or, becauſe 
God ſhewed himſelf the Lord of hoſts, or the Lord of the whole 
Earth, by diſpoſing the Kingdom of Perſia at his pleaſure, f He 
doth not threaten the deſrruftion of the whole Nation, bur the 
making ofir all Tributary, ſo as it ſhould have no Kings nor Prin- 
ces of its own- 


= 7 4 H. 


s The Prophet having from the 46th. Chapter b 
the Judgments of God againſt he ite toy =" Hwvrgmsy 
Moabitesy Philiſtines, Ammonites, Edomites, Syrians, Kedarens ” v3 
Elamites, or Perſians ( the moſt of which had been Enemies to _ 
fews ) in theſe two Chapters he denounceth God's Judgm = 
gainfſt the Chaldeans and Babylonians, Theſe were to 26%. God's 
Vengeance on all the reſt, and therefore are themſelves + obtads 
'n the laſt place to be deſtroyed by the Meaes ; the Prophecy againſ! 
-hem, 1s mixed with many gracious promiſes to the Jews. _ 


2 Declare ye among the nations, a 7 
1 , and publiſh, a: 
| fet up a ſtandard, publiſh, and concead. nor 4: oa: 
Babylon is taken, * Bel is confounded e, Merodach jz it up 
x 
2es are broken in pieces d. IG 
6 The Prophet calls ro Men to publiſh it among other Nations 


wr off into poſed Speech incouraging his Soldiers from the Booty they ſhould þ 


and to ſer up a Standard to make ſome fi ] 
rogether to hear whar he had ro ſay "is a ba. ory OE Ny, - 
aad been an inſtrument of great miſchief unto moſt Peo le ho 
ived about them, to whom it would therefore be glad dex, "8 _ 
News to hear that Babylon their common Enemy was a -1 
c That by Bel and Meroaach are meant two principal 76 er a 
Babylonians, moſt think ; but what, is not ſo well agreed 'S ren 
think. that Bel 1s Baal by contraction, but they judge moſt v0 
bably, who think it was the image of one Belus, who was Sd , 
2 King of Babylon, and they judge the like of M-rodach : we f red 
Scripture that Meredach was ſome of their Kings Names, Iſa 4 =_— 
Thap* 52. 31- thoſe who deſire to be further tarisfied about < { 
(dols, may read the Engliſh Anns: ations upon 1/2. 46: r. and ou _ . 
r44:ons upon that Verſe. Ir was an ordinary practice A "8 
Heathens when they had any Princes died, that had been "0 = 
their Government, to pay a Divine Homage to their Ima og 14 
Yatues, Theſe Idols are ſaid: to be confounded. & Either b: = 
may - wm __ = avle at this pinch to help their laps lines, os 
uſe th Te "i 
wht =, 0uld be deſtroyed together with the lilly People that 
3 For out of the north there cometh up a nation a- 
gainſt her e, which ſhall make her land deſolate, and 
none ſhall dwell therein : they ſhall remoye they ſhall 
_ both man and beaſt f. OY 
e From Media which lay Northward to. Ba 
rhrough which Cyrus his way to Babylon lay. , p: i Os 
ieemeth not to relate only to Cyrus his firſt taking of Babylon. ang 


| dealt very gently with it, but to a ſecond taking of it by Darius 


the King of the M-des, who upon their defecti 

Monarchy,came and made an honcible onh> = c 4 2 
ing up (as ſome tell us) four thouſand of their Nobles and flz i n 
multitudes of the common People ; or of the miſchief done $4 8 
afterward by Seleucus Nicanor,who is ſaid to have built a Cir Kar 
he called Seleucia, within fourſcore, and Ten Miles of bar” 4 b 
which means he brought Babylon to an utter deſolation. tag 
4 F In thoſe days,and in that time,ſaith the LORD, 
the children of 1fael ſhall come, they and the children 
of Judah together, going and weeping g : they ſhall go 
wo ge the LORD their God 5b. 

£ In the days wherein God ſhall begin to e 7 
upon Baby/on, (which was in the time of ok "#., icon ag 
des ) the Children of Judah ſhall come out of Captivity, and ſome 
of the Children of Iſrael ( viz. thoſe of the 'Ten Tribes ) hearin 
that their Brethren were gone out of the Captivity of Babylon ſhath 
go up alſo from the ſeveral places into which they were diſpoſed b 
the aſyrians: Weeping either for ſorrow in the ſenſe of their _ 
which had brought the miſeries of Captivity upon them, or for 
joy thar God ever ſhould thew them ſuch a Mercy as to bring then 
home again into their own Country. þ And thoſe that feared 
vod, whether of rhe Ten Tribes, or of the Kingdom of Judah 
worſhipped God at feruſalem, after their 01d accuſtomed manner, * 


5 They ſhall ask the way to Zion with their faces 
thitherward, ſaying 3, come and ler us joyn our ſclves 
co the LORDin a perpetual covenant, zhat ſhail ever 


be forgotten &, 

7 Thar is, thoſe of Fudah and 1/-ael that fear the Lord ſhall ſort. 
ouſly and ſteadily ſeek the true God, and the true way of h's wore 
(hip. k And, being ſenſible that they had broken the covenant 
which their Fathers had formerly made with Sod, with a delire to 
renew their covenant, and that not for a time, but for ever. See 
chap. 31: 31. The only queſtion is, Whether this promiſe be yet ac« 
compliſhed or no, or when it was, or ſhall be fulfilled ? 4»ſw. it 
was without doubt in a great meaſure fulfilled upon the Jews come 
ing out of the captivity of Babylen, when thoſe of the Kingdom of 
Judah returned to Jeruſalem, and were very zealous for reſtoring 
the true Worſhip of God, and renewed their covenant with God 
(as we read in the Book of Ezra & Nehemiah) but Mr.Calvuin thinks 
it was more eminently fulfilled under the Kingdom of the M 52h, 
when though many believed not, yet many others did believe.and 


9 © But it ſhall come to paſs in the latter days, 
zbat T will bring again the capcivity of Elam, faith che . 


LORDg. 

 g We had the like promiſe as to Moab, Chap: 48:47: and as to 
Ammon, Yer. 6. the ſame latter days either fignifie after many days, 
or in the time of the Meſiss. In the former ſenſe it may refer to 
Cyrus, who conquered Perſis. In the latter ſence it is referred to 
the ſpiritual liberty which ſome of theſe poor Heathens were 


Elemites were at Hieruſalem at Penteceſt, and were ſome of theſe con- 


| verted to Chriſt. 
EET CHAP. L 
- *Tſa-13:1- The Judgment of Babel,and the Land of Chaldes, for thiir Idelatry,Tyranny, 


brought into by the Goſpel. We read As 2: 9. that ſome of theſe | P 


and 21: 1, and Pride ; with gracious promiſes of the Redemption of Ijrael inter- 

and 47:1- mired, Verſe 45,19, 20, 34- | 

3 _ THE word that the LORD ſpake * againſt Babylon 
F _ and againſt the land of the Chaldeans + by Jere- 


© hando L 
; ub miah the prophet #» 


were added to the Church, and whether a further fulfilling of it be 
not yet to come, time muſt ſhew. 


6 My people hath been loſt ſheep 7, their ſhepherds 

have cauſed them to go aſtray mz, they have turned 

them away oy the mountains » : they have gone from : 
mountain to hill o, they have forgotten their 4 reſting Aooge '3. 


lace p. 
I All Men are compared to Sheep that go aſtray, 1/a. 53: 6. here _ 
it is applied to the Jews who are called the Lord's People by reaſon 
of the ancient Covenant Ged made with their Fathers : they are 
ſaid to be loſt, cither with reſpect to their captivity being calt out: 
of the Land which God gave them for Paſtures, or in reſpect of 
their Idolatry. »» Their Civil and' Eccleſiaſtical Governours have - 
been a cauſe of it- The former by their wicked Commands for- 
cing them to Idolatry and Superſtition,or at leaſt by their wicked 
Example ſetting them an Example, and by their ill goverament 
conniving at them in their Idolatrous Practices, for which they are 

SONG 


Chap. L. 


broken in pieces, her idols are confounded, her ima- _ <Þ2P- 
I: 


= by A. ha. rite Is 


Chap L. 


j] Or, 
deſtroyer, 


T Heb. 

b;e, 87 
corpulent, 

1] Or, neigh 
& flecay, 


7 E R E 


gone into Captivity. Their Piicfts, ant Ecclefiaſtical Governors. 
t-aching. them ſuch Praftices and incouraging them by their own 
Examples, and promiſing them impunity, and ſecurity in them. 
» Either they have been a cauſe of their offering Sacrificesto Idols 
upon the Mountains, or of their being carried into Caprivity over 


the Mountains. o Either wandring up and downin a ſtrange Land, 


or in their way thither, or running from one ſpecies of Idolarry to 
arother. p They have forgotten the Land of Canaan which I gave 
- them fora reſting place after their toilſom Travel in the Wilderneſs, 
or ( as ſome would have it ) they have forgotten me who am their 


relt. 

7 All thatfound them have devoured them 9, and their 
adverſariesſaid, We offend not, becauſe they have ſinned 
againit the LORD r, the habitation of juftice s, even the 
LORD, the hope of their fathers z. | 

g As they be inthe condition of loſt Sheep, fo they have been 
ander the fate of loſt Sheep, which every Dog, Fox, Wolf devours. 
7 And thoſe that are their Enemies have pretended that in deſtroying 
them they have done noill, becauſe they had ſinned, ſo as the fins 
of the Jews did both expoſe them to the Wrath of God, and alſo 


emboldned their Enemies, and encouraged them to think that they ' 


did God Service in deſtroying them. «5 The habitation of Juſtice. Some 
think this is a Name here given to God, who indeed is the habita- 
tion of Juſtice, but whether the Chaldeans would call him ſo may be 
a queſtion. Others therefore think the prepoſition /n-is underſtood, 
making this the aggravation of the Jews ſins, that they were com- 
mitted in a Land which'ought to have been an habitation of Juſtice, 
as ſz. 26. 10. it is ſaid that the wicked Man in 4 land of uprightneſs 
will deal unjuſtly. Mr. Calvin hath another notion, viz. "That the 


Prophet here incourageth himſelf againſt what the Adverfaries had ' 


promiſed themſelves becauſe the People had offended God :. vis. 
that notwithſtanding this, God was a righteous God, in whom 
Juſtice dwelt, and who would be faithful.to his Promiſes. # And 
he was their hope, and had been he in whom their Fathers before 
them had hoped, and that nor in vain. | 

8 Removeout of che midſt of Babylon «, and go forth 
out of the iand of the Chaldeans, and be as the he- goats 


before the flocks. 


u Theſe words immediately following the other, confirm Mr. 
Calvin's notion. God by his Prophet commanding his people to 
remove out of Babylon, and to go forth chearfully and Skipping 
like the He-goars of the Flock leading the way, and ſetting an Ex- 
ample unto others. We fiad much ſuch a Call, 1s. 48. 20. Chap. 


Fr..5. which is applied to Spiritual Babylon, Rev. 18 4. where the - 


coming out is to beunderſtood of aſeparation from them as to any 
Religious Communion, which alſo wastheir Duty asto old Babylon, 
but that is not the coming outhere ſpoken of. 

9 © For lo, I willraife and cauſe to come up againſt 
Babylon, an aflembly of great nations from the north- 
countrey, and they ſhall fer themſelves in array againſt 
her w, from thence ſhe ſhall be taken 3 their arrows 
ſhall be as of a mighty [| expert man : none ſhall returnin 
vain .*.. : ; | 

w He means the Medes and Perſians (as it isexpounded afterward) 
. I will ſo direfſt their Arrows, that every Arrow they ſhoot ſhall 
pierce ene or other. Or, ( as ſome rather chuſe to interpret it) 
no Soldier of that aſſembly of great Nations, that ſhall come up 
againſt Babylen ſhall return without ſome Booty or other. The 
scaſon of the diff:rent reading- noted in the Margent, is the diffe- 
renee of a point in the Heb, which if ſet on the right fide of the 
Letter, the word ſignifieth a deſtroyer : if on the left lide, an expers 
21an as we tranſlate 1t. 


10 And Chaidea ſhall be a ſpoil : all that ſpoil her 


ſhall be facisfied. faith the LORL x- 


* Sarisfied with Spoil and plunder, for Babylon and Chaldes was at 
that time one of the richelt places in thoſe parts of the World She 
was abundant in treaſure, Chep. 51. 13. 

11 Becauſ: 'ye were giad, becauſe ye rejoyced x, Oye 
deſtroyers of mine heritage y, becauſe yearegrown Þ far, 
as the heifer at grafs, and || bellow as bulls z. | 

* They rejoyced at the ruine of the Jews, the ſame thing 1s laid 
to the charge of the Edom:tes, Obad:ah 12. The Chaldeans were Gods 
Rod to ſcou- g- the Fews ; but when Menare made uſe of by God, 
as his Rod and Scourge, they ought not to put off Humanity, but 
to behave th-mſclves decently, aud as Perſons that are ſenſible of 
the miſ:ries which their Brethren ſuffer, y God calls them his 
Heritage, becauſe they formerly were a People whom he owned 
above all other People, xz There is ſome difference amongſt critical 
Interpreters, whether the Heifer here mentioned be to be underſtood 
of a Heifer at Graſs (as we tranſlate it ) or an Heifer uſed to tread 
out the Corn ; or whether the laſt words be to be underſtood of a 
Horſe=neightng, ( as the words may be interpreted ) or a Bull bellow- 
ing. Bvt theſe are things of very ſmall mament. The cauſe for 
which Babylon is threatacd, was doubtleſs their Luxury ofall ſorts 
commonly attending great Wealth, and Proſperity meeting with 
hearts unſanQtified. 


12 Your mother ſhall be ſore confounded, ſhe that 
bare you -ſhall be aſbamed 4: behold, the hindermoſt 
of the nations b ſhe be a wildernels, a dry land, and a 
deſar &o ; 


a Your chief City Baby/on, or your Countrey,which is the common 
Mother of all the Chaldeans ſhall be deſtroyed, or ſhall be aſhamed of 
you, who are not able to defend her. 6 The ſenſe here ſeems a 
liccle difficult, becauſe it appears no ſuch ſtrange thing that the 
hindermoſt of the Nations ſhould be a Wilderneſs. Ir is therefore 
probable that the words Jha be, are to be underſtood before the 
hindermoſt of the Nations, our Tranſlarion ſupplieth them after, ſo 
the reading will be, it ſhall be the hindermoft of the Nations, 8 
Wilderneſs, &c. That is, Babylon, that hath been ſo famous, 
and accounted the head of the Nations, ſhall become the 
m—_— of all Natigns, a mezr Wilderneſs, and a dry land, and a 

ElALCt, 


M 1 4 


13 Becauſe of the wrath of the LORD, it fhall not 
be inhabited, but ic ſhall be wholly deſoiate c : every 


one that goeth by Babylon, ſhall be'aſtoniſhed, and 
hiſs at all her plagues . | 

_ © The ſame thing is threatned againſt Babylon, Ifa. 13.20, I fhaZ 
never be inhabited, neither ſhall it be dwelt in from generation to generation, 
d It ſcemerh ro be a proverbial Speech made uſe of to expreſs the 
miſerable ſtate of a place; we had it before, Chap. 49. 17. applyed 
to Edom, Ir is according to the threatning, Deut. 28. 37. Sce Chap. 
25.9, 18. and 29. 18. and 42. 18. Exek. 5. 15. 


14 Put your ſelves in arcay againft Babylon round 


about e : all ye that bend the bow, thoot at her, 


ſpare no arrows f: for ſhe hath ſinned againſt the 
e The Prophet calls to the Medes and Perſians, with thoſe who 
ſhould come with them to their afliſtance, to put themſelves in 
Military order ready to come up againſt Babylon. f The Perſians 
as was noted before ) were very famous for the Bow, therefore he 
ſpeaketh unto them as'an Army of Archers, to ſhoot at the Baby- 
lonians, and to ſpare no Arrows. g Becauſe Babylon had ſinned 
againſt the Lord exceedingly, as Gen. 13. 13. by their Idolatry, 
Luxury, and cruel uſage of the Jews, &c., | 
:5Shout againſt her round about þ: ſhe hath given her 


handz : her foundations are faln, her walls are thrown 


down k& : * for it is-the vengeance of the LOR DJ: * Chap. | þ 
take vengeance upon her ; as ſhe hath done, do unto go, wi 


her m2. | | Ce 4 
h Either as Soldiers uſe to ſhout when they fall upon their Ene- 

my, oras they uſe to ſhout and triumph when they are entred a 

City, or when their Enemies fly. -i Either acknowledging them= 


ſelves overcome, and yielding themſelves to the power of their E- * 


nemies, or as ſome think confederating-with the Zy4ians, - but the 
former is more probable & Thar is, ſhe is wholly ſubdued and 
conquered, as if her Walls were thrown down, for literally her 
Walls were hor beaten down by Cyr», for he took the City by 
ſurprize 1 God is he who brings this Vengeance upon Balyles, 
though it be by your hands. mr is very obſervable, that there'is 
hardly any fins which the Lord fo ordinarily puniſheth in the like 
kind, as thoſe which are offences againſt the Laws of Jufice and 
Charity, The common fate of crucl and uncharitable Men, is to 
meet with others to do to them, as they have done to others, uri- 
merciful Men find no mercy. See Pſal. 137. 8, 9+ Jude. 1.6, 7. 
Adoni-Bezek acknowledged Gods Juſtice in it. 


16 Cutoff the ſower from Babylon, and him hat 


handleth the || ſickle in thetime of harveſt»: for fear of ! Or, 
the opprefling ſword, they ſhall turn every one to his Sb 


people, and they ſhall flee every one to bis own land o. 

nu We are told that Babylou was ſo large a City, that within the 
Walls of it there was much plowed ground: or elſe the threatnin 
imports that God would deal more feverely with Babylon, than 
Conquerors uſe to do with places which they Conquer, who uſe 
to ſpare and leave behind them, Plowmen, and ſuch asuſe to Till the 
ground, but in the deſtruttion of Babylon, it ſhould not be ſo. o He 
ſpeaks either of fuch Strangers as for Commerce had their Abodes 
in Babylon, or ſuch Aſſiſtants as the Baby/onians had gotten againſt 
their Enemies, who upon the coming in of the Enemies ſhould 
maks as much haſte home as they could. 


17 © Irael 3s a ſcattered ſheep p, the lions have 
driven him away g, firſttheking of Aiſyria hath devoured 
him 7, and laſt this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon 
hatch broken his bones. 

p By Jrael is here meant the whole T'welve Tribes ( tho ſome 
times it ſignifieth the Ten Tribes in oppoſition to Jubab) they 
were all wandering Sheep, they became penally ſcattered Sheep. 
9 Enemies as fierce and cruel as Lions, had ſeized rhem, and carried 
them into Captivity. 7 Firſt the King of 4/jria devoured the Ten 
Tribes which were ftritly call'd Jra:l, 2 Kings 17.6. Then Nebuchads 


| nezzar the King of Babylon took Feruſalem as we heard Chap. 39: and 


carried awaythe People, and burnt the Temple, which the Prophet 
here calls a breaking of his Bones, | 


18 Therefore thus ſaith the LORD of hofts, the God 
of Iſrael, Behold, Iwill punith the king of Babylon, and 
his land r, as I have puniſhed the king of Afſyria 5s | 

r God may juſtly puniſh thoſe who do the things which he hath 
commanded them to do, if they do it not in that manner which he 
direQeth, or, if what they do, be not done in obedience to his 
Command, but in fatisf:&ion to their own Luſts, which was the 
caſe of the Aſfjrians, 1/a.10.7, / Some refer this to the puniſhment 
of the Aſſyrians in the deſtruftion of Sexnacheriband his Army inthe 
time of Hezekiah, but the Prophet ſeemeth here to ſpeak of a de- 
firu&ion of &ſjrta, which followed after his devouring of the Ter 
Tribes, from whence we may conclude, that 4ſjria was deſtroye4 
before the time of this Revelation. | ;/ ; 

19 And I will bring Iſrael again to his habitation r, 
and he ſhall feed on Carmel and Baſhan, and his ſoul 


ſhall be ſatisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead s. - ; 
£ This muſt be underſtood of Judah, which was part of thar 
People who were called [rael, for to this day we have neither read 
nor heard of the Ten Tribes being brought back again to thelizr 
habitation. « The only difficulty 1s how it is ſaid rhar the' Jews 
upon their return ſhould feed upon Carme! and Baſban, and Mount 
Ephraim and Gilead, which were places that belong'd not to the 
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin : to which it is anſwered, that theſe 
places were granted to the Jews by Demetrius the Father and the 
Son, as we are told by . Joſephus, 1-13. c.5.8, Theſe places were 
rich Grounds .for feeding Cartel; therefore ir 1s ſaid rhey jhal feed bn 
Carmel and Baſhan, &c. IR RIP on hor DoS 
20 In thoſe days, and .in. that; time, faith the 
LORD, the iniquicy of Iſra21 ſhall be ſought for, arid. 
S x” 2 | there 


| Chap. 


x — = PIR m_n—_ 
LURT._ cs rawy pu War ys. 


” cp mm ——e—ony —_— 
eee iy —_— noe — ne ED epern—ng - —_—_ 
CE ISI an . S—— - = : 
4 CE Hop os _—_ PF i 9% xa 16 ena 2 OR . 


157 neo gy nr 740 OST 


CCD i _—_—_—_— 


-' - > 
"** 


+447 
: 
i 
: 


E Clap. 


Fi- 29. 


* Chap: 


c1.10,1T 


*t 2p. L 


"ment, and nor found. 


.80 up, 


and the firs of jadah, and they 


hore ſhall be none : 
| » en whom [I 


jhall not be found w, for I will paidoa Ol 


reſerve x. 


w Some here reſtrain the term iniquiry ro *be 1!olatry of the Jews, 


which indeed was their great fin, which God did more eſpecially 
unifh them for, and after the Captivity of Babylon, we do nor read 
of their off:nding in thac kind, which was according to the Pro- 


phecy of 1/aia\, Iſa. 27. 9. that when God ſhould make the Stones 


ne Ty under, the Groves and 
ofthe Altar as Chalk-ones that are bearen a , th 
- t the laſt words ſcem to guide 


mages ſhould nor ſtand up. x Bu : 
—_ a Donn ſenſe of the term iniquity, and to point us to another 
ſenſe of the whole former phraſe, viz. That God would no longer 
puniſh the ſins of ths Jews, they ſhould be ſought for as to punith- 
A 14 thoſe words and noe muſt be under” 
ſtood as if noze, they ſhall be puniſhed no more than if they had 
none. x For as to thoſe whom I ſave from the Captivity of Babylon, 
Twi! pardon them, not that they were all excuſed from the obligation 
their ſins laid them under as to Eternal Death, bur that ther Temporal 
puniſhmen: was remitted to the whole Body of rhe Jews ; and thoſe 
that were truly penirent alſo, ſhould be diſcharged from their 
obligation to Erernal Death. The obligation thar ſin layeth the 
ſinner undec to Erernal Death may be remitted, and yer rhe temporal 
puniſhment due to them may remain, 259m. 12,13, t4,0And on the 
other ſide the puniſhment in this Life, may be ſuſpended or remitted, 
and the obligation, ſin layerh the finner und-r to Eternal Death, 


TY : © Go up againſt the land of || Merathaim y, ever 


againſt ir, and againſt the inhabicants of || Pekod y, 
WR and utterly deſtroy after them, ſaich che LORD, 
and do according to all thit I have commanded 


0, thee &. 


- There is ſome Diſputes amongſt Interpreters, Whether the 
words here M:rathaim and Pekod be to be taken as common Nouns, 
the one ſignifying Rebels or Rulers, the other Yi/tation, becauſe the 
Chald:ans were Rebels againſt che Lord, and were great Rulers over 
all the contiguous Nations : Or whether they be proper Names of 
ſome places which Cyrus piſſed by, or, it may be, took in, and 
conquier:d in his way to Babylon. z The latter are Gods Words by 
his Prophet, like the Former commanding him with his Armies to 
and deſtroy them flying away, or them that ſhould ſucceed 
after them, their whole Poitecity ; intimating Gods deſign utterly 
to deſtroy them, which deſtrutiva was gently begun by Cyr, 
and perfected by Darius. | 

22 A ſound of battel is in the land, and of great 


deſtruction 4. 
@ Thar is in the Land of Chaladea. 
22 How iz the * hammer of the whole earth cut aſun- 


der and broken? how is Babylon become a deſolation 


among the nations b * 
b The latter pact of the Verſe expounds the former, God had 


made the Babylmians his Hammer, to break other Nations in pieces, 
now it was i ſelf broken ; the Particle how may be underſtood either 
as expreſſing triumph and rejoycing, or admiration, Or as inquiring 
how ſuch a thing could be in rhe laſt ſenſe. The mext Verle is an 


anſwer to this. 
24 I have laid a ſaare for thee, and thou art alſo 


taken, O Babylon, and thou waſt not aware, thou arr 
E ” 8 , 1 = , Aa P 
found, and allo caught c, becaufe thou haſt ſtriven 


againſt the LORD #- ; | 

© We arerold that Cyr with his great Army diverted the River 
Evphrates, ſoashis Army palſed over and furprized the City ſo ſud- 
denly that thoſe in the midſt of it, did not know it when part of the 
City was alre:dy taken; God dire&ed Cyr: to this Stratagem for 
the taking ofthe City, which the Propher calls a ſnare, wherein the 
Babylonians were taken. d The reaſon of this unexpetted ruine to 
this great People was their ſinning againſt the Lord, v. 14. which is 
here call'd a ſtriving againſt him, as indeed all fin is. 


25 The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath 
brought forth the weapons of his indignation : for this 
5s the work of the LORD God of hoſts, in the land of 


the Chaldeans e. 


e Rabylon was ſo rich, and potent a Nation, and had been ſo great 
a Conquerour, that People looking only with the eye of ſenſe, and 
judging according to probabilities in the Eyes of Men, might well 
25k how theſe things could poſſibly be 2? To which the Prophet 
here anſwereth, That the hand cf God was to be eyed in the caſe, 
"this was the Lords Work upon the Cialdeans ; God had opened his 
'Armoury, and the Mzdes were to make uſe of the Weapons of his 
indignation. He who threarned this deſtruttion was ableto carry it 
through, and it was no great matter what Weapons either the 
Babyonians had to defend themſelves, or the Mzdes to offend them, 
Gods power and ſtrength was only to be regarded. 
 - 26 Come againit her from the utmoſtborder f, open 


her ſtore-houlesg : ||calt her up as heaps h, and deſtroy | the midſt of her y, and they ſhall become * as women J2* Nat, - 
an, 3, 


her utterly : let nothing of her be lefc. 
= f The Prophet in the Name of God calleth ro the Enemies of 
Babylon, the Medes,.tro come up, from che furtheſt parts of their 
Dominions, or from all parts, to fight againſt Babylov. g To open 
the Granaries, or Store-houſes, or Treaſures of the Babylomans, 
þ And to caſt up the Ciries as heaps of Rubbilh, and utterly rodeſtroy 
the City, with ſuch a toral deſtruftion that nothing of it ſhould be 


left. 
: LS Slay all her bullocks : let them 'go down to the 


flaughterg : wo unto them, tor their day is come, the 
time of cheir viſitation. ' 
' By Bullocks in this place Interpreters generally underſtand the 


reat and Rich Men of Baylor. 
F 28 The voice of them that fleeand eſcape out of the 


land of Babylon * to declare in Zion the vengeance of 
the LORD our GOD, the vengeance of his tem- 


ple þ. 


ST ERB MIA FP 


| 


j 
z 


þ The Prophet here, brings in the poor J:ws that had been 
Cap tives in Bab;l/ow going 
Liberty, rowards Z:on there joytully to declare the Revenge whi 

wt 4; CC) ge Which 
their God had taken for them, and for his Holy Temple, w hich the 
Chaldeans had burnt and deſtroyed. 

29 Call rogether the archers againſt Babylon 3 : all 
ye that bend the bow, camp againſt it round about C 
let none thereof eſcape, recompence her according to 
her werk ; according to all that ſhe hath done, dounto 
her: for ſhe hath been proud againſt the LORD, acainſt 

he holy One of = 
l et oly One of Iſrael &. 

; The word tranſlated Archers ſignifierh* alſo many, and j 

; : ers, and 1s b 
divers fo tranſlated. but the tollowing Words more ” aſtifie i 
Tranſlation, k The cauſe of God's calling for Bavylou's Enemies 


{ againſt her, isaſſigned to be her Pride againilt the Lord. 


30 Therefore jhall her young men fall in che ſtreets, 


and all her men of war (ball b at dav 
— aprimyPooyh | e cut off in that day /, 


I See Chap. 49 26. where we met with the ſame words. 


time 7bat [will viſit thee ws. 
m Babylon is particularly branded for Pride, which is the ſwelling 


he exc-lleth, or thinks that he excelleth another. 
account ot the Pride of Babylon, Iſa. 14. 12, 13,14. and particular] 
of one of their Kings, Dan. 5. 20, 21. 


none jhall raile himup : 
Cities, and it ſhall devour all round about him ». 

2 Babylon before call:d the moft Proud, here Pride in the ab 
( which ſpeaketh this People exceſlively faulty in this ching } == 
tall, and 1o fall, as never more to be recovercd and raiſed up. 


33 9 Thus faith che LORD of hoſts, The children 
of [icael and the children of Judahwere oppreſſed tope- 
ther o, and all that took them captives heid them faſt 
they refuſed to let them go p, g 

o Nor together in reſpe& of times, for there was 150 years difes 
rence betwixc the time of Iſrael's and Juda)s Captivity ; nor bythe 
ſame Enemy, 1/rael was carried away Captive by the 4ſrians, Judah 
by the Chaideans. Together in this place lignifics no more than thar 
they were both oppreiled, or alike oppretſed. p And ſome may 
think that my Pcophecies are but Flatteries, and vain Words, for 
thoſe who have them in their hands are able ro keep them, and will 
not be willing to ler them go. R 


34 Their redeemer zs ſtrong, the LORD of hofts is 
his name 9, he (hal througbly plead their cauſe », that 
he may give reſt co theland, and diſquiec the inhabitants 


of Babylon /. 

9 The Lord whoſe Name is the Lord of Hoſts, is he that is their 
Avenger : ( for ſo the word ſignifies ) and he is as ſtrong as any of 
thoſe that hold them faſt, and will not let them go. rHe will 
plead their cauſe, nor like a Lawyer, bur aQtually, and really effe& 
it, as pleading is often taken, as Chap. 25, 31. Ezek,17, 20.7013, 2. 
J Thele are the two ends which God aimeth at, to give his People 
reſt, and to puniſh. Babylon. 

25 T A ſword js t upon the Chaldeans, ſaith the 
LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and 


upon her princes, and upon her wiſe men. 

# Thar is, there ſhall come a Sword, the Sword of the Meds, 
upon Babylon, and all the Land of the Chaldeans, and all Orders of 
Perſons in it. 


ſome liers; and in the Hebrew it hath both ſignifications ; whic 

makes ſome think it is to be underſtood of the chief Men who are 
the Props, Stays and Bars of a place whoſe Wiſdom God threatens 
ſhould fail them, ſo as they ſhould do, and ſhew themſelves Fools. 


fayers and Wizzards whom he calls liars, becauſe they divined falſe, 
and faith they ſhould dote, not foreſeeing what ſhould be. w And 
though they were full of valiant mighty Men, yet, their hearts 
een them when this day came, and all be deſtroyed amongſt 
the reſt. 


| 


[ 
[1 


237 A ſword is upon their horſes, and upon their 
chariots x, and upon all the mingled people that are in 


a {word js upon ber treaſures, and they ſhall be rob- 


d z. ; In. r3.15 
* Though they be full of Chariots and Horſes, the Enemy ſhall * Chap, 
; deſtroy them. y By the mingled People ſome underſtand thoſe 40, 24, 


whomthe Babylon;anshad hired totherr Aſſiſtance from other Nations, 
others, ſuch {trangers as lived among{t them ; others a People under 
the power of the Ch2!d:ans, made up of People of ſeveral Countries, 
See Chap. 25. 20. 24, Ek. 30. 5.they ſeem ro ſignifie a People that 
were not Native Chaldeans, but under their Dominion. » That is, 
faint-hearted, z And though Babylonhath great Treaſures, yetthoſe 
ſhall not ſecure her, ſhe ſhall be robbed of them. 

38 ” A drought is upon her waters, and they ſhalbe 


are mad upon their idols b. 
& Some think that this Phraſe hath a ſpecial reference to Cyrus 


his Stratagem uſed in the ſurprize of Ba#ylon ; one part of it was 
running on one fide, 


"+ ca by the great River Enphrates, 


which 


Others Tranſlating it {zars as we do, underſtand it of their Souths 


back upon Cyrus his Proclamation of 


31 Behold, I z»againſt thee, O :hu + moſt proud | 
# 3 _ © g. 3 - F s - 
ſaich the LORD God of hoſts, for thy day is come, the ray 


ofa Mans Feart in a [:]1f-opinion, cauſed from ſome thing wherein 
We havea large 


| The linnerexalteth himſ, 
againſt God, and either judgeth himſelf wiſer, or more mi ay - can 


32 And the | moſt proud ſhal ftumbie and fall, and + Heb; 
and I will kindle a fire in his rides 


TY. 


Chap, L- 


? 
o 


. SM. A” . F TY 
dried up a, for it zsthe land of graven images, and they Bugs Fr. 
þ | - 


OE be " 


Chap. LI. 


which Cyrus diverted by cutting ſeveral Channels, till he had drained 


ir {0 low, that it became paſlable for his Army to go over : Others 
think that a want of Rain his here threained b God gives the 
reaſon of this Judgment which was their Idolatry, aad exceeding 
zeal for it. 


29 Therefore * the wild beaſts of the deſerts with 


* Tfa. 83. 
22, & 34. the wild beaſts of che iſlands ſhall dwell there, and the 
14 Chap. owls fhal dwelltherein : and itſhal be no more inhabired 
6.37: for ever: neither ſhal ic be dwelt infrom generation to 
= generation. | 
*Gen.19. 40 * As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and 
0 the neighbour cities thereof, ſaith the LORD 3 ſo ſhall 
2'319- no man abide there c, neither ſhall any ſon of man 
Chap. 49. d . 
18, well therein» | | 
c The ſubſtance of both theſe Verſes is, That Babylon ſhould be 
totally ruined, as Sodom and Gomorrah, ſo as there ſhould be no Ha- 
bitation for Men, bur wild beaſts only of all ſorts ſhould inhabit 
and lodge in it, The fulfilling of this, we havenot in holy Writ, 
only the beginning of its accompliſhment, it being taken by Cyrus 
who only made them Triburaries, and rook away their Government. 
But they rebelling againſt the Emperour of the Medes, Darius Hyſt aſpis 
a ſucceeding Emperour pulled down their Walls. And about 250 
Years after Seleu:us Nicanorg a Grecian Prince, and the Medes being 
before conquered by Alexander the Great, utterly deſtroyed Babylon, 
ſo asin the time of Hadrian the Roman Emperour, there was nothing 
left ftanding of that great City but ſome pieces of Walls. 
_ | 41 * Behold, a people ſhall come from the north, 
5 :.Þ and agreat nation, and many kings ſhall be raiſed up 


from the coaſts of the earth . 

da The Medes and Perſians with their Armies, who ſhall alſo have 
many other Kings, who from the ſeveral parts of the earth thall 
joyn with them and help them. 

42 They ſhall hold the bow and the lancee: they are 
cruel and will not ſhew mercy f: * their voice ſhal roar 
*IGa,s; 30. like the ſeas, and they ſhall ride upon horſes, every one 
put in array like a man to the battel, againſt chee, 
O daughter of Babylon g. 

e Theſe were the two uſual weapons of Soldiers in thoſe Countries, 
Chap. 6. 23« f The Perſians were a crucl bloody People. g Theſe 
Phraſes ſignifie no more» than that the Enemies ſhould come upon 
Bavjlow in a terrible manner, and prepared to deſtroy them. 


43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, 
and his hands waxed feeble : * anguiſh took holdon him, 
and pangs as of a woman in travail b. 

þ The Medes ſhall not be more prepared to deſtroy the Babylonians, 
than they fhall be unprepared to mak? any reſiſtance ; as God will 
inimate their Enemies, 1o he will diſpirit them, ſo as they ſhall 
faint upon the report of their coming, and be like a Woman upon 
whom ſtrong pangs of Travail are. 


44 Behold, he ſhall come up * like a lion from the 
id *" ſwelling of Jordan, untothe habitation of the ſtrong : 
but I will make them ſuddenly run away from her : 
and who zs a choſen man bat T may appoint over her ? 
Il Or, for who islike me ? and who will || appoint me the 
emvent me time ? and who is that ſhepherd thar will ſtand before 
to plead, me - 

45 Therefore hear ye the counfel ofthe LORD, that 
he hath caken againſt Babylon, and his purpoſes that he 
hath purpoſed againſt che land of the Chaldeans : ſurely 
the leaſt of the flock ſhall draw them out : ſurely he ſhall 
make their habitation deſolate with them 5. 


7 See the Notes on Chap. 49. 19. where we have applied unto 
Edom all that is here ſpoken againſt Babylon. | 

46 Arche noiſe of the taking of Babylon the earth is 
moved, and the cry is heard among the nations &. 

þ We have much the ſame ſpok?n with reference to Edom, ch 49. 
20. The words are only expreſſive of the greatneſs of the deſtruction 
of Baby/on, which ſhould be ſach as ſhould make all thar part of the 
World ſhake, and the noiſe of it would ring throughout all the 
Nations in that part of the Earth. 


CHAF. EE 


The ſevere Judgment of God againft Voluptuous, Covetous, Tyrarmical and 
Tolatrous Babel, in the Revenge, and for the Redemption of Iſrael, 
I 58. Feremiah delivereth the Book of this Prophecy to Seraigh, to 

' be caft into Euphrates, in token of the perpetual {faking of Babylon, 
59 64. 


* Chap. 
45+ 24+ 


4PHus fichthe LORD, Behold, I will raiſe up againft | 


+ Heb. AI Babylon, and againſt them that dwell in + the 
wee/h:ort. midſt of them thac riſe up againit me, a deftroying 
wind ad 


# In this Chapter the Prophecy of the deſtruQion of Babylon is 
continued under new Metaphors; he begins with that of a Wind, 
a deſtroying Wind, ( as northerly Winds are ordinarily very perni- 
cious, ) but the Hebrew Idiom fo ill ſuiteth that of other Languages. 
that it is no ealie matter poſitively ro aſſert the ſenſe of the words 
uſed. In the Hebrew they are and ro or againſt thoſe that inhabit the 
heart of thoſe that riſe up. Some would have ir thole that are wiſe in 
their own opinion, and are taerefore ſaid to dwell in their hearr. 
Others, thole that are ſecure ; bur the beſt Interpreters judge our 
Tranſlation to have beſt hir rhe feale, —— them that dwell in the 
heart, 1. e. that is in the midit of the Chalaeans who are here ſaid 
* have riſen up againſt G Q D, to ftrive againit G OD, Chap. 
56. 24; 


7E RET a 


| way deſtroying them. 


Chap. LI: | 


2 And will ſend unto Babylon * fanners, that ſhall , ci] 

fan her, ard empty her land þ : for in the day of trouble aP-j 
Af | 15.7. 

chey. ſhall be againft her round abour c. E-5* J2-Bes 

b Wicked Men are compared to chaff, Pſal. 2. 4. Suck as executs 
Judgment on them are called Fanmners, Fer.. 15.7. So Matth 3. 12: 
becauſe as the Fanner kcepeth what is in the Fan unquier.in a 
continual motion and agitation, by which (. advantaged by rhe 
Wind ) he emptieth it of che Chaff : ſo the Executioners of GOD's 
Vengeance,by a ſucceſſion of Judgments keeps a people from quiet; 
till all their Chaff be winnowed out, and the Fan be emptied ofall 
bur the more ſolid Grain. c For ( be faith ) as the Fanner firſt 
Ridlerh whar.he hath in. his Fan one way, then another, firſt throweth 
it up, then lets it fall into-rhe Fan, ſo the Enemies ſhould b8 
round about Bbylon, and GOD would beon every ide and every 


: 
. 


3 Againtt hjm that bendeth, let the archer bend his 
bow, and againſt him that lifrech up himſelf in his 
Brigandine 4? and ſpare ye nother youngmen, deſtroy 
ye utterly all her hoſte. ., + Cd al 

d Whatever Arms the Babylonians ſhall be armed with, they ſhall 
meet with their Matches, thoſe that ace Archers, ſhall meer with 
Archers-to bend the Bow againſt them and thoſe who are other- 
wiſe armed ſhall meet wirh Perſons prepared to incounter them ar 
their own ky t e Their whole Hoſt ſhall be deſtroyed both 
young and old Men- 

4 Thus theſlain ſhall fall inthe land of che Chaldeans, - © :-. 
and they that are thruſt through * in her ſtreersf. * Chap, - 
 F Thus all of them ſhall be deſtcoyed, ſome in the Fields, ſome 49: ou 
in tlie Streets of their Cities» I =o p; 

5 For Iſrael bath not been forſaken; nor Jud4h of his 
God, of the LORD of hoſts g ; though their larid was 
filled wich ſin againſt the Holy One of Iſrael b. -_ > .. 

[4 Thar 1s, nor utterly forſaken, for ina ſenſe they were forſaken 
as to ſome gradual manifeſtar.ons of GOD's Love to them, bur 
Judah and .tjrael were not left as a Widow, or were nor divorced 
from GOD. h The word tranllated fin, ſignifies a molt heinous 
finning, or deſolation, and the beſt Ingerpreters judge that ſm here- 
ſignifizth the puniſhment of Sin. GOD hath nor forſaken rhe 7ews 
utterly, though as they were formerly filled with grievous ſins; 
#57 hg be now filled with grievous Judgments becauſe of their 
'ſtas. 

. 6 *Flee out of the midſt of Babylon, and deliver 
every, man his own ſoul : be notcut off in her iniquity: ,_ -_ © 'Þ 
for * this is therime ofche LORDS vengeance, he will v9 } 
render unto her a recompence k- . © * Chap: i 

; It is a matter of no grear moment whether we underſtand. 50. 15 28. 'Þ 
theſe words as ſpoken to the Jews in the Captivity of Babylom, as Kh 1 
| Chap. 50. 8. or torhoſe whom the Chaldeans had hired to help cherits 

Or to ſuch ſtrangers as for their ſecular advantages lived in Babylon. 
By Soul here ſeemerh to be meant Life, and by Iniquity the puniſh-: 
ment of the Babylonians iniquity ( as the Hebrew word oft ſignifies 
though in the New Teſtament theſe words be uſed as a moriition 
to People ro ſeparate from the Idolatries of myitical Babylon, yer. 
they ſeem here to be only a warning to others to remove out of 
the reach of Babylon's fall. k For the time is conie when GOD hath 
determined to take vengeance on Babylon, and to recompence to 
her all her ſin, and that cruelty which ſhe ſhewed to the Jews in 
particular, | | : ot $17 

7 Babylon hath been * a golden cup in the LORDS *Rev 14< 
rand, that made all the earth drunken /: the nations *: & 174+ | 
have drunken of ner wine, therefore the nations are 
mad mm. | 4h, | ils 

I A golden Cup, becauſe of her great Rickes and Plenty, GO 
hitherto had made uſe of Babylon, asa Rod in his Hand, — ne 
her Riches and Power, and proſperity proportioned to the Service 
he had for herto do; what ihe did the did by commiſſion from God, 
rherefore this Golden Cup is ſaid to have been in the Lord's Hand | 
ſhe had made all the Nations about her drunken with the Lord's. 
Fury. m Conquering them ay, and making them mad through the 
miſery and ſmart they felt from her. Babylon in Daniel is compared 
to an head of Gold, and Rev. 17. 4+ She is faid fo have had a Golden 
Cup in her hand, bur the meaning' is no more thari this. That God 
had raiſed up Babylon to great degrees of dignity and ſplendour: 
intending to makeuſe of her to execute his Vengeance upon many 
other People, and he did accordingly ſouſe her, to give the Cup of 
his Fury to many Nations to theencaging of divers People, burnow 
the courſe of his Providence toward her was altering, &«. 


8 Babylon is ſuddenly -* fallen and deſtroyed = : *Ifi 21.9. : 
how! for her, * take balm for her pain, if fo be ſhe may Rev. 14.8. 
be healed ». & '$, 2. 

» That is, ſhe ſhall ſuddenly fall and be deſtroyed, you may try Chap. 
all ths probable ways for her Cure, but they will all be uſed ro no 46.-11. 
purpoſe. | 

9 We would have healed Babylon, but ſhe is not 
healed .*., forſake her, and let us go every one to his: 


own countrey o,, for her judgment reacheth unto 
teaven, and 1s lifred up even to the sky p. .. .. - ; 

©. The Prophet hereſeemethto Soufanens the mercenary Soldier y 
that ſhould come to help-rhe Chaldeens, as if they ſhould ſay this, 
they would have helped Bzbylon, bur there was ne healing far her. 
o And therefore they call one to another ro leave her to her ſelf, and, 
return each Man to his own Countrey, p For her puniſhmeovrt was: 
very great, - her caſe too ſad for them to help. The reaching of. 
things to the Heavens, and lifring them up to the Skies are phraſes. 
uſed to ſignifie ligh and great meaſures, and degrees of things, ſo, 
expreſſed Gen. 11,4. and 28, 12. Deus. r. 28. 1 Sam. 5, 12. 2 Chrone 
28. 9. Pſal. 107. 26. is: 

10' The LORD hath brought forth our righteouſnefs,” . 
come and let *. us declare ia Zion the work of the » chap. 


LORD our GOD 9. | ; 1 $0. 38 
l EF: 4 q Theſes 


4 : e ſpoken as in the perſon of the Jews owning 
PR, gn words *Laby 1. Tobe the mighty Work of God. 2. 
An a& of Juſtice, and Judgment pleading rhe Caufe and revenging 
the Wrongs of his People ; and owning the Jewiſh Religion, ani cal- 
ling one to another to go to che Temple to declare what God had 
done for them, and to give thanks unto him for it. 

1x * Make + bright thearrows r, gather the ſhields, 


the LORD hath * 1 
the Medes 7, for hisdevice is againſt Babylonto deitroy 
it, becauſe it is the * vengeance of the LORD, the 


vengeance of his temple «. 

4 Prepare the Arrows for fighting, whether by featherin go, 
ſharpning, or poliſhing and cleanſing of them, is not much material. 
f You that are Chaldeans, gather all the Shields you have together, 
you will have need of them all : 
the Chaldeans, gather you together your Shields. t For God hitch pur 
a Spirit into Cyrus and Dariws, &c. and his deſign 1s againſt Babylon to 
PEE it. # It is aday in whick God 1s reſolved to take vengeace 
on Babylon, to take vengeance for the indignities they have offered 
to, and the horrible profanation of his Temple. 


12 Set up the ſtandard upon the walls of Babylon, 


make the watch ſtrong, ſer up the watchmen, prepare 
Heb. the + ambuſhes »: for the LORD hath both deviſed 


#i® nd done thatwhich he ſpake againſt the inhabitants of 
Babylon. 


w. Some judge theſe words ſpoken to the M:d:s, declaring the 
Will of God, that they ſhould uſe all probable means to conquer 
Babylon, or ( as ſome would have it ) diſplay their Banners upon. 
the Walls of it, as ſigns of its being already conquered : Bur certainly 
it-is more reaſonable to conclude them the Prophets Words to the 
Babylonians, either rouſing them our of their ſecuricy ( for it appears 
they were ſtrangely ſecure from Dan. 5. Hiſtorians tell us that the 
Ciry was fortified by Walls fifry Cubits high, and two hundred 
Cubirs broad, and by a very deep and large Ditch, beſides that on 
one ſide it had the River Enphrares ) or at leaſt quickning them to 
make all the preparation they could, though all would be to very 
little purpoſe, for God had reſolved upon what he would do upon, 
Babylon, and it was already as good as done. 

13 O thou that dwelleit upon many waters x, abun- 


dant in treaſures y, thine end is come, and the meaſure 


of thy covetouſneſs z. 

x Babylon is ſaid to dwell upon many Waters, becauſe upon the 
great River Euphrates, which they fay did not only run by it, but 
almoſt incompaſs it, branching it ſelf into many ſmaller Rivers, 
which made ſeveral parts of the City, Iflands. » It is a City much 
noted in Scripture for Wealth, and made much more wealthy than 
it was by Traffick, by the Conqueſt of Many Nations. z The 
Prophet tells them that now their gathering time was over, there 
was now a boundary ſer to their coverouſneſs ;. in the Hebrew. it is 
the Cubit of thy covetouſneſs, which is by our Tranſlators well 

 tranflared a car becauſe it was amongſt the Jews the common 
meaſure of height and depth.,, The wo:d by us tranſlated covetouſ- 
neſs, as Exod. 18, 21. may .cither ſignifte Riches the obje&t of their 
covetouſneſs, or proſperity, or that unlawful delire of having more, 
which is properly called Caverou[neſs, either becauſe they ſhould be 
deſtroyed utterly, or becauſe they ſhould proſper no more, there 
was no end put to the Babylon:ans Luſts, but there was an end put 
to the ſatisfa&tion of their Luſts. 


Chap. 
Heb. 
1. 13. 


| Chap. 
©. 28. 


+ Heb. 
bi ſol. , Surely 1 will fill theewith men, aswith caterpillars 
and they (ball + lifc up a ſhout againſt thee c. 

# The Lord thar is able to bring to paſs what he ſaith, hath ſworn 
by his Life, or by himſelf, ſee the like phraſe Chap. 22. 5. and 44. 
26. and 49. 13: Amos 4. 2. and 6.8. Jja. 45: 23, that is the thing 
next inenrtioned ſhall come to paſs as'certainly as that there is a God 
in Heaven, or that God liveth. 6b TI will bring againſt thee a great 
Army, that ſhaij be like a Fwarm of Caterpillers, and ſhall come 
againſt thee in ſuch numbers as Caterpillars uſe to come, and for the 
ſame end, to eat thee up, and deſtioy thee, andas Soldiers uſe to 
do when they go on to fight their Enemies, or to aſſault Cities, 
they ſhall make a great ſhout againſt thee. 

15 * He hath made the earch by his power, he hath 
eſtabliſhed the world by his wiſdom, and hath * ſtretched 
'Chap- 10. out the heaven by his underſtanding. <0 
122,13,14 16 When he uttereth his voice there is a[| multitude 
25 of waters in the heavens, and he * cauſech the vapours 
*® Job g.8- . 
P41. 152, to aſcend from theends of the carth, he maketh light- 
2. nings with the rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of 


Iſa. 40. 22+ his creaſuress 
I = noiſe, 
35. 4 founder is confounded by the graven image : for his 
* Chap. molten image is falſhood, and there 3s no breath in 


*Gen, 1. 
x, 6 


m. | 
18 They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time 

of their viſitation they (ball periſh. 

: I9 * The portion of Jacob is not like them, for he is 

the former of allthings, and Tae! is the rod of his inhe- 


ritance : the LORD of hoſts is his name 9d. 

4 We had theſe five Verſes all in the tenth Chapter, Verſe 12. 
13, 14,15, 16. See there the explication of the ſeveral paſſages in 
them, the ſcope of which is only to convince thoſe to whom the 
Prophet ſpoke, that notwithſtanding all the Power, and Riches, 
and Greatneſs, and Aliances of the Chaldzans, yet that God who had 
threatned this ruine to them was able to bring it upon them, and all 
their Idols were Vanities, things of nought thatſhould not beable to 
prore& them, and from whoſe power or impotency, they muſt not 
meaſure nor make up a judgment of what God was able to do, for 
Iſrasls God was that God who made the World and the Lord of all 
the Armies of the Creatures whether in Heaven or Earth. 
20 * Thou art my battle-axe and weapons of war : 


' #0 know, 


Sg Chap. 
' 10. 16, 


T Chap- 


'M oO. 23- 


raiſed up the ſpiric of the kings of 


or you that are the Enemies of |. 


14 The LORD of hoſts hath ſworn by + himſelf, ſaying, | 


17 * Every man|| is brutiſh by his knowledge, every 


an + #' H. 


for || with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and 
wich chee wiil I deſtroy kingdoms e. 


e Interpreters are here divided, whether by thou or the in this !7 524 or 
and the tollowing Verſes to underſtand Cyrw, whom God made uſe © #9. 


of ra deſtroy Babylon, and many other places, or Babylon. Our Tran- 
ſlators underſtand it of Cyr, and therefore ſpeak of the future 
Tenſe, will I, The Hebrew Text will not reſolve us ;I rather incline 
to 1Nterpret it of Babylon, as indeed the moſt do, and ſo itſhould be 
T:ou haft been, and art, for that is the ſence, Cyrus and Darins were 
nor yet in Being. God had made uſe of P3/zl:n like an Hawmer or 
Batt:c-Axe to break many Nations in pieces. 

21 And with thee will I break in pieces the horſe 
and his rider, and with thee will I break in pieces the 
chariot and his rider : 

22 With thee alſo will I break in pieces man and 
woman, and with thee will I break in pieces old and 
young, and with thee will I breakin pieces the young 
man, and the maid. 

23 I will alſo breakiin pieces with thee the ſhepherd, 
and his flock, and with thee will I break in pieces the 


I break in pieces captains and, rulers f. 

f The ſenſe of all theſe three Verſes is the ſame, viz. That God 
had made uſe, and was itill making uſe of the Babylmians to waſte 
and to deſtroy many Nations, to ſpoil and impoveriſh much Peo- 
ple, waſting their Goods, routing their Armies, killing all ſortz of 
their Inhabitants. 

24 And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the 
inhabitancs of Chaldea, all their evil that they have dons 
1 Zion, in your ſight, ſaith the LORD g. 

£ The Particle in the front of rhis Verſe which our Tranſlators 
| ( underſtanding the four former Verſes of Cyr ) render and in a 
Ccopulative ſenſe, muſt be rendred now or but, if the four former 
Verſes be underſtood of Babylon, and the ſenſe isthis, Though | 
have hitherto made uſe of Babylon, and ſhall yet for a time make uſe 
of the Chalaeans and Babylonians to deſtoy ſeveral other Nations, 
' yet now rhe time is come, thatI will punith them, and zecompence 
.fo them all the miſchief they have done to the Jews and ſome of 
the Jews ſhall live to ſes ir. 


25 Behold, I aw againſt thee, O deſtroying moun- 
tain, faith the LORD, which deſtroyelt all the earth b, 
and I will ſtretch our my hand upon thee, and roll thee 
down from the rocks 5, and will make thee a burnt 
mountain &. 

h Babylonis not here called a Mountain becauſe it was ſituated upon 
any Hills or Mountains, for it appears ftom Ger. 11. 2. that it was 
ſicuated in a Plain, and we read Yerſe. 13 that it dwelt upon man 
Water: ; but becauſe it was very highfor its Power, and Greatneſs, 
{;and had very high Walls and Towers, that it looked at a diſtance 
{ Iike an high rocky Mountain, and as ſome ſay ( being a very large 
| City ) was full of Trees. They had deſtroyed many People ofthe 
; Earth that lay near to them. # God threatens to deſtroy them not 

withſtanding their Towers, and great Fortifications, as many times 

they threw down MalefaQors from high Rocks, Mountains, and 

Precipices. k And tro make them like Rena or Yeſuvins, or like ſome 
| other Mountains of Sulphur, or other biruminous matter fired, 
whichare always burning, or elſe he threatneth that their Cities and 
Towers which appeared like a Mountain ſhould be burnt. 


\ >. 29 


{ 26 And they ſhal not take ofchee a ſtone for a corner, 
nor a ſtone for foundations, but thou ſhalt bet deſolate + Heb; 
everlaſiing 
I God threatneth to Babylon an utter ruine and deſolation, ſo as deſolstionse 


for ever ſaith the LORD IU. 


they ſhould not have a ſtone left fir to lay a foundation, or to 

make a corner ſtone : or, as ſome others interpret it, That City 

ſhould never be built again, there ſhould never from the Rubbith 

of it be taken a ſtone to lay the foundation, nor to lay upon the 
, Corners of new Houſes, new Walls, new Towers in that place, 
Foundation ſtones, and corner ſtones,are principal ſtones in Buildings. 
5 gg ſhall be left in Babylon of any worth, value or conſiderable« 
neſs. 

27 Set yeup a ſtandar1in the land, blow the trumpet 
among[t the nations mz, prepare the nations againſt 
her, call together againſt her the kingdoms of Aratat », 
Minni, and Aſhchenaz o, appoint a captain againſt her 
p, cauſe the horſes to come up as the rough caterpil- 
lars 9. 

m Theſe former words of this Verſe are expounded by thoſe 
that follow, ſetting up of Standards and blowings of Trumpets, 
are preparatory to bring Armies together. The ſetting up of 
Standards, and blowing of Trumpets. are Military ſigns of the 
Will of thoſe Princes or Captains General, whoſe thoſe Standards 
are, and to whom thoſe Trumpets belong, that thoſe Soldiers 
who are under their Command ſhould gather themſelves together 
to the places where thoſe Standards are 1et up, and thoſe Trumpets 
blown. » What this Kingdom of Ararat was. o And thoſe of 
Mrmni and Aſbchenaz is very hard to determine, we read of a 
Mountain called Ararat, where the Ark reſted afrer the Flood, 
Geneſis 8. 4. Of Minni we read no where elſe; moſt Writers 
think theſe were two Kingdoms within Armenia. Aſbchenaz de= 
ſcended from Noah by Faphat, Geneſis 10. 3- certain it is that the 
Emperour of the Medes had the Dominion of theſe places, from 
whence it is very probable that either Cyr#s or Darizs, or both 
drew out Soldiers to help them to conquer the Chaldeans. p Aﬀeer 
Peopleare gathered together for War, the firſt thing to be done is 
to put them into Military Order, conſtituting a Captain General. 
q Let the Horſes come up like the rough Caterpisar. Others read 
it like the waſting Caterpillar, or like the horrible afcighting Cas 
rerpillar. Great Diſputes there are amongſt critical Interpreters 
what Caterpillars are here meant, the Caterpillars being generally 


ſmooth ; but as we know not the complexion of Inf:Cts over ew 
ng 


husbandman, and his yoke of oxen, and with thee will - 


Chap, LI. 


ry 


© Dat Fire 


SMOG ATI o8MF%C ns At * 
. 


CA Bai 


fy 


Chap. LI. 


4 batt The NAGA OAT tw 
o 


moo: 9m 2 EA, fl . 


(38, - 


7 6 R E 


the World, ſfoevzn amongſt us, we ſez ſore Caterpillars that look 
2 little rough ; that which alone we are here to attend is, why the 
Median Horſes are compared to theſe Inſe&s ; undoubtedly it is either 
x. With reſpe& to their Numbers, for Caterpillars in thoſe Ceun- 
tries uſed to come in vaſte numbers. 2:Or in regard of the horror, 
and trembling cauſed by them in People when they came, being 
a great Plague to the places which they infeſted. EO 
28 Prepare againſt her the nations with the kings of 
the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers 
thereof, and all the land of his dominion r. 

+ Here the Prophet declares thoſe particular Princes, and Nati- 
ons that ſhould be God's Inſtruments to deſtroy Babylon, viz. Cyrus 
and Darius the Emperours of the Medes, with all the Forces under 
their Command, and People under their Dominion. 

29 And the land ſhall tremble and ſorrow /; for. 
every purpoſe of the LORD ſhall be performed againſt 
Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a deſolation 


without an inhabitant r. 

\ That is, Babylon, or the Land of Chaldea ſhall tremble and ſors 
row. #t For God hath determined to deſtroy it, and to leave ic 
wholly deſolate, ſo as none ſhould dwell in it. 

20 The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to 
_ fight, they have remained in their holds, their might 
's_ hath failed *, they became as women /*: they have 
Chap. 50. burnt her dwelling places, her bars are broken 7 
37. ſ When God hath determined an end, he ordereth means pro- 

portionable to that end. Babylon had many valiant and mighy Men, 
and it is very probable the Babylmians truſted very much to them, 
but when it came to the puſh,God took off their courage, ſo as they 
had no heart to fight, bur kept themſelves in their ſtrong Holds, 
and, if at any time they cam? out, their courage failed thzm, and 
they behaved themſelves more like Women than Men of War, fo 
as their Enemies burnt their Cities, brake down their Forrifications, 
and made what havock they pleaſed. 

21 One poſt ſhall run to meetanother, and one meſ- 


ſenger to meet another, to ſhew the king of Babylon 


- that his city is taken at one end #. 

« We have had occaſion once and again to recite what we have 
in Civil Hiſtorians about the taking of Babylon by Cyrus, viz. That 
it was taken by ſurprize, by the M:4ian Emperours unexpetted, 
diverting the River Euphrates by divers Channels which he cur; as 
alſo that Babylon was a very vaſt City, the greatneſs of which mighs 
admit of Poſts, and Meſſengers from one end of the City to another 
to acquaint the King what was done at the other end of the City 
in which himſelf was Reſident, and it is ſaid that the King of Ba» 
bylen when the City was taken, did not know of his danger untill 
the Enemy had entred the City. 


32 And that the * paſſages are ſtopt w, and the 
reeds they have burnt with fire x, and the men of war 


are afrighted y. 
w This was part of the Meſſage which the Prophet faith the 
Meſſenger ſhould carry ro the King of Babylon, that was in the other 
parc of the City, that the paſſages over the River Euphrates, or any 
other paſſiges by which the Babylonians might, upon the Enemies 
entrance, make their eſcape, were all ſtopped, and guarded with 
Soldiers, or otherwiſe ſo as their was no hope of any making an 
eſcape, x The word tranſlated Reeds ſignifies alſo ſtanding Pools of 
Water,and that ſome judge the ſence,theWater is drained out of rhe 
Pits or Pools, ſo as it could not hinder the enterance of the Enemies; 
thoſe that adhere r10 the Tranſlation of itReeds,ſay that upon the bor- 
ders of theRiver£uphrates were vaſt quantities of great and tallRecds, 
which with theMud in which they ſtood, were as anotherWall to the 
City, bunt the Medes had burnt them up ſo that the way was open to 
theWalls; and the Men of War y ſeeing theſe Reeds burnt up,and the 
Water drained from them,were afrighted, ſo as their hearts through 
fear failed them. | 
33 For thus ſaith the LORD of hoſts, the God of 
| Iſrael. The daughter of Babylon 3s like a threlhing 
Or, = floor x, || it i* time to threſh her: yet alictle white, 
- #-* and the time of her harveſt (halt come 4. 
ed z Babylon had been a threſhing inſtrument, by which, and a 
hur threfhing floor in which Gol had threſhed many orher Nations, God 
| now inrended to make it as a Threſhing-flaor wherein he would 
threſh the Chaldeans. a Some think becauſe of the next words that 
the words were better tranſlated, it is time to tread her, ( ſo the word 
ſignifies ) as Men uſe to prepare their Threſhing-floors againſt the 
time of Harveſt, for the time of this Harveſt was near 3 her Harveſt 
fignifierh the Harveſt which the Juſtice of God would have from 
the ruine of theEbaldeans. 

34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath de- 
voured me, he hath cruſhed me, he hath made me an 
empty veſlel, he hath ſwallowed me up like a dragon, 
he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath caſt 


me out b. 

b The Prophet ſpeaketh this in the Name of the Jews complains 
ing of the King of Babylon as the Author of all the Miſcries they had 
indureds which he expreſſerh by ſeveral Phraſes ſignifying the ſame 


42 


© Chap. 
50. 38. 


M 1 4 fi Chap. 


for her. How far it is lawful fot us to pray againſt 6ur Enemi 
we have heard once and again. + ws Es mw Ang 
35 Therefore thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will 
plead thy cauſe, and take vengeance for thee. d, and I * Chap: | 
will * dry-up her ſea, and make her ſprings drye. 5* 3% | 
d Men had need rake heed how they give cauſe of appeals to God 
2gainſt them, eſpecially the appeals of ſuch as are a People that 
have a Covenant relation ts God. God in thoſe caſes ordinarily 
ſhewerh himſelf a ſw;/?. witneſs and Judgez and gives a ſpeedy judge 
ment in ſuch cautes. Beho'd ſaith God I will plead thy cauſe nor 
with words, bur aQtually with my judicial diſpeaſations, therefore 
It 15 expounded by taking vengeance. c, The vengeance which God 
threatneth is expreſſed meraphirically under the notion of drying up 
her S:a, and making her Springs dry, which ſignifies the depriving 
of her of all-Neceflaries, not only of the abundance of her Men, 
Riches, Treaſures, but of her Springs. Thus I had rather expound 
ir, than as referringto the particular Stratageni by which Cy-us rook 
Babylon, viz, By drying up in ſome meature the River Euphrates; 


Nd aaa 


mapmmmuar oe game © ll gags WW wa 


— - 


that is, turning it into other Channels, | 
37 And Babylon ſhall become heaps 4, a * dwelling  : . +. | 
place for dragons,an aſtoniſhment and an hiſfing with- * 16. 13. 3 
out an inhabitant e, | 2 
# Heaps of Rubbiſh. e See the Not Chap. 55. 34 | 
the ſame thing was before ſaid. Cs 2 wh RES 
38 They ſhall roar cogether like lions : they ſhall 
[| yell as lions whelps m. TE | [| Or, ſhake 
7 It is incertain whether this be to be underſtood of the Medes, *P*"" ebves. 
making horrible roarings and noiſes when they took Baby'on: Or, 
of the Babylonians, who upon the raking of their Ciry (as is ulual ) 
made horrid Outcries, as being a People quite undone ; ſome thinl 
it reterreth to the drunken noiſes of the Bebylonians at their Feſtiva) 
aduring the celebration of which we are told their City was taken; 
bur to this one would think the compariſon of Lies Whelps ( which 
ordinarily yell for want of ViRuals, or for ſome miſchief done 
them not when their Bellies are full ) ſhould not ſo well agree. 
, 39 In their heat I will make their feaſts», and | 
"I will make them drunken, that they may rejoyce, *Ver.57 
and flzep a perpetual ſleep, and not awake, faith the 
LORD o. 


n When they ſhall grow hot with Wine, I will put or give, or 
make them a Feaſt of another nature, Interpreters judge that the 
Prophet referreth to the Feaſt made by Belſhazzar, Dan. 5. r. To a 
thouſand of his Lerds, when he, and his Wives 2nd Concubines drank 
Wine out of the Veſſels belonging to the Temp!e, during which 
Feaſt the City was taken, o So they were made drunk with the 
Wine Cup of God's Fury, becauſe the Lord had deſigned them to 
utter ruine, and deſtruQon, that as Men filled with Wine are mer- 
Ty, and ſhour, and then fall aſleep; ſo the Chaldeans being drunk 
with the Wine of the Lord's Wrath, while they were marry with 
their Cups of Wine, might fall into ſuch a Sleep as they ſhould no 
ver awake out of. | 
40 I will bring them down like lambs to the ſlaugh- 
ter, like rams with he goats p. 

P That is, they ſhall be deſtroyed before they be awar of ir. 

4r How is Sheſhach q taken? and how is the praiſe 
of the whole earth ſurprized 7 ? how is Babylon be- 
come an aſtoniſhment among the nations / ? | 
q We meet with this term Sheſhach only here, and Chap. 25, 26: 
both places leave ic doubtful whether it be to be taken for an Idol, 
which they cailed by the Name of Shach: Or a Name given tothe 
City of Babylon, which worſhipped that Ido), to the honour  f 
which the Babylonians kept a yearly Feſtival for ſeveral days. In 
the time of which Feſtival they ſay it was that Cyrus took the City 
of Babylon. r Babylon that was ſo famous over all the World for her 
ſplendor. { And fo it is interpreted in the next words, wherein 
Babylon for the puniſhment brought upon it is ſaid to be an aſtoniſh+ 
ment to all Nations, which makes it probable thar Babylon is what 
was called Sheſhach, by the doubling of aLettzr, becauſe ſhe wors 
ſhipped Shach. 

42. The ſea is come up upon Babylon : ſhe is cover- 
ed with the multitude of the waves thereof ?. | 
t A multitude of Enemies, that are like the Sea in which there 
is a multitude of Waters, orthat will over-run them as the Sea over 
floweth rhe Shoar, or any Land into which it breaketh. 

43 Her cities are a deſolation,a dry Jand,and a wil- 
derneſs, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither 


doth any ſon of man paſs thereby «. 

u See Ch#p. 2.6. and 9. 12. the words are all of them deſcrip- 
tive of an utrer deſclation, that ſhould not only be the fate of Baby» 
lon the head Ciry, but of all the inferiour Cities that were as Daugh- 
ters to that Mother City. 

44 And I will punifh Bel in Babylon w, and TI will 
bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath fwal- 
lowed up x, and the nations ſhall not flow together 
any more unto himy, yea the wall of Babylon ſhall 
fall >. 

w Bel was that principal Babylonian Idol, of which fee what 15 not- 
ed, Chap. 50. 2. x All the Veſſels of the Temple, 2 Chron. 36. 7. 


thing. viz. That it was the King of Babylon that had ruined them, 
and filled himfſc1f and his Soldiers with their delicate things, and 
caſt them our of their Land, dealing with them as Wolves or other 
Beaſts of Prey, that eat what rey pleiſe of other Beaſts they have 
preyed upon, and leave the reſt in the Fields. 

25 The þ violence done to me, and to [| my fleſh, 
FLf be upon Babylon, ſhall the F inhabitants of Zion ſay ; 


I Or. the and my blood upon the inhabitants oi Chaldea, ſhall 
remainaer. Jeruſalem ſay ” pi : 
T Heb. inv" , The words are either a Prayer,cr a prediion of God sVenge- 
bab/treſi. ance vpon Babylon, ſo Fſal, 137. Yer. 7,8. God bath ſaid Venye- 
ance is his and he will repay it. The Churc': of the Jews here 
commits its cauſe ro God, and pray 


} Heb. 


My vid 


2th kim to execute Vengeance i 


and what ever Gifts the Babylonians had preſented to him, » It 
was the cnſtom of other Nations to ſend Preſents to the gods of 
thoſe Nations whom they were in ſubjefion to, or whom they 
would appeaſe, whence it is that we fead the Ph!hſtines when they 
had the Aik would not ſend it home withour a preſent, 1 Sav. 6. 
11. God by his Prophets foretelleth that the time ſhould come 
when the Nations ſhould come no more to Babylon, either to pay 
an homage to their chief Idol,nor yet to bring Offcrings unto him. 
z And the City of Babylon ſhould be a!ſo-ruined. © Chap. 

45 * My people, go ye out of the midſt of her, and ,,, g.& 
[ deliver ye every man his ſoul from the fizrce anger of Yer+6+. | 
' the LORD 5. ET ev.as. 4. 

6 Q a Theſe - 


2009. I” CI A REES 


ip. LI. 7 E R E 
> , Theſe words are anexhortation to the Jews to be willing upon 
the firſt Proclamation of liberty by Cyr, to go out of Babylon, not- 
withſtanding the pleaſantneſs of the place, and that now their ſtakes 
| had been pitched there many Years, becauſe of the Ruine which 
ſhould woſt certainly come on that place: 
46 And leſt your hearts faint, and ye fear for the 
rumour that (ball be heard in the land þ : a rumour ſhall 
both come ore year, and after that in enother year ſhall 
| come 2 rumourand- violence in the land,ruler againſt 
ruler c. 


' þ And leſt they ſhould be affrighted by the Succeſſion of Evils, 
Year after Year that ſhould come upon Babylov. Some think it 
were better tranſlated, 4nd les mt your hearts faint. Though you 
ſhould hear of Cyrus his coming Year after Year, yet faintnor ( for 
they ſay Cyr was one Year preparing, and that he ſpent the ſe- 
cond Year in paſſing through Aſhris, ſo as he came not at Babylon 
rill the third Year 5 no not though you ſhould ſee or hear of ſucceſ- 
ſive troubles, and a great deal of violence in the Land by the op- 
poſition of great Princes one to another, for none of them ſhall do 
you any harm ; but this doth not ſo well iute to the former verſe, 
where they are bidden to make haſte our, and to fave their own 
Lives. I do therefore prefer the Senſe of our Interpreters and their 
Tranſlation of it, as making another Argument to perſwad them 
to make haſte out, becauſe they would by reaſon of the ſucceſſive 
evils Year after Year coming upon the Batylonians live there very 
troubleſome and uneaſie Lives. 


47 Therefore behold; the days come, that f I will 
do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon, and 
her whole land ſhall be confounded c, and all her flaim 


ſhall fall in the midſt of her 4. | 
c I will do, that is, I will execute Judgment upon the Idols of 
Babjloz, and the whole Land of Cha!dea ſhall be confounded, when 
they ſhall ſee that their Idols will do them no more Service. 4 Some 
in ſtead of her lain, would have it read her dancers ( for the City 
was taken while Belſbazzer and his whole Court were Revelling ) 
| bur the learned Author of the Engliſh Hmotations tells us the word 
© Ia: 44+ Will nor bear it. 
23. & 49. 48 Then * the heaven, and the earth, and all that 
173+ Rev? 55 therein ſhall ſing for Babylon e, for the ſpoilers ſhall 


4 Heb. I 
will viſit ie 


38+ 2% come unto her from the north, ſaith the LORD f. 
| e All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth ſhall rejoice at the ven- 
geance which God ſhall take upon Babylon, which had been the 
deſtroyer of ſo many of their People. f The Median Soldiers are 
thoſe here called Spoilers from the North, 
FE 49 || As pogo bath cauſed the ſlain of Iſrael to fall, 
| «gps ſo at Babylon {hall fall the ſlain of |] all the earth g. 
2. O : + £ The words in the Hebrew have ſome difficulty, which is not ſo 
37 go of I. obvious to thoſe not acquainted with that Language,burt hath given 
; = =, © occaſion to Interpreters to vary in their particular Tranſlations of 
rs Four it, but they moſtly agree in the general ſenſe, viz. That theſe words 
— with B#Y are given as a Reaſon why the whole Earth ſhould fo auch rejoice 
DT 20 - þ, in the ruine of Babylon, becauſe Babylon had cauſed Iſrael to fall: 
2 ſ| Or, *be Th.clatter term ache Earth muſt be underſtood in a reſtrained ſenſe, 
 OuP'« for that earth; the Chaldeans coming up from all parts of Chaliea 


to help Babylon, ſhould: be ſlain there, as by the means of Babylon, 
the 17 aclites were ſlain thatcame up from all parts of Jude to hejp 
Jeruſalem. 

50 Ye that have eſcaped the ſword, go away, ſtand 
nor ſtill : remember the LORD afar off ;, and lerjJe- 


ruſalem come irito your mind k. 

h Ir is hard to reſolve wiether the Prophet here ſpeaks j> the 
Chaldeans, or the Medes, or the Jews, though moſt underſtand .t of 
the Jews whom God would have leave Babylon as ſoon as they ſhould 
have a Liberty proclaimed. «s And to remember when they came 
into Judea the great things both of Juſtice toward the Chaldeans,and 
Mercy towards them which God had done. k And keep Jeruſalem 
in their mind, as the place were they were to worſhip God accor- 


[3 P.. my 
IO, + 


T © & 


=: 4 EZ. Chap. Lf 


uſe many words to the ſame purpoſe ; he ſaw the Jews ſaying in 
their hearts, How can theſe things be ? Babylon hath impregnable 
Walls rwo hundred foor high,(ſo Hiſtorians report ) and of a great 
breadth, and ir hath very ſtrong and high Towers; God by his 
Prophet tells them, that if they could mount up as high as Heaven, 
if they could make the Towers much ſtronger than they were, yer 
the Spoilers were to come from him, and he could and would ſend 
Spoilers, who would pull down her walls,and break down herTowers. 

54 A ſound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and 


great deſtruction from the land of the Chaldeans p. 

p Toaſſure them, that what God threatned ſhould certainly be, 
he callsto the Jews toliſten, asif already there were a cry from Ba- 
_ and a ſound of a great deſtru&ion from the Land of the Chal- 

eans, 


55 Becauſe the LORD hath ſpoiled Babylon q, and 
deſtroyed out of her the great voice r, when her waves 
do roar, like great waters, a noiſe of their voice is ut- 
tered 5. | 

q The Sword is not ſo much the Sword of the Meder,as the Sword 
of the Lord. Ir is he whois to be looked art, as the ſpoiler of Ba- 
bylon. r And hath made to ceaſe in that great City the nojſes cau.- 
ied from multitudes of people init walking up and down, and trafe 
ficking together. 5 The noiſe of her enemies that ſhall break in 
upon her ſhall be like the noiſe and roaring of the Sea when it dae 
theth upon the Shore or upon ſome Rocks. That ſhall be the on- 
ly noiſe ſhall be heard in her, inſtead of the noiſes wont there to 
be made from the multitude of people, or from Revellers, 

56 Becauſe the ſpoiler is come upon her, evez upon 
Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of 
their Bows is broken tr, for the LORD God of recom- 


pences, ſhall ſurely requite «. 

# Little moreis ſaid here than was before, only the words hing 
the taking of Babylon by a ſurprize when the King, and the Inhabi- 
tants were not aware of it, which we had before alſo told us, Yerſ. 
39» 40. u In this the Prophet ſaith, that God would a& but as a 
juſt God, a God of Recompences, Where Gaed's people ſuffer wrong 
and either cannot revenge themſelves, or may not do it, being 
privat perſons ( to whom God hath given no power of the Sword 
if they can exerciſe Faith and patience, they thall find God a God 
of Recompences, that can and will requite their Enemies, and plead 
their cauſe. 

57 And*®I will make drunk her princes,and her wiſe 
men, her captains and her rulers, and her mighty men, 
and they ſhall ſleep a perpetual ſleep, and not wake, 


ſaith the king, whoſe name js the LORD of hoſts w. 

w Drunken Men uſe to fall aſleep- The Prophet ſpeaks here me- 
taphorically. His meaning is, that the Lord would fill them with 
the wine of his fury mentioned chap: 25: 15, 16. and upon the drin- 
king of it they ſhould ſleep their laſt fleep, the effe&s of it ſhould 
be their utter Ruine and deſtrution. Yet there ſeemeth to be an 
alluſion to the poſture the King of Babylon, and the Thouſand of his 
Lords mentioned, Dan: 5. t. was in, when their City was taken 
( which as was before ſaid ) wasin the time of the Feſtival of their 
Idol Shach ) when they were drinking Wine in the Bowls that were 
brought from the Temple at Jeruſalem, Verſe 30. it is ſaid, In that 
very night was Belſhazzar the king of the Chaldeans ain, 

58 Thus faich the LORD of hoſts, |] the broad walls pry 

of Babylon ſhall be utterly |] broken, and her high gates 5099 "Bo. 


(hall be burnt with fire x, and * the people ſhall la- 4lor. 


tVcre 3% 


| Or, thi 


ding to his dire&ion, and for which God had ſo wrought. 


51 We are confounded, becauſe we have heard re- 
proach 1, ſhame hath covered our faces; for ſtrangers 
are come into the ſanctuaries of the LORD's houſe ws. 

1 The words of this verſe ſeem to prove that the Jews were the 
Perſons intended in the former verſe, whom God would have to go 
away, and not to ſtand ſtill, for it is out of doubt, that it is of them 
the Prophet here ſpeaketh, and whom the Prophet brings in here, 


Gaying, we are confounded, that is, aſbamed ( as it is expounded in 
the next words) to hear the enemies reproaching us, tor our God, | 
or for our Religion, as Pſal, 137. 3. And m becauſe Pagans that were ' 
Strangers to the Commonwealth of 1rae!, who Numb: 1: 51, might | 
not come near the Tabernacle of the Lord, were come, and thar ' 
not to worſhip, but to plunder and rifle inthe San#uaries of the Lord, | 
even into the Court of the Prieſts and of the /ſraelites, and into the | 
- moſt holy place ; thoſe whoſe very preſence in theſe places had been | 
MW a pollution of them. 
© 52 Wherefore behold, the days come, faith the 
LORD, that I will do judgment upon. her graven imas- | 
ges, and through all her land, the wounded ſhall 


groan 2. | 
» For which complaints of my people, or rather for which pros- | 
fanation of my Holy place, I will be revenged upon their Graven 
Images, and not only upon their Idols, but upon the worſhippers 
of them, and cauſe a groaning of wounded Men over all the Coun. 
try of the Chaldeans ; I will cauſe them to know that their Idols 
are not able to prote& themt from my Power and Juſtice. 
53 * Though Babylon ſhould mount up co heaven, 
and thoughſhe ſhould forrifie the height of her ſtrength, 
et from me ſhall ſpoilers come unto her, faith the | 


ORD 0. 

oe We are very prone to meaſure things by the meaſures of our 
-own Reaſons, and to judge of events which are to be the effe&s of 
Divine power, by humane probabilities, therefore God 1s pur to 


” 


be” ;  *Obad: 4. 


" 
2 


7 - 


' Zedekiah, the ſame with Manahah, x Chron 8: 6: Others think it was 
' a Name of Office, and ſignified Lord Chamberiain; but the beſt In- 


bour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they ſhall be {|Or, made 
WCAaryY y). ; yon 8 

2 Incredible things are told us by Hiſtorians of this great City. , then 
They ſay the compaſs of it was threeſcore miles about. That her 3” 
Walls were in height two hundred foot, in breadth, ſuch as two 
Chariots might drive a breaſt upon the top of them, that it had an 
hundred great Gates, many of them of Braſs, God threatens the 
breaking down of theſe Walls, and the burning of theſe high Gates 
and Towers. y And that though the people ſhould labour to 
quench this Fire, or to rebuild this City, yer it would be all loſt la. 
beur, and they ſhould give over theirenterpriſe, as being weary, 

59 \ The word which Jeremiah the Prophet com- 
manded Serajah, the ſon of Neriab, the ſon of Maaſcei- es 
ah z, when be went || with Zedekiah the king of Judah ||Or, 0:5 
into Babylon #, in the fourth year of his reign b, and fl -b ; 
this Seraiah was a || quiet prince . Prince of 


z Of this Seraiah we read no more than we have in this Verſe, Menuchs 


; though chap 36: 26. theft be mention made of another Seraiah.aWe or chief 


no where read of any JourneyZedekiah made intoBabylon till he was chambers 
carried a Priſoner thither,it is therefore probable that with ſhould be in. 
tranſlated from as the ſame particle is in other places, Geneſis 4: 1. 

and 44. 4. it being not uſual with great Princes to make viſits one 

to another at ſuch diſtances, though the Jews tell us a ſtory of ſome 
ſuchthing. 6 The expreſſing of this circumſtance of time,lets us 
know that the Propheſic was many Years before Babslon was deſtroy- 

ed, for it was ſeven Years before Jeruſalem was taken ; fo as 1t muſt 

be above ſixty Years before it was fulfilled in the firſt degree, m 
The Hebrew word admits of various Interpretations, ſome think thar 
Menucha was a place over which Seraiah had ſome Authority under 


terpretersſee no Reaſon to vary from our Tranſlation, the ſenſe of 
which is, that he wasa Man of a moderat quiet Temper, that pers 
ſwaded to Peace. | : 

60 So Jeremiah wrote ina book all the evil that 
ſhould come upon Babylon, eve all theſe words hat are | 
written againſt Babylon. ! 

61 And Jeremiab ſaid to Seraiah, when thou comeſt | 
to Babylon, and ſhalt ſee, and Jhalt read a'l theſe | 


wordsn. 


» Notto the Chaldeanr, nor poſlibly is it to be underſiood of a 
mecr 


F Hebs 
ae: ſolation. 


* Goo roy Teading this book, that thou ſhalt bind * a ſtone to it, 


23S. 208. 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| + Heb. 
rigned, 
| 
| 
t 
E- 
4 
a < 
F Heb. 


blinded, 


F Chaps LIL. 


' phecy the time ſhould come after ſome Years, when Babylox ſhould 


32k 0s) 
” = "x 


2 
4 
meer private reading of them to himfc1f, but to the Jews, that were 
in Babylon, acquainting them with what G:2d had ſpoken againft 
Babylon by the Prophet. 

62 Then ſhale chou ſay, O LORD, thou haſt ſpo- 
ken againſt this place to cut ir off, chat none ſhall re- 
main 1n it, neither man nor beaſt, but that ir ſhall be 
+ deſolate for ever 0. 

o Thou ſhalr treſtifie that thou believeſt what thou haſt read to 


be what ſhal moſt certainly come to paſs, by ſpeaking words to this 
Senſe. 


62 And it ſhall be when thou haſt made an end of 


Fi 


nd 


and caſt it into the midſt of Euphrates. 

64 And thou ſhalt ſay, Thus ſhall Babylon ſink, and 
ſhall not riſe from the evil that I will bring upon her 
p: and they ſhall be weary 9q. Thus far are the words 


of Jeremiah 7. 

p Ic hath been ofren ſaid that Euphrares was that great River 
which ran by the Walls of Babylon; into this Seraiah is commanded 
by Jeremiah to throw this Roll of Prophecy againſt Babylon, ſymbo- 
lically to teach the Fews, that according to the Tenor of his Pro- 


be D-:ſtroyed never to riſe again to any great view, or degree of 
ſplendor, no more than that Rull with che Stone ricd to it thould 
riſe from the b-tcom of Euphrates. q Some read though they weary 
themſ-Ives, that is, do what they can, or ( asit is here ) and they 
ſhal be weary with that weight of Judgement which ſhal be upon 
them. r E:ither the words of Jeremy relating to Babylon reach thus 
far, or all the words of Jeremiah remaining on Sacred Record ( for 
it is thought that the next Chapter was rather penned by ſome, other 
Holy Man ) Or ( which ſeemeth the beſt ) the Propherical word 
of Jeremiah, forthe matter of the next Chapter is Hiſtorical, and the 
Book of Lamentations is not- Prophetical ; as to the main of it, 
though there be in it three or four Prophetical Paſſages, Lam: 4+ 21, 


22, Oc. 

CHAP. 

A Repetition of the Reign of Z-dekiah : Of the Siege, Taking, and Des» 
frufion of Jerulatem : With the Cauſ's thereof ; 'and what further 
hapened there, 1t——=30. Evil-merodach advanceth Jeho:achin, 

$ — 

: Edekiah 24s One and twenty years old when he 
y + began to reign, and he reigned eleven years 
in Jervſalem ; and his morhers name was Hamutal, the 
daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 

2 And he did that. which was evil in the eyes of che 
LORD according to all that Jehoiakim had dor:e. 

2 For through the anger of the LORD it came to 
paſs in Jeruſalem and Judah, till he had caſt them our 
from his preſence, that Zedekiah rebelled againſt che 
king of Babylon 4. 


Ir is generally thought tht what we have in this Chapter was not 
penned oy the Prophet Feremiah,who it is not probable would have fo 
largely repeated what he bad relaied betore Chop. 39. and could not 
Hiſtorically relate what happene4 after his rime as ſome things did 
which are ment:oned rowards tne end of rhe Chapter, from Yer. 31. 
to the end. They therefore rather th:1k it penned by fone ocher of 
thoſe in Babylon, and put in' here as a Preface ro the Book of Lamen- 
tations, Whar we have in the threc firſt Verſes is intirely take out 
of 2 Kings 24.18, :9, 20, See th: Notes there. 

a Here the wicked Aﬀ&:ngs of Zedekiah, and particularly his Re- 
beilion againſt the King of Babylon who had made him King, as 
2 Kings 24. '7. and to who'n h- had given an Oath of Feaity, is 
aſcribed to the wrath of the Lora; God not putting any ſuch wick 
edne'!s into his hearr, but ſ:f-ring Him fo to miſczrry, having a 
deſign to ſend Judah into Captivity. | Princes are often by God ſuf 
fered to miſcarry, for rh {1 -s of their People, which lhould oblige 
us when we thi::k we have cauſe to complain of the Errours of our 
Rulers, to conſider whether we have nor bv ſme ſinful courſes 
provok-d God, which hath mad» him leave our Rulers ſo to mllcarry 
in order tv our Ruine and Puniſhme:t FELE ; 

4 And ir came to paſs in the ninth year of his reign, 
in the tenth moneth, in the tenth day of the moneth, 
har Nebuchad:ezzar king. of Babylon came, he and all 
his army againſt Jeruſalem, and pitched againſt it,and 
builc forts againſt ir round abour. 


5 So the ciry was beſieged unto the eleventh year of 


king Zedekiah. 

6 And in the fourch moneth,in the ninth day ofthe mo- 
neth, the famine was fore in the city, ſothat there was 
no bread for the p2ople of theland. 

7 Then the cicy was broken up, and all the men of 
war fled, and went forth out of the city by night. by 


R ® 4 14% 


| 


| 


Dieke 


BEE I ; 
"Ow | _ Chap. [1] 
the king of Babylon bound him-in || chains, and carried {| Or, ie 
him to Babylon, and put him in # priſon till the day of”: 
his death 5, 7 oy 
_ 6 This Hiſtory 1s fourd, 2 Kings 25. r, 2,3.4. 5, 6, 7, 8. much 
in the ſame words. Ses the Annotations on that Chapter. 
alſo bath the ſubſtance of it, Chap» 39. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 


ther of thoſe places have the laſt words, 
Zedtkiah died in Babylon a Priſoner. 


12 T Now in the fifch moneth, in the tenth day of 
the moneth, ( which was the nineteenth year of Nebu- 
chadnezzar king of Babylon ) came Nebuzar-adan {|j Or, <> 
7 captain of the guard, which Þ ſerved the king of Ba- Marſhal. 
bylon, into Jeruſalem. f Heb. 


b.' 
in the * 
Iule of 
Jeremiah ppyds 
» 7. only nei- 

trom whence we learn that 


| + Heb. . 
15 Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard cars food befort 


ried away captive certain of the poor of the people, and 
the reſidue of the people that remained in the city, and 
thoſe chat fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, 
and the reſt of the mulritude. 


16 But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard left 


certain of the poor of the land for vine-dreſſers and for 
husbandmen <c. 


c See the Notes on 2 Kings 25. from Yerſe 8. to the 13. where all 
this is related, only with a ſmall differeiice as to the Day of the 
Moneth when Necbuzar*adan came to Jeruſalem and burnt the 
Temple. In the Kings it is ſaid he came the ſeventh Day, here it is 
ſaid he came the tenth Day. See the ſolution of it in the Annotations 
on 2 Kings 25. probably he might come into Fernſalem the feventh 
Day, and not burn the Temple till the tenth. Mech of it alſo is 
related by Jeremiah, Chap. 39. The Proveſi-Marſbsl about a Munerh 
after the taking of the Ci'y, returned with a part of the Army,burnt 
the Temple, the great Mens Houſes in the City, and many other 
Houſes, and carried away divers Priſoners, but lefr ſome of the 
poorer fort of the People to dreſs the Vineyards, and Till the 
Ground, which isa thing very uſual with Conquerers, fr their own 
advantage, that their Conqueſts may yield tkem ſome Revenue. - © - , 
17 Alſothe * pillars of brafs that were inthe houſe of * Chaps 
the LORD, and the baſes, and the brazen ſea that was ?7* 7% 
in the houſe of th: LORD, the Chaldeans brake, and 
carried all the braſs o? them to Babyion c. | 
ce The particular enumeration of the Parts and Utenſils of the 
Temple menticne1 in this, and in the following Verſes, may be 
conceived fo have been to juftifie the Prophecy of Jeremiah, Chap. 
27. 19. where there is a particular menticn made of tie Pillars, the 
Baſ-s, and rhe S?a, that ihey ſhould ail with rhe reſidue of the 
Veſlels of the Temple be carricd into Babylon. Of theſe Pillars we 
read 1 Kings 7. 15. they were of Braſs eighteen Cubits high, they 
were in the Porch of the Temple, Yerſe 21. of the Baſes we read' 
there alſo largely from Yerſe 7. to Verſe 38. they allo were all of 
Braſs ; andof the Sea fiom Yerſe 23. te Verſe 27. Theſe being all 
_—_ of Braſs were for conveniency of carriage broken by the Chal. 
CANS. f = 
18 * The caldrons alſo 4, and the{| ſhovels e, and * Exod? 
the ſnuffers f, and the || bowls g, and the ſpoons .*., 27- 3+ © + 
and all the veſlels of braſs wherewith they miniſtred, 0: 
took they away. ; os reg 
d Theſe were called Pots, 2 Kings 25. 14+ © Which were to rhe aſhes. 
xemove the aſhes from the Aitar. f S-+me think that rhis word in [|| Or, ba= 
this place were better Tra::flared To»gs, becauſe he 1s ſperking of ſens. 
Inſtruments of Braſs, and that thoſe Utenſils are nor here underſtood 
with which they ſnuffed the Lamps, becaule they were of Goid. 
g Or Bzſons;it is uncertain which is here wtended, there being in the 
Temple. both Bowls to drink in,and alſo Baſoxs to recerve the Blood 
of the Sacrifices. '.* The word is ſuch as may ſignifie Ladles, or 
Cups, or Diſhes. | | | 
19 And the baſons, and the || fire-pans, and the bowls 


and the caldrons, and the candleſticks, and the frocnn ee , 


and the cups: hat which was of gold iz gold, and chat 
which was of filver iz filver, took the captain of the 
guard away h. NY tha 
þ Some of theſe Utenſils were only of Braſs ; others, were ſome }. 
of them Braſs, ſome of Silver, ſome of Gold, the Captain of. the. 


guard carried away all, both thoſe of Silvery and thoſe of Goid,zand 
thoſe of Braſs. 


20 The two pillars, one ſea, and twelve brazen bulls, 
that were under the baſes which king Solomon had made 


CMM TO CUTT——RY ” "UNREST 7 Oy Wo wr 


"> AT NS 2A” F ok LES 


ny 


—_— gory I _ Ss 14 ot RG 


*&Þ Ts © Ln 7 45 Oe gnyeys or 
£44 £ a? . 


+ Heb. ; 


the way of the gate, between the ewe walls, which was 


by the kings garden, ( now the Chaldeans were by | 
the city round about) and they went by. the way of call Jachin and Boaz, Y:rſe 23- a molten Sea, ten Cubirs broad, this 


the plain. | 

8 © But the army of the Chaldeans purſued after the 
king. and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, 
and all his army was ſcattered from him. 

9 Then they took the king, and carried him up un- 
to the king of Babylon to Riblah,in the land of Hamath; 
where he gave judgement upon him, 

ro And the king of Babyion ſlew the ſons of Zede- 
kiah before his eyes, he ſlew allo all the princes of Ju- 
dah in Riblah. 


it Then he | put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and 


in the houſe of the LORD : Þ the braſs of all theſe veſ- 
ſels was without weight #« © 
; Solomon made two Pillars, 1 Kings 7, 15. which 


_ their braſs | 
Perſe 21. he. - 


Verſe 25, ſtood upon twelve Oxen, and had ten Baſes, Yerſe 25. 27; 
the making of all theſe rook up a vaſt quantity of Braſs, as any one 
will eafi'fy judge, who I Kings 7, 27. readeth the dimenſions of 
theſe things. | BOS 

21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one pil- - | - 
lar was eighteen cubits, anda Þ fillet of twelve cubits , jx.4, 
did compals it, and the thickneſs thereof was four fin- , thred. 
gers: it was hollow &. + x > 

b This agrzerh with 1 Kings 7. 15. where what is called here a; 
fillet, is called a thred, concerning'the height of the Pillars we read © 
tie ſame 2 Kings 25. 17, 2 Chron. 3. 15, a Boo 

6 Q 2 22 And 


of the king. 


Capra 
the bi 


height of one chapiter 247 five cubits with nzt-WOrKk, 
and pomegranates upon tie chapirers round about, all 


: more than three Cubits. 


row, in the two rows two hundred, in the four rows {( two upon 


\ bout the particular number 


_ cipal 


oe M them that + were near the kings perſon which were 


{Or,t%he who muſtered the:people of the land, and threeſcore 
of #52 nen of the people of the land, har were found in the 


22 And a chapiter of braſs 2.45 upon It, and the 


of braſs, the ſecond pillar alſo, and the pomegranates 


were like to theſe. 

22 And there were ninety and fix pomegranates On 
a ſide, 4»d * ail the pomegranates upon the net-work, 
were an hundred round about 1, _ 22> 

7 There.are ſome differences as to the meaſure of theſe Chapiters 
betwixt 2 Kings 25. 17. and this Text; here the heighr of them 1s 
made to be five Cubits, there it 1s {aid to be three Cubits, that 
which is ſaid to reſolve this difficulty is, That there were three parts 
in the Chapitcr, the Square, the Belly, and the Crown, and that this 
Text gives an account of the whole 3 but that Text 2 Kings 25+ '7- 


gives an account only of the BU, and the Crown which were no 
The like difference there is berwixt this | 


J'BREMIT A H. 


31 9 And It care to paſs in the ſeven and thirtivch 
year ot the c:ptivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah s, 
in the twwelfth wmoneth, in the five and twentieth dy 


of the monerh s, 1bar Evil-merodzch king of Babylon, 
in the fr#} year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoi- 
achin king of Judah, end broughs him forth out of 
priſon z. 

s Jerojachin began his Reignat eighteen Years of Ago, 2 FKmrs 24. 
8. and Reigned but three Moneths, but that ke yictded hin {cf to 
the King of Babylon Beſteging him, verſe 12. in the eighth Year of 
the King of Bady/or's Reign, He was a Priſcver in Babylen ( as ap- 
peareth by this Text J in which circur-ſtances he continued ( as 
appears from this Texr ) abour thirty Y:.ais; which was during the 
whole Reign of Nebuchadrezzar, ſometimes calicd Nebuct adnezzar 
fometimes Nebuchadinoſor. Evil-Merodach was Son to this Ne uchad- 
rez&ar, who, 1n the twelfth Moneth of that Year, the 25:h Day cf 


Text, and 1 Kings 7. 19. and 2 Chron. 4. 13: about the number of | 
the Pomegranates, In the Bock of Kings It 1s ſaid the Pomegranares | 
were in number two hundred, Chron. 4. 13+ they are faid to have 
been four hundred, The meaning 15, There were an hundred in a 


—_ 


of the Moncth ( faith this Text, but 2 K925 25. 27. it is the zwenty 
Jeventh ay, but that difference may eafi'y be reconciled, Fhe Pen- 
man of this part cf Holy Writ, might ccunt preciſely from the 
Day of his Fathers Death, and the Perman ofthe Bock of Kinrs Gm 
the r1me of th: Corcnarion of Ev:l- Merodach,or when he openly ſhewed 


Some other difference allo there 5s a- 
of Pomegranates. on a fide, which 
areſaid to be bur ninety fix» which make on the two iid-s bur one 
hundred ninery twoy on the four ſides but three hundred eighty 
four. and comes up neither to the two hundred mentioned in 
the Book of Kings, nor v0 the. number of four hundred men- 
tion:d in the Book of  Chroniclcs, Vide the Engliſh Annotations, 
where the learned Author hath obſerved that in the Hebrew, 
what we Tranſlace of a ſide, is word for word Wind-ward, that is, 
toward the four Winds, ſo as the Table was ſquare, and there were 
twenty four on each ſide which made ninety ſix in all, to which 
four being added, one at each corver, this made an hundred. But 
theſe are niceties, a ſatisfa&tion in which is of no gteat concernment 
to us. uoleſs to fatisfie ſuch as would make uſe of theſe little things 
to Queſtion the Authority of the Scriptures, becauſe of theſe ſeem- 
ing contradi&ions of how little concernment ſo ever thy be as toour 
Faith and Holineſs. —- 

24 T And thecaptain of the guard took Seraiah the 


Chief prieſt, and Zephaniah the ſecond prieſt, and the 


thiee keepers of the | door . 

m Ses the Notes on 2 Kings 25-18. where we have the ſame words. 
This Seraiah was not he mentioned Chap- 51. 59. but the Son of 
Azariah, 1 Chron. 6.i4. By the ſecond Pricſt, Interpreters underitand 
him that ſepylicd the place of the High Prieſt in caſe he were ſick, 


each Pillar) four hundred. 


himfeltas King ; or the one might reckon frem the Day tlat Evil- 
Meroagch deciced the thing, the other from tte Day when he pur it 
in Ex-cution) t Lifred up the head, which ſignifies in Scriptue the 
alrering of ones E::ate that is in Milery, Gen. 40. 20 which is all 
that 1S here meant, for his bringing FEim cut of Priſon is menti= 
oned mn the next werds. The Reaſon of this favour is variouſly 
gueiſ:d at. The Reverend Author of cur Engliſh Aunttations fanſieth 
that Evil-Merodach, mighr be much of the ſame Age with him, and 
thar Jeh:jachin got jnto the Acquaintance cf this Evil-Meredach, du- 
ring his Thirty Years Captivity, who confidering his long Impriſon- 
ment, and that now there was no danger cf his heading the Jews 
( whoſe Ciry had now been Deſtoyed Twenty five Years and up- 
wa'd ) this Piince out cf his Humanity might ſhew him this Fa- 


Princes and Counſellors. 
32 And ſpake Þ kindly unto him, and fet his throne 


Baylon «. 

u The King of Babylon might have o-her Kings kis Priſoners, his 
Father having been ſo great a Conqucrour, or he might have other 
Kings his Subjetts, that might reſice at his Curr; and either our of 
a particular kindneſs he had ro Jeh:j1c//n, or in revard of the Fame 
of David and Solomen, from whom j:/-1j :£/1 lincally deſcended, he 
might do him this Honour. : | ; 


&c. he thar was ſent by Zedekiah to the Prophet, Chap. 21, 1. 
and whom Shemaiah chode by his Letters Chap. 29+ 25. for not ſer- 
ting Jeremiah in theStocks.It is probable there were more Keepers of 
the Door, but the Captain of the Guard took only three of the Prin- 


25 He took alſo out of the city, an eunuch, which 
had the charge of the men of war, and ſeven men of 


found in the city, and the || principal ſcribe of the hoſt, 


midſt of the city ». 

n See 2 Kings 25. 19. only there is mention but of five men, 
here there is mention of ſeven, but probably two of them were of 
leſs ncte. | | : 

26 So Nebutzar-adan the captain of the guard took 
thenj, and brovight them to the king of Babylon to 
Riblah. | Roe: 

27 And -the king of Babylon ſmote them, and put 
themes death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath. "Thus 
Judah was carried away captive out of his own Jand 0. 

0 See 2 Kings 25. 20, 21. ; 

28 Thbis is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried 
away captive; in the ſeventh year, three thouſand 
Jews and three and twenty p. 
 Þ That is in the time of Jehoiachm, 2 Kings 24. 12,13, I. here 
It is ſaid to be in the ſeventh year, there in the cighth year, it might 
be in part of borh. Burt there is a difference in the number of the 
captives which are here ſaid to be 3023, and 2 Kings 24+ 144 16. 
ſeven thouſand, or eight. It is thought by ſome that rhe number 
here mentioned were ſuch as properly belonged to Judah, and the 
number mentioned 2 Kings 24+ were the number of the Captives of 
Judah and Benjamin. See the Engliſh Annotations. | 


29 In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he car- 
ried away captive from Jeruſalem eight hundred thirty 
and two t perſons 4. 

q That was the Year when the City was broken up. 

30 In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrez- 
zar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carried 
away captive of the Jews ſeven hundred, fourty and 
five perſons's all the perſons were four thouſand and ſix 
hundred 7. 


r Ofthis we read nothing more in HolyWrit,ſome judge it to have 
bzen upon occaſion of Jbmae!'s killing Gedaliah, but this was four 


33 And changed his priſon-garments: and he did 
continually eat bread before him all the days of his life. 
| 34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet 
given him of the King of Babylon, + every day a por- 
—_ until the day of. his death, all the days of his 
ife 2y. 


w He treated him like a Prince with a reſpe& becoming his for= 
mer State. took care both for his Habit = Dier, for his wes 
that ir ſhould be decent, ſuch as became a Perſon of his Quality, 
though a Caprive: for his Diet, that he ſhouJd have it in his Court, 
thereby learning others that Humanity which becometh all Men to 
treat others witty that are fallen under their power ; that Decency 
which becometh them as Men, and as Men whole Circumſtances 
have been betrer; doing to others,as we would they ſhould do unto 
us Thus Jehoiachin's Lot was different from that of bis Father Je- 
hniachim, whoſe Bcdy was caſt out as we heard beſcre: As alſo from 
that of his Uncle Zedekiah who did not only die in Babylon, but died 
a Priſoner; his Nephew Jehoiachim died there, and a Captive, but 
not in durance. Theſe four Jaſt Verſes are found alſo 2 Kings 25s 
27, 28, 29, 30. and being found here in a Narrative form, Telated as 
2 piece of Hiſtory relating a thing done r.ct in a Prophetical ſtile,are 
an Argument ( as was ſaid before) tht this whole Chapter isno 
part of the Prophecy of Jeremiah, and probably not wrote by him 
for he beginniyg his Prophecy in tte thirteen Year of Joſiah who 
reigned thirty one Years, and continuing it three Moneths during 
the Reign of Jehoachaz, and eleven Years during the Reign of Jehoi= 
acoim, and three Moneth during the Reign of Jehoiachin ( cr Jeconia 
| ah ) and eleven Years during the Reign of Zedtkiah; and Fehoiachin 
outliving the Reign of Zed:kiah Twenty five Years, it muſt needs be 
ſixty five Years and an half after the word of the Lord firſt came to 
Jeremiah before the Death of Jeboiachin; ſo as the Prophet if he lived 
ro that time muſt be near an hundred Years o!d, which is not pro- 
bable. Here now endeth the Hiſtory of the Kingdom of Judah. I 
ſhal only note the ſevere Judgement of God upon this People, whoſe 
Kingdom was made up of the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and 
halfrhe Tribe of Manaſth, In the numbring of the Perſons belong= 
ingto theſe two Tribes, Numbe 1: ( counting half of the number of 
the Tribe of Manaſth) we find One hundred twenty 6x thouſand one 
kundred, Numb. 26. we ſind of them One hundred fourty eight thouſand 
feur hundred and fifry. Here Verſe 30. we find no more of them car« 
ried into Captivity, than four theuſand and ſix hundred, From whence 
we may judge what a multitude of them were ſlain by the Sword 
or killed by the Famine and the PeſtiJence, though we make a great 
allowance for ſuch as were left in the Land to dreſs Vineyards, and 
to till the Ground. Ir is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God, to mock his meſſengers, d-ſpiſe kis words, and miſuſe his 
a prey rid there be 16 remedy, as Chis People did, a Chronicks 


Years after the taking of the City, and we are not certain what at 


this time brought agaia the Chaldean Forces: 


THE 


vour, n0r are ſuch things u: uſual in Nations vpon their changes of 


Chap. Lt 


T Hebz 


| above the chrones of the kings that were with him in good chings 


with him, 


f Heb: 
the matte 
of the day 


in bis days 


> + OO Ges one GA eu 


£ 


OR hx i 7 EIS 


© HO gs mo pe 


}t Heb. 
for the 
greatneſs 
of ſervie 


Zudts 


T H E : 
” 


Lamentations of JEREMIAH 


His Book in Greek, Tatine, and Engliſh bath its name from the Subject matter of it, which Fp Lamentation 5 
So alſo amongſt the Hebrew Writers, but inthe Hebrew it hath its Name from the firft word of the Book, as alſg 


the frve Books of Moles have. 


That it was Wrote by Jeremiah none ean reaſonably queſtion, becauſe inthe Hebrew it is filed, The Book of Jeremiah. 

There is little controverſie about the Time, or Occaſion of the Writing of it. That the Occaſim was the miſeries of the 
People, by reaſon of the Famine, Sword, and Captivity is evident to thoſe that read any partof it ; but whether they wer e 
thoſe miſeries which began with the Death of Joſiah, and held en till the City was taken, which was two and iwent y or three and 
twenty years after ; Or thoſe only which began with the Siege and followed on many Years, hath been doubted by ſome. That 
Jeremiah lamented for Joſiah, and all the ſinging Men, and ſinging Women ſpake of Joſiah in their Lamentations 
3s plain from 2 Chron. 35. 25. But that theſe were the forms they uſed, or that they were compoſed upon that [ad account 
appeareth not, and the miſeries, which the Prophet mentionerh befel not the People in the time of Joſiah, but during the Siege 
Nor is there any thing which looks like a Lamentation fer Joſiah through the 
whole Book, unleſs Chap. 4, 20» which ( as we ſhall ſhew ) may alſo be fairly interpreted of Zedekiah : Some think that 
Jeremiah began to write them upon the Death of Joſiah, and continued his flile to the time of the Captivity, ſetting down all 


more than twenty Years after Joſiah's Death 


the miſeries the People ſuffered all along that time. 


The Scope of the writing as to thoſe whom it immediatly concerned, is plain and obvious, viz. to offe& the People with theſe 
Fudgments which came upon them for their ſins: As to us ( upon whom the ends of the World are come ) to mind us to take 


becd of their Sins, leſt we be ſharers in their Plagues. 


| The Book is made up of Complaints of their lamentable condition 3 Petitions unto God for Mercy, and Prophecies both of 


their better eſtate and the ruine of their Enemies. 


Inthe four firſt Chapters are ſeveral Alphabets of Letters beginming the ſeveral Verſes, each Verſe beginning with a new 
Letter, only Chapter 3+ every three Verſes begins with a new Leteer ; the mytery of which we do not underſtand, nor peſſibly 
was there any myſtery intended in it, only the Chapters were ſo compoſed for the advantage of our Memories. 

| The whole Book lets us [ce from what an height of dignity, towhat adepth of miſery ſin may bring Nations, how much ſoever 
intereſted in God; and likewiſe dirc&s us to our duty in ſuch fates of Aflittions and Miſery if we would chtain Mercy, 


CHA F- k | | 
Jeremiah lamenteth the former Excellency and preſent Miſery of Jeruſalem 
for her ſn, 1 12. She complaineth of her Grief, 13 17s Con- 
feſſeth God's Judgments to be Righteous: And prayeth unts him, 

18 22. | 
| Ow doth the city ſit ſolitary, that was full of peo- 

ple a? bow is ſhe become as a widow b? ſhe that 
was great among the nations, and princeſs among the 
provinces, how is ſhe become tributary c ? 

a The intrrogative Particle how ? Once expreſſed and twice more 
underſtood in this Verſe, doth not ſo much inquire the cauſe or 
Reaſon of the effe&, as expreſs admiration, or lamentation. The 
Propher admires the miſerable ſtate of the City, which-was full of 
people beyond the proportion of other Cities, and now was ſolitary, 
ſo thin of people that ſcarce any could be ſeen in her Streets. 
b She that had a King, or rather a God, that was an husband to 
her, now was forſaken of God, her King 
and ſhe like a poor widow. «c She that was like a Princeſs a= 
mongſt the Nations, that ſometimes ( as in Davids time.) had the 
Moabites, Ammonites, &c. Tributaries to her, was now a Tributary 
her ſelfs 

2 * She weepeth ſore in * the night, and her tears 
are on her cheeks d: among all her lovers ſhe hath none 
to comfort her, all her friends have dealt treacherouſly 


with her, they are become her enemies e. 

d All her hours are hours of ſadneſs, ſhe dothnot only mournin 
the day time, bur in the night alſo, when ſhe ſhould reſt, her Cheeks 
are like the Graſs in the Morning hanging full of drops, as if her 
Head were a Fountain of Water, and her Eyes Rivers of Tears. 
e In her proſperity ſhe had a great many Friends that ſoughr, and 
courted her favour, with whom ſhe made Leagues and confederated 
( ſuch were the Egyprians, Aſſjrians, &c. ) but they were now ſofar 


from helping the Jews, that they helped their Enemies, and dealt |' 


treacherouſly with them becoming themſelves Enemies inſtead of 
Aſſiſtants ro them. 


2 Judahis gone into captivity, becauſe of affliction, 
and + becauſe of great ſervitude f; ſhe dwelleth among 
the heathen, ſhe findeth no reſtg: all her perſecutors 


overtook her between the {traits þ. 

f This is expounded as the cauſe why the Jews were carried into 
Captivicy,becauſe of the ſervitude, and &pprefſion exerciſed amongſt 
them, oppreiſion by their Rulers, and ſervitude more generally. 
keeping their Servants bzyond the Year of Jubile, when they ought 
to have ſet them ar Liberty, and that this was one cauſe appeareth 
from Jer. 34+ 17. or if becauſe of affiitiion, &c, be joyned to the next 
words, the ſenſe is plain ſbe dwell:th among#t the Heathen, by reaſon 
of her low condition, and the ſtate of ſervitude the is in, g Where 
ſhe ( that is the Jews ) have neither any fatisfaQtion nor quiet in 
their own minds, nor are they by their Enernies ſuffered co be at 

aietany where. þ Thoſe that purſued them with all violence to de- 
rn them, overtook them in places where tl.ey could not eſcape 
them,as Huniſmen and other take their Game by driving them inco 
ſtrait and narrow places. x 

The ways of Zion do mourn, becauſe none com- 
eth to the ſolemn feaſts ;: all her gates are deſolate k: 
her prieſts ſigh /, hervirgins are aftlited, and ſhe is in 
bitterneſs w. - 

; The ways that lead to the Temple, have as unlovely a Com- 
plexion as Mourners, being overgrown by reaſon that none goeth 
up-as uſually to che Feaſts of che Paſſover, of Tabernacles, &c. Ei. 
cher all the Gates of Jers/alem, gr rhe Temple, or all her Cities ars 


taken from her, |' x 
departed p: her princes are become like harts chat find 


;no paſture, and they are gone without ſtrength before 


FE purſuer 9» 


ſoever ſplendor the City had, whether from the multitude or gal- 


very thin of people, the places that uſe to be fo full. 7 Her Priefts 
that were wont to be fo fully imployed at Feſtivals receiving ths 
peoples Oblations, and offering Sacrifices, they mourn having now - 
_ ing m"—_ -_ you mane we thoſe Feaſts were wont to 
play with Timbrels, Plal. 68. 25, ey now moutn, and perſo 
of all Ages and Ranks are in bitterneſs. 4 ; Y OMe, | 
5 Her adverſaries are * the chief, her enemies pro- » Jer. 52: 
ſper : for the LORD hath afflicted her » ; for the mul- 23. 
titude of her tranſgreflions, her children are gone into - 
captivity before the enemy o. 

» God hath fulfilled his threatning, Dev. 28. 43. The Enemy is 
got ab:ve us, and we are brought very low, for the multitude of ovir 
ſins, direCtly contrary to his promiſe in caſe of obedience, Ver. 13. 

o Not only our young and old Men, but the little Children, have 
been driven like Sheep before the Enemey into a miſerable Capti» 
Vity. 


6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is 


p All the Inhabitants of Z:on have loſt their former Beauty, what- 


lantry of her Inhabirants, it isall gone, her Nobles are become thi; 

and 1ll-favoured like Beaſts dal ſtarved, their ors fin 

_ to deftroy them, and they have no ſtrength to oppoſe or feliſt 

Theme : | - 

: #7 Jeruſalem remembred in the days of her affliction; 

and of her miſeries, all her || pleaſant things thae ſhe [| Or, 4s 

had in the days of old, when her people fell into the 9% 

hand of the enemy, and none did help her r, the ad- 

verfaries ſaw her, and did mock at her fabbaths /« ha 
» The Inhabitants of Jeruſalem now, that they are in aflition and 

miſery, have time toRemember their former Mercies, and with how 

many deſirable things God had once bleſſed them, and compare 

her former ſtate before ſhe fell into the Enemies hands, with her 

preſent ſtate now ſhe is in their power. { Now ir is an 2Mi&ion to 

them to hear her Enemies mock at her Sabbaths, which while they i 

enjoyed they abuſed. ne 7% 


8 Jeruſalem hath grievouſly ſinned : therefore ſhe + Heb. ; & | 
+ is removed ; all that honoured her, deſpiſe her r, * be- pe... Þ 
cauſe they have ſeen her nakedneſs : yea ſhe ſigheth, meving, os | 
and turneth backward. @ 

t She is carried out of her own Land into ari Enemies Countrey, ©"s- 
and made an hiſſing and ſcorn to thoſe who before Reverenced her, * Jer: 13+ } 
( in allthis God is Righteous; for all orders of Men have grievouſly 26 Ezek. 
ſinned ) becauſe rhey have ſcen the Lord ſtripping her of all her 15-37-% . 


Bleflings, and expoſing her to the ſcorn and Reproach ef all Men as 23: 29+ 
Strumpets are expoſed. * Deur. 


9 Her filthinefs zs in her skirts w, ſhe * remembreth - 
not her laſt end, therefore ſhe came down wonderful- 
ly : ſhe had no comforter x : O LORD behold ry af. - 
fliction : -for the enemy hach magnified bizy/elf y. 

w He pzrſiſteth in his compariſon of the Jewiſh people, either 
to a flutriſh naſty Woman, or te an impudent Wominn that is not 
aſhamed to expoſe her naſtineſs or wickedneſs to rhe view of all. 
x That is, the Jews never conſidered, or wonld nor believe what 
thoſe degrees of fin would at laſt bring them to, and that hath been 
the cauſe of that prodigious Calamity into which God had broughe 
them, y The Prophet turas himſelf ro God, whom he defies ro 


6 Q3 behold 


| 
FT 
| 
it 


LE Bo - 
»n of this people, that is with a pitiful compaſſh 
— _—_— very aſia thing in Holy Scripture, to ſignific 
the as of the Heart, by the a&s of the inward and outward Senſes, 
thoſe eſpecially of the Memory, Eye and Ear, becauſe ObjeQs muſt 
in by the Senſes before they can affe& the Soul. 


an ( 97 _ tad ſpeaking of God after the manner of Men ) 
the Servants of God deſiring God to have compaſſion on them, ſhew 


them favour, &c. Deſire him to behold and look upon their affliQti- 


oo The adverſary hath ſpread out his hand upon all 
ker || pleaſant things z : for ſhe hath ſeen that the hea- 
then entred in her ſantuary, whom thou didft com- 
mand rhat they * ſhould not enter into thy congregatt- 


on 34. | 
' 2 Thatis, hath got them into poſſeſſion. By pleaſant things are 


underſtood the Ornaments of the Temple, upon whic 

ox mad had laid violent hands, ſo this Phraſe of ſpreading out the 
hand is taken, 1/s. 25- 11- The things of the Sanftuary were always 
pleaſant things to thoſe that feared God, poſlibly thoſe that litcle 
valued them before, now looked upon them in their true notion. 
We ſeldom know our Mercies till we come to be deprived of them. 
s He means the Ammonites, and Moabites whom the Law concerned, 
Deut. 23. 3. Some of whom probably aſſiſted the Babylonians in the 
| Conqueſt of Fudes. 

*Jer. 52-6. + All her people ſigh *®, they ſeek bread b, they 
'Or, 9 have given their pleaſant things for mear to | | relieve 
make the 11. fQulc : ſee, O LORD, and conſider, for I am be- 


ae 9n ome vile d 

ug þ He ſpeaketh probably with reference to the Seige, afcer which 
: the people had ſcarcely any pleaſant things to exchange for Bread. 
The whole Body of the people was in a {ad conditicn, and in 2 
Land that ordinarlily flowed with Milk and Honey, they were at 
Joſs for Bread to cat- © And gave any thing for ſomething to ſa- 
risfic their hunger» 4 The Prophet ſends up aſudden Ejaculation 
to God much like that Yer. 6. The Argument he uſeth 1s drawn 
from the miſery the people were in, expreſſed under the notion of 
being become vile, that is miierable or contemprible. 


"82 © [| Is it nothing to you, all ye that + paſs by ? 


_ * behold, and ſee, * if there be any ſorrow like ro my 
+ Heb. forrow : which is done unto me, wherewith the LORD 
-paſs by hath aflited me in the day of his fierce anger e. 

Fhe way. © , The Prophet ſpeaks in the Name of the Jewiſh Church, as a Wo- 
* Dan. 9. -man in miſery ſitting by the way ſide, and calling to paſſengers that 
142. came by to have compaſſion on her, ſuggeſting to them, that her 


affliction was no ordinary affliction, nor the effect of a common 
and. ordinary Providence but the effect of the Lord's fierce anger, 


a moſt ſevere puniſhment. | 
13 om above: hath he ſent fire into my bones, and 


it prevaileth againſt chem f ; he hath ſpread a ner for 
my feet g, he hath turned me back : he hath made me 


deſolare, and faint all the day, w 
2 _, F Fy Fire he means aJudgment as conſuming, andas afflictive as 
E fire in the Bones, which had conſumed the ſtrength of the Jews. 
£g That: is, God had brought them into a condition wherein they 
were entangled, and could not get out, The Holy Man owner 
God as the firſt cauſe of all the evil they ſuffered, and Entitles God 
"to their various kinds of afflictions; both in Captivity, and during 
irhe Stege, looking beyond the Babylonians who were the proximate 
-inftrumental cauſe. : . 
14 The yoke of tranſgreſſions is bound by his 
hand : they are wreathed, and come up upon my 
-neck 3: he hath made my ſtrength to fail ; the LORD 


*hath delivered me into heir hands, from whom I am not 

: ahle:toriſe up &. q . 
þ Still the Propheteyeth God in all, and acknowledgeth his Ju- 

 Kice-while he ec: | their afflictionsthe yoke of their cranſgreſſions, that 
© _.. » "5s, which was put upon their neck, upon the ſame account that 

i | Yokesare put about the Necks of Beaſts that uſe to break Hedges, 
 *&*+. and bound to keep them faſt. / My puniſhments are twiſted as 
Cords, to make them more ſtrong ; I have a complication of Judg- 
ments upon me, Sword, Famine, Peſtilence, Captivity, they are not 
only prepared for myNeck, but they are already put upon it. & All 
'my valiant Men, the ſtrength of my Nation 1s breken, and Iam fo 
p fallen, that I am not able to riſe again» . 
-% 15 The LORD hath trodden under foot all my 
2A mighty men inthe midſt of me /: he hath called an al- 
ks ' femblyagainſtme,tocruſh my young men =» : theLORD 
6 IF hath trodden || the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as 
 winepreſ; 110 4 wineprels ». 


=, of the Fire 4 In the midf# of me, may be Interpreted either as pleonaFical, or ag 
I in denoting the place in which they loſt their valiant Men, viz. in the 
= 7 midft of the Giry during the Siege, not in the Field. » Inſtead of 


thoſe ſolemn Aſſemblies that were wont to be callgd together wich= 

in Hieruſslem by ſound of Trumpet for the ſolemn Worſhip of God ; 

God had called an Aſſembly of Chaldeans as Adverſarics againſt the 

City, to cruſh the Inhabitants of it. » God had trodden upon the 

= Jews as Men uſe ro ftamp Grapes in a Winepreſs, where they uſe to 
"cruſh them to pieces to get outthe juice, and then they throw the 

husks that are good for nothing upon the Dunghills, Theſe are 


 ®Jer.13. 7 
17. and 


T 4+ 17. 
Chap. 2. 
18... 


2? and that pleatifully ; p having neither thee preſent with us as for- 
{merly dv our owns or comfort, nor any Friend that will deal by 


The Lamentations of FEREMIAYQ, 


Chap. I» 
us as Friends ſometimes doby others in ſwooning fits to fetch back 

their Souls. q Either the other Cities of Judah ( Jervſalem was the 

Morker City ) or my people, my Inhabitants, are waſted deitroyed 

and made delolate, becauſe the Enemy hath prevailed. Fn 

17 * Zion ſpreadeth forth her hands », and there ;; * Jer.4.3t, 
none to comfort her /; the LORD hath commanded 
concerning Jacob that his adverſaries ſhould be round a» 
bout him z: Jeruſalem is as a menſtruous woman a- 
monegſt them «. 

r The ſame in this Verſe is meant by Ziow, Jacob and Feruſalem 
unleſs Zion more ſpecially ſignifieth the Jews conſidered as a Church. 
becauſe of the Temple built upon it. She ſpreaderh our her hands 
2S 1n a poſture of mourning, and bewailing herſelf. { But ſhe had 
none that could afford her any comfort. # God had commanded 
concerning the Fews who were deſcended from Jacob, ( their twelve 
Tribes from his twelve Sons) that their Enemies ſhould incompaſs 
them, » They were become loathſome and filchy even inthe Eyes 
of their Enemies like Women, which were {ſeparated from the con- 
gregation during their legal Uuncleanneſs. 

18 F The LORD is * righteous, for I have * rebel- *Dan.g'7, 
led againſt his F commandment w 3: hear, I Pray You * 1 Sam. 
all people, and behold my ſorrow : my virgins and my 12:!4, "5: 
young men are gone into captivity x. + rae ag 

w The Prophet either dire&eth thoſe that feared God what they 
ſhould ſay, or expreſſeth what many of them did ſay in the Name 
of the reſt. acknowledging both the Lords Juſtice and F aithfulneſs, 
becauſe they had been diſobedient ro the Commandments of God. 
x In theſe words the Prophet only perſonates a paſſionat Woman beg= 
ging pity of all becauſe her Children were taken from her. 

19 I called for my lovers, but they * deceived me y; * Jer. 393 
my prieſts and mine elders gave upthe ghoſt in the ci- 14- 
ty, while they ſought their meat to relieve their ſoul z. 

7 T defired help of my Allies and Confederates who courted my 
Friendſhip and Alliancein my Proſperity, but they failed mine ex- 
peCtation, none of them either would or could ſuccour me. z My 
Mitery was ſuch through the Famine, that not only my common 
people but thoſe of the beſt rank in the City, Magiſtrates and Prieſts 
6s 98 as they went along the Street ſeeking Bread to ſatisfie their 

unger- 

20 Behold, OLORDa, for I am in diſtreſs ; my 
* bowels are troubled: mine heart is turned within * If 16. 
me, for I have grievouſly rebelled s * abroad the fworg !!:Jer-48. 
bereaveth, at home rhere is as deathb. I ng. 

Spas” Re 2-11. Hoſ. 

@ The Petition is of the ſame nature as before a petition for mer- ,, g 
cy as the produ&tt of that piry and compaſſion which extream miſery * DR ; 
begets in good Souls ( and is aſcribed unto God though found in : 
him in a much more perfe& degree, Pſal. 78. 38. ar.d 86 35. and feek.o.ce: 
111.4. ) through the eyes affetting the heart. b The argument OMP 
the Propher uſcth is drawn from the miſery this people was now 
in, which he expreſſeth meraphorically, telling us their Bowels 
were troubled, their Heart turned, ſignifying the more inward di. 
ſturbance of their mind; or more plainly, and that both generally 
ſaying they were in diſtreſs, and more particularly by the great 
Judgments of the Sword, and Famine, the Sword in the Field, the 
Famine in the City ; unleſs the Sword alone be meant both with. 
out and within the Gates of the City. In all this the Church juſti- 
fieth God, confeſſing this was bur rhe righteous produt of her ſin, 
by which, ſhe having formerly ſubjeQed her ſelf to God, had grie- 
vouſly rebelled ; for as-all Men are born Subje&s ro God, ſo by 
their ſins they are become Rebels, ſo it 1s a great aggravation of 
Mens Rebellion againſt the Lord, when they have formerly taken 
an Oath of fealty tothe Lord, and as Moſes ſaid, avoucked the Lord 
as their God. 

21 They have heard that I ſigh c, rhere is none to 
comfort me 4: all mine enemies heard of my trouble, 
they are glad that thou haſt done ite : thou wilt *bring * 7g, 13; 
the day rbat thou haſt || called, and they ſhall be like un- &c. Jer. 
to me f. 46. & Co 

c The Nations contiguous to me, Ezypr, &c. thoſe that before ! Or, £r0« 
courted me, as pretended Friends have been no ſtrangers ro my bit-= clarmeas 
ter afflitions, that have brought forth ſighs from me. 4 Burt there 


mouth, 


$9; 35. 


i5none of them can or will comfort me, but give meover as in a 
deſparate caſe. e The Edomites, Obad. 1. &c. and Moabites and os 
ther Heathen Nations, with whom I have had hoſtility, they are 
glad at the great miſery that hath befallen me. f Burthou haſt de- 
clared thy pleaſure for their deſtruftion alſo, and haſt by me pre- 
claimed it, Jer. 49. and 5o. and thou ſhalt in thatday bring them 
into as ſad a condition as the Church of the Jews are now in- Ag 
they ſeldom in themſelves feel thoſe Miſeries, which they have fele 
and compaſſionated in others : So Men hardly eſcape ther own 
thare at laſt in thoſe evils which they have rejoyced to ſee brought 
upon God's people. | 

22 Let all their wickedneſs come before thee : and do 
unto them as thou haſi done unto me for all my tranſ- + 
greflions: for my ſighs are many, and my heart is 
faintg. 

£ This Verſe 1s another prophetical Curſe or Imprecation, ſeve- 
ral of which we meet with in Holy Write, P/al. 109, 6, 7, 8, g. 
and 137. 8. Fer, I1. 20. and I8. 23. and in many other Texts, which 
would inclineus to think that our Saviour's Precept, Matth. 5. 44- 
to pray for thoſe that perſecute us, backed by his own Example, 
Luke 23+ 34+ and Stephen's, Afs 7.60. is either to be interpreted of 
praying for the forgivenneſs of their fins, ( we ouglit to deſire the e- 
ternal Condemnaticn of none : ) orto be reſtrained to ſuch as are 
our perſonal Enemies, not the common Enemies ofthe Church of 
God. Our Saviour's Precept moſt certainly is not to be ſo Inter- 
preted, bur that we may lawfully pray for ſuch Evils to the impla- 
caple Enemies of the Church, and people of God as may reſtrain and 
weaken their hands, and put them out of a capacity of waſting the 
Lord's Heritage ; we are only obliged by ir to wiſh well to their 
Souls, and to deiire no evil againſt them outof private Revenge or 


Malice, but only out ofLove to Ged, 2nd Zeal for his Glory ; bur 
for 


Int 4 I. © 


br th - 8 


= 4x ad | 


ow or — 


6d ORE ev 


LES _ TI ITED 


Chap. II. 


for their outward Proſperity in their Courſes of Enmity we ought 
no more to pray, than againſt their eternal Salvation ; for this 
were to beg of God to Encourage his Enemies in their, enmity 
againſt him. And though Jeremiah were a greater Prophet than 
any of us can pretend, and had Revelations of Particular future 
Contingencies which we have not; yet every one may prophelie a 
ruine to the Enemies of Gods Church and People, and ſuch as re- 
joyce in their ruine ; God never uſing a Rod againſt his People, 
which he doth nor at laſt burn,nor ever countenancing Inhumanity 
in any ,but much leſs when it is rooted in a malice againſt himſelf, 
and his intereſt in the World. 
CHAP. IL 
Jeremiah lamenteth the Miſery of Jeruſalem ; and its Carſes ; and therr 
Enemies derifugn, 1 17. An Exhortation to true Sorrow aud Repent- 
ance, @ fervent Prayer 18 =m— yz, : 
Ow hath the LORD covered the daughter of Zi- 
on with a cloudin his anger 4,and caſt down from 
heaven to the earth the daughter of Iſrael b,and remem- 
bred not his footſtool in the day of his anger c'! 

a Ir hath been formerly obſerved that great States and Kingdoms 
are often in Scripture expreſſed under the notion of daughters, Pſal. 
137. 8: Iſa. 47. 1. 5. Lament. 4. 21, 22. Jer. 46, 11.1ſa. 10. 30. the 
meaning is, how hath God obſcured all the beauty and glory of the 
Church and State of the Jews. b Thar is,thrown them down from 
the higheſt pitch of Glory and Honour, to the meaneſt degree of 
Baſeneſs and Servitude. c The Earth is called the Lord's Foot- 
ſtool, Iſa, 66. 1. Matthe 5. 35. LAFs 7.49. buthere plainly the Tem- 
Ple is underſtood, called Gods Foot-ſtool, 1 Chron. 28. 2. and the 
whole Temple ſeems rather to be underſtood,than the 4rk,for we read 
of no indignity offered tothe Ark by the Chaldeans,more than to any 
other part of the Temple; God had tuffered the Chald:ans to burn the 
whole Temple, and it may juſtly be doubted whether thole other 
Texts that mention a-worſhipping at Gods Foot-ſtool, Pſal. 99, 5.: 
and 132. 7. be not to be underſtood of worſhipping in the Temple 
for it was not the privilge of all the Jews to come {o near the Ark 
as to worſhip before that : The reaſon of the complaint is Gods per-. 
miſſion of the Chaldeans to burn the Temple. See Fer. 52. 13. 

2 The LORD hach ſwallowed up all the habitation 


of Jacob, and hath nor pitied 4d: he hath thrown dowa 


+ Heb. 
172a4 to. 


p dah e : he hathtbrought them down to the ground : he 
rouch. 


bath polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof f. 
. d As he hath had no reſpe@ tohis own Houſe, ſo he hath had 
much leſs reſpe& to the common Habitations of the Jews, e Their 
military Fortifications have been of no uſe to them, he hath made 
them to touch the ground, 7. e, ſuffered the Enemies to batter them 
to the Earth. f Thar is, Either delivered them into the hands of 
Pagans whom to touch they judged a legal pollution, or elſe dealt 
with them as with a poluted thing, caſt them off, or brake them 
in pieces. All this is made the effe& of Gods Wrath,and his Work; 
for as a Man is ſaid to do that which he incourageth others to do, 
and aſſiſts them in doing ; ſo God is ſaid to have done this, becauſe 
he- did not only ſuffer the Chaldeens to do it, but uſed them as a 
Rod in his Hand, inclining them to do it, and aſſiſting them 1n rhe 
Execution ofthis Wrath. | 
He hath cus off in his fierce anger all the horn of 
Ifraelg : he hath drawn back his right hand from be- 
fore the enemy h, and he burned againſt Jacob like a} 
flaming fire, which devoureth round about 3. | 

g That is, the beauty and ſtrength of iſrael, ſo Horn ſignifieth by 

an uſual Metaphor in Scripture.Pſal. 7 5. 4. Jer 48.25, Oc. the Horn 
being much the beauty of the Beaſt, as alfo that Member by which 
the Beaſt puts forth its ſtrength in aſſaulting its Adverſary. h Ei- 
ther God hath drawn back his Aſſiſtance which he was wont to 
give the Jews againſt their Enemies : Or Iſrael, through Gods 
leaving of them, hath drawn back his right hand ; but it ſeems ra- 
ther to be underſtood of Gods weakening the {ſraelits right hand,ſo 
as they were not able to hold them up (as before) againſt their E- 
nemies. # God had conſumed them, nor in this or that part, bur 
round about, as a fire ſeizing an houſe oc heap of combuſti- 
ble matter at once, on all ſides. 
+ Heb.rthe 4 He hath bent his bow like an enemy # he ſtood 
defreable of with bis right hand as an adverſary &, and ſlew7all rbat 
the eye. mere pleaſant to theeye L,inthe tabernacle of the daugh- 
ter of Zion : he poured our his fury like fire m. 

k That is, God, (whom by their ſins they had provoked and made 
their Enemy) behaved himſelf as an Enemy, bending his Bow,and 
Atretching out his right hand, 7 and flew their young Men, and 
Maidens who were pleaſantto look upon. mAnd had brought Judg- 
ments upon them like fire, which devours without any diſcrimina- 


tion. 

5. The LORD was an enemy ; he hath ſwallowed 
up Iſrael, he hath ſwallowed up all her palaces; he 
hath deſtroyed his ſtrong holds, and hath increaſed in 
the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation ». 

n See Ver. 2. Several pathetical expreſſions ſignifying the ſame 
things, properly imitating the diale& of Mourners whoſe paſſion 
ſuffers them nort'to ſpeak according to Art, but frequently they fay 
the ſame things over and over. | 

6 And he hath violently * taken away his || taber- 
nacle,Has if it were of a garden, he hath deſtroyed his 
places of the aſſembly p: the LORD hath cauſed the 
ſolemn feaſts, and ſabbaths ro be forgotten in Zion,and 
hath deſpiſed in the indignation of his anger the king 
and the prieſt q. 

o The word tranſlated Tabernacle (ſay ſome) ſignifies art hedge or 


bt Iſa $45 
{] Or, hedge 


ſhould denote Gods withdrawing his ProteQion from the Jews, but 


The Lamentationsof F E R E M 1 A H. 


in his wrath the ſtrong holds of the daughter of Ju- 


| it 1s nO Where fo tranſlated. Tr is another word uſed, Pſal. 80.12. 
_ 89. 40. The moſt judicious Interpreters think that the word 
- 11gnifieth the Tewple, and the rather becauſe of what followeth. 

P By the places of the aſſembly may be underſtood the Synago= 

gu. q By the King and Prieſt are meant Perſons of greateſt 
ank and minency,thoughit is thought here is a ſpecial reference 

ro Zeaekiah the King of Judah, and Scraiah who was the High-Prieſt, 
the former of which was miſerably handled. the latter flain- 


7 The LORD hath caſt off his altar : he hath abhor- 


red his ſanQtuary : he hath + given up into the hand of + Heb. 


the enemy the walls of her palaces « ; 
a NOiſe in the houſe of the LORD, 
ſolemn feaſt :. 
So By Altar and Sanfuary ſeemeth not to be meant firifly here 
tne places or Buildings ſo called, which are ſaid to be the Lord's, 
becauſe he dire&ed the making of thera, and they were dedicated 
to his Service, and ufed for no other uſe ; but the ſtared Worſhip 
and Communion of the Church of the Jews ;av Airar is taken, 1 Cor. 
10.18. God by his ſuffering the place to be deſtroyed where alone 
they might Sacrifice, ſeemed to have abhorred hisown Inſtitutions, 
as 1t 15 ſaid, The preyers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. s He 
faith the Lord alſo hath deſtroyed the moſt ſtately of their Civil 
Edifices. « And the Enemies with their Triumphs and Blaſphemies, 
had made as great noiſe, to the reproach'and diſhonour, of God, as 
before thoſe that ſang holy Songs, or plaid on Inſtruments were 
wont to make in the Temple to the Honour and Glory of God, 


8 The LORD hath purpoſed to deſtroy the wall. of 
the daughter of Zion # ; * he hath ſtretched out a line - 
w, he hath not withdrawn his hand from + deſtroying * > King 
x: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to la- 2! 13- 
ment ; they languiſhed together. y. 


* they have made /«# »p. 
as in a day of the 


rical ſenſe, for the Krength and ſecurity of the p ( the ſtrength op 
and ſceurity of aplace lying much in its Walls. ) w Artificers uſe ** 
with Lines not only to mark out places for building, bur alſo for 
deſtruQtion, to dire& them what to cut of, ſcch a Line is here 
meant. x God had gone ou in deſtroying them. y And had made 
their Walls and Ramparts feeble, and to ſhake like a Manunder 
ſome languiſhing Diſtemper, that had no ſtrength leftro 

9 Hergates are ſunk into the ground z, he hath de- _.. 
ſtroyed and broken her bars a,* her king and her princes + 2 Kin 
are among the Gentiles b ; the law is no mere c, her *. 


prophetsajſo find no viſioh from the LORD 8. 2:5. 6,7. 
with Rubbiſh. s The Bolts of the Gates are broken. 
and the Nobles of Judah that were not ſlain were in miſerable Cap. 26 
tivity. c The Law was no more read and opened, nor was there *' 
any more Sacrifices offered according ro the preſcript of ir, 
nor any ſolemn feaſts kept according to the direction of it. 4 They 
had but very few Prophets amongſt them from this time to the time 
of the Goſpel, and very few of thoſe at this time alive had any Re- 
velations from God, we read only of this Prophet, Ezekiel, Daniel, 
and three after the Captivity, Haggai, Zechariah and Malachy. $.- 
10 The elders ofthe daughter of Zion ſit upon the * Job 2. 
ground, and keep ſilence e : they have * caſt up duſt '* 
upon their heads ; they have girded themſelves with 
ſackcloth ; the virgins of Jeruſalem hang down their 
heads tothe ground e. © EY 
e Sitting upon the ground, keeping ſilence, throwing Duſt on 
their Heads, girding themſelves with Sackcloth, hanging down the 
Head, were all of them Poſtures and aftions and Geſtures of Mour- 
ners. The meaning of this whole Verſe is, that the whole City of 
Hieruſalew was in a very ad ftateand condition, and all perſons in 
itin a mournful poſture. Not the common People only, but 
the graveſt of their Magiſtracy and Miniſtry. Thoſe who were 
wont to fit in the Chairs of Magiſtracy and of Teachers. Their 
young Women alſo which uſed to be moſt brisk and frolick, thoſe 
whoſe condition was furtheſt off from ſorrow, and who were leaſt . -- 
diſpoſed to it, were now, all of them drownedin floods of it. {4 
11 Mineeyes do fail with tears f, *® my bowels are , ng. 
troubled g ; my liver is poured upon the earth b, for | or, 
the deſtruction of the daughter of my people 3, becauſe foine. 
the children and the ſuckling || ſwoon in the ſtreets of 
the city &. | h - ; 
F This whole Verſe is but expreſſive of the Prophet's great affli&ti. 
on for the Miſeries come upon the Jews. He wept himſelf almoſt 
blind. g His paſſion had diſturbed his bodily Humours, that his 
Bowels were troubled, þ His gall lying under his Liver, upon this 
diſturbance was vomited up, they are all no more than Expreſſions 
of very great great affliction and forrow. # For. the miſeries be- 
fallen the Jews, he had mourned for their ſins before, and for their 
Plagues too which he had in proſpeR, Jer. g. 11 he now mourns for 
them, as being come upon them ; which mourning conſidered on- 
ly as for their Miſeries, ſpake no more than the Prophet's good 
Nature and Love to his Countrey : but conſidered as the Indication 
of Gods Wrathand Diſpleaſure wasalſo agodly ſorrow. k The Chil- 
dren and Sucklings fainted and ſwooned, either for want of Wa« 
ter, or Bread, or Milk in their Mother or Nurſes Breaſts during the 
Famine, occaſioned by the long Siege of the City, This appears in 
the next Verſe- " | 
12 They ſay to their mothers, Where is corn and 
wine ? when they ſwooned as the wounded in the ſtreets 
of the city,when their ſoul was poured out into their 


mothers boſom &. OY: Ys 
k The little Children ignorant of the cauſe of the failure of their 


». 


uſual Food called to their Mothers for it asformerly, being ready: 


Blood uſe to faint, and died in their Mothers arms ; for ſo I had ra- 


fence, and they would have it here ſo tranſlated,and ſo the ue ro faint and die, asmen mortally wounded for want of Spirits and 


ther interpret- the Phraſe poured out their fouls, than ( as ſome, ) 
unter» 


6Q4 


Chap. | 


{. 74 


Ws: If. +3. 17%} 
The term Wal in this Verſe ſcemeth to be taken in a metaphv- Y Yor we "1 


- ut 
FLEE 29.43. 0 ” 


> 


24.15, an: 


z Thar is, the Gates of Jeruſalem are deſtroyed, and covered over *Pſal. 74. 
b Zedrkinh 9. Ezcks 7. 


Mr EIT 


' 


—_ 


4 
| 
14 


PL 


: 


DANI” ON ee roots ROT WIR 


: : ? 
$A 4 WI wat PF. 


If ---: 7ne LamenB®tions of F 
” unfderflanding by Sutrthe deſires of th:ir Souls, for he is ſpeaking 
x 7 hong he as more grown Children, the Phraſe is capable 


of both Senſes. : 
of Th Whar thing ſhall I take to wicneſs for thee? what 


- - what(ball I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O 
virgin mee of Zion ? for thy breach is great like 


© the fſea; who can heal thee mw? ' : = 
Bu: m The Summ of this verſe is, That the miſerable condition of 
the people was both in:ompareable and incurable. There was no peo- 


- ple whole miſerable condition was in any degree parallel to the mi- 
CO of the Jews. Ir is ſome comfortto perſons m miſery to con- 
ſider, that others are aad have been as miſerable as they, but the 
Prophet had not this Topick from whence to fetch an Argument 
of comfort ro the Jews ; there were none to whom he could liken 
them, nor was there any preſent cure for; them, their breach was 

| like a Sea-breach where the waters come in with ſuch a Torrent, 

-— -thit while the Tide abates, there is no making any bank or defence 

| againſt them. . : : 

: 2:8, "I Thy * Prophets have ſeen vain and fooliſh things 


*31- forthee », and they have not diſcovered thine iniqui- 

223: 16.0), to turn. away thy captivity e ; but have ſeen for 

27: 14. thee falſe burdens and cauſes of baniſhment p. 

29-8, 9» » Not the Lords Prophets in thee, but thoſe Prophets to whom 
K:13.2 you choſe rather to hearken, and whom you believed rather than 
* .. me, andothers ſent by God to reveal his Will unto you, came and 
told you idle and vain Stories, that thoſe who were carried -into 


ou ſuch ſmooth and p'eaſant chings, tickled your Humours in- 

of difcovering your Sins, which were bringing theſe Judg- 
ments upon you ; whereas they, ought to. bave dealt freely, and 
faithfully with you, and have made you ſenſible of your ſins, and 
this might have prevented your miſerable Captivity, p But they 

" rather ſpent their breath in telling you falſe ſtorjgs to incourage 
ou in-your ſinful courſes, and ſo proved to you the cauſes of your 
Cntrent; or elſe they told you falſe Stories which they preten- 
ded to bethe cauſes of the Captivity of your Brethren, in the mean 


TY the ſame Errors, till you came to be more miſcrable than thoſe that 
eb: paſs went into captivity before you. 

>: way. 15 All thac | paſs by, * clap rheir hands atthee ; 
zek. 25. they hiſs and wag their head at the daughter of Jeruſa- 
oe. - 4g. lem 9, ſaying, 1: this the city that men call * the perfe- 


AN thing (ball I liken to thee, O daughter of Jeruſalem 2? 


"Y - . Captivity, ſhould after rwo years return, &c. o And by telling | 


time concealing the true caules, and ſuffering you to run on in | 


EKEMIAH. 


| thou haſt done this x ; * Shall the women ear their fruit * Lev. 26: 
and children || of a ſpan long y ? ſhall the prieſt and the _ Deur. 
prophet be f!4in in the Sanctuary of the LORD =z ? Jer. go py 

* That is, not to Heathen who never owned thee, nor were Chap.4.1o, 
called by thy Naine, bur to thine own People called thy Portion Ezek.s. "tg 
and thine Heritage 3 let thy former relation to us, and our former || Or,ſwads 
acknowledgments of thee,prevail with thee. y» Wilt thou ſuffer, {eg with 
orſhould ſuch a thing be, as for Women to ſarisfie their Hunger gþcir 

with the fruit of their own Bodies, and that when they are very hands 
young. 2 And ſhall thy Miniſters be ſlain and rhat in thy SanQtu= ; 
ary ? any humane Blood polluted it, ſhall nor the blood of thoſe 
that were the Miniſters of God be judged a pollution, and a pro*s 
fanation of it ? | 

2t The young and the old lie on the ground in the 
ſtreets, my virginsand my young men ate fallen by the 

{word: * thou haſt ſlain them in the day of thine an-* Chap; 


ger, thou haſt kitled, and not pitied 4. 3. 43+ 
# None of what Sex or Age ſoever are ſpared ; though the hands 
of the Chaldeans have done this, yet they have been ſer on and affiſt= 
ed by thee, and have been but the Executioners of thy wrath and 
diſpleaſure, | 
22 Thou haft called as in a ſolemn day; my terrors 
round about 6b, ſo that in the day of the LORDS an- 
ger none eſcaped, nor remained : thoſe that I have 
{wadled and brought up,hath mine enemy conſuraed c. 
 b As my People were wont to be called together from all parts 
in a ſolemn day, when they were to meet at Jeruſalem from all 
Parts of 7udea to now by thy Providence my terrible Enemies or 
, terrible things are 'by thee called together againſt that Holy City, 
. Whither thy People were wont to be called to thy ſolemn Wor- 
| ſhip, c Thou haſt made me as a great mother to bring up many 
' Inhabitants that were my Children, and now the Enemy hath con- 
' ſumed the far greater number of them. 
CHAP. HL 
' The faithful bewail their Miſery and Contempt, 1 2i, They nouriſh 
their hope by Conſideration of the Juftice, Providence, and Mercies of Got + 
22 38. They fiir up themſelves to Repentance, Patimnce, Prayers, 
and confidence of deliver ance for themſelves, and Divine wengeance on 
their Encmies, 39. 6 Go 
I Am the man & that hath ſeen aflition by the red of 


his wrath 6. 
# Some underſtand this of the Prophet, ſome of the People who 
were before ſet out under the Notion ofa Woman, a Daughter, 
here of # man. b Aﬀfliftion muſt here be taken Emphatically . for 


2 =p Rion of beauty,, the joy of the wholeearth q? 

IE q This was according to God's Threatnings, 1 Kings 9. 8. Jer; 
18: 16. and 19: 18. God had poured out all his Bleſſings upon this 
People, whatſoever might adorn them, or make them happy, ſo as | 
all People bleſſed the Jewijb Nation : But now the caſe was ſo alte- | 
red, that all people ſcoffed at them, and hifled, and admired at the 

_ _ Change which God had made. : 

” 3 x6 * All thine enemies have opened their mouth a- 


gainſt thee : they hiſs and gnaſh the teeth : they ſay, 


Kg 


. » We have ſwallowed ber up: certainly this is the day that 
2; we looked for: we have found, we have ſeen it 7. 

E * r As Strangors that had nv Quarrels with, nor prejudices againſt 
| the Jews, paſiag by their Country, and their great City Jeryſalem, 
deſpiſed and ſcorned ir ſo their Enemies with whom they had 
former Quarrels, and who had taken up prejudice againſt them, 


they. reproached and 3buſcd them, and triumphed in their Ruine, 
and in the ſucceſs of their Arms againſt them, and bleſſed themſelves | 
as having now ſ:en the day they had looked and wiſhed for. / 

17 The LORD harh done 74: which he had devi-,\ 


ſed the hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded 
in the days of old : he hath thrown down and hath 
not pitied : and he hath cauſed :bine enemy to rejoice 
over thee, he harh ſet up the horn of thine adverſa- 


TICS FI. 
s God hath not ſurprized us by theſe Providences, he gave us 
notice what he would do, and hath done no more than what he 
' threatned long fince, Levit; 26: 16, &c- Deut. 28: r5, &c. It is 
true, hehath (everely puniſhed us, ſo'as in his Diſpenſation there 
appear no prints of pity, he hath ſer up our Enemies, and hath 
made them to triumph ovet his People, bur in all this he hath but 
juſtified his truth, and fulfilled his word. | . 
x3 Their earth cried to the LORD ?, O wall of the 
E Jer: r4: daughter of Zion, * let tears run down like a riverday 
7. Chap: and night; give thy {elf no reſt, let ot the apple of 
F-16 thine eye ceaſe «. | 
” _.-# They cryed unto God ſeriouſly, though not ſincerely from 
their heart, though not with their whole heart; either by the wall, 
or upon the Wall, or ( which is judged moſt robable ) by occa- 
ſion of the breaches made in the Wall. Upon this he turns his diſ- 
courſe to the Wall it ſelf, and calls to it, or to thoſe that were u- 
ponit,” or near it, inceſſantly ro mourn. In the Hebrew it is, ler 
wt the daughter of thine eye ceale, we call it the 4ppie. The Latines, 
the Pup:!, or Babe of the Eye. 
19 Ariſe, cry outin the night : in the beginning of 
the watches pour out thine heart like water before the 
face of the LORD : lift up thine handstoward him, for 


LY 
BY x 
*- i 


eminent degrees of afflition, cauſed not meerly from the powet 
and malice of the Enemy,but from the Wrath of God tho brought 
upon them by the Chaldeans who were to the two Thibes,the Rod of 
Gods Wrath, as the Aſhrians are called with reference to the ten 
Tribes, 1/a. 10. 5. 

2' He hath led me, and brought me into darkneſs, but 


not to light c. | 

K © Darkneſs in Scripture ( metaphorically taken) ſignifies 1zno- 

rance, Sin and Mſery ; and Light ſignifies Knowledge, a filate of Grace 

ora ſtate of 7th and jollity, they are both here taken in the latter | 
ſenſe, as light is taken, Efther 8. 16. Micah.7. 8. Job 18. 5, Pſal, oy 
97. 11. and alſo Darkneſs is uſed, Jer. 13. 16. 2 Sam. 22. 29. Proe 
29, 20, Joel 2, 2. Ezek, 32. 8. The ſenſe is God hath not brought 
me into a joyful and profperous; bur into a ſad and calamitous e« 


| ſtate and condition. 


3 Surely againſt me is he turned,he turneth his hand 
againſt me all the day d. + 


4 The courſe of Gods Providence toward me is quite altered, 
his hand, that is, his power which was wont to be with me, and 
for me againſt my Enemies, is now turned againſt me, nor is it for 
a moment, or for one ſtroke or two, but his hand is continually 
againſt me. 


4 My fleſh and my skin hath he made old, he hath 


broken my bones e, 
eI was a Yirgine, young and fair, but T am quite altered, and 
am now asan old Woman whoſe Fleſh is decayed, & my Skin wrin- 
kled ; all my Beauty is gone, and all my Strength is gone, my "1 
Bones, thoſe in whom my ſtrength conſiſted, are flain and broken, Ro 


5 He hath builded againſt me f, and compaſſed me 


with gall and travail g. 

f He hath net builded with me increaſirg my proſperity, and 
protefting my Houſes, bur he hath builded Forts and Batteries an@ 
Caſtles, (military Buildings)ro batter down my Walls and Houſes, 
I/a.29 2, 3- Orwith Poiſon, Venom and Miſery (as ſome Tran- 
late it ) and ſeems more proper than gal and rravail, which have 
no cognation one with another. We are not well acquainted with 
the ancient DialeC& of other Countries, the ſenſe is obvious, God 
had ſurrounded them with Miſery and Calamitics. 


6 * He hath ſet me in dark places,as they that bedead * Pſall 88 


of o'd bh. 5, 6. 
hþ The Prophet compareth their ſtate in Babylon to the ſtate of 
Bodies in the Graves, or in ſome charyal Houſe, which are places 
of darkneſs,full of rottenneſs and dead Mens Bones. Such was the 
ſtate of the Jews in Jeruſalem during the time of the Siege before 
the City was taken, when Jeruſalem was a moft miſerable place by 
reaſon of the Multitudes ſlain by the Enemy, or by the Famine * 
Such was their eſtate in Babylon, where the company of Heathens 


the lifz of thy young children, that faint for hunger in 
the fp of every ſtreet w. 
 w The Prophet calls upon the Jews, not to be floathful in this 
| their very evil day, bur to riſe up from their Beds, and either at 
the beginaing of ths four warcies, or at the beginning of each 
Watch, at all times in the Night, ro betake themſelves ro God by 
Prayer,and that not ina cold lazy manner,vut ſo asto pour our their 
hearts with their words ; and he moveth them ro it, as for their 
ownfſake, ſo for the ſake ofcheir young Children, who every where, 


made their ſtate, as the ſtate of the living amongſt the dead. *Job 2.234 
7 * He hath hedged me about,that I cannot get out & 19,8. 


z : he hath made my chain heavy &. 

# The uſe of an Hedge about an incloſed Field, is twofold : Ta 
keep out other Beaſts, which belong to the Owner of the Ground; 
in this ſenſe God ſet an Hedge ſometimes about Caanan, Iſaiah 5. 
5. 2: To keep in thoſe Beaſts that are within, thus God had 
now hedged them in, into a barren place where they had no 
Paſture, but were continually puſhed at by other Beaſts with 


were ſtarved to death. 


20 4 Bchold O LORD, and conſider to whom 


whom they were mixed, and who were ſtronger than they, = 
they 


_ Chap. 1II;- 


> TS NY 


4 1 > , 
I EE es err EET HT Eg 
©®. 


*-r05ut 


A ci 


ma__—c-. 


5 -to « 
M> 


ASTOR ey, er 
LH 


| Chap. VI. 


* Job 19. 
16-I1a-38. 
13.Hol. 5. 
14. & 17. 
vE) 8. 


F Tob To 
20. & 16+ 
I 26 


+ Heb. 
$0115, 


+ Heb: 
bitterneſſes. 


f| Or, rolled 


me inthe 


#ſbes. 


f Heb. 
good. 


lOr, re- 


men bere 


they could net get out. &k God hath dealt with them as with grie- 
vous Malefagors, who are Icaded with heavy Chains. He had 
made their afflition heavy and iniupportable. 

8 Alſo when I cry and ſhout /, he ſhutreth out my 
prayer m, 

I In the condition I am in, I cannot he!p my ſelf, no Creatures 
can help me, I have nohope but in Ged, I take the ordinary courſe 
in that caſe, which is Prayer, I pray fervently and aloud as thoſe 
that are ſerious and importunate for what they defire (for ſhouting 
here ſignifies no more than making a loud noiſe, not a loud noiſe of 
joy and rejoycing, as it moſtly ſignifies) bur he deals with me as 
great perſons that have no mind to liſten ro Suitors and ſhut their 
Gates againſt them, he ſhutteth out my Supplications, which made 
their caſe wholly deſperate and remedilels, | 

9 He hath incloſed my ways with hewen ſtones », 
he hath made my paths crooked 0. 

n Ways in Scripture ordinarily ſignifies Mens Courſes, and me- 
thods of Counſels, and Adtions; if the term be taken in that ſenſe 
here, it ſignifierh Gods defeating all their Methods and Counſels 
taken for their own ſecurity, in the purſuit of which they metnor 
with ordinary, but with inſuperable difficulties like Walls of hewn 
ſtone. o Nay God had not only defeated their Counſels, but had 
made them prove more fatal and pernicious to themſelves, which 
ſeemeth to be intended, by making their ways crooked, which 
ſhould have led right on to the end intended. : 

10 * He was untome as a bear lying in walt, and as 
a lion in ſecret places p. | 
þ That is he hath taken all advantages againſt pne to deſtroy me. 
11 He hath turned aſide my ways, and'pulled me 1n 
pieces, he hath made me deſolate q. 

q The ſamething is repeated in other Phraſesz which was before 
ſaid, viz. That God had pleaſed by his Providence to fruſtrate all the 
deſigns and counſels of the Fews, and miſerably to deſtroy them, 
as a Lion, or a Bear ( the wild beaſts mentioned before) tear in pie- 
ces the B-aſts they prey upon. | 

12 He hath bent his bow, and * ſet me as a mark 
for the arrow r. 

r He bath prepared himſe'f for aQts of vindicative Juſtice, and he 
bath made me tie obje& of ir. | : ; 

:2 He hath cauſedthe + arrowsof his quiver to enter 
into my reins s. 


The Lamentations of FEREMIAN.. 


| direted to Ged, which: ſhewed that though they were mightily 
perplexed, yet they were rot in utter deſpair ; and to this FT a. 
tollowing Verſes ſeems to ir.cline. | 
20 My foul hath chews ſtill in remembrance : andis . 
7 humbled within me #2. 75 5 SS, . { Heb, 
s That is, I'cannor forget them, and the thoughts of them ſink boved, J 
my ſpirits. - | | $7 Sy + E. 
21 This I Þ recal to my mind, therefore have ] T Hib- 
hope b. | .; noo 
b This, not what was already ſaid; that made them deſpair, and "_e bell 
their Souls to bow down; bur this, that which followorth; con- 77 
cerning the Nature of God, and other good Providences.  Iſeeno- 
thing 1n the circumſtances of my condition to Comfort me, but I 
ſee ſomething in Gods Nature, and in'ſome other Diſpenſations of 
his Providence, which gives me ground to hope for better things 
than an utter Ruine and Deſtru&ion. | 3 
22 C* [js of the LORDS mercies that we are-not *5;y- 
R F Mal. 
conſumed, becauſe his compaſſions fail not c. 
c Mercy is nothing elſe but Love flowing freely from any, to 
Perſons in miſery, and differs from Compaſſion only in the freeneſs 
of the emanation. It is not becauſe God had not power enough ut- 


s Thar is, he hath made his Judgments to pierce the moſt inward 
parts of the Nation ; or he hath mortally wounded me. In the Heb. 
it is the daughters of his quiver, a way of ſpeaking very uſual in He- 
brew, to expreſs any thing thar comes from another as the effe& 
either of a natural or moral cauſe, fo Sparks arecalled the Sons of the 
quick coal, Job 5-+7« and Corn the Sons of rho thor; &c. ; 

14 I was * a deriſion to all my people, and * their 
ſong all the day z. 

£ Though ſome thinkthe Prophet ſpeaks this of himſelf, yet con- 
ſidering he hath all along ſpoken in the name of the People, it is not 
probable, which makes a difficulty, how the pecple could be ade- 
riſiontv themſelves ? It ſeemerh therefore ill Tranſlated, and that 
it ſhould have been, 7 was a deriſion to all people, leaving out my, that 
is to all Foreigners, to whom the Jews were ade a derifion and 
an hifling, there only wants the Jaft Letter in \DY, and it is well, 


obſerved by the learned Author of the Engliſh Amnorations, that the 
like defeCt 1s to be found asto the ſame word, 2 Sam. 22. 24- Com» 
pared with Pſal. 18. 43.-ſothat ? is not a Pronoun affix (upon which 
ſuppoſal our Tranſlators go ) but one of the Letters that form the 
plural number, the other being left out, and DY put for TAN). 


15 He hath filled me with Þ bitterneſs, he hathmade 
me drunken with wormwood #«: 

« That is, he hath filled me with ſevereand bitter diſpenſations; 
Wormwood 1s a bitter Herb, bur it is alſo a wholeſome Herbz and 
therefore ſome think that the Hebrew word ſhould rather be Tranſla- 
ted Henbane, and that it ſignifies ſome Herb whoſe juice is intoxi- 
cating and poiſonous. | ' 

16 He hath alſo broken my teeth with gravel-ſtones, 
he hath || covered me with aſhes w, 

w Theſe are but more metaphorical expreſſions ſignifying the 
unpleaſant difficult condition into which God had brought this pec- 
ple. They were like Men that lived upon gritty bread, more fit to 
break their teeth than to nouriſh them; they were in the ſtate of 
Mourners, and no ordinary Mourners, who were wont to throw 
aſhes on their heads, they were all over-covered with aſhes. ; 

i7 And thou haſt removed my ſoul far off from 
peace x: I forgac + proſperity y. ; 

x Peace here ſignifieth a rather than a freedom from war. 
Though during the Siege they. were far from Peace in aſtri& ſenſe, 
yet in their Captivity they had that peace, bur both their minds 
were far off from quiet, and their Perſons from Proſperity ; the Pro- 
pher owneth God as the cauſe of this, y They had in Canaan lived 
proſperouſly, but now they thought of it no more, norunderſtood 
what ſuch a thing meant. 


18 AndI faid, My ſtrength and my hope is peri- 
ſhed from the LORD. 

19 || Remembring mine afflition and my miſery, 
the wormwood and the gail z« 

Z If according to our Tranſlation we read Remembring, or while 1 
remember theſe rwo Verſes contain bur one Sentence; in the former 
part the? Prophet in the Name of this People expreſſeth their def. 
pairing Conditicn ; in the latter he gives the reaſon of ir, vi2. The 
peoples poring upon their great and heavy Afiictions, which he 
compares to wormwood and gall, two things exceſſively bitter, and 
ofren made uſe of to ſignifie great affliction, Pſal. 69. 21. Fer. 8. 14. 
and 9g. 15- and 23. 15. Rev. 8. t1. Butir may as well be rezd impe. 
ratively, Remember mine affliction, (o the firſt of theſe two Verlesex- 
preſleth the dejetion of the peoples Minds in their Captivity, cau- 
ſed though their pronnefs to deſpair of any better condition that 
their angry God wou!d bring them into. The 19h Vesleis a prayer 


TT I 


the great fairhfulneſs of God in fulfilling his many promiſes made 


19neceſſary to waiting, for all turbulency and impatience of Spirit 


terly to have conſumed us, nor becauſe we had not guilt encugh 
to have provoked his Juſtice to have put an end to our Lives, as well - 
as to the Lives of many Thouſands of our Countreymen, bur ir is 
meerly from the Lords free Love and Pity to us in cur Miſeries. If - 
God had nor a Blefling in ſtore for us, how is ir that weare Cap- 
tives, and not ſlain as many others were duringthe Siege ? 


23 They are new every morning, great js chy faith- 
fulneſs d. EY | 
d Theſe Compaſſions of God are renewed day by day, to declare 


for Mercy to his people. 


24 The LORD 3s my * portion, faith my ſoul, there *Pfal. 
fore will I hope in him e-. 5. & 73s 
e God is the portion of his people, and they have choſen him as 29-& 1 

their portion, he hath declared himſelf to them as ſuch, and they 57*  :* 
have accepted him as ſuch. This gives them grovnd both for pati- Jer. 10» 
ence under his Providences, and alſo ofexp<&ation of good frem 10» 


him in their loweſt and meaneſt ſtate. | 
25 The LORD js good to them that waitfor him, 
to the ſoul that ſeeketh him f. 
f Good is a term of a very comprehenſive notion. The nature 
of it lieth in a ſuteableneſs to the thing or perſon to whom it re- 
Jateth, So it ſignifieth profit and pleaſantneſs. There is in God an 
eſſential goodneſs, which is his abſolute perfeQion ; but this Texe 
ſpeaketh of a communicative goodneſs, which floweth from him to 
his Creatures, and is ſeen in his ſuting their various neceſſities and 
defires with ſatisfa&ory Diſpenſations of Previdence. Though God 
be in one degree or other good to all, ye: he is more elpecially 
good to the true Worſhippers of him ; yet poſſibly nor in their ſea- 
ſons or times when they expe& or would have God ſhew himſelf 
ſo tothem, in this or that way, but always to thoſe who wait for 
him, patiently induring Trials and Afﬀflitions until God pleaſe to 
ſend them deliverance. 
26 [It 5s good that a-»9an ſhould both hope, and quiet- 

ly wait for the ſalvation of the LORD g. 

£ Geod here either ſignifies hozeFum, what becomes Men, and is 
their Duty ; or Utile, what is profitable, and will rurn to good ac- 
count to them. Hoping and waiting differ but as the motherand deugh- 
ter. Hope being the Mother of Patience and Waiting, or as the 
Habit and 489. Hoping and Waiting being much the ſame, flow- 
ing froma gracious power and habit given theSoul to wait. Luiemeſs 


under ſad Providences is oppoſed to waiting. The Salvation of the 
Lord refers to the outward Man, in preſerving or delivering us 
fromdangers. Or tothe Soul and inward Man, in preſerving us 
from, anddelivering our Souls out of dangers they fear, or evils 
they are preſſed with. Now fora Man in the midſt of all evils to 
hope in God, and without turbulence or diſorder in himſelf, to, 
wait for a preſervation from, or adelivery cut ofany evils, is what 
becometh a Man ( a Child of God eſpecially ) and will turn to a 
good account to them. 

27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his 
youth 5. | 


h Good here muſt be expounded in the ſame ſenſe as in the fore- 
going Verſe. Iris not pleaſant, bur it is profitable, icis honoura- 
ble, what becomes us, and is eur Duty, quiety and patiently to 
bear what afflition God will pleaſe to lay upon us, to reſtrain our 
wild and wanton Spirits when they are moſt prone to be too brisk 
and laſcivious. Some by Toke underſtand the Law of God, called 
a yoke ( becauſe indeed 1t is ſo tofleſh and blood ) Math. 11. 29: It 
is not ſo eafie to bend a Neck ſtiffened with Age, or change an Hearr 
made hard by Cuſtom. $ lomn bids us to train up one in their 
Youth in the way we would have them ro walk ; and whether God 
will tame us when young, by his Word »r by his Rod, it isof ad« 
vantage to a Man; Ir is alſo laudable, and what becomes a Man, 
early to bear the yoke of Gods Law, or to bear afflitive Providences, 
to tave his Heart betimes humbled go the Will and fear of God. 

28 He ſitteth alone and keepeth ſilence, becauſe he 
hath born ## upon him 4, X 

h Our Ergliſh Annotations ſupplying Thit, makes the Connexion 
clear, Ir is good for a Man that he {it alone, Jer, 15. 17. not doing 
what he doth to be ſeen. of Men, bur ſitting alone, and when he. 
is alone, ſuppreſſingthe mutinies of his Spirit, and keeping his Soul 
in ſubjeQion to God, becauſe God hath humbled him by his Rod, 
humbling himſe)fro his Will. 

29 He putteth his mouth in the duſt, if fo be there 
may be hope 4 : 

# If That may be ſupplyed, or when { as Pagnine Trar ſlateth ?J, 
ver. 28. the connexion of theſe words with the former, is very fair 


and eafie, for then thoſe words, wer. 27, it is good that muſt be re- 
peated in the beginning of wer. 28. and 29+ however borh this and 
ch er Verſes letus know the Duty of Perſons under AM &icns 
in © to their obtaining Mercy at the Hind of God, and 

6 R admirably 


Y vx £ 

a 

2.5K 
"Rs 

<5 308 

o q « 
®. 
bw 

<4 
"Y 


; [2 e, and quietly wait for God's Salvation, 
| -4Fy + aqrer Bis er a, becauſe he bath laid it upon 
them. They ſit alone ana keep ſilence, Ver. 28. and here they put rheir 
mouths in the duft, that is, bumble themſelves to the feet of Gr d, 
and to the Will of God ; not being too confident of deliverances uw 
this Life, but if peradventure #here may be hope. _ GN | 

3 He giveth his cheek to him that ſmiceth him &: 


he is filled full with reproach. | 

IF þ According ro our Saviour's Precept, at. 5+ 39: he doth not 

by take any , private Revenge, he 1s reproached and reviled, bur 

when he is ſo he revileth nos again, 1 Pets 2. 23+ bes filled with re- 
proach from others,but his mouth is not filled with the reproaching 
f others. ; 

1 For the LORD will not caſt off for ever ». 

* This is that which beareth up his ſpirits, that though the Lord 
may for a time eſtrange himſelf from his people, yet he will not 
always forſake them. ? : 

nd Bur though he cauſe grief, yet will he have 


ccmpaſlion according to the multitude of his mer: 
1CS 7, | 

yet Butthovgh as 2 prudent Parent he may ſee reaſon to cauſe grief 

in, and to aMi& his own people, yet as a fender good Father, rhac 

itiech his Children in Mitery he will have compaſſion vpon them, 

| having not only Mercies, but a multitude or abundance ot Mercies. 

For * he doth not afflit t willingly, nor grieve 


the children of men 0. | 
 -8 In the Hzbrew it is ke doth not afflidt from his heart, that is with 


:5 OWN Meer motion without a cauſe given him fiom the 
Aa 2Mifted. Hence Judgment is called Gods frange work ; 
ſhewing Mercy is his proper natural Work which flowerh from 
bimſelf without any cauſe in the Creature. Judgment is his ſtrange 
work ro which he never proceederh but when provoked, and as it 
were forced from the Creature, whence it folioweth, that he can- 
not delight in ir- ; 
'24 To cruſh under his feet all the priſoners of the 


earth 
420 To turn away the right of a man before the face 


. . of |] che-moſt High 9. wp 
[| Or, ye By - To ſubvert a man in his cauſe, the LORD [|] ap- 


| Or, ſecth proveth not re | ET Os 
"= ade p Here are three things mentioned, of all whichir is ſaid, that God 
approveth them not, neither all, nor any of them, The firſt 15 to 
eruſb the priſoners of the earth ; he hath power to cuſh all Men n the 
World, they arc his priſoners, and cannot fly from him. but he 
delighteth nor in it: Some think ir ſpoken with ſpecial reference to 
the Jews, who now were all Captives: 9 A ſecond thirg which 15 
ſaid God approveth nor, is turning away the 1ight of a man before the 
face of the moſt High: Some by the moſt High underftand Ge, and 
ES make rhe ſenſc to be in the ſight of God, Others think that a Superi- 
our Magiſtrate is underſtood, who Ec. 5. 8. is called zhe Higheſt ; 
5nd that ſeemeth the moſt probable ſ.nſe. The rurning away the 
right of a Man before rhem, ſignifieth the uſe of any Arts to de- 
 prive them of their juſt ap, by miſiepreſenting their Cauſe, aſper- 
ſing their Perſons, &c- »r The third thing mentioned is the ſubvert- 
ing 4 man in his cauſe, either by Art, and Rherorick, making it ro 
appear bad when it is not ſo, or by meer Will and Power overs 

0.4 it contrary to Right and Juſtice | 

TWho is he * char faich, and it cometh to paſs, 


hen the LORD commandeth ## not 5, _ 

5 The ſenſe of theſe words is doubted by notie. That nothing co- 
merh to paſs in the World, bur by the diſpoſal of Divine Provi- 
dence, either cffeQing it by an immediate influence, or permitting 
J it: But to what end rhefe words are brought in this place, is not ſo 
generally agreed. Some think they are brought in to check the Blaſ- 
: - phemy of | cs that ſpake of what had befailen the Jews as a thing 
_ which God had no hand in- Others think they are brought in as ex- 
pounding that term: that went befrre, The Lord ſeeth noe. Thovgh 

do not approve of ſinful aftions, nor inclhne any Mars Heart 

or will to them, yet hath an hand in. the perm:ſſion of the 
meſt crue) ard unjuſt ations, which he couideaſily hinder. ] ſhou}d 
rather incline to interpret them as an Argument brought by the 
Prophet in the Name of the people of G: d, arguing themſelves in- 
to a quiet ſubmiſſion to the affliftive Providences under which the 
Jaboured from the conſideration of the Superior hand of God in 
them, as Chriſt told Pilate, Thou couldſt nor Eave had any power 
againſt me, if it had nor been given thee from above : Shall there be 
evil in a City, and the Lord hath not done it, Amos 3+ 6. 
Þ 38 Our of the mouth of the moſt High proceedeth 
© * Iſ.g5,q, 296 * evil and good 8? 
F**** 7 Inthe Heb. the form of theſe words is interrogatory, as much 
-as if he ſhould ſay, Dorth not evil come out ef God's Mouth from 
"his Dire&ion and Command, and from his Providence, as well as 
.g2od ? He ſpeaks of evilsof puniſhment, judicial aftliftive Diſpen- 

ations ; ſv it agrezth with Jeb 2. 10. Ames 3. 6. Ir is no reproach 
unto God to make him the Author of his own puniſhment, tho' we 
call them evil. . 


39 * Wherefore doth a living man |] complain « ? a 


man for the puniſhmene of, his ſins w ? 
= # This Verſe admits of various Senſes, cauſed from the various 
faterptetation of the' Hebrew word, which we Tranſlate Complain, 
which alſo ſignifies ro mourn or grieve, ſo ſome render it ; why 
'doth- aliving Man grieve or vex himſelf? Bur the word is noted 
moſt generally ro ſignifie complaining or murmuring- w The word 
alſo which we Tranſlate Sin, fomerimes ſignifieth that oblique AR 
which we call Sin ; and thoſe who Interpret the former word grieve 
or vex, thus underſtand the word Tranſlated Sin, ſupplying ſome 
ſuch words as theſe. Let him mourn for his Sin ? Why doth he mourn 
for h's Afﬀfiitions and Plagues. let him rather ſpend his Tears vpon 
his Sins. Bur the word alſo ſtgnifies .the guile of ſs or obligation 
to Death, which it layeth Men under, (i: lieth at the door, Gen+ 4. 
_ 7, ſo alſo Gen. 20. 9. andalſo any puniſhment brought upon Men for 


The Lamentations of FE REMI AH. 


winbly give us the CharaQer of Perſors under affliftions pre- | 


pleaſure and delight ; or { which ſeemerh the beſt ſenſe to me ) not 


| 


lin Gn,4.13 where we Tranſlate it puniſkment. This ſenſi 
Tranſlators follow, The Piophet then in the Perſon of the Noe, 
checks himſelfin his Complaints for their puniſhments from the con. 
fideration, that nothing had befallen them, but what was the juſt 
reward # x ſins. 

40 Let us ſearch and try our ways, and turn again 
to the LORD x. y 

x Seing God doth not grieve us willingly, nor delight t 
us though we be his Pritoners, and ſeing the Hand of God Se 
theſe things upon us, and thar juſtly to recompence our I::iquities 
into our Befoms, inſtead of mourning and frerring againſt Gcd 
wh:ch is nor reaſonable, nor will be of any profitto us, Let us ex. 
amine our Thoughts, Words and Aﬀions and conſider whar they 
have been, and reform, and turn again to the Loid, by Apoftatiz= 
ing from whom we have brought theſe evils vpon vs. 
| 4+ Ler uslifr up our heart with eur hands unto God 
in the heavens y - 

7 Let us apply our ſelves unto God by Prayer, often expreſſed un- 
der this Notion in Scripture from that geſture orcinaily uſed in 
Prayer: andlet usnor doit in Hypocriſie, tur joyning our H®, ts 
with our H,nds, praying ſeriouſly and f-rvently. 

42 We have tranſgreiſed and have rebelled, thou 
haſt not pardoned z. | : 
 ® The Prcphetdoth not diQate words, but ſenſe to them - teach. 
Ing them the matter of their prayer firſt by way of Confeſſion. Sin 
1s called 2 Tranfgrefſion, becauſe it is going afive from tte way of 
God's Precepts ; it is called Rebellion, becauſe it is an aCt contrary to 
that Allegiance and Duty which we owe unto God, and the Cove- 
nant we bave made Wirth him, By pardoning here, is meanr, the 
pm of the guiity perſ-ns from the tempora! puniſhment cue 
for ſin ( as it is often taken in Scripture ) toir ſ1gnifies,' thou haſt 
plagyed us according to the juſt deſert of our fins. . 

43 Thou haſt covered with anger a, and perſecuted 
us ; F thou haſt flain, thou haſt nor pitied 6. 

4 Either thou haſt covercd thy ſelf with anger, or covered thy 
own Face with anger, fo as not to iook vpen us to move thy pitv,or 
( which is more probably the ſenſe ) thou baſt covered, that js over 
whelmed us with thy Wrath. 6 Thou haſt purſued us to a faral 
Ruine, wichour ſhewing us any pity. 

44 Thou haſt covered thy ſelf with a cloud, that our 
prayer ſhould not paſs through c« 

c God had covered them with Wrath, overwhelming them with 
Afflitions ſo as they had no way to eſcape; and whereas in rhis 
d{treſs they had nothing elſe 10do, butonly to apply themſctlves to 
God, he had hid his Face from - h-m, 1o as they could get no come= 
fortable ſight of him, he was as one covered with a Cloud that could 
not be diſcerned through that op:cous Body. What is meant by this 
Clond, whether his fixed Reſolution ro puniſh them, or his freſh 
Remembrance of their ſins, or his juſt Will to be Revenged on 
them, ſeems roo curiouſly erquired. The Phraſe is a Mctaphor 
and ſignifies no more than that God would not hear their prayer in 
their diſtrets. 

45 Thou haſt made us as the * off-ſcouring and re- | 
fuſe in the midit of the people d. . * 1 Corz 
| a That is, thou baſt made us to all Nations extreamly contemp. + hog 

tible, ſo as they valueus no more than the Sweepings of their Huu- 
ſes, or the moſt vile refuſe, and cuntempt.ble things imaginable. 
46 * All our enemies have opened their mouths a- * Chap 


gainſt us e. 


F Chap. 


2+ 21, 


2+ 16. 
e Thatis, to mock, ſcoff, and Reproach vs. 
47 * Fear and a ſnare is come upon us, deſolation , 
and deſtruction f. . nay , 


f All manner of miſery was come upon them. They were ſciz2d g 
firſt with fears and teriours, going to eſcape theſe they fell into Ie 49-43 
Snare, or (asit is in thc Heb.) inro a pir, ont of which they could 
| Not get, they were waſted. made deſolate and deſtroyed. 


48 * Mine eye rurneth down with rivers of water, , R 
for the deftruction of the daughter of my people. x, %} - 

49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaſeth not, with 17. © 
out any intermiflion g. 

£ The Prophet was deeply affeRed vpon the proſpeR of this evit 


before it came, Jer, 9. I. and was now much more affe&ed when he 
ſaw the Judgment was come, he wept plentifully and conſtantly, 
as forcheir fins which had brought theſe Judgments upon them, ſo 
for rhe Judgments themſelves, as Indications of Gods Diſplealure 
and wrath againſt them for their Tranſgreſſions. 


5o Till the LORD look down, and behold from 
heaven 6. 


h That is, until the Lord ſhew me ſon e favcur. 
on Chap. 1+ ver. 9. 

51 Mine cye affefterh F mine heart, || becauſe of ; 1,4, 
all the daughters of my city &. my ſoul. 

k The Eye and rhe Ear, are thoſe Organs of the Body, by which || Or, more 
the Soul exerciſeth irs Senſes to bring in all Obje&s whether pleas than-all. 
fant or ſad to the underſtanding to judge of them, according to the 
judgment of which vpon them it 1s zfc&ed, with Joy or Sorrow, 

Delire or Averſation, &, A&nd theEye is the chicfeſt of theſe, be. 

cauſe its Evidence is more certain, and leſs ſubjc& to deceit. The 
Prophet, and moſt of the Jews were Eye-witnefles to the Evils which 

had befallen the Jews, and which at preſent were upon them, ſo as 

their Hearts were the moreafﬀefted. The word Tranſlated afe#, 

is by ſome noted to ſignifie to wafte and conſume, which are the ef 

fefts of adeep affefting the Heart with fad and miſerable ObjeQs. 

k Our Margent tells us, that it may be alſo read more than all the 
Daughters of my City ; according to which, the ſenſe is, that he was 

more affetted with the State of Jeruſalem, than the tendereft Wo- 

man that had lived in it; bur ir is as well, if not better in this 

place rendred cauſally; ſhewing the reaſon of his deep afflition, 

viz. all thoſe Miſeries he had {cen fall upon all the-Fewiſþ Nation, * Pſal. 
or vpon all the Inhabitants of Jeruſalem. 35. 19. & 


See the Notes 


52 Mine enemies chaſed me ſors like a bird, * with- pa 4. & 


our caule /. 9.3. & 
115+ 161, 


[ As 


| 
| 
i 


Chap. III. 


where, ſo mine Enemies to whom I gave no cauſe purſued me- 


52 They have cut off my life in the dungeon ; and | ofthis nature which we meet with as Propheſies, r1ongh tome of 


caſt a ſtone upon me mm, PD 
” Dungeon ſeemeth not to be here taken literally for the loweſt 


The Lamentations of F E R E M TI A BH. 


I As Boys beat a Bird from Buſh to Buſk, ſuffering it to reſt no q P/al. 69. 22,23, 24, & and 109. 6,7, 8,9, to, &c. Fer. 11+ 20, 


and naſtieſt place in Priſons, which probably wzs the portion but of 


a few of the Jews; but metaphorically for the loweſt and ſaddeſt 
condition of Miſery. Their Enemies had brought them into the 
deepeſt Miſeries of the cutting off of their Lives, and as Men uſe ro 
rol] great Stones upon the Months of Dens and Pits, where they 
have ſhut up Perſons to make them ſure from eſcaping our, ſo their 
Enemies had dealt with them, doing what Jay in them to makethetr 
Condition remedileſs and deſperate. 


*Pſal.69+ 54 * Waters flowed over mine head », the: * I ſaid, 

2. & 124+ ] am cut off 0. | 

- th Mi&ions often in Scripture are called Water, Iſa. 28. I7, 18. 
inf —5, : ar®® 55. 19. oTam utterly undone, there is no hope for me. 

prom 55 {C*Icalled upon thy Name, O LORD, out of 

* Pal. the low dungeon p. 

330. 2, p Thar is, out of my deepeſt afflition, as Jonah out of the belly 


of H:1, Jonah 2. 2. I cried unto God, and called upon him for mec- 


Cy. Soi re oY : 
56 Thou haſt heard my voice 9, hide not thine ear 
at my breathing, at my cry r. 

q 1 in former great Aff; tions applied my {lf unto thee, and thou 
didſt hear me. r Shew me now the ſame favour. . Our former 
expzrience of God's goodneſs to us in hearing our Prayers, ought 
to hold up our hands in Prayer, and beget a co:fidence in us, that 
we perſiſting in our Duty, ſhal find God the ſame God, yeſterday, 
this day, and forever. : LY | 

57. Thou dreweſt near in the day bat I called on 


thee s: thou fſaidſt, Fear not fr. | 
s There was atime when I was in diſtreſs, and called upon thee, 
and thou didſt draw near unto me. God is never far off from an 


 nafive ſenſe, for the Gold which adorned the Temple either in irg 


of us, as fo his «ſſential preſence; . nor is 1t poſſible thar he ſhould, ' 
For he filleth all piaces. Burt he is ſaid t6 be near us, or far off from | 
us, as he manzifelts, or doth not manifeſt his goodneſs to us by a&ts 
of gracious Providence; of that drawing near the Text ſpeaketh: 
God being infinite in goodneſs and mercy, is ſpoken of as abſent 
from thoſe Perſons and places, where he is not ſhewing mercy, and 
preſent only there where he ſheweth forth his goodneſs, and to be 
drawing nigh to them to wh'»m he begineth to ſhew Mercy. # Thou 
didſt incourage me formerly upon my Prayer. 


58 O LORD, thou haſt pleaded the cauſes of my ſoul 


#, thou haſt redeemed my life >». JEL 

# Thou haſt been woar to take my part againſt my Enemies, not 
like a Lawyer by word of mouth, but attually and really pleading 
my Cauſe. w Thqu haſt ſaved me from many a danger which louked 
fataily upon me. RE RR 

59 OLORD, thou haſt ſeen my wrong x, judge 
thou my cauſe y. rx ; 

x Thou haſt a perfe&t knowledge of Mens perverſe; and unrigli- 
t-ous dealings with me at this time. y Do thou judge betwixr me 
and mine Enemies, and deal with them according to what ſhal ap- 
pear juſt ro thee. | | : 

60 Thou haſt ſeen all their vengeance z, «ndall their 
imaginations againft me a. . 

z Thou haſt been a witneſs to all their fury and rage. # And al} 
their ma'icious and bloody contrivances againſt me. | 

64 Thou haſt heard their reproach, © LORD? and 
all their imaginations againſt me 56. - ; 

þ Whatever knowledge Men get of things done from their Eye or 
Earg thou baſt from thy omniſciency, thou knoweſt not only their 
malicious aCtions, but words ad thoughts. ; 

62 The lips of thoſe that roſe up againſt me and their 


device againit me all the day c. | 
c That is, thou haſt obſerved and not-d the motions, or produfts 
of my Encies lips, and their ſecret devices, befure they came out 
of their lips. 7 0 LES. 
$ 63 Behold their ſitting down, and riſing up, * I am 
> Ver. 14: their muſick 4. ED 
d Thar is at all times when they ſit down, and riſe vpT am their 
ſong» Though probably the words have a ſpecial reference to their 
ſitting down at Feaſts, and at their merry meetings, I am all the 
ſabje& of theic diicourſe, they ſpend their time in mocking and fcof- 
fing at us, and at. Jeruſalem ; we are they that make them ſport. _. 
*Prag.4." 64 J* Render unto them a recompenſe, O ORD, 
i according to the work of their hands e. 

e Theſe three laſt verſes are all but the ſame general Petition, 
though expreſſed in various Phraſes, the Prophet tad prayed, werſe 
59. that God would judge his peoples cauſe, here he praycth that 
he would alſo judge his Enemies, he only defireth juſtice againſt 
them, a recompence of the work of their hands. | 

65 Give chem || ſorrow of heart f, chy curſe unto 


them. Ss | | | 

f The word tranſlated ſorrow of heart is found no where elſe ih 
Holy Writ, which makes a certain particular explication of ir to be 
difficule, and hath given Interpreters a ſtrange liberty in tranſlating 


f] Or, 4b fin 


naty of 
heart. 


Chap. 
nd 15. 15. See alſo Chap. 1. 22. It is hard to interpret all p:ſſages 


them are ſo, and others may be both Propliclies and P ayers. 


. CS H A P., IV. ; , 

Zion bewaileth her Miſery : Confeſſeth her (ns, 1 6. Miſ ries of thi 
Chief ones: Women who killed and dr-ſſud their own Children, J—, 
The ſin of the falſe Propvets and Priefls * Their vain hope, . 1 3 192 
_ King taken Priſontr, 20+ Edom is threatned : And Zion comfort« 
ed, 21 22, þ- 

Ow is the gold become dim ! hw is the moſt fine 
gold changed 2! the ſtones of the ſanduary are 
poured out in the top of every 1treet 6. S ons 
4 Though ſortie take Gold here metaphorically as ſignifying the 
molt precious things, yet the mott and beſt Interpreters rake itin its 


cieling or in its veſſels,the houſe of th: Lord being burnt by Nebuz.ars 
adan, Jer. 52.13. the Gold in and about rhe Temple muſt needs be 
diſcoloured, How ! is here a Note of Admiration. b That is, are 
-— "44 down and ſcattered iti the head of every Sireer about the 
190 ; SI 
2 The precious fons of Zion c, comparable to fins 
gold, how are they efteemed as earthen pitchers, the 
work of the hands of the potter dd :  __ - 
c Either the Nobles arid Great Men, or the Prieſts, or the good. 
Men among the Jews d that for their intrinſick worth, and value 
may be compared to Gold, are lookt upon no berter than eartheri 
Vellcls, the workmanſhip of an . ordinary Potter. God carryin 
Jeremiah down to the Potters houſe, Jer. 18- 2. and ig. Is- 
taught them that they were no more in his hand, he now proverh ic 
by ais Providence, they were indeed made to, and as miſerably and 
itreparably broken in pieces. 2” 7 
3 Even the || ſea monſters draw out the breaſt, they 
give ſuck to their young ones: the daughter of my 
people is become cruel f, like the oftriches in the wilder= 


5 A Cx 
Ot; 6s 
PE i 


nels 6: | = —_ 
# The learned Author of our Engliſh Annotatiovs, well _—_ 
thac whatever Creature is here intended by the word Tranſl:t 
Sea hionfters, yet our Tranſlation js not proper, the Text ſpeaking 
of Creatures of God's making, Monſters, p:operly ſignifying ſuch 
as have ſomething beyond their natural bulk and propo-tion. y hat 
Creatures are ſignified by che Hebrew term, wherher Sea Calves, or 
Dragons, or Serpents, or Whales, is very hard to ſay, the Hebrew «ord 
ſignifying ſome Creatures, occurring ſo rarely as it is not eaſiy to 
derermine the Species, from the word uſed to expreſs it. .H= &ers 
tainly ſpeaks of {ume brute Beaſts, and thoſe tar are moſt ſavage, 
he ſaith there are none ſuch, but by a narura! inftin& feed and n..u- 
rith. their young ones. f But the Jewiſh Women were becorre crue 
to their Chi'dren, cither forced to appear ſo, having rhrough the 
Famine rio Milk eo give them, not any thing to Relieye them,or were 
indeed ſo, killing them to make Food for themſelyes, as Chop. 2 26, 
& L'ke Oftr.ches that lay their Eggs, and leave them in the Sand, arid 
are hardned againſt their young ones, (as Job 39. 14, 15, 16.) ſom 
think a kind of Owls are intended, which for want of Mcrat eat u 
their Young ones as the Jewiſh Women now did. See verſe 10. ./_ 
4 The tongue of che ſucking hild cleaveth to the 
roof of his mouth for thirſt : the young children ask 
bread, and no man breaketh it unto them b . _ 
hb As the fatneſs of the Mothers Milk makes it inſtead of Bread 
and Fleſh to the ſucking Child, ſo the Moiſture of ir makes ir to be. 
as Drink to allay irs heat, the Ch.1dren wanting its mojſture their 
Mouths were hot and dry; it was a time of Famine, the lictle 
Children underftanding not the caſe of the City; were importunate 
for ſomething to eaty bur ndne hid enotigh for bimfel] much leſg 
for others. See Chap. 2. 12, 13». + | oo 8 EO 
5 They that did feed delicately are deſolate in- the 
ſtreets: they that were brought op in fcarlet, embrace the 
dunghills 4. x © ind oo 
5 This Judgement reached not only to the common People,but ta 
Perſons of the higheſt Rank and Order, whoſe Miſery was now ſa 
much the greater, becauſe ſo contrary. to their former ſplendid ſtar 
and way of living» They were wont to fare deliciouſly; now they 
wanted Bread to eat, and were deſolate in the Streets: "They were 
wont to cat upon Scarlet Carpets, or to lodge wpon Secarler Beds, 
and Couches, now they ſearchrt for their Meat upon, or wete glad © 
lie upon Durnghills, _ : | - el 
6 For the || ptiniſhment of the iniquity of the daugh- | 05: #8. 
ter of my people, is greater than the puniſhment of the ®; © 
n of Sogom, that was * overthrown as in a moment; * Geatig. 
and no hands ſtayed oh her &, .  _. _— 
& The word Trafiſtaced Puniſhment, ſignifies alſo Iniquity ( as was - } 
ſaid in the Notes on Chap. 3. ver- 39. ) the ſins of the Jews are come 
pared to the fins of Seam, Iſs. 3.9. Excke 16. 46, 48; 49. Hence their ? 
Rulers are called Rulers of Sodom, 1/4. 1. 10. either their fins were ſpe ? | 
cifically the ſame, (as they were ) as to many fins, Ezek; 16, 459. or 
they were of an equal magnitude, -and provocative na'ure, P 
Prophet here. complains, That they were puniſhed like S»dem, Ames 
4.11, yea and their puniſhment was greater, becauſe more fingring, 


it, ſhield, ſorrow, and grief, obſlinacy of hardneſs of heart, perplexity, 


abj. tion or breaking of heart ; the beſt guides we have to dicett us in | 
| the ſenſe of it are, 71. The orher things joyned with it, Perfecution, Des | 


frufion, a recompence according to their works, ſo that ſome af- 
fli&tive evil of an heavy nature is certainly ſignifizd by it. 2. The 
Analegy .of Faith which reftraineth us from wiſhing or praying for 
ſpiritual or eternal evils againſt our worſt Enemies - it therefore 
probably ſignifies, ſuch perplexity, and breakings of mind as com- 
monly attend a ſtate of great affliction. : 

66 Perſecute them and deſtroy them in anger from 

* Pal. 8.3-under * the heavens of the LORD pg. | ; 

Z Bring them to a temporal Ruine and Deſtrution. How far 

ſuch Petitions are lawful we have before ſh:wed; in our Notes on 


and gradual, whereas Sodom was overthrown in a mqment, and. 
that by no humane hands that abode upon her, cauſing her x 
continued Torment, as there did upon the Jews. David faid, It 
is berter to fall into the immediate hand of God; than into the hands 
of Men» : | | : | 
7 Her Nazarites ] were purer than ſnow, they were 
whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than 
rubies, their poliſhing was of ſapphire y.. .  _ 
| By Nazarites in this place the moſt and beſt Ini ters do. 
not underſtand Perſons, who vere of the Religious. Order of 'Ns- 
zarites, the Laws of which Order are to be read, Numb, 6, 3 god 
ny whom we read mi 2. a I 2 for here is a Beduty defepibs 
T nde 


| 


; 4 a __— » _ 1 A, -avil  -; » "4 - v hd 4 by . 
« Pr «Rs ek i » heb WO 
SA. y #* S. * > y : : p L 


2». Kio I The Lamentations of F E 
EP a! eral Mitaplers ) which could never agree to. them ; » tur 
Se bes Robly and ing:nucully bred. The word Nezer 
; zligoifying a Crown, or Enſign of Honour, 2 : 
4a The Name Nazrice was given to Perſons ſplendid for thei: Bree 
ing, op game; Ine or Honour and Dignity, it is given to J9«p/ 
Gen. 49. 26. we 1 men 
| abun 3.17. Her Nazarites 1 
n Fa hoenh Es in reſpe& of Birth, Education, Eſtate, 
Miziftracy or the like, were diſtinguiſhed from rhe reſt of the Peo- | 
le m He exptefſerh their former ſplendid Eftate by the Meta: 
EV -phors'of Smw, ME, Rubies, and Sapphirese 
& rib. , $. Their, viſage- is + blacker than a coal » : they are, 


: darker 4 
; han black-"H5gne s* 
Pr. » They that in the proſperity of the City were fair, plump and 
*Tuddy, look now black for want of fit nouriſhment, and through 
'fofrow and grief. 0 
het Comratilcet, Garbs, and Habits, did not now know them. 
> And by reaſon of the F2mine, (for he ſpeaketh with relation to the 
$amine during the Siege ) they are almoſt ſtarved, their Skin is w1- 
*thered, and hard, and even ſtickerh to their Bones, | 

: g They that be ſlain with the ſword,are better than they 


that are {lain with hunger 9: for theſe T pine away, 
Fcicken through for want of the fruits of the field 7. 
© '9 During the Siege many were killed by the Enemies Sword : 
\, many more periſhed by Famine, *the Propher ſaith the condirion of 
* thoſe who periſhed by theSword was much better than the condition 
®of thoſe who periſhed by Famine, becauſe they had a quicker Death, 
and were ſooner diſparched and pur our of their pain, wherezs 
* they who periſhed by Hunger, dyed a miſerable lingring Death, 
Fr we Pad away, becauſe they wanted Corn and Herbs, the 
"Pruits + e Field, ro uphold their Souls in Life. 

&** The hands of the pitiful women have ſfodden 
their own: children, they were their meat in the de- 
! fraction of the daughter of my people /. 

L This was according to what God had threatned in caſe of diſos 
ence, Deut, 28. 57. and a thing which hath ofcen happened in 

— Sizpes, 2 Kings 6. 29. ſuch things did happen in the laſt deſtruQtion 
| wſalem, as We read in Joſephus, and though we read of no ſuch 


1 
he 


, 


ND c ih -bappening'iri the Siege of ir by Nebuchadnezzar, yet that there 
| + lee inſtances appears from this Text. 
* xx The 'LORD hath accompliſbed his fury, he 
be * 2 n 3 "A 4 


th poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a 
in Zion,and it hath devoured the foundations there- 
FT, Et _ 
+ An unvſual fire, which burns vp not only the roof, and ſuper- 
-firnQure bur the foundations, leavingno bottom for hopes of being 
_ » reſtored. - See Dew. 32: 22, | IE | 
1.1122 The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of 
_ ®*the world would not have believed, that the adverſary 
_ -”and the enemy ſhould bave enrred into the gates of Je- 
:ruſalem Hs ? 
- 4 Jeruſslem was fo naturally and arificially fortified, and fo favour- 
ed by God, and rakennorice of as a place which the Lord cared for, 
and. watced overs that it cou!d not have entred into the thoughts of 
- any of thoſe that were Enemies to ir,that they ſhould ever have been 
. able ro make themſelves Maſters of it. 1 8} 
13 © For the fins of her prophets, and the injquities 
, of her- prieſts, that have ſhed- the blood of the juſt in 
.the midit of her w. 


1J.) 7 
F 


_ 
4 X 
d, 
s, 
£ 
-. 


ers, Either incouraging the People to, the wickedneſles they com- 
"mirred, - or not reftraining them, and denouncing the Wrath of 
God againſt them. So though they were the corrupe Magiſtrats 
«that had ſhed. the innocent Blood, yet the Prieſts and Prophets be- 
5 - guilty of it, either encouraging the Magiſtrates co it, or 
g 1 up in their bloody courſes, or by burning the Chil- 

1 that were burnt in the Valley of Hinnom. The Eccleſiaſtical 
-werea great cauſe of the firſt & laſt DeſtruQtion of Feruſalem,and 
EY are: AR-oher places that come to ruine through their 


1 - 


- 


.f [ ty,or incouraging others in their wicked courſes, 

"which both ſheweth us' how great a Bleſſing to a People, a goodly, 
veonſcientious Miniſtry is: And how great a Plague and Curſe a Mi- 
oy, 45 which is otherwiſe. Sec Fer. Fo 31. and LED 2Is 

"— F _ © 14" They have wandred' 2s blind wer in the ſtreets, 

I D_ they have pollutted rhemſelves with blood,|] ſo that men 

 & 7hor r4gy 1, could nor rouch their garments x: 


ut. x - A variety of Interpreters hath made this Text much more dif- 
A $owehs./ © , ficulr than it 3s. Certainly nothing can appear more reaſonablethan 
—  — .. @.. "ro interpret the Pronoun in the front of the Verſe relatively, and to 
ferch the antecedent from the former Verſe. They, that is, the Pro- 
phers and the Prieſts wandred up and down the Streets like blind Men, 
eing ſpiritually blind, polluting themſelves with blood, either the. 
of the Children which they flew, or the ju? Men mentioned, 
the laughter of whom they either encouraged, or at leaſt 
id iſcourage ; ſo as one could not touch a Propher or Prieſt, 
"bur he muſt be legally polluted, and there were ſo many of them, 
"that Men could nor walk i the Streets but they muſt touch ſome of 
"chem, Some thinking the Diſcourſe of the Prieſts done with, in- 
*terpret They of the blind Men in the City who could not walk up 
be gr on; the Streets without touching the Bodies of ſome thar 
-were ſlain. Others interpret the words of the common People: 
Who during the Siegez could no more avoid touching Bodies ſlain 
/and fo polluting themſelves with blood, than blind men could, ſo 
as they abhorred to! touch their own Garments. The firſt ſenſe 
emeth ro me moſt natural and eaſe. 
15 They cried untothem, Depart ye ||, ;t 3s unclean, 
depart, depart,” touch not when they tled away and 
wandred y: they ſaid amongſt che heathen, They ſhal 


'no-more ſojourn there, Py 


» WU wa 
- = 


-R BE 


makes them as much divided in the ſenſe of this 
> Sam. 1. 10. 2 Kings 11. | Verſe. Either the Jews that made Conſcience of keeping the Law a« 
d- | gainſt touching dead Bodies,cried to the other Fews to lcave the City as 


it ſeparate from his Brethren, Deut- 33. 16. could not ſtay in it without polluting themſylves. | 
ran{late 1 ſep n ou ol lignifieth her ſeparated | called to them to that purpoles Or their Enemies ſpake in that 
places of | Language to them. z For their Enemies had reſolved they ſhould 


fot known in the ſtreets 0: their skin cleaverh to their | 
6 it is withered, it is become hke a ſtick p. | 


*. 0 aA), rant re ag thy EOS woe bs a» 8 


2 EMIA RH. Chap, ty. 
y The various application of the Proncun, 7h y by interpreters | 
as of th- tormer 


/cpb, | themſelves did, rhe City being now ſo full of dead Bodies that they 


Or the Prieits 


not ſtay in Jeruſalem. 

16 The || anger of the LORD hzth divided them, [| Or, face, 
he will no more regard them a: they reſpe&ted not the 
perſons of the prieſts,they favoured not the elders 5; 

a Theſe words ſeem to be the Language of their Enemi*«s rri- 
umphing over them, as diſcerning that their God was pruvoked := 
gainit them, and would have no more regard or xefpett unto them : 
and that b they had miſuſed his Prophets which agreerh with 2 


Inſomuch that thoſe who before knew them by ; Chrox. 36. 16. But others rather think thele latter words ( if nor the 


former alſo) are the Prophets words expreſſive of the cauſe of th: ir 
miſeries, viz. The Lords anger who had divided them, ec. und 
the effett of it. Their Enemies having no regard to the moſt grave 
and venerable Perions amonglt them. 

17 As for us, * our eyes as yet failed ſor our vain , 
help : in our watching, we have wathed for a nation 5 
tbat could not ſave vs c. Ezck. 297 

c That is, in expeQation of the Egyptians, whom they waited for 16 
fo raiſe the S'ege, it was a long time before they came, and when 
they did comethey could do them no ſervice at all, Jer. 37. 5, 7,8. 

18 * They hunt our ſteps that we cannor go in our 


IA. 30; 


- --w Nor for their ſins alone who were the fa!ſe Prophets, and Baa! s' 
-Priefte,but for their {ins in an eminent degree,they were theRinglead- 


ſtreets : our end is near, our days are fulfilled, for our : 2 Kings 
end is come d. Eo aa 
| a The Caalaeans imployed in the ſiege are ſo cloſe upon us, that 

we cannot ſtir a foot about our bulinetles,nor look out at our Doors, 

nor walk ſafely in the Streets; we are ruined, there is an end of our 

_ ſtate; our period is come, and the time of our proſperity is e- 

apieds 

I9 Ourperſecutors are * ſwifter than the eagles of the * neue; 
heaven, they purſued us upon the mountains, they laid 28. 49- 
wait for us in the wilderneſs e. 

e Our Enemies who purſued us to deſtroy ns were very ſwifr in 
their purſuit of us, ( «s ſwift as an Eagle, was a proverbial Expreſſion ) 
we could no where be ſafe, if we ſought retuge in the Mountains 
they followed us thither, if we fled from them into the Wildernels, 
they laid wait for us there. 

20 The breath of our noſtrils, the anointed of the 
LORD * was taken in their pits f, of whom we *] ' 

- . ; er.52.8. 
_ Under his ſhadow we ſhal live amongtt the hea- 
tnEnN F. 

- Tha he calls ſome Prince here the breath of their noſtrils, that 
iS their Life, Gen, 2.7, is, out of doubt, though ſome of the Jews 
would have it underſtoofi of Fofah, yer who ſo conſidereth that he 
was not taken but ſlain, and that not by the Chaleans but by the 
Egyptians 23 years before the City was taken, will ſee reaſon to cons 
clude that he mezneth Zexekiah, who though a bad man yet was a 
King, and of Davia's line, and afforded ſome proteCtion to the Jews. 

We promiſed our ſelves that though th-Land of Judah was encom- 
patled with Pagan Nations, yet through Zedekiah's valour and good 
conduCt in Government we ſhould live comfortably, he being a co- 
vering and refrefhing to us, but ſaith the Prophet, he alſo is fallen 
into Enemies hands, 

21 Rejoyce and be plad, O daughter of Edom, that 
dwelleſt in the land of Uz 5, * the cup allo ſhal paſs *Jer: 25: 
through unto thee 3 : thou ſhalt be drunken and fhalt 15,16, 21/ 
make thy ſelf naked &, 

h The Edemites were deſcended from Eſau the elder Brother of 

Jacob, and dwelled in a part of Arabia, that obtained the*Name o© 
Uz, probably from Ut the Son of Diſhan, who deſcended from Seir, 
Gen, 36. 20, 28+ they out of their old hatred to the Jews rejoyced at 
their ruine, as we learn from the Prophecy of Obadiah, who upon 
this account was ſent to Propheſic againſt them, the Prophet here 
tronically ſaith, Rejoyce in the ſame ſente as Eccleſ, 11, 9g. Selomon bids 
the young Man rejoyce, but their joy ſhould be bur for alittle time. 
# For God was dealing out the Cup of his Fury te more than the 
Jewiſh Nation, and amongſt others ro the' Edomtes., k And they 
ſhould be filled, and intoxicated with it, and make themſelves naked as 
drunken Men ſometimes do in their Debavches. 

22 C*|| The puniſhment of thine iniquity is accom- 
pliſhed, O daughter of Zion &, he will no more [| carry*16.40.2] 
thee into captivity /: he will viſit thine iniquity, O || Or, :hins 
daughter of Edom, he will diſcover thy ſins g. 7 gt | 

k O Judes thy puniſhment is paſt, but the puniſhment of Zdom is , 0's —_— 
yet to' come. ' 'The Jews were to abide many years in Captivity, but fie H1a,-9agy 
they were now ſuffering their Jaſt puniſhment from the Chaldeans, 7 ſos, 
they were only for ſome Years tocontinue in that ſtate of Captives. 

I Aﬀer thy term of Captivity ſhal be expired, thou ſkalt noc tor thy 
old fins ſuffer any more puniſhment ; not that their preſent Captivi« 
ty ſhould be a!l their puniſhment in caſe they went on in ſinful 
courſes, ( as they did in reje&ing Chriſt, and cauſing him to be 
Crucified ) for thoſe new wickedneſles after many Years they were 
deſtroyed by the Romans, But the Prophet hints, that there thou!d 
at preſents or for their paſt ſins no more wrath be poured out upon 
them, ner would God ever detain them in this Captivity. g Bur 
for the Edomites, their puniſhment was yet wholly ro come, God 
was yet beginning to puniſh them, and would do ir, diſcovering their 
ſms. As the pardon of ſin is in Scripture ſer out under the notion of 
covering it, Pſal. 32.1- ſo the puniſhment of fin may be expreſ« 
ſed by diſcovering it, Job 20. 27. but the learned Author of the En. 
gliſh Annotations, conceiveth the Hebrew may be better read, He wif 
diſcover thee for thy ſins, becauſe of the Particle by {et- before 74 ſin; 
( though ourTranſlation taketh no notice of it.) He will diſcover upon 
thy ſens, and ſo it anſwereth, Jer 49+ Io. ( as he conceiveth ) 7 have 
made Eſau bare, I have uncovered his ſecret places, and be ſball nos be able t0 


| hige himſelf. 


CHAP, Y. 


—_ ww cc oo 


as. we ww ns WMH bon 


” 
a : 
-  wermnoang 
-_ 


T - 


Chap. V. 
; C H A P, V. 

An humble prayer, preſenting to the Lord their grent Miſery, IS. 
Confeſſing $heir Sins, 16——18, Impliring D-l:erance, 19 22+ 
Emember, O LORD, whatis come upon us: con- 

| ſider and behold our reproach 4s. ES 
a It hath been befcre obſerved, thar it is very frequent 1 Scrip 
ture to expreſs thoſe afts which are reafoably confequent fo The 
exerciſe of our exterior or interior ſenſes, by rerms which ſignifie 
the exerciſe of thoſe ſenſes. That which the Prophet here prayeth 
for is God's freeing the Jews from thoſe Calamities which opprei- 
ſed them, this he prayerh for under the notion of God's remem- 
bring them, and beholding their reproach. 
2 Our inheritance is turned to 


toaliens b. 

b What our Fathers inherited as given them by thee, and we as 
Jeft ro us by them, is come into the hands of the Chaldeans. 

2 Weare Orphans and fatherleſs c, our mothers are 
as Widows &e 

c Weare all of us without a King ( whois the common Father of 
the Countrey ) we zre deprived of thy Fatherly care and proteCti- 
on, many young Children amongſt us are lefe without an earchly 
Parent. 4d Either our great Cities are Iike Widows wanting Magi- 
ſtrate. Or, cur Women that were Married are left Widows. 

4 We have drunken our water for money, our wood 
Þ+ is fold to us e. | 

e This ſeemerh to refer to the State of the Jews in Babylon, where 
it is probable their Adverfaries made them buy both Water and 
Wood, which in the Land of Canaan they had plentifully and with- 
out any further chargeto them, than ferching the one, and cutting 
down and bringing home the other. 

5 | Our necksare under perſecution, we labour and 


have no reſt f. 

f As the generality of Priſ:ners of War, are made Slaves and put 
to hard and inceſſant labour, fo in probability the moſt of the Jews 
were af firſt at leaſt. 

6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to 
the Aſlyrians, to be fatisfied with bread g. 

Z'The ten Tribes were all carried Captives into Yſhris, many of 
the Kingdom of Judah, as we have heard, fled inro Egypt aft-r the 
taking of Jeruſalem, Giving the hana may either ſigr1fie working 
with their hands, and labouring for them : Or, yield:ng up them- 
ſelves tortheir power, or lifting up the hands as ſupplicants rothem, 
or ſtriking hand making Covenants with them, or lending them 
their hands to heip them, and all to get any thing ro Ive upon. 

7 * Our fathers have ſinned and are not, and we have 


born their iniquities 4, 

h We muſt not urdcrſtand this in the ſame ſenſe as Ezek. 18. 2. 
where God r<:fle&erh upon then: for uſing a Proverb ro this ſenſe. 
' Tr is the Propher who here ſpeaketh, and in the Name of the godly 
F-2ws who would not excuſe themleives, 2s if they ſuffered meer]y 
for their Forefithers ſins. - But the Proptict cunfefT-th and bewail- 
eth thar God had puniſhed their Iniquities and the Iniquities of their 
Forefathers toge' hery and it was better wich their Forefathers who 
had ſinned, and were dead and gone, than with them vp:n whom 
the puniſhment of their iniquity did abide, and was like ſo to do a 
Jong time. | | 

8 Servants have ruled over us z: zhere is none that 
doth deliver «s out of their hands k 

; Either thoſe who ſometimes were our Servants, tributary to us, 
or the Poſterity of Cham, condemned of old to be Servants to our 
forefather Shem, Gen. 9 26. Or the Servants of th:ſe Maſters whom 
we ſerve in Babylon, k And none wall help us and give us more li- 
berty. 

9 We gat our bread with rhe peril of our lives, be- 


cauſe of the ſword of the wildernels /. 


ſtangers, our houſes 


T Heb. 
cometh for 
Price. 


+} Heb. or 
our necks 
Wwe are pere 


fecuted. 


1 The Enemies lay encamped in all rhe Plains, fo as they could 


ſtir out no way bur che Sword of rhe Chaldeans was upon them, and 
. what Vitals they gat they adventured their Lives for, during the 
| time of the Siege. : 

*Jobzo. 10 Our * skin was black like an oven, becauſe of 
30- Pia. the [| rerrible famine »s. 
no | 83. » The want of bread cauſed leanneſs, and paleneſs, and ill co- 
Or. 7er- lours in their Faces. 


part 11 They raviſhed the women in Zion, and the maids 


in the cities of Judah ». : | ; 
» Uſual Ourrzges of barbarous Souldiers. The Heb. is, They 

W:mbled, a modeſt rerm to expreſs thoſe aCtions by. 
*Iſa-47.6. _ 12 Princes are hanged up by their hand w; * the 


faces of elders were noc honoured: 


The Lamentations of FEREMI A H. 


OF” a= 5 . wy 
F os. or 
& 


Toh Chap.” 
w Moſt probably by the Enemies hands, though ſome wou!d 3 
have 1t by their hands intimating a more ſharp aid lingringdeath. 
Hanging was an ancient way in the Eaſtern Countries cf putting 
MalefaCtors te death, Gen. 40. 19. 

13 They took the young men to grind, and the chil- 
dren fell under the wood x, - | 

z Their baſe ſervile condition is exprefſ:d by the labour they 

were put to, which was either grinding in the Mill ( an o:dinary 
employment of Sl-ves in thoſe Countries ) or carrying Mill-ſtones; 
and the younger Children, 1n c2rrying great Burdens of Wood un- 
der which they fell, as being not able ro ſtand under the Burdens 
laid upon them. | 

14 The elders have ceaſed from the gate, the young 
men from their muſick y. 
y Ourgrave Men were wont to fit and execute Judgment in the 
Gates, but now there is no ſuch thing. Our young Men were wont 
to play on Muſick, and to have their merry Meetings, but they are 
allo ceaſed. _ | 
15 The joy of our heart is ceaſed, our dance is 
eturned into mourning &<. 
z Either our Rejoycing at our ſolemn Feftivals, and Dancings 
tiere, which were uſual as appeareth from miny Scriptures. Or, 
all ourJoy and Dancings as well at other times as in our Solemn 
Feſtivals. | - = 
16 f The crown is fallen from our head a: wo unto + Heb. the. 
us that we have ſinned b. crown of =! 
4. Or, the crown of our head is fallen, by which is not only to be 9% head 
underſtood the Ceflation of their Kingdom, tur all their Honours, ® fallen, + 
Splencor and Dignity, ( Crown being taken in a Meraphorical No- | 3 
tion) b We muſt thank our ſelves for all this, this wo is come : 
upon us becauſe of ours fins &: be 
17 For this our heart is faint, for * 
eyes are dim c. | " | 
c Fither for our ſins theſe Miſeries are befallen us : or for theſe 


Miſeries our Spirits fail us, and weare almoſt blinded with weep= 
iN 


theſe rhings our *Pl 6 7a. 


18 Becauſe of the mountain of Zion which is deſo- 
late, the foxes walk upon it d. 

d Foxes and other wild Beaſts, which fly from places inhabited 
for fear of M-n inhabiting, and are much in deſolate places The 
'Mountan cf Zion, where the Temple once ſtood, and people met 
to worſhip. God, was now a deſolate unfrequented place, ſo as wild 
B:aſts run up and down. there. | 

19 Thou, O LORD, * remaineſt for ever : thy 1:76 
throne from generation to generation e, -  .. anday-164 

e That is, Lord though for our fins thou ſuffcreſt theſe things and -o .. 
to be done unto us, and our Throne be through rhy righteous Pro- 12. 27 :nd } 
vidence thrown down, and thy Throne in thy SznQuary amongſt 145. 13. : 
us be thrown down ; yet thcu art ſtill the ſame God, thy power is Habe1.12. 
not diminiſhed, nor thy goodneſs abated. Thou ruleſt the Werld, 
and ſhalt Rule it for ever andever. : 


20 Wherefore doſt thou forget us for ever, and for- YA 
ſake us | ſo long time f ? + Heb. find 
f Wherefore doſt thou in the Diſpenſations of thy Providence, length of 
carry thy ſelf as it thou hadſt forgotten us, and forſaken us, andthar days. 
for a long times | | | | l 
21 * Turn thou us unto thee, O LORD, and we »p;,, «. © 
ſhall be turned g: renew our days as of old þ. 3,7,19% A 
g See the like expreſſion Jer. 31. 18. Turnttou us unto thee by ' 4 


* Pal 959; | 


| J 


' giving us Repentance, and then our condition will be altered, or 
receive us into thy favour, andrthen it ſhall be well wich us. . þ Res» 
ſtore us roour former Eſtate, that it may be with us as it hath for 

: merly been. 


22 || But thou haſt utterly rejected us ; thou art very jg, 6, 
wroth againſt us 3. | "Ss - wilt chews 
i Our Tranſlators have here ſo rendered the Particle 'I that the uitcrly re 
words ſcem to expreſs ſomediffidence in the Prepher of G.:ds M-r- j:8 Ss 
cy in Reftoring the people to their former ſtare, tome expicſſions 
of which nature we find falling from the miſt eminent Servants cf 
God in an hour of great Temptation : But where ſuch a ſenſe is not 
neceſſary; it is hard to put 1t upon a Texr. Some therefore. ex- 
vound DR 'D in this place by But if. Others tranſlate them, 4l- 
though thou haftly &c. Mr. Calvin prefereth the Trarſlation of them 
by Nif#, unleſs thou haſt utterly rejeHied us, and thinks that by tis Ex- 
preſhon the Prophet confirmeth himſe}f againſt Tempratiops cf dif 
fidence, becauſe it was impoſſible God ſhovId utterly caſt cf his peo« 
ple,” Rom. 11* 2, Others read it Interrogatively, Haft thu utterly res 
refed us? Which doth not ſuppoſe that the Prophet beheved' he had, 


| though his prefent Providence ſhewed him very angry with them. 


6 $ 


A TABLE 


Of ſome Principal Matters contained 


" A Ctions : Why no Adions of Wicked are pleaſing to GOD; 

3 Pal. 14. I, - 

F * « Adam, how could a Rib be taken out of him, but it was i- 

| - ther ſuperfluous or defe&tive 5 Gen. 2. 21. 

4. How he knew Eve was taken out of him ; Gen. 2. 23. 

if ' . Afiftions, # means of Happineſs; Job 5. 17. 6. 

1 Angels, why ſome called Seraphims ; Ila. 6, 2. k. p 

F 9} of Noah, how could the Creatures which came out of it 

© ger into Iſlands; Gen. 9. 17. 

BK Ark in Tabernacle,why call d the Teffimony ; Exod.2 5-16. 5. 

E Atheiſts, their Cavils anſwer'd; Gen, 3. 1. & 6. 15. & 
26. 31..5, Numbs 22, 28. 1 Sam. 13» 5. 2 Sam. 
IF. 7. 1 Kings 20. 30. 2 Kings 18. 2, 1 Chron. 


22. 14. 2 Chron. 22. 2. 


. © Barrenne(s, why a Reproach ; Gene 30-23. 
Eek. || Rirthright, Priviledges thereof ; Gen. 25+ 31; 
3 tt jÞ Blood, why forbidden to be eaten; Lev.3.17. 4. & 17, 11. 0. 
—_ [8 'Cain, whom did be fear ; Gen» 43 14. ; : 
my F- - That there were a Multitude f People in the Earth when 


t&- - be flew Abel; Gen. 3. 14. # 
—_ TI © Weak gint Conquered y degrees ; Joſh: 11. 18, 

 - s Friirfolnel; thereof proved; Exod. 3.8.7. 
Ceremonies, divers obſerv/d before Moſes ; Gen. 3s 35. 
' Chariots of Iron, what ; Joſh. 17. 1660, 
| - rf it's God*s uſual Method to take them intd Covenant 
© -opith their Parents ; Pal. 22. 30. g. 

._ * They ſuffer for their Parents Sims ; Ifa. 14. 21. x. 

IP } -Chriff, bow be « our Goel; Fob 19.25. I. 
ry 5 Concubine, what ; oo 22. * L 
s Or "AED on of Sin muſt be particular ; Lev. F. 7. x. 
| ” - =" pkHog = their Marriage be lawful ; Lev. 
| _ Ras” 


a $0.4. Þ 

"WY =p ,ancil ; h, Power of the Sanhedrim, or great Council of the 
_ Fews; Gen. 44- 20. be Col. 2, | 
| Cuſhites, who; 2 Chron. 21. I6. 

| David, whether he did well in recalling Abſalom ;. 2 Sams. 


If 22e 
Whether he did well in the Charge he gave Solomon con- 
rerning Shimei; 1 Kings 2.3. 4. 
| lb ' Dreams may be. either Praiſe-worthy or Blame-worthy ; 
= TRIES 3-5, 6 OO 
| "— How they differ from Viſions; Job 3.13. 
$$ \ Duty,the grace of God does not free us from it ; Deur. 30.10, 3. 
' Fat, why forbidden to be caten ; Lev. 3.17. k. 
* Firft-born, their Priviledges ; Gen. 25. 31. — 
 Foreknowledge of Ged, its abſolute Certainty in the moſt con- 
| tingent things ; 1 Kings 13.2. e. 
- An infallible Demonſtration thereof ; Iſa. 45. 13. k. 
| Fruitfulne(s of the Land of Canaan proved ; Exod.z. 8. r. 
alk”: a” whether League made with them was obliging ; 
_—: OM, 9. IF. | 
MES ' God, ”# Certanty of bis Foreknowledge ; 1 Kings 13. 2. e. 
=. Ia.q5.23. 4. 
==. : Why — do unjuſtly; Job 34- 13. 5. 8 40, 2. b. 
- _ How far forth be may leve wicked Men; Ila, 48. 14. xz. 
” _” Grate ele] diſcharges not from Duty; Deuts 30. To. z. 
E-. x Hebrew Text, its Purity aſſerted, notwithflanding ſome divers 
= - _»\Readings S Ge 7 oma 2. Oo "ES 
2.  Jael, whethe ing SUCTIA Was e; JUdM. 4.2Is 
z ET vr \: God's Poobibition of bis People ro Marry with "nn 


BG &. + Megiftrits "Yr, ed to Puniſh them; Job 31. 28. 8. 

A If Te hchah;” 'J he he ſacrificed his Daughter ; Judg. 1 I*39. 
e's F God in Man, wherein it conſiſts ; Gen. 1. 26. 2. 

4, ir Cavils anfwer*d ; Gen. 3. I. & 6. IF. & 

be 21. i. Numb. 22. 28. 1 Sam. 13. 5. 2 Sam. 15.7, 

Dgs 20; 30. 2 Kings 18. 2. 1 Chron 22s 14. 

2D te | 1. 22. 2. 

0 Sree Men arc juftly punifh'd for their wicked ſatentions; 

; LOS. 8 2. $1... 

2 or ogg I fr orng, what ; Joſh. 3.4. b, 


> IDS.--.4 \ 
Boe . . L 
=F%> I o < < 
-, » 4 a mY . . 
: o % _ - 
a p 
; - A - 
- xi = - by . 
F- £5 "3 . . 
- 22 Shan ; 
- o 6% 
756 . 
= » . 
% 
þ 43 
A 4 
y | 
i ' » 
F - 


in the Notes of the Firft Volume. 


Manſlayer, whether bis Cauſe was tried in City of Refuge, @ 
elſewhere Numb. 35. 12. 5. | 
Marriage, God's Prohibition of unequal Matches with 1dols- 
ters ; Gen. 24. 3. e. DN | 
Somme are void iplo facto; Ezra 10. 2 f. 
3 gut Adarriage of Couſin-germans be lawful ; Tevit 
- - .. IS, I4. fo : . 


Mzvifters, __ highly reſents Injuries done to them ; 1 Kings 
12. 4. &. | 
Moſes, how could he be confirmed in his preſent Calling and 
Work by @ thing future ; Ex0d. 3+ 12- 
Why he negledted to Circumciſe his Son Exod. 4. 24. 
Whether it was decent for bim to commend himſelf ; 
Numb. 12. 3. | 

Muſick, its Power on the Spirits and Aﬀe#ions, x San,1x6.16. 
Neighbour is any Man,tho a Stranger or Heathen, Pf. 1 5.3. & 
Noah* Ark, bow the Creatures that came out of it could get 
znto Iſlends ; Gen. 9g. 17. 
Offering ; 4, rg between Sin-offering and Treſpaſs-ffer= 
ng; Lev. 5. 6. 
Pardoning of Sin 5s an A& of Power ; Numb. I4. 17. R. 
Parents Children may ſuffer for their Sins ; Iſa. 14. 21. x. 
People, why puniſh'd for Sins of Rulers; 2 Chron, 21. 14+ 
Phyla@eries, what ; Exod. 13. g. 
Prayer : The ſame words may be repeated ſometimes ; EccleC. 
* 2, MM. 
Prieſts, how far forth their Sentence was valid; Lev.27.14.5, 
Prophets, what ; 1 Sam. 10. 5. m. 
Sons of Prophets, what ; 1 Sam- 10. 5. m. 
Prophecy ; Means to attain it 3 2 Kings 3.15. 
Providence, how far forth to be taken for a Rule of our Tudga 
ment ; 2 Sam. 14. 22: latter end of the Note. © 
Rites; divers Ceremonial Rites obſerved before Moles ; Gen. 


3T. 35. 
Rulers;why People are puniſh for their Sins; 2 Chron.2 I.I4. 
Sabbath, whether inflituted from the Beginning ; Gen. 2, e, 

Neh. 9g. 14. | 
What it's a Sign of ; Exod. 31. 12. h. 

T hree ſorts of Sabbaths ; Exod. 23. 12. » 
Sanhedrim, their great Power ; Gen« 49» 10, Col. 2; 
Sacrifices, wby ſo many ſorts of them; Lev. 1. ce 
Why of Oxen and Sheep ; Lev. 1. d. 
Saul, by God puniſh*d him ſo ſeverely, for that which ſeemed 
ſo ſmall a Fault ; 1 Sam. 12. 14; 
Why God delayed puniſhing his ſlaying the Gibeonites till 

after his Death.; 2 Sam. 21.1.4. 

Sentence of the Prieſts, how far valid ; Leve 27.14. s. 
Seraphim ; why ſome Angels ſo called; Ifa, 6, 2. b. | 
Serpent ; how it could ſpeak, and why Eve not frighted with 
the Diſcourſe ; Gen. 3. 1+ c. 
Shekel of SanFuary,why ſo called; Gen, 23.15. Ex. 30013. 0. 
Sickneſs, how Perſons are to be dealt withal orkactob 3-7. 0. 
Sin ; why God ptniſh*d the whole Soctety for the Sin of one ; 
Jolh. 7. I. Co 
Sin-off-ring ; Difference between that and Treſpaſs-offering ; 
EV. F. 6. 
Particular Confeſſion of Sin muſt be made ; Lev. 5« 7. r. 
Pardon of it an A# of Power ; Numbe 14. 17. z. 
SOlomon, whether he was ſaved; 1 Kings 11.43, @ 
Soetbſayers, what ; I{a: 2. 6s %. 
Tempt ; [everal Significations of the word; Gen. 22.1. b, 
Teraphim, what ; Gene 31. 19. 


| Thoughts ; unclean thoughts forbidden by Law as well as Gef- 


pet; Job 31.1. 4. 
Tithes, their ſeveral ſorts ; Deut. 11: 17. g. 
Tongues, why called a Man's Honour ; Gen. 49. 6. I, 
Treſpaſs-offering how it differs from Sin-offering ; Lev. 5.6. 
Viſton, what, and how it differs from a Dream ; Job 3. 13. 
Virginity, why counted a Reproach by Jews ; Iſa. 4e 1. g. 
A Vow, what; Fcclel. 5: 4. 9. 


y y 3» I9., Sos 


VS ade with Gibeonites was ebliging ; 


ſt Jeolaters ; Job 31. 28., 


Pe AI 
be 9% © Sa 
AZ Sa” 

: CE w#O 
= 
” [/ # 
ws, "IS 
by . 
y 


_- 


c 


Why their Afdions are not pleaſing to Ged; Pſal, 14. r. fe 
How far forth God may love them ; Iſa. 48. 14+ e. 
Word of God, its Excellency above God's Works, as a means 


of Salvation ; Pſal, 19,7. %. 


_—_— 


There may be Exceſs in uſe of Marriage-bed ; Pro, 5.19. n. 


Wicked ; how far good Men rejoyce in their DeFtrudion ; Job 


a ARCS 
. 0 


